aaa } ui
tk i

: th ont | | aE HS shasta
Tek Hee it i fe Bat Ain

; ait MAE, ay (es il mts

rary on mt Ae ey

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2011 with funding from
University of Toronto
http://www.archive.org/details/anglosaxonoldengOOwrig

pee ol Mediaey,, e
A - «
© %,
LIBRARY
Toronto, onrane


ANGLO-SAXON
AND
OLD ENGLISH VOCABULARIES
BY
THOMAS WRIGHT, Ese, M. A,
F. S. A., HON. M. RB. S. L.
SECOND EDITION.
EDITED AND COLLATED
BY
RICHARD PAUL WULCKER.
VOLUME I:
VOCABULARIES.
‘
LONDON:
TRUBNER & Co, LUDGATE HILL
1884.
[AU rights reserved.|


PREFACE TO THE PRESENT EDITION.
‘Tur Collection of Vocabularies and Glossaries which Wright in his
day prepared, contained pre-eminently Latin-Anglo-Saxon and Latin-
Old-English works of this kind. Wright added, however, several
works in which the English stood very much in the background
(as in VIII and X pp. 121—139, and 142—175 '), or only in entirely
scattered references (as in VII pp. 96—1211). Indeed in Vol. IT
two Old-German Vocabularies were incorporated. For the purpose
of restoring a greater symmetry I have left out the five articles above-
named. On the other hand, I took up anew three others; viz. 2., 7.
and 15, transcripts of which were most kindly placed at my disposal.
It did not fall within the plan of the book to give a complete Collection
of all the Anglo-Saxon and Old-English Vocabularies and Glossaries
remaining in England. The articles already incorporated by Wright have-
been compared anew with the MSS., as far as the MSS. were accessible. .

As for lexical purposes it is most desirable to have an
alphabetically arranged Index (Wright has only one arranged
according to the subjects for his Vol. I!) such a one has been
prepared by several of my pupils.

The explanatory and critical remarks of Wright I have reprinted
and added my own, which I marked with “R. W.” Especially in ‘
the Anglo-Saxon portion occur many references, which would have

1 see original edition.

— (oe
been put in the alphabetical index, if I had earlier decided to
add the index.

A mistake slipped into the superscription of No. 4, It was
entitled according to Wright as Archbishop Aflfric’s Vocabulary,
however, according to Dietrich’s excellent investigation, the author
was Abbot Allfric. In the table of contents I have thus also
changed it.

Only the agreeable duty remains to me to thank most heartily
those who aided me in the elaboration of my work by the loan of
transcripts; namely, Prof. Dr. J. Zupitza (No. 1), Miss Lucie |
Toulmin Smith (Nos. 2! and 7), the Librarian, Dr. A. Holder (No. 9)
and Dr. W. Aldis Wright (No. 15).

RICHARD PAUL WULCKER.

Letesic, January 1884.

1 As the first sheets of the text were already printed in 1877, reference in
No. 2 could not be made to Zupitza’s Supplement (Haupt’s Zeitschrift p. 223226).

ORIGINAL PREFACE.’
‘Tux Public is indebted for the following volume to the liberality
and public spirit of Mr. Joseph Mayer, whose name is now so well
known to all who interest themselves in the Archeology of this
country. Its design originated in a social conversation between
Mr. Mayer and myself, and we have endeavoured in it to make
available to labourers in the field of antiquarian research and
investigation a class of documents which, though they have been
hitherto almost overlooked, form a rich treasury of information on
almost every subject connected with the Archeology of the Middle
Ages. They have been furnished by a number of contemporary
manuscripts, scattered through various libraries in this country and
abroad. Of one of the most valuable of the later vocabularies
here printed, the original is preserved in Mr. Mayer’s own collection;
and for the communication and permission to print another—the
curious and interesting pictorial vocabulary which closes the series—
we owe our sincere thanks to the Lord Londesborough, of whose
collection the manuscript forms a part. As far as regards my own
labours, I will only say, that I have endeavoured to make the texts,
which are arranged in strict chronological order, as nearly as is
consistent with the duty of an editor, fac-similes of those of the
original manuscripts. In fact, their very errors and corruptions
1 September 1857.

— iv —
form no unimportant facts in the history of education and know-
ledge, and they have been carefully preserved as, under these cir-
cumstances, an integral part of the text itself. Nevertheless, when-
ever I have been able to meet with several copies of the same
tract, I have collated them, and made use of any additional matter
they furnished, without interfering with the text of that which I have
chosen as the best. It will be quite evident to anybody who
glances at the contents of the present volume, that it is susceptible
of annotations which might be made to swell out several such
volumes. I therefore beg to state that I have had no intention of
loading the volume with elaborate annotations; but I have hoped {
that a few explanatory and illustrative notes would make the work '
more popular, and would render it more useful to the general i
reader, and their pretensions go no further. {
THOMAS WRIGHT.
Brompton, Lonpon, ,
September, 1857.

ORIGINAL INTRODUCTION.

Tue Treatises which form the present volume are interesting in several
points of view. Their importance in a philological sense, as monuments of
the languages which prevailed at different periods in this island, is evident
at the first glance, and need not be dilated upon. They are curious records
of the history of Education; and, above all, they are filled with invaluable
materials for illustrating the conditions and manners of our forefathers at
various periods of their history, as well as the Antiquities of the Middle
Ages in general. The history of Education is a subject which is now
deservedly attracting more attention than was formerly given to it. It is
certainly not uninteresting to trace the various efforts which were made,
at all periods of the middle ages, to simplify and render popular the forms
of elementary instruction, and the several modifications which these forms
underwent.

The groundwork of all school-learning was the knowledge of the Latin
language; and the first tasks of the young scholar were to learn the
elements of the Latin grammar, to commit to memory words and their
meanings, and to practise conversation in the Latin tongue. It was this
practical application of the language which contributed very largely to its
corruption, for the scholar began by making himself acquainted not with
the pure Latin diction of classical books, but with a nomenclature of
words—many of them extremely barbarous—which it had then become
customary to apply to objects of ordinary use and occurence. The lessons
were given by word of mouth, as boys could not in those times be accom-
modated with books; but they had slates, or roughly made tablets (tabula),
on which they wrote down the lesson in grammar, or the portion of vocabu-
lary, from the lips of the master, and, after committing it to memory,

—~vi —

erased the writing, to make place for another. The teacher had necessarily
his own written exemplar of an elementary Latin grammar, as well as his
own written vocabulary of words, from which he read, interpreted, and
explained. The old illuminations of manuscripts give us not unfrequently
pictures of the interior of the school, in which we see the scholars arranged,
with their tablets, before or round the teacher, who is dictating to them.
In the earlier periods of Christianity among the Anglo-Saxons, the study
of the Latin language was pursued with extraordinary zeal and pro-
portionate success, and our island was celebrated for its learned men; but
as time passed on, various circumstances combined to produce a general
neglect of learning, so that king Alfred complained, in the latter part of
the ninth century, that very few of his subjects could translate from Latin
into their mother tongue. “So clean,” he said, “was teaching ruined among
the English people, that there were very few even of the ecclesiastical
order, southward of the Humber, who could understand their service in
English, or declare forth an epistle out of Latin into English; and I think
there were not many beyond Humber.” It may be observed, that in the
earlier period, the Northumbrian kingdom was the great seat of learning.
“So few such there were,” Alfred adds, “that I cannot think of a single
instance to the south of the Thames when I began to reign. To God
Almighty be thanks that we now have any teacher in stall.”?

Some of the causes of this decadence in the study of Latin among
the Anglo-Saxons belonged probably to a change which had taken place
in the social condition of the country, and were not to be overcome. Our
great-minded Anglo-Saxon king intimates that his countrymen began to
prefer books translated into or compiled in their own language to Latin
compositions, and his own example in labouring upon such translations, or
causing others to labour upon them, contributed no doubt to give per-
manence to this very natural taste. Nevertheless, the study of Latin was
revived in England with some success during the tenth century, and it was
increased by the intercourse between the English and continental scholars.
Still this study was by no means general, and at the end of this century
and beginning of the next, the labours of the two Alfrics in translating
and compiling in English show sufficiently the neglect of the study of Latin

1 Swe clene hio wes o®feallenu on weron, bet ic furSum anne anlepne ne
Angelcynne pet swiSe feawa waron be- meg gebencean, be susan Temese ba ba
hionan Humbre pe hiora beninga cuSen ic to rice feng. Gode elmihtogum sie benc,
understondan on Englisc, o8SefursSum an  pette we nu enigne on stal habba’s lare-
wrend-gewrit of Ladene on Englise arec- owa.”—Kinig Alfred’s Preface to the Trans-
cean; and ic wene bette noht monige be- lation of Gregory's Pastorale.
giondan Humbre naren. Swe feawa hiora

\

| — vi —
even among the English clergy, which is confirmed by the complaints of
the Norman ecclesiastics after the conquest. It is to these two distin-
guished scholars that we owe the first elementary school-books that are
known to have existed in the English language—a Latin grammar (com-
piled and translated from Donatus and Priscian) and Latin-English voca-
bularies.

It is singular how soon our forefathers began to exercise their ingenuity
in arranging their elementary books—and more especially the vocabu-
laries—in forms calculated to be most attractive to the learner, or to
enable him more easily to commit them to memory. ‘The first of the
treatises printed in the present volume, which had passed successively
through the hands of the two Alfrics, the archbishop and his disciple, is
compiled in the form of an interesting and very amusing dialogue, so con-
trived as to embody a large number of the words of common occurrence
in the ordinary relations of life. It is written in Latin, but accompanied
with a continuous interlinear gloss in Anglo-Saxon, precisely on the plan
of the modern elementary books of the Hamiltonian system of teaching,
to which it has been more than once compared; but it possessed one
striking difference, which must not be overlooked—that the old Anglo-
Saxon treatise was glossed for the assistance of the teacher, and not, as
in the modern books of this description, for the learner. In fact, it is
evident that at this time the schoolmasters themselves were very imper-
fectly acquainted with the Latin language, and that they found it necessary
to have books in which the English meaning was written above or beside
the Latin word, to enable them to explain it to their scholars. It was
this same ignorance which rendered it necessary to have vocabularies, or
lists of Latin words, with the translation attached to them—such as those
which form the bulk of the present volume. In the earlier and better
period, no doubt the teacher had such lists merely in Latin, or glossed
only in cases of difficulty, and he was sufficiently learned in the language
to explain them himself; but now the schoolmaster required to be reminded
himself of the meaning of the Latin word. Nor was this all; for, besides
the very incorrect and corrupt manner in which the words are frequently
written in these manuscript vocabularies, in many instances the Latin word
is wrongly interpreted. Several instances of such blunders may be pointed
out in Alfric’s “Colloquy;”! and others ‘occur frequently in the Anglo-
Saxon vocabularies, some of which are indicated in the notes.

1 Some of these are curious. Atp.95 instead of an adverb. On p. 97, the
1. 10 oceurs the adverb solum, which the merchant speaks of selling merchandise
glossator has translated as an adjective, carius, dearer, than he bought it; but

— vii —

These vocabularies appear to have been numerous during the later
Anglo-Saxon period, and those which remain differ considerably from each
other. I have included in the present volume all that are now known to
exist. The last of them brings us down to at least the middle of the
twelfth century, after which we lose sight of similar vocabularies, until we
reach the fifteenth century.

The Anglo-Norman period presents us with a new description of voca-
bulary, in which the words, still kept together in their different classes,
are collected into a sort of continuous discourse. Of these, the earliest,
and in many respects the most curious, is that by the celebrated scholar,
Alexander Neckam, in which the principal operations and professions of
life are enumerated and described in a familiar style. Neckam, singularly
enough for an ecclesiastic, begins with the kitchen, describes its furniture
and implements and their several uses, and treats of the articles of food
and of the methods of cooking them. He then turns to the possessor of
the house, describes his dress and accoutrements, when remaining at home
or when riding abroad, and introduces us in the sequel to his chamber
and to its furniture. The chamber-maid is next introduced to us, with
her household employments; and we are taken to the poultry-yard, with a
chapter on the cooking of poultry and fish, and on the characteristics of
good wine. We are next taught how to build a feudal castle, to fortify
it, to store and to defend it; and this leads us naturally to the subject of
war in general, and to arms, armour, and soldiers. From this we return
to matters of a more domestic character—to the barn, the poultry-yard,
and the stable, and to that important occupation of medieval domestic
life, weaving. The occupations of the country follow, and the author
explains the construction of carts and waggons, the process of building an
ordinary house, and its parts, the various implements and operations
of farming, and the construction and use of the plough. We turn rather
abruptly from agriculture to navigation, and are instructed in the different
sorts of ships, and in their parts and the articles with which they were
usually stored. The tools, qualifications, and duties of the medieval scribe,
the operations of the goldsmith, and a copious enumeration of ecclesiastical
furniture, complete this curious treatise.

‘The similar treatise of John de Garlande, composed in the earlier half
of the following century, differs very much from its predecessor in details
the Anglo-Saxon interpreter has trans- speaking of the fisherman’s art, he evi-
lated as though it meant more beloved, dently did not know whether the Latin
evidently not understanding the phrase amus meant the hook or the bait.
to which it belongs. Again, on p. 93,

a

and arrangement. Its author occupies himself more with the objects which
meet the eye in the interior of a great city (Paris), than with feudal or
agricultural life. After giving, by way of introduction, a description of
the human body and its various parts and members, he proceeds with a
long list of trades and manufactures, and the various articles made or
sold, such as the hawker who carried shoes and other articles of leather
for sale on a pole, the girdle-makers, saddlers, shield-makers, buckle-
makers, dealers in needles and other such articles, makers of bridles,
hucksters, frobishers (or furbishers), the shopkeepers of the Grand-Pont,
glovers, hatters, bowyers, makers of brooches and clasps, bell-makers,
coblers, cordwainers, furriers, street criers, menders of cups, itinerant
dealers in wine, sellers of cakes, regraters, bakers, pie-makers, cooks,
changers, minters, goldsmiths, clothiers, linen-drapers, apothecaries, car-
penters, wheelwrights, cart-makers, millers, armourers, fullers, dyers, tanners,
smiths. At this point, John de Garlande interrupts his list of trades, to
describe the house of a citizen (probus homo) and its furniture, which is
followed by the different implements necessary to a scholar, or clerk.
John de Garlande then proceeds to give the learner a list of his own
wardrobe. A rather quaint account of the ecclesiastical library of a priest
follows, with his apparel, and the implements belonging to the service of
the church. We return from the church very abruptly to the stable, and
then we have a list of the various domestic implements belonging to the
mistress of the house, with descriptions of the occupations and employments
peculiar to women—weaving, needlework, &c. The account of a poultry-
shop in the Parvis of Notre Dame furnishes an occasion for giving a list
of domestic fowls; that of the fowler, for an enumeration of wild fowls;
and that of the fisherman, for a list of fish. In the chapters following,
John de Garlande enumerates the domestic animals he had seen in the
fields, the wild ones he had met with in the king’s forest, the plants and
herbs which grew in his own garden, the fruits in his orchard, and the
shrubs in his grove; he gives a description of his own hall, an enumera-
tion of the ships he had seen at sea, of the various tortures of the mar-
tyrs which were suggested to his mind by the fear of shipwreck, of the
jongleurs, minstrels, dancing girls, &c., who performed at the feasts of
the rich, of the punishments reserved for sinners, and of the joys of the
blessed.

The close of the thirteenth century introduces us to a document of a
novel character, although still similar in plan. It is written in verse, no
doubt that it might be more easily carried in the memory, and, instead
of being intended to teach the Latin language, its purpose was to teach
French to the children of the English nobility and gentry. Accordingly,

— ec

the text is written in French, with an interlinear gloss in English. This |)
“treatise,” as it is called, which was written by a man evidently of aristo- |
cratic blood, named Walter de Biblesworth, marks a very important period
in the history of the English language, as it shows that before the end
of the thirteenth century, and perhaps subsequently to the barons’ wars,
that language had already become the mother tongue of the children of
the Anglo-Norman nobility, and that they learnt it before they were
taught French.?

The subjects in this treatise are arranged in an order which seems
to have been considered most suitable to the class for which they were
intended. Walter de Biblesworth begins with the child when new-born,
tells how it is to be nursed and fed, and then proceeds to the description
of the human body. In this and in other parts, the author labours to
impress upon the learner the nice distinctions between words of nearly
similar meaning, and the different meanings of words which are similar in |
sound, as well as the distinction of genders, which even then appears to

1 I may perhaps be allowed to repeat was Walter de Biblesworth, a man known
here the remarks on this subject made in elsewhere as a writer of French verse,
a paper on the History of the English and apparently belonging himself to the
Language, read before the Historic So- aristocratic class; he was a friend of the
ciety of Lancashire and Cheshire, and great statesman of the reign of Edward I.,
printed in their Transactions, vol. ix, p. Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln and Salis-
150, 1857. I there said, “It was not bury, and compiled the treatise we are
only as the language of the Normans, but _ speaking of at the request of the lady Dio-
as that peculiarly of the feudal aristo- nysia de Monchensey. Thus all the rela-
eracy in general, that French was intro- tions of the author and of his book were
duced into England under William the of an aristocratic character. Now, Walter
Conqueror; and it was in that character de Biblesworth states his object to be to
that it continued to be the language of instruct the rising generation in the pro-
the aristocracy until feudalism itself was per use of the words of the French lan-
broken down, It had ceased, however, guage, and especially in the correct ap-
to be exclusively their language in the plication of the genders; and the French
thirteenth century. In the latter; years words are explained in English, implying
of that century, a tract or treatise was thus that the learner was acquainted with
written in French or Anglo-Norman the English language before he began to
verse, forming a sort of vocabulary of lear French. We thus ascertain the very
that language, and designed expressly important fact, that, before the end of
for the purpose of teaching it to child- the thirteenth century, the children of
ren. The number of copies of this tract the aristocracy of England learnt English
still preserved in MS. show that it was before they were instructed in any other
a popular elementary book, and that language—or, in other words, that Eng-
it was in extensive use. The compiler lish had become their mother tongue.”

have presented a difficulty to the young beginner in the French language.
The description of the body itself is followed by the process of clothing
it, and by an enumeration of the various articles of apparel. The author
then returns again to the manners of the child, and describes its proper
diet. After some rather curious instructions for the proper and distinctive
use of certain classes of words, we are taken to the barn, and the teacher
describes the processes of thrashing, of converting corn into meal, of
baking, of the cultivation of flax, and the various stages through which
_ it went before it is converted into linen cloth, and of brewing, as well as
_ of the character and effects of good ale. The scholar is next taken a-fish-
ing, and the various characteristics of the country, with the phases of the
weather, and the changes of season, are pointed out to thim. The fine
weather offers the occasion of another rural excursion, with a description
of the flowers, the fruit and other trees, the birds, and the animals which
are supposed to present themselves to his view. Rural occupations are
next introduced, with full descriptions of a cart and a plough. Then we
witness the building of a house, and the arrangements of its different parts,
the domestic processes of lighting the fire, cooking the food, and placing
it on the table, and the various articles of food and their arrangement.
The whole closes with the description of a great feast. The notion of
composing such vocabularies in verse was applied to Latin, as well as to
French, an example of which will be found also in the present volume.
During the fourteenth century, school teaching seems to have fallen
greatly into neglect in this country, and we hardly find any manuscripts
of these educational treatises between those of the thirteenth century and
those of the fifteenth. In the latter century, however, a great movement
took place,—it was the age, especially, of founding grammar-schools, so
many of which were re-founded at the dissolution of papal colleges under
Edward VI. A similar degradation, in fact, had taken place to that
which we have remarked under the Anglo-Saxons, though the causes were
not entirely the same. The influence of the great development of learning
in the twelfth century, and the example of the able and elegant Latin
writers whom that age had produced, extended over at least a portion of
the thirteenth century; but before the end of that century, the priest was
already gaining the victory over the school-master, and the power of the
universities was yielding to that of the Popish church. During the two
following centuries, learning was reduced almost to its lowest degree; and
this became so apparent, that an effort was made to raise it by striking
at what was supposed to be the root of the evil—the want or the
inefficiency of the elementary schools. Those who undertook the task ot
reformers, however, mistook the cause of the evil, and did not understand :

— xii —

that the Middle Ages were approaching their end, and that there was no
remedy for the restoration of forms and principles which were expiring
from their own exhaustion. Nevertheless, the effort seems to have been
made with earnestness, and caused, in the fifteenth century, a considerable
extension in the lower grades of scholastic education. The manuscripts
of grammatical treatises—of school-books, in fact—now become extremely
numerous. Latin-English vocabularies are also not uncommon during this
period, and I have given three in the present volume—one from a manu-
script in the British Museum, and the two others from private collections.
The last of these, and apparently the latest in date—but it is not very
easy to distinguish nicely the distinctive dates of this particular class of
manuscripts during the fifteenth century—presents a new peculiarity,—it
is illustrated with rude pen-and-ink drawings in the margin of many of
the articles enumerated in the text of the vocabulary. These illustrations,
we should imagine, were designed to assist in fixing the attention of the
scholar on his task, and it thus, as the latest of these attempts at improve-
ment, forms an appropriate conclusion to our volume. It shows us,
moreover, how little of novelty there is in most of the plans for simpli-
fying school teaching in more modern times, for in these medieval treatises
we meet with the prototypes of almost every scheme that has been pro-
posed, from the more recent Hamiltonian system to the Orbis Sensualium
Pictus of Comenius, which made so much noise by its novelty of plan in
the earlier part of the seventeenth century.

I can hardly be doubted that the manuscripts of these vocabularies
of the fifteenth century were written by schoolmasters for their own use;
and we cannot help being struck by the large proportion of barbarous
Latin words which are introduced into them, and by the gross blunders
with which they abound, especially in their orthography. Many of the
Latin words are so disguised and corrupted, that we can hardly recognise
them; and in some instances, the schoolmaster has actually mistaken the
genders. It is thus clear that the schoolmasters of the fifteenth century
were very imperfect scholars themselves, and we can easily understand
how the Latinists of the old school fell into that barbarous style of writing
which drew upon them the ridicule of the classical scholars after the revi-
val of learning, as well as their hostility to that new light which exposed
their defects. These vocabularies of the fifteenth century differ so entirely
from each other, both in their general arrangement and in the words
introduced under each head, that there seems little room for doubt that
each schoolmaster compiled his own book. This circumstance has added
extremely to their philological value, as the English words in each voca-
bulary may be supposed to present some, at least, of the peculiarities of

— xiii —
the dialect in which it was written. Through the preceding ages, the
schoolmasters seem to have laboured under a difference of opinion as to
the subject which had a claim to precedence of the others, and therefore
ought to be placed at the head of the vocabulary. Archbishop Alfric
gave the palm to agriculture, expressly in the Colloquy, and practically
in his Vocabulary! The vocabulary from the Brussels manuscript,? and
that printed as the appendix to the present volume from the Cottonian
MS, begin with birds, for which it would be difficult to assign any reason.
The Anglo-Saxon glossary of the other Cottonian manuscript, with the
semi-Saxon vocabulary abridged from it,> first present the more natural
order of commencing with the Deity and with the human body and its
parts. Alexander Neckam, as already stated, begins with the kitchen;
-but John de Garlande returns to the more natural order, beginning with
man and the human body, which is adopted also in principle by Walter
de Biblesworth. The vocabularies of the fifteenth century adopt, I think,
invariably the human body as the leading subject, but they arrange the
subjects which follow very diversely. Some of them, too, divide and
subdivide these subjects under more numerous heads, or titles, than
others. :
It is this circumstance of grouping the words under different heads
which gives these vocabularies their value as illustrations of the conditions
and manners of society. It is evident that the compiler gave, in each
case, the names of all such things as habitually presented themselves to
his view, or, in other words, that he presents us with an exact list and
description of all the objects which were in use at the time he wrote, and
no more. We have, therefore, in each a sort of measure of the fashions,
and comforts, and utilities of contemporary life, as well as in some cases
of its sentiments. Thus, to begin with a man’s habitation, his house—
the words which describe the parts of the Anglo-Saxon house are few in
number, a heal or hall, a bur or bedroom, and in some cases a cicen or
kitchen, and the materials are chiefly beams of wood, laths, and plaister.®
But when we come to the vocabularies of the Anglo-Norman period, we
soon find traces of that ostentation in domestic buildings which William
of Malmsbury assures us that the Normans introduced into this island;
the house becomes more massive, and the rooms more numerous, and more
diversified in their purposes. When we look at the furniture of the house,
the difference is still more apparent. The description given by Alexander
1 See pp. 90, 91, and 104 of the pre- 4B. 304.

sent volume. 5 P. 536.
2 P. 284 of the present volume. 6 See col. 126, 184, 185, and 326.
3 See p. 258.

— xiv —

Neckam of the hall, the chambers, the kitchen, and the other departments
of the ordinary domestic establishment in the twelfth century, and the
furniture of each, almost brings them before our eyes, and nothing could |
be more curious than the account which the same writer gives us of the
process of building and storing a castle. The bare lists of names in
the vocabularies of the fifteenth century are hardly less expressive. Thus,
in the earliest of these vocabularies, we have the baronial hall furnished
with its board and trestles, with which the table was laid out when
wanted; the table dormant, or permanent table, which was probably even
then an article of rarer occurrence; benches, as the ordinary seats; a long-
settle to draw up to the fire, or to place on the dais, behind the high
table; a chair, for ceremonious occasions, and a stool; a cushion for the
chair; bankers and dossers, or carpets to lay over the principal seats; a
screen; a basin and laver, for washing the hands of the guests; andirons
to support the fire, tongs to arrange it, and bellows to raise it into a
flame.1 So again, in the subject of costume, we have the names of differ-
ent articles of wearing apparel in use at successive periods, from the
tenth century to the end of the thirteenth, and again during the fifteenth
centuries. The same thing may be said of the weapons of war. Some of
these documents, and especially the Dictionarius of John de Garlande,
throw an interesting light upon the trades and manufactures of the
middle ages. Others show us the progress—or rather the want of pro-
gress—of our forefathers in the practice of agriculture. In fact, there is
hardly any subject connected with medieval life which does not receive
some light from the tracts which are printed in the present volume. We
here see our forefathers in all their positions of relationship, position, and
occupation, from infancy to old age; we are introduced to the child in
the nursery, and to the boy at his school; we see him in the clothes he
wore, and with the arms that he carried to those constant wars which
absorbed so much of medieval life; we learn in minute detail how he
lived, what was his food and how it was prepared, and what he drank;
we see the industrious house-wife attending to her domestic cares, or busied
in her usual occupations of spinning and weaving; we witness the games
and amusements of the different stages of life; and we even penetrate into
the retired study of the scholar.

Again, in these vocabularies the Archeologist will find the only means |
of identifying by their proper names a multitude of utensils, which are
elsewhere named without description, or of which he is acquainted with
the forms, but knows not what to call them. This is especially the case

1 See col. 656, 657.

— xv —

with a class of articles which have been during the last few years much

more studied by antiquaries than formerly, such as medieval pottery, and

vessels for the table of glass and metal, as well as articles of jewellery

and other ornaments of the person. We even gain instructive glances at

notions which show us the progress of science, and at implements of
_ yarious kinds which reveal to us important facts in the history of modern

inventions.

None of these, perhaps, is of more importance than the curious early
allusion to the use of the mariner’s compass by the navigators of the
western seas.1 It is well known to all readers that this invaluable inven-
tion has been formerly supposed to have been brought from the East,
and not to have been known in the West until the fourteenth century,
when it was used by the Italian mariners. Allusions to it have, however,
been discovered by the students of medieval literature in works which
date as far back as the thirteenth century. In the following pages, we
find this invention not only alluded to in the twelfth century, but described
in such a manner as to show that it was then absolutely in its infancy, and
to leave little doubt of its having originated in the west. Alexander Neckam,
in his treatise de Utensilibus, enumerates, among the ship’s stores, a needle
which was placed on a pivot, and when turned round and left to take its
own position in repose, taught the sailors their way when the polar star
was concealed from them by clouds or tempest. I have discovered a passage
in another of Neckam’s works, the inedited treatise de Naturis Rerum, which
gives a more distinct account of this invention. “Mariners at sea,” he says,
“when through cloudy weather in the day which hides the sun, or through
the darkness of the night, they lose the knowledge of the quarter of the
world to which they are sailing, touch a needle with the magnet, which will
turn round till, on its motion ceasing, its point will be directed towards the
north.” A comparison of these two passages seems to shew pretty clearly
that at this time the navigators had no regular box for the compass, but
that they merely carried with them a needle which had been touched with the
magnet (perhaps sometimes they carried the magnet also, and touched the
needle for the occasion), and that when they had to use it, they merely
placed it upon some point, or pivot, on which it could turn with tolerable
freedom, and then gave it a motion, and waited until it ceased moving.
This mode of using the needle was, it must be confessed, rude enough.
The passage in the treatise de Utensilibus contains one particular which
is very obscure, as Neckam informs us that when the needle ceased moving
it pointed towards the east (donec cuspis acus respiciat orientem); and as

1 In a treatise of Alexander Neckam de Ufensilibus,

— xi —

all the manuscripts agree in this reading, and it is glossed by est, this
must be the intention of the writer. I know no way of explaining this,
unless it be by the supposition that, as in the twelfth century the Hast
was the grand object of most voyages from this part of the world, an |
attempt had been made to improve the magnetic needle by adding to it
a limb at right angles, which should point to the east when the needle
itself pointed to the north; and that this was what Neckam calls the cu-
spis acus. Between this time and the date—whatever it may be—of the
poem, also quoted in my note on the passage of Neckam, which contains
the first allusion to the mariner’s compass in the tirteenth century, an
attempt had been made to facilitate its use.! This was done by thrusting
the needle through some substance which would not sink, and placing it
upon the surface of water. Guiot de Provins, the author of the poem
alluded to, calls this substance a festu, a stick or straw (the Latin festuca).
The mariners, he tells us, have a contrivance depending on the qualities
of the magnet, which cannot fail. The magnet, he adds, is an ugly
brownish stone, to which iron is attracted. “After they have caused a
needle to touch it, and placed it in a stick, they put it in the water,
without anything more, and the stick keeps it on the surface. Then it
turns its point towards the star with such certainty, that no man will
ever have any doubt of it, nor will it ever for anything go false. When
the sea is dark and hazy, that they can neither see star nor moon, they
place a light by the needle, and then they have no fear of going wrong;
towards the star goes the point, whereby the mariners have the knowledge
to keep the right way. It is an art which cannot fail.” According to
another poet, the substance through which the needle was usually thrust
was cork. He tells us that “the mariners who went to Friesland, or to
Greece, or Acre, or Venice,” were guided in their route by the polar star;
but when at night, or in obscure weather, it was invisible, they discovered
its position by the following contrivance: —“They thrust a needle of iron
through a piece of cork, so that it is almost buried in it, and then touch
it with the loadstone; then they place it in a vessel full of water, so that
no one pushes it out until the water is calm, for in whatever direction
the point aims, there without doubt is the polar star.” The MS. in which
this latter poem was found is undoubtedly of the fourteenth century; but

1 In this interval, we meet with an- Hier. cap. 89,) “Acus ferrea, postquam
other slight but very curious allusion to adamantem contigerit, ad stellam septen-
the use of the magnetic needle for pur- trionalem, que velut axis firmamenti aliis
poses of navigation, Jacques de Vitri, vergentibus non movetur, semper conver-
one of the historians of the crusades, who  titur; unde valde necessarius est navigan-
wrote about the year 1218, says, (Hist. tibus in mari.”

— xvii —
the poem itself is evidently of somewhat older date—of the beginning of
that century, or not improbably of the century preceding. It is possible,
therefore, that this rudely constructed mariner’s compass may have con-
tinued unimproved until the fourteenth century.

The philologist will appreciate the tracts printed in the following
pages as a continuous series of very valuable monuments of the languages
spoken in our island during the Middle Ages. It is these vocabularies
alone which have preserved from oblivion a very considerable and inter-
esting portion of the Anglo-Saxon tongue, and without their assistance our
Anglo-Saxon dictionaries would be far more imperfect than they are.
I have endeavoured to collect together in the present volume all the
Anglo-Saxon vocabularies that are known to exist, not only on account
of their diversity, but because I believe that their individual utility will
be increased by thus presenting them in a collective form. They represent
the Anglo-Saxon language as it existed in the tenth and eleventh cen-
turies; and, as written no doubt in different places, they may possibly present
some traces of the local dialects of that period. The curious semi-Saxon
yocabulary is chiefly interesting as representing the Anglo-Saxon in its
period of transition, when it was in a state of rapid decadence. The inter-

! This very curious poem, a sort of Pour bise ne pour autre afaire
song, is preserved in a manuscript for- Ne laist sen dout servise & faire
merly in the collection of M. Barrois, of La tresmontaigne clere et pure;
Paris, and now in that of Lord Ashburn- ‘eS maroniers par son esclaire
ham, Tt was first pointed out by M. Fr, 2° souvent hors de contraire,

1p8 'y ‘ A
Michel, who printed the portion relating pr 0° “nein les asséure.
9 s Et quant la nuis est trop oseure,

to the mariner’s compass in the preface Svest cle encor de tel nature,
to his Lats inédits, Paris 1836. As this C’a Yaimant fait le fer traire,
is now a rare book, I have thought it Ci que par forche et par droiture,
desirable to give here the whole passage. Et par ruille qui tous jours dure,
It is as follows:— Sevent le liu de son repaire.

La tresmontaine est de tel guise, Son repaire sevent & route,

Qwele est el firmament asisse Quant li tans n’a de clarté goute,

Ou ele luist et reflambie. Tout chil qui font cest maistrise,

Li maronier qui vont en Frise, Qui une aguille de fer boute

En Gresse, en Acre, ou en Venisse, Si qwele pert presque toute

Sevent par li toute la yoie; En i. poi de liége, et Vatise -

Pour nule riens ne se desvoic, A la pierre @aimant bise;

Tout jours se tient en une moie. S’en Ji. vaissel plain @’ yave est mise,

Tant est de li grans li servisse, Si que nus hors ne la deboute,

Se la mers est enflée ou koie Si tost com Tiave s’aserise;

Ja ne sera c’on ne le voie, Car dons quel part la pointe vise,

Ne pour galerne ne pour bise. La tresmontaigne est 14 sans doute.

— xviii —
linear gloss to Alexander Neckam, and the commentary on John de Gar-
lande,! are most important monuments of the language which for a while
usurped among our forefathers the place of the Anglo-Saxon, and which
we know by the name of the Anglo-Norman. In the partial vocabulary
of the names of plants, which follows them, we have the two languages in
juxta-position, the Anglo-Saxon having then emerged from that state which
has been termed semi-Saxon, and become early English. We are again
introduced to the English language more generally by Walter de Bibles-
worth, the interlinear gloss to whose treatise represents no doubt the
English of the beginning of the fourteenth century. All the subsequent
vocabularies given here belong, as far as the language is concerned, to
the fifteenth century. As written in different parts of the country, they
bear evident marks of dialect; one of them—the vocabulary in Latin
verse-—is a very curious relic of the dialect of the West of England at a
period of which such remains are extremely rare.
1 Omitted in the Present Edition,

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.
Page
Preface to the present edition. . . . . . 1... ws. I
Original preface . . . . . « «© »- ». « © «es... WT
Original introduction. . ©. . . - 2. 2. 2. 2. ee eee Vv
. Column
1. Anglo-Saxon Vocabulary. 8th Century . . . . . ... 1
2, Kentish Glosses. 9th Century. . . - . . . 2... 55
8. Colloquy of #lfric . . 2. 2. 1 we ee ee ee 8D
4, Abbot Hilfric’s Vocabulary. . . . . . . . . ws. 104
5. Supplement to Hilfric’s Vocabulary . . . . . . . . . 168
6. Anglo-Saxon Glossary. 10th Century . . . . . . . . 192
7, Anglo-Saxon Glosses. 10th Century . . . . . . . . . 248
8. Anglo-Saxon Vocabulary. 10th or 11th Century . . . . . 258
9. Anglo-Saxon Vocabulary. 11th Century. . . . . . . . 284
10. Anglo-Saxon Vocabulary. 11th Century. . . . . . . . 304
11. Glosses, Latin and Anglo-Saxon. 11th Century . . . . . 338
12, Miscellaneous Anglo-Saxon Glosses. 11th Century. . . . . 474
13. Semi-Saxon Vocabulary. 12th Century . . . . . . . . 536
14, Vocabulary of the Names of Plants. 13th Century . . . . 554
15. Latin and English Vocabulary. 15th Century . . . . . . 560
16. Metrical Vocabularies. 15th Century. . . . . . . . . 622
17. Names of Parts of the Human Body. 158 Century . . . . 631
18, English Vocabulary. 15th Century . . . . . . . . « 633
19. Nominale. 15th Century . . . . . . . 1. ew ee 678
20. Pictorial Vocabulary. 15th Century . . . . . . « « . 745
——————

ERRATA.
Col. 545 1. 2 for merherbarum read materherbarum.

gd
IL.
ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY,
OF THE EIGHTH CENTURY’.

Interpretatio nominum ebraicorum et grecorum.
Adsida, flood. Libitorium, saa.
Caluarie locus, cualmstou. Lignarium, wuidubinde.
Coliferte, gepofta. Mantega, taeg.
Clauis, helma. Malina, fyled flood.
Crepidinem, neopouard. 5 Mappa, eneoribt.
Doleus, byden. Maculosus, spec-faag.
Dasile, boor. Menta, minte.
Decurat, hornnaap. Rastrum, raece.
Ferula, hreod. Scisca, eoforprote.
Fundus, bodan. 10 Sublatorium, bloestbaelg*.
Gemellus, getuin, Tantalus, aelbitu.
Clebulum, hrider. Ua, euwa.
Jungula, geoc-boga. Uomer, seer.
Ledo, nepfiod.

Incipit glosa secundum ordinem elimentorum alphabeti.

Abelena, haeselhnutu. 15 Absinthium, wermod.
Abies, etspe. Abortus, misbyrd.

1 This early and interesting monument Archbishop Parker. It is, therefore, not
of our language is preserved in a fine improbable that this Vocabulary was ori-
vellum manuscript in the collection of ginally compiled and written for the school
Archbishop Parker, in the Library of Corpus of Canterbury.

Christi College, Cambridge, No. sti. (The text of the present edition is based
I have no hesitation in ascribing the on a collation recently made by Prof. J.
writing to the eighth century. It re- Zupitza, of Beilin, Some of the foreign
sembles rather closely that of the well- terms are rendered by Latin, some by
known Durham Book, its cbaracters ap- Anglo - Saxon expressions; only those
proaching almost to uncials. Some one rendered into Anglo-Saxon were retained,
has written on the first leaf, in a hand including some which were omitted by
perhaps of the thirteenth century, that Wright. — R. W.]
it belonged to the church of Canterbury — 2 or blast-baely, literally a blast-bay.
liber Sancti Augustini Cant, — whence it The Anglo-Saxon word for bellows.
uo doubt came into the possession of

1

3 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 4
Ablata, binumine. Adgrediuntur, geeodun.
Abunde, genycthlice. Adlido, tonwinto.
Abiget, wereth. Adnitentibus, tilgendum.
Ab euro, eastansudan. Ad libidines, wraene.
Ad euronothum, eastsuth. 5 Adtonitus, hlysnende.
Abditis, gehyddum. Ad fasces, to weordmyndum.
Ab affrico, sudanwestan. Adfligit, gchuach,
Ab borea, castannorpan. Adrogantissime, wloncli.
Aconito, pungas. Adplaudat, onhliorrouuit.
Aceruus, muha‘. 10 Adcommodaturus, unoende.
A circio, nordanwestan. 4 Aduentio, sarwo,.
Actionaris, folegeroebum. Aduocatus, pingere.
Acisculum, piic. Adhibuit, geladade, uel aduocauit.
Aerabulus, mapuldur, Adplicuit, gepiudde.
Achalantis, uel luscinia, wel roscinia, 15 Aequatis, efnum.
nehtegale, Aesculus, boece.
Acrifolus, holegn?. Aegit, wraec.
Acega, holthona. Aestuaria, fleotas.
Accearium, steli. Aere alieno, geabuli.
Acitula, hromsa. 20 Aegesta, gors.
Acitelum, hromsan crop. Aequipensum, ebnwege.
Accitulium, geces sure, Afiniculum [ellende]*, a finibus pro-
Acinum, hindberiae. cul.
Acris, fortis uel from’, Afflarat, ansuaep.
Actionabatur, scirde. 25 A fafonio, supanwestan.
Actuarius, wraec. Affricus, westsudwind.
Accetum, gefeotodne. Affectui, megsibbe, uel dilectione.
Acegia, snite. Agre[s]tis, wilde.
Aceti cotilla, uas, i. bolle. Agastrum, aegmang.
Acus, netl, uel, gronuise. 30 Agitatio, unstilnis.
Accidia, tedium, uel anwietas, i. sorg. Agitate, onettad.
Accinctu, denetle. Agapem, suoesendo.
Adsute, gesiuwide. Agmen, weorod.
Addictus, forscrifen. Alea, tebl.
Adridente, tyctende. 35 Aleator, teblere.
Aduncis, gebegdum. Albulo, flio.
Ad penses, to nyttum. Alium, gaarleec.
Adsensore, fultemendum. Alba spina, heagodorn.
Adcelinis, to-hald, uel incumbens. Alcion, isern.
Alqueue, end suelece. 40 Alnus, aler.
Ademto, gebinumini. Alneum, fulactreo.
Adsaeclum, pegn, [minister turpitu-  Alietum, spaerhabue.
dinis *], Alneta, alerholt.
1 This rare word also oceurs in Al frie’s 8 The MS, reads aeris fortio. KR. W.
Heptatench, Ex. 22,6, R. W. 4 These two words are added in another
2 Cf. Leo, Angelsiichsisches glossar, and later hand, R. W.
Halle 1872 u. 1877 pag. 125. R. W. 5 Added in a Jater hand. R, W.

| 5 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 6
Alga, waar. Antemna, seglgerd.
Altrinsecus, on ba halfe. Antedoque, wyrtdrenc.
Albipedius, huitfoot. Ansatae, aetgaere.
Aluuium, meeli. Antena, boga.

Aluiolum, aldaht. 5 Anavius, sorgendi.
Alga, scaldhyflas, wel sondhyllas. Annua, gerlice.
Alternantium, staefnendra. Anate, clader, sticca.
Alacris, snel. Anser, goos.

Alacer, suift. Anus, ald uuif.
Alueus, streamraad. 10 Anguila, el.

Alitus, aethm. Anceps, tuigendi.
Alumnae, fostorbearn. Antulus, caecbora,
Alapiciosa', calwa. Aporiens, anscungendi.
Aluearia, hyfi. Aplustra, geroedro.
Altilia, foedils. 15 Aper, eobor.

_ Aleido, meau. Aporiamur, biad preade.
Alcanus, poden. Apiastrum, biowyrt.
Alites, challes?. Apio, merice.

Alueum, eduaelle. Apotasia, fraetgengian.

Alitudo, fothur. 20 Appetitus, gidsung.

Alligeo, reeceo. Apparilione, getiunge.

Altor, fostorfaeder. Aparatu, aexfaru.

Allox, tahae. Applare, eorscripel.

Allauda, lauricae. Apricitas, gethingio.

Amisionem, forlor. 25 Apparatum, geprec.

Ammentum, seeptog. — Appotheca, winfaet.

Ambrones, gredge. Apporeor, onsteuum, guibus ejus uis-
Ambages, ymbsuaepe. cera interno foetore coguentur,
Ambrosea, suoetnis, et inde loquendo caxalauit odorem
Amens, emod. 30 foetorem.

Amites, fugultreo, wel reftras. Aquilium, onga.

Amtes, oemsetinne wiingeardes. Aquemale, lebel.

Ambulas, piustra, Aquilae, segnas.

Amilarius, mearh. Armonia, suinsung.

Ambila, laec. 35 Ariolatus, frihtrung. ~

Amiculo, hregli. Areoli, sceabas,

Amentis, sceptloum. Ardia, hragra.

Andeda, brandrod. Argella, laam.

Aneta, enid. Argutiae, thrauuo.

Anetum, dili. 40 Arrius, faag.

Antiae, loceas. Arbutus, aespe.

Anguens, breer. Argutiae, gleaunisse.

Antefata, forewyrde. Ara, faestin.

Antemne, wacde. Archtoes, waegnepix}.

1 For alopeciosa, a late Latin word for 2 Perhaps for callas == men, men
a state of baldness prodneed by a disease of war. Cf. Grein, sprachsatz II., pag.
called in medieval Latin alopecia, from 73. R. W.
the Greek adomexia. 4

7 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 8

Arlura, tot. Aulea, streagl:

Argilla, thoae. Auum, meli.

Arula, fyrponne. Auspicantur, haelsadon.

Artemon, obersegl, uel malus nauis. Auster, suduuind.

Armilausia, serce. 5 Augur, haelsere.

Arpago, awel, uel clauuo. Ausurae, groeni aar *.

Arpa, earngeot. ; Agxungia, rysel.

Arnaglosa', wegbrade. Asxredones, lynisas.

Arbia, ceber. Azredo, lynis. :

Armus, boog, 10 Amis, aex.

Arbate, sibed.

Ars plumaria, wuyndeereft. Bacidones, raedinne.

Archiatros, heahlecas. Bagula, bridels.

Aruina, risel. Basis, teter.

Ardebat, scaan. 15 Ballista, staeflidre.

Arectas, hlysnendi. Basterna, beer.

Arcessitus, feotod. Batuitum, gebeaten.

Arbitus, faestinnum. Bacciuia, beger.

Arcister, strelbora. Ballena, horn.

Asilo, briosa. 20 Barritus, genung.

Asses scorteas, liprine trymsas. Battat, geonath. .

Aspaltum, spaldur. Basterna, scrid.

Ascalonium, ynnelacc. Balbus, wulisp.

Astu, facni, wel fraefeli. Balus, isernfeotor.

Ascopa, kylle. 25 Bachantes, uuoedende.

Aspera, unsmopi. Baratrum, dael.

Asapa, earngeat. Basis, syl.

Astur, haesualwe. Ballationes, cnop.

Atflarat, onsueop. Balbutus, stom, wlisp.

Atticus, dora. 30 Ban, segn.

Attoniti, hlysnende, afyrhte. Bapis, treuteru *.

Atqueue, on suilce. Baruina, barriggae.

Auriculum, carwiega. Baineum, stofa.

Auus, aeldrafaeder. Balatus, bletid.

Auriola, stigu. 35 Bariulus, reagufine.

Auellanus, haesl. Beacita, stearn.

Aucupatione, setunge. Beta, bere, arbor dicitur.

Ausus, gedyrstig. Aeneficiun*, freomo.

Auehit, onweg aferide. Berrus, baar*. P

Auserunt, nomun hlodun. 40 Berruca, uearte.

Auena, ate. Bellicum, slag.
1» in this word is added in a later 4 Of course, this is a mere error of

hand. R, W. the scribe for Beneficium. RW.
2 Perhaps for usurae? R. W. 5 Berrus, no doubt, here stands for
8 Bosworth has, ‘Treuteru, a sort of — Ver7ess & boar.

standard, verilli quoddam genus’.

4
3] LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 10
Bena’, higrae. Bux’, box.

Bena, ate. = Bubo, wu.
Becta’, stert. Buculus, rondbaeg.
Bicoca, haebreblete. Burrum, bruun.
Bitumen, liim. 5 Bubalis, weosend.
Bitiligo, blaecthrust, fel. Buccula, buue.
Bile, atr. Bucitum, seotu.
Bitulus, bere. Butio, frysea.
Biothanatas, seoltbonan. Bunia, byden.
Bitricius, steopfaeder. 10 Bubla, flood.
Birbicariolus, werna. Byssum, tuin.
Bitorius, erdling. Byrseus, lederuyrtha.
Bipertitum, herbid.
Bilance, tuiheolore. Calculus, cale.
Bibulta, billeru. 15 Caccabum, cetil.
Blitum, clate. Cados, ambras.
Blessus, rtom. Cartellus, windil.
Bothoma*, embrin. Calculus, ratio, uel sententia, uel
Blohonicula, stoppa. numerus, uel teblstan.
Bofellum*, falud. 20 Cartilago, naesgristle.
Bona, scaet. Carbunculus, spryng.
Boreus, eastnordwind. Cautere, aam,
Bobulcus, hridhiorde. Catapulta, flaan.
Bouestra, radre. Cabillatio, glio. ‘
Bacarius, meresuin, 25 Camellea*®, wulfescamb.
Bofor, lendislieg. Canes linga’, ribbe.
Bombosa, hlaegulendi. Calentes, hatende.
Botrum, clystri. Caulem, steola.
Bolides, sundgerd in scipe, wef Capulus, helt.

metrap, 30 Caumeuniae, eordreste.
Briensis, honduyrm. Catabatus, romei.
Brahiale, gyrdels. Calear, spora.
Bratium, malt. Cauterium, merciseren.
Bradigabo, felduop. Catasta, geloed.
Broel, edisc, deortuun. 35 Cappillatur, faexnis.
Broellarius, ediscueard. Capsis, cest.
Bruchus, ceter. Carcura, craet.
Bruncus, wrot. Caractis, wueterpruh.
Braciae, cian. Cariscus, cuicbeam, uuice.
Braugina, barice. 40 Capitium, hood.
Bulla, sigl. Camisa, ha[a}m.

1 Of course, forverna, abondman. The — embrin, embryne, ymbryne, anniversarius,
6 is often used for v in this corrupt cyclus. R. W,
Latin, as in the next word, which repre- 4 Bofellum, for bovitlum, a fold, Anglo-
sents the Latin word avena. Ata is an oat. Saxon falud, faled,

2 For vecta, vectis. 5 For buzus.

3 Bothoma or Bothonia perhaps for 6 For chamaleon, a plant: the wolf's
Boedromia which word was translated thistle. — 7 or cinoglosa. R. W.

Hil LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 12
Carix, seeg. Cauerniculis, holum.
Canalibus, waeterdrum Capistrinum, geflit.
Cappa, scieging. Cassidis, helmes. ®
Castanea, cistenbeam. Casus, fer,
Calta, veade clafre, uel genus floris. 5 Casis, ned.
Capistrum, caebestr. Casso, idle.
Calcesta, huite clafre. Cassium, helm.
Cancer, haebrn. Cardo, heor.
Caleiculium, iecsessurae'. Cabillatur, mandrat.
Cardella, pisteltuige. 10 Caelatum, agraben.
Cacomicanus, logdor. Catagrinas, bleremina mees.
Calomachus, haet. Canthera, trog.
Cardus, pistel. Callus, waar.
Castorius, beber. Caluarium?, caluuerclim.
Caenum, wase. 15 Cardiolus, uudusnite.
Carectum, hreod. Cailis, paat.
Carpella, sadulboga. Capistro, caefli.
Carina, bythne. Calleo, fraefeleo.
Canti, faelge. Cauliculus, steola.
Cassidele, pung. 20 Carpebat, sclat. '
Cappa, snod. Cauernus, holu.
Carpasini, gresgroeni. Cartamo, lybeorn,
Calmetum, merse. Carcesia, bunan.
Caliga, scoh. Cessere, on wicum.
Carbo, gloed. 25 Cercilus, aesc.
Carduelis, linetuige. Censores, gerocfan,
Caradrion, laurici. Censeo, doema.
Cantarus, wibil. Cesuram, gegandende *.
Caper, heber. Celox, ceo).
Callos, weorras, uel ill. 30 Cerus, elh.
Carula, crauue. Cerula, heawi.
Cartilago, grundsopa. Cerasius, ciserbeam.
Capria, raha. Cerefolium, cunclle.
Cauda, steort. Cefalus, heardhara.
Caldaria, cetil. 35 Cepa, ynnilaec, cipe.
Cater, suearth. Cementum, liim, lapidum.
Cartago, braadponne. Cente, wildegoos.
Caragios, lyblaecan. Cespites, tyrb.
Casla, heden. Cessit, gecode.
Canda, boga. 40 Cereacus, hornblauuere.
Campus, brogdetende welcleppetende. — Cernua, hald.
Carbasus, seglbosm. Cerefolium, cerfelle.
Cautionem, gewrit. Chaus*, duolma, prima confusio,
Capulum, helt. omnium rerun.
Caumati, suole. 45 Chaumos, suol.

1 Cuckoo's sour, wood sorrel. Cf. pag. 3 For gegangende?
3, 22. 4 For chaos.

2 For caluaria, the place of skulls.

18 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 14
Chartamo, lybeorn. Conuincens, oberstaelende.
Chorus’, eostnordwind. Codices, onheawas.
Citropodes, chroa, croha. Consutum, gesiowed.
Cicuta, hymlice. Corimbos, bergan,
Cicuta, wodewistle. 5 Commercium, ceapstou, gestrion.
Cicad, seeggescere, wel haman. Corben, mand.
Ciconia, store. Conpactis, gegacdradon.
Cicer, bean. Corbus, cauuel.
Cisculus, heardheau. Consulo, frigno. A
Cinoglosa, ribbe. 10 Conuicta, oberstaeled.
Cireinno, gabulrond. Coneidit, toslog.
Circius, westnordwind. Conparantem, gegaerwendne.
Cis, biheonan. Coaluissent, suornadun.
Cimiteriun, licburg. Concedam, lytesna.
Circinni, windeloceas. 15 Coniurati, gemode.
Circinatio, oefsung. Contumax, anmood.
Cinnamonum, eymin resina, Confusione, gemengiunge.
Cicuanus, higrae. Concesserim, arecte.
Citonium, goodaepel. Conpar, gehaeplice.
Clauia, borda. 20 Constipuisse, gesuedrade.
Claua, steng. Conuenio, ic groetu.
Clustella, clustorloc. Contis, spreotum.
Cladica, wefl, uel owef. Contos, speoru.
Clinici, faertyhted. Condicione, raedenne.
Clauus caligaris, scohneg). 25 Consobrinus, gesuigran.
Clasis, flota. Cocleae, lytle sneglas.
Clatrum, pearuc. Coffinus, mand.
Clabatum, gebyrded. Commentariensis, gerocfa. ~
Clus, teltreo. Cospis, palstr.
Clima, half. 30 Color, aac.
Clauicularius, caeghiorde. Corylus, laesl.

 Commisura, flycticlad. Cornacula, crauue.
Conabulum, cildatrog. Cornix, crawe.
Colonus, gebuur. Conglutinata, gelimed.
Colobium, hom. 35 Corimbos, leactrogas.

| Contribulius, meig, uel sanguine. Colostrum, beost.
Coccum bistinctum, wiolocread. Cocleas, uuiolocas.
Cotizat, tebleth. Conpos, faegen.
Conuexu, hualf. Contentus, geneord.
Conguilium, wilocscel. 40 Commentis, seorwum.
Contemtum, heuuendlice. Cors?, numerus militum, tuun.
Conlato, oembecht. Confici, gemengan.
Commeatos, sonde. Conpetentes portiunculas, i. gelimp-
Contubernalis, gepofta. lice daele.
Coniectura, resung. 45 Conpagem, gegederung.
Condidit, gesette. Coituras, gegangendo,

1 Perhaps for Eurus, R W 2 For cohors.

15 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 16
Commanipularius, gescota uel con-  Cocilus, ampre.

scius, socius, collega. Crebrat, siftid.
Consobrinus, sueor. Crebrum, sibi.
Corax, hrefn. Crucus, gelo.
Commisura, cimbing. 5 Cripta, ascussum.
Cox, hwetestan. Crepundia, maenoe.
Coxa, thegh. P Cratem, flecta, uel hyrpil.
Conpetum, tuun, prop. Crus, scia.
Colicus, eoburthrote. Crabro, waefs, uel hurnitu.
Colus, wulfmod. 10 Crustula, similis, haalstaan.
Conca, mundleu. Crama, flete.
Coagolum, ceselyb. Crates, hegas.
Commolitio, forgrindet. Cragacus, styria. a
Concisium, scelle. Cuniculos, smyglas.
Confundit, menget. 15 Curiositas, feorwit, geornis.
Commentum, apoht. Culcites, bed.
Conderetur, gewarht. Cucumis, popeg.
Conpedium, gescroepnis. Culmus, wyrd.
Coleandrum, cellendre. Curculio, emil.
Colomata, haetcolae. 20 Cupa, byden. 7
Concha, beme, Cuba, tunne.
Conualuit, geuacrpte. Cummi, teoru.
Consors, orsorg. Culiz, mygg.
Comitauere, togelestunne. Cuculus, gaec.
Conclamatus, loma. 25 Cucuzata, lepeuuince.
Concessit, geuuatu. Culinia, cocas.
Commendabat, trymide. Cucuma, fyreruce.
Condebitores, gescolan. Cuspis, palstr.
Concussionibus, raednisse. Cunae, cildcladas.
Confoti, afoedde. 30 Curtina, wagryft.
Conuenientes, seruuende. Culter, saex.
Conlisio, slaege. Cuneus, waecg.
Coturno, wodhae'’. Cuppa, accipiendo, t. beodbolle.
Contio, gemoot. 5 Cyprinus, forneted cli?
Costa, rib. 35 j
Contionatur, madalade, declamat. Damma, bestia, 7%. eola.
Consobrinus, filius patruelis, uel mo- Defrutum, coerin.

derg. Detulerat, brohte.
Confutat, oberstaclid. Delicatus, wrast.
Conpilat, stilith. 40 Destituit, obgibeht.
Cornu, ceste. Deuotaturus, wergendi.
Conectit, teldat. Desis, suuer.
Concretum, gerunnen. Desolutus, onsaelid.
Conca, musclan scel. Destituunt, towuorpon.
Coccum, wioloc, 45 Destitutae, toworpne.

1 This interpretation of cothwrnus is to have taken cothurnus for coturnia =
rather singnlar. The glossator appears woodhen. R. W.

ny LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 18

Decipula, bisuicfalle. Distabuerunt, asundun.

Decrepita, dobgendi. Discensor, ungedyre.

Desidebat, unsibbade. Dilectum, [meniu] exercitum.

Defatiget, suenceth. Difficile, wearnwislice.

Delumentum, dhuehl. 5 Digitalium  musculorum, fingrdoe-

Deponile, wefta. cana.

Deconfugione, statione, hydae. Dicam, quedol.

Deliberatio, ymbdriodung. Dicas, quedole.

Delicatis et querulis, wrastum end  Difinis, suide micel.
seobgendum. 10 Dispensatio, scir.

Defectura, aspringendi. Dimisis, asclaecadun.

Decidens, gewitendi. Dicimenta, tacne.

Debita pensio, gedaebeni geabuli.  Dispectus, fraecud.

Deditio, handgand. Dignitosa, meodomlice.

Detractauit, forsooc. 15 Disoluerat, ascaeltte.

Deuia callus, horweg stig. Diuinos, wuitgan.

Defferuntur, meldadun,uelwroegdun. Distitutwm, ofgefen.

Dehiscat, tocinit. Distentus, adegen.

Detriturigne, agnidine. Dolatum, gesniden.

Dentalia, sulesreost. 20 Dodrans, egur.

- Deuinxit, geband. Dolatura, braadlastecus.
Decerni, scriben. Dos, wituma, vel uuetma.
Degloberei, flean. Domatis, huses.

Defotabat, forsuor. Dolones, bunsporan.
Depraehendo, anfindo. 25 Dromidus, afyred olbenda.
Desciuit, widstylde, pedem retraxit. Dromidarius, se eorodmon.
Defert, wroegde. Dracontia, gimro, dicitur.
Delectum, cyri, uel electio. Duleissapa, caerin,
Detestare, onseacan. Dumus, pyrne.
Detrimentum, wonung. 30
Degenerauerat, misthagch. Eatenus, oddaet.
Desisse, tionade. Ebor, elpendbaan.
Degesto, geraedit. Ebredio, hrisle.
Decreta, gedoht. Ebulum, walhwyrt.
Deuota, cystig. 35 Echo, wudumer.
Difortium, [weggedal'] repudium. Echinus, piscis, uel scel.
Diem obiit, asualt. Edera, uuduwinde.
Dictatorem, aldur. Eder, ifegn.
Dilotis, todaeldum. Edilitatem, hamscire.
Delibutus, gesmirwid. 40 Edissere, asaecgan.
Dilatio, aelding. Effosis, ahlocadum [enebata,asuond’].
Ditor, gefyrdro. Effetum, ontudri.
Dispendium, wom. Eftafolium, sinfulle.
Disceptant, flitat. Eftafylon, gelodwyrt.
Dissimulat, midid, 45 Efficaciter, [welociter], fromlice.
Disparuit, ungeseneweam. Efficax, [expeditus], from.
1 Added in another hand. R. W. 2 These two words are added in another
hand. R. W.
2

\

19 LATIN AND ANGILO-SAXON GLOSSES, 20 F
Effectum, deid. Eximet, aliesct.
Fyre, earfedlice. Exegestus, gebero.
Egerere, ascrepan, Expendisse, araefnde.
Egesta, ascrepen. Exundauit, auucol.
Egra, slacce. 5 Experimentum, andwisnis.
Elogio, geddi. Exercitiis, bigangum.
Eluderet, auuegde. Exorti, adresti.
Electrum, elotr. Exposito, geborone.
Eleborus, pung, woedeberge. Exaltauit, stone.
Elogia, \aac. 10 Expedisset, drowode.
Elegans, loquax, smicre. Expedierant, aracddun.
Eliminat, adytid. Exito, perditio, endistaeb.
Elimat, gesuirbet. Exoleuerunt, gesuedradun.
Empta, geboht. Ex phalange, [of dreote], of foedan.
Empticius, ceapeneht. 15 Exauctorauit, geheende.
Emolumentum, lean, fultum. Expilatam, [apryid], arytrid.
Emblema, fothr. Expeditio, faerd.
Emuncetoria, candeltuist. Exintera, ansceat.
Emaones, scinneras. Explodit, excludit, atynid.
Emenso, oberfoerde, 20 Exagium, andmitta.
Eneruat, asuond. Extale, snaedilpearm.
Enum, cetil. Exilia, gestinecum.
Enucleata, geondsmead. Expeditis, gearuum.
Enixa, beorende. Exta, lesen.
Eniaa est, genuit agnam, 1. ceolbor 25 Exenium, laac.

lomb. Exactor, scultheta.
Eptasyllon', gelodwyrt. Excolat, siid.
Epilenticus, woda. Exta, precordia, baecpearm.
Eptafolium, sinfulle. Examusin, [geornlice], absolute, certe
Epimenia, nest. 30 uel exquisite.
Ependiten, cop. Exorbitans, asuab.
Erimio, hindberge. Exalaparetur, suungen.
Erenis [haegtis” ], furia. Extipices, haclsent.
Erenditen, cop. Expensa, daeguuini.
Erpica, egde. 35 Exerta lingua, naccfa]d tunge.
Erpicarius, egdere. Excesus, egylt.
Erugo, rust. Exigebant, avaefndun.
Errabiles, huerbende. Expeditionibus, ferdun.
Ericius, iil. Examen, suela}rm.
Esculus, boece. 40 Extorres, wraeccan.
Euiscerata, athed. Exactio, geabulesmonung.
E vestigio, [on lande], on laste. Expediam, arecio.
Euidens, seotol. Excubias, weardseld.
Eurynis, waleyrge. Expendere, to aseodenne.
Eumenides, haehtisse. 45 Exugia, gescincio,
Expeditus, abunden. Expilatam, arydid.

1 For eptafylion. RB. W. 2 Added in another hand, R. W.

ai LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 22
Expresserunt, arehtun. Fenum, graces.
Exerceri, wesan draegtre. Ferrugine, iserngrei. :
Exercitatae, dare getyhtan. Ferruginem, obscuritatem ferri, i. om.
Expeditio, hergiung. Fiber *, bebr.
| Exactum, baedde. 5 Fiscilla, taenil.
Expeditus, uelox, [snel], fortis. Frida, stearn.
Fibra, pearm.
Facetia, glio. Filix, fearn.
Fale, walhhabuce. Fiscillus, stictenel.
Fasces [libri], goduueb. 10 Fibrae, librlaeppan.
Fagus, boece. Fibula, hringesigl.
Fastidium [odium], eymnis. Fiscillis, sprinclum.
Fasianus, worhona. Filum, dred.
_ Fascias, wedel » Finicia, Beosu.
— Famfaluca, [faam], leasung. 15 Ficetula, sugga.
Fasciarum, suaedila. Fibrans, risende
Falcis, wudubil, side, riftras. Fiscalis, redagebellicum (?), weegn-
Famfaluca, wapul. fearu.
Faleastrum, wudubil. Fimum, goor.
Faonius, westsudwind. 20 Fictis, facnum.
Festinatio', malscrung. Fistulis, peotum.
Falarica, xgtxro*. Figite, suidigad.
Falanzx, foeda. Filiaster, steopsunu.
Farius, faag. Flauum, fuluum, read.
Facessit, suedrad. 25 Flegmata, horh.
Farsa, acrummen, Flabanus, suan.
Fauo, bean. Flabum, geolu.
Fasces, cynedomas. Flagris, suiopum.
Fastu, wulencu, Flamma, bled.
Fabrile, sinidlice.. 30 Floccus, loca. .
Farelas, hryste. Flauescit, glitinat, albescit.
Falerata, gehyrsti. Flagrans, stincendi.
Feruginius, greig. Flebotoma, blodsaex. 7
Ferox, roede, ferae similis. Fortuna, wyrd.
Ferculum, disc, uasculum. 35 Forfices, scerero.
Ferinum, hold. Fouet, feormat, broedeth.
Feriatus, gerested Foederatas, getreuuade.
Fenus, spefa}rua. Fornicem, bogan.
Foenus, borg. Formido, anoda.
Foederatus, getriowad. 40 Forfex, isern sceruru‘.
Faecce, maere. Fors wyrd.
Fespa, waefs. Forceps, tong.
Fefellit, uuegit. Fornacula, cyline heorde.
Ferula, aescdrote. Foras, bolean.
Fellus, catte. 45 Fortex, edwelle.
1 The MS. has festinatio. --R. W. 3 For biber.
2 For @tger, a short spear or javelin, 4 Cf. forfices. R. W.
a kind of dart, Cf. p. 23, 15 framea.

23 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 24
Fornis, bogo, supercolumnis. Garula, crauue.
Follis, blaesbaelg. Garbas, sceabas.
Fornaculum, here. Galmaria, caluuer.
Formaticus, cese, a forma. Galmum, moling.
Fronulus, linetuigle. 5 Galmulum, molegnstyeci.
Fratuelis, geaduling. Galmilla, liimealuuer.
Fraiuelis, suhterga'. Gabea*, mefa]u.
Fratuelis, brodorsunu. Gabalacrum, calwer.
Frugus, uncystig, heamul. Gestus, gebero.
Frixum, afigaen. 10 Generosus, aedile.
Fraga, obet. Genista, brom.
Fracxinus, aesc. Gente, wildegoos.
Fringella, fine. Genuino, tuse, naturale.
Frutectum, lose, locus ubi ponunt. Genas, heagaspen.
Framea, xtgaeru. 15 Gente, wildegoos.
Fons, hleor. Gelum, forst.
Fretus, bald. Geumatrix, geac.
Fragor, suoeg, cirm. Giluus, geolu.
Fraudulenter, faeconlice. Gillus, grei.
Frontuosus, bald. 20 Gipsus, spaeren.
Frutina, fultemend. Gippus, hofr.
Fuscinula, awel. Giluus, falu.
Furcimen, waergrood. Gilbus, gyrno.
Furbum, bruun. Gingria, spon.
Fundi, grundus. 25 Glis, egle.
Funalia, condel. Globus, leoma.
Fusum, spinel. Glarea, cisilstan.
Fucus, faex, taelg. Gladiolum, saecg.
Fusarius, wananbeam. — . Gitilia, clife.
Funix*, gonot, wel doppa, enid. 30 Glomer, clouue.
Furuncus, meard. - Glus, frecnis.
Fungus, suom. Glaucum, heauui, grei.
Funda, lidre. Glandula, cirnel.
Furfures, sifidan. Gilebo, unwis,
Funestauere, smiton. 35 Gladiatores, cempan.
Funestissima, da deadlicustan. Gluten, teoru.
Funalia, cerei, waexcondel. Gripem, gig.
Fulgine, sooth. Grillus, hama.
Furia, haehtis. Gremen, Taethm.
40 Gramen, quice. |
Gargarizet, gagulsuille*. Grassator, forhergend. .
Garrit, gionat. Grallus, hrooc. .
Gannatura, gliu. Gracilis, smel.
Galla, gallue. Gregariorum, unaedilsa.
1 See Grein, sprachschatz der ags.dichter heat, burning; gagolbwrnes = wanton~
Il, pag. 493, fratuelis for fratruclis R. W. ness; and iagul = gargarismus. R. W.
2 For Phoeniz? R W. 4 For gavia = larus, gull, Germ, mive,
3 Cfr. gagulsuole meaning lascivious R. W.

25 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 26
Gregatim, wearnmelum. Hymeneos, hemedo,
Grus, gruis, cornoch. Ibices, firgengaet.
Grauis, cornue. Idoneus, oxstaelde.
Graffium, greef. Igni sacrum, oman.
Grunnire, grunnettan. 5 Ignarium, aalgewere.
Graticium, wagflecta. Ilia, midhridir, niodanweard hype.
Gurgulio, drotbolla. Titic, panan,
Gurgustium, ceosol. Imbricibus, paectigilum.
Gurgustiore', cetan. Inergumenos, wodan.
Gurgulio*, emil. 10 Indruticans, wraestendi.
Gunna, heden. Inians, gredig.
Impetigo, teter.
Hastilia telorum, scaeptloan, Inextricabilis, untosliten.
Habitudines, geberu. Inluuies secundarum, hama, in quo
Harundo, canna, hreod. 15 fit paruulus.
Haustum, dryne. Incommodum, unbryce.
Habenis, gewaldledrum. Inprouuisu, feringa.
Habile, lioduwac. Infestatio, unliopuwacnis.
Heus! geheresthu. Infula, wieordmynd.
Hebitatus, astyntid. 20 Inminente, aetweosendre.
Hebesceret, asuand. Infestus, gemenged.
| Hebitabit, asclacade. Ingesta, ondoen.
Heia. welga. Inola, eolene.
Herodius, walchhabue. Intestinum, pearm.
Hersutum, drustum. 25 Interamen, inifli*.
Helleborus, woidiberge. Instites, suedelas.
Herinis*, walerigge. Infima, viol.
Hebetat, styntid. Intexunt, wundun. .
Hiulca, cinendi. Inlex, tyctendi.
Hibiscum, biscopuuyrt. 30 Interim, prage.
Hirundo, sualuue, °  Increpitans, hleoprendi.
Histrix, iil. Infestus, flach.
Hinnitus, hnaeggiung. Interceptum, arasad.
Hyna, naectgenge. Interceptio, raepsung *.
Holor, suan. 35 Infandum, manful.
Hora, sueg. Inlecebris, tychtingum.
Horno, pysgere. Ingratus, lad.
Hoctatus, gelaechtrad. Incuda, onfilti.
Horno, pysgere. Inritatus, gegremid.
Holido, fule. 40 Incitamenta, tyhtinne.
Honeraria, hiaestscip. Interasile, interana, gly ffa.
Huscide, tolice. Intula, waalhwyrt.
Humase, bimyldan. Inprobus, gemah.
Hyadas, raedgasram. : Ingruerit, onhriosed.
1 Perhaps for gurgustia, cf, Bosworth 4 Inelf or inilf means viscera, interanea.
22c. RoW. R, W.
2 For curculio. 5 Perhaps refsung in the MS. R. W.
8 For Erinnys, the weleyrig.

27 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 28
Inruens, perende. Inruit, raesde.
Intractabilis, wnliopwwace. Inpingit, smat, gemaercode.
Innunes, orceas. Incentor, tyhtend.
In procinctu, in degnunge. Incantata, gegaelen.
Intercepit, riefsde. 5 Incantatores, galdriggan.
Intercepit, fornoom Infestationes, tionan.
TInterceptum est, racfsit waes. Intercapidine, ginnisse.
Insimulatione, feringe. Inundatio, gyte.
Inpendebatur, geben wacs. Incurrus, ongong-
Interpellare, raefsit. 10 Inbuit, onreod.
Industria, geornis. Infastum, sliden.
Inpendebat, salde. Inruptio, ongong.
In dies crudesceret, aforht. Innixus, stvimendi.
In transmigrationem, in foernisse. Incanduit, auueoll.
Iners, esuind', asolcen. 15 Ineptus, gemedid.
Interuentu, pingunge. Intrinicio, forsliet, ,
Inlectus, getyhtid. Insirtim, insondgewearp.
Interlitam, bismiride. Innitor, onhlingo °.
Inpactae, onligenre. Inficio, blondu.
Indigestae, unobereumenre. 20 Infula, uyrdo.
Innitentes, widerhlingende. Inmoratur, wunat.
Insolesceret, oberuuenide. Infectum, geblonden.
Inpulsore, baedendre. Indomitus, wilde.
Infractus, ungeuuemmid. Instincta, onsuapen,
TInopimum. unasaedde. 25 Intransmeabili, unoferfoer.
Inditas, da gesettan. Inbellem, orwige.
Infici, gemengde. Internicium bellum dicitur quo nullus
Index, tacnendi, toretendi. remanet, utcualm.
Inposterem®, bisuuicend. Inulus, hindeaelf.
Inter primores, bitu* acldrum. 30 In catamo, in bece.
Intercapido, firstmaere. Initiatum, gestoepid.
Insolens, forwuencd. Intimandum, to eydenne.
In curia, in maedle. Jota, sochtha’.
Incuba, maere. Jouem, puner.
In mimo, in gliowe. 35 Irridabant, tyhton.
Inuisus, lath. Trritum, forhogd, inanem.
In estiuo cenaculi, yppe, ubi per Isic, laex.
estatem frigus captant. Isca, tyndrin.
Inuolucus, wullue. Istic, uueder.
Inuoluco, uudubinde. 40 Istuc, hider.
Inquilinis, genacot*. Jungetum, risedyfel.
Indolis, hyhtful, wel diendi. Jurisperiti, redbovan.
Infridat, kaelid’. Jubar, earendel.
1 For asuind, R. W 5 For infrigidat. R. W.
2 No doubt an error forimpostorenm RW. 6 For onhlinie or onhlinio. Cf. Beda
8 For bitun, bitwin. R. W. IW, 17, R. We
4 For geneat colonus. R. W. 7 Perhaps an error for iochda. Somu.

29 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 30
Jugum, enol. Legula, gyrdilshringe.
Junetura, foeging. Lendina, hnitu®.
Juuentus', midferh. Leuir, tacur.
Juncus, rise. Lectidiclatum, gepuorneflete.
Jubar, leoma. 5 Lepus, leporis, hava.
Lentum uimen, tohgerd.
Labrum, segn. Lenticula, piose.
Larbula, egisgrima. Lesta, borda.
Lacerna, haecile, uel loda. Lenirent, afroebirdun 7.
Lacessit, gremid. 10 Ligones, meottucas.
Laogoena’, crog. Liburnices, gerec.
_ Latrina, genge, groepe, atqueduc- Ligustrum, hunigsuge.
tus, cloacas. Livida toxica, da wonnan acirinan.
| Laudae*, laurice. Liquentes, hlutre.
Lacessitus, gegremid. 15 Lien, milte.
Leaxiua, laeg. Libertabus, frioletan.
Lacesso, suto. Liciatorium, hebelgerd.
Laquear, firsthrof. Limax, snegl.
Lanz, heolor. Limphaticus, woedendi.
Lanucar, flode. 20 Lituus, erye.
Lactuca, pudistel. Licidus, hueet.
Lacunar, hebenhus. Libertus, frioleta.
Lapatium*, lelodrae. Linter, baat.
Lacerta, adexe. Lingula, gyrdilshringe.
Larus, meau. 25 Limus, laam.
Lappa, clibe. Limbus, dres, liste.
Latex, burne. Liberalitas, roopnis. -
Laena, rift. Lihargum, slaegu*.
Labat, weagat. Linea, waebtaeg.
Lana, wil. 30 Liciwm, hebeld.
Laquearia, firste. Licia, hebeld, dred.
Latratus, bercae. Lima, fil.
Laudariulus, freemase. Lolium, ate.
Ladascapiae, briensis, i.hondwyrm. — Lotium, hlond.
Lanterna, \ehtfact. 35 Lodix, loda.
Lacessere, gremman. Locusta, lopust.
Lepor, wood. Luscus, anege.
Lebes, huer. Lucor, freceo.
Lenta, toh. Lurcones, siras.
Lenocinium, tyhten. 40 Lunulus, mene, scillingas.
Legit, collegit, lisit. Luculentum, torhtnis.
Lembum, listan*. Lumbare, gyrdilsbroee.
1 An error for juuencus. R. W. 6 hutu is corrected to hnitu in the
2 For lagena. R. W. MS. R. W.
; Eor aan Ae. 1 For afrocfredun. R. W.
5 list means a list of cloth, limbus 8 For lethargum, cf. slagu, Bosw. 64 j.
panni. Cf. limbus. R. W. RW.

31 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 32
Ludi litterari, staefplagan. Maiales, bearug.
Lutraos, otr. Mango, mengo.
Lucius, haecid. Maulistis, seyend.
Lupatis, bridelsum. Mastice, huiteudu.
Lucanica, merh. ~—- 5 Malua, hoce, cottue, uel gearwanleaf.
Lurdus, \emphalt. M{arjubium, biowyrt, uel hune.
Lupus, brer'. Matrix, quida.
Ludarius, steor. Massa, clyne.
Lumbricus, regnwyrm. Mapalia, byre*.
Luteum, crohha. 10 Mars, Martis, tiig*.
LIupercal, haerg. Magalia, byre.
Lumbus, side. Macilentus, gefaested.
Luscinia, naectegale. Manere, bidan.
Luscinius, forse. Madidum, obdaenit.
Lupus, wulf. 15 Madefacta, geuucted.
Lupa, wylf. Machinamenta, ordone.
Lupinare, wilfholu. Mantega, taeg.
Lumbulos, lendebrede. Malas, gebsias.
Lymphatico, woedendi. Mendacio conposito, geregnade.
Lymbo, dresi. 20 Meatim, meomore *.
Melarium, mire apuldur.
Manipulatim, preatmelum. Melodium, suinsung.
Mancus, anhendi. Melito, meditor, meadrobordan.
Maforte*, scyfla. Mergulus, scalfur.
Manes, dede. 25 Merx, mertze.
Manica, glof. Mereo, groeto.
Manile, \ebil. ° Merula, osle.
Manitergium, lin. Megale®, hearma.
Margo, obr. Medulla, merg.
Malagma, salf. 30 Mercurium, woden.
Malus, apuldur. Mentagra, bituihn.
Mandras, eouuistras. Merga, scraeb.
Maceratus, preatende. Metricius, mederwyrhta.
Mastigium, suiopan. Miluus, glioda.
Manubium, waelreaf. 35 Milium, miil.
Manticum, hondfulbeowes. Mirifillo’, gearwe.
Masca, grima. Mimopora, deofscip *.
Mascus, grima. Minaci, hlibendri.
Marsopicus, fina. Mitra, haet.
Marsuppia, ceodas. 40 Mordicos, bibitne.
Marruca, snegl. Molestissimum, earbetlicust.
1 lupus denotes a drier, R. Wy expert. R. W.
2 An error for Mawors = instigator. 6 For megalium a salve. Hearma
3 Perhaps an error for byri (byrig) denotes a sling for supporting a wounded
castella, domus. R, W. arm, R, W.
4 Tiig or Tiw was the Anglo - Saxon 7 For millefolio. R. W.
god of war, R. W. 8 deofscip means nauis piratica a ship
5 The meaning of meomor is skilful, used by pirates. R, W.

33 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 84
Monarchia, anuualda. Napis, naep.
Morgit', milcit. Nazarei, loccas.
Mosiclum, ragu. Nabulum, ferescaet.
Momentum, scytel. Nauiter, suidfromlice,
Molibus, ormetum. 5 Neptams, tyndre.
Mordacius, clouae. Netila’, hearma.
Mouebor, styrid. Nepa, haebern.
Moles, falthing. Negotia, unemetta.
Molosus, rodhund.’ Nebulonis, scinlaecan.
Morenula, eil. 10 Nequiquam, holunga.
Mosicum, ragu. Netum, gesiuwid.
Mora, heorotberge. Neruus, sionu.
Municeps, burgliod. Necabantur, aqualdun.
Munifica, cystigan. Nitoriwm, spinil.
Murica, gespon. 15 Nymbus, storm.
Murenula, bool. Ninguit, sniwid 8.
Muluctra, ceoldre. Nigra spina, slaghdorn.
Munila, baeg. Nixu, werdeode.
Muscipula, muusfalle. Noctua, ulula, ule.
Mucro, mece. 20 Nomisma, mynit.
Mugil, haeced. Noctua, naehthraefn.
Musiranus*, screauua. Naualia, faelging.
Mustela, wueosule. Non subsciuum, unfaecni.
Mulio, horsdegn. Nodus, wrasan, ost.
Mugil, heardhara. 25 Notae, speccan.
Mulgit, milcit. Notatus, oncunnen.
Mus, muris, muus. Nouerca, steopmoder.
Multabitur, wuitnath. Noma’, rihtebred.
Murilium, byrgen. Numularius, nummorum praerogatur,
Musca*, egesgrima. 30 miyniteri.
Musica, myrgnis. Nurus, snoro.
Murice, wurman. Nux, hnutbeam.
Musca, flege. Nugacitas, unnytnis.
Murus, braer. Nueli, cirnlas.
Myrtus, wuir. 35 Nullo negotio, naenge earbede.
Numquid, nehuruis,
Naus{a]tio, uulatune.
Nauiter, horsclice. Obolitio *, edung.
Nastartium 4, tuuncressa. Obsides, gislas.
_ Napta®, blaecteoru. 40 Obrizum, smaetegold.
Napta®, tynder. Obriguit, gefreos,
— Nauus®, pumilio, duerg. Obliquum, seytehald.
1 No doubt, an error for molgit or 6 No doubt, an error for nanus. K. W.
mulget. R. W. 7 For mitella, 1 suppose. R. W
* An error for mus araneus. R. W. ni
| 8 For masca. R. W. 8 The MS. has: suwid. R. W.
4 For nasturcium. R. W. 9 An error for norma. R, W.
5 For naphtha, R. W. 10 Por abolitio. R. W.
3

a)

35 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 36
Obnixus, strimendi. Omentum, maffa.

Obreptione, criopunge. Omen, hael.

Obestrum', beost. Onocratallus’, feolufer.

Optimates, gesidas. Opilauit, forclemde ’.

Obuncans, genyclede. 5 Oppilauit clausit, gegiscte.

Obtenuit, forcnom, bigaet. Opinare®, resigan.

Obnixe, geornlice. Oportunitatem, gehydnis.

Obunca, crump- Opere plumario, hisiudi werci '°.

Obuix*, widerstal. Oppilatae, bisparade.

Obligamentum, lyb, lybsu 5. 10 Origanum, wurmille.

Obstruit, fordytte. Oridanum"', eolone.

Obiecte, ongensette. Orcus, ore.

Obiectus, uuitsetnis. Oresta, dres.

Obruere, oberurecan. Oripilatio, celiwearte,

Obsedatus, gislhada. 15 Orcus, dyrs, heldiobul.

Obturat, folclaemid. Ordinatissimam, pa gesettan.

Obdtinuit, ofercuom. Orbita, hueolrad.

Obiectionibus, gestalum. Ortigomera, edischen.

Obnoxius, scyldig. Oratores, spelbodan.

Obex, ogengel. 20 Ordinatus, gehaeplice.

Obicula, geocstecca. Or, onginnendi.

Occupauit, onette. Orion, eburdring.

Ocrets, baangeberg Orbia, sifan, utunda.

Occa, faelging. Orbitae, last.

Occubuit, gecrong. 25 Oscillae, totridan.

Occiput, hneeca. Oscitantes, geongendi.

Occabat, egide. Osma, suice.

Ocearium, staeli. Ostriger, bruunbeosu.

Offendit, moette.

Offirmans 4, claemende. 30 Patrimonium, gestrion.

Officit, werdit. Partim, sume daeli.

Ogastrum®, aeggimong. Palpitans, brogdctende.

Olor, suon. Particulatim, styecimelum,

Oligia, nettae. Paludamentum, genus uestimenti bel-

Olgastrum, aeggimong. 35 lici, haeeile.

Olor, cicnus, aelbitu®. Patrocinium, mundbyrd.

Olim, singale. Paranimphus, dryhtguma.

Olastrum, staeb. Palestra, plaega.

Omni modo, oeghwelce dinga. Pastinare, settan.

1 No doubt, an error for colostrum. R. W. 6 Cf. Bosw. 979: ylfete, ylfetu a swan,

7" olor, cygnus. R, W.

he con an ee 7 Onoerotatlus means a pelican. R. W.
: 7 ee " ? 8 Cf. obturat fulelemid, R. W.
TGs 9 For opinari. R. W.

4 It seems evident from the Anglo- 10 besiwian, bisiwian means to sew
Saxon interpretation that this should be together, to join; jungere. Bisiwed feper-
affirmans. Offirmare means to bo stiff-  geweore, Cot. 145. Cf. Bosworth 16f, R. W.
necked, obstinate. R. W. 41 An error for origanum, wild mar-

5 Cf. olgastrum. R. W. joram, R. W.

{
37 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 38
Palatina, raecedlic. Pariter, gelice.
Panice, ruseam '. Paruca, hicae.
Parce, wyrde. Palpantum, olectendra.
Parcas, burgrune. Paimula, steorrodor.
Parabsides, gauutan, 5 Parricidio, megeualm.
Palearibus *, deadraegelum. Paciscitur, gedingadon.
Palas 8, scoble. Palagdrigus, ecilmehti.
Papilio, fitfalde. Partigatum, wuduhona,
Papula, wearte. Patina’, bran.
Pampinus, crous. 10 Paleae, aegnan.
Papiliuus, wiolucscel +. Pabulatores, horshiordas.
Palingenesean, edscaeft. Passim, styccimelum.
Paneta, holoponne. Partica, reodnaese.
Paneta, disc. Perstrenue, fromlice.
Paupilius *, scaldhulas. 15 Pedisequa, dignen.
Papula, spryng. Perpessum est, adroten is.
Pandis, geapum. Perfidia, treuleasnis.
_ Patruus, faedra. Percommoda, suacenlic, matutinos,
Patruelis, faedran sunu. morgenlic.
Patruelis, geaduling. 20 Percrebuit, mereweard.
Paxillum, palum, nacgl. Perduellium, porh gefeht.
Panpila, wibl. Perseudoterum®, dorh ludget.
Panuculum, wefl. Percitus, hred.
Palagra, ecilma®. Pelices, cebise.
Pascsos, geroscade. 25 Penduloso, haldi.
Pastinaca, walhmore. Permixtum, gemengetlic.
Pla)pirum, eorise. Pertinaciter, anuuillice.
Pangebant, faedun. Pessum, spilth.
Palla, rift. Petisse, sohte.
Parula, mase. 30 Peranticipationem, dorh obst.
Papilio, buterflege. Peruispellones *°, dorh byrgeras.
Paliurus, sinfulle. Perpendiculum, coldred.
Pauo, pauua. Per hironiam"', dorh hosp.
Passus, faedm, wel tuegen stridi. Perna, fiicci.
Palumbes, cuscote. 35 Pedo, uel paturum, feotur.
Pastellus, hunigaeppel. Perpendiculum, pundur,
Pansa, scaffoot *. Pedor, reorum '%,
Paranymphus, dryhtguma, Penuria, wed).
Parumper, huouhlot{um|. Percellitur, bid slaegen.
Patera, fiola. 40 Peruicax, droehtig.
Papauer, popei. Pero, himming.
1 Cf, Bosworth, pag. 295 (56%). RW. 8 For balaena, petdecver, I suppose. R.W.
2 For pallaribus, R. W. 9 Vor per pseudothurwm. RB. W.
8 For pala. RW. = * i,
4 wioluescel denotes a shell-fish, RW. CR FARCE Til
5 = ee ee 1 For ironiam RW.
6 Cf. palagdrigus, KR W. 12 For reorung = mussitatio, I suppose.
7 The meaning of scaffoot is splay- or RW.
broad- footed. R. W.

39 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 40

Pessum, clifhlep. Piceca, neb.

Pessul, hacca. Piscis, fise.

Peducla', luus. Pistillus, gnidil.

Petrafocaria, flint. Plunas®, plumtreu.

Pendulus, ridusende. 5 Pliadas, sibunsterri.

Pella, sadulfelge. Plantago, unegbrade.

' Pecten, camb. Platisa, flooe.

Percellitur, slaegen. Plectra, auunden,

Pes, fot. Plataria, setin.

Perstant, tioludun. 10 Plus minus, ymb det.

Persoluio, ic drouuio. Polenta, smeodoma,

Petulans, wraene. Postena, boga.

Perpendit, achtad. Portio, hlyte.

Perstromata, ornamenta, steba. Populus, birce.

Pendulus, oheldi. 15 Politis, smoedum.

Pellis, fel. Portentum, scin.

Perpes, hvraed. Pilimita, hvingfaag.

Petuita, sped ?. Porfyrio, feolufer.

Pectica, slahae, Porcopiscis, styrga.

Philosophus, udwuta. 20 Porcaster, foor.

Phisillos*, leceas. Porcellus, faerh.

Phitecus, apa. Pollux’, duma.

Piraticam, wicinesceadan. Poleo ®, scaebe.

Pituita, gebrec’. Pollinis, gruiit %.

Pice sacuo, unamelte smeornue. 25 Pollis, grytt.

Pingit, faehit. Papauer, popeg.

Pistrimum®, cofa. Posthumus, unlab.

Pila, thothr. Polentum, fahame.

Pittacium, osperi, clut, cleot. Pons, brycg.

Pisum, piosan, 30 Procax, huuel.

Pistrilla, cofincel. Probum, seuuin.

Pillentes, bere. Procuratio, sciir '°.

Pirus, pirge. Promulserit, lidercade. j

Pinus, furhwudu. Profusis, genythfullum.

Pictus acu, mid nethle asiowid. 35 Promulgarunt, scribun.

Picus, higre, fina. Prouehit, gefremid.

Pix, picis, pic. Procaptu, fenge.

Pilus, her. Promaritima, saegeseotu.
1 For pediculus, R. W. 6 Por prunus. R W.
2 Yor pituita = phlegm, catarrh, rheum. 7 An error for poller, R, W.

RW. 8 For polio. R. W.
8 Vor physicos. BR. W. 9 gruiit seems to be the same word as
4 This explanation of pituita is rather  grut or grytt, R. W.

singular. Gebree commonly denotes a 10 sei denotes as well a shire, conuty,

noise; here perhaps sneezing, sternutation, province as the superintendence of a pro-

Cf. reuma. R. W. vince = pracfectura, superintendence, care,
5 For pistrinum. R. W. charge, R, W.

| 41 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 42

| Praetextatus, gegeruuid. Prorostris, hachsedlum.

_ Propropera!, fraehraede. Praeceps, trondendi 7,

_ Priuigna, nift. 5 Procus, brydguma.

_ Proscripsit, faerred. Prodigus, stryndere.
Propensior, tylg. Praesumtio, forenyme.

_ Profligatis, forslaegenum. Propugnaculum, briostbiorg.

_ Praerupta, staegilre. Proueho, fyrdru.

Probus *, ferht. 10 Proceres, geroefan,

| Proterunt, tredun. Propero, hraede.

_ Proterentem, naetendne. Praetersorium, paad 8.

_ Praefectae, frodre *. Ptysones, berecorn® beorende.
Profecta, gefremid- Putamina, hnyglan '°.
Praecipitat, ascufid. 1 5 Pudor, scomo,

_ Praecipita, afael. Pugiles, qui feriunt puncto, cosp".
Praefaricator *, reccileas. Pulenta, briig.

Praestantior, fromra. Pustula, onegseta.
Praesidium, spoed. Pus 7, uuorm.
Praestante, fremmendum. Pulizx, fleh.

Proteri, brecan. 20 Pultentum, fahame '8,
Praxinus, uiridus color uel xse. Puntus, brond.
Prosapia, obcniorisse. Pulleium, duergedostle.
Presetuas, byrga. , Pullus, brid.

Pruina, hrim. Pulla, blaco.
Pretersorim, paad. 26 .

Prifeta, drinuintra steor. Qualus, mand,
Prifignus, nefa. Quadripertitum, cocunung
Prouehitur, fremid. Quacumque, suae suide,
Prunas, gloede. Quantisper, suac suide.
Prurigo, gycenis. ae Quaternio; quatern.
Pronus, nihold *. Quadrare, gecblicadun.

_ Pronuba, heordsuaepe. Quin etiam, acedon.
Prodimur, biredne. Quisquiliz, aegnan "4,
Proflicta, forslegen. P Quinquefolium, hracfnesfoot.
Praeuentus, spoed. 35 Quinqueneruia, leciwyrt '*.
Prunus, plume. Quintus, giululing.

Progna, sualuue. Quocumque modo, gehwelci wega.
Praesorium, pund °. Quoquo modo, aengepinga.

1 For propera. The first part of the 8 paad means a smock - frock or shirt.
Anglo-Saxon composition is fre = freo,  Tergoro has the meaning of to cover over,
meaning celeriter. Of. propero. RB. W. to clothe. R, W.

2 Perhaps an error for phobus = poBog ? 9A grain of barley. RW.

R. W. 10 Cf. Bosworth 37f R. W
8 The meaning of frod is: wise, prudent, 11 Cosp denotes a fetter. R. W
Rea 12 Pus means the matter, corruption of

4 For praevaricator. R. W. an ulcer, R. W.

5 The Anglo-Saxon equivalent seems 18 Of. polentum. R. W.

_ tobe ‘ighold’. Wright reads ‘nihold’, R. W. 14 Cf, paleae. R.W.

6 Pund denotes a fold, septum. R.W. 15 Or lecewyrt; cf. Leo, Gloss. 20, 9;

7 Cf. Leo, Angelsichsischos Glossar II, 451, 16; 500, 12. R. W,

190, 25. R. W.

43 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 44

Raster 3, egide. Rigentia, forclingendu.

Rancidis, bitrum. Ripariolus, staedsuualwe.

Radius, hrisl. Roscinia, nacetegale.

Rabulus?, flitere in cobotum. Rodinope, \elothrac.

Rationato, ambaect. 5 Rostrum, neb, uel seipes caeli.

Rabies, geris. Robor, arbor, aac.

Rancor, troh. Rostratum, tindecte.

Rastros, mettocas. Rostris, foreuuallum, uel tindum.

Ramnus, deofedorn. Roscido, deawe.

Radio, gabulrond. 10 Rostri, tindas.

Renunculus, lundlaga. Rotrum, nabogar 8,

Retentare, stouvigan. Runcina, locer, seeaba.

Rema 8, stream. Rumex, edric.

Refugium, geberg. Rubigo, brond, oom.

Resina, teoru. 15 Ruber, read.

Reuma, gebrec. Ruscus, enioholen.

Reses, slace. Rubisca sacltna.

Respuplica, cynedoom. Rubisca, raedda, rabisca.

Relatu, spelli.

Reciprocato, gestaefnendre. 20 Sablo, molde,

Reclines, suaehalde. Salebrae, puerhfyri 9%

Recessus, heolstras. Sartago, brediponne.

Remota, from adoenre. Sarcinatum, gesiouuid.

Reserat, onlaec. : Sarculum, uueodhoe.

Remex, roedra. 25 Sartatecta, gefoegnisse.

Repagula, sale. Saeuo, unslit, smeoro '.

Rectprocis, wrixlindum. Salix, salh.

Relatio, edcuide. Sagax, gleu.

Retorto, gedraune 4. Sarmentum, spraec.

Renis, hedir. 30 Salibaribus, midlum.

Rediua, aettaelg. Sarcofago, licbeorg.

Reuerant, spunnun, Sacellorum, haerga.

Respectus, etsith, Sarcio, siouu.

Reponile, gearnuuinde. Sarcinatum, gesiowid.

Retiunculas 5, resunge. 35 Sambucus, cllaern.

Rictus, grennung. Sandalium, scete, loda.

Rimosa, cionecti. Sambucus, sueglhorn.

Rien®, laendino. Salum, haeb.

Rima, getael. Sagulum, loda.

Rigore, heardnisse, 40 Sanguinis, cniorisse ''.

Ridimiculae 1, cynewiddan. Sardinas, heringas.
1 Or rastrum. R. W. 7 ¥or redimicula a royal wreath, a
2 For rabula. The meaning of this diadem. R. W

word isa pettifogger, wrangler in actions, 8 nafogar denotes an auger, a wimble.

causes (in eobotum or eofotum). R. W. R W.
3 An error for rheuma, I suppose. R. W. 9 The same as purhfarn, R W.
4 For gedrawene. R. W. 10 Cf, Pice s@uo and seuo,
5 For ratiunculas. R, W. 11 The meaning of this word is a family,
6 For ren. R. W. generation, R, W.

45 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES, 46

. Saginabant, maestun. Scalmus, thol.

_ Sandix!, uueard. Sceda, taeg.

_ Sardas, smeltas. Scienices, scinneras ©.

_ Saliunca, sure. Scirpea, eorise leber.
Salum, seeg, uel mare. 5 Scalpula, sculdur.
Salsa, sure. Scaphum, scip.

 Sarabare, braecen * dicitur. Sciphus, bolla.
Satiare, asoedan. Scintella, sperca.

_ Sacra orgia, edmelu. Scalpio, scriopu.

_ Scolonia 8, cipe. 10 Sceuwm, goduureci.

— Scabellum, windfona. Scabro, unsmoedi.

 Scalpellum, bredisern. Scenis, scinnum.
 Scrobibus, furum. Semispatium, peohsaex.
Scopa, besma. Sentina, lectha.

— Scalprum, byrs, uel puarm. 15 Sentes, dornas.

— Scamma4, feld. Serpillum, bradelaec.
Saltuum, feltha. Seditio, unsib.

Scylla, eduuelle *, Seta, byrst. :
Scansio, scyrft. Secessus, heolstr.

Sceptra, onwald. 20 Sella, sadol. F

Scena, scadu. Sequester, byrga.

Scotomaticus, staerblind. Sclabrum, uuind.

Scalpro, bore. Scalpo, clawe.

Scirpea, lebr, breuis. Scuporum, bliuda.

Scarpinat, scripid. 25 Semigelato, halfclungni.

. Scalpellum, bor. Sero, eornisti.
Scaturit, criid. Seuo, smeoru.

Scoria, sinder. Serum, hweg.
Scurra, scond. Sensim, softe.

_ Scorelus, omer. 30 Senon’, cearricgge.

 Scrofa, sugu. Senecen, gundesuilge.
Scara, scaed. Sepeliant, onsuebbad.

_ Seniphes, mygg. Sermo, spree,

_ Scilla, glaedine. Sedulium, regu.
Scasa, ebordrote. 35 Senex, ald.

Scindulis, scidum. Senior, aeldra.

_ Scena, uuebung. Sibba, sigl ®.

Scrobibus, groepum. Singultat, sicetit, uel gescaslaet.

1 sandiz means minium or red lead; _ has interpreted scena by scinna (cf. scennis)
the Anglo-Saxon equivalent: a guard or which word denotes as well splendour,
watch! R, W. beauty, as vision, representation. Scin-

2 The form braccew and brecce is met neras, therefore, means players, actors.
with as well in Latin as in Anglo-Saxon. R. W.

RW. 7 Sinonis a sort of medicinal herb. R W.

8 Corrupted from ascalonium. R. W. 8 Is sibba an Latin word or perhaps

4 Scamma denotes the wrestling place the Anglo-Saxon sib, sibbe? The meaning
in the palaestra. R. W. - of sigl, sigel is I. a collar, a seal; 2. a
5 Of wertigo, R. W. kind of grain, rye. R. W.

6 scienices for scenices. ‘The glossator

|

47 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 48
Sicomoros, heopan. Splenis, milte.
Situla, omber. Spina alba, haegudorn.
Sinapian, cressa. Spina nigra, slahdorn.
Sicalia,' ryge. Spatula, bed.
Sinuosa, faedmendi. 5 Spiramentum, hol.-
Simpla, anfald. Spiato, matte.
Strina, meremenin. Squalores, orfeormnisse.
Singultus, gesca. Stabula, seto.
Sinnum, cirm. Stiba, handle.
Siliqua, pisanhosa. 10 Stabulum, stal.
Sisca, snidstreo. Strigillum, sereope.
Sinfoniaca, belone *. Stragua, strel.
Signaum *, segn. Stuppa, heordan.
Simultas, unsib. Sternutatio, fnora.
Sinopede, redestan. 15 Struerer, streide. |
Stmbulum, herebenc 4. Sturnus, staer.
Sinus, byge. Strues, heap.
-Sinus, faedm. Striga, haegtis.
Smus ®, wellyrgae. Stornus, dropfaag.
Socrus, sueger. 20 Stipatoribus, ymbhringendum.
Socer, sur 6, Strepitu, braechtme,
Soccus, soce, slebescoh. Strenue, fromlice.
Solisequia, sunfolgend. Strictis, getogenum.
Sopio, suebbo. Stiria, gecilae.
Sopitis, onsuebdum. 25 Stabulum, falaed.
Sollicitat, tyhted. Stagnum, mere.
Sorix 7, mus. Stilium, spinel.
Sortem, wyrd, condicionem. Stertens, hrutende.
Sortilegos, hlytan. Stilio, hraedemuus.
Sollicito, tyhto. 30 Suppa, ecambe.
Soluat, ondest. Stangulat®, wyrged, uel smorad.
Sollicitare, tyhtan. Stricta macera, getogone sueorde.
Soricarius, mushabuc. Stamen, wearp.
Sopor, momna *. Sternit, gehnegith.
Spina, bodeg. 35 Strenas, lybesne.
Spatulas rami a similitudine, spadi, Stellatus, astaenid.
dicti. Strutio, stryta.
Spicas, ear. Stigmata, picung.
Spatiaretur, suicade. Stomachum, maga.
Spiculis, flanum. 40 Strigillus, aera, aerenscreop.
Sponda, bencselma. Stenax, wurpul.
1 For secalia (cerealia). R. W. 5 For. sinus. R. W.
2 belone or belene devotes « kind of 6 For sweor, swer, Ro W.
herb: henbane, and a sweet cake or sweet 7 sorex denotes a rat, a field ~ mouse.
meat, R. W. R. W.
3 So the MS. R. W. 8 Perhaps an error for momra. Cf. Bos-
4 Au error of the scribe for herebecn. worth 44k mamrung =a sleeping. R.W.
Cf, symbulum. R. W. 9 An error for strangulat, R. W.

49 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 50
Stiga, gaad. Tabetum, bred.
Sturfus, fina '. Talumbus, gescadwyrt.
Strabus, scelege. Taxatione, raedinne.
Subplaudans, gelpende. Tabuisset, asuond, 45.
Suffundit, ablended. 5 Tantisper, dus suide.
Surculus, tuig, ouuaestm. Taberna, winaern,
Susurio, wrohtspitel. Talaria, fedrhoman.
Surum, spearua. Taurus, fear.
Sullus, ottor. Taxauerat, gierende.
Subarrata, geuuetfaestae. 10 Talus, oncleouue.
Suspensus, ahaefd Tabulata, dille.
Sualdam, durhere. Tala, webgerodes.
Subfragator, mundbora. Tabulamen, dille.
Subsciuum, fraecni. Taenis *, duaelum.
Successus, spoed. 15 Tegula, tigule.
Sublustris, scir, Tedis, blesum.
Subulcus, snan °. Teter, duerc.
Suesta, suina, sceadu. Territorium, \ond.
Surgit, waexit. Tentigo, gesca.
Sulforia, sueflsueart. 20 Tentorium, geteld.
Suspenderat, awenide. Tempe, sceadugeardas.
Sucini *, glaeres. Testudo, borddeaca.
Subigo, wrotu. Tessera, tasul.
Subcono, under haehnisse. Tertiana, lenctinald.
Sudum, lybt, siccum. 25 Terebellus, nabogaar.
Sutrinator, scoere. Tenticum, sprindel.
Subsannat, hospetet. Telum, web.
Suffocacium, cecil. Textrinum, webb.
Subiugatis, gededum. Termofilas, faesten *.
Suis, suin. 30 Temonibus, pixlum.
_ Suaeder, butan todum. Teres, siunhuurful.
Sunt, sint. Temperiem, uueder.
Suellium, suinin. Tehis, tegum, fodrum.
Subtalaris, steppescoh. Leloniaris, uuiegeroebum.
Supuratio, gelostr. 35 Thymus. haet.
Symbulum, herebecun. Tholus, hrof.
Thadalus °, brooc.
Taxus, iuu. Thessera, beeme.
Talpa, wond. Titica, uuefl.
Taculus, broce. 40 Tisifone, uualeyrge.
Talpa, wondeuneorpe. Titio, brond.
Tabunus +, briosa. Tilia, lind.
Tapetsa, rye. Tignarius, hrofuuyrhta.
1 The meaning of fina is a wood pecker, 6 For taeniis. R. W.
marsopicus, R. W. 7 fasten denotes a fortress, castle,
2 No doubt an error for suan. R. W. wall. R. W.
8 For succina. R W. _ 8 An error for caballus, I suppose.
4 For tabanus an ox-fly. R. W: See taculus, and ef. Bosw. 20p. R. W.
5 Added in the same hand. R. W.
4

51 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 52
Tincti, sli. Tranant, dorhsuimmad. |
Tilio, baest. Tripes, stool.
Tignum, tin. Tria, buice.
Titule, gataloe. Tractibus, naescum.
Tibialis, baanrist. 5 Trita, drostle.
Tipo®, draca, uel inflatio. Truitius, draesce.
Tigillum, first. Traigis, higvae.
Tinnulus, a tinniendo dicitur, id est Tricent, wlden °.
eran. Tubera, clate.
Tonica® polimita, hringfaag. 10 Tubo, druh.
Torta, auunden. Tubolo, fala.
Tonsa, rodr. Turdella, drostle.
Tortum, coecil. Turdus, seric.
Torquet, uurace. Tuta, orsorg.
Toreuma, eduuaelle. 15 Tuber, tumor, asuollen.
Torax, feoluferd. Tudicla, thuaere.
Torrentibus, streamum. Tutellam, scildenne.
Torosa, sionuualt. Tuber, hofer.
Toga, goduuebbe.
Torquent, prungun. 20 Ualba, durheri.
Trux, unhiorde. Vatilla, gloedscofl.
Trutina, heolor. 7 Uarix, ampre.
Traductus, georuuyrde, Uangas, spadan.
Tragoedia, bebbi, cantio. Uadimonium, borggilefde.
Tropea, sigebeen. 25 Uatilla, isern scobl.
Triplia, \ebl*. Uanus, gemacded.
Traiectus, dorhbrogden. Uapore, aethme.
Tridens, auuel, meottoc. Uanna, fon,
Tremulus, aespe. Uacca, cun.
Trufulus, feluspreei 30 Uada breuia, geuueada. ;
Transtrum, saes. Uerbere torto, awundere suiopan*?. —
Trulla, cruee. Uerruca, wearte.
Turl®, scofl. Uenabula, coborspreot.
Triquadrum,drifeodor. Uentriculus, ceosol §. |
Trans, bigeonan. 35 Uescada, mundleu 9.
Tragelaphus, ech. Ueror, witro.
Trulla, ponne. Uexilla, seign.
Transfert, geuuendit. Vestibulum, eaebrtuun.
Tribuli, braere. Uenetum, geolu.
1 For sliw? Cf. Bosw. G4t. R. W. is clearly to the third Georgic, 1. 106; — |
2 For typhon. R. W. Illi instant verbere torto.
8 For tunica. R. W. [Other glosses seem to be taken from
4 bd is obliterated. R. W. Virgil’s Aineid. We find the glosses:
5 For trulla, I suppose. R. W. Troiae ab oris =a finibus Troiae, and
1 Ui superum = uiolentia deorum, references
6 The MS. has aeden. R. W. to the beginning of the AEneid. R, W.)
7 The compiler of this glossary was 8 The MS. has cedsol, R. W.
evidently here taking his glosses from 9 The meaning of mundleu, mundleowe
the Georgics of Virgil, as the reference is a basin, RW.

1
53 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 54
Vertigo, eduuelle. Uiscellum, broht,
Uectis, song}. 4 Uiscera, tharme, thumle.
Uespas, wuaefsas. Uimen, wearp.
Uerberatorum, corthr. Uillus, wuloh.
Uerberatrum, flete. 5 Uirgo, unmaelo.
Uesica, bledre. Uitulus, caclf.
Ueneria, smeoruwyrt. Uitula, cucaelf.
Uespertilio, hraedemuus. Vistula, sugesweard.
Uernaculus, frioleta. Vibrat, borettid, uel diregad *.
Uecors, gemaad. 10 Ultroque citroque, hider ond hider.
Uernacula, menen, Ulinus, elm.
Uetellus, sueor. Ulula, wae.
 Uertil®, huerb. Umbilicus, nabula.
— Ueniculum*®, waegn. Umecta, gibrec.
Uertiginem, suinglunge. 15 Unibrellas, stalu to fuglum.
Vesper, suansteorra. Unguentum, smeoru.
_ Uetorno, faecuum. Undecumque, huonan huegu °.
Uermis, eordmata. Unguana, naegl.
Uemiculus *, cornuurma. Uoticompos, woto ornatus, i. fegen.
Uerbi gratia, wuordes intinga. 20 Uoluola, wuduuninde.
Uiolenter, roedclice. Uorago, hool
_ Uitiginem, bleci. Uoragine, suelgendi.
Uia secta, iringes uneg °. Uotium, oestful.
Uicatum, libr. Uoluma, gorst.  ,
Uittas, thuelan ® 25 Uordalium, laesti. :
Uitelli, sueoras. Uox, stebn. s:
UVillis, wuloum Urciolum, waetercruce.
| Uitiligo, blectha. Urna, amber.
 Uitricius, steopfaeder. Uris, urum,
Uicium, fuglesbean. 30 Uerticeta, netlan.
_ Uillosa, rye". Urguet, threatade.
_ Uiscus, mistel. Uscide, tohlice.
Uilla, lininryee. Usurpauit, aguette.
 Uiburna, widuuuinde. Usia, suernit.
Uirecta, quicae. 35 Utensile, geloma.
Uitiatum, awended. Uulgo, passim, oeghuer.
_ Uibrat, brogdetted. Uzxorius, ceorl.
Uitiato oculo, widyhtge egan.
Uirgultum, gerd. Yryseon, hereseearum.
Uiscera tosta, gebreded flaese. 40 Ymnus, loob.
Uibice, lelan.
_ Uinco, obersuido. Zizania, laser.
| Uiresceret, greouue.
1 No doubt an error for steng. R. W. 6 Of. tani RW.
2 Perhaps an error for uertigo? RW. 7 Cf. tapetsa. R. We
3 For uehiculum. R. W. 8 Is diregad an Anglo ~ Saxon word?
. 4 An error for uermiculus. R. W. R.W.
. >° Cf. W. Grimm, Deutsche heldensage 9 In the same line, after hwegu, the
| 394 ff. R. W. scribe wrote: speru. R. W.

II.
KENTISH GLOSSES,
OF THE NINTH CENTURY }.
1. Glosses referring to the Proverbs (3°) per uias tenebrosas, durh driost-
of Solomon. rie weogas.
qui letantur, da geblissiad.
y inrebus pessimis, on werstum dingwun.
(2°) iacitur, is worpen. 5 infames, unhlisie.
pennatorum, gefideradra. que mollit, sio hnescad.
et moliuntur fraudes, and bereatiad —pupertatis sue, hire meidhades.
sic . . . rapiunt, swa reafiad. calles, sidfatu.
praedicat, bodad.
clamitat, hi clepad. 10 UL
et... cupiunt, and gewilniad. non te deserant, ne forleton.
el... . odibunt, and hatiad. gutturi tuo, dinre hraca.
en proferam, efne nu ic ford brenge. et ne innitaris, and ne getrua du.
quia uocaui, fordam ie geecide (4°) et recede, and gewit.
ego . . . ridebo, ic hiihe. 15umbi . . lo tuo, pinum nafelan.
cum insonuerit, donne sweid. et inrigatio, and leccine.
ingruerit, onbricp. saturitate, of gesundfulnesse.
exosam, onseunede. torcularia tua, pine winwringan,.
(3°) et detraxerunt, and hio teldan. et... redundabunt, and genihsumiad.
et... perfruetur, and he brecd. 20ne abicias, ne awearp du.
timore . . . sublato, atogenum ege nec defi.as, ne du ne atiara.
cum... coriperis, bonne pu bist
dread.
mM et . . . complacet, and gelicad.
penes te, nih de. 25 affluit, swelhd.
gradientes, farende. et... non ualent comparari, and
et omnem semitam bonam, and calne ne magon bion widmetene.

godna sidfet. qui tenuerit, pe hefd.

' Phe following glosses. are from a “Zeitschrift fiir Deutsches altertum. Neue
MS. of the British Museum, Cotton Vesp. folge, 9. bd.” Our text is based on a —
D, VI. -- According to the handwriting recent collation of this repriut with the
this MS. belongs to the first half of the MS. in question. ;

- ninth century, its dialect is that of Kent. Wright did not take these glosses into

Zupitza lately edited these glosses in his collection. R. W.

|

57 KENTISH GLOSSES. 58
stabiliuit, gestadclade. et... stabilientur, and sin gesta-
 erumperunt, up abrycan. delade.
rore, of deauwe. nouit, wat.
(4°) ne affluant, ne aflowan. peruerse, forhwerfede.
et. . + non impingel, and ue et- 5faciet, he ded.
spernd.
ne paueas repentino terrore, ne forta 7 .
du of ferlican ogan.
ne capiaris, det du ne sio gripen. ut custodias, pet du. . -
prohibere, forbiodon. 10 ect . . . conseruent, and ge...
si uales et ipse benefac, gif dumeht 6") nitidius, scinendre.
and du self tela do. (gladius) biceps, twiiece.
ne dicas, ne sege du. descendunt, nider .. .
cras, to morgen. et... penetrant, and farad.
ne moliaris, ne pendu. 15 wagi, woriende.
ne contendas, ne flit du. et inuestigabiles *, and unasperiendlic.
JSrustra, on idel. et ne recedas, and ne gewit du.
ne cemuleris, ne du ne onhere. ne des, ne sele du.
ne immiteris, ne du ne geefenlee. et gemas, and du giomras.
omnis inlusor, xl bismericnd. 20 cur detestatus sum, for hwe onscu-
sermocinatio cius, his wordlune. nede ic.
et... non adquieuit, and ne ge-
dafede.
Iv audiui, ie...
25 docentium, ... ra.
(5) tenellus, myra. magistris, . . . m.
et... adquire, and gestrion. paene, fornion.
 arripe, gegrip. sinagoge, werede.
glorificaberis, du bist gewuldrad. de cisterna tua, of dinum seade.
aumenta 1, eacan. 30 diri . entur, sint gereahte.
corona inclita, myriic cynehelm. et... diwide, and todel.
ne delecteris, ne gelustfulla du. habeto, du...
et desere, and forlet. solus, ane.
dormiunt, hh... *  uena tua, din edra.
(5") et non rapitur, and ne bid 35 et letare, and geblissa.
gegripen. adulescentia tue, dinve giogede.
nisi supplantauerint, buton hi be-  cerua carissima et gratissimus hin-
swican. nulus, eala du liofeste hind and
comedunt, hi etad. gecwemest hindcealf.
ausculta, hlest. 40 inebriant, ginddrencad.
ne recedant, ne gewitan. (6°) et... delectare, and gelustfulla.
uita, lif. quare seduceris, for hwi cart du
quia ex ipso... procedit, dara beswicen.
fordam ford gewit. et foueris, and du bist gestrangad.
remoue, fram astere. et... considerat, and he besceawad.
palpebre, dinum brewum. capiunt, gegripad.
} 1 For augmenta. R. W. 2 ue in inuestigabiles seems almost
certain, but very indistinct. R. W.

59 KENTISH GLOSSES. 60
et... constingitur', and he bid ge- — discordias, widwernesse.

wriden. liga, gewrid.
multidtudine, of .. - et circumda gutturi tuo, and uton
et... decipietur, and he bid be- ymbsele dinre hraca.

swicen. 5 yradiantur, hi faran.

VI (7) et a blanda lingua extranea,
si spoponderis, gif du behete. and fram swesere tungan uton
defixisti, du afesnadest. cumenre.
inlaqueatus es, du eart gegrinad. concupiscat, ge...
et captus, and geheft. 10 ne capiaris nutibus illius, de les du
incidisti, hrure, sio gegripen hiora onwaldum.
discurre, irnn. scorti, forlegese 8.
nec dormitent, ne hneppian. uix, uneade.
eruere, si du ut alened *. ut... non ardeant, det ne byrnan.
dammula, hind. 15 plante eius, his fotwelme.
aucupis, hireres*. sic... non erit, swa ne bid.
ad formicam, to emet .u. cum tetigerit, donne ethrind.
ducem, lateau. deprehensus, xnfunden.
nec praeceptorem, ne bodiend adulter, unrihthemere.
parat, hit gerewad. 20 inopiam, ermde.
estate, on sumere. turpitudinem, folnesse.
paululum dormitabis, gehwede huep- et. . - non delebitur, and ne bid

past. adilegad.
conseres, du on arets 4. quia ... non parcet, fordam ne arad.
(7) quasi uiator, swa wiferend®. 25 nec adquiescet cuiusquam precibus,
et pauperies, and ermd. ne hio ne gepafod eniges benum.
quasi uir armatus, swa gewepued dona plurima, manega giofa.

wer.
impiger, nusleac °. yu
homo apostata, afliged mon, .i. re- 30 ct... reconde, and behed.

trogradiens. quasi pupillam, swa sien.
peruerso, dweran. (8') custodiat, da...
annuit, gebeacnad 7. dulcia, werede.
terit, he treped. per cancellos, durh erepelas.
iurgia, tionan. 35 prospeai, ic...
extimplo, feringa. uideo, ge...
et... conterctur, and he bid forbret.  wecordem iuuenem, gionne dysine.
medicinam, lecedom transit, ferd.
et... detestatur, and onscunod. in obscuco, on forsworeenan.
sublimes, wp ahafene. 40 aduesperescente die, gewfenedan
machinans, saarwiende. deige.
proferentem, ford brengende. oceurrit, ongen arn.
testem fallacem, leasa gewitnesse. garrula et uaga, hiud and wid-
eum, dane. scridel.

1 For constringitur. Z. 5 Perhaps for swiferend? R. W,

2 For alesed? Z. 6 An error for unsleac. Z.

3 For hiweres. Z. 7 y is rather illegible. R, W.

4 For asets? ef. conseres in vy, XXIV. Z. 8 Read forleg(t)ran or forleges(t)re. Z.

q
61 KENTISH GLOSSES. 62
nec ualens, na megende. [ab] ea, hire.
consistere, wunian. penetrantes, farende.
insidiatur, hio searwad. im interiora, on da inran.
adprehensumque deosculatur, gegri- .
pen and hio cyst. 5 a
procaci wultu, gemagnum andwlitan. in ipsis foribus, on dam fordtege.
et... blanditur, and hio swesleed. —clamito, ic . ..
uictimas, onsegednesse. et ... animaduertite, and ongiotad.
debui, ic scolde. de rebus magnis, be mestum dingum.
reddidi, ic ageald. 10 (9") aperientur, siont ondone *.
et repperi, and ic gemete. ut ... praedicent, det hio bodian.
intexui, ic wef. guttur meum, min hraca.
tapetibus pictis, gemetum tepedum. et... detestabuntur, and onse.. ad.
aspersi, ic giondstreide. neque peruersum, ne forhwerfed.
ueni, cum. 15 cunctis opibus pretiosissimis, callum
uberibus, of udrum. dior.....
et fruamur, and wuton brucon, omne desiderabile, all gewilnienlic.
cupitis ampleaibus, ge...... comparari, bion widmeten.
donec inlucescat, oddet onliohte. eruditis .. . cogitationibus, gelereddum
(8°) uia longissima, dam lengestan2Q  gedancum. ;
wig. et... intersum, and ic betw..° eam.
sacculum, sec. arrogantiam, U.....e. esse®
tulit, hio nam. os bilingue, twispecne mud.
plene lune, ... les monan. et... detestor, and ic onseunige.
mretiuit, hio.e. te! 25 legum conditores, scepttenras 7.
blanditiis, swesendum, decernunt, gescadad *.
et ... protraxit, and hio teah. imperant, bebiodad.
et quasi agnus lasciuiens, and swa  potentes, rica.
plegende lamp. opes superbe, ofermode prede 9.
et tgnorans, and nat. 30(9°) et lapide presiosa, aud dior-
quod ... trahatur, pet togen... weordum stane.
donec transfigat, oddet afestnige. et genimina mea, and mine cidas.
tecor eius, his lifere. ut ditem, det ic geweolegie.
uel ut si auis festinet, odde swa et ...repleam, and ic gefelle.
-.. efst fugel. 35 possedit, ahte.
de periculo, be frecednesse. initium ©, on fruman.
quia ... agitur, pet hit . s don. quicquam, enig dine.
ne abstrahatur, ne sio atogen. antequam ... faceret, er don de he
neque decipiaris, ne pu ne sio be- dede.
swicen. AQ eterno, ... m.
fortissimi quique, gehwilce stongeste®. ordinata sum, ic eam geendebyrd.
1 Perhaps trepte? Z. 7 Zupitza reads: sceptteuras, but scept
2 For strongeste. Z. in scepttenras is very doubtful, R. W.
3 done in ondone is not clear. R. W. 8 ge and ad in gescadad are quite il-
4 These letters are very doubtful. R,W. legible. R. W.
5 th in betwili is obliterated. R. W. 9 ofermode seems to be an adjective,
6 Read upahafenesse, ef. omnis ar- prede a substantive (for pride, pryde). R. W.
rogans in v. XVI. Z. 10 The Vulgate has: in initio. R.W,
|
j

63 KENTISH GLOSSES. 64
ex antiquis, of ealdum. derisorem, telend.
et... antequam ... fieretl, and er qui arguit, se de dread.
dan de gewurde. generat, eynd.
necdum erant abysi, ne da get weron — macz:lam, wam.
- grundas. 5 (10°) diliget, ... d.
concepta, geeacnad. da, sele.
necdum ... erumperant, ne da get  occasionem, intigan 6.
up brecon. et addetur, and si geaht.
graui mole, ahefegum hefe. multiplicabuntur, biod .. .
necdum ... constiterant, ne da get 10 inlusor, bismeriend.
asette weron. portabis, du byrst.
ego parturiebar, is wes geeacnad. ef clamosa, and hlud.
et cardines, and hearran. inlecebris, on forspanegum 7.
quando praeparabat, da he ge- — omnino, eallunga.
gearwade. 15 sedet, hio sit.
aderam, ic etwes. super sellam, ofer sctol.
gyro, embferte *. uocaret, ... ge.
quando ... uallabat, da he ge- ct pergentes, and ferende.
strangade. itinere suo, hio® sidfate.
aethera, roderas. 20 uecordi, gedwolenum.
librabat, wei. aque furtiue, diofende weteru.
ne transirent, pet hi ne oferferdan. et . . . suauior, and wensure ®,
appendebat, wei. et ignorauit, and hio nat.
cuncta conponens, ealle geglengende. et . . . conuiuie eius, and hiora ge-
(10°) et delectabar, and ic wes ge-25 _ biorscipes.
lusfullad *. : :
ludens, plegende. aS
ad fores meas, et minum gatum. non proderunt, ne fromiad.
et obseruat potest* ostii mei, and non affliget, ne geswend.
begemd stude+ minre dure. 30(11") et ... subuertit, and he ge- .
et hauriet, and he hlet. hwerf.
ledet, dered. egestatem, wedle.
oderunt, . .. dan, operata est, worhte,
5 manus remissa, aslacad hand.
IDs 35 fortium, ... ra.
excidit, hio foreearf. diuitias, weolan.
immolauit uictimas suas, hio offrede parat, gegearwad.
hiore ansegednesse. qui... stertit, se de hret.
miscuit, hio gemende. operit, oferwrihd.
ad arcem et ad menia, to burge40Qet ... putrescet, and forrotad.
and to wealle. ceditur, bid swungen.
relinquite, forletad. confidentur ®, getrioulice.
1 Read embhwerfte. Z. 6 For intingan, cf. Bosw. 40e, R. W.
2 For gelustfullad, R. W. 7 Read forspanungum. Z.
3 An error for postes, R. W. 8 For hiore. Z.
4 Zupitza reads stode, It may be either 9 For wensumre, cf penuriam, v. XXVIII.
ooru. RW. L.
5 Added in a latter hand. RW. 10 So the MS instead of confidenter. KR. W.

| 65 KENTISH GLOSSES. 66
qui... depranat, se de gesweotelad'. — mulier gratioso 6, gefol wif.
_ qui annuit, se de gebeaenad. crudelis, welhriou.
uerberabitur, bid swungen. propinquos abicit, magos aweorpd.
wena, edra. opus instabili, unstadolfest weore 7.
et... aperit, and ontend. 5 seminanti, sawondum.
_ inuenietur, bid... sectatio, efterfylgnic s.
qui indiget, se d 2 wedlat. uoluntas, g.. «
custodienti, to gehealdene. (18°) cireulus aureus, gelden trendel.
(11°) non deerit, na wana bid. pulera, fe...
egestate, of ... 10 prestolatio, anbidine.
nec sociabitur, ne geferleed. diuidunt, todeled.
| dabitur, bid sald. propria, agene.
 acetum, eced. ditiores, weliogarn.
| non commouebitur, ne bid astered. et... fiunt, and bdiod.
(12") parturiet, eacnad. 15 gui inebriat, se de drin .. .
met... peribit, and forweord. inebriabitur, bit drucen *.
. - Srumenta, hwetes.
= maledicitur, bid wereged.
stetera 3, anmitta. uendentium, cypendra.
pondus, wiht. 20 inuestigator, speriend.
contumelia, tiona. obprimetur, bid .. .
 diriget, gerecd. corruet, ahriosd.
 supplantatio, biswic. uirens folium, growende leaf.
uastabit, berefat. possidebit, ah.
. corruit, hreosp. 25 uentos, ... 8.
et... capientur, and biod gribene*, — seruiet, diowad.
mortuo, ... dum. sapienti, ... m.
sollicitorum, ymbhedigra. '
simulator, lecetere. a
decipit, beswicd. 30 (13°) impie, ... ce.
liberabuntur, biodh alesede’ of. non roborabitur, ne bid gestrangad.
(12:)in perditione, on forspillednesse. et... non commouebitur, and ne bid
tacebit, swigad. astered.
Sraudulenter, facenlice. putredo, forrotadnes.
archana, diohla. 35 res dignas, medeme dine.
fidelis, getriowe. qu... gerit, se de det.
celat, bediolad. uerte, acyrad.
commissum, gelt. doctrina sua noscitur, of his lare
affligitur, bit geswenced. bit ancwawen
cauet, warat. 40 excors, modleas.
securus, orsorh. patebit, openad.
1 sweotelian means to testify, prove. R.W. 6 An error for gratiosa. Z.
q 2 So the MS. Zupitza has de, but there 7 weore is very faint in the MS. R. W.
mci mnoretoomeforsons., “RL. 8 For efterylgine, see Bosw. 24. RW.
For statera. Z. , Z
Miitrigripene. 2. 8 For drancen. 7%.
5 Is perhaps to be divided: biod ha- 10 For ancnawen, Z.
lesede of? R. W.
5

67 KENTISH GLOSSES. 68
nouit, wat. substantia festinata, geonet sped.
iumentorum suorum, his netena. minuetur, bid gewanad.
qui operatur, se de werd. paulatim, litlum and litlum.
munumentum ', getremmine. qu differtur, pe bid gecld.
proficiet, fremet. 5 affligit, geswend.
malo, ...m. desiderium ueniens, cumede’gewilung.
efugiet, forflioh. (15") alicui rei, enigum dince.
replebitur, bid .. . obligat, gewrid.
(14°) et... retribuetur, and bid — uersabitur, drohtnat.
golden. 10 worago, swelgend.
dissimulat, forberet. astutus, letig.
callidus, \cti. agit, ded.
nouit, wat. aperiet, untend.
mentitur, wegd. nuntius, boda.
testis .. . fraudulentus, facenful ge-15 et ignominia ei qui deserit, and
wita. netenes dam se de forlet.
qui promittit, se behet. qu... adquiescit, se de gedafed.
et... pungitur®, and bid witnod. arguenti, »..m. .
labium, .. + 1a si complebitur, gif hio bid gefclled.
concinnat, gepiod. 20 delectat, gelusfullad *.
qui... ineunt, de onginnad. detestantur, onscuniad.
consilia, gedeaht. qui fugiunt, de fliod.
acciderit, belipmd *. et... efficietur, and he bid ge-
malo, of ... worden.
homo uersutus, leti* mon, 25 persequitur, feld.
celat, bediolad. et... retribuentur, and bid golden.
tributis, trifetum, gafel. et nepotes, and neofan.
et... letificabitur, and he bid... et custoditur, and bid gehealden.
iter, sidfet. in noualibus, on dengum.
decipiet, beswicd. 30 ct... congregabuntur, and biod ge-
Jraudulentus, facenful. samnode.
lucrum, gestrion. qui pareit, se de ared.
(14¥) deuium, welise >, instanter, anredlice.
erudit, lerd.
Ball 35 insaturabilis, unasedendlic.
inconsideratus, unbesceawad. —_
operantium, wercendra. my
detestabitur, onscunod. (15°) [domum] . . . eastructam, timb-
et confunditur, and he bid gescend. runga.
ast, he is. AO despicitur, b.. .
consilio, «.. S ab eo, fram dam.
reguntur, biod gereahte. infami ... uta, on unhlisum wige.
1 Read munimentum. Z. and: lytig, letig: Oros., 5, 7. Boet. 37, 4.
4 P 4 4 Raw
Les eg explained punitur in- 5 Perhaps for wilese = weglease? Z.
EAGLE The form wig is met with p. 68, 1. 42;
3 An error for belimpd. Z. p. 76, 33, RW.
4 Of p.68, Lt and p 69, 1. 10, 125 : Bees s

, 669 KENTISH GLOSSES, 70
| plurime segetes, manega ecyras. nec... graditur, ne he ne ged.
| dolosus testis, facynful eydere’ exiraret*, gegladad *.
| prudentium, ... ra. in merore animi, on gnornunga modes.
| facilis ', edve. deicitur, bid aworpen.
inludit, bepeed. bet... pascitur, and bid fed.
morabitur, wunad. imperitia, uf ungleaunesse.
germinabunt, growad. quasi iuge conuiuium, swa singal ge-
extrema, endas. biorscipe.
| replebitur, bid... et insatiabiles, and unascdenlic.
astutus, letig. J 10 uocari, b.. -
(16") operabitur, werd. ad olera, to wertum.
uir uersutus, letig wer. quam ad uitulum saginatum, donne
odiosus, hatol. to fettum stioree ®
diuitum, .. . n. suscitatas, awehte,
qui despicit, se de forsiohd. 15 sepis 7, haga.
errant, dwoliad. absque offendiculo, buto otspernince 8.
praecparant, gegearwiad. et... despicit, and forsiod.
uersipellis, ficol . i . pretti. dissipantur, sin tostente 9.
in paucitate, on gehwednese. confirmantur, sint.. .
— gubernatur, is begemed. 20 in sententia, on cwide.
(16°) ossuum, bana 2. optimus, selest.
qui calumniatur, se de hespd. super eruditum, ofer gelereduc.
exprobat, hespd. (17°) pulcherrimus, fegerest.
factori eius, his wertan, qui sectatur, se de feld.
eum, hine. 25 fama bona, god hlisa.
eleuat, up ahefd. impinguat, amest.
; sapientium, ... ra.
xv commorabitur. wunad.
responsio mollis, hnesce andswore.  despicit, forsiod.
sermo durus, heard spec. 30 qui... adquiescit, se de gedafed.
Jatuorum, stunra. possessor, agend.
ebullit, wapolad. et... praecedit, and ford gewit.
contepplantur °, besceawiad. A
inmoderata, ungemetegead. an
inridet, tirhd. 35 ponderator, pundernged 195
astutior fiet, werra bid. dirigentur, b...
et... conturbatio, and gedrefednes. omnis arrogans, ele upahafenes,
disseminabunt, tosawad. (18") redimitur, is alesed.
(17*) dissimile, ungelic, et declinatur, and he bid aheld.
deserenti, forletendum. AQcum placuerint, ponne liciad.
qui... corripit, de dread. disponit, gedihnad.
1 The glossator translates facilius. Z, 8 For butou odspernince or etspernince,
2 Rather doubtful. R. W, Z.
8 Read contemplantur. Z 9 For tostencte. R. W,
Miner estar eaitard’ 2, @ pundern a Ricteaay The Anglo-
5 gegladad faiut, rather doubtful. R.W- dere, Perhaps is the me oe
: J . ps is the meaning of this
See Bosw. 69¢. R, W. gloss: ponderator = pundern, uel (= ge)
7 The Vulgate has sepes, R, W. pundero (= pundere)? R. W.

|
;
wl KENTISH GLOSSES. 72
pondus, pund. exprobrat, hespd.
iudicia, .. . mas. letatur, bb...
diuinatio, wilung. senum, eldra.
non errabit, ne dwolad. non decet, ne glenget.
impie, ...@ 5 composita, glengede.
solium, cynesetl. labium mentiens, wegende welere.
dirigetur 1, bid... gemma, gim.
et... placabit, and gegladad. grdlissima, geewemest.
imber serotinus, smelt hagol. prestolantis, anbidineges.
semita,... ta. 10 celat, bediolad *.
declinat, ... a. anicitias, freondscipas.
humiliari, b.. repetit, gehydlect ®.
eruditus, gelered. separat, toscered,
repperiet. gemet. JSederatos, gesibbade.
(18°) appellabitur, bit genemned. 15 expedit, fremet.
maiora, mare. urse, byrene.
percipiet, onfehd. raptis fetibus, odbrodenum hwel-
et... addet, and to geced. pum.
composita, geglengede. confidenti, getriowende.
ossuum, bana. 20et ... deserit, and forlet.
compulit, genet. (19°) et... comprobatur, and bid
et... ardescit, and bird *. afandan 6.
peruersus, forhwerfed. plaudet, hafet *,
lites, saca. peruersi cordis, dwerre hiortan.
uerbosus, werdi. 25 qui uertit, se de cyrd.
et... separat, and toscered. et ... incidet, and befeld.
lactat *, secet. in ignominia sua, on his netenesse.
attonitis, areahtum. set nec ... letabitur, ac ne blissad.
mordens, slitende. aetatem floridam, blowende elde.
perficit, fulfremet. BO exsiccat, a...
dignitatis, werdnes. inferre, on geledan.
repperietur, bit gemet. nec percutere, ne slean.
animo suo, is mode. qui moderatur, se de gemetegad.
urbium, burga. doctus, gelered.
set... temperantur, ac hio biod 35 pretiosi, diores.
gemetgode. spiritus, gast.
(20°) reputabitur, bid geteald.
XVII si conpresserit, gif he gewelt.
buccella sicca, drege bite. xv
uictimis, onsegednessum. 40 “
(19') obdedit, hersumad. occasiones, intigan 8.
et optemperat, and hersumad. reprobabilis, afadodlic °.
1 For diligetur. Z. 5 For gehydlect, goedlect. Z.
2 Read: birnd. Z. 6 An error for afandad. Z.
3 lactare means to allure, entice; the 7 See Bosw. 34k. R, W.
glossator makes use of ‘secean, secan” = 8 For intingan, cf. p. 64, 1.7. Z.
to inquire, ask for, adire, petere. R. W. 9 Read afandodlic. Z.
4 For bedigolad or bedioglad. R, W.

73 KENTISH GLOSSSES. 74
dixeris!, du... addunt, to gezcad.
que uersantur, de drohniad 2. quos habuit, de habbad.
contempnit, forheged. separantur, biod toscerede.
redundans, ediende *. et... non effugict, and ne aflid.
fons, burne. 5 colunt, weordiad.
inmiscent, on gemengad. dona, of ...
rixis, of sacum. distribuentis, todelendes.
bilinguis, twispeces. hominis pauperis, earmne monnon.
interiora, inran. oderunt, ... n.
et dissolutus, and toslacad. 10 insuper, der to eacan.
dissipantis, tostencendes. procul, fior.
Sortissima, strengest. et... recesserunt, and gewiton.
currit, irnd. qui... sectatur, se de feld.
(20°) ualidus, stran *. abebit’,... d. ;
et... dignwn, and weordne. 15 non decent, ne rised.
sustentat inbecillitatem suam, uder- — stulium, ... ne.
wreodad® his untrumnesse. deliciw, ...8.
ad irascendum, to iorsienne. dominari, wealdan.
sapientium, ».. ra. practergredi, forgeman . 7. forbugon.
donum, gefe. 20fremitus, gremetune.
dilatat, tobret. (21) herbam, werta.
spatium, fee. hiraritas® eius, his gledues. a .
accusator sui, wrehten his selfes. tacta® ... perstillantia, driopende
uenit, .. d. hrof.
inuestigabit, smead. 25 litigosa® mulier, sactul wif.
 contradictiones, widerewidas. dantur, sint sealde.
 comprimit, oftrect. proprie, senderlice.
sors, hlet. uxor prudens, glea wif.
et... diiudicat, and tosced. pigredo, sleup odde scleacnes.
| qui adiuuatur, de is gefultumad. 30 soporem, mamor "!.
uectes, scetelas. dissoluta, asclacad.
cum obsecrationibus, mid halsungum. et . . . eswriet, and hinrad '*.
(21) ride ®, stidlice. mortificabitur, bid ewelmed.
uir amicabilis, lufwendlic wer. Senerator '*, lend.
Ls 35 domino, ... ne.
suas uicissitudinem suam, his gewriel '*.
torquens, dreagende. ne desperis ®, ne georwen du.
Sestinus, hred, ad interfectionem ... eius, to his
contra, on. ewale,
Seruet, weld. 40 damnum, hendo.
animo suo, his mod. cum rapuerit, dome he gegrip.
1 The Vulgate has diverit, 7%. 9 For tecta, Z.
2 For drohtniad. R. W. 10 For litigiosa. Z. A
3 Read ediende. Z 11 See I, s. v. sopor KR. W.
4 For strang. R. W. 12 For hingrad. R. W.
5 Read underwreodad, Z 13 Read feneratur. Z
6 An ercor for rigide. Z. 14 For gewricsl. Z.
7 For habebit. R. W. 15 An error for despercs. Z.
8 Read hilaritas. Z,

15 KENTISH GLOSSES. 76
et... apponet, and to geset. exstitit, wunade. ‘
in nouissimis tuis, on dinum endum. — alieni, ... 8
homo indigens, bedearfende mon. caleulo, of griosne,
et... commorabitur, and hio wunad. — consiliis, ....m.
absque uisitatione, buton niosunga. 5 roborantur, and sint gestrangade
pessimi!, metestum. gubernaculis, . ..m.
nec ... applicat, ne he ne gepiod. tractanda, to smyagenne.
flagellato, geswungen. ad quam festinatur, to dam de hit
si... corripueris, gif du dreast *. efts7 wes.
(22r) ignominiosus, ungewis. 10 carebit, dolad.
et infelix, and ungeselig. (23) pondus, hefe.
non cesses, ne ablin du. deuorare, forswelgan.
deridet, teld. post uota, efter behate.
. et... deuorat, and forsweld. et curuat, and gebegd.
parata sunt, gerewe sint. 15 eos, da.
derisoribus, telerum. spiraculum, ord.
iudicia, ... 8. inuestigat, asperet.
et mallei percutientes, and sleande  roboratur, bid. .
slice. iuuenum, ... ra.
corporibus, ...m. 20 senum... ra.
oe canicies, harnes.
+ xx liuor, lela.
twnultuosa, madeli. abstergit, adreid.
sicut ruitus*, swa grimetung. in secretioribus, on deohlum.
qui separat, se toscered. 25 F.
a contentionibus, fram flitum. eae
miscentur, ...d. diuisiones, todal.
arare, herian. inclinabit, he ...
mendicabit, he wedlat. appendit, aweget.
exhauriet, 4... 30 (23°) et impingetur, and bio odsperd 8.
uocantur, biod... detrahent, telad.
beatos, ... ge. noluerunt, ... dan.
posse 4, wideftan. peruersa uia, duer wig.
intuitu suo ®, on his begemene. miserebitur, hi...
(22y) et saturare, and sio du... 35 multato pestilente, gewitnodum ewilde.
emptor, beccen. excogitat, dend 9.
cum recesserit, donne he gewit. ut detrahet'®, pet he ut atio.
et ... gloriabitur, and hit... qui opturat, se fordett.
et uas pretiosum, and diorrest fet. ad, et.
fideiussor, borhhond 6. AO et nonexaudictur, and ne bid gehered.
1 Perhaps for pessimis? The Vulgate 6 In borbhond two 6’s are written by
has: pessima. Z. mistake: bbrh, and r is above the line.
2 dreagan or drean meaus corripere, R, W.
castigare, inerepare. R. W. 7 Real efst. Z.
3 Read rugitus. Z. 8 For odspernd (= impinget, instead of
4 For post se, see the Vulgate XX, 7.. impingetur) Z.
R. We 9 For dencd. R. W.
5 The glossator seems to have read in 10 Read detrahat, Z.
tuitu suo, not intuitu suo. Z.

77 KENTISH GLOSSES. 78
munus absconditum, behed lac. mutuum, to borge.
indignationem maximam, mestan e-  fenerantis, lened ©.
bylhd. uirga, of... .
tusto, ...m. et... consummabitur, and he bid for-
pauor, ferht. 5 numen.
pui errauerit, se de gedweled. promptus, arod.
in coetu, on weorede. dedit, he...
commorabitur, wunad. pauperi, ...n.
epulos !, wiste. eice, ut aweorpd.
pinguia, fetto. 10 ct exibit, and utged.
non ditabitur, ne bid geweolegad. et supplantantur, and beod beswicene.
quam com muliere rixosa, donne mid © uerba, of...
secfullan wife. oceidendus, to ofslanne.
(24°) thesaurus desiderabilis, ge- fouea profunda, diop seat.
wilniendlic goldhord. 15 incidat ', on ahreasd.
tusti. . +8. colligata 8 est, is gegederad.
dissipabit, totencd °. et... fugabit, and bid afligd.
Jortium, strangere *. (25°) ut augeat, pet he gesce.
robur, strend 4. ditiori, weolegrum.
et arrogans, and up ahafen. 20 et egebit, and he wedlad.
occidunt, ofslead. sapientium, ... ra.
et desiderat, and gegernd. appone, to gesete.
et non cessabit, and ne ablind. redundabit, hio... q
que offeruntur, de biod brohte. tripliciter, driofeealdlice.
testis mendax, leas gewitnes. 25 firmitatem, trumnesse.
obediens, .. . sum, illis, dam.
uictoriam, sige. uiolentiam, strende %
procaciter, geaplice. non conteras, ne forbree du.
| offirmat, afestnad. et configet, and ofsticod.
corrigit, gerecd. 30 uiro furioso, hathort were.
equus paratur, hors is gegearwad. ne... discas, de les du liornic.
- qui defigunt, de afestniad.
; xr uades, borhhande.
(24°) operator, werhta. pro debitis, for geltum.
callidus, letig. 35 unde restituas, hwonon agelts du.
et afflictus est, and is geswenced. cause est, dinga his.
damno, of hende. tollas '°, nime.
in uia peruersi, on dreorum® wige. operimentum, oferbredels.
 prouerbium, biewide. (25%) ne transgrediaris terminos an-
adolescens, iunges. 40  tiquos, ne oferstepe du calde ge-
cum senuerit, donne he ealdad, mero.
imperat, bebiot. posuerunt, settan,
1 For epulas. Z. 7 The Vulgate reads incidet. R. W.
2 An error for tostened. R. W. 8 The compiler of the glosses confounded
8 For strangera, R. W. colligare with colligere. Z. Of.p. 83, 1. 41.
4 For strengd, strencd. R. W. RW.
5 So the MS, for dweorum. R. W, 9 See p. 77,119 R. W.
6 Read lenend or lenendes. Z. 10 The Vulgate has tollat. R. W.

uh) KENTISH GLOSSES. 80
uidisti, d... uestictur, bid...
ante ignobiles, beforan edelborenum t. — (26") dormitatio, rest.
; _ eme, bege.
ASMA exultai, ... nad.
cultrum, ser. 5 genuit, ceid 6,
ne desideres, ne gewilnadi2. gaudeat ... sic.
de, of. exultet ... nie.
ut diteris, pet du sio geweolugad. genuit ...d.
modum, gemet. puteus angustus, neare pyt-
ne erigas, ne du up ne arer, 10 incautos, unuuere.
opes, werde. Souce, ...8.
facient, ... d. suffusio. agotenes.
non comedas, ne et du. nonne, W...
cibos, ...8- his, dam.
arioli, dreas. 15 calicibus epotandis, drunendum 7 ea-
coniectoris, Wiccan. lice.
quoniam ...estimat, for dam de he —_flauescit, glitenat.
wend, splenduerit, scind.
quod ignorat, pet hi nat. cotor, blio.
euomes, du... 20 ingreditur, hit...
pulchros sermones tuos, dine fegeran — blande, lufwedlice *.
specce. regulus, slawerm*.
- (26") nec adtingas, ne du ne ethrin. —diffundet, togiot.
intro eas, in ga. uidebunt, ...p.
propinquus, mygd. 25 loquetur, ...p.
ingrediatur, in ga. (27") sopitus, swefed.
aures tue, ....1. repperiam, ic gemete.
subtrahere, ation, =
si... percusseris, gif du slehst. gn
uirga®, of... 30 dispositione, dehtnunge.
morietur, he... initur, bid ongunnen.
et... liberabis, and du alest. stulto, ...m.
renes, edran, aperiet, h... ;
non emuletur, ne onherie. uocabitur bid...
prestulatio tua, pin anbidine. 35 detractatur'°, is teled.
ia... & si desperaueris, gif du georwenst.
comesationibus, ofersetum. lapsus"', aslidenum-
qui... conferunt, pa bregad. imminuetur, db...
uacantes, ge.-. (27°) qui ducuntur, pe sion ledde.
cymbala*, hearpan. 40 qui trahuntur, pe sin togene.
qui... consummentur, de biod for-  utres, megene.
nume®, non suppetunt, ne gehelpap.
1 The Anglo-Saxon expression answers 7 For drancendum or druncniendum,
to the Latin nobiles. Z. See p. 66, 1.16. R. W.
2 An error for gewilna du, Z. 8 For lufwendlice. Z.
3 See p 78, 1.3. R. W. 9 or slaw-wyrm = slow-worm, R. W.
4 The Vulgate reads symbola. R. W 10 The Vulgate has detractor. Z.
5 For fornumene. Z. 11 The Vulgate reads lassus. Z.
6 Perhaps an error forcend. Z.

81 KENTISH GLOSSES. 82
seruatorem, weard. carmina, liod.
fallit, wegd. pruinas, gleda.
Sanum, .. «8. (29°) domatis, huses.
guituri, ...¥. : quan cum muliere litigosa’, danne
quam, )ane. _5 mid flitgeornan wife.
insidieris, searw p '. et uena corrupta, and gewemmed
uastes, reafa. weteredre.
displiceat, ... ge. opprimitur, bid ofdreced.
cum detractoribus, mid telendum. urbs patens, open burh. .
(28") prepara, gegearawa. 10 cohibere, geweldan.
et... exerce, and bega. il
ut ... aedifices, pet du getimbrige. oN!
lactes, gel. indecens, wngerisenu.
urtice, of netelan. quo, hwider.
parun, litel. 15 prolatum, ford broht.
inguam, witodlice. in quaempiam, on enine.
modicum, gehwede. et chamus, and bridel.
(28°) pauzilium, lithwon. (30") pulchras .. . dfibilas, fogere
conseres, du on asets. seacan 4, :
quasi cursor, swa renel. 20 quomodo, swa.
et mendacitas, and perflicnes. nascatur, si oncenned.
— temulenti, windruncynes.
XXV terminat, endad.
| quas transtulerunt, da rehton. silentium, swigan.
celare, bedeahlian. 25 qui iterat, de geedleed.
inuestigare, smegan. leena, wildior.
rubiginem, hom. sicut .., uertitur, swe forhwerfed bid.
quam ut hunilieris, ponne pet du sio in cardine suo, on hiore hyrran.
geniderad. sub ascella sua, under his oxne.
ne proferas, ne ep du. 30 sententias, ewidas.
emendare, gebetan. (30°) deprekensus, anfunden.
ne... non possis, de les du ne  ludens, plegende.
meige. sussurrone subtracto, abrodenum ge-
cum dehonestaueris*, donne du ge- ~ dwilde.
arweordas. 35 et... conquiescunt, and gerestad.
| et... ne reueles, and ne onwrih du. susurronis, desiges.
et... non cesset, and he ne ablind. ad intima, to incundum.
malum, wppel. quomodo si... [uelis]5, swil gif du
(29°) inauris aurea, gylden earspinl. wille.
lenietur, bid gelidgod. 40 uas fictile, lemen fet.
taculum, gar. labia tumentia, dindendende ® weleras.
dens putridus, forrotad tod. sociata, geferlchte.
et amittit, and forlet. N quando summiserit, donne he under-
pallium, wefels. ~ diod,
1 For searwa pu. Z. ) 4 Read scancan. Z,
2 The Anglo-Saxon translator has mis- 5 uelis is omitted in the MS. R. W.
taken the Latin dehonestaueris. Z. 6 For dindende, Z.
3 See pag. 74, 25 and pag. 83, 22. R.W,
6

83 KENTISH GLOSSES. 84
qui operit, se de werd !. XXVIUI
qui uoluit, se de welt. nemine, nenegum.
(31") [os] lubricum, twisprece. persequente, chtende.
(32°) paratur, is gegearwod.
5 commessatores .i., wesan oppe eteras.
XXVIII coacerual, geheapad.
et fenore liberali, and of frilicum
pariat, atewd, gestrione.
laudet, herie. (33°) fugerit, flio.
saxum, stan. 10 concidet, ahriosd.
honerosa, byrdenmete ®. deserit, forlet.
grauior, hefegre. inuidet, angad.
concitati, asterede. (33%) iactat, gelpd.
ferre, acuman. concitat, awecp.
calcabit, tret. 15 indigebit, bedearf.
uariis odoribus, misselieum sweccum. penuriam, erda".
et... dulcoratur, and bid geweordleht. a
(31°) sustinuere, fordelgiad. Bos
dispendia, leras. non sequetur, ne felhd.
qui spopondit, pe behet. 20 sumpserint, nimp.
tecta perstillantia, driopende hrofas*. _perdet, forleose.
litigosa, flitgeor 4. inuoluet, befelt,
comparantur, sint widmetene. (34) in posterum, ford on.
uentum, wind. obuiauerunt, ongen coman.
quasi qui... teneat, swa se de helt. 25 correptio, dreal '*.
iacuitur ®, is scerped. refrigerabit, he arerd.
et... ewacuit, and scerpd. delicias, estas.
qui seruat, se de helt. profetia, witedom.
quomodo . . . respendent®, swa swa (34°) delicate, estclice.
scinad. 30a pueritia, fram enihthade.
prospicientium, behealdenra. nutrit, fet.
(82") insatiabiles, unasedenlic. procliuior, fordloten.
conflatur 7, is blawen. subleuabitur, bid up ahafen.
tm conflatorio, on smiddan. : —
si contuderis, deh du percee 8. 35 AEM
quasi tipsonas *, swa berecorn. morante, wuniendum.
feriente, derecedum. '°. (35") et ... nou, and ie ende.
diligenter, georlice '. si nosti, wastu de nasdu,
sed ... tribuitur, ac is seald. ignitus clipeus, ferentarga.
prata, geheige. 40 ne addas, ne gexcdu.
collecta sunt, sint gegaderade. et arguaris, and du sio dread.
1 For wercd, The glossator confounded 7 The Vulgate reads probatur. Z.
operaré with operire. Z. 8 For persce, Z.
2 So read I. RW. 9 A corruption of ptisanas, Z,
3 See pag. 74 1.23. R, W. 10 For derscendum, cf. 1. 35. Z.
4 For flitgeorn, Z. 11 Read geornlice. Z.
5 The Vulgate has exacuitur. Cf. next 12 Read ermda, Z.
line. R, W. 318 Cf, Leo, Ags. glossar, p. 390 1. 47.
6 For resplendent. Z. RW.

85 KENTISH GLOSSES. 86
inueniarisque, and du sio gemet. in sublime, up .i. heah.
ne deneges, ne forwern du. ad eliciendum, ut to ationne.
uictui meo, minre anlifene. expremit, ofdrecd, swetelad.
ne... inliciar, de les ie sio for- (36%) qui... emulget®, se de meled.
spanen. Set... elicit, and ut atiohd.
ad negandum, to widsacenne. et... producit, and ford gelet.
et... furer, and ic stele. discordias, twirednesse.
et periurem, and ic swerige.
nee accuses, ne du ne wrei. an
(35°) molaribus suis, of his cintodum. 10 on
sanguissuge, lyces. dilecte mi, cala du min gecorena.
affer afer, bren bryn. nullum secretum, enig deahle.
insaturabilia, unasecenlice. et mutent, and hio wendan.
sufficit, genoh is. siceram, bior. .
qui subsannat, se de hyspda. 15 merentibus, grnorniendum *.
et qui despicit, and se cde forsiohd.  doloris, sares.
partum, eacnunga. et... mon recordentur, and ne siut
efodiant, up adelfad. gemunene °,
dificilia, earfodu. et causis, and dine.
penitus, eallunga. 20 qui pertranseunt, de gewitad.
colubri, nedran. decerne, toscad,
in adolescentia, on giohdhade. (87") lanam, wulla °.
tergens, dregende. institoris, cypan.
(36") odiosam, hatol. praedam, hude.
in matrimonium, on gesinscipe. 25 domesticis suis, hiore gehusan.
minima, lyssan. et cybaria, and andlifene.
sapientiora, wisran. et emit, and hi bohte.
formice, emetan. ad fortia, to strenran*,
que parant, da gearwiad. Sussum, spinle.
lepuscult, haran. 30 duplicibus, of twifealdum.
inualida, unstran 1. stragulam uestem, gebliod reaf.
| ‘qui collocat, se de gestadclad. byssum, of twine.
| cubile suum, his den. indumentum, reaf.
| et egreditur, and ut ged. nobilis, edelboren.
per turmas, durh heapas. 35 sindonem, scetan.
stelio, hryremus. cingulum, gerdels.
nititur, he ged. et ridebit, and hio hlihd.
in edibus, on hofum. (37°) tu supergressa est’, du ofer-
gradiuntur, gad. stope.
9 eee
een ) WO ising 410 5 ALCUINI EXHORTATIO AD
et qui... aparuit, and se de ateaud. GUIDONEM COMITEM.
postquam eleuatus est, seoddan he (39") eaplicare, onwrion,
hup ahafen bid. (53°) constans, anred,
1 For unstrang. R. W. 5 For gemunende. Z,
2 The Vulgate has quod incedit. Z. 6 For wullan? Z.
3 The Vulg. reads emunyit, Z. 7 Vor strengran, R. W.
4 Read guorniendum. Z. 8 Read es, Z.

|
87 KENTISH GLOSSES. 88
(61°) intentione, on da gerad '. in quacunque causa, on cihwileam
ualet, fremed *. dinge.
percutit, slehd. (66°) sapores, stencas.
(61°) appetit, gedind §. sonos, sweigas.
(62°) proditor, lewend. 5 transitorias, gewitenlice.
pracdicator, bodiend. uolatilis, fugeles.
non... promittitur, nis behaten.
instantissime, geornlicost. (77°) pater, folder] ©.
contendat, eftsf 4. mater, modo|r].
principalia, heafodlicf ®, 10frater, brodo[r].
originalia, frfmdlice °. soror, sweosto[r].
(62°) pullulant, wfacsad *. Jilius, [sun]a.
ratum, gescad. filia, Aohtor.
extirpatis, arubfdxm , patruus, foedera.
praecidere, bprckpfbn®. 15 amita mea, min fad{u).
ex contemptu, of forhpgxugb’. matertera mea, min modrix.
per contumaciam, purh bpxndfnufsf!!. — awneulus meus, min eam.
praesumtio, drksnfs 1, uietricius, stel op |feder.
pertinacia, bngknnb1*. priuignus, stelop}sunu 8,
(63") lasciuia, wild. 20 filiaster, steopdohter.
eneruatio, awordenes. uir, ciorl.
(66") pollicentur, sint behat..... uirgo, ides.
condonauit, forgef. [puella, mei]den 17,
sugestiones, lare. mamilla, tit[t].
tollerare, forberan "4, 25 papilla, forw[eard] tit[t].
constat, wunad. ereuerat, wf{px }8.
1 Omitted by Zupitza. RW. 10 = forhogunga. K. W.
2 Omitted by Zupitaa. R. W. 11 = apundennese, R. W.
8 For gedined or gedincd. I. W. 12 = drisnes. R. W. ,
4 This kind of cipher-writing by which 13 = angina, R. W.
the consonant following a certain vowel 14 Omitted by Zupitza. R. W.
was placed for the latter, was very much 15 The letters enclosed in brackets are-
in vogue in the Middle Ages, (eftsf = eftse, rather illegible. R. W.
being an error fer efste). R. W. 16 This gloss is very doubtful. KR. W.
5 = heafodlice. R. W. 17 All these letters are quite gone.
6 == fremdlice. RW. Zupitza reads: puella (mei)den, RK. W.
7 = weacsad. R. W. 18 = weox. R. W.
8 = aruaedum. Perhaps miswritten fur Several other glosses had been inserted
arauedum. Z, here but they have become entirely {l-
9 Vor bekprfbu == aciorfan?. 2. legible. R. W.
;

Tit.
THE COLLOQUY OF a
\ > 1
ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC
OF THE TENTH CENTURY,
: Colloquium ad pueros lingue Latine locutione exercendos, ab Ailfrico
primwn compilatum, et deinde ab Ailfrico Bata, eius discipulo, auctum,
 Latine et Saxonice.
we cildra biddap pe eala lareow Pet pu tece us sprecan
D. Nos pueri rogamus te, magister, ut doceas nos loqui
[rihte] for bam ungelwrede we syndon and gewammodlice we sprecap
Latialiter recte, quia — idiote sumus, et  corrupte loquimur.
hwet wille ge sprecan
M. Quid uultis loqui?
hwet rece we hwet wesprecan buton hit riht spree sy and
D. Quid curamus quid loquamur, nisi recta locutio sit, et
 behefe ues del oppe fracod
. utilis, non anilis, aut turpis?
wille [ge beon] beswungen on leornunge
M. Uultis flagellari in discendo ?

* Alfric of Canterbury, by whom this contemporary with Alfric Bata, Tle only

Colloquy was compiled, was commonly other copy known is preserved in a MS.
known by the title of Alfric the Grammarian, in the Library of St. John’s College, Ox-
from the active part he took in the edu- ford, in which the title, or rubric, is,
cational movement of his time. He was Hane sententiam Latini sermonis olim
for 4 short time bishop of Wilton, and  Alfricus abbas composuit, gui meus fuit
in 995 succeeded Sigeric as archbishop of magister, sed tamen ego Ailfrie Bata
Canterbury. Te died on the 16th of No- multas postea huic addidi appendices.
vember, 1006. The colloquy was probably Some additional words from the Oxford
composed in the earlier period of his life, MS. are here printed within brackets. It
when ho was a monk of Winchester. It will not escape remark, how much superior
was, as stated in the Latin title, enlarged the sentiment which pervades this Anglo-
and republished by Alfric Bata, a scholar Saxon tract is to that of the later me-
nnder the archbishop when he taught in — diaeval treatises of the same description.
the schools at Winchester, and who is It is impossible now to say which were
supposed to have died about the middle the additions made by Alfric Bata to the
of the eleventh century. On both these original tract, but we may reasonably
writers, sce my Biographia Britannica Lite- cousider the whole as belonging to the
raria, Anglo-Saxon period, pp. 480—500. tenth century.
The enlarged edition of the colloquy, by {Our text is based ona recent collation
Alfric Bata, seems to have so entirely super- of Wright’s print with the MS, — On Alfric
seded the original, that it appears to be the of Canterbury, see Dietrich in Zeitschrift
only one now preserved. It is here printed fiir histor, Theologie, 25. bd. pag. 487 et
from a manuscript in the British Museum, seqq., and 26. bd. pag. 163 et seqq. R W.]
MS. Cotton. Tiberins A. IIL, fol. 58, vo,

90 COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC.
leofre ys us beon beswuugen } for lare penne hit ne cunnan
D. Carius est nobis flagellari pro doctrina, quam —_nescire;
ac we witan pe  bilewitue  wesan and nellan onbelwden swinegla us buton
sed scimus te mansuectum esse, et nolle inferre plagas nobis, nisi
pu bi tu-genydd fram us
cogaris a nobis.
ie axie pe hwat spryest pu hwat hwfst bu weorkes
M. Interrogo te quid mihi loqueris? quid habes _ operis?
ic eom geanwyrde monue and ic sincge wlee deg seofon
D. Professus sum monachum, et psallam omni die septem
tida mid gebroprum and ic eom  bysgod [on redinga] and on sange
sinaxes* cum fratribus, et occupatus sum lectionibus et cantu;
ac Peah hwepere ic wolde betwenan leornian sprecan on Leden gereorde
sed tamen uellem interim discere sermocinari Latina lingua.
hwet cunnon pas pine geferan
M. Quid sciunt isti tui socii?
sume synt yrplincgas sume scephyrdas sume oxanhyrdas sume
. D. Alii sunt aratores, alii opiliones, quidam bubulci, quidam
eae swylee — huntan sume _fisceras sume fugeleras sume cypmenn
etiam uenatores, alii piscatores, alii aucupes, quidam mereatores,
sume scewyrhtan sealteras beceras.
quidam sutores, quidam salinatores, quidam pistores loci,
hwet segest bu yrplinge hu begest bu weore pin
M. Quid dicis tu, arator®, quomodo exerces opus tuum?
eala Jeof hlaford pearle ic deorfe ic gaut on degred pywende
A. O- mi domine, nimium laboro; exeo  diluculo, minando
oxon to felda and iugie hig to syl nys hyt swa_ stearc
boues ad campum, et iungo eos ad  aratrum; non est tam aspera
winter pwt ic durre lutian at ham for ege hlafurdes mines ac geiukodan
hiemps ut audeam latere domi, pre timore domini mei; sed iunetis
oxan and gefestnodon sceare and cultre mid pere syl wlee dwg ie sceal
bobus, et confirmato uomere et cultro  aratro, omni die debeo
eriau fulne weer 4 oppe mare
arare integrum agrum, aut plus.
hiefst pu wnigne  geferan
M. Habes aliquem socium?
ic hebbe sumne cnapan pywende oxan mid  gadisene pe
A. Habeo quendam puerum minantem boues cum stimulo5, qui
eac swilce nu has ys for cylde and hreame.
etiam modo raucus est, pre frigore et clamatione.
1 The MS. has: beswugen. R. W. to the practice of agriculture, is curiously
2 Septem synaxes, the seven canonical illustrated by implication here, where it
hours, or, more literally according to the is taken first in order of the occupations
meaning of the word, the assemblies of of men, and more directly further on,
the monks at those hours for the several where its excellence is made the subject
services which belonged to them. It is of discussion,
from this practice that the old Catholic 4 The MS, reads distinctly eper, which
service - books are called Hours (horae, is no donbt an error for ecer, R. W.
heures), as containing the forms of service 5 It isa curious circumstance, as showing
for the canonical hours of the day. (See how little the practice of agriculture had
further on.) changed in this country through many
8 The Anglo-Saxon sentiment which centuries, that the illuminations of ma-
gave the first rank in worth and utility  uuscripts, down to alate period, represent

COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC: IL
hwat mare dest pu on dug
M. Quid amplius facis in die?
gewyslice penne mare ic do icsceal fyllan binnan oxan mid hig
A. Certe adhue plus facio. Debeo implere presepia boum feno,
and weterian1 hig and scearn2 heora beran ut
et adaquare eos, et _fimum eorum portare foras.
hig hig) micel |gedeorf ys hyt
M. O, O,|\magnus} labor est!
ge leof/ micel jgedeorf hit ys forbam ic neom freoh.
A. Etiamj magnus labor est, quia non sum liber’,
[hwet segst pu] sceaphyrde hafst pu nig gedeorf.
M. Quid dicis tu, opilio? Habes tu aliquem laborem‘4?
gea leof ichwbbe on forewerdne morgen icdrife sceap mine to heora lese
O. Etiam habeo; in primo mane mino oues meas ad pascua,
and stande ofer hig on hete and oneyle mid hnundum peles wulfas forswelgen
et sto super eas, inestu® et frigore, cum canibus, ne lupi® deuorent
hig and icagenlede hig to heoraloca and melke hig tweowa on deg and heora
eas, et reduco eas ad caulas, et mulgeo eas bis in die, et caulas
loca ichwbbe on perto and cyse and buteran icdo and ic eom getrywe
earum moueo insuper, et caseum et butirum facio, ct fidelis sum
hlaforde minon
domino meo’7. :
eala oxanhyrde hwet wyrst pu
M. O bubulee, quid operaris tu?
| ealaWaford’ min ( micel {te gedeorfe penne se yrplinge unseen)
B. O domine mi,/multum) laboro. Quando arator disiungit
paoxan ic lede hig to’ Iese—and eallo niht iestande ofer hig waciende
boues, ego duco eos ad pascua, et tota nocte sto super cos uigilando
for peofan and eft onarne mergen icbetwce hig pam yrplincge wel gefylde
propter fures*, et iterum primo mane adsigno eos aratori, bene pastos
and geweeterode
et adaquatos.
ys pes of pinum geferum
M. Est iste ex tuis sociis?
gea he ys
D. Etiam est.
the oxen yoked to the plough, driven by a profound contempt for the unnoble classes
the ploughman, with the boy who carries of society, was introduced into our island.
the goad [gadiserne], to urge them on. 4 The MS, reads labore, R, W.

1 The MS. by an error reads wete- 5 The MS. has esto. R. W.
terian, R. W. 6 Wolves appear still at this time to

2 The glossator wrote sceasn, R. W. have been common in England.

3 The agricultural labourer, among the 7 It would appear from this passage that
Anglo-Saxons, was a serf (a peow), and ewes’ milk was that used principally by
belonged to the lord of the land as much the Anglo-Saxons; and that it was the
as the land itself, to which, in fact, he business of the shepherd to furnish the
was attached. This passage of Alfric’s household with milk, butter, and cheese.
Colloquy is a enrious illustration of the 8 Cattle were the great objects of plunder
feeling of commiseration for the condition in the predatory excursions of the middlo
ofthe servile class, which prevailed among ages, and tho care of tho cattle at night
the Anglo-Saxon clergy, and which dis- was a duty of great importance among
appeared at the time of the Norman con- the Anglo-Saxons; henco ‘the herdsman
quest, when fendalism, which incnleated was a person of more consideration than

92 COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC.
canst bu enig ping
M. Seis tu aliquid?
wnne creft ic cann.
V. Unam artem scio. .
hwylene ys
M. Quale est?
hunta ic eom,
V. Uenator sum.
hwas
M. Cuius?
cineges
V. Regis.
hu begest pu craft pinne
M. Quomodo exerces artem tuam?
icbrede me max and sette hig on stowe gehieppre and getihte hundas
: V. Plecto mihi retia, et pono ea in loco apto, et instigo canes
mine pet wildeor hig ehton op pat hig pe enman to pam nettan
meos ut  feras persequantur, usque quo perueniunt ad retia
unforseeawodlice and pathigswa beon begrynodeland ic ofslea hig on Pam maxum
inprouise, et sic inretientur, et ego iugulo eosin retibus. *
ne canst pu huntian buton mid  nettum
M. Nescis uenare nisi cum retibus?
gea  butan nettum huntian ic meg
VY. Etiam, sine retibus uenare possum.
hn
M. Quomodo?
mid swiftum hondum icbetecc3 wildeor
VY. Cum uelocibus canibus insequor feras.
hwilee wildeor swypost gefeht pu
M. Quales feras maxime capis?
iegefeo heortas and baras and = rann and regan and hwilon
V. Capio ceruos, et apros, et dammas, et capreos, et aliquando
haran
lepores.
were bu todeg on hantnolde
M. Fuisti hodie in uenatione?
ic nes  forpam snnnandeg ys, ac gyrstandwg i¢ wes on |
VY. Non fui, quia dominicus dies est, sed  heri fui in
hontunge
uenatione.
the agricultural labourer. His duties, as is no doubt an error of the scribe for
intimated in our text, are illustrated by begrynode. R. W.
what Bede tells us with regard to the 2 The hunter among the Angfo-Saxons
poet Cxdmon, in the seventh century — appears to have answered nearly to our
Quod dum tempore quodam faceret, ct gamekeeper, and his method of taking the
relicta domo convivii, egressus est ad game militates rather against our ordinary
stabula jumentorum, quorum ei custodia notions of the mediaeval passion for the
nocte illa erat delegata. Bedae Hist, Eccles. chase. But the Anglo-Saxons do not
lib. iv. c. 24, Im king Alfred’s Anglo- appear to have been, in general, great
Saxon version this passage is rendered: hunters, in the seuse of the word as it
to neata scypene, dir heorde him was was taken by the Anglo-~ Normans, for
dere nihte beboden. hawking appears to have been the more
1 The manuscript reads begrynode, which —_ favourite diversion with them.
8 An error for betece. R, W.

COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC. 93
hwet gelehtest pu
M. Quid cepisti?
twegen heortas and znne bar
V. Duos ceruos et unum aprum.
hn gefencge pu hig
: M. Quomodo cepisti eos?
heortas ic gefenge on nettum and bar ic ofsloh
VY. Ceruos cepi in retibus, et aprum iugulaui.
hu were pu dyrstig ofstikian bar .
M. Quomodo  fuisti ausus iugulare aprum?
hundas bedrifon hyne to me and fe par togeanes standende fierlice
VY. Canes perduxerunt eum ad me, etego e contra stans  subito
ofstikode hyne
ingulaui cum.
swype pryste pu ware pa
M. Ualde audax fuisti tune.
ne sceal hunta forhtfull wesan forpam mislice wildeor
VY. Non debet uenator formidolosus esse, quia uarie bestie
wuniad on wudum
morantur in siluis.
hwet dest pu be pinre huntunge
M. Quid facis de tua uenatione?
ie sylle cyne swa hwat swa ic gefo foram iceom hunta bys
V. Ego do regi quicquid capio, quia sum uenator eius.
hwet sylp he pe 7
M. Quid dat ipse tibi?
heseryt me wel and fett and hwilon sylp me hors oppe
VY. Uestit me bene et pascit, aliquando dat mihi equum, aut
beah pet pe lnstlicor craft minne ic beganege
armillam, ut libentius artem meam exerceam.
hwylene creft canst pn
M. Qualem artem scis tu?
ie eom fiscere
P. Ego sum _piscator.
hwet begyst pn of pinum crafte
M. Quid adquiris de tua arte?
Digleofan aud scrnd = and feoh
P. Uictum et uestitum et pecuniam'.
hu gefehst pu _—_fixas
M. Quomodo capis pisces?
ie astigie min scyp and wyrpe max mine on ea and anegil, vel ws?,
P. Ascendo nauem, et pono retia mea inamne, et hamum
ie wyrpe and spyrtan and swahwet swa hig geheftad ic genime
proiicio et sportas, et  quicquid ceperint sumo.
hwet gif hitunclene beop?  fixas
M. Quid si inmundi‘ fuerint pisces?

1 The hunter was a man in the employ _a hook, is of course the origin of our term
of another; his occupation was an office, angling, given to the process of fishing
or service, The fisherman worked for with the line and book
himself. 8 — fi RW.

2 The glossator appears to have been Mo ABS Seo Debliy ays Ht 8 lig
doubtful of the meaning of hamus. The 4 The MS, by an error reads inmundo,
word @s means a bait; angil, which means RW.

7
1 :

94 COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC.
ic utwyrpe paunclenan! nt andgenime me  clene to mete
P. Ego proiiciam inmundos? foras, et sumo mihi mundos in escam.
hwer cypsthu  fixas pine
M. Ubi uendis pisces tuos?
on ceastre
P. In ciuitate.
hwa_ bigb hi
M. Quis emit illos?
ceasterwara icne mag  swa fela [gefon] swa fela swa ic magS gesyllan
P. Ciues. Non possum tot capere quot possum uendere.
hwilee —fixas gefehst pu
M. Quales pisces capis?
elas and hacodas mynas and eleputan  sceotan and lampredan
P. Anguillas, et lucios, menas, et capitones, tructos, et murenas 4,
and swawyleeswa on watere swymmap sprote
et qualescunque in amne natant saliu.
forhwi ne fixast pu on se
M. Cur non piscaris in mari _—_ a
hwilon ie do ac seldon forpam{ micel | rewyt me ys
P, Aliquando facio, sed raro, quia magnum nauigiuin mihi est
to se
. ad mare.
hwet fehst bu on se
M. Quid capis in mari?
herinegas and leaxas mereswyn and stirian ostran and crabban muslan
P. Alleces ct isicios, de}finos et sturias, ostreas et cancros, musculas,
pinewinclan secoccas fage and floc and lopystran and fela swylces
torniculi, neptigalli, platesia, et platissa, et polipodes, et  similia>,
wilt bu fon sumne hwel
M. Uis capere aliquem cetum?
nic
P. Nolo.
forhwi
M. Quare?
forhwan plyhtlie pinge hitys gefon hwel gebeorhtlicre ys me faran
P. Quia periculosa res est capere cetum. utius est mihi ire
1 The MS. has: utclenan, R. W. fish, because they were more extensively
2 Here the MS. again reads inmundo. used than any other kind of fish throughout
R. W. the Middle Ages. Red-herrings figure
8 In the MS. we find: ic ne meg swa largely in the mediaeval household accounts.
fela swa ic meg swa fela swa ic meg. R.W. The Anglo-Saxon name for the salmon,
4 The list of river-fish is not very large; called in old English lax, had not been
and it is not easy to explain the absence quite displaced by the Anglo-Norman one
of several which must have been in common in the fourteenth century. The mereswyn
use among our Anglo-Saxon forefathers, | was probably the porpoise, which was
especially if mynas signify minnows, as supposed to answer to the Latin delphinus.
it has been interpreted. [See the Index The sturgeon (stiria) is now no more eaten
s. v. mynas. R. W.] Fel-pout is still the than the porpoise; the fage and floc were
name for a small kind of eel. probably plaice and soles; the s@coccas
5 Herrings come first in the list of sea- were no doubt cockles,

COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC. 95
to ea mid scype mynan penne faran mid manegum scypum on huntunge
ad amnem cum [naue]! mea, quam ire cum multis nauibus in uenationem
branes
ballene.
q forhwi swa
/ M. Cur sic?
forpam leofre ys me gefon fise pene icmeg  ofslean pe
P. Quia carius est mihi capere piscem quem possum occidere, qui
na petan moe ac eacswyleo mine geferan mid anum slego he meg beseucean
non solum me sed etiam meos socios uno ictu potest mergere
oppe geewy!man
aut mortificare.
and peah menige gefop hwalas and ctberstap freenysse andf micelne
M. Et tamen multi capiunt cetos,? et euadunt pericula, et magnum
sceat panon begytap ———_
pretium inde adquirunt.
sob pusegst ac fc ne gepristige for modes mines nytenysse
P. Uerum dicis, sed ego non audeo, propter mentis mex ignauiam.
hwat segst pu fagelere hu beswiest pu fugelas
M. Quid dicis tu, anceps? quomodo decipis aues?
on feala wisan ic beswice fugelas hwilon mid neton
A. Multis modis decipio aues; aliquando  retibus, aliquando
mid grinum mid lime mid hwistlunge mid hafoce
laqueis, aliquando glutino, aliquando  sibilo, _aliquando __accipitre,
mid treppan
aliquando decipula.
hefst bu hafoe
M. Habes accipitrem?
ic hebbe
A. Habeo.
canst pu temian hig
M. Scis domitare eos?
gea iccann hwet sceoldon hig me buton iceupe temian hig
A. Etiam scio. Quid deberent mihi, nisi scirem domitare eos?
syle me anue hafoe
V. Da mihi unum accipitrem.
icsylle lustlice gyf pusylst me wnne swyftne hound — hwylene
A. Dabo libenter, si dederis mihi unum uelocem canem. Qualem
hafac wilt pu habban pone maran hwaber pe pane lessan
accipitrem uis habere, maiorem aut minorem ?
syle me pene maran
VY. Da mihi maiorem.
ho afest pu hafocas _ pine
M. Quomodo pascis accipitres tuos?

i The Cotton MS. has homo mea (for as well as by the northern nations. The
hamo). But the Anglo-Saxon translation walrus was an object of value then, on
answers to naue not to hamo. R. W. account of its teeth, which, ander the

2 There are many reasons for believing name of whales’-bone, were used in place
that the whale trade was carried on to of ivory, and form the substance of many
a considerable extent by the Anglo-Saxons, ornamental objects in our cabinets,

}
96 COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC
hig fedap hig sylfe and me on wintra and on lencgten ic lete hig
A. Ipsi pascunt se et me in hieme, et in uere dimitto eos
wetwindan to wuda and genyme me briddas on hwrfeste and temige hig
auolare ad siluam, et capio mihi pullos' in autumno, et domito eos.
and forhwi forlest pu pa getemedon ietwindan fram pe
M. Et cur permittis[tu] domitos auolare a te?
forpam ic nelle fedan hig on sumera forpam pe hig pearle etap
A. Quia nolo pascere eos in estate, eo quod nimium comedunt.
and manige fedap pa getemodon ofer sumor fet eft hig habban
M. Et multi pascunt domitos super estatem, ut iterum habeant
gearuwe
paratos.
gea swa higdop ac ic nelle o2 petan deorfan ofer hig
A. Etiam sic faciunt, sed ego nolo in tantum laborare super eos,
forpam iccann opre na pet wnne ac eacswilce manige gefon
quia scio alios non solum unum sed etiam plures capere%.
hwet segst pu mancgeret
M. Quid dicis tu, mereator?
ic secge pet behefe iceom ge cinge and eoldormannum and
MER. Ego dico quod utilis sum et regi et ducibus et
weligum and eallum follce
diuitibus et omni populo.
aud hu
M. Et quomodo?
ie astige ~minscyp mid blestum minum and rowe  ofer
MER. Ego ascendo nauem cum mercibus meis, et nauigo ultra
swlice dielas and cype mine pinge and biege pincg dyrwyrde pa on pisum
marinas partes et uendo meas res, et emo res pretiosas que in hac
lande ne beop acennede and ic hittogelede eow hider mid micclan plibte
terra non nascuntur, et adduco _uobis hue, cum magno periculo
ofer s@ and hwylon  forlidenesse ic polie mid lyre ealra pinga
super mare, et aliquando naufragium patior, cum iactura omnium rerum
minra uneape cwic ctberstende
mearum, wuix uitus euadens.
hwylce pine geledst pu us
M. Quales res adduces nobis?
pellas and sidan deorwyrpe gymmas and gold _ seleupe
MER. Purpurum, et sericum, pretiosas gemmas, et aurum, uarias
reaf and wyrtgemange win and ele  ylpesban and mestlinge er and
uestes, et pigmenta, uinum, et oleum, ebur, et auricalcum, xs, et
tin swefel and gles and pylees — fela
stagnum, sulfur, et uitrum, et his similia 5.
1 The MS. has pullo. R. W. dealers, aud principally in petty wares,
2 So the MS. Not: op put, as Wright — monger.
read. R W. 5 We must no doubt consider this as
3 The MS. by an error reads: cape for a list of the most valuable articles im-
capere. R. W. ported into this country under the Anglo-
4 It is a curious instance of the degrad- Saxons. Purpura, or, as it is translated
ation through which words go, that what in Anglo-Saxon, pellas, was a sort of
was in the Saxon period the designation for rich stuff brought from the east, and is
the most elevated descripticn of merchant, coupled with silk. Pigmenta, explained
manegere, is vow only a term for small by wyrtgemanc, appears to have been

| COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC. 97
| wilt pu syllan  pinge pine her eal swa pu hi gebohtest per
M. Uis uendere res tuas hic, sicut emisti illic ?
ic nelle hwet penne me fremode gedeorf min ac ie wielle!
MER. Nolo. Quid tune mihi proficit labor meus? Sed uolo
heora cypen her luflicor ponne [ic] gebicge ber pet sum  gestreon me
uendere hic carius quam emi _ illic ut aliquod lucrum mihi
ie begyte panon icme afede and min wif and mine sunu
adquiram, unde me pascam et uxorem et _ filios.
pu sceowyrhta hwet wyrest bu us nytwyrpnesse
M. Tu,  sutor, quid operaris nobis utilitatis?
ys witodlice creft min behefe Pearle eow and neodpearf
- §. Est quidem ars mea utilis ualde uobis et necessaria.
hu
M. Quomodo?
. ie biege hyda and fell and gearkie hig mid crefte minon and wyrce
5. Ego emo cutes et pelles, et preparo eas arte mea, et facio
of him gescy _—mistlices cynnes swyftleras and sceos leperhosa and
ex eis calciamenta diuersi generis, subtalares et ficones, coligas et
butericas bridelpwancgas and gereda flaxanwelpinnan® and higdifata  spurlepera
utres, frenos et falera,  flascones et calidilia®, calcaria
and helftra pusan and fetelsas and nan eower nele oferwintran buton
et chamos, peras et marsupia, et nemo uestrum uult hiemare sine
minon crefte
mea arte.
sealtera hwat us fremapb creft pin
M. O salinator, quid nobis proficit ars tua?
pearle fremap creft min eow eallum nan eower  blisse brycd
S. Multum prodest ars mea omnibus, nemo uestrum gaudio fruitur
on gererdincge oppe mete buton creft min gistlipe him beo
in prandio aut cena nisi ars mea hospita ei fuerit*.
bu
M. Quomodo?
a general term for perfumes. Glass appears 4 The importance of the salter is better
to have been little made inEngland during understood when wo consider that, as the
the Saxon period; and the enumeration produce of the land was in the Middle
of the metals would seem to show that Ages almost entirely consumed on the spot,
the great mining operations of the Romans and it was not easy to get supplies of
had ceased after the Saxon invasion. provisions from a distance, immense quan-
1 So the MS. R. W. tities of victuals of all kinds were salted,
2 It will be seen by this enumeration in order that they might keep during the
of articles, that the business of the Anglo- whole year round, and were preserved in
Saxon shoewright was much more exten- vast Jarders and storehouses. This habit
sive than that of the modern shoemaker; of eating so much salt meat, would cause
in fact, all articles made of leather came = meats eaten without salt tu be considered
within his province, Among these were insipid. In fact, the quantity of salt used
| leathern flasks, and various other vessels, in the Middle Ages must have been enor-
as well as leather bags and purses (pusan mous; and to it, probably, we must ascribe
and fatelsas). the prevalence of those diseases which
3 It is doubtful, whether the MS. has excited so much horror under the name
calidilia or casidilia. R. W. of leprosy.

98 COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC.
hwyle manna purh werodum! pnrhbryep mettum bnton swecce sealtes
S. Quis hominum dulcibus  perfruitur cibis sine sapore salis?
hwa gefylp cleafan his oppe hedderna _buton crefte2 minon  efne

Quis repplet cellaria sua siue promptuaria sine arte mea? Ecce
butergepweor «le and cysgerunn losap eow buton ic hyrde wtwese cow pe

butirum omne et caseum perit uobis, nisi ego custos adsim, qui

ne furpoon an wyrtum eowrum butan me brncap
nec saltem oleribus uestris sine me utimini.
{hwet segst pu] becere hwam fremap [creft pin] opbe hwaper we butan
M. Quid dicis tu, pistor?® Cui prodest ars tua, aut si sine
pe magon lif adreogan
te possimus uitam ducere ?
ge magon purh sum fee butan {minon crefte lif adreogan
P. Potestis quidem per aliquod spatium sine arte mea uitam ducere,
ac] na lanege ne to wel souplice butan crefte minon @#le beod emtig
sed non diu, nec adeo bene; nam sine arte mea omnis mensa uacua
byp gesewen and buton hlafe «le mete to wlettan byp gehwyrfed ic heortan
uidetur esse, et sine pane omnis cibus in nausium conuertitur. Ego cor
mannes gestrangie ic megen wera aud furpon litlinegas nellap for-
hominis confirmo, ego robur uirorum sum, et nee paruuli uolunt pre-
bigean me
terire me.
[hwiet secgab we be coce] hweper we bepurfon on euigon <crefte
M. Quid dicimus de coco, si  indigemus in aliquo arte eius?
gif ge me ut adrifap fram eowrum geferscype ge etab
Dicit cocus: Si me expellitis a uestro collegio, manducabitis
wyrta eowre grene and flescmettas eowre hreawe and furpon —fett
holera uestrauirida, et carnes uestras crudas, et nec saltem pingue
brop ge magon [butan criefte minon habban]
ius potestis sine arte mea habere.
wenereccab [be crafte Pinon] nehe us ueodpearf ys forpam we
M. Non curamus de arte tua, nec nobis neccessariaest, quia nos
sylfe magon Seopan papinge pe to seopenue synd and bradan pa pinge be
ipsi possumus coquere que coquenda sunt et assare que
to bredene synd 3
assanda sunt.4
gif geforpy me fram adryfap pat ge pus don pone beo ge
Dicit cocus: Si ideo me expellitis, ut sic faciatis, tune eritis
ealle prelas and nan  eower nobip hlaford and peahhwepere buton [crefte
omnes serui,® et nullus uestrum erit dominus;et tamen sine arte
minon] ge ne etap
mea non manducatis.

1 The glossator seems to have repeated expressing the feeling of the more strictly
the preposition ‘‘purh” of purhbryep before sober part of the community, against the
“werodum”, R, W. extravagance of the table, which seems to

2 By an error the MS. reads: buton have been increasing very much during the
scrafte. R W. letter part of the Anglo-Saxon period,

8 The Cotton MS, reads pastor, 5 The Cotton MS., by an evident error,

RW. has coci. R, W.

4 The writer of the colloquy is here

COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC. 99
eala munuc pe me tospyest efne ic hebbe afandod pe habban
M. O monache, qui mihi locutus es, ecce probaui _ te habere
gode geferan and pearle uevdpearfe and ic ahsie pa
bonos socios, et ualde necessarios; qui sunt illi?
ichxbbe smipas isenesmipas goldsmip _ seoloforsmip arsmip
D. Habeo fabros, ferrarium, aurificem, argentarium, erarium,
treowwyrhtan and manegra opre mistlicra crefta biggenceras
lignarium, et multos alios uariarum artium operatores. '
hefst enigne2 — wisne gepeabtan
M. Habes aliquem sapientem consiliarium ?
gewislice ichebbe {ho meg] ure  gegaderunge buton gepeahtynde
D. Certe habco. Quomodo potest nostra congregatio sine consiliario
beon wissod
regi?
é (hwet segst pu] wisa hwile craft pe gepuht betwux pas furpra
M. Quid dicis tu, sapiens? que ars tibi uidetur inter istas prior
wesan
esse?
[icsecge pe[ me ys gepuht godes beowdom betweoh pas creftas ealdorscype
C. Dico tibi, mihi uidetur seruitium Dei inter istas artes primatum
healdan swaswa hit [ys] gered on godspelle fyrmest secead Tice godes
tenere, sicut legitur in euangelio, Primum querite regnum Dei
and rihwisnesse hys aud pas binge ealle beop togehyhte eow
et iustitiam eius, et hec omnia adiicientur uobis.
and hwile pe gepubt betwux creftas wornld8 heoldan ealdordom
M. Et quales tibi uidetur inter artes seculares retinere primatum ?
eorptilp forpam se yrpling us _ ealle fett
C. Agricultura, quia arator nos omnes pascit. 4
sesmip secgd hwanon [pam yrplingc] sylanscear oppe cnlter pe na
Ferrarius dicit:5 Unde aratori uomer aut culter, qui nec
gade haefp boton of crefte minon hwanon fiscere ancgel oppe sceowyrhton
stimulum habet nisi ex arte mea? Unde piscatori hamus, aut _sutori
al oppe seamere ned! nis hit of minon geweorce
subula, siue sartori®acus? nonne ex meo opere?
se gepeahtend andswerap sop witodlice segst ac eallum us leofre
Consiliarius respondit: Uerum quidem dicis; sed omnibus nobis carius
ys wikian mid pe yrplincge ponne mid pe forpam se yrpling syld us
est hospitari apud te aratorem quam apud te; quia arator dat nobis
1 Smith was the general term for a 4 This notion of the pre-eminence of
worker in metals, and wright for one who agriculture above all other crafts, has been
worked in wood, and other materials. noticed before, It is no less curious to
Hence, in the later English period, smith remark, at this yery early period, the sort
(which, in Anglo-Saxon, when used without of antagonism between the agricultaral
any characteristic addition, was understood and the trading and manufacturing portion
as applying more particularly to the worker of the community, which seems to have
in irou,) became the particular name of existed in all ages in modern times. The
a blacksmith, and wright of a carpenter, artisans who are introduced in the colloquy,
| as it is still in Scotland. The iron-smith rise up indignantly to protest against the
(isene-smid) of the Anglo-Saxons was our superiority which the “wise man” ascribes
blacksmith and whitesmith combined. to agriculture.
: 2 The MS. has erroneously : enigre, R W. 5 The MS. omitted the ¢ in dicit. R.W.
8 Sic MS. for creftas worulde or woruld 6 The MS. reads saltori. R, W.
creftas, R, W,

100 COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC.
laf and drene pu hwat sylst us on smippan  pinre buton isenne
panem et potum; tu quid das nobis in officina’ tua, nisi ferreas
fyrspearcan and sweginega  beatendra slecgea and blawendra _byliga
2 scinctillas et sonitus tundentium malleorum ct flantium? follium?
setreowwyrhta segd hwile eower ne notab crafte minon bonne hus
Lignarius dicit: Quis uestrum non utitur arte mea, cum domos,
and mistlice fata and scypa’ eow eallum ic wyrce
et diuersa uasa, et naues, omnibus fabrico?
se golsmip 3 andwyrt eala trywwyrta forhwi swa sprycst pu ponne ne furpon
Ferrarius respondit: O lignarie, cur sic loqueris, cum nee saltem
an pyrl  [buton crafte rant pu nemiht don
unum foramen sine arte mea uales facere?
se gepeahtend saxgp eala geferan and gode wyrhtan uton towurpon hwetlicor
Consiliarius dicit: O socii ct boni operarii, dissoluamus  citius
pas geflitn and sy sibb and gepwernyss betweoh us and framige
has contentiones, et sit pax et concordia inter nos, et prosit
urum gehwylenm opron on crefte hys and gedwarian symble mid pam yrplinge
unusquisque alteri arte sua, et conueniamus semper apud aratorem,
per we bicleofan us and foddor horsum urum  habbap and pis gepeaht
ubi uictum nobis et pabula equis nostris habemus; et hocconsilium
icsylle eallum wyrhtnm pat anragehwyle craft his geornlice  begange
do omnibus operariis, ut unusquisque artem suam Giligenter exerceat;
forbam see craft his forlat he byp forleten fram pam crefte swa hwader
quia qui artem suam dimiserit, ipse dimittatur ab arte. Siue
pusyswa messeprest swa munue swa ceorl swa kempa bega oppe behwyrf
sis sacerdos, sive monachus, seu laicus, seu_miles, exerce
pesylfne on pisum and beo pat pneart furpam/ micel { bynd4 and
Ps temet ipsum in hoc; et esto quod es, quia |magnum/dampnum et
yetne sceamu hytis menn nelle wesan pet pet he ys aid pat pe he wesan  sceal
“af uerecundia est homini nolleS esse quod est et quod esse debet.
eala  cild ho eow licab peos spec
M. O pueri, quomodo uobis placet ista locutio?
wel heolicab us ac pearle deoplice spryest and ofer
D. Bene quidem placet nobis, sed ualde profunde loqueris, et ultra
mepe ure pu forptyht sprece ac spree us efter = urnm
etatem nostram protrahis sermonem; sed loquere nobis juxta nostrum
andgyte pt wemagon understandau pa ping pe pu specst
intellectum, ut possimus intelligere que loqueris ?
feahsige eow forhwi swa geornlice leornia ge
M. Interrogo uos cur tam diligenter discitis.
forpam wenellab wesan swa stunte nytenn pa nan ping witap bnton
D. Quia nolumus esse sicut bruta animalia, que nihil sciunt nisi
gers6 and water |
herbam et aquam.
and hwat wille ge
M. Et quid uultis uos?
[we] wyllap wesan wise
D. Uolumus esse sapientes.
1 The scribe by an evident error wrote: 4 Sic MS.; not hynd, R. W
officia. R. W. 5 The MS, reads nelle. R. W.
2 The MS. has: flantiu. R. W. 6 The MS. reads gerd instead of gers. R W.
3 So the MS. R. W.
es narpeet eet ttn,
CAMPBEL] En of Mediag. SS
a”) ad SE xs (GQ. ea,

COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC. 101
j °
onhwilcon wisdome wille ge beon prettige oppe pusenthiwe on
M. Qua  sapientia? Uultis esse uersipelles, aut milleformes, in
leasungum lytige on sprecum on glewlice hindergepe wel sprecende and yfele
mendaciis uafri,' in loquelis astuti, _uersuti, bene loquentes et male
pencende swesum wordum underpeodde facn® widinnan tyddriende swa swa
cogitantes, dulcibus uerbis dediti, dolum intus lentes, — sicut
bergyls metton ofergeweorke wipinnan fall stence
sepulchrum depicto mausoleo intus plenum fetore?
we nellap swa wesan wise forpam henys wis pe mid dydrunge
D. Nolumus sic esse sapientes, quia non est sapiens qui simulatione
hyne sylfne beswicd
semet ipsum decipit.
ac hu wille ge
M. Sed quomodo uultis?
wewyllap beon bylewite butan licetunge and wise pet webugon
D. Uolumus esse simplices sine hipochrisi, et sapientes, ut declinemus
fram yfele and don goda gyt peahhwepere deoplicor mid us
a malo et faciamus bona; adhuc tamen  profundius nobiscum
pusmeagst bonne yld ure onfon mege ac sprec us after uron
disputas quam xtas nostra capere possit; sed loquere nobis nostro
gewunon nes swa_ deoplice a
more, non tam profunde. : .
and ic do walswa gebiddab pu cnapa hwat dydest [to] deg /
M. Et ego faciam sicut rogatis. Tu, puer, quid fecisti hodie?
manega pingcicdyde on pisse niht papa cnyll icgehyrde icaras “
D. Multas res feci. Hac nocte,quandosignum audiui, surrexi :
on minonbedde and eode to eyrcean4 and sang uhtsang mid
de lectulo et exiui ad ecclesiam, et cantaui nocturnam cum
gebroprum ezfterha wesungon be eallum halgum and degredlice  lofsanges
fratribus; deinde cantauimus de omnibus sanctis et matutinales laudes;
efter bysum prim and seofon seolmas mid letanian and capitol messan
post hee, primam, et vii. psalmos, cum letaniis, et primam missam;
Syppan undertide and dydon meassa5 be dege wfter pisum wesungan middeg
deinde tertiam, et fecimus missam de die; post hee cantauimus sextam,
and eton and druncon® and slepon and eft we arison and
et manducauimus, et bibimus, et dormiuimus, et iterum surreximus, et
supgon non and nu wesynd her etforan be gearuwe gehyran hwet
cantauimus nonam, et modo sumus hic coram te, parati audire quid
puus secge7
nobis dixeris.
1 The Cotton MS. has astuti for uafri. o’clock in the morning, at which the monk
2 The scribe wrote: fan. R. W. was called from his bed by the ringing
3 The MS. has: qua simulatione. R.W. of the church bell. The service of prime
4 In cyrcean the writer omitted the r. followed, at six o’clock; after which came
R. W. underntide, or tierce, at about nine
5 So the MS. R. W. o'clock — and middag, or sext, at noon.
6 The scribe wrote: drucon. R.W. It appears that the monks had no meal
7 The account here given of the regular _ until after the mid-day service; and that
Occupations of the young monk, during after it they retired to sleep, from which
a part of the day, is very curious. The they were roused to perform the service
uhtsang, or nocturn, called at a later of none, about two o'clock. It appears
period matutina, or matins, began at three not to have been till after this latter ser-
8

102 COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC.
*
hwenne wylle ge syngan efen oppe nibtsange
M. Quando uultis cantare uesperum aut completorium?!
ponne hyt tima byp
D. Quando tempus crit.
. were pu todeg beswuncgen
M. Fuisti hodie uerberatus ?
ienws foram werlice ic me heold
D. Non fui, quia caute me tenui.
and ha pine geferan
M. Et quomodo tui socii?
hwet me ahsast be pam ic ne deor yppan pe  digla
D. Quid me interrogas de hoc? Non audeo pandere tibi secreta
ure anragehwyle wat gif he beswuncgen wes oppe na
nostra. Unusquisque scit si flagellatus erat an non.
hwet ytst pu on deg
M. Quid manducas in die?
gyt flewscmettum ic bruce fordam cild ic eom under gyrda drohtniende
D, Adhue carnibus uescor,? quia puer sum sub uirga degens.
hwet mare ytst bu
M. Quid plus manducas ?
wyrta and wegra fisc and  cyse buteran and beana and alle
D. Holera et oua, pisces et caseum, butirum et fabas, et omnia
clene binge icete | mid micelre _pancunge
munda manduco, cum gratiarum actione.
swybe waxgeorn eart pu bonne puealle pingcetst pe pe toforan
M. Ualde = edax es, cum omnia manducas que tibi appo-
[gesette synd]
nuntur. =
ie ne com ate oes atic ealle cynn  metta on anre
D. Non sum |_ tam uorax ut omnia genera ciborum in una
gereordinge etan mege :
refectione edere possum. u
ac ho
M. Sed quomodo?
ic brace hwilon pisum mettum oprum mid syfernysse
D. Uescor aliquando his cibis, et aliquando aliis, cum sobrietate,
swa swa dafnad munuce nes mid oferhropse forpam ic eom nan gluto
sicut decet monachum, non cum uoracitate, quia non sum gluto.
and hwet drinest pu
M. Et quid bibis ?
eala gif ichebbe oppe weter gif icnebbe ealu
D. Ceruisam, si habeo, uel aquam, si non habeo ceruisam.
ne drincst pu win
M. Nonne bibis uinum?
vico that they were properly at liberty compline, at seven, which finished the
to attend to other business; and the hoys, _ canonical service of the day.
or younger members of the community, 2 There would seem to be an error here,
then went to school. for the child evidently means to say, not
1 The evening service, or vespers, com- _ that he eat meat, but that he did not eat
menced at four o'clock and nihtsang, or meat, because he was as yet too young.

COLLOQUY OF ARCHBISHOP ALFRIG. 103
icne eom swa spedig Pet ic mege bicgean me win and win
D. Non sum tam diues ut possim emere mihi uinum; et uinum
nys drenc cilda ne dysgra ac ealdra and wisra
non est potus puerorum siue stultorum, sed senum et sapientum.
hwer  slepst
M. Ubi dormis?
on slepern mid gebroprum
D. In dormitorio cum fratribus.
hwa awech pe to uhtsancge .
M. Quis excitat te ad nocturnos ?
hwilon ic gehyre cnyll and icerise! hwilon Jareow min
D, Aliquando audio signum, et surgo; aliquando magister meus
awech me stiplico mid gyrde
excitat me duriter cum uirga.
eala ge(gode] cildra andwynsume leorneras eow manap eower lareow
*  M. O probi pueri, et uenusti mathites, uos hortatur uester eruditor
pet ge hyrsumian godcundum Jarum and pet ge healdan eow sylfe znlice
ut pareatis diuinis disciplinis, et | obseruetis uosmet eleganter
on elcere stowe gab peawlice ponne ge gehyran cyricean
ubique locorum. Inceditis morigerate, cum auscultaueritis ecclesie
bellan and gap into cyrcean and abugab eadmodlice to halgum
campanas, et ingredimini in orationem, et inclinate suppliciter ad almas
wefodum and standap peawlice and = singad anmodlice and gebiddab
aras, et state disciplinabiliter, et concinite unanimiter et interuenite
for eowrum synnum and = gap ut butan hygeleaste to claustre obpe
pro uestris erratibus, et egredimini sine scirilitatem in claustrum uel
to leorninge.
in gimnasium.
1 So the MS, for arise. R. W.
4
;
.

‘ > + ,
ARCHBISHOP ALFRICS VOCABULARY,
. OF THE TENTH CENTURY.!
7 Rastrum, uel rastellum, raca.
DE INSTRUMENTIS AGRICO- Trak i a
LARUM. raha, cibe.
‘ Runcatio, weodung.
Uomer, uel uomis, scear. Tragum, dregnet, uel drege.
Aratrum, sulh.* 5 Stimulus, gal].
Aratio, eriung. Aculeus, sticel, wel gadisen.
Buris, sulhbeam. Ueractum, lenctenerde.
Stercoratio, dingiung. Sulcus, furh.
Fimus, dinig.® Circus, uel circulus, widpe.
Dentale, cipp. 10 Funiculus, uel funis, rap.
Stiba, sulhhandla. Proscissio, landbreece.
Occatio, egegung. Ouile, sceapahus.

1 The vocabulary, or glossary, of arch- The object of these vocabularies was
bishop Alfric, is printed from one of the chiefly twofold; first, to interpret Latin
mannscripts of Junius, in the Bodleian words to the Anglo-Saxon scholar, and
Library at Oxford; it usually follows Al- secondly, to furnish him with the Latin
frie’s Anglo-Saxon translation from the words for the common objects of life.
Latin Grammar of Priscian, which was The vocabulary of Alfric would seem to
the favourite class-book of the mediaeval have been originally arranged with a view
schools. It was transcribed, not always to the latter object; but we find the plan
correctly, by or for Junins, from a MS. often broken into, by the introduction of
in the possession of Reubens the painter, words which have nothing to do with
which is no longer known to exist. This those which they immediately follow, and
manuscript, from an apparent reference | which appear, in some instances, to have
to king Cnut, seems to be not older than been taken almost at hazard from an al-
the eleventh century, when Alfric’s ori-  phabetical dictionary. In accordance with
ginal vocabulary was perhaps considerably the character given to the science of agri-
modified, and this no doubt gave it the culture, in the colloquy, it takes the pre-
irregular character it here presents. The fol- cedence of all other subjects in the voca-
lowing lines were prefixed to it in the MS: _ bulary.

aa . . 2 A plough is still called a sull, in
Presulis hic redolent Elfricl lypsana summi, , 4

Qui rector patria perstitit Matra the dialects of the West of England.
Inter pontifices rutilans ceu mystica lampas, 8 So the MS. of Junins. But dinig is

Defensor regni, necne salus populi. nothing but a misreading of dung (= Germ,
Heu nostram fera mors extinxit nempe Iueernam, dung). See the Anglo-Saxon version of

Heu nostri cecidit fons quoque consilii. 8). 8 Ww
Hune sexta decimaque kalendas namqueDecembris, the Holy Gospels, Luc, 13, 8. R, W.

Assumpsit Michahel, seu dedit Emanuhel.

106 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 107
Bucetum, hrydra fald. Capistorium, corntroh.
Bouile stabulum, scepensteal, uel Tritorium, perscel.$
fald. Cybutum, uel cistella, cest, uel eare.
Uitularius, cealfahus. Mozitia, uel arcula, teg.
Bobellum, fald. 5 Sitarchia, metefetels, wel sceatcod,
Subula, el. Astraba, fotbret.
Repagulum, salpanra. Saccus, bigerdel.
Acrum, scencen. Arpax, geara feng, uel lupus.
Scops, bisme. Arpago, uel palum, hooe.
Caule, sceapa locu. 10 Columbar, sceacul, uel bend.
Aiquiale, horsern. Limes, fotsidgerif.
Uanga, spada. Scrupulum, ynea.
Coniuncla, pristra. Manuliatus, uel manicatus, geslefed.
Turminosus, fortogen. Pigrus, uel lentus, sleac, uel slaw.
Surculus, wingeardes screadungisen. 15
TLerebrum, nauegar.! Epiphania, xtewung.*
Pastinatum, plantsticea. Scenophegia, getimbra halgung, uel
Fossorium, costere, uel delfisen, uel geteld wurpung.
spadu, uel pal. Neomenia, niwemona.
Ligo, becea, uel palus, uel fustis. 20 Encenia, niwecirchalgung.
| Faleastrum, sipe, uel bill. Sinagoga, gegaderung
Serrula, saga, uel snide. Cerimonia, uel orgia, 9.5 gelddagas,
Ferrarius, isernwyrhte. pet sind halige.
| Plaustrum, uel carrum, wen. Heresis, kyre, uel gedwelo- efter-
Rota, hweol. 25 felgund.
Cantus, felga. Palla, cyrtel, uel oferbredels.
Modiolus, nauebe. Murenula, uel torques, swurbeh.
Radii, spacan. Redimicula, keuinge.
Temo, uel arctoes, pisl. Reticulum, feaxnet.
Hircipes, uel tribula, egpa- 30 Monilia, menas.
Spadatus, uel eunuchizatus, belisnod.? — Inaures, earpreonas, uel earhringas.
Sarcina, seam, uel berden. Lunula, bend.
Propolim, uel pertica, stod. Tenia, teppan, uel dolsmeltas.
| Scudicia, uel fossorium, spad. Catelle, swurracenteh,
_ Jugum, ioc. 35 Uitta, snod. .
Jugales, ioctema, Rigula, feaxnet.
| Artena, boga. Ricinum, winpel, uel orl.
| Obicula, ioesticca. Discriminalia, uplegene, uel feaxpre-
| Rotabulum, myxforce, uel ofenraca. onas.
1 Nauegar, an auger. (Cf. p. 44 1.11 s.v. 4 Quitting entirely the subject of agri-
--rotrum). Alfric introduces, in his enume- culture, the compiler of the vocabulary
ration, tools necessary or useful to the introduces abruptly a number of words
i agriculturist, which are not absolutely belonging to ecclesiastical affairs, which
agricultural instruments. are oddly enough mixed with a few words
2 This word is no doubt introduced of a different description.
.| here as applied to animals, and revords 5 The g stands no doubt for Grace,
: one of the operations in farming, meaning that the preceding word is Greek,
3A flail, still called in Lancashire a and not Latin.
thresshel,

108 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 109
Orarium, wel ciclas, orl. Acer, i. uehemens, strang.
Calamistrum, feaxnadel. Achor, i. conturbatio, drefing.
Menstruum opus, monpes weore. Actionator, folegerefa.

Uomex, uel womens, spiwere, Acisculum, pic.

Stipes, stipitis, treowwessteb. 5 Asscopa, flaxe oppe cylle.

Stips, stipitis, wist, uel anleofa, uel Agape, wlmesse.

zlmesse. Altanus, poden.

Superstitio, superfluitas, oferflowenes.  Anastasis, dygelnyssum.4
Gimnosophista, nacod plegere. Angiportus, i. refrigerium nauium,
Ariolus, wigbedwiglere. 10 hyd.

Aruspex, degmelsceawere. Ardamo, i. gusto, ic gesmecge.
Augur, uel auspex, fugelweoblere. Andreporesis, i. homo utriusque gene-
Astrologus, uel magus, uel mathema- ris, beddel.

ticus, tungelwitega, geberdwiglere. Centaurus, uel ippocentaurus, healf
Scinodens, twiseltode, 15 man and healf hors.

Puerperium, hyseberdlinge. Onocentaurus, healf mann and healf
Puerpera, cildiungwif. assa.

Virago, ceorlstrang femne. Agrestis, wilde.

Portentum, uel prodigium, uel osten- Brunda, heortes heafod.

tum, fortacen. 20 Orbis, uel firmamentum, ymbhwerft.
Satiri, wel fauni, uel sehni,* uel fauni Rotella, uel orbiculus, lytel ymb-

Jficarii, unfele men, wudewasan, hweorft.

unfele wihtu.

h NOMINA OMNIUM HOMINUM
Ueredus, cratehors. COMMUNITERS
Mannus, wel brunnicus, gepracen hors, 25 ; ‘
Burdo, hors of steden, wel of asrenne. Imperator, Cesar, wel Augustus,
Alfa, i. initium, angin.? casere,
Abra, i. ancilla, pinen, wyln. Basileus, kining.
Acha, i. uirtus, strengd. Regillus, undereyning.

1 The compiler has singularly mis- Anglo-Saxon words in the vocabulary, at
understood the Latin word arusper. Deg- the meaning of which we can only guess,
mal-sceawere signifies literally one who on account of the obscurity or corrupt-
announces or proclaims the hours of the ness of the Latin equivalents.
day. 4 It is evident that the compiler of

2 Somner conjectures, perhaps rightly, this part of the vocabulary mistook entirely
that sehni is a corruption of obsceni. the meaning of the Latin word, and

8 This, and the words which follow, imagined it to be anastrus, or something
were evidently taken from an alphabeti- of that kind, meaning without stars. It
cal glossary. It may perhaps be well to is hardly necessary to say that dygelnys-
observe, with regard to them, as well as sum means in secrecy, or in darkness.
to many Latin words in this vocabulary, 5 It will be seen at once that, in the
that the Anglo-Saxon scholars did not list of political terms which follow, the
take their standard of Latin from the compiler has sought to explain the words
good classical writers, but they sought in use in the Roman empire by their
their words in the Origines of Isidore, nearest Anglo-Saxon equivalents, and not
and in writings of that class; aud they to give the Latin to the terms in use
affected, especially, barbarous compounds under the Anglo-Saxon government, Ne-
from the Greek. The words, here given vertheless, some of them are extremely
in alphabetical order, belong chiefly to curious as helping us to understand the
these two classes. From this circum- real import of the Anglo-Saxon words.
stance, also, it appears that there are

110 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. lll
Diadema, kynegerd. Senatus, ealdormanna dugud.
| Sceptrum, cynegerd. Censores, uel judices, uel arbitri,
Ducatus, ealdordom. deman.
Consul, gerefa. Proceres, uel primores, uel primarit,
Proconsul, undergerefa. 5 yldest burhwara.
Exconsul, hiredgerefa. Municeps, portgerefa, wel burhwita.
Monarces, anwalda. Curiales, uel decuriales, burhgerefa.
Pretor, uel prefectus, uel prepo-  Commentariensis, gerefa.
situs, uel questor, burhgerefa. Exactor, hecewol.
Tribunus, manna ealdor. . 10 Collegiati, replingeweardes.
Millenarius, pusendrica. Mercedarii, hyregildan.
Ciliarcus, pusendes ealdor. Publicanus, wiegerefa.
Preses, scirgerefa. Uillicus, uel actor, uel curator, uel
Centurio, hundredes ealdor. procurator, uel rector, tungerefa.
Quinquagenarius, uel pentecontarcus, 15 Colonus, odres eardes landseta?
fiftiga ealdor. Inquilinus, tungebur.
Cohors, fifhund cempena ealdor. Indigena, inlenda.
Emeritus, aleten cempa. Uernaculus, inbirdling.
Tyro, iungwiga. Uernula, fostorling.
Optiones, gecorene cempan. 20 Aédilis, hofweard, uel byriweard, wel
Sinmistes, uel consecretalis, gehala, botlweard.
uel geruna. Libertus, freoleta.
Rebellio, widerewyda. : Libertinus, freoletan sunu.
Excubie, degweccan. Titirus, seyphyred.
Excubitor, uigil, degweard. 25 Canum seruitor, hundwealh.
Uigilie, nihtweccan. Pirata, uel piraticus, uel cilix, wicing,
Ueltes, swifte xrendracan. uel scegdman.
Turma, prittig ridwigena. Archipiratra, yldest wicing.
Legio, fepu. Uappa, awerde.
Acies, gerewud! feda. 30 Uafer, uel fatuus, wel socors, abroten,
Manipulus, twahund cempna. uel dwes. -
Castrum, fyrd. Cernuus, pronus, uel inclinatus,
Castra, fyrdwic. hnitol, wel eadmod.
Exercitus, here. Himeneos, hemeda.
Cuneus, getrymmed fepa. 35 Atqueuus, uel coetaneus, efneald.
Ale, fedes. Cliuosus, clifig, tohyld.
Nodus, getrum. Coturnus, ofermod. 7
Agmen, gangend feda. Pabulator, horshyrde, wel fodder-
Ciues, burhwara. brytta.
Oppidanus, burhseta. 40 Agressor, strudere, uel reafere.
Oulgus, uel plebs, heanra burhwered. —_Sarcitector, uel tignarius, hrofwyrhta.
1 Not gererud as Wright printed. R. W. to be taken in its original sense of a
2 This is one of several instances which = husbandman, whereas the translator seems
occur in the course of the vocabulary, of to have taken it in its secondary mean-
the mistaking, by the Anglo-Saxon trans- ing of a colonist. A little further down,
lator, of the real meaning of the Latin the name so familiar to the readers of
word: colonus was no doubt, from the Virgil, Tityrus, is given as a general
other words in connexion withit, intended word for a shepherd,

112 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 113
Carpentarius, wenwyrhta. Raucedo, hasnys.
Lignarius, treowwyrhta. Arteriasis, sweoreopu.
Opifex, creeftiga. Suspirium, hriung, uel siecetung.
Fullones, fulleres. Apostema, swyle.
Nauicularius, scipwyrhta. 5 Enpus, ingeswel.
Architectus, yldestwyrhta,* Peripleumonia, blothrecung.
Cimentarius, wealwyrhta. Emoptois, blotspiung.
Latomus, stanwyrhta. Phtisis, wyrshrecing, uel wyrs us-
Caligarius, lestwyrhta. spiung.®
Lapidicina, uel lapidicedium, stan- 10 Ypaticus, liferadl.
hywet. Lienosus, milteseoc.
Nefresis, lendenwyre.
Pestilentia, uel contagium, uel lues,  Cacewia, yfeladl.

cwealm.” Atrophia, meteafliung.
Carbunculus, spring, uel angset, uel 15 Sciascis, hipwerc.

pustula, cwydele, uel pustella,  Uertibulum, hwyrfban.

swelca, P Artericus, uel artriticus, lidadl.
Scotomia,’ swinglung. Caucalus, cyselstan.

Spasmos, hramma, uel swiung. Disuria, uel stranguria, earfod lete
Titanus, oferbecgeteung.* 20 micga.
Telum, i. dolor lateris, sticwere,  Strictura, gebynd.

sticadl. Saturiasis, synwrennys, uel galseipe.
Yleos, hrifwere, uel hrifteung.® Diarria, utsiht.

Ydrofobam, uel limphatici, weter-  Dissenteria, blodig utsiht.
fyrhtnys. 25 Lienteria, mete utsiht.
Epilepsia, uel caduca, uel laruatio, Colum, hrop.’

uel comitialis, breeccopu, fylleseoe.  Colica, hropwyre.

Reuma, bree. Orificium, wlees kynnes mud uel |
Coriza, nebgebree. dyrl.

Brancos, hreegebree. 30 Alopecia, feaxfeallung.

Tipus, lengtenadl. Parodite, earcopu, ota, J. ear.
Pleuriticus, on sidan lama, uel sidadl, _Inpetigo, teter.

1 Here, again, the translator has mis- word swail; and wild-fire is, I think,
taken the meaning of his word rather still in some parts used for the erysipelas.
singularly, for he supposed that the im-  [Cf. Germ. wildex viur = erysipelas, sacer
port of the first member of the compound _ignis. R. W.] But in general the Anglo-
word was the same in architectus as in Saxon names for diseases, which were
archepiscopus, and words of that class. mostly popular expressions or translations

2 We now have a list of diseases, which of the Latin, have been lost in the Eng-
no doubt includes all those that were lish language.
known to the Saxon physicians, com- 3 An error for scotoma a fainting fit,
mencing with the most fearful of all— swoon. R. W.
the plague, In sticwere and sticadl 4 Cf, Bosw. 50f£, R. W.
we have a term which is still preserved 5 The meaning of hrifteung is: a pain
in the popular word stitch, applied to a in the bowels, iliaca passio, Wright
pain in the side (= Germ. seitenstechen).  wisprinted: brig-teung. R. W.

One of the names for the epilepsy, fyl- 6 Sic MS. R. W.
leseoc, was preserved in the later term: 7 This word still exists in the pro-
the falling sickness. Swyle, for an vincial name ropes, for bowels. Colum
aposteme, is preserved in the provincial is the Greek xw/ov

114 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 115
Erysipila, wilde fyr. Suppressum testamentum, forswiged
Serpedo, pytful wyrmses. yrfebee.
Prurigo, emertung. Cretio, yrfefyrt.
Pruritus, gicpa. Nuncupatio, underne yrfebec.
Uerruca, wearte. 5 Jus liberorum, samhiwna yrfebec.
Nictalmus, nihtege. Familie erciscunde, yrfegedal.
Satiriasis, weartene heap. Mandatum, handfestnung.
Elephanticus, uel hicteris, uel artua-  Satura lex, menibrededom.
tus, sydmycleadl. Rodia lex, scipmanna riht.
Ordeolus, stigend. 10 Cirographum, redinggewrit, uel
Furunculus, uel antrax, angseta. handgewrit.
Oscedo, mudcopu. Donatio, forgifung.
Frenus, mudberstinge. Dos, morgengifu.
Uleus, rotung. Conditio, geewyde, uel gewyrd.
Tabes, gemolsnad flese, wel forrotad. 15 Stipulatio, gehat.
Pharmacia, sealflecung. Sacramentum, adwed, uel adegehat.
Ligatura, sarclad. Res, xht, uel pine.
Picra, biterwyrtdrenc. Jus, decretum, uel lex, andweald.
Tiriaca, drene wid attre. Peculium, heanra mann, uel ceorlic
Catartica, i. purgatoria, wyrtdrenc.20  zhta. :
Catapodia, swylgende drenc. Locatio, behyring, wel gehyred feoh.
Diamoron, berigdrenc. Conduco, ie ahyre.
Colliria, eagsealfe. Congressio, gefeoht.
Girba, se ealra mesta mortere. Jus publicum, ealdormanna riht.
Pilurus, wel pistor, se pe pilap, vel 25 Jus quiritum, weala sunderriht.
tribulap. Plebisscita, medricra gesetnyssa.
Tipsana, berengebered corn, Senatus consultum, rviecra gesetnes.
Stacten, stor pe bid ofgewringe. Constitutio, kyninga gesetnysse.
Responsa, geaxode domas.
Fas, Godes riht.? 30 Jurisconsultus, uel iurisperitus, viht-
Jus, mennise riht. serifendom,
Jus naturale, gecynde riht. ies credita, gelened feoh, uel on
| Solempnitas, peaw, uel wise. borh geseald.
Stipendium, seipe, uel bigleofa. Usura, wemstsceat.
Pragma, xbod, uel intinga, 35 Commodum, len.
Pragmatica negotia, xbodas, uel cea- — Precarium, landeslen.
punge. Mutuum, wrixlung. -
Hereditas, yrfeweardnes. Depositum, to healdenne, uel xdfest
Legatum, gewriten yrfe. teht, uel beewyddod.
Legatum testamentum, heahgerefan40 Pignus, wed, uel alencd feoh.
gesetnysse. Arra, gylden wedd, uel feoh.
Legatarius, yrfeweardwritere. Arrabona, uel arrabo, wedd, uel
|| Testator, yrfewritend. wedlac.
'| Intestata hereditas, ungewriten yrfe. Miducia, forweddad feoh.
Ruptum testamentum, uncwedene yrfe-  Ypotheca, feohlenung butan borge.
L bec.
" 1 Here we commence another series of terms, belonging to the Roman law, which appears
to be quite out of its place, and was perhaps an addition to the original vocabulary.
9

116 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 17
Parricidii actio, megmorpres wit- Bobla, flod.
nung. Bargina, bocefel.
Inficiatio, uel abiuratio, borges and- Bulga, lepercoddas.
sec. Bacharus, mereswyn.
Ambitus iudicium, gebohtre scire wit- 5 Burdus, seamere.
nung. Bases, tredelas, uel stepas.
Maiestatis reus, wid eyning forwyrht.  Crepusculum, glomung.®
Compedes, fotfetera. Conticinium, cwylttid, uel gebed-
Nerui boia, fotcopsa, uel sweor- giht.
scacul. 10 Aupicium initium, angin.
Anguilla, uel scutica, swipa. Uibrisse, nosterla her.
Scorpio, ostig gyrd, uel tindig. Zenia, gifu.
Eculeus, unhela prepel. Sales, wynsum gamen.
Ignominia, scande. Stiria stillicidia, ises gicel.
Infamia, unhlisa. 15 Olympias, fif wintra fee.
Exilium, wreesid. Lustrum quinquennium, fif wintra
Postliminium, edeyr of sprzeside. feec.
Relegatus, to wite asend midunsehte. Bimus, uel biennis, uel bimulus, twi-
Patibulum, galga.' winter. [winter.
Culleum, lees eynnes witnung. 20 Trimus,‘uel triennis, uel trimulus, dri-
Fabe frese, uel pilate, gepunede Afuum, uel etas perpetua, wider-
beane. feorlic, wel ece.
Facinus, scedded. Prestigium,® scinhiw.
Uis potestatis, riecra manna need. Arpa, erengeat,
Calumnia, holtihte, uel teone. 25 Lotium, hlom, uel micga.
Seditio, foleslite, wel eswicung, sacu, Submanicatus, be slyfan gebunden.
ceast. Comitia, wyrdsciras.
Saerilegium, godesfees deofd. Draconarii, uel uexillarii, uel sig-
Stuprum, raptum, wifa nydnimung. niferi, segnboran, taenboran,
Adulterium, ewena geligr, wel unriht 30 Purulentus, wurmsihtig.
hemed. Uermiculus, cornwurma.
Balus, isern feter- Melinum, uel croceum, geolu.
Bagula, bridel, i. frenum. Centumpellio, feleferp.
Momentum, to hwile len. Lithologia, stanlesung.
Instrumentum, tool. 35 Lithostratos, stanbricge.
Instructum, gewroht. Taberna, boccest.
Usus, nittung, uel notu, uel eord- Gilarea, glitis, uel samia, sand.
westm, cess, to wte alyfed. Flebotomus, blodsex.
Merces, cepepinge. Flebotomarius, blodletere.
Commercium, cepena dinga gewrixle. 40 Fiscus, uel saccus publicus, biggyrdel.
Bicoca, hzferblete, uel pur.” Rudera, uel ruina, geswapa, uel meox. |p
1 Galga, the gallows, appears to have © Anglo-Saxon equivalents, are always in- 9
been the usual form of capital punishment _ telligible.
among the Anglo-Saxons, and is repre- 8 The Anglo-Saxon word for twilight |
sented not uncommonly in the early il- is still preserved in the Scottish gloming.
luminated manuscripts. The words which follow, are of a very
2 The extracts from the alphabetical miscellaneous character. ;
glossary, now in the letter B, recommence 4 So the MS. R. W. [rigium. R. W.
here. Neither the Latin words, nor their 5 Junius seems to have written pres-

118 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC’S VOCABULARY. 119
Quisquilie, eppelscreada, wel corn- Scirra aquilinus, sciurus, acwern. etorr
eesceda. Taxus, uel meles, cuniculus, broc.
Capreoli, wingeardbogas. Bromus marinus, seolh.
| Quitinas, 9. cadacas,' milscre treowa Linz, lox.
blostman. 5 Glis, sisemus.
Subacta coria, uel medicata, uel con-  Mustella, wesle.
fecta, getannede hyd. Camelus, uel dromeda, olfend.
Feriatus, restedeg. Simia, uel spina, apa.
Jaculum, uel funda, widnyt, uel fla, Talpa, uel talpo, wandewurpe.
Coragium, medena byrgen. 10 Licos, wulf.
Aquagium, weeterpeote. Lepus, uel lagos, g., hara.
Hostimentum, widerriht, uel edlean. Ceruus, uel eripes, heortbuc.
Idolothytum, idelgildofrung. Cerua, hind.
Galerus, uel pilleus, fellen het. Damula, uel caprea, uel dorcas, g.,
Annicto, uel annuto, ic wincie. 15 hrege.
Camilema, leaces sex. Capreus, rahdeor.
Subplaudo, ic gilpe. Hinnulus, hindcealf,
_ Repatrio, ic hamsidie. Oulpes, fox.
| Obunco, ic ymbelippe. Purcastor, foor.
Obrigesco, ic stifie. 20 Aper, wilde bar{4car)
Oppando, oppansus, ic adenige. Uerres, tam bar.
Infesto, ic ehtige. Magalis, bearh.
Expertus, i. multum peritus, purh-  Scrofa, sugu.
lered, uel gleaw. Sus, swyn.
Expers, indoctus, delleas, uel creft- 25 Suilla, uel sucula, gilte.
leas. Suilli, uel porcelli, uel nefrendes,
= fearas.
NOMINA FERARUM. Caper, uel hircus, uel tragos, bucea.
Animal, zle cuce pine, uel nyten.?2 Capra egida, gatbucean hyrde.
Pecus, iumentum, elees kynnes nyten. 30 Hedus, ticcen.
Fera, wilddeor. Ibix, firinggat.
Bellua, rede deor. Sonipes, hors.+
Elephans, ylp. Equifer, wilde cynnes hors.
Promuscida, ylpes bile, uel wrot. Agaso, horsben.
Unicornis, uel monoceros, uel rino- 35 Jumentum, hryorif.®
| ceros, anhyrne deor. Equa, mere,
| Griffes, eow, fiderfote fugel. Canterius, hengst.
Urus, wesend. Faussarius, steda.
Bubalus, wilde oxa. Equartium, stood.
Fiber, castor, ponticus, befer. 40 Poledrus, fola. _
- Raturus, ret. 7-aF- Sagma, seamsadol.
| Lutria, otor. Sagmarius equus, seamhors.
Netila, hearma. Antela, fordgyrd.
| Ferunca, uel ferunculus, meard. Postela, wfterrepe.
1 So the MS. R. W. — milisc means 4 Of. the Index. R. W.
_ mitizs. Cf, Bosw. 463, R. W.
; 2 Wright misprinted nyhten. R. W. 5 So read I, Wright printed: Aryo/if,
| 8 So the MS. R. W. Bosw. hwyorif. R. W.

120 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 121

Subligar, pearmgyrd. Ouis, uel mandritis, g. scep.

Scansile, stirap. Mandra, uel ouile, loce.

Corbus, sadulboga. Ueruex, uel manto, weper.

Sella, sadul. Agnus, cinist® (sic) lamb.

Centrum, uel filtrum, felt 5 Magnicaper, ormete bucean.

Chama! hi at mid a DE NOMINIBUS INSECTORUM,

Bogula, saliuare, brydel. Musca, fleoge.

Ducale, latteh. Chosdrus, uel castros, beomoder.

Mulus, mul. 10 Fucus, dran.

Asinus, assa. Crabro, hyrnet.

Onager, wilde assa. Oestrum, beaw, uel hyrnette.

Ursus, bera. Blatta, niltbuttorfleoge.

Ursa, byrene. Uespa, weeps.

Muriceps, uel musio, murilegus, catt. 15 Apis, uel melle, beo.

Sorex, mus. Atticus, uel burdo, dora.

Canis, hund. Scarabeus, scearnfifel.

Canicula, biege. Papilio, buttorfleoge.

Millus, uel collarium, sweortch, Locusta, astaco, gerstapa.

Molossus, rydda. 20 Bruchus, ceafor.

Inutilis canis, hrodhund. Cinomya, hundesfleoge.

Cinomia, hundesfleoge. Bibiones, uel mustiones, musefleotan,

Ricinus, hundestleoge. uel wurma smite.®

Bos, oxa. Culex, stut.*

Uacea, uel buccula, eu. 25 Cicindela, se glisigenda wibba.s

Anniculus, uel trio, steoroxa. Formica, mete.

Uitulus, cealf. Loppe, fleonde neddre, wel attor-

Juuencus, uel uitula, steor, coppe.®

Annicula, wel uaccula, heahfore. Gurgulio, cawelwurm.

Juniculus, iung hryper. 30 Seinifes, uel tado,’ gnet.

Juuenca, iung cu. Limax, snegl.

Inus,' oxa on pam forman teame.  estudo, gchused snegl.

Binus, on pam efteran teame. Bombyx, sidwyrm, uel seolewyrm.

Mutinus, gadinca, uel hnoe. Eruca, melsceafa,

Altilium, fret heahfore. 35 Termes, uel teredo, wyrm pe borad

Altile, fedels. treow.

Aries, ramm. Sanguisuga, uel hirudo, lece.

Triennis, pry-winter, sumer gildeto. Pulex, fleo,
! Wright printed Unus. R. W. plained as signifying a spider, and it eon-
2-1 do not understand this word, But tinued to be used apparently in that sense

1 think cinist to be an Anglo - Saxon in English until the fifteenth century; yet

expression. Wright printed it in italics in some cases this meaning appears to be

as belonging to agnus. R. W. doubtful. In an A.-S. MS. in the Cot-
8 So the MS.; not sinite as Wright tonian library, Vitel. C. IIL, we have

read. R. W. drawings of the attercoppa of that period,
4 A guat is still called a stué in Somer- which by uo means agree with the notion

sotshire. of its being a spider. One of them is
5 The glittering worm, no doubt the engraved in my Archzological Album, |!

glow-worm, p. 182. :
6 The word attercoppa is generally ex- 7 So the MS.; not tudo, R.W. '

122 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 123
Pediculus, uel sexpes, lus. Ciatus, hnep.
Lens, uel lendix, hnitu. Anthlia, hneep.
Cimex, mapu. Dolium, eyf.
Tippula, weter-buea, uel gat. Fundum, bydenbotm.
Tinea, modde. 5 Hauritorium, hleden.
Tamus,! mapa, mite. Patella, panne.
Culex, miege. Colatorium, seohhe.
Mordiculus, bitela. Cribrum, syfe.
Botrax, uel botraca, yee. Cupa, tunne.
Rana, frogga.? 10 Tympanum, tunnebotm.
Buffo, tadige. Cistella, uel cartallum, windel.
Lacerta, uel stilio, efete. Corbis, uel qualus, tenel.
Emigranus, flesemapu. Batus, amber.
Blatta, eorwiega. Sartago, uel frixorium, hyrsting-
Stellio, slawyrm. 15 panne.
Tauri, eordeaferas. Canistrum, uel aluearium, hyf.
Spalangius, slawyrm. Cophinus, wilige.
Surio, uel briensis, uel sirineus, hand- Orca, ore.
wyrm, Enophorum,  winfeet. }
Musaraneus, screawa. 20 Quasillus, litel tencl.
Istrix, se mara igil. Flaxa, flaxe.
Lumbricus, renwyrm, uel angeltwiece. Lagena, escen.
Chelio, testudo, wel marina gugalia, Anfora, crocea.
sesnel, uel pinewinclan. Situla, stoppa.®
Ricinus, hundeswyrm. 25 Ansa, sal.
Usia, swineslus. Ydria, uel soriscula, weterfet.
Buprestis, twinwyrm. Muletrale, uel sinum, uel muletrum,
NOMINA UASORUMs enue
Amfora, sester. 30 Scortia, leprenfeet.
Cantarus, winsester.4 Flasco, buterue.
Crater, wel canna, canne. Lenticula, xrenbyt.
Patera, mele. Sciffus, leuel.
Alabastrum, stenen elefet. Emicadium, cleft.
Cocula, olfata. 35 Urceus, uel immansiterna, ceac.
Karchesia, melas. Acetabulum, ced feet.
Caupus, uel obba, cuppe. Emistis, andrece fet, uel trapetum.
Fiala, uel scala, bledu. 4 Cucuma, cyperen hwer.
Cratera, eardefzt. Lebes, hwer, uel cytel.
1 Sie MS.; Wright read: tomus. R. W. periwinkle (pinewincla, or sa-snal), placed
2 It is curious that in the eyes of the © in the same category.
Anglo-Saxon naturalists, the frog, the 3 This chapter, and what follows, appear
toad, the lizard or eft (efete), and other to have been accidentally displaced, and
reptiles, were usually placed under the so interposed between the list of insects
head of insects; and this odd classification and the list of birds.
was preserved to rather a late period. 4 Wright, by an error, has: wincester.
Here we have the shrew-mouse (screawe), R. W.
and the hedgehog (istrix, igil), as well 5 The modern word stoop.
as the slow-worm (slaw-wyrm), and the

124 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 125
Cacabus, cytel. Colobium, smoc, uel syre.
Gillo, weegel. Tubroces, uel brace, strapulas.
Malluuiz, handpweales feet. Perizomata, uel campestria, uel suc-
Pelluuie, fotpweales feet. cinctoria, wedbrec.
Paropsis, uel catinus, lepeldre fet, 5 Manica, uel brachilia, slyfa.
Trisilis, pryfotad fet. Toral, rooc. .
Patena, huseldise. Amphibalum, rubhregel.
Cimbia, scipfet. Anabola, winpel.
Lagena, lemen fet. Pedula, meo.
Sartago, isen panne. 10 Commissura, clut.
Arula, uel batilla, fyrpanne. Glomus, clypen.
Pizis, bixen box. Uitta, snod.
Limbus, stemning, uel hem.

Domus, uel lar, hus.' Fascia, wyninge.
Supellex, yddise. 15 Fascia, nostle.
Cubiculum, bedcofa, uel bur. Uallegias, wynegas.
Cubicularius, burpen. Instita, pres.
Camerarius, bedpen. Callicula, roce.
Culcites, feperbed. Stigmentum, ful maal on regel.
Plumacius, bedbolster. 20 Textrinum opus, towlic weore.
Capitale, heafdbolster. Colus, distef.
Ceruical, wangere. Fusus, spinl.
Stragula, westling. Cernui, fotleaste leshosum. 2
Sindo, scyte. Fico, sco.
Puluillus, lytel pyle. 25 Solew, solen.
Fulcrum, eal bedreaf. Subtalares, swyfteleares.
Uestis, clamis, serud. Baxee, wifes sceos.
Sagum, hwitel. Coturnus, triwen scco.8
Cunabulum, cradel. ere dylle. 568.20 Caligarius, lestweorhta.
Cune, uel crebundie, cildclades. 30 Talares, unhege sceos.
Planeta, cxppe. Ocree, uel tibiales, leperhosa.
Penula, gerenod cxppe. Calopodium, uel mustricula, leste.
Pretexta, cildes scrud. Obstrigelli, rifelingas.*
Manualis, handlin. Nebris, sceat, wel heortes hyd.
Mantium, glof. 35 Bulga, hydig fet.
Zona, gyrdel. Polymita, uel oculata, hringfagh.s

1 From the list of vessels of different when it was used as the poetical term
kinds, the vocabulary goes on to describe for the lady’s room. The enumeration of
the house, with its parts and contents, articles of dress is also introduced here
beginning with the chamber, because pro- in the sequel, as they were usually kept
bably it was the room in which, being in the bed-chamber,
less public, most of the articles of any ~ 2 Cf, Bosworth, 40w. R. W, {
value were kept, and which had most 8 4. ¢., a wooden shoe —a rather curious !
furniture. Of the names here given to interpretation of the Latin cothurnus. f
the chamber, the first, bedcofa, means 4 A rough shoe, worn by the Scots in '
literally a bed-recess, or bed-closet; for the fourteenth century, was called a rive- t
the bed-room was probably, in earlier ling. [Cf. f. 1. Minot’s poems: rough- J
times and in the ordinary houses, only a fute rivelings. R. W.] t
recess from the room in which the family 5 Cf. pag. 40, 17s. v. Pilimita. R. W. t
lived, Bur is the bower of a later period,

126 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 127

Orbiculata, ligregel. Mantile, handhregl.

Sigillum, uel bulla, insegel. Mappula, bearmelad, uel regl.

Arcus, forbigels. Mappa, wetersceat.

Columna, swer. Foculare, heord.

Excussorium, flor on huse. 5 Focarius, fyrbeta.

Tectum, pecen, uel rof. Carbo, coll.

Ualua, hlidgata. Pruna, gled.

Patronus, stapul. Titio, uel torris, brand.

Ascensorium, steger- Andena, wel tripes, brandisen.

Destina, uel postis, uel fulcimen,10 Fuscinula, uel tridens, awul.
stipere. Ueru, spitu.

Secessus, digle hus. Rotabulum, ofenraca.?

Tignum, reefter. Uerriculum, uel scope, bysm.

Asseres, letta.’ Olitor, lectunward.

Laquear, fyrst. 15 Comedia, racu, tunlic spec.

Cleta cratis, hyrdel. Pastillus, lite] hlaf.

Uectis, steng. Assura, uel assatura, brede.

Paxillus, cyrfel, uel litel stigul. Coctus, gesoden and gebacen.

Sardanium, butere. Elixus cibus, gesoden met on we-

Taxea, spic. 20 tere.

Palestra, gewinstow. Offa, uel frustum, sticce.

Arca, uel scrinium, serin. Offella, uel particula, spices sned.

Conuocatio, geladung. Offarius, uel particularius, twickere.

Altar, uel ara, weofod. Gastrimargia, gyfernys, wel oferfil.

Crux, uel staurus, rod. 25 Isicia, merhgehet.

Lampas, blase. Omenta, uel membrana, fylmena.

Lucernarium, leohtfeet. Formentum, ofenbacen hlaf.

Emunctorium, candelsnytels. Polentum, wurtmete mid meluwe.

Papirus, weoce Spumaticum, mete of meluwe and

Horologium, degmeel. 30 of bane gesoden.

Gnomon, degmeelspilu. Minutal, gebeaten fisc. [flese.

Salinare, uel salinum, sealtfet.” Martisia, uel baptitura, gebeaten

Gausape, beodregl. Succidia, eald hryterflese.*

Mensorium, meose. [sacca.  Obesta, beost.

Legula, wel coclea, uel code, mete- 35 Colostrum, byst.

Dapes, uel fercula, wista, uel sand. ‘Silotrum, pillsape.

Fercula, berdisc. Excoriatus, beflx.

Discifer, uel discoforus, discpen. Culliola, bnutehula.

Satira, hleddise.

1 This humble enumeration of the parts the hall, or eating room, and to the dinner
of a common dwelling-house, posts, rafters, table, The list of articles of cookery is
Jaths, a roof, and a floor, (it is evidently not very numerous; nor does it bespeak
supposed to be built of nothing but timber,) a very high degree of refinement in gas-
offers a strong contrast with the elaborate _ tronomy.
detailsin the latervocabularies, and reminds 8 So the MS. Wright read: ofer-raca.
us of the remarks of William of Malmes- R. W.
bury, on the great development of domes- 4 For bryderflesc, I suppose. But the
tic architecture after the Norman Conquest. meaning of succidia is: a flitch of bacon,

2 We are now supposed to return to RW.

128 ARCHBISHUP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY 129
_— _ Oxygala, sur meole, acidum lac.
DE GENERIBUS POTIONUM.' Colustrum, bysting, dicce meole.
Ceruisia, celea, eala. Pusta, hacine.
Uinum, merum, win. Sapa. eftereala.
Acetum, eced. 5 Lexinum, lehmealtwurt.
Oleum, ele. Acinum, mealtwurt.
Oleaginus, clebeamen. Feces, drosna.
Olea, uel oliua, elebeam. Issiguum, stream, uel weeto.
Medo, medu, uel medus. Caupo, tabernarius, teppere, win-
Mellicratum, geswet win. - 10 brytta.
Ydromellum, beor, uel ofetes wos. Diuisor, dzlere.
Oximellum, geswet eced. Dispensator, dihtnere.
Inomellum, must mid hunig gemeng- -Economus, stiward.
ed. Ephemeris, anes deges weore.
Mulsum, beor. 15 Diarium, degwine.
Mustum, niwe win. Bucida, qui boues mactat, lryper-
Sicera, xlces kinnes gewring butan heawere.
wine and weetere,
Liquor, weta. Cantor, sangere.
Sapa, perewos. 20 Trenos, sarlic sang.
Falernum, pet seleste win. Precentor, foresingend.
Infertum uinum, messewin. Threnum, wanung.
Limpidum uinum, seir win. Succentor, zftersingend.
Spurcum vinum, ful win. Yineneus, uel epithalamium, bry dsang.
Crudum uinum, weala win. 25 Concentor, midsingend.
Suceinacium uinum, geolu win. Monodia, g , latersicinium, quasi soli-
Honorarium uinum, hlaforda win. cinium, pet is anes sones.
Compositum uinum, uel conditum, ge- _Bicinium, twegra sang.
wyrtod win. Ymnus, lofsang.
Mirratum winum, gemenged mid 30 Chorus, singende heap.
myrran. Chorea, hluddra sang.
Defecatum uinum, gehluttrad win. Matutinum officium, uhtgebed, uel
Meracum uinum, gehlyttrod win. penung.
Defrutum uinum, gesoden win, uel Uespertinum officium, sxfengebed,
passum. 35 uel peowdom.
Fecula, gesoden winberigen. Responsorium, reps. 1
Carenum, morad. Lectio, reding.
Fauus, beobread. Diaphonia, ungeswege sang.
Liquamen, uel garum, fiscbryne. Canticum, sum swegesang.
Salsugo muria, bryne. 40 Psalmus, proprie, hearpsang.
Serum, hweg. Canticum, psalm efter herpansang.
Raptura, syring. Psalmus, xr herpansang.
Coagulum, rynning. Armonia, gepwere sang. ;
Coagulatus, gerunnen, Simphonia, answege sang. !
1 From the dishes we are introduced of words relating to ecclesiastical matters, ,
to the drinks of the Anglo-Saxons, which and others of a miscellaneous character;
appear to be proportionally more nume- after which we return again to the sub-
rons, They are followed by another batch —_ject of natural history, in a list of birds,

130 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 131
Fertum, messelac. Commolio, ic grinde.

Offertorium, lanesang.' Commolitus, gegrunde.

Oblatio, ofrung. Deuoto, ic wyrge. -

Dano, sawlsceat, uel syndrig godes —Deuotatio, wergnes, wel gehat.

lac.2 5 Compensatio, edleanung.

Dedicatum, gode gesyld. ’
Consecratum, gode gehalgad. NOMINAL SULUM.
Officium, penung. Cignus, ylfete.
Immolatio, onsegung. Pauo, pauus, pawe.
Sacrificium, offrung. 10 Aquila, earn.
Mactatio, snidung. Beacita, uel sturnus, stearn,
Holocaustum, ealoffrung. Herodios, g., swan.
Libatio, wintifer. Olor, swan.
Omilia, folclic lar. {ung.6 Ardea, hragra, diomedea.
Ceremonie g. orgia, geldhaealhalg- 15 Ficedula, swertling.
Munus, ivel zenia, lac. Strix, uel cauanna, uel noctua, uel
Eleemosyna, uel agape, zlmesse. ulula, ule.
Donum, datum, uel donatum, gifu. Lucinia, uel philomela, nightegale.
Pretium, wurd. Mergus, scealfr.

| Depretiatus, wurdleas. 20 Mergulus, fugeldoppe.

_ Care ualet, pretiosum est, deor hit is. | Auca, gos.

_ Uile ualet, undeor hit is. Aucarius, goshafue.

| Care uendidit, deore he hit bohte, Anser, ganra.

uel sealde. Anas, ened.

| Uile uendidit, undeore he bohte. 25 Ciconia, store.
Uilis, waclic. Rubisca, rudduc.5
Carus, leof. Auricinctus, goldfine,
Odiosus, purblad. Alauda, lauerce.
Uiuus, cuce. Bugium, hefenblete.6
Rediuiuus, geedcuced. 30 Alcedo, uel alcion, mew.?
Mortuus, dead. Columba, culfer.8
Defunctus, fordfaren. Palumbus, wudeculfre.
Defungitur, fordferd. Bitorius, uel pintorus, wrenna.
Longeuus, langlife. Cicada, uicetula, hegesugge.°
Capillamenta, rupe odd‘ drisne, 35 Cicada, hilhama.
Polio, ic smedie. Turdus, servic."
Plano, uel leuigo, ic gegnide. Cornix, crawe.
Conficio, ic gemenge. Buteo, eyta.

1 Lenan means commodare, offerre. regular English name for the redbreast,
lene- or lane-sang seems to be a literal or robin; and I am not sure that it has
translation of offertorium. R. W. yet entirely disappeared from our local

2 Perhaps an error for donum. The dialects.
sawlsceat was a custom different from 6 Cf. pag. 9, 1.4. R. W.
the general church tax (cyricsceat). Cf. 7 See pag. 24, 1.7. R. W.

Leges Aedelstani: And ic wille eac... 8 The pigeon is still called a culver in
pet man agyfe pa cyricsceattas and pa some of our dialects.
sawlsceattas etc. R. W. 9 The hedge-sparrow is still called, in

8 Cf. pag. 107, 1.22. R. W. Gloucestershire, a haysuck,

4 The writer omitted e in odd. R.W. 10 The shrike.

5 Ruddock continued long to be the

10

132 ARCHBISHOP ALERIC'S VOCABULARY. 133
Turtur, turtle. Bardioriolus, colmase.
Coruus, remn. Oscines aues, wigole fugules.
Nicticorax, nihtremn. -
Gracculus, uel monedula, cco.' NOMINA HERBARUM*
Gaia, uel catanus, higere. 5 Apiago, beowyrt.
Cuculus, geac. Lilium, lilie.
3 Strgnus, stern. sltirnus Fafida, \eomuc.®
Turdus, ster.? Colochintida, wylde cyrfet.
Turdella, se mare ster. Rosa, rose.
Coturnix, erschen. 10 Brionia, uel ampelos leuce, g., hwit
Pica, agu. wilde wingeard.
Pluuialis, hulfestre. Labrusca, wilde wingerd.
Bubo, uf. Brabasca, uel amplos male, blac
Picus, fina. wingeard.
Gracculus, uel garrulus, hroc. 15 Botanicum, uel uiridarium, wyrttun.
Miluus, glida.* Cucumerarium, wyrttun.
Ibis, geolna. Caluna, megpa.
Fulica, dopenid. Feniculum, fynel.
Uultur, earngeap. Nepita, nepte-
Aceta, snite, uel wudecoec. 20 Adriatica, uel malum terre, gallue.
Grus, eran, Costus, cost.
Florentius, goldfine. Trifolium, geacessure,’ uel prilefe.
Luscinus, geolewearte. Uaccinium, branwyrt.
Parrax, wrenna, uel hicemase. Abrotonum, superne wude.
Merula, uel plara, prose. 25 Lubestica, lufestice.
Accipiter, uel raptor, spearhafoc. Uolui, sinwealte swammas.
Cintus, uel frugellus, goldfine. Sinpatus, cneowhole.
Hirundo, swalewe. Solsequium, uel heliotropium, solsece,
Carduelis, linetwige. uel sigelhwerfe.
Rapariolus, fiscere. 30 Astula regia, wuderofe.
Tanticus, erdling. Millefolium, uel myrifilon, g. uel cen-
Capo, capun. i tefolia, geruwe.
Gallus, coc. Tanaceta, helde.
Gallinaccus, eapua. Samum, hylwurt.
Pullus, cicen. 35 Herba, gers, uel wyrt.
Falco, uel capus, « capiendo, wealh- — Butunus, heope.
hafoc. Apium, merce.
Scoricarius, bleripittel. Cenenifuga, atterlape.

1 Ceo is the modern word chough. of wild plants, The cause of the list

2 The stare, or starling. One would being so numerous was no doubt the cir-
Suppose that in the next line mare is an cumstance of their being so much used
error for lessa. for medicinal purposes,

3 Glede continued to be the usual Eng- 5 This is the reading of the MS. R. W.
lish name for the kite till a compara- 6 Geaces-sure or ga@ces-sure, literally
tively late period, and will be found in cuckoo’s-sour, was the plant we now know
our vocabularies of the fifteenth century, by the namé of wood-sorrel, which is still

4 The list of plants is rather copious, called in some parts of the country
and many of their Anglo-Saxon names cuckoo-sorrel,
are still preseryed as the popular names

134 ARCUBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 135
Febrefugia, uel febrifuga, feferfuge.  Crispa, uictoriola, smeringwyrt.
Ruta, rude. Centaurea, eordgealle.
_ Blitum, uel lappa, clate, uel clyf  Strumus, uel wua lupina, nihtscada.
wyrt.! Saluia, fenfearn.
| Simphoniaca, hennebelle. 5 Collocasia, harewinta.
Gersussa, biscopwyrt. Filia, fearn.
Ramusium, ramesan. Herba putida, megpa.
Dilla, uel acrocorium, docce. Cresco, kerse.
Anetum, dile. Uermiculi, meddre.
Cucumer, hwerhwette. 10 Filix arboratica, eferfearn.
Anadonia, feldwyrd. Sintea, uel senecion, grundeswelge.s
Gladiolum, gledene. Nap siluatica, sperewyrt, uel wilde
Cinaglossa, uel plantago, uel lapa- neep.
tium, wegbrede.” Carex, uel sabium, uel lisca, seeg.
Artemisia, uel matrum herba, mug-15 Rubia, meddre.
wyrt. Juncus, rise.
Annuosa, xscprotu. Scirpus, rise.
Amorfolia, clate. Bremium, earise.
Cepe, ennelec. Ulua, grede.
Saxifraga, sundcorn. 20 Gramen, cwice.
Philantropium, lappa, clate. Alga, sewaur.4
Auris leporis, halswyrt. Consolda, degesege.
Ebulum, walwyrt. Raphanum, uel radix, redic.
Allium, garleac. Tursus, cimia, crop.
Herba munda, gipcorn. 25 Centaurea major, curmelle.
Poletis, hwitleac. Brittannica, cusloppe.
Melletina, medewyrt. ; Malua, malwe, uel geormenletic.
Porrus, porleac. Pastinaca, feldmora,
Cameleon, g., wulfescamb. Daucus, wealmora.
Cynocephaleon, heortclefre. 30 Napus, nep.
Electrum, elehtre. Citocatia, gipcorn.
Ficus, fiewyrt. Cariota, waldmora.
Papauer, popig. Sinapis, senep.
Saliunca, wilde popig. Cucurbita, cyrfet.
Apiaster, wudemerce. 35 Papirus, duphamoyr.
_ Petrosilion, stanmerce. Nasturtium, tunkerse.
_ Menta, minte. Rapa, nep.
Alumen, uel stipteria, efne. Fungus, uel tuber, metteswaw.
Viola, hofe. - Carduus, pistel.
Gerobotana, uel uerbena, uel sagmen,  Coliandrum, celendre.
hiscopwyrtil. Cerefolium, cerfille.
Calta, uel trifillon, clefre. Elleborum, uel ueratrum, wodepistle.
1 Clyf-wyrt is generally understood as clyfwyrt same man hatad foxesclife,
designating the plant now called forglove saab on arn he ac
(the digitalis purpurea). The Anglo- 5 Now'sSttened down into groundsell,
Saxon herbal of the Cottonian MS. (Vitel. the name of a well-known plant.
C, III.) gives three names of this plant — 4 Still called waure in Kent.

136 ARCUBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY, 137
Cicuta, hemlic. Satirion, suderige.
Aconita, pung. Pollegia, hylwyrt.
Betonica, seo lesse biscop[wyrt{. Hermodactyla, crawanleac.
Urtica, netle. Centaurea minor, banwyrt.
Archangelica, blinde netle. 5 Hedera nigra, wudebinde.
Sisimbrium, balsminte. Pappus, pistles blostm.
Calamus, uel canna, uel harundo,  Sarrabum, wilde lactuce.
reod. Fromos, uel lucernaris, uel insana,
Quinquefolium, pentafillon, fifleafe. uel lucubros, candelwyrt.
Uinea, peruince. 10
— ce mistiltan. NOMINA ABBORUM.
Marrubium, wel prassium, harhune. Arbor, treow.
Canicula, argentilla. Quercus, uel ilex, ac.
Fraga, streaberige. Robur, iung ac.
Framen, streaberiewisan. 15 Quernum, acleac.
Nimphea, eadocea.' Corilus, hesel.
Eruca, calfwyrt. Saginus, hwit hesel.
Caballopodia, wel ungulacaballi,colo-  Juglantis, uel nux, hnutu.
greig.? Fracxinus, esc.
Ciminum, eymen. 20 dsculus, boc.
Agrimonia, stiewyrt. Fagus, boc.
Modera, cicenamete. Faginus, becen.
Helena, horshelene. Suberies, mestentriow-
Diptamnus, uel bibulcos, wilde np. _ Nemus, uel lucus, bearu.
Sandia, wad. 25 Saltus, holt.
Fucus, waad. Spartus, pyfel.
Tinctura, teging. Arbustum, iung treow.
Arboracia, wel lapsana, cal. Truncus, stoc.
Alfa, edelfyrdingwyrt. Stipes, stofn.§
Origanum, warmelle. 30 Sirculus, uel wirgultum, sprauta.
Altea, uel euiscus, seomint. Daphnis, uel laurus, laurbeam.
Cardamon, cerse. Seno, uel tilia, lind.
Pionia, pionia. Malus, apulder.‘
Mandragora, eordeppel. Malus matranus, surmelst apulder.
Oxylapation, g., anes cynnes clate.35 Malomellus, swite apulder.
Brionia, wild cyrfet, uel hwit win- Mespila, openers.?
geard, Pirus, pirige.®
1 Literally, the water-dock, the beautiful durcomb, in the Isle of Wight, Appledore
plant we now call the water-lily. One in Kent, and another Appledore in Devon-
might suppose that the Anglo-Saxons shire, and perhaps Appledram in Sussex.
named their plants with more regard to 5 It is rather singular that we should
the leaves than to the flowers, to judge find this not very delicate name of the
by this instance. medlar at so early a period. It is found
2 An error for coltgreig. R. W. in MSS. of the fifteenth century, and is
8 This word is still preserved in Lei- a word sufficiently familiar to the readers
cestershire under the form stovin, signi- of the popular literature of the sixteenth
fying the stump of a tree. and seventeenth centuries.
4 The Anglo-Saxon name of the apple- 6 In the fifteenth century the English
tree is preserved in the names of several name for the pear-tree still continued to
places, such as Appledurford, or Apple- be piry, pire, or perye.

it
1)
138 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 139
Persicarius, persoctreow. Uariculus, hwitingtreow.

| Cariscus, ewicbeam. Cresis, cwictreow.
Pinus, pintreow. Sicomorus, uel celsa, wps.
Prunus, plumtreow. Pruniculus, plumsla. 4
Ficus, ficbeam. 5 Flaui, uel mori, blaceberian.
Cerasus, cyrstreow. Ligustrum, hunisuge.
Cornus, corntreow. Bacido, botrus, clyster.
Carica, ficappel. Accidinetum, gost.
Morus, uel rubus, morbeam. Coquimella, uel prunus, uel nixa,
Palma, palmtwig, vel palm. 10 plumtreow.
Abies, uel gallica, gyrtreow. Amigdala, uel nutida, magdalatreow.
Ulmus, ulmtreow. Nux, uel nucarius, hnutbeam. -
Genesta, brom. Busus, box.
Taxus, iw. Ornus, eow.
Acer, mapulder;! acernum, mapul- 15 Cedrus, cederbeam.

dern. Cedria, hissep.

Populus, byre. Abellane, hesl, uel heselhnutu.
Marica, uel brogus, hep.? Sentes, pornas; senticosus, porniht.
Alnus, alr. Prutex, pyfel. Z

Castanea, cystel, uel cystbeam.§ 20 Ramnus, pifeporn.

Glans, xcern. Spina, porn.

Granum, cyrnel. Tribulus, porn.

 Corimbi, berigen. Alba spina, hegporn.

_ Flos, blostm. Spina, uel sentrix, pyfel.
Cauliculus, stela. 25 Uepres, bremlas.

Radix, wyrtruma. Mastix, uel resina, cuter.

_ Uimen, lel. Carpo balsami, balsames bled.
Uiticella, wipwiude.s Opobalsamum, balsames tear.
Pirorium, leferbed. Vitis, wintreow.

Pirus, gladiolus, lefer. 30 Saliz, wipig?

Ramus, boga. Mirica, hep.

Olea, oliua, elebeam. Silua, wudu; calones, wudicras.
Amurea, elesdrosna. Lignum, aheawan treow.
Oleaster, unwestmbere clebeam. Stirps, styb, uel spranca.6
Betulus, byre. 35 Glans, glandis, picbred.
Betulentum, byrcholt. Amenus locus, luffendlie stede.
Rubus, heopbrymel. Claua, styng."

Acrifolius, holen. Contus, spreot.

Gignalia, hagan.

1 Mapulder, the maple. It still oceurs wild convolvulus; but how it came to
in the Anglo-Saxon form in names of find a place among trees, is not clear.
places, as in Mappledurwell in Hamp- ‘The same may be said of the bulrush
shire, and Mapplederham in Oxfordshire.  (la@fer).

2 Marica seems to be only an error 5 Withy is still a common provincial
for myrica, under which form it is re- name for the willow.
peated below. hep means erica, thymum, 6 So the MS.; Wright has: sprauta,
thyme. But sprauta means: a sprout, surculus,

$ The modern word chestnut is mercly not: a stem or trunk of a tree. — Cf.
cysthnut, the nut of the cyst-tree. pag. 149 1. 23, R. W.

4 Withwind is still a name for the 7 The compiler of the vocabulary now

‘

‘4

\

140 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 141
Capsella, serin. Molendinarius, wel molinarius, mylen-
Cardinarius, i. primarius, se yldesta. wyrd.
Causidicus, aduocatus, forespeca. Molitura, grist.
Carpentum, currus, horswen. Cerealis pistor, gristra.
Caragius, fugelhwata. 5 Pistor, beecere.
Circinum, meltange. Pistrinum, becern.
Emisperia, healftryndel. Fornax, clibanus, ofn.
Clatrum, pearruc. Cribrum, sife.
Tribus, cneores. Cribellum, lytel sife.
Cimiterium, poliandrium, halig leger- 10 Uannus, fann.

[stow]. Uentilabrum, windwigsyfe.
Coccum, rubicundum, bis tinctum, Capisterium, hridder.

weolcread. Taratantara, hridder.
Conquilium, weolocesscyll. Sporta, cawl.
Contubernalis, gepofta. 15 Corbes, leap.
Coclea, gewind. Tritorium, perscel.
Conniueo, ic wincige. Pila, pilstre.
Confuto, ic oferstele. Pilum, pilstampe.
Conflatilis, gegoten. Pilunus, pilere.
Columen, i. culmen, rof. 20 Apludes, uel cantaina, hweete gryttan.
Commentator, expositor, dihtere. Ergasterium, werchus,
Conspiratio, geewidredden. Oficina, smidde.
Crates, i. flecta, hyrdel. Incus, anfilte.
Crisoletus, auricolor, goldbleoh. Aries, ram to wuree.
Bida, uel basterna, uel capsus, wel 25 Securis, uel secespita, 2x.

currus, uel esseda, uel quadriga,  Dolabrum, bradex.

uel carpentum, cret. Bipennis, twibille, uel stanex.
Capsus, betogan creet. Falcastrum, bill.
Cuba, byden. Ascia, adesa.
Pilentum, uel petorritum, uel rada, 30 Falciola, uel falcicula, sicol.

erat. Falz, side.
Carracutium, hehhwiolad wen Uitrum, uel hialum, gles.
Crepido, uteweard. Electrum, smylting, uel gler.
Cassata, forhrered. Metallum, wlces kynnes weeg, uel
Clasendis, sweordes scead. 35 ora opde clyna. ;
Categia, i. telum, gesceot. Massa, dad, uel bloma.1 ;
Oppidum, festen. q .
Usbanus, burhsita., vel burhman. NOMINA ARMORUM®?
Ciuis, ceasterware. Arma, wepna,
Castellum, wic, uel lytel port. 40 Armamentarium, wepnahus.
goes off again into a series of miscel- 1 Bloma, the metal taken from the ores.
Janeous words, which are at first taken, It is the origin of the technical term
as in several instances before, from an  bloomery, for the places where one of
alphabetical dictionary of the Latin lan- the operations of smelting is performed.
guage. He first breaks into the regu- (Bosworth has ; “dah” instead of dad. R. W.)
larity of the alphabetical words by in- 2 In this chapter we have apparently
troducing one or two on account of their a tolerably good account of the arms,
similar meaning, or from contrast, and offensive and defensive, of the Anglo-
then he leaves them altogether. Saxon fighting men. The former are the

{

142 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 143
Galea, leperhelm. Pugio, uel clunabulum, lytel sweord,
Cassis, irsenhelm. uel hypesex. [reaf.
; Corona, diadema, cynehelm. Spolia, uel manubie, uel prede, here-
Lorica, wel torax, uel squama, — Preda, reaflac.
byrne.! 5 Hasta, getridwet spere.
Gladius, uel machera, uel spata, vel Hastilia, gafelucas.*
Sramea, uel pugio, sweord. Contus, spereleas sceaft.
Spatarius, swyrdbora. Trudes, uel amites, spreotas.
_ Armiger, wepenbora. Claua, uel cateia, uel teutona, anes
Siynifer, uel uexillifer, tacnbora. 10  cynnes gesceot.
_ Lancea, Sfalarica, spere. Pila, gesceot.
Uenabulum, barspere, uel huntig- Lancea, wigar,
spere. Amentum, wegures gewidspere.
Sica, litel sweord. Falarica, uel fala, wigspere.
Capulum, hilte. 15 Telum, uel obeliscus, flaa.
Mucro, swurdes ord. [feoht.  Sagitta, uel spiculum, gefyderad flaa.
Intestinum bellum, necheburena ge- Scorpius, geettrad flaa.
 Ciuile bellum, burware® gefeoht. Cuspis, sceaft.
| Asta, quiris, sceaft. Coriti, bogefodder.
_ Uagina, scead. 20 Theca, fodder.
Manubrium, heft and helfe. Dolones, stefsweord.
_ Rasorium, scearsex. Balista, gelocen boge.
_ Nouaculum, neglsex. Clipeus, testudo, scyld.
_ Faretra, coker. Ancile, sintryndel,® lytel scyld.
| Telum, sagitta, fla.* 25 Pelt, uel parme, pa lessan scyldas.
Arcus, boga. Apex, summitas galew, helmes top.
! Anquina, bogenstreng. Crista, helmes camb.
 Scutum, uel clipeus, uel parma, scyld. Conus, helmes byge.
| Pelta, lytel seyld. Speculea, sceawere.
| Umbo, randbeh, wel bucula. 30 Bipennis, twybill.
_ Funda, lythre. Caduceatores, uel pacifici, gesibbe
 Fundiblum, steeflithere. serendracan.
_ Classica, bledhornas. Prefeciales, gefeohtes bodan.
_ Ensis, hiltleas sweord.
{ Capulus, hilte. 35 NOMINA XII. VENTORUMS
Mucro, elees wepnes ord. Subsolanus, easten wind.
. Machera, aneege sweord. Auster, uel nothus, suden wind.
_ sword and spear, bows and arrows for 8 The word flo, for an arrow, was in
the archer, and slings; the latter are use in the English language as late as
principally the shield, the helm, and the the time of Chaucer,
byrnie or coat of mail. 4 The gavelok of the English of a later
1 The byrnie, or brunie, of early Eng- period. Thus we are told in one of the
lish poetry, where it seems to be used metrical romances— f
as a general term for the armour of the Gaveloles also thike flowe
body— So gnattes, ichil avowe.
Ereiraygntenttt/coliastarn, Arthour and Merlin, p. 338.
Alle yarmed swithe wel. 5 Tread in the MS.: sintryndel. R. W.
. #runy, and launce, and sweord of stel. 6 This list of names of the points of
Kyng Alisaundre, 1. 1867. the winds, is substantially the same as
2 So the MS, R. W. the list of Frankish names which Eginhard
t
LI

144 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 145
Fauonius, uel zephirus, westen wind. Platea, wid street.
Septentrio, nordan wind. Quintane, fifte del pexre strete.
Oulturnus, castan sudan wind. Murus, weal.
Eurus, euroauster, nordan eastan Menia, burhweall.
wind. 5 Porta, portgeat. .
Euroafricus, sudan ecasten wind. Promurale, foreburh. ~~
Africus, sudan westan wind. Turris, stypel.
Corus, nordan westan wind. Propugnacula, wighus.
Circius, nordan easten wind. [wind. Ara, se hihsta wighus.
Aquilo, uel boreas, nordan westan 10 Coclew, adulseape.! (burge.
Forus, uel prorostra, motstow on
Spiracula, unclenra gasta wunung- Curia, dombus.
stow. Theatrum, wafungstede.2
Baratrum, uorago profunda, ewie- Amphitheatrum, syneweald wafung-
susl, wel hellelie deopnes. 15 stede.
Erebum, hellescead. Farus, heve-beac[n].
Stix, hellemere. Coclea, windelstan.
Tartara, uel gehenna, hellewite. Cireuitus, ascensus, gewind.
Infernus, helle. Termas, uel gymnasium, beepstede.
Colonia, %. peregrinorum cultura, 20 Apodyterium, badiendra manna hus,
elelendra eordbigennys. 2. domus quo uestimenta balnean-
Municipium, burhscipe. tium ponuntur, per hi hi un-
Uicus, wic. scredad inne.
Castellum, port. Taberne, uel gurgustia, lytle hus of
Casirum, heahfesten. 25 bredan.
Pagi, tunstede. Macellum, fleestret, uel fleceyping.
Conciliabula, manna gegaderung. Mercatum, ceping.
Compita, ceorla samnung, uel ge-  Telonewm,'scipmanne myrt se ceping.
motstow. Apoditerium, breawern.
imagined to have been first given to the Vulturnus, [eastan nordan wind.]
winds by Charlemagne. Ventis vero hoc Eurus, eastan sudan wind.
modo nomina imposuit, ut subsolanum Euroauster, sudan eastan wind.
vocaret ostroniwint, eurum ostsundroni, Austroafricus, sudan westan wind.
euroaustrum sundostroni, austrum sun- Africus, westan sudan wind.
droni, austroafricum sundwestroni, africum Corus, westan nordan wind.
westsundroni, zephyrum westroni, corum Circius, nordau westan wind,
westnordroni, circium nordwestroni, sep- Aquilo, nordan eastan wind.
tentrionem nordroni, aquilonem nordost- 1 Adul-seape, or adel-seape, is a sewer
roni, vultarnum ostnordroni. Vit. Caroli or sink. Coclee is an evident error for
Imp., p. 92, ed Teulet. The writer of cloaca.
the manuscript of our Anglo-Saxon voca- 2 Literally, a place for sights, ex-
bulary has evidently made some confusion _plaining the word according to its Greek
in copying the list, so as to leave one derivation. This, and the translation of 9
wind entirely out, It probably stood the following word (syneweald wafung-
originally thus, which would agree ex-  s¢ede, a circular place for sights), show jj
actly witk the list and description given that our Anglo-Saxon forefathers were |)
by Isidore, lib. xiii, ¢. 11: not acquainted with the uses of theatres jj
Subsolanus, eastan wind. and amphitheatres, and had no words in
Auster, uel nothus, suban wind. their Jangnage to express them.
Favonius, vel sephirus, westan wind, ® Cf. Bosw, pag. 2v s, v. ceapsceamul. [ft
Septentrio, norpan wind. R. W. b

146 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 147
Librarius, uel bibliopola, uel anti-  Orbita, wenes swep.

quarius, uel scriba, uel fenestella,  Limus, lutum, fenn.*

wrytere. Rus, unered land.

Festiuitas, solempnitas, uel celebri-  Satio, seminatio, sednad.

tas, uel ceremonia, freolsdeg. 5 Fundus, prop. .

Fasti, weoredagas. Alluuius ager, weterig cer.
Scena, uel tabernaculum, geteld. Noualis ager, brocen land, uel ge-
Capitilauium, heafodpweal. worht land. :

Manulauium, handpweal. Proscissio, landopenung.
Pedilauium, fotpweal. 10 Squalidus ager, forletan acer.
Cenum, miox.! Uliginosus ager, fennig zxcer.
Fauilla, ysle. Subcisiua, hryding.

Gleba, turf. Centuria, twahund ecera.

Labina, sliddor. Area, breda piling, wel flor on to
Uolutabrum, sol, uel gesyd. 15 _ perscenne. .
Uligo, moor. Pratum, med.

Sabulum, molde. Fines, gemere,

Argilla, laam. Limites, hafudland.

Samia, cleg. Decumanus, tiode hafudecer.
Sulphur, swefel. 20 Pertica, metgeard.

Alumen, efne. Porca, bale.

Creta, uel cimola, hwit heard stan. Miliarium, leouue, mile.

Creta argentea, sperstan. ; Passus, stepe.

Bitumen, anes cynnes lim. Stadium, furlang.

Arena, sand. 25 Diuersorium, tocirhus, vel cumenhus.
Agger, eordbyre, uel geworht stret,  Hospitium, uel metatum, cumena wi-

strata uel delapidata. cung. .

Uallum, scidwealles eordbyri.? Prandium, underngereord.
Iter, uel itus, eadfere weg. Cena, efengereord.
Itiner,’ lang and steare weg. 30 Merenda, nonmete.
Actus, anes wenes gangweg. Tabulatorium, wahdyling.  -
Uia, twegra wena gangweg. Entheca, g., suppellex, ineddisc, uel
Publica uia, ealles hereweg. inorf.
Priuata uia, tuunweg. ; Canalis, peote.
Semita, manna pad. 35 Tegule, imbrices, lateres, uel later-
Cailis, deora pad. culi, hroftigla. .
Tramites, weterweg. Silex, flint.
Diuortia, diverticula, mistlice woge Scopulum, torr.

wegas. Spelea, uel spelunca, scref.
Compita, weggeleta. 40 Cautes, uel murices, scearpeste stanas.
Ambitus, twicen. Calculus, secysul.

_ 1The Anglo-Saxon miox, or meox, the Saxon camps or residences were always,
dung, filth, is the origin of the provincial or at least usually, crowned with palings,
term mizen, a dunghill, and of the modern or timber fences.
muck. 8 So the MS. R. W.

2 Literally, an embankment for a wall 4 The word fen preserved its original
of palings; a cnrious mode of interpret- meaning of mud, in the Hriglish langnage,
ing the Latin, which would seem to in- till at least the fifteenth century.
timate that the valla which surrounded

11

|
148 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 149
Scrupulus, lytel stan. Liber, seo inre hrind.
Cos, hwetstan. Spadones, unberende telgan.
Pumex, pumiestan. Capreoli, uel cincinni, uel uncinuli,
Calcisuia, geberdstan.! wingearda hocas pe hi mid bindad
Gagates, gagatstan. 5 pet him nehst bid.
Pirites, uel focaris lapis, fyrstan, Corimbi, wingearda hringa.
Specularis, purhscyne stan. Preacoqua, redripe winberige.
Succinum, uel electrum, sap, smelting. | Ceraunie, reade winberige.
Flestria, gim pe bid on coches Aminea uitis, hwit wingeard.
micga.? 10 Ablaqueatio, niderwart treowes del-
Aurum obrizum, read gold. fing, bedelfing.
Brattea,® gylden lefr. Putatio, screadung.
Pecuarius, feohstrang man. Cima, crop.
Pondus, uel pondo, gewyht, uel pund. Propaginatio, wintwiga plantung.
Dipondius, twegra pundra gewiht. 15 Fossio, dicung.
Trutina, wega. Fossor, dikere.
~ Lanz, scale. Arbusta, iung treow, uel treowstede.
Bilances, twa scale. Frutecta, plur., pyfelas.
Examen, wegetunge. Capreoli, wingearda gewind. [mora.
Momentana, uel statam, sytlewega.* 20 Auiaria, weglesa beara, secreta ne-
Campana, wulwega. Recidiua, edgrowung.
Plantaria, gesawena plantan.
NOMINA TRITICI SUNT. Plante, treowes sprancan.
Frumentum, corn. Radix, wyrtrume.
Scandula, twisld corn. 25 Surculus, weterboh.
Farrago, grene berecres.° Uirgultum, telgan.
Spica, ear. Germen, berende boh.
Arista, egla.® Matura mors, ripe dead.
Culmus, healm.” Immatura, unripe dead.
Folliculus, codd. 30 Fomes, gesweelud spoon, wel tynder.
Stipule, healmes laf. Precoquus fructus, redripe westm.
Palea, ceaf. Ramnus, uel sentix ursina, dyfeporn.
Migma, xsceda. Herbitum, orfgebitt.
Legumen, ofet. Crustumie, uel uolemis, uel insana,
Vicia, musepise. 35 uel melimendrum, healfreade peran.
Digladior, pugno, ic feohte.
Caudex, uel codex,> hrind. Derogo, ic ofteo.
1 Somner conjectures that, in this ar- 3 So the MS. R. W.
ticle, the Latin should be cala viva, and 4 sytle- or sitl-(=setl-) wega means
the Anglo-Saxon gebern stan, or gebarned _statera, R. W.
stan. 5 Cres is no doubt an error for gras.
2 The precious stone, pretended, ac- 6 The beards of barley are still called
cording to a legend of great antiquity, ails in Essex.
to be found in the maw or gizzard of a 17 The straw of corn, as well as the
cock, is called by Pliny alectoria (from stalks of many other plants, are still call-
the Greek adéxrwp, a cock), and by ed haulm in many of our provincial f
Isidore electria, The latter word seems dialects. !
to have been corrupted by our compiler 8 An error for cortex. R. W. f
into flestria.

150 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 151
Derogatio, \ehtrung. Sectio, eliofung.
Degenero, ic misdeo. Serra, saga.
Deriuo, ic gelede.
Srosecliscn, aang UESTIUM NOMINA.
Discriminatus, geglenged. 5 Uestitus, hreglung.
Habitus, scruud.

Sailtus, hlyp. Cultus, reaf.
Luctatio, wraxlung. Tunica, tunice.
Spectacula, uel ludicra, yppe, uel Bombicinum, seoleen.

weardsteal. 10 Bombiz, seolewyrm.
Orcestra, uel pulpitus, gligmanna  Sericum, seolc.

yppe. Olosericum, eal seolcen.
Carceres, horsa steal. Tramasericum, scoleen ab.2
Auriga, scridwisa, uel wenere. Bissum, 9., papagen, swipe hwit
Tragedi, uel comedi,unweorde scopes.15 _ fleax.
Temelici, idel sangere. Lineum, linen.
Histriones, trupas. Laneum, wyllen.
Mimus, jocista, scurra, gligmon. Linostema, linen wearp, uel wyllen
Pantomimus, gligman. ab.
Saltator, tumbere. 20 Praesegmina, praecisiones, screadan.
Alea, tefel. Segmentata uestis, gerewen hregel.
Alew, tefelstanas. Pauidensis, dicce gewefen hregel.
Aleator, teflere. Leuidensis, denne gewefen hregel.
Pirgus, cyningstan on teefle. Clauus, wel purpura, purpuren hre-
Tessere, uel lepuscule, federscite25 gel.

tefel. Polymita, fealahiwes hregel.
Tesselle, lytle feperscite florstanas. alla, wel rasilis, wogum bewerod
Pila, uel sfera, doper. hregel.
Rogus, aad. Interpola uestis, geedniwod eald hre-
Strues, wudefine. 30 gel.
Calones, wudigeras. Panucla, geclutad hregel.
Mationes, stanwirhte. Acu picta, uel frigia, gediht, uel
Fistule, peote. gesiwed hregel.
Constructio, wel instructio, hyrdung. _‘Trilicis, prylen hregel.
Instructio, ealdere timbrunga bote. 35 Colodium, slefleas scrud.
Constructio, niwe timbrung. Leuitonarium, slefleas ancra scrud.
Norma, weterpund. Lumbare, uel-renale, lenden sidreaf.
Circinum, meltange. Linna, hnysce hwitel.
Centrum, mzltanges prica. Renones, stide and ruge breost-
Epigri, uel claui, negles. 4Q  rocces,
Perpendiculum, wealles rihtungpred. - Birrus, unsmede hraegel.
Commissura, borda gefeg. Diplois, twifeld hregel.

1 After another intercalation from the | gymnastic sports in use among the Anglo-
alphabetical dictionary, the compiler now Saxons, 7
proceeds to give a tather brief list of
games and amusements. Leaping and 2 The yarn of a weavers warp is, I
wrestling appear here as the principal believe, still called an abd.

152 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY, 153 |
Melotes, wel pera, geeten, uelbroecen —Subfibulum, uel subligaculum, under-
rooc, hwredel.
Anaboladium, wel sindo, linen heafod- Fasciola, nosle, uel sarclad.
es wrigels, Saccus, uel fiscus, kingesgafoles
Circumtectum, tryndyled reaf. 5 bigerdel.
Trabea, cynelic reaf. Saccellus, lytel see.
Paludamentum, caseres reaf to ge- Marsupium, uel marsippa, seod. |
feohte. Mastruga, crusne.
Regillum, uel peplum, uel palla, uel Clamis, hacele, wel fotsid sciecel.2
amiculum, ricere wife hregl, uel 10 Sagum, hwitel.
deorwurde weefels. Toga candida, uel cretata, gehwit }
Fimbria, fnado, uel leppan. hregel.
Stola, uel ricinum, orl. Toga, sidreaf swilee meteres wyreed
Sipla, an healfhruh teppet. on anlicnysse.
Stuppa, exeumbe,! 15 Toga palmata, uel toga picta, sige-
Tomentum, hnygela. reaf.
Platum, seolce hnygele. Cinctus gabinus, twilepped serud on
Tinctura, deah. twam healfan gescredde swa mie-
Coccus, read deah, teras metad on anlicnyssan.
Ferrugo, blac purpur. 20 Anelus, lytel hring.
Calathus, wearpfet. Inauris, earpreon, uel earring.
Pensum, uel diarium, degwine. Calamanca, het.
Infula, biscopheafodlin.
Cidaris, uel mitra, hufe. Accubitus, hnylung.
Diadema, bend agimmed and ge- 25 Affluentia, oferflowendnys.
smided. Opulentia, metes genihtsumnys.
Nimbus, mid golde gesiwud bend. Epule, wist.
Capitulum, uel capitularium, heafod- Dapes, kininga wist, wel estas.
clap, wel appa. Merendo, meridiendo, to middan dege
Antie, earloccas. 80. ic ete.
Monile, uel serpentinum, myne, uel Fermentacius panis, gehafen hlaf.
sweorbeh. Azimus, deorf.
Antrax, uel clauus, uel strophium, Cibarius, ceorlise hlaf.
angseta, uel gyrdel, uel agimmed —Acrizimus panis, geseorid hlaf.
gerdel. 85 Siligineus, uel triticeus, hweeten hlaf.
Carbunculus, seo blace begne. Subcinericeus, uel focarius, heord-
Fibula, preon, uel oferfeng, uel dale. bacen hlaf.
Speculea, sceawere. Clibanius, ofenbacen hlaf.
Periscelides, seangbendas, Frixus panis, gehyrst hlaf.
Tinius, smede ringce. 40 Amolium, dust of dem...
Zona, uel zonarium, uel brachile, uel Simila, uel pollis, smedma.
redimiculum, gyrdel. Inuolucrum, gewynd.
Baitheus, swyrdes gyrdel. Thorus genialis, brydbed.
Ungulus, agymmed hringe. Pluteus, brederes beddes inneweard.
Samothracius, geheafdod hringce. 45 Sponda, uthealf pes beddes.
1 What we now call oakum, i. e, the 2 So the MSR. W.
hemp from old ropés.

154 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 155
Lectica, bedrest. Promuntorium, clif.
Storea, uel psiata, meatta.
Cama, sceort bed wid eordan. Patriarcha, heahfeder.
Bajanula, ferbed. Propheta, uel uates, witega.
Scabellum, uel subpedaneum, fot- 5 Apostolus, zrendraca.
seamul. Episcopus, biscop.
Scansilia, stapas, uel stirapas, Archiepiscopus, arcebiscop.
Cilindrus, scort sinewealt stan, uel Diaecesis, uel parochia, bisceopscir,

treow. uel biscopric.
Pala, uel uentilabrum, windswingla. 10 Rex, eyneg.
Furcilla, litel forca. Regnum, rice.
Fisclum, eleseocche. Sceptrum, cynegeard, cynedom.
Mensurnum opus, mondes weore. Regina, ewen.
Funalia, uel funes, candelweoca. Imperator, uel Caesar, uel Augustus,
Lampas, candeles leoma. 15 casere.
Lucubrum, leohtes leohting. Imperatrix, uel Augusta, caseres wif.
Pira, upstandende herebeacn, Dux, heretoga, uel heorl
Rogus, bustum, forberned [aad]. Princeps, uel comes, ealdorman.
Farus, herebeacn. Fasces, ealdordomas.
Fictilia, uel samia, \emene fatu.' 20 Primas, heafodman, uel pegn.
Asierina, readde lemene fatu. Clito, edeling.
Crisendeta, gyldena, uel gegylde fatu. Odses, gisel.
Celata, advifene fatu.? Satrapa, pegn.

Judex, uel censor, uel arbiter, dema.

Calum, heofen. 25 Monachus, munue.
Angelus, wel nuntius, encgel. Monacha, uel monialis, mynecenu.
Archangelus, heahencgel. Presbiter, messepreost.
Stella, steorra. Sacellanus, handpreost.
Sidus, tungel. Sacerdos, sacerd, uel eyrepingere.
Sol, sunne. 30 Clericus, preost, uel pingere.
Luna, mona. Diaconus, uel leuita, diacon.
Firmamentum, roder. Subdiaconus, underdiacon,
Cursus, ryne. Archidiaconus, arcediacon.
Mundus, middaneard. Eremita, westensetla.
Tellus, terra, solum, uel aruum, eorda. 35 Anachoreta, ancra.
Humus, rus, aruum, molde, uel land. Nonna, arwurde wudewe, wel nunne.
Mare, uel aequor, se.
Sinus, seebbung. Homo, man, uel microcosmus, lesse
Oceanus, garsecg. middaneard.®
Mare eoum, eastse. 40 Anima, sawl.
Mare arctoum, nordse. Animus, mod, uel gedanc.

1 Earthen vessels, for which the Latin 8 Microcosmus, derived from the two
Samia is here used as a general term. Greek words uixgds and xdouos. i.e. a
In the next line, Asterina is no doubt little world, or the world in miniature,
an error of the scribe for Aretina, See first applied metaphorically to the human
the chapter de vasis escariis in Isidori frame by one of the Greek philosophers,
Etymolog., lib. xx., ¢. 4. was a favourite word with the medieval

2 i. e, engraved or embossed vessels. writers to signify a man.

156 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 157
Spiritis, gast. Corona, uel circulus, wulderbeah.
Sensus, gewit. Tauco, hringban des eagan.
Intellectus, andgit. Lacryma, tear.
Cogitatio, gepane. Luscus, scylegede. °
Corpus, lichama. 5 Monoftalmus, anegede.
Caro, flee.! Caecus, blind.
Vertex, hnol.® [panne. Genae, hecgaswind.
Caluarium, forheafod, wel heafod- Malae, hleor.
Anciput, forheafod. Mazilla, gewenge. [cinban.
Oceiput, uel postex, efteweard hzefod. 10 Mandibula, ceachan, uel ceacan, uel
Sinciput, oferhealf heafod. Pinnula, earleppa, uel ufweard eare.
Coma, uel cirrus, loce unscoren. Pinnule, fleran, uel earleppan.
Cerebrum, uel cerebellum, bregen. Nasus, nosu.
Cesaries, fex. Columna, eal ufweard nosu.
Uncinus, loce. 15 Nares, nosdyrla.
Crines, wifmannes loccas. Internasus, uel interfinium, uel inter-
Timpus, punwang.- pinnium, nosegristle, wel middel-
Facies, anwlita, uel neb. > flere.
Uultus, andwlita, uel rudu. Pirula, foreweard nosu.
Species, hiw. 20 Pinnulae, uteweard nosterle.
Uisus, gesihd. Auris, eare.
Tactus, repung, uel xthrin. Labium, ufeweard lippa.
Auditus, hlyst. Labrum, nidera lippe.
Odor, odoratus, stenge. Rostrum, foreweard feng pere lip-
Odor, brod. 25 pena togedere.
Gustus, anbyrignys. Lingua, uel plectrum, tunge, wel
Sapor, swece. hearpnegel.
Odor, olfactus, stenge. Sublinguium, huf.
Pili, her. Denies, ted.
Capilli, heafodher. 30 Praecisores, foreted.
Comae, loceas, uelunscoren her. Canini, uel colomelli, mannes tuxas.
Compago, gefeg. Molares, uel genuini, wangted.
Compages, gefeinega. Gingiue, todaflese. '
Frons, forheafod. Aduersi dentes, da eahta forworden }
Oculus, eage; oculi, eagan. 35  tep betwux tuxum.
Supercilia, oferbrua, Palatum, uel uranon, goma, uel hrof }
Cilia, brua. des mudes. [
Palpebre, breawas. Collum, sweora, uel swura,
Circulus, des seohringe. Fauces, hracan.
Pupilla, uel pupula, seo. 40 Arteriae, windeddran. i
Yrqui, beahhyrne, wel agneras; uol- Guttur, protu.
uos dicimus angulos oculorum. Mentum, cin. t
Praefolium, fel ufan eagan. Gurgulio, protbolla.
Intercilium, betwux oferbruan and Chautrum, eal protbolla. !
brewum. 45 Rumen, wasend, uel edroc.?
1 Sic MS. R. W. 3 It must not be supposed that the
2 We still use the word noll, in trivial © words wasend and edroc are synonymous;
speech, for the top of a man’s head. but the compiler seems to have been

158 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 159
| Ceruix, uel iugulum, hnecea. Truncus, heafodleas bodig.
_ Humerus, eaxla. Cutis, uel pellis, hyd.
Ola, ufeweard exle des eftrandzles. Corium, uel tergus, hyd.
Brachium, hearm. Costa, rib.
Torus, uel musculus, uel lacertus, 5 Aruina, uel adeps, uel axungia, uel
_ mus{cl] des earmes. abdomen, hrysel, wel gelend, uel
 Torosus, earmstrang. swind, uel swines smere.
Cuba, elboga. Pulpa, uel uiscum, lira.
 Cubitum, fedm betwux elboga and Os, ban.
__ handwyrste. 10 Nerui, sinu.
_ Palmus, span, uel handbred. Latus, side.
Uina, eln, uel spanning betwux Pori, i. spiramenta unde sudor ema-
duman and scitefingre. nat, licpeotan, wel swatpyrlu.
Uola, uel tenar, uel ir,s middeward _Uentriculus, mage.
hand. 15 Scapula, sculder.
Pugillus, se gripe dere hand. Pale, gesculdre.
Palma, handbred. Interscapilium, middel gesculdru.
Pugnus, fyst. Dorsum, hrieg.
Artus, pa maran lida. Tergum, bee.
Ungula, hof. 20 Uertigo, hwerfa.
Unguis, negel; ungues, neeglas. Uertibulum, uel uertebra, hwerban.
Cartilago, gristle. Spondilia, geloda, wel gelyndu.
Impetigo, eagan wean, uel wearh- Sacra spina, lendenban neopeweard.
braede. Renes, uel lumbi, lendenu, uel hype-
Albugo, eagflea. 25 ban.
Mentedra, uel oscedo, mudadl on Catacrina, hypeban.
_ goman. Aluus, rif, wel seo inre wamb.
Ascella, uel subhircos, oxn, uel ruh- Matria, uterus, wifmannes innod, uel
oxn. cildhama.
Cada, hrisel; cadula, lytel hrisel. 30 Folliculus, cildhama.
Lacertus, bog. Secundae, cildhama.
Digiti, fingras. Medulla, wei lucanica, mearh.
Pollex, duma. Omentum, fylmen.
Index, wel salutaris, scytefinger. Intestina, smelpearmas, uel inne-
Medius, uel impudicus, middelfinger.35  weard.
Medicus, wel annularis, goldfinger. Ilium, scare.
Auricularis, lecefinger. Ilia, smelepearmas,
Praccordia, forebreost. Tolia, uel porunula, reada.
Pectus, breost. Extales, snedel, uel beec-pearm2
Pectusculum, breostban. 40 Exta, midrif.
Torax, foranbodig, uel breostbeden. | Umbilicus, navela.
Mamiilla, tit. Disseptum, midrif.
Ubera, meolcebreost. Clunes, hypas.
Papilla, tittstrycel. ates, earslyre.
. donbtful whether the Latin word meant 1 Ir seems to be an error for yecg or
the weasand (wasend), or whether it was chir, R. W.
identical with the rather similar Latin 2 The MS. by an error reads: barcpearm,
word derived from it, ruminatio. R, W.

160 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 161 |
Anus, uel uerpus, carsperl.. Obligia, nytte. I
Crementum, weres sed, uel cid. Stomachus, maga. §
Uesica, bleddre. Colus, roop. I
Meatus, fordgang. Uenter, seo utre wamb. l
Ueretrum, wepengecynd. 5 Cauliculus, fearhhama. ;
Genitalia, gecendlimu. Matrix, ewid, uel cildhama. ; j
Femen, inneweard deoh. Mentagra, tan. j
Coxa, peoh. “Alloz, micele tan. | (
Femur, utanweard peoh. otrax, yee. i
Posteriora, bece. 10 Mentera, beedpearm.® “Ti
Cecum intestinum, emupa. Hermafroditus, wepenwifestre, uel | |
Suffragines, hamma. scritta,* uel beddel. D
Poples, hamm. Hirniosus, healede. E
Renunculi, lundlagan. Scamma in homine, se rude on pam |}
Crus, scance; crura, sceanca.! 15 men. D
Genu, cneow. Glippus, g-, grymede. R
Geniculi, eneowwyrste. Uaria, ewydele, uel hwylca. R
Sura, sperlira. Cronculus, angseta. i
Tibiae, scina, wel scinban. Capitosus, mycelheafdode. I
Pes, fot. 20 Petilus, litelfota.
Talus, ancleow.* Frontalis, uel calidus, steornede. P
Tazillus, lytel ancleow. Uentriculosus, weembede. - U
Plante, fotwelm, Tergosus, earsode. h
Planta, foreweard fot. Genosus, cneowede. i
Subtel, middel fot. 25 Talaricus, cleonede. q
Calx, hohspor. Calcaneus, honede. ti
Solum, lest. Surosus, sperlirede. ii
Uiscera, beflagen flee, uel innopes  Mentagricus, tanede- 2
innewearde. Mancus, wohhandede. (
Cor, heorte. 30 Peduncus, wohfotede. Ui
Bucleamen, heorthama. Podagricus, deagwyrmede, uel deag- |
Jecor, lifre. gede. 2
Pulmo, uel fecatum, uel pleumon, uel Flegmaticus, mzldropiende. Pi
epar, lungen. Reumaticus, saftriende, wel drefliende. | |
Splen, milte. 35 Molaricus, swediende. Pi
Rien, crop. Plegus, earming. Ti
Lien, lundlaga. Balbus, stamer. (i
Pulsus, cleppetung. Catax, heolt. a
Fibrae, lifreleppan, uel pearmas. Blesus, plips.® hy
Fel, uel bilis, gealla. 40 Surdus, uel surdaster, deaf. F
1 The shank. When his subjects and 83 Mentera, should perhaps be entera, hi
contemporaries gave our first Edward the or inentera; and bad appears to be a Py
title of Long-shanks, they meant literally mere error of the copyist for bac. The Ps
long-legged, without supposing they were process of forming ¢, c, and d, was so |."
using any trivial or derogatory term. similar, that they are often confounded. | J
2 The ankle is still called ankley in 4 The old English word scrat, which | Pii
Sussex; and the word anclow continued meant similarly a hermaphrodite. Ph
in use in the English language till the 5 So the MS., not wlips. R, W.
Alfteenth century. 1

162 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 163
Debilis, uel eneruatus, lame.
Strabus, scyleagede. NOMINA COLORUM.
Lippus, sureagede. ¢ Color, bleoh.
Unimanus, anhende. Albus, hwit.
Agger, uel aegrotus, adlig. 5 Amincus, uel albus, hwit.
Morbus, adi. Candidus, purhhwit.
Paraclitus, bedrida. Subalbus, healfhwit.
Clinicus, hofrede. Niger, blac.
Ulcerosus, hreofla. Aler, teter, sweart.
Leprosus, licbrowere. 10 Unicolor, anes bleos.
Lunaticus, monapseoc. Bicolor, twihiwe.
Demoniacus, deofelseoc. Discolor, mislic bleo.
Energumenus, gewitseoc. Uarius, uel discolor, fah.
Elisa mens, uel deiecta, forscrenct. Uiridis, grene.
Demens, gemendleas. 15 Busius, fealu.
Rabidus, uel insanus, wod. Dosinus, uel cinereus, assedun.
Rabies, wodnys. Bruntus, wann.2
Freneticus, se pe for sleape awed. Balidinus, hryte.
Lethargus, ungelimplice slapfulnis. Auidius, grinu.
Vigil, uel uigilans, wacul. 20 Natius, dun. ,
Peruigil, durhwacul. Giluus, geoluhwit.
Uigilia, wecen. Ceruinus, dunfalu.
Incolumis, gesund. Myrteus, bleoreod,
Eneruis, megenleas. Glaucus, greg.
Lotium, hweal.' 25 Elbus, deorcegreg.
Urina, micga. Guttatus, cylu.
Minctio, miggung. Roseus, uel rubeus, uel pheniceus,
Exugium, miegern. read.
Callus, ile. Perseus, blewen.
Uiscum, gerunnen blod. 30 Suceinaceus, uel croceus, uel flauus,
Menstrua, monadblod. geolu.
Fantasma, uel fantasia, gedwimor.  Ceruleus, sweart.
Pituita, i. minuta saliua, horas, uel Limpidus, scir.
hreeunda, wel spatlung.
Pitisso, ic spatlige. 35 Doctor, uel imbutor, uel eruditor,
Euomitio, spiwinge. lareow.
Oscitatio, ganung. Discipulus, uel mathites, leorning-
Singultus, siccitung. eniht.
Sternutatio, uel sternutamentum, snyt- _ Disciplina, lar, uel steor.
inge, wel fneosung. 40 Doctrina, lar.
Spiratio, edung. Dogmatista, lareow.
Pedatio, feorting. Paedagogus, cildahyrde, vel lareow.
Fesiculatio, fisting. Documentum, uel specimen, larbysn.
Sibilatio, hwistlung. Scolasticus, uel cliens, scolman.
| Pluuicinatio, stance. 45 Caraxatio, gewrit.
Pluuicino, ic stancrige. Epistola, uel pitacium, xrendgewrit.
1 Not “pweal” as Wright printed. R,W. 2 Here Junius added: Lege Brunius. R.W.
12

164 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY 165
Quaternio, cine. Dispendium, uel damnum, uel detri- ]
Planca, spelt. mentum, hynd, uel lyre, wel hearm. !
Diploma, bod on cine. Commodum, questus, hyd, uel freme. | |
Membrana, bocfel. Commutatio, gehwearf. I
Scedula, ymle. 5 Nihil, nanwiht. (
Sceda, screade. Nihili, naht- }
Graphium, uel scriptorium, gref. Fronimus, wis. I
Pictor, metere. Prudens, snotor. 6
Pictura, metinge. Sagax, uel gnarus, uel astutus, uel |
Minium, read teafor.' 10 callidus, petig, uel abered. }
Gluten, lim to fugele.? Frugi, uel parcus, uncystig. I
Glara, xglim. Largus, uel dapsilis, cystig. I
Incaustum, uel atramentum, blee. Famosus, uel opinosus, hlisful. I
Sculptor, uel celator, grefere. Sophus, uel sophista, wis. i
Sculptura, greft. 15 Sophista, wite. I
Agalma, uel iconisma, uel idea, an- Insipidus, angered.® I

licnes. Stultus, stunt. 1
Scalprum, uel scalpellum, uel coelum,  Stultomalus, yfeldysig.

grafsex. Impudens, scamleas.
Ingenium, ordanc. 20 Tenax, festhafel. [sagul. }
Artifex, creftica. Falcidicus, uel falsiloquus, unsod- | *
Opifex, wyrhta. Auarus, uel cupidus, gitsere. :
Architectus, yldest wyrhta. Raptor, uel praedo, uel spoliator, }),
Aurifex, goldsmid. reafere. ,
Argentarius, seolfersmid. 25 Fallax, uel mendax, swicol. sf
rarius, mestlinesmid. Planus, uel seductor, swica.
Nummularius, mynetere. Elogium, uel dictio, saga.
Palatium, kynelic botl. Empiria, manegra embesmeagunga.
Thesaurus, goldhord. Emunctoria, candeltwist. [gerim.
Gazophilacium, madmhus. 30 Ephemerides, numerus cotidianus,
Abdificium, getimbrung. Emeritus, prouectus, gepungen.
Basis, post. Epithalamium, carmen nubentium,
Postis, uel fulcimentum, sylle. giftleod.
Forus, uel prorostra, motstow. -
Logotheta, ety 35 NOMINA NAUIUM.
Negotium, intinga. Nauis, uel faselus, scip.
Negotiatio, eypineg. Rates, scipu.
Sacramentum, uel mysterium, geryna,  Nauiscella, uel cimba, wel campolus,

uel digla. uel musculus, sceort scip.
Testimonium, gewitnes, uel gecydnes. 40 Scapha, uel trieris, litel scip, uel
Recompensatio, edlean. sceigd.

1 This word is still preserved among [Cf. Grein, sprachschatz ; Vol. II pag.526
the peasantry in various parts of England R. W.)
in the form tiver, applied to a compo- 2 The compiler of the vocabulary bas
sition of tar and red ochre, which is used mistaken the Latin word gluten to signify
to mark sheep, or to colour wood,. and here bird-lime, instead of glue.
protect it against the effects of exposure 3 So the MS, Wright printed: ungered.
to weather. RW.

166 ARCHBISHOP ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 167
Linter, bat. Palmula, rodves bled.
Pontonium, punt.' Antenna, segelgyrd.®
Carabus, scipincel. Cornua, segelgyrde endas.
Littoraria, trohscip. Malus, uel artemo, mest.
Carina, scipes botm. 5 Portisculus, uel hortator remigum,
Nauclerus, scipes hlaford. sciphamor,
Proreta, ancorman. Anchora, uel saburra, ancra.
Gubernator, steorman. Uelum, segel.
Gubernio, steora. Dalum lytel segel.
Nauta, roper. 10 Rudentes, sciprapas.
Remex, redra. Propes, fotrap.
Puppis, steorsetl. Plagae, netrapas.
Remus, steorroder. Uerriculum, dregnet.*
Prora, ancersetl, wel forscip. Nassa, bogenet, wel leap.
Trudes, spreotas.? 15 Cassis, deornet.
Transtra, scipsetl. Conopeum, fleohnet.
Transtra, uel iuga, pofta.

1 It is hardly necessary to say that the 2 Sprits — preserved especially in the
word punt, as a name for a sort of boat, term bow-sprit.
is as well known among us in the present 3 The yards,
day, as it was among the Anglo-Saxons 4 As the ordinary ships were used
in the tenth century. It will be remarked especially for fishing, the compiler goes
how many of the Anglo-Saxon words, on naturally enough to speak of nets,
connected with shipping, have been pre- (see pag. 183 1. 9—14. R. W.) with which
served in our navy, he concludes rather abruptly.

|
I
|
¢
¢
(
¢
Vv
. C
ae r a i
SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRICS VOCABULARY, Jc
z)
OF THE TENTH OR ELEVENTH CENTURY. 5
¢
(
eT (
Reus, seyldig. Delator, wrohtbora. ;
Damnatus, fordemed. Patricida, federslaga. 0
Hosticus, uel hostilis, feondlic, Parricida, megslaga.
Osor, feond. Cicatrixz, dolhswad. h
Facinus, maan. 5 Soma, lichama, 4
Peiero, ic forswerige. Truncus, heafodleas bodig. .
Gibborosus, uel strumosus, hoferede. Funus, lic, uel hreaw. e
Profanus, manful. Feretrum, bere.* E
Ezxosus, perosus, ansete. Mausoleum, uel bustum, kyninga |!
Callidus, geap. 10 byrgen.
Uersutus, hindergeap. Sarcofagum, pruh.* 4
Simulator, hiwere. Unguina, uel unguenta, smyrels, uel p
Fictor, uel hipocrita, liccetere. sealf. f
Adulator, uel fauisor, liffetere. Reses, uel deses, uel piger, slaw. E
Adulatio, liffetung. 15 Infidus, ungetreowe. i
Deceptor, bepecend, Iniuriosus, teonful. E
Seductor, lefend. Contentiosus, geflitful. A
Proditor, lewend. Impiger, uel praepes, unslew. F
i
1 This Vocabulary is said to have been the ancient religious belief Many words | U
found, as a sort of Supplement to the found in Alfric’s vocabulary are repeated, li
former, following it in the same manu- but sometimes with variations in the in-  ()
script, but with some intervening matter  terpretation, which are not without in- Jy
of another description. It seems, indeed, terest.
to have been the design of the compiler 2 A bier. 1
to give at more length some classes of 8 This word, which is of common use flu
words which are given less numerously in Anglo-Saxon, aud is evidently con- Jin
in the vocabulary of Alfric, such as those nected with the modern trough, was pre- Jw
belonging to the family and domestic served in the old English words throh, 3
relations, some classes of natural pheno- thrugh, and thurwe, signifying a coffin. Jit
mena, naval terms, the names of various A flat gravestone is still called a through i
classes of buildings in use among the in the dialects of the north of England. 4
Romans, and a few words connected with tr

170 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 171
Lentus, uel piger, sleac. Arrabo, wedlac.
Conciliabulum, gemotstow. Cliens, uel clientulus, eniht.
Consulo tibi, ic rede de. Ephebus, uel buteo, beardleas.
Consulo te, ic frine de. Galos, glos, weres swuster.
Conciliatio, gesibsumung. 5 Sponsalia, brytofta, uel brydgifa.
Consiliator, reedgifa. Procus, wogere.
Concilio, ie gesibbige. Sponsus, brydiguma.
Concionor, uel meditor, uel precor,  Pronuba, hadswape.*

ie smeage. Sponsa, bryd.
Judex, uel consul, ealdorman, 10 Paranymphus, hadswape.
Censor, uel arbiter, dema. Infans, uel alogos, g., unsprecende
Mas, hys cild. cild.4
Seaxus, werhad, wel wifhad.t Paranymphus, dryhtguma,’ uel dryht-
Coniunx, gemecga.? ealdor.
Coniuges, uel coniugales, gesinhiwan. 15 Unicuba, anlegere wifman.
Coniugium, uel matrimonium, gesin- Uzxoratus, pe wif hefd.

scipe. Nimpha, bryt.

Complex, uel consentiens, gegada. Derelicta, laf, uel forleten wif.
Complices, conspirantes, gegadan, uel Priuignus, steopcild.

gebweerniende. 20 Anula, uel uetula, eald wif.
Incestus, uel impurus, unclene. Adolescens, uel inuestis, uel inuesti-
Ancilla, serua, abra, uel dula, 9. ceps, geong man.

wyln. Pubetenus, frumbyrdling.

Seruus, dulus, g., peowa. Pecuniosus, feohstrang.
Emptitius, geboht peowa. 25 Locuples, landspedig.
Uerna, uel uernaculus, imberdling, Gamos, bryd.

uel fostorling. Egenus, wedla.

Alumnus, fosterfeder. Leno, wemere, wel tihtere.
Praepositus, foreset, uel gerefa. Telonearius, tolnere, uel tollere.
Fatigatus, atered. 30 Profugus, flyma.

Exercitatus, acostnod. Exul, utlaga.

Populus, fole, uel byretreow. Hebes, dwees, uel sott.

Exercitus, here, Hebetudo, dwesnys, uel sotscipe.
Procinctus, fyrdinge. Edax, uel glutto, frettol.

Edictum, geban. 35 Uorator, greedig.

Apparatus, gearcung. Ambro, gifere, uel frec.

Uulgus, uel plebs, ceorlise fole. Procax, uel peruicax, gemah.
Heros, hiaford. Procacitas, wel peruicacia, gemahnys.
Congregatio, concio, gegaderung. Cachinnatio, ceahhetung, wel cincung.
Conuentus, conuentio, gesamnung. 40 Hilaris, gledman. _

1 It is curious that the Anglo-Saxon than the Latin énfans. The latter, however,
language seems to have had no abstract is explained by Isidore, lib. xi, ce. 2,
term for sex, which was expressed only thus —Infans dicitur homo prime ztatis,
severally as manhood or womanhood. dictus autem infans, quia adlue fari nescit,

2 The old English word make, applied id est, loqui non potest; nondum enim
either to husband or wife. bene ordinatis dentibus, minor est ser-

3 Cf. pag. 174 1.35. R. W. monis expressio,

4 The compiler of the vocabulary has 8 Sie MS., not brydguma, R. W.
translated the Greek word alogos, rather

172 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 173 |!
Tristis, wnrot, uel gealh. Exterminatus, ut adryfen. : :
Mestus, wel merens, dreorig. Expers, delleas. ,
Frames, uel popina, hunger. Exsors, orhlyta. ‘
Derisio, telhlehter. Pater, feder. [!
Tripudium, gefea. 5 Mater, moder. |
Rancor, anda. Auus, ealdefeder. l
Abstinentia, syfernys. Patruus, federa. f
Abstinens, syfer. Matertera, moddrige. I
Cura, cara. Auia, ealdemoder. I
Obesus, oferfet. 10 Proauus, pridde feder,
Pinguedo, smyltnys. ‘Proauuia, pridde moder. |
Crassitudo, fetnys. Abauus, feowerpe fader.
Corpulentus, diccul. Abauia, feowerpe moder. i
Grossus, great. Tritauus, fifte feeder. J
Macer, hizne. 15 Tritauuia, fifte moder, 4
Macilentus, dynnul. Familia, hyred. q
Macies, uel tabitudo, hlennes. Propago, cynren, P
Gracilis, uel exilis, uel subtilis, smel. Generatio, eneores.
Exiguus, gepwede.! Soboles, uel proles, bearn, uel cnosl, |#
Irsutus, uel ispidus, ruh. 20 uel tudder, .
Ualidus, vel uegetus, trum. Filius, suna. i
Inualidus, unstrang. Filia, dochtor, dohter. 1
Inbecillis, wanhal. Liberi, freobearn, uel edelborene
Sollicitus, ymbhedig. cild. i
Curiosus, carful. 25 Soror, suster.
Securitas, karleasnes. Filiaster, steopdohter. iH
Studium, bigegnes, uel smeagung. Frater, broder.
Causa, uel negotium, intinga. Nepos, suna sune, uel broder sune, J!
Obstinatus, pertinax, anwilla. uel suster sune, pet is nefa. J
Obstinatio, pertinacia, anwilnes. 30 Neptis, broder dochter, wed suster
Uerecundus, uel pudens, scamfest. dohter, nefene, pridde dohter. p
Pudicus, sideful. Abnepos, feowerpe sune.
Impudicus, unsideful. Abneptis, feowerpe dohter. q
Castus, clwne. Adnepos, fifte sune.
Incestus, wnclene. 35 Adneptis, fifte dohter. P
Exilium, wreesid. Trinepos, sixte sune.
Peregrinatio, z\deodignes. Trineptis, sixte dohter. f
Prohemium, durhlocung. Agnati, federn magas. L
Praefatio, forespee. Cognati, meddern magas. ti
Reconciliatio, edpingung. 40 Propinquus, meg, uel gesibling. f
Pacificatio, gesibsumung. Patrueles, federan sunan. J
Relegatus, wide asent. Matrueles, moddrian sunan. hi
Religatus, wel uinculatus, gewripen.  Fratres, gebrodru, uel gelodan, uel ff)
Deportatus, to wite asent butan his siblingas.

gode. 45 Fratres patrueles, federon sunan. p
Exterminator, utdrefere. Consobrini, gesustrenu.

1 Wright reads: gehwade, R. W.

174 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 175
Sobrini, geswusterenu bearn. Tempus, tid.
Socer, sweor. Cursus, ryne.
Socrus, sweger. Areus, bigels.
Gener, abum. Iris, renboga.
Nurus, snora. 5 Pluuia, ren.
Uitricus, uel patraster, steopfeder. Ninguidus, besniwod.
Priuignus, steopsunu. Lonitruum, uel tonitrus, punor.
Patruus meus, min federa. Fulgor, uel fulmen, ligit.
Patruus meus magnus, mines federan Nix, snaw.
feeder. 10 Niueus, snawhwit.
Propatruus meus, mines federan  Nivalis, snawlic.
eldrefeder. Grando, hagol.
Abpatruus meus, mines federan Gelu, forst.
.pridde fader. Pruina, brim.
Amita mea, min fapu. 15 Glacies, is.
Amita mea magna, minre fapa moder. —Glacialis, forstlic.
Proamita mea, minre fapan yldre- Aer, lyft.
moder. Atther, hroder,
Abamita mea, minre fapan pridde Uentus, wind.
moder. 20 Nubes, wole.
Auunculus meus, min eam, Aura, hwida, uel weder.2
Auunculus meus magnus, mines eames Nimbus, seur.
feeder. Nebula, mist, wel genip.
Proauunculus meus, mines eames Procella, storm.
yldrefeder. 25 Imber, ferlic ren.
Abauunculus meus, mines eames Ros, deaw.
pridde feder. Lux, leoht.
Matertera mea, min moddrige. Tenebrae, uel furfuraculum, dystru.
Matertera mea magna, minre modd- —Seculum, woruld.
rige moder. 80 uum, yld.
Promatertera mea, minre moddrian Dies, dxg.
eldremoder. Caligo, dimnes.
Abmatertera mea, minre moddrian Mane, xrmyrgen.
pridde moder. Crepusculum, tweoneleoht, uel deor-
Pronuba, hadswepa ; ipsa est et para-35  cung.
nimpha. Conticinium, uel gallicinium, hancred.
Fratissa!, brodor wif. Intempestum, uel intempesta nox,
Leuir, tacor, i. frater mariti. midniht.
Janitrices, gebropre wif. Maligna lux, uel dubia, tweonulleoht.
Coniuges, gemaccan. 40 Matutinum, uhtentid.
Nupta, beweddod. Diluculum, degred.
Innuba, unbeweddod. Aurora, degrima.
Coniugium, uel connubium, gesyn- Prima, prim.
scipe. Tertia, undern,
Contubernium, gegadorwist. 45 Sexta, middeg.
Nona, non.
Annus, gear. Suprema, ofernon, odde geloten deg.
1 So the MS. Rk. W. 2 Wright printed: reder, R. W.

176 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC’'S VOCABULARY. 177
Uesperum, efen. Fertilitas, westmbernys,
Serum, bedtid. Ubertas, genyhtsumnys.
Hora, tid. f
Horoscopus, tidsceawere. Campus, feld.
Ebdomada, uel septimana, wueu. 5 Planities, smepnys. ;
Mensis, monad. Asquor, brym, sx. ;
Uer, lencten.! Pascua, les. ]
4istas, sumor. Pratum, med. ]
Autumnus, heerfest. Ager, xcer. ]
Hyems, winter. 10 Compascuus ager, gemene les. !
Uernalis dies, lengtenlic deg. Seges, gesawen zxcer, uel land. ]
Uer nouum, foreweard lencten, uel  Uia, weg. K
middewerd lencten. Biuia uel biuium, twiweg. (
Uer adultum, xfterwerd lencten.  Triuiwm, wegeleton. }
Eodem modo et aestas et autumnus 15 Iter, sidfet. ‘Il
uocantur, on pa ylean wisan sumor —Inuium, compitum, weggedal. l
and herfest biod gecigede. Inuium, ungefere, uel wegleas pad. |!
Zstiuus dies, sumorlic deg. Deserium, uel heremus, westen. E
Autumnalis dies, herfestlic deg. Patria, eard.® l
Hiemalis dies, winterlic deg, uel20 Pagus, tun. 7
nox, odde niht. Prouincia, scir. 4
Pridie, uel esternum, erendeg. Mons, munt. N
Postpridie, todeg. Tumulus, beorh.
Postperendie, oferdrige [deg]. Collis, hyll.
Centurias, getalu, uel heapas, uel25 Monticellus, beorh ufeweard. i)
hundredu. Uailis, dene. i
Kalende, gehealddagas, uel halige Diluuium, flod. i
dagas. Uadum, ford. h
Nonae, ceapdagas. [cuntur. Pons, brieg. Ny
Idus, swesingdagas, ab edendo di-30 Aqua, weter.
Aiquinoctium, eroniht. Limpha, hiuttor weeter. iy
Frigus, cyle. Gutta, uel stilla, dropa. My
Calor, hete. Stagnum, mere.
Asstus, uel cauma, swolop.? Amnis, ea mid treowum ymbset. py
Feruor, hete micel. 35 lumen, flod, wel yrnende ea. Oi
Siccitas, uel ariditas, drugape. Fluuius, singalflowende ea. f
Humor, uel mador, wete. Ripa, stexp.* I
Sterilitas, uel infaecunditas, unwestm- Riuus, rid. Pep
bernys. Latex, burna. Ci)
1 Lenten, or Lent, remained long in 3 In the Latin writers of the close of [fi
the English language in its original signi- the Roman empire of the West, the word |);
fication of Spring. Thus, in a lyric com- patria had come into use in the mere Un
position of the thirteenth century, (printed meaning of a land or province, as it is Wn
in Wright’s Lyric Poetry of the Thirteenth explained here. k
Century, p. 43,) the approach of Spring 4 The more modern stade, or staith,
is described as follows: which is still used in some parts of the §iti
Batten) ys comebriih Hove) oAGEEe. country in the signification of a bank of i
pblcamneaan Ae ee J ae or, in some places, of a wharf fp,
2 Hence our modern word swelter. :

178 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 179
Torrens, broc. Ruminatio, ciwung, uel edroc, uel
Unda, ed. aceocung.
Litus, strand. Ruma, uel paleare, freetleppa.
Crepido, brerd, uel ofer. Singultus, geoesung.
Alueus, stream, wel streamracu. 5 Sarpta uinea, gescreaded wingeard.
Riuulus, lytel rid. Scorteus, ledern.
Fluctus, wealeynde ea. Porus, uel spiramentum, ordung.
Fons, well. Usus, nyttung, wel pearf, vel gewuna.
Latex, welspreng. Delinimentum, stracung, uel olecung.
Lacus, uel lacuna, sead. 10 Lepida, uel facunda, getingce.
Harena, sandeesel. Splendida, uel ornata, beorht.
Spuma, fam. Exagonum, sixeege.
Gurges, wel. Sexangulatum, sixhernede.
Abyssus, deopnys. Insusurrare, i. occulte detrahere, dig-
Uortex, edwinde. 15 lice talan.
Uorago, swelgend. Diuerticulum, wegtwiflung.
Uiuarium, fisepol. Compitum, wega gemittung.
Euripus, uel piscina, fisepol. Ancillantur, hyrsumiad.
Una serta, an gerif fisca. Formulantur, peowiad.
Tormentum, tintregung, uel wite. 20 Sinuatio, besining..
Saltus, holt. Anfractus, abrocen land, uel hilces.
Solum, uel tellus, uel terra, uel ar-  Inprouida, uel inconsiderata, unbe-
uum, land. sceawode. [sceortlice.
Summaiim, breuiter, uel commatice,
Aporiamur, we synd bereafod. 25 Obsurduit, adeafede.
Bonis nostris, wum godum. Uolubile scema, sinewealt gesceap.
Pessime, \uperlice. Globositas, sinewealtnes.
Reprehensibiliter, tallice. Semirotundum, healf-sinewealt.
Non mihi est cordi, nis me on ge- Jaenerata domino, gode on borh
dance, wel on mode. 30 geseald.
Non animaduerto, ic ne understande. Scema locutionis, sprecewise.
Non mihi occurrit, ne com hit me Jabulositas, spellung.
ongean. Anilis fabula, ealdra cwena spell.
Persuadeo, ic lwre. Sermo commentitius, gesmead spree.
Collatio, wordmittung, uel word-35 Aguarum alluuio, wetera gewesc.
somnung. [beode. Defecatio, uel purgatio, hlyttrung.
Imperito, ic wealdige, uel oferbe- Ommne genus holitorum, i. holerum,
Pecuniosus, welig. seghwyle wyrteyn.
| Colorare, hiwian. Omne genus arbustorum, xghwile
Affabre, creftlice, wel smicere. 40 treoweyn.
De popularibus, of beorhleodum. Omne genus seminarum, xghwile
| Uenusto, ic eyrtenlece. sedeyn.
Orno, ic smicere geglengce. Zizania, laser.
Obumbro, ic ofersceadewige. Lolium, bopen; et cetera adulterina
Habilis coniunctio, gedafenlic peod-45 genera, and odre lydre cynn
nys. Cophinus, wilige, uel leap.
Praerogatiua, frumgifu, uel synder  Conuersantur, uel commorantur, sa-
wurdmynt. mod wuniad.
13

P|
180 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 181
In procinctu, to gefeohte. Musculus, hran.
Promptus, gearu. Polypus, loppestre.
Specula, uel conspicilium, weardsteal. Alec, uel iairus, uel taricius, uel
Pracruptum, hengeclif. sardina, hering.
Spectaculum, wefd, uel wefersyn, 5 Pansor, floc.
uel wafung. Fannus, reohhe.
Idioma, proprietas linguae, agen uel Sepia, cudele, uel wasescite.
gecynde sprac. Conche, uel cochlee, scille, uel see-
Idiota, ungelered. sneglas.?
Imperitus, ungleaw. 10 Murice, uel conchylium, weluc.®
Inportunus, gemah. Nassa, ewul, uel boganet.
Petitiosus, bedul.
Eculeus, uel catasta, wearhrod, uel NOMINA NAUIUM, ET INSTRU-
prypeluf. MENTA EARUM.
Distrastio, ceap. 15 Linter, bat.
Uenditio, sala. Ratis, seip.
Contractio, uel contractus, nemingce. Nauicula, scippincel.
Trieris, sceip. !
NOMINA PISCIUM. Ypogauus, horsascip. !
Balena, uel cete, uel cetus, uel pistrix,20 Nauta, geredru. ;
hwel. Nauclerus, sciphlaford. !
Cetarius, hwelhunta. Gubernator, steora. ]
Delphin, uel bocharius, uel simones, Gubernio, steorman. ]
mereswin. Aplustre, geredru, uel scipgetawu. :
Rombus, styria. 25 Archiromacus, swiftscip. f
Lupus, uel scardo, bers. Myoparo, hidscip. |
Gobio, blege.* Barca, flotscip. §
Murena, uel murina, uel lampreda, Liburna, hule.4 |
mereneddra. Dromo, xse, uel bard. 0
Murenula, tigle. 30 Pontonium, flyte. i
Mulus, uel mugilis, heardra. Caudex, punt. I
Platesia, facg. Paro, sceabena scip. i
Esocius, uel salmo, lex. Trabaria, anbyme scip. i
Sparus, dunorbodu. Littoraria, uel tonsilla, trohscip. B
Lucius, hacod, 35 Cumba, uel caupolus, purruc.5 t
Tinca, sliw. Scalpus, scip, uel seigl. ;
Tructa, truht. Cimba, uel carina, scipesbotm. ‘
Capito, myne, uel zlepute. Musculos,® sceort scip. L
Turnus, forn. Celox, flotscip. y
Rocea, scylga. 40 Parunculus, plegscip.
Cancer, crabba. Fori, scipesflor.
Foca, seol. Struppus, strop, uel arwidde. 4
\
1 The modern bleak, called in some 3 Weluc, the modern word whelk, q
parts a blay. 4 Our modern name hulk, for the hody .
2 Sa-snegl, sea-snail, appears to have of the ship. ‘
been the common name for shell - fish. 5. Sic MS, R. W. r
I believe the term is still in use among 6 So the MS. R. W. 4
our American brethren, a

f

i]

| 182 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 183

!

Palmula, avbled. Remex, repra-
; Antenna, uel temo, segelgyrd, Peeris, gearafeng.
 Cornua, pa twegen endas pere segl- — Uncini, hocas.
gyrde. Trudes, spreotas.
: Transtra, poftan. 5 Accessus, flod.
Clauus, helma, Recessus, ebbe.

_ Artemon, uel malus, mest. Syrtes, sandvid.

Parastates, mesttwist. Reuma, ebbe, uel gytestream.

| Proreta, ancerman, Plagae, netrapas.

j Gubernaculum, steorsceofl.! 10 Tragum, uel uerriculum, drege.
Ponsis, sciphledder. Nassa, bogenet.

Uelum, seg). Cassis, deornett.

Naulum, sciptol. Conopeum, fleohnet, wel miegnet.
Cauernamen, pranga. Labrum, margo, uel crepido, step,
Acateon, se mesta segl.® 15 wel brerd.

Epidromo, se medemesta segl. Loramentum, uel tormentum, widde.
Dalum, se lesta segl.

Puluini, slidor. Lasciua, gagol.

Puppis, steorsetl. Allugo, fyne.

Anguina, cops. 20 Alluginatus, fynig.®

Prora, ancersetl. Numisma, seylling.

Funes, uel restes, rapas, Mensularius, pennighwyrfere.

_ Porticulus, hamor. Collybista, pennigmangere.

Spirae, linan, Trapezita, wel monetarius, mynetere.
Sipara, anes fotes segl. 25 Paracaraximus, fals pening.‘
Propes, sceacline. Folles, dyneras.

Safon, step. Procuratio, scir.

Rudentes, sciprapas. Procurator, scirman.

Opisfera, sedingline. Proconsul, hehgerefa.

Pronesium, meerelsrap. 30 Curator, gerefa.

Tonsilia, scipmeerls. Augur, uel ariolus, wicca.
Remuleus, tohline. Sortilegus, tanhlytere.

_ Strupiar, midla. Aduocatus, patronus, uel interpellator,
Bolidis, sundgyrd. forspeca, wel mundbora.
Cataprorates, sundline. 35 Apologia, ladung.

Aistuaria, fleotes tonctte. [yst. Apologeticus, beladung.

4istus, recessus et accessus maris,

Ledona, nepflod, uel ebba. Domus, hus, hywreden.®

Malina, heahflod. - Proaula, i. domus coram aula, selde.
1 Literally, the ship-shovel, the rudder. 3 Tho Latin of these two words should
2 Perhaps we may conclude from this, no doubt be wligo and uliginosus.

and the two following words, that the 4 So the MS. not flaspenig as Wright

ordinary Anglo-Saxon ships had only wrote. R, W.

three sails, as here named —the large 5 The words which follow are very

sail, the middle sail, and the small sail; curious, The compiler is endeavouring

but these names may be only an attempt to explain, in Anglo-Saxon, the various

to explain the Latin words, by describing descriptions of Roman buildings, and parts

what they meant in the want of equivalent of a Roman house; and the way in which

5 he does this not only shows that the

184 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY, 185 9h
Zetas aestiuales, sumerselde, Popina, snedinghus. bi
Zetas hyemales, winterselde. Lautorium, wescern.
Salutatorium, gretinghus. Officina, smidpe, uel weorchus. B
Consistorium, pet hus per man  Equiale, horsern.
dwead heora handa. 5 Bostar, uel bouiale, scipen. P
Tricorum, uel triclinium, gercord-  Ouile, i. sepimenta, uel caulae, secapa-
hus. hus. u
Epicausterium, domhus, wel mothus. Caprile, gatahus. 5
Thermas, beedhus, uel beedstow. Casa, uel casula, insete hus, uel
Gymnasium, leorninghus. 10 lytel hus. x
Coquina, uel culina, cicen. Gurgustulum, uel gurgustium, neara A
Colimbus, i. aquaeductus, weeterscipes screef,
hus. Tugurium, hule. i
Ypodromum, goldhordhus,! uel spon- _ Magalia, uel mappalia, uel capanna, A
doromum, digle gangern. 15 byre, uel sceapheorden.
Ecclesia, circe. Carcer, uel ergastulum, uel lautumia, 4b
Aides, hofa. ewertern. T
Aidicula, lytel hof. Latrina, uel secessus, gang. 0
Templum, templ. Absida, sinewealt cleofa, uel portic. 9
Basilica, cinges hof, uel cyree. 20 Asseres, latta, wel reafteres.
Porticus, portic. Abaso, infirmatorium, seocera manna
Peribolum, acire. hus.
Aula, heall. Cancelli, lytle porticas, 4
Triclinium, bur prybeddod.2 Brationarium, mealthus. i
Camera, bur. 25 Pistrina, becern. I
Caminatum, fyrhus, Pistrilla, lytel bacern. ¢
Cubiculum, bedcofa, Farinale, mealehus. E
Refectorium, beodern. Granarium, cornhus.
Dormitorium, slepern. Horreum, bern. t
Auditorium, sprechus. 30 Siccatorium, cyln, wel ast. P
Capitolium, domhus. Tornatorium, prylhus.
Curia, uel senatus, upwitena spriec-  Uestiarium, hregelhus. }
hus. Bibliotheca, uel armarium, wel ar-
Cella, cete. chiuum, boochord.
Cellarium, hordern. 35 Librarium, bochus,
Lardarium, spichus. Salinarium, sealthus. 5
Carnale, fleschus. Caenaculum, gemeene metern. 2
Apotheca, winhus. Zenodochium, gisthus eldeodigra §,
rarium, feohhus. manna. vl
Piscinale, fischus. 40 Nosocomium, seocra manna hus. ;
greater part of them were unknown to gold-finder, and gold-farmer, which were ))\
the Anglo-Saxons, but he gives us the used in the sixteenth and seventeenth
Anglo-Saxon names for such buildings, centuries for a cleaner-out of privies, The
and parts of buildings, as were known durability of such popular phrases is ex-
to our remote forefathers, and helps us  traordinary. i
to comprehend their meaning. 2A very singular translation of tri- |)
1 This word is very curious as a name clinium, as if it meant a three - bedded i
for a privy, in connection with the words room, E

186 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. 187
Lupanar, uel circus, uel theatrum, Lustra, wilddeora holl and denn.
myltestrehus.' , Lucus, wel nemus, beora.
Bainearium, uel thermarium, bed- Papilio, ganggeteld.
hus. Tenda, tyldsyle.
Pomarium, uel cucumerarium, eppel- 5 Clauus tentorii, fitersticca.
hus. Circumlutus locus, mid weter ymb-
 Claustrum, frsten, uel clauster. tyrnd stede.
_ Spelunca, uel specus, uel antrum,  Alluuium, wetergewesc.
screef, Netorium, inspinn.
Scriptorium, pisleferhus. 10 Pectica, flepecamb.
Aumatium, uelarmarium, elees eyn- — Liciatorium, lorh, uel webbeam.
nes cepehus. Tela, langweb.
Faenile, highus. Licium, hefeld.
Atrium, mycel and rum heall, wel Lacerna, hacele geflenod, wel ge-
eafertun. 15 corded.
Gazophylacium, madmhus. Uertigo, hwyorfa.
Thesaurarium, goldhold.? Suppar, interula, syre.
Oratorium, uel oraculum, gebedhus. Radiolum, hrisl.
Propitiatorium, uel sanctum sancto- _ Alibrum, breol.
rum, uel secretarium, uel pastofo- 20 Tramarium, medema persa.‘
rum, gesceot bieftan pem heah- Ragana, underhwitel.
weofode. Matazxa, uel corductum, uel stramen- b
Asylum, fridhus, wel generstede. tum, strel, uel bedding.
Sutrina domus, sutera hus. Peblum, web.
Potionarium, zlces cinnes drenchus. 25 Lectisternia, bedreaf.
Caenobium, feala muneca wunung. Stamen, wearp.
Ergasterium, uel operatorium, weore- Fulcra, eal bedreaf.
' hus. Lodix, westling.
Genitium, towhus of wulle * Globus, clywe.
Parietinae, roflease and monlease 30 Glomus, unwunden gearn.
ealde weallas. Glomer, globellum, cleowen.
Ypogaeum, uel sublerraneum, eord-  Deponile, wefta, uel weft. [steef.
hus. Panuli, planus, uel panus, colus, dis-
1 It is rather curious that the Anglo- mansions of the great, and was applied to
Saxon scholar should confound a theatre the room in which the maidens attached to
with a brothel; but the mistake arose the noble lady’s household were assembled,
probably from his forming his judgment in the various employments peculiar to
of the character of the Roman stage only them, such as the various branches of
from the ecclesiastical writers, who decried spinning, weaving, sewing, embroidering,
both the theatrical performances, which &c,, of which the lord made a profit. It
had become degraded enough, and the is probably with this idea that the Anglo-
drama in general, Saxon compiler of the glossary interprets
2 Wright by an error printed: goldhord. gyneceum as “a towhouse of wool.” The
RW. different words belonging to weaving, and
8 Genitium is apparently a corruption women’s domestic employments, follow
of gineceum (yyneceum), the apartment immediately after.
of the women. Under the Franks on the 4 1. read persa, not wersa as Wright
Continent, and the Saxons in Britain, the does. R W. 4
_erm gyyneceum was preserved in the

188 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC'S VOCABULARY. J ay
Cielas, uel oraria, orlas, Mathematicus, tungelwitega, wel ge- | fi
Apidiscus, webhoe. byrdwitega. fh
Ordior, ic hefaldige. Sortilegus, tanhlyta. 0
Insubula,' webbeamas. Oreades, muntelfen. Al
Percussorium, slege. 5 Dryades, wuduelfen. Gi
Tara, webgerepru. Moides, feldelfen. (i
Pecten, bannuccamb. Hamadryades, wylde elfen. Au
Texo, ic wefe. Naiades, sexelfen. Ni
Texta, gewefen. Castalides, dunelfen. Ni
Textor, webba. 10 Penates, cofgodas. Mi
Textrix, webbestre. Tisiphona, welcyrre.® iy
Trama, uel subtemen, oweb, uel ob.  Pareae, hegtesse.
Polymita, uel orbiculata, wingfah. Satyri, uel fauni, unfele men. La
Ependeton, cop, uel hoppada, uel Ficarii, uel inuit, wudewasan.* A
ufrescrud. [wurdscipas. 15 Abatis, fetfellere. p
Fasces, ealdordomas, wel pa hehstan —_Lictor, uel uirgifer, hyldere. - WA
Flamininus honor, biscoplic wurd- Lanio, uel lanista, uel carnifex, uel
seipe. macellarius, hyldere, uel cwellere, |),
Flammeolum, uel flammeum, biscopes uel flectawere. Ch
huf. 20 Quaestionarius, dema. N
Flamen, biscop. Creditor, lenere. A
- Maneipatio, peowdom, Ariolus, wicca. E
Manumissor, freotgifa. Commentariensis, gerefa. 3
Manumissio, freotgife. A seeretis, uel principis consiliarius, |)
Emancipatio, freodom. 25 geruna.
Manus impositio, handgang. A responsis, i. magister responsorum, | §j
Manumissus, gefreod. yldest «rendraca. D
Liricus, scop. A caliculis, magister calicum, yldest |p
Poema, leod. byrla. i
Poesis, leodweorc. 30 Assecla, folgere. B
Poeta, uel uates, leodwyrhta. Teloneum, tolsetl. D
Tragicus, uel comicus, unwurd scop. Pincerna, byrle. Ni
Pythonissa, hellevune, uel hegtesse.  Plagiarius, nytena deof. N
Horoscopus, degmelsceawere.” Questor, dema. iB
1 An error of the scribe for insubule. would apply singly to Tystphoue, while 9”
R. W. wel-cyrian was the name of the three
2 The compiler has again followed the fates of the Anglo-Saxon mythology. (sic!
derivation of the word, iustead of the R W,)
meaning of the word itself; and, instead [The MS. by an error has: wielcyrte. [ipl
of interpreting horoscopus as one who R. W.] q
tells people’s fortunes by calenlating their 4 The Anglo-Saxon of this aud the fii
nativities, he took it to mean one who preceding word seem to have been simil- ju
announces the hours of the day, The arly transposed. It furnishes us with a
words which follow are curions illustra- very curious and instructive example of
tious of the fairy mythology of our fore- the long preservation of words connected
fathers. with popular superstitions; for, in Withal’s
2 The Anglo-Saxon of this and the  Dictionarie, ed. 1608, p. 62, we have, in
following word appear to be transposed. the list of four-footed beasts, “a woodwose,
Hagtesse means properly a fury, or, in  satyrus.”
its modern representative, a hag, and

190 SUPPLEMENT TO ALFRIC’S VOCABULARY. 911
Transilio, ie oferhleape. Facetiae, wynsum gliw.
Transilitor, oferhleapend. Delumentum,* pweal.
Questus, uel lucrum, gestreon. Commonitorium, uel pictacium, erend-
 Altilis, fedels. gewrit.
Citharedus, hearpere. 5 Canalis, uel colimbus, uel aquaeduc-
Citharistria,’ hearpestre. tus, weterpeote.
Auledus, reodpipere.? Cataclysmus, brymflod.
Salpisia, aule, bymere. Ductilis, astrengd.
Salpica, bymesangere. Prouentus, sped.
Salpizo, uel buccino, ic byme.3 10 Argutiae, gleawnys.
Sponsor, uel praes, uel fideiussoru2l  Academice, snotorlice.
uas, uel uadator, borhhand. Affectuose, uel deuote, holdlice.
Aimulus, gesaca, uel gewinna, Euax, wilcume.
Accidiosus, uel tediosus, asolcen. Eatenus, uel eotenus, od pet.
Petitor, uel petax, biddere. 15 Gratiosus, doncful.
Pygmaeus, uel nanus, uel pumilio, Officiosus, estful, uel gehyrsum.
dweorg. Inofficiosus, ingratus, unestful.
Paponius, druncen. Uotiuus, estful. -
Cancellarius, uel scriniarius, burpen. Lentus, waac.
Sacri scriniarius, cyreweard. 20 Familiaris, hiweud.
Antigrafus, writere. Affabilis, wordwynsum.
Estimator, xhtere. Inaptus,> ungefege.
4Estimatio, eltunge. Incongruus, ungepeslic.
Lana suscida, uel sucilenta, una- Familiaritas, hiweudrednys. .
wescen wull. [fen. 25 Contubernalis, uel socius, gefera.
Sideratus, uel ictuatus, feerunge astor-  Contubernium, gadorwist.
Desxtrochirium, brad earmbeah. Terribilis, ahwilc, uel egeslic, wel
Dissologia, twigsprec. dryslic.
Acetabulum, uel garale, ecedfet. Siliquastrum, uel cathedra quadrata,
Exentera, unsceot, uel geopena. 30  fiperscyte setel.
Decorticatum, xfelle, wel rindleas. Corollarium, i. merces, med,
Struma, halsgang. Peripetasma, limbstefning.
Neuum, werhbrede. Cementum, grundstanas.
Eucharis, swes, uel wynsum. Basis, syll.
Facetus, sweswyrde. 35 Fultura, fotstan.
1 So the MS. R. W. 8 Beme was the common word in old
2 The compiler perhaps thought the English for a trumpet, and emere for a
pipe of the Roman minstrel was a pipe trumpeter.
of reeds, Somner supposes that aule, 4 No doubt an error for delutamentum.
in the next line, should be auletes, or 5 So the MS, R, W.
auledus.

i
i
b
b
sb
B
VI
“ Hi
B
ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSARY, '
i
OF THE TENTH CENTURY.'
A
3
B
Argumentum, wergeapnis. Bardus, stultus, ineptus, uel babiger. 9§
Barbarus, i. truculentus, gentilis ser- 45
Bainus, perscel. uus, uel ungereord. 3
Baista, g., glasin. Barius, warius, fah. 3
Balidus, dun. 5 Baratrum, t. terre hiatus, del, uel 3
Balus, isern feotor. feerseap.*
Balatus, hlowung. Baratorium, byre. 3
Balatio, erop. |. searu.  Bathma, i. femora, peoh, 3
Ballista, catapulta, uel machina belli, Baus, sicol.
Balbus, qui wult loqui et non potest, 10 Beabis, beatum facis, pu geadgast. }

wlips,” uel swetwyrda. Beneficium, i. donum, freme, gife. j
Balbutus, stomer. Benetum, uel scirbasu. 3
Balsis, teter. Beneficus, benefactor, fremful. ji
Ballum, poper. Beneplacita, gecweme. ;
Baliheum, cingulum, uel belt. 15 Bena,® ate. p
Balla loca prasinum,> brunbasu. Benignitas, fremsumnes. [bora. 3
Bapis, i. hortus, uel teru. Belliger, i. miles, bellator, wepen- jj,
Barritus, geonung, uel dissimilis, Bellicosus, pugnandi eupidus, wig- j

gepota, rarung. bere.

1 This alphabetical glossary, valnable lected from it in the following pages. It 5
in several points of view, is taken from is, as will be seen, truncated, J
a manuscript of the tenth century in the 2 Here the scribe wrote wlips, not
library of the British Museum, MS, Harl. plips. Cf. pag. 161 1.39. R. W. i
No, 3376. It is, in the original, a gloss- & Prasinum means: green as leek. Is 2}
ary of difficult and uncommon Latin balla loca perhaps an error for: 2aAdev- }
words, explained in Latin; but to the xoc? R. W. i
Latin explanations the compiler, or others 4 Wright printed: scap = sheath, va-
who possessed the manuscript after him, gina. But I read: seap =pit, lake, gulph.
have added a considerable number of in- Cf, Bosw. pag. 61t. R. W.
terpretations in English of the time, or 5 The writer means wena (= bena) or
as it is now called technically by philo- auena. Cf, barius = uarius, benetum =
logists, Anglo-Saxon. These U have col- uenetum, berruca=uerruca etc. R, W. -

194 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 195
Belliter, cene. Bitumen, scipter, wel lim.
Bellator, fihtling. Bitorius, wrenna, bitriscus.
Bellona, i. furia, dea belli, mater Biuligo, niger uelamen, rift.
Martis, wylfen. Bizus, tysca.
Bellica, wiglic. 5 Bobella, swearte.
Beiuae, bestiae maris, wylfene. Bofor, Jembis lieg.”
Beisarum, pyfela, uel boxa. Boia, arcus, uel geoe.
Betica, wicpegn. Boias, catenas, sweorcopsas, wel
Berrus, bera, uel bar. handcopsas.
Berruca, wearte. 10 Boi, scettas.
Berbex, rom. Bolidis, sundgyrd on scipe, wel net-
Bibliotheca, i. librorum repositio, boc- rap.
hord, uel fodder.t Bombus, hlowung, uox inepta, soni-
Bibulis buccis, hleostrum. tus, tumultus, uel sorbellus, clamor
Bibultum, bilhergas. 15 tubis, cyrm.
Bibina, i. temen. Bombicinum, seoleen gegerla.
Bicoca, heferbleta. Bombosa, hlowende, putende.
Bictonatus, selfbona. Boreus, eastnordwind.
Biennis, twiwintre. Borbus, cena, slim.
Biformia, twihiwe. 20 Bothonia, ezmbern.
Bifori, twideledre. Botholicula, stoppa
Bifarius, i. bilinguis, uel piseina,?  Botrus,® clystra.
fisewelle. Botrax, yee.
Bifida, bis diuisa, twideledu. Bouellum, fald.
Biga, ubi ti equi currui iunguntur, 25 Bouile, scipen.
horscret. Bubalus, wesend.
Bigener, aworden, uel doc. Buban, raredumle.
Bilance, twiwege, uel heolore. Bubimus, weser.
Bile, felle, attre. Bucula, iuuenca, uitula, stire.
Bilustris, twi-ferum, wei hiwum. 30 Buccula, bue.
Binius, ti. biennius, twiwintre, Buculus, uel bucularis, randbeag.
Binas, butu. Buccis, buccellis, welrum.
Binas quinquies, tuwa fife. Bucleamen, heorthama.
Bino munere, iwifeaidre’ gife. Buccetum, vipfald.
Bipennis securis, <wilafte zx, uel 35 Buccilla, geofola.
twibile. Bulla, gemma, uel sigh.
Bistinctus coccus, twegra bieo. Bullifer, bulberende.
Bistincto cocco, of twibleoum dero- Bulbile, bucce. [gyrdu.
dine, uel of twitelgedun. Bullas, ornamenta cinguli, forpge-
Bissina, candida, hwit. 40 Bunia, byden.
Bissemis, twiga healfum. Busius, fealu.
Bisso retorto, hwite twine geprawue. Burrus, rufus, niger, burlis, brun.
Bis terque, VI, twiga priga. . Burro, panno, hacole. :
1 Lread fodder, Wright printed rodder. 2 Cf. butros. Botrus answers to Greek
R. W. Borevc. R. W,
2 Are the first two Latin words in any 4 An error for bubo or bubonem.
connexion with the Anglo-Saxon gloss? R. W.
RW:
14

196 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 197 Hs
Burris, curuamentum aratri, sulh- — Cachinnus, ceahhetung. %
beam. Cacomicanus,* logpor. ,
Butium, eyta, frisea. Caducus, demoniacus, brecseoca, uel |
Butiuncula, tunyneel. inanis. ¥
Butros, clystra. 5 Cadurcus,® cip. j
Buturnus, heope. Cades, oppidum, uel westm. '
Blandus, suauis, lenis, placidus, io-  Calcaneus, exterior pars pedis, hela.
cundus, lipe. Calcanosus, healede. ta
Blanda, lipe, swes, jocunda, oliccung. Calcatrix, tredend. ri
Blandis sermonibus, lenis uerbis,10 Calcaria, dicta quia in calce homi- yy
lipum, wel swet-wyrdum. nis ligantur, spuran. in
Blandide, geswese. Calces, ilas, wearras.
Blanditur, gesweslecp, adolatur, Calceos, gescy. ‘
oleccap, libercap. Calcis, finis, lim, tahspura. ,
Blandiens, oliccende.! 15 Calcibus, fyrsnum, houm. :
Blasphemia, uituperatio, tel. Calcis uiua, gebernd lim. :
Blatis, bitelum. Callidissime bestiole, prettigustan 9),
Blatea,? lucifuga, wiega. deore. ,
Blauum, color est uestis, bleo. Caldaria, cetel. }
Blurus, caluus, blere. 20 Callosa, wearihte.
Bracile, slyfan. Callositas, wearihtnes, uel unsmepnes. 9
Bratium, mealt. Calmetum, merse.
Bradigatio, ploratio campi, feldwop. Calmidus, curtina, godweb. :
Brateolis, laminis, platungum. Callus, ile. q
Bratea fila, torta aurea fila, pa25 Callis, iter pecudum, pep. 1
aprawenan goldpredas. Callide, ingeniose, geaplice. ,
Bresion, bulut. Caluarium, strictura, uel calwer- 9)
Brigacus, scearbeam. {uel edise, clympe. 1
Broel,3 hortus ceruorum, deortun,  Calleo, decipio, ic frefelie, callem in- ¥,
Broellarius, ediseweard. 30 _ uestigo. :
Brogus, hep. Calecantum, uitrolum, attrum. ,
Brumela, bellicum, uel sla. Caligans, obumbrans, dymmede.
Bruncus, wrot. Caligarius, lestwyrhta. '
Bruntus, won. Caliga, scoh. [bant. |
Brugma, barice. 35 Caliginabant, apeostredan, obumbra- §,
Bruuinus, lytel wiega. Calbrum, cyllebrond.® ‘
Byrsarius, uel byrseus, leperwyrhta.  Calsus, meon.”
Byligon, clade. Caiabit, brycgap. ;
Byrrum, casul. Calatus, leap.
40 Calamuca, hacule. ;
1 In the MS. the iis placed over ane, denotes as well a linen blanket only as 9
8 R. W. a bed, marriage-bed in general, The
2 The MS. has: blatta. R. W. meaning of cip is: tent, booth. Cf. Ca- 9
8 Bosw.20¢ thinks broelan Anglo-Saxon —tereus. R. W.
word corrupted from Latin brolium or © Cylle means a censer. Cf. storcylle
briolium. But the scribe, no doubt, used  Aelfr. Hom. II, 294, R. W.
Broel as an Latin expression, R, W. 7 Meo denotes a kind of shoe, pedule.
4The scribe means xxxouyzavor. RW, Cf. Bosw. 45m, R. W. !
5 Cadurcus, used by Iuvenal 7, 221,

|
198 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 199
Calamistrum, walespin]. Captiose, hedendlice.
Calumpnia, accusatio falsa, hosp,  Captiuus, heftling.
hearmsprec, holtihte. Capsa, uel snod,
Camera, arcus, fornax, bigels, boga, Caper, hefergat.

incleofa. 5 Capella, tuba, scofle, spadu.
Camerarius, burben. Capilli, heafodher.

Camematus, gescend. Capillatura, loegewind, uel fexnes.
Campana, cimbala, belle. Capillamenta, rawe, drisne.
Caninus, tux. Capitulatio, mearcung.

Candelle, burne. 10 Capitula, wel heafodbolstor, origo
Canna, eb’,! harundo, calamus, uel angin.

bune. Capital, lex, heafod.*

Cannabum, henep, uel pis. Capitale, heafodclap, wel wangere.
Cannalis, pryng. Capistrum, helfter, uel ceelfster.
Cannabin, g. henep. 15 Capitoli, hearges.

Cancer, crabba, forceps, heferbite. Capia,* raa.

Cancella, gesceot, gradus ligneus. Capiat, gegripe, retineat.
Cantabiles, wynsume. Capitium, hod.

Cantarus, ubi aqua mittitur, uel  Capiclum, clufu.

ydria, tunne, uel animal, wifel. 20 Capulus, manubrium gladii uel unius-
Cantilena, a canendo, modulatio, uel cuiusque rei, mid hilte.

sarlic blis. Carbasus, tumor ueli, seglbosm,
Cantionum, uel galdra. Carbasa, uela nauium, seglbosmas,
Canti, felga. Carbasini, gersgrene.

Canalis, pruh, uel mylentroh. 25 Carbunculi, bylas.
Cana® uellus, wulflys. Carcesia, summitas mali, et genus
Canistrum, uas uinetum, uel tenel. poculorum, uel buna.
Caniglata, melsceafa. Carceria sunt in cacumine arboris
Canile, domus canis, hundahus. trocliae, quasi flicteria, per quas
Canini, tuxas. 30 funes trahuntur, mestlon.®
Canities, grauitas, senectus, har-  Carcer, dictus a coarcendo, witern.
wengnes. Cardis, pistlum.
Canis, uel canicula, stella quae Sirius Cardiacus, dicitur qui patitur labo-
uocatur, se hara-steorra. rem cordis, uel morbus cordis,
Canonica, tidsangas. 35 heort-copa, wel ece, modseocnes,
Canor, modulatio, weorpung, uel uel unmiht.
cantus. Carpentarius, wenwyrhta.
Capax, qui multum capit, andgetul, Carpere, arripere, twiccian.
gripul, numul. Carperabat, genicelde.
Captura, detentio, captio, heft, uel40 Carpella, sadolboga.

wer. Carpobalsamum, balsames bled.

1 eb’ seems to mean ebraice; but can- word. I suppose lex to be aLatin word
na (xevye) is met with as well in Latin and heafod a literal translation of capi-
as in Greek, R. W. tal. R. W.

2 An error of the glossator for lana. 4 An error for caprea. R. W.

R. W. 5 Bosw. 44¢ printed: mestlor, but the

8 Wright printed capital lex-heafod MS. has: mastlon. R. W.
as if lex-heafod were an Anglo-Saxon

200 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES, 201 |!
_ Carnali commercio, flesclicum ge-  Casla,® spring. (
mange. Castalidas nymphas, pa manfullan |!
Carnifex, interfector, feorhbona. gydena, uel dunelfa. (
Carpsit, discerpsit, trahit, euellit, uel _ Castor, befer. t
test. 5 Castra, oppida, loca altissima sita, |!
Carpunt, uellint, plucciap. dicta quasi casa alta, herewic, |!
Cartallus, fiscella, windel. uel gefylco.
Cartilago, grundsopa. Cataplasma, medicamentum, clipa. (
Coriza, sternutatio, fnora. Catacrinas, hypban.
Carracutium, uehiculum, serid, quasi 10 Catalecticus, ubi in pede uersus una |!
carrum acutum. sillaba deest, py metercund. (
Caradrum, dolor ossium, banwzere. Cataclismus, diluuium, brym, wel (
Caracalla, cappa. holm. (
Caractis, weterpruh. Catarticum potus, lybeorn.*
Caracter, G., stilus, figura, ferrum 15 Catasta, genus supplicii eculeo simile, | |
coloratum, quo note pecudibus uel woepe, nomen ludi, uel geled,
tnuruntur, mearcisern, quadrupalium. (
Carismata dona, gastgifu, uel haligu. —_ Catenatis lacertis, geracod teagodum | |
Cariar, bedling.' earmum. (
Cariscus, modica musca, wie, uel 20 Catercus, cip. (
ewicbeam. Cateruatim, gregatim, multipliciter, |‘
Carix, seeg. heapmelum. (
Caries, putredo lignorum, uel ferri, Catus, doctus, ingeniosus, sacer, uel ||
sindor, uel uestutas. bolla. (
Carios, lybbestran. 25 Catholicus, geleafful, rectus.
Carecta, loca caricis plena, spina-  Catholice fidei, pes geleaflican ge- ||
curium, seegihtig, uel hreodihtig. leafan.
Carectum, hreod. Capriolus, raa. (
Care uendidit, deore bebohte. Capriole, riege. (
Carolios, atroa, inobediens, unhere. 30 Caprioli, dicti quod capiant arbores, ||
Cassabundus, uacillans, _ titubans, wingeardhocgas. (
hreosende. Cauantur, ewacuantur, pyrliap.
Cassaretur, aidlad.” Caua, splendida, hol. (
Cassatum, hid. Cauea, domus in theatro, deorfald. }!
Cassata, forhrered. 35 Cauernamen, wrong. I (
Casses, retia, uel cassan. Cauernas, holu, speluncas, screfu, |!
Cassium, conum, helm. concauas petras. (
Cassidis, helmes. Cauillum, cauillatio, conuitium, bism- |
Cassidile, wung. rung, geflit.

Cassibus, calamitatibus, uel ferum,40 Cauta, weerlic, sollicita. (
uel helme. Cauculus, dolor renum, uel lapis in
Cassus, inanis, scelus, malum, uacuus, uesice, bledre, i. wrina in lapidem §

uel fer. uertitur. (
; (
1 badling denotes a carrier of letters. 3 An error for Castalia, I suppose.
Cf. Bosw. pag. 121, R, W. R. W.
2 So read I. Wright has: asolad. @ Iybcorm means: wild saffron, cartha-
R. W. mus. R. We
\

202 LATIN AND ANGI.O-SAXON GLOSSES. 203
Caucale, ease, uel nester. " — Ceruleus, i. glaucus, grenchewen,
| Cauda, steort. fah, deore. Color est-inter album
Cauterium, mearcisern, uel tynder.’ et nigrum, subniger.
Cautela, i. astutia, werscipe. Cerulei profundi, deorcre dypan.
Cautere, i. aam.” 5 Ceruleis turbinibus, lageflodum pode-
Cautes, i. aspera saxa in mari, uel num.
torres, wel cludas, uel rupes. Cerimingius, hearpanstapas.
Caulas, g., locu, i. munimenta ouium, Cerotum, wnguentum de cera, wex-
uel sepimenta ouilium. sealf,
Caulus, cawel. 10 Centuclum, felt.
Cauliculus, steola, ramunculus, twigu.  Centumeilio, i. pellis, feleferd, uel
Caulon, crop. centumpellis.
Caupus, i. tabernarius qui uinum — Centipillium, i. omentum, film.
- uendit, teeppere. Celeum, ceruise, ealu.
Cautus, i. sagax, prouidens, acutus,15 Celestis bibliothece, bocgesamnunge.
wer, - Celibatus, i. sine uxore uir, uel ui-
Confirmatio, festnung. duatus, uel abstinentia uirginitatis,
Caumene, hlywpa, uel eordreste. clengeorn. :
Caumatio, swolig. [syfad.  Celibes, i. casti, steriles, celestem
Causatur, i. querelatur, causam dicit,20  uitam ducentes, clengeorne.
Causauit, seofade. Celibea Tempe, heofenlicre reminge.
Caustica, nocens, unhere, scepdende. —Celsa agreste, sicomorus, heortberge.
Causas, res, incan, uel ping. Cellarium, incleofa, sic dictum quia
Causidicus, i. legator, disertus, facun- in ea colligantur ministeria men-
dus, spelboda. 25 sarum uel quae necessaria uictui
Cerimoniae, i. hostiae, ritus sacri supersunt.
ficandi, religiones, sacrificia, geld. —_ Celatum, i. pictum, agrafen, astemped.
Cereus, wexcandel, Celatura, i. sculptura, graft.
Cerealis pistor, i. gristra. Celon, stempingisern.
Cerethei, redehere. 30 Celox, uel cilion, i. species nauis, i.
Cereuma, uel celeuma, idem et toma, ceol, wel stempingisern.
i. leta cantatio, lewisplega. Cementum, i. cesura lapidis, uel lim,
Cerebrum, bregen, uel exe. uel mendacium cogitatum.
Ceratos agros, gedyngde sxceras. Cementa, i. petre, grundstanas, uel
Cerastus, tapor. 85 funes.
Ceruinus, dunfealu. : Ceminigi, hearpanstala.
Ceruix, sweora. Cenosas, pa fennigan meras, i. pa-
Ceruical, i. capitale, bolster, uel ludes paludosas, uel adelihtan,
wongere. fulan, lutosas, fetidas, immundas.
Certaui, contendi, ic flat, pugnaui,4Q Ceno, i. luto, mixe, horwe.
ie wan, conaui, dimicaui. Cenobium, 1. congregatio, mynsterlif.
Cercinum, risn. Cenantibus, i. wescentibus, reorden-
Ceruellum, i. ceutrum, bregen. dum.
Cerula, uel nox, uel celina, i. nigra,  Cenum, 1. luti uorago, uel lutum sub
obscura unda, uel laguflod. 45  aquis fetidum, i. wase, uel fren.
1 Of. caracter pag. 200 1.15. R. W. 2 xavryetoy denotes a marking-iron.
RW.

204 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 205 ,
Cenulenti, i, litosi, olidi, fule. Ciclamina, slite.
Ceniluti, swina hlose. Cicla, orel, ryft.
Congium reddit, tala, wel mycel gropa. Cicer, beancyn. f
Cetus, i.congregatio, conuentus,werud,  Cicidemon, nedderbita.
multitudo. 5 Cione, stapole. (
Ceca formidine, blindre fyrhto. Ciula, ceol. (
Cephalus, 9. heafodpanne. Cimosis, fleo on eagum. '
Cephalia, i. dolor capitis, uel cephal-  Cimex, summitas arboris, wel mapa. !
argia, heafod-weerc, uel ece. Cimentum, stanlim. t
Ceutrum, protbolla. 10 Cidaricus, handswyle. |
Cesa, i. abscisa, occisa, aheawen. Ciprum, cipersealf. (
Cesaream tributum, i. regalis, gafol.  Cipus, ecroplec.
Cessam, %. desistam, cessauero, ic  Clangenti sistro, sonanti tube, bla-
gestille, wed ablinne. wendre. |
Cessio, i. typ. 15 Clangor, tubarum sonus, uel wow |
Cesura, toheawenne. tubae, dyne, gepun, cyrm.
Chronographus, tidscriptor. Claua, fuste, steng, uel borda. |
Cinnamomum, resina, suderne rind. Clauus calicularis, scohnegl.
Cinthium, mitra, snod. Claumentia, claua, steng.
Cinum, hagan. 20 Claus, lignum tentorii, uel telde.
Cicinnus, i. uinnus, loc. Clauatum, sutum, uel gebyrd. |
Cicindilibus, weocum. Clauato, signato, getacnod.
Cinereus, deterrimus color, escfealu,  Cadicla, wefl, uel oweb. |
uel esegreg. Clades, pestes, ewyld.
Cittis, fylmenum. [fatum. 25 Clamosa, oferhlud.
Ciatis, i. calathis, wasis, uel beod- Classica, sciphere, uel swegas.
Cistula, sporta, uel cyst. Classicis, flotlicum, sciplicum.
Cistella, capsilla, cartellum, tenel. Clasmatorius, efractor, husbrycel.
Cisalpina, quasi circa’ Alpes, ex ista  Clarus, insignis, nobilis, perspicuus, \
parte, beheonan. 30 mere.
Circillus, nauicula, uel heardheawa. Clatrum, 7. pearroc, hegstef.
Cirrus, crinus, loc. Clatica, wefta,
Circinnus, gafelrod. Cliuosum, i. inclinatum, clifehtig.
Circumspectio, circuitus, embeponc,  Cliens, i. socius, pegn, gesiba.
uel sceawung, cautio. 35 Clinice, i. lectus, tetrus, fortihtend.
Cirta, acdrenc, uel nomen loci. Cliuium, i. discensum, helde, burh-
Circopythicos, sprinca. steal.
Circumuenientium, embdrydiendra. Clima, i. plaga, ascensio, epl.
Circentium, ringsittendra.? Cluit, pollet, uiget, nobilitat, pihp,
Cironitus, dun. 40 uel defendit.
Circulus decennouenalis, se nigan-  Clunis, renibus, come, gupan.
teopa® getelcircul. Clustella, clusterloc.
Cicur, t. mansuetus, placidus, man-  Conici, conari, reswian.
pwere. Commodus, i. honestus, congruus,
1 There can be no doubt that this is 8 The scribe corrected niganteopa from
an error for citra Alpes. neoganteopa. R, W.
2 The MS, has: embringsittendra, R.W,

206 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 207
utilis, aptus, gehyplic, peslic, uel  Commentarius, stertractere, uel hal-
gescreepe. sere.
Commodum, lucrum, utile, len, ge- Commeatos, sande. [dan.
serepe. Comeant, simul pergebant, midfer-
Commodius, congruentius, gehyplicor. 5 Comeans, socius, gesipa.
Commoditas, i. utilitas, behefnes, Commanipularius, collega, miles, in-
nytweorpnes. cempa, uel gescota.
Commolitis, forgrundenum. Commanipulares, commilitones, socii,
Comosus, sceagode. gefylce.
Comotio, gewrixl. 10 Competa clausa, betyndan wega ge-
Commisura, s. dicitur tabularum con- letan.
iunctio, gefeg, cimbing, clut, wel  Competis, terminis, wega geletum.
flihteclap. Competum, uel compitum, i. uilla,
Comis, uel ramis, ti. bogum. uel pingstow, uel prop.
Cominiscitur, recordatur, commen-15 Competitor, amicus, uel rogator bap-
tatur, fingitur, he sarwab. tismi, fulwihtbena.
Comicus, s. est qui comedia’ scribit, Compendiose, breuiter, gegne.
cantator, uel artifex canticorum Compendiosius, ametendlicor.
seculorum, idem satyricus, i. scop, | Comperhennis, ece efenlic.
toculator, poeta. 20 Comperit, i. intellemit, cognouit, in-
Comitatus, consecutus, uel gesip- uenit, didicit, onfunde.
reden. Competentes partiunculas, conueni-
Comite uita, sospite uitae,? gelesten- entes, gelimplice dele.
dum life. Competentibus horis, on peslicum
Commisio, conflictus, gefeoht. 25 timan.
Commilitonibus, sociis, uel campge- Compagines, i. coniunctiones, iunc-
ferum, uel gerefum. turae, gefeg.
Comitiales, i. garritores, uel dies Compagem, iuncturam, uel gegade-
mensi, uel ylfie, wel monapseoce, rung.
uel dagas. 80 Compaginum, coniunctionum, gefo-
Comitiorum dies, honorum dies, ar- gum.
| dagas, wel weordungdagas. Compar germane, similis fratri, ge-
| Commissoria, tabularum coniunctio, mee.

treowfeging. Comparatus, i. assimilatus, geefen-

Comitata, t. sociata, gemidsipegad,35 _licad, inuentus, wipmeten.
uel geferleht. Comparare, i. emere, uel ceapigan.

Comitarisne tu? hu ne midsipgadest | Comparatio, wipmetenes.
pu? Copla, poples, hom.

Commissus, preceptum, beboden. Compos ... potens, facetus, potens,

Committat, tradat, uel gefremep, 40 prudens, uel getelwis.

Comitatur, sequitur, midsipige. Comptus, i. ornatus, geglengad.

Commenta, i. tractationes, machina- Communi diuidendo actio, gemanan
menta, excogitata, adiumenta, astu- gedal.
tia, argumenta, machinationes, ficta,  Completorium, gefyllingtid.®
Sraudes, onpanc, dicta, mendacia, 45 Complodere, uel concutere, conlidere,
sarwa. enyllan.

1 Read comedias. R. W. 3 Completorium was the last of the
2 An error for uita. R. We J

208 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 209 |
Conpluta, bolster. Confudisti, conturbasti, uel gedretdest, ||
Complanans, geemnettende. diuidisti, pu gescendest.
Conprehensus, oferfangen. Confugium, i. statium, portus, hyp. '
Copsus, syl, securis. Coniectura, i. opinatio, estimatio, in-
Conprobat, gesep. 5 terpretatio,uelreswung,uelredels, |
Coaptat, i. coniungat, gepeslecp. consimilia,
Coagulum, ceslyb. Consero, i. interpono, coniecto, con-
Coagitatum, geheapod. iungo, ie embsette.
Coagolatio, gemang. [uorum.  Consessum, gemot.
Coax i, cra, uox ranarum uel cor- 10 Consenior, efenealda. [getred.
Coangustant, arctant, genyrwiap. Constipatio, %. conuentio hominum, ,
Conflagrat, i. conburet, he amerap, Constipata, i. consita, repleta, cir- |’
concremat. [blawen. cumdata, emb prungen,uel hringed.!
Conflatum, incensum, oneled, ge-  Constipuit, i. defecit, gesweprade, wel | '
Confragosum, cyrmende. 15 congregauit.
Confectos, i. compositos, mixtos, uel Consternat, i. perterritat, contristat,
bewelde. conuincat, indomitat, fyrhtap, ge-
Conflixit, i. certauit, gewon. bregp, geacolmodap, deicit, wel
Confricatus, i. limatus, exprimatus, ofercymp, confudit.
toewysed, wel gebeowed. 20 Constans, stabilis, gesteppig, anrede.
Confrixa, gecocsade. Consistorium, stalern.
Conjirmatio, assertio, trymnes. Consideratus, cordatus, wel bescea-
Confirmo, 7. astruo, ic gesepe, wel wod.
afeestnie. Consideratio, foresceawung.
Conficiam, i. confundam, ie geneto, 25 Consuluit, i. ammonuit, interrogauit, |
Conjiciebantur, efenstaledan. befran.
Cognata, %. coniuncta, prepingua,  Consulens, %. consilium tenens, proui-
gesib, wel cup. dens, uel redende.
Cognate propinquitatis, megeupre Consulo, i. requiro, uel inquire, ic
sibbe. 30 frine, uel ic rede.
Conglutinata, commixta, gelimed. Consultas, consilia, redas.
Congelauerat, tosomne geret. Consumptor, i. deuorator, gifre,
Congrua, i. conuenientia, pa gelimp- gredig, gluto.
lican, peslic. Consumptum, i. deuoratum, degluti-
Congruunt, gepeslecap, uel peslecan.35 tum, ofertogen, finitum.
Congressibus, i. pugnis, of anwigum, Consuetam opem, gewunelic weore. |
uel gewinnum. Consuetudinariis, gewunelican.
Congrediens certando, winnende. Consummabilis aeui, gefyllendlicre |
Confutat, i. confundit, conuincit, ofer- eldo, impleto aeuo.
stelp, gescent. 40 Conspicatio, i. conspirago, facen- |
Confusum, i. permixtum, inconditum, geewys.
obscurum, inordinatum, impolitum, Conspirauerant, geanlewhtan, uel ge-
uel forscamed, anwyrdan.
canonical hours, which completed the re- 1 Cf. circentium, pag. 204 1.39. R. W. (
ligious service of the day. It is here 2 In Andreas 1. 377 we meet with i
rather literally translated by the Anglo- acolmod in the meaning of: timid, of a f
Saxon word, fearful mind. R. W.

210 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 211
Conspiret, i. consentiet, gepwerie,  Colestrum, beost.*
uel samod orpie.! Colum, cum quo colat uinum, uel
Conspicue, i. preclare, healice, instrumentum rusticum, uel in-
beorhtlice, testinum cratis, uel roscidum, uel
Consobrini, i. ex sorore et fratre, 5 wulmod, uel carbo, rop.
uel ex duabus sororibus, geswegran, Columbarium, mest.
gesweosternu, uel gesweoras. Conluctantia, depugnantia, pa sam-
Consobrinus, filius patruelis, sweor. winnendan.
Consocierunt, coniunxerunt, geferleh-  Conlidit, i. allidit, ztspearn, offendit.
ton. 10 Conliserint, tosomne cnyllap.
Consona, geswege. Colibates,* hegsteald men.
Colonus, i. incola, cultor, inguilinus,  Colica, colum, ropweere.
bigenga, tilia, inbuend. Colimbus, i. concrematus, uel weter-
— Colono sine, gebyrdum gemere. gelat.
Coloni nimbi, i.manna, pluuiae famu- 15 Colit, i. uenerat, begep.
lantes, gepensume scuras. Collidium, unmyrge plega.
Colostrum, i.lac nouum, beost, uel  Contabescunt, i. easiccant, hy aswin-
obestum, dap, wel heo beop unblipe.
Colomata, hacole. Contribulus, i. ciues, consanguineus,
Collocatio, i. extremitas, gestapelung.20 meg, gelanda, parens, gesib, pro-
Colos, i. color conciliatus, copor. pinquus, uel simul tribulatus.
Colosus, i. infirmus, hreof. Contritio, geprestednes, uel gebry-
Colomacus, genesta, hep. sednes, forgnidennes.
Colobium, dictum quia longum est, et  Contriuit, gepreeste, minuit, fortred.
* sine manicis, lopa, hom, wel smoc, 25 Contemptus, i. contemptio, forhogung.
mentel. Contemplatio, foresceawung.
Conlatum, i. simbolum, confessio, con-  Contemplantibus, intuentibus, scea-
gregatum, datum, simul conporta- wiendum.
tum, tributum, uel purhtogen. Contentus, i. sufficiens, ephelde, uel
Conlatio, i. conductio, comparatio,30  gepef, fulhealden.
consiliatio, i. datio, contentio, ge-  Contenta, sinu concluso, belocenum
peahtung, gescead, wel racu.? fenge.
Colapsus, i. colafus, pugnus, fyst, Conterat, genet, geyrmp, forbryt,
uel tarastrus. tobrecp.
Conlationes, raca. 35 Contegit, i. consuit, bepeach.
Collarium, sweorclap, wel teg, uel  Contecta, bepeaht.
sal. Contingat, i. fiat, eueniat, pertinet,
Collatum, i. uas in quo deportatur attingat, tangat, petat, etrinp,
uinum, uel crogcyn. getilp.
Collegiati, repingweardas. 40 Contigit, i. accidit, euenit, gelamp,5
Colera, uentris inflatio, uel solutio, getilde.
wyrms. Conticinium, ewyldtid, swignes.
Colerata, fucata, getelged. Conticiscent, silebant, wel siccitan.
1 Wright by a misprint has: samod- 3 Cf. colostrum pag. 210, 1,17. R. W.
onpie. Orpion means spirare, samod orpie 2 So the MS. R. W.
is therefore a literal translation of: con- 5 gelimp is corrected to gelamp in the
spirare. Cf. Bosw. pag. 52h, R. W, MS. R. W.
2 The MS. has: of racu. R. W.
P 15

212 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 213 |?
Continet, i. habet, tenct, embhefp. Codices, onheawas. uel rinda. C
Continuanda, to auletenne. Conditio, i. status, iudicio, procreatio, |‘
Contubernia, societas, gemana. natura, sors, regula, lex, rectitudo,
Contubernalis, i. domesticus, comes, gescxp, gewyrd, gesceft, gebyrd. |!
conuiua, assecla, gepofta. 5 Condensa, i. spissa, secreta, picce,
Contubernali sodalitate, gepeodlicre uel oferpeaht. (
geferreedenne. Condescendo, niper astigende. (
Contumax, i. superbus, anmoda, con-  Condolomata, articula, leopu-sar, wel | |
temptor. gepind.
Contudit, i. domauit, forstynt, fregit, 10 Conductor, mercennarius, hyra. (
compressit. Conductum, gearnwinde.
Cotula, uel catus, bolla. Conductio, gehyrung, uel behyred } |
Contractauit, i. palpauit, gegrapade. feoh.
Contra mille nocendi artes, ongen  Conuiator, gegenga. (
pusendfealde deriende creftas. 15 Conwictor, conuiua, gebeor.
Contionator, i. locutor, motere, uel Corimbi, i. witi racemi, uel botriones, | |
mapelere, uel cireuli, wingeard-hringas, uel ||
Contionatur, i. conclamat, loquitur, bergan, wel croppas, bacce.
contestatur in populo, mapelap. Corimbus, cacumen nauis, leahtroh. ||
Contrecta, i. palpa, handla. 20 Coriza, i. sternutatio, cartilagines, ||
Cotizat, teflap. nebgebreec, uel fnora, (
Coticulus, uel coticula, lytel hwetstan. | Cornipedum, hornfotedne. (
Cotilla, bolle.’ Cordias, byttehlid.
Cocula, aalfatu, crusne, wel heden.? Correctio, preal. (
Omnia uasa coquendi sic dicuntur,25 Corrector, styrend, increpator. me
Coculus, frence. Corporalis inlecebre, lichamlicre una-
Cocologus,8 wordsomnere. lefednesse. (
Coccum bistinctum, weolocread, uel  Cohors, d.* milites, uel preat. (
twihiwe godweb. Coruscatio, i. fulgor, splendor, lig- ||
Cocleae, lytle sneglas, uel weolocas. 30 rese, uel wling. |
Conuenticula, conuentus, gemetincga. | Corupeta, gnohioc.5 (
Conuenientes nuptae, gedafenlice for- Coragium, %. uirginale funus, uel ||
gifene. wop. |
Conuersor, i. locumuto, utor, habito, Coortat, i. monet, uel corrigit, uel ||
ic drohtige, maneo. 35 hyrt, docet.
Conualuit, i. confortauit, gewyrpte. Concentus, i. adunationes multarum ||
Conuolatus, alatus, flihtas. uocum, efenhleoprung, uel dream. ||
Conuoluit, i. cingit, embhrinep. Concessit, i. permisit, concedit, alyfde, }'
Conuical, nehgebur. dedit, é
Condit, i. abscondit, reseruat, uel 40 Concessio, typ. !
selt, uel gehyt. Conceptos dolores, pa angunnenan ||
Condicta, i. decreta, wel ewidas. sar. (
Condiuit, saliuit, gendstredde. Conceptacula, andfenge-stowe. |
Condictiorius, esnecund. Conche, et cocleae, sesneglas.
1 Cf. cotula, 1. 12. R. W. 4d means: dicit, dicitur or dicuntur,
1 5 R. W.
vile ERE Ib, Baar 5 1 doubt whether the MS. has gnohioe
8 The seribe means catalogus. R. W. or yuohioc, R. W.

| 214 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 215
Conca, i. coclea, mundleow. Cracinus, worhen.
Concidit, i. cecidit, uel tosloh, for-  Crama, fleote.
heow. Crabro, hyrnetu.
Conciliabulum, locus sinodali,| sinap- — Crebrat, i. frangit, sift.
stow. 5 Crebrum, cribellum, sife.
Concinnatas, congregatas, geheapod. Crepaculum, sonum, dyne, uel gepun.
Concisium, scelle. Crepat, i. sonat, cracap, brastlap.
Concipit, i. accipit, intelligit,embrehp,  Crementum, 7. augmentum, westm,
onfeng, geeacnap. cip.
Concreta, i. commixta, coniuncta, co- 10 Cremium, i. frixorium, hyrstepanne.
adunata, gerunnen. Crepundium, i. monile gutturis, myne.
Concretio, i. coagolatio, cennung,  Crepundia, i. insignia, indicia, cuna-
gemang, gescep. bula, fretwunga.
Conclamatus, i. commotus, conuocatus,  Crepuit, i. sonuit, brastlade.
desperatus, wel loma. 15 Crepitat, i. resonat, scylp, cyrmp,
Conclusum, finitum, embfangen. reescettep.
Coniuratus, i. concordatus, consen-  Crepitus, i. sonitus, fragor, sonus,
. tiens, gemoda. conflictus, eyrm, flamen, fragor,
— Coniugalis, gemeclic. - sweg.
Coniunctim, gedertangne. 20 Crepitantia lora, brastliende bendas,
Coniuncla, pistra. strengas, uel bendas.
Coniurante polo, mid pweriendum  Creta, t. nata, currus, poe, uel erat.
heofene. Cretabulus, beaw.
Coniuncto actu, gepeodre dede. Crebris, i. spissis, gelomlicum.
Conquirens, i. causans, meditans, uel 25 Crebro, i. celebro, frequenter, mani-
begetend. festo, oft, redlice.
Coeternus, efenece. Creporibus, byrstum.
Coheres, efn yrfeweard. Crepo, ui, tum, sono, wel ic smuge.
Coituras pergente, gegangende. Cresis, cwictreow. [mandeed.
Connuntiator, i. adsertor, gesepend. 30 .Crimen, i. peccatum, scyld, lehter,
Concaluit, ahatode, exardescit. Crinis, -nalis, loc.
Conauerit, geteohhade. Crysolachan, %. awreum olus, uel atri-
Conabuli, gepeode. plex, i. tunmelde.
Concutit, i. turbat, terreat, toscecp, _Cristas, i. comas, uel combas on
ofpryscep, percutit. 35 fugele, wel loccas. ,
Cocula, crusne, uel heden. Crocus, i. lute coloris, geolu.
Come, peoh, Croceus, i. rubicundus, rubeus, geolu,
Cratem, i. flecta, hyrdel, hege, uel greg.
flehtran. Crocata cacumina, pa ageolewedan
Craticula, hyrste, becering. 40 yplenu.3
Cratus, bolla. Crouitorium, gerstun.
Cratium, waga. Cronculus, oneseta,
Crapulatus, i. subito inebriatus, ofer-  Crudescit, 7. seuit, inualescit, reawde,
fylled, geilleroccad.? uel blodgade.
1 Read: sinodalis. quam potens crapulatus a vino = swa
R. W. swa geillorocad (sic /) fram wine. R. W.
3 L read yplenu or ypleno. Wright has
2 Cf. Spelm. Psalterium, 77, 71: tan- —yplenei. R. W.

216 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 217 |}
Cruentata, i. sanguinolenta, sangui- Cupidineo, on gredigum. {
nata, geblodgad, uel sanguinea. Cupa, uel cupo, byden.
Cruscula, scinu. Cupide, i. auare, syfiende. i
Crus, sceanca. Cuiuis, cuilibet, enigum. I
Crustula, helsta, uel rinde. 5 Cudo, i. percutio, cedo, uel onfilte.
Crucicola, rodbigenga. Cyrographum, i. conscriptio hominis, |!
Crustus, cyrten, uel man, manualis scriptio, gewrit
Cunabula, i. crepundia, initia, rudi- reden, wel agnung. ]
menta, uel panni infantiae, cild- Cyprum, coper.
clapas, wel cradelas, uel primordia. 10 Cyprinus, eypren. ]
Cuneus, i. densus populus, turba,  Cyclis, rynum. ]
preat, we? getrymedfepa, wel weeg. | Cyanea lapis, hewenstan. !
Cuneata, gefered, sociata. Cycropide, cicropisces. |
Cuniullus, lytel were.
Cuniculum, i. foramen, canalis, pu- 15 Decrepita, t. uetula,\ forweren, ualde
teum, monumentum, uel greop. senex.
Cuniculus, snegl, smygels. Decretum, i. institutum, positum, con-
Cunctatur, i. dubitat, moratur, hesitat, silium, placitum, gepoht, statutum,
prydab, trepidat, interrogat, tardat. laga, diffinitum, gesetnes, iudicium.
Cupide, %. auare, syfiende. 20 Decipulosa, i. inlecebrosa, leahter-
Cubicularius, custos cubili, bedpegn. fulle, wel forspenninga.
Cubitum, elnboga, uel fepm. Decanus, i. princeps militibus, uel
Cubile, burcot. tyna aldor. 4
Cuba, i. ulna, elnboga, uel hondwyrst. Decaluatum, decollatum, besceoren.
Cumulus, i. tumulus, apex, aceruus,25 De cortice cornu, of corntreowes
coaceruatio, beorg. rindum.
Cum infami eulogio, mid py unzpelan De concordi, be gepweerlicre.
gydde, wel unweorplican. De consanguineo, of gesibbum, uel
Cummi, teru. of freondhealdlicum.
Cultrix, i. inseruiens, bigengestre. 30 Decliui, i. proni, inclinati, humiliati,
Culmus, i. stramen spicarum, exerci- uel aheldre.
tus, healm, wel stela. Deceptrix, fallax, seductrix, biswica.
Culocrisolus, erpling. Deceptio, i. fraus, lotwrenc, biswic-
Curia, i. domus consilii, conuentus, ung.
gemothus, wel stow, congregatio.35 Decruente, ofblodene.
Curuanas, scethas. Defigitet,? i. defatiget, lassat, swencep,
Cursat, currit, pocarad, cursitat. flagellat.
Curuatura, biging. Defectura, aspringende.
Curiosus, fyrwetgeorn. Defectus, i. terminus, asprungen, de-
Curiositas, ferwetnes. 40 fectio.
Curiose, fyrewyttre. Defectio, geteorung.
Cura (s. dicitur quod cor agitat, i  Defecatum, i. liquidum, purum, ahlut-
conturbat), i. sollicitudo, cogitatio, trad.
studium, uel medicina, curatio, wel  Defrutum, 7. winum, medo, geswet,
lacnung, uel gymen, uel hogu. 45 uel weall.
Cucurrit, purharn. Defricatum, abeowed.
1 Forwetet in the margin 2 Sic MS. R. W.

218 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 219

Defuit, i. absens fuit, ateorada, i. Demulceat, blanditur, olecce.

absens fuit. . Demptus, abscissus, genumen.

Deglobere, spoliare, uel beflean. Dentile, topsticca.

Degener, i. ignobilis, xenosle, dis- Dentale, s. est aratri pars prima

similis parentibus. 5 in qua uomer inducitur quasi dens,

Degeneri languore, xenoslum adle, sule-reost, wel proc.

uel unebelre. Densescit, spissat,2 piccab.

Degesta, i. disposita, clarificata, se-  Deneger,* i. ignobilis, ecnosle, megp-

rena, praeclara, uel gescerede. leas.

Degenerat, mispihp. 10 Depeculatus, t. uastatus, depracdatus,

Degestio, i. egestio, driting. depopulatus, bescyred.

Degenerante, gexcnosliendum. Dependo, i. reddo, persoluam, dabo,

Delicatus, i. tenerus, querulus, amoe- satisfacio, sustento, mensuro, ic

. nus, unbrocheard, uel sefta, pom- agylde.

posus, dilectus, mearuwe, 15 Deprauat, i. maculat, confundit, uel
Deliciosa, i. amabilior, leta, epgeorn, gewep, flectat.
uel estful. De post fetantes, efter pon tuddor-

Delicius, i. in deliciis amatus, est- fostre, uel of pam sipborenum.

georn, estful. Depo,* wefta.

Delibratio, ymbprydung. 20 Deponile, weftan.

Delitescit, i. moram facit, latet, occul- Depositum, i commendatum, len.
tat, abscondit, betinp, wel dyrnp, Depromo, i. ostendo, profero, pro-
| tardat, latap. tulero, exposuero, geyppe.

Delinuit, olehte, i. geloccade. Deprono saltu, of py mere.

Delibor, i. immolor, uel ic beo on- 25 De recessibus, i. de occultis, uel de

lesed. secretis interioribus, of heolhstrum,

Delumentum, i. lauatio, pweal. of diglum.

Deludis, i decipis, bepehst!, uel we- Deruta, i. ewersa, ahwerfde.

gest. Derare, gewidagur gedon.

De latebrosis recessibus, of dymmum 30 Destinatus, i. missus, ordinatus, depu-

diglum, wel of dyrnum. tatus, uel foreteohpad.

Delatera, unlybbe. Destitutae, i. derelictae, desertae, uel

Delectatio, lustbernes, uel lufsumnes. toworpne.

Delento fruto, of piccum felde, de  Desertor, i. interfector, seductor,

denso campo. 85 xswica,° uastator.
- Delenifica, blipe word. Deserta, s. wocata quae non seruntur,

Delebra, tang. destituta, aletan.

Demolitur, bid forsworfen, i. extermi- Desequuntur, i. accusabant, uel mel-

natur, uel forgniden. dadan.

Demoniaticus, insanus, amens, uel4Q Desteruit, somniauit, reat.

woda. Desiderabilis, wilsumlic.

Demonico globo, deofelicum gefer-  Desidet, i. discordat, uel. desistit,

scipe. distat, defert, unsibbap.

Deminute, gewanude, uel gelytlade. Desicit, tetrep.

1 Cf. Bosw pag. 15P; Leo, pag. 210, R.W. 4 An error for deponile, see the next
2 The MS. reads: spissas. R. W. word R. W.
8 Sic MS. R. W. 5 The glossator means: @scwiga. R.W.

220 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES, 221 FF

Desiduus, i. desidiosus, ignauus, diu-  Deditio, i. traditio, handgang. D
turnus, disiduo i. diulurne, simle. Dedignor, ic forhogige.

Desile, bor. Dedalei tecti, of daliscre pecene.

Desiderantissimus, i. qui desideratur, — Debita, i. obnoxia, merita, iura, nead. {I
gelustfullesta. 5 Debita pensio, i. digna tributa, geda- . |!

Desiccet, adrugic. fene gaful. I

De sanguinibus, of blodgemongum. Debitis, gedcfum, congruis. I

Desolutus, i. liberatus, onlesed, un- Debitus usus, ¢. congruus, neadge- |)
seled. wuna, uel geneadod bryce. I

Desolatum, i. orbatum, toslopen, dis- 10 Debitor, i. obnowius, reus, uel nead-
sipatum, gylda. I!

Desoluit, avafap. [lysend.  Deordinauit, i. eaauctorauit, gehende.

Desolator, uastator, westend, to-  Dehiscens, i. absorbens, subsidens,

Desudans, i. laborans, winnende, uel aperiens, inhians, patefaciens, scin- ||
swetende. 15 dens, uel cinende. ]

Deteriorauerunt, wyrsadon. Dealibus, i. deificis, godlieum.

Deteriora, pa sxemran, Deambulacrum, circuitus, embgoug. |]

Deterius, wyrs. Dealbabor, ic beo gehwitad, uel |)

Detrudere, sy pu onbesceofen. ablicen. : ]

Detrusis, i. expulsis, uel eaxclusis, 20 Dextrocerium, i. brachiale, armillum, ]
praecipitatis, onbesceofenum, per- uel torium, earmbeag.
turbatis. Dextralis, i. dextre abilis, handex,

Detractatio, uituperatio, tel. Dextro cornu, fram swipre healfe.

Detritu rugine, agnidene. Deiectior, aworpenra, i. humilior.

Deturpans, i. dissipans, maculans, 25 Dictator, i. dictor, relator, praeceptor,
atoliende. imperator, dihtnere, ordinator, pre-

Deuotus, i. largus, honorabilis, cystig, seriptor.
uoluntarius. ¢ Dictu, i. dicione, sagu, uel oratione.

Deuotio, i. obsequio, bonitas, honor,  Dicio, uel arbitrio, iudicio, uel ra-
estfulnes. 30  tione, lege, uel dihte.

Deuenustat, deformat, geatolhiwap. Dicaz, i. facundus, qui uerbis iocatur

Deuium, sloh. in quamlibet rem, uel ewedel.

Deuia, s. loca secreta et abdita, quasi Differt, i. moratur, prolongat, susti-
extra uia, uel inuia, sine uia, or- net, distal, diuidit, tardat, eleap,
wegnes. 35 wel tostent.!

Deuia callus, orweg stig. Differentius, i. eminentius, todeled-

Deuiat, i. errat, declinat, onwoh cerp. licor, wel rum.

Deuulgatissimum, i. opinatissimum,  Diffusa, i. sparsa, dispersa, to-
pone hiisfullestan. bradde.

Deifice contemplationis, pare god- 40 Diffidentia, disperantia,? ortreownes.
lican, wel godeundre besceawunga. —Difficiliore, i. grauiore, earfepran.

Dehinc, i. deinde, abhinc, rursun,  Digesti, i. sereni, leui, uel praedicti,
+. dein, uel ponane, uel forpan. gelihte.

De ingenito fomite, of gecyndelicre  Digesta, i. ordinata, composita, uel
tyndran. 45 eaposita, enarata, geendebyrde.

" See Leo, ags. gloss. pag, 476, 33 and 2 So the MS. R. Wy

Bosw. pag. 77%. R. W.

222 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 223
Dignitas, i. honestas, excellentia, fas- tum, efwendla, wonung, wom,

tigium, weorpscipe, vel gepungen- wana, uel henpa.

nes. Dispersae, i. distribute, date, pa ge-
Dignitosa, i. mediocriter, medomlice. strodnan, uel tostencte.
Dignissimus, se weorpesta. 5 Disperatio,? ormodnes.
Digamma, uel uau, uel f. Dispertiens, brytniende.
Dinexa, i. uetusta, pa ealdan. Discoforus, discifer, uel stiweard.
Dinosci, intellegi, toenawen. Discolus,t. dificilis, contrarius, wiper-
Dimissa, i. humilia, abogene, to- cora.

slopene. 10 Discordator, discors, ungepwera.
Dilatio, i. mora, elding. Discoriat, hyldep.
Dilatum, i. adductum, amplificatum, Discolor, i. dissimilis, wngebleoh,

proditum, prolongatum, geyld. sine colore.
Dilatant, tobredap. Discrimen, i. periculum, damnum,
Dilatauerunt, i. aperuerunt, hi geo-15 _ orleahter.

penadon. Discriminale, uplegen, uel czfing.
Dilitum, gegniden. Discriminare, tosceadan, 7. diuidere.
Dilitiscendo, mipende. Disenteria, blodig utsiht.
Dilituisse, i. celasse, gedyrnan. Dissentio, discordia, uel geter.
Diligenter, willendlice. 20 Dissertitudo, astutia, gleawnes.
Dilectaque rura, and pa lufwende  Dissides, i. tardi, lete.

eardas, uel leofe. Dissiluit, descendit, gelihte, uel dis-
Diriuatiuum, deductum, seyriendlic. silit.
Diriguit, i. obstipuit, horruit, in-  Dissiliunt, toscutan.

duruit, ablyede. 25 Discidium, i. separatio, diuisio, ruma,
Diripio, i. rapio, abstraho, aufero, Discipulatus, lareowdom, wel leor-

eripio, ic etbrede, uel ie forgripe. nung.
Dirigit, i. regit, gerecep, extendit. Discretum, detractum, uel gesceadwis-
Dirigebar, ic wes gereht. lic.
Directanei, fordrihte. 30 Discretor, i. divisor, tosceadend.
Dire parce, i. contrarii doctores, uel Discrepent, distant, tosceadap.

repre wylfenne.* Discretio, i. diuisio, gesceadwisnes,
Diremptam, uastatam, uel genumenan. Discretus, i. modestus, gesceadwis.
Directi cailis, rihtes sipfetes. Disparuit, i. euanuit, gedwan.
Diro, grimre. 35 Dispari murice, ungemeecre wur-
Dirutus, i. erutus, ahryred. man.
Disceptant, lacerant, i. contendunt, Dispartire, tostenc.

flitap, disputant. Distenta, i. eatenta, apened, tobred.
Discerpit, lacerat, toslit, i. deworat, Distentat, tobrede.

carpit, ploceap, discernit. 40 Distent, i. separent, tostandap.
Discerne, i. diiudica, toscead. Discrepat, discordat, interest, tostent.
Dispectior, forsewenlicra. Distantes uires, i. discordes, tostan-
Dispensatio, dihtnung, brytnung, scir, dendum megna.

gedal, wel diht. Distabuit, aswand.
Dispendium, i. damnum, impedimen- 45 Disputat, i. tractat, estimat, contendit,

tum,. defectio, periculum, detrimen- uel flit.

1 Gf. pag. 194 1,3, 6. R. W. 2 Sie MS. R. W.

224 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 225
Disputatio, i. deceptio, seductio, con- Domuit, i. uicit, mitigaut, wylde.
tentio, beswicung, meditatio. Domui, hiwhredenne.
Distitutum, i. donatum, agifen, Dormitatio, hnappung.
Distinat, i. disponit, contendit, mittit,  Donatio, landbec.?
teohhap, asent. 5 Dona@ria sancta, i. sacrificia, halige
Dissona, 1. discordantia, incongrua, gife.
ungeswega, wel gehleopre, uelun- Dos,-tis, dotalis, i. wed, gifu, uel
gerade. feedren feoh.
Dissociabile, i. separabile, insociabile, Dosmui,® thorie.
ungeferlices. 10 Doto,-as, dono, uel gifu.
Dissolutio, towesnes, uel tolesednes, Dodrans, i. malina, egur.
dispersio. Dodrante, dreariende.
Discutiens, i. iudicans, querens, uel Draconarius, 7. uewillarius, signifer,
swengende. segnbora.
Dispono, ic geendebyrde, uel ge-15 Dulcis sapor,‘ i. dulcis odor, swete
fadige, uel todele. smec,
Distulit, i. moram fecit, tardauit, pro-  Dulcisone, i. blanda, weredre, uel
longauit, abduxit, ylde, elcode. wynsumre.
Districtio, rigor, strec.' Dulcifauo, weredum beobreade, uel
Districtior, i. rigidior, stiplicor. 20 swaesum.
Distortum, misbroden. Duicedo, werednes.
Diuexum, % inclinatum, pronum,  Ductili, i. leui, fusili, uel astrenged.
stephlepe. Dumus, i. spina, spineta, pyrne.
Diuortium, i. discidium, diuisio con- Dumas, spinas, uel grefe.
iugiorum, hiwgedal. [ung. 25 Duodeno solio, twelffealdum setle.
Diuinatio, prophetia, diuinitas, hals- | Duodenus apex, twelffeald gepungen-
Diuinos, ariolos, witgan. nes.
Diua, welig. Dure, i. pertinaciter, pessime, heard-
Diurnum, i. unius die, degrynum, lice.
uel deglicum. 30 Dusit, i. adduait, brohte, uel esti-
Diurne psalmodie, pes deglican mauit.
sealmsanges. Durus, crudelis, asper, stip, repe.
Diurnae asce, deghryne mettas.
Dolatum, 1. incisum, planum, hywyt. Ea intentione, on pa gerad.
Dolatura, i. lata securis, brad 2x. 35 Earundem, para sylfra.
Dolosus, i. insidiosus, fraudulentus, Ebur, i. 0s elefantis, a barro dictum,
callidus, inwitful, uel racenful, i. ab elefanto, elpenban.
Dolua, toroc. Eclipsis, i. solis uel lune defectio,
Docta uitrix, gelered ofer swipestre. onsprungennes.
Docta fastigia, gelerede xprotu. 40 Echinus, i. piscis, cancer, uel scel.
Domestica scissura, hiweudlic geter. Eculeus, stimulus, uel prypel, genus
Dote, gife. tormenti.
Donat, gewelegade, forgef. Ecclesiasticis dogmatis, ciricliere, doc-
Domat, superat, gewylt, temap. trinis.
1 Wright by an error printed: strat 3 Read: domui. R. W. :
REIWe 4 The MS. reads: sapa. R, W.
2 A charter, or deed of land,

226 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 227
Edazx, i. uorax, uorator, etol, gifre. | Egerere, ascrepan,
Ederetur, nasceretur, i. manducetur, Egentum, pyrfendra.
proferetur, wes geypt. Egestus, gebero.
Edes, i. templum, hofa. Egre, i. grauiter, dolenter, earfoplice.
Edendis dapibus, wtlicum estum. 5 Egella, gorst.”
Edita, i. alta, creata, formata, scripta, Egit, i. ducit, compulit, wree.
facta, instituta, nata, locuta, ad- gra, adlig.
nuntiata, roborata, uel gehigde. Elanguet, ablacode.
Edite, i. renate, renouate, reparate, _Electrum, i. sucus arboris, ewieseol-
constitute, uel gesettap. 10 fer, wed mestling.
Edilitas, xtnes. Elegans, i. speciosus, gratus, pulcher,
Edisserit, i, explanat, enarrat, ex- wynsum, wlitig, praecipuus, mag-
ponit, scripsit, refert, uel arecp. nus.
Edomitus, untemed, wilde. Elefans, y\pend.
Effatum, deed. 15 Elefantinosa, i. maxime, pere un-
Effarier, dicere, asecgan. smepan.
| Efferus, i. seuerus, ferox, immansue-  Elimat, i. mundat, expulit, eacludit,
tus, repa. forsweorfed.
Effeto, i. sine foetu, ebetato, debili- Eliminate, adrifene.
tato, euacuato, exinanito, ortydre!. 20 Lliquat, i. eaprimit . . . mutilat, mi-
Effeta, i. sine foetu, debilia, priuata, nuit, depremit, uel grint.
sine’ fructu, uel gelde, uacuata, Elimino, i. distruo limitem, foras
ineruata, sterilis, stulta. eicio, mortifico, expello, ic ut anyde,
Effecit, i. perfecit, fecit, geworhte, uel drife, uel adyde.
uel dampnauit. 25 Elideret, i. offenderet, ascrencte.
 Effectus, i. factus, operatio, portatus, Elisi, i. expressi, percussi, expulsi,
peritia, fered, uel geworden. afflicti, cesi, flagellati, ut apyde’,
Effectibus, %. operibus, monitionibus, uel ascrencte.
uel dedum. Elucubratum, ¢. meditatum, lucidum,
Efficax, hwet, i. citus, expeditus,30  euigilatum, accensum, purum, hlutt-
astutus, acutus, sollers, peritus, or.
arud. Elumbem, i. eneruem, aswunden.
Efficaciter, i. uelociter, caflice, scearp- -Eludit, i. decipit, beswicp, awegp.
lice. Elogium, i. fama, testamentum, uer-
Efficit, i. perficit, facit, he gefremep,35 bum, carmen, fanum, uel gyd.
uel gewyrcp. Elogia, i. munus, lac.
Effrenus, unmidled, uel unseled, Elbus, i. medius color, dyrcegreg,
Effrenate, amidludes. s. inter nigrum et album.
Effossis, i. ewulsis, ut aneddum, sub- _Elongo, prolongo, ic ylde.
uersis. 40 Eloquentia, peritia, getingnes.
Effoth, bat. Eloquenter, getynglice.
Effunde, i. sperne, sparge, trahe, Emarcuit, elanguit, ablacode.
ateoh, interfice. Emature, gepungenlice.
Effugentur, syn afligde. Emergat, i. exsurgit, eleuat, exit,
Effusione, on todale, 45 uenit, up amylp.
1 So read I. Wright has: ontydre. R.W. 3 See Rosw. 4y. R. W.
2 Gorst denotes a furze, erica, rubus.
R. OW.
; 16

228 LATIN AND ANGILO-SAXON GLOSSES. 229
Emeritus, i. ueteranus miles, gepung- Equitatus, ferdwerod?, wel eored-
en, prefectus. gerid, i. equitatio,
Emellus, wunmeagol. Equo,s maria, seypa, uel holmas.’
Eminentia, i. sublimitas, eacellentia, Erepta, uel abrepta,' i. sublata, ge-
celsitudo, oferhlifung. 5 ned, pa genumenan.
Emigraneus, i. uermis capitis, emi-  Erassis, leohtum.
graneum, i. dolor timporum, pun-  Erimius, hindbrer.
wonga sar. Erugo, i. uitium frumenti, uel ferri,
Emigrabit, ut asceadep. rust, om, uel tinea.
Empticius, i. emptor, uenditor, cepe- 10 Hrugine, i. rubigine, of ruste, wel
mon. ome.
Emptorium, i. mercatus, ceapstow. Erue, i. defende, gener, uel arede.
Emolumentum, %. lucrum, auxilium, Erumpunt, procedunt, up abrecap,
questum, uel lean, meritum la- fordbringap, toberstap.
boris. 15 Erumpens, i. exoriens, uphleapende.
Emulari, i. imitari, uel ellenwodian. -Eruta, i. distructa, up alocene, uel
Emulus, i. contrarius, gewinna, wiper- ahrerede,
winna, eefstig, wiperhyegende, emi-  Eructuat, i. a corde emittit, bylcettep,
nens. roccetep.
Emulatio, 1. dissensio, anhering. 20 Erubescant, ignescant, asceamen.
Emunctoria, candeltwist.1 Erpica, 9, egpe-
Eneruat, i. marcescet, aswand. Erpicarius, egpere. ;
Eneruus, %. sine uirtute, aswunden, Errabilis, uertibilis, hwerfende.
emortuus, Erratibus, erroribus, gedwyldum.
Eneruata, asleacod, asionad. 25 Eradicat, extirpat, up aluep.
Eneruatius, i. debilius, sleaclice. Essentia, i. aeternitas, natura, wun-
pweorlice. ung.
Eneruiter, waclice, turpiter. Estus, i. fluctus, accessus maris, unda,
Enistius, erpling. inquietudo, uel recessus, uel cibus,
Eoi magi, easterne tungelwitegan. 30 uel geter.
Eotenus, i. eo decreto, ordine, huc  Estuaria, fleotas.
usque, uel forpy. Ethereus, se roderlica:
Equanimiter, emlice, simili modo. Euaginat, uttihp.
Epulenur, utan wistfullian, welsimbl- — Euanesco, ¢. euaneo, ic fordwine.
ian. 35 Luertere, ahwerfdon, uel gehwurfan
Eques, i. homo equo portatus, sessor, towurpan.
ridda. Euernenent,® streawiap.
Equester, qui equitat, rede-wiga,  Euellet, i. eruet, alyft. h
uel -cempa. Euellit, i. eradicat, exstirpat, ut
que sonore, mid gedremum swege.40 _alucp
Equiparat, i. coequat, i. imitatur, E uestigio, statim, uel of laste.
assimilat, uel wipermet. Euidens, i. manifestus, patens, per-
Equipensium, efenwege. spicuus, certum, sweotul, gewis.
1 The Anglo-Saxon name for a pair of is written uel ab, which means erepta,
snuffers, uel abrepta. R. W.
2 Wright printed: ferd gerod. RK. W. 3 Perhaps an error of tho scribe for:
8 An error for equor. R. W. sternerent? R. W.
4 In the original over the E of Erepta

230 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 231
E uirgine, fram wepenleasre. Exesum, wel comessum, aholad, purh
Inermi, femnan. etan fornumen.
Euomatio, speowung. Exequiis pluribus, menigfealdum
Ewhalet, i. redolet, spiret, reddit, penungum.
abyft, fetet, wel stemp. 5 Exiliata, i. consumpta, wreesibe.
Examen... uel iudicium, rectitudo, Exigit, myngab, i. desiderat, requirit,
discussio, wel swearm. J cupit, cogit, intellegit, arefnap.
Examina, ti. iudica, uel proba, uel  Exitus, finis, effectus, terminus, egres-
amere,! sus, utgong, endestef.
Exauctorauit, deordinauit, gehende. 10 Exitium, i. periculum, forpsip, utsip,
Exagium, onmitta. mors, perdictio.
Exagonum, sixfeald. [erefte.  Exhibeo, i. porrigo, prebeo, tribuo,
Exametro heroico, sixfealdum leop- ic bryttie, dono, ostendo, ic bringe.
Ex aditis, i. ex ingressibus, of in- Exhilaror, ie beo gegladad.
ferum. 15 Ex integro, of anginne.
Exhaustum, i. consumptum, siccatum, Eximia, nobilia, insignia, healicu.
up abroden, pigrum. Exhilitas,> hlennes.
Euacuatum, aslacod. Exhibita, praeparata, gegearcod.
_ Exacerbatio, irritatie, abolgennes, Excidium, t. euersio, expugnatio, casus,
| Exactor, i. postulator, scyldleta, 1.20 ruina, uel hereteam.
monitor censum. Excidit, cecidit, uel gewat.
Exacerbauit, i. prouocauit, adflixit, Excipiatur, i. segregatur, sy fram
he tyride,? abealg, wel onscunede. asceaden. [wel arydred.
Examinasti, probasti, asude. Expilatam, i. conquassatam, apryd,
Exaticum, sixecge-bere. 25 Explicuit, i. formauit, uel ut aledde.
Exasperat, i. seuit, prouocat, uel Haquisitiores, smealicran.
abiterie. Extirpat, i. exterminat, eradicat,
Exercitiis, i. laboribus, studiis, bi- astifecad.
gongum. Exttipices, i. auruspices,$ halseras.
Exercet, i. parat, adiuuat, begep, 30 Extinctus, i. peremptus, occisus, mor-
fatigat, gearwap. tuus, adweesced, forpfaren, acweald.
Exercendo, to beganne. Extrinsecus, i. separatim, utene.
Exercitio, i. meditatio, gymen. Extricabile, unforfeored.
Ezxercebor, i. laboraui, ic dearf. Ezxsicat, agat. [serydde.
Exercitate, pwre getihtan. 35 Eafibulat, i. exsoluit, unspeon, un-
Exercebat, fremede, beeode. Ex passo, i. ex caleficato wino, of ge-
Exertum, i. sollicitum, edoctum, aper- weldum wine.
tum, nacod, nudatum, xwede, Lata, i. intestina, fibras pectorum,
exporrectum, expeditum, beneced. hostiare, gesen.
Exheredet, i. exalienat de hereditate, 40 Extale, rop, snedelpearm, uel smeru-
be yrfe weardige. pearm, wel beecbearm.
Exerere, i. euaginare, proferre, exer- Extra, i. ultra, aliena, alia, plus,
cere, uel abredan. praeter, uel fremde,
1 Cf. Bosw. pag. 7b. R. W. 4 After wwede the writer added: pes
2 Wright has: lietyride. R. W. uacodan, R. W.
® The glossator means: herastichum —...,4ne Suoseator altered exigitas to
(se. hordeum). R. W. , & Sic MS. R. W.

232 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 233

Expedire, i. narrare, insinuare, ca- — Exortatoria, memoriter, gemyndelice.
planare, soluere, gereccan. Exordia, i. principia, frympu.

Explicitus, liber, efficatus, from, snel.  Eortatio, i. monitio, doctrina, uel |

Expeditus, i. generosus, hilaris, for- trymnes.
tis, alacer, swift, promptus, para- 5 Exordinationes, misfadunga.
tus. Exorbitantes, i. circuientes, declinan-

Expedierunt, arefdon, uel reddon. tes, aswifende,

Expedita, gefremed, i. intellecta,  LExoliuerunt, i. tabuerunt, eruperunt,
prompta, proferta. corripuerunt, uel geswepredon.

Expediet, gerecce. 10 Excolit, colit, begep.

Expeditio, i. praeparatio exercitus, Expositio, i. tractatio, traht.
hergung, ferd. Explorat, i. inquirit... praedat...

Expeditionibus, exercitibus, fyrdum. uastat, hergap.

Expensa, i. substantia, census, deg- Explodit, atynep.  -
wine, 15 Explodatur, i. expellatur, sy ut aned,

Expenso, i. finito, gedale. uel awrecen sy.

Expertus, cognitus, i. probatus, in- Extorres, %. exules, peregrini, ut-
uentus, ongeten, onfunden, lendan, extranei, wreccean,

Experimentum, i. testamentum, uel  Extorti, apreste.
onfundennes. 20 Exprobatio, i. improperatio, obiur-

Expers, i. ignarus, alienus, sine gatio, edwit.
parte, imperitus, inscius, priuatus, Eaxcusorium, pauimentum, flor.
ordala. {nod. Excusetur, sy beladod.

Experiri, i. inueniri, cognosci, acun- _ Excusso, i. emuncto, excitato, uel

Experientia, ‘onfundennes. 25 — ascunad.

Exspectabiles senatores, pa medumest- _Excussor, accusator, wrohtberend.
an ealdras. Excussatio, lad, ladung, wel wroht.

Expresserant, i. assimilabant, uel Excubitores, heafodweardas.
arehton. Excussit, i. deiecit, fram aswengde,

Expressit, i. manifestauit, ostendit,30 uel todraf.
ut apyde,' wel awrang. Excussabile, ladiendlice.

Extentio, t. tenacitas uentris, tentigo, Excutere, asceacan.
gebind. Excussam, expulsam, asceacene.

Exter, alienus, fremde. Excliditur, i. eticitur, extra ponitur,

Exterorum, i. peregrinorum, utancum- 35 bib ut alocan.
enra. [end.  Exulat, i. captiuatur, perigrinatur,

Exterminator, uastator, westend, yt- eicitur, alienatur, fugatur, eapel-

Ex centro, i. ex medio, of midlene. litur, wreclastap.

Excessus, t. culpa, delicta, egylt, Kaul, i. peregrinus, alienus, utlenda.
mislimp, uel tyddernes, circuitus, 40 Exultat, i. gaudet, laetatur, gehiht,
bigas. gloriatur.

Hucesserit, i. culpauerit, fregerit, uel Ezcultatio, letitia, hihting.
forgemeleasap. Exugia, i. minctura, miegerne.

Excedit, i. superat, gepihp, oferstihp. Haxwutae, spolie, reaf, t. uestes mortu-

Excedat, oferstige. 45 orum, uel pelles ferarum, uel reaf-

Exortatus, geypped. lac.

1 Cf, elisi pag. 227 1.26. RW.

234 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 235
Exustus, i. spoliatus, forsweld, for- — Falcicula, lociscrn.
heped. Falcarius, i. faleiferens, uel falci-
Exundauit, i. inundauit, aweol. Sera, sipberend, wel mepre.
Exsumptuauit, pauperauit, geyrmde. — Falcastrum, i. ferramentum euruum,
Expulit, awearp, eiecit. 5 asimilitudine falcis wocatum, wudu-
Extrenus, ytemeste. bil, wel foddur.
Falsa imagine, lease gehiwunga.
Fastus,... elatio,... uel gepungen- — Falsi _nebulo, pes leasan scinlecan.
nes, uel gelp, wel arrogantia. Faiconus, hafocere.
Fasti flatibus, %. superbie flatibus, 10 Faleras, i. jactabas, uel gehyrste.
bledum. Falana, i. exercitus, multitudo mili- -
Fastidium, i. altitudo, odium longum, tum, cohors, preat, herig, fepa.
contemptum, uel nausia, uel eprot, Falarica, i. theca gladii, tele genus
.unmegnes, zmelnes, zlengnes, uel uel aste® grandis, uel lancea magna,
cisnes. 15 etgar.

Fastidia, i. arrogantia, superbia, Fausta adclamantes, i. alto canendo,
eprotu. uel herigend sang, uel lofsang.
Fasces, i. honores, dignitates, plagas, Fauor, t. fama, honor, testimonium

triumphos, eynedomas, uel aldor, laudis, laus, laetitia, wyrpmynd,
uel gegerla, uel godweb. 20 uel hliwing.
Fasce, i. onere, wel hefe. Fauorabilis, laudabilis, famosus, hlis-
Fascellas, weoningas. ful.
Fasellus, i. genus holeris, uel geneat. Fauus, i. fabe, uel beobread.
Faseacus, nomen auis, reodmupa. Fafamentio,? epungum.
Fabrefacti:m, i. ornate compositum, 25 Fauet, i. adulatur, oleceep, adiuuat,
uel ornamentum, uel gesmidodum. opitulatur, assentit, hyrt, uel con-
Fabrile, smiplice. sentit, placat.
Fabre, 1. perfecte, arteficiose, in- Fauillantium, yslendra.
geniose, creftig. Fauis, | hliwsast.
Fabafresa, gegrunden bean, s dicta 30 Fatidictu,t of sage.
quia molata est. Fatiscit, uel fatescit, i. euanescit,
Fabula, i. -bella,! spel, wel unnyt dissoluitur, desinit, discedit, lacessit,
spree. fordwinp, mylt, sweprede, aswand,
Factio, i. coniuratio, conuuentus, ius, ateorade, dissipat, deficit.
Sactiuncula, narratio, uelhosp. 35 Fatis, gewyrdum.
Factiosa, falsa, wrohtbora. Fatigat, gewece, uel drecce.
_ Facinia, hortan. Fata, i. fortuna, euentus, uel dicta;
Faccus, exercitus, here. locuta, gewyrda.
Falerato, i. ornato, uel fictitio, gered- Famosum tropheum, hlisfulne sigor.
od, gehyrste. 40 Famiiia, hiwreden, uel familiaritas,
Fallentis fortunae, wegendre geszl- eneoris.
ignesse, wel bepecendre. Familiarissimum, pone hiweupestan.
Faltum, embheped. Familice frugalitatis, hungerlicre
Falx, falcis, wingeardseax, rifter, gnepelicnesse. .
uel sicul. _ 45 Famulatus, peowdom.
1 The glossator means to say: fabella. 8 Fauamentio is altered to fafamen-
R. W. tio in the MS. R W.
2 =hastae, R. W. 4 Wright reads: fatidicum. R. W.

236 LATIN AND ANGIO-SAXON GLOSSES. 237 1
Fanaticia, godwrecnes. Ferna, slypresn. Fi
Fanatice, i. profani, hearhlicre, pes -Fertum, messclac, uel gehladen. Fi
hzpenan, uel templicre. Fertilitas, i. habundantia, westm- }f
Fanaticus, i. minister templi, futura bernes.
praecinens, uel ylfig. 5 Ferreus umbo, isen randbeag. t
Fantasia, i. imaginatio, admiratio, Feruentibus, i. festinantibus, onctten-
delusio mentis, reuelatio, multitudo, dum cretum. fi
fantasma, seinlac, uel hiw. Feruor, i. calor, wylm.
Farius, uel fah, 7. loquax. Fercula, cibaria, swesendo. fi
Farcire, i. fulcire, acrammian. 10 Feruidus, weallende.
Farra, i. triticum, frumentum, uel Feritas, i. crudelitas, ferocitas, in- |p
bleodu. clementia, duritia, repnes.
Farsa, 7. impleta, acrummen. Feriatus, pausatus, quietus, gerestad. |}
Faratorium, byres. Feria, weorcdeg, i. fando dicta,
Feralia, i. lugubria, mortifera, mor-15 quasi faria. i
talia, tristia, noxia, luctuosa, uel  Feriati dies, restedagas.
deriendlican, replican. Feribus, snasum.' i
Feraces glebas, pa westmbere tyrf. Ferinum, i. superbum, deorenum.
Ferratas acies, pa isnodan truman. Ferinis jubis, deorenum fihtum. 1
Ferale monstrum, replie scinhiw. 20 Ferri fodina, in quo loco ferrum }j
Feralis bestia, repe nyten. foditur, isern ore. 1
Ferres, i. sustinebas, pu poladest, Ferocitas,® uel erudelitas, rednes.
contuleras. Ferocia, i. crudelitates, repnessa. ]
Fere, i. admodum, prope, aliquoties,  Festis choreis, mundis, preatum, uel
pene, forte, uel repa. 25  sanctis.
Fereatis, i. quietis, restendum, se- Fesso stamine, i. lassato pondere, },
curis. wihte.
Ferunt, i. portant, fatentur, sustinent,  Fesiculatio, fisting.
dicunt, uel forpyldiap, urgatur,  Fespa, wesp.® !
prebent, bringap. 30 Femur, peoh, uel hype.
Ferrugo, uel ferrugineus, i. color Femininum secus, wifhad.
purpurae subnigrae, isengreg. Femineis, wiflices.
Ferruginem, i.rasura ferri, gesweorf. Feniceum, t. coccineum, rubrum, uel
Ferrugineo flore, omigum blostme, basu.
uel isengregum blostme, uel pur- 35 Fenisece, meperas.
pureo. Fenile, heghus.
Ferus, t. crudelis, immitis, durus, Fenus, ¢. lucrum, usura, uel borg,
repe. uel len.
Ferula, i. harundo, wirgula, uel nomen Fenerator, uel commodator, uel cre-
holeris, eseprote. 40 ditor, redditor, lwenend, uel strude.
Fermum, hala. Fefellit, i. delusit, wegde, uel be-
Fermentum, hef, uel beorma. pehte.
Fertur, 1. dicitur, ostenditur, uel wes —Fellitat, i. decipit, suggit, beswiep.
fered. Felici reditu, geseligum edhwyrftum.
1 Snas denotes: a spit, dart used in 2 Tho MS, has: ferocitas i. ferocitas.
war, uert, R. W.
R. W. 8 So the MS., for uespa.

238 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 239
Fellita, i. decepta, beswicenre. Fidibus, i. fidis cithare, strengum.
Felethi, fepehere. Fidi prepositi, getrywes ingehides.
Fetose, tudderfulle, teamfulle, wel Fida comes, %. fidelis, getreow ge-
tuddre. sipa.
Foetus, i. fructus, partus, filius, tudder, 5 Fiducia, i. confidentia, byldu.
b = Ei baldli ,
soboles. Miducialius, baldlicor.
Foeta, i. fecunda, plena, grauida, Fidei commissum, on treowe geleton.
eacenu, ; Figmenta, a plasmatio, mendacia,
galls coniunctus, gewered, 0 hiwunga, lignes, uaria figura, com-
uel pacificatus, amicus. positio,
Foedera, i. pacta amicitiae, wera, Figulum, tigele.
certa amicitia. ; Fit, i. contingit, euenit, uel sit, fuit,
Fedus, deformis, turpis, uel ful, uel uel erit, bip.
pudor. Fither, sneedelpearm.
Foedatus, fedus redditus, deturpatus, 15 Fixi, i. solidaui, firmaui, constitut,
uel geunwlitegad. ic afestnode.
Foedus, i. pactum, iuratio, coniunctio, Fialas, steapas.
were. Flammaticus, ligen.
Feda, i. turpia, uel polluta, ful. Flammeolum, i. umbra solis, sun-
Feculentus, i. fece plenus, drestig. 20  sceadu.
Fecundus, i. copiosus, fructuosus, uel  Flammeum, uel ligen.
habundans, uel tydriend. Flaminea, i. episcopali gradus, bis-
Fecundare, i. multiplicare, gewestm ceophadas, wel sacerd.
berian. Plammiger, ligberend.
Fex, i. uirus, uel drosna. 25 Flammicomos ortus, ligliccede ! up-
Febris, bryneadl. q springas.
Filatum, gearn. Flammicomis, ligloccum.
Filiscetum, gearnbed. Flammigeris quadrigis, ligberum
Fistulas, i. arterias, earpyrel. scridum, uel crgetum.
Fibra; i. uena, iecoris intestina, lifer- 30 Flauum, i. fuluum, rubeum, geole-
| _leppa, pearm. read, wel geolecrog.
Pibrans, hrysiende. : Flauescit, i. maturescit, glitenap, wel
Tibula, s. dicta quod ligat, cnep, geolwap, splendescit.
| sigl, spennels. Flaua cesaries, geola feax.
Finicium, i. coccinum luteris, beasu.35 Flaua specie, of gleteriendum, uel
Finistris, pyrlum. [gedal. scylfrum hiwe, wel doxum.
Finium regum, dorum actio, gemera Flaccentia,® contracta, aclungre.
Pindit, i. rupit, toclyfp. Flactris, i. pontibus, uel fleopomum.
Pinait, ids Jigurabat, hiwade. Flabra, i. flatus uentorum, bledas,
Firmator, i, adsertor, gesepend. 40 uel fabula.
Firmaretur, i. consolidat, wes ge- Flagitiosus, i. corruptor, criminosus,
trymed, wel gestapolad, wel gefest- manful.
nad, — Flagitia, i. uitia, i. spurcitia, fyren-
Firmo fulcimenio, trumre under- dada, mandeda, scelera.
wrepinege. 45 Flagrorum, i. flagellorum, swipena.®
1 An error for ligloccede upspringas, 2 So the MS. R W.
See the next word. R. W. 3 Wright has: swipera. R. W.

;
240 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 241
Flatus, i. uentus, s. aura, spiritus,  Fluxum, i. superfluitas, oferflownes.
procella, orop, uel epung. Fluxit, decurrit, manauit, fleow.
Flasca, g. flascumna, uel flasce, tryw- _ F'luctiuagampraedam, paypworigend-
en byt dicte, pro uehendis ac re- an hupa,
cendendis. 5 Foramina, pyrel.
Flagrantisfurie, byrnendes galscipes,  Foratoriwm, heardheawe, uel nafogar.
uel repnesse. ha oro, i. loco iudicario, uel ceapstreete.
Flegma, t. saliua, flegmon, g., horh, ota, i. confortata, uel sealf.
uel meldropa. Totus, i. nutritus, refectus, recreatus,
Fleumon, uel dicitur inflammans, i.10  calefactus, uel gelacnod.
infirmitas stomachi, magan untrum- — F’entona, pa wyllican, uel welle.
nes. Focarius, fyrbeta.
Flemen, -nis, flentium humor, tear. Focea, scolh.
Fleba, flyne. Focilat, i. reficit, gehyrt, uel gehlywp.
Flebiles, werendlice. 15 Foculare, heorth,
Flebo, flebilis, werendlic. Furnus, tynder.
Flebotomum, blodsex. Fodina, gylden weeg.2
Flecta, hyrdel. Fordalium, gesoden wyrtmete,
Flectit, curuat, inclinat, gebigp. Fomes, i. incendium, astula minuta,
Flexo tramite, inclinato, gebigdre20  tynder.
stige. Fomentat, lexnode.
Flores, blostma, s. nominati quod Fomenta, i. adiumenta, adiutoria,
cito defluant de arboribus. medicamenta, nutrimenta, uel sen-
Florescit, i. floret, blewp, crescit, tentia, uel swesunga.
grewp. 25 Fomet, feormep.
Florent, blowap. Fouet, i. nutrit, pascit, uel gehlywp.
Florei cespitis, blowendre tyrf. Foueae, seapes.
Floralia, pa blowendlican. Fouere, i. alere, auxiliari, gehliwan.
Floruit, grytte. Fouerat, i. educauerat, gehyrte.
Floriferum, i. blostmbere. 30 Folle bubulum, i. uas piceum, uel
Florigeri, blostmberes. hwite cylle.
Floribus, uel ornamentis, blostmum. Folliginis, belgum.
Florida tellus, i. florulenta terra, ollis, bledbylig, linus, mantica
blowende eorpe. Sabrilis.
Floccio, unriht. 35 Forcipes, tangan.
Flosculus, blostm. Forcelle, gefle, dictae quod frumenta
Fluctuat, i. uacillat, dubitat, anxia- celluntur, i. commouentur, unde et
tur, cogitat, estuat, worap. oscilla.
Fluctiuagi ponti, pes ypicndan ses. Fordalium, wyrta.
Fluentis, i. lasciue, i. galre.* 40 Forfices, reglsceara.
Fluido, i. fluenti, flowendum. Forpices, fexsceara.
Fluitent, flowen. Forsitan, i. forsan, fortasse, wen-
Fluuiali, flodenum. unga, wenis, uel wtigue.
Fluminei lauacri, flodenes pweales. Fouwessoria, dicta quod foueam faciat,
Flustra, i. unda, yp, xdwella. 45 quasi fouessoria, mattoc, uel hand-
Fluens, stream. spitel.
1 So the MS, not gabre. R. W. 2 A gold mine,

242 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 243
Fragor, i. strepitus tonitruum, fremi-  F'requens, celer, assidua, gelomlic.
tus, cyrm, wel sweg, sonitus. Frequentes, gelomlican,densos, multos.
Fraga, uel ofet, s. est terra fortis  Fressa, i. molita, fracta, diuisa, ge-
et inculta. grunden.
Fraciun, i. pumorum, streabergan, 5 Mretus, i. fiduciam habens, gebyld,
uel eorpbergan.' getruwad,
Fragmine, i. particulis, gebrycum. Frigesco, i. frigeo, algeo, ic cealdige.
Fraglat, i. odorat, odorem dat,  Frigens, frigidus, i. deficiens, gelidus,
stemp, stinep. uel brytende.
Fraglantes, i. olentes, odorantes, stem- 10 Frico, abstraho, uello, gebrytte.
ende. Frigida pestis, colewyld.
Frangenda, pa tobrytendlican. Frigi, berned, uel gehyrsted.
Fragiles honores, tyddre weorpmynt- — Frigula, i. uasa fictilia, inutilia, falsa
gras. dicta, ficta, inania machina, uel
Fragili bello, uel inbecilli, tyddrum 15 —_ unsope saga.
gefeohte. Irigor, i. timor, gelu, pruina, rigor,
Fratoribus, gestunum. bruma, hiemps, uel cele.
Fratricidi, broporsleges. Friuolus, i. mendax, fictus, ineptus,
| Fraus, s. dicitur quasi fracta fides, inutilis, leuis, bismerlic.
faen, mendacium, deceptio. 20 Friaura, wylm, uel hyrsting.
Fraudulenter, i. astute, facenlice. Frixa, brede.
Fraudauerat, uastauerat, beseyrede, Frixorium, %. sartago, cremium,
uel bedeelde. hyrstepanne, wed spxe, cocorpanne.
Fraudulentas, pa feenan. Friairi, i. coqui, bredan.
Fraudulenta, i. subdola, facenful. 95 Frons, hleor, uel wlita.
Frenarier, beon gemidlad. Frontes, qualitates, uel wlitan.
Freneticus, i. demoniaticus, amens,  Frondes, s. dicuntur quod ferant
insanus, gewitleasa. uirgultas uel umbras, geleafris,
Frendens, hnegende, fneesettende,2 uel bogas. /
uel grymettende, irascens. 30 Frondea, pa gepufan.
Frendit, i. stridet dentibus, irascitur,  Frondente, blowendum, spelndente.s
rugiet, grymettep. Frondescere, growen.
Frenus, mupberstung- Frondea robora, gepufe beamas, uel
Fremit, i. perstrepit, furit, rugit, helmas.
seuit, irascitur, indignabitur, grist- 35, F'rondet, comat, gewlitegap.
batap, ardet, flat, gemit, clamat,  Frondea ficus, %. frondosa, gepuf
grymettep. ficbeam, uel helm, wel rug.
Fremitus, i. mugitus, uel rugitus, Frondiferinemoris, helmberes bearu-
grymettung, uel bremung. wes.
Frequentat, uisitat, i. iterat, repetit, 4q Frondigeris coronis, helmberendum
gelomlecp. wuldorbeagum.
Frequentissimus,i.celeberrimus,brym- — Frondosis dumis, ramosis, gepufum
est. greefum.
1 In German the strawberry is called: 3 I read: spelndente, which is but an
erdbeere. QR. W. error of the scribe for splendente. Wright
2 In Old-English fnasten is met with printed: spelndene, and mistook it for
in the meaning of: spirare, flare. Cf. an Anglo-Saxon word, R. W.
Mave). 548, Gaw. 1702. R. W.
17

244 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 245
Fronduerat, greow. Funesta, i. scelesta, criminosa, wn-
Frondus, bog. hyre.
Frontialis, steorrede. (bald.  Funestus, crudelis, perniciosus, wel-
Frontuosus, i. curiosus, gemah, uel grim, unhere.
Frugalitas, 7. temperantia, parcitas, 5 Funeste, wedende.

spernes, gnepelicnes. Funiculus, modicum funus, rap, uel
Frugalis, largus, gifend. strenc.
Fruges, frumenta, ofet, westm. Luror enim animi cito finitur, uel
Frugi, parcus uti, gemetfest. grauius est quam ira, repnes,
Lrugifer, ubertas, westmberne. 10 woden, dream.
Frunculas, wearte, byle. Furuerunt, insanierunt, repegadan,
Frustrum, t. incassum, on idel. Furia, insania, amentia, wodscipe,
Frustrari, aidlian. repnes.
Frustratim, i. particulatin, minu-  Furunculus, mearp, uel ongseta,

tatim, sticmelum, delmelum. 15 wearte, wel byl.
Frustris, i. partibus, sticeum. Furie, burhrunan, repe.
Frustum, bita, dictum quod capiatur Furias, iras, repscipas, uel hatheort-

a fragmines nessa.
Frutectum, i. arborum densitas, uel  Furit, trascitur, wet.

ramus, pyfel. 20 Fusarius, trabs uinee, winbeam.4
Frutices, ramos, pyrne. Fusus, uel spin).
Frutex, frutecta, pyfel. Fusile, nitorium, leui ductili, gegoten.
Fuga, i. fugatio, fleam. Fusi, uel spinle, prostrati, gescende.
Fugax, t. fugitiua, fugiens, flygui2 Futile, %. inane, inutile, leue, labile,
Fugaces turmas, pa ecargan mengo; 25 _ tnstabilis, infirmus, bwiper.

uel ueloces. Fulcior, sustentor, ic eom embtrymed.
Fugat, flicp, ayfert, flymp. Fulcimentum, i. adminiculum, wrape.
Fugitiuus, i. interdum qui fugit, Fuleris, thoris, lectis, uel wrepstup-
* flugul. um, wel heofodbolstrum, uel
Fucus, deag, uel telg. 30 bedreafum.
Fugo, ic aflige. Fulgura, ligrese, uel ligas.
Fugus,® bece. Fulmine ictus, percussus, ligberes.
Fuligo, sot. Fullo, webwyrhta.
Fumus, rec, lig. Fuluum, flauum, splendidum, nigrum,
F'umigabunt, smeocap. 35  geolu, rubeum, rubicundum, fealu.
'umarat, reohte, reac. Fuluis metallis, geolewum andweore-
Funalia cerei, i. candela de cere, um.

wexcandel, uel /ucernarum stuppe. Furca, furcula (diminutiue), gefle.
Funalis, gemetlic. Furca, wearhrod.
Funeratus, sepultus, humatus, uelrew. 40 Furcifer, wearh.
Funebrem, luctuosum, heofendlice. Furua, fusca, nigra, deore.
Funestauere, maculauere, smittodan.  urtiua, clandestina, secreta, furtune
Funestissima, mortalia, pa deadlic- latentia, stulur.

ostan. Furtunum, fatum, gewif, wyrd.

1A bit; a small piece bitten off, 3 An error for fagus. R. W.

2 Here I read flygul, but s.v. fugitiuus 4 Here Wright passed over two pages:
tho seribe wrote: flugul. R. W. fol. 92v and 93". R. W.

246 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 247
Furfures, purgamentun farinae, Fundamentum, uel fundamen, s. dic-
sesceadan. tum quod fundus sit domui, stapol.
Fuscus, i. niger uel tenebrosus, deorec, F’undamen, stapol.
dungreg. Fundali stridore, liperlicum swege.
Fuscatus, t. denigratus, obnubilatus, 5 Fundatum, consolidatum, gestapelad,
asweartad, forsworcen, forpysmed.  Fundos, bocland, wel landrice.
Fusa,' spinl. Functus, usus, genotad.
Fusi, i. dispersi, confusi, uel gend- Fungus, spongus, dicta ab uligine,
gotene. swom.
Fustrum, semotu. 10 Fungor, utor, perago, ie nyttige.
Fusu, dictum quod per ipsum fun- Fungalis, luscinia, nihtegale.
datur quod netum est, spin). Future mercis, toweardes gestreones.®
Fundat, edificat, consolidat, construat,
- gestapelap.
1 An error for fusus, see also fusu. R,W. is no reason to do so, the word “swom”
is quite legible. R. W.
2 Wright printed “‘iwom?” But there 3 Here the MS. breaks off. R. W.

VIL.
ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES,
OF THE TENTH CENTURY.’
[Quod etiam iusti uenia indigeant.] gaudia, gefean.
quaedam, sume. uulnus, wunde.
patitur, polab. longa, langsum.
mala, yfela, _ experientia, afangdung.
pugnam, gewinn. 5notum, cup.
internis, pan incundum. ~ hoe plenam,® on pysse fulle.
exteriora, pa yttran. tempore, tyde.
mouent, styriap. iustitiam, rihtwisnesse.
numquan ita, na swa. nisi, nimpe.
perfecto, on full fremedum.? 10 miserendo, miltiende.
capitur, bip onfangen. lauet, apwea.
uictoria, sige. dans, syllende.
bello, gecampe. uirtutum, megna.
securus, orsorh, munera, lac.
Jruatur, bruce. 15 det, sylle.
inter, betwyhs. ueniam, forgyfenesse.
discordes, ungetwere. [De incognoscibilibus epigramma.]
contagia, besmitenessa. diuinorum operum, godcundra wurea.
serpunt, smugap. secretas, digle.
ipsaque, pa sylfan. 20 noscere, oncnawan.
1 These glosses which refer to Prosper’s Our text is based on a recent collation
epigrammata are taken from two leaves of this print with the MS.
of a miscellaneous codex of the British The first leaf (fol. 166r) begins with
Museum, Cotton, Tib. A, VI. According | Epigramma LXxxxvi, line 3 (Moguntiae
to the handwriting these glosses were — 1494), then follows 166¥, 165¥, 1657, R.W.
written as early as the tenth century. 2 There appears to be au é before the
Thomas Wright edited them in the Reli- d in fremedum. R. W.
quie Antique, Vol. 1; but did not take 3 The Latin text runs thus: Non esse hoc
them into his collection of Vocabularies. plenam tempore justitiam. R. W.

250 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 251
causas, intingan. de numero, of getele.
humanis, menniseum. auctus, geiht.®

non est, nis. impiorum, wrleasra.

possibile, arefniendlic. morbo, mid adle.

ingeniis, orpancum. 5 obsessis, ofsettum.

ullo, i. aliquo, mid sumre. praestanda est, to tipienne is.
intuitu, sceawunge. curd, caru.

speculatur, sceawap. medendi, lacniendes.

operta, oferwrigene- donec i. dum, pa hwile. — [haman.
qui multa, se fala. 10 in egroto corpore, on adligum lic-
ut lateant, pet dlutian.’ . uita, life.

seit, wat. : manet, wina).

placuisse, gelician. sic prauis, swa dweorun.
mens, mod. et uitiorum, and hleahtra.
imbuta, pet getydde. 15 mole, hefe.

simul, samod, grauatis, gehefedum.

omnia, ealle ping. sanctarum, haligra.

discit, leorna). pictas est, mrfastness is.

per, purh. adhibenda, to geareygenne.
operum, wurea, 20 precum, gebeda.

speciem, hyw. dum, pa hwile.

artificem, creftean. possibile, arefinendlic 4
immensis, ongemetum. mutari, beon awende. :
numeris, on getelum. horrescat, geandracige.
ponderibus, hefum. 25 noctis, nihte,

que suis, and his. deuia, of wege.

serutari, smeagan. lucis, leohtes.

ne cura, pet na caru. amor, lufu.

procax, dyrstig. conuersisque, gecyrredun. —
abstrusa, forditt. 30 nowam, niwe.

laboret, swince. mentem, mod.

nosse, cunnan, det, sylle.

et habere, and habban. gratia, gyfu.

datur, his geseald. qua, pere.

[De peccatoribus non desperandis.] 35 iustificante, gerihtwisiendre.
desperandum, to ortruwienne. [De prouidentia pacis.]

sed, ac. * conprehendenda, to getriwenne.
fiant, hi beon. doctrina, lar.

studiosius, geenyrdlicost.” inter, betwyh.

supplicandum, to biddene.? AO tribulationum, gedrefednesse.
quia, pi pe. turbines, dreohnessum.
numerus, getel. difficulter, earfoplice.
sanctorum, haligra. agnoscitur, bip oncnawen,

1 lutian means celare, latere, “ad” does ‘Here begins fol. 166". RW
not belong to the following word. Is it an 4 Wright by an error printed: arfen-
abbreviation of “pet”? R. W. iendlic. RW.

2 These four words are very faint in
the MS. R. W.

q

252 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 253
nec, nena. mearum, minra.
facile, eapelice. comes, gesid.
inueniuntur, beop gemette. inremota, s. inseparala, wnascyrod.
in aduersitate, on wiperwerdnesse. rerum, pinga. ‘
praesidia, helpas. 5 trepidam, forht.
dum non perturbant, pa whyle pe  breuem, sceort.

na gedrefap. uitam, lif.
discrimina, horhleahtras. domino, drihtenum.
pacis, sibbe. deo, gode.
praelia, gewinn. 10 dicemus, wel consecremus, utan halg-
nulla, na. ian 3
premunt, ofpricecap.l celeri, swyftre. .
exercere, began. uides, pu gesyhst.
diuinis, mid codcundlicum. rotatu, turnunge.
conuenit, gedafnap. 15 rapidos, swyfte.
armis, wepnum. dies, dagas.
consilio, mid gepehte. meare, uel pergere i, transire, faran.
omnes, calle, Sragilis, tyddres.
minas, peowwracan. membra, lima.
tranquillam, gedefe. 20 mundi, middaneardes,
et curtis, and carum. minui, wanian.
uacuam, xmtig. perire, losian.
mentem, mod, labi, beon ashliden.*
inbuit, lerd. fugit, flyhp.
et placidi pectoris, and gegladodes 25 omne, eall.

breostes, quod tenemus, pxt we healdap.
hospes, euma. neque .. habent, ne. . nabbap.
corde, heortan. cupidas, gredige. A |
quieto, on gedefre, uana, idelnessa.
adquiri, beon begyten. 30 mentes, mod.
in seuo, on repre. specie, hiwe.
turbine, preohnesse. trahunt, teap.
[Quod uerum bonum nemo perdit  inani, idelum.

inuitus.] ubi nunc, la wher nu pa.
inuitus, gencdod. 35 imago, anlicnes.
anittere, forletan. rerum est, pinga is.
temporalia, hwilwendlice. ubi sunt, la wher sind. +
[De quaerenda perseuerantia.] opes, speda,
crescere, wehsan,? potentum, ricera.
non cupiens, na gew...* 40 quibus, pam.
[Expliciunt Epigrammata Prosperi.|  occupare, gebysgian.
[Versus Prosperi ad coniugem suam.|  captas, gehiefte.
age iam, nu la. animas fuit, sawla wes.
precor, ic bydde. uoluptas, willa, p

1 So the MS. R W 3 The rest of this word is cut off. R. W.

2 folio 165 begins with the last line 4 So the MS. for asliden, RW.
of the epigram : de querenda perseuerantia.

R. W.

254 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 255
[Prosper de fide et moribus christi- mors, deap.
| anorum et martirun.] rapit, gegripp.

qui centum, se pe hund tweontiguin.' una, an.

quondam, geo gefyrn. homines, menn.

uertebat, wende. 5 undique, eghwanan.

aratris, sulum. bella, gefeoht.

ut geminos, pet getwinne. Srenunt, grimettap.

possit habbere,? mage habban. omnis, ealle.

boues, oxan. furor, hatheortnes.

uectus, geferod. 10 excitat, awehp.

magnificas, meerlice. incumbunt, onnhigap.
carpentis, i. curribus, on cretum. reges, cyningas.

per urbes, gynd byrig regibus, eyningum.

rus, land. innumeris, ungerimum
uacuum, xmtig. 15 impia, arleas.

fessis, gewehtum. sacuit, wett.

aeger, adlig. discordia, ungedweernes.
adit, geferd. si concluso, gyf beclysedre.*
ille decem, se tyn. superessent, to lafe weron.
celsis, healicum. 20 tempore, tyda.

sulcans, to cleofende. secla, worulde.

maria, s@s. posset, gyf mihte.

carinis, seypum. habbere, habban.

nune, nina. tamen, pehwhepera.

lembum, nauiculam i. ratem, bat. 25 occasum i. obitum nostrum, fordsip
exiguum, gehwedne. urne.

scandit, astihp. deceret, gedafnode.

ipse, sylf. Jinem, geendunge.

regit, styrp. uitae, lifes.

idem, se ilea. 30 quemque, gewhylene.

status, stede. uidere, behealdan.
| agris, ecerum. (na)m, (wit)odlice.

non urbibus, ne burgum. mihi, me.
| ullis, enigum. quid prodest, whet framap.-
omnia que in fine, ealle and on ende.35 quod longo, pet langum.
praecipitata, besccowene. flumina, flod.

ruunt, hreosap. cursu, ryne.

ferro, ysene. semper, symle.

peste, ewylde. inexaustis, unforhladenum.
Same, hungre. 40 prona, forp.

uinclis, bendum. Seruntur i. portantur, healdum.
algore, cyle. aquis, weterum.

calore, hetan. (m)ulta quod, . .la pet.
mille modis, mid [usend gemetum. uicerunt, oferswiddan.
miseros, fa earman. 45 saecula, woruld.

1 An error for teontigum. 2. W. 8 Here begins fol. 165%. R. W.
2 Sic MS. Cf. pag. 253 1. 24. RW.

256 LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES. 257

suis locis, on hira stowum. putent, wenap.

durant, purhwunedan. autem, soplice.

florea rura, blosmige land. grauis, swiert.

manent, wuniap. mansueto, mandweran.

nostri, ure. 5 sareina, byrpen.

sed non mansere, ac na purhwinedun. — dorso, rhigge.'

parentes, federas. ledit, derap.

uitam, lif. blandum, geswiese.

corporis, uel temporis, tide. mitia, pa lipan.

hospes, cuma, 10 colla, sweoran.

ago, ic droge iugum, nio.*

non, na. (to)ta mente, mid eallum mode.

ergo, cornestlice. deus, god.

necquicquam, on ydel. tota ui, mid ealre strengje.

in saecula, on worulde. 15 amari, beon gelufad.

nati, acynnedde. praecipitur, is beboden.

pereunt, losiap. uigeat, peo.

nobis et quibus, us and mid pam. cura, caru.

occidimus i. deficimus, we gewitap. secunda, oper.

uitam aeternam, lif ece. 20 hominis, mannes.

uita, life. sibi quisque, him enig.

ut mereamur, pet we geearnian. nolit, nele.

in ista, on pyssum. fieri, beon.

subeat, wel inueniat, becume. non inferat, ne onbelede.

requies, vest. 25 ulli, enigum.

longa, langsum. (uin)dictam, wrece.

labore breui, on secortum gedeorfe. dessus, gederod.

tamen, pehwhepera. nesciat, na cunne.

iste sit, i. est, pis is. exigere, ofgan.

forte, wenunga. 30(co)utentus, (g)edeef.

rebellibus, wipercorum. modicis, on gewhedum.

asper, sticol odde teart. uitae, forbuge.

rigidas 7. duras, hearde. sublimis, healic.*

leges, laga. haberi, beon gehiefd.

corda, heortan, 35
1 So the MS. R. W. 3 Our MS. ends with the line: Con-
2 Wright printed nio But this word tentus modicis uitet sublimis haberi, RW.

seems to be ioe or iuc. KR. W.

al ul 4 Y VY > Dp yt

ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY,
j (OF THE TENTH OR ELEVENTH CENTURY.)

| 7 Fulix, ganot.

| DE AUIBUS. Anser, hwite gos.
Aquila, earn. Canta,’ greg gos.
Arpa, eargeat.” Olor, swon.
Acega, wuducoc. 5 Porphyrio, fealuor.
Strutio, struta. Alacid,® ....
Griphus, giw. Aceipiter, goshafue.
Ossifragus, herefong. Herodius, wealbhafue.
Anatis, ened. Alietum, spearhafue.
Aneta, ened. 10 Suricaricis,’ mushafue.
Larax,® ened. Miluus, glida.
Ciciris,t .. . Butzus, tysea.®
Mergulus, scealfor. Ciconia, store.
Mergus, dopfugel. Grus, cran.

1 This Vocabulary is taken from a in a gloss of this description. It con-
manuscript in the British Museum (MS. tains several cnrions and not very common
Cotton., Cleopat. A. 111, fol. 76, 7°), in words.

a writing which may be of the latter 2 The meaning of this word is: a young
part of the tenth, or of the earlier part eagle, a hen-driver, cf. Leo pag. 352, 43.
of the eleventh century. It is preceded Rosw. translates it: a brazen gate (!). R.W.
by a rather copions alphabetical dictionary, 5 The glossator meant to say, I suppuse :
Latin and Anglo-Saxon, which breaks off Aneta ened, wel (= l) anaz (for anas) ened.
abruptly by a mutilation of the manu- Cf. the next vocabulary. R. W.
script with tke letter P (No. XI in our 4 No Anglo-Saxon equivalent is given.
volumne); and it is followed by Anglo- R. W.
Saxon glosses on Latin lives of saints 5 Read: Ganta. R. W.
(No. XI). The vocabulary itself, which © Without an Anglo-Saxon equivalent.
presents some points of resemblance in R. W.
its construction with that which is given 7 Cf. Siricaricis in the next vocabn-
in this volume as the Vocabnlary of Arch- lary. R. W.
bishop Alfric, seems to end confusedly 8 tysea denotes: buteo a buzzard. R.W.
18

260 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 261
Onocratarum,' varedumle. Cuculus, geac.
Cucu,? hieapewince. Tabunus, briosa.
Bicoca, heferblete. Musca, fleoge.
Fusianus,® worhana. Uespertilia, * hreapemus.
Rusunia,* nihtegale. 5 Scnifes, gnet.
Columba, culfre. Culix, myge.
Pudumba®, cusceote. Uespis, wesp.
Coruus, hrefn. Adlticus, * feldbeo.
Cornix, crawe. Apis, beo.
Grallus, hroc. 10 Pampilio, “ fiffealde.
Cornicula, cio. Crabro, hyrnetu.
Beacita,’ stearn. Nocticoraz, © nihthrefn.
Mursopicus,’ fina. Scarebius, 1° wifel.
Picus, higere. Blata, hrepbita.
Noctua, ule. 15 Bruchus, ceafor.
UOlula, ule. Locusta, gershoppe.
Rubesca, seltra.® Curculio, emel.
Sigitula, freemase. Cicada, hama.
Parra, cummase. =
Pumlameolmase! . 20 INCIPIT DE PISCIBUS.
Litorius, werna.® Platissa, floc.
Tilaris, lauwerce. Coclea, weoloc.
Cucuzata, irpling. Lucius, hacod.
Scutacus, © ragofine. Tinctus, sliw.
Turdella, prostle. 25 Coetus, hwel.
Merula, osle. Piscis, fise.
Scorellus, amore. Ballena, uel pilina, hron.
Cardella, pisteltwige. Delfin, mereswin.
Turdus, seric. Bacharus, mereswin.
Trutius, prisce. 30 Focus, seolh,
Birbicariolus, irpling. Porcopiscis, styriga.
Ciaus, edischenn. Isic," leax.
Pullus, cicen. Ostrea, ostre.
Sturnus, ster. Geniscula, muxle.
Florulus, goldfine. 35 Cancer, hefern.
Passer, spearwa. Sardina, hering.
Gallus, hana. Lupus, bers.
Gallina, henn. Murenula, 21.
ITirunda," swealwe. Castorius, hefer.
1 For onocrotalus. R. W. 9 or wrena. Cf. Bitorius in the next
2 Cf. Cucurata in the next vocabulary. vocab. R. W.
Ray 10 Cf. Scutatis in the next voeab. R.W.
3 Read fasianus or phasianus. KR. W. 1 So the MS. R. W.
4 Read ruscinia for luseinia. R. W. 12 So the MS. R. W.
5 For palumba. R. W. 18 Read atticus. R. W.
6 Cf. Beatica in the next vocab. R. W. \4 For papilio. R. W.
7 For marsopicus, R. W. 15 Read: nycticorar. R. W.
8 a bunting, emberiza, rubetra avis. 16 The glossator means searabaeus. RW.
RW. 17 Cf. Ysox in the next vocab, R.W.

262 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 263
Ludtrus, hotor. Anima, saul.
Anguilla, sme) 2). Corpus, lichoma.
Ceffalus, heardra. Caro, flese.
Sardina, smelt. Crementum, sed.
INCIPIT DE TEXTRINALIBUS. ° a i.
Textrina, telum, web. Gustus, birgnes.
Liciatorium, webbeam. Auditus, gehirnes.
Fussum, spinl. Odoratus, swe.
Radium,} hrisl. 10 Tactus, hrine.
Cladica, wefl. Caput, heafod.
Deponile, wefta. Uertex, hnol.
Nitorium,? . .. Pilus, heer.
Uertelum,® hweorfa. Coma, feax.
Colus, wulmod. 15 Facies, hleor.
Glomer,* cliwen. Capillis,!* loee.
Conductum, gernwinde. Cerebrum, bregen.
Plumaria, byrdiege. Caluaria, heafodpanne.
Stamen, wearp. i Occipitium, hnecea.
Subtimen,® aweb. 20 Capitium, forewerd swira.
Petica,® sle. Cessaries, lx, wiffex.
Apidiscus, webhoc. Lympora,'> punwonge.
Scafus,' uma. Uultus, anwlita.
Tala,* webgerepro. Frons, hnifol.
Claus,® teltre. 25 Supercilium, oferbruwa.
Fila, pred. Intercilium, betuh bruwum.
Lana, wull. Cilium, bruwa.
Cellus, flis. Palpebrae, brewas.
Leno, wifpegn. Oculus, eage.
Pedissequa, pinen. 30 Pupilla, seo.
Alibrum, reol. Papula, seo.
Calatum, toweht. Corona, beag.
Insabula,!° meodoma. Lacrime, tearas.
INCIPIT DE HOMINE ET DE35, es pe
ARTIBUS EIUS. Stes nee
i ue Mala, * ceacan.
Homo, mann. Mazilla, ceacan.
Antropus, mann. Mentem,* cin.
Chomos,'! middangeard. [geard. Auris, eare.
Michrochosmos, se lessa middan-40 Pinnula, ufeweard care.
1 For radius. R. W. 9 Read clauus. R. W.
2 No Anglo-Saxon equivalent given. 10 For insubula. R. W.
Cf. next vocab.: netorium, inspin. R. W. 11 The glossator means cosmos. R. W.
3 Read uerticillum. R. W. 12 Cf. Capilli, loccas, in the next vocab.
4 Or glomus, R. W. RW.
5 Read subtegmen. R. W. 18 For tempora. KR. W.
6 Cf. Pestica in the next vocab. R. W. M4 Read malue and mavillae, R. W.
7 For scapus. R. W. 15 For mentum. R. W.
8 Cf. Tara in the next vocab. R. W.

264 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 265
Naris, nasu. Auricularis, earcliesnend.
Columpna, eall sco nasu. Ungula, neg.
Pirula, forewerd nasu. Truncus, bodig.
Pennula, nexspyrel. Torax, breost.
Flegma, horg. 5 Pectus, breost.
Os, mup. Mammille, tittas.
Labium, welor. Ubera, spana.
Dens, top. Lac, meole.
Abum,' neopera welor. Cutis, sweard.
Gingifa,” topriman. 10 Pellis, fel.
Precissor, foreceorfend. Pulpa, lira.
Canini, hundlice. Uiscus, herpbelig.
Molares, eweorntep. Aruina, gelynde.
Lingua, tunge. ; Nerui, senwe.
Palatum, goma, 15 Uertibula, hweorban.
Faus,* hyge. Gartilago, gristle.
Sublinguae, undertungan. Costa, rib.
Toles, cyrula.* Latus, side.
Rumen, wasend. Oss, ban.
Gurgilio, protbolla. 20 Dorsum, hryg.
Anteriae,®> xdre. Terga, bee.
Collum, swira. Palae, lirycriple.
Ceruex, swira. Spina, lrygmerglip.
Gula, hyace. Radiolus, ribbspacan.
Humeri, eaxla. 25 Medulla, mearg.
Scapulus, sculdor. Spondilia, hryerib.
Brachium, earm. Sacra spina, se halga stert.
Subbrachia, underearme. Renes, xdran.
Ascilla,® oxtan. Lumbia, lendena.
Ulna, eln. 30 Genitalia, pa cennendlican.
Cubitus, fepm. Uirilia, pa werlican.
Manus, hand. Ueretrum, teors.
Pugnus, fepm. Calamus, teors, pet wepen, uel lim.
Palma, bradhand. Testiculi, beallucas.
Uola, handbred.* 35 Uiscera, inilve.
Artus, lip. Meatis,*> utgang.
Articulus, lipincel, lytel lip. Anus, becpearm.
Digiti, fingras. Nates, earsenda.
Pollex, puma. Ydropicus, healede.
Index, beenend. [finger. 40 Femor, peoh.
Salutarius, halettend midemesta Femina, innewerd peoh.
Inpudicus, wwiscberend midmesta Coa, peohscanca. 5
finger. Subfragines, hamma.
Anularis, hringfinger. Puples, hamma.
1Read album. An error for labrum; 5 Read Arteriae. R. W.
ef, p. 157 1.23. R. W. 6 For asella. R. W.
2 Read gingiuae. R.W.— 3 For faux. RW. 7 See Palma uext vocab. R. W.
4 Cf. Toles in the uext vocab. R.W. 8 Read meatus. R, W.

266 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 267
Genua, cneowa. Cicindilia,> weocan.
Crura, sceancan. Seuo, smero.
Tibiae, scancan. —
Surra, scanclira. INCIPIT DE ALEA.
Talus, ancleow. 5 Alea, tefl.
Planta, nipeweard fot. Calculus, teflstan.
Pedes, fot. Aleator, teflere.
Calx, hela, hoh nipeweard. Cotizo, ic tzefle, tesseris, teflum.
Uiscera, innepas. Cerea, weax. .
Cor, heorte. 10 Lampas, leohtfet.
Sanguis, blod. Candela, candel.
Cruor, dead blod. Papirus, taper.
Tecor, liuer. Agapis, degmete.
Puimon, lungen. Attomos, mot.
Splen, milte. 15 Agonteta, ellenlace.
Fel, gealla. Agen,* beogang.
Stomachus, maga. Aluearia, hyf.
Intestinum, inilue. Mel, hunig.
Onentem,' midhrypre. Om Apiastrum, beowyrt.
Cecwsn blind pean INCIPIT DE PLAUSTRIS ET
Ruina, lynde. DE PARTIBUS EIUS.
Ansa, hringe Plaustrum, wen.
Cingulum, gyrdel. Carpentarius, wengerefa.
Zona, gyrdel. 25 Rota, hweol.
Ardeda, brandrida.? Themon, pisl.
: ' Radii, spacan.
INCIPIT DE IGNE. Canti, felg.
Ignis, fyr. Axedo, lynis.
Fiamma, leg. 30 Jugula, incboga.
Flamina, bled. Axis, eax.
Scintilla, spearea. Altitudo, foper.
Scindula, scid. Tabula plaustri, wengehrado.
Cinis, asce. Tugun, ine.
Fauilla, ysle. 35 Modialis, nafu.
Fumus, rec,
Torris, brand, INCIPIT DE LECTULO.
Fax, pecile, blysige. Stratum, bed.
Isica, tyndre. Lectum, bed.
Ignarium, algeweore. 40 Sindo, scyte.
Luz, leoht. Ceruical, heafodbolster.
Silex, flint. Puluillus, pyle.
Lucerna, blecern. Armilausia, sere.
1 For omentum. R. W. 8 For cicindela. R. W.
2 brandrida seems to be the same as 4 An error for agmen = examen, a
brandreda: a fire-grate. It belongs to the swarm of bees. R. W.
next section. R. W.

268 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 269
Tonica, tunece. Butrus, hos.
Sagum, lwitel oppe ryft. Robor, ac.

. Cappa, sciccing. Glandizx,® sceren,
Capsula, hacele. Alba spina, hegborn.
Ependiten,’ cop. 5 Quisquilia, hagan.
Mafors, seyfele. Nigra spina, slagporn.
Sanctimonialis, uunne. Moros, slan.

Apiarius, beocere. Fraxinus, esc.
Fawn, beobread. Acerabulos, mabuldor.

. Gratis, brod. 10 Tremulos, wspe.
Altor, festerfeder. Acriuolus,’ holen.
Altria, festermodor. Beta, birce.
Alumnus, fosterbropor. Alnus, alr.
Vitricius, steopfeder. Abies, seppe, gyr-
Nouerca, steopmoder. 15 Ulnetum,® alorholt.
Pupillis,* steopeild. Uirecta, wice.
Albuga, flig. Uacedo, redisn.
Anguis, weternedre. Cerasius, cirisbeam.
Antidotum, drene. Cariscus, wice.
Auena, wistle. 20 Castaneus, cistenbeam.
Aruo, ierpland. Ramnus, coltetreppe, pefandorn.
Agella, lam. Ruscus, eneoholen, fyres.
Agapa, ciepeman. Taxus, iw.
Albium, mele. Torriculum, hyrwe.
Anagrippa, anlicnes. 25 Myrtus, wir.
Apotassia, fretgenga. Malus, apuldor.
Alga, war. Malum, sppel.
Antulum, ceac. Melarium, milise apuldor.
Antheuilus, ceacbora. Metianun, milise xppel.
Aucupis, fuglere. 30 Plumnus, plumtreow.
Rete, net. Prunum, plyme.
Amitis, lorg. Pirus, pirige.
Rudens, rap. Pirwn, pere.
Aucupium, fuglung. Pinus, pintreow.

INCIPIT DE LIGNIS. °° peal wie
Fagus, beee. Rubus, pyr.’
Populus, birce. Tribulus, brembelbrar.
Absculus, boc.* Acinum, hindberge.
Abellanus, uel colurnus, hes. 40 Bacce, bergan.
Auilina, hnutu. Sambucus, ellen.
Nucliun,® eyrnel. Timus,’° hep.
. 1 Read ependites. KL W. 6 Read glandis or glandes. R. W.

2 See pag. 31 1,24. R. W. 7 An error for acrifolium. KR. W.

3 An error for pupillus. R. W. 8 Read alnetum. R. W.

4 Mere the translator is not quite right, 9 The MS. has ‘pyr or ‘pyu’ instead of
for wsculus denotes net a beeck-tree but ‘pyrn’. RW. -
the eommon oak-tree. BR. W. 10 For thymus. BR. W.

5 Read nucleus, R, W.

270 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY Q71
Genista, brom. Coliandrum, '* celendre.
Oliua, elebeam. Mento, minte.
Uinea, wingeard. Cartamo, lybeorn.
Uua, winberge. Acitula, hramse.
Butros,' geclystre. 5 Acitelum, hramsancrop.
Oleaster, windeltreow. Accitulium, iacessure. }°
Ortus pomorum, apeldertun. Arniglosa, wegbrade.
Ortus olerem,? leahtum.® Cinoglosa, ribbe.
Folium, leaf. Ambila,'" leac.
Cortix, rind. 10 Horidanum, elone.'®
Radix, wyrtruma. Napis, np.
Ramus, twig. Pastinaca, wealmore.
Framen, spee- Seu britia, willecerse. '®
Roboretum, xeen. Bibulta, billere.
Apeletum, spracen. 15 Eptafolium, sinfulle. ,
Uiuorna,* wuduwinde. —— Maina,® hocleaf.
Eder,’ ifig. Marubium, hune.
Fursarius, wanabeam.® Mastica,®* hwit cudu.
Fraga, streowberge. Ostrum, wyrma.?*
20 Omagnum, *8 wyrmella.
: Papilluum, eolxsege. **
DE HERBIS TERRA. Parulus, ee
Apio,’ merce. Scilla, gledene. *>
Alium, garleac. Quinqueneruia, lecewyrt.
Serpulum, cropleac. 25 Quinqueuolium, fifleafe.
Ascolonium,® cipa.
Ungio,® yneleac. INCIPIT DE SUIBUS.
Alba, ! cipa, wite tun. Uistrina, stigo.
Duricorium, holleac. Aper, etfor.*°
Porrum, por. 30 Sus, swin.
Cerefolium, ceruille. Uerrus,?" bar.
Nasturcium, leaccersan, tuncers. 12 Maialis, bearg.
Ibiscum, biscepwyrt. 1° Scrofa, sugu.
1 Read botrus = botrys. R. Wr 18 Cf. Cockayne, Leechdoms ete. Vol. II.
2 An error for olerum. R. W. pag. 572 s. v. bisceopwyrt. R. W.
8 So the MS, for leahtun. R, W. 14 Coliandrum or coriandrum. R. W,
4 The glossator means to say: uibur- 15 An error for menta. KR. W.
num. R. W. 16 Cf pag. 11, 1.9. and pag. 3, 1. 22. RW, af
5 Read edera or hedera. KR. W. 17 Perhaps an error for allium? R.W. — 2
6 The spindle-tree, fusanum arbor. R.W. 18 Cf. Cockayne, Leechd. III. pag. 324,
7 For apium. R. W. 19 Cf. Cork. IL p. 410. RW.
8 For ascalonium, R. W. 20 Read malua. R. W.
9 Ungio for unio. R. W. 21 See Mastix in the next vocab, R.W.
10 Alba sc. unio. R. W. 22 See Cock. IL pag. 410. R. W.
11 Wéte is an error for hwite or white. 23 Read origanum, R. W.
Half of the n in ¢un is eut off. The scribe 24 Cf. Cock. LIL. pag. 324. R. W.
| wrote tuncers, I suppose. Cf, Nastureium. 25 Cf. Cock. TI. pag. 388, R. W.
| RW. 26 Read eofor, R. W.
| 12:-The MS. has tune, R. W. 27 = werres. RK. W.

272 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 273

Porcus, ferh, Lima, mylenstan, feol.

Porscaster, for.’ Cultellus, seax.

Forda, gefearh sugu. Hasta, spere.

Ausungia, rysle, Sicca, cultur.®

Perna, flicce. 5 Uomer, scer.

Larda, spic. Uatilla,’ ferrece.

Lucanica, mearg. Boratorium, byres.®

Bruncus,? wrot. Rotum, uel taratrum, timbor.

tus, rop. Desile, bor.

Suesta, swina swapu. 10 Olatrum, scafa.

Seta, byrst, Runcina, locor,

Bubullus, swan. Lerebellus,® ...

Extale, snedel. Lynibor,® ...

Interamen, inelue. Pila, popor.
M 8B

ORES AEE 15 INCIPIT DE FRUGIBUS.
INCIPIT DE METALLIS. Orden) bere.2°

Obrizum, smete gold. Triticum, hwete.

Aurum, gold. Singula,"' ryge.

Aurifex, goldsmip. 20 Faar, spelt.

Argentum, seolfer. Spica, ear.

Auricalcos, grene ar, mestlinc. Aresta,'* egle.

Aes, ar. Calmum, windelstreow.

Succinum, gler. Parirus,'* fleawyrt.

Ferrum, isen. 25 Ululatus, wulfagepot.

Plumbun, lead. Grues, gryt.

Stagnum, tin. Iuuencibus,'* risepyfel.

Aurifodina, gyldingwecg.* Inbilium, leohtleap.

Metallum, clympre. Botre, xpro.

Faber, smip. 30 Peana, lecp.*®

Officina, smippe. Coluber, snaca.

Follis, blestbelg. Stiba, handle.

Cudo,® anfilte. Aaxima, stoc.

Forceps, tang. Mosiclum, ragu.

Carbo, col. 35 Subsiciua,’® wscapo.

Malleus, hamer. Exigia,” gesanco.
1 for, fearh denotes a little pig, a far- 10 The scribe by an error wrote twice:

row, Germ, ferkel. R. W. ordeum, bere. R W.
2 An error for truncus = proboscis. R.W. 41 The writer means to say: secale. R.W.
8 Read ilium or ilia. R. W. 12 For arista. R. W.
4 Cf. pag. 241 117, R. W. 1 An error for papirus, I suppose.
5 Cudo means to beat, to coin, stamp, _ fleawyrt is called in Latin: psyllium. RW.

R. W. 14 An error for iuncis. R. W.

8 Taken from Lat. culter=sica. R.W 15 Perhaps an error for paeonia (2).
7 For uatillum or batillum. R, W. ecb’ I do not understand. R. W.
8 byres denotes: a burin, an engraver’s 16 Read subseciua, R, W.

tool. R. W. 17 Read exugia or exsugia, R. W.
9 The Anglo-Saxon equivalent is wanting.

RW.

J
Q74 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 275
Grabra,' gat. Astu, feecne. |
Uordalium, leste. Adridens,? tyhtende.
Gergenna, sticca. Alitus, pm.
Cornas,? geap. Aueit,'°aweg ferep.
Misarius, steda.> 5 Aquile, segnas.
Equa, mire. Adclinas, toheald.
Equus, hors. Adrogans,...11
Cabullus,* hengest. Agem,.+.1
Burdus,? seamere. Adsciti, gegaderade.
Peducla, lus. 10 Augustum, brad.
Ascarida, hnitu. Bucecum,'® dysig.
Ladasca, pie. Balus, embrin.18
Ursie,® sweorhnitu. Bona, stoppa.14
Mulus, mul. Bodonicula, amber. 15
Asina, eosol. 15 Ureius, handwyrm.
Camellus, oluend. Briensis,16 teter.
Arimentarius,’ hierde. Balsis, isenfeter. 17
Arimentum, hiord. Bulla, sigil.
Boua, oxa. Balsus,13 wlips,
Antile, heahfru. 20 Blessus, stamor.
Uacca, eu. Batuitum, gebeaten.
_ Foetus, mele. Broel, ense.19
Uitulus, cealf. Broelarius, ediseweard.
Taurus, fearr. Buculus, randbeah.
Uecta, enwintre. 25 Byrseus, lypenwyrhta.
Laudaris, steor. Caprea, ra.
Uolio, fald. Capre,* gat.
Aubobuleus, oxnahyrde Caper, heefer.
Priueta, priwintre stcor. Edum,*° tiecen.
7 30 Iircus, bucea. -
INCIPIT NOMINA SECUNDUM  Titula, gataloc.*!
ORDINEM LITTERARUM. Titurus, gatahierde.
Acris, from. Calear, spura.
Alacris, snel, blide. Cuspis, gad.
Ansxius, sorgiende. 35 Catesta,*® gelep.
Appetitus, gitsung. Uenator, hunta.
1 An error for capra. R. W. 18 See pag.9 1.18 and pag. 192 1. 14.
2 Read coruus = curuus, R. W. R, W.
3 misarius = emissarius (equus). R. W. 14 Cf. pag. 9 1. 19 and pag. 195 1, 2t.
4 So the MS. R. W. R. W.
5 Read burdo. R. W. 15 Cf. pag. 195 1,20. R. W.
6 See Urcius pag. 275 1.15. BR. W. 16 See pag. 9 1.31. R. W.
7 or armentarius. I. W. 17 Cf. pag. 8 1. 14 and 24; pag. 192
8 An error for ouile. R. W. 113. R. W.
9 Anerror for alliciens, I suppose. R.W, 18 An error for: balbus. R. W.
10 = auchit, R. W. 19 Of. pag. 9 1. 85: broel edise and
11 Here the glossator gives no Anglo- pag. 196 1.29. R. W.
Saxon equivalents. R. W. 20 Read edus = hoedus. R. W,
12 The scribe seems to mean: bucco. 21 Cf. pag. 51 14. R. W.
R. W, 22 Cf. pag. 10 1.34. RW.
19

{
{
276 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. Q77
Uenabula, .. 1 ‘ Pistrilla, lytel cofa.
Molosus, rophund. Pristris,> dege.
Unfer, grighund. Panis, Waf.
Bruccus, reec. Paxmatium, bradhlaf.
Celox, ceol. 5 Sparsum, daag.
Capsis, cist. Sparsio, dages hlefpe.
Colonus, gebur. Tinipa, gebyrgen.
Cistula, spirte. Palagra, xcilma.
Colobium, hom. Pironis,\...
Cacabum,* citel. 10 Pastula,® ongseta.
Lenes,? hwer. Papula, wearte.
Lancona, cille. Punctus, brord.
Sartago, bredingpanne. Pugillaris, gyrdelbred.
Olla, greoua. Plutecus, apa.}*
Patella, patella. 15 Pendera, fugelint.12
Camos,* swol. Pansa, scaffot. %
Scalpellum, bredisen. Paranimphus, dryhtmon.
Capitium, heafodsmel. Pronuba, hadswepe.
Condicio, redin. Sponsus, brydguma.
Clauicularius, cegbora. 20 Sponsa, bryd.
Cicur, manpweere. Thalamus, bry dbur.
Crocus, gzle, geolo. Nuptiae, iemung.
Camisa,® ham. Sibba, feresoca.
Calta, redeclefer. Sarcum, weodhoclu.
Sarcio, ic supe. 25 Scalprum, bor.
Sarcidis, geseped is. Sternutatio fnora.
Oscida,® totrida. Tussis, hwosta. d
Omelias,? sprece. Serina,14 meremen.
Ortodoxos, wuldorlic. Soccus, slypescos.
Onix, blere. 30 Subtalaris, steeppescos.
Caluus, calo. Sandia, wyrt.15
Recalbus,8 upfeax. Stirillum, buccanbeard.
Procuratio, scir. Stabula, siota.
Patrocinium, mundbyrd. Saginatum, iemested.
Parsus, geroscod. 35 Tinctorium, telgung.
Plumacium, langbolster. Tyro, cempa.
Pistrinum, cofa. Tibialis, banrift.
1 The writer omitted the Anglo-Saxon 9 Sic MS. R. W.
translation. R. W. 10 Read pustula. R. W.
2 Read cacabus. R. W. 11 Read phitecus (an error for pithecus).
® An error for lebes. 2. W. Cf. pag. 89 1. 22. R. W.
4 The glossator means to say: cauma 12 I doubt whether the MS. has fugelint
or caumos. Cf. chaumos pag. 12 1. 43, ot fugelim, R. W.
RW. 18 Cf. pag. 27 1.37. R. W.
5 = camisia. R. W. 14 Read Sirenes. R. W.
6 Read oscilla. RK. W. 15 Of, pag. 281 1.29. R. W.
7 Or homilias, R W.
8 = recaluus. RK. W.

i 278 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. Q79
Tricilo, scora.’ Tabetum, cecin.18
Torax, feolufor.2 Toxi,14 pang.
Tenticun, spinde). Triligium, prielig hregil.
Trulla, scofl. Tus, inbernis.
Soporatus,? gewyrsmed. 5 Tibicen, pipere.
Titillatio, kitelung. Tubicen, bemere.
Scabellum, windfona. Villinguae, tuddor.
Sella, sotol. Tertiana, \enctelad], 15
Subsellium. scamol. Tridens, mettac.
Stomachus, ...* 10 Zubulo, fealo. 16
Sambucus, saltere. Talpa, wund.17
Stronius,> dropfag. Tolia,?3 cyrnel.
Balidus, duon.® Uoluula, hymele.
Salamandra, weternedre. Ulmus, helm.
Scutwn, sceld. 15 Uincus,19 mistellam.
Scutarius, sceldwyrhta. Uadimonium, borgwed.
Sandix, wad. Uotibus, esteful.
Stiria, gecele. Ultro citro, hider and pider.
Sinus, wellere. Uestiarius, hreglweard.
Singultum,” gescea. 20 Exnado hior,*® collecti.
Sceda, teah. Exenodochia, susceptio peregrinorum.
Salum, sege.® Ymnun, lof,
Simfoniaca, belune.® Ypoteseo bassio, scirnis.
Senecen, .. .10 Nicalalbum, milise seppel.2t
Talunbus, gescaldwyrt.'! 25 Passtellus,*? hunigeppel.
Uarix, ompre. Aratrum, sulh.
Millefolium, gearwe. Arua, yrpland.
Urtica, netele. Juger, ioc.
Scirpia,* lefer. Seges, weer.
Foenum, heg. 30 Sulcus, furh,
Stipula, healm. . 7
Maitor’um, iotsld. INCIPIT DE DOMIBUS.
Taber, syl. Domus, hus.
Tegorium, lytel cyte. Aulea, heall.
Tapeta, reowu. 35 Uestibulum, cauertun.
1 Cf. Bosw. 601, R. W. 18 Cf, pag. 60 11, R. W.
2 Cf. pag. 51 1,16. R. W. 14 Read toxicum. R. W.
3 An error for suppuratus. R. W. 15 So the MS., instead of lenctenadl.
4 The scribe omitted the Anglo-Saxon RW.
equivalent. R. W. 16 Cf pag 52 1.11. R. W.
5 Read sturnus. Of pag. 48 1.19, RW. 17 Tread wund vot pund as Wright
© Cf, pag. 192 Lo. R. W. printed, Cf. pag. 49 1.39. RW.
1 Read singultus R. W. 18 Read toles. R. W.
8 Cf. pag. 45 1.5. RW. 19 Read uisewm, Mistellam means : birds-
9 Cf. pag. 471.12. R. W. lime made of the mistletoe. I. W.
10 No Anglo-Saxon translation given. 20 Read Erenadochior, collecti (sic!) e
RW. Xenodochia ete, KR. W.
11 Cf. pag-50 1.2. R. W. 21 Cf. Bosw. 461. R. W.
2 Read seirpea. BR. W. 2 Read pastillus. RK. W.

I
280 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY, 281 |
Camara, hrof, Serum, hwag.
Paratica, first. Caluiale, calwerbriw. !°
Partica,’ winbeam. Pultum, briw.
Tignus,? reefter. Coclear, cucere. 11
Trabs, beam. 5 Clerius cibus, wyrtmete.12
Paries, wah. Quadripertitum, cocormete. 13
Laquear, resn. Uiuertitum, ponmete. 14
Tignaris, hrofwyrhta. Calipeatum, heting.
Pauimentum, flor. Obestrum, beost.
Obstupum,’ feorstupu. 10 Juta, awilled meole.
Ualua, duru. Ocastrum, gemenced xg.
Sponda, hobanca. Offa, sticce.
Spondeus, benc. Cachar,15 lira.
Postes, durstodl. Seruiunculos, forglendred.
Limen, persewald. 15 Reunculos,16 lundlaga.
Superliminare, oferdyre. Pincerna, byrele.
Spatula, bed. Taberna, winern.
INCIPIT DE MENSA. ei cenwe win.
Mensa, beod. 20 Merum, hluttor win.
Discus, dise. Dulcisapa, awilled win.
Catinus, scutel. Uinum conditum, gewyrtod win.
Parabsidis,s gabote. Defrucatum,\7 gesweted win,
Uarsalis,> sealtfet. Defecatum, ahlutrod win.
Uas buteri, buterstoppa. 25 Mulsum, medo.
Butirum, butere. Celia, ealo.
Lac, meole. Ceruisa, 13 swatan.
Uerberatum, fliete. Pollis, grut.
Lac tudiclum, geprofen fliete. Sandix, wyrt,19 |
Lae coagolatum, molcen. 30 Prandium, undermete.
Uerberaturium,’ pwiril. Cena, wfenmete.
Sinum, eyrin. Uiciolum, ®° cruce.
Caseum, cyse. Uescada, mundlan. 21
Calmaria,' cealfre. Manile, \euil. 4
Calmum,® molegn. 35 Alueolum, treg.
Calmilla,? lim. Maniteorium, ?? handlind.
1 Read portica or porticus. R. W. 15 Of. pag. 42 1.27, R. W.
2 Read tignum. R. W. 14 Wright printed: ronmete. R. W.
% For obstipum. R. W. 15 Aun error for caro, I suppose, which
4 The glossator means paropsis. K.W. Was originally written charo. R.W.
5 Read was salis. R. W. 16 Read renunculus. R, W.
6 Read werberatorium. R W. 17 Read defrutatum. R. W.
7 The writer means to say: caluaria 18 = cereuisia, R. W.
cealfre (= calwer). R W,. 19 Cf. Sandix pag. 277 1.31. R. W.
8 An error for galbanum. R. W. 20 The scribe seems tv mean vwicti-
9 Or calamilla. R. W. lum = fictilum or fictile. R. W.
10 Cf. Bosw, 214. R, W. 21 Cf, pag.52 1.35. R. W.
11 Or eucelere. Cf. Bosw. 22t, R. W. 22 Read manutergium handlin, R.W.
32 Cf. Bosw. pag. 96, R. W.

282 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 283
Matile,’ sceat. Choors, tun.12
Tabulamen, pille. Corus, preat.
| Patera, hnepp. Sella, sylla.
Cucumus,? popei. Pella, radolfelt.
Pecten, camb. 5 Carpella, sadolboga.
Melle dulci, leoht beor. Cicer, bean.
Ciatum,® steap. Coreum,18 hyd.
Fiola, bledu. Cassidile, pung.
Ciatus, bolla. Coruis, 14 mand.
Delumentum,* pweal. 10 Cornicen, hornbora.
Poculum, wegi. Culinia,15 coc.
Antulum, ceac.> Coquina, cycene.
Annona,® nonmete. Cacobatus, hrum.
Origia,? suntreow. Comicus, scop.
Cacista, hwite clefr.s 15 Melopius, leohtwyrhta.
Cuba,® tunne. Conquilium,16 weoloc,
Doleum,'© byden. Celeps, hegsteald man.
Colicus, eoforprote. 11 Calearium, scoh.
Callus, war. Cancer, stalla.
Clamidis, godweb. 20 Concern,' hafern.
Frigus, cele. Cartilago, leoces heafod.
Calor, heto. Cliens, gepofta.18
1 Read mantile. R. W. 10 = dolium. R. W.
2 For cucumis. R. W. 11 Eoforprote is called in Latin car-
8 Read ciatus or cyathus. R. W. lina acaulis. R. W.
4 Sic MS ; not delamentum. R. W. 12 Cf, pag. 14 1.41, R. W
5 See pag.6 1.12. R. W. 13 = corium. R. W.
6 Annona denotes: income, revenue. 14 Read corbis, R. W.
Is Annona au error for Coena? 15 Read culina. R. W.
RW. 16 Read conchilium. R W.
7 Wright printed oxigia. R. W. 17 An error for cancer. Ik. W.
8 See pag. 111.7. R. W. 18 For the remainder of this MS. sve
9 Read cupa, RK. W. No, XI R. W.

IX.
1 r z
ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY,
OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY.
|
|
Alacid, mew, uel alcedo.'®

Vi 2 , \

NOMINA UOLUCRUM. Accipiter, goshafoe, wel aucarius.
Aquila, earn. Herodius, wealh hafoc, uel falco,
Arpa, earngeat.” uel capus.
Griphus, giow. 5 Hetum, spearhafoc.
Ossigra, gos.* Siricaricis, mushafoc. !
Cignus, elfetu.t Miluus, wel garrulus, glida.
Mergulus, dopfugel.® Ciconia, store.
Fulix, ganot.® Grus, eran.
Aneta, ened. 10 Onagratulus,raradumbla, pet his pur.
Uel anaz,' xned. Cucurata, hleapewince.
Anser, uel ganra,® hwit gos. Acegia, suite.”
Ganta, uel auca,® greg gos. Fursianus,!* worhana.
Olor, swann. Luscinia, nihtegala, uel achalantida.

1 This vocabulary is taken from a 6 The word is interpreted as meaning
manuscript in the Royal Library at specially the pen-duck, but it seems to
Brussels No. 539 (now No. 1829). It have been used as a general term for a
contains fewer classes of words than the sea-fow]. Ganotes bed = the ganot’s bath,
other vocabularies, and those words are was a common poetical term for the sea.
chiefly on Natural History and Anatomy ; 7 Wright has uelanaz, ened. For anaz
but as far as it goes, it is more copious. read anas. R. W.

(Our text is based on a recent collation 8 The words wel ganra are added in
made by Dr. A. Holder, of Carlsruhe.) R.W. another hand. A. H

2 Wright printed earngeap. Cf. pag. 258 9 The second g in grag corrected from c.
La RW. auca is added in another hand. A. H.

3 Of. pag. 258 1.8 ossifragus aud 259 10 These two words are added in another
1. 7 accipiter. The glossator meant to hand. A. H.
say, ossifragus, goshafoe. R. W. 11 Cf. pag. 259 1.10. R. W.

4 Cf. pag. 35 1.36. R. W. 12 Cf. acega pag. 2581.5. RW.

5 Literally, a dipping fowl — the moor- 13 An error for fasianus. Cf. pag. 260
hen; still called in Dutch; doopvogel, be ee i. We

286 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 287
Columba, culfre. Hirundo, swealewe.
Palumba, cuscote,’ uel wuduculfre.? — Noclicorax, nihthreefn.'5
Corwus, hrefn, uel corax. Ardea, hragra.
Cornix, crawe. Diomedia, gr. uel herodios,'4 swan.
Cornicula, eyo, uel graulas 5 Turdella, scealfor.
Gralus,* hroc. Mergula, scealfor.'®
Beatica, tearn.s Butio, cyta.'7
Marsopicus, fina, uel ficus. Soricarius, bleria pyttel.!*
Picus, higera, uel gagia. Bubo, huf.
Noctua, ule, uel strix, uel cauanna.10 Pellicanus, stangella and wanfota.
Rubisca, salthaga, wel rudduc.® Ortigometra, segescara,'9
Fringilla, fine. Coturnix, erschen.
Sigatula, frecmase. Philomelia,*® nihtegale.
Parra, colmase. Ciupella, hulfestran,®*
Parrula, spicmase.? © 15 Ismarus alietum, spearhafoe.
Bitorius,s wrenna, uel pintorus. Uiperina, nedderwinde.
Tilaris, lawerce, uel alauda. Scorellus, clodhamer and feldeware,
Ficitula, sugga. uel bugium.
eer regotne. [DE NAUE ET PARTIBUS
erula, prostle. 20 EJUS\2
Cardella,? linece. ‘J
Turdus, scric. Gubernio, i. steora.2?
Strutio, pryssce.!° Gubernator, steorman.”
Cuculus, geac, uel ciculus, tucos, 25 Nauta, repra.
Birbicaliolus, eordling1 uel tanticus. Nauis, scip.
Pullus, (cy)cen.!® Archiromacus, swift scip.
Ornithia, fugelas, wel orneas. Scapha, srendscip.
Stirnus, ster, uel fulia. Barca, flotscip.
Passer, spearewa. 30 Liburna, hule.
Gallus, coc. Dromo, wxse.*4
Gallinaceus, i.!° capun, capo.'* Pontonium, flyte.
Gallina, hen. Trabaria, t. caudex, punt, t. ponto-
Ornitha, gr. benn. nium.
1 Still called, in different parts of the 15 nm in hrafn corrected from m, A. H.
country, cushots or cowshots. 16 Cf. pag. 258 1.13. R. W.
2 The MS. has eulfr. R. W. 17 See pag. 259 1.12. R. W.
3 Read gracula or graculus. R. W. 18 Cf. pag. 259 1.10 and pag. 286 1.6,
4 gralus, altered from grallus (for graclus R. W.
= graculus) in MS. A. H. 19 The Greek word proves that the
5 So the MS. A. H. — Cf. pag. 260 Meaning Of segescara is not cicada (ef.
1, 12 stearn. BR. W. Bosw. 61 ) but coturnix (cf. Leo pag. 145,
6 Ch. pag. 260 1.17. R. W. 39). RW.
7 Wright read swicmase. R. W. 20 The first J struck out by another
8 Cf. pag. 260 1.21 s. v. litorius. R.W. band. A. H.
9 Cf. pag. 260 1.28. R. W. 21 Arafter pin ciupella struck out. A.H.
10 Cf. pag. 260 1.30. R. W. Wright has hulfstan. R. W.
11 Cf. pag. 260 1.31. R. W. 22 Cf. pag. 165 ff. and 181 ff. R. W.
12 cy in cycen added in another band, A, H, 23 These five words were omitted by
13 i. means id cst. Tt. W. Wright. R. W.
14 Added in avother hand. A. Il. 24 Cf. pag. 181 1.29. R. W,

288 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 289 {
Puppis, se sftera stemn.+ Honeraria, sciplest. '
Cumba, purruc.? Sirtim, sandgewurp."*
Carina, bytme. Jungetum, risedyfel.15
Fori, i. tabulata nauium, scipes  Ledo, nepflod.
flor. 5 Proceris, gearufang.
Columbaria, arlocu. Arula, heord.
Remi, ara. Remex, redra.
Trastra,’ poftan. Reuma, gytestream.
Palnula, arbled. Scalmus, doll.
Antemna, seglgyrd. 10 Tabule, bord.
Cornua, pa ytemystan endas pre  Uncinos, hocas.
seglgyrde, Rostrata nauis, i. barda.
Malus, mest. Trieris, scexgd16
Modius, mesteyst. Linter, bat.
Carceria, hunpyrlu. 15 Musculus, i. sceortscip.
Parastates, mestwist. Carabus, scipincel.
Clauus, helma. Iuttoraria, trochscip.
Gubernaculum, steorropur. Puppis, steorsetl.
Pons,’ sciphledder.® Prora, ancersetl.
Uela, seglu. 20 Trudes, spreotas.
Prora, frumstemn.* Transtra, scipsetl and poftan.
Funes, restes, rapas. Una serta, i. an gerif fissea, odde an
Spire, linan. snes fissca, odde odra pinga.
2 aa
7 95 DE MEMBRIS HOMINUM.
Safo, steg.° Anima, sawl.
Opisfera, stedingline.'’° Homo, man.
Prosnesium,11 marels. Antropus, man.
Anguina, racea. Microcosmus, lessa middaneard.}7
Remuleum, tohline. 30 Corpus, lichama,
Strupiar, midlu. Caro, flese.
Cataporates,12 sundline. Crementum, cid.
Bolidis, sundgerd.13 Sensus, sefa.
Aplustra, geredru. Uisus, gesyhp.
Estuaria, fleotas. 35 Auditus, gehyrnes.
Glarea, ceoselstan. Odoratus, swee.
1 Wright printed «ften-stemn. R.W 11 Read pronesium. Cf. pag. 182 1. 30.
2 Cf. pag. 181 1.35. R. W R. W.
8 Sic MS. A. Hi. 12 An error for cataprorates. R. W.
x PevceRaan Raye AM 48 the MS. has: sundgfrd. A. Hh,
© One d added above the line in the 14 Cf. pag. 183 1.7. R. W. — d over |
same hand. A. H. the line. A. HL
7 Of. pag. 182 1.21. R. W. 15 gover the line in the same hand. A. H.
8 Pag. 182]. 26 we find sceacline. R.W. 16 Cf. pag. 165 1. 41 and pag. 181 J. 18.
9 Of. pag. 182 1.27: Safon step. R.W. R. W.
10 Gf. pag. 182 1.29. R.W.—g written 17 y above the line by the same hand.
over the line by the same hand. A. H, AH.

90 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 291
Gustus, byrignes. Palatum, mudes hrof.
Tactus, xthrine. Sublingua, uf.°
Capud, heafod Toles, grynlas.”
Uertex, hnol. Rumas, wasend.
Caluaria, heafodpanne. 5 Gurgulium, drotbolla.
Cerebrum, bregn. Anteria’ xddre.
Obcapud, foreweard eafod, postex. Gula, hracu.
Capilli, loceas. Collum, swyra.
Tautones,’ bruwa. Ceruix,® hnoll.
Coma, feax. ; 10 Humera, eaxla.
Cesaries, pilos,? her. Scapulus, sculdur.
Crines, loceas. Brachium, earm.
_ Limpor, dunwange. [oferbruwa.  Ascella,!° oxn.
 Uultus, facies, uel frons,supercilium, Ulna, eln.
Intercilium, betweoh bruwum, 15 Cubitus, feepm.
Cilium, bruwa. Manus, hand, duma.
Palpebre, brewas. Pugna, fysd.
gp Oculus, eage. Pugilla,1 gripe. ;
Lacrima, tear. Palma, handbred, uel salair.
; Corona, helm. 20 Artus, lipu.
Pupilla, seo. Articuli minores, digiti, fingras.
| Gene, hagoswind.® Pollex, puma.
7 Barba, beard. Index, bycniend.
Mentum, cin. Salutaris, heletend.
: Male, ceocan. 25 Ipudicus,'* unewise.
_ Mazille, cinban. Anularis, fingerlic.
| Mandibule, ceacan. Auricularis, earscrypel.
q Auris, eare. Ungula, negel.
Nasus, nosu. Truncus, bodig.
Cartilago, nosugrisle. 30 Torax, breost.
Internasum, neb. Mamille, tittas.
FPlegma, hrog. Pupille, seon.
Os, mud. Lac, meoluc.
4 Labrum, weler. Cutis, hid.
_ Dens, tod. 35 Pellis, fel.
| Ingua,* todreoma. Pulpa,' lira.
_ Lingua, tunge. / Uiscus, herdbylig.
[ Faus, weo.® Aruina, gelynd.1t
» . amr
So the MS. Of. pag. 157 1.2. R. W. ® So the MS. Originally arteria. A.H.
? So the MS. A. H. ° above the line, A. H.
° Of. pag. 157 1.7. R. W. — n in 1° Of. pag. 158 1. 28. R. W.
| swind added over the line, A. H. ‘ Altered from pugillas in MS. A.H.
' ; Read gingiuae. R. W. 12 Originally Jpudicus. A. H.— Wright
. Cf. Bosw. pag. 897. R. W. — The printed Pudicus, R. W.
second stroke ofu in fausis effaced. A. H. 13° Cf. p. 159 1.8. R. W.
, OF pag. 157 1. 28, RW. “4 ge and y above the line by another
@ in grynlas above the line. In the hand. In the line lind. A. H. — Cf.
line gryntes. A. H. p. 1591.5. R. We .
20

292 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 29:

Nerui, sina.’ Splena, milte.

Uertuba,? hweorfa. Fel, gealla.

Costa, ribb. Stomagus,' maga.

Dorsum, ricig. Intestinum,'° inelfe.

Terga, bee. 5 Omentum, midhridre.

Pale, ricgrble. Discepium t. reticulum, nette.

Spina, hriegmeard. Uitalia, uiscera, renuncule, i. lund-

Radiolus, spacan. lagan."!

Spondila,’ hriegrib.

Medulla, mearh. 10 NOMINA PISCIUM.

Sacra spina, se haliga.® Coetus, hwel.

Renes, xddran. Piscis, fise.

Lumbos, lendenu. Pina, delfin, uel

Genitalia, pa cennedan.* Bacharus, mereswin.

Uirilia, d(a) weerlican.® 15 Ballena, hran.

Uirilius, pintel.® Porcopiscis, stiriga.

Calamus, teors. Usocus, seolh.

Testiculi, herpan. Cancer, crabba.

Uiscera, inelfe. Ysox, leax.

Meatus, utgong. 20 Ostrea, ostre.

F’.. em," gor. Geniscula, mucxle.

Anus, becdearm. Sardina, hering.

Nattes,® earsendu. Platissa, floc.

Femor, deoh. Item et bubla.'®

Femina, inneweard deoh. 25 Coclea, weolue.

Coxa, peohseanca, Lucius, hacud.

Suffragines, hamma. Mugil, idem.

Genua, cnyowu Tinctus, sliu.'*

Crura, sconean. Lypus, beers.

Tibia, scina, 30 Castorius, befor.

Surra, sperlira. Chephialus, heardra. 7

Talos, ancleo. Murenula, 21)

Pedes, fet. Anguilla, smel el.

Planta, fotwelma, Sartale, smylt.'® i

Calzx,® ile. 35 Bisarius, fisewelle. \

Cor, heorte.

Sanguis, blod, eruor mortuorum. [DE ARTE TEXTORIA]"*

Jecor, lifer, Textrina, web, uel telum.

Pulmon, lungen. Liciatorium, websceaft.
‘So the MS. R. W. 1° num in intestinum over an erasure. A.H.
? Cf. p. 159 1.20. R. W. Added in another hand. A. H.
* Of. p. 159 1. 23. R. W. Phe scribe means to say: focus or pho-
“Wright printed cennendan. R. W. cus. R. W.
* a in da omitted in MS. A. H. '3The reading of this line appears to
° Wright has: wirilitas. R. W. be doubtful. Wright printed Jd, etbubla.
7 Two or three letters effaced. I think, RW. g

the scribe wrote fimum. A. IL. “7 over erasure. A. H.
® Wright: nates. R. W. © Of. pag, 262 1. 4: sardina, smelt. R.W.
° And blotted out before a. A. He ‘© Omitted in MS., but cf. p. 262.1. 6, "|

=
ANGi, -SAXON VOCABULARY. 295
sum, splin.' Fauilla, ysle.
adium, hrefl. Funus, ree.
Wadia, well, Accendilia, weocan.®
Deponile, wefta. .
itorium, inspin. 5 [DE ALEA.]10
lertellum, hweorfa, Alea, tefel.
olus, wulmod. Calculus, tefelstan.
tlomer, cliwen. Aleator,'| teflere.
‘onductum, gearnwinde. - 7
Plumaria, byrdinge.* 10 [DE PLAUSTRIS.}1
samen, wearp. Carpentarius, wenwyrhta. !2
Subtimen, awebb. Plaustrum, wen.
Pectica, flepecomb. Rota, hweol.
lpidiscus, webhoc. Themon, pisle.
Scaphus, uma. 15 Radii, spacan.
‘ala, webgerepru. Canti, felgan.
| Claus, tebere.® Naualium, dinege.
a ila, dred. . ’ . ,
| Lana, wul. NOMINA HERBARUM, GRECE
| Uellus, flis. 20 ET LATINE.38
| Scolonia,4 ynneleac.
eno, wifbegn. Anbila, 15 leac.
| Pedissequa, abra.* Acimus, hyndberige. 16
pAlibrum, riul. Ambrosia, hyndhelepe.
| Insubula, meoduma. 25 Artemesia, mugwyrt.
| Ansa, hringe.® Apollinaris, glofwyrt.
f ingulum, gyrdels. Cinoglossa, ribbe.
| Andeda, brondreda. Septefilos, hymelic. 17
|Arula, fyrpanne
| Sica,® tindre. 30 Astula regia, '® baso, popig.
| Scintilla, spearca. Cardus, sme piste].
itium, brand. Cliton, clate.'®
indula, scid. Cardamon, cerse.
| ignarium,” algeweore. Apium, merce.
| inis, wrce.® 35 Botracion, clufdung.?°
| ' A metathese of spinl. R. W. of plants are here given with the Anglo-
{ 2 Cf. p. 262 1.18. R. W. Saxon equivalents. This explains why there
| * Of. p. 262 1.25: claus, teltre. R.W. are so many repetitions of the same plant.
pe * Of. p. 1081.23. R. Ww. ™ Read ascalonia. Cf. p. 270 1. 26.
Cf. p.266 1.93 RW. R. W.
: © Ch. isica p. 266 1.39. R. W. UW Oraipy 27 mle BORA We
* See pag. 266 1.40. RW. > © 4 in acimus is written over in the
® Au error for cinis, wsce, 1 snppose. same hand. A. H. The raspberry is still
Of. p. 266 1.34. R. W. called a hindberry in the Noith of Eng-
j ® Cf. cicindilia p.207 1.1. R. W. Jand.
° Omitted in the MS. A. H. But cf. 7 Cf. p. 126 1.1 and Bosw. pag. 398.
267, R. Ww. Roe
‘ Over erasure. A. H. 8 Cf, p.133 1.30. R. W.
| ? wan over erasure. A. H. Cr. p. 134 1.3 and p. 9 1. 16. R.W.
i. ¢.; both Latin and Greek names 2° See Bosw. pag. 221. R. W.

296 ANGILO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 29
Anetum, dile. Cicuta, hymelic.'®
Bobonica, hratele. Anteleuce, smzl pistel.?°
Acetula, ramese.! Bucstalmum, hwit megede.
Carix, segg. Apasina, clife.
Brassica, wuducerfille. 5 Cerofolium, enneleac.
Acantan, beowirt.® Ahillea, colloneroh.
Camedus, heortcleffre.? Culmus, healm.
Ascolonia, cipe. Cicuta, wodewistle.?!
Catharticum,* libbeorn. Anchorum, medere.*?
Camellea,® wulfescamb. 10 Apis siluatica, wudumerce.
Arnaglosse, wegbrade.® Conize, lubestica.?®
Cucumeris, hwerhwette.7 Iris Illirica, hwatend.
Camesete, ellenwyrt. Calcesta, hwite clefre.
Agrimonia, garclife. Fynuclum,** finol.
Centauria, eordgealla.® 15 Innulor, eolone.?®
Coxa, pung. Felicem, fearn.
Aconita, pung. Calcilum, iacessure.”°
Aristologia, smerewyrt.? Lactuca, leahtric.
Calitrice,'° weeterwyrt. Cinnamomum, cymen.
Artemessia, tagantes helde. 20 Furfures, sifeda.
Arthea, mersemcalewe." Leontopedium, leonfot.**
Coantrum,** cellendre. Felix minuta, eoforfearn.
Brittanice, heweny dele.'* Laterculum, beolone.
Absinthium, weremod. Ciclamina, slite.
Buglosse, foxesglofa.'4 25 Lappatium, docee, 7. gledene, 7. caria.
Bacinia, berige. Gladiolum, seegg.
Camemelon alba, se brada wulfes- Malba, mealewe.
camb,!> : (lon.  Gramina, ewice.
Beneolentem, magade, '6 uel camemel- Genista, brom.
Canis lingua, hundestunge.!7 30 Merculialis,2" cedele, cyrlic.
Batracion, clufwyrt.'® Millefolium, gearewe.
1 Cf. p. 3.1.20. R. W. * Of, p. 296 1.10. R. W.
2 Of p. 1383 Ls. R. OW. © Of. p.135 1.7. R. W. — The second
° Of. p. 134 1.30, RW. a in magade corrected from e. A. H.
* Read carthamus. R. W. ‘7 n in hundes inserted over the line.
* Read chamaeleon. R. W. A. HL
® nin arna corrected fromm. A.H. — © Of, p. 295 1.35. R. W.
See p. 134 1.18. R. W. *® Of. p. 295 1. 28. R,W.
7 Of. p. 1341.10. R. W. 20 Of. p. 295 1.31. R.W.
© h blotted out before eord A. H. 21 So the MS., not ‘pistle’. Of. Leo
° The first r over erasnre. A. H. Gloss. p. 13 1.36. A. H.
%° An error for callitrichon. R. W. 2 Of. p. 299 1.29. R. W.
uel al ¢ 23 Of. Bosw. p.43¢and p. 301 1.35. R W.
* The MS. has Arthea, Mers mealewe. — 3 in conize corrected from a. An e€
A. H. is blotted out after J in lubestica, A H
* Read coriandrum. Cf. p. 1351.40. R.W. ** y corrected from u in MS. A.H.
® Of. p. 135 1.26. R. W. — h before 2° Of. Bosw. pag. 25h. R. W. |
y blotted ont. Jt after y struck out by 26 Of, Note 6 on pag. 133, R. W.
the first scribe. H. A. 27 Sic MS. R. W.
4 Of, Note 1 on p.185, R. W.

=
ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 299
‘alla, galloc. Hedera nigra, eordifig.
imigio, hyndberige.! Erifeon, lidwyrt, idem est ostriago.
fosilicum,? ragu. Herba iras, gorst.!®
olum,® ellenwyrt. Swige, banwyrt.13
fenta, minte. 5 Gallitrici, stelwyrt 1!
farubium,* harehune. Eicios,!5 haranspeccel.
eribalbum, greate wyrt. Innule campane, sperewyrt.
faliterre, elehtre. Intula, walwyrt.1®
etonica, byscopwyrt. Napis, nep.
fasturcium,® tuncerse, 10 Pastinace, wuducerfille.'7
aca, streawberige. Nimphea, colloneroh.'$
lta, reade clefre. Oriathamum, eolone.'®
ttyride, libcorn.” Rolon, earbe.”°
Fungus, swamm. Quinguenerbia,*' ribbe.
ippa, clate. 15 Tenedissa, helde.2?
‘enegrecio, wyllecerse. Urtica, netle.
gend, crog. Toxa, pung.?*
lium, ate. Quinquefila, hrefnesfot.
Colocus, eofordrote. Origanum, elere.4
Ferula, escdrote. 20 Sinfitum, gallac.
Felicina, eoforfearn.$ Radiolum, eoforfearn.?”
Corimbus, ifigerop. Prosopes, bete.
gustrum,® hunisuce. Prassion, hune.*®
Delfinion, fugeleswyse.'° Titemallos, singrene.
allitricium, weterwyrt. 25 Ramnus, pefedorn.
iotropus, sigelhweorfa.'! Juncus, risce.?*
Malagma, sealf. Sigsonte, stanmeree.?6
Gentiana, feldwyrt. Ocimum, mistel.
Mastix, hwit cwuda. Ueneria, medere.??
Heraclea, calcatrippe. 30 Nereta, seminte.
Eptafilon, gelodwyrt. Plantago, wegbrade.
* Of. p. 295 1.23. R. W. © The scribe wrote: walwr. Cf p 301
? Read mosiclum. R. W. 1, 8 and p. 301.1, 17. A. HL
* An o blotted out before b. A. H. 7 Cf, p. 2961.5. R. W.
* a over erasure. A. He *® Of p.297 1.6. R. W.
* ¢ corrected above ¢ by a later hand. Of. p. 297 1.15. R. W.
A. BL *© Rolon seems to be an error for
® Sic MS. R W. robon or robos =orobos. Of. Cock. L.
7 tt corrected from cc in MS. A.H Il. p. 380. R. W.
eect. p.085 1.10, R. W. 7! The second n corrected from wu in
® So the Ms. Wright printed ligustrum. MS, A. H.
Rw * The reading of the MS. seems to be
*° Cf. the explanation of this word an error for tanaceta or tanacetum. RK. W.
Bosw. 278. R W. *° Cf. Cora p. 296 1. 16, R. W.
1 Cf, p. 301 1, 10 and p. 138 1 28. RW. * Wright printed @lepe. R. W.
™ Gorst means: a bramble erica, rubus. > Of p. 297 1, 22. RW.
Cf p. 30019, RW. *° Of, p. 271 1.17. RW.
* Of p. 300 1. R. W. 7 Cf p, 135 1 16, R. W.
Ch p. 296 1.19. R Ww. °° Of. p. 134 1. 36 and Bosw. p. 67%. R.W.
* Read echion or echium. R. W. * Cf. p. 300 1.10 and p. 1351.15, R.W.

300 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 301
Uiola aurosa et uiola purpurea, ban- — Sinapdones, cersan.
wyrt.! Sicalia, lyge.
Senecio, grundeswylige.® Hierobotanum, hretelwyrt.!*
Simphonica, beolone.* Brassica siluatica, wuducerefille,4
Pissli, reosan. 5 Gramis birecta, ewice.'®
Uiumum, fugelesleac. Solsequia, golde.
Speragus, wuducerfille. Rosmarina, sundeaw.
Sarpulum, brade leac. Gagantes, mugwyrt.'® .
Tribulus, gorst.4 Athee, seminte.!7
Rosmarinum, feldmeedere. 10 Eliotropus, sigelhweorfa.
Obtalmon, magede.® Ruta, rude.
Ruscus, eneowholen.® Iua, iue. ¢
Raphanus, ancre, pxt is redic.7 Sisimbrium, brocminte.'8
Thiaspis, lambescerse. Colatidis, singrene.
Rodinaps, ompre, docce. 15 Scilla et gladiola, gledene.'®
Salsa, sure. Scolonia, cipe.
Tytymalosca, libeorn.® Samsuhchon, cyningeswyrt.2°
Papauer, popig. Uulnetrum, moldcorn.
Umbilicum, berwinde. Scippio, lefer.
Scilla, gledene. 20 Uiticella, weodubinde.
Uictoriale, cneowholen.® Poloten, crawanleac.
Perdicalis, homorwyrt. Scolimbos, se umbrada pistel.
Uiperina, nedderwyrt. Simphonia, beolone.
Pollegia, broderwyrt, haelwyrt,dwe-  Senttio, syr, grundeswylige.
orges dwostle. 25 Pastinace, moran.
Unnio, ynneleac. Lapadium, \elopre.
Peucedanum, cammoce. Malue herratice, geormenleaf.*!
Semperuiuum, sinfulle. Canafel®® siluatica, henep.
Uermenaca, redic.'° Ebuli, ellenwyrt.
Pilogonus et sanguinaria, xt is un- 30 Mentarium, feldminte.
fortredde."! Cerefolium, cerfelle.
Uiola, simeringwyrt. Sinapis, senap.
Stena, hepeole. Abrotomum, sedrenewuda.
Pentajilon, fifleafe. Pconia, peonia.
Sandix, wad.'* 35 Lubestica, lufestice *3
1 See p. 187 Ld. R. W. 4 Cf, p. 2961.5. R. W.
2 Of. Cock. Leechd. III. p 329. R.W. 15 Cf p, 297 1. 28. R. W.
8 Crp iils. RW. 16 Of. p 295 1.25. R. W.
4 Cf p.299 1.3. R. W. 17 Of. p. 299 1.30, R.W.
5 Cf. p. 2961.29. RW. 18 Cf. Cock, HI p. 316. R, W.
6 Cf. p.133 1.27. The plant still called 19 Cf. Cock. II p. 328. R, W.
knee-holly in the South of England. 20 Read sampsychon. R. W. — The
7 Cf. p 135123, RW. second n in eyninges above the line in
8 Cf. p. 298 1.13. R. W. the same hand. The MS, has only wr
9 Cf Note 6. R. W. instead of wyrt. A. H.
10 Of. p. 300 1.13. RW. 21 Cf. Cock, IIT p. 328. R.W.— 9 in
11 The second d above the line. R.W. geormen above the line. A. H,
12 Cf. p. 186 1.25. R. W. 22 An error for cannabis. R. W-
13 The scribe wrote hretelw7. Cf. p. 299. 98 Cf p. 297 Lil. R. We
Note 16, A. H.
:
i
a

ANG! ON VOCABULARY. 3
rosa. Hulsida, camedris.4
on, i. tewerion, brunwyrt.! Arciotidas,® fyrses berian.
0, lipwyrt. Actis,® i. sambucus, ellen.
is, cicenamete,? Elimos, i. lini semen, \inswd.
dlonis,’ hegehymele. 5
Cf. Cock, Ill p. 316. R. W. 4 Is camedris au Anglo-Saxon word??
R, W.
eEpGaek: IC p. 18% Re W. 5 Read Arceuthides. R. W.
Cf. Cock. II p. 331. R. W. 6 Read Acte. R. W.
i

xX.
ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY,
OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY. ;
;
Deus omnipotens, pet is god e#l- Membrum, an lim.

mihtig, se wes wfre unbegunnen AMembra, ma lima.

and zxfre byd ungeendod. Capud, heafod. :
Celum, heofen. Copita,* ma. :
Angelus, engel. 5 Uertex, hnol.

Archangelus, heahengel. Cerebrum, bragen.
Stella, steorra. Ceruia, hnecca. :
Sol, sunna. Collum, swyre. ;
Luna, mona. Frons, forewearde heafod.
Firmamentum, roder. 10 Nasus, uel naris, nosu. ;
Cursus, ryne. Capillus, her.
Mundus, uel cosmus, middaneard. Capilli, ma. |
Tellus, uel terra, eorpe. Cesaries, fex.
Humus, molde. Coma, loc.
Mare, uel equor, sx. 15 Auris, eare.
Pelagus, wid se. Aures, ma.
Oceanum, garsege. Timpus, punwenege.
Homo, man. Timpora, ma.
Mas, uel masculus, werhades man. _ Mazilla, hleor.
Femina, wifhades man. 20 Facies, ansyn.
Sexus, werhad odde wifhad. Supercilium, oferbruwa,
Palpebre, brewas.

1 Although there seems to be little  cabulary is here printed from a copy in
room for doubt that the fourth of the Vo- MS. Cotton, Julius A. IL, in the British
cabularies printed in the present volume Museum. Another occurs in the MS in
is rightly ascribed to Alfric, yet in the St. John’s College, Oxford, already al-
known MSS. Alfric’s Grammar is followed Inded to.
by a vocabulary which is differently ar- 2 Read capita. Ma means ma heafdu
ranged, and more condensed. This yo- or heafod in the plural number. R.W. |

06 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY, - 307
Oculus, eaga. Medius, middelfinger.
Oculi, ma, Medicus, lecefinger.
Pupilla, seo. Auricularius, earefinger.
Os, mud. Palma, handbred,
Os, ban. 5 Artus, lid.
fedulla, merh. Latus, side.
abium, weler. Latera, ma.
abia, ma. Costa, rib.
Dens, tod. Coste, uel costas, ma.
Dentes, ma. 10 Renes, lendena.
ingua, tunge. Neruus, sinu.
Palatum, goma. Nerui, ma.
Guttur, prota. Uena, xddre.
Mentum, cin. Uene, ma.
Barba, beard. 15 Femur, peoh.
| Pectus, breost. Femora, ma.
| Cor, heorte. Coxa, peoh.
| Pulmones, lungena. Clunis, hype. ;
ecur, lifer. Poples, ham.
| Fel, gealla. 20 Poplites, ma.
! tomachus, maga. Genu, cneow.
_ Splen, milte. Genua, ma.
_ Adeps, rysel. Pulpa, lira. .
Aruina, ungel. Sura, sperlira. .
_ Uiscus, innod. 25 Crus, sceanca.
' Uiscera, ma. Crura, ma.
| Lata,’ dearmas. Tibia, secyne, odde scinban.
7 Sanguis, blod. Talus, angcleow.*
| Caro, flesc. Pes, fot.
|} Cutis, hyd. 30 Pedes, ma.
i Pellis, fell. Planta, fotwylm.
| Scapula, sculdra. Plante, uel plantas, ma.
| Dorsum, hryc. Alloz,* ta.
Venter, wamb. Alloces, ma.
Brachium, earm. 35 Ungula, hof, odde clawu.
| Brachia, ma. Patriarcha, heahfeder.
| Ulna, eleboga. Propheta, witega.
| Manus, hand. Apostolus, apostol.
| Digitus, finger. Archiepiscopus, ercebisceop.
Digiti, ma. 40 Episcopus, leodbisceop.
Unguis, negl. Diocessis,* uel parochia, bisceoprice.
Ungues, ma. Regnum, rice.
Pollex, puma. Abbas, abbod, odde feder.
| Index, scytelfinger. Presbiter, mzssepreost.
1 Read exta. R. W. 3 Of. p. 6 1.23 and 161 1.8. R.W.
2 ¢ added above the line. R, W. 4 Sic MS. R. W.
| 21

308 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 309
Sacerdos, sacerd. Altor, uel nutritor, fosterfeder.
Clericus, preost, odde cleric. Altrix, uel nutrix, fostermoder.
Diaconus, uel leuita, diacon. Alumpnus, fostercild.
Subdiaconus, underdiacon. Patruus, federa.
Archidiaconus, ercediacon. 5 Matertera, moddrige.
Monachus, munuc, oddeanstandende. Auunculus, eam.
Monacha, uel monialis, mycenu.* Amita, fapu.
Anachorita, ancra, Osculum, cos.
Eremita, westensetla. Propinguus, meg.
Nonna, arwurpewydewe, odde nunne. 10 Affinis, uel consanguineos,’ sibling.
Cantor, sangere. Amicus, freond.
Cantrix, sangystre. Progenies, uel tribus, magp. :
Lector, vedere. Generatio, cynren.
Lectriz, redistre. Gener, adum.
Laicus, lewede man. 15 Socer, sweor.
Coniunx, gemecca. Socrus, sweger.
Coniuges, uel conjugales, gesinhiwan. Nurus, snoru. /
Coniungium,? uel matrimonium, sin- Rex, cyning.

scipe. Sceptrum, cynegyrd. :
Castus, clene. 20 Regina, cwen.
Incestus, unclene. Imperator, uel cesar, uel augustus,
Pulcher homo, feger man. casere,
Formosus, wel gewlitegod. Imperatrix, uel augusta, pes caseres
Deformis, hiwleas. cwen.
Speciosus, uel decorus, wlitig. 25 Princeps, ealdorman.
Pater, feeder. Dux, heoratoga,’ odde lateow.
Mater, moder. Comes, ealdorman, odde gerefa.
Auus, ealda fader. Clito, xpelinge.
Abauus, pridde fader. Obses, gysel.
Proauus, feorpa feder. 30 Primas, heafodman.
Atauus, fifta feeder. Satrapa, pegn.
Filius, sunu. Judex, dema.
Filia, dohter. Prepositus, gerefa, odde prafost.
Soboles, bearn, Miles, wel adleta,’ cempa.
Liberi, ma bearn. 35 Exercitus, here.
Familia, hiwreden, odde hired. Populus, fole.
Frater, broder. Procinctus,* fyrdinge.
Soror, swuster. Edictum, geban.
Uitricus, steopfeder. Uulgus, ceorlfole.
Nouerca, steopmoder. 40 Congregatio, uel contio, gegaderung.
Priuignus, steopsunu. Conuentus, uel conuentio, gemetinge.
Filiaster, steopdohter. Sinodus, sinod.
Nepos, neua. Dominus, uel herus, hlaford.
Neptis, bewimmen. Matrona, fordwif.

1 No doubt an error of the scribe for 8 Read athleta R. W.
mynecenu. Cf. pag. 155. 1. 26. R, W. 4 Procinctus means: (an army) pre-

2 So has the MS. R. W. pared for battle. R. W-

:
{

310 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 311
Domina, hlefdige. Piscator, fiscere.
Cliens, uel clientulus, ineniht. Rete, nyt.
mpticius, geboht peowa. Amus, angel.
Uernaculus, inbyrdlinge. Uenator, hunta.
eruus, peowa 5 Uenabulum, barspere.
Ancilla, uel serua, uel abra, wyln.' Auceps, fugelere.
stos, uel pastor, hyrde. Laqueus, gryn.
Puer, cnapa. Trapezeta, wel nummularius, myne-
Puella, meden, odde geong wifman. tere.
irgo, medenman. 10 Nummisma, mynet.
Procus, wogere. Sollers, menigtiwe.
Sponsus, brydguma. Iners, creftleas.
sponsa, bryd. Potens, mihtig.
Infans, unsprecende cild. Gigas, ent.
ir, wer, odde wepman, 15 Nanus, dweorh.
Mutier, wif. Fidis,’ streng.
| Maritus, ceorl be wif hefd. Citharista, hearpere.
lor, wif pe wer hefd. Cithara, hearpe.
idua, widewe. Tubicen, bymere.
Senex, eald man. 20 Tuba, byma. :
Anus, eald wif. Tibicen, pipere.
| Adolescens, iung man. Musa, pipe, odde hwistle.
Juuenis, iunglinge. Fidicen, fidelere.
Paterfamilias, hyredes hlaford. Fidicina, fipelestre.
faterfamilias, hiredes moder odde 25 Cornicen, hornblawere.
! hlefdige. Cornu, horn.
} onsiliarius, redbora. Fistula, hwistle.
onsilium, red. Liticen, trud.
ontionator, gemotman. Lituus, trudhorn, odde sarga.
Operarius, wyrhta. 30 Poeta, sceop, odde leodwyrhta.
‘aber, uel cudo, smid. Mimus, uel scurra, gligman.
Jfficina, smidde. Saltator, hleapere.
errarius, isenwyrhta. Saltatrix, hleapestre.
j ignarius, treowwyrhta. Mercator, uel negatiator,® mangere.
urifex, goldsmid. 35 Mera, waru.
Argentarius, seolforsmid. Pirata, wicing, odde flotman.
| Erarius, meslingesmid.* Classis, sciphere.
Rusticus, scerceorl. Nauis, scip.
| Arator, yrdlinge. Remus, roder.
irs, creef.” 40 Remex, uel nauta, redra.
Artifex, creftea. Gubernator, wel nauclerus, steorman,
Jpus, weore, Proreta, ancerman.
Ipifex, creftca. Prora, pxr se ancerman sit.
Architectus, yldest wyrhta.* Puppis, steorsetl. O
| 1Cf. p.108 1.28. R. W. 4 Read trapesita. R. W.
| 2 So the MS. Read: creft. R. W. 5 An error for fides. R. W.
Cf. p. 112, Note 1. R. W. 6 Sic MS, R. W.
{

312 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 313
Anchoro,' ancer. Incantator, galere.
Antempna, segelgyrd. Ueneficus, unlybwyrhta.
Uelum, segl, odde wahreft.’ Maleficus, yfeldeda.
Clauus, steorsccofol, odpe nxgl. Magus, dry.
Medicus, lece. 5 Phytonyssa,’ wycce.
Medicina, \ecedom. Centurio, hundredes ealdor.
Arsura, uel ustulatio, bernet.* Persecutor, ehtere.
Potio, drenc. Theolenarius,’ tollere.
Unguentum, smyrels, odde sealfe. Bonus homo, god man.
Malagma, clida.* 10 Malus, yfel.
Salinator, sealtere. Bonum, god.
Sutor, sutere. Malum, yfel
Sartor, seamere. Dispendium, uel dampnum, hynd.
Sartrix, seamestre. Jactura, lyre.
Dispensator, dihtnere. 15 Commodum, hyd.
Diuisor, delere. Res, pinge. :
Pincerna, byrle. Anulus, hringe. :
Caupo, teppere. Armilla, beah.
Diues, welig. Diadema, eynchealm.
Locuples, landspedig. 20 Capitium, het.
Inops, hafenleas. Monile, myne, odde swurbeah. :
Pauper, dearfa. Spinther, dole, odde preon. ?
Egenus, wedla. Fibula, oferfenge. }
Fur, peof. Uitta, snod. :
Latro. seapa.° 25 Inauris, earpreon. i
Profugus, flyma. Indigena, uel incolo,” inlendise. :
Exul, utlaga. Aduena, wtan cuman.
Fidelis, getreowe, odde geleafful. Peregrinus, xlpeodig.
Infidelis, ungetreowe. Colonus, tilia.° ;
Felix, gesselig. 30 Agricola, cerman.
Infelix, ungeselig. Messor, riptere.
Contentiosus, geflitful. Messis, gerip.
Iniuriosus, teonful. Aceruus, hreac, odde hype.”
Piger, sleac. Aratrum, sulh. '
Inpiger, unsleaw. 35 Uomer, scear.
Hebes, dwes. Cultor, culter.
Parasitus, leas olecere. Jugum, geoc.
Augur, wiglere. Stimulus, gad.
1 Read anchora. R. W. 6 An error for pytonyssa. R. W.
2 Wah-reft, or wah-rift, means proper- 7 Read telonarius. R. W.
ly tapestry, or hangings for walls. 8 Read incola. R. W.
% Burning, or cauterising, was one of 9 The compiler of this vocabulary has
¢ the great processes of the healing art in given a correct interpretation of the word
the middle ages; and fall directions for  colonus, as signifying a husbandman. See
it are given in the old treatises on leech- _ before, p. 111 Note 2.
craft. 10 These two Anglo-Saxon words are
4 Cf. Aelfr. Hom.I, 476. R. W. the originals of our modern words rick
5 Read sceapa or scapa. R. W. (applied to hay, &c.) and heap. :
}
:
i

14 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 315
Aculeus, sticels. Strabo, scelgegede.
Circus, uel circulus, widde.' Lippus, suregede.
Funis, uel funiculus, rap. Mancus, anhende.
Doctor, lareow. Infirmus, wntrum.
Magister, megister. 5 Eger, uel egrotdus,* adlig.
Scriptor, writere. Paraclytus, frofergast.
Scriptura, gewrit- Paracliticus,’ beddreda, odde se pe
Euuangelium, id est, bonum nuntium, hefd paralisin.
godspel. Leprosus, hreoflig, odde licdrowere.
Quaternio, cine.” 10 Lunaticus, monadseoc, ;
Planta, spelt. Demoniacus, deofolseoc.
Diploma, boga. Energuminus, gewitseoc.
Enula,* perl. Morbus, adl.
Pergamentum, uel membranum, boc- Pests, ewild.
fel. 15 Amens, uel demens, gemyndleas.
Sceda, uel scedula, ymele. Rabidus, uel insanus, wod.
Penna, feper. Sanus, hal.
Graffium, gref.* Rabies, wodnys.
Pictor, metere. Incolomis,’ gesund.
Pictura, metinge. 20 Freneticus, se pe purh sleapleaste
Minium, teafor. awet.
Gluten, lim. Frenesis, seo untrumnys.
Cementum, lim to wealle. Lethargus, uel letargicus, ungelimp-
Sculptor, grafere. lice slapol.
Sculpture, greeft. 25 Lethargia, ungelimplic slapolnys.
Imaga,’ uel agalma, anlycnyss. Uigil, wacol.
Scalprum, uel scalpellum, grefsex. Uigila, weece.
Scola, scol. Peruigil, purhwacol.
Scolasticus, scolman. Pius, arfest. :
Pedagogas,’ cildrehyrda. 30 Impius, arleas.
Discipulus, leorningeniht. Justus, vihtwis.
Disciplina, lar, odde steor. Iniustus, unrihtwis.
Doctrina, lar. Famosus, hiisful.
Miser, earminge. Fama, hiisa. :
Caecus, blind. 35 Infamis, unhlisful.
Claudus, healt. Infamia, unhiisa.
Mutus, dumb. Largus, cystig.
Balbus, stamur. Tenax, festhafod, odde uncystig.
| Blessus, wlips.” Frugi, uel parcus, sperhende.
| Surdus, deaf. 40 Auarus, gytsere.
| Debilis, lama. Raptor, reafere.
Luscus, uel monoptalmus, anegede. Sagax, uel gnarus, gleaw.
| ' Cf. Bosw. 98% R. W. 5 Sic MS. R. W.
2 Cf p. 164 1.1. R. Wz ® Read pedagogus. R. W.
* An error for gemmula? R. W. 7 Cf. p. 8 1. 23 and p. 1611.39. R.W.
* The graf was the instrament used
for writing on the table-book, answering
the Roman stylus. °

316 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 317
Sapiens, wis. Uesperum, efen.
Insipiens, unwis. Hora, tid.
Prudens, snoter. Ebdomada, wucu.
Inprudens, unsnoter. Mensis, mona.
Astutus, petig. 5 Uer, lengeten.
Stultus, stunt. Estas, sumor,
Sottus, sot. Autumnus, herfest.
Uerax, sodfest. Hyemps, winter.
Ueridicus, sodsagol. Uernum tempus, lenctentid.
Fallax, uel mendax, leas. 10 Uernalis dies, lenctenlic deg.
Falsidicus, unsodsagol. Hiemalis nox, winterlic niht.
Testis, gewita. Annus, gear.
Testimonium, gewitnys, odde ge- Tempus, tima.

cydnys. Hodie, to deg. ,
Sermo, uel locutio, spree. 15 Cras, to merigen.
Cursor, rynel. Heri, gyrstan deg.
Superbus, modig. Nune, uel modo, nu. i
Superbia, modignys, Sursum, up. ;
Humilis, eadmod. Deorsum, nyder.
Humilitus,’ eadmodnys 20 Calor, hete.
Uita, lif. Frigus, cyle. ;
Anima, sawul., Ferfor,’ mycel hete. :
Spiritus, gast. Cauma, swalod. }
Mors, dead. *  Siccitas, drugad, odde hed.
Yris, uel arcus, renboga. 25 Humor, weta.
Tonitruum, punor. Sterelitas, unwestmbernis. }
Fulgor, leget. Fertilitas, westbernys.’
Pluuia, ren. Color, bleoh.
Nix, snaw. Albus, hwit. ;
Grando, hagol. 30 Niger, blac.
Gelu, forst, Rubor, read.”
Glacies, is. Fuluus, wel flauus, geolu. :
Aer, lyft. Uiridis, grene.
Uentus, wind. Uarius, fah.
Aura, hwida, odde weder. 35 Unius coloris, anes bleos. :
Nimbus, secur. Discolor, mislices bleos.
Procella, storm. Forma, hiw.
Nubes, wolen. Fantasma, gedwimor.
Lux, l\eoht. Umbra, sceadu.
Tenebre, peostru. 40 Creator, seyppend.
Flamma, lig. Creatura, geseaft.’
Seculum, weorld.
Dies, deg. Auis, uel uolatilis, fugel.
Nox, niht. Aquila, earn.
Mane, merien. 45 Coruus, hrem.*

* Read humilitas. R. W. * Of. p. 3221. 10 hremmesfot instead of

? Sic MS. R. W. hrefnesfot. R. W.

* An error for gesceaft, R. W.

:

318 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 319
Miluus, glida. Scabro," hyrnete.
Accipiter, heafue. Scarabeus, seernwibba.
Grus, cran, Musca, fleoge.
Ardea, hragra. Cinomia, hundes lus.
Ciconia, store. 5 Culex, stut.
Merula, prostle. Scinifes,” gneet.
Columbe,' culfre.
Palumba, wuduculfre. Piscis, fise.
Aneta, ened. Cetus, hweel.
Alcedo, mew. 10 Delfinus, mereswin.
Pauo, pawa Ysicius," uel salo, lex.
Olor, uel cingnus,’ ylfette. Mugilis, uel mugil, mecefisc,
Rostrum, bile. Taricus, uel allec, herine.
Mergus, uel mergulus, scealfra.” Mullus, heardra.
HHyrundo, swalewe- 15 Tructa, truht.
Passer, spearwa, odde lytel fugel. Anguilla, el.
Turduh,* ster. Fannus, reohche.
Ficus,’ fina. Rocea, scealga.
Auca,’ gos. Canger,* crabba.
Anser, ganya.’ 20 Polipos, loppestre.
Gallus, coc. Ostrea, uel ostreum, ostre.
Gallina, hen. Muscula, muxle,
Conturnix,’ erschen. Murena, uel murenula, myreneddra.
Pullus, cicen, odde brid, oddefola. Luceus, hacod.
Ouum, xg. 25 Belua, egeslic nyten on sx, odde
Nidus, nest. on lande.
Uespertilio, hreremus.” Conchra,”’ scyl.
| Noctua, uel strinz,’ ule.
Fulco, uel capum, hwealhafoc.”” Fera, wildeor.
Turtur, turtle. 30 Lupus, wulf.
Graculus, hroc. Leo, leo.
Alauda, lauerce. Linx, gemeneged hund and wulf.
| Parrax, wrenne. Unicornis, anhyrned deor; pet deor
| Apis, beo. hefp enne horn bufan pam twam
| Fucus, dren. 35 eagum, swa strangne and swa
| Uespa, weaps. scearpne pet he fiht wid pone
| Bruchus, ceafor. myclan ylp, and hine oft ge-
|
* Read columba. R.W. late period; and I believe it is still in
? So the MS. R. W. use in some parts of the country.
> Cf. p. 258 1.13 and p. 287 1.5. ® Sic MS. R. W.
ah \\vd © Read falco and wealhhafoc instead of
* Read turdus. R. W. fulco and hwealhafoc. Cf. p. 132 1. 36.
* Of. p. 286 1.8. R. W. R. W.
° The scribe means to say: auica. Cf. ™ Read crabro. R. W.
aucarius goshafoc, p. 285 1.2. R. W. Cf. p. 261 1.5 and p. 1211.30. R.W.
7 So the MS. R. W. Of. p. 261 1. 32 and p. 293 1.19, R.W.
| ; ® Rere-mouse, or rear-mouse, was the * Sic MS. R.W.
common name in English for a bat till a 3 Read concha. R. W.

320 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 32)
wundad on dwre wambe of dead. -Porcus, uel sus, swin.
He hatte eac rinoceron and  Scroffa, suga.
monoceron. Aper, uel uerres, bar.
Griffus, fiderfote fugel, leone gelic — Magalis,” bearh.
on westme, and earne gelic on 5 Porcellus, fearh.
heafde and on fiperum; se is swa Bos, oxa.
mycel pet he gewylt hors and  Uacca, uel bucula, cu.
men. Uitulus, cealf.
Uulpis,* fox. Juuencus, styre.
Taxo, uel melus,* broc. 10 Ouis, sceap.
Equus, hors. Aries, ram.
Equa, myre. Ueruex, weber.
Asinus, uel asina, assa. Agnus, lamb.
Camelus, olfend. Pecus, uel iumentum, nyten.
Onager, wilde assa. 15 Animal, zle pinge pe cucu byd.
Mulus, mul. Canis, hund. j
Elefans,' ylp. Molosus, rydda.
Ursus, bera. Catulus, hwylp.
Ursa, heo.? Dracus,* draca.
Simia, apa. 20 Uipera, uel serpens, uel anguis,
Lutrius,” oter. neddre.
Fiber,’ beofer. Coluber, snaca. :
Feruncus, merd. Rubeta, tadie. )
Mustela, wesle. Rana, frogga.
TLalpa, wandewurpe. 25 Lacerta, efeta. }
Cattus, uel murilegutus, aut muriceps,  Stellio, slawyrm. }
cat.° Locusta, gzrsstapa.
Yricius,® uel erinacius, il. Sanguissuga, uel hyrundo,’ lece.
Glis, sisemus. Limax, snegel.
Mus, uel sorex, mus. 30 Testudo, se pe hefd hus.
Uermis, wyrm. Formica, mette.
Lubricus,’ angeltwicca. Eruca, melsceafa.
Ceruus, heort. Peduculus, lus.
Cerua, hynd Pulex, flea.
Damma, uel dammula, da. 35 Cimex, madu.
Hinnulus, hindcealf. Linea, modde. ;
Capreolus, rahdeor.
Caprea, rege. Herba, gers, odde wyrt.
Caper, uel hircus, bucca. Allium, leac.
Capra, uel capella, gat. 40 Dilla, docea.
Hedus, ticcen. . Libestica, lufestice.”°
Lepus, hara. Febrefugia, feferfugia."
* Read meles. R. W. 7 Read lumbricus. R. W.
* Heo, she, i.e, the female of the bear. ® Read maialis. R. W.
* Read lutra. R. W. ° An error for hirudo, R. W-
* Sic MS. R. W. 1 Of. p, 133 1.25, R. W.
> Read murilegulus. Of. p, 120 1. 15 “Of padi. RW.
RW.
© An error for ericins. R. W.

6 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 327
Puteus, pyt. Indicatorium, xstel.
cus, sead. Scabellum, sceamul.
atex, burna, odde broe. Thus, stor.
Odor, brep.
Domus, hus. 5 Turibulum, storcyl.
Templum, tempel. Legula, sticea.
Aecelesia, cyree, odde geleafful Regola, reogolsticca.
gaderung- Lampas, uel lucerna, uel laterna,
Angulus, hyrne, odde heal. leohtfeet.
Uera,' weofod. 10 Lichinus,’ blacern.
iber, uel codex, uel uolumen, boc. Cereus, tapor.
ittera, stef. Cera, weax.
Folium, leaf. Candela, candel.
Pagina, tramet. Munctorium, isentanga.
Arca, scrin. 15 Clocca, belle.
oculus, cyst, odde mederce. Cloccarium, uel lucar, belhus.
| Caliz, calic. Tintinnabulum, litel belle.
Patina, huseldisc. Compana,* mycel belle.
rua, uel staurus, rod. Uestis, uel uestimentum, uel indumen-
andelabrum, candelstef. 20 tum, reaf. ;
athedra, bisceopstef.’ Alba, albe.
Fundamentum, grundweal.* Casula, méssehacele.
| Pauimentum, uel solum, flor. Stola, stole.
j Paries, wah.* Superhumerale, sculdorhregl.
| ectum, pecen, odde rof. 25 Planeta, ceppe.”
“enestra, ehdyrl.” Manualis, handlin, odde handboe.
i} Hostium,® duru. Cingulum, uel zona, uel cinctorium,
| Hostiarius, dureweard. gyrdel.
| Janua, uel ualua, geat. Caliga, wel ocrea, hosa.
| Arcus, uel fornix, bigels. 30 Fico, sceo.'”
| Columpna, swer. Caleiamentum, gescy.
| Januarius, geatweard. Suptalaris,"' swyftlere.
q lausura, loc. Tractorium, tigl.
| Clauis, cxeg. Flagrum, uel flagellum, scypu.”
| Clauus, negel. 35 Uirga, gyrd.
| Sera, hepse. Dormitorium, slepern.
| Chorus, chor. Lectum, uel lectulum, bed.
| Gradus, stepe. Stramentum, beddinge.
j 1 An error for altare. R. W. in Anglo-Saxon eag-duru, an eye-door,
? So the MS. Read bisceopsctl. © Read ostium.
 * Literally, the ground wall. The Anglo- 7 ‘The glossator meant to say, 1 sup-
E tous perhaps understood by a foundation —_ pose: Licinium = wick, or wick-yarn.
je low wall of stone on which the wooden RW,
‘alls of the house were raised. ® Read campana. R, W.
_ * Wah, or wag, was applied especially ° Cf. pag. 1241.31 and p. 8281, 10. RW.
| te the walls of a house, and was preserved 10 Cf. pag. 125 1, 24. R. W.
| in the later English wawe, or waghe. "Read subtalaris, R. W.
* Ehpyrl, or eagpyrl, means literally ™ A miswriting for swipu, or swipe.
j eye hole. A window was also called R. W.

328 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 329

Stragula, westlinge, Lardum, spic.

Sagum, hwytel. Caseus, cyse.

Puluinar, pyle. Butyrum, butere.

Syndo, scyte. Ouwm, wg.

Fulcra, eal bedreaf. 5 Sal, sealt.

Femoralia, breec. Panis, haf.

Perizomata, uel campestria, wedbree.  Olera, wyrta.

Filum, pred. Ceruisa, uel celea,* eale.

Fimbrium, fned. Medo, meodu.

Cappa, ceppe. 10 Ydromellum, uel mulsum,* beor.

Pellicie,’ pylece. Lac, meole.

Colobium, uel interula, syric. Mustum, must.

Manica, slyf. Sicera, zlces cynnes gewringe buton

Cuculla, cugle. wine anum,

Pedulos, meon. 15 Manuterium, uel mantele, sceat.

Commissura, clut. Cultellus, sex.

Loral, roc. [roe. Artauus, enif.

Mastruga, crusene, odde deorfellen Uas, feet.

Tela, uel peplum, web, Poculum, drenceuppe.

Linum, fleax. 20 Anaphus, haep.”

Lana, wul. Patera, bledu.

Glomus, cliwen. Cibus, uel esca, mete.

Colus, disteef. Potus, drenc.

Fusus, spin. Liquor, weta.°

Textrinum opus, towlic weore. 25 Claustrum, clauster.

Latrina, gang. Coquina, eycene.

Trabes, beam. Cocus, coc.

Tignum, refter. Ignis, uel focus, fyr.

Laquear, fyrst. Flamma, lig.

Cleata, hyrdel.? 30 Pruna, gled.

Cymbalum, cimbal. {ung-hus. — Anfdena],” brandisen.

Refectorium, beoddern, odde gercord- tio,’ brand.

Tapeta, setregl. Olla, crocea.

Matta, meatte. , Caccabus, eytel.

Mensa, beod, odde myse. 35 Lebes, hwyr.

Discus, dise, Caro, flese.

Discifer, discpegn. Jus, brod.

Minister, pen. Jutilis® canis, brodhund.
} Read pellicia. R. W. ® This is probably the origin of the
* Tho meauing of hyrdel is a hurdle, modern use of the word wet, in such

erates, R. W. phrases as heavy wet, i. ¢., strong liquor
% Read celia BR, W. or drink, in tavern language.
* Read mulseum. R. W. 7 The scribe wrote An, brandisen. R.W.
* It is hardly necessary to remark that ® Read titio KR. W.

this word, which has occurred before, ° The MS. has Jutilis, or futilis R.W.

(see p. 123 1. 1. 2.) was the original of the ;

later medieval word hanap, also applied

to a cuv for the table.

0 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 331
‘ascinula, awel. Cupa, tunne.
Comedia, racu. Utensilia, andluman,
Daps,' sand. Supplex, yddisce.
Yerculum, berdisc. Aula, heal.
aeru,” spitu. 5 Triclinium, bur.
ssura, brede. Solarium, upflor.
rtano,® isenpanna- i Turris, stypel.
rizorium, hyrstynge. Cardo, hearre.
octio, gesod. Strigil, uel strigilis, horseamb.
octus, gesoden, odde gebacen. 10 Risus, hleahter.
Prustrum,* styece. Letus, blipe.
Offa, snd. Tristis, unrot.
Mica, cruma, Mestus, dreorig.
lestiarium, regelhus. Famis,? hunger.
Testamentum, ewyde. 15 Abundantia, uel copia, genihtsumnys.
Sigillum, insegl. Letitia, blys.
| Cellarium, hyddern. Tristitia, unrotnys.
| Cellerarius, hordere. Jeiunium, fasten.
folendenum,® myln. Jeiunius,'' feestende.
fola, ewyrnstan.°® 20 Pinguis, feet.
| Mei, hunig. Pinguedo, fetnys.
| Vietus, bigleofa. Corpulentus, piccol.
Pecunia, uel nummus, feoh. Macer, uel macilentus, hlene.
flarsupium, seod.? Macies, lennys.
Pistrinum, becern. 25 Grossus, great.
| Fornax, uel clibanus, ofen. Gracilis, smel.
Pistor, becestre, Longus, lang.
Granum, corn. Breuis, sceort.
| Farina, melu. Magnus, mycel.
Bratium, mealt. 80 Paruus, lytel.
| Acus, sifepa. Fortis, strang.
Jribra,® uel cribellum, sife. Inualidus, unstrang.
| Purfures, greta. Sollitus,'? carful.
Fex, drosna, Securus, orsorh.
/ Anfora, sester. 35 Cura, caru.
| Languena,> bue.'° Securitas, orsorhnys.
_Dolium, cyfe. Causa, intinga.
|
|? Read dapes. Cf. pag. 1261.36. R, W. girdle, called at a later period of the
* So the MS. R. W. middle ages a gypsere (in French gib-
* Read sartago. R, W- becidre). The remains of this article are
* Read frustum. R. W. found not uncommonly in the Anglo-
* Read molendinum. R. W. Saxon graves of the Pagan period.
° The quern, or stones turned with the ® An error for cribrum. Cf. pag. 123
and to grind corn (the domestic mill), 1.8. R. W.
ppears to have remained in constant °* Miswritten for lagena. RW.
se since the time of the Romans, and *° What we now call a bucket, A pail
has fallen into disuse only very recently is still called a bouk in Cheshire.
n some parts of the country. ‘ Read Jeiunus. R. W.
7 The bag, or purse, carried at the ™ Miswritten for sollicitus. R. W.

332 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 333 |
Accusator, wregere. Uectis, stenge.
Excusator, beladigend. Arcus, boga.
Accusatio, wregine. Faretra, cocer.
Excusatio, beladung.’ Scutum, uel clipeus, seyld.
Magnum, uel multum, mycel. 5 Umbro,’ randbeah.
~ Nichit,* naht. Funda, lipere.
Aliquid, sum pinge. Atrium, cauertun, odde inburh.
Sella, sadol, odde sctl. Fundibalum,’ steflidere.
Mento, felt. Ciuitas, ceaster.
Ulcea, garan. 10 Porta, portgeat.
Scansile, stigrap.* Ciuis, ceastergewara, odde portman.
Corrigia, dwange. Preco, bydel.
Calcar, spura. Oppidum, festen.
Antela, fordgyrd. Castellum, wie, odde lytel port.
Postela, wfterrap. 15 Urbs, burh.
Falere, geredu. Urbanus, burhwita,
Frenum, bridel. Suburbanus, se pe sit buton deere
Capistrum, helftre. berig.
Arma, wepua. Carcer, eweartrn.”
Galea, helm. 20 Oppidanus, se pe on festene sit.
Lorica, byrne, Villa, tun.
Gladius, uel machera, uel spata, uel _ Uillanus, tunman.
Sramea, .... Uillicus, tungerefa.
Spatarius, swurdbora. Ortus, orcyrd.”
Armiger, wepnbora. 25 Ortulanus, orcerdweard.
Bellum, uel pugna, gefeoht. Pomerium, xppeltun.
Signifer, tacnbora. Uiridiarium, wyrtun,
Lancea, uel falarica, spere. Horreum, bern.
Uictor, sigefest. Sepes, hege.
Uictoria, sige. 30 Fossa, dic.
Acies, ege. Puteus, pyt.
Capulum, hiltan. Predium, worpig.””
Mucro, swurdes ord, odde odres  Ferramentum, tol.
wepnes. Securis, ex.
Sica, lytel swurd, odde handsex. 35 Ascia, adesa.
Asta,’ uel quiris, sceaft. Terebrum, nauegar.
Uagina, scead. Terebro, ic borige.
Manubrium, heft. Foramen, dyrl.
Sagitta, uel telum, fla. Uanga, uel fossorium, spedu.
Fustis, sagol. Ligo, becca.
Cf. Bosw. D. 40p, R. W. ® Read hasta. R. W.
* Sic MS. R. W. 7 An error for umbo. R. W.
* Cf. Bosw. D. 277. R. W. ® Read eweartern, R. W.
4 The origiu of our word stirrup. It ® Read hortus. R. W.
might be supposed, from the form of the ° The origin of so many names of lo~
Anglo - Saxon word, that the Teutons calities in England ending in -worth or
originally used ropes for stirrups. worthy, as Wandsworth, Rickmansworth,
No Anglo-Saxon eqnivalent is given.  Holdsworthy, &c.
RW.

—
34 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY, 335
|
Bipennis, stanex.' Adulatio, lyffetung.
Palus, pal. Deceptor, uel seductor, bepecend.
Serra, snid. Proditor, uel traditor, lewa.
‘alx, sicol. Homicida, manslaga.
‘alcastrum, sipe. 5 Patricida, frderslaga.
Acus, nedl. Matricida, modorslaga.
Subula, wl. Fratricida, brodorslaga.
durum, gold. Parricida, wegslaga,
Argentum, seolfer. Uulnus, wund.
Auricalcum, goldmeesline.* 10 Cicatriz, dolhswapu.
s,* bres. Corpus, lic wgber ge cuces ge
Stagnum, tin. deades.*
Plumbum, lead. Truncus, heafodleas bodig.
Uitrum, gles. Funus, lie, odde hreaw.
Ferrum, isen. 15 Cadauer, lic, odde hold.’ 2
Electrum, smyltinc. Feretrum, ber.
Metallum, xlees cynnes wege. Uiuus, cucu.
| Massa, bloma, odde dah. Mortuus, dead.
Lapis, uel petra, stan. Defunctus, fordfaren.
Rima, uel fissura, cinu. 20 Longeuus, langlif.
| Marmor, marmstan. Nobilis, zpelboren.
 Saxum, weorestan. Presiosius,* deorwurpe.
Silex, flint. Uilis, waclic.
Gipsum, sperstan. Carus, leof.
| Gemma, gimstan. 25 Odiosus, lad.
Margarita, meregrota. Limen, oferslege, odde prexwold.
Calx, cealestan. Sciffus, lefel.
Aries, ram. Usceus,’ ceac.
| Cimentum,’ andweore to wealle. Peluis, wetermele.
| Cimentarius, wealwyrhta. 30 Plaustrum, uel carrum, wen.
! Rogus, ad. Rota, hweol.
Jocus, plega. Currus, uel basterna, uel hesseda,
| Locus, stow. cret.
Omnis, ele. Stabulum, fald, odde hus be wege.
 Omne, 2). 35 Caula, loc.
Totum, eal. Tugurium, hule.
Prophanus, manful. Cella, cyte.
Exosus, uel perosus, andsete. Mausaleum,' druh, odde ofergeweore.
Callidus, geap. Monumentum, uel sepulchrum, byri-
Simulator, hiwere. 40 gen.
Ypochrita, liccetere. Sarcofagum, durh.°
Adulator, lyffetere. Elemosina, wlmesse.
| "A stone-axe, The use of this ex- of the island, were really the Roman
1 Pression, in the explanation of the Latin weapon designated by that name,
bipennis, is curious, as showing, ap- * Rexd cementum, R. W.
parently, either that the Anglo-Saxons > Cf. Bosw. D. 37j. R. W.
did use axes made of stone, or that they * Sic MS. R. W.
believed that the axes of stone, so often ° Read urceus. R. W.
_ fonnd in different parts of England, and ® durh or druh cf, 1, 88. R. W.
tially ascribed to the Celtic population
f

336 ANGLO-SAXON VOCABULARY. 337
Donum, uel datum, gyfu. Pellis, fel.
Munus, lac. Cutis, uel corium, hyd.
Uter, byt- 6 Nebris, nmsc, odde heorpa.*
Flasco, butruc. Mercennarius, hyrman.
Ventorium, uel tabernaculum, geteld. 5 Horologium, degmel.
Pretium, wurd. Gnomon, degmeles pil.
Corbis, uel cofinus, wylige, odde  LHospes, cuma.
meoxbearwe.' Hospitium, gesthus.
Sportella, tenel. Hostis, uel osor, feond.
Cartallum, windel. 10 Mansio, wunung.
Calathus, wearp fet. Thesaurus, hord.
Pila, pilstoc, odde poder. Gazaphilacium, madmhus.
Loquela, spree. Edaz, uel glutto, ofereotol.
Uox, stemn. Ambro, frec.*
Sonus, swag. 15 Gulosus, gifre.
Uerbum, word. Procax, gemah.
Pecten, camb. Procacitas, gemahnes.
Sopo,’ sape. Obstinatus, anwille.
Perna, flicce. Abstinantia,® anwilnys.
Sagene, senet. 20 Uerecundus, sceamfest.
Follis, bylig. Impudens, unsceamfest.
Malleus, slege. Pudicus, sydeful.
Lima, feole. Inpudicus, unsydeful.
Scorium, synder. Interpres, wealhstod
Forceps, tange. 25 Reus, seyldig.
Carbo, col. Damnatus, uel condempnatus, for-
Forfex, sceara- demed,
Nouacula, neglsex, Peccator, synful.
Cos, hwetstan. Peceatum, syn.
Apricus locus, hleowstede. 30 Sceleratus, uel facinorosus, forsey]-
Apricitas, hleowd. degod.
Edificium, getimbrung. Scelus, seyld.
Palatium, cynebotl. Facinus, uel culpa, gylt.
Basis, sy). Adulter, forligr.
Postis, post. 35 Periurus, forsworen.
Catena, racenteah.° Gybberosus, uel strumosus, hoferede.
Compes, uel cippus, fotcops. Gibbus, uel struma, hofer.
Bogia, ine, odde swurcops. Meretrix, uel scorta, myltestre.
Manice, handcops. . Pelex, cyfes.
Complex, gegada. 40 We ne magon swa peab ealle naman
Poena, uel supplicium, wite. awritan ne furpor gepencan.
Uincula, uel ligamen, bend,
1 Cf. Rosw. D. 450, R. W. 125 1. 84. Or =hearde linum, stuppa?
* Read sapo=6aroy. R. W. RW
> Cf. Bosw. D. 53x, R. W. ° Of. pag. 339 Ambronibus and note.
* Of, pag. 125 1 84. nase means ‘ten- RW. J
der, soft’. heorpa = heorta (hyd); cf. pag. ® So the MS. Read obstinantia, R.W.
- ee 7

= - = .
XI.
None DIN © wad
GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON,
(FROM A MANUSCRIPT OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY.)
Anhelantium, epgiendra. Ammodum, ualde. -
| Agonista, oretmecga. Argenti, seolfres.
Agens, wrecende, drifende. Ac forficis, and sceara. ‘
Auida, da gifran. Aqueductum, wetergelada.
Aduehunt, ham wegad. 5 Aut flaua, des fealwan.
Amena, da wynsuman. Antecessor, fore-iernend,
Adstipulationibus, trymnessum. Austeritate, rednesse.
| Altrinsecus, on twa healfa. Austerius, rede.
| Allegoriam, gebecnendlicum.” Arroganter, gilplice.
| Anagogen, gastlecum andgite.” 10 Atrox, seo grimme.
| Autumo, estimo. Ambronibus, frecum gifrum.4
| Affectum, hyldo. Apparatu, geprece, s. adiutorio.
|
} 1 Tt was a common practice with the 8 Literally: intellectual understanding,
| Anglo-Saxon teacher to add in the Latin knowledge. R. W.
book he read in the schools an interlinear 4 The word Ambro, in this sense, is
_ gloss, explaining the more difficult words, not used by any pure Latin writer, but
( the meanings of which he was perhaps appears to have arisen originally as a
afraid of forgetting himself. Some one sort of popular, we might say slang, word.
f them, in the glossary here printed, has The grammarian Pompeius Festus (lib i,
aken evidently from several of these  p.6%, Valpy’s ed.), says that the Ambrones
glossed manuscripts, the glosses, and placed = were a people of Gaul who lost their
i them in alphabetical order, for greater territory by a sudden inundation of the
facility of reference. It is preserved in sea, and afterwards lived by robbery and
i manuscript apparently of the eleventh plunder, until they were crushed by
century, MS. Cotton., Cleopatra A, III. It Marius; hence it came into practice to
| is especially valuable for the number of call men who lived disgracefully Am-
ords it contains which are not found brones — “Ambrones fuerunt gens quedam
Isewhere. Gallica qui, subita inundatione mavis
® Prom beenian, beacnian to point out, cum amisissent sedes suas, rapinis ct
show. predationibus se suosque alere ceperunt ;
23

340 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 341
Ad inportunum, to dem gemalecan.' — Assertionibus, gesegenum.
Ambronis, gifrum. Absurdum, dyslic.
A predito, gewelegodum.? Anicula, eald cwene.
Antidota, wyrtdrencas. Ambrosia, elesealfe,® diuino odore,
Accumulare, heapian. 5 pxre swotstencan.
Amminiculo, adiutorio. Abigerentur, pellerentur.
Auri obriza lammina, da smexte gyl- -Aufugiunt, beflugan.
denan cladas.° Atrocitas, grimnes.
Arrogantie, gilpes. Auerna, ancilla, mennen.
Argumento, gleawnesse. 10 A cimentario,? from dem stanwyrh-
Argumento, ordonce, gleawnesse. tum.
Ab inlecebrarum, from unalifendle-  Alloguntur, tospreecon.
cum. Animaduerti, to angitanne and to
Ambitiuntur, ymbhwyrfte, ymbham- oncnawenne,
mene.4 15 Apologitico, aladiendre.
Ad tantum, to swa micelre. Ad liquidum, ad walan.
Adstipulatur, is sedende and ewed- Attonitis, tohireniendum odde hlos-
ende. nendum.
Acies, scearpnes. A tortoribus, from dem tintergen-
Anfractus, dweorhfyro. 20 dum.
Alitis, auis. Agonizans, campiende.
Agapem, swesendo. A primeuo, from dere frumildo.
Aporians, onscuniende. Armenia, hrydera heorde.
Asperrima, dere strecan. Anachoreseos, on anacorsetle. ®
Affatim, genihtsum. 25 Adire, gesecan.
Abdicare, denegare. Aliter, on enige odre wisan.
Alpium, munt geofa.> Autentica ueterum, mid ealdletre.
Ad sedandam, to gestillende. Adquisita, gestrined.
Aduersione, drean. Ad prelum, to winwringum.
A funesto, fram deem deadberendum. 30Astrusam, secretam.
03, et Cimbros, Teutonosque, C. Marius mean simply, made of pure gold, The
delevit; ex quo tractum est, ut turpis compiler of these glosses seems to have
vita homines Ambrones dicerentur.” At been rather imperfectly acquainted with
the beginning of the seventh century, the meaning when he added the word
Isidore gives the word in his Glosses auri, The Anglo-Saxon gloss is not
with the somewhat more definite meaning quite clear—perhaps it refers to the
of a waster, a consumer of patrimonies, ornamentation of the dresses of people
a spendthrift, a rioter, a prodigal —“Am- of high rank by thin plates of gold at-
bro,devorator, consumptor patrimoniorum, tached to them, as we know to have been
decoctor, luwuriosus, profusus.” It was the case among the Franks. (Cf. Bosw.
in this signification that it came into D.-64y. R. W.)
medieval Latin, where it was synonymous * Cf. hammen Leo Gloss, 113. R. W.
with leccator, Since Ducange quotes ag 5 This name for Alps appears to be a
his authority for it Gildas, Aldhelm, Boni- mere corruption of mons Jovis.
face, and Geoffrey of Monmouth, it seems © This word, meaning literally oil-
to have been a favourite word among the salve, seems rather a curious interpre~
Anglo-Saxon Latinists. Cf. pag. 340 1, 2, tation or explanation of the Latin word.
’ Of. Bosw. D, 291. R. W. . 7 Read cementario. KR. W.
? gewelgian means: to make wealthy, ® Literally, ou anachorite’s seat, i. ¢.,
to wax rich. R. W. the position of being an anachorite, or
* Obrisus is aword belonging to medie- _ hermit.
val, not to pnre, Latinity, and appears to

342 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 343
Aruina, rysle. Ab ingruenti, from pere onfeallendan.
A triplicis, dees priefealdan. Adgregatur, wes togerimed.

Altor, fosterfreder. Arbitraretur, wende.

Alexandria, ciuitatis. A pithonibus, fram helrunum.‘
Apologitica, fulfremedlicre. 5 Applaudunt, gulpan.

Arcebat, bewerede. Agitabant, onstyredan, drifan.

Ad palatinas, to dem palentlicum. Adgrederetur, he togeeode.

Ad tortas, to dem won. Adtori.. °

Archiatros, heahlecas odde ecref-  Adolesceret, wlancode.

gan.! 10 Applicauit, tobefeold.
Albo, nombec.” A circio, nordanwestan.
Apostatare, zeswician. Abeo apud, to dan swide.
Anthlete,'! oretmeegan. Adstridule, dere hristendan toswege.
Ad ultimum, da odnihstan. Ae lictoribus, tinterdegnum.
Agonizarunt, ellencampedon odde 15 Alulentis, deem ton.
prowedon. Amicula, das wepelsan.’

Arithmetica, rimereft. Artubus, imum.

Adfinium, neahmaga. Ad prediolum, to hira sundorlande.
Animaduerteret, dahe ongitende was.  Arceretur, adrifen, bewercd ware.
Ad suos libitos, to hira willum, 20 Arida, weosniendre.

A fanatica, of dere godwrecan. Adacto, awrecenum, togedyddum,
Astringentes, gebindende. Actionabatur, scirde.

Amphitheatri,1 plegstowe. Apice, hrofe.
Ad argumentum, to gleawnesse. Absit, wana sie.
Atrocisque, and grimmum. 25 Ad inuentionum,! to ancnawnessum.
Ad excubias, xt pam weardsctlum. —-Abhominentur, onscuniad.
Adglomerantur, togedcoddan. Ac cauillantes, and telende.
Attonitis, stupefactis. A puplicis, openlecum.
Adnecterent, gewrestan, gecnyttan. Assertionibus, segenum.
Abscedunt, hie ham ferdan. 30 Adstipulationibus, larum and trym-
Adultam, gewexen. nessum, cydnessum.
Abeuntem, on weg farendan. Affectu, for hylde and lufe.
Archimandrita, heahlearcow. Antie frontis, loceas odde feaxeacan.
Alimonia, edulia, alimenta, uictualia. _ Assute, gesiwede.
Aliorsum, elles hwider. 35 Ansatas,’ spreotas, xtgaras.
Affatim, genihtsumlice. Aurea, da gegyldnan.
Ac maturescere, and ripian. Atram, da sweartan.
Adstipulabimur, we trymmad.® Adultus, lung.$
Armonia, dream, swinsunge. Aries, wendoll.
Aruspicum, galdorcrefta, odde hal- 40 Apum, genitiuus pluralis.

sera. Almus, sanctus.
Adibitis, gegearwedum. Auxilium, miniculum.
Adibis, du gesecst. Accola, landleod, bugend.

* So the MS. R. W. * The writing is here obliterated by a

? i. e., name-book, an album, stain.

* Of. pag. 338 1. 7 and 343 1. 30. ® So the MS, Read das wafelsan. R. W.
* This Anglo-Saxon word is found else- 7 Hastas is omitted. R. W.

ere in the sense of a sorcerer. ® The MS, has lwng or Jung (?). R. W.

344 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 345, /
Adserto, defensor. Ad caulas, to ewestrum.s 7
Arceri, uocari, gefetadue. Adridente, tyhtende,
Admouit, facere jussit. Ad pensas, to nyttum.
Adthletam, et amicum. Adclinis, toheald.
Ad fundum, grund, 5 Adqueue, and swilce.
Alcides, columnas. Adseculam, pegn.
Affectuose, holdlice. Adgrediuntur, geeodon.
Acriter, duriter. Adtonitis, hlysnendum, tohirenien-
Altum, magnum. dum.?
Atrox, horrens. 10 Ad fasces, to weordmyndum.
Abilina, hnutu. Aduocatus, dingere.
Abies, xspe. Adhibuit, geladode. ‘
Absintium, wermod. Adplicuit, gedidde.
Ancilla, pinen. Addicit, fordemet.
Abortus, misbyrd. 15 Abellana, haslhnutu.
Abunde, gerihtlice. Adfinitate, gesibnesse. ;
Ab Africa, sudanwestan. Applicabo, ic tolide, ic lide.
Ab borea, eastaunordan. Anagliua, agrafenc, odde aholede.
Abditis, gehyddum. Aure tenuis,s smylte wedere.
Ab euro, eastansudan. 20 Auriga, wenere.
Ad euronothum, eastsud. Abenas, salas.°
Aconita, dungas. Alueum, streamrace.
Accersiuit, ladode. Agrestes, wudulice, odde wilde. :
Ac dignariis, folegercfum. Anthletarum,’ cempena.
Acisculum, pic." 25 Agonis, gewinnes.
Achalantis, wel luscina, uel roscinia,  Algosis, pam warihtum.

nihtegale. Aluearti,” hyfe.
Acerabulus, joclis,2 mapuldor. Ad incolatum, to eldeodignesse.
Aerifolus, holen. Ardui, pes heanhades.
Acega, holthana. 30 Arcuum, bigelsa.
Accearium, style.® Autumo, ic wene.
Acitula, hromsa.! Ambronibus, dem frecum."! :
Acitelum, hransan crop.‘ Aparatio, gepingio. :
Accitulium, geacassure.? Auita, yldra feder.
Abilina, nomen regionis, uel huutu.s 35 Atauus, fifta feeder. |
Actuarius, wree. Abnepos, feorpa sunu.
Accitum, gefetodne. Aporians, onscunicnde,*
Acegia, snite. Anatholi, des anatholes.
Acus, needl, odde gronwisc. Actutum, sona.

1A pick, for digging. Aciculus, or 6 ORL 1. RW.
acisculus, is a medieval word. 7 Of, pag. 341 1. 17, RW.

2 Cf, Cock. II pag. 337, R. W. 8 So the MS. R. W.

8 Steel. Accearium, also, or more cur- 9 Of course the Latin in this article
rectly acciarium, is not a word belonging is a vulgarism for habenas, reins.
to pure Latinity, as is the case with 10 For alveare. i
many which follow, 11 Cf. pag. 340 1,2. R. W.

4 Cf, Cock. II pag. 333. R. W. 12 Of, pag. 340 1. 23. R. W.

5 Cuckoo’s-sorrel. It is remarkable how |
long plants have borne names connected
with the cuckoo.

— =
GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. B47
Acathemice,’ deer cudwitlican. Antennarum, segelgyrda.
Astromonia,’ tungelcreftwisan. Antefatis, werworduin.
Aduectabant, ham feredan. Aurorescere, lihte.
{fflatus, eacen, odde gelicnes. Ansatas, speru.S :
Abolere, aiepan.” 5 Alumne, fosterbearn,
Assantibus, breedendum. Argutus, se gleawa.
A triplici cerebre, from pam drie- Anthlia, hledhweogl.
fealdan braegene. Alis, fiderum.
Affabiliter, \uflice. Annuatim, gearlice.
trite, gegnidenan. 10 Actus, gebeded.
Artus, lid. Adultus, geweaxen.®
reersiuit,> ladode. Anteritus, zreldo.
Apertis, tobreddum. Aliger, fiderberende.
Ariolorum, pa pxt womferht reniad, — Ardina,!° swind.
galdorgalera. 15 Annua uota, pa gearlican gehat.
Alloces, da miclan tan. \ $02 Absidam, cleofan.
} Abegerunt, from adreofan. Arta, mid pa nearwan.
| Amiculis, gegerelan. Alcidis, helcol.!*
| Amiculo, hregle. Amens, gemed.
Aguste, dere ruman. 20 Aprum, cofor.
| Augustum, brad. Altercaretur, cidde.
| Adtonito, dem todunicndan. - Astus, bred.
Acri, grimme. Astula, spon.
Atrocius, grimlicor. Auceps, fugelere.
Adsciti, gegaderade 25 Argolicas, da creaciscan, !*
| Archipiratta,® heah sedeof. Acerra, fete odde gledfzte.
| Apicibus, stafum. Artis, nearewum,
Adcisceretur, togcladede. Achile, scyld.
| Atramentum, sweartnesse. Aristis, eglum, odde carun.
Ademptam, genumenc. 30 Arcibus, hrofum, odde  bigelsum
Adplaudunt, gulpan.t burgum.
Antiquitus, gefyrn, Allecto, weleyrige.
| Agapem, elmessum, swasendo.> Accidia, slecnes.
| Argutis, bem swogendtmn, hleodre- — Acercatur, asurige.
\ gendum. 35 Acredinis, surnesse.
| rpagine,® slitunge. Agiographa, sancta scriptura, halig
| Assentatrix, sio gepafigeudc. gewrit.
: writerum.? Apocrifa, dyrngewrita.
|
1 So the MS. R. W. to have been used especially for a copier
| 2 aiepan or aipan means: to cast out, of old books. See Du Cange.
demolish. R. W. 8 Cf. pag. 343 1. 85. 1. W.
8 So the MS. R, W. 9 Cf. pag. 3421.31. R. W.
ae? Cf. pag. 348 1. 5. OR. WL 10 Read arvina.
5 Cf. pag. 340 1, 22. R. W. 11 This seems to be a corruption of
6 For Harpagine. Hercules, i. ¢, Alcides. ‘Taken literally
7 The word antiquarius, in the sense it would mean hell-coal.
Of a writer of books, a serjbe, is found 12 Greek; Greekish, in old English.
| u Isidore, Orig., vi, 14. It seems at first

348 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. B49.
Ante postes, beforan hlidgeate." Africus, westsud wind.
Apotheca, winfet, winhorn.” Agreste, wilde.
Armentorum, heorda, Agmen, werod.
Azimum, peorf. Alba spina, hegdorn.
Adgrediar eum, ic hine angine. 5 Alcion, isen.?
Aceruum, muwan. Alneta, alorholt.
Attriuit, gepreste. Alga, war.
Audita, gefrege- Alneum, fuletreow.
Anaglifa, heahgrefte. Albipedius, hwitfot.
Amulas, amelas.* 10 Alternantium, stefnendra.
Argillosa, doihte. Alacris, snel.
Argilla, do. Alucer,’® swift.
Armamentarium, wepenhus. Alitus, pm.
Aratiuncula, sulineela. Alium, leac.
Aratrun, sul. I5 Alapiciosa,!! calwa.
Aure tenuis,s smylte wedere. Aluor,’? swon, odde ilfatu.
Adpendes, du amst. Aura, hwiodan, odde orepe.
Abenas,° salas. Amens, emod.
Adnitentibus, tillgendum. Amites, fugeltrio, reftras.
Auruspices, galdorgaleras. 20 Amilarius, mearh.'®
A cibis luculentioribus, fram swettrum — Amiculo, hregle-
mettum. Anos, hringas.
Abortiuos, beordorewelmas. Andena, brandred.'*
Auguria, helsunga. Aneta, ened, a natanda.
Adulta, geweaxen.® 25 Anetum, dile.
Adtrectauerit, grapode. Antena, boga.
Ad conficiendos, to gewyrecune. Anxius, sorgende,
Azimos, deorflingas.? Annua, gerlice.'®
Ac micare, and seinefrian. Anaglifa, aholad.'®
Ansa, nostle. 30 Anser, gos.
Arula, fyrpanne > Antidotum, rene, wyrtdrene.
Amita, fade. Anguila, el.
Albugo, eagfled. Anceps, tweogende.
Adacinum, dagrenan. Antulus, ceacbora.
Auricomus, gyldenfeaxa. 35 Armilausia, serce,"7
1 i, e., before the back door: rather a occupied by the ladies. he Latin word
curious and ignorant translation of ante- is found in the Gloss of Isidore,
postis. ho 9 Cf. pag. 3501.7, R W.
2 The MS. has: win ern. R. W. 10 So the MS. R. W.
8 The ama, or its dimiuutive amula, 11 For alopecia, a disease which causes
was the sacred vessel used in the church baldness,
to hold the consecrated wine, or anything 12 For olor, Il-fetu is given in Somner
else which had been consecrated, as an A.S. name for a swan.
4 Cf. pag. 345 1. 19. R, W. 18 Of. Bosw. D. 442, R. W.
5 Of course for habenas. 14 Cf, pag. 329 1. 31, R, W.
6 Cf. pag. 3471. 11. R. W. 15 Of. pag. 347 1.9, R. W-
7 Cf pag 348 1. 4. R. W. 16 Cf. pag. 345 1,18, R. W.
8 The fire-pan appears to have been 17 The sagum, or military frock, open at
used especially for warming the rooms the sides, but covering the back and breast.

0 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 351
iplustra, gevedro. Auehit, aweg aferede.
poriamur, biod preade. Auricularius, eargespeca.
ipiaster, swines mearce. Auspicentur, helsadon.
potasia, fretgengan. Ausure, brucende.
Esculos, bece. 5 Aurocaleum, grene ar.
Apricitas, hiw. Aucupium, yltwist.

Ichior, isen.* Azredones, lynisas.°
quilium, onga. Azgredo, lynis.5
itpago, awel, odde clawu. Adrogantissime, wlanclice.
quemanile, leuel. 10 Amis, eax.
Aciem, fedan. Areister, strelbora.
reoli, sceafas. Aquila, carn.
rmum, bog. Abdicatione, beseyrednesse.
ses corteas, liperene trymsas. Arpa, eargeat.®
Apogium, eorpern. 15 Abdictis, serscrifenum.
Anguens, bremel. Anser, hwite gos.
Arrius, fag. Atrium, cafertun.
| Aigit, free. Alacid, mew.7
| Archtoes, wenes disl. Apoplexia, ferdeap,
| Artemon, seg. 20 Accipiter, goshafue.s

ida, drignes. Alietum, spearhafuc.®
chiatros, heahlecas. Adticus, feldbeo, dora.!°
cem, cnol. Apis, beo.

\ commentariis, fram trehterum.? Apostoma,'' swyle.
| Ardebat, scan. * 25 Ardea, hragra.!”

| Ad expensas, to nyttum. Apidiscus, webhoc.
| ‘cersitus, fetod.3 Alibrum, reol.

cister, strelbora and scytta. Arteriaca, gebreedrene.
ispera, unsmode. Antropus, man.

| Adsessore, fultemendum. 30 Amaracium, sealseyn.
tflarat, ansueop. Anima, saul.
estuaria, fleotas. Adulterium, geligere.
| Adfero, ic tobere. Auditus, gehirnes.
ltqueue, ond swylee.' Auris, eare.
| Attacus, dora. 35 Album, neodera welor.
| Auriculum, earwiega, odde dros. Anterie, wedre.
| Auster, sudwind. Antheris, edran.
bellanus, hes). Aruo, ierdland.
| Aucupatione, setunge. Articulus, lidinecl, lytel lid.
| Ausus, gedyrstig. 40 Anus, beecpearm.
| 1 Of. pag. 349 1. 5 and pag. 4 1, 39. 6 Cf. pag. 258 1. 4. R. W.
ik. Wa 7 Cf. pag. 269 1. 6 and pag. 5 1. 16.
2 trehtere or trahtere denotes: an in- 8 Cf. pag. 2591. 7. R. W.
pretor, commentator, R, W. 9 Ch pag. 259 1.9, R. W.
! CE pag. 3461.12. RW. 10 Read Atticus or Altica (i. e., apis).
| 4 Cf. pag. 845 1. 5 and pag. 71. 32, Cf. pag. 261 1. 8. R. Wz
RW. 11 Read apostema. R. W.
5 Read axedo, axedones, Cf. pag. 8 1, 9, 12 Cf, pag. 6 1,37, R. W.
R. W,
{

352 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 353
Ansa, hringe. Alnus, alr.
Apiastrum, beowyrt. Amera, seal."! |
Alea, tefl. Acinum, hindberige.
Aleator, tiflere. Apeletum, spracen.'*
Agapis, degmete. 5 Apio, mercc.!*
Attomos, mot. Alium, gearleac.
Agontea, ellenlxea.' Ascolonium, cipa "
Agen, beogang. Alba cipa, hwite leac.
Altitudo, foder Arnaglosa. wegbrede."
Amadriades,? feldzlbinne odde el- 10 Ambila, leac.
fenne. Aurun, gold.
Armilausia, sere.s Aurifex, goldsmid.
Apiarius, beocere. Argentum, seolfor.
Aggusti, pa yldestan caseras.' 4Es, ar.
Altrix, festermodor.® 15 Argentum uiuum, ewiescolfor. |
Alwnnus, fosterbrodor. Aurifodina, gyldingwege.
Anguis, weternzdre. Ascarida, hnitu.
Abnepos, feorpa sunu. Antile, heahfru. :
Adnepos, fifta sunu. Acris, from. j
Apatruus meus, mines federan prid- 20 Auriculum, dros.
da feder. Anaxie, geornlice. j
Auena, wistle. Appetitus, gistung.
Albium, mele. Astu, facne. .
Agapa, ciepeman. Aquile, segnas.'® {
Anterie,° geotend, sinewind. 25 Adsciti, gegaderade.
Anagrippa, anlicnes. Arua, yrdland.
Acerua mors, ungeweaxenra deap. Aulwa, heal. :
Apotassia, fretgenga." Annona, nonmete. 5
Aquor,® geseunes. Apex, acumen. :
Antulum, ceac.9 30 Angarizauerit, ...'°
Aucupis, fuglere.'° Ad stauram, to wermete.
Artemesia, mucgwyrt. Accussor, wregend.!* :
Arnaglosa, wegbrede. Ascinaria, esuleweorn.'®
Amitis, lorg. Altilia, fuglas, odde ameste fugelas.
Aucupium, fuglung. 35 Ad exitus, to geletum. ;
1 Cf. Bosw. D. 25v. R. W. 18 Read apium. Cf. Cock II pag. 338. —
2 Read hamadryades. R. W. ROW.
3 Cf. pag. 349 1. 385. RW. 14 Gf, pag. 352 1. 33. R. We :
_ 4 SOF Angnstus, the oldest or earliest 15 In the book here glossed, the aquil@
Cesar.” were no doubt the Roman eagles, which
5 So the MS. R. W. the glossator explained as meaning an
6 Read arterie, R. W. ensign or banner, segn,
7 Of. pag. 3501, 4. R. We 16 The Anglo-Saxon gloss has been
8 For @quor, no doubt. erased, as though the compiler had found,
9 Cf. pag. 349 1, 34. R. W. after it was written, that it was erroneous.
10 Cf. pag. 347 1, 24. R. W. 17 Cf, pag. 332 1,1. R. W.
11 The willow, still called the sally on 18 Cweorn meant a mill, the stone of
the border of Wales and in the West of which is still called a quern. Esul meant
England, an ass, and the esud-cweorn was “|
12 Cf. Cock. I pag. 345. R. W. a large qnern stone turned by au ass.
A

4 : GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 355
Amphoram, amber. Adstipulans, fylstende and geecende
Auulsus, aweg abroden. and gewemende.

Azyma, andbita, beorma.’ Alpes, munt iofes clifu.®

Allegoriam, deem gchiowendlican.? Aggerens,’ hlawum.

Anagogen, dem godeundan heahstan. 5 Ara, wiggebed.

Adsuete, gewunade. Allusiones, plegan.

Ammodum, swide. Abscidam, wort ic.

Ac privata, and dere synderlic. Articulata, rihtlidlicn, ’

Arte plumaria, bleocrefte. Anhela, sworetendleca.

Argumento, mid ordonce. 10 Achiuum, grece-

Achademice, dere udwiottelican. Ad instar, on gelienesse.

Accepto ferre, onfon. Arbiter, doema.

Ariolandi, on wigbede to halsicnne. Arsantes, da gegendan.8

Antes, leaf. Adhesit, etfealh and oncleofode.

“Acutum, da sona and hrede. 15 Anfractibus, ymbgongum, bogetun-

Ademptam, odbrogen.® gum, hileum.

Ad infame, to dem unhlisberum. Aceruos, muwan, hreacas.

A merulento, from dem hlutrum, Alterna, wrixliende.

Antes, oweestmas. Amplam, brade.

Actus, geneded. 20 Actos, da todrifenan.

Aprico, wearman. Arcitenens, heofenhebbend.®

Astu, facne. Adunci, gebegdes.

Arceri, aweg adrifan. Ambit, ymbgyrded.

_ Artius, festlicor. Atomo,’ mote

Astu, gleawnisse and sceare. 25 Ambo, begen, butu.

Arcebant, ut adriofan. Arguto, scearpe.

Abyssum, deagelnesse. Arta, gefeged.

Adsciscier, to geladian and gecigean. Auide, dere gifran.

Arratam, beweddad. Ad superos, to upwarum.

Ausis, gedyrstignessum. 30 Adfinis, nehgebur.

Astus, gebregdnes, weerlotes. Adictus, forslegen.

Acta, genende.+ Aidonew, hearpen,!°

Anzia, geencgdu. Arcis, feestennes.

Acerra, rycelsbuce. A lanionibus, from hylderum.

Anchile,®> scelde 35 Arrectas, upp arehte.

Allectio, tyhtend. Agquis, gelicum.
* Azyma means the feast of unlcavened ° This is another example of the singul-

bread. R. W. ar blunders made by these Anglo-Saxon
? gehiowian means: simnlare. R. W.  glossators, and of the state of learning
* Cf. pag. 346 1. 30. R. W. exhibited in the ordinary schools. Ar-
“of. 1. 20. R. W. citenens, the archer, was most probably,
* Read: ancile. R. W. in the book from which this word was
© See before note 5 on p. 341. It is taken, used as an epithet of Apollo, but

not clear, however, where the Anglo- the writer of the gloss supposed it to be

Saxon writers found this name, as I am formed from ara, instead of arcus,

not aware that the Alps are called Mons ' The Latin word is here probably a

Jovis by any ancient writer. corruption of the Greek oydévec, night-
7 So the MS. R. W. ingales.
* Cf. pag. 12 1. 28. R. W.

= 24

356 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 357
y

Asceila, ohsta.' Agnus, lamb. , |
Abortus, samboren. Acrum, scencel. !
Achariter,? baldlice. Asellus, weorf. ]
Apporia,’ inca. Asinus, assa. . |
Accedia, biternes. 5 Artocobus,® smeel hlaf.
Asserum, twiga. Aurippus, ewecesond.
Acinos, bergan. Afficiar, genirwed and geenged.
Aplestia, oferfyl. Amaro, pa biteran.
Aplesta, steorra. Aruum, wonge.
Amarcas, lytle leas. 10 Ad oras, to dem gemerum.
Agaso, horsdegn, Agitabat, styrede.
Alleh, grindle Acimum, maltwyrt.!°
Appetitorum, andfang. Ahiolatus," frihtrung.
Armille, midlhringas. Anses, restras.
Antela, fordgyrde. 15 Aplustra, gerepro.!
Ascia, adesa.
Asula, iren hiord. Balus, isenfetor.
Auris, inneweard eare. Bacidones, redenne
Auricula, utweard eare. Bagula, bridels.
Articulus, handwyrst. 20 Balsis, teter.
Auricularis, earfinger. Ballista, steflidere, odde scaru, &
Aluus, mannes scaru. machina bella.
Adeps, gelynd. Barsterna, beer.
Albus, hwit. Baccinia, begir
Auidius, grionu. 25 Bacce, bergan.
Aureus, giolu. Ballena, bran, odde hweel.
Alcido, mew. Barritus, ginung, odde ravinge.
Alauda, lawerce. Battat,’ gina.
Auricinctus, goldfine. Basterna, cret
Ardea, hragra.4 30 Balbus, wlisp.
Aranea, gongelwafre.5 Blessus, scomm.
Accipiter, pipat. Ballationes, cnop.
Acinum, maltwyrt. Basis, syl.
Alucurus, uel thimus, hed.§ Balbutus, scom, wlisp-
Acidinetum, gorst.* 35 Bapys, treuteru, bansegn.
Alans, riscleac.® Baruhina, bericge.
Anniculus, steor. Balatus, bleted.
Aries, weder. Barrulus, vagufine.

* Ohsta means: the armpit, asella. % Riscleac means: allium. R. W.

R. W. ° @oréxoxog means: a baker. R. W.

? Read: acriter. R. W. 19 Cf, pag. 356 1. 33. R. W.

> Read: aporia. R. W. 114 corruption of Hariolatio, The Anglo-

* Cf. pag. 6 1. 37. R. W. Saxon teacher evilently, from his inter-

* Cf. Bosw. D. 27 gang-wefre and Leo pretation of Arivlandi in the preceding
Gl. p. 77, 55; p. 424, 16. gange-vyfre. page, supposed the Latin word to be

R. W. derived from ara, an altar.
® Cf. Cock. Leechd. III pag. 329. R. W. 12 Cf. pag. 6 1. 14. RR. W.
7 Cf. Cock. TIT pag. 323. R. W. 3 Sic MS. R. W.

GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 359
Beacita, stearn. Bradigabo, feldwuop.
errus, bar. Brucus, ceafer.
Benigniter, medomlice. Bruncus, wrot.5
Berruca,' wearte. Bracie, cian.
Berna,’ higre. 5 Byrseus, lederwyrhta, odde lypen-
Bettonica, aterlade. wyrhta.
icoca, heferblete. Balteum, gyrdel, odde belt.
itwmen, lim, Bata, mittan.
ile, ater. Blata, hredbita,
Bitricius, steopfeder. 10 Barba, beard.
irbicariolus, yrdling.2 Brachium, earm.
Bitorius, wana. Butrus, hos.
Blitum, clate. Beta, birce.
Byssum, twins Bibulta, billere.
Bratheas, goldtel. 15 Bubullus, swan.
Batilla, fyrscofl. Boratorium, byres.
Bolidis, sundgyrd in seipe, odde rap, Burdus, seamere.
i, metrap. Boua, oxa.
Bothoma, embren.4 Batuitum, gebeaten.
‘othonicla, stoppa. 20 Broelarius, ediscweard.
Bobellum, falod. Butirum, butere. .
Bona, scet. Bajulat, bierd.
Bon, scettas. Bombicinum, siolcen.
Boreus, eastnord wind, Baratrum, pytte.
Bobulcus, hridhierde. 25 Biothanatas,* selfbonan.
Bouestra, radre. Bisso retorto, hwite twine gedrawen.
Bocharius, mereswin. Bombose, dere putendan. ~~
Bofor, lembis lieg. Baptisterio, fulwiht stowe.
Bombosa, WMeglende. Bucellam, cicel.
| Botrum, clystre. 30 Boias, beagas.
Butros, geclystre. Byrse, hyde.
Briensis, handwyrm. Bis quingentenum, tuwa tiftig.
Bux, borg. Bituminis, sciptaran.
Bulla, sigel. Baiolabantur, borene werou.
Butio, cyta. 35 Bis senis, tuwa healfum.
Bubo, wuf. Basterne, scrides.
Buculus, vondbeag. Bilance, twyfealdre heolra.
Burrum, bruun. Basilisci, deve nedran.
Badius, brun. Bratea fila, se gyldna dred.
Bubalis, wesend. 40 Bullis, bulum.
Buccula, buce. Bigis, cratum,
Bunia, byden. Bustis, byrgelsum.
Bubla, flod. Bucula, cealf.
Bratium, mealt. Bombis, hlowengum, odde swoegum.
* Of course, an error for verruca and pag. 9 1. 11 and 12. R. W.)
verna. * The MS. has twin not tyin. R. W.
* The Saxon word is understood to * So the MS. R. W.
signify a farmer, but whence the Latin * Bruncus seems here to be an error
rd was obtained it is hard to say. (Cf. for truncus.

360 GLUSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 361
Bis terna, sex. Boreali, pxre nordlican.
Buculam, stire. Borith erba fullonum, leadorwyrt5
Bellona, weleyrge. Batis, stapul.
Bargina, da elpeodigan odde of el- — Bassis, stepe.

peodisere. 5 Bagulum, biotul.+
Bariona, culfran sunu. Bipinnis, twibill.
Buccis, mudun. Bacus, sicel.
Bernis,! peowenna: Buris, sulhbeam.
Butra, dysige. Boie, bogan. 4
Barca, scip. 10 Blurus, blere. ‘
Brattea, se gyldna. Busius, fealo.

Buxeus, sio bixne. Bruntus, wonn, :
Bombix, sioluewyrm, odde sidwyrm, Balidus, hrut. i
odde loppe. Berbigarulus, uel tanticus, yrdling.®
Bernam, peowne. 15 Bardioriolus, colmase. i

Bachus, win. Biturius, wrenna.
Bellonia, wilde deor. Bugium, heferblete. j
Bulga, belge odde bylge. Baptua, syring.
Barbiia, beme. Betulus, byree.6 j
Biblis, bocum. 20 Betuleum, byrcholt.
Biblum, boe. Bremium, earise.
Biformis, twihiowe, swa swa bid Beta, bete.
healf mon and healf fear. Brittanica, cuslyppe.”
Batutas, pa gebeatenan. Bimus, on dem eftran teame.
Bulla, bula. 25 Berbex, rom.
Bina, twegen. Bouile, seypen.
Bachi, wines. Bamus, derscel.8
Bassia, cossas. Bidubium, i. marra, bill.
Biblos, bec. Barbarus, walch, sive ungerad.
Bis binis de fontibus, of feower stri- 30 Barbarismus, miseweden word.
celum. Brancos, hrecgebree.9
Brumalia, pa winterlican. Botrax, yee.
Bratea, gylden pel arlegen.? Bibliotheca, bochord.
Brume, wintres. Bicinium, twega sang.
Blandior, ic eweme. 35 Bigamus, i. uir unius mulieris.”
Bellipotens, wiga odde wigstrang. .
* Yor vernis, as below bernam for * A flail, or implement’ for thrashing,
vernam. still called’ in some of onr local dialects
7 Of Lait RW. a thrashle. 7:
* Cf. Vulgata Jerem. 2, 22 and Malach. ° It appears that this strange Latin,
3,2. RW. and its Auglo-Saxon interpretation, mean
* Bagula is found iu the medieval Lat- simply a sore throat, or bronchitis, A .
in writers iu the sense of a bridle. The Latin’ saint’s life, quoted in Ducange,
Anglo-Saxon word byotal, more usually speaking of catching a fish and drawing
written bytl, is represented in our modern it ashore, has the elegant Latin phrase, ?
English by beetle, a wooden hammer used  Apprehende branciam ejus et trahe in |
for beating clothes. siccum.
> Of. p. 358 1. 1k. RL W. 19 Nobody but the writer of an Anglo-
° Cf. p. 359 1. 13. RW. Saxon gloss would imagine that bigamy
7 Cf. Cock, HI p. 323. RK, W. meaut having ouly one wife.
_—

362 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 363
Calculus, ceale, numestan. Carbo, gled.
Cacabum, citel. Carduelis, linetwige.
Cados, ambras. Caradrion, lewerce.
Cartellus, windel. Cantarus, wifel.
Cartilago, uxsgristle. 5 Callos, wearras, ilas.
Carbunculus, spryng. Carula, crawe.
Camellea, wulfescamb. Cartilago, grundsopa.
Canis lingua, ribbe, hundestunge. Caper, heefer.
Caulem, stela. Catrum, sweard.
Cataracte, peotan, weterpruh. 10 Caldaria, citel.
Caumeunie, eordreste.t Cartago, bredepanne.3
Caccabatus, hrumig. Caragios, lyblecan.*
Cauterium, mearcisen. Casla, heden.

Capsis, cyst. Carbasus, seglbosm.
“Carruca, cret. 15 Cautionem, gewrit.
Cariscus, ewicbeam, wice. Cauerniculis, holum.
Capitium, hod. Capestrinum, geflit.
Camisa, ham, cemes. Cassidis, helmes. 7
Cappa, sciccing. Cassida, helmas.
Castanea, cistenbeam. 20 Cassus, fer.

Calta, reade clefre. Cassis, ned.
Capisternum, caefester. Casso, idle.

Cariz, secg. Cassium, helm.
Calcesta, hwite clefre. Celutum, agrefen.
Cancer, hefern. 25 Canthera, trog.
Caleiculium, iacessure. Canda, boga.
Cacomicanus,? logper. Cardiolus, wudusnite.
Calomacus, heed, Callis, pad.

Castorius, befer. Capistro, ceefli.
Cenum, wase. 30 Callus, wear.

Carina, bytne. Calleo, freefele.
Carectum, hreod. Cartomo, lybcorn.
Canti, felga. Carceria, bunan.
Cassidele, pung. Cercylus, wsc.
Carrassinum, grene gers. 35 Censores, gerefan.
Cappa, snod. Cesuram, gegangende.
Calmetum, mersc. Celox, ceol.

Caliga, scoh. Cefalus, heardra.

* Caumeunie represents a medieval * Breding-panne is interpreted in the
Greek word, xcuevyiar, meaning a bed dictionaries a frying-pan; but in medieval
laid on the ground. It is found in the Latin we find the word cartagium used
lives of saints. (Cf. pag. 10 1. 30. R. W.) for a measure of corn or bread, un quar-

- Another medieval Greek word, xaxo- tier, which is probably the meaning of
uyzavos, i. e. mala machinans. The the word here.

Anglo-Saxons had rather a leaning to * Caragius is found in the theological
Greek words, which perhaps originated writings of Bede and in other medieval
with Theodore of Canterbury in the se- writers in the sense of a sorcerer,
yenth century. (Cf. pag. 111.11, R. W.)

364 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 365
Cente,! wilde gos. Coniurati, gemode.
Celatum, abracod, ut aprungen. Contumax, aumode.
Cessere, onwican. Confusione, gemengunge.
Ceriacus, hornblawere. Concesserim, arecte.
Chori, eastannordan windas. 5 Conpar, geheplice.
Circius, westnord wind. Constipuisse, geswidrade.
Circinni, windeloceas. Contos, speru, odde spreotas.
Cirros, loccas. Consobrinus, geswiria, odde swustur
Circinnatio, efesung. sunu,
Cicuanus, higere. 10 Color, ac.
Cis, beheonan. Colyrus,? hes).
Cicuta, hymlic. Cornua, crawe.
Ciconia, store. Corimbos, leactrogas.*
Ciscillus, heardheaw. Colostrum, beost.
Cinoglosa, ribbe. 15 Cassan, beost.
Citonium, godeppel. Coclyas, wilocas.
Cicer, bean, pisan. Commentis, ordoncum, searwum.
Corrumpitur, is gewemmed. Confici, gemenge.
Clibosum, clifihte. Consobrinus, swor.
Clauia, borda. 20 Corax, hrefn.
Claua, steng. Cox,‘ hwetstan.
Clustella, clusterloc. Cotem, hwetestan.
Cladica, wefl, odde owef, oddeclau- Coxa, peoh.

dica. Conpelum, tun, prop.
Clasis, flota, sciphere. 25 Colicus, efordrote.
Classes, scipu. Coruis, cawel.
Conpescens, gestillende. Conpagem, gegederong.
Contribuli, gesibbe. Coituras, gegangendo.
Confectum, geblanden. Coaceruassent, geheapodan.
Confectus, gewrged. 30 Coagulum, cyslyb.
Colocinthidw, hundesewelean. Commolitis, pu forgrindesp.+
Commissum, gefremed. Coneisium, scelle.
Conticiscent, swigiad. Commentum, adobt.
Consuluerunt, frunian. Conderetur, geworht.
Conpulsus, gebeded. 35 Concis, scellum.
Colliridam, healstan. Coleandrum, cellendre.
Coccum, weoleread. Colomate, hiedcole.
Conlato, ambehte. Contagione, besmitenesse. |
Commeatos, sande. Conualuit, gewyrpte.
Conuincens, oferstelende. 40 Consors, orsorg.
Codices, onheawas. Comitauere, togelestenne.
Corimbos, berian. Commendabat, trymede.
Consulo, ie frine. Concussionibus, rednessum.
Coaluissent, swornodon. Confoti, afedde.
Concedam, lytisna. 45 Conuenientes, syrwende.

* So-the MS. Wright printed; cante. * Ch. pag. 864 1. 42, R. We
Cf. pag. 12 1. 87, R. W. * So the MS. R. W.

* Of course, this is a corruption of corylus.

366 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 367
Conlisio, slege. Cingebant, ymbhefdan.
Coturno, wodhen.! Caricarum, ciserxpla.
Confutat, ofersteled, odde widflited.  Conualescas, pu getrumast.
Conpilat, stiled. Cerethi, eoredmen, redechere.
Cornu, cyste. . 5 Carpenta, isenum greftum.
Coneretum, gerunnen. Cemedes, ealdorman.
Conca, musclan scil. Cognomine, freonaman.
Conectit, teldat. Concusa, onscacene.
Cocilus, ompre. Cerimonias, onsegdnessa.
Conputatio, getel. 10 Chori, mittan.
Catalagus,” getzl. Cimentarii, weallwyrhtan.
Coniectorem, swefnreccere. Capitella, heafedstol.
Commentarii, treahteras. Canti, felga.
Conspersam, gecneden. Coluber cerastis, nedre gehyrnedu.*
-Conpingite, gefegad. 15 Conmute, onwende.
Crebrat, syfted. Conparuit, xtiewde.
| Crepido, rima. Creuere, gesion.
Crama, flete. Contentus, dancful.
Crates, hegas. Conderunt, gesettan.
| Cragacus, styria. 20 Commodarent, borgedan.
Cuneus, wered, weeg. Conpingite, gefegad.
Creditor, byrga. Coarim,+ handseax.
Cuniculos, smygelas. Condies, geswet.
Culcites, bed. Crepuerit, berstlad.
| Culcitatum, bed. 25 Conpescens, gestillende.
Cucumis, popig. Conplosis, flocende.
Culix, myeg. Cictris, ilnetu.
Culini, cocas. Cautibus, cliofum.
Curtina, wagryft. Cucu, hleapewince.
Culter, seax, odde scyrseax. 30 Columba, culfre.
Chameleon, xmete. Cornix, crawe.
Cythropodes, priefete, ricelsfit. Cornicula, cio.
Compendiis, gestreonum. Cucuzata, irdling.
Contemitibiliora, pa hirwendlican Ciaus, edischen.
Contra latrantes, wid pa beorcendan. 35 Cuculus, geac.
_ Crebrius, gelome. Cuneus, heap.
i Conuenire, gerisnian. Crabro, hyrnetu.
a Calce, fyrsne, stige. Curculio, emel.
Cedes, welfill. Cicada, hama.
i Coluber cerastis, gerumpenu nedre.s 40 Coetus, hweel.
— Conpulsus, gebeded. Coclea, weoloc.
_ Cognatio, megburg. Cancer, heefern.
Cibaria, mettas. Cladica, wefl.
Cum recisset, mid type geascode. Colus, wulmod.
4 ; The MS. has he. R. W. -* One may doubt whether the MS. has
I * Sie MS. _R. W. ‘ coarim or perhaps coltrim (= coltrum or
b Cf. the Anglo-Saxon Version of ‘Epi- cultram ?). R. W.
f stola Alexandri’ (ed, by Cockayne) fol.
$2403.15. R. W.

=
368 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 369
Conductum, gernwinde. Cerefolium, ceruille. i
Claus, teltre. Cudo, anfilte.
Calatum, toweht. Carbo, col.
Chomos, middangeard. Calmum, windelstreow. i
Corpus, lichama. 5 Coluber, snaca, odde nedre. ]
Caro, flesc. Cornas, geap. |
Crementum, sed. Caballus, hengest. 1
Caput, heafod. Camellum, oluend.
Cephal, heafud. Caprea, ra.
Coma, feax. 10 Capreola, rage.
Capilli, loccas. Capra, gat.
Cerebrum, bregen. Capri, heferes. !
Capitium, foreweard sweora heafod. Calear, spura. j
Cessaries, 1s, wiffex. Cuspis, gad.
Cilium, bruwa. 15 Catesta, geled.
Corona, beag. Colonus, gebyr.8
Columna, eal nosu. Cistula, spirte.
Canini, hundlice odde tuxas. Camos, swol.
Collum, sweora. Capitium, heafodsmel.
Ceruex, sweora, 20 Condicio, redin.
Cubitus, feepm.' Clauicularius, cegbora.
Cutis, sweard. Cicur,® mandwere.
Costa, rib. Crocus, geolu.
Cor, heorte. Crocea, gioluwre.
Cruor, dead blod. 25 Calbuus,6 calo.
Calamus, pet wepenlice lim. Camara, hrof.
Cecum, blindpearm. Catinus, scutel.
Cingulum, gyrdel. Caseum, cyse.
Cinis, acse. Calmaria, cealre.
Cicindilio, se... .? 30 Caimum, molegn. .
Cotizo, ic tefle. Caluiale, cealerbriw.
Carea,’ weax. Coclear, cucelere.
Candela, candel. Clerius™ cibus, wyrtmete.
Carpentarius, wengerefa. Celia, ealo.
Ceruical, heafedbolster. 35 Ceruisa,* swatan.
Capsula, hacele. Cena, wefenmete.
Castaneus, cistenbeam. Cucumus, popi-
Cortix, rind. Ciatum, steap.
* The glossator has here apparently ° Cicurius is given in Ducange as a
mistaken the Latin word, and supposed medieval Latin word bearing the meaning
it referred to a measure, instead of a limb. of prudent, gentle, placid, mild, ete.
? Defaced in the MS. Cf. pag. 121 © For calvus. These clerical errors in
1, 25: Cicindela se glisigenda wibba. this document are too numerous to men-
R. W. tion; we have, below, cacobatus for caca-
* The origin of the modern word boor, batus (blackened with soot), celeps fur
a countryman. celebs, ete.
* Cf. pag. 11 1. 45 and pag. 12 1. 45. 7 So the MS. R. W.
R. W.

370 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 3871

Cuba, tunne. Cittis, uilmenum, epelscealum ymb

Calamidis, godweb. da cyrnlu.

Calor, hete. Contecta, bedeat.

Choors, tun. Cercilo, scipe.*

| Chorus, preat. 5 Calones, wuderas.
Carpella, sadelboga. Clientes, degnhyssas.

Cornicem, hornbora. Clientele, pegnscole,

Coguina, eycene. Cum lixarum, mid weterbererum.

Cacobatus, hrum.' Collationes, ymbeahtas.

Comicus, scop. 10 Conflictu, gefeohte.

Celeps, hegsteald man. Collegio, winescipe.

Cartilago, \eaces heafod. Curtinarum, wagryfta.

Cliens, gepofta. Comminiscimur, resiad, odde somud

Congeries, heap. mengad we.5

“Crura, scancan. 15 Crepitantes, rescettende.

Commissuram, gefog. Crepitarent, rescettan.

Coneilio, gemote. ¢ Concessum...

Comminatus, beotiende. Congeries, gesamnung.

Coffinos, manda. Confectio, geregnong.

Commutatio, gewrixle. 20 Cauterio, hoce.

Conducere, aheran. Cernua, da niowelan.

Conuentione, gemote. Cautibus, stanum, odde snyringum.

Comminatus, beotode. Cautes, clifstanas.

Conquirerunt, etsamne sohtan, Collario, sale.

Ceruical, wangere, heafod p.? 25 Contionatorum, gemotmanna.

Contubernium, gadorwiste. Consulatus, gerefscipe.

Cautionem, gewrit. Corbibus, caulum.

Cahus,’ dwolma. Cauponibus, winbryttum.

Cribraret, syfte. Commendenda, to bebeodenne.

Conuiciebant, teonewidedon. 30 Crates, hyrdlas.

Confertam, getrummen. Cuniculum, grep.

Coagitatum, gehrysed. Carismatum, gifena.

Cum emulo, mid widerweardum. Conspicatur, sceawode.

Calcaribus, spurum. Conflictibus, geflitum.

Calear, spura. 35 Cleri, biscophyrede.s

Circentium, hringseta. Cassibus, wyrdum.

Carene, cerenes, odie hunigteares. Cataplasma, Jecedomnessa, odde

Coxarum, bana. sealfe.

Catalectico, dy metereundum. Cibbo, copse.

Cronographorum, tidwritera. 40 Chaldeorum, tungelerzeftum,*
' Cf. Bosw. D. 38e. R. W. readable through a damage of the vellum.
* Of. pag. 368 1. 35. R. W. ® The bishop’s flock, or family, a rather
* 4. e. chaus or chaos. Cf. pag. 12 1. picturesque expression for the clergy.

48. R. W. * Of course the writer from whom this
* Of. pag. 12 1. 25 and pag. 363 1. 34. gloss was taken used the word Chaldwi
- R. W. in the sense of enchanters.
* Two words which follow this are an-
“ 25

372 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 373
Cloacarum, flodena. Citra pontum, ofer se.
Cuparum, tunnena. Carybdibus, swelgendnessum.
Callositas, unsmednes, odde wear- — Cirris, loccum.

rihtnes. Consparsione, gecynde.
Commercia,’ ceapunge. 5 Competali, xt pam wega geletuin
Ceni,1 wasan. weran.
Conibentia,2 hebbenga. Calamitosam, pet earme.
Consummatim, scyndendlice. Comitiales, gebrecsioce.9
Cernuas, niole, odde hnifolerumbe.® Cantando, galdor galende. |
Cleratis, clerochade. 10 Capulo tenus, od hielt.
Curbo, gebegde. Conspiratio, facengeewis,'° odde and-
Condito, gerecanade. wyrding.
Culine, cylene. Crista, cambihte, camb on hette
Circumquaque, ymb det. odde on helme.
Calcatur, teled is, 15 Congrediens, feohtende.

Calamitosa, dy hearmlican. Cum fratrueli, mid brodorsuna,
Crustulis, healstanum. Colerata, getelged, odde gedeagod.
Crustis, herstinghlafum. Conquilii, telges.

Crasso, dy fettan. Cum infami eulogio, mid py une-
Corbos, caulas. 20 pelan gidde.
Catecizatus,* gecristnad. Conopio, nette, fleogryfte.
Caccabatum, berumad.® Cedunt, rumad, steppad.
Casus, gelimp. Cauannarum,"'’ ulena.
Clanculis, dem diglum. Confer, forgeaf. ‘
Catapultas, speru, boltas. 25 Castalidas nymphas, dunelfa.'?
Celibes, hegsteald men.® Carpere, telan.
Cymiterio, byrgenstowe. Cultum, gyld.
Caraxabimus,’ writad. Conpellens, gretende.
Clatros, pearrocum. Consanguine, pre gesibban.
Clatrorum, pearroca. 30 Confertur, widmeten is.
Castarum, wita cyn. Censebat, scop.
Cauillatione, geslitgliwe.s Cartis,® bocum.
Caracteribus, angelienessum, odde  Certantes, flitende.
stefwriterum. Certamine, on geflite.
' So has the MS. R. W. "! Cavanna, or cavannus, in the sense
2 Read: cohibentia. R. W. of an owl, is a word belonging to medie~ |
* Cf. Bosw. D. 37a. R. W. yal Latin, and is found in the Anglo-
* Christened, because catechising was a Saxon writers, such as Aldbelm. It is |
principal part of the ceremony. represented in old French by the word }
* Of. pag. 8701.9. R. W. chouan.
® Cf. pag. 370 1. 11. R. W. ™ Such glosses as this furnish curious f
* Oharacare, from the Greek, was used illustrations of the Anglo-Saxon notions
by the medieval Latin writers in the sense of elves or fairies; but it implies some i
of to write. It occurs in Prudentius. confusion of ideas to call the Castalides ‘
* Cf, pag. 10 1. 24. R. W. mountain elves. (Cf. pag. 1891.9. R.W.)
° The Anglo-Saxon word denotes: a 8 Chartis; the Anglo-Saxons called
frantic man, pbreneticus. R. W. everything written in a separate form, a
The words which follow are in a book. A written leaf was a book.
rather later hand. . |

374 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 375
Consternati, ofercymene. Callosa, |a wearrihtan.
Clades, adla. Consulis, geareyninges.5
Conglobatur, somnode. Consul, gereyning, odde heretoga.
Cnues, eldo. Cursum, hreedlice.
Cuderet, smidode, odde gescop. 5 Castra, herewic, fyrdwic.
Cararit, ielde. Contundunt, forstyntad.
Capisterium, hridder. Capessit, nam, hefde.
Chaliben, isern, Cetra, scyld.
Chalibis, irenum. Cenidos, atole. b
Concinnant, heapedan. 10 Cient, hrepad.
Crudescentes, pet pa swidfeormende. Causam, pinge.
Contrita, ofermened. Credita, da bebodenan.
Cartula, boc. Conpilat, strad.
Curam, lecedom. Contos, spreotas, speru.
‘Cipporum, cospa. 15 Cenosis, pam adelihtum.
Coenobium, mynsterlif. Capulus, holt.
Centauri, pes centaures. Contribulibus, megsiblicum.
Clancula, pa diglan. Crocata, pa giolureadan.
Clanculis, mid diglum. Contente, gecweme.
Catax, sio healte, odde healt. 20 Commanipulares, efenheapas.
 Calcis, limes. Conspirati, onan’ gesworene.
Callosi, hreofe, odde wearrihte. Celiter, heofonlice.
Consulta, redas. Cola, lim.
Conpeta clausa, pa belocenan wega Commota, limes del.
geleta. 25 Concinnabant, seredon.
Classica, swege, odde pa herelican.  Conmanipularibus, efenheapwm.
Commentis, trahte odde trahtadum. Caldeorum, tungelereftig.
Carolios, unhiere, _  Conticio, swigunge.
Cluris,! zpelum. Conticinio, swigan.
Curis, sorgum. 30 Contexta, awundne.
Cura, sorg. Contunsionibus, slegum.
Casibus, gegongum. Cyclade, hwiolfage.
Conpellere, pxt heo gebedde. Catastarum, wita.‘
Cursant, pocerodan. Constantina, demera.®
Compturum, gefretwadne. 35 Citra, ofer.
Conpressit, dyde. Cassaretur, wes aidlad.
Carperra, geniclede. - Capitolii, des heafodlican hearges.
Commate, gewrite. Comitiales, pa symbel monadlicanadla
Certa, gewis. Concertatio, compung and geflit.
Caccabis, hwerum. 40 Conquilini, wiolctelges.
Ciclades, gegirelan. Clauate, bebyrde, odde bestefnde.
Chao,? dimnesse gastas. Cincinni, windeloccas.
' Perhaps a corruption of clutis (= xdv- * An instrument of torture, explained
totic)? Cf. pag. 379 1. 25. R. W. in some of the medieval glosses by equuleus.
* Read: chaos. R. W. (Cf. pag. 372 1. 31. R. W.)
* i. e. a king whose authority lasted a * demera seems to be no Anglo-Saxou
year. It was the Anglo-Saxon notion of word. R. W.
a Roman consul.

376 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 3m
Conuiciorum, tionewida. Coenodoaia, idelgilp.®
Conlisiones, gecnosu, odde gescxned,  Cristata, gchelmad.
Conuolatus, breahtmung.' Clamat, potrad.
Comere, freetwian. Caupo, winbyrele, odde on tunnum.
Conlata, forgifen. 5 Condentem, me wyrcende.?
Castalidas, pa dunlican. Certu, wepne.s
Cithara, hearpan. Curuis, geapum.
Corni, corntreowes. Crepitabant, dynedan and punedan.
Corbes, leapas, Contortis, aprawenum dredum. |
Chaus, diopnis.? 10 Capitellis, heafudlicum. |
Creuisti, pu gesege. Calce, helan.
Creuit, geseah. Celidrum, nedran. :
Caries, preahs. Carinam, scip. ;
Chalibem, bill. Cretus, acenned.
Capital, heafudslege. 15 Cuspide, negle, odde spere. |
Conuexa, da hwalfan. Crepitum, pununge-
Cardo, stadul. Cum pelago, mid sex. '
Crustis, stansticcum. Conuoluens, wendende.
Caci, pyrses.? Coors, gerefa.
Cluua, steng odde wxpen. 20 Crepitant, hleodrien.
Cyclus, ryne. Cretus, gesceapen.
Cyclis, rynum. Clamidem, hacelan, odde lachen, odde
Cerula, da wonhewan, odde da lodan. :
swearthewenan, odde yda. Cessit, beag.
Constellatio, leases spelles talu. 25 Constat, cudlice is. i
Compos, wilhremig.’ Censura, dom. ‘
Cedebat, beag Crepacula, clatrunge. :
Colludia, plegan. Colubros, snacan. :
Crete, acende. Crepitare, hleodrian. :
Cruste, hlafes. 30 Condo, ic wyrtige.
Clasma,4 clam, odde wed, odde wera. Carpor, ie beo sliten. |
Consulunt, red sohtan. Curam, ic hele and hleonie.
Carine, scipes. Contrahat, gewyrce and togetio. ;
Cataclismum, brimflode. Contulerunt, brohton odde forgeafan.
Coenidos, fule. 35 Crepitat, wreotad. j
Coeni, fennes. Conpertum, cud. :
Conpillat, forstel. Curfa, geap. '
Cetra, seylde.® Capax, festhaful. t
* So has the MS. R. W. * This barbarous word is the origin of
* Cf. pag. 374 1. 42. RK. Wz our modery word claim, and meant, in
* Thyrs, the giaut or spectre. This was medieval Latin, an action at law, for a
the light in which the Anglo-Saxon schol- bond or other obligation. {
ars looked upon many of the persons of ° Of. pag. 375 1.8. R. W. 4
classic fable, and we sball find other © Cenodoxia (Greek xevodoéia) was a
traces of it in these glosses. Of course, word in use in medieval Latin in the
Cacus, the threeheaded son of Vulcan, is sense of vain-glory.
the individual here alluded to. (Cf. pag. 7 So has the MS. KR. W. |
379 1, 22. R. W) * The MS, has cartu or cestu. R. W.

378 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 379

|  Conplector, ic beclyppe. Contingere, gehrinan.

Contagia, besmitenessa. Certare, widfeohtan.

|  Ciebant, hleodriende andbetniad. Copia, genihtsum pes yfeles.

Cursat, iornd. Cyllinee, cillinescum.

Ciebo, ic acliopie. 5 Cati, ingeniosi.

Choortes, heredreatas. Caumate, swole.®

Cicada, hyllehama odde gerstapa. Carpebantur, weran slitene.
Circius et boreus, twegen nordwindas. Catasta, werod.

Conteriti, sionewaltum. Celeumatis,6 seleopes.
Contis, swiorum. 10 Colludio, besmitenesse.
Cuspite, palstre. Conpediuntur, beob gecyspte.
Copus, pet snid. Caprarius, gathiorde.

Cauo, holun. Contestabor, ic cype.

Carica, ficeppel. Concisius,* hludur.

Crapula, illeracu. 15 Conpluitur, bid gerined.
Chaos, gedwolman.! Cimbula, lytlum scipe.

| Cauernas, screafu. Conpilabat, stel and copade.

| Cruda, pa blodgan. Commonitorium, xrendgewrit. .

| Casus, gegong. Caraba, scip.

Corimbos, croppas. 20 Commissura, flyhteclad.

Coci, coces. Colobysta, peningmongere.

Cornipedum, horsa. Cyclopes, anige pyrsas.”

| Columpnis, wradum, Ceruleas, da hewen grenan, odde pa

| Conexa, gepeoded. grenhzwenan.

; Cyclopum, dyrsa.? 25 Clyton, epeling.

| Calamistratis, gecrymptum. Coma, bled.

Cohercens, gehebbende. Calathus, cysefzt.

| Caucumine,’ heannesse. Carduusorrens,se onscunienda pystel

 Comitum, gerefena. Ciatos, melas.8

| Codea, sneg). 30 Colophium, undersyre.

Ceca, blind is. Corbus, sadelboga.
Cereri, of hwete. Corrigie, olpwongas.

h Committo, ic befeste. Cobsus, syletx.9
Cruentos, blodge. Cultrum, culter.

_ Cruentis, pem blodigum. 35 Circinnum, gafolrand.

Casum, gegong.* Capitale, heafodpanne.
Clauus, negl, odde sprota. Cacumen capitalis, heannes pere
 Cauernis, holum. heafodpannan.

Clepsydra, weterwrite. Cerebrum, seam pere heafodpannan.

i Concordi, somod dyrlice, 40 Ceruellum, bregen.

i Comitentur, sipien and feren. Coma, feax, sceacga.

Conpressa, befongen. Cesaries, des wonges locfeax.
‘Cf. pag. 370 1. 28. R. W. ° Of. pag. 369 1.18. R. W.

} * See, before, note 3 on pag. 376. A ® xédevuce, or xélevouc, the song sung
Cyclops was, in Anglo-Saxon feelings, a by the sailors in rowing, to keep stroke.
giaut or spectre. * Cf. pag. 376 note 3. R. W.

* Read: cacumine. R. W. ® Cf. pag. 122 1. 36. R. We

* Cf. pag. 372 1.23. R. W, ° So the MS. R. W.

380 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 381
i Cartilago, se reoma pes bregenes.  Consuta, gesiwid.
Chautrum, al se protbolla. Constipari, ymbhiwan,
Cuba, elnboga. Cradeli, welhreowe,
Cubitus, se earm betweonan clnbogan — Conuenientur, ungerisenlice.
and handwyrste. 5 Carmine rithmico, smicere leode.
Catacrinis, hupban. Charismate, healiere gife.
Centumpellis, feleferd. Congerie, gerecenesse.
Calx, hela. Commoditas, sio getesnes.
Conpluuium, flod. Confecta, geworht.
Conpluuiosus, flode. 10 Crepundia, glenga.
Cronculus,' ongseta. Continentia, forhefdnes.
-— Capitosus, micelheafdede. Ay-Zeaned Consortio, gemanan.
Canus, fulhar. Cum tuta, mid gesunde.
Comosus, sceacgede. - Capessunt, nimad.
Ceruinus, dunfealu. 15 Crebra, mid gelomlice
Calcanosus, helade. Conmanipulares, efenwerod.
Cintus, fine. Conuersationis, drohtunge.
Cracinus, worhen.® Commissa, pa gefremedan.
Coturnix, edischen. Conflictu, gefeohte.
Cretabulus, beaw. 20 Comitata, mid sipudu.
Cinomia, hundesbeo. Conpensationis, edleanunge.
Ceruus, .. Conprobatur, bid acunnod.
Cibus, mete. Comitem, gefere.
Caupo, wetan. Comi, beon hyrst odde fretwian.
Capo, cucelere. 25 Conposita, geglengedu.
Carenum, pele alu. Confutans, oferstelende.
Cardus, pistel. Cernua, hnifolerump.5
Cataplasma, flacg. Curuaque, gebiged.
Cipus, cipeleac. Carmentriumphale, pxt sigorliceleod.
Cirta, acdrenc. 30 Conici, beon ongiten.
Corbis, leap. Cimento, wrade.
Canis, hund. Climatis, hwealfe.
Canicula, bicce. Climatibus, hwealfum.
Ceruus, heorot. Ceremonias, gescrifu, domas.
Cerua, hind. 35 Copule, gesomnunge.
Caule, sceapa locu. Confingat, hiwad.
Caprile, gata hus. Clangor, gepun
Canile, hunda hus. Constantia, bielde.
Clamet, cancer.‘ Copulas, gegaderunga.
Cibborium, ps heahalteres ofer- 40 Coercuit, bewerede.
geweore. Crypte, cinan.
Confici, bid geworht. Confluentibus, toflowendum.
Cespites, tyrf. Crepundiorum, freetwednessa, odde
Coneretione, brode, somodwellunge. pununga. J
* It is a corruption of furunculus. * Of. 1 34. R. W.
R. W. * So has the MS. R. W.
? Of. pag. 260 1.4. R. W. ° Of. pag. 872 1.9. R. W.

382 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 383
Ceremoniis, godgildum. Contubernia, gemanan.
Curuatura, erymbing, hylding. Conpendio, getxsnes.
Coniectionis, bodunge. Certuri, efter onfond.
Collega, gefera. Circiter, hu hugu.>
Coniecturam, anspell. g 5 Contulit, forgeaf.
Contionantur, tosprecan. Conexum, gebunden.
Crebruit, mersud. Celibres,s mere.
Cupidinis, lustbernnesse. Consulentes, veedfindende.
Capidine, fyrstmearce. Cum de stuppe, of heordan.
Celebri, mid merhlisan. 10 Conticinio, pere swigunge.
Cataclismi, widses. Consortium, gemanan.®
Committenda, to befestenne. Confusam, pa gescendan.
Cum quispiam, ponne hwyle. Cruente, pes unhieran.
Conicidatur, beon oncnawen. Conrosus, gnegen.
Consulebant, gereddan. 15 Contendamus, higien we.
Concinnati, pes geregnedan. Congruentia, gerisnessa.
Caracteres, mearce.! Conelusus, betiened.
Charismatum, healicra gifena.* Concentus, song. .
 Caruerit, polade. Conteaxtas, awundene.
 Cateruas, heapum: 20 Crematuros, forbernende.
Comminiscuntur, reswodan, specan, Confosa, purhstungen.
weran gemunende. Contunsionibus, slegum.7
Cedens, wes forbugende. Clientele, pegnredenne, odde hiwre-
| Cisterne, seades. denne.
Censura, dome. 25 Consulta, gereding.
_ Commertio,s gemanan. Congruentes, gerisniende.
Contulerunt, hie forgeafan. Coacta, genidedu.
Concordantes, somod gepwierende. Calumnia, teonan-
Carnificum, para flesewellera. Commenta, trahtunga,
Capax, giffest.? 30 Commentariola, trahtas.
Consummatis, gefyldum. Citra Ponium, begeondan Wendel sex.$
| Cathegorias, gehiwunge odde ge-  Calcem, ende.
| beacnunge. Clangorem, geprete.
Conperit, onfunde. Charybdibus, hwyrfepolum.
i Cycladibus, hwegl godwebbum.* 35 Conamine, magene.
{i Cachinnos, cancetunge. Cerula, pere wannan.9
| Copulam, to bem gemanan. Crypta, screfe.
f loncertatio, somodgeflit. Calamitatum, hearma.
| Canonicis, pem regolecum. Censuram, pet gescrif.
udis, hreawum. 40 Cestarum, dirnhemendra.
\ Conieciunt,> bewurpan. Commodum,nyt,and getese, and bryce
i ; The MS. bas meare. * The Wendel-sea of the Anglo-Saxons
Hi Cf. pag. 3811. 6. R. W. is generally understood to be the Medi-
| *So the MS. i. W terranean, which the Anglo-Saxons consid-
1 5 of. pag. 374 1. 41. R. Ww. ered to be the Sea of the Vandals, or,
Cf. the Anglo-Saxon version of Bede as they called them, Wendels. The Ro-
1, 27. R. W. mans understood by Pontus the Euxine.
| ° Ch 1.1. RW. ° Ch. pag. 876 1. 23 and pag. 379 1. 23.
Cf. pag. 375 1. 31. R. W. R. W.

384 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 385.
Conderet, geworhte. Devincait,* geband.
Contentus, pancfull. Deglobere, flean. {
Cenaculi, uphuses. Descurris, hofdelum.
Circumuenire, beswican. - Deprehendo, ic anfinde.
Caparetur, wes gefangen. 5 Deprenderint, onfundan.
Conpetenti, mid gedzefenlice. Dedala, ingeniosa.
Continetur, bid heefd. Defert, wregde. .
Contionator, mapelere. Degeneraverat, mispah. |
Capidinem, fivstmeare.! Desisse, teorode.
Conlisiones, gesceningnessa. 10 Degesto, gereded.
Comere, freetwum. Decreta, gepoht.
Cooperante, somodwyrcendum. Deviavit, onwoh cierde.
Conabor, ic onginne. Demolitus, aipende. :
Classis, preates. Diuinos, witgan.
Comit, gehyrsteb. 15 Dustria, gleawnes.5
Culmina, heahdo. Desistens, ablinnende.
Clarus, mere. Desistit, ablon,
Conamina, angin. Decretum, bebod.
Cederet, cearf. Decorticauit, berinde, beflog.
Culmina, heahpo. 20 Diem obiit, aswealt.
Curiositas, firwetgeornes. Dilotis, todeldum.
Crustu, i. ornatu, freetwunge. Ditor, gefyrdro.
Colum, wulmod. Dissimilat, midep.
Distabuerunt, aswundon.

Defrutum, coerin.? 25 Difficile, wearnwislice.
Detulerat, brohte. Difinis, swide mice.
Deses, swer. Dispensatio, scir. ;
Destituunt, towurpon. Dimisis, aslecadum.
Destitute, toworpne. Dicimenta, tacne.
Decipula, biswic. 30 Dissolucrat, aslecte.
Desidebai, wnsibbade. Distitutum, ofgifene. :
Defatiget, swenced. Discrepantes, todelende.
Delumentum, pweal. Disputauit, smeade.
Depoline,® wefta. Diuersorium, gestern.
Deliberatio, ymbpriodung. 35 Discrepatio, pridung.
Decidens, gewitende. Dolatum, gesniden. i
Debita pensione, gedefum gafule. Domatis, huses.
Deditio, handgong. Dolones, hunspuran.
Detractavit, forsoc. Dromidus, ofyrit olfenda.
Devia callus, horweg stig. 40 Dracantia, gimrodor.
Defferuntur, meldedonoddewregdan. Dulcisapa, cyren, odde awylled win.
Dehiscat, tocinep. Dumus, porn odde pyrne.
Dentalia, sules reost. Deseuiet, grimsap.

Of. pag. 382 1.9. R. W. See in the next column the word dulei-

? Mulled, or boiled wine. The Latin is  sapa, and it occurs again.
a medieval word, or rather a word used 2 Deponile, in the supplement to Al-
in a medieval sense; but the derivation fric’s Glossary.
of the Anglo-Saxon is not so evident. * Sie MS. R. W. — * Read: ~

386 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 387
Despondi, gesceatwyrpe. Dehonestare, unweordian.
Discooperiens, onwreonde. Duodecies quinquagies millia, twelf-
Dilatione, ildenne. sibum fiftig pusenda.
Distentus, apegin. Disceptare, flitan.
Disseruit, sede. 5 Delicate, pere wrastlican.
Deuotatio, gehat, odde wirgnes. Decretalibus, psem reedendlicum.
Depreuatum, bepwyrad. Dalmatie, pere burge.4
Delegauit, getealde. Delitiscere, bemidan.
Detestabile, ladlic. Deuotabant, wyrgdan, ad sweredan.
Desierant, ablunnan. 10 Domatis, huses.
Differtur, bidilded. Delatum, geferedne, odde aledne.
Detestantur, lapetted. De recessibus, of heolstrum.
Dextralia, earm oddeearmgegirelan. De clatris, of pearrocum.
De stipite, of beame. De congestu, be gesomnungum.
De sartagine, of bradre pannan. 15 Damnatorum, replinga.
Defricabitur, sie agniden. De torrente, of dem byrnendum.
Dirute, oferhryred. Deturpans, onrettep.
Decapoleas,' tienceastro. Direpta, pa genumenan.
Delfin, mereswin. Depeculata, pa ofdrifenan, odde pa
Dens, tod. 20 forstolenan. _
Digiti, fingras. Discifer, discberend.
Dorsum, hrye. Dilituisse, gediernan.
Disceptum, nette. De stuppe stamineo, be cemdan
Duricorium, holleac. wearpe.
Domus, hus. 25 Dactulus, ficeeppel odde palmeppel.
Desile, bor. Distinatus, onsended.
Defecatum, ahlutrod win. Distratio, bibyegong.
Doleum, byden. Disparuit, forswealt, stiewde.
Dedrans,? egor. De sceuo, of pem sceolan,
Decrepito, tobigende. 30 Dileberaret,? gepohte.
Dilibatus,? gesmyred. Dissona, ungerade.
Diocessin, biscopscir. Dedecus, wnwlites,
Delusus, afered, weged. Donatur, geweordad.
De pilis, of herum. Duzi, tealde.
Donec transeat, od pit pe gewitep.35 Deprauandam, to mishworfenum.
Diffamauerunt, gewidmersan. Debachatus, wedende.
Diriet, gegriped. Decriminalia, heafodfreetennesse.
Dissire, gerece. Diane, vicenne®
Dispertitus est, todeled is. Discrepent, scadad.
Decimatis, teopingsceat. 40 Deuote, holdlice.
Dissertitudinem, gleawnesse. Delo, swa hatte pxt ealand.
De obstrusis,’ of dem diglum. Deuotaturus, wyrgende.
De conca, of muscellan. Depromsit, ypte.
* Read decapolis. R. W. ’ This word given hero as representing
? For dodrans. Diana is not, I believe, found elsewhere
* So has the MS. R. W. than in this vocabulary (ricenne seems to
* Dalmatia was, ofcourse,a country, nota be a translation of aereuijc: the pure,
own; butwe have manysuch proofsoftheig- sound, swift goddess. R. W.).
jorance of the writer of some of these glosses.
26

388 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 389
De cortice corni, ofcorntreowesrinde. Defensante, gescyldendum.
Dignissimus, se weorheste, Digerit, writep.

Dignius, pa weordelicor. Discludere, aweg alucan, odde ascea-
Deformem, atole. dan.

Ductum, gedon. 5 De uite, of wingearde.

Digessit, awrat, odde gerchte. Dempsit, gewonede.

Diuexa, pa healdan. Dempta, gewanedum.

Demebat, nom. Dudum, xr, odde nu.

Donatus, forgifen. Dogma, lare.

Dehiscit, tocined. 10 Dogmatum, haligra lara.
Dialectica, wordlocum. De puppe, of scipe.

Diui, godes. Defatu, bewyrded, oppe geionge.
Dote, weotoma, odde midwedde. Discrimina, wretenessa.

Direxit, onsende. Discriminalia, gegirelan.
Discriminet, scadep. 15 Discrimine, todxlednesse.

Dagon, swa hatte se god. Dira, ic grimheard.

Demptis, genumenum, De stipite, of triowe.

Dilubra, gield. Dempto, onweg adonum.

Ditis, helgodes. Decernere, redan.

Dramate, py brydelican gewrite.1 20 Depellar, ic adrife.

Deluditur, weged wes, Directo, rihtre.

Depopulis, idende.? Decernere, gestihtigan.

Duelli, gefeohtes. Draconum, nedrena.

Deuotaret, wyrgde. Dire, heardre.t

Defruti, cerenes. 25 Decies senos, tan and fingras.
Dapsilis, rumheort. De uertice, of ufeweardum bergum.
Defruti, wines. Dicione, mehe.

Discessurus, from gewitende. Dirior, bittera.

Disparuit, gedwan. Dapes, mettas.

Dedecus, unwlite, odde sconde. 30 Dicto citius, hradur ponne ic mege
Dissimulato, bemidenum. an word gecwepan.

Dissimulare, bemipan, odde yldan. Diues, welig.

Dissimulari, leasliccettan. Deliro, ic dwolie.

Dicione, on walde. Deliras, pu dwolast.

Dedat, sylle. 35 Dandi, sealdnesse. ;
Delo, on deem eglonde.3 Depascor, ic ete. 4
Dedere, syllat. Descendens, gryndende.

Dumos, pyrnan. De fraude, of facne.

Dumis, pyrnum. Dispendium, wom.

Diuexi, pes hwalfan. 40 Desidiosorum, slawera.

Dites, diuites, welige. Delatoribus, wregendum.

Degebat, lifde, odde drohtode, Diuortio, hiwgedale, geflite.5
Diremptas, todelende. Destinatur, wes onsended.

* The modern dictionaries interpret this * The Dire were, of course, the Furies,
as meaning a play. Perhaps, however, the | but the Anglo-Saxon word here given as
Latin drama is here merely a corruption equivalent appears not to be found else-
of dragma. where. 7

? hydian, hidian means vastare, depo- ‘ This word appears to be added by a
pulari. R. W. rather later hand.

° Of. pag. 387 1. 41. R. W. :

390 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 391
Destinare, to ansendan. Duruerunt, purhwunedan.
Dé curricis,: of craetum. Digena,® landleod.

_ Demetarum, ametenra. De utrarumque, be hiera begra.

| Deciduam, gewitendlic. Disserentis, secgende.
Disceptauimus, we flitan. 5 Deformatio, sio unwlitegung.
Diffitemur, we widsacad. Deiracta, fram atoge.4
Deaterior, gesundra. Dignitosam, medomlican.
Desiuimus, we geblunnon. Definitionem, getimbrunge.
Dissertas, getinge. Dicturi, we sind anspecende.
Deuirginauit, megdhade benom. 10 Dilationis, yldinge.

Diuortium, geflit and gecid asyn- Deformes, unwlitig.
drung, hiwgedal.? Delicias, wista,
Dolatura, bradex. Discutit, towearp.
Dapis, swete mete. Dissentit, geunpweerad.
Damulus, don. 15
Digesta, awritene. Eatenus, oppet.
Dirempias, todelende. Ebor,4 elpanban, odde elpend.

| Discretas, todelede. Ebredio, hristle.

| Dulcedinis, swetnesse. Ebulum, wealwyrt.

| Dulcauit, geswette. 20 Echo, wudumeer.®
Debitis, gedafenum. Edera, wuduwinde.

Dispendio, wanunge. Eder, ifig.
De latebrosis, of pem heolstriccum. Edilitatem, hamscir.

| Desistunt, ablinnad, ateoriap. Edulium, et.

__ Disrupta, tobrocene. 25 Edissere, i, exponere, aseegan.
Dispari, ungelice. Effeminati, molles, odde bedlingas.
Differentia, toberennes. Eneruata, pa aswundenan.
Defectu, wanunge. Eneruat, aswond.

| Dediti, sealde. Epithalamium, brydsang. ,

| Degens, drohtiende.8 30 Eptafylon, gelodwyrt.

| Deleramenta,* dofunge, dwolunge. Efficaciter, fromlice.

} Dictu, gesegene. Efficaz, from.

| Deputatam,* getealdne. Effectum, ded.

| Disputationis, sprece. 5 Lgre, earfodlice.

Dogmatista, lareow. 35 Egerere, ascrepan.
De recessibus, of degolnessum. Egesta, ascrepen.
Dirimenies, todelende. Egra, slece.

_ Dirimuntur, sient todelede. Eluderet, awegde.
Desertissimi, swa swa pa gleawestan.  Eulogio,’ gidde.

Deturpans, gescendende. 40 Elleborus, wedeberge, pung.

_ Delaturos, bringende. Elegans, smicre.

l Detulerit, brohte. Eliminat, aidep.

| * Read curris. R. W. ° A wood-mare, In the Anglo-Saxon

? Of. pag. 389 1, 42. R. W. superstitions, the Echo was supposed to

* Of. pag. 388 1. 42. R. W. be a spirit which dwelt in the wilds and

| “So has the MS. R. W. mocked people who passed there, as the
* No donbt intended for indigena, but _night-mare tormented people in bed.

how it should have found a place in this 7 w appears to be added by a later

__ truncated form under the letter Dis difficult hand. R. W.
to conjecture. (Cf. pag. 385 1. 15. R, W.)

{ t

392 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 393
Elogia, \ae. Exito, endestef.
Elimat, geswyrfep. Ex falange, of fepan, of preate.
Elimauit, gerihte. Exactorauit, gehiende.
Empta, geboht. Expilatam, ahrydred, abrid.
Emticius, ceapeniht. 5 Expeditio, fird, herenitig.
Emolomentum,' fultum, odde lean. Expeditionum, fyrda.
Emblemma, foper. Exentera, ansceot.
Emunctoria, candeltwist. Explodit, eacludit, atyned, odde
Eneruiter, waclice. asceaf on weg.
Emonso,! oferferde. 10 Extale, snzedel, pearm.
Emenso, aurnenum. Exta, isen. |
Enum, citel. Ezilia, gestincum. ;
Eniaxe, geondsmead, odde geornlice. Eapeditis, gearwum.
Enixe, berende. Extipices,! aruspices, helsendas. :
Eniaza est, cilforlamb, odde acen- 15 Expensa, degwine, odde andliofen.

nende wes. Examusim, geornlice.
Erimo, hindberige. Excesus, xgylt.
Erenis,? hegtes. Expeditionibus, firdum.
Eumenides, hegtesse. Extori, expulsi, wreccan.
Erenditen, cop. 20 Exactio, gafules manung.
Erpica, egepe. Excubias, weardsetl, odde weecan. —
Erpicarius, egepere. Excubiis, weardum.
Erugo, rust. Exugia, gihsinga, odde miegern.
Errabiles, hwyrfende. Expresserunt, arehtun. ;
Ericius, il. 25 Exercitate, para getyhtan.
Esculus, bece. Exactum, bedde.
Euiscerata, ethyd. Expeditus, uelox, fortis, snel.
Euidens, sweotol. Ex Ormista,? middangeardes metend.
E westigio, an laste, odde on luste. Expressum, apryd.
Expeditus, abunden. 30 Emulus, gehata.
Exegestus, gebzro. Et tortam panis, and hylstene hlafas.
Expendisse, arefnde. Exagitabat, rerde.
Exundauit, aweol. Erumperant, fordblestan.
Experimentum, andwisnes. Exequias, deappenunga.
Ezéercitus, bigangum. 35 Exosas, lade.
Exercitationis, raedan biionges. Eleganti forma, smicerre ansine.
Extorti, apreste. Eleganti, gecorenlice.
Exposito, geborene. Egregius, wmirce.
Exalauit, stanc. Epistilia, headfodlic, ufeweard swer. ~
Expendisset, prowode. 40 Elides, pu enysest.
Expedierant, arerdan. Efferri, beran.

1 Sic MS. R. W. Orosius was Hormesta, or Hormesta Mundi,

? For Erynnis. Hates, or hegtes, means of the latter of which the Anglo-Saxon
in Anglo-Saxon a hag or fary, and it is here was evidently intended to be a trans-
here given as tho interpretation both of lation. It 1s very commonly written Or-
the Erinnys and of the Eumenides of the | ™esta in the manuscripts. The book was
ancient mythology. no doubt quoted in the gloss from which

* The title commonly given in the this gloss was taken, and the glossator
Middle Ages to the Histuria of Paulus has intended to translate the title.

1
?

394 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 395
| Expendatur, sie awegen, odde Epitaphion, byrgeuleod.
ahangen. Electri, eolhsandes.
| Empticius, heeftincel.' Extirpatus, aswefecad.
| = Edulio, mete. Extirpans, awyrtwalad.
| Emarcuit, forwisnode. 5 E frondosis, of pem helmihtum. 4
| = Emergebant, up astigan. Eleuantuosa,® pre unsmepan.
Emergeret, arise. Exprimendos, to awringenne.
Experge, forht. Epidaurum, pere megpe.*
Euentus, gegang, odde gelimp. Exorcizans, halgiende.
Excederet, ofereode. 10 Exorcismi, halgunge.
Erarium, mapmhus. Expertus sit, oncunnende wes.
Exactoribus, bydelum. Exulat, wracode.
Externorum, fremdra. Exulans, wraciende.
Expergefactus, i. suscitatus, aweht. LEfferra, sio repe, odde sio steorlease.
‘Explanare, areccan. 15 Elosericis, ealgodwebbum.
Epar, iecur. Effebo, ungebierde.
Esox, leax. Ezxorbitans, aswifende.
{ Exagium, onmitta. Ex: terite glomere,? of sinuwealtum
j Epiafolium, sinfulle. cliwene,
| Exigia, gescinco. 20 Exibuit, gebryttade.
| Equa, myre. Equiperat, wipmetep. .
| Equiale, horsern. Expiauit, gefelsode, odde adilegode.
| Equs, hors. Edicta, gebodo.
Emisarius, steda. Expedire, reccan.
Edum,? tiecen. 25 Exterminans, aiepende.
Efffeta, berende bid, odde gelde, odde  Emulatores, onhyrgend.
afyldum. Eliciens, abeodende.
| LEucharistia, husl. Edidit, awrat, odde aswgde.
| Ergastulum, hengen. Exorbitantes, aswisende,
| Ex mineoo,® of bocreade, 30 Et suoue taurili, odda? pa pe et pem
I Euanuerit, agep. geldum per wes swin and sceap
| lioquin,* eleor. and fear.
Exterminant, unrotlice dop. Emersisse, pet hie up astigen.
Eructuabo, arecco. ) Emersit, aras.
Equor, se. 35 Elis, afliden.
Edem, hus. Ezxosa, feounga.
Expetit, gesohte, gewilne. Elucubrate, pa ahlutredan.
Enucleata, ascyled. Equitatum, eorodum.
Enucleare, ascilian. Elisisse, aserencan.
Euentus, wyrd. 40 Experiamur, onfinden.
_ Elimatus, adrifen. Exacerbapit, gremede.
| Eliminate, adrifene. E merulento, a, from pem hlutrum.
Epicedion, licleod. Extemplo, sona.
i 1 Cf. pag. 3921.5. R. W. * The meaning of this barbarous Latin
* So has the MS. R. W. word is evidently uneven.
> So the MS. Read: ex minio. R. W. ° The glossator appears to have taken
* This is in the manuscript corrected  Epidaurus for a people, instead of a
by an early hand to Alioguin, town.

396 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 397
Elicona, swa hatte sio dun. Extalibus, roppum.
Ex centro, of midle. Emula, pa feondlic.
*Expers, ordzle. Exempta, ut atogene.
Equat, hine widmete. Ezxplosis, ut adrifenum.
Ezertis, on bundonne. 5 Explosa, adrifenre.
Extat, wes. Effebum,' beardleasne.
Eximia, fremere. Examen, swearm.
Edaces, pa eotendan. Exilium, wrecsip.
Effebi, geongan, beardleases. Edomiti, pes atemedan.
Excussit, fram swengde. 10 Eructant, forpblawab.
Exuuias, reat. E geminis, of getwinnum.
Elicuit, gerehte, odde ut ateah, and  xperto, cupum.
asmeade and awrat. Exilis, lytel.
Enumerans, arimende. Idem de in-  Elimentum, stefrof.
lustribus uiris.! 15 Eleotropam, Grece; Latine solsequium
Effarier, asecgan. idem sigelhweorfe.
Expertur, onfindende. Erro, Ie weorpe.
Euo, yldo. . Et salis, and se.
Ex scola, of scole. Equore, on se. '
ooo 00 Ole 20 Eliforus,8 wedeberge, odde ceaster-
Eximiam, pet fremere. eesc.
Extis, iesende, odde innelfe. Exuuias, deap reaf, idem nelle ie
Ex herebro, of helle. him pet lif ongeniman.
Expolietur, sie areaht. Ezto, ic eam.
Extaseos, gastlicre uphefnesse. 25 Excepit, ut afeng, odde ut adyde.
Eleganter, gecorenlice, odde apelice.  Ezxedi, ic et.
Euentuum, gelimpa. Eburneus dens, elpend top.
Eoae, eastdaelas. Eget, bepearf.
Elogio, gidde.s Exsangues, orblede.
Eeois, eastfolcum. 30 Excidium, hryre.
Eculei, on galgan geworhtre.4 Epimoenia, fostrapas.
Expletis, forslegenum. Expedius, alifedlicur,
Exalaparetur, wes fystslegenu. Editiorem, hearan.
Epicurii, up on pam rodore para Eheu, wa la wa.
steorsceawera.® 85 Exactores, gerefan.
Ederet, ypte, and cidde. Ezalabat, reac.
Et morosam, and pone softe langan, Extorsit, awreste.
Experiar, ie onfinde. Exactio, gaful.
Eliseum, sunfeld, pet. is neor (xna) Ependiten, hacele.9
wong.® 40 Exolescunt, aidliap.
Egessit, ut apyde. 7 Exterum, endestef.
‘ Apparently the title of one of the ®xna is unreadable from a stain in
books from which these glosses are taken. the vellum. R. W.
? A word and its gloss are here un- 7 So has the MS. R. W.
readable, from a stain in the vellum. * A corruption of helleborus. The helle-
* Of. pag. 391 1, 39 and pag. 3921.1. bore was believed to be a remedy against
R. Wz. madness.
* Ct. pag. 375 note 4. R. W. ° A priest’s vest. The Latin word is |
* The glossator seems to have supposed — given Epidecen and Ependicen in Ducange.
that an Epicurean was an astronomer.

398 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 399
Eucharis, wynsum. Execrandum, onscuniendlic.
Exzenia, lac. Excusari, beladian.

Enigmata, geddunga. Eliganti, geredre.

Et mentum, and cin. Epigrammatibus, ofergewritum.
Elbus, deorce greg. 5 Ergastula, nirwpa.

Euomatio, spiwing. Euulsam, afyrredne.

Euomuit, ut aspau. Examine, preate.

Excusorium, flor on huse. Exul, wrecca.

Enixius, geornlicor. Exsangue, orsaule.

Enucleata, ascealode. 10

Erga, yb. Facessante, swepriendum.

_ Existentibus, wesendum, beondum. Facessit, discedit, swedrap.

Extorrem, wreccan. Fretus, brucende, odde geweorpad.
Et spontaneum, and pone wilsuman. Flustra, flod, odde hern.
Et mulse, and pere miliscan. 15 Flustris, sigendum.
Extaseos, ferenga. Fouere, wirman.
Experiri, acunnian. Forcipis, tange.
Exorsum, onginnende. Forceps, tang.

_ Emulumenta,? gestreon. Forficis, sceara.
Explodatur, is aweg adrifen, is 20 Furuauoracis, deore.?

_ _ adweesced. Flaua, pes fealewan.
Emeritos, pa epelan, pa gecorenan. Fulua, sio fealwe.

| Euellantur, ut alocene. Falerata, pa geglengedan.

| Eramentum, argeweore. Feruore, wilme, and bryne.

lj Buectus, upwegen. 25 Fenerator, gafolgilda.
Edita, seo acennede. Fraudis, manes.

Editus, acenned. Felethi, fepemen, fepehere,

| Erogante, pere gedeledan. Felethei, foreirnerum.

| Exitio, cwale. Freti, gefyrprede.

Execranda, pa onscuniendlecan. 30 Falarica, fyrdwerod, feohtgegyre-

j Elephantinosa, sio hreoflice. lan, etgar, wel genus teli.

_ Extricabili, ungebrocenre. Frugalitatis, mid gnepnesse.
Expertem, wanhlytne. Future, pere toweardan.
Elideret, gebrace. Flagitiosum, pone manfullan.
Emulabantur, weran sacende. 35 Facula, fecele, blysige.

| ~Effigic, on hiwe. Fax, fecele, blysige.

| Ldictis, gebennum, odde gescrifum.  eriatus, i, sanctus uel requies, ge-
E quibus, of pam. freod, gerestep.?

| Exorruit, onscunode. Formosa, wlitig.

 Eidem, pere ilcan. 40 Fucate, getelgode.

Evuta, toworpenum. Fucatum, getelgod.
Ezortatorium, trymendlic. . Fronde, telgan.

Exuias, ongirede. Fomitibus, tyndrum.

_ Exibentes, gegearwiende. Fastu, ofermetto.

’ For zenia. The E is marked with ? Of. pag. 401 1. 14, BR. W.

e in the manuscript as being super- * So has the MS. R. W.
luous.

400 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 401
Factiosam, pone facenfullan. Fefellisset, pa pa he leag.
Factiones, facn. Famelicum, pane hingriendan.
Fati, wyrde, odde gegonges. Familice, pa hungerlican.
Fidenter, getreowlice. Fusoque, spinle.
Fidere, getrywan. 5 Fusum, spinl.
Fabrefactam, smicere geworhte, Frugalis, westmbere.

asmidode. Frusta,® in sticco.
Fastigium, heannesse. Frustatim,® in stiece.
Flaminia, healdnessa. Focularibus, fyrgearwungum.
Flebotomo, blodseaxe.! 10 Fortuitu, mid weas, gelimpe.
Fletoma, blodseax. Fautor, gefultumiend.
Falcastrum, sipe. Farris, hwetes, speltes.
Fanatice, pere deofel[gylde]. Faar, spelt.
Fausta, pes epelan, odde rume. Furue, pere sweartan,
Fortune, wyrde. 15 Furuo, py sweartan.
Fortuna, wyrd. Fuliginis, fylnesse.
Fragore, gebrece, swoege.2 Fuligine, hrume.
Fraudulenta, sio facenfulle. Figmenta, hiwung, odde leasspel.
Factio, searu. Frontosa, mid heafod baldre.
Fantasma, scinhiw. 20 Furibunde, pere hatheortan.4
Fantasmate, scinhiwe. Fotam, gewyrmede, odde geholpene.
Fruniscantur, brucad. Fluminauit,> scan.
Famulatibus, peowdomum. Fatebatur, heo andette. .
Fiscillis, tenelum. Fundo, grunde.
Fortuitu, wyrdgesceapum. 25 Fundi, grundas, odde boclandes.
Fauorabile, hergendlice. Fimi, gores.
Florigera, pa blostmberendan. Fulta, gefyrpredo.
Frondescit, blowed. Formidolosis, forhtigendum.
Factionibus, searwum, Facinus, man.
Ferinam, pa wildeorlican. -30 Friuola, leasunga.
Ferocitatem, repnesse. Falsato, py leasan.
Funesti, pes repan and pes dead- F'ratruele, his broporsuna. ;

berendan. Formosa, mid enlicre. 7
Funesto, pem hatheortan. Formosior, wlitigre. ;
Foetosis, tudorfestum. 35 Fuscinula, awelas. {
Facundia, getingnesse. Fore, wesan, and beon.
Ferebatur, wes sed. Fascis, sceafes.
Frequentantem, oft secende. Fasculo, sceafe.
Facultas, epelicnes. Fuluis, geolwum, odde deorcum, :
Feralibus, mid replicum. 40 Fantasmate, pere glyderinge.
Fasciarum, swepelum, wreda. Fertur, is sed.
Fascia, wred. Falerata, becefed.
Flagitante, wilnigendum. Fulcire, wrepian.
Farciuntur, weran acrummene. Fulmina, ligita.
Frustrari, gewegnian. 45 Facitie,® gleo.

1 Of. pag. 22 1. 33. R, W. * Cf. pag. 400 1. 34. R. We

2 Of. pag. 23 1. 18. R. W. ® Read: fulminauit. R. W.

® Sic MS. R. W.

P |

402 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 403
Fagus, bece. Fiscilla, tenel.
Fagis, becum. Fiscilus, stictenel.
Fasianus, worhana. Fida, stern, odde getrywe.
Fascia, swepil, wred. Fibra, pearm.
Famfaluca,' leasung, odde fam. 5 Fibrarum, pearma.
Fasciarum, swepila. Fibre, pearmas,
Faicis, wudubil, sipe, rifter. Fibula, sigel, odde hringe, fifele.
Fasces, godweb, odde ealdordomas. Fiscilis, sprinclum.
Facundia, i. eloquentia, wop. Filum, pred.
Famfaluca, wapul.? 10 Filatum, gearn.
Falcastrum, wudubil, odde sie. Fenicia, baso.
Fauonius, westsudwind. Figmenta, i. plasmatio hominum, ge-
Fascinatus, i. laudatis stulte, mals- weore.
crung.t Filix, fearn.
Farius, fag. 15 Filiscetum, fearnbed.
| Farsa, acrummen. Felicem, fearn.
|  Fasces, cynedomas. Fibras, spenas.
| Fastu, wlenceo. Ficetula, sucga.
| Falla,® bean. Fibrans, hrissende.
Fabrile, smiplice. 20 Finiculis,® finul.
Fabri, creftiglice. Fiscalis, redegafellicum, wenfare.
| Ferruginius,® greg. Fimum, gor.
| Ferox, repig, odde berend. Fictis, facnum.
Ferculi, discas. Fistulis, peotum.
Fercula, swesende. 25 Figite, swipiad.
Ferinum, hold. Filiaster, steopsunu.
| Feries,i.quietis,uelsecuris,restendum. Flustra, i. unde, sigend.
_ Fenus, spearwa. Flauum, i. fuluum, read.
{ Foenus, borh. Flegmata, horh.
| Fenore, borge. 30 Flegma, horh.
| Foederatus, getreowed, getreude. . Flabanus,6 swan.
Fecce, mere. Flabum,' geolu.
| Fepa,’ weps. Flamina, biscophadas, odde bled.
| Fefellit, i. eludit, wegep. Flaminium, biscophade.
Furula, escprote. 35 Flagris, swipum.
_ Fenum, gres, odde hig. Floccus, loca.
_ Ferrugine, i. ferreo colore, isengreg,  Flauescit, albescit, glitenap.
j gesweorf. Flagrans, stincende.
| Fiber, befer. Fouit, bredep, feormap.
| Ferrugine, greghewe isene oppe 40 Formido, onoba.
| sinderome, Forfix, isernfetor.

‘ This medieval Latin word seems to ? Of. Leo’s Gloss. pag. 8 1. 13. R. W.
be entirely unknown to the lexicographers, * The two last words added in a differ-
and the Anglo-Saxon glossator himself does ent hand-writing.

not appear to have been qnite satisfied * Of. Bosw. D. 44k. R. W.
of its meaning; for it is explained no ° Of course for faba. R. W.
more than five lines below by an Anglo- ® So the MS. R. W.

Saxon word the meaning of which appears ” Of course for flavum.
not to be known.

27

404 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON 405
Fornacule, cylene, heorpe. Llagrantia, blatesnung.
Foros, bolea. Furva, swearte.
Fortex,! edwiclle. Folliculum, gchopp.
Foilis, blasthelg. Far serotina, spelt samgrene.
Folliginis, bylgum. 5 Frigetur, sie gehyrsted.
Fornaculum, here. Fluctris, biflitum.
Fronulus, linetwige. Facies, hleor.
Fratuelis,? i, filius fratris, suchtyrga.  F’rons, hnifol, odde foreweard hea-
Frugus, uneystig, odde heamol, fer- fod.6
cup. 10 Faus,7 hyge.
Frixum, afigen. Femor, }eoh.
Fraxinus, ese. Femina, inneweard peoh.
Fraga, ofet. Fel, gealla.
Fringella, fine. Felle, geallan.
Framea, sweord, odde extgare. 15 Flamma, leg.
Fretus, confidens, presumplus, bald, Flammiger, legberende.
Fragor, ecirm, sweg, gebree.® Fauilla, ysle.
Fraudulenter, facenlice. Fumus, rec.
Frutina, fultumend. Florulus, goldfine. -
Fuscinula, awel. 20 Folium, leaf.
Furuum, i. nigrum, brun. Framen; spxe.
Funalia, candela, odde candel- Fussarius, wanabeam.®
weocan. Fraga, streowberge.
Fuliz, ganot, odde dopened. Forda,? gefearh, sugu. |
Furuncus, mearp. 25 Ferrum, isen. :
Fungus, swamm, odde feldswam. Faber, smip. ;
Funda, lipere. Fiola, bledu.
Fundibule, liperan. Frigus, ciele.
Funestissima, pa deadlicostan. Forfex, scer.
Funalia cerei, weaxcandel. 30 Fucus, telg, deag.
Funalia, i, lucernarum, stuppe.4 Fucorum, telga.
Fuligine, soote. Furca, wearhrod.
Furia, hegtesse. Fistucam,? strewu, eglan.
Furiarum, hegtessa, odde weden- ebricitantem, feferseocne.
heotra synna.> 35 Fretum, deop. t
Fetas, melee and tydrende. Filacteria, lyfesra.9
Fetus, mele. Falerato, gehyrste.
Fetu, tudre, odde midbeorpre. Falerarum, lyrsta. :
Fictilia, lemena.? Fornicibus, bogum. 4
Fulchra,? redescamelas. 40 Fornicem, bogan. 4
Furibundus, weallende. Farus, beacenstan. :
* For Vortex. ° These latter words are added in a
? So the MS. R. W. different ink.
* The last word added in another hand © The last words in another hand.
and different ink. 7 Apparently a corruption of fauces.
* A blank is left for the gloss, as ®° Of. pag. 270 1. 18. R. W.
though the glossator conld not find an ° Cf. Beda 4,27. R. W.
equivalent in Anglo-Saxon. (Cf.1.22, R. W.)

406 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 407
 Funebre, heofendlice, hrawlie. Fasce, gegirlan. -
Fortunatum, pone gewilseligan.' Fascie, breostlines.
Furtunatus,? gewifseli. Fantasma, sein, i. et nebulun.
Fato, gewife. Falancx,? fepa.
Fortune, gewife. 5 Farcire, acrymman,
Fato, wintergegonge. Farsit, fylde.
Fortuito, semnendlice. Farsis, gefyldum.
Flamen, biscop,® odde orop, odde — Filicumque, and fearnes, odda fearna.®
gast. Fucare, reode gnidan.7
Farciuntur, acrummene weran. 10 Furiis, wedenheortnessum.
Fors, wyrd. Furuiores, sweartran.
Flauescentibus, falewende. Floralia, blostmgeld.s
Fotam, sealfode. Fauorem, fultum.
Fomentat, lacnode. Fatis, wyrdum.
* Fulminauit, lixte. 15 Flaminibus, biscopum.
Forti, festes. Fotu, bepinge.
Fumigabundis,+ pes stincendan. Fomentat, bepede.
Flara, bledas. Fraudabere, pu bist bescered.
Fidibus, strengum, Functus, brucende.
p 8" H
Falconum, wealhhafeca. 20 Fisct, eynedomes.
Fabrefactis, gesmiccrade. Faltum, gehladen.
Fati, gewrites. Faui, beobread,
Fistula, wistle. Fauste, geselge.
Ferit, sloh. Flari, sweopan.
Faminem, sprece. - 25 Factitat, dep, andwyreep.
Fatescunt,®? sweperedan. Furcifer, wearg.
Fontona,? pa wyllican. Furcifera, pa weargberendan.
Fautam famam, pone eadeganhilisan. Friabant,? breean.
Findit, toslaf, tocleaf. Fullones, wealeeres.9
Findere, todzlan. 30 Fatali, gelimplice.
Facessit, fremede. Fibras, pearmas.
Facessunt, fremmad,. Fatu, sprece.
Frondosis duis, pem gehilmdum  Faciant, ic do.
greefum. Faxo, ie do.
Friens, brytende. 35 Flatu, orepe.
Fricabat, gebrytte. Fricans, filiende.
Foeta, eacene. Fouebo, ie lufige.
s s is
‘Tread here: gewilseligan, not gewif- In fact it represented the Frencl: fuillir.
swligan, but cf. the next line. R. W. ° This word is added iu another ink,
2? So the MS. R. W. as a correction; for the Latin word is in
* The two Anglo-Saxon words which the genitive case plural.
follow are in another ink, by a glossator * Literally to paint with red, referring
who seems to have understood the Latin to the painting of the face. We should
word differently. say in English, to rouge.
* Fumigabundus is given in Ducange ° The glossator seems to have snpposed
in the sense of fumans. that the name of the Floralia was derived,
> Fatescerc, as we learn from Ducange, not from Flora, but from /los.
is another form, or rather a corruption * A foller is still called in Lancashire
of, falescere, which in medieval Latin a walker.
had the meanings of carere, cessare, finire.

408 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGIO-SAXON. 409
Fouet, fedep. Falx, sipe.
Frutescit, pufap, and wridap. Iauces, goman.
Frondosis, pufugum. Faucibus, geaflum.
Furibus, mus, peofum.' Fiber, snedel, pearm,
Frutecta, ..... 5 Frontialis, steorrede.
Fatescit, adeadap. Fordalium,® gesoden wyrtmete.
Fraudor, ic com beseyred. Formaticum, uel formellum, cyse.
Fingunt, gehiowiap. Folialis, erompeht.
Funestam, pa welhreowan, odde  Ferculum, zlees cynnes panmete.
pone hragifran. 10 Formentum, ofenbacen hlaf.
Fecunda, westmberu. Ficus, ficbeam.
Friuola, leasunge. Flaga, hindberian.®
Fraudaret, bescyrede. Fragos, heorotberge.
Frutecta, gewrid, odde puftas.” Flauia, uel mori, blace berian. :
Fessum, mepne 15 Fascinium, streuberie.
Fusco, sweartum. Fraga, streuberian.?
Fulcit, wrepep. . Fenuculum, finul.
Flagrantior, swipstincendre, Febrifuga, feferfuge.
Furtiua, stulur. Frumentum, hwete.
Furtum, stala. 20 Farina, melu.
Ferarum, wilddcora, Fas, riht, odde godes riht.
Fatum, gegon. Fastidia, aprotenes.
Fata, deapwyrde. Fessa, geswenced. '
Fabrica, weorce. Furias, wuhunga.
Funambulus, rapgon. 25 Furfures, syfepa.
Fingo, ie hiwige. Filia minuta, eoforfearn.
Fasci,? swearte. Fenegrecio, wyllecerse.®
Fuge, fleamas. Ferula, eseprote.
Fugitiuus, fretum. Filicina, eoforfearn,
Fatuiter, dyslice. 30 Filia aurisa, banwyrt.’
Fugacia, pa fleondan, Fuscus, tegl, odde feax.
Fullonum, leaporwyrt. Finicia,’© baso.
Ferrugineas, pa isengregan. Fusarius, wananbeam."'
' Foeneratur, strynep. Foederatas, getrewde.
Fascinatio, gebeotung. 35 Faonius, westsupwind.
Fetta, clefra.* Febris a feruore nominatur, id est,
Focus, seol. bryneadl.
Fusorium, delfisen. Frenesis, weding  Greci mentem
Foratorium, uel terebellum, nafogar. Srenas dicunt, hinc et freneticus.
40 Fleumon, magan untrymnes dictum
1 Of. pag. 411 1. 1. R. W. 7 Of. pag. 136 1. 14 and pag. 270 1. 19.
? These two words are written in another R. W.
hand. ® Read: foeno graco. Cf. pag. 298 1.
* Read: fusci, ef. 1. 16. R. W. 16. R. W.
4 Of. pag. 134 1. 42. R. W. * Read: viola aurosa. Of. pag. 300
° So the MS. R. W. 11. RW.
° Of. pag. 269 1. 39, pag. 295 1. 23, © For Phenicia, of purple colour.
pag. 2981.2, R. W, "Of, pag. 405 1. 22. R. W.
F

410 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 411
apoplegi, quod interpretatur in- Furo, mearp,?idem deminutiue furun-
flammans. ; culus, a furuo dictus, unde et fur.

Frunculus, quasi ferunculus, id est Frutices, seoomhylti.
ongseta, Greece antraz, ab igne.  Farus, Grecum est nomen, nam fos,

Frenus, mupbersting. 5 lux, oros autem uisio, aput' eos

Farmacida, in Latinum medicamina nominatur, hine compositum nomen
sonat, id est sealflecnung, id est est fari, id est fyrtor.3

_ formantur nomina farmaceaticus Fornum, hlafofn, a farre dictum.
et farmaceatica et farmaceaticum. Forus, ubi uua calcatur, hoc est

Flebotomum, blodseax, odder edder-49 wingetred.
seax. Grace namque fleps, wena, Faba pressa, gegrunden bean.
tomum uero incisio nominatur. Frondes, geleafhris.

Foedus fecerunt, were genoman. Fomes, spoon. Idem astula.

Familia erciscunde, yrfegedal, quia Fructus, in eo malum cidonium, siue

-erciscunda enim apud ueteres diui-15  malum cotonium, id est codsppel.
sio nuncupabatur. Feniculum, finol, Grace matron.

Finium regundorum actio ordo, ge- Fascia, seaxclad, odde wredwridels.

i mera gedal. Fasciola, sarclap.
| Fructus, gefsweorc, sive leneslandes Far, grut.

bryce. 20 Farcimen, geheecca, odde mear-
} Facinus, scepded. heeecel.

Flagitium, legerteam, odde tiht. Flasce, trinnubytte,! eadem et flas-

Filizx, fearn, cuius radix utilis est ad cones.
soluendam difficultatem pariendi. Fiscus, kyninga seod.

Fundum, fetes botm. 25 Farcille, berigeble.

Foculare, heort. Folles, pa mestan digneras.

Fastorum libri, cyninga bec, sine Fafida, hleomoe.5
consula bec. Fercula, eyninggereordo.

Fertum, messelac. Fornicibus, holum stanum.

Furie, burgrunan. 30 Freneticus, brecseoc.

Functi, gerefan. Fomentam, tyndre.

Familia, cneoris. Hee autem in  Furus, styccu.
patre terminatur. Fumigabundus, styniendum.®

Fratres, gebropor, et aliquando ge- -Falanges, hereprym.
megas, aliguando gelondan, quas 35 Frico, ic gnide.

Latini paternitates interpretantur. Ferunca, merd.

Fratres patrueles, suctyrian, sic dic- ALLE PATER.
tus est ad patres eorum, si fratres LU FILIUS.
inter se fuerunt, IA SPIRITUS SANCTUS.

Fratrueles autem matertere' filiit, hoc 40
est modrigan sunu. Gastrimargia, gifernes.

Fratrissa,fratris uxor, hocestbropor- Gregatim, heapmelum, odde wrad-

_ wif. melum.

Fauces, hracan, quod per eas famur  Gestiant, girnad.
woces. Gymnasio, on plegestowum.

* Sic MS. RK. W. 4 Is trinnubytte an Anglo-Saxon word?

? Cf. pag. 404 1, 25, R. W. Ue 6

2 Of. pag. 405 1. 41. R. W, > Cf. Cock. Leechd. IIL, pag. 332, R. W.
® Of. pag. 406 J. 17. R. W.

412 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 41
Gramina, gredas. Garbas, sceafas.
Granigera, pa cornberendan. Galnaria,® calwere.
Glumula,’ gewrid, egenu, odde Gabalacrum, calwer.
scealu, Galmum, molegn.®
Garrulitas, geonung. 5 Galmilia, lim, molegen. 7
Gluten, lim, odde tero. Gente, wilde gos.
. Ghuinatum, tosomne gelimed. Geumatrex, geac.
Gestus,” gebserum. Gipsus, spiren.
Gestu, gebero. Gigrars, cora.
Gulosa, mid giferre. 10 Glarea, cisilstan."!
Gentilitatis, heedennesse. Gladiolum, secg.
Gnarus, se wisa. Gillis, fonfyr, odde egle.
Generositas, epelborennes. Glomer, cleowen.
Gerosam,3 pet epele. Glacum,’® hewen, odde grag.
Grauitate, lare, 15 Glus, frecnes, odde lim.
Grassatoribus, peofum. Glitilia, clife.
Glebulis, turfum. Globus, leoma.
Glebe, tyrf. Globis, leomum.
Grassator, hergicnd and ahidend. Glandula, cyrnel.
Glareis, ceoslum. 20 Gladiatores, cempan.
Gynmosophistis, heahlareowum. Gripem, giu.'#
Geometrica, eorpgemet. Griphus, giv.’
Gazarum, para gestreona. Gratia, est, gifu.
Gestibus, gebeerum. Grillus, ama.
Genuinis,s tuxum. 25 Gregariorum, wnepelra.
Gurguliones, protbollan. Gurgustium, cesol.
Gula, hrace. Galeatum, gehylmed.
Gradatim, fegre, odde fotmelum. Grandeuus, frod.
Gloriatur, gilpad. Germanus, ewenbropor.
Genuini, cwipenlicre. 30 Gibbus, hoferede.
Gratatur, blissap. Gausape, sccat.
Gannature, cancettende. Grus, eran.
Glomerantibus, ymbheapiendum. Grallus, lvoe. ‘
Geneliatici,> heepene. Gallus, hana.
Gurgurizat,® iagulswyled. 35 Gallicinium, honered-tid.
Garret, geonap. Gallina, henn.
Garrula, sio hlydende, Geniscula, mucxle. ,
Galla, galluc. Gustus, birgnes-
Garula, erawe. Gene, heagospind.
Grauculus,’ hroe. 40 Gingifa, toprima.
' For glomulus, in the sense, appar- 5 For calvaria, R. W.
ently, of a little heap. ° Cf. Bosw. D. 464, R. W.
? So the MS. R, W. Sie, for gante. R. W.
3 Sic, for yenerosam. 4 Of pag. 412 1. 20. R, W.
* Cf pag. 157 1. 22. R. W. 12 For glaucum.
’ Sie, for yentilici. R. W. ‘8 Vor glis, apparently.
° Sie, for gargarizat. ™ Of. pag. 258 1. 7. R. W.
? Sie, for graculus. R. W.
;

4 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 415
artilago,! gristle. Garrio, ie hlyde.
Yenitalia, pa cennendlican. Gramnine, grese.
Genua, cneowa. Gramen, ewice.
Gratis, brod. Gremium, bearm,
Glandix, eceren. 5 Gyrens, ymbfonde.
enista, brom. Grosse, greatre. =
‘enescletum, bromfwsten. Grossas et graciles, great and smel.
ues, gryt. Gracilis, lytel.
abra, gat.” Grandem, micel. |
rergenna,’ sticca. 10 Genitrix, flind.
trammaticorum, stefwriterum. Gentis, mines cynnes.
Flaucoma, eagscoung. Germine, mid minre grownesse.
Fenesi, fatu. Grauis, sio picce wrlyft, odde ge-
resticulatio, plega. stebpig-
tradatin, softe. 15 Gradu lento, listnie and lategange.
rerula, berend. Geminus, twyfeald.
iymnica, pa upwitliean. Granata, wpeltreowu.
‘ener, apum. Gillone,* stznan.
Typsan, dracan. Gotium, feld.
lermanas, getwisan. 20 Gotia, feldas.
| Gemellos, getwisan. Graticula,"! becering.
| Gorgoneis, pm hellicum. Glebenus, eaghyll from pm ong-
rgustia, hus. noran.
‘eruli, berend.4 Gigra,!? se flesc top wipeftan pone
‘ammate, gewrite. 25 tux. .
lomerauit, ymbhringde. Gemitus, geomrung.
rassantibus, hidendum. Galbus, pynne monn.
liribus, eglum.® Giluus, gioluhwit.
|Geseos,6 cneoris boca. Guttatus, cylew.
loriosas, saltim, huhugu. 30 Genosus, cneowade.
rallicule, scos. Gans, grege gos.
\Gracili, pxre’ lytlan. Gignalia, hagan.
ipsa, needre.7 Gnesis, ewictreow.!®
forgoneo, aterlicum, odde biter.§ Gesce, eall hwite wysan-
lescit,9 weaxep. 35 Gracilis, smal.
| ‘eminum, twifalde. Genas, hleor.
| |Gestat, birep. Gelu, forst.
lesco,® ic weaxe. Girba, se calra mesta mortere.
jostica, pa Grecisean, Geomantia, purh corpan witgung.
| : Of course for cartilago. 5 Of. 1. 22. R. W.
| @ Read: capra. R. W. ‘ * Apparently for crescit and cresco.
| Gergenna is a medieval Latin word © Gillo was a medieval Latin word for
ffor what we call in modern English a an amphora or wine vessel, and is preserved
| Istaff; we can easily understand why — in German under the form of geltz, a pail.
' yvas called in Anglo-Saxon a stik. "" Sic, for eraticula.
Cf. 1.16. R. W. " The MS. has gigra or gigna. Cf. pag.
J)* Gr. pag. 413 1. 12. RW. 157 1, 83 and pag. 264 1. 10. R. W.
| Sic, for geneseos. % Cf. pag. 139 1. 2. R. W.
ice. 19. Rw.

416 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 4
Glaucus, gleseneage. Habitudine, onsiene.
Gagates, secol. Haustum, dryne.
Gerabotane, biscopwyrt.! ITabenis, salum, odde geweald-
Gleba silicis, stanes floh. leperum.
Geneales, brydrest. 5 Habile, lipowac.
Gigrillus,? wince. Heus, gehyrs pu?
Gladiolum, gledene. Hebitatus,'° astynt.
Grissa garina, wordcersa.* Hebeti, dysige.
Gotuna, cammuc.* Hebesceret, aswand.
Germanitatis, brodorsibbe. 10 Herodius, wealhhafuc.™
Gimnicis artibus, upwitlicum. Hauritoria,!® hledhwiogl.
Gramina, cipas. Herinis,'® weleyrge.
Grunnire, grennigan. Hibiscum,biscopwyrt,mersemeal we.
Gazas, feohgestreon. Hirundo, swealwe.
Gallitricum, weterwyrt.° 15 Hyna,!* nihtgenge.
Gentiana, feldwyrt. Holor, swan.
* Gagantes, mucgwyrt.® Hora, sweg.
Grandisona tuba, hludstefne byme.  Hoctatus, geleahtrod.
Grandescit, crescit, micelap. | Honeraria, seyphlest.
20 Holido, fule.
Horrendus, pet egesfulle. Humare, bemyldan.
Hiulca, cinende. Hymeneos, wifping, gifta, hemed.
Historiographus, stefwritere.7 Histriatarum, waledra.
Heresceret, tocleofode,® and opfealh. Hispidus, ruh.
Hortantur, lerdan. 25 Hirsutus, ruh.
Hortamini, lerad. Homo, mann.
Hiulcas, pa giniendan, odde tara. Horidanum, elene.'® ‘
Hortamentis, lare. Hasta, spere.
Hortus, wyrtun. Hostimen, leasung, odde wundor.
Holitor,® leacweard. 30 Hidropicos,"" weterfull.
Hironiam, purh smicernesse, and  Hesitantes, tweogende. q
hiwunge. Hesperia, Eotoles. ;
Heroicis, mid eorllicum. Herculus, hearge. 1
Historia, vacu Hierophantorum, scincreefta.'® ;
Habitudo, gebzro. 35 Hircitallo, hyse, wise.
1 Of. pag. 134 1. 40. R. W. 1 i.e, the Welsh-hawk, the faleon. In
? Sic, for gyrgillus. the Anglo-Saxon period the favourite hawk —
* So the MS. R. W. for falconry was obtained from Wales. (Cf.
* Cf. Cock. Leechd. III, pag. 316. R.W. pag. 259 1. 8. R. W.)
* Of. pag. 296 1. 19. R. W. ” Cf. Bosw. Dict. 36p. R. W.
° Of. pag. 301 1. 8. R. W. ‘SA corruption for Erinnys, one of the
7 The Anglo-Saxon word means properly _— Furies.
a grammarian, and not a historiographer. Of. pag. 270 1. 38. R. W.
° The meaning of tocleofian is: adhe- ’ Read hyena (= the nightwanderer).
rescere. R. W. - R. W.
° Of course, for olitor, and the next 16 Of, pag. 271 1. 10. R. W.
word for ironiam, but the first meaning *7 Originally written hidripicus, bat cor-
given to the latter is not a proof of the rected in a different ink, as given in the
scholarship of the glossator. text,
1° Sic MS. R. W. © i, e. conjurers, magicians.
ij

418 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 419
Hymenis, peninge. Inmunes, cleclease, laplease.
Humectans, weetende. Inextricabilem, pa wnabrecendlican,
Herebvi,' helle. Indepte, pere begitenan.
Horrisonis, gryrelicum. Inportunus, se gema.
Honera,' ie bere. 5 Internicionis, ewilde, forwyrde.
Horrendum, gryrum. Ingruere, ongehreosan.
Horrida, ic eom gryrelic. Inhianter, gredelice.
Hausi, ic gehierde. Inhians, gredig.
Horno,® gierstandege. Mtibus, smelpearmum.®
Hamus, hoe. 10 Intestinum, pearm.
Hospes, gast. Incompta, ungefretwodu.
Hilidros, i. celidros, nedyan. Inguina, smelpearmas.
Hesperius, swana steorra." Insolescat, wlancap.
Humerus, exel. Insolentiam, wlence.
Hinulus, hindcealf. 15 Iniercapidinis, firstmearces.®
Hircus, bucca. Indruticans,’© wrestende, odde wlan-
Hlorreum, beren. cende.
Hordeum, bere. Indagantes, aspyrigende, odde a-
Hebitauit, aslacude. smeagende.
Hrodia' lex, cipemonna riht. 20 Instanter, baldlice.
Hereditas, ierfe. Inlecebrarum, unalifendlecum.
Hostia proprie, fyrdtimber. Increpuerit, punode, odde hleoprede.
Hincneomon,* nederbita. In simulacra, on anlienesse.
Herba proprie, gers. Inlibate, pere ungederedan.
Hedera nigra, wudubind, eorpifig.® 25 In clandistino, on pem diglan.
Hierobotanim, redic.6 Introrsum, inn.
Herbairas, gorst.’ In cunis, in cilderadelum.
Hinnulicapini, eldne. Ingerebat, ongebrohte.
In gemino, on twyfealdre.

Insitum, gecynde. 30 Ingeminent, getwyfylden.
Imis, of neopeweardum. Ignaris, unwisum.
Tubare, leoman. Integritatis, onwealhnesse.
In imo, inopan. Integer, onwalh.
Ita prorsus, eallenga. Idoneam, pancfulle.
Infulas, weorpmynd. 35 Ingluuie, frecnesse.'!
In catalogo, on getele. Inexperto, unafundenum.
Infectis, gextredum, bewyledum, be- In remoto, asyndedre.

fyledum. Incommoditate, ungetesnesse.
Inconuenienter, ungerisenlice. Inuisendum, to secanne.
In oromate, on gastlicre gesihpe. 40 Intulerit, ongebrohte.
Instrumentis, andgeloman. Inter, betwux.
Tacturam, xfwyrdlan. Instinctu, onbryrdinge.

* Sic MS. R. W. 7 Cf. pag. 299 1. 3. R. W.

2 Read: hesterno. R. W. ° Of. pag. 159 1. 37. R. W.

* i. e. the shepherds’ star. ° Cf. pag. 27 1. 31 and pag. 384 1. 9.

* For Ichneumon. R. W.

* Cf. pag. 299 1. 1. R. W. So the MS. R. W.

* Cf, pag. 135 1. 23, R. W. " Read: fretnesse. Rs W.

a 28

420 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. o
Instincta, inswapen. In consortio, on pem gemanum.
Inuisum, pone Japan. Inconsulte, unredlice.
Inuisa, pa lapan. Indolem, gebicrdne, pone epelan
Inpudens, scomleas. geongan.
Inuisorum, lapra. 5 Instigauit, onbryrde.
Inuestes cateruas, pa xnlecan heapas —Insigniter, xpelice.
and pa ungebyrdan heapas. Inrumpere, inresan. 4
Imperii, vices. Inruptiones, onresan.
Imperitat, wealdep. Inceptis, onginne.
Incestum, hemed. 10 In pulpito, on redescamole.®
Incestus, forhealden. In tribulanoterritorio, on pam suador
In arida, on drigum. gereflande.
Incestatur, hemend. Interimitur, wearp ofslegen.
Infamiam, to unhlisan. Inerguminum, pere gewitseocan.
Infamis, pes unhliscadgan, orret- 15 Inerguminos, wodan.
scipe. Inpensa, gebryttodre.
Inedia, wedlnes. Tanitor, duruweard.
Ingesserunt, inrecan. Insignis, mere.
Ingruens, onfillende, oddehreosende. Insignia, mzrnesse.
Inluuiem, widl and ful. 20 Insignem, merne.
Iilinc, donan. Inpudicarum, unclenra.
Istinc, heonan. Inlicias, ongespanest.
In tantum, swa swipe. Inprobus, unsele, gemah.
In conum, on heannesse. Infectum, wungeworht, geblanden.
Mico, rape. 25 Turis, ewe.
Inuitus, gepreatod and genided. Innupti, unforgifenum.
Inuitant, geniddan. In rapinam, on reaflac.
Interualla, hwilsticcu. Tecor, lifer.
Incentor, wrehtend, tyhtend. In clero, on preostheape.
Intra, binnan. 30 Inflexibili, unabegendlicre.
Tubelemus, pet freolsger.' Indulcauit, geswette.
Impendebatur, wes brytnod. Intemerata, ungearwyrd.
Infra, efter. Infesta, pa repan.
Inquiens, ewepende. Infestationes, teonan.
Indicia, tacn. 35 Ineunte, ongangendre.
Indigena, landleod. Imbricibus, hroftigelum. |
Interpellata, hio ws beden. Ingluwiem, in pane wasend.*
Inproperio,? hospe- Tamque, somod.
Inpingere, onspurnan, odde eefestan. Inertes, ungleawe.
Insimulare, gewregan. 40 Idem, hoc.
Insimulatio, wrohte. Igni sacrum, oman.>
Inlustris, pre ezbelican, Ignarium,s algeweore.
Incommodum, unbriece, ungescrepe, Intertiare, geborhfestan.
inutile. Inima,' untosliten.
' The meaning of freols is: a time of * Cf. pag. 419 1. 35. R. W.
freedom, holy day, feast; freolsger deno- * Read: ignis sacer or ignem sacrum.
tes: a feast-year, jubilee. R, W. Cr. pag. 261. 4. RB. W.
? Read: inprobrio (or opprobrio). R. W. © Sic, for igniarium. R. W.
* Cf pag. 404 1. 40, R. W. ? So has the MS. R. W. |

422 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 423
Inpetigo, teter. Tuuencibus, risepyfel.
Impetigo, eagan wenn, odde wearge- In _capsella, on ciste.
breede. In sitharciis,9 in fxtelsum.
Inprouisu, feringa, hredlice. In triclinio, on preofealdun huse.'”
Infestatio, unleopowacnes. 5 Incursere, onslogan.
Infestatione, sorheriunge. Industria, gleaunes.
Inminente, zxtwesendre. Inperauit, wilt.
Ingesta, ondoen. In antris, on holum.
Infestus, ungetese. Iugeri, zceras.
Inola, eolone.* 10 In nemore, on bearwe.
Instites, swepelas. Ibices, fyrengatum,'!
Intexunt, awunden. In singultum, in sicettunge and
Iners, wswind, asolcen. geoxunge.
Interlitam, besmyred. Inclyti, mere.
-Indigeste, unofercumenc. 15 Inclitum, merne.
Infici, gemengde. In competis, on wega gemotum.
Inpastorem,? biswicend. Ignaui, earge.
Inter primores, betweon ieldrum. In conclaui, on cofan.
Inuolucus, weoluc. In iubilo, on drime.
Inquilinis,’ geneat. 20 In clangore, on hwelunge.
Indolis, hyhtful, pionde, pone In fastigio, in heannesse.
gleawan. Indictio, gecwed.
Inpingit, gemearcode, uel signat. Tuniperum, quicbeam.
Incantata, gegzlen. Instaura, geedniwa.
Tncantatores, galdrigean. 25 In tritura, in trifelunge.
Intentatis, biotiap. Insontam, unsynnige.
Inundatio, gyte. Inibis, ongang.
Incursus, ongon. Interrasilem, inheald.
Ixtrinicio,’ forsliet. Imperitia, unglednes.
In sirtim, on sandgeweorp. 30 In pelicatu,? on cifeshade.
dInmoratur, wunap. Inpetigine, on tetere.'?
Intransmeabili, unoferfere. Inpulerit, beat.
Inbellem, orwige. In prouectione, on wegfore.
Initiatum, gesteped, gehalgodne. Irqui, ongneras. ,
In catamo, in bece. 35 Interceptus est, arased wes.
Tota, sohetha.> Isic, leax.
Irridabant, tyhton. Insabula, meodoma.
Isca, tyndre.6 Intercilium, betwuh bruwun.
Tuncus, rise.” Index, beenend, scytefinger.
Iungetum,> riscpyfel. 40 Iugula, iucboga.
| * Cf. Cock. Leechd. III pag. 325. R.W. ° Sie, for sitarchiis. R. W.
? Read: impostorem. R. W. *° The glossator has singularly mistrans-
. * So has the MS. R. W. lated this word, through bungling at the
* An error for internecio. R. W. derivation.
| ° Of. pag. 28 1. 33. R. W. "Of, pag. 261.2. R. W.
© Cf. pag. 28 1. 28. R. W. Tt seems evident, from the Anglo-
* Of. pag. 135 1. 16 and pag. 299 1. Saxon interpretation, that the author of °
26. R. W. this gloss took the Latin for two words,
® Read: juncetum. R. W.

al
424 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 425
Tugum, iue. Inexpertus, wnandwis.
Tuger, ine. In tribuli, in pem gesibbum.
Ibiscum, biseopwyrt.! Ineluctuabilis,® pa unoferwinnene.
Inbilium, \eohtleap. Indegitamenta,® pava boca.
Jurisperiti, redboran. 5 Interpres, wealhstod.
Inimum,? gliw. In luxum, in lust.
Inruunt, onkreosap. Incanduisset, onhatode.
Impetu, pere... In tribulanam, in pa burh.
In zonis, in gyrdelsum. In basileon, on eyninga bocum.
Inter natos, betwuh bearnum. 10 Inlicias, spones.
In biuio, in twega wega’gelete. Insectatum, ehtende.?
Im agonia,® in elne. Inproperasse, pet hie zxtwite.
Inualescebant, strangedon, swipedon. —_Indisciplinatorum, unpeawfulra.
In natataria, on sundmere. Inter Scyllam, betwuh pa freenesse
Institis, in swapum. 15 stowe.
In preterium,* in mepelern. Indisruptis, wntoslitenum. ;
In cateno, in tisege. Tconisma, gelicnes.
Inproba, gemah. Imbribus, seurum.
Inprouitatem, gemangnesse. In Tempis, on scenfeldum.$
In gimnasio, on leorninghuse. 20 Ignicomis, se fyrfeaxna.
In propatulo, on ewiscnesse. Incestans, gewemde.
In gastrimargie,® in gifernesse. Ingurgitat, wextep.
Inmunitas, orceasnes. In extasi, in modes heamnesse, on —
In atomo, in breahtme. gastliere gesihde. 7
Inter biothanatas, betweonan self- 25 Infindens, gerawende, slitende, and
myrpras. ceorfende.
Instinctu, tihtnesse. In ueribus, in fnasum.
In genitali, in pere gecyndeleun. Infidus, ungetreowe.
Inprecatatur, bed. Infamare, georrettan.
Inauditum, ungefrege. 30 Inflictis, onslegum.
Inletus, getyhted. Inuestis, ungebyrd.
Insectiones, ehtnesse. Jaculatas, pa flanihtan.
Infiscaretur, gegafelod, bestroden Inpiger, unsleac.
were. Inspirans, onswetende,
Inrosatum, of rosena. 35 In diuos, in god.
Interpellans, gretende. Joppiter, punor, odde dur?
In focularibus, on heordum. In Latio, in Eatole.
Intempestiue, in swigean midre nihte. Infecit, geblende.
Indulte, pes alefdan. Illexit, beswac, getihte.'?
1 Of. pag. 270 1. 38. R. W. ® Sic, for indigitamenta. R. W.
* Inimum is an evident and gross blunder 7 Of. pag. 424 1. 32. R. W.
of the Anglo-Saxon glossator, who, in ar- ® ,In the bright-fields.“ The Anglo~
ranging the Latin words in alphabetical Saxon interpretation of the classical Tempe.
order, misread in for m. It should be ° In this rather curious gloss, the two
Mimus. names of the northern god are introduced
* So the MS. R. W. to explain the classical Jupiter.
* For pretorium. © This word is in another hand, but
* Read: ineluctabilis. R. W. nearly contemporary.

426 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 427
In thermas, on bepe. Insulsior, wnsaltera,
Incultis, wunbeganum, Inficians, \ehtriende.
Trritat, gremede. Inpedit, agelep.
In spira,' in hringe. In frigore, on cele.
Instantia, inwunenesse. 5 Infridat,> celp.
In carruca, on scride, oppe on erete. Jam, geara, oppe geogara.
In preceps, on scyteres, oppe on  Incolomi, gesundum.
ferfyll, unforesceawadlic. Inermis, wngewepnad.
Ingenitam, xpelborene, Inter saxa, betweonan stanas.
In conticinio,* in swigunge. 10 Inheret, oncliofad.
Inteniabat, beotade. In cespites, on tyrf.
Intentarentur, wavan beotende. Incerta, ungewis.
Inficere, gehiwian, geregnian. © Tuga, duna swioran.
Itidentidem, eft gelice. Infandum, sio godwrece.t
Impetrare, begitan. 15 Insomnes, unslepige.
Inpolito, repum. Inplumen, ungefeperedne.
In quis, on pem. Insertum, ingeseted.
Ictibus, slegum. In olitorum, in geweaxenra,
Infandum, pet manwrece, manful. In cucumerario, on wyrttune.
Infausti, pes ungeszligan. 20 Inmane, ungemetlic.
Tuuencum, steor. Inauris, earhring.
Tuniculus, iung hryper. Indruto, szflode.®
Infestos, pa unhioran. Institor, cipemann.
Infecta, gewemde. f Terarchon, heah landrica.
In spera,’ on hringgewindlan. 25 Ipotamus, sehengest.
In cupis, on bydenum. Internasus, nosgrisele.
In giro, on ymbhwyrfte. Imens,® cinn,
In occa, on fyrh, Ilium, rysle.
Tus, xriht. Ibin, rindeclifre.?
Jus, brod. 30 Isica, mearhgehexe.§
Incus, onfilte. Imus, oxa on frumteame.
In margine, on ofre. Ippus, indrihtenwieg.
Infandas, pa manfullan, Interdum, oft.
Infecta, geweete. Internicies, ferhqualu.®
In saltibus, on wuduwaldum. 35 Iusta lance, mid pa efnan helurblede.
Itidem, pet ilce. In glanigeris, in pem stanberendum.
Tuuenta, inguphad. In exercitatione, on behogadnesse.
Index, tecned. Inaniter, unnytlice.
Insanum, pone weddendan. Tactatis, gelegdum.
Tuuabat, lysted. 40 Imperalis* hypodromi, pes caserlican
In palato, in goman, ber mon pone huses.
smac todelep. In. sabanis, on scetum.
In gracilem, on smelne, Incentor, tyhtere.
' For in sphera. * seflod means: sea-flood, tide, inund-
* Conticinium was the medieval Latin ation. R. W.
word for midnight. ® So the MS. R, W.
* For infrigat, of course. 7 Of. Bosw. D. 55y. R. W.
“Cf. pag. 426 1. 19, R. W. ° Cf. pag. 127 1. 26. R. W,

428 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 4
Inrumpere, onblestan. Jus gentium, ealra peoda riht.
Ingenuis, mid tuxum.' lus militare, cempena riht.
Infatigabiliter, ungedrehtlice. Jus puplicum,® caldormanna riht.
Ineluctabilis, unafohtendlic. Tus Quiritum, Romwara sundorriht.
Inepia, pa ungelimplican. 5 Jurisconsultus, iurisperitus, id est,
In frixorio, on brede pannan. rihtserifend, sive domsettend,
Idus, swesenddagas. Jus liberarum, somhiwena yrfebec.
Intende, beheald. Invitum testamentum, awegune yrfe-
Inperbitas,? gemah. bec.
Tn orbem, on pysne mislecan ymb- 10 Inofficiosum testamentum, unarlice
hwyft® and bleofagan. yrfebec.
Interna, pa inlecan. Jus, anwald, a iure possidendo.
Inditur, is ingeleded. Intestata hereditas, ungewriten yrfe,
Inditus, bediped. eadem et caduca.
Intento, higiendre. 15 Instrumentum, tohl.8
Ture, anwalde. Instructum, geworht weore.
Inrita, se unnytta and forhogoda. Integri restitutione, ofstondene beod,
Increpitans, hleprende. siue ofstonden feoh.
Inlecebris, tihtennum. Iniuria, unriht.
Ingratus, lad. 20 Infictiatio, borges andsaca, idem et
Inuisus, lad. abiuratio.
Incitamenta, tyhtenne. Incerta iudicium, geligra witnung.
Intula, wealewyrt. Ignominium, scondehlewung, siue
Intractabilis, inlipewac.4 fracepu, idem et infamium.
Industria, geornesse. 25 Intempestum, midniht.
Inpendebat, sealde. In centurias seniorum et iuniorum
In dies crudesceret, aford.° diuisus; centurias getalu sive
Interuentu, pingunge. heapas dicte.
In pacte, an slegenre. Insipidum, quod saporem non habet,
Innitentes, wiperhlyniende. 30 hoc est unmeagle sive emelle.
Inpulsore, bedendre. Inuitat me, he me Jathath,
Infractus, gewemmed. Inuitat se, he him thinget.9
Inopimum, unasedde. Infurcarunt, ahengon.
Inditas, pa gesettan. Infurcatus, ahongen.
Inter primores, betweoh yldrum. 35 /nculcare, sepe repetere, et aliquando
Inuoluco, wipewinde.° inculcare est inbecwedan ; est enim t
Ibices, firgenget.? metaforicos ab eo quod estcaleare.S —
Inconstans, unfestred. Inmolatio, onsegegiung. :
Jus, mennise riht. Inquilinus, tungebur.’°
tus naturale, gecynde riht. 40 Indigine,® inlenda. -
Jus ciuile, anre burge riht. Interpinnium, mildelflera..!
1 Of, pag. 412 1. 25. R. W. ° In the manuscript, here and in the
? For improbitas. line preceding, the th is used instead of
* So the MS. R. W. the Anglo-Saxon letter. This occurs again
* So the MS. Cf. pag. 271. 2. R, W. a little farther on, but very rarely. (Cf.
5 aford is the translation of in dies, Nr. I. R. W.)
not of crudesceret. Cf. pag. 27 1. 13. R. W. 1° Of. pag. 27 1. 41 and pag. 422 1.20.
* The wild convolvulus, or bindweed, RW.
7 Of. pag. 423 1. 11. R. W. ™ Read: middelflera Ct. pag. 157 1.
® Sic MS. 17, R. W.
i

GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 431
erscapulum, mildelgescyldru.t Liuoris, wfestes.
‘estina, pearmas. Lacertum, earm.
eiuna, smelpearmas. Lenocinia, tyhtenne.
ricius, se lessa il. Lenocinantibus, leastyhtendum,
strix, se mara il.” 5 Liuoris, ledde, andan.
lex, accyn.? - Liuor, wam.
indicum, basu hewen. Latebra, heolstre.
subuli, webbeamas.4 Litterature, namredenne.
dromelum, zppelwin, beor. Largiria,® gifernesse.
fris illirica, hwatend. 10 Liberalitate, freodome, odde cystig-
elaborate, ungeswuncenre. nesse.
Inminutus, onboren, Lectitando, eft redende.
Lentesceret, oncleofode.
Lupatis, bridlum, frenis. Ludorum, plegena.
nto, pem ton, lihte, odde late. 15 Lustratur, geclensod.
ypa, clife.6 Lustris, facum, odde fifgearum.
enta, toh. Lis, gecid.
Lusus, wynne. Laterculis, getalum.
ego, ic lese. Leuirum, tacor.'°
oria, Wynn. 20 Longiuscule, feor, odde wide.
enocinia, leastihtinge, leasolecung. Liwidas, da wanihtan.
amentabile, heafsang. Libida,? pa wannan,
asciuia, gagolbzernesse. Limpidis, scinendum.
unulis, mynum.7 Ludibrio, bysmer.
unules, mynescillingas.* 25 Luctatorum, wrestliendra.
iburnas, flotscipu. Luctatur,' wrestlere.
bara,’ segnes, gudfana. Letamen, gor, seear.
Lima, feol, odde mylenstan. Longius, wide.
aturus, adreogende. Lupercalibus, godgildum.
ature, adreag. 30 Libescant, sfestian, lelian.
ustramenta, deofolgild. Lustro, ryne.
Liniamento, hlodan, gegirelan. Lepida, mid wleere, per egetyngan,
Liniamentis, hreglgewedum. wod.!
atuerunt, bemidon. Leporis, wletnesse.
udificare, gebysmerian. 35 Larbula,!® egesegrima.
iquentis, (pere) flitan gesceafte. Lagena, croh. :
iminium (f)irste. Legythum, eroh.
Liquidas, pa hiutran and pa sciran, Laude,!* lawerce.
Lymphas, weter. Lexiua, leah. '®
* Read: middelyescyldru. ° Sic MS.
? The greater il was the porcupine, the ° Cf. pag. 301.3. R W.
lesser the hedgehog. - (Cf. pag. 122 1. 21, Read: luctator. R. W.
R. W.) ” Of pag. 29 1. 37. R. W.
> Cf. Bosw. D. It. R. W. *S Por larwula, the diminutive of larua,
“Cf. pag. 423 1. 37. RW. a hag or witch. (Cf. pag. 29 1. 8. R, W.)
* Cf. 1.17 and pag. 29 1. 39, R. W. Of course for alauda, a lark. Another
* Cf. pag. 29 1. 26. R. W. instance of our glossator’s ignorance,
7 Cf. pag. 301 40. R, W. Of pag. 291. 16. R. We
® Read: labra. R. W. °

432 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 433
\
Lacessitus, gegremed. Limax, sng). 4
Latrariis, bordpacan.' Ligustrum, hunigsuge.
Laquear, fierst.* Liliagrum, slegu.'7
Laquearea, fierste.® Licidus, hwet.
Lacunar, flode, hrof.* 5 Ligquidus, hwet.
Lacessiens, gremmende. Liscisque, mid lefrum.
Lactuca, padistel, leahtiric.° Liberalitas, ropnes. -
Lacunar, hushefen, odde heofenhrof. Linea, webtawa.
Larus, meu. Licia, hefeldprede.
Lebetes, hweras. 10 Licium, hefeld.
Laena, rift. Lucor, freced.'8
Labat,s wagap, aslad, and gefioll. Lumbare, gyrdel odde bree.
Latratur, byree.7 Luculentum, torhtnes.
Lardariulus, freemase.8 Ludi litterare, stefplegan.
Lebes, hwer.® 15 Lutrus, otor.
Lingula, gyrdelhringe.'° Lucius, hacod.
Legula, gyrdelhringe.!° Lurdus, lemphealt.
Lembum, liste, odde pres.'! Lupus, bears.
Limbus, listum odde presum. Ludares, steor.?°
Lendina, hnitu.'® 20 Lumbricus, renwyrm.
Lepidum, lista. . p...™ Luteum, crocea.
Lectidiclatum, geproren flyte.'® Lupercal, hearh.”!
Lepus, hara. Lucum, hearga.
Lentum uimen, tohgerd." Luscinia, nihtegale.
Lenticula, pise, erenu, elebyt.!® 25 Luscinius, frocx.?*
Lesta, borda. Lupa,?® wulf.
Ligones, mettocas.'® Lupinare, wulfholu.
Libramentum, lifer. Lumbulos, lendebrede.
Liburnices, gerec. Lactans, sucende.
Liuida toxica, pa wonnan etrenan. 30 Lucus,** heof.
Libertabus, frigletan. Luxerunt, weopan.
Libertus, frigleta. Ligonem, mattuc.2® ;
Liciatorium, hefeldgyrd. Lagones, mattucas.”®
. Of Bosw. D. 19u. R, W. 18 Of. pag. 30 1. 10. R. W.
? Cf. pag. 29 1. 18. R. W. 17 Of. pag. 30 1. 28. R. W.
3 Of. pag. 29 1. 81, R. W. 18 Of. pag. 30 1. 38, R. W.
* Cf. pag. 29 1. 22 and 1. 8. R. W. '® So has the MS, R. W.
° Of. pag. 29 1. 21. R. W. . 2° Of. pag. 81 1. 8. R, W:
° Of, pag. 29 1. 29. RW. 2 Hearh means a temple, or holy place,
* Of. pag. 29 1. 32. R, W. as in the next line, where ueus is intended
° Cf. pag. 29 1. 33. R. W. no doubt for a holy grove. The glossator
° Cf. pag. 29 1. 38. R. W. appears to have been ill acquainted with
© Of. pag. 30 1. 1 and 24. R. W. the meaning of the word lupercal.
" Of. pag. 29 1. 42. R. W. 2 Of. pag. 31 1. 14. R. W.
Of. pag. 30 1. 2. R. W. 3 Cf. pag. 31 1, 15 and 16. R. W.
Of, pag. 30 1. 4, R. W. 4 Read: luctus. R. W.
“ Of. pag. 301. 6. R. W. °° Of, pag. 432 1. 27, R. W.
* Cf. pag. 301.7, R. W.

434 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 435
Lorica anata,’ hringedu byrne. Lumbia,!* lendena.
Limpidissinos, pa hlutresdan.? Lucerna, blecern.
Lustrata, geondhworfen. Lichinis,'> blecernum.
Lora, rapas. Lux, leoht.
Luteres,> tigelan. 5 Lampas, leohtfet.
Leunculi, leonhwelpas. Lectum, bed.
Lecitho,* elechorn. Larda, spic. a
Linxerunt, liccedon. Lanterne, leohtfetes. .
Lincxere, liecigan. Lancona, cylle.
Linies, pu smyrest. 10 Laquear, resn.
Liniuit, smyrede. Limen, pereswold, odde durn,
Lenis, smede. Lactudiclum, geproren flyte,"4
Lita, gesmyrede and gehyrde, Lac coagolatum, molcen.
Lentis, pysan.® Larbanum, segl.'®
Lacinia, lappan. 15 Labara, gegyrele.
Lacos, laca. Luaxcus, (a)nige.}®
Linum, fleax. Lintre, bate.
Labrum, brerd. Lintrum, lytle bate.
Lucanica, mearh.é Liza, leah!"
Luciuida, leohtsceawigend. 20 Legumen, bean.
Lygistra,’ hopu. Latrena, genge.'®
Larax, ened.§ Latex, burna.
Litorius, werna.? Laticum, weetera.
Locusta, gershoppe. . Lacertus, efete.
Lana, wull. 25 Limphale, weeter.
Luporwm, wull.!? Locuste, stapan.
Leno, wifpegn. Lunaticos, braecseoce.
_ Lanugine, flyse. Loculos, seodas.
Lacrime, tearas. Loculum, seodeyst.
Lanugo, wullknoppa,'! 30 Lintrem, bat.
Labium, welor. Liquido, andgitlice.
Labellis, welerum. Lurcones, sliteras.
Lingua, tunge. Lacertosis, dem earmswipum.
Lac, meole. Lu«oriante, feste gepuf.
Lactantium, meolocsucendra. 35 Librantis, heolorende.
Latus, side. Librate, ahiolorod.
? For hamata, ringed mail. " Bosw. printed wullhnoppa (96 f).
* Read: hlutrestan. R. W.
* Sic, for lateres. R. W. So has the MS. R. W.
* Read: lecythos. R. W. ‘3 Lichinis, an error for lychnuchis?
* Of. pag. 30 1, 7 and 4321.25. R. W. RW.
* Lucanica denotes a sausage (= mearh- Of. pag. 301. 4 and 4321.22. R. W.
gehec). R. W. Read: labanum. R. W.
* Read: ligustra, R. W. © Read: Inscus, anige. Cf. pag. 30 1.
* Of, pag. 258 1. 11, R. W. 37. R.W.
° Cf. pag. 260 1, 21 and pag, 286 1. ” Of, pag. 431 1. 39. R. W.
ie R. Ws “Cf. pag. 29 1. 12. R. W.
© wull is an error for wul/, or wulfa.
RW.
E 29

436 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 437
Liniamento, limgelecg. Larbata, se unf.. .*

Liberalitatis, rumheortnesse. Latrat, beorcep.'®

Liminio,! wriecsipe. Lita, attre gemeled.

Libitos, licongum. Lento defruto, geswettum.'*

Lurca, fretan.? 5 Lurconibus, slitendlicum.

Lurcatur, freted. Lurcare, forgle(ndrian),!®

Loeto tenus, od dead. Lixarum, weterberere, odde ned-
Loetaliter, deadlice. lungum.
Latrinarum, gengena.® Lautumie, carcernes.

Lupercalibus, pem gildendum.s 10 Legithum,!® ampellan, odde clefzet.
Lictorum, pegna.® Lictorum, witniendra piowa, odde
Lenonum, sponera, wegnera.® flescwellera. . ;
Liture, liming. Libidus,!" da wonnan. ‘
Lepida, getinge. Lupercalia, gelegergield. 7
Labescit, aglad. 15 Luem, adle and wole. :
Laturi, prowgende.” Latona, pures modur.'§ ;
Larbatos,* hreofe. Ligustra, blostman.
Luto, wurmaman.? Lauta, pa clenan odde munda. )
Laudacismi, pre uncysest.7 Lances, wegscala. f
Leti, wyrpenna. 20 Lutea, pet giolureade. ’
Lauta munia,' pa clenan penunga. Lent.., druncen, drynewirig. ;
Lances, beodas. Liram, hearpan.
Libelli, pundes. Lauri, laurbeames.

Lacessant, sliten odde gremeden. Laribus, fyrum. :
Lippos oculos, da surigan cagan. 25 Larem, fyr.
Lautos, clene. Lurida, da sweartan.
Lentescunt, toadan, tedan. Luridus, wan and blee.
Lodix, loda. Lntex, se.
Lictor, pegn, witnere. Libros, rinde.
Lautea, dem giolwum. 30 Luebant, poledan, and prowedan.
Libosas, da giolwan. Lethea, pem helwenlican,
Lenticule, croges odde ampellan. Lustra, fereltu.
Labe, womme. Liquitur, formeltep.
Ludrica, plegan, luftas.'° Laterculus, talu.?°
Luendi, prowgende." 35 Lampas Titanea, pet sunlice leohit-
Lectissima, pet gecoreneste. feet.

1 Vor e limine? eliminatio? R. W. ‘9 Of, pag. 432 1.13. R. W.

2 Read: lurcare or lurcari. R. W. 4 Of. pag. 128 1. 34 and pag, 281 1. 23,

* Cf pag. 435 1. 21, R. W. RW.

* Cf. pag. 487 1, 14. RW. 'S The glossator seems to have transla-

* Cf. 1, 29 and pag. 437 1. 11. R. W. ted: forglendrian, Cf. Leo Gl, 359 1. 52.

® Cf, pag. 171 1. 22. R. We RW

7 So has the MS. R. W. © For lecythum,

* Apparently for larvatos, (Cf. pag. 431 " Yor liuidos.
1, 35. R. W.) ‘8 Thor’s mother, a curious illustration

° Cf. Cock. III, pag. 349. R. W. of the northern mythology,

Read: ludiera, and lustas, R. W. Read: latex, R. W.

"Of 1. 16. R. W. °° The meaning of latereulum is a eata-

% unfagra, I suppose, R. W. logne of employments. R, W.

—
38 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 439
Lumina, mine cagan. Lapsa, brohte.
Luminibus, eagun. Lacerna, hacele, odde lotha.
Lusit, plegode. Lymphatico, wedende.!?
Ludo, ie plege. Lien, milte.
Ligor, ic beo bunden. 5 Lucunar, flode.'*
Lesis, dem gederedum. Locium, ate.
Lacerata, tocorfen. Limu,® reowe.
Libat, byrgep. Lena, veowe-
Legit, ccosep. Lena linea, linen reowe.
Luxerat, heofde.* 10 Lithargiam, gimynde biniming.'®
Lanio, slaga. Lienosis, miltcodu.!*
Laguoenas, ambras.2 Lienteria, mete utsihd.!>
Lanio, flesemangere. Ligamentum, onwritung.'°
Lorumentum,> widde. Ligatura, sarclad.
Lappis, clatum. 15 Libri iuris, ebec.
‘Limpus, honsteore.‘ Lex, foleredenne, sive ealles folces
Lemprida,> lempedu. gesetnes.
Lapidaria, eweornbill. Legatum, gewriten yrfe.
Lacontrapis, angeltwecea.® Legaturius, gewriten yrfeweard.
Lisca, secg. 20 Locatio, behyrung sive behyred feoh.
Lilium, lilie. Lumentum, sape.
Leo, lio. Lotium, hlond.
Leontopedium, lionfot. Lana sucida, wawaxen wul.
Leena, lio. Lectio, bocreding.
Lugubriter, hefelice. 25 Lectores, bocraderas.
Lurconibus, gredgum. Lyrici, scopas.
Longanimem, langsume. Liberi, suna.
Lustrans, felsende. Lumbi, hupbanan.
Lustraturus, geondferende. Lacus ubi frugum liquor decurrit, id
Liberalitatis,’ steflecum. 30. est winmere sive wincole.
Limphaticum, wodan.& Limus, slim.
Litaturus, onsacende. Lolium, lasur.
Leuius, xdre. Linea, rihtebred.
Longe lateque, side and wide. Leuidensis, thynwefen hregl.'*
_ Litrat, onblewp.? 35 Lebes, lytel eytel.
Lusit, beswac. Licinius, weoce.'®
_ Libet, raesode. Leptefilos, hymlic.'®
| Lustrat, clensade. Laterculum, belenc.
| Cf, pag. 433 1. 30. R. W. 4 Read: lacunar. R. W.
2 Cf. pag. 431 1, 36. R. W. Read: lana or lena. Cf. next line,
* Read: loramentum. R. W. : R W.
| * Cf Bosw. D. 37. R. W. Read: lcthargiam, Rt. W.
> Sic MS. “Cf. pag. 113 1 1. R. We
° Cf. pag. 122 1. 22, RW. ‘© Of, pag. 113 1. 25, R. W.
7 The meaning of staflec is: belonging  \° Read: onwridung. R. W.
to letters, literary. R. W, "Of. pag. 151 1. 23. R. W.
° Ch. pag. 30 1 19. R. W. % Read: licinium. R. W.
* Read: lituat? R. W. Read: septefilos. Cf. pag. 295 1. 28.
Cf, pag. 438 1. 31, RW. RW.

440 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 441
Lappatium, docee. Morarum, ieldinga.
Lattyride, \ybeorn. Morosa, eldendlice.
Lapadiun, \clodre.* Manubias, herereaf.
Lassar uel wsdre, gyprite.® Macilento, gehlenedum.
Ludiuaga, wandriendu. 5 Moenia, weallas.
Latibulum, syretum. Moema,' stangetimbru.
|Magnificum, micellic. al
Machinam, searoereft, ' Matrone, pere Nlafdian. {
Molimen, seavo. Municipum,"® burhscipe. |
Moliuntur, syrwad. 10 Municipatu, burhreddemne.
Memoriale, eowres gemyndelican. Municipium, pere burge. :
Mentis, modes, gleawnes. Mandibularum, geagla.
AMucrone, sweorde. Minaretur, beotode.
Mucronibus, sweordum. Mactus, se myrwa, eced.
Mulse, pere miliscan. 15 Musitantes, pa runiendan.
Macheram, sweord. Maneum, anhende.
Munificentiam, festnunge. Mandras, \ocu.®
Malagma, lecedome, clame. . 0 d a
Meri, pes clenan wincs. 5 3 P o
Mala, xppel. 20 Mastigiis, leadesclyuum, leadstafum.
Malus, apuldor. Minacem, pa ormetan.
Mestam, pa unrotan. Merita, gecarnunga.
Mala granata, xppeleyrulu.® Macta, pa mageecctan.’?
Malifer, zpelbere. Matrinonia, hemedgemauan.
Monarchiam, anwald. 25 Muliercule, carmum wife.
Molaribus, grindetopum, tuxun, Marginem, ofor.
Macheram, mece.t Marginibus, ofrum.
Mucrone, mece.5 Mitescere, growan, milescian.
Municipes, burhware. Marsupia, seodas.
Manipulatim, heapmelum. 30 Mediocri, gnepre.
Maniplis, heapun. Marsum, wyrmgalere.'!
Muionis, horspegnes. Mecharum,'? dyrniicendra.
Manipulo, heape. Mecham, forlegisse.
Mentam.., gema... Martyrizauit, prowode.
Minutatim, styeeemelum. 35 Maris, wyrmhelseras.
Membratim, limmelun. Munuscula, lac.
Malleoli, para spaca speldra.s Magestraiibus,® caldormanna.
* So the MS. Cf. pag. 298 1.13. BR. W. 7 This word is clearly written with mm
* Read: laser. lL. is used as well in in the MS.
Anglo-Saxon as in Latin. Cf, pag. 54 1. *® Mandra denotes a team, set of hor-
42 and pag. 4391.32, BR. Wz ses, of mules etc. The meaning of loc is
* This is probably one of the glossa- a fold. RW.
tor’s errors, A2ppelcyrniu would mean an ° The noxt words have become entirely
applekernel or pippin, He was unacquain- illegible. R. W.
ted with pomegranates. ° Cf. Bosw, D, 44j. R. W.
* Cf 1.16. R. W. - " Of. 1. 35. R. W.
> Cf. 1. 13 and 14, R. W. Read: ma@charum. Of. next line.
° Of. Bosw. D. 669, R, W. R. W.
3 So has the MS. R, W.

442 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 43
Militia, wigropes dugude.' Marruca, snegl.®
Matronalis, pere hiwlican. Magialis, bearug."
Muricibus, wurmun. Malistis, scyhend.
Mitre, eowre hettas. Mastice, hwiteweodu.'”
Meticulosis, pem forhtiendlicum. 5 Marubium, hune, odde beowyrt.
Manice, slyfan. Matrix, quitha.'®
Maturius, tidlicor, hredlicor. Marsmar, tig.
Mastigias, da lela? Mantega, tig.'®
Mastigium, swipan. Marsius, logeper.'®
Magnopere, naht swide. 10 Macilentus, gefested.!?
Metricam,> eorpgemet. Macilia, eagflea.
Musicam, swinsungereft. Merula, drostle.
Mechanicam, lececreft.4 Megale, hearma.'®
Matertere, modrigan. Mendacio conposito, gerenode.
Matertera mea materna, minre mod- 15 Metricus, meterwyrhta.

rigan moder. Mesaulum, cafertun.
Memorant, gemunad. Miluus, glida.
Marcescunt, forwerniad. Mimopara, deofscip.'®
Marcida, pa forwisnedan. Milium, mil.
Mauors, wig, odde gefeoht. 20 Mitra, het.
Maforte, scyfla.® Mitras, hettas.
Moafortibus, scyfelum. Miniaci, Wifendre.”!
Manica, glof. Molles, fam, hwastas.
Manicula, glof. Morgit, mileet.?*

_ Manitegrum, lim.* 25 Mossiclum, ragu.**
Maceratus, preatende. Molibus, ormetum.**
Manubium, welreaf. Morenula, el.

Manticum, handfulbeowes.7 Mora, heorutberge.*°
Mascus,> grima. Murica, gespan.

Musca,? egesegrima. 30 Munila, beah.*°

Masca, grima. Musiranus, sereawa.?*
Marsopicus, fina. Mugil, hacod, odde heardra.

' Read: wigrodes, R. W. 3 Of pag. 159 1. 28, RW.

* lela means: scars, marks from beat- * So has the MS. Read: Mars, martis.
ing; mastigium a whip, scourge. Cf. next R. W.
line and pag. 441 1. 20, R. W. * Cf. pag. 82.117. RW.

* Read: geometricam (artem) or ycu- © Of. Bosw. D. 42y. R. W.
metriam. R. W. "Of pag. 441 1 4. RL Wy

* The glossator translated medicam (ar- ** Of, pag. 32 1. 28. R. W.
tem). R. W. Of, pag. 32 1. 37, R, We

° Of. pag. 311, 24. RW. 2° Cf. pag. 442 14. RL WL

° Read: manutergium. R. W. ™ Of, pag. 32 1. 38, R. W.

7 Cf. pag. 31 1. 36. RW. 2 Of. pag. 33.1.2. R. We

® So has the MS. R. W. 23 Cf. pag. 33 1, 3, RW.

°* Read: masca, Cf. pag. 291. 8. R. W. ™* Cf. pag. 33.15. R. We

* An error for murana? KR, W. °° Cr pag. 33 1.12. RW.

"Read: maialis. Cf. pag, 271 1. 32. *© Read: monilia. Cf. pag. 33 1. 18.

2 oF 7" R. W. , RW.

. pag. 2711, 18 and pag. 298 1. 29, *" Cf. pag. 33 1, 22. R. W.
RW.

444 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 445
|
Murus,' bremel. Massa, clyno.
Myrtus, wir, wirtrcow. Misarius,® steda.
Mystice, gerynelice. Mulus, mul.
Mine, healfsester. Molosus, rodhund, rydda.
Macies, hlennes. 5 Millefolium, gearwe.
Munimentum, festnung. Mensa, beod.
Masculinum, wepuedeyn. Merum, hluttor win, odde swerum.
Mutuo, borge, odde wrixle. Mero, wine. :
Mina, dif. Manile, lefel. j
Musac,? bleostening. 10 Maniterium,® handlin,
Malo ingenio, yfele ordance, Matile, sceat.* /
Masdi, magan. Melle dulci, leoht beor. t
Mutuare, wrixlan, hlenan. Melopius, leodwyrhta.s
Mutare, hredlicre. Minun, gliw.
Molestus, unype. 15 Momentum, scutel.?
Molestissimum, carfodlicost. Mustela, wesle.
Murenulas, mynas. Mus, mus.
Monstra, scinlac. Messor, riftre.
Mutilum, hnot. Muriceps, cat.
Mutilatis, hnottum. 20 Mollibus, hnescum.
Mergulis, scealfor. Manicabat, morgenwacode.
Mursopicius, fina? AMetretas, gemetfatu.
Musca, fleoge. Munificentiam, cyste,
Murenula, xl, Mergule, dopfugeles.
Microchosmos, se lessa middangeard. 25 Murice, wurma, weoloc.
Mala, ceacan. Melote, hredan.'°
Mazilla, ceacan. Murex, wurma.'!
Mentem, cinn. Musica, da dreamlican.
Mandibulas, cinban. Malleoli, tyndercyn.
Manus, hand. 30 Matrice, ewidan.!”
Mammille, tittas. Mathematicorum, tunglera,
Medulla, mearh. Merulenta, da ahlytredan.
Meatis,’ utgan. Mancipium, pede.
Mel, hunig. . Missarum, sendnessa.
Moros, slan. 35 Melancolie, dees sweartan galgan.'®
Mento, minte. Monaptalmis,'® xnegum.
Mentastrum, cal mintan cyn. Marsorum, wyrmgalera.!*
Malua, hocleaf. Manipulo, were,
~~ Malua, hoe, cottue. Mala punica, da Affricaniscan eppla.
Metallum, elympre. 40 Melodiam, scalmsang.
' Cf. pag. 33 1. 34. RW. - 7 Read: maniile. R. W.
? Mosaic, musiuus. The Anglo-Saxon * Read: melopaius, R. W.
word is curious enough, artistically. ° Cf. pag. 38 1 4. RW.
* Read: marsopicus. Ci. pag. 286 1. 8. Read: melotes. R. W.
R. W. * Of. 25. RK, W.
* Read: meatus. R. W. ” Cf. pag. 443.1. 6. R. We
* For emissarius (equus). *’ A very literal translation of the Latin
© For manutergium. (Cf. pag. 442 1. word.
25. R. W.) Cf, pag. 441 1. 31. RW.

———
446 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 447
lanipulares, cempan. Madescunt, daniad and wetigad.
Vatricularis, pearfum. Milleno, dusendlicre.
fodulare, singan. Monoceros, anhyrne.
Modulabor, singe. Materia, pet oder antimber. |
Membrarum, filmena.! 5 Mitia, milde.
Mirteta, wirgrefen.? Mandit, cted.
Maturesceret, weox- Mando, ic ete.
Marmora glauca, pa hewnan ses. Madendum, lotendra.
Vunia, penunge, heese.® Mandeo, ic bite.
Maculam, mal. 10 Maculabat, pet is sang on pet
Maculam pullam, pone sweartan weeter.
speccan. Murice, telge.
Madentia, pa panan. Mefariam,'’ manigfealde.
_ Molam, hweorfan. Mordazx, bitende and slitende.
fartem, gefeoht. 15 Machina, weore.
Misellis, earmum. Madide, pere druncnan.
Macerare, megeregan, gehlenian. Musis, mid sangum.
_ Malis, mestum. Madens, myltende.
_ Mercimonium, ceping. Manes, deadas and deadgodas.
_ Mulceat, hnesce. 20 Mechus, gewemmend and forlicgend.*
_ Myrtea, denu.* Minuta, lytle.
| Multate,® acwealde. Morsum, bite. ;
Warcida, pa gescruncenan and pa  Afodis, wrencum.
pynhlenan. Muttire, abyffan.
_ Morota, mageecte.* 25 Murotenus, wid done weall.
_ Mascam, griming. Marcebat, \senede.
Viserescat, gemiltsige. Minacibus, heum.
Welos, swinsunga. Meretricabitur, forliged.
Melodia, swinsang. Manseres, filii meretricum.9
Mantilia, hacelan. 30 Mutulat, stommeted.
Malas, haguswind, odde punwange. _Matrenas, godmodra.'°
| Multans, witniende. Marra, bill.
| Meatus, fereltu. Mastellas, stanbill.
Meat, fered. Muscus, treowes meos.
Menstrua, da monadlecan, 35 Mula, el."
Musica, pa gliwhleodriendlican. Murenula, sel.”
| Murmure, grymetunge. Mugilis, sleow.
| Metallis, cladum. Musculus, muscle.
r letaplasmus, wlite. Metallum, bloma.'®
" Read: membranarum. R. W. * Read: manzeres (a word of Hebraic
* Cf. pag. 4441, 2. RW. origin). R. W.
* Read: munera. R. W. Read: matronas. R. W.
“Read: myrteta. R. W. Cf. mulus pag. 180 1. 31. R. W.
* Read: mulctate. Cf. 1. 32. R. W. 2 Of. pag. 180 1. 30. R. W.
* Of. pag. 441 1. 23, RW. ** The origin of onr modern terms bloom
* For multifariam, arising probably from and bloomery, in the making of iron. (Cf.
isreading a contraction. pag. t41 note 1, R. W,)
* Cf. pag. 441 1. 82 and 33. R. W.

448 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 449° )
Mailleus, slecg, hamur. Metitur, wende.'4
Malleolus, handhamur.! Medosa mandata, mid ligespelle.'®
Molaricus, spediende.? Machinis, wigcreftum.
Mandibula, pet wange wid paceocan  AMussantes, pes wregendan.

ufan. 5 Meoitus,!° dohte.
Medius, middelfinger. Matura satus," swide ripe.
Medicus, lecefinger. Molita miram, det gemynte irre.
Mentedra, mudadl on goman.® Munitum castrum, da festan ceastre.
Myrteus, bleoread, musfcalu.* Mas, ceorl.
Mentagricus, tanede.5 10 Mars, Tuu.'®
Minctio, miging. Merz, med.
Mordiculus, bitela.’ Mango, ic menge.
Morsus, snied. Minax, beotende.
Macetum, mealt. Madeo, pene.
Mutinus, gadinca. 15 Medor, lacnie.
Molitura, grist. Meatim, minlice.
Mula,’ mylen. Maiusculus, lytle.
Molendarius, myleweard.® Margo, menge.
Munificentia, est. Madefactum, gehweted.
Mellena, dusendmele.° 20 Mares, wepnedman.
Multimodam, manigfealdne. Mitigaret, gestilde.
Marsi, galdergalend.'® Mantile, beodscyte, odde beodsceat.
Matronalis, da wiflican. Malagma, quod sine igne maceretur,
Melancolia, gealla." et conprehendetur ; maceretur autem
Metropolis, ealdorburh. 25  geeneden bid siue gebered bid,
Marginis, stedum. conprehendatur uero in heap bid
Manum, menigdu. gesamnod.
Medullata, gebatad. Mandatum, handfestnung.
Mortariola, mortere. Mancipatio, handselen.
Mirstillago, eneowholen.'* 30 Mutuum, mutung sive wrixlung.
Maura, elehtre.'® Merces, eypeping.

‘ This interpretation of malleolus is seem now to admit of no very intellig-
rather singular; the glossator evidently ible interpretation.
thought it was a mere diminutive of * Read: millena. R. W.
malleus, and in this sense the word was °° Of. pag. 445 1. 37, R. W.
used in medieval Latin. "Of. pag. 445 1. 35. R. W.

* Perhaps swediende in the MS. Cf. Cf. pag. 133 1, 27, pag. 269 1. 22,
Bosw. D. 71x. R. W. pag. 300 }. 12 and}, 21. R. W.

* Cf. pag. 158 1. 26. R. W. * Of. Cock. III, pag. 324. R. W.

* Of. pag. 163 1. 23. R. W. An error for mutatur? R. W.

° Cf. pag. 161 1. 7 and 28. R, W. ® Read: mendosa. R. W.

° Cf. pag. 122 1. 8 R. W. ** Perhaps an error for meditatus ?

* For mola. RW.

* Opposite this word, in the margin, * For satis.
we have the letters reagl’. Short abbre- '8 Or Tiw, the war-god of the Anglo-
viations of words thus placed are found Saxon mythology, from whom we derive
not nnfrequently in the MS., which I have the name of Tuesday. He is here natnr-
not printed becanse they seem to be mere ally enough identified with Mars. (Cf.
private indications, perhaps, of anew book pag. 32 1. 10. R, W.)
from which the glosses are taken, and they

=
GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 451
Mercatus, ceapunggemot. Mulsurum, gemilscad weter.
alum, wite. Medus, winberge te hunige awylled.°
Matutinum, ubttid, sive beforan dege.  Mozicia, sealtleaf.”
Mane, ermergen. Melinum, geolu.
Meridies, middegtid. 5 Mentrati, fenminte.
Morarius, begbeam, unde merota  Muscum, meose.
dicta; morarius etiam celsa woca- Malumterra, galloc.s
tur, mora, hec, commune nomen Manus ferne, forreotes folm.9
est, bergena. Mula, elene.
Macula, mescre. 10 Mandragina; pung.
Momentana, helur.' Melleuna, meodowyrt.!°
Momentum, helerunge.1 Merculialis, cedele.! 0
Missa, messe. Merculiaris, merce.'”
unera propriw, medsceattas. Mentasri, feldminte.'*
Mactatio, sniding. 15
lagi, scinleean. Nautter, horslice, hwetlice.'4
Maides,* seelfenne. WNaucleri, scipweredes.>
iles ordinarius, anlang cempa, wel Nectareum, pone hunigtearlican.
heanra cempa, idem gregarius, Neuorum, wensprynga, lela.
fanipulis, twahund cempena. 20 Non desistunt, ne ablinnad, ne ateor-
Municipales, innihte beborene. iad.
fanumissus, gefreod. Normam uite, regol.
fanumissor, freotgifa. Normam, regol.
latrona, hemedwif. Nondum, na da git.
later, anes cildes modor. 25 Noualibus, wyrdelandumn,
erfamilias, manigra cilda modur. Nimborum, wolena.
nstrum, monadblod. Naptarum, heordena, xbreda,
lurenam, merensedre, Grece myrina acumba.!>
dicitur. Nuptiales, pa giftelican.
falleolus, sumerlida.° 30 Nequiquam, holenga.
| Mioparo, hydscip.* Nutibus, beaenengum.
_ Modius, mestcyst.° Nundinarum, wicdaga, odde ceap-
| Mataxa, wede. stowa.
| Maciones, scylfas. Negotium, scir.
lastruga, heden. 35 Notariorum, notwritera.
lartisa, gebeaten- Nausiam, wlatunge."?
_ Melicratum, gemilscad win, Neofitus, niwancumen.
1 Of. Bosw. D. 35° and 35q. R. W. " Read: mercurialis. Of. Cock. 1317.
? A blunder of the glossator for Naiades. R, W.
* Read: sumerlida (= malleoli). R. W. 1 Of. Cock. III 338. R. W.
* Read: myoparo. R. W. *8 Read: mentarium. Cf. pag. 3011. 30,
°® Modius denotes tbe hole in which the R. W.
ast is fixed. R. W. '* The manuscript is so much defaced
° Cf. pag. 1281.9. R. W. here that the correct reading of this word
7 Cf, Bosw. D, 61°. R. W. is very uncertain. (Cf. pag. 33 1. 38. R. W.)
° Cf. pag. 133 1. 20. R. W. ** The glossator confounded naute@ with
* Cf. Cock. Tl 327. R. W. naucleri. R, W.
1 Cf. pag, 134 1, 27, R. W. "© Cf. pag. 33 1. 40. R. W.
Of. pag. 33 1. 37. R. W.
— 30

452 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 453
Nititur, he higode, odde tilode. Nucli, cyrnias."!
Nepotum, sweostorbearna. Nucleus, cyrnel.
Nec lenonum, leassponunge.' Non placui, ie ne geewemde.
Notitia, eyppe. Nisus, tilgende.
Natalibus, gebyrdum. 5 Nauticos, nedlingas.'*
Nenias, leasspellunga. Nauta, nedling.'*
Natiua, acennedlieum. Non adquieuit, ne gedafode.
Natum, acenmnedne. Non abnui, ic ne wipsoc. 4
Nefandum, pet god wreee. Nouerca, steopmodur.
Non mixta, se unmengeda, 10 Ne cuncteris, ne lata pu.
Nitebar, ic girnde. Noctua, ule.
Notricauerit, ne geswiced. Nocticorax, nihthremn.'*
Ni torpens, sio slawe. Naris, nosu.
Nitar, ic onginne. Nates, earsenda.
Nastucium, tuncerse.* 15 Nigra spina, slahdorn.'4
Napta, blecteru.® Nasturcium, leacceerse,! id est, tun-
Napis, nep.4 caerse.
Napus, Englis np.‘ Nicalalbum, milise seppel.'®
Nabulum, fereesceet.® Non detracta, ne forsace ic.'7
Neptam, tynder.6 20 Nauacula, scyrseax.}§
Netila,” hearma. Nanus, were.'®
Nepa, heefern.8 Ne uellitis, ne willad ge.
Nitorium, spinl.° Non cognoscebat, ne grette.
eo, ic spinne. Non peram, ne fetels.
Ninguit, sniwed. 25 Nuruum, snoru.®°
Netum est, aspunnen is. Nequiores, wyrsan.
Non subsciuum, unfsene.'° Nummularior, mynetera.?!
Neent, spinnad. Nuptias, giming.
Note, speccan. Nanciscunt, begitad.
Non neunt, ne spinnad. 30 Nardo, elesealf.
Norma, rihtebred. Non ut*passiuis, nales swa wide.
Nugigerelus, wrendwrecan unnyt- Neuorum, wlitewomma.
nesse. Nutabunda, wagiende,
Nux, hnutbeam, odde walhhnutu. Neutericis, pem niwum.?®
Nugacitas, unnytnes. 35 Nemoribus, bearwum.
1 Of. pag. 430 1. 21 and pag. 436 1. 12. The meaning of nedling is: a slave,
R. W. servant. R. W.
* Read: nasturcium. Cf. pag. 135 1. "> Of. pag. 132 1. 3. R. W.
36 and pag. 270 1, 32, R. W. ‘* The black-thorn, the thorn which pro-
* Cf. pag. 451 1. 27. R. W. duces sloes,
* Cf. pag. 185 1. 12 and 30, R. W. 1 Of. pag. 452 1. 15. R. W.
° Of. pag. 34.1. 3. R. W. *© Of. pag. 269 1. 28. R. W.
° Read: naphtam. Cf. 1, 16. R. W. Read: detracto. R. W.
7 An error for mitella, a sort of female ** Read: novacula. R. W.
headdress. (Cf. pag. 34 1. 6. R. W.) 9 Read: dwere or dwerg. R. W.
® Cf. pag. 84.1.7. R. W. 2° Read: nurum. R. W.
° Of. pag. 34 1. 14. R. W. *1 Read: numularius. Cf. pag. 34 1. 29,
1 So has the MS. R. W. R. W.
™ Read: nuclei. Cf. next line. R, W. Read: neotericis. R. W.

—
GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 455
ebulis, scinlzecan. Non quibat, ne meahte.s
lon calcitres, ne spornette pu. Natam, dohtor.
lugaciter, unnytlice. Non cunctante, no latiendum.
ectunt, bundan. Nactus, begiotende.
feophytus, se niwa. 5 Nati, suna.
‘odosi, ostihtum. Numen, sunu, odde meahte.6
Nodus, ost.1 Non cessit, no abeag.
icolatis, palmepla. Nitria, pet is of leadre.”
Naufragauerunt, gedurfan. Notetur, sio geleahtrad.
‘on dissona, nalles ungerade. 10 Nec minus, mete gemezres.
umina, gild. Nebulam, scingedwolan.
lardi pistici, pire getrywan ele- Nectar, win, pone swetan smac.s
sealfe. Nectare, wingedrince.
enias, bismerleod. Nauta, sciprowend.
rexibus, salum. 15 Nauita, scip.° 4
fon tricauerit, ne leted. Nauigeros, pa sciplidendan.
atricis, nedrum.? Nimbis, stormum.
atric, nedre. Naualia, scipropor.
utu, meahte. Nectar, hunig, odde mildeaw.
ec balsamorum, ne crismena. 20 Neuis, wommum.
lon cunctante, ne tweoge. Nefandas, da unasecgendlican.
anctus, begitende. Noxazx, leahtras.'°
i forsan, nimde wen were. Won scando, ne astige ic,
utum, willan. Nune, hwilum.
' Nec Bachus, ne wines god.3 25 Neunemo, torrebrande,”
ilotica, sio AXgiptisce. Niuibus, snawum.
odatis, geenyttum. ~ Non uereor, no ic me onsitte.
lon usquam, neowerno, nawern.4 Nilotica, pa Egiptisce."*
lodos, bende. Nepa, crabba, odde hefern.'*
lat, swam, swimd. 30 No trano, no ic fleoge.
lectantem, bindende. Noxam, gylt.'
antes, swimmende. Non uergo, ne ga ic on setl.
lummismate, mynete. Non errantes, rihtwise.
Necessitudinum, neadsibba. Necarent, ewealdon.
lotabiliter, telwyrdlice. 35 Mimbo, scure.
‘on refragabatur, no widdon. Nemphe, cudlice,'*
jyctilia, nihtgild. Nitatur, tilige.
lymphas, gydena. Non retur, ne demed he.
* The MS. has nudus or nodus. R. W. articles, and the compiler of these glosses
? So has the MS. R. W. was evidently very doubtful about its true
* The Anglo-Saxon mythology has not character. ;
god answering exactly to Bacchus. ° Read: sciper, or scipmon. R. W.
* Cf. Bosw. 48i and 48. R. W. © Read: nowias. R. W.
* Of. Nr. XU, XLVI. R. W. " Of, pag. 454 1. 26. R. W.
° Of. Nr. XII, XXXIX and LXIX. ” Of. pag. 34.1.7. R. W.
R. W. *S Of. 1. 22 and pag. 4561.7. R. W.
7 Of. pag. 456 1. 14. RW. ™ Read: mnempe. R. W.
° Several different interpretations of the
‘ord nectar oceur in these and following

456 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 457
Nigro colore, pa blacan betlas.! Nuncupatio, est undyrne yrfebec.
Nisa, wreded. Nerui, fotcopsas.
Nuda, nacod and ceald, None, ceapdagas, a nundinis; idus,
Non pigra, wilet. swesenddagas, ab edendo. Ise-
Non gratus, no liofwende. 5 meria Greet equinoctium uocant.
Ne uioler, pxt ic ne sie besmiten,  Newwm, weargebraede.!
Noxam, dare. Nicromantia, purh deades witgung.
Nemoris, bearwes. Nymfe, weeterelfenne.)*
Nothus, sudan wind, odde dooc,  Naides, selfenne.'?
hornungsunu.? 10 Nodus, getrum.
Nodorum, rapa. Numerarii, gafeles andfendgend.5 i
Non abortabit, no miscalfad.* Nepos, suna sunu, neptis ; pronepus,
Ne innitaris, ne gilp du. pridda sunu, pronepitis. ;
Nitrum, leador. Nuculeus, sive nucleus, heslhnute
Nasus, nosu. 15 cyrnel.
Nares, nespyrel. Nam siluatica, smerowyrt.
Natius, dunu. Nepita, nepte.*®
Nectar, frummeolue.* Nymphea, collonerog.!*
Nanciscuntur, andfindende.
Normulis, gemetum. 20 Obtutus, gesihd.
Numquit,® ac pu ewidst. Oracula, gespreco.
Natilicium, geeynda. Obsequia, denunga-
Nodaretur, gefestnod. Olfactum, stene, swec.
Nubigenu, woleenwyrcende.6 Odoratus, swe.
Nupte,> bryd. 25 Opulentique, pere wistgifendan.
Nauarcas, scipmen.* Obrizum, pet smeete.!®
Numine, leso.8 Obliterantes, adiligiende, forgitende.
Numquam sunt sera, ue beod xfre to Oblectamenta, lustfulnes.
late. Obriza lammina, pa smete gyldnan
Nudapes, berfisce.® 30 cladas.
Nidore, stence. Opinatur, wend.
Nex, ewealm. Ob indaganda, fore to aspyriaune.
Non dissimulamus, ne letad we. Operculis, oferwrigelsum.
Nyctalmus,” nihteage. Operam, girnesse.
* betlas has no Latin equivalent. * i. e. begotten of a cloud, applied to
R, W. the Centaurs, as the offspriug of Ixion and
? No doubt, in the original textin which the cloud.
this word stood, it was notus, the south * Read: nauarchos. R. W.
wind, and was glossed as such, but in the ® Cf. Sommer’s Dict. R. W.
debased orthography of medieval Latin, ® Read: berfot. R. W.
another glossator seems to have supposed © Ducange supposes this to be a cor-
it might be nothus, a bastard. ruption of nyctalops, i. e. seeing by night.
* In the text where this gloss was found, ™ Of. Bosw. pag. 880. R. W.
the word abortare was no doubt used in 12 i, e. water-elves and sea-elves, acur-
a restricted sense, as applied to a cow, ious bit of illustration of our Anglo -Saxon
and hence it is interpreted, to miscalve. popular mythology.
* Another guess at the meaning of the S Read: nepeta. R. W.
word nectar. Of, Cock, IMT, pag. 319. R. W.
* So has the MS. R. W. "© Of, pag. 341. 40. R. W.
:

458 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 459
Obolisci, stanrocces.' Obestrum, beost.
Obscenitatis, fracodnesse. Obesca, beost.
Oraculum, spe. Obunca, crump.
Oraculorum, spreca. Obuix, widerstal.®
Obliqua, scytehealden. 5 Obligamentum, lyb, lyfesn.*
Oromate, gastlicre gesihde.” Obiecte, ongensete.7
Occa, furh, fylging, walh. Obsedatu,s gisldu.
Opinatissimus, se hliseadgesta. Obtinuit, ofercom,
Oriundus, ypped. Obiectionibus, gestalum.
Orthodowis, rihtgeleaffullum. 10 Obex, ogengel.? .
Occasione, intingan. Obicula, geoesticea.!?
Ob detectum, pere onwrigenan. Occupauit, onette.
Obuncabat, oferfeng. Ocreis, banbeorgum.!!
Obrutos, oferhrerede. Occipui, hnecea.!?
Olosericis, mid eall seoleenumn.® 15 Occabat, egede.'®
Oratores, pyles. Occearium, style.'*
Obstinatam, anwille. Ofendit, mette.
Obsecundans, hiercnde. Officit, wyrde.!®
_ Offenderet, abulge. Offirmans, clemende.'*
Ordiretur, wes awefen. 20 Ogastrum, eggemang."?
Obeuntem, pa fordfarenan. Oligia, nette.'®
Ob potiorem, forzemeran.* Olor, swon, ilfetu, swan.
Obtemperare, hyrsumian. Olastrum, staf.
Obstipuit, forhtode, ofereymen was. Omnimoda, eghwylee pinga.'?
Orbibus, hringum. 25 Omentum, massa.
Obscene, pere fulan. Onocratulus, fealefor.?°
Obscena, pa ladlecan. Opere plumario, besiwed federge-
Obsidione, feestenne, and ofsetenesse. weore.*!
Offam, snd. Oppilate, besparrade.
Obolitio, epung. 30 Oridanum, clene.
Obreptione, creopunge. Orcus, ore, pyrs, odde heldeofol.””
Obomates, gesidas. Oripilato, eylewearte.”*
Obuncans, gecnyclede. Oresta, draes.?*
1 Read: obelisci.“R, W. 19 Of, pag. 35 1. 31. R. W.
? Read: oramate or horamate. RK. W. 16 Of. pag. 35 note 4. R, W.
* Read: holosericis. R. W. *7 Of. pag. 35 1. 32. R. W.
“So has the MS. R. W. 18 Cf, pag. 35 1. 34. R. W.
° Of. pag. 35.1.9, R. W. © Read: omnimodo. R. W.
© Of. pag. 35 1. 10. R. W. 2 A fieldfare. The Latin is a corrup-
7 Of. pag. 35 1.12. R. W. tion of onocrotalus, which, however, means
® Of. pag. 35 1. 15. R. W. a different bird from a fieldfare.
° Of. pag. 35 1. 20. R. W. 21 Of. pag. 36 1.8. R. Wz
10 Of. pag. 85 1. 21. R. W. ™” Orcus was a name for Pluto, the god
™ Of, pag. 35 1. 23, R. W. of the infernal regions, hence we can easily
"™ Read: occiput. Cf. pag. 35 1. 26. understand the explanation of heldeofol.
, ' RW. Ore, in Anglo-Saxon, like thyrs, means a
Cf. pag. 35 1. 27. R. W. spectre, or goblin.
™ Steel. Occearium is apparently a cor- *3 Of. pag. 36 1. 14. R. W.
ruption of aciarium, explained as meaning ** Of, pag. 36.1. 13. R. W.
indurata ferri acies.

wi
460 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON, 461
Orbita, hweoglrad. Orthodoxus, wuldorlic.
Ortigomera, erschen. Onix, blere.
Or, onginnende. Obstupum, feorstudu.!°
Ore, frane. Olimpiaci, pes pleglican."!
Oscille, totridan. 5 Orbes, orbibus, hringa, hohhwyrfinge.
Osma, swice. Ortagraphorum, rihtwriterum.!? :
Ostriger, brunbaso.1 Oppilatum, gedyrned.
Onustus, gehleden. Obliqua curuatura, sio seytchealde
Oram, leppan. onbegnes.
Occubuit, gecrang. 10 Obcognate, pre sibban. :
Obrigesceret, astifode. Oportunus, sio tidlice.
Obtuperabitis, gedemad, and telad. Obuncabat, ymbclypte.
Oscitauit, sworette. Obsidem, gisl.
Obriguerunt, astifedan.? Obses, gisl.
Oppansum, apened. 15 Operepretium, reed.!®
Ophiomachus, broc. Oculum, sprece.'4
Obelus, scilling.® Ordine prepostero, onwendedre ende-
Ossifragus, herefong. byrdnesse. ;
Onocratarum,s raredumle. Olfactoriola, pe hiera elesealfa on-
Ostrea, ostre. 20 weran.
Oculus, eage. Ostro, telge, deage.!®
Os, mud. Ostentationis, gylpes.
Oscedo, mudcodu. Obstacula, widsteallas.
Oss,5 ban. Obstrusus, deagol.
Onentem, midhrypere. 25 Opace, deagle.
: Oliua, elebeam. Oras, ofras.
Oleaster, windeltreow. Ora, andwlita.
Oleastri, eletwiges. Occellorum, egna.'?
Ortus pomorum, apuldertun. Oppetere, gecrang.
Ortus olerum,® leahtun. 30 Ordo, hade:
Ostrum, wurma, read godweb. Oramina, gebedo.'®
Omganum,’ wurmille. Ocius, rade.
Officina, smidde. Opacis, pem diglum.
Olatrum, scafa. Obesus, fet.
Ordeum, bere.8 35 Organa, peotan.
Olla, greoua. Orbes, heofinga.'®
Omelias, spreece.? Olo, eall.2°
‘Of. pag. 36 1. 28, RK. W. © Read: obstipum. KR. W.
Gil it. RoW. " Of. Nr. XII, 1. R. W.
* Read: obolus. KR. W. Read: orthographorum. KR. W.
* For onocrotalus, a bittern. (Cf. pag. 13 Of, Nr. XII, XXX. BR. We
2601.1, RW.) “ Read: oraculum. R. W.
° So has the MS, R. W. 18 Of, Nr. XII, XXXVI. R. W.
© A herb-garden. Of course, in this and 16 Of, Nr. XII, XLII. R. W.
the preceding article, ortus is a mere cor- 7 Read: ocellorum.
ruption of hortus. 1° Of. Nr. XII, LXX. R. W.
7 For origanum. 2° CLeloee R. awe
® Read: hordeum. R. W. 2° Read: olos or olon (= holos, holon).
*® Read: homelias. R. W. R. W.

462 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 463
Obeuntem, sweltende. Ortodowice, pws rihtgelyfdan geleafan.
Oppido, swide. Obrirum metallum, asoden weax.? i
Oraret, wyrdade. Olidarum, unsyfra.
Oppeteret, swulte odde feolle. Opriant, onscyniad.’°
Opimus, se strengese.' 5 0b quam rem, fore foleum.
Octena, eahta sidum. Oppilauit, betynde, gegiscde.
Opimis, mid pm genihtsumestan. Onocharois, ancorlie set].
Olimpi, roderes.” Obruerunt, slogon.
Octauam, strelas.? Obstergunt, on wega dydan.  .
Odas, leod. 10 Obstrictas, forfyldan.
Opimum, pet wiolie.* Oceulit, gehydde.’
Olidas, pa fulan. Obpositum,' widerbrecan.
Ocumbat, aswelte. Orbata, benumen.
Obliquat, fyred. Opis, meahte.
Oceano, on garsecge. 15 Origanum, wurmille.
Orco, deade. Obtenuit, begeat.
Oppida, tunas. Ordinatissimam, pa gesettan.
Oppidani, burhsetan. Obnixe, geornlice. |
Ostriger, telberend.® Obligamentum, lyb.
Origo, frymd. 20 Occas, fealga.
Occidat, aswelte. Occiput, hracea.
Olim, iu, fyrn. Obpressus, ofereumen.
Obsequitur, folgad. Obpressit, ofercom.
Obrasum, ascefen. Olla aenea, cytel; sed ideo additus
Obulum, sceat.® 25 aenea quia est et olla fictilis, id
_ Oscitantes, ganiende. est crocca.
Obtigit, gelamp. Olagraphum,'* testamentum est, eall
Obtani,’ geara gewunan odde ge- writene yrfebec.
wunede. Obuoluere, beweefan.
Oraria, orelu 30 Omelie uerba, folclare.
Orbita, sol.4 Ostiarii, duruweardas.
Ofella, spiceshis.’ Oreades, wudueelfenne.
Ornus, eow. Origanum, feltwurma.'*
Ouicula, lytel sceap. Opratanum, weelisc.'®
Oppilius, scephyrde.® 35 Opiffera, helpendrap.'®
Ouile, sceapahus. Ostriago, lidwyrt.!7
Omina, hwata. Ortica, netele,'®
* So has the MS. R. W. tor did not understand the Latin text. R. W.
? The Anglo-Saxon glossator of course © Read: operiant. R, W.
took Olympus for heaven. * Read: anachoresis. R. W.
* The glossator did not translate octa- ™? Read: occuluit. R. W-
wam, strel means sagitta, telum. R. W. * Read: olographum or holographum.
* wiolie = weolig. R. W. R. W.
° Of. pag. 4601. 7. R. W. “Of, pag. 136 1. 30 and pag. 299 1.
° Cf. pag. 460 1. 17. R. W. 19. RW.
7 The meaning of ofella is a bit, little © Read: abrotanum. R. W.
bit. R. W. 1© Opifer answers to helpend-ber. R. W.
® Read; opilio. R, W. 7 Of, pag. 302 1.3. R, We
* Read; obryzum metatium. The glossa- © Read; urtica, R. W.

464 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 465
Oaylapatium, sio scearpe docee.' Portendentes, becnende, tacniende.
Ocimum, mistel.? Puberes, enihtas, geonglingas.
Optalmon, magope.® Pulmentum, fosternod.8 .
Offensa, forhelde. Pronepotum, fornefena.
5 Penitudinis, hreowsunge.

Paucorum, feara.4 Paranymphus, drihtguma,
Passiuus, sio widgille.® Propalat, openiende.
Proreta, foresteora. Pastinantem, settende.
Propinaret, fordscencte. Precipuum, seo healice. 7
Prestulanti, onbidendum. 10 Pubescens, weaxende, fordframiende. ;
Per augustam, purh pet rume. Pausantis, pa restendan.
Propositi, ingehygdes. Pubesceret, pah. |
Panuclis, weflum. Per tenera, durh da myrwan. |
Punica, pa Affricaniscan. Petulantiam, galnesse.
Prestare, forestandan. 15 Prestrigias,? wiccecreftas, scinhiw.
Perpes, swift. Politissimis, des smicerestan, and
Promontorio, foremunte. pes smedestan.
Posteritatem, efterweardnesse. Philosophie, wisdomes.
Propensius, geornlicor. Philargiria, gifernesse. :
Peripsema, geswepa. 20 Penniger, feperberend.
Pelta, plegscylde. Probrosas, onscuniendlican.
Phalanx, firdwerod. Presago, mid witedomes.1!
Prosapia, tuddor. Prouenerunt, gelumpen.
Per atauos, purh ildran federas. Palmitum, telgena.
Parsimonia, gnednes. 25 Periclitatur, frecelsod.
Practice, pere dorlecan. Propinquitatis, nehsibbe.
Prerogatiuam, sundorweordunge. Prerogatiua, sundorgife.
Plantaria, plantunga, seten. Probrosum, onscuniendlic.'°
Prostibuli, geligeres. Preconia, mezrnessa.
Preoccupetur, geonet odde geefest. 30 Pollesceret, dunge.
Prescius, forewis. Probrosis, facenfullum.
Prediti, gewelegode. Pallor, bleco.
Prefecture, scire. Procaciter, awille.
Paradigma, bispel, bysene. Profugus, flima.
Pululantes, upspryttende. 35 Proficiscens, ferende.
Penticotharcos,6 ealdormen, wel quin-  Potiretur, wes brucende.

quagenarios. Profanare, gewidlian.
Promulgatur, fordypped. Pendiculo, segne.
Proceritatis, legen.? Pedetemtim," fegere, lipelice.
Procumberet, gefeoll. 40 Palestrarum, gestrynga, plegstowa.
Portentorumque, foretacna. Preses, gerefa.

' Of. pag. 186 1. 35. R. W. tyxcevragxos), a commander of fifty men.

? Of. pag. 299 1. 28. R. W. 7 An error for: lenge? R. W.

* Of, pag. 3001. 11. R. W. ® Cf. Nr. XII, Il. R. W.

* So written in the manuscript, but ° Sic, for prestigias. The word ocenrs
evidently an error for feawa. again in the next column.

* Of. Nr. XU, XLUL. R. W. ° Cf. 1. 21, R. W.

° A corruption of pentecontarchus (srey- "So has the MS. R. W.

'
466 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 467
Preside, heahgerefan. Pedisequas, pinenna.
Patrocinium, mundbyrde. Parentele, fxderen, enosles.
Perfidorum, treowleasra. Proserpinam, gydene.®
Puplica,' openlecre. . Peritiam, gleawnesse.
Proscriptionem, forewritenesse. 5 Presbiteri, recceras.
Procaciter, bealdlice. Parricida, megmyrpra,
Promiscui, gehweederes. Puplicum, cynestreete."
Prastigia, scincrefte. Properare, efstan.
Putamina, pa bnyglan.” Pertesum, swide lang.
Pluma, fepere. 10 Portunalia, pa hydlican.®
Parasitis, geneatum, gesopum. Possessure, gesittende,
Putores, fulnesse. Pittacia, erendgewrito.9
Pignus, bearn. Passim, welhwer.
Propugnaculum, breostgebeorh. Prepostero, oncirredre.
Perpetitur, refnde. 15 Patronus, mundbora.
Phanatice,! godgildlicre.* Populose, pre folewelegan.
Processere, fordeodan. Plausu, deem plegan.
Patrimonium, federgestreona. Paruit, hirde.

’ Per tanta, purh swa manigera. Parentibus, hirsumiendum.
Procul, longe. 20 Purulentus, wurmsi.'°
Penitus, longe. Parricidium, myrprunge.!'
Prope modum, neah and efene. Probabilis, hergendlic.’®

_ Probauit, gecydde. Palmam, sigores.

_ Predia, sundorland. Propago, tudor, odde ecyn-

Pro foribus, beforan pem durum. 25 Pompulenta, sio glenglice.
Prepostero, xfterfylgendre. Probrum, hosp, lehter.
Piacula, synna, scylda. Plasmatica, pere frumheowunge.

} Plectro, scecele odde slegele. Peritorum, witena.

_ Plumemus, scecen we.* Periscelides, scanegegirelan.

Pelices, cifesene. 30 Pertinaz, anwille.

Pellexerint, beswicon. Plenilunio, fullum mone.

_ Procum, brydguma.® Presidio, mundbyrde, and fultome.
Pateretur, lete. ~ Presumpsimus, we gepristlecton.
Phantasmate, scinhiwes. Protelaretur, wes geelded.'®
Prestantissimus, se betesta, and se 35 Progeniem, forecynren.

fyrmesta. Presidet, wylt.
Purpurescit, readode. Presagia, dihta, odde saga.
Pedisequis, pinennum. Prestantior, fromra.
* So has the MS. R. W. * Read portumnalia. Cf. Bosw. 39n.
* Of. pag. 42 1. 14. RW. R. W.
* Cf. pag. 236 1. I—3, RB. W. ° Pittaciwm, in medieval Latin, was nsed
“Cf. Nr. XII, XXVIL R. W. to signify a tablet on which messages were
* Cf. pag. 42 1.5. R. W. written to be sent as letters. =
*It is hardly necessary to say that Of. Nr. XII, XLUL R. W.
gydene, in Anglo-Saxon, means simply a "Of. 6 R. W.
goddess. The writer of these glosses ap- “ This is the medieval meaning of the
pears not to have had a very clear notion word probabilis,
of the classical mythology, *S Protelaretur denotes: to defer, post-
* {. @. a king’s road, pone, R. W.
- 31

468 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 469

Procax, freuol,' odde litig. Pessum, clifhlyp.

Precordia, forebreost. Petra focaria, fyrstan, flint. |

Portum, hyde. Pella, sadolfelg.\*

Patrauerat, pa durhteah. Pendulus, ohylde.

Pretendere, gerecean. 5 Phitecus, apa.'®

Partim, sume dele. Piratici, wicingsceapan, szsceapan,

Palpitans, brodetende. zscmen,

Parce, wyrde.2 Pingit, fegd.

Papilio, fiffalde.® © Pistrimum, cofa,'®

Papula, wearte.* 10 Pistrilla, cofincel.

Papiluus, eolugseeg.5 Pila, dopor.

Papila, wifel.® Petuita, sped.

Passos, gerostode.? Pia, picia, pic.

Palagra, xcelma.® Perplexitans, manifealdnes.'*

Pastinaca, wealmore. 15 Plantago, uel septineruia, wegbraede.'*

Parula, mase. Platissa, flooc.'®

Pariulus, sinfulle.® Plectra, awunden.

Pastellus, hunigzppel. Plus minus, ymb pet.

Papauer, popig. Populus, byrce.

Pariter, gelice. 20 Polimita, hringfag.°°

Palmula, steorroder. Polimitarium, ceasterwyrhta.”!

Parruca, yee. Porfyrio, fealfor.”

Papulatores, horshyrdas.'! Porcopiscis, styria.*®

Perstrenue, framlice. Porcaster, foor.**

Per seudoterum, purh ludget.!? 25 Porcellus, fearh.

Per uispellones, purh byrgeras.'® Pons, brye.

Perpendiculum, colpred. Promaritima, segesetu.?>

Petigo, teter. . Pretextutus, gegirwed.*°

Pelta, scyld. Propera, freahrede.?"

Perspicuus, heahpungen. 30 Proscripsit, forredde.

Pero, hemming i. ruh sco. Profligatis, forslegenum.

1 So has the MS. R. W. 1 Of, pag. 39 1. 22. Read pithecus.
? The Latin word is intended for Parca, RaW

the Fates, represented by the Anglo-Saxon ‘© Read pistrinum. R. W.

Wyrde. (Cf. pag. 37 1. 3. R. W.) 7 Read perplexitas, R. W. '
> Cf. pag. 37 1. 8. R. W. © Of. pag. 134 1, 13 and pag. 322 1.
* Read papilla, Cf. pag. 37 1. 9. 30. R. W.

R. W. © Read platessa. R. W.

° Cf. Leo Gl. pag. 475 1. 55. R. We 7° Read polymitus. R, W.

° Of. pag. 37 1. 22. R. W. 21 This word and its gloss are added in

7 The glossator translated assos. Of, pag. a different hand in the manuscript. (Read
371.25. RW. polymitarium, R. W.)

° Cf. pag. 87 1, 24. R. W. 7 Of pag. 2591, 5. R. W.

° Of. pag. 37 1. 82, R. W. 22 Cf. pag, 40 1,19. RB. W.

1° Of. pag. 88.1, 2, R. We 4 Cf. pag. 40 1. 20. R. W.

™ Read pabulatores. R. W, 25 Of, pag. 40 1. 38. R. W.

% Read pseudothyrum. R. W. © Read pretectatus. Cf. pag. 41 1. 1,

*® Read wespillones. R. W, RW.

“ Of, Bosw. 56v. R, W. 27 Of, pag, 411, 2. R. W.

‘470 GLOSSES, LATIN AND ANGLO-SAXON. 471
Preuectue, frodre.! Plectas, gewind.
Prouecta, gefremed. Primitiua, pa frumcennedan.
Pretersorim, waad.® Per turbinem, purh gestun.
Pretersorim, waad.” Psalter, salteras.
Prifeta, prie wintre steor.s 5 Proditor, lewend.
Prurigo, gicenes. Pacatos, gesibsume.
Prouentus, sped. Preceps, scyteheald.
Prunus, plyme. Precipitate, scufad.
Progna, swealwe.‘ Peruagatus, swiciende.
Prorostris, hehseldum, foreweard- 10 Phase, eastran.'° 7
scip. Paucxillum, lytel.
Prodigus, strydere. Postumus, unlaf,
Pridie, dege er. Palestricis, pem werstlicum.
Pustula, angseta. Pando, geape.
Pus, worms. 15 Propeta, steora.™
‘Puntus, brord.® Portisculo, hamere.
Prenotatur, foremearcod.® Per patentes, purh pa ruman.
Pentatheucum, fifpocum.? Per cola, purh stieceo,!*
Prouerbium, biwyrde. Pariat, herep.'®
Patruus, federa. 20
Pertritus, getyrge. —
Prerupti, widerstegre.
Preputia, scama, pawepenlicanlimo, Prenotatur, foremearcod,
Peruie, ungefere.s Pentatheucum, fifbocum.
Precidit, forcearf. 25 Prouerbium, biwyrde.
Pauimus, we feddan. Patruus, federa,
Pithonis, helrun. Pertritus, getyrged.
Porrectus, areht. Prerupti, wiperstegre.
Parui, ic hyrsumige. Preputia, seama, pa wepenlican limo.
Precipitas, widscyfs pu. 30 Peruie, ungefere.
Piaculum, man. Precidit, forcearf.
Polymitarius, ceasterwyrhta.9 Pauimus, we feddan.
Postes, durustod. Pithonis, helrun.'*
' Of. pag. 411,13, R. W. latter portion of the manuscript, It ends
? Cf. pag. 41 1. 26 and Bosw. 85s. with the foot of the left-hand column of
RW. a page, the pages of this MS. consisting
3 Cf. pag. 41 1. 27, R, W. of two columns each, and the right-hand
* Read progne. R. W. column had been left blank by the ori-
5 Read punctus. R. W. ginal writer, but another haud distinctly
® Read prenotatus. R, W. different, though still Anglo-Saxon, and
7 Read pentateuchum. R. W. of a rather later date, has filled it up by
* The glossator confounded inuie with making a copy of fourteen consecutive
peruie. KR. W. words from the preceding page, with the
* Cf. pag. 469 1. 21. R. W. addition of three new ones. Some further
© This word seems to be a corruption remarks on this subject will be found in
of pasche, pasche. R. W. the Introduction to the present volume.
™ Read proreta. R. W. (These alphabetical glosses refer to Ald-
” Of. Nr. XII, 1. R. W. helm’s works. Cf. Nr. XII. R. W.)
° With this live our alphabetical glosses ™ Read Pythonis, Pythonissa. R. W.
eud abruptly, perhaps by the loss of the

i helrynegu. pr
orrectus, areht. Palpitraret, li
Parui, ic hyrsumige. gette.” 7
Polimitarius, ceasterwyrhta.'
"Of. pag. 470 1, 32. R. W. A ? Read palpitaret. BR. W.
cae

— al
XII.
7 TOA
MISCELLANEOUS ANGLO-SAXON GLOSSES.
(Cf. Nr. VII and Nr. XL.1)
[1. Miscellaneous Glosses.] Excubias, weardsetl.
Detracta, ic forsace.? Eucharitia, husl."
Non detracto, ne forsace ic. Exagia, handmitta.'”
Detrans,3 egor. Epithalamiun, brydsang.
Decrepito, tobigende.‘ 5 Ergastulum, hengen.'®
Dilibatus, gesmired.® Fofex, scer.'*
Diocessim, .... ° Nauacula, scirseax.'®
Echo, windumer.” Tonsura, scaro.
| Exactoratus, gehened.® Fucus, telg, deah.
Eologium, gedd.° 10 Flegma, horh,'®
afta, berende bip.'° Sputum, spatl.
* The foregoing Glosses are followed in © No Anglo-Saxon equivalent given, as
he manuscript, MS. Cotton. Cleopatra, is the case not unfrequently in this cvl-
III, by a Vocabulary of the ordinary lection of glosses. (But cf. pag. 386 1. 32.
ind (cf, Nr. VIII), which passes, almost R. W.)
imperceptibly (fol. 87 ro), into another series 7 Perhaps for wudu-mer, the popular
f miscellaneous Anglo-Saxon glosses, name for the echo,
bich are not, except partially at the ® Read exauctoratus. Cf. pag. 201. 15,
jeginning, in alphabetical order. It may R. W.
@ remarked, that the orthography of this ° Read eulogium. Of. pag. 19 1. 6.
ection is more corrupt even than that RW.
the former. 1 Cf. pag. 18 1. 42. R. W.
* Read detracto. Cf. pag. 17 1. 15. * Read eucharistia, R. W.
R. W. 2 Of, pag. 20 1. 20, R. W.
* A corruption of dodrans. 3 Of. pag. 894 1. 29. R, W.
* Cf. pag. 17 1, 2 (dobgendi) and pag. “ Read forfex, R. W.
86 1. 30. R. W. Of. pag. 142 1, 22, R. W.
* Of. pag. 171. 40. R. We 16 Of, pag. 23 1. 28. R. W.

476 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 477
Frugus, fereup- Limax, snegl. !
Ferinum, hold.t Lumbricus, regnwyrm.
Furca, wearhrod. Luscinus,”” frox.'6
Fucatum, gedelgod. Rana, yee.
Hostimen, leasung.” 5 Lacertus, efete.
Fascia, wred. Sanguisuga, lece.
Gramen,.... 8 Mancus, anhende.
Gladiolum, sege. Manica, glof.
Gannatura, ganung.* Momentum, scutil.
Histrio,. 1... 3 10 Malagma, sealf.
Hostimen, wundor.® Mastigia, swipe.
Iteramen, inilfe.7 Manticum, handful.!7
Iurisperiti, redboran. Massiranus, sereawa.'®
Mimum, gliw. Mustella, wesle, {
Karus, leof. 15 Mus, mus. !
Carissi,8 gefo. Sorex, scirfemus.'®
Kalende, begannes, Pelx, musfealle.?° ,
Kalamus, hreod. Mulio, horshierde,
Larbanum, segl.? Messor, riftre. f
Lurco, sur.!° 20 Muriceps, catt.
Larbula, grima. Falcis,”" rifter.
Lunules, mene. !4 Falcastrum, sipe.
Luscus, anege. Nux, hnutbeam.
Lurdus, lemphealt.'* Napta, tero.”®
Lodix, lopa. 25 Nanus, were.?$
Liza, leah.'® Neo, ic spinne.
Legumen, bean. Netum est, aspunnen is.
Lenticula, pyse. Inbibit, degluttiuit,
Latrena, genge.' Discrepare, non cordare,
Lotium, hiand. 30 Lectitat, frequenter legit.
Latex, burna. Falsariam, mendacem,
Lusus, wyn. Interpres, qui linquam*' transfert.
‘The meaning of ferinum is: game, 'S Read liviuia, R. W.
venison; hold denotes: a dead body, car- ™ Read latrina, R. W.
cass, rotted flesh. R, W. *® Read luscinius. R. W.
2 Of. pag. 417 1. 29. R, W. *® frox is the translation of the next
* No Anglo-Saxon equivalent given; but word: rana, frox, yce. R. W.
cf. pag. 412 1, 1 and pag, 416 1. 12, 7 Of, pag. 442 1. 28. R. W.
Re. 8 Read musaraneus. Of. pag. 4431. 31.
* Cr. pag, 23 1. 43, R. W. RW.
* No translation given, but cf pag. 150 © Of. pag. 47 1. 27. R. W.
1,17, RW. *° A mousetrap. The compiler has here
° Of. 1.5. R. W. given a list of vermin, with the trap and
7 Cf. pag. 26 1. 25 and note 4. R. W. the cat for taking them.
® So has the MS. Read charis. R. W. 21 So has the MS. R. W.
° Cf. pag. 430 1. 27. R: W. 72 Of. pag. 451 1, 27. R. W.
Cf, pag. 30 1, 39. R. W. 5 Read dwere or dwerg. Cf. pag. 453
™ Read lunula or lunule. R. W. VRPT FP Vs
Of. pag. 433 1.17. R. W.

—
MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 479
Ribula,* Paraliticor, laman.'*
Ex mineoo,? of bocreade. Euanuerit, agetp.®
Discolorem,' Sub modio, undernmete.'4
Uerbi gratia, worde ewedene. Donec transcat, oddxt pe gewitep.
Congeries, heap. 5 Tota una.®
Proemium, profatio.3 Apex, acumen litere.
Crura, sconcan. Concilio, gemote.
Nemas,4 lodrung. Fatue, gemad.'®
[2. Glosses referring to the Gospel  Reconciliare.'*
of St. Matthew.) 10 Quadrantem.
Sciscitabatur, interragabatus.* Moechatus est, fornicatus est.
In principibus, in ealdormannum, Scandalizat, offendit.
Clam, oculte. Erue,
Percidentes, cadentes. Repudii, utdrifan.1®
Secessit, gewat. 15 Non cognoscebat, ne groette.
Delusus, afered, weged. Prebe, da.
A bimatu, abeate duorum annorum.© —_ Angarizauerit,!°_ beadwxtp.9
Et infra, and beniopan pam. Mutuare,®® wrislan, hlenan.
In Rama, in eccelsum.' Ethnice, xthna.
_ De pilis, of herum. 20 Elioquin,?! elcor.
Locuste, stapan. Exterminant, unrotlice dop.
_ Mel siluestre.® Simplex, purum. .
Ne uellitis,9 ne willap ge. Ad stauram, to wermete.®*
Securis, wx. Neent, spinnap.”*
Uentilabrum, windsobl.!° 25 Fistucam,®* sanctum,® strewu, eglan.
Sine modo, forlet nu pus.'! Tribulus,?> genus frutis.
Conplacui, gelicodo, gefag. Inruunt, anhreosap.
Pinnaculum,* circuitus templi. Stridor, girstbitung.
Retro, under bee. Febricitantem, feferseoce.
Traditus esset, geseald wes. 30 Fretum, deop.
Reficientes, conponentes. Modice fide, parue fidei.
Opinio, fama. Porro, eonu.
Lunaticos, brecseoce. Seui, nepe.
» No Anglo-Saxon equivalent given. “The Anglo-Saxon word denotes: a
Rk. W. breakfast. Cf. Matth. V, 15. R. W.
? Read ex minio. R. W. % Read unum. R. W.
3 Read prefatio. R. W. 2 Cf. Matth. V, 18. R. W.
* For nenia. 7 Read reconciliari. R. W.
* Read interrogabatur. R. W. © Cf. Matth. XIX, 7. R. W.
© Cf. Matth. HW, 17, R. W. © Read angariauerit. R. W.
7 Of. Matth. 1, 18. R. W. 7° Read mutuari. R. W.
° Cf. Matth. III, 4. R. W. 1 For alioquin.
® So has the MS. R. W. 72 Read staturam. Cf. Matth, VI, 27.
*° For wind-scobl. (Cf. Matth. III, 12. R. W.
R. W.) * Read nent. R. W.
Cf. Matth. UI, 15. R. W. * Read festucam. Cf. Matth. VII, 3.
™ Our compiler has made a strange mis- RW.
ike in his interpretation of this word. °° Of. Matth. VII, 6. R. W.
Read paralyticos. R. W. 2° Of, Matth. VII, 16. KR. W.
-

=
480 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 481 |
Impetu, were. Tetracha, quartam."'
Prepleceps,! oferclif. Triclinio, yferan hyse.'*
Puplicani, awiscferinend. Pedestres, fepemen.
Commissuram, gefog. Coffinos,'® manda.
Tubicines, bemeras. 5 Fantasma, uisio.
Tumultuantem, hlydende. Ducatum, \adscipe.'4
Comminatus, beotigende. Bar Iona, filius columbe.'®
Diffamauerunt, gewidmerdan. Commutatio, gewrixle.
In Belzebul,® in principe demonorum. — Transfiguratus, on oprum hiwe.'®
In zonis, in gyrdelsum. 10 Didragma, due dragma.""
Non peram, ne fatels. Hamum, angul.
Castellum, castel. Staterem, genus nummi.'8
Presides, gerefan. Scandalizauerit, offenderit.
Super tecta, on hrofum. Expedit ei, proderit ei.'®
Asse ueneunt,> 15 Asinaria, esul eweorn.””
Ueneunt, uenduntur. Castrauerunt, eumicizauerit.2!
Murum,s snore, Per foramen acus, purh nedle pyrel.
Socrum, sweger. Conducere, aheran.??
Mollibus, hnescum. Conuentione, gemote.
Inter natos, betuh bearnum. 20 Percuratori,? gerefan.
Uim, neadhade. Betfage, nomen castelli.
Per sata, purh eceras. Subiugalis, tam.*®
Uellere, hnoppiam.? Strauerunt, bettan.
Accussor,? wregend. Nummulariorum, munetera.
Diriet,® gegripep. 25 Lactantium, meolesucgendra.
Nequiores, wyrsan. Reuerebuntur,**
In parabolis, in prouerbis.? Nuptias, gemung.
Zizania, atan, odde lasor.” Altilia, fuglas.*®
Satis tribus, prim myddum.® Ad exitus, to geletum.?*
Eructuabo, arecco.® 30 Ut caperent, geesoden.
Dissere, gerece.'® Nomisma, denarius.*"
* Read preceps. Cf. Matth. VIII, 32. * Cf XVI, 17, R. W.
R. W. ** CheXVIl, 2) Rs We
? So has the MS. R. W. Read didrachma. Of. XVII, 23.
° Cf. Matth. X, 29. R. W. R. W.
* Of course this is a mere error of the * Of. XVI, 26. RK. W.
collector of the glosses for nurum. » Of. XVIU, 6. R. W.
* Read accusator. R. W. ®° Of. XVIII, 6 mola asinaria. R. W.
* Apparently for déiripiet. Cf. Matth. ** Read eunuchizauerunt. Cf. XIX, 12.
XII, 24. R. W. R. W.
* Cf. Matth. XIII, 29 and 38. R. W. 22 Ofexex, 1. BRE
® Cf. ibid. XII, 33. R. W. 23 Of. XXI, 5. R. W.
°® Read eructabo XIII, 35. R. W. ** The Vulg. has uerebuntur XXI, 37.
1° Of. XII, 36: edissere. R. W. R. W.
" Read tetrarcha XIV, 1. R. W. 25 Of. XXII, 4. R. W.
™ Read huse. Cf. Bosw. 97 1. R. W. 2© The Vulg. has ad exitus uiarum XXII,
' Read cophinos. R. W. 9. RW.
“Cf XV, t4. BR. W. 27 Read numisma. R. W.

482 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 483
Filacteria, lyfesna.! Decimatis, teopingsceat.'®
| Proselitum, aduenam. Mentam, mintan.'*
(8. Miscellaneous Glosses referring Rutam, rutan.'®
to the New Testament.] Edem, huss.!®
Cominatus est, beotode. 5 Ueneunt, bebyegap.?°
 Conguirerunt, etsamne sohton. Depondio, duobus pondis.**
_ Uolo, mundare, Non neunt, ne spinnap.”*
 Blasuemiat, telep, yfelsap.* Socrus, sweger.*>
Quidem facius dicere,* Norus, snoru.*4
_ Leui Alphei, Mathei Alphei. 10 Nimbis, scur.
_ Adsumentum,® Minutum, paruum. ‘
In parabulis, in gelifnessum.7 Non capiet,
| Dispertitus est, todeled is. Peram, fetel.
Ultro, be selfwille. Hidripicus, weeterfull.?5 ,
Puppi, steorstefn. 15 Baiulat, bierd.
Ceruicat, wangere, heafodp’.® Saginatum, amested.
Legio, ui. milia.® Simfonia, lignum concauum.
Non peram.” Chorum, strang heap.
Scandalis, soccus est, wel genus cal- Cados, anphora, i. amber.
ciamentorum." 20 Cautionem, gewrit.
Contuberniam, gadorwiste.!? Apicem, ord, cnol, heanes.?&
Et adplicuerunt, gelidun.'® Cahus,?" dwolma.
Urceorum, crucena. Sicinorum, Sychemware.?®
Set, gestillid.1 ¥mnas, c. dragmas appendit. .
Et spumat, and spetled. 25 Sudorium, swatlin.
Luscum, anigne. Austerius, repe.
Equor, sx. Suspensus, ahangen, bidende.
In bino, in twega wega gelete.!® Arescentibus, forweosnodon.
Numulariorum, munetera. Manicabat, morgen wacode.
Uersutias, gesweopotnessa. 30 Pacti sunt, gepingodon.
Sub obtentu, under intingan. Occidit Pascham, occidi®® agnum.
' Read phylacteria Matth. XXIII, 5. R. W. © Read @dem, hus. R. W.
2 Of. Mare. I, 41. R. W. 2° Cf. pag. 480 1. 16. BR. W.
* Read blasphemat Marc. Il, 7. R. W. ** Perhaps an error for dispondeo, duo-
} * Read quid est facilius. Of. Marc. I, 9. bus ponderibus? R. W.
R. W. 22 Of. pag. 479 1. 24. R. W.
* Of. Mare. I, 14. R. W. 3 Of. pag. 480 1. 18. R. We
° Cf. Mare. II, 21. R. W. ** Of. pag. 480 1. 17. R. W.
7 Read in parabolis, in gelicnessum. R.W- °° It may be doubted if this were ever
® So has the MS. Cf. Marc. IV, 38.R. W. used as an Anglo-Saxon word for the dis-
* Cf. Mare. V, 9. R. W. ease, but it was an attempt by the glos-
*° Of. Mare. VI, 8. R. W. sator at a literal translation of the Latin,
™ Read sandaliis, cf. Marc. VI,9. R. W. — which is here written sufficiently corruptly.
Read contubernia VI, 39. R. W. (Read hydropicus. R. W.)
* Of. VI, 58. R. W. *® Cf. pag. 479 1. 6. R. W.
“ Read sedatus. R. W. °7 For chaos. Of. pag. 121. 43. R. W-
** Read in biuio. R. W. ** The inhabitants of Sichem, or Shechem
© Read decima. R. W. — the Shechemites. This gloss is probably
Of, pag. 134 1. 87. R. W. taken from the Pentateuch.
© Of. pag. 134 1.2. R, W. *© Read occidit, R, W.
. 32
|

484 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 485 .
Amphoram, amber. Plectentis, flustriende, windende.
Expetit, gesohte, gewilne. Conuiciebant, teon, ewidon. {
Cribraret, sifte. Decurio, consiliarius. ;
Auulsus, aweg abroden. Acurio, decurio dicitur. :
Imagonia, inclue- 5 Pugillarem, writbrec.'®
Inualescebant, strangadan, swidodon. _Tetracha, feorpan dzles aldor.'
Decurio, qui oficium carum egerit. Lysania, nomen principis.
Parasceuem, preparatio.* Abilina, nomen regionis.

Metretas, gemetfatu. Et ageliater,'® et ducebatur.
Architriclino, principi triclino. 10 Supra pinnam, ofer ymbgang.'®
Piscina, fisemere, et quamuis piscem. Prenoctans, purh niht weeter.'7
In nataria, on fundmere.* Si mutuum, gif wrixle.
Scenophegia, tabernaculorum dedi- Confertam, gecrumen.
catio.4 Coagitatum, gehrysed.
Liniuit, smirede. 15 Loculum, seodcist.
Encenie, noue dedicationis. Cophinus, mand.'®
In stitis, in swapum.> Inprouitatem, gemagnesse.!*
Loculos, seodas. Suaisti, pu suge.
Hesitantes, tweogende. Simplex, anfeald, clene, hluttor.2°
Si quo minus, eleor. 20 [4. Aldhelmi de Laudibus Virginitatis.]
Coors, preat.® Dissertitudinem, g..awnesse.”! 11.
Palmam, brade hand. Urbanitatis, burhsprece.??
In preterium, in mepelern. Gimnosophistas, plegmen.
Gazofilacium, welahord, feoh.” Palestricis, dem werstlicum.
Quadrans, quarta pars uncie.® 25 In gimnasio, on leorninghuse.
Azyma, andbida, beorma.° Olimpiaci, dees pleglican.
Nardi pistici.'° Agonis, gewinnes.
Lagenam, watererog. Nauiter, hredlice.
In cateno, in disee. Nanciscunt, begitap.?*
Tedere, swa swa unrot.!! 30 Strenua, pa strangan, odde fore-
Anathematizare, frendian.'* mihtiglice.
1 Read intextina or interanea_ R. W. “ Read tetrarcha. Cf. pag. 481 1. 1.
? Read parasceue Cf. Marc. XV, 42. Rew,
R. W. ’ Read agebatur. R. W.
* So has the MS Read sundmere. R. W. ‘6 Of. pag. 478 1. 28. R. W.
* Read scenopegia = feast of the taber- ‘7 Read pernoctans. The meaning of pern.
nacles. R. W. is: burh niht waeccend, waciend. R. W,
® An error for in semitis? R. W. 8 Cf, pag. 4811.4. R. W.
° Read cohors, Cf. pag. 14 1. 41. ‘© Read inprobitatem. R. W.
RW. © After this line, in the manuscript,
7 Read gazophylacium. Cf. Marc, XII, follow a column and two-thirds blank, and
lige RoW then, at the head of the first column of
® Of, Mare, XII, 42, R. W. the next page, the glosses commence again,
° Cf. Mare. XIV, 1. R. W. as though intended as a new collection.
‘© Read nardi spicati, Cf, Mare. XIV, *! Damaged by the cutting of the leaf
3. RW. and uncertain in the manuscript. (Read |
™ An error for tedet me? R. We gleawnesse. Cf. pag. 386 1. 41. R. W.)
™ So has the MS. Cf, fremdian, Bosw. ** Burh-sprec, courtly speech, such as
e7 f R. W. was used in the town,
Read writ-bec. *8 Read nanciscuntur. R. W.

486 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 487
Anthletarum, cempena.! Coxarum, bana, peona.
Cum emulo, mid widerweardum. Corimbas, wuas.?
Flagrante, stincende.® Tilie, linde.
| Sinuosis, dem fiedmlice. Catalcctico, dymetcunda.
Scammatis, gewinstowe. 5 Brachia catalecto,®
Nardo, elesealfe. Generam et rorum,9
De obstrusis, of dem diglum. Allearii, hyfe.
Non ut passiuis, nu les swa wide.8 —_Uestibulo, foredyre.
Pando, geap. Enucleata, ascyled.
Strepente, swogende. 10 Tropologiam, beacnunge.
Stridende, brehtniende.* Anagogen, celsissimo intellectu.
In stadio, octaua pars mil, Digesta, scripta.
Falerato, gehyrste. Cronographorum," tidwritera.
_ Cornipede, equo. Grammaticorum, stefwriterum.
 Calcaribus, spurum. 15 Ortograuorum,” rihtwriterum.
_ Lupatis, cenepum. Percola, purhsticced.
_ Facetus, linguosus. Commata, membratim.
Orbes, orbibus, hringa, hohwerfinge. Direptas, diuisas.'®
Classicis, dem sciplicum. Sequestratim, gedeled edlice.
Liburnam, nauem. 20 Codicibus, rindum.'4 Vi.
Lintrem, bat. Ad incolatum, to eldeodignesse.
Proreta, steora. Pariat, hered.
_ Naucleri, princeps nauis. Gurgustio, ceolan.
Portisculo, hamere. Nardi, elesealfe.
Spumosis, dem famegum. 25 Spirantis, pere stincende.
Algosis, dem warihtum. Olfactum, odorem.
Tractibus, drohtum. Ammodum, ualde. Vu.
In propatulo, on wwiscnesse. 1. Charismatum, diuinorum donorum.
Theatrales, da pleglican. Potissimum, ealra swidost.
Circentium, hringseta.® 30 Priuatam, da synderlican.
Liquido, andgitlice. Iv. Munificentiam, cyste.
Facessante, swedriende. Sanctimonie, haligdomes.
Per patentes, durh pa ruman. Malagma, lecedom.
Caltarum, clafrena. Gabuli, patibuli.
_ Maluarum, geormanleafa. 35 Buentus, wyrd.
Lento, pyton.® Prestulanti, bidendum.'¢
Carene, cerenes,® Septies uicena, et quaterna.'?
Receptacula, uiscera. Uirginumilia, caliiit milia.
* Read athictarum. R. W. ' Aldh. alvearii. R. W.
? Aldh. fragrante. R. W. ™ Read chronographorum. R. W.
* Aldh. non ut passiuos. KR. W. So has the MS. Read orthographo-
* Read stridente. R. W. rum. RW.
* Read circensium. R. W. ‘3 Aldh. diremptas, R. W.
* Aldh. lento careni defruto. R. W. * Aldh corticibus, R, W.
7 Aldh, corymbos. KR. W. * Aldh. admodum. R, W.
® Aldh, brachycatalectico, R. W. ‘© Aldh, prestolanti. R, W.
* So printed Wright. Read genera me-  Aldh septies vicena et quater dena
trorum. RB. W, Virginum millia. R. W.

488 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 489
In oromate, on gestlicre gesihde.t Inter scillam, betweonan,
Extaseos, diuinitatem. id nomen loci, pa frecenesse.
Augustam, amplam. Ratibus, flietum.
Ardui, des heanhades. vil. Baratrum, pytte.
Scismaticorum, ereticorum.2 5 Lintre, bate.
Stirpidus, owestmum.® Gestiunt, gernad.
De conca, of muscellan.* Neuorum, wlite, womma,
Obrizum, smezte.® Ix. Deformatos, geatelod.
Uenustas, fegernes. Atromento, nigritudinis.9
Bombicinum, sioleen. 10 Cercilo, scipe.'°
Cittis, filmenum. Glomeratis, ymbheapod.!! XL.
Contecta, bepeaht. Uertigo, wendend.
Palmeti, palmbearwes.6 Ambronibus, dem frecum.
Dactulus, pomis.? Lurconibus, sigirgendum.
Nicolaum, alius nomen eius. 15 In gastrimargie, in gifernesse.'®
Commoditas, utilitas. Rumusculus, merd.
Baltheus, gyrdel. Cenodoxie, wane glorie.
Bullifer, estened. Tirunculis, militibus.
Hauritoria, hledhwiog]l. Genuinis, tuscum.'®
Arcuum, bigelsa. 20 Malaribus, cweorntodum.'*
Fornicibus, bogum. Lacertosis, dem earmswidum.
Tubo, peote. Manipulatim, heapmelum.
Autumo, ic wene. Strophose, des feeenan.’®
Uoracis, des gifran. Uenabulis, eoforspreotum.
Merule,® dopfugeles. 25 Umbonibus, randbeagum.
Tacturam, ewyrdlan. Pugiles, sweordboran. .
Crepundia, ornamenta, Macheram, gladium.
Pulpa, lira. Inextricabilem, da untolesende.
Cauliculus, stela. Pelta, scuto.
Questu, gestreonde. 30 Leuiathan, se draca.
Farus, beacanstan, in promontoria  Cerethei, eoredmen.'® XU.
rupis posita, t. fyrtor. Feletei, foreirnerum.'*
Dehonestare, unweordian. Apparatu, gedrece.
Quisquiliarum, benseala. X.  Falarica, lancea.
Peripsema, geswepo. 35 Indepte, dere begitenan.
Querulosis, sarseofunge. Successibus, spedum.
Questibus, quidungum. Natrix, genus serpentis.'*
Supereilio, oferhigd. Elimatus, adrifen.
* Read oramate. Cf. pag. 458 1. 6 * Read atramento. R. W.
R. W. 1° aldh. circilo. R. W. :
? Read schismaticorum, hereticorum. ™ Read glomeratus. R. W.
R. W. 2 Aldb. in gastrimargia voraginem.
5 Read stirpibus. R. W. R. W.
» * Read concha. R. W. *3 Read gingivis. R. W.
* Of pag. 457 1. 26. R. W. ™ Read molaribus. R. W.
® Aldh. palmetis, R, W. '. Aldh. strophose fraudis. R. W.
7 Read dactylus. R. W. ‘© The glossator translated ceti. R. W.
° Read merguli. Cf. pag. 284 1. 8. ” Cf. pag. 399 1, 27. R. W.
R. W. © Of pag, 454 1, 17. 18. R. W.

490 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES, 491
Orci duodecies, inferni, Panucla, wefla.®
twelf sidum, guinguages, fiftig pu- Fucate, getelgade.

senda.! Plumario, dy awundenan ryfte, feper-
Expeditionum, fyrda. creefte.!°

| Flustris, sigendum.? 5 Textrinum, pet weblice.

| Obumbrando, figurando. Thoracibus, imaginibus,'!
Internicionis, spildes. Tacintho, hewen.'*

Decalogii uerborum. Cocco, weolocread.

Non refragabatur, non resistet, Uermiculo, wealhbaso.

Territorii, tunas. 10 Bisso retorto,'* hwite twine geprawen.
Pronepotibus, bearna bearn. Murice, wyrman.

Conspirati, coniurati. XI. — Comminiscimur, resiat.'4
Propugnacula, breostweal. Electri, eolhsandes.

Calones, wuderas. Sucine, gleres.'®

Clientes, degnhyssas. 15 Sauciant, wulnerant.'® XVL
Cum lixarum, mid weterbererum.4 — Dracontia, gimrodor. Xv.
Emeritos, perfectos. Delicate, dere wrastlican. OVE,
Funebre, heofendlice. Pedagogio, mzgedhade.

Epicedion, licleod,® Repetante, eftsidgendum.'"

Et epitaphion, byrigleod, 20 Exctirpatus, asuefecad.

Utrumque est carmen super tumulum. Passionum, uncysta.

Collationes, ymbeahtas. Inmunitas, orceasnes, ~
Massilliensis, Melselea. Solitare, anlaga.

_ Elimauit, interpretauit. Recapitulatio, eftspellung.
Disceptare, flitan. 25 Intercapidine, firstmearces.’® Xvi.
Disputare, interpretare. Lunulis, mynum, uel argenteis.
Conflictu, gefeohte. Xv. Calomistro, ferro.!®
Residuo, altero. Cincinnorum, capillarum.
Tendiculum, seada. XU. = Stibio, herba.

Sityriaca,® wyrtdrenc wid atre. 30 Mandibulas, cinban.
Facula, decele. XIV. Suatim, suarum more.
Theorice, contemplatiue. Indruticans, wrestende.?°
In practice, in actuali. Aretissima, angustima. XVUL.
Edylio, esu." Factiosam, da feecnan.
Supplemento, stilnesse, gefylnesse. 35 Senticosis, dem dorhnihtum.
Collegio, winescipe. Xv.  Separatim, gescadenlice. XIX,
Curtinarum, uelarum, wagryfta.’ Mediocritas, paruitas rerium.
Textura, weofung, gewef. Noualibus, wyrdelandum.

‘ Aldh. phalanx duodecies quinquage- Of, Aldh. arte plumaria. R. W.
nis expeditionum milibus R. W. Of, Aldh. toraciclis. R. W.

? Of. Bosw. 630, R. W. ” jacintho = hyacintho RB. W.

* Read decaloyi. R. W. 8 bysso retorto. R. W.

* Aldh. cum licarum coetibus. R. W. So has the MS. R. W.

* Read epithrenion. R. W. ** Aldh. succini. R, W.

* A blunder of the glossator. The Latin © Of. Aldh. sauciatur. R. W.
words are: etsi theriaca. R. W, 7 Aldh. repedanti. R. W.

7 Read edulio. R. W. *® Aldh, intercapedinis, R. W.

° Read cortinarum. R W. ‘© Aldh. calamistro. R. W.

* Read pannicule R. W. ° Aldh. infruticans. R. W.

492 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 493 |’
Clumula, broudasiunetura.' Crepitantes, vescetende.
Contexere, plectere. Ex amussim, diligenter.’° XXL |
(I. De Elia.) Terimus, tredad.
Uegitatione, uehementione.? XX. Neutericis, deem niwum.'
Addicti, damnati. 5 Suppeditent, auailient.
Ineuitabile, ineffugabile. Adfatim, ubertim.
Pendere, reddere. Carptim, breuiter.
ii. De Eliseo. Obolisci, genus lapidis..
Quadrupes, cealf. Glaucoma, eagsung.
Bombose, dere thundendan. 10 Subfundit, orretted.
Reboasse, ahlowan. Scotomaticorum, cecorum.
Melote, hredan. Uictricia, da sigelican.
In propatulo, in manifesto. Concessum, gemote.
iii. De Danielo, retinaculum.> Librantis, heolorende.
Ob indaganda, to aspyrienne. XxX1.15 Labara, segelgyrd.
Colludio, fraude, deceptione. Salebrosos, da unsmepan. XXUI
Texuisse, pet he awrite. Anfractus, dwerfuru.
Conlufio, contagione, immunditia.4 v. De Iohanne.
Fabrefactam, pulchre opere. Lima, feol.
Sine uirili uola, butan weres geman. 20 Hymeneos, hemedo.
Minutatim, sticcemelum. Aporians, onscunigende.
Proceritas, celsitudo. Laturus, passurus.
Coniectura, resong. Matrice, quidan.
Cono, heanes.5 Paranympus, drihtguman.
Perpeti, da hradan.® 25 De Iohanne.
Nutabunda, pa wagiende. Stipis, elmessan.
Lumoriante, festegepuf. Nemoribus, bearwum.
Caraxatis, conscriptis.* E frondosis, of dem helmihtum.
Potentatus, meahte. Congeries, gesomnung.
Portendentes, figurantes. 30 Sophiste, das wordwisan.
Inminiculo, adiutorio. Friabat, confregit.'*
Bibertitam,’ duplicem. Sumptuosa, diliciosa.
iiii. De iii. pueris. Sequestra, byrgea.
Auita, yldrafeder. Haustum, potum.
Externe, aliene. 35 Roboete, ycean.!®
Pulmentum, bilifen, andlifen. Confectio, gereohnung.
Musica, da dreamlican. vi. De Paulo et Necromatia. Idem.
Naptarum, fomitum, heordan.® Pithonissa, heahrun. AXLY.
Refragabantur, widsocan. Manubia, welreaf.4
Malleoli, tyndercyn, id est dyphomer. 40 Quinguies quadragenas exev.
* Aldh, glumula. R. W. © Aldh. prepeti. R. W.
2 Aldh. vegetatione. R. W. 7 Aldh charavatis. R. W.
* The copyist seems here to have pla- ° For bipartitam
ced the gloss by mistake over the title ° Aldh. naptarum fomite. R, W.
of the chapter of which he was copying © Aldh, ex amussi. R. W.
the glosses. ‘ Aldh, neotericis. R. W.
Of 125. RW. 2 Aldh. fricabat. R. W.
* Aldh, sub cono sublimi verticis 'S Aldh. robeta. R. W.
RW. ™ Aldh, manubias, R. W.

494 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 495
Rimatur, meditabat. Inbricibus, broftigum.
Siquipedas, ministri.' xi. De Gregorio.

- Decretalibus, dem redendlicum. Laturi, doonde.

vii. De Luca. Acathemice, dere udwitlican.'!

— Cauterio, hoce. 5 XXVIT,

— Cataplasma, medicina. Sophisma, scientia.

- Purulentis, dem wyrmsigum. Cautum, scriptum.'*

Incommoditas, infirmitas. Scedarum, librorum.

viii. De Clementi. Scissitationibus, domum.*®
Cernua, da mowelan. 10 Gulio, gydde."*
Flebotomo, blodseax. Contionatorum, gemotmanna.
Baptisterio, fulwihtstowe. waa xii. De Basilio.
Taxauerat, figurabat. Usquequaque, lenge-swidor-awa.'®
Propaginibus, twigo settende.? Pro rostris, in gemotstowum.

| Elimauit, gerizahte. 15 Fruniscantur, brucad.

 -wiiii. De Siluestro. Attonis, hlosnendum.'®
Auxonie, Italie. Nutibus, potentatibus.

_ Alpium, montium. xili. De Antonio.

- Cautibus, stanum. Stibarius, sulhhebbere."7) = Xxvitt.
Speleo, spelunce. 20 Occa, wealh, ope wyrding.
Inextricabili, dy untolysendum. Noualibus, wyrdelandum.

 Callario, saule.‘ In atomo, in breahtme.
Eleuantuosa, dere unsmedan.5 Aduectabant, ham feredan.

Sine tricarum, sine mora.® Barritus, raringe.

 Oppilatim, gedyrned.” 25 xiili. De Paulo.

x. De Martino. Bucellam, cicel.'®
Bigarum, cratwa, XXVI. —-Bissenis, sexaginta.

Fatu, wyrde. Crustule, healstanes.

Parcarum, dearum. Hiulco rostro, gangende mupe.
Perniciter, hredlice. 30 xv. De Hilarion.

Reclinem, onhylded. Uulgo, welhweer. XXIX.
Obliqua, sio scythealde. Spinam, bodig.

Curuatura, onbegnes. Titionibus, brandum.

| Anatholi, des anatholes.s Inexperto, dy unandwisan.'9

Nebulis, scinlecan. 35 Consulatus, gerefscipes.
Prestigiis, scin.® Contente, deres gehealdnan.
A cimentario, wealwyrhtum.'° xvi. De Iohanne.
* Aldh. sequipedas. R. W.  Aldh, Academice. R. W.
2 aldh. propagines. R. W. Read cantum. Cf. Aldh. R. W.
* Aldh. Ausonia. R. W. 8 Aldh. sciscitationibus. R. W.
* Aldh, collario, R. W. “* Perhaps an error for elogio? Cf.
* Aldh. elephantinosa corporis incom- Aldh. R. W.
moditas. R. W. Of. Bosw. 41t, R. W.
® Aldh, sine tricarum obstaculo. R, W. ‘6 Aldh. attonitis, R. W.
7 Aldh. oppilatum. R. W. ‘7 Phe MS. has XII. ‘De Antonio. Aldh.
® Aldh. Anatolii nebulonis. R. W. stivarius, R. W.
\ * Aldh. prastigias. R. W. *® Aldh. buccellam. R. W.
*° Aldh. a cementario. R. W. ” Aldh. in experto. R. W.

496 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 497
Ciliarcho, tribuno. Cauponibus, winbryttum.
From feowertienum op hundnigon- Commendenda, to bebeodenne.*
tig,’ quinguies bilustris. Nundinarum, ceapstowa.
Consulta, redas. Exosas, afeonge.® XXXI.
Liniamento, limgelecg. 5 Rapaci, dere risendan.
Afflatus, eacen, uel gelicnes. Sub pretextu, under mundbyre.
xvii. De Benedicto. Inter biothonatas, betweonan sylf-
Fortunatum, done gewilseligan. myrde.'°
XXX. Abolere, aiedan.
Eulogie, benedictionis. 10 xviii. De Hilarione."
Liberalitatis, rumheortnesse. Uulgo, late. XXIX.
Mactus, meced. Exmergeret, surgeret.
Per augustam, durh pet rume. Succumberet, getrunge.!*
Hesperie, Eotoles. , Familice, pa ungerlican.!*
Cum aduocato, mid pingere. 15 Frugalitatis, abstinentie.'®
Authentico, principali. Non calcitres, ne spornette.
Classibus, heapum. Epidaurum, dere megde.'*
Diruta, gehriered. Dalmatie, dere burge.'*
Fato, gewife. Municipium, burgscipe.
Fortune, wyrde. 20 Bouem, oxan.
Haut? frustra, non frustra, Peduces, oues.'®
Genesi, fatu. Armenta, hridero.
Mathematicorum, tunglera. Bobulcos, oxena hierdas.
Secundis, gesundelican. Subulcos, swanas.
Constellationem, steorrscewere. 25 Superi, upgodo.
Priuilegium, bonorem.® Strue, fine.
Prouerunt,* gelumpon. Scindulis, scidum.
Faice, riftre. Crates, hyrdlas.
Fiscillis, tenelum.® Assantibus, bradendum.
Refertis, gefyldum. 30 Legislator, Moyses.
Onustis, gehladenum. Obtruncati, breuiati.
Corbibus, caulum. xix. De Malcho.
Exprimendos, to awringenne. Ob cognate, dere gesibban.!® XXXII.
Merulenti, da ahlytredan.® Instinctu, tikitnesse.!7
Idem et de peccati defruto. 35 Strofose, das fecnan.'§
Carenes, apothecis.” Liminio, wreeside.'®
Recondenda, to gehealdenne. Mancipium, peow.
‘ The glossator translates usque nona- "Cf pag. 495 Nr. XV. R. W.
genariam (senectam) cap. XXIX; notguin-  *? Aldh. succumbere, R. W.
quies bilustris cap. XXIX. R. W. 13 Aldh. famelica frugalitatis parsimo-
? So has the MS. R. W. nia RW.
3 Read honorem. R. W. ™ Aldh. iuxta Epidaurum Dalmatia
* Read prowenerunt. R. W. municipium. R, W.
® Aldh, fiscellis. R, W. Read pecudes. R. W.
® Aldh. merulenta. R. W. © Aldh. 0b cognate propinquitatis cu-
7 Aldh, merulenta defecati nectaris de- vam R, W.
fruta apothecis calestibus. R. W. ‘7 Aldh. instructu. R W.
° Aldh. committenda. R. W. ‘* Aldh, strophosi. R. W.
° Aldh. erosus. R. W.  Aldh. postliminium. R, W.
*° Aldh, inter biothanatos, R, W.

498 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 499
Glebulis, turfum. Serio, georneste.
Nugaciter, unnytlice. Expertus sit, oncunnende wes.
In, genetali, in dere gecyndelice.' Delatum, geferedne.
Profanando, maculando. Commentis, searwum.
Non feram, non sinam. XXXIL 5 Inletus, getyhted.?
xx. De Narciso. Inconsulie, unredlice swa.
Delitiscere, bemidan. Scenam, sceadwe.
Anastasis, resurrectionis. Flamen, biscop.
Fortuito, semnendlice. Altrite, gegnidenan.
Oportunus, sio tidlice. 10 Uelantem sospitem, halne.s
Exorcizans, haligende. Prostituta, forliges.
Cicindilibus, weocum. Prostibuli, forliggange.
Aruma, rysele.? Insimulare, wregian.
Seuo, smerwe. Melancolie, des sweartan galgan.
Madefactus, ofdzned. 15 Nausiam, wletan.® ;
Probrosum, edwid, fullic. De recessibus, of heolstrum.
Chirographatur, scribebat. Procax, hwal.
Apologeticam, excussationem. Obuncabat, ymbelypte.
Concinnatas, cumulatas. Exulat, wracode.
Presbiteros, senes. 20 Potiretur, utebatur.
Emulabantur, imitabantur. Cote, hwetstane.
Deuotabant, wyrgdon. Insectiones, ehtnesse.!°
_ Domatis, huses. Conspiratio, coniuratio.
 Tigillo, tecti. Artus, lido.
A triplici, from dem? 25 xxii. De Babillo.
cerebre, pricfealdan bregene.® Excubias, weardsetl. XXXII
Inprecabatur, bed. Mandras, eowestras.
Rancidis, dem dreorum.' Arcebat, bewerede.
Inauditum, ungefrege. Palatias zetas, da heallican seld.™
xxi. De Anastasio. 30 Yppodromi, pxs huses.!2
Altor, fosterfeder. Conflictibus, geflitum.
Periodas, circuitus.® Perpendiculo, reht.
Affabiliter, luflice. Uergeretur, were onsigen.
Latrine, gengan. Cleri, biscophirede.
Cuniculum, grep. 35 Boias, beagas.
Carismatum, gifena.6 Nec tunc, bundan.'®
Indolis, geogode. Fallere, decipere.
Gesticulatio, plega. Ictibus, slegum.
Missarum, sendnessa. xxiii. De Cosma et Damiano.
Conspicatur, sceawode. 40 Albo, nombred, in quo consulis nomen
Tnuestes, absque barba. seripserant.
* Aldh. in genitali. R. W. ” Aldh. illectus. R, W.
? Aldb. aruina. R. W. ® Aldb, ualentem sospitem. R. W.
* Aldh. a triplicis summitate cerebri. ° Aldh. nauseam. R. W.
R. W. *° Aldh. inscctationes, R. W.
| * Read raucidis. Cf. Aldb, R, W. ! Aldh. palatinas zetas. R. W.
* Aldb, periodos. R. W. ™ Read ippodromi or hippodromi. R. W.
| ° Read charismatum. R. W. ** Read nectunt, Cf. Aldh. BR. W.
33

500 MISCELLANEOUS. GLOSSES. 501 .
Archiatros, heahleecas. XXXIV, Libitos, lieongum.'* |
Litterature, scripture. Elosericis, ealgodwebnum. '* |
Apostasie, fleamlastes. Sagina, fodre.
Pedemtimi, softe.' Epithalami, bry dleod."*
Monaptalmis, enegum.2 5 Uestalis, gydeulice.
Balbis, stamerum, Sed secus cessit, ac on odre wisan
Blessis, wlipsum.® rynde,
Refocilando, hyrttende. Syllogismi conclusionibus.
Fortune, gewife. Phitronieade.!®
Cassibus, wyrdum.* 10 Herculis, hearge.'® |
Ad superos, ad uiuentes. Udis, wetum.
Consternati, conterriti. Nodosi, ostihtum.
Effera, sio rede. Cibbo, copse.'®
Eculei, cruci. Pudentissimis, dem fulestum.!7
Agonizarunt, preowedan. 15 Lotio, hlande.
xxii(i). De Crissanti. Chaldeorum, tungelereftum,
Gymnosophistis, weoroldsnottrum. Hierophantorum, scincrefta.
XXXY. — Ariolorum, da pet womfreht reniad,
Rethoribus, wodborum.5 Marsorum, wyrmgalera.
Ualitudines, adle.6 20 Lustramenta, lybsin.
Cataplasma, lecedomnessa. Ambrosiam, suauem odorem.
Uisco, fugellime. In rosatum, on rosena.
Glutinarum, gelimedne.7 Deglobere, behyldan.'®
Arihimitica, rimereft.8 Byrse, hyde.'®
Astronomia, tungelereft wisan, 25 Supparum, ecemban.°
Astrologia, ratio siderum. Putamina, hniglan.
Mechanica, searocreeft.9 Lanterne, leohtfates.
Cathagorias, x. predicamenta.'° Singillatim, singulariter.
Commentis, searwum. Cloacarum, flodena.
Prestare, elicre wes.'! 30 Cuniculi, grep.
Neophytus, se niwa. Ingesserunt, onheapedon.
Precipuus, se mesta. De clatris, of pearrocum.
Proscriptionem, gestrod. Sugillaretur, osogen were.
Infiscaretur, gegafelod. De congestu, be gesomnungum.?!
* Aldh. pedetentim. R. W. rum generibus distinguuntur. R. W.
2 Aldh. monophtalmis. RB. W. 11 So has the MS. Aldh. prestaret.
* Aldh. blasis, R. W. R. W.
* Aldh. casibus. R. W. ” Aldh. libitus. R. W.
* Read rhetoribus. R. W. 13 Aldh. olosericis. R. W.
© Read inualetudines. R. W. % Aldh. epithalamii. R. W.
7 Read glutinatum. R. W, 'S Aldh. Amphitrioniade, id est, Her-
® Read arithmetica, R. W. culis sacello, hearge is a translation of
°In the dictionaries, this word is wrongly —sacello. R. W.
explained as derived from searo, in the *6 Aldb. cippi. R. W.
sense of deceit, and as meaning a deceit- 17 Aldh. putentissimis. R. W.
ful art or stratagem. It is evidently de- © Aldh. deglubere. R. W.
tived from the word in the sense of a '® Aldh. birse. R. W.
machine, or instrument. 20 Read stuparum. R. W.
° Aldh. categorias, que predicamento- *1 Aldh. de congesta copia. R. W.

502 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 503
Pignus, wed. XXXVL — Ceni, wasan.
| -xx(v). De Iuliano. Pubescentem, weaxende.
Competem, getelne.1 Deprenderint, onfundon.»
Magnopere, swide. Obstinatam, pa anwillan.
| Tedas, spelde. 5 Conibentia, hebbenga.'?
| Faces ardentes. Obsecundans, herende.
Bis quingentenum, tua fiftig. Anhelat, desiderat.
Effebo, ungebarde.? Acutun, son, sona,'!
Hircitallo, hysse.$ Direpta, pa genumenan.
Theca, fodre. 10 Depeculata, pa ofdrifenan.
Damnatorum, replinga. Abegerunt, fram adreofon.
Fasciarum, swepela. Strictim, sceortlice.
Tragoediam, sarlicleod. Consummatim, scyndendlice.'”
Ter denis, preotienum. Doleum, weterbyden.'®
Cuparum, tunnena. 15 Obeuntem, morientem.'4
Bituminis, scipteran. Cyppum, hoferedne.'®
Farciuntur, acrummene weron, Melote, hredan.
Pyrebele, id est, fyr.* Amiculis, gegerelican.
Obolisci, des stanes.® Lucum, hearga.
Spere, zpples.* 20 In citeriorem, in done firran.
In conum, on heahnisse. Discifer, discberend.
De torrente, of dam byrnendum. Rudentum, bremmendra.!°
Licis, hefeldpredum.? Affatim, ubertim.
Pollices, puman. y Manipulo, were.
Alloces, pa miclan tan. 34 25 Cernuas, neole. XXXVI.
wis, predum. xxvii. De Apollonio.
Lurcare, fretan. Cleratis, clerochade.'"
Gurguliones, protan- Anfractus, pwyrhfero.
| Oppilauit, behydde. Exorbitans, aswifende.
Callositas, unsmedes. 30 Subterfugiens, bifleonde-
Tabo, hune, uel adle. Dilituisse, gediernan.'®
| Deturpans, onrettep. Antipatris, pater Herodis.'®
| In sabanis, on sabanum, id est scete.  Thoraciclas, imaginibus.
| Boiolabantur, borene weron.8 Octenis temporum, lustris al,?°
| Uoti compos, wilfegen. 35 Interpellans, gretende.
[xxv]i. De Ammon, Curbo, gebegde.?!
| Commercia, ceapunge. XxXvu. De stuppe stamineo, be cembum
Inuisi, des ladan. wearpe.””
' Aldh. compotem. R. W.  Aldh. et summatim. R. W.
2 Aldh. ephebo. R. W. 8 Aldh, dolium. R. W.
* Aldh. hircitalio. R. W. ™ Aldh. abeuntem. R. W.
* Aldh. flammantis pyre. R. W. S aldh. gibbum. R. W.
° Read obelisci. R. W. © Aldh. rudentium. R. W.
© Read sphere. R. W. 7 Aldh. clericatus, R. W,
7 Aldh. lictis. R. W. ‘© Aldh. delituisse. R. W.
* Aldh. baiulabantur. R. W. © Aldh, Antipatri R. W.
° Aldh. deprekenderent. RB. W. 2° Aldh. octonis temporum lustris. R.W.
*° Read cohibentia. R. W. 7) Aldh. curuo. R. W.
"So has the MS. Aldh, actutum. R. W. * Aldh, de stuppe stamine. R. W.

504 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 505
Putamine, bniglan. Idem et palatas, and cariarum,'? :
Ordiretur, wefen wes. Nicolaos, palmeppla. \
Ex terite glomere, of sinuwealtum Massas, clyno.
cliwen.’ Antes, ordines. :
Fuso, spinele. 5 Racemis, bergeum.
Netum, aspunnem. Mitescere, milesa.
Radiis, hrislum. Flauescentibus, falewende.
Stridentibus, hristlendum. Calamitosa, dy earmlican. i,
Extricabatur, tolesed waran.” Crustulis, halstanum.
Parsimonia, festenbehefednes. 10 Tortellis, ceaum (?)
Hortorum, wyrtuna. Exibuit, gebryttade.'!
Condito, gecocanade. Simila, melewes, smedma.
Culine, cycene. Polline, gryttes.
In focularibus, on heordum. Crasso, dy fettan.
Intempestiue, in swigean modre- 15 Corbos, caulas.'?
nehte.? Legythum, crog
Lautune, earcerne.* Equiperat, widmetep.'*
Circumquaque, ymb pet. Nutabunto, dy wagigendan.'4 XL.
Sub diuo, under lyfte. Secundum, dy 2fterlicum hade.'®
Aliorsum, elles hwyder. 20 Gradatim, softe.
Strictis, getogene. Spatiantes, hweorfende.
Offendisset, inuenisset. Amminiculum, adiutorium.®
Simultatem, unsibbe. Expiauit, gefelsode.
Incentor, tyhtend. Plecta, windonge."*
Sequestra, byrgea. 25 Plumemus, windan.'?
Leto tenus, od dead. Uestibula, foredyre.
Clasma, mal. Enucleare, ascilian.
Fors, wyrd. xxviii. De Sancta Maria.
Glomerarentur, gesomnedon. Gerula, berend.
Familicis, hungregum.® 30 Nurus, snoro.
Calcatur, teled is. Germana, soror.
Tubeleus, annus.® Pelices, cyfesa.'®
Remissionum, exenium, lac.7 Priuilegium, honorem.
Eulogie, benedictionis. Obsidem, gisl.
Parasitis, ministris. 35 Receptacula, andfengnessa.
Propostero, onwendedre.® xxix. De Cecilia.
Mala Punica, pa Affracaniscan xppla.  Indulte, pes alefdan.
Dactulus, ficeppel.? Proci, bidderes.
* Aldh. ex tereti filorum glomere. R. W. 1 Aldh. et palatas, id est, caricarum
? Aldh. extricabantur. R. W. massas. R. W.
° Read midrenezhte. Aldh. intempesta M Aldh. exhibuit. R. W.
noctis. R. W. 1 Aldi corbes. R, W.
* Aldh, lautumie, R. W. 3 Aldh, @quiparat. R. W.
° Aldh. famelicis, R. W. ™ Read nutabundo. R. W.
® Aldh. Iubileus, R. W.  Aldh. secundi secus. R. W.
7 Aldh. xenfum. R. W. © Aldh. adminiculum. R. W.
® Aldh, prapostero. R. W. 17 Sjdh. plectro plumemus, R, W. |
° Aldh. dactylis. R. W. 18 Aldh pellices. R. W.

506 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 507
Purgamenta, ewead. Saroastren, rex Bahtianorum gentis.®
Latrinarwn, gengena. XLII.
Bis quinquagenis et ter quinis, i. cen- xxxii, De Justina.
tum quindecim. Expedire, reccan,
Sirenarum, meremennena. 5 Apicibus, stafum.
Inexpertus, unandwis. Scemmatizarunt, licetton.!?
Pellexerunt, beswican. Disparuit, forswealt.
Sub pretextu, under mundbyre. Aruspicum, helsera.
Leiirum, tacor, pet is brydguma  Adibitis, todonum,"!
brodor. 10 Exterminans, aiedende.
Distinatus, onsended.? Ineluctuabilis, pa unoferwinnene.!*
Serta, hringas. Exorcismi, halgunge.'®
Edicta, gebodo. XLI Catacizatus, gecristnad.'®
xxx, De Agatha. Bissemis, tuwahealfum.'*
Aguste, pere ruman.3 15 Bisternis sextum, drim binnan drim
| Trinacria, Sicilia, butan.!4
Lictorum, pegna. Adscisceretur, togeladede.
Sacrafragnum, pa scearwan gebr’.4 Peruicax, gemah.
Siculus, se Sicilisca. Refragatur, widwinnend,!>
Adstipulantur, adfirmant. 20 Roborabiliter, stranglice.'°
Turris, wighuses. Oculum, sprece.'7
Opere pretium, red. Xiu. ©-Ulro, hrape.
[xx]xi. De Lucia. Purpurescit, readode.
In catalogo, in rime. Sectas, peawas. XLIV.
In tribuli, in dem gesibban.d 25 xxxili. De Eugenia.
Siracusas, sio burg.6 Argumenta, searwe.
Successibus, spedum. Ob potiorem, fore meran.
Rerum, ceatta. Caccabatum, besciten, behrumod.
 Distratio, bibyegong. Atramentum, sweartnesse.
_ Marsupia, siodas. 30 Basterne, scrides.
Acri, grimme, angere, sorge. Uehiculo, fore.
_ Lenonum, sponera. Pedisequis, degnum.
| Atras offulas, das sweartan sneda.7 Spadonibus, afyrdum.
Resine, scipteran. Rassis, scorenum.'®
 Tabuerunt, dwinan. 35 Fortuis, semnendlice.'®
Predo, hiopere. Casibus, wyrdum.
Archiparatta, heahsedeof.8 Adempiam, genumene.
* Aldh. pellexerint. R. W. norance of the glossator. (Aldh. Soroastrem.
? Aldh. destinatus. R. W. R. W.)
* Read augusta. R. W. 1° Aldh. schematizarunt. R. W.
* Aldh. nec aera testularum fragmina. “™ Aldh. adhibitis. R. W.
R. W. % Aldh. in eluctabile. R. W.
* Aldh. contribuli. R. W. 8 Aldh. exorcismo catechizatus, R. W.
4 Aldh. Syracuse oppidum. R, W. “ Aldh. bis seni uel dis terni. R. W.
* Aldh. atre picis offulas. R. W. 18 Aldh. refragator. R. W.
* Aldh. archipirata. R. W. © Aldh, fauorabiliter. R. W.
° This no doubt means Zoroaster, though 7 Read oraculum. R. W.
the title given to him is not easily ex- 8 Read rasis. R. W.
plained, and must have arisen from the ig- Read fortuitis, R. W,

508 MISCELILANEOUS GLOSSES. 509
Proserpinam, hicra deofla sum. xxxvi. De Scolastica ae Cristina,
Minerua, dea artium. simulque, Dorohthea,
Adplaudunt, gulpan. Tiara, het. XLVI
Stolida consulta, pa dolan redas. Fulminauit, lixte. :
Scrupulum, incan. 5 Inportune, gemalice.s

Municipium, burh. Reluctaretur, widstod.

Sub modio, under mittan. Eliciens, abeodende.

De sceuo, of dem sceolan.t Minaci, oferlifiende.

Infamis, orretscipe. Proceritate, heannesse.

Clanculis, dem diglum. 10 Porrectam, areredne.

Deliberaret, gepohte. Forti, festes.

Traducta, georwyrded. Liture, liming.

Inpingere, xtspornan. Indegitamentum, para boca.9
Catapultas, speru, boltas. Sudibus, stengum.

Recorsit, eft ongenbigde.* 15 Uenusti, pes fegeran.

Antiquitus, gefyrn. Obstipuit, ofercymen wes.!?
Caleor, spura.® Carminibus, galdorledum.

Dissona, ungerade. Inritabant, gremedan.

Quadrare, gefegan. Catastarum, witacyn.

Fotam, sealfode. 20 Adplicuit, todyde."*

xxxiiiii. De Agne. Naufragauerunt, gedurfan.'?
Celibes, hegstealdman. XLV. Deprauandam, to mishwofenum.
Enulatores, onhyrgendras. .  Ordine prepostero, onwendedre ende-
Uernantibus, grenum. byrdnesse.

Frontosa, sio balde. 25 Pretorium, domhus, domern.
Dedecus, wnwilites. Cauillatione, geslitgliwe.
Donatur, geweordad. Prosperare, feran.’*
Adgrederetur, gecode. Gannature, bysmires.'4
Porecinus strepitus, pet symlice Indolem, giogude. XLVI.
gestun.! 30 xxxvii. De Constantine.
Cumiterio, byrgenstowe.> Pretorum, ealdormanna.!®
Caraxabimus, writat. Subarrauit, geweddade.'®
[xxx]v. De Yecla et Eulalie. Apparatu, geprece.
Incommodum, unbehefe. XLVI. A circio, nordan.
Dusit, tealde.6 35 Traciarum, traciana,!7
Clatros, pearrocum. Passim, wide. SUI.
Enixte, geornlice.7 xxxvili. De Eustochie.
Pyrarum, bela. Scedulis, bocum.'®

* Aldh. dum sauo. R. W. 1 Aldh. obstupuit R. W

? Aldh. retorsit. R. W. 1 Aldh. applicauit. R. W.

* Read calcar. Cf. Aldb, R. W.  Aldh. naufragaucrant. R. W.

* Aldh. porctnus paganorum strepitus. 13 Aldh. properare. R. W.

R. W. % Aldh. gannitura. R. W.

* Aldh. cemiterio. R W. 'S Aldh. procerum. R. W.

© Aldh. dui, R. W. 16 Ajdh. subarrarct, BR. W.

7 Read enixe. Cf. Aldh. BR. W. 17 Ajdh. Thraciarum. R. W.

* Aldh. opportune. KR. W. 18 Aldh schedulis. R. W.

° Aldh, indigamentorum. R, W.

510 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 511
Seaies terna, eahtatiene. Portunalia, oppe wt ydum weeran
Interpres, wealhstod. gesette.!®
Pertessum, adrotsumis.' Et suouetaurili,* odda pa pe cet pem
Insigniter, merlice. geldum per wes swin and scep.
Edidit, awrat. 5 Numina, gield.
Caracteribus, angelicnessum.” Melodiam, sealmsang.
Lepida, getinge. xl. De Rufina et Secunda.
Citro pontum, ofer see? Incanduisset, onhatode LI.
Tenacissimis, prem festestum. Manipulares, cempan.
Bilancee, twyfealdre heolra.* 10 Laturi, prowigende.
Trutinabat, heolrode aweg.° Fumigabundis, pes stincendan.
Ad stridule, to swege.6 Nardi pistici, pere getreowan ele-
Remugiet, hlowed. sealfe.
De Chione et Hierene et Agape. Emersisse, pe hie uparisan.
_ Rusticis, cierliscum. L. 15 Elisa, asliden.
_ Arcersire, geladian." Sine murmura, butan hearmheort-
_ Exorbitantes, aswifende. nesse.
 Carybdibus, swelgnessum.$ xli. De Anatholia et Uictoria.
Non dissona, nales ungerade. Decriminalia, heafodfretennesse.™*
Cirris, loecum. 20 LiL
Consparsione, gecynde. Perhiscelides, ornamenta crurum,’®
In luxum, in lust. Matricularis, pearfum.'®
_ Labescit, aglad. Prodiga, pes stryndedan.
Suppellex, geloma. Liberalitatem, rumheortnesse.!7
Lebetes, hweres. 25 Pitacia, erendbec.'®
Bassiare, cyssan. Lupercalibus, pem gildendum. Lu-
Instinctu, tyhtnesse. perci uocantur illi sacerdotes qui
Debachatus, wedende. ministrant deo qui uocatur Pan.
LIudificatus, weged. Ad agapem, to elmessum.
Effeta; ealde.9 30 Basilisci, pere needran.
Habitudine, onsiene. Flara, bledas.'®
Artubus, liodum. Calamitosam, |et earme.°°
Inceptis, onginnissum. Orbitationibus, biastepnessum.*!
Lupercia, xt dam gilde.'° Arceretur, bewered were.
Competalia, et pam wega geletum 35 Diane, ricenne.”®
weeran.! Larbatos, hreofe.?4
1 Aldh. pertasum. R. W. S Aldb. et suowetaurilia. R. W.
? Aldh. characteribus. R. W. * Aldh. discriminalia. R. W.
* Aldh. citra pontum, R. W. * Aldh. periscelides. R. W.
* Aldh. bilance. R. W. *° Aldh. matriculariis. RW.
® Aldh, trutinabit. R. W. 7 Aldh. liberalitate. R. W.
° Aldh, ad stridule buccine sonum. ** Aldh. pittacia. R. W.
R. W. ** Aldh. flabra. R. W.
7 Aldh. accersiri. R. W. *° Aldh. calamitosum. R. W.
° Aldh. charybdibus. R. W. 1 Aldh. flebilibus orbitatis questibus.
° Aldh. effecta. R. W. R. W.
*° Aldh. lupercalia. R. W. *? Cf. pag. 387 1. 88. Cf. Kemble, the
 Aldh. compitalia. R. W. Saxons in England, Book, chap. XII. R.W.
™ Aldh. portumnalia. R. W. *8 Aldh. laruatos, R. W.

512 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 513 |
Camitiales, gebracseoce.' Subripuit, forsteel.
Cantando, galdorgalende. Colerata, geelged.§
Spiris, hringum. Probrum, edwit. LVI.
Capulo tenus, od hielt. Ostentationis, gylpes.
Adacto, purhwrecen. 5 Prostitutis, forlegesum.
xlii. De Losep et Dauid et Samson — Sumptuosius, behy delice, wistfullice.
et aliis plurimis. Inlicias, spones.
Exosa, scounga. Lin.  Setosa, dy hrisehtan, pa herihtam,
Conspiratio, facengeewis. Conquilii, telges.®
Argutis, pem swogendum. 10 Bacciniorum, bergena, odde ofeta.
Fidibus, strengum. Per hironiam, purh hucx.'° .
Mandibulas, cinban. Crocea, pa geolwan. |
Rictus, ceaflas. Luto, wyrmaman.'!
Frustatim, in stiece. Sandix, wyrt, odde wad,
Crista, cambihte. 15 Adinuentionibus, aspyrgengum.!®
Cassidis, helme. Plastica, gewyrce.
Thoraca, byrne.? Infectum, ungeffremed.
Falarica, spere. Refragatur, widsoc.
Umbonis, randbeages. Iurisperitorum, refborena.
Parma, scylde. 20 Inproperasse, pet hie setwite.
Singulariter, anwiglice. Cum infami eulogio, mid py une-
Congrediens, feohtende. pelan gidde.'®
Utpote, swa hit wes. Prouerbiorum, gydda.
In basileon, on cyninga bocum. Manicas, slyfan.
Percéllitur, slegen.> 25 Redimiculo, cyre, widdan."
Pelicatus, cyfeshade.* Mitre, hettes.
Eneruiter, waclice. Theristotedes,'*op pe wudewan gierela,
Flaminium, biscophade. Liv. LVI,
Ratam, pa gerisnan.> Solario, cenaculo.
Ostro, telgedeage. 80 Equitatum, etrodum.'®
Simultate, unsibbe. Abra, pinnenne.
Cum fratrueli, mid brodorsuna. Conopio, nette, fleogryfte.!7
Meri, wines. Uecordem, gemededne.
Nenias, bismerleod. Elisisse, ascrencan.'® :
Elucubrate, py ahlytrede.¢ 35 Insolentiam, pa forwenedan. LYIIL,
xliii. De uestimento uirginum. Subucula, hacele.
Delicatis, wrestlicum. LY.  Bysina, hwit.!®
Legulam, hringan.? Tachinthina, hewen.®°
* Aldh. comitiales. R. W. 1.18. R. W.
? Aldh. thorace. R. W.  Aldh. adinuentionum. R. W.
2 Aldh. percutitur. R. W. 13 Aldh. eum infami prouerbiorum elogio.
* Aldh. pellicatus. R. W. R. W.
* Aldh. rata. R. W. ‘* Aldh. redimicula. R. W.
© Aldh, elucubratam. R. W. * Aldh. theristro. R. W.
7 Aldh. ligulam. R. W. *© Aldh. equitatu. R. W.
® Aldh. colorata. R. W. ‘7 Aldh. conop@o. R. W.
° Aldh. conchilii. R. W. *© Aldh. elicisse. R. W. ‘
* Aldh, per ironiam. RB, W. "© Aldh. bissina. R. W.
“ Aldh, ecroceo . . . luto. Of. pag. 426 2 Read hiacinthina. R W.

514 |. MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 515
_ Capitium, healsed. Fenus, hiereborg.
_ Manice, slyfan. Tricatio, ylding.
_ Ambitiuntur, ymbhumne.t Rimosa barca, pxt cinene scip.
_ Antic, loceas. Quassata, geenysed.
Timponum, punwongena.? 5 Sero, sid. j
Pulla, pa blacan. Adtigisset, gylap, gelamp.'”
Mafortibus, scyfelum. Carbasa, segelbosmas.
Cedunt, rumad, steppad. Antemnarum, segelgyrda.
Uitiarum, nostlena. Sinuata, gebesmed.
Nexibus, salum. 10 Sylocismi, pxre uncyste.!!
Talo tenus, odan cleow. Inter Scyllam, betwuh pa freenesse-
Falconum, wealhhafeca. stowe.
Cauannarum, ulena. Barbarismi, pa uncyste.
Obunca, pa crumban. Indisruptis, untoslitenum.
Fuscinula, awel. 15 Rudentibus, wederapum.
Arpagine, sutunge. . Laudacismi, dere uncyste.!?
Sorices, mys. Antefatis, werwordum.
Puplicatam, pa geopenedan.’ Non obgerit,"* ne swyltep.
Indisciplinatorum, undeawfulra. Non tricauerit, ne leted.
Sugillatinis, telnesse.* 20 Inbricibus, hroftighum.
Malagma, \excesealfe. Lepida, pere getyngan.
Purulentis, gewyrms’.® Discrepent, seadad.
Experiamur, onfinden. Sapa, ciern.'
Stipulatorem, trymmend. E merulento, a from pam hlutrum.'®
Libida, pa wannan. 25 Temeto, wine.
Uibex, lel. Fucorum, telga.
Assentatrix, sio gebpafigende. Fabrefactis, gesmicerade.
Exacerbauit, gremede. Iconisma, gelicnes.
Passiua, sio wide. Stemmate, wlite.
Rethoricamur, we sprecap.® 30 Uersor, hwerfigo.
Gratuita, sio uncype. Uacillare, wine wealtigan.
Subpeditat, fultumap. Triste, pet swere.
Philosophare, pet we sprecen,’ Deuote, holdlice.
Yppone regensi, pere burge.® Turificatur, onsegd sic.'®
Tectis, bedeahtum. 35 Matertere, modrigan.
Suatim, hiora deawe.9 Heliev, id est, Ierusalem.
Infesta, pa teonfullan. Auroresceret, lihte,
Antiquartis, writerum. Extemplo, sona.
Tricabatur, geeylded. Quasi ara, swa wefesten.
* Aldh. ambiuntur. R. W. * hiora i. e. swina deawe. R. W.
? Aldb. temporum. R. W. © Aldh. attigit. R. W.
* Read publicatam. R. W. ™ Aldb. soloecismi. R. W.
* Aldh. sugillationis. R. W. % Aldh. lautacismi. R. W.
| *So has the MS. Cf. gewyrmsi pag. S Sic MS. R. W.
| 467 1. 20. RW. M Read dulcisapa. K. W.
° Read rhetoricamur. R. W.  Aldh. a merulento temeto. R. W.
7 Aldh. philosopharé decreuimus. R.W. ‘© Aldh, thurificatur. R. W.
° Aldh. Hipponensis. R. W.
34

hi
{
516 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES 517
Lditissimae, et hiehste,* Deuotaturus, wiergende.
Ansatas, speru. Plectra, sceacelas.
Tueri, scylded beon. Fidibus, strengum.
Subsistentia, aweosung. Follibus, bylgum.
Ualete, wesap hale. 5 Capsis, cystum,
Alumne, fosterbearn.” Carbo, gled.
Tirones, compan. Calculus, cealestan.
Per sudum, purh pa hlutran. Cualbas,'* dureras.'°
Confer, forgeaf. Decies senes, id est lx.
Predo, sceapa. 10 Depromsit, ypte.
Pellax, frecness oppe se beswicenda. Garbas, manipulas, sceafas.
Rabula, se risenda. Stirpis, owesmum.
Raptor, strudend, odde gripend. Tana, heargas.
Bis dicere, pet he tuwa cwede. Ilia, innepas. “
Pup pup, teg teg. 15 Extirpans, awyrtwalad.
Bibramine, scilbronge.® Peculantis, pos scion.”
Fiant prosa. Obridzum, smete gyldne.'®
(x)lilii. De metro incipit. Punicio,"* dy brunan odde py brun-
Inbribus, scurum. basewan.
Demis, nimis. 20 Linctura, telgunge.
Cynthia, luna. Murice, wyrman.
Prepedibus, hradum.* Concineasque, and pa weolocreade.!®
Rostris, ceaflum. Puluerulenta, dy dystgan.
Pipant, pritigead. De cortice corni, of corntreowes rinde.
Modulare, singan.* 25 Dactulus, palmappel.’®
Lrati, gewrites.6 Unio, searogemme.
Ruricolas musas, landelfe. De conca, of muscellan.!* ,
Castalidas nymphas, dunelfa. Sablo, molde, sande.
Elicona, swa hatte sio dun." Bratea fila, se gyldna dried.
Delo, swa hatte pet ealand-® 30 Bino uersu, py twyfealdan fere.'°
Latamina, mater solis.8 Sena paradigmata, siexfealdre anlic-
Argutus, se gleawa. nesse.
Garrula, sio hlydende. Palmite, wintwiges.
Cola, idem membrum.® Antes, ordines.
Commata,® pars membrim.\” 35 Ligustra, hunigsuge.
Bombosa, pare ravigendan. Per dumos, purh greefan.
' Aldh. editissima. R. W. ' So has the MS. R. W.
? The following words are taken from ™ Aldh, ualuas. R. W.
the poetical ‘De Laudibus Uirginum, Pre-  Aldh, petulantis. R. W.
fatio ad Maximam Abbatissam.’ R. W. i.e. beaten gold, It meant the thin
* Aldh. wibramine. R. W. Plate-gold which was much in use for
* Aldh. prepetibus. KR. W. ornamenting rich dresses, and other pur-
° Aldh. modulari. KR. W. poses, during the Frankish and Anglo-
* Ald. fasti. R. W. Saxon periods. (Aldh. obrisum. R. W.)
7 Aldh. Helicona. R. W. 1 Aldh. puniceo. R. W.
* Aldh. quem Delo peperit Latona.  Aldh. coccineosque. R. W.
R. W. © Aldh. dactylus. R. W.
* Aldh, Colaque cum pedibus pergant 7 Read concha. R. W.
et commata ternis, R. W.

518 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES, 519
| Circio, hringsete.1 Carpere, telan.
| Fibula, sigel. Plectit, witnad.
Bullis, bylum. Scurrarum, seeawera.
Petala, goldfyld fel. Speculum, sunscin.
| Yergore, hyde. 5 xlvii. De Hieremia.
Saliginis, selenum.? Dignissimus, se weorpesta.
Membrarum, filmena.3 Hirsutus, ruh.
Ex centro, of midle. Mirteta, wirgrefen.
Anthlia, bledhweogl.4 Flaminibus, episcopis.
Mergula, scealfor. 10 Sacelli, hearges.
Alis, fiderum. Belis, water.'?
Grauculus, hroc.’ Massam, elyne.
Leti, wyrdenna. Atram offam, pa sweartan snd.
Occas, fealge. xlviii, De tribus pueris.
Uersiculos, hweorfende.® 15 Fistula, wistle
Teretes cycli, pes sinewealtanhringes.  Puberibus, onihtum.
| Fulua, sio fealwe. Cultum, gield.
Uenustas, fregernes. Nodarent, bundan.
Porro, fior. Nequibat, non potuit.'®
Molimine, searwe." 20 xlix. De Danielo.
Strophosa, py feenan.s Ignicomis, se fyrfeaxna.
Rictu, ceafle. Sedans, gestilde. ©
xlv. De Elia. 1. De Iohanne Baptista.
Tenia, honore uel cyninggicrela.? Prodat, cyded.
Actus, gebeded. 25 Adfatim, ubertim.
Bigis, cratum. Obstrusus, deagol.
Obstacula, widsteallas. Frugi, abstinentie.
In Tempis, on scenfeldum.!® Ocula, sprece.'* 7
Cruda, dura. Adultus, geweaxen.
Bustis, byrgelsum. 30 Maturesceret, weox.
Antichristus, contrarius Christo. Natrix, ewip.””
Bucula, cealf. Potior, mara,
xlvi. De Eliseo. Marmora glauca, pa hewnan ss.
Bombis, hlowengum. Tomant, hlynredan.'®
Sacra, gield. 35 Conpellens, gretende.'"
Ultro, rede, Confertur, widermeten is.
— Lauta munia, pa clenan penunga. Ringescens, abolgen.'®
| Carismata, gyfa.'" Stomachatur, iersad,
1 Aldh, in circo, KR. W. terpreted the word by a general term
-? Aldh. salignis. R. W. signifying ‘bright fields.” (Aldh. in temp-
3 Aldh. membranarum. RB. W. lis paradisi. R. W.)
* Read antlia. R. W. Read charismata. R. W-.
’ Read graculus. R. W. 2 Aldh. Belis delubra nefandi. R. W.
© Aldh. wersicolor. R. W. 3 Aldh. non quibat. R. W.
7 Aldh molimina. R. W. Read oracula. R. W.
® Aldh. strophoso rictu. R. W. *’ Read Matrix. R. W.
° Aldh, tenuia. R. W. z ‘© Read tonant. R. W.
*° The glossator has here taken the clas- 7 Aldh. compellans. R. W.
sieal beauties of Tempe as a name for all 'S Aldh. ringens. R. W.
localities of extreme beauty, and has in-

+
520 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 521
Consanguine, pere gesibbau.' Conflictum, geflit.

Incestans, gewemde, Certantes, flitende.
Lances, beodas. Certamine, on geflite.
Uectant, feredan. Molosos, rothundas.°
Per natam, per filiam, 5 Consternati, ofercymene.
Scenica ludicra, py pleglican plegan. —-Ferit, sloh.
Vectifera walue, pre forscytlican Ewertis, onbundon.’”
dura.” Armento, hry dero.
Crustra, clusterlocu.® Culcita, bedde.

li. De Iohanne Euangelista. 10 Rugosa, pere gehrumpnan.
Ingurgitat, weted. In extasi, in modes heahnnesse.
Salebroso, pwyresfura. Deformem, atole.

Armonia, swinsunge.* Turpabat, orretted.
Haustus, potus, Antisitus, eryeldo.™

lii. De Paulo Apostolo. 15 Conglobatur, somnode,'”
Paulus, pius, i. mirabilis, Gymnica, pa upwitlican,
Furuo, py sweartan. Grues, yeldo.'®
Ingeminans, twyfealde. Scobem, gilp.'

Expers, ordzle. Infindens, gerawende,

liii. De Luca euangelista. 20 Turribus, wighusum.'®
Quadrupes, cealf.® Ductum, gedon.,

Quattuor decies cum uii. degeret annos, lvi. De Ambrosio,

id est lex, et quattuor annos.® Hesperie, on Eotole.
Procurans, lecnende, In cunis, in cildcladum.
Ulcera, poccas. 25 Bis terna, sex.

Fotu, sealfe. Nutu, meahte.
Fidis, getreowum. Munia, degnunge.

litii, De Clementi. lvii. De Martino.

Equat, hine widermet.” Nec balsamorum, ne crismena.
Uisere, uidere. 30 Unctum, smyrenesse.
Censebat, scop. Faminem, sprece.'®

lv. De Siluestro. In ueribus, in snasum.'?
Cartis, bocum ® Exta, iesendne, isend.
Natricis, nedrum. Fomentat, lecnode.

Sacelli, huses, 35 Eatat, wes.

 Aldh. consanguinei. R. W. * The glossator translates scobem. Aldh,

2 aldh uectifere ualue. R. W. has scrobem. R. W.

* Aldh. claustra. R. W. ' The fortifications of the Anglo-Saxons

* Aldh. harmoniam. R. W. in their earlier times consisted merely of

° Aldh. quadrupedis uituli. R. W. an intrenchment, surrounded by an earthen

® Aldh, quatuor et decies etc. R. W. bank or mould. Hence they had to ex-

7 i. e. e@quat. R. W. . press their notion of a tower by calling

® Read chartis. R. W. ita wig-hus, or war-house. We have further

® So has the MS. Cf. pag. 4451.4. R.W. on the Latin castrum explained similarly

1 Aldh, exsertis. The MS. has bundn. R.W. by here-wie.

“ Aldh. ante situm. R. W. © Aldh. diserto famine. R. W.

 Aldh. conglobat. R. W. 7 Aldh. in werubus, R. W.

‘S Miswritten for caries. Cf. pag. 374 -

4. Re W.

522 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 523
lviii. De Gregorio. Germanas, getwisan.7
Sollers, gleaw. Chalibem, isern.
| Istuc, hidere. lxv. De Narciso.
| Libelli, pundes, Annua uota, pa gerlican gehtte.
lix. De Basilio. 5 Fontona, willican.s
Librate, ahiolorod. Edaces, pa eotendan.
Sceui, sceolan, Papirus, paper.
Digessit, awrat. In centro, in midle.
Cuderet, smidode, Scrofe, suge.
Inmunis, orceas. 10 Aruina, rysle.
Accola, buend. Fantam famam, pone cadegan
lx. De Antonio. hlisan.9
Conquirens, begitende. Concinnant, heapedan.
Diuexa, pa healdan.! Sugillent, teldon.
Cararit, ialde.? 15 Maculam, mal.
Gener, apum. Lacessant, wliten, oppe gremeden.
Ixi. De Paulo. Glaucoma, eagsiong.
Infidus, ungetreowe, Lippos oculos, pa surigan cagan.
Gestu, gebero. Crudescentes, pa swipfeormende.
Demebat, nom. 20 Frusta, aidlad.!°
Facescunt, swederedan.s Stellis, eagum.'°
Pro aprico, for dere wearman. Ora, andwlita.
Aliger, fiderberende. Occellorum, ztna.'! i
Eximia, fremere. Altor, fosterfeder.
lxii. De Hilarione. 25 Ixvi- De Anastasio.
Simulare, giliccetton. Ani, pes earses.
Perpendicula, waldred, pet is riht- | Apicum, plegena.
nesse. Seria, heorneste.
Cypsam, dracan.* Infamare, georrettan.
Turbida, drefende.® 30 Arceri, gefetadne.
Stricta lege, pere festan x. Porro, feorran.
Oras, obras, ofras, Inertes, earge.
Marmora, sz.6 Contrita, ofermened,
lxiii. De Iohanne. Mecham, forlegisse.
Uirgineo claue, mid dam unwemlican 35 Obuncat, ymbfeng.
cegan. Tecta et tigilli, hrofes.!
Ixiili. De Benedicto. Lustris, fifum.
| Faustus, felix. Uoluentibus, fealdendum.
Capisterium, hridder. Uetre, radores.'®
Uictoria, pa sigelican. 40 Lautos, clene.
_Rimarum, filmena, oppe cinena. Desistit, ablon.
1 Aldh. deueaa. R. W. 7 alah. germano. RoW. |
2 Gf. note 13, pag. 520. Aldh. has * Aldh. fontana. R. W.
curarit. R. W. ° Aldh, faustam famam. R. W.
* Aldh. fatiscant. R. W. ‘© Aldh. frustrataque stellis. R. W.
“ Aldh. gipsum. R. W. "Of. pag. 461 1, 28. R. W.
> Aldh. turgida, R. W.  Aldh. tecta tigilli. R. W.
* Aldh, marmora ponti. KR. W. *S Read @thra. Of. Aldh, BR. W.

|
{|
524 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 525
Ixvii. De Babyllo- Excubias, veaf."!
Cartula, boc.! Lodix, loda.
Excubias, weecan. Ni forsan, nimde wen were.
Non cunctante, ne tweoge. Restes, rapas.
Stemmate, frtenisse. 5 Suras, sconca.
Absidan, cleofan.? Cipporum, cospa.
Pullis, besmitenum. Turgida, pa toswolnan.
Inflictis, onslegium.® Findit, toslaf.
Inuestis, ungebyrd.4 Lotia, hlond.
Effebi, geongan. 10 Lictor, pegn.
Ouantes, gaudentes. Putenti, pere fulan.
Ixviii. De Cosmi et Damiano. Buculam, stire.
Urbene, mid dam getingeline.® Byrse, hyde.”
Groceos, pa geolwan.6 Arta, mid pa nearwan..
Gemellos, getwysan. 15 Inpiger, unsleac. *
Curam, lecedom. Oppetere, gecrong.'®
Luscos, wenige. Dehiscit, tocinet.
Pellantes, adrifende." Emersit, aras.'4
Strabos, sceolige. Habenis, salum.
Marsupia, seodas. 20 Yomis, bocum.
Farsa gorgoneis, acrumne pam helli- Ixx. De Juliano.
cum.8 Stricto, getogene.
Proto, pere xrestan.? Dialectica, wordlocum.
(Ixix.) De Crissanti. Rethoricis, pem getingelicum.'®
Indolis, geogode. 25 Diui, godes,
Donatus, forgifen. Nutum, willan.
Puber, geong. Lectum, bedde.'®
Nanctus, begytende. Dote, weotoma.
Ultro, bewillan, selfwilles. Rigidus, anwille.
Excussit, framswengde. 30 Facessit, fremede.
Taculatas, pa flanihtan. Direzit, onsende.
Lentescunt, toadan, tedan.'? Cenabium, mynsterlif.!7
Uestalis, gydenlic. Gurgustia, mynsterlif.
Ueneris, lustes. Discriminet, scadet.'°
Numina, gield. 35 Ordo, bade.
Ueste, gydene. Limen, duru.
Neuum, wom. Nodosa, py ostihan.'®
Maculam pullam, pone sweartan Monoptalmi, aneges.'®
speccan. Forti, py festan.
* Read chartula. R. W * Aldh, tempore proto. R W
? Read absidam. R. W. © gy has the MS, R. W.
% The MS, has onslegii, R. W. 1 Aldh, exuuias. R. W.
* Aldh. in westes. R. W. 2 Aldh. birsa. R. W.
° Aldh, urbanus. R. W. ‘3 Aldh, oppeteret. R. W.
° Read croceos. R. W. “ Aldh. emerserit. R. W.
* Aldh. pellentes. R. W. % Aldh. rhetoricas. R. W.
"In Aldhelm we do not meet with farsa © Aldh, lecto. R. W.
gorgoneis. gorgoncis is used pag. 166 1. 17 Read coenobium. R. W.
11; farsa (marsupia farsa) p. 165 1. 35, ® Aldh, nodoso, R. W.
Aldh. ed. Giles). R. W. © Read monophtalmi. R. W.

526 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 527
Inspirans, onspecende. Procurans, begende.
Minerua, dea artiun. Rotante, prawende.
Nec Bachus, ne wines god. Molam, hweorfan.'!
Crustis, ornamentis. Discifer, discberend.'*
Tesellum, teslum.' 5 Crusta, hlaue.'*
Neptunus, deus aquarun. Amens, gemed.
Alcidis, Helcol.? Luxerunt, weopan.
Centauri, pes centaures. Fata, wyrde.
Caci, cacuses. Consulta, redas.
Claue, stenge.? 10 Ixxii. De Apollonio.
Oramina, gebedo. Suppea, acumba.'* ‘
Catax, sio healte.* Signa, gelicnessa.
Statis, welfyl.> Conpeta clausa, pa belocenan yndan-
Peruzotos, giond pa burh.® wega.!®
Dagon, swa hatte se god. 15 Friens, brytende.'®
Uulsum, abrogden. Lis, gecid.
Lutea, pam geolwum. Bellona, weleyrge.
In diuos, in god. Infecit, geblond.
Cassata, aidlad. Classica, swege.
Toppiter, punor.” 20 Martem, gefeoht.
In Latio, in Eatole. Incentor, tyhtend.
Demptis, genumenum. Pignora, wed.
Pluton, deus inferni. Adsciscere, gelapgan.
Falsato, py leasan. Misellis, earmum.
Arcadie, pare megpe. 25 Geruli, berend.
Glus, lim. Turtas, hlafas.*"
Pangit, fagde. Colobostrum, beost.!®
Caicis, limes. Lenticule, croges, oppe ampellan.
Quadratur, gefegde feoperscette.s Ixxiii. De Hieronimo.
Fascia, sweopolas. 30 Clancula, pa diglan.
Postunus, unlaf.® Bargina, pa eldeodigan,'®
Madentia, pa panan Elicuit, gerehte.
Callosi, hreofe, odde wearrihtum.'? Commentis, trahte.
Ixxi. De Amos. ; Enumerans, arimende, i. de in-
Nilotica, sio Aigiptisce. 35 — lustribus.
Frondosis dumis, pem gehilmdum Aprum, eofor.
grefum. Saltu, wudu.
* Aldh. tessellis. (Giles lesellis) teslum © Aldh. calloso. R. W.
miswritten for ceflum? BK. W. 1 Aldh. molem. R. W.
? aAldh. Alcides. R. W. *? Phe glossator translates discifer. Aldh.
* Aldb. clauam, R. W. has piseifer. R. W.
* Giles has cutaz. R. W. ** Aldh. crustula, R. W.
° Aldh, stragis. R, W. “ Aldh. stuppea... uelamina. R. W.
* Aldh. per Azoton, R. W. © Aldh. compita clausa. R. W.
7 Read Iupiter. R. W. ** Read fricans, R. W.
° Cf. fiperfot = four-footed, quadruped. Read tortas. R, W.
R. W. * Read colostrum. R. W.
° For posthumus, a posthumous child. ™ Read peregrina or peregrinas. R, W.

528 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES, 529
Carolios, unkere.! i Per deuia, purh westen. |
Dilubra, gicld.? Creuere, gesion.

Ixxiiii. De sancta Maria. Curis, sorgum.

Proco, brydguman. Casibus, gegongum.
Feta, eacene. 5 Euo, yldo. |
Salamonis, in Hierusalem.* Ixxx. De Agnen. |
Puerperium, hysebeord. . Fasce, gegyrlan.
Labe, womme. Togatus, gegyred.
Ixxv. De Cicilia.. Uisco, fugellime.
Uiuacem, pet lifigende. 10 Auceps, fugelere.
Ludrica, plegan.4 Subarrauit, geweddade.
Bassia, cossas. Ditis, helgodes.
Puerio, py pueriscan.> Gestu, gebernessum.
Inlexit, beswac. Ixxxi. De Tecla.
Leuirum, tacor. 15 U[U|lcanus,® fyr, obpe fyresgod,
Luendi, prowgende. hellesmip.

Ixxvi. De Agapem. Won usquam, neowerno, nawern. \
Effarier, asecgan. Scammate locus, on gewinstowe. |
Pipillis, papillis, breostum, pet is, Ixxxi(i), De Eulalie. |

foreweardum.® 20 Satagit, gernde.
Torribus, brandum. Maniplis, heapum.
Trinacrie, Sicilie, id est Pachmus. Ixxxiii. De Scolastica.
Peleros, Lybiis. Ex scola, of scole.
Cluris, epelum.7 Uoto, gyrnesse.

Ixxvii. De Lucia. 25 Conpellere, pet hio gebedde.'®
Patula, pa ruman.$ Ixxxiii(i). De Constantia.
Altercaretur, cidde. Peripsema, geswepa, genswepa.
Lenonum, sponera. Cursant, pocerodan.

Crepitat, rescetted.® Probo, gecorenum.
Nodatis, gecnyttum. 30 Satrape, gesidas.
Modulator, singe. Inertam, pa eargan.! .

Ixxviii. De Justina. Ocius, rade.

Astus, bred. Ixxxv. De Constantino.
Nugaci, py unnyttan. Exemplo, sona,!®

Scemmatizans, liccettende.'° 85 Pretor, ealdorman.

Expertur, onfindende.'! Nodos, bende.

Usquam, ohwer. Tedasque, and biernende speld. .

lxxix. De Eugenia. Compturum, gefretwadne.

Reboat, onhwiled. Erepta, pa etgenumenan.
Refeilit, beswac. 40 Facessunt, fremmap.

‘1 do not find this word in Aldhelm, 5 Aldh, patulas. R, W.

R. W. ° Aldh. crepitabant. R. W.

? Aldh. delubra. R. W.  Aldh. schematisans. R, W.

° Aldh. Solymis. R. W. " Aldh. expertus. R. W.

* Read ludicra. R. W. ™ So has the MS. R. W.

° Aldh. Pierio, R. W. *% Aldh. subnixis precibus gestit com-

® Aldh. papillis. R. W. pellere uirgo. R. W.

* Here and pag. 374 1. 29 read claris. Read inertem. R. W.

Cf. Aldh, R. W, ° Read extemplo. R. W.

530 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 531
Lacessat, slitep.' Ciclades, gegirelan.
Conpressit, pyde. Ixxxviiil. De Rufina et Secunda.
Dramate, py brydelican gewrite,? id  Adgreditur, onginned.
est, mutatio personarum, ut est Rugis, hrypellum.'°
Cantica Canticorum. 5 Calce, stige.'
Digessit, gerehte- Fimi, scearnes.
Faminem, sprece.® In thermas, on bede.
Argolicas, pa Creacisean. Fax, fecele.
Opacis, pem diglum. Scopuli, stanes. ~
Pelasgos, pa Creaciscan. 10 Planca, weel.'?
Pinguntur, awriten weran. Nat, swam. e
Lectissima, pet gecoreneste. Chao, dimnesse gastas.'®
Propere, freofestlice. Ixxxix. De Anatholia.
Comis, feaxum. Latrat, beorced.
Ixxxvi. De Triades. 15 Depopulans, idende.
Titulis, wyrpmyndum. Ructabat, blew, odde roccette.
Carperrabat, geniclede. Incultis, unbeganum.
Segmentata, golde siowode. Eaulat, wreclastode
Innuba, unhemedo. Uibrabat, bliccette.
 Buccis, mupum. 20 Lacerti, earmes.
| Gramate, gewrite.* Callosa, pa wearrihtan.'*
 Eximiam, pet fremicle. Scatens, weallende.
Commate, gewrite.® Consulis, gearcyninges.
 Certa, gewis. Artis, nearewum.
 Acerra, stete, uel gledfate. 25 Butra, dysige.'®
Ixxxvii. De Chione et Agape et Marsum, wyrmgalere.
Hierene. Toruam, pa unhieran.
Bernas, peowenna.° Trritat, gremede.
Pellaz, leas. In spira, in hringe.
Misellis, earmum. 30 Glomeravit, ymbhringde,
| Calcabis, bwerum.7 Cursum, hredlice.'®
| Deluditur, weged wes. Eliminate, adrifene.'*
| Larbam, be colan, egesgriman.§ Fatescunt, geswederiad.'®
Fantasma, scin, idem et nebulum. Castra, herewic.
Fautor, fuitumend. 35 Classica, sweg.
Quirent, mehton. Digessit, gerehtum,"®
Larbata, se unfegera. Salpix, byme.?°
Autumant, wendan.° Martem, gefeoht.
|} Aldh. lacessit. R. W. ™ Aldb. plana carina. R. W.
|? Aldh. sponsali dramate. R. W.  Aldh. absque chao R. W.
* Aldh. famina. R. W. * Aldh. calloso. R. W.
* Read grammate. R. W. * Read bruta. R. W.
* Aldh. seribit commate uitam. R. W. © Read cursim. R. W.
* Read wernas. R. W. ‘7 The next glosses are taken from Ald-
* Read cacabis. R. W. helm’s poem: De Octo Principalibus Uitiis.
° cola, colla denotes a helmet. R. W. Read eliminata. R. W.
? Aldh. autumat. R. W.  Aldh. fatiscant. R. W.
™ Read hrympellum. R. W. 1 Read digestis. RK. W.
™ Read calle. R. W. * Read salpine. R. W.
35
|

532 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 533
Cassida, healm. Lentus, druncen, odde orsorg.
Thoracis, byrnan. Cient, hrewad.
Achile, seyld.t Celebrem, merne.
Duelli, gefeohtes. Scarilitas, sceawendsprec.®
Macheram, sweord. 5 Nectantem, biddende.®
Senspatium, peohseax.? Philargiria, gitsunge.
Parmarum, scylda. Puplica,’ pa cynelican.
Vestudine, scyldrecan. Lita, atre gemeled.$
Contundunt, forstyntap- Periuria, manswara.
Sparorum, spera. 10 Hymenis, penninge.®
Macerare, megeregan, gehlenian. Clausam, pinge.'?
Uibice, lele. Credita, pa bebodenan.
Capessit, nam, hefde. Compilat, strad.'! |
Grassantibus, hidendum. Lincxere, liccigan.
Peruadens, purhferende. 15 Tabo, heolfe.
Ingluuiem, gifernesse. Sistin, hearnes.!®
Potestur, possum. Incursere, onslogan.'5
Falanx, feda. Arcibus, hrofum, oddde bigelsum.
Cetra, seyld. Numismate, mynete.
Lurcatur, freted. 20 Paradigmate, gelicnesse.
Gestit, gyrmed. Furiarum, hegtessa.
Extis, iesende. Gorgoneo, pem hellicum.
Farcire, acrymman. Contos, spreotas.
Prepinguibus, frefettum. Tessa, flanas."*
Gulosa, py frettan. 25 Ydris, waternedrum,'®
Ambro, gifre. Allecto, welcyrge.
Aristis, elguin. Ad scandala, to geswicum.
Eneruare, aslacige. Accidia, slecnes.'°
Pastinat, sette. Nouitatum, hereticorum.
Uite, wintreow. 30 Tiro, helme.!7
Ueretrum, scamescan lim. Pila, flanas.
Procaci, hwalle. Typhus, wlane.
Probrum, edwit. Gliribus, eglum.
Deuotaret, wyrgde.® Protus, ealdorman.
Defruti, cerenes. 35 Farsit, fylde.
Dapsilis, rwnheort. Scabra, unsmede.
Cenidos, atole.4 Uillicat, twiecad.!8
Auitum, yldranfeder. Ruminet, edreced, ceowep.
‘ Read ancile. R. W. " Read strad. R, W.
? The glossator translated semispata (se- ” So has the MS. hearnes (= raucedo)
mispatha), Aldh, se in spatium. R. W. is a curious translation of sistrum. R. W.
* Read deuoraret. R. W. Read incussere. R. W.
* Aldh, cinedos. R. W. “ Read tela. R. W.
° Aldh. seurrilitas. R, W. Read hydris. R. W.
* Aldh. nectentem. R. W. ‘© Read acedia (= cimyjdere). R. W.
7 So has the MS. R. W. '7 So has the MS. Cf. pag. 516 1. 7.
* Aldh. spicula lita ueneno. R. W. Rk, W. j
° Read nummis or nummi. R W.  Aldh. uellicat, R. W,
' Read eausam, BR. We

534 MISCELLANEOUS GLOSSES. 535
Cenosis, pem adlihtum. Acescatur, asurige.?
Uolutabro, sole." Malis, mestun.
Rumen, edreced roc. Antemnas, segelgyrdas.+
Porcaster, bearg. Rudentum, weterrap.
Obesus, fet. 5 Barca, scip.
Tuncis, rixum. Racemos, bergean. .
Filicumque, and fearnes. Capulus, holt.
Folliginis, bylgum.” Spinam, bodig.
Organa, peotan. Ocreos, banberge, scangebeorg.>
Ocius, citius. 10 Natrix, nedre.
Barbita bombis, organum. Ex herebo, of helle.®
1 aldh. uolutabri. R. W. in the margin, after this word: pa pe
? Read folligenis. R. W. wfre costes
* Aldh. ascescant. R, W. ° Read ocreas. R. W.
.* The seribe, or a scribe, has written ® So has the MS. R. W.
7

-
;
SXGISIEE
SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY

(OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY.)
Vertex, nol. Clunis, hupe.
Cer[uix], necca. Pulpa,....
Timpus, punwenge. Sura, sperlire.
Timpora, mo.” Crus, sceonke.
Mazxilla, leor. 5 Tibia, scine.
Facies, onsene. Talus, oncleou.
Palpebre, bre(awas). Pianta, fotwelm,
Pupilla, seo. Al(loz),toa.
Labium, weler. Ungula, hof, uel clau.
Labia, mo. 10 Diocesis, uel parochia, biscopriche.
Adeps, rusel. Heremita, westense(tla).
Aruina, ungel. Coniuna, imecea.
Uiscus, 2... Coniuges, wel coniugales, isinheowen.
Uiscera, mo. Coniugium, uel matrimonium,
Exta, permes. 15 sins(cipe).
Uina, elbowe. Castus, clene.
Femur, tel coxa, pih. Formosus, wel iwlitegod.

* The vocabulary given above, which  lipps, who printed a few copies privately. ¢
appears from the decadence of the gram- It there followed a copy of Alfric’s Gram-
matical forms, and from the orthography, mar, written in the same language, and
to belong to about the middle of the is an extremely curious monnment of this
twelfth century, is an abridgement of Nr. latter in its state of transition, It has been
X, It was discovered, in the fragment- carefully corrected in the present edition.
ary form in which it is here printed, on ? Mo, i. e. more, (ma in the purer
some leaves of vellum used as the cover Anglo-Saxon text,) is merely the mode
or binding of one of the old registers of of indicating the plural number.
Worcester Cathedral, by Sir Thomas Phil-

538 SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY, 539
Deformis, heowleas. Consiliarius, reedbora.
Decorus, wliti. Con{cio|nator, imotmon.
Sobole[s, uel] liberi, bearn. .  Operarius, wurhta.
Uictricius, stepfeder. Faber, uel cudo, smip.
Priuiuignus, stepsune. 5 Officina, smip(de).
Fileaster, stepa(oh )ter. Avrarius, mestlingsmip.
Nepos, neva. Arator, urpling.
Altor, uel nutritor, fosterfeder. Artifex, creftca,
Altrix, uel nutrix, fostermoder. Opus, were.
Alumnus, fostercild. 10 Opi[ fex], creftca.
Propinquus, mei. Architectus, eldest wurhtena.
Affinis, uel consanguineus, sibling. Amus, angel.
(Proge)nies, wel tribus, meip. Uenator, hunta.
Generatio, cunrun. Uena(bul)um, borsper.
Gener, opam. 15 Auceps, fuwelare.
Socer, sweor. Trapezeta,uel nummularius, munetare.
So(crus), sweger. Num{i]sma, munet.
Nurus, snore. Sollers, menituwe.
_ Princeps, aldermon. Iners, creftleas.
Dux, heretowa, uel letteow. 20 Nanus, dweruh.
Comes, aldermon, wel ireva. Fidis, (str)eng.
| Clito, xpeling. Tubicen, bemare,
Obses, gysel. Tibicen, pipare.
Primas, heavedmon. Musa, pipe, uel hwistle.
Satrapa, pein. 25 Fidicen, fipela.
Tudex, dema. Fistula, hwistle.
Miles, uel athleta . .., kempe Liticen, trup.
Procinctus, furding. Lituus, truphorn.
Edictum, iban. Poeta, scop, uel leopwurhte.
Uulgus, cheorlfole.t 30 (Mir )nus, uel scurra, gleomon.
Congregatio, uel contio, igederung. Mercator, uel negociator, mangare.
Conuentus, uel conuentio, imeting. Classis, scip(her)e.
Sinodus, sinop, uel imot. Remus, roper.
Dominus, uel herus, loverd. Remex, uel nauta, repra.
Materna,... . wif? 35 Gubernator, uelnauclerus, steor[mo]n.
Cliens, uel clientulus, inkniht.5 Proreta, ankermon.
Prora, per pe ankermon sit.
ed Puppis, steor(setl).
Antenna, seilgerd.
+. (wy)ln, wel pinen. 40 Uelum, seil, uel wahreft.
Oi{sios)....... Clauus, steorscofle, uel neil.
.... (unsprecen)de child. (Mala)gma, cliwa.*
Paterfamilias, hiredes loverd. Sartor, seamere,
1 Cf, pag. 309 1. 39. R. W. caused the lacuna indicated by these breaks.
2 Cf. pag. 309 1. 44. R. W. The lesser deficiencies are the result of
* The leaves of the MS. had been cut mutilations of the edges of the leaves.
at the top and bottom, when they were * Read clida. Cf. pag. 312 1. 10. R. W.
used to form the cover of a book, which

:

540 SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY. 541
Sartrix, heo1 Stimulus, gode.
Dispensator, dihtnare. Aculeus, sticels.
Dikuiso)r, delare, Circus, uel circulus, wipbe.
Pincerna, birle. Epistola, xrindiwrit.
Caupo, teppare. 5 Quaternio, cine.
Diues, weli. Planta, spelt.
Locuples, lond(spe)di. Diploma, bowa.
Inops, havenleas. Scedla, uel scedula, ymele.
Pauper, perfa. Pictor, metere.
Egenus, wedla. 10 Pictura, meting.
Fur, peof. Minium, teapor.
Latro, (se)apa. Gluten, lim.
Merx, ware. Sculptor, grafere.
Concors, ipwere. Grafium, gref.
Profugus, fleme. 15 Sculptura, gref.
Exul, utlawe. Agalma, onlicnesse.
Conten{tios|us, iflitful. Scalprum, uel scalpellum, gref[sex).
Iniuriosus, teonful.
Piger, slac. —
Hebes, dwes. 20
Parasitus, (leas)olecere. ... oleum,w....
Augur, wielare. (Luscus) uel monoptalmus, oneige(de).
Incantator, galere. ++. + + seuleigede.
Ueneficus, unlibwurhta. Lippus, sureigede.
| MaJleficus, ufeldede. 25 Mancus, onhende.
Magus, dri. Infirmus, untrum.
Phitonissa, wicche. £g(er), uel languidus, adlig.
Centurio, hundredes (eald)or. Paraclitus, frofergost.
Persecutor, ehtere. Paraliticus, bedreda.
Dispendium, uel damnum, hinp. 30 Leprosus, licbroware.
Jactura, lure. Lunaticus, monapsic.
Commodum, hinp. Demoniacus, deofelsic.
(Ar)milla, beah. Energuminus,. ..
Diadema, kinehelm. (Mor)bus, adl. hs
Capicium, het. 35 Pestis, ewuld.
Monile, mune, uel sweorbeah. Amens, uel demens, imundleas.
(Spi)nter, dale, uel preon. Rabidus, uel insanus,..- -
Fibula, oferfeng. +++. , Wodnesse.
Uitta, snod. Incolumis, isund.
Inauris, earpreon. 40 Frenetus,” pe pet puruh slopleaste
Indigena, uel incola, inlendise. awet.
Aduena, utancumen. Letargicus, unilimpliche slapel
Peregrinus, alpeodi. Peruigil, puruhwacol.
Messor, riftere. Pius, orfest.
Messis, irip. 45... ., (ar)leas.
Aceruus,, hreac, uel hupel. Famosus, hlisful.

* heo = she, i. €. a female seamer, wo- ? Read freneticus. RK. W.
man tailor, R. W. ‘ .

542 SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY, 543

Fama, hiisa. Coternix, ediscine.

Infamis, wnhlisful. Pullus, chiken, uel brid, uel fole.

Infamia, unhli(sa). Uespertilio, re(remus).

eee «we custis (Woetua), uel strix, uel bubo, ule.

Tenax, festhafol. 5 Graculus, roe.

Parcus, uncusti. Parrax, wremna.

Frugi, vel parcus, sparhende Apis, beo.

S(agax, uel gna)rus, gleaw. Fucus, dro(n).

Prudens, snoter . ++. (hyr)nette.

Imprudens, unsnoter. 10 Scarabeeus, scearnbudoa, uel budda.

Astutus, peti. Cinomia, hundesfliz.

Stultu(s), 2... Culex, stut.

(Ue)rax, sopfest. Cetus, ....

Ueridicus, sopsawel. ++. + sy MeBreswin.

Fallax, uel mendazx, leas. 15 Ysicius, wel salmo, lex.

Falsidicus, un(sopsawel). Taricus, uel illec, hering.

+. iwita. Fannus, vo(che).

Testimonium, iwitnesse, uelicupnesse. +. . , crabbe.

Cursor, runel. Polipes, loppestre.

Superbus, modi. 20 Murena, uel murenula, mereneddre,

+... (mo)dinesse. Bitho 0 oro

Humilis, edmod. Belua, eislic nuten on se oper on

Humilitas, edmodnesse. londe.

Aer, luft. Concha, scel

Auro, hwipa. 25 Fera, wilde d(eor).

Nimbus), scur. «+. (imenge)d hund and wulf.
| Procella, storm. Unicornis, uel rinoceron, uel mono-
_ Nubes, weolcne. ceron, onhurne deo(r).

Ver, leinten. (Me)lus, broc.

Autumnus, herfest. 30 Camelus, olfend.

Uernum temp(us),... . Onager, wilde assa.

Uernalis dies, \eintenlic dei. Elefans, y\p.

Cauma, sweoli. Dutrius, .. « «

Humor, wete. ~ +. +, beofer.

Sterilitas, un(westmbernes)se. 35 Lubricus, ongeltweeeche,

Fertilitas, westmbernesse. Capreolus, roadeor.

Color, bleo. Caprea, roa.

Ruber, read. «ee. , bucea,

Fuluus, uel flauus,.... Caprea, uel capella, got.

+. « fouh. 40 Damma, uel dammula, do.

Discolor, misliches bleos. Ceruus, heort.

Forma, heow. Cig. akin .

Fantasma, idwimor. Hinnulus, hind.*

Merul .. .., meav.1 Hedus, tiechen.

Turdus, ster. 45 Scroffa, suwa.

‘Read mergulus. R. W. * Read cerua, hind; hinnulus hind-
kalf. BOW.

544 SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY. 545
Aper, uel uerres, b(or). Caula, uel magudaris, caul.
+. , beruth,! Cresco, earse.
Uacca, uel bucula, ku. a
Iuuenencus,? steor. Artemisia, mugwurt. 4
Canis, hund. 5 Felterre, uel centaurea, eorpgalla. |
Molo(sus), Ambrosia,» . +. )
(Ru)beta, tadde. Hermodactula tidolosa, crowelec.
Lacerta, evete. Pastinaca, walmore. I
Stellio, slowurm. iol me
Locusta, greshoppe. 10(Agr)imonia, gorelifu.
Eilmaz)y. ... Rafanum, redic.
(Testu)do, pe pe havep hus. Filex, fearn. t
Eruca, meslesceafe. Carex, seg. 4
Cimex, mabe. Arbor, ....
Tine(a), .. 15 (Quere)us, uel ylex, oc
Taxus, iw. ©
= Fagus, boctreow.
Alnus, olr.
+... =. - wurt. Malus, zp(eltre).
Abrotanum, superwude. 20(Uir)ga, gerd.
Malua, hoc. Uirgultum, telgra.
Malua crispa, (symeringwu)rt. Granum, kurnel.
Sinitia, grundeswulie. Uleia, holi.
Anetum, dile. Populus, ....-
Polipodium, rifnesfot. 25..... palmtwig.
. «+, (d)eieseien. Genesta, brom.
Solsequium,....- Sentes, pornes.
+ e.s ge - sgnudes Frutex, pifel.
Betonica, peo lesse biscopwurt. Ramnus,...-
Ta(nacetum, hel)de. 80... ., bremelas.
Saxifragia, sundcorn, Apies, sps.
Gitsana, fearn. Morus, morbeam.
Calamus, uel canna,uel(arundo,re)od. — Uitis, wintreow.
Papauer, popi. Salia, wipi.
Absinthium, wermot. gore.e . ae
Urtica, netle. Lignum, iheawen treow.
Archan(gelica, blin)denctle. Ligna, drige wude.
Plantago, weibreode. Truncus, stoc.
Uinca, pervenke. Sita co a6"
Marrubium, hor(hune). 40 (Nemus), uel saltus, holt.
- 1... , streberiewise. Desertum, uel heremus, westen,
Modera, chicnemete. Uia, wei.
Apium, mere. Semita, pep.
Lappa, clote, uel clif.... ... . (buta)n weie.
+... , horselne. 45 Iter, sipfeet.
Sandix, wod. Patria, epel.
' An error of the scribe for baruh = ? So has the MS. R. W.
bearh? RB. W.

;
546 SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY. f47
Prouincia, uel pagus, scyr. Regula, regolsticke.
Mons, .... Lampas, uel lucerna, uellater(na),..
.... hul, vel beoruh. «o>. 0 rae
Uallis, dene. Lichinus, blacern.
Fenum, hei, wel grees. 5 Munctorium, irene tonge.
Ager, aker. (Gio(cca) a ae
Se(ges, asowen)zker. —_——-
Campus, feld. (Cingu)lum, uel cinctorium, uel zona,
Uadum, ford. gurdel.
Litus, sestrond. 10 Caliga, uel ocrea, hosa.
Alueus, stream. (Calciamen)tum, isco.
.. +. (burn)a. Suptalaris, swiftlere.
Riuus, rip. Tractorium, tigel.
Aqua, water. Flagrum, uel flag(ellum), ... .
Gutta, uel stilla, drope. 15 Dormitorium, slepern.
Stangnum,..... Stramentum, bedding.
(Amni)s, eaa. Stragula, wels ... «1
Flumen, flod, uel fluuius. +. +4, hwitel,
Ripa, step. Puluinar, pule.
Gurges, wel. 20 Sindo, scete.
Dacus,.... Fulcra, al bedreaf.
. + ++, (br)oc, wel burna. F(emoralia),. .«
_ Unda, upe. Perizomata, uel campestria, wedbrec.
. Domus, hus. Fimbria, fned.
_ Eelesia, chirche, uel ileafful(gader- 25 Colobi(um),..... . suric.
ung). Pedula, meo.
see ee eee. uel ilapung. Commissura, elut.
Pagina, tramet- Toral, roc.
Archa, scrin Tela, uel pep(lum),....
| Loculus, cheste, uel... . 30... ., cleowen. .
(Cal)ix, calic Colus, distzf.
Patena, huseldise. Fusus, spindle.
Crux, uel staurus, rod, Textrinum opus, teowli(e were).
| Cathedra,...+... soe Gong.
Fundamentum, grundwal. 35 Trabes, beam.
Pauimentum, uel solum, flor. . Tignum, refter.
| Tectum, pecen. Laquear, first.
|... . uel fornix, bigels. Cleta, hu(rdel).
Columna, sweor. (Refecto)rium, beoddern, uel ireord-
Clausura, loc. 40  unghus.
Clauis, keie. Tapeta, setreigel. .
|... . uel sera, hespe. Mensa,.....
Chorus, chor. Discifer, disepein.
Gradus, stepe. Minister, pein.
Indicatorium,..... 45 Lardum, spic.
(Legul)a, sticke. Puls, bri?
Yh pag. 228 11. RW. 2 Read pullus=brid. I, W.
36

548 SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY. 549
At... wee. Acus, sifepe.
(Me)do, meodu. Crib(ra) .. « ., sife.
Idromellum, uel mulsum, beor. Furfures, gruta.
Cicera, ilehes cunnes iw(rinc buton) Fez, drosne.

win one.! 5 Anfora, sester.
Manuterium, uel mantele, scet. Lagena, b(uk).
Cultellus, sex. . eymout:
Artaws, hh... 2 Cupa, tunna. |
... + 4 drunccuppe. Utensilia, andloman.
Anaphus, nep. 10 Suppellex, yddi(sce).
Patera, bledu. (Priclinijum, bur.
Andena, bron(disen). Solarium, upflor.
...+ + brond. Cardo, heorre.
Olla, crocke. Strigil, uel strigilis,.... +
Cacabus, chetel. 15 Risus, leihter.
Lebes, hwer. Tristis, wnrot.
Caro, flese. Mestus, dreori-
200 e006 Abundantia, . . ., inihstumnesse.
(Iu)tilis canis, brophund. Corpulentus, piccol.
Fuscinula, owul.® 20 Inualidus, unstrong.
Uneinus, hoc. Solli(tus), ». ++
Commedia), .... Amurca, it. fex olei, dersten.
Daps, sonde. Securus, orseoruh.
Ferculum, berdise. Tutus, siker.
Ueru, spite. 25 C(au)sa, intinga.
Assura, bred. Occasio, inca.
. +. +, irene ponne. Excusator, beladiend.
Frizorium, hursting. Mento, feh.*
Coctio, isod. =
Coctus, isod(on) .... 30 (Signife)r, tocnebora.
Frustum, stucche, Lancea, uel talarica,® spere.
Offa, snode. Uictor, sigefeit.®
Uestiarium, reilhus. Uictoriaee, ae
Sigillum,..... Capulum, hilta.
(Cel)larium, heddern. 35 Mucro, swerdes ord, wel opres
Celerarius, hordare. wepnes. .
Mola, cweornstan. Sica, lutel(swerd, wel han)d sex.
Ui(cius, bigleo)ue. Asta, uel quiris, sceft.
Pecunia, feoh. Telum, fio.
Marsupium, seod. 40 Fustis, sowel. _
Pistrinum, bakern. Uectis, steng.
For(nax, uel cliba)nus, oven. Faretra, «+. +
Pistor, bakestre. Clipeus, sceld.
Bracium, malt. Umbo, randbeah.

‘Of pag. 329 1.13. R. W. : 4 Of pag. 3321.9. R. W.

? Read k(nif), Cf. pag. 329 1. 17. ° Read falarica. R. W.

R. W. ° Cf. pag. 832 1. 29. R. W.
° Cf. pag. 3301.1. R. W.

\
550 SEMLSAXON VOCABULARY. 551
Atrium, cafertun, vel inburh. +++ + (me)regrota.
(P)undibalum, steflipere. Calex,' chaleston.
Ciuitas, chestre. Aries, rom.
| Ciuis, cheasteriwara, uel (portmon). Cimentum, andweore to walle.
(Prec)o, budel. 5 Cemen(tarius, walwur)hta.
Oppidum, festen. Rogus, od.
Castellum, wic, uel lutel port. Tocus, pleiga.
Urbs, bu(ruh). Prophanus, monful.
+....., buruhwita. Exosus, uel perosus, and(sete).
Suburbanus, pe pe sit buton pere10........ gleaw (geap?).?
buri. Simulator, heoware.
Car(cer),..... Hipocrita, licettere.
Oppidanus, pe pe on festene sit. Adulator, lufe(tere).
Uillanus, tunmon. (Adula)cio, luffetung.
Uillicus,...... 15 Deceptor, uel seductor, bewechend
(Or)tus, orchard. Proditor,.....
| Ortolanus, orchardweard. (Z)omicida, monsleia.
| Pomerium, epeltun. Patricida, matricida, fratricida, par-
Me. ---.-, wurtun. racida.
Predium, worpig. 20(C)icatria, dolhswape.
Ferramentum, tol. Truncus, heafedleas bodi
Securis, ex. Corpus, lic. P
Ascia, ade(sa). Funis,.....
+ +++ +, (na)vegar. (Cad)auer, lic, uel hold.
Terebro, ic bore. 25 Feretrum, bere.
Uanga, uel fossorium, spade. Defunctus, forpfaren.
Lico, becea. Longeuus,.+ +++.
.... (ston)ex. (Wobi)lis, epelboren.
_ Palus, pal. Ignobilis, unzpelboren.
Serra, snid. 30 Uilis, woclic.
Fala, sicol. Carus, leof.
Falcastrum, .... Limen, ofersleie, uel preoxwold
Acus, nelde.! Sciffus, lefel.
(A)uricalcum, goldmestling. Urceus, ceac.
Ais, bres. 35 Peluis,......
Electrum, smulting. (P)laustrum, uel carrum, wein.
Metallum, (ilches cunnes w)ecg. Currus, uel basterna, uel heseda, kert.
Massa, bloma, uel dah. Stabu(lum, fold, uel hu)s bi weige.
Lapis, uel petra, ston. Caula, loc
Fissura, heone.? 40 Tugurium, hule.
Marmor,.... Cella, cot.
Saxum, wereston. Mausoleum, pruh .... .
Silex, flint. Monumentum, uel sepulerum, buriles.
Gipsum, sperston. Sargofagum, pruh.
Gemma, gimston. 45 Donum, uel datum,.....
‘So has the MS. R. W. 3 Cf. pag. 334 1.39. R. W.
? Read keone. R. W.

552 SEMI-SAXON VOCABULARY. 553
Munus, loc. (Gaza)filaciun, madmhus.
Uter, butte. Ldax, uel gluto, oferetel.
Flasco, buttruc. Ambro, friec.
Tentorium, uel taberna(culum),.....  Gulosus, gifre.
= 5 P(rocax) imouh.

(Wouacu)lum, neilsex. Procacitas, imouhnesse.
Cos, hweston.? Obstinatus, onwille.
Apricus locus, leowstude. Obstinantia, onwilln(is).
Apricitas, leowp. - Uerecundus, secomefest.
Edific(ium), itimbrung. 10 Inpudens, unsceomefest.
Palatium, kinelie botl. Pudicus, sideful.
Bassis, sulle. Inpud(icus), unsideful.
Postis, post. ‘ Interpres, wealhstod.
Compes, uel cippus, £(otcops). Reus, seuldi.
Boia, ioe uel sweorcops. 15 Damnatus, uel condemnatus, for-
Manica, hondeops. (demed).
Complex, igada. Sceleratus, uel facinorosus, forscul-
Pena, uel sup(plicium), wite. degod. 7
Nebris, nest." Scelus, seuld.
Mercennarius, hurmon. 20 Facinus, uel culpa, gi(It).
Tlorologium, deimel. Adulter, forliger, wel ewbreche. :
Goomon,® (deeime)les pil.” Gibberosus, uel strumosus, hoferede.
Hospes, cura. Gibb(us, uel) struma, hofer. :
Hospitium, gesthus. Meretrix, uel scorta, multestre.
Hostis, uel osor, feond. 25 Pelex, cyfes, et cetera.
Thesaurus, hor(a).

‘Cf. pag. 3371. 38. KR. W. * Cf. pag. 337 1.6. KL We

? So has the MS. R. W.

XIV.
VOCABULARY OF TIE NAMES OF PLANTS!
(OF THE MIDDLE OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY.)
Pulegium, i. puliol, i. hulwurt.
CHAUDES HERBES. Agrimonia, i. agremoine, i. garcliuc.
Artimesie, i. mugwrt,i.merherbarum. — Consolida, i. consoude, i. daiseic.
Marubium, i. maruil, i. horehune. Cumfiria, i. cumfirie, t. galloc.
Ruta, i. rue. 5 Mentastrum, i. mentastre, 7. horsminte.
Apium, i. ache. Auencia, i. avence, i. harefot.
Buglosa, i. bugle, 7. wudebrune. Porius, i. poret, i. lek.
Saniculum, t. sanicle, 7. wudemerch, Regina, i. reine, 7. medwurt.
Sinapium, i. sencuel, 7. senei. Millefolium, i. milfoil.
| Zizania, i. neele, i, cockel. 10 Ebulum, i. eble, i. walwurt.
| Absinthium, i. aloigne, i. wermod. Leuisticum, i. luvesche, 7. luuestiche.
| Elna enula, i. ialne, i. gretwurt. Cepa, i. oingnun, i. knelek.?
| Bethonica, i, beteine. Saluia, i. sauge, 7. fenuern.
Abrotanum, i. aueroine, i. supewurt. Centauria, i. centoire, 7. hurdreue.
* This vocabulary of names of plants, as illustrating the lists of plants in the
evidently intended for the use ofa medic- _— other vocabularies in the present volume.
al practitioner, is preserved in a manu- The history of the popular nomenclatare
seript in the British Museum (MS. Harl. of plants is a very curious and interesting
No. 978, fol. 21, vo), which appears to subject; and the manuscripts of all periods
have been written in the period interven- are very rich in materials for it. There
ing between the battles of Lewes and is another list of names of plants in the
Evesham, that js, in 1264 or 1265. The three languages, resembling the one here
explanations of the Latin names are given printed, but arranged in alphabetical order,
in Anglo-Norman and in English; and in and rather more full, in a manuscript of
a few instances either the Anglo-Norman the fourteenth century in the British Ma-
or English is omitted, and even in one seum, MS. Sloane, No. 5.
or two cases the Latin. It is given here ? Of. pag. 134 1 ly. R. W.

556 VOCABULARY OF THE NAMES OF PLANTS. 557
Arcangelica, i. mort ortie, i. blinde  Cerfolium, i. eerfoil, i. villen.
netle. Camomilla, i. camemille, i. maiwe.
Pollipodium, i. poliol, i. reuenfot. Nepta, i. nepte, 7. kattesminte.
Felix arboratica, i. pollipode, i. Argentea, i. argentine, i. lilie.
eueruern. 5 Enula, i. alne, i. horselne.
Saluinca, i. gauntelee, i. foxesgloue.  Ysopus, i. ysope.
Butunus, i. butuns, i. hoepe. Spurgia, i. spurge, i. guweorn (guw-
Nasturtium, i. kersuns, i. cressen. corn ?).
Coliandrum, i. coriandre, i. chele Lauendula, i. lauendre.
priem. 10 Fion, i. camglata, 7. foxesgloue.
Petrosillum, i. peresil, i. stoansuke. Euscute, i. doder.
Closera, i. alisaundre, 7. wilde percil.  Satureia, i. satureie, 7. timbre.
Fauida, i. fauede, i. leomeke. Borago, i. burage-
Sandia, i. waisde, i. wod. Tribulus marinus, 7. calketrappe,
Gladiolum, i. flamine, i. gladene. 15  scapistel.
Febrefugia, i. fewerfue, i. adrelwurt. — Fwmus terre, i. fumetere, 7. cuntchoare. |
Tanesetum, i. tanesie, i. helde. Calamentum, i. calemente.
Pilosella, i. peluselle, i. musere. Ypis, i. herbe Johan, i. uelderude.
Uermiculum, i, warance, i. wrotte. Organum, i. organe. ;
Raffarium, i. raiz, t. redich. 20 Origanum, i. puliol real, i. wde-
Silimbrium, i. balsamitis, 7. broc- minte.®
minten. Menta, i. mente, 7. minten.
Ambrosia, i. ambrose, i. hindehele. Anetum, i. ancte, i. dile.
Althea, i. ymalue, 7. holihoc. Elitropium, i. solsegle, i. gloden.
Saxifragium, i. saxifrage, i. waiwurt. 25 Eptaphilos, i. salerne, i. uarewurt.
Bidella, i. samsuns, i. lechis. Elleborum album, i. alebre blone.
Bursa pastoris, i. sanguinarie,i.blod- — Eleborum, i. ellebre, i. lungwurt,
wurt. Pionia, i. pioine-
Feniculum, i. fanuil, 7. fenecel. Ortica, i. ortie, i. nettle.
Quinquefolium, i. quintfoil, 7. fiflef. 30 Ualeriane, i. stichwurt.
Tapsus barbatus, i. moleine, 7. softe.  Celsi, i, murer, 7. murberien.
Fabaria, i. fauerole. Auellane, i. petite noiz, i. litel nute.
Trifolium, i. trifoil, i. wite clouere. Frisgonem, i. fresgun, i. enehole,
Diptannum, i. ditaundere. Sponsa solis, i grinnil.
Cotula fetida, i. ameruche, i. miwe. 35 Pinpernele, i. pinpre, i. briddes-
Persicaria, i. saucheneie, 7. crone- tunge.
sanke. Lingua canis, i. chenlange, i. hundes-
Lanceolata, i. \aunceleie, i. ribbe. tunge.
Mater silua,i. cheuefoil,?i. wudebide.! Dormentille, i. ortie griesche, i. doc-
Sambucus, i. suew, i. ellarne. 40 nettle.
Ueruena, i. uerucine, 2. irenharde. Lappa, i. bardane, i. clote.
Arundo, i. rosel, i. reod. Burneia, i. sprungwurt.
Osmunda, i. osmunde, 7. bonwurt. Epitime, i. epithimum, 7. fordboh.
Olibanus, 7. encens, i. stor. Turmentine,® 7. nutehede.
Fungus, i. wuluesfist. 45 Widebawme;* 7. haluewnde.’
» So has the MS. Read wudebinde. * No Latin equivalent is given. R. W.
RaW? * idebawme in widebawme is obliterated.
? So has the MS. R. W. R. W.

558 VOCABULARY OF THE NAMES OF PLANTS. 559
Malua cripia, i. screpemalue. Atriplex, i. arasches.
Consolida media, i. pundreclouere. Mercurialis, i. euenlesten, 7. mercurial.
Herba benedicta, i.herbebencit, i. he- Malwa, i. malue, i. hoe.
meluc. Caulus, i. cholet, i. kaul.
Hedera nigra, i. iere, i. oerpiui. 5 Andiuia, i. letrun, z. pugepistel.
Herba Roberti, i. herbe Robert, t. Psilliun, ¢. lusesed.
chareuille. Uirga pastoris, i. wilde tesel.
FHinnula campana, i. sperewurt. Ypoquistidos, i. hundesrose.
Hastula regia, i. muge de bois, i. — Iusquiamus, i. chenille, i. hennebone.
wuderoue. 10 Viola, i. uiole, i. appelleaf.
Intiba, i. muruns, ¢. chienemete. Alimonis, i. wilde popi.
Tregerontis, i. cenesuns, %. grunde- Aizon, i. sinfulle.
swilie. Tucia, i. tutie.
Iuniperii, i. geneiure, i. gorst. Litargirum, i. escume de or.
Ligustrum, i. triffoil, 7. hunisuccles. 15
Labrusca, i. hundesberien. INTER FRIGIDUM ET CALIDUM.
Alleum, i. ail, i. garlec. Lapis lazuli, i. pere.
Murum, i. blakeberie. Manna.
Genesta, i. genest, i. brom.
Omfacium, i. winberi stones. 290 INTER FRIGIDUM ET CALIDUM
Ostragium, i. herbyue, i. lipewurt. TEMPERATUM.
Plantago, i. planteinc, i weibrode.  Mirtus, i. gagel.
' Bragagantum, i. dragagant.
FREIDES HERBES. Mirobolani, aa HE cana
Morella, i. morele, i. atterlope. 25 Bedagrage, i. spina alba, i. witporn.
Touis barba, i. iubarbe, i. singrene. Bolum, 7. bol.
Lactuca, i. letue, 7. slepwurt. Arnoglosa, i. plauntein.
Fraga, i. fraser, i. streberilef. Argentum uiuum, i. uif argent.
 Ramni, i. grosiler, i. pefeporn. Berberis.
Astula regia, i. popi- 30
;

xXxV.
A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY.
\ (OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.:)

Ab, preposicio, ancé fro. Acantus, [ane hoppyn.]
Abecula, le ance the bake of aknyf.  Acaluaster . . . ance ballyd byfore.
Abestis intestina hostiarum aspiciens, Acellarius . . . ancé a spenser.

et an’¢ a gyller of bestys. [Acorsus . . . ance Redmerche.]
Abhine in antea, ance fro hen forth 5 Acopa ... ance an obligacion or

ward, a tayl.
Abies . . . anv a fyrre. Acra ... ant an aker of lond.
Ablacto . i. a lacte remouere, ane  Acrementum . . . an‘é encres.

to awenye. Acroceramen ... ance a wawe of
Abrotanum .. . ance wodesoure. 10 the see.
Absconsa . . . ance a sconse. Actenus . . . ance tyl now.
Absinthium . . . ane wermod. [Acsi . . . anv as thowe.]
Ac eciam ance and also. vel and Acticola . . . ance Ramsyn.?

forsothe. Acuarium, ance an agulere.

‘ This vocabulary is preserved in a Our text is based on a copy made by
manuscript in the Library of the Trinity Mr. W. Aldis Wright.
College, Cambridge. The MS. is of the 2 In the margin,
15th century.

562 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 563
| Acumen, ance a popyn. Aliquamdiu, ance somedellonge.
Acupictor, ance a broderer. Aliquantus, [ance sumwhat.]
Acusile, ance a trenket. Allec , ance an heryng.
Adagonista, an*e a man of lawe. Alleluya, [ance wodesoure |
Adicio, ance to cast to. 5 Allicio, ance to drawe to.
| Adhereo, to drawe or tocleuy to. Allium, ance garlyk.
Adiectivo, ance to cast to. Allumen, ang°é alme.
Adipatum, ance browes. Allua, ance the grete to.
Adinvicem, ance to gedyr. [Alo, ance to reme.]
Ador, [ance flowr.] 10 Alopitis, the braun.
Adsum, ancé to be ny. Alnus, ance an eldertree.
Adtrica, ance the mase. Alphinus, ance an awfyn.
Aduenio, to come to. Alpinus, anc¢ longend to hylle ofalpys.
Adultus, ance ygrowe. Altarium, ance a superaltarye.
Adunco, ance to drawe wyth an 15 Altea malua, [ance the holy hokke.|
* hooke. Alterutrum, ance fro on tyl an othyr.
Advoco, ance to clepy to. Altus, [ance hye.]
Adustio, ance brennynge. Aluta, cordewayne.
Affinis, ance bysybbe. Alutarius, ance a cordewaner.
Affinitas, ance sybrede. 20 Alvus, ance a trowe.
Agalancia, ance a plover. Ama, he that muche loueth.
Agelarius, ance an hayward. Amabo, ance a louely worde.
[Agerarius, ance a curdogge.] “  Amarusa, ance a mathge.
Agnus castus, ance toutsayne. Amasius, Amasia, ance a leman.
Agonia, ance anger. 25 Ametus, ance a merlyn.
Agrestis, ance wylde. Amethon, ance a slykston.
[Agromellum, ance Growt.] Am/jlo, ance to travayle.
Agulus, ance a shephoke. Amfora uel amphora, ancé a tankard.
Alabrum, [a reel.) Amictum, ance an amyte.
Alaris, ance a company of hors. 30 Amictoria, ance a couerture.
Alator, ance a wanelasour. [Amica, ance a paramour.]
Alarica, ance a coronel. Amminiculor, ance to helpe.
| Alauda, ance a lark. Amissis, an’e a squyre.
Alba, ance an awbe. Amphibulus, ance a sclauayn or fal-
Albor, ance whytnesse. 85 dyng.
Albus, ance whyte. Amphivia, ance Seles.
[Albus candidus, ance mylke whyte.] Amphistrum, ance a sterne, or an
Alcedo, ance a colmose, [a wodewale.} helme.
Alcanna, ance alkenet. Anabatrum, [ance a style.]
Alcion, ance a Semewe. 40 Anabolandium, ance a rochet.
[Alchinum vel Alchimum, ance Alke-  Anabulla, ance spurge.
myn.] Anadrogia, ance a deye.
[Algea, ffletwort.] [Anagallus, ance Pympernele.]
Algenia, ance the coold ache. Anas, ance a doke.
Algorismus, ance augrym. 45 Anacius, ance a tele.
Alicitor, ance an hobeye et hic Pere- Anatus, ance a mallard.
grinus idem est. Anata, a doke.
Alietus, ance an hobey. Anatene, ance up enttynge.
37

564 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 565
Anca, ance the knebon. Aquarium, ance a gutur.
Ancha, ance a tache. Aquenomio, an’é a spute.
Ancer, ance a gander, Aquebaiulus, ancé an holy water clerk.
Ancerulus, ance a goslynge. Aquillus, ance an Oxebowe.
Andena, ance an Andyre. 5 Aquitannia vel Aquitania, an°¢ Gas-
Androchia, ance a deye. cune.
Anelo, ance to panty & blowe. [Arallus, a plow fote.]
Anetum, [dylle-] . Arano to flowe to reme as water ;
Angivs, ance a shepardestaf. & make fayre. f
Anhetum, ance Aneyse. 10 Aratrum, ance a plowe.
Annicito, ance to twynkele. Arbia, ance a bosum.
[Annodoma, ane feltwort.] Arbitus, ance a crabtree.
Anuncio, ance to shewe. Arbitum, ance a crabbe.
Anquiromagus, ance the sterne of the — Arcella, ance a fforser.

shypp. 15 Archangelica, ance the blyndnetel.
[Ansea, ance a trusse.] Archimacherus, ance a mayster cooke.
Anser, ance a gander. Archonizo, ance to moweye.
Ansorium, a shavyngknyf, or a  Archonistus, ance a mowyer.

trenket. Arcista, an arcetere,
Anterior, ance byfore. 20 Architenens, ance an Archer.
Antesellum, ance for asyon of the  Arconio, ance to stake.

sadell. Arcubilus, ance an Archer.
Antica, [ance an hache.] Arcuarius, a bowyer.
Antipera, ance a serene. Arcubius, ance a wayte.
Antiphora, ance evensonge. 25 Arculus, ance the Arsyon of a sad-
Antiquitus, [ance yn olde tyme.] elle.
Antrax, ance the felon. [Ardicomata, ante a quayle.]
Apago, ance a lether to bere ynne Arena, ance gravel.

thynge. Arenus, ance a pane of goold.
[Apastinata, ance Chervylle.] 30 Areola, ance a lykbedde.
Appendium, ance a yernwynder, or  Argentifilum, sylver wyre.

a reel. Argentum, Quyksylver.
Aper, ance a boor. Argilla, [ance Cley.]
Aperio, ance to opene. Arista, ance an eyle.
Apertus, ance openyd. 35 Aristologia, [ance Smerwort.]
Apium, ance Ache [vel Merche]. Armamentum, ance takelyng.
Aplustrum, [ance an hashe.] Armariolum, ance an almarye.
Apoca, ance aquytaunce. Armelausa, ance a cloke.
[Apolinaris, ance closwort.] Armilausa, A sclavayn.
Aporima, ioys of gras. 40 Ars metrica, ance arsmetryke.
Appareo, ance to seme or to apere. Artemesia, ance moderwort.
Appendicium, ance a lady trayne et  Artificialis, ance a craftiman.

ance a pendaunt of a gyrdyll. Artocopus, ance a symynel,
Applico, ance to ryve or to shypye. Artocrea, ance a tart.
Apposissio, ance puttyng to. 45 Arthochasius, ance a flawun.
Apto, ance to shappe or to araye. Arvambulus, ance a londlepar.
Aquaductile, ance a condyt. Ascarida, [A Teke.]
Aquagium, ance a gutur ora condyt, [Ascio, ance to thwyte or schyrpe.]

| 566 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY, 567
Asculto, ance to lystny. Auleum, ance a doser.
Aserra, ance a shyppe- Aumentum, ance an hagase.
[Asitabulum, ance a sawser.] Aurealis, ance an erewygge.
Asina, [the pose.] Aureatus, ance ygyld.
Aspa, ance an haspe. 5 Auricaleum, ance latoun.
| Aspergo, ance a cormeraunt. Auricula muris, ance mushere,
Aspersorium, ance an holy water  Aurifilum, ance gooldwyre.
stykke. Aurifrisius, ance an hospray.
Assa, ancé roost. Aurifrigium, ance goldwyre.
Assacula, ance an hastelet. 10 Auzilior, ance to helpe.
Assatus, ance yrosted.
Assedula, ance surdokke. Baburra, ance Sothede.
[Assedella, ance a table dormant.] Bacis, ance a truel.
Asser, [ance a latche.] Bacillus, ance a warderere.
Assidela, anc a table dormant. 15 Baco, ance bacon.
Assilo, to stroke. Bacallarius, ancé a bachyler.
Asso, ancé to rooste. Baffa, ance a flyeche of bacon.
Astayda, ance a tyke. Bafer, ance gretwombed.
Astrum, ance a sterre. Balbutio, [ance to stamery.]
Astularegia, ance woderofe. 20 [Balbio, ance to blaty.]
Asura, ance azure. Balducta, ance a erudde, Item dici-
Athachiacio,anceathachy ment or arest- tur, ance poshet-
ynge. Balla, ance a bale.
Athleta, ance a champyon. Ballivus, ance a baylyf.
Attractorium, ance atrayne, sed me- 25 Balneo, ance to bathye.
ius a trays. Balo, ance to blete.
Atramentum, ance Bleche. Balteus, [ance a baudrek.]
Atriplices, [ance Orage-] Balteo, ance a bancker.
Attat interiectio timentis ut expaves- [Bancorium vel Bancarium, ance a
centis, ance for dowte. 30 _ bankere.]
Attenuo, to make thynne or feble. Bancia, ance pasnep or skyrwyt.
Attollo, ance to lyft up, or to do a Barba jovis [ance syngrene.]
way. Barbillus, ance a ruget vel melius
[Aucarius, a gosherde.] a barbyle.
Auca, ance a goos. 35 [Bardana, ance Clote.]
Auccionor, ance to hukke. Barellus, ance a barell.
_ Auccionator et Auccionatrix, an huk-  [Barusia, ance a barhyde.]
ker & an hukkester. Basilisca, ance baldemonye.
| Auccupacio, anve fowlynge. Batillus, a belle clapere vel a swyn-
Aucupator et Aucupatric et Aucu-40  gell.
| parius idem sunt, ance fowlers. Baucia, ance skyrwyt.
Auccupacio, ance fowlynge. Batus, ane a bushell vel secundum
| Audacia, ance hardynesse. alios trium modiorum ance a pecke.
Audio, ance to huyre. Beatus, ance yblessyd.
Ls Audiencia, ance an hurynge. 45 Bedellus, ance a bedull.
_ Auencia, ance avance. Belberici marini sunt similes vmbi-
 Auicipula, ance a putfalle. licis umbilicus ci ance navelwort.
 Auigerulus, ance a pulter. Belua, ance an engyne.

“
i
568 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 569
Benedictus, [ance yblessed.] Breno, ance bran.
Beneficium, ance a good dede. [Brionia, ance wyldenepe.] 4
Benevolentia, an good wy). [Briscus, ance a feyldvare.]
Berberi sunt fructus cuiusdan arbo-  Britages, ancé britage.
ris, ance berberynes. 5 Britannia, ance brytayne
Berbica, ance ewe. Brodium, ancé broth.
Bernix, ance vernysh. Brucus, ance a taddepol.
Bernix cantabre veronice idem sunt  Brueris, ance heth
vernyshe. Bubo, ance an vie.
[Berula, ance Bleddere.] 16 Bucco [ance to blowe.]
Betacius, ance bete. Bucula, ance a bucule.
[Betonica, ance Bytayne.] Bufo, ante a tode.
Bethonica, ancé betayne. [Bugla, ance Bugle.]
Bever, ance bever. Bulgra, ance bugres.
Bibera, ance a beverache. 15 Bullio, ance to buly.
Bigata, ance akartlode. Bullicio, ance berme.
Bilbus, ance a welke. Burcida, ance a purskyttere.
Birrus vel Birrum, i. grosswn vesti- Burnetus, ance burnet, color quidam
mentum, ance a dudde. est.
Biriscus [a feyldefare.] 20 Burbilium, ance nombles.
Bisacuta, ance a twybyl. Burris, ance the plowebeme.
Bismalua (MS. Bismabua), an bys- [Bursa pastoris, anceshepardespurse.]
malwe twymalwe. Butus, ance Shadde sed melius Bustus.
Blodius, ance Blewe. Buus, ance hox.
_ {Bodarius, ance heybrere.] 25
* Boletus, ance tender old cloth. Cachinnor, an*e to mowe.
Bombacinum, ance secundum quosdan  Caculipes, ance a page.
Aketoun, Calamandrum, ance a volupere.
Bombicinum, ance a Takke. Calatus, ance a panyer.
Bombinco, to crye as a bee. 30 Calear, ance a spore.
Bondagium, ance Bondage. Caleatrepa, ance a kalketrappe.
Bostio, ance a Boye. Calciamentum, ance Chausure.
Bostare, ance a Snyte. Calculus, ance a cowntes.
Bovectus, ancé a stere. [Calea, a lyndtre.]
Braciologia, ance a shortspekynge. 35 Calefactorium, ance a Chawfur
Brachiale, ance a wardebrace Calefureum, ance galwes.
Brachium, ance an arme. | Calendarium, ance a kalendere.]
Brancia, ance a gyle. Calibs, ance Steel.
Brandium, ance Bokeram. Calix, ance a Chalys.
Brasicta, ance Tutes. 40 Calopodium, ance a tapyn.
Brasio, ance to brewe. Calor, ance hete.
Brasium, ance malt. Calvicies, ance ballednesse.
Brasiarium, ane a brewehous. Cama, ance a shortbedde.
Brasiarius, ance a brewer. Cambucca, ance a busshoppys cros.
Brasiaria, ance a brewestere. 45 Cambuccarius, ance a Croser.
([Bremetica, a breme.] Camamilla, ance Camamylle.
Brevigerulus, [an¢ a Brevytour.] [Camedreos, ance Teterwose.]
[Brella, ance sterche.] Camelinus, ance camelyn.

570 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 571
[Camerarius, ance a chamberlayne.] — Carinis, ance a make.
Caminus, ance a chymeney. Carnarium, [ance a charnel.]
Campanile, ance a styppyl. Carniprivium, ance shrofday, quia
Campester, ance a feyldefare. tunc privamur carnibus.
Campio, ance a champion. 5 Carinis, ance a mathe.
Camus, ance a barnacle. Carpa, [ance a toppe.]

| Canabum, ance hempe. Carporo, ance to wynde.
Cancellus .. . ala palacij. i. parvum Carptare, an‘ to karde.

foramen parietis, ance a kernell. Carptarius, aneé a kardemakere.
Candeo, ance wylde madur. 10 Carrucarius, a p{l]owman.
Canevasium, ance Canevas. Carrucata, a plowelond.
Canendula, ance a Plover. Caruca, ance Suthernewode.
Canicies, anc’ hoorenesse. Cassa, ance a mowe.
Canistrum, ance a basket. Cassator, ance a moweare.
[Canus, ance Grenew or hore.] 15 Casilius, ance myd amene.
Capa, a cope. Cassis, ance an helme.
Capana, ance a kot. Castrimargus, an‘é a wodecocke.
Capana, ance a pynsour. Catallum, ancé catall.
Capellus, ance an hatte. Catantrum, ance a trendell.
Capellarius, ance an hattere. 20[Cathapia, ance Spurge.]
Caper, ance a gotbukke. Catapucia, lesse spurge.
Capra, a gootdoo. Catasta, ance a cage.
Capicium, ance an hode. Catello, to mewe or to tykele.
Capisterium, ance avanne [or aSeve.]  Catta, ance a hecatte.
Capistrum, ance an haltre. 25 Cavatus, ance ymade holwe.
Capitanius, ance a captayn. Cauilla, ance a pyn.
Capito, ance a cole. [Cavilla, an ancle.]
Cappa, ance the cappe of a fleyle. Cavni, ance fayryes.
Cappilegium, ance a fleylbond. [Cauterium ferruin ustum, ance Syn-
Capra, a gotdo. 30 der.]
Caprifolium, ance wodebynde. Cavus, ance holw.
Capus, ance a musket. Cavitas, ance holwnehse.
Caracalla, ance a sclavayn or a Cecula, ance a Slowerme.
cope. a Cecuta, ance hemlok.

Caracus, ance a carryk. 35 Cefalia, ance the hede Ache.
Caraxis, ance tokenynge. Celarium, ance a celer.
Carbonella, [ance a colhoppe.] Celatorium, ance a celour, or a co-
Carchesia, [the saylyerd.] verlyt.
Carcosium, ance a carkoys. Celeps, ance a chesell to peynte
Cardinalis, ance a cardynal. 40 wyth.
Cardo, ance a thystell, or a tesell. Celerarius, ance a celerer.
Cardinarius, ance a teselere. -  Celectis, ance hevenlyche.
Carduelis, ance a goldfynche. Celioforum, ane an alepot.
Carduus, ance a tesel. Cellens, ance Overcomynge.
Cardus, ance a corde. 7 45 Celtica, spikenard.
Carectarius, ancé a cartere. Cementum, ance morter.
Carentivillum, ancé a kanvas. Cenositas, ance felthede.
Carex, ance Segge. Cenovectorium, ance a berwe.

)
572 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 573
Cenovectorium rotatum, awhelberwe. — Cireulator, ance a tornur.
Ce[no]vectorium manuale, an hand-  Circumcido, ance to kytte a boute.
berwe. Circumpres (so in MS.), ance a |
Cenovectorium, ance a berwe. prayer of a worde.
Cepa, ance an oynon. 5 Circumuolo, ance to fle a boute, |
Cephalia, ance the hede Ache. [Ciromellum, ance wort.] |
Cepiarium, ance Sewe. Cirrus, i. plicatura capillorum et
Ceplatum, ance cyne. ane a cop. |
Cepulatum, ance sew. Citator, ance a Sompnere.
Cepum, ance talwe. 10 Citacus, ance a popinjay.
Cerasus, ance a Cherytree. Citharedo, an‘é to harpe.
Cerifolium, [ance honysouke.] Citheres, a name of an hylle. |
Ceruida, ané a tapstaf. Citator, ance a Sumnere.
Ceruisia, ance Ale. Cito, ance to sompny.
Cervus, Cerva, ance hert and hynde. 15 Citola, ance a cytole.
Cesia, ance a pokke or frakene. Claretum, ance Clareye.
Cespes, ance a turf. Classatorium, ance a clapere, or a
Cesso, ance to leue of. styppyll.
Chamus, ance a bernake. Claudeo, ance to halte.
Cherub, a cherube. 20 Claudus, ance halt, or lame.
Cherucus, ance a fane. Clavigarius, a lorymere.
Chilindrus, ance a leuel vel est in-  Clavus, ance a nayle.
strumentum quo hore notantur [ance Clepsedra, ance & tappe.
a chylaundre.]} Clericatus, ance Clergye.
Chorea, ance a karole. 25 Clerimonia, ance clergye.
Choricista, [ance a crowdere.] [Clibanicius, a loof.]
Chorinus, ance a dawncere. Clinus, ance bedlyche.
Chorealus, ance a daunceleder. Clipeola, i. anulus quia fit ad modium
Chorus, ance a crowde. clipet ., ance a lytylbreche.
Chorusta, ance a querester. 30 Clipsedra, ance a spyket.
Chrismale, ance a Crismere. Clitella, ance a cliket, or a forsere.
Cicada, ance a grashoppere. Clitorium, ance a clyket.
Cicuta, an*¢ an homeluk. Cloca, ance a cloke. =
Cignus, ance a swan. b Cloto, on of thre shapsisterys vel
Cilix [quidam piscis, a loche.] 35  shappystrys [vel ance destynyes.]
Cimbale, a cymbale. Cnusticium, i. quedam pars sotularis,
Cimbus, ance a vat. ance a Ryvette.
Cimicia, herba fetens, mathge. Coaccio, ance dystresse.
Ciminum, ance Comyn. Coagulatorium, a mylkefessell, or a
Cinasus, ance a puddynge. 40 cherne.
Cincinnus, ance a lok. Coagulum, ance rennynge.
Cingulum, a gurse. Coagulum, an‘ a crudde.
Cinomia, ance a fleys flye. Coagulo, ance to make a crudde.
Cinopre, ance Cynopre. Coaugeo, ane to eche to gedyr.
Cinus, an‘¢ an haythorne & an kawe. 45 Coccinium, an’é coton.
Cipharius, ance a cuppere, or a dys- Cochlea ... Item est alta et ro- |
shere. tunda turris [a topcastel.]
Circumspectus, ance Skylful. Coctinus, ance a Quynstre.

574 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 575
Codex, ance coode. Conniveo, [ance to twyncly.]
Coliandrum herba est, ance colyandre. [Congelima, ance prane.]
[Coliteratis, a Costrel.] * Conophorum, ance a Costrell.
Colus, ance a dystaf. Conqueror, ance plany.
Collaphus, ance a buffet. 5 [Consida, ance Brovnwort |
Collarium, ance a colere. Consobrini, ance systersones.
Colldtinea, ance a thynned. Consolida, ance consowde
Collistrigium, ance a pyllory. Conspicamen, ance clene.
Collofium, ance a coffyn. Conspicacio, clenynge.
Colatorium, ance a Colyndore. 10 Consternor, [ance to be astoned.]
Colon, the endelez gutte. Contentor, ance to hold a payd.
Colomelli, ance tuskes. Contero, an‘e to breke or defoule.
Colostrum, ance rennet. Contra, ancé ayens.
Coluber, [ance a snake.] Contravaria, ance a luller.
Colum, [ance a colyndore, or a tun- 15 Contraversia, ance Debat.
*nyng dysch.| Contristor, ance to be made sory.
[Columbare, ance a culverhous.] Contus, ance a potstykke,
Comatulus, ance lytyl heryd. Contutatus, ance yhyd.
Commater, ance a godmodur. Contuiator, an hydere.
Comissarius, ance a commissarye. 20 Conualesco, to rekevere,
Commissio, ance a commyssion. Cooperculum, ance a Covercule.
Commissura, ancé a mortays. Coopertorium, ance a coverlyt.
Complutus, ance wet wyth rayne. Copula, ance a codde.
Complustrum, ance a clowster of Copularius, ance a cuple.
notys. 25 Corgigatorium, ance a cherne.
Conca, ance a loppyster. Corium, [ance an hyde.]
Concedo, ance to graunte. Coriza, ance ryflynge of the nose.
Concavia, ancé a maner mace. Coristerium, ance a barhyde.
Concludo, ance to close, or to con- Corigia, ance a thwange.
clude. 30 Cornale, ance a cornal.
Condilus, ance a knokyl. Cornicarius, ance an hornere.
Conditio, ance Saverynge. Corniculum, ance a cornet.
Conductum, ance a saf condyt. Corniculatum, ance a blowyng wyth
Conduum, ance a Quaryndoun. an horne.
| Conduus, ance a Quaryndon tre. 35 Cornix, ance a crowe.
Confectio, ance confyt. Cornus, an hepetre.
| Confidencia, ance trust. Cornubium, ance an hornpipe.
Confido, ance to truste. Coronale, ance a cornal.
Confinia, ance trypys. Corporale, ance a ‘corporas.
Confiria, ance confyrye. 40 Corptrix, ance a kardestere.
Confiria, ance confyrie. Corrigiarius, a gyrdeler.
Confisco, ance to sese in the gyn-  Corrigiatus, ance Ithonged.
gyshonde, Corrodium, ance a lyvereye.
Conflatorium, ance an herth. Corruca, ance a buntynge.
Confortamen, ancé confort. 45 Corulus, ance an haseltre.
Conforto, ance to conforte & make Costa, ance a ryb [et est instrumen-
myrthe. tum pistoris, a rybbere.]
[Confusus, ance ashamed.] Costa pastalis, ance a doweryb,

576 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 577 |
Costus, [ance Costmarye.] Cultrus, [ance a Cultur.]
Cotagium, ane a cotage, or a cot. Cumularius, ance a muwyer.
Coutranus, slep to beth fet mete. Cunabulator et Cunabulatrix, a rok-
Crabo, ance a dore. kere & a rokkestere.
Cranium, ance the braynpanne. 5 Cunctitenens, ance almyghty.
Crapulo, [ance to surfet.] Cuneus, [ance a wegge.| é
Crariolum, anc a rake. Cuniculus, ance a Conynge.
Cras, ance to morwe. Cunio, ane undermyne.
Crassipulum, Crassipularium, Cruci-  Cunus, [a wegge-]
bolum, ance a Cresset. 10 Cupa, ance a cupe, or a Cowle.
Crassula, ance orpyne. [Cupatorium, a worpynfat.]
Crassula minor, ance Crawsope. Cuparius, ance a cowpare.
Crates, ance an hyrdyl. [Cuprum, ance Copar.]
Craticulatum, ance a latyse. Currax, ance lyght to renne.
Creagra, [ance an owel.] 15 Curtina, ance a curtyn.
[Crepidium, ance Clowtys.] Culrjruca, ance an heysugge.
Crepita, a boote. Curvo, ance to croke.
Crepundarius, ance a rokkere. Cuspis, ance a Soket.
Crepundaria, ancé a rokkestere. Cuscute, ance Doder.
Cresco, ance to wexe or growe. 20 Custus, ance costys.
Creta, ance chaalke. Cutum, ane Donge.
, [Cressula, ance Mader.] Cuva, ance a cuve or a vaat.
Cretifico, ance to marly.
Certificatum (so MS.), ance marle. Dacia, ance Denmarke.
Certificatio, ance marlynge. 25 Dalmatica, ance a tunycle.
Cribrum, ance a rydder vel a syve. Dampnis, ance a loreytre.
Criminor, ance to blame, or be Damus, ance a bukke.
blamed. Dama, ance a doo.
Crisma, ance creyme. Dea, ance a goddesse.
Crispus, [ance cryps.] 30 Debacor, ance to wex wilde.
Crispatura vel Crispacium, quoddam Decaudo, to kytte of the tayle.
genus cibi est, ance Crispes. Decet, ance hyt semyth.
Croceus, ance yelwe. Deciduus, ance lygtly fallen.
Crosia, ance a swal ponde. Decius, ance a des.
Crucibolum, ance a cresset- 35 Decresco, ance to wanye.
Crucifixum, ance a Crucifix. Dedignacio, ance dysdeygne.
. Cruma, ance a pouche. Defectus, ance a defawte.
Crurale, ance a Quysson. Deforis, ance bethowte.
Crusto, ance to tynky. Degaudeo, ance to ioye by hynde.
Crustator, ance a tynkere. 40 Degelo, [ance to thawe.]
Crustellum, [ance a cruste.] Degener, ance ynkynde.
Cubile [ance a cuche.] Delibero, ance to delyuery or to a=
Cubitus, ance an Elbowe. vyse.
Cuculo, to erye as a Cokow. Delibutus, ance be bawdyd or vntyd.
Cucumer, ance a Goorde, 45 Deliciositas, ance delyte.
Culcitra, ance a Quylte. Delicius, ance a Cokeney.
Culex, ance a Gnat. Delicium, ance Delyte.
Cultellus, ance a knyfe. Deluo, ance to wasty awey,

578 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY, 579
Deluvius, ance a floode. Displico, ance to displaye.
Demullo, ance to drede. Displicatus, ance displayd.
Denariatus, ance a Penyworthe. Displiceo, ance to dysplese.
Denique, ance at laste, or forsothe. _ Dispondeo, ance to by hote or trowthe.
| Dentrix, ance a pyke. 5 Dissimulo, anve to lykeny or feyne
Denuncio, ance to shewe. or myslykene.
| Depastino, to do away grapys. Distillo, anvé to stylle or droppe.
| Depositor, ance a sewer. Distrigio, ance to stryde.
Deprecor, ance to beseche, pray. [Ditanus, ance dytayne.2]
Depetro, to by hynde stonde. 10 [Divinacio, ance wychecraft.]
Deprimo, ance to east doun. Docillus, ance a dussel.
Deprope, ance fro ny. Doctificus, ance makyng wys.
Deputo, ance to ordeyne vel ance to Dola, %. docillus, ance a dosel.
™ trowe, Doma, [ance the ryggynge.]
Derelinquo, ance to forsake. 15 Domicilium, ance Ouese.
Desperacio, ane wanhope. Domina, ance a lady.
Destruo, ance to destruye, or waste, Dominus, a lord.
Deturpo, ance to defoule. Dominatus, ance a lordshyp.
Devenio, ancé to come fro. Dominus legum, ancé a man of lawe.
Devolvo, ance to turne vpsodoun, 20 Donativum, [ance a waryson.]
Deus, ance god. Dormito, {ance to nappe-]
Deatrarius, ance a stede. Dormitorium, ance'a Doortur.
Diafragmen, ane the mydryf. Dorsorium, ante a dorsere.
[Diametrus, a duble metre.] Draganti, ance vytryole, or coporose.
Diaphosia, sunuoys vel melius soun 25 Dragetum, ance drageye.
of voys. Dromo, ance a dromond.
Dictatura, ance dytynge. [Dromus, anve sharp wyn.]
Difficilimus, ance hardest. Duca, ance a leste, or a molde.
Digitale, ance a themyl. Duicia, ance Ducettus.
Dignosus, ance worthy. 30 Dulcor, ance swetnesse.
Dinodium, anv a lytyl hulle. Duricies, [ance hardnesse.]
Discrusus, curyng ouer.
Diplois, [ance a dublet-] Lbulus, ance walwort.
Diptania, ance dytayne. Eciam, ance forsothe.
[Dironomon, ance a kervare.] 35 Z contra, [ance ayeward.]
Discinctus, ance ungyrd. Edentator, ance a tothdrawere.
Discingo, ance to ungyrd Edepol, by the hous of edepol.
Discredentia, ance mysbyleve. Edia, ance Ese.
Discretinus, ance skylful. Educamen, ancé a teme of checonn.
Discrimen, [ance pe shode of the 40 Educamentum, ance brodynge.
hed.] Edulia, ance sowell.
Discriminale, [ance an herstrenge.!]  Edus, ance a kyde.
(Disco, to make dyshys.] Effodio, ance to dyke, or delve.
[Disgerbigator, ance a Teddere.] Effosso, ance to dygge up.
Dispensa, ance a spense, vel ance 45 Egeator, anc a comander of a shyp.
spendynge. Egestas, ance nede,
' This article is inserted in the margin. ? Tn margin.
38

580 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 581
[Eleborus, ance byshyppeswort.] Euaneo, an’* to vanshe a wey,
[Eleborus niger, ane longwort.] Evaporo, ane to wexe hote.
Electum, ance @ \cfe of goolde. Euersum iri, [ance go to be turnyd
Elephantus, [an olyfaunt.] vpsedoun] [sie dicitur amatum iri
Elixer, a mater of metall in aleomye. 5 go to be loued.]
LEmiperus, ance a sprot. Euersum, an‘ vpsodoun,
Emolumentum, [ance tolle.] Euidens, ance cler opyn.
Emula, ance a dokke. Eulogio, ane to prayse and alowe.
Emungo, ance to quenche. Eugenes, ancé noble wytty.
Emunctus, ance a queynte. 10 Eupatorium, an*¢ambrosye, or wylde
Encletico, to bowe. sauge.
Enula campana, ance horshelyn. Eupatica, ance lyuerwort.
[Enula, ane scabwort.] Euiro, ance to gylle.
Enulus, ance a fawn. Euitaneus, ance wythoute ende.
Epatica, ance lyverwort. 15 Eupheamismos, ance good chaun-
Epaticum, ance a lyverpaddyng. gynge.
Epallio, to ordeyne. Exactor, ance a puruyour.
Epefio, to hamb. Examitum, ancé a myte, or an Amys.
Ephimera, ance a sperlynge. Exancio, ance to ynbynde.
Epyfemur, ance breygyrdyl. 20 Exardeo, ance to brenne.
Epyglotum, ance the throtebolle. Exarmigio, to make faste.
Epyphanes, ance god schewynge. Excerpno, anc to clense.
LEpyphium, ance an hamborwe. Excessus, ance excesse, passynge
Epyphio, ance to hamburwe. oute, or surmountynge.
Epitogium, ance a gowne. 25 Excludo, to shut oute. ©
Equicium, ance a rake [a level.] [et Eacoguo, ane to sethe brenne or
ane haras.] purge.
Equiferus, [ance an hakeneyman.] Excudio, ance to squyngyl.
Equidromium, ance a rake. [Excudia, a swyngylstok.]
Equilibrum, ance a lewel. 30 Excussorium, ane a swyngelstok.
Lquillus, ance an hakeney. Exestuo, ance to wexe hote, or byle.
Lquitibia, ance a kambrell. Exhumo, to vnberye.
Erarius, ance a brasyer. Exorrior, ance to be born, or sprynge.
Erifilum, ance Braswyre. Expello, ance to put oute.
Eripio, ance to delyvere. 35 Expericlus, ance a squyrel.
Erpica, ance an harwe. LExpollio, ance to pulshe, or furby.
[Eruus, ance quechyn ] Expugno, ance to bete doun, over-
Eruca, ance whytpyper |velskyrwyt. ] come.
Erudero, ance to myne. Exsacco, ance to vnsacke.
Erula, ance the core. 40 Exscaturizo, ance to sealdy.
Escaria, ance Dresserbord. Exsucco, ance to drawe out Iuse,
Escarium, ane ees. Exterius, ance wythoute.
Estaurinus, anc a Gurnard, Extinguo, ance to quenche.
Esursum, ance fro above. Extollo, ance to bere up, or to hye,
Lsusium, ance brende bras calce- 45 Extraduco, ance to lede out.
monie. [Extunc, ance fro thanne.]
Eticies, a voys to answere.
Euado, ance to a skapye.

|
582 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 583
Fabafresa, ance a spelked bene. Ferrus, ancé an hors schoo.
Fabrica, ance a forge. Ferrarius, ance an yreworchere or
Fabricatus, ance y forged. an yremongere, or a ferrour.
_ Facimia, ance a forspeker or a tyly- Feruca, ance a throstylkock.
| ystere. 5 Festuca, ance the blaad of corn, or
| Faculo, ance to make faget. a strawe.
_ Facuminaria, ance a lullere. Festum, [ance the furst.]
Fagus, ance a beche. Fetuntrus, ance a fulmere.
Fala, ance Brytage. Fetontria, ance a martron.
Falco, ance to repe, or mowe, 10 Fibula, a tache or a laas [or a
Falerarius, ance a sompterhors. botun].
Falerator, ance a sompterman. Ficedula, ance a rooke.
Fanula, ance a fanon. Fidelica, ance a cherne.
Farraga, ane forrage. Fidicen, [ance a fydelere.]
Farcimen, ance Farsure. 15 Filatrix, ance a spynnester.
Faricapsa, ance a bynne. [Filiandra, gosesomere.]
Farina, ance mele. Filica, ance a kote.
Farna, ance a forme. Fillis, ance a ffylbertre.
Farracio, ance Melwynge. [Filium, a ffylbert.]
Farrago, ance forage. 20 Filix, ance fferon,
Fascennina, i. femina que novit in- Frltrum, ance a quylte, or a materas.
cantare; ancé a tylyester. Fimbria, ance an hem.
Faselus, ance a galey. Financia, ance a ffynaunce.
Fatesco, ance to ffayle to feble to Firmaculum,an¢eaclapse, ora broche,
wexe weyry. 25 Firmacularius, ance a brouche =
Favonius, {the west wynde.] makere.
Febrimacio, ance sturrynge of londe. Fiola, ance a ffyole or a cruet,
Fecontria, ance a martret. | Firmatius, a loof.]
[Pedorarius, ance a fewtrer.] Firmamenta, ance takelynge.
Fel, ance galle. 30 Fistulista, ance a Pypere.
Felicitas, ance selyhede. Fizura, ance prykkynge or festen-
i[Feltrum, ance ffelt.] ynge. ‘ .
Femorale, ance a strapul. Flabellum, ance a swyvyer-
Fenestra, ance a wyndowe. Flabrum, [a blast. ]
Fenestrale, ancé a ffenestral. 35 Flagellator, ance a threschere.
| Fenissa, ance an heymakere. Flagellum, ancé a ffleyle, or a scorge.
Feniseca, an‘ a mowere. Flagito, ancé to axe or aske beseche
Fenicarius, ance a theseler. wyth ery. ‘
Fenile, ance an heyrek. Flameum, ance kerchef.
Fere, ance almost 40| Flaketta, a flaket.]
Perecia, ance a quylte. [Flammula, ance sperwort.]
[Fersura, ance fetherveye sed melius  Flasca, ance fflagot.
febrifuga.] Flato, ance a flavon.
Ferina, an‘é venesoun. Flecto, ance to wrynge mony.
Feritorium, ance a batyndore. 45 Flexarius, ance a floccher.
Ferme, ance almost. Florenus, ance a ffloreyn.
Perrarius, [ance a ferrour.] Florencius, ance a goldfynche,
Perrifilum, ance wyre of yre. Fluctus, a flode.

}

584 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 585
Foca, an*é a Porpays. Frondator, ance an hekemose.
Focale, ance fewel. Frontale, ance a frontell. :
Folliculus, ancé a flexhoppe. Frugella, ance a rooke.
Fongia, ance stokfyshe. Frumentum, [an*« whete.]
Fentinella, ance the nekke putte. 5 Frunito, ance to tanny.
/orago, ance a lyste, or a purrel. Frunitor, a Tanner.
Toramen, ance an hol. Frunitorium, a tanhous.
Iorarium, ance an hedelonde. Frutex, {underwode.]
Foresta, ance a forest. Tuga, ane a chas, or a fleynge.
Forestarius, a forstere. 10 [Pugarius, a dryvere or a drovare.]
Forefactura, ane a forfet. Fugius, a drone & gret.
Formella, [ance a forme.] Fulgur, ance the leme that brennyth,
Formipedium, ance a leste. Fulica, ance a Semewe.
Formosus, ance Welshape. Fuligo, [ance soot.)
Formula, ance a leste or a lytyl 15 Fumus, [ance smoke.]

molde. Fumus terre, an’ fumytere.
Formula, ance a fforme. Fundator, ancé a founder or slynger.
Forulus, ance a forel. Fundulus, ance a looche.
Fossa, ance a dyche. Fungia, ane Stokfysh.
Fosso, to dyche. 20 Fungea, quidam panis [koket.] Item,
Fossorium, ancé a moolde i. boletus. Item ance a taddechese.
Fovea, ance a dyche. Fungus, a ffynch [vel an Estrich,
Fractillus, ance a vag, or a dag. secundum quosdam.]
Fraculus, ance a Pyperquerne. Funifex, ance a ropere.
Fragillus, ance a grate. 25 Furfura, ance the scales of the hede
Fragmen, ance brokemete. or berde.
Fragus, ance the wryste, or aknokyl.  Furniculus, ance a fferet.
Fragum, ance a strebery. Fuscus, ance broun.
Fragus, ance a streberytre. Fuscamen, ance ffustayn or flustyan.
Francursina, ance Berefot. 30 Fustibulum, ance a stafslynge.
Fraria, ance a brotherhede. Fusus, ance a spyndel.
[Fratruelus, a broper sone.] Fusura, ance spynnynge.
[Fratruela, a broper dowter.]
Fraxinus, ance asche. Gagas, ance Geet.
F'requento, ance to haunte. 35 Galanga, ance Galyngale.
Fretum, i.feruor maris, anccawalke. G@allacia, ance blancmanger.
Frico, ance to frote. Galla, ane a kokkescombe.
Frigellus, ance a rudduk. Gallus, ance a Cok.
Frigeo, [to wexe colde.] [Galliare, ance a chapelet.]
Frigilla, ance a rudduk. 40 |Galus, li, hec. i. soror mariti soro-
Frigmareventus, ance Wynchelsee. ris mee, ance my systerys hus-
[Fringulus, a grundyl.] bande syster.]
Frigucio, ance [to Oyvery or quake.] — Grallitricum, ance clareye.
Frixa, ante acolhoppe, orasmache- Galliprelium, ance kokkysfythynge.

cok. 45 Gamarus, an‘ a banstikyl.
Frixum, ance a firytour. [Gannerius, ance a bannynge.]
Frivatura, ance fryynge vel quod Garba, ance a Shefe.

Srigitur, ance a, flroyse. Garcio, an’e a grome.

586 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 587
Gardicius, ance a wardeyn. Gracilis, ance smal.

Gariofilata, ance auens vel gilofre. Gracillo, to cakele as an hen.
Gariofilus, ance Cloves. Graculus, ance a Jaye.

Garus, ance greue. [Gracus, a whytynge.]

| Garennia, ance wareyne. 5 Gramen, ance gras.

\ Garriofila, ance glowgelofre, Gran, a wryt.

i Gavata, ance a bolle. Grana paradisi, ancé grayn de parys.
Gaudeo, ance woode or madur. Granomellum, ance growte, vel wort.
Gelicidium, ance thawe. Granum solis, ance Gromylle.
Gello, ance a cherle. 10[Grapa, an hol to putte yn a barre.}
[Gelopto, ance to waloppe.] Gratarium, ance a grate.

Gemo, (ance to wayle.| Gratanter, ance gladly.

Gentiana, [ance stanmerche.] Grato, ane to cracche.

Genesa, a bond of cloth. Gravitudo et Gravitas et Gravedo,

Genesta, ance brome. 15 ance hevynesse.

*Genetaliacus, ancé a tellere of kynde. Gravia, ance the hewe, or the webbe.

[Geralogodion, ance Tryacle.] Gregarius, ance a fflockere, et est

Gerio, ance to ordeyne. canis pastoris.

[Gerlinus, a, um, ance sherlokked Gregatim, ance to gedyr.
et dicitur de equo.| 20 Gressenus, ance a brokke.

[Gerolotista, ante a sompturman.] Griseus, ance grey.

Gerra, ance a doggedraue. Grossitas, ance Gretenesse.

Gerusa, ance a goode, vel ante a Grunnus, ance a gruyn, or a wrot.
Gesarme. Grus, ance a Craan.

Gibbus, [ance kybe.] 25 Gulio, [a gyle.]

Giga, ance a gytterne. Gumma arabica, ance Gumme arabyk.

Gingium, ance Gyngebred. Gurtus, ance a were.

Gipsum, ance cley or morter. Guttatus, ance pomeled ut equus.

Giraculum, ance a trendel. Gutta, ance a drope.

Girgillus, ance a reel. 30 Guttorium, ance a guttur.

Girgillo, [ane to rele.] Guttulus, ance Menuse.

Glabella, [ance the schulle.] Gutiurna, ance Quynsy.

Glabra, ance a scalle.

Glabrosus, scalled. Habena, ancé a rayne.

Gladiatura, ancé a swerdpleyynge, 35 Hac, ance hydur vel hydurward.
or bokeler pleyynge. Hactenus, ance hydur to vel in to

_ Glans, a slyngston. thys tyme.

— Glaucus, ance gelu. Hasta, {a shaft.]

Glimo, to be gyle. Hastule, ance Stykkes. °
Giis, [ance a glonsers.] 40 Hauritorium, [ance a boket] vel ance
Glomus, ance a clewe. a ladell.

Glorior, ance to ioye. Hausorium, [an‘e a boket.]

Glosa, ancé a loche. Hedera, [ance yvy.]

| Glustrum, ance Cowslyppe. Henociani, ance stronge geantes.
Glutinum, ance glewe. 45 Herbagium, ance herbage.

Gobio, ance a gurnard vel secundum  [Herba paralisis, ance Couslyppe.]
alios a goioun. Herbiseca, ance a mowere.
Gomerus, ancé a banstykyl. Herbarius, ance a teddere.

588 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 589
Hereditas, ance herytage. [imnale et Imnarium, ance an ym-
Herniosus, ance brokyn. nere.]}
Hic, ancé here. Impaciens, ance ynbuxum.
ITyemo, ance to wyntry. Impedio, ance to lette.
Hyematus, ance acumelyd. 5 [Impedia, ance an ouerlether.}
ITymnare, [a hymnale. | Impeto, ane to asayle.
Hylle, ance trypys. Inpetus et Impes, ance a folhaste.
Iline, ance hennys. Impinguo, ance to fatty.
Hyo, [to galpe.] Impinguo, ance to do a way drye
Hornulus, ance sumdel orible. 10 shabbe.
Horreo, [to agryse-} Implico, ance to emplye, to folde yn.
Hlostio, ance to stryche. Imposterum, ance hereafterwarde.
Lostorium, a stryche. Impotens, ance unmyghty.
Hue, ance hydur, vel hydyrward. Impotencia, ance feblenesse.
Hlumano, ane to clothe yn manhede. 15 Impromptus, ance wnredy-
Humecto, ancé to moyste. Improprium, ance unpropre.
Humeratis, [ance a spanbelere.] Imputo, ance to a twyte.
Humerus, ance a shuldur. In ante [fro hennes forthward.]
Humilio, to a bowe. Inarto, ancé to yoke.
Humor, ance moystnesse. 20 Incanto, ance to enchaunte.
Huscus, ance an holme. Incaustorium, ance an ynkehorn.
Incommodo, to make wrake.
Jacinctinus, ance ynde colour. Incredulus, ance unlefable.
Jaculum, [ance a dart-] Incredulitas, ance unbylefe.
[Jam nunc, ance rygth nov vel nov 25 Incrudo, to make rawe.
nov.} Incurro, to ren yn.
Jam tunc, ance nowe thanne, vel nowe Incussorium, ance a vauser, quidam
as thanne. malleolus est.
Jarus, ance Cokkupyntel et ance Cal- Inde [therby.]
vysfote. 30 Indignor, ance to dysdeyne.
Icarpa, ance a wolletoppe. Indomitus, ance vntame, wylde.
Iconomia, ance husbondrye. [Indela, ance a gelet.]
Ictericia, ance the Jawnes. Induro, ance to make harde.
Ideo, ance therfore vel forthat. Infernas, ance a vende of helle.
Idio, ance a clynche of gres. 35 Infigo, ance to styke.
Jecur, ance the mawe. Infula, ance a chesyble.
Jejuno, ance to vaste. Infundo, ance to gete in.
Jesa, ance a gesarme. Inglorio, ance to unmerthe.
' [Ugnacia, a chesekake.] Inguen, ance the grynde.
Ignitegium, ance keuerfve. 40 Inicio, ance atamye.
Ile, [ance the pythe of a penne.] Inicius, bygynnynge.
Ilex, ance a traytour. [Inicius, cia, cium, ance bygynnynge.]
Mlicitus, ance vnbehouely vel vnlefful. — Zrnaturalitas, ance ynkyndenesse.
Iilitus, ance bydavbyd. Innodius, ancé the nave of wheole.
Iilorsum, ance thydyrward. 45 Innumerus, ance wythoute numbre.
Illue, ance thydur, vel thydyrward. — Insequor, ance to folwe.
Iiludo, ance to scorne, or deceyue.  Jnsero, ance to plante to gedyr, or
Imber, ance a shure. brace to gedyr, or grafte.

590 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 591
Insidior, ance to traye, or aspye Jusquiamus, mi, qui et Insania dici-
seytfully. tur, herba est, ance hennebane.

Insigne, ance a Cote armere. [Justiciarius, ance a Justyse.]
Insitus, ance planted or graffed. Justicius, ance ryghtful.
Inspiro, ance to enspyre. 5 Justorium, ance a clappe of the mylle.
Instita . . . . quedam vestis talaris, Jutto, ance to Jutteye.
que dicitur stola, ance a roket. Jutum, ance Jutus.
Intellectus, ance vnderstondynge. Knipulus, i. parvus cultellus, ance a
Inter, ance bytwene. knyvet.
Interamentum, ance entraylys. 10
Interclausum, ance an enterclos. Labina, [ance a myre.]
Interclusorium, ance a pyndefolde. Labedo, ance a blotte.
Interdico, ance interdyte. Laciferis, ance a newe shappere.
Interea, ance the mene whyle. Lacinia, [ance a gore.]
Interfinium, ance the grystell of the 15 Lactis, ance a chesleb.
_ * nose. Lactes, ance roof of fyshe, or mylke
Interim, ance the menwhyle. of fyshe.
Internodium, ance the knepanne, or = Lactissinium, ance whyt mete.
wherlebon. [Lactis, ance rennet, or rennynge.]
Interrogo, ance to axe, or enquyre. 20 Lactitarium, ance charlet.
Interula, [ance a smok.] [Lattrinum, ance laton.]
Intestinum, [ance guttys.] Lacunar, ance a lase [or a louer.]
Intrepidus, ance bold. Laganum, ance a pancake.
Invenio, ance to fynde. Laero, -ronis, est quoddam animal
Invetero, ance to be olde. 25 pilosum ut Cuniculus [secundum
Invicem, ance to geder, to hepe. alios a wylde cat.]
Inunco, ance to faste with an hoke. Laguncula, ance a potel.
Inuolutarium, ance a voluper. Lama, a plate [Item lama, sley-
Inurbanitas, ance vylonye. brede.]
Jocale, ance a jewel. 30 Lameres, ance Elmawes.
Iperica, ance seynt Johnys worte. [Lamina calibina, ance a Gad of
Lpoletum, ance a mawe. stele.]
Ipopirgium, ance andyre. [Lanceolata, ance Rybwort.]
Iratus, ance wroth. Lanix, ance a sherde.
Trreveror, ance to unworshepy. 35 Lanugo, ance a loke of wulle.
Tris, ance dicitur flourdelys et Ireos, Lappa, ance a clote. ‘
ance gladyyn. Lapacia, [ance the rededokke.]
Lrudo, ance a waterleche. Lapicidium, ance a quarrey.
Trruo, ance to falle in. Lappates dicitur cibus ex oleribus
Isophagus, ance the weysande. 40 factus, ance Jutes.
Istac, ance herawey. Laquearia, ance a lase.
Juba, ancé a mane. Laqueus, ance a lace vel an¢ a grene.
Juliafera, ance a yong hynde. Lardum, ance laard.
Juncata, ance Juncade, siveacrudde Lata, ance a lache.
ymade yn ryshes. 45 [Lazulum, ance azure.]
Junctura, ance a Juynt. Laterale, ance a Corset.
Jussellum, quidam cibus factus ex  [Latoma, ance a stonax.|
ovis et lacte, ance Jussell. Latus, ance a syde.

f
592 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 593
Latrocinium, ance thefte. Limo, ance a rygwythe.

Lauacrum, [ance a lauer.| [Linguagium, ance langage.]

Lauandria, ance lauandre. [Lingua avis, ance stychwort.]

Laurus, ance a loreytre. |Lingua bovis, oxtunge.]

Laxa, ance a lees. 5 [Lingua canis, ance hundystonge.]

Lechitus, ance an elevat. [Lingua cervi, ance hertystonge.]

Lectisternium, ance bed clothes. Lingulo, anc to slynge-

Lectiuncula, ance a lessun. Linipes, anc \ynfet.

Legatus, ance a legat. Linipulus, ance a streche of flaxe.

Legenda, anc¢ a legende. 10 Linodium, ance a flexhoppe.

Lena, ance a bawde. Linosina, ance a curtyn.

Lenochides, ancé mercury. Lintheamen, ane a shete.

Lens, ancé a nyte. Linum, [flex.]

Lenticula, [ance a pokke.] Item est  Lippo, ance to watery with ye.
vas oliarium ex auro et argento15 Liridus, i. diversi coloris, ance Py- |
[ance a crismatorye, or an Elvat.] keled.

Lentigo, i. lenticula, [frekun.] Liripipium, ance a typet.

Lentiscus, ance a beeche. Lista, ance Segge.

Leporarius, [a grehunde.] Litatorium, ance a slykston.

Lepido, to speke fayre. 20 Litor, ance a dauber.

Lepus, [an hare.} Lituus, ance a lylkynghorn.

Lepusculus, [ance a leveret.] Locax, ance a brace.

~Lesca, ance a shefure of brede [or  Locium, ance lye, or pysse.
of fleys or fyshe or a leshe.] Locusta, ance a honysouke.

[Lesco, to leshe.] Lodi, ance a blanket.

Leuia, ance a spanne. 25 Lodium, ance a lover.

Libertinus, [ance a frankelayn.] Loligo, {a codelynge.]

Libertas, ance ffredom. Lolium, [cokkul.]

Libum, ance a wastell. Lolidodium, ance a kartsadell.

Lichinus, ance the weke of a candele. 30 Longanimitas, ance longnesse of soule,

Lichinus, -na, -num, ance gnast of or durynge.
candele. Lorimarius, ance a sporyare, or a

Liciatorium, ance a tredel. lormener.

[Zicisca, a grekyche-] Lotriz, ance a lauander.

Licium, [a throme.] 35 [Lubrica, -ce, aruwbale.]

Lienteria, ance the flux, Lucanica, [frankemyl.]

Ligeus, ance lygeman. Lucar, [aneé a park.]

Ligeancia, ance lygeance. Lucarius, ance a fforstere, [or a par-

[Lignipedium, ance a stylte.] kare}

Ligumen, ance Grewell. 40 Lucterinus, ance an Otyr.

Ligustrum, ance a primerose. Lucetum, ance Wareyne.

Lima, ance a vyle. Lucibricunculum, ancé a fforborystok.

Limaca et limax, ance a snayl. Luciferum, ance the day sterre.

Limas, ance a barmelothe. Lucinus, ance a luce.

Limatorium, ance lytarge or lymayle. 45 Lucillus, ance a pyke.

Limax, i. limaca, ance a snayle. Luctor, [ance to wraxle.]

Limen, ance a thresfolde. Luctuosus, ance ful of mornynge-

Limes, the cop of an hylle, Lucubrax, wonynge of monythe,

594 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 595
Ludus, ancé a game or a pleye. Manceres, ance a sylkethrede.
Lugeo, [ance to grone | Marascallus, ance a Marchal.
Lumbricus, ance a maddock. Margus, ance a plovere.
Lumbus, ance the lende. Marito, ance to marye.
Lupinus, [ance Tylles.] 5 Maritagium, ance wedloke.
Lupus, [ance a wolf] Itemancea pyke.  Marsupium, ane a pautener.
Lureisca, ane¢ a luyre. MMartirologium, ance the martylogye.
[Lureisco, ance to luyre.] Martrix, ancé a martron.
Luteus, ance skarlet. Mastixo, [ance to chowe.]
Indericius, [an Oter.] 10 Mastromaticus, ancé a sothseyer.
Lutus, ance skarlet. Mataxo, ance to hychele.
Luziuium, ance lye. Mataxa, an hychele.
Luxidromium, ance a broke. Mataxator, mataxatrix, an hycheler.
Mataxarius, an hychelmaker.
_Machera, ance a dressurenyf. 15 Materfamilias, ance an huswyf.
Macianus, a crabbetre. Materacium, ance a materas.
Macianum, a crabbe. Matertera, ance a beldame.
Macula, ance a mayl. Matria, ance the panetrie.
Mafora, ance a voluper. Matrix, ance mader.
Maglis, ance a cavistok. 20 Mauiscus, ance a thryshe.
Magnitudo, ance gretnesse. Mediamna, ancé a moot.
Majus, ance more. Medo, [ance meth.]
Malaxo, ance to enede. Medum, ance mede.
Male, ance wykkedly., Megarus, ance a makerel.
Malvia, ance the ebbe. 25 Meger, ance wode sek.
Malum macianum, ance a Crabbe. Melanurus, a merlynge vel ut qui-
Malum quiriacum, ance a Costard. busdam videtur a makerel.
Malus, ance a maste. Melaturus, anté a breme de mere.
Mamphora, ance a mokedore. Melessa, ance medeswote.
Mammonetus, ance a marmoset. 30 Mellilotum, ance hertyluere.
Mandarus, ance a wortstoke. [Meilissa, ance Medewort.]
Mango, ance a cursure. Melota, [ance a sclavayn.|
Manglisa, ance a choppechurche- [Mellotum, ance threleuedgras.]
Mangonale, ance a mangnel, or a Aembranarius, a perchymyner.
gunne. 35 Mempirium, ance a wyps.
Manerium, ance a manere- Mendium, ance a dressyngbord.
Manica, [ance a manicle.] Mensaculum, ance a bordenyf.
Manicula, ance a Pynet lor Pyuet.]  Mensacula, ance a dressyngenyf.
Maniculo, [ance to manycle.} Mensifium, ance a cuppebord.
Mancipium, ance a spayre- 40 Mensuro, ance to mesure.
Mansio, ance a dwellynge. {Mentascum, ance horsmynte.]
Mantus, ance a metayn. Menticulosus, [ance Ballukod.]
Manubium, ance a spayre. Mentum, ance a chyn.
Manubrium, ance an hafte. Mephas, ance the mose.
Manulia, ance a spayere. 45 Menusa, ance menuse.
[Afanuus, ance an hakneyman.] Mercimonium, ance Merchaundyse.
Manutercium, ance an handstaf. Item — Mercurialis, ance Mercurye.
ane an handele. Meremium, ance tymber.
39

596 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 597
Mergus, ance a Cormeraunt. Motus terre, ance erthequave.
Ventus meridialis, ance Southwynde. Mucidus, ance yvyned.

Merlinus, ance a merlyn. Mucido, ance to vynye.

Merula, ance a throstel. Muco, ance to movie.

Mespila, a medeler. 5 Mugil, a myluel,

Messuaginm, ance a mesplace. Muleitrum, ance a payle.

Metellus, ance a reperefe. Multicolor, ance Medle.
Micatorium, ance a grate. Multipes, ance a lokecheste, or a
Millefolium, ance Myllefoyle vel Nose- shrympe.

blede. 10 Multo, ance a wether or a moton.
Mimilogium, [ance mynstrisye.] [Munella, ance a shakel.] '
Mineria, ance a myne vel Ore vel mi- — Musculus, [ance the sperlyner.]

nera secundum quosdam et ance Mussetum, ance musserouns,

ore..., as goold ore, syluer Aussum, ance endelyshame.

ore etc, 15 Mustilio, ance Mestylyon.

Minito, ance to gye, or gouerne. Muta, ance a meet of hundys.
Minium, ance vermylon, ([Mutilamen, a meym.]
Mintuosa, ancé Smerwort. Mutilatus, [ance meymed.]
Minutal, [a kantel.]

Mirra, ance Maser. 20 Nappa, ance a rybbe,
(Misothonium, a Spytylhous.] Napta, ance herdys.

Missile, ance a shafte & a shetel & Napus, ance Nep.

a gauelot. Naris, ance a nose, or a Nostrel.
Miztilio, ance Draggeye. Nasturcium, [ance walcarse.]
Mixtus, ance medled. 25 Nativus, ance bonde.

Mola piperis, an*e pyperquerne. Navigator, ance a rower.
Molendinum, ance a mylle. Nebula, ance a wafur,
Molendinarius, ancé a mylnard. Nec, ance nougt.
Mollis, ance neshe, Nefandus, ance a cursed.
Molosus, [a blod honde.] 30 Negligencia, ance slowthe.
Molucrum, [the mylle spyndelle.] Negocius, -cij, hic dicitur demon noc-
Monacha, ance a nunne. turnus qui illudit homines, vel qui
Mongotorium, ance Mongeorn, ludit cum hominibus, ance the game
Monicio, ance an heste, or warnynge. gobelyn.
Monitum, ance a byddynge, or a35 Neriges, est spiritus malignus tor-
warnynge, quens homines de nocte, ance the
Mono, ance a maner of bef. mare i, Epialtes.
Moracia, [ance a walnote.] WNeutropogoldium, ance a lumpe of
Morbillus, ance the meseles. brede.
Morella, ance Morelle. 40 Nimius, ance Overmyche.
Moris, an’é a roche. Ninerus, ance a Cokewolde.
[Morsus galline, ance Chykemete.] Wisi, ance but.
Morus, ance a mulberytre. Item mo-  Nisilla, ance a lytyl shynynge.
rus est quidam piscis, ance an  Niscus, ance shynynge.
haddock. 45 Niseo, ance to shyne.
Moticium, ance colys. Nitrum, [fullers cley.]
Motorium, ance a Potstykke. Nodus, ance a Cnotte, or a botun.
Motus, ance sterynge. [Wodosa, a nosul, avis est.)

598 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY, 599
Noster, ance owre. Omembrana, ance a ballue cod,
Notio, ance knowyng. Omentum, ance a pauncheclout [vel
Noxa, ance a gnawynge. Myggerne.]
Nucha, ance the hole of the polle. Omestra, ance a myggerne.
[Nubula, a wafur.] 5 [Omiplata, ance the shulderblad.]
Nucleum, ance rede pyle. Omo, ance of o manere.
[Nucifragus, ance a notehach.} Omoplata, ance the shulderbon.
Nucleus, ance the kernell. Onoforium, a costrel.
Nudius tercius, thys day thre days. Operarius, a werkman.
Nudius quartus, thys day foure days. 10 Operarium, ance a shoppe or a
Nullatenus, anc no manere. werkehous,
Nullo, ance anoynter. [Opifium, ance an hamburwe.]
Numacius, ance a penitollere. [Optridium, pe raye.]
Numella, ance a shakel. Opploma, atargett. Opplamacus, ance
Nuncubi, ance Now where. 15 a peeler.
Orca, ance a tankard.
Obba, genus est calicis, ance a Juyste. Ordinale, ance an ordynal.
Obduro, ance to make harde. Orditura, ance warpe.
Obelo, to shete and smyte wyth a Orewis, ance drevel. }
bolte. 20 Orexo, [ance to dryvele.]
Oblacio, ance offerynge. Orgeo, seynge wyth mowth.
Oblecto, to lycoruse delyte. Origo, ance a berthe, or a begyn-
Oblector, ance to helpe, or delyte. nynge.
Oblata, ance an obeley. Oristrum, ance a roket.
Obligar, ance a gartur. 25[Orare, ance to hemny.]
Obolatus, ance an halfpeny worth. Orobus, ance a vech.
Obprobrium, ance despyte. Orpina, ance orpyne vel hassewort.
Obrigeo, ance to be a ferd. Ortocopus, ance a Symenel.
Obsequium, ance buxumnesse, or ser- Ortogonium, ance a squyre.
vyse. 30 Ostorium, ance a stryche.
Obsitus, ance by set a bowte, or  Ovilactum, ance Jussel.
plantyd a bowte. Oxillo, ance to wexe soure,
Obstupefacio, ance to make a ferd, -
or a gast. Pabulum, ance voddur.
[Obstupesco, ance to wexe aferd, or 35[Pagania, ance hethnesse.]
dulle, or an egghe, ut dentes fili- Pala... Item dicitur latum instru-
orum obstupescunt.| mentum ferreum ad opus ignis
Obvadio, to legge wagere. [a pele.]
[Ocellulus, ance an ylet.] Palalia, ance festys of palys.
Ocra, ance Oker. 40 Palatum, ance the roof of the mowthe,
_ Ocrea, ance a boot. Palea, ance chaf.
Odorinsequus, [a brachet or a spay- Paleare, an*¢ a dewlappe. '
nel.] - Palestris, ance a morhen.
Oestrum, [ance a brese.] [Palicium, -cij, est quedam clausura
[Oficialis, ance an Offycyal.] 45 facta ex palis, ance a Palys.]
[Olementum, ance the element.] Palladium, ance an ymage of palas.
Olosa, ance a breme, or an Alose. Pailliditas, [ance palnesse.]
Omasus, ance a grete puddynge. Pallidus, [ance pale.]

|

600 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 601
Palmito, ance bargayne. Patroniso, ance to wowe, or to de-
Palpebra, ance an yeled. fende.
Palus, [ance myre-} Paulo ante, a lytylbyfore.
Palus, ancé a stake, or a stode. Pazillus, ance a culture. A
Pandoxina, ance a brewhous. 5 Pecten, -tinis, hic, est instrumentum
Panduca, ance a baggepype. pectendi, a combe, et temendi a
Panellus, ance a panell. sleye ... et quidam piscis, ance’
Panetarius, ancé a pantere. a plays, et dicitur, ance a batyn-
Panificina, ance a bakhous. . dore.
Panillus, ance a panell. 10 Pectrix, ance « kembestere.
Panitor, ance a Panytere. Pecia, ance a pece, or lytyl part of
Pannagium, ance Pannage. a thyng.
Pannator, ance a drapere. Pecoides, ancé a ffulmere, or a Pulkat.
Pannicipium, ance a presse. Pedalis, [a laste.]
Pannosus, ance thredbare. 15 Pedana, ance a vampey.
Panus, -ni, hic, virgula illa circa Pedano, ance to vampeye.

quam trama involvitur. Idem et  Pedica, ance a panter.

canellus dicitur, ancé a Quele.  Pedinus, ance a pawne.

Item i. spola. Item est quidam Pedules . . . pars caligarum que

piscis, ancé a lynge. 20 pedem capit, ance a vampey-
Paniceus, ance ragged. Pedulus, [ance a pynson, or a sok.)
Papatum, ance pap. Pegma, baculus cum massa plumbi
Papaver, ance Popy. in summitate pendente et ance a
Papilio, ance a boturflye. babul.
Papirus, ance a bulryshe. 25 Pelegum, ance Pylyole. ‘
Papirum, ance Papyre. Pellicia, ance a pylche.
Papula, ance a whelke. Pellicium, ance a pylche.
Paradella, ance the rede dokke. Pellicillum, ance a brushe.
Paragus, ance a bryd of yuel hap. Pelicula, ance a rybbyngskyn.
Parasivus, ancé the heue of a knyf. 30 Pelliparius, [a Scynner.]
Parcimonia, ance sparynge. Pellura, ance Pellure.
Parella, ance dokke. Pelvis, a basyn.
Parcus, ancé a Park. Pendulum, ance a Pendaunt.
[Paritonius, ance the rownde of the Pennarium, ance a Pennere.

erth.] 35 Pensaciones, ance truage.
Parcior, ance to party. Penucella, parvum veaillum, ance a
Parura, ance a Parure. penselle.
Pascua, ance a fiedyngstede. Penulatus, ance yfurred.
Passim, ance fro pas to pas. Penularius, ance a parmenter [or a
Passio, ancé a passyon, or a tho-40 _ scynnere.]

lynge. [Penus, an horstayle.] i
Pasta, ance Dowe. Pepillo, to erye as a pecock.
Pastellus, ance a Pastey. Peplum, ance a wynpul.
Patera, ance a bolle. Pepo, [ance mortreuus.]
Paterfamilias, ance anhousbondeman. 45 Pepulus, ance a bolastre. '
Patina, [ance a Peele.] Peraptum, an‘é Papelotes.
Sacerdotissa patrina, anv¢ a wom-  Perazitus, ance a gloton.

mangossyb. Perca, ance a perche.

:

602 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY, 603

Perdilla, ance a dokke. Pindo, ance to cnede.

Perdix, ance a Partryche. Pindo, ancé a baker, or a kneder.

Peregrinus, ance an hobeye. [Pionia, ance Pyonye.]

Perendinator, a Surgyon. Piper longum, ance longpiper.

Pergamenum, ance Perchemyn, 5 Piper album, whyt pyper.

Pergulum, ance a Pyndfold. Piperis mola, ance a Pyper querne.

[Perjacio, ance to perjette.] Piponelia, ance Pympernele.

Perimetrum, ance aboute mesure. Pipunculus, ance a flaveoun.

Pipsimo, -as, to pare a thynge. Piramus, hegh shap oftreys.

Peritoria, ance Perytorye. 10 Piracium, ance a Perehorde.

Perjuro, ance to forswerye. Piretum, ance Pereye.

Perma, ance a Bokelere, Pisto, ance to knede or bake.

Perna, ance a flyeche. Pistrinum, ance a bachous.

Pero, -ronis, hic, quoddam calcia-  Pistrio, ance to moolde or bake.
mentum rusticorum amplum et al- 15 Pistrio, ancé a moolder or a bakere.
tum, quod alio nomine dicitur Cul-  Pituita, ance the Pyppe.
poneus [ance Cokeres.] Placenta, {a symnel.]

Peronizo, ance to purchase. Placito, ance to plede.

Perpendiculum, {a plumet.] Piaeitum, ance plee.

Perseverancia, ance long lestynge. 20 Planatorium, ancé a boture, instru-

Persicaria, culrage. mentum ferrarij .est.

Persoleo, assidue discere vel ance to — Planicies, ance Playnet etiam in panno
welwone. ancé dicitur Champe.

Persuadeo, ance to egge or to tyse. Plantaria, ance plontes.

Pertica, ance a Perche. 25 Platanus, ance a plane.

Pervigil, ance a Wayte. Plebs, ancé rascayl of folke. oe

[Pervinca, ance Pervynke.] Plectrum, an% a wreste.

Pescorvi, ance Crowfot. Plostrum, ancé a chare of ij whelys.

Pessellum, ancé a barre, or a lacche. Plumacius, ance a plumere avis est.

Petilius, ance a bolt. 30 Pluma, ance a ffether.

Petulium, ance a bolt. Plumbatum, ance a coope of leed.

Petulus, -la, -lum, ance whyt foted Plumbum, ance leed.
et dicitur de equo. Plumbarius, ane a plomer.

Phalanga, ancé a coveltre. Plumbaria, ance a plomerye.

[Philosella, ance lanworte, or Mus-35 Plumbilamina, ance a plate of leed.
here.] Pluscula, ance a bocule.

Phocus, ance a Purpays. Plutum, ance rayn.

Pica, [a powch.] Podarius, ance a Croser.

[Picarius, quidam ciphus, ance a  Podex, ance the endeles gut.
curskyn.] 40 Podiarius, ancé a croser.

Pictacio, -as, ance to puynte, or to Podium, ance a croos.

| clovte. Polenta, ance wort.
WBietaciccrius, ance a Cobulare, or a — Lolentriticum, ance a bultur.
| Cloutere. Polentritico, ance to bulty.

Picten, ance a tye. 45 Polceacus, ancé longynge to berthe.

[Pigma, a babul.] Polimitus, Ray or motle or medlee.

Pigreo, ane to be slow. Polipus, a loppestere.

Pilestros, wode. [Politridium, a bultyngeloth.]

604 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 605

[Pollisium, ance an ynehe.] Priaula, ancé a perche.

Pollictor, ance a bornyshour. Primulus, ancé a lytylfurst.

Pollubrum, ancé a broshe. Priorissa, ance a Pryorysse.

Polictorium, ance a broshe. Privignus, a stypsone.

Pomacium, ance pomys. 5 Privigna, a stypdowtur.

Popliliga, ance a gartour. Prius, ance rather.

Populatus, ance folk wonyynge. Procella, {a storme.]

Populus, ance a populertre. Processionale, ance a processional.

Porca, a porpays- Procor, ance to wowe.

Porcarium, an®e a swynstye. 10 Procus, ance a wowere.

Porrigo, ance pokkes. Proditor, ance a traytour, or a tur-

Porretarium, ancé a lekbed. mentour,

Porrata, ance porrey. Proditus, ance betrayed.

Porretum, ance a porrete. Prodicio, ance tresoun.

Porrum, anc leeke. 15 Produculus, madprud.

[Portale, ance a porche.] Prolego, to outlawe.

Porticus, ance a porche. Promereor, ance to deserue.

Portisus, ance ful of hetys. Promico, to shewe, or shyne.

Portoforium, ane a Porthos. Promitto, ance to behote.

Posse, ance a lytyl hauynge, or a20[Promotorium, ance a prychel.]
lytyl myght. Pronuba, ance a bawdstrot.

Posterior, ance hyderour. Pronubus, ance a bawde.

Postis, ance a post. Prope, ance ny.

Postsellium, ancé the hyndur assyoun —‘Propono, je to purpose et
of a sadyl. 25 Propositum,Jance a purpos-

[Potella, ance a potel.] Propugnacula, ance kerneles.

Potisso, [ance to syppy.] Proreto, ance to sterne or to stere

Potus, [ance drynke.} out.

Prece, ance bedus. Prosectum, ance a Jeblet of the

Precinctus, ance ygurd. 30 goos.

Precox, an‘ sunnerysynge. Prosequor, ance to purchase,

Prefero, ance to bere by fore. Prostro, ance to caste doyn.

Prefiguro, ance to tokyn byfore. Prostro, ance to cast down.

Prepositor, an°é a setter of mes. Prossus, ance owterly, sed melius

Prepositus, ane a reue. 35 prorsus.

Presellum, ancé the assyon of a sa- Provideo, ance to purveye, or to
delle. see byfore.

Presento, [ance to presenty.] Provoco, ance to tourne & to calle

Presumptuo, anc to mystake. out.

Presumo, ance to take on honde, or 40 Proaimo, ancé to make next, or ny.
awntur. Prurio, [ance to ytehe.]

Pretendo, ance to go by fore. Psalterium, ance a sawtrey.

Preteritus, ane ypassyd. Pudoro, ance to shame.

Preteritus, ance a passynge. Pugil, [a champyon.]

Prevaleo, ance to be myghty, or more 45 Pula, ance medlyng of water and
worthe. wyne.

Prevenio, ance to come by fore. Pulex, ancé a flee.

Previdencia, a forsyghte. Pulegium, [ance hullewort.]

606 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 607
Pullificio, to haeche chykyn, to make — [Rasta, ance doder.]

derke. Ratonicida, ance a ratoner.
[Pullegium, ance hullewort.] Recano, to erye as a tygre.
Pulliferus, ance a pultur. Recedo, ance to go ayen.
Pultria, ance pultrie. 5 Recensitus, ance newe rype.
Pullificacio, ance hacchynge. Recepcio, ance a receyuynge.
Pulmo, ance the longon. <[Receptor, ance a receyuor.]
Puls, ance Gruel. Recinum vel Recinium, matronale ope-
Pulsatorium, ance a clapere. rimentum sive quedam vestis vel
Pulso, ance to rynge. - 10 pallium quod vulgo dicitur Movortem
Puluinar, ance a bolster. vel quoddam rete.
Pumex, ance pomys. Reelusorium, ance a Pyndfold.
Pupilla, ance the appul of the ye. Recreo, ance to fylle or aye make.
Pusio, ance a sneuelard. Recubitus, ance syttynge or lyynge.
Pustula, ance pokkes. 15 Recupero, ancé to rekeuery.
Putacia, ance a skantulon. Recussorium, ance a hamour.
Putacio, to poynte, or to cloute. Reda, ance a thylle.
Putor, ance stenche. Refrigerium, ance helpe kepynge.

Regilla, ance a Quenyscloth.

Quactum, ance creyme. 20 Regina prati, ance medesewte.
Quadra, ance a cantel. Regimen, ance Gouernayle. -
Quadratus, ance squared. Regnum, ance a kyngdome.
Qualia, ance a Quayle. Rella, pannus est ance Ray.
Quantum, ance how myche. Relaxo, ance to relese.
Quare, ance why. 25 Remex, ance a sterysman.
Quarrura, ance a quarre. Renuncio, ance to forsake.
Quaternus, ance a Quayer. Repecio, ance to clute.
Quaxillum, ance a tappehose. Repeciarius, ance a clutere.
| Querela, ance a playnt. Repente, ance Sodenly.
Querelor, ance to playne. 30 Repentinus, ance sodeyn.
Querimonia, ance a playnt. Repeto, ance to aske ayen.
Queremonior, ance to playne. Repetundus, ance Sad ayen askyng.
Questor, ance a Pardonere. Repofocilium, ance an hedbronde.
|| Quia et quoniam, ance for why. Repositorium, ance an almarye.
Quini, ance but. 35 Reprehendo, ance to vndernyme.
| Quinterno, ance a gytterne. Lteprobo, ance to repreve.
Quintus, ance the fyfihe. Repulvero, ance to poudere ayen.
e| (Quiriacum, a Costard.] Requies, ance rest.
(Quoversum, ance vhodurward.] Requiesco, ance to bygynne to rest.
I 40 Respublica, ance a comyn thynge.
Rabulum, i. organum, ance glee. Resero, ance to ynluke, or to shewe.
Radius, ance a spoke. Respondeo, ance to answere.
Ralus, ance a fleyng addur. Resupinus, ance wyde ope.
Rana, ance a frogge. Reticula, ance a calle.
(Raphanus, ance Rapys.] 45 Reticulum, a calle. Item reticulum,
ree, ance a rauenere, or Rauasch- a rayle [vel a rayne.]

ynge. Retinaculum, ance a Rayne.
ia ance a thrushe. Retiolum, ance a calle.

608 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 609
Retrogradus, {ance Restyfe.] Salgearium, ance a sawger.
Retrorsum, ance bakward. Salpo, i. cornubium, ance an horn-
Retroverto, to turne abak, pype-
Retundo, ance to smyte ayen. Salsiamentum, anc sauce.
Revolus, ance a Pedeler. 5 Salsicia, ance a sawsyge.
Ricus, vndoynge of thowt. Salsarium, ané a sawcere.
Rimatorium, ance a serchour. _ Saltulus, ance a loppystere.
Ringo, ance to grenne [or rory.] Salutaris, ancé helful or holsum.
Risidus, ance a slyngeston. Sambuca, ance eldertre. Item sam-
Ritmus, ance ryme. 10 buca est quoddam genus simphonie
Roba, ance a Robe. musicum, ance a Gytterne.
Rochia, ance a Roche. [Sanalam, ance Prymerole.]
Rocus, homo scacci, ance a Roke. Sandix, [ance madur.]}
Roga, ance a Dole. Sanguinacium, ancé a blodpuddynge.
Rogitum, ance a roket. 15 Sanguineus, ance blody.
Rosa marina, [ance Rosemaryne.] Sanguisecus, ancé a blodhonde.
Rostrum, [ance a byle.] Saponaria, ance Crowsope.
Rostrum porcinum, ancé sowthystell. Sarabarra, sunt fluxa et sinuosa
Rotula, ance a rolle. vestimenta, vel capitum tegmina, vel
Rotundus, ance rond. 20 anc a sclauayn.
Rubella, ance a ruget, piscis est. Sarabra, toches of maystre.
Rubeta, ance a tode. Sarculum, [ance a wedehoke.]}
[Ruberca, quodam herba, ance Gla- Sardallus, a sparlynge.

dyne.] Sarrio, ancé to clene, cutte or wede.
Rubescens, ance shamfast. 25 Sarissa, ance a materas, et quoddam
Rubedo, ance rednesse. genus armorum, ance a Jakke of
Rubea, ance mader. defense.
Rubiaria, wyn of grapys. Saticulum, ancé a sedlepe..
Rubiginator, ance a fiorbour. Satisfacio, ance to do ynowe.
Rubus, ane a bushe. 30 Satrape, ance seriawntes.
Ructo, ance to balke. [Saturia, ance Ballokwort.]
Rudentes, ance Cables. Satureia, ance sauereye.
Rudes, ance a Cable. [Sauponaria, ance Crovsope.]
Rugella, i. rubella, ance a ruget. Savina, [ance sauyne.])
Ruga, [ance a wrynkyl, or a playt.]35 Sauma, ance a Sadylcharge.
Auino, ance to falle. Scabiosa, ance scabiose.
Rumbus, ance a Sturgyon. Serabo, -bonis, hic, i. vespe longiorc
tupa, ance a braoke. crura habentes. Item invenitur Cra
Ruscus, ance a grost, or furses. bo, -bonis et scabo, ance a dore.
Russetus, ance Russet. 40 Scaccarium, ance a Chekere.

Scaccus, ance the meny of the cheker

Saber, ance grauell. Scale, ance a laddere.
Saccus, ance a sakke. Scalpo, [ance to eracche.]
Sacristerium, ance the sextrye, Scalprum, ancé a grate, or a shaue
Saginum, ance saym. 45 Scansile, ance a styrop et ance a style
Salamandra, ance Oreket. Scannarium, ance a bankere.
[Salatrum, Suredokke.] Scarabo, ance a scharabot [et ant
Salgea, ance sawge. a bytylle.]

610 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 611
Scariaballum, ance a Cogge. Sedile, [ance a banker.|
Scarifacio, ance to grate. Sedum, ance a worde space.
Scarifactor et Scarifactrixz, ance a  Seforniculum, ance a porteolygs.
gratere. Seysina, ance a sesyng.
Scariola, ance the mylkthystel. 5 Seisino, ance to sese.
Searletum, ance Scarlet. Selabicalis, ance a kartladdere.
Scarpsella, ance a seryppe. Sello, ance to sadely.
Scaurus, ance longe heles. Semianimis, half coragyous.
Scedaculum, an‘¢ a scantulon, Semicinctorium, ance a synk or a
Scelero et sceleror, ance to do felanye.10 lace.
[Seia, ance the whyrlebon.] Semilio, ance a sedlepe.
Scientum, ance a sparre. : Seminus, ance lesse.
Scindula, ance a shyngul. Item ance Seminimus, half lesse.
a blad. Semiorculus, ance an arche.
Scindularius, a bladesmyth. 15 Semiquarta, ance a pynte.
Scipio, ance a maner of an hokedstaf. | Semoveo, ance to do a wey.
Scissorium, ance a trenchere. Senecta, ance age.
Scitor, ance a querour. Senescallus, ance a steward.
Sclavina, est vestis peregrinorum, ane Senio, ance an hasard.
a Sclauayne. 20 Sensualitas, ance a seylle, reson.
Scocia, ance Scotlond. Septiformis, ance seuenfolde.
Scon, interjectio, ante showe, ut di- Sepum, ance talwe.
citur gallina lirida secon, ance py-. Sericum, ance selk.
keled hen show. Serarius, ance a lokyere.
Scordion allia, {ance wyldgarlyk.] 25 Seromollum, ance wort.
Scordiscus, anc a shave. Seropelinus, ance thredbare.
[Scorioballum, ance a cogwhele.] [Seropellina, ance a roket.]
Scorpio, quoddam animal venenosum. Serpedo, ance meseles.
Item dicitur quidam piscis vel ver- _ Serpigo, ance a tetyr.
mis, ance a stykelyng. 30 Serpillum, ance peletur [vel hony-
Serato, ance to cracehe, souke.]
Screa, [ance Spotel.] Servicium, ance servyse.
Sereo, [ance to spete.] Serula, ane a stapul.
Scrinium, vas vel locus ubi libri vel Serum, ance. whey.
thesauri servantur. Item ance a35 Seta, ance an hoggeshere.
Serene. Setosus, ance brystely.
Scrophus, ance a lytyl grauel. Shopa, ance a shoppe.
Seruta, extai. tripe, ane‘thefelvelde. Sibula, ance an ale.
| Seulpo, ance to graue. Sicca, quidam piscis est, ané a codel.
Scurulus, a squyrel. 40 Siccus, ance drye.
, Scutella, ance a dyyshe. Siccatus, ance dryed.
Scutica, ance a whippe. Sigesterium, ance draaf.
Scutiger, [ance a geman.] Signaculum, ance a clapse.
Seutra, ance a chawfur. [Silenius, a gogyn.]e
Scutum, [a bokeler.] 45 Siler, ance an Osyer.
Secretum, ane privyte. Scilicet, ance that is to sey [or to
¢ Securicula, [an hachet.] wyte.]
Sedenus, une the syxtencthe, Siligo, ance rye,
40

612 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 613 |
[Sition, soulond.] Spica, [ance an Er.]
Silvanus, ance a wodewose. Spinter, ance a pyn.
Silurus, ance a loche. Spinus, ance a Slotre, vel a thorn.
Simallus, ance a sperlynge. Spiramen, ancé a blast. i
[Simicosus, ance Nockestrange.| 5 Spissus, ance thykke.
Simio, to make Sfnattyd. Splen, ance the mylte.
Simplicitas, ance Symplenesse. Spola, ance a Quyl, or a Spole.
[Simplo, an axebathere.] Sponda, ance a bolster [et ance a
Sinautem, ance or ellys. forme.]
Sinapium, ance Mustard. 10 Spondile, ance the ryggebon [vel the
[Sinamomum, ance Synamome.| brest bone.]
Sincopi, ance Swonynge. Sporta, ance a lepe [or a basket.]
Sindon, ance Sendel. Spuma, ance berme.
Singularis, ance a bor. [Spumatorium, a skemere.]
Singultio, [to snobbe, or syche.] 15 Squama, ance a scale or a mayle.
Singulatim, ance fro on to an other. Sguinancia, ance the Quynsy.
: [Sinimone, ance Grundyswylye. Stabes, ance a spotte.
Sinoglostorium, ance a flodegate. Stalerum, ance a colrake.
Siquidem, ance forsothe. Stamen, ance warpe.
Siquominus, ance wythoute lesse. 20 Stannum, ance tyn.
Sirma, i. cauda vestis feminarum,  [Stapulum, ance a Stapul.]
ance a trayne. Statuncula, ance a tryst.
[Sirentorium, a warrok. Staurus, ance stoore.
Sirna, an haddok.] Stauro, ance to store.
[Stromellum, ance wort.] 25 [Sterea, ance the ysecrace.]
Sistarca, [ance an Almarye.] Sterlingus, ance a striylyng or a peys-
Sitractio, ance fallynge. peny.
Smaragdus, ance an emerawde. Sternium, ance a bedstede.
Smigmator, ance a sopere. Sternulo, [ance to fnese.]
Solatrumi.morella, ane smalmorell. 30 Sterquilinium, ance a donghepe.
Soldanus, a Sowdan. Stibio, to starche.
Soldarius, ance a Sowdeour. [Stilio, ance uely.]
Soldatura, ance Sowdere. Stinctum, t. satirion, [ane sanycle.]
Solea, ance a Sole. Stipa, anc stode.
[Solfo, ance to solfe.] 35 Stoica, ance a porche peyntyd.
Solicitus, ance besy. Storilicitor, ance a Purvyour.
Solidatus, ance a shyllyngworth. Storium, ancé a matte, or a bed.
Sororitas, an°¢ a systerhede. Storiator, a mattere.
Spadix, [ance bay.] Stragulum, ance ray. ~
[Sparagus, ance Colverfot.] 40 Stratum, ance lytour.
Sparrus, ance a rowe. Strena, Anselle.
Spasmus, ance the Crompe. Strengula, quidam piscis, ance a che-
Spatula, ance a Cambrel, and a sclyse. veyne.
Spectaculum, ance wordelys vanyte.  Strido, [ance to grenne or grente with
Item est instrumentum iuvans vi- 45 _ the theth.]
sum, a spectacle. Strigilis, an horscombe.
Sperula, i. parva spera [et ance a [Stropa, a styrop.]
bowle.] |Strophiarius, a Gyrdelere.]

614 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY, 615
Studia, ance a swyngelstok. Surculus, [ance a Graffe.]
Stupa, ance herdes. Suscito, ance to arere, or to areyse.
Stupo, ance to stoppe with herdes. Suspendium, ancé a tredel.
Sturnus, quedam avis, ance a staar, — Suspirium, ance syghynge.
Suador, ance monyshynge. 5 Suspiro, [ance to syche.}
Subdivo, i. sine tecto vel sub celo, Sutura, ance a Sem.
ance theroute.
Suber, [ance sape.] Tabulatus, ance a kyrnelle of the
Subjectus, ance vndureast. walle.
Subitus, ance sodeyne. 10 Talpefodium, ance a wonthylle.
Sublapheum, ance a Shelvingstole. Talus, ance an hele.
Subligar, [ance a gartur.] Tam, ance aswell.
Sublimare, ance ouerslaye. Tamen, ance neuertheles.
Subpedium, ance a tredel. [Tansetum, Tansey.]
Subsellium, [a panel.] 15 Tantillus, ance a dwrfe.
[Subspicio, ance to loure.] Tapetum, [a tapyt.]
Subula, ance an ale, Tapisterium, ance a Testour,
| Subverto, ance to destruye, to tune Taratantara, . . . est instrwmentum
vpsedoun. quo farina colatur, Et instrumen-
Succidium, ance Sovse. 20 tum cujus percussione granum de-
Suceingo, ance to gyrde vndur. Sluit inter molas.molendini, ance a
Succuticus, ance ful of juse. clacke [et ance an hersystete] et est
Sucus, ance Juys. clangor tubarum.
Suctus, ance a tenche, Tardarius, ancé a tareel quoddam
Sudarium, ance a mokedore. 25 genus nisi.
Sudoro, [ance to swete.] Tardus, ance slowe.
Suffarcino, ance to tukky. Targia, anc a targat, or a pavys.
Suffragina, ance a knokel. Tarinus, quidam vermis lardi, ance a
Suffulcio, ance to putte vndur. mathe.
[Suillus, i. parva sus, a yelte.] 30[Zarta, a tarte.]
[Suistacium, a Swynysty.] Tassis, ance a mowe.
Supera, ... quedam vestis,ancearoket. Taxus, ance a brok.
Supero, i. pannuim rugare, ance to Taxus, ance an Eev.
rydely. Tegilectum, ance a coverlyth.
Superaltare, ance a superaltarye. 35 Temo, [a thylle.]
Supercilium, ance a browe. Temporatus, ance ytempored.
Superculum, ance a covercule. Tena vel Tenia, lance a flrenge vel
[Superfilo, ance et gallice, to surfyle.] a coyfe.]
| Superliminare, [ance a lyntel.] Tenaculum, [ance a rynge of a dore.]
Superpellicium, ance surplys. 40 Tener, [ance tendere or neshe.]
Supertunica, ance a Syrcote. Tenere, ance sherdes. 7
Supinus, ance wholnya. Tenia, ance an herstrynge.
Supara, ance a roket. Tengiagio, ance a tenche,
Suppa, ance a Sope. Tenorcula, ance a telor of an arblast.
Suppo, ance to Supe. 45 Tensa, ance a vedme.
Supplicio, ance fallyng under man. Tenta, ance a tente, or an harwe.
Suppono, ance to undersette, or to Tentigo, 7. extensio vel arrectio virilis
suppose. membri. Item dicitur ance a kyker.

616 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 617
Tentum, ance a tenon, quod ponitur Torta et Tortula, a tapur or a torche.
in commissura. Torticius, ance a torche.
Tenuale, ance a barbykan. Tortillus, ance a shaky).
Tercellus, [a tercel.] Torrundo, ance a kake.
Terebellum i. Furfuraculum, {et ance 5[Tostum, ance a toste-]
a Persour.] [| Totomalus, ance ffeterwort.]
Terebrum, ance an augur, or aPersour. Tractorium, ancé a trays.
Terga, ance a targe. Praha, hoe genus est vehiculi a tra-
Terremotus, ance erthequake. hendo dicta, quia rotas non habet, |
[Zerro, i. terram alicui supponere,10 [ance a Dreye.| .
ancé to tere or daube.| Trahiculum, ance a trahys. |
Tersorium, ance a swepelles [amal- rama ... est filum inter stamen
kyn.] discurrens, ance abbe, dicitur et
Tersus, ance a turfh. quoddam instrumentum teaxtricum
Testa, ance a shylle. 15 quod inequale est. Item Trama,
Testudo, ance a snayl. ance an hem.
Tetrarco, to rayne. Tramellum, ance a traysus, vel quod-
Teatum i. semicinctorium, ance a seyut. dam genus retis, ance a tramayle.
Theca, ance a cas. [Tramerium, ance Traveys. Ergaste-
Theoroticus, ance a dyuyn. 20 rium idem est.]
Thuribulus, ance a castere of cense. Transfigo, ance to styke. ;
Tibiarius, ance a Pypemaker. Tremulus, quedam arbor, ance an f
Tigna, ance restoureg. Apse.
Tigrus, ance a tygur. [Trenga, ance a dreye.]
Tilia, ance lynde. 25 Trepica, i. ocrea, ance a boot.
Timbia, an“ a cherne. Trevulgo, to shewe trewys or tretys.
Timetitas, ance a dampnyngge. Tribracca, ‘ance a breeyghgyrdyll.
Timpanum, a taber, or a tymbre. Tribula, ance a shovell.
Tina, ance a Covelle. [Tricatura, a warde of a lok.]
Tinctor, ance a dyere. 30 Lriclinum, ance a bed.
Tinex, ance a mathe. Trimatria, hallys.
Tirocinium, ance a tornement. Tripa, ance a trype.
Tispatum, ance umbles. Tristellus, ance a Trestell.
Titer, ance a belwether. Tritor, ance a defoulere.
Titimallus, ance spurge. 35 Vritorium, [a pystel.]
Toga, ance a gowne. y Triturator, ance a thresshere.
Togella, ance a towayle. Trochus, et Torpillus, ance a top.
Tolerancia, ance sufferaunce. Troparium, quidam liber, ancé a tro-
Tolus, ance a pomel. pere.
Tomentum dicitur quia aut in filo aut 40 Trucio, to make fel.
in tela tumeat, nec subtilitatem ha-  Trudela, avis est, ance a tele.
bet, ance abbe. Trufa, ance a trefele.
Tonstrix, ance a Shyppestere. Trufo, ance to trefele.
Toral vel Torale, ance a keverlyt. Truga, quedam avis, ance a wewe-
Torcio, ance a grevaunce. 45 strete.
Tornamentum, ance a tornament. Trulla, ané a trulle.
Tornatrix, ance a tumbelyster. Trunculus, [ance a lytyl waste.]
Torta, ance a kake. Truncus, [the wast.]

618 A LATIN AND ENGLISU VOCABULARY. 619
Trussula, ance a trussell. Verugirus, anc* a turnebroche.
Truta, quidam piscis, ance a trwght. — Vesicula, i. parva vesica. Iten dicitur
Trutinator, ance a weyere. lla tenuis pellicula in gutture avis
Tubera, ance taddechese. in qua cibaria congregantur, a
Tuitus, ance lokynge. 5 croppe, or a case.

Tumentum, ance abbe. Vespa, ance a waps [et est vespa ma-

Tuo, ance to thuy, et dicitur a tu. Jor illa, ancé an hernet.]

Turba, ance a Turbut- Vester, ance gowre.

Turbacio, trobelynge, lettynge. Vestibulum, [ance a vestrye-]

Turcus, ance a Turke. 10 Vestiplicium, ancé a presse.

Turdinus, ance a Quayle. Vestis, ance clothynge.

Turgesco, [ance to balky.] Vestitus, ance yclothed.

Tussimulus, i. pulsatorium, ance the  Vetulana, ance an old quene or an
rynge of a dore. old wymman.

Tussis, ance the koghwhe. 15 Vewus, ance a trussell.

Tutibo, ance to tumble. Vibix, [a wale.]

Tutibarum, vel Tutibarium, anceatum- | Vibrilla, a penywygtle.]
brell. Viburnium, ance a brome.

Vicecomes, ancé a shreve.

Vaccarium, ance a vacherye. 20 Vicia, [a wech.]

Vacceuallis, hic estlocus in silva qua-  Vicemonitor, ance a submaystere.
dam, ubi sanctus kenelmus occubuit  Vidulo, to vydelé crowthe & Sytole.
et sepeliebatur, ance Covbach. Vidularius, ance a vythulare.

Vaccinium, ance a coweslyppe. Vidula, ance a vythule.

Valatrum, ance a cherne. 25 Vietum, ance wronge.

Valectus, ance a yeman, Villifico, ance to walle, or to bylle.

Vanga, ance a spade. Vimen, [ance twygge.]

Varratum, i. novale, valwe. Vindemix, ance vendage.

Varracio, an valwynge. Viniferum, ance a wynpot.

Varro, ance to valwe londe. 30 Vinitria, ance vyntrye.

Vello, [ance to wedy.] [Virga pastoris, ance wylde tesel.]

Venaticus, ance a brache, vel arache —‘*Virgata, ance a yerdlond.

| [or a spaynel.] Viridarius, ance a hayward, or a

Venor, ance to hunty. Forster.

Venatus, huntynge. 35 Viride grecum, ance verdegrece.

Venilia, flowynge of the see. Viridissiccus, ance verinys.

Ventilabrum, pala ventilandi, instru-  Viridium, ance vernysh.
mentum ventilandi [or a wynne  Virificum, ance vernysh.
shete.] Vita, ance a fylet.

Ventilogium, ance wethercock. 40 Vitellicium, ance Cavdell.

| Ventitricum, ance a wyndmylle. Vitrum, ance glaas.

Verbescor, ance to chyde. [Vitro, to glase.

Vermiculum, ance vermyloun. Vitrarius, a glasyave.]

Vermis, [ance a worme.| Vitulo, ancé to calue.

Verruca, [ance a werte.] 45 Vitula, ance a fythele.

Vertebrum, ance a wherve, or arcele, Vicus, [a buyle or a boch.]

Vertitor, ance a tornour. Vimus, ance an Elme.

Vertinellus, ance a twyste. Viphus, i. Aleator, ancé an hasardour.

|
620 A LATIN AND ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 621
Vmbilicus, ance Nauelworte. Vilagatus, ance vtlawyd. |
Vmbrus, ancé a maystyf, ora blode- —- Vilagaria, ance vtlawrye.
hunde. Vtrum, ance whether. |
Vna, ance togedere.
Vnitas, [ance Onhede.} 5[Warena, a wareyne.
Volemus, ance a Perwarduntre, Warenarius, a warner. ;
Volo, ance a whele. Waldum, ance wode.}
Volta, ance a wont. Vuapassa, an‘é resonn.
Volutus, ance bywrappyd, or bytra-  Witurnus, [the north wynde.]
nyd. 10
Vranuscopus, ance a Raye. Xpianus, ance Crystene.
Vrba, ance a reuers. Xrismale, ance a Crysmere.
Vreeolus, [ance a Posnet.] Arismatorium, ance the Eluat.
Vrector, ance a brenner.
Vssim, i. ardenter, ance brenuyngly. 15 Zeduarium, quedam herba est, ance
Vstrina, ance a bakhous. zeduale.
Vstrinatorium, ancé a kylle. Zitanus, i. taxus, ance a brook.
Vsus, ance a holyntre. Zonico, ance to gyrde vp.
Vter, ance whether.
Additions.
The original MS. is in the Gale Collection in Trinity College Lib-
rary and the Class mark is 0. 5. 4. —- The words in square brackets
are in a later hand.
Page 560, 561. Add.:
Abdenago . . . interpretaten serviens tacens an‘ a stylle,

|
7 1
METRICAL VOCABULARIES.
(OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.)
stumlyth yn harneys i. purpura i. superbus
Cespitat in phaleris yppus, blattaque suppinus;
i. lingua i. uino i.sermo i. stulto
Glossa uelud themato labat emus infatuato,
s.ille i. bonus i. in operacione i. fidelis i. sermone
Qui calus in praxi simul est, et pisticus emo,
i. lans i. loquitur uel predicat
Illius? oda placet, hie recte _ theologizat,
tresory i. diuitis .
Qui cupide seruas ypogeum gazophilacis.
| i. celestis i, altas sedes
Cerdus ad vranici scandes algalmata regni.
falses3 homines i. deuoratores qui stant in falsis causis i. depredantes
Pseustes, ambrones, sicophantes, uispiliones,
primus flunius inferni 24S flunius 3us fluuius us flunius inferni i. cirenibunt
Stix et Cochitus Lethe Flagitonque rotabunt.

1 These curious vocabularies are printed peculiar to the dialects of the West of
from a manuscript of the fifteenth cev- England and the Welsh border, we may
tury (MS. Harl. 1002, fol. 113, r°), but perhaps conclude that the MS. was written
the text is in all probability of an earl- in that part of the island. The Latin
ier date. The name of Spencer is sub- contains a rather large number of words
scribed to the end of it, but names signed adopted from the Greek. -
in this way are those more usually of * A Latin commentator states in tho
the copyist than of the author. Fromthe margin that this word has ,,Media corrupta
occurrence in the interlinear gloss ofsever- — cat'sa_metri.“
al words, such as sullow and bannut, * Read falsos. R. W,

623 METRICAL VOCABULARIES. |
the hanches i.cerni i. capre i. quoquine
Targa! _laphi? dorceque latus delata popine,

i. aqua cocta rosste a payge of the keschyn
An sint elixa, sint assaue, scit bene lixa.
a stode3 i. generosi everey i. sponsas
Bulla uelud proceres, stola‘ sic cburnca nuptas;
pro sicut i.lectum i.coopertorium i.ornat i. meusale bordeclothe
Vtque cubile thoral  decusat, gausape mensam,
a kernere i, uacat a surgyon or a chamerleyue ;
Cironomon mensis, lectis assistit aleptes.
fowlere a murtherer of men her derke hernys
Dumetis® auceps latet, et sicarius antris,
gracilis puer bysnevyllyd —colte i. uillosus i. hirsutus
Puseo reumaticus, pullus lappatus et hirtus,
a foome i. nobili
Hinnulis heredi nunquam spernantur herili.
a byttore 9
Hine elephas barrit,® onocrotulus hiccine bombit,
i. asinus silnestris a lytulle frogge crowkyt
Hin? onager rudit, ranunculus inde coaxat.
bowre-mayde glasse i. dominam
Abra tenens speculum sese speculatur et heram;
pro sicut mayster coke i. domino
Vtque machirus hero, sicque sibi preparat escas.
trunens arboris a aundyre
Stipes ut andena sustentus deperit ardens,°
i. falsi serunli lordlyche
Seruicio sic sepe spenduli res tabet herilis.
hicdolus i. seruus
Qui multis duliam promittit heris placitura,®
Sphendulus alterius fiat et non assecla uerus.?
grauiter accentuans i. nomen acuto aceentu proferri
Baritonans onoma cum debeat oxitonari,
i. rectus gramaticus i. illiteratus
Non hic ortographus, sed agrammatus esse probatur.
tauenere!! i, estus aeris
Fecula non acinum' caupo canina__repellit,
uermes, Anglice myntys!3
Et bibulus! musti bibiones arcet amurca.
i. sanctus i. uana gloria
Non est hic agnus quem sinodoxia tangit,
1 Read terga. BR. W. ® A commentator adds. the gloss: Anti-
? Read elaphi. R. W. pera anglice a strene. R. W. ;
* 4. nodus in cingulo, Latin gloss. ° These two verses are added in the
* i, uestis longa mulieris, Latin gloss. margin of the MS. R. W.
R. W. 10 The Latin glossator adds: et dicas

* locus ubi multi dumicreseunt, Latin acim quod in yua cernis acutum, R. W.

gloss. R. W. 1 So has the MS. R. W.
® In the margin here we read, ‘Barri, 2 est qui multum bibit, Latin gloss.
-orum, sine singulari, sunt Judi, Anglice _ RW.
bace, sed hic harrne eliphas est.’ 13°The word mint, in the signification
7 Read hine. R. W. of a mite, is still preserved in the dialects
of the west of Engtand,

METRICAL VOCABULARIES. 624
i. granat malus mos bonum opus orationis diete
Quemque premit cathesis non potest diasinaxis.
i, homines cnbitales qui obliquo nidet
Inter pigmeos nanus regnat, strabo luscos,
Loripes extales, monotalmus quoque cecos.
whey i.olla whey potte
Assit’ plena cero mea seria, theca leeo,
dispensator, botelere bakere uel panttere
Promus et arthocopus acerna popina ferinis.
broke-ballockyd awowere i.immundus — pame of the honde®
Hernia praua proco spureum genus, et uola cassa,
aloppyster or acrabbe3 nostrelle —_i. macula in ocalo
Polipus* et rini  glauconia sit tibi talmi.s
abotelere buschel uas olearium
Fert anaphos pincerna bathos, abatiss quoque orcam,
a costrelle cofer
- Et puer onophorum,” capsa, caper, armiger, arpen.®
waturpotte, watur barel
Ydria dat latices, oleum cadus, anphora uinum;
a narowcase9 bow
Et telum pharatra, corito conditur archus. -
princeps omnium, pastor ecclesia i. pius
Archimandrita sit celebs,!° eusebiusque.
horse palfray kolte stede mare
Equus, caballus, pullus, dextrarius, equina;
bole oxe cowe  bulloke calfe hayfare
Taurus, bos, uacca, buculus, uitulusque, iuuenca;
wether schepe lombe lombe a ram
Est ueruex, ouis, agnellus, simul agnus, aries;
goote buk kede goote idem est doo herte
Hircus, capriolus, caper, capra, damaque, ceruus;
bore pyege swyne sow Gelte -sowpyg
Aper, porcellus, porcus, sus, scropha, suilla.
hond whelpe ereyhownd blodehownde
Canis, caniculus, leporarius, atque molosus.
catte idem est chytte  whesille | Totte mowse
Murelegus, catus, catulus, mustela,|rato, mus.
kocke  henne chekynge capone pokoe ~~ swanne
Gallus, gallina, pullus, capo, pauoque, signis.
gandur _ goslynge mallard doke gose
Ancer, et ancerulus, anas, anata, simul auca.
* serio i. ordinatim et est aduerbium, anglice a avenere. R. W.
Latin gloss. R. W. * hic onaphus i. ciphus (read scyphus)
? A Latin commentator adds tHe words, | supernis (superne?) latens. R. W.
concauitas palme. ® hic arpeps gladius mercurii i. gladius
* est piscis, Latin gloss. R. W. curuatus ad modum falcis, R. W.
‘ The Latin glossator adds, sed hic est ° hic carichus i. est techa facta de corio,
fetor naris. anglice bowcase. R. W.
* talmon grece orulus latine inde hic *° quasi celestem uitam ducens et idem
talmus (read ophtalmus. R. W.) i. oculus. est quod castns. R. W.
© Hic est Abathis qui prebet anenam,
Al

625 METRICAL VOCABULARIES.
sparow larke — pye revyn colvyr 4
Passer, et alauda, pica, coruusque, columba;
parthyryd quayle wodekoc jay
Perdix, coturnix, castrimargus, graculusque;
wodekoc pynok! sparowhawke  wrenne
Gallus siluester, lirifa, nisus, regulusque,
kyte chowge snyte hayron  grype
Miluus, monedula, sic ibis, ardea, uulter.
crane owle popynyay swalow nyQttyngale
Grus, bubo, psitagus, et irundo, sic philomena.
flee lowse nete mothe hondworme worme
Pulex, pediculus, lens, tinea, curio, uermis;
flye gnatte bee dogflye addurcop? drane
Musca, culex, apis, ciniphex, aranea, fucus.
toode frogge addure snayle wateraddure foayle ora suayle
Bufo, rana, serpens, testudo, uipera, limax;
wont’ ematte Teremowse — grashoppere butturflye
Talpa, formica, uespertilioque, cicada, papilio.
bawsyn4 conyng hare lyon lebard
Castor, cuniculus, lepus, leo, uel leopardus.
stokfyche wale eyster lytul fiche ’ whelke
Fungia, cete, uel ostria, pisciculus quoque, concha;
fyehe neele  samoun lampray heryng
Piscis, et anguilla, salmo, murena, uel allec.
barlyche beene pyse rye wheete otyn
Ordium, faba, pisa, siligo, frumentum, auena;
malte vache draggé medylde corne
Et brasium, uicia, dragetum,® mixtilioque.
Worte siromellum, sed growte dicas agromellum;
sychere ale wyne drastys methe
Sisera, ceruisia, uinum, feces, ydromellum.
botyr whey dordus.curddys® chese mylke
Butirum, serum, coagulum, casius, et lac;
crayme sowre mylke whey — poshoote7 boystryg8
Quactum, exigalum, serum, balducta, colustrum.
halle howse chamer garner grange schepyn
Aula, domus, camera, granarium, grandia, boscar;
soler speuce or botrye kychyn idem est
Solarium, promptuarium, coquina, popina;
* Pinnock was a name for the hedge- _ place. The Promptorium Parvulorum gives
Sparrow. ~Draggé, menglyd corne, miztio.“
? Cf. pag. 120, note 6. ° This is perhaps the meaning of dorde
% Want, or wont, the old name for a in the old ballad of the Feest, —
mole, is still in use in some of the pro- Ther was castrell in cambys
vincial dialects. And capuls in cullys,
* Bawson, bawsin, or baustone, was a With blandamets in dorde.
common name for the badger. 7 A posset. The Prompt. Parv. has ,,Pos~
* This word seems misplaced here. A sot, balducta.“
dragé, as representing the Latin word * [have not met with this English word
dragetum, was a sort of comfit; but in elsewhere. Colustrum is explained in an
English the word draggé was given to a old glossary quoted in the Dictionary of
mixed corn, called by Tusser dredge, which  Ducange by ,,novum lac.“
is evidently the meaning of it in this

METRICAL VOCABULARIES. 626
brewarne bakehouse —stabulle _stye, or aswyne holke
Pandoxatorium, pistrinum, stabulum, ara.
tempulle chyrche idem est synagoge chapelle
Templum, ecclesia, basilica, sinagogaque, capella;
i (a)uawter oratory chyrche-hayel beryels
| Ara, oratorium, cimiteriumque, sepulerum.
! bedde schete chalon? ——qnylte_bedde-strawe3
! Lectus, linthiamen, tapetum, culcitra, stratur?;
j ' , tap! ) }
bolstar coverlyte pelowe blancketh celynge
Seruical, toral, puluinar, lodexque, uelamen.
brasyn potte posnette cawdrune brondyre4 fryyn-panne panue or potte
Vreeus, vreiolus, cacabus, tripos,  lebes, olla;
mortare pestelle gredyre broche nowle
Mortarium, pila, craticula, ueruque, creagra.
dysche ladylle  crokstyke dobeler plater
Discus, metorium, contus, scutella, parapsis.
7 sawsesere spone coop peced salte
Salsarium, coclear, ciphus, crater, simul sal.
bordeclothe towelle trenchere clothe broche .
Gausape, manitergium, scissoria, mappa, uerutum.
spykkett6 chesewate oylepott tankard  barelle
Clepsidra, casiarium, lechitus, amphora, cadus,
basyn lauere bancare spere schylde
Peluis, lauatorium, bancarium, lancia, scutum.
perche checure tabelere dyce idem est
Pertica, scaccarium, alea, decius quoque, talus;
kyng roche alphyn kny@t quene pewne
Rex, rocus, alphinus, miles, regina, pedinus.
hede top molde? nolle ere
Est capud et uertex, est cinceput, occeput, auris;
templys schede lokke here idem est. here
Tempora, discrimen, coma, crinis, siue capillos.
vesayge scolle brayne werte scrofe or scalle.
Est facies, cranium, cerabrum, papula quoque, glabra.
yebrowe ledeofpeeye space bytwene nostrelle
Est supercilium, cilium, sic palpebra_ naris.
white of pe face ye happulle ye, i. oculus
Albucies, facies, oculus, pupillaque, talmus;
forehede nose _ nostrelle erystylle poose
Frons, nasus, rinus, cartulagoque, caturrus;
mowthe lyppe berde cheke gummys rofeofthe mowthe
Os, labrum, barba, faux, et iungiua, palatum ;
chekebone idem est chynne tonge idem est
Mandula, mandibula, mentum, dens, glossaque, lingua,
schynygt thombe schewyt forefyngure
Pollet enim pollex, res uisas indicat index,

* Church-haye, or church-hawe, was not * A cup. The Catholicon has the word,
jan uncommon name for a churchyard. »A pece of silver or metalle, crater, cra-
| ? ,Chalun, bedde-clothe, thorale, chalo.* tera.
|Prompt. Parv. ° A spigot.

* Straw was the usual material of beds. 7 The suture of the skull,

* A brandreth,

-
627 METRICAL VOCABULARIES.
medylle fyngure lechefyngure acordyt
Stat medius medio, medicus iam conuenit egro,
ere lytil fyngure
Quas tua fert auris sordes trahit auricularis. ,
brest armepytt syde tete idemest idem est
Pectus, et acella, latus, vber, mamma, mamilla;
hele foote too hele sole hele
Calx, pes, artiétlus, calcanius, plantaque, talus. |
bone flesche yuncte marowe
Os, caro, iunctura, medio fit in osse medulla;
werelbone vayne zenew  skyn_—_—sidem est
Uertebra, cum uena, neruus, pellis, cutis atque.
thye _ hepe thetendurnesse of be thye bam grete too kue
Crus, femur, et famen poples, alluxque, genu sit.
body hert gal mylt kedney myddereffe
Corpus sunt infra cor, fel, splen, ren, diafragma;
bowellys longys mawe bdladdure ynwarde  throte
Uiscera, pulmo, iecur, uesica, precordia, guttur;
lyndy lynere i.stroma flyxrop blode idem est
Lumbus, epar, matrix, lien, cruor quoque, sanguis.
rede blode. a gibelet gotte
Exta manent extra, sunt intestina sed intra.
pehoole ofaprevay arswyspe gong idem est hovle
Gumphus, menpirium, latrinam, cloaca, foramen.
Dum paro menpirium, sub gumpho murmurat anus.
ars wolde woman qwynsys  rawe
Anus anus pedit, quia coctona cruda comedit.
nappyt hyssyt
Dum dormitat anus, uelud ancer sibulat anus.
corne mylle mylston  bynue kog
Far, mola, molaris, faricapsa, scariaballum ;
clakkel — whele flodeyate spyudulle
Batillum, rota, sinoglostorium quoque, fusus.
forge fyre tonge below marchel anfeld
Fabrica, pir, forceps, follis, marcollus, et incus;
pynsors nayle cawser  horschoe
Pallatum, scalpum, clauus, incussoria, ferrus.
schofyle spade pycows — whelebarow forke
Tribula, uanga, ligo, ceneuecthorium quoque, furca;
cracche idem est myxon
Presepe, cum presepio, starquiliniumque,
flexe wolle hempe selkeworme hordy2 _selke
Linum, lana, canapus, bumbax, stupa, ceriumque;
wase stoppe
Cum grossa stupa rimas edis bene stupa.
dystafe spyndylle warbe threde reele -
Colus cum fuso, uertebrum, filum, alabrumque ;
' The clapper of the mill. line is added in the margiu of the manu-
2 have not before met with the word script.
hordy in the sense of stupa. The next

METRICAL VOCABULARIES. 628
i garnewyue clewe warpe offel
Iurgillum, glomerus, subtegmen, sic quoque stamen ;
spole webbe clothe idem est darte
Panus, cum tela, pannus, uestis quoque, telum.
webbe dartys
| Nos uestit tela, gerimus ad prelia tela.
brydylle barnaculle? cropyn3 paytrelled
| Frenum, cum chamo, postela, uel antela sit.
1 solowhanddul solowbeme solowS cnltere —chyppe chare
Stiua, buris, aratrum, culter, dentale, uomerquo.
extre spokys cartenave —_vely
Est axis duplex, radii sunt, timpana, canti;
solowborde goke bonde —wythe
Barcha iugum iungas, bic demum uincula, retorta,
bytylle weege
Mallus, intersimonium, meditiliumque.
$ thombe harpe schare yorow
Pollice tango liram, facio cum uomere liram,
wayne chare the perrepyllis carte thylle
Plaustellum, currus, epredia, bigaque, reda;
barnaculle brydulle reyne idem est halter
Camus, cum freno, lorum, uel abena, capistrum.
brode axe —_persere axe hachet  sawe
Est dolabrum, penitral, securis, ascia, cerra.
swerde idem est basselard® daggar
Ensis, sic gladius, seca, sic sit armicudium.
cordedenare sowter clowte of a schoo
Est alutarius, sutor quoque, pictacium sit;
clowtere or cobelere tynkere lethere brystylle
Pictaciarius, incrustator, corria, seta.
lest overlether
Formipedia, licinia, impedia sit.
baryngsexe7 sole nalle corduane
Sunt ansoria, solie, sibula, cordibanumque.
blacchepot blacche blacke
Attramentorium, sunt attromenta, sed atrum.
clowtyst corduane lest of a boote
Incrustas allutam, dic et quitibiale.

* ,Oof, threde for webbynge, trama, the text of the Cambridge MS.), the capar-
stamen,“ Prompt. Parv.; an illustration ison of the horse is described thus —
of which Mr, Way quotes from the Wi- Hir paytrelle was of a riallo fyno"
cliffite version of Leviticus xiii. 47,—“ Hir cropur was of arafé,

A wullun clooth, or lynnen, that hath a Mir bridulle was of golde fyne,
lepre in the oof (in stamine, Vulg.) or in On every side honge bellis thre.
the werpe, it shall be holdun a lepre.“ * The Anglo-Saxon name of the plow,

? I have not before met with this word preserved only in the dialects of the West
in the sense of a horse’s bit (camus.) of England, See before, p. 105, note 2.

2 Cropon occurs in the Promptorium ® The baselard was a long dagger, usu-
Parvalorum as synonymous with crapper. ally worn suspended at the girdle.

“The strap across the horse’s breast. * The Anglo-Saxon seaz,

| In the early ballad of True Thomas (in

629 METRICAL VOCABULARIES.
taylere webstere  dyere tannare idem est
Est scissor, textor, tinctor, serdoque, frunitor;
smyth towkere! mason skynnere
Est faber, fullo, latamus, penularius atque
carpyntere dawbere leche
Carpentarius, est cementarius, aleptes;
karvere lavendere glovere fowlere
Cironomon, lotrix, cerotecarius, auceps.
appultre peeretre — hasyl note bannenote-tre2 fygge
Pomus, pirus, corulus, nux, auelanaque, ficus ;
plumtre vyne qwynstre  hepetre thewe-thornys’  ellarue
Prunus, uitis, coctanus, cornus, morusque, sambucus.
wythy  wardentre aspe chasteyn oke
Salix, uolemus, tremulus, castania, quercus;
beche burehe populere asche elme
Fagus, lentiscus, populus, six fraxinus, vlmus;
ewe boxe vertre wythy mapulle
Taxus, sic buxus, abics, ciler, acer addes.
busehe idemest — brere cherytre wyld vyne
Et rubus, dumus, tribulus, cerasus, oliaster;
yvy pynetre jenupyrtre wylde vyne masere
Edera, pinus, iuniparus, labruscaque, mirra.
baytre tre bowe moreé or roote levys
Laurus, lignum, ramus, radix sunt arbore, frondes,
smokke brechys  schyrt gowne  achymere
Est interula, bracce, camisia, toga, et iupa;
a bond hoode braygurdylle taberde
Instita, capicium, perysomaque, collobiumque;
keyfe cappe —_pyllyon ~—_hoose vampey
Thenaque, caleptra, pilius, caligaque, pedana.
cloke sleve coote kyrtylle
Est armilansa,® manica, tinica, tinicella;
kotyn or pakelothe dobelat panchere
Est bumbicinium uestis, diploydis, epifemur,
pope patryarke  cardynalle buschope
Papa, patriarcha, cardinalis, presul, atque
archebyschope prelatteorbyschop — suffrygaue
Archipresul, antistes, suffraganius sit,
chapyllayne prest idem est
Atque capellanus, sacerdos, presbiter addes,
decone subdeacone benott idem est
Diaconus, subdiaconus, exorsista, benedictus.
kyng emparowre  prynce duke _a lord of thowsond knygtes
Rex, imperator, princeps, dux, et ~ ciliarcha ;
‘A dyer. or dog-rose, and ramnus is given as its
? In the dialects of the West of Eng- Latin equivalent. Perhaps it is intended
land a walnut is universally called a ban- here for the blackberry.
nut. This is by much the earliest example * More, a root, is also a word peculiar
of the word I have met with, to the West of England.
* The Anglo-Saxon thefe-thorn is usu- * Read armilausa. R. W.
ally explained as meaning the wild-briar,

METRICAL VOCABULARIES. 630
erle baron knygth  juge deacon
Comes, et baro, miles, iudex, diaconusque.
reve baylé — vplond-man cherle
Prepositus, balliuus, rusticus, et colobertus ;
towneman — gentylmen _bondeman gentylman
Uillicus, et proceres, natiuus, et est generosus.
Explicit liber Equus caballus, quod Spencer R.
!
|
|

X VIL. |
NAMES OF THE PARTS OF THE HUMAN BODY.
(OF THE SAME DATE AS THE PRECEDING.)
amowthe face chyn tothe throte —_tonge rofe of pe mowthe
Os, facies, mentum, dens, guttur, lingua, palatum; .
berde browe brye2 forehede tempelle — lyppe
Barba, supercilium, cilium, frons, tempora, labrum.
pe lede sygt ye whyte ofpeye appulleof pe ye
Palpebra sunt, acies, oculus, albugo, pupilla.
cop of pe nose snevel of pe nose the brygge of pe nose _ nostrelle
Purula, pus nasi sunt, __ interfinia, naris.
fore party of pe hede myddul party nolle the brayne
Sinciput, interciput, occiput, ac cerabrum, pars
hede scolle foretop schade of pe here ere

Est capitis, cranium, uertex, discrimen, ct auris.
cheke gummes here
ffaux, et iungiue, cum frontinella, capillis.
grystyl of pe nose lap of pe ere cheketothe
Est cartilago, sic legia, sic genuinus.
pame of pehoude iutys® handus cubyte a feme
Palme, iuncture manibus sunt, vlna, lacertus;

nayle fyngurys schuldur breste nekke

Vngues cum digitis, humerus, cum pectore, collum.

armepytt fyste — acubyte blodde tete
Acelia, pugnus, cubitus, cum sanguine, mamma;

1 This is printed from the same manu- a sort of supplement (MS. Harl. No. 1002, |
script as the preceding more general voca~ _fol. 116, v°).
bulary, which it follows immediately as ? The eyelashes.
> So has the MS. Read iuntys. R. W.

PARTS OF THE HUMAN BODY. 632
wombe bladdur — bakke rybbebone rybbe
Uenter, uesica, tergum, spondilia, costa.

1 anavyle syede flesche skynne buttok
Est vmbilicus, latus, et caro, pelle, nates sunt.

( hert mylte  Jonges long gutte gal kydney mydrefe mawe
Cor, splen, pulmo, lien, fel, ren, diafragma, iecurque.
anarce thye — schare bakke backebone —arcehoole
Anus, crus, pubes, dorsum, sic spina, podexque.
smal-pypys! stomake inwarde lyver
Arterie, stomacus, post intestina, sic epar.
whyrlebone kneys kneepanne zenew
Uertebra cum genibus, sunt internodia, neruus;
hamme schene modure ancle
Poples, atque sura, matrix hiis additur, anca,
the sperlyver? — vayne legge the mayster vayne
Musculus, et uena, sic tibia, sicque sophena.

4 tooyn sole of pe foote heele marow —_a pynne
Articuli, planta, cum calce, medulla, cauilla.
part  foote hele pathe idem est
Pars pedis est hic calx, sed dicitur semita callis.
gretetoo thome reder
Istis coniungas? allux, pollex quoque, lector.
amane hys thyng idem est apyntyl idem est idem
Menticula, testiculi, ueratrum, tentigo, priapus.
thombe forefyngur medullefyngur lechefyngur litylle fyngure
Est pollex, index, medius, medicus, auricularis.
Jemys of a beste
Hee sunt menbra uiri, sed dic partes animalis.
‘ A rather curious name for the arteries. Anglo-Saxon name for the calf of the leg.
? More usually sperlire, or sparlire, the * The MS. has conigas. R. W.
42

:
|
.
XVIII.
ENGLISH VOCABULARY:
(OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.)
Hoc supercilium, Ae browe.
NOMINA MENBRORUM HO- Hoc intercilium, i. spacium inter cilia.
MINIS. Hic oculus, Ae hee.
Hoc capud, Ae hede. Hee palpebra, Ae heelyde.
Hoc incipud, Ae frunte. 5 Hec albugo, Ae wyte of the hee.
Hoc intercipud, est media pars. Hee pupilla, Ae perylle.*
Hoc occipud, Ae nodulle, capitis. Hec acies, Ae syght.
Hee cesaries, Aé fortoppe. Hic nasus, Aé nese.
Hic crinis, Ae hare. Hoc interfinium, Ae bryg of the nese.
Hic pilus, Ae here. 10 Hec naris, Aé nesestyrlle.
Hie cicinnus, Ae lokkes. Hic purulus, Ae nesehende.
Hee corona, Aé crowne. Hoc labium, A¢ lyppe.
Hic cirrus, Aé nodulle. Hoc labrum, idem est.
Hee ceruex, Ae hatrelle.? Hoc os, -ris, Ae mowthe,
Hee auris, Aé nere. 15 Hoc momentum,* Ae chynne.
Hoc cilium, Aé here of the hee. Hec menta, Ae chyne.

* This vocabulary of names of things, well, Dict. of Archaic Words, gives the
in Latin and English, is printed from a following illustrative lines from a MS. of
manuscript of, I think, early in the fif- the fifteenth century:
teenth century, in the old Royal Library Also from the haterel of the croun
in the British Museum, MS. Reg. 17, C. 3 pro, the sole of the foot ther doun.
XVIL, fol. 21, ro. The MS. contains other Perle means an affection in the eye,
Grae many Greve, apparently what we now call a sty.

? The crown of the head. The Latin Read mentum. RB. W.
shonld be vertex instead of cervex. Halli-

635 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 636
Hec gena, Ae cheke. Hoe os, ossis, A€ bone.

Hee mala, idem est. Hee medulla, A® marow.

Hoc ffaus, idem est. Hee febra, Ae wayne.

Hee maxilla, A chekebane. Hee uena, idem est.

Hoc genobodum, idem est. 5 Hoc palatum, Aé palate.

Hoe tempus, Ae thonwangues. Hic orexis, est anelitus oris.
Hee cartulago, Ae gro. Hic polipus, Ae snotte.

Hoe collum, Ae necke. Hee vina est spatium inter manum
Hee barba, Ae berde. et capud.

Hoc cranium, Ae harnpanne. 10 Hie nodus, Ae knokylle.

Hoe cerebrum, Ae harnes. Hoe epilacium, Ae honde-mowle.'
Hic dens, Ae thothe. Hee junctura, Ae joynte.

Hic geminus, Ae wangtotht. Hec vnguis, Aé nayle.

Hic molaris, idem est. Hee vngula, idem est.

Hee lingua, Ae tong. 15 Hee mamma, Ae pappe.

Hlec glossa, idem est. Hee mamilla, idem est.

Hee gula, Ae troht. Hoc vber, idem est.”

| Hoc guttur, idem est. Hic torax, Ae brestbone.

Hie ysofagus, Ae waysande. Hie vmbelicus, Ae nawelle.
Hoc frumen, Ae code. 20 Hic clunis, idem est.®

Hic humerus, Ae schuldyre. Hee nates, Ae thees.

Hoe brachium, Ae arme. Hic lumbus, idem est.

Hie cubitus, Ac helbow. Hee piga, idem est.

Hie musculus, Ae brawne. Hee pinguedo, Ae grese.

Hee sura, idem est. 25 Hie pirtomen, Ae arsholere.
Hec pulpa, idem est. Hec wlua, Ae cuntte.

Hec manus, Ae hande. Hoe oilinetum, Ae mygrayne.
Hee palma, bola, et ir, idem sunt. Hec tentigo, Ae kykyre.

Hie pollex, Ae thowme. Hoc epar, Ae lywer.

Hic digitus, Ae fynger. 30 Hoc splen, Aé mylte.

Hoc corpus, Ae body. Hoc fel, Ae galle.

Hoc dorsum, Aé bake. Hic pulmo, Ae lunggys.

Hic ‘wenter, Ae wambe. Hic stomacus, Ae stomak.
| Hee caro, Ae flesche. Hoc gecur, Ae maw.

Hic pectus, Ae breste. 35 Hoc diafragma, Ae myddere.*
Hoc corium, Ae hyde. Hoc ren, Ae nere.®

Hec cutis, idem est. Hoe uiscus, Ae bowelle.

Hic sanguis, Ac blode. Hoc perecordium, idem est.
Hie humor, idem est. Hoc ueretrum, Ae pyntylle.

' The honde-mowle appears to havebeen word and the next. The Nominale in the
the palm of the hand. It is the gloss on same MS. (Reg. 17 C. XVII, fol. 39, ro)
|copinole in Walter de Biblesworth. explains, ,,hec natis, Anglice luddockes.“

* Another vocabulary in the same vo- * For mydderede, the midriff.

Inme of MS. (MS. Reg. 17 C. XVIL., fol. * An old name for the kidney, still
38 vo.) gives ,,uber, -is, Anglice hyddere,“ preserved in the dialects of East Anglia, -
the latter word no doubt representing the though it is more usually employed popul-
modern udder. arly to denote the fat of the kidneys.

* The glossator has misinterpreted this
|

637 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 638

Hic priapus, est finis ueretri. Hie palifridus, Ae palfray.

Hic cirbus, Ae harstharme. Hic tradarius, idem est.

Hoc femur, A¢ thee. Hic emissarius, Ae stalon.

Hic poplex, Ae hamme. Hie pullus, Ae fole.

Hoc genu, At knee. 5 Hee porca, A® sowe. j

Hee tubia, A® schanke. Hic poreus, Aé swyne.

Hic pes, -dis, Ae fote. Hic porcellus, A& gryse.

Hic talus, Aé hele. Hoc aper, Ac bore.

Hic artuculus, Aé tho. Hic cingulus, idem,

Hee cauilla, Ae ankylle. 10 Hic oderinsicus, Ac spanegeole.®

Hee anta, Aé knebone. Hic leporarius, Ae grayhownd.

Hoc mandibilum, Ae chewylle.1 Hee licesta, Ae byche.

Hlec fragus, Aé kneborde. Hie canis, Ac dogge.

Hee matrix est in qua inuoluitur puer. Hic molosus, Ae banddogge.

Hee homopleta, Ae schulderbane. 15 Hic ancer, Ae gandyr. '

Hee allux, A€ grete to. Hec auca, A gosse. |

Hee acella, Aé harmole. Hic ancerulus, Ae geslyng.

Hee uarex, -cis, est quedam uena Hee aucula, idem.
tendens a uertice capitis vsque ad Hic gallus, Ae cocke.

plantam, que si bedatur reddet ho- 90 Hec gallina, Ae henne.

minem curuum. Hic pullus, Ae chekyn.

Hic capo, Aé capon.
Hoe astile, idem.
NOMINA ANIMALIUM, Hic spado, -inis, idem.
Hic et hee bos, Ae neete. : 25 Hic catus, Ae catte.
Hic trio, idem est. Hic mureligus, Ae idem.
Hic bouiculus, Ae bullok. Hic pilax, idem.
Hee uacca, Aé kowe. Hic juba, Ae horsemane.
Hee jumenta, Ae que. Hee caprona, iden.
Hee junix, idem est. 30 Hic dromedarius, Ace drowmondere.
Hic taurus, Ae bulle. Hic rato, Ae raton, |
Hic uitulus, Ae calfe. Hie soriex, idem.
Hic equs, Ae horse. Hic mus, Ae mowse.
Hee equa, Ae mere. Hic ouis, Ae schepe.
Hic caballus, Ae carthors. 36 Hic aries, Ac wedyr.
Hoc equicium, Ae harres. Hic gargia, Ae gymbure.4
Hic equiferus, Ae wyld hors. ITic agnus, Ae lamme.
Hic dextrarius, Ae stede. Hee ambigua, est ouis portans duos —
Hie mannus, Ae rownse.” agnos.
Hic bladius, Ae hackenay. 40 i
Hie equilas, idem est.

* Chewylle, for chowl, or jowl, the jaw. Armure he toke that was rusty,

2 Rounse. A rouncy is generally inter- 3 ,Andhorsyd hym,on,an old romney !
preted as meaning a common hackney jek PUES , :
Pore Ties iim (1 aieceto Goin mache In Lincolnshire, they still call a female
(Weber, Met. R., vol. ii. p. 340), when sheep which has beenutwicg shorn agim-
the hero went to disguise himself as an ber; in the north of England it is called —
half-witted and clownish feliow — al

d

639 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 640
hb Hee ardua, Aé heyrune.
NOMINA ANIMALLUM Hee columba, Ae ‘fee

FERARUM. Hic palunbus, At stokedowef.

Hic leo, Ae lyon. Tic mauiseus, Ae mawysse.

Hec liona, Ae lyonys. 5 Hee fidedula, idem.

Hic lupus, Ae wlfe. Hee merges, Ae cote.

Hic lepus, Ae hare. Hic sturnus, A€ sterlyng.

Hic wipes, Ae foxe. Hic regulus, A€ wrenne.

Hee mustela, Ae weysyl. Ific sperrus, idem.

Hie fetonarus, Ae fulmerde. 10 Hie carduelis, Ae goldefynche.

Hie erinacius, Ae hurchon, Hic cabus, Ae crawe.

Hee melota, Ae broke.! Hec aquila, Ae neggle.

Hie taxus, idem. Itec miluus, Ae glede.4

Hee talpa, A¢ molle. Hic pascer, Ae sparow.

Hie pardus, Ae leparde. 15 Hee vpipa, Ae wype-5

Hee parda, est femella. Hic tercellus, Ae hawke.

Hic pardus, est qui generat cum leona. ‘Hic prepes, idem.

Hie ceruus, Aé harte. Hic nisus, Ac sperhawke.

Hec cerua, Ae hynde. Hie ancipiter, Ae goshawke.

Hic hinulus, Ae fawne. 20 Hic erodius, Ae gerfawcune.

Hee simea, Ae nape. Hic graculus, Ae jay.

Hic vrsus, Ae bere. Hic citacus, Ae papinjay.

Hie vreus, Ae buke. Hee alauda, Ae larke.

_ Hoc elephas, -tis, Ae elyfawnte. Hie arundo, Ae swalo.

Hee pantera, Ae pantere, cum multis 25 Hec nodula, Ae kae.6

coloribus. Hee bubo, -is, Ae nowle
Hic et hec lin, est animal habens Tlic coruus, Ae rawyn.

oculos acutos. Hie frondator, A‘ tytmase.

Hie scurellus, Ae a squyrylle. Hee olor, Ae swane.

Hic sirogrillus, idem. 80 Hic signus, idem.

Hic Cuniculus, Ae conninge. Hic grus, Ae crane.

Hic zenozephalus, Ae maremusset. Hie cuculus, Ae eucko.

j eee rest uel forestus, Ac forest.2 Hee frigella, Ae robynet, redbrest.7
PCS Hee ciconia, Aé storke.
NOMINA AUIUM. 35 Hee marula, est auis habens nigrum
Hie fornix, Ae wodekok. rostrum.
Hee orna, idem. Hic pellicar, Ae pellicane.
Hee philomena, Ae nyghtyngale. Hlic rostellus, Ae spynke.
| Hee lucar, i. lucia. Hee frugella, Ae roke.

Hee nicticoraxz, Ae nyghtcrake.3 40 Hee agalauda, Ae plowere.
| Hee auia, idem. Hic perdix, Ae pertrycke.
| 1 The broke was the badger. * The lapwing.

2 The ferret. © A chough. The A.-S. ceo.

* The caprimulgus Europeus, still call- 7 i.e, ,little Robin® redbreast. It is
ed in Yorkshire a night-crow. Its more the earliest instance of the use of this
usual name is night-jar. popular name that I have met with. Robin

* A kite. The Anglo-Saxon name. See was a common appollation of affectionate
p. 132 1. 16, familiarity.

641 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 642
Hee fuliga, Ae semawe. Hoe ostrium, Ae ostyre.
Hic campester, A feldfare. Hic megarus, Ae makyrelle.
Hic merulus, Ae marlyon. Hic ypotamus, est marinus.
Hic cornix, Ae erawe. Hee rochea, Ae roche.
Hic pauo, Ae pacok. 5 Hie brumillus, A€ brone.6
Ilic coturnix, A morchene. Hee tortuga, Ae wylke.
lic vitur, Ae grype.’ Hic rumbus, Ae storjon.
Hic fasianus, Ae fesant. Hic clamitus, Ae wytyng.
Hoc rustrum, Ae nebbe.? Hic torpedo, est piscis habens multos
Tlic mergus, Ae cote. 10 pedes.
Hee qualia, Ae quayle. Hee phoca, Ae porpas.
Mic pellicanus, Ae pellycane. Hee delphin, Ae sawmone.
Hic fenix, Ae fenys. Hlec merula, Ae lamprone.
Hic capus, Ae musket.’ Ice rogaterea, Ae thornbacke.
q 15 Hic teatus, Ae tenche.
NOMINA PISCIUM. Mic mullus, Ae codlyng. :
Hoe allec, Ae heryng. Hic codlingus, idem.
Ific salmo, Ac salmon. Hlee perca, Ac perche. |
Sloe mugyl, idem. Ilee gamorus, Ae hornekek. 1
Hic uronoscopus, Ae thornbak. 20 Hic gobio, Ae gojune.
Hic fundulus, Ae playsse. Hoc turtur, Ae turbote.
Hic pecten, idem. Hic polupus, Ae lopstere.
Hic luceus, Ae pyke. Hee conca, Ae cochilt.
fic dentrix, idem. 4
0 Hic lucellus, Ac pyckerylle. 25 NOMINA UERMIUM.
Hie gamerus, Ac spyrlyng. Hee cerpigo, -nis, Ae regworme. .
lic silurus, Ae loche. Tlec lacerta, A® newte.
Hlic scorpio, Ae stytlyng.‘ Hee vria, est pediculus porci.
Hee muprena, Ae lamprune. Hee lens, -dis, Ae nyte.
Hee lampada, Ae \ampray. 30 Hee salamandra, Ae cryket.
Hie caput, A¢ caboche.® Hic grillius, idem.
Hec anguilla, Ae nele. Hee apes, Ae bee.
Ilic cancer, Ae crabbe. Hee saguisuga, i. irundo.
Hee balena, Ace qwalle. Hee pala, Ae wode.
Ilic cetus, idem. 35 Hee sicada, Ae gyrssoppe.
Hee ceta, idem. Hee irania, Aé crane."
Iloc cete, idem. Hee amittena, Ae scheptyke.
Ilic congruus, Ae conggyre. Hee culex, Ae knate.
Hic epimora, est piscis qui moritur Hic fucus, Ae drane.
eodem die quo nascitur, 40 Lec uaspa, Ae waspe.
Hoc cochile, est quilibet piscis oblecta. Tic papilio, Ae butterfle.
* @rype was an old name for the vul- * The stickleback.
ture, and is not unfrequently found in 5 ‘The bulhead, or miller’s-thumb, called
that sense in the early metrical romances, in old French chabot.
though it is sometimes used to signify a ° Brone, the bream.
griffln. 7 Prane, or irane, from the A.-N., was
? A bird’s neb or beak. a common name for a spider.
3 The male of the sparrowhawk,

643 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. . 644
Hec teredo, est uermis corodens ligna. Hee minifera, Ae waterlylle.
Hic cimex, Ae mawke.' Hec embroca, Ae maythe.*
Hec tinea, Ae moke.? Hic daucus, Ae clapwype.®
Hic cirus, Ae handworme. Hoc olus, -ris, Ae worte.
Hic scarabeus, Ae wode. 5 Hoc magudere, Ae calstok.
Hec incedula, Ae glydeworme.§ Hic caulus, Ae uwle (?) or thyme.
Hee nocticula, Ae idem. Hee cuna, Ae croppe.®
Hee noctuluca, idem. Hec saliua, Ae salwe.
Hee tanterida, est uermis terre. Hec vrtica, Aé nettylle.
Hic emigramus, est uermis capitis. 10 Hec pimpinella, Ae primerolle.
Hic lumbricus, est uermis uentri. Hoc ligustrum, idem.
Hic tarus, est uermis lardi. Hoc pringrius, idem.
Hic bombex, Ae sylkworme. Hec uiola, Ae wyolet.
Hic bufo, Ae tade. Hoe uaccinium, Ae cowsokulle.7
Hie erinacius, Ae nurchon. 15 Hee papauer, Ae chesbolle.8
“Hic glis, -ris, Ae dormowse. Hoc omella, idem.
Hee formica, Ae pysmyre. Hic felix, -cis, Ae brakyn.
Hec testugo, Aé snele- Hoc solsequium, Ae sawsykylle.
Hic limaz, -cis, idem. Hoc ditaneum, Ae dytan.
- 20 po ae : colybyn.
ec lactuca, Aé letys
isi liye AE AST G Hic muscus, Ae muske.
Hoc petrocillum, Ae percylle. Hic carduus, Ae thystylle.
Hoc ciler, Ae mynte. Hoc gramen, Aé bent.°
Hee menta, idem. 25 Hec murica, Ae wermine brome.
Hoc nausticium, Ae waterkyrs. Hee edera, Ae iwyn.
Hoc milifolium, Ae mylfoile. Hec licoricia, Ae licorys.
Hec beta, Ae bete. Hoc alleum, Ae garle.
Hic ysopus, Ae ysoppe. Hoc sinapium, Ae warkecok.
Ysopus est harba, ysopo spergitnr unda.30 Hee sepula, Ae chesbolle.
Hee altea, Ae wyld malle. Hee salgea, Ae sawge.
Hee saliunca, Ae wyne. Hee selidonia, Ae solydyne.
Hee uepres, Hoc feniculum, Ae fynkylle.
Hee vua, Ae grapys. Hee malua, Aé malle.
Hic calamus, Ae rede. 35 Hoc apium, Aé the.
Hec rosa, Aé rose. Hoc trifolium, Aé hartclauer.
Hoc lilium, Ae lylle. Hic sicassis, idem.
* Mawke, a maggot, still in use in the or top, of a plant. The Catholicon has
northern dialects. »@_croppe, cima.“
* A moth. 7 Apparently another name for the cow-
2 The glow-worm. slip.
* Camomile (the anthemis cotula of bo- * Chesbolle was an old name for the
tanists), still called in some districts may poppy.
weed; the A.-S. mageda. See the A.-S. ° The word bent was applied usually
Vocabularies. 4 to the long coarse grass growing on the
* Clap-wype. Daucus is understood to —_ moors, but often in a more general sense
mean the parsnip. to grass of all kinds.
* Perhaps it should be cima, the crop,

645 , ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 646
Hoc pentifolium, Ae filife.
Hoc sirpillum, Ae petergrys.' NOMINA ARBORUM.
Hoc piper, Ae pepyre.
tea ts mn eaenet Regula est quod omnia nomina arborum
v0 tens 5 sunt feminini generis exceptis quatuor,
Hoc synamomum, a ° hic oliaster, ct hie piaster, hic rubus,
Hoc strigillum, Ae morelle. ct hic dumus. Hie oliaster est vua ste-
Hoc solatrum, idem. rilis.
Hee ueruena, A€ warwayn. 0 |
Hee agremonia, Ae ogremoyne Hes i 4 Fae te
Hee pimpernella, Ae pimpernolle. 10 CRO CE MEN TESTE 0" |
9 Lec ibex, est juuenis quarcus.
Hee sintecula, Ae synthon. i
" Hee sambuca, Ae hyllortre.'
Hec scandur, Ae madyr.
5 A Tec taxus, Aé hawtre, newtre.
Hic sendo, idem.
ah Hee corolus, Aé hesylletre.
Hee pionia, Ae pyon.
Sher cae - , Hec auelana, Ae walnottre. ;
Hic tintimalius, Ae spowrge. 15
Hee arbutus, A¢ crabtre
Hee rapa, Ae rape. 4 ;
Hee fraxinus, A€ heschetre.
Hoc bacar, Ae nepe. ‘Hee epi aeeseauTae
HicucrocuswAs sgrurnouns Tee aa ~ris ve es ulletre
Hic plantago, Ae waybred. oc Cie ” Act P r
é k 20 Hec abies, Ae fyrretre.
Hoc raparium, Ae raddyk.
. Hee prunus, A¢ plumtre.
Hic tipus, Ae homelok. 4 2
b Hee castania, Ae chestantre.
(HIE Tey ts Hee ficus, Ac fyketre, uel fructus.
Hic cardo, Aé cardoun.? cc ficus, Be ty: 2 4
Hic carduus, Aé tasylle. Nux, auelana, pirns, glans, et castania,
Hic arundo, Ae rede. 25 ficns,
Hee canna, Ae cane Fructum cum ligno sub eodem nomine
a ag ° signo.
Hee carix, -cis, Ae segge.
Hee papirio, Ae reschebusk. Hec mesculus, A¢ meletre,
Hic junctus, A¢ resche. Ilec sorbus, Aé opynharstre.*
Hic sirpus, idem. 30 Hee sirasus, Aé cheritre.
Hic papirius, idem. Lec oliua, Ae olyftre.
Hoe borago, Ae borage. Hee sentis, est spina.
Hoc sepe, Ae hongon. Hee silex, Ae wyllotre.
Hee concilida, Ae consaude, Hec lentiscus, Ae byrketre.
Hoc absinthium, Ae wormode. 35 Hec coccinus, Ae quoynetre.
Hee costus, Aé coste. Hee tremulus, A¢ hespetre.
Hee febrifuga, Ae fevyrfew. Hee malus, Aé apultre.
Hee gensta, A¢ gromylle.® Hee pomus, idem.
Hee lappa, Ae clete.* Hec tribulus, Ae brame.®
Hee endiua, Ae endywe. 40 Hee uepres, idem.
.
” Serpillom is understood as meaning, * The clote, or yellow water-lilly.
in the older vocabularies, wild thyme. * Hyllor, the elder. still called in some
? Cardon (Lat. carduus), the old French parts of England a hilder-tree.
name for the thistle; in modern French, ° Chestan-tre, the chestnut. See before,
chardon. the note 3 on p. 138.
* Gromylle, the plant now called grom- 7 See before, p. 137 |. 36.
well, the lithospermum officinale of bo- 5 i. e, a bramble.
tanists,

647 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 648

Hee singinerperus, est quedam arbor Hoc cornum, Ae pete.
cuius cyneres uolunt ignem seruare NOMINA PERTINENCIA
per annum. ECCLESIE,

Signiperus quod glens pir tibi dicitur arbor,

De gigno, -is, et pir, quod dicitur ignis, 5 Zoe delebrum, i. ecclesia.

Et cuius cyneresinuolent ardere per annum. 59 altare, i. ara.

Hoc uimen, Ae osere. Hic calix, Ae chalys.

Hic wiburius, Ae idem. Hee patena, A¢ patent.

Hee cornus, Ae pettre. Hic sercophagus, i. petra.

Hee morus, Aé mulberytre. 10 Hee tumba, idem.

Hec tilia, -Ae bastetre. Hee libitina, A¢ bere.

Hee vssis, Ae olyntre. Hoc feretrum, idem.

Tec damasenus, Ae damyssyntre. Hoc tribulum, Ae sensours.

Hec cedrus, A¢ sydyretre, et est ta- Hoc tus, Ae cense.
lis nature quod nunquam putrescet 15 Hec ascera, Ae a lytil chyp.

“in aqua nec in terra. Hee campana, Ae belle.

Hec cipressus, est arbor odorissimus Hoc tintinabilum, A¢ lytylle belle.
et tepida, et habet naturam et ru- Hoc uentilogium, Ae wedercok.
brum colorem, Ae cypyrtre Hec ymago, Ae ymage.

fi . 20 Hoc semitorium, Ae kyrgarth.4
NOMINA FRUCTUUM. Hoc marmor, Aé marbulle.
| Hoc pomum, Aé apulle. Hec candela, Ae candylle.
| Hee nux, Aé notte. Hoc candelabrum, Ae candylstyk.

Hic nuclius, Ae kyrnelle. Hoc campanile, Ae stepulle.

Hec auelena, Aé walnot. 25 Hoc aspersorium, Ae strynkylle.6

Hoc pirum, A¢ pere. Hic ysopus, Ae idem est.

| Hee glans, A¢ acorne. Hic ambo, -is, Ae letrune.®

Hoc ciresum, Ae chery. Hoc campanare, Aé belhowse.

Hoc uolemum, Ae permayne.! Hoc ablatum, Aé obley.

Hoc prunum, Ae plumme. 30 Hoc antiphonarium, Aé anfenare.

Hoc stragum, A strabery. Hoc missale, Ae mesbok.

Hic ficus, Ac fyke. Hoc gradale, Aé grayel.

| Hee racemus, Ae rasyn. Hoc troperium, Ae tropure.

Hee vuapassa, idem. Hoc martilogium, Ae martilage.

Hee vua, A grape. 35 Hee bibleoteca, Ae bybulle.

Hoc sorbum, Aé hopynhars. Hoe armariolum, Aé almery.

Hoe malum granatum, Aepounkarnet.? Hoc sacrarium, Aé sacrary.

Hoc malum punicum, idem. Hoc orologium, Aé orlage.

Hoc coccinum, Ae quoyne.® Hoc uitrum, Ae glasse.

| Hoc masuclum, Aé orange. 40 Hoc sudarium, Aé sudary.
‘A sort of apple, of which Drayton * The pomegranate.

speaks as being a modern importation * Quoyne, or coyne, the quince.

into our island. * The churchyard, still called a kirk-

The pearemaine, which to France long ere tous garth in the north.

was knowne, * The holy-water sprinkler, or aspersoir.
Which careful frut'rers now have denizen’d our © The lectern, or reading desk.
PeIpolbe Sone keviil
43

649 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 650 |
Hee cera, Ae wax. Hee infula, A€ chesibylle.®
Hee cancella, Ae chawnsylle. Iloc ostrum, i. purpura.
ITic corus, idem est. Hoc ordinale, Aé ordinalle.
Tres sunt partes columne, talus, stilus, _ 1 ordinarius, idem est.
t epistilium; uasis est fundamentum, % a 7
situs est media pars, Lael est NOMINA ARTLPICIORUM.
superior pars. Hic excubus, Ae wayte.
Hoc superpelicium, Ae surplys. lic liricen, qui canit in lira.
Hee crisma, Aé creme.) Hic secuticen, qui canit in scituta.
Hoe crismatorum, Aé crismator. 10 Hie tibicen, qui canit in tubia.
Hee alba, Ae haube. Iie monetarius, qui facit monetam.
Hee stola, Aé stole. Hic aurifaber, Ae goldesmythe.
Hee crux, Aé crosse. Hie candidarius, Aé lawnder,
Hoe lauatorium, Ae lavatory. Tlic, hee formicapola, uenditor vn-
Hee fons, Ae welle.® 15 guentorum.
Hic cereus, Aé serge. Iie sementarius, A® mason.
Hic lampas, A¢ lampe. Hie littamus, idem est.
Hic absconsus, Ae sconse.* Hic mango, Ae horsemownger.
Hec lucerna, Aé lantyrne. Hic mores, i, quod stultus.
Hoc pulpitum, Aé polepyt. 20 Hie sissor, Ae taylegour. :
Hee fiola, A¢ fiolle. Hic carpentarius, Ae kartwryght. |
Hoc oleum, Ae oyle. Ific molendinarius, A mylu.
Hee pixis, Ae boyst.+ Hic frunes, Ae barkare.?
Hoc alabaustrum, A&é idem est, Hic tannator, idem est.
Hee hostia, est corpus Christi. 25 Hic serdo, idem est.
Hoc uiaticum, idem est. Iie pandoxatrix, A bacstare.
Hoc uestiarium, A rewystre. Hic architector, Aé thekare.®
Loe clamparium, A¢ clochere.® Hic cuparius, Ae cowpare.
Hee restis, est corda. Ific aliator, A€ hassardore.
Hoe fedus, idem. 30 Hie triculator, Ae tresorre.”
Hie laqueus, idem. Hic tesaurarius, idem est.
Hic funiculus, idem. Lie figulus, Ae potter.
Hic batillus, Ae clapyre. Mfic pistor, Ae backstare.
Hoc manutergium, Ae towelle. tlic carnifex, Aé bochere.
Hee peruria, A€ perrore. 35 Hic seroticarius, Ae glowere. °
Hoc uelum, Ae wayle. Hic pelliparius, A€ schynnere.
Hic amittus, Ae amytte. Hie scriba, Aé chaunsyllere.
Hic tiera, idem est. Hie cancellarius, idem est.
Hee fanulla, Ae fanone. Mic sinescallus, Ae stewerede.
Lic manipulus, Aé idem est. 40 Hic uicecomes, Aé scheryf,
Hee zona, Aé gyrdylle. Hic comes, Aé herrylle.
Hec poderis, Ae rochytt. Hec comitissa, Ae cowntasse,
* The crism, or consecrated oil. ® The MS. has chesibylle or clesibylle. ¥
? More correctly the font. ‘ Ps kW,
°* A sort of candlestick made to be at- * 4. @, a tanner.
tached to the wall. The word is still in ® Literally a thatcher.
use for such candlesticks in the north of ° Tresorre, a treasurer.
England. ‘A glover. The Latin word should be
+ ‘The box for holding the oil, &¢., a pyx. _cirolecarius, for chirothecarius. |
’ Read campanarium. BR. W.

651 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 652
Hic baro, A€ baron. Hic archarius, Ae bowere.
Hee baronissa, Ae baronys. Hic pannarius, Ae drapure.
Hic abbas, Ae abott. Hic cicarius, est ille qui facit cicas.5
Hic prior, Ae pryor Hie mercator, Ae marchand.
Hic monacus, Ae monk. 5 Ilic institor, Ae idem est.
Hic canonicus, Ae chanon. lic fleobotomator, Ae blodclater.
Hic opilio, A¢ scheperd. Hic scarificator, Ae carsare.6
Hic subulcus, Ae swynard. Hie tonsor, Ae cuttere.
Hic bubulcus, Ae hoxhard. Hie rasor, Ae shawere.
Hic ortolanus, Ae gardyner. 10 Hie sitator, A’ somundare.7
Hie nugator, Ae trifulere. Hic edituus, est custos domus.
Iie pincerna, Aé botelere. Tic sortilegus, Ae wyche.
Hic, hec aduena, Ae comelyng.' Ilec siren, Ae meremaydyn.
Hic temerarius, A¢ folchardy. tlic eruginator, Ae forbushere.*
Hic cocus, Ae coke. 15 Ilic armiger, Ae sqwyere.
Hie coquinarius, idem est. Hic latro,® idem est.
Tlic lixa, idem est quod lixo, Ae quys- = Llie scutifer, idem est.
trone. Hic sitharista, Ae harpure.
Hic barbitansor, Ae barbur. ITic sitharizo, idem est.
Hic auceps, Aé fowlere. 20 =)
Hic Aote Ae fyschere, NOMINA FLUMINUM.
| Hee pectrix, Ae kemster. Hoc mare, A® see.
Ilic textor, Ae webstere. Hoc pelagus, idem.
| Hic fullo, Ae fullare. Hoc fretum, idem.
Hic faber, Ae smythe. 25 Hoc equor, idem.
| Hee Sabrissa, A€ smytwyfe. 7 Hoe altum, idem.
Hic uecors, Ae cowharde. Hie fluuius, idem.
Hic apotecarius, Ae spycere. tiie cathaclismus, inundacio aque.
Hic ninarius,? Aé cokwalde. Hic fons, Ac welle.
Tlie triumphus,s A constabulle. 30 Hic puteus, Ac pytt.
Hic alutarius, Ae cordewencre. Hee limpha, Ae water.
Hic scellarius, Ae sadyllar. Hee latex, idem.
| Hic pustularius, Ac botullere. Hie riuus, Ae syke.'®
| Hic lorimarius, Ae gyrdylhare. Hoc uiuarium, Ae wywere.
Hie capistrius, A¢ helterere.t 35 Hoe stagnum, Ae poynde.
‘The common name for a stranger or — was extensively employed by the medieval
guest. surgeons.
2 Ninnarius. ‘This low-Latin word, so- T 4 ey a somner.
Metimes spelt minarius, is usually em- ° Forbushere. This was a business of
ployed to signify what we call a wittol, considerable importance when armour and
or contented cuckold. arms wero in general use, and were in
* Triumphus. This word is not found continual need of furbishing, or scrubbing.
in this sense in Ducange. The name Frobisher is probably derived
* Helterer, one who makes halters. from it.
5 Sicarius (incorrectly written cicarius) °'This is a very extraordinary use of
is here used for one who makes sicas, or the word latro.
daggers. Syke is still used in the dialects of
* Carsare. I have not met with this the north of England to signify a small
Word before. The practice of scarification stream or gutter.
|
|

653 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 654
Hoc medianum, est spacium inter Hic tripolus, idem.
aquas. Ilic bipennis, Ae twybyle.
Ilec piscina, Ae pole. Hic clipeus, Ae schelde.
Hoc amnis, est aqua tantum precens. Hoe seutum, idem.
: 5 Hee lancea, Aé spere.
NOMINA METALLORUM. Fea prem 4 a
Hoe aurum, Ae golde. Ile cuspis, Ae poynte.
Hoc argentum, A€ sylwor Hee catepulta, a bradharrow.®
Hoc es, -ris, Aé brasse. Hee feretra, Ae qwywere.
Hoc plumbum, Ae lede. 10 Hee pelta, Ae boculere.
Hoe ferrum, A® yryn. Hee umbo, -nis, A€ wose.
Hoe electrum, Ae pewtyre- Hee antile, Ae halnase.
Hee calibs, Ae stele. Hee cathena, idem. .
Hoc stagnum, Aé tyne. Hic arcus, Ae bow.
Hoe auricaleum, Ae latone.' 15 Hic tropheus, Ae bawdryk.
Hoc cuprum, Aé copurre. Hee cica, Aé misericord.
Hee funda, Ae slyng.
NOMINA ARMORUM. Hec lorax, Aé inno
Hee spata, Ae fawchon. Hic mucro, Ae swerd.
Hic pugis, A€ myserecord.* 20 Hec securis, Ae axe.
Hee fustis, hic baculus, idem sunt. Hec securicula, Aé hachytt.
Hee sudes, idem. Hoc braciolum, Aé brasor.®
Hee lorica, Ae hawbyrgon. Hoe brachiale, idem.
Hee claua, Aé mase. Hee targea, Ae targett.
Hee galea, Ac helme. 25 + 7
Hee ee id idem. NOMINA ORNAMENTORUM. '
Hee ensis, Ae swerde. Hee camicia, Aé sarke.
Hic gladius, idem. Hee inchila, Ae rochett.
Hee gesa, Ae gysserne.® Hoc femorale, Ae breke. \
Hoc telum, Aé darte. 30 Hee bracce, -arum, idem.
Hoc jaculum, idem. Hee tunica, Aé cote.
Hoc missele, idem. Hee supertunica, Ae surkote.
Hoc pilum, idem est. Hee caliga, Aé hose.
Hee balista, Ae awblast.4 Hee pedana, Ae wampe.7
Hoc petillum, Ae bolte. 35 Hee formula, Aé last.
Hee petulio, idem. Hoc formipedium, idem.

‘The metal formerly called in English ° The gisarme, or giserne, was the bill
laten, or latten, from the French laiton, or battle-axe. It has been identified with
was a compound of copper, very much the Latin gesa by an older authority, the
resembling brass, which was extensively commentator on John de Garlande.
used in the middle ages, but the exact * Awblast, the arbalest, or crossbow.
composition of which seems not now to ’ A broad-arrow was distinguished by
be known. a large forked head.

? Read pugio. Myserecord. This name ° Brasor, the brasser, or armour for the
was given to a thin bladed dagger worn arm.
by the warrior, and used to dispatch one 7 Vampe, or vampy, bottoms of hose
who was dangerously wounded, intended, covering the foot; or, perhaps here, the
as it is said, to imply that this was an upper leather of a boot, |
act of mercy. (Cf. pag. 654 1, 16. R. W,)

655 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 656

Hoc perplicar, Ae gavterc. Hee corigia, A¢ thowyng.6

Hoc subligar, idem. Hoc braccale, Ae brygyrdylle.

Hoc lumbare, Ae brekgyrdylle. Hic loculus, Ae purse.

Hoe perizoma, idem. Hoc marsupium, idem.

Hee toga, Ae gowne. 5 Hic ocria, Ae bote.

Hee linistema, Aé tarteryne.' Hic sotularis, Ae scho.

Hee lacuna, est extremitas uestis. Hoc antepedale, A® wampe.

Hoc gremium, Ae scyrtte. Hoc pedium, idem.

Hoc jfimbrium, Ae hemme. Hic pero, -ri, A€ wolyng.”

Hee pera, Ae strype. 10 Hee mantica, Ae male.

Hoc presegmen, Aé screde, Hee zonata, idem.

Hee armilausa, Aé cloke. Hoc redimentum, est ornamentum.

Hee instita, Ae rokytte.? Hoc discriminale, est ornamentum

Hee tena, Ae howe. capitis mulieris.

Hec tenea, Ac tappe. 15 Hee caracalla, Ae kelle.®

Hoc reticulum, Ae kelle.3 Hoc peplum, Ae wympulle.

Hoe sertum, Ae garland. Hoc tricatorium, Ae tressure.

Hoc capellum, Ac hatte. Hec uitta, Ae bend.

Hee mitra, Ae mytyre. Hoc seruale, idem est quod sertum.

Hee galliare, idem. 20 Hee inauris, est annulus in aure.

Hee nata, idem. Hoc armillum, est ornamentum.

Hee laurea, Ae crowne.

ieee, Waders, idem. NOMINA INSTRUMENTORUM
ec corona, idem. AULE

Hee manica, Aé myttan. 25 a

Hoc epitogium, Ae cowrteby.t Hee aula, Aé halle.

Hoc limpidium, Ae idem. Hee mensa, Ae borde.

Hoc bombacilium, Ae idem. Hic tristellus, Aé treste.

Hec capa, Ae cope. Hoc bancarium, Ae banquere.

Hec clauus, Ae mantylle. 30 Hoe dorsarium, Ae dosur.

Hoc pallium, idem. Hec buda, Ae natte.

Hee lacerna, idem. Hoc scorium, idem.

Hee carelta, A¢ lasse.5 Hee cillaba, Ae tabulle dormawnd.9

Hee caxacalla, Ae idem. Hee peluis, Ae basyn.

Hoc stropheum, Ae gyrdylle. 35 Hoc lauatorium, Ae laworre.

Hic balteus, idem. Hie ignis, Ae fyr.

Hoc singulum, idem. Hic focus, idem.

Hee ligula, Ae garter. Hie pir, idem.
* Tarterine is described as a kind of 7 Wolyng, a leathern sack.

silk stuff, said to have been so named ® Kelle signifies properly a smock, or

because it was obtained from the Tartars, petticoat; perhaps it is used here for what
* Cf. Catholicon Anglicum p. 310. R. W. we call a smock-frock. (Cf. note 3.)
* Kelle, a covering of network for the ° Table dormaunt appears to have been

head. the name for a permanent table in the

| ‘A courtby, or courtpy, was a short hall, as distinguished from the board which

cloak of coarse cloth, was placed temporarily upon trestles. The
* Lasse, a cassock. Latin cillaba appears to have been applied
° Thowyng, a thong. to a round table.

657 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 658
Iloc focarium, A harthe. Ilic artocopus, Aé symnelle.s
Hee fax, -cis, Ae brande. Hic panis, Ae lof of bred.
Hlec torris, idem. Ji lesea, Ae seywe.®
Hec teda, idem. Tlic torcellus, Ae cake.
Hic tissio, idem. 5 Hoc minutal, A€ cantelle.
Hoe ricrepofocilium, A& yolestok.' Hlic mucor, Aé mowlde. |
Hic, hee ciner, A€ askys. Tec briba, Ae lumpe. .
Hee andena, A& awndyren. Toc frustrum, A& mese, gobyt. |
Hoc sedile, Ae langsedylle.® Iloc ferculum, idem.
Hee cathedra, Ae chayere 10 Farcla sunt frustra, dicuutur fereula vasa.
Hee forceps, Aé tangges. Hee mica, Ae crowm.
Hoc scannum, Ae bynke.* Hee mappa, Ae bordeclathe. ;
Hoc stabellum, Aé stole. Hoc gausape, Ae sanap.° )
Hoe fultrum, Ae cosyn, Tlic morsus, Ae bytte. j
Hoc focale, Ae wode to the fyre. 15 Hoc manutergium, Ae towelle. |
Hic culigna, Ae pare belows. Hoc selarium, Ae celare.'° }
Hee antipera, A¢ screne. Hoc sal, A¢ salte. :
Floc cocliar, A® spone. ;
NOMINA PERTINENCIA AD _ ,, 7/¢¢ sporticula, Ae relef."
PINCERNAM. 20 Hoe dolium, Ae townne.
Hic vter, Ae buffylle.’*
Panis fluentatus, Ae gurbred. Hic collator, Aé costylle.'*
Panis furfurius, Ae branbred. Hoe murra, Aé masere.
Panis ordiccius, Ae barlybred. Hoc uinum, Ae wyne.
Panis triticius, Ae whetbred. 25 Hoe merum, A® mede.
Panis similaginius, Ae paynmayn.4 Iloc claretum, A€ clarett.
Panis fabicius, Ae benebred. Hee seruicia, Aé ale.
Panis pisacius, A¢ pesbred. Hee selia, idem est.
Panis auenacius, Ae hafyrbred.s Hie ciphus, Ae coppe.
Panis siliginius, Ae tharfbred.® 30 Iloe cooperculum, Ae cowerkylle.
Panis sigalinus, ideni. Hee fex, Ae dregges.
Panis muscidus, Ae mowldebred. Hoe nectar, Ae pyment.
Hoc libwn, Ae wastelle.7 Hoe armariolum, At almere.
* What is still called in the north a * Sanap, a napkiv. The romance of Sir |
yule-clog, or yule-log. Degrevant, J. 1387, speaks of —
? The long wooden seat with back and Towellas ofsBegeiany 5
arms, Which is still called a settle. Whygth as the sees fame,
% Bynke, a bench — the usual seat in Sanap at Fr an
the hall.
* Payn-mayn was the name given to '° Celare, a salt-sellar.
the bread of finer quality. OD Rp, 3 cA eciets
* Hafyr-bred, bread made of oats; vat- 2 Buffylle, a leather bottle, for liquors,
cakes. as would appear from the Latin equiva-
° This term is now used in the north lent.
for unleavened bread. ‘3 Costylle. A  costrel was a bottle or
7 Wastelle, a cake, the Fr. ydteau. vessel of wood, resembling that which the
® 4, €., a shive, or slice. labourers still carry with them in harvest
time.

659 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 660
Hoc sissorium, Aé trenchure. ITec pustula, A® bokylle.
Hic casius, A¢ chese. Hoc speculum, Ae meror.
Hoc cepe, A€ hongon.! Hic fusus, A spyndylle.
Casins ot cepe ueninnt ad prandia sepe. Hee madula, Ae jurdan,
Hoc butirum, A€ buttyre. 5 Tlic jurdanus, idem est.
Hic cadus, A® barylle. Hoc tapetum, Ae tapyt.
Hic ducellus, Ae dosylle.* Hoc coopertorium, Aé coverhyde.
Foc poculum, Ae drynk. Hoe carentreuillum, Ae canwas.
Flic potus, idem est. Lectus plumalis, Ae fedyrbed,
Hie cophinus, Ae hampere. 10 Hie lectus, Ae bede.
Seruicia noua, Ae new ale. Hoc stratum, Ae bedlytter.
Seruicia deficata, Ae stale ale. Est lectus stratum, uia regia sit tibi strata.
Seruicia acerba, A€ sowre ale. Hoe epicaustorium, Ae chymne.
Hoc placentwn, Aé wastelle. . Hie caminus, idem est.
i
NOMINA PERTINENCIA AD NOMINA PERTINENCIA AD
CAMERAM. COQUINAM.
| Hoc pecten, Ae combe. Hie coqus, A® coke.
| Hoc colobium, Ae tabarde. 20 Hic, hee lica, Ae quystron.4
| Hee armilausa, Aé cloke. Hoc mortarium, A mortere.
| Hic clauus, idem. Hic pilus, Ae pestylle.
Hoc capicium, Ae hode. Hoe micatorium, Ae myowre.5
Hee supertunica, Ae furdcote. Hoe mortorium, A¢ postyk.
Hee tunica, Ae cote. 25 Hee olla, A¢ potte-
Hec toga, Ae gowne. Hee anca, Aé potere.
Hec manica, Aé slewe. Hie vreeus, Aé posnett.
Hee glitella, Ae kostyre.* Hic vreiolus, Ae idem.
Hee sista, Ae kyst. Hee ollula, Ae tdem.
Hee arca, Aé arke. 30 Hee patella, Ae panne.
Hee teca, idem. Hee tripes, Ae burnderthe.®
Hee capsa, idem est. Hee scapha, A bolle.
Hic nodulus, Aé boton. Hoe frixorium, Ae friyngpan.
| Hoc calcar, Ae spore. Iie limas, A¢ naprune.
| Hee stupa, Ae barre. 35 Hoc succidium, Ae sowsse.
| Hoe monile, A¢ broche. Hoc ramentum, Ae ramayle.7
| Hee aguaria, Ae nedylhows. Hoc sepum, Ae tallo.
* 4. e, an onion. From the verse which * Kostyr, the hanging of the wall of
follows we may perhaps conclude that it the room — aulaum.
was usual to eat onions with cheese. * Quystron, the cook’s assistant, or scul-
* Dosylle, the faucet of a barrel. Robert lion.
of Gloucester, describing the disturbances ° Myowr, an implement for reducing
in Oxford in the thirteenth century, and bread into crumbs, in old French esmicure.
the mischief the scholars did in the towns- ° Burnderthe, a brandreth, or iron tripot,
men’s houses, (ed. Hearne, p. 542), says — to place over a fire for supporting a pot
Vor the mer was viniter, hii breke the viniterie, or kettle.
And alle othere in the toun, and a Sit 7 Ramayle, scrapings.
Hii caste awei the dosils; that win orn abrod so,
That It was pité gret of so much harm {do.

661 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 662
Hoc ueru, Ae spytt. Caro spadonia, capuneflesche.
Hoc uerutum, Aé spit with mete. Caro caponina, caponflesche.
Hic fumus, Ae reke. Caro gallinacia, heneflesche.
Hee flamma, Aé low. Caro grossa, grete flesche.
Hee fuligo, A& sote. 5 Caro assota, rost flesche.
Hoc brodium, Ae brothe. Caro in brodio, in broth.
Hoc ferculum, A mese. Caro cocta in pasta, bakyn.
Iloc potagium, Ae potage. Iie pugio, Aé pejon.
Hoc edulium, Aé sowle.' Hoe caldarium, Aé caldron.
Hoc adipatum, Ae browys. 10 Hee ferina, Ae wenyson.
Iloc lacticinium, Ae wyttemet. Hoc senapium, Ae mustarde.
Hoc lac, Ae my)ke. Hoc alleum, Aé garly.
Hoc serum, Ae way. Hoc ius uiride, Ae warins.
Hoc coagulum, A¢ crodde. Hee emulaga, Ae batyre. j
Hoc coactum, Ae reme. 15 Hie chalaphus, A¢ pangere.
Hee perapsis, A doblere. Caro cruda, Aé ra flesche.
Hoc sallarium, Ae sowser. Caro rancida, Ae rest flesche.
Hec taleteca, Ae blawmunger. Hic scamellus, A¢ dressyn-knyfbord.
Hoc pepe, A mortrus, Hic nidor, sapor coquine-
Hic garrus, A¢ brewett. 20 Hic afingea, pinguedo porci. }
Hoc sepulatum, Aé sewe. Hoc abdomen, idem est.
Hic pastillus, Ae pastyth. Hec nebula, Ae noble.
Hie baco, Ae bacon. Hee uafra, Ae wayfyre.
Hee perna, A¢ flyk. Hic flato, Ae flaune.*
Hoc lardum, Aé Jardyre. 25 Hee ecratericula, Ae rostyryn.
Hoc fertum, Aé podynge. Hec artocria, a pie de pundio.
Hec salucia, A® sauscyre.
2
pee ance eT eee NOMINA PERTINENCIA AD

ec olda, A¢ hyspyn. BRASORIUM
Hic omasus, Ae trype. 30
Caro recens, fresche flesche. Hec brasiatrix, A’ brewster.

Caro salsa, salt flesche. Hee cima, A¢ kymnelle.>
Caro bouina, beyfflesche.® Hee tina, Aé sa.

Caro porcina, swyneflesche. Hic fornax, Aé furnasse-
Caro uitulina, calfflesche. 35 Hoc alueum, Ae trogh.
Caro mutulina, chepeflesche. Hoc brasium, A¢ malte.
Caro aucina, goseflesche. Hee barzisa, Ae wortte.

* Sowle, anything eaten with bread, like ° These interpretations would seem to
cheese, &ec., still called in some of the show that the Anglo-Norman terms, beef,
English dialects sool or sowl. Thus, in pork, &c., had not yet entirely superseded .
the romance of Havelok, 1, 767 — the names of meat of Anglo-Saxon deriv-

Kam he nevere hom hand-bare, ation.
That he ne broucte bred and sowel. Wayfire . . . flaune. Wafers were a

2 Hagase, ‘The hagas was the paunch,  YeTY light kind of cakes; in old French
or stomach, of the animal, staffed with  gifres; flauns were custards, Horan
minced-meat, &c., something in the man- Kymnelie, « tab) for househi ae
ner ofa sausage; the origin of the modern —_POS*S;_& vat.

Scottish haggis.

663 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 664
Hoc dragium, A€ draf. "
Hoc nae Ae caldron. NOMINA PERTINENCIA AD
Hic cacabus, idem. ORRIUM,
Hoe taratantarum, Aé temse.! Hec garba, Aé chef.
Hee cuuella, Ae kuulioune * 5 Hic manipulus, Ae repe.
Hoc cilicium, Ae hayre. Hec corbex, Aé lepe.
Hoc ydromellum, Ae growte. Hoc uentilabrum, Ae wyndylle.
Hee mola, A¢ quernes. Hic modius, Aé buschelle.
Hee pruera, lingge.® Hic corus, Aé mesure.
Merica, idem est. 10 Hec prebenda, Ae probend.
Hic abbatis, Ae prowande.
Abbatis auenam dat equis abbatis anenam.
Se teu ab Hec auena, Ae otys.
. Hoe ostorium, Ae stryke.
Hic pistor, Aé bacstere. 15 Hec ala, Ae wenge.
Hec ferina, Aé mele. Hoe flagellum, Ae flayle.
Hic furfur, A® bran. Hoc rastrum, Ae rake.
Hic flos, Ae flowre. Hoc granum, A® corne.
Hee similago, est purissimus flos. Hee spica, Ae cornehere,
| Hec pasta, Ae dagh. 20 Hoc frumentum, A& wete.
Hoe leuamentum, Aé lewan.4 Hoc triticum, Ae whete.
Hoc fermentum, A¢ surdagh.> Hee pisa, Ae pese.
Hoc crebrum, Aé syfe. Hec faba, Ae bene.
Hoc pellen, Ae floure. Hee uicia, Ae feche.
Hoc pollitridium, Ae bultclathe. 25 Hee lens, Ae lentylle.
Hec falanga, Aé satre. Hoc ordium, Aé barly.
Hec pela, Ae pele. Hee siligo, Ae rye.
Hec uertebra, Ae cobarde. Hoc sigalum, idem.
Hoc tresorium, A€ scomure. Hee curalis, Ae crappys.
Hic furnus, A€ oven. 30 Hoe lollium, A® populle.
Poletriduare, to bulte. Hic cratis, Aé fleke.
Hoc sinarium, A® sotre. Hoc tribulum, Ae schowulle.
Hee casta, Ae rybbe. Hec solea, Aé sole.
Hic cultellus, Ae knyfe. Hee pedana, Ae wampay.7
Hec sindula, Aé blade. 35 Hoc intercucium, Ae weltte.
Hoc manubrium, A¢ hefte. Hoc pictacium, A¢ clowte.
| Hoc penum, A¢ egge.
| Hic perrasmus, Ae tonge. a
| Hee cuspis, Ae poynte. UERBA pe PERTI-
| Hec sperula, Ae werylle. 40 ' :
Pluit, raynes, Deus meus.§
_! Temse, a sieve. The word is still in brooms, and other domestic purposes.
use in the North of England. * Leaven. ‘

2 Cuvella signifies a small tnd. ° Sur-dagh, i. sour dough.

* Pruera is a corrnption of bruera, and © A strike, or bushel measure.
merica of mirica. Ling, the calluna of 7 Wampay. See before, p. 654 1. 34.
modern botanists, is introduced here be- ° Deus meus ete. is added in a differ-

| canse it was nsed largely for making ent hand-writing. R. W.
44

665 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 666 |
Gelat, freses, Deus tuus. e . =f
Degelat, thowes, Deus suus. a Ee AD
Floctat, snawes, Deus ilius. pe
Ningit, snawes, Deus ipsius. Hoc multrum, A€ chesfat.*
Tonat, thoneres, Deus sanctus. 5 Hoe lac, Ae mylk.
Grandinat, hayles, Deus omnipotens. Hoc butirum, Ae buttyre.
Fulgurat, lewnes, Deus creator. Hic caseus, Ae chese.
Fulminat, idem, Deus dat omnia. Hoc coagulum, Ae crodes.
Hee bedulta, A€ possyt.
NOMINA PERTINENCIA ap 10700 i pares
190; way.
CARECTARIAM. Hee antipera, Ae kyrne.
Hee beta, est secundus panis. Hoc almariolum, Aé almary.
Hee gerusia, Ae gadde. Hoc torcular, Ae prassur.
Hee mantica, Ae male. 15 Hoc coactum, Aé reme.
Hec mastiga, Ae wyppe- Hee multra, Ae payle.
Hee reda, Ae chare. Hee lactis, -cis, Ae cheslypp.4
Hic aculeus, Ae brode.!
Hoc plaustrum, Ae wayne. .
Hee tema, AFT: ae 20 NOMINA LUDORUM.
Hee torques, Ae wythe,? Hoc hastiludium, A iustyng.
Hic currus, Aé karte. Hoe tirocinium, Ae turnament.
Hee bina, est currus habens duos Hoc interludium, A¢ entyrlute.
equos. Hic trocus, Aé toppe.
Hee rota, Ae qwele. 25 Hee scutica, Ae scowrge.
Hic radius, Ae spake. Hee pila, Aé balle.
Hoc meditulium, Ae nawef. Hoc pedum, Aé cambok.5
Hic axis, Ae axyltre. Hie pirrus, Ae chekyr.
Hoc hunullum, Aé lynpyne. Hic scaccarius, idem.
Hic limo, Aé thyllys. 30 Hic scaccus, Ae chesse.
Hoc fricsorium, Ae pynne. Hic talus, Aé dyse.
Hic uiredus, Ae thylhors. Hee alea, idem.
Hoc dorsilollum, Ae cartsadylle. Hee tabella, Ae tabulles.
Hee singula, Ae garthe. Hee tuba, A trumpe.
Hec postela, Aé taylerape. 35 Hee buccina, idem.
Hec antela, A€ paytrylle. Hee fistula, Ae pype.
Hee trane, -arum, Ae trays. Hee idraulis, Ae waterpype.
Hoe capistrum, A¢ heltyre. Hee anduca, A belepype. .
Hoc scansile, Ae styroppe. Hee cithera, Aé harpe.
Hee stropa, idem. 40 Hee lira, Ae harpestring.
Hee strigilis, Ae horscombe. Hoc plectrum, Ae wrastt.
Hoe aratrum, Aé plogh. Hoc tympanum, Ae taburne,
Hoc iugum, Ae gokke. Hie sambucus, Ae sytholle.
* Brode, a prick, or goad. still called cheeselop in the north.
? A with, or twisted rod. * Cambok, an old game at ball played
® Ches-fat, a milkpail. with a crooked stick, mentioned under
* Cheslyppe. Perhaps runnet, which is this name by Stowe.

667 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 668
Hec uetella, A rybybe. Hee uectis, idem.
Hec symphonia, Aé synphane. Hic clatrus, idem.
| Hec palpita, Ae sawtre. Hic obex, idem. 4
Hee uiella, Ae fythylle. Hoc ostiolum, Ae hek.®
Hoc symbalum, Ae symbale. 5 Hoc superliminare, Ae ouverslay.
Hoc organum, Aé organs. Hoc superlimen, idem est.
Hoc tignum, Ae spere.
Hoc tigillum, Ae idem.
NOMINA PERTINENCIA Hoe festum, est lignum ad quod omnia
DOMORUM. 10 tigna conueniunt.
Hoc fundum, Ae growndwalle.' Hec trapecula, Ae byndbalk.
Hee bassis, idem. Hoc doma, Ae rofe.
Hee paries, Ae walle. Hic hamus, Ae hoke.
Hic murus, idem. Hee sericula, Ae clykyt.
Hic cardo, Ae thriswald. 15
oe . NOMINA AD NUTRIARIUM
Hee postis, A post. Hee obstatrix, Ae mydwyfe.
Hoc laquear, A¢ postband. Fassiatus, Ae swathild.
Hec fania, Ae pautre. 20 Hoc eunabulum, Ae credylle.
Hee trabes, Ae balk. Reperre, to crepe.
Hee tegula, Ae teylle. Salmare, to slawer.
Hoe later, idem. Hee salmacio, A¢ slaveryng.
Hoc laquear, Aé postband. Hoc salmarium, Aé¢ slaveryngclout.
Hee cauilla, Ae pynne. 25 Alutare, to fyle.
Hic cuneus, Ae wegge. Mutulare, to mamere.
Hec tingnus, Ae howsehessyng. Hec mutulatio, Ae mameryng.
Hoe domicilium, idem. Uagire, i. clamare sicut infans.
Hoc edificium, idem. Hee ancilla, Ae maydyn.
Hee columna, Aé pelere. 30 Hee puella, idem.
Hec uolta, Ae wowte. Hec trocus, Ae toppe.
Hoc lodium, Aé lowere.2 Hee mataxa, A¢ hekylle.
Hoc spelare, Ae wyndow. Hic limphus, Ae topflax.
Hee fenestra, idem. Hec fascia, Ae credylbande.
Hoc ostium, Ae dore. 35 Hic colus, Ae roke.
Hec sera, Aé lok. Hic fusus, Ae spyndylle.
Hee uictinella, Ae stapulle. Hee lacrima, Aé tere.
Hec clauis, Ae kay. Surdus, -a, -um, deffe.
Hoe repagulum, Ae dorebar. Surdaster, -a, -um, Aé halfedeffe,
Hoc pessulum, idem. 40
. * Ground-walle; this is the old Anglo- * Hek is perhaps used in the same
Saxon term. See before, p. 326 1. 22. signification which it still bears in the
* Lowere, a louver. The open tarret, north, the lower half of the door, which
or lantern, on the roof of a building, remains shut while the other half opens.
especially on the old baronial halls, the * The MS. has Nutriariam. — The words
original object of which was to carry off follow each other in this chapter as thongh
the smoke from the fire in the middle of | they had been taken from the ,, Treatise“
the hall. of Walter de Biblesworth,

669 ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 670
Hoc oratorium, Aé oratory.
NOMINA PERTINENCIA AD Hoc refectorium, Ac ten
Hoc dormitorium, Aé dorture.
IOWA NU Hoc capitulum, Ae chapytur.
Hie bubulcus, Ae oxarde. 5 Hoc locutorium, Aé parloure.
Hic, hee bos, Ae ox. Hoc claustrum, Ae clostyre.
Hic taurus, Ae bulle. Hee porticus, Ae porche,
Hee uacca, Ae cow. Hee proaula, idem est.
Hic bowiculus, Ae styrk. Hee aula, Aé halle.
Hee juuenca, A€ quee. 10 Hee camera, Ae chawmbur.
Hic uitulus, Ae calfe. Hee talamus, idem est.
Hoc presepe, Ae crybe. Hee latrina, Ae wardroppe-
Hoc bouerium, A oxstalle. Hec cloaca, idem est.
Hic palus, Ae stak. Hoc selarium, A selare.
15 Hee panteria, Ae pantre. |
Hee botelaria, A¢ botelary.
NOMINA SERPENTUM. Hoc lardarium, Aé lardyrhouse.
Hie idrus, serpens antiqua. Hee quoquina, Ae kechyn.
Hec emfimenia, serpens cum duobus Hoc pistrinum, Aé bachouse.
capitibus. 20 Hoe brasorium, A¢ brewhouse.
Hic cholendrus, serpens qui moritur Hoc torale, Ae kylnhowse. |
in aquis. Hoc furnium, A€ ovenhouse. :
Hic seps, serpens exiguus. Hoc orreum, Aé lathe. ;
Hic dipsas, serpens magne malicie. Hoc granarium, idem est. :
Hec salpia, serpens qui non uidetur.25 Hoc palare, Ae chafhouse.
Hie coluber, Ae snake. Hoc boster, Ae schyppune.
Hoc stabulum, Aé stabulle.
NOMINA PERTINENCIA AD Hoe columbare, Ae dowecote.
SUARIUM. Hee barcaria, Ae schepehouse.
al 30 Hee porcaria, Ae swyncote.
Hic porcarius, Ae swyneherde. Hoe suarium, idem est.
Hic aper, Ae bore. Hee ara, idem est.
Hic, hee sus, Ae sowe. Hoc ouile, Ae falde.
Hee porea, i. quod scrofa. Hoe tigurrium, Ae cheperdhowse.
Hie frendis, Ae galt. 35 Hoc gallinarium, A¢ henecote.
Hic neufrendis, Ae gylt, Hee salina, Aé saltecote.
Hic porcellus, Ae gryse. Hoc repositorium, Ae hordehouse.
Hee garbana, idem est.
Hoe argastulum, A€ prisoun.
NOMINA LELOJSSTUUAPDIS Abie Gocands idenmed
DOMORUM. Hoc prostipulum, est domus meretricis.
Hoe monasterium, Ae mynstre. Hoc lupanar, idem est.
Hee ecclesia, A¢ kyrk. Hee quinquatria, est domus habens
Hie cancellus, Ae chawnsylle. quinque porticus sub se.
Hic chorus, idem est. 45
Hec capella, Aé chapylle.
* Galt, a boar-pig,

671 ENGLISH VOCABULARY, 672
Hie socer, Ae! pater in lege.
Hee socrus, Ae mater in lege.
NOMINA CONSANGUINIORIUM. 77, nurus, Ae fitia in fag
Hic pater, Aé fadyre. Hic gener, A€ sone-in-law.
Hic genitor, idem est. 5 Hee amita, soror patris.
Hic, hec parens, est pater uel mater, Hee matertera, soror matris.
Hic uictricus, Aé stepfadyre. Hie auus, Ae eldfader.
Hee uictrica, Ae stepmodyre. Hee auia, Ae eldmoder.
Hic filiaster, Ae stepsone. Hic proceser, pater patris in lege.
Hee preuigna, Ae stepdoghter. 10 Hic nepos, est filius filii.
Hec filiaster, idem est. Hee neptis, est filia filti uel filie.
Hic compater, Ae godefader. Hee glos, -ris, est soror in lege,
Hee commater, Ae godemoder. Hie leuir, est frater in lege.
Hic filiolus, Ae godeson.
Hec filiola, Ae goddoghter. 15
ie Frater, Ae brother. NOMINA TEMPORA ANNI.
Hic germanus, idem est. Hic yemps, Ae wyntyre.
Hee soror, Aé syster. Hoc uer, -ris, vere.
Hee germana, idem est. Hee estas, Ae summure.
Hie sororius, Ae syster hosband. 20 Hic autumnus, A¢ harwest.
"So the MS. R. W. .

WIN
A NOMINALEs
(OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.)
Incipit nominale sub compendio compilatum tam de fixis quam de mobilibus.
Hoc cinciput, i. pars anterior.
ao VOCABULIS AD SINGULA ioe interciput, i. media pars.
EMBRA HUMANI CORPORIS Hoc ffrontispicium, a fortope.
SPECTANTIBUS. d Hee vertex, A¢ hatrelle.
Hoc principium, 5 Hoc discrimen, the schade of the
Hoe inicium, hede.?
Hoc exordium, (A begynnyng. Hie crinis,
Hoe primordium, | Hic capillus, Acchhares
lic origo, ' Hee coma,
Hoc caput, Ace hede. 10 Hic pilus,
Hoc occiput, a nodyle. Hoc cerebrum, a brayn.

' A common title for the vocabularies string attached, to tie it when rolled. It

of the fifteenth century was that of No- is unfortunately not quite complete, a leaf
méinale, intimating that it was strictly a having been lost; but to judge from the
vocabulary of nouns, or names of things, part which remains, that which is lost was
classified under their different heads. The probably the least important part of it,
nominale here printed is taken from a and may be supplied from the complete
very curious MS. of the fifteenth cen- vocabularies of the fifteenth century, printed
tury, in the collection of Joseph Mayer, in the present volume.
Esq., F.S.A., of Liverpool, which had no ? Schede, or shed, was the common
doubt belonged to the schoolmaster who name for the separation of the hair on
taught with it, and remains in its origi- the top of the head, from which it spread
nal cover of vellum, contrived so as to down on either side (= Germ. scheitel.
roll up to make it more portable, witha R. W.).

675 A NOMINALE. 676
Hoe crinium, a harnpane. Hee lingua, peut
Hec ffacies, a face. Tec glossa, Be.
Hee ffaciecula, i. parva facies. Hoe aon 1
1 ype:
Hoc tempus, a tunwonge. Hoc labrum,
Hec macula, a spote- 5 Hic dens, -tis, a tothe.
| Hee papula, a blane. Hee jungiva, a gume.
Hee mazilla, Hec auris, a nere.
Hee mola, ha chekbene. Hee auricula, i. parva auris.
Hee jaux, Hee colera, the ersope.°
Hee frons, a forete. 10 Hec mandibula, a chekebone.
Hoc cilium, a brow. Hic porrigo, a poke.
Hoe supercilium, a browbone. Hee veruka, a warte.
Hoc intercilium, the space betwene Hoc ulcus, a kylle.®
the eyn. Hic gibbus, a byle behynde.
Hic oculus, ee ied 15 Hic gibber, a byle before.
ne. és
Hic = Hee struma, idem est.
Hec palpebra, the eelyde. Hoc collum, a neke. bd
Hee pupilla, the appylle of the ee. Hee gula, ba thrOtes
Hee albedo, Hoc gutiur,
Hee aces the whyte of the ce. 20 Hec frontinella, the pyte in the neke.
Hoc albumen, Hoe frumen, i. summa pars gutturis.
Hee acies, the scharpnes of the ee. Hee ructa, i id
idem est.
Hic nasus, a nese. Hoc rumen,
Hee naris, a nesthyrylle. Hic ysophagus, a wesande.
Hoc interfinium, the bryg of the nese. 25 Hoc epiglotum, a thotegole.
Hec purila, the poynt of the nese. Hic stomacus, a stomake.
Hec cartilago, a grystylle. Hoc brachium, a narme.
Hoc rostrum, a bylle. Hee acella, a narmehole.
Hic cirrus, a topylle.® Hie cubitus, a cubyte.
Hic polipus, the fylth of the nese. 30 Hic humerus, a chwdyr.
Hee saliva, a spyttynge. Hic manus, a hande.
Hec orexis, & spewynge. Hic digitus, a fyngyr.
Hee glabra, a scale. Hee palma,
Hoc mentum, a chyn. Hoe ir, irsg the lone of the hande.
Hec uteelaris, a wongtothe.* 35 Hee vola,
Hoc os, -ris, a mowthe. Hic pollex, a thome.
Hee gena, h ITic index, the secunde fynger.
Hee “ae eke Hic medius, the longe fynger.
l p Be TYE
' The Anglo-Saxon punwang, a temple. signify a tuft or crest.
See the A.-S. vocabularies in the present * Wong, or wang, was the AS. word
volume. for a check; wang-tod meant a grinder.
? Ne, an eye. This practice of prefixing Wangtooth is, I believe, still used in this
the final n of the article to the noun, sense in the north.
when the latter commences with a vowel, ° A Nominale in MS. Reg. 17, C. XVIL,
is of constant recurrence in these vocab- fol. 38, v9, gives, ;,colera, Anglice arwax,“
ularies of the fifteenth century. ° A kile, or ulcerated sore,
* Topple was used by old writers to

677 A NOMINALE, 678
Hic méedicus, the therde fynger. Hoc viscus,
Hic auricularis, the lytyle fynger. Hoc inestinun bowyle.
Hic pugnus, a fyste. Hoc extum,
Hee iunguis, > Hoc scrutum, a trype.
Hee Bers & Dey’: 5 Hee diafragma, a mydrede.
Hee junctura, a joynt. Hec pulpa, Ace brawne.
Hoe corpus, a body. Hoc epa, -tis, a lyver.
Tec cutis, be ar, Hoc splen, a mylte.
Hec peliis, amas Hoc cor, -dis, a herte. 5
Hoc tergum, Wake 10 Hoc ren, -is, a nere.?
Hoc ae ee Hic lien, -nis, a longegute. !
Hoc spondile, a bakebone. Ific pulmo, the lownges.
Hic torax, a brestebone. Hoc jecor, a mawe. - ;
Tic vented Hoc cadaver, a caryoun. |
Hic alvuus,) * “4% 15 Hoc burburium, owmlys.’
Hic umbelicus, a navyle. Hoc cepum, talow.
Hee natis, a bottoke. Hoc ee gres betwen the
Hec cawda) . 5.4 Hic pinguedo) skyn and the...
Hee dica, ta lial Hic adeps, idem est.
Hic lumbus, a hype. 20 Hic sanguis,
Hoc uber, - ie Hic ae Ace blodg:
Hee manna} pape. Hec omomestra, a medryn.*
Hee mamilla, Hoc fel, -lis, a gale.
Hoc pectus, a breste. Hoc sperma, Ace fry.
Hoc latus, a syde. 25 Hoc stercus,
Hee costa, a ey Hee parti pole,
Hee pubes, gong hore.! Hoc cirbrum, a gute.
Hoc femur, h Hoe genu, a kne.
Hoc crus, fa wep Hoc internodium, the knope of the
Hoc veretruey tyl 30 kne.
Hie priapus, 5* PYPt'™ Hee tibia, a lege.
Hee vulva, a cunte. Hec sura, a chynbone.
Hic testiculus, a balloke. Hic nervus, a synow.
Hic ramex, locus genitalium. Hee vena, a vayn.
Hoe genitale, a balloke stone. 35 Hoe os, -sis, a bone.
Hec piga, a balloke code. Hee medulla, margthe.>
Hic anus,)a ners. Hoc crus, -ris, a the.
Hic Pa 8 Hee cavilla, a nankyle.
Hee poplex, a hame. Hic musculus, the calfe of the lege.
Hee matrix, 40 Hic fragus, a wyrste.°
Hee stera, pellis in qua conci- Hic talus, a Hele.
Hee secundina, pitur infans. Hic cals, = -
Hee secunda, Hee duricies, hardnes of the hande.
* 4. e, young hair. The Nominale in * The umbles.
MS. Reg. 17, ©. XVII, fol. 38, v, ex- * The midriff.
plains pubes and picten (pecten) by ,An- * The marrow; A.-S. mearh, or mearg.
glice rawne.“ ° The bend of the knee.
* Cf. p. 636 note 5.

679 A NOMINALE, 680
Hic pes, -dis, a fote. Hoc carecter, F,
Hec planta, the sole of the fote. Hoc eral het) Ng
Hec apostema, a postym. Hee lenticula, a frakyn.*
Hee vertebra, the wherlbone. Hee omoplata, a schuldyrbone.
Hic sinus, a bosome. 5 Hoe pollicium, a nynche.
Hoc grabatum, penultima corrupta,
a skyrte. CAPITULUM 2”.
Siigeg seme nfo Homes NOMINA DIGNITATUM CLERT-
fic allux, -cis, a grete too.
Hic articulus, a lytyle too. 10 CORUM.
Hoc vulnus, Hic papa, a pape.
Hee plaga, { e Wena, Hic ‘oqantak Ace apostyle.
Recia, regna plage dicuntur, vulnera plage. Fe patriarcha, a patriarke.
Hic sudor, -ris, Ace swete. Hic cardinalis, a cardynale.
Hee lacrima, a tere. 15 Hic archyepiscopus, an ersbychope.
Hic porus, a sweteholle. Hic episcopus, a byschope.
Hec scabia, a skale. Hic archidiaconus, a narsdekyn.
Hic corona, a crowne. Hic diaconus, a dekyn.
Hec vesica, a bledyr. Hic decanus, a dene.
Hec urina, Ace pysse. 20 Hie legatus, a legate.
Hec urinula, idem est. Hic propheta, a profete.
Hoc bumbum, a ferte. Hic officialis, an -offyeyale.
Hee lirida, a fyse. Hic poeta, a poyte.
Hic passus, a rayke.' Hie archisinagogus, i. princeps sina-
Hoc progressus, a goynge forthe. 25 “ gogie.
Hie regressus,) a Hic cancellarius, a chanceller.
Hee revercio, ¢ * YO™PYRS agayne- Hic suffraganus, a suffrykayn.
Hic adventus, Hic abbas, a abbote,
Hic Mecmeit COTES AOS Hic prior, a pryor.
Hic recessus, a 30 Hic subprior, a subprior.
Hee bliss, COREY NES- Hic causidicus, a vokyte.
Hic gustus, a taystyng. Hic philosofus, a fylysofer.
Hic olfactus, a smellyng. Hic monachus, 2 monke.
| Hic auditus, a heryng. Hic canonicus, a chanoun.
Hic visus, a syghte. 35 Hic celerarius, a celerer.
Hic tactus, a towchyng. Hic sacrista, a secristoun.
Hee anima, a salle. Hic comissarius, a comyssari.
Hic spiritus, a spret. Hic rector, a person.
Hec mens, a mynde. Hie vicarius, a vyker.
Hic sensus, a wyte. 40 Hie Breskiter ft
Hoc factum, a dyde. Hic sacerdos, 0 1
Hee vita, Ace lyfe. Hic doctor, a dotyr.
Hee conversacio, idem est. Hic legista, a legistery.
Hec voluntas, a wyle. Hic bacularius, a bachyler.
‘A step. This word is no doubt con- *? Nerre, a scar, or pock-mark, still
heeted with the old English word rayke, called an ar in the north.
or rake, to proceed, or go, * A spot, or freckle.
45

681 A NOMINALE. 682
Hic sophista, a sovyster. Hie eg goniet bat
Hic preco, Nit bedell Hic ceroferarius, ) * Sergberare.
Hic bidellus, $ * P°°YN® Hie chorista, lee
Fie diaconus, Ili para Some Rg,
5 % a dekyn. Ee
Hee levita, a y 5 Ilic hospitelarius, a hosteler.
Hic subdiaconus, a subdekyn. Tic patronus, a patrone.
Hie acolitus, a colyte. Hic sequestarius, a sequesterer.
Hie exorcista, a benyte. Hie latinista, a Latynmaker.
Hic magister, i eaaaatyt
Hic pedagogus; ue 10 CAPITULUM 3,
ie, eS a a NOMINA RERUM PERTINEN-
Hic clericus, a clarke. CIUM CLERICO.
Hic discipulus, a dyscyple. Hic cornu, indeclinabile, a horne. ,
Hie scriptor, a wryter. 15 Hoc pennare, a pener.
Hic minister, a mynester. Hoc incaustum, Ace ynke. .
Hic gubernator, a governer. Hic calamus, a stalke. |
Hie instructor, a submastyr. Hee penna, a pen. |
Hic frater, a frere. Hoc Cora, a wheston. :
Hic novellus,, 20 Hic cos, -tis, .
Hie novicius, Baroy: Hic artavus, a penknyfe,
Hic succellerarius, a sowthselerer. Hee vagina, a schethe.
Hic templarius, a templer. Hec bursa, a purs.
Hic, hee heremita, a ermyte. Hoe percaminum, perchement.
Hic, hec anacorita, a ancoryse. 25 Hie papirus, paupere.
Hic gramaticus, a gramaryoun. Hee sidula, a scrowle.
Hie citator, } Hec zona, agyr-
Hie aparator, @ cuimiauinila, Hoc tropheum, rnaiiccomaleaae dyle.
Hic iudex, a domsman, Hic pumex, Ace pomege.
Hic notarius, 30 Hie quaternus, a quare.”
Hic arbiter, } 3 ahsenere Hee diptica, a smale tabyle.*
Hic lector, a redere. Hic stilus, 4
Hic cantator, a synger. Hic poe & poyntyle,
Hie musicus, a musyker. Hoc plumbum, Ace lede.
Hie modulator, a 35 Hoc regulare, a rewler.
Hie dictor, me Aken ec yier Hee crota, Acé calke.
Hic versificator, a versyfyer. Hoe punctorium, a prykker.

‘A querister, or chorister. It is a very At countyng stunnleheea ae
fore, p. 314 1. 10, ; iat before in tabuls ane, en sett,

* A tablet, or table-book. The common For the wax, or other similar substance,
use of table-books in the middle ages has” composition was substituted in the course
been alluded to more than once in the °F the fifteenth century, which eventually
Present volume. According to the Boke gaye place to what is known as asses’ skin.
of Curtasye (p. 22), the steward of the The Roman stylus, and Anglo-Saxon
baronial household set down his accounts 97@/: See before, p. 314, note 4.
in a table-book before they were entered
in the regular books —

683 A NOMINALE, 684
Hoc some : Hic, hec burgensis, a burgys.
a rasure. 5
Hee novacula, Hee civis, a cyttenere.
Hic pulver, -ris, powdyr. Hie arculius, a wayte.
Hoc fulgur, Ace bornston.1 Hic constabularius, a constabyle.
Hee rosina, Ace rosyle. 5 Hic lictor, a sargent.
Hic camerarius, a chamerlance.
Hie aresponsis, i. qui respondit pro
CAPITULUM 4». principe.
NOMINA DIGNITATUM LAI, 7¢ “viger, a kayberere,
Clava ferit, clavis aperit, clavus duo iungit.
CORUM. Clavis nos vel vas qui fert sit claviger;
Hic imperator, . Indue te clavo, rege clavo, percute clavo.
Hic erieerncan gaomperowne. Hie centurio, qui habet centum milites.
» y
Mie rex, “gis Pico Hic quaternio, qui habet iiijor milites.
Hic regulus, pms. 15 Hic decurio, qui habet x. milites.
Hic princeps, a prynce. Hic tetrarcha, princeps 49” regionum,
Hic dux, -cis, a duke. Hic proditor, a traytore. .
Hic comes, Ace nerle. Hic assecretis, a cowncellere.
Hic Cea lord: Hic archimentrita, i. princeps omnium.
Hic herus, peor ces 20 Hic panterius, a pantrer.®
Hic baro, a barone. Hie pincerna, a botler.
Hic miles, -tis, Hic cokus, a kuke.
Hic eques, bs knyght. Hic, hec lixa, a kychyn page.t
Hic tiro, -nis, Hic archemerus, a master cuke.
Hic neoptolemus, a gong knyght. 25 Hic ianitor, a porter.
Hic principatus, a prinshode. Hic Romanus, a Romayn.
Hic vicecomes, a scheryfe. Hic Iudeus, a Jew.
Hic siniscallus, a stewerde. Hic Saracenus, a Sarzyn.
Hic armi er Hie predo, } 4
Hic eleifert ane quyere. * 30 Hic vespilio,S * Topher.
Hic heres, an are, Hic primiplus, qui habet primam ber-
Hic ballivus, a bayle. bam.
| Hic villieus, } ae Hic primipilus, qui fert pila ad prelia.
Hic prepositus,) * te Primipilus berbam primam desingnat ha-
Hic maior, } 35 bentem,
Hic prefectus, a mayr. Ast primipilus qui fert ad prelia pila.
Hie senior, i la Hic venator, a hunter.
Hic decrepitus,s * mans Hic ephebus, a gung man.
Hic, hec homo.) Hie cimiflo, a naskkyste.®
3 a man.
Hic mas, 40 Hic mango, a cosyr.
Hie homunculus, a lyty! man. Hic stabularius, a stabyler.
pe Prater amilias, Mipananment Hic macercator, a pleter.
lic iconimus,
2 Bornston, perhaps brimstone. (panis); and the pantry was especially the
* The Anglo-Saxon gerefa, a reeve. bread department of the household.
* The panter, pantrer, or pantner, was * Or a quistron.
properly the officer of the household who ® Called more usually an askfyse, the
had the care and distribution of the bread servant who made and blew the fire.

685 A NOMINALE, 686
Hic exelerarius, a byrier.1 Hic urigenator, a frobycher.4
Hic tribunus, a sawdyn. Hic sarrator, a sawer.
Hic fullo, a walker.
Hic tinctor, a lytster.® ]
CAPITULUM 5. 5 Hic plumbarius, a plumber. .
‘A Hie sutor,
NOMINA ARTIFICIUM. Hic  &, a sowter.®
Ific emptor, a byer. Hic picticiarius, a cobbeler. )
Hic venditor, a seller. Hic funerius, a ropere.
Hic mercator, a merchande. 10 Hie restio, id.
Hic mercinarius, a mercer. Hic cribrarius, Acce fysmaker.?
Hic pannarius, a draper. Hic pelliparius, Acce skynner.
Hic figalus, a potter. Hic molendinarius, a milner. :
Hic membrarius, a perchmenter. Hie farrator, a ferrur. :
Hic campanarius, a belmaker. 15 Hee murida, a ratunner.§ ;
[Hic apo]ticarius, a spycer. Hic cuperius, a cowper. ;
[Hee alpoteca, a spycer schope. Hic victillarius, a hukster.
Hic revelus, a peder.? Hic capillarius, a bokylmaker.
Hic faber, a smythe. Hic scutarius, a scheldmaker.
Hic aurifaber, a goldsmyth. 20 Hie corrigiarius, Acce gyrdilmaker.
Hic carpentarius, a wryghte. Hic lorinarius, a loryner.®
Hic tector, a theker. Hic cipharius, a copmaker.
Hie tegularius, a tyller. Hic sirotecarius, Acce gloyfer.
Hic auceps, a fowler. Hic firmacularius, a brochmaker.
Hic sissor, a taylgor. 25 Hie nauta, Acce schypman.
Hic piscator, a fychere. Hic medicus, a leche.
Hic piscarius, a fychmanger. Hie carnifex, a bocher.
Piscator prendit quod piscarius bene vendit. Hic circulator, qui amputat vites.
Hic textor, a webster. Hic tibiarius, Acce legmaker.
Hic versor, a tornere. 30 Hic carbonerius, a colger.!®
Hic berbetonsor, a berbor. Hic pectinarius, a comemaker,
Hic reciarius, a netmaker. Hic cordex, a stryngmaker.
Hic fleobotomator, a blodletter, Hic plummarius, a plumstere.
Hie monetarius, a monymaker. Hic salinarius, a salter.
Hic serdo, i berkere.? 35 Hic anularius, a ryngmaker.
Hic frunitor,s Pere Hic corbio, a pangermaker.
Hic sellarius, a sadyler. Mie citaciarius, a relmaker.
‘The attendant who served the wine. * See before, p. 652, note 8.
The verb birle, (A.-S. birlian) to draw or * Lytster, a dyer.
pour out wine, is not an uncommon word ° Sowter, a shoemaker; the Latin sutor.
in the old writers. In the metrical ro- It is preserved in the Scottish dialect.
mance of The Avowynge of King Arther 7 From the Latin word, this would seem
(Robson's Metr. Rom., p. 80), we are told to mean a maker of sieves. Perhaps it
that there was at a great feast — should be syfmaker.
— rialle servys and fyne, ° A rat-catcher.
In bollus biriutte thay the wyne. ° A maker of horses’ bits.
* Pedder was the old name for a pedlar, —“” @ ¢ @ collier.
* . e., a tanner.

687 A NOMINALE, 688
Hic circumforarius, a mycher.t Hic pugnator, a fyghter.
Hic vascularius, a turner. Hic vestigator, a trufer.
Hic ursarius, a berwarde. Hie gemellus, a twynlynge.
Hic fossarius, a dyker. Hic tortor, a turmenter.
Hic plantator, a nymper.? 5 Hic lictor, idem est.
Hic ortilanus, a gardyner. Hic disculus, a trowean.
Hic avigerulus, a pulter. Hic trutannus, idem,
Hic tolonarius, a toller. Hic cancelladon
Hic rusticus, a fyldman. Hic alumnator,
Hie villicus, a townman. 10 Hic ligator, a bynder.
Hic messor, a scherer. Hic baiulator, a berer.
Hic fulcator, a mawer, Hic cultellarius, a cuteler.
Hie fugator, a dryfer. Hic balistarius, qui facit balistas.
| Hic stinarius, a halder.® Hic murator, Acce waller.
| Hic arator, a tyller. 15 Hie rotarius, Acce whelmaker.
‘Hie harpicator, a haroer. Hic cassarius, a casmaker.
Hic bigarius, a cartter. Hie ceparius, Acce ungonseller.5
Hic pastor, a hyrdman. Hic pomilio, Ace apulseler.
| Hie vaccarius, a cowherd. Hic tabernarius, Acce taberner.
Hie equinarius, a horsharde. 20 Hic caupo, idem est.
Hic mulundinarius, a mulharde, Hic candelarius, a candeller.
Hie asinarius, a nashard. Hic cerarius, Accé whaxmaker.
Hic bubulcus, a swynherde. Hic archonista, a bower.
Hic aucarius, a gosherd. Hic metellus, Acce reve.
Hic pictor, a panter. 25 Hic inclusor, a pynder.
Hie sculptor, a grafer. Hic mendicus, Acce beggere.
Hic smigmator, a sopseler.* Hic ruscator, a tylkyllere.
Hic pugilius, a schampyon: Hic naucherus,® qui regit navym.
Hic latamus, a mason. Hic polentradinator, Ace a bulter.
Hie simentarius, idem est. 30 Hic pistor, Acce a baxter.
Hee latomega, a mason ax. Hic pandoxator, Acce brewster.
Hic petro, -nis, a mason schype. Hic focarius, a fewyller.
| Hee regula, a mason rewlle. Hic ignarius, idem est.
| Hoc perpendiculum, idem. Hic fauconerius, a fawconer.
| Hec amussis, a mason lyne. 35 Hic prebitor, qui dat prebenda.
Hee troclea, a wyndas. Hic prebendarius, cuius sunt prebenda.
Hic hostiarius, a nostyller. Hic dapifer, Acce mettes gyffer.
Hic architenens, a narcher. Hic depositor, a serofer in halle.
* A micher means one who goes sneak- settings of trees. From the A.-S. impian,
ing about for improper purposes, as to to graft, or plant. .
steal on the sly, to act as a messenger in * The man who held the plow.
illicit amours, &c. In the latter sense, * A dealer in soap. Smigma is usually
the verb to mich was in common use taken for an unguent for perfuming, or
among the Elizabethan writers. pomatam.
? Properly one who grafts, or who plants ° i. e, a seller of onions.
® Read nauclerus.

689 A NOMINALE. 690
Hic depositarius, ille qui commedit. Hec mater, a modyre.
Hec familia, a menge.' Hlic compater, a godfadyre.
Hic peregrinus, Acce a pylgrym. Hic paternus, idem.
Tlic alienigena, Acce a cumlynge. Hec commater, a godmodyre.
Tlic, hee comes, Acce a felow. 5 Hec materna, idem est.
lic, hee sodalis, idem est. Hic aes} At ;
Hic infans, Hie natus, 7
Hic pucio, § Acce a chylde. Hee filia,
Iie a ss Hee — Acee a dowghter. /
Hic adolescens, est puer xitijcem an- 10 Hic filiolus, a godsune. |
norum. Hee filiola, Acce a goddowghter.
Hic decrepitus, ille qui vadit cum Hic frater, a brodyr.
baculo. Hic germanus, Accé a halfebrodyre.
Hic tantillus, a dwarf. Hee soror, a syster.
Hic verbius, -ui, qui est beatus vel 15 Hee germana, a halfesyster.
qui habet uxorem. Hee fraternitas, a brotherode.
Hic perhendinator, Acce a sogorner, Hic fratruelis, filius patris,
Hie liber, Acce freman. Hee fraterna, filia fratris.
Hic libertinus, Acce ille qui fit liber. Hic sorarius, i. filius sororis.
Hic gigas, a gyawnte. 20 Hee sororia, i. filia sororis.
Ilic, hee pifundabalista, Acceaslynger Hic cognatus, a cosyne.
Hic teaillaris, a spy in batylle. Hee cognata, a nese.
Hic bestiarius, a pescryere. Hee neptis, idem est.
Hic solenciarius, idem est. Hic affinis, a sybmane.
Hic apprenticius, a prentys. 25 Hic consanguinius, idem.
Hie cathecuminus, noviter conversus Hee consanguinia, a sybwomane.
et non baptizatus. ITie pais ana’
Hic patruus, °
Hee ameta,
CAPITULUM 6. 30 Hee eg a nawntt.
NOMINA CONSANGUINITATIS ae oo aaa a
_ 7 ‘ic victricus, .
ET APFINITATIS, Hie patriarchus, idem.
Hic triavus, the thyrde fadyre. Iie prevignus, a stepsune.
Hec triawa, the thyrd fro the modyre. 35 Hee filiaster, }
Hic attavus, the thyrde fadyre. Hee Peer a stepdowghter,
Hee attava, the thyrd modyre. Hic gemellus, a twynlynge of men.
Hic abavus, the secund fro thy fadyr. Hee gemella, a twynlynge of women.
Hec abava, the secundefrothemodyr. Hic pupillus, a modyrles chylde.
Hic proavus, the forne fadyre. 40 Hic orphanus, a fadyrles chylde.
Hee proava, the forne modyre. Hie orbus, qui privatur prole.
Hic avus, Acce a neld fadyre. Hic abortivus, i.non suo tempore ortus.
Hee ava, a nold modyre. Hic postimus, he that is born aftyr
Hic pater, a fadyr. the deth of hys fadyre.
‘ More properly written maisnie (from blishment of the feudal lord. It has no
the Anglo-Norman), the household; the connection whatever with the word many
whole attendance upon the personal esta- (the Anglo-Saxon manig).

| 691 A NOMINALE, 692
Hic proculius, est jilius natus patre Hee materfa[millias, huswyf~
existente procul. Hee nutriz, Acce norysch.
Hee pupilla, que caret purentibus.' Hee vidua, a wydo.
Hee orba, que privatur prole. Hec equitrissa, que equitat.
Hee proculia, est nata patre ewi- 5 Hec anus, a nold wyff.
stente procul. Hee claviger, que portat c[laves].
Hic sponsus, Hec ignaria, que facit i[gnem)].
Hic a) a husband. Hee Laer a peel :
Hee peonsany fe [Hee fem]ina, a woman.
Hee coniunz,. = Wye. 10[Hee flabrissa, Acce a smyth wyfe.
Hec domiduca, a bryde. Hee rustica, Acce a feldman wyfe.
Hoc si aumirace Hee obstetrix, a mydwyfe.
Hoe sponsale, Be. Hee abatissa, Acce a abatyse.
Hee affinis, a lyans. Hec monialis, a nune.
Hic socer, a neldfadyre. 15 Hec patronissa, idem est
Hec socrus, a noldmodyre. Hee sacerdotissa est femina dans
Hic gener, a dowghter husband. sacra.
Hee nurus, i. uxor filii. Hic, hee sinobita, qui vel que manet
Hic sorarius, sponsus uxoris. ae sinobio.
Hee glos, . 2 20 Hee anacorita, a ankrys.
izec Gitnerat t. uxor fratris.
pe leven, i, igsien Tay ucxoris. NOMINA ARTIFICIUM
lec noverca, a stepmodyr. MULIERUM.
25 Hee pectrixz, a kempster.
CAPITULUM 7. Hec textria, a webster.
Hee scutrix, a sewster,
NOMINA DIGNITATUM Hec tontrix, a barbor.
MULIERUM. Hee pistrix, a baxter.
30 Hee pandoxatrix, a brewster.
Hec imperatrix, a e{m]prys. Hee filatrix, Ace a spynner.
Hee induperatrix, idem. Hee carpetrix, a carder.
Hee regina, qwen. Hee lotrix, a lawnder.
Hec ducissa, a duches, Hee siccatrix, a dryster.
| Hee regula, idem. 35 Hee reciaria, Acce a kelmaker.
Hec comitissa, a comytiss. Hee palmaria, a brawdster.
| Hee baronissa, a baronyss. Hee salinaria, a salster.
Hee poe} ial Hee avigerula, que vendit aves.
Hee hera, ety. Hee sereatrix, a sylkmaker.
Hee abra, } b 2, 40 Hee androchia, a dayre.
Hee ancillaS * P™Woman.” Hee apoticaria, Acce a spyser wyfe.
Hec paiellay} a wade Hee auxiatriv, a hukster.
Hee ampha, 2
Hee adolescentula, puella sxiijjeem
[annorum)].
' Read parentibus, 2 i. e, a chambermaid,

697 A NOMINALE, 698
Iie barbatissa, qui canit in barbita. Hie spado, -nis, a haknay.
Ific simphonista, Accé a simphoner. Hic veredus, Acce a eartthors.

= Hic tripudiator, a dawnser. Hic admissarius, equus qui portat
Hic et hee lerecen, a herper. arma.
Hic, hec coraula, qui vel que ducit 5 Hic pullus, a folle.

coria in aula, Hic equiferus, a wyld hors.
Hic organista, qui ludit ad organa. Tec equifera, a wyld mer.
Ile buccinator, a trumper, Hoc equicium, a hares.

Hic simphonizator, a simphoner. Tic, hec bos, -vis, a nox.
Tic citolator, a cytolerer. 10 Hic taurus, a bulle.

Hee vacca, a kowe.

Hic buculus, a stott.

NOMINA OPERARIORUM. Hee juvenca, a qwye.

Hic cultor, a tylman. Hic vitulus, a calfe.
Hic, hee agricola, idem est. 15 Hec vitula, qwye calffe.
Hic rusticus, a churle. Hoc armentum, a drowe.
Hic frondator, a wodfeller. Hee ovis, a schepe.
Hic vector, Acce a berer. Hee ovicula, idem est.
Hic triturator, Acce a tasker.! Que male fetet ovis non est meliortribus....
Hic vinitor, a wynmaker. 20 Hee adacia, i. ovis vitula,
Hie septor, a hegmaker. Hee apica, a scabbyd ewe.
Hic litor, Acce a dowker. Hic titerus, Acce a belwether.
Hie aqueductor, a waterleder. Hee bidua, a gymbyre.
Hic aquebajulus, a holiwater-clerke, Hie agnus, a lame.
Hic runcator, } lowker.2 25 Hec agna, a new lame.
Hic circulator, 1 Hee cenaria, Acce a cad.®
Hic colibertus, Acce a carle.® Hee aries,
Hie operarius, Acce a werkman. Hee serdeca,t Aceeeredcrs
Hic verver, Acce a tuppe.
NOMINA ANIMALIUM DomEstt- 2° Ze gre, @ floke.
ic singuilusy Accent
CORUM. Hic aper, a bore.
Hie equus, a hors. Hic nefrendus, a galtte.
Hee equa, a mer. Hec sus, suis, a sowe.
Hoc jumentum, quoddam animal ad-35 Hec scropha, idem est.
juvans. Hic porcus, Acce a hoge.
Hic dextrarius, Acce a stede, Hic porcellus, idem est.
Hic succussarius, a trotter. Hic ircus, a gat.
Hic gradarius, a hawmbler. Hec capra, idem est.
Hic emissarius, a stalan. 40 Hec caprella, a sche gatt.
Hie caballus, Acce a cabylle.t Hic capriolus, a lytil gatt.

' Tasker, i. e., a thrasher. The word taken to signify a freedman, is curious.
is now used in some dialects for a reaper; Sie, a capul, or horse of burthen.
perhaps so named as working by task, or * Quye, a female calf,
piece. ° Cad. This word is at present used in

? A weeder. the dialect of the eastern counties to sig-

’ The sense here given to the word carle, nify a very small pig.
as synonymous with collibertus, generally

699 A NOMINALE, 700
|
Hic asinus, Acce a nas. Hee omer Ubsera fapuete
| Hec asina, uxor ejus. Hee dacas, tel ed
Hic burdo, 7. genitum inter equum et Hee dama, Acce a doo.
| asinam. : Hic enulus, Ace a fawne.
| Hic mulus, Acce a mule. 5 Hie lupus, Acce a wolffe.
Hee mula, a mule. Hee lupa, uxor ejus.
Hie camelus, a camylle. Hic vulpes, Acce a fox.
Hee camela, uxor ejus. Hie ursus, Acce a bere.
Hic dromedarius, a dromedary. Hee ursa, uxor ejus.
Hic dromedus, a dromund. 10 Hic urunacius, Acce a urchen. e%éerwee
Hic, hec canis, a hunde, Hic castor, Acce a bever,
Hic catellus, a whelpe. Hic canisponticus, idem.
Hee canicula, a byche. Hie cirogrillus, a sqwerylle, cneLle
Hie adorrinsicus, a spangelle. Hic taxus, Acce a broke.
Hie leporarius, a grayhund. 15 Hec melota, idem est.
Hic molosus, a banddoge. Hic lutricius, a notyre. «+2 olen
Hic aggregarius, a scheperd dog. Hee mustela, wesylle.
Hic luciscus, est canis genitus inter Hic sorex, Acce a raton.
canem et vulpem. Hic mus, -ris, Accé a mows.
Hee lucisca, est canicula similiter 20 Hic glis, ; Vacca padoriowss
nata. Hic sorex, >
Hic caniculus, a kenet.! . Hic nex, -cis, media producta, animal Hone,
Hic mureligus, a catt. mrsile geet simile capre.
Hic catus, idem est. Hic ferutus, Acce a forytt.
Hie catulus, a kytylyng.? 25 Hic sinozephalus, a mancowe.®
Hie catellus, idem. Hic fetoutrus, Acce a fulmard,*
Hee polea, est colleccio vel pluralitas Hic tigris, -ris vel -dis, velox animal.
quorumeunque bestarum. Hic linx, animal penetrans parietes
: visu oculorum suorum.
30 Hic panter, animal diversi coloris. L,
NOMINA FERARUM. Hic gamelion, animal varii coloris et “4##
sola aere vivit, a buttyrfle. a
Hie leo, Acce a lyon. Hie onager, Acce a wyld has /zss7
Hee lea, Hic tragela; nus arte cervus parte
| Hee Tetna,} Ace a lyonys. 35 Hic Mra, eae -
Ilic leopardus, Acce a leberde. Hic effimatus, animal inpungnans ser-
| Hee leoparda, uxor ejus. pentes.
Ilic, hec elephas, -antis, aclephawnt. Hic cocadrillus, Aece a cocadrylle.
Hic unicornus, Acce a unycorne. Hee talpa, Acce a molle.
Hec simia, Acce a nappe. 40 Hic spinx, vermis lucens in noctibus.
Hic cervus, a hertt. Tic lepus, Acce a hare.
Hee cerva, Acce a hynde. Hie cuniculus, Acce a conynge.
* A small species of hunting dog, ment- _ seems to be often used as the simple equi-
joned often in the old writers on the chase, valent of a hound.
and not uncommonly in the metrical ro- 7 A Kitten.
mances, and supposed by some to be equi- * Mancowe, a baboon.
valent with our harrier. The word, however, * A polecat. The word is still in use
in the northern dialects.

7
;
701 A NOMINALE. 702
NOMINA VOLATILIUM eoduis a eae
DOMESTICORUM. Hee snoneibilap a kowe.
Hic gallus, a coke. Hic piews,}
Hec gallina, Acce a henne. 5 Hee pica, ® pye
Hic capo, Acce a capon. Hic graculus, Acce a jaye.
Hie pullus, Acce a chekyn. Hic trundo, a swalo.
Hic, hee natis, -tis, Acce a malerde. —Orescit harundo, sngit hirudo, canit hirundo.
Hee anas, -tis, Acce a duke. Hee toda, a wagsterd.4
Hic ancer, Acce a gander. 10 Hic regulus, a wrenne-
Hee auca, Acce a gose. Regulus est serpens, avis, et rex parvulus
Hic ancerulus, a geslynge. CUA
Hec columba, a dowfe. Hee frigella, a roberd.5
Hic pavo, Acce a pecoke. Hic psitacus, Acce a papynjay.
Hie signus, 15 Hic cuculus, Arce a cauko.
Hie olor, j AST O GEC, Hee philomena, a nyghtynggale.
Hic phenix, media producta, a phenes.
INCOMESTILIUM. 20 Hee ie, .
. on i a goldfynche.
Hee ales, Acce a byrde. Ife carduelis, ciate
Hee volucris, idem est. Hic turtur, Acce a turtyldowff.
Hee aquila, Acre a negylle. Flee alauda, Acce a larke.
Hie grifes, a grefyne. Hic palustris, a redesparowe.°
Hic falco, a fawkon. 25 Hee calendula, a plovere.
Hic erodius, Acce a jarfawkon. Hie conturnix, a qwaylle.
Hie ancipiter, Acce a goshawke. Hic fecianus, a fesantt-
Hic tercellus, a tercelle. Hic maviscus, a thyrstylle.
Hie nisus, a sperhawk. Hic sturnus, a sterlynge.
Hic capus, Acce a muskytt. 30 Hic frondator, a sterkyng.
Hic milvus, a glede. Hic perdix, a partryke.
Hic condulus, Acce a busherde. Hic ficedula, a nuthage.7
Hie corvus, a rawyn. Hee ardia, a haron.
Hic cornia, Acce a crawe. Hic palumbus, a cowscott.
Hie nicticorax, a nyghtcraw. 35 Hee fulceca, a semawe.8
Hic struccio, a nostryche. Hic passer, a sparowe.
Hic bubo, Acce a nowlle. Hee merges, a cott.
Hic castrimergus, a wodkoke. Hic ruruscus, a feldfare.
Me ibis, nadia} Hie garulus, a thrus.
Hie ibex, -cis, be AS 40 Hic pratellus, a buntyle.9
Hie onocrotalus, a butturre.1 Hic virudiarius, a ruddoke.!?
Hic pelicanus, Acce a pelican. Hee sarra, a wyld drake.
? The bittern. 7 Nuthage, the nuthatch,
? Wype, the lapwing. ® Semawe, probably the sea-mew.
* Bake was the old form of bat. ® Buntyle, the bunting, or woodlark.
* Wagsterd, probably the water-wagtail. ‘° The robin. See, on the popular name
° ‘The chaffinch. of this familiar bird, a former note, p. 640.
° The reedsparrow.

703 A NOMINALE. 704
Hic, hec grus, a crane. Hoc cepum, talowe.
Tlic conturnix, a kyrlewe. Hic armus, a spawde.
Hec campestrer, a feldfare. Hee vicecolla, a gragge.
Hic viscus, a byrdlyme. Hee membrana, est pellis ale vesper-
Hoc viscerium, a lymepott. 5 tilionis.
Hec vitubila, a pyttfalle. Hoc jecor, a mawe.
Hee discipula, a swyke.' Hoc reticulum, pinguedo circa jecur.
Hoc falconerium, a faweonere moe. Hoe pectusculum, a bruskette.
Hoc aucipium, a hawkynge.
10
NOMINA PISCIUM.
PARTES ANIMALIUM Fol pcan aerele
BRUTORUM. Hig edtitur piscis, hecservat aromata pixis.
Hoc stirillum, a gaytt berde. Hee belua, i. animal magnum nf{ajris.
Tec juba, a hors mane. 15 Hic cetus, a whalle.
Hee cornu, indeclinabile, a horne. Est hominum coetus, set vivit in equore
Corna gerit cornus, pecudum sunt cor- CoS .
nua... ec balena, a balene.
Militis est quando properat sua bella ge- 70 salmo, -nis, a sawmun.
pias 20 Hee amphinia,
Hoe rostrum, a bylle. Hie delfinis, a porpas.
Hee ceta, a brystille. Hee foca. fren,
Hec crista, est crinis vel quod eminet Hoc allec, a herynge. -
super galeam et super capita quo- _ Hie congruus, a cungyre.
rundam animalium, the cokcome. 25 Hic megarus, @ maerelle.
Hee galla, idem est. Hee lampreda, a lampray.
Hic pugio, -nis, a tange.” Hee murenula, a lamprun.
Hee ungula, a clee. Hee anguilla, a nele.
Hec calcar, a spure. Hic polanus, 1
Hoc paliare, a dewlappe. 30 Tic pecten, ; a place.
Hee cauda, a taylle. Hic molanurus, piscis qui magnam
Hee ala, a wenge. caudam [habet}.
Tec pinna, a fynne. Hic dentriz, a pyke.
Hee pluma, a fedyre. Hie lucius, a lewse. Zcce
Hee penna, a penne. 35 Hie luticulus, a pyke.
Loc ilum, the pyf of the penne. Hic turbo, -nis, a turbott.
Hec lana, wolle. Hic wronoscopus, a thornbake.
Hoc vellus, a fleys. Hee ragadia, raye.
Hic villus, a lok of wolle. Hee epimera, a sprott.
Hee brunda, a harte horne. 40 Hec truta, a trowte,
Hee suama, , scalle. Hie capito, a bulhede.
Hee brancia, » vio Hic morus, a haddoke.
Hee senccicih syne. Hic gulio, -nis, a goryone.
Hee lactis, a cheslepe.s Hic solimicus, a menawe.
* Swyke, a trap, or suare, for birds. > Rennet is still called cheeselope in
* Vange, a sting, still used in the north the north.
of England.

705 A NOMINALE. 706
Hee alosa, a loch. Hoc amphibim, est serpens cum tribus
Hic gamerus, a styklynge. capitibus.
Ilec tenia, a tenche. Tic jaculus, 4
Hic brimellus, a breme, Hic biceps, } a flyande eddyre. 1
Hic pelanius, a flewke. 5 Hee arena, a
Hic ipotamus, i. equus marinus. Hee arene SaDStans,
Hie swamatus, a hundfych. Hic bufo, a tode.
Hee squilla, piscis delecatus. Hee rana, a frosche.
Hee sirena, a mermaydyn. Hec lacerta, a newtt.
Hes outrir a nostyre. 10 Hic scorpio, a scorpyone. i
lec ostria, Hic pulex, a flye.
Hic musculus, a muscul. Hic lens, -dis, a nyte. |
Hic cancer, a crabbe. Lens, -dis, capiti, lens, -tis, convenitur
Hic polipus,} orl. '
Hee gorra, 5 * Leper 15 Hic multipes, a welbode.1
Hee cepia, est piscis de quo fitcaustum. Hee cencipita, idem est.
Tic sperlyngus, } Hee scutula, a blyndworme.
Hie thimalus, i ESS Hoc tumultum, est vermis in cornubus
Hic rumbus, a sturyon. arietum.
Hee fungia, stokfyche. 20 Hee tinia, a moke. i
Hie mulus, a mulett. Hec terudo, -nis, a treworme.
Hee folea, a folfyche. Hic trunos, idem est.
Hie glaucus, a whytynge. ‘ Hic ciro, -nis, a handeworme. ;
Hee balbena, a balbene. Hic limax, a snyle.
Hic norus, a mellewelle. 25 Hee eruca, a coleworm.
Hoc conchile, -lis, alle manner schel- Hee sanguissuga, a horsleche.
fyche, Hic pediculus, a lows.
Hic pedicus, idem est.
Hee ascarida, a scheplows.
NOMINA VERMIUM ET 30 Hie tramus, a mowght.
+ Hee lendex, -cis, idem.
MUSCARUM. Hie serastes, i. serpens cornutus.
Hic vermis, a worme. Hic dipsas, -dis, t. quidam serpens.
Hic drago, a dragone Hee museca, a flye.
Hic serpens, a nedyre. 35 In plurali numero hee serene sunt
Hic basiliscus, rex serpencium. serpentes volantes.
Hic idrus, a watyrnedyre. Hee musio, -nis, a grett flye.
Hic natrix, -cis, violator aquarum. Hee apes, -is, a bee.
Hic hispis, -dis, quoddam genus ser- Hie fucus, a drane.
pentis. 40 Hoc examen, a swarme.
Hie ibis, -dis, Hee juxura, a hyfe.
Hic coluber, i panei, Hee aaa a Tani,
Hic ferastrix, a hornyde eddyre. Hic rambricus, a paddoke.? |
' Welbode, a woodlouse. little diversity in the use of the word
? Paddoke. Possibly the Latin should paddok, In some of the modern English
be lumbricus, which is explained in the dialects it is applied to a fiog. We might
next glossary as signifying a tadpole. naturally suppose it to be a diminutive of
There appears to haye been always some = pade, which was also a name for a toad;
|

707 A NOMINALE, 708
Hoc orameum, %. collectio apum. Tec siragra, i. nodositas manuum.
| Lic papilio, a buttyrflye. Hee tussis, -sis, the host.
| Hee polemita, a somerboyde.' Hic caterrus, the pose.
| Hee sicoma, a myge.? Hee spasma, the eramppe.
Hic culex, a gnaytt. 5 Hee tisis, the tyssyke.
Hie brucus, a breas.8 Hee ypomanes, the fransey.
Hee cicada, a grysope. 7 Hic bubo, -nis, i. morbus sub ano.
Hee salamandra, a erekytt. Hic frebris, the fevere.
Hie crabius,* a cercole. Tlic fluxus, the flux.
Hic bumbio, a hundflye. 10 Hoc uleus, -ris, a kyle.
Hic ariax, a hert horne, Hee apostema, a postem.
Hee formica, a pysmyre. Hoe eres) Poea..
Hee apaphsibena, a nedyr with ij. Hee plaga,
hedes. Hec cicatrix, a festyre.
Hee urma, a egesworme. 15 Hic, hec intereus, est morbus inter
Hic papheas, serpens cum grosso ca- carnem et cutem.
pite. Hee muliebria,
Hec bredraca, serpens habens faciem In plurali hec menstrua, sunt infir-
hominis. mitates mulierum,
20 Hee idropis, -dis vel -pis, dropsye.
NOMINA MORBORUM ET INFIR- “ie pruritus, Ik:
Hee pruri fa gekynge.
prurigo,
MORUM VIRORUM. Hec extisis, -is, a swoynyng.
Hee lepra, a mesylery. Hic Merguey, a 7
Hee ered a Spell 25 Hee litergia,S “ eae
Hic cancer, the cankere. Hee surditas, a defnes.
Hee porigo, a poke. Hic tumor, -ris, bolnynge.
Hee papula, a redspott. Hec cecitas, -tis, a blyndnes.
Hoc glandulum, a waxkyrnylle.> Hee dissentaria, est divicio vel ulce-
Hee pustula, a blane. 30 ratio intestinorum.
Hee scabies, a scabbe. Hec lippitudo, est infirmitas occulorum.
Hee glabra, a scalle. Hec paralisis, pallsay.
Hee podegra, Hee lentigo, ‘
Hic Ferree, a mole. Hee lenticula} 8 frakkyne.®
Hee sinnancia, a swynacye. 35 Hec gutta, a gutt.
Hic gibbus, a boche in bake. Hec impetico, sicca scabies.
Hic figus, the fyge. Hec sinax, -cis, pursenes, vel quod-
Hee struma, a boch in the brestes. dam festum.
and a passage in the Coventry Mysteries, ' The same Latin word is explained in
P. 164, evidently makes a distinction bet- the next glossary by a bude — apparently
| ween the two words — a species of beetle.
1 seal prune that paddok, and prevyn hym * A midge, or gnat.
as a pad. * The breeze, or gadfly,
An English gloss of the latter part of * Perhaps for crabro, a hornet,
the fourteenth century (Relig. Ant., vol. * Wazkyrnylle. Palsgrave has the word
i, p 8), explains the Latin rana by a  waxenkernel, which is explained as mean-
paddoke, which agrees with the English ing an enlarged gland in the neck,
provincial use of the word just alluded to, ° A freckle,

709 A NOMINALE, 10 @
Hee gutturna, the qwynse, et inde  Gutturnosus, -a, -um, hafand the
gut. qwynsy-
Turnosus, -a, -um, full off thatewelle.  Semicecus, -a, -um, halfblynd.
Hee commissialis, i. morbus caducus. Gibbosus, -a, -um, bochy.
Hee glaucoma, a the gowyl sowght. 5
Hee ictaricia, the jandis.
NOMINA ARBORUM ARABILIUM
ET FLORUM.
NOMINA INFIRMORUM. RD diec arbaiasheniel
Hic infirmus, a sek mane. Hee arbula, idem.
Infirmus, -a, -um, seke. Hee salgia, a sawge.
Morbosus, -a, -wm, full of ewylle. Hee minta, mynt.
Languidus, -a, -um, sorounde. Hoc petrocillum, persylle.
Leprosus, -a, -um, leperus. 15 Hic ditamnus, detane.
Limatygus, -a, -um, lymatyke. Hoc feniculum, fynkylle.
Limphaticus, -a, -um, hafande the Tic isopus, -pi, ysope.
fransey. Hoc cerbellum, pellatur.
Hic erecticius, qui vexatur multis Hoc olus, -ris, cole.
demonibus. 20 Hee maguderis, a calstok.®
Surdus, -a, -um, defe. Hec beta, idem est.
Mutus, -a, -um, dowme. Hec borago, -nis, borage.
Hec stroba, a woman glyande. Hoc porrum, a \eke.
Mutulatus, -a, -um, handles. Hic bilbus, a l\ekes hed.
Cardiacus, -a, -um, purse. 25 Hoc porrulum, a portte.
Idropicus, -a, -wm, hafand the dropsy. Hoc sepe, a nongone.*
Cecus, -a, -um, blynd. Hec sepa, a chesbolle.®
Claudus, -a, -um, Hec hinnula, a scalyone.
Hic et hec loripes, qui habet pedem Hee fantula, idem est.
ligneum. 30 Fantulus est filius, sed fantula crescit in
Extalus, media gine nee ortis.
Litergitus, -a, -um, . * Hee ascolonia, a holleke.
Hie strabo, -nis, a glyere. Hee allia, garleke.
Luscus, -a, -um, he that is sand- Hoc allium, idem est.
blynde.2 35 Hee columbina, a columbyne.
Lippus, -a, -um, blereyed. Hic crocus, sapherone.
Hic monoculus, a oneeyd man. Hec ruta, rewe.
Hic lanaculus, qui fert lanam ad Hoc caliandrum, a caliawndyre.
oculos tergendos. Hoc cinamonum, canylle.
Paraliticus,- -a, -um, hafand the 40 Hoc piper, pepyre.
pallsy. Hoc seminum, comyne.
Harniosus, -a, -um, burstyn. Hee eruta, whytte pepyre,
Calculosus, -a,-um, hafand the stone.  Hec lactuca, letys.
* Glyande, squinting. pie de chou, and is supposed to mean
? Sandblind, @. ¢. dimsighted. the stalk of the cale, or colewort.
* Calstok, called in the Prompt. Pary. * An onion.
a calkestoke, is explained by Palsgrave * The word can hardly mean here a
Poppy.

711 A NOMINALE. 712
Hoe lens, -tis, quoddam genus ligu- Hee felix, -cis, media corrupta, bra-
minis. kyne.
Hic sinollus, a chesboile. Hoe Selicetum, ba BrAkyabuake’
| Hec rapa, a neppe- Hoc filacerium,
Hoc rapum, idem. 5 Hee viola, a vyolytte.
| Hee napus, genus liguminis. Hic cardo, -nis, media corrupta, thys-
Hee sinapis, herba ferens sinapia, tylle.
Hoc sinapi, indeclinabile, semen si-  Ilic cirpus, hic junceiis, a rysche.
napis. Hic papirus, a sene.4
Hee camamella, camamelle. 10 Hic papirio, locus ubi crescunt.
Hee sandax, -cis maddyre. Hee carex, -icis, a flege.
Hoc sinicium, a tasylle. Hoe carecetum, locus ubi crescunt.
Tec pionia, a pione. Hic scabius, ti, scabryge.
Hoc lilium, a lylye. Hee malva, a maloo.
Toc apium, smalege.1 15 Hee celidonia, celydoun.
Hoc melo, -nis, genus liguminis. Tec filago, quedam herba.
Hic cucumur, vel-mis,a palmernutte.? —-_Hoe vastucium, welcresse.
Hoc cucumerium, locus ubi crescunt. Hoc ligustrum, a primerose.
Hec betonia, betony. Hee elena campana, horshalle.*
Hic flos, -ris, a flowre. 20 Hee uticella, haryffe.6
Hoc floretum, locus ubi crescunt. Hic fragus, a streberewyse.
Hee verveta, a verveyn. Hoc fragum, a strebere.
Hee egromonia, egromonyn. Hee cimnicia, hundfynkylle.
Hoc absinthium, wormwod. Hic ebolus, walwortte.
Hec artemesia, mugwortt. 25 Hoc albatorium, sothernwodc.
Hoc millefolium, Acce garow. Hee amarusa, donfinkylle.”
Hic costus, rybbe. Hoe consolidum, a daysey.
Hec plantago, -nis, waybrede. Hee hastula, wodrufte.
Hee paradilla, a doke. ec lavendula, lavandyre.
Hec urtica, a netylle. 30 Hee ipia, chekynmette.
Hoc urticetum, a netylbuske. Hee loriala, loryalle.
Hec arundo, -nis, a red. Hee scurea, saveray.
Hec buglossa, oxtunge.® Hoc tansetum, tansaye.
Hee secuta, a humloke, Hoc epitimeum, tyme.
Hec anacia, anas. 35 Hee vermicularis, stoucroppe.
Hee genciana, a gencyan. Hec valmaria, penegrysse
Hoc polipodicum, a pollypod. Hoc glustrum, flowrd of feld. Unde
Hoc folium, est herba natans sine invenitur metrice de beata virgine:
radice.
* Smallage, or wild celery (the apium hairiff is given to the plant called more
graveolens of botanists). usually cleavers, or goose-grass (apium
? Palmer-nutte. The next vocabulary | aparine); in the north it is applied to
ee cucumer by a flage. catchweed.
Bugloss, the lycopsis arvensis of bot- 7 Perhaps amarusa is a corruption of
anists. . ; amaracus, which is explained differently
The wild nasturtium. as meaning sweet marjoram (origanum
| ® Called elsewhere horsehelin. vulgare), or feverfew (pyrethrum par-
* Haryffe. In Gloucestershire the name —_thenium).
47

713 A NOMINALE. 714
© mater, glustri decor, candorque ligustri, 7c gariofilus, a cloyfe.$
Labo cadens lustri, necnon et sorde palustri,  J/ec masia, a mace.
Nato prelustri me jungas more colustri, Hoc quiperium, a quybybe.
No regar amplustri Satane per lirida lustri. — /Jog zucurca, zugure.
Hee spurgia, a sporge. 5 Hoc anisium, anys.
Hee tormentilla, tormentyne. Hoc feniculum, fynkylsede.
Hec alcia, est magna silvestris. Hic racemus, a rasyn.
Hee caperis, i. herba frutex spinosus. Hoc risi, indeclinabile, ryse.
Hee bursa pastaris, harebelle. Hoc alexandrum, alysandyre.
Hec centaria, centarye. 10 Loc granellum, granes.
Hoe ligustrum, a cowslowpe. Hoc zeduarium, zeduarye.
Hoc porarium, a \ekbed. Hoc electuarium, letwerye.
Hoc subterrarium, a debylle. Hoe balsamum, bawme.
Papaver, Aé a chespolle.t Hoc ponderale, haburdepays.
15 Hic census, rychenes.
Hoc unium, vyneloun.*
DE NOMINIBUS SPECIERUM. Hee asura, asyre.
Hic apoticarius, a spyere. Hoc gummi, indeclinabile, gume.
Hec species, -ei, spyce- Hoc dragetum, drage. :
Est species logicus, est altera grammati- 20 Hic pulver, vel -vis, powdyre.
corum, 0
Estque genus species, epagles ot forma eae rw
Est eciam species gratum quod ‘prestat Hee semiuncia, half a nouns,
odorem ; Hoc pondus, a wehgt.
Totque modus species viriatur quot mo- 25 Hec ‘statera, idem est.
nitorem, Hic bilanz, -cis, belans. '
Hoc piper, -ris, peper. Hoe stateris, idem.
Hic crocus, saferon. Hoc examen, lingua bilancis.
Hoc amigdalum, a almunde. Est examen apum colleccio, lingua bi-
Hoc amigdalatum, almund-mylk.? 30 dancis.
Hee ficus, a fyke, or a fikes, Hee dragma, est octava pars uncie.
Hic ficus morbus, hee ficns fructus et  Hec rosina, rosyn.
arbor. Hoc butumen, terre.
Hoc ciminium, comyn. Hee pix, -cis, pyk.
Hoc zinzibrum, gyngyre. 35 Hoc ponde, a fowdrelle.
Hee liquirisia, lyeorys. Res sit vera staterem portate statera.
Hoc amomum, canylle. Hic bipondus, i. genus ponderis ex
Hec galanga, galyngaye. duabus assibus appositum.
* A poppy. See p. 710 1. 27. tinued in fashion until at least the end
? Almond-milk, or almond-cream, ap- of the seventeenth century, as would ap-
pears to have been a favourite article in pear from the following extract from one
the pastry and dessert department during of the popular dramatists of that age:
the middle ages. The Forme of Cury (p. 17) »The devil take mo, I love you so, thatI could
gives the following receipt for making a be content to abjure wine for ever, and drink
yeawdel of almand-mylk“: Take almandes othing but almond=m {1k for jon ea
blanched, and drawe hem up with wyne; ie ek RA /OUNO b>
do thereto powdor of gynger, and sugar, Cloyfe, a clove.
and color it with saffron; boile it and * Vyneloun, a sort of spice,
serve it forthe.“ It seems to have con-

115 A. NOMINALE. 716
Hlec wvapassa, a vaysyn. Hoc cicomonium, fructus ejus.
Hee massa polatarum, a frayle ful Hee vitis, a vyntre.
of fyks. Hee uva, a grape.
[Hic dactilis, Acc an almonde].! Hee pinus, -ni vel -nus.
5 Hoe pinum, fructus ejus.
—_ Hoe pinetum, locus ubi crescunt.
NOMINA ARBORUM ET EARUM 7, quarts Scivelh-cs® opprifiton
FRUCTUUM. Hee glans, -dis, a nacorun,
Hee arbor, vel -bos, a tre. Tec galla, a nake-appylle.
Hee pirus, a pertre. 10 Tec ibex, -cis, a sapplynge.
Hoc pirum, a pere. Hec laurus, -ri vel -rus, a loryltre.
Hoe piretum, est locus ubi crescunt. Hee fraccinus, a neschtre.
Hec pomus, a nappyltre. Hoc fraccinum, a kay of a nesche.
Hoc pomum, a nappylle. Hoe fraccinetum, locus ubi habundant.
Hoc pometum, locus ubi crescunt. 15 Hic oliaster, i. oliva silvestris.
Hee taxus, ew. Hee abies, etis, a fyrre.
Hec serasus, a cheretre. Hee acer, -ris, a mapultre,
Hoc serasum, a chere. Hee cedrus, a cedyrtre.
Hee prunus, a plumtre. Hec salix, -icis, a welogh.
Hoc prunum, a plum. 20 Hec tremulus, a nespe.
Hec pepulus, a bolystre. Hee ulnus, a nellyrtre.
Hoc pepulum, a bolysse.? Hee bucus, Acce a boxtre. ‘
Hec corulus, a hesyltre. Hec sambucus, a burtre.
Hoe coruletum, ubi habundant, Hec ussus, a holyntre.
Hee nux, -cis, a nutte. 25 Hee lentiscus, a byrktre.
Hec avelana, a walnutte and the loc bidellium, i. arbor dans bonum
nutte. o|dorem].
Hee ficus, -ci vel -cus, a figtre or Hee spina, a thorn.
a fig. Hoc spinetum, locus ubi crescunt.
Hee cariga, a fig. 30 Hec plantacius, a plantre.
Hee castania, a cheston, or the tre. Hee fagus, -gi, a bechtre.
Hee cornus, -ni vel -nus, a slotre. Hee cilia, a lynde.
Hoe cornum, a slo. Hee cocianus, a coventre.t
Hoe cornetum, ubi habundant. Hoc socianum, fructus ejus.
Hec ramnus, -ni, a thethorntre.6 35 Hee percitus, arbor quedam.
Hoe ramnum, -ni, fructus ejus. Hoc malagranatum, fructus .....
Hec ema, i. alba spina. Hec mespulus, a meltre.5
Hee arbitus, wodcrabtre. Hoc mespulum, fructus ejus.
Hoc arbitum, a crabe. Hec esculus, fructus ejus.
Hee amigdalus, a almund. 40 Hee populus, a popyltre.
Hec morus, a fylberdtre. Hee cipressus, a cypyrtre.
Hoc morum, fructus ejus. Hee malus punicus, quedam arbor.
Hic cicomonis, a cycomyrtre. Loc malum punicum, fructus ejus.
‘ This line is written in a rather later | Anglo-Saxons. See before the Auglo-Saxon
hand than the rest of the manuscript. Vocabularies.
? i. €., a bullace (prunus insititia). * The coigne-tree, or quince.
* Generally interpreted as the dog rose, ° The medlar, mespilus germanica.
or wild briar, called pefe-porn by the

veWs A NOMINALE. 718
Hee juniperus, parva arbor spinosa. Hie frons, -dis, a gren bught.
Hee sanguinus, arbor colorissanguinii. Hoe folium, a lefe.
Hoc sanguinetum, locus ubi crescunt. Ilic ramus,
pee 4 7 a braunche.
Hee nucliarius, est quelibet arbor Tic ramusculus,
Serens nuces. 5 Hoc ramale, a dry brawnche.
Hoc nucliarium, locus ubi crescunt. Hee palmes, -tis, a brawnch of vyne. .
Hee silva, Mic pampinus, folium vitis. '
6 a woyd. 9 A ey
Hec indago, Hie botrus, -i, flos vitis.
Hee subuscus, undyrwod. Hic racemus, a brawnch of grapys.
Hic titrus, arbor que cito surgit. 10 Hee acinus, est granellum uva.
Hee volemus, a warduntre,) Hec labrusca, est agrestis vitis, vel
Hoc volemum, fructus ejus. botrus amarus,
Hee merica, media producta, a brome loc germen, H a burjonyug.
Hoe succétum, ubi crescunt frutices. Hee pululacio,
Hic rubus, -i, a buske. 15 Iec astula, -e,
6 aa { a chype.
Hoc rubietum, ubi crescunt vel ru- Hee quisquilie,
biant. Hic saltus, a lawnd.
Hic dumus, a thornbuske. Hic rogus, .
at _ 9 a bronde.
Hic tribulus, Hie fax, -cis,
Hee vepres, a brere, 20 Hec ticio, -nis, a colpytte.
Hee veprecula, Hee fala, a fagot.
Hoc virgultum, a halte.? Hie faciculus, a kynch.®
Hee virga, a wand, Hec cima, the crop of a tre.
Hee viprex, ~icis, a schyd.® Cima caput virge, verborum glorla sema
Hoc vimen, -nis, qwykyr. 25 Hic fullus, a fylberdtre.®
Hoc vimitum, locus ubi crescunt. Hee condimus, a warduntre.
Hee saliunea, -ce, a whyn. Hoc condimum, a wardun.
Hee aborigo, Arbor i
‘ sunt super} On rborium uomen femiuinum dic fore
Hee abories, superflue fauctes semper,
Hee stipes, -tis, i. arbor. 30 Ni rubus, dumus, oliaster, sive piaster,
Hee radix, a rot. Adda viburnum predictis, addito vimen,
Hic truncus, a stok.
Hic vel hee cortex, -cis, bark.
Hic liber, interior pars corticis. BEEAEUNE PARTES
Hoc suber, intima pars corticis. 35 FRUCTUUM.
Hoc abdomen, grundsope.4 Hoc nauci, indeclinabile, dcfe.
‘ The warden was a large coarse pear fes. Amant. vol. ii., p. 30 (ed. Pauli),
used for baking. has misrepresented the story of Phillis and
? A holt, or copse. Demophoon, in Ovid, in order to give a
* Schyd means usually a billet of wood. derivation of this word —
* Grund-sope. This appears to be a 7
different meaning of the word to that which and Dempphonanasaag Feproyeds
q : at of the Goddes providence
it usually bears. The Prompt. Parv. gives, Was shape suche an evidence
»Growndesope of any lycoure, fer, sedi- Ever afterward ayein the slowe,
men.“ That Phillis in the same throwe
a a Was shape into a nutte-tre,
b que en PGND IAM bral That alle men it mighte se,
undle. ; . : And after Phillis philliberde
The Latin should be fillis, ,,Filberde- This tre was cleped in the yerd.
tree, phillis,“ Prompt. Parv. Guwer, Con-

719 A NOMINALE. 720
Hic nuclius, a kyrnyl, Hoc processionale, a processyonar.
Hee moraria, a cobyng nut. Hoc martilogium, a mertilloge.
Hee perima, } Hee biblioteca, a bybulle.
Hee peripsina, Cig Pha ALES Biblioteca mea servat meam bibliotecam.
| lec pulpa, the mett. 5 Hoc manuale, a manuelle.
Hee arula, the crok. Hic passionerius, a passyonar.
Hec pertica, the sterte’ of anapulle. Hoc regestrum, a regyster.
Hee testa, a schelle, vel cortex nucis. Hoc ordinale, a ordynalle.
Hic crucifizus, a crucyfixe.
NOMINA DOMORUM ET RERuM '° Hee Pr o'r
ECCLESIASTICARUM. Hee statia, } Pop 5S
Hoc monasterium, a mynster. Hee eucaristia, hostia sacrata.
Hec cenobium, a nabbay. Hoc altare, a nawtyr.
Hee abathia, idem est. 15 Hoc superaltare, a hye awtyr.
Hoc hospitale, a nospytalle. Hic fons, -tis, a font.
Hoc sinodogium, 2 . di 3 Hoc carisma, -tis, creme.
Hoc diverticulum,$ ” ~~" Hoc oleum, oylle.
Hee ecclesia, Hic baptismus, a batym.
Hoc templum, 20 Hec extremaunecio, a nentment.
Hoc delubrum, ) a kyrk. Hee confirmacio, confyrmynge.
Hoc fanum, Baptismum proprie fertur mundacio meutis,
Hee basilica, Exterior querit per aquam, baptisma vocatur.
Hic cancellus, Hee vox baptismus signat utrumque simul.
Hic ch 4 ; a chawnsylle. 25 Hic cat - £ ill mnt od
fic chorus, 25 Hic catecuminus, est ille qui est con:
Hoc vestibulum, a revestre. versus ad fidem et non est bapti-
Hic porticus, a porche. zatus.
Hoe pulpitum, a pollepyt. Hoc vexillum, a banere.
Hoc campanile, a stepulle. Hic calix, -cis, a chalys.
Hoc oratorium, a oratory. 30 Vas cleris vinique calix est et nomen
Hoc portiferium, a portas. juertte
Hoc gradale, a grale. Hoc corperarium, a corperax,
_ Hoc missale, a myssalle. Tec fiola, a crewyt.
Hic troporius, a tropery. Ilec pixis, -dis, a box.
Hic calendarius, a calendar. 35 Hic editur pissis, hic servat aromata
Hic ymnerius, a ymner. pixts.
Hoc ymnare, idem est. Hoc ostiarium, a obley, or a box.
Hic antiphonerius, a antyphonere. Hoc ostia, a cyst.
Hec letania, letony. Hoc thus, -ris,
Hoc alphabetum, a nabse.? 40 Hoc thimiama, i encens.
Hee gracia, a grace. Hoc incensum,
Hoc premorium, a primer. Iloc aspersorium, a strynkylle.
Hoc psalterium, a sawtyr. Hoc turibulum, a sensyr.
Hoc brevarium, a brevyar. Hee acerra, a schyp for censse.°
' The stalk. period to hold the incense, as well as
* i.e, an abc. other articles. A similar vessel was used
* The nef, a vessel in the form of a at the baronial table tu hold wine, &.
ship, used in the church from an early

721 A NOMINALE. 722
Iloc sacrarium, a sacrear. Hoc candelabrum, a eandylstyk.
Iloc lectrinum, a letyrn, Hee secula, a rysch.°
Iloc vitrum, glasse. Hic stilus, a peller.
Hoe feretrum, Est stilus unde scribit puer, stilus esto
Hic loculus, a: ber. 5 colnmna,
Hee libitina, Dictandique modus ducitur esse stilus,
Iloc facitergium, a towylle. Hoc circinatorium, a circynatory.
Hoc manutergium, a sanope. Hoc claustrum, a clostyr.
Loc velum, a vayle. Hoc valitudinarium, a fermery.
Toc crismale, a crisome. 10 Hoe ventilogium, a a
Hee lucerna, a lantron.! Hee cheruca, } elie OS!
Ilec absconsa, a scons.” Hoc semitorium, eee
ITec lampas, -dis, lawmpe. Hoc atrium, } ee LP
Loc lurthium, a nawtyrcloth. Atria dic aulas, eadem semitoria dicas.
Toc organum, a organ. 15 Hoc sudarium, a sudary.
Hee decima, tythe. Hic gradus, a degre.
Hee oblacio, a offeryng. Hic certofagus, \
Hee alba, a nawbe. Hoc mauseolum,
Hie amictus, a namyt. Hic tumulus,
Hee fanula, a fanune.s 20 Hee tumba, & stay.
Hec casula, Hoe poliandrum, |
Hee poderis, i @ dharalla Hoc feo
Hoc spectaculum, a spectakylle. Hoc glossum, a schryn.
Hoe pedum, a clappe.t i. opilio i. ovem’ {. lupi
Hee capa, a cape. 25 Manda vetat a licos intrare
Hee dalmatica, a canturcope.5 meandrnm
Hec zona, a belt. Clausit Alexandrum magnum parvum
Hee tunicula, tunakyl. poliandrum,
Hee mitra, a mytyre. Hee reliquie, -arum, relyks.
Hee patura, a parur. 30 Hic bostarius, a grafmakere.
Tec stola, a stolle. Hee capsa,
Hoc superpellicium, a surplys. Hee capsulla, r
Hoc orilegium rlyge. Hee capella, }.  5Y%
gium, a norlyge. ‘ec capcella,
Hic oronoscopus, a orlegge. Tlec cista,
Hoc aurifigium, a goldfre. 35 Hee crupta, a hol in the erthe.
Hoc superfemorale,.. . Per quem fit crapta, non fiunt carmina
Hee caleptra, a coppe- scripta,
Hoc pedum, a crowche, Hoc consistorium, a constre.
ITic cerius, a serge. In plurali hec sacerdotorum dicuntur
Hic torticus, Ran 40 loco inferiora, ad que omnis erit
Hlec teda, -e, } BONS DORE Cha a.... nus sacerdotibus,
Ilec candela, a candyle. Hoc dormitorium, a dortore.
Mic lichinus, a weke. Hec cella, a celle.
* A Jantern. * We must conclude, from the Latin
? See before, p. 649 1. 18. equivalent, that this word signifies a
° The priest’s maniple. maniple.
* Pedum occurs again below, where it ® Rysch, a rushlight.
is explained as a crowche, or pastoral staff.

728 A NOMINALE, 724
| Hoc capitulum, a chapyture. Tloc selarium, a selere.
_ Hoc centorium, : Ile sal, -lis, salt.
Hoe tabernaculum, } gtebernakylle. Tlec cambuca, a cambok.*
Hee regia, est domus regis. Ifoc coclier, a spon.
Hoc castellum, a castylle. 5 Hie calathus, a baskyt.
Hoc palacium, a palas. Hic corbes, ?) t
Hoc atrium, a hawlle. IToe dolium, (OS
Hee aula, idem est. Hoe uter, -ris, a busche.
Hic turrus,) . towre Hic colateralis, a costrille.
Hee arax, i 2 10 Hee clipsidra, a spygotte.
Hee phalea, turris lignea. Hic ciphus, a cope.
Hic citus, est passio vel mari domus. Hee servicia, ale.
Hee mancio, -nis, a dwellynge plas. Hoc vinum,
Hoc messuagium, a messe.! Hoc merum, j Lpe
gium, A
Hoc contagium, a cotage- 15 Hee fem, cic, dregges.
Hoc opidum, a caystelle. Hoc claretum, a clarete.
Hoc penetrale, a chawmbyre. Hoc nectar, -ris, pyment.
Hoe Syon, indeclinabile, Syon. Fex vini tibi sit, olei dicatur amurea.
Montem dicSyon, dicecclesiam fureSyon. Hoc scabellum, a stolle.
Tres sunt partes columne, s. basis,20 Hoc monile, a broche.
stilus, et epistilium; basis est fun- Hoc acuare, a nedylhows.
damentum, stilus est media pars, lec pluscula, a bokylle.
et epistilium est supprema pars. Hoc speculum, a myrrore.
Hee heremus, Acce armytegke. Hoc scissorium, a trencher.
Hoe heremum, scitum illius loci. 25 Hic bino, a cartstaffe,
Hee traha, a sled.
Hec buris, a plughbeme.
NOMINA DOMO PERTINENCIA. dec Sormepedia, a last.
Hoc scamnum, a bynk. Hoc senvectorium, a barow.
Hee mensa, a tabylle. 30 Hoc serculum, a wedhoe.
Hec fultra, a cuschoun. Hec mensacula, a bordknyf.*
Hee cathedra, a chare. Hec olla, a potte.
Hic tristellus, a trestylle. Hec idria, a watyrpotte.
Hee pelvis, a basyn. Hic contus,
Hoc Se rcs a lavyre. 35 Hee pila, } 2 TEA oe
Hoc mantile, a towylle. Hic ursiolus, a posnet.6
Hoc sedile, a longsetylle. Hec ampulla, est olla cum duabus
Hec forceps, tange.? auribus.
Hec tripos, a brandrythe. Hic discus, a dische.
Hoe manutergium, a sanope. 40 Hic perapsis, -dis, a dobler.’
4 A mansion, or manor. ticles, like those by which butchers hang
Tongs. up carcases of slaughtered animals.
* Cambuck, and the medieval Latin * i.e, a carving-knife.
words cambuca, or cambuta, were used ° A pestle.
in the sense of a bent or crooked staff or ° A skillet, or small pot.
beam, and here perhaps means some im- * A dobler. The same Latin word is
Plement for supporting or suspending ar- _ explained in the next vocabulary a platter.

725 A NOMINALE. 726
Hee pila, a pestylle. Hic manipulus, a repe.
Hic fornax, a fornes. Tlic modius, a buschylle.
Kt pila pes pontis, pila ludus, pila taberua; Jie corus, a mesur.
Pila terit pultes, sed pila jerunturinhostes. 77,6 gsorium, a strikylle.®
Tloc veru, a spytt. 5 Hie vannus, a fanne.
Hoc pepe, moteryls. Hee ala, a weng.
Hoc striaballum, a cog of a welle. Hoc ventilabrum, a scotylle.‘
Hic assicus, a mylnerpyt. Hoc flagellum, a flaylle.
Hoc emolimentum, a meltyre. Hoc rastrum, a rak.
Hee ferricapsa, a hopyr. - 10 Hoc granum, corn.
Hoe sinoglossotorium, a flodgat. Hoc frumentum, whet.
Hoe terratorium, a clape. Hoc ordium, barly.
Hic alvus, a trowght. Hee pise, a pese.
Hee pala, a pele. Hee faba, a ben.
Tee vertybra, a colrak.? 15 Hee vicia, a fech.
Hie pastellus, a pastethe. Hee ecruralis, eraps.
Hee mebula, a mekylle. Hoc exaticum, byge.5
Hee vafra, a wafron. Hee mixtilio, -nis, idem est.
Hoc placentum, a wastylle. Hee avena, hafyr.
Hic artocopus, a symnylle. 20 Hee siligo, ry.
Hoc fermentum, surdowght. Hoc lolium, a popylle.
Hoc furfur, branne. Hee cratis, a flek.
Hee costa, a rybe. Hoe tugurrium, a hollek.
Lec mola, a qwernston. Hoc ovile, a fald.
Hoc cilicium, a hare. 25 Hic vomer, vel hee, -mis, a seke.
Hoc idromellum, growtt.? Hoc cultrum, a cultyr.
Hoc ciromellum, wort. Hoc jugum, a gok.
Hoe sigisterium, draf. Hec harpica, a harowe.
Hee cuva, i mo Hoc bidens, a mattok.
Hee uva, d 30 Hee liga, vel mera, a pyk.
Hee congelima, a scowk. Hee vanga, a spathe.
Hic arcomus, a haystak. Hee furca, a fork.
Hlec arista, a nawn. Hoe tribulum, a scowule.
Hee spica, a ner. Hoc dolubrum, a brodax.
Hee febula, a bencodde. 35 Hee securis, a nax.
Hee tina, & soe. Hee serucula, a hachyt.
Hoe tinarium, a so-tre. Hee acia, a thyxylle.
Hie corbis, 1 Hoc terubrum, mbt
Hee Reet ahs, Hoc penetrale ; beam be at
Hee garba, 40 Hoc sumen, tharne.
Hee merges, i a schaffe, Hoe armoriolum, a nalmry.®
ges; 9 vy:
' A coal-rake, or implement for raking * A strickle, or piece of wood for le-
the ashes of a fire, velling the corn in the measure.
? Growtt, a sort of ale. In the old play * Scotylle, a winnowing-fan.
of Tom Tyler and his Wif, this liquor is * A kind of barley.
mentioned in the two verses of a song — ° An aumbry, or cupboard, formed from
This jolly grout is jolly and stout, the Low Latin word almariolum.
I pray you stout it still-a,

727 A NOMINALE. 728
Hoc orium, a lath. Hoc ligatoriwn, a tedyre.'
Hoc bostare, a noxhows. Hic cacabus, a eawdrun,
Hoc stabulum, a stabylle. Ilic urcius, a bras pott.
Hee arena, gravylle. Hec sterago, a fryngpanne.
Hee mantica, a malle. 5 Hee creagra, a fleschok.
Hic mergus, H naiatentt Hec sertago, a fryngpanne.
Hec situla, nd Hee cratis, a rostgern.
Hee postica, a posturne. Hoc ipopirgium, a nawndyrn.
Hoc perforale, a persure. Hoc spumatorium, a scomur,
Hec lima, a fylle. 10 Hoc ireposimum, a horshamer.
Hic circinus, a compas. Hic arquelus, a noxbowe.
Hic folus, a bolle. Hec lanea, a slaye.
Hoc clavarium, i. repositorium cla- Hoc hausorium, a ladylle.
vorum. Hoc scorium, a natt.
Hee revictica, a grawyngern. 15 Hec navecula, schetylle.
Hec sarra, a sawe. Hoc jubar, a neppe.
Hoc repagulum, a barre. Hoc licium, a throm.
Hee gerula, a gad. Hic cathinus, a gret doblere.
Hee mastica, whypceord. Hoc micatorium, a myere.
Hic aculius, a brad. 20 Hoc trajecterium, a potlyd.
Hoc plaustrum, a wayn. Hoc omentum, a strengerd.
Hee quadriga, a chargott. Hoc bolideum, a plum of lede.
Hee biga, a cart. Hec conspica, a glen.
Hic currus, idem est. Hec iberna, t. tempestas maris.
Hee rota, whele. 25 Hic palus, a stak.
Hee axis, a naxyltre. Hoc abditorium, a cofyr.
Hic radius, a spak. Hec clitella, a pak.
Hoc meditollium, a nar. Hee cupa, a stope.
Hic cantus, a felowe. Hec trolla, a trowylle.
Hee cavilla, a nayle or a pyn. 30 Hic rogus, a fyre.
Hic temo, a teme. Hic ignis, idem.
Hec torques, a wythe. Hec roga, almus. -
Hic limo, a thylle. Hic rogus est ignis, elemosina sit roga
Hic limarillum, a thylpyn. aicta
Hic viredus, a thylhors. 35 Hoc cunabilum, a credylle.
Hoc dorsolallium, a cartsadylle. Hee rubigo, a rust.
Hee singula, a horsgarthe. Hoc torcular, a pressur.
Seingula scingit equum, singula sunt ho- Hoc falcastrum, a bylle.
minum, Hie faux, a chek.
Hoc postela, a croper. 40 Hec falx, a sykyl, or a seth.
Hec trahicie, trays. Hee scopa, a besum.
Hee antela, a pettrylle. Hee paries, a walle.
Hee opisie, -arum, harnes. Hee scala, a leddyr.
Hoc capistrum, a heltyr. Hoc foramen, a hole.
Hoc scansile, a styroppe. 45 Hic later, -ris, a tylle.
Hoc calamistrum, a horskame. Hic marmor, -ris, a marbylle.
' Tedyre, a cord to tie an animal toa stake, still called in Kent a tether.
48

729 A NOMINALE. 730 |
Hoc gipsum, morter. Hee fornix, -icis, a bordylhows.®
IIoc cementum, eyment. Hoc scortorium, idem est.
Hic simentarius, a waller. ~ Hoc opella, a schope. |
Hic asser, @ \att. Lec scopa, idem.
Hec latta, idem. 5 Hoc oranum, a tressurry.
Hee cratis,... Hoc gazafilacium, a hordhows.¢
Hec escaria, a mettabylle. Hee prosenica, est domus mendicorum.
Hic escarinus, a metdysch. Hoc vinarium, est locus ubi vinum
Hoc lorum, a brydille. reponitur.
Hec abena, a rayn. 10 Hee lapidisina, est domus latamorum,
vel est ubi lapides ceduntur.
= f Hoc toloneum, a tolboythe.
JAM DE EDIFICIIS DOMORUM. Qui mausoleum Petree or canopeum,
Hoc edificium; a bygyng.' Sen tolonenm, non reor esse reum.
Hee domus, a hows. 15 Hoc asilum, est domus refugii.
Hec casa, a lytille hows. Hoc refectorium, a fermory.
Hee talamus, Hoc brasinium, a malthows.
Hec camera, | me chamtere. Hoc oratorium, est domus orationis.
Hic conclavis, re Hoc triclinium, est domus trina ses-
Hee zeta, 20 — sione f[acta].
Hoc tristegum, i. domus tricamerata, Hoc cellarium, a seller.
Hoc pretorium, a moythalle. Hic papilio, -nis, i. tectorium.
Hoc celarium, a spens.” Hoc fanuficium, a pantry.
IToc dispensorium, idem est. Hee paraula, locus ante aulam.
Hoc lardarium, a lardyrhows. 25 Hoc apendicium, a pentys.7
Hec coguina, a kychyn. Hoc repositorium, est locus ubi ali-
Toc pistrinum, a bakhows. quid repo[nitur].
Hoc molendinum, myln. Hec apoteca, a spycerschope.
Hee forica, a prevy. Hoc macellum, bochery.
Hee pennates, -cium, idem est. 30 Hoc armentorium, locus ubi fiunt
Hoc stabulum, a stabulle. arma].
Hoe boster, a bose.? Hec caula, schepeot.
Noster erit, nomen proprium, stabulum loc mérrepolium, est domus un-
quoque boster ; guenta...
Bostaris facit hee gero, bostaris ille. 35 Hec mirreteca, est repositorumung....
Hec amissis, a swyer.* Hoc armamentorium, est reposi-
Hec fabrica, a forge. torium.
Hee carcer, a presun. Hoc columbare, dowfhows.
Hoc argastulum, a denjon. Hec menia, -orum, sunt muri ci-
Hee taberna, a tabyrn. 40  vitatis.
Hec teges, parva domus. Hoc genitorium, a buhows.
* Bygyng, a building; from the A.-S, ° A brothel; from the Anglo-Norman;
biegan, to build. the modern French bordel.
? The spense, or buttery. ° A treasury; the Auglo-Saxon word.
* A stable for cattle. "A pentise, or shed over a door.
* The Latin word amussis means a
carpenter's rule.

731 A NOMINALE. 732
Hoe argasterium, ubi aliquid opus fit. Hic tignuus, vel hoc tegimen, a sparre.
Hee antica, a hek.! Hec capula, a cuppylle.
Hec postica, a postyrn. Hec doma, a howsrof.
Hoc posticum idem est. loc tectum, idem est.
Ilec postis, t 5 Iec grunda, a eskyng.®
Hee postellus, } Supost. Hee sugrunda, a bemfellyng.
Hee fultura, idem est. floc lodium, a lovyre.
Hec litura, a mortare. Hoc lucaner, -ris, idem est.
Hie fundus, a grund. Tlic caminus, a chymney.
Hic murus, a walle. 10 Iloc epicausterium, idem est.
Hoc antemurale, a harchcame. Dic epicausterium scriptoris esse cathedra.
Hoc promurale, defencio ante murum. Est epicausterium fornax ubi dequoquis
Hoc signaculum, a bretys.? ; ollas.
Hoc saxum, Ast illud longum que fumus ab ede recedit.
Hee petrilla, a stone, 15 Hoc pinnaculum, a pinnaky).
Hec petra, Hic cunius, a weg.
Hee calx, -cis, lyme. Hec pinna, est summitas cujuslibet rei.
Pars pedis est hic calx, lapis ustus dici- Sit tibi montis apex, dicas pinna quoque
tur hee calx. templi.
Hoc plastrum, a plastyr. 20 Hoc pavimentum, a pament.
Hlec arena, sand or gravylle. Hoc guttatorium, a guttar.
Hic palus, a palys. Hoc stillicidium, a drope.
Hee basisassis est future columpne. Hee tectura, thak,
Hoc periperium, est superficies pa- _ Hoc tegimen, idem.
rietis. 25 Hoc tabellatum, a burdwogh.4
Hec archus, a vowt. Hee cal, era pars do-
Hoc laquiare, a postband, Hoc frontispicium,) mus,
Hee trabia, a balk. Hoc hostium, a dore.
Hec trabicula, idem est, Hee fenestra, a wyndoe.
Hee stipes, a stok. 30
* Hek. A heck-door, in the north, is that the distinction between wall and
a door of which the lower part only is  wogh, in English, was the same as be-
panelled, and the upper latticed. The tween the original words in Anglo-Saxon,
word, which is not very common in this namely, the latter was applied peculiarly
sonse in old writers, occurs in the Townley to the walls of a house, and the former
Mysteries, which were written in theNorth to a wall of enclosure, or separation, in
(p. 106) — general. Thus, in the following lines,
Good wyff, open the hek, seys thon not what ower, telling the story of Pyramus and
I bryng, Thisbe, informs us that they lived so
It is explained in the glossary as ,the ‘lose together, that the walls of their
inuer door between the entry or lobby, houses, and those of their court or yard,
and the house or kitchen.“ adjoined to each other —
4 A bretasche, Amonge the which, two there were
Eskyng. A pentise is called an esking Aboven all other noblo and great,
in Lincolnshire. Dwellend tho within a strete
* Burd-wogh, a wall, or partition, of poe ec ale ee
Seeiecieenvonet oa = eed pli , But wowo to wowe and wallo to walle, ’
, Gower, Conf, Amantis, vol. i, p. 324, ed. Panli-
the samo way. It may be here remarked

733 A NOMINALE, 734
Hoe fenestrale, a fenestralle.t Hee barcaria, i. ovile, a schepcott.
Hee porta, |
oe rea “rin a gatt. NOMINA VESTIMENTORUM.
Hee fores, 5 Hec vestis, a clethyng.
lec valva, a wekyt. Hoc indumentum, idem est.
Hec valve, -arum, faldyngates. Hoc mutarium, a chaungyngeloth.
Hoc limen, -nis, thryswold. Hoc stragulum, ray.
Hic cardo, -nis, penultima corrupta, Hic pannus, clothe.
a har of a dore.? 10 Hee lanugo, -nis, walkyng.
Ilec vertibra, idem. Hee camisia, a sark.
Hee cera, lok. Hec interula, idem est.
Hee serula, } amtoes lec bracce, -arum, brek.
Hic clatrus, a barre. Hec tunica, a cot.
Cardo sus est foribus si cardonis sit generalis, 15 Hec supertunica, a furd cott.
Et si cardonis est herba nociva colonis, Hec dupliteca, a doplyt.
Cardonis est herba multum fullonibus apta. Hee toga, a gown.
Hee clavis k Hee clamis, & mantylle.
Hee clavicula, } areey Hee acupicta, a jak of fens.
Hec clava, a mese. 20 Hec instita, a rochyt.
Hie clavus, a naylle. Hic superus, idem est.
Clava ferit, clavis aperit, clavus duo jungit. Hee armiclausa, a clok.
Hoc pessulum, a snek.3 Hee tribrica, the strapuls of a pare
Hee mastiga, a snekbank. brek.
Hic gumfus, a dorbande. 25 Hoc lumbare, a brekbelt.
Hee haspa, a hespe. Hoc braccale, idem est.
Hic vectis, a slott.4 Hoc colobium, a taberd.
Iec grapa, est foramen in quo quies- Hoc cotobium, i. vestis collobia par-
cit vectis, vula dena.
Hic clitorium, a clekyt.s 30 Hoe colarium, a colar.
Ric huncus, a erok. - Hec manica, a slefe,
ITic cava, a guttyr in the herthe. Hee lucina, a gore.6
Tec fistula, est instrumentum in quo Hoc mancupium, a spare.
aqua currit. Hee fibula, a lase.
Arbor aqueductus est fistula, musica, 35 Hoc pannideusium, a boton.
morbus. Hoe armiclausum, a clespe.
Hoe aquaductum, Hoe mominlum, a naglott.
Hoc guttarium, fa guttur. Hee consuetura, a seme.
Hoc aqueductile, Hee fimbria, a heme.
Hic aqueductus, a cundyth undyr the 40 Hic lumbus, a burdyre.
erthe.
* A fenestral was a window formed of * Slot, the bolt of a dvor.
a frame of paper and cloth, instead of * Clekyt, a cliket, or latch-key.
glass. ° Gore, a hem, or gusset. In Walter de
? Har, a Moge. In the dialect of Dur-  Biblesworth, it is given as the interpre~
ham, a har is the hole in a stone in which tation of the Anglo-Norman or French
the spindle of a gate rests. yeroun.
> Snek, a latch of a door.

| 735 A NOMINALE. 736
Hoc strophewm Hic tonitrus, a thonderyng.
Hee Ba } fa gyrdylle, Hee nix, snawe. 5
Zona dic stropheum, palmam die esse — FJec glacies, -ei, yse.
ernie. Hee grando, halle.
Hoc cimicinctum, a sayut of sylk. 5 Hoc gelu, indeclinabile, frost.
Hoc textum, est idem. Hee pruina, a rymfrost.
Hoc plusculum, a bokylle. Hic ros, -ris, a dewe.
Hec lingula, a tung. Hec pluvia, a rayne.
Hec stipa, a stoythe. Hoc confragum, a plays where the
Hoc pendulum, a pendand. 10 whyrwynd metes.
Hee mardacula, a sparbelt. Hoc bivium, a gaytschadyls.*
Hoc mercipium, a pawtnere.! Hee aqua, watyre.
Hic cultellus, a knyff. Hee tectis, idem est.
Hoc acumen, Hee limpha etiam idem est.
Hee acies, } fs 15 Est aqua doctrina, populus, dolor, ac ele-
‘Hee sindula, a blayd. ——-
Hoc manubrium, a heft. Hoc mare,
Hee spirula, a vyville.” Hie pelagus, } the see.
EADS pas es)
Hoc tenaculum, Hoc fretum, a whalle.
Hic spirasmus, } HES 20 Hoc flumen
si ld ve Having, ¢ & Bod.
Hee vagina, a schethe. Hic fluvius, a
Hoc capicium, a hod. Hic fons, -tis, a welle.
Hoc leripipium, a typitte. Hic rivus, a revyre.
Hee tena, a coyfe. Hic rivulus, a bek.5
Hic pilius, a cape. 25 Hic virarium, a vever.
Be flameolum, } eurehyte. Hee gurges, -tis, a strem.
foc multiplicium, Hec fovea, advil
Hoc sudarium, a sudary. Hec fossa, } YC.
Hee tricatura, a trussure. Hoc stangnum, a dame.
Hoc peplum, a wympulle. 30 Hoc filandrum, a gossomyre.
Hoc craticulum, a kelle. Hic vel hee dies, a day.
Bag Oh ttn ¢ Hec nox, -tis, a nyght.
_ Hic affricus, the sowth-est wynd. Hic quadragesima, a lentyn.
Hie circius, est ventus borialis sub Hoc natale, gole.
aquilonem versus occidentem. 35 Hoc pascha, pase.
Hic aquilo, septentris, ventus boralis, Hoc carnibrevium, .. .
idem est; ventus aquilonaris est Hoc ipopanti, candylmesse.
sibi conjunctus versus orientem;  Hec pentetoste, -tes, whysunday.
ventus collateralis est intermedius  Hec estas, somyre.
inter bariam et subsolanum. 40 Hic yems, wyntyre.
Hee nubes, a clowd. Hoc ver, groyngtyme.
Hie fulgur, leyfnyng. Hic bisextus, lepgere.
* Pawtnere, a purse. * Cross-roads; the word siguifles lite-
2 Vyrille, a gimlet, or wimble. rally, a separation or divergence of roads;
* Unfortunately a leaf of the original — ,gateschadyle, compitum,“ Prompt. Parv.
MS. has been torn ont here, making a SA small brook; still in use in the
rather extensive lacuna, as the manuscript north.
is written in three columns.

737 A NOMINALE, 738
Hec terra, th Ilec pila, a balle.
Hic humus, } wee Hoc pedum, a clubbe.
Hoc saxifragium, a qwaryle.! Hoc pirrum, the chekyre.
Hoc vallis, a dayle. Hec pirga, the poynt of the chekyre.
Hic mons, -tis, a hylle. 5 Hoe scaccarium, idem est.
Hic collis, the top of a hylle. Tlic talus, a dyse.
Hoc pratum, a medowe. Tec decies, idem est.
Tec via, a way. Hec alea, the menge.
Hic vicus, a strett. Tlec tuba, a trumpe.
Hee ripa, a bank. 10 Hec fistula, a pype.
Hec insula, a nyle. Tlec buccina, a beme.
Hee gleba, a clott. Hic idraicus, a wadyrpype-
Hec rupes, a roche. Hee cithera, } h
Hoc inclusorium, a pynfold. Tec lira, lee i
pe campus, i eed 15 HHec fides, a harpstryng.
ic rus, Toc plectrum, a wrast.
Hoc firmamentum, a fyrmament. Hoc timpanum, a tymbyre.
Hec acra, a nakyre. Ilic psalmatus, the sytalle.
Hee bovaga, a noxgang. Hee vitula, a rybybe.
Hlic selio, ~nis, a butt. 20 Hee simphonia, a symphony.
Tec virgata, a rodlande. Hee paupita, a sawtre.
Hec puppis, a schyppe. Hoc psalterium, idem est.
Hee navis, idem est. Salterium dicitur organicum fore librum.
Hie lumbus, a bott.
_ 9
Paes °° by VITE BT MATERIIS IPSIUS.
IIe rudens, a cabylle. Hee vitis, a vyne.
Hic funis, a cord. Ilec vitula, idem est.
Itie funiculus, idem. Hoe vitulamen est planta vite inf...
Tlic remus, a nore. 30 Et vitis radix, sunt fructus vin...
Hee antenne, -arum, gret eabyls. Pampinus est folium, botrus flos vin . .
Toe columber, a arehole.2 lec vinea, est locus ubique usitatus.
Hee ancora, a nankyre. Hec venosa, idem est.
Iloc troclea, a wyndas. Hec labrusca, est vitis silvestris.
Tlvc rete, tt 35 Hie palmes, a brawnch of vyne.
Hee plaga, } pee Hoc sincetum, est ramus pretentus a
Hic hamus, a hok. vite.
. Tic botrus, flos vitis.
Iie racemus, a raysyn.
NOMINA LUDORUM. 40 Hic bubastus, est wilis ved uva in agro.
Tlic ludus, a play. Ilic spado, i. circulus vitis.
Hoe hastiludium, a justyng. Hee uva, i a grape,
Hic armilustras, a turnament. Hec uvula,
Hee acies, a scheltrone.® Hec uvapassa,
‘A quarry. * The sheltron was a square, or divi-
2 4, e., an air-hole —a small unglazed sion of soldiers — a squadron.
window.

7
7
739 A NOMINALE, 740
.
Dant uvapassa clibano simeraria plebe, Hee torta, a cak.
| Uva precerra, vel procox tibi primatnra, Hee nebula, oblys.'
ubl preco Est nnbis nebula tennis panisqne rotundus.
Quo quando vel precox tibi prematura sunt fee Iesca, a schyfe.t
| uya. 5 Hee colirida, a doreake.®
Hee precocia, idem est. Hoc crustrum, a crust.
Hee corda, est uva serotina. Hoc frustrum, a lumpe-
Cordus, -a, -um, i, serotinus, -a, wm. Hoc minutal, a eantylle.
Hee mica, a crwme.
10 Hec pasta, doght
ny E J 4 i .
DE CIBIS GENERALIBUS. . Hee pasmacta, t. parvus panis.
Hic cibus Hee buccella, a morsylle.
)( Boaise Hie lus, id
Hec esca, ic morcellus, idem est.
Hic dapis, -pem, -pe, idem est. "a
Nobiliti iles frons generosa dapes. +
: Ne ea 5 DE SPECIEBUS LIGUMINIS.
Hoc manna, awngyls fode. ;
Hoc jantaculum, a dynere. Hoc ligumen, potage.
Hoc auncinium, Hoc olus, -ris, wortes.
: myddyner
Hee imranda, d oe tal Hee porreta, porray.
Hoc merarium, § - 20 Hee vita, i sor
Hec cena, a sopere.? Hoc sepulatum,
Hec musta, idem est. Hee sorbuncula, idem est.
Die mustam cenam, mustumqne latens LZoc pulmentum, browys.?
odorem. Hoc adipatum, idem est.
Hoc obsonium, a reresopere. 25 Hoc amigdalatum, almundmylke.*
Hoc convivium, a fest. Hoc risi, indeclinabile, ryse.
Hec dieta, est cibus moderatus, etc. Hoc puls, )
Estque dieta cibus moderatus, iter quoque Lec aplauda, $ a mese.
diet. Hoc ferculum,
Hoc corrodium, leveraye. 30 Fercula nos saciant, prelatos fercula portant.
Hee polenta, grewylle.
DE PANIBUS ET PARTIBUS — Zee brodium, brewe.
j FORUM Hoc pomarium, appuljuse.
} M. Hoc jurcellum, jursylle.?
Hic panis, brede. 35 Hoc sarabracium, sarabrase.
Hic lifus, a \ofe. Hoe lattum, lorray.!°
Hoe colifium, hardbred. Hoc mel, hony.
Hec placenta, wastylle. Hic garus, a fyscbrowe."!
Hic artocapus, a symnylle. Hoc oleum, oyle.
' A meal between the dinner and supper. * Broth.
2 A second supper, takon late in the ® See before, p. 713, note 2.
evening. ° Jussell was a favourite dish, composed
> A small round loaf, as it is explained Of eggs and grated bread, boiled in broth,
in the verse. and seasoned with sage and saffron.
* Schyfe, or shive, a slice. © Lorray, orlorré, was adish, in ancient
* Dor- cake. The collyrida was a sort cookery, for which receipts are found in
of cracknell, or crisp cake, somewhat re- most of the cookery books.
sembling. biscuit. ‘! Literally, broth of fish.
© Pottage.

>
741 A NOMINALE. 742 §
Hoc omlaccinium, charlyt.' Hee carnes vitule, veylle.
Hoc morticum, a culys. Hlec caro, -nis, man’s flesche.
Carnes caruifives, carnem vendunt mere-
trices.
DE CIBIS GENERALIBUS. 5 Hee vipa, a wynsope.
Hee assa, wnt Hic ipa, a watyrsope.
Hee ee Hec offa, a alesope.
Hec carbonella, a colope. Est crateris vipa, scutelle dicitur offa,
Hec Sriza, idem Sed limphe proprie dicitur ipa fore.
by ;
Hoc crimium, crowkoun? 10
Hes ce ae met. DE LECTIS ET ORNAMENTIS
loc frixum, idem est.
Frixa nocent, elixa juvant, assata cohercent. EORUM.
Hec artocrea, a pye. Hee torena, est lectus regis.
Hic pastellus, a pasthethe. 15 Hoc plumale, a fedyrbed.
Hic artocasius, cibus factus ex pane Hoc cooportorium, a coverlyd.
et casio. Hoc toral, -lis, idem est.
Hec tarta, a tartt. Hec lodex, -icis, a blankytt.
Hee flata, a flawn. Hoc linthiamen, a schett.
Hoc opacum, idem est. 20 Hic carentivellus, canvas.
Hoc fertum, a podyng. Hoc linthium, a tapytt.
Hoc omasum, idem. Hee tapeta, idem est.
Hoc laganum, same cake. Hec culcitra, a matrys.
Hec salsucia, a sawstyre. Hoe cervical, a peloware.
Hec hilla, idem est. 25 Hec curtina, a curtyn.
Hee delicie, Hic lectus, a bed.
Hee lauticia, dantyths. Hoc stratum, idem est.
Hee galanticie, Hoc grabatum, media producta, idem
Hoc frizum, a froys.® est.
Hoc strutum, 7 30 Est lectus stratum, fertur via regia strata ;
oo Gaye } a tripe. Mobile fit stratus ad quod depressus habetgr.
J .
Hee perra, a flyk. Hic lectulus, i. parvus lectus.
Hic petaso, -nis, idem est. Hic thorus, idem est.
Hee petasiculus, half a flyk. Dicas esse thoros, paliaria, brachia, lectos.
Hoc succidium, sowse. 35 Hoc lectiferum, est lectus stratum vel
Hoc tucetum, hagas. locus ubi lectuli sternuntur, vel
Hec carnes bovine, befte. stramenta lectorum.
Hee carnes porcine, pork. Hee bojenila, i. lectus.
Hee carnes ovine, moton. Hoc concubile, est lectus concubinarum.
' Charlet was a dish, in medieval cook- & favourite dish with the monks; for
ery, of which the principal ingredient was Gower (Conf. Amant., vol. ti. p. 92), de-
minced pork. scribing the troubled sleep of Sompno-
? Perhaps the dish called in the early lence, says —
treatises on cookery crayton, or criton — = .
7 " Whan he is falle in suche a dreme,
a preparation of chickens. Right hi iathol at -
* A froise was a sort of pancake. The He Touts Sli calles, ea
word is still used in the dialect of the And brustleth as a monkes froise,
eastern countries. It appears to have been ‘Whan It is throwe into the panne,

743 A NOMINALE. 744
Hoc concubiculum, idem est. Hec bamba, est lectus,
Hic genialis, est lectus qui in nup- — Sit cooportorium lecto lecturaque crinis,

cits sternitur. Sit tectorem domibus regimen cat sic verge,
Hee sponda, est exterior pars lecti. Armaque craterras quoque simul capnias.
Hoc fultrum, est pes lecti. 5 Hec amphicapa, est tapeta ex utra-
Lectus servorum, discumbentium gra- que parte villosa.

batum. Hec sipha, idem est.
Cum soleas in eas caput inclinari gravatum, | Amphicapam dicas gemma de parte villosa,
Disce graba signare caput, venit inde gra-  Sicut historiis simplex est sipha trapeta.

batum. 10 Hoc subsiterium, est tapetum sub pe-

Hec lectica, est lectus vel thorus, vel ditali,

currus quod dicitur lectus, vel est Hec curtina, a curtyn.

curtina circa lectum. Dicas curtinas quasi rerum corda tenentes ;
Hee spinge, -arum, sunt lectuli in Hoc conopeum, est curtina adinst...
_ [quibus] sunt posite efigie. 15... repium recium texta ad ar-
Hoc torrium, est quidam lectus. dendos culices et muscas.
Hoc stramentum, letyr. Hoe auriale, a cord or a pelowe.
Hoc stratorium, idem. Hoc cervical, idem est.
Hoc stabum, idem est. Hoc pulviner,
Hic punicanus, est lectus circumclu- 20 Hoc cervicarium, ; a coschyn.

sus tapicoleribus rubeis. Hic pulvinus,
Hoc punicanum, idem est. Hoc limphun, } est po... ex line
Hoc crepodium, a credyle. Hoe limpheolum, et lana contextus.

=
49

D q T > rt
A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY.
(OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.)
NOMINA PERTINENCIA Sesaries hominum, sed crines sunt mulie-
Tum;
HUMANO CORPORI. Hajus vel illius bene dicitur esse capillus.
Hoc caput, Ance a hede. Hoc cranium, Ance a hernpane.
Hoc occiput, Ance the last parte of 5 Loc cerebrum, Ancé a brayne.
the hede.  . Hee ffacies, Ance a face.
Hoc interciput, Ance the myd parte LHec mazilla, )

of the hede. Hee malay, idem sunt, a scheke.
Hoc cinciput, Ance the forme part. HTec gena, )

Cinciput anterior capitis pars dicitur esse; 10 Lic frrons, -tis, Ance a forhed,

Occiput et partem designat posteriorem ; Hic ffrons, -dis, Ane brawnche.

Ast mediam partem dicas interciput esse. Frons, -dis, ramus, frons, -tis, pars capi-

Hoc frontisipium, Ance a forhed. talte.

Hic vertex, Ance a natrelle.? Hoc cilium, Ance a here of the hie,
is ti ce

Hoc discrimen, Ance the sced of the 15 Hee bucca, } Anee ayneibae.

hede. Hec ffaux,

Sit tibi discrimen divisio, glabra, periclum. Ad navem malus spectat, malus est viciosus,

Hic crinis, Faux est mala, malum vicium, malum quo-

Hic pilus, , quespomamy
ce a

acom i an sunt, Ane & 90 Hoc supercilium, Ance a bro...

Hee coma, babel Hoc intercilium, Ance betwyn the

Hee sesaries, browes.

* This very curious vocabulary is pre- wise blank places in the manuscript, are
served in a manuscript in the possession here given, with the inscriptions attached,
of Lord Londesborough, which I think is of the same size, and as nearly as possible
of the latter part of the fifteenth century. facsimilies, of the original.

The illustrative sketches, which occupy the * The hatrelle.
margins and what would have been other-

747 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 748
|
| Hic oculus, Ance a nye. Hlec auris, ) 4
= a ere.
Hee palpebra, Ance a nyelede. Tee auricula, §
Hee pupilia, Ance the balle of the ye. Hoc tolera,' Ace a eresop.
| Hee abbcies, - Hec febra, Ace a weyne.
Hee abbedo, } Ance tha wy tintilio yes 5 Hee mandebula, a schekebone.
Hic nasus, Ancée a nase. Hic dens, -tis, Ace a thothe.
Hic naris, Ance the nesethyr.... Hoc mazillare, a walthothe.
Iloc interficium, Ance the bryd of Hic molaris, idem est. “
the ne. Ventes molares, lapides dic esse molares.
Hee piruela, Ance the cop of the 10 Hec veruca, Ace a wrothe.”
ne) Ss Hie gelbus, Ancé a wen.
Hee cartilago, Ancé a grystyl. Hoc collum, Ance a nek.
Hoc tempus, Ancé a tempylle. Hee gula,
Hie cirrus, Ace the cop of the hede. Hoc guttur, i a throthe.
Hoc pus, snot. 15 Hie jugulus,
Hic polipus, idem. Est gula pars colli, vicium gula restat
Polupus est naris fetor, et in equore piscis. edendi.
Hee mustilago, Ace a mulere .. Hlec fontinella, Ace the nekhole.
Hic mentum, Ace a schyne. Hie isiofagus, Ace a wesawnt.
Hec barba, 20 Hoc pupillum, the blak of the ye,
9 a berd. Tk
Hoc genorbidum, oe bachium,
Hoc os, ossis, Ace a bone. Tic lacertus, ¢ a harmehole.
Hoc os, -ris, Acé a mowth. Hee ulna,
Os, oris, loquitur, corio vestitur os, ossis. Brachia dic ulnas, panni mensura sit ulua.
Tec lingua, Ace a tung. 25 Hic vultus, -tus, -ui, Ace a schere.$
Hee glossa, idem est. Hee spina,  yibahe.
Est membrum lingua, designat ethecigonis. | Hoc spondile, v8
Hoc labium, Ace.a lyp super os. Hec spina, Ace a thorne.
Hoc labrum, Ance a lyp. Me pungit spina, pars est ia corpore spina.
Hee gingiva, Ace a gome. 30 Hee acella, Acé a harmhole.
Hoc omestrum, Acé a mygerne. Hie subricus, idem est.
nia 3
£ 1s ONES 7 Ip
a RW Y U yes =
Ve Qa
er, Sah
fi Y
* Colera. See before, p. 676 1. 9. countenance or mien, is not a very com-
? Wrothe. A wart is still called a wrat mon word, but it occurs more than once
in some of the northern dialects. in the romances of Gawayne, edited for
* The word schere, in the sense of the Roxburgh Club by Sir Frederick Madden.

749 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 750
Hic ricus, -ci, Ace a kodlomb. Hoc tergus, |
Hic ricus, -cus, -ui, Ace the nest of — Hoc dorsum‘ } a’ bak of a best.
the ye. Hic venter,
Tlic ricus per -ci pecnlas fera dicimus esse, Toc wera, a wombe.
Hloricnsicane -ui pars ultima constat ocelli. 5 Hic alvus,
Iie cubitus, Ace a helbowe. Tic umbelicus, Ace a nawylle.
Hic umerus, Ace a schuldere. Hee nates, Ace a botok.
Hee arteria, Acé the hole of the throt. Hic lumbus, Ace a hepe.
Hee uva, Ace the knot of the nek. loc femur, idem est.
Opptulio os uvam, fert vitis fertilis uvam.1Q Hic vel hec clunis, Ace a hepebone.
Hic armus, Ace a schuldyr. Hic torax, Ace a brestbone.
ITic humerus, ) ; Hoc pectus, Ace a brest.
7§ idem sunt, x
Hee scapula, Hlec mamilla, Ace a lytyl pap.
Hoc platum, Ace a schuldyrbone. Hec mamma, Ace a pap of a woman.
Tic stomacus, Ace stomake. 15 Hoc uber, Ace a pap of a best.
Hee jecur, Ace a maw. Nos hominum proprie mamillas dicimus
Hee manus, -nus, -ui, Ace a hand. one
Hee palma, Ubera et pecudam, sed mamme et mulie-
Hoc ir, the palme of the hand. Gt cute, OE rum;
Hee vola, go Cuins mamillas dixisti, dieqne patillas.
Palma manus, palma arbor, victoriapalma. Hoc latus, Ace a syde,
Hie digitus, Ace a fyngyr. Hee costa, Ace a rybe.
Hic articulus, Ace a too. Hec costa, Ac¢ a baksterys slomb,
Est manuum digitus, articnlusque pedum. Pars lateris costa, res pistoris quoque costa.
Hic junctura, Ace junctur. 25 Hec pubes, )
Hoc fren, Acethe sckyn ofthe brayne, Hic lanugo, 5 Ance schere.
Hec pellis, Ace the sckyn of a best. Hoc pecten,
In capitis cerebro fren est tenussima pellis; Hoc femur, i
Pellitur a carne pellis, carnis cutis heret. Hoc crus, a they.
Hoc corium, Acé ledyr. 30 Hic penis, {idem Att
Hic pollex, Ace a thumb. Hic priapus, i
Hic allux, Ace a grete too. Hic testiculus, a balokstone.
Est manuum polles, sed dicatur pedis allux. Hic piga, Ace a balokeod.
Hee unguis, Ace a nayle of a man. Hee vulva, Ace a cunt.
Hee ungula, Ace a claw of a best. 35 Hic cunnus, idem est.
Unguis non brutis datur, sed ungula bratis. Hie tentigo, Ace a kykyr.
Hoc tergum, Ace a bak of a man, —-Hec catwrda,' Ace a bobrelle.
a fA, a/]
vane AV Pag
i ey
ess \mmdh OD)
) iL
common, : :
* Caturda was used in the Latin of the female sexual organs, either the labia pu-
fifteenth century to indicate a part of the dendi, or the nymphe.

751 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 752
Hee munda, a schyn that a sehyld Extractus venis cruor est, tu eorpare san-
Hee mar, weousere amin SEAS,
Hee steria, gence! y _ Hoc fel, Ace the galle.
Hee cavilla, Ace a hankyl. Hoc sperma, -tis, Acé mankynd.
Hoc extum Ace a gret paugh. 5 Semen quod seritur, set progenies quoque
Hoc viscus, Ace a bowelle. sheriia:
Hoc nytunum, Ace a bowelle. Hoe alatum, Ace a rofom.'
Hoc trutum, Ace a tharme. Hic condulus, Ace a knokylle.
Hee struta, Ace a startere of nete. Hoc —* irons
Hoc intestinum i Min eataviie 10 Hec meda, $
Hic colus, a Hoc genu, Ace a kne.
Tec diafragma, Ace a mydred. Hic poplex, Ace a hame.
Hoc cordis, Ace a hert. Toc — nebene
Hic splen, Ace the mylt. Hoc vertebrum, —
Hic ren, -nis, Ace the nerys. 15 Hee tibea, Ace a leg.
Hoc epar, -ris, Ace the lywer. Hec tibea, Ace a trompe.
Cor sapit, et pulmo lognitur, felcoligit iram, ‘Tibia dat souitum, me portat tibia totum,
Splen ridere facit, cogit amare jecur. Hec\sura, AGMMMTabone:
Hic pulmo, Ace a long. Hic nervus, Ace a senow.
Hoc burbulum, Ace a umblye. 20 Hic pes, -dis, Ace a fothe.
Hee elia, Ace flank. Hic poder, Ace the fylthe of the fothe.
Hoc cepum, Ave talow. Hic callus, ad the harde of the
Hee pinguedo, Ace fatnes. Hee planta, fothe.
Erba sit hee fragus, hoc fragrum sit tibi Signat callus plantam collumque bovinum.
fructus, 25 Hie sudor, Ace swete.
Hie fragrus, -gi, pomplex cernatur baberi. —F¥ee arcacis, Ace slepe of the fothe.
Hic fragus, Ace a hame. Pes patitur artare, Ance my fothe ys a
Hee fragus, Ace a streberywyse. slepe.
Hoc fragum, Ace a strebery. Hoc apostema, -tis, Ace a postemet.”
Hic talus, Ace a hele. 30 Hec glaucoma, Ace a gome.
Hic talus, Ace a dyse. Hic articulus, Ace a too.
Ludo enm talis, terram tango quoque talis. 77g vola, Ace the holle of the fothe.
Hic sanguis, WReVISe, Est vola pars palme, pars ale, pars pedis
Hie cruor, una.
Sanguis alit corpus, cruor est a corpore 35 Hic pollex, Ace a thombe.
sumptns ; Hic index, Ace a lykpot.3
4
= hy
y apy hank. GG
; Rey ——
SF
2 wee gies a
“ Rofom. In the Devonshire dialect the page, representing a hand, sword, and head,
waist is called rofoam, are drawn upside-down in the original, as
? An aposteme, or abscess, here shown.
* The second cut at the bottom of this

\
753 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 754
Hic medius, Ace the longman. Hee paterna, Ace a patyn.
Tlic medius, Ace the leche. Hoc corporarium, ; "i
~ 5 . cé coperas.
Hic auricularis, Ace the lythylman.! Hoe corporale, P
Pollex, index, medius, modicus, aurieularis. [fee fiola
. 5 pd a cruet.
Hee vesica, Ancé a bleder. 5 Hic urcius,
Hic musculus, Ace a muskylle. Hee osta,
: 4 7 ¢ @ nobely.2 -
Hic musculus, Ace a lytyl mus. Hic panis,
Est musculus piscis, parvus mus, pars [Joc sacramentum, Ance the sacra-
tibiales. ment.
Hee solia, Ace the sole of the fote. 10 Hoc sacrium, Barrifyea
Hoe solium, Ace a kynges sete. Toc sacrificium, yeas
Sub pede sit solia, solium quoque regia Joc turibulum, Ace a sensere.
Balers Hec aserra, a schyp that zychel
ere in.
15 Hoc thus, /Aveedaneenna |
eS Hoe incesum, _ -
on Hee candela, Ace a candelle.
& Hic almoriolum, Ace almery.
“ Hic lampas, Ace a lawmp.
L 20 Hic lichinus, Ace meche.
NOMINA ECCLESIE pp-—7~ 2 E
—_— -, Ae Hic mergulus, Acé herne in the lamp.
NESSESSARIA, lay) Hoc olium, Ace oylle.
Hoc glee ricaarrsatmpr’ foo ane Hic cerreus, Ace a torche.
Hee ara, pklagrcores AKkon Hie cerulus, a lytyl torche.
Hoc supera ce a ri, 25 Hoe candelebrun
wweraltare, A superaltori. ae on candyllestyk.
Hee crux, Ace a crosse. Hoc candelarium,
Hee imago, Ace a ymage. Hoc crisma, -tis, Ace a crem.
Hie lichitus, for a eylepott. Hoe crismatorium, Acé a crismatory.
Toe vixillum, Ace a banyre. Hoe vestiarium, tri
Hic calix, Ace a schalys, 30 Hoc vestibulum, e Robey
* These popular names of the fingers A Nominale in MS. Reg 17, C. XVIL,
seem to be of considerable antiquity. The fol. 39, 1, gives the following list, very
following curious lines are quoted by Mr. similar to that in our text:
Halliwell (Dict. of Arch. Words) from a - Hic wp olLenyunies themes,
MS. of the fifteenth century in the Uni- sages ae iter tod
versity PULL ai Cambridge (Ff. v. 48, Hic medius, Ae lang-fynger.
ib ODE Hie medicus, Ae leche
like a fyngir has a namo, als men thaire fyngors Hic auricularis, Ae lytyl-fynger.
lle, A 7
‘Tho lest fyngir hat 1ityt-man, for hit is lest MR Halliwell has printed a modern nurs-
of alle; ery rhyme, (Nursery Rhymes of England,
Tho next fynger hat leche-man, for quen a fifth edition, p. 155), in which names very
. leche dos ogt, similar to these are still used, namely,
Wh that fynger Magiases eS thumbkin, foreman, longman, ringman,
Loug-man hat the mydilmast, for longest and littleman. In Norfolk the fingers are
fyngor hit is; called popularly, Yom-thumbkin, Will-
The ferthe men calls toweher, therwith men — qilkin, Long-gracious, Betty bodkin, Little-
, ; ; touches i-wis ; tit. G
Cho fifte fynger is the thow Mbp and sl has + & , the oblaysor lotteries
And fastest haldes of alle the tother, forthi men
calles hit rigt,

| 755 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 756
| Hoc missale, Ae a myssale. Foc ventilogium, a wedercok.
| Hoc gradale, Ace a grayelle. Hoc calasisorium, Arc a hers.
Hoc troparium, Acé tropere. Hoe freretrun,
Hoc callendarium, Ace a calendere. Hoe sandapulun, hnce Ye
Hoc ymnare, Ave a ymnere. 5 Hee libetina, icidmemien
Hee leges, Hic. loculus,
Hee legenda, ; a legend. Est loculus bursa, paryns locus, et Inbitina,
Hic legendus, Tec sera, Ace wax.
Hee letenia, Hoc vitrum
Hec aint a letenyboke. 10 Hoc ilum, j t Aneel
Hoc psalterium, Ace a sawtereboke. Hoc orologium, Ace a horologe.
Hoe cntifonarium, a amphanere. Hoc oritimum, Ace a cloke.
Hoc primarium, Ace a premere. Hoc organum, Ace a orgon.
Hoc mertilogium, Ace a mertelage- Hoe osculatorium, Ace a paxbrede.
Hoc manuale, a crystynningboke. 15 Hoc manutergium, Nandeclotl
Hoc passionarilum], Acca passionari. Hic towalus, i eng ONS
Hoc regestrum, Ace a regestyr. Hic certofagus,
Hoc ordinale, Ace a ordynal. Hoc ecpulerun,} Ance a grafe.
Hoc portiforum, Acé a portes. Hoc bustum,
Hoc touale, Ace a toual. 20 Hoc tumba, Ante b
Hoc temperalium, Ace a temperal. Hoc Be ome Li WITT
Hec casula, Ace a chesypyl. Hoc poliandrum, A‘é a byryelston.®
Hec alba, Ace a hawbe. Hic ysopus, Ace a sprenkylle.
Hic amictus, Ace a amyte. Hoc aspersorium, idem est.
Hee zona, 25 Hic stallus, Ace a stalle.
Hoc ieee a gyrdylle. Hoc mausolium,
Hic phano, -is, Ace phanun.' Hic tumulus, } Ance a grafe.
Hec capa, Ace a cope. Hoc pulpetorium, Ace a pulpyt.
Hoc superpelicium, a syrples. g
Hec dalmatica, 4 tonykyl. 30 = \
Hic ffons, -tis, Ace a funte. aN
Hie gradus, -dus, -ui, Ace a grese,? Y ' \
Hie baptismus, Ace crystyndome. If , .
| Hoc pizis, i < [colaare
Hoc alabastrum, c+ [bes 35 Le a
Hee campana, —7
Hec Ceca a belle. OE OFFI a
Hoc campanile, Ace a stepyl. Hee corda,
Hoc camparium, idem est. Hee funis, 5 * OPS
Hoc tintinabulum, a lytyl belle. 40 Hee lanterna,
Hic batillus, Ace a clapyr. Hee lucerna, } a lanterne.
1 ;
Mey, line dtrotions in-thomwilt spo rO tne ere eat hp tedoee Dy
of Henry VI., for the building of the col- Bi HDL (Rh ae COTE
y_Vl., e ag) % as shalle be convenient.“ — And from
ea at pier and Cambridge, we read, the provostes stalle unto the greece called
Enhancing of the ground of ths cemetery, "UH Charl, 90 fete," fe,
7 feete di., and the samo walle in height fo, -Yoncy, % Curie was tho old name

157 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 758
Hoc lectrinium, Hic bucculus,
Hic ambo, a leyterne. Hic jus ON cp nay
Hic discus, Hee buccula,
Hic obstratis, A‘e a pannyng. Hee ninietea, | a hekfere.
Hoc velum, Ace a veyle. 5 Hic vitulus, Ace a ealfe.
Hoc simutorium, i auschacenn Hic vervex, Ace a ram.
Hoe atrium, bed 7 Hie aries, Ace a wedyr.
ASA Hec ovis, alle raanner a chepe.
aN Hec verbica, Ace a hew.
[2 @ 10 Hee adasia, Ace pyllyd hew.
(P @ oe Hee erna, Ace a hewlambe.
NM, i) NR Hic agnus, Ace a wedyrlombe.
di i Yr Hic agnellus, a lyty] lambe.
Pa fq VA Hic titirus, Ace a belwedyr.
tH) 15 Hic equiferus, Ace a wyld hors.
“ Hic aper, Ace a wyld bore.
NOMINA ANIMALIUM Hic pen Pea
DOMESTICARUM. pee vnafrenda, } ® ROBE:
Hic deatrarius, Ace a stede. 20 Hee porea,
Hic emissarius, a corsowyr. Hic et hee sus, { a sow.
Hic sucarius, Ace a trotore.! Hee scrofa,
Hic palafridus, a palfrey. Hee porcula, .
Hic gradarius, vce a reranorels Hee t fren a geldyd sow.
Hic mannus, Ace a hakeney. 25 Hie porcellus, Ace a pyg-
Hic cabo, Acc a stalon. Hic caper, a get buk.
Hic caballus, Ace a capulle. Hec capra, Ace a gothe.
Hic viridus, Ace a thylhors. Hie edus,
Hic spado, Ace a gelt hors. Hic capriots, a kyd lomb.
Hic equus, Ace alle maner hors. 30 Hic edulus,
Hec equa, Ace a mare. Tic leporarius, a frefownd.4
Hic pullus, Ace a schekyn. Hic odorincicus, a stanyel.
Hic pullus, Ace a fole. Hic caniculus, a qwelpe.
Pullus, -a, -um, Ace blak. Hic catulus, idem est.
Pullus equs, pullus galline, pullus et ater. 35 Hec catula, a byche qwelpe.
Hic pa h Hee lacesca, Ace a byche.
Hee asina, aoe Hic molossus, Ace a bonddoge.
Hic saginarius, Ace a palhors.® Hic catus,
Hic taurus, Ace a bole. Hic mureligus, a catt.
Hic mulus, Ace a mule. 40 Hic pilax,
Hic et hec bos, Ace a hox. Hic catellus, Ace a cytlyng.®
Hee vacca, Hic bubalus, Ace a bogelle.®
Hee eee iP
* Trotore, a trotter, hunger, and fyrst, for thirst, which were
? Hawmlore, 1. e. an ambler. forms of the dialects of the Welsh border
* Pal-horse, evidently a packhorse. in the fourteenth century.
‘te, a greyhound. The use of the * A kitten.
letter f in this word is rather singular, * Bogelle, a beagle.
and reminds us of the words fynger, for

| 759 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 760
NOMINA ANIMA- Tre aieius Ya urchyn. sack
j i, maul Hic irmacius, (Rowe
LIUM FERORUM. pis Hic dromidarius, Ace a dromedarye.
Hic leo, Ance alywn. . Hee ffera, Ace a wyld best.
| Hee leena, ie leo- nn Palau 5 ITic camelus, Ace a schamelle. f hers
| Hee leonissa,) nys. Be S Hic lepusculus, Ace a leveret.
Hic cervus, Accahert. & and Hic ffeber, D Gina
Hic servus, Ace a serwant. Hic re j .
Hic cervus per c, scriptum sit bestia silve; Hic grillus, Ace a pryket.2 a1 chef
S. si scribatur servus, famulus vocitatur. 10 Hie wnicornus, a unicorne.
Hee cerva, Ace a hynde. Hic gurrex, Ace a watermowse. <fetex
Hic cervulus, Ace a hertes ealfe. Hic roonideus, Ace a redmowse.
Hic damus, Ace a dobuk. Hic cornu, indeclinabile, Ace a horne.
Hic vel hec dama, Ace a doo. Hec ungula, Ace a claw.
Hic hinnilus, Ace a fowne. 15 Hoe palare, Ace a dewlap.
Hee fferina, -ne, Ac venisyn. Hee crista.
Hie lupus, Ace a wulfe. i Hee juba, } le
Hee lupa, Ace a femel wulfe. Hie Jubar rex fuerat, jubar hoe lux, hee
Hic ursus, Ace a bere. gon colltth
Hec ursa, idem est. 20 Hee cauda, : Ace a tayle.
Hic leopardus, Ace a lebard. Hic dica,
Hee leoparda, idem est. Hic colimellus, Ace thoyse.®
Hic vulpes, Ace a ffox. Hee ceta, Ace a brystylle.
Hee simia, Ace a hape.
Hic cuniculus, Ace a conyng. 2
Hec cunicula, idem est Tag Ch NOMINA AVIUM
Hic furo, -is, Ace a foret. ‘pt. oan DOMESTICA-
Hic olefans, a olefawnt. _.,., ee RUM
Hic sirogrillus, inc | aaa “aS .
Hic scurellus, } gecur ee. 20 \ Hicgallus, Acc acok.
Hec mustela, a wesylle. Hec gallina, Ace a hene.
Hic lepus, Ace a hare. Hic pullus, Ace a cheke.
| Hie rato, Ace a ratun. Hic ancer, Ace a gander.
| Hic sorex, idem est. Hee auca, Ace a gose.
| Hic mus, Ace mowse. 35 Mic ancerulus, Ace a guslyng.
Hic vel hee talpa, Ace a molle. Hic capo, -is,
Hic castor, i Hic alle, } lle
Hee meat a brok. Hic pavo, Ace a pocokk.
| Hic taxus, Hic anas, for drake.
| Hec taxus, a hewtre.! 40 Hee anata, a heynd.
| Hie arbor taxus, hinc taxnm dico melotamw Hic columbus, i Pa dowe:
Hic fetrunctus, } Imard Iec columba,
Hie pecoides, © Sulmare, Hic pipio, Ace dowbyrd.
‘A yew-tree. is the equivalent of the Latin grillus, or
? A pricket is, properly, a buck in his a form of this word peculiar to one of
secoud year. The Prompt. Parv. has, “Pry- the provincial dialects.
ket, beest, capriolus.“ But in our text it * Thoyse, the tusk of a boar.
must be either an error for cryket, which
50

761 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 762 |
|
Tlic palumbus, 7 Hic onux, Ace a nothak. |
Hee Sainte fa mtondoa Hic castrimergus, a wodcok.
Hie ancipiter, a goshawke. Hic conturnix, Ace a curlowyr. !
Hic erodius, a gerfawkyn. Hlec qualena, Ace a quayle.
Hic nisus, Ace a sperhawke. 5 Hic milvus, Ace a potok.s
Hic capus, Acé a muskyte. Hee pica, Ace a pye.
Hic acensorius, Ace a hoby. Hic citacus, a popynjay. :
Hic aluctor, Ace a merlone. . Hic garulus, a
Hic aluctus, Ace a stayicl. nef Hic amines BBY:
Hic basterdus, Ace a laner. 10 Hee ipipa, Ace a wype.
Tie a - Hic calendula, a plover.
Hic olor, Tlic maviscus, a
Hic sturdus, } pine LY /
*, Hic campestris, a feldfare.
7 7 Me Hic pelicanus, Ace a pelycan.
NOMINA’AVIUM = noms > Hee ardea, Ace a hea
FFERORUM. Lies _ Hec Ardea, the name of a towyn.
Hic regulus, Ace a y/ “AW Ardea nomen avis, et nomen dicitur urbis.
wrene. fy Hee sigonia, Ace a storke.
Hic vultur, Ace a grype. 20 Hee ibis, Ace a snyte.
Hie pascer, Ace a sparow. Hic populus, a schevelard.®
Hic carduelis, Ace a goldfynche. Hic aspergo, a cormerawnt,
Hee alauda, Hic pitus, -ti, Ace a sethe.
Hee antl a larke. Tic onocratulus, Ace a betore,
Hee serris, 25 Hee talendiola, Ace a holste.
Hec filomena, Ace a nytynggal. Hic filicus, Ace a telle cok.
Hec alcedo, Ace a colmow.1 Hee filica, Ace a telle hen.
Hic sturnus, Ace a sterlyng. Hic perdix, Ace a partryk. 1
Hie irundo, Ace a swalow. : Hic utericius, a morcok.
Hic vespertilio, bak. 30 Hic mergus, Ace a cote.
Hec lucifuga, } —_—* Hie mergulus, Ace a dokare.6
Hic corvus, Ace a crow. Hec agredula, a tetmose.
Hic cornix, Ace a rewyn. Hie cuculus, Ace a cocow.
Hic niticorax, Ace a nyterawyn. Hic turtur, Ace a turtylle.
Hee monedula, k 35 Hic merulus, Ace a thyrstyllecok.
Hic nodus, i oa: Hic merula, idem est.
Hee ffrigella, Ace a rodok. Ific ornix. foaavtt
Hee lonefa, Ace a donek.? Hic ffesanus, } abenant
Hic bubo, Ace a howylle. Hic umnis, Ace a scheldrak.
Hee aquila, Ace a egyle. 40 Hie frigella, Ace a roke.
Hee ulula, Ace a semow. Hic selido, a kynges fychere.
1 More usually written colmose, the ‘ This is still preserved as the name
A.-S. colmase, the sea~mew. for the singing thrush in the eastern
? Donek, or dunnock, the hedge-spar- counties.
row. A hedge-sparrow is still called a “A water-fowl, the anas clypeata of —
dunnock in the north of England, and a naturalists.
doney in Northamptonshire. ° Docare, the diver, or didapper.
° A puttock, or kite.

763 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 764
Hlic icter, Ace a wodake.! Ilee poca, Ace a pyche.
Hic tradus, a wagstyrt. Hie echinus, cnet
Hie strix, -cis, Ace a schryche. Hie ectinus, } peaergne,
| Lloc grus, Ance a crane. Ilec frisgula, Ace a chevender.§
eee rostum, Ace a bylle. 5 Hie murex, Acc a breme.
Tlec ala, Ace a whynge. Ilec murenula, Ace a lampren.
Hec vola, pars quedam ale. Ilec perca, Ace a perche.
lec vola, a parte of the harmehole. Itc guttulus, Ace a gojon.
Hlec vola, the lowest parte of the fote. —_I/ec sepia, Ace a troyte.
Est vola pars palme, pars ale, pars pedis 10
ima.
Hee pluma, Ace a fedyr.
Hee penna, Ac a pen. 3
Hic cates, Ace My cane. NOMINA PISCIUM
Hoc ilum, i. medulla penne. 15 MARINORUM.
Hee aurata, Acé a sedow.9
Hee! setus, }whalle.
NOMINA PISCIUM AQUA- esate
RUM RECENCIUM ECR GB italy Meh } a sperlyn
4 Zs = 20 Hic tumalus, perlyng-
| Hic crocodolus, Ace a codlyng.” Hic sardellus, Ace a swerdfyche.
Hec murena, Ace a lamprey. ITec ostria, Ace a hoystyr.
ITic salmo, Ace samwn. Hec ostra, Ace a hoysterchelle.
Hic lucius, Ace a lus? Ostra notat testam, clausum notat ostria
Hic dentrix, Ace a pyke. 25 piscem,
| Hic lupis, idem est. Hic ausculus, Ace a muskylle.
Hic luaculus, a pykrelle.* ITee telie, -arum, idem est.
| Sic alosa, Ace a leche. Hee conca, Ace a cokylle.
| Hic ganerius, Ace a stekelyng. Hic bulbus, Ace a wylke.
| Tlic mullus, Ace a bulhyd. 30 Hic cancer, Ace a crabe.
| Tlic fundulus, Ace a flexpeng.d ITic polupus, Ace a lobstar.
Jlee spunere, -arum, Ac¢aspyrlyng. Hic conchilus, Ace a astsyche.
Tec menusa, Ilic saltilus, Ace a hobstere.
Ilic serullus,f eaten sy Tlic meganus, Ace a makrel.
Hic morus, Ace a haddok, 35 Toe allec, h
Iie capita, Ace a dar.® Hee gerra, } a heryng-
Hic turtur, Ace a gurnard. Hee ragadia, Ace a ray.
| tlic gobio, Ace a gobon.” Hie uronoscopus, a thornbak.
Tee anguilla, Ace a helle. Hie garus, Ace a schate.!°
Tiec truca, Ace a tryotht. 40 Hic morus, Ace a haddok.
| Hee rocia, Acé a roche. Hic merlinggus, Ace a merlyng.
! Wodake, the woodhock, or woodpecker. ® Dar, the dare, or, as it is now more
? The Prompt. Parv. has, “Codlynge, usually called, the dace,
fysche, morus.“ 7 Gobon, the whiting.
* A luce, or pike. ® Chevender, the cheven, or chub.
\ * A young pike. ° Sedow, the fish called a gilthead
* Flex-peng. The Latin word fundulus (sparus).
is generally interpreted a yudgeon. 1 The skate,

|
765 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 766 |
4
Hic mugilus, Acé a mowel.! Hic vermis, a worme.
Hee rosina, Ace a sehors. Hlec rana, Ave a frog.
Hic sepio, Ace a leenge.” Ilic bufo, Ace a tode.
Hic PANS, Ace a hake. Hic scorpio, Ac¢ a searpyn.
Hie squylla, 5 [lic serpens, alle maner naderes.
Hic congruus, Ace a cungur. Hic agguis, Ace a wateradder.
Hoc pecten, Ace a playse. Hic coluber, Ave a snake.
Hee ffoca, Ace a floke.* Hec vispera, Ace a berard.
Tlic molanus, Acé a melet. Hic idrus,
Tlic turbo, -is, Ace a but.* 10 Hee idra, a blyndwurme.
Hec rubella, Ace & rochet.5 Hee matrix,
— 5 Hee crest ceaa b
ip Hee rugella, athens ec cresta, Ace a angyl
Hoc rustiforum, b Hie biceps, afl Goa
Hee solia, Ace a sole. Hie jaculus, } bean ISTE
Hic canis, a dokefyche." 15 Hic calus, a slowurme.
Hee ffingia, Ace a stokfyche. Hec septipedia, a gagrylle. |
Hoc rasorium, Ace a yasowyr. Hie acacia} aycocatinnel |
Hic dolfinus, Ace a dolfyn. Re Tic basilicus eh |
.— Hee balena, Ace a_porpeyse. Hee nocticula, a glouberd.
Hie rumbus, Ace a sturgyn. 20 Hic lumbricus, Ace a tadpolle. :
Hic branchia, Ace a gylle. Hee salomandra, Ace a cryket.
Hee sqama, a sealyd fyche. Hee lacerta, Ace a newte.
Hee puma, Ace a fiyn. Hee formica,
a pysmere.
Hoc zabulum, Ace sond Hee reine 3 an
Hoc laquamen, Ance rownd. 25 Hic bibio, Ave a hoxbame.
Hee lactis, Anceé mylkere.® Hee aranea, a nedyrcopp.
Hee testa, Ance a schylle: Hic auriglus, Ace a sylverwurme.
Hee siren, Ance a mermayd. Hic multipes, Ace a tuentifot-wurme.
Hec sanguifica,
30 Hee irudo, } a leche.
Hee limax
NOMINA VERMIUM. Hee testo, } ® S4yle.
Hie draco, a dragon. Hic pulex, Ace a flee.
yoga Aye
wns ANE 5
<_ CEs, TAN ecaNs,
i
a Qyraco
! The mullet, mugit cephalus of Cuvier. ® Horn-keck appears in Palsgrave as the
? Ling, the gadus molva of Linneus. name of a fish, which is said to aes]
5 Floke, or flewke (the A.-S. floc), the also a greenback. =gar-4cr8/ Bicone
flowsder. 7 ie, the dog-ifen, F Mf Bi J
* Turbo means properly a whelk. ° Mylkere, the milt or soft roe of the
* Perhaps the ronget, or piper-fish. male fish.

767 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 768
Hic pedicus, } lowse Hoc plumbum, Ace lede.
Tlic pediculus, -* Hoc auricalcum, Ace latun.
Hic lens -dis, Ace a nyte. Hoc stagnum, Ace tynne.
Hee ascarida, a teke. Hloc stangnum, Ace a pond.
ie tarii Est aqua stans arte stagnum, stannum dic
Hee impetigo, a ryngworme. Hlec caleps, Acé stele.
Hee mica, Ace a mynte.” Hoc ferum, Ace yryn.
Hee museca, Ace a fflye, alle maner. Hoe metallum, Ace metalle.
Hic curembes, -tis, Acc a betylle. 10
Hoc eruga, Ace a wurtwurme.
a
NOMINA LAP /@e
DUM. ey)
NOMINA MUSCA- “fit#oy4 oe, 5 ope?
Fi <a 15 Hic lapis, aA
RUM. 9 fr — Lec petra, a stonne.
Hic apes, -pis, A% abee. eo J Loc saxum,
Hic asilus, Ac¢ a dyane. ; Ilic mermur, Ace a merbylstone.
Hee vespa, Ace a waspe. Hlic et hec silex, Ace a flyntstone.
Hic tabanus, Acé a humbylbee. 20 Iie seripulus, Acc a lytyl stone.
Hee sicada, A a grashoppyr. Hee margarita, Ac¢ a perylle.
Hee sinomea, Ace a hondflye. Hee Margareta, a maydyn.
| Tlic siniflex, Ance a red fflye. Margarita lapis, sed Margareta puella.
Hoc crestrum, Ace a brese. Hoc mola, Ace a mylstonne.
Hic culex, a knat. 25 Lec acates, Ace a grynstone.
Hoc gamalion, Acc a myght. Hoc cos, -tis, Ace a watstone.
Hee polumita, Ace a bude.3 Hic terebentus, Ace a thone.
| Hic stabo, Ace a scarbude.4 Hee gemma, Ace a precius stone.
| Hic papilio, Ave a butterfflye. His jaspes, Ace precioustone.
30 Tic berellus, Ace a berelleston.
q Hic saphirus, Ace a safyr.
NOMINA ME- a Hic stupelus, Ace a precius stonne.
a (Om Hic cautes, Ace a saltstone.
TALLORUM. * .
TN Hic rupes, Ace a roche of stone.
Hoc aurum, ffor eae 35 Ilec pumes, Ace a nedyrstonne.>
gold. — ew Hec pama, Ace a grapond.
Hoc  argentum, Sele ~~ [Me jacinctus, Ace a precius stone.
Ave sylver. Sl Ss ITic rudus, Ace a cobylstene.
| Toc es, eris, idem est. Hoc tapacior, Avé a stone.
} i
Hoe es, -ris, Ace brasse. 40 Tlic gagates, mal
| Loc electrum, Ace pewtyr. Hee a me Py-
Hoc cuprum, Ace copyr. Hee timeria, Ae a frestone.
1 Maked, a maggot. word is still preserved in the dialect of
| 2 A mite. See before, p.623, note 13. the eastern comnties.
3 Bude, the weovil, a small insect of * Scarbude, or scarnbude, a kind of
the beetle tribe which is destructive to beetle.
grain. Tusser, as quoted by Halliwell, * ‘The adder-stone,
speaks of ,bowd-eaten malt;“ and the

;
769 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 770
Hee magdalena, a balwyn.! ITic veruvertor, a spetcturnere.
loc egipsum, Ace a egypstone.2 Tlec andena, a handyryn.
Hic calculus, a ston in a mannys — Hoc ipegurgium, a gobard.
bleder. Hoc micatorium, a myure. }
Hic saxus, Acé a bolokstone. 5 Hee criagra, J flechehol
Hee tegula, Acé a tilstone. Hec tridex, i oS |
Hee cals, -cis, Ace a calkestone. Hec limas, a haprune. |
Hic cals, Ace a parte of the fote, Hoc spumatorium, a schomore.5 H
Pars pedis est hie cals, lapis ustus dicitur [foe qustorium, a lady).
hee cals. 10 Hoe motarium, a potstyk.
Hoc armum, Ace grawelle. Hee laxis, lys.6 ;
Hee gloria, Ac¢ a schescllestone. Hee aspiculna, } Te |
Hie carboculus, a varbokylstone. Hoc calafactorium, a schasure.7 ;
Hic petro, a chyp of a stone. Hee capana, a pothoke.
15 Hoc’ morterium, Ace a mortere.
Hoc tribulum,
TINE Hee pila: ; ® pestells.
ete s» NOMINA PERTINEN- Mh 2, ’ —
ler on ‘oc fractillum, a pepyrquerne.
} I. CIA COQUINE. Hic fractillus, a rage.
: s. Hic archimacherus, a 20 Hee patella, a pane.
¥ ne) mastercoke. . Hee scutella, a seotylle.
: Hic cocus, alle maner a Hee parapcis, -idis, a plater.
cokys. Iloc assitabulum, a sauser.
Hic lixa, a swyllere.?
Hic dapifer, a berere of mete. 25
Hic tripes, a brenlede.* Boles
Ife cacabus, ae
Hic lebes, { a cawdurne. aff me
Hoc caduum,? Pat 2)
Hee machera, a dressyngburd. 30 ss
Hec mensacula, a dressyngknyfe.
Hic urcius, Ace a bras pot. NOMINA PERTINENCIA
Hie urciolus, Ace a posnet. BOTULARIE.
Comic fryyngpan.
Hoc fricsorium, a "YYPEPs 35 Hic botularius, a botelere.
Hic discus, a dyche. Hoc dolium, Ace a tune.
Hie cratus, in . Hic cadus, a barelle.
Hee craticula, } SPSS:
Loc veru, indeclinabile, a spete.
* Perhaps the baleis, a sort of ruby. * A senllion, one who swills the dishes.
It seems to be the same word as balayn * The brandlet, or brandreth. Cf. p.
in the following passage from the metrical 660 1. 31,
romance of Richard Coer-de-Lion, 1. 2979. > i. e., a skummer,
Her baner whyt, withouten fable, Fi PS SUS eylsacie Le eee
With thre Sarezynes hedes off sablo, pers ee the frying-pan.
That wer schapen noble and large Sckasure, or shasor, a wine-cvoler.
Of balayn, both scheeld and targe. ® In Somersetshire, a broken pan is still
2 Probably gypsum, onl gene Or

771 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY, 772
Hoc mustum, A‘é moste.
. Hoc idromellum, Ace wurte.
<
EP
ebeta: :
We 10 2 [a
g Hoc ciromellum, Ace growte.5
es Hoc claretum, a clerote wyne.
Hoc nectar, Ace piment.®
Hoc onafrum, 15 Hee amurca, a lyf of wyn.
Hic uter, -ris, a flaget.! Hee servisia, alle maner ale.
Hee olla, Hee selea, Ace stale ale.
Hee lura, a mowth of a flaget. Hee ffexs, Ace dregys.
Hee lura, a nek of a flaget. Hee spuma, Ace berme.
Lura sit os utris, et collum luridus inde. 20
Hic cifus, alle manyr copys.
Hic crater, 2 7
Hee cateria, } Ance a pese. (pry wur
Hee urna, a cowpe.
Hec murra, a masowyr. 25 NOMINA PERTINENCIA
Hoc coopertorium, a... a .
Hlec clepsidra, a speget. NENT UB,
Hee urnula, a not.® Hic panatrius, a pantre.
Hee orca, Ace a cane. Hic panis, Ace a lofe.
Hic canterus, a colok.4 30 Hee quadra, a cantel of brede.
Hee amphora, a tancard.. Hec lesca,
| Hec idria, a watyrpot. Hec colirida, j a schefe of brede.
Hec ffidelia, idem est. Hoe peripsima, Ace a paryng.
Hec justa, Ace a gyste. Hec mica, Ace a crume.
Hoc vinum, alle mancr wyne. 35 Hic bolus, }
Hoc tementum, Ace strong wyne. Hic murcellus, ; a musselle.®
Hoc villum, Acé febylle wyne. Hee buccella,
Hoe fralarnum, Ace gode wyne. Est buccella cibus quantum semel accipis
Hoe tenulentum, Ace thyn wyne. Cis,
Hoc merum, Ace cler wyne. 40 Hoc salinum, 1
Hee sapa, Ace qeketh wyne. Hoc assitabulum, } reales
Hoc amuennum, Ace wyte wyne. Hoc frustrum, Ace a lumpe.
' A flask, a leathern bottle. > See before, p. 725 1. 27.
* Pece, or pese, was a common name © Seo before.
for a drinking-cup. 7 The little figure at the head of this
* Not, or nut, a sort of small vase. article is curious, as showing the usual
* Collock is the name given in the north- form of the loaf of bread at this period.
ern dialects to a large pail. ® 4. e., a morsel.

173 A PICTORIAL’ VOCABULARY. 774
Hic sal, saltis, A‘ salt.
Hoe coclear, A’ a spone. r .
Hoc candelebrum, A¢acand-
ylsteyke.
Hoc gausape, } 5 x
Hoc toral, ialbupdelothes ~~
Hee mappa, wa)
Hoe sissorium, Acéatreneh- oN
Tloce manitergium, a hand- 10 So = in a
clothe. es? ee f
Hee culingna, Ae a line- Bo 2B gat h
shark,! ey < )) [
NOMINA VESTIMEN- 15 . vy 1
TORUM. P
Hec vestis wd
Hoc vestimentum, hac clothe, T7, : a
Hoc indumentum, 20 ik aN ;
Hoc superum, Ance a pryn.” Lg agen ry ‘ |
Hoc pelicium, Ace a pylchen:* 4 i ip i} q
Hoc scapilorium, Ace a scap- nae id :
lorey. f Vi Ny Yq }
Hec capa, Ac¢ a cope. 25 BS j (Rx vy lk a
Hee sarabarda, Acé a sclav- a ANG 3\\He
anes ove i Nes)
Hoc mantile. i
Hoc auemialentny ; a mantelle. j ’ \\\ 7
Hec seclas, -cis, idem est. 30 E®
Hoc capellum, Ace a hat. aw,
Hic capellus, idem est. 3
Hic pilius, Ace a cape. Pe
Hec tena, Ace a hewd.s fer Bi | Cie
Hoc capucium, Ace a hode. 35 NE et oe
Hec armilansa, a cloke. BS fd
Hoc colobium, a tabare. GN. ER ,
Hec toga, i 4 AN i ]
Hoc er PiSReas 4 8 W
Hec supertunica, a syreote. 40 . lh
Hee roba, A*é a robe. \ /-
' Lineshark. Culigna, in good ;
Latin, signified a drinking bowl. ;
2 Pryn, a woman's smock.
> A forred outer-coat. a ‘
* Hewd, the extremity of the |
riband hanging from the bishop's ————
a // j ey
aS

15 - A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY, 776
Hee tunica, Ace a cote. :
Hoc ventrale, a corsete. NOMINA PERTINENCIA
Tee ial Ja scherte, CAMERE.
Hee su al 7 5 Hic camrius, Ance a scham-
Hec insti POCO Ein Inetey Hic et hee claret berleyne.
Hee lombesina, Ancé a paltoke.! Hoc lectum, alle maner oft beddys.
He bracce, -arum, Hoc grabatum, aseke mannys beddys.
Hoc ffemorale, ance a breke. Hoc torum, Ace a husbondes bedde
Hoc perizoma, 10 Hec toreuma, Ace a kynges bedde.*
Hic forulus, Ace a huwyng. Hoc supralectum, } Pct
Hoc lumbare, Ace a bregyrdyle. Hee tectora, ye
Hec legula, Ace a lanyr. Hoc capisterium, Ace a redele.®
Hoc subligar, Ace a styltbonde. Hoc pallium, Ace a palle.
; 7 15 Hoc tapetum, Ace a schalun.¢
Subliger est legula caligas quas sublygans Hoc coopertorium, a cowyrlythe.
alte. = i
; Hoc torall, idem est.
Hoc tibiale, a strapylle. Est toral mappa, tegmen lectoque yocatur.
| Hee caliga, Ace a hose. Hic lodex, Ace a blanket.
Hic mancus, Ace a meteyne. 20 Hoc linthiamen, Ace a schete.
Hec ffirotica, Ace a glofe.” Hoc carentivillum, a canvas.
Hic sotularis, Ace a scho. Hoc ffultrum, Ace a matras.
Hic pedulus, Ace a soke. Hee sponda, Ac a fiedyrbedde. .
Mic frractillus, Aceadag ofagowyn.? Hoe servical, Ace a pelow.
25 Hec coma, }
Hoc pecten, ) * cog,
P
Hoc caliandrum, a wulpere.’
SS,
| C
iN EBELEV eee
I . a Pe we + 8 S * ne Se
\ as s eer 7B os OF
| ’ re .7y <n in 5K ==
‘A paltock was a doublet or cloak and prevailed more or less till the latter
descending to the middle of the thigh. part of the fifteenth century.
It is a word which has recently been * The celure, or roof, of the bed.
brought into use again. * The ridel, or bed-curtain.
? For cirotica, i. e. chirotheca. It is ® See before, p. 626, note 2.
another example of the curious use of * Wulpere. The Latin word caliendrum
the /, remarked in a former note. signifies false hair — a periwig. A wul-
* The dageing, jagging, or foliating,  pere was perhaps a head-dress composed
the edges of garments, came into fashion of false hair; probably the same word as
apparently in the reign of Edward III, volupere.
51

:
177 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 778
Hoc anabatum, Acé adocer addorsum. Hoc festum, a holyday. ;
Hoc calatrale, Acé a sydedocer. Pars festum tecti et dicitur esse solenne,
Hee fforma, ; f Hoc tingnum, a spere.
Hoc schabellum, 3 * *O*M°- Hee trabecula, a wynbeme.
Hoc scannum, Ace a benche. 5 Hec trabes, a refter.
Hee antipera, Ace a screne. Ific postis, -tis, a poste.
Hoc scopum, a matte. Hoc laquiare, Ace a postbondde.
Hoc utensule, howseho.! Hoc sigillum, a barer of a rofetre.
Iloc stramentum, lyttere. Hee ffenestra, Ace a wyndow.
Hic stratus, -tus, -ui, bed 10 Hoc lucanar, a day of a wyndow.4
Hoc stratum, -ti, -to, fa a Hoc superuminare, Ace a lenterne.s
Stratus vel -tum confinguntur tibi lectum. Hee antica, Ace a porche.
Hoc epicausterium, a thuelle.® Hoc ostium, Ance a dore.
Hic caminus, a grete fyre. Hoe osticulum, Ace a hatche.
Hie caminus, a chymny. 15 Hoc limen, -nis,...
Emittens fumum tibi sit locus ipsecaminus, Hee grunda, a hespe.
Maximus atque rogus tibi dicituresse ca~ Hoc domicilium,.. .
minus. Hoc institucium, .. .
Hee fagota, a fagat. Hee cavilla, Ace a pyn.
Hoc focale, fuelle. 20 Hoc manutentum Ance a haginday.¢
Hic fax, -cis, Ance a chyde. Hoc findolum, a lache.
Hee sera, Ace a loke. A
Hee serula, Ace a clyket.
PARTES DOMUS. Hoc pesulum, Ace a hespe.
Hee paries, Ha} 25 Hee ventifica, a serene.
ic murus, a walle. Hee assia, -e, Ace a burde.
Hoc doma, -tis, a roffe. Hec pertica, Ace a pherche.
Hoc festum, a roffetre. Hoc repagulum, a barre.
Re ee eS
READ
AU NOES,
(VV) The Sota
PAABE Dea re- Hi One
Hse Hi Pr Siw Miao d
ANT eas RT SRE
a Bo | Bari ao se ARCER
BEETS i ee
O90 V2 cl)
* Househo. Perhaps this singular word * Otherwise called a bay of a window,
signifies a chamber-pot. the space between the mullions.
? Litter, the straw with which the bed * The lantern, or light from above.
was formerly made. ° A sort of wooden latch for a door is
* The pipe of the chimney. still called a haggeday in Yorkshire,

779 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 780
Hic clatravus, Ace a lache. Hie archidiaconus, Ace a arsdekyn.
Hic obex, Ance a hoke. Hic officialis, Ace a offysere.
Hic gumser, Ance a hengylle. Hic comissarius, Ace a comissere.
Hee vectes, Ance a hoke. Hlic rector, Ance a persun.
Hee area, Ancé a florthe.* 5 Hic vicarius, Ante a vecory.
Hee capedo, dicitur spacium inter Tlic presbeter,
parietes. Hic et hec sacerdos, a pryst.
Hoe scannum, Ace a benche. ITie capellanus,
Hoe focarium, Ace a hartstone. Sacris dicatus vel sacris deditus atque
Hic ffocus, idem est. 40 Sacra dans, vel dux sacer esto sacerdos.
Hie focus, Ance a hautere. Hie diaconus, Ae
Hie ffocus, Ance a fyir. Hic levita, Onley
Est altare focus, locus et focus ignis. Hie subdiaconus, a subdekyn.
Hoc reposilium, Ace a fyirbelowys. Hie acoletus, Ancé a colet.
Hee basys, the growndpelyr. 15 Ilic eworcista, Ance a benet.
Hic stilus, Ace a smal of a pelyr. Hic et hee secrista, a sekyrsteyn,
Hic stilus, Ace a poyntelle. Hic aquarius, a halywater-clerke.
Hic stilus, alle maner speche. Hic aquebachelus, idem est.
Est stilus unde puer scribit modus atqne 20 pe etl, gt Ne
loquendi; te prior, -ris, a prier.
Atque stilus media pars dicitur esse co- Vic supprior, Ance a supprier.
lumna; Hic sellerarius, a selerer.
Dico basi portare domom sellamae victis Hie subselarius, a subselerer.
ab ipsa, 5 5
Portat epistilium quibus est erecta eaten He candnicie pagclenon,
25 Mic monacus, a mongke.
Hee cobluma, Ance a pylere. Hic ffrater, a frere,
Hee fornix, } Ae ee Hic eremita, a heremyte.
Tic arcus, Hic doctor,
Hee vouta, Ace a wout. Hic instructor,
Hee cardo, Ance a durherre, 30 Hic monitor,
Hic petegogus,
NOMINA ECCLESIASTICORUM. — 7/i¢ aucior, ) SESE
ic imbutor,
| Hic papa, Ace a pape.® Hic papas,
Hic patriarca, Ace a patriark. 35 Hic didasculus,
| Hic cardinalis, Ace a cardinalle. Hic magister, -ri, -ro,

Ilic archiepiscopus, Ac’ a arsby- Doctor et instructor, monitor, petegogus,
schop, et auctor,
Hlic episcopus, Ance a byschop. Imbutor, papas, didasculus, atque magister.

Hic legatus, Ance a legat. 40 Hic legista, a legister.
Hic suffragancus, a suftrigan. Hic grammaticus, a grammaryon.
Hic decanus, Ance a dene. Hie dioleticus, ss
Hie canselarius, Hic areista, } SB exerieng
4 5 B } ler. ow 3
Hie scriba, aseorrnc® Hie sophista, a sophister.
1 A hengle, or hinge. It is a curious example of the extent to
? 4. e., a floor. which the order for erasing the pope’s
* This word had been nearly erasedin name from public documents was carried
} the MS., no doubt after the Reformation. out.

781 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY, 782 |
:
;
Hic bacularius, a bacler. Hoc septrum, regis dignitas.
Hie clericus, a clerke. Tloc solium, a kynges sete.
Hoc fiscale, a kynges porse.
Ae Hoc sistale, a kynges tax
ee 5 Hoe gazophilacium, a tresure.
erm my ff Wo. ey Wie dua, ~cis, a duke.
a al RECN Hie baro, -nis, a baron.
Seay a yt z Tlic barunculus, a baronet.! |
SN pee Hic miles -tis, a knygte.
Corey 10 Hie armiger, a squyer. |
== Tic generosus, e gentylman.
Iie scolaris, a seoler. Hie tiro, a yong knygte.
Hic teolagus, a mayster of divinite. Hic dominus, al maner lordes.
Hlic sitarius, a sumner, Hoc dominium, a lordechyppe.
Hie apparitor, } id 15 Hoc donativum, a waresun,
Hie sitator; idem sunt, Hoc corrodium, } Sve
Tlee armilla, y
PCR EN Hee nima, a sylver rodde. :
ten Abas
A of ii
ea (eg eli
ih ohigen a 20
File. + effi
es sso = a NOMINA AR-
teers atlas MORUM.
. ys l
NOMINA DOMINORUM 8 Ee arn eee Qe
Ct o o
TEMPORALIUM. tura, (pyn.
4Tie imperator, a nemperour. Hic conus, a bd)
Hoe diadema, lapis preciosus. crest. .
Hie rex, a kyng. 30 Hec galea, media producta, a galle.
Hee laurea, corona regis. Hee galea, media corrupta, a helme.
Fie wo Prides earlaut Induo me galea, galeatus duco galeam.
Hee Gaines s. cleri. Hee bombecina, a acton.?
Legis est certum clerique corona poete, Hee lassis, a palett.
Aurea rex gestat diadema vel induperator. 35 Lic tassis, a nett.
3 ¢: ) ieee?
if s \ 8 farncd&
‘ ie, ASN
PY 2 cog) \
PToe- ON N
@ 0
‘4. e, @ lesser or miner baron, Our ? The acketoun, or acton, was a sort
modern title of baronet of course came of tunic worn under the coat of mafl.
in at a much later period.

783 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 784
Hee tassis galea, hie tassis rethia monstrat. Hee daca, Ance a pollex.
Hee lorica, a habirjun. Hee petrima, Ance a gune.6
Hee suamata, a plate. Hoc telum, avdente
Ifec brachialia, Ance a brasere. Hoc pilum, ; i
Hee larva, Ace a visere. 5 Hee tela, -e, Ance a webe.
Hee larva, Ace a dewylle.! Nos vestit tela, volitant per prelia tela.
Hee larva, Ace a selerelle.® Hee balista, Ace a arowblaste.
Larva fugit volucres, faciem tegit, est quo- Hoc mustile,
que demon, Hoc jaculum, i avdarte;
Hic torax, Ace a brystbone. 10 Hee sestus, Ace a pavis.7
Hic torax, Acé a brystplate. Hee parma, Auce a bokeler.
flec femoralia, Ace a quischens.3 Hee umbo, Ance a bosbokelere.
Hee tibialia, Ace a legarnes. Hoc mangnalium, Ance a gyn.
Hic gladius, Ace a swerd. Ilec brida, Ace a trappe.
Hic anceps, Ace a towhand swerd. 15 Jloc tribucetum, Ance a pytfalle.
Hee gesa, Ace a gysyryne.4 Hee ffalaa, Ace a lumpe of a walle.
Non amat ille Jhesum qui fert ad prelia Hoc propinaculum, Ace a bretayge.8
apse. Hoc superfossorium, a drawtebryge.
Hee spata, Ace a pleyend swerd. Hee listia, a castylledyche.
Hee sica, Ace a baselard. 20
Hee soliferia, Ace a fauschune.
IIec clava, Ace a mase. x
Clava ferit, clavis aperit, clavus duojungit. © NOMINA BLADO- “f ie
Hic armituriun, Ace a dagar. RUM ET ARBO- NS
Hic dagardus, idem est. 25 RUM. . if
Hec pugio, -onis, idem est. “, a 163.
Hee funda, Ace a sclyng. Hee seges, 8°. x
Hoc fustibulum, a handsclyng. Tloc satum, | / i
Hee babrilla, Ace a dongbabylle. Hoc bladum,\ Af
5 , corne. | I
Hie arcus, -cus, -i, Ace a bow. 30 Hoc granum, fis
Hee sagista, Ace a arow. Hoc fruges, | eo
Hee catapulta, a brode arow. Hic messis,
ee sab co Gl My Dum seritur seges, sata dum radisibus
Hee ceculicula, a sparke. herent,
Hee ffudes,® a pikestafe. 35 Blada virore virent, granaria grana reser-
Fustes fetate poterint sudes bene dici. vant;
Tec ffustis, Ace a batte. Fruges dum fruimur, sunt messes quando
Hic baculus, Ac¢ alle maner stavis. metantur.
Tec lancea, An*é a spere. Hoc frumentum, Ace whete.
Tlec asta, Ancé a schafte. 40 Hoc triticum, idem est.
Hoc scutum, Rncclee Hoc essaticum, Ance bere.®
Hoe cliphium, } parses. Hoc ordium, Ance harly.
* 4. e, a devil, or demon; a hobgoblin. ° This is the first occurrence of the gun
? This means apparently a scarecrow. among weapons in these vocabularies.
* More nsually called cusses, the pieces 7 The pavis was a large shield.
of armour which protected the thighs. ® ‘The bretasche, or parapet.
* See before, p. 653 1. 29, ® Bere, a kind of barley.
* Sic, for sudes.

785 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 786 |
|
Hee siligo, : Hic sinolus,
Hoe Phe Ance rye. rimouaieaee ta schybbolle :
Hee avena, Ance hotys. Hoe petrocillum, Ance persely.
Hee faba, Ace a bene. Ilec salgea, Ancé sawge. |
Hec pisa, Ace a pese. 5 Loc lilium, Ancé a lylly. |
Hee viscia, Ace a feche.! Hee columbina, Ance a columbyn.
Iloc viscium, Ace a wyse. Hee violeta, Ance a violet.
Si comedes visciam non est viscium tibi Hoc Atel ley Ance idem est. :
magnum ; Hic isopus, Ance isopp. :
A viscio -as horum discendet utrumqne. 10 //ec ditanus, Ace detany.
RP Hee seladonia, a seladony.
pee Mein i Ae Hee igromonia, a ygromony.
4 y . Hee urtica, Ance a netylle.
Radix, festuca, conculnio, nodus, arista, Hie anagalidos, Ance netyllesede.
Granum cum palia fer sufficit sit quequs 15 Ive paradilla, Ance a doke.
+ Berita, Hee secuta, Ance a humlok.
Sunt partes messis firma tellure manentes, 7 en roe morelle. {
Ilee seliqua, Ace a pescodde. Hoe solsequium, Ance a rode. /
Hee filupra, Ance a bencodde. Hee pervica, Ance a perwynke. :
Hlic manipulus, a handfulle. 20 Hee malvia, Ance a hok.5
Hic arcomus, Ance a stathele. Hee lancea, Ance a robworte.® ;
Hoe ffenum, Ancé hey. 7 Ilec buglossa, Ace lange-de-befe.
Hoc ffenile, Ace a heystakke. Tec ebula, Ace a wallewurte.7
Hee garba, Hoc bigustrum, Ace a prymrose,
Hee merges, fae a schefe, 25 Hoc ligustrum, Ace a cowyslepe.
Hee gelima, Hee rosa, Ace a rose
Ilec congelima, Ance a schokke.2 Hoc fragrum, Ace a strawbery.
Toc pabulum, Ance fo- 4 Ilee mentica, Acé a mynte.
dyr. \ 5 Hic papillus, Ace a heyoffe.®
Hoe olus, -ris, Ance : ie 30 Hee eruca, Ace a schyulok.9
wurtes, 4X Ye Hee eruca, Ance a carlok.
Hee betana, Ance bet- VA y \ Hee ruta, Ace rew.
any. ‘ r Hee frallax, Ace madyr.
Hee betate, -tes, Ace bs ] fa Hoc venenum, Ace a wede.
bettes. 35 Hee plantago, Ace weybrede.
Hee borago, -nis, Acco soe iyo Hec maguderis, a calstok.
broges.® Hoc olusculum, a wurtplant.
Iloc porrum, Ace a £4 Hie cirpus, Ancé a roysche.
leke. dil u Hic cucumer, Acé a flage.
Iloc sepe, indeclinabile, a hunyn. 40 Ilec papirus, Ané a bolroysche.
Porri vel sepe fertur bulbus capud esse.  Jfoc feneculum, Ance a ficnelle.
Hoe allium, Ance garleke. Ilie crocus, Ance safryn.
‘a. e, a vetch. ' © Perhaps the plant adders tongue, called
2 A shock, at the present day in the in Latin lancea Christi.
north, is twelve sheaves of corn. 7 Wall-wort.
* Broges, i. e. borage. ® Hayhofe, or ground-ivy.
* A chibbal, or small onior. * Rocket, the reseda of botanists.
* The holyhock.

787 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 788
'
Hee zizania, Ance a drawke.! &\
Hee artimatia, Ance wodrofe. >)
Hee seniglossa, An‘ hertestunge. & cl @& \ >
Hee mandracora, Ancé a mandrak. tei
Hoc aspium, Ancé a gresse. 5 cop
Hee salmea, Ane a pepyrgresse. Sf. fi
Hoc anisum, Ancé a culrayge.
Hee dragansia, Ance a dragauns.
Hoc meretrum, Ance ffenyllesede.
Hee camamilla, Ancé a manga 10 NOMINA ESSCARUM.
Hoc papaver, -ris, Ance a papy- Hoc prandium, Yi, cee
Hee samina, Ancé a saveryn.* Hoc epulum, } : .
Hic jusquianus, Ance a hennebane. — Hic cibus,
Hoc jurbarium, Ance a silfgrene.® Hee esca, } Ane mete.
Hee letusa, Ance letuse. 15 Hee daps,
“Hic cardo, -is, Ance a nettille. Hoe jantaculum, Ance a dynere.
Hee avencia, Ancé a avans, Hee cena, Ancé a soper.
Hec vervene, Ancé vermyne. Hoc obsenium, Ancé a rryresoper.
Hec menoloca, Ance a bothun.* Hoc alleum, Ance garleke.
Hic suctus, Ance a juse. 20 Hic victus, -tus, -tui, }
Hee locusta, Ance ? sokylblome.® Hoc victuale, Pncalysefode:
Hee arundo, -nis, dd Hoc pulmentorium, Ancé a pulment.
Hec canna, ba hoe Est cibus et semen pulmentum dicitur
Hee carex, Ance a sege. - . e886,
Hec rapa, Ance a neppe.6 95 At cibus anidemssont pulmentaria dicta.
Hoc colitropium, a paratory. Hoc edulium, Ancé sowylle.'!
Hec conseria, Ance a wyld fr... Hic repastus, -tus, -tui, Ance mele.
Hoc morsuspoli, a schykynw ...7 Hic panis, Ance brede.
Hee lentige, a nedmet.8 j Hic artocopus, Ance a A
Hee eufrasia, Ance a heufrasy ...°30 symnelle. Hee
Hoe lollium, } Anee Poreie Hee placencia, Ance lores
Hoc git, indeclinabile, are a payman.” Lantecop)
Hoc pulmentum, benys and pese. Hoe labum, the wa- ad
| Hoc cirpillum, Ance a pellek.! Hoc libellum,) stelle. &
Hee silago, Ance wyld rye. 35 Hee frugia, Ancé fres-
brede,
Hicpanis subverucius,amelerescake.'*
‘ This word is still preserved in the ° Hyebright (euphrasia officinalis).
dialects of the Eastern counties, where it ° Pellek, a name for wild-tlyme, or,
is applied to a plant resembling darnell. as it is popularly called in some parts,
? Perhaps the savin-tree (juniperus sa- _ladies’ bedstraw.
| bina). ' See before, p. 661 1. 9.
* The honseleek. * 4, ¢., painmain, See before, p. 657 1. 26.
* A button, or bud? 1 A miller’s cake. Perhaps this name
® Sokyl-blome, perhaps the honey-suckle. alludes to the common report that the
® Catmint, or nep (nepeta cataria). miller always stole the flour from his
7 4. ¢, chicken-wort. customers to make his cakes, which were
° Nedmete, perhaps the lentil, a small baked on the sly. Seo The Reve's Tale
kind of pulse. in Chaucer,

789 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 790 |
Tec nebula. wafr Foc pomum, Ane a nappelle. :
Hee gafra, } g Wwatrun- Hoc pirum, Ancé a pere.
Hoc calenum, Ance a flyrmele.t Tloc volemum, Ance a wardyn. :
Hoc vitalium, Ance charlett.? Hoc perapsima, An’? a paryng.
Hic artocacius, Ancée a flawne. 5 Hee pulpa, Ane a meyte.
Hec artocria, Ance a tartelat. Hee arula, Ane a eroke.® ]
Hic artocrius, Ancé a pye. Tolle peripsima, post pete pulpam, eet
Sie: laren nis arulam. ]
Hoc ae } Ance potage. Hoc sinapium, Ance mustarde. ]
Hoc polenta, Ance grewelle. 10 Salgia, sirpillum, piper, alia, sal, petro-
Hoc laganum, Ance a pancake. Ae cillum, |
Tip aplauda, Ance a cawdelle. Ex hiis sit salsa, non est sentencia falsa. |
Hoc adopatum, Ance brues. Hic nuclius, a not.
Hee carbonella, Ancée a colepe.8 Hic nucleus, Ance kyrnelle. |
Hec pepissa, Ance fat fleyche. 15 /
Hoc consisum, Ance alle maner sew. !
Hoc sepelatum, An‘¢ a sew. @\ ts
Hec pereta, Ance leke-potage. t
Hoc omentum, Ance a womclotte.* = {
Hoc extum 20 \ =
Hoc esmium, } Ance a Wye S i \\ :
Hoc brodium, Ance a brothe. ( il 3
Hoc frerculum, Ance a mese. oe Gara
Hoc fferculum, a salt stole. { \
Fercula nos faciant, prelatos fercula portant. 25
tee Sais NOMINA INFIRMITATUM.
Hoc omasum, fan a podyng.
Hoc tucetum, Hec puscula, Ance a whele,
Hee ulia, Ance a sawsyrlyng.® Hoc ulcus, ~ceris, Ance a byle.
Hoc obsoniofgrus, a jusselle. 30 Hee scabies, -ei, Ance a scabbe.
Hec assa, Ance a rost mete. Hee impetigo, Ance a tesyng.”
Hoc lactatum, 2. t Hec veruca, Ance a werte.
Hoc balductum, } (OE Hee glabra, Ance a scalle.
Hee perna, Ance a flyk of bacun. Hec macula, Ance a spote.
Hee promulada, Ante grovy. 35 Hec lentecula, Ance a frekyn.
Hoc ovum, Ance a hey. Hee lepra, Ance a mesellerye.
Hoc albumen, Ance the whyte of the Zee febris, Ance a fewer.
hey. Hee utorica, Ance the chawndyse.
Hic vitellus, Ance a gelke. Hic spasmus, Anc¢ the crampe.
Tres partes ovi, albumen, testa, vitellus. 40 Hic tussis, Ance the cowe.®
Hee pulp, Anve the brawn of abore, ee eatecis, ~ce, Ance a seunnyng.”
* Fyrmele, perhaps frumity, or furmity. * Arula is explained in the Anglo-Saxon
2A dish made of minced pork. vocabularies as meaning a fire-pan, or vessel
° A collop, or slice of meat, or rasher for holding lighted charcoal.
of bacon, broiled. 7 An old name for a ring-worm.
* The wombelout was properly the caul * Cowe, a congh. This shows the old
which envelopes the intestines. way of pronouncing the word.
* A sausage. ° A disease of the heart.

791 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 792
Hic catarus, Ancé a pore.! Hee regina, Pi 2
Hee reuma, Ance a chynge. Ancé a quene. *S es.
Hee gutta, Ance the gowte. Hee duxissa, y wf
Hee eatin Ance the flyx. Ance a dukes.
Nominativo clunucus, -ca, -cum, Ace 5 Hee cometissa, a
| berede.? Aneéa cometas. (4) roy) \W
| Hic gibbus, Ance a wenne. Hee baronissa,® *°8*\= AIRS
Hee cardia, Ance a cardiakylle. An¢éa baronys. A
Ilec squacia, Ance a queynose.* Hee domina, Ance alle maner lady.
Hic cancer, Ance a cankyr. 10 Hec psraannia, Ancée a barowwoman,
Hee idrepia, Ance the dropsy. Hee damicella, Ance a damselle.
Hee antrax, Ancé a felun bleyn.t Tee fflammia, ivrcemee
Hee porigo, Ance pokkys. Hoe era Oe acne ee
Hec serpedo, Ancé a tetere. Hoc reticulum, Ancée a calle.
Hee paucitas, Anc¢ a cattes here.s 15 Hoc splimter, Ance a pynne.
‘Hie morbus caducus, the fallynevylle. Lec vitta, Ance a felet.
Hic paraliticus, Ace the palsey. Hoe crinale, Ance a herebond.
Hie mutulatus, Ance a mayn.® Hee tricatura, Ance a tresewyr.?
Hoe vulnus, ede IIoc monile, Ance a broche.
Hee plaga, } . 20 Hic limbus, Ance a rebant.
| Hic sicatrix, Ance a old wownde. Hoc peplum, Ance a wympylle.
Tec peruda, Ance a keybe hele. Hoc teare, -ris, Ance a bonet.
Hee vibex, Ance a strype.7 Tic anulus, Ance a ryng.
Hee anggrena, Ance dede fleyche. Hoc certum, Ancé a garlond.
Hee insanies, Ance a whele. 25 Hee febula, Ance a lase.
Hoc epilema, -tis, Ancé a playster. Hoc calamustrum, a quiver.
Hec abatissa, Ance a abeyse.
Hee priorissa, Ance a pryoryse.
Hee monialis, Ance a none.
a 30 Hee presbeterissa, ti fi
SNe ITec sacerdotissa, j pane ee
} Brg \ Hie sacerdotulus, Anc¢ a prestes sun.
aes Tec sacerdotula, Ancé a_prestes
} dowtyr.
i 35 Hee uxor,
Te } a wyfe.
| NOMINA MULIERUM CUM SUIS pee fam
INSTRUMENTIS. Tee mation, } ® Woman.
Hee imperatrix, Ance a hempryse. Hee ustrinatrix, a kylme wyfe.
40 Lec deciccatrix, idem est.
Toc ustrinum, Ance a kylme.
1 A pose, or cold in the head. 7 Strype. The Nomenelator, a vocabulary
? Berede, perhaps bed-rid. printed in 1585, explains vibew by ,the
* The qninsy. marke of a blowe or stripe remaining in
* A whitlow. the fleshe blacke and blewe.“
° Huloet has, “Cattes-heere, otherwyse ®° A kerchief.
called a felon, furwnculus.“ ° The tressure, or arrangement of the
© i.e, a maim, hair.
52

"193 ‘A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 794
Hoc fulicium, Ance Hee ffassia, Ance credylbond.
a hayyr. ia Hee mammus,
- Hecandrochia, Ance © (\ Hee mamillo, Ance pappe.
a deyry. Hoe uber, -ris,
Hie casius, Ance 5 Hie panniculis, Ance a clowte,
schese. Hee virgo, Ance vergyn.
Hie tirus, Ancenyw Hee puella, Ance maydyn.
schese. Hee meretrix, Ance hore.
Hoc butirum, Ance * ahs 1 Hee materffemilias, a hoswyf. :
botyr. 10 Hee vedua, Ance a wedow. |
Hoc mulsum, Ance the wyte of botyr. Hee rustica, a fyldwyfe. ;
Hoc serum, Ancé the whey of chese. Hee pandoxatrix, a browstere.
Sit liquor hoo sernm, defandat casiusipsum. Yee filatrize, Ance a spynnere.
Hoc tolustrum, Ance besning.? Hec colus, Ance a dysestafe. 1
Hee balducta, 15 Mic fusus, Ance a spyndylle. |
Hoe coagulum, i a crud or a posset. Hee pelticula, Ance i re |
Hoe occigalum, Ance a sowyr mylke. Lec nebryda, idem est.
Hic quactus, Ance creme. Hoc vertebrum, Ancé a aworowylle.®
Hoc lacticium, Ance wyte mete. Hoe girgillum, Ance a bladys. |
Hec sissma, Ance a schesfatte. 20 Hoe alabrum, Ver. 1
Hoc valatorium, Ance a scharne.® Hoc traale, -is, } ee Oe
Hoc coagulatorium, a scharnstafe.
Hoc multrum, Ance a mylkepayle. Y d
Hoc multrale, Ance the tyn of the . » WiBAND
mylke.* 25 tH] LRG Rs 2,
Hie mulsor, Ance a mylker. (a : TEMES
Hoc lac, Ance mylke. aay Or SONS
Hoc androchiatorium, Anceadeyry, _A— SN
Hee aucionatrix, Ance a hoxter. 0 o€3G i) PRS SS >
Hee virago, a sturdy qwene, 30}, girl ftosy
Hee armifodrita, Ané a scrate.® “4 ,
Hee mater, dyr.
Hee genetrix, } a Hic virgillus, a yerwyndylleblad.
Hee nutrix, Ance a norys. Hic globus, Ance a clew.
Hec cunia, dyll 35 Hic glomicellus, idem est.
Hoc cunabilum, } sree Hec glomeracio, a hep of threde.
2 Tec congeries, Ance a hep of stonys.
— Congeries lapidum tibi sit, giomeracio fili.
YY VARA Hoc ffilum, Ance threde.
PINaaAl 40 Hec lotrex, Ance a lavundare.
Hoc locium, Ance ley and nettyng.
ieee Hoc smigma, -tis, Ance a soppe.’
‘The inscription to this diagram is
written at the edge of the paper and partly 3 A churn.
lost, but it was evidently casius, i. e., * i.e, a milk-can,
cheese. * A hermaphrodite. See before, p. 6951. 2.
? Besning, the first milk, now called the ® A whirle, or round piece of wood put
beastings. The Latin word should be co- on the spindle of the spinning-wheel,
lustrum. 7 i. @, soap,

795 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 796
Hoc stigma, Ance the dere yn aman- —aryum, campus, ager, rus, sic diversificatur;
nys_ hede.t Dum seritur sit ager, et semen conditar illo;
Smigma capud mundat, stigma dolore gra- | Campus dicatur dum fructibus expoliatur ;
vat. Messibus est arvum tectum flore vel erbis,
oc sulfur, Ance brynston. 5 Incultum rus est, veluti sunt pascua silve,
Hee feratorium, ) a batylledore. Hee carucata, Ance plowlode.
Hoc pecten, § Hee bovata, a hoxgangyn lond.
Hee textrix, Ance a webster. Hee acra, Ancé a akyr lond.
Hec matatrix, Ance a hokylster. Hee virgata, Ance a eryd lond.
Hec mataxa, Ane a hekylle. 10 Hic selis, -is, Ance a ryggyd lond.
ITec excudia, Ance a sungyllestok.? Hic sulcus, for
Hee excudiatorium, Ance a sungylle- Hee lira, } orgy:
hand. Hee sulcacio, Ance a balkyng.
Hee stupa, Ance herdys. Hee fforeta, Ance a hedlond.
Hee narpa, Ance schewys. 15 Hec amsages, Ance a but of lond.
Hoc rupeste, a repyllestok.3 Hoc pratum, Ance a medow.
Hoe asperum, Ance a top of lyne. Hoc marescum, Ancé a merche.
Hic limphus, a stryke of lyne. Hoc archifenium, fe
Hee costa, Ance a rybbe. Hoc croftum, } B) Crore:
Hoc linum, Ance fflax. 20 Hic ortus, -ti, Ance a gerd.
Hee sutrix, Ance a sewer. Hic ortus, -tus, -ui, a spryngyng.
Hec brasiatrix, a brewster. Ortus, -ta, -tum, Ance spryngyng.
Hee contrix, a barbowres wyfe. Ortus origo datur, per quartam dum va-
Hec pronuba, a bawstrop.t riatur ;
Hec obstetrix, a mydwyfe. 25 Quo crescunt herbe locus est ortusque
Hec pectrix, -cis, a cemster.5 = secunde;
Hee carminatric, idem est. Post ortum periit infantulus ortus in orto.
Hoc erbarium, Ancée a herbar.
NOMINA TERRARUM. Hoc virgultum, Ance a holt.
Hec terra, -e, 30 Hic mons, -tis, Ance a hylle. °
Hec ruus, -i, b | Ance the fyld. Hee collis, Ance a lytylle hylle.
| Hoc arvum, -i, Hic agger, idem est.
Loc campum, -i,
Seeavre 4 Ne ye SN
oo ane d ol ce grin i, ea
1 A mark of disgrace, by burning, &c. ts another name for the same implement.
on the head. * Repylle-stok, au implement for clean-
? A swingle-stock, a wooden implement ing flax.
for beating flax or hemp, to séparate the * See before, p. 695 1. 18.
outer coating from the fibre. Swingle-hand ’ A female who combs, a kembster.

797 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 798 |
Hoc montanun, rete MieAte Hee rypa, Ancé a banke.
Ilic alpes, i peg Sl Ne Hic et hec mergo, idem est.
Distant montana sic, alpes, collis, etageer;  Pavitis mergo, maris litus, sic ripa fluentis,
Designant magnum cumulum terre duo Hoe senum, Ancée a modyngstrete.
prima, 5 Hec gleba, Ance a clote.
Alteria bina notant parvum cumulum quo- — JJo¢ cosidium, Ance a torsy.4
a te Hee solitudo, a wyldernys.
Hee vallis, Ance a wale. Hec meta, Ante a butte.
Hee palis, Ance a more. Hee lapifodina,
Hee bts Ance a fenne. 10 Toc suctieagion, i a stonquarelle.
Hee via, Ance a wey. Hee aurifodina, a goldquarelle.
Hec platea, a hye wey. Hee argentifodina, a sylverquarelle,
Hic vicus, Ance a strete. Hee sertis, Ance a sandbedde,
Hee trama, Hee insula, Anc¢ a hylyn of the see.
Hee orbita, bane a paytt. 15 Hee ceclas, idem est.
Hee semita, Hec mediamnis, a frechewater-dyk.
‘Trama parva via tibi sit tranversa per Hee cateracta, Ance a wey of hewyn.
aT Hee cateracta, An*é a wyndowe. 1
Hee venella, Ance a lane. Est cateracta via dicitur celique fenistra.
Hee specula, a totynghylle.* 20 Hic traco, Ance a hollewey.
Hie fumus, Ance smoke. Hic bivius,
Hic trivius, a gateschedelle.
LP Hie quatrivius
Za am He sualinedy
(Gz 25 Hee caverna, a denne.
fj (Za Hee cripa,
AL! Hoc volutabrum, Ance a selot.s
ey Hic et hec et hoc specus, Ance a wel-
RN bryng.®
uf, we , 30 Hic scrobs, Ance a swynwrotyng.
NOMINA AQUARUM.
Hoe fimarium, Hoc mare,
Hoc sterculinium, { a muckelle.2 Hoc pelagus, Ance the see. :
Hoe sabulum, Ance sonde. 35 Iloc equor,
ees arema, Ance gravelle. Hoc salum, Ancé saltwater.
Hoc argillum, Hee aqua:
Hee argilla, } Ance clay. Hee ee dns ce : :
Hic linus, Ance a sclott.? Hee limpha, \ rset
Hoc fossatum, a scdyke. 40 Hee unda,
‘To tote was to spy, or watch. A * Torsy. Perhaps this is a blunder for
toting-hill would be a mound, or hill, in corsy, and means a causeway.
a prominent position, raised or occupied 5 Volutabrum is explained in the No-
for watching. menclator, ,A wallowing place for cattell,
? A muck-hill, or dunghill. bores, and swine.“ A wide ditch is still
* Sclott. Sticky clay is still called slot called a slot in Devonshire.
in Lincolnshire. ° Welbryng. This word, to judge by
the Latin equivalent, must mean a cave.

| 799 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY, 800
| Lec cloaca, An‘é a prevy.
tyJgey
Gye WEE a Wane lve
GP ie 0 POO)
Hee aqua, Ancé sorow. ‘
Hee aqua, Ancé lernyng. Hee catacumba, idem est.
Hee aqua, Ance folke. 15 Hee pissina, Ance a wayir.
_ Est aqua qua fruimur doetrina, dolor, po- — Z79¢ meandrum, Ance a stynkyng
pulnsque. pytt.
Hee ammis, Ancé frechewater. Hee stilla,
Hee pluvia, Ance reyn. Hec gutta, i a drope.
1 g a
Hee nix, Ance snow. 20 Foc ‘stellocidum, Ance a howsegoter.
Hoc gelu, Ancé a forst. Hoc stillicidium, Ance a spowte.
Hee pruina, Ancé a horeforst. Hie austrus, -us, -ui, Ance a drawte.
Hic ros, -ris, Ance a dew. Hec sorbicio, Ance a spyung.
Hee glacies, -ei, Ance hyse. Hee catadurpa, Ance a cundythe.
Hee grando, -is, Ancé a hayle. 25 Tee ledonis, Ance a sulse.”
Hec fossa, Hee malma, a growndheve.
Hee fovia, Wrcchandyle Hic cataclismus, Ance Noys flode.
yke. - :
Hee cavea, Ilic portus, -tus, -tui, Ance a hawyn.
Hee antra, a oF Ilie cataclismus, Anc¢ helle, ut patet
| Ifc fons, -tis, F er versus,
j Ance a welle. Ors prin tibi delivium, baratrique pro-
| Hee scatebra, } 4 Te fandum.
Hee scatarigo, . (we eae
q erep
EY toi nen, msl 35 NOMINA PLANETORUM.
Ance a tum- £41 i H : LToe celum,
relle. cH Iie polus, } Ance IRE
Hoc stagnum, } ® 1 Ilic paradisus, Ance paradyse.
Ana ponde. Lfic sol, } Anna a
Hec lacuna, Ant® a playche of water. 40 /lic phebus, oe
Hoc vadum, Ante a wadth.! fic clipsis, the clyppes of the sunne.
Hic rivus, Ance a revyr. Ilec luna, barroel
Iie rivulus, Ance a lake. Tlec phede, } - we
ITic gurges, -tis, Hoc pleniluniun, Ance fulmone.
Hoe rudor, a gotyr. 45 IIec neomenia, Ance a newmone.
Hee rudor,
* 4. e, a place you can wade through, ? Sulse, the flow of the sea-tide,
a ford,

801 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 802
Hic aier, | Hic tonitrus, Ance thwndur.
Hee aera, . ne Iloc fulmen, Ance lytenyng.
Hic ether, ( tho wethyr. Hoc fulgur, idem est.
Hec ethera, _, lic rogus,
Tlic ventus, 5 Hie ignis, Ance fyre,
Hee aura, } git vig Tic focus,
Hee nubes, Hic iems, Vin
Hoe radi, a clowde, Hee stall ee ne
Tlee nubula, Hee quadragesima, Ance lenten.
Hee stella, 10 Hee iris, Ance a reynbowe.
Hoc astrum, \ Ance alice maner Ilec ira, Ance wrethe.
Hoc sidus, sterres. Iris res mira, sed non est iris in fra.
Hic canis, Hic ecto, -is, vow in aera respon-
Hic esperes, Ance hewynsterre, dens.
Hic jubiter, a daysterre. 15 Tee ver, -ris, the tyme gruyng.
Hee esta, Ance somer.
. Hee filandra, a gossummer.

7 I\ , 4 Solsticium estivale, Ance mydsomer.
~~ Ror | 20 Hic autumnus, Ance hervyst.
bares aac — Tlic infernus, ~i,
ae o.. Sao ic tartarus, ~i,

ae g Hic oreus, ~i, Ance helle.
a fy ITec jehenna, -e,
+ Be Tee avernus, -i.
me GRD 4 25 a; oe
APEX 2 “° Hic antepos, 2 ad
ina Ilee lamea, j LES Kies.
Tlic 7? | NOMINA DOMORUM.
. 7 idem sunt. .
Hic lucifer, JIoc monasterium, Ance a mynster.
Tlic saturnus, a pestlens planyt. 30 pyo¢ eclesia,
Tie unus, Ancé a lodsman. Hoe templum, Ance a kyrke.
Hic annus, Ancé a gere. Hee baselica,
Hic mensis, Ancé a monythe.
Hee quindena, Ance a fortenyte, j
Hee pica, 35 IN
Hee ebdomeda, Anse aawake. i ate
Tic vel hee dies, -ei, Ance a day. AAS C
Toe diliculum, Ancé a mornyng. “NYAS PAA, ‘\
Hie meredies, Ance a mydday. } ! Chins
Hec nox, -tis, Ance a nythe. 40 p € eh [al
Equinoxium, Ance mydnythe, = 4 lat
Iloc erepusculum, é y ‘a
Hoc vesper, -eris, ba hewyntyde. G EY “hy
Hoc vesperum, Ance a hewynsong- vod ‘s [7]
tyde, 45 4 \\ Go)
Hoe ignitegium, Ance curfew. Pla” ed
Foc intempestum, Ancé mydnythe. HANSA 8 o¢ € (as
Hie biseatus, a lepegere. -. i fia

803 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 804
Hee capella, Ance a schapelle. Hoc galinarium, a hencote.
Hoe oe ali Vike aT Hoc tigurium, Ance a hoywl.!
Hoe vestibulum, 7 Hoc magale, Ance a lodge.
Hoe campanile, Ance a bellehowse. Hoe stabulum, Ance a stabylle.
| Hoe atrium, 5 Iloc bostar, -aris, Ance a scbepyn.
Tec aula, } Ance a halle. Hic carcer, Ance a peeaiatea
Hoc atrium, a kyrkegerde. Hoc pretorium, Ance a motehalle.
Atria die aulas, eadem sumitoria dicas. Hoc toloneum, Ance a tolbothe.
Hee camera, , Hoc lupaner,
Hee simina, { 10 Hee fornia, ia horehowse.
Hic talamus, Ance a schambyr. Hoe prostibulum,
Hee conta ( Hoe lanifisium, a wulhowse.
Hee conclave, Hoc tabernaculum, a tabernakyl.
Hoc solarium, Ance a solere. Hee foruca, c
_Hoc penu, indeclinabile, Ance a seler. 15 Hee laterrina, ; o) Bren ye
Hoc cubile, Ance a cowche. Hoc temtorium, Ance a...
Hee cubicila, Ance a kenelle. Hoc pandocsatorium, a bry whowse.
Hec domus,) Ane alle maner of Joc pistrinum, Ance a bakehowse.
Hee edes, i howse. Hoe ustrinum, a ,
fre veasa: i ics see... 20 Hoe torale, { a kylinhowse.
Hee casula, 7 Hec scola, } yc’ Hee
Hec casula, Ance a schesepylle. Hoc studium, =
Dico domum parvam casulam tibi dimi- Hee sella, Ane a selle.
nutivum, Hoc predium, Ance a maner.
Ac indumentum dicatur presbeterale. 25 Hee salina, An¢é a saltcote.
Hoc dormitorium, Ancée a dorter. Hoc diversorium, jnee 4 hyn
Hoc larduarium, Ance a lardyr. Hoe hospicium, } eS
Hee cansella, ; Hee opella, Ante a schoppe.
Hoe cansellum, 5 * selleauvaltles Hoc gazafilacium, a treserhouse,
Hee panatria, Ance a pantyr. 30
ee pt, Ane 2 botry. NOMINA ARTIFICIUM CUM
ma Fee mie } a spenyse. SUIS INSTRUMENTIS.
Hee epoteca, Hie cultor,
Hee coquina, en 35 Hic et hec agricola, } # londtyllere.
Hee pompina, j seyonon: ic nauta,
Hee affina, Ance a werkhowse. Hic qaane @ diye.
Hee tabarna, Hic proreta, Ance a stereman.
Hee cauponn Ance a taverne. Hic naucherus, a pursberer.
Hee pila, 40 Hee prora, Ance a forstanyg.
Hoc granatorium, Hee puppis, Ange the in parti?
Hoe granarium, ba garnyr. Hee ratis, Ance the schyppes syde,
Hoc orium, Ance a beyrne. Hee carina, Ancé a holle.
Hoe porcatorium, Ance a hogstye.
1 A hovel. not sure that I have read them quite
| * The reading of these words is some- correctly.
what doubtful in the manuscript, and I am

:
805 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 806 .
Prora prior navis pars dicitur, ultima puppis, | Hoc armamentum, a hal takylle.? ;
Sic latus esse ratem, ventrem dicitur esse Hee saburra, Ance a lastage. :
caninamy ITic malus, Ance a mast. :
Toc naulum, Ane a schyppes tolle. lie _paterfamilias,
Tec antemnis, a hedrope. 5 Hie maritus, ; eghuehands
Iie parastes, Ancé a cabylle. Hic tantellus, Ancé a congyn.
Tlic rudens, -tis, Ancé a seyllerope. lic vir,
Hec supera, -eris, Ancéaseyllebonde. Lic vel hec homo, } aan: :
Hoc velum, Ance a seylle. Hic omunculus, Ance a duorow.® -
Tic cherucus, Ancé a fanne. 10 Hic membrarius, a parchmeare.
Hoc cachesium, Ance a seylgerde. Hic servus,
Tec ancora, Ance a ankyr. Ile famulus, |
Hoc podrum, Ance a helme. Tic verna, a servante.
Hic remex, Ance a rodyr. Hic satrapa, \
Hoc amplustrum, idem est. 15 Hoe maneipium,
Hic porticulus, Ance a maylat. Hic garcio, Ance a knafe.
Iie abbestus, Ance a fyirstone. ITic vel hee seurra, Ance a harlat.
Hoc pericudium, Ance a fyrhyrg... Lic vel hec alocropa, idem est.
Hic ‘acus, -cus, -cui, Ante a nedylle. Hie nugator, Ance chaper.4
Hie! jaclus, athred inanedyl... 20 ee nuga, Ance a chape.
Hee troclia, Ance a wynddas. Iie nugigerulus, Ancé a trifelle.
Hec coclia, Ance a wyndylle. Hic sponsus, a wedman.
Hee navicula, bot Hic puer, Ance a schyle.
Hee lembus, } a ITic et hec latro, a day-thefe.
Nos vestit limbus, nos vectat per mare 25 [Tic fur, Ance a nyte thefe.
Jembus. Tempore nocturno fur anfert, latro diurno
Hee facelus, Ance a sogbote.' Hic suffarcinator, Ance a bryber.
Hic remus, Ance a hore. Hic ursarius, a berward.
Hee palmula, the brede of the hore. Hic victor, a cummer.®
Hoc columbar, Ance the holle of the 39
schyp.
a sce?
eg OS - Jp “A
j ie 4 SS
wis ==
See —— a
' Sog-bote. In the Nomenclator, phase- 2A dwarf.
lus is interpreted as signifying a pinnace. * 4. e., a japer, a jester or mocker.
? Haltakylle, 1 suppose, the whole tackle * Cummer, probably a gossip, Scottice.
or furniture of the ship — armamenta
navis,

807 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 808
PANDUCSATOR CUM SUIS
a. INSTRUMENTIS.
5 Hic panducsator, a brever.
; i! Hoc brasium, Ancé malt.
Tee} Hoc plumbum, Anvé a lede.
fe G>" Hee fornax, -cis, An*é a fornys.
Hee cuva, Ancé a fatte.
10 Hee cupa, a colle.?
CUPERUS CUM SUIS INSTRU. Vee #na, tdem est.
~- Hoe idromellum, Ance wurte.
MENTIS. Hoc ciromellum, Ance growte.
Hic carpentarius, a carpenter. Hee falanga, Ancée a try.*
» Hic cuperus, a cowper. 15 Hee spuma, An*é barme.
Hoc dolebrum, a brodehax. Hoc multrale, a payle.
Hec securis, Ancé a hax. Hoc colum, {
Hee seculicula, a hachet. Hoc infusorium, alse Gunny:
Hee acia, a tyxhyl.! Hoc colatorium, a clenyngsefe.
Hoe aquiscium, a quyver. 20 Hoe cinofegium, i Ance drafe.
Hoc perpendiculum, a plomet. . Hoc sagisterium,
Hec regula, Aneé a rewylle. Hee amurca, drowsyn.
Hoc terebrum, Ance a wymbylle. Hec scafe, Ancé a bolle.
foc teribellum, Ance a persowyr. Hee scoba. Ance a besum.
Hic bipennus, i Alo 25
oo Xs i ee PISTOR CUM SUIS INSTRU-
ec leviga, Ance a plane. —
Hec seltis, Ance a scheselle. MENTIS.
Hec strofina, a gropyngyryn. Hic pistor, Ance a baker.
Hee sarra, An‘e a saw. 30 Hie clibanus, Ance a rele.*
Hee vibra, Ance a brake. Hoc tersorium, Ance a malkyn.
Hic circulus, Ance a hope. Hee pala, Ancé a forkyn.
Hie aser, -ris, Ane a borde. Hoc furnorium, 5
| Hie cunius, Ane a sceselle. Hee pila, } Ance pyle
35 Hoc pollentridium, a bultpele.
i Polenduare, Ance a bult.
Se a
iets fe. gla, a
x
‘ Tyzhyl, apparently a sort of axe. + Rele. Clibanus means properly the
2 Colle, a hogshead, or large barrel. oven,
° Try, a corn-sereen, ° The baker’s peel, or implement for
putting the bread into the oven.
53

809 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 810
Hoc taratanterum, Ancé a tense. Hic pomelio, venditor pomorumn.
Taratantarisare, Ancé to bult. Ilic pomelio, custos pomorum. Versus.
Ilic taratantarizator, Anc¢ a censarc. — Pomelio custos, vector, vel venditor extat.
Hec pasta, An‘é dowe.
Hee farina, Ance mele. 5 Loc pomerium, a norchard.
Hoc furfur, Ance bryn Hoc pomerium, a whorde.
Loc polen, floc pomelium, idem.
pie polentum, {a Gilera Hee fals, Searpe.”
ec simila, Hoc macillium, a jyppe.
Hoe ador, indeclinabile, 10 Iec labrusca, the bark of the vyne.
Hie panificator, Ance a mouldere.' Hoe vitulamen, a branche.
Panificare, Ance moulde. Hoc sarmentum, the cuttyng.
Hoc jocabulum, Ance a colrake. Hec antes, a siron.* ;
Hee costa, be. Hec progago, a rote. ;
Hoc scalprum, j e Pike 15 Hic pamplus, a vyncleffe.
Hee vibra, Ance a brake.* Hec uva, a grape.
Ilec massa, Anc¢ a gobet of dow. Ilic acinus, a stongrape.
Hloc fermentum, Ante sowyrdow. Lic botrus, a closter.
Pampulus est folium, botrus flos, vinea
Hie fossor, Ancé a dyker. 20 toture.
Tlic murinator, a waller.
Ilec merra, a mattoke. lie tector, Ance a thaser.®
Hee vanga, a spade. Hic contraitus, Ancé a crepylie.
Hee stribula, a schowle. Hee contraita, idem est.
Hoc sinovectorium, a barow. 25 Hoc sustentaculum,, the
Hee furca, a forke. Hoc podium, ; be faa
Hee merga, idem.
Lic auceps, Ane a fowlere.
Hic pomelio, gardyner. Hoc viscum, Ance byrdlyme.
Hic olitor, ; id 30 Tic laquius, Ance a snare.
Hic ortolanus, § *“°" sun Hoc volatorium, An‘¢ a schafnet.
Hic plantator, a plantor. Hie avigerulus, Anc¢ a pulter. ;
a SS
‘Whe person who wakes the dough evidently iu a different seuse.
into loaves. 3 Scarpe, an instrument for pruning
2 One meaning of the word brake isa vines. See the verse in the next column,
baker’s kneading-trough. It occurs before, * Antes, a sprout.
p. 807 }. 31, with the same Latin, but ° A thatcher.

811 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 812
Hic messor, Ancé a
scherer.! é
Hee fals, Anc¢ a sek- Seah ~.
! ylle. i :
Hie faleator, Ancé a 5 shes pee
mower. (ae EN) ij Be
Hee fals, Ane a be, a |) aN
sythe. pom dt eK BF 4
False puto vineta, meto /& Fle. a Ages} «
sata, tondeo prata. #"” 10 " Yan DA
seg of Sud
Hie auriga, ) a FFITE oe,
Hic vereda, a cartar. f
Hie Eaicetahite, |S
*Hee carecta, Ance a carte. 15 Hie nemus, -ris, ;
fic capsis, Ancé a carte. Hic lucus, ; a forest.
Hee biga, } a wayne. Hee feresta, _)
| Loc plaustrum, Hoc lucar, -ris, Ance a forestax.
Hic currus, Ance a carte. Hic parcarius, Ancé a parcar.
Hoc carpentum, Ance a schare.* 20 Hee indago, Ance a parke.
Hoc. veredum, Ancé a thylle. Hoc vallum, Ance a parke. palys.
Hic veredus, Ance a thylhorse. Vallo, -as, -i, vallum facere.
Hee rota, An‘é a quele. Hoc tribucetum, Ance a sawtre.
Hic cantus, -ti, -to, Anc¢ a felow.
Hic cantus, -tus, -tui, Ance a song. 25
Cantus, -ti, bige, cautus cautantis in ore. i
Mic radius, Ance a spoke. We
Hic radius, Ance a sunbeme.
Est radius rote, solis, tele, geometric.
Hee axis, Ance a exylletre. 30 WL
Hoc meditulium, Ance a nafe.
Hoc epuscium, Ance a cartelowte. Hic architenens, ) Theveth
Hoc retinaculum, Ancé a trayse. Hic sagittarius, § —_
1) uy) ?
Hoc traale, idem est. Hic arcus, Ance a bowe.
Tec epicia, -orum, Ance a berhom. 35 Hee arcitula, Ance a bowstryng.
Hee scutica, Ante a quippe. Hee catapulta, Ance a brode arw.
Hic funis, Ance a rope. Hee sagitta, Ance a harow.
Hee merga, Ance a forke. Hoc petulium, Ance a bolt.
Hoc capistrum, Ance a halter. Hoc amentum, Ance a nok.
Hic inclusarius, Ance a hayward. 40 Hee cuspis, Ance a bolthed.
Hic lucarius, Hee faretra, Ante a quiver.
Hic viridarius, ‘ Ancée a forster. Hic corintheus, a bowehowse.
Tlie forestarius, Hee veltria, a lese of grehowndes. ©
Hic nullus, a grehownd colere.
. A reaper. Reaping is still called shear- * A barholm, or collar for a horse to
ing in Scotland. draw by.
7 i.e, a car.

533013
813 A PICTORIAL VOCABULARY. 814
Hoc cornu, indeclinabile, Anceahorne, Hee caulamaula, a scheperdes pype.
Hoc defensorium, m Hoc pedum, Ancé a scheperdes stafe.
Hoc brachitectum, } Ae gr Weta Hic padus, Ance a scheperdes croke.
Tee Susticula, Ancé a lytyl pype. Hic palus, ) 2 foldstake.
Hie agamus, a sengyl man. 5 Hic pazillus, §
Hee cratis, Ance a herdylle.
Ilic archimendritas, ? Hic pixus, Ance a box.
Ile opelio, i a schepard. Hoc butumen, Ancé a tere.
Tic pastor, Hoc unguentum, Ancé grese.
Hic grex, i B Ak, 10 Hie vacearius, a cowhgrd. “e
Hie villus, Foc armentum, Ancé a aryfte.
IIe vellus, Ance a slefe. Hic equiarius, Ance a horsheyrd.
Hoe ovile, i a fold Hic capriarius, Ancé a gatcheyrd.
Hee caula, . Hic edrius, i for a precher.
]
|
|
|
|
©. L, Pfeil, Printer, Marburg (Hesse).
ye



al
wy
oO
a
{ 3
| io} |
oe
WRIGHT, THOMAS. _ PE
ANGLo-Saxon AND OLD ENGLISH 274
VOCABULARIES. mb)
W7
IMS
LIBRARY
Pontifical Institute of 4) “oof Studies
TORONTO, ONT, CANADA M5S 4)

H
oe Pi a cH
i) Nii ' z i
J a At

i i a aT eh
i i) B
