

=== page 001 ===

Leiden Indo-European
Etymological Dictionary Series
Etymological Dictionary of Greek
Edited by
Alexander Lubotsky
VOLUME 10/1
By
Robert Beekes
With the assistance of
Lucien van Beek
VOLUME ONE
SUB
AEGID
BRILL
LEIDEN BOSTON
•
2010

=== page 002 ===

This publication has been made possible by the financial support of the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Beekes, R. S. P. (Robert Stephen Paul)
Etymological dictionary of Greek / by Robert Beekes; with the assistance of
Lucien van Beek.
p. cm. — (Leiden Indo-European etymological dictionary series ; v. 10/1-2)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-90-04-17418-4 (hardback: alk. paper) 1. Greek language-Etymology—
Dictionaries. I. Beek, Lucien van. II. Title.
PA422.B44 2010
482.03-dc22
Preface.......
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VOLUME ONE
Pre-Greek loanwords in Greek.........
2009036652
Abbreviations and symbols
The Greek etymological dictionary A-A
ISSN: 1574-3586
ISBN Set: 978 90 04 17418 4
ISBN Volume One: 978 90 04 17420 7
Copyright 2009 by Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill, Hotei Publishing,
IDC Publishers, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers and VSP.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission from the publisher.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use is granted by Koninklijke Brill NV
provided that the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Suite 910, Danvers, MA 01923, USA.
Fees are subject to change.
PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS
vii
XV
xlv
VOLUME TWO
The Greek etymological dictionary M-Q
Bibliography....
.887
.1687
Indices.......
1747

=== page 003 ===

PREFACE
Whoever takes up the task of writing a new etymological dictionary of Greek, has to
depart from the existing dictionaries. The present dictionary, too, owes a great deal
to previous work in the field, especially to the excellent dictionaries of Hjalmar Frisk
and Pierre Chantraine.
Apart from compiling the first comprehensive etymological dictionary of Greek
in the English language and incorporating the most recent scholarly literature on
Greek etymology, there were a number of other reasons why a new dictionary
seemed to be a desideratum. In the preface to his dictionary, Frisk expressed doubts
on three points: 1. the laryngeal theory; 2. Mycenaean; and 3. the Pelasgian theory on
the Greek substrate language. Ironically, it is precisely on these three points that
substantial progress has been made in the last decades, so that we can now be much
more confident in these areas.
1. Frisk felt uneasy about the laryngeals. In the preface (p. vi) he wrote: "Für die
griechische Etymologie fällt sowieso die Laryngaltheorie (...) nicht schwer ins
Gewicht". I have been acquainted with the problems of the laryngeal theory since the
start of my academic career (see my dissertation, Beekes 1969), and I vividly
remember how the chaotic spectrum of theories and hypotheses discouraged many
people in the beginning.
Since the 1980's, the situation has changed dramatically. When Bammesberger's
Die Laryngaltheorie appeared (Bammesberger (ed.) 1988), there had already been
general consensus on the main rules of development of the laryngeals in Greek and
in other Indo-European languages. It is absolutely clear now that the development of
the laryngeals is essential for understanding Greek etymology. Chantraine's
Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque (DELG) often does not give
reconstructions with laryngeals either; as a consequence, many of the etymologies
still defended in his dictionary are clearly untenable within the framework of the
laryngeal theory. It must be admitted, however, that many of these deficiencies have
been remedied in the Supplement (DELG Supp.), which often contains very helpful
contributions.
2. The study of Mycenaean has by now become an integral part of Greek studies.
The Mycenaean material was already accepted by Chantraine and incorporated into
DELG. I have tried to include all Mycenaean data with a reasonably certain
interpretation, provided that these data have a bearing on the etymological
interpretation of classical Greek. Personal names are generally excluded from the
discussion, as their interpretation is often too uncertain to base any conclusions on.
The task of incorporating Mycenaean data was not too difficult, since we have the
excellent Diccionario Micénico (1985-1993) by Aura Jorro at our disposal. Although

=== page 004 ===

!
viii
PREFACE
PREFACE
ix
the Mycenaean material is limited, it is of great importance and should always be
taken ito account. The exact attestations of the Mycenaean words are usually not
cited, as they can easily be traced in Aura Jorro's dictionary.
3. It is now clear that the Pelasgian theory, which started from the assumption
that there was an Indo-European substrate in Greek, has been a completely
unfruitful and wrong approach. Although Frisk doubted this theory, he nevertheless
consistently referred to Pelasgian throughout the dictionary. This is a pity, because
the theory has yielded no positive results. Chantraine often used the vague terms
‘achéen' or 'mediterranéen', without clearly identifying Greek substrate words in this
way.
In the present dictionary, no reference to the Pelasgian theory is made anymore.
Instead, I have extensively used Furnée's 1972 book, who meticulously studied the
substrate material and concluded that we are dealing with loanwords from a single
non-Indo-European language. Unfortunately, this work has been neglected or
rejected by most scholars without due argumentation. In order to explain the
principles of Furnée's work and to present his conclusions, as well as my own.
findings from recent years, I have written a special introduction to Pre-Greek (as I
call the substrate language), see pp. xiii-xlii. Throughout the dictionary, much
attention is paid to the Pre-Greek material, and one of my main goals was to
generate a collection of substrate words which would be as complete as possible. I
intend to publish a separate work, containing all certain or probable Pre-Greek
etyma, in the coming years.
The dictionaries of Frisk and Chantraine are different in their orientation. Whereas
Chantraine is more oriented towards the philological study of Greek (as follows
from the subtitle Histoire des mots), Frisk focuses on the Indo-European side of
Greek etymology. In fact, it may be fair to say that Frisk to some extent tried to
produce not an etymological dictionary of Greek only, but of Greek and Indo-
European at the same time. The main focus of the present dictionary is also
etymology, rather than philology.
I started working on the project in 2002. At first, the idea was to produce an
updated English translation of Frisk in the framework of the Indo-European
Etymological Dictionary project. While largely maintaining the philological part of
the entries, I modernized old reconstructions, added new ones from the literature,
and rejected older etymologies in the light of the substrate theory. Furthermore,
many new entries have been incorporated, most of them glosses by Hesychius, which
were gleaned from DELG, from Furnée's book and from the new 2005 edition of
Hesychius (part III, II-Σ).
Gradually, I have come to the conclusion that a much more rigorous approach
was necessary: there is simply too much irrelevant and dated literature in Frisk's
dictionary, and many of his pre-laryngealist reconstructions are now useless. Also,
research interest in Indo-European studies has shifted considerably over the course
of decades. It was therefore decided to completely reorganize the etymological
treatment of the entries.
The rigorous editing of the etymological sections of the dictionary was done by
Lucien van Beek. He integrated my own views with traditional etymologies and
recent insights. In those cases where a word can now be proven to be of Pre-Greek
origin, part of the old reasoning has sometimes been retained in order to illustrate
the flaws in the traditional approach, according to which practically every word is
bound to have an Indo-European etymology.
Structure of the entry
After the lemma, grammatical information is given between square brackets, for
instance, Súpoμа [v.] 'to lament, bewail', or yкατα [n.pl.] 'intestines'. If it is
unknown (for instance, in a gloss), this may be indicated with a query.
The grammatical information is followed by the meaning of the word. For most
of the glosses, an English translation has been provided. Although this is a major
break with tradition in Classical Studies, I consider it to be convenient for specialists
in other Indo-European languages than Greek. Of course, in many cases a gloss can
be ambiguous, but I hope to have been sufficiently prudent in the translations.
At the end of the first paragraph, I give the origin of the word (in abbreviated
form) between two arrowheads. The abbreviations must be understood as follows:
<IE➤
<IE?➤
<GR➤
<PG➤
<PG?>
<LW➤
<LW Sem.>
<EUR➤
KONOM
<?>
There is a good Indo-European (IE) etymology. The IE root is
reconstructed, and in most cases also the formation represented by the
Greek etymon. If there are no cognates, but the Greek word looks Indo-
European, a reconstruction has sometimes been proposed, too.
An Indo-European etymology exists for the entry concerned, but it is not
entirely convincing.
The word was coined in the more recent (pre)history of Greek, and
consists of one or more (possibly) inherited elements; however, the
formation as a whole was certainly not inherited from IE.
The word certainly belongs to the Pre-Greek substrate language. The
reason for this decision may be indicated with (V), which means that
there are formal variants, or with (S) if the word contains a suffix
characteristic for Pre-Greek.
The word may be Pre-Greek (see above on (V) and (S)).
A loanword. The donor language is indicated in abbreviated form,
= a loanword from Semitic.
e.g.
A loanword from (one of the European substrate language(s). Such
words are not reconstructible for PIE, but share similarities with words
from other European language families (Germanic, Italo-Celtic, Balto-
Slavic) that must be due to substrate influence.
An onomatopoeic word.
No good etymology exists, or the etymology is unknown.
The philological information is subdivided into sections in order to make the
presentation more transparent:

=== page 005 ===

X
PREFACE
PREFACE
xi
•VAR
.DIAL
Inflectional forms and phonological variants.
Dialectal forms. Mycenaean is mostly given in the (approximate)
phonological transcription.
•COMP Compounds (only the most common or etymologically relevant
compounds are given).
•DER
Derivatives.
ETYM Etymological discussion.
The Proto-Indo-European reconstructions
The reconstructions in this book follow some conventions which deviate from
common usage. Let me mention the most important ones:
a) PIE had no phoneme *a. Whenever *a appears in a reconstruction, the stage of
language should always be understood as post-PIE.
b) In IE reconstructions, vocalization of resonants and laryngeals is as a rule not
indicated, since the consonantal and vocalic allophones were not phonologized in
the proto-language. Thus, for the PIE pre-form of Baívw, I write *g*m-ie/o-.
Whenever vocalization is indicated, i.e. *g"m-ie/o-, this is understood to be a post-
PIE development.
c) I follow Kortlandt's theory of Balto-Slavic accentuation, and adopted his
reconstruction of (pre-)glottalized consonants for PIE (see, for instance, on έкατóv
and лεντηкоντα).
d) It should be noted that the term 'prothetic vowel' is used in this dictionary to
indicate the vowel (mostly a-) that may or may not be present in Pre-Greek substrate
words. In inherited words, a facultative prothetic vowel is not reconstructed any
more since it contradicts the laryngeal theory.
Bibliographical references
Within the limited amount of time available for this project, it proved impossible to
modernize all references and to check all reference works. It was necessary,
therefore, to make certain strategic choices. It was decided to concentrate on the
etymologically relevant publications and to adjust the philological treatment of the
material only sporadically.
The second editions of reference works, such as Lejeune's Phonétique historique
(1972) and Risch's Wortbildung (1974) have been systematically consulted. I have
generally maintained references to Chantraine Formation, as this book contains a
very concise and precise overview of the different suffixed nominal formations in
Greek.
In contrast to Frisk's dictionary, references to works on specific morphological
topics have been left out. For instance, for a derivation in -σúvη, Frisk often refers to
Wyss's 1954 book. Other such works, to which the reader can refer, are: Redard 1949
(-iτns), Boßhardt 1942 (-ɛúc), Fraenkel 1910 (agent nouns), Benveniste 1948 (agent
and action nouns), and, more recently, Leukart 1994 (suffix -τāç, -āç).
Furthermore, references to the dictionaries of individual languages have largely
been omitted. Most references to Walde-Hoffmann (Latin), Vasmer (Russian),
Fraenkel (Lithuanian), etc. are superfluous in a Greek etymological dictionary. It is
understood that the reader who wants to know more about the cognates in a given
branch will find his way to the relevant dictionaries. References to Mayrhofer's
KEWA have been retained in some instances, because it often contains more details
than the EWAia. The LIV² has proven to be a very important work of reference for
all verbal roots, even if I very often disagree with details of their analysis.
References to Strömberg's Pflanzennamen and Fischnamen have been maintained,
as well as to Thompson's Glossary of Greek fishes. Unfortunately, it has not been.
possible to adjust all references concerning Greek religion to recent works such as
Burkert 1985.
Regarding the epigraphic material, no systematic check has been made of the
SEG.
Acknowledgements
A new etymological dictionary of a language like Greek cannot be written in a few
years by just one person, without the help of others. Many people helped me on
various stages of the project.
First of all, I am greatly indebted to Lucien van Beek for editing, correcting and
proofreading the whole volume containing about 7500 entries over the course of
more than two years. Several others assisted him in this work, sacrificing many
weeks of their spare time: Alwin Kloekhorst, Guus Kroonen, Michael Peyrot, Tijmen
Pronk, and especially Michiel de Vaan. Needless to say, it is I who remain
responsible for all views expressed in this dictionary, and for any mistakes in it.
I am very grateful to Alexander Lubotsky, who proofread a large part of the
dictionary, and spent a lot of time and effort in formatting the manuscript. Dr.
Velizar Sadovsky (Vienna) has been so kind to write many macros for generating
indices and bibliography and to proofread some parts of the manuscript. I am
indebted to Dr. Thomas Olander (Copenhagen) for solving various font problems.
I would like to thank the students of our department - Kristen de Joseph, Marijn
van Putten, Simon Mulder and Alain Corbeau - for technical assistance. Kristen de
Joseph further copy-edited the manuscript. Marijn van Putten and Simon Mulder
helped compiling the bibliography.

=== page 006 ===

Contents:
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
A. Introduction
B. Phonology
1. The phonemic system of Pre-Greek
2a. Characteristic sounds or sound groups: 1. av; 2. ẞ; 3. ßd; 4. yd; 5. yv; 6. 8v; 7. KT; 8. KX; 9 µV; 10. Ov;
11. лô; 12. pd; 13. PKV; 14. pv (pd, v8); 15. σ; 16. σẞ; 17. σy; 18. OK, σT; 19. σTλ; 20. TO; 21. qе; 22. XH,
XV; 23. - 24. w; 25. geminates
2b. How to recognize words as Pre-Greek?
3. Prothetic vowel
4. s-mobile
5. Consonant variation
5.1. Voiceless voiced / aspirated stop; 5.2. Prenasalization; 5.3. Nasalization; 5.4. Labial stops / m / u
(a. π, ß, o̟ / µ; b. к, ẞ, & / (F); c. µ / (F)); 5.5. Stops interchanging with σ(σ), with stop + σ/ or with o
+ stop; 5.6. Velar / labial / dental stops: labio-velars; 5.7. Dentals / liquids; 5.8. Simple / geminate; 5.9.
σ- zero; 5.10. K-, T- / zero; 5.11. v-, λ- / zero; 5.12. Metathesis, shift of aspiration; 5.13. Secondary
phonetic developments; 5.14. Other variation.
6. Vowel variation
6.1. Single vowels, timbre; 6.2. Long / short; 6.3. Single / diphthong; 6.4. Rising diphthongs?
6.5. Secondary vowels (or syncope).
C. Morphology
1. Reduplication
2. Suffixes
2.1. Introduction; 2.2. Survey of the suffixes; 2.3. The material: -aß-(o-), -ay-, -ayy-o-, -ad-, -αð-o-,
-al-/ɛ(1)-, -aï(Ƒ)-o-, -αïß-o-, -αið-, -αïv-, -αɩp-(0-), -aк-, -aλ(\)-o-, -aµß-o-, -αμv-o-, -αμ-o-, -αv-o-,
-āv-, -avd-, -avdp(-o)-, -avð/τ-, -avv(-o)-, -α§-, -aл-o-, -ap, -ap-, -ao-a/o-, -ασσ-o-, -ατ-, -αup-a/o-,
-ax-, -aч-, -y-, -yp-, -ɛd-, -ɛl-a, -εip-o-, -ɛλ-a/o-, -ε\\-α/o-, -εµ-o-, -εµv-(o-), -ɛvv-a, -ɛp-a/o-,
-ET-O-, -εup-, -EUT-, -nß-a/o-, -n0-(0-), -nk/x-, -nλ-o-, -nv, -nv-, -np, -np-, -no(0)-a/o-, -nt-(0-), -ntt-,
--o-, -0-0-, -0p-α/o-, -iß-, -уy/к/x-, -īd-, -18va, -10-, -īð-, -ik-, -īk-, -1λ-, -ïλ-, -ıλλ-a/o-, -ɩµv-a/o-,
-iv-a/o-, -īv-(0-), -1vd-, -1v0-(0-), -1§-, -īπ-0-, -10-α/o-, -1ʊk-o-, -it-a/o-, -1X-, -kv-, -µ-o-, -v-, -§-, -oñ-,
-op-, -oσσ-a, -ott-a, -ovλ-o-, -ovp-, -ovo(σ)-a, -ñv-, -πɩ-, -p-, -p¥-, -pd-, -pv-, -σk-, -σ-0, -σσ-, -σT-,
-στpov, -T-0-, -TT-, -vß-, -vyy-, -vd-, -vdva, -vð-, -vɩ-a, -vk-, -ñк-, -vλ-, -vµ-, -vµß-, -vµv-, -ñv-, -vvd-,
-uvē/t-, -vvv-, -vε-, -vn-, -vp-, -ūp-, -vo-, -vt-, -vx-, -40-, -q-0-, -wк-, -wλ-, -wμ-, -wv-, -wπ-, -wp-,
-Woo-, -WT-.
3. Word end
3.1. in vowel (a. -α; b. -1, -ɩç; c. -v, -vç; d. -ɛvç; e. -w, -wc); 3.2. in -p (a. -ap; b. -ip; c. -op; d. -wp);
3.3. in -, -v (a. -§; b. -y); 3.4. in -v; 3.5. in -ãç.
D. The unity of Pre-Greek
E. Pre-Greek is non-Indo-European
A. Introduction
The substrate language of Greek will be called 'Pre-Greek' in this dictionary; this is a
translation of the German term 'das Vorgriechische'. No written texts exist in this
language, but it is known from a considerable number of loanwords in Greek.

=== page 007 ===

xiv
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
:
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
XV
The study of Pre-Greek has had an unfortunate history. In the past century, it was
called 'Pelasgian' and considered a dialect of Indo-European. This idea fascinated
scholars, and research concentrated on this proposal. But the whole idea was clearly
wrong, and by now, it is generally agreed that the substrate was non-Indo-European.
Therefore, the term 'Pelasgian' can no longer be used. Frisk already had strong
doubts about the Pelasgian theory, but nevertheless, he often mentioned the
proposals of its adherents. Since all work following this line has turned out to be
useless, I decided to make no mention of the theory anymore in the dictionary.
When Frisk completed his dictionary in 1972, Furnée's book 'Die wichtigsten
konsonantischen Erscheinungen des Vorgriechischen', which was his dissertation.
written under the supervision of F.B.J. Kuiper, had just appeared. It was an
elaboration of Kuiper's 1956 study on Greek substrate words, which opened a new
chapter in the research of the field. Furnée rejected the Pelasgian theory, too (see
especially op. cit. pp. 40-55).
Furnée's book met with fierce criticism and was largely neglected. In my view, this
was a major mistake in Greek scholarship. True, some of his identifications are
improbable, and his repeated claim that certain forms were expressive leads
nowhere. What remains, however, is that he studied a great number of relevant
forms and drew obvious conclusions from them. Pre-Greek words often show a type
of variation which is not found in inherited words. It is self-evident that this
variation must be studied, and this is what Furnée did. It has turned out (as Kuiper
had already shown) that this variation shows certain recurrent patterns and can be
used to recognize Pre-Greek elements.
Furnée's book is not easy to use: every form is discussed at three or four places,
each time in a different context, so that it may be difficult to find out what his point
really is. On the other hand, his treatment is very careful, and there hardly any
obvious mistakes. I found a number of cases which he had not recognized (e.g.
лτшxóc), but this does not change the fact that his book was the best collection at the
time. Furnée worked on it for twenty years, and even now it is the only hand-book
on the subject. The short overview which follows below is based on Furnée's material
and on my own research of more than thirty years.¹
Furnée went astray in two respects. First, he considered almost all variation to be
of an expressive character, which is certainly wrong: it is evident that the variation
found is due to the adaptation of words (or phonemes) of a foreign language to
Greek. We shall see below that many variants can be understood in this way.
Secondly, Furnée was sometimes overzealous in his search for inner-Greek
correspondences. Many of Furnée's discoveries are brilliant (see s.v. Sopúкviov for
an example), but sometimes he went too far: not every alternation necessarily points
to Pre-Greek origin. The author can hardly be blamed for his enthusiasm. He was
exploring new ground, and it can only be expected that he sometimes overplayed his
hand.
¹ Since Kuiper was my supervisor as well, I was acquainted with the book from the very beginning (see
my review in Lingua 36, 1975).
1
!
Several scholars were baffled by Furnée's proposals and hence rejected the whole
book altogether. His method, however, was correct and I have only filtered out the
improbable suggestions. In many cases, of course, we cannot be absolutely certain,
but this cannot be an objection. Except for a very small number of cases, Furnée's
material does consist of Pre-Greek words. His index contains 4400 words, and
taking into account that many of these words concern derivatives and variants, as
well as a few Indo-European words, I estimate that Furnée's book discusses some
1000 Pre-Greek etyma.²
In general, I have given only a few personal names and toponyms, and no
material of this kind from outside Greece and Asia Minor. The comparison with
Basque or Caucasian languages has not been considered in this dictionary, as this is
not my competence; it is likely that there are such connections, but this must be left
to other scholars.
My suggested reconstructions are not essential. One may ignore them and just
consider the variation itself. These variants are often explained as incidental
phenomena (assimilation, influence of other words, etc.), and such explanations may
be sometimes correct, but if we know that some variants frequently occur, we will
have to consider Pre-Greek origin. Existing etymological dictionaries often seem to
avoid the conclusion that a word is a substrate element. It is remarkable that
Chantraine was quite aware of the problem in his Formation, but in his dictionary he
often withdrew his earlier evaluation (which in my view was correct). It looks as if
substrate elements were not welcome there.
The relationship with Anatolian languages is a separate problem. A Greek word is
often called a loan from an Anatolian language, while it may just as well be borrowed
from the Pre-Greek substrate. It is generally accepted, on the basis of toponyms, that
there was a language which was once spoken both in Greece and in western Asia
Minor. In most cases, however, it is impossible to distinguish between substrate
words and loans from Asia Minor (the latter are from a later date). A word may have
been adopted through commerce, as often happens between two neighboring
countries, or starting from the time when Greeks settled in Asia Minor, probably as
early as the 15th century. From a methodological point of view, I think it is better to
consider such words as Pre-Greek, and to define them as loanwords from an
Anatolian language only when there is reason to do so. Still, it is clear that we may
often make mistakes here. A case in point is τoλúлη 'clew, ball of wool ready for
spinning'. The word is clearly related to Luwian and Hitt. taluppa/i- lump, clod'.
The Greek word is typical of Pre-Greek words: the structure CaC-up- (with a
appearing as o before u) and the absence of an Indo-European etymology (Melchert
Orpheus 8 (1998): 47-51 is not convincing) imply that the word is Pre-Greek or Pre-
Anatolian. On the other hand, 'clew' is not a word that is easily brought from
overseas; it is an everyday word that the speakers of Greek and Anatolian must have
2 Note that Furnée often adduces new material that is not mentioned in the current etymological
dictionaries, mostly glosses from Hesychius.
3 A point for further study is to establish how far to the east such related names can be found. It is my
impression that these names can be found as far south as Cilicia.

=== page 008 ===

xvi
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xvii
picked up not far from home. I completely agree with Furnée's interpretation (3533)
that the word was brought to Greece by settlers from Anatolia who spoke the
language, which, from another perspective, we call Pre-Greek. In other words,
τоλúлη is a loan from an Anatolian language, but this (probably non-Indo-
European) language was also spoken in large parts of Greece before the Greeks
(speaking an Indo-European language) arrived there.
It is essential to realize that substrate words are a frequent phenomenon. One may
regret this (for instance, from the Indo-Europeanist point of view), but this is
irrelevant; the existence of Pre-Greek words is simply a fact that has to be accepted.
To me, it is fascinating that in this way we can learn something about the oldest
language of Europe (including Anatolia), of which we otherwise have no evidence.
The 'Pelasgian' theory has done much harm, and it is time to forget it. The latest
attempt was Heubeck's 'Minoisch-Mykenisch' (discussed by Furnée 55-66), where
the material was reduced to some ten words; the theory has by now been tacitly
abandoned.
B. Phonology
1. The phonemic system of Pre-Greek
Voiceless, voiced and aspirated stops may interchange in Pre-Greek words, without
any apparent conditioning factors. This fact shows that voice and aspiration were
not distinctive features in Pre-Greek. On the other hand, the Linear B signs
(graphemes) for rjo, rja and tja show that palatalization probably was distinctive.
This is confirmed by the sign pte (e.g. in ra-pte-re /rapteres/ with the agent suffix
-ter-), which must go back to an earlier p'e. In the Pre-Greek material, such a
phoneme may underlie examples like еáлτα. One may wonder whether кpoσσóqеov
points to p³ > pt, which was realized with aspiration. Further, the signs two, twe, dwo,
dwe, nwa, swa, swi, point to labialization as a distinctive feature, i.e. two, twe, dwo, de,
nwa, swa, swi. Note that palatal and labial forms of graphemes are found both with
resonants and stops, which is a phenomenon alien to Indo-European languages. The
existence of labiovelars is confirmed by qa-si-re-u Baoilɛúc, etc. (see further
=
Beekes Glotta 73 (1995/6): 12f.). We may thus posit the following system³:
P
py
t
ty
pw
tw
W
k
ky
kw
S
Sy
SW
r
ry
rw
1
ly
1w
m
my
mw
n
ny
nw
Of course, it is possible that one or more of the posited phonemes did not occur in
Pre-Greek (e.g., m³ is a rare sound in the languages of the world).
We can now use this insight in explaining the surfacing Greek forms. Thus,
Sáøvn / davxv(a)- can now be explained from a Pre-Greek form *dak"n-.6 In the
former form, the labiovelar yields a labial stop op. In the latter, it is rendered by -vx-,
with anticipation of the labial feature, while the labiovelar turns up as a velar, possib-
ly by dissimilation from uk". Again, note that aspiration is not phonemic in Pre-
Greek. It is very important to note that we cannot predict how a Pre-Greek form will
surface in Greek: sometimes a stop turns up as an aspirate, sometimes as a voiced
stop (e.g. aiлúç / äcap, see B 5.1. below). As a consequence, it may happen that there
is a large number of variants, but it may also be that there are no variants at all.
As a second example, we may also understand aúxýv / Lesb. äµôηv from a pre-
form *ank"ēn. The latter form is directly understandable, with o from the labiovelar.
The first form went through *an"kën or *ankën, giving aúxny with loss of the nasal
(a development known from Armenian). Perhaps, a scenario *ak"ēn > avxv is also
possible, with a prenasalized form *ank"ēn (> äμony) beside *ak"ēn. Such
interpretations may be wrong in individual cases, but this is no reason not to try. On
the other hand, variation that is strange from an exclusively Indo-European point of
view becomes understandable in this way, starting as we do from a limited set of
assumptions.
The existence of palatalized phonemes in Pre-Greek may explain a number of
other developments. Thus, I assume that a geminate \\ may continue Pre-Greek *.
We know that IE *ly gave λ in Greek, but if a variant with single λ coexists, we are
warned. For example, the name Axiλλɛúç has a variant Axiλɛúc with one λ. And
although the latter only occurs in Homer, this fact points to Pre-Greek origin. The
variant was preserved because it was metrically convenient, it was not created for
metrical purposes. Of course, the fact that there was more variation at an earlier date
is what we expect. As far as the other palatalized resonants are concerned, any may
have given atv, ar may have given atp (or also εp with coloring of the vowel, see
section C₂ below on the suffixes), etc. We have -atp-, -av- but no *-auλ- in Pre-
Greek words. This is confirmed by the fact that geminate \ is very frequent (Fur.
387), whereas geminate pp, vv and μu are much less frequent, or even rare.
In a similar fashion, *as" may have yielded either -ao- or -ao-, cf. кáßatoos,
which has a v.l. кáßaσoç. In rendering such a foreign word, the palatalization may
have been represented at one time, and may have been neglected at another. This
4 Of course, it could be due to the fact that a different distinction was present in Pre-Greek (like fortis /
lenis, found in most Anatolian languages), but no obvious distribution pointing in this direction can be
discerned in the material.
5 Note that I distinguish between palatals of Pre-Greek origin, which are indicated by a superscript y
(e.g. k), and palatovelars of Indo-European origin.
6
Although I assume that voice was not distinctive in Pre-Greek, I do write d- in this case, because only
8- surfaces in Greek. We must avoid losing information present in the Greek fórms. Thus, my notation of
Pre-Greek forms is heuristic to a certain degree, and not always consistent with the phonemic system I
tentatively reconstruct here.
7 On prenasalization, see B5.2. below. As an alternative, an Indo-European etymology starting with the
root *h₂emg"- ‘to tie, betroth', can be offered; see the dictionary (although I prefer the analysis given here).

=== page 009 ===

xviii
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xix
•
phenomenon was the main cause of variation in Pre-Greek forms. The
interpretation is further confirmed by the parallel development of labialized.
consonants. Thus, I suppose that ar" resulted in -α(v)p- (see the section on the
suffixes). In this way, we may understand кaλapow beside кoλópoẞov from a pre-
form kalar"-op-. Another form which shows the remarkable interchange a/av is
ápaσxádɛç / aúpoσxác. Here one might assume a pre-form *ar" ask-at-. Note that the
labial element would at the same time explain the o as a variant of a in both cases. A
similar mechanism must be at the basis of the etymon äλož, aúλaž, wlał, evlákā,
which is hopeless from an Indo-European point of view. I assume that all forms go
back on Pre-Greek *al"-ak-. It gives avλaк- through anticipation, äλoк- through
coloring. In this way, the first two forms, which are best attested, are directly clear.
Further, av/ɛv/w interchange frequently, which explains wλa and ɛúláάka; óλok- is
not problematic either, as both /a/'s were colored to [o] by the labialized resonant.
Only the Homeric accusative wλкa is hopeless: it is the only form that has no vowel
between A and к, and therefore may be due to some accident of the tradition. This is
a problem that has not been solved yet.
I do not know whether a diphthong is allowed in suffixes of the structure VC, cf.
the forms in -aifoç. Structurally, one could think of -ay"-, or even -aw³-, but such
sounds are rather rare in the languages of the world. An instance of -aɩ- due to a
palatalized consonant is εains / εαлívηs / ävw (a brilliant combination by Fur.
158, etc.), which must contain -ap³- (the palatalization was ignored in the last form).
Comparable to the development in ščarívŋs is kva̸y / kivánɛtov, from k³n- with 1
representing palatalization, cf. Beekes 2008. Likewise, I assume that лvτóç beside
луτós points to *p'nut-. Perhaps, we must interpret σɩwлάw as *s'ōp- because of
εvσwлíα. An interesting case is Xuvεç· ελµvеεç, for which I assume *I'm- beside
*al'm- with prothetic a (see B3 below on the prothetic vowel).
A palatalized consonant could color a to e. A good example is кúлapoç, kúralpos,
but also kúñɛpoç, kúлɛpoç, where we have all possible variants due to the palatalized
consonant. Compare further Káẞapvot next to Káßɛpot. Likewise, we have (aкɛλTIS
next to εкελτÍÇ 'кoλóкuvται', where the interchange occurs after ¢ from earlier
palatalized ť. Sɩépa beside dɩyápa may have had -pt-; \(\)ow next to ȧ\(\)áßŋs
back to *al'ap-, with the common variation a/o before a labial. A clear example
is Aaσɩtós with, next to it, λɛσɩτóç and λáσtai, λáσtaupoç. It may be interpreted as
representing PG *las't-.
goes
Kuiper Lingua 21 (1968): 269-277 pointed out that the substrate language had
labiovelars. He especially pointed to aλuкpós next to ¿áλyya, þáλлw. I added a
few remarks in Beekes Glotta 73 (1995/6): 12f. From Mycenaean, we have a-to-ro-qo
(ǎvеpwлoç) and qe-to (лíðoç), Mo-qo-so (Móyos), qi-si-pe-e (the dual of čípoc).
Further there is A-i-ti-jo-qo (gen. Aiеíoлoç), óеαλμóç with the variants Öкτα\\oç
and óлτíλ(λ)оç, which cannot be explained from Indo-European. Instead of εipos,
we would perhaps expect **чíqoç. So the developments are largely as those of Greek,
but not completely.
Pre-Greek probably had a /y/ and a /w/. Initial ya- presumably often lost its y-,
but it may sometimes be represented by ia- as in ťaµẞoç, 'Iάowv. The ending -uta
may have been -uy-a (a Pre-Greek y may have had a different development from y in
inherited words). In the same way, -ala may derive from PG *-ay-a with a variant
-εɩα, cf. IIŋvελóлεα. Perhaps, the y disappeared in some cases, giving yaia beside yã
(see below on the suffix -at- / -ε(1)-).
Initial w- was often lost (ävaε), but wa- may also have been rendered by oa-, as in
Oatós beside Cret. Fatóç. The same holds for 'Oiλɛús, which has been considered to
be identical with the root of "Dos). We find va- (which became va-) in váкɩvoç,
Cret. Fáкivoç. Fur. 377 assumes a prothetic v- in the latter word, but this seems
improbable to me. Another example may be va/ɛλos. The differences are probably
due to the date at which the word was borrowed and depend on whether the Greek
dialect concerned still had a Ƒ at that time. Another treatment can be found in the
word for 'truffle', for which we find oüitov, oldvov (also -Tv-), üdvov (also -tv-), or
ĭtov. These are probably all renderings of *wit-. (Fur. 184 again assumes a prothetic
vowel, fit- / òfit-, which does not seem to be the right solution. He further assumes
a variation *wit- / wut-, which also seems improbable to me, though the variation 1/
v is attested.) Rather, v- is a form of ot-, with the -o- changed under influence of the
-- (cf. Lejeune 1972: 174, and note that Greek did not allow -UL- before consonants; of
course, o became v in Boeotian in the 3rd c. BC; variation of / v is found in more
Pre-Greek words). This case nicely shows that variation in Pre-Greek words is due to
different rendering of the sounds of a foreign language, and therefore has to be taken
seriously. ẞpáкaλov. þóлaλov (H.) probably attests a development *wrak- > ßpak-
(as Fur. 147 remarks on кaλαūpoч: "Die landläufige Etymologie <connecting> þéлw
ist wohl ohne weiteres aufzugeben."). σopóa. лaλioúpov ɛidos 'sorb-apple' (H.)
continues *sorw- (cf. Lat. sorbus, Fr. sorbier, Fur. 230).
It seems that there was no initial aspiration in Pre-Greek. Furnée has a few words
with ȧ-, έ- (one or two with i-; none with ó-, ǹ-, w-). Several of these are doubtful;
best is aчuaσá (aiμoí). One might conclude that the language had no h. This would
agree with the fact that aspiration is not a distinctive feature in the stops. However,
this conclusion is remarkable for "pws, "Eλλŋvεç and "Hoaστoç, which we expect to
be Pre-Greek words (but note that Myc. a-pa-i-ti-jo does not have a₂2-). Of course,
aspiration may have been added secondarily in Greek in individual cases, cf. the
variation in ǎôða / äqa and λedávŋ / éledávŋ, which is a variant of dɛλεdwvŋ.
However, Prof. Ruijgh pointed out to me that Mycenaean had toponyms (a²-ra-tu-
wa) and personal names (a₂-ku-mi-jo) with initial h-; it also occurs in inlaut (pi-a₂-la,
ko-ri-a₂-da-na); cf. further e-ma-a₂ (/Hermāhās/ 'Hermes').
Originally, I thought that Pre-Greek only had three vowels: a, i, u. The Greek
words concerned often have ε and o, but this would not be surprising, as the three
vowels have a wide phonetic range, and the phoneme /a/ may have sounded like [e]
or [o] in many environments. The main reason for me to assume this simple three-
vowel system was the fact that the system of suffixes has a, i, u, but not e, o. We have
-αy-, -ɩy-, -vy-; prenasalized -- -- -by-; likewise -a0-, -10-, -v0-; and
prenasalized -ave-, -1v0-, -uve-, but no forms with -εy(y)-, -oy(y)-, etc. The only
cases I noticed are 'Pηoкovos and öλovos (but as a variant of öλuvos), and
ŋoλóvŋ with a variant µη\(\)ávěŋ.

=== page 010 ===

XX
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxi
Recently, I have become more inclined to assume a system with the usual five
vowels, because there seems to be a distinction between the two variations α / ɛ and
ao, on the one hand, and a stable, not interchanging a, on the other. This would
point to a system with a, e and o. On the other hand, it is difficult to explain why the
suffixes do not show the same variation that we find in the root vowels.
It is essential that the palatalized and labialized consonants colored an adjacent a
to ε and o, respectively. On the effects of palatalized consonants see Beekes 2008: 46-
55. Fur. 340 has a rule a > o before o, w, v (e.g. kaλuẞóç / кoλuẞóc); this can now be
understood as the o-like realization of /a/ before high rounded vowels in the
following syllable (see 15.3.2).
So, e and o originally were variants of the phoneme /a/. It is difficult to establish
whether they had already become full phonemes in Pre-Greek. A good illustration of
the case is the name of Apollo. In Hittite, Appaliunas renders Apollon- (see Beekes
JANER 3, 2003). We know that Greek originally had Алελλ-, with -- arising from
-a- before the palatalized . The -o- developed only later in Greek, but I assume that
the Hittite form still shows the -a-. The Pre-Greek form was Apalun-.
I have long doubted (and still doubt) whether there was phonemic vowel length
in Pre-Greek. Greek substrate words quite often only have a form with a long vowel.
Vacillation is sometimes found, as in Opiváкη beside Opĭvač (see B 6.2), and note
ößpччoç beside ẞpiµóç, ßpiµn. Quite a different argument is the following: ǎxupov
and лíτũpov both mean ‘chaff; it is therefore probable that they contain the same
suffix -up-; but in the first word the u is short, while it is long in the second.
n
Note that often represents ā (уã\\íç / уη0-), and as our knowledge of the
relevant dialects is rather limited, we often simply do not know whether η represents
an older a or e. If we had not had Dor. σidãpos, we would not have known that it
contains an old ā. Also, Añµvos represents Aāµvoç. There are well-known Pre-Greek
words with <*ē, like σлηλαov.
n
I assume two diphthongs, ai and au. If there were no e and o, we do not expect
other diphthongs. A diphthong εu is rare (Fur. 353 Anm. 5; I found some 12 instances
in the whole of Furnée's material); it interchanges with av. Fur. 339 Anm. 2) calls &
"(in mehreren Fällen) nur eine Nebenform von at". Also, ou is rather rare, and we
may find ou more often, but mostly interchanging with other vowels (see the remark
on the suffix -oup-). See further section B6.1 on vowel variation.
Regarding the accentuation, I noted vacillation in: äßpaшç / -µíç; aiywλios / -1ós;
ǎxupos / -ós; ǎxwp / ȧxŵp; кópvdoç / kopudós; kopúdaλoç / kopvdaλλóç; µédiµvoç /
µediµvóç; oíkvog / σikvóç; üpiσxos / úpiσσós. Note also the almost identical forms
such as Avкayóç / lúkoчoç. This does not imply that the language had no clear
stress: the Greeks who adopted a word could simply have been uncertain about it.
The phenomenon may, however, be important heuristically: such variation is very
rare in inherited words.
2a. Characteristic sounds and sound groups
In Pre-Greek words, we find some sounds or clusters that are rare in PIE words. In
brackets, I give the variants.
}
1. av: Of course, au does occur in PIE words, but only when it derives from *h₂eu
(mostly in initial position) or eh₂u. Examples: ßλaūdɛç, ßpaúкaç, ypaúkalaç,
Kávavotpov, KagaÚpa, tpav áva; Aappavvdóc.
2. ẞ: As is well known, *b was rare in PIE. In Pre-Greek words, it seems to occur
relatively often. Examples: äßλapoɩ, àßúpßηλoç, ápßúlŋ, átápßaktos, ßápßiloç,
Oópuẞoç, kíẞaλoç. It is frequently found word-initially. Of course, ẞ may also go
back to a Pre-Greek labiovelar (i.e. labialized velar): e.g. Baoiλeúc, Myc. qa-si-re-u.
3. ẞd: The cluster is possible in PIE words, but it is rare (see on ẞ sub 2. above).
Examples: äßεlov, äßdnpa, äßdns, ïßdns, avto-káßdalos, kíßdŋlos, kvßáßda;
KouBi入iTTLa.
4. yd: Cf. Fur. 3185. There is nothing against PIE *gd, but it is infrequent. Of
course, the group is reminiscent of ẞd. Examples: äydvç, àµvydáλŋ, ydovлéw (cf.
ktvnéw), "ydŋ, kpíydavov, Aúydn.
5. yv: Example: iyvúç (iкvúc). On xv, qv, see the section on the suffixes.
6. Sv: The sequence is rare in IE words. Examples: άкidvóç, àλαлadvóç, ȧpáxιdvα,
Aɛnadvóc (λa-), σíлvdvoç; 'Apiádvn.
7. кT: The group is regular in PIE, but in Pre-Greek it is found with variants; see
B5.5. Examples: àßívktov, þáktai, diktv.
8. KX: The group can hardly be of IE origin, but it is not frequent. I noted þáкxap,
λákxa, oáкxap, ovêxáç; Báкxoç, Bpíakxoç, Búkxiç. The group -кx- is the geminate of
оп лч, TO.
X. Cf.
9. μv: The group is certainly possible in PIE words, but it is also frequent in
Pre-Greek. Examples: àµqι-кéλεµ,
µvoç, þаσчµánc, kpnävós,
入áuva, 入wpvivóv, uépuva, podauvos, oiyuuvov, oidpavov; AtÚuvios.
10. ov: The diphthong is perfectly IE, but it is found several times in Pre-Greek. I
do not think that Pre-Greek had a diphthong -ou-, but it may have arisen from e.g.
-ar", which often surfaces as -oup-. Examples: σεvdoúky, okiovpos, otpovłós,
tάyxovpoç, toûqoç, qávdoupoç, poñokoç, xloúvns.
11. 丌p:
The
group can hardly be of PIE origin, but it is rare in Pre-Greek words,
too. Like in the case of кX, it is the geminate of o. Examples: ȧpx₁áñóns (?); Σañóó
(Yαлqw).
12. pd: On a morpheme boundary, the group is possible in PIE. Examples from
Pre-Greek: ȧyépa, kañapdɛñσaɩ, kapdaµáλŋ.
13. pкv: A rare group, perhaps there is even no reason to speak of a group.
Examples: äßapkva, þɛpkviç.
14. pv (variants pd, vd): Examples: kíoipviç (-v8-), áxépda (-va), oкañépda. See
the section on the suffixes.
15. A σ occurs both word-initially and between vowels, where it has disappeared
in most inherited words. Initial: σápuττα, σауúрov, σáναлτν, σávбαλov,
oápUtta, gayÚprov, oávantly,
aappvpdeiv,aekova, außivn, aiyuuvov. Intervocalic: àyaov入入ic, ăyxovoa (ËyX-),
aïovo(o)a, aiuaσιá, αïσαкoç, äλεσov, Spóσoç. After resonant: ǎλσoç, þáλσaμov,
yɛloóv, yévoquos, pápoitros (-vitios).

=== page 011 ===

xxii
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
16. oẞ: The group is hardly known from inherited words (oẞévvчu is
problematic). Examples: ǎoßolos, Bíoßn, "Aoßetos. -σẞ- may continue Pre-Greek
-sg"-: Myc. ti-qa-jo may stand for /thisgaios/ toẞaños.
17. oy: Again, this group is hardly known from IE words. It may sometimes
continue -g, as in άuvoyéλā, Aσуɛláτaç (see 5.5). Examples: àλioyέw, voyívn,
páσyavov, áσyávdnc, moyíc.
18. σк, στ: These groups are well known from IE, but mostly in word initial
position. See section B5.5. Examples: Béokɛpol, þúotaž, kúotepol, λaotayɛi.
19. στλ: Though the cluster contains nothing that could not be IE, it occurs more
often in substrate words. Examples: äστ\iyyεç, σt\εyyis.
20. 10: The group can hardly be of PIE origin. In Pre-Greek, it is a variant of ɩɩ
and σo (see 5.5). Sometimes, it is clearly the geminate of 0: Aτíç beside Anvη.
Further examples: itОέλa, kótðvßoç, Пɛtðaλoí.
21. 00: The cluster is possible in inherited words. Example: váσкaqov.
22. Xu, XV: Rather rare in IE; Fur. 110 assumes that the nasal caused the aspiration.
Examples: Savxμóç, dаvxvα-, σаvõдóv.
23. Frisk gives some seventy lemmas with -. Many words are clearly Pre-Greek,
and there are no convincing Indo-European etymologies. That many of these words
are of substrate origin is also clear from the fact that there are variants with σ-.
Apparently, Pre-Greek did not have any difficulty with ps-, as Greek has so many
words with -. Originally, I thought that all words with - were Pre-Greek, but this
thesis cannot be maintained. Among the non-substrate words, чúλλa originally did
not have *ps-, and - for q- is secondary (see Lejeune 1972: 39); the verb uw may
well be non-IE.
24. w: Of course, w is perfectly IE, but it also occurs in Pre-Greek words.
Examples: àqiap@tic,ävOpwtog, ávwviç, áropwlog, àppw8éw, àoka入ónas,
Faokwvdas, àoftw入eiv, Ba入入wth, Kaoowpic, 入wpuzivóv.
25. Geminates (see also B5.8 on single / geminated consonants): Indo-European
had no geminates. Of course, geminates arose in Greek, but they are not very
frequent. I doubt whether Pre-Greek had geminates, but several occur in Pre-Greek
words (Brixhe 1976: 95 states that there were no geminates in this language). As
Pre-Greek had palatalized phonemes, I wonder whether was (often) represented by
M in Greek. In a similar vein, perhaps n' might be represented as vv, and ry as pp,
but this needs further investigation. For σσ and ɩɩ see B5.5. Unclear are dd, kê, лë,
and µµ (a palatalized my is a rare sound). Some further examples:
88:
Stops: dd: äddaı, äddık
KK: ákkadog, Bé入ekkog, 入ákkos(?)
лл: ǎуρɩллоç, λоÚллç
τt: ẞíttakoç, látta, káttos, þáttaßos, µéttes, µíttos; Mittakóç.
Liquids: 入入: à入入áng, &入入osting, àqí入入akav, Ba入入wth, B8É入入a, Bi入入iv, náte入入a
Ú
vv: ȧyávva, ßλévvos, yívvos, λaxávva; Aíktuvva
8 We also have to recall the instances of кX, л, Tе (see above).
!
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxiii
pp: ȧppáẞaka, ẞippn, ßippoč, kappóv
Sibilant σσ: aïovo(σ)a, äppioσa, yiooa.
2b. How to recognize words as Pre-Greek?
This appears to be relatively easy. A first indication is that a given word has no IE
etymology. Often, there is variation which is impossible to explain in Indo-European
terms. Therefore, the discussion of these variants is essential. Then, there are
numerous suffixes that are typical for Pre-Greek (see the list below). The meaning
may also provide an indication. The words concerned are often names of plants or
animals, or part of viticulture. Frequently, the words are sexual terms.
If we have some of the above features, it is quite clear that we are dealing with a
Pre-Greek word. The origin of the word is then indicated <PG in the dictionary. In
many cases, we do not have enough data and can only suspect that the word might
be Pre-Greek (the origin is then indicated as <PG?➤).
3. Prothetic vowel
Pre-Greek had a prothetic vowel, e.g. ȧoкáλapos beside кáλaqoç. In most cases, the
vowel is ȧ-. The numbers (Fur. 368ff.) are as follows: a ± 90, 0 10, ε 5, 1 3, v ø, ŋ 6, at 2.
Note that, generally speaking, a may interchange with o, ɛ, and at. Indeed, we have
cases where prothetic o interchanges with a, and the same holds for ε (e.g. ɛikλ- /
aikλ-, έyía / àчía). Although not all other cases can be explained away, it seems that
the phenomenon originally only concerned a. Examples: ȧyaσv\\iç / yŋ@vλXíç;
ákipic / Kippis; àkopvoi / kópvoy; àxpadafiÚ入a/Xpauadoidan; ávapitns/vnpitns;
άσкáλaßoç / (0)кaλaßwtnc; áxúvwWY / KÚVWY.
4. s-mobile
A large number of words shows an initial σ- before a consonant, which is absent in
practically identical variants. It occurs before a stop or m (so not before r, l, n); the
stop is mostly voiceless, sometimes aspirated; see Fur. 390f. Examples: yéλevos /
oxéλivos, (0)kidáqŋ, kikepos / okiykoç, (0)kopdúλŋ, þátalos / σñ-, néλeðos / on-,
pattáyns / on-, Opłykós (tplyxós) / otpiyxós, tomεt̃ov / σtvääεt̃ov, (σ)µýpivšos,
(0)μúpava. A prothetic vowel may appear before an s-mobile (Fur. 3908):
àoká入apog / okadapwtng/ kadapás, àopápayos / opápayos / pápay², àoká入apoc /
ká入apos.
5. Consonant variation
5.1 Voiceless/voiced / aspirated stop
Furnée's conclusion was that ‘Pre-Greek' was a non-Indo-European language, with
no recognizable cognates. This implies that the phonemic system may have been
different from that of Indo-European. Thus, he found that the stops show variation
between voiced, voiceless and aspirated, so that there presumably was no phonemic
distinction between voice and aspiration in the language. As there is no reason to
assume that this is a recent phenomenon, it strongly suggests that the language was
non-Indo-European. For example, лτшуóç belongs to a root ptāk- | ptōk- also seen
in éτáž, -кóç. Since such a variation is hardly understandable in Indo-European

=== page 012 ===

xxiv
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
!
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
XXV
terms, the word must be Pre-Greek. Furnée's discussion of this variation runs from
p. 115 till p. 200. Even if we allow for some mistakes, it is clear that there is abundant
evidence for this phenomenon.
5.2 Prenasalization
Before a stop, a nasal may be present or not in Pre-Greek words. E.g. кáxpus /
кayxpuç, kopuчń / кópvµßoç, σaλáßη / σaλáµßη, etc. The phenomenon is extremely
frequent, but its precise origin is not known (prenasalized consonants?).
5.3 Nasalization
A consonant is replaced by a homorganic nasal: Kıdaqɛúɛv / кɩvaqɛúεv, qλŋdva /
4入ńvapos.
5.4. Labial stops / m / ų
There are three interchanges: labial stop / µ, labial stop / Ƒ and µ / F.
F
Labial stopu (Fur. 203-227). Examples: apßúλŋ / äpµvla n.pl.; ßápßitos /
Bápitog; KÚlvdig / kÚBivic; 入vkáßag / 入vkáuas; uÚotaE / BÚotaž; okó入vuog /
akó入ußos; pápuakov / póppavta; opápayog / auápayog.
Labial stop F (Fur. 228-242). Examples: τéеηла, еáлo / еаñµа; кóßaλoç /
kava入ós; kagoapás / kaoaÚpa; kpáupos/kpaipos.
μ/F (Fur. 242-247). A difficulty here is that Greek did not preserve a Ƒ in most
cases, so that we often just find zero, and the F can only be reconstructed. This gives
rise to a certain degree of uncertainty. Perhaps, we have to reckon with the
possibility of a development ụ > b. Examples: ßaovµvi-átŋs / Baovv-íaç; kpíµvov /
кpívov; µédµvos / ƒεðiµvos; σíyvµvos / σiyūvos (also σiyuvvos). The evidence
comprises 8 or 9 words in -μvoç. It is found six times word-initially: e.g. µñλov /
ov; μεów / övvλεúw; notе μεoч / àépoч (εpoч), where the latter forms
could continue *à-fεpoy / *-fεpoy with a prothetic vowel. Note further кúaμoç /
kúμnxa, which perhaps continues *кvƑ-aμ-, *кvμ-ηk-.
5.5 Stops interchanging with σ(σ), with stop + σ/τ or with σ + stop
This kind of variation is quite complicated. I distinguished no less than 10 (or even
15) different types. They may be represented as follows (C = consonant):
a. labials
1. C/ Ct
2. C/Cs
3. C/SC
b. velars
K/KT
K/OK
4. Ct / Cs
/ T
π/W
(π/σл)
πT / Y
KT /
KT / OK
(OK)
OK / 00
5. Ct/sC
6. CssC
7. Cs/ss
E100
8. SC/ss
8c. C/ ss
dentals
9. t / ss
T/OT
10. t / st
K/00
The analysis of these variants is not easy, and I mainly present the data here. A
question that needs to be explained is why exactly s or t are involved in the given
variation.
The most complicated instance is 5b, where we find кɩ/σк. In fact, the most
complicated phenomenon contains most information, and can be solved best. In this
case, one expects a cluster with k, i.e. a consonant before or after the k. One of the
two expected clusters must have undergone metathesis. As Greek did undergo a
metathesis ™к > кT (and no metathesis of σk or ε), we may assume that precisely this
phenomenon was operative here. Thus, for an earlier stage we may reconstruct an
interchange σк/Tк. This interchange can be easily explained by assuming a
consonant, probably unknown to Greek, which resulted either in σ or in t. In my
interpretation, this must have been a palatalized dental, i.e. /ty. For instance,
άµvoyéλa / àµvydáλŋ was probably *amutgala, represented first as *amusgala or
*amudgala, the latter yielding *amugdala. A less clear example is Asklepios, who was
called A(1)σкλαлóç or A(1)yλaлóç. It could be that the name was *Atklap-, giving
*A(i)sklap- or *A(i)dglap-. In the latter form, metathesis did not operate because
*Agdlap- was not tolerated in Greek; the dental was then simply lost. Needless to
say, it often happens that only one variant is found. The strange feature or phoneme
may also be dismissed altogether, as in diкɛiv next to Síσкoç and Síкtvov.
**
One might suppose that all variants in this group are due to a palatalized dental,
but this is not evident, as consonant clusters are rather rare, and as there are no
suffixes beginning with a consonant (except n, r, etc.). We may be unable to
determine what exactly happened in each case.
Type 4 is treated by Fur. 2633. Since Pre-Greek did not distinguish voice and
aspiration in stops, these often vary; so if we speak of kt or кT, this also includes
realization as xe, such as in μópox0os below. If we consider the variation with labials,
as in pt/ps, it is clear that we are dealing with a labial followed by a dental. The dental
could also appear as s, so it is clear that the phoneme concerned was a palatalized
dental, which I note /ty/. This means that we are dealing with a group pty. In the same
way, with a velar we have kt.
The example Supa next to Supápa is well-known and clear. Furnée further
gives уvадлτоúç. Xaλivoúc (H.) beside yλauчoi ✗αλivoì στóματos (H.) and
comparеs лτíλоv with Dor. víλov. His example óлτóç 'cooked' next to ŏov is less
evident.
Among the forms with a velar, there is no problem with µópoxеoç / µópoчoç. The
best known example is 'Epɛɛúç (also 'Epixɛúc) next to Epɛxσɛs on Attic vases. I
have no opinion on 'Epixovios; it may be a Graecisized form, and in this case it is
unimportant for Pre-Greek. See further the ethnonyms Дατúλε-rtoi, Anλó-rtys,
Taλn-yoi, Aadé-oi and Tpavi-poí. Other forms are less clear.
9 Since the word yittákiov / notáкtov ‘pistachio' is probably an oriental loanword, there are no good
examples for an interchange oσ / ot.

=== page 013 ===

xxvi
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
There may have been series with three forms, with kt / ks, pt / ps and also k or p. I
can only mention "Apaxos / Apáεns next to "Apayos, and perhaps, next to dɩépa /
Supápa, the verb dέow (together with dɛy-), for both cf. Fur. 263.
Above, we assumed that a labial or a velar could be followed by a palatalized
dental /t. If this is right, we can also postulate that this consonant (labial or velar)
was followed by a normal dental. Of course, this yielded pt and kt. I assume that the
second consonant of this group (the dental) could have been dropped, which yielded
single p or k. This explains the tуре л(τ)оλεµоç (Fur. $50) and ẞpóyxos (with
prenasalization) beside ßpóxos (Fur. §51).
I will shortly review the 10 (15) types (I call the labials 1a, etc., the velars 1b, etc.).
чa. л may represent a single phoneme p', as we saw in B1. Examples: (Fur. 315ff.):
уVÛÑ- / уVÛÑɩ- (уvvæεt-); кoλúµßaiva / кoλúßdaiva; kíßaλos / kißdnç; Xúnn / Xúnta;
without variants note кpóσσoôеov, σappvôеɛïv.
1b. кT is most probably explained like 5b, discussed above (so ib is a part of 5b).
Examples (Fur. 319ff.): ǎpakis / ápáktyv; µoyéw / µoxеéw; лɛλɛкáv / onéλektos;
ákakia / káktOG.
2a. may result from *pt. It is remarkable that there is no 2b. к / ‹, as ε is
unproblematic in Greek."
ça. л / σл, b. к / σk: Both may represent *p, tk. Examples: ¤íσßŋ / Đíßic (Fur.
292²), þékos / Béokepoi; ïxλa / ľʊkλαɩ; µáкɛλλa / µáokŋ (ßáoên); µñkoç / µúσkoç;
páкɛλov/páσкwλoç (Fur. 295ff.).
4ª. лτ / ỵ, b. кт / & were discussed above and may continue *pty, kt; they may
belong together with 2a. Examples: dɩóðépa / diyápa (Fur. 263 Anm. 3); xaλußdiкóç
/ Xáλvyoç (Fur. 318, 324); µópox¤os / µópošos (Fur. 263 Anm. 3).
5b. KT / OK was discussed above. Examples: άuvoyéλa / àµvydáλŋ (Fur. 301 Anm.
2); Síoкoç / SiкTU(OV) (Fur. 279, 319).
6a. ¼ / σл, b. / oк. Fur. 393 simply considered the interchange as due to
metathesis, which, of course, is possible. *sp, *sk may represent *p, tk. Examples
(Fur. 393): áσлívðɩov / á¥ívðɩov; óσôūç / чúaɩ; ïσxíov / išūç; poñakoç / počós.
7b. § / σσ. If § represents *kt, the k may have disappeared in other cases (which
did not give ε) after which * became σσ. Examples: кpižóç / кpiσσós (Fur. 1305);
σíßda / žíµßa (Fur. 317); τpaúžava, tpáčavov / τpaúσavov (Fur. 2867²); ¡§áλŋ / iσáλŋ
(ioσéλa, itéλa); Ovλins / OvσσεÚç.
8b. σk / σσ can be explained parallel to 7b: *ťk > σк or, with loss of the k, *ť > σơ.
Example (Fur. 300): Úpiσxos / úpíσσoç.
9a. τ / σσ. This is the well-known element that yielded σσ / TT. Furnée does not
discuss it under this heading, because he gives only one phoneme (letter) and its
variants; for instance, he discusses σK / кT under к / кt. The situation is also different
here, as we are able to discern a distribution among the Greek dialects, and attribute
the different renderings of these loanwords to dialectal developments. Still, the fact
remains that a foreign element was rendered in different ways, as with all other
10
I have some difficulty with Furnée's section XI (Fur. 323-329). My conclusion is that a variation C /
Co cannot be proven, although some instances remain difficult to explain otherwise.
|
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxvii
phenomena discussed here. Fur. 253 has the heading t, 8, 0 / σ(σ), . I think this
should be reformulated as t (§, 0), TT (TO) / σ ($), σƠ, i.e. ɩ with its usual variants §, 0;
or the geminated ɩɩ (with its expected variant τ0, which is the Greek form of
geminated 00), interchanging with σ or σσ. If the was [sd], it does not fit in well. As
to its interpretation, it could represent single **, which was rendered ɩɩ or σσ, or
single σ, τ (the variant ( would then fit in, but one would also expect a variant στ).
Examples (Fur. 253ff.): кITTÓÇ / кɩσσÓç, кρóτɩоν / кρóσσоеоν, µúðτívé / poívn,
Teitov/gitov, tion/o[入on, yádoc / yálas, dow入eiv/dquw入ń.
I think that the phoneme rendered by σσ, Att. TT (called the foreign phoneme or
Fremdphonem) was a palatalized velar, which I write as k³, cf. Beekes JIES 37 (2009):
191-197. This would be parallel to the development of inherited velar + yod, which
gave σơ, Att. ɩɩ, as in quláσow, qvλáïïw. This interpretation is confirmed by
Đáλaσσa, áλαττα, where we have a variant daλáyɣav. Đáλασσav (H.). Here we see
that after the nasal (prenasalization is well known in Pre-Greek), the palatal feature
of the consonant was dropped. This resulted in a velar (here realized as an aspirate).
The variant shows that we may be dealing with a velar in cases of σơ / ɩɩ. We can
also compare кoλúдßava beside кoλúẞdaiva, which had p'; again we see that the
palatal feature was lost after the inserted nasal.
There is a third representation. We know that the name of Odysseus was
'DAvoσev-, 'Duttεv-. This means that it probably had a palatalized velar, *k³. But we
also find Ovλžεúç (Ibyc. apud Diom. Gr. p. 321 K, Hdn. Gr., Plut.), a form which was
at the basis of Latin Ulixes. This form was taken from a Western Greek dialect,
probably Doric. Therefore, a third representation of the foreign phoneme is --.
10a. Tστ may be from *t giving σ or, with loss of the t, * > σσ. Examples
(Fur. 301ff.): Ballwτý / Ballaúσtiov; µáτpu̟\\o / µáστ\\; µútis / µúotač;
natíλŋ / naotíλn.
As we saw, it is very difficult to determine what exactly happened in each case; on
the other hand, it is clear that almost all variation can be understood if we start from
just a few assumptions.
5.6 Velar / labial / dental stops: labiovelars
There is limited evidence for variation between velar and labial, between velar and
dental, and between labial and dental, and between all the three classes (Fur. 388ff.).
We find:
к/л, ẞ к/τ, 8 л/τ
Y/B y/8 B/8
X/Q Q/0 X/Q/0
Y/B/8
It is remarkable that the variants mostly agree in voice / aspiration. Since examples
of this phenomenon are not particularly numerous, this may be an indication that
the words concerned are not of Pre-Greek origin, but due to borrowing from a
different substrate, for instance. Examples:
кл: кλάvιoν/лλavíç
y / ẞ: ẞpáкaλov / þóraλov; yλéñw / ßλénw; xáλiç / paλikpóv
K / T: ảσkávỒŋg / åσtávdns

=== page 014 ===

xxviii
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxix
y / d: yáλatµov / ȧdaλtó̟µov
ñ / τ: þaлaívɛɩ / Bataívei
ß / §: σáµßaλov / σávdaλov
∮ / 日: yvupai / yvidos
y / B / 8: yépupa / Bépupa / dépupa.
It is tempting to assume labiovelars to explain these cases, but some cases may have a
different origin (thus, ßpáкaλov / póлαλov could be due to dissimilation in the first
variant). On the existence of labiovelars in Pre-Greek, see above on the phonemic
system.
5.7. Dentals/liquids
There are some instances of variation between dentals (including n) and liquids (l,
r). This variation is incidental. Examples (Fur. 387f.):
a. 8 / λ: äßλapos / ßdapoí (Fur. 330²7), Sáøvn / Xáqvn, 'Odvooeús / 'Olvooɛús. Cf.
Myc. gen. da-pu₂-ri-to-jo /dapurinthoio/ / Xaẞúpivеoç, кαλáдшvеa / Myc. ka-da-mi-
ta. The interchange 8 / λ and the fact that Linear B has signs for da, de, di, etc.
(which Lejeune explained by assuming a specific, unusual sound d) might point to a
dental fricative X.
日 / 入: Oánta / 入átta
v / λ: vítpov / Xitpov
b. 8 / p: oißda / Ziyippar
v / p: B入ñxvov / 入ñxpov
c. \ / p: å¶npíc / ášŋλís, kpíßavos / kλíßavoç, kpŵµač / kλwµač.
5.8. Simple/geminate
Except for a few isolated cases, we find this interchange in v / vv, but more notably
in A. On T/T and σ/ σσ see above sub 5.5. Cf. Fur. 386f. Examples:
v / vv: ǎvnov (also τ) / ǎvvηov (also τ); τηµεvíc / τßεvva. In this context, note the
suffix -vvv-.
λ / Aλ: ßαλ(X)Ńv; Ovλíç / Ovλλíç; σлéλɛðoç / σñéÀÀŋší dat.pl.; µaкéλŋ / μάкελα (this
probably derives from PG *-ala-). Note yɛãσ(σ)ov, σápĩσɑ / σápɩσσa, and the case of
Adńvn / Atig / Attikóg.
5.9. σ-/zero
We discussed σ / zero before consonant under s-mobile above, section B4.
An -s- from Pre-Greek is normally maintained. The only instances that I know of,
where it may have disappeared, are (cf. Fur. 241): σúpixos, dúpidoos / úpɩxós (also
-íσkoç, -íσxoç, -íoσoc); oußáλlaç / úẞáλλns; σaуnvη / Cypr. ȧyávα; σɩлúŋ / iлúa.
Perhaps EXAάç beside Σεoí belongs here, too. Another instance could be ǎлov,
which is cognate with Lat. pirum which points to -pis-.
5.10. K-, T-/ zero
There are instances where a velar or a dental may be absent in initial position (Fur.
391, and 1315). Dentals may also be absent in inlaut. Examples:
!
K / zero: kávdapog / ävOpač, Ka入iv8Éouan / å入ív8w, kóyXval / öyXval, KavOń入lov /
áven入cov.
y / zero: yívvos / ivvós, but this form may be a late development. As an explana-
tion, one could think of a uvular 9.
τ/zero: τáуoupos / ǎyxoupos, τηуavov / ñуavov, tíquov /íquov (with ī in LSJ);
S / zero: dɛɛdwvn / έλedávŋ (also έ-).
Loss of a dental in inlaut: véτwлov / víшлov, iОovλíç / ïovlís, ȧoídapos / àσíapos.
5.11. V-,
λ- / zero
v- and λ- can also be absent (Fur. 391f): vápeα / ǎpea (also ǎ-). após / aiynpóc,
λ¤µvé / äýín, λatµevεía / áτµýν. Perhaps, it concerns palatalized n', l, which
are pronounced very 'light'.
5.12. Metathesis, shift of aspiration
There are instances of metathesis. It mostly concerns p, sometimes λ. The consonant
jumps to the other side of the vowel or the consonant: kipoós / kpiσoÓS, KPIĘÓS;
tépµɩvƉos / tpéµç. Cf. Tεpµíλai / Tpεµíλai; ǎprí§ / áñpí§; kédpora / кépdoлa;
váðpaž / vápěně. In most cases, it cannot be determined what the original configur-
ation was. In a case like pẞws / εüpwç, where ẞ may stand for (or continue) F, I
would think that the F was anticipated. It may concern an original rw.
The cases of σл / ¼ and oк / ε are discussed in 5.5 above.
Shift of aspiration is found in some cases: Opłykós / τplyxós, áеpayévη /
ȧvôpáxvn. In the case of opáτуη / лávη the metathesis seems to have occurred in the
later history of Greek (Beekes 2003).
5.13 Secondary phonetic developments
1.
We
may assume secondary phonetic developments, either in Greek or perhaps
already in the original language. One might consider:
ßd- > ßλ-: ßdapoí / äßλapot. For this case, cf. 5.7b § / λ.
ßd > ßp: ßdέλλɩov/pέov (Fur. 308)
yd- > d-: ydoñños / doñños
Sv- > yv-: Svópos / yvópos
kµ- > µ-: kµéλe0/µà¤еov
у-> σл-: чεvбvλ-/σлоубúλη? See 5.5.6 above.
y- > o-: yéqas / oɛiqa; yittakos / oíttakoç; cf. Yanqw, Zanqw.
2. a >o before v in the following syllable. The a was probably pronounced a little
higher before the u, and was realized as [å], which resulted in o. Examples: ȧžovyyía
> óžúyyɩov, kaλúßŋ > kóλußoç, *okapaß- (kápaßoc) > okopóßulos, dopúkvov for
*8(a)puкv-.
5.14 Other variation
There are a few instances of isolated and puzzling variation. I mention just one, the
word for 'night', where we have чéqaç, kvéyac, dvóqoç, (óqoç. I think that in some
of these cases, the solution may be found in a cluster. Carian, for example, allows an
initial cluster kbd-. Such clusters would have been simplified in Greek. In an
inherited word, we have the parallel of Lat. pecten, Gr. êtɛíç, which is supposed to

=== page 015 ===

XXX
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxxi
continue *pkt. If we assume a cluster *kdn- in our example, it may have been
reduced to kn- or, with loss of the first consonant, to dn-. Thus, the process is the
same as the reduction yd- > 8-, see 5.13 above. Such variant simplifications are typical
for loanwords. In this way, we could connect two of the words; but I see no way to
connect the other two.
6. Vowel variation
6.1 Single vowels (timbre)
The vowels show many variants. I will discuss them in the following order: first a,
then e and o; and within each of these groups first the short vowel, then the
diphthongs, then the long vowel (and the long diphthongs, but these hardly occur).
Note that a variation x / y is not repeated under y.
1. the vowel a.
1a. a ε has 80 occurrences in Furnée's material (347). Examples: ǎyxovσa /
Byrona, &pos / ěpuros yádvdol/yéxivo, Cake入tic/Čeke入tic, Kaiata/
KAIÉTAç, káµños / kéµлop, кáxpus / kέyxpoç, σávdvě / σevdoúkn.
ib. ao. This interchange also occurs frequently. Fur. 339 mentions that he found 80
instances. Examples: άovyyía / óúуyiov, ȧppwdéw / oppwdéw, ypáßiov /
yoßpíaɩ, ǹñíaλos / ǹлíolos, кáßač / kóßakτpa, кαλúßη / кóλußos, Aukayós /
Aúkoчoç.
1c. a / at (Fur. 336ff.). Examples: άкpaιový / άкpaлvýs̟, àσúpŋlos / aiσúqiOS,
Аáуμаτα /Аαíучаτα. The there is due to the following palatalized consonant.
id. a av (Fur. 30237). Examples: каvαúστρov / кáváστрov, μváσov/μúσov; ǎo
/ avλač. In the last example, the v is probably due to the following labialized
phoneme lw.
1e. α / w: кλádos / klŵvač.
1f. ate (Fur. 352 Anm. 4, 339 Anm. 2). Examples: кapíα / кεɩρíα, кúлαιρоs /
кúлερоç, λαιαí / Aɛia. Both at and ɛ are due to the following palatalized
consonant.
1g. av ev (Fur. 353 Anm. 5). Examples: Aavкavín / λevkavín, nétavpov / rétevpov;
avλaževλáкa.
1h. av / w, o (Fur. 301³²). Examples: кaσaúpa(s) / кaσwpíç, еañµа / ¤ãµα, σañσaε /
TWolkes, BaÚka入ov / Boros, Kadaipoy / Ko入入Wpopov / Ko入入ópopov.
1i. à aι (Fur. 338). Examples: Anapyos / λaí¤apyos, Aŋkáw / Aaiкáčw, лýуavov /
paikavov.
1j. α / ā. Examples: Aados (Andiov) / Aãdos (Ańdiov).
2. the vowel ε.
!
2d. ε Ev (Fur. 115). Example: äpуετoç / ǎρкεvƉoç.
2e. Et / at: see al.
2f. Ein (Fur. 339 Anm. 2). Examples: кɛíеov (XεÍTIOV) / кÝÐιOV, Xεapós apóç.
2g. Ev / ε: see ε / εv.
2h. Ev / av: see av.
2i. εn (Fur. 35842). Examples: Evστpov / ηvvστpov, péppés pépμŋpα, чáкελov /
Bákndov, undea/uédea (uélea); II入ayóves/Iledayóves.
2j. 11 / 1 (Fur. 171114). Examples: ßλñτov / Bλíτov, σкñvos / σкíva, /
YuÚBLov.
3. the vowel o.
3a. o/a: see a.
3b. o / t (Fur. 1917). Examples: ăkovog / ăkivos, i邙pirador / pikada, "OvoyaLv /
ÖVLYALV.
3c. o / v (Fur. 358ff.). Examples: öλovos / öλuvos, σкoloßpέw / σкolvßpós, okútn
/ -kótta, kudwviov / кodávɛa, kupoćas / kopois, npútavis / épótavis, toɲɛtov /
στуллεν. о and u were phonetically very close, and not distinguished
phonologic-ally (cf. on ε / 1).
o v
3d. oov (Fur. 359). Examples: ẞpóкoç / þρоÛкoç, кOλoτέa / кoλоÚTεa (also -λv-,
-入w-).
3e. o / w (Fur. 279). Examples: уvoτέpa / уvwτέpa, кoλλwpoßov / кoλλópoẞov,
qaoiwlos / qaoiolos (also -oulos), wpvyyes / őpuč, -yos; woxoi / boxn.
3f. ot / v (Fur. 127). Example: xpaμadoïλai / ȧxpadaµúλa (áкpaµúλa).
3g. otov (Fur. 358). Examples: кolovtía / koloitía (кoλotέa), yoúdiov / yoíðns?
3h. ov/v (Fur. 12029). Examples: ктÚлоç / уdovлεw, кpoūvaι / уpūvóc.
3i. ovw (Fur. 133). Examples: μwкáoµαι /µovкýšεt; λoúñηç / λáßηě (Fur. 148).
3j. w/n. Example: еpwvač / àvеpývη.
3k. w / v (Fur. 30235). Examples: (wytos / Túyyoç, vσσwños / iσσúñoç, λwßɛúw /
入upálerv.
31. oɛ. Example: yopyupa / yɛpyupa
4. 1 v. There is some variation between 1 and v, but I do not know how to interpret
it. Examples (Fur. 364ff.): aiovµváw / aiσчµváw; àvé píσкos / även pvσkov; ßídŋy /
ßudoí; ßpikós / ßpukóç; (úyaστpov / σiyiotpov; kiváлETOV / KUVOÛлεÇ; Kúßeols /
kíßioiç; µápoirnos / µáðvñños.
5. v /ɛ. Example: yupyaƉós / yɛpyaƉoç.
The behavior of the diphthongs may be summarized as follows:
al / El
and (vice versa) El / at
2a. E
1
a: see under a.
l
2b. (Fur. 355ff.). Examples: Bλítvε / Bλétveç, εßíσкoç / iẞíσкoç, déлaç / Mуc.
dipa, Ěvtußov/vtuBos, Ke入入óv/ KiddiE, KI入入ipas/ke入入ipas, KÚTEDOG / KÚTLOOR,
λéσqoç / σлos (q). The e was not phonologically distinguished from i, and they
were phonetically close.
2c. ɛ / 1 / v (Fur. 3545). Example: кɛxpáμos / kíxpaµos (kiykpáµac) / kúxpakos.
av / εv, w
Ol / U, Ov
Ev / av
ov / v, Ol, w
All this variation is understandable in terms of adaptation of a three-vowel system.

=== page 016 ===

xxxii
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxxiii
6.2. Long / short:
One may doubt whether Pre-Greek had a distinction of long and short vowels (see
B1). We do find ŋ and w, however, but not very often, and the latter has several
variants. On the other hand, the variations w/ o and ŋ / ε are not very frequent
(although in this case also the difference in timbre may have been important,
depending on the Greek dialect). Variation between long en short I and v is frequent,
especially in suffixes: yηðvov / уáðɩa, kúßeois / kíßnois, dißis / Oißɩç, kpiµvov /
Kpivov, OpivaE / Apivákn; niúlov/hódiov, otov
кápaẞoç / kapáµßios (cf. кηpaqíç), qɛvāкílw / лηуηкí 'deceivе'; '((-) /
уεv(-); уvoτépa / yvwtέpa.
There is some evidence for short vowel + CC alternating with long vowel + C: e.g.
µñkoç / µúσkoç; Aápiσa / Aápiσσa; see B 1 on -1}, -v§.
6.3. Single vowel/diphthong:
There are several instances where a diphthong varies with a single vowel. They can
be found above (6.1). Most frequent is a / at, but this is due to the effect of a
following palatalized consonant. We further find a / av, ε / εv, and ou / v and ot / v.
In two cases we find diphthong alternating with a long vowel: at / ã, εt / ŋ. Examples
were given above.
6.4. Rising diphthongs?
Relatively frequent in Pre-Greek words are sequences of a more closed vowel
followed by a more open one, sequences that are not found in IE. They would be
rising diphthongs if they formed one syllable, but in fact we may have to do with two
syllables. Examples are:
-ɛa-: σɛãyúv (σL-, OV-)
-la-: Batiákn, Oiaσoç, Opiaµßoç, oíaλov, qiáλn, qiapóç. Note σɩāywv (oɛ-, ov-)
-ɩv-: ivyń
-va-: ẞpvaλíwv, yúaλov (yvɛ-), кúaµoç, rúaλoç, rúavov, ovaypís
-vε-: yvéλɩov (yúaλov), núɛlos (ñva-)
Remarkable, too, is the sequence -wv- in лшv(у), μwÚç.
6.5. Secondary vowels (or elision)
Sometimes, words show a vowel that is absent in nearly identical forms. It mostly
concerns vowels between a stop and a resonant. It is often not clear whether the
presence or the absence of a vowel is secondary. See Fur. 378-385. Examples: ẞpάyxia
/ ßapáуxia; dopúкvov for *SpuкV- in στpυXV-; σкépßolos / σкέpaqos; kvúča /
(a)kóvula; okópodov/okópdov; tovopi(w/tovepi(w; Apenvia / Aprvia; kvwy /
KIVÁÆETOV / KUVOoñлεç; Kopúßavtes / Kúpẞavtes.
1. Reduplication
C. Morphology
Some forms seem to have reduplication, though we often cannot demonstrate this.
Most frequent is partial reduplication, where only the first consonant and a vowel
are repeated. The vowel is mostly ε or 1.
Examples: Béẞpa; ßé(µ)ßpoc; уáyуaшov; yayyλiov; yayypaiva; yiyapτov;
уíуyλuдoç; кíкuẞos; σéovqoç / Ziovqoç (cf. σópos); μεчαíкvλov (also µ-); vεvino;
σéσελ(C); oíovpа (also -upvα); μεμßρáç(?); perhaps кíкчµοç; кíxραµоç (also кε-, кv-,
KIYK-); Sevбpúw. Also the names Kéкρoч; Пεлáрnos; Titaphσios; Aéλɛyɛç. With
prenasalization we find τεvерη, ε (cf. ȧvepηdwv, Opava). In these
examples, I neglect the fact that there may (or may not be prenasalization.
Other reduplication vowels are found in: λáλaµç (cf. λaïλay), кoкpúç, perhaps
also уηñ
Intensive reduplication in: μópдopos (opдpaíα), µapµapvyn.
More difficult to judge are yέλyıç next to ảyλïç (perhaps from *yɛ-yλ-, à-yλ-),
képka next to ǎкpɩç (if from *кɛ-кp-, ȧ-кp-). Also Mεußλíapos beside Bλíapos (cf.
μεдßрác), Mεдẞλíç = Méλoç, also Mчuaλλíç.
µεµßρáç), Mεµßλis
A completely different type is perhaps found in άµáµažvç (cf. άµačíc), and
perhaps also àµαfuðádes.
2. Suffixes
2.1 Introduction
It appears that most suffixes have the same structure. They contain a consonant; if
this is a stop, it can be prenasalized, i.e. -ẞ- or -μß-, -0- or -v0-, etc. The stop has its
usual variants, like ẞ / л / Q, etc., although mostly one of these is predominant. The
suffix usually starts with one of the vowels of the language, mostly a, ɩ, v (we find ε
or o only rarely, e.g. öλovos beside öλuvos). Thus, we may find e.g. ayy - tyy -
vyy; ave – ive – vv0, etc.
A different structure is present in suffixes containing -v- (mostly followed by a
vowel) directly after the root-final consonant: e.g. кúðvoç, лσáкvα, μóλυνov,
Qεvaкviç, σaτapvíc. In this way, the groups -pv-, -Sv-, -кv-, -μv- in Pre-Greek words
probably originated. In the case of -uv-, we often find a vowel again: -ɑµv-, -qv-,
-vμv-. The groups -μv- and -pv- are especially frequent. They are very important, as
they are found in Etruscan, which for the rest shows little agreement with Pre-Greek;
-uv- is found as far as in Cappadocian (see Beekes BiOr 59 (2002): 441f.). Perhaps,
the
groups -avv-, -IVV-, -vvv- arose in this way, too.
Other consonants are found in suffix-initial position, too: e.g., -p-, -8-, -y-, rarely
-入-.Examples: wudpós, kÚpidpa, navaypic, pá入apos; okanépda; 入ádapyos; ǒviyiv.
It is often possible to determine to which series the Pre-Greek consonant
belonged. Thus, -aɩv- could render -any-, while -al- seems to have resulted in -aλλ-
(or -- with coloring of the vowel). Likewise, -εup- could represent -ar-. This
thesis would be nicely supported by the segment -aup-, if this represents -ar"- (e.g.
aupoσxádɛç beside ȧpaσxádɛç, if this form had *-ar"-). Cf. B₁ above.

=== page 017 ===

xxxiv
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
XXXV
Another type of suffix has σ followed by a dental: кávασov (-στpov), λaðτpóv or
another stop vepvσkov, aúpoσxáç, кavvaßíσкa; these forms may have been partly
adapted to Greek suffixes (-τpov). See below on the suffix -σt-.
A form such as -ɛut- is deviating; we do not often find a diphthong before the
consonant. Does it stand for *-aut- from -atw? Cf. -aių- in λatov, where we may
suspect ay" or awy (but it may be part of the root). See further section B1.
Not seldom do we find a long and a short vowel with a suffix (= consonant), e.g.
10 – īе, vê – ūк. In the case of up, one might again think of ur > uir, although r³ is a
rare phoneme (like m❜).
2.2 Survey of the suffixes
In principle, we find one of the three vowels of the language followed by a
(prenasalized) consonant: a, i, u + (m)P, (n)T, (n)K. The groups actually found are, in
Greek letters (forms in brackets are rare or less frequent):
auß
1.
2.
aNC
iNC
UNC
UB
3.
4.
5.
(avt)
avǒ
6.
ave
7.
8.
9.
ayy
tvd
[Ve
Lyy
(UVT) uvǒ
(uvė)
VYY
So, we do not find: 1. VNë and 3. VNô, 7. VNê, 9. VNX (except for Saλayxav).
In the same way, we find vowel + C. The consonant may have the normal
variation: plain, voiced, aspirated. A palatalized consonant could color a preceding
and/or a following /a/ to [ɛ], which may also appear as ɛt. This phenomenon is often
seen in languages with palatalized consonants, such as Russian and Irish. Thus, we
find -ar represented as -atp- (-εup- is also possible). A palatalized -- may be
rendered as a geminate -^^-.
If a labialized consonant followed or preceded an a, this vowel may have been
perceived as (an allophone of) /o/. For example, -ar"- may be represented as -aup-,
with anticipation of the labial element, but also as -oup-, in which case the a was
colored.
The suffixal consonant may be geminated; as there is frequent variation between
single and geminated consonants in the language, there possibly was no opposition.
Vowels could be either short or long; in suffixes, a long vowel was quite frequent.
A long ū was sometimes represented as w.
2.3 The material
The examples are mostly taken from Furnée, to whom I refer for details. Words can
also be checked in the present dictionary. Variants are given in brackets. I added
geographical names (TN) from Fick 1905, and some more material, with references.
1. -ap-(o-) (Fur. 107):àypákapos, a入(入)áns, àoká入apos, attéde/apos, kávvapos,
кóλλaßoç, µéσ(σ)αßov, λατpaßóç, µáττaßoç. TN Kαττáßioç (Rhodes, Fick 47),
Káστaßos (Caria).
2. -αу-: ȧpлaу- (cf. Chantraine 1933: 397ff.), λáτaž, ovpač.
3. -ayy-o-: σqápay yoç.
3a. -ayx-: Saλáyxav.
4.-ad-:àpaoyádes, ueippás, oupá8.
5. -α-0-: ȧσлáλaƉoç, yupуaðóç, σлúpaðο. TN Yρvátov (Epidauros).
6. -at-/-ε(1) before a vowel: There are words in -ata / -ε(1) a, such as уpччέa /
уρччεía (also уpu̟µεĩα) / уpu̟шαíα (note the hesitation in the accentuation). I
suggest that the suffix was -ay-(a), which was pronounced as [-œya] or [-eya] (we
saw that ε often varies with at). The speakers of Greek identified the suffix with
Gr. -at- or -εt-, but the -y- could also be lost. In this way the three variant forms
can be explained. Further examples are кoλoɩτéα / кoλ(o)vτέα, кopxupéα
(кopкódρva in H. is probably an error); кódεα / кódɛα (note the short a), beside
кwбvia / кwdía (these are not entirely clear to me, but cf. Aµáðva / Aµáеɛiα).
Furthermore, *-ay-a is likely to be the same suffix as -ɛtă which makes feminine
names, e.g. Aµáλðɛia, IIŋveλóñeia, 'Iqчédɛia (note that in Myc. Ipemedeja, the
-j- is preserved, cf. Ruijgh 1957: 1553). Of course, many place names end in -ɛta:
Kaduɛía, Kaλaúpɛia, Kɛpúvɛia, Mídɛia, Σkɛλɛpdɛía, Aɛßádɛia, etc.
The final was often adapted to -aía after the dominant type, which is derived
from the adjectives in -años (see Chantraine, Form. 91): type ávaуkaiŋ; cf.
阝putaia, Sipkaia, oßaia.
We also find -ɛia used in nouns: Savpɛía, Čaλɛía, кovλvẞáτεia.
Nouns with -ɛo- are very rare; we find: ywλɛóç, ɛiλɛóç, кoλɛóv, VIкÚλɛov,
ovqeós(?), qwleóç. It may further be found in Nкéavos < *-kay-an-, note the by-
forms yηv, yɛv-.
Beside -ɑɩɑ, -ɛɩɑ, we may expect thematic -at-o-; we find it e.g. in Sípкalov,
orýλalov, yɩqaïov; ypaчaïoç, *σкapaßaios (reconstructed by Fur. 169).
7. -αч(F)-o- (see Fur. 23322, 255³2): Partly from -aɩƑo-; it is often impossible to
establish whether a form had a -F- or not. See also 6. above. Examples: ȧкvλaiov,
àparós, Bayaios, Badalóv, dipkalov, ë入alov (Myc.era, / rawo), uátalog, legoalov,
σípaιov; Axaɩfóç. TN Аστʊлáλαια (Fick: 58).
8. -auß-o-: TN IIɛppaчßoí (Thess.).
9. -α10-: TN Σúµɑíða (Thess.), IIɛpaɩðɛïç (Arc. deme), Kɛλaɩɛîç (Thess. deme),
Kuvailɛis (Arc. deme).
10. -αtv- (Fur. 171¹7): äkaiva, -ov, Bolíτaiva, уáyypaiva, koλúßdaiva (also -văß-),
kopÚpaiva, HÚpaiva, ouÚpaiva, tpiaiva.
11. -atp-(0-) represents -aƒ³-: kúлaipos (also -ɛpov, -npis, -epoc), µáxaipa.
12. -aк- (Fur. 15864): åßupτáкη, aðλaž, þatiákn, dóvaε / Sŵva / Sovvač, Opíváкη
(Opĭvač), Owpač (also -η\, -āкoç), kavvákn, Oūlákn, riotákn, qápμaкov. TN
Zápā, -n (Lac.).
13. -αλ(\)-o- (Fur. 25428, Beekes 2008): ȧpúßaλlos, aiyíðaλ(\)oç, кopúðaλ(\)oç
(also -óç), лáрdaloç. TN Kαστalía (Phoc. source), Pápoãloç, Σtúµqālos
(Arc.).
14. -aup-o- (Fur.184):dioýpaqipos, Opiaipos, laupos, kapáupas, onpaußos.
15. -aμv-o-: Síкτаµνov, þáðаµvоc, σévdaшvoç. TN Σédaμvos (Crete).
15. -aµ-o-: äptaµoç. TN Kíσ(σ)αµoç (Cos), IIέpyaµov, Kŵyaμos (Lydia), Kúaµov
(Kydon.), YSpaμoç (Kydon.).
:

=== page 018 ===

xxxvi
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxxvii
16. -av-o-: TN'Iápdavos (HN Crete, Elis), Алdavós (HN Thess.), 'Hpidavós (HN),
Avdavos (Fick: 18).
17. -āv-: yevtɩavý.
18. -avd-:àoyávòns.
19. -avdp-: yɛλavdpóv. TN Týλavбpos (Fick 51), Túµavd(p)os (Pamph.), Mvíav-
S(p)os (Fick: 53), Þoléyavdpoç.
20. -avе/τ- (Fur. 191³; 216”, -avɩ- unless otherwise stated): aλíßaç, áoкávěŋs
(oкávaç), Kiλλíẞaç (but кɛλλíẞατ-), óкpíßaç, qáλave/τOS, "Aẞavτεs (Fick: 69,
etc.), Méλave/t-, Пɛipavе/τ-, Пíуavtɛç, Kopúßavtɛç. TN Baẞpávτiov (Chios).
21. -avv-: túpavvos.
22. -ač- (cf. --, -o§-): äµaža, átpáqažvç, oaßážaç (also -кτ-), TN Kupτápлažov
(Crete).
23. -aл-o- (Fur. 235³¹): äpvaлoç, yavσañós, µóvaños. TN Mɛσσαлoç (Crete, Fick:
24).
24. ap (Fur. 13475), mostly neuters: "кταp, кúdap, véкτap, σкívap, σuчap; adj.
μάкαp; anim. ŏap, Sáμаp (gen. -pτoc), cf. Myc. dama beside duma.
25. -ap- (Fur. 257³): äσkapos, þaσσápa, yádapoç, yiyyλapos, kiσƉapoç, kúσσapoç,
\ɛoxápa, qálapa. Also σídāpoç? TN Алτара (Crete, Lycia), IIάτapa (Lycia),
Méyapa (Fick: 75), Alapía (Crete).
26. -ασ-a/o- (Fur. 1575): кápлασos, kalaσós (káßaiσoç), лáуaσa. TN Kúpßaσa
(Crete), Indaσa (Mess.), Пayaσaí (Thess.).
27. -ασσ-o-: TN 'Рτασσós (Crete), Kpvaσσós (Crete), Muкáλŋσoós, Taqiaooós
(Fick: 32).
28. -at-: ảnáty, ǹλaкátη. TN Kaipaτos (Crete), Míλaτos (Crete, Fick: 27).
29. -aup-a/o- (this may continue -ar"-): (a)чaupos, qλañpoç, (á)µavpós, äyλavpos,
Aŋoavpós, kaσaúpa (-as), láotavpoç, ñétavpov (ev). TN ’Eлíðavpoç.
30. -ax-: ẞóτpaxos, kúµßaxos, σελáxos.
30a. -ay-: Avkayós, okivdaysós.
31. -yd-: perhaps ǎлpiуda [adv.].
32. -yp (cf. on -p-): лаvαурíç, σvaypis.
33. -εd-: TN Tévεdoç, Aéßɛdoç, perhaps in Aaкɛdaiwv.
34. -ε-a: see below sub 73. on -ɩσ-.
35. -ɛƖp-o- (may continue -er³-, -ar³-): aïyeɩpoç, kúñɛpov, σáßɛipos (σañépdns);
Kápeipo.
36. -ɛλ-a/o- (cf. the next): àµvoyéλa, ảoqódeloc, ßpíkeλoc, Spúysela, (¿ni)Tápelos,
iτеźλa, kúßɛλa, perhaps vσлεµлεoç.
37. -e入入-a/o- (cf. 36.): ákpóone入入os, Báte入入a, B8É入入a, náte入入a, nÉ入入a.
38. -ɛµ-o- (Fur. 1514²): ¡áλeµoç, koáλeµoç, ï(t)óλɛµoç (if not IE), Đɛλɛµóv.
39. -εv-(0-) (Fur. 15144): άuoi-кéλεµvov, Kαρτεµvídεç. TN Σéλεµvoç (Fick: 95).
40. -ɛvv-a (I wonder whether n' could give vv): τηßevva. Cf. ßλévvoç. Cf. Lat. (from
Etruscan) (doss-)ennus, Porsenna.
41. -ɛp-a/o-: dɩô¤épa, ảʊképa (also -ŋpa), kaσoítɛpos. TNɛpos (Crete).
42. -ɛt-o- (Fur. 115†): kaiɛtóç, kainetoç, µáoretov, vénetos, tyλúyetos? TN Evлétη
(Att.), Taüуετoç.
42a. -v- as in nom. -ɛúç: Baσiλɛúç; several PNs like Axiλ(\)εúç, 'Odvoσeúç.
43. -ɛup- see -aup-.
44. -ɛvt- (Fur. 173, 1817): ßaokevtaí, kpatevtai.
45. -ηẞ-α/o-: kúpηßos. TN Kávdηßa, Tévdnßa, Toppηßós (all in Lydia).
46. -110-(0-): TN Herápηßoç, Σɛoápŋßos (Fick 67), Kiкúvηłoç (Pagas.), Hápvòs,
-10- (Att.). Cf. -a0-.
47. -1K-, -X (Fur. 199, 2457º): ßńpně, dávdně, Awßně, rýλně, tpávně, QĤANĚ; KÚµNĚ /
KÚfunXa.
48. -n入-o- (Fur. 1155): appókndos, púppndos, áovpndos, Bákndos, kápndos,
kißdnλos, vevinλos, tpáxnloc, qáonlos.
49. -ńv (Fur. 17228): átińv, áttayńv, aixńv (äupnv), Ba入(入)ńv, Soduńv, toońv,
kaµaońv (-aσós), kvyńv, σelpýv, owlńv, tayńv, tißýv, perhaps ȧdýv. TN ☹ŋpýv
(Crete, Fick: 25), Tpočýv, Apadýv (Crete).
50. -nv-: y入apprńvn.
51. -ηp: σлívеηp; Alyλáŋp? TN IIoеŋpɛús (Crete), Kúеŋpa.
52. -np-(Fur.2040): pònpa, ävónpa, ainpós, àoká入npov, àornpá (-épa); i4upnpis,
kúлnpiç, Xeßŋpíç.
53. -10(0)-a/o- (cf. -aoo-): TN Máрлησσα (M Paгos), Muкaλησσóç (Boeotian, Fick
80); Apdyítós (Att.), Yµŋttós (Att.).
54. -ŋt-(0-) (Fur. 172¹¹³): ȧ\(\)áßns, kávns, Xéßŋs, háoðλns, tárns (Myc. tepa).
Perhaps also äv(v)ηtov (also -Ɖov, -σov)? TN Mãoŋta (Fick 71).
55. -ττ- see -100-.
56. -ŋy-0-: TN Aïdηyós (Euboea), Пaλnyós (Thracia).
57. 0-0 (see Chantraine 1933: 368, and cf. -voc): ßρévôoç, кavеóç, σлéλɛðoç,
liveos.
58. -Op-a/o-: кúpiеρα, µáрαеpov; HN Aíßηopa. On -alpov see Fur. 3033:
кáv(v)aðpov, σлáλaеpov. Cf. on -σtp-ov.
59. -īẞ-: ¿pvðiẞη.
60. -чу- μаστу-, nɛµqiy-.
61. -tyу/к/X-: äστλɩууaç, ßρυτууoí, λμуyos, еpíyyos (also -tyк-, -уX-), еµуž‚
-yyos, diyyos.
62. -id- (cf. -v8-, Fur. 3247): Baλẞíc, yɛλyic, knλic, kpyris, oqpāyis.
63. -18-va (probably a combination of two suffixes, cf. on -v-): ȧpáxidva (cf. äpakoç,
-X-).
64. -ï0-, -10- (cf. -ɩvd-): äyλıç, -ï0-, aiyıðaλoç, aiyıƉoç, yáλiðoi, ǹλíðloç, káλiðoç.
65. -K- (cf. -IX-, Fur. 226¹02): кáλikov, kúpvika, λé(í)kpika, µvpíkŋ (later i), vwpikov,
σWOIKES.
65a -iк-: DoívɩKEÇ.
66. 1入-,-ī入-:aiyidwy, Kovian, uéoldov, Lapi入门, votin (onatin (--)
лαστíλη, στрóẞiλoç. TN Σкavбíŋ (Cos).
67. -L入入-a/o-: äpyi入dog, &qu入入a, &pi入入a, äou入入a, póBL入入oc.
68. -чµv-a/o- (Fur. 246¾¹): µédâvos (also -í-), µépчµva, oídpiµvov.
=
69. -ɩv-a/o-: äkɩvos, áлóλivov, (ßα) þáкɩvov, yoσσúлvov, kótɩvoç, óžíva. TN
Múpiva (Lemnos), Σíкivoç (Cyclades).

=== page 019 ===

xxxviii
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xxxix
70. -īv-(0-): kýµuvov, irutívn, þntívn, oéλɩvov, qočīvos, qopívn. TN Σaλaµív-.
71. -v8- (cf. -ve- and -18-, -IT-): кúẞivdiç, äλivdov. TN Kpavoívdwv (R), IIúpivoç
(Caria).
72.-1v0-(o-) (cf. -iv8-):aiyuvdoc, àotivelov, 入apipiveos, Mikuvdes. TN Kńpiveos
(Euboea), Kópɩvēos (Fick 74).
72a. -IČ-: KOTÍŠIÇ, kuvíčɛis, σópviča.
72b. -iл-o-: TN EÜρīлoç.
73. -ɩσ-α/o-: ǎpлσa (-eša), kútiσoç. TN Aápiσα, Kɛdpioós, Knyioós (-ĩσ005 = -10005,
Fick 25, 61).
73a. -ɩσk-o-: ȧÀ¤íσkov, ïßiσkoç, µapíσkos, úpíσkos (and variants).
74. -ɩɩ-a/o- (cf. -18-, -10-, Fur. 163): ßápßitos, ßóλ(ß)itov, rópqitov. TN Σúßpita
(Crete).
75. -IX- (cf. -1к-): ǎpoixos.
76. -кv- (probably a combination of -v- with a preceding consonant; see sub 78 on
-v-):äpapkva, dopÚkvlov, ioákva, pidákvn.
77. -μ-: TN Aάτµos (Caria), Iάτos.
78. -v- (Fur. 13265), where a preceding velar may become aspirated: ȧpáxvη, davxva-,
Képkvos, kÚdvos, kudixvov, mediyvn, oatapvis, itvov / idvov, yúdvos;
Káßapvoç. TN Kúðvos (Cyclades).
79 -0- (cf. --): µopošós (also -x¤-).
80. -o- (Fur. 107), often there is a variant with -aẞ-: λ(\)0ч, кαλαūpoų, -ños
(-óqis), kóλλow, σkáλoy. TN Kopóлη (Thess.), Kασσónη (Corc.).
81. -op (see also the section on word end): äxopa (-vpa), λéñopiç.
82.-000-a, -OTT-a: TN 'Epμávoσσa (Chios), Аšiоττηvos (Lydia).
83. -ov入-: paoioudos (-wdos)?
84. -oup (may contine -ar"-): "vdoupoç, кáßoupoç, Ayyoúpiov (also λo-, Av-),
raλíovpoç, rávdovpa, σáyovpov, τáyxovpoç. TN Auкóσoupa (Arc., the oldest
town of all; Fick: 93).
85. -ovσ(σ)- (Fur. 1975): äyxovσa (also έ-), aï¤ovσ(σ)a (also aïdwσσa), kádovσa.
TN Aкídovσa, Kηλovσa (M Kýλwoσa).
86. -v- (this may rather be a suffix -v- after a root): Oεpáñvn, öµævn.
-π-
87. л (this suffix probably consisted of one phoneme p³): µаðu̟лτóv,
méoov (1)ntov, oávantLv.
88. -p- (Fur. 12437; 21562): Báλaypos, yɩypos, σíуpai; 'Idaypos (= Lyc. idākre?). See
also the suffixes -pv-, -py- and -yP-.
89. -py-: Mábapyos (also -at-, -n-).
90. -pd-: TN Kúapda (Caria).
91. -pv- (Fur. 48126, 21562): ȧкapváv (ȧкápvač), кußɛpváw, Anɛpvéw (also App-),
σкéлαρvoç. We also find variants without -v-: oíσupva / σioupa, кuẞɛpváw /
kvµepíval, σatapvides / σaτapidɛç, kiσɩpviç / кiσσчpıç. Therefore, the cluster
probably arose by addition of the suffix -v-. Note that -rn- is found in Etruscan
and already in Cappadocian (Fur. 48126). See also the suffix -p-. TN Paláσapva
(Crete), Aέpva, Aλíkupva (Aet.).
92. σa: There are several words in -σa: Séya, Siya, кóчa (кoчía), кáva (кáµчa),
perhaps λáva.
93. -σк-: ÚpíσKOS (-X-, -σσ-).
94. -0- (Fur. 25427, in several cases this does not seem to be a suffix, but rather the
end of a root; cf. on -ao-, -10-, -vo-): äλσoç, кáßaiσoç (also -ασ-), μúσoç, rσoç,
qpápσoç. TN Пpíavσos (Crete).
95.-00-: KÚnaools, KUtáplooo, oáplooa.
96. -στ-: áλáßαστoç, Оεστ- (cf. Myc. temitija / timitija), λɛлαστý, rλatáviotos.
TN Kápvotos, Dalotóg.
97. -στp- (cf. -еp-): ȧλáßαστрov, бéлαστрov (also λ-), évvστpov (also ñ-),
(úyaotpov, Aai(0)tpóv, oiyiotpov.
98. -t-: äσpaltos, ätpaktos, äqlaστov.
99. -tt- (see 5.5 on tɩ / σσ): kupittoí, npokótta; Þépeqatta.
100. -Uẞ-: EVTUẞov, Bópuẞoç, ïvτußos (also -ouẞ-), σíλλußoç, σкóλußoç (also -μ-),
OKOλúẞpa (-oẞ-); cf. óxiẞóç.
101. -vyy-: 入ápuyE, riouyyos, onluyy-, pápuyE.
102. -vd-: áµúç, -doc, ¿µúc, kopudós, tnλaµús, Xλaµús.
103. -vdva: TN Kaλvová (Cos).
104. -v0-, -ñ¤-: άyvús, Aýkułos.
105. -vi-a: äyvia, кádvia; Aprvα. TN Kivdvía (Crete, also Kivdúŋ, Fick 18, 24).
106. -vk-: ǎµívž, ïdvž, okapdáµivktoç. TN Nāpuε (Locris).
107. -ŪK-: doĭdvě, kñpvš, -vkoç, kapúk(k)n, σávdvě.
108. -v- (Fur. 20514): åpßúλŋ, dáкtvλoç, kavеúλŋ, kpwßúλn, fuaíkuλov (also με-),
σpóvdulos (also σл-).
109. -Ūλ-: (σ)kopdúλn, oqovdúλn (also σл-). TN Kαpdaµúlŋ (Mess.).
110. -v入入-: Zißu入入a.
111. -vụ-: yépoupov, yíyy\uuos, -BéXuuvoş. TN Kápvua (Crete).
112. -vµß-: ÏŒvµßoç, kóλvµßoç.
113. -vµv- (cf. Fur. 243% on -umn- in Etruscan and Cappadocian): aiovµváw,
σíучμvoç. TN'Píτ/Ovμva (Crete), Aápчuva (Locr.).
114. -Uv- (see also the suffix -vvv-): ßóðuvoç, σtyúvη (cf. -vvv-), λáyuvoç. TN Пópτuv
(Crete).
115. -Uvv-: oiyuvvos, AÍктuvvα. Cf. on -ūv-.
116. -vvd- (cf. -vvе / T-): Bɛpɛкúvdat. TN Kαµúvdioç (Rhodes).
117. -UVе/T-: þóλuvov, öλuvƉos; Bɛpekúvě/tai. TN Zákuvłos (+88), Típuvs.
118. -v§-: TN’Oλóqužos (Athos).
119. -Vπ-: ÏσovNoç (older üσσшños), µápovéños, oiσúin, toλúrn.
120. -up-: ȧnσupos, äxupa (also -opα), (équρoç, μаvкupóv, λáupoç, óvupíčɛtal,
σατúpoç. TN "Eλupos (Crete), Téyupa (Boeotia), Níoupos (Cos).
121. -ūp-: ǎyкupa, áváyupos (also óvó-), yéqūpa, λáqupov, rλnivpíc, nítupov.
122. -vσ- (on-vστроν see -στрov): ǎpvσoç.
123. -UT-: MIVUTÓS, vyrútios. TN Aaуɩváлʊtov (Crete), Koλλvíós (Crete).
124. -Up-: KÉ入ūpos.
125. -vx-: ßó(σ)τpuxos. TN Móσuxλov (Lemnos).

=== page 020 ===

xl
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
xli
126. -p0-: poooóplov, 入ákap0ov, fló入opdog, vá(a)Kaplov, aappvposiv.
127. -cp- (on -acp-o- see Chantraine Form. 263): ȧpyέλoqot (also -λ-), þaotpocós
(also -лóç), σέpiyos, oέovipos.
128. -WK-: TN Kowкída (Att., Fick 70).
129. -wλ-: àñoqwλios (?), (páσkwλoç. TN Kíµwλos (Cyclades).
130.-wu-: Bápwrog.
131. -wv- (Fur. 30339): à入kuóv, jiov, aav8ov, arv8ǘv, oxadov.
132. wл- (a variant is -oυл-): Ovμaλwy, aiyíλшл-, кɩνáлετоν (кUVOÛлεÇ). TN
Еúршлóça (Crete), Kaσσwëη (Epirus).
133. -wp- (Fur. 2115º): áxŵp, àµávwp, ßiátwp, ixŵp, Aɛítwp. TN Пíλwpos (Chalc.,
Fick 22).
134. -woo (see -ovo(0)-): TN Alpqwoσós (Euboea), Пdwoσós (Caria, Fick 26).
135. -wɩ- (Fur. 28383; 384¹³²): ȧσkalaßwτns, -kavdwtóv, kißwtós, кpáµßwτov,
оiσлwτη. TN εσлρwτoi.
3. Word end
Word end provides an interesting situation, as some original finals of the Pre-Greek
language may have been preserved. Of course, Greek endings must be removed,
notably oc, -ov. Thus, -tov, -vov may often continue original -, -v: cf. Myc. dunijo
next to duni. The words in -v0os have replaced almost all of those in -v- (as in
Típuvė-).
3.1. words ending in a vowel
a. -a. A short -a can only come from *-ya < *-ih₂ in inherited Greek words. In all
other cases, we may be dealing with a Pre-Greek ending -a that was originally short.
It is often difficult to see whether -a is short or long; the material requires further
study. Examples: ǎẞapкva, ȧyávva, áyépda, ädalta (?), aíkovda, äßdŋpa, äkapa,
ǎkop-va, ákóσtɩλα, áкτápα, äλapα, àµovxpá, äpda, áσtayáva, ä‹ða, ßpoúka, yóda,
yóla, dáža, Sápda, daλáyɣa, Оáлta, µóða, þóµža, σátta, σópviča, σova, kέdpora
(also X-), etc. Note forms in -va, like äpva, and in -ɛvva. Note, further, σaλaµávdpa,
oko入órevdpa.
For words ending in -σa, see the list of suffixes.
b. 1. IE words (neuters) in -1 are very rare in Greek. Examples of Pre-Greek words in
-i: Čákti, kópi, oívaлɩ, τáуʊpɩ (τaуúpiov), áкapí. We may assume that many words
ending in -tov, -vov originally ended in -1, -v. Final -iç is frequent, too.
c. -v. áẞapú, кóvdu, μwλv. For -vov, see the foregoing. Final -uç is also found several
times: äуduç, äpлvs, átpá‹pašvç, ßíðuv, ßλétus, -µévdvs, µíµapkvs, µwús, rŋlaµúc,
pánus.
d. -ɛus. Though the ending may also be inherited from IE, in many words it is clearly
of Pre-Greek origin, e.g. Baσλɛús (Myc. qa-si-re-u), Axıλ(\)ɛúç. I withdraw my
considerations in FS Kortlandt on this point.
e. -w. кoеw, кóрłw, µotw, tïtw, Пελλw. The suffix also makes feminine names in -ó:
Aŋτw, Σaлpw. It is usually assumed that the original inflection of all words in -w
derives from stems in *-oi-; I assume that Pre-Greek words secondarily joined this
inflection. Words in -ws are masculine: ȧxapvw(s), ñpws; Mívwç, Táλws.
3.2. words ending in -p
a. -ap. ǎσap(ov)?, ákxávtap, þáкap, έλíµap, kúdap, véktap, vwkap, oɛλiap.
b. -op. Examples: ȧdiуóp, áккóp, кaккóρ, кέµµoρ (also -µл-), лíσop.
c. -up. Examples: чíðup, (Dor.) µáptvp.
d.
-wp. Examples: ǎxwp, ixwp, кελwp, чółwp.
3.3. words with a nom. in - or -y.
a. - (stem in -к-) is found quite often:
-až: äßaž, áкápvaž, äµßaž, àvdpáçaž, äv¤pač, þúσtaž, µáλßaž, σavσaž. ǎva has
a stem in -кT-.
-āž: cpévač, páč, ocŃ
-ně: Sávdně, þýpně
-ı§: ǎddɩž, áv¤épič, ȧnpíž, kóλič, ápri
-o: Béßpot, ßippo
-ov: Bpoú
-vě: ẞλíτvž, уópτvč; Пvúč, Στúč.
Note acc. Báλλɛкα; acc. ẞpíукα.
b. -y: 入átpay, 入aiday, ă入iy,kóply, aiyitoy, kó入入oy, uépoy, yúy, uóvwy.
Monosyllabic: xpéμч.
4. words in -v: Ba入入ńv, kappáv; 2yńv. kivdvv, uóoovv, pwdvves.
5. words ending in -aç (ã-stems): àßáç, äßλaç, äßpaç(?), àµíaç, àσkaλwñaç,
àokwvdas,áttayās, Badás (Barās), Baokās, Bias, kadapás, Kaoāg; Aláias,
Aσyελaτaç.
With a stem in -avt-: àλíßas (-vt-), Avkáßas (-vt-) etc.; see the suffix section.
With stem in ad-: ȧxpáç, ßovviác, лρηшváç; see the suffix section.
D. The unity of Pre-Greek
The material itself shows that we are largely dealing with one language, or a group of
closely related dialects or languages. Of course, we cannot demonstrate in each and
every case that the words that are non-Greek belong to this same language. The bulk
of the known non-Greek words, however, seem to fit the general picture of the Pre-
Greek substrate. For example, кóτłvßos / kóovµßos does not only show the element
σσ / τð, well-known from geographical names, but also the suffix -vẞ- with
prenasalization. The pair кpóσσtov / кpóτɩov also shows the element σσ / ɩ, but
кρóσσopov has a suffix added that is also typical for this language. The word
Saλáyxav next to álασσα (-ττα) again has the suffix σσ / τ, but also
prenasalization. ǎστλiу / öστλу has both the typical (prenasalized) suffix -tyy- and
variation ao. In µpivo / σµpivos we have the 's-mobile' and the well known
suffix, while μépμs, -100s has the variant without prenasalization, and σunpiyyɛç has

=== page 021 ===

xlii
PRE-GREEK LOANWORDS IN GREEK
a different Pre-Greek suffix. In (µ) / ВρÚττоS (ẞρúσσoc) we have a
combination of a prothetic vowel and prenasalization.
Other languages may well have existed in the area. Thus, it is not certain that
Hieroglyphic Minoan reproduces the same language as Linear A. Further,
Eteocretan has not yet been connected with other elements and seems isolated.
Another matter is that (non-Indo-European) loanwords from old Europe may
have entered Greece, cf. Beekes 2000: 21-31. Moreover, these may have already been
adopted in Pre-Greek, as is suggested by έpέßivos, which has a Pre-Greek suffix,
but a root which is attested (with some variation) in other European languages.
Sometimes, elements from other IE languages may also have been adopted at a very
early date, such as лéλεкυç.
However, I think that it is methodologically more sound to start from the
assumption that non-Greek words are Pre-Greek. Only when there is reason to
assume that they have a different origin, should we consider this option.
E. Pre-Greek is non-Indo-European
Our knowledge of Indo-European has expanded so much, especially in the last thirty
years (notably because of the laryngeal theory) that in some cases we can say almost
with certainty that an Indo-European reconstruction is impossible. A good example
is the word yváloç. In order to explain the -a- of this word, we need to introduce a
h₂. However, a preform *gnh₂dh- would have given Gr. *yvā¤-. One might think that
assuming *he would remedy the problem, but *gnh₂edh- would yield *yava-. The
conclusion is that no Indo-European proto-form can be reconstructed, and that the
word cannot be of Indo-European origin. Another example is the word кpηшvós
'overhanging bank', for which a connection with кρεμαчαι 'to hang (up)' used to be
evident. However, we now know that most long vowels go back to a short vowel plus
a laryngeal, and that long vowels cannot be postulated at random. In this particular
case, there are simply no conceivable formations that would contain a long root
vowel. This morphological objection is strengthened by the fact that there is no trace
of the expected root-final -a- < *-h₂- (as in кpɛµαµαι < *kremh2-). Positively, one can
say that landscape terms are frequently borrowed from a substrate language. The
inevitable conclusion is that the word is Pre-Greek.
A. LANGUAGES
Aegin.
Aeol.
Aetol.
Alb.
Arc.
Att.
Av.
AV
Bel.
Bret.
BSl.
Co.
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
Aeginetan
Gm.
Germanic
Aeolic
Go.
Gothic
Aetolian
Gr.
Greek
Albanian
H.
Hesychius
Arcadian
Heracl.
Heraclean
Arc.-Cypr.
Arcado-Cyprian
Hitt.
Hittite
Arg.
Arm.
Argive
HLuw.
Hieroglyphic Luwian
Classical Armenian
IA
Attic
IE
Ionic-Attic
Indo-European
Avestan
IIr.
Indo-Iranian
Atharvavedic
Ion.
Ionic
Balt.
Baltic
Ir.
Irish
Belorussian
It.
Italic
Boeot.
Boeotian
Khot.
Khotanese
Breton
Lac.
Laconian
Balto-Slavic
Lat.
Latin
Bulg.
CLuw.
Bulgarian
Latv.
Latvian
Cuneiform Luwian
Lesb.
Lesbian
Cornish
Lith.
Lithuanian
Corcyr.
Corcyrean
LG
Low German
Cret.
Cretan
Locr.
Locrian
CS
Church Slavic
Luw.
Luwian
Cypr.
Cyprian
Lyc.
Lycian
Cyren.
Cyrenaean
Lyd.
Lydian
Cz.
Dan.
Czech
MBret.
Middle Breton
Danish
MCo.
Middle Cornish
Delph.
Delphian
MDu.
Middle Dutch
Dor.
Doric
ME
Middle English
El.
Elean
Meg.
Megarian
ep.
epic
Mess.
Messenian
Epid.
Epidaurian
MHG
Middle High German
Etr.
Etruscan
MIr.
Middle Irish
Fal.
Faliscan
MLG
Middle Low German
Gaul.
Gaulish
MoDu.
Modern Dutch
gloss.
in glosses
MOE
Modern English
:

=== page 022 ===

xliv
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
xlv
MoFr.
Modern French
PAlb.
MOHG
Modern High German
Pamph.
Molr.
Modern Irish
PAnat.
MoNw.
Modern Norwegian
PCl.
Proto-Albanian
Pamphylian
Proto-Anatolian
Proto-Celtic
!
B. RECONSTRUCTION, GRAMMAR AND TEXT
abl.
acc.
ablative
accusative
lit.
litt.
literally
literature
MoP
Modern Persian
PGM.
Proto-Germanic
acc. to
according to
loc.
locative
MoSw.
Modern Swedish
Phoc.
Phocian
act.
active
m.
masculine
MP
Middle Persian
Phryg.
Phrygian
AD
anno domini
med.
middle
MW
Middle Welsh
PIA
Proto-Ionic-Attic
adj.
adjective
n.
Myc.
Mycenaean
PIAr.
Proto-Indo-Aryan
adv.
adverb
neg.
NPhr.
New Phrygian
PIE
NWGr.
North-West Greek
PIr.
Proto-Indo-European
Proto-Iranian
aor.
aorist
nom.
athem.
athematic
num.
Osc.
Oscan
PIt.
Proto-Italic
BC
before Christ
obl.
neuter
negative
nominative
numeral
oblique
OAlb.
Old Albanian
Pol.
Polish
C.
century
opt.
optative
OAv.
Old Avestan
PSI.
OBret.
Old Breton
PTo.
Proto-Slavic
Proto-Tocharian
cf.
compare
p.
page
coll.
collective
p.c.
personal
communica-
OCo.
Old Cornish
QIE
Quasi-Indo-European
compar.
comparative
tion
OCS
Old Church Slavonic
Rhod.
Rhodian
conj.
1. conjecture
pcl.
particle
OCz.
Old Czech
Ru.
Russian
2. conjunction
perf.
perfect
OE
Old English
RUCS
Russian Church Slavic
dat.
dative
pers.
OFr.
Old Frisian
RV
Rigvedic
desid.
desiderative
pl.
plural
OHG
Old High German
SCr.
Serbo-Croatian
dial.
dialectal
PN
personal
personal name
OIC.
Old Icelandic
Sicil.
Sicilian
DN
theonym
postpos.
Olr.
Old Irish
Skt.
Sanskrit
du.
dual
ppp.
postposition
passive past particple
OLat.
Old Latin
Sln.
Slovene
e.g.
for example
pres.
present
OLFr.
Old Low Franconian
Sogd.
Sogdian
EN
ethnonym
pref.
prefix
OLG
Old Low German
Sw.
Swedish
encl.
enclitic
prep.
preposition
OLith.
Old Lithuanian
Swi.
Swiss German
et al.
and others
pret.
preterite
OP
Old Persian
Thess.
Thessalian
f.
feminine
prev.
preverb
OPhr.
Old Phrygian
TOA
Tocharian A
fthc.
forthcoming
pron.
pronoun
OPO.
Old Polish
TOAB
Tocharian A and B
fut.
future
pass.
passive
OPr.
Old Prussian
TOB
Tocharian B
gen.
genitive
ptc.
participle
ORU.
Old Russian
U
Umbrian
H
any PIE laryngeal
rel.
OS
Old Saxon
Ukr.
Ukranian
HN
hydronym
subj.
relative
subjunctive
Oss.
Ossetic
Ven.
Venetic
id.
idem
sg.
OSW.
Old Swedish
VLat.
Vulgar Latin
ind.
indicative
superl.
singular
superlative
OW
Old Welsh
W
Welsh
indecl.
indeclinable
S.V.
sub voce
Pael.
Paelignian
WGm.
West-Germanic
inj.
Pal.
Palaic
YAv.
Young Avestan
ins.
inscr.
interr.
intr.
injunctive
instrumental
inscription(s)
interrogative
intransitive
them.
TN
thematic
toponym
trans.
transitive
V.
verb
ipf.
ipv.
imperfect
imperative
irr.
irregular
var.
vel sim.
viz.
VOC.
or similarly
namely, to wit
vocative
variant

=== page 023 ===

xlvi
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
C. AUTHORS AND WORKS
Only the most common authors and works are mentioned here. Please refer to LSJ
for a complete list.
A. = Aeschylus
AB Anecdota Graeca, v. I
=
A.D. Apollonius Dyscolus
=
A.R. Apollonius Rhodius
=
=
Aesch. Alex. Aeschylus Alexandrinus
Agath. = Agathias
Alc. = Alcaeus
Alcm. Alcman
=
Amm. Marc. = Ammianus Marcellinus
And. Andocides
=
Ant. Diog. Antonius Diogenes
=
Ant. Lib. Antoninus Liberalis
Antip.
=
=
Antipater
Antiph. Antiphanes
=
=
Ap. Ty. Apollonius Tyanensis
Apollon. Apollonius
=
App. = Appianus
Ar. Aristophanes
=
Ar. Did. Arius Didymus
=
Arc. Arcadius
=
Arch. Archias
Arist. Aristoteles
=
Ascl. = Asclepiodotus or Asclepius
Asclep. Asclepiades
=
Asp. = Aspasius
Ath. Athenaeus
=
Aus. Ausonius
=
B. = Bacchylides
Bacch.
=
Bacchius
Call. Callimachus
=
Call. Com. Callias Comicus
=
Call. Hist. = Callias Historicus
Callin. Callinus
=
Cerc. Cercidas
=
Cercop. Cercopes
=
Com. Comedy, Comic
=
D. Demosthenes
=
D. C. Dio Cassius
=
D. Chr. Dio Chrysostomus
=
D. H. Dionysius Halicarnassensis
=
D. L. = Diogenes Laertius
D. P. = Dionysius Periegeta
D. S. Diodorus Siculus
=
D. T. Dionysius Thrax
=
Dam. = Damascius
Din. Dinarchus
=
=
Diog. Diogenes
=
Dioph. Diophantus
Dsc. Dioscorides Medicus
=
E. = Euripides
=
EM Etymologicum Magnum
Ep. in the Epic dialect
=
Epic. = Epicus
Epig. = Epigenes
Epin. = Epinicus
=
Et. Gen. Etymologicum Genuinum
=
Et. Gud. Etymologicum Gudianum
Eub. Eubulus
=
Euc. Euclides
=
Eup. = Eupolis
Euph.Euphorio
Eust. = Eustathius
=
Eustr. Eustratius
Foed.
=
=
Foedus
Gal. Galenus
Gramm.
=
Grammarians
h. Ap., etc. = Hymnus ad Apollinem, etc.
=
h. Hom. hymni Homerici
H. = Hesychius
Halic. = Halicarnassus
Hdn. Herodianus
=
Hdt. Herodotus
=
Heracl. Heraclas
=
Herod. Herodas
=
Herod. Med. = Herodotus Medicus
=
Hes. Hesiodus
=
Hld. Heliodorus, Scriptor Eroticus
Hom. Homer
=
=
Hp. Hippocrates
Hsch. Hesychius
=
i
į
L
=
Hymn. Hymnus, Hymni
Il. = Iliad
Is. = Isaeus
J. = Josephus
Leon. Leonidas (two epigrammatists)
=
Leonid. Leonidas Medicus
=
Lyc. = Lycophron
Lyr. = Lyricus, Lyric poetry
Lys. = Lysias
=
Lysim. Lysimachus
Mel. = Meleager
Meliss. = Melissus
Men. Menander
=
Moer. Moeris
=
Mosch. Moschus
=
NT Novum Testamentum
=
Nic. Nicander or Nicias
=
Nic. Dam. Nicolaus Damascenus
=
Od. = Odyssey
Orac. = Oraculum
Oratt. Oratores Attici
=
Orchom. Orchomenus
=
Pall. = Palladius or Palladas
Parm. Parmenides
=
Ph. = Philo
Phan. = Phanias
=
Phil. Philippus Epigrammaticus
Philet.
=
Philetas
=
Philipp. Com. Philippus Comicus
Philol. Philolaus
=
Philonid. = Philonides
Phld. Philodemus Philosophus
=
=
Phlp. Philoponus
Phoen. Phoenix
=
Pi. = Pindarus
Pl. = Plato
Plb. = Polybius
Plin. = Pliny
Poet. Poeta, poetica
=
post-Hom.post-Homeric
Prisc. = Priscus Historicus
Quint. Quintilianus
=
Rhet. Rhetorical, Rhetoric
=
Ruf. = Rufus
S. = Sophocles
S. E. = Sextus Empiricus
Sext. = Sextus Philosophus
Sm. Symmachus
=
=
St. Byz. Stephanus Byzantius
Str. = Strabo
Tab. Heracl. = Tabulae Heracleenses
Th. Thucydides
=
Them. Themistius
=
Themist. Themistocles
=
Theo Sm. = Theon Smyrnaeus
Theoc. =
Theocritus
Theod. Theodorus
=
=
Thgn. Theognis
Thphr. Theophrastus
=
Ti. Locr. Timaeus Locrus
=
Tim. Timotheus Lyricus
=
Tim. Com. Timotheus Comicus
=
Tim. Gaz. Timotheus Gazaeus
=
Tim. Lex. Timaeus Grammaticus
=
Trag. Tragic, Tragedy
=
Tryph. Tryphiodorus
=
X. = Xenophon
=
Xenoph. Xenophanes
Zen. = Zenobius
Zon. = Zonas
xlvii

=== page 024 ===

xlviii
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
D. SYMBOLS
<
>>
<<
AXX➤
(?)
*X
<X>
/X/
[X]
becomes by regular phonological development
reflects by regular phonological development
is replaced by way of analogy
replaces by way of analogy
the origin of the word (see preface above)
see also the entry
see s.v.
meaning uncertain or appurtenance uncertain
a reconstructed item of a proto-stage
spelled with the symbol X
the phoneme X
phonetically pronounced as X
A
ȧ-1 copulative prefix (å åеpolσtiкÓV). ◄IE *sm-▷
●VAR E.g. in änα§; by Grassmann's dissimilation or by psilosis also ά-, which was
analogically extended: ǎλoxoç, ådɛλóóç; äлɛdos ‘even', äßios ‘rich'. A form like
Hom. ǎкoɩɩ was not aspirated because the Attic redactors of the text did not know
the word, so they followed the Ionic pronunciation (cf. λos next to nεoç).
•ETYM From IE *sm- in Skt. sa- (sá-nāman- 'with the same name'), Lat. sem-, sim-
(sim-plex), from PIE *sm-, a zero grade to *sem in Skt. sám 'together', ►εlç. Within
Greek, cf. also ►óµóç, ►äµa. From the meaning ‘together, provided with', the so-
called å έtatкóv (intensive) developed, e.g. ä-εdvov· лoλúœεpvov 'with much
dowry' (H.), cf. ►εdva. It has been supposed that in some cases a comparable à-
arose from *- (the zero grade of *hen ‘in'), e.g. åλέyw (Seiler KZ 75 (1957): 1-23), but
the alleged instances are probably all wrong.
ȧ- 2 privative prefix (ȧ στεрητкÓV). <IE *n->
•VAR Prevocalic av-.
•ETYM The antevocalic form av- arose because of a following laryngeal (Indo-
European roots always started with a consonant), which led to vocalization of the
nasal: *n-HV-> *anV-. In Greek, the loss of initial consonants (*u-, *s-) disturbed
the original distribution: thus alσos (< *à-flooc) next to the reshaped ǎviσoç.
Sometimes this led to analogical forms, like ǎ-oloc next to original äv-ocoç. In the
Myc. PN a-u-po-no /Ahupnos/, the a- stands before h-, like in classical ǎvévoç. In
άópiotos (to öpos <*worwo-), we see that the initial F- was originally retained before
*o as well.
If the second member began with laryngeal + cons., this yielded Greek vη-, vä-, vw-
like in vηypετoç, vwdós < *n-h,gr-, *n-h3d-. These adjectives were later reshaped, e.g.
into ȧvwvvμoç (see Beekes 1969: 98-113) In ȧváɛdoç, ává-ελлτоç and áváлvεvστOS,
which seem to show ava- ‘un-', the last two are analogical, and the first may stand
for ȧv-ɛɛdv-. On pleonastic ȧ(v)-, cf. ► åßéλtepos.
å(v)- was originally limited to verbal adjectives and bahuvrīhis, both in Greek and in
other IE languages; see Frisk 1941: 4ff., 44ff., Frisk 1948: 8ff., Wackernagel 1920-
1924(2): 284ff., Wackernagel 1920-1924(1): 282f., and Moorhouse 1959. In other
languages, we have e.g. Skt. a(n)-, Lat. in-, Go. un-, all from PIE *n-. The sentence
negative was *ne, in Lat. ne-scio, ne-fas, etc., but this use is not attested for Greek
(not in véлобEC).
ȧ- 3 <PG(V)►

=== page 025 ===

2
ȧ- 4
•ETYM In Pre-Greek substrate words, a "prothetic vowel" occurs, e.g. ǎστaxuç next to
στάxuç. In other words, the prothetic vowel may be present in the reflex of a
substrate word or not.
Without a doubt, a phonetic process was at the origin of these variations. It is rather
frequent, see Fur.: 368-378. The vowel was almost always ȧ- (only very few
exceptions can be recorded, see Pre-Greek).
ȧ- 4 in Anatolian place names, е.g. Алaσóç / Пó, "Avμßα / ☹úμẞρα. <LW>
•ETYM The origin of the phenomenon is unknown, and could be different from that
of the Pre-Greek prothetic vowel. It is probably due to adaptation from a non-IE
language.
à 5 interjection (Il.). <ONOM>
DER ǎw [v.] 'to sigh, groan'.
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic; see Schwyzer: 716.
άáατos Mg. unknown. In vūv o öð
á. Στvyòç üdwp (E 271) 'inviolable'?,
äεoç ȧ. ( 91, X 5) ‘infallible'?, кápτoç ȧ. (A. R. 2, 77) 'invincible'? <<?>
•VAR For the varying length of the vowel, see LfgrE s.v.
•ETYM Comparable to ►äτŋ and ►ảάw 'to damage'. Cf. perhaps ȧáßaktoi ȧßλaßeïs
‘undamaged (H.). Note that the privative prefix is å-, not åv-.
ǎada Evdɛiα. Aάкwvɛç 'want, lack (Lacon.)' (H.). <?>
.
•DER ȧadεiv. ȧлopɛt̃σðaɩ, àσitɛïv 'to be in distress, abstain from food' (H.), see on
►ǎбnv. We also find ȧadɛiv. oxλεïv, Аvлεiσеα, adiкɛiv 'to disturb, be vexed, be
wronged' (s.v. ►ávdávw, ►ŋdúc).
•ETYM The forms and meanings are uncertain; see DELG for an uncertain suggestion
by Frisk. Latte assumes ädd = ä(a, contrary to the alphabetical order.
àάw [v.] 'to breathe with the mouth wide open' (Arist.). <ONOM➤
●DER άaσµós (Arist.).
•ETYM Probably onomatopoeic. Another suggestion by Solmsen 1901: 284 relates it to
► ǎnu. Cf. perhaps ► ǎ(w 2, from ►ǎ.
áávða [f.] · ɛidos έvwτíov лapà Аλkµāvi ws Apiσtopávηs ‘a kind of earring in Alcm.,
acc. to Ar.' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Schulze 1892: 38 explained it as *avo-avea to the root of oùç < *h₂ous-, but
since the suffix is unclear (cf. oivávěŋ), this analysis cannot be substantiated. Cf. also
Bechtel 1921, 2: 366.
äɑëτoç [adj.] In xɛpɛç ǎañɩɑɩ (Hom., Hes.), later of кñτoç (Opp.), perhaps
'invincible'. <?►
ETYM Aristophanes read *аεлτоυÇ, which is also unclear. Meier-Brügger's
explanation of άлτоεлη doеs not convince me. Сf. ►аεлτоç and ► έáqеŋ.
ă(a)rog →ăntoG.
=>
áάoxεtos ⇒ xw.
ȧẞapiστáv
3
ȧáw [v.] 'to damage', med. 'act in blindness' (Il.). <IE? *h₂euh₂->
•VAR Beside pres. ȧãτai (T 91 = 129) < *åƑắετaι only aor. ǎaσa (contracted dσa) <
*åfåɛtaɩ
*ǎƒãσa, med. -áµŋv, pass. ååσðŋv. With -σк-: åάokei. qłɛipei, ßλáлtɛ ‘destroys,
damages' (H.); difficult кatέßaσкɛ• katέßλayev ‘damaged' (H.), for *кaτ-αẞασкɛ?
•COMP àɛσíqpwv (wrong for åασt-) ‘damaged in mind (Il.), cf. åασiópos. ßláßŋv
qépwv 'bringing damage' (H.); ȧvατ(ε)í 'without harm, with impunity' (A.).
⚫ETYM For PGr. *awa-je/o-, we may mechanically reconstruct an IE root *h₂euh₂-, but
there are no known cognates. A verbal noun *awá-teh₂-, with which compare aváta
(Alc.), yields ärŋ 'damage, guilt, delusion'. Not connected to wτEIλŃ.
äßa · tpoxòs ǹ ßoń ‘wheel or screaming' (H.). ◄?►
⚫ETYM In the sense of 'screaming', Specht compared äßa with Hom. avε [ipf.]
'called'. See further the glosses àẞnpet. de 'sings' and ȧẞéσσε· εллоеεi, Ɖopuẞɛi
'yearns for, makes noise' (both H.); lastly also äßwp with the meaning ẞon. See
▶av8ń, ▶àeidw.
äẞayva⚫ póda Maкɛdóvɛç 'roses (Maced.)' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM See Kalléris 1954: 66-73; Belardi Ric. ling. 4 (1958): 196.
ȧßaкns [adj.]<?>
•VAR Only Aeol. åßáкηv öpέva [acc.sg.] (Sapph.), explained as nσúxiov kaì лpãov
'quiet and gentle' (EM).
•DER ȧẞáкnσav (8 249) 'ñσúxασav' (?) and áẞaкióμεvoç 'quieť (Anacr.). Further
áßaкýµwv. äλaloç, áσúvɛtoç ‘unspoken, not understood (H.), and áßákŋtos.
ávεniqеovos 'without reproach' (H.).
•ETYM Perhaps it belongs to ßá(w (ßéßaktai, þáčic) ‘to speak'.
=
ápak入ń → ăflača.
áßaλñ · ȧxpɛïov, Aάкwvɛç 'useless, foolish (Lacon.)'. oi dè vwepòv 'bastard' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 167, 348 compares äßελλov· ταлεvóν 'vile, low' (H., Cyr.) and ǎẞaλıç
чoxеpà λaíα 'worthless olive tree' (H.), but not ►ȧqeλńs.
=>
äparis →&pa入n.
ȧßávtaσiv · áváẞaσɩv 'mounting' (H.). ◄GR?►
•ETYM For earlier *ȧ(µ)ßávτασσv [dat.pl.]? See Schwyzer: 50.
äßaž, -koç [m.] ‘board for calculating or drawing' (Cratin., Arist.). <PG?(V) ►
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. The assumption of a loan from Hebr. 'ābāq ‘sand, dusť
(Lewy 1895: 173) is semantically weak (rejected by E. Masson 1967: 97). On the
meaning, cf. Bruneau REGr. 80 (1967): 325-330; see also Kratzsch WZHalle 23 (1973):
126, who defends the connection with Hebrew. Borrowed as Lat. abacus. Kuiper
compared auáкiov. äßaž. Aáкwvɛç (H.), but Fur.: 221 doubts this. Yet, if the
comparison is correct, the word is Pre-Greek (variation ẞ/µ).
ȧẞαρiστáv yuvaкišoµévηv, кαеαчρодévηу каτашηvíοç. Kúлριоt 'being made to play
a womanly role, being cleansed or purified during the menses (Cypr.)' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Related to σaßapíxic, with Cyprian loss of s-?

=== page 026 ===

4
ăpapkva
ȧẞpauís
5
äßαρкva [f.] Aчuós 'hunger' (H.). <PG?>
•
⚫ETYM Fur.: 122 connects it to μapуóç 'mad, gluttonous', which is not convincing.
The formation with -va after -к- suggests Pre-Greek origin.
àßaptai → ȧчapɛúç.
äßaptos · ändŋoτos 'greedy', oi dè ǎμapyos 'greedy' (H.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR ȧẞapτíα. ȧлλŋστíα 'greediness' (H.).
•ETYM Fur.: 217 connects it to μápуos, which seems difficult formally; or do we have
to read *äßapyos? If so, the word clearly shows a prothetic vowel, which points to
substrate origin.
áßapú [n.] · ópíyavov <tò ¿v> Makɛdovíą (or Maкɛdoviac?) ‘oregano (Maced.)' (H.).
<LW➤
•ETYM Related to åµápaкov ‘origanum', acc. to Fur.: 210. Cf. also ßapú. tɩvès µév
σ víaа εwdɛç 'acc. to some, an odoriferous incense' (H.); see Latte. The
suggestion of Kalléris 1954: 75f., who assumes connection with ẞapús as having a
strong (heavy) odor' (with prothetic a), is untenable.
.
äßdeλλov [adj.] · tarɛvóv ‘low, abaseď (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Hesychius also has äßελλov with the same mg.; Latte rejects it as a corruption
of the other form, which is unnecessary.
•ETYM See Fur.: 167. If the variation ßd / ẞ is real, it is a Pre-Greek word, which is
likely anyway for a form with ẞd.
äßdŋpa [f.] · kai äßdia ǹ ¤áλaσσa (EM 3, 8). <PG?▷
•ETYM Fur.: 309 connects it with the TN "Aẞnpa.
äßбns [m., f.] uάστε лαρ³ ¨Ïллóvакт 'whip (Hippon.)' (H.). <PG(V)►
•
⚫ETYM Probably a foreign word in Hipponax; see O. Masson 1962: 170 (fr. 130). Fur.:
388 convincingly compares àẞpiστýу· µáστуа (H.). The word is Pre-Greek because
of the cluster ẞ8 (see ibid.: 318), with -ẞp- perhaps representing earlier -ẞd-.
äßɛiç ëxaç 'vipers; you have' (H.). <?>
•
⚫ETYM Perhaps Illyrian, with ẞ from IE *gh, as in víẞa. xióva. It is unlikely, however,
that Exis should be reconstructed as *h,egh-i-. Maybe the gloss is just Lat. habēs (see
Pisani Paideia 10 (1955): 279).
äßellov→åßaλn, äßdeλlov.
àßéλtepos [adj.] ‘simple, stupid' (Ar.). <?►
⚫ETYM Wackernagel GGN (1902): 745ff. connected it with ßέλτɛpoç, assuming that an
original mg. 'morally good' developed into 'too good, simple', with an unclear prefix.
This is unlikely; see Osthoff MU 6 (1910): 177 and Hatzidakis Glotta 11 (1921): 175f for
different analyses.
àẞépẞηov [adj.] · лoλú, ¿лaxеéç, µéya, ßapú, áxáiσtov, µáτaiov 'much, heavy or
burdensome, great, empty, rash' (H.). <PG(V)►
VAR àẞúẞnlov (H.) is glossed in the same way; also -ŋtos (EM).
1
•ETYM The variation points to a Pre-Greek word. Fur.: 374 compares MoGr. Búpẞηo
'abundance'.
ảßńp [m./f.]? · oľkŋµa σtoàs ëxov, taµɛiov. Aákwvɛç ‘house provided with store-
houses, treasury (Lacon.)' (H.). <<?>
ETYM Unknown. Not identical with anp ‘air' (as in Frisk, who compares MoSw.
vind 1. 'wind' 2. 'bottom').
=>
àßi入入rov → àuí入入akav.
äßɩv [acc.m./f.] · ¿λátŋy, oi dè neúkŋv ‘silver fir; pine' (H.). <LW?►
⚫ETYM Comparing Lat. abies, Mayer KZ 66 (1939): 96f. assumed that PIE *ab- 'tree'
occurs in several Illyrian and Iranian names, such as "Aẞat, "Aẞpot, Aẞiкń =Yaía (St.
Byz.). If this is the case, is the root from a non-IE language in Europe?
ȧßɩτápiov [n.] latrine' (IGR I, 599, Istropolis, Scythia Minor). <LW Lat.>
•ETYM From an unknown Lat. *abitōrium ‘latrine', in turn from abire (DELG Supp.):
a case in which a Latin word is known only from Greek.
•
àẞλadéwę [adv.] ndéws 'sweet' (H.). <?>
•ETYM A connection with *ẞλadús ‘powerless' leaves the initial vowel unexplained
(see on Bladɛiç); the semantic development is also problematic. Connection with
·άµaλdúvw ‘to make weak' would point to *h₂mld- (with -aλ- analogically after the
full grade *auελ8-), but in this case one would expect *άµßλad- for our word; there is
yet no etymology.
äßλapoi [m.] · žúla ‘wooď (H.). <PG(V)►
ETYM Fur.: 370 compares ẞdapoí. Spúɛç, dévdpa 'trees' (H.); the word is Pre-Greek
(with prothetic vowel and ẞ8 alternating with Bλ). It is less probable that ẞápuεç
also belongs here.
=>
åßλnxpós ⇒ ßλnXpós.
=>
áßλoñés [adj.] · åßλaßéç. Kpñtes ‘sound, undamaged (Cret.)' (H.). → ßlántw.
àßolɛïç [m./f.] · repißolaì úñò Σikɛλwv ‘garments (Sicilian)' (H.).
▸ apó入入ns.
⚫ETYM Probably related to aẞóns.
ȧẞoléw [v.] 'meet' (A. R., Call.), = ȧvτißoλéw. <GR?>>
•VAR ȧẞoλñσαι ȧлаντñσαι 'to encounter' (H.).
•DER ȧẞoλŋtús 'meeting' (H.).
•ETYM Cf. кßoλov ñµap. кað ö áлavtwoɩv eiç taútóv, ǹ eúkaipov, iɛpóv (H.), which
may have its length for metrical reasons, or alternatively have arisen by
decomposition; cf. ►εлηßoλoç. The ȧ- could be copulative (see ȧ- 1).
ảßóλλŋs [m.] ‘kind of coat' (imperial period). <LW>>
•VAR Also άẞoλλa (Peripl. M. Rubr.).
⚫ETYMLW from Lat. abolla (Varro). Cf. ► ȧßoλɛîç.
άßpaµíç a fìsh, a kind of mullet (Opp.). ◄Lw? Eg.➤

=== page 027 ===

6
7
⚫VAR Also ǎẞpaчuç, ȧßpaßíç (PLond. ined., IIIP).
•ETYM The fish was salted in Egypt (Ath. 7, 312b). Fur.: 220 thinks that the form with
ẞ is due to a recent assimilation. It is either Pre-Greek, or a loan from Egyptian.
áßpiotýv →äßdns.
àßpós [adj.] ‘graceful, delicate, pretty' (Hes.); mostly of young girls and women. <?>
•VAR Fem. äßpa 'favorite slave' (not a Semitic loan, E. Masson 1967: 98).
•DER ȧẞpóτns 'splendor, luxury', áẞpoσúvη 'id.'; denominative ȧẞpúvoμα [v.] 'to live
a delicate life', act. 'to treat soft-heartedly'.
⚫ETYM No etymology. Not related to ßη 'youthful power', which has ŋ- < *ē (< *eh,).
On the feminine substantive, see Francis Glotta 53 (1975): 43-66.
ȧẞpoτá w [v.] 'to miss'. <GR>
•VAR Only in ȧẞpotážoµev [aor.subj.] (K 65).
•DER ȧẞpóτačiç (H., Eust.).
•ETYM Perhaps formed on the basis of µßpoτov, the aorist of άuaptávw. Could it
be an artificial archaism of the Doloneia (DELG)? On -ßp- instead of -µßp-, see
Schwyzer: 277. Is it metrically conditioned?
ȧßpótovov [n.] ‘wormwood' (Thphr.). <?>
•VAR Also ȧ-.
•ETYM Unknown; probably a loanword, perhaps from the Greek substrate.
Connected with ȧßpós by folk etymology. From Akk. (a)murdennu ‘flower with
thorns', acc. to Bailey TPS 1955: 82.
äßpuva [n.pl.] 'mulberries' (Parth. apud Ath.). <?>
•VAR Also ȧ-.
•ETYM Unknown.
áßpvtoí [m.] · ¿xívwv ðaλaσoíwv εldos ‘kind of sea urchin' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also ǎμẞputtoi· εldoç έxívwv Baλaσoíwv'id.', ẞpúτtos (Ar.), ßpúσσoç (Arist.).
•ETYM The formal variation (prothetic vowel and prenasalization) is typical of Pre-
Greek substrate words.
.
áßvdóv [adj.] · ẞaðú 'deep' (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM von Blumenthal IF 49 (1931): 175 considers it to have an Illyrian origin
(“bottomless”, related to ßuðós). If the connection with ßułóç is correct, it is not
necessarily Illyrian, but could also be a substrate word with prothetic à-. See ẞu0óc.
=>
áßúpßηlos →ȧßépßŋlos.
áßvptákŋ [f.] a sauce of leek, cress and pomegranate seeds (Pherecr.). ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM Defined as úлóτчµа þαpßapıкóv ‘a foreign dish' (Suid.). Theopompus
wrote: ½ɛɩ dè Mýdwv yat̃av, žvða лoiet̃tai åßuptáky ‘he will arrive in Media, where
the ȧ. is made' (Suid. 17 Kock), so perhaps it is an Iranian loan. But the structure à-
ẞupt-ák-n is reminiscent of Pre-Greek words; for the suffix, cf. ẞaτiáкη, кavváкη,
лστάкη. See also Fur.: 15864.
=>
äßvoσos → ßubós.
aya- intensifying prefix, e.g. ȧya-kλens ‘of great renown'. <◄IE *meg-h2- ‘great’▷
•DER Verbs: ǎyaμaɩ [v.] 'to admire, envy', àуáo̟µαι (Hes.), ȧyaíoμaι (Od.), ȧyášw ‘to
have too much' (A. Supp. 1061). Nominal derivatives: äyŋ ‘admiration, envy' (Il.),
άуáσµaτa (S. Fr. 885), ǎya(σ)σiç (H., EM). See also ǎyāv.
ETYM The same stem as дéуα-, continuing a PIE zero grade *mgh₂-. It has a
counterpart in Av. aš-, e.g. aš-aojah- 'with great strength' (from a zero grade *mgs-);
see Schindler 1987: 345. See ȧyáλλo̟μα, ►ǎуāv, ►ȧyavaкτéw, ►ȧyavós, ►µéyaç.
àyaðíç 1, -ídos [f.] ‘ball of thread, clew' (Pherecyd.). <?►
⚫ETYM No etymology. Under ȧyalóc, Frisk connects Skt. gadhya- 'was festzuhalten
ist'. Cf. ►άya¤íç 2.
==
àyaliç 2, -ídoc = σŋσauís H.; oŋσaµís = σŋσaµñ 'a mixture of sesame seeds, roasted
onoalís
and pounded with honey', an Athenian delicacy given to guests at a wedding. Note
the expression ȧyaßŵv ȧya¤ídɛç ‘quantities of goods'. <PG? (V)►
•ETYM Belardi Ric. ling. 4 (1958): 196 compared yáða. ȧλλávτα ‘sausages (vel sim.)'
(H.); see ►åλλãç. If this is correct, the word is Pre-Greek, because of the prothetic
vowel. Fur.: 370 also compares yńеvov.
àyabóc [adj.] 'good, fit, noble' (II.). <IE?, LW?>
•VAR άкaðóv ȧyaóv 'good' (H.); xáσios. Xpηotós ‘good, useful (H.). Dor. xáïos
'noble, good' (long ā).
•DIAL Cypr. ȧ aos must probably be read ȧyaboç, see Egetmeyer Kadmos 32 (1993):
145-155.
•ETYM The older comparison with Gm. forms like Go. gops, MoHG gut, MLG gaden
'to fit' etc., and Slavic words like OCS godɩnь 'pleasant', goditi ‘be pleasant' and Ru.
gódnyj 'useful' should be forgotten, as these require a root *ged"- (LIV² s.v.), from
which Skt. gadh- 'to take, seize' derives. ȧyalóc is considered to be from a European
substrate by Beekes KZ 109 (1996). An Indo-European attempt by Pinault MSS 38.
(1979): 165-170, who derives the word from *mgh₂-dhh,-o- 'made great', or 'whose
deeds are great' (Ruijgh 1991b). I find this semantic development difficult. Moreover,
as Pinault admits, a suffix -do- is rare (see Chantraine 1933: 366). Finally, there are
forms like akaóv and xáσtos; if these variants are reliable, the word could be Pre-
Greek.
ayatos [adj.] epithet of a sacrificial calf in the Labyadai inscr. (Schwyzer: 323). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. Connected with aya-, based on comparison with ayatov.
εлíчeovov 'liable to envy' (H.); see Buck 1955: 245.
ȧyaλλís [f.] ‘dwarf iris, Iris attica' (h. Dem.). <?>
•VAR Also msc. (H.). On Nic. fr. 74, 31 see DELG.
•DER ȧyaλλíç• váкɩvoç ½ Opvallis, ǹ ȧvayaλlís ‘hyacinth, plantain, pimpernel'
(H.).
⚫ETYM No etymology; see DELG, André 1956 s.v. anagallis and Strömberg 1940: 78.
ȧyáλλoμai [v.] ‘to be proud, exult in' (Il.). <?►

=== page 028 ===

8
áyádoxov
•DER ǎyaλua 'glory, delight, honor; statue'. In later language, ȧyáλλoμat is replaced
by ȧyaλáoμα, -táw after the verbs in -táw; thence ȧyaλλíaσıç, -íªµα. àуáλλoç.
Aoídopos 'slandering' (H.), ayaλáoμα opɛiσðaι, Tapavτīvo 'to slander
(Tarent.)' (H.); Fur.: 370 compares yappióμεa, but there is no support for this. The
plant name ȧyaλλís (h. Cer., Nic.) probably does not belong to ȧyáλλoµai.
⚫ETYM Looks like a denominative of *ȧyaλóc, but such a form is unknown.
ȧyáλoxov [n.] ‘eagle-wood, Aquilaria malacensis' (Dsc.). <LW>>
⚫ETYM One suspects an Oriental loanword; cf. Schrader-Nehring 1917: 39f. On
Pahlavi ’wlwg < *agalūk, see Henning BSOAS 11 (1943-1946): 728.
ảyaua=aya-.
(v) wv (Nachmanson Glotta 4
Ayauéµvwv [m.] the Greek commander before Troy (Il.). <GR►
•VAR Att. vases Aуaчéσдwv, also
(1913): 246).
⚫ETYM Since Prellwitz BB 17 (1891): 171f., a pre-form *Aya-μéd-μwv has been
assumed, with the root of µédoμat. The development -dµ- > -vµ- > -μv- is known in
various Greek dialects (other examples in Lejeune 1972: 775, where also on the
development to -σμ-).
Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 330f. connected the second part with µévos and
µévɛv (which von Kamptz 1982: 181 and 209 finds improbable), explaining -σµ- as a
kind of popular assimilation.
äyāv [adv.] 'much, too much' (Pi.). <IE *mg-eh₂-m
•DIAL Aeolic or Doric in origin, which explains the long a.
ETYM The old accusative of the adjective μéyaç. The form is important, as it points
to the type nom. *CeC-C, acc. *CC-eC-m, which I assume is the original
hysterodynamic inflection in Indo-European (see Beekes 1985: 103f.). Cf. also ȧya-.
άyavaкtéw [v.] ‘be indignant or irritated' (Hp.). <GR?>
⚫ETYM Expressive formation in -αкτέw like vλaкtéw (to vláw), so from original
*ȧyaváw? Cf. áуávηµ¤• àσxáλλw, ȧyavaкτw (H.). Pinault RPh. 65 (1991 [1993]):
196-198 derives it from *ȧya-vaкτoç 'pressed too much', from ►váσow. Uncertain.
άyávva⇒άxávη.
àyavós [adj.] ‘mild, gentle' (Il.). <?►
•ETYM No etymology. The connection with ǎyaμα or yávos [n.] 'splendor' (Bechtel
1914) is semantically unconvincing.
àyaлáw [v.] ‘to receive with friendship; to like, love' (Il.). <IE?►
•VAR Also άуaлášw (Il.). Retrograde άyáлη ‘(Christian) love' (late, especially LXX
and NT).
⚫ETYM Pinault RPh. 65 (1991 [1993]): 199-216 assumes it derives from *àуα-лã- 'to
protect greatly', referring to similar expressions in Sanskrit; cf. ►εµášoµai. The
Christian use may have been influenced by Hebr. "ahābā ‘'love'; see Ruijgh Lingua 25
(1970): 306.
1
àyyepákoiov
ȧyapıкóv [n.] name of several mushrooms (Dsc.). <GR➤
9
•ETYM Perhaps from the TN Ayapía (Sarmatia)? See André 1956 s.v. agaricum and
Strömberg 1940: 122.
ȧyaσvíç [f.] plant that produces aάuμwviαкóv, Fecula marmarica (Dsc.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur: 254 connects it with yŋullis (Dor. yā-), which is Pre-Greek.
Comparing the latter with ayaoullis, we note the prothetic vowel and the
interchange 0/o. See André 1956 s.v. agasyllis.
àyavóc [adj.] 'admirable, noble' (Il.). <?>
ETYM Acc. to Schwyzer IF 30 (1912): 430ff., Aeolic = ȧya-Fóç; perhaps related to
► ǎyaμaɩ. An expressive gemination of the F has been proposed (e.g. Ruijgh Lingua
25 (1970)). But since a suffix -uo- is doubtful in Greek (cf. Chantraine 1933: 124: “le
suffixe était mort en grec"), the word may rather be Pre-Greek.
ȧyavpós [adj.] not quite certain, perhaps ‘proud' (Hes., Hdt.; rare). <?►
ETYM Was yaupos reshaped after ȧyavóc? A pre-Greek origin should also be
considered.
ayyapos [m.] 'Persian mounted courier' (X.). <LW➤
•VAR Rarely as an adjective, e.g. äуyɑpov лũp ‘signal fire' (A. Ag. 282).
=
•DER ȧyyapηïoc ayyapos (Hdt.), substantivized άyyapηïov ‘institution of the
ǎyyapot' (Hdt. 8, 98, with a description of it). Denominative ȧyyapεúw (v.] 'press
into service' (Ev. Matt., pap., inscr.); thence ayyapɛvτns ‘impressed laborer' (pap.
VIP) and ȧyyapɛía 'service' (pap., inscr.), plur. ȧyyapɛia 'cursus publicus' (inscr.
IIIP); ȧуyapıкós (pap.). Hell. and late by-forms are έyyapɛúw, -έw, -ía, by folk-
etymology after the preverb έv-.
•ETYM The exact source is unknown. Not from Akk. agru ‘hired man'; see Eilers IIJ 5
(1962): 225; Happ Glotta 40 (1962): 201. On the realia see Rostowzew Klio 6 (1906):
249ff. and R. Schmitt Glotta 49 (1971): 97-100 (who defends an Iranian origin).
Mancini Glotta 73 (1995): 210-222 reconstructs a form OP *angarā- > *ȧyyapŋ- as the
basis of ȧyyapnov (Hdt. 8, 98), which must be the oldest Greek form. Extensively on
this word Brust 2005: 17ff.
ayyɛlos [m.] 'messenger' (Il.). <LW>
DIAL Perhaps Myc. a-ke-ro.
⚫DER Denominative ȧyyέλw [v.] 'to convey a message'. Did ayyɛλing [m.]
'messenger' (Hom.) arise from a false interpretation of the genitive (tñc) ȧyyedinc?
See Leumann 1950: 168ff. Thence ǹ άyyɛλiŋ 'female messenger' (Hes. Th. 781). From
άyyɛlía: ȧyyɛliwtŋs, -ŵtis ‘(female) messenger' (h. Merc. 296); from ǎyyɛloç:
ɑyyɛλikóç ‘of a messenger' (late); from ảyyéλλw: ǎyyɛλµa ‘announcement' (E., Th.),
ȧyyɛλɩɩкóç ‘premonitory' (late), ȧyyéλtɛɩpa ‘female messenger' (Orph. H. 78, 3; not
certain).
⚫ETYM The connection with Skt. ángiras-, name of mythical beings, has now been
abandoned. Perhaps an Oriental loan, like ►äyyapoç.
àyyepákouov →àyeppákapoc.

=== page 029 ===

10
ǎууoлηvíα
į
ǎyos
11
ǎуyoлŋvía [n.pl.] · τà τшν µελσσwv кηpía 'honeycombs' (H.). <LW>
•
⚫ETYM From Iranian angupën, see Bailey BSOAS 20 (1957): 51 (does not belong to
▶ǎyyos).
ayyos [n.] 'vessel' (II.). <PG(V)
•DIAL Probably Myc. a-ke-ha [pl.].
⚫ETYM Possibly a Mediterranean loanword (cf. Chantraine 1933: 418), as kitchen
utensils are often borrowed. Fur.: 275, 3072 compares äуduç. ǎyyoç Kρηtiкóv, which
is quite tempting.
•
ǎyyovpa [f.] · þáž, στaquλń ‘grape, bunch of grapes' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Cf. MoGr. äywpos, äyoupos ‘unripe, green, young man' and ȧyovpída ‘unripe
grape', from a-wpos ‘unripe, green', with the spirant as a transitional sound;
secondary nasalization as in MoGr. Cret. ayyoupos 'young, youngster' and ȧyyoúpi
'gherkin'. The MGr. and MoGr. word was borrowed as MP angur ‘grape' and Eg.-
Arab. aggur gherkin'. See Kretschmer Glotta 20 (1932): 239f.; also Cocco Arch. glott.
ital. 54 (1969): 98.
ayyoupos 'cake'. → youpoç.
àyɛipw [v.] 'to gather' (Il.). <IE *h₂ger- ‘gather'>
•DIAL Myc. a-ke-re, a-ko-ra /agora/, a-ma-ko-to me-no /ham-agortō mēnos/ 'in the
month of the Assembly'? See Taillardat REGr. 97 (1984): 365-373.
●COMP dµŋyepńs ‘gathered together' (II.), veqeλŋyɛpéta 'cloud-gatherer' (Il.).
●DER ►άyopá s.v.; ǎyopos ‘gathering' (E.). Often ȧyup- (cf. Schwyzer: 351): äyupiS
‘gathering, mass' (Il.), with лаvηyupis gathering of all' (Arc. лаváyopσiç,
лаvαуopíα); ȧуúpτηs 'beggar', denominative άyupτálw 'to beg', àучpτεúw (Str.),
whence ȧyupτɛía, adjective άyʊpτiкóç (Str., Plu.). Also άyupτúp ‘beggar', άyúpτpia
'beggar-woman' (A. Ag. 1273). Also ȧyupuós 'gathering' and ǎyupμa 'anything
collected'. The formations in ȧyɛp- kept the connection with the verb: äyɛpois
'gathering, inspection of the army' (Hdt.), ảyɛpµós ‘gathering of funds, troops, etc.'
(inscr., Arist.), ȧyεðµoσúvé (Opp.), άyέptaç ‘collector' (IG 14, 423: I 35 [Taurom.]).
ǎyap- is found in ǎyappis ‘meeting' (IG 14, 759: 12 [Naples]); also ǎyoppis. ȧyopá,
äеpoσiç ‘gathering' (H.) which may be Aeolic, see Chantraine 1933: 280.
ETYM No direct cognates, but the reconstruction *h₂ger- is unproblematic. See
further yέpyɛpа лoλλá 'lots, often' (H.) and τà уápyapa 'heaps, lots'.
ŋyεpéƉovtaɩ and -to have a present suffix -0- (cf. Schwyzer: 703); nyɛpéƉovtai (I
231) and ηуεpé¤¤¤¤¤ɩ (K 127, Aristarchus) have an unexpected long vowel; the forms
were built on frequent ηyεpέovτo.
ảyέλŋ [f.] ‘herd, troop' (II.). ◄IE *h₂eģ- ‘drive’▷
⚫ETYM From ►ǎyw, with a suffix *-1-. Comparison with Lat. agilis, Skt. ajirá- 'mobile,
quick' and Lat. agolum 'staff of a shepherd' makes little sense; the formations are
probably independent.
àyépda⇒äxɛpdos.
.
ȧyɛppaкáẞoç [m.] ·σταquλý 'bunch of grapes' (H.). <PG(V)>
1
⚫VAR ȧyyεpáкoμov. σταquλýу 'id.'; ȧуpáкaßoç. στaquλn ‘id.' (both H.).
⚫ETYM Latte rejects two of these forms (how to decide which?), followed by Fur.: 221.
I think this is indefensible. The word is Pre-Greek in any case, like so many words
concerning wine (e.g. àpaσxádɛc). Note the element -aẞ-. The -- is a prop vowel
(see Fur.: 378ff.); variation a/o and ẞ/µ are also well-known in Pre-Greek (which
means all the glosses are real); the yy may represent a prenasalized consonant, one of
the clearest characteristics of Pre-Greek words.
àyέpwxos [adj.] ‘magnanimous, prouď (Il.). <?>
•DER ȧyɛpwxía 'magnanimity' (LXX, Plb.). Uncertain is Dor. yɛpwxía (Ar. Lys. 980).
•ETYM No etymology.
àyέtpia [f.] · µaĩa. Tapavtīvoɩ ‘midwife (Tarent.)' (H.); àvayéτpia. ǹ tałę tiktovσaiS
únηpεtoñσa yuvǹ лapà Tapaνtivos ‘woman who watches over the midwives in
Tarent.' (H.). <?>
•ETYM McKenzie Class. Quart. 15 (1921): 48 assumes that it stands for earlier
*ȧypéτpia, from ȧypéw with a suffix -τpía and subsequent dissimilation. This
seems quite improbable semantically.
ǎyn →ȧya-.
ảyńvwp [adj.] epithet of Ovµós of uncertain mg; perhaps ‘proud (Il.). ◄IE *h₂eģ-
'drive'>
•VAR PN Aynvwp.
●DER ȧynvopín (Hom.), whence àуηvopέw (Nonnos).
⚫ETYM First part probably related to ayw (Risch IF 59 (1949): 39f), rather than to ȧya-
(Sommer 1948: 169f.); cf. also Kuiper MKNAW 14: 5 (1951): 5: 207. On the evolution
of the meaning, see DELG.
ȧynpατov [n.] a plant, ‘Origanum onites' (Dsc.). <?>
⚫ETYM Assuming an original meaning ‘unaging', it can be connected to yŋpáσкw,
уñpaç. Semantic parallels are given by Strömberg 1940: 103; these are uncompelling.
ảyńpatos [m.] stone used to polish women's shoes (Gal.). <?►
ETYM A connection with the word for 'age' does not seem appropriate. Szemerényi
Gnomon 43 (1971): 641-75 proposes ȧy-nраτos 'very lovely', which is not much
better.
=>
äyɩos [adj.] 'holy' (Hdt.). ◄IE *Hieh₂g-➤
•DER Yod-present ǎoμα [v.] 'to honor' (Il.), from *ǎyчoμαɩ. Late nouns àуióτŋs and
ȧyiwoúvn (LXX), verbs ȧyílw 'to consecrate, dedicate' (Pi., S.) and ȧyıάw ‘id.'
(LXX), whence ȧyouós 'offering to the dead' (D. S.), ȧyiaσμóç 'consecration' (LXX,
NT), ȧyíaoua 'id., sanctuary' (LXX); ȧуστηpιov 'holy vessel' (Inscr. Perg. 255, 9),
άyiaotýpiov ‘sanctuary' (LXX) and άyoτús ‘ceremony' (Call.). ȧyɩotɛúw [v.] ‘be
holy, be pure; consecrate' (Pl., E.) also presupposes a nominal form in -σt- (ȧyiσtóç

=== page 030 ===

12
!
13
only in Et. Gud. s.v. ȧyɩστɛía); thence ȧуíστεчµα 'sanctuary' (Procop.) and ȧyɩσtɛía
'ritual, service' (Isoc.).
•ETYM The connection with Skt. yájati 'honor with sacrifice and prayer' is
semantically unobjectionable and formally explained by Lubotsky's rule (Lubotsky
MSS (1981): 133-8), i.e. in *Hieh₂g-, the glottal element of the pre-glottalized *g was
lost before a consonant. This means that it is unnecessary to assume a-vocalism for
this root in PIE, as is done by many scholars (e.g. LIV² s.v. *Hiag-). The primary
noun ǎyɩoç seems to have a suffix *-iHo-. A different formation is found in ►áyvós.
ȧукúλoç [adj.] 'curved, bent' (Il.). <IE *henk- 'bend'>
•COMP ȧукvλoµÝτηs 'who thinks crooked thoughts' (II.), from an old verb *μη-μ (cf.
Skt. mắti), see Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 306.
•DER Denominatives ȧyкúλλw [v.] 'to bend backwards' (Aret.) and ȧyкvλów [v.] 'to
bend' (Ar.); from the latter ȧукúλwμа 'loop' (Gal.), -wous medical term, name of
various lame or stiff conditions (Gal.); ȧyкúλŋ ‘strap, loop, hook, hinge of a door,
etc.' (B., Hp., S., E.). Thence àукvλητós provided with ȧyкúλa' (A.), ȧyкvλíç [f.]
'hook' (Opp.), to which ȧyкvλidwτóç 'provided with a loop' (Hp. apud Gal.),
άукúλov loop, etc.' (medic.).
Many derivatives built on the root *h₂enk- with a different suffix:
a) With *-l-: ảyкáλŋ [f.] ‘curved arm, armful (Archil.), mostly plur.; diminutive
άykaλíç, mostly plur. -ídɛç (Il.), which is more frequent in the epic for metrical
reasons. ǎykalov [acc.sg.] ‘armful, sheaf (h. Merc. 82) is not entirely certain.
Denominative ȧyкαλío̟µα [v.] ‘to embrace' (Semon.), action nouns άykáάλioµa
(Tim. Pers.), ȧyкаλσμµós (pap.). A derivation in *-1- without suffixal vowel is found
in ȧykλóv. σкoλóv 'curved, bent, crooked' (H.), provided that the gloss is correct.
b) With *-n-: ȧyкŵv, -ŵvoç [m.] ‘elbow' (II.), dat.pl. ȧyкáσɩ (Opp.), said of many
protruding objects; cf. ȧyкáç below. Late diminutives ȧyкávov, -íσkoç, -íσkɩov;
denominative åyкwvíčw [v.] ‘to lean on the elbows' (Com. Adesp., gloss.), whence
άyкwvoµóç (Eust.). Further äykovaɩ [f.pl.] ‘arms' (Il.), enlargement with -ta. An old
e-grade may be found in εл-ηукεvides 'long planks on a ship' (see Bechtel 1914).
c) With *-s-: ǎyкoç [n.] 'mountain glen' (II.), formally comparable with Skt. áňkas-
[n.] ‘curve'.
d) With *-tro-: äукɩστрov 'hook' (Od.; from *ȧyкí(w), the formation of which is
unclear (see Chantraine 1933: 333f.); thence ȧyкíστpiov, ȧykiσtpεúw, ȧYKIOTPEVTIKÓS
and åукɩστpɛíα (only marginal attestations).
Unclear is the formation of ảyкáç ảykáλaç ‘armful, sheaf (H., see Bechtel 1914).
Adverbs äyкaev [adv.] ‘in(to) the arms, on the elbows' (A.), ȧyкáç 'into the arms'
(Il., only antevocalic except in Y 711), probably the elided dat.pl. with a zero grade
suffix belonging to ȧyкóv; thence ȧукáčoμai [v.] 'to lift up in the arms' (II.).
⚫ETYM All forms derive from a widespread IE root *h₂enk-, found in e.g. Skt. áñcati
'to bend, curve' and ácati 'id.'. Not connected with this group of words is Hitt.
hai(n)k-ta to bestow', med. 'to bow' (see Kloekhorst 2008). In Greek, we also find
►öyкoç ‘barb' continuing *h₂onk-o-. For the stem in -u-, cf. Skt. anku-rá- 'hook'
(note the operation of Wheeler's Law in Greek). The l-suffix is found in OHG angul
'fishhook', ON ól [f.] ‘belt' (perhaps an old formation; cf. ảyкúλŋ), óll ‘germ' etc.
1
One generally connects it with äyкūpa ‘anchor' (Alc.), but I suggest that this is a
substrate word.
ȧykáλŋ •VAR ȧYкúv, äукoç, etc. → àукúλoç.
ǎyкupa [f.] ‘anchor' (Alc.).
•DER Dervatives are scarce: άyкupwτós 'anchor-shaped' (Ph. Bel.), àуkúptov (Ph.
Bel.), àyкupíšw [v.] ‘to make sbd. stumble' (old com.).
•ETYM The suffix -ūpa is typically Pre-Greek, as in yέqūpa, yópyūpa; it therefore
does not continue an inherited formation *-ur-ia-. Borrowed as Lat. ancora.
ȧyλaós [adj.] 'splendid, beautiful, famous' (II.); formulary epithet, e.g. of vióç. <?>
•VAR The Cretan and Cyprian gloss ȧylaóv. yλaqupóv ‘hollow(ed), polished' are
due to misunderstanding of the Homeric usage, acc. to Leumann 1950: 272¹8.
•DER ȧyλaïa 'splendor, beauty' (II.), also PN; ȧyλaí\w [v.] ‘to embellish, glorify',
med. 'to take delight in'.
⚫ETYM Probably from *ȧyλaƑóc. Connected with yaλývη, ȧyáλλoμai (cf. Szemerényi
1964: 155), or to ►àyavóç, ►àyavóç. The connection with ȧyáλλoμα enjoys a certain
popularity.
=>
*ȧyλís → *aiyλíç.
äyλiç, -100¢ [f.] 'clove of garlic' (Ar.). <PG(V)►
•DER ȧyλídiov in: ȧyλídia. σкópoda ‘garlic' (H.), with interchange 0/ 8 (Fur.: 194).
•ETYM Fur.: 127, 282 connects it with yέλyıç, -100, -ɩdos as yɛλ-y-: ȧ-yλ-, for which
cf. kép-k-a: ȧ-kp-íç. This seems quite possible.
ảyλúɛoðaɩ [v.] · ßλáτɛσða ‘to be hindered, damaged (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM von Blumenthal IF 49 (1931): 176 thinks it is Hyllaean or rather Messapian,
connecting it with Go. agls. Quite uncertain.
άyvós [adj.] ‘(ritually) pure, holy' (Od., mostly poet.). <IE *(H)ih₂g-no- 'holy'>
•DER ȧyvóτns 'purity' (NT, etc.). Verbal derivations: 1. ȧyvɛúw [v.] 'to consider holy,
be pure, purify' (IA), whence ȧyvɛía 'purification', äyvɛuμα, áƒετp,
ȧyveutikós; 2. ȧyví¼w [v.] ‘to purify, consecrate' (poetic), whence ǎyvoµa, -oµóç,
-LσTIKÓÇ, etc., ȧуvíτηs 'purifier' (Lyc.) after nouns in -íτηç, cf. Redard 1949: 11.
⚫ETYM Related to ǎyıoc; it may be the same formation as Skt. yajñá- 'sacrifice'.
äyvos [f., m.] tree name: 'withy', 'Vitex agnus castus' (h. Merc.), = λúyoç. The name
probably also denotes a fish and a bird, see DELG s.v. <EUR?, PG?>
•VAR Also ǎyovoç; cf. ǎyovov = µupoívŋ à ypía ‘wild myrtle' (Fur.: 381).
•ETYM Comparable with OCS jagnędɩ ‘black poplar' (Lidén IF 18 (1905-1906): 506); if
this is correct, it is perhaps a European substrate word (on which phenomenon, see
Beekes 2000). On the folk-etymological connection with the notion of chastity
(ȧуvóτηs), see Strömberg 1940: 154.
äyvчu [v.] 'to break' (Il.). ◄IE *ueh₂g- 'break'>
•VAR Fut. ǎεw, aor. εaža or ñα, perf. čāya, pass. aor. ẵуny or έắуηy (on verse-final
Єayn A 559 see Wackernagel 1916: 141, Chantraine 1942: 18).

=== page 031 ===

14
àyvis
•COMP Mostly in кatάyvʊµ, with ã from -α-Ƒay- (Björck 1950: 42, 147).
●DER ȧyń ‘fragment' (A., E.), long ā- certainly in A. R. 1, 554; 4, 941; further iwyń <
*FL-Fwy-ń 'shelter', if originally 'breaking of the wind' (§ 533), also in composition
εлwуaí, -ń 'place of shelter' (ε 404), perhaps dissimilated from *ε7-FɩFwyai (but see
Bechtel 1914). Further ȧyuós 'fracture, cleft' (Hp., E.), ǎyua 'fragment' (late); ǎžos =
ȧyuós (Crete), but hardly from the o-aor.; appurtenance of the TN Oážos (Hdt. 4,
154) as fážoç is uncertain. Cf. also yaкτóç (= F-)· кλáσµα ‘fragment' (H.). On
Fayavo- (Thespiae), see CEG 6, and Taillardat RPh. sér. 3: 40 (1966): 76. Also äyavoç
[adj.] 'broken' (S. fr. 231).
•ETYM From *Fáyvyμ (the F is clearly visible in Homer) < *uh₂g-n(eu)-, belonging to
ToB wāk- 'to go apart', caus. 'to split' and perhaps also to Hitt. uāk-' / u̟akk- ‘to bite'
(cf. Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). A palatovelar is best reconstructed based on Skt. vájra-
'thunderbolt' and its Indo-Iranian cognates. Greek -Fwy- is from *uoh₁g-. Perhaps
Lat. vāgīna is also related; cf. MoHG Scheide 'id.' related to scheiden 'to separate'.
ȧyvúc [f.] 'weaving stones' (Plu.). <PG(S)►
•VAR -Ũ0εç [pl.].
⚫ETYM See Chantraine 1933: 366. Probably a substrate word; suffixes of the type -00-
are typical of Pre-Greek.
ȧyopá [f.] 'gathering, assembly, market, trade, traffic' (Hom.).
•DER ȧyopητns 'speaker' (epic), which perhaps rather derives from ȧyopάoμai
(Fraenkel 1910: 25f.). Denominative verbs: 1. άyopáoμa 'to speak (in public, in the
assembly)' (epic Ion., poet.), only in isolated forms; άyopηtús ‘eloquence' (epic),
ȧyopaτpóç 'speaker' (inscr. Delphi, cf. Bechtel 1921, 2: 151); 2. ȧyopɛúw ‘id.' (Hom.),
as a simplex rare in Attic (Wackernagel 1916: 220ff., Fournier 1946: 41ff.), whence
ȧyopεvτns 'speaker', -τýpov ‘podium', -σuç ‘speech' (all rare and late); 3. ȧyopá¶w 'to
be on the market, do shoppings' (IA); thence ȧyópaσıç ‘purchase' (Pl.), Boeot.
àyópaσσıç (Holt 1941: 49f.), ȧyopaσía ‘id.', ayopaσµós ‘id.' (LXX), -aoµa, usually
plur. ȧyopáσματα 'purchased wares' (D.); agent noun àуopaστns 'purchaser' (X.),
fem. ȧyopáστpiα (pap.), ȧуoрαστкóç 'pertaining to trade' (Pl.).
•ETYM Verbal noun related to ►ảyɛípw.
ayos [n.] 'pollution, guilt; expiation' (Hdt., A., Th.); the word denotes the notion of
'sacredness' in ǎуεa· τεµεvη 'consecrated piece of land' (H.), for which Bechtel 1921,
1: 115 suggests Lesbian origin, and also in S. Ant. 775, A. Ch. 155, etc. ◄IE? *(H)ieh,ģ-
'sacred'>
●COMP έv-ayńs ‘under a curse or pollution' (Hdt., S.), whence έvayí\w [v.] ‘to
sacrifice to the deaď, ¿vayioµós, -toμa. Rare and late έváyıoç [adj.] (after ǎyıoç),
έvayıкóç. The opposite εv-ayns ‘immaculate' (Parm., S.) is found as Eúhayns (IG
12(9), 56 [Styra V₁]); the simplex ayns (of the sun, Emp. 47) is clearly secondary.
ETYM Formerly connected with Skt. ágas- [n.] 'fault, sin', but the long vowel of
Sanskrit cannot be accounted for. DELG s.v. explains it as a psilotic form of *ǎyos
belonging with ǎyios (cf. Chantraine and Masson 1954: 85-107), which certainly fits
the attested meaning 'sacredness' well. As Chantraine remarks, all forms can easily
be derived from the root *hag- 'sacred', except for ayos, the psilosis of which has not
àypeipva
15
received a convincing explanation. At any rate, it did not serve to distinguish the
word from ǎyios (per DELG).
ȧyoστóç [m.] in Homer only in the formula λɛ yaĩav άyoʊτų, which is usually taken
to mean 'with the hand (bent like a claw)' (A 425). Taken by Hell. imitative poets (A.
R., Theoc.) as 'arm, elbow'. <?>
⚫ETYM Solmsen 1909: iff. proposed an original *ȧyop-στoç "collector", derived from
► ȧyɛípw 'to gather' with a suffix *-st- found in semantically close лаλαστη 'flat hand,
breadth of four fingers', Skt. hásta- 'hand', MoHG Faust 'fist', OCS gröstь 'handful❜
etc. Not really convincing.
äypa [f.] 'hunting, way of catching; prey' (Od.). <?, PG?(V)►
•COMP Instruments: лuрáуpа 'fire tongs' (II.), кpɛáypa 'meat tongs' (Ar.); as medical
terms ódovτáypa ‘tooth tongs'; diseases: лodáуpa ‘podagra', xɛpάypa ‘gout in the
hand'. Compounds in -áуpɛτoç: лaλiváуpɛtos ‘to be taken back' (epic since Il.),
aúτáуpετos 'self-chosen' (Od.). Boάypia 'what was taken from a cow (= shield)',
ȧvdpáypiov 'spoils of a slain enemy'. The interpretation of these compounds is
debated, see DELG.
•DER ȧypɛús 'hunter' (Pi., A., etc.), more common is ȧypɛúw [v.] 'to hunt' (Hdt., S.,
E., X.), whence ȧypɛvτýs ‘hunter' (Sol., S. [lyr.]), άypɛvtýp ‘id.' (Theoc., Call.),
ǎypɛvчa 'catch, hunting net' (Sol., A., E., X.,); on the mg. of ảуpéτηs see Redard
1949: 23658. Further ảypwσow [v.] ‘to catch' (Od.), cf. Schwyzer: 733; ȧypέw [v.] 'to
take, seize' (II., Sapph., Archil.), in Hom. only ipv. ǎypɛt, -Tε (see Wackernagel 1916:
166f.), Aeol. кaτáуpɛvτov [ipv.]; aor.ptc. ȧypéОɛvτα, -τεç, verbal adj. ȧypɛτaí (Cos).
Agent noun ȧypεμwv (also -μáv) 'hunting spear, hunter', etc. (A., H., EM), whence
àуpéшov 'catch' (AP).
•ETYM The relation between äypa and ȧypéw is unclear. Schwyzer: 727' pleads
against ȧypéw as a denominative from ǎypa. McKenzie Class. Quart. 15 (1921): 46f.
and 125 separated the two words: ǎypa and άypɛús would belong to ȧypós 'field',
whereas ȧypέw would derive from the compounds in -áуpɛτoç, which themselves
belong to ȧyɛipw 'to gather'.
The existence of compounds like aúτáуpɛτos beside avaípɛτos could indicate that
aipźw and ȧypźw were associated, and this may explain formal variants like
-αíуpετoç. Connection with Indo-Iranian (Skt. ghāsé-ajra-, Av. vǝhrkam azrōdaidīm,
both hapaxes of which the mg. is uncertain) and Celtic words (OW hair, MW aer
'battle' <*agră, OIr. ár [n.] 'defeat' <*agro-, Gaul. EN Veragri) is rejected by DELG,
where it is remarked that none of these words bear the concrete meaning of
'catching' that is attested in Greek.
Fur.: (see index) thinks that ȧypéw is a substrate word because of the prenasalized
forms (Thess. ayypε-), the form with at for a (PN 'Eαíуpɛτos on coins from Asia
Minor, on which see Vendryes 1938: 331-334; this form can hardly be reliable), the
variant έypέw, and the metathesized form apyɛɩɩɛ. See ▶(wypέw.
áypáraßos →àyeppákapoc.
ȧypɛiqva [f.] ‘harrow' (AP 6, 297). ◄PG?(V)►

=== page 032 ===

16
•DER ȧypion [f.] 'harrow' (Hdn., H.).
áypinvóv
ETYM One compares ypupãσai ypáqɛiv. Aάкwvɛç. oi dè žúɛiv кai àµúσσɛv 'to
write (Lacon.), others: to plane and scratch' (H.). The ȧ- would remain unexplained.
But note that the attestations are very late. Pre-Greek origin with a prothetic vowel is
possible. The form in -va also suggests Pre-Greek, cf. Fur. 13265.
ȧypηvóv [n.]. <ëvdvµa> diktvoεiðèç ö лεpítíðεvται oi ẞакуεúovtεç Alovúσw.
'Epaτoσévη è αúτò кαλɛi [уpñvvv] ½ уñvov ‘garment like a net which those
possessed by Dionysus put on. Eratosthenes calls it a y.' (H.). <?►
•VAR άуpηvα. Síкτva кai žvdvμa 'nets and clothing' (H.); cf. άуpηvòv локílov
¿peoÛv diktvoeidès kai ëvdvµa dè лotóv (EM 14, 2).
⚫ETYM Does the word have a prothetic vowel? Cf. also ypývn. ävðŋ ovuкtá ‘mixed
flowers' (H.), cf. Strömberg 1944: 15. A derivation from ǎypa (DELG) is quite
uncertain. Nilsson 1941(1): 204 says that the net on the Omphalos was called
άypηvóv; this statement is ascribed to Hesychius and Pollux (4, 116), but neither
author says so: it was only a guess by PW s.v. ("wohl auch"). In fact, Hesychius states
that it was called ▸yáyyaшov.
άypŋoketai · mikpaívɛtaɩ ‘is made bitter, tastes bitter' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Latte suggested that it stands for άypíokɛtaɩ and derives from äypɩoç,
comparing ȧλеíσкw/ ȧλеńσкw to aλ0aívw. Semantically not convincing.
ǎуρɩллoç [m.] Laconian name for the wild olive (Zen.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ǎypɩqpoç. yévoç Tɩ ȧypíaç èλɛíaç 'species of wild olive' (H.).
•ETYM Fur.: 158 notes that these words have the variation 11/q, characteristic of Pre-
Greek words.
àypós [m.] ‘field' (Il.). <IE *h₂eg-ro- ‘field'▷
•VAR Myc. a-ko-ro /agros/; PN a-ko-ro-qo-ro /Agrok"olos/.
⚫COMP ǎypoiкos 'who lives in the country' (ȧypo-Folk-), ǎypwστɩç; also ǎуpuлvoç
"who sleeps outside", which developed into 'sleepless, awake' (IA); cf. ǎyp-avλos (II.)
'who has his bed/lair in the field'.
•DER Thence ǎyptos 'wild', with derivations: ȧypɩóτŋs [f.] 'wildness' (Pl., D., X.),
άуpóμa, àуpów, ȧypiaívw [v.] 'to become (make) wild'. ȧypótŋs [m.]
‘countryman, rustic' (л 218, E.), άypoτýp [m.] (E.) ‘id.', also ảypóτns (E.) and
àypwotns (S., E.), of unclear formation (see Bechtel 1914 s.v. ǎypwotɩç, but also
Meier-Brügger KZ 103 (1990) above).
ȧypowτns (Il.) for ȧypóτηs would have arisen at verse end (Risch 1937: 32). On
ȧypéτηs see ►äypa. Comp. ȧypóτεpos 'wild', cf. opéστεpoç. 'living in the mountains
(as opposed to the fields)'.
⚫ETYM Old IE word, originally designating the uncultivated field: cf. Skt. ájra-, Lat.
ager, Go. akrs and Arm. art. Derivation from *heg- 'drive' is probable.
äypunvog →ăypos.
ǎypwσtic, -180, -ɛws [f.] 'dog's-tooth grass' (Od.). <GR>
ăyxoupon 1
17
●ETYM Formerly supposed to be the fem. of ȧypwotηs 'countryman', from ►ȧypós
(Bechtel 1914 s.v., Strömberg 1940: 117). However, Meier-Brügger KZ 103 (1990): 33f.
convincingly explained the word as *h₂egro-h,d-ti- 'Feld-Futter', comparing ►vñστç
for the formation.
ayua [f.] 'street, road' (II.). <PG(S) ►
•VAR Plur. ȧyviai.
●DER Ayutɛúç [m.] ‘guardian of the streets', epithet of Apollo (com., E.), whence the
month name Ayuínos (Argos); Ayváτŋs [m.] ‘id.' (A.), also 'inhabitant of an ǎ.'
(Pharsalos), cf. ȧyviñtai. kwµñtal ‘village dwellers' (H.); fem. ȧyvɩāts (Pi., E. [lyr.]).
•ETYM Mainly a poetic word. Generally considered to be a perf. ptc. of ǎyw 'to
drive' without reduplication, but this makes little sense as the formation is without a
parallel (save archaic iduĩa); more probably a substrate word in -ua, for which cf.
► кwSvia, see Szemerényi 1964: 203ff. and Beekes 1998: 25f.
ǎyxɩ [adv., prep.] ‘near' (Il.). <IE *h₂emg"- ‘tie, betroth'>
●Comp άyxé-µaxos (II.) probably after tηλé-µaxos (only as a PN), see Trümpy 1950:
113f.
⚫DER Further adverbial forms ȧyxó-01, -0ɛv; ȧyxou. Comp. áoσov, àσσoτépw, superl.
äуxiστα, -ov, also ǎσσɩστα, Elean aσtoτα (see Peters 1980a: 288). From the superl.
άyxiσtivos 'near each other' (II.), see Chantraine 1933: 204. On Locr. ȧyxiστεdāv =
ȧуxiστndav see Fraenkel Glotta 20 (1932): 84f. More forms in DELG.
⚫ETYM Considered to be the locative of a root noun related to ǎyxw (Schwyzer:
622), or a direct derivation from äуxw after лépɩ, ǎvt. West Glotta 77 (1999): 118f.
suggests reconsidering the reading ȧyxŋotivoɩ, -aɩ for άyxɩσtīvoɩ, -aɩ, which is a v.l.
at all Homeric places, and which he interprets as άyxi + εd-t- ‘a sitting close
together. More probable is the suggestion by Watkins (apud West 1.c.) that the
compound contains the root no- 'to sit'.
àyxíλwy [f.] ‘swelling which obstructs the lacrymal duct' (Gal. 19, 438). ◄ PG(V)►
•VAR Synonym aiyíλwy (Cels.).
⚫ETYM Galen analyzes it as ǎyxt and wч. Strömberg 1944: 95f. follows this, and
explains the -- from the synonym aiyiλwy. Frisk suggests that the first member is
from ǎyxw instead. Not very convincing. The synonym points to a Pre-Greek
origin, due to variation a/aɩ and y/X and prenasalization. Influence of äyxı/ äyxw on
aiyíλwy is improbable. Note that at before NC is not tolerated in Greek; perhaps the
first i derives from a palatalized /g'/. The analysis in terms of Pre-Greek is *a(n)g'-il-
ōp-.
ȧyxóvη [f] = чavбpayópa 'mandrake' (Ps.-Dsc.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
ǎyxovpos 1 [m.] ‘gold' (AP, Plu.), presumably the name of the son of Midas (Plu. 2,
306f.). <?>
•ETYM Fur.: 391 compares τάyxoupos yàp ò xpvoós, ǹ Néšis Mepoikη ‘τ. means gold
in Persian' (sch. Theoc., p. 351 W.) and tάyxapaç ‘gold' (Cosmas ad OGI 199). If the

=== page 033 ===

18
ayxoupos 2
word is Pre-Greek, I propose a sequence -ar"- giving either -ap- or -oup-; see
► ȧyxoupos 2 and, most notably, ► ápaσxádec.
ȧyxoūpos 2 [m.] 'dawn' (Call.). <?>
•VAR άyxoŨpoç ópерóç. Kúлρioɩ. † qwσqópos kaì oi σùv avτó̟ ‘dawn (Cypr.);
bringer of light, and what comes with him' (H.). Variant ǎyxaupos 'near the
morning' (AP 4, 111); 'time near dawn' (Call.), see LSJ Supp.
⚫ETYM Unknown. The interchange ou/au is reliable, as both occur in Callimachus (so
if av is explained from aüptov, we cannot understand -oup-). Perhaps PG -arw-
yielded variants in -aup- (with anticipation of the labial element) and oup- (with
additional coloring of the vowel); cf. ► ȧpaσxádɛç.
ǎyxovσa [f.] a plant, ‘Anchusa tinctoria' (Thphr., Dsc.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also yxovoa (Ar.).
•COMP Also кaτάyxovσa (Ps.-Dsc.); cf. чevdáyxovσa (Plin.).
•ETYM The variant yxovoa excludes derivation from ►äyxw (which is defended by
Strömberg 1940: 64). A typical substrate word; see Fur.: 346 and 197" on the suffix
-ovσa. Not related to ȧyxúvwys.
äyxpav [adj.] · µúшлα. Aoкpoí ‘short-sighted (Locrian)' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Bechtel 1921 compares ǎkapov• tuqλóv ‘blinď (H.). These forms show typical
variations of Pre-Greek: к/x and prenasalization (see Fur.: 127).
ayxw [v.] 'to squeeze, strangle' (Il.). <IE *h₂emg¹- ‘narrow, strangle'>
•DER άyxóvŋ ‘hanging, strangling', for the suffix cf. ►ñɛpóvò, etc.; Lat. LW angina
(Leumann Sprache 1 (1949): 205, but see E-M s.v.). Thence ȧyxóvios 'fit for hanging'
(E., Nonn.), ȧyxováw 'to strangle' (Man.). ȧукτηp, -ñpoç [m.] 'tool for sewing up
wounds' (Cels. Med., Plu.).
•ETYM An exact correspondence for the thematic present is found in Lat. angō 'to
bind together, strangle'. Hitt. hamank-', hame/ink- has a nasal present *h₂m-(e)n-g¹-.
The widespread u-stem adjective *h₂emg¹-u- in Skt. amhú- ‘narrow', Go. aggwus,
Arm. anju-k, OCS o̟zʊ-kú is not found in Greek. See ►äyxɩ.
äyw [v.] ‘to drive, lead, bring, carry; to draw, etc.' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂eģ- ‘drive, lead'>
•VAR Аor. nyayov, perf. ñxα (Att.); Dor. ȧyńyoxa, whence άynoxa, ȧyéwxa.
•DIAL Myc. a-ke /agei/.
●COMP With ảл-, ɛio-, ¿‹-, kat-, etc.; σtpatŋyós ‘leader (of the army), commander'.
On -αуéτηs in compounds (ȧpxуéηs, etc.) see Fraenkel 1910: 59ff., Sommer 1950:
11f.
•DER ȧyós 'leader' (poet. since Il.), which is formally identical with Skt. ajá- 'driver',
but perhaps a parallel formation; άyń ‘transport' (Chios), ‘winding' (Arat.); άywv,
-vos [m.] ‘gathering, rally (to see games)' (II.), whence άyóvios, ȧywvía, ȧywviáw,
άуwváτηs; verb άywví oμa 'to contend for a prize, etc.', whence άywviσç,
άywvioµa, άywviotŃs, &ywviotikós, etc. Further äкtwp, -opos ‘leader' (A.), also a PN
(II.), but Lat. actor may be an independent formation; ǎyµa· кλéµµα ‘theft' (H.).
Reduplicated nouns: ȧywyós [m.] 'leader' (IA), ȧywyn 'carrying away' (IA),
formation unclear, whence ȧywyɛúç, àуwyчдoç, ȧyáyiov, ȧywyaños, άywyɩká.
ǎddi, -1x0
19
"yavov'spoke' seems unrelated (in spite of Frisk 1938: 17f.). Unclear is the formation
of ảyĩvéµevaɩ, ảyɩvéw ‘to lead, carry' (II.), and the relation with Dor. Aetol. ȧyvéw
‘id.'.
Cf. further on ►áyéλn, ►äžios, ► äεwv, ▸öyµoç; also ►ȧypóç. Not here ►äyvia.
●ETYM Old thematic present, also found in Skt. ájati, Av. azaiti, Arm. acem, Lat. agō,
OIr. -aig, ON aka and ToAB āk-, all 'to drive, lead' vel sim. Originally the verb was
present (see LIV² s.v. *h₂eg-). ►öуµos 'furrow, etc.' derives from *h₂og-mo-, neatly
corresponding to Skt. ájma- ‘trajectory', and proves that the regular reflex of *h₂o in
Greek was o, not a (as was contended by Ruijgh).
ảdayµós [m.] · kvησµós ‘itch³ (H.). ◄PG(V)►
●VAR Also in S. Tr. 770 acc. to Phot. (codd. odayμós).
•Der Cf. ådaktŵ• кvý¤oµaι ‘to itch³, áάdažñoaɩ• kvñoai ‘to scrape, scratch', àdaxã.
kvα, kvýßei kepaλýv. ynλaqḍ ‘scratches the head, gropes' (H.).
•ETYM The old explanation of ȧdayµós as assimilated from oda- is due to the desire
to reduce everything to Indo-European roots; see Van Beek fthc.b. There is no
compelling reason to connect a word for 'scratch' with 'tooth'; the vocalic variation
points to PG origin. See ►ódáž.
=>
ȧdańç, -és → dañval.
ådalós [m.] · äσßolos ‘soot' (H.). ◄LW Maced.➤
•ETYM Macedonian for aïaλoc; see von Blumenthal 1930: 5. See ►áεñ, ►ädpaιa.
àdáµaç, -avtoç [m.] a strong metal, ‘steel' (Hes.); ‘diamond' (Thphr.). <?>
•VAR PN ASáμaç (Hom.).
●DER áðaµávtivos (Pi., A.).
•ETYM Both the appellative and the PN are often derived from dávμ as
'indomitable'; for the formation, cf. άкáµaç and Chantraine 1933: 269. But
semantically, the etymology is rather strange. It is rather a loanword that was
adapted by folk etymology. Acc. to Troxler 1964: 19-21 and Barb 1969: 66-82, it is a
loan from Semitic, comparing Akk. adamu. Lubotsky 1998: 4143 refers to NPhr.
(α)τεaμа 'stone'.
ádápɛža · ɛipývn 'peace' (H.). <?>
•ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 24 compares άτapačia and thinks the word is of Illyrian
origin. Very uncertain.
ȧdápкn [f.] 'salt deposit on the herbage of marshes' (Dsc., Gal.). <LW Celt.>>
VAR Also - [m.], äбapкoç [m.].
⚫ETYM Like Lat. adarca (Plin.), a loanword from Gaulish: cf. Ir. adarc 'horn', which is
from Basque adar 'horn', with a Celt. suffix -k- (Pokorny Zeitschr. f. celt. Phil. 14
(1923): 273; Pokorny Zeitschr. f. celt. Phil. 16 (1927): 112).
äddavov⇒ä¶w 1.
äddıž, -ɩxoç [f.] a measure of four choinikes (Ar. fr. 709). <?►

=== page 034 ===

20
ȧSɛaλτwhaιɛ
ǎdis
221
⚫ETYM Unknown. The suffix is also found in xoчvič (which has -Iк-). Geminated 88 is
rare in IA, and names for measures are often borrowed. Cf. кáðdixos s.v. ►kádoc,
which is combined by Fur.: 1305, who assumes a substrate word with the alternation
к/zero. Cf. also Szemerényi 1969b: 248.
ȧdɛa\τwhatε [38g.opt.aor.] unknown (inscr. Elis [approx. 350ª]). <?>
⚫ETYM DELG (see s.v. for more details) thinks of déλτoç 'writing tablet', referring to
Buck 1955: 263.
ȧdɛlqɛós [m.] ‘brother' (Il.). <GR➤
•VAR Att. adɛλpós (shortened form); adeλen 'sister' (Pi. -ɛá, Att. -on). Cret.
adevilog.
•DER ȧdeλqidéoç, -déŋ (Att. -Soñç, -бñ) 'nephew', 'niece'. adeλɩp. ȧɛɛóç,
Aάкwvɛç 'brother (Lacon.)' (H.) is due to contamination with opάtŋp. Diminutive
ådɛλqíðɩov (Ar.), ådɛλqiкóç ‘brotherly, etc.' (Arist.), ådeλqóτŋs ‘brotherhood'
(LXX), ȧdɛλqílw [v.] 'to accept as a brother' (Hecat.), ádéλqığıc (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Derived from a word for 'womb' with copulative a < *sm-, meaning 'from the
same womb'; cf. adελôoí• oi έк τñç aúτñç dελqúos yɛyovóτεs. Sελoùs yàp ǹ µǹtpa
(H.). However, the -ε- cannot be from -εF- because of Cret. -toc; acc. to Wackernagel
1916: 52f., it must derive from *-eio-, which forms material adjectives. We may also
assume a ntr. *Sɛλopós as a base noun, thus *ha-g"elp'eh-o-. Att. àdɛλopóç is from
contracted forms like ådɛλôoũ < -ɛou. The inherited word for 'brother', opátŋp, was
primarily used in a religious or political sense (e.g. øpáτpa, opaτpíα), and could
perhaps also be used for other members of the extended family, like nephews. Greek
probably introduced the expression *páτηp ådɛλqɛós 'brother proper', cf. Skt.
sagarbhya- and, within Greek, ouoуаστрιoç. It has been suggested that the word
derived from pre-Greek matrilinear societies (Kretschmer Glotta 2 (1910): 201ff.), but
the word may instead point to a society with concubines (лαλλaкαí); see Gonda
Mnem. 15 (1962): 390-2. See Seλqús.
ȧdɛvкnç, -és [adj.] unknown, said of öλε poç, óñ (Od.). <IE? *deuk-
'care'?>
•DIAL Perhaps Myc. de-u-ka-ri-jo /Deukaliōn/.
•ETYM Like Hoλv-dɛúêηç, it presupposes a noun *Sɛñкoç [n.], for which no cognates
can be suggested. Not to Lat. duco 'to lead', etc., as per Lagercrantz KZ 35 (1899): 276.
Cf. Sɛúkel oppovíčεɩ consider, ponder' (H.), ¿vduкέwç ‘careful'; ȧdɛvкns would then
mean 'careless, thoughtless', which fits the meaning very well. In a sch. on A. R. 1,
1027, SɛŪKoç is glossed as yλεŨкоç, which seems most improbable. Is it a mistake for
гAEYKOΣ? The name Aɛvкaλíwv may derive from *Aɛvкaλíwv; see Bechtel 1914 s.v.
► ȧdevкŃç.
áðñ · oúpavós. Makɛdóvɛç heaven (Maced.)' (H.). ◄LW Mac.➤
ETYM Identical with alonp, which
➤ainp, which features the typical Macedonian
Lautverschiebung (8 for Gr. 8, etc.).
ådŋkótes [perf.ptc.nom.pl.] in kaµáts̟ ådŋkótes ŋdè kaì űrvu̟ (K 98), mg. uncertain.
<?>
⚫ETYM Connected with any or ηdúc, and ȧadɛiv (cf. ►äada). For discussion, see
DELG.
àdŋµovéw [v.] ‘to be restless, scared (Hp., Pl., X.). <?►
VAR With short ȧ- (Nic. fr. 16).
•DER άdηµovía (Epicur., Plu.), àηµoσúvη (Democr., X.).
ETYM An Ionic word. Allen Class. Rev. 20 (1906): 5 connected it with Sañvai;
Debrunner 1937: 266 assumed a contraction from *ådanµovéw; semantically not
compelling. Not related to idúc, nor to ȧŋdnc (Leumann 1950: 30982).
ádúv, -évoc [f.] ‘gland' (Hp.). <IE?, PG?>
•VAR Later [m.].
⚫ETYM One compares Lat. inguen, -inis [n.] 'groin, swelling on the groin' and Molc.
økkr [m.] ‘growth, tumor' < PGm. *enkwa- < *eng"o-. However, since PIE had no
words beginning with a vowel, this would be reconstructed as *h,eng"-, but a zero
grade *h,ng"-e- would give Gr. *έvdɛ- acc. to Rix' Law (*HRC- > Gr. a/ɛ/oRC). This
implies that the Greek word cannot be cognate with the Germanic one (the latter can
be cognate with the Latin word, of course, as *h,eng"-, see Schrijver 1991: 58). Greek
άdnv thus remains isolated. Fur.: 172118 suggests a substrate origin (words in -v). For
a recent challenge of the validity of Rix's Law, see Nikolaev 2005, and on the present
word, p. 5054.
ädny [adv.] 'to one's fill' (Il.). <IE *seh₂- 'satiate'>
•VAR In epic with psilosis. The a- may undergo metrical lengthening.
•DER ǎdoç [m., n.] 'satiety' (Il.), ȧdivós 'crowded, thronging, vehement, etc' (mainly
epic), ►ȧdpós. From *ádŋ-: àdaños leading to satiety, unpleasant' (Sophr., H.). Cf.
further the glosses ►ǎada and ảadɛïv (H.), and ►ådµwλý and ►ǎoŋ.
•ETYM Old accusative of a noun supposed in the first member of adŋ-qáάyos ‘glutton'
(but what kind of compound is it?). Often connected with the root *seh₂- 'to satisfy',
which is found in several Greek verbal forms: ǎµevai (II.), aor. ►ãσai, ǎσaσðaι (epic)
'to become satiated' and ►ǎaτoç. áðηy was analyzed by Frisk as containing a stem
åd- and connected with Arm. at-ok' ‘full, ripe' (cf. ►ådpós); but, as Clackson 1994:
170f. remarks, ádŋy itself may simply contain a suffix -dŋv. Still, this does not explain
the other derivations with -8-. Other languages have an enlargement in -t(i)-: Lat.
satis ‘enough', Go. saps ‘satiated', ga-soþjan, Lith. sótis ‘satiaty' etc. (see ► åσai).
ȧdíavtov [n.] name of a plant, 'Adiantum' (Thphr.). <IE?, GR▷
•VAR ȧdíavτos [m.].
•ETYM Explained as 'what cannot be irrigated' (►Staívw); see Strömberg 1940: 74f.
ádíêŋ [f.] ‘nettle', = åкaλńoŋ (Ps.-Dsc. 4, 93). <PG?>
•ETYM Cf. ► έλíkη 'willow'. The connection with OHG nazza, nezzila etc. as *ņd-ikā
(cf. Frisk) is most improbable; it is rather a substrate word.
=>
ádɩvós → ädŋv, ádpós.
ädıç [?] · wç Añíшv, áðρóo̟ɩ, ǹ εσɣápa ‘in masses, hearth' (H.). <LW Mac.➤

=== page 035 ===

22
ȧdμwλń
●ETYM In the meaning åðpóoɩ, probably a mistake for äλıç; in the sense έoxápa,
Macedonian (= Lat. aedēs), acc. to von Blumenthal IF 49 (1931): 179.
ádµwλý [f.] · àлopía, óλɩywpía, ǎyvota, ǹovxía ‘difficulty, contempt or negligence,
ignorance, rest or quiet' (H.); cf. Hdn. Gr.1, 324, etc. <?>
•Var ådµwλía. ǹ ǎyvota ‘ignorance' (Suid., Call. fr. 717 Pf.), ádµodín (EM). Further
ȧσчwλεĭv=ȧуvoɛiv (H., EM 155, 33).
•Der ådµwlw. ảкηdɩ ‘am careless' (Suid.), ådµwλɛïv. ȧyvoɛïv ½ ȧyvwµovɛiv ǹ
άкηdɩāv 'to be ignorant, act or treat unfairly, be careless' (EM). ȧdµwλɛi. xwpis
Sóλov 'without resource' (Suid.).
•ETYM Frisk derived it from äd- (in ►ädŋy) with “suffixal” -µwλ- (Frisk Eranos 41
(1943): 52), which is highly improbable. Acc. to Fur.: 2638, the word can hardly be
inherited. On the interchange Su/ σμ, see Schwyzer: 208 (unclear).
ädµwveç [pl.] a sea-fish (Opp. Hal. 3, 371). <?►
•VAR Also ǎdμwes.
⚫ETYM Unknown; see Thompson 1947.
áðvóv [adj.] · ȧyvóv. Kpñtes holy (Cret.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Is it a hypercorrect form, caused by the development Sv > yv? Or just a form
invented to explain Aptádvn? See Bechtel 1921(2): 777.
ådoléoxns [m.] ‘idle talker' (Ar.). <?►
•VAR On à see Björck 1950: 142, 41.
•DER Later ȧdóλɛσxos; thence ȧdoleoxía, -éw, -ikós.
•ETYM Perhaps from *ȧado-λéσxηs to ȧadɛïv. òxλɛïv (H.), with λéσxη as a second
member in the sense of 'conversation', and a first member *ȧ-σFad- (see ►ávdávw,
►Súc); cf. Schulze 1892: 452f. Quite uncertain. See DELG for more details.
ádpaía aiopía 'clear weather' (H.). <LW Mac.
•
⚫ETYM Probably Macedonian; see von Blumenthal 1930: 5.
=>
ádpáqažvs → átpáqažvs.
ádovoláσaσai [v.aor.] 'to accept the membership of, qvλñç кαì dηµov кaì œpaτpíaç
(IG 2², 553: 15, LSJ Supp.). <GR➤
⚫DER ȧdovσlov. ȧpεστóv, σúµówvov 'pleased, harmonious, agreed' (H.), ȧdovolaσá-
voláμεvo 'who agreed' (H.).
ETYM Probably connected with ǎdos 'decree' < 'decision'.
ȧdpóc [adj.] 'thick, strong, full-grown, ripe' (Hdt.). <IE *seh₂- 'satiate'>
●DER ȧSpóτηs strength' (Hell.); on Hom. ȧ(v)Spotñta [acc.] see ►ávǹp. ȧdpúvw [v.]
'to make ripe', med. 'to ripen', whence ädpuvσtç; sometimes also ȧdpéw, ȧdpóoµai.
Plant name àdpwdns (Strömberg 1940: 82).
•ETYM From root ȧd- in ►ädŋv, with a suffix -po-.
ädpva · лλoĩa µovóžvλα, Kúлpot 'ships made out of one piece of wood (Cypr.)'.
Aéyovtaι dè kai oi έv tó̟ ápótpu̟ otλo 'the poles in the plough'. Σкελoì dè ädpva
λéyovσi τà µñλa ‘apples (Sicilian)', лαрà dε Аττiкoïç áкpódpva ‘fruits grown on
!
àeipw 1
23
upper branches of trees (Att.)' (H.). Also ädpva. oi σtüλoi åpóτpov, dɩ úv d
iστoẞoεùç ápμóεtai 'by which the plough beam is fixed' (H.). <IE *dru- 'tree', PG>
•ETYM In the first gloss, it seems to continue *ǎ-Spva (consisting) of one single tree',
a compound from ȧ- < *sm- and Spüç. This can also be assumed for the second,
agricultiral meaning. For the meaning ‘one single' of ȧ-, cf. µávʊxεç s.v. ►ővv§. But
in the third meaning, 'apples', it is probably folk-etymological, as it is a variant of
►μádpva, which is non-IE. Compounds with a second member -Spv- are rare and
doubtful; see DELG s.v. Spüç.
"Adwvis, -idos [m.] theonym. <LW?>
•VAR Also ASwv, -os.
ETYM Supposed to be a loan from Semitic (Hebr. ādōn 'Lord'). But no cult
connected with this name is known in the Semitic world, nor a myth parallel to that
in Greece. See Burkert 1985: 176f., arguing against Kretschmer, e.g. Kretschmer
Glotta 7 (1916): 29ff. and Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 235f. Fur.: 32821 points to the
proper name Adwv, an Armenian general and a Phrygian flute-player.
äɛoç [m.] 'burden, contest, prize of a contest' (Il.). On the mg. Trümpy 1950: 150f.
<IE? *hued 'contest'?>
VAR Also -ov [n.] (Il.).
•DIAL Arc. [ǎ]Ƒεðλa (IG 5(2), 75), Att. contr. λoç, -ov.
●DER àéðλov ‘id.' (epic), às ‘of the contest' (Thgn., Call.), ǎo unhappy'
(Att.), åÐλiótŋc; à(e)0λéw, -ɛúw [v.] 'to contend for³, à(ε)ŋtýp, -týc, à(é)0λnua,
-OLG-TLKÓC.
⚫ETYM The original meaning probably was 'contest for a prize. Not related to Skt.
vayati 'be tired' (as per Trümpy 1950: 150-151), which is from *hueh₂-. The word.
looks Indo-European; the form suggests a root reconstruction *h₂ued-.
ȧɛídw [v.] 'to sing (the praises of)' (II.). <IE? *h₂ueid- ‘sing'>
•DIAL Att. ǎSw.
●DER ảoɩdń, wdź ‘song', whence ȧoídios, ¿dikóç. Agent noun ȧodós, ¿dóc ‘singer'.
Thence, or from ȧoid, the verb ȧoidiáw (epic) = àɛídw; derived from @dn: Qidetov a
building in Athens for musical contests. Further ǎɛoµɑ, ãƒµa [n.] ‘song' (IA),
άσμáτov (Pl. Com.); άoµós [m.] ‘id.' (Pl. Com.).
•ETYM The ablaut suggests PIE *hueid-, but no cognate outside Greek is known.
Older speculations, now dated, are found in Frisk and DELG. Harðarson 1993b: 163
assumed the reconstruction *h₂ue-(h2)ud-, with loss of the laryngeal (which seems
difficult) and dissimilation as in εлov < *h₂e-uе-uk"-. See ►aúdý, ►ảndwv.
ȧɛípw 1 [v.] 'to raise' (Il.). <IE? *h₂uer- ‘raise'?>
•VAR ǎwpτo 'hung' (Il.), which Tichy 1983: 364f. explains as an injunctive *ǎopτo <
PIE *h₂ur-tó.
•DIAL Att. aïpw, for which Frisk suggested a recent formation to the Att. fut. ǎpw <
*ȧɛpw. Improbable is a root *sr-, as per Heubeck Orbis 13 (1964): 264-7. Taillardat
RPh. 57 (1983): 21-25 convincingly assumes a zero grade verb *awr-je/o- > aïpw.

=== page 036 ===

24
àeipw 2
ãeoa
25
•COMP ȧεpσí-лоdɛç ‘lifting their feet' (II.); µετñopos ‘(sth.) in the air', Att. µετéwpoç,
Аеol. лεdáороç (these are not from ►ȧnp).
●DER ǎpσiç [f.] ‘raising' (Arist.); ►ȧptńp.
⚫ETYM Not from άnp ‘air' (which has long *ā-). No cognates are known, but the form
requires the reconstruction *h₂uer-. See also άɛípw 2; an important question is
whether these are originally the same verb. See
InspéÐovtat.
ȧpτýp, aiwpa; cf. also ►ǎpµa 2,
ȧɛípw 2 [v.] ‘to bind together, join' (II.); mostly with ovv-. Cf. žuvaipɛtal· ovvártetai
‘is attached' (H.). <IE? *h₂uer-? ‘bind'>
•VAR Note awρτo 'was hanging'; πapηépеŋ 'was made to hang beside' П 341.
DIAL Perhaps Myc. o-pa-wo-ta /op-aworta/ 'pieces of armor??
•COMP Nominal stem -aop- ‘band, link' in *τɛtp(a)-áopos, tetpãopos, contracted
Téτpwpoç 'which yokes four together' (Od.), whence τετрãoрía 'four-horse chariot'
(Pi.); from σuvaɛipw also ovvãopos, ovvǹopos ‘coupled together, spouse', Att.
ovvwpic, -ídoc [f.] 'two-horse team', to which belongs σuvwpiкεúετal 'drives with a
team of horses' (Ar. Nub. 15), but *ovvwpiкóç is unattested; from ovvwpis also
ovvwpiaσtńs ‘driver of a ovvwpic' (Luc.), which presupposes a verb *ovvwpiášɛiv.
Contrasted with ovvýopos is лapñopos, лapáopos (Il.) ‘(horse) joined beside', also
'outstretched' and 'reckless' (see Leumann 1950: 222ff.); a vеrb лараɛíрw seems to
have existed beside ovvaɛípw, but it is attested only in a special use лapηépеη ε
Kápη (II 341) 'the head hung on one side', cf. Leumann loc. cit. Isolated ȧлηopoç 'far
away'. έnnopoç suspended over', кaτηopoç ‘hanging down', and кaτwpiç ‘band
hanging down' rather belong with μετηopoç, µετéwpoç, see ▸ȧɛípw 1.
•DER Action noun άopτý *attaching, ‘sth. attached, bag for tying' (Men.), medic.
term referring to the bronchi and the hose-like aorta (Hp., Arist.). Agent or
instrument noun àoptúp, -ñpos [m.] *attacher', 'sword-belt' (Od.), with unclear o-
vocalism; also ȧóptŋs (pap., H.) and ảoptɛús (H.). Denominative or deverbative ptc.
ȧopτηɛíç 'hanged' (AP). ǎopτpα [n.pl.] 'pulmonary lobe' (Hp.), after nouns in
-τpov (Chantraine 1933: 331f.). See further ǎop, -opos [n.] 'sword' (probably
unrelated); related is ► ápτáw ‘to hang'.
⚫ETYM Solmsen 1901: 289ff. separated it from aɛípw 1 'to raise', but DELG tends to
consider the second as a specialization of the first (see extensive discussion in
DELG). The present entry is mostly connected with a root *uerH- ‘to bind, hang on,
strick' in Balto-Slavic, e.g. Lith. virve 'string', OCS obora < *ob-vora ‘string, twine',
Lith. vérti ‘to pierce, string', etc., but the exact demarcation from the root *Huer- ‘to
open' is unclear; perhaps it was originally one root. For Greek, the closest connection
is with Alb. vjerr 'to hang, suspend. See ► ápτýp, ►άptáw, ►ǎop.
ȧɛкnλoç [adj.] 'unbearable' (only Σ 77, Epya). <GR>
•ETYM The form was based on the root *uek- 'to wish' in ►ékúv, ►čkiλoc; see
Philipp in LfgrE s.v.
.
ȧźλioι [m.pl.] oi àdɛλqàç yuvaikas έoxηkótes 'who have sisters as wives', i.e.
'brothers-in-law' (H.). <IE *sue-lo->
⚫VAR aiλiol. σúyyaußpot 'the husbands of two sisters' (H.); εiλíoveç in Pollux 3, 32 (oi
dè àdɛλøàç yŋµavtes óµóyaµßpoɩ ½ σúууaµßpoɩ ½ µãλλov σvукŋdeotai kai napà
toiç montaïç ɛiλíovec), with metrical lengthening of *¿λíoves or *ελiovεç.
⚫ETYM alot may be an itacistic notation for *^o (*λtot). The ȧ- in ȧéλɩɩ is taken
as a ‘copulative' a-. Cognate with ON svilar [m.pl.] ‘brothers-in-law, whose wives are
sisters', PIE *sue-lo-, a derivative in -l- of the reflexive pronoun *sue.
ǎελλa [f.] 'storm wind' (II.). <IE? *h₂uel->
•VAR άελλŋ (ПI 374).
•DIAL Aeol. avɛλλa.
•DER Aɛλλw, -oñç [f.] name of a Harpy (Hes.); άε\\aĩoç, also άɛ\\áç ‘fast like a
storm' (S.), àɛɛ (Nonn.), άε\\wdŋs (sch. Il.). Bird name ȧɛ\\óc (H.) and
ǎελov. τaxú quick' (EM). Note ȧελns (of кovíσaλoç I 13), perhaps from ȧoλŃ,
but rather not after äελλa. Verb àéλλεται· лvɛĩ (EM).
•ETYM Cf. Oúελa. Direct derivation fron the root of ǎŋµɩ, *hueh¸-, is impossible
because of related W awel [f.] 'wind', which requires the reconstruction *h₂eu-el-.
The Greek form can also be derived from *åƑɛλ-ɩα. The gloss åεíλŋ. лvoý ‘breath,
etc.' (H.) does not fit in. See ➤àétμov.
ǎɛµµа [n.] 'bow' (Call.). <?>
•ETYM Assuming an original meaning 'bowstring' (cf. ►vɛupá), explained as an
artificial form for ǎµµa 'knot, cord (to ►äлτw); this is doubtful.
åetµóv → átµóç.
aékwave waveávw.
äɛлtos [adj.] of uncertain mg., cf. äεлτoν· iσxυpóv, áoíkytov (äðɩktov) ‘strong,
uninhabited' (H.). <?>
VAR Sometimes we find ǎαлτоç oг äελлτоç (A. Supp. 908, Ag. 141, etc.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. See Wackernagel Stud. ital. fil. class. 5 (1897): 27ff.
άźpoy [m.] Boeotian name for the bird µépoy, (sch. Ar. Av. 1354). <PG? (S, V)►
·VAR Also Aépores. Ovoc, Tpolljva Katolkoivtec. kai èv Makedovia yévog Tr. Kaí
öpvεá τva 'people inhabiting Troezen; lineage in Macedonia; kind of bird' (H.); the
gloss άερолóç. кoxλíaç 'snail' (H.) is corrupted acc. to DELG following Latte.
Variants εlpowμépoч, also Boeotian (Arist.); PN'HÉрoлoç.
=
•ETYM See Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 12-34; it is clearly a substrate element.
Chantraine thinks that the a- is long because of Ant. Lib. 18, 3 ǹépoлoç. Fur.: 243,
246, 352 assumes the interchange µ/ F and prothesis α-/ ε-/ ǹ-: µεpor- / åƑεpoл- /
εt̃pon- < *¿Ƒεpoл- / ǹƑεpoл- (but this remains uncertain; perhaps ɛi-, ǹ- are
secondary lengthenings). Pre-Greek origin of the bird name and the proper name is
probable (cf. the suffix -oл-). See µépoy, ► лnvéλoy.
äɛσa [v.aor.] 'to spend (the night)' (Od.), always with vúкτα(s). ◄IE *h₂ues- 'live, dwell,
spend the night'>
•VAR Secondary pres. ȧéσкw (Hdn., H.).

=== page 037 ===

26
46
devippov
⚫ETYM Related to Skt. vásati ‘to dwell, live, spend the night', Hitt. huiš-zi 'to live', ToB
wäs- [verb] 'to stay, to wait', Go. wisan 'to be', Arm. gom ‘I am' (but rejected by
Kortlandt AAL 19 (1998): 19f.) etc. There is also an old present iaúw < *h¸i-h₂eus-.
Not related to ďσtu, έotía.
deoippov = àáw.
déow → ăega.
äletov · äriσtov. Zikɛλoí 'not trustworthy (Sicilian)' (H.). <?►
•DER ȧɛτów in åετwеεшvτ (Delphi, SGDI 2034, 17), but the mg. 'if they are
persuaded' poses difficulties, as it is the opposite of the gloss; see DELG.
•ETYM Unexplained.
anxns [adj.] 'änavστos, σuvεxηs, incessant', of noise, pain (II.). <GR>
DER In H. also àчaxés and ȧε×és àɩáv 'incessant'; axés. àdiexés
'unceasing' (Suid.).
⚫ETYM Probably for *ȧCaɛxnc, which can be read in all places in Homer, from *ȧ-dia-
exǹs (cf. ovvexńs 'continuous') (Schulze 1892: 471, Bechtel 1914 s.v.). But the
contraction *aε > ŋ is irregular in Ionic. DELG therefore suggests the influence of
nxn and compounds like Svoηxús, but also remarks that *ɑɛ > ŋ may be found in
Thessalian, Lesbian and Arcado-Cyprian. For the meaning, Bechtel assumes 'der
ohne Einhalt etwas tut', but it simply means 'without interrruption'; diéxw means 'to
stand apart, be separate'.
äľov [adj.] · µéλav, úyŋλóv ‘black or dark, high' (H.). <?►
•ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 33 corrects µéλav to µέyav. However, his explanation
from *ag-ion (to aǎyav and µέyaç) is quite uncertain.
=>
copian → &rog.
aw 1 [v.] 'to dry' (II.). <IE *h₂ed- 'dry'>>
•VAR Mostly intr. ǎšoµai ‘to parch’.
●COMP äddavov• Eŋpóv. Aákwveç ‘dry (Lacon.)' (H.) would be a compound of ǎa
(see below) and avoç 'dry' (Fraenkel Gnomon 21 (1949): 39, Fraenkel Glotta 32 (1953):
22); improbable; Latte corrects the gloss to *äddavov. Cf. ȧšavtós. ñalaiótŋs kai
Kóviç 'antiquity, dust' (H.), which remains unclear.
...
•DER Hell. ǎ a 'dryness, heat', in σáкoç лεлɑλayµévov än (X 184) often
interpreted as 'shield defiled with mold', which seems unnecessary, cf. ǎÇa. äoßoloç
Kóviç 'soot, dust or ashes', лаλαιótŋs. kórpos ¿v åууεí úлоµεívασа ‘filth having
remained behind in a receptacle' (H.).
Adjective à aλéos ‘barren, ariď (Il.), cf. ioxaλéos, avστaλéoç. Verbs åšávoµai (h.
Ven.), àčaívw (Nic.) 'to parch', both deverbative.
•ETYM Acc. to Frisk, the nearest cognates are found in Slavic: OPol. ozd ‘dried malt',
Cz., Sln. ozdíti 'to dry malt' < *h₂esd-. Germanic has a group of words with velars in
place of dentals: Go. azgo, OHG asca 'ashes'. However, it is more probable that Gr.
ǎw is comparable to Hitt. hat- 'to dry up' < *h₂od-ei, and should be reconstructed as
*h₂ed-ie/o- (cf. Kloekhorst 2008). What is perhaps originally an extension of the
}
ȧnovλos
27
same root, if *h₂eh,s- < pre-PIE *h₂eds-, is found in Lat. āreō 'to be dry', āra ‘altar'
(OLat. āsa), Hitt. ḥašša- 'hearth' < *h₂eh,s-h₂. Skt. ása- [m.] ‘ashes, dust' probably
continues *h₂eh,s-o-. Cf. ►avoç, ►ávσταλéoç.
=>
aw 2 [v.] 'to cry, groan'. & 5.
ảŋdwv, -óvos [f.] ‘nightingale' (Od.). ◄PG?(S)►
•VAR Also aŋdá, -oñç [f.] (S.). Also [m.], but rare.
•ETYM From *åƑηdáv; cf. åßηdóvα. åŋdóva (H.). Connection with åɛídw and
►aúdń (which is almost universally accepted) is difficult, since a lengthened grade
*h₂uēd- is improbable. The word could therefore well be Pre-Greek; for the suffix, cf.
bird and animals names like Xελidwv 'swallow', τεvēpηdáv 'wasp'.
änu [v.] 'to blow' (Il.). <IE *hueh,- 'blow'>
•VAR Forms in Schwyzer: 680.
●DER ȧýtŋ [f.], ȧńτns [m.] 'wind'; rare are the verbal nouns äŋua, äŋoiç. A zero grade
àɛ- << *h₂uh,- in detµóv. tò éveñµа (H.), whence ►άτµóç. Cf. further ►ǎελλa; ǎoç.
лvεµа ½ ǎŋµα (cod. laua) 'breath, wind' (H.) is an innovation. Unrelated is ►ȧnp,
which has long ã-.
•ETYM An old verbal root *h₂ueh,- is also reflected in Skt. váti, Go. waian, OHG waen
and OCS isg. vě-jo, all 'to blow'. The word for 'wind is (a thematization of) the
participle of this root: *h₂ueh,-nt-o- > Skt. váta- [m.], Av. vāta-, both of which must
often be read with three syllables, representing Proto-Indo-Iranian *vaHata-. The
same word is found in Lat. ventus, Go. winds, ToA want, ToB yente; Hitt. huuant- is
from unthematicized *huh,-ent-. A form with suffix *-t- has been assumed in in
►ȧnoupoç 'airy, quick (as wind?)' (poet.), for which cf. Skt. vātula- 'windy', but this
gives formal problems (*tu > ou is not regular). See ►äɛlla, apa, ► ȧńovpoç,
►ȧτµós.
anp [f.] 'mist, haze, clouds' (Il.), later 'air, atmosphere'. ◄IE *h₂eus-er->
•VAR Gen. ηεpoç. The nom. άńp (also Att.; thence gen. άέpoc) arose by dissimilation;
is it an Atticism in Homer? Later Ion. nnp.
•DIAL Aeol. aunp, Dor. ȧßýp (= avńp) (H.).
•DER Derivatives: hεpóεls, hεpoεidnç 'dim, cloudy', also ▸aupa.
ETYM ȧnp is not cognate with ǎŋu. Meillet BSL 26 (1925): 7ff. assumed an original
meaning 'suspension' and derived the word from ȧɛipw 'raise'. However, this leaves
the length of the initial vowel unexplained. Kiparsky Lang. 43 (1967): 619, 626 derives
the word from *auser, arguing that related ▸apa < *h₂eus-r-h₂ still means 'morning
mist' in ε 469. See ►ñέpios, ►ñpɩ.
ảǹovlos [adj.] in the hapax ȧnovλa pya (E 876) ‘criminal acts'. <?, PG?(V)►
•VAR ainovλov. ǎvo̟дov, кαкoлоóv 'lawless, doing ill' (H.).
⚫ETYM It has been proposed that the word is a modification of aïovλoç 'unseemly,
evil' (aťovλa péčεv, E 403, etc.) after äŋµi or ańoupos. Different explanations are
found in Bechtel 1914 and Brugmann Sächs. Ber. 53 (1901): 94. Fraenkel Glotta 34
(1955): 307ff proposed *α(F)Loovλa, connecting it with loos (highly doubtful). Fur.:

=== page 038 ===

28
ȧnσupoç
253 points to the variant al- in the gloss, which may imply a substrate origin
(comparing ǎŋtos, which may have a variant aïŋtos).
ánovpos [adj.] probably ‘light, agile', said of ants (A.). <PG?(S)►
•VAR Cf. anσupov. τò λεлτоν, τò μετέwρоν кαi койчoν лαрȧ τò ȧépɩ σúρεσðαι ènì
ópvéwv 'delicate, elevated, light, after being dragged through the air by birds' (Suda).
•ETYM Connection with ►ǎŋăɩ is improbable; rather a substrate word (where the
suffix-up- is not infrequent).
äŋtos [adj.] in ¤ápoos äntov ($ 395), mg. uncertain. <PG?(V)►
•VAR Cf. also ápσoç ääτov (Q. S. 1, 217). Also äŋtol. åkópeσtol, ärλŋotai
'insatiable, greedy'; áńτovę. µεуálaç. Aioxúlos Aеáμavτ ‘great (Aesch.)' (H.),
äŋtos. ó ákatánаvστоç 'incessant' (Hdn. Gr. 1, 220).
•ETYM The first explanation connects the word with ǎµɛvaɩ, ➤ão 'to satiate', but
this would mean that it differs from ǎatos, &τos by its long vowel, which is
improbable. Perhaps it is the same word as aïŋtos (in réλwp aïŋtov Σ 410, said of
Hephaistos). If so, the variation a/ at might point to a substrate word; metrical
lengthening is improbable, and a < at impossible. See Fur.: 253, though his
connection with ► ảnσvλos remains uncertain. Palmer 1963: 339 connects the epithet
of Hephaistos with Myc. a-ja-me-no as ‘artist'; this is improbable. Not related to
ǎnu. See Sabbadini Riv. studi class. 15 (1967): 78-84.
ȧ0ắpŋ [f.] 'gruel, porridge' (Ar.). <?>
•VAR Also à¤ýpη, -a [f.] (Hell.); influence of ►ȧonp?
•DER åðapódŋs (Ruf. Med.) and à¤ηpwμa 'kind of ulcer' (Gal.).
•ETYM Unexplained; an Egyptian word according to Pliny (N. H. 22, 121). The final -11
in Attic, which is confirmed by Moeris, would lead us to suppose a pre-form
*ȧeapfã. Connection with ȧ0p is neither formally nor semantically plausible. Not
related to Lat. ador (Hamp TPS (1968): 106), as this belongs to Go. atisk and Iran.
ādu grain' (Szemerényi 1969a: 968f.).
=>
ȧ0ελẞ- → à éλyɛIV.
åðéλyeɩv [v.] · åµέλyɛɩv ‘to milk' (H., EM), (¿§)a¤éλyɛtaɩ (Hp.), explained as лapíɛtaɩ,
diɛkλúɛtai ‘lets go, releases' by Galen. Also à¤έλyŋtai. Oŋlášetai ǹ Olíßntai ‘is
suckled, compressed' (H.), cf. à¤έλyntai. Bakxɛiós qnoi Onlášetai ǹ èrionãtai, kai
έкеλìẞηται ŵç кal Níкavбpoç is suckled, drawn after one; is squeezed (out),
crowded' (Erotian. 20, 1; see Hp. De med. off. 11). <PG(V)>
⚫VAR Cf. á éλẞεtai diŋɛītai ‘is strained through' (AB); àеɛλßɛĩ· ελкεɩ 'draws' (H.)
and à¤ɛλßáčɛv. Sinaïv 'to strain through' (H.); further ȧéλετai dɩŋfɛītai ‘id.'
(Diocl. Com. fr. 7 Kock, An. Bekk. 350).
⚫ETYM These verbs, meaning 'to press, draw away, filter', have no etymology. The
variation ẞ/ 8/ y should not be explained from an IE labiovelar (as per Solmsen 1909:
9¹), as contamination leading to three different forms is improbable. Since Pre-Greek
also had labiovelars (cf. Baoiλɛúc, Myc. qa-si-re-u), substrate origin is most probably
the source of the alternations. See Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 12f., and cf. yéqupa
beside Séqupa, see Fur.: 388, 390.
ȧеpayέvn
ȧ0ɛpí w [v.] 'to disparage, neglect' (II.). Originally always with negation. <?>
•DER à épiσToç. ȧopóvtστos (Zonar., A. Fr. 128), cod. -itov.
29
⚫ETYM Unknown. The glosses àɛpéç. àvóŋtov, àvóσɩov, àкpißéç ‘stupid, not in
order, precise' (H.) and àОɛps. ó σídηpos ȧτεiρǹs öτav εpín, etc. 'indestructible
iron when it is heateď (H.) seem unrelated in view of their meaning. An older
proposal derives it from *äßɛpoç, connecting it with Skt. ádhara- ‘(be)low' (see
Bechtel 1914). Another proposal (DELG) derives it from áp, as flocci facio.
Neither is convincing.
Anvn [f.] the goddess (II.), a common Greek goddess dating from Minoan times,
protecting the palace, and depicted with a snake. <PG>
●DIAL Myc. a-ta-na-po-ti-ni-ja [dat.sg.]? (see Aura Jorro 1985-1993: 112). Dor. (etc.)
AOáva.
⚫DER The town Aеñvai (Dor. Aеāvat) contains the same onomastic element; for the
suffix cf. Muкñvaɩ. Thence Aеηvaños 'Athenian' (Il.), whence fem. Aеηvaía, -η,
which is also used as the name of the goddess (88 times im Hom.). This form gave
*AOŋváa (Aeol. 'Alavaa with short va), which was contracted to Att. A ŋvā.
⚫ETYM Like the goddess itself, the name is pre-Greek. Note the suffix *-an-. See
▶ Attikóg.
ànp, -épos [m.] ‘awn', plur. ‘chaff, barb of a weapon, spine or prickle of a fish', also
‘edge of a weapon' (Hes.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR With a nasal áv¤épíε, -ɩкoç, etc.; with suffix -ɛwv: àvłɛpɛwv, -wvos (see below).
•COMP àеós 'winnowing-fan', from 'consumer of chaff (Od. λ 128 = 8 275),
but the two n's are surprising.
●DER à¤ɛpívŋ f., -īvos m. ‘kind of smelt, Atherina hepsetus' (Arist.), cf. Chantraine
1933: 204, Thompson 1947 s.v. Also à¤εpηïç, -ído¢ [f.] 'prickly' (Nic.), à¤ɛpwdŋc
(Thphr.).
Variants with nasal: ávеépí§, -ɩкoç [m.] = à¤ýp, also ‘ear' (Il.), ávěέpiкoç [m.] ‘stalk
of an asphodel, asphodel plant' (Hp.), ávеɛpiкwdŋs (Thphr.). With the suffix of
place -ɛúv: ȧvɛpɛwv, -wvos [m.] ‘chin' (Il.).
⚫ETYM No etymology. IE ablaut *h₂end¹- : *h₂nd¹- is impossible, as both forms would
give Gr. ȧve- acc. to Rix's Law. The nasalized forms could be due to folk etymology,
but rather point to Pre-Greek prenasalization. Fur.: 296 further adduces ȧvеεpíσкoç
=ȧveɛpiк- with the interchange σк/ к; perhaps also ǎve puσкov / ε- 'chervil'. Not
related to Lat. ador, both because of the meaning, and because this is kindred with
Iran. ādu, Go. atisk; see Szemerényi 1969a: 958f. The word has nothing to do with
names of the wasp or forest bee (►áv0pývn, ►áv0pndwv), nor with ►ävēpwños.
à¤payέvŋ [f.] a plant, 'Clematis vitalba' (Thphr.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Frisk compares ►ǎpaç ‘chariot', which he thinks would fit a climbing plant.
well, but I don't see what a car has to do with a plant. See Strömberg 1940: 108. Fur.:
288 compares ȧvdpáxvη and concludes to a substrate origin (prenasalization), which
is probable anyhow.

=== page 039 ===

30
ädpas
äßpaç [m., f.] · äpua. 'Pódio 'chariot (Rhodian)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Formerly compared with Skt. vandhúra- [m.] 'wagon-seat',
taken as a wicker basket tied upon the wagon, and connected with MoHG winden,
etc. (Pok.: 1148) as IE *uend¹- : und¹- >(>) Gr. *Ƒa0-. As the formation of the Sanskrit
word is unclear, and the root is hardly attested outside Germanic, the connection
must be false. Bănăţeanu REIE 3 (1943): 149 calls the word Anatolian. Connection
with Kávva pov is improbable.
ȧ0pέw [v.] 'to gaze at, observe' (II.). <?>
•DER à¤pýµata⋅ dŵpa rɛµiñóµeva rapà tŵv ovyyevwv taïs yakovµévais rapšévais
лαрà Aɛσßíoç ‘gifts having been sent by kinsfolk to maidens being given in marriage
(Lesbian)' (H.) (Snell Glotta 37 (1959): 282-287, cf. Renehan Glotta 49 (1971): 66).
•ETYM No etymology. One compares έvėpɛiv. quλáσσяv 'to guard' (H.) and еpησкw.
vow 'to perceive' (H.), Оpησкɛúw 'to observe' etc., but this leaves the ȧ- unexplained.
It cannot be the zero grade of έv-, since a zero grade *h,n- would still yield ¿v-. The
derivation by Hoffmann 1921: 78f. from a noun *åpos ‘directed at a goal', from IE
*der- 'to hold' and copulative a- (cf. ►ảеpóoc), is most improbable. On the use of
ȧepέw, see Prévot RPh. 61 (1935): 246f.
àpóos [adj.] 'in crowds, gathered together' (II.). <?>
●DIAL Att. à¤póos (spiritus asper perhaps restored after äлaç, äµα).
•DER à¤poí¼w (ȧ-) ‘to gather together' (Archil.).
•ETYM Compared with Skt. sadhry-añc- ‘united' (Brugmann 1894: 14ff.), which was
formerly analyzed as containing the root *der- 'to hold, but this is no longer
maintained by EWAia. It does not belong to apέw, nor to Opóvoç. It is probable
that á is from *sm-, but the further analysis is uncertain. Risch 1937: 179 compares
ȧλλó-Opooc speaking a foreign language', in which case it would mean 'calling.
together'(?).
ȧOúpw [v.] 'to play, sport' (II.). <?>
•VAR Only present.
•DER ǎoupμa 'plaything, toy' (II.), plur. also ‘adornments', diminutive άupμάτov.
Deverbative άupɛúeoðai. raíšeiv, µyvúɛiv, okiptāv ‘to play, intermingle, leap' (H.).
•ETYM From *ȧup-yw. Compared with Lith. padùrmai 'impetuous', Ru. dur'
'foolishness', from PIE *dhuer(H)- ‘to whirl, rush'. However, ά- cannot be the zero
grade of *h,en- 'in' (which would not really make sense semantically anyway), and an
initial laryngeal gives the improbable root structure *h₂d"uerH-.
a exclamation of surprise, pain, or sorrow. <ONOM▷
•VAR Also aiaĩ.
⚫ETYM Elementary formation, found in many languages.
ai 'if. → ɛi.
=>
aỉa 1 [f.] ‘earth' (Il.). <?►
•ETYM By some considered identical with ala 2 (Brugmann IF 15 (1903-1904): 94ff.,
Brugmann IF 29 (1911-1912): 206ff.), in which case it would originally mean ‘mother'.
1
į
aiyiaλós
31
The relation with yata and μata is uncertain; cf. Güntert 1914: 126f., Brandenstein
1954b: 80. Van Windekens assumed *as-ya from *h₂s- 'dry' (but this root perhaps did
not exist; see ǎ(w). Woodhouse KZ 107 (1994): 99f.) assumes *sausia, but cf. avoç.
aia 2 [f.] 'mother, grandmother?? (Il., poet.). <?>
•VAR Cf. αẵα· úлò Kupŋvaiwv tηеíç kai µała kai ádeλqǹ Kpǹtys. kai qutóv ti. ěti dè
ó kápлoç avtu̟ óµávyµos (EM 27, 24).
•ETYM Compared with Lat. avia ‘grandmother'; uncertain. Elementary word? See
► ala 1.
alāvs [adj.] 'horrible' (Archil.); the mg. 'eternal' (A.) through association with ▸aiɛí.
<?>
•VAR Ion. ainvns.
•ETYM There is a speculative hypothesis by Wackernagel 1897: 7, who assumed the
reconstruction *σaч-āvýs 'with terrifying face' (whence Lat. saevus, the word for
'face' seen in άлηуns, etc.). See Degani Helikon 2 (1962): 37-56.
aiẞoi exclamation of disgust (Ar.). ◄ONOM▷
•VAR Also aiẞoiẞoi, of laughter.
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic, elementary formation. See Schwyzer: 600.
aiyavéŋ [f.] ‘hunting spear, javelin' (Il.). <?►
•ETYM For the suffix, cf. the names of trees and animal skins in -έŋ, -έa: µndén,
пτελéŋ, кuvéŋ etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 91f.). If named after the material, one
compares the word for ‘oak' in PGm. *aik-, which is also supposed in ▸alyíλwy and
Lat. aesculus. Trümpy 1950: 52, 57 explains that the alyavén was thrown by a strap.
Laser Gymnasium 60 (1953): 115-121 connected it with PIE *heig- 'to stir, set in
movement', in Skt. éjati, to which alуɛç. кúματa (see α) is compared. This is
semantically improbable, and if Skt. ej- belongs to ing- (see Mayrhofer EWAia 1:
264), then the root contained a labiovelar, which would make the connection
impossible. To aixµn, acc. to Bechtel 1914.
aiyɛɩpos [f.] 'black poplar' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR atyɛpos (Com. Adesp. 1276, Kock).
▶
•DER aiyeɩpwv 'poplar grove', aiyɛipivos, aiyɛipitŋs ‘of the poplar' (all Hell. and late).
•ETYM The connection with aiyiλwy, aiyavéŋ is uncertain. Sommer IF 55 (1937):
260 pointed to numerous non-IE words like ayıðos and names in Aiy- (Aïyıva,
Aiyaí, etc.), suggesting a Pre-Greek origin. This would be confirmed by the form
with -ε-.
aiyɩaλós [adj.] ‘sea-shore, beach'; also TN, e.g. the coast of Achaea (II.). <?►
•DIAL Myc. a3-ki-a₂-ri-jo probably /aigihalio-/, see Aura Jorro 1985-1993: 134.
•DER aiyiáλɛoç, aiуiaλɛúç, aiyiαλiкóç, -λítηs, -λwdŋs all are late derivations. Also
Alyiaλɛiç name of the inhabitants of the coast of Achaea Hdt.).
•ETYM The Myc. form seems to confirm that the second element is derived from
►ǎλç. For the first member, cf. alyes. tà kýµata. Awpiεis 'waves (Dor.)' (H.) and
Artem. 2, 12 kai yàp tà µɛyáλa kúµata alyas έv tý ovvηßɛíḍ λéyoµεv 'we usually call

=== page 040 ===

32
aiyudos
large waves alyaç'. This in turn is comparable with Skt. ej- ‘to storm', but see
➤ aiyavén. It is highly improbable that alyɛç in the sense of кúμaτα is a metaphorical
use of a 'goat' (as per Heubeck IF 68 (1963): 13-21). The word is Pre-Greek acc. to
Chantraine 1933: 248, which cannot be excluded, though Chantraine now calls it ‘all
too easy' in DELG s.v.
atybos [m.] 'titmouse (Parus)' (Ar.). <PG(S,V)>
VAR ayivos (Dionys. Av. 1, 12); αуivoç μкpós ‘parra modica' (gloss.), not
mentioned by Frisk or DELG; aiyiofos (Arist. v.l.), for *ayıσoç?
•DER aiyíðaλλoç, -¤ālos (Ar.).
•ETYM A typical substrate word, discernible from its prenasalization and the suffix
-aλ(\)- with variation \/ \. See Fur.: 267, 288, 254³, 304, 387, with further literature.
aiyily [adj.] 'sheer, steep' (II.), also as a TN. <?>
•VAR aiyiy vчŋλǹ nétpa kaì rólɩç kaì itéa úлò oúpшwv high rock, citadel,
willow (Thourian)' (H.).
•ETYM The Ancients explained it as 'abandoned even by goats', which is clearly a folk
etymology. In modern times, it is connected with Lith. lìpti ‘to clamber' (see Solmsen
1901: 73') as 'what can be climbed only by goats', which is also highly doubtful. The
meaning 'clamber' for the root *leip- is secondary to 'stick, cleave', and it is far from
certain that Greek underwent the same development as Lithuanian. The formation
in alyɩ- is unexplained as well (see aïε). Cf. also ǎλ лéτрα 'rock' (H.), the
explanation of which from 'what cannot be climbed' is doubtful too; the gloss Mių.
лéτрα à' ǹç üdwρ στáčя rock from which water drips' may be due to later
interpretation (Solmsen, cf. Persson 1912(1): 152¹); Marzullo 1969: 101f thinks it is a
mistake for a[iyí]λy.
•
aiyíλwy, -wños [m.] ‘kind of oak' (Thphr.), also ‘oat-grass' (Thphr.); ‘ulcer in the eye,
lacrymal fistula', for which see ȧyxiλwy. On the mg. see Strömberg 1940: 87. <?▷
•ETYM As the name of a kind of oak, aiyiλwy has been connected with the Gm. word
for 'oak', PGm. *aik- (Pok.: 13). Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 335 connected -λwy
with λóлη ‘cork' (cf. λwy. xλaµúç ‘cloak, mantle' H.), adduced from Pliny (H. N. 16,
6, 13): aegilops fert pannos arentes ... non in cortice modo, verum et e ramis
dependentes. Within Greek, it is doubtful whether one can connect it with ▸aiyavén
and ayɛɩpoç. Strömberg 1940: 137 derives aiyiλwy in the second meaning from
ayıλoç 'havergrass' (Theoc.), which is certainly correct.
aiyiç [f.] 'goatskin' (E. Cyc., Hdt. 4, 189), a mantle protecting Zeus and Athena (II.);
later also 'storm wind' (A.); further 'heart-wood of the Corsican pine or the silver fir
in Arcadia' (Thphr). Also 'speck in the eye' (Hp.), on which see ►ảyλíŋ. <GR>
●DER aiyioxos epithet of Zeus (II.), cf. yaɩáƑoxos. With the last mg. εл-αɩуíèw ‘rush
upon' (from a storm wind) (Hom).
•ETYM Probably a goatskin in origin (thus Hdt. 4, 189); formation like veßpis ‘fawn-
skin' (see ► vɛßpós), etc. In Homer, gods and men are frightened when it is shaken.
For the meaning 'storm wind', see Heubeck IF 68 (1963): 13-21. Kretschmer Glotta 27
33
(1939): 28, connected it with ayλŋ and alyɛç. tà кúµατa ‘waves' (H.); one might
think of Skt. éjati 'to move, set in motion'.
*aiyλíç, -ídos ‘speck in the eye' (Gall.). ◄?►
•ETYM The form is reconstructed in order to account for aiyiç and άyλín(s); cf. also
aiyaλides (H.). See RPh. 73 (1999) 81f. s.v. aiyíç (derived from aïyλn). Or should we
reconstruct *àyλiç?
aïyλŋ 1 [f.] ‘light (of sun or moon), gleam, radiance' (Il.). <?►
•DER aiyλnas gleaming' (II.), aiyλátas, -ýtŋs epithet of Apollo (inscr. Anaphe,
Thera; A. R.); aiyλá(w 'to shine, gleam' (Man.).
•ETYM The connection with Skt. éjati ‘to move, tremble' (cf. ►aiyavén) is rightly.
rejected by DELG. The epithets Алólλwv Aσyɛλáτas (Anaphe) and Алóλλwv
Alуλáτaç (Anaphe, Thera) are often compared. In view of the variation aiy^- /
ȧoy()\-, the epithets must be Pre-Greek. The noun may be of Pre-Greek origin too
(it has no etymology), but it does not necessarily have the same origin as the
epithets; it is methodically incorrect to clarify the formation of the appellative by that
of a name.
aïyλŋ 2 [f.] ‘ring' (deduced from glosses). <?►
•ETYM Lewy KZ 59 (1932) derived it from aïyλaç. áµqidéas kai yéλdia ‘iron rings,
anklets”. τà ëɛpì tǹv űviv toũ ápóτpov ‘things around the plowshare' (H.), from
aiу<i>λia Saкτvλídia ‘small rings' (H.), and other words attested in lexicons. He
explained it as a loan from Hebr. 'agil ‘(ear-)ring', which remains hypothetical. As
Frisk remarks, metonymic use of aïyλn 1 'gleam, splendor' is well possible.
aiуvлɩóç [m.] ‘vulture' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•Var aiуíñoy. ȧetós úïò Makedóvwv ‘eagle (Maced.)' (EM 28, 19).
•ETYM The comparison with Skt. rji-pyá-, epithet of the bird śyená- ‘eagle, falcon',
Av. ǝrǝzi-fiia- is formally difficult, since we expect *apC-; influence by aï and you
'vulture' has been assumed, but this seems unlikely. Fur.: 364 compares the gloss
aiуíлoч, which is evidently a variant of the same word. Variation between i and u is
well-attested in substrate words (cf. ►µáðσлñoç/ µáðʊʊëлoç), and -o-is a Pre-
Greek suffix. you itself is no doubt a substrate word as well; it may be a variant of
*(a)g'up-, which also gives alуʊл-, with prothetic vowel and palatalized /g'. No.
conclusion is reached by Meier-Brügger KZ108 (1995): 50-55.
aiywλɩóç [m.] a kind of owl, 'Stix flammea' (Arist.). <?>
•VAR Also aiywλios.
⚫ETYM The reading aitwλtos (Arist. HA 563ª 31) is wrong, as evidenced by forms
from modern southern Italy (agoléo etc.); see Rohlfs ByzZ 37 (1937): 55. Etymology
unknown.
åïdŋλoç [adj.] mg. not quite clear: 'hated; annihilating, destructive; invisible, unseen”
(II.). See the discussion in DELG. <GR>
⚫ETYM It is difficult to decide what the primary meaning is, but it is rather clear that
the word contains a privative a with a form of idɛĭv. Ivanov 1999: 283-292 compares

=== page 041 ===

34
Aïdns, -ao
Ru. nevidal' for the semantics and assumes the development 'invisible' > ‘strange,
dangerous'.
Aïns, -ao [m.] Hades (II.). <IE *n-uid- ‘unseen, invisible'>
•VAR With metathesis of quantity gen. -ɛw; also gen. "Audós, dat. -í. Att. Aïdŋç, -ov;
Aïns is found in later Ionic poetry (Semon., Herodas), the Doric form Aïdaç, gen.
-a in tragedy. An inscription from Thessaly (SEG 16, 380) gives Afidav.
•DER AïSwvεús (Il.), see Risch 1937: 158.
•ETYM Thieme proposed (Thieme 1952: 35-55) that the word derives from *sm uid-
(Skt. sám vid-) as 'das Sichzusammenfinden [gathering of the family in the
underworld]'. To my mind, this is not correct, as then Aid- should denote the
Underworld, not the God of the Underworld. In Homer, it rather seems to denote
the God, e.g. in formulaic Sóμov "Aidos εlow. The aspiration in Attic is secondary
and arose by contraction from ó Aïns (Kamerbeek apud Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970):
307).
The other explanation, as *n-uid-, 'the Unseen', seems the correct one. In Beekes
1998: 17-19, I pointed out that the replacement of a root noun, first in the nominative
(here as the final element of a compound), is parallel to the case of quyn : qúyadɛ.
The initial A is sometimes lengthened for metrical reasons: it is not lengthened.
when it is not necessary or impossible, like in "Audóσde.
aïdoμaι [v.] 'to hold back, be ashamed; to honor, respect' (II.). <IE? *h₂eis-d- 'honor'>
•VAR αïdɛo, aidóµεvoç, αïdετо, see Chantraine 1942: 310f.; more frequent is
denominative aidéoμa (from *aides-je/o-).
•DER aidwç [f.] 'shame, reverence' (II.), whence 1. aidoĩos < *-os-jo- ‘inspiring aidwç'
(Il., epic poet.) substantivized ntr. τò aidoïov, usually plur. τà aidoĩa 'private parts'
(II.), whence aidoɩwdns and aidoïкóç; 2. compound άv-aids ‘shameless' (II.),
ávaídɛia, etc.; 3. aidéo̟µα < *aides-je/o- 'to hold back, revere', as a legal term also 'to
be reconciled' (Hom., IA), fut. aidéσoμa. Thence aïdɛσiç 'mercy, pardon' (D.,
Arist.), aidɛστóç 'honorable' (Plu.), aidɛσtiкós (sch.); aidηjμwv 'modest' (X., Arist.),
ɑidŋµovкóç and -μoσúvη (late and rare). aidéσчos (post-class. prose) ‘object of
aidwc', also aidŋσчoç (Orph.), whence aidɛσчóτŋs (pap.). 4. aidooúvn
aidŋµoσúvn (AB, Phot.).
=
•ETYM It is formally uncertain that a PIE root *h₂eisd-, from which Go. aistan 'to
hold back, respect' and Skt. īḍé < PIIr. *Hizd- ‘to praise, honor' derive, would give
Gr. aid-: we would expect *h₂eisd- to appear as Gr. ai¢- (cf. ïw < *si-sd-). Of course,
the connection is semantically very tempting. Without final *-d, the root *h₂eis- is
found in MoHG Ehre 'honor', ON eir, etc., and in Osc. aisusis [abl.pl.] 'sacrificiis',
and perhaps originally in the verb *his-ske/o- 'to demand > Skt. iccháti ‘search for❜,
OCS iskati 'to search', etc.
åïdvlos [adj.] · Opaσús ‘bold, rash' (H., EM). ◄?►
⚫ETYM A mistake for åïdnλos (E 897)? Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 2184 differs. Fur.:
262f. compares aïovλoç.
1
aietóg
35
aïdwoσa [f.] (cod. aidãσσα). τñs avλñç τà τεixíα 'the walls of the court or hall' (H.).
<PG(V)►
⚫ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 5f. suggested that the word is Illyrian for aïovσa. Latte
thinks it is a corruption (but on three points?). Fur.: 197 considers it a a substrate
word, taking aïovσa as a variant form, and comparing Kýλwσσa / Kηλoñσa, a
mountain in Sicyon.
ɑiɛí [adv.] ‘always' (Il.) ◄IE *h₂ei-u- ‘time of living, well-being’▷
•VAR aiw (A. Ch. 350, AB 363), see below.
•DIAL aiƑɛí (Cypr., Locr., Phoc.), àɛí (Att.), aiɛs (Dor.); ain (Tarent.).
•DER ǎïdios 'eternal' (Hes., IA), whence åïdióτηs ‘eternity' (Arist., Hell.).
•ETYM From *aiwes-i, the old locative of an s-stem, which is found without ending in
Dor. aiés, and also in the accus. aiw < *aiwos-m. Beside the s-stem, Greek had an n-
stem in aiwv, from which aiév derives. The Tarentine form would be an old
instrumental *h₂eiu-eh₁, but this is unclear. On the accentuation of the Greek forms
see Hamp Glotta 67 (1989): 41.
The s- and n-stems derive from the old PIE u-stem *h₂oi-u- > Av. āiiu- 'life, time of
life', gen. *hi-eu-s > OAv. yaoš, thematicized *h₂ei-u-o- > Lat. aevum, which in Greek
may be found in Aeol. aŭ(v), äï(v) < *aiw-i(n). As Weiss MSS 55 (1994): 151f.
suggested, the zero grade *h₂iu- is perhaps found as the first member of Cypr. u-wa-
i-se 'forever' <*hiu(u)-h₂ei-s- (but see ) and of byins. Both the s-stem and the n-
stem extensions seem to be found in Sanskrit: áyu-n-i [loc.], and áyu-ș- [n.].
aiéλovpos [m., f.] probably '(wild) cat' (Hdt., Ar.); domestic cats were not found in
the Greek world. <?>
⚫VAR Also aiλoupos (Arist.).
•ETYM The explanation as a compound of alóλoç (< *aiɛλoc) and oúpá 'with moving
tail (cf. EM 34, 8: aïλovpoç ëapà tò aióλλɛiv kaì ảváyɛɩv tǹv oúpàv kaì kɩvɛĭv) still
seems possible, although the -- is problematic. The connection with Lat. viverra
'ferret' and Lith. vaiveris 'male of the polecat / pitchew', starting from *FaчFépoupos
(Ehrlich 1912: 128ff.), should be abandoned. Note that the word may well have been
adapted by folk etymology, and that from aiɛ- we expect an Attic development to
ãε-, not the loss of -ε-.
=>
aiév [adv.] 'always' (epic poet.). → aiwv.
aiéç → aiɛí.
=>
aiɛtóç [m.] ‘eagle' (II.), also metaph. 'tympanum, pediment'. <IE *h₂eu-i- ‘bird'>
•VAR Att. ǎɛτóç; aißɛtós. àɛtóç, Пɛpyaño (H.), with ẞ = F; aiŋtós (Arat. 522), which
is artificial (DELG).
•DER_åɛtideús [m.] ‘young eagle' (Ael., Aesop.), άetítŋs (\íðos) (Ael.), áɛtwdns
(Philostr.), aiɛτóɛiç (Opp.); aiɛtiałos ‘ptng. to the tympanum' (inscr.); àétwµa
'tympanum' (Hp., Att. inscr.), åétwσis ‘arched roof of a xελávη³ (Ath. Mech.).
ETYM From *aiƑɛτoç < *awjetó-, cf. Lat. avis. For the suffix -ετo-, cf. voετóc,
луρετóç. The artificial form aintós does not allow us to conclude that it is a substrate
word, as per Fur.: 115%. Not a Semitic word (Astour JAOS 86 (1966): 278B).

=== page 042 ===

!
36
aičŋós [adj.] unknown; 'strong'? (Il.). <?►
ait nós
•VAR Also aľšnios; aišŋaç (Theopomp. Col.), aišāɛv. evtpaqès ßláoτηua 'well-fed
offspring' (H.).
⚫ETYM Danielsson 1892 gives no definitive answer. The gloss suggested a connection
with ȧɛí and ñv, which may be folk-etymological (DELG). Fur.: 234, who connects it
with Alσηлоç, is incorrect.
aïntos →ǎntos.
aiðáλŋ [f.] ‘soot' (Hp.).
•VAR αiaλoç [m.] (Hp., E.), also as an adj. = ailaλóɛ (Nic. Th. 659).
●DER αiðaλóɛıç (Il., poet.) 'smoky, dark brown', also of the sheet of lightning (E. Ph.
183 [lyr.]), perhaps ‘fiery, burning'; aiaλéos ‘id.' (A. R., Nic.); aiðaλíwv, -iwvoç
(Theoc. 7, 138), epithet of the τéττɩуɛç, probably a color term with verse-final
metrical lengthening); aiaλwdns ‘id.' (Arist., Gal.). Unclear aitaλídaç. τà èv τŵ
σíτ уɩvóμεvα, ½ τоÙÇ ¿ν τ üбаτ στаλαучоùç τou λaíou 'what is in the food, or
drops of olive oil in the water' (H.). Denominative verb aidaλów ‘to make sooty',
med. -óoμa 'to soot up' (E., Lyc.); αiðaλwσɛç ‘clouds of sooty smoke' (Max. Tyr. 41,
4), perhaps directly from aïðaλoç.
•ETYM See aïОw.
▶
aiðńp, -έpos [f., m.] ‘clear sky, heaven' (Il.). <IE *h₂eid"- ‘kindle, ignite'>
•COMP On aienp and apη as a second member (e.g. in üлαíðpoç, üñaɩėpoç) see
Sommer 1948: 151f.
•DER αïОpη, -ā ‘id.' (Il.); aiðpíŋ, -ía ‘clear sky, nice weather'; aïopios, -ov [adj.] ‘of the
sky, bright' (IA); the ntr. aïeptov, diminutive aipídiov was used in imperial times as
a folk-etymological adaptation of Lat. atrium.
alpos 'fresh, cold air' (§ 318 αïеpu̟ kai kaµátw deduŋµévov). Cf. aißpɛĩ. xɛášɛi ‘to
expose to or pass the winter' (H.), αiðpɩvóv· лpw¨ïvóv ‘early' (H.); improbable
Bouquiaus-Simon Ant. class. 31 (1962): 25ff.
With full-grade of the suffix ailéptos ‘in the air, heavenly' (trag.), beside which rare
and late aiεpóns, aiðɛpiwdns, aiðɛpítŋc, aiðɛpóoμai.
iapós ‘cheerful, bright' (Alc.) may contain an old ablauting form of the root. The
verb itaívɛiv (A. D., H.) could point to an r/n-stem.
⚫ETYM Generally derived from aïow; perhaps the formation was influenced by ȧnp.
Aiеíoлεç [m.pl.] ethnonym, 'Ethiopians'(?). <PG(S)►
•DIAL Myc. PN a-i-ti-jo-qo /Aithiok"s/ (or /-ō-/); for the u-stem in Me-to-qe-u, Wo-
no-qe-we (/Woinok"ēwei/) cf. Aiеɩолñεç (Нom.).
⚫ETYM Since antiquity explained as '(people) with burnt faces'. In Beekes Glotta 73
(1995-1996): 12-34, I objected that aiß- always means 'burning' in the sense of
‘brilliant, emitting light' (cf. aloч), and never ‘burnt'. Also, the -- is unexplained,
and -o- is a typical substrate suffix (as opposed to 'face' -шл-). Therefore, the
word must be compared with ethnonyms like Аpúоñɛç, Aóloŋɛç and is of Pre-Greek
origin.
aï¤ovσa [f.] ‘portico' (Il.); also a plant, cf. ► aï¤w. ◄PG(V)►
=
•VAR aïovoσa (Hdn. Gr. 2, 919).
aiká入入w
37
•ETYM Generally explained as a ptc. of aïow meaning ‘glowing, place where the sun
burns' or 'place where fire can be kindled', which is hardly convincing. A better
explanation is that of Fur.: 1975, who deems it a substrate word, as a technical term
of building, because of the form with -00-. The form ▸aidwoσa confirms this; it can
hardly be a mistake for aïovoa (which would imply three mistakes), and it has -σσ-.
Of course, a folk-etymological connection with aïow is likely.
aïw [v.] ‘to kindle', intr. med. 'burn (with light)' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂eid¹- 'kindle'>
VAR Only present.
COMP Cf. Aiеíолεç. Оn кαк-1еnç sее on кéукɛl S.V. ►кáукavoç.
•DER alloç [m.] 'burning heat' (E.) = Skt. édha- [m.] 'firewood', OHG eit [m.], OE ād
'blaze, pyre'; aiós 'sparkling, glowing', also 'dark-colored'; also aïwv, -wvos (II.)
and allow (on the mgs. see Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 15-17).
alƉoç [n.] ‘fire' (A. R.); aiеńεç ‘sooty' (Nic.), also ains ‘burning' (Cratin. 88), if this
does not stand for aißñç from aiÐ½εɩç; aïɩvoç (H., EM).
Perhaps related is ai¤óλɩкɛç ‘pustule, pimple' (Hp., Gal.), cf. ñoµôó\v\ ‘bubble' for
the formation.
ai voow 'to stir violently' (Sapph., Pi.), also prefixed with àv-, St-, кατ-, лαр-, is
usually considered cognate, but the development of meaning is strange. The verbal
noun aïvyчa 'spark, glow' (Plb.) did not undergo the metaphorical development of
ai úσow, as opposed to αiðuкτýp ‘stirring violently' (Opp.). But note that these are
late derivations. Also кaτaïvε öµßpoç. ó kataiðúσowv 'which is floating down' (H.);
diff. Pisani Paideia 15 (1960): 245f.
aïovia [f.] name of a bird (see Thompson 1895 s.v.), also epithet of Athena, see Kock
Arch. f. Religionswiss. 18 (1915): 127ff. but also Kretschmer Glotta 9 (1918): 229f.,
mostly explained as a color term, but rather a substrate word (Szemerényi 1964: 207,
Beekes 1998: 25 on the suffix -via.). On aïovoa 'hemlock, Conium maculatum' (Ps.-
Dsc.) see CEG 4 (from 'black'). Cf. also aionp, aiáλŋ, aïovoa.
•ETYM Old PIE verbal root, of which the zero grade *h₂idh- probably appears in
iłapóç, iðaívw. Sanskrit has the root form idh-, with a nasal present i-n-ddhé 'to
kindle'. Thematic altos can be of PIE date, cf. Skt. édha- [m.] 'firewood', OHG eit
[m.], OE ad 'glow, funeral pyre'. aloç [n.] 'fire' (A. R.) and Skt. édhas- [n.]
'firewood' are independent formations, since the Greek word is late. Remarkable
forms in other languages include Av. aēsma- [m.] 'firewood', Lith. íesmė ‘id.', Lat.
aedēs 'dwelling place, temple', aestās ‘summer', aestus 'heat', and several Germanic
forms, e.g. OHG eit (see above) and ON eisa [f.] 'burning coals'.
aikášeɩ [v.] · kaλɛĩ ‘calls' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Pisani IF 58 (1942): 243 compared it to Osc. aíkdafed, which he interpreted as
'proclamavit'; this is highly dubious. The connection with Latv. aîcinât 'to call' is
doubted by Pok.: 15. Is it a mistake for aiкáλλw?
αiкáλλw [v.] ‘to flatter, fondle' (trag.), especially said of animals. <?>
•VAR Only present.

=== page 043 ===

38
alvos
39
•DER αťkaλoç. кóla ‘flatterer' (H.); aikáλŋ· åñáty ‘deceit (Zonar.).
•ETYM Looks like a denominative of the forms given in the glosses (unless these are
based on the verb). Etymology unknown.
άïкýç [adj.] ‘improper, unseemly'. <GR▷
•VAR Att. alkŃç <*ȧ-fiк-Ńç, next to άякηç (Ion. poet.).
•DER ȧεikɛíŋ, aikɛía, aiкía 'unseemly treatment, disrespect'; άɛкí(w, aiкílw, -oμai 'to
maltreat', whence aïкioµa (trag., Lys.), aiкioμóç (D., LXX). ȧɛкÉλoç, aiкéλoç
(Hom., poet.) contain an enlargement of synonymous ȧεкýç, αiкŃc.
•ETYM Privative verbal adjective to čoɩкα, du. εïкtov < *we-w(o)ik-. In ȧɛкnç, -ɛ- is
probably secondary after ɛiкá(w, εikáv, etc. See ɛikálw, ► ˝oika.
aikλoi ai ywvíat τou ẞéλovç 'the angles of the missile' (H.). → aixµń.
.
alкλov [n.] 'evening meal at Sparta' (Epich.). <PG(V)►
•VAR äïkλov; <σvv>aiyλía = ovvaikλía; \vkaixλíaç. ó Avкóßpwτoç ‘eaten by wolves'
(-ẞpoτos codd.).
•DER άvaikλɛia• ädεɩva ‘supperless' (H.). Also aĭкvov· dɛiлvov ‘meal' (H., Suid.);
εлáïкλα (Pl.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 139 points to εlкlov. Sɛiлvov and ɛiкλɛt̃· dεɩлvɛi (H.), and compares
ikvɛíav. tpoqɛĩa ‘nourishment' and ikvɛños. tpoqɛúç. ‘Pódio ‘feeder (Rhod.)' (H.);
he correctly concludes that it is a substrate word. This may be reconstructed as
*(a)wikl/n-: for the prothetic vowel, cf. ȧépoл- / µέpoл-; the interchange between λ
and v may be secondary. A comparison with aiкášɛ• кaλɛï ‘calls' (H.) or ►aikáλλw
is completely uncertain.
ativos [m.] 'song of mourning' (trag.), sometimes as an adj. ‘plaintive' (E. Hel. 171).
<?1
•VAR aλiva [adv.] (Call.).
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. Boisacq's postulation of a Phrygian origin lacks support
(cf. ►λɛyos). It appears to be derived from the interjection ►ať and ►λivos.
αio⇒ άéλLOL.
aíµa [n.] ‘blooď (Il.). <?►
⚫COMP aiμakoupíat offerings of blood' to the dead (Pi.); aiµáλwy 'mass of blood'
(Hp.), see CEG 6.
•DER aiμác 'flow of blood' (S.); diminutive aquátiov, also name of a dish (Arr., M.
Ant., inscr. Cos, Miletus, etc.), aiμaría 'Spartan blood soop' (Poll.). Derived
adjectives: aiμaτóɛ 'bloody' (epic, poet.); aiµatŋpós (poet.), aiµŋpós (Man.);
aiµatwdns (Hp., Th., Arist., Hell.), aiµwdns (Luc.), see on aiµwdéw; aiµatikós
(Arist.), aiµáτvos (Arist.); aquaλéos (AP, Nonnos); aïµwv (E.), a¡µóvios ‘red as
blooď (Ath.); aiµatíτηs ‘like blooď (Hp., Thphr.); aiµatwrós (E.), aiµwróc (Ph.). In
a similar meaning compounds like vaчμoç, üчаquoç. Denominative verbs: 1.
aiμáσσw, -áττw 'to make or be bloody' (A.), whence late nouns aчuayµóç, aïµažiç,
and adjectives aiµaкtóç, aiµaкtiкóç; 2. aiµaτów (IA), aiµáτwσię (Gal.); 3. aiµατílw
(A., Arist.).
:
}
⚫ETYM aĭua replaces the old IE word for blood čap < *h,esh₂-r. It has no established
etymology. The connection with OHG seim 'virgin honey', W hufen from the
uncertain PIE root *sei- 'to drip' (Pok. 889) is accepted by Weiss HSPh. 98 (1998): 31-
61, but cannot explain the Greek vocalism. Acc. to Sommer 1905: 29ff., it is related to
Skt. is refreshment'. See Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 651; cf. also alováw,
►ixwp.
aiμɑoiά [f.] ‘wall around a terrain', of stone (thus Hdt. 2, 138) or thorns (Od.). <?>
•VAR Cf. aiμoí. Spvμoí. Aiσxúλoç Aiτvaíaç 'copses, thickets (A. Aitnaiai)' (H.).
⚫ETYM Comparable with Lat. saepēs ‘hedge, fence', which has p for m. Fur.: 223 finds
the variation in other non-IE loans, e.g. Пεvéστai / Mεvéστaι (Schwyzer: 333),
yéqupa / Arm. kamurj. On the accentuation, see Scheller 1951: 87f.; on the meaning,
Picard Rev. arch. (1946): 68f.
aiµúλoç [adj.] conventionally translated as ‘flattering', mostly said of words (Hes.);
acc. to Güntert 1921: 103, it means 'wily'; Weiss HSPh. 98 (1998): 31-61 points to the
semantics of spellbinding, e.g. in aiμví óyoσ // Oέλyɛi. <?>
•VAR Also aíuúλoç (Оd.).
⚫ETYM The suffix is also found in στwμúλos 'talkative'. A direct connection with
OHG seim 'virgin honey' is impossible (see on alua), as this etymon originally
denoted a ‘thick liquid'. Acc. to Güntert (ibid.), aiµúλos derives from ►aïµwv in the
same way as ȧyкóv relates to ȧyкúλoç. This idea is integrated by Weiss HSPh. 98
(1998): 31-61 in his account of чuεpos and ► aïµwv.
aiµwdźw [v.] ‘to be set on edge', of the teeth, as caused by sour stuff (Hp.). <?►
•DER aiµwdía (Hp., Arist., Dsc.); whence aiµwdiáw ‘to have aiµwdía' (Hp., Arist.),
whence aiµwdɩaoµós (H.). aiµwdŋg is a back-formation in the sense of having
aiµwdía' (Gal.). Further aiµwdns ‘bloody', to ▸ alµa.
•ETYM The second element can hardly be separated from ódwv ‘tooth' (Szemerényi
1964: 81). It is difficult to assume that the first part is from alµa, as we would expect
to see a trace of the suffix -ατ-. Solmsen 1909: 25ff. connected the first member with
Gm. *sai-ra- in Go. sair, OHG sēr 'pain', ON sár 'wound', positing *ai-uos for Greek.
aïμwv, -ovoç [adj.] only in Σкαμávбpov aïµovα Opηs (E 49), mg. sometimes glossed
as 'skillful', but rather ‘eager' (see below). <IE *seh₂i-mon- ‘bond'>
⚫ETYM The word is found in the Thessalian names 'Iллαíμшv, Ачuovos (see Bechtel
1921, 1: 203). Weiss HSPh. 98 (1998): 31-61 assumes a pre-form *seh₂i-mon-, from the
root *shi- ‘to binď' which he also assumes to be present in чµɛpos ‘longing, love'
and in aquúλos. The fact that the meaning ‘eager' fits so well in this passage
confirms Weiss's proposal.
alvos [m.] ‘meaningful words, praise' (Il.), also ‘decision' (inscr.). <?>
•VAR aïvη (Hdt.). Cf. the primary formation in ávaívoμa 'to deny, refuse' (II.), from
*άva-aívoµai (cf. àva-vɛúw), acc. to Bechtel 1914.
•DER aivéw [v.] 'to approve, praise', also 'to decide' (Il., mainly epic Ion. poet.), fut.
-now, secondarily -έow, etc. (see Wackernagel 1916: 180f.); Att. has έлαɩvéw, Aeol.
(Hes.) aïvηu. From aivéw: aïvɛσɩ 'praise' (LXX, NT), αïvŋois (Ph.). Rare is

=== page 044 ===

40
aivós
aivíčoµaɩ [v.] ‘to praise' (Hom.); usually aivíσσquai (-ɩɩ-) (IA) ‘to speak in riddles',
from 'to speak words full of content, i.e. difficult to understand'; thence with aïvɩyμа
'dark saying, riddle' (Pi.); thence aivɩуμаτódηs, аiviуμаτiστns, aivɩуµаτíαç,
αivɩуμаτιкóç; also aivɩyuós 'id.' (Att.); aïvičıç 'id.' (Plot.). alviкτηp 'who speaks in
riddles' (S.), alviкτns (Timo), aiviкτηpíwę (A.).
ETYM Etymology unknown. Compared by Pok. 11 with Germanic words for 'oath'
(Go. aips, OHG eid), which is mostly rejected.
aivós [adj.] 'terrible' (II.). <?>
•VAR Оn лαιvý see Leumann 1950: 258f.
•COMP Common as the first member of poetic compounds, but no derivatives.
ETYM No etymology. Connected with Skt. énas 'crime' by Pok. 10. On the
expression aivóɛv aivwç, see Leumann l.c. See also LfgrE.
aïvvuaɩ [v.] ‘to take, seize' (II.). ◄IE *h₂ei- ‘give’▷
•VAR Only present.
DIAL Myc. PN a3-nu-me-no /Ainumenos/.
•COMP Often with ε-, also in the verbal noun -aɩtos 'selected' (Il.).
•ETYM The verbal noun *aitos is at the base of aiτéw. The same root is found in
ToB ai-, ToA e- 'to give (act.), take (med.)', and it was previously thought to be
reflected in Hitt. pai- 'to give', which was analyzed as *pe-ai-. Recently, however,
Kloekhorst 2008 has given a convincing alternative: an i-present to the root *h,p- 'to
seize'. Thus, the present root is eliminated as an example for PIE *a. In nominal
form the root is found in Oscan aeteis [gen.sg.] 'part (of a possession)'. YAv.
aētahmāiiuš does not contain a noun aēta- 'punishment', but rather the pronoun
aēta- 'that'; cf. Fischer and Ritter MSS 52 (1991): 9-13. See aloa, aiτía, ► díaita.
aïvw [v.] 'winnow' (Pherecr., Hp.), but see the glosses. <?>
•var Aor. žvai; pres. also ằvéw (Ar. Fr. 694 (uncertain), Ath.), ảoāvéw (Ar. Eq. 394
v.l.), ǎqŋva. škoчa ‘struck³, áóñvai. tò tàs értioµévas kpiðàs xepoi tpiyaɩ ‘rubbing
by hand of the winnowed barley-corns' (H.); further aïvwv лτíσσwv ‘winnowing',
ivaç кóчaç 'having struck' and уávaɩ (= Ƒāvαɩ)· лερшлτíσα 'strip off the husk or
skin' (cod. -лτúσat); see Solmsen 1901: 280.
⚫DER Bechtel KZ 46 (1914): 374 compares the name of a phratry Favídat (Argos).
⚫ETYM Comparable with Lat. vannus 'winnowing-basket', OHG wintōn 'to fan', Go.
dis-winbjan Aкμāv, to winnow'. The Germanic words seem to derive from the word
for ‘wind (cf. Lat. ventilare ‘to fan'), but aïvw has no trace of the -t-. Derivation of
the Greek word from *h₂ueh,- seems to be excluded by yávaɩ, which has no vowel
before the άvéw has been explained from *ά-Fav-éw (Solmsen 1901: 272), which
F.
beside yával would imply a non-IE word. Note that the exact meaning of the word is
unclear.
aïž, aiyós [f.] ‘goat', rarely msc. (II.). Also a water bird (Janzén 1937: 17, a meteor
(Arist.) and a star (Aratos). ◄IE? *h₂eiģ- ‘goat’▷
DIAL Myc. a3-ki-pa-ta /aigi-pa(s) tas/ (?) 'goatherd'; a-ki-po-de, interpretation
uncertain.
CHÚC
see
41
•COMP αiлóλoç 'goatherd' < *alу-лоλоç, sее лελш and ẞоυкóλoç (cf. Meier-
Brügger 1992a: 92); thence aiлoλέw [v.] 'to herd goats' (A., Lys., Theoc.), only
present; aiñóλia [n.pl.] 'herds of goats' (Il.), also -tov [sg.]; aiñoλiкós (Theoc.).
Further aiyi-ẞotos 'browsed by goats' (Od.); unclear the gloss aiлólos. kárŋlos
лapà Kʊлpíοç ‘peddlar (Cypr.)' (H.), see Leumann 1950: 271ff.; to be rejected is
Latte's correction ȧí- àei.
⚫DER See aiyiç 'goatskin'. Diminutive of aï: aiyidov (Pherecr., Antiph.). On alyɛç
τȧ кúματα 'waves'. Awpiɛis (H.), see on aiyiaλós. Connection with toponyms like
Aiyaí, Aiyañoç, Ayiva, etc., is at best folk-etymological.
-
•ETYM The compounds in -- are unexplained (Heubeck IF 69 (1964): 13-21 is
unclear); the typе aiлóλoç is old in any case. at is cognate with Arm. ayc 'goat' (i-
stem), which is reconstructed as *h₂eig-ih₂ (Clackson 1994: 88-90 after Meillet). The
zero grade is often supposed in Av. izaēna- ‘of leather', but we do not know if the
word referred to the skin of a goat. If the connection is correct, the word could be IE.
However, Skt. ajá- ‘goat' looks similar, but is formally deviant. This could suggest
that Avestan, Greek and Armenian borrowed the word from a common source,
perhaps Anatolian. On the distribution, see Mallory & Adams 1997 s.v. Connection
with *heig- as 'jumper' (Thieme 1953: 571) is rejected by Mayrhofer EW Aia 1: 264,
since Skt. éjati did not have a palatovelar, nor does it mean 'to jump'. Cf. ► αïyıλoç,
► αiyiλwy, ‣ Sía.
aióλos [adj.] ‘agile, glittering, variegateď (II.). <?►
•DIAL Myc. a3-wo-ro /Aiwolos/ name of a cow.
•COMP As a second member, e.g. kopułaíoλoç ‘with glittering (colorful) helmet.
•DER Denominaitve aiów [v.] 'to move quickly to and fro' (v 27), (med.) 'to change
color' (Hes. Sc. 399), 'to make colorful (Nic. Th. 155); aioλéw = лoкíλλw (Pl. Cra.
409a), alóλŋoiç 'rapid movement' (sch. Pi. P. 4, 412); aioli w 'to trick with words' (S.
fr. 912), aióλσµa ‘varied tones' (S. Ichn. 319); aloλáoμa 'to be restless' (Hp. Mul. 2,
174b, uncertain). aioλíaç [m.] fish name (cf. Strömberg 1943: 23, Thompson 1947
s.v.), aióλɛtoç (EM), aioλídaç⋅ лoкíλoυç, ταxɛïç 'variegated, quick' (H.). PN Aïoλoç,
EN Aioλɛiç.
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. Benveniste BSL 38 (1937): 107 connected aiwv, Skt. áyu-
'vital force' (formally improbable); Risch Mus. Helv. 29 (1972): 97 argued that the
original meaning was a color. On aiέλoupos, see s.v. For the type *Cai-CoR-, cf.
► alwpa, ▸alováw.
aiováw [v.] ‘to moisten, bathe (a wound)' (Hp.). <?►
•DER Verbal nouns alóvŋois and aióvηµa.
•ETYM Etymology unknown.
ainó入og → al.
aiлús [adj.] 'steep, sheer' (II., mostly epic and poet.) ◄ PG(V) ►
•VAR A different stem in aiлá (aiлà þéɛеpα © 369) and aiлýv (лóλɩv ….. aiлýv y 130,
etc.), maybe a metrical device.

=== page 045 ===

42
aipa 1
•DER αiлnεç (Hom.), is an enlargement of aiлúç, see Schwyzer: 527. Further alлoç
[n.] 'steepness, precipice' (E.), whence aiлɛvóç < *aiлɛσ-vóç ‘steep'.
•ETYM ►aiya probably belongs here, too. Furthermore, Fur.: 158 connects it with
žαívηs and ►εαлívηç, as well as äqvw and ►äqap, which is highly convincing.
Variations shown here include л/Q, labial / ¼ (cf. ► Séqw / Séy/w and þíτtakos /
чttakóç), and anticipation of a palatalized consonant *ap²- as ai-.
aipa 1 [f.] 'sledgehammer' (Call. fr. 115, 12), = σqñpa, άžívη ‘hammer, axe-head' (H.),
σpupa (Et. Gen.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Acc. to Schwyzer: 474, it is from ►αïpw (improbable).
alpa 2 [f.] ‘rye-grass, darnel, Lolium temulentum' (Thphr.). <?>
⚫VAR Often plur. aipai.
•DER αipɩvos of rye-grass' (Dsc.), aipwdns 'mixed with rye-grass' (Thphr.).
Denominative -aɩpóoµaɩ [v.] ‘to change into rye-grass' (Thphr.).
•ETYM Specht KZ 66 (1939): 12 connected it with Skt. erakā- [f.] a kind of grass,
assuming that both languages borrowed the word from an Oriental language; this is
rejected by Thieme 1953: 586. Berger WZKSS 3 (1959): 48 thinks that the Sanskrit
word is of Austro-Asiatic origin. On erakā-, see now Klaus MSS 57 (1997): 49-64; see
► αiρóлɩvov.
aipέw [v.] ‘to take, grasp, seize', med. 'to take for oneself, choose' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Except for late forms like ȧv-úpησα (Q. S.), έλɛiv is used as a suppletive
aorist.
•DIAL Cret. aiλéw is a contamination of aipέw and έλɛīv; Pamphyl. ȧyλέow from
ȧypέw and έλɛiv; for other such forms see Vendryes 1938: 331ff.
●DER ɑïpɛσɩç ‘capture, choice, party, philosophical school (whence heresy)' (IA),
aipéσчμoç pregnable' (X.); aipɛtós 'what can be taken or chosen' (IA), aipetikós ‘to
be chosen, causing schisms' (late); aipετns 'who chooses' (Vett. Val.), kaðaɩpétŋs
‘destroyer' (Th.), aipɛtíç [f.] 'who chooses' (LXX), back-formation to aipɛtí\w [v.] ‘to
elect' (Hell.), which is a denominative to aipɛτóç. From aipɛτí(w also aipetiσtńs
'adherent' (Plb., D. L.).
•ETYM No etymology.
aiρóлɩvov [n.] 'sieve' (Ar. fr. 480). <◄GR?>
•VAR Cf. apóлvov. σkotɛivóv, kai kóσkivov év ó̟ лupoì σýšovtai ‘dark, also a sieve
through which wheat is sieved'; An. Bk. 359, 24 continues with úлèp toũ tàs alpaç
Sεɛiv because it passes through the rye-grass'; also aерóлvov. τò àpaɩòv
kóσkivov. rapà tò tàs aẵpas roleĭv ȧreïvai kaì xwpíšeɩv ǹ dɩà tò αïpeɩv tòv rívov ö
εστɩ τòν þúлоν 'a porous sieve, after its making the rye-grass go apart; or after its
removing the лívov, i.e. the dirt' (EM 38, 42), the first part of which is clearly folk-
etymological.
⚫ETYM DELG thinks that it consists of aïpw 'to remove' and лívoç 'filth', like the
latter part of the final gloss; for the type of compound, see Schwyzer: 442.
Alternatively, it may be a Pre-Greek word reshaped by folk etymology.
=>
aïpw → àeipw 1.
!
į
àiodwv
aloa [f.] 'share, destiny, decree' (Il., epic and lyr.). <IE *h₂ei- 'give, take'>
•DIAL Myc. a3-sa/aisa/; also found in Arc.-Cypr.
43
⚫DER aïotoç 'auspicious, opportune'; also with v-, έ‹-, кατ-, лαρ-, whence alσtóoμal
[v.] 'to take as a good omen' (Plu., App.); aïoчos 'destined, fitting' (Hom.),
¿vaíoµoç, ávaíoчos (Emp.).
Thence prefixed denominative av-aɩɩµów [v.] ‘to consume (the apportioned share)'
(Ion.), whence ávαɩõчµµατα ‘expenses' (Hdt.); кaτaɩσчµów [v.] 'to consume
entirely' (com.). Adjectival abstract alσчíα лλоúτov 'the due apportionment of
wealth' (A. Eu. 996). See on aloчuváw, ▸aiσvµváw, ► alovµvýtns.
Some PNs: Aïowv, Aloíaç, etc.
•ETYM alσa is from the root seen in aïvuμaι, derived with -α from a form in -t-
found in Osc. aeteis [gen.sg.] 'part', Gr. *altoç (see alτéw), aïtioç. An ablauting
root shape could be found in σσaσÐαι · кληроσеαι. Aéσßioi (H.).
•
aťσakoç [?] · ó tñs dáqvns kládoc, öv katéxovteç üµvoν τoÙÇ Bεоúç 'the branch of
the sweet bay; while grasping these, the gods were praised' (H.). Cf. Plu. Mor. 615b.
Acc. to EM 38, 49 it indicates the bird έpíðaкoç. <PG(S,O)►
•ETYM Etymology unknown. The word is Pre-Greek (or Anatolian), acc. to Nehring
Glotta 14 (1925): 183 and Krause KZ 67 (1942): 214*. Note the initial ai-, intervocalic
-σ-, and the suffix -ak-. See ▸ aiσáλwv.
aloáλwv [m.] kind of falcon (Arist.); see Thompson 1895. <PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. aiσápwv. ɛldos iépakos ‘id.' (H.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 387 gives it as Pre-Greek form with the variation p/ λ, of which he has
more than 30 examples.
Aïσŋлoç [m.] HN in Mysia (Il.); also PN (Il.). <PG➤
⚫ETYM Fur.: 234 compares aišŋóç. No doubt a Pre-Greek name.
aiσðávoµai [v.] ‘to perceive, apprehend, note' (IA). <IE *h,eu-is- 'perceive'>
•VAR Incidentally pres. aïσoμai (Th.); aor. aiσ0éσ0αι, fut. aiσðŋσɛσðαι (IA).
•DER aïσðŋoiç ‘perception, knowledge' (Hp., Pl., etc.), both the act and the object of
perception (cf. E. IA 1243, Arist.); aiσðŋoin (Aret.) = aïoðŋoiç; aioðnτós 'perceptible'
and ɑioðŋtɩkós ‘able to perceive', both mainly philosophical terms; aiσðŋtýplov ‘one
of the senses' (Arist.), aiσðŋτýs [m.] 'who perceives' (Pl.).
⚫ETYM Interpreted as PGr. *awis-th-, and connected with aïw 'to perceive, hear' <
*awis-je/o-. A similar pre-form is found in Lat. audio ‘to hear' < *h₂eui-dh,-ie/o- (see
De Vaan 2008 s.v.), oboedio 'to obey'. It is probable that the Greek suffix -0-, which
builds resultative verbal forms, is from *dhh,- 'to do, etc.' as well. Further related to
Skt. āvís., Av. āuuiš ‘manifestly', OCS (j)avě ‘evidently', which are adverbial forms in
-is.
àïσwv [ptc.] 'to breathe out, exhale' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Or rather *äïσðáv (II 468), äïσðε (Y 403), of ¤vµóv.
•ETYM We can connect it with äïov (= tò ảлéëvɛov Eust.) in έëεì ôíλov äïov ñtop (O
252), but much remains uncertain. See Bechtel 1914 and DELG.

=== page 046 ===

44
ätoow
aixuń
45
åïσow [v.] ‘to move quickly, dart, rush (upon)' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Pres. ǎσow (Pi.), äττw (Att.), fut. άïw. The ȧ- is always long in Hom., except in
vлaïεɩ (126), see Chantraine 1942: 110, and in aïŋ (A. R. 3, 1302); elsewhere it is
mostly short.
COMP As a second member in лоλv-á¨¨ч, коρvе-άï; also in τpixáïкεç?
•DER άïký 'rush' (O 709); root noun ǎï in άvéµwv äiкaç (A. R. 4, 820), or ȧíkaç?
Both a and are long.
•ETYM Unexplained. Comparison with Skt. vevijyáte ‘to raise, flee, move quickly' is
formally impossible (no trace of a Ƒ in Homer, and the long i remains unexplained).
Danielsson IF 14 (1903): 386ff. reconstructs *aif-ik- and compares aióλoç.
aťovλos [adj.] ‘unseemly, evil' (Hom.), in aľovλa péčɛiv, eidévai, µvðýoaσðaι (opposed
to αťσчμα). <PG?>
•COMP aiovλo-εpyós (Max. Astrol.) after aïovλa péčɛɩv (Hom.).
•ETYM The overall appearance is Pre-Greek: initial ai-, intervocalic -σ-, suffix -vλ-.
Cf. ►ánov\os.
aiovµváw [v.] ‘to be ruler' (Hom.). <PG(V)►
●var aiovµvýtηp (§ 347) has a variant aiov(1)ŕtŋp, now preferred by West Glotta 77
(1999): 119f. Also PNs Aïovμvoç, Aiovýtηs (Hom.).
•DIAL Meg. aioчváw.
•DER αiσvμvητкp ( 347 v.l.), aiovµvýtηs (aiováτac) title of a high magistrate in
several towns (inscr., Arist.), in Homer 0 258 a referee of games; fem. alovµvítis
(Suid.); aiovμvητεíα 'office of alσчµvýτηs' (Arist.), Verbal noun alovμvητúç
(Miletus). Further aiσúµvov = ẞovλεvτηpov in Megara (Paus.), from the verb or
from *αťovμvoç.
⚫ETYM Previously derived from alσα, aïσчoç, *aïoчuvos by Solmsen 1909: 36ff. and
Fraenkel 1910: 172f. However, Chantraine 1933: 216 and von Blumenthal 1930: 33
assume a Pre-Greek origin, which must be correct: it explains the interchanges µ/ Ƒ
(cf. Fur: 244) and v/ t. The word and its derivations are reminiscent of кuẞepváw.
Further details are in the LfgrE.
Deroy Ant. class. 26 (1958): 404-410 compares Lat. aerumna 'task, distress'.
->
aioýprog → àoÚondos.
aloxos [n.] ‘shame, ugliness', plur. ‘disgraceful deeds' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Comp. aiσxíwv, superl. aïoxɩOTOS.
•DER aiσxpóc 'dishonoring, ugly', denominative aloxúvw 'to dishonor', med. 'to be
ashamed' (Il.), back-formation aloxúvn 'shame' (IA). PN Aioxúloç, perhaps an
enlargement of an old u-stem. Further derivatives: 1. from alσxpós: aiσxpóτns
‘ugliness' (Pl. Gorg. 525a, Ep. Eph. 5, 4), aioxpooúvη (Tz.). 2. from aiσxúvw:
alσxuvτnp 'violator' (A. Ch. 998), alσxvväηλós ‘timid, shy', also ‘disgraceful (Pl.,
Arist.), aiσxvvτη\ía (Plu.); it has -- from the opposite ȧv-aíσxuvτos (Alc., Att.),
whence avaiσxvvtía, -téw, -τημα; secondary aiσxuvτós (Ps. Phoc.). Rare
aiσxuvτnpós and aioxuvtikós.
!
1
Į
⚫ETYM The older comparison with Go. aiwiski [n.] 'aioxúvn' is generally abandoned
in view of obvious formal difficulties. De Lamberterie 1990: 835-840 plausibly
compares aïdouat, positing *aid-sk- for Greek next to *aid-st- in Go. aistan.
àτãç [m.] 'eromenos' (Ar.), also a fish (pap. Tebt. 701, 44). <?>
•VAR Fem. άîtɩç (Hdn. Gr., Alcm. 34 Page). Also åάɛítav. tòv έtaïpov 'companion'.
Apiσtopávns dè τòv έpúμεvov 'eromenos' (Ar. fr. 738; also Theocr. 12, 14, where it is
called Thessalian).
DIAL A Doric or Thessalian word.
•ETYM Uncertain. From ►åïw ‘to hear' acc. to Diels Herm. 31 (1896): 372 and Bechtel
1921, 1: 201; see also Arena Riv. fil. class. 96 (1968): 257f.
airéw [v.] 'to ask, request, beg' (II.). <GR
•COMP Often prefixed with ȧл-, εε-, лαρ-, etc.
•DER 1. aïtŋσiç ‘demand, request' (IA), aiτησчoç; 2. aïτηua 'demand, claim' (Pl.,
Arist.), aitŋµatikós and aitŋuatwdns; 3. aitytýs ‘requestor' (pap., D. C.); aitytikós
(Arist., D. L.), 4. aitíšw = aitéw (epic since Od.).
⚫ETYM A denominative of *altos; see ➤aïvvµai, ➤aioa and ► aïtios.
ατɩoç [adj.] 'guilty, responsible' (Il.). ◄GR►
•DER Thence (or directly from *altos): aiτía [f.] 'responsibility, guilt, cause;
accusation', also 'disease'; thence denominative aiτɩάo̟μαι 'to accuse, charge with',
secondary aiτiášoμai (X., D. C.).
To aiτiáoμai: aiτíaσiç (Antipho, Arist.) and altíaμа (A., Th.) 'accusation, charge';
ɑitɩatós (Arist., Plot.) 'having a cause' (tò αitiατóv ‘effect' as opposed to τò ατov
'cause') is rather directly from aiτía because of the meaning; from tò aitɩatóv, the
grammarians created ǹ αitiatiкǹ лtwσiç 'accusative case', so properly 'case of what is
effectuated' (Wackernagel 1920-1924(1): 19).
From aitía (or tò aïtiov): aitiwdŋs ‘causal', philosophical term (Hell. and late),
likewise aitiwuа (pap., Act. Ap.) = aiτíaμα, and with the same vocalism altiwolę
(Eust.) aitíaoiç.
===
•ETYM αïtoç, αitía and ɑitéw were derived from *altos 'share' (see ►aïvvμal,
►aitéw), which is semantically understandable. The suffix -toç may have been added
to ait- after the change of *ti > ƠI.
aiqvns [adv.] 'suddenly' (E. IA 1581, Hp. Int. 39). <PG(V)►
•DER More common as well as more archaic is έšaíqvòs (Hom., Pi., trag., etc.). The
adjective aiqvídios (A., Th., Arist.), on the other hand, is more common and more
archaic than aɩvídios (Pl., Gal.). Adverbial forms aiqvòdíç, -dóv (Hdn.).
•ETYM Related to ➤ alya, s.v., and also to ►äqvw, ▶äqap, ►έžanívns, etc.
aixun [f.] 'point of a spear, spear' (II.). On its use in Homer, see Trümpy 1950: 52ff. <IE
*h₂eik-(s)m- 'spear'>>
•DIAL Myc. az-ka-sa-ma /aiksmans/.
•COMP αixμ-áλwτos 'prisoner of war' (Pi.), whence fem. aixμaλwτiç, adj.
αixμαλwτɩкóç, abstract aixuaλwoía. Thence denominative verbs aixμαλwτíчw and

=== page 047 ===

46
aiya
aixuaλwτɛów (Hell. and late); from aixuaλwτílw: aixμaλwτστ and
aixua入wtouós.
%
•DER aixunεiç 'armed with a spear' (A., Opp.); aixµητns 'spearman, warrior' (II.),
aixuntά (E 197), fem. aïxµητiç (EM); with secondary suffix aixµnτp (Opp., Q. S.,
Nonn.); aixuntos ‘armed with a spear, war-like' (Lyc. 454 verse-final).
Denominative aixµáw [v.] 'to throw the spear, to arm with a spear' (Il.).
•ETYM The Mycenaean form proves PGr. *aiksmā. The word is connected with
alkλoɩ ai ywvíaɩ toñ þéλovs ‘points of the arrow' (H.) and with Lith. iēšmas, OPr.
aysmis 'spit' which may derive from *h₂eik-(s)m-. The original meaning must have
been 'point'. Within Greek, we further find Cypr. iкuaµévoç 'wounded' (Ruijgh 1957:
136), iktéa. άkóvτiov 'javelin' (H.), and perhaps iкταp 'near'. Uncertain is the
appurtenance ofïydiç [f.] (Sol.), "yon (Hp.) 'mortar', but cf. Fur.: 321.
alya [adv.] 'quickly, suddenly' (Il., poet.) <PG>
•DER aiyŋpós ‘quick' (Il., Pi.).
⚫ETYM Sommer IF 11 (1900): 243 connected the word with aiлúç 'steep' as *aiл-σ-a;
the forms can also be understood in substrate terms (with Fur.: 158) as alternation of
a labial with w. Furnée further connects it with έaiqvns, ► έšanívns, ► äqap, ►äqvw,
etc.
aïw [v.] 'perceive, hear' (II.). <IE *h,euis- 'perceive'>
•VAR Ipf. ǎïov (see below); verbal adj. έл-άïστоs 'perceived, detected' (Hdt.) to
έnaïw, ¿nó̟w (Att. prose), whence aor. ¿ññoa (¿ñýïoa).
DIAL Cypr. fut. awiyesomai.
•ETYM The ipf. ǎïov was considered by Schulze KZ 29 (1888): 251ff. to be an original
aorist, from which a present dïw was formed secondarily. Schulze found traces of an
original pres. *ȧɛíw in ǎɛɩ· åкoúɛ, äɛτε· άкoúσatε (H.), and in εл-άяv (E. HF 773),
but this is difficult to fit in with the etymology prevailing today: ǎïov <*awis-e/o- is
generally connected with Skt. āvis [adv.] 'evidently, manifestly' and OCS (j)avě ‘id.',
so the Greek verb is probably a denominative from this adverb. As Kloekhorst
recently showed, the Hitt. verb au-³ / u- 'to see' (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.) can also be
connected with it, since in o-grade forms *h₂ou-, the laryngeal would regularly be
lost. Noteworthy, though improbable, is the connection by Szemerényi Glotta 38
(1960): 243 with the word for ‘ear'. Within Greek, compare aor. ǹσðóµηv, pres.
► alσávoμaι, with -0- indicating the completion of a process.
aiw
→ aiɛí.
aiwv, -ŵvos [m., f.] ‘(life)time, long period of time, eternity' (Il.). <◄IE *h₂ei-u- ‘time of
living, well-being'>
•VAR aiév [adv.] 'always'.
•DER alwvios 'enduring, eternal (Pl., Hell., NT), aiwvóτηs 'perpetuitas' (gloss.);
alwvi av to make or be eternal' (Dam., Phot., Suid.), aióvioua 'perpetuation,
monument' (Ostr.).
•ETYM From *aiƑúv, an n-stem also found in the old locative aiév ‘always', which
coexisted with the s-stem in aiw, aléç, aiɛí ‘id.'. See also ov. On the meaning, see
ákakadic, -idoc
47
Stadtmüller Saeculum 2 (1951): 315ff. A neuter u-stem is found in Skt. áyu-, Av. āiiu
‘(life)time', OAv. gen. yaoš, dat. yauuōi < *h₂oi-u, *h₂i-eu-s, *h₂i-eu-ei. Latin has
thematicized aevus < *h₂ei-u-o-; Gothic has an i-stem aiwins [acc.pl.]. An old
derivation is Lat. iuvenis, Skt. yúvan- 'young man' from *h₂iu-Hen- with the
Hoffmann suffix (having vital strength'). Derived from this are Lith. jaunas, OCS
juno 'young' and Go. jund ‘youth' < *h¸iu-Hn-ti-.
aiwpa [f.] 'swing, hammock, noose, halter' (Pl.). <?►
•DER aiwpέw 'to raise, hang' (Pi., IA), also -έoμa 'to hand, hover', also prefixed with
σuv-, Úлερ-. Thence aiwpŋois (mainly medic.), ouv- (Pl.), úлεp- (Hp.); aiwpηµa (E.
[lyr.], Lyc.).
⚫ETYM Previously, an intensive (iterative) verb *Fat-Fwp-έw was reconstructed, from
which *FaчFwpa > aiwpa was a derivation. This type is not accepted anymore.
Taillardat RPh. 57 (1983): 21-25 assumes *huōr-eie- > *àƑwpéw (formation as in
лшλέw, etc. to the root of aɛípw 'to hang'); reduplication would then have resulted in
*άƑaƑwp-, which would have given *aƑαɩwp- > aiwp- (like *aƑaɩpw > aïpw). The
reduplication with ȧF-αƑ- seems uncertain to me, just like the development to *ȧFaj-
and its continuation as (άƑ)-at- before a vowel.
Aкáбnuoç [m.] name of a hero. <?>
●DER Aкad½µεiα the gymnasium in Athens where Plato taught, the Platonic school
(Ar.), hɛkadŋµɛias (Att. inscr., see LSJ Supp.).
•ETYM Generally identified with the first element of έкάɛpyos (which derives from
*uek-m); and with the PN Boeot. Fhεкadaμoç, Thess. Ƒεкε-; in Attic this form may
have been 'Eкádnµoç (D. L., St. Byz.); but see Lejeune 1972: $2543, who objects that
the aspiration was lost.
Fur.: 309 separates it from these words and connects the Lydian TN Aкadauíç and
the Carian PN Aктαdηµoç. Cf. also Tapкovбnuoç (Cilicia)? However, the names in
Greece seem to have (had) a F-, of which there is no trace in the Anatolian names.
The meaning of -dau- is unknown. If the word was Pre-Greek, the varying vocalism
can be better understood (assimilations are rare in Greek).
äkaɩva [f.] ‘spike, prick, goad' (A. R.), Also ‘ten-foot rod in Thessaly (Bechtel 1921, 1:
116, 204), cf. äkaiva dé έoti µétpov dɛкáлovv ☹ɛσσáλwv εpεµα (sch. A. R. 3, 1323;
Call. fr. 24, 6). In Egypt a measure of 100 square ft. (Hero, pap.). <GR?, PG?►
⚫ETYM Traditionally derived from the n-stem ►ǎкwv with the suffix -ta. However, it
may also contain the Pre-Greek suffix -atva (see Fur.: 171") added directly to the
stem άк-. The measure is in origin the same word; for the semantics, DELG
compares кáλaμoç, Lat. pertica, MoFr. perche.
ȧкαкaλíç, -ídos [f.] name of several plants (Dsc.). <PG(V)
•VAR Cf. áкaкaλλíç. ǎvoç vapкioσov. Kpñteç ‘flower of narcissus (Cret.)' (H.).
кakaλiç vápкiσσоç (H.), каккаλíα = στрúуvov úлνшτкóу 'sleepy nightshade,
úлvæɩɩкóv
Withania somnifera' (Dsc. 4, 72 and 122). Further кáyкavov = кaк(к)alía
'Mercurialis tomentosa' (Gal., Paul. Aeg.).

=== page 048 ===

⠀
48
àkáknta
⚫ETYM Frisk assumes an Oriental origin, possibly Egyptian, but why? Fur.: 371, 277
(see also 138) compares кaкaλíç and кáyкavov, variants which prove a Pre-Greek
origin. Cf. also ► άкaкíα.
άкáкητα [adj.] epithet of Hermes (Il., Hes.) and Prometheus (Hes.), of unknown mg.
<?>
•DER άкaкŃσιos (Call.).
•ETYM If the glosses άkakiɛiç. ovviɛiç and ȧkakiɛi• ovvɩɛĭ are reliable, the word could
mean ‘ouvɛtós' (Hoffmann BB 17 (1891): 328). DELG rejects the glosses without
reason and assumes a meaning 'benevolent'. Risch 1954: 395f. thinks it was built on
ǎкakoç, ȧкáкāç after µητíɛτa (which is not easy). See also Fraenkel 1956b: 168, and
LfgrE.
άкαкíα [f.] name of a tree or plant, ‘acacia' or 'Genista acanthoclada' (Dsc.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Probably a substrate word; cf. ►άкaкaλíç. Fur.: 321 compares кάкTOÇ. There is
no reason for an Oriental origin, as DELG assumes. Kramer ZPE 97 (1993): 146
compares Coptic kakɛ, kɛkɛ, kɛкεɩ 'dark', the color of the wood of the acacia; the ȧ-
would have been taken from ǎkavēoç. This is unconvincing.
άкaλavėíç ⚫VAR = άкavěíç. →ǎкavēα.
=>
ȧkalappɛiτns [adj.] only in ε άкαλappɛíταo ẞabupрóov nкεavoĩo (H 422, T 434).
<GR
•COMP Similar άкaλáppoos (Orph.).
•DER The adverbial first member is only sparsely attested (Hes., Sapph.), and in
glosses like åkaλóv. žovxov, „pãov, µaλaкóv ‘quiet, mild, soft' (H.), åkaλŵç [adv.]
(Eust.).
•ETYM From ȧкaλa-ppefé-tys, a compound of ảкaλá and ►péw with suffixal -τŋç.
Meier-Brügger Glotta 73 (1995): 9-11, derives the first member from the root *kelh₂-,
seen in кéλadoç as 'rauschend dahineilen', and interprets ȧ-kaλappɛíτηs as 'kein
rauschendes Fliessen habend, still fliessend'. See ► άкý 2.
ȧкaλnoŋ [f.] 'stinging nettle, sea anemone' (Eup.). ◄PG?(V)►
•VAR Thphr. (HP 7, 7, 2) has áкaλúqŋ.
•ETYM Unknown; cf. Thompson 1947 s.v. There is no reason to suppose the influence
of ǎкavea, etc. (Frisk). Semitic etymology in Lewy 1895: 50. Suffixal -bh- is quite
common in names of trees and plants. The variation v/ 11 could point to a Pre-Greek
word, although there are no clear parallels to it.
ǎkavea [f.] 'thorn, thistle', name of different thorny plants (Strömberg 1940: 17), also
'backbone, spine' of fish, snake, or man (Od.). <PG?>
•VAR Note ǎкaveos [m.] 'acanthus' (Acanthus mollis).
·DER Many derived adjektives: ákávolvos, ákavdwòng, ákavikós, akavenpós,
ákavēŋɛɩç ‘provided with thorns, etc.'. Further diminutive åкávěɩov; åкavēíaç kind
of shark or grasshopper (cf. Strömberg 1943: 47, Strömberg 1944: 17); άkavēíç name
of a bird (goldfinch' or 'linnet', cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.), also a plant name;
ȧкavevλíç bird name (Thompson s.v.), àкaveiwv 'hedgehog', àкavеéα a plant,
ȧkapós
49
άкavеɛwv and -Owv 'thorny break, spinetum² àкavý mg. unknown.
Denominative verb àкavěóoμaι 'to be thorny' (Thphr.).
•ETYM The basic meaning is 'thorn', whence ‘'backbone, spine'. Usually, ǎkavos
'pine-thistle' is considered basic, but a connection with ǎvoç (as *akan-antho-; see
Frisk) is improbable. Analysis as a compound *äк-avea 'sharp flower' (Kretschmer
1896: 403 A. 1) is a type of etymology of the past. Belardi Rend. Acc. Linc. 10 (1955):
309-331 assumes an Indo-Mediterranean substrate word, connecting Skt. kaṇṭ(h)a-,
but such combinations with Sanskrit are mostly incorrect, and the Indo-
Mediterranean hypothesis is quite doubtful. Most probable is a Pre-Greek substrate
element, though in this case there is no positive indication except for the ending in
short -a (see Pre-Greek); in this respect, there is no reason to assume a secondary
Greek formation (as per DELG). Niedermann Glotta 19 (1931): 8ff. connected it with
áкaλavēíç = áкavēíç (Ar.), by metathesis of *åкavaλíç.
ǎкavoç [m.] a thistle, ‘Atractylis gummifera', 'dorniger Fruchtkopf (Thphr.).
<PG? (S)►
•VAR Also ǎкav, -vos (LXX).
●DER ÅKAVIKÓÇ, Åkavúdŋc, ȧkavíľw (all Thphr.), áкávov (H.).
ETYM For the formation, cf. лλáτаvoç, þáчavоç, лúаvоç, etc.; the word is mostly
derived from the root åк- 'sharp', but the suffix -avos rather points to a non-IE word
(words like ǎkwv, ȧкóvη confirm that the -a- is foreign).
άkapńs, -és [adj.] ‘small, tiny' (Ar.). <?►
•VAR Mostly in fixed expressions, e.g. έv ȧкapɛĩ (xpóvov), àкapñ ‘a moment', of time
(Aг.); also кατéлeσov àkapǹs tŵ déɛ 'it was a hair-breadth escape'; ovк áкapñ 'not
at all'. A form ǎкap is attributed to Antiphon (Taillardat 1962: $248).
●DER άkapiañoç id. (D.), cf. Chantraine 1933: 49.
•ETYM Traditionally derived from kɛípw, ¿кápŋy ‘to cut' as 'too short to cuť: ãò
ẞpaxú, ö ovde kɛĩpaɩ olóv tɛ (H.); this is doubtful. Perhaps (not even a) louse'? See
►ȧkapí.
άkapí [n.] ‘mite' (Arist.). <PG?►
•ETYM Fur.: 371 connects it with кápvoç = 0ɛip 'louse' (H.), which is quite attractive.
It is usually connected with ►ȧкapńc, s.v. DELG suggests a contamination of ȧкapńs
with kópɩç ‘bug'. I would rather think that кópɩç is cognate, as a substrate word, with
prothetic vowel and a/o interchange.
äkapva [f.] · Sáqvò 'sweet bay' (H.). <PG?►
•ETYM The word has been connected with ►ǎкαστoç ‘maple' (and further with OHG
ahorn), but this must be explained differently. ǎкapva is most probably a substrate
word (note the sequence -pv-).
=>
ákápvav → àyapvwc.
=>
ärapov → ăyxpav.
ȧкapós [m.]?. σŋµaívei tòv έykéqaλov i tǹv keqaλny 'brain, head' (EM 45, 13). <?>

=== page 049 ===

50
ǎKAσKA
•ETYM Cf. уkapos and "yêpoç, with the same mg., which point to έv and кápŋ
'head'. It would be the only relatively certain instance of *hnC- yielding à-, but
Nussbaum 1986: 72f. remains sceptical, as one would expect * άкpoç instead of
ȧкapós if the form is old.
äraoka → àkń 2.
•
äkaσtoç [m.] · σqévdaµ voç ‘maple' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM We may posit *äkap-στoç and assume that the word is cognate with Lat. acer,
-ris 'maple', OHG ahorn (which is sometimes connected with ǎкapva · Sáøvn H.,
s.v.), and Gallo-Rom. *akar(n)os ‘id.' (Hubschmied Rev. celt. 50 (1933): 263f.); see
Pok. 20. For the formation, we may compare лλaτávστoç, but the derivation from
*-id-to- (cf. Chantraine 1933: 302) may well be wrong. Since plant names are often
borrowed, and the formation is unclear, we may envisage a substrate origin. Fur.: 371
compares кάστov. úλov. Aеаµãvεç 'wood' (H.), and for the meaning σoévdaμvov.
žúλov (H.), o.c. 164. A further comparison with кóστоν 'wooden parts of a wagon'
(o.c. 343) is less certain.
ǎкατoç [f., m.] 'light vessel' (Thgn.), 'boat-shaped cup' (com.). <?>
⚫DER Diminutives άкáτov, which also denotes a kind of women's shoe (Ar.), and
άкατηvápιov (Olsson AfP 11 (1935): 219); further άкáτɛoç, τà áкáτɛα (sc. iστíα)
'small sails' (X.); ȧкατíç [f.] 'millipede' (Steph. Med.), see Strömberg 1944: 11.
•ETYM Probably a technical loanword. Often connected with ȧк- ‘sharp' (see ►áкń),
but without any obvious reason. Winter 1950: 12 connected it with êòtývη. éλoчov
µéya wc kñtos (H.), which could perhaps belong with ►кñτoç instead.
akaxiÏw = &xozial.
=>
άкaxμέvoç [perf.ptc.] ‘sharpened' (Il.). ◄IE? *h₂ek- ‘sharp'>
⚫ETYM From the root *h₂ek- 'sharp'; a reduplicated formation *åк-αк-σ-μέvoç has
been suggested, which remains speculative.
ȧkéāvoç [m.] a kind of leguminous vegetable (Pherecr.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained. For the overall structure, cf. Nкɛavós.
ákeber → ákoÚw.
==
άKέwv •VAR Also -έovoa, -έovτe. → άký 2.
ảкý 1 [f.] · ákµǹ od pov point of an iron tool' (Suid., H.), cod. aixµη. <IЕ *h₂ek-
'point, sharp'>
●VAR A parallel formation is áкíç, -ídos [f.] ‘needle, arrow, barb' (Hp.).
•COMP On -кηS SEE ►ÝKŃ.
●DER From áкíç: άkídiov ‘small barb' (BCH 29, 572), áкidódŋs 'pointed' (Thphr.),
άкidwτóç ‘id.' (Paul. Aeg.), also plant names like åкiðшτóv (Dsc.), passive verbal adj.
ηкɩdwµévoç (IG 2, 807), also compounded in άкɩdoεids (Procl.). áкíσкλwv [gen.pl.]
(BGU 1028, 12; 16 [II³]), mg. uncertain, was borrowed from Lat. acisculum 'small
pointed hammer of a stonemason', cf. Schubart's comment ad loc. Reduplicated
form in ►άкwкń ‘point (of a lance, sword, etc.)' (Hom., Theoc., Opp.), cf. ảywyń.
ȧkiváкns
51
•ETYM Probably from a root noun; see Schwyzer: 465. Derived from a root åк-
'sharp', seen in several other etyma. Not related to ►ǎкaiva, ►ǎкavoç. See ►ǎкwv,
► άkµý, ►ákóvŋ, ► äкpoç, ►äкwŃ.
άкn 2 [f.] 'silence, quiet' (II.). <?>
•VAR Beside the instr. ảêã, ảêα (Pi.) only acc. άкηv; in Hom. adverbial in άкǹv
¿yévovto oɩwiŋ, which shows that the original mg. was ‘quiet, calm²; cf. áкǹv ñyɛs-
nouxíav nyεç 'were bringing quiet or calm' (H.).
•DER ȧKέwv, -έovτε, -έovσa is a ptc.; the form in -wv became indeclinable (A 422).
The optative ȧкéoç (A. R. 1, 765) is a late creation.
άкηvov ovxov 'quiet' (EM 48, 1); ǎкασкα = чouxws 'quietly' (H., Crat. 126),
ákaʊkḍ (Pi. fr. 28), formation unexplained; ảкaλá [n.pl., adv.] (Hes. fr. 218, Sappho
43 LP); ȧкaλav (Sappho 68, 86 LP); áкaλóv· Ïσvxov, épḍov, µaλaкóv ‘quiet, mild,
soft' (H.); this adverb also in ȧкaλappɛíτao < ȧкaλa-pɛƑɛ- (II.).
•ETYM It may be connected with кα, assuming ablaut.
άкńpatoç [adj.] ‘undamaged, intact' (Il.). <?►
•VAR άképaɩoç ‘id.' (Hdt.).
●DER åkŋpáσios ‘pure' (Od.), ‘untouched' (h. Merc., AP). Similar formations are
ȧкnpios 'undamaged (by the кñрεc)' (Оd., epic), áкépatoç 'unharmed, undamaged'
(IA). From ȧképaloç: åkepaiótŋc (Plb.), åkepalooúvŋ (Suid.), åkɛpatóoµai (Eust.).
•ETYM An epic and poetic word. It is unnecessary to assume a second, independent
word meaning 'pure' (Od.), as Frisk does. DELG pleads for a unified meaning
‘intact, pure'. Perhaps, άкépaτos (not from кηpaívw, A. Supp. 999) was metrically
lengthened from *åкépaτoç, from the stem of кɛpα-í(w 'to destroy', but influence of
кp is improbable. In some cases, the meaning may have been influenced by
►кερávvчμɩ 'to mix'. Lee Glotta 39 (1961): 191-205 connects it with Kɛipw, but this
leaves the formation unexplained.
άкɩɗvóç [adj.] ‘weak, small' (Od.). <PG?►
•VAR ȧKidpós (Cyr.).
•DER ȧкιбρwлάw. àµßλvwrw 'to be dim-sighted' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The element -Sv- may point to a substrate word. In view of the
variant with -p-, Fur.: 388 assumes a substrate word with v/ p, though the
interchange is rare (cf. лрóкviç). At 360, he compares σкiðapóv. àpaóv 'thin,
slender' (H.), which cannot be considered certain. Frisk also compares åkɩpóç ‘weak’
(Theoc.); cf. áкɩpñ. áσðεvñ, oúk értɛtaµéva ‘weak, not stretcheď (H.) and ákɩpŵç.
ɛúlaßŵç, átpéµas 'discreet, quiet' (H.); but áкɩpóç. ßoppãs ‘the north winď (H.)
cannot belong here. For the interchange 8/ p, Fur.: 388 gives only oiẞda, where it is
probably conditioned by the preceding ß.
άкīváкηs [m.] ‘short sword of Persians and Scythians' (Hdt.). ◄LW Pers.?, PG?►
⚫VAR KIVάкns (S. fr. 1061); the t was long in Hor. Od. 1, 27, 5.
⚫ETYM Perhaps an Iranian loan: Benveniste 1940b: 202 compares kyn'k; see further
Bailey TPS 1955: 69. However, kiváкηs in Sophocles (Belardi 1969: 202) could suggest
that the word is Pre-Greek rather than Iranian. It is supposed that άкívayuа
=

=== page 050 ===

52
ȧkipíç
tívayµa (Lyr. Adesp. 30 B) and áкivayuós. tivayµós, kívŋows ‘stirring, movement'
(H.) arose under influence of áкiváкηs (Mansion 1904: 64).
άкipíç [?] Aúxvos 'lamp' (H.). <PG?>
•VAR Cf. kippis (Lacon.) for λúxvos (EM 515, 17), also kípıç (H.).
•ETYM Unknown, but it may well be Pre-Greek in view of the variations.
ǎкivos [m.] 'wild basil, Calamintha graveolens' (Dsc. 3, 43). <PG(V) ►
⚫VAR Also ǎkovoç (ibid.).
•ETYM The vowel interchange, though rare, may point to a substrate word. See Fur.:
191.
ákipóg →àkidvós.
ȧккá, -oñç [f.] 'bogey' (Plu. 2, 1040b), acc. to others (Zen. 1, 53) 'vain woman'. <PG,
ONOM‣
•DER Also as a PN (Plu.); ȧккíčoμa [v.] 'to adorn oneself (Pl.).
•ETYM A ‘Lallwort' or nursery word; cf. Lat. Acca (Larentia) and Skt. akkā (gramm.).
Cf. also ȧккw. yuvǹ è̟nì µiwpią dɩaßaλλoµévy, † qaoɩv ¿vortpišoµévyv týñ idią ɛikóvi
wç étépą diaλéyɛoðaɩ 'woman slandered to be crazy, etc.' (Suda 1, 87).
άêµý [f.] ‘point, edge; culminating point, prime, zenith' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂ek- ‘point, sharp’▷
•VAR The acc. άêμýν is used adverbially in the sense as yet, still'.
●DER άêµaños ‘in full bloom, timely' (A.), ákµnvóc ‘full-grown' ( 191). Denominative
verb àêµášw [v.] ‘to be in one's prime' (IA); thence: 1. åkµaotýs = άkuaïos (Hdn.),
oi άкμασταí name of a gymnastic club in Thyatira (inscr.); 2. ȧкµασtiкós = ákµałos
(Hp., Gal.).
•ETYM Derivative in -μn of the root in ►ảкý, ►ǎкpoç, etc.
äkuŋvos [adj.] ‘fasting (from food)' (Il., only in T). <IE *kemh₂- ‘get tired">
⚫ETYM A scholion on T 163 derives it from Aeol. ǎкuα, which Hesychius explains as
vησtɛía, vdɛa 'fasting, need'. Bechtel 1914 compares кoμшσα- уéμovσа 'filling' (H.),
which would point to privative à- and a zero grade -кµη- 'to fill'; this is highly
uncertain. Fur.: 369 compares Old Georg. si-qmili ‘hunger', etc., which is very
uncertain too. Blanc 1999: 317-338 proposes a derivation from *kemh2- (кáµvw) in the
sense to care (for)', which yields 'not properly cared for, neglected' (see also DELG
Supp.). This seems attractive (cf. лolúkuntos).
äкμwv, -ovoç [m.] ‘anvil' (Il.), also 'meteoric stone' (Hes. Th. 722), = oúpavóç n
σídŋpov 'heaven, iron' (H.), = àλɛtpíßavoç, Kúлpioɩ ‘pestle (Cypr.)' (H.). <IE *h₂ek-
mon- 'stone, heaven'>>
⚫COMP άкμó-εTov [n.] (Hom.) 'base of an anvil', with the root of tíðnµu.
⚫DER Diminutive άкuóvtov (Aisop.).
⚫ETYM Old word for 'stone', found in several languages: Skt. áśman- [m.] 'stone,
heaven', cf. the glosses meaning of ǎкuwv as 'heaven'; Av. asman- 'stone, heaven',
OP asman- 'heaven'; Lith. akmuō, -eñs 'stone' (with regular depalatalization before
m; āšmens ‘sharp side, edge' with aš- from other positions). The relation of these
words to OCS kamy, -ene 'stone' and the Germanic group ON hamarr 'hammer'
àkóvitov
53
(originally made of stone) is much discussed. One supposes the root ak- ‘sharp' in
►ȧкn, etc. On these questions see the litt. in Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 137, e.g. Maher JIES
1 (1973): 441ff. and Mallory & Adams 1997: 547.
ǎкvηστiç [f.] 'backbone' (A. R. 4, 1403: εл' äкvηotiv); name of a plant (Nic. Th. 52).
<GR➤
⚫ETYM It is supposed that кατ' äкνηστɩv stands for older кaτà кvñστɩv ‘rasp' (к 161),
(Wackernagel Glotta 2 (1910): 1, Fraenkel Glotta 4 (1913): 42, Leumann 1950: 49); on
KVÑOTIÇ SEE ► -Kvaiw.
äкoτη, -ov [m.] 'bedfellow, husband' (Il.). <IE *kei- 'lie, be situated'>
⚫COMP лαрáкOLTIÇ (II.).
⚫ETYM Secondarily built on ǎкoɩɩç [f.], on which see Chantraine REGr. 59-60 (1946-
1947): 225f.: the idea that the woman is the one sharing the bed of the man is more
natural than the other way around; also, the feminine is more frequent. With
copulative ά- and koitŋ or koītos ‘bed' (Chantraine 1933: 26ff. and 113f.). The psilosis
may be analogical after äλoxoç or dialectal (Lesbian, Ionic). See ►кɛчμai.
äкoλos [m.] 'bit, morsel' (p 222.). <PG?►
•VAR Boeot. acc. to Stratt. 47, 7.
•ETYM Possibly of foreign origin; cf. Phrygian ẞɛкoç αккaλos (Haas 1966: 84). A
connection with Skt. aśnáti 'to eat' does not explain the formation. A suggestion by
Fur.: 371 is to connect it to кóλov, a type of food preserved in pots (pap. III³); Ath. 6,
262a and Eust. explain it as ǹ τpoon. Nothing suggests an identity with ǎкulos
'acorn'.
ákóλovoç [adj.] 'following; corresponding' (Att., com.).
⚫VAR Often substantivized [m., f.] 'follower, companion'.
⚫DER Diminutive άкoλovíσкoç (Ptol. Euerg.), abstract aкolovía retinue,
attendants; sequence, succession, consequence' (S., Pl.), mostly as a philosophical
term. Denominative άкoλovéw [v.] ‘to follow' (Ar.), whence áкoλoúŋoıç (Arist.)
and ákoλovėŋtikóç [adj.] (Arist..).
⚫ETYM Derived from кéλɛvos 'path' with copulative à-. The double ablaut seems
surprising, but there are parallels (see Van Beek fthc.b); it does not point to vowel
assimilation.
άкóvŋ [f.] ‘whetstone' (Pi.). ◄IE *hek- ‘sharp, point'>
●DER ȧkováw [v.] 'to whet' (IA), nominal derivations άкóvησç (H., Suid.), ȧкovητńs
(Ed. Diocl., Hdn.); further άкóviov name of a medicine for the eye (Dsc.), ȧкovíaç
fish name (Numen. apud Ath. 17, 326a).
⚫ETYM Formation in -óvη like лεрóvη, ßɛλóvŋ, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 207), with ȧк-
as in ►άкý, ►άкµý, etc. For the suffix -n-, cf. ►ǎкwv.
άêóvĩtov [n.] the poisonous plant ‘Aconitum' (Thphr.), but also other plants, see
André 1956. <PG?►
•DER ȧKOVITIKÓç (X.).

=== page 051 ===

54
ǎkopva
•ETYM Derived by the ancients from άкovτí 'without dust', i.e. without struggle /
fight (áкóvτоÇ Q. S.), therefore 'invincible', because of its deadly effect.
Semantically, this is hardly possible. Cf. Jüthner Glotta 29 (1942): 73ff., Strömberg
1940: 150 A. 1. Fur.: 121 connects it with кový, кwvoç. A substrate word is in any case
probable.
ǎкopva [f.] 'fish thistle, Cnicus Acarna' (Thphr.). <PG(V) >
•VAR (σ)ópvos, see below.
•ETYM On the final short -a, see Chantraine 1933: 100ff. Strömberg 1944: 17 compares
kópvos. kevtpoμvpoívŋ, Σikeλoí ‘butcher's broom (plant name)' (H.) and σкópvoç.
kópvos, µupoívŋ tò qutóv ‘myrtle'. It seems possible that άkopvós (óкopvós)
‘grasshopper' derives from ǎkopva (Strömberg), cf. áкavеíaç ‘grasshopper' beside
ǎkavea 'thorn, thistle'. The ȧ- is a Pre-Greek prothetic vowel, and did not arise by
connection with ảк- 'sharp'. The variation ȧ-/ σ-/ zero, the cluster -pv- and the short
-a all point to a Pre-Greek word.
ǎkopov [n.] 'yellow flag, Iris Pseudacorus' (Dsc., Gal.). <?>
•ETYM The ancients derived the word from кópη ‘pupil of the eye'; it would be used
to care for the pupil. See Strömberg 1940: 98. Fur.: 359 compares кúpa, which would
be the Libyan form (Ps.-Dsc. 2, 169).
ǎkoç [n.] 'cure, medicine' (Il.). <?>
•DIAL Myc. a₂-ke-te-re /hakestēres/, ja-ke-te-re /jakestēres/.
•COMP ȧq-, έq-aкéoμα (Delph.).
•DER Denominative verb áкéoµat ‘to cure; repair' (II.). Thence 1. áкéσμaτa 'remedy'
(Il., Pi., A., inscr.); άкɛσµós ‘healing' (Call.), áкéσµov. ¡áƒчµov ‘healing' (H.); 2.
ǎкɛσɩs 'healing' (Hdt., inscr.); áкéσчµos ‘id.' (Plu.) and άкéσtoç epithet of Apollo
(Paus.), ákɛσíaç iaτpós ‘healer' (Phot.). 3. áкéστwp epithet of Apollo (E. Andr. 900),
fem. åкɛσtopíç (Hp.), abstract ȧкεστopía ‘art of healing' (A. R.). 4. åkeσtýp
'tranquilizing' (Xalivóc, S. OC 714 [lyr.]), ȧкεστηрoç 'healing' (App.) and
άкεστηpιov 'tailor's shop' (Lib.); Акεστηрídηs PN (Styra). Feminines άкɛστpíç
'midwife' (Hp.) and άкéστpiα 'tailor woman' (Antiph., Luc.). 5. ȧкɛotŃs [m.]
'patcher, tailor' (X., Lyc.), fem. ȧкɛotídɛç ‘bars in furnaces' (Dsc. 5, 74). Instrument
nouns: 6. άkéσtpa [f.] ‘darning needle' (Luc., pap.), 7. äkɛσtpov [n.] ‘medicine' (S.).
Adjectives: άкɛσtós ‘curable' (N 115, Hp., Antipho), originally from ǎkoç, but
interpreted as derived from άкéoµai; άkeσtikǹ téxvn 'tailor's trade' (Democr., Pl.).
Also ȧкn 'healing' (Hp.), probably from ȧкéoμat. From ȧкý perhaps *ǎкчμoç (Cic.
Att. 10, 12a, 4), see Arbenz 1933: 93, Thomas 1912: 125ff. Also výkeotos (Hes.), which
(beside ȧváкεστoç, άvýкεστoç) seems to be from *n-h₂k-, but could be analogical in
view of the Myc. form with j-. PN'Enкías (Attica; Pailler Lettre de Pallas 4 (1996):
8).
●ETYM Etymology unknown. The compounds with ảo- and έo-, as well as the Myc.
form with j-, seem to point to original yod. DELG's reconstruction *iēk-/iǝk- is
impossible, as *eh,/ h, would have resulted in *к-. An original root *Hieh,k- seems
possible. It is quite thinkable that the psilotic forms are epicisms or Ionic forms. A
55
connection with OIr. hicc 'healing' has been suggested, but its relation to MW iach
'healthy' is uncertain (Schrijver 1995: 103).
άкOστη [f.] 'barley' (Nic. Al. 106). <?>
•VAR ȧyoστaí, -έw (AB 213 [gramm.]).
⚫DER Denominative verb in the ptc. ȧkoσtýσas (Z 506, O 263) 'well-fed, of ïëлoç.
Unclear is άкóστɩλa· έλáxiστa 'slightest, not at all' (H.). koσtaí = åkoσtý (H.) may
have lost its vowel, see Kuiper 1956: 221.
•ETYM Hesychius calls the word Cyprian; the scholion on Z 506, Thessalian, as a
word for food in general (cf. Bechtel 1921, 1: 204). It is compared with Lat. acus -eris
[n.] ‘chaff, Go. ahs and OHG ahir [n.] ‘ear (of corn)' (see Frisk), but the analysis, in
which a suffix -τn with substantivizing function is added to *akos- (comparing Lat.
onus-tus, venus-tus and perhaps locus-ta), is rather weak; an e-grade *akes- would be
expected. Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1961): 652 proposes *ako(n)stā < *akont-tā
'barbed', from the word for ‘javelin', ►äkwv. However, the forms with -y- and
кoστaí, if these are old, rather point to foreign origin. See ►äxvn.
ȧkoúw [v.] 'to hear', also 'to obey, be called' (II.). <IE *h₂keus- 'hear'>
•VAR Perf. áкnkoa. άkevei tŋpɛi, Kúлρioɩ 'watches (over), observes (Cypr.)' (H.).
•COMP Vηкovστέw < *ņ-h₂k-. Often prefixed: vлaкoúw 'to be obedienť, úŕýkoos,
ÈÑAкOÚW, έлÝкOOS, KATAKOÚW, Katýkoos, etc.
●DER άkový (II.), άkoń ‘hearing, tiding; ear' (with shortening in hiatus) < *akḍā <
akḍhā < *akowhā < *akowsā. Diminutive άкoïdiov (gloss.), denominative verb
άкoάη άкoúεç (H.), cf. the discussion on áкováčoμa below, whencе ȧкоαστñрεs.
ȧруη τɩç ларà Mɛταлоντíоç 'kind of magistrature (Metap.)' (H.). 2. äкovσiç
'hearing', plur. 'sounds' (Arist.), åкoúσчoç 'fit for hearing' (S.). 3. ǎкovσμa 'sound,
rumor, (oral) teachings' (S. OC 518 [lyr.], X., Arist.). Diminutive åкovσµátov (Ps.-
Luc. Philopatr.), άkovσµatikós (Iamb.). 4. ákovoτns ‘listener, pupil' (Men., D. H.,
Phld.), ȧкovστηptov lecture hall, audience' (Gal., Them., Porph.). 5. áкovστós
‘audible' (h. Merc., IA), άкovστí(w 'to make hear' (LXX); άкovσtiкóç ‘ptng. to
hearing' (Arist., Epic.). Deverbative άкováčoμai [v.] ‘to hear, listen' (Hom., Hp.),
rarely act. -άw; formally, this could also derive from άкový. Desiderative άкovσɛíw
(S., H.).
⚫ETYM Related to Go. hausjan 'to hear' as *h₂kous-ie/o-. ȧкoúw is from *άкovo-yw; cf.
άкovστós, йкovσμat. The primary verb may be found in the gloss áкɛúεt. The word
has often been explained as a compound from åк- ‘sharp' and oʊç, but this is not
certain. In support of such a compound, wτ-αкovστέw 'to eavesdrop' may be
compared within Greek. See KOέW.
àkpāńs, -és →ăkpos.
ȧкpaɩový, -és [adj.] 'unmixed, pure, sheer; untouched, inviolate' (E.). ◄PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 159 compares άкpαлуηs (mss. Lysipp. fr. 9 apud EM 531, 56 = Et. Gud.
338, 15). If this is reliable, it is a substrate word (л/ Q, a/ aɩ).
àkpaquý入a →àxpadauý入a.

=== page 052 ===

56
άkpatíšoµai → kepávvvu.
ȧкpaτíčoμaι
ảêpάxoλoç [adj.] ‘raging passionately' (Ar.). <IE *kerh₂- ‘mix’▷
⚫DER Abstract ȧкpãxoλía, Ion. àкpηxoλín (Hp.); denominative ȧкpãxoλέw [v.] (Pl.).
⚫ETYM Literally "with unmixed bile"”, from *àкpắτ-xolos, with *άкpáç = ǎкpāτoç, cf.
ȧкρητó-xoλoç (Нp.) and ɛúкpáç = ɛüкpātos ‘well-mixed'. Later, it was changed to
åкpóxoloç (Arist.). Brugmann IF 17 (1904-1905): 174ff. assumes the same first
member occurs in áкpýлedoç. ǹ áуaðń (scil. yñ) (H.). See ►кεpávvчµ.
ȧкρεµáv, -óvoç [m.] 'bough, branch' (Simon.); on the mg. see Strömberg 1937: 141f.,
54f. APG(V)►
•VAR Accentuation after Hdn. Gr. 1, 33; the mss. mostly have -έµwv.
•ETYM The old etymology with äкpoç is improbable, as the formation is unclear (see
Chantraine 1933: 172f.). It is most improbable that кpɛµóv (Eratosth.) is due to
►êpɛµávvvļu. Like the etymology, it is a desperate attempt to reduce the word to
known elements. Fur.: 115 adduces άypeµáv. кáµaž, λaµñáç, dópv ‘pole, torch, shaft'
(H.), which shows that it is a substrate word.
àкpīßńs, -és [adj.] ‘exact, precise' (Hp.). ◄GR?►
●COMP ȧкpißo-λoyía (Arist.).
•DER ȧкpíẞɛia 'precision' (IA); denominatives: 1. àкpiẞów [v.] 'to investigate
accurately, etc.' (Att.), also intr. 'to be exact' (Arist.). Thence άкpíßwσiç ‘exact
observance (J.) and ảкpíßwµa ‘precise account, exact knowledge' (Phld., Epicur.). 2.
άкpiẞɛúw [V] 'to use accurately, give precise instructions' (S. E., Did., pap.). 3.
άкpɩßášw [v.] ‘to investigate accurately, etc.', also pass. 'to be prouď (LXX, Aq.,
Thd.), whence άкpɩßaσµóç, -aσµa 'precise investigation', also ‘law, legislation',
-αστns ‘investigator', also ‘legislator'.
•ETYM The explanation by Schwyzer Glotta 12 (1923): 12ff., that the word is from
ǎkpos and εiẞw with early itacism, is hardly acceptable. Tichy MSS 36 (1977): 151-172
explains the word from äкpıç 'mountain top', in the dative-locative in -ī, and ẞñvai
'to go'.
ȧkpíç, -ídoç [f.] 'grasshopper' (Il.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Hardly related to кpíw ‘creak' (Strömberg 1944: 15ff), which leaves the ȧ-
unexplained. Winter 1950: 15 connects it to képka• ảêpíç (H.); Fur.: 127 accepts this,
comparing yéλyiç next to ǎyλis for the variation. Of course, a substrate word for a
grasshopper is not unexpected. However, Furnée's further comparison with äxηpov.
ảêpída (H.) (< *ảxεpdov [Bechtel 1921, 2: 671]) is less convincing.
.
ǎкριστɩv · кλεлτρiαv, åλετpíða, Þpúyto 'female thief, female slave who grinds corn
(Phrygian)' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown. Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934): 205f. suggested that the suffix -(i)stis
is Phrygian; a suffix -st- could be Pre-Greek.
ȧкpoάoμai [v.] 'to hearken, obey' (X.), ó áкpоáµεvoç may secondarily mean 'reader'
(Philostr.). <GR>
ăktaívw
57
●DER ȧкpóασiç hearing, obeying, also ‘lecture (hall)' (IA). άкpóαдa 'what is heard',
e.g. 'rumor, lecture, song' (X., Arist., Plb.), plur. also personified as 'lecturer, singer'
(Plb.); thence ȧкρoªµаτкóç 'fit (only) for hearing' (Plu.); άкpoατý ‘listener, pupil',
also 'reader' (Att., Hell.), whence άкpoatɩкóç; άкpоаτηplov 'lecture hall, audience'
(Act. Ap., Ph., Plu.); άкpoášoµαι (Epich.).
•ETYM Commonly derived from a univerbation of ▶äкpos and ►oʊs that denoted
the top of the ear, whence ‘to prick the ears, be keen to hear' (Frisk GHÅ 56 : 3
(1950): 21); however, cf. Szemerényi SMEA 3 (1967): 69ff. The derivation is
straightforward semantically, but some formal difficulties remain.
=
àpoßvotia → tóaOn.
ǎкpoç, -a, -ov [adj.] ‘at the farthest point, topmost, outermost' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂ek- ‘sharp,
point'>
•VAR Old substantivized forms äкpa [f.], äкpov [n.] 'highest or farthest point,
headland, cape', Hom. кατ äкρηs (лódios) 'from the highest point down', hence
'completely, utterly', also кat äкpηεv (which became кatà кpñßèv by association
with Kápa); see Leumann 1950: 56ff.
⚫COMP ȧкрóлоλç (Od.), the Iliad still has ǎкpη лóλç, see Risch IF 59 (1949): 20;
άкpans epithet of the wind (ẞ 421, & 253, Hes. Op. 594) is often interpreted as
'blowing vehemently', but probably originally 'blowing on/ from the heights'; also
adverbial άкpαɛì nλɛĩv (Arr.).
=
●Der äkpis, -10s [f.] ‘hill-top, mountain peak' (Od.), always plur., see on ►ökpɩç; sing.
only Epigr. Gr. 1035, 8. άкpałoç ‘dwelling on heights', epithet of several gods, also
ǎкpoç (Opp.). áкpía. ǹ Aеŋvā ¿v "Apyɛ (H.), also name of other goddesses, ȧкpíaι.
τà ǎкpα τwν ópέwv 'mountain-tops' (H.). Substantives: άкpóτηs 'highest point,
completion, perfection' (Hp., Arist., Phld.). äкpwv, -wvos [m.] 'extremity' (Hippiatr.
7), diminutive άкpwváptov (ibid.), abstract ȧкpwvía (A. Eu. 188), probably
'mutilation' (cf. the discussion on åкpшτηpiaσµóç below). ȧкpwτηptov 'projecting
part, e.g. promontory, sternpost of a ship, etc.', plur. also ‘extremities of the body'
(IA), probably directly from äкpoç, cf. deoµóç: deoµwtńpiov. From άкpwτýpiov:
άкpwτηpiá¶w ‘to remove the stern, mutilate, amputate' (IA), cf. άкpwτepñoai. kóyai
* ȧxpɛɩwσα 'to beat, render useless' (H.), also 'to jut out like a promontory' (Plb.,
Str.). Verbal nouns άкpшτηрιασμóуç (Dsc.), ȧкpwτηpiaσis (gloss.). Denominative
verbs to ǎкpoç: άкpí(w 'to go on tiptoe' (E.), 'τä äкpa έσ¤íɛɩv' (sch. Ø 12); on
άкρúσσει άкρоãται, έкшν oу úлaкovεɩ, „poσлoεt̃τal (H.) see Frisk GHÅ 56: 3
(1950): 22.
•ETYM The root *hek- is widespread in IE, and several r-derivatives from it are
found: Skt. áśri- [f.] 'corner, sharp side', catur-aśra- ‘quadrangular', Lat. ācer, -ris, -re
(with unexplained length), Gaul. Axrotalus PN 'with high forehead', Olr. ér 'high',
OLith. aštras, OCS ostro 'sharp'. Hitt. hekur 'rock sanctuary' is unrelated; cf. Puhvel
HED s.v. See further άкý, άкµý, and Ŏкpiç. A connection with the root *h₂ek-
has been assumed unjustly for many words, e.g. ►áкaλńcŋ, ►ákóσtŋ, and ► ǎкopva.
άкtaívw [v.] ‘to erect' (A.), of σtáσiv, ßáoiv. ◄?►

=== page 053 ===

58
átéa
•VAR Aor. άкταɩvwσal (Anacr.), see Immisch PhW 48 (1928): 908. Unclear are
áktail wv. ákta(wv, apodvioýuevog, ň ópuñs tanpov, H fletewpilwv ‘willing, full of
impulse, or lifting (the spirit)' (H.), åktaívev. µetewpíɛɩ 'to lift (the spirit)' (H.);
úroaktaívovto. τpεµov 'were trembling' (H.), as a v.l. for úлepiktaívovto (¥ 3), of
лóбεç. Also ȧлαкtaívwv· Ó кɩvɛÏσða µǹ dvváµεvos 'unable to move' (H.).
⚫ETYM The only suggestion is that it derives from ǎyw through *ảкτáw or *äktw (cf.
Schwyzer: 705f., Schwyzer 1937: 70), but this is doubted by DELG. Cf. Bechtel 1914.
άкTÉα [f.] 'elder-tree, Sambucus nigra' (Emp.). <?>
•VAR Contracted άêtñ; also áкtéoç [m.].
•DER ǎкTIVOS (Thphr.).
•ETYM On the suffix -έa, which forms tree names, see Chantraine 1933: 92 (iτéa,
лɩɛλéɑ). Witczak Linguistica Baltica 1 (1992): 201-211) connects it with Arm. hac'i
‘ash', which he disassociates from oεúa. Borrowed from Greek are Lat. acte (Plin.)
and OHG atuh, at(t)ah.
ȧкτý 1 [f.] 'promontory, rocky coast, rough shore, edge' (Il.). <PG?, IE?>
●DER ảкtañoç, -a, -ov ‘located at or belonging to the coast' (Th., Hp., Call.); the fem.
άкτaía is also the name of a plant (Plin.); see Strömberg 1940: 115 (also on ǎкtov and
άкτívη). ǎкτιos epithet of Pan (Theoc.) and Apollo (A. R.), ǎкτioν = άкτý (Ael.).
áêtítŋs [m.] ‘who lives on the coast (A. P.), áкtítŋs λíos 'stone from Piraeus or
Argolis' (IG, S.). άкτάw [v.] 'to banquet' (which would derive from *to banquet on
the shore', Plu. 2, 668b) is rather from ►ȧкτý 2.
⚫ETYM Derivation from ȧк- 'sharp' is possible acc. to Frisk and DELG, but if Fur.: 127
is right in comparing öxêŋ, -os ‘shore, bank' (which seems quite convincing), it
could be a substrate word (variations α/ o, кt/ X☺). Cf. ►áktý 2.
άкτη 2 [f.] 'corn' (II.), often Aŋµntεpos or àλôítoυ ȧкτη, for which reason it cannot
mean 'flour', as DELG rightly points out. Cf. åкτη· τpoo̟é̟ ‘nourishment' (H.).
<PG(V)►
⚫ETYM There is no trace of initial digamma. Fur.: 127 compares *oxon in ►εoxos;
see also ibid. 320 on oxý. This evidence cannot be ignored, and áкτý ‘corn' is a
substrate word. Skoda 1993: 275-283 thinks that the word means 'ear (of corn)' and
therefore belongs to ȧк- 'sharp'.
åktŋpís, -ídos [f.] ‘staff (Achae. 21), 'bar of wood supporting a chariot-pole' (Poll. 10,
157).<?>
•ETYM Unknown. The explanation as a univerbation of άкtaívw (*ảкtáw) and
épɛídw (Frisk) seems most improbable.
άktís, -īvos [f.] ‘ray, beam of light' (II.), also ‘spoke of a wheel (AP). <?>
■COMP Frequent as a first member.
•DER ȧKTIVwτós 'provided with ȧкtīvεç' (inscr. Delos IVª Michel 815, Ph.), áкtɩvádŋs
[adj.] ‘like beams' (Philostr.), åкúvηdóv [adv.] ‘id.' (Luc.).
•ETYM άкτíç is built like dɛλoíç, yλwxic, and wdic, and probably derived from a noun.
It resembles Skt. aktú-, but the meaning of the latter is very difficult (see Renou 1937:
6; Kuiper Vāk 2 (1953): 81f., 89f.); one meaning seems to be ‘night', another has been
59
derived from añj- 'to smear', but Kuiper thinks it means 'ray, light'. This has been
connected with *no/ekt- ‘night, the zero grade of which is also found in Go. uhtwo
[f.] < PGm. *uŋxtwōn- < *ŋk"t-u-n-) 'dawn' (Lith. anksti ‘early' requires an initial
laryngeal, which excludes derivation from 'night', as Gr. vú shows that there was no
laryngeal.) Relation of åкτíç to the word for 'night' is excluded, however, as it shows
no trace of a labiovelar. Thus it remains without an etymology.
ǎкvλoç [m., f.] the edible acorn of the Quercus Ilex (K 242). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Connection with Skt. aśnáti ‘eat' or with ►äkoλos is improbable. It is rather a
substrate word (Fur.: 25532) because of aкuλaïov, since -vλ- is a frequent Pre-Greek
suffix.
ȧkwкń [f.] 'point of a lance or sword, etc.' (II., Theoc., Opp.). <IE *hek- ‘sharp, point'>
⚫ETYM Reduplicated formation of unknown structure: *h₂(e)k-h₂ök- or (hardly
feasible) *h₂k-o-h₂k-, from the root *hek- ‘sharp' (see ► áάкý).
äkwv, -ovτoç [m.] ‘javelin, dart' (II.). <IE? *h₂ek- ‘sharp, point'>
⚫DER Diminutive άкóvτov (h. Merc. 460, Hdt., Pl.), áкovτíaç [m.] 'kind of snake',
also 'meteor', because of its speed (Nic.), ȧкovτíλoç [m.] = ȧкovτíaç ‘id.' (H.). Verb
άкovτíw [V.] 'to throw a javelin' (Il.), verbal nouns 1. άкOVτɩστÚç 'game of the dart'
(Il.); 2. ákóvtiσiç 'throwing the javelin' (X.); 3. áкovtσµós ‘id., shooting (of stars)'
(X., Str., Arr.); 4. áкóváσµa ‘distance of a dart's throw' (X.), ‘javelin' (Str., Plu.); 5.
àKOVTLOÍa
άкovτɩσíα = άкóvτσι (SIG 1060, 1062), cf. Chantraine 1933: 86. Agent nouns:
ákovtiotýs [m.] (II.), cf. Schwyzer: 500a; more recent ákovtiotýp ‘id.' (E.); also used
as an adjective in Opp. and Nonn.; ȧкoντστηр also as 'spring, fountain', see Zingerle
Glotta 19 (1931): 72f. Further άкovτστpiov 'ballista' (Agath.); άкovτiσtiкós 'ptng. to
throwing the darť (Pl., X.).
•ETYM ǎkwv is considered to be a derivative -n- of the root in ►ảкý, etc. But there is
no proof for this, as ǎkaiva need not be a derivation of the stem of äкwv, so
perhaps the -vt-suffix is original. From other languages, we can compare Skt. aśáni-
'point of an arrow', Lat. agna ‘ear (of corn)' (which could be a substrate word, cf. De
Vaan 2008 s.v.), Gm., e.g. Go. ahana 'chaff, and ON ogn, pl. agnar ‘id.'.
ảλáßa · µéλav ά уpáчoµεv ‘black [stuff] with which we write' (H.); ảλáßŋ. Mɩyvúc,
σrodós, kapkivos 'soot, embers, crab³, úлò dε Kʊлрíшν µαpíλŋ 'coal-dust (Cypr.)'
(H.); àλáßn ävepaкεs 'coals' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM See Petersson IF 34 (1914/1915): 241. Because of its structure, it is probably a
Pre-Greek word (note -aẞ-).
ảλáßaσtos [m.] 'vase without handles for storing perfumes', often made of alabaster
(Hdt.). <LW>
•VAR Later àλaẞáστрoç [m.], -τpov [n.].
■DER Diminutive àλaßáστov (Eub.); further ȧλaßáστрiov [n.] and ȧλaßaστpivn
(scil. Moτoµía) ‘alabaster quarry' (pap.); àλαßαστpítŋs (\íños) [m.] ‘alabaster',
àλaßaotītis rétрα (Callix.); ȧλaßάστρivos (pap.); ȧλaßαστpóv [m.] 'alabaster
quarry', àλaßaστpшvíτηs 'worker in an alabaster quarry' (pap.).

=== page 054 ===

60
àλáẞns
•ETYM Sethe Berl.Ak.Sb. 1933: 888f. explained the form as Egyptian: *a-la-baste 'vase
of the goddess Ebáste' (= Bubastis); this is doubtful. Fur.: 32926 uses the -p- as
evidence for a substrate word, but it could be analogical. The sequence -st- could be
Pre-Greek.
à入ápng →à入入áns.
áλačŵv, -óvoc [m., f.] ‘charlatan, quack, braggart, boaster' (Arist.). <?>
VAR Also as a adjective.
•DER ȧλačoviкóç 'boastful' (Hp., X., Arist.), àλačovíaç = ȧλačóv (Hdn.), àλašoσúvn
'bragging' (Aq.).
•ETYM ȧλaóv is identical with the Thracian EN Aλačov. Perhaps it simply became
an appellative, just like vandal (though with a different meaning). See Burkert RhM
105 (1962): 50f. Of course, this interpretation remains uncertain. Implausible is the
connection with Hitt. halzai- 'to cry, invoke' by Van Windekens KZ 100 (1987):
307f., which Kloekhorst 2008: 276f. analyses as *h₂lt-(0)i-.
ảλaɩ0ɛpéç [adj.] · Xλiapóv, ǹλiołɛpés ‘warm, warmed in the sun' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
ȧλaλá interjection (Pi.), also personified Aλaλá. <ONOM➤
•VAR Also ȧλaλaí (Ar.), also as a plur. substantive 'war cry, exultation' (Pi.).
•DER ảλaλŋtós [m.] ‘cry of war, of fear, of victory' (Il.); improbable Leumann 1950:
211 (connecting àλáλŋua 'to wander'). Denominative verb àλaλá(w 'to call ȧλaλá'
(mainly poetic), whence ȧλaλayчóç (Hdt., E., Arr.), àλáλaудa (Call., Plu.), ȧλaλayń
(S.).
⚫ETYM An elementary cry, like Skt. alalā-bhávant- (RV, 'making cheerful, of water).
See Theander Eranos 15 (1915): 98ff. and Kretschmer Glotta 9 (1918): 228ff. Cf.
►ελɛɛŨ, ►ỎλoλÚw.
ȧλávy, -vyyos [f.] 'gulping, choking' (Nic. Al. 18). <ONOM
⚫ETYM One suggests contamination of λúy 'hiccup' and another word, like ►ȧλúw
or åλάoдa; this is not very convincing. Does it contain aλaλá? It is rather a
primary onomatopoeic formation (with the Pre-Greek element -v[y]y-).
ȧλáoμα [v.] 'to wander, roam; to be banished' (II.). <IE *h₂elh₂- ‘wander, roam
about'>
•VAR Aor. áλýðŋv (Hom.), perf. áλáλŋoðaɩ, áλaλýµevos (Hom.) with present mg.
(cf. the accent, see Wackernagel Gött. Nachr. 1914: 117f., Chantraine 1942: 190). Late
áλaívw (see Schwyzer: 733).
•Der Deverbal äλŋ (Od., Hp., trag.), whence àλɛía (AB, H.); ảλýtŋs [m.], also [adj.]
'wanderer, rover; vagrant' (Od.), Dor. ȧλáτaç, also a PN; àλñτiç, -1dos [f.] 'beggar,
refugee; roaming about' (Od., Hdt., trag.), åλŋtiкós (D. Chr.). To ɑlýτηs
denominative ȧλŋtɛów [v.] 'to roam about (as a beggar or refugee)', thence ȧλŋtɛía,
àλatɛía (A., E. [lyr.]). Rare άλŋtýp name of a dance (Aristox.), aλnτwp. iɛpeús
‘priest' (H.), perhaps originally “beggar priest", on which see Masson RPh. 89 (1963):
214-218.
|
ä入aotog
61
Further ȧλnuwv 'roving' (Od.), åληчoσúvη (Man.). Action nouns: άλŋτúç 'roving'
(Call., Man.), äλα óðлopíα 'journey' (H.). ȧλáλayč. ǹ лλávη ‘wandering' (H.)
has a strange formation; acc. to Leumann 1950: 211 also ảλaλŋtų (ПI 78), but cf. on
-à入a入á.
•ETYM άλάoμaɩ is an old intensive verb in -άoμat, which can be compared with Latv.
aluôt ‘id.' and PIt. *ala- in Lat. ambulō ‘to walk', U amb-oltu 'must go around'. LIV²
reconstructs a root *h₂elh₂- for PIE. See ȧλéoμat, äλios, ►åλúw, ►ǹλáoкw.
ảλaós [adj.] ‘blind' (Il., trag. [lyr.], A. R.). <?►
●VAR Cf. к 493 = µl 267 µávtios (-nos?) ảλaoũ, which provides a metrical problem.
•DER Denominative verb ȧlaów (Od., AP), cf. Wackernagel 1916: 127. Thence
àλawτúç (1503) ‘blinding, blindness'.
⚫ETYM No etymology. The explanation from λáw 'see' is problematic, as a privative
formation should have barytone accentuation. A. B. 1095 says that the word was
Cypriot, which may mean that it belongs to the Achaean layer in Homer (Ruijgh
1957: 160). The usual word for 'blind' is ‣tuqλóç.
ȧλaná w [v.] 'to drain, plunder, destroy' (Hom.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Аor. άλáлažα, fut. áλaлážw. The future λaлáчav is found twice in A. (Th. 47,
531; doubtful in Ag. 130); pres. λaлáσσw 'to empty' is used as a medical term. A. Eu.
562 probably has λaлadvóv (cod. λέл-) = àλaлadvóv. Cf. further λaлášɛv.
ÉKKEVOŨV, άQ' OÜ кai τò öρvyµa 'to empty out, whence also digging' (H.).
•DER ȧλaлadvóç ‘exhausted, feeble' (Hom.), often with negation, and with analogical
-8 (Schwyzer: 489); ȧλaлadvoσúvn (Q. S.).
ETYM A connection with Skt. álpa- 'small' and Lith. alpstù 'to faint' is formally
impossible. The interchange of the prothetic vowel points to a substrate word. Fur.:
371 comparеs λалαрóç (like áкidvóc: áкipóc), which is not evident semantically. The
original meaning seems to have been 'to empty'; cf. the compounds with ε-. The
word has been compared (but hardly correctly) with λáлaðoç, λañáρŋ by DELG and
Fur.: 371.
älapa · tò toũ dópatos eiç tòv aúλòv tñc έidopatídos ¿µniittov. † kápva Пovtiká.
<kaì dévdpa áλapiai> ảq' wv yívetai tà dópaτa (H.), cf. EM 57, 53. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Ėlápat• Tà ĖV T CỦA TV Sopátv appo,óueva (H.).
•ETYM The interchange a/ & clearly points to a substrate word. See Fur.: 347.
äλaσtos [adj.] uncertain mg. (also of related words), see DELG. Perhaps ‘insufferable',
as an epithet of лévеoç and äxoç? Perhaps accursed' as a vocative (ǎλaστε, e.g. X
261)? <?>
•DER Original noun àλáστwp '‘avenging spirit' or 'he who does deeds which merit
vengeance', either from ȧλαστéw or directly from ǎλaστoç; attributively of gods, but
also of men; a PN in Hom. Also àλáστopos (A., S.); derivative àλaστopía (J.).
Denominative verb àλaστéw (Hom., Call.), èлаλαστησаç (α 252), denoting an
emotion, perhaps ‘full of wrath', or 'distraught'? Also àλaστaívw. Svσлaðέw ‘to
suffer a hard fate' (H.).

=== page 055 ===

62
ä入 yos
ETYM Uncertain. One connects Aaveávw, assuming an original meaning 'one who
cannot forget or be forgotten'. Frisk correctly considers it formally impeccable, but
hypothetical with regard to the meaning. DELG accepts it. Muller's explanation
(Muller in Teeuwen 1929: 649ff., Muller Mnem. 57 (1929): 116ff.), that it is from
►λáw 'to see' with ȧ- from *n-, zero grade of έv ("invisus, invisor, qui invidendo
nocet”), is artificial and formally problematic (*h,n- giving έv-).
äλyos [n.] ‘pain, grief (Il.). <?►
●DER åλyɛɩvós ‘painful, grievous' (A.) < *åλyɛo-vós, àλɛyɛɩvós (epic), see ►ȧλέyw;
ȧλyɩvóɛç ‘id.' (poet.), metrical device, see Chantraine 1933: 271; άλynpós ‘id.' (LXX)
belongs to aλyέw (see below); άpyaλéos ‘id.' (Hom.), dissimilated from *ảλyaλéoc;
thence ȧpyaλɛóτηs (Ph., Eust.). Denominative verbs: 1. åλyέw 'to suffer, be worried'
(IA), fut. -now. Thence äλyŋous 'suffering' (S., Ar.) and äλyŋua 'pain' (Hp., S., E.,
Men.), further ȧλуndóv 'pain' (Ion. poet., Pl.); on åλynpós see above. 2. ȧλyúvw 'to
cause pain',, -qμa 'to suffer pain' (trag.). Thence aλyuvois (Phlp., Olymp.) and
ȧλyuvτnp (Zos.). Primary grades of comparison ȧλyiwv and ǎλуiστos (Hom., trag.).
⚫ETYM The words is often connected with àλéyw. Although this has a different
meaning 'to take care, mind, heed', a development to 'worry, grief is conceivable (cf.
MoDu. zorgen 'to take care' beside MoE sorrow). Cf. Seiler 1950: 85, Seiler Word 11
(1955): 288, and Szemerényi 1964: 148ff, who defends the identity.
ảλdaívw [v.] ‘to make grow, strengthen' (A.). <IE *h₂el- 'feed, rear'>
•VAR ηλdavε (σ 70 = w 368), rather impf. of ȧλSávw.
•COMP As a second member -aλdńc, in ávaλdýs ‘infertile' (Hp., Ar., Arat.), veaλdýs
(Opp.) and vɛoaλdns (H.) 'newly grown', all direct derivations from the verb.
•DER ȧλSnoкw intr. 'grow' (Y 599), also trans. (Theoc.), ȧλdioкávw (Hdn. Gr. 2, 716).
Iterative preterite ȧλdnσaσкε (Orph. L. 370). Deverbal äλdŋ 'growth' (Hdn. Gr. 1,
311); άλdǹɛç ‘growing' (Max.), ȧλdшos 'causing growth' (Method. apud EM).
•ETYM άλdaívw, ½λdave, and áλdñoкw replace an unattested root verb, an extension
in -- from the root of avaλtos and vεāλýs; cf. ȧλaívw. The root *h₂el- is
found in Lat. alō 'to feed' and Go. alan 'to grow up'.
ȧλća 1 [f.] 'warmth', specifically of the sun (Hom.). <IE *suelH- ‘singe, burn'>
•VAR Ion. ȧλén. Perhaps also ȧλéa, cf. on àλɛaívεiv below.
•COMP Seе ►εлãλýs.
•DER άλɛɛvós exposed to the sun, hot' (Ion., X., Arist.), after paɛivó etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 196); άλuкpós lukewarm' (Nic.), after aλuкpós or from false split
of ¤² àλvкpóç? Cf. åλvкτpóv. εüðivov 'splendid (of weather)' (H.); ȧλɛóv. Оɛpµòv ½
Xλapóv hot, warm' (H.); ȧλens (S. Ph. 859), not ȧdens as per Reiske. Denominative
verb: àλɛaívw ‘to warm (oneself)' (Hp., Archil., Ar., etc.), aspirated åλ- in Attic acc.
to Eust. 1636. Thence ȧλɛavτɩкóç 'fit for warming' (S. E.). 2. ȧλɛά(w 'to be warm,
warm up' (Arist., Gal., H.).
•ETYM Derived from the verb seen in Germanic and Baltic (OE swelan 'to burn
slowly', MoHG schwelen, Lith. svilti intr. 'to singe'), with a suffix -έa (Chantraine
1933: 91). For *hFaλ-, this implies a reconstruction *sulH-e-, see εin. The
etymology was rejected by Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 653, who connects it with
1:
63
MIr. allas 'sweat', Hitt. allani ia-zi 'to sweat, perspire', as well as Lat. adoleō 'to burn
(as an offering)'.
ảλéa 2 → àλéoµai.
=>
áléyw [v.] 'to care for, mind, heed' (II.), mostly with negation. <IE *h₂leg- ‘care,
mind'>
•VAR Only pres.
●COMP Svo-ŋleyŃs originally 'who does not care, pitiless', secondarily associated
with aλyos (Hom.); ȧv-ŋλɛyns ‘id.' (Q. S.), to be read for Hom. Tavηλɛyns (Bechtel
Herm. 39 (1904): 155f., Leumann 1950: 45; cf. avηλeyés. àqpóvtiotov 'unmindful',
probably for older *vn\ɛyns < *ṇ-h₂leg-.
•DER Enlargements ȧλεyí(w and ȧλεyúvw, both only pres. and impf.
•ETYM Although there is no etymology, the structure of the word suggests an IE
origin. An identity with aλyos is semantically improbable. De Lamberterie RPh. 71
(1997): 150 defends the connection with λέyw, which is unacceptable from the
perspective of laryngeal theory.
ǎλɛσov [n.] ‘drinking cup with two handles' (II.), also 'hip socket' (Marsyas apud Ath.
479c).<?>
•VAR ǎλɛσos [m.] (Ar.).
⚫ETYM No etymology; probably a loan.
àλɛítŋs [m.] ‘offender, criminal' (Il.). <IE *h₂leit- ‘offense' (?) ►
•COMP From the stem of the aorist åλu‍tó-ževoç ‘offending against a friend' (Pi.), with
metrical lengthening, e.g. ǹλɩtó-µŋvos ‘missing the right month', i.e. ‘born untimely’
(Il.). vnλeitides (Od.) to be read *vηλεiτɛɛç (Beekes 1969: 108f., 289), cf. vηλεiτnc
Antim. 177W; vη\eítns. åvaµáptηo 'blameless' LSJ Supp.; vηλitées. ávaµáptytol,
ávaítiol, [ǎxpno toɩ] ‘blameless, guiltless, [useless]' (H.) with vη- < *n-h₂leit-.
•Der åλɛitɛia• ǹ áµapría 'fault' (Suid.); ablauting åλoiτηs ‘avenger' (Emp.), Aλoītis
epithet of Athena (Lyc. 936); άλorτós 'criminal (Lyk. 136); ȧλoɩτaí. кoιvaí,
àµɑpτwλaí, noɩvai ‘common, faults, requitals' (H.); ȧλoτýεσσav. kovýv, ävavdpov
'common, husbandless' (EM).
Zero grade aor. λov, secondary pres. ȧλταívw 'to offend against, transgress'
(Hom.). From aλ₁τεïv: ȧλτ½µшv 'criminal' but also 'cursed' (II.), ààíäηoðúvé
'crime' (Opp.), àλíτŋµα ‘id.' (AP). Also ȧλτηpios 'breaking the law' (Att.); *åλτp is
unattested, but is also suggested by åλíτpia. ǹ áµ¤pτwλós 'transgressing woman' (Et.
Gud. 2) and ȧλτpós (below); åλitŋpós ‘id.' (S. OC 371), if not a mistake for -ǹptoç in
àλitŋpiódŋs ‘cursed' (Pl., D. C.). From åλɩτaívw further åλpós [m.] ‘criminal,
rogue', also [adj.] (Hom.). Thence ȧλiτpaívw = åλaívw (epic poet.), also ȧλiτpéw
(A. Eu. 316: άλτр@v codd., but aλτóv Dorat). Abstracts aτpía (S., Ar.),
ȧλpoσúvη (A. R., AP).
⚫ETYM On the relation of the Greek forms, see Tichy Glotta 55 (1977): 160ff. The
ablaut suggests an old IE form. The only cognate proposed is PGm. *laipa- in OHG
leid 'harm' and ON leiðr 'offensive'. On åλτηµwv, Keany Glotta 59 (1981): 76-69 is of
doubtful value.

=== page 056 ===

64
ȧλɛíqw
àλɛíqw [v.] 'to anoint with oil' (Il.). <IE? *h₂leibh- ‘ointment', PG?>
•DIAL Myc. e-na-ri-po-to /en-aliptos/; a-re-pa-te /aleip¹atei/; a-re-pa-zo-o /aleipha-
zohos/ ‘boiler (\έw) of unguent.
•DER 1. äλɛap, -ατoç [n.] ‘unguent, anointing oil' (Il.) and äλɛqɑ [n.] (> Lat.
adeps), with a perhaps from *-nt, Szemerényi SMEA 2 (1967): 2364. Thence
åλeiqatítns (äptos) ‘bread baked with oil' (Epich.). 2. áλon ‘anointing, ointment,
grease' (IA), àλouaños [adj.] (Lyc. 579), also àλopɛiov 'Salbungszimmer' (Eust.), see
Chantraine 1933: 6of., and aλoupáw [v.] 'to smear with pitch' (Aq.). 3. äλɛıç
'anointing' (Ion. Hell.). 4. äλɛчµµа 'ointment, unguent' (IA), àλεчµµáτ (Diog.
apud D. L.) and àµατóðŋ (Нp.); Aeol. äλɩллα (EM 64, 40). 5. àλɛiás [f.]
'spreading [of ointment], shaving' (pap.). 6. àλɛíqiov. &) õpŵvtai oi åλεĩлtaɩ ‘which
is used by anointers' (H.). Agent nouns: άλεiлτηs ‘anointer, trainer of athletes'
(Arist., Hell.), àλeintikós (Plu.); ȧλɛɩtýp ‘id.' (Man.), fem. åλɛíëτpia (Lys., com.).
Thence, or directly from ȧλɛíqw, ȧλεлηpov (Alex. Com.). ȧλɛɛúc (inscr. Priene).
•ETYM Generally connected with λíñoç ‘fať, but this is impossible because of the
*-p- and the "prothetic" à-. A connection with aλívw is formally (*h₂lei(b)-) and
semantically easier. The suggestions by Szemerényi Gnomon 42 (1971): 653 are
improbable. Semantically close is Skt. limpáti 'smear, stick, adhere' (cf. Mayrhofer
EW Aia s.v. rep-), but Gr. -q- makes the comparison impossible (see λíлoç);
perhaps it is rather related to Go. bileiban ‘to stick', etc.? Cf. Pok. 670 (*leip-). In
principle, the interchanges observed could also point to substrate origin.
ȧλεкτρvwv, -óvos [m., f.] 'cock' (Thgn.). <GR?>
•DIAL Myc. PN a-re-ku-tu-ru-wo/Alektruōn/.
•ETYM The word seems to be built on åλéкτwp, -opos [m.] ‘cock' (Pi.), with the suffix
-vwv, as in ►áλкvóv ‘kingfisher'; however, note that the suffix is rare. ȧλέкTwp itself
is an agent noun from ►àλéεw 'to ward off.
ȧλέw [v.] 'to ward off, defend' (II.). <IE *h₂elk-, *h₂lek-s- 'ward off>
•Var ảλečńow, -ŋoa (Hom.); without -ŋ- med. aor. ȧλéžασðaɩ (Hom.), fut. άλéžo̟µai
(S.).
DIAL Myc. A-re-ke-se-u /Alekseus/; a-re-ko-to-re /Alektorei/.
•COMP As a first member aλε(1-), e.g. in àλɛčí-кaкoç (Hom.); also Aλéžav poç,
from which comes the Hittite rendering Alakšanduš. Sommer's view that it is
Anatolian in origin (Sommer IF 55 (1937): 187ff., Sommer 1948: 186ff.) is now
abandoned.
•DER άλériov ‘medicine' (Nik.), ǎλɛğıç ‘Hilfe, Abwehr' (Aristid., EM). On ảλéktwp,
from which ȧλεкτpuάv is derived.
From the stem with -ŋ- (cf. àλe¿ńow): åλéžŋois ‘defense, help' (Ion.), àλéžŋua
'defense, medicine' (Ion. poet.); ȧλɛητ 'defender' (Hom.), fem. ȧλεteipa (AP,
Nonn.), derivation pos 'helping out', ȧ
'medicine' (Hp.,
Thphr.); άλɛžńτwp (S.); ȧλešntikós (Alex. Aphr.).
•ETYM άλé- corresponds exactly with Skt. rákṣati ‘to protect'. Besides àλɛž-, a stem
άλк- exists in Greek; see ►άλкý. These continue *h₂(e)lk-: *h₂lek-s-, with a different
君
65
full-grade slot as in *h₂eug-: *hueg-s-. A connection with Lat. ulciscor 'to avenge'
presupposes *h₂l- > *ol- (LIV² s.v. *h₂elk-), and is not likely from the semantic side.
άλéoμaι [v.] 'to avoid, shun, flee' (II.). <IE? *h₂leu- 'escape, ward off (?) ►
•VAR Also ȧλεúετaɩ (Hom.); aor. ǹλεúaτo (Hom.); act. ȧλɛúw (trag. [lyr.]).
•COMP vηλens (Hom.) 'inescapable' <*ṇ-h₂leu-.
•DER Verbal noun ảλéa ‘avoiding, escape, shelter'; - ȧλewpń ‘escape, shelter' (Il.),
dissimilated from *åλεƑ-wλŋ (Chantraine 1933: 243). Denominative verb ȧλɛɛívw=
άλéoµaɩ, from a noun *åλεƑ-εv-, perhaps an r/n-stem (cf. äλɛap. åλɛwpíav ǹ
лоλчwрíav å. or consideration' H.), for which one expects *h₂leu-r, gen. *h₂lu-en-s.
åλɛáleiv. kpúntɛiv ǹ “poßáλλɛv, kai ɛïpyɛɩv, àqavíɛv ‘hide, ward off, make
invisible' (H.) either denominative to ȧλéa or deverbative to ȧλéoμai. A zero grade
of the root in ȧλúσкw (epic, trag.) 'to avoid, flee', fut. ȧλúw with analogical ε.
Enlargements to this are ȧλvσкάw and ȧλvoкávw (epic).
•ETYM A connection with aλúw is very doubtful because of its deviant mg. 'to be
distraught, beside oneself. LIV2 s.v. *h₂leu- 'fernhalten' follows Hackstein 1995:
214-216, who connects it with ToB älyinträ [subj.] ‘they shall keep away'.
ảλéw [v.] 'to grind' (Od., with кατ-). <IE *h₂elh,- ‘grind'>
•VAR Aor. ñλɛσα (IA), epic äλɛσσa, perf. áλýλeka, -ɛ(0)µai.
•DER 1. ȧλéατα ‘wheat-groats' (inscr. Milete [VIª]) < *ảλéƑata, also áλɛíατα (Hom.)
with metrical lengthening, cf. Schulze 1892: 226 and Hdn. 2, 472, 12, who explains
ǎλɛap from ǎλɛap. Thematicized in aλɛup-ov, mostly plur. ǎλɛupa ‘flour' (Hdt.).
Thence ȧλɛúpivos and àλɛupódŋs (medic.), ȧλɛvpítns (äptos). 2. äλŋtov, -τa 'flour'
(Hp., Sophr.) with ŋ after ǎuŋtos or as the result of contraction of ȧλɛaт-. Thence
άλýσiov. rãv tò àλŋλɛσµévov ‘anything ground' (H.), Lacon. άλŋhov (with h < *s <
*t before i). 3. åλetós [m.] (Plu.) and ảλŋtós (Babr.) ‘mealing'. 4. äλɛois and äλŋois
‘id.' (Gp.). 5. ȧλɛσµós ‘id.' (J.) and ǎλɛσµa (EM), with secondary -σ-. 6. ǎλŋµa [n.]
'flour' (S.).
Agent nouns: Övoç åλétŋs ‘grinder (upper millstone)' (Gortyn, X.), also Ŏvos åλetwv
(Alexis). 2. åλɛtpis 'woman who grinds corn' (Hom.), åλɛτpɛúw ‘to mill' (ep.).
Instrument noun: äλɛστpov 'fee for milling' (pap.); adj. ȧλɛτɩкóç ‘of milling' (pap.).
On ȧλετpíẞavos [m.] 'pestle' (Ar.) cf. Schwyzer: 263, 438.
Lengthened verbal stem àλnow (Hp., Thphr.). Unclear àλívw = λεлτúvw 'to crush,
pounď (Phot. ex S.); cf. åλiv[v]óv• àµvdpóv ‘dim' (H.), see Güntert IF 45 (1927): 345.
•ETYM ȧλéw is probably an athematic present *åλɛ- < *h₂elh,- The formation of *äλε-
Fap may be compared with Arm. aliwr ‘flour' < *h₂leh,-uṛ. The verb is Arm. ałam.
Further cognates are found in Indo-Iranian, e.g. MInd. āță ‘flour' (+ Hindi, Bengali),
MoP ārd ‘id.', Av. aša- ‘ground' < *arta-. Cf. the PIE root *melH-, with the same
meaning, and μáλɛvрov.
àλŋons [adj.] ‘true, real' (Il.). <IE *leh₂d"- 'be hidden">
•DIAL Dor. áλã¤ńs.
•DER ȧλŋoɛíŋ, -ɛíã 'truth, reality'; younger is àλη0εă, Schwyzer: 469. Denominative
verb áλŋɛúw ‘to speak the truth' (S.), àλŋ¤íšoµαɩ ‘id.' (Hdt.); àλŋþí¼w (PHolm.) in
the technical meaning 'to dye with genuine purple'. Late derivatives: ȧλnevσiç

=== page 057 ===

66
ä入ica
67
'Wahrhaftigkeit (S. E.) and åλŋevτn's 'who always speaks the truth' (Max. Tyr.);
adj. àλŋɛvtiкóç 'truthful, who loves the truth' (Arist.). Enlarged àλŋɩvós (IA) and
άλŋ¤кós (Ps.-Callisth.).
•ETYM άλŋons is a compound with privative à-; the second member is either from
*λñßos (Dor. Aã¤os) or λýðŋ (Hom.), or from the verb Añßw, λað- ‘to be hidden, be
unknown'. Cf. Luther 1935.
άλńs [adj.] ‘thronged, crowded' (Hdt.). <IE *uel- ‘press'>
•VAR Or åλns: the spiritus asper is uncertain. It is regular in άλns, but not for Dor.
aría.
•DER ȧλíw 'to gather' (Ion. poet.); abstract aλin (public) assembly' (Dor. àλía).
From it Dor. ȧλaía ‘id.', Att. ǹλaía ‘tribunal', where the ǹ- must be a false Ionicism
of a Doric LW, see Meyer Phil. 48 (1889): 187. Thence ηiášoµα [v.] 'to be seated in
the aía' (Ar.) with ǹλαστns (Dor. ȧλ-) 'member of the n.', which may also be
derived directly from the noun after diкαστηç: Síкη, etc.; adj. ǹλαστIкóç. Action
nouns: ǹλíaσɩ ‘being a member of the ǹ.' (Att.), áλíaσσis (Tegea) ‘meeting'; àλíaσµa
unclear mg. (Gela). áλiaкtýp. τóños έv & áеpoíšovtaɩ oi Σıkɛλoí ‘place where
Sicilians convene' (H.). Cf. the month name Adaños (Dreros), to ȧλía.
•ETYM Aeol. ► άoλns has the same meaning as ďλns. If the formations are identical,
both may go back to *ά-Fαλvns or *ȧ-Foλvns, with copulative ȧ-, ȧ- < *sη- and
*wa/oln- < QIE *-ul-n-. We may suppose a noun *Féλ-vos 'crowd, throng', suffixed
like voç, σμñvos (Chantraine 1933: 420), which would belong to εw. The
expected full grade may be found in the hapax άɛλλńs (г 13). Finally, àλavéws.
óloσxɛpwç, Tapavtīvo 'completely (Tarant.)' (H.) and afλavɛws (meaning
uncertain, Elis) might also be the same word. Cf. ► äλis, ►ảoλλýs.
ȧλaívw, -oμai [v.] 'to cure', med. 'to become whole and sound' (Hp.). <IE? *h₂el-
'grow'>
•VAR äλɛto (II.). Fut. åλе½σoμαι, -ow (Il.). The fut. ȧλéoμα (Aret.) was perhaps
formed after its opposite лpεoμαi of лupéσσw (but DELG comments: “l'hypothèse
reste en l'air"); cf. also ǎλεıç 'healing' (Hp.). On these forms see van Brock 1961:
198-207 ("capricieuses formations", all late).
Note àλɛiv. vytáčav 'to make sound' (Hp. apud Gal. 19, 76); further presents
ȧλeńσкw and ȧλíσкw (Hp.).
•DER Glosses: äλα. Оεpµασía ½ Оɛpañɛíɑ ‘warmth or heat, service' (H.); äλoç.
pápμaкov ‘drug' (EM); àλðɛúç. iατpós ‘physician' (H.); áàðàívε· αüžɛ, Oɛpañevel,
Úуιαívεi чáρμαкov yàp äλoç 'increases, attends to, for äλoç means "drug" (H.).
ȧλnεç 'curing' (Nic.) was formed directly to the verb. Probably the mythical name
AλBaía, also a plant name, a kind of mallow (Thphr.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 81 (partly
incorrect); áλíoкos (Ps.-Dsc.), cf. synonymous iẞíσкоç. àλеεστηpiα ‘medicine'
(Nic.), cf. Xapioτηpiα, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 63f.).
On the PN "AλOηоç, also Аеos, see Bechtel Herm. 56 (1921): 228 and the
mythical name AλBaía, see below.
!
1
•ETYM Aλеaívw has often been connected to the root of avaλτos (Schwyzer: 703 ẞ),
*h₂el-, seen in Lat. alō ‘to rear', Go. alands 'growing up', etc. (see LIV² s.v. and also on
► ȧλSaívw).
However, DELG remarks that the word was originally used for the growth of scar
tissue, translating äλɛto xεip with “le bras se guérit”. The meaning 'to heal' is not
evidently connected with aλ- 'grow, feed'; the glosses systematically give the
meaning 'to heal' etc. Оɛрαлεíα may mean 'medical or surgical treatment'; εpμaσía
is less clear (is it a false reading?), and aε also deviates semantically (is it for
►àλdaívw?).
The name Аλеηл/оç is clearly Pre-Greek (cf. the river Аïσηлоç), and perhaps the
mythical name Albaía as well (the suffix -ata, -ɛa is also known in Pre-Greek
words); at any rate, we cannot be sure that the names belong to the verb.
An alternative etymology connects it with Skt. rdhnóti 'to succeed, accomplish,
thrive' (Rix MSS 27 (1970): 88 and Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 118 [taken up in LIV² as
*h₂eldh-]).
ȧλíẞaç, -avτoç [m.] 'corpse, dead person' (Pl. Resp. 387c, H.), also of the Styx (S. Fr.
790) and metaph. of wine-vinegar (Hippon.). <PG➤
•VAR ảλíẞaç. vɛkpós ñ ßpoñxos ñ notaµós ñ öžos 'corpse, ẞpouxos, river, vinegar'
(H.); for other glosses see Peiffer ad Call. fr. 216 (v.l. ȧ-; perhaps the vowel is long).
⚫ETYM The ancient explanation as 'sapless', with privative ȧ- and Außáç, is based on
popular etymology. The conjecture of Immisch Arch. f. Religionswiss. 14 (1911): 449f.)
is incorrect. Kretschmer Glotta 28 (1940): 269 connected it with Etr. lupu 'he died'
and Lat. Libitina, which is possible but uncertain. The deviant shape of the word, as
well as forms like óкpíßaç, кıλλíẞaç, Auкáßaç and Kopúßavτɛs (which does not
belong to Baívw), clearly point to a substrate origin.
ȧliẞdów [v.] 'to sink, submerge into the sea; to hide' (Lyc.). <PG>
•VAR Tzetzes ad Lyc. 351 gives ȧλvßdñoai.
•ETYM The ancients connected the word with äλs and *ßdúw, which is allegedly
Aeolic for Sów, but this must be a popular etymology. The strange structure of the
word and the group -ẞ8- make substrate origin almost certain. The elements aλɩ-
and -Sów may have been influenced by the Greek words.
áλíукios [adj.] 'like, resembling' (Il.). <?►
•VAR More frequent is έvaλíykɩoç.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The comparison with OCS lice 'face, cheek' etc. is uncertain.
The ȧ- has been interpreted as the zero grade of έv-, but this is not likely. See Beekes
1969: 25ff. contra Seiler KZ 75 (1957): 11-16. Note that an IE root cannot have the
structure *lein(k)-.
äλɩčα [f.] · ǹ λεÚкη τò dévεpov (Twv -wv ms.), Maкɛdóvɛç 'Populus alba, abele
(Maced.)' (H.). <EUR?>
⚫ETYM Kretschmer (Kretschmer Glotta 15 (1927): 305f., Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934):
104f.) compared OHG elira, Go. *alisa in Span. alisa and Ru. ol'xa ‘alder', as well as
old Germanic TNs and HNs, e.g. Alisa (Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 3 (1951-1952):

=== page 058 ===

68
69
άλín
165ff.); we may also compare the Thessalian place name 'Olóv. Hatzidakis Glotta 23
(1935): 268ff. assumes a loan in Macedonian from a northern language, supposing
that the suffix is the same as in píša, qúča, kóvuča. The word seems non-Indo-
European. For European substrate words in Greek, see Beekes 2000: 21ff.
άλíŋ · кáлpoç, Makɛdóvɛç 'boar (Maced.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. E. Maaß's suggestion (Maaß RhM 74 (1925): 472) that it
originally means άσОεvý, άdúvaτos 'weak', and belongs to äλɩv (= ǹλíðɩov,
µátalov, kevóv, έλaqpóv [H.], s.v.) makes no sense.
ȧλikákkaßoç [?] plant name, 'Physalis Alkekengi' (Dsc., BGU 1 120, 37). <GR►
•VAR Also -кáкaßoç, -káкaßov? Cf. áλikákkaßa. ¿ toû λwτoû кapróç. kaì nóɑç
Eidos fruit of various plants; kind of grass' (H.).
•ETYM Plant of which the fruit resembles a кáккaßoç; áλɩ- would mean 'salt', thus
'salt-cellar'? See Amigues Journal des Savants 1984: 151-154.
.
ȧλɩкúρкηç · þúλλa µýkwvos µetà öžovç λɛavеévτa. ½ úñótpiµµa èk πλɛióvwv кpeŵv
leaves of the poppy pounded with vinegar, dish consisting of various kinds of meat'
(H.). <?>
•ETYM There is no support for Latte's proposal to read -кúкηy, which would
resemble кukɛwv. DELG suggests a connection with кupкavāv 'to mix', which is
quite probable.
.
äλiv [adj.] λíov. μáταιov. кεvóv. έλappóv 'vain, empty, idle, light' (H.). <?>
•VAR Or is it an adverb?
⚫ETYM Fur.: 391 compares forms with d-: daλóç = µwpós (Cyr.), as well as daλns (H.,
Cyr. acc. to Wendel and Latte), Saλís (codd.); cf. daλeïç = oi àµaðɛïç (sch. Theocr. 9,
33e). See ►ȧλín.
ȧλivdέw [v.] 'to roll', med. 'to roll in the dust; roam' (Ar.). <PG?>
•VAR Also áλívdw; aor. ηλīσa.
•DER ǎλɩvdov· Spóµov áрµáτшv 'race of chariots' (EM, H.), áλívdŋois ‘rolling' (in the
dust, of athletes; Hp.), åλvd½еpα ‘place for rolling' (Ar., Phryn.).
⚫ETYM Formation like кuλívdw, кUλivdéw, which are close in meaning, but the
nature of their relationship with aλivdéw is uncertain. One connects the latter with
► ɛiλéw, ►λw, etc., comparing Ƒáλŋ (cod. váλn). oσкóλŋ 'worm, larva' (H.). DELG
assumes the root *uel- which, lengthened with -d-, is seen in OS wealtan, OHG
walzan (Pok. 1140). Taillardat REA 58 (1956): 191³ reconstructs a present *ul-n-ed-mi
with anaptyictic -i-. The i-epenthesis is without parallel, and an old nasal present is
improbable. The suffix -ind- is rather non-Indo-European; even in this case,
however, the root could still be Indo-European. Yet Fur.: 1305 compares kaλɩvdéoμai
‘id.' as a variant with initial k-; several words with variation k/ zero exist among the
substrate words.
åλívɛɩv [v.] (cod. -vɛïv). ȧλɛiqɛiv 'to anoint the skin with oil (H.). áλīvai• ¿ñaλɛîyai
'to smear over' (H.). iv-aλaλioμéva ‘engraveď (Cyprus). кαταλīvaι· kataλɛiyaɩ ‘to
ȧλíσкoμai
69
pour down' (H.) is now confirmed by an inscr. from Selinous, see RPh. 69 (1995) 128,
l. 16. <IE *h₂lei(H)- ‘smear'>
•DER Verbal noun ǎλivσiç τoŬ έpуαστηрíov (Epid.).
•ETYM ȧλívw, which probably derives from < *åλiv-iw, is cognate with Lat. linō 'to
smear, rub', which is originally an n-present; the root is *h₂li- > åλt-. One would like
to reconstruct *h¸li-n-H-, but Lat. litus has short i (cf. the discussion in De Vaan
2008, as well as LIV² s.v. *h₂leiH-, with more forms). Probably the same root as in
►ȧλɛíqw.
.
ávov [adj.] ȧuvôρóv, Kρñτεç 'weak, faint' (Cret.)' (H.). <?►
•VAR Cf. aλivɛiv = λεлτúvw 'to crush' (S. fr. 995).
•ETYM See Güntert IF 45 (1927): 345. DELG mentions the word s.v. ► ảλéw.
äλı§, -koç [m.] ‘groats of rice-wheat' (Chrysipp. Tyan. apud Ath.), also a fish sauce,
called hallēc in Latin (Dsc 4, 148). <LW?>
ETYM Walde 1910: 25 derived the word from àλéw; this is unconvincing. The
formation is like λ, Xóλ (Chantraine 1933: 382f.). The nature of the connection
with Lat. alica is unknown. A loanword from an unknown language.
ǎλɩoç, -a, -ov [adj.] 'fruitless, idle' (Hom.). <?>
•VAR Also [adv.] ‘in vain'.
•DER ȧλiów 'to prevent' (epic, S.).
•ETYM An old term, which was gradually replaced by µáταιoç. The connection with
► ǹλíčios, ►ǹλáoкw, and further to άλάoμat is correctly rejected by DELG; it does
not explain the spiritus asper. There are no traces of F-; cf. Sommer 1905: 98.
Schwyzer: 461 points to the expression ɛiç üdwp ypáqɛv, suggesting the word
belongs to ǎλç 'sea'. DELG supports this by remarking that the word is often used of
Béλos, indicating an arrow that misses its target and falls into the sea - but why
would it fall into the sea?
äλis [adv.] 'in crowds, enough' (Il.). ◄IE *uel- ‘turn, wind▷
•VAR The form yάλɩ· iкavóv ‘sufficient' (H.) shows initial Ƒ-.
⚫ETYM Connected with w 'to press', aλns, ȧoλλns. It could be an old
nominative, but the form yáλı rather suggests that the -s is an adverbial marker like
in avis, xwpis (cf. Skt. bahíḥ).
àλíoßŋ [f.] · åñáτη ‘deceiť' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. The sequence -σß- is hardly Indo-European.
ȧλoyέw [v.] 'to pollute' (LXX). <?>
•ETYM Ritual term of unknown origin. Fur.: 298 compares Ayvús 'smoke, soot',
which supposes a prothetic vowel and interchange o/zero before velar (highly
uncertain). Still, the group -oy- often occurs in substrate words, see Pre-Greek 2a, 17.
áλíσkoµaɩ [v.] ‘to be caught' (II.). <IE *uelh3- ‘seize, catch'>
•VAR Homer only has the aor. ȧλwvai; further fut. áλóσoµaι, aor. εáλwv < *η-faλw-
(IA).
•DIAL Thess. Faλσσкετai and Arc. Faλóvτos prove the initial F-.

=== page 059 ===

70
1
à入入áoow, -átTW
71
•DER ǎλwσiç 'capture' (Pi.), àλwoчuoç 'seizable, etc.'; äλwµα = ȧváλwμa 'expenses'
(Boeot. inscr.), cf. ávaλíoкw. The gloss ȧλwváкη áváλwμα. Xaλкidɛiç (H.) is
probably corrupt.
•ETYM The initial aspiration may have been taken from aipɛiv, ελɛiv. The aor. έáλwv
is from *n-Fắλwv. áλíoкoμai has the suffix -10к-. A root *uelh3- explains all the
forms: the zero grade *ulh3- gives *Fλw- before a consonant (e.g. 1/2pl. aor.) and
*Faλ- before a vowel (e.g. 3pl. aor.); contamination then gives *Faλw-. Perhaps it is
better to assume a passive aorist with -ŋ-: *ulh¸-eh,- > *Ƒaλw- like *g*ih¸-eh,- > ßɩw-
(defended by Normier KZ 92 (1978): 132ff.; cf. Harðarson 1993a: 208); an objection
could be that this form must be terribly old. Cognates are Lat. vellō 'to pluck, tear
out', Hitt. ualḥzi 'to strike', ToA wälläṣtär [3sg.pres.] 'to die' (see LIV² s.v. *uelh3-),
and perhaps also Go. wilwan 'to rob, plunder', Arm. gołanam 'to steal'. Cf.
►ávaλíσкw and εiλwτεç.
ǎoμa [n.] 'water-plantain, Alisma Plantago' (Dsc. 3, 152). <?>
•ETYM The word does not contain ►äλç. See Strömberg 1940: 115.
.
àλíqaλoç [?] · yέvos Spvóc 'species of tree' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Cf. ►ȧλíqλotos. However, it seems less probable that aλípaλos would be just
a corruption of that word (Latte); rather, the word in photos is a secondary
formation.
ȧlíqλotos [m., f.] 'sea-bark oak, Quercus pseudosuber' (Thphr. HP 3, 8, 2). <?>
⚫ETYM Belongs with qλotós 'bark', but hardly with äλıç, as suggested by DELG. A
different name for eveúphotos. See ►àλípaλoç.
.
ǎλ [adj.] лéτрα 'rock' (H.). <PG?(V)>
⚫ETYM Beside Níч. лετрα (H.), Fur.: 372, 378 also compares λíẞaτos, which in
Homer is always said of лετрη. Quite possible, but not certain. If aiyiλuy also
belongs here, its second element is certainly non-Indo-European, whereas its first
part probably is.
ȧλкý 1 [f.] 'defense, help' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂elk-, *h₂lek-s- 'ward off, defend'>>
•VAR Aor. áλaλкɛĩv (Hom.), late epic forms: fut. ȧλaλкńow (A. R.), present ȧλáλкw
(Q. S.).
•COMP As a second member, after the s-stems, in εTεp-αλкηs helping one side' (epic
poet.), etc. Old i-stem in äv-aλkıɩs (epic), with ȧvaλкɛíŋ (epic) after other nouns in
-ein.
DER TN Aλaλкоμεvaí (Boeotia), or is the resemblance fortuitous? Thence
Aλaλкouεvníç epithet of Athena 'from A.' (Il; the interpretation 'protectress' is
probably secondary).
A root noun only in äλê-1 [dat.sg.] (Hom.).
Thence ȧλкεiç brave' (h. Hom., Pi.), Dor. ȧλкāç, enlarged åλкηστýs (Opp.) after
áλpnotńs, wµnotýc; ảλkaños (E. Hel. 1152 [lyr.]).
The basis of ǎλкчμоç (poet. since Hom.) is unclear (see Arbenz 1933: 13 and 31. The
gloss àλêµaïoç. vɛavíokos ‘boy' (H.) is probably a mistake for or a contamination
with aкuaños 'in one's prime'.
{
į
ǎAкap [n.] 'defense' (epic, lyr.).
Agent noun: ȧλкτηp, -ñpos 'warden, protector' (Hom., Pi.), åλкτpios 'curing'
(Nonn.) and ȧλкτýpιov [n.] 'medicine' (Nic.).
Also from ȧλк-: ȧλкáew [v.] 'to assist' (A., S. [acc. to gramm.]), cf. ȧuvváw; further
άλкάw [v.] ‘to show strength' (EM), ǹλkášovto. ǹμúvovτo 'they warded off (H.);
thence άλкáσμata (S.).
PNS: Aλкuáv, -μéwv (-μaíwv, cf. Björck 1950: 111), -μnvη, etc.
•ETYM From the same root as ►áλέ§w, with *h₂(e)lk- beside *h₂lek-s-.
ǎλкη 2 [f.] ‘elk' (Paus.). <IE? *h,el- 'red, brown'>
•ETYM Like Lat. alcēs, alcē (Caesar), äλêò is a loan from Germanic: ON elgr < PGM.
*al 3í-, besides which a form PGm. *álx- with initial stress is supposed, from which
alcēs and äλêη could be traced. West Germanic forms like OHG elahho, OE eolh
presuppose the stem PGm. *élxa(n)-, which arose secondarily. Slavic forms like Ru.
los' 'elk' presuppose PIE *olki-, and are compared with ON elgr. The root is
connected with a great number of words for animals, e.g. λapos (s.v.; see Pok.
302), and it is assumed that the root indicated a color. I think that an IE word or root
must be doubted; it may well be a loan from a non-Indo-European language.
άλkváv, -óvos [f.] ‘kingfisher, Alcedo ispida' (Il.). <PG?►
VAR Also àλкvóv (after äλc).
•DER Thence ȧλкvovís ‘id.' (A. R.), áλkvovídes (ǹµépal) ‘period of the wintersolstice,
when the kingfisher nests' (Ar.), also called aλкvóvɛto (Arist.). áλкvdóv (Hdn. Gr.
2, 285) is after other bird names in -Swv (thence Lat. alcēdo).
•ETYM See Thompson 1895 s.v. Origin unknown; probably a loan from a non-IE
language (cf. Fur.: 30339 on substrate words in -wv.) For the suffix, cf. ►ȧλεкτpvwv
(Ruijgh Minos 9 (1968): 152f.).
ȧλλá [adv.] 'but, however' (Il.). <IE *h₂el-io- 'other'>
•DIAL Cypr. alλa.
•ETYM The acc.pl. of äλλoç, used as an adverb. Cf. MoHG übrigens, Lat. ceterum, etc.
ảλλáßŋs [f.] ‘Nile fish, Labeo Niloticus' (Str.). <PG?>
⚫VAR Also ȧλáẞns.
⚫ETYM From Eg. repi or lepi (Thompson 1947 s.v.). Fur.: 145 etc. connects o
(with *a realized as e before *) and ȧλλoring, and concludes that it is a substrate
word. The ȧλλáẞns must not be an Egyptian fish.
ȧλlāç, -āvtoç [m.] ‘sausage, black pudding' (Hippon.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Kretschmer Glotta 1 (1909): 323 compared ǎλληv. λáxavov. 'Iτaλoí,
кαì εлì τoŨ ȧρτuvėévtos repikóµµατoç, ¿‹ où áλλαντолóληs (H.), and assumes
*ȧλλā-FEVT-. This would contain an Oscan word; cf. Lat. alium 'garlic'. But
Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 653 notes that origin in southern Italy is implausible
for a word from Hipponax.
álláσow, -άττw (v.] 'to change, alter' (Hom.). <GR
•VAR Aor. áλλážαi.

=== page 060 ===

72
àλλnλovc, -wv, -OLÇ
•DER ảλλayń (cf. áλλaуñvai) ‘(ex)change' (Att.); äλλayµa ‘exchange, price' (Hp.,
LXX), àλλayµóç ‘id.' (Man.). äλlais ‘exchange, trade' (Arist.), åλλážчµα (pap.,
gloss.), scil. чµáτα, ‘changes of raiment'. άλλaкüкós pertaining to exchange' (Pl.,
Arist.), àλλáyɗŋv ‘alternating' (Hdn.). Note ȧλλáž· ¿vò\\ayµévwç ‘exchangeď (H.),
εл-, лαр-, àµч-aλλáž (Hp., Th., S., X.).
•ETYM ȧλλáσow is derived from äλλoc, either through a stem in a velar (for which,
compare àλλá‹ and àλλaxoû, -ñ [though direct connection is improbable]) or with
a suffix -áσow.
ȧλλnλovç, -wv, -ots [adj.] 'each other' (Il.). <IE *h₂el-io- 'other'>
•ETYM From repeated aλλoc, i.e. *allo-aλλo-, in which the color of the second
initial vowel was restored. Cf. Lat. alius alium, Skt. anyo'nyam. On the single second.
-λ- see Schwyzer: 260.
ǎλλiž, -ĭkoç [f.] ‘men's upper garment' (Euph.), = xλquús a short mantle', also =
εμлорлηчα 'garment secured by a brooch' (H.). <?>
ETYM For the glosses (EM, Suid.), see DELG. Origin unknown. The word is
supposed to be Thessalian. Lat. alicula also belongs here.
állodaлóç [adj.] 'from another land, foreign' (Il.). <?►
ETYM Derived from äλlos; for the formation, sее τηλεdαлós, navtodañóc,
лоdАлóç, ηµεdАлóç. It has been explained as àλλod-αлóç, preserving the old neuter
pronominal marker *-d (Lat. aliud); the latter part would be the same as Lat. -inquus
< PIE *-nk"o- in longinquus, etc. Meillet BSL 28 (1927-1928): 42ff. expresses doubt:
-Ɛαлóç is an unknown suffix. Moreover, suffixes are not added to case forms like the
neutral -d.
äλλoµaɩ [v.] ‘to jump, leap' (Il.). ◄IE *sel- ‘jump’►
•VAR Hom. has an aor. åλro, of unknown quantity, which could be an unaugmented
Aeolic form (Schwyzer: 751¹).
•COMP лρоaλǹs (Hom.) 'sloping, rushing forward'
•DER ǎλμa 'jump' (Hom.), äλois 'jumping' (Hp., Arist.); ȧλτp (Crates Com.), in
sports, 'weights kept in the hands while jumping'.
⚫ETYM From *hal-je/o-. A yod-present is probably also found in Lat. saliō, which
could perhaps derive from *sl-ie/o- (LIV², who reconstruct a root *sel-). A root *sal-
is impossible, as PIE had no phoneme a, but De Vaan suggests a root *sh₂l- in order
to account for the Italo-Celtic reflexes like OIr. saltraid ‘to trample' < *sal-tro-. Also
related to Skt. ásarat [3sg.aor.] ‘to run, rush' (Narten MSS 26 (1969): 77ff.), ToB
salāte [med.pret.] 'jumped'; further forms in LIV2 s.v. 1. *sel-. See лάλλoμα.
allos [adj.] 'other' (Il.). <IE *h₂el-io- ‘other'>
•DIAL Cypr. alλoç.
•COMP àλλoлpóσaλλos ‘unreliable, fickle' from ǎλλo пpòç äλλov Aéywv, Bechtel
1914; ảλλoœpovέw ‘to give no heed, be senseless' with a special development of ǎλλo-
(improbable Aeol. åλλos = ǹλɛóc, Bechtel 1914); ȧλλopáσσw 'to be delirious' (Hp.)
with an unclear second element. Cf. s.v. ηλáσкw.
j
1
i
!
ǎλož, -кoç
73
•DER Abstract ȧóτη [f.] (comm. Arist.); aλoños of another kind, different'
(Hom., IA), an adjectival formation in -oчoç after τочоç, лочоç, olоç; thence
ȧλotóτη 'being different' (Hp., Pl.) and ȧown ‘of strange appearance' (Aret.,
Vett. Val.). Denominative verb åλlotów 'to change' (IA), allowσis ‘change,
difference' (Pl., Arist.), àλλoíwµa ‘id.' (Damox.) and ȧ\\owtiкós (Arist., Gal.). On
►άλλáσow, see s.v.
Several adverbs: ǎλλoεv, áλλaxñ, etc. On aλλodaлóç and
ȧλλýλouc, see s.v.
From an adverb with -τp- (cf. Skt. anyá-tra ‘elsewhere') comes aλλóτpιoç ‘alien,
strange, belonging to someone else' (Il.). Thence ȧoτióτηs (Pl., Arist.),
ȧλoτρiów [v.] (IA), whence ȧλλotpiwois (Th., Hell.).
•ETYM ǎλλoç < *hel-io- 'other', like in Lat. alius, Go. aljis, Olr. aile, ToB alyek, TOA
ālak (depalatalized) < *h₂el-io-k-, Arm. ayl. Beside *h₂el-io-, a similar adjective is
reconstructed for IIr. *Hania-> Skt. anyá- ‘other', etc., but this form is most
probably due to contamination of *h₂elio- with the comparative *h₂entero-.
ǎλμa [n.] ‘(sacred) grove' (Lyc. 319). <?►
⚫ETYM The word has the same meaning as ►äλooç. Is it from the root åλ- 'to feed' in
►àλSaívw, etc.?
áλoáw 'to thresh'. → àλwn.
->
ȧλón [f.] 'bitter aloe, Aloe vera' (Dsc.). <LW Or.>
⚫ETYM As for ►ȧyáλoxov, an Oriental loanword is suspected (Lewy 1895: 36).
äλo, -Koç [f.] 'furrow' (trag., com.). <PG
•VAR Also avλa (Hes.), λкa [acc.sg.], -as [acc.pl.] (Hom.), Dor. λaž (EM 625,
37), also in óμ-wλaкɛç (A. R. 2, 396). Further εvλáкã 'plough', with Lacon. ɛúλažɛīv
[inf.fut.] (Orac. apud Th. 5, 16); avλáxα. ǹ üvvç 'plowshare' (H.) and *öλoкɛç (cod.
óλoкɛúç). aúλaкɛç 'furrows' (H.).
•DER ảλOKÍ¢w [v.] 'to draw furrows, plough' (Ar., Lyc.); aúλaкí(w ‘id.' (pap.), verbal
noun aúλaкiσμós (pap.). Rare and late aúλaкóεç (Max.), aúλaкádŋç (Eust.),
diminutive aúλáktov (schol.).
•ETYM The exact relation between this cluster of forms has always been unclear.
Solmsen 1901: 258ff. explained wλкα as from *ǎƑoλka (kaτà wλka N 707 for original
*кaɩ ǎƑoλкa), but it is strange that there are no further traces of this form. The zero
grade of *ȧFoλк- would then give *ȧƑλaк-, seen in avλač. In laryngealistic terms, a
root *h₂uelk- has been supposed in Lith. velkù, OCS vlěko, Av. varǝk- 'to draw'. This
is tempting, but cannot be correct. If the Balto-Slavic words are isolated (there is
further only Av. vǝrǝc-), the verb may be non-IE. Moreover, for Balto-Slavic and
Iranian we would rather reconstruct *uelk"- with a labiovelar, which is impossible
for Greek. Furthermore, there is no trace of the verbal root in Greek, which has ελкw
'to draw' < *selk-.
Pisani IF 53 (1935): 29 derived avλač from avλóc and separated it from ǎλo, etc.,
which is improbable. The variants are strongly reminiscent of substrate words, as
Beekes 1969: 40 maintained (withdrawn ibid. 275-7). Variation of prothetic ε/ a/ o/
aʊ/ ɛu, and also that of к and X (aúλáxa), are what one often finds in substrate

=== page 061 ===

拳
74
ȧlooúdvn
words, so Pre-Greek origin is most probable. The Homeric form is the only one
without a vowel between λ and к, and therefore it is suspect. If we assume labialized
phonemes like /w/ for Pre-Greek, a reconstruction *alak- can explain all the
different variants: avλa (by anticipation of the labial feature), which gives a by
contraction; aλo (coloring of the second vowel by the labialized liquid), óλok-
(influence on both vowels; I see no reason not to take the gloss seriously). Cf.
►ápaσɣádɛç, etc. The interchange of initial a/ ε (which gave εúlaк-) is difficult to
understand phonetically, but it may be related to plain α/ ɛ.
áλoσúðvŋ [adj.] epithet of Thetis (Y 207), of the Nereids (A. R. 4, 1599), name of a sea
goddess (8 404). Mg. unknown. ◄IE? *seh₂-l- ‘salt', *ud-n- 'water', PG?▷
•DIAL Myc. a₂-ṛo[ ]u-do-pi has been interpreted as /halos hudo(t)p¹i/.
•ETYM Connected with ►äλs and Swp as "wave of the sea”. The glosses üdvai
€уyovoι, σúvτpopot 'born inside, raised together with (?)' and üdvηs. εidwç, žµñεipos
'knowing, experienced' (H.) may have been extracted from áλoσúðvη. The relevance
of the Myc. words is unclear; cf. DELG. Since the meaning is not very clear, and the
structure aCVC-udn- is typically Pre-Greek, we may doubt the traditional
interpretation. Chantraine's Kaλudwv, -údva (which is typically Pre-Greek) is an
example; cf. Kaλuкadvoç. Schwyzer: 475, 5 wonders if the nom. was -udva, in which
case Pre-Greek origin would be even more probable.
äloxos⇒léxetal.
ǎλлvστоç [adj.] see below (Pi. I. 5 (4), 12). <?►
=
•VAR εлαλлvоç ‘amiable' (Pi. P. 8, 84) ǹdús, лpooŋvýs 'sweet, gentle' (sch.);
àλлaλéov· áуaлŋtóv ‘amiable' (H.), from which perhaps ápлαλéos, by influence of
ȧρлáчw; the gloss áлáλчµα· áрлαктá, лpoσqiàñ 'robbed, beloved' shows the double.
cf. also áprαλíčoµai. àoµévws déxoμa 'to accept gladly' (H.). Here also the PN
Аλлovídηs (inscr. Karthaia), see Bechtel 1917a: 5f., from "Аλлwv.
•DIAL Uncertain äλлtap (inscr. Crete).
mg.;
⚫ETYM Wackernagel KZ 43 (1910): 377 reads *ǎλлστоç for äλлνστoç: a primary
superlative formation, which could be attested as a PN in A. Pers. 982 (but the text is
uncertain). The assumption of an old r/n-stem, to which the Cretan form would
point, is unnecessary. It is doubtful to interpret åλл- as *Ƒαλл-, a zero grade of
*Ƒɛλл- in ► ëλñoµaɩ, ►έλлíç (for wouldn't one expect *Ƒλaл-?).
ǎλç, ȧλóç [m.] 'salt' (II.), very often plur. <IE *seh₂-l- 'salt'>>
•VAR As fem. (only sg.) a poetical word for the sea (after álaσσa, or as a
collective?). Since Arist. also äλaç, -atoç [n.] from the acc.pl., see Leumann 1950:
160f.
•DIAL Myc. o-pi-a2-ra /opi-hala/ 'coastal regions' cf. qpaloc; a-pi-a₂-ro
/Amphihalos/, a₂-ri-e perhaps/haliën/, see Perpillou 1973: 61², 161.
•COMP άλí-λooç, -лóρquρoç (for åλ- after the i-stems, not locatival with Schwyzer:
476 5, 1. On ȧλ-µε sее µúμat. On ȧloupyós 'who exploits a salt mine' see
DELG Supp.
i
&入UKTOTEON
75
●DER 1. äλµŋ ‘seawater, brine' (Od.), whence àλμaía ‘id.' (Ar., Nic.), áλµás (¿λaía)
'pickled olive' (com.), áλµvpós ‘salty, bitter' (Od.), which would stand for *¿λupós
(Schwyzer: 482: 6); thence aλμupwdns, áλµvpótŋs and verbs àλμvρíчw, ȧλµvρów,
further ȧλuvpíç [f.] 'brackish soil, salty liquid', cf. лλημupíç and λчupε (see
►µúpoµaɩ); from äλµŋ also åλµýeis (A.) and áλµɛúw ‘to pickle' (Dsc.), whence
äλµevois, áλµevtýs.
2. äλoç, (-a), -ov ‘of the sea' (epic poet.), áλiás [f.] 'fishing boat' (Arist., D. S.). 3.
áλía [f.] 'salt tub' (com., Hell.). 4. äλivos 'consisting of salt' (Hdt., Str.). 5. äλчµoç ‘of
the sea' (Trag. Adesp., LXX), äλчov plant name, cf. Strömberg 1940: 97, 114. 6.
άλíτns 'salty, of the sea'. 7. áλí(w 'to salt' (Arist.), άλioµóc (Sor.), but not ǎλɩσμa
'Alisma plantago' (Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 115, which is unexplained. 8. After
äλoç, ǎλvoç and άλ- as a first member for åλ-: áλiɛúç 'fisherman' (Od.), ȧλiɛúw
[v.] 'to fish' (LXX, NT, Plu.), -εúoμa (also com.), ȧλετкós ‘belonging to
fish(ermen)' (Pl., X., Hell.); from áλieúw: ȧλievtýs ‘fisherman' (Cerc.), from ȧλɩɛúç
or ȧλɩɛúw: άλɩɛía ‘fishery' (Arist., Str.), from ȧλiɛúw: åλíɛvµa ‘id.' (Str.). 9. áλi-ádns
'sailor' (S. [lyr.]). 10. άiapóc 'salty' (Eust.). 11. áλuкóç 'salty' (Hp., Arist.), áλvкótηs
(Arist.), áλukiç [f.] 'salt mine' (Str.), áλvкódŋs (Hp.; also in Thphr. HP 9, 11, 2
instead of codd. άλiкódηc), ȧλvкɛía 'pickling' (Ptol.). 12. From the neuter τò äλaç,
late formations like ȧλáτov (diminutive), άλáτvos, áλατíw and άλατкÓV
'salarium' (gloss.) are derived.
⚫ETYM Old word found in most IE languages: Lat. sāl, OIr. salann, Arm. ał, Latv. sàls,
OCS solo 'salt', as well as OCS slano ‘salted' < *solno), ToB salyiye, ToA sāle. An
enlargement in -d is found in Germanic (Go. salt), Arm. ałt, and Balto-Slavic, e.g.
Lith. sald-ùs 'sweet', OCS sladб-kʊ ‘id.'. Lith. sólymas is an important form, since it
points to *seh₂l-, while other languages require *sh₂-el. This points to an original
paradigm of nom. *seh₂-(0)l, acc. sh₂-el-m, gen. *sh₂-l-os. On possible Sanskrit
cognates, see Thieme ZDMG 111 (1961): 94ff. ►ȧλoσúdvn.
ǎloos [n.] 'sacred grove' (Il.). <PG?(V)►
•DER ȧλowdns 'belonging to the grove' (E. [lyr.], Thphr.), àλoŋïdɛç vúµqaɩ (A. R.),
after Nηpηides, etc.; äλowμa and ȧlowv = äλoos (Aq.). Further ȧλoívη a plant
(Dsc.), see André 1985, and cf. CEG 6.
•ETYM "Aλτç [f.], the name of the temple domain in Olympia, would be identical
with aloos (see Paus. 5, 10, 1); on this basis one reconstructs äλoos as *altios. Fur.:
249, 253 accepts the equation, but interprets it in the context of other instances of an
interchange of dental and sibilant in substrate words (avvηov/ ävησov). Van
Windekens KZ 100 (1987): 308f. connects it with Hitt. als- 'owe fealty, give
allegiance', which is hardly convincing. See ►äλμa.
äλvša [f.] · äλväov 'herb terrible, Globularia alypum' (H.). <?►
ETYM The hypothesis of von Blumenthal 1930: 34 (from *ȧ-λuy-iα to vypóc,
Aɛvyaλéoç) is doubtful.
ȧλvк(p)óv →ðaλvкpóç.
άλvкtoлédŋ [f.] 'bond' (Hes., A. R., etc.). <?>

=== page 062 ===

76
äλvois
ȧλoós
77
⚫ETYM Designation of a shackle. For the formation, we may compare iστoлédη (Od.);
see Risch IF 59 (1949): 26. Schulze KZ 28 (1887): 280 connects the first element with
Skt. ruj 'to break', which Risch doubts. The latter assumes the contamination of
ǎλτos and ǎppηкtos (лédaç... ápрýкτovę ȧλúτoυç N 36f.) under the influence of
ȧλúσкw (see on aλúw). All of this remains highly uncertain.
äλvois [f.] ‘chain', also as a woman's ornament (Hdt.). <IE *uel- ‘wind'>
DER Thence Hell. diminutives àλúotov and aλvoidov, further aλvσidwτós
'consisting of chains' (Plb., D. S.), ȧλvondóv 'in chains' (Man.).
•ETYM Originally 'winding', derived from *Fáλ-uç, belonging to *Ƒέλuτpov,
►ɛiλúw, etc.; see Frisk Eranos 43 (1945): 225ff. However, the a-vocalism remains
unexplained, as the root contained no final laryngeal. For the aspiration, cf. ► čλɩ§.
äλvoσov [n.] name of a plant (Dsc.). <GR?>
•ETYM With privative a from λúσσa 'rage', because of the curing effect of the seeds
(Dsc. 3, 91). Cf. Strömberg 1940: 91.
ȧλúτaç [m.] = paßdoóópos ½ µаστɩуóóópoç (EM 72, 15), policemen in Elis (inscr.).
<EUR➤
•COMP άλuτáxηs 'commander of the ảλútať (inscr., Luc.).
•DER Denominative àλvτātai (cod. àλútatai). rapatŋηpåĩ ‘observes' (H.).
⚫ETYM Explained as *Faλv-τãç 'staff-bearer' with Go. walus 'staff, ON volr 'id.'; see
Bechtel 1921, 2: 863. The Greek word is hardly inherited, in which case it would have
to be from *ulHu-. A direct loan from Germanic is improbable, so there may have
been a third intermediary source. Krahe Glotta 22 (1954): 123f. supposed an Illyrian
origin, but the word may also be non-IE (words with this meaning are very
frequently borrowed).
ȧλúw [v.] 'to be distraught, be beside oneself, from pain, anguish, etc. (II.). <?>
•VAR only present, except àλaλúσa poßɛiσðaι, àλúav 'put to flight, scare; be
excited' (H.).
•DER Medical terms aλvσμóc, whence àλvoµwdŋç, äλvoiç, áλúkŋ ‘fear, agitation', see
► ȧλáλvyč. Backformation äλuç ‘id.' (Hp.); with -к-: áλúkη ‘distress, anguish’; see
also ▸ȧλáλvy.
=
Verbs: ȧλúoкw (on áλvoкášw and ảλvokávw see ►ảλéa 2), ảλúσow, fut. àλú¾w
àλúw (Hom.), perhaps all from an enlarged stem aλUк-, which is also found in
áλvêtéw, perf. áλαλúкτηµαι ‘to be afraid (Hom.), áλʊкτά(w ‘to be afraid, wander'
(B., Hdt.), cf. Bechtel 1914 s.v. ȧλúw. Further ȧλvστálw, ȧλvστаívw (H., EM), cf.
perhaps ȧλvσévεα· àσ0évɛiα (EM 70, 45); also àλvσμaívw 'to be weak' (Call.),
ȧλvdµaívεɩv. àλúεv, άлоρεiv 'to be beside oneself (H.).
•ETYM ȧλúw is considered to be a derivation in -u- from the root ȧλ- in ►áλáoμαι,
and/or from λéoμat. This remains just a guess. Puhvel's connection with Hitt.
aluanz- ‘bewitcheď is doubtful (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
äλqa [n.] name of the first letter of the alphabet (Pl.). <LW Sem.>
●COMP Collocation ảλqáßŋtos [m., f.]; also [n.pl.]? (Irenaeus of Lyon), see Schwyzer
KZ 58 (1931): 199ff.
}
!
i
⚫ETYM From Hebr. 'aleph (see Schwyzer: 140 y and Schwyzer KZ 58 (1931): 177-183).
For the final vowel, cf. ßñτα, from Hebr. bêth. See Einarson Class. Phil. 62 (1967): 1-24
and 262f.
ȧλqávw [v.] 'to earn, gain' (E.). <IE *h₂elgh- ‘earn'>>
•VAR ảλqaívw (H., EM); Aor. àλqɛĩv (Hom.).
•COMP ȧλqεσíẞotos of girls, bringing in (many) oxen'; type τεpчíµßρoτo, with
shortening for *åλqŋoɩ- as in ελkɛoinendos.
•DER ȧλon 'produce, gain' (Lyc.).
•ETYM A counterpart to the thematic aorist aλqɛiv is found in the Indo-Iranian
present Skt. árhati 'to earn', YAv. arajaiti ‘is worth' < *helg. Further, ȧλoń
formally corresponds with Lith. algà ‘wages', but they are probably independent
formations. From Hittite, one adduces ḥalkuēššar ‘supplies for a festival'. The Greek
aor. is from the zero grade *h₂lgh- with Rix's Law. On ȧλqaívw = àµɛíẞw in Aetius,
see Benveniste L'année sociologique 5 (1951): 19-20.
ȧlqŋotýs, -ov [m.] ‘grain-eating', in the epic expression avέpes àλoŋotaí (Od.).
<GR➤
•DIAL Also a fish name in Dor. åλoŋotás ‘Labrus cinaedus' (Epich.); also called
kívaɩdoç, cf. Strömberg 1943: 56; also Thompson 1947.
•ETYM Clearly from äλo, in opposition to wμŋoτýs, plus *hed- ‘eat', in the
expression ȧvépɛs àλoŋoτaí. In antiquity, the word was strangely enough not
understood; cf. the strange gloss åλpnotñoi. toïç eúpetikoïç kai ouveτoчç 'intelligent'
(H.). The -- was lost for metrical reasons; see Fraenkel 1910: 38.
äλqı [n.] 'barley-groats' (h. Cer. 208). <IE? *h₂elbhi 'barley'>
•VAR Plur. ǎλQITα (II.), from which the sing. äλqiτov, in Hom. only in ȧλчíτov ȧкτη.
•DER ȧλqiτηpós (Antiph., Herod.), àλQITEúç 'miller' (Hyp.), àλQITEúw 'to grind
barley' (Hippon.), ȧλτяíα (Hyp., Poll.) and aλTεov (Poll., AB). Further
ȧλitioμós 'mixing with barley groats' (inscr. Delos) as if from *ȧλQIτíεLV;
ȧλqitηdóv (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM One previously assumed an i/n-stem äλqı, plur. *äλpata, as in Skt. ásthi, gen.
asthnás 'bone', on the basis of aλíqaτa. äλqiτa ǹ äλevpα (H.). But i/n-stems are
doubtful, and aλiqaτa has been read as *α (Latte); cf. DELG, which
compares àλnчaτov ävôoç ελains (Peek 1897); the form would have been derived
from ȧλéw 'to grind'.
ǎλqı may be identical with Alb. elb, -i 'barley' from *albhi; see Demiraj 1997. Further
origin is uncertain; perhaps the word is from PIE *h₂(e)lbh-i. Also related is Turc.
arpa 'barley', which is perhaps from an Iranian form *arbi; see Vasmer 1921: 16ff. See
Mallory & Adams 1997: 51 for Iranian forms.
On the meaning, see Moritz Class. Quart. 43 (1949): 113ff., who connected äλq with
aλqávw, but this is judged improbable by DELG. Connection with aλpós 'leprosy'
and Lat. albus 'white' (cf. Aɛúк' äλqiτα Σ 560) is rejected by Demiraj 1997.
ȧApós [m.] 'dull-white leprosy' (Hes.). <IE *h₂elb¹o- 'white’▷

=== page 063 ===

78
•DER åλowdŋs ‘leprous' (Gal.). As an adjective àλqoús. Aɛukoús 'white' (H.),
ȧλwooúç. Aɛvkoús ‘id.' (see below). Thence aλqivía. ǹ λεúкη. Пεppaiẞoí (H.).
⚫ETYM Identical with Lat. albus and U alfu ‘alba'. Extended forms with PIE *d may be
found in the word for 'swan', e.g. OHG albiz, OCS lebed, but this could also be a
European substrate word. The main comparanda are geographical names, especially
river-names like Aλqɛiós, Lat. Albula; Lat. Albis = MoHG Elbe; also ON elfr 'river'.
On the river names, see Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 4 (1953): 40ff. Most of these
names, however, are probably of non-IE origin.
The word plays a role in discussions about the existence of PIE *a, since Hittite has
alpa- 'cloud'. However, if this is related, it could easily represent thematic *h₂olb¹o-.
IE *b is frequent in color terms (e.g. äpyupoc).
The form aλwoós (H.) was compared with Arm. aławni ‘pigeon' < IE *alH-bª-n-, but
now there is a different explanation of the word: *plh₂-bh-ni- (see Klingenschmitt
1982: 68"). The relation between ȧλpós and aλwopós cannot be explained in Indo-
European terms; perhaps ȧλwoóc is a simple mistake due to misreading of op as w?
ȧλwn [f.] 'threshing floor, garden' (Il.), also 'halo' (around sun and moon) (Arat.); also
'disk' of the sun or moon, or of a shield. <?>
•VAR Also ǎλws, gen. -w, -wos or -wvos; recent äλwv.
•DIAL Cypr. ǎλovα· кñлοɩ ‘gardens' (H.), probably ntr. plur.; Cypr. gen. alawo,
ȧλƑw? Dor. aλos in Sicily is probably from *alwo-.
⚫COMP μητp-aλoíãç 'matricide' (A.); Schwyzer 451 4.
=
•DER άλwɛúç ‘farmer' (A. R., Arat.), also PN in Hom.; ȧλwɛvós (AP) and áλwïoç
(Nic.) of the threshing floor', Aλwiás epithet of Anw (Nonn.). ȧλwvía (grain on the)
threshing floor' (pap., Ath.), diminutive ȧλávov (Gp., Hdn.); áλwviкóç (pap., Ed.
Diocl.). Denominative verbs ȧλwvεvoμα (App.), áλwví(w (H.) 'to work at the
threshing floor'; further ȧλoάw, aλotáw (II.) 'to thresh, crush', epic -o- stands for
original length; as a second member in лατр-aλoías etc. (Att. and late), see
Schwyzer: 451 4. Thence aloŋquós 'threshing', aλonτn's 'thresher', àλóŋτpa [pl.]
'wages for threshing', all known from papyri. Auch aλoτp 'thresher' (Nonnos,
AP), àλo(i)nois (EM, gloss.).
⚫ETYM Perhaps from earlier *ȧλwFŋ. äλws and the Cypr. forms might derive from a
hysterodynamic noun of the typе лáτрwç, with nom. *-ōu-s, acc. -ou-m, gen. -u-os;
see Beekes Mnem. 24 (1972): 350-2. If MoSw. lō 'threshing floor' is cognate, we might
also reconstruct a root *h₂(e)l-. The explanation by Schwyzer: 479: 7 (from PIE
uel(u)- 'to wind', original meaning 'round') must be rejected, as it does not explain
the Cyprian forms without initial w-, nor the meaning ‘garden'. Semantically, we
probably have to think of a small piece of land near the farm, used for growing fruits
and vegetables (garden) and for threshing. From threshing-floor, we can understand.
the development to 'disk' and then to 'halo'; see Ure Class. Quart. 49 (1955): 225-230.
The conjecture of Van Windekens KZ 100 (1987): 309f. is to be rejected.
àλóлnž, -ekoç [f.] ‘fox' (Archil.). <IE *h₂lop- 'fox'>
⚫VAR On the gender see DELG. A shortened form is ȧλwлá (Alc.), ȧλwлóç (Hdn.);
on its origin see Sommer 1948: 5. Denominative ȧλwñεúɛɩ· àvɩxvεúεi 'tracks' (H.).
j
!
i
äuados
79
⚫DER Diminutive άλwлéкioν (Аr.); ȧλwлεкéη, -ñ 'fox-skin' (Hdt.); ȧλwлεкíα a
disease of the skin (Arist.); also ȧλшлεкíασç (Gal.) in the same meaning; àλwñɛkiaç
[m.] 'branded with a fox' (Luc.); àλwлεкíç f. = кvvαλóлη (X.), also 'head-gear of
ảλwnɛkiç kuvaλóñηš
fox-skin' (X.) and 'kind of vine' (Plin.), see details in Strömberg 1940: 139;
ảλwnɛkɩdɛúç [m.] ‘young fox' (Ar.); ảλwñékɛios [adj.] (Gal.), àλwéɛkódŋs (H., EM).
Denominative àλwлɛкí‹ƒ [v.] ‘to behave like a fox', i.e. 'to be cunning'.
•ETYM ȧλóлη may correspond to Arm. ałuēs, gen. -esu 'fox'. Cf. further Lith. lāpė
and Latv. lapsa. Schrijver JIES 26 (1998): 421-434 connects it with the Celtic words
like W llywarn, etc., which he derives from *lop-erno-, and reconstructs *h₂lop-. The
Greek long ō is explained from an old nom. *h₂lōp-s. (Skt. lopāśá- ‘jackal' and MP
rōpās 'fox' have an original diphthong in the root and cannot be connected; Lat.
volpes 'fox', Lith. vilpišys 'wild cat' should also be kept apart; Schrijver starts from a
root *ulp-).
The inflection aλa̸ëη§, -ɛkoç is unique in Greek. There is no support for the
paradigm -ōk-s, -ek-os assumed by Rix 1976: 143. In the Armenian form, the ē
presents difficulties and is probably secondary, the word rather showing old short e;
see Clackson 1994: 95.
De Vaan IIJ 43 (2000): 279-293, disassociates the suffix from the Indo-Ir. one (as
above the words were disassociated) and doubts that Skt. -āśa- etc. are of IE origin.
He follows Chantraine 1933: 376 in assuming that the Greek (and Armenian) suffix
-ek- was taken from a non-IE language; Greek would have lengthened the vowel in
the nominative. But this does not explain the Greek ablaut: one would expect that
the long vowel had been introduced everywhere. Rather, the suffixes are IE, and the
long vowel of Sanskrit and the short one of Armenian confirm the Greek ablaut as
archaic. See also Blažek Linguistica Baltica 7 (1998): 25-31.
ǎua [prep., adv.] 'at the same time (with), together (with)' (II.). <IE *sem- 'one'>
●DIAL Dor. άµă, originally instrumental, see Schwyzer: 550. àµɛî [loc.] (Delphi).
áµákiç. äñaž, Kpñτεç ‘once (Cret.)' (H.); Tarent. ȧµáüç ‘together³ (H.).
●comp áµaµŋλís plant growing at the same time as the apple tree, ‘medlar',
•Der äµvdıç (Aeol.) ‘together'.
=
•ETYM Probably the zero grade of the root *sem-, *som- in ►ɛlc, ► dµós: perhaps from
*smh₂- (see ►óµós). For the adverbial ending -a, see Schwyzer: 622 8; on кápτa,
Ruijgh 1980: 189ff. See ȧµáoμαι 2, ► äµaža.
àuádpva → uádpva.
äµaboç [f.] 'sand (Il.). ◄EUR➤
•DER àµaðītıç [f.] 'living in the sand' (Epich.), of кóyxos; also TN (J.); àµ¤¤ódŋs
‘sandy' (Str.); TNs 'Hµaðíŋ (II.), Aµaßoûç (Cyprus) < *-oƑevt-, cf. ǹµà¤óεɩ ‘sandy'
(Od.). Denominative verb άua0úvw 'to turn into dust, etc.' (epic poet.).
•ETYM It is mostly assumed that wάuaboç was created from ǎuaos on the model of
чáμчoç, and that ǎuμos was secondarily created to wáµµoç. Beekes 2000: 26 finds
these assumptions far from convincing, as they depend on the etymology of чáuu.
ǎuaboç has been connected with MHG sampt, and a pre-form PIE *samǝdho- was

=== page 064 ===

80
áµaiµáketog, (-n), -ov
reconstructed. But DELG already warned that the connection does not guarantee IE
origin. Kuiper NOWELE 25 (1995): 67 favors European substrate origin because of
the a-vocalism and the varying consonantism. On possible Albanian connections,
see Çabej 1969: 174f. See ►äµµoç, ➤yáµaðoc, ▶yáµios.
áµaiµáketos, (-n), -ov [adj.] Homeric epithet of unknown mg. (Il.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Connections with μакрóç, μачµáш, μáxoμα should probably all be
rejected; see discussion in Tichy 1983: 314ff. One might conceive of a Pre-Greek
word, *a-mai-mak-eto- (with prothetic vowel and reduplication).
àziakptic → Lókpwv.
άuaλбúvw [v.] 'to destroy, weaken' (Il.). <?►
•ETYM One assumes that the verb is a denominative from an otherwise unknown
pre-form *ȧuaλdúç. The first question is whether the word has the same root as
►Bladɛiç. The ȧ- must then have been added after the privative formations (which
always express some lack), but this is not very probable; influence of quaλóc is not
very likely either. Connection with µελdoµαι 'to smelt' is not compelling because of
the meaning. However, it has a variant àµéλdɛɩv, which shows the same problem as
in ȧuaλSúvw/ Bλadúc, and in this case we are certain of cognate forms with s-, viz.
OHG smelzan. Does this point to an old interchange of *h₂m-/sm-? The question has
not yet been solved. µαλðaкóç, µɑλaкós, áµaλóç and außλús differ too much to be
useful. Bλévva and μúλn do not belong here.
ǎαλλa [f.] 'sheaf (Soph.). <PG?>
•COMP ȧuaλλoбετnp 'binder of sheaves' (II.).
•DER άuaλλɛúw 'to bind sheaves' (EM) and ȧuaλλεov (àµáλov) (Call. Com., H.,
Eust.).
⚫ETYM Considered to be a derivation in a from an older l-stem, eventually from the
verb άµáqμa 'to gather'. However, if άµάo̟μαɩ is used primarily for drawing
liquids, it can hardly be connected with äµaλλa. One might also think of ► ảµáw 1 ˚to
reap corn'. Words in -λa may well be Pre-Greek. See ►äµn.
άuaλoyía [f.] see below (v.l. for oμo- Alciphr. 4, 18, 10). ◄?►
•VAR = åßdŋpitioµós ‘foolery', garrulitas (gloss.); άuaλóyos. qλúapos ‘id.', garrulus
(gloss.).
•ETYM According to Latte Glotta 32 (1953): 37f., it is haplological for *άμaλλooуía,
which properly meant 'collecting sheaves', then 'the accompanying song' >
'bragging'. This is rightly called "sehr hypothetisch" by Frisk. Grošelj Živa Ant. 7
(1957): 40 assumed *άuaλo-λoyía.
άuaλós [adj.] 'weak, soft' (epic poet.), said of young animals and men (Il.). <◄PG?►
•DER Perhaps here άuaλ[^]o ȧqavíɛ 'makes invisible' (H.) and åµαλáлτw (S.),
which would equal άuaλdúvw 'to soften' (H.), after ẞλáлτw, §άлτш, see
Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 212.
•ETYM Uncertain. Mostly connected with άuaλdúvw, but this is just a guess. One
further connects àµßλúç < *àµλús, but this, too, is doubtful. Fur.: 224 connects it
!
81
with άлaλóç, with the Pre-Greek interchange labialu. This is possible, but
remains uncertain.
άµáµažvs, -vos [f.] 'vine trained on two poles' (Epich., Sapph.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also gen. -udos (Sapph.). Acc. to H. = ǎμлελoç ½ уévoç στaquλñç 'grape-vine
or kind of grape-bunch'; σταquλñs yévoç, oi dè τǹv ávadɛvdpáða oűτw kaλɛiołaι
'kind of grape-bunch, thus a vine that grows up trees' (Suid.).
•ETYM Fur.: 212 compares àµačíç. yévos otaqulñs áлò åvadevdpádos (H.), which
must be correct. It is a typical substrate word, showing reduplication. Furnée's
further connection with ẞñка ȧvadɛvdpás (H.) is very doubtful; better, though still
doubtful, is the comparison with Hitt. māḥla- ‘grape-vine' (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
Cf. also Kuiper 1956: 215¹5.
áµaunλis, -ídos [f.] ‘a tree or bush with edible fruits', probably ‘medlar, Mespilus
germanica' (Hp.). <GR>
•ETYM Description in Ath. 14, 650 c-e; the speakers are uncertain about the plant,
and also about the name: we also find oμounλis 'which resembles the μ., and
лчunλíç. It should probably be analyzed as 'which blossoms at the same time as the
apple tree'. See Strömberg 1944: 32.
άµávav [f.] · ǎµažav ‘chassis, wagon' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 34 assumes a loan from an unknown IE language, from
*sņi-aks-nā (cf. ►ǎµaža); this is highly uncertain. We may compare ►áñývò ‘id.'
(s.v., cf. also ►кαлávα), with Kuiper 1956: 213 and Fur.: 224. A variation л/ μ is well-
known in substrate words. Latte's suggestion of a corruption is therefore gratuitous.
ǎμávdaλov [adj.] = àчavéç лap' Аλкaíw 'unseen (Alcaeus)' (Hdn.; Et. Gen. A p. 20
Reitzenstein; EM 76, 52). ◄?►
•DER ȧчavdaλoï àqavíčɛi, ßλántɛi ‘makes unseen, damages' (H.).
•ETYM Acc. to Hdn. it belongs to quaλdúvw; is it then dissimilated from *ảµáλdaλoç
(Schwyzer: 258)? This is doubtful.
ȧμāvīτaι [m.pl.] 'kind of mushroom' (Nic.). <?>
•ETYM Perhaps derived from a place name, e.g. the mountain "Aμavoc in Asia Minor,
but it occurs frequently (Koukoules Ep. Et. Byz. 17 (1948): 75; Chantraine RPh. 91
(1965): 201-3). For the suffix, cf. ȧkovitov, ßwλítηs. The gloss åµávopes. doßiñves
‘small abscess, boil (H.) may be unrelated.
àqiávopes → àziavital.
auaža [f.] 'framework, chassis of a four-wheeled wagon; wagon' (II.). <PG(V)►
●COMP áµažitós ‘practicable for a wagon' (òdóc, Pi.), mostly substantivized [f.]
'carriage-road' (II.), from iéval 'to go' and a suffix -To-.
•ETYM Usually derived from ǎua and áž- (in ►ǎwv) with a suffix -α, e.g. Adrados
Emerita 17: 146f. However, the interpretation as 'one-axler' (Meringer KZ 40 (1907):
217ff.) does not fit the ǎuaža; one would rather expect 'two-axler' (cf. ►diopoc). It
hardly belongs to ToB amäkṣpänta 'wagon-master' (for which, Adams 1999: 19
reconstructs unclear IE *hem-), unless as a loan from Greek. Also improbable is

=== page 065 ===

82
Adams KZ 97 (1984): 230-232 ('containing axles'). Finally, Forssman 1966: 8-11 argues
that the aspiration is late, which suggests that the word does not contain ǎua.
Fur.: 221 compares άßaкλý. äµaža (Cyr.), i.e. the interchange åµaк-/ åßaк-, from
which we must conclude that the etymon is Pre-Greek. Note that Bănăţeanu REIE 3
(1943): 136f. already assumed an Anatolian origin.
áµάo̟чa [v.] 'to draw (milk), gather' (Od.). <?>
•VAR The act. άuάw occurs late only.
●COMP In compounds with έë-, кat-, etc.
•DER ǎun 'shovel (Ar.), 'hod' (inscr.), 'water-bucket, pail' (Plu.; Lat. hama, Cato),
'spade' (Gp.); probably derived from the verb, not the other way around; from here
άuíç f. 'chamber-pot' (Hp.).
ETYM Mostly connected with ǎun, but even this seems not quite certain (Schulze
1892: 3653 and Solmsen 1909: 195 separate them). As the basic meaning of the verb
and of ǎuŋ are unclear, the etymology is uncertain. It has further been connected
with άuvíov and ►ävτλoç; a relationship with ǎμaλλa has also been suggested; all
are uncertain. Cf. Bechtel 1914 and Solmsen 1909: 180ff. Originally, the meaning was
no doubt quite specific, so the verb should not be connected with ►äua. Connection
with Skt. ámatra- [n.] 'vase' is also quite uncertain (the treatment of Mayrhofer
EWAia is unsatisfactory; words for vases mostly have no etymology). One has
connected it with Lith. sémti, 1sg. semiù 'to scoop, ladle', sámtis 'ladle' < *semH-, to
which perhaps belongs Lat. sentīna 'bilge-water' (see ►ävτλoç). See ►άµáw.
ȧuápa [f.] 'trench, channel' (Il.). <?>
VAR ȧu-? (Frisk); Ion. ȧuápŋ. Cf. àµápεvμα. áероíσμаτα ẞорẞópov 'collection of
filth' (H.) and ǹ ¿v toĩç kýrolç údpopón, rapå ró äµa kai kʊws kai óµalŵs peïv, i
olov áµapón tɩs ovσa ‘irrigation in gardens (...)' (H.).
•ETYM The second gloss from Hesychius is a typical example of folk etymology.
Formerly connected with dɩ-, -aµāv in the meaning 'to dig out', and with aμŋ
'shovel' (Schulze 1892: 365f., Solmsen 1909: 194ff.), which is improbable. Others
considered a relationship with Hitt. amiiar(a)- 'canal': see Puhvel HED s.v. But note
that the words only have initial am- in common. The word could belong to the
Greek-Anatolian substrate. A third option is a connection with Alb. amë 'river-bed,
source' and river names like Amantia, Amana, Amara, etc.; see Krahe Beitr. z.
Namenforsch. 4 (1953): 52f. and Kuiper NOWELE 25 (1995): 73-5. This comparison is
formally better than that with Hittite. See aμapía.
ȧμápǎкov [n.] ‘Origanum Majorana, marjoram' (Pherecr.). <PG?>
•VAR Also -āp-, -os [m.].
•ETYM The long ã in Ionic-Attic points to recent origin; cf. ȧßapú. òpíyavov <tò ¿v>
Maкɛdovíą (H.). If this is accepted, the variation ẞ/μ points to a Pre-Greek substrate
word, which is probable anyhow. Connection with Skt. maruva(ka)- 'id.' must be
wrong. See Fur.: 210f., who further compares ẞāpos/v 'a kind of spice'. From Greek
comes Lat. amaracum, -us, MLat. maioracus, maiorana, whence the modern forms.
.
àuapúnow
83
άμαpɛчv [v.] · άкоλоvеεïν, лεíеεσÐα, áμаpτávε 'to follow, believe, miss the mark'
(H.). GR, IE *sm- 'one' and *h₂er- 'join'>
•ETYM The last explanation of the gloss can hardly be reconciled with the first, so
they should be separated. One may compare Aμápios, epithet of Zeus and Athena in
Achaia (Aymard 1938: 455-470); the word might mean 'who brings together' (cf.
Quayúpios). Further comparison with ►áµapτñ, ► óµapréw and ►öµnpos.
άapía [?] · óµov, лapaya̸ywç 'together, by a slight change' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Not understandable. One would think that the meaning belongs to another
gloss, as aμapía can hardly be an adverb.
ȧμapτávw [v.] 'to miss the mark, fail' (II.). <IE *h₂mert- 'miss, fail'>
•VAR Аor. άμaptɛiv.
DIAL Aeol. nußроτоv (Hom.).
●Comp vqµeptǹs, vāµ- (Hom.) ‘infallible, unmistakable', Dor. vāµépteia (S.).
Younger ávaμápτητos 'without fault.
●DER άµapría ‘faulť (Att.); àµáptiov (A.), àµaptác (Ion. and late), àµáprŋua (Att.,
Hell.), ȧapτwλń (Thgn.), ȧuapτwλía (Hp., com.); secondary άuapτwλóç 'sinner'
(Arist., Hell.), whence άuapτwλóç 'erroneous, erring' (Arist.).
•ETYм vηдεpτns presupposes *n-h₂mert-, and seems old because of the full grade
root (cf. ávaμápτητoc). Probably, the -ap- in áμapτávw replaces -pa- after the full
grade (note that Aeolic has au[ẞ] poτ-). The aspiration must be analogical. The word
has no known cognates, but the reconstructed root looks perfectly IE. Cf. Ruijgh
Lingua 25 (1970): 308f.
άμαρτý [adv.] ‘at the same time, together' (II.). <IE *sm-h₂er-t-, GR>
•VAR -η in Aristarchus; elsewhere -ñ, -ñ, but probably wrongly.
●der áµapτýdny (sch. Ø 162, H.), which is also a probable reading of N 584
óμαpτηdηy (Wackernagel 1916: 70).
⚫ETYM Old instrumental (in *-eh, > -n, which also explains the accent) of a verbal
adjective *ǎapros joined together, meeting' (äμa and ȧpapíσкw). Also from here
probably comes ȧµapτéw 'to meet, get together', which is mostly written ►óμapτέw
(II.). See also ŏupos.
ȧμapúσow [v.] 'to sparkle, twinkle' (of the eye) (h. Merc., Hes.). <PG>
•VAR Only present.
●DER άµapvyń ‘twinkling' (h. Merc.), àµápvyμa ‘id.' (Hes., Sappho), with ū by
metrical lengthening, while Aeolic has -μα; άμápvyž ‘id.' (Hdn.). Perhaps a
nasalized form in Aµapvykɛúç (Y 630) and in ảµapvykvσía. ßoo¨τpvxía ‘curly things’
(H.) (rather unclear; mistake?). άµapútta. τoùç óðaλµúç ‘eyes' (H.); taken as a
Cret. dual ȧuaрúкτа 'the twinkling ones'.
=
•ETYM Compare with μapμaípw (s.v.; cf. µаρµарvуń). As -úσow is typically Greek
(Schwyzer: 733), a comparison with Lith. mérkti ‘to close the eyes, twinkle', etc. is not
admissible. The word may well be of Pre-Greek origin, with ά- interchanging with
reduplication and the suffix -v/-vy, which is typical of the substrate language and
shows prenasalization. See Kuiper 1956: 221.

=== page 066 ===

84
àuata
àµɑta [n.pl.]? disputed; hapax in SIG 421 A 5 and 26 (IIIª). <IE *h₂eh,(s)-mōr ‘day’►
•ETYM Leumann 1950: 276 reinstated the view that this form is simply ηµατα 'days',
which is no doubt correct.
άµavpós [adj.] ‘hardly seen, dim, faint' (Od.); on the mg. see McKinley Ant. class. 26
(1957): 12-39, Neugebauer Ant. class. 27 (1968): 373f. <PG?>
•VAR Rarely μaupos or μavpós (Hdn., Gal., H.), probably from μauvρóo̟µaι, -ów
(Hes.).
●DER áµavpótŋs (Gal.), àµavpía = caligo (gloss.). Denominative verb quavpóoμa ‘to
become dim', rarely aчavpów ‘to make dim' (Ion., poet., Hell.). Thence άμaúpwσiç
'obfuscation' (Hp., Arist.), auaúpwμa 'id.' (Plu.).
•ETYM It is assumed that µavpóoμat arose through loss of the initial vowel (see the
material in Strömberg 1944: 44f.). However, it could also be a case of a prothetic
vowel vs. its absence, and therefore a substrate phenomenon. Substrate origin is
probable anyhow, as the word has no etymology. It is a Scythian loan acc. to Puhvel
1957: 237: from maurva-.
άuάw 1 [v.] 'to reap corn, cut, mow down' (Il.). <IE? *h₂meh,- 'mow'>
•VAR Homer often has long ȧ-, no doubt metrical (Chantraine 1942: 111).
•COMP Especially in ȧл-, diaμáw 'to cut off, mow, harvest' (Od.).
•Der ǎµntos [m.] ‘(time of) harvest' (Hom.), on the accent see LSJ; àµntúc [f.]
(Hymn. Is.); àµŋtýp ‘reaper' (Il.), άµýtɛipa [f.] (EM), àµntpís [f.] (Poll. 1, 222).
Daneben auτs (Porph.). Instrument noun auτpov 'sickle' (Max. Tyr.),
ɑµntikós [adj.] ‘made for cutting'.
•ETYM Connected with OHG māen, OE māwan ‘to mow', which means we have a
root *h₂meh₁-; ǎuntos could then be identical with MHG māt, OE mæd 'reaping'.
The Anatolian form Hitt. hamešḥa(nt)- 'spring, time of harvest' is important, as it
shows that the *h, belonged to the root. ȧuáw probably derives from ǎµŋ < *h₂mh,-
eh2-, acc. to Schrijver 1991: 20 (no vowel assimilation from *amē-, as per Peters 1980a:
914). For ǎun, Morgenstierne Acta orientalia 7 (1929): 200 connects Pashto yūm
‘spade' (cf. Pok. 502, but it is doubtful whether a PIE root *ieh,m- is permissible).
The verb dɩ-aµáw is separated from àµáw 'to mow' by Irigoin in the LfgrE. On
►ǎμaλλa 'sheaf and ►àµápa ‘'canal', see s.vv.
→
àuáw 2 → àziáozial.
=>
äμẞn → äußwv.
äµßiž, -īkos [m.] 'spouted vessel' (Ath. 11, 480d), also ‘alembic' (Zos. Alch.). <?>
⚫VAR Also ǎuẞīкoç m. (Posid.).
⚫ETYM Explained as 'počí×ελoç кúλ and ɛiç öεù ávηучévη (Ath. 11, 480d); see
Diehl on Semon. fr. 24. Statements about these words in the handbooks are unclear.
The suffix is no doubt a substrate element, as it is in кúε. It is often connected with
► äµßn, ► äµßwv, but correctly so? Chantraine 1933: 376 calls these words Semitic, but
without references. Derivation from ávaẞaívw seems most improbable.
άµßλakiokw→ àµлλaкíoкw and άµßλíσkw.
àµɛíẞw, -oμaɩ
àµßλíokw [v.] ‘to cause to miscarry' (S.). <IE? *h₂mlh3->
85
•VAR Pres. also (-)αµßλóoµα, -ów (IA), -ww (Max.), -wokɛiv. tò átɛlès yevvñoal,
τò qɛīpaɩ ẞpéqoç ‘uneffected birth, miscarriage of a foetus' (Suid.), -wσσεv
wμotokɛīv ‘to miscarry' (H.); aor. (¿§-)aµßλwoai.
•Der From àµßλóoµai: äµßλwoię ‘miscarriage' (Lys., Arist.), àµßλwoчoç (Max.),
ǎuẞλwua (Antipho Soph., Aret.), àµßλwσμós (Aret.); instrument noun àµßλwtηpiov
(Orib.), adjective àµßλwtikós (Gal.). The formation of aµßλwеpíðɩov ‘abortive child
(Ph.), 'drug causing abortion' (Poll.), also -ídios [adj.] (Aret.), looks strange. A
secondary suffix -ídiov was added to -0 po- (Chantraine 1933: 373 and 68ff.).
•ETYM The connection with μúλη as 'miscarriage' (Hp.), recte 'hard formation in a
woman's womb', should be given up; Chantraine thinks it may be the same word as
'mill', and Frisk, who gives the suggestion under außλíσкw, does not mention it s.v.
чúλη. Rix MSS 27 (1970): 1054¹ considers the root *h₂mlh, and a connection with
►ȧußλúc (but see there).
ȧµẞλúç, -εīα, -ú [adj.] 'blunt; dim, faint (of sight)' (IA). <?>
●Der åµßλútŋs ‘bluntness, weakness' (Arist., Plu.); denominative verbs: 1. àµẞλúvw
[v.] 'to make blunt, weaken' (IA); ǎµßλuvσis (comm. Arist.), außλuvτp (Poeta de
herb.), åµßλvvtikóç ‘causing weakness' (Dsc.). 2. außλvwoow (-úttw) [v.] ‘to be
short-sighteď (Hp., Pl.), from *åµßλv-w¥, cf. àµßλv-wñóç, also àµßλwñós, àµßλŵy;
Schwyzer: 733, Sommer 1948: 3ff.
•ETYM άµẞλúç can be from *aμλ-ús. It cannot be from *h₂mlhu-, as per Rix MSS 27
(1970): 90, as this would give *άuaλus. The connection with άuaλós is a mere guess
and it explains nothing. Perhaps related to außλ(aк)íoкw; there have also been
attempts to compare it to άuaλSúvw, lastly Nikolaev 2005.
=>>
äµßwv, -wvos [m.] 'rim or edge of a cup (especially one that curves inwards)' (A.).
<?>
•VAR Attic for Ion. äußŋ ‘raised edge, protuberance' (Gal. 18a 340); äµßŋ. ǹ tñs ïtvos
óqpûç tŵv kullŵv ảσлíðwv ‘rim of a shield (...)' (H.), ‘rim of a wheel (Democr.).
One compares also ȧváßwveç Baеμov εldoç 'kind of step or threshold' (H.).
•ETYM On the formation, see Chantraine 1933: 162 and Schwyzer: 487; on the
meaning, Ross Glotta 49 (1971): 244-258. Probably a loanword. Connection with Lat.
umbō is quite uncertain; Chantraine (and, tentatively, Frisk) connect it with ►äµßɩ§.
άµéðvʊtoç, -ov [adj.] ‘not drunken, not intoxicating' (Plu., Dsc.); substantivized
'remedy against drunkenness' (Plu.), also as the name of a plant, see Strömberg 1940:
91; 'amethyst' (LXX). <IE *med¹u ‘sweet; honey, wine'>>
•ETYM Compound of privative à- and µéðu. The stone ‘amethyst' was named after its
color: the red of wine diluted with water such that it is no longer intoxicating
(Clausing Glotta 20 (1932): 292).
àµɛíßw, -quaɩ [v.] 'to change, exchange', med. also 'to answer, repay' (II.). <IE
*h₂meig"- 'change'>
•Var àµeißovtes ‘rafters that meet and cross each other' (Y 712).

=== page 067 ===

86
àueívov
•DER άµoßη ‘change, exchange, requital, recompense, answer, etc.', àµoßaños
'abwechselnd' (Pi., Emp., Hdt.), àµoßádioç 'id.' (Opp.); àµoчßчaĭov 'payment,
reward' (IGRom., Lydia). ȧoßɛús name of Poseidon in Lyc. 617. Adverbs:
àµoßηdíç, (é)aµoßadíc (Hom.), cf. Schwyzer 631. Late denominative àµoßá¶w [v.]
'to swap' (Men. Prot.). äµɛç (Plb., LXX) ‘(ex)change, etc.', åµɛiëtikós. åµoißós
'one who exchanges' (II.), also adjective 'in requital' (S.), frequent as a second
member.
⚫ETYM No exact correspondence. It has been compared to Lat. migrare 'to wander' as
if from *migros ‘changing (place)'. The -ẞ- probably goes back to *g", as *b is rare in
PIE. Therefore, the root was *h₂meig™-, which may be an extension of *h₂mei- ‘to
change' (as in Skt. máyate and Lat. com-mūnis), but an enlargement -g"- is rare.
άµɛívwv [adj.] ‘better, stronger, more advantageous' (Il.). <?►
|-
•ETYM No etymology. Attic proper names with Aμεv- are supposed to show that the
-ɛt is a real diphthong, so it does not derive from *àµεvwv. DELG therefore
remarks that the word could be an old positive. Seiler 1950: 120 assumed *ȧ-μεvwv,
from *μvúc with privative à-; this is improbable. Note that a root *h₂mein- would
violate the IE root structure constraints, so it would have to be from *h₂mei-n-.
άuɛipw [v.] 'to bereave' (Pi.). <?>
•COMP ȧлаμɛíрw (p 322 v. l., Hes.).
•ETYM Solmsen KZ 29 (1888): 354 took the verb as an innovation for åµέpdw to
άµépoai, áµep◊ñvat. Perhaps related to άµέpdw. A reconstruction *hmer-ie/o- is
perfectly possible.
àµέλyw [v.] ‘milk' (Il.). <IE *h₂melg- ‘milk'>
"
●COMP iлл-ηuoλyoí 'Mare Milker', name of Scythians and other nomads (N 5, Hes.).
•DER ǎueλšıç 'milking' (Pi., LXX); plant name åµελžívη (Ps.-Dsc.), see Strömberg
1940: 160 (who compares auɛpoívŋ and ελžívŋ). àµελêтñpa (H.) explaining
àpartñpa.
ảµolyós, àµoλyń (Hdn.); άµoλyɛúç and àµóλyɩov ‘milking pail' (Theoc.), àµoλyádɛç
Bóɛç 'dairy cows' (S. Ichn. 5). On ȧuoλуαчoç, àµoλуáčɛɩ see ►àµoλуóç.
⚫ETYM An old verb, also found with full grade root in OHG melchan, OE melcan,
Alb. mjel, ToA mālkant [ptc.], Lith. mélžu, with the acute due to the following *ģ
(Winter's Law). The zero grade root appears in OCS mlúzo̟, MIr. bligim, Lat. mulgeō.
This points to an old ablauting athematic root present sing. *h₂mélģ-ti, plur. *h₂mlģ-
énti. Not connected with Skt. marjmi, mrjánti ‘to wipe off (see ►óµópyvvu).
ǎμεvai [v.] 'to satiate, take one's fill'. →ǎoal.
άuevηvóc [adj.] 'without power' (II.). ◄GR, IE *men-s->
•DER ȧuεvývwσɛv (N 562).
⚫ETYM Built on auεvns (E.), from μévoç, perhaps modelled after aкunvóc (Od.).
ȧuέpyw [v.] 'to pluck', of flowers (Sapph.), also of olives = 'squeeze out'? (Com. Adesp.
437); àµépуw. tò ¿клεw 'to press out' (Hdn.). <IE?, PG?>
auns, -nos
87
●DER ɑµópyŋ ‘watery part which runs out when olives are pressed' (Hp.), borrowed
as Lat. amurca, amurga; also àµópyng, äµopyos, äµopyɩ. Agent noun àµopyoí.
лóλεwç öλεеpoι 'destructions of a city' (Cratin.). άμopуεúç 'squeezer of olive oil'
(Poll.), äµopyµa. σúlλɛyµa, äpɩvµa collection, condiment' (H.). Unclear aμopyíç,
-ídos [f.] 'stalks of mallow, Malva silvestris' (Ar.); perhaps named after the island
Amorgos (Taillardat RPh. 33 (1959): 66; cf. also Taillardat REGr. 64 (1951): 11ff.).
Adjective aμópyɩvos epithet of XiTwv and other garments (com., Aeschin.), cf.
аμóруεа xρбμаtos ɛidoç, àñò výσoυ Аμоруобντoç 'kind of color, from the island.
of Amorgos' (Suid.).
ETYM Lat. mergae 'pitchfork' could be related. It seems that the Greek root is related
to Skt. marj- (see oчóруvчд), but it is unclear how the initial vocalism could be
explained. Although a PIE root *h₂merg- is perfectly possible, the word may also be a
technical term borrowed from the substrate language.
ȧuεpdw [v.] 'to deprive of (II.). <IE *h₂merd- 'cause injury'>
•VAR µépdɛɩ· kwλýɛ, ßláлɩɛ ‘'hinders, disables' (H.); µɛpеɛĩσa. otepŋfeĩoa
‘deprived' (H.).
•ETYM If the form without the initial vowel is secondary, the root may have been
*h₂merd-, which is cognate with Skt. mrdnāti, mardati 'zerreiben, zerdrücken' (cf.
►μаpaívw), OAv. mōrǝndat ‘destroys', Lat. mordeō 'to bite', OE smeortan ‘to cause
pain' (with initial s- of Germanic origin). Perhaps related to άuɛípw.
άuéow · wµonλáτa 'shoulder blades' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Compare with duoc; if this represents *Hom(e)s-, we could assume *h₂mes-,
but then the language can hardly be Greek, given the preserved intervocalic -σ-. Is it
then Macedonian? It can hardly be Phrygian, which does not preserve intervocalic
-s- either. The word may have quite a different origin (see Beekes Sprache 18 (1972):
127).
àµɛúσaσðaɩ [v.] 'to surpass, go beyond' (Pi., Euph.), also ‘to trade, exchange' in Cret.,
cf. Bechtel 1921, 2: 778. <IE? *h₂meu(H)- 'move, push'>
•VAR diaμievσtás àλačóvaç 'vagrants' (H.); daµετs. уevotηs, áлateŵv 'liar, cheat'
(H.).
•DER àµεúðчoç = лорεúσчµç (A. R. 4, 297 after EM 82, 11), cf. auεvoiñopos, -enýs
(Pi.).
•ETYM The meaning 'trade' could derive from 'to go to the other side'. The
comparison with auúvw 'to push back', further with Lat. moveō, Lith. máuti, 1sg.
máuju 'to tear off, Skt. mivati ‘move, push' < *miH-(e)u- (the European forms
continuing *mieu-), is rather uncertain. If it is Indo-European, the root may be
*h,meu-, cf. Heubeck Glotta 65 (1987): 37-44 and s.v. ► àµúµwv.
äun ⇒àqiáozial.
άuńkwa [adj.] · Sɛivá. Tapavtīvoɩ ‘fearful (Tarantian)' (H.). <?►
ETYM Acc. to von Blumenthal 1930: 14, the word is Messapian. A mere guess.
äuns, -ntos [m.] 'cake' (Ar.). <?>

=== page 068 ===

88
àuía
•DER Diminutive åµŋtíσkoç kind of cake' (com.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. It has been compared to ǎua. The latter word has a
reduplicated variant àµ¤µuðádɛç, typical of substrate words, but it need not be
cognate with ǎuns.
άua [f.] ‘kind of tunny which swims up rivers', perhaps ‘bonito' (Sotad. Com.). <?>
•VAR Also -íaç [m.].
•ETYM Unknown. Thompson 1947 s.v. supposes an Egyptian origin (mehi, mḥit
name of a fish). Cf. Strömberg 1943: 128 and De Saint Denis 1947 s.V.
ǎµuða [f.] · ëdɛoµa rolóv, kai äptvµa wę Avaкpέwv ‘kind of meat, condiment' (H.); for
Anacr. see 467 Page. <PG(V)►
•VAR P. Hamb. 90, 18 has an acc. pl. ǎµÐαç. Cf. áµaµðádes. ñdvoµá ti okevaotòV
Sià кpεwv εiç μкρà кεкo̟µµévшv dɩ ȧρτчµáτшv (Photius 86 R.).
•ETYM The variant with reduplication is typical of substrate words. The word has
been connected with auns, but this is quite uncertain.
auλλa [f.] 'contest' (Pi.). <PG(S) ►
•DER Denominative verb áuλλáoμai 'to compete' (IA); ȧµλητηp 'competing' (S.),
άшp of the competition' (Philostr., Aristid.); άuλλητкóç ‘id.' (Pl.);
áuinua 'competition' (S. [lyr.], inscr. Cyr.).
⚫ETYM Derived from *ǎμ--α by Frisk (comparing Búελλa, ǎuaλλa), but this is
problematic. All words in -λ(a) look non-IE (i.e. Pre-Greek), so an IE suffix of this
shape is very doubtful (cf. Benveniste 1935: 41). For the form, cf. aquíλλaкav. olvov
‘wine' (H.).
.
auíaкav [f.]? olvov. Onẞaño 'wine (Theban)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. See Fur.: 221 (also on ȧßítov). Cf. ► ßñкa.
άux¤¤λóɛσσα [adj.] 'rich in almonds', epithet of Lemnos (753). <PG>>
……
•ETYM Call. fr. 18, 8 has άμóεσσav... népα, so he connects oμíxλn. This must be
a folk etymology, since o- comes from *h3-. Scholion BT on 753 gives = εúdaíµwv,
which is no more than a noncommittal guess (*åµкτo-αλoɛσσα [Lagercrantz IF 50
(1932): 277-80] is a construct that would hardly have been syncopated to our form).
The ancient interpretation as άлpóσμкτоç ‘inhospitable' does not explain the form
of the word. The connection with Go. maihstus 'mist' has the objection that the latter
word is not known in Greek. Leumann 1950: 214 and 273), accepts the solution of
Doederlein, who identified the form with ảµúydaλdov ‘almond'. This explanation fits
well and gives no difficulties for the formation. The variation may be confirmed by
ǎμuкτo. уλuкú. oi dè äµктov (H.) and àµvкλíç. yλuкús, ǹdús (H.); for кτ/ кλ, cf.
ȧpáкτη / ǎpoкλov etc. See Fur.: 140, 388.
άчá [f.] ‘mamma, mother; nurse', tpoqóç kaì µýτ кαе úлокoρioμóv 'rearer and
mother (hypocoristic)' (EM 84, 22). ◄ONOM▷
•VAR àµµía (Hdt.).
⚫ETYM Nursery word. Cf. Lat. amma, and Chantraine REGr. 59-60 (1946-7): 242ff.
ăion va
89
*ǎuž · ovykomoτòç äpτos, Tapavτivo 'bread of unbolted meal (Tarantian)' (H.).
1?7
⚫ETYM Gloss 3662 has àµкoviστoç, 3702 ápkopotov; thus *àµ(c)?
ǎo [f.] 'sand' (Pl.). <LW➤
•Der åµµádŋs (Hp., Arist.), ǎµµvos (Peripl. M. Rubr.), åµµítŋs [m.] (sc. Aí¤oç), also
auμitic [f.] 'sandstone' (Plin.).
⚫ETYM Considered to be a contamination of aμabos and чáчμoç, but this
assumed starting point fails to appreciate that the word is non-Indo-European and,
as such, may not have followed the sound laws of IE words. On Аµµíτηs as a river
name, see Redard 1949: 130 etc.
ǎuvāчoç [m., f.] 'grandchild' (Call.). <<GR>
•VAR Also ǎµ vαчµoç; plur. àµváµovεs (Poll. 3, 19). Cf. the gloss cited by DELG.
•DIAL Oros in Reitzenstein 1897: 5: äµvaшo oi àñóуovoɩ кuρíwç лapà tǹv tŵv
Kupηvaiwv diáλektov oi tŵv åµvæv åµvoi äµvaµoi λéyovtai. tovtéotiv tŵv apvŵv
ăpves. (...).
•ETYM Probably a reduplicated form of aµvóç; cf. лαidóлaiç (DELG). See Dobias-
Lalou REGr. 111 (1998): 403-417.
άµvíov [n.] ‘patera, vase to receive the blood of a sacrifice' (y 444); see Brommer
Herm. 77 (1942): 357 and 364. <?>
⚫ETYM Connection with άuάoμat is no more than a guess.
ảµvós [m., f.] ‘lamb' (S.). ◄ IE *h₂eg”-n-, *h₂og" -n- ‘lamb'▷
•VAR àµvóa• лpóß¤τov, oi dè àµvós ‘cattle, lamb' (H.), unreliable.
•COMP άµvoкŵv 'stupid like a sheep' (from кoέw, Taillardat 1962: § 453) áµvokóµos
(Latte for -кóлоç). лочµηу 'herdsman' (H.).
•DER Special feminine forms: ȧuvý, -á (Cos, Gortyn, etc.), àµvác (LXX), àµvíc
(Theoc.). Adjectives: aµvεtos (Theoc.), aµvatos (pap.) 'made of lambskin'; thence
άuvɛiov, ȧuvíov, also àµvяóç, äµvios 'inner membrane surrounding the foetus'
(Emp.), also -óc.
•ETYM Identical with Lat. agnus < *h₂eg"-no-, OIr. úan < *h₂og"-no-, OCS agnę <
*h₂eg"-n-ent- (with long vowel and acute from Winter's Law). OE ēanian, E yean,
Du. oonen < PGm. *awnōn seem to presuppose -gwh-, but see Schrijver 1991: 39, 438.
aμo- 'some, someone, somebody', indefinite pronominal stem in oúdaµóç, etc. ◄IE
*smH-o- 'some'>
•VAR Also in aμov, áµñ, áµoĩ, áµwσ-уε-лwç; also µndaµó-.
•ETYM Identical with Skt. sama- ‘someone' and Go. sums ‘'id'. The Greek and
Germanic forms require *smH-o-, and the Skt. form may also go back to this. A
similar form is at the basis of OIr. samail and Lat. similis 'like' < *semh₂-l-, see on
►óμaλóç. The forms seem to be an enlargement of *sem- 'one' (see ɛic), but the
exact relation is unclear.
ǎuova [?] unknown (only IG 5(2), 4: 22). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.

=== page 069 ===

90
ǎ
äµoos [adj.] · kakóç. Zikɛλoí ‘bad (Sicilian)' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR μoчoç. σкvеpшлós 'sullen, sad' (H.), see on σµolós = σkvėpwŋóç (Hdn. Gr. 1,
109), σμoчos (Theognost.), oµvós (H.).
⚫ETYM Given the plausible connection with quotós (see above and s.v.), the initial
displays a number of variations, which are typical for Pre-Greek (Fur.: 368). Not
related to μoчτоç (s.v.; pace von Blumenthal 1930: 15f.).
àµoλyóç [m.] ‘darkness'. Only (¿v) vuêtòs áµoλyā) (A 173, O 324, X 28 and 317, § 841).
<?>
•VAR óμoλy. Čów ‘in darkness' (H.), where the ms. has óμoλoyw. As an adjective
(which is probably a secondary, learned development) in E. fr. 104: åµoλyòv vúkta.
Еúρлíôç Аλкμývη Čoεpàν кαì σкоτεvýу 'dark'. oi dè µépоç τñS VUKTÒÇ KAʊ Ő
ȧuéλyovσiv 'part of the night during which they milk' (H.).
●DER ảµoλyañoç in µáša àµoλyaíŋ barley-cake made with milk' (Hes. Op. 590), see
below; άµoλуaïov µaσtòv ávaσxóµεvos 'who held up a breast full of milk' (AP 7, 657,
Leon.). ȧuoλyáčɛ· μεσημßρíčε ´passes the noon' (H.).
⚫ETYM The meaning had already been lost in antiquity. If a verbal noun of ȧuéλyw,
auoλyós, it means 'the milking' (and the oxytonesis has to be secondary). The
expression μáča auoλyaín in Hesiod is interpreted by Proclus and in EM s.v. μáča as
άкuaía 'at its height, in full bloom': τò yàp ảµoλyòv έлì toñ áкµaíov tíðɛtai. Thus
also Eustathius on O 324: Axatoi dε кaτà τoùs уλwσσoypάqovs àµoλyòv tǹv ákµýv
paot. However, this meaning may have been derived from the text (see Leumann
1950: 274). Nilsson 1920: 35f. took it as the time of milking at the beginning of the
night. DELG judges this interpretation to be more probable than that of ‘fullness'.
Older literature is mentioned in DELG and Frisk; see also Bolling AmJPh. 78 (1958):
165-172; Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 654. Parvulescu Glotta 63 (1985): 152-158
argues that vuкτòç άµoλy indicates the evening twilight, and adduces parallels
from other languages for an original meaning 'night milking'. Still, if óμoλoyw
points to *oμoλyós, the alternation ȧ-/o- could point to a substrate word.
auópa [f.] 'sweet cake' (Philet.). <?>
•VAR àµópa. σεµíðaλiç έóðǹ σùv µéλɩɩ 'fine wheat flour boiled with honey' (H.).
•DER άµоpíτηs ǎpτos (LXX), also written aμoßíτηs (Ath.) and aµopуíτaç.
”λaкoñvτaç ‘flat cakes' (H.), both = àµopƑírηs, with a suffix -ītŋs.
⚫ETYM From original *åµópƑa. Etymology unknown; perhaps Pre-Greek *(a)mar"-a?
àµopßóc [m., f.] 'follower, shepherd' (Call.). <?>
•DER Adjective aμopßañoç, said of Xapádpai gravel' (Nic. Th. 28, 489), mg. unclear;
scholiasts render it with лочμεvкαí 'of herdsmen' or oкOτενódяç 'dark' (which may
be mere guesses); cf. EM 85, 20: àµopßǹs кaì àµopßés. onuaívei tò µeσovúktiov napà
tǹv öppny ... σŋμaívɛɩ kai τòv åкólovov 'the time of midnight; companion'.
Denominative verbs àμopßéw (Antim.) and ȧµopßεúw (Nic.) 'to accompany'.
ȧμopẞíτns belongs to ▸ȧuópa.
⚫ETYM Unknown. Improbable analysis by Pisani RILomb. 77 (1943-44): 541.
àqiópyn →àquépyw.
àurdakiakw
άuopyíç [f.] kind of dress (Cratin. fr. 96). <PG➤
91
•var λaµrtñpes åµopyoúç (Emp. fr. 84), perhaps lanterns clothed in muslin (cf. Lat.
lintea lanterna, Pl. Bacch. 446).
•DER Unclear aµopyís, -ídos [f.] 'stalks of mallow, Malva silvestris' (Ar.); perhaps
named after the island Amorgos (Taillardat RPh. 33 (1959): 66; cf. also Taillardat
REGr. 64 (1951): 11ff.). Adjective aµópyɩvos epithet of XiTwv and other garments
(com., Aeschin.), cf. àµópуɛα. xpŵµatos ɛldos, áлò výσov Аµоруoūvτoç ‘kind of
color, after the island of Amorgos' (Suid.).
•ETYM The name of the island may have been used to designate clothes, cf. MOE
jersey, jeans, etc. Cf. Taillardat 1962: section 262.
ǎµotov [adv.] ‘incessantly, without pause' (Il.), especially in the phrase ǎμoτov
μεμаwç. <IЕ *meh,- 'get tired'>
•VAR Thence the adj. äµoτos (Theoc.).
•ETYM Uncertain, as the exact meaning is unknown. Seiler KZ 75 (1957): 17-20
assumes zero grade of ev + zero grade of uεv-, like in εччεμαшç; yet a zero grade of
Ev is uncertain. Forssman 1986: 329-339 explains it as *n-mn-tom memnuōs as
'Unerstrebtes/-bares erstrebend', with Greek and Sanskrit parallels. This is tempting,
but for the oldest formula with Eris (twice at verse end), the proposed meaning does
not fit. There, it clearly means 'incessantly, indefatigable', which rather suggests a
connection with *meh,-, as seen in uwλoç, OHG muojan 'to tire', muodi 'tired', Go.
af-mauiþs ‘id.' < *mō-etos), Ru. májať, 1sg. máju‘to wear out' (LIV² s.v. *meh¸-).
ǎμлελoç [f.] 'grape-vine, Vitis vinifera' (Il.). <PG?>
⚫DER Diminutives: άμлéλov (Aг., Hp.), àµлɛλíç (Ar.), also a bird name = ȧμлελíwv,
see below.
Adjectives: άunɛλóε ‘rich in vines' (Il.); àµлελvos ‘of the vine' (Hdt., Arist., Plb.),
άµлɛλкóç ‘id.' (Hell.), àµлéλoç ‘id.' (Ph., Ach. Tat.), àµлελódηs 'rich in vines'
(Poll., H.). àµлελītis (yñ, Xépoos) 'viniculture' (pap.), àµïeλitikós (pap.).
άμлελóv [m.] 'vineyard' (Aeschin. 2, 156 [v.l.], Hell.); άµлελεóν (Theoc., AP),
diminutive άμлελwvidov (pap.); àµлελɛíα ‘'id.' (inscr. Cherson.), after quτɛía.
ȧμлελíwv [m.] name of an unknown bird (Dionys. Av.), see Thompson 1895 s.v.
•ETYM Cannot be explained in IE terms, and generally considered to be a substrate
word (although there are no further indications for this).
àµлλaкíoкw [v.] 'to miss, fail; to be bereft of; to transgress' (Archil.). <PG(V)►
VAR Also außλaкíoкw; late and rare present to the aoг. ηчлλαкov (also ňµß-), pass.
perf. ημлλáкŋμαi. Notе åлλαкáv (E. Alc. 242, IA 124) and ȧvαлλáкηtoç (S. OT 472).
•DIAL Does not occur in Attic.
•DER άμлλaкía 'fault' (Hp.) with ảµлλαкɩ@τç f. = iɛpà vóσoç (Poet. de herb.).
Further ȧuлλáкιov (Pi. P. 11, 26) and áμлλáкημα (poet., late prose).
ETYM Compared with außλíoкw, which DELG rejects for both formal and
semantic reasons. are typical for substrate words (see Fur.: 281f.). Blanc 1994: 79-85
connects it with лλáчoμα. As Van Beek suggests to me (p.c.), this is quite
attractive, provided that лášoμα (which has no convincing etymology) is a
substrate word. The group would then display a prothetic vowel (which is otherwise

=== page 070 ===

22
92
àurpóv
rare in verbal forms!), prenasalization, and interchange ẞ/ л (if we include
άµßλíσкw), and we could reconstruct a Pre-Greek verbal root *(a)"pla”k-.
ȧμлpóv [n.] 'rope for drawing loads' (inscr. V-IVª). <?►
•VAR Accentuation after Et. Gen., H.
•DER àµлpɛúw [v.] 'to draw along, drag' (E. apud Phot., Call.); έε-αµлpɛúw (Ar. Lys.
289), whence a retrograde derivative εεαμлpov 'team of oxen' (gloss.); σvv-aµлpεúw
(Arist.). åµépevtǹs ővos (S. apud Phot.).
•ETYM Technical term of unknown origin.
äµлvž, -vкos [f., m.] ‘women's diadem; horse's bit; rim of a wheeľ (II.). ◄PG>
•DIAL Myc. a-pu-ke /ampukei/ in a context of horses' harnesses, a-na-pu-ke /an-
ampukes/ of ǹvíaɩ, a-pu-ko-wo-ko /ampuk(o)-worgos/.
•COMP Xρvσ-áµлυε 'with a golden bit' (Il.).
●DER άµïvкtñpes (A.), àµ˜vкτýpiα and ȧµлνкáµаτa (S.) are poetic enlargements.
Denominative άшлкáш [v.] 'to tie up with a headband (AP, EM).
ETYM Formerly considered to be a root noun лε prefixed with aμ- = ȧva-,
belonging to úкα 'solidly', лʊкvóc, etc., and cognate with Av. pusă 'diadem' < IE
*pukeh₂- (Lidén 1932: 148ff.); this is seconded by Benveniste BSL 34 (1933): 41, who
adduced further forms and borrowings from Iranian. However, Szemerényi Gnomon
43 (1971): 655 points out that å va- would not fit the meaning, as *åµqɩ-лк- would be
expected. As this form could hardly give άµлʊк-, the etymology is doubtful. The
notion 'thick, solid' does not seem to fit the objects in question. Szemerényi also
doubts the connection with Iranian.
A word for such objects is easily borrowed. If we analyze the word as *amp-uk-, it
contains a typical substrate suffix (Beekes 2003: 12-15).
ǎμлшτç [f.] 'ebb' (Hp.). <GR>
•DER άμлwτíчw 'to ebb' (Ph., Eust.).
⚫ETYM Variant of άváлwτç (Pi.), a fem. agent noun of åvαлívш; ǎµлwτiç (Оálaσσα)
= resorbens unda (Hor.). See Schulze KZ 56 (1929): 287, Schulze KZ 57 (1930): 275, as
well as Fraenkel 1910: 116; but see also the critical notes in DELG.
ảµvydáλŋ [f.] ‘almond' (Hp.). <PG(V)►
•VAR άµúydaλov [n.], åµúydaλos [f.] (Luc.). Also àµvoyéλa, -vλa (Cyrene).
•DER άuvydaλíç [f.] = áµvydáλŋ (Philox., Plu.), diminutive aµvydáλov (Hp.).
Adjectives: auvydáλivos 'made of almond' (X., Thphr.), àµvydáλios ‘almond-
shaped (pap.), àµvydaλóɛ ‘id.' (Nic.), àµwydaλwdns ‘id.' (Thphr.). άµvydaλéa, -ñ
'almond tree' (Eup., Hp., Arist., Thphr.), áµvydaλítηs 'spurge' (Dsc., Plin.).
•ETYM A typical substrate word (note -yd-, which interchanges with--oy-), which is
confirmed by the identification with άuxеaλóɛσσa; on the variation see Pre-Greek.
Fur.: 140 further compares μúкηpоs and Hitt. mitgaimi- 'sweet bread', Luw.
mitgaimi- 'sweet(ened)'. Borrowed into Lat. as amygdala; also amiddula, amyndala,
amandula, whence OHG mandala.
àµvdpós [adj.] ‘dim, faint, obscure' (Archil.). ◄?►
•VAR άμvбã vaι кpúчa 'hide, cover' (H.).
}
đuúc, -úÔos
93
93
•Der åµvdpŋeç ‘id.' (Nic.); åµvôpółŋs ‘darkness, weakness, etc.' (Ph., Gal., Plot.).
Denominative audρóoμα become dark', -ów 'to make dark' (Ph., comm. Arist.);
thence àµúdpwσts (comm. Arist.).
•ETYM Unknown. άμaupós is close in meaning and form, but the two cannot be
combined in Indo-European terms. Influence of paidpós has been proposed, but
such contaminations are often rather gratuitous. In principle, dvd- may continue a
root *h₂mud-. The Slavic root *mod- 'weakness etc.' cannot continue *mud- in view
of Winter's Law (so it is from *mudh-).
=
àuÚkapis → flÚK7.
ǎuvos [m.] 'cake of fine meal' (Ar.). <GR?►
•VAR ǎµvλov [n.] 'starch' (Dsc.).
•DER Diminutive άµúλov 1 [n.] ‘cake' (Plu.), whence άµvλãτov ‘id.' (sch. Ar. Pax
1195); άμúov 2 'starch' (Hp., Arist.), whence aчvidшτóv 'kind of (starched) chiton'
(Hermipp.). For the formation cf. áλvoidwτóc, xεipidwτós (Chantraine 1933: 305).
⚫ETYM Starch is made from unground grain, which suggests that ǎvλoç derives
from чúλn (cf. ǎµvλov. στεppóv, äкλaστov 'firm, unbroken' EM) with privative ȧ-.
However, given the form, we expect a basic meaning 'having no mill', not
‘unground', which casts some doubts on the etymology. Lat. LW amulum > MoFr.
amidon.
ảµµwv [adj.] ‘noble, excellent' (Il.), never of gods. <IE *h₂meu->
•Var äµvµoç. áyaðós, áfiwuntos, äfeµntos kaì åµýµwv 'good, blameless' (H.).
•ETYM Traditionally connected with µ˜μаp. α‰σxos, qóßos, wóyos 'shame, fear,
blame' (H.) and µvµapíšɛi. yɛλoláčε ‘jests', which is taken to be Aeolic for µµаp,
►µãµoç ‘blame”. ¿µúμwv would then originally mean 'without blame', and relate to
μчбμαρ as άлεíρшv to лεчрар. However, Heubeck Glotta 65 (1987): 37-44 proposed a
derivation from aµv- < *h₂mu- in άμεúσασðα 'to surpass', i.e. 'who surpasses others'
(with metrically lengthened u in the sequence of three shorts). This seems to be an
improvement. The root (Pok. 743) would mean 'to bend the motion, (re)move',
found in Lat. moveō and in ¿µúvw ‘to ward off, but this is not entirely convincing.
άuvvw [v.] 'to ward off, defend, help' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Pret. ημúvatov (impf. or aor.? See Schwyzer: 703).
•DER άµúvτwp 'warden, defender' (II.), also as a PN; άµvτñрεç 'brow tines of a stag's
antlers' (Arist.); auµʊvτηpios 'fit for warding off (Pl., Hell.), àµʊvτηpov (Pl., Hell.);
άµvvtikós ‘id.' (Pl., Arist.). àµvípóv (A. apud Phot.), not glossed. åµúvtηs
'defender' (Phot., Hdn.), also PN, cf. кηp-aµúvτηs (Lyc.); ȧuvvíaç 'id.' (Ar. Eq. 570).
äuvva 'defense, revenge', etc. (Theopomp. Com.); retrograde formation, see
Schwyzer: 475, Chantraine 1933: 101. Xεч-áμvvα = xλaïva лª×ɛĩa (A. fr. and S. fr.).
⚫ETYM If the nasal is originally a present marker, as in кλívw, лλúvw, we have a root
ȧuv-, which may be found in auεúσασеаι 'to excel, transcend', but the semantics.
are not quite clear. So a thematicized nasal present *åµv-vƑ-w?
àµúç, -údos [f.] ‘freshwater turtle', Xελóvŋ Aчvaía (Archig. apud Gal.). ◄ PG(V)►
•VAR Also ¿µús (Arist. HA 588a 8, H.).

=== page 071 ===

94
ȧμúσow
⚫ETYM Considered to be a contamination of εµús ‘id.' and άµía ‘tunny' by Strömberg
1943: 81, but this is improbable. The form with έ- rather shows a substrate origin; see
Fur: 347. Perhaps found in лηλv?
άµúσow [v.] ‘to scratch, tear, lacerate' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR àµúσxεσðαi. tó žéɛiv tàs oápkas tois övvεiv 'the laceration of the flesh with
claws' (H.).; ȧuvxý ‘rent, wound'.
=
●DER 1. άµvxý ‘rent, wounď (Hp.), àµvõiaĩos mg. uncertain (Pl. Ax. 366a) and
άuvxwdns 'crackeď (Hp., Thphr.), åµvõηdóv ‘superficially, lightly' (EM); 2. áµvõµós
'id.' (Theoc.), auvучós (conj. in A. Ch. 24); 3. ǎuvyчa 'rending' (S., E.); 4. äµvžiç
'scratching' (Orph., Ach. Tat.). Adverb àµúš (¿µôñσa Nic.) μóλs (Euph.);
adjective ȧvкτкóç 'scratching, irritating' (Plu., medic.). Also avкáλat- ai ȧkídɛç
τŵv ẞɛλŵv ‘the barbs of arrows' (H., EM), cf. Chantraine 1933: 245ff., Schwyzer: 483.
Cf. áµúoxeσðai. tó žéelv tàs σápkas toĩç övvživ ‘laceration of flesh with claws' (H.).
•ETYM A root *ǎμvк/X- is assumed, which would continue IE *h₂muk/g-; this is then
compared with Lat. mücrō 'sharp point, sword' (cf. De Vaan 2008 s.v.). Further
comparanda include Lith. mušti 'to beat' and OE gemyscan 'to afflict, tease'
(Holthausen IF 48 (1930): 266). This seems a rather small basis for reconstructing an
IE root. Fur.: 347 accepts the comparison with Latin, but as a substrate word (though
his assimilation rule α- > ε- before v/ 1 [34633] seems doubtful to me). The form
άuvox- shows a typical Pre-Greek variation (insertion of -σ- before stop).
&qvoti →Úw.
άuvoxpóc [adj.] 'immaculate, pure' (Parth.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also aμvxpós (S. apud Phot., Suid.) and άuvxvóc, áµvyvóc, áµúσkapoç (Suid.);
ǎμovxα. кαеαρεúovoa. Aáкwveç ‘clean or pure (Lacon.)' (H.). àµvoxñvai. kaŝãpaɩ,
ȧyvíσa 'to cleanse' (H.).
•ETYM The variations к/ Y/ X and σ/ zero suggest a Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 299);
perhaps also σк/ §, if Furnée is right in connecting aµúžavos· ávóσɩos ‘impure' (H.),
with privative a- (cf. Fur.: 393). Also related is µúσкos. µíaσµa, кñdos ‘defilement,
care' (H.). Not related to άлоμúσσw (sее ►μúσσoд and чúžα). Sее ►чúDOÇ.
=
ȧuqaoin [f.] 'speechlessness' (P 695 = 8704), of εлéwv. <GR▷
⚫ETYM Equivalent of apaσin (E.) from äqatos (►½µí), with aμ- indicating a long
syllable, acc. to Chantraine 1942: 99. Perhaps modelled after außpoσín.
äµny, -ɛvos →aúxv.
àµœí [adv., prep.] ‘around, on both sides' (Il.). <IE *h₂nt-bhi 'on both sides, around’>>
•VAR Also ȧupíç [adv.] ‘id., apart', more rare as a prep. 'around, outside of (epic).
•DIAL Myc. a-pi, e.g. in a-pi-qo-ro-i /amphi-koloihi/ 'servants' [dat.pl.]. Also in PNs,
e.g. a-pi-a-ro /Amp¹ihalos/.
•ETYM This old adverb is originally a case form of the word for 'face', as is clearly
shown by the cognate ToB āntpi, antapi ‘both' < *h₂ent-b¹o(i)-; cf. Jasanoff BSL 71
(1976): 123-131 (see ►ǎµow). Greek àµqí and Lat. amb(i)-, am-, an-, continue the
E
1
A
ȧupioẞntéw
95
instrumental *h₂nt-bhi. Further forms: Alb. mbi 'at', W ambi-, OIr. imb-, OHG umbi
'around', Skt. abhí, OAv. aibi 'towards'. Grassmann's dissimilation law gave åчл- in
άμл-έxw etc. The word is important in historical phonology, because it shows that a
zero grade h₂n- (cf. the OHG and IIr. forms) gives ȧv- in Greek (so-called Lex Rix).
άuqiáчw [v.] 'to clothe, put on' (Alciphr.). <GR>
•ETYM Hellenistic innovation for ȧuquévvчдu beside ȧuquéw, which was built on the
aor. ȧμqi-éσai.
àuprás, -ov [m.] name of a mediocre Sicilian wine (com.); cf. Ath. 31e, Suid. <GR>
•var Cf. àµýs̟• oïvov ävßos oi dè µéλava olvov 'the flower of the vine; red wine'
(H.).
•ETYM -ɩaç is a suffix used in names of wines. See Baunack Phil. 70 (1911): 356; is
there a connection with aµqí, -w? Fur.: 341 connects the gloss with άuqάç, and also
►öμqa ‘unripe grape', which is quite possible.
àqupiyvos →yÚns.
àipré wàiprázw.
кéεov [m., n.] àµqißapés. oi dè τòv þaστóμε úлò бúˆ àvерóлwv
þaστašóµεvov dúo
Sippov, alla Sε àµíкoλov úlov 'chariot-board borne by two men; wood
hollowed on both sides' (H.). <?>
⚫var åµqiкελεµvíç kat ößeλwv nepiкρéµãσiç iσoρрóлwç 'hanging down from a bar
in equipoise' (H.).
●DIAL Myc. o-pi-ke-re-mi-ni-ja-pi /opi-kelemniāp¹i/ [ins.pl.] part of a chair
(connection with êpeµávvv, supposing /-krēmn-/, is impossible; see ► kpnµvóc).
⚫ETYM Connected with кɛλéovτɛç by Fur.: 245. This seems quite possible, but he
assumes a variation µ/ F, which is unlikely. One might rather assume a suffix -μv-
beside another formation.
aqupidaprńs →入ápupa.
aupiov [n.] 'garment' (S.). <GR
⚫VAR Or ǎupov (sch. D. T. 196).
•ETYM Shortened form of aµqiεσμa. See Grégoire Byzantion 13 (1938): 396ff.
ȧuqíñoλoç [f., m.] ‘servant, handmaid' (II.), also 'priest(ess)' (Pi.), i.e. 'one who takes
care of the gods'. <IE *h₂mbhi-kwol(h,)-o- 'servant'>
DIAL Myc. a-pi-qo-ro /amphi-k"olos/.
•Der åµôɩñoλɛïov ‘servant dwelling' (IG 4, 39 [Aigina Vª]), àµôɩñoλía ‘servanthood'
(D. S.). Denominatives àµôɩñoλɛúw [v.] ‘to work as a servant, ply, take care of (epic,
Hdt.), ȧμчлоλéw ‘id.' (Pi., B.).
•ETYM From *h₂mbi-kol(h₁)-o-, identical in origin with Lat. anculus 'servanť and
Skt. abhicará 'witchcraft' (AV+); cf. Lat. anc(u)lare 'to serve the gods' and Ved.
pari-cará- 'servant'. Sее лελоμα and Bouкóλoç.
àuqioßntéw [v.] ‘to go asunder, disagree, dispute' (Att., Hdt.). ◄GR➤
•VAR Also -ẞăτéw (Ion., perhaps also Lesb., Rhod.?).

=== page 072 ===

96
Aμpú
(Att.),
•DER ȧµσßτηous 'dispute, controversy, claim', juridical term
åµqoßýtnois
áµiqioßytýollos 'controversial'; åµqioßytytikós ‘belonging to the dispute' (Pl.).
außτηua 'dispute' (Pl., Arist.), außτiкóç (Aps.). From ȧuqiσẞatéw:
àµqioßaoín (Hdt.).
•ETYM Compounded from auois and ßaivɛv (ßñvα) 'to go apart', as if from
*åµqioßýtns or *åßáηs who goes apart' (cf. εμpßýtnc, napai-ßátns).
Aµqɩɩpówv [m.] name of a king of Tiryns, later Thebes (Il.). <?>
•ETYM Neumann 1983: 334 rejects the connection with τpúш, and starts from
*Amphi-tōr, with a suffix -uōn like in ►åλɛкτpúwv.
ȧuqopɛúc [m.] 'jar with two handles', also a measure (Ar., Hdt.). <<GR>
⚫VAR Also aμqiqopɛúc (II.).
●DIAL Myc. (KN) a-pi-po-re-we /amp¹i-p³orēwes/, a-po-re-we /amphorēwe/ [du.].
●DER àµôopídiov (Ar.), or -ɛídiov, see Schwyzer 471; àµpopíσкos [m.] (D., inscr.);
àµópov (gloss.); unclear άµpopɛíw. qoptíw load (H.). àµopíτŋs as an adjective,
of ȧyúv, 'contest with an ȧ. as a prize', Call. fr. 80); as a substantive of uncertain mg.
(PSI 5, 535, 31, see Redard 1949: 106f.; àµqoρшкóç (sch.); àµpopí [adv.] (Eust.),
whence a verb áшoopíw was derived (Eust.).
•ETYM From ȧuq-qopεúç, i.e. 'born on two sides', but with -ɛuç from the instrument
nouns. Borrowed as Lat. amphora, diminutive ampulla.
ȧuqovdíç [adv.] hapax of uncertain mg. (p 237): àµqovdìç àɛípaç. <?>
⚫ETYM Interpreted as if àµqwdíç, from *¿µqwfadís 'by both ears'. Cf. ¿¿wßádia.
Éváτiα. Aάкwvεç ‘earrings (Lacon.)' (H.). See Bechtel 1914 s.v. and DELG.
ǎuqw [pron.] 'both' (II.). <IE *h₂(e)nt-bhoh,>
•VAR Later replaced by ȧuóτεpoç.
⚫ETYM Identical with Lat. ambō. The original form of the anlaut is found in ToA
ampi (ToB antapi, antpi; see àμopí). Other languages have forms without the nasal:
Skt. ubháu, Av. uua; OCS oba, Lith. abu. Germanic has no initial vowel, e.g. Go. bai.
There is no overall explanation for the forms, but connection with άuoíseems clear.
ǎuwμov [n.] an Indian spice-plant, 'Amomum subulatum' (Hp.). <LW India>
●DER àµwµíç [f.] ‘false Amomum' (Dsc.), from Armenia; àµwµítŋs λíßavos (Dsc.).
•ETYM An Oriental loanword; cf. ►кɩvváμwμov. See André 1956 s.v. amōmum and E.
Masson 1967: 50³.
áµwoas [v.] · kpeµáʊaç, Tapavtīvoɩ hung up (Tarantian)' (H.). ◄GR?►
•ETYM Immisch Leipz. Stud. 8 (1885): 276 thinks this is an allegro-form of ȧvεμwσaç.
Latte suggests äчwσaç from *àµów, which would be a denominative from ǎµa
'something tied'. Possible, but hypothetical.
ȧµwʊyέлwç ‘in some way'.
•ETYM From ǎuws уε лws. See àµó-.
ăUWTOV = kaotávelov. →µóta.
äv [pcl.] modal particle (IA, Arc.). <?>
:
i
ávaívoual
97
•ETYM The identification with the questioning particle Lat. an, Go. an (see Lee
AmJPh. 88 (1967): 45ff.) becomes superfluous because of the ingenious connection
with кɛ(v), which derives from *ken. We have to assume that *oỷ кav < *Hoi̟u kỵ was
analyzed as ovк av; see Forbes Glotta 37 (1958): 179-182.
ává [prep.] 'up along' (II.). <IE *h₂en- 'up, on high'>
•VAR With elision and apocope äv, áv; adverbial ǎva.
●DIAL Myc. a-na-ke-e /an-age¹en/ [inf.]; perhaps /anō-/, in a-no-qa-si-a /anō-g™asiā/
‘expedition (?)', etc. Lesb., Thess., Arc. and Cypr. have ov, giving bv- in Arc. and
Cypr., cf. Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 309.
•DER Adverb ävw, whence ävw0ev, ȧvwτépw, ȧvwτáτw; on -w see Schwyzer: 550.
•ETYM On the use of ȧvá, see DELG. It is an old adverb, also found in Iranian and
Germanic: Av. ana, OP anā 'upwards, along'; Go. ana, OHG an(a), OE on 'on, ať.
Perhaps also in Lat. an-hēlāre, an-testārī, Arm. am-barnam 'to raise', etc. It is
doubtful that Skt. ánu 'along' derives from *h,enu.
ávaya入入is, -idos →áya入入ic.
áváyêŋ [f.] ‘force, necessity' (Il.). <?►
•VAR ȧvaykaín (II.) cf. Schwyzer: 469
•DER άvayкaños 'constrained, forced', also 'related by kinship' (since Il.), whence
άvαукαιóτη [f.] 'kinship' (Att., Hell.), also 'necessity' (S. E.); ȧvaукaιwdns.
'indispensable' (avaукaшwdéστεpα sch.). Denominative verb: ȧvayкáw [v.] 'to force,
compel' (IA, not in Hom.), whence άváукασμа 'means of coercion' (J.); ȧvaукαστηp
'coercer' (Amorgos), ávαукаστηpios 'compelling' (D. H.); ávaукaotikós ‘id.' (Pl.,
Arist.). кaτaváyêŋ kind of vetch, ‘'Ornithopus compressus', used in making philtres.
•ETYM The word has been compared with Celtic words for 'necessity, fate' (OIr. écen,
Wangen), which may go back to *ank- < *h₂enk-, and also the Germanic group of
OHG ahta, MoHG Acht 'outlawry'. However, Matasović 2008 s.v. *anku-
reconstructs the Celtic group as belonging to *neku- ‘violent death'. NPhr. avavkat
has an uncertain meaning and possibly a Greek loanword. Oettinger 1979: 175f.
argued for the connection with Hitt. henkan- 'death' (with he- <*h₂ē- by Eichner's
Law), but acc. to Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. hai(n)k-tta(ri), the -e- must go back to a
diphthong.
It is not excluded that ȧváукη is a substrate word; for the field of meaning, cf.
►üẞpis, which has no good etymology either.
áváyupos [m.] ‘stinking bean-trefoil, Anagyris foetida' (Ar.) <?►
•VAR - [m.], also óvóyupos (Nic.), where folk etymology after övos (Strömberg
1940: 155) is improbable, as ava- is very common in Greek.
•DER Thence the Attic deme Avayupoûç (Ar., Pl.).
•ETYM Unknown. The form with ỏvo- might point to a substrate word, as a/ o is
frequent in such words. Amigues RPh. 73 (1999): 147-154 starts from MLat. faba
inversa 'inverted bean' and connects it with yupós (CEG 6).
ȧvaivoμai aivos.

=== page 073 ===

98
ávaloquów
:
ăvaupos
99
ávaσчów →αloa.
ávaкápdɩov →kápdaµov.
άvaкŵç [adv.] ‘attentively, heedfully' (Hdt.). <GR➤
•VAR Only in ȧvaкŵç ëxɛiv tɩvóç to pay attention to sth.'.
⚫ETYM From *ȧvaкówç, adverb of *ava-кóos, which is a verbal adjective from *åva-
Koέw 'to look after'; see кośw. Cf. ȧuvo-кwv 'simpleton', literally 'sheep-minded'
(Ar.) <*àuvo-KÓWV.
ávakwxń →ávoKWXn.
ávalɛĩ [v.] · oxoláčɛ, Tapavtīvoɩ ‘is at leisure (Tarantian)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. Latte corrects it to avaλɛaívɛ 'to brush, crush' (highly uncertain,
see DELG).
άvāλíokw [v.] ‘to use up, spend, consume' (A.). <GR➤
•VAR Fut. ȧvāλwow, aor. ȧvýλwσa, new present avāλów.
•DER ȧváλwois 'expenditure, consumption' (Thgn.), áváλwµa ‘id.' (Att.), ȧvýλwµα
(pap., inscr.); secondary simplex ǎλwμa (Boeot.), see Fraenkel 1910: 119; diminutive
ávaλшдάτov (Ph., pap.). ávaλwτns 'squanderer' (Pl.), whence ȧvaλwτiкós (Pl., Ph.).
⚫ETYM From *ȧva-Fαλíoкw, originally 'to tear up'; cf. HG verzehren 'to consume'. See
► ȧλíσкoμaι.
ǎvαλτoç [adj.] ‘insatiable' (Od.). <IE *h₂el- 'grow; make grow, feed'>
•VAR Cf. ǎλτρоν· дшσðóç 'reward' (H.); from 'what guarantees food' (DELG)?
⚫ETYM Negative verbal adjective of the root seen in Lat. alō, OIr. alim, ON ala 'to
feed' and Go. alands ‘τpεqóμεvoç, nourished', which in Greek only exists as a verbal
root in enlarged form: ȧλdaívw, perhaps àλaívw. Perhaps vεāλýs ‘fresh, not
tired' is from the same root as well.
ǎvaž, -кτoç [m.] 'lord, ruler' (II.). <PG>
●VAR Voc. äva (Il.); plur. (F)ávaкεç name of the Dioskouroi (Hom.); fem. (F)ávaσσa
<*wanak(t)-ia 'mistress' (II.).
=
DIAL Myc. wa-na-ka /wanaks/; wa-na-ka-te /wanaktei/; wa-na-ka-te-ro
Faváкτερoç, -ov, with -Tɛpoç indicating opposition like in ȧypótɛpos, ópéotepos.
wa-na-so-i wanassoiin/ [dat.du.], also wa-na-se-wi-jo /wanass-ēwios/, -e-wi-ja |-
ēwia/, of vases.
•COMP Avacayóрaç, etc., Iлл@važ, etc.
•DER ȧvažía 'command, rule' (Pi., A.), which may also derive from áváσσw; adjective
ávážios royal' (sch.). From (F) ávaкεs derives (F) avάкяov 'temple of the
Dioskouroi' (Att., NWGr.), Aváкɛα [pl.] festival for the Dioskouroi (Lys.),
ávaкóσιoç [adj.] (Rhegion). Denominative ȧváσσw [v.] 'to be lord, rule' (II.).
•ETYM No IE etymology, and probably a substrate word. Are OPhr. vanaktei, NPhr.
ovavaкτav loans from Greek? The word is important for the interpretation of the
Myc. signs of the z- and s-series: is wa-na-s° derived from the stem in -kt-, or from
the stem in -k-? See Crespo Minos 19 (1985): 91-104, and Viredaz 1993. It is probable
[
that the forms without -t- are younger, but see e.g. Ruijgh 1957: 112 and Ruijgh
Lingua 25 (1970): 309ff.
ávažvpídɛç [f.] ‘long, wide trousers', worn by the Persians and other eastern peoples
(Hdt.). LW Iran.>
•ETYM Persian loanword. Cf. R. Schmitt Glotta 49 (1971): 96.
ávažvpíç = óžaλìç 'sour wine' (Dsc.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
ȧvapíτηs →vηpitns.
ávappixáoµai [v.] 'to climb with hands and feet' (Ar.). <?>
•VAR Also ȧppιxάoμa (Hippon.); called obsolete by Lucian; perhaps shortened from
ȧvapp-.
•ETYM Unknown. See Solmsen IF 13 (1902/03): 132ff. and Ehrlich 1912: 53.
ávápσtoç [adj., m.] 'incongruous', hence 'strange, hostile' (II.); equivalent of Svoμεvýs.
< GR➤
•DER Cf. ǎpolov. Síкatov 'just, lawful (H.), which is explained as a back-formation to
ávápotos (see Frisk 1941: 7).
⚫ETYM Generally assumed to be a derivative of apapíσкw 'not fitting'.
ávaστaλúčw [v.] 'to burst into tears' (Anacr. 43, 4). ◄PG?(V)►
•Var áσtvlášɛ• Avnei µetà kλave μou grieves with weeping' (H.) probably stands
for *ȧστaλúεL.
=
•ETYM Cf. ảσtaλúxεv (read -úšɛv?). áva[ß]λúšev, kλaíɛv ‘weep' (H.), vɛóotaλvž.
vɛodáкputos 'who just cried' (H.); cf. also στáλvě, to be read for σtáλŋž in Zonar.,
στaλayµóç 'drop'. Cf. ►σtaláσow, -άw 'to drip, drop'. The suffix is also in other
words for 'crying etc.': ypú¼w, iú(w, óλoλúšw, ótotú(w. The prothetic ȧ- of åσtaλvy-
beside στáλu could be a prothetic vowel; if so, this points to substrate origin.
àvaotídwvos [adj.] · àvatetaµévos ‘lifted up' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown.
ávaσvρτóλiçσúpw.
ăvateí →àáw.
ǎvaupoç [m.] ‘torrent' (Mosch.); also a river name in Thessaly (Hes. Sc. 477) and
Acarnania. <PG>
⚫ETYM Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 51ff. interpreted the word as "waterless", from
the dried up river-bed in summer, comparing vavpoç: ó έ vɛtŵv ovviotáµievoç
лоταшóç river arising out of heavy showers' (EM); see discussion on xapádpa s.v.
►Xépadoç. It was therefore analyzed as a privative àv- and a word for 'water', which
is not attested but supposed in A"yλaupos (but see there), and further in Oŋσaupós
and Kévτaupoç (Kretschmer l.c.). The source name Apa (Nonnos) was also
compared, and Krahe IF 48 (1930): 216 connected it with Italic (Illyrian?) HNs like
Metaurus, Pisaurus, as well as HNs like Avara, Avantia (Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch.

=== page 074 ===

!
100
ȧvdávw
4 (1953): 49 and 115). Having thus been etymologized, the second element was further
compared with Skt. vár(i) and the Gm. group of ON aurr [m.] 'whet, water' (Pok.
80f.), but since that root contains no initial laryngeal, it could never yield Gr. av-. No
doubt, the word is non-Greek, and probably non-IE (if the connection with Krahe's
river names is correct). The assumption of a privative ȧv- is highly improbable; such
assumptions are due to the desire to interpret everything as Greek and as Indo-
European as possible, even when all facts point in a different direction. The further
comparison with HNs without -r- in Fur.: 230 is doubtful.
ávdávw [v.] ‘to please' (Il.); used in a political context as it pleased the people (to
decide)', hence 'to decide'. <IE *sueh₂d->
•VAR Aor. ȧdɛĭv (Aeol. ɛűadov in Hom.), perf. čāda. Present also Att. ► ñdoµai.
•DIAL Dor. adávw should perhaps be assumed on the basis of ȧdávovta. ȧpέoкovta
'pleasing' (H.); Baunack Phil. 70 (1911): 353; cf. An¤ávw.
•COMP avеádns (see s.v.).
•DER ǎdoç 'decision, resolution' (Halic., Thasos), ädŋµ· µ 'decree, law' (H.);
also fáðɩɩç in yάdığıç⋅ óµoλoyía and ǎðɩɩç. óµoλoyía лapà Tapavτívois agreement
(Tarantian)' (H.) (to *Ƒadíšoµai).
•ETYM The initial F- is seen in Aeol. εvade, Cret. Ƒade < PGr. *e-swad-e and in Locr.
FεFadnчóτa. The root is that of кdoµαι, ñdúç; see also avoάdns. Sanskrit has
svádati 'to make savory', which derives from *suh₂-n-d- acc. to LIV, but is rather
from *sueh₂d-e- with loss of laryngeal per Lubotsky's Law (Lubotsky MSS 40 (1981):
133). The factitive in Lat. suādeō 'to advise, recommend' is reminiscent of the Greek
meaning 'to decide'.
ävɗŋpa [n.pl.] ‘raised bank of a river or ditch; dike, border of the sea, seed-bed'
(Hyp.). <PG?>
•VAR Rarely sing. ǎvôηpov.
•DER ȧvdŋpevtĤs 'workman employed on dikes' (pap.).
•ETYM Neumann 1961: 91 points to the fact that many words connected with
irrigation look non-Indo-European: beside ävεηpa, he mentions apdw 'to irrigate'
and yopyúpa 'underground drain'. Fur.: 204 thinks that -npov is a non-IE suffix.
Ibid. 347, he compares the Thracian place name "Evdηpov, but there is little support
for this.
ävdivos [m.]? лεpíñaτos (cod. лεрì лavτóç) ‘walking about' (H.); acc. to
Hemsterhuis, <лapà Tapavtívoɩs> from the following line belongs in this gloss too.
<?>
●DER ȧvdɩvíw (cod. ȧvadɩvíw). лερɩлατш 'to walk up and down' (H.) is Doric.
•ETYM Uncertain. On Illyrian and Messapian hypotheses, see Frisk s.v. Alternatively,
is it from Sivéw (s.v. Sivn)? See Forssman 1966: 61f.
ávбрáлodov [n.] 'prisoner of war sold as a slave, slave' (II.); on the spread of the word
see Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 76. <GR
•DER Diminutive ávεpaлódov (Hyp., Diph., pap.). Adjective ȧvdpaлodódŋs ‘slave-
like' (Pl., Arist.), whence ȧvdpaлodwdía 'servile attitude' (Arist., Plu.). Denominative
!
i
ăveloc
101
verb ȧvбpaлodiw, -oμαi [v.] 'to enslave, sell as slaves' (IA); thence ȧvôрaлóбOLS
‘enslavement' (Xen.), -tσµós ‘id.' (Att.). άvôpañoðiστ½§ ‘slave trader' (Att.);
ȧvбpaлodiστɩкóç ‘ptng. to slave trade' (Pl., Eup.); àvεpaлoðiστýpios ‘id.' (Tz.).
•ETYM The plural ávdpáлoða ‘of whom only the feet are human' is original; this
form was modelled after tετpáлoda 'quadruped' and is originally a consonant stem
(cf. [dat.pl.] avралóðεσσ [Н 475]). From ȧvôрáлoda, the thematic sing.
ȧvбрáлобov was derived. See Wackernagel KZ 30 (1890): 298 and Leumann 1950:
157f. On the a-, see Bader RPh. 43 (1969): 31.
ávбpáxvŋ [f.] plant name ‘Portulaca oleracea', also 'Sedum stellatum' (Thphr.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR With dissimilation ȧvôpáxλn (Thphr.); also ävdpaxvos [f.] (Paus.).
•ETYM Fur: 288 compares à payévη, which is formally quite acceptable, i.e.
*(a)"trak(V)n/l-, with metathesis of aspiration (1972, 393), variation n/ 1 (388), the
common phenomenon of prenasalization, and anaptyxis of ε. Substrate origin is
probable anyhow.
ávбpɛïqóvtŋ [adj.] in'Evvaλí à. (B 651). ◄IE *h₂nr-gwon-teh₂- 'man-slayer'>
⚫ETYM The epithet was changed after åpуɛïöóvτηs: it should be read as avṛoovt-
'slaying men', with an extremely old zero grade of *h₂nr-. Cf. ►ȧvôpotýs, and see R.
Schmitt 1967: 124f.
ávdpiás →ávńp.
Avôpoµáxŋ [f.] the wife of Hektor (Il.). ◄ GR➤
•ETYM Called this way because her husband is a famous warrior. Likewise, Hektor's
son has the name Aσtvávač (ruler, protector of the city'), after his father's deeds.
See Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 103.
ávdpóµntov · ovoraσtóv έyxεipídiov tpayikóv ‘stage-dagger (in tragedy)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM A Tarentine gloss; see Latte. DELG derives the word from ává and Spóμoç,
which seems doubtful; the structure remains unclear.
ávɗpotńs [m.] ‘manhood, strength' (II 857, etc.). <IE *h₂ner- 'man'➤
•ETYM ȧvdpoτýta only fits the hexameter if it is read *anṛtāta, with old vocalic *-r.
Arguments in favor of the antiquity of this epithet are found in Ruijgh 1995: 85-91.
Arguments against this interpretation were developed by Berg following Tichy
Glotta 59 (1981): 55.
ävɛµos [m.] ‘wind' (Il.). <IE *h₂enh,-mo- 'wind'>
•DIAL Myc. (KN) a-ne-mo (i-je-re-ja) /anemon (hiereiā)/.
•COMP vηvεμín 'calm' < *n-h₂n-, see on ►vývεμoç.
•DER ηvεμóεɩ 'windy' (epic poet.), metrically lengthened; ȧvεµwλios ‘idle, useless'
(Il.), after åлopólios (Bechtel 1914, Chantraine 1933: 43; Risch 1937: 122 reminds of
άлατηo); see on μεμs. Further ávεµwdŋs 'windy' (Hp., Arist., Hell.);
ávεμaños 'windy, vain' (Pl., com., Alciphr.), after adjectives of measure in -taños?
ávεµwτaç övos ǎpetos, iɛpós, tois àvéμo vóµεvos év Tapavτivois ‘a donkey let
loose, sacred, being offered to the winds (Tarent.)' (H.); ávɛµwtɩs epithet of Athena

=== page 075 ===

!
102
ȧvεμwvn
(who calms the wind; Paus.). ȧvεμía 'flatulence' (Hp.); on avεдη s.v.
Denominative verbs: ávεµóðµα ‘to be(come) inflateď (Hp., Pl.); ávεµíšo̟µai ‘to be
driven with the wind' (Ep. Jak.).
•ETYM Gr. äveµos agrees with Lat. animus < *anamo-; Skt. ánila- [m.] 'wind, air' has
-lo-. Further, Arm. hołm 'wind' arose by dissimilation of n--m and has o-vocalism.
This may point to an original m-stem nom. *h₂onh,-m, obl. *h₂nh,-em-. The verbal
root *h₂enh,- is present in Skt. ániti ‘breathes', OIr. anaid, -ana 'to wait, remain' and
in Go. us-anan ‘to exhale'; a different present formation is in PTo. *anask- < QIE
*henh,-ske/o-. See L đơQua, I ävtal.
ávεuwvη [f.] the plant 'anemone' (Cratin.). <LW?>
●DER àveµwvís [f.] = àvεµávŋ ñµεpoç (Nic.).
⚫ETYM Derivation from ǎvɛµoç is supported by Strömberg 1940: 77. An improbable
Semitic etymology was proposed by Lewy 1895: 49. It is more likely a loanword,
perhaps from the substrate.
ȧvevetɛi [v.] · ȧpvεt̃τaι ‘denies' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Acc. to von Blumenthal 1930: 34, we should read *àvaɩvɛtɛî (cf. àvaívoµai); or
is it rather misspelled for άvaivεtai?
ǎvev [adv.] 'far from, without' (II.). <IE *sn(H)- 'without'>>
●DIAL ǎvɛuv (Epidauros), ävɛvç (Olympia), ävıç (Megara apud Ar.); cf. xwpic.
●DER ävɛv0ɛ(v) (Il.) and ȧлávεvеεv.
•ETYM No exact correspondence exists. ävɛu looks like the old locative of a u-stem.
The comparison with Germanic forms like Go. inu ‘without' < *enu and OHG ānu
'id.'<*ēnu cannot explain the Greek ȧ- (the suggestion that the Germanic forms
contain a lengthened grade *h₂en(e)u- (Nikolaev 2007: 165) is morphologically
unwarranted, and Eichner's Law that long vowels are not colored by an adjacent
laryngeal is unacceptable).
A better comparison is with Skt. sanutár 'away, off, aside' < *sen(H)u-ter (or *snHu-
?), Lat. sine 'without' < *seni < *snH-i, and ToA sne, ToB snai < *snH-i. Thus, the
Greek form could be from *snh,-eu > *saneu. In this case, ävεu must be a psilotic
form. Within Greek, ǎτɛp may be cognate, but it would exclude a root-final
laryngeal. I have no solution for this problem.
ávɛчióç [m.] ‘cousin' (Il.). ◄IE *(h₂) nepot- 'grandson'▷
•DER Secondary fem. ȧvɛчá ‘id.' (Isoc., X.). Further ávεчiadoûç [m.] ‘cousin's son'
(com., D.), cf. ȧdɛλqɩdoñç; also áveчiádŋs (Pachnemunis, Iamb.), to which ávɛчadñ
'cousin's daughter' (Ar.). ȧveчións, -ŋtos [f.] ‘cousinhood' (Pl.).
⚫ETYM Corresponds with Av. naptiia- 'descendant' and OCS netii 'nephew', derived
from the word for 'grandson, nephew' seen in Skt. nápāt, Lat. nepōs, etc. The ȧ- can
be *h, but possibly represents *sm-, expressing the reciprocity of the relation
(Benveniste 1969(1): 234). Not related to ▸véñodεç.
ävɛw, ävɛw [adv.] 'silent(ly)' (Il.), a predicate of plural subjects except in ½ 93 ävɛw
ПOTO. <GR?>
•VAR Recent ǎvɛws. äqwvoç 'mute' (Gal. Lex. Hp.).
ȧvýp
●COMP ávɛoσtaσíŋ. Оáµßoç ‘amazement' (H.).
103
•ETYM Eust. ad Y 93 takes the form as an adverb (perhaps Aristarchus as well, see
Buttmann 1825(2): 2); the notation with -1 was supposed to be due to the
interpretation as an adjective with plural subjects. Acc. to traditional interpretation
(see Chantraine 1942: 249), it is an old instrumental in -w. However, Peters 1993b:
85ff. asserts that it is an occidental Ionic form continuing *an-awo- 'without voice'
(with quantitative metathesis), for which he compares the gloss äßa. Bon. The form
ǎveų) is the original nom.pl., while ävɛw arose by reanalysis as an adverb.
ävnov [n.] 'dill, Anethum Graveolens' (Aeol., Att.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also ǎvvnov (Ar.); ävòτov (Alc.), ävvηtov (Thphr.).
•DER ȧvneɩvoç 'made of dill' (Theoc., Dsc.), ȧvηеíτηs olvos (Gp.).
•ETYM Cf. λáлαеov and other plant names in -0ov (-os) (Chantraine 1933: 368). The
word is Egyptian, acc. to Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 240. Fur.: 254 compares
►ävvŋσov; for the equation, cf. the gloss s.v. ►äve puσкov. On the gemination, see
ibid. 387; for variation 0/σ, see ibid. 253ff.
ávývoеev [v.] 'gushed forth, mounted up' (A 266, p 270). <?►
•ETYM The relation of this form to έл-εv-ývoеε and лap-εv-ηvoеε is unclear, and
therefore the etymology uncertain. See ¿vēεïv; not related to ►äveos. Nikolaev
2007: 165¹ assumes a root *h₂ned¹- 'to move/stick out' [not in LIV²], but the
Schwebeablaut makes connection with äveos improbable.
ávŋrelín →vnteλéw.
ávýp [m.] 'man' (Il.). <IE *h₂ner- 'man'>
•VAR Gen. ȧvdpós, acc. ävdpa (analogical; Hom. has the old form ávépa < *h¸ner-m,
whence gen. ȧvépoç, etc.).
●DIAL Myc. a-di-ri-ja-te /andriantei/, a-di-ri-ja-pi /andrian(t)p¹i/, A-ta-no (see below
on compounds).
●COMP As a first member ȧvdpo-: -kµŋtos, -ktaoia; on ►áv♪påлodov s.v. As a
second member -ηvwp, е.g. pη\-, 01σ- (Hom.); in PNs Ay-nvwp, Myc. A-ta-no
Antānōr/; fem. ȧvτɩ-ávɛpα, кudɩ-άvɛɩpα; as a second member -ȧvôpoç in äv-
avdpoç, λ-avdpoc; PNs especially in Asia Minor and Cyprus: 'Hyno-avdpoç, Tépë-;
Hom. Aλé-.
•DER Diminutive ȧvôpíov (com.), whence (with an unclear suffix -nt-) àvdpiás,
-ávτoç 'statue' (Pi., IA). ȧvôpíç [f.] ‘woman' (Sm.); àvdp(e)wv [m.] ‘men's room'
(Hdt.), ȧvSpávov (Delos) and ȧvdpwvītis ‘id.' (Lys., X.).
Abstracts: ȧ vSpɛía (-ŋiŋ, -ía) ‘manliness, courage' (A.); ávdpotýs, -tñtos ‘id.' (II 857,
26), on which see Ruijgh 1995: 88ff.; ǹvopέŋ ‘id.' (Hom.) for Aeolic avopέa < *-pía,
perhaps from a compound, cf. εvavopía (Pi.). Thence άvópeos (S.).
Adjectives: avôpεños (Ion. àvdpηïoç, cf. Chantraine 1933: 52, Schwyzer: 468 : 3)
'manly, courageous', whence άvdpɛtów [v.] ‘to make courageous' (LXX); ȧvôpiкóç ‘of
the man, manly' (Att.), àvôрóμεoç 'human' (II.), with -μεoç = Skt. -maya- (?);
ȧvdpwdns 'manly' (Emp.).

=== page 076 ===

i
104
ävenov
Denominative verbs: àv♪póoµai [v.] 'to become a man' (Hdt., Hp., E.), -ów ‘to turn
into a man (trans.)' (Lyc.); ȧvôpúvoμαι [v.] 'to become a man' (Ps. Callisth.);
ávбpíčoμai [v.] 'to become a man, represent a man' (Att.), -iw 'to turn into a man
(trans.)' (X.).
⚫ETYMȧvýp is identical with Arm. ayr, gen. arn 'man', Skt. ná, obl. nár-, NPhr. avap,
Italic ner- in Osc. nerum 'virorum', Lat. Nerō (Sabellic), W ner 'chief, and Alb. njerí
‘human being, person'. The gloss vwpɛĭ does not belong here.
ävdemov →ăvdoc.
=>
ávoɛpɛúv •VAR ȧvēεpiε. → à¤ýp.
áveíaç, -ov [m.] a fish, 'Labrus anthias' (Anan.). <?>
•ETYM Connected with ävos 'flower' by Strömberg 1943: 26 because of its color;
Thompson 1947 s.v. differs on this.
ávos [n.] 'flower' (II.). <◄IE? *h₂end¹- ‘sprout’▷
●DER 1. Substantives. Diminutives vútov (M. Ant., Dsc.), also a plant, like
ávvλλíç (Dsc.) and äveλλov (Ps.-Dsc.); ȧvýλtov v.l. for ávúλλtov (Dsc. 3, 156; 4,
121), also кavenλov (Charax); áváλov a plant, cf. Chantraine 1933: 74; ávěápiov.
épúnua 'redness, blush' (H.).
=
Further avenλn a crown of flowers' (Thphr.), or from ȧvéw? Thence ȧvenλãç [m.]
'flower trader' vel sim.; àveɛóv [m.] 'flowerbed' (Amasia), àveúv (gloss.).
ávðndwv [f.] ‘bee' (cf. ávеpηdwv and Chantraine 1933: 361), also a plant. ávoσúvη
‘Blüte' (AP). On aveíaç see there. Avеɛστýpiα [n.pl.] 'spring festival (IA), see
Chantraine 1933: 63, Schwyzer: 470), month name Aveɛotnpiwv.
Independent formation ävεμov [n.] 'flower, rosette' (Sappho); acc. to Frisk, it
cannot be a recent back-formation (as per Leumann 1950: 249ff.), as there are many
derivatives; for the formation cf. ǎpуεчov and Chantraine 1933: 132, Ruijgh 1957: 102f.
Thence ȧvεμwdns 'rich in flowers' (poet. since Sappho), àvеɛµшτóç ‘id.' (Attica),
ȧveɛuíç plant name, also little flower' (Nic.), àvеεμíσчov plant name (Alex. Trall.),
ávéμov 'blossom' (X., Thphr.); Hom. PNs Avеεμíшv and Avеεµídns (acc. to
Leumann l.c.), TN Avеεµоûç (Macedonia). Derived poetic verbs avēɛµíšoµaɩ and
έлavеɛµíчw (A., S. [lyr.]).
2. Adjectives: äveɩvos 'made of flowers, variegated (184, Hp., Arist.); avenpós 'rich
in flowers', metaph. ‘fresh, lush' (S., E., Ar., etc.) is rather from ávěέw (Chantraine
1933: 232). Other adjectives are isolated and late (see Frisk).
3. Verb àvéw 'to bloom, blossom' (Od., IA), often metaph.; thence äveŋois
'blossom' (Thphr., Plu.), έ-avėέw, έžávěŋois (Hp., Th.) and εávеηµα (Hp., Arist.).
Backformation även 'flowering' (Pl., Nic., Ael.); verbal adj. ȧvеŋτɩкóç = ávěɩkós
(Thphr.). ȧveiw 'to cover with flowers, decorate', with several preverbs (Hdt., S., E.,
Arist.).
•ETYM ǎvoç has been equated with Skt. ándhas- [n.] 'sprout of the soma plant', but
see the objections by Burrow Archiv. Linguist. 6 (1954): 61 and Chantraine. Uncertain
is the appurtenance of Alb. endë 'flour'; see Meyer 1891: 5. The word is perhaps also
related to Arm. and 'field'. The comparison with EFris. åndul 'marsh grass' and its
|
!
ávepndov, -óvoc
105
Germanic cognates does not inspire confidence. A connection with άvývoεv
(Schwebeablaut *h₂end"- : h₂nodh-) is improbable.
ávēpaž, -ǎkos [m.] ‘charcoal' (Ar.), metaph. ‘carbuncle' (Arist.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Mostly plur. ǎvepaкεç.
•DER Many derivatives: diminutive ȧvěpáкiov (Thphr.), ávеpaкiá 'heap of coals' (I
213); ávеpaкíaç "coal-man" (Luc.); avеpaкíτηs [m.] name of a gem (Plin.), -ītıç [f.]
'kind of coal' (Plin.); avopaкóv [m.] 'heap of coals' (Hdn.), ávеpáкwμa 'id.' (Dsc.);
ȧvėpaкápioç carbonarius (gloss.). Adjectives: àvepaкódŋs like charcoal' (Hp.,
Arist.), ávеpaкηpós ‘of charcoal' (Alex., Delos), ávě páкivos ‘of carbuncle' (LXX,
pap.).
Denominative verbs: 1. àvе paкóoμαι 'to be burnt to coals' (A., E., Thphr.), 'to
develop an ulcer' (Aët.); thence ȧvěpáкwσiç 'carbonization' (Dsc.), also 'ulcer' (Paul.
Aeg., Gal.). 2. àve paкɛúw 'to burn charcoal, carbonize' (Ar., Thphr.); deverbal
ȧvepakεús 'charcoal burner' (App., Aesop., Them.; pilavеpaкɛúç already in Ar.);
ȧvеpaкεvτns 'id.' (And., Ael.), àvėpaкɛía 'carbonization' (Thphr.). 3. ávеpaкí(w 'to
roast on charcoal' (Ar., pap.); back-formation ȧvеpaкidɛç ‘small fish for roasting'
(Philyll.); cf. εлavėpaкidɛç ‘id.' (Ar.) to έлavеpaкíчw.
•ETYM One compares Arm. ant'el 'charcoal', and further Georg. *nt' in v-a-nt'-ab ‘to
kindle (Vogt NTS 9 (1962/63): 333), but the formations are different. Fur.: 197, 393
compares ȧvdpáxλn ‘warming-pan, brazier' (Eust.) (cf. ȧvé páкiov 'brazier'), and
furter (391) Kávdapoç. ävßpač (H.), with the interchange к/ zero. Also note the suffix
-aк- (see Pre-Greek). Therefore, a substrate origin is clear; a comparison with Hitt.
āant- 'warm' is useless, as it does not explain the formation of the Greek word.
ȧvepηdwv, -óvos [f.] 'hornet' (D. S.). <PG(V)►
•DER ȧvepηvn [f.] 'bee, wasp' (Ar., Arist.); thence avеprvov [n.] 'wasps' nest' (Ar.),
ávеpηvádŋs ‘built like a wasps' nest' (Plu.).
åvðŋdwv [f.] ‘bee' (Damocr. apud Gal.).
Further Evеpηdwv [f.] (Arist., Dsc.), ►лæµöpηdóv [f.] ‘kind of wasp' (Nic.).
•ETYM No doubt a substrate word. Beside åvepηdwv, åvepývη, we find tεv0pŋdáv
(Arist.), τεvēρývη (Nic.); tevеpývov (Arist.). There are several forms which lack the
first nasal: Tε (Hp.), à pηvη (Suidas, etc.), and forms without
reduplication or initial à-, e.g. Opvn (Eust.) and Opηvóns (Democr. apud Ael.). Cf.
further Opwvač. knoýv. Aákwveç ‘drone (Lacon.)' (H.), though I know of no other
cases with the interchange / w. Further note εµpηdwv [f.] a wasp (Nic.).
In sum, we have a root 0 pη/wv- with a prothetic vowel or reduplication (cf.
кɛкpúpaloç, Σiovoos) and prenasalization; see Kuiper 1956: 221f. We may
reconstruct PG *(a)Ntrān-, *ta-Ntran-. For the interchange v/ 8, we may perhaps
compare qλnvaqáw qλnd@vτа. ПIεμчрηбáv could show that the word had a
labiovelar (see Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 12f.). There is no ground to assume that
tevėpývη, tevőpηdwv are dissimilated from *τεpp-; relation to à¤ýp, ávеépi is
improbable. Needless to say, the connection with Оpέoμaι, Оópuẞoç (Frisk)
makes no sense. tεßµηdáv. лpwpɛúç 'officer in command at the bow' (H.) is a joking.

=== page 077 ===

106
ävepokov
formation from the language of sailors, modelled after animal names in -ŋdov (see
Chantraine 1933: 360f.).
A difficult problem is the relation to Germanic and Balto-Slavic words for ‘drone':
OS dren, drāno, MoHG Drohne, Lith. tränas; on this, see Kuiper 1956: 222.
ävėpuoкov [n.] ‘chervil, Scandix australis' (Sapph.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also Evepuσкov (Pherecr.).
•DER ȧvėpiσkoç [m.] (Pollux 6, 106); ávеpíσкiov· λáxavov ëxov ävðos, ws ävŋßov, ǹ
τò avvŋσov ‘garden herbs, such as dill' (H.).
•ETYM No etymology. Connected with à¤ýp, ávеép₁ because of the prickly fruits
(Frisk). Fur: 364 points to the interchange 1/ u; for ɛ/ α, he considers the assimilation
a > ε before / v, which is doubtful. He rejects Opúσкα· áуpia λáxava 'wild herbs'
(H.) as a mistake for äveρvoкα. Because of the variations, a substrate origin seems
certain.
ǎvерwлоç [m.] 'man' (II.). <PG(S) ►
DIAL Myc. a-to-ro-qo /anthrōk"os/.
⚫DER Diminutives, usually depreciatory: ȧvěpánov (E., com.), ȧvершлíσкоç (E., Ar.,
Pl.), ávеpwiτápiov (com.).
Further derivatives: àvеpшлw. ǹ уʊvǹ лαрà Аáкwoɩv 'woman (Lacon.)' (H.);
àvôρwлéŋ, -ññ [f.] ‘human skin' (Hdt., Poll.); ȧvеpшëóτηç [f.] ‘humanity' (Ph., S.
E.). Adjectives: ávеpóлεo 'human' (Ion. etc. -½ïoç), ávерáлvoç ‘id.' (IA),
ávеpwлкóç ‘id.' (Pl., Arist.). Denominative verbs: 1. àvеpwлíšoµai ‘to behave like a
man' (Ar., Luc.); thencе àvеpшлσμóc humankinď (Aristipp.); 2. ȧvepwлεúðα [v.]
'to behave like a man' (Arist.); 3. ȧvершлóоμа 'to be human' (Plu.).
⚫ETYM ǎvершлоç resembles Hitt. antuuaḥḥaš- / antuḥš- 'man', but it has nothing to
do with it, as the latter derives from a compound *h,en-du(e)h₂-s- 'having
breath/spirit inside' (cf. Ovμóç < *dhuh₂-mó-). As no IE explanation has been found,
the word is probably of substrate origin. The occurrence of -oq- in Mycenaean does
not prove Indo-European origin, as the substrate language also had labiovelars (e.g.
Baoilɛúc, Myc. qa-si-re-u). Kuiper had already given a substrate interpretation on
the basis of Spwy (Kuiper 1956: 211f and Kuiper Lingua 21 (1968): 275f., defended by
Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 13-15). Rosén KZ 99 (1986): 243f., incorrectly assumes
that the laryngeals had an aspirating effect. Improbable suggestions are offered by
Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 312 and Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 655f.
ávía [f.] 'grief, distress' (Od.). <?>
•VAR Att. either i or ĭ; Hom. always -in. ǎva [n.pl.] ‘id.' (A. Pers. [lyr.]) is taken to be
a back-formation after e.g. oiλía: qpíλoç.
●DIAL Aeol. óvía (Sappho 1, 3).
•DER άviapóc, -ŋpós (Od., IA) ‘uncomfortable, grievous'. Denominative verbs: aviάw
'to grieve, distress' (Od., IA); also άvá(w (epic since Il.).
•ETYM The connection with Skt. ámīvā [f.] ‘disease, pain' requires an unwarranted
dissimilation m - u>n - u, and should be rejected. Kuiper AION 1 (1959): 157ff.
assumes a pre-from *an-is-yā < *n-is-io-, from the root of Skt. is- 'to desire',
comparing Skt. an-ista- 'unwished for'.
j
1
107
As remarked by Nikolaev 2006, derivation from *h₂eis- ‘to search' is semantically not
very convincing. He proposes instead to connect the root *h,eis(h₂)- 'to refresh, etc.',
reconstructing *n-(h₁)is(h₂)-iio- (sic!). The suffix -iio- is assumed to explain the
length of i, but a collective *n-His-ih, > PGr. *anihja would do better both formally
and semantically (the transition to a feminine is trivial).
The reflex of the vocalized nasal in Aeolic is debated: see the discussion by Nikolaev
(ibid.: fn. 21), who adduces a suggestion by Bechtel that the PNs Ilavσavias and
Avσavíaç contain the genuine Aeolic variant.
ávɩypós [adj.] 'unpleasant' (Nic.). <?>
•VAR ávɩуpóv• άкáðαpτov, þauλov, kaкóv, dvowdɛç, àσɛßéç 'foul, mean, bad,
malodorous, impure' (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Connection with ►ví(w is improbable, as this had a labiovelar
*-gw-.
ävvηoov [n.] ‘anise, Pimpinella Anisum' (Hp.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ävŋoov (v.l. in codd.); ävησ00v (Dsc.); ävησσov (inscr. Delos IIª).
•ETYM Probably the same word as ävηov. The variation v/vv (perhaps also σ/00)
and the intervocalic -σ- demonstrate substrate origin.
åvvís [f.] · µntpòs ½ natpòs µýtyp ‘mother of one's mother or father' (H.; also IG 7,
3380 [Boeotia]). <IE *h₂en- ‘grandmother'>
VAR ávú in acc. àvúv (IG 9(2), 877 [Larisa]).
•ETYM Perhaps an elementary formation, like Hitt. anna- 'mother'. However, Hitt.
hanna- and Lyc. xñna- 'grandmother' have an initial laryngeal, like Arm. han
'grandmother', Lat. anna 'foster-mother' and OHG ana 'grandmother, ancestor'.
ávóкalov. Úлεpov 'upper part of a house'. уpáqɛταl кai ȧváyɛtov (H.). → ȧvú yatov.
άvoкwxń [f.] 'cessation', especially 'cessation of arms, truce' (Th.). <GR▷
•VAR Also avaкwxń.
•DER Denominative άvoкwxɛúw [v.] 'to hold back, hinder' (Hdt., S., etc.), also άvaк-;
ȧvaкwxéw (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Reduplicated derivative of avέxw, like Stoкwxn from diéxw; cf. ►åкwêŋ. The
form with ava- was introduced after the formation had become opaque. The
formation is clearly recent, as there is no trace of the initial aspiration (root *hekh-).
See ▸ Exw.
ávóлaɩa [adv.]? hapax of uncertain mg. (a 320); also the mountain (in the Oeta) and
the pass through which the Persians circumvented the pass of Thermopylae (Hdt. 7,
216). ◄GR?►
•VAR άvoлaîα Hdn. 2, 133; άvóлatos epithet of fire (Emp. 51), perhaps 'up by the hole
in the roof (?).
ETYM Already unclear in antiquity (see DELG). Bechtel 1914 thinks that it is a
hypostasis of ȧvà τã óлã ‘on high through the hole of the roof; Chantraine thinks it
must be an adverb (ntr.plur.) because of the short -a.
ǎvía [adv.] ‘over against, face to face' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂ent- 'face'>

=== page 078 ===

108
äv
109
•VAR Also ǎvτηv.
●DER άvτάç “hostile' (Pi.). Denominative verb άvτáw 'to come towards, meet with'
(Il.); ȧл-avτáw 'to meet' (IA), áлávτησiç 'encounter' (S., Arist.) and áлávτηµα ‘id.'
(E., LXX).
•ETYM The root noun *åvτ- gave rise to a derivative ävτoμai ‘to meet, implore' (Il.).
ävτa is the accusative of this noun; the locative is ►ávτí, and the old instrumental
*h₂nt-bhi is continued in auqi; see there for further etymology. ävτηу was perhaps
formed after Sv, лλην, etc.; the case form is still apparent in ěvavτa = έv ävta, etc.
For the meaning, we may compare especially Go. and(a)- ‘against', Lith. añt and
OLith. antà 'towards'.
ävτai [f.pl.] · ävεμot 'winds' (H.). <IE? *h₂ueh,- 'blow'>
•VAR ávτάç· évoάs ‘breezes, breaths' (H.).
•ETYM To be corrected to añτal, anτaç? Derivation from *h₂enh,- 'breathe' (see
►ǎvεμoç) is impossible, as this would give *åvετai < *henh-t- or *ǎτai < *h₂ṇh₁-t-).
See discussion on ánτηs s.v. ►änuɩ.
ávταкαioç [m.] a kind of sturgeon (Hdt.). <LW▷
•VAR Also adjectival (Antiph.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Probably an adapted foreign word; cf. Hdt. 4, 53: kýteά te µɛyáλa
ávákavða, tà ávtakaíovç kaλéovot (the fish is found in the Borysthenes = Dniepr).
ävταp [n.] ȧετòç úло Tуруηушv ‘eagle (Etruscan)'. Evpopíwv Sε díaσμа 'warp' (H.)
<Etr., GR?>
•ETYM These are clearly two glosses. The first is Etruscan; for the second, cf. avτíov
'(part of the) loom', so it probably derives from avɩ- in åvτí etc., with the inanimate
suffix -ap (or from ► ȧpapíoкw?).
ávtátas m. ‘surety, guarantor (Cretan)'. ◄ GR►
ETYM Lit. "who pays (gets the damage, ǎτη) for another"; see Kretschmer Glotta 18
(1930): 91.
ȧvτnpηs [adj.] 'set over against, opposite' (S.). <GR>
•ETYM From ȧvτaɛípw 'to raise against', thus *avτ(1)-aƑép-ns (cf. *ñƑελios > ñàíos),
acc. to Blanc RPh. 66 (1992): 247-254.
ȧvτηpís, -ídos [f.] 'prop, support' (E.). <GR
•VAR ȧvτηpios. στηµwv, кai кavшν ó лρоσкεíµεvos τη Оúрα 'warp; bar placed on a
door' (H.).
•ETYM Backformation from àvτɛpɛídw 'to lean against', with lengthening of the
initial root vowel, and reshaping of -pεid- after the suffix -18- (as in εykpic); cf. ¿ykλiç
to έykλivw, ¿µníç to έµлívw. For the formation in -ɩoç, cf. лαуiç : náyios, ßwµis :
Boulos.
ävtŋotis [?] ‘confronting”, only in kat ävtŋotiv Deµévŋ nepikadλéa diqpov (v 387).
< GR➤
•ETYM From ǎvτηy ïotaσðaɩ, with äväŋ- as a first member. The second member is
the zero grade -σt- with suffixal -1-, cf. §aotis < *}-av-στ-ɩç. See Bechtel 1914 S.V.
ávτí [prep.] opposite, over against; instead of (II.). <IE *h₂ent- 'front, face'>
•DIAL Myc. a-ti-pa-mo /Antiphamos/, etc.
•COMP vαvτ, άлévavτɩ, кaτévavτi (Dor., Hell.); ȧvávτηs 'uphill, steep' (Hdt.); see
also ►ávτávεipa.
•DER ȧvτíos ‘opposite, opposed to' (Il.; Att. prose has έvavτíos), thence ávτádɛç
[f.pl.] 'tonsils' (medic.). Denominative àvτióoµαι [v.] 'to oppose' (Hdt.). ȧvτáw 'to
come towards, participate, etc.' (epic Ion. poet.) was derived from the ntr.plur. ȧvτía
[adv.] 'opposite'; post-Homeric is άvτάw.
⚫ETYM Identical with Skt. ánti 'facing', Lat. ante 'before', and Hitt. hanti ‘opposite,
separate'. It is the old locative of a root noun preserved in Hitt. ḥant- 'front,
forehead'. Another case form of the same noun is ►ävta.
ávɩɩávæɩpa [f.] epithet of the Amazons (II.); further only in Pi. Ol. 12, 16, σtáσ¹Ç
ȧvτιávεpα '(faction) in which man is set against man'. <GR>
⚫ETYM Cf. Kudi-ávɛipa and ßwτɩ-ávɛipα. The words is a compound from ȧvtí and
avnp, with the original meaning 'a match for men' (cf. àvτíɛoç 'godlike'), but often
taken as 'hostile to men'.
ȧvτкpú [adv.] 'right opposite' (II.). <PG?>
•VAR Att. ǎVTIкpuç, katavtikpú (with stress after 10ú?).
•DIAL Att. Kaτ-, άл-αντрокυ (IG 22, 1672: 25 and 1668: 88) perhaps from *ȧvτα-кpv
(see Beekes and Cuypers below).
ETYM Assuming a compound with ȧvτ- does not help much (the connection with
ȧvτIкpoúw 'to come into collision' by Kretschmer Glotta 4 (1913): 356 is improbable,
as are other attempts). Beekes and Cuypers Mnem. 56 (2003) argue that the -v is
short, but metrically lengthened in Homer.
The Attic form may have developed from ȧvτα-кpu with anticipation of the p and
assimilation a > 0.
ävτλos [m.] 'bilge-water' (Od.). <?►
•DIAL Myc. a-ta-ra, a vase, has been interpreted as /antla/, but this may be doubted.
•DER ȧvτλía ‘bilge-water, hold of a ship' (S., Ar.), 'container' (pap.), ávτλíov ‘id.'
(Ar.). Denominative verb ȧvτλéw 'to bale out bilge-water, pump' (Hdt.); late verbal
nouns ävτλŋσiç, ávτλŋσµóç; ävτλημа 'bucket'.
⚫ETYM Connection with Lat. sentina 'bilge-water' (Solmsen 1909: 189; Chantraine
1933: 375), for which preforms *ävτλos (psilosis) < *ǎµ-0λo- are assumed, is
impossible in Indo-European terms, as *sm- would give ȧ-, not ȧv-. If reliable, the
Myc. form would exclude an original *s-. Quite convincing is the proposal by
Benveniste BSL 50 (1954): 39 to compare Hitt. han- 'to draw water', although it
requires an unusual suffix -tλos (cf. DELG). This is accepted by both Puhvel HED
and Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. The comparsion with Lat. sentīna remains tempting, but in
this case the word cannot be Indo-European, which seems quite well possible for a
technical term.
ǎva →ǎva.
ǎvτoμos [m.] 'country road' (Tab. Heracl. 1, 12), probably not 'palisade'. <?>

=== page 079 ===

110
ăvtpov
•VAR ȧVτóμovç. σкóλолαç. Σкɛλoí 'anything pointed (Sicilian)' (H.).
•ETYM Explained as *áváτoµoç to ávaτέµvw 'to cut open', but the semantics are not
very convincing. Hardly related to Lat. antemna ‘yard (as per von Blumenthal 1930:
(16).
ävτpov [n.] 'cave' (Od.). <PG?>
●DER ávτpwdŋs 'with many caves' (X., Arist.), avτpaños living in caves' (E.),
ávɩpiádes [f.pl.] 'cave nymphs' (AP, Phryn.), cf. кρηviádes, ópeotiádec; ávtpnïs [f.]
'living in caves' (Antip. Sid.).
•ETYM Derivation of ävτpov and Arm. ayr ‘grotto' from a pre-form *antēr (De
Lamberterie BSL 73 (1978): 243f.) is impossible, as was shown by Clackson 1994: 98.
Connection with ävεμoç (Schwyzer: 532) is formally impossible since the root is
dissyllabic *henh,-. Giannakis Glotta 76 (2000): 192-198 incorrectly explains the
form as from *anti-trh2-om, with the root *terh₂- 'to cross'. The disappearance of*-ti-
and the loss of the laryngeal are both improbable. Lat. antrum is a loan from Greek.
It is best to return to Chantraine 1933: 331 and assume a substrate word.
ävτuž, -yos [f.] 'edge, rim of anything round; rail of a chariot' (II.), cf. Delebecque 1951:
177f.<?>
•ETYM Previously explained as ává plus a root noun -τuε as belonging to τɛúxw,
TETUкETV. However, since these have -X- or -к-, the etymology is highly questionable.
The word resembles ►ǎµлvž (gen. -кos), which has no etymology either; see also on
►кαταчτuž, which is unclear as well.
ǎvvµ [v.] ‘to effect, accomplish' (Il.). <IE *senH- 'win, accomplish'>
•VAR Thematic ȧvúw, ávúw; *ávƑw > ǎvw; enlarged with dental ávúτw, Att. ȧvúτw
(see Schwyzer: 704: 1), aor. évvσa (secondary, see below), "vɛσα (Strunk, below).
Glosses kaσávεiç ȧvúεlç, Aάкwvɛç (H.) <*кabavɛiç; ȧavéç. où τɛλεσησóµεvov 'not
about to be fulfilled' (H.).
DIAL Myc. a-nu-to /Anutos/; a₁-nu-me-no /hanumenos/.
•DER ǎvvoiç success, accomplishment' (epic poet., late prose), whence àvúσчoç
'successful' (X., Pl.); ǎvvoμa ‘id.' (sch.). àv-nvu(σ)TOS 'unfeasible, without end'
(Od.); from this avvoτós (ȧv-) ‘feasible' (E., X.), ȧvu(σ)τɩкóç ‘effective' (X., Arist.).
ávvtǹs = Lat. exactor (Just.).
•ETYM ǎvчμɩ is related to Skt. sanóti ‘to win, obtain' <*sn-n-eu-. Acc. to Strunk 1967:
116, the aorist veσa < *senh,-s- is old and corresponds to Skt. asāniṣam. If this is
correct, Hitt. ša(n) h-zi 'to search, try, mean' < *senh₂- cannot be related. Cf. also the
group of OHG sinnan 'to strive for'. See ➤aúðévíns.
ävwya [v.] 'to command, order' (II.), perf. with present mg. <IE *h,eg-''say', or *h₂eg->
•VAR Plpf. nvwyɛa; secondary pres. ȧvwyw, aor. -a (Schwyzer: 767).
•DIAL An Achaean word, see Ruijgh 1957: 128ff.
•ETYM Originally, a compound äv-wya 'to proclaim loudly' <*-he-h₂og-, ablauting
with ǹ ‘he said < *h₁e-h₁eģ-t. Related to Lat. aiō < *åg-io-H (probably from *h,g-, but
the development remains difficult; see Schrijver 1991: 485; adagio 'proverb' is
probably unrelated; see De Vaan 2008 s.v. aiō). Also related to Arm. arac
:
}
!
ǎočos
111
'proverbium', pres. asem ‘say' (s < *g); Arm. a- < *h,- before consonant would be
regular. Hackstein 1995: 332-4 assumes initial *h₂- because of ToB ākṣām, but his
connection with Gr. ►ǎw is improbable; this is followed by LIV² s.v. *h₂eģ- ‘sagen'.
Cf. nuí.
áváyatov [n.] 'anything raised from the ground' (X.), 'prison'. <GR>
•VAR Also ȧváyatov and ►ávóкalov.
•ETYM Clearly a compound of yñ with ǎvw. See ▸ yñ.
ážívn [f.] ‘axe' (Il.), díστοµоç лελεкUS 'two-edged axe' (H.). <LW>
•ETYM Compared with Lat. ascia 'axe' and Germanic words for 'axe', Go. aqizi, etc.,
but this does not lead to an IE reconstruction. Ruijgh BiOrbis 54 (1997): 540" notes
that -in- is a typical substrate suffix, and that the sign for a in Linear B is a double
axe. Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 656 remarks that Akk. haṣṣinu and Aram.
ḥaṣṣină are so close that they must be the same word. I propose that the Semitic and
Greek words are loans from an Anatolian language.
ǎžios [adj.] 'worth' (II.). ◄IE? *h₂eģ- ‘carry'▷
•DER Abstract άžía ‘value, wages' (IA). Denominative άtów, -óoµα [v.] 'to deem
worthy, esteem; require' (S., IA); thence àεíwμa 'estimation, requirement, decree,
etc.' (Att., Hell.), diminutive àžiwμáτiov (Arr.), adjective àчɩwµατiкóç 'high in rank'
(Hell.); ȧšíwois 'valuation, assessment, opinion' (Hdt., Th., E.).
⚫ETYM Generally assumed to be derived from ayw in the sense of 'to weigh' (cf. Lat.
agīna), perhaps first from *äıç ‘weight'. Some doubts remain, as no such derivative
in-ti- is known from ǎyw, and the semantics are not really strong.
ážovyyía →òžúyyɩov.
äwv, -ovos [m.] 'axle, axis' (Il.). <IE *h₂eks->
DIAL Myc. a-ko-so-ne /aksones/.
•ETYM Old noun, also found in Skt. ákṣa- [m.], Lat. axis, Lith. ašis, OCS osb; OHG
ahsa [f.], all ‘axle, axis'. Derivatives in -/- are found in ON oxull [m.], W echel [f.],
Lat. āla ‘arm-pit, wing' < *aks-lā (cf. axilla). The word has been connected with ǎyw
(Benveniste 1935: 7, 24, 121), but this is uncertain. It is improbable that a wv is
contained in äµažα.
ǎotos [m.] 'servant (of a god)' (A. Ag. 231 [lyr.], Call. fr. 353, IG 9(1), 976 [Corcyra,
metr. inscr.]). <PG?(V)►
•Var äoloi. vänpétai, Oɛpárovtes, áкóλovo servants, attendants, followers' (H.);
älos
ǎчoç = ερáлwν or Оɛрáлαivα (Seleucus, gloss. apud Ath. 6, 267c = Eust. 1024, 44
and 1090, 56).
•DIAL Myc. a-o-ze-jo probably does not belong here.
•DER άocía 'service of a god' (epigr.); denominative ȧoléw [v.] 'to serve' (A. fr. 54,
H.).
•ETYM In the same sense as öoç in epic los "Apηos, if this means Oɛpáлwv; cf. ò\ɛía
(cod. ¿šɛiéα). еɛpañɛíɑ (H.). This ölos has been considered identical with ►öłos
'branch' from antiquity onwards: ó kλádos toũ roλéμov 'the branch of war' (H.).

=== page 080 ===

112
ào入入ńs, -ec
Modern scholars have taken it as 'sprout', but DELG notes that öcos does not have
this meaning. Although DELG accepts the connection with ŏoç < *o-sd-o- (prefix o-
and zero grade of sed 'sit down'), but it is not very convincing semantically.
Brugmann IF 19 (1906): 379 argues against Schulze 1892: 498, who explained ǎoчoç
from *ȧ-008-10-s (to ódós), but Frisk and DELG do not reject this.
Fur: 341 cites the form aloc, and concludes from the interchange a/o that the word
is Pre-Greek. He assumes (374, following Frisk) that ǎo os has a secondary
copulative a- under influence of άoσσέw 'to accompany', but this must remain
uncertain, as it could also be a real Pre-Greek prothetic vowel.
ảo\\ńs, -ec [adj.] ‘all together, in throngs' (II.). ◄ IE *uel- ‘press'>
•DER ảo\\í【w [v.] ‘to press together, assemble' (epic poet.) and ảo\\ɛi· ovváyɛɩ
'brings together' (H.), whence ȧó\\ŋois (EM). Adverb άoλλýηv ‘together' (Mosch.,
Opp.).
•ETYM ảoÀÀŃ≤ < *å-Ƒoλvýc is probably the Aeol. form of *ả-Ƒaλvýc; see ► άλýs.
ǎop, -opos [n.] 'sword' (Il.). <IE? *ns- 'sword'>
•VAR For ǎopaç [acc.pl.] p 222 read äopa y'. See Trümpy 1950: 60ff.
•DIAL Note the tribe of the Aopεis in Corinth and the AƑopoí on Corcyra.
•COMP Xpuσάopoç, also xpvoάop-a, -1 (II.), epithet of gods and godesses, also of
Orpheus, 'with golden sword', but others take it as 'with golden pendant' (below);
also PN Xpvoάwp (Hes.).
⚫ETYM ǎop was taken as a root noun related to ȧɛípw with the original meaning 'what
hangs'; this would fit xpvσάopos well. Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 312f. rejected this,
assuming *ns-ṛ, with the o-grade from an Aeolic (or Achaean) zero grade. This
would be cognate with Lat. ĕnsis 'sword' and Skt. asi- (both from *ns-i-), though the
Skt. word means 'butcher's knife'. Scholars have also pointed to Pal. hašira- ‘dagger³,
but *h₂ns would have given Gr. *àv-. All in all, the etymology remains a bit
uncertain.
ǎopov [m.] · µoxλóv, évλŵva, Ovpwpóv. Kúлpioi ‘bar or bolt, gateway, porter (Cypr.)'
(H.). <IE? *h₂uer- 'shut, cover'>
⚫ETYM Comparable forms are OCS za-vorú μoxλóç', Ru. za-vór 'passage blocked
with bars', related to OCS za-vrěti ‘to shuť < earlier *ver-ti, and Lith. su-vérti ‘id.”,
Skt. api-vṛṇoti 'to lock', and Lat. operiō ‘id.'. Previously, an action noun *sm-uoro-
'locking' was assumed for the Greek word, but the meaning of *sm- would be
unclear. Therefore, a root *h₂uer- is preferable, which nicely confirms Lubotsky's
analysis of Skt. vṛṇóti 'to shut' as *Huer- in view of forms like ávar, ápāvṛta-,
ápivṛta-, see Lubotsky 2000a: 315-325. The acute in the Balto-Slavic forms is probably
secondary.
άoptý •VAR άoptńp. →ȧɛípw 2.
άoσσέw [v.] 'to help, support'. <IE *sek"- 'follow'>
•VAR Only aor. άoσσñσαι (Mosch. 4, 110).
113
●DER ảoσoŋtýp [m.] ‘helper, protector³ (Il.); cf. ỏσontñpa. ßoŋ¤óv ‘assistant' and
¿oσontó̟p. ¿níkovpos, tiµwpós, ávtì toũ ảoσoŋtýp ‘ally, avenger (instead of å.)' (H.),
but the forms are unexplained.
⚫ETYM άoσσέw is an iterative deverbative or denominative from *ǎoσσos < *sm-sok™-
io- (an old formation, cf. Lat. socius) from the root of лoμaι, Lat. sequor. On
account of the aspiration in Skt. sákhi- ‘ally, associate', one often finds the
reconstruction *sok"h₂-i-. Pinault therefore adduced this word as an example for his
rule that a laryngeal was lost between consonant and yod in PIE (Pinault 1982: 265-
272), but the so-called Lex Pinault is still under debate. See on ►εnoµai, ▶ónáwv,
and Myc. e-qe-ta.
ánaλós [adj.] 'tender, weak' (II.). <?>
•DER άлaλía 'tenderness' (Gp.) and áлaλíaç 'sucking-pig' (D. L. 8, 20; uncertain);
áñáliov. Oñµa, dελoáкtov ‘victim; sucking-pig' (H.) (but the text is doubtful).
Denominative verb áлaλúvw 'to soften' (X., Hp. usw.), áлaλvσμóç (Нp.), ȧлαλuvτnç
(Zonar.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The formation may be compared with ouaλóç, áτalóç, see
Chantraine 1933: 245. Fur.: 224 compares άuaλós, assuming variation л/ µ; this is
possible, but uncertain.
ánavtáw ⇒ävta.
ǎлα [adv.] 'once' (Od.). <IE *peh,ģ- 'firm, solid'>
•ETYM From ȧ- < *sm- ‘one' (cf. ►ɛic) and -ñα§, related to лó̟yvvµ ‘to fix,
coagulate', with adverbial -ç.
ȧлapуía [f.] a plant which has its leaves on the ground (Thphr. HP 7, 8, 3). <?>
•ETYM Strömberg 1944: 30f. thinks it comes from ȧpyós ‘brilliant, white' (cf.
► ápуɛµov, ► ápуεµwvη) because of the color; unfortunately, we know nothing about
the latter.
ảлapívŋ [f.] the plant ‘cleavers, Gallium aparine' (Thphr.). ◄PG?(S)►
⚫ETYM André Latomus 15 (1956): 295 connects it with apηv (?). However, note the
suffix -iv-, which is typical of the substrate language.
äñas [adj.] ‘all, whole' (Il.). ◄GR►
•ETYM From ȧ- (cf. ɛiç) and ►лãç, s.v.
áñáτŋ [f.] ‘fraud, deceit' (II.); on the mg. see Luther 1935: 97ff. <PG(S,V) ►
●DER åлatŋλóç ‘fraudulent, deceitful (Il., IA), perhaps from ảлaτáw (Chantraine
1933: 241f.), with the metrical variant άoç (Оd.); άлατεwv, -wvos [m.]
‘deceiver' (Hp., Democr., Pl.); άлáτlla (Cerc., POxy. 1082 fr. 39) is found in
έžañaτúλλw (Ar.), cf. Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 219.
Denominative άлατáш [v.] 'to deceive' (Il.). Thence åлáτŋσɩç ‘deception' (LXX,
Phld.), ȧлáτημα 'deceit' (Gorg.), άлατηµwν 'deceitful' (Orac. apud Zos.), ȧкó
‘id.' (Pl., Arist.), áñaτητýs ‘frauď (gloss.); ȧлατεúw = áлaτáw (Xenoph. 11).
•ETYM Kuiper Glotta 21 (1933): 283 connected ηлεролεúç, explaining ảлátŋ as *ảnу-
τã from an r/n-stem *ǎлαр, *åлvóç. This is morphologically unconvincing.

=== page 081 ===

114
AnatoÚpla
Connection with лóντоç, лáτо and Go. finþan as per Pedersen 1926: 65 is
improbable.
Fur: 234f. connected ǎτη < *ȧFα-τn, with the substrate variation л/ F, which is
possible but not compelling either. His comparison with ảлaqɛîv is attractive (for
which the variant άлoεïv shows substrate origin, see ►åлaqíσкw), as this has the
same meaning. If ǹлεр-Ол-εúш is cognate, note the suffix -ол-, which is also a
substrate element (Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 18-25).
Aлatoúpia [n.pl.] the festival ‘Apatouria'. <GR, IE *sm-ph₂tor-uo-▷
●DER As a name of Aphrodite Алаτovpíа, Алаτovρiác, also the back-formation
Алаτоúрη (Troеzen, Pantikapaion, Phanagoria); further Алάτoυpov τò τñу
Appodiτns iɛpóv' (Str. 11, 2, 10). Month name Алаτоυрióν, -εáv, also Алατорóv
(Amorgos).
•ETYM Old celebration of the Ionians, on the occasion of which new members were
accepted to the phratries. It derives from an intermediary adjective *άлáτoρоç (e.g.
Kretschmer Glotta 4 (1913): 336) < *ảлatopfos, which consists of copulative a- and
the o-grade of лаτуp, so *sm-ph₂tor-u- ‘of the same father'. The -F- is compared with
Skt. pítṛvya- ‘father's brother', Lat. patruus ‘id.', etc. (see on ►µòtpvá). Differently
Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 656.
•
åлαчívov [n.] Аáкwvɛç кáρdorov ivy (...) ‘stone kneading-trough (Lacon.)'
(H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. DELG compares άqɩvášɛ, of which the explanation is lost.
ảлaqiσкw [v.] ‘to deceive' (Od.). <PG?►
•VAR Аor. άлaqɛïv, also àñaqñσai (h. Ap.); àñoqɛïv· àñatñσaɩ ‘to deceive' (H.).
⚫ETYM The present was probably built on the aorist. Van Windekens connects it with
µµôo̟µα, but reduplication of ac- < *mbh- is highly improbable. The form ảлoqɛïv,
if it was not influenced by άлó, suggests substrate origin, as assumed by Fur: 341; he
also connects it with ảлáτη (234). Perhaps here άлoç.
ǎлaqoç [m.] · ëñoу tò öpvɛov ‘hoopoe, Upupa epops' (H.). <PG➤
ETYM Onomatopoeic, with the suffix -aqoç frequent in animal names (see
Chantraine 1933: 263). The variation with čлoš, -лoç suggests a substrate word. Cf.
Lat. upupa.
ȧnaqovliotwp [?] · σtaquλivos Aάkwveç ‘carrot (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Latte comments: "aq-vλíστwρ cum u.l. ȧл-"; but the meaning of aquλíav 'to
strain, filter' does not fit semantically. Could it stand for *στaqovλ-?
ảnɛλý [f.] ‘threat', also ‘promise' (Il.). <IE? *h₂pelH- (?) ‘speak publicly’▷
•DER άлελéw [v.] 'to promise, threaten' (Il., IA). άлελŋτηp [m.] 'threatener, boaster'
(Il., poet.), fem. άлελ½τεрα (Nonn.); άлελτ ‘'id.' (D. S., J.). Adjectives:
άлæλŋtýpios ‘threatening' (Hdt.) and åëåéíкóç ‘id.' (Pl., X.); agent nouns:
άлɛλýµaïa ‘threats' (S.), àïɛi\ŋoiç ‘threať (Phld.).
●ETYM If related to Latv. pelt 'to revile', the root would be *h₂pel(H)-. Assuming s-
mobile, åлɛλý has further been compared with the Germanic group of Go. spill [n.]
I
115
'fable', and also with Arm. ara-spel ‘legend, proverb', in which case the s- would pose
difficulties as Armenian also vocalizes the initial laryngeal. LIV² assumes a nasal
present *(s)pelnH- with secondary full grade and copulative a-, and compares ToA
pälläntär, ToB pällätär 'to praise'. In view of the many additional hypotheses
required, this seems rather far-fetched.
ȧлεpéσɩoç [adv.] 'endless, immense' (II.). <GR>
•VAR άлερεíσιоç; also àлεípτоç (Od.).
⚫ETYM For *ȧлεрéσчоç, a derivation in -to- from *а-лεр-ετоÇ, a privative verbal
adjective to ▸лɛipw, with metrical lengthening (Chantraine 1942: 101). άneipitos (k
195, Hes. Th. 109, etc.), with unclear --, has the same meaning. As Vine 1998: 26ff.
remarks, the e-grade root is remarkable in a formation in *-etó-.
ảлέ\\aɩ [f.pl.] ‘(people's) assembly' (IG 5(1), 1144: 21, 1146: 41 [Gytheion Iª]). <?►
•VAR = onkoí, ¿KK\ŋoiai, ȧpxaipeσial 'precincts, assemblies, elections of magistrates'
(H.).
.DIAL Doric.
•DER Алελλαñoç, -αtwv Doric month name (Delphi, Epidauros; Tenos); τả áƒε\\aĩa
'sacrifice at the apellai' (Delphi); άлελλαкáç. iɛρŵv Koιvwvoúç (H.). Denominative
άлελλáчw, Laconian for έккλŋσiάw (Plu., H.).
⚫ETYM Formally, a connection with IE *h₂pel- would be the most easy solution, but
there are no obvious cognates for such a root. In Greek, we find a gloss άлε\\εv-
άлокλεíɛν, and this may well provide us with the original meaning of ȧлéλλαɩ,
enclosed space, meeting place'. Note that oŋkoí in the gloss cited above means 'pen,
fold', and compare σάкшσɛ· άлέкÀεLσEV.
I have argued that the name of Apollo (see on Алó\\wv) has nothing to do with
the ȧлéλλa (Beekes JANER 3 (2003): 1-21).
ảnɛllóv [n.] · aïyɛɩpoç 'black poplar' (H.). <?►
ETYM The word has been connected with Lat. populus. Although IE origin is
improbable, a reconstruction *h₂pel-> ȧлελ- is possible in principle, with po-h₂pel-o-
> *pōpelo-> Lat. pōpulus. Does HG Vielbaum also belong here (Kluge and Seebold
1989 s.v. Pappel)?
ǎлελoç [n.] 'wound' (Call. fr. 343). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown. A derivation from лελαç 'skin' with privative ȧ-, or from the root
of Lat. pellō 'to push', is improbable. Van Windekens Orbis 15 (1966): 256 compared
ToB pile, ToA päl 'wound', on which see Adams 1999; highly uncertain.
ȧлɛрáw [v.] 'to pour out' (A.). <GR?>
●Der åлépaσç (Thphr.). Beside it εε-ɛpáw 'pour out, vomit' (Hp.), έžέpaµa ‘spittle,
Katež,
vomit' (NT), épaσiç 'dye extract' (PHolm. 15, 39). Also dɩ-, кat-, кatεε-, µεt-, ovv-
εpáw (Hell.).
•ETYM Acc. to Debrunner IF 48 (1930): 282, the word is a denominative of pa 'earth'
(cf. ►špašɛ), cf. the scholion to Ar. Vesp. 993: έžɛpάow. eis tǹv yñv µetaßaλw. ɛ̃pa
yảp ǹ yñ. In this case, εpāv originally meant 'to pour out on the earth', which is
possible. On MoGr. ɛpvw, épaσa, see Grégoire Byzantion 13 (1938): 399f.

=== page 082 ===

116
ànepeiolog →ànelpéalog.
άлývη [f.] ‘four-wheeled wagon' (Il.), synonymous with äuaža, see Delebecque 1951:
174f. <PG(V)►
•var nýva· áлývη ‘four-wheeled wagon' (H.). Myc. a-pe-ne-wo /apēnēwōn/ [gen.pl.]
would be an attribute of drawing animals, but ȧлývη probably had -āvā (see below).
⚫ETYM The gloss éývα· áлývé (H.) suggests that the ȧ- is a real prothetic vowel and
that the word is Pre-Greek. This excludes a morphological analysis ȧл-ηvη. Further,
there is the synonym кaлάvā (Xenarch. 11, Thess.), with interchange k-/ zero. Fur.:
2249 compares yάлоç· öxημα. Tʊppηvoí 'wagon (Etr.)' (H.), also adducing (285)
λаμлηvη ‘id.', which has a variant λaлívη without prenasalization; on variation \/
zero see Fur.: 392. Further, one has compared aμaváv· äµažav (H.).
Bănăţeanu REIE 3 (1943): 141 thought the word is Anatolian (which amounts to
saying that it is a substrate word); Szemerényi JHS 94 (1947): 149f. thought it could
be Semitic.
The comparison with кαлávα is the most convincing and shows foreign (substrate)
origin, because of the variation к-/ zero, see Fur.: 391f. This means that some of the
other variants adduced by Furnée must be left aside.
άлηvýs̟, -és [adj.] 'unfriendly, harsh' (II.). <IE? *h₂en-os- 'face'>
•DER ȧлηvεiα [f.] 'harshness' (Thphr., A. R.).
⚫ETYM Formation like лρävýs̟ (лρηvýs̟) and лpoσηvýs (лpoσāvýc), from ȧлó (лρó,
лрóc) with a second element for which *ñvos [n.] 'face' is traditionally assumed. A
problem with this analysis is that Skt. *ānas- does not exist, and that ánana- [n.]
'mouth' is of uncertain interpretation. Blanc CEG 1 connects ►ávaívoμaɩ, which is
doubtful. So there is no clear etymology.
ànnýpwvároÚpas.
άлɩvóσσw →лéñvyrai.
ǎлɩov [n.] ‘pear' (Pl.). <?►
•VAR ǎлoç [f.] ‘pear tree' (Thphr.), but these are not always distinguished, cf.
Wackernagel 1920-1924(2): 17.
⚫ETYM Related to Lat. pirum, pirus. Generally considered to be a Mediterranian LW.
See Hubschmid 1963: 121. Berger MSS 9 (1956): 15ff compares Burushaski phešo,
which is improbable. Steinbauer 1989: 68 argues that the word could be from IE
*h₂pis-o-, which seems even less likely.
ǎлoç [adj.] 'distant, far away' (Il.). <GR>
⚫ETYM From άлó; for the formation, cf. avτíoç. The word appears in the formula
(tnλóðev) ¿§ àñíns yains. In S. OC 1685 it has a long å-, probably under influence of
Алíα 'Peloponnese'; see Aлç. Seе ►ȧлó.
άлλετoç [adj.] 'boundless, immense' (Emp., S., IA prose), said of the sky, height, time,
gold.<?>
•ETYM Privative ȧ- plus an unknown second member; not related to ▶лλéеpov, as
per DELG.
áñλóos [adj.] ‘single, simple' (A.). <?►
ànóKUVOV
•VAR Contracted άлλoυç; haрax άлλóç (Аn. Оx. 2, 231).
117
●COMP dirλóoç, §ɩлλoûç 'twofold, double, twice' (since Il.), also diлλós (Opp.).
•DER ȧлλoïç [f.] (II.), of xλaiva. Diminutive anλoïdɩov (pap.); åлλoïкóç ‘simple,
plain' (Hell.). άлλóτŋs [f.] ‘simplicity, plainness' (X., Arist.). Denominative verbs: 1.
άлλów [v.] 'to develop, unfold', whence äлλwσiç and äлλwµa, årλwtikós (all late); 2.
ȧлλooμα 'to act modestly' (X., D. C.).
•ETYM άлλóoç is the opposite of diлλóoç, diñλoûç ‘twofold, double' (Il.) and late
Sɩлλós (Оpp.). Direct connection of ȧлλós with Lat. simplus, duplus, and Gm. forms
like Go. tweifl [acc.] ‘doubt' (assuming a root *pel- ‘to fold') is problematic, as Gr.
-лλоç is late and rare compared to -лλóоç. Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 218
considered secondary influence of -лλóƑоs ‘sailing', related to лλéw. Cf.
►Siлλάσoç.
ảлó [prep.] ‘far away, away from' (Il.) ◄IE *hepo ‘from'>
•VAR ǎлo [adv.].
•DIAL Arc.-Cypr., Aeol. ȧлú. Note Myc. a-pu-do-ke, a-pe-do-ke /apu-dōke/, /ap-
edōke/.
⚫DER Beside ǎло-еεу also ǎлшеev 'from afar, far from' (Schwyzer: 628, Lejeune 1939:
332).
•ETYM Old adverb and preverb, identical with Skt. ápa ‘away from', Lat. ab, and Go.
af 'down'; probably also to Hitt. appa ‘after' (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). From PIE
h₂épo, which has a variant *h₂pó- > OCS po, >> PGm. fana that would also have
given áлó. Seе ►ǎлoç.
ȧлodidpáσкw →didpάokw.
άлóερσε [v.] 'swept away' (II.). <IE? *uer- 'tear'>
•VAR Only this form occurs.
•ETYM Formerly interpreted as the s-aorist from a root, *uer- or *uers- (Gil Emerita 32
(1964): 181), which was also supposed in ►àлoúpaç, but this probably has a root *ur-
eh2. Forssman 1980: 192 more convincingly reconstructs άлóεрσε as *uert-s- from
the root for 'turn', also seen in ►äppw < *uert-ie/o-.
áñóðɛotos [adj.] ‘despised, uncared for', said of Odysseus's dog (p 296). ◄GR➤
•ETYM The opposite лоλú-Оεσs 'much desired' (Call.) and PNs such as 'Epμó-
еεσTOS, Boeot. Otó-QεiστOÇ, and ǎ-Оεστоs (of 'Epivúc, H.) show that the word
belongs to Béσσασα, root *ghed. Incorrect hypothesis (а-лóеεστ) by
Leumann 1950: 64f.
ǎлovα [n.pl.] 'ransom, fine' (Il.). <GR>
•VAR Sing. ǎлоVOV (IG 14, 1389: 1; 10).
•ETYM Formerly analyzed as *åлóлоvоs with haplology, so derived from άлоτívш 'to
pay, atone', modelled after лový: tívw. Rather, it is simply from *sm- in the sense of
equalizing payment, atonement', see West Glotta 77 (1999): 121.
άлóкuvov [n.] plant name 'Cynanchum erectum' or 'Marsdenia erecta' (Dsc.). <GR>

=== page 083 ===

118
άлoλávov
•VAR = á é чаρµáкu̟ лρòç ávαípɛσɩу кuvшv 'cake mixed with a drug
against the killing of dogs' (H.).
⚫ETYM Substantivized from an adjective *άлóкuvos 'hostile to dogs', acc. to
Strömberg 1944: 26.
άлоλávτov [n.] probably a herb, in σлáрτα áлоλανtíov (PMag. Lond. 1, 121, 209
[IIIP]). <PG(V)►
•var raλλávtɩov (Hippiatr. 66).
●ETYM The proposal of Strömberg 1944: 27 to connect λévtov ‘linen cloth' is
improbable. Fur.: 344 compares лαλλάντoν, a kind of grass, which suggests that the
words are Pre-Greek.
áлоλaúш [v.] 'to enjoy' (Ar.), "von Haus aus kein feines Wort" (Wackernagel 1916:
229). ◄IE? *leh₂u- 'seize, capture'>
•DER Verbal nouns áлólavσis (Att.), áлólavσμa (late) ‘enjoyment, adjective
άлоλavστɩкóç 'producing enjoyment' (Arist., Plb.).
⚫ETYM Mostly connected with Aɛía 'booty', Dor. λãíã (< *λāƑ-íä) ‘booty', for which
an IE root *leh₂u- could be assumed. This root is also assumed in Lat. lucrum ‘gain',
which could be from *luklo- < *lh₂u-tló- (Schrijver 1991: 240), and in Go. laun [n.]
‘reward' < *leh₂u-no-. However, the appurtenance of OCS love 'catch, chase', loviti
‘to catch, chase' would require *lh₂eu-, which is an improbable formation. Unrelated
is Skt. lotra-, lota- ‘booty' (lex.), which is from MInd. loptra-, see Wackernagel 1896:
91. The appurtenance of após 'delicious' is uncertain.
It is best to assume that anteconsonantal *leh₂u-C- (e.g. in the s-aorist) yielded
*λauC-, which was generalized to the other tense forms.
See Aɛía.
ảлolɛîv[a] [?] · àлoστрés̟εɩv. Аáкwvɛç 'turn away (Lacon.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM From άло-лoλεïv (Thurneysen Glotta 12 (1922): 145). Cf. ► áñvliŵvai.
Алólλwv, -wvos [m.] theonym (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR VOC. "Алоλλov.
●DIAL Алέλλwv (Dor.), Aлɛíλwv (Cypr.), "Алλov (Thess.). Perhaps in Myc. ]pe-rjo[
/A]peljo[n-/, see Ruijgh 1967a: 56.
•ETYM Schmidt KZ 32 (1893): 327ff. assumed that the vocative "Алoλlov was
assimilated from "Алελλov with unaccented ε, and that the other cases (with accented
ε) introduced the o analogically. However, such vowel assimilations cannot be
assumed so easily in Greek (cf. Van Beek fthc.b). The e-vocalism is found in the PNs
Anellíwv, Anellñç, etc. Moreover, Сypг. Алεíλwv points to a pre-form *Алέλɩwv
for Dor. Алελλwv; Thess. "Алλouv perhaps derives from Pre-Greek *Apel'ōn with
syncope and -ouv from *-ōn (Ruijgh apud Beekes JANER 3 (2003), see below).
▶
In spite of repeated attempts, there is no IE etymology. As Apollo was assumed to
come from Asia Minor, one looked there for a connection. But Lyd. Pλdans Artimuk
(see on Aprεµ) had initial q-. Burkert's idea that the name was derived from
άлελλα is impossible (see detailed argumentation in Beekes JANER 3 (2003)). The
name is probably Pre-Greek, and Hitt. DINGIR] Appaliunaš, mentioned in a treaty
ămplyda
119
between Alaksandus of Wilusa and the Hittite king, may well be the Pre-Greek
proto-form Apalun. The Hittite rendering shows that the oldest Pre-Greek form
had *a. This became e before the palatal *1. The e was then assimilated (in Pre-
Greek) to o by the following -ōn.
άлóμελɩ [n.] kind of mead, made from the water used to wash honeycombs (Dsc.).
<GR➤
⚫ETYM Derived from µέλɩ; the prefix has a pejorative meaning (Strömberg 1944: 29f.).
άлоúрãç [aor.ptc.] 'taking away, depriving' (Il.). <IE? *ureh₂- 'draw, tear' (?)
•VAR Ind. root aorist 2sg. áлηupãç, 3sg. -ă, 1sg. -wv (after the type έtiµa : ¿tiµwv);
fut. ȧлovρησovσ or pσσσ (X 489); see Strunk Glotta 37 (1958): 118-127. Ptc. med.
άлovрắμεvoç (Нes. Sc. 173), which is analogical since a zero grade -urh₂- would have
yielded -Fpǎ-.
⚫ETYM For *άлo-Ƒpās (see Lejeune 1972: 181 and 228), as if from a root *ureh₂-, which
is not known from other languages. The зsg. åл-ηúpã is supposed to stand for *åл-ŋ-
Fpā with long augment. The barytonesis is Aeolic (Wackernagel Gött. Nachr. 1914:
119). See further on ►άлóεpσε, which is unrelated.
ároqpác, -ádos [adj.] ‘unlucky, wicked' (Pl.). <GR▷
•VAR Mostly fem. (of ǹjµépa), but also msc. (Eup. 309).
•ETYM From opάw, opadń, opádµwv, with -opás after the nouns in -ás (Chantraine
1933: 351, Schwyzer: 507).
ȧлopáσŋ [f.] term for Soúλn (Seleuc. apud Ath. 6, 267e). <?►
•VAR -œpáτη in Eust. 1090, 57.
•ETYM Unknown.
ȧлowo [adj.] 'worthless (?)' (Od.). <GR?>
•ETYM Glossed as ávεµ, µáτoç ‘futile, idle'. Not related to opελos 'use'.
Probably connected to алочεïу· άлατñσα 'to deceive' (H.), in which case the word
originally meant 'deceiving'. For the formation cf. aчapτwλóc, see Chantraine 1933:
43. Derivation from *ȧло-qаƑо-λios (as per Neitzel Glotta 57 (1979): 1-20), like in
ravo-pópoi. Aiodɛïç iέpɛtaɩ ‘priestesses' (H.), is doubtful. See ►åлaqiσкw.
áлоxεpoßioτoç [adj.] 'living from his hands' < 'who obtains his livelihood by his
hands' (Hdt.). GR>
•VAR Also ȧлоxεчpóßios (Poll.), not -ẞíwToc; see Wackernagel Glotta 14 (1925): 55.
⚫ETYM Compounded of ẞíoτos and ȧлò xεɩρшv.
äллa [m.] ‘father' (Call.). <ONOM➤
●DER ǎллaç title of a priest (Magnesia, Lydia); Christian priest; also = tpoqɛús ‘foster
father' (H.).
•ETYM Acc. to EM 167, 32, the word is Macedonian, but this is doubtful. An
elementary word, cf. лáñña, äɩɩa, äлqα, and ToB appa-kke 'father'.
äлpɩуda [adv.] 'fast, tight; continously' (A. Pers. [lyr.]). <?►

=== page 084 ===

120
•VAR άлpíž ‘id.' (S., Pl.).
ànpozic, -idoc
•DIALEM 132, 53 also yέvos tɩ åkávеns (Kúлpio); see ǎpriε.
⚫DER άлριубóлληкtoç (also -τó-) ‘struck unceasingly' (A.).
•ETYM For adverbs in -(Y) da, -, see Schwyzer: 620, 626. Frisk analyzed it as
containing intensive α- and ►лpíw ‘to saw', assuming an original mg. 'as tight as the
teeth of a saw'; this is rather dubious, both formally (лplу- is attested only late, cf.
DELG) and semantically.
ánpošíc, -ídos [f.] name of a shrub, 'Dictamnus albus' (Pythag. apud Plin. HN 24, 158).
<?>
•ETYM Unexplained.
ảnτepéws [adv.] ‘promptly, as quick as lightning' (Hes., Parm.). ◄GR▷
•DER ȧлτερúσσоμа [v.] 'to flap the wings' (Archil.), cf. лτεрúσσоμа to лτéрuč;
άntɛpúoµai (Arat.) after ȧqúw : ȧqúoow, etc.
⚫ETYM From ǎлτεpos 'winged, quick' (Trag. Adesp., H.), which is built on copulative
ȧ- and лτεрóv. The ending -έws is metrically conditioned. Cf. ►лtepóv.
άntoenýs [adj.] said of Hera (℗ 209), exact mg. unknown. <IE? *seng™h_ ‘sing'>
•ETYM Analyzed by Wackernagel BB 4 (1878): 283f. as *å-eñto-eñýs ‘who speaks
words that should not be spoken' (*ņ-uek"to-uek-es-), which is not really
convincing. Meier-Brügger MSS 50 (1989): 91-96 suggests that it contains *n-sngwh_
to- 'what cannot be sung', from the root *seng wh- in E sing; *n-sngwh-to- would also
occur in ► ǎαлτoç. Neither hypothesis is really evident.
ǎëɩw [v.] ‘to join, attach, grasp; kindle' (II.). ◄IE *h₂ep- ‘join, fit’▷
VAR Mostly med.
●DER άoń ‘kindling, touching, grip, etc.' (Hdt., Pl., etc.); thence aqάw 'to handle,
treat' (Il.), only pres.; further ȧqάσow ‘id.' (Ion., Hell.) and ȧqášɛi. ȧvadéɣetai
'undertake, give security, etc.' (H.).
ǎчç handling' (Hp., Pl., Arist.); ǎyos [n.] 'connection', plur. ‘joints' (Od.), see
Chantraine 1933: 421; ǎµα 'noose, cord' (Hp., Hdt., et al), whence late άatíš,
áµµatɩσµós, diminutive àµátov (Gal.). ȧyíc, -ïdos [f.] ‘mesh, rim, etc.', lengthened
from ǎviç 'connection'.
Perhaps avaчη and xopdayós (s.v. ►xopεn) contain a derivative of ǎлτw, but this
may be doubted.
•ETYM Fur.: 324, 353 took ȧpáw as evidence for Pre-Greek origin, but it is rather a
denominative to άon, which has analogical aspiration. As will be argued in Van Beek
fthc.a, ǎлτw derives from the root *h₂ep- seen in Hitt. happ-i 'to join' and Lat. aptus
‘fit, apt'. The initial aspiration is secondary after verbs like εлw 'to take care of <
*se p-, and the root-final aspirate -Q- can be explained by analogy with taq-, ʊkaq-,
etc. The same proposal was done already by Kretschmer Glotta 7 (1916): 352, but it
was neglected e.g. by Frisk.
On the relation between ayos 'joint' and other Indo-European forms, see Clackson
1994: 98ff. Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 656 separated two meanings: he connected.
'to fasten' with Lat. apiō and 'to kindle' with Gm. sengen 'to singe', OCS prě-sočiti ‘to
ăpapos
121
dry' < *senk™-. This is now abandoned, as its root is reconstructed as *sek- 'to dry up',
with a pure velar (see LIV² s.v.).
άлvλɩvai [v.] uncertain (IG 5(2) p. xxxvi D 1, 20 [Tegea IV³]). <<GR?>
⚫ETYM Thurneysen Glotta 12 (1922): 145 supposed haplology from *åлv-ñoliwvai ‘to
give back'; cf. άлоλεiv[a]. A better hypothesis is that of Buck 1955: $162, 10, who
understands it as 'to regulate, cancel and connects it with άлo-λɛtów 'to erase' (see
►Aɛtos), with iotacism and the ending -wval of the infinitive.
äëîâ [m.] endearing address between brothers and sisters or beloved ones (Eust.).
ONOM
●Der åлôíov (Eust.), åлôápiov (Xenarch., Smyrna), åлôíðɩov (sch.); ȧëôía (Poll.,
H.), àлôñç [m.] ‘papa' (Theoc.), expressive but unexplained.
⚫ETYM An elementary form of address; cf. unaspirated ǎллα, etc. See Chantraine
REGr. 59-60 (1946-1947): 245 and Kretschmer Glotta 16 (1928): 184.
äpa [adv.] 'of course, then, so' (Il.). <IE *h₂(e)r 'thus, so'>
•VAR Also ǎp, enclitic pa, with elision p'.
●DIAL Cypr. p(a) (H.), against Latte; see Ruijgh 1971: 4337.
•ETYM On final -a, see Schwyzer: 622f. Related to Lith. iř, Latv. ir ‘and, also; even' and
(with full grade) the question particle Lith. ar, Latv. ar. Connection with the root of
► ȧpapíσкw, ► ǎpɩɩ is possible, assuming an original sense ‘accordingly' vel sim., and
would require *hr. However, Cypr. εp(a) (if trustworthy) would point to *her, but
this is impossible since *h,r would have given *έpa, not ȧpa.
ȧpá [f.] 'prayer, curse' (Il.). <IE? *h₂eru- ‘prostrate'>
●DIAL Ion. άpń, Arc. кaταρƑoç 'cursed'; the interpretation of Myc. ka-ta-wo is
doubtful.
•COMP лоλvaάpητos (Od.) 'much prayed for'.
●DER άpaños ‘belonging to ȧ.' (trag.); ȧpātóc (-11-) ‘prayed for, accursed (Il., poet.).
Denominative apάoµai [v.] ‘id.' (Il.), which often occurs with preverbs, e.g. έn-, kat-
apáqua (IA). Thence ȧpyτýp [m.] 'who prays, priest' (II.), fem. ȧpýtɛpa (Call., A.
R.), ápηtýpiov ‘place for praying, etc.' (Plu.).
•ETYM Arcadian shows a pre-form *άpƑά, which neatly explains the difference in
quantity of ǎ- in Ionic and Attic. The final -a in Attic ȧpá poses problems, however,
since we expect -1 after *F. Perhaps it is from (-)åápάoµaɩ or from the frequent plural
ȧpaí (cf. Schwyzer: 1882).
Meillet BSL 26 (1925): 19f. compared ȧpúɛ 'cry'. Not connected to Arm. uranam 'to
deny' < *ōr- (see Clackson 1994: 102f.). The connection with Hitt. aruuae-zi 'to
prostrate, bow', is revived by Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. who proposed that the Hittite verb
derives from thematic *h₂oruo-. If related, Greek would presuppose a noun *h₂(e)ru-
eh₂-.
äpaßos [m.] ‘rattle, ring', of armor or teeth (Il.). <PG(V)►
•DER Denominative verb ȧpaßéw ‘to rattle, ring' (II.).
•ETYM The same suffix is found in ¤ópuẞoç, кóvaßoç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 260).
For the stem cf. ►ǎpadoç, ►ápáčw. Perhaps the word is onomatopoeic, see Güntert

=== page 085 ===

122
ápáyònv
1914: 145f. Fur:: 142 compares άрoññσα· лaτñσαι to tread' (H.), which points to
substrate origin (with interchange a/ o). As Furnée remarks, a word can be both
onomatopoeic and a substrate word.
=
ȧpάydnv ⚫VAR ǎpayµa, ápayµóç. → ȧpáσσw.
ǎpadoç [m.] ‘disturbance, palpitation' (Hp.). ◄ONOM▷
•DER ȧpad<Ĥσ>el· Oopvßýσel, tapážɛɩ ‘make noise, agitate' and ȧpádystal. kekóvistai
(?), ovykέxvtaɩ has caused to hasten, is confounded' (H.); also ȧpáčovoɩv.
Épεíčovσiv 'provoke' (H.).
•ETYM Cf. кÉλadoç, öµadoç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 359). Perhaps onomatopoeic (but
is it primarily used of sounds?). Cf. ►äpaßos.
ȧpáчw [v.] 'to snarl, growl', of dogs (D. H.). <PG>
•VAR Also ȧppáčw; páčw (Cratin.); also púčw (Hermipp.).
•DER ȧppi w (AB), reduplicated ȧpapíw (Ammon.).
⚫ETYM On the anlaut, see Schwyzer: 310. Is it onomatopoieic and/or Pre-Greek? Cf.
► ǎpaẞos and ►ǎpadoç.
άpaɩós [adj.] ‘thin, slender, with open spaces' (II.). <?►
•VAR ȧp- (Hdn. Gr., also in mss.).
⚫DER ȧpaιóτηs looseness' (Hp., Arist.), opposed to лʊkvótηç; àpaiódng 'porous'
(Gal.). ȧpatów [v.] 'to rarify' (Hp., Arist.), whence ȧpaíwµa, ȧpaíwσiç.
•ETYM The word probably had F- (Sommer 1905: 114), but there is no further
explanation. Fur.: 339 etc. compares ápßós. dieotós, ȧpaiós, ¿laypós (H.) if this
gloss stands for (or derives from) *άpaßoç, but this is highly uncertain.
ǎpαкıç [f.] ‘bowl, pan' (Ath. 11, 502b: Aioλeïs tǹv qiáλŋv äpakiv kaλoñƠƖV). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR ǎpaкıç (cod. ȧpá<к>n<v>). qiálŋy kaì ápάкτηу bowl or pan' (H.); έ
ȧp(a)кídwv (cod. ǎpкiawv). έк quaλav 'of bowls' (H.).
•DER άpaкτñpa. ȧµελкτñpα 'milking-pail' (H.), derived from ȧpáкτηv.
⚫ETYM The form with -кT- proves substrate origin (see Fur.: index). Given this, it is
unnecessary to assume -α- in ȧpкídwv. Fur.: 308, 319 further compares ǎpoкλov =
quán (Nic. fr. 129) with кT > кλ, for which he gives parallels. The interchange a/ o is
well-known in substrate words.
ǎpakoç [m.] wild chickling, 'Lathyrus annuus' (Ar.). Cf. ǎpaкoι öσлpióv tɩ, tò dè
aúτò кai λáupov 'a pulse, the same as λ.' (H.). <PG>
●VAR Also [n.]; also a consonant stem ǎpaέ [m.] (pap.). Variant äpaxos (Gal.).
•DIAL Myc. PN a-ra-ko?
●DER Diminutive άpaкiç, ȧpaкíσкoç (Gal.). Further ȧpáxɩdva (Thphr.); άpaxvoñç.
ɛidoç ỏσлpíov ‘kind of pulse' (H.); ápáxvò a plant, ‘Heracleum sphondylium' (Ps.-
Dsc. 3, 76).
⚫ÉTYM The interchange к/ X and the suffix -18va- clearly prove substrate origin (Fur.:
127f.). Unrelated is Lat. arinca 'kind of spelt'.
ǎpaža [?] mythical plant growing near the Araxes (Ps. Plu., Fluv. 23,2). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
ȧpáxvn
123
ȧpapíσkw [v.] ‘to fit together, construct, equip, etc.' (Il.+). <IE *h₂er- ‘fit’▷
•VAR Them. aor. ȧpapɛïv, s-aor. ǎpoaɩ, perf. äpāpa (intr.); pass. aor. Épеŋv; äpµevos
'fitting, equipped' is an isolated med. root ptc. (Il.), with substantivized ntr.plur.
► ǎρμεva.
•DIAL Myc. a-ra-ro-wo-a /ararwoha/ [n.pl.]; a-ra-ru-ja /araruia(i)/; ka-ka-re-a /kħalk-
āreha/ 'equipped with bronze'.
•DER Many etyma derive from the same root, e.g. ǎpμа, ápμóç, ► ápμovía,
ápµó¶w, ► άptúc, ǎpopov. From the perfect äpapa derives άpapóτws 'well-fitted
(A., E., Pl.). Further åp¤µós ‘tie, friendship' (h. Merc. 524), äp¤µos ‘allied' (epic Ion.)
and áp¤µέw [v.] ‘to unite' (Il., A. R.). ápµń ‘junction' (Hp.), ǎpµā f. ‘union,
intercourse (Delph., Plu., H.). äpσov. Síкatov 'just' (H.) probably arose from ȧv-
ápσtos by decomposition. See also ►ápi¤µóç, ► ápɛíwv, ►ȧpéokw, ► ȧpetý, ►äpti,
► ŏap.
•ETYM The present is based on the aor. ȧpapɛiv; there is also an old perfect äpäpa.
The nearest cognate is the Arm. arari ‘I made', pres. arnem, which also has a
reduplicated aorist. The root is found in other languages too, e.g. Av. arəm ‘fitting’
and Skt. rtá- 'order' (see LIV² s.v.).
Hitt. āra- 'proper', Hitt. arā- 'friend' and Lyc. ara- ‘rite', Lyc. erawazije 'monument'
are connected by Kloekhorst 2008 under the assumption of an o-grade *h₂or-o-
(etc.), with neutralization of the laryngeals before *o.
ápáσow [v.] 'to beat, strike', of rattling, clashing (Il.). <?►
•VAR Aor. άpážai.
•DER άpayμós ‘clashing, rattling' (A.).
•ETYM Unknown. Is the word onomatopoeic? Cf. ►ǎpaßoç. On possible connection
with páσow, pσσw 'to beat' see there.
ápaoxádes [m./f.pl.] · tà rɛpvoɩvà kλýµata ‘last year's vinetwigs' (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. άpéσ×αɩ· кλýµατα, þóτpuɛç ‘vinetwigs, bunches of grapes' (H.) and
ópeσxác. tò oùv toïç ßótpvoiv ȧqaɩρɛðèv кλñµα 'twig with bunches of grapes taken
off (H.). Clearly related aúpoσxás = tò katà ßótpvv кλñµa (Eratosth. 37), also name
of a wine (Parth.). DELG s.v. öσxn gives opɛσxáda, 'dit de branches d'ormaux', from
Harp. (as in Nic. Al. 109 [not in LSJ]), and further to bloσxos 'pedicle of the
pomegranate (Nic. Th. 870).
•ETYM Öλoσxos may have λ for p. I am convinced that the four forms of the word
(apa-, apɛ-, opε-, aupo-) are not old compounds (certainly not if we connect
öλoσxos). It is rather a vocalic variation in an evident substrate word (Fur.: 302, 342,
348). In Pre-Greek, I reconstruct ar"-ask-at-, which explains interchange a-/av-/o-
and -pa-/-po-.
ȧpáxιdva →ǎpakoç.
apáxvn [f.] 'spider's web, spider' (Hp.). <LW Medit.>>
•VAR ảpáxvηs [m.] ‘spider' (Hes.), äpaxvos [m.] (A.).
●DER άpáxviov 'spider's web' (Od., com., Arist.), also diminutive (Arist.),
ȧpaxvɩwdns 'like a spider's web' (Hp., Arist., Dsc.) denominative apaxóa [v.] 'to

=== page 086 ===

!
124
ăpaxos
be covered with spider's webs' (Arist., Nonn.). Adjectives ȧpaxvwdns (Arist., Ael.),
ȧpaxvηεç (Nic.) and apaxvatos (AP), denominative ȧpaxvάo̟дa 'to weave a web'
(Eust.). ȧpáxvηкɛç· àpáxva (H.) is reshaped after σóñкéç, µúðµηкeç, okwλŋkɛç, etc.
•ETYM άpάxvò can be from *araksnā-, like Lat. arāneus [m.] ‘spider', arānea [f.]
'spider's web'. As the word looks non-IE and since it is limited to these two
languages, it is probably a borrowing. Connection with äpкuç is impossible in IE
terms, and for a substrate element it is difficult, too. See Gil Fernández 1959: 24f.
äpaxos →ăpakOG.
ápßálŋ [f.] · tǹyavov ỏotpákivov. Tapavτīvoɩ ‘earthenware frying-pan (Tarent.)'
(H.).<?>
•ETYM Unknown.
äpẞnlos [m.] 'semicircular knife', used by cobblers (Nic. Th. 423). Also metaph. of a
geometrical figure (Papp.), see Mugler 1958-1959 S.V. <PG>
•VAR Cf. also ȧvápßηλα· τà µǹ έεεσμévα, àрßýλoç уàρ τà бéрματα <εéovσ> (H.).
•ETYM A substrate word, see Fur.: 1155 on the suffix.
ápßívvn [f.] · kpéaç. Σɩkɛλoí ‘flesh, meat (Sicilian)' (H.). <LW➤
⚫ETYM Connected to Lat. arvina 'fat, especially around the intestines', from which it
is a loan (Campanile 1969: 318f). Acc. to von Blumenthal 1930: 16, the word is
Messapian and cognate with arvīna.
ápßúλŋ [f.] ‘shoe that covers the whole foot up to the ankle' (Hp.). ◄PG(S,V)►
•VAR ȧpẞúкη (read apẞúλns). τо úло½µаτ 'sandal' (H.). Also àpáẞulaç
úrodýµatoc eïdn qoptiкà kai ẞapßapiкà 'kinds of coarse, non-Greek sandals' (H.).
And ǎpμvλα- úлоdýµatα. Kúñρioι 'sandals (Cypr.)' (H.).
●DER katápßvλos 'reaching down to the shoes' (S.); cf. кa¤ápßuλos xlavis.
•ETYM Clearly a substrate word, as evidenced by the suffix -vλ- (Fur.: 201¹) and
variations Bμ, ap/apα, and кατ-/кaß-ápßulos (Bănăţeanu REIE 3 (1943): 145,
Knauer Glotta 33 (1954): 114').
ápya入éo →ä入yos.
Apуɛïчóvτηs epithet of Hermes (Il.). <?►
•ETYM Since Kretschmer, assumed to be a metrical reshaping of *Apyoqóvtis
(Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 45ff., Kretschmer Glotta 24 (1936): 236f., Kretschmer
Glotta 27 (1939): 33): “killer of Argos", the many-eyed primordial Giant. Ruijgh 1995:
87306 takes the form at face value (i.e. *argehi-kwh on-tā-) and assumes that it originally
means 'who kills by his flash', from the s-stem *äpyos seen in έvapyńs and ȧpyɛvvós.
The connection of the second member with εévε by Heubeck Beitr. z.
Namenforsch. 5 (1954): 19ff., assuming a sense "shining in splendour", is
unconvincing. Chantraine 1935: 69ff., thinks of a Pre-Greek word, which seems quite
possible.
Further literature: Chittenden AJA 52 (1948): 24-33 (“dog-killer"); West 1978: 368f.;
Koller Glotta 54 (1976): 211-215 (unconvincing).
125
äpyɛλλa [f.]? · oľкnµa Maкεdovкóv, öлɛp Đɛpµaívovtεs λovovtaι Macedonian
dwelling-place, where [men] bathe while warming up' (Suid.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ǎpyıλa, ǎpyiλa [f.] ‘subterranean house' (Magna Graecia, Strabo V 244 =
Ephor. [fr. 45], cf. Eust. ad D. P. 1166).
⚫ETYM From this word comes Alb. ragál' 'cottage' (Jokl IF 44 (1927): 13ff.). See also
Pagliaro Ric. ling. 1 (1950): 145f. and Hubschmid 1963: 81. The interchanges ɛ/ɩ and
\/\λ clearly point to a substrate word. Related to äpy\\os 'white clay'? See Kalléris
1954: 104.
•
ȧpyέλoqoɩ [m.pl.] ‘legs and feet of a sheepskin, offaľ (Ar. V. 672 only). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Cf. ȧpyíλoppoι· λaлápai кwdíwv [read: кwdíwv] 'the flanks of sheepskins' · of dè
ñpwкtóv. kaì µŋλwτaí ‘anus; sheepskin' (H.).
•DIAL Acc. to the sch. and AB 8, the word is Attic for лodɛwvɛç ‘ragged ends of the
skins of animals'.
⚫ETYM Derivation from ȧpyós (in which case the -- is unexplicable) or from λópos
"kann jedenfalls unmöglich richtig sein" (Frisk). One is inclined to consider it as a
momentary creation of Aristophanes, but how could his audience have understood
him? It is rather a word that we simply do not know. Fur.: 358 adduces the gloss with
-1-, which probably demonstrates substrate origin, e.g. *arg-al-ap-. The word clearly
denotes the useless parts of a sheep(skin), cf. the meanings ‘anus' or 'membrum
virile' (attested for „odɛwv).
ǎpyɛµov [n.] ‘white spot in the eye, albugo' (Hp.), also plant name (Plin.). ◄IE? *h₂erg-
‘brilliant, white'>
•VAR Also -os [m.].
●DER åpуεµávη 'Papaver Argemone' (Crateuas), a remedy against äpyεµoç, cf.
Chantraine 1933: 208. Not from Hebr. 'argāmān 'red purple' (Lagarde Gött. Abh. 35
(1888): 205, cf. Lewy 1895: 49f.), because of the mg.
⚫ETYM Connected to *äpyos in åpуɛστηç, ápуɛvvóç, like äveεμov to avoç, yet the
latter derivation is difficult; cf. Chantraine 1933: 132. Further connected to ► ápyós 1.
ȧpyɛvvóc ⚫VAR ȧруεστηç. ȧpyós.
=>
ápyńs, -ñtos [adj.] ‘brilliant white, gleaming' (II.). ◄IE *h₂erģ- ‘brilliant, white’▷
•VAR Also -ÉTɩ, -éta (II.).
•DER Poetical enlargement ȧpynσ-τýs ‘id.' (B.), after wunστns? (Schwyzer: 500¹).
ǎpynεiç (Dor. -áɛıç, contr. ȧpyāc) (Pi.).
⚫ETYM Formation like youvnc, etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 267) from ►ápyóç. The
ablaut -nt-/-ET- is of IE origin.
ápуɩɩлns [adj.] context and mg. unclear (Archil. 160). <?>
•VAR ȧpуíλɩлεç [pl.] (Nic. Th. 213), of exival, acc. to the scholia = кλεUкOι 'very
white', but see Frisk III s.v. on the mg.
•ETYM Connected with ȧpyı- in apуɩ-кépaʊvoç, etc. (see ►ápyós). DELG relates the
second member to λπ- 'fat', comparing it with ȧpyétɩ dŋµ✪ ‘with a white greasy
shine'.

=== page 087 ===

126
äpyı入入a →ăpye入入a.
ǎpyλos [f.] 'white clay' (Arist.). ◄PG?►
•VAR ǎpyɩ\\a [f.] ‘id.' (Gal.).
•DIAL ǎpyilos (inscr. Acarnan.).
ăpyi入入a
•ETYM Generally derived from ȧpyós 1, but the suffix (Chantraine 1933: 249,
Schwyzer: 483) could be non-IE (cf. äuλλα); note the interchanges /^ and -oc/-
ǎ. Given the meaning, a substrate word is quite possible, and connection with ȧpyós,
which means 'brilliant white', is semantically not evident. Lat. argilla is a loan from
Greek.
ȧpyós 1 [adj.] 'shining white, brilliant', also ‘quick, agile' (II.). ◄IE *h₂rg- ‘white’▷
•DIAL Myc. po-da-ko /podargos/ name of a cow; to-ma-ko /stomargos/ (?, see
►στóµα); tu-ma-ko /thumargos/?
●COMP As a first member ȧpyɩ- in åpуí-лovç, ápуɩ-képavvos, ápyɩ-ódwv, etc. It is
also found in epic åpуɩ-óε (B 647, 656), with a v.l. ȧpyɩvóɛç, for which cf.
Apуivoñσσai. See also ȧруiλíлηç. For ȧруióлоυç ȧɛτóç, Maкɛбóvɛç read άруíлoç.
As a second member in лóðaруoç 'with quick feet'.
⚫DER Denominative ȧpyaívw [v.] 'to be white' (E., Opp., Nonn.), apуītɩç (Verg.,
Plin.), of ǎμлελoç.
ȧpyāç, -ā [m.] (Achae.), àpyóλaç [m.] (Suid.), types of snake (named after their
agility). As a PN, with regular shift of accent, "Apyos [m.] (Od.), 'the nimble one, of
the dog of Odysseus, and Apyw [f.], name of a mythical ship (Od.).
A neuter s-stem in ¿v-apyns and in: 1. ȧpyεσ-τýs [m.] ‘clear', epithet of the south
wind vótos (Il.) and the west wind Zέqupos (Hes.), also substantivized Apуéστns
(Arist.) the wind itself, with regular shift of accent; in Nic. Th. 592 it is an
enlargement of apуns; 2. ápуevvós < *åpyɛσ-vóc ‘shining white' (II.), an Aeolic form.
ȧpуnεç (Dor. ȧpуáεç, contracted άpуãç -āvτoç) 'shining white' (A. [lyr.], Pi.,
Orph.) is just an enlargement of the t-stem ► ápyńs.
•ETYM Wackernagel already pointed to the similarity of Gr. ȧpyóç, ȧpyɩ- with Skt.
rjrá-, in compounds rji-, which suggests that *h₂rg-ró- > *άpypós dissimilated to
apyós. The root *h₂(e)rg- is found in several formations in various languages: Lat.
argentum 'silver' (further cognates see ǎpyupoç), Skt. árjuna- 'white, light', ToA
ārki, ToB ārkwi 'white', Hitt. harki- 'white, bright'. The meanings 'white' and 'quick,
nimble are both found in Skt. as well, and must have developed via 'brilliant,
sparkling'. See ǎpyɛµov.
▶
ǎpyós 2 [adj.] 'idle, lazy' (Hdt.). <GR>
•ETYM Contracted from ȧ-(F)ɛpyós (Il.), with privative ȧ- and (F)έpyov.
äpyupos [m.] 'silver' (Il.). <IE *h₂erģ- ‘brilliant white'>
•DIAL Myc. a-ku-ro/arguros/.
•COMP Frequent as a first member е.g. ȧруuрó-лεα (II.) 'with a foot of silver',
epithet of Thetis.
•DER ȧpyúpɛoç > ȧpyupouç 'of silver' (Il.+), ȧpyúpɛtoç ‘id.' (Att.), apyvpwdns 'rich in
silver' (X.). ápуúptov 'silver coin, money' (IA), ȧpyupɩкóc 'concerning money'
apdw
127
(Hell.); diminutive ȧpyupídiov (com, Isoc.). ȧpyupic 'silver vessel' (Pi., Pherecr.),
ȧpуupíτηç, fem. -Tɩç 'containing silver', also as a plant name (Strömberg 1940: 26),
also concerning money' (X., Plb.), ȧpyúpios [m.] plant name (H.), = ȧpyúpɛoç
(Alcm.), ȧpуupwτai [pl.] name of a government authority in Sillyon (Fraenkel 1910-
1912(1): 170. Denominative verbs: 1. ápучpóoμaι [v.] 'to be covered with silver', -ów
‘to cover with silver' (Pi., Dialex.), verbal noun åpуúpшμa ‘silver plate' (Lys.,
Antiph.), diminutive άpyʊpшµátov (Arr.), adjective ápуvpwµaτiкóç (Ephesus). 2.
ápуupíšoчaι [v.] 'to squeeze money from' (Din., J.), ȧpyupɩσµós (Str., Ph.). 3.
ȧpyupɛúw [v.] 'to dig for silver' (D. S., Str.); independent of this is ȧpyvpevtiký [f.]
(scil. Téxvn) 'art of the silversmith' (Eustr.).
•ETYM ǎpyupos derives from a u-stem also seen in ǎpyuqos and in Skt. árju-na-
'white, bright', ToB ārkwi 'white', Lat. arguō 'to make clear', Hitt. arkuuae-zi 'to make
a plea', etc. Other languages have a thematicized nt-stem in the word for 'silver': Lat.
argentum, OIr. argat, Av. ərəzata-, Skt. rajatá- [n.], all < *h¸rģ-nt-o-. On the realia see
Mallory & Adams 1997 s.v. Silver.
äpyuqos [adj.] ‘gleaming white' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂erģ- ‘white'>
•VAR Also ȧpyúεoç.
•ETYM From the u-stem also continued in ►äpyupos, with the suffix -po- (on which
see Chantraine 1933: 263).
apda [f.] 'dirt' (Pherecr. 53). <PG?>
•DER ǎpdaλos ‘id.' (Erot.), acc. to Erot. also 'ävеpwños ó µǹ кaƉapŵç (ŵv'; cf.
aïðaλoç, ëτúaλov for the suffix (Chantraine 1933: 245). Denominative verb ȧpdaλów
[v.] 'to defile' (Hp., LXX).
⚫ETYM Connection with apdw 'to irrigate' is impossible because äpda has short ȧ-.
Fur: 391f compares бápбα. μµóλvoua 'filth' and Sapбαívε· μоλúvε 'defiles' (H.).
These glosses cannot be ignored. Is it simply loss of 8- through dissimilation, or does
the interchange 8/zero point to a substrate word? The ending has been explained
from *-rdịă > *-rzdă > -pdă, but the short -ă may also point to substrate origin.
apdıç, -10¢ [f.] 'point of an arrow' (Hdt., A. Pr. 880 [lyr.]). <IE? *h₂erd- 'point'>
•DER ȧpdikóç. qapéτpa ‘quiver' (H.).
⚫ETYM Probably related to OIr. aird < *ardi- 'point, direction'; ON erta < *artjan- 'to
spur, incite' (but its connection with Skt. árdati 'to be scattered' is semantically
unconvincing).
apdw [v.] 'to irrigate, water' (Pi.). <? PG?>
•VAR Long ã- acc. to Hdn. Gr. 2, 109.
●COMP vεo-apdńs 'recently watereď (Þ 346).
●DER άpdµós ‘watering place' (Il.), enlarged ȧpdη¤µós (Lyc., Nic.); ȧpdáλɩα. τoùs
леμеvαç τшν кεραμídwν, oüç vɩoι yopуúpaç кaλoчσiv 'the bottoms of tiles, which
some call y.' (H.). Purely formal enlargement in åpdɛúw (A. Pr. 852, Arist.), whence
άpdɛía ‘irrigation' (Str., Plu.), äpdɛvois ‘id.' (Plb.), ápdúσчoç (H.); ȧpdevτýs [m.]
‘irrigator' (Man.).

=== page 088 ===

128
ȧpεiń
ETYM The connection with έppádαται < *FεƑρádaτal is most probably wrong,
because the 8 in έppádaτa (which belongs to paívw) is secondary (thus already
Frisk).
Fur.: 241 compares ларdакóç 'humid' (highly doubtful) and ǎpσɛα. λɛчµшveç 'humid
meadows' (H.) (254). The latter proposal is attractive, as -σoç is a pre-Greek suffix.
Furnée also follows the proposal by Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 294f. that ǎ- is
due to a pre-form *åƑápdw (comparing vɛoapdns), the prothetic vowel of which he
explains as a substrate element. Neumann 1961: 91 noted that several technical terms
for irrigation are pre-Greek (yopyúpa, ►ävdηpa).
ápɛin [f.] 'threat(s)' (Il.). ◄?►
•COMP Seе ►εлуpela.
⚫DER Denominative apɛiáw [v.] 'to threaten' (Hippon.).
•ETYM Formerly connected with Skt. irasya 'malevolence', irasyáti 'to be angry, be
envious', under the assumption of *h₂rh,-es- (see Peters Sprache 32 (1986): 371f.).
However, the meaning is different, cf. ► ápń. Relationship with ¿ëýpɛɑ depends on
the question if this contains PGr. *ē. A further comparison is with "pos
ẞλáßos áкoúσɩov (H.); yet, damage is not the same as menace, notes DELG.
ȧpɛíwv [adj.] 'better, stronger, nobler' (II.). <?>
•DIAL Myc. a-rjo-a₂ /arjoha/.
kaí
•ETYM A primary comparative, beside which stands a superlative ►äpiotoç. Acc. to
Güntert IF 27 (1910): 67, åpɛíwv (like Awïwv) was not a primary comparative, but
rather formed from an old positive. Seiler 1950: 116ff. finds this positive in äpɛtOC,
seen in tɛixos ǎpεtov (II.), and connects it with äpoç öcpελoç 'benefit' (H.). The Myc.
comparative is formed differently and suggests derivation from the root *h₂er-, if it
does not stand for *h₂erh,-ios- (with the Lex Pinault, loss of laryngeal before yod).
άpćoкw [v.] ‘to please, satisfy' (Il.). ◄IE? *h₂erh,- ‘please, satisfy' (?)►
•VAR Aor. ȧpéσai.
•DER ǎpɛσɩç ‘grace' (Priene IIª). ápεστós 'pleasing' (Hdt.), åpεστp [m.]
"reconciliator", name of a sacrificial cake for appeasing a deity (inscr., Ael. Dion.),
whence ȧpeσtpios ‘expiatory' (D. H.), åpeσtηpía (Ovoía) and åpeστýptov (inscr.);
Apéστwp PN (Hes., etc.) and ápéσµɩov ‘fee' (Stiris).
From the present äpɛσkoç ‘pleasant, flattering' (Arist., Thphr.), åpɛokɛía ‘flattering
person' (Arist., Hell.). Backformation from ȧpɛσкɛía: áρεσкεúοµαι [v.] 'to flatter'
(Clearch., Plu.), áρéσкεvµα (Plu., Epicur.) and ȧpεσкεvτiкós (M. Ant.).
⚫ETYM The word seems to have a disyllabic root *h₂erh,-, but connection with ȧpɛíwv,
ȧpετn is semantically not compelling. The connection with *h₂er- in ȧpapíσкw is
formally unclear (origin of the -ε-?).
ȧpετn [f.] 'excellence' (II.). <IE? *h₂erh₁->
⚫COMP aivapéτη [voc.] 'terribly brave' (II.).
⚫DER Denominative åpeτáw [v.] 'to prosper, thrive' (Od.).
•ETYM Not directly related to άpéσкw for semantic reasons. Connection with
► ápɛíwv is semantically attractive, but formally not clear. Vine 1998: 61f. suggests an
"Apns, "Apews
129
analysis *h₂(e)r-etéh₂- to the root of ȧpapioкw, which would be formally excellent
and for which he adduces semantic arguments. Nikolaev 2005 wants to reconstruct
*h₂nr-eteh₂- from the word for 'man, hero', and tries to reformulate Rix's Law.
apn [f.] 'bane, ruin' (II.). <?>
⚫ETYM Probably related to the ptc. ápηµévos ßεßµµévos, damaged' (II.), but the
long a poses difficulties. Further connected with äpos. (...) Bλáßos ȧкoúσιov
‘involuntary damage' (H., see ►äpos), and áñapés. ùyɩés ‘healthy' (H.); perhaps also
with ►άpɛɩý. Finally, one may consider a connection with "Apηs. For Ion. åpn
'prayer', see ►ápá.
ȧpńyw [v.] ‘to help, support (against)' (Il.). ◄IE *h¸reh,g- ‘help, support'>
●DER ápηywv, -óvos m. f. ‘helper' (Il.). With old ablaut apwyń ‘help, support' and
ȧpwyós, -óv 'helper' (II.).
•ETYM The forms require *h₂re/oh₁g-, unless *h₂rēg-, *h₂rōg- were root nouns, for
which there is no indication. Possibly comparable with Germanic forms such as
OHG geruohhen, OS rōkjan, ON røkja, etc. ‘to care for and MoDu. roekeloos
'without care' (with old ō); if so, not related to Lat. regō, Gr. ópéyw, with which Skt.
rajā 'king' seems to be connected (on which, see Gonda KZ 73 (1956): 151ff.).
&pnv, ảp vóc [m., f.] ‘sheep, lamb′ (Il.). <IE *urh,-en- lamb’»
•VAR Nom. pýv (A. R. 4, 1497), taken from compounded forms.
•DIAL Myc. we-re-ne-ja /wrēneja/ in a list of leather goods; wa-ni-ko /warniskos/,
found as a PN in the class. language; wo-ro-ne-ja /wroneja/ may perhaps also
represent /wolneja/ 'woollen'; The F- is found in Fαpηv (Gortyn) and ẞávvɛia• tà
äpvɛia, kaì tà ßávvµa tò aútò (H.); pāva. ǎpva ‘sheep, lamb' is probably Elean,
with n >ā.
●COMP ëоλú-ppηv < *ñoλú-fpïv < *urh,-n-.
●DER ǎpvɛtos ‘of a sheep or lamb' (Hdt.), like αïyɛoç, Bóɛtos (Chantraine 1933: 50f.);
apvéa [f.] 'sheepskin' (Hdn.), also 'sheep-breeding' (POxy. 2, 297, 8) like aiyέa etc.
(Chantraine 91); άpvaкíç 'sheepskin' (Ar.), haplological fem. from *ȧpvó-vaкoç?
Uncertain is the appurtenance of ȧpvɛtóc and ȧpvεuτnp. Also ȧpvεiov 'butcher's
shop' (Didym.); diminutive apvíov ‘little lamb', also ‘sheepskin' (Lys.).
Popular ǎpixa (acc.). äppεv épóßatov ‘male cattle' (H.), ßápixoɩ (= F-). ǎpveç 'sheep'
(H.) (Chantraine 1933: 403), but the absence of the nasal is unexplained. It is
confirmed by the PN Fapixos (Tarente).
•ETYM άpŃv < fapńv < *urh,-ēn matches Arm. garn, -in ‘lamb'. Skt. úraṇa- [m.] ‘id.'
is a thematization of *urh,-en-, cf. MP varak ‘ram'. The original inflection was nom.
*urh,-en, acc. *urh,-en-m, gen. *urh,-n-os > *Ƒαpηy, *Ƒаpεvα, *Ƒρηvoç. This means
that the oblique stem Fap-v- is due to a reshaping. Unrelated is ɛipos ‘wooľ, which
derives from *FépƑos. Cf. Meier-Brügger KZ 103 (1990): 26-29.
Apns, Apεws [m.] the god of war; also god of vengeance and oaths (Arcadia, Athens,
etc., see Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 195ff.); metonym. for 'war' (Trümpy 1950: 152f.).
< PG➤
•VAR On the inflexion see Schwyzer: 576.

=== page 089 ===

130
ápduós
•DIAL Myc. dat. a-re, adj. a-re-(i-)jo; PN a-re-(i-)me-ne. Boeot. Lesb. "Apɛuç.
•DER Fem. "Apɛia in Arc. τàv Aеávav τàv "Apεav; adj. "Apɛoç, Ion. Apŕïoç, Lesb.
Apɛúïoç (Zevs Apelos Epirus, "Apεоç лáуоç Athens, whence Арεолaуíτηs). PN
Apnτádne (Bechtel 1917a: 11).
•ETYM The ancient grammarians and lexicographers (e.g. EM 140) connected apń
'Schaden, Unheil, Verderben', cf. ǎpos. ßλáßoç áкoúσчov (H.). The connection is
improbable: IE origin of such a name is not to be expected. On the flection Schulze
1892: 454ff., Bechtel (above) and Kretschmer Glotta 15 (1927): 197.
ap0uóc=apapírk.
ǎpopov [n.] 'joint, articulation' (Hdt., Hp., S., E.), also ‘article' as a grammatical term
(Arist.). IE *her-dro- 'fitting'>
•DER &ppitis (vóøoc) gout (Hp.), appttukóc (Hp., Gal.); dp0pós of the joint or
article' (Gal., gramm.); åpеpódŋs 'provided with joints' (X., Arist., Gal.), áp pwdía
(Gal.). Denominative verb appóoμa 'to be articulated', -ów ‘to articulate' (Hp.,
Hermipp., X.), ǎppwois 'articulation' (Phld., Str.).
•ETYM From *her-dro-, derived from *h₂er- 'to fit' with the instrument suffix. See
►ȧpapíσкw.
åpɩ- ‘good, very' (II.), as a first member in compounds. ◄IE *h₂er-➤
•COMP In ȧpí-yvwtoç, -dɛiketoç, -пpεñýç, etc.
⚫ETYM Willi KZ 112 (1999): 86-100 convincingly disassociates apt- from ¿pt- and
maintains the widely accepted connection with ǎpiστoç. He concludes that the forms.
with έpi- are mainly bahuvrīhis (possessive compounds), while those with ȧpt- are
verbal governing compounds. Willi accepts Heubeck's connection of ¿pɩ- as *ser-i,
related to Hitt. šēr ‘above, up', with psilosis (95ff.), see έpt-. This is better than the
analysis by Fur.: 348, who thinks the element is Pre-Greek because of the variation έ-
/ ȧ-.
ȧpía [f.] Doric for qɛ\\ódpuç ‘holm-oak' (Thphr.). <?►
●DER ȧpɛívoç ‘of oak' (IG 11(2), 161: A 70, Delos).
•ETYM Unknown.
Apiádvn [f.] daughter of Minos, abducted by Theseus (II.). <PG>
●VAR Aptάyvŋ on a vase; Apindŋ acc. to Zenodotos at Σ 592, Call. cf. 67.13 The form
is confirmed by Apindav· τǹv Apiádvòv. Kpñtes (H.).
•ETYM The gloss á♪vóv· ȧyvóv. Kpñòèç ‘pure (Cret.)' (H.) is artificial, as yv > Sv is
not a Cretan development (Brown 1985: 25). This means that the word probably does
not contain ȧyvóc. An IE etymology is improbable for a Cretan goddess, and the
group -v- is found in other Pre-Greek words.
ȧpideíкetos [adj.] 'most famous' (Il.). <IE *deik- 'show'>
ETYM A compound from apt- and a second member which was formerly
connected with dŋdéxaτaɩ, under the assumption of metrical lengthening for *åpt-
SÉкETOÇ (Schulze 1892: 242). Nowadays, the form is read dɛdéxαταɩ and is
1
}
ǎplotov
131
considered to be related to dɛíкvvμɩ, which means that ȧpɩ-dɛikɛtoç also derives
from this root (which seemed obvious anyhow).
apínos [adj.] ‘clear, easily recognizable' (II.), equivalent of ȧpídŋλoç. ◄IE *h₂eri-
dieh₂-lo->
•ETYM Explained as *-dieh₂-lo- to Séaτo by Schulze 1892: 244 (in pre-laryngealist
terms: *-os). Others want to read -- as -88-, cf. Shipp 1967: 50ff.; Chantraine
1942: 169.
ápɩ¤µóç [m.] ‘number; payment (Od.). <IE *h₂rei- ‘count’▷
•VAR Through metathesis ȧui0pós (Schwyzer: 268).
⚫DER Denominative verb apiμéw 'count' (Il.), whence ȧpíμnua (A., Secund.),
ápíμnois (Ion., Hell.) 'count, payment', with ȧpеµητɩкóç 'of counting',
ápiðµŋtikós
'arithmetical' (Pl., etc.); agent noun àpiеμnτns ([Pl.] Just. 373b).
Perhaps in the PNS 'Елурιτоç, Arc. Пεdápiτoç and the Arc. appellative 'Елáрiτоι 'the
chosen ones', see Wackernagel 1916: 250 and Wackernagel Phil. 86 (1931): 133ff.
•ETYM A derivation in -0μo- from the root of výpɩτos 'countless'. Outside Greek,
there are comparable words in Germanic: ON rím [n.] ‘account', OHG rīm [m.]
'row, number', and in Celtic: OIr. rím 'number'. Probably, Lat. rītus ‘religious
observance, rite' is related too (< *h₂rei-ti-).
apıλa [f.] unknown (only IG Rom. 4, 1349). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
ȧpíç 1, -ídos [f.] ‘bow-drill' (Hp.). <?>
•ETYM Technical term of unknown origin. For the formation, cf. ȧkiç, dokiç, σaviç
(Chantraine 1933: 337). Grošelj Živa Ant. 7 (1957): 41 connects έpiwλŋ.
ápíç 2, -ídos [f.] plant name, 'Arisarum vulgare', also 'Spaкovτíа μкрá' (Ps.-Dsc.).
<?>
⚫ETYM Diminutive of ǎpov? Cf. also ► ápíσapov.
ápíσapov [n.] a plant, ‘Arisarum vulgare' (Dsc.). <?>
⚫ETYM See ►ǎpov and ►äσapov (Strömberg 1940: 157f.).
ȧpiσtepóc [adj.] 'left' (II.). <<GR>
"
=
•DER the plant name ȧpɩστɛɛwv (Plin.) nepiotɛpewv ‘dovecoat' was perhaps
reshaped after the latter form; see Strömberg 1940: 153,251f. Or is it unrelated to 'left'?
•ETYM Formed with the contrast-marking suffix -τɛpo-; connection with äpɩσ-toç is
mostly assumed. A problem is that omens coming from the left side were considered
unfavorable in Greece. It is thought that the left side was considered favorable in
earlier times, judging by parallels like Lat. sinister (but see the doubts in De Vaan
2008 s.v.), OHG winister, Av. vairiia.stāra- ‘left, more favorable' (or are these old
euphemisms?).
ǎpiστov [n.] 'breakfast' (II.), taken in the afternoon in classical times (see Athen. 11b
ff.). IE *h,eier- day, morning', *hed- ‘eat'>

=== page 090 ===

132
ǎplotos
•DER Denominative άptoτáw [v.] 'to have breakfast' (IA), ápiστηts who eats twice a
day' (Hp.). ápιστητɩкóç 'who loves breakfast' (Eup.), àpiσtηtηpiov 'refectory' (BCH
15, 184). 2. ȧpioτí(w 'to give breakfast' (Ar.), -íčoμa 'to have breakfast' (Hp.).
ETYM An old compound meaning "eaten in the morning", a contraction of a
locative ǎpɩ (< *aťɛp-1) and the zero grade of έd- ‘eat' (see ►έσ¤íw) + to-suffix:
*heieri-hd-to-; see Bechtel 1914. Note, however, that no ‘early' is now derived
from *h₂eus-er-i.
äpioroc [adj.] 'the best, first, noblest' (II.). <?>
●DER àpiσtívôŋv [adv.] 'according to birth or merit' (Att.), whence substantivized
ȧpiσtivdāç [m.] (Sparta).
ápiσteús (mostly plur. ápɩστñεç) ‘they who excel, chiefs' (Il.); ȧpiotɛúw [v.] ‘to be the
best, excel' (II.), åpɩστɛía [f.] 'deed of valor' (Gorg., S.). ȧpiσteús could be a back-
formation from άplστɛúw, if the latter was derived directly from ǎpiστoç. Also
ápiotɛĩa, Ion. ȧpiotýïa [n.pl.] ‘meed of valor' (Hdt., S.), but åpɩʊtɛĩoç ‘belonging to
the ǎpστo (D. H., Plu.) directly from ǎpiστoç. Further numerous PNs, like
Apioτwv, Apioτiwv, etc.
•ETYM A primary superlative to the comparative ȧpɛíwv. It is sometimes
considered to contain the prefix åȧpt-, but this seems improbable to me. Perhaps it is
related to ► ápapíσêw, as ‘the fittest’.
=>
ăpixa → ápńv.
ápixáoqial →ávappixáozial.
áprávn [f.] • tò pálya & tòv otýµova έykatarλékovoi dialóµɛvaɩ ‘thread with which
the warp is intertwined, when they are setting it up in the loom' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM The connection with ►äpкuç is doubtful. The suffix is also seen in Speñávŋ,
кaлávŋ, Oŋyávŋ, etc.; see Chantraine 1933: 198f. Probably a loanword, perhaps Pre-
Greek.
äpкɛvƉoç [f.] ‘juniper, Juniperus macrocarpa' (Hp.). ◄PG?, EUR?►
•VAR ǎpуετoç. η äρкεvoç. Kρñτεç (H.).
•DER ȧpкɛvēíç, -ídos [f.] 'juniper-berry' (Hp.), ȧpкεvidíτns (olvos) 'wine from or
perfumed with juniper-berries' (Dsc. 5, 46 ed. Sprengel).
•ETYM Within Greek, the gloss äpyεtos is certainly cognate, cf. Brown 1985: 25. In
view of this, ǎpkɛvoç is clearly a substrate word. On the suffix see Fur.: 1153, on the
material cf. Beekes 2000: 27. The word has always been connected with the Slavic
group of Ru. rakíta ‘willow, Salix fragilis' < *arkūtā; these can be combined if we
assume a loan from the European substrate. The comparison with ǎpкuç 'net' is
improbable.
άpкέw [v.] ‘to ward off, defend; suffice' (Il.). <IE *h₂erk- ‘hold, contain’>
•COMP Often -αpkns: e.g. aútápкηs 'self-sufficient'; yuɩápкηs 'strengthening the
limbs' (Pi.), etc. Perhaps лоdáркns.
⚫DER Verbal noun ǎpкɛσɩç 'help' (S., inscr. Thera); also ǎpкoç [n.] 'defense' (Alc.),
which is rather deverbative to ȧpкέw because of its limited distribution. Further
i
}
i
į
ăpia 1
133
ǎpkɩos (Il., epic) ‘to be relied on, sure, certain, sufficient' (the development of the
mg. is difficult). Perhaps here äpкtov 'burdock, Arctium Lappa' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Related to Lat. arceō 'to hold off, contain, etc.' and Hitt. hark-zi 'to hold, have’,
and perhaps also to the noun Arm. argel 'hindrance'.
äpêŋλoç [m.] ‘young panther, kind of panther' (Callix.). <PG?►
●VAR Perhaps äpkŋla. ….. Kpñtes tǹv üotpixa = ‘hedgehog, porcupine (Cret.)' (H.),
if it is itacistic for ȧpкúλā 'bear'.
•ETYM Unknown. On the suffix (as a substrate element) see Fur.: 1155. It is not clear
whether the gloss belongs here.
äpktos [f., m.?] ‘bear' (Il.); also name of a constellation: ‘Ursa Major' (Scherer 1953:
131ff.), 'the north'; also a crustacean, ‘Arctos Ursus' = téττ₁ (Arist.), see Thompson
1947: 17. ◄IE *h₂rtko- ‘bear'>
•VAR Younger form äpkoç [m., f.] (LXX); the form appears at an early date in names,
see Dobias-Lalou 2000: 6. Late ǎpě (OGI 201, 15).
●COMP Apêtoũpos (Hes.), with -opos ‘surveyor'; see ► œpoupós.
●DER Diminutives åpêtúλos (Poll.), äpkv\\os (sch. Opp.), ǎpkıλoç (Eust.).
άpêtкós ‘northern' (Arist.), ȧpкτŵoç ‘id.' (Luc.), after έcoç ‘'eastern' from wç;
ǎpк(T)εoç 'belonging to a bear' (Dsc.), after aïyɛɩoç, þóɛoç, etc.; ápktñ < -éŋ [f.]
'skin of a bear' (Anaxandr.). ǎpкτios [adj.] 'northern' (Nonn.), ǎpкτov [n.] plant
name, 'Inula candida' (Dsc.), Strömberg 1940: 118. Denominative verb ȧpкτεúw,
-εúoμai 'to serve Artemis as a female bear' (Lys., sch. Ar. Lys. 645).
It is uncertain whether the ethonym Apкádɛç belongs here; see Sommer 1934: 63f.
•ETYM Old name of the bear found in Skt. ŕkṣa-, Av. arša-, Arm. arj, Lat. ursus, Celtic
forms like MIr. art, and Hitt. hartagga- 'some wild animal'. These (especially the
latter) lead to a reconstruction *hrtko-. The late Greek form with single -к- is
confirmed by the derivations. It is probably just a simplification of the cluster; or is it
from before the metathesis?
The old etymology as 'destroyer' (Skt. rákṣas-, Av. raš- 'damage') has become
untenable with the laryngeal theory.
ǎpкuç, -voç [f.] 'net' (A.). <PG?>
VAR Mostly plur.
•DER ǎpkvov 'id.' (EM), after Síкτvov; also äpкvλov. Síктvov 'net' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Acc. to Lidén IF 18 (1905-1906): 507f., in the sense of 'twined,
woven’, related to äpkɛvłos and ápкávŋ and the Slavic words for 'willow'. This is
improbable, as one expects a derivative suffix. A technical term which may well be a
substrate word; for the u-stem, cf. µíµapкvç, þáïvs / þáquç, etc.
äpμa 1 [n.] ‘wagon, car', especially ‘war chariot' (Il.); on the use in Homer see
Delebecque 1951: 170f. <IE *h₂er- ‘join'➤
•VAR Often plur.
●DIAL Myc. a-mo /arm (^)o/, dat. a-mo-te-i, plur. a-mo-ta, bút it means 'wheel'.
Further a-mo-te-jo-na-de /armoteiöna-de/ 'to the wheel-maker's shop'. On traces of
the
mg. 'wheel' in Homer, see Panagl 1992: 137-44.

=== page 091 ===

134
ăpia 2
●COMP ápµato-лηyós (II.) ‘wheel-maker³, etc. ápµáµaža contains ǎµaža (Ar.), unless
it is an adapted Persian word. On ►ßητáðµшv, see s.v.
•DER άpµáτεoç ‘of the chariot' (E., X.), ápµατóεç ‘'ïd.' (Critias), ápμatíτŋs ‘using
chariots' (Philostr., pap.), diminutive ȧpμáτov (gloss.). Denominative ȧpμaτεúш [v.]
'to drive a wagon' (E. Or. 994).
⚫ETYM Derived from the root ap- ‘to fit' in ►åpapíσкw. It is assumed that the rough
breathing (also in άpµów, άρμovía, etc.) is due to an original suffix -sm-. This
presupposes that thematic apμós is the older form, since only a thematic suffix
-smo- is known. However, note that the Mycenaean form has no initial aspiration.
Outside Greek, several forms have a suffix -m-, e.g. Lat. arma [pl.] ‘weapons', Arm.
y-armar 'fitting'. Unrelated is the word for ‘arm' in Lat. arma [m.] ‘arm², Go. arms
'id.', because of Skt.īrmá- ‘id.' < *h₂rH-mo- with root-final laryngeal.
apua 2 [n.] 'food' (Hp. acc. to Hellad. apud Phot. [p. 533 B]; also v.l. for ǎpμεva Hes.
Th. 639). <?>
►
•ETYM Connection with apoμa 'to take for oneself, or with ȧpapíσкw has been
suggested (cf. ►ǎpμɛva in the meaning 'food'). Furthermore, it is mentioned in the
gloss vwyaλεúματα ½ vwyαλíσµατα• τà кaτà λɛëtòv έdéqµata. oi dè tà µǹ ɛiç
Xoptaσíav, á\\à tpvqepà äpµata (H.).
ápμaλá [?] a plant, ‘rue' = лηуavov ǎyptov (Dsc.). <LW Sem.?>
•VAR Syrian for лηуανоν кηлα‰ov (Ps.-Dsc. 3, 45). Also ȧpapá (pap.).
⚫ETYM Cf. Arab. harmal 'rue'. Is àpμaλá from Semitic, or the other way round?
ápµaλɩá [f.] ‘ration, food (Hes.). <?►
•VAR Also apμoλia, -ɛa (pap.) and äpμwλα. ápτúμаτа. Аρкádεç 'condiments (Arc.)'
(H.). Other glosses may contain mistakes: άpµóyaλa. τà ápτýµata. Tapavtīvoi
'condiments (Tarantine)' (alphabetically wrong) and άpμóμaλα (read -ματα?). Cf.
further pμaλwσaτo· σuvéλaßev 'collected' (H.).
•ETYM On the suffix, see Chantraine 1933: 82. The variation -aλ-, -oλ-, -wλ- suggests
a loanword; connection with ►äpμεva 'food' or apμa 2 ‘id.' is hardly feasible.
äpµeva [n.pl.] ‘sail, tackle; instruments; food' (Hes., epic Ion.). <IE *h₂er- ‘fit’▷
•VAR Rarely sing.
●DER άpµɛvíšw ‘to sail' (gloss.), MoGr. also 'to deliver, lead' (see Browning Class. Rev.
N.S. 19 (1969): 68.).
•ETYM Literally 'what has been fitted out', ‘equipment', a substantivization of
ǎpuεvos from ► ȧpapíσкw.
ápµów [v.] ‘to join, fit together, connect (II.). <IE *h₂er- ‘fìt’▷
•VAR Aor. ápμóσal.
•DIAL Att. -ÓTTW; Dor. aor. ȧoдóα.
●DER ápµoσtýs (Dor. -týp) [m.] title of an official, especially of the Spartan governor
in dependent cities (inscr., Th.), àрµóστшр (A.) 'commander', action nouns
ǎpμoσμа ‘joined work' (E. Hel. 411), äpμoσ ‘tuning of an instrument' (Phryn.,
Theol. Ar.), àpuoστiкóç (Theol. Ar.). With -y-: ȧpμoуn 'fitting together' (Eup.), cf.
Dor. ǎρμožα, ǎpµoktai.
!
言
ápveuthp,-ñpos
135
⚫ETYM Denominative verb from άρμóτãç acc. to Ruijgh 1967a: 48, which itself
derives from ►ápuós 'joint' (S.).
ápμovía [f.] 'means of joining; frame; covenant, agreement, etc.' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂er- 'fit'➤
•ETYM Derived from an adjective only known as a PN: "Apμwv, for which cf.
Apμovíбns (Il.). Also found in ẞητápµwv. Like apμa 1, this adjective derives from
ap- 'to fit' with a suffix -men-. See ▸ȧpapíσкw.
ápuós [m.] ‘joint' (S., E., inscr.). <IE *h₂(e)r-smo- ‘joint'>
•DER Hence the old locative apμoî [adv.] ‘just, lately' (A.). ápµóðɩoç ‘fitting, etc.'
(Thgn.) seems to be a back-formation to ► ápµów.
⚫ETYM See ►ȧpμów.
ăpuu入a →áppú入n.
äpqiw入a →ápua入iá.
ápvariç →ápńv.
apvɛiós [m.] 'ram' (Il.). ◄IE? *h₂ers-n-i- ‘ram'>
•VAR Cf. apvɛiós ó tpietǹs kpiós 'three-year-old ram' (H.). Also in Pausanias 159
Erbse, who cites Istros apva, εlτα άµvóv, εľτα ápуɛióν, εiτα Аɩлоуváчovα. For
ȧpvnós, see below.
•DIAL Att. apvɛwç [m.].
●DER ápvnádec, -ádwv [fem.pl.] (Aeol., Del.³ 644, 15).
⚫ETYM As the glosses indicate, the word was a designation for a ram of a certain age
(Benveniste BSL 45 (1949): 103). Att. apvɛws shows that the original form was
*άpvnós, which is confirmed by Aeol. ápvnádeç. The form with a in Homer may
have arisen by reinterpretation of spelled E. We thus have to reconstruct *ar(s)nējos
or *ar(s)neuos. The old connection with (F)άpηv was rightfully rejected by Meillet IF
5 (1895): 328f., both because of the meaning and because the word had no digamma.
*άpvŋós therefore appears to belong to ǎpony ‘male animal' (see there on the
absence of an initial digamma). The same formation, but from a different root, is
found in Skt. vṛṣṇí-, Av. varšni-, also meaning 'ram'. An alternative, but less
convincing etymology derives the word from the verb ȧpvɛvw (s.v. ►ȧpvεuτnp); see
Bechtel 1914.
άpvέoµaɩ [v.] ‘to deny, refuse, decline' (Il.). <IE *h₂res- 'refuse, deny'▷
•VAR Aor. ȧpvnoaσłaι.
●der äpvŋoɩç ‘deniaľ (trag., Pl., D.), ápvýσšos (S.), perhaps after åµqioßntýolios;
ȧpvηtiкóç 'negative' (Chrysipp., Numen.). Probably deverbal: äл-αpvos and ε-
apvoc (IA).
⚫ETYM Mayrhofer KZ 71 (1953): 75ff. connected the word with Av. rah- 'to be disloyal,
unfaithful' (3pl. intens. rārǝšiieiṇtī, caus. råŋhaiiǝn), assuming a nasal present *h₂r-n-
es- for Greek. This etymology fits both form and meaning very well, cf. also Beekes
MSS 38 (1979): 10-11. Unrelated is Arm. uranam ‘to deny', see Clackson 1994: 102f.
ȧpvevtúp, -ñpos [m.] ‘jumper, acrobat', also a bird (Il., Hdt., Arat.). ◄GR➤

=== page 092 ===

136
ăpvuquan
•VAR Acc. to sch. AT on M 385, the ȧpvεuτǹp is ó кußiotýp, napà toùç ǎpvaç. oʊtol
yàp кuẞiστwσiv wσлεp τòv ȧépα кuρíττoντεç 'tumbler; ram (for they tumble while
butting with the horns)', but this may be a folk-etymological interpretation after
ȧpvɛtós ‘ram'. Also ȧpvεvτns [m.] epithet of a fish (Numen. apud Ath.); cf.
Strömberg 1943: 50.
•DER ȧpvevτýpia [n.pl.] 'diving tricks' (Arat.), apvέvw [v.] ‘to dive' (Lyc.).
•ETYM The connection with apvɛtós ‘ram' is uncertain. See Fur.: 235 on äpvaлov.
τòv äpvα (H.) (Latte reads ȧpvápiov); he prefers a separate root for 'jump'.
ǎpvvuaɩ [v.] ‘to win, gain, acquire' (Il.). ◄ IE *h₂er- ‘take, acquire'>
•VAR Aor. ápέołaɩ.
•COMP Starting from the expression µuσðòv ǎpvvσðα, the verb σapvéw to work,
serve for hire' (Hp.) was formed.
•DER ǎpos [n.] 'benefit' (A. Supp. 885 [uncertain reading], H., Eust.).
•ETYM An old nasal present äpvvµaɩ < *h₂r-nu-, seen in Arm. arnum ‘to take', aor.
aři, and in Av. ǝrǝnuuaiṇti ‘they grant'. Hitt. arnu-zi 'to transport, deport' is related
to ►őρvvμɩ.
=
äpordov →ăpaklv.
äpov [n.] a plant, ‘Arum italicum' etc., cuckoo-pint (Thphr.); see LSJ. ◄LW? Eg.➤
⚫ETYM Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 244 and Hemmerdinger Glotta 48 (1970): 54
derived it from Eg. r 'reed, cane'; cf. Plin. Hist. Nat. 19, 5, 30, 95: est inter genera et
quod in Aegypto aron vocant. Perhaps, it is also contained in ►ápíç and ► ápíσapov.
Comparison with Lat. (h)arundo 'cane' is less probable.
äpos [n.]= öpeλos 'advantage' (H.). <?>
•VAR ǎpoç öqελos kaì <ntétpaç> kolλás, ¿v alç üdwp à¤poíšeτai öµßpiov, kai ßλáßos
άкoúσιov advantage; hollows of rocks in which rain water is collected; also
involuntary damage' (H.).
•ETYM In the first sense, usually compared with ►äpvμa. For the second, Defner
1923: 47 compares Laconian ȧpé. Aάккoç 'cistern'. For the third, see on ►ápη.
ȧpów [v.] 'to plow, plant' (Il.). <IE *h₂erh 3- 'plow'>
•VAR Aor. ȧpóσal.
•DIAL Myc. a-ro-u-ra /aroura/.
●DER άpotýp [m.] ‘plowman' (Il.), secondarily ápótŋs [m.] (IA, poet.); ǎpoτoç [m.]
'plowing, (plowed) land, etc.' (Il.); thence apoτησo pη (Arat. 1053), after
adjectives of time in -ǹσioç; άpotɩкóç 'fit for plowing' (Gal.), perhaps directly from
ápów; 2. ǎpoσis 'plowing, etc.' (Arist., Arat., Ael.), 'farmland' (Hom.), whence
άpóσчoç ‘arable' (Thphr., Str.); sometimes with secondary length ǎpwots (pap.) and
άpwσчoç (S. Ant. 569), metrically conditioned (Arbenz 1933: 48); 3. ǎpwµa
'farmland' (S., com.); 4. ápoσµós ‘plowing' (pap.); 5. Doric *ápaτús (on -a- see
below) is perhaps contained in the month name Аpáτvoç.
ǎpoτpov plow' (Il.); thence denominative verbs: 1. ȧpoτрεúw [V.] 'to plow'
(Pherecyd., Lyc., Nic., Babr.), ȧpoτpɛúç 'plowman' (Theoc., Bion, Arat.), ȧpoτpεvτp
‘id.' (AP), ȧpóτрεчμа 'plowing' (Poet. apud Stob.); 2. ȧpoτpiáw = ȧpów (Call.,
{
áprátw
137
=
Thphr.), ȧpoτpíaσis (LXX) and ȧpoτpíaμα 'plowed land' (sch. Ar.); 3. ȧpoτpiów
-táw (LXX); 4. ȧpoτpiá¶w 'to plow' (pap.), ȧpotpiaotýs (EM) and ápoτpiagµiós (sch.
Opp.).
ǎpoupa ‘arable land' (Il.), already Myc. a-ro-u-ra. Thence ȧpoupaños 'rural' (IA),
ȧpoupíτηs 'id.' (Babr.), diminutives ápoúptov (AP) and ȧpoupídiov (pap.); from
Egyptian papyri: άpovpηdóv [n.] ‘surface measured by ǎpoupar' (substantivized
adverb), ȧpovpιouós 'measuring in ǎpoupar'.
⚫ETYM An old yod-present derived from the dissyllabic root *h₂erh 3-. The reflex of
-h3 is seen in the aorist, and perhaps also in the present if this directly continues
*herh-ie/o- (this is one of the very few counterexamples against Pinault's Law in
Greek). The -a- in the Doric forms (ǎpατpov, Apáτvoç, fut. ȧpáσavτɩ (Tab. Heracl.);
Ther. Rhod. vápaτov) is probably due to influence of the verb ȧpáw, which must be
analogical (though it is hard to indicate a precise model). Cognate yod-presents are
Lat. arāre, MIr. airim, Go. arjan, Lith. árti, 1sg. ariù, OCS orati, 1sg. orjo̟.
The formation of ǎpoτpov is matched by Arm. arawr, Lat. arātrum (with secondary
length), MIr. arathar, and ON arðr; all from an instrument noun *h₂erh¸-tro- ‘plow';
the same formation is continued by Lith. árti, OCS ralo < PBSl. *arH-tlo- or -dhlo-. It
is possible that Hitt. harra-' 'to grind, crush' is cognate, in which case 'to plow' was
originally called 'to break the soil'.
ǎpoupa is a derivation in -α from a verbal noun *apo-Fap 'plowing'; on the details
see Peters 1980a: 143ff. This old r/n-stem *h₂erh₂-uṛ, gen. *h₂rh¸-uen-s is continued in
MIr. arbor < *arur, gen. OIr. arbe < *aruens 'corn', Skt. urvárā- ‘arable land'; a
similar formation is found in Lat. arvum < *h₂erh¸-uo-.
ápлášw [v.] ‘to snatch away' (Il.). <PG?(S), IE? *serp- ‘prune'>
•VAR Аor. άρлážai (Il.), ápráσai (Hom.).
•DER From άρлaу-: ǎpëα [f.] ‘plundering' (Hes.), [m.] 'robber' (Ar.); ȧpлaуń
'robbery' (Sol.), áρлáуŋ 'hook, rake' (E.); ǎpлayos [m.] 'hook' (A., S.); ȧprayɛúç
'robber' (Them.) was probably taken from ȧpлαуn; *άρлауóv is found in the Latin
borrowing harpago 'grappling-hook' (Plaut.).
Deverbal from ȧpná¶w: ȧpлaкτýp [m.] 'robber' (Il.), άрлαкτηs (Call.); action nouns
ápлaуóç ‘robbery, booty' (Plu., Vett. Val.), äpлayµa ‘id.' (Lyc., LXX), ápíaktúç [f.]
'robbery' (Call.); άpлáуɩov ‘vessel like the кλɛчúðpa' (Alex. Aphr.).
Adjectives: άpлáучos 'robbed, stolen' (Call., AP), lengthened åpлαучaños ‘id.'
(Оrph.); ȧpлaкτɩkóç ‘rapacious' (Luc.), ápíaкtýpios ‘id.' (Lyc.). Adverb ápлáуdŋv
'snatching' (A. R., Opp., Aret.).
Forms deriving from the aorist åpлáσɑ are less frequent: äpëaσµa (Pl., Men.),
ápraσµós (Plu.), ǎpéασç (Phryn.), ápíaσtkós (Arist., Phld.), ǎpëɑσoç name of a
predatory bird (Ant. Lib.).
⚫ETYM άρлáчw seems to be a denominative verb from a stem άρлay-. This may be
related within Greek to ǎpë- (from which άprášw may have been derived directly),
as found in äpiη ‘sickle', also a bird of prey. Less probable is connection with
► ǎpítuç and ►äpëtva; as DELG remarks, this may be based on folk etymology.
The word for 'sickle' is derived from a root *serp-. If άpлálw is derived from this,
too, it would originally mean 'to snatch'. However, the etymology is far from certain,

=== page 093 ===

138
ȧpлaléoç
as a suffix -ay- cannot be explained in IE terms, and forms which contain it seem to
be substrate words (Chantraine 1933: 397). Nor can ȧрл- be easily explained as an IE
form, since the zero grade *srp- would be expected to yield pan-.
ápлaλéoç [adj.] ‘devouring, greedy, consuming'; thence 'with pleasure, attractive,
alluring' (Od.). <GR>
⚫DER Denominative ȧpлaλíw [v.] 'to be eager to receive; to exact greedily' (A.),
ápraλíčo̟µai àσµévwç déxoµaι 'to receive gladly' (H.).
⚫ETYM Dissimilated from àλлαλéos, which belongs to äλлvστоç. The original
form is recorded by Hesychius: άλлaλaïov (leg. -έov). ȧуαлητóу ‘amiable'. The
secondary connection with ȧрлáчw еxplains the spiritus asper and the development
of the meaning.
ápredńc [adj.] ‘flať' (Nic. Th. 420). ◄PG?(V)►
•VAR Sometimes with rough breathing ȧp-. Cf. ¿pлεdóɛσσa (-doσσa ms.). ¿ñíñedos
'level, flat' (H.).
●der åpëɛdóɛiç (Antim. Col.). Denominative verb åpлεdíσa. ¿µaλioai, έdaqiσai ‘to
make even or level, beat level and firm' (H.).
⚫ETYM Connection with лédov (for which one compares äлεdoç ‘flat') leads nowhere.
Since antiquity, the word has been derived from apɩ-лεdýç (Did., Hdn.), but this is
rightly rejected by Frisk. If the gloss with &- is reliable, it is a substrate word (Frisk
refers to poupɩç = εpíupiç for εp- from έpi-).
ȧρлεdóvη [f.] 'cord, yarn', used to ensnare game, etc. (Hdt.). <?>
•VAR Also -ɛSwv [f.] (AP).
•DER ȧpлεdovíčεv. Awлoduτεïv. кai dià σлáрτov Оηpāv 'to steal clothes; hunt by
rope' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown; cf. the names of instruments in -dúv, -dóvn (Schwyzer: 529f., 490,
Chantraine 1933: 361f., 207). Connection with ȧpлάw is improbable for a word for
'cord'. Grošelj Živa Ant. 7 (1957): 225f. connects the word with Lith. veřpti 'to spin',
but then the -ap- must be analogical after -εp-.
ǎpлɛчα [f.] ‘hedge' (Nic.), cf. ápréļas. τoùç ai̟µaσiwdɛiç tónovç. oi dè τɛixŋ kai
εpɩßóλovç. oi dè τà кɩɩµaкódŋ xwpia 'places that are hedged in; walls and
enclosures; terraced places' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also ǎρлεoç [f.] ‘id.' (Mylasa). Cf. further ǎрrioai. aiµaolaí. † tápovç 'walls;
ditches' and ǎρлž. εidos áкávěŋç, Kúлpio 'kind of thorny plant (Cypr.)' (H.). Also
áрлáva дávбpaι ẞоσкηματwv 'cattle folds'.
⚫ETYM Connection with äρлη, åρлεðóvη, àpлá‹w is not convincing. Chantraine's
suggestion that the basic meaning is ‘limit of a terrain', and so perhaps connected
with άpëɛdóvŋ ‘cord', is improbable: the äpлε(α is clearly something in the terrain,
functioning as a boundary (aμaσiá). The variation -ε(α/-ɩσα (in äρлσα) is typical
for substrate words.
äpлη [f.] ‘sickle' (II.), also a bird of prey (after its claws, see Bechtel 1914 and
Thompson 1895). <IE?, ? *ser(p)- ‘sickle'>
i
1
1
j
appaẞwv 1, -wvos
139
•VAR ǎρлnç εidos ópvéov 'kind of bird' (H.) and άρлετóу· άкóµшστov ½ iкτīvoç.
Kρñτεç 'untended; a kite (Cretan)' (H.).
•DER Acc. to Leumann 1950: 294, the bird comes from the interpretation of Homer;
not convincing.
•ETYM ǎρлη agrees with OCS sropб, Latv. sirpe 'sickle'. Furthermore, one compares
Lat. sarpiō and sarpō, sarpere 'trim, prune (vine)', but the vocalism is difficult to
accout for (see Schrijver 1991: 493: from sarriō). If we suppose an IE origin, “äpëŋ a
un vocalisme ambigu", say E-M, by which they must mean that it is difficult to
explain. I agree with E-M and am inclined to assume a non-IE word (for the concept
of European substrate words, see Beekes 2000). The appurtenance of OIr. serr is also
doubtful; see Vendryes. For a hypothesis of an Oriental origin, see Grimme Glotta 14
(1925): 17. It is improbable to take äρлη as the basis of ǎprα, ȧρлáуŋ, ȧprášw, as
Szemerényi 1964: 205, 213 does.
ǎpлɩ [f.]?. ɛidoç áкávenç 'kind of thorny plant' (H.). <PG>
•VAR Also ǎлp; and ǎлpiуda· ɛidoç áкavens ‘id.' (Cypr. EM 132, 53).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The variation with -yda and the form itself suggest substrate
origin.
ápлíç, -ĭdoç [f.] 'kind of shoe' (Call.), = кpηíç 'man's high boot' (EM 148, 36). <?>
•VAR ȧρлídεç. μaλaкai кpηíðɛç † úлoð½µατа soft boots or sandals' (H.). partiç =
кρηíç (H., EM).
•ETYM The word is Laconian, acc. to Hesychius. A formal variant is paлíç, so the
word must be Pre-Greek.
Аρлvα [f.] usually plur. 'the Harpies', demons (II.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Old dual Apεπvía (Aigina); the same form (but with -via) is also found in EM
138, 21.
•ETYM The expression "Аpivat άvòpéyavto (§ 371 = a 241) was once suggestive of
etymological connection with εрεлτoμαι 'to feed on', but this is impossible in view
of the -. Moreover, apart from olda, perfect forms without reduplication do not
exist. The suffix -va is typical for substrate words, cf. äyvia, aïvia, etc., and the
variation ɛ/ zero is also a substrate characteristic. It must be concluded that the name
is a substrate element, like e.g. Eiλɛívia. See Szemerényi 1964: 203-213 and Beekes
1998: 24f. The aspiration may have been taken from ǎpлášw by folk etymology.
äρлuç [f.] 'love' (Parth.). <?>
•VAR ǎpëuv• ëpwτa. Aioλɛïç love (Aeol.)' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown. Fur.: 327f. connects the word with "Apπviα.
ȧppáẞn [f.]. Oúpa. olov yép<p>ov 'door, such as of wickerwork' (H.). <?>
ETYM Unknown. Not related to Hebr. 'arab 'twist', as per Lewy 1895: 130, though
Hesychius's gloss may indicate that the door was twisted or twined.
ȧppaßwv 1, -wvos [m.] ‘caution money' (Antiph.). <LW➤
•VAR Also ȧpaẞwv
●DER ȧppaßwvíčetai. ȧppaßŵvi didoτal ‘is presented with caution money' (H.).

=== page 094 ===

140
áppapov 2
•ETYM A Semitic loan acc. to Lewy 1895: 120, followed by Schwyzer: 153, 316, who
compare Hebr. ‘ērābōn ‘id.'. But the Semitic character of the word is not certain;
perhaps the word is a loan from elsewhere (Cohen GLECS 8 (1957): 13). Egyptian has
'rb. Cf. E. Masson 1967: 30ff. Cf. Lat. arrabō, arra.
•
ȧppaẞóv 2 [m.]? ǎукιστрov 'fish-hook' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. An attempt at an explanation in Lewy 1895: 130.
äppatos [adj.] = okλnpòs, åµetáoτpoqoç ‘hard, unalterable' (Pl. Cra. 407d, Resp. 535c,
Ax. 365a). <?>
•VAR In Euph. 24 the -a- is long.
•ETYM Uncertain. Does it derive from *å-Ƒpατ-oç, from PIE *uert- 'to twist'? If this is
correct, the length of the -a- would be spurious. An analysis -Fpǎ-τoç is more
obvious.
appηvnc [adj.] 'growling', only in Čáкotóv tɛ кal ȧppηvés (Theoc. 25, 83), scil. Onpíov,
said of a dog; acc. to H. = ǎyptov, Svoxɛpés ‘wild, intractable'. <?>
⚫DER ȧppηvεiv. λoιdopɛiv. кai <εлì> уʊvαкì· лрòç ävεрα diαчépɛσa 'to slander,
abuse; of a woman, to quarrel with a man' (H.).
●ETYM Unknown. Is it from άp(p)ášw ‘to bark, howľ, remodelled after otpηvýc or
άлηvýç? See ►ápá¶w.
appηópos [f.] name of the Athenian girls who carried the symbols of Athena in
procession (Paus.). <?▷
•VAR έppηópos, -έw (inscr.); and ¿poŋqópos, -ía; also έpσε-, έpσo- (inscr., sch. Ar.).
●DER ȧppηoopía 'procession of appηópoť (Lys.), denominative appropέw [v.]
(Ar., Din.), τà àppòóópia (sch. Ar., EM).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. In antiquity, the word was derived from ǎppηtos ‘unsaid,
mysterious' (with an inexplicable loss of -to-), or from εpoŋ 'dew', also the name of a
daughter of Kekrops. See Adrados Emerita 19: 117-133 and Burkert Herm. 94 (1966):
1ff.
àppixάoµai →άvappixáoµai.
äppixos [f., m.] ‘basket' (Ar.). <PG?(S)►
●VAR άpíσkoç. Kóqivoç i άyyɛïov λúyɩvov 'basket or vessel of chaste-tree wood (H.).
•DER ǎpσixos (D. S.), diminutive appixís [f.] (Ath.).
●ETYM Unknown. The development -pσ- > -pp- is normal in Attic (Forbes Glotta 36
(1958): 265); the same suffix occurs in the synonym σúpixos (Schwyzer: 498,
Chantraine 1933: 402). Fur.: 348 hesitantly compares ǎpuσoç/ puσoç 'basket'.
Probably a substrate word; it does not belong to άεpoσɩ- (ảɛípw), as DELG suggested.
àppwdéw →Õppwdéw.
äpσɛa [n.pl.] λεчμшvɛç 'meadows' (H.). <?>
•VAR Delph. apσia (F. Delph. 3, 4, 42, 13)?
一
⚫ETYM Unknown. Schwyzer suggested a relation with äpdw 'to irrigate', with a suffix
-σoç like in ǎλσos etc. (Schwyzer: 513, cf. Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 254). The suffix
!
i
141
-σoç, however, may be a substrate element (Fur.: 25427). Gusmani 1969: 512 compares
Hitt. arši- 'plantation'.
ȧpσεviкóv [n.] 'arsenic' (Arist.). <LW Orient.>
•VAR Also appεvɩкóv, fem. appεvikń (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Word of oriental origin, ultimately from MP *zarnik ‘gold-colored' (cf. MoP
zarnīx, zarnīq ‘id.' and see xλón, ►X\wpós), probably via a Semitic intermediary
(Syr. zarnīkā) and reshaped after åpσevikós, ȧppevikóç ‘male'. See Schrader-Nehring
1917 S.V.
äpoŋv, -evos [adj.] ‘male' (Il.). <IE *uers-n- 'male'>
•DIAL Att. ǎppηv; Ion., Lesb., Cret. εpoŋy, Lacon. äpons.
●DER ȧppévtɛpos ‘male' (Arc.) and έpσεvaitεpos (El.) are probably secondary after
Onλútεpos.
ȧpσεviкós (Att. -pp-) 'male' (Hell.), έpσεviкóç (pap.), àpσévios (Teuthis); ȧpoéviov
[n.] 'male child' (pap.). Adverb appɛvwdwç 'male' (LXX); abstracts: appevótns [f.]
'masculinity, masculine gender' (Stoic.), ȧpoévwμa 'masculine seed' (sch. Opp.).
Denominative verb appεvóoμa 'to become man, behave like a man' (Luc., Ph.).
•ETYM ǎpoŋy and poŋy reflect IE *u(e)rsën ‘male animal', the zero grade ǎpoŋy
corresponding to Skt. (v)ṛṣa-bhá- ‘bull, Arm. arn ‘ram', and full grade pony to OP
aršan- ‘man, male', Lat. verrēs ‘ram', Lith. veřšis bull calf. The Gr. forms show no
trace of a digamma, cf. especially Gortyn ɛpσεv-. Pronk fthc.b has argued that initial
*u- was lost in Greek, Armenian and in part of the Indo-Iranian cognates in the
compound *gehu-ursen 'bull', attested in ToA kayurs, ToB kaurṣe bull' and ON
kursi 'bull calf (a brilliant find by Kroonen, p.c.). For the former, textbook view see
the discussion in Peters 1993a. Cf. ► ápvɛiós, ► ápvevtýp.
äpolov →àvápoloc.
.
ápowludes · úródŋµa yʊvaɩkɛt̃ov 'women's sandal (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
ápτáßŋ [f.] a Persian and Egyptian measure (Hdt.). <LW Iran.>
•VAR Also ȧpτéẞn.
●DER In papyri: àptáßɩos ‘measuring an α.', ápτaßɩaños ‘id.', áptaßíɛios (or -ɩɛños)
‘id.'; cf. кoτvλíɛoç (and -ɩɛños) from кoτúλŋ (Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 95); abstract
ápτaßiɛía (also -ẞɛía, -ßía) 'tax for one a.'.
ETYM The word is of Iranian (Old Persian) origin, acc. to R. Schmitt Glotta 49
(1971):100-102.
ǎpτaчoç [m.] 'butcher, cook' (S.). <?>
•DIAL Perhaps Myc. a-to-mo.
⚫ETYM Eustathios 577, 45 explains it as ó ɛiç ǎptɩa téμvwv, in which case it would be
haplological for *åptí-taµoç or *åρtó-taµoç ‘artful cutting'. DELG objects that we
should expect -τoμos; to my mind, the whole etymology is most improbable. Fur.:
345 thinks it is a substrate word; although there is no further evidence, this is a priori
the most likely solution.

=== page 095 ===

142
ȧpτáw
{
143
ápτáw [v.] 'to bind to, hang upon, attach to' (Hdt.). ◄GR▷
•DER Verbal nouns: äpτηµα designation of several objects, such as 'ear-pendant'
(Hdt.), 'weight' (Arist.), etc.; äpäŋoɩ ‘hanging' (Papp.), áváptŋois ‘id.' (Thphr.),
áptŋσµós ‘id.' (AB). Further ȧpτávò 'rope, noose' (A.), after лλεкτávŋ, etc.
•ETYM ȧpτáw is reconstructed as *åƑɛpτάw, from ảɛípw ‘to bind, hang', but the
derivation is unusual (Schwyzer: 705f.). Cf. ►ȧpτηp and ▸ȧpτηpíα.
άpteµýs [adj.] ‘fresh, healthy' (Il.). <?►
●DER åpteµéw [v.] 'to be healthy' (Nonn.), åpτεµía ‘health' (Max., AP, Procl.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The word has been explained as a haplology, either from *ȧpti-
Sɛµń (to déµaç), or as a compound from ȧp- = ȧpt- (but see on åpлεdýc) and
*téµos (to ► tηµeλéw), Fick & Bechtel 1894: 439. Both are unconvincing.
"Apteμiç, -180¢ [f.] name of the goddess (Il.). <PG>
•VAR Gen. also -ɩtoç.
•DIAL Myc. a-te-mi-to/Artemitos/ [gen.]; a-ti-mi-te /Artimitei/ [dat.]. Dor. "Aptaμiç,
-τоç; Boeot. "Apτaшç, -doç; Delphi "Aptɛµç, -ɩoç (SIG 671, etc.).
•DER Apτεµíσιos, Apτaµíños [m.], also the month name Aptɛµioiwv (Th.);
Aptεµíσov [n.] ‘temple of A.' (Hdt.). Apτaµíτa [n.pl.] ‘festival of A.' (Delphi).
ápteµdñïov [n.], àptɛµoía [f.] plant name, see Strömberg 1940: 100. Аpτεμσιασταí
[m.pl.] worhsippers of A. (Athens), as if from *åpτɛµioiálw; cf. Año\\wvaotai
(Chantraine 1933: 316).
⚫ETYM The forms show an interchange e/i, which may point to Pre-Greek origin. We
further find ela (see Fur.: 185), which is rather an old phenomenon than a recent
assimilation. The variation t/d is due to a recent replacement of the suffix: Myc. has
-t-, and the forms in -σtov- presuppose a -t- too.
The name is found in Lydian inscriptions (Artimuś, Artimu-), and Lycian has ertemi,
but this does not prove that the name comes from Lydia or Asia Minor. Improbable
is Illyrian origin (Ruipérez Emerita 15 (1947): 1ff. and Ruipérez Zephyrus 2 (1951):
89ff., who assumed Illyr. *artos 'bear'). Against the interpretation as 'bear-godess'
and connection with ǎpкτos see Kretschmer Glotta 27 (1939): 34, who connects
ǎpτaчoç 'butcher', which seems very improbable. The Indo-European interpretation
by Peters 1989: 214ff. involves many difficulties and should be rejected.
ȧpτéμwv, -ovoç [m.] 'foresail' (Act. Ap. 27, 40); mg. uncertain in Lyd. Mens. 2, 12. <?>
•ETYM A technical word, for which a precise explanation of meaning and history is
lacking. Connection with ȧpτéoμal or apτáw with a suffix -μwv (Chantraine 1933:
172, Schwyzer: 522) does not explain the meaning. Borrowed as Lat. artemo(n) name
of a sail (since Lucil.); it also means 'principal pulley' (Vitr. 10, 2, 9). Cf. Vart 1887:
101-106 and Rougé 1966: 58f.
àptéoµai [v.] ‘to prepare, make ready' (Hdt.). <GR➤
•COMP Prefixed ȧv-, лар-арτéоμai (Hdt., Arr.).
●der äptnois (Hdt.), with a v.l. ǎptiσiç, from ȧptíšw; άpτí(w 'to prepare, equip’
(Theoc.), кaτapτíšw (Hdt.), cf. the pair αitéw : αití¶w. The s-stem in εsaptńs ‘ready'
(Od.) does not presuppose an s-stem noun.
!
!
{
⚫ETYM Derived from the root ap- in ►ȧpapíσкw, via an intermediary noun in -T-; not
directly from ►äpti.
ȧpτnp [m.] 1. that by which anything is carried (LXX Ne. 4, 17 [11]); 2. kind of shoe
(Pherecr. 38, H.). <<GR>
⚫ETYM 1. derives from *ȧƑεp-τnp, from ȧɛípw 1 'to raise'; 2. could be analyzed as
'what is bound to', from ȧɛípw 2 'to bind', or from ȧptáw with haplology for
*àptn-tńp.
ȧpτnpía [f.] 'artery', 'windpipe' (Hp., Pl., Arist.); see Strömberg 1944: 60. <GR➤
•DER ȧpτηpiaкóç (medic.) and ápτηpións (Gal.); ȧpτηpíασis 'bronchitis' (Isid.
Etym. 4, 7, 14), as if from a verb of disease *åpτηpiάw, cf. чwpiaσiç, ¿pvėpiaσiç.
•ETYM Like the semantically comparable άopτý (see ►άɛipw 2), it probably derives
from ȧɛipw 'to bind, hang up'. On the formation, see Chantraine 1933: 81 and
Scheller 1951: 59.
äpɩɩ [adv.] ‘just, just now, recently' (A.); in Homer only in compounds and
derivatives). <IE *h₂er- 'fit'>
•COMP Frequent as a first member, first meaning 'right, fitting': ȧpτɩ-ε˜½s ‘who
knows well how to use the word', ȧpτí-opwv, 'sensible, intelligent'; ápτí-лoç (all
Hom.), ȧpτí-Xεip, ȧpti-µελńs (Pl.). In later compounds, it means 'recently'.
●DER ǎpτios (II.) 'right, fitting', also ‘even' (of numbers), ápτióτŋs [f.] (Arist.),
ápτiáкiç [adv.] 'an even number of times' (Pl.), ȧptiάw [v.] 'to play at odd and even'
(Ar.); áptiaơµós (Arist.). Perhaps ȧprí\w to order, equip, etc.', if not from
► ápτέoμaɩ; usually åл-, ¿‹-, кaτаpτílw, with a number of derivatives; from the
simplex ȧpτɩστñpεs [pl.] title of an officer in Elatea.
•ETYM Probably a locative of the t-stem *h₂er-t- 'order', from the root of ▸ȧpapíσкw.
The word neatly corresponds with Arm. ard‘just now', cf. ard-a-cin ‘just born, åpti-
Yevic', and with Lith. arti 'close by'. Lat. ars, artis reminds of ȧptíoppwv and ȧptixɛp,
where the first element may mean 'skillful'. See ►ávápσioç.
ápτíaλa [n.pl.] 'decoration of the ear' (Poll. 5, 97). <?►
•DIAL Doric.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Connection with ǎpτɩoç, with a suffix -aλo- (Schwyzer: 483f.,
Chantraine 1933: 245f.), has been suggested.
ǎpτos [m.] 'bread' (Od.). <?>
DIAL On Myc. a-to-po-qo /arto-pok"os/ 'baker', sее ►лεσσш.
•COMP Frequent as a first member, notе áρτо-кóлоç baker' (Hdt.) with metathesis
(cf. Lith. kepù beside OCS peko); further ȧρτолоóç 'id.' (X.), etc.
•DER Diminutive ȧpτíσкoç [m.] (Hp., Dsc., Gal.) and ȧpτíσкiov (Damocr.).
•ETYM Unknown; connection with ȧp- 'fit' is improbable. Pisani Ric. ling. 1 (1950):
141 derives it from Iranian *arta- ‘flour' as a borrowing, which is impossible for a
word already attested in Mycenaean. Hubschmid 1953b: 104 adduces Basque arto
‘id.', OSpan. artal 'especie de empanada', etc. and considers it to be a substrate word
(or is it a loan from Greek?).

=== page 096 ===

144
áptów
ȧpτów [v.] 'to arrange, prepare', also of food 'to season' (Il.). <IE *h₂(e)r-tu- 'order'>
•COMP Frequently prefixed, e.g. ε-, kat-aptów (II.).
⚫DER 1. ǎpτu̟μа 'condiment' (Hp., S.), with late derivations aptvµátov,
ápad, átvµatikóç; áptvµã and áρτu̟ματãç [m.] 'spice trader' (pap.). 2.
ǎpτvσiç arrangement, seasoning' (Ph., D. S.). 3. ápτυτηр name of an official (Thera).
4. ȧptutikós [adj.] 'fit for seasoning' (sch.); åpτutikóv [n.] ‘herb' (Sammelb. 5224,
50). A variant is åprúvw = ȧptúw (Il.); see Schwyzer: 727f.
•ETYM The verb is denominative in origin, but the noun is found only in ápτúç.
σúvtažıç ‘ordering', ápτúv. qıλíav kaì σýµßaσɩv ½ кpíσɩ ‘friendship, coming
together, decision' (H.). It is a derivation in -tu- from her- 'to fit' as in ȧpapíσкw,
and
may well be old, cf. Skt. ṛtú- [m.] ‘fixed time, order, rule' < *h₂rtu-, Arm. ard,
gen. ardu 'order', Lat. artus, gen. -ūs [m.] ‘joint, limb'.
ǎpva [n.pl.] · τà'Hpakλewtikà kápva 'Heraclean filberts' (H.). <LW➤
•VAR Cf. avapá• tả IIovtikả kápva 'nuts from the Pontic area' (H.).
⚫ETYM ǎpvov is considered a variant of kápvov; see Strömberg 1940: 155f.; thus also
Fur: 391. The variation к/zero points to substrate origin. One would conceive of a
Pre-Greek form *qar-, of which the first phoneme (a uvular) was rendered as k- or
zero in Greek.
Alb. arrë [f.] 'nut, nut-tree', OCS orě×³ ‘nuť, Lith. ríešas, ríešutas ‘nuť, Latv. riēksts
'nut', and OPr. buccareisis 'beech-nut' (first element bucus 'beech') are too different
to be compared to the Greek forms: the BSl. forms have *a/or- beside *r-, followed by
-ei-.
ápúßaλλos [m.] ‘bag or purse which can be tied together' (Stesich.), 'globular oil flask'
(Ar.). <PG?(S)►
•DIAL ȧpßuλída. λńкvеov. Лáкwvɛç ‘oil flask (Lacon.)' (H.). Also ȧpuẞáσσaλov.
KOTÚλη Qλáσкwv 'small vessel, flagon' (H.).
⚫ETYM Hesychius explains it as ápúßaλλoi. τà µapoúлла 'рouchеs'. ȧïò toñ áρúεv
Kai ẞáλλεiv εiç aúτoúç 'because sth. is scooped and put into them'. This explanation
(though defended by Chantraine) is folk-etymological and is not worth discussion. It
is not even certain that the meaning ‘flask' is primary. Most probably Pre-Greek
(note the suffix -a\\os), cf. ► þaλλávtiov.
ȧpów 1 [v.] 'to draw water' (Hes.). <?►
•VAR Aor. ȧpúσal.
•DIAL With an enlargement -- (Schwyzer: 704): Att. ápúτw, Lesb. ápvtýµevoi (Alc.).
•COMP As a second member in έtv-ǹpvois ‘soup ladle', (wµńpvoiç, oivýpvois etc.
(com.).
•DER ȧpvστηp, -ñpos [m.] 'spoon' (Alc., Semon., Hdt.), ȧpuτýp (Dsc., pap.); fem.
ȧpvστp-íc, -ídos (AP), more common ȧpútava ‘id.' (Ar., Antiph., Thphr., pap.),
after ȧpúτw, see Chantraine 1933: 109; diminutive άpuτaívov (Lebena [IIª]).
ǎpvσtic [f.] 'ladle' (S.), diminutive àρúστixoç [m.] (com., Aegina); apvσávη ‘id.'
(Timo), cf. names for utensils like λɛkávη; άpvoãs (Delos) probably denotes the
profession 'water drawer'; for äpvσos [m.] ‘wicker basket' (Hdn.), cf. τáµσoç,
ǎpxw
145
rétaσos, etc.; ápu̟tó̟σчos and ȧpúσчoç ‘potable' (sch.); apvσtikós 'fit for scooping'
(Ael.).
ETYM Unknown. Frisk Eranos 50 (1952): 1-8 takes it as *Fapów (comparing
[F]apvσσáμεvoç Hes. Op. 550), and connects it with Arm. gerem 'to take prisoner',
εúpíσкw 'to find', assuming a root *uer-; but the Greek -a- creates difficulties for this
etymology. It could be from a u-present *urh,-u-, but there is no further support. For
other doubtful attempts see DELG.
ȧpów 2 [v.] 'to speak, cry', only in glosses: åpúεi. àvtì <toû> Aéyeɩ, ßoặ ‘shouts, instead
of speaks'; ápúovσai. λéуovσaι, кελɛúovσαι 'who are speaking, urging'; ȧpúσaσ0α.
εлɩкαλéσασÐαι 'to summon' (H.). <?►
•DIAL It is Syracusan acc. to EM 134, 12.
•ETYM Unknown. Not related to άpvéoμa 'to refuse, deny', as per Meillet BSL 26
(1925): 19f. Latte corrects it to άлúεi = ǹnúεi.
ȧpxn [f.] 1. 'begin, origin' (Il.); 2. ‘reign' (Pi.). ◄GR➤
●DER From 1: ȧpxaños ‘original, ancient, old' (Pi.), ȧpxatótŋs [f.] ‘antiquity' (Pl., D.
H.); late denominatives apxaïw [v.] 'to be old-fashioned', of style (D. H., Plu.),
άpxaïσµóç ‘old-fashionedness, etc.' (Men., D. H.); ȧpxaɩwėɛiç (Xpóvoc) ‘ageď (pap.
VIP). Also ȧpxaïкóç ‘old-fashioned' (Ar., Antiph.).
From 2: ȧpxɩкós ‘ptng. to power, etc.' (A., Th., Pl.), later also taken to 1. (Phld.);
diminutive (scornful) ȧpxídiov (Ar., D.), ȧpx½ïov, ȧpxεiov 'government building',
ȧpxετ (Dig.) and ȧpxεwτкós (Lyd.); Dorianized ȧpxéτaç [m.] 'ruler' (E.), which
could derive from ǎpxw directly; axis (Thasos), άpxívη (Syros), both incorrectly
written with -ɛt-, and άpxηïç (Amyklai) are names of priestesses.
•ETYM άpxη is a verbal noun of ǎpxw.
ȧpxós 1 =ǎpxw.
ȧpxóc 2 [m.] 'rectum, anus' (Hp.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Frisk asks if it could be a joking formation for ►ȧpxóc 1.
äpxw [v.] 'to be the first', thence 1. 'to begin' (Il.); 2. 'to rule' (Il.). <IE? *h₂r-ske/o- 'start,
rule'>
•VAR Aor. ǎpai.
•DIAL Uncertain is the interpretation of Myc. a-ke- in PNs: /arke-/ or /age-/?
Uncertain too is Myc. o-ka, see Aura Jorro 1985-1993.
•COMP ȧpуéкαкoç 'who initiated the evil' (Il.); ȧpxitéкτwv (Hdt.) after
τερлɩкераuvоç (?); ȧpxt- is never found in poetry.
•DER ȧpxóc [m.] 'leader' (Il., poet.); ȧpxɛúw [v.] 'to be the first, command' (epic since
Il.), which is also used as an official term (Paphos, Cos) could be denominative to
άpxós or be an enlargement of äpxw after Baoiλɛúw, άpiotɛúw. The usual term is
ǎрxwv, -ovτоç [m.] 'commander', name of the highest official in Athens, fem.
ȧpxovτis (Cat. Cod. Astr.), short form ȧpxis (Tenos). Late derivations: άpxovτɩкóç
'ptng. to the a.' (AP, pap.), ápxovtɛúw [v.] ‘to be a.' (Olbia), ȧpуovτiáш [v.] ‘to wish
to command (sch., Lyd.). ǎpуµατα [n.pl.] 'first fruits' (§ 446), ảлápуµata (Ar.),
άлαρxαí; also ǎρxματα (H.) with restored -X-. On άpxý, see s.v.

=== page 097 ===

146
ǎpwμα
⚫ETYM Klingenschmitt 1974: 274' suggested to derive äpxw from a present *h₂r-ske/o-
'(der Reihenfolge und dem Range nach) der erste sein'. The reconstruction was
pleaded for more recently by Matzinger KZ 113 (2000): 287-28827, who also derives
Arm. ark'ay 'king' from the same root. Frisk and Chantraine only mention the
connection with ►öpxaµos 'commander' (Il.). The variation α-/ o- between these
words has been taken to point to substrate origin by Fur.: 342, but this proposal does
not seem compelling, since the morphological analysis of opxaμos is unclear.
LIV² s.v. *regh- follows Tichy, who reconstructed *(h₂)rgh-ske/o- to a root found in
MHG ragen, regen ‘to rise, stir' and Lith. regëti 'to watch'. This seems possible only if
we assume a root *h₂rg"-, because a PIE root could not start in *r- (cf. Beekes 1995:
148), but also because of the Greek imperfect "pxε. The present ǎpxw may have
specialized its meaning from 'start to join' to 'undertake'.
apwua [n.] 'condiment, aromatic planť (Hp.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. See Schmeja 1968: 133. For the suffix -wμa, see Chantraine 1933:
184ff.
ẵσaɩ [v.aor.inf.] ‘to satiate, take one's fill' (Il.) ◄IE *seh₂- ‘satiate'>
•VAR Inf.pres. ǎμεvaɩ, subj. εwµεv < *ñ-o-µεv; fut. ǎσεv; them. pres. ǎεται (Hes. Sc.
101 cod. Laur.; the other mss. have ǎaτaɩ, which may be athem. or stand for
contracted *&τai; cf. åτai· лληpoñía 'is filled' [H.]). See Solmsen 1901: 93f.
DIAL Myc. a-se-so-si /asēsonsi/ [fut.].
•DER ǎ-ατoç > άτoç insatiable'.
⚫ETYM Derivatives from this old athematic root aorist are ►ädŋy and ►äoŋ. PIE
*seh₂-/sh₂- is found as a verbal root in Hitt. šāḥ-' 'to clog, to stuff, and further in
isolated nominal derivations: Lith. sotùs ‘satiated', Lat. satis ‘enough', OIr. sáith
'fullness', and Lith. sótis 'satiety' (all < *s(e)h₂-ti-); Go. gasopjan 'to satiate'
(denominative) etc. On *εá(5) w 'to satiate' see Peters 1993b: 89ff.
άoaλńs [adj.] = äqpovtis, áµépiµvos ‘careless, thoughtless', attribute of μavía (EM 151,
49 = A. fr. 319). <?>
=
•DER άσáλɛα (cod. àσaléa) ȧμερччvíα кaì åλoyiστía 'freedom from care,
thoughtlessness', EM = Sophron (113).
ETYM Acc. to EM, the word derives from σáλn in the sense of oppovτis 'thought,
care'. Modern scholars derive it from σáλoç (with regular transition to an s-stem),
which is glossed by Hesychius as oppovtís, tapaxý ‘agitation', and is identified with
►σáλoç 'turbulent movement'. oáλŋ (also σáλa H.) would be a back-formation of
ȧoaλns and άσalɛĩv (cod. ảσáλɛv)· à¶povtɩσ¤ñvaɩ. It is uncertain, however, if we
are dealing with one and the same word.
àσάuvos [f.] 'bathtub' (II.). <PG(S) ►
•DIAL Myc. a-sa-mi-to /asaminthos/.
•ETYM A clear substrate word because of the suffix in -ve-, like in the TNs Kópɩvłoç,
"Ouveoç, etc. Gaerte PhW 1922: 888 and von Blumenthal IF 48 (1930): 50 pointed to
Sum. asam, Akk. assammu(m), ansammum 'earthenware water-vessel'. Improbable
speculations by Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 657.
ǎσapov [n.] hazelwort, Asarum europaeum' (Crateuas). <PG?►
147
•VAR Short, unadapted form äσap (Aët.), whence àσapítηs (Dsc.), of oĭvoç.
•ETYM Unknown. Lewy 1895: 47 thinks it is Semitic. A priori, a Pre-Greek word is
most probable. Cf. perhaps ►ápíσapov, and Strömberg 1940: 158.
ǎσẞεστoç [adj.] 'unquenchable, unextinguishable', also ‘unslaked' (II.). <GR▷
•ETYM Verbal adjective of ►σßévvvµɩ. As a substantive, it indicates either unslaked
lime (tíτavos) or an unknown combustible mineral. It never means ‘asbestos'
(åμíavτoç), see Diels KZ 47 (1916): 203ff.
ǎoßolos [f., m.] ‘soot' (Hippon.). <PG(V)►
●VAR Also ảσßóλŋ [f.] (Semon.). In the gloss aσßolóɛv. µéya, úyŋλóv, µέλav ‘big,
high, dark' (H.), Latte reads the second as yoλóεv: for µέya, we may also posit µέλav,
but its final v was read as v. This led to the interpretation of yoλoev as vyŋλóv.
•DER ảσßolwdŋs ‘'sooty' (Dsc.), denominative verb ảσßolóoµaɩ in ŋoßoλwµévos
(Macho), also ȧoẞoláw (Aesop.), ȧoßolaíveτai fuscatur (gloss.).
•ETYM Fur.: 154f. posits substrate origin, which must be correct in view of the rare
cluster oẞ and the variant σлоdóç 'soot', which was hitherto unexplained. This
means that ǎoẞolos has a Pre-Greek prothetic vowel. Furnée further points to
σoditis (äptos) 'bread baked in hot ashes', which is also called σлоλɛús (Philet.
apud Ath. 3, 114e); note that the latter is unnecessarily corrected to *σлodεúc by
Frisk! For the interchange S/λ, cf. ►λaßúpivoç beside Myc. da-pu₂-ri-to-. Finally,
Fur.: 393 asks whether the group is identical with wólos 'soot' (A.), which seems
most probable to me (but identification with woos 'dirt' is less obvious). On
variation σл/ч in Pre-Greek words, see Fur.: 393.
The analysis as a compound äσ-ẞolos, with elements derived from *h₂eh,s- 'to dry'
and Báλλw, must be abandoned; it was semantically unlikely anyway.
Aσyɛláτaç [m.] epithet of Алóλλwv on Anaphe. <PG>
•VAR Алóλλwv Aiуλáτaç (Anaphe, Thera).
⚫ETYM The explanation in Greek terms by Schwyzer: 27 (who assumes a development
ao > a[o]) is rightly criticized by Chantraine s.v. aïуλn; part of Schwyzer's evidence
is itself Pre-Greek. The variation in these epithets is typical of Pre-Greek words, as
can clearly be seen in the name AАσкληлóç: aС-/aiC- and asC-/aisC-. In the present
case, we only have aiC- and asC-, but the principle remains the same (Fur.: 293, 295;
see also Pre-Greek). Furnée's (ibid.: 234, 335) further connection with ȧyλa(F)óc and
äyλaupos deserves consideration. The resemblance of Akkadian azugallatu 'great
physician' (Burkert 1992: 78) is remarkable. Thus, the word is probably a loan via
(Pre-)Anatolian and Pre-Greek. A connection with aïуλn cannot be proven.
ȧσελyns [adj.] 'elated, wanton, unconstrained' (Lys.). <?>
•VAR Unclear άoáλyav. üßpiv, àµéλaav 'insolence, indifference' and άoaλyávaç
poßɛpós, expŋke dè oütwç лapaßapßapí\wv ‘fearfuľ (H.); as the final remark says,
this may be just a vulgar or 'barbarian' pronunciation.
•DER ȧσέλyɛa licentiousness' (Pl.). Denominative aσελyaívw 'to be elated' (D.);
sporadically ȧσελyéw (sch.); ảσéλyŋua (Plb., pap.).

=== page 098 ===

148
ǎon
⚫ETYM The interchange a/ɛ is frequent in Pre-Greek words, but it is unclear if the
glosses belong here: άoáλya could perhaps be a Pre-Greek formation meaning
ȧσελyɛía, but the formation of the second gloss and its semantic relation to our word
are unexplained. I am not sure whether the conclusion of a substrate origin is
admissible. Havers IF 28 (1911): 194ff., stated that the word is Boeotian for *å¤ɛλyńs̟,
but this is semantically difficult.
ǎon [f.] 'disgust, loathing, dissatisfaction' (Hp.). <GR?>
•DIAL Aeol. äσā.
●DER àσŋpós (-ā-) 'causing discomfort, feeling disgust' (Aeol, Ion.), àσwdŋs ‘id.'
(Hp.). àσáoµaι [v.] 'to feel nausea' (Aeol., Ion., Arist.), probably denominative.
•ETYM If the word originally meant ‘surfeit', then äσŋ is from ►ẵʊaɩ, but the
formation poses difficulties. Unlikely is the suggestion by Solmsen 1909: 242ff., who
assumed an analogically preserved suffix -σã- from the zero grade root ȧ- < PIE
*sh₂-, rejecting a pre-form *sh-ti-eh-. It would be better to posit *(h)ad-s-ā, an old
collective from the s-stem in ädos 'satiation' (Il.); problematic, however, is the failure
of a geminate -σσ- (only in ảσσapotέpas Sapph. 77) to appear in Aeolic. The
simplification to -σ- would be due to epic influence acc. to Schwyzer: 321, but all in
all, the explanation is not entirely convincing. See ädŋv, ►ådµodín.
aoua [n.] 'short-drawn breath, panting', as a medical term 'asthma' (Il.). <?►
•DER Medical term ảσ¤µatiкós [adj.], also àσ¤µatías, áo¤µatwdns; denominative
ảσ¤µaívw [v.] 'to pant, breathe with difficulty' (Il.); late àσðµášw (AB); uncertain
àσ¤µáqµai (pap.), äσ¤µnois (gloss.).
•ETYM Unclear. -Qµa is known as a suffix (cf. ï¤µa), but derivation from *h₂enh,- ‘to
breathe' (in ävεμoc) seems impossible: it would have to yield avɛ-, even as the
result of a zero grade *h₂nh,-. The -σ- is also found in i-σ0µóç. Chantraine offers an
unclear comment: “dans le cas de äσeμa, le σ donne une certaine valeur d'harmonie
imitative." If he means that it is onomatopoeic, the same could be supposed for the
word itself.
áoida [f.] 'stork' (LXX). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Cf. ȧoída (-ov cod.). έpwdióv 'heron' (H.).
•ETYM A loanword from Semitic, cf. Hebr. h'sidhah.
.
àσíapos [adj.] · έлoкá‹wv. † àσíðapos limping upon' (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM Fur: 391¹4 takes it as Pre-Greek (adducing other cases of variation
dental/zero).
ǎolla [f.] 'yoke for carrying baskets, etc.' (Simon.). <PG(S)►
ETYM An improbable Semitic etymology is offered by Lewy 1895: 110. Most
probably, ǎoλλa is a substrate word in view of the suffix -λa, cf. ►äuλλα.
ȧoípaкoç [m.] 'locust' without wings (Dsc.). <?>
⚫ETYM Considered to be an Egyptian loanword (Strömberg 1944: 16, Gil Fernández
1959: 238), but no argument is given. A substrate word is more probable.
ǎois, -tos [f.] 'slime, mud' (Il. ❤ 321). <?>
149
●DER ảσwdŋs (A. Supp. 31), perhaps for *ảσiwdŋs after the homonym that belongs to
ǎon? Ancient commentators derived the reading Aσíw (instead of Aσių) in B 461
from this word (Eust.), instead of from Aσía.
*-n-.
⚫ETYM The comparison with Skt. ásita- 'dark, black' (for -ta-, compare Skt. hári-
‘yellow' beside hári-ta- ‘id.') presupposes that the s in äσɩ was preserved after *-
Nikolaev 2005: 50f. pleads for a reconstruction *h₂nsi- for these words, arguing
against the Lex Rix, but there is no compelling evidence for *h2-: Cop compared Hitt.
hanzana 'black', but see the critical remarks in Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. The etymology
must be regarded as uncertain.
Fur.: 80426 compares ä¤· σúστηµɑ öðɑτos (H.), but variation o/zero is further
unknown in Pre-Greek words.
άokáλaßos [m.] ‘lizard, gecko' (SGDI 3123 [Corinth], Nic.). <◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also ȧσkaλaßwτηs (Ar.), σкaλaßwτηs (Оrac. apud Eus. PE 5, 12), kaλaßwtns
(LXX), cf. yaλewtŋs to yaλɛóç; further Argive кaλaßúotŋs (H.) and άσкóλaxα (read
*ảoкáλaßa?), cf. Chantraine 1933: 403; кwλwτηs (Arist.); see kwλov; kalaßáç.
kaλaßwτns (H.).
•ETYM Clearly a substrate word. The ending -ẞos is often found in animal names, see
Chantraine 1933: 266ff. Several variations are typical for substrate words: prothetic
vowel, σ-mobile, etc. On the suffix -wt-, see Fur.: 283f. Less probable is a connection
with σkáλoy 'mole' (Fur.: 154).
ȧσкáλaqoç [m.] name of an unknown bird, perhaps an owl (Arist.), see Thompson
1895 s.v. Also a PN (II.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Also кáλaqoç. áσкáλaqoç. Máyvntes (H.).
⚫ETYM The suffix -qoç in animal names is well known. Clearly a substrate word, like
▶ àoká入apog.
ȧσкαλávov [n.] of кpóµvov, ‘onion from Askalon', in Palestine (Diocl.). <GR>
⚫ETYM Cf. Strömberg 1940: 125 and André 1956 s.v. Ascalonia. Lat. ascalōnia, whence
MoFr. échalotte > MoHG Schalotte and MoE scallion, was borrowed from Greek.
ȧσкαλóлaç [m.] 'woodcock, Scolopax rusticola' (Arist.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Ending with long ā (DELG)?
⚫ETYM Probably identical with oкоλóлаž. A substrate word with typical variations.
ảʊkávdŋs [m.] ǎyyɛλoç, ηµɛpodpóµoç 'messenger, courier' (Plu.). <LW Iran.>
•VAR Also ȧσyávεdns, áotávdns.
•ETYM An Iranian word, cf. Buddhist Sogdian zy'nt, 'sť'nyk 'messenger', as well as
Bab. ašgandu (Happ Glotta 40 (1962): 198ff., Schmid Glotta 40 (1962): 321). Cf. Arm.
astandel 'waner'.
ȧσкávτηs [m.] 'pallet, bier' (Ar.). ◄PG(V)►
•DIAL ảкxávðap (codd. ȧкxaλíßap). кpáßßatos. Aáкwveç ‘couch (Laconian)' (H.);
σкávðav. кpáßßatov ‘id.' (H.).
•ETYM The variations are due to substrate, rather than “vulgar” or “popular” origin
(which solves nothing).

=== page 099 ===

150
ãokapitw
ãokpa
151
άoкapí¶w →σkaipw.
ȧoкapíç, -ídos [f.] 'worm in the intestines, larva of the gnat' (Hp.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Also σkapidɛç. ɛldoç éλµív¤wv ‘kind of worm' (H.).
•ETYM Generally taken to be from άσкapíšw ‘to jump', e.g. in Strömberg 1944: 24;
Frisk thinks this is semantically not strong. German Springwurm is a calque from
Greek. In view of the prothetic vowel, it is rather a substrate word.
ǎσкapos [m.] 1. a kind of shoe, cf. ǎσкαрoι· уévоç úrodŋµátwv † oavdaλíwv (H.); also
2. a musical instrument, cf. Poll. 4, 60: Evo de tǹv \ɩðúpav tǹv avtǹv elvai tậ
ãokáp) Bvozialoévy voil ovov. <?>
• ETYM The musical instrument was a square with strings, so it probably has nothing
to do with the shoe. Fur. analyses the shoe as a suffix -apoç added to åσkóç ‘skin, bag
made of a skin'. The gloss ȧσкapopópov· popτηуóv 'carrier of cargo' (H.) is unclear;
does it imply that äσkapoç means ‘bag, pack, load'? Cf. ► áσképa and ►ảoêŋpá.
ȧσкελńs [adj.] ‘obstinate', also ‘weak, soft'? (Il.). ◄GR?>
•DER Adverb ȧσкελéç, -éwç. Note the gloss áσкaλɛŵç. äуav σкληpuç 'very hard'
(H.), wrong for ȧσкɛλéwę?
⚫ETYM Mostly derived from σкέλλw 'to dry up', either with privative ά- in the sense
of 'not withered, soft' (cf. лεpɩ-σкɛλns 'completely dried up, hard'), or with
copulative à- in the sense 'dried up, hard' (note the contradiction). The latter
meaning fits άσкελèç aiɛí, with the notion ‘obstinately', but not к 463, where it seems
to mean 'weak'.
ȧσкépα [f.] 'winter shoe with fur lining' (Hippon.). <PG?(V)►
•DIAL Ion. -n. Also in Attic inscr., SEG 13, 13: 148.
•DER Diminutive άσкɛpíσкoç [m.] (Hippon.).
⚫ETYM A loanword, but is it from Lydian (see Kretschmer Glotta 27 (1939): 37, O.
Masson 1962: 125) or a substrate word (it is also attested in Attic inscr.)? Fur.: 348
compares ►ǎσкαpol.
άσkéw [v.] ‘to process raw materials, shape by art' (Il.), ‘to exercise, train' (Hdt.). ◄?►
•VAR Aor. άσкñoal.
•DIAL Myc. a-ke-ti-ri-ja /askētriai/, also a-ke-ti-ra,, 'workers', of textile or wool?
●Der äoknoiç [f.] ‘(gymnastic) exercise' (Hp.), 'ascetism, way of life' (Luc.); ǎσкŋµa
[n.] 'exercise' (Hp., X.); ȧσкɛía (H.); deverbal ǎσкη [f.] = äσkŋσiç (Pl. Com.). Agent
nouns: άoêŋtýs [m.] ‘skilled worker', ‘athlete' (Att.), ‘hermit' (Ph.); άokŋtýp (Poet.
apud Gal. Protr. 13), fem. άσк½τpια ‘nun' (Cat. Cod. Astr.); άokŋtikós [adj.]
‘industrious' (Pl. Lg. 806a), ‘of an athlete' (Ar.), ‘ascetic' (from άokηtýc or from
ǎσкŋσɩç, or even directly from ȧσKέw).
•ETYM The oldest meaning may be ‘to fashion material, embellish or refine it. As
DELG remarks, it could be a denominative of åσкóc, implying an original meaning
prepare a skin', but this remains uncertain.
'to
ȧσкnons [adj.] 'unhurt, unscathed' (Il.). <?>
•VAR ȧσкηеéɛç = -0ɛïç ( 255), not άσкɛеéɛç as per Eustathius (see Leumann 1950:
263).
⚫ETYM Presupposes a noun *σкñеoç [n.] 'damage', which has been connected with a
Germano-Celtic group: e.g. Go. skapis [n.] 'damage'. However, the comparison is
impossible, as does not match Gothic þ.
.
ȧσкηpá [f.] • ɛldóç tɩ twv kaotavíwv 'kind of chestnut' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 1315 compares Arm. kask ‘chestnut'; for alternation к/zero, cf. ►äddı§.
See кáστava.
Aσкλŋëiós [m.] hero, later god of medicine (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Doг. -ãƒɩóç.
•DIAL Aσкλαлóç (Epid., Troiz.), Аσxλaлóç (Boeot.), Aiσxλaлóç, Аσкαλαлóç
(Thess.), Аσкαλлóç (Gort.), Aiσxλaßiós (on a bronze figure from Bologna with
Corinthian letters; see Kretschmer Glotta 30 (1943): 116), Ауλaлóç (Lac.),
•DER ảσkλŋëás [f.] name of a plant (Dsc); see Strömberg 1940: 99. Patronymic
Аσкληлáðŋç [m.] (Il.), Аσкλŋëáðɛo name of a metre (Heph.); Аoкλŋëíɛia
(-ídɛα) [n.pl.] 'festival for A.' (Pl.); Аoкλŋëεt̃ov [n.] ‘temple for A.' (Plb., Str.);
Аσкληлαкóç (Aristid., Dam.); Aσкληлãστaí (-ãл-) [m.pl.] name of worshippers of
A. (Rhodos), cf. on Aprεμσασταí s.v. "Apτεµç). άσкλŋлáç [ƒ.] plant name (Dsc.,
Gal.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 99.
⚫ETYM Szemerényi's etymology (Szemerényi JHS 94 (1947): 155) from Hitt. aššula-
'well-being' and pai-/pi- ‘to give' cannot be correct, as it does not explain the velar.
The name is typical for Pre-Greek words: apart from minor variations (ẞ/ л, αλ(α)/
λa, к/ X/ Y), we find a/ aɩ (a well-known variation, see Fur.: 335-339) followed by
-уλαл- or -σкλαл-/ -σ×λαл/ß-. To my mind, this goes back on a voiced velar without
-σ-, or a voiceless velar with -σ-. The -σ- was probably palatalized and we must
reconstruct *(a)-s'klap-. As the group -σy- is rare in Greek, especially before another
consonant, the loss of -σ- can be understood. The palatal character was sometimes
expressed as a preceding or following 1 (see on ►¿½aiqvnc, ►¿šanívns and ►rivutós
beside ▸лVUτóç).
· AVUTÓS).
Fur. 233f., 296 attempts to connect aiyλn and ȧyλaóc as found in the epithets of
Apollo Aiyanτηs, Aσyɛλātāç ‘the shining one'. However, this must be rejected, as
here there are no variants with aiσ- < as as in Asklepios.
άσkóç [m.] ‘animal skin, hide', mostly ‘bag made of it (Il.). <?►
•DIAL άKKóp. άσkóç. Aákwves (H.).
•DER Diminutives άσкíov (Hp., Crates Com.), άσkídiov (Ar., Posidon.). άokítŋc (sc.
Spwч) [m.] ‘dropsy, patient with this illness' (Epicur.); äσкwµa ‘leather padding', of
the hole which served for the rowlock (Ar.). Denominative verb ảoкwσɑto. ǹxĐéσðn
'was vexed' (H.). See ►ȧσкóλiα.
•ETYM Unknown. Boeot. furnishes a PN Ƒασкávdaç, but there is no trace of F- in
Homer. Not related to páσкwλoç, as per Fur.: 241.
ǎσкpα [f.]? • Spüç ǎкαρлоç 'trеe without fruits' (H.). <LW Medit.>>

=== page 100 ===

152
ǎokupov
153
•DER Note the place name "Aoкpa in Boeotia.
⚫ETYM Hubschmid 1953b: 83f. compares Basque azkáŕ ‘kind of oak' and Lat. aesculus
'id.', which suggests that it is a Mediterranean. word.
ǎokupov [n., m.] ‘St. John's wort, Hypericum perforatum' (Dsc.), also = ǎλɩσµα (Ps.-
Dsc.). See André 1956 s.v. ascyron. <PG(V)>
•VAR σKúpov (Nic. Th. 74).
•DER Okupáw [v.] 'to go mad', from eating a. (Nic.).
•ETYM The prothetic vowel points to a substrate word (Fur.: 373).
ȧσкwλα [n.pl.] festival for Dionysus (sch. Ar. Pl. 1129). <?>
•DER ȧσkwλiάw [v.] (Ar. Pl. 1129), which acc. to the sch. means 'to hop on greased.
wine-skins at the ȧ.', whence άσкwλiaσµóç (Poll. 9, 121); elsewhere it means 'to hop
on one leg; jump up and down with the legs held together' (Arist.).
•ETYM Chantraine 1933: 243f. derived åσкwλ- from ảσкóç ‘hide, bag, etc.' with a
suffix -(ō)lo-, but given the different meaning, the connection with ảσкós must be
secondary. Better seems the comparison by Schulze 1892: 141² with σкwλoßati™w ‘to
walk upon stilts' (Epich.), ȧyкwλiádev· äλλεσÐα. Kρñτεç 'to jump (Cret.)' (AB 1, 327,
5), and ȧyкwλiάwv. áÌλóµevos té̟ étépu̟ nodí (H.). Schulze assumed that *ǎσкwλoç
derives from *ǎv-σкwλoç; likewise, DELG derived the forms in ȧyкwλ- from ȧva-
and kwλov 'member'. However, it seems clear that the ά- is a prothetic vowel.
σKwλoẞaτiw itself is clearly derived from σкwλoç 'pole'.
ǎouɛvoç [adj.] 'well-pleased, glad' (II.). <?>
•DER ảσµɛvíw [v.] 'to receive with joy, to be content' (Plb.), àσµεviσµóç ‘satisfaction'
(Ph.); dơu£vé [v.] (Din.).
⚫ETYM An isolated participle, which has been interpreted as a sigmatic aorist *Fád-σ-
μεvos from the root of ►ávdávw, ►ždoµai, but note that the form has no aspiration.
Wackernagel 1897: 6 proposed connection with ►véoµaɩ ‘to return' as *ṇs-s-menos,
assuming an original meaning 'safe' (see DELG). Not compelling.
àσñášoµai [v.] ‘to welcome kindly, greet' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Аoг. άσлáσασðαι.
●DIAL Myc. PN a-pa-si-jo-jo, perhaps /Aspasioio/.
•DER Verbal nouns àσлaσµóç (Thgn.), äσлaσµα (E., Ph.), áσлασtús [f.] (Call.)
‘greeting, caress'. An old adjective is άσлáσoç 'welcome, cheerful' (II.), after other
adjectives in -σtos (Schwyzer: 466, Chantraine 1933: 41), cf. еavμáσioç.
Verbal adjective ȧσлαστóç 'welcomе' (Оd.), ȧσлаστιкóç 'cheerful, friendly' (Plb.).
On ảσraкášoµai (Com. Adesp.), åσnakŵç. qiλoqpóvws ‘'friendly' (H.) see Frisk 1934:
62ff.
•ETYM No etymology. Connection with σлáw in the sense of 'to draw to onself has
been proposed, but then the ȧ- would have to be the Pre-Greek prothetic vowel.
Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 189f. derives it from *av-σrášoµai.
άσлaípw [v.] ‘to pant, struggle, resist' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂sperH- ‘kick with the foot’▷
●VAR Only pres.; also σлaípw (Arist.).
●DER ảσлapí¶w (Arist.), cf. áσкapíšw to ▸okaipw.
•ETYM The conviction that ȧ- in άσлαípш is secondary (Frisk) has no basis; it does
not derive from ȧva- (Kretschmer KZ 33 (1895): 566, etc.). Rather, the form without
ȧ- will be secondary (perhaps after the pair άoкapíšw: σkaipw?).
Related forms are Lith. spiriù 'to kick with the foot', Skt. sphuráti 'id.', Lat. spernō 'to
despise', ON sperna, among others. Lubotsky 2006 reconstructs the verb as *TsperH-
'to kick with the heel in view of the irregular correspondences in the anlaut. The
words may be old compounds of *pd- 'foot' and *per(H)- 'to beat, kick'.
ảσлálaðoç [f., m.] name of several types of thorn-bush (Thgn.), see Dawkins JHS 56
(1936): 7. ◄PG?(S)►
⚫ETYM Solmsen 1909: 21 connected σñɑλúσσɛτɑi· σñɑpáσσetal, tapáσoɛtaɩ ‘to rip,
agitate' (H.), opaλáσσɛv téµvɛɩv, кεVτεĭv 'to cut, sting' (H.), etc. (see ȧσлáλα), but
this is semantically unconvincing. It is rather a loanword (substrate?); the suffix -os
often occurs in plant names, see André 1956: 234.
Alessio compares Lat. palla 'genesta alba' (Alessio RILomb. 74 (1940-1941): 737ff.,
Alessio Studi etruschi 15 (1941): 219. See also Fournier RPh. 1950: 172-176.
άσлálaž, -aкos [m.] 'mole, Sphalax typhus' (Arist.), see Thompson Class. Rev. 32
(1918): 9ff. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also σлάλα [m., f.] (Arist.), àσqάλaž [m.] (Babr.) and σpáλaž (Paus.).
⚫ETYM The suffix -a in animal names is well known, e.g. kópač, σкúλač (Chantraine
1933: 378). The connection with a root *sp(h)el- ‘to split, tear off (Pok. 985) is hardly
credible. The variations (prothetic vowel, л/q) in combination with the suffix -ak-
virtually ascertain substrate origin. The synonym σkáλow may be a variant, or a
recent metathesis. ►σлáλaеpov 'poker' does not belong here.
άσлáλiɛúç [m.] ‘fisher' (Nic.). <PG?>
•VAR ảσлáλovç· toùs ixēúaç. Aðaµãvɛç ‘fish (Athamanian)' (H.). Cf. äσлalov.
σкÚτoç 'skin, hide' (H.) (unrelated?).
•DER άσлαλíα. τou áλiéwç épуaσía 'trade of the fisherman' (H.) for *àσлαλɛía? Cf.
άσлíσ áεσaɩ, σaуηvɛñσaɩ 'fish, catch as in a neť (AB 183).
⚫ETYM Cf. άλiεÚç. The etymology is unknown; the old comparison with Lat. squalus
name of a big fish, ON hvalr 'whale' must be forgotten. Rather a susbtrate word, with
Huber 1921: 21. DELG strangely doubts the connection of άσлαλεúç and ǎσлαλoç.
ǎσлαλоv=σлoλáç.
áonápayos →àopápayoc.
ảơ áƠLoç=domášouat.
ȧσлερxés [adv.] 'unceasingly' (II.). <IE *spergh- 'hurry'>
•ETYM Derived from σлέðèw ‘to (be in a) hurry', with copulative (intensive) a-; see
Chantraine 1933: 427.
äσлετоç [adj.] endless, immense' (Il.). <IE *sek"- 'say'>

=== page 101 ===

154
ȧσлidńc
•ETYM From *n-sk"-eto-, literally ‘unspeakable', a negative verbal adjective to έvvέлw
< PGr. *en-hek"-. The omission of *ke > Tɛ in this word, which is probably due to
the preceding σ-, has given rise to the name ǎσлετоç-rule.
ȧσлds •ETYM A hapax in Si' åσлdéОç лεdíoιо, which some read instead of dià
σлidéos medíolo. Doubtful; further details s.v. ► σñídioç.
ǎoudog ou入ás 1.
àσñíç 1, -ídos [f.] 'shield' (Il.), a round shield, as opposed to σáкoç, see Trümpy 1950:
20ff. and LfgrE s.v. ◄IE *h₂esp- ‘cut'?>
●DER Diminutive άσлíðɩov (Hermipp.), also as a plant (Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 55;
άσлdíʊêò and -íoкoç (LXX, inscr.), άσлðíσкov (inscr.), άσðiσкápiov (Lyd.);
άσлστηs 'warrior with shield' (II.), secondary άσлστηр (S., E.) and άσлíστwp (A.
Ag. 404 [lyr.]), see Chantraine 1933: 327 and 325f.; ảσmotкós (D. H.). Further
àσлdíτηs (S. Fr.), probably after oлλíτηs; more common åσлidióηs (Il., Theocr.,
etc.), metrically conditioned in origin; àσлðóε 'consisting of shields' (Opp.).
άσлdεov mg. uncertain (inscr., pap.); cf. forms in -εov in Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3:
12ff.; note the gloss đơnuôĩa• tàç TÚXa, TV ẢO TÍÔv kai pépos tig vs TPÒs TỈ
лрúдva 'plates of shields, also a part of the ship near the stern' (H.). Denominative
άσлíчw ‘to shield, protect' (Lydia, H., Suid.).
⚫ETYM No remotely convincing suggestions have been made (see older litt. in Frisk)
until Melchert 2007: 253-8, who finds the root of CLuw., Hitt. hasp- in Lat. asper
'rough, harsh' and also in Gr. àσлíç, starting from an i-stem *h₂esp-i-, with meaning
specialized to 'skin, leather', thence 'shield'.
àσníç 2, -ídoç [f.] name of the Egyptian cobra, 'Coluber haie' (Hdt.). <GR>
•ETYM Perhaps identical with ảσлiç 1, after the shield formed by the snake's neck
when it attacks. Rather not a loanword.
äσëλŋvov [n.] a plant (Dsc.). ◄ GR➤
•VAR Also -os [m.].
ETYM Perhaps from privative à- and σлλу: the plant would cure anthrax. Rather
not a loanword.
ǎσлρiç [f.] kind of oak, 'Quercus Cerris' (Thphr.). <?>
•ETYM No etymology. It is not related to OHG aspa 'asp', as this originally had -ps-,
and the Greek -r- would remain unexplained.
Hubschmid 1953b: 98 compares Basque tšapaŕ ‘oak', but this does not fit well.
ǎoσa [n.pl.] indefinite pronoun, = Tɩvά.
=
•VAR Att. ǎττα; äσσα, Att. äττα = ätiva. → tíç.
ǎσлpoç [adj.] ‘rough' (Ael.). <LW Lat.>
•ETYM A loan from Lat. asper. For the later history of the word, see DELG.
ảσtakós [m.] 1. ‘the smooth lobster' (Philyll.), 2. 'hollow of the ear' (Poll.). ◄PG(V)►
●VAR ỏσtakós (Aristom.), Attic acc. to Ath. 3, 105b.
ȧoteµpńs
155
⚫ETYM Often analyzed as a k-derivation of the word for 'bone' (Gr. oστéov, Skt. ásthi,
obl. asth(á)n-); so *hesth₁-n-kó-. However, this etymology dates from a time when
every Greek word had to be given an IE origin. The formation is unparallelled in
Greek, and the assimilation ảoτα- < óστα- is highly improbable. The comparison
with Skt. an-ástha-ka- 'without bones' (Frisk) is irrelevant: it is formed with a suffix
productive in that language; neither does MInd. aṭṭhi-taco 'lobster' < *asthi-tvacas-
'with bony skin' prove anything for Greek.
Rather, we are dealing with a substrate word, with variation ȧ-/ ỏ-. See Fur.: 137. See
► ȧσtpáyalos, ►ỏσtéov, ▶őσtpaкov.
ảσtảλŋ [f.] · roλúrovç ó ¿v tí µukтñp₁ 'excrescence in the nostril' (1.), žvioi σkwλŋka
oùpàv ëxovta ‘worm with a tail (2.) (H.). <?►
•ETYM Fur.: 379 compares (1.) with äστλy and öστy ‘anything curled', which is
also used for the arms of the cuttle-fish. This cannot be substantiated. The etymology
of (2.) is completely unknown. Chantraine adduces ảσtaλúšɛiv, but this must be a
mistake; see άvaσταλúw.
ảotávdŋs →ảokávdns.
àστaqiç, -ídos [f.] 'dried grapes, raisins' (Hdt., IA, inscr. Tegea [Vª]); στaqìç ȧypía
‘stavesacre, Delphinium Staphisagria' (Hp.), see André 1956 s.v. pedicularia herba.
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also oσTaqis (Cratin.), στaqíç (Hp.).
●DER otaqídios (Hp.) and otaqıdítŋs (Orib.), of olvoç. Also otaqıdevtaĩoç (Hp.), as
if from *στaqidεvτns or *σταqidɛów. Denominative verb στaqidów [v.] 'to dry
grapes, produce raisins' (Dsc., Gp.).
•ETYM The formation reminds of kɛdpiç, keqaλis and other parts or products of
plants; the stem recalls ►σtaqulý ‘grapes'. A typical substrate word, with prothetic
vowel and variation a/o-.
ǎσταxus [m.] ‘ear of corn' (II.), 'bandage' (Gal.). <PG(V)►
•VAR σtάxus (Il.+), -ûç (E.); see ►otáxvs.
•ETYM Previously connected with OHG stanga, stengil, etc. Undoubtedly a substrate
word in view of the prothetic vowel.
ȧστÉλɛqoç [m.]? · tò лepì tǹv кiðápav Sépμa 'the skin around the thorax' (H.). <?>
●ETYM Unknown. Fur.: 373 compares ►σtépqoç ‘skin, etc.', with variation p/λ and
prothetic vowel. However, substrate origin is unlikely for the latter word, as it has a
decent Indo-European etymology.
ȧστεμons [adj.] 'firm, stiff' (II.). <?>
•VAR ȧστεμqεws [adv.] (Od.).
•ETYM Unclear. The ά- is assumed to be either copulative (“stamped tight”) or
privative (“unmoved, unshaken”, which is the meaning given by LSJ). This
presupposes a noun *στεµôos or a verb *στέµów 'to press, stamp', but these are not
known in Greek (only ►στóµqos and ▸σtéµßw, with the wrong stop). Unrelated is

=== page 102 ===

156
►στéµqvλα. Appurtenance to the PIE roots in Pok. (*stebh- 1012, *stem- 1021) is
difficult.
ȧστеpoлn [f.] 'lightning' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR More common is στεрол½ (Il.); ȧστpaлó̟ (Нdt.); στролá· àστpaлý. Пáðɩɩ
lightning (Paphian)' and στopráv (cod. -τáv). τǹv άotpa˜ýv ‘id.' (H.); Στорлãоç
epithet of Zeus (Tegea). Note σtpoqaí. ȧσtpañaí (H.).
•DER άστεpoлητηc, -oū [m.] epithet of Zeus (Il.), ȧστεpoлñτa кεpavνóv (IG 14, 641)
after ápyñta kɛpauvóv (Hom.); ảσtepoïaïos (Corn.).
From ȧστрαл½: άστралα‰ƒ (Arist.) and ảστрáлoç (Оrph.); άστрαлηdóv
(Aristobul.). Denominative άστpάлτш [v.] 'to thunder' (Il.), aor. άσtpáðaɩ; late
ǎστpääɩ (Suid.) and άσtpartiкós (sch.).
A variant which occurs in poetry is στрáлτш (S., A. R.), whence the back-formation
στραлŃ (EM).
•ETYM Mostly analyzed as a compound from ȧστýp ‘'star' and óл- ‘eye', meaning
'star-eye'. For the semantics of the formation, Arm. p'ayl-akn ‘lightning' is compared
(p'ayl 'glow, splendour' and akn ‘eye'), as well as Arm. areg-akn ‘sun' (arew ‘sun' and
akn). However, 'glow, splendour' is not the same as 'star' and, more importantly, the
variants otεporó̟ and άστpaïŋ cannot be explained in this way (also note ë/ in
στpo¶½). Also, if άστрáлτw is not a very recent formation, one would expect
*άστρασσw from the IE pre-form, as DELG points out. The word must therefore
belong to the substrate layer, as Kuiper and Furnée already saw. See Beekes MSS 48
(1987):15-20.
äotŋvos [adj.] ‘miserable' (Call.), acc. to EM 159, 11 лapà tò µǹ otáoiv find oťknoiv
Exεv. <GR?>
VAR Remarkable is the athematic plural in ȧστñvɛç. ταλαíлwρоι, dvσTUXEÏÇ
'distressed, unfortunate' (H.).
•DER Denominative άotŋvɛĩ· áduvatɛĩ ‘is unable' (H.).
•ETYM The gloss of EM is clearly a guess. Possibly from privative a- and the second
member of Súσtnvoç.
▸
ȧστnp, -épos [m.] 'star' (Il.). <IE *h₂ster- 'star'>
•VAR Plur. mostly äστpa, whence secondary sg. äσtpov.
●DER Diminutives: άσtɛpíσkoç (Call., Thphr.), ảo tɛpíoкɩov (Apollon.); ảσtŋpídiov
'star-like ornament' (pap.).
Adjectives: άστεpóε 'starry' (II.); ȧστɛpwτóç ‘id.' (inscr. IIIª); àστépɩoç ‘star-like'
(Arat., Call.), ntr. åστéptov, which is also found as a plant name (Crateuas); see
Strömberg 1940: 48, 50; ảσtepiaños ‘like a star' (Cleom.); άotɛpikós ‘belonging to the
stars' (Theol. Ar.), ȧστεpwdns (sch.).
Substantives: ȧστεpíaç fish and bird name (Philyll., Arist.), cf. Strömberg 1943: 28,
Thompson 1895: 57; ȧotepitns, of Aíos, name of a mythical stone (Ptol. Heph.), fem.
άστερчτɩç plant name (Ps.-Apul.).
From the zero grade in ǎστpα (ǎστpov): ǎστpov ‘star-like ornament (inscr.);
άστρoç 'starred, of the stars' (AP, Phlp.); àȧστρiкóç 'belonging to the stars'
(Philostr.); άστpaños ‘starred' (Nonn.).
i
i
άστpáуaλos
157
Rare denominatives: ȧστεpí(w [v.] 'to arrange in constellations' (Hipparch.);
ȧστεpów [V.] 'to change into stars, provide with stars' (Placit., sch.).
⚫ETYM The reconstruction of the word for 'star' is straightforward: hysterodynamic
nom. *h₂stēr, acc. *h₂ster-m, gen. *h₂str-os, seen in Hitt. hasterza /ḥstert/, Arm. astł,
OIr. ser < *h₂ster-h₂, Go. stairno << *h₂ster-no-, ToB ścir ye, Av. star-ǝm [acc.sg.], Skt.
tāraḥ [nom.pl.] (the absence of the s- is unexplained), stŕ-bhiḥ [instr.pl.]; Lat. stella <
*stēr-lā or rather *stēl-nā.
► άσtɛporý, etc. do not belong here. The connection with PIE *h₂eh,s- 'to burn'
seems quite probable; Sumerian-Babylonian origin (Ištar 'Venus'), on the other
hand, is highly improbable in view of the initial laryngeal. On the internal derivation
of the word, see most recently Pinault 2007: 271-279.
dotóg →ǎotv.
ȧστpaßdα [adv.]? mg. unknown; used with Sopкáσɩv лαíčɛv (Hdt. 3, 64). <?►
•VAR Accent unknown.
•ETYM Formation like кpúßda, kúßða, þíуða (Schwyzer: 626), of unknown
etymology.
ảστpáßŋ [f.] ‘comfortable saddle for an ass or a mule' (Lys.), see RE 4, 1792. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Оn άστрάлηу (Аnon. in Rh. 8, 668) see below. Note Lat. astrama = σavíc,
úлолódov (gloss. II 22, 15, see RE), where the -m- for -b- may point to (Pre-Greek)
substrate origin.
•ETYM Connection with ȧoτpaẞns 'steadfast' (as per DELG) is improbable.
Neumann Inc. ling. 1 (1974): 103-8 connects Hitt. ašatar 'seat' (from aš- 'to sit'), but
-ba- is rare in Hittite. Fur.: 143 mentions άστрáлηу (-αлηу trad.), referring to
Sturtevant Class. Phil. 6 (1911): 208. Variation aẞ/αл is well-known in substrate
words (Fur.: 107), so it may well be a Pre-Greek word. This analysis is rejected
without good reason by Neumann (who points to other words in -ẞa/os, but these
are probably loanwords too).
àoτpaßńs, -és [adj.] ‘straight, steadfast, rigid' (Pi., Hp., Pl.). <GR➤
•DER άστpaßαλíɛv. óµɑλíšɛv, ɛúðúvяv ‘to make even or level, direct (H.).
άστpaßiσtηp. öpyavóv tɩ wę diorτpov ‘an instrument, as that for seeing through'
(H.).
⚫ETYM Commonly assumed to belong to στpaßós 'squinting', στpεßλós 'twisted,
crooked', etc., with privative ȧ-.
ảστpáуalos [m.] ‘one of the neck vertebrae; anklebone; knuckle-bones (used as dice);
dice' (Il.). Also a plant, see DELG Supp. <PG(V)>
•VAR ȧστpayáλŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Anacr.), στpáуaλos (Vita Aesop. (G) 69, see LSJ Supp.).
•Der ảotpayaλwtós (µáoti§) ‘(whip) made from ȧ.' (Crates Com.), ảσtpayaλwtý a
plant (Philum.); see Schwyzer: 503, Chantraine 1933: 305.
άστpayáλɛoç 'covering the ankles, talaris' (Aq.), ảστpαyaλîτç ‘kind of iris' (Gal.),
άστpayaλīvoç ‘bull finch' (Dionys.). Denominative åστpayaλí\w [v.] ‘to play with ȧ.'

=== page 103 ===

158
=
(com., Pl.), whence άστpayáɩɩs 'dicing' (Arist.), άστpαyaλiστns ‘dice player'
(com.), ȧστpαуaλɩστιкóç [adj.] (Eust.). Hypocoristic ǎστpıç [f.]
(Call.); with the hypocoristic suffix -✗- also äστpixos [m.] (Antiph.), see Schwyzer:
498.
⚫ETYM Generally considered to be a derivation in -λ- (Chantraine 1933: 247) of the
inherited word for 'bone' (see oσTέov). The same etymology is often assumed for
► ȧστaкóç and ►őστpaкov, öστрεоv, but this cannot be correct. There is no good.
explanation for the -y-. Therefore, it is probably a substrate word (Beekes 1969: 51).
ảσtpalós [m.] · ¿ yapòç úïò ☹etταλãv ‘starling (Thess.)' (H.). <LW?>
•ETYM Closely resembles words for ‘tern' and 'starling', like Lat. sturnus, OHG stara
[f.], etc. However, the reconstruction *åστpуλóç, assumed by Schwyzer (see Frisk), is
improbable. A much simpler solution is to assume independent suffixes -no- and
-lo-. Although we may mechanically reconstruct *h₂str-lo- for Greek and *h₂stor-no-
for the European branches, it is more likely that the word is non-IE. See Thompson
1895 S.V.
àotpanń →àotpotń.
Atpɛús [m.] father of Agamemnon, son of Pelops, etc. (Il.).
•ETYM West Glotta 77 (1999): 262-266 remarks that the form in -ɛúç is extremely rare
(the nom. in Homer only in B 106, while 'Aτpέos viós occurs 11 times). The name
was interpreted as ǎτpɛστoç ‘undaunted'. West supposes that the name may have
had Aτpε(h)- followed by -ías (there is a variant Aτpéαc) or by -iwv (Aτpɛiwv occurs
as a patronymic). This possible form explains the Hittite name Attar(i)ššija-,
mentioned as a man from Aḥhijaua- = Achaea. This name may represent *ATɛpolas
or *Aτpɛσɩaç: a man with the same or a related name.
=>
ǎστριç •VAR ǎσtpixos. → áσtpάyaλoç.
ǎστ [n.] 'town' (Il.). <IE *ueh₂stu- ‘town’➤
•VAR Att. -ɛws, Ion. -ɛoç.
•DIAL Myc. wa-tu /wastu/, Boeot. Faστios [gen.]; Myc. wa-tu-o-ko /wastuokos/, Arc.
Ƒασστvoxō [gen.].
•DER άσTIкóç ‘of a town' (A., etc.), which could also be derived from άστós (see
below); sometimes άστuкóç after äσtv; άσtɛïoç ‘id.', also 'fine, polite' (Att., Arist.),
whence ȧστεós (Vett. Val.), ȧστεoσúvη (Lib.), denominative ȧστεïšoµai [v.] (Str.,
J.), àσtɛïσµóç (Demetr. Eloc., D. H.), àσtéïoµa (Tz.); further άoteïevoµai (sch.).
Curious formation in äσtupov ‘(small) town' (Call., Nic.). áστóç [m.] ‘citizen' (Il.) <
*ȧστFÓç, Thess. ƑαστƑоç; thence äστios = άστɩкós (inscr. Crete, Stymphalos, Delos).
ȧσtíτns [m.] 'fellow citizen' (S.) after лоλíτηç.
•ETYM ǎσTU < Fάotu resembles Skt. vastu [n.] 'residence, abode' (younger vastu [n.]
'place, thing'), Messap. vastei [dat.] and ToA wast, ToB ost 'house'. Together with
άσTU, this requires ablauting *ueh₂stu-, *uh₂steu, the latter form being generalized in
άσTU (see Beekes IF 93 (1988): 24). The root shape implies that the word cannot
belong to Skt. vásati ‘to dwell, live', Gr. aor. ►äɛσa 'to spend the night', Hitt. huiš-z
'to live'. Recently, some scholars have therefore assumed metathesis of *h₂us- to
1:
áopápayos 2
159
*uh₂s-, either restricted to Greek or in PIE (see litt. in Balles 2007: 17, especially Neri
KZ 118 (2005 [2006]): 20832), but this does not convince. It is not probable either that
the group of ǎσTV is related to Lat. vāstus ‘desolate', OHG wuosti ‘barren', Olr. fás
'empty', which rather belong to the root *h,ueh₂- 'to lack, disappear'.
άotvlášɛi⇒άvaσtaλú\w.
ȧoups [adj.] 'lewd, filthy' (Hdt. 4, 51). ◄GR?►
•ETYM Uncertain. Perhaps copulative α- and *σúpos, which would be an old verbal
noun to σúpw 'to drag, sweep', with the same semantic shift as in σúpμα, σupчετóc
'refuse, litter'.
ȧovon [f.] kind of kaσía ‘cinnamon' (Peripl. M. Rubr. 12, Dsc. 1, 13). <LW➤
•VAR άσvôηµwv (v.l.).
•ETYM Unknown loanword, see André 1956 s.v. asufi.
ảσúqŋλos [adj.] uncertain, ‘headstrong, insulting' or 'foolish' (Il.)? ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM The scholion on Ven. A and Bechtel 1914 connect σopóc, with privative ȧ-.
For the vocalism, Σíovoos and oέσvôoç· лavoûрyos (H.) are compared. Fur.: 337
further compares the gloss aloúpios. delvós, yevdýç, ȧлατяúν ‘awesome, deceptive,
áñatɛóv
treacherous' (H.), -os (Cyr.), which seems to fit well. In view of the interchange at-/
a-, substrate origin is more probable than the traditional etymology.
äσqαλτos [f., m.] 'asphalt, bitumen' (Hdt.). <PG?>
•VAR Also -ov [n.].
•DER ȧσqάλTIOν 'treacle clover, Psoralea bituminosa' (Dsc.), named after the smell
(see Strömberg 1940: 62); άoqaλtītɩç ‘bituminous' (Str.), of ẞwloc, etc.; άoqaλtwdng
'like a.' (Arist., Str.), whence ȧoqaλτwdɛúoµαι [v.] 'to cover with a.'.
Denominative verb ảσqaλτów ‘to smear with a.' (LXX), whence ảσøáλtwois (Suid.);
άσqaλτíšw [v.] ‘to smell like a.' (Dsc.).
•ETYM Generally taken as a negated verbal adjective of σá\\ɛσaɩ, under the
assumption that it denoted the material that protects walls from tumbling down
(σpáleσa). For the 'causative' meaning of the verbal adjective one compares
ȧμévστoç; still, this semantic point makes the etymology weak. It is rather a
substrate word. Diels KZ 47 (1916): 207ff. noted that sources occur everywhere in the
Greek world, e.g. on Zakynthos and near Dyrrhachium.
ảσqápayoç 1 [m.] 'throat, gullet' (X 328, Plu.). ◄PG(S,V)►
•VAR σqάpayyos (σpápayos Latte). ßpóyxos, τpáxŋlos, las̟µós, yópos ‘windpipe,
neck, throat, noise' (H.); = qápvyš (Apion apud Phot.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 227 connects pápay\, -yyos ‘gorge' and compares σápayyes (codd. -és)
sine expl. (H.). The combination of the variations and the suffix -ay-/-ayy-
(prenasalization) proves substrate origin. He further compares μápayoɩ oi
ȧлóкρηvo óоι 'overhanging places' (H.), which seems improbable to me.
ảσqápayos 2 [m.] ‘asparagus, young shoots' (Cratin.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also άσлáрayos (com., Thphr., Plb., etc. [not given separately by LSJ]).

=== page 104 ===

160
161
•DER àσqapayía 'rootstock of the asparagus' (Thphr.) and ȧopapaywvía 'wreath of
asparagus' (Plu.), cf. ẞpvwvía, podwvía.
⚫ETYM The word has been compared with oqapayέoμa 'to burst with a noise,
teem', but it is rather a substrate word, as is made probable by the variation л/Q.
àσqódɛλos [m.] 'asphodel, Asphodelus ramosa' (Hes.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also σpódeλos (H.), σqodeλóç (Ar.); σлodɛλós (v.ll. acc. to Hdn. Gr. 2, 152).
•DER άσqodɛλós 'grown with a.' (Od.), on the accent see Schwyzer: 420;
ȧσqodɛλwdŋs like a.' (Thphr.), àσqodéλivos ‘made of a.' (Luc.).
•ETYM A substrate word, as is shown by the variants. Fur.: 288 further compares
σqovdúλ(ε)lov, σлovú o 'Heracleum sphondylium', which would show
prenasalization. A speculative attempt by Biraud 1993: 35-46, who finds the same
suffix in σtuqελós, Tápelos, pákeλoç, etc.
ȧoxaλáw [v.] 'to be distressed, grieved' (Il., Archil., E.). <?>
•VAR ȧoxáλλw (Od., IA) is more usual; fut. ȧoxaλɛi (A. Prom. 764).
⚫ETYM Commonly derived from *ǎoxalos 'who cannot hold himself, with privative
a- and the root of oxεiv, to which a suffix -aλo- would have been added. Highly
doubtful.
*άoxédiov · tpaxú, Kpñτεç ‘rough (Cretan)' (H.). →ảσxéliov.
ȧoxέdwpoc [m.] 'wild boar' in Magna Graecia (A. Fr. 191). <?>
⚫ETYM Kretschmer KZ 36 (1900): 267f. proposed a Doric form *ȧv-oxε-dopf-os 'who
resists the lance', which would originally be an epithet. Comparable formations are
µev-éyxns, µev-aixμns. Possible at best.
.
ȧσxéλov • τpαxú, Kρñτεç 'rough (Cretan)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Latte notes: “non coharens ideoque asperum”, and corrects to άσxέdiov.
DELG connects the corrected form with oxɛd-óv and exw (which may be what Latte
meant). However, Latte's correction is too uncertain to be printed in the edition of
Hesychius.
ȧoxíov [n.] 'puffball, Lycoperdon giganteum' (Thphr.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. Semitic etymology in Lewy 1895: 31.
ǎoxv [n.] 'inspissated juice of the fruit of the bird cherry (Prunus Padus)', used by the
Scythians (Hdt. 4, 23). <LW Iran.▷
•ETYM See the note ad loc. in the edition of Legrand.
äσwτos •VAR ɑowtía. → owóç.
ǎτα=oç.
áτaßvpíτns [adj.] scil. äpτoç, a kind of bread from Rhodes (Sopat.). <GR➤
•ETYM Cf. Ataẞupía. ǹ ‘Pódos ráλat (H.) and the mountain 'Aτãẞúpiov. The suffix
-íτns is common for kinds of bread, cf. Redard 1949: 88.
àtá入avtog →Tá入avtov.
i
άτaλóç [adj.] ‘tender, delicate' (Il.). <PG?(V)►
•DER Denominative verb áτáλλw (pres. only) 'to skip in childish glee', trans. 'to
bring up (a child)' (Il.); ȧτáλµατа· лаíуνа 'toуs' (H.). With internal reduplication
(Schwyzer: 648) άτάλλw 'to rear, tenď (Il.), aor. åtítŋ\a; átitáλtaç ‘foster father'
(Gortyn).
ETYM Extensive discussion in DELG. Leumann Glotta 15 (1927): 153ff. (also
Leumann 1950: 139ff.) derives ȧtaλós from the expression ȧτaλà oppovéwv, which
arose by reanalysis of άτaλappovέwv. This is based on åtaλάopwv, and this again is
the negation of τaλáqpwv. Although it explains the compositional vowel a, the
whole analysis is too complicated. Derivation from äττα (Benveniste 1969(2): 85ff.)
seems improbable too. What remains is an adjective ȧτaλós of unknown origin, with
a verb that means 'to treat tenderly'. Fur.: 262 compares ȧ(aλaí. véaɩ kaì áraλaí and
concludes that it is a substrate word. This is quite probable.
ȧtáλvµvoc [f.] = кokkuµηλéa, ‘plum tree' (Nic.). <PG(S) ►
⚫ETYM Unknown, but no doubt a substrate word (suffix -vμvoc).
ȧráp [adv.]? 'nevertheless, but' (Il.). ◄GR►
⚫ETYM A combination of *het = Lat. at 'but' (also in Go. appan 'but') and ►ǎp (s.v.
►ǎpa). Cf. avτáp and Ruijgh 1957: 43ff.
átápßaktos [adj.] ‘fearless' (Pi., B.). <PG?, ?►
⚫ETYM A privative verbal adjective, which presupposes an unattested *τapßáσow or
*Tapẞáw that would belong to τápßoç, τapßéw, see Fur.: 219. Cf. áτáρµvкτоç
(Euph., Nic.) to τapμúσσw 'to scare' (Lyc.). See tápßoç.
-=>
áτapítós •var áτapëóç. → àτpanós, átparitós.
åτapτŋpós [adj.] 'mischievous, baneful' (II.), mg. not quite certain. <?>
●Der åtaptãtai. ßλántei, noveî, Avлεĩ ‘hinders, labors, grieves' (H.).
ETYM Unknown. Stürmer IF 47 (1929): 299 assumes a pre-form *äταpoç
'unfatiguing, comparing ȧτépaμvos and Tɛípw. This is impossible because the
roots concerned are dissyllabic (*terh,- 'to pierce', *terh₂- 'to overcome').
áτáσðaλos [adj.] ‘reckless, wickeď (Il., Aeol.). <?>
•DER ảτασðaλíaι (always plur. in Hom.), sing. -ín, -ía (Hes., Hdt., Pi.); ảτασ¤áλλwv
[pres.ptc.] (Od.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. As DELG remarks, connection with aτη is impossible as the
latter has long å-. The gloss from Hesychius ȧлò τоū taîç ätαiç Đáλλε is clearly a
folk etymology. The proposal by Frisk Eranos 31 (1933): 21ff. to posit *ǎ-apστoç =
Skt. á-dhṛṣta- ‘irresistable', to Oápooç, is a desparate attempt. See also Fur.: 379.
ȧτεipns [adj.] 'indestructible, stubborn, hard' (Il.). <?>
ETYM Mostly connected with Tɛípw 'to tire', Lat. terō 'to rub', in which case the
proposal by Bechtel 1914 s.v. to posit *åτεpƑ-ns (with the *-u- of tέpu) makes some
sense. Improbable is the proposal by Wackernagel 1897: 14ff., who assumed *åtɛpσ-
ns to τépσoμal and an original meaning 'not dried up, fresh'.

=== page 105 ===

162
átéuBw
άτéµẞw [v.] 'to maltreat', med. 'to be bereft of (II.), also 'to revile' (A. R.) by a false
interpretation of o 312, acc. to Leumann 1950: 33. <?>
•VAR Only pres.
•der átéµßios. µeµчíµopoç ‘criticizing' (EM).
•ETYM Unknown. Traditionally connected with Skt. dabhnóti ‘to damage' < *d¹eb¹-,
but aspiration is not lost after nasal in Greek (Schwyzer: 333).
ȧtevns, -és [adj.] ‘tense, fixed, attentive' (Hes.). <IE? *ten- 'draw, stretch'>
•DER άteví¶w [v.] ‘to stare' (Hp.), åτevioµós (Thphr.) and åéviσis (Paul. Aeg.).
•ETYM Perhaps 'with tension', if derived from a substantive *τévos [n.] = Lat. tenus
[n.] 'cord' with copulative a- (and Ionic psilosis), from the root of tɛivw.
ǎτεp [prep.] 'without, far from' (II.). <IE *sn-ter, *snHu, *snHi 'without'>
•DER ǎTερеε(v), Aeol. ǎτɛpa ‘id.' (Pi., A. and S. [lyr.]); åлáτεpеεv, also as adv. (Il.).
•ETYM A psilotic form (perhaps Aeolic) from *άτép, identical with OHG suntar
'separated, but' < PIE *sn-tér. There was also a form *snH(e)u giving Greek ǎvev
and remade in Skt. sanu-tár 'separate from, far away' (cf. Av. hanara). Again
differently formed are ToA sne, ToB snai 'without', Lat. sine ‘id.' < *seni, OIr. sain
'particular, different'. However, these words require a laryngeal (*snH-), which is
impossible for ǎtεp. This is problematic, but remains unsolved to date (in spite of
Meier-Brügger Glotta 66 (1988): 137-141). The suggestion by Nikolaev 2007: 165 that
ǎtɛp continues *h₂n-ter is unacceptable, in view of the problems this creates for
►ǎveu (which he derives from *h₂n-eu). The fact that the word is psilotic shows that
it is a poetic (epic and Ionic) word.
άtépaµvos [adj.] ‘hard, stubborn, merciless' (Od.). <IE? *terh₂- 'overcome'>
•VAR Athematic άτɛpáµwv ‘id.' (Ar.).
•DER ȧTεpaμ vía (Hp.), àτεpaµvóτηs (Thphr.), áτεpaµvádŋc (Gal.).
•ETYM Analyzed as a privative formation to a noun *τépaµα, from the root of
► tɛipw, ▸tépny, which implies an original meaning 'without weakness'. This is
semantically a bit strained, and worse, there is no evidence for *h₂ in this root
(*terh,-). It seems more natural to connect *terh₂- 'to overcome', as found in Hitt.
tarra-tta(ri) ‘to be able', Skt. tiráte 'to overcome'. There is also an adjective τεpáμwv,
but Frisk and Chantraine think that it may be secondarily derived from άtépaµvos.
ätepos⇒ëtepos.
ȧτéwv [ptc.] unknown, 'mad' vel sim. (II.). <?>
•VAR ȧTÉε (Call. fr. 633).
•ETYM Connection with äτη (Bechtel 1914) seems impossible because there the ά- is
long. It has therefore been proposed to read Y 332 as åτéovτα with synizesis, or even
as ȧ(F)ατέovτα.
äτŋ [f.] 'damage, guilt, blindness, dazzlement' (II.), 'penalty, fine' (Gortyn). <?>
●COMP ǎv-aτoç, ǎл-ατоç (Gortyn).
i
}
ȧtµýv, -évos
163
•DER ȧTηpós 'blinded, bringing disaster' (Thgn., A.), àτηpíα (Pl. Com., X.); ȧτáoμαi
(ȧƑατáoμαι; see below) 'to suffer or sustain damage' (S., E.), 'to lose a suit, be fined'
(Gortyn, Gytheion).
•ETYM As appears from avάta (Alc.) and denominative åƑατãταɩ (Gytheion), äτη
derives from *åƑáτŋ. Note ảyaτãσðaɩ (= ảƑα-). ßláлτεσðaɩ ‘to be damageď (H.).
The à is long except in Archil. 73 (where it is possible to read ǎyn, see Page
Entretiens Hardt 10 (1964): 110), and in A. Ag. 131 (where Hermann reads ǎya).
*άƑάτη is a verbal noun to *åƑá-σaι (see ►ảάw), which could mechanically derive
from PIE *h₂ueh2-. Fur.: 234 compares ȧƑατη with άлάτη (interchange Ƒ/л). Cf.
DELG Supp. s.v. ►άáw on the parallellism with Hitt. waštul ‘'fault', which is
semantically very neat - but this does not prove that there is an etymological relation
with ǎτη.
ȧtŋuελns tŋueλéw.
άτíw [v.] 'not to heed, to despise' (Il.). ◄GR►
•VAR Aor. ȧτío(o)al.
•ETYM Formation in -(í)\w to the stem of ► τíw; cf. the synonym ovк ảλɛyí™w.
át[tá入入w →áta入ós.
àτíw [v.] 'to dishonor' (Thgn. 621, Orph. L. 62). ◄GR➤
⚫ETYM Incidental formation, antithetic to tíw after the pattern of tɩµáw : àτµáw
(which derives from ǎτчμoç, but has been reshaped after τчuάw). Cf. the older form
► ȧτíw.
”Atlas, -avtoç [m.] ‘Atlas' (Od.), name of the god who carries the pillars of heaven.
<PG
•DER Atλavtíç [f.] (Hes.), among other things the name of a mythical island,
plausibly interpreted as Minoan Crete (Castleden 1998); thence Aτλαντɩкóç (E.) and
Aτλávτεos (Critias).
•ETYM Originally the name of an Arcadian mountain god; the name was transferred
to the mountain chain in Western Africa, see Solmsen 1909: 24.
The old interpretation is that the word is built from copulative a- and the root *telh₂-
of τλñvaɩ, and that it was later reshaped to an nt-stem (cf. Aτλãyɛvéwv Hes. Op.
383). The name of the African mountain is also compared with Berber ádrār
'mountain' (Steinhauser Glotta 25 (1936): 229ff.). Brandenstein Arch. Orbis 17:1
(1949): 69ff. plausibly suggested folk-etymological reshaping of Berb. ádrār.
The assumption of initial *sm- is clearly a desperate guess. It cannot to be expected
that this ancient Titan carries an Indo-European name; moreover, Pre-Greek words
often end in -ant-. See Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 12'.
átµýv, -évoc [m.] 'servant, slave' (Call.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ǎtµεvos [m.] (Archil., POxu. 8, 1087 column 2, 38, Call. fr. 538), also as an
adjective = SovλIKÓÇ (H.).

=== page 106 ===

:
164
atpós
•DER àtµɛvíç ‘female servant' (EM); also aduɛvidɛs (EM), after dµwç? áτµεvía
'slavery' (Man., AP), átµévos ‘laborious' (Nic.); denominative άuɛów (Nic.), for
*&TLEVEÚw.
•ETYM The variation τ/8 points to a substrate word. Fur.: 179 (also 95) adduces
Аaτuεvɛía. Sovλɛía (H.); other instances of λ-/zero are found ibid.: 392.
ȧτμóç [m.] 'steam, vapor, odor' (A.). <?>
•VAR ȧTuń [f.] 'id.' (Hes.).
•DER άτµíç [f.] ‘steam' (Hdt., Pl., Arist.), whence ȧτµ₁dás (Arist.) and áτóμα
[v.] 'to be changed into steam' (Arist.). Also áτµádηs (Arist., Thphr.), átµí¶w [v.] ‘to
steam, evaporate' (S., X., Arist.), which may also derive from áτuíç.
•ETYM Contracted from àɛτµóç, cf. the glosses àετµóv. tò rveñµa ‘winď, äɛtµa.
qλó ‘flame' (H.)? Compared with ►äŋµ, and further with ►άütµý, but the vocalism
is unexplained. DELG points to the difference in meaning with äŋ (see Solmsen
1901: 271f.). Not to Skt. ātmán- 'soul', OHG ātum ‘breath' < *h,eh₁t-m-.
ǎo →ǎα.
átpakig →ätpaktog.
ätpaktos [m., f.] ‘spindle' (Hdt.), also ‘arrow' (S., A. fr. 139); Laconian acc. to Th. 4,
40. <PG(V)>
•VAR ǎSpaкTOÇ (H., gloss.), see LSJ Supp.
⚫DER Diminutive ȧτрάкτоν (Epic. anon. in Arch. Pap. 7, 9, fr. 10; POxy. 14, 1740, 2).
ȧτрαкτvλ(λ)íç, -ídos 'spindle-thistle, Carthamus lanatus' (Arist., Thphr., Theoc.),
ȧτpaкíç kind of thistle (Gal.), see Strömberg 1940: 105.
•ETYM The connection with Lat. torqueō, τрεлw and Myc. to-ro-qe-jo-me-no
/trokeiomenos/, etc. is impossible in view of the -к-; moreover, the ȧ- would remain
unexplained.
It is rather a loan from the substrate; this may find support in ǎdpaкτoç and átpakíç,
if the variation к/кT is old and not due to simplification. Skt. tarku- has formerly
been compared, but it derives from tark- 'to turn' and is unrelated.
ȧτpañóç [f.] ‘(foot) path' (Hdt.). <PG?(V), EUR?>
•VAR άταρлóç (Il.), áταpëɩτóç (Il.), åτpañɩτóç (Оd.) after άµažiτóc (s.v. ►áµáža);
άtpañŋtós (AB 460).
⚫ETYM Often taken as copulative a- and the verbal root τpa”- seen in ▶τpaïέw ‘to
tread (grapes)', the o-grade of which is seen in τporέovto. ¿nátovv ‘were treading'
(H.). Possible, though the formation is strange (cf. the doubts in DELG). It is rather
a substrate word, of which the interchange ap/pa could also be an indication. In IE
words with this variation, one of the variants is analogical, but this seems impossible
here: the root has a full grade II τρεл-, so we cannot understand the vocalization
-ap-. Ru. tropá ‘id.' (Fraenkel 1956a: 104) could point to a European substrate word
(cf. Beekes 2000).
ȧτpáqažus, -vos [f.] 'orach, Atriplex rosea' (Hp.). <PG(V)►
j
i
áttayās,-ā
165
•VAR ádpáqažvs (ȧdp-), ávdpáqažvs, átpáqažic, cf. Hdn. Gr. 1, 539; 2, 49; 467 and
Strömberg 1940: 160.
•ETYM Clearly a substrate word, as is shown by the variants 8/, the prenasalization
and perhaps the interchange v/t. Folk etymology (after ȧdpóc, ȧvnp) does not
explain all the variants. See Fur.: 179, etc. Lat. ātriplex is a loan from Greek (Frisk)
rather than a parallel borrowing (as suggested by André 1956 s.v.).
άτpekýs [adj.] ‘exact, precise' (Il.); see Luther 1935: 43ff.; Leumann 1950: 304f. <?>
•VAR Homer has only adverbial ȧtpekés and átpekέwę.
•DER άτpέкɛɩα 'what exactly happened, truth' (Hdt., Pi.), Ion. also -ɛin (-in);
άtpeкótηs ‘id.' (sch.). Denominative verb ȧτpɛкέw [v.] 'to be sure, etc.' (E. fr. 315).
•ETYM Unknown. The analysis as a compound of privative a- and an s-stem *τpéкoç,
in the sense ‘undistorted', finds no further support: connection with the root of Lat.
torqueō is impossible, because a reflex of the labiovelar would be lacking.
άtpéµa •Var átpéµas. →tpéliw.
ατролαvлαιç [adj.] uncertain (IG 5(1), 278 [Lacon. IP]). <GR
•DER Also лрαTOÑAVÑAIÇ.
⚫ETYM Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1911): 269f. (also Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 211) reads
áбpoлáμлaç = 'the ripе лáμлαç'. Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 658 objects that a
boy cannot be ȧdpóç if he is in his 5th year (LSJ Supp.) of state education (at the age
of 12). He convincingly interprets the first element as 'second' (äτεpoc), see
Szemerényi 1964: 271.
άtpúyɛtos [adj.] uncertain (II.), epithet of the sea and the aether. <IE? *trug- ‘dry'➤
•ETYM In antiquity connected with ►τpvyάw and interpreted as ‘unfruitful, but this
is formally not easy. Vine 1998: 62-64 proposes *n-trug-eto- 'un-dry-able', cf.
τpuyεv. εŋpávеŋ and τpuyŋtós = Enpaσía. This is quite possible. Leukart 1986
analyzed it as intensive ȧ- and τpú(w, assuming the sense 'strongly murmuring'; this
is less probable.
äττα 1 [m.voc.] ‘father' (Il.). <IE atta 'father'>
VAR ǎTтяV [acc.] 'grandfather' (Thespiae).
•DIAL Thess. acc. to Eust. 777, 54, used to address one's foster father.
⚫ETYM A nursery word which is found in several IE languages, and may be inherited:
Lat. atta inflected Hitt. atta-, Go. atta, gen. -ins, etc.; suffixed OCS оtúсь. See also
▶ ăna.
}
ätta 2 =
=>
: tɩvà. •VAR ätta = ätiva. → TÍS.
átraßuyás →àttayās.
ảɩɩayāç, -ā [m.] kind of partridge, francolin, Tetrao francolinus' (Ar.). See
Thompson 1895 s.v. <PG?(S)►
•VAR ȧttayýv, -ñvos (Arist.), which is the scientific form; also áττayñs, -έos (Opp.);
without α-: τaynv = ȧτταуηv (Suid.).

=== page 107 ===

166
ȧττάкnc, -ov
•DER Diminutive áttayŋvápiov (gramm.), tayŋvápιov (Suid.). Fish name åttayîvoç
(Dorio apud Ath., ms. -ɛvóc), perhaps after the color (Strömberg 1943: 120), but see
Lacroix Ant. class. 6 (1937): 295.
•ETYM On the formation see Chantraine 1933: 31 and 167, Björck 1950: 63 and 272,
Strömberg 1944: 45, also Hubschmid 1963: 119. Unexplained; it is called
onomatopoeic (after the cry) by Ael. N. A. 4, 42. It could be a substrate word (note
the suffix -ny, for which see Fur.: 1728). On the variant without prothetic vowel, see
Fur: 374.
áttáкηç, -ov [m.] 'kind of locust' (LXX). <LW>
•VAR Also ȧTTαкúç (LXX), äтταкoç [m.] (Aristeas, Ph.).
ETYM Probably a loanword, but from the orient, or from the substrate? See Gil
Fernández 1959: 238. Cf. ►áttéλaßoç.
άττalíčoµai [v.] ·лλαvшμαι. Σiкελoí 'to cause to wander (Sicilian)' (H.). <?>
ETYM Acc. to Lobeck 1843: 147 it is a denominative of άτaλóç; this remains
hypothetical.
ǎττava [n.pl.] · τýуavα. кαì лλaкoñç ó έn aútŵv σкɛvalóµɛvoç frying-pan; flat cake
which is prepared on it' (H.). <LW>
•DER Diminutive ȧττаvídεç. лλαкоÛντεç, εvеρυлτоι 'flat cakes, sops' (H.). Further
άτταvíτη ‘a cake', beside τηуavíτηs (Hippon.) and ταуηvíτηs (Ath.), see Redard
1949: 87f.
=
⚫ETYM Unknown. Because of the form in Hippon., Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 282f.
supposed that the word was Anatolian, see O. Masson 1962: 119. Ernout 1946: 28
Ernout BSL 30 (1930): 92 compares Lat. atena, adtanus, atanuuium, atanulus, cups
for religious service, which he considers to be Etruscan (but the Greek words are not
cups).
ȧττápaуoç [m.] 'crumb, morsel of bread' (Ath., Call.), tò ¿λáxiσtov. oi dè tàç è̟nì tŵv
ǎpτwv \uкτaivaç. oi dè tàç kaλovµεvaç víxaç blisters on cakes or loafs of wheat-
bread; morsels' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Certainly a loanword, possibly Pre-Greek.
áttápvµa [n.]? · nóµa, σóðiσµа Kôητкóv 'drink, Cretan device' (H.). <GR>
⚫ETYM Brown 1985: 35 thinks σóqiσµа should be understood in the sense 'invention,
specialty'. He derives àττápчμа from the place name "Алτара (with Сretan
assimilation). Like Latte, he considers a mistake for *ȧττapiкá.
áttéλaßoç [m.] an edible locust (Hdt.). <PG(S)►
•Var áttéλeßos (LXX), cf. åtteλeßóóðαλµoç (Eub.); also Thess. PN Attedeßei[os],
άt(t)eλɛßaía Masson Mus. Helv. 43 (1986): 486. Also átteλáßŋ. åkpídaç 'locusts'
(H.).
•ETYM Clearly a substrate word (note -ẞos). Semitic etymology by Lewy 1895: 17¹;
Strömberg 1944: 16 reckoned with Egyptian origin.
áttŋyós [m.] ‘male goat' (Magnesia Mae. [IIª]; Eust. ad 1 222). <LW Anat.>
aiyń
167
ETYM Acc. to Eust., άττηуós was used by certain Ionians; Arnobius 5, 6 calls the
word attagus hircus' Phrygian. So probably an Anatolian loan.
Attiкós, Aτ¤íç [adj.] 'Attic'. <PG(V) >>
•VAR Also ATеɩкós (IG 4²(1), 104), Aекós (IG 42(1), 102). Fem. Aτеíç ‘'Attic',
especially the land ‘Attica'.
⚫ETYM Derived from the same source as the name of Athens, displaying 0, geminated
TO, and unaspirated TT, which are typical Pre-Greek variants. See ▸ Añval.
ǎττoµαι [v.] 'to set the warp in the loom, i.e. start the web' (Hermipp. 2). <IE *h₂et-
'stick, pierce'>
•DER ǎσua 'warp' (AB), cf. Siaoua (Call., etc.) from diášoµα = äττоμα (Nicophon),
see below. Cf. ǎTTεσ0αι· diáεσðαι στηµovа (H.).
⚫ETYM ǎττoμαι derives from *äτ-чoμαi; di-áčoμαι must be analogal after verbs in -(w.
Bechtel 1914: 130f. connected йτpiov. The connection with Alb. end, ind 'to set the
warp in the loom' (for which Klingenschmitt 1982: 1138 reconstructs *h₂nt-ie-) is
impossible, as *h₂nt- gave Greek *åvɩ- (in spite of Nikolaev's recent attempt,
Nikolaev 2005).
Van Beek (p.c.) proposes to connect Hitt. hatt-ª(r) ‘to pierce, prick' and reconstruct
*h₂et-ie/o- for ǎττоμα. In Greek, the verb was restricted in its meaning to weaving;
cf. also ►αστic, which may derive from *-h₂et-ti-. The development of meaning is
trivial; compare MoE stitch beside stick (into), and MoDu. insteken 'to insert' (in
knitting).
άτúчoμαι [v.] 'to be frightened, amazed, terrified' (II.). <PIE *h₂tug- 'be terrified'>>
VAR Aor. pass. ȧτuxОεíç, later ȧτúčш, aor. ȧτúčαι.
•DER ȧTUČηλós 'terrible' (A. R.).
•ETYM The comparison wirh Hitt. ḥatuki- ‘terrible' and Skt. tujyáte ‘to be seized by
panic' (the usual mg. of Skt. tuj- is 'to push, set in motion') convinces both formally
and semantically.
aʊ [adv.] ‘again, on the other hand, on the contrary' (Il.). <IE *h₂eu ‘away, again'▷
•DER As a prefix in ► avɣáttɛɩv.
•ETYM To Lat. au- in au-fugiō, etc., Lith. au-, OCS u- 'away from', further to Skt. áva
'down'. It is frequently found in adverbs and particles, e.g. aʊte (avtáp), aðtis, aðtiv
(aúτíкa), aúðɩ, aðɩç, aʊеɛ, and in the pronoun avτóç. Cf. Osc. auti = Lat. aut, and
Lat. autem.
avaívw •VAR avaλéoç. → años.
avayń [f.] = avavtý, “Eŋpavtiký vóσoç, atrophy' (Hp. gloss. XIX 86, 18 K) [not in LSJ].
<GR➤
•ETYM Concatenation of avos 'dry' (avaívw, avavτ½), and a second element, cf.
Xopdaчóc disease in the great guts'. Connection with äлτw 'to fasten' may be
doubted.
avyń [f.] ‘light, glow, ray of light', e.g. of the sun (Il.). ◄IE? *h₂eug- ‘shine'>
•COMP On μελavavync, etc., see DELG.

=== page 108 ===

168
aúdń
•DER αvyńɛɩç ‘clear-sighted' (Nic.), aúyítnc (Xíðos) name of a precious stone (Plin.);
avуīτiç plant name = ȧvayaλλìç † Þolviкñ (Ps.-Dsc.), see Redard 1949: 67, 70 and
aʊyîtɩç
Strömberg 1940: 25).
Denominative verbs: 1. avуášoμα (-ά(w) ‘to see clearly, lighten, shine upon' (Il.,
poet., LXX), verbal nouns avyaoμа (LXX) and avуaσµóç (Placit.); avуáστεɩpα
lightening' (Orph.). 2. avyéw [v.] 'to illuminate' (LXX).
Note ayos (H.) as an explanation of ǹúc; Avyú [f.] name of a bitch (X.) is probably
a term of endearment.
•ETYM Probably an old verbal noun, cf. Alb. ag 'dawn' < *h₂eug-, see Demiraj 1997.
Perhaps further to OCS jugε 'South, south wind'. Connection with the root *h₂eug-
'to increase, grow strong' seems plausible, in view of the limited distribution of the
words meaning 'light'.
avdn [f.] '(human) voice, sound, speech' (II.). <IE *h₂ued- 'speak'>
•VAR *oúdǹεσσa is a suggestion of Aristotle for αúð½εσσα, meant as yɛoç'; on
this see Beekes Sprache 18 (1972): 127f.
•DER aúdɛıç ‘with (human) voice' (Il.); denominative verb aúdáw, aor. aúdñσai
'talk, speak, speak to' (II.). (Chantraine's opposition of a goddess) with a human
voice, language as opposed to the language of the gods is wrong. It means 'having a
voice [to speak with]', which may be 'human' or 'beautiful' as the context requires;
see Beekes, l.c. 128 n.3.)
•ETYM Mostly derived from a root *h₂ued- that is assumed for åɛídw, and with
lengthened grade for å(Ƒ)ηd-wv. An o-grade *h₂uod- is assumed for the name 'Hoí-
(F)odos and in Ƒodóv (written yodóv). yóŋta ‘sorcerer', Ƒodāv (written y-). kλαíɛv
'to weep' (H.), but DELG considers the glosses unreliable. Note that this would
presuppose the Saussure Effect (loss of the initial laryngeal before o-grade of the
root), which is not certain (see Van Beek 2009). The problem with this whole
account is that an alternation *hu-ed- beside *hu-ei-d is suspicious, and that a long
vowel in *hu-ēd- is not very probable either.
There has also been discussion whether *hud- gave ud- (Beekes) or aúd- (Peters
1980a: 65ff., 72). The zero grade is seen in ►údéw, cf. ¡ðapós < *h¸id¹-. Outside Greek,
a root (h₂)ued(H)- is found in Skt. vádati 'speak', ptc. uditá- and in OCS vaditi. A
root-final laryngeal is improbable, as we would then expect aspiration of the stop in
Sanskrit. Hitt. uttar 'word, thing, story, reason, etc.' is probably unrelated, while Lith.
1sg. vadinù ‘to call, name' points to *-d- on account of Winter's Law. See aŋSwv,
► oúdnεσσa.
avepíw →èpÚw.
avðádns, -es [adj.] ‘conceited, presumptuous, arrogant' (Hdt.). ◄GR►
•DER Thence aveάdɛα 'conceit, presumption' (Att., Hell.), also -ía; aúðaðiкóç (Ar.).
Denominative avеadíчoµαι [v.] 'to be presumptuous, etc.' (Pl., Them.), avеáðσµа
(A.); also avadιáčoμα (J.) ‘id.'.
•ETYM From *aúτо-Ƒádηç, a compound of avτóç and the root of ȧdɛïv <*swad- with
crasis. A contracted Ionic form avτwdŋs is given by A. D. Pron. 74, 9 and H. See
▶ávdávw.
!
i
aúλń
169
avévτηs, -ov [m.] ‘author, perpetrator', also 'murderer' (Hdt.). <IE *senH- 'win,
accomplish'>
•DER Only late, e.g. fem. αúðévτpiα = кupía (Lydia); avеεvτía 'dictatorship' (LXX,
pap.); aúƉɛvtikóç ‘authentic, correct, etc.' (pap.), etc.
•ETYM The forms aỷto-évíηs (S.) and ovvévτηs ouvεpyós 'working together' (H.)
point to earlier *vτηs, the full grade of the root of ȧvúw 'to accomplish', combined
with avτóc. The root is aniț from forms where the laryngeal was lost before vowel,
acc. to Rikov Orpheus 4 (1994): 63-66. On the later history of the word see DELG.
aʊðɩ [adv.] ‘right here, there, immediately' (Il.); later contaminated with aɩç ‘again'
(Call.). <GR
•ETYM Probably, avi arose from aúτóðɩ by haplology (Meillet MSL 20 (1920): 106f.).
Att. avis and Rhegin. aviv seem to be conflations of avi and αUTIÇ/ αUTIV (see
Schwyzer: 629); on -5 and -v see Schwyzer: 619f.
aviaxoi in N 41-2 qλoyì looi ȧoλλées ǹè Ovéλλŋ || äßpoшo víαxo <?>
ETYM Acc. to Frisk, Aeolic for *ȧ-FíƑaxo (Schwyzer: 224) which would belong to
iaxń < *ƑчFaxń. Acc. to Aristarchus, ȧ- is copulative or intensive: 'shouting intensely';
acc. to Apion and Hesychius it contains privative ȧ-, meaning 'without a sound'; less
probable. The application of ẞpóμoç to fire, wind, etc. is found more often. See
▶ iáxw.
ávídɛtos [adj.] ‘invisible', in åvïdétov· às̟avoñç, ảopáτov (H.). <IE *uid- ‘see'>
•ETYM Probably from *ṇ-uid-eto-, where *-etó- has potential value. Vine 1998: 33-35
argues for the interpretation of Myc. o-wi-de-ta-i as a dat.pl. /owidetä"i/ 'to the
invisible deities (of the nether world?)' < *n-uid-eto-.
=
aira² →ă入ok.
avλn [f.] 'open court, courtyard' (since Il.). <IE *heus-leh₂>
•VAR Another formation in avλıç, acc. -tv, gen. -180s [f.] 'night camp (in open air)'
(Il.).
•COMP ǎypaulos 'who passes the night outside' (Il.); έлavλoç (Оd.).
•DER αλεoç ‘of the courtyard' (Od.), after ερкεчç; aúλaños (LXX) is rare and late,
substantivized as avλaía [f.] 'curtain' (Hyp., Thphr.), also avλɛía (Andania); aλov
[n.] 'cottage, fold, cave' (h. Merc.); aüλios [adj.] 'belonging to the avλn or auλov' (A.
R.); avλía. лavλiç † ǹ µкpà αúλý (AB 463); aúλiкós 'of the court' (Plb., Phld.).
Diminutive avλídiov (Thphr.). avλítns (avλýtns H.) 'farm servant' (S., A. R.).
aúλiádes (API.), of výµðaɩ, cf. kpηvádec.
Denominative verb aúλíšoµαι [v.] 'to lie in the courtyard, camp (in the open), pass
the night' (IA), late verbal nouns aλiσiç (Ael.), aúλioµós (Sm., H.), aðλioµa (sch.);
αúλστηpιov (Herm., Aq.).
•ETYM aúλý, avλis are derivations of the root of laúw, ►ǎɛσα ‘to spend the night,
which is also seen in Arm. aw-t' 'place to spend the night' and aganim 'to spend the
night'. The formation in -/- has also been supposed in ToB aulāre, ToA olar
'companion', if from *h₂eu-l(e)h₂- + -ro-.

=== page 109 ===

j
170
aű入npa
As remarked by Clackson 1994: 104ff. (already Peters 1980a: 39f.), all Greek forms
may derive from *h₂eus-l-. Clackson sees no reason to assume a separate root *h₂eu-
just for Armenian, and assumes old Schwebeablaut *h₂eus- ~ *h₂ues-.
avλŋpa →ɛüλŋpa.
avλiç →avλń.
avλós [m.] ‘hollow tube, pipe, flute' (Il.); also ‘cow-bane, Cicuta virosa' (Ps.-Plu.). ◄IE
*h₂eu-l- 'tube'>
•DER Diminutive aúλíσкoç (Thgn., Hp., S., Arist.), aúλíðɩov (Alex. Trall.).
avλóv [m., f.] 'defile, glen, etc.' (Hdt.); on -úv, see Chantraine 1933:164; diminutive
avλwvíoкoç [m.] (Thphr.), avλwviádɛç (Opp.), of vúµqai, cf. avλádɛç to ► avλý),
Avλwvɛúc epithet of Dionysus (Attica), avλwvíľw (H.). avλwτóç 'provided with
pipes' (A.).
Denominative verb avλéw [v.] ‘to blow (a flute)' (Alcm.), aðλŋσïç ‘flute-playing' (Pl.,
Arist.), aűλŋµa ‘piece of music for the flute (Pl., Ar.); aúλŋtýs ‘flutisť (IA) and
avλŋtýp (Ion.) ‘flute-player', fem. aúλŋtpís (IA), whence diminutive aúλŋtpídiov
(Theopomp. Hist.), also avλnτpiα (D. L.); avλntiкóç [adj.] 'concerning the flute or
flutist' (Pl., Arist.), from aúλητηs or from avλéw, aúλóç. TN aúλŋτηpιov (H.) and
avλητηpíα. avλwv Onкη 'place for storing flutes' (H.).
aúλiž (cod. aúλí). qλéy 'blood-vessel' (H.), cf. Xóλ 'guts, bowels'. On the mg. of
avλшлç, epithet of the helmet (Il.), see Trümpy 1950: 44. Also avλwñíaç a kind of
tunny(?), perhaps = ȧveías (Thompson 1947: 20)?
•ETYM Several cognates with a suffix -/- are found, e.g. Lith. aūlas [m.] ‘leg of a boot',
MoNw. (dial.) aul 'hollow stalk of Angelica', Lat. alvus 'belly, cavity, etc.' (with
metathesis). Hitt. auli- [c.] 'tube-shaped organ in the neck' < *h₂ouli-, OPr. aulis
'shin'. The words adduced all denote hollow or tube-like objects. The
correspondences avλóc Lith. aulas, kavλóç: Lith. káulas <*kehu-ló- are
noteworthy, see Güntert 1914: 154. See ►ěvavλoç.
=
avvos →Bauvoç.
avчw [v.] ‘to increase, strengthen, magnify; grow' (Il.). ◄IE *h₂eug-, *h¸ueg-s- 'grow'>
•VAR άéžw (Il.), aúžávw (Ion.-Att.), avчúvw (Aesop.), aor. αúžñσaɩ, late àɛžñoaɩ
(Nonnos). It is unfortunate that avεw and aůžávw are not treated separately in LSJ.
•DER Action nouns aŋois (IA), avšŋoía (Hdt.), aűžŋµa (Hp., E.), aűžŋ (Pl.), aúžiç
(H., v.l. in Pl. Phlb. 42d) 'increase, growth'. Agent noun aůžητý [m.] 'booster,
promotor' (Orph.), Aúžú name of a goddess of growth (Paus., Poll.).
avžíç, -ídoç [f.] ‘young of the tunny' (Phryn. Com., Arist., Nic.), see Strömberg 1943:
127, either from aчw or ažŋ.
Adjectives: avчnτкóç 'increasing, furthering' (Hp., Arist.), avччоç 'id.' (Hp., A.),
uncertain avenpóc (Nic.).
⚫ETYM Derived from the PIE root *huegs-, where the -s- is probably presentic in
origin. *h₂ueg- is found in Gm. (e.g. Go. wahsjan), Skt. vakṣáyati 'to make grow', Av.
vaxš- 'id.'.
1
!
1
!
aüpa
171
A root *h₂eug-, without -s-, is found in Lat. augeō ‘to increase (tr.)', Go. aukan, Lith.
áugti 'to grow'; the zero grade in Skt. ugrá- [adj.] ‘big, strong'. An s-stem is found in
Lat. augur ‘propheť, Skt. ójas- [n.] ‘strength', enlarged in Lat. augustus ‘venerable'.
With -s-, *h₂eugs- is found in ToB auks- 'to grow (intr.)'. Zero grade *ug-s- is found
in Skt. pres. ptc. úkṣant-, med. ukṣámāṇa-, and Av. pres. uxšiieiti 'grows'.
The conclusion to be drawn from all these forms is that *h₂eug- and *h₂ueg-s- are old,
where the full grade slot changed in the latter because of the root structure. The same
phenomenon is found in ȧλкý <*h₂elk- beside ȧλéεw < *h₂lek-s-.
avoc [adj.] 'dry' (Il.). <IE *h₂s-us- 'dry'>
•DIAL Att. avoç.
•DER Abstract avótŋs [f.] ‘drought' (Arist.); avový (Archil., A. [lyr.], Herod.), cf.
kaλλový, ǹdový (Chantraine 1933: 207).
avaλéos 'dry' (Hes., poet.) like ȧšaλéos etc.; aúnpós (AP), cf. avσtŋpóç; also avσóv.
Eŋpóv 'dry' (H.) with a suffix -s- like in puσóç, yavσóç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 454).
On avσταλéoç, aúστηpóç, see below.
Denominative verb avaívw [v.] 'to dry', also avaívw (compounded with ảл-, ảo̟-,
кaτ-, кaе-avaívw); thence avavoiç 'drying, dehydration' (Arist.), avaσμóç ‘id.'
(Hp.); avavτý name of a disease 'dehydration' (Hp.).
A primary verb seems to be implied by the gloss avw. Enpaívw ‘dry up' (Hdn.),
which finds support in ȧqavɛt (Ar. Eq. 394), unnecessarily corrected in ȧqāveĭ by
Solmsen 1901: 277, and perhaps in époσaúση (S. Ant. 619). It may be denominative,
however (Schwyzer: 723). Thence avσis (EM).
Two adjectives with related mg: avστaλéos ‘dried up' (Od.), cf. avaλéoç; and
avστηpós 'harsh' (Hp.) presuppose a verbal adj. *aðστoç; but cf. the synonym
KaÚotelpa.
⚫ETYM αvoç, avoç is cognate with Lith. sausas, OCS suxv, OE sear all 'dry'. Skt. śosa-
[m.] 'drying', assimilated from *soșa-, is secondary. Uncertain is the appurtenance of
Alb. than ‘dry', see Demiraj 1997 s.v. Forms pointing to *sus- are Skt. śúşka- = Av.
huška-, OP uška- 'dry', perhaps also Lat. sūdus 'dry, bright' < *suzd- (but see De
Vaan 2008 s.v.). From *sus-, verbs like Skt. śúṣyati, Latv. sust‘to become dry' are
derived.
Lubotsky KZ 98 (1985): 1-10 argues that the Greek form goes back on *h₂sus-. This
root shape is found in ȧvσταλéoç, which has five syllables. Lubotsky further analyzes
avoç as a perfect ptc. of *hes- 'to be dry' (not 'to burn, glow'), as seen in ä‹w and in
Lat. āreō. The reconstruction of the root has altered slightly: Lat. is from *h₂eh,s-, and
Gr. ǎw< *h₂ed-ie/o-, but this does not affect the analysis, as a zero grade *h₂h,s- is
simplified to *h2s-. Balto-Slavic and Germanic are derived from *h₂sous- with
secondary o-grade. In this way, the awkward reconstruction *saus- with PIE *a can
be avoided.
Doubtful criticism on Lubotsky by Berg and Lindeman Glotta 70 (1992): 181-196,
based on the reconstruction of a proto-hexameter; they end with assuming IE *a,
and a prothetic vowel of non-laryngeal origin, etc. See ▸ aúxµóç.
aupa [f.] usually 'breeze, fresh air' (ε 469, etc., poet.), but see below.

=== page 110 ===

172
avpi
•ETYM Kiparsky Lang. 43 (1967): 619, 626 connects ►ảṁp < *h₂eus-ēr, showing that
aupa still clearly means 'morning mist' in ε 469.
.
avpɩ [adj.] • taxέws ‘quickly' (AB 464). <?►
●COMP aṁpi-ßátās ‘walking quickly' (A. fr. 280), in the gloss αúpiẞátas. Aioxúlos to
avpi (ms. aïptov) ĖÌ TOŨ TaXÉ, Tiênơi, khí ô a’Tò, uxostagía oÜt, nơi tò
ovoμa (fr. 207 M) ταxуßµwv (H.).
⚫ETYM αúpiẞáτãç derives from aupɩ ẞαívεɩv (ßñvαι), with the suffix -τnc. Etymology
unknown. Perhaps the compound contained apɩ 'early in the morning' (see
►aupiov) and was later misunderstood. Cf. ►aúpoí.
aptov [adv.] 'tomorrow' (Il.). <IE *h₂eus-r- 'dawn'>
•DER αúpíчεv. þiуov кai τò ɛiç apιov úлεрτíеεσαι be cold or shiver; defer until
tomorrow' (H.).
•ETYM Derived from *aupt, the old locative of an r-stem also found in Lith. aušrà
'dawn', Skt. usrá- [f.] ‘morning', and, within Greek, in ►ảnp (see on ►ëwc) and ►ñpɩ.
The same stem is also found in ǎyx-aupos (vúε) ‘near the morning' (A. R. 4, 111),
perhaps for earlier *άyxaúpios, which itself would derive from the expression äyõɩ
ths aÜplov.
avpoí [?] Aayoi ["oaupoi] 'hares' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Perhaps related to apɩ. Taxέws (H.). Acc. to Keil Herm. 23 (1888): 317 and
Latte Glotta 32 (1953): 41f. we should read aúpoí (= àßpoí). λáy<v>oí. Doubtful.
aúpoσxác, -ádos ⇒ápaσxádes.
avolos aúτós.
=>
avστaλéos ⚫VAR аvστηрóç. avoç.
aŮtáp ⇒átáp, ai.
άÜTέw •VAR άÜtý. → aʊw 1.
avτíкα [adv.] 'immediately' (Il.). <GR
⚫ETYM For the ending cf. τηvíкα, ǹvíka, róka, öka, etc.; for the first element see av,
aðúv, and especially aúτóç. Cf. έavτñ¿ ‘id.' (Thgn.) from έ aútñs tñs ódoũ
(Wackernagel 1916: 414). See Monteil 1963: 296.
ȧüτμn [f.] 'breath; scent' (II.). <IE *h₂seut- 'seethe'>
•COMP vńUTUOÇ < *n-h,sut-mo-.
•DER Also άüτμηv, -έvos [m.] (Y 765, y 289).
⚫ETYM Fritz KZ 106 (1993): 288-299 solved the problem by connecting OHG siodan
'sieden', reconstructing *h₂seut-. Greek άüt- is from *h₂sut-; the o-grade *h₂sout- is
found in Go. sauþs 'sacrifice'; Fritz also gives a discussion of the semantics. Not to
äɛtµa. ‹plóž or άetµóv. tò èveñµa (H.), nor to ►ảτµós ‘steam, vapor.
aútódiov [adv.] probably ‘immediately' (only 0 449). ◄IE *dieu- ‘light of day'>
}
aúxéw
173
•ETYM In antiquity, interpreted as ε aútñç tñç ódov λóvτα. Schulze KZ 29 (1888):
258 supposed *avτó-diƑov, derived from the root *dieu- (Lat. dies, Zɛúc),
comparing aúτ-ñµаp 'on the same day', and Skt. sa-dívaḥ 'at once'. Quite possible.
avτoкáẞdaλoç [adj.] 'improvised, extempore' (Arist.); also subst. plur. 'buffoons,
improvisers' (Eup.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 316 compares кavalós. µwpoλóyos (not to Lyd. кaúŋs ‘priest', as per
Latte), with interchange Bd/ B/ F. The group -ẞ8- is almost certainly of substrate
origin. To my mind, the word is cognate with кóßāλoç, etc. (see Kuiper 1956: 215),
Fur.: 237.
avτoкpáτwp, -opos [m., f.] ‘one's own master, independent', = Lat. imperator (Th.).
<GR➤
•ETYM For older *αúτoкpατηs after the agent nouns in -twp.
avtóµatos, (-11), -ov [adj.] 'spontaneous, automatic, of one's own accord' (II.). <IE
*mn-to- 'thought'>
•ETYM Formed of aúτós and the zero grade of the root of μéμova, µéµaµεv,
►μévoç. The second member -μaτo agrees with the second element of Lat.
commentus and with Skt. matá-, Lith. miñtas ‘thought', etc. Cf. Chantraine 1933:
303f., Schwyzer: 502f.
avτós [pron.] 'self' (Il.), ó aúτós ‘the same'; in the oblique cases also as an anaphorical
pronoun of the 3rd person. <IE *heu ‘again' + *to- ‘that'➤
•COMP Very many compounds; cf. Sommer 1948: 83ff., 153ff. and DELG s.v. See
►кασíуνητoç, aúτódiov, ▶aútóμatos.
•DER avtítηs (sc. olvoc) ‘local wine(?)', see Redard 1949: 96; also 'all alone' (Arist.,
hapax); aúτóτηs [f.] 'identity' (S. E.), taútótŋs [f.] ‘id.' (Arist.). Denominative verbs:
τаúτóоμαι 'to become identified' (Dam., Procl.), τaúτíčш [v.] 'to use as a synonym'
(Procl., Eust.).
aűτwç [adv.] ‘just like, like it was, merely, etc.' (for the accent see Schwyzer: 384);
avσчoç ‘idle, in vain' (Ibykos) reminds of aúτóμaτoç.
See further aútóði, ► aútíka.
•ETYM Risch 1937: 312 derives it from *að tóv. On Go. auþs, auþeis, MoHG öde, etc.
see Mezger KZ 82 (1968): 288ff.
.
avɣáttæv [v.] · ávaxwpeïv kaì tò ¿µµéveiv ¿yxátteν 'to go back' (H.). ◄GR►
•DIAL Doric
ETYM The forms are Cretan, with -ɣáττяv standing for xácɛv (Buck 1955: 71). It is
supposed that av-, as a prefix, corresponds with Lat. au- (e.g. auferō), Lith. au-, Slav.
u-. See ‣ av.
▶
auxéw [v.] 'to boast' (Hdt.). <?>
●COMP KEVE-AUXŃs ‘idle boasting' (Il.).
•DER auxημa 'boasting' (Pi., S., Th.), whence aúуηµаτíaç 'boaster' (sch., Eust.) and
aʊõŋµatiкóç (Eust.); axŋσiç ‘id.' (Th., Aq.); back-formation auxη ‘boasting, pride'
(Pi.), aúxáv. кaúησ 'boasting' (H.), wrong Güntert 1914: 153f.; aúxýεs (Opp., AP);

=== page 111 ===

174
avxýv, -évos
àpalltal
175
auxos ‘id.' (sch.). aúxaλéos [adj.] ‘boasting, proud' (Xenoph., H.), cf. apoaλéos to
Đápσoç, Bapσɛiv); avxntýs [m.] ‘boaster' (Poll.), aúŋtɩkós ‘boasting' (sch.).
•ETYM Unrelated to ɛxoµaɩ, which goes back on a root *h,uegh. Adontz 1937: 10
derived the word from aúxηv, assuming an original sense 'to keep one's neck
proudly'; unconvincing formally as well as semantically. On Oettinger's connection
with Hitt. huek-zi / huk- ‘to conjure, treat by incantation' is followed with due
hesitation by Kloekhorst 2008 s.v., as formal (*h₂ugh- > Gr. ÚX-) as well as semantic
objections can be made against it. Discussion in Peters 1980a: 18ff.
Fur.: 391 considers non-IE origin, connecting кauxáoμal with interchange к-/zero.
Probably from a Pre-Greek uvular, see Pre-Greek.
aʊxýv, -évos [m.] ‘neck, throat; isthmus' (II.). ◄IE? *h₂emg"-u- ‘narrowness'>
VAR Aeol. acc. ǎupɛva (Theoc. 30. 28), avoηy in Jo. Gramm. Comp. 3, 16 is very
doubtful, cf. Solmsen 1909: 1182. Further äшoηv. aúxηv, τpáxηλos 'neck, throat' (H.);
also àµôýv. aúλýv ‘id.' (H.).
•DER auxέvios 'of the neck' (Od.), diminutive auxέviov (An. Ox., Eust.), auxɛvíaç
[m.] 'provided with bull's necks' (gloss.). Denominative verb auxεvíw [v.] 'to cut the
throat' (S.), 'to bind by the throat' (Ph., Hippiatr.), whence auxεviστnp [m.] (Lyc.,
Hippiatr.).
•ETYM The variants äuoηy and aúxηv are generally assumed to reflect *amgh-en
with assimilatory loss of nasality in auxηv (Pisani Ric. ling. 1 (1950): 182f., most
recently Pronk fthc.a). The Greek words are then derived from the IE u-stem
adjective reflected in Skt. amhú-, OCS o̟zök, Go. aggwus 'narrow', which derive
from the root *h₂emg"-, see ǎyxw. One further connects Arm. awji-k' [pl.] 'neck',
with a similar assimilation of the nasal to the following labiovelar, which is a
controversial development (see Clackson 1994: 107ff.).
Alternatively, the variants may show that the word is Pre-Greek. Variation
labial/velar, however, is rare (Fur.: 388, q/xwpiaµós, but cf. yéqupa/ ßéqupa); also
a/av is rare; μ/F occurs mostly before n or intervocalically (Fur.: 242-247).
Therefore, I think we must compare the type Sάovη / Savxva-, which Fur.: 229-233
explains as showing variation labial/Ƒ. In my opinion, these forms had a labiovelar
*gh, which either gave o (in Aeolic) or -vx- with anticipation of the labial element
(see Pre-Greek). So we have *ao-ηv beside av-xηv; ǎup-ηy then shows the well-
known prenasalization.
The Armenian form does not prove IE origin, as it can be a loan from an Anatolian
language, cf. yéqupa - kamurj (Beekes Glotta 78 (2004)).
avxuós [m.] 'drought; squalor' (Hp.). <GR>
•DER avxµηpós ‘dry, dirty' (Hp.; Chantraine 1933: 232f.), whence rare abstracts
aúxµnpótns, avxµnpía, aúxµñpódns; aúxµwdns ‘id.' (Hdt., E., Arist.). Hapax
aúxuñεç (h. Hom. 19, 6); aúxuαλéos (Choeril., Amynt.), after aαλéos etc.
Denominative auxµéw [v.] 'to be dry, dirty' (Od., IA), also avxµáw. aʊxµwʊiç ‘dirť'
(Gal. 16, 88) is probably an enlargement of aúxμós. Late by-form avxµý [f.] (Q. S.,
Phryn.).
į
⚫ETYM A compound of avoç 'dry' and -xμ- from the word for earth (see ►x0wv),
see Pronk fthc.a. A similar formation may be preserved in vεo-xμ-ós ‘new³, see
Wackernagel KZ 33 (1895): 1f.
avw 1 [v.] 'to cry aloud, call' (II.). ◄ ?►
•VAR The v is long everywhere. Ipf. avε (dissyllabic), mostly aor. åσal, fut. άvσw.
•DER άÜτn (battle) cry' (cf. Trümpy 1950: 153ff.), Corcyr. αFuτα, with ȧüτéw = aw
(II.), only pres. except for late ηüτŋσa (Nonn., Epigr. Gr.); à¨τéw can either be
denominative from ȧüτη or deverbative from aűw (Schwyzer: 705f.). Also avový
'shouting' (Semon. 7, 20).
⚫ETYM The word may be onomatopoeic, but nothing more can be said. Specht KZ 59
(1932): 121 mentioned äßα. τpoxòs ǹ Boń (H.).
avw 2 [v.] 'to get a light, light a fire' (ε 490). On the mg. Borthwick Class. Quart. 63
(1969): 296. IE *h₂eus- 'scoop, take'.>
●DIAL Myc. pu-ra-u-to-ro/puraustrō/ [du.], žvavov. žvėɛç, Kúëpioɩ ‘put in(to) [ipv.]'
(H.).
●COMP έvaúw ‘to kindle' (Hdt.), med. 'to scoop fire' (IA); έvavoµa ‘spark, etc.' (Hell.)
and vavois (Plu. Cim. 10), also of drawing water; έžañoαɩ• ¿ɛɛïv ‘to take out' (H.,
Pl. Com.), whence avoτp 'fire-tongs, кpɛáуpа' (A., inscr.); кατañσαι·
katavtλñoaɩ (cod. katavλñσai), kaτadñσaɩ ‘to pour down, go down' (H.); also
кa añσaι. áчavioa 'to hide' (H.).
Uncertain are кataúσɛis (Alcm. 95) and лpoσaúση (S. Ant. 619 [lyr.]).
Further upαúστηs [m.] 'moth that gets singed in a candle' (A.), лuрaúστpa [f.] ‘pair
of fire-tongs', núpavoτpov [n.] ‘id.' (Herod.), cod. лúpαστpov; all from ëũρ αʊɛv
(see the Myc. form above). With analogical loss of σ: yoɩvatɩç. oivoxón 'vessel (for
pouring wine)' (H.).
•ETYM auw may be from *h₂eus-e/o- or from *h₂eus-ie/o-; most Greek forms show
psilosis. IE cognates are ON ausa 'to scoop' <*ausanan and Lat. hauriō 'to scoop'
(with hypercorrect h-). The predominant connection with fire seems to be a
secondary development of Greek. See ►ȧqúσow.
avw 3 ⇒iavw.
:
avw 4 →avoç.
áqadía [f.] enmity' (Eup. 34). <GR>
•DER ǎqados ‘displeasing, odious' (EM) and acádioç ‘id.' (Hdn.).
⚫ETYM Derivations from ȧqavdávw, ȧqadɛīv (Od.); see ►ávdávw.
ảo̟áкŋ [f.] ‘vetch, Vicia angustifolia' (Pherecr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ǎqaкos (Schwyzer 1950: 30).
⚫ETYM Dsc. and Galen think it comes from qaкóç ‘lentil'. The suggestion by Fur.: 373
is attractive: he takes ȧ- as a prothetic vowel and considers the word to be a substrate
word (note the change of inflection -os: -n). Likewise Pisani Paideia 11 (1956): 296.
àqaµɩñtai [m.pl.] slaves in Crete (Str.). Also άqajuwtai. oikétaɩ άypoĩкoɩ ‘rural
household slaves' (H.). ◄GR►

=== page 112 ===

176
ăpap
•ETYM Literally, ‘those in a state of άqaµía (= άoŋµía)' who have no onμn. Cf.
áqnµoñvtas. ȧypoíkovs (H.).
apap [adv.] 'forthwith, immediately' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ảqvós. ¿šaíqvns ‘suddenly' (H.).
●DER ȧqάpτεpos (Y 311) 'quicker'; ȧqapɛí (åœápɛɩ DELG). τaxέws kaì ảкórws
'quickly and indefatigably' (EM, H., Suid.).
•ETYM One connects äqvw, assuming a neuter r/n-stem. Van Windekens 1941: 28
connects Go. abrs 'strong', comparing for the meaning MoE fast. Fur. (see index)
brilliantly connected έaiovηs and ►εžαлívηs, and further alva, -ŋpóç, assuming a
substrate element with variation α/ αɩ, л/ Q. He also connected ►αiлúç etc., which is
quite possible (cf. MoHG jäh, both 'steep' and 'immediate').
ȧqapɛús [m.] 'belly-fin of the female tunny' (Arist. HA 543a, uncertain), τo е½λεos
Đúvvou tò úïò tñ yaotpì rtepúylov ‘id.' (H.). <PG? (V) ►
ETYM Fur.: 174 compares åẞapταí· лτηvαí, Kúлрto 'flying, wings'; for -τoç in
substrate words see äτpaктoç, äσoaλτoç. The suggestion in DELG that it could
belong with äppap is ununderstandable.
ȧopáρкn [f.] name of an evergreen tree, 'Arbutus hybrida' (Thphr.). <PG?(V)►
⚫ETYM Improbable theory by Strömberg 1944: 27ff. (compound from ȧлo- and
ǎpkus), see Frisk. Unclear is άapкíðɛτov. άypεvτóv, áðvσíaστov 'caught,
unsacrificeď (H.), see DELG. Fur.: 175 refers to Schwyzer: 530, comparing Thess.
Dapкadwv, which would point to a prothetic vowel. A substrate word is probable
anyhow.
ȧqάσow •VAR άqάw. → äntw.
ȧqatɛɩv [?] uncertain (IG 5(1), 209: 34); not an infinitive, see Bourguet 1927: 110, 4 and
124, 1. <?
•ETYM Unknown.
ȧqaupós [adj.] 'weak' (II.). <PG(V) ►
•DER ȧaupóτηs [f.] (Anaxag.). Denominative verb aqaupoτal (Erot., v.l.
ȧμavρoбται), as an explanation of άμαλdúvεταi 'becomes weak'.
•ETYM Unknown. These words are often explained as contaminations (see Frisk), but
there is no reason to assume such processes; it only testifies to our ignorance. Much
more probably, Fur.: 330 compares paupoç. кouçoç 'light' (H.), qλaupoç 'indifferent,
bad' (with inserted λ?) and paulos ‘insignificant'. I would suggest that άчavpóç /
μaupóç is also cognate (with interchange μ/ labial stop, cf. e.g. λaqúσσw/ λaµvpóç,
etc., see Fur.: 224ff.). Note the v.l. of the verb cited above, and note that -aupos can
hardly represent something IE (*-eh₂u-ro-?).
άqelńs, -és [adj.] ‘plain, simple' (IA). <GR>
•DER ȧqελɛa, -ɛíŋ [f.] (Hp.), late apελóτŋs [f.] (Act. Ap., Vett. Val.); Chantraine
1933: 298.
•ETYM Highly improbable is the proposal by Persson 1912(2): 797³, who connects
Qɛɛús 'stony terrain' and analyzes it as 'without a stone, even'. This etymology is
ăpla
177
even given by LSJ as the meaning of the word! Chantraine points to the geminate in
Qɛɛúc. New analysis by Taillardat RPh. 71 (1997): 153f., see DELG Supp.: the word
means 'without quality', be it positive or negative, and is derived from ȧqɛɛiv 'to
take away, deprive'.
aqɛvos [n.] 'wealth' (II.). <IE? *h₂ben- 'rich'>
VAR Also msc., after лλочτоç, acc. to Fehrle PhW 46 (1926): 700f.
•COMP εηεvns (II.); the better attested v.l. εúηyεvns can hardly be correct, see
Bechtel 1914. As a second member in the PNs At-, Kλɛ-, Tɩµ-aqévns.
•DER With loss of vowel and remarkable final accent: άovɛtós (II.), also άqvɛóç ‘rich'
(II.). Thence back-formation äqvos [n.] (Pi. fr. 219). Lengthened άovýµwv (Antim.),
after лоλUкτηдwv, etc.
Denominative verb åôvúɛ, åðvúvæɩ· óλßíɛɩ ‘is blisseď (H.); þudòv áovúvovtal·
лλоυτобσɩу 'aгe wealthy' (Suid.).
•ETYM The old connection with Skt. ápnas- [n.] 'possessions, riches' is now generally
rejected. ǎqɛvos was one of the corner stones of the Pelasgian theory, which must
now be abandoned (see my Introduction).
The agreement with Hitt. happina(nt)- ‘rich' is remarkable, but cannot be correct in
view of the more likely comparison with Lat. ops 'power', opulentus 'wealthy' (which
is probably not directly related to the Hitt. word, see De Vaan 2008 s.v. ops).
Balles KZ 110 (1997) starts from *n-gwn-o-, parallel to a formation in -io- in Skt.
ághnya (the valuable animal which is) not to be killed'. She explains the adjective
with final accent from *ngwn-es-ó-> ȧovɛó-, with metrical lengthening in Homer.
However, the explanation of the full grade as analogical after σ0évoç is improbable;
the whole construction is not convincing.
The Greek word looks IE (ablaut; cf. also archaic εúŋevés). For Greek a root
*h₂ben- is the obvious reconstruction. The accent and the form aqvɛós may be
explained following Balles: *h2b^nes-ó-, with ablaut as in "λyos / åλɛyɛvós (metrical
lengthening in Homer is probable as *aqvɛoto is impossible in the hexameter and
*άovɛoç, -v, etc. are difficult). The recent attempt to connect appεvos with IE *h₂ebh-
'stream' by Willi 2004 does not convince.
It cannot be connected with the Hittite word (reading *hpina- is doubtful). A loan
from Anatolian would probably have к-, and the o, the s-stem, and the adjective
would be unclear.
àqńtwp, -opos [m.] epithet of Apollo (I 404). <GR➤
•VAR άqŋtopɛía. μаvτεíа 'power of divination' (H.). σas̟é̟τwp. µávtis åλŋ¤ýs,
finvútns, Épfnveús 'true diviner, informer, interpreter' (H.).
⚫ETYM Eustathios and the scholia explained it, among other things, as ‘prophet'
(Eust. óµoo̟é̟τwp), i.e. from copulative α- and opŋuí. This cannot be correct. It rather
derives from ȧpínu, in the sense 'who sends off. This could well mean 'archer' ('to
discharge). Kraus Wien. Ak. Anz. 87: 516ff. suggests 'who sends off people on a
journey'.
äqða [f.] a pedriatic illness, 'thrush' (Hp.). <PG?►
•VAR Mostly plur. ǎqai.

=== page 113 ===

178
àpia
ȧopós
179
●DER ȧqеwdns, áóðáw (Hp.).
•ETYM Hardly related to äлτw. Fur.: 3185 thinks it is a substrate word because of the
group -0- (but I see no reason to follow him in supposing that the dental is
secondary).
aqía [f.] ‘lesser celandine, Ranunculus ficaria' (Thphr. HP 7, 7, 3). ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM The connection with aquévai (tò ǎvos) in Thphr. is untenable. The word is
rather a loan. Krahe 1955: 44 connected Lat. apium 'parsley' (further to *ap- ‘water').
Fur: 167 objects that these are quite different plants. Himself, he proposes to
compare äoppiσσa ‘id.' (Apul. Herb. 15), see ibid.: 330, with parallels for the insertion
of-p-.
àqías [?] · ßwµós ‘step, altar' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown; Maaß Arch. f. Religionswiss. 23 (1925): 228 can be forgotten.
ǎqlaσtov [n.] ‘curved poop of a ship, with its ornaments' (O 717, Hdt.). ◄PG?►
⚫ETYM Bechtel 1921(3): 285 posited ‘that which prevents destruction', from privative
ȧ- and pλáw; improbable. Rather Pre-Greek, thus already Hermann Gött. Nachr.
(1943): 1f. For a PG suffix -τo- cf. ►ǎtpaktoç. Borrowed from Greek: Lat. aplustr(i)a,
-ōrum.
ȧqletñpes →qléw.
àqλoσµóc [m.] 'foaming at the mouth' (O 607). <?>
•ETYM Possibly a verbal noun in -σμós to εqidεv. diéppeεv 'flowed out'; cf.
diañéqλoide v. diaкéxvtaɩ ‘has been poured out'; лεloidévai· pluktaɩvoñσðaɩ ‘to
have blisters' (H.), etc., see ▸olidáw. Is the ȧ- copulative, or after ►åœpós ‘id.'?
äqvw [adv.] 'suddenly' (A.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Late ǎqvwç (Epigr. Gr. 468; Schwyzer: 405, 624³).
⚫ETYM Related to ǎqap; often interpreted as a frozen case form of a heteroclitic
stem (Schwyzer: 520). More probable is Furnée's brilliant proposal to connect
έžaiovŋs and ►εaлívηs, etc. By-forms are άovós. чaíovns (Schwyzer: 624) and
ȧqvídia. ȧqvídav, äqvw (both H.); on aiqvidios cf. ► aïqvns.
ȧqópdiov [n.] 'excrement' (yaστpóç, Nic.). ◄?►
⚫ETYM Frisk suggests that it is from *ȧpódiov (äpodos ‘excrements'), reshaped
euphemistically (after pópoc) or drastically (after opεn)? Not entirely convincing.
äoppa [f.] 'kind of plaster' (Aët. 15, 14). ◄GR▷
⚫ETYM Perhaps a shortening of Appodíτη in the same sense (Aetius).
àqpatías [m.] · ioxupós. Kpñteç ‘strong (Cretan)' (H.). ◄?►
•ETYM Latte corrects to ȧopaττíaç, a development of *åöpaкɩɩāç, from äqpaktos.
Uncertain.
.
ȧopious [acc.pl.m.] · à¤έpaç ‘chaff (H.). <IE? *He/ob¹ri- ‘awn'>
⚫ETYM Hoffmann BB 18 (1892): 287 compared Skt. ábhri- 'hoe, pickaxe', which
Wackernagel accepts, see Latte's edition of Hesychius. However, Szemerényi
Gnomon 43 (1971): 658 rightly asks whether the meanings are compatible.
.
äppis · µúptov (H.), i.e. pudendum muliebre. <GR▷
⚫ETYM Hypocoristicon of Aphrodite (DELG).
ǎoppioσa [f.] a plant = ȧσкληлáç (Apul. Herb. 15). <PG(S,V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 330 connects ►ápía. The suffix -too- suggests a Pre-Greek word.
Aopodiτn [f.] goddess of love (Il.). <LW Sem.?>
•DIAL Cypr. Aqopodíτa, Cret. Aqopdita.
⚫DER Appodiτáptov an eyesalve (Gal.), Apodiτapídiov ‘darling' (Pl. Com.); adj.
Aoppodioios belonging to A.' (IA), substantivized Aopodiotov 'temple of A.';
ȧopodioia [n.pl.] 'sexual intercourse', άopodiolaкóç; denominative άqpodioiá【w [v.]
'to have intercourse' (IA), whence apodioαoμó, pois 'lecher',
ȧqpodioiaσtikós.
For Apppodioiaστai 'worshippers of A.' (Rhodos), cf. Алоλλwviασταl.
•ETYM The connection with appós (Kretschmer KZ 33 (1895): 267) and other older
explanations (e.g. Maaß N. Jb. f. d. klass. Altertum 27 (1924): 457ff.) are now
abandoned. A recent Indo-European attempt was made by Witczak 1993: 115-123.
As the goddess seems to be of oriental origin (see Burkert 1985: 152ff.), the name
probably comes from the East too. A possibility is the Semitic name of the goddess
Aštoret, Astarte; cf. Burkert op. cit. 248¹8. It may have entered Greek via another
language. Less probable is the connection with Pre-Greek лpútavɩç, Etr. (e)pr9ni as
lady, mistress' by Hammarström Glotta 11 (1921): 215f.
West Glotta 76 (1998): 134-138 rejects the idea that the name renders Aštart (Ugaritic
'Attartu), but he thinks it may well be of Semitic origin. It is not easy either to
connect the root prd, from which a word for 'pigeon' was formed. West ends with
the suggestion that the name may have rendered a title 'She of the villages', but this
seems not very adequate. Still, it seems possible that the name came from the one
languages which on historical grounds we should expect to be relevant: Cypriot
Phoenician.
ȧoppós [m.] 'foam, slaver' (Il.). <?>
•DER άqpwdns 'foaming' (Hp.), ȧoppɩóɛ ‘id.' (Nic.; metri causa, see Chantraine 1933:
272). ȧqpītis, -idos f. ‘kind of åqúŋ' (Arist.), see Redard 1949: 81.
Denominatives άopέw [v.] 'to foam' (II.), àœpíšw ‘id.' (IA), whence appσµós
(medic.) and ȧoppiotýc [m.] (AP); àœptáw [v.] ‘id.' (Opp.); àœpóoµaɩ [v.] ‘id.' (Theol.
Ar.).
•ETYM Meillet BSL 31 (1931): 51f. connected Arm. p'rp'ur ‘foam' (which does not
belong to σлɛipw), but the ả- is problematic (*h₂- would give a- in Armenian), and
the *bh presupposed by Greek did not give p'. Not to Skt. abhrá- [n.] ‘cloud' (because
of the meaning), not to ►öµßpos, because the rule of de-aspiration before resonant is
not valid. Not here άopious. à¤épas (H.).

=== page 114 ===

180
àpún
ảqúŋ [f.] ‘small fry of various fishes' (Epich., Ar.), only plur. in Att. acc. to H. s.v.
άqúшν τчń. See Thompson 1947: 19f. ◄IE *b¹h₂u- ‘grow'>
•VAR Mostly plural. Also ȧqúa, cf. ȧqúa. µeµßpás ‘sprať (H.). The gen.pl. is åqúwv,
not-wv, which means it is ntr.
•DIAL Perhaps Myc. a-pu₂-we, -de (TNs)/Ap³uwei/, /Ap¹ūn-de/; see below.
•DER ȧqúdiov (Ar.), with u (see Schwyzer: 199); ȧquwdηs 'whitish' (Hp.).
Denominative ȧqúw [v.] 'to become whitish' (Hp.); see Chantraine 1933: 431.
⚫ETYM From privative ȧ- and qúw (one compares nonnats 'Aphua pellucida' in Nice)
seems folk etymology, but is defended by Meier-Brügger MSS 52 (1991): 123-125: *ṇ-
buH-o- 'without growth' (the root is actually *bh₂u-), which is a recent formation
compared with Skt. ábhva- 'monster' < *ṇ-b¹h₂u-o- (with loss of laryngeal). The
accentuation of the gen. pl. ȧqúwv (not -wv, Hdn. Gr. 1. 425, 13) points to an
unextended stem ȧqu- (nom. *ȧqυ-c), cf. quyń, qúya-dɛ. DELG also keeps open the
possibility of a substrate word.
ȧqvoyɛtós [m.] 'mud', carried by a stream (A 495). <?►
•VAR As an adj. 'filthy' (Nic. Al. 432), but ȧquσyɛτóv is better; also 'abundant' (ibid.
584). ȧqúσyεtos (Tyrannion).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Nicander did not understand the meaning any longer, and
connected it with ȧqúσow. Formation like ouрQετós (Schwyzer: 501, Chantraine
1933: 300).
ȧqúσow [v.] 'to draw or scoop liquids' (II.). <?>
•VAR Also ȧqúw in έ-aqúovtɛç (95), εαqúovσiv· εžavτλýσovσɩv 'they will drain'
(H.); aor. ảút(o)ai, fut. ảquặc.
●DER άqvoµós (Suid.) and άôúðчos (sch.), also άúžчo (Nic.) with transition to
the flexion with velar.
äqvooav. tǹv kotúλŋv <лapà> Tapavtívoɩç ‘cup (Tarantine)' (H.). Also áqúσta.
kotúλn, otáµvos ‘cup, jar' (H.) and άqutpís (cod. άqútpic). ápútaiva (cod. ǎpлaivα)
'ladle or cup' (H.). Uncertain кατηvdpáqvžas. katéktɛvaç (H.).
⚫ETYM Oehler (see Schulze 1892: 311) explained the form as ȧo + vo- < *h₂us-, the
zero grade of avo- found in avw 2 'to light a fire' and Lat. hauriō < *h₂(e)us-, which
is quite possible. The presents àqúσow and ȧqúw are probably derived from the
aorist.
Axaчuévηs [m.] Achaimenes, ancestor of the Persian royal house (Hdt.). <LW
Persian‣
•VAR Gen. -EOS, -OUS.
•DER Axαчevídaι [pl.] descendents of A., a Persian clan to which the Persian kings
belonged (Hdt.); Axaчévoç ‘Persian' (A. Pl.); Axaчεvía a part of Persia (St. Byz.);
Axaчevītis [f.] epithet of Babylon (Epiphan.). ȧxaчɛvíç, -ídos [f.] a plant (Ps.-Dsc.);
see Strömberg 1940: 134ff. and André 1956 s.v. achaemenis.
⚫ETYM From OP Haxāmaniš, which probably means 'having the mind (-man-) of a
friend'. Greek -α- in Аxα-μévηs (instead of -ā- in Haxā-maniš is probably an
adaptation to names like Taλaɩ-μévng, IIvλai-µévns, etc. (Schwyzer: 448). Jacobsohn
ȧxapvwç, -w
181
KZ 54 (1927): 261f. explained -at- from the stem haxāi- = Skt. sakhāy- ‘friend, which
is cognate with Lat. socius.
àxaívɛɩ [v.] · σaíveɩ, naišɛɩ, koλakevɛɩ ‘fawns, plays, flatters' (H.). <?►
•ETYM No etymology.
axaívn [f.] 'kind of bread, made by women for the Thesmophoria' (Semus 13). <?►
ETYM No etymology.
ȧxaïvηs, -ov [m.] 'brocket, two-year-old stag' (Arist.). <?>
•VAR άxaïvŋ [f.], also άxaïvη ‘roe' (Arist.).
•DER ȧxauvén [f.] 'deerskin' (A. R.).
•ETYM The word has been derived from Axata, the supposed habitat of the animal;
cf. Keller 1909: 350; Keller 1887: 77, 79, 91. Brands 1935: 81 points to EM, sch. A. R. 4,
175, who derive it from a town Axauvéa in Crete.
Axatoi [m.pl.] name of a Greek tribe (II.). <PG?>
•VAR Sg. Axαiós ‘Achaean', fem. Axataí, sing. -á (see Schwyzer: 460).
•DER Axaïïç, -ídos [f.] (scil. yaĩa) 'the land Achaea' or 'the Achaean woman' (scil.
yuvń), also Axaïïáç [f.] (II.); Axaïïкóç, Att. Axäïkóç (cf. Schwyzer: 265f.) ‘Achaean';
Axain, Att. Axaïa [f.], the Thessalian and Peloponnesian regions ‘Achaea'; also a
town (Rhodos, etc.), perhaps trisyllabic.
•ETYM The name Axatoi < AxaiƑoí (cf. Lat. Achīvī) is known from Egyptian sources
as ''jw's, to be read as Aqaiwaša, and also in Hitt. Ahhija, later Aḥhijaua (e.g.
Kretschmer Glotta 21 (1933): 227). In spite of strong opposition (e.g. Sommer 1934,
Sommer IF 55 (1937): 169ff.), the equation is now generally accepted, but the Hittite
form has not been satisfactorily explained (why is there no reflex of the second a in
Hittite?). Recenly, Finkelberg Glotta 66 (1988): 127-134 derived the Greek form from
Hitt. Ahhiiaua, with -hii̟- giving X, but this is doubtful. The name is no doubt Pre-
Greek, e.g. /Akaywa-/.
άxáλov [n.] a plant, = oidypītic, åλðaía (Hippiatr. 11), but these are two different
plants; they are both used as medicaments. <?>
ETYM No etymology.
άxávŋ [f.] name of a measure = 45 μéðчvo (Ar.); ‘chest, box' (Phanod.). <?►
•ETYM Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 54 compares Eg. hn 'chest' (Akk. hannū).
Fur.: 138 compared Hitt. (Hurr.) aganni, but this means 'bowl' (and is connected
with Akk. agannu ‘bowl', Kronasser 1962-1987: 245, and with Eg. 'ikn 'pot'). He also
compares ȧyávvα⋅ ǎµažα <iɛpà> кaí ǹ év oúpav@ аρктоç (H.) (with ǎuaža taken as
'box'; and the Bear seen as a box?); ibid.: 392, he compares λaxávva (H.). No
solution can be offered.
ȧxapvós, -w [m.] a sea fish, = opowç, perhaps 'bass' (Callias Com. 3). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also ǎxapvos; άxápvās, with gen. ȧxápvov (Arist. fr. 566). Comparable forms:
áxápva. ɛïdoç ix¤úos ‘kind of fish' (H.), ȧxépva (cod. -λα)· ¡×еùç лotós ‘id.' (H.);
άkapváv (Ath.), áкápvaž· λáßpač ‘bass' (H.).

=== page 115 ===

182
áyátns, -ov
⚫ETYM The variation X/к and the ending -w(s) point to Pre-Greek origin; the group
-pv- is also frequent in such words. Cf. Thompson 1947: 6f.
ȧxắtηs, -ov [m.] ‘agate' (Thphr.). <LW>
àxáns,
⚫ETYM Borrowing from an unknown source. Semitic etymology in Lewy 1895: 56. The
river Achates on Sicily and the PN Achates are probably called after the stone.
äxɛpdos [f.] ‘wild pear, Pyrus amygdaliformis' (Od.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also [m.] (Theoc.); ȧyέpda (cod. -αα). äлoç, övη 'pear-tree, pear' (H.).
äxηpov. ȧкpída Kρñτεç ‘locust (Cretan)' (H.), with Cretan development ɛpd > ŋp;
ȧkpída is changed by Latte into ȧxpáda, which is doubtful; cf. ► áкpíç.
⚫ETYM Theoretically, ȧyépda could be Macedonian, but there are no further
indications.
Comprared with Alb. dardhë 'pear' < *ghord-. In this case, the ȧ- must be a real
prothetic vowel, and the word a non-IE loan word. Connection with ȧxpáç is
evident.
àxepwïç, -ídos [f.] ‘white poplar, Populus alba' (Il.). <PG?►
⚫ETYM Connection of -wis (< *-ōsis) with Lith. úosis ‘'ash' is most improbable.
Derivation from Axépwv is a mere formal guess. The stem άxɛpw- suggests a Pre-
Greek word (type ►ňpws; cf. on ►áxapvws).
Axépwv, -ovτos [m.] name of several rivers, also the mythical river of the Underworld
(Od.). <?>
●DER AXεpoúσios (A.), fem. -tás (Pl., X.); younger Axεpóvt(ε)чos, fem. -tác (E.).
•ETYM Connected with the Balto-Slavic group of Lith. ēžeras, āžeras, OPr. assaran,
OCS jezero ‘lake', under the influence of which Axέpwv has been interpreted as
'forming lakes'. Acc. to Derksen 2008 s.v., the BSI. group may be related to the group
of Lith. ežià 'boundary(-strip)', ORu. ězú ‘fish weir', and also with Arm. ezr ‘bank,
border' as PIE *h,egh- (the group of Lith. ežeras then goes back to *h,og"-er-o-). This
reconstruction implies that the Greek name cannot be related, in view of its initial
A-. The gloss ȧxɛpoúσia. üdata έλwdŋ 'marshy waters' may be based on ideas of the
Underworld river, and cannot be used as a testimony for the original meaning of the
name.
ȧxεúw⇒ǎxvvμai.
ǎxnv, -ñvos [m.] 'poor' (Theocr.), a Doric word. <PG? (S) ►
•VAR άε×ñvεç· лévητεç (day-)laborers, poor (men)' (H.) must be due to folk
etymology (privative a and ëxw).
•DIAL ÉXÑVES• KEVoi, лwɣoi ‘bereft, beggar(ly)' (H.) must be from IA.
●COMP KTEAV-ĤXNs. ´évès ‘(day-)laborer, poor (man)' (H.).
•DER ȧxnvía 'poverty, lack' (A.), with short a- after the negation. Other formation in
άxnvɛïç• kevoí (H.); verb ηávш· лτwуɛúw 'to beg' (Suid.), perhaps to be read *ixávw,
see below. Also άxatos (IG 3, 1385)?
ETYM Connection with ixaváw 'desire' (Hom.) has been proposed (cf. Wackernagel
1897: 11f.), with an alternation ī / ā. Indo-Iranian forms with a similar alternation
AXI入入eÚs
183
exist: Skt. ihate 'to desire', Av. iziieiti 'to strive, long for' beside Av. āzi- [m.] 'desire',
etc. In laryngealistic terms, this alternation would continue *h₂e-h₂g"- beside *h¸i-
h₂g"-. But if Av. aēzah- 'desire' belongs to this group rather than Av. āzi-, which is far
more likely, the root should be reconstructed as *Heigh- (Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 273)
and Greek άxηv cannot be connected. ToA ākāl, ToB akālk ‘desire' are supposed to
be Iranian loans.
Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 659 proposes that άxúv is from ȧ-ex- (doubtful). Not
related to "xap (A.), which has short t-.
Since an IE etymology is unknown, the word might be Pre-Greek (Chantraine 1933:
166: "vocabulaire technique et populaire"; "cette fois encore il semble s'être produit
une collision entre un suffixe indo-européen et une finale méditerranéenne"). IE
adjectives in -v, -vos are hardly known (cf. Chantraine ibid.), but the suffix is well-
known in Pre-Greek, cf. ►άτшýν and see Fur.: 172118.
äxoчaι [v.] 'to be loaded', mostly of mental oppression: 'to be vexed or grieved' (Il.).
◄IE *h₂ed¹gh- 'squeeze, (op)press'>
•VAR Аor. á×еεσðñvai.
•DER ǎxos [n.] 'load', also metaph. 'burden, trouble' (Il.). Thence ȧvós
‘burdensome' (E., X.), and rare forms like å×¤ŋpós (Antiph. 94, uncertain), åxßñɛis
(Marc. Sid. 96), ȧxе½µwv (Man. 4, 501). Denominative verb ȧxíw 'to load (Babr.),
perhaps ȧxonσas (for ȧxíσaç?). yoдшσаç, йуovν лληpwoas 'stuffed, filled' (H.).
ȧxondwv, -óvos [f.] 'weight, burden' (A.); cf. ȧλyηdóv.
•ETYM Former comparisons (äxßos ‘load' with ayw ‘to carry'; ǎ×¤µα ‘to be grieveď
with ǎo̟дα, ǎvчμα 'to be sad' were formally not very convincing (a verbal suffix
-0- is not well represented). One also compared oxέw, but this is more plausibly
connected with xoμ to be hated'.
Risch IF 69 (1964): 78 etymologically connected äxoµα with Hitt. ḥatk-¹ ‘to shut,
close, make tight', which would mean that we have to reconstruct *h₂ed¹gh-. Both
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. and Puhvel HED s.v. accept this etymology, noting that it is
corroborated by the fact that neither the -t- nor the -k- is ever spelled with a
geminate in Hittite. The meaning 'to shut' in Hittite must have developed from 'to
squeeze'.
AXIAɛúc [m.] the son of Peleus and Thetis (II.). <PG>
•VAR Also Axiλɛús (Il.).
•DIAL Myc. a-ki-re-u, dat. a-ki-re-we.
•der Axiλλñïos (Hdt.), Att. Axíλλɛos (E.); also a plant.
•ETYM The variation \\ ~ λ (like σσ ~ σ in Odvσ(σ)εúc) is typical of Pre-Greek
words, and probably points to a palatalized phoneme /ly. Any metrical explanation
of the origin of this interchange is vicious. I do not believe that the name is
hypocoristic for an older compound, or that it belongs to ►ǎxos 'pain'.
Holland Glotta 71 (1993): 17-27 gives a new proposal for Achilles. He connects it
again with ǎxos, though he admits that it does not mean 'fear' as in Germanic:
although he translates it as 'grief in some passages, in Greek it means 'distress'. He
cites instances where Homer mentions the axos of Achilles, but these can easily be

=== page 116 ===

184
ax入ós, -Úos
understood as folk-etymological explanations of the name. Holland explains the
geminate as hypocoristic, and then assumes an element -λo- for which he cites.
opyíλos 'inclined to anger', but here without any meaning; it contradicts his
intepretation of the λ as a remnant of λaós 'army', for which there is no evidence.
The most serious mistake is that he does not accept the evidence of Mycenaean,
where we find a-ki-re-u = Axıλλɛús. Holland admits (19) that the word enjoyed a
certain popularity, and that “the name was not invented for the Homeric hero". It
shows that the name existed in this form centuries before Homer. The name can
easily be understood as Pre-Greek: note the suffix -Ɛus, and the variaton between
geminate and simple consonant (Fur.: 387). Holland sweeps this explanation away as
"nebulous pre-Greek" (17), but this is no argument. In doing this, he takes us back to
the period before we knew Mycenaean, and his interpretation must be
fundamentally rejected. Achilles is clearly a hero taken over from other stories. The
meaning of the name remains unknown, but this is unimportant.
áxλúc, -úoç [f.] ‘mist, darkness' (Il.). ◄IE *heg'lu- 'mist, dark weather'>
•VAR Later -ŬS.
•DER ȧxλvwdns ‘hazy, murky' (Hp., Arist., Hell.); ȧx\vóɛç ‘cloudy, dark' (Epigr.
apud Hdt., Hell., late epic). Denominative verbs: ȧxλúw [v.] 'to become (make) dark'
(Od., epic), ǎxλvous ‘obfuscation' (Syn. Alch.); άxλúvoμa 'to become dark' (Q. S.);
ȧxλvóoμa 'to become dark', -ów 'to get dark' (Thphr.).
ȧxλudiäv. ерúлтεσеα 'to break small' (H.) after the verbs for diseases in -táw
(Schwyzer: 732), perhaps by contamination with xλdäv (xλidiāv).
⚫ETYM Seems identical with OPr. aglo [n.] 'rain' (which need not be a u-stem); Arm.
ałja-m-ułj-k' [pl.] 'darkness' requires metathesis of -gh-, and subsequent
palatalization of gh to j. The reduplication is typical of Armenian.
äxvn [f.] 'foam, froth; chaff (Il., poet., Hp.). <PG(V) ►
•ETYM With a different velar, we find Lat. agna ‘ear of corn' < *akna, Go. ahana
'chaff, etc., from the root *hek- 'sharp'. Connection with this root has been
proposed for ǎxvη too, assuming a suffix -snh₂-, but this seems ad hoc: the more
obvious connection with axupov 'chaff shows that it is a Pre-Greek word.
ǎxvvдa [v.] 'to grieve, lament for' (Il.). <IE *h₂eg¹- ‘distress, fear'>
•VAR Ptc. also άxɛúwv, άxéwv (Il.; see below); aor. áкaxéσðaɩ, ákaxɛïv, ákaxñoal,
perf. áкáxημaι (åкηxεµεvη metr. cond.?); thence a new pres. άкaxíšoµai, -í¶w;
ǎxoμa occurs only twice (Od.). Rare presents are åкaxúvw (Antim.), ákáxoµai (Q.
S.) and ȧxváσбηu (Alc. 81), a re-formation in -άw from *ǎxvòµ, *ǎxvatai.
•DER An old noun is ǎxoç [n.] 'sadness, pain' (II.); ȧxvúc, -úoç [f.] ‘id.' (Call.) after
ăxvuuan.
⚫ETYM Although a difference in meaning exists, ǎxos corresponds with the s-stem in
Go. agis [n.], OE ege [m.] ‘fear'. Further, Gm. has a preterito-present Go. og 'to fear',
and the Go. ptc. un-agands 'fearless' is thematic, like ǎxoμat. Further cognates are
OIr. -ágadar ‘id.', and PIIr. *Hagha- > Skt. aghá- [adj.] ‘evil, bad, dangerous' (RV+),
YAv. aya- [adj.] ‘bad, eviľ.
ăxupa
185
ȧxɛúwv is tentatively interpreted as a participle built on an athematic present *äxεv
(DELG) or aorist *xεva (Frisk). For åxéwv beside ǎxoc, one compares кpatέwv to
кpáτoç. See Strunk 1967: 105ff., and cf. West ZPE 67 (1987): 17-19.
άxpadáµvla [?] · ó кoxλíaç ‘snaiľ (H.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Cf. άкpaµúλa. кoxλíaç, Tapavtívois (H.); xpaµadoiλai. Xελ@vai 'tortoises'. kai
ai vwoρóτaτaι twv кUvwv 'the most hybridized of bitches'. oi de ToÙÇ KOXλíaç 'snails'
(H.). Here the last explanation has clearly been added later, as the case forms do not
agree.
ETYM As two forms have both 8 and μ, the syllable with 8 was probably lost in
ȧкpaμúla (either in reality or only graphically: in AAA?). Since two forms end in
-μvλa, the original form will have been ȧxpadaμvλa. Variation ot/ v is well known in
Pre-Greek words. The analysis will be *(a)krad-am-ul-a, with well-known Pre-Greek
suffixes. The word closely resembles the town Kapdaµúλŋ (II.), also on Chios; for the
metathesis see Fur.: 392 (on τépшvos/τéшoc).
áxpás, -ádos [f.] ‘the wild pear and its fruit, Pyrus amygdaliformis' (com., Arist.).
<PG(V)►
•ETYM One connects ►äxεpdos. Acc. to Frisk and Chantraine, it is possibly a
loanword; to my mind, it is Pre-Greek, with ȧ-xɛpd- beside ȧ-xpad-, with metathesis
and a/ɛ (cf. Fur.: 392 στɛpуíç / στpɛyуíç). Admittedly, the alternation can also be
understood in IE terms, but such an origin is highly improbable for a word for 'pear'.
DELG points out that -ác, -ádoc is frequent in plant names.
ȧxpɛiov [acc.sg.n.] not quite certain: ȧxpeñov idŵv (B 269); ȧxpεiov 8' έyéλασσε (σ
163); ȧxpeĭov kλáčev (Theoc. 25, 72). <GR>
●COMP ȧxpɛɩó-yɛ\ws [adj.] (Cratin.); άxpɛíws yɛλāv (API.).
•ETYM It may be the same word as άxpεños 'useless, idle' (see ►xpη).
ǎxpt, ǎxpic [adv., prep., conj.] 'to the uttermost; as far as, until, as long as' (Il.). <IE
*me-g"sri 'until'>
•DER ǎxpo (Corcyra; after the locatives in -ot).
•ETYM This is the zero grade of µεxpɩ. On the variant with -, see Schwyzer: 404f.,
650.
άxúvwy →kúvwy.
äxupa [n.pl.] 'chaff (com.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Rarely sing. -ov; collective sing. ȧxupós or axupos [m.] 'heap of chaff. Note
ǎxopα. τà лíτupa. vioι dè кpavíov 'chaff, skull; head' (H.).
•COMP ȧxуpoеηên (X.).
●DER άxvpwdns (Arist.), áxúpɩvos (Plu.), etc.; axupwv, -wvos [m.] 'storehouse for
chaff (Delos), ȧxúpios [m.] 'heap of chaff (Heraklea). Denominative verb ȧxupów
[v.] 'to mix with chaff, etc. (Arist., Thphr.), whence ȧxúpwois (Arist.).
Remarkable is ȧxvpшiaí [f.pl.] 'heap of chaff (E 502, AP 9, 384, 15), which is a form in
-tá from a noun in -μos. The form in -aí is probably an old locative; see Dürbeck

=== page 117 ===

186
axupiaí
MSS 37 (1978): 39-57. The same formation is found in ȧxúpulos (Arat. 1097), said of
ǎunτoç. Doubtful ȧxupμóc (Ar. V. 1310; conj. by Dindorf for ȧxupóc).
⚫ETYM The analysis as an old r/n-stem to ǎxvη is impossible, as the -v- would remain
unexplained. The word is clearly identical with ǎxopa (see ►äxwp), a gloss not
mentioned in the literature. It shows that the word is Pre-Greek (Fur.: 362). This
explains the relation to ǎxvη: Pre-Greek has often a suffix with -v- beside the more
frequent suffixes -VC-; moreover, -up- is well known.
ȧxvpµuaí →ǎxvpa.
äxwp, -opos [m.] 'scurf, dandruff (Ar. fr. 410, Hdn. Gr. 2, 937). <PG(V) ►
•VAR άxŵp, -ŵpos (Alex. Tracl.). Cf áxŵpa. tòv áxwpa. ɛïpŋtai dè tò nitupŵdes tĤS
кεчaλns 'the scurf of the head' (H.) and ǎxopα. τà лíτupα. žvɩoɩ dè кpavíov ‘chaff,
skull; head' (H.).
●Der åxwpwdns (Aët., v.l. in Hp. Liqu. 6); àxwpέw [v.] ‘to suffer from ǎxwp', or -táw
(conj. in Paul. Aeg. 3, 3).
•ETYM The connection with ǎxupa ‘chaff is proven by the glosses. The vocalic
interchange points to Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 211, 302, 362). See also Skoda RPh. 60
(1986): 215-222.
ǎy [adv.] ‘back(wards), again' (Il.). ◄IE *hep- ‘from, away'▷
•DER ǎчεpov = Üστερоν, лáλν (Alc., H., Zonar.), after üστεpov.
⚫ETYM Identical with Lat. abs 'away, back'. For the -< cf. and Schwyzer: 620. The
relation to ǎão, etc. is unclear.
ảчsívðɩov [n.] ‘wormwood, Artemisia Absinthium' (Hp.). ◄PG(S)►
•VAR Also ǎчлvos [f., m.] and àчvðíα [f.].
•DER άчðíτη oivos (Dsc.); aчivāτov ‘drink prepared with ά.' (Aët.) and
áчivеáτiov (pap.); cf. Lat. absinthiātum (vinum).
⚫ETYM The suffix -v0- proves Pre-Greek origin.
άvíç, -idos →ǎnτw.
ayoppos [adj.] 'going backwards' (Il.). ◄GR►
•VAR Also -ov [adv.].
ETYM Forssman 1980: 185ff. convincingly derives the second member from the
verbal root Fεpp- ‘to go away', see ►ppw. The problem with the older analysis "with
the oppos backwards" is that oppoç is an Attic word; in the epic language we find
лαλív-opσoç with the expected treatment of -rs-. The form ȧyóppoos in άyoppóov
Nкɛavoio (Σ 399, v 65) is either from ǎy and póos with compositional -o-, or rather
from ǎyoppos reshaped after póos (discussion in Forssman l.c.).
aw 'to eat one's fill'. →dσal.
*ǎw ‘to blow'.⇒änu.
áúv, -óvoç 1 [?] a fish (Epich., H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Epich. 63 has àóvɛç qάypoɩ tε. No etymology.
ȧúv, -óvoc 2 [?] Plur., a kind of garment (P. Amh. 2, 3a, II, 21). ◄LW Eg.>
•VAR áïúv (ai) (B. 17, 112, S., H. s.v. λчμα, see LSJ Supp.).
187
⚫ETYM The text in B. (αióvα лорoupέav) shows that it was awv. An Egyptian word,
see Latte Phil. 87 (1932): 271f. and Latte Glotta 34 (1955): 192.
ǎwpot 1 [adj.] uncertain, epithet of the лódεç of Scylla (μ 89), also in opposition to the
Óлíσеɩɩ лóбеç (Philem. 145). <?>
ETYM Acc. to scholia H and Q, it means ǎкwλot: toùç yàp "Iwvaç λéyɛiv qaʊi tǹv
кwλñν wpηv кai wpaíav (sch. μ 89). In SIG 1037 (Milete IV-IIIª), wpη is a part of the
sacrificial animal, but different from кwλñ. Bechtel 1914 s.v. translates ‘Beine, die
keine Waden haben', so ‘legs without calfs', but his comparison with Lat. sūra seems
impossible. Van Windekens proposes to understand awpol (H.), i.e. 'wakeful'
(belonging with wopos 'sleep'). The meaning in Philem. may be artificial.
ǎwpos 2 [m.] 'sleep' (Sapph. 57). ◄?►
•VAR Call. fr. 177, 28 (Pfeiffer) has ŵpov.
ETYM Acc. to EM 117, 14, it stands for poç: кατà лАεoνασμòν τой à µηdèу лλεov
σnuaívovτoç. poç yàp ó üлvoç 'the à does not mean anything, for wopoç means
Üлvoç'. Cf. ǎwρos (cod. ǎopoc). ävлvоç. Mηечμvato (H.). See ȧwTέw.
ȧwτéw [v.] 'to sleep'(?), with üлvov as an object (K 159, K 548). <?>
•VAR Only present.
⚫ETYM In the same meaning, but without object, in Simon. 37, 5. H. glosses άwτεite
(уλUкÙν Üлvov, к 548) with άлavνðí‹ετε τòν Üлνov 'pick sleep (vel sim.)'. Derived
from ǎwτos; connection with ǎwpos 2 'sleep' seems impossible.
ǎwτoç [m.] ‘flock of wool, down; the choicest, the flower of its kinď (Il.). Raman
Glotta 53 (1975): 195-205 shows that the word means 'nap, tap'. <?>
●VAR Also -ov [n.].
•DER άwτεúεɩv. ȧлavеíɛσеα to pluck off flowers' (H.), vaivɛv 'to weave, plan'
(AB).
•ETYM Considered to be a verbal noun to ➤ǎŋu, so *blowing'; this was also argued
by Jacquinod REA 90 (1988): 319-323, assuming *h₂uoh,-to-. But semantically, there is
no support for the connection with 'blow'; the etymology was merely suggested by
the formal appearance. Rather the word is a technical term, as remarked by DELG; it
remains without etymology.

=== page 118 ===

!
1
B
ẞă 1 [interj.] imitation of the bleating of a lamb (Hermipp. 19). ◄ONOM▷
ETYM Onomatopoeic word. Cf. ►ẞñ.
ẞă 2 Abbreviation of ẞaσɩλɛûç ‘king' (A. Supp. 892, lyr.). ◄GR►
•ETYM Cf. Schwyzer: 423 A. 2. However, there is a v.l. лã, an abbreviation of лατηp.
ßaßá¢ɛɩv [v.] · tò <µǹ> dinp0pwµéva Aéyɛɩv. évɩoɩ dè ßoãv 'to speak [in]articulately; to
cry' (H.). <ONOM▷
•VAR Also Baẞíw, -úľw (Zenod.).
•DER ßáẞa [m.] ‘chatterer' (Archil.); þáßaкo úлò 'Hλɛíwv téttɩyes ‘cicadas”, úñò
Пovτɩкшv dε ẞáτpaxoi ‘frogs'; ßáẞaкα. τòv уáλλov ‘eunuch' (H.) (see Maas RhM 74
(1925): 469f.).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic forms like these are frequent: cf. ßaßaí, ►ßáľw, ► þaüľw,
► ßaßpáčw, and ►ẞáẞalov; cf. also ► ßápßapos, ► ßaßúptaç, ► ßóµßos, etc.
Baẞaí [interj.] Exclamation of surprise (E.). <ONOM▷
•VAR Extended Baẞatá (Ar.).
•ETYM Cf. Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934): 254. Lat. babae is borrowed from Greek. Cf.
► ßaßáчw and ►лaлaï, as well as ►лÓÑOL.
=
þáßaka →ßaßáčεiv.
Baẞáкivov, -oç [m.] (or [n.]?) Xúτpaç ɛldoç kind of earthen pot' (H.). <LW Celt.?,
Anat.?>
⚫VAR Cf. Bakáïov· μετрoν τɩ ‘a measure' (H.).
⚫ETYM Latte Glotta 32 (1953): 41 compared εußαкavítŋs. tò µetà toŨ τapíxoυç кai
otéatos okevašóµevov ßpшµа food prepared with salted [fish] meat and hard fať
(H. and Cyrill. mss.) to reconstruct an unreduplicated form *þáкivos (-ov), probably
also found in Lat. bacchinon (Greg. Tur., whence MoFr. bassin). The word is
supposed to be Anatolian or Celtic. Fur.: 171 connects the word with qáktai. Aŋvoi,
σɩлúαι, лúελο (▸áкτov 2) and Myc. pa-ko-to [du.] /paktō/. The variation would
then point to a Pre-Greek word, but this is uncertain.
ßaßáкtηs [m.] epithet of Pan (Cratin.), Dionysus (Corn.). ◄ONOM▷
•VAR EKẞaẞážαι έкσαλɛñσαι 'shake violently' (H.) = S. fr. 139. ßaßáčaι• óxσασðaι
'dance' (H.); ßaßáktns. ópxnotńc, dµvwdóc, µaviwdŋc, kpaúyaσoç, öðɛv kaì Báкxoç
'dancer, singer of hymns, like a madman, shouter, whence also Bacchus' (H.); =
Aáλos 'talkative' (EM 183, 45).

=== page 119 ===

F
190
Bápadov
•ETYM Onomatopoeic word to express joy; cf. ßaßácw. DELG considers the
connection with Lydian to be an etymological speculation on Bacchus. The terms
with ßaßa(k)- may sometimes have included other expressions of joy etc., which
were not limited to one language only.
.
Báẞalov [n.] кpаúуaσov. Aáкwveç 'bawler, shouter; Laconians' (H.). <ONOM➤
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic word; cf. ßaßáľw, ► ßaßákτηs. On the -λ- in the suffix, cf.
►λálos; on bal-, see also Pok. 91f. On ẞáßalov. aidoĭov 'private parts', see
► ẞáμẞαλov.
.
Baẞnp [m.] ó Aprs (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown.
Báẞiov [n.] 'baby' (Dam. Isid. 75). <ONOM▷
•DER See L. Robert 1963: 368.
•ETYM A nursery word used in Syria. See ▸ßaßáčw and Pok. 91 (E baby). Also related
is Baẞáλia 'cradle' (Oehl IF 57 (1940): 11ff.).
ßaßpáčw [v.] ‘to chirp', of cicadas (Anan., H.). <ONOM▷
•ETYM Onomatopoeic word; cf. ►ẞaßáľw.
ßaßpýv [?] · úлóotaσiç έλaíov katà Maкɛdóvaç ‘sediment of olive-oil (Maced.)' (H.).
<PG?
⚫ETYM Hoffmann 1906: 73f. relates it to ßáлтw, which is doubful. The meaning
suggests a Pre-Greek word: sometimes it is connected with ▸ẞáßpně.
ßáßpŋ} [m./f.] in ßáßpŋkɛs. tà oỷλα τŵν óðóντwv, oi dè σlayóvas oi dè èv tois
ódoñσiv áñò tñç tpoqñs katexóµεva 'the gums of the teeth, the jaws; particles of
food stuck between the teeth' (H.). <PG?(V)►
•Var ßéßpikes. tò ěvdov tŵv olayóvwv µépos ‘the part within the jaws’(?) (H.).
⚫ETYM Kalléris 1954: 114f. derives the word from a root ẞp- in ẞíßpwoкw, but this root
ends in *h, and should not be lost in this formation. There seems no apparent
reason to connect this gloss with ßaßpýv, as per Kalléris and DELG. Is ßápŋkes just a
mistake? The meaning of ẞéßρηкɛç unclear: µépoç can hardly mean 'piece of food'.
The word is probably Pre-Greek, in view of the variation a/ ε. See ßaßpŃv,
▶ Bápnkec.
ßaßúaç [m./f.]? · ßópßopos, лnλóc ‘mud, earth' (H.); ßaßúŋ. xɛíµappos, oi dè róli
[read лηλóc?] 'winter-flowing mud' (H.); Baкíaç [read ßaßúaç?]. ßóрßороç, лηλóc
Úло Tаpavτívwv 'mud, earth [Tarent.]' (EM 186,1). <PG?>
⚫ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 20 suggests Messapian origin (with the ending -uos).
However, the meaning rather suggests a Pre-Greek word.
ßaßúptaç [m.] · ò лapáµwpoç ‘an almost foolish man' (H.). ◄LW>
•DER Also a PN (Wilhelm 1909: 321).
•ETYM Cf. Lat. baburrus 'stultus, ineptus'; cf. the type ẞápẞapos (?) and E-M s.v.
babit.
i
>
.
Baiẞuε, -vкoc
191
ẞayaчos [m.] ó µátalos. ½ Zεùç Þрúуioç. µéуaç. лoλúç. τаxúç 'foolish/idle; or the
Phrygian Zeus; great, many, swift' (H.). <?>
•ETYM The gloss consists of two or more elements; see Solmsen 1909: 139¹. One may
think of a connection with OP baga- ‘goď (cf. ► ẞáyos). Schmitt Sprache 9 (1963): 38-
47 reads Baλaioç, but Heitsch Glotta 46 (1968): 74f. returns to Bayaĭoç.
ẞáyapov [adj.] · Xλapóv, Aάкwveç 'warm (Lacon.)' (H.) <?>
.
ETYM No etymology.
ßáyos [m.]? · kλáoµa äptov <”> µášŋs. kaì ßaoiλeùs, kai otpatŋyós. Aάkwves ‘piece
of cake or barley-cake; both a king and general (Lacon.)' (H.). <GR>
•ETYM Probably a contamination of Ƒáyos (ǎyvu̟) and άyós (Latte). Pisani KZ 67
(1940): 111 thinks ßaσiλɛúç = OP baga- ‘lord, god' (cf. the people's name Bayadάovɛç
[Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 232]), but see Petersen AmJPh. 56: 64ff. and Belardi
Doxa 3 (1950): 197.
=
Badas →Báta入og.
=
Baōnv → Baívw.
pádiov →Bátog 2.
Bádpva → quádpva.
=>
Báчw [v.] 'to speak, say' often of nonsense (II.). <ONOM▸
•VAR Only present stem, except for ẞéßaktai (О 408) and ëßažas (H.).
●DER ẞážıç ‘word, rumour' (Emp.), ßáyµata [pl.] (A. Pers. 637 [lyr.]).
•ETYM Cf. þáσкɛƖv. λέyɛƖv (which Latte deletes), kakoλoyɛïv (H.) (cf. λáokɛv).
Possibly from *ẞáк-σкεv (Schwyzer: 708; cf. Bákis). ►ẞáσkavos can hardly be
separated from ẞáσкɛν. See also άßaкns. Onomatopoeic; cf. ►ßaßáчw (the
objections of DELG are hardly decisive).
Báopov →Baivw.
ßaðú¢ [adj.] ‘deep, high', metaph. ‘rich', etc. (II.). ◄IE?>
•COMP Many compounds with Baðv-: e.g. -кoλñoç, -λεчo (Hom.).
•DER Grades of compar. Baеúτεpos, -τatos, rarely ẞáðɩov, þáσσov, þáðiσtos (Seiler
1950: 52). Factitive verb ẞaðúvw (II.), 'go down, sink (intr.)' (Ph.). On Baеúλoç,
-voç see Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 218. Besides ẞévoç 'depth' (II.) and ßáðoç [n.]
'id.' (IA, mainly in an ethical sense).
⚫ETYM Related to ẞévos, but there are no further etymological connections; only an
alternation *-en- : -ṇ- can be reconstructed, which suggests IE origin. ẞévôoç is not
analogical after лévðoç (as per Schwyzer RhM 81 (1932): 201, accepted by Pok. 465).
Not related to ßáñtw (and ßóðpos), as per Szemerényi Glotta 38 (1960): 211-216, nor
to ►ßñσσa, ► ßáσoos, or ► ßuðós.
ßaïa [f.] ‘grandmother' (Str.). ◄ONOM, PG?►
•ETYM Nursery word; might be Pre-Greek (Fur.: 217).
Baïßvž, -vкos [m.] ‘pelican' (Hdn. Gr., H. ex Philet., Choerob.). ◄ PG(S)►

=== page 120 ===

192
•VAR Bauẞukāveç. лελεкāvεç (H.).
Baie-
⚫ETYM For the suffix, cf. öpτvε, îẞvž, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 397). þaîẞvž seems to be a
typical Pre-Greek word (Baußuк- by assimilation?).
Baie- →ẞátos.
Baívw [v.] 'to go' (II.). ◄IE *gwem-, *g″eh₂- ‘go’➤
•VAR Only present stem. Other presents: 1. ẞáσкw, mostly ipv. þáʊkɛ, -tε (Il.); 2.
ẞɩẞáσкw (II.), mostly causative; 3. ẞíßŋµɩ (ßißāµɩ), -áw (to ßηv, see below) in ßißás,
Biẞwv, Biẞa 'stride' (Chantraine 1942: 300); 4. causative ßißálw (post-Hom.); 5.
Biẞáσewv in μαкpà ẞ. (II.), metrical lengthening of ßißác at verse end (Chantraine
1942: 327, Shipp 1967: 39). Suppletive aor. ẞηv, fut. ßǹσoµαι (factitive ¤ßŋoa, ßǹow
after čotŋσa, otńow), perf. þéßŋka (all Il.).
•COMP άvα-, άлo-, εк-, εµ-ßαívw, etc.
●DER 1. þáσiç [f.] ‘step, base' (Pi., in compounds Il.) = Skt. gáti- (see below). 2. Baτnp,
-ñpoç [m.] ‘threshold, basis' (Amips., inscr., etc.). 3. -ßátŋs, -ov [m.] in compounds
with ảvα-, άлo-, ¿µ-ßátŋs, etc. (Il.), also with nominal first element, e.g. στulo-ẞá-
τns; 4. Baτos in compounds: àvα- (àµ-)ẞατóc, etc. (II.); as a simplex, Baτós
‘accessible' (X.) is very rare; see Chantraine 1933: 302ff. Abstracts in -σía are derived
from -ẞáτns and -ẞατoç, like úлεрßασíα 'transgression' (II.); also denominatives in
-ɛúw and -έw, like έµßatɛúw, etc. 5. -ßás, -ádos [f.] in ►¿µßadés. Hence the adverb
Bádny step by step'. 6. Bápov 'basis, seat', etc. (IA), þáеpã. 7. þaðµós and ßaoµós
[m.] ‘step, basis', etc. (Hell.; ßaßµís [f.] Pi.). Unrelated is ► þaµßaívwv.
From the root ẞη-: ßñµa, ßãµa [n.] ‘step', etc. (h. Merc., etc.), = Av. gāman- [n.]
‘step'; further, ẞηlós (Bāλós) [m.] ‘threshold' (Il.), ßŋlá [n.pl.] = nédɩλa (Panyas.);
see Chantraine 1933: 240. Also -ßŔτηc, -ov [m.] in ¿µлυpißý-ths (tpiños) 'standing
over the fire' (702); see also Staßτη 'circle, etc.' (Ar.) and ►àµqioßntéw.
•ETYM The verbal root *gem- has a number of exact matches in other branches.
Greek Baivw and ẞáoкw both go back to the root *gem-. The first is a yod-present,
from *gwanie/o- < *g"m-ie/o-, identical with Lat. veniō; the second is a present in
*ske/o- from *g*m-sk-, seen back in Skt. gácchati. The full grade is seen in Go. qiman
'to come' and Skt. ágamam [aor.] 'I went'. Morphologically, Báoç is comparable
with Skt. gáti-, Lat. con-ventio, and Go. ga-qumps. Further, -ẞaτos = Skt. (-)gata- and
Lat. -ventus.
The non-presentic forms ẞηv, ßýσoµai, þéßηka, etc. are derived from a different
root ßη- (ßã-) < *g″eh₂-. For ßíßŋµɩ, cf. Skt. jígāti ‘he goes'. The aor. ßŋv agrees
exactly with Skt. ágām ‘I went'; the noun ßñµa corresponds to Av. gā-man- [n.] ‘step,
pace'. The root pair gem- :: geh₂- may be compared with *drem- (see Spaµɛïv) ::
* dreh₂- (see didpáσкw). See ►ẞéẞalos, ẞéẞηos, ßwμós, ►ẞaστálw,
►
►ẞητápμwv.
Baiós [adj.] 'small, slight' (Parm.). <?>
•VAR Cf. ßatós (Il.).
•DER Balov, -óvoç [m.] a small worthless fish = Bλévvos (Epich.), cf. Strömberg 1943:
32, Chantraine 1928: 10. On the meaning of μéτpoу лαрà Аλεεαvбрεñσ (H.) see
►Baïs.
U
i
Bákavov 1
193
•ETYM The word has been compared with nẞatóç. Fur.: 378 takes the - as
prothetic, allegedly indicative of Pre-Greek origin; in my view, this remains
uncertain.
Bats [f.] 'palm leaf (LXX, pap.). ◄LW➤
•VAR Acc. -tv. Also ẞáïov [n.] ‘id., measuring rod' (Ev. Jo., pap.).
•DER Adj. Baïvós (Sm.) 'made of palm leaf, ẞaivý [f.] 'branch of a palm' (LXX).
•ETYM From Eg. bj, Copt. bai. See Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 245f.
ßaítŋ [f.] ‘shepherds' or peasants' coat or tent made of skins' (Hdt.), also 'covered hall'
(Magnesia, Mantinea; see Gossage Class. Rev.N.S. 9 (1959): 12f.). <PG?>
●DER ßaitwva• tòv εútελñ ävdpa ‘shabby man' in opposition to Batás. eútelǹs yvvý
H.; for the gloss ẞaíτiov see ẞλÍTOV.
⚫ETYM Unknown (see Pisani Sprache 1 (1949): 138). Go. paida 'Xiτóv' and other Gm.
words, like OHG pfeit [f.] ‘shirt, coat' etc., are borrowed from ẞaíτη; from Gm. in
turn is Fi. paita ‘shirt'. With a suffix -k-, we can probably connect Alb. petk 'coat'. If
the Albanian continues *paitakā, the word may have been taken over from a
European substrate (Fur.: 158 argues for Pre-Greek origin).
Baitiov [n.] · ßotávn éµqepǹs diktáµvw, ˝yovv yλó̟xwv ‘plant resembling dittany, or
rather pennyroyaľ (H.). <?►
•ETYM ẞaíτov was supposed to be a mistake for ẞλítov; see ẞλíτov (not accepted
by DELG).
Baíτvλos [m.] kind of (magical) stone (Sotacos of Carystos apud Plin. N. H. 37, 135)
which fell from heaven (Dam. Isid. 94, 203). Acc. to Hesychius and others, the stone
was given to Kronos instead of Zeus. Also name of a god (All BεTúλw, Dura iii³).
Baíτvλov av кατéлεç Аpostol. 9.24, of a greedy person. <LW Sem.>
•VARU (LSJ Supp.).
•DER Baiτútov (Dam., etc.).
•ETYM Zuntz Class. et Med. 8 (1966): 169ff., with special attention for the sources,
thought that it was a Mediterranean word, also seen in Sem. bethel, interpreted as
'House of God'. Unfortunately, Zuntz postulates a pan-Mediterranean substrate as a
common source, which is hardly acceptable. Hemmerdinger Glotta 48 (1970): 99f.
rather opts for Semitic origin, and likewise Röllig, Dict. Deities Demons (s.v. Bethel).
The fact that the word appears very late in Greek, and in the context of northern
Syria, makes this the most probable solution: Bayt-el 'House of El'. An old Pre-Greek
word is therefore improbable (cf. further West 1997: 294f.; Davidson Herm. 123
(1995): 363-9).
-
Baitv→Blétveç.
ẞáкavov 1 [n.] ‘Althaea cannabina'. <?►
•VAR Cf. ẞákavov. τò ȧypιoкávaẞov (Lex. Parisinus gr. 2419).
•DER Bakávov (POsl.).
•ETYM For the suffix, cf. λáxavov and see Chantraine 1933: 199. Cf. ► þáкavov 2 and
DELG Supp. s.v.

=== page 121 ===

194
Báravov 2
195
Bákavov 2 [n.] 'Brassica napus oleifera' (pap. IP-IIP). <LW Eg.>>
ETYM See ẞáкavov 1.
ßákŋlos 1 [m.] ‘woman-like man' (Antiph.), ‘eunuch in service of Cybele' (Luc.).
Bándoc-ànóKotos, óin'éviwv yá入dos, oi Sè ávdpóyuvos, ä入dol rapeuévog
yuvaɩкódŋs ‘a castrated man, a Gallus or hermaphrodite or a weakened man, a
woman-like man' (H.) ◄LW Anat.>>
⚫ETYM Cf. кáẞηλos and кáλŋßoç, with comparable meanings, in Hesychius. Maaẞ
RhM 74 (1925): 472ff. and Nehring Sprache 1 (1949): 165 assume metathesis.
Kretschmer Glotta 16 (1928): 192 compares Báкxos; this is improbable. The word is
probably Anatolian (so perhaps Pre-Greek, [Fur.: 116]?). On the meaning, see Lucas
RhM 88 (1939): 189f. and Masson RPh. 93 (1967): 229.
.
þáкηlos 2 [adj.] · ó μέyaç ‘big or great man' (H.). ◄PG(S)►
•ETYM Fur.: 115 compares Báуiov. μεуа (H.). The suffix -no- is well known in Pre-
Greek.
þákkapis, -idos [f.] ‘unguent from asarum' (Semon.). <PG?, LW Lyd.?>
•VAR Acc. -tv. Also þáкkap [n.] = äσapov (Plin.) and ẞáкxapı [n.] (Aret.), þáкxap
[n.] (Ps.-Dsc.).
...
⚫ETYM The word is Lydian, according to Sch. A. Pers. 42; cf. þáккapıç ű入入o 8è
чúρov Audóv (H.). Whereas Fur.: 128 argues for Pre-Greek origin (words in -ap are
well-represented there), E. Masson 1967: 100f. suggests that it is Anatolian. The word
is not of Gaulish origin (WH 1, 91); Lat. baccar etc. are borrowed from Greek.
.
ẞaкóv [adj.] · лɛσóv. Kpñtɛç ‘falling (Cret.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. The word is not to be derived an unknown verb *ẞắкw, aor.
**ẞǎкov (as per Bechtel 1921, 2: 782), nor is a connection with ẞáкτpov ('stick', see
► ẞαкτηpíα) or ẞáкται iσxupoí 'strong men' (H.) very likely. Cf. ►ȧẞaкŃç.
Báкται [m.] iσxupoí 'strong men' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Fur.: 311 etc., connects the word with Hitt. uakturi- ‘solid, durable' and
Lycaon. Ovavубaчons, etc. (with prenasalization), which remains very uncertain.
þaкτηpíα [ƒ.] ‘staff, stick, scepter (as a symbol of judges)' (Ar.). <EUR
•VAR Also Baкτηpiov (Ar.), ßαкτηpídiov (H.), þaкtnpíç, -ídos [f.] (Achae. [?]). Cf.
ẞáкτpov [n.] 'stick, cudgel (A.).
•DIAL Cypr. pa-ka-ra (LSJ Supp.).
•DER Also Báкτpov ‘id.', whence ẞaкɩpɛúw [v.] ‘to prop' (arg. metr. in S. OC),
ẞáktpevµa (E.); ßaкτŋpɛúw (Suid.) by influenced of ẞaktnpía.
•ETYM Bαкτηpíα looks like an abstract formation from *ẞaкτηp, with a by-form
ẞáкτpov, just as άpoτp beside ǎpoτpov. It has been compared with ►þáкτaι ·
ioxupoí (H.) (doubtful) and Baкóv (improbable). The word is related to Lat.
baculum 'staff, stick', which points to *bak-tlo-. From baculum in turn is borrowed
Báкλov 'stick, cudgel' (Aesop.); also OIr. bacc 'hook, crook' etc. Pok. 93 gives other,
quite doubtful, forms. Is it a European loanword, given the a-vocalism?
ẞáкτρov [n.] кáµŋλos 'camel' (H.) <LW Iran.>
•ETYM If the gloss is correct, rather ‘Bactrian', as Bactrian camels were famous (Arist.
HA 498 b 8).
þáкxos [?] a fish, kind of кεστρεús 'mullet' (Hicesios apud Ath. 306 e). <?►
⚫ETYM See Thompson 1947, Saint-Denis 1947 and Strömberg 1943: 96.
þáкxvλoç [m.] = äρτos σлodíτηs bread baked in hot ashes' (Nic. Fr. 121). Elean, acc.
to H. <PG?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Perhaps PG because of the geminate -кX- and the suffix -vλ-.
ẞáλaypos [m.] a freshwater fish, kind of carp (Arist.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Báλ(\)ɛpos, Balλipóc, Baλīvos (Bapĭvoc) (Arist.).
⚫ETYM See Thompson 1947 s.v. amd Strömberg 1943: 39. Fur.: 116 compares ßápakoç.
¿õеùç лoιóç ‘kind of fish' (H.); this is uncertain. Still, the word is certainly Pre-Greek
because of the variants (Fur.: 192).
ẞaλavɛĩov [n.] ‘warm bath, bathroom' (Ar.). <PG➤
•DER ẞaλavɛúç [m.] ‘bath-man' (Ar.), as a basis of further derivatives (cf. кvaqɛãov :
кvaqɛúç, etc.)? Also Baλavíτns (-ɛítŋs) ‘bather' (Plb.). Baλavápiov [n.] (pap., inscr.)
with the Latin suffix -ārium.
⚫ETYM DELG attempts to derive the word from ẞáλavoç ‘acorn' as 'stopper', but this
is improbable. For a term for bathing in warm water, which is probably an Aegaean
custom, we might expect Pre-Greek origin, like doάuvoç. The structure of the
word is frequent in Pre-Greek: Baλ-av- (with ß-, -α-, -av-). From Baλavεtov comes
Lat. bal(i)neum.
ßáλavos [f.] ‘acorn, fruit like an acorn, date', and objects like an acorn, e.g. ‘stopper';
also name of a fish (Od.). <IE *g"lh₂- 'acorn'>
•DER Baλávov ‘acorn-drink' (Nicoch.), 'suppository' (medic.), Balavis ‘stopper'
(Hp., pap.), ßaλavīτɩç ‘kind of chestnuť (Plin.). ẞalavwτós ‘fastened with a ẞ.'
(Parm.), Balavwdŋs, Baλávivos ‘made of dates' (Thphr.), ßaλavηpós ‘like a ẞ.'
(Thphr.).
Verbs: 1. Baλavílw 'to shake off acorns' (AP, Zen.), 'to administer a suppository'
(Hp.); 2. Balavów 'to fasten with a ẞ.' (Ar.).
⚫ETYM Old IE word. The closest kin is Arm. kałin, gen. kałnoy ‘acorn', although a
pre-form *gh₂-eno- (> ßálavos) would also have to give Arm. -an- (so the -in- is
probably analogical). Several related forms have a dental suffix: Lat. glāns, -andis
(*g"lh₂-nd-), CS želudú (< *želo̟dɩ < *gelh₂-end-), Alb. lend [m.], Tosk lëndë [f.]
‘acorn'. A different formation is found in Baltic, e.g. Lith. gilė ‘acorn'. Not related to
Báλλw, which derives from *gelh,-.
Báλapıç plant name = púov 'oyster-green', Auxvís 'rose campion' (Ps.-Dsc.), ßoτávn
τpiquos 'three-leaved plant' (H.). <PG?►
•VAR Also Báλλapıç.
⚫ETYM Unknown. Perhaps Pre-Greek because of -λ-/ -λλ-.
ẞaλaúσtov [n.] 'flower of the wild pomegranate' (Dsc., Gal.). <PG➤
•VAR Baλwoτov (pap. III³).

=== page 122 ===

196
Baλẞíc, -idos
{
Bá入入w
197
•COMP ẞaλavσtiovpyós (Alciphr. 1, 2), form and mg. uncertain, ‘dyer'?
•DER ẞaλaúστ(p)ɩvos (pap.).
•ETYM The variation av/w is typical of Pre-Greek words. Moreover, the meaning
already suggests substrate origin. Fur.: 301 compares
(Dsc.).
Baλλwτń ‘'Ballota nigra'
ßaλßíç, -īdoç [f.] 'rope indicating start and finish of the race-course, turning post'
(Att.). <PG>
•DER ßaλßidwdns 'provided with cavities' (Hp.), cf. Wendel Herm. 69 (1934): 345.
•ETYM Formation with -īd- like kpŋtís, kvnµís, etc. Baλßís is a technical term
borrowed from the Pre-Greek (already Grošelj Živa Ant. 4 (1954): 164ff.).
Báλe [interj.] with optative: ‘o that!' (Alcm.). <GR➤
•VAR Also ǎßáλe, äßále (= å þáλε) with ind. and inf. (Call.).
•ETYM Probably an aor.ipv. of Báλλw. Older litt. is mentioned by Frisk, who
compares the Lithuanian permissive particle te-gùl (quite uncertain).
ßaλiós [adj.] ‘spotted, dappled? (E.), 'swift' (Opp.; after åpyós). <?►
•VAR With a different accent (see Schwyzer: 380, 635): Balios, name of a horse of
Achilles (II.).
•DER Baλía. oqeaλuía 'an eye-disease' (H.)?
⚫ETYM Сf. лоλóc and other color adjectives in -(F)ós (Chantraine 1933: 123). Since
*b- is rare in PIE, it has been considered a loanword from another IE language: e.g.
Thracian/Phrygian (Solmsen KZ 34 (1897): 72ff.), Illyrian (Grošelj Živa Ant. 3 (1953):
203), Macedonian (Schwyzer: 68³, hesitantly). If so, the genuinely Greek cognate
would have to be paλióç. Pok.: 118 posits *bel-.
Athanassakis Glotta 78 (2000): 1-11 demonstrates with an extensive discussion that
the word is of Illyrian origin; cf. Alb. ballë ‘horse with a white spot on its forehead'.
For the Albanian word, Huld 1984: 40 reconstructs *bhol-; Demiraj 1997 assumes
*bħh₂l-.
ßalis [f.] = oikus äyptos 'wild cucumber' (Ps.-Dsc.). <?>
•DER ẞaλidiká (kápva 'nut-bearing tree', pap.).
•ETYM See André Ét. class. 24 (1956): 40-2, who connects it with Báλλw, because the
fruit throws out its sap and kernel.
ẞaλλávτιov [n.] 'purse' (com., Thphr.). <PG?>
VAR BaλávτIov (less frequent).
ETYM Unknown. Krahe (see Frisk) thought it was a word from the northern
Balkans, related to Lat. follis. However, it is perhaps Pre-Greek because of the
variation -- ~ -λλ-. Cf. Baλλiov.
.
ẞáλλεкα [?] чñopov 'pebble' (H.). <PG(S)►
•ETYM The connection with Lat. (Iber.) bal()uca 'gold-sand, grain of gold' (WH s.v.
balūx; Belardi Doxa 3 (1950): 198) is improbable, since the gloss does not refer to
gold. Apparently, the word contains a suffix -εк-, which is very rare (compare
► ȧλóлη³); therefore, we opt for Pre-Greek origin.
1
}
!
ẞaλ(λ)ηv, -ñvoç [m.] 'king' (A.), also name of a mythical stone in Phrygia (Ps.-Plu.).
<LW Anat.>
•VAR Less certain ẞaληv = лαληy (inscr. IVa Lycia).
•DER ßaλλŋvaïov (öpoç) = þaðiλiкòv öpoç.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. According to H. and others, the word is Thourian or Phrygian;
at any rate, it is an Anatolian loan (Solmsen 1909: 138f.). The word is not related to
Lat. dēbilis, nor to Aram. balēna ‘our Lord'. The ending - is a common feature of
Pre-Greek (Fur.: 143).
Baλŋtúç [f.] Festival in Eleusis during which stones were thrown (Ath. 9, 406d ff.; see
Deubner 1932: 69). <?>
ETYM Because of the incomprehensible formation of the stem (in spite of fut.
Baλλn-ow), the word is probably a loanword adapted to ßáλλw by folk etymology.
(Schwyzer: 291). On the other hand, DELG accepts a morphological analysis ßaλλŋ-
+ -TUG.
ẞaλíчw [v.] = ẞáλλw 'to throw' (Sophr.), but = кwµáчw, xoρεúw 'to celebrate; to
dance (Ath., etc.), known from the western colonies (Ath. 8, 362b f.). <GR>
•Der ßaλλioµós ‘dance' (Alex.). ßaλλioτýs (Shipp Glotta 39 (1960): 149-52) from
which Lat. ballista 'catapult' (since Plaut.); Baλλioτpα 'id.' (Procop.); as a
constellation Scherer 1953: 203.
•ETYM Derived from þáλλw. On the meaning, see Paessens RhM 90 (1941): 146ff.,
Radermacher RhM 91 (1942): 52ff., and DELG. Lat. ballare 'dance' is related to
Baλλiw, but is not directly borrowed from it.
þaλλíov [n.] = qaλλóc ‘phallus' (Herod.). <LW➤
•DER Baλλíwv PN (Axionic.), Lat. Ballio (Pt.); Thracian people's name Tpɩ-ßaλλoi?
(but see Detschew 1957: 526).
⚫ETYM If cognate with paλλóc, the word might be from another language (Thraco-
Phrygian?). See Haas Wien. Stud. 71 (1958): 161-7. See also Fur.: 172, who assumes a
Pre-Greek root *paλ/ Baλ- 'Hervorspringendes'. Note also ẞá(μ)ẞaλov ‘aidoiov'.
Báλiç, -ɛws [f.] a medicinal plant (Xanth. 16). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. See L. Robert 1937: 156-8. Cf. ẞáλ(\)apıç, Baλλwτη, and
► Baλiç.
ẞáλλw [v.] 'to throw, hiť (Il.), originally probably ‘to reach, hit by throwing'. <IE
*g"elh, 'hit by throwing'>
•VAR Aor. Baλɛiv (Bλɛiŋv, žvµßλýtyv, čßλnto), perf. þéßλŋкα, -μαι, (ßeßoλnévos
from *Béẞola, Chantraine 1942: 235?), fut. þaλw, also ẞaλλnow (see Baλλntúc).
•DIAL Arc. Séλλw in ¿o-Séλλw = ¿к-ßάλλw, also (έλλw, ɛɛv (EM, see below).
•COMP άvα-, άлo-, εµ-, ¿к-þáλλw, etc.
●DER 1. ßóλoç [m.] ‘throwing, neť (A.); in compounds лpóßoloç [m.] ‘projecting
land', etc. (Od.). 2. ßoλń [f.] ‘throw(ing)' (Il.). Many derivatives of þóλoc, Boλý: see
DELG. 3. ẞéλoç [n.] 'throwing weapon' (II.); cf. ►ßɛλóvŋ. 4. þéλεµvov ‘arrow, javelin'
(II.), see below. 5. -ẞλns in compounds, е.g. лроßλń, -ñτoç projecting' (II.). 6.
Bλña 'throw, throwing weapon; wound'. 7. -ßλŋσiç in compounds, e.g. ȧváẞλŋσiç

=== page 123 ===

198
Bαλlwτń
'delay' (II.). 8. -Bλŋστрov (on the σ see Schwyzer: 706) in ȧuqiẞληστрov 'net' (Hes.).
See ▶Baλλntús, ► ßλñtpov.
Few derived agent nouns; from a simplex only Bλntɛipa óiσtwv (Alex. Aet.); nouns
in -ɛus were derived from the compounds, e.g. -ẞoλɛúc (Hell.) in àµœißoλɛúç, etc.;
also daßλǹtwp (Man.) = diáßoloç. Formation in -(é)tŋs in ékatŋßeλé-tns (II.) ·
*-gelh₁-teh₂-, = έkatnßóλos.
Adjectives: from the compounds we have derivations in -ßŋτɩкós and -ßλñoчoç,
and adverbs in -dŋv, e.g. ñapaßλýdŋv (II.).
Deverbative Bolέw has been assumed for the perfect forms in ẞεẞonaτo,
Beẞoλnuevos, etc., but see Chantraine 1942: 435.
•ETYM IA ẞáλλw and Arc. (ελλw, -Sέλλw point to original *g"-. The geminate -\\-
derives either from a yod-present PGr. *g"al-ie/o- or from a nasal present PGr. *g*al-
n-e/o-, perhaps for originally athematic *g"]-n(e)h,-. The full-grade in Arc. Sέλλw
(\é\\w) was taken from the aorist (elev• ëßalev (H.), which represents an old root
aorist *h,e-gelh₁-t (see Harðarson 1993a: 162ff.), while ẞalov continues the zero
grade of the same root aorist: 3pl. *g*lh,-o-nt. The old full grade Bελε- is also found in
►ékatŋßɛλétŋs and in ẞéλɛµvov (note that Fur.: 151 considers the latter to be a
substrate word because of the suffix, and connects лελεµí(w). The form ẞλn- derives
from the zero grade *g"lh,-C-, which is certain for ẞλητo (see Francis Glotta 52
(1974): 11-30). On the meaning of ẞληv, see McCullagh KZ 115 (2002): 59-78.
Remarkably, this seemingly old verb has no certain cognates. Av. ni-yräire probably
stands for *ni-ynā- (Insler KZ 81 (1967): 259-64), while the appurtenance of ToA klā-
, ToB klāyā ‘to fall', Skt. ud-gūrṇa-, and Olr. atbaill 'dies' is highly uncertain
(notwithstanding LIV² s.v. *gwelh,-). Not related to Skt. galati ‘to drip', OHG quellan
'to bubble up', etc. (= LIV² s.v. 2.*gelH-). See Boúλoµai, ► ßɛλóvŋ.
ßaλλwtý [f.] a plant, ‘Ballota nigra' (Dsc.). ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM Cf. ►ẞálapis, ẞális, and Strömberg 1940: 151. Fur.: 301 compares
►ẞαλaúστov (also -woτov); the interchange av/ w is well-attested in Pre-Greek
words, as is the suffix -wt-.
ßaλµóc [m.] ([n.]?) · στñ¤ô¢ ‘breasť (H.). ◄PG▷
⚫ETYM Unknown. According to Grošelj Živa Ant. 3 (1953): 196, the word is Pre-
Greek. For the suffix, cf. λaquóç. Fur.: 172, 178 convincingly compares paλòv. Tò
στεpεòv kúкλwμa τо στéрvov 'the solid circle of the breast' (H.). The variation
bertween Baλμ- and paλ- points to Pre-Greek origin.
Báλoauov [n.] 'balsam', both the shrub and its oil (Arist.); 'Comiphora
Opobalsamum' and 'Chrysanthemum balsamita'. <LW>
•VAR See below.
●DER ßaλσaµívη ẞoúóðaλµov³ (Ps.-Dsk.), ‘ò̟лoßáλσ¤µov' (Plin.); cf. Strömberg 1944:
38.
•ETYM Assumed to be Semitic, cf. Akk. bašāmu, Hebr. bāśām, and Arab. bašām ‘id.'
(Lewy 1895: 41). Fur.: 143 etc. argues for Near-Eastern origin on the basis of the --
(and Arm. apr(a)sam and the variants лάλσαμov, ßλáσaµov, þáρσaμov). However,
Schrader-Nehring 1917 (s.v. Balsam) state that the plant originated from the far south
:
ẞávavoos, -ov
199
(Africa) and became known only after Alexander. On plant names in -aμov, -aμoç,
see Schwyzer: 494 and Chantraine 1933: 133.
Baußaivw [v.] 'to chatter with the teeth, stammer' (K 375, Bion, AP). <ONOM➤
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic verb. Cf. ßaµßaкúчw (Hippon.), ßaµßαλúчw (Phryn., H.);
yoyyúчw, etc., as well as ẞaußaλɛiv (H.). See Weber RhM 82 (1933): 193². Not related
to Baivw, as per Schwyzer: 647. Cf. ► ßaßáčɛiv, ► þáẞalov.
.
ẞaußакevτpiαι [f.] ·μаууаνεúτρiαι, oi dè qapµáкiσσαι, oi dè laλouσa 'tricksters,
others: women using charms, others: chattering women', also tò dè ßaµßaкɛiaç
Xápɩv. papµaкɛíaç xápiv ‘thanks to sorcery' (both H.). <LW India?>
●var þáµßakovs toùs qápµakovs Kíλɩkeç kaλoñoɩv 'the Cilicians call drugs ẞ.' (AB).
Also ȧẞauẞáкevτoç 'not seasoned', of food (Pyrgion apud Ath.), for which there are
no obvious cognates.
•ETYM A word for medicine or charms; the meaning aλoñσal must have arisen
secondarily. The basis is identical with that of the word for 'cotton', ẞaußáкiOV;
cotton was thought to have a medicinal effect.
ẞaµßáкiov [n.] ‘cotton' (Suidas s.v. лáµßač). ◄LW India?>
●var raµßakis (AP 6,254,6, Myrin.), лáµßaž (Suid.).
●DER ßaµßakoɛidńs, v.l. for ßoµßvк- (Dsc. 3,16).
⚫ETYM Cotton is first mentioned in an inscription by Sanherib. Hdt. 3,106 describes it
as Indian. Theophrastus says that it was found near the Persian Gulf. We find the
word in MP pambak, whence Arm. bambak, Oss. bæmbæg. From Greek were
borrowed Lat. bambax, bambagium with Ital. bambagia; through the influence of
Bóμẞu (because of the formal and semantic resemblance?), Ital. bombagio, MoFr.
bombasin. Another Gr. designation is έpiórov; cf. MoHG Baumwolle. Pliny uses
the word gossypium. Unclear is whether ẞúσσos in Pausanias also means 'cotton'.
For 'cotton', see also кáρлασоç. Cf. ►þaµßaкɛúτpiai.
ßáµßalov · ¡µátiov. kai tò aidoĩov. Opúyɛç ‘a garment; genitals (Phrygian)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Probably two words. See L. Robert 1963: 153 (the treatment of Campanile SSL
3 (1963): 83-85 is incorrect).
þaµßpadwv, -óvos [f.] kind of sprat (Epich.). <PG?(V)►
●var ßɛµßpáç (Aristomen.), µεµßpáç; ßeßpáda• à¤ɛpívny ‘kind of smelt' (H.).
•DER μεμẞpaqúa s.v. ► ȧqún.
•ETYM The word has been derived from ẞpá(w, by comparison with ẞaußpaoμós.
кaxλaσμóç 'splashing of water' and ẞaµßρáσσε ópуíɛται 'is angry' (Cyr.), under
the improbable assumption that the fish was named after the sound it makes (e.g.
Strömberg 1943: 63ff.). Given the formal variants, the word is rather Pre-Greek. For
the formation, cf. animal names like τεvеpηwv, τεpηdwv (Schwyzer: 529f.,
Chantraine 1933: 360f.).
ẞávavooc, -ov [adj., m.] ‘of an artisan; artisan'; metaph. 'vulgar' (IA). <PG(S)►
⚫DER ẞavavoía.

=== page 124 ===

200
Bavvátal
⚫ETYM According to EM 187, 40, a haplology from *Baúvavoos, in turn a compound
of Bauvos 'furnace' and aw 'scoop, light a fire'. Although this would fit
Hesychius' explanation Bavavoía. лãʊa téxvò dià лupóç. кupíwç dè ǹ repì tàc
kaµívovs, kai rãs texvitys xalkeùç ½ xpuσoxóos ßávavoos 'any art using fire; in
common usage, the art using furnaces; also, any metal worker or goldsmith is a
ẞávavooc', we have to disregard that as folk etymology (Kretschmer Glotta 21 (1933):
178). Evidently, it is rather a Pre-Greek word. For the suffix -σoç, cf. кóµлασoç and
opušos (see Pre-Greek).
þavvátai [f.] · ai λožoì kai µǹ iðuteveis ódoì rapà Tapavtívoiç. tò dè avtò kaì
ẞávvaτpo 'slanting and non-straight roads (Tarant.); the same as ẞávvatpoť (H.).
<?>
⚫ETYM DELG suggests that ẞ- represents F-, and that the gloss contains *Fapv-, as in
ẞávvɛa 'piste des moutons'. Uncertain.
ẞavwτóç [m.] 'vase used as a measure' (pap. IIIª, Callix.). <PG➤
•ETYM Pre-Greek; for the suffix -wɩ-, see Pre-Greek (the -w probably goes back to
-au-, which makes comparison with ẞávavσoç attractive).
þáлτw [v.] ‘to immerse, so as to temper or color' (Od.). <?►
•VAR Aor. Báyai.
•DER 1. ẞaqń ‘dipping, temper, dye' (IA); 2. þáµα ‘dye' (Pl.); 3. þáчç ‘iď (Antiph.).
Baqɛús 'dyer' (Pl.), Baqɛiov (Str.); verb ẞαлτíw, which appears metathesized in
ẞɩлτáчw (Epich.).
•ETYM Often considered to be a yod-present comparable to ON kvefja 'to press
down, immerse, choke' and OSw. kvaf [n.] ‘depth' (thus Frisk). However, this does
not explain the -a-. The by-form þúлtæv· þaлtíšɛv (H.) is perhaps formed
analogically after dúлtåv (see ►dúw) or кúлtɛv; it does not reflect an original zero
grade.
Bápa pov [n.] 'cleft, abyss'. <PG➤
=
•VAR ẞépεеpov (Hom.; Aeol.?, Chantraine 1942: 114), from which (through
*ẞépеpov) ẞéеpov (Euph.), Arc. (épεpov (representing 8-; cf. (ε\\w
SEλw s.v.
► ẞáλλw).
•ETYM The connection with ẞiẞpwoкw 'devour' cannot be maintained: *gerh₂- |
*g"rh3- would give *Sɛpo-/ Bpw-, *ẞap(o)-. In view of the variants, the word is rather
Pre-Greek, like pápay\; see Beekes 1969: 193 (on alleged Illyrian cognates, see
Krahe IF 58 (1942): 220).
•
Bápaкoç [m.] ixОùç лоóç H., a freshwater fish in a Boeotian inscr. <PG?>
•VAR Cf. ẞapкaños (Theognost.).
⚫ETYM Cf. Thompson 1947 s.v. and Lacroix 1938: 52. Fur.: 116 compares ẞáλaypoc(?).
ẞápač, -koç [m.] a kind of cake (Epil.). <PG(S,V)>>
.
•VAR ßńpně (Ath.; H. also ßŕpač); лápač (Test. Epict.); ßápakes. tà époqvpáµata
τñç μáčη 'dough kneaded in advance for a cake' Attikoí dè ßýpηkaç dŋλoi dè kai
tǹy toλúrŋy ‘it also designates the ball-shaped cake' (H.).
Bápnkes
201
⚫ETYM A foreign word (thus already Bechtel 1921, 2: 368), and typically Pre-Greek
(suffix -ak-, variants ẞ/л). Cf. ►ẞápikes.
.
ßápßaž · iépač napà Aíßvoɩ ‘hawk, falcon (Libyan)' (H.). A PN on Thera, Masson RPh.
93 (1967): 231. <?>
ETYM See Fauth Herm. 96 (1968): 257f.
ẞápßapoc, -ov [m.] 'foreign(er), non-Greek', also adj. ‘uncivilized, raw' (IA).
<ONOM
•COMP Bapẞapóqwvos 'of foreign speech' (Il.).
•DER ẞapẞapikóç 'foreign' (Simon., Th., X., Arist., etc.) with Bapẞapíкiov name of a
garment (pap.); Bapßapwdns (sch., Tz.).
Denominative verbs: 1. Bapẞapi w 'to behave like a foreigner, to side with the
barbarians = Persians' (Hdt.), whence ẞаpẞаpiσμós use of foreign language or
customs, language mistakes' (Arist., Hell.), adv. ẞapßapiστí ‘in a foreign way, in
foreign language' (Ar., Plu. et al.); 2. ßapßapóoμai 'to become a barbarian, become
uncivilized' (S.).
ETYM An onomatopoeic reduplicated formation, which originally referred to the
language of the foreigner. One may compare Skt. (post-Vedic) barbara- ‘stammer', a
designation of non-Aryan peoples. In spite of Sumer. barbar 'foreigner' not of
Babylonian or Sumerian origin. From ẞápßapos was borrowed Lat. barbarus.
Comparable formations in other IE languages are mentioned in Pok. 91f. and
Mayrhofer EW Aia 2: 217 s.v. balbalā-.
ßápßitos [f.] or [m.] musical instrument with many strings (Pi.). <PG(S,V) ►
•VAR Later also -ov [n.], also ẞápшτо (EM 188, 21, called Aeolic); also ẞápμoç
(Phillis apud Ath. 14, 636c) and ẞápwµos (Ath.).
•ETYM Foreign word (Phrygian? See Str. 10, 3, 17). Grošelj Slavistična Revija 4 (1951):
250 connects it with pópμy, as does Fur.: 173, etc. The word is most probably Pre-
Greek, with a suffix -T-. Perhaps the strange -w- in the variant ẞápwμos can be
explained from *bar"m-? Otherwise, one might consider the possibility that this -w-
is the result of epenthesis.
ẞapßós [m.] = µúστpov 'spoon' (Ar. fr. 341). ◄?►
•ETYM Unknown.
ßapdñv [v.] · tò ßɩášɛoðaɩ yuvaïkaç. Aµñpakiŵtai 'to coerce women (Ambrac.)' (H.).
<?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Not convincing are the solutions by Pisani RhM 97 (1945): 62¹4 (of
Illyrian origin, from *ber- 'bear', which would also be the source of Lat. forda
'pregnant'), Bechtel 1921, 2: 282 (as original *Ƒαpбñv related to ǎpdaλoç ‘dirt'), and
Pischel BB 7 (1883): 334 (to Skt. mṛdnáti ‘squeezes').
Bápŋkɛç [m.]/[f.]? = τà ovλa τŵv ódóvτwv, σiaуóvεç, τoλúлη 'the gums, cheeks; clew
of wool', etc. (EM 188, 37ff.). <PG?➤
•VAR ►ßápakeç ‘toλúëŋ' ‘ball-shaped cake' (H.).
į

=== page 125 ===

1
202
Bápic 1
ETYM Cf. ßaßρñкεç ‘id.'. Is the word from Pre-Gr. *barw-ak-? or simply
reduplicated, i.e. *ba-b[a]r-ak-?
ẞāpɩç 1 [f.] ‘Egyptian boat, a kind of raft' (A.). <LW Eg.>
•VAR Gen. -SOS, -LOS.
⚫ETYM The word is of Egyptian origin, cf. Copt. bari 'boat' (Hemmerdinger Glotta 46
(1968): 241). From ẞapıç is borrowed Lat. bāris, barca (< *bārica) 'bark'. Fur.: 325, on
the other hand, considers all these words to be loans from a Mediterranean
substrate. On the 'strengthened' form Boúẞapis (Philist. 56), see Chantraine 1928: 16.
Bapis 2 [f.] large (fortified) house' (LXX). Toponym, see L. Robert 1963: 14-6, 128.
<LW Illyr.?>
•VAR Gen. -Sos, -ews.
•ETYM Probably Illyrian (Krahe 1955: 39, with ā from au); cf. ►ẞavpía · oiкía EM
(Messapian) and ẞúpiov. Alternatively, we may consider the possibility that the
word derives from a Pre-Greek form *bar"-, which would explain the interchange
Bap- ~Baup-~ẞup-.
Bapiτns [m.] name of a bird (Dionys. Av. 3, 2). <?>
•ETYM Unknown; any connection with ẞãpıç 2 is not compelling.
Bápixoi · äpveç ‘lambs, sheep' (H.). →άpńv.
Bapváievos →uápvaiai.
Bapos [m.] kind of spice (Mnesim. 4, 62). <?>
•VAR ẞápov [n.].
•ETYM Unknown.
ẞapúɛç [m.]/[f.]? · dévdpa ‘trees' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown. The word is hardly related to ẞopéaç, as per Osthoff 1901: 48. See
▶ ß入apor.
ẞáp<v>ka • aidoïov лapà Tapavtívolç. kai repóvn 'the genitals [Tarant.]; a pin' (H.).
1?1
⚫ETYM Unknown. Completely uncertain is the idea of von Blumenthal 1930: 10f. that
the word is Illyrian-Messapian, related to Lat. feriō, forō, and to opάpuy, etc.
Comparison of the suffix (Lat. verruca) is pointless, since the -u- is a conjecture.
ßapús [adj.] ‘heavy', of tone 'low, deep' (Il.). ◄IE *g"rh₂-u- ‘heavy'.➤
•COMP ẞapú-убovéos (Pi.), etc.
●der ßapútns, -ŋtos [f.] (Att.). Denominatives: 1. ẞapúvw 'weigh down, oppress'
(Il.); 2. ßapúðw ‘be weighed down' (Il.); 3. Bapéw see below. Further ßápos [n.]
'heavy weight' (as a simplex Hdt.; in compounds (Xaλкo-, oivo-ẞapńs) already Il.).
The ptc. Bɛẞapηws (oïvw ßeßapnótɛç, -óta y 139, T 122) cf. oivoẞapńs (A 225;
metrically lengthened oivoßẞapɛiwv 1 374, к 555), from which oivoẞapéw (Thgn.);
thence (?) ßεßаnµévos (Pl.); Bópŋuai (Sapph. Supp. 25, 17) with Aeol. vocalism;
Bapέw (Hp. Morb.).
言
Báσкavoç, -ov
203
•ETYM The word is identical in formation with Skt. gurú- and Go. kaurus 'heavy',
whereas Lat. gravis reflects *graus < *g*reh₂us. The full grade is seen in the Skt.
compar. gárīyān. Lat. brūtus ‘heavy, brute', which goes back to an extended *g™rH-u-
to-, is originally an Oscan word. Cf. ►ẞpiapóc, ►ẞpíew.
Báp(a)uos =Báptos.
.
Baσayiкopos [adj.] · ó ¤ãσσov σuvovσtáčwv (Hippon.). <?►
•ETYM Is this word corrupt? See O. Masson 1962: 173. Shall we compare άyíkopos
'quickly satiated s.v. ► äntw?
Báσavoc [f.] 'touchstone, examination, inquiry (by torture), agony' (Pi.). <LW Eg.
(Lyd.)►
•DER ẞaσavíτηs λíos (H., Ptol.). Denominative Baσavi w 'put to the test, inquire
(by torture)' (IA).
•ETYM From Eg. bahan, a stone, which was used by the Egyptians as a touchstone of
gold. It came to Greece via Lydia (Avdía λíðoç, B. 22); the σ for h is unclear. See
Sethe Berl.Ak.Sb. 1933: 894ff.; Kretschmer Glotta 24 (1936): 90. In Plin. 36, 58,
basaniten became basalten by mistake, which is the origin of basalt. See Niedermann
Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 127f.
Baoɩɛúç [m.] 'king (especially the Persian king), prince' (II.). <PG(S)►
•DIAL Myc. qa-si-re-u /gasileus/; fem. qa-si-re-i-ja; qa-si-re-wi-jo-te /gWasilewjontes/.
⚫DER Feminine forms: Baoiλɛia (Od.); ßaσiλíç (S.), ẞaσiλnis (Man., Epigr. Gr. 989, 3),
Baoooa (inscr. Athens 337ª, com.; formed to stems in -к- from words like
Kilioσa, Poivɩooσa, etc.); ßaσíλivva 'wife of the apxwv Baσɩλɛús in Athens' (D.; cf.
Kópɩvva, Þíλɩvva, etc., hypocoristic, Schwyzer 491; differently Chantraine 1933: 205).
Diminutive Baoiλíσкoç, also name of a snake, fish, etc. (Hp.; cf. Strömberg 1943:
91f.), adjectives ßaσ½ïos (Od.), Baoilɛos (Att.); fem. also Baoilŋïs (Il.);
substantivized ntr. ẞaoλ½ïov, ẞaσíλɛov, 'king's palace' (IA). Denominative verb:
Baσiλɛów (II.).
⚫ETYM Beside Baσiλɛúc, Greek has two other words for 'king', koipavos and ► ǎvač.
Baoλɛúc is the youngest; see Wackernagel 1916: 209ff. The word is no doubt of Pre-
Greek origin (i.e., not a loanword from another country); labiovelars are well-known
in this language.
Báoкavoç, -ov [adj., m.] 'one who bewitches, sorcerer, slanderer' (Att.). <EUR?>
•DER Baσkavía, Baσкávov 'bewitching, witchcraft'; Baσкoσúvη ‘id.' (Poet. de herb.,
mag. pap.), for ẞaσк(av)oσúvη. Denominative verb ẞaσкaívw 'to bewitch'.
•ETYM Generally connected with ẞáσкɛv. Aéyɛv, кaкoλoyɛïv, and further with
►ẞázw. However, þáσкɛv in the sense ‘kakoλoyɛïv' may have been influenced by
ẞáσкavoç itself. Kretschmer 1896: 2484 unconvincingly considered the word to be a
borrowing from a Thraco-Illyrian representative of oŋuí, qάσкw. One has also tried
to connect Lat. fascinum, which cannot be a loanword from Greek; perhaps the Latin
and the Greek have a common origin in a substrate. Cf. further ►ẞaσкεvτaí,
► BáσKIOL.

=== page 126 ===

204
Baokapitalv
}
Barávn
205
Baokapišɛɩv [v.] · okapíšeɩv, Kpñtεç ‘to jump (Cret.)' (H.).
•ETYM DELG thinks it is derived from þáσкw after the verbs in -apíšw, but this
hardly explains the meaning 'jump'.
Báora →fiaké入n-
Baoкāç [m.] kind of duck (Ar. Av. 885, v. 1. Arist. HA 593b 17), PG(V)►
•VAR Acc. -ă. Also ẞoσкáç, -ádos (Arist. ibid., Alex. Mynd. apud Ath. 9, 395d, and
qaʊkáç, -ádos [f.] (Alex. Mynd. ibid.); H. gives all forms.
•ETYM Cf. άττayãç, έλaσãç, and other bird names; see Chantraine 1933: 31. The o of
the variant Boσкás can hardly be due to influence of þóσкw; nor is the ẞ- (compared
to the o- of paσoкáç) Thracian or Illyrian. For the gloss ßoσкáç. qaσkáç. Aíßioi (H.),
Latte suggests: "<I>\uptot? (propter ẞ pro q)". However, the variation has to be
taken seriously: it clearly points to Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 168; unconvincing,
however, is his link with Bulg. patka, Span. pato, p. 251; Sardian busciu, adduced by
Thompson 1895 s.v. Boʊкáç, is nothing better).
Baσкaúλns [m./f.] an unknown utensil (POxy. 1, 109, 22, III-IVP). <LW Celt.>>
VAR Perhaps also μаσкаvληç.
⚫ETYM Grenfell-Hunt adduce Lat. vasculum, but this would hardly yield the Greek
form. WH considered it a loan from Lat. bascauda (also m-) ‘metal washing-basin'
(Mart.). Thus Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 660, but his proposal that the Greek
word is due to a misreading of A for A is improbable; it could well be a phonetic
development. Fur.: 212 thinks that the word is Pre-Greek, as shown by b/m and d/l.
He further recalls Talmud. maskel 'basin', which would confirm its Mediterranean
origin. However, Martialis 14, 99 appears to prove that the word is Celtic (or perhaps
a European substrate word).
ßaokevtaí [m.]/[f.]? · qaσkídeç, ảyкáλat 'fascides; bundles' (H.). <EUR▷
•VAR Cf. BáσкIOι Sεσμaì opvуávwv 'bundles of firewood' (H.).
ETYM It has been suggested that the word is Macedonian, cognate with Lat. fascia
'binding'. On the assumption that paσкídɛç is the genuinely Greek reflex,
Szemerényi KZ 71 (1954): 212f. proposed that it is Illyrian. However, the word rather
seems to come from a European substrate; see Beekes 2000: 21-31. Not related to
▶ páokwdog.
Báoкw →ẞáčw and ẞaívw.
ßaσoápa [f.] ‘fox' (sch. Lyc. 771), 'dress of a Bacchante' (EM, AB, H.) from the skin of
a fox; 'bacchante' (sch. Lyc. 771, EM), 'impudent woman' (Lyc., EM). <LW Eg.>
•DER Baσσápiov 'fox' (Hdt. 4, 192; Libyan), Baσσapɛúç name of Dionysus (Hor.),
Báoσapos = Báкxoç (Orph.); denominative verb àva-ßaσoapéw 'to break forth in
Bacchic frenzy' (Anacr.).
•ETYM Herodotus calls the word Libyan, which seems to be confirmed by the
etymological connection with Eg. wasar, Copt. bašor (Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971):
660, without reference). Szemerényi further tries to maintain the connection with
Hitt. uaššuųar ‘clothing', rightly rejected by Neumann 1961: 19. Fur.: 257³ notes that
Báoσos = Baσoápa (EM), and that -ap(oc) is a frequent Pre-Greek suffix.
•
Báσσoç [n.] · ovdetépws. ǹ ßñooa ‘a neuter word meaning glen, vale' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Schwyzer RhM 81 (1932): 199f. (who argues against the accentuation ẞãσσoç)
proposes *ßáð-σoç. However, beside ßñσσɑ, we find Dor. ßãσσɑ, so that þáσσoç
could be a variant of ßñσσα and ßãσσa; if so, Pre-Greek origin becomes likely. The
suggestion of Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934): 258f. that Lat. bassus 'lowly' is borrowed
from this word remains quite uncertain. See ẞñoσa, ► þaðúç.
þaστá [n.pl.] · úлodýµiata.'Itaλiŵtat ‘sandals (Ital.)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Johansson IF 19 (1906): 121 takes ẞaστá as Messapian and connects it with
OHG, etc. bast 'bark'. Jacobsohn ZfdA 66 (1952-1953): 238ff. thinks it is an Iranian
(Scythian) Wanderwort, i.e. Av. and OP basta- 'bounď (cf. nɛt̃oµa, nεvеεрóç); this is
uncertain. Not related to Lat. fascis (see BaσкEUτaí). See Meid IF 69 (1965): 232.
þaστá¶w [v.] ‘to lift up, raise' (Od.). <?>
•VAR Aor. Baστάσaι, late ẞaστážai.
•DER ẞáσταуμа 'load' (E.), Baστayń 'transport' (Lyd.). Here also ßáσtpaxais tous
τраxnλovç. Boшwτoi 'necks, throats (Boeot.)' (H.) (EM), from ßáστaкaç (from
*ßáσtaž, cf. *µáστα and Bechtel 1921, 1: 303) contaminated with τpáxηλos; further
Baʊtpaxn\íšɛi• tíɩ twist the neck, overpower' (H.) and ẞaστpaxaliσai.
tpaxŋ\iáσai; from carrying on one's back. ßaσtépviov from Lat. basterna.
•ETYM Unknown. Connection with Baívw (see Schwyzer 1937: 70) is not convincing.
ẞaovvíaç [m.] kind of sacrificial cake, from the island Hecate near Delos (Semos 3).
< PG➤
●der ßaovµviátŋs ‘baker of ẞ.' (inscr. Corycos, Lycia).
•ETYM See von Wilamowitz 1931: 264. Fur.: 245 adduces the variant with -uv-, which
proves Pre-Greek origin.
Báτalo [m.]
кαταлúуwν кai ȧvdpóyuvos, кívaιdos, кluτos ‘a lewd man,
hermaphrodite, catamite; lascivious' (H.); = лpwкτóç ‘anus' (Eup. 82 apud Harp.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also ẞáτTalos; ßatās, Badāç and σлátaλoç ‘wanton, lascivious'; see below.
•DER ẞaταλíčoμa 'to live like a ẞ.' (Theano), -íw (τà óлíσðα, of a horse) 'to turn to
and fro' (Hippiatr.). Shortened (cf. Chantraine 1933: 31f.) þaτãç. ó кataqepńs.
Tapavtīvoɩ ‘lecherous person (Tarantinian)' (H.); ßadãç. kivaidos ws Aµepías (H.).
Demosthenes was called Báτ(T)αλoç in his youth (D. 18, 180; Aeschin. 1, 126; 2,99),
which perhaps referred to a speech-defect, namely pronouncing \ for P and thus
Battaλíčɛv for ßατταpíčɛv ‘to stammer'; see Holst Symb. Oslo. 4 (1926): 11ff.
•ETYM There has been an attempt to connect the word with ẞaτéw ‘mount'; however,
that ẞadãs would be formed after ßádŋv, ßadí¼w is quite improbable. Fur.: 154, etc.
convincingly connects it with σлάτаλоç, which indicates Pre-Greek origin, along
with the interchange ɩɩ/ τ/ d.
Bατávη ⚫ETYM Sее ►лατávη.

=== page 127 ===

206
Batéw •var Batɛúw → Baívw.
ẞãτάкη [f.] a cup (Diph.). <LW Iran.?>>
Batέw
ETYM The word is Persian, according to Ath. 784a. Rudgren Glotta 38 (1958): 10-4,
compared MoP bad(i)yah < *bātiaka-. Thence the Lat. LW batioca. Fur.: 179
compares ßátoç, ßádos ‘measure for liquids' (LXX), and the suffix -αкη (15864), but
see ▸ Báτoç 2.
Baτis [f.] 'skate, ray' (Epich.); also a bird, 'stone chat'? (Arist.); also 'samphire,
Crithmum maritimum' (Plin.). <PG(V)>
•ETYM If the word is identical with ►þóτç, the vowel interchange points to Pre-
Greek origin, which is to be expected for a fish name anyhow.
ßátos 1. [m.] and [f.] 'bramble, Rubus ulmifolius' (Od.). Also a fish, ‘skate' (Epich.),
because of its spines (Strömberg 1943: 47). ◄LW▷
•VAR ẞátov [n.] ‘blackberry' (D. S.).
•DER ẞaτía (ẞaɩɩá?) ‘thickeť (Pi.); ßátov ‘mulberry on Salamis' (Parth.); ßaτís
‘skate' (Epich.); name of a bird (Arist. HA 592b 17: öpviç okwλŋkooáyoc); plant
name 'Crithmum maritimum' (Plin.); ßaτóɛç 'thorny' (Nic.). Not here Batíɛα =
σñμa Mupívηs (B 813) and the PN Báτяα (Hellanic.), which are rather Illyrian.
⚫ETYM Bertoldi Glotta 21 (1933): 258ff. points to μavτía 'blackberry', identified as
Dacian by Dsc. 4, 37, as well as several other plant names pointing to *ma(n)t-, e.g.
Alb. man ‘mulberry', Gheg mand; see also Fur.: 209, 272. A widespread
Mediterranean word. See also DELG.
Báτoç 2 [m.] a measure for liquids (LXX). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Also Bádoç.
•ETYM Probably a loan from Semitic (Hebr. bath); see LSJ Supp. s.v. þαíð, þαíðapa.
Cf. ►ẞaτiáкn.
ßáτpaxoç [m.] ‘frog' (Hdt.). Also name of a fish, Lophius piscatorius' (Arist.), see
Strömberg 1943: 92f. ◄PG(V)►
...
•VAR Ion. ẞáеpaкos with displacement of aspiration, a common phenomenon (cf.
Lejeune 1972: 59f.); þóτpaxos (Hp.) and ßpóτaxos (Xenoph. 40, see Bechtel 1921(3):
109); ßpaτáxovç. ẞaτpáxoυç (H.); further ẞpоúxετos. ẞάτраxov бε Kúлριоι (H.),
perhaps after ẞpуxáoμαi; þúρеαкoç. ßáτpaxoç (H.); ßρúτ×α· þáτpaxoɩ µкpoi
ěxovtes oúpás ‘frogs having small tails' (H.) (cf. ßpúw?); ßplayxóvnv. þátpaxov.
Ôwkɛĩç (H.), a mistake for *ßp(a)τ-ayx-?; ßpóyxos· þáτpaxos (H.) may also be a
mistake; also ẞλíкavoç, Bλíкapoç, ßλíxa(c) (H., EM, Suid.); Bλíτaxos (H.). ßáßaкói.
úñò’Hλɛíwv téttiyɛç ‘cicalas”, úïò Пovtikŵv dè þáτpaxoi (H.), see ►ßaßáľw.
●DER Diminutive ßaτpáxιov (Paus.), also plant name 'Ranunculus' (Hp., Dsc., cf.
Strömberg 1940: 119); ẞаτраxíσкol· µépos ti tñç кɩеáрaç a part of the lyre' (H.); on
the suffixes Chantraine 1933: 408. Batpaxitns, -ītis (λíðoç; because of the color;
Plin.).
•ETYM Several variants are due to folk etymology or taboo, and also to simple
phonetic variation. A priori, a local (i.e. Pre-Greek) form is to be expected for all of
these forms; the variation a/ o points to this. This holds for ẞapdaкoç as well, if this
i
Baukóg
207
is what must be read in H. for ẞapaкoç. ẞápaxoç (Fur.: 1842; see Latte). The form
may in origin have been onomatopoeic paτ-ax- (Grošelj Živa Ant. 6 (1956): 235),
with which compare ßpεкɛкεε; or even *brt-ak-, from which the forms with -v- may
have originated (ßúpðakoç, ßpútɩxos). The hopeless forms playxóvn, ßpóyxos (is
this form to be read for pоúxετoc?) contain a (misread) prenasalized *(ẞpaτ)αyxoç,
which would also point to Pre-Greek origin. The forms ßλк/x- and ßáßakoɩ are
etymologically unrelated. For the meaning 'hearth', Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971):
660 refers to Alb. vatër.
ẞατταpíчw [v.] denoting a speech-defect, perhaps 'to stammer' (Hippon.). Cf. Holst
Symb. Oslo. 4 (1926): 11. <ONOM▷
•VAR Cf. ẞаττapioµoîç. qlvapiais 'nonsense' and Báττoç. ...τplóówvoç,
ioxvóqwvoç 'feeble; thin- or weak-voiced' (H.).
●der ßattapioµós (Phld.). Cf. Báttapos (Herod.).
•ETYM The word is comparable to ßattoλoyéw ‘stammer' (Ev. Matt. 6, 7, Simp.)
together with ẞattoλoyía. ȧpyoλoyía, ákaɩpoλoyía ‘ill-timed speech' (H.). Cf. the
PN Báττоç (Hdt. 4, 155). See also ßáτaλoç. Is it onomatopoeic? Cf. Lat. butubatta;
on Baττoλoуéw, see especially Blass and Debrunner 1959: Anh. § 40. See also Pok. 95.
Bavßáw [v.] 'to sleep' (E. Fr. 694, etc.), also factitive 'to put to sleep' = кoчµíšw (H.).
<ONOM
•DER ßavßwv [m.] = öλioßoç (Herod.), also ßavßá. τiðývy Aýµntpos ‘nurse of D.'.
σaívε dε кai кoiλíav, ŵç лαρ”Еµлεdoкλεï (fr. 153) 'it means the womb/belly too,
like in Emp.' (H.); see Headlam and Knox 1922 to Herod. 6, 19; on the formation
Schwyzer: 478. Baußaλíw to make sleep' (Alex. 229) see ►ẞavkaλáw.
•ETYM A nursery word.
ßaußvкãves →ẞaîßvč.
Baüчw [v.] 'to bark; revile, cry, etc.' (A.). <ONOM▷
DIAL Dor. Baüodw.
DER Also Bauẞúčw (pap.).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic form from Baú Baú (Com. adespota 1304). Cf. Lat. baubor
'bark', Lith. baubti 'cry', of cows, etc.
Bavkaλáw [v.] 'to lull to sleep, nurse' (Crates).
•DER ßavкáλŋ ‘cradle' (Sor.).
⚫ETYM Denominative from ẞaúкaλoç, known only from EM 192, 20: Baúкaλov.
µaλakišóµevov, tpvqɛpóv, kai wp¤ïστóv ‘softened, effeminate, affected. This in turn
is a derivation from ▸ þauкóç, cf. ► ßavßáw.
ẞavкáλov [n.] vase with a narrow neck (pap.). <LW?>
⚫ETYM One supposes Egyptian origin. See Nencioni Riv. degli stud. or. 19 (1940): 98ff.
DELG suggests ẞavкaλáw, which does not seem probable. On the forms (including
MoFr. bocal) Leroy-Molinghen Byzantion 35 (1965): 214-20. Cf. кavкáλlov (s.v.
►кαйкoç) and ẞiкoç.
Baukóç [adj.] 'affected, prudish' (Arar. 9). <PG?>

=== page 128 ===

208
Baivos
⚫COMP ẞаuколаνoupyos (Arist. EN 1127b 27).
•DER Bauкides [pl.] 'women's shoes' (Com., Herod.), Bauкíčoμa, -íw 'to play the
prude, еpúлτεσal' (Alex. Com.); ẞаuкισμóç a dance' (Poll.). PN Bauкoç. On
► Bavкaλáw, see s.v.
⚫ETYM Cf. yλaukóç, σavкóç, and poλкóç for the suffix. It is probably a Pre-Greek
adjective (but the comparison in Fur.: 325 with чaukpós, µavkupóç is not evident). It
is uncertain whether the gloss 'women's shoes' belongs to this lemma. For Iranian
comparanda, see Rundgren Orientalia Suecana 6 (1957): 60f.
Bañvoç [m.] ‘furnace', also = xuτpóñoυç (stand for a) pot' (Eratosth., Max. Tyr., etc.).
<PG?>
•var Cf. ßaúvŋ. káfuvos ǹ xwvevtýpiov ‘furnace' (H.).
ETYM Technical term without etymology. Fur.: 236 compares aůvoç kάuvoç.
Baupia →Úplov, Bāpic.
ẞSáλλw [v.] 'to milk (cows)' (Pl.). <PG➤
•VAR Mostly present (rare aorists ßdáλaç, ßdńλaio). Also ßλλw (sch. Theocr. 11,
34) (cf. ßέλλa ‘leech').
•DER ßáλσıç ‘suction' (Gal.). Difficult daλoi paqidɛs ‘garfish, Belone acus'
Đaλáooiai. kaì qλéßes kpioowdeis ‘varicose veins' (H.) (not a mistake for ßɛλóvη);
ßɛλλaɩ ‘id.' (H.), misread for ßdaλoí, or a variant of *ßdελλai?
•ETYM It is deceptive that ẞdáλλw looks like a zero grade of ẞdéλλ-(a). The meaning
'leech' and the group ẞ8- show that it is a Pre-Greek word, as does the geminate --
(perhaps bdal-, or *bal-). If ẞdaλoí does belong here, it exhibits the Pre-Greek
interchange -\\\/λ-.
ẞSÉλov [n.] ‘(aromatic) gum of the oriental wine palm' (Dsc., Plin.). <LW Sem.>>
VAR Also ẞdéλλa (J.).
•ETYM An Oriental loan; cf. Hebr. bedōlaḥ and Akk. budulḥu. See Lewy 1895: 45 and
Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 84f.
ẞdɛλvpós [adj.] 'disgusting, loathsome' (Ar.). <PG>
•DER ẞSελúσσoμаι (-ττ-), fut. ßбελúчoμα 'feel a loathing' (Hp.), act. -úσow, -ÚτTW
(LXX) together with ßɛλvyuía (Cratin.), etc. Verbal adjective ẞελUкτós
(ßбɛλúкτpoлoç from *ßελvкto-τpоëо A.). PN Bdɛλv-kλéwv (Ar.), ßdɛλuxpós
(Epich.).
ETYM BOɛλupóç is mostly explained as formed from ßdé-w with a suffix -λv- (as in
On-v-c), but this is hardly possible. A verb in -ɛw does not yield a stem in -ɛ to
which suffixes can be added. Moreover, a suffix -λu- probably does not exist: Oñλuç
seems rather to be built on a λ-stem (DELG, Frisk), and -λv- was certainly no longer
productive (Chantraine 1933: 121). One scholar assumed a suffix -λ- in ßdéλλwv.
tpéµwv » ßdéwv, ßdéλɛσðaɩ· кoiλioλutɛïv (H.; the forms are doubted) and in ßdóλos
'stench' (Com. Adesp. 781; cf. yaλɛóßdoλov, s.v. yaλén). However, these forms are
just as difficult: there was no stem ßdɛ- to which a suffix could be added. Moreover,
the derivation of ßdɛλupós from ßdéw is not clear semantically (in H., forms are
often explained with μσéw): it is easy to understand that the verb was later
BELÉλOTES
209
influenced by the meaning of ẞdελupóç. Therefore, the word cannot be explained as
an inner-Greek formation. An analysis as ßɛλ-up- then seems more probable, both
components of which are probably Pre-Greek: ẞd- and the suffix -up- (see Pre-
Greek).
ẞdéw [v.] 'to break wind, fart' (com.). <IE *pesd- 'break wind (smoothly)'>
•VAR Aor. ßdéσaɩ (AP) and ßdɛñσaı (Hierocl.).
•DER BS-Úλλw 'break wind (for fear)' (Ar.) and ẞdévvvµa. ¿ккεvoñμι τηу кoιλív
‘empty the intestines' Suid. (ßdévɛoða H., correct? Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 97f.) Cf.
ẞdóλoç, ßdɛλupós and ßdɛλúσσqμai.
•ETYM ẞdéw goes back to an old PIE verb *pesd- reflected in e.g. Ru. bzdeť, Lith.
bezdu, bezděti, Lat. pēdō < *pezdō. Thus, ßdéw itself must come from *ẞzdźw; see
Schwyzer: 326 add. 5. Cf. also ►лépdoμai.
ßέßaɩos [adj.] ‘firm, steady' (Parm., IA). <GR>
•der ßeßaiótns [f.] ‘stability' (Pl.), denominative ßɛßatów ‘establish’ (IA).
⚫ETYM Generally connected with ßñvaɩ, though the formation is unclear; it is hardly
from *ßɛßa-vo-10ç, as per Wackernagel 1916: 113' (cf. *fid-vo-los > idvios).
ẞéẞŋlos [adj.] ‘allowed to be trodden, profane, permitteď (trag.). ◄GR▷
DIAL Dor. Béßäλoc, Cyrene ßáẞaλoç.
⚫ETYM Like ẞéẞaios, the word is connected with the perfect ẞéẞη-кα, but the
formation is not quite clear. Cyren. Báẞaλoç is also problematic; cf. Kretschmer
Glotta 18 (1930): 235.
=
Beppáda →Barippadov.
ßéßpo§ [adj.] · άyaðós, xpnotós, kadós 'good, useful/good, beautiful (H.). ◄PG?>
ETYM Acc. to Grošelj Živa Ant. 3 (1953): 197f., it is a foreign word, related to Lat.
for(c)tis, etc. (?). For the ending, cf. ßippoέ s.v. ► ßippos. The word is probably Pre-
Greek. See Beßpóç, ►ẞρoкóç.
ßɛßpós [adj.] 'stupid' (Hippon. 40 Masson). Wvxpós, tetvqwµέvos ‘cold/stupid,
stupid' (H.). PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also Bεuẞрóç· τετучшμεvoç, лáрετоç 'stupid, relaxed' (H.).
ETYM We may compare ẞéßpot, with the semantic development 'good' > 'too good,
stupid'. See Masson ad loc. The prenasalized form indicates Pre-Greek origin.
ẞɛελoлεç [pl. m./f.] · s̟µávteç olç άvadoñσi Aakɛdalióvioi tovę viкηóópovç ‘leather
straps with which the Lacedaimonians honored victorious men' (H.). <PG?>
•VAR The notation -εt- or -- was discussed in antiquity, An. Ox. 2, 289; Bourguet
1927: 973.
•ETYM Neither Solmsen 1901: 255 (*fied- to yis [= fic]· чµáç, Lat. vieō 'bind, plait') nor
Kalén GHÅ 26:2 (1920): 105ff. (*Fεσε-εoεs to Skt. veṣṭate 'wrap round and
*λopos 'tie, strap'; cf. apyεloqot) offer a persuasive hypothesis. The word is
probably non-IE, and must be analyzed as ẞ(ε)ελ-ол- with the frequent Pre-Greek
suffix -oл- (кaλañpoч).

=== page 129 ===

210
•
Beikádec
þeiкádɛç · dépμata Opeµµátwv vóow еavóvτwv, Аáкwveç ‘skins of animals perished
from disease (Lacon.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
=
Bεioμual →Bios.
ẞékos [m.] ‘breaď (Hdt. 2,2). ◄IE? *b¹h,g- ‘bake'.➤
•ETYM Identified as Phrygian by Herodotus, which is to be confirmed by its
occurrence in Phrygian inscriptions. Hipponax (fr. 125 Masson) seems to identify it
as Cyprian (which may have borrowed it from Phrygian as well); see O. Masson 1961:
167f. and Solmsen KZ 34 (1897): 70. Fur.: 297 compares ẞéσкɛpoɩ· äρτoɩ úлo
Aaкwvwv (H.): "eine altes vorgriechisches Restwort, das sich in drei entlegenen
Gebieten (Zentral-Kleinasien, Kypros, Peloponnesos) behauptet hat."
•
Béλa noç 'sun'. •ETYM See εïλŋ 1.
þéλekkos [m.] · Ŏonpióv ti ¿liqepès \ałúpw µéyeƉos épɛßív¤ov ëxov ‘pulse resembling
a caper spurge (Euphorbia Lathyris) having the size of a chick-pea' (H.); also in Ar.
fr. 755. <PG?>
•VAR Ms. -US.
●ETYM Fur.: 150f compares ►лéλɛkus, méλekkov, -os, just as Kretschmer 1896: 106f.
before him.
Bé入equva → Bá入入w.
ßέλλiov [adj.] · átvxés, Kpñtes ‘unfortunate (Cret.)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Fur.: 389 compares yɛλσóv. átvxés (H.).
ßɛλloúvns [adj.] · tplópxns. Aákwveç ‘buzzard (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
●ETYM As a hypothesis, Grošelj Živa Ant. 4 (1954): 166 connects aλóc, Lat. Balliō.
For the formation, cf. ►έploúvηs.
ßɛλóvŋ [f.] ‘needle' (Arist.). <?>
●DER Diminutive Beλovíc (Hermipp.); both also as fish names, see Strömberg 1943:
36f.
•ETYM Cf. лεpóvη, etc., on which see Chantraine 1933: 207. Connection with ßáλλw
is not semantically evident. Fick 1874-1876(1): 404 therefore connected the word with
Lith. geliù, gélti 'sting'. Is ẞ- for 8- Aeolic?
ßéλtɛpoç [adj.] ‘better, the best' (Il.). ◄IE? *bel- ‘strong'.➤
⚫VAR BEλTíwv (post-Hom.); superlative ẞéλτατoç (A.), þéλτστoç (Att.).
•DIAL Dor. (Theoc.) ẞévtiσtos (λt> VT).
•DER From BeλTíwv: ßελτiów (Ph.). On ►ȧßéλτɛpoç, see s.v.
⚫ETYM Mostly connected with Skt. bála- [n.] 'force', Lat. de-bilis 'without power',
OCS boljii 'bigger', etc. But the formation is unclear, most notably the --. Seiler
1950: 91ff. assumes *ßελτós 'desired' > 'better' (it is hardly related to Boúλoμa
because of the ẞ-, but cf. Cret. Séλτov. ȧya¤óv [Phot.]). On bála-, etc., see the
discussion in Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 215.
Béµßič, -ikos →ßóµßos.
ßeµßpás, -ádos →ßaµßpadwv.
BETTOVIKŃ
211
ßévɛtos [adj.] ‘blue', in the circus (Lyd.). ◄LW Lat.➤
●DER ẞevetɩavós ‘partisan of the Blues' (M. Ant. 1,5).
⚫ETYM From Lat. venetus; see E-M s.v. and André 1949: 181f.
Bévdos →padÚç.
=
ßɛpßépɩov [n.] ‘kind of headdress' (Anacr. 21, 3; LSJ Supp.). <?►
•ETYM The word has been compared with Bɛppóv and Bεpóv. Saσú. Older
suggestions which assumed the meaning 'shabby garment' must now be abandoned.
Bɛpyatos [adj.] 'romantic, invented' (Alex. P. Oxy. 1801, Str. 2, 3, 5). <GR>
•ETYM Alexander (DELG; LSJ: Antiphanes) of Berga in Thrace was famous for his
'tall tales'.
Bépeopov →Bápadpov.
Bεpεvíkιov a plant (H.); 'nitre' of good quality (Gal.). <<GR>
•DER BEρEVIкápiov víτpov (Orib.); Bɛpeviкides 'women's shoes' (H.).
•ETYM The word derives from the name of queen Berenike.
ẞɛpíкokкov [n.] ‘apricot' (Gp.). <LW? Lat.?>
⚫VAR BEPIKÓKKIOV.
⚫ETYM DELG mentions that Latin has the word praecoquum 'precocious' (perhaps it
was considered a precocious variant of the peach), which was transcribed in Greek as
épaiкókkɩov (not in LSJ); note Gr. ►кóккoç ‘grain of fruit'. However, it is unclear
how this could have yielded ẞepíкoккov. Through Arab. albarquq and Catal.
a(1)bercoc, the word reached French as apricot.
Bépkios · ¿λaqoç úïò Aaкwvwv ‘deer (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. See Bourguet 1927: 634.
.
Bɛpкvíç [m./f.]? άкpíç 'locust' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Evidently cognate with ẞpoбкoç, etc. Fur.: 129 50 considers it a different word,
but a suffix -n- (without a preceding vowel) is typical for Pre-Greek (see Pre-Greek).
ßɛpvwµɛða [v.] ·кλŋpwσóµεða. Aάкwvɛç 'we shall appoint (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
•VAR Cf. Beppéau кλŋpwσai H., which may be corrupt.
⚫ETYM Kretschmer KZ 35 (1899): 605 and Fraenkel Glotta 2 (1910): 37 connect the
word with μépos, μεípoчa with dissimilation from μεp-v-. von Blumenthal Glotta 18
(1930): 153f. argues for Illyrian origin (cf. qepvý).
Beppóc →pippoE.
Béakepol → Békog.
=
ẞettovikń [f.] ‘Paul's betony, Sideritis purpurea' (Paul. Aeg.). <LW Lat.>
●ETYM From Lat. uettonica, betonica; see André 1956.

=== page 130 ===

212
Bεūdos
Bɛudos [n.] 'rich woman's dress' (Sapph.); = ayaλμa at Hermione (EM 195, 52). <LW
Phryg▸
⚫ETYM See Pfeiffer 1949-1953 on Call. fr. 7, 11. ẞɛñdoç is borrowed from Phrygian
beudos, the statue of a goddess, which itself derives from PIE *bheud-os- (Lubotsky
JIES 36 (2008): 96-98). The comparison with -yaúdŋs by Fur.: 116 is improbable.
ẞñкα [f.]? • ȧvadevopás 'vine that grows up trees' (H.). <PG?>
●ETYM Fur.: 212, etc. compares άµašis. yévos otaqulñs åïò ávadevdpádos (H.); this
is possible, but doubtful (on p. 393, he even adduces a Georgian word).
ßýla = olvos. →πndós.
Býlŋua · kwλvua, opáyua ¿v rotaµų. Aάкwveç ‘an obstacle, fence in a river (Lacon.)'
(H.).
ETYM Related to Messen. ληuα. The word is from *Féλ-vημα; see εiλw and
► ắλńs.
ẞηλóç ⚫VAR ẞñµa. →ẞaívw.
ßýž [m., f.] ‘coughing' (Th.). <PG?►
•VAR Gen. ßèxós, also Bηкóç, see Schulze 1933a: 703.
•DER Diminutive ßηxíov, also a plant ‘colt's-foot (Hustenkraut), Tussilago farfara', as
a medicine against coughing (Lehmann KZ 41, 94, Strömberg 1940: 85f.).
Denominative ẞnoow, ßŕžw, žßnža.
•ETYM The root noun ẞr denotes the illness as an agent. Fur.: 128 notes BÝкlov and
лηxioν as variants and concludes that it is Pre-Greek. Ultimately, the word might be
of onomatopoeic origin (but certainly not IE, pace Pisani Arch. glott. ital. 53 (1968):
63f.).
ßŋpíxaλkov [n.] · tò µápavňov, Aάkwvɛç H., perhaps to be corrected in μápaеpov
'fennel' (DELG). <?>
⚫ETYM Cf. ǎvеpuσка· äуpia λáxava ларАлλñσа ȧvýšoι, oỉa кai τà µápavеa 'wild
herbs close to dill, like the µ.' (AB 404, 23). See Hesselman 1932: 94. To be read as
Fηpi- (Bechtel 1921, 2: 373).
ßǹpvλos [f.] a precious stone, 'beryl' (LXX). <LW India▷
•VAR ẞηpúλov ‘id.' (LXX).
•DER ẞηpúλλoç a plant (Ps.-Dsc.); Bnpv\\ítns (\íðoç, Cat. Cod. Astr.).
•ETYM The stone came from India in Hellenistic times; the name was Prākr. veruliya
< veļuriya (Sanskritized vaiḍūrya-). The word is Dravidian, perhaps derived from
Vēļūr, present-day Bēlūr, a town in southern India; see Master BSOAS 11 (1943):
304ff. Bnpuλoc is a back-formation from ẞηpúλλov; see Leumann Glotta 32 (1953):
2156.
ẞnoaλov 'brick' (Moses Alch.). <?>
•VAR Cf. Bioaλov (Alex. Trall.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The word is no doubt non-IE.
ßñσσa [f.] ‘wooded combe, glen' (Il.). <PG?>
•DIAL Dor. ẞãoσa
•DER Bηoońεis (Hes.).
~
Biẞpwokw
213
•ETYM On the assumption that ẞabús reflects a zero grade (*h₂), ßñσσa has been
connected with it as an e-grade root variant, i.e. *ẞão-a; this would imply, however,
that Bévos, certainly related to Baús, is secondary. I would rather take ẞéveos and
Babús as reflecting old en In ablaut, so that ẞñσσa cannot be connected.
Alternatively, ẞñσσа was thought to be cognate with Av. vī-gā9- [f.] ‘ravine', Skt.
gáhate 'plunge' (or gāhá-), OIr. báidim ‘sink into the water' (LIV₂ *gweh₂d¹-). Any
relation with ẞutós can be excluded, but Fur.: 330 refers to the gloss ẞpñσσa
ẞñσσα (H.) and opts for Pre-Greek origin (Bρñσσα is a town and a promontory in
Lesbos; see Fick 1905: 63).
ita →ä入pa.
ßŋtápµwv [m.] ‘dancer' (0 250, 383, Man.); åïò toũ ǹpµooµévws Baívɛɩv ‘to walk fitly'
(H.). <GR?>
•DER Secondary ẞétapµós ‘dance' (A. R. 1, 1135).
•ETYM Usually connected with ȧpapíσкw, etc., though there is no other compound
in -apµwv governing the first member (as in лoλv-кτ½µwv; see Sommer 1948: 12²,
117). The first member seems to be derived from ẞñvat, but there is no clear solution.
Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 35 assumes haplology from *ẞημаτ-áрμwv, which
seems possible; Brugmann Sächs. Ber. 51 (1899): 199' starts from * *ẞ or
(with dissimilation) *ßñτрov = Skt. gátram ‘limb'. Belardi Doxa 3 (1950): 198 assumes
ẞ-τ- (nom. *ẞns), like Sw-t- (nom. Súc). Cf. also Bechtel 1914: 81f.; Knecht 1946: 34;
Schwyzer: 442.
-
ßíã [f.] ‘strength, force' (II.). ◄IE *gwei- 'conquer, force'>
•DIAL Ion. Bín.
•COMP úлépßɩos (II.), ávtíßios (II.), etc.
•DER ẞíaчoç ‘violenť (Od.); ßiatás [m.] 'strong' (Alcm.). Denominative verb ßiáoµat,
ßiάw (II.), ßiášoµai, þráľw (II.). Biaσµós (Eup.), ẞiαστp (Gorg.) ‘violent man',
BlaσTIкós 'using violence' (Pl.). On ►ßivέw, see s.v.
•ETYM Presumably, a derivative of the verbal too *g"ei-, reflected in Skt. jáyati
'conquer'. Conversely, a connection with Skt. j(i)yá- 'robbery' (?) can be excluded,
since its direct cognate Av. ziiä- points to *g"- instead (Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 574).
Biẞáw →ẞaívw.
ßißλos →ßúßλoç.
ßißpwoкw [v.] 'to devour' (originally non-presentic; for the late present see below).
<IE *gerh,- 'devour'>
•VAR Perf. Béẞpwкa (II.), ßɛßpółos A 35 (see Chantraine 1942: 429), þεßpwσετaι
(Od.), ßéßpwμai (A.), aor. ßpwv (h. Ap. 122), pass. ¿ßpóny (Hdt.). Other forms are
late: ẞpww (Herod.), fut. ßpwσoμai (Hell.), ßißpwσкw (Babr.), ávaßpwoкwv (H.),
Eẞpwoa, -a (Hell.). Desiderative Bpwoɛíw 'desire to eat' (Call.).

=== page 131 ===

214
Biōnv
•COMP wμo-ẞpwç, -τoç ‘eating raw meat' (E.), Sηuo- 'devouring his people', Ouμo-
Bópos (11.), cf. Lat. carni-vorus, Skt. aja-gará- 'devouring goats', Av. aspō.gara-
‘eating horses'.
⚫DER Action nouns: ßpшτúç (II.) and ßpwσiç (II.) "food' (Chantraine BSL 59 (1964):
11-22); also ẞpwuŋ (Od.), ßpãµa (IA); ßpwτóv (E.); ßpóσчμoç ‘eatable' (A.). Agent
nouns: ßpwτýp (A.), as ‘moth' also ßpwστúp (Aq.). Bopá ‘food (of a predator)’
(possibly cognate to the *goreh₂- that seems to be set forth by Lat. vorāre). On
► ẞoúẞρwστis, see s.v.
•ETYM Derived from IE *gerh-, which formed a root aorist (which fits the
semantics; 200íw is to a certain extent used as the corresponding present). The zero
grade is found in the verbal adj. ßpwτóc, which agrees morphologically with Lith.
girtas 'drunk' and Skt. gīrná- 'devoured'. Greek generalized this zero grade ẞpw-,
further regular in the plural of the aorist and perfect, as in e.g. ßpwç [2sg.aor.]. The
aor. is found in Arm. eker [3sg.] (*he-g"erh3-et) from the pres. utem and in the Skt.
aor. garat, gārīt. Sanskrit has a perfect jagāra for *ge-g"orh¸-e and a present giráti <
*grh-e/o-; the latter agrees with OCS žuro 'devour'. Lat. vorāre may be
denominative. ►ẞápal pov is not related. Cf. ► Sépη.
ßídŋv · ɛidos, kpoũµa, Σoqokλñç Akpidíw “ŵs έnyáλleiv ßídŋy te kaì žuvavλíav”.
äλλoɩ ßíðvv (H.) ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also Budoí. oi µovoikoí, i кpoñµáti. σoqws Kpŋoív (H.). Also yaλɛĩ ßídvv LSJ
Supp.
•ETYM A musical term, the details of which are unknown; even the case form of the
lemmas is unclear. Fur.: 194 correctly concludes that the word is Pre-Greek
(variation / v). Kathakis-Karamanos Glotta 83 (1985): 165, considers ßíduv as the
original form of the word.
Bidv(1)01 [m.pl.] 'supervisor', designation of Spartan officials supervising male youths
(Laconia, Messenia [IIª], Paus.). <IE *ueid- 'see'>
•VAR Also Bideot; Pausanias's Bidatoɩ is wrong.
•ETYM Probably from *Ƒɩdvσ-toɩ, i.e. the zero grade of the perf.ptc. ɛidwç, for which
cf. Hom. fem. Fidvĩa (see ►olda). Cf. the Mycenaean PN wi-do-wo-i-jo. Striano
Glotta 68 (1990): 40-48, tries to explain the two notations ßidu(1)oɩ, ßidɛoi as
rendering *wid-wos-ios. Further comparanda are Att. idñ(i)oi. σuvíσtopεç, páptupes
'witnesses' (Solon apud Ar. fr. 222), and iduĩot ... oi tàs qovikàs díkaç kpìvovtes
'they who judge in cases of murder' (H.). The form with -ɛ- is not well explained; see
Bechtel 1921, 2: 355ff. On ẞt-/ ßɛt- cf. Bourguet 1927: 973. A parallel formation was
considered for Béßatos, but this is hardly correct.
Bitakiwv [gen.pl.] дкρшv λíеwv 'small stones' (Suid.). <LW Sem.?, PG?(S)>
•
⚫ETYM Lewy KZ 59 (1932): 190 compares Aram. bizqā, biz qā, etc. 'broken piece,
small stone'. However, -aк- could also represent the Pre-Greek suffix.
BIKía [f.] 'vetch', vicia sativa (Gal.) <LW Lat.>>
•VAR BIKíov [n.].
•ETYM From Latin vicia.
Bippn
215
ßīkoç [m.] ‘vase with handles', also a measure (Hdt.; see Solmsen 1909: 65; also
Hippon. fr. 142 Masson). <LW Eg.?, Sem.?>
⚫DER Diminutive ẞiкíov (pap.), ẞiкídiov (Suid.).
⚫ETYM Egyptian origin has been considered: cf. Eg. b:ķ.t ‘oil flask, used as a measure'
(Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 241). E. Masson 1967: 78ff. considers Semitic
origin. Not related to Lat. fiscus, as per Fur.: 294, nor to ► þavкáλiov.
Billos · tò àvdpet̃ov µóplov tò koɩvwç ßiλλív ‘the lot of a man, commonly ẞiλλiv'
(Hdn. I, 158). <PG>
•VAR Also ßiλãs (ib.).
•DER PN Bíλλoç, -apos (L. Robert 1963: 16-22).
•ETYM Fur.: 325 compares ȧßíλλov. ȧvôpɛĩov (H.). The prothetic vowel may point to
Pre-Greek origin, which is expected anyway. Biλív is Ephesian if the form is a nom.;
cf. the Pre-Greek words in -v (see Pre-Greek).
BiuB入is →ÚB入os.
ẞīvέw [v.] ‘coire, futuere' (Ar.), also τò ßíα µíуvvoða 'to have intercourse by force'
(Sol. apud H.). <?>
•VAR Bevéw (Olympia V₁), impf. ẞiveokóµnv, fut. Bivǹow.
•DER Desiderative ßɩvηtiáw (Ar.), as if from *ßivηtýs; cf. ŵvntiáw : [wvntńs :]
Wvéofial.
•ETYM ẞīvéw is a vulgar word that is often connected with ßía 'force', but the
association with 'force' may be secondary. It has also been compared with Çáɛɩ. Bɩvɛĩ
(H.), but it is unclear how these words should be related. Skt. jináti ‘overpower,
suppress' cannot be related in view of Av. zināiti, which proves *g- (instead of *g"-);
nor can we connect Sivéw, as the meaning is too far off (pace Palmer Minos 5 (1957):
62). Basing himself on the variant Bɛvéw, De Lamberterie (CEG 1) proposes a
connection with *g"en- ‘woman', with ĩ from kĩvéw; in that case, however, we would
expect *Sev-. See
Bios →Biw-.
váži.
ßɩós [m.] ‘bow', also ‘bowstring' (II.), see Trümpy 1950: 66f. ◄IE *g*ieh2- ‘string’▷
•VAR Rare after Homer, replaced by tóčov.
•ETYM Related to Skt. j¡yá-, Av. jiiā- ‘bowstring'. Schindler 1972: 20 assumes a root
noun *gieh2-, and derives the Greek word from *gih2-0- ‘provided with a
bowstring'; this, however, depends on whether the meaning bowstring' is found in
Greek. Schwyzer 1950: 324 starts from an original fem. o-stem, which is rather
doubtful. The word is probably further related to Lith. gijà 'thread', OCS ži-ca
'string'; yet note the slightly different root *giH- ‘string, sinew, etc.' in Lat. filum
'thread', etc.
ẞippη • лupáуpa, oi dè Spéлavov ‘pair of fire-tongs; pruning-knife' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Fur.: 232, 251 compares Svan berež ‘iron'; Akk. parzillu, Hebr. barzel, Ugar.
brśl, South Arabic przn ‘id.'; furthermore, OE bræs, OFris. bras(penning), Basque
burdin (cf. Dussaud 1953: 162). Is the word from Asia Minor?

=== page 132 ===

216
Bippos
入adeic
217
Bippos [m.] 'kind of cloak' (Artem.). <EUR?>
•VAR ßíppoč⋅ daoú, Makɛdòveç ‘dense (Maced.)' (H.); ßɛppóv, þεipov. Saσú (H.);
ẞɩрρшеñvαι· ταлεɩушОñуαι 'bе reduced' (H.).
•ETYM Cf. Lat. birrus ‘id.'; was the word originally Celtic? Cf. MIr. berr, W byrr
'short'. See Friedmann 1937: 92. Is it a European substrate word?
Bioẞn [f.] Bioẞηs (-v?). Sрéлavov Aéyouσ Mɛσάло. кαì εоρτǹу Вoßаια, у µεiç
kλadevtýpia ‘pruning-knife [Messap.]; the festival Bɩoßata, a festival at pruning-
time' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. Messapian?
ßíota§ ¿ ß³ <µetà> ßaoiλéa лapà IIεpσais 'the second after the king (Pers.)' (H.).
<LW Pers.➤
•ETYM Certainly a mistake for *ẞɩτaž, a borrowing from a Persian word for 'viceroy',
known from MP as bidaxš. The Persian word is discussed by Szemerényi Acta
Iranica 5 (1975): 363ff., but our gloss is not mentioned there, and the article does not
bring us much further. Nyberg Eranos 44 (1946): 2372 analyzed the first part as Iran.
*bitiya 'second'. Amm. Marc. 23, 614 has it in the form vitaxa. Later Greek has
Bidažnç, tutiážns.
Biowv, -wvos [m.] 'European bison' (Paus.). <EUR▷
•ETYM Cf. OHG wisunt. The Greek form comes from Lat. bisōn, and this in turn
from Gm. (thus DELG), of which the ultimate origin remains unknown (Kluge²² s.v.
Wisent). See Pok. 1134.
Bíτoç [?] 'binding of a wheel' (Ed. Diocl.). <LW Lat.>
•ETYM From Lat. uitus.
BittaKog →vittaKOg.
ßɩw- [v.] ‘to live' (Il.). ◄IE *g″eih¸- ‘live' (or *g*h¸(e)i-?)►
•VAR Aor. έßíwv, ßɩwvai; s-aor. ¿ßíwoa (Hdt.), med. fact. έßɩwσao (0 468); fut.
ßɛíoμaι, ßéoµαι (Il.; old subjunctive, cf. doμat), also Biwσoμat; perf. ßɛßíwka.
ẞióμɛσða (h. Ap. 528 for *Bεtoμε0a? DELG); pres. ẞiów (Arist.).
•DER ẞíoc (way of, means of) life', ßioτń [f.] ‘id.' (Od.), ßíoτoç [m.] 'id.' (II.); also
Cret. Bíɛτos (see below). ßɩwtós 'worth living' (Att.), ßɩwσчoç ‘to be lived (Hdt.).
With 8 from *g" Heracl. ¿vdedɩwкóta, if = ¿µßeßɩwkóta. In PN Bɩo-; Bítwv < Bio-.
⚫ETYM The root ended in a laryngeal, and the zero grade *gih,- is seen in Av. ji-ti-,
OCS ži-tv, as well as in Lat. vīta, Osc. bíitam [acc.]; with a suffix -uo-, it
appears in
Skt. jivá, OCS živú, Lat. vīvus, etc. (all ‘alive'), and in the thematic presents derived
from this adjective: Lat.vīvō, Skt. jívati, OCS živo̟, ToA śāw-, ToB śāy- ~ śāw- (all
'live'). The forms with short i (e.g. Go. qiwa-, MW byw) may be due to pretonic
shortening, i.e. Dybo's Law (Schrijver 1991: 355, 526). Greek does not have forms with
long i, which is understandable since all forms attested have a vowel after the root:
*gih-o-> ßíoç, *gih¸-eto-> ßíoτoç. (For the formation, cf. Oávaτoç; for the most
recent discussion on this, see Vine 1998.) Cret. ẞíɛτos will have restored the suffix
-ετoç. One noteworthy form is byɩns, which must derive from *hiu-g™ih¸-ēs, with
analogically restored vocalism of the ending. The aorist έẞiwv has been
reconstructed by Francis 1970: 76ff. with the suffix -eh,-, seen in the Greek “passive"
aorist (e.g. ¿µávηv); thus, *gih¸-eh,- yielded ßɩw-. A full grade I *geih3- (probably
old; cf. Klein 1988: 272) must be assumed for ẞέ(í) oμat. The same full grade is seen in
Skt. gáya-, Av. gaiia- 'life' < *ge/oih3-0- and in ORu. gojь 'peace'. A full grade II
*gieh is seen in Av. jiiä-tu- 'life' (Skt. *jyā-tu- in jīvātu-, which must have been
reshaped after jivati); Gr. (wƑós is probably from this root form (rather than from
the zero grade of the root, as per Klein (l.c.): 257ff.). Since this root form seems to be
found in Gr. (w-w, Čñ-v as well (see ►(ww), Schwebeablaut cannot be avoided (pace
Anttila 1969: 137). Arm. kea-m ‘I live' (see LIV²) is difficult to judge. On the basis of
BSI. accentual reflexes, Kortlandt reconstructs *g"h₂(e)i- (e.g. Kortlandt 1992: 2374);
for Greek, one would have to assume laryngeal metathesis *g"h3i- > *g"ih¸- (in pre-
consonantal position).
ßλáßŋ [f.] ‘damage' (A.) ◄PG➤
•VAR Bλáẞos [n.].
•DIAL Cretan áẞλoñés. ȧßλaßés H., åßλoñía = ȧßλáßeia, kataßλáñɛðai
(inscr.).
⚫COMP ȧẞλaẞns.
=
•DER ßλɑßɛpós ‘damaging' (Hes.), formed to åẞλaßńs like кpatɛpós to ȧkpatýs
(Schwyzer 482). Verb ßλáлτw, ßλáyaɩ, ¿ßλáßŋv, originally ‘to hinder, disable' (Il.),
also without suffix ßλáßɛtai (T 82, 166 = v 34), probably old (Chantraine 1942: 311).
Bλáчis (Pl.).
•ETYM On the basis of the Cretan forms, Bλaß- is mostly considered to have resulted
from ẞλaл- by assimilation. With ßλaл- as the original form, it is connected with
Skt. mŕc- f., marká- m. ‘damage', Av. mǝrǝṇcaitē ‘destroys', which require a
reconstruction *mr/lk"-. However, the development to -λo- (which is Arc.-Cypr.,
Myc.) is not found in Cretan (although one might consider an Achaean substrate on
Crete). On the other hand, the interchanges a ~o and ẞ ~ л are typical for Pre-
Greek; Fur. 144 compares àẞλaßía áẞλoлíα with ȧpaßñoa, Cret. ȧpoлñσaɩ. A
connection with Lat. mulceō ‘stroke, caress', mulcō is doubtful because of the velar
and the meaning; see WH s.vv. Puhvel HED suggested a connection with Hitt.
gullakuwan, but this means 'scheusslich' (Tischler 1983ff. s.v.). Cf. ►ẞláσnos.
Bλayis [?] · knλiç. Aάkwveç ‘stain (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
-
·
⚫ETYM Unknown. von Blumenthal 1930: 23f., suggests connecting the word with
Bλaí<c> ßλŋtý. Aάкwvɛç 'stuck (Laconian)' (H.).
ßλadeĩç [adj.] · άdúvatoi έ ådvváτwv ‘powerless'; ßλadapóv. ¿kλeλvµέvov, xañvov
'flaccid, porous' and ẞλadapá. ǎwpa, µwpá, wµá ‘untimely, sluggish' and ßλáðav [?].
vw0pŵç ‘slothfuľ, and ßλadóv· áðúvatov ‘powerless' (H.). <IE? *mld-u->
•VAR These words are sometimes identified with ẞladús Hp. Aër. 20; perhaps
Bλadapós bottle' Gal. 19, 88 is related, too.
ETYM In spite of the variation, mostly only Bladús is cited, although the
appurtenance of that form is actually doubtful. On that basis, the word is often
equated with Skt. mrdú-, Lat. mollis < *moldui- 'soft', and further connected with

=== page 133 ===

218
B入aí
►ȧμaλSúvw. Evidently, the latter connection is impossible in IE terms because of the
prothetic vowel; Arm. mełk 'weak, soft' shows that this group had no initial
laryngeal. Rather, I would take the variation in the suffix and that in the initial
(presence vs. absence of a prothetic vowel) as indications of substrate origin,
although this cannot be proven independently.
ßλaí [?] · ß\nxń [corr. for ßλntŋ], Aάkwveç ‘bleating (Lacon.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown; see ▸ẞλayiç.
Blatós [adj.] 'bent, distorted' (Hp.). <PG(V)►
•VAR лλaσós (Phot.).
•der ßλaiowdns, Blaioótns, Blaloóoµai, ßλaiowois (all Arist.).
⚫ETYM Formation as in yavσós, yaµyós, Nožós (Chantraine 1933: 434). Lat. blaesus
'lisping, stammering' may eventually be borrowed from Greek? Pre-Greek origin is
probable in view of the variation ẞ ~ л.
ßláž, -kóc [m., f.] ‘indolent, stolid, stupid' (Ar.), from 'weak'? Also a fish (Erot.),
Strömberg 1943: 33f. <IE? *mlh₂(e)k- ‘weak’▷
•DER Bλaкiкóç, Blaкwdŋs ‘id.'; ßlaкíaç. ¡×¤ùç лiós ‘a kind of fish' (H.).
Denominative Baкɛúw [v.] 'to be slack', whence ẞλaкɛía, ßλáкɛvμa.
•ETYM The word cannot be of IA origin. If it is related to μaλaкóç, one might posit
*mlh₂-k- (which would explain the long a) next to *mlh2-ek-. Without the suffix -k-,
Skt. mla-tá- 'soft' and OIr. mláith 'tender, soft' (< *mla-ti-) may be related, but Lat.
flaccus should be left out. Perhaps Ru. molčáť' 'be silent', which may go back to
*mlh₂k-, is related, too. ßxpós is also possibly related (but not ►µúλŋ, nor
►áµaλSúvw, both of which are outdated comparisons). See ►µaλaкóç.
B入ártw →入án.
Bλaστávw [v.] 'to bud, sprout, grow' (A.). <?>
•var Aor. ßλaʊtɛïv, intr. fut. ßλaσtǹow (Thphr.), trans. aor. ¿ßλáσtŋoa (Emp.),
perf. Bεẞλáστηкα (Hp.), έẞλáστηкα (E.); recent formations Bλaστέw, ßlaσtáw.
•DER ßλáσtŋµa ‘offshoot' (A.), Bλaσtкós (Thphr.); deverbal ßλaσtós ‘id.' (Hdt.),
ẞλáστŋ ‘origin' (S.), whence Blaσtέw (Thphr.).
•ETYM The aorist ßλaστɛïv is the basis of all the forms. Its analysis is uncertain;
perhaps *ẞλα-tεïv (or ßlad-, ßlaτ-). Connection with ßλwpós ‘tall' is impossible
if the words are IE (an ablaut *mld"-, *mlōd"- is impossible in an adjective); the same
holds true for μoλεúw 'cut off (and transplant) the shoots of trees' (cf. further
►Bλwoкw). From other languages, OHG blat (etc.) leaf is often proposed as a
comparandum.
Blaoqnuéw [v.] ‘to speak profanely, slander' (Arist.). <?►
•DER ẞλaσqŋµía (Democr.); ßλáoηµoç 'evil-speaking' is rare and late (D.).
⚫ETYM ẞλασqηµéw and ẞλaσoŋµía seem to be older than ẞλáσqηuos, which is
reminiscent of avôpaya¤ía (from ávǹp ȧya¤óc), etc. The second element seems to
be on, the first is uncertain (ßláßoç, μéλɛoç, etc.). Cf. the synonymous
▶ keptoµéw, ▶Aotdopέw, which have no etymology. On MoGr. ẞλaσtnµw, see CEG 5.
B入ÉTw
ßλáτta [f.] ‘purple' (Ed. Diocl.). <LW Lat.➤
•ETYM From Lat. blatta, which is itself of unclear origin.
ßλattoĩ [v.] · raidаpiεúεται 'behaves childishly' (H.). <ONOM▷
219
•ETYM Latte ad loc. compares Lat. blatiō, blaterō ‘babble, chatter'. The word is an
onomatopoeic formation; cf. ►ẞaßáľw.
Bλaúτη [f.] 'slipper' (Com.). <PG(V)►
●var þλañdeç. ¿µßádes, kpηäïdes, oavdália 'slippers, boots, sandals' (H.).
●DER Verb ßλautoũv. úrodéeiv. ǹ rλýσoɛiv oavdalių, oi dè úrodŋµat ‘to put on
shoes, or: strike with a sandal, or with a shoe' (H.) (from Men.).
⚫ETYM Although it is often assumed reshaping that ẞλaudɛç results from analogical
reshaping of ẞλañταɩ after έµßádεç, it is preferable to explain the variation τ ~ ♪ as
Pre-Greek.
=
Blei→Bλétves.
ßλɛµɛaívw [v.] ‘to boast' (Il.; σ0έveï ßλeµɛaívwv, -vεi ℗ 337, etc.). <?>
•VAR ȧẞλεμéç. ȧσ0εvéç, paulov 'weak' and άßλεµýs. ätodµos, átepnýs, rapeiµévos
'without courage, without joy, slack'.
•DER άẞλεµns ‘powerless' (Nic.); unclear -έws лívwv ‘immoderately' (?; Panyas.).
•ETYM Formation like µɛvɛaívw. Thus, the word is probably from *ßλέµos in ά-
Bλεμns (cf. uεvɛaívw to μέvoc). No etymology.
ẞλévvă [f.] ‘mucous discharge, μúžα (Hp.). <PG(V)►
丌
•VAR Also Bλévvoç [n.] (Arist.); ëλévvai. µúžaɩ H.; ßλéva. µúča. oi dè día toû ñ ñλéva
kaì nhévva là ảolevn kai Suơkívnta H; \evvepaí = uu cóSets (Hp. apud Gal. 19,
131). лληváðŋç· àσ0εvǹs (H.) is perhaps to be read лλεv(v)-, Fur.: 144.
⚫DER BAεvvwdnç 'slimy, mucous' (Hp.). Also ẞλev(v)ós ‘id., idiot' (Epich.), and (with
regular retraction of the accent) Bλévvos [m.] a fish (Sophr., H. as an explanation of
σtaλís), see Strömberg 1943: 29, Grilli Stud. ital. fil. class. 33 (1961): 201f.
⚫ETYM On the assumption that ẞλévvos goes back to *µλɛd-o-vos (Lejeune 1972: 124),
it was often connected with Skt. úrṇa-mradas- 'soft as wool' (would be Gr.
*-ßλedńs), mrdú- 'soft', and MIr. blind 'slime from the mouth of a dead man' (Pok.
718). Justified criticism can be found in DELG, “Pour le sens ces rapprochements ne
s'imposent pas." and Frisk, "Der sehr beschränkte Wert dieser Kombinationen liegt
indessen auf der Hand." As Fur.: 144 points out, the variations л ~ ẞ, vv ~ v prove
Pre-Greek origin. If the final -a is short, Bλeva cannot be IE, whereas this ending is
frequent in Pre-Greek.
ẞλéлw [v.] 'to see, look, perceive' (Solon). <PG?>
•VAR Aor. ßλéчal; other forms (e.g. ßέßλɛqa, þéßloca) are late. Also rotɩ-yλεroi
[opt.] (Alcm. 23, 75).
●COMP Often with prepositions, e.g. άvα-, ȧvτ-, άло-. Also лаpaßλŵy (Il.),
KUVOẞλWW (H.).

=== page 134 ===

220
B入Étuyes
•DER Bλéчiç 'sight' (X.); Beчías a fish, кɛqaλīvos (Strömberg 1943: 42); ẞλéµµα
‘glance' (Att.); rare ßλéños ‘id.' (Ar.). Expressive deverbative: ßlenáčovtes.
ẞλénovtes and ẞλenetúlei. Bλénei H., perhaps for ẞλenetilei, cf. xpeµietíšei.
Bλépapov 'eyelid' (Il.), mostly plur.; thence ẞɛqapídɛs [f.pl.] (rarely sg.) 'eye-lashes',
also 'eyelids' (Ar., X., Arist.); ẞlεqapiτides τpixεs 'eye-lashes' (Paul. Aeg.);
Bλɛqapıкós of the eyelids' (Cael. Aur.); ßλɛqapíšw [v.] ‘to blink' (sch.).
•ETYM уλέлw exists beside λεлw just as yλéqapov beside ßλéqapov; the variation
was taken to suggest a labiovelar *g*- with irregular development (see Schwyzer:
298f.), but rather points to substrate origin. von Blumenthal 1930: 21 points to
Macedonian уλéлov = ßλéлw. It is possible that the verb and the noun ßλέqapov are
unrelated; in that case, the latter word may originally have been *yλéqapov and may
have influenced the verb. But it seems more probable that they were cognate, with ẞ/
y and л/ pointing to a Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 389; pace Hamp Glotta 72 (1994): 15),
although ẞ/y is rare. Pre-Greek had labiovelars which did not always develop in the
same way as their inherited equivalents.
Y
•
ßlétvyes [m./f.]? oλvapiai, oi dè ßλékvyɛç 'nonsense, foolery; also ẞ.' (H.). <ONOM,
PG?➤
•VAR Cf. *ẞlaτaуílovσa [conj. for Blaστapíčovσα]· έлкρоτоÑσa 'rattling,
applauding' (H.); also úлερßλαττúovσav (DELG s.v. þλattoî).
•ETYM With ẞλɛt-, Bλek-, -ßλatt-, þλiк-, we find quite a number of stem variants,
perhaps of onomatopoeic origin, otherwise possibly Pre-Greek (cf. Grošelj Živa Ant.
7 (1957): 42). See ► ẞλíкavov.
ßλétves [pl.] · ai ẞdéλa ‘leeches' (H.). <PG(V)►
•var *ßλítvž (ms. þaɩτvε). ßdéλλa H.; the correction by Latte seems evident, but is
not mentioned by DELG.
•ETYM Analyzed as a derivation in -tu- from a stem Bλε- (see Frisk s.v.), seen in
kataßλéƉɛ and kaßλéɛɩ katanivɛ (both) ‘gulp down' and λɛ· Bλiooɛi, àµélyei,
Bλíчe collect honey, milk' (H.). Note that Bλíw is further unknown, and that the
semantics are incompatible if ẞλíσσε stands for ẞλíττw; therefore, DELG s.v. thinks
that the gloss may be corrupt. However, since a root Bλε- is impossible in IE (the
basic shape is *CeC-), the word must be Pre-Greek, which is confirmed by BλíτVĚ
(Fur.: 355). For vs beside -vž, cf. Fur.: 218 on µñpvě. Cf. ► déλɛap.
入épapov →入ÉTW.
Brñp =8é\eap.
ßλñpaɩ [f.] · ai kvídai. äλλoi xóptov. oi dè tŵv óorpíwv tǹv kaλáµŋy 'nettles; fodder,
the stalk of straw of pulse' (H.). <?►
•ETYM The conjecture of Strömberg 1944: 54f. is improbable. Note that the gloss is
corrupt (the case forms do not agree); perhaps one should assume a second gloss
B入ip.Xóptov ...?
Bλŋoτpí¼w →ßáλ\w.
Britw
221
ßλñτpov [n.] ‘bolt, plug' (like in MoGr.); only O 678 žvσtòv koλAntòv Bλýtpoloi ‘a
shaft or lance shod with bands'. Scholars in antiquity were uncertain: τñs áµáčns
tpoxoi. σqñveç. ¿µ³λ½µаτа. oi è уóшové кai σßλàs á óvwv 'wheels of a wagon;
wedges; insertions; bolts and the joins of axles' (H.). <GR?>
⚫ETYM The connection with ẞáλλw remains uncertain. The factitive ptc. ẞλŋtpwσas
'providing with ẞ.' is explained by Hesychius as εuẞaλóv.
ß^ŋxń [f.] ‘bleating' (µ 266, A.). ◄ONOM▷
•DIAL Dor. Bλãxã.
•DER
ηxάoμα ‘bleat' (Ar.), perhaps not denominative, but an independent
intensive like ẞpuɣáoμai, µvкáo̟μai, etc. (see Schwyzer: 683). þann¤µós (Ael.; cf.
µvên¤µós, etc.), ßλýxnµa H., ßλnxás (Opp., cf. µnkáç, Schwyzer: 508). ß\nxntá [pl.]
‘bleating animals' (Eup., cf. ¿pлεtá, etc.). Bλŋxwdŋs ‘bleating' (Babr.). ßλŋxášw
(Autocr.).
ETYM An onomatopoeic formation with many parallels, e.g. Cz. blekati, MLG
bleken, MoHG blöken; and, without the velar, CS blějati, Latv. blêt, and MHG blæjen;
with a dental, there are Gm. words like OE blætan, OHG blazen; all of which point to
original *ē. Trag. ẞλãxã must be a hyperdorism; note ẞλnxάoμa in Theoc.
ßλñvov [n.] 'male fern, Aspidium Filix-mas'. <PG(V) ►
•VAR Also Bλñxpov (Dsc.), ẞλnxpa H., also ẞλãxvov (Phan. Hist), ẞλāxpov (H.).
ETYM No etymology. See Rohlfs 1958: 124, Rohlfs Sprache 5 (1959): 1752, and Rohlfs
Glotta 38 (1959): 103. The variation p/v does not derive from an r/n-stem, but points
to Pre-Greek origin; see Fur.: 388.
Bλŋxpós [adj.] ‘weak' (Alc.). <?>
•VAR ȧẞλnxpós (Il.; s.v.).
•DER ẞλñxpos a plant, Strömberg 1940: 24.
⚫ETYM Connected with ẞλá as Ionic; the -X- would be expressive (thus Chantraine
1933: 225f.; not via *µλāk-σ-póc). Not related to μaλáxη, as per Bechtel 1914 s.v.
ȧẞλnxpóc. Blanc 1999: 317-38 suggests connection of the root *gelh₁- 'sting' (Pok.
470); the à was either lost in Bλnxpós (which is an insufficient solution), or added
later to aẞxpós.
ßλńxwv, -wvoc [f.] ‘pennyroyal', 'Mentha pulegium' (h. Cer.). <PG>
•VAR Ion. yλnxwv, Dor. yλάxwv; also ßλnxó, -ovs (Schwyzer 479); ßxós = Bλńxwv
(Thphr., Dsc.).
•DIAL Myc. ka-ra-ko/glākōn/, but the reading is doubtful.
•DER ßλŋxwvías ‘prepared with ß.' (Ar.); Chantraine 1933: 94f. yλŋxwvitns (olvos;
Dsc.).
•ETYM Unknown. The variation ẞ-
~
y- could be due to dissimilation (Schwyzer:
299); cf. ẞ-/ уλεлw. But since the word has no etymology, and since the stem
formation is strange, we are rather dealing with a Pre-Greek word. For a folk-
etymological connection with Bλnxάoμai, see Strömberg 1940: 155.
=>
BλiTw→Bλétves.

=== page 135 ===

222
B入ikavov
ẞóāε
223
Baikavov →入íxas.
ßλikás [m.]/[f.]? · σúkov qúÀλov ‘leave of a fig' (H.). Also EM 201, 41, Choeroeb., An.
Ox. 2,184, 9. <PG?>
•ETYM Unknown. Most probably a Pre-Greek word.
ßλīµá¢w [v.] ‘to feel, squeeze' (e.g. woman's breasts, Com., Hp.). Also = ßλíτw (EM).
1?1
•COMP Verbal noun ßλíµaois. ǹ tŵv titOŵv Oliyiç ‘squeezing tits' (H.).
•DER Cf. ßλɩµážαιı. ßaotáσaɩ ‘lift up' (Latte thinks that this gloss is corrupt), átµáσai
'dishonour' (H.); Bλíµη· лpoлηλaкiσµóç, üßpiç ‘besmearing, offense' (H., EM).
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
Bítov [n.] ‘blite, Amaranthus Blitum' (Hp.). <?>
•DER A few denigrating designations of persons: ßλɩτás [f.] ‘old woman', Bio-
μάμμαç mg. uncertain (Ar. Nub. 1001; or to μελ?), ẞλíτwvαç· τoÙÇ εúÝÐε 'silly' (H.).
ETYM Unknown. Not related as *μ- to μúλη, àµαλdúvw. LW Lat. blitum
'blite', also bliteus 'tasteless, foolish' (Plaut.).
ßλíɩɩw [v.] ‘to cut out the comb of bees' (Arist.). ◄IE *meli, -tos ‘honey'➤
⚫VAR Analogical ẞλíчw (H.), aor. Bλíoai.
•DER ẞotηpíç [f.], from *ẞλστp; PN Bλotixη.
⚫ETYM From *μλit-дw, zero grade denominative of uελɩ, -ɩτoç 'honey'.
Bλíτupɩ 'the sound of the chord of a harp'; hence 'sound without mg.' (S. E.) ◄ONOM▷
ETYM Probably onomatopoeic.
•
Bλítupov · έotì qutòv ǹ qápµakov ǹ xopdñs µíµŋµa ‘a plant or drug or an imitation of
a gut-string' (EM 201, 43). <?>
ETYM For the last part, see ẞλÍTUPI.
Blix(av)wdns [adj.] 'clammy'; cf. LSJ Supp. <?>
●var ßλixwdns (Hp.), ßλɩxavádŋs (Diph.). ßλíkavos (which must not be changed to
*ẞλíxavov). ßáτpaxov ‘frog' кaì ẞλíxav ‘?” (H.)
⚫ETYM Minon RPh. 74 (2000): 263f. compares Bλaxáv. þáτpаxov and Artemis's
epithet ẞλayavīτɩç. Grošelj Živa Ant. 7 (1957): 42, adduces ßεßλɩxãoµévov (ms.
ßeßλvx-)· µɛµoλvoµévov ‘staineď (H.).
Bloσupós [adj.] uncertain, perhaps 'terrible' (II.). <?>
•COMP Bλoσuρúлiç [f.] (A 36; on the see Schwyzer: 463, Chantraine 1942: 208),
-wπós (AP, D. P.), -шлεε [du.] (Оpp.); ßλoσvрóµµаτоç (Сеrc.), ẞλoσupóqpwv (A.).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. Leumann 1950: 141ff. derives it from Blooup(óc) ‘of a vulture', as if
it were Aeolic from IE *g"Įtur(os), related to Lat. voltur(us) 'id'. There is no evidence,
however, that the word is IE.
ẞλúчw [v.] ‘to bubble, gush forth' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Aor. Bλvoal.
•DER Verbs ẞlów (LXX), ßλvoτávw (Procop.); Blúσis (AP). Also adj. ßλúdiov.
vypóv, (éov 'humid, seething' (H.).
i
i
f
•ETYM Cf. кλúчw, oλúčw; Bλúw is probably secondary. Maurice BSL 82 (1987): 216f.,
attempted to connect it with oλúw (oivóqλvě). We may consider onomatopoeic
origin. In any case, not related to Skt. galati 'drip' or OHG quellan.
Bλwpós [adj.] (grown) high' (of trees; Il.). <PG?>
•VARYλwеpós (H., see LSJ Supp. and Fur.: 389), a form which is often overlooked.
•ETYM The connection with a word for ‘head (Skt. mūrdhán- [m.], OE molda [m.]
'upper part of the head, crown') as *uλw0póc is obsolete. Nor can it be connected to
►μελaеpov or ẞλaστávw, two alternative proposals by Frisk. Further, ▸ Bλwoкw
"est loin pour le sens" (DELG). In my view, the variant with y- points to Pre-Greek
origin (see Beekes 1969: 215f.).
ßλwµoi [?] · στpaßoí ‘squintings' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. See Grošelj Živa Ant. 3 (1953): 198 (who compares ẞáλλw).
Bλwμóc [m.] 'piece of bread' (Call.). <?>
•COMP Óкτá-ẞλwμos (Hes. Op. 442), see Hofinger Ant. class. 36 (1967): 457ff.
•ETYM Not related to ẞλéɛ in кaßλéɛ (H.; see ẞλéτvεç). Cf. чwμóç s.v. ►чñv;
however, the etymology is unknown.
Bλwoкw [v.] 'to go, come' (II.). <IE *melh₂- 'come'>
•VAR Aor. μoλεĭv, έßλw. ¿qávŋ, wỵετo, čστŋ ‘appeared, went, stood up' (H.); fut.
µoλoñµaι (ßλŵžaɩ, ßλwчw Lyc.), perf. µέµßλwкa (þéßλwke. ǹpeµei, qúɛταɩ 'be at rest,
grow', H.).
•COMP Also with кατα-, лpo-, ¿к-, etc. aúτóµoλos ‘deserter' (Hdt.); άyxíµoλov (ñλ0ε,
Il.), old absolutive, Wackernagel Mus. Helv. 1 (1944): 226ff.; ȧyx₁ßλwç. äpti napwv
'just arrived' (H.).
•DER лроμоλý (mostly plur. -aí) ‘approach, vestibule' (Ar.); Bλwoç. лapovσia
'presence' (H.).
•ETYM The present þλwoкw < *µλw-σkw (cf. µoλ-ɛïv, µé-µßλw-кa) from *mlh3-sk- is
clear. The aorist stem Bλw- then has the same origin, with the zero grade from the
plural. The nominal forms with -μoλ- have the o-grade *molh3-, while the aor. stem
μoλ-ɛ/o- is explained from metathesis in *µελo-μ, -§, -ɩ < *melh¸- (after Ruipérez
Emerita 10 (1942): 386-407). Harðarson 1993a: 169f. and 224f., also assumes *!h3> oλo
under the accent, which is doubtful; a twofold development µλw- (in ¤ßλw) beside
μoλo is improbable. I would expect *-h3-V- to have yielded -aλV-, which was
replaced by oλV- after the predominant o-vocalism. The metathesis is not an
independent phonetic development, but part of this process of morphological
reorganisation. Outside Greek, the verb may be found in Slavic, e.g. SCr. iz-mòlīti
*let appear', i.e. 'show', and Sln. molíti ‘pass, hand over'. The connection with ToA
mluskª- 'escape' (and ToB mlutka-? Cf. Adams s.v.) is uncertain. Connection with
μελλw is phonetically improbable (because of the laryngeal), while that with
►μoλεúw 'cut off and transplant the shoots of trees' is semantically very difficult.
ßóã³ [m.] a fish, ‘Box boops' (Epich.). <?►
●VAR Ion. þóŋš, later ßw\. Ar. Byz. preferred ẞówy (ap. Ath.). Cf. þóα = σáλлŋ
(Pancrat. apud Ath.).

=== page 136 ===

224
Boáw
•ETYM The ancients believed that the fish was called this way because it cried; see
Strömberg 1943: 63-6 and Thompson 1947 s.v. ẞwε. Thence the Latin loanword boca;
MoGr. Boina, youna, yita.
Boáw [v.] 'to cry' (II.). <ONOM>
•VAR Aor. Boñσai (Ion. also ßwoαi), ßɛßwµévoç, èẞwσ0ŋv.
•DER ßoń ‘cry' (II.), Bontús ‘id.' (a 369), þóāµa, þóŋua ‘id.' (A.), Bónσiç ‘id.' (Thd.,
Quint.); Bonτns (Hp.), fem. ßoātɩç (aúdá) ‘louď (A.).
•ETYM Probably a deverbative like лotáoµɑɩ, with deverbal ßoń (Schwyzer: 683);
alternatively, Boάw is denominative from ẞon. A connection with Skt. jóguve 'to
speak loudly' (intensive) and BSl., e.g. Lith. gaudžiù, gaūsti ‘to cry, weep' and OCS
govor 'noise' is conceivable, but these may just as well belong to yoάw. Boáw is
rather onomatopoeic; cf. bū s.v. Búaç. Lat. boō, boāre was borrowed from Greek.
The same root is found in Boneεw, ▸ẞwστpéw.
Bondpoµéw →Bontóos.
Bontóos [m.] 'who brings help (in war)' (Il.). ◄GR►
•VAR Dor. Boã¤óos, Att. and Hdt. Boŋßós (see below).
DER Hence a denominative Aetol. Boãoéw (Lesb. ßãónu), and by hyphairesis
Dor. Boaéw, Att. and Hdt. Bonéw 'come to help on a cry, help' (cf. Kretschmer
Glotta 18 (1930): 96f.). From Boabóos resp. Boŋó(0)s: Aetol. Boaoïa (< *ßoa¤ofía),
Att. Bona 'help' (rebuilt after the nouns in -ɛtă [Schwyzer: 469]). From Bonoέw as
a back-formation Bontós (or contracted from Boŋ0óos, see Schwyzer: 469?);
Boneŋos 'help' (Hp.).
•ETYM ßoŋßóos is from an expression like (¿ïì) ßoǹv Đɛïv (see Schulze 1933a: 188).
Based on Boŋbéw, Boŋłóc, the synonym ßoŋdpoµéw (Eur.) was created, together
with ßondpóµa [pl.] name of a festival (D.; month name Boŋdpoµtáv, Bondpóµos),
and ßoŋSpóµos (E.; on the connection, see Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 96ff.).
ẞópos [m.] ‘hole, trench, pit (dug in the ground)' (Il.; on the mg. see Hutchinson JHS
55 (1935): 1ff.; also as a sports term, see Jüthner Wiener Stud. 53 (1935): 68ff.). ◄PG?►
•DER Diminutive Boepíov (Alciphr.), also 'small ulcer' (Hp.). Also ẞóðūvos [m.]
(Cratin.; cf. aioxpós: aiσxúvoμai, Chantraine 1933: 208).
⚫ETYM ẞópos and ẞóuvos have been connected with Lith. bedù 'sting, dig', Lat.
fodio 'to dig', fossa 'ditch', and MW bedd 'canal'. In order to explain the discrepancy
between Greek ẞ- and Lat. f-, dissimilation of PIE *bod"- to PGr. *bod"- was
assumed, or influence of ßabús (but Alciphr. 3, 13 ¿ußaðúvaç þóеpia may be a later
association). Equally unsatisfying is the solution of Petersson 1921: 128ff., who
assumed a labiovelar and connected the word with уvíσσwv. dopúσowv 'digging
out' (H.) and further to Baús, etc. (see ẞułóc). Since the IE connection is
impossible, and the formation (nominal -v-, see Pre-Greek) is also suspect, we
should better derive the word from Pre-Greek; even the meaning suggests such
origin.
ẞóλẞitov [n.] 'cow dung' (see Rohlfs ByzZ 37 (1937): 54f.). <PG>
!
{
BóλLTOV
225
•VAR Also -os [m.] (Thphr.), ßóλß₁o (PMag. Par.; after σлúðaðoç, σnéλɛfoç? See
Chantraine 1933: 367); also þóλiτov, -os (Cratin.); þóλßíτα. àðódɛvµa þoós ‘cow
dung' (H.) (i.e. ßóλẞic), followed by Bóλẞubov. TÓ AUTÓ.
●DER Bolívоs (Ar.); Bolíτaiva cuttle fish, which smells badly (Arist.), also
ẞoλẞíτov (Gal.) and Boλßís (Epich.).
ETYM As an alternative to the unsatsifactory assumption that ẞóλτov arose from
Bóλẞirov through dissimilation, Frisk implausibly suggested that it is rather
ẞóλẞτov that is secondary, influenced by Boλßós. þóλitov cannot be derived from
Báλλw, Bóλos, and Boλewv 'Düngerhaufen' either, because this leaves the formation
unexplained. Much better is it to explain the variation as Pre-Greek, which is further
confirmed by the suffix -ITOV (Fur.: 163; further 180, 187); in addition, the alter-
nations T e and u are typical for Pre-Greek. The variation between ẞ and zero,
to which Fur: devotes an entire chapter, is perhaps best explained from a labialized
lateral, i.e. *bal-it- in this case (cf. avλa and Pre-Greek). The discussions in Frisk
and DELG are typical examples of the wrong method to explain away the
characteristics of Pre-Greek.
~
L
~
Bolẞóc [m.] 'onion; purse-tassels, Muscari comosum' (Att., Arist.). <ONOM>
•DER BOλẞíov (Hp.), Boλßápiov (Epict.), Boλßíoкos (AP) 'small onion'. From Boλẞós
the plant ßoλßívη (Thphr., see Strömberg 1937: 86). On the fishnames ßoλßídiov,
Boλßítiov, ßoλßitívn see ►þóλßitov; also ßoλßītiç, þoλßɩtíç. See Thompson 1947: 33.
•ETYM The form of the word is expressive, sound-symbolic, with a kind of
reduplication. There are no direct relatives. It is reminiscent of words for round,
globular objects, like Lat. bulla 'water bubble', Buλλá þɛßvoµéva 'stuffed objects'
(H.), Lith. burbulas 'water bubble', etc.; cf. ẞoµßvλíç s.v. ►ßóµßoç. Further, similar to
Arm. bołk radish' (less adequate, however, is Skt. bálba-ja- [m.] kind of grass,
‘Eleusine indica', originally ‘balba-born'); cf. Pok. 103 and WH s.v. bulbus. Lat.
bulbus is a loan. Cf. ► ßwλoç.
Bo入éw Bá入入w.
Boλewv 'dunghill' (Din.). <GR?>
●DER BOλɛóc 'heaped' (inscr. IIª, LSJ Supp.), of Aiot 'stones' as boundary marks.
•ETYM Generally derived from Báλλw, but this could be deceptive. The suffix is
obscure; see Chantraine 1933: 164. Boλɛós may or may not be cognate.
Bolín [f.] 'female slave in Crete' (Seleucus apud Ath. 267c). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
Bóλvoç [m.] 'aurochs, the European bison', = Bóvaσos (Arist.). <PG(S)►
ETYM The conclusion, on the basis of Bóvaσos, that the word derives from
*ẞóvvos is most uncertain. The influence of Bous is also a mere guess. No
etymology. Probably Pre-Greek; cf. Krahe Die Antike 15 (1939): 180 and Krause 1958:
62f.
Bólitov →ßóλẞitov.

=== page 137 ===

226
BouBoia
ßoµßoía [f.] · ǹ koλvµßàç èλaía лapà Kuлpíoç ‘olive pickled in brine (Cypr.)' (H.).
1?1
•ETYM Unknown.
Bóuẞos [m.] 'noise with a low tone' (IA). <ONOM, PG>>
•DER Bouẞéw give a low tone, hum' (Il.). Boµßáč interj., as ironic imitation of a
swollen style (Ar. Th. 45), with intensive reduplication ßoµßaλoßoµßáž (ibid. 48).
Related are: Bouẞvλiós (accent. acc. to Hdn. 1, 116; IA) ‘humming insect', also vase
with a small neck (from the sound when emptied), also ßoчßúλŋv. Anкuov 'a vase'
(H.) and Bouẞvλía. кpývη ¿v Boɩwτią 'source in Boeotia' (H.); with different mg.:
ßßvíða лpóλvyaç 'waterbubbles' (H.). ẞóµẞvž, -˜кoç [m.] low sounding
flute, the lowest tone of a flute' (Ar.); also ẞoμẞuкíαç (of кáλαчoç 'reed-pipe';
Thphr.); Bouẞúкā [f.] name of a flute player (Theoc.); also 'drone', with ẞoμẞúкiov
kind of bee (Arist.). Glosses ßoμßpú¼wv. tovÐopúšwv, ßowv ‘mumbling, shouting';
ßoµßpvváčεiv. ßpεvúɛσða 'be haughty' (H.). Related is εuß₁ whipping-top;
insect'.
⚫ETYM Although лéµôi and лoµôóλvž, variants of ẞéµßiε, show typical Pre-Greek
characteristics (e.g. -üк- beside -к-), the ultimate origin of the word is probably
onomatopoeic. Cf. Lith. bimbalas, Latv. bambals 'beetle', CS buben ‘drum', 3sg. Alb.
bubullin 'it thunders', ON bumla [f.] ‘drum'. Lat. bombus is a Greek loan. See
► Boλẞóc.
Bóμẞv, -vкoç [m.] 'silk-worm' (Arist.). <PG>
VAR The quantity of the v is unknown.
•DER Bouẞúкiov 'cocoon of the ẞ.' (Arist.); Boµßúкivoç (Lib.).
•ETYM Bóμẞvε must be of Anatolian origin, as is also suggested by its structure: it is
now known that silk was also produced in Greece itself (Kos and Asia Minor) before
it was introduced from the east (Hemmerdinger Glotta 48 (1970): 65). We may
compare several words for 'cotton' (see ẞaußáкiov), of which Osman. pambuk
'cotton' is the best match. The word may derive from an original *p/bamb-ūk- (with
suffix -uk-, probably with long ; cf. also Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 381ff., DNP:
347ff.).
Bóvaσ(o)oc [m.] 'aurochs' (Arist.). <EUR
⚫ETYM Unexplained; generally considered to be a loanword from a European
language. There have been attempts to connect it with Bóλvoc, which is quite
uncertain. Fur.: 213 tries to connect it with Paeonian ►µóvaлoç, for which there is no
basis.
ẞopáßißpwoкW.
ẞópaσσoç [m.] ‘growing spadix of the date with immature fruit' (Dsc. 1, 109, 5). ◄LW
Eg.➤
⚫ETYM Egyptian word; cf. Arab. bosr 'unripe date'. See Cuny REA 20 (1918): 223f.
ßópatov →ppáov.
ßópßopos [m.] ‘mire, filth' (Asios). <?►
!
}
!
Bóokw
227
●DER Bopẞopitaɩ name of an association in Thera (inscr.) and of a Manichaean-
gnostic sect (Epiph.). Denominatives: Bopßopów, Bopßopi\w (Dsc.; = μoλúvε H.).
See also Boßopúšw.
•ETYM Expressive reduplicated formation, probably onomatopoeic (cf. the gloss
Bopẞopíčε s.v. ẞopßopúšw). A connection with Arm. kork ‘dirt', which would
require a reconstruction *g" org" (or)o-, remains very doubtful.
ßopßopúšw [v.] ‘to rumble' (Hippon., see LSJ Supp.). <?►
•DER ßорßоpu̟уη. rolós tis ñxos, öv кai кopкopuуǹv кaλoñσɩv ‘kind of sound, also
called к.' (H.), ẞopßopvyµóc ‘id.' (Hp.); also ßopßópwσts (Archig. apud Aët.), as if
from Bopẞopów (see ► Bópßopoc). Bopßopíčɛ. yoyyúčɛ, µolúvei. Kúrpɩoɩ ‘grumbles,
stains (Cypr.)' (H.), ßopßopioµóc (Cael. Aur.) = ßopßopvуµós.
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic reduplicated formation. Connected with ẞópßopos, though
partly different in meaning (developments like these are not infrequently found in
onomatopoeic words). In ẞopẞopía, the two meanings come together. No
etymology.
ßopßúλa · réya στpoyyúλov dià µýkwvos kai oŋoáµing peyébovs äpτov 'round pastry
made from poppy and sesame, of the size of a loaf of bread (H.). <LW Anat.>
⚫ETYM Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 661 compares Hitt. NINDA purpura- 'Klotz' or
‘Kugel, Knödeľ. Names of pastries are frequently borrowed from Asia Minor.
ẞopćac, -ov [m.] ‘north wind, north', also PN (II.); see Nielsen Class. et Med. 7 (1945):
1ff. IE? *g"(o)rH- 'mountain'>
●DIAL Att. (contracted) ßoppãç, -ã (see Scheller 1951: 114), Ion. Bopéŋs, contracted
ẞopñs, -έw, Lesb. ßopíaιç (1 < ɛ; aɩ for ā).
●DER ßópɛtos, Ion. Bopηtos (Chantraine 1933: 52) ‘of the north wind; fem. also
Bope(1)ác, Bopniás (A.). Local adverbs: Popéŋev, ßoppãеev, ßoppółɛv, etc.
Denominative: ßopɛúw ‘come from the north' (Thphr.).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. Taken as 'wind from the mountains', related to a word for
'mountain' seen in Skt. girí-, Av. gairi-, Lith. girė 'wood', and OCS gora; cf. Illyr. bora
'mountain' in names (Krahe IF 57 (1940): 125ff.), as well as Sɛiрáç. So thе улερ-
Bópɛo are properly ‘those living beyond the mountains' (Pedersen KZ 36 (1900):
319). The formation, however, is unclear; see Pedersen 1926: 66, Schwyzer: 461. On
wind names in -íaç, see Chantraine 1933: 95. Is the word an IE formation at all?
ẞóσкw [v.] 'to feed, tend', med. 'to feed oneself (Il.). ◄IE *geh¸- ‘feed, tenď’➤
•VAR Fut. Boσknow (Od., but see Chantraine 1942: 446), hapax ẞwσɛσƉɛ (A. R. 1, 685;
see below); έßoσкýðnv, þeßóoknka, ¿ẞóσкŋσa are all Hell. and late.
•DIAL Myc. su-qo-ta-o /su-g"ŏtäōn/, qo-u-qo-ta /gou-g"ŏtai/.
•COMP In compounds -ßwτηs and -ßóτns (ov-ßá-τηç, iлло-ßó-τηs); aiуíßоTOS
'browsed by goats'; лоvλßóτεɩрα. As a first member in ẞwτɩ-ávɛipa 'feeding men'
(Il.); see Risch 1937: 174.
•DER BOOK 'fodder, meadow' (A.); ẞóσкηµа ‘id.', also 'cattle tended, herd' (trag.).
Booкós 'shepherd' (Aesop.; a back-formation, see Schwyzer 541); fem. Boʊкáç
'feeding itself (Nic.). Bóσç ‘fodder' (T 268); ßoτóv ‘cattle', especially ‘sheep' (II.),
}

=== page 138 ===

228
Bóauapoc
ẞotávŋ 'fodder' (Chantraine 1933: 199), þoτέw ‘tend' (Nic., H.); Boτηp ‘shepherd' (o
215; fem. þótɛɩpa (Eust.); ßwτwp (II.), cf. Benveniste 1948: 29 on the difference
between -Twp and -Tnp.
•ETYM Old IE verb. Its nearest relation is Lith. gúotas ‘herd' (*geh3-to-); cf. ßoτóv
(*gh-to-). ►ẞous is probably derived from this root.
ßóσµapos [m.] ‘Indian millet, Ragi, Eleusine coracana' (Str.). <?►
VAR Bóoμopov (Peripl. M. Rubr.).
•ETYM Unknown.
ẞóστpuxoç [m.] ‘curl, lock of hair' (Archil.). ◄PG?►
•VAR Plur. also ẞóστpvxa (AP).
•DER ẞoστpúxiov, also 'vine-tendril' (Arist., AP), Boστpúžia. στéµqvla 'mass of
pressed graped or olives' (H.); cf. þóτpuxos s.v. ▸ Bótpus; Bootpuxηdóv ‘in locks'
(Luc.). Booτpvxiw, Boσtpvxóoμai. On the suffix -X- see Chantraine 1933: 402.
⚫ETYM Unknown. The suffix -vx- could well be Pre-Greek (-vC- is frequent), and
such origin is probable for the whole word. On the confusion with ►þóτpuç, see
there.
Botávn →óokW.
Bóτs a fish (Sophr.). <?>
•VAR BÓTIC. Bóλτtov H., considered corrupt by Latte; on sufficient grounds?
•ETYM Perhaps identical with Batíç.
Bóτpuç, -voc [m.] 'bunch of grapes' (Il.). <PG?>
VAR Also acc. Bóτрvа (Euph.), LSJ Supp.
•DER ẞoτpuŋpós of the genus grapes' (Thphr., cf. oivηpós Chantraine 1933: 233).
Botpuïtns, -itis (λíos) kind of pearl, 'Calamine' (Dsc.). Adverb Boτpudóv (II.).
Isolated ẞoτpuμós. tpvyŋtós ‘vintage' (H.), as if from *ẞoτpúw; see Schwyzer: 492.
After Bóoτpuxos arose þóτpuxos ‘lock of hair' (Pherecr.; probably E. Or. 1267) and
Boστpúxov 'vine-tendril' and ßoσtpixítns, see ▸ Bóotpvxos.
•ETYM Like ǎµлɛλoç, the word is probably Pre-Greek. It is hardly Semitic (Hebr.
boşer 'uvae immaturae acerbae'), as per Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 661. Fur.: 302
considers it originally to have been identical with ẞóστpuxos (interchange σt/t); this
is very doubtful.
Bov augmentative prefix. <GR➤
⚫ETYM This meaning seems to have developed from the bahuvrihi compounds of the
type 'having X like a ẞ.' See ẞoúßρwστic, Bovyátɛ, etc. Cf. DELG and further
Richardson BICS 8 (1961): 15-22 and Richardson Hermathena 96 (1962): 92.
ẞoñα [f.]? · àуελŋ лαídшv. Аáкwvεs 'a group of children (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
•VAR Wrong accent acc. to DELG. Bovóa. άyέλŋ tɩç ‘a herď (EM; perhaps from
Bovσóa, to σεúεiv? But original σσ would not have disappeared; Wahrmann Glotta
17 (1929): 242 supposes an hyperarchaism).
●DER ßovayóp· ȧyelápxns, ó tñs ảyéλns äpxwv naïs. Aάкwvɛç ‘slave who watches
over the herd (Lacon.)' (H.); also Bovayós, Boayós (inscr.). Further ovμẞovai.
:
Boúẞßntic, -los
229
σvvwμóτa 'confederate'. σvµßovád<d>ei. vnepµaxeĩ. Aάкwvɛç ‘fight in defense of
(H.).
ETYM According to von Blumenthal 1930: 9, the word is Illyrian for qun; this is
semantically improbable. See Bechtel 1921, 2: 368f. and Kretschmer Glotta 17 (1929):
242.
ßovayɛtóv [m.]/[n.]? · úлò þoŵv ɛiλкvoµévov žúλov ‘piece of wood drawn by oxen'
(H.). <GR>
•ETYM The word is simply from ẞous and ǎyw.
•
ẞováкpai [f.] oi qoíviкɛç úлò Аaкwvwv (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. LSJ translates 'palms', but it is impossible to know if this was really
the intended sense.
ßovßáλiov 1 [n.] 'bracelet' (Com., inscr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Mostly plur. -α. Cf. ßovлáλɩva (Delos) and ßovñaλídɛç· лɛpiokɛlides ‘leg-
bands' (H.)."
⚫ETYM The variation ẞ ~ л points to Pre-Greek origin (so not from лάλλw!). For the
suffix -tv-, Fur.: 145, 373 refers to yoσσúлɩvov, άлóλvov. The word is hardly
connected with Boúßaλiç 'antelope' (as per L. Robert 1963: 24-30).
Bovẞátov 2 [n.] 'wild cucumber, äypioç σiкvóç' (Ps. Diosc., Hp. apud H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Explained from the prefix ẞov- and ►ẞáλλw, see André Ét. class. 24 (1956):
40-2, but this looks like a folk-etymological explanation; the structure of the word is
strange. As a plant name, the word is rather Pre-Greek.
Boúßalis, -i(d)os [f.] ‘(African) antilope' (Hdt.); see Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 52;
Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 263. <?>
•VAR Also Boúẞaλos [m.] (Arist.).
•ETYM The word seems to contain ►ßoûç, but this is rather a secondary association,
as the formation is unclear. It was borrowed as Lat. būbalus, whence later bufalus,
OFr. bufle, E buffalo.
ßovßápaç · (1) µɛyalovaútηç, rapà tǹу ßāpɩv ‘great sailor [?], after the ẞ. (a flat-
bottomed boat)' kai (2) µéya ßápos &xwv having heavy weight' кai (3) avõnµatías
‘boaster' ½) (4) ŏ µéyaç kaì ávaíoðŋtos äv◊pwrоç ‘great and unnoticed man' (H.).
GR, ?>
•VAR Cod. Boẞ-. Cf. Boúßapıç vewç övoμa 'name of a ship' (H.).
•ETYM In (3) the ms. has кaι aúŋµaτíaç; кavõητív ex EM Alb. The other
definitions are clear.
Boúẞaστiç [f.] 'groin' (Aët.). <PG?>
•ETYM Related to Bouẞov; further unknown. DELG improbably considers it to
have been coined after the Egyptian goddess Boúßaστiç. Note that Pre-Greek has a
suffix -(a)σt-; see Pre-Greek.
Boúẞntis, -los [f.] 'stream for watering cattle'(?) (Tab. Heracl. 2, 13, 14). <?>

=== page 139 ===

230
Boúẞpwotic
•ETYM Since the word is Doric, it is not related to ëßèv (šßāv). The form *-ẞα-ετɩç
(Schwyzer: 270) has no basis. The old connection with Lith. gëtis 'Viehtrifť seems
impossible, as a labiovelar would yield 8-. Foreign origin (Kretschmer KZ 30 (1890):
579, Fraenkel 1910: 116 A. 1) is always possible, but ẞov- suggests a Greek word.
ßoúßpwotis [f.] ‘ravenous appetite' ( 532), also as a goddess. <GR?>
•ETYM The meaning is not quite certain: 'hunger' does not fit well in Homer, and in
antiquity it was interpreted as olστpos ‘gadfly'. The word seems to have an
augmentative ẞov (Schwyzer: 434), like ẞoúλo and þоúлεvα (which are
possibly synonymous), and a second element as in ßßpóσкw; it is modelled after
vñσtis (Risch 1937: 39), but as an agent noun (like äµinwtic).
Boußáv, -wvos [m.] ‘groin' (Il.); ‘swollen gland' (Hp.). <?►
•VAR Late also ẞoµßáv (Moeris; after ßóµßoç?).
•DER BOUẞwvíσKoç 'bandage for the groin' (Heliod. apud Orib.; cf. уpaqiσкoç, etc.,
Chantraine 1933: 408); Boußávov the plant ‘Aster amellus' (Dsc., Strömberg 1940:
87). Denominative ßovßwviάw ‘to suffer from swollen glands' (Ar.).
•ETYM Unknown. Formation like µváv, σtaуóv. Connection with Bouvós ‘hill' is
morphologically impossible. It can hardly be related to Skt. gavini [f.du.] ‘part of the
lower body'. If the (late) variant ßóµßwv is reliable, the word is then be Pre-Greek.
Bovyáïe [m.] 'braggart'? (N 824, σ 79). <?►
•VAR Schol. Boukaiɛ.
•ETYM Contains the prefix Bov- as in ßoúßpwotiç, Boukópuča, Boúraɩç, etc.; the
second member could be related to the pres. yaíw (cf. кúdɛï yaíwv). The ā is
problematic (Zenodotus wrote Bovyniε; Chantraine 1942: 22). See Latacz 1966: 129f.
ẞovкátiα [n.pl.] a festival in Delphi (inscr.). ◄IE? *tken- ‘slay'>
•DER BOUкátos name of a month.
⚫ETYM The analysis as 'killing of cows' (from кaívw) is factually correct. Puhvel KZ
79 (1964-5): 7ff. (after Wackernagel-Debrunner 1930: 372) reads '(festival) of 100
cows' as in Skt. go-śatam. Note that ►έкatóv derives from *dkm-tom > *ekaton, and
that the *d also leaves a trace in the decades in *-dkomth₂> -ýкovτα. This shows that
the *-t- did not cause lengthening.
Bouкóλoç [m., adj.] 'cowherd' (II.). <IE *k"el(H)- 'turn around'>
•DIAL Myc. qo-u-ko-ro /g"ou-kolos/.
•DER BOUкoλía herds of cattle' (h. Merc.), Bovкólia (-tov) ‘id.' (Hdt.); ẞovкoλεïov
‘office of the apxwv Baσɛúç' (Arist. Ath. 3, 5; cf. лputavɛiov); ßovkoλíç [f.], also
[adj.] 'pasture' (D. H.); Bouкolíσkoç kind of bandage (Gal.; cf. ẞovßwvíσкoç s.v.
►Bouẞwv); Bouкoλívη· кíукλoç τò öpvɛov 'the bird к.' (H.); see Thompson 1895 s.v.;
BOUкoλIкós ptng. to the shepherd, “bucolic” (Theoc.). Denominative ẞovкoλéw
(II.), ẞovкoλáčoμat, -táčw 'sing shepherd songs' (Theoc.). From Bouкóλoç, as a short
name, Bouкoç (Theoc.).
⚫ETYM Old compound of ßoûç and лéλoµαɩ, cognate with OIr. búachaill, MW bugail
'shepherd'. Cf. aiлólos and ►àµœíñoλoç.
Bouvós
BOUкOVστÝPLOV [n.] ‘arena for bulls' (IGRom. 3, 484, Oenoanda II³). <GR▷
231
⚫ETYM For кOVIστηplov (Vitr., Pergamon), cf. кovíστpα ‘arena' (Heberdey and
Kalinka 1897: 2, 70). Acc. to Robert Hellenika 3 (1946): 149f., however, it must be
equated with ẞukaviotŃpiov.
Bovλquía [f.] 'hunger like a bull' (Timocl.). <GR>
DER Bovλáw [v.] 'to have hunger like a bull' (Ar.). Bovλчuwττw (Suid.)
Bou入uláw.
▶
=
•ETYM From ẞoúλчµoç, properly an adjective (Alex.), but also = Bovλчuía (Plu.) by
association with Aquóc; see Risch IF 59 (1949): 59. In contains augmentative Bou-, as
in Boúẞpwσtic, ► ẞovyáïɛ.
▸
ßoúλoµaɩ [v.] ‘want, wish' (II.). ◄IE *g"el- (*g"elh¸-?) ‘want, wish’▷
VAR The other tenses are based on the present: Bovλnoouαι, ¿ẞovýеηv,
ßeßoúλnuai. On ßéßovla (A 113) see below.
•DIAL Arc.-Cypr. Eretr. (also Hom., see Chantraine 1942: 311) þóλoμaι, Lesb.
Bóλλoμai, Dor. (Cret.) ẞwλoμai; Thess. ẞéλλoμai, Boeot. Bɛíλoμn, Dor. (Heracl., etc.)
Snλoμaι, Locr. Delph. Sɛíλoμai.
●DER ßovλń ‘will, decision, council' (II.); Dor. Arc. ßwλá, Lesb. þóλλa. Denominative
Boulevw (Bwλ-, ẞoλλ-ɛúw), -oμαt 'deliberate' (Il.), with many derivatives: Boúλɛvuα,
Bouλɛia, BoulevτÝ, BouλευτÝριov 'council chamber'.
•ETYM The verb has been much discussed, yet there is no agreement on its prehistory
(the root must have been *gel-/gwol-). We can assume that there was a perfect
*Béẞola with present meaning, a trace of which could be found in лpo-ßέßovλa (A
113), with ou from Boúλoμat. The o-vocalism and the ẞ- may have spread from there.
(We cannot exclude influence from Bovλn, but this is probably itself to be derived
from the present.) However, it seems doubtful that the perfect alone is the source of
the pervasive o-vocalism. The central problem is the origin of the present, for which
a suffix -n- or -s- has been assumed, although Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 315f.
maintains that only -λv- can explain the compensatory lengthening (see also Slings
Mnem. 28 (1975): 1-16). Peters 1986: 311 suggested a root in *-h3, which may help to
explain the o-vocalism: a nasal present *g"l-n-h3- would have yielded *ẞaλvo- [or
Blavo-?], which was replaced by *Boλv-, and Pamphylian BOXEμεvos would have
Boλɛ- < *ẞɛλo- < *g"elh. However, Peters' solution remains problematic because we
have no evidence of Bλw-, nor is there a clear basis for the introduction of the o-
vocalism.
ẞovλūτós [m.] lit. “unyoking of the oxen”, ‘evening' (II 779 = 1 58, in ßovλutóv de).
<GR➤
⚫ETYM From ►ẞous and λúw with a suffix -τo- (Chantraine 1933: 303). The length
in Au- is caused by a laryngeal, also seen in Lat. so-lü-tus, Skt. lü-na- 'cut off, and in
TOAB läwa 'to send'.
Bouvós [m.] 'hill' (Hdt.). <PG?>
•VAR ßovvós. σtißáç, kúrpioi ‘bed of leaves, matress (Cypr.)' (H.).
1

=== page 140 ===

1
232
Bovnadides
•DER Bouvis [f.] 'hilly' (A.; cf. Oopic). Plant names Bouviás 'Brassica napus'
(Agatharch.) and Boúviov 'Bunium ferulaceum' (Dsc.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 117.
Bouviτns epithet of Pan, but reinterpreted as containing Bouç; Dor. Bwvitns.
ETYM Acc. to Hdt. 4, 199, the word is Cyrenaean, but it is actually Doric (Solmsen
BPhW 1906: 756f.). It is a dialectal word that spread in Hellenistic times (DELG).
Fur.: 208, 213 cites µovváç, µovvadiкóv as variants of Bouvás, which may point to
Pre-Greek origin. He further adduces Basque muno 'hill', and additionally refers to
лроúvoυç Bouvoùç (H.). Fur.: 21353 thinks that Bouvós. στßáç 'bed of straw' derives
from Búvw.
þovлalides •var þovлáλiva. ⇒ßovßáλtov.
ßoúлpŋotɩs [adj.] ‘poisonous beetle' (Nic.); also a plant, Bunias erucago? (Thphr.).
<GR➤
⚫ETYM See Amigues RPh. 64 (1990): 89-97, who interprets it as 'who inflames cattle',
and explains the plant name as secondary to that of the animal.
.
ẞoúлτvov [m.]/[n.]? · Boτávŋ, λɛyoµévŋ tpíqu\\ov ‘a plant called clover' (H.). ◄PG►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 318 thinks that the word is Pre-Greek because of the group л, which is
quite possible.
ẞovpdwv [m.] 'mule' (Edict. Dioclet.). <LW Lat.>
•ETYM A loanword from Lat. burdō.
ßoûç [f., m.] ‘cow, bull, ox' (Il.). ◄IE *geh¸-u- 'cow'>
•VAR Gen. Boóç; acc. ßwv (Dor. and H 238), Dor. nom. ßwç; Att. acc. ßoûv after ßoûc
(see below).
•DIAL Myc. qo-o/g"ōns/? (Ruijgh 1967a: 131).
•COMP As a first member, Bov-, Bo(F)- (before vowel): Bouкóλoç, Boúẞoτoç,
►Boúτupov, Boŋlátyg, ßownię. On augmentative Bou- s.v. and ►ßoúßpwotic,
► ßovyáiɛ, ► ßovλчíα. See also εкaτóµßη. As a second member also -ßotoç, e.g.
¿vvɛá-ẞotos (11.) <*-ßoƑio- = Skt. gávya- (see below).
●DER_Diminutives Boïdov (Ar.), Boúdiov (Hermipp., pap.). Further ßoúτηs
'cowherd', also adj. ‘of a cow' (A.), with ´oλv-ßoútηs 'rich in cows'; Boɛúç ‘strap of
cow-leather' (ẞ 426), ßowv, -wvos [m.] ‘cow-sty' (Heraklea).
Adjectives: Bóɛtos, Bóɛos 'bovine' (II.), substantivized fem. Boɛín, Boéŋ 'cow-hide'
(II.). With a suffix -к-: ẞoɛ-кóç (Th. et al.) and ẞo-üкóç (Elis, Priene); also ẞóïvos
(gloss., Eust.); Bowdns (Adam., Apollon. Lex.).
Denominative verb Boów 'to transform into an ox' (Eust.).
On Bouкoç, Bovкatoç see ẞovкóλoç. See also Boña and Bovσóc.
•ETYM BoÛç is cognate of Skt. gáuḥ, acc. gắm (= ßwv), Lat. bōs (from Osc.-Umbr.),
=
gen.pl. boum Bowv = Skt. gávām, U acc. bum = ẞwv; Arm. kov (u-stem), OIr. bó,
OHG chuo, ToA ko, ToB ke,, Latv. gùovs all 'cow', OCS gov-ędo ‘cattle'. Adjective
*gou-io- in -ẞo(F) LOS = Skt. gávya-, Arm. kogi ‘butter'.
The root was probably *g"eh,-, as seen in þóσкw 'to tend'; the circumflex accent in
the nom.sg. points to a lost laryngeal. The original inflection is still unclear: we
expect *geh3-u-s, gen. gh¸-eu-s (proterodynamic); the latter form explains Av. gaoš
1
!
1
ẞpaẞeús
233
and Gr. BoƑós, but not Skt. gáuḥ, nor the acc. gắm, þúóv, which look like old forms.
The Greek nom. could be *geh-us > Bouç; the acc. may have been *g"ōm < older
*g"oum.
Bovoós [f.] 'path for cows', only dat. Bovσoi (Orchomenos, Arcadia, Schwyzer: 664, 15;
18). GR?
•ETYM From *ẞov-σóƑos (Schwyzer: 450); related to σɛúw. Cf. µŋlooón. ódóc, di
Пç лрóẞατα ελαúvɛtai. 'Pódio ‘road on which cattle is driven (Rhod.)' (H.), as well
Boña. Not related to Ion. Buσσós 'depth, bottom' (as per Fraenkel Glotta 32
(1953):22).
as
•
ẞovτávŋ [f.] A: (1) µépos ti tñs µαкpāç vεwç ‘part of a long ship³; (2) ½ µáστ ‘a
whip', ĥ (3) távvois tñs Boɛías ‘force of an ox'. (4) µépos dè tñs vews, épòs ö tò
ηdáλov Seoµεveται 'part of the ship to which the rudder is tied'. (5) Snλoĩ dè kai
μáxηv 'a battle'. (6) andíav 'nausea'. <PG(V)>
•VAR Cf. B: BovσTávy. Booσtaσía, ǹ twv ßowv otáσiç 'cowshed'. (2) † µáσt₹ ‘whip',
(3) кαi лληуń ‘blow'.
τ
⚫ETYM Glosses A1, B3, and A4, which was added later, are unexplained. Gloss A2 is
identical to B2: they show the typical Pre-Greek variation ~ στ (Fur.: 304f). For A5,
Fur. compares ẞúτava. кóvбvλo 'knuckle, swelling' (H.), and for A6, he suggests
that a gloss Boúτaλis (Aisop. 85) andúv was lost (Fur. 305f.). A3 and B₁ are probably
folk etymologies from antiquity.
ẞOÛT(T)₁ç [f.] ‘vase in the form of a frustum of a cone' (Hero). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Boútη.
tt. ▸
•ETYM Lat. buttis may be borrowed from Greek; the Greek word itself is evidently
Pre-Greek because of the alternation τ ~ τT. See ßuτívη, ßwτiov, ßwoiov (cf. also
Szemerényi BSOAS 19 (1957): 627f.).
ẞoúτūpov [n.] ‘butter' (Hp.). <GR
•VAR Also Boúτupos (Gal.), after tupós.
⚫ETYM From Bouç and tupóç; cf. ẞoúσταеμν (: σταеμóç). Lat. būtÿrum is borrowed.
from the Greek, and from the Latin in turn OHG butera, MoDu. boter, etc. See
Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 177f.
ßoŵлç [adj.] epithet of Hera: 'with the head of a cow'(?), 'with the eyes of a cow' (II.).
<GR
⚫ETYM From Boûç and ►*wч.
ßpá [?] · ȧdɛλqoí, úлò'Hλɛíшv 'brothers [Elean]' (cod. Iɛtwv) (H.). <?>
.
•ETYM If the word is related to oppάτηp, it could perhaps be an Illyrian element in the
Elean dialect, cf. Alb. vëlla ‘brother', which is unexplained otherwise (Demiraj 1997;
cf. also Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 33; Pisani Sprache 7 (1961): 100). Latte even
reads 'I\\upíwv for the Dawv of the manuscript.
ßpaßɛús [m.] ‘judge at the games, arbitrator, umpire; leader' (S.). ◄PG?►
•DIAL Here perhaps Myc. mo-ro-qa, but form and mg. (a person, official?) are
unknown.

=== page 141 ===

|
234
Bpápǔ入ov
•DER ẞpáßεvμa 'decision of a judge' (S.), ßpaßɛía ‘decision' (E.), ßpaẞεov 'prize'
(Men.).
•ETYM Etymology unknown. Probably Pre-Greek (see Chantraine 1933: 125). In order
to account for the Myc. form (where /a/ may phonetically be [o]), we may
reconstruct *mrog"-, *mrag"-, or *mrg"-. If this word is of Pre-Greek origin indeed,
this could imply that the athletic contests, too, are part of the Pre-Greek heritage.
ẞpáẞňov [n.] 'sloe, Prunus spinosa' (Theoc.). <PG?>
•VAR ßpáßuλos [f.] (Aret.). Mss. also ßpaßi-, ßpaßη-; also ßápßios (Gp).
•ETYM Unknown; a loanword. Cf. ẞpaẞúλn ávεдávη poɩVIкñ (Ps.-Dsc.). See
André 1956 s.v. brabilla.
ßpάyos [?] · λos 'marsh-meadow' (H.). <?►
=
⚫ETYM ẞpάyoç might somehow be related to ẞpáxos, ẞpáxɛa 'shallows' (Hdt.). For
these words, Fick BB 29 (1905): 199f. proposed that they are of Macedonian origin,
whereas Çabej 1969: 176 compared Alb. berrakë 'sumpfiges Land'. According to
Moutsos KZ 88 (1974): 74-76, who reads ẞpayós (as in the ms.), the word means
‘embankment, garden-plot' (however, his IE etymology remains quite uncertain).
Bpáyxos [m.] 'hoarseness, angina' (Hp.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Pápayxos (Hippon.), ßpáуxŋ [f.] (Xenocr.) ‘id.' and ẞpayxia. ǹ
лεpiτpáxηλoç áλуndóv 'pain around the neck' (H.).
●DER ßpayxaλéos ‘hoarse' (Hp.), ẞpayxóc ‘id.' (AP). ßpayxáw, ßpayxiáw [v.] ‘to have
a sore throat (Arist.); ßpayɩáðε· лvíуoɩσðε ‘choke, stifle' (H.). Different mg. in
ẞpáyxia [pl.] gills of fishes, bronchial tubes', also ẞapáyxia, ßapáxvia (Hdn.).
⚫ETYM The resemblance with ẞpóyxos 'windpipe' may have caused the semantic shift
of ẞpáyxia. Fur. 128, 276 connects the word with ßpaxwdns. tpaxúc 'rough, harsh'
(H.), ẞpaкíaç τрауεt̃ç τóлоç ‘rough places' (H.), and ẞарaкivñoɩv. áкávšαiç.
σкóλoчл 'thorns, palisade' (H.). Thus, we arrive at a set of variants ẞpaк-/ ẞpax-/
ẞpayx-, which are typical of Pre-Greek. The aorist ßpaxɛiv ‘rattle, clash' (Johansson
KZ 36 (1900): 345f.) may also be connected as 'produce a raw sound'. The additional
a in the first syllable of ẞápayxos (Schwyzer: 278, 831) may be due to purely phonetic
epenthesis, but this type of variation, too, is frequent in Pre-Greek words as well
(Fur.: 378-385).
ẞpadús [adj.] 'slow' (Il.). <IE? *g*rd-u- 'slow'>
•VAR Compar. and superl. ẞpadútɛpoç, -tatos, also ßpadiwv, ẞápiστos and
ẞpadiστατos (Ael.).
●der ßpadvtýs, -tñtos ‘slowness' (Il.), ßpádoc ‘id.' (X.; after táxoc). Denominative
ẞpadúvw 'retard' (A.).
⚫ETYM ẞpadús may morphologically be identical with Lith. gurdus 'slow', Latv. gurds
'tired', reflecting *grdú- (Fraenkel Phil. 97 (1948): 172; Fraenkel KZ 69 (1951): 76ff.).
Lat. gurdus ‘dolt, heavy' can be connected as well (De Vaan 2008 s.v.).
ẞpáðu 1 [n.] 'savin, Juniperus sabina'; also 'Juniperus foetidissima' (Dsc.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Also ẞópaτov [n.] (D. S.); ßopatívn (Aq.).
i
Bpáoow
235
•ETYM ẞpáv has been compared with a Semitic word, Aram. berāt, Hebr. berōš,
Assyr. burāšu ‘cypress'; Lat. bratus (Plin.), an Anatolian cypress, must go back to the
same source (Lewy 1895: 34; Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 671).
Fur.: 187 thinks it is rather a loan word from the Near East, comparing кUлápiσσoç
and Hebr. göfer (this might be supported by the suffix -tv-). For the u-stem, cf. µwλv,
μíσv, and σwpv (Chantraine 1933: 119), as well as Sáкpu 'resin'.
!
ẞρáеv 2. лóα τɩ εoчç voμεvη 'some herb offered to the gods' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
j
ẞpáкaι [f.pl.] 'breeches' (pap., inscr., D. S.), worn by Gauls. <LW Celt.>
⚫ETYM Borrowed from Celtic, just like Lat. brācae.
}
i
Bpákadov = póradov.
ẞpáкava [n.] · τà ǎypia λáxava 'wild vegetables' (H.; also Pherecr., Luc.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM ẞpáкava has been compared with OHG moraha, OE moru 'carrot'. Fur.: 330
rather compared ẞáкavov 'cabbage(-seed)' (Aët.), which requires the assumption of
an alternation ẞ ~ ßp (or even ẞ ~ Bε ~ ßp); for such an alternation there are indeed
parallels in the Pre-Greek lexicon.
•
ẞpakɛiv [v.] · ovviéval 'to comprehend'; ßpážať ovλλaßɛiv, dakɛīv, kataлɩɛīv ‘to put
together, comprehend; bite; gulp down' (H.). <?>
...
•ETYM Perhaps also to be considered here is Svoßpáкavov. Svoxɛpés,
Svσкατavónov hard to manage, ... hard to understand' (H.). Since Roth KZ 19
Svokatavóŋtov
(1870): 223, the word has been connected with Skt. mṛśáti 'touch, take, seize' (*mrk-).
Further comparisons have been with páчa σullaßɛīv, ávalŵσai, кpúyaɩ,
еŋpɛñσa comprehend; spend; hide; hunt' and Врáлτяу· εσðíεν, кρúлтεν,
ßþрáлτεɩv. έσðíɛɩv, кpúrtelv,
ȧqavíčɛiv, tu̟ o̟tó̟µati ëλkeiv, i otεváчɛv ‘eat; hide; render invisible; suck up with
the mouth; sigh', as either influenced by μápчa or related to it (with assimilation of
ê to initial µ-, giving л; Schwyzer: 302). All of these comparisons are uncertain (see
►µápëτw). Cf. further ßpáкɛτov. лλño ‘crowď and ßpáττε· лλŋþúvɛɩv,
ẞapúvɛɩv 'multiply, oppress' (H.). See Belardi Doxa 3 (1950): 200. See ► ẞpóчai.
...
ßpáкoç [m.]? · кáλaµoç. ¡µátiov roλʊτɛλéç ‘reed; an expensive cloak' (H., also Sappho
57, Theoc. 28,11). <?>
•ETYM The word has been identified with páкoç ‘ragged cloth', but the meaning
does not fit. Also, the first gloss is unclear. Perhaps the word goes back to *urko-,
parallel to yάpkav. þáßdov ‘roď (H.; Belardi Doxa 3 (1950): 199f.).
Bpántlv →阝pakeiv.
ẞpáσow [v.] 'to shake violently, agitate, boil (up), winnow' (Ar.). <?►
¿k-ßpŋσow
•VAR Att. ẞpáττw, also έк-ßpησσw (Gal.), aor. ẞpåσaι, έßpáσ0ŋy, fut. ẞpáσw, perf.
ẞéßpaσµai. In H., • tò ñovõñ ódúpeσat 'wailing in silence'. Also ẞpá(w ‘be boiling'.
•DER ẞpaσuós 'boiling', ßpάoua ‘id.', ßpaσuaτías ‘upheaval' (Posidon., etc.; cf.
µvkntías oɛoµóç, σɛσµɑτíaç Chantraine 1933: 94f.), ßpáσiç ‘boiling' (Orib.).
ẞpáστns [m.] 'earthquake' (Arist.), ßpαστηp 'winnowing-fan' (gloss.).

=== page 142 ===

236
Bpáoowv
1
Bpévdoc
237
⚫ETYM Bezzenberger BB 27 (1902): 152f. connected the word with Latv. murdēt ‘boil
up', Lith. mùrdau, mùrdyti “etwas im Wasser rüttelnd behandeln"; this is uncertain.
Bpáσowvßpaxús.
.
ẞpavкavão aι [v.] · έлì τŵν кλαióνтwν лαidíшv λéyɛtai wę µíµŋµa qwvñç ‘is said
when children weep, onomatopoeic' (H.). <?>
ETYM Related to ẞpouкoç?
ẞpaxɛīv [v.] • ηxñσai, чoñσai 'to sound' (H.), 'to rattle, clash' (II.). <PG?>
.
•VAR Aor. ẞpáxε, ßpaxe. Perhaps here ẞpáxαλov. Xpεµετɩσµóv 'neighing' (H.).
⚫ETYM Possibly related to ẞpáyxos.
ẞpaxiwv, -ovoc [m.] 'upper arm', as opposed to лñ³¢ (II.). ◄GR?►
•DER ẞpaxióviov armlet' (Delos IIª), ßpaxioviστp ‘id.' (Plu.), see Chantraine 1933:
327f.; ẞpaxiálov, -áptov (Sm.), ẞpaxióλov (Alex. Trall.) from Lat. bracchiale,
bracchiolum.
⚫ETYM According to Pollux 2, 138 originally the comparative of ẞpaxúc: ŏti ¿σtì tou
лnуεwе ВраxúτTεроÇ 'because it is shorter than the forearm'. However, the
phonetically regular reflex of *mrg -ios- is probably seen in ẞpáσσwv (K 226):
ẞpaxiwv would have to be a later formation. Alternatively, Ruijgh Minos 9 (1968):
147f. (see also Ruijgh 1991b: 585) assumes that it has the same suffix as Kuλλолоdíwv.
The word was borrowed as Lat. bracchium, which in turn was the source of MW
braich, etc.
Bpaxúc [adj.] 'short' (Hdt., Pi.). <IE *mrgªú- ‘short'>
•VAR Grades of compar. ẞpaxúτεpoç, -tatos, ßpáxiστoç. ẞpaxíwv (in this sense only
Choerob., elsewhere ‘upper arm', s.v.); hapax legomenon ẞpáσσwv τε vóoç (K 226),
after Oáσowv?
DIAL Aeol. ẞpoxúc.
•der ßpaxútns, -tytos (Pl.); tò ßpáxos (only Procop.). Denominative ßpaxúvw
‘shorten' (Hp.). On ßpáxɛa [n.pl.] ‘shallows' see ►ßpáyos.
•ETYM ßpaxús (< *mrghú-) finds a morphological match in Skt. múhuḥ, múhu [adv.]
'suddenly', muhūrtá- [n.] 'short time, moment' (Prakritisms for *mrhú-), Av.
mǝrǝzu- 'short' in mərəzu-jiti-, məǝrǝzu-juua- 'short life' resp. 'short-lived' (cf. ó Bíoc
Bpaxúc [Hp.]), Sogd. murzak ‘id.', OHG murg(i) 'short', and OE myrge 'entertaining'
("kurzweilig"). Further related are Go. ga-maurgjan 'to shorten', and Lat. brevis (<
*mreg¹u-i-).
Bpéyua •VAR ẞpεyμós. →ẞpεxμÓS.
=>
ßpέyµa 2 → ßpέxw.
Bpéyua 3 [n.] a substance found in peppercorns (Dsc.2, 159). <LW India➤
•ETYM Word of Indian origin, acc. to Pliny NH XII, 14,27; see Hemmerdinger Glotta
48 (1970): 64.
ßpekekekéž [interj.] imitation of the sound of frogs (Ar. Ran. 209). ◄ONOM➤
1
!
!
1
Bpéμw [v.] 'to roar, grumble' (Il.). ◄ONOM▷
•VAR Only pres.
●COMP ßapú-ßpoµos, etc.; -ßpeµ-étns in ¿pi-, vyɩ-ßpeµ-étns (II.). -ßpév-tāç in ávağı-
ẞpév-tāç, ȧpyɩ-ßpév-tāç. Also aioλo-ßpóvtās from ßpovtáw.
•DER ẞpóμoç 'loud noise' (II.) whence póчuos boisterous' (Pi.), Bpóμoç as a name
of Bacchos (A.). -ßpovτn 'thunder' (Il.), Bpóvτηs name of a Cyclops (Hes.),
Bpovτnσios (Zεúc); ẞpovτéα name of a precious stone (Plin.). Denominative
ẞpovτáw to thunder' (II.). ßpεvταí· ßpovτaí (H.). Deverbative ẞpoμéw (iterative-
intensive) (II.); ßpшµáoμаι 'cry' (Ar.). Further ẞpεμεaívwv. ηxwv H., see
► ẞλɛɛaívw. Note that the -vt-forms refer to thunder, whereas the forms with µ and
without τ indicate droning sounds in general.
T
•ETYM Although ẞpéµw resembles Lat. fremō ‘to rumble, roar', OHG breman ‘buzz',
and MW brefu 'roar' (Pok. 142), these cannot be connected, since they derive from
*brem-, whereas Greek has ẞ-. Therefore, it is rather an onomatopoeic word.
► ßρóµo ~ þóρμos in the sense ‘oats' (Hp.) is not related, but probably Pre-Greek.
Cf. ►xpεμεtíw.
ẞpévdov [m.]/[n.]? λaqov 'deer' (H.). Вρévτiov· ǹ кɛчaλǹ toñ ¿λáqov 'a stag's head;
the head of a deer' (Str. 6,3,6, EM). <LW Messap.>
=
⚫ETYM A Messapian word (EM), possibly also found in place names, e.g. Bpεvtéσiov
Brundisium. Further possible cognates are found in NGm., e.g. MoSw. dial.
brind(e) 'male elk' and MoNw. (dial.) brund (Latv. briêdis, probably from Gm.); cf.
Alb. bri 'horn, antlers', without a dental (Demiraj 1997 s.v.). See Krahe 1955: 39; Rix
Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 5 (1970): 115ff.
ßpévôos [m.] is attested in wide variety of (only partly polysemic) meanings: 1. a bird
(a waterbird in Arist. HA 609ª23, but a singing bird (v.l. ßpív¤oc) in Arist. HA 15ª16 =
Kóσσuqov 'blackbird' (H.); see Thompson 1895 s.v.); 2. ‘pride' (Ath.); 3. · žvðµýv,
túµßoç ‘bottom, base; tomb' (H.). 4. a perfume ßpévƉov. µúpov tɩ ‘a perfume' <tõv
лaxέwv>, wç þáккapıç (an unguent), oi dε äveɩvov μúpov 'perfume of flowers' (H.),
cf. ẞpεvivo. àveɩv (H.). 5. ßpέvēɩva⋅ þɩčápiα τivá, olç έpvеpaívovτai ai уuvaikεç
tàç napɛiás ‘roots with which women redden their cheeks' oi dè äyxovʊav, ovê eỦ
… oi dè qûkoç (‘orchiľ’?) napeµqepès kúdei Aqpoditns (H.) 6. ßpévðis = Opídač (Nic.
fr. 120), ßpévеič. Opidakívη. Kúrpio 'lettuce (Cypr.)' (H.). <?►
ú
•DER ẞрévеεov (µúpov; Sapph.). ßpévðus, -vos [f.] 'perfume of ẞpé
(Phld.). More usual is pεvúоμat (pres. only) 'to behave haughtily, swagger' (Ar.),
also ẞpεvеúvoμaι (AP).
⚫ETYM DELG is of the opinion that the name of the bird is the same word as that for
'arrogance', which is quite doubtful. It suggests that there were two groups, the bird
name (and 'arrogance') on the one hand, and the plants and perfume on the other.
The word for ‘túµßoç' may constitute yet another group. However, these categories
remain uncertain.
If the v.l. pívos is reliable, the bird name may be Pre-Greek because of the
variation 1/ ε. On the other hand, pivdεïv. Ovμα, εεíε be agitated,

=== page 143 ===

238
ẞpéτaç, -εoc
provoke' (H.) is not related (pace von Blumenthal 1930: 6, Krahe DLZ 51 (1930): 1654;
see also Alessio Studi etruschi 15 (1941): 190ff.).
ßpétaç, -eos [n.] 'wooden image of a god (A.). <PG?>
•DER PN Bρéτwv (Attica), Bechtel 1917a: 13f.
⚫ETYM DELG suggests that the word is the Doric equivalent of óavov, likewise an
image of a god. No etymology (see Benveniste RPh. 58 (1929)128f.).
ẞpéqos [n.] 'newborn child, young of an animal (Il.). ◄IE? *g"erb¹- / greb¹- ‘child,
young'>
•COMP ẞpεQO-KTÓvoç 'child-killing' (Lyc.).
•DER ßpeqwdns ‘childish' (Ph.), ßpεpółεv 'from childhood' (Eust.).
•ETYM ẞpéqoç is related to OCS žrěbę, žrěbvcv foal'; the Greek reflects *greb"-, but
the Slavic must go back to *gwerb- (in South Slavic, the regular metathesis of PSI. *er
yields rě). The appurtenance of MIr. brommach ‘foal' (< *g"romb¹āko-) is uncertain;
on Skt. gárbha- 'womb', see deλqúç.
ẞpεxuós [m.] 'front part of the head' (II.). <IE? *mreg"-n- brain(-pan)'>
•VAR Also ßpέyµa [n.] (Stratt.; Schwyzer: 206), ßpεyµós (EM), ßpéxµa (v.l. Alciphr.
3,5).
•ETYM Not related to pέxw. The word is rather related to WGm. words for ‘brain':
OE broegen, MLG bragen, OFr. brein, etc. (PGm. *bragna-), from *mregh- or *b¹regh-;
cf. also OW br(e)ithel. The connection of Benveniste BSL 31 (1930): 80 with Av.
mǝrǝzu- 'cervical vertebra' and MoIran. words for 'neck' from *mrz- remains
uncertain.
ẞpέxw [v.] ‘to wet, drench' (Hp.). <IE? *mergh- 'wet, moisten’▷
•VAR Aor. Bpéaι, ßρεxеñvaι, ßpαxñvai; ȧvaßéßpoxεv (P 54).
•DER ẞpoxn 'rain, moistening, inundation' (Democr.), poxετós (AP), ßpoxµóc,
ẞpéyua (Erot.). Bpoxís ‘ink-horn' (AP), ßpóxtov ‘id.' (pap.).
ETYM In spite of the doubts expressed in DELG s.v., and the difference in meaning,
ẞpéxw is possibly related to Latv. merguôt ‘rain slowly', merga 'soft rain', which can
be traced back to *mergh- (Trautmann 1923: 182; however, Ru. morosíť ‘rain slowly’
cannot be connected because of its -s-). pεxw would require *mregh- with
schwebeablaut (cf. the discussion s.v. ►ßpéqoc; perhaps it is a secondary full grade
on the basis of a zero grade *Bpax-). See ẞpúxios.
ßpǹooɛɩv [v.] · tò µetà ßŋxòs åvantúɛiv. évioi tañta Xwpic toũ p ypáqovσi ‘to spit up
by coughing; sometimes written without the p' (Gal. Lex. Hipp.); ßpñσσ×· þýσσε 'to
bleat, cough' (H.). <ONOM
•Der ßpñуµ¤• àñó̟ntvoµa ảnò Owpakoç, rapà 'Iлroкpátɛɩ ‘what is spit out from the
chest' (H.) Acc. to Bechtel 1917a: 12f., also the Boeot. PN Bρɛiкídaç (= Bpηк-) (?).
●ETYM An expressive (onomatopoeic) word, a variant of ßñσσɛv, perhaps under the
influence of ẞpaxεv. The gloss ßpýσσovoɩv. þλŋxwvtal. qwvei tà лpóßata ‘calls
the cattle' (H.) suggests that the -p- is a variant of -λ- (and perhaps of & in the cluster
ẞ8-?; cf. Fur. 330).
1
1
紮
Bpíyka
239
ßpí (ßpī) [?] · ¿ñì toũ µɛyálov kai iσxupoñ kaì xâλεñoũ tíðɛtaɩ ‘an epithet of the
[words] great, strong and fierce' (H.). <PG►
•DIAL The interpretation of Myc. pi-ri-ta-wo is uncertain.
●COMP In e.g. ßpɩ-ǹävoç ‘crying loudly' of Ares (N 521), with ǹëúw (Bechtel 1914 s.v.),
Bpiápɛws see below, ßpiŋpóv. µɛyáλws kɛxapiσµévov ‘very happy' (H.), Bρíaкxoç
'Bacchante' (S.) with iáxw, "Iaкxoç.
•DER ßpiapós [adj.] ‘strong' (Il.); ßptáw [v.] ‘to be or make strong, mighty' (Hes.)
back-formation from ßpiapóc? See Schwyzer: 682f., Bechtel l.c.; also ẞpiɛpóç. For
Bptápɛws, a giant with hundred arms (Il.), in Hes. 'Oßpiápɛws, the interpretation
'who causes much damage (apη)' (Bechtel 1914) is most uncertain; much more
probably it is a Pre-Greek name, cf. Fur.: 168103.
*
With -0- Bpi0w 'to be laden with, be full of (II.), perf. þéßpiða, aor. ßpiσaï; ßpïúç
‘heavy' (?) (II.), ßpï¤os [n.] ‘weight' (Hp.), ßpíðoσúvŋ ‘id.' (Il.). Here also ßpɩvdɛïv.
еvμoñσαι, ¿pεíε 'to be agitated, irritate' (H.) with prenasalization of ẞp10-? (For
the mg., cf. ppчuáoμα.) Further ßpíµŋ, ►ßpчµáoµai. See also ẞpíw and ►üßpıç.
•ETYM Since the idea of an old ‘ablauť' *ī / ia must be given up and such cases must
be reconstructed as *-ih,- / -ih-e, ẞpiapós could in principle continue *grih₂-eros.
The suffix can hardly be anything else, because we cannot assume a derivational
system -i-ro- here, nor has a root *piap any plausibility (pace Benveniste 1935:
15). The connection with Bapús ‘heavy' is very doubtful, as this word continues
*g"rh₂-u-; a derivative *g"rh₂-iH- would have given *ßapī-. *gr-iH-, derived from a
root without laryngeal, would be possible, but the only evidence for such a root is
Skt. grī-ṣmá- [m.] ‘midsummer' (Wackernagel KZ 61 (1934): 197f.). However, the
semantics are very weak, and for the explanation of the second part -ṣmá- as from
sámā '[half-]year', Av. ham- 'summer' is difficult as the latter derive from *smH-. As
Fur.: 168104; 174122; 246f. remarks, the word group, meaning 'big, strong, xaλɛñóç³, can
be alternatively connected with Bpquós 'great, difficult' (see ẞpíun). Since ẞpчμ- is
very probably related to ößpчoç (cf. oßptápɛws), this whole etymon must be of Pre-
Greek origin in view of the variants (Fur.: index). See ►œpquáσooµai.
ßpia = ródiç, tɛixoç, in Thracian (Str. 7, 6, 1); ßpíav. tǹv ¿ï³ ảypoïç (äkpolç?) kwµnv
‘an unfortified village in the country (in the periphery?)' (H.). <LW Thrac.?>
•ETYM The word has been connected with ToA ri, ToB riye 'town' (which may
continue < *urih,-en-) since Lidén 1916: 143f. (see Adams s.v.). ► píov ‘peak,
headland' has also been compared. The theory of Pisani KZ 75 (1957): 78f. (i.e., that
the word is Ligurian) is improbable. Fur.: 270¹³ refers to IIoλτvμßpía, Σnλv(µ)µßpía
and 355 to Bpća, a town in Thrace. As DELG remarks, the word can hardly be
regarded as genuinely Greek.
Bpiapós →pi.
ßpíyka [m.] · tò µikpóv. Kúrpioi 'small (Cypr.)' (H.); ßpíукoç name of a sea-fish (ap.
Ath. 322e), = ixßñç kntwdns ‘cetaceous fish' (H.) (Thompson 1947 s.v.); further
ȧvwdópкaç ẞpíуkoç (cod. ßpíкxoç) ó ¿×¤ñç, úлò ①ŋßaíшv ‘sea-fish (Theb.)' (H.)
(Strömberg 1943: 58); also PN (Eretria). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. For the stem formation, see ►ßpíšw.

=== page 144 ===

240
Bpitw
ẞpiw [v.] ‘to be sleepy, nod' (A 4, 223, A.). <?►
•VAR Aor. ßpiža (Od., E. Rh. 826 [lyr.], v.l. ßpia), ßpišai. vrvŵoai, vvotážai ‘sleep,
take a nap'; ßpɩσðɛíç. úrvwoɑç H.; ßpi¢á, -oñ¢ [f.] = ¿vvävóµavti (Semus 5).
äpplktov. äурuлvov 'sleepless', àßpí. εуpηyópw 'awake' (H.; cf. άлpí s.v.
►ǎлpɩуda and Schwyzer: 620).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The connection with ẞpí-, ẞpíew (Curtius 1858: 475; cf. Lat.
somnō gravātus) is improbable.
=
Bpiew →ẞpí.
.
ẞpíкɛλoɩ [m.] oi µèv toùs iστóлodaç, áñò toũ ßápovç kai tou úlov. oi dè
Bappápovc. Aidvuoc sè tà tpayikà npoowneia, napà Kpativy, olov Bpot eikedon,
Év Zɛpuopiois 'long beams of the loom, made of a weight and wood; barbarians;
characters in tragedy (apud Cratinus, acc. to Didymus); like a mortal (in Cratinus's
Seriphians)' (H.). <PG?►
•VAR Also: ẞpíкɛλoç. Kpaτivoç Σɛpios (204K.) “<alp',> alpɛ dɛũpo toùç
ẞpikéλous” (“raise high the beams”). εσtɩ dè ßapßapikòv tò ővoµa, tíðɛtai dè [kaì]
¿¨ì èpoσóлwv τpayɩkŵv kai ɛ"pŋtai oiovɛì ßpotų [ɛ]íkɛλos ǹ Bpišìv [ɛ]íkeλoç.
Bpiyɛs yȧp vos ßapßapiкòv ‘the word is barbarian; it is used for tragic characters
[too] and it is used like “like a man” or “like a barbarian". For the Bpiyɛs are a
barbaric race.' (Paus. Gr. p. 169 Erbse). Cf. ẞpuкóv. Bápßapov; ßpuкóç· Bápẞapos;
ßpiyɛs. ßápßapoɩ. oi dè σoλoikiσtaí ‘barbarian, or those who speek incorrectly' (H.).
⚫ETYM Perhaps we are dealing with a Pre-Greek word ẞpiк-/ ßpuк- 'barbarian,
foreigner': the variation ( ~ v is well known, and -ελ- is a Pre-Greek suffix (see Pre-
Greek: suffixes). The idea that the word has anything to do with Bpíyɛs is clearly
folk-etymological, whereas an interpretation as ßpoτų εľкεlos is a learned
etymology. According to Grošelj Živa Ant. 4 (1954): 166f., it is a Pre-Greek word
related to œpíkɛç• Xápakɛç ‘pointed stick, palisade (?)' (H.). The gloss as iotórodeç
'beams' in H. is unclear; perhaps it is inspired by a folk-etymological interpretation
of ẞpíкɛλo from ßápos and кɛλ- (= čúλov).
ßpíµn [f.] · åлɛilý, kai yʊvaikɛía άppŋt̃oлoïïɑ ‘threat; also womanly vice (H.,
supposed to refer to A. R. 4, 1677 Mydɛins ßpiµŋ rоλvôаρµáкov); doubtful conj. h.
Hom. 28, 10 (of Athena); also probably Orph. Fr. 79 = 'roaring'. <PG>>
•var Cf. ßpyós. µéyas, xaλeñós ‘great, difficult' (H.)
•DER Bpчuw epithet of Hecate and Persephone (A. R.), also 'Oßpyiw; ßpyiwdns
(Herm. apud Stob. [?]). Verbs: ßpчµάoμα ‘snort with anger' vel sim. (Ar. Eq. 855,
Phld.) with ßpíµŋµa (H., API. [?]), more usual &µ-ßpiáoµai (A.); ßpɩµóoµaɩ ‘id.'
(X.), ßpiµaívetai. Ovµaívetai, ópyíčɛtaɩ ‘is angry, rages'; ßpчµá¶wv. tã toũ Xéovtos
Xpμεvo vñ using the voice of the lion'; ẞpчá ópуą ɛiç σvvovσíαv. Kúлρio
'is longing for company (Cypr.)' (H.).
•ETYM Probably based on ẞpt- in ßpiapós, ßpíew. As these words are rare, their
meanings are not quite clear (cf. Solmsen KZ 42 (1909): 207²). The assumption that
the original meaning was ‘heaviness, vehemence, energy', etc. is partly based on the
wrong etymological connection with ẞapús (see the discussion on ►ßpt-). Pre-Greek
Bpóoc 1
241
origin is proven by Fur. (index) credible connection with opчuáσσoμα, the whole
group of ẞpt-, and with oẞpчuos (cf. 'Oẞpчó). See ►ẞpí.
ẞpivdɛiv →ẞpí.
Bpitóµaptiç [f.] epithet of Artemis on Crete (inscr., Str.), also a goddess or nymph on
Crete, Dreros (Call. Dian. 190). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Вρɩτóµapriç, -µápëεa (Crete); There is also a form Bputóµaptis
(Wahrmann Glotta 19 (1931): 170).
●der Bpitoµáptiα [n.pl.] festival on Delos (inscr.).
•ETYM Acc. to Marinatos Apx. AελT. 9: 79ff. it belongs to the Aetolian DN
Máрлησσα. Wahrmann (l.c.) held that -μаρлç is the original form, but it is
improbable that Bρiτóμаρτiç is due to dissimilation.
Acc. to Solin. 11, 8, it means ‘dulcis virgo' = 'sweet maiden', which seems confirmed
by the gloss. Latte thinks that the gloss may have been invented secondarily to
explain the name, but Brown 1985: 41 rightly objects that the u-stem cannot be
accounted for in this way. Proposals for an IE etymology are useless. For the
interchange л/ ɩ, Fur.: 166 compares Пavoлɛúç / Þavotɛúç; see also ibid.: 389. A
variation / v is also known from Pre-Greek. See ►ẞpitú.
.
BPIτú [adj.] уAUкú. Kρñτεç 'sweet (Cret.)' (H.). <PG>
●COMP See also on ▶Bpitólaptis, epithet of Artemis on Crete (inscr., Str.), also a
goddess or nymph on Crete, Dreros (Call. Dian. 190).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The hypothesis of Magnien Glotta 21 (1933): 178 is improbable.
Bpóyxos [m.] 'windpipe, throat' (Hp.). ◄PG(V)►
•DER ßpóyxia [n.pl.] ‘bronchial tubes' (Hp.), ẞpoyxin [f.] 'system of conducts
connecting heart with liver' (Hp., cf. ápτηpía), ßpoyxεãov 'bronchial cartiledge' (S.).
ẞpoуxwτηp 'neck in a garment (J.; cf. τpoïwτýp - τpoïós, Chantraine 1933: 327f.).
Denominative ẞpoуõɩáčεɩ· кataлívε 'gulps down' (H.).
⚫ETYM The word is evidently connected with ẞpóžai and ẞpóxoç. The nasal infix,
which would be inexplicable if the word were IE, can be easily understood as Pre-
Greek prenasalization. For the formation of ßpóxos ~ ßpóyxos, compare кóxλoc ~
kóуxvŋ, and µóx☺os ~ μoуέw. It is conceivable that ẞpoxe- is not a suffixal derivation
from this word, but just another form of the root. Further, ßpáyxos and ►ßpaxɛïv
belong to this group, with the typical variation a/o.
ẞpoкós [adj.]· μwpós, “Eλλŋveç ‘dull' (H.); ẞpóкwv. áµaðýç, áлaídεvtos, olov Bóoknua
'who has not learnt; uneducated; like a piece of cattle' (H.). <?>
•ETYM DELG refers to ßpóкol· áttéλɛßoɩ ‘locusts' and considers it to be “un emploi
plaisant” of 'locust'. To my mind, it is rather an accidental homonym. Fur.: 145
suggests connection with лрóкov. λítov 'numb' (H.), and, much more doubtfully,
with Lat. bargus 'sine ingenio'.
ẞpóμoç 1 [m.] 'oats' (Thphr.). PG(V) >
•VAR Also ẞópμoç (Dieuch. apud Orib.).

=== page 145 ===

242
Bpóros 2
•ETYM Probably Pre-Greek on account of the alternating vocalism; cf. further
examples in Fur.: 392.
ẞpóμoç 2 [m.] . Tóлоç εiç öv ελαчo oúρoñσι кai ȧoodɛúovσ 'place into which deer
urinate and defecate' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. Hardly related to ßpέµw (as per LSJ).
ßpovtń →ßpéµw.
ẞpóžai [v.] 'to gulp down, swallow (again)' (μ 240, 8 222; H. ẞpóžai as a simplex =
poчñσaι, AP). <PG➤
●VAR Aor. pass. åvaßpoxév (\ 586), perf. ávaßéßpoxɛv (P 54, acc. to Zenodotus for
ávapéppixev). BpáEar. кαταлɛv ‘gulp down' (H.). Cf. ßpoúč. tpáxn\os, ßpóyxos
'neck, throat' (H.).
•COMP Mostly ȧva-, kata-ßpóžai.
•DER ẞpóxos [m.] 'throat, gullet' (Hp.), ßpox0wdns 'shallow' (?; Nic.); ßpoxiw
'take a mouthful, clear the throat, give to drink' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM The surprising o-vocalism in the aorist can hardly be explained by Aeolic
origin, in spite of the gloss ẞpážaɩ. The notation кατα-ßpшžαɩ (Ar.) may be due to
influence of ßißpwσкw. ßpóxƉoç, probably an action noun, has been compared with
yváðoç, σtñ³oç, etc. (Schwyzer: 510f., Chantraine 1933: 367), but these are body parts
(note that yválos is Pre-Greek). Not related to Biẞpwoкw, as *g™rh3-C- would have
given *Bpw-C-. From other languages, one adduces Gm. and Celt. words like MHG
krage 'neck, throat, collar', ME crawe 'crop, craw (of a bird)' (which may contain
*g"rog"-), and OIr. brágae 'neck', MW breuant 'windpipe' from PCl. *brāg-, PIE
*g"rōg"- (not from *grHg"-, as this would give pη/a/wx- in Greek). However, this
IE etymology can explain neither póxos, nor póyxos or payxos. The
aberrant o-vocalism is confirmed by the a-vocalism of ßpáyxos, which should be
interpreted as reflecting Pre-Greek origin. If ẞpoúč. τpáxηlos, ẞpóyxos (H.) is
reliable, it would also remain unexplained by the IE etymology; for o/ou in Pre-
Greek, however, cf. koλotéa/ koλovτéa (see Pre-Greek).
ẞpotós [m., f.] (mortal) man', also ‘mortal' (Il.). ◄IE *mr-tó- 'dead, mortal">
●COMP qaɛσíµßpotos ‘shining on mortals', ßpotoloɩyós ‘ruining mortals' (Il.), etc.
Note ǎẞpoτos 'without men' (A. Pr. 2).
•DER ẞpóτEOS (T 545, etc.), ßpóτεos (Archil.) 'mortal, human' (cf. Wackernagel 1916:
69', S. Schmid 1950: 28f.); ßpоτησios 'id.' (Hes.), after 'Iеaкnσioç, qiλoτσioç, etc., see
Chantraine 1933: 41f.; ßpoτaí· уuvaiкɛç 'women' (H.), corrected by Latte to ẞpoτoí(?).
ǎ-μẞpoτoç immortal, divine', note ȧ-ßpóτη vúč (± 78), cf. àµqßpóτη άσлíç 'shield
protecting in all directions' (B 389); άµßpóσoç ‘id.³, àµßpoσíŋ ‘Ambrosia', food of
the gods (all Il.). On PNs with μópτos see Masson RPh. 89 (1963): 222f. Unrelated is
▶ uapaivw.
⚫ETYM ẞpoτÓS, Aeolic from *mrtó-, agrees with Arm. mard 'man' (*mṛtó-), Skt. mṛtá-
(verbal adj.), Av. mǝrǝta- 'dead'; Lat. mortuus, OCS mrtvб 'dead' (with suffix after
vivus, živo). The privative Skt. a-mŕta-, Av. a-maša- 'immortal' is comparable to ǎ-
μẞpoτoç. Another vocalism is found in μopτóç· ävершños, Оvητós 'man' (H.) =
Bpóxos
243
Skt. márta, Av. marǝta- 'the mortal one, man', probably representing a different
ablaut grade *mor-.
ẞpóτoç [m.] mostly interpreted as 'clotted blood' (Il.). Except for μéλava ßpóτov ‘dark
blood' (w 189) only at verse end in the formula ẞpótov ai̟µatóεvta 'red blood' (H
425).<?>
•DER ẞpotóεis 'bloody' in čvapa ẞpotóεvτa (Z 480, etc.) and ßpoτóεvt ȧvdpáypia
(E 509); further the hapax ẞεßpоτшµéva tɛúxea (λ 41 = Q. S. 1, 717; after this Stesich.
42 Spáкwv ... kápa ßeßpotwµévos).
•ETYM Perhaps Aeolic (with retracted accent) for *ẞpaτós, but the connection with
Skt. mūrtá- 'clotted' (pres. mūrchati) is only possible if loss of the laryngeal under
unknown circumstances is accepted. (The word has been compared with στpα-τós,
Aeol. στpo-τóc, to Skt. stir-ná-, but the latter contains a different root; see Beekes
1969: 243.). Differently, Leumann 1950: 124ff.: he maintains that póτoç is from
ǎμẞpoτoç, wrongly taken as avaiμwv; this is hardly probable. Improbably, Schulze
KZ 29 (1888): 257f.: that ảµqißpótŋ (åσïíç B 389, etc.) is from *ẞpoτóv ‘body'.
ẞpoñкoç [m.] 'locust' (Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ßpoños (LXX, Ph.), ẞpoúкα (Cypr., H.); ßpañкoç (Cret.), ßpaúкη (AB, H.),
ßpe<ñ>koç⋅ ǹ µuкpà ảкpíç, úñò Kpηtwv ‘small locust (Cret.)' (H.), ßpúкoç (H.),
ẞpókoι ȧTTÉλεẞot, ȧкpídɛç 'locusts' (H.).
•DIAL Ion. acc. to H.
•ETYM ẞpúкos (and ẞpouxos) was compared with ẞpúкw 'eat greedily, grind the
teeth' (EM), but the agreement may be secondary. No doubt a Pre-Greek word, a
hypothesis which is confirmed by the vocalic variation. The names of small animals
frequently show such variations, but this is precisely due to foreign origin, or to
dialectal differences (cf. Schwyzer: 198). See also ẞɛpкvíç. Lat. bruchus is borrowed
from the Greek, MoFr. bruche in turn from Latin.
ßpoñλoç [m.] · лóa vʊdpoç ‘plant growing in water' (H.). <?►
•ETYM The text has лovηpos; see Rohlfs 1930: 388.
=>
Bpóxos →ppčan.
ẞpóxos [m.] 'noose, slip-knot' (Od.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR ßpvYXós· ßpóxos (H.).
•DER ẞpoxic 'id.' (AP).
⚫ETYM The word has been connected with μóроττоу· έк O̟Аoιоб лλεуμa tɩ, & лov
ȧλλovę toç Anunτpíos 'plaiting of bark, with which the A. used to hit each other'
(H.), but it is uncertain whether the noose was made of bark (see Fur.: 341). ßpóxos
has also been compared with Slavic words like OCS mrěža ‘net, noose', Serb. mreža
'net', and Latv. meîga, maîga ‘railing, gallery', Lith. márška ‘neť (Vasmer 1953(2):
119). However, these words would need implausible reconstructions *morHg"-skeh₂-
and *merHg"-ieh₂-, whereas they could be explained much more easily from *merg-
with Winter's law. If the gloss on ẞpuyxóc, which had not been noticed earlier, is
reliable, then the prenasalization points to Pre-Greek origin. Not connected to
►ßpέxw, nor to ➤ fiépļus.

=== page 146 ===

244
Bpi
Bpixios
245
=
Bpù →Bpuv.
ßpvaλiZwv [v.] · Sɩappησσwv ‘breaking' (H.). ◄PG?►
...
•DER ẞpvaλуμóv. чódov, ñxov 'sound' and puаλíкται· лоλεμкoì ópηστaí.
μεvédovлo' "Iẞuкoç кai Στησíxopos 'war dancers; steadfast in battle (Ibyc. and
Stes.)' (H.). Further, Aαкwviкà ópуηµατα dɩà Maλéaç Kai Bpvá入ixa...,
лрбшρуovão de уuvaτкɛç кal Алòλλwv 'Laconian dances... and ẞ. ..., which the
dè kaì
ẞ....,
women danced for Apollo, too' (Poll. 4,104); ẞpλλXIσtai [read ẞpvaλ-]. oi aiσxpà
ñpoownɛïa repitiðéµevoi yuvaikɛĩa kaì vµvovs ädovτεs 'people who wear ugly
masks of women and sing songs' (H.); ßpvdáλɩxa (read ßpváλixa?; ms. -íxa).
пρóσwлov уvvaɩкɛãov ‘female mask' (H.; further corrupt).
•ETYM Derived from *ßpúaλos (-ŋ, -ov), which itself is connected with ► ßpúw, but
the meaning does not match very well. For the semantics, it has been compared with
ẞpváσoμa ávaẞakxevooµai µetá tivos kivńoews 'burst into Bacchic frenzy with a
certain movement' (H.). It is probably a Pre-Greek word: Fur.: 174 also cites.
ẞpvavɩwv. μετεwρióμεvoç кai kopwvwv 'is raised and streches the neck [is
ambitious]' (H.).
.
ßpúðaкɛç [?] oi Xitŵves ßoµßúкɩvol. ½ yέvos ibayevwv ‘silken tunics; an ancient
stock' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Fur.: 187 compares ßpτуyoí. xɩtŵveç ‘tunics' (H.), and further, ßpvtívny.
ẞvσσívηy (H.); he reconstructs a word *ẞpuе/τ-os ‘linen' (or 'silk??). Cf. ► þúσσoç.
.
ßpúкoç [m.] · кñpvž, oi dè ßápßapos, oi dè åttedɛßos herald; barbarian; locusť (H.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR ẞpúкaivai. iépɛiai úïò Awptέwv ‘priestesses (Dor.)' (H.). Also ßpuxós. кñpvš
(H.).
•ETYM On the explanation άττέλɛßoç, see ßpoñкoç; for ßápẞapos, see ẞpíкɛλoɩ. For
ẞpuxóc, cf. Bpuxaλɛíō, the epiclesis of Hermes at Pharsalos (Dettori Myrtia 15
(2000): 27-33). Further unknown.
ẞpбкw [V.] 'to bite, eat greedily' (Com.), next to ßpбxw 'grind the teeth' (Hp.), but the
distinction is not always clear. <IE *g*ruHgh-➤
•VAR Aor. ẞpučaɩ, fut. ßpúžw.
•DIAL ẞpúкw Att. acc. to Moeris and Ammon.
●DER ßpvyµós (Eup.); ßpvketós. taútòv tŵ ßpvyµŵ, kai ßpvênßµòs dµoíws. AwpieïS
‘the same as ẞ., and likewise for ẞ. (Dor.)' (H.); cf. dakeτóv, ßpvxηŋßµóç. Further
Bpukedavóg.modvpáyos ‘eating a lot' (H.), cf. лɛvкɛdavóc; ßpúydŋy ‘with
clenched teeth' (?) (AP).
...
•ETYM If the к in ẞpúкw is secondary for x in ßpučαɩ, then ßpú\w and ßpúxw may
continue *gruHgh-, cf. OCS gryzo, grysti ‘gnaw', Lith. gráužiu, gráužti ‘id.' (the initial
accentuation of Ru. grýzla shows that the root must have contained a laryngeal).
Further related are Olr. brón 'sorrow', MW brwyn 'biting pain' (from *brúgnos with
pretonic shortening), and possibly Arm. krcem 'gnaw' <*kurcem (perhaps
metathesized like turc, gen. trcoy ‘jaw'; see Lidén 1906: 34f.), if c for expected j can
find an explanation. Cf. ► ßp˜v, ► ßpuxáoµai, ► ßpúxios.
ßpvlixiotaí →ßpvaλilwv.
ẞpчv in ẞpūvεiлεīу 'call for drink', of small children (Ar. Nu. 1382). <ONOM▷
•VAR Also ẞpu or ẞpou.
•DER ẞpúλλw ‘id.' (Ar. Equ.1126); ßpúλλwv· únonívwv ‘drinking a little' (H.).
•ETYM Probably based on an onomatopoeic form. West Glotta 47 (1970): 184f., thinks
it represents ẞptov, which would be surprising.
ẞpúσσoç [m.] a kind of sea urchin (Arist.). <PG(V)►
●var äµßpvttoi ɛldos έxívov Balaσσíov, Apiototéλns aútoùs dè ßpúttovç kadɛi
'kind of sea urchin, also called ẞ. by Arist.' (H.) (also äßpuττoι); also ßpúttos. eidos
éxivov neλayiov, ws qŋoiv Apiototéλŋs, oi dè ixðúv, oi dè tpiov\\áßws, äµßpvttov,
ŋv, Aáxns roleĩ ‘some: a fish; others, with three syllables, àµß., [?]' (H.; it cannot be
concluded that the reading ǎẞpυTτol is false).
•ETYM The variants, together with the prenasalization, prove that this is a Pre-Greek
word.
=
ẞpúτava →ẞúτava.
BputLyyoi
pvdakes.
ẞpūτoç [m.] 'beer' made of barley (Archil.). <LW Thrac.>>
•VAR Also -ov [n.]; also ẞpoñτoç, ßpúttiov (H.).
●DER ßpútɛa (-la) [n.pl.] 'refuse of olives or grapes, tà otέµqvla' (Ath.). ßpútvoç
(Cratin.), ßputiкós (Antiph.).
•ETYM As is evident from the variant forms, ßpuτoç is a loan word from Thracian. It
may be identical with OE broð, OHG prod ‘juice', OIr. bruth ‘glow' (*brutos, -om).
The closest comparandum is Lat. défrŭtum [n.] 'must boiled down', from Lat.
ferv(e)ō; see Schrijver 1991: 254f. Whether the long ũ of the Greek goes back to
Thracian as well is unknown. Lat. brīsa 'refuse of grapes' is probably also derived
from Thrac. ẞpúτɛα, -α (Demiraj 1997 s.v. bërsi). Not connected to oppέap,
▶ popúvw.
ẞpчxáoμa [v.] 'to roar, bellow' (II.). <ONOM►
•VAR Perf. ßéßpuxa (with pres. mg.), Aor. ßpvxñσaσðal.
•DER ßpuxηеµós ‘roar(ing)' (Arist.), ßpúxŋµa ‘id.' (A.); retrograde ẞpvxń (Opp., cf.
ßpúxw); ßpvxntŃs, ßpvxntýp; ßpvxèdóv (A. R.). Perhaps here also ẞpoúxεtos.
ẞáτpaxov dè Kúлpioɩ ‘frog [Cypr.]', ßpuxós. kýpu₹ ‘herald (H.; also ẞpuкós). For
the forms see Fraenkel 1912: 953 (p. 96).
⚫ETYM The intensive perfect ẞéßρуxα (cf. μεμvкa, etc.) was the basis of ẞpuxáoμai.
Probably of onomatopoeic origin.
Bpvxios [adj.] 'deep (under water)' (A.). <?>
•DER Úлóẞрvxα 'under water', originally an adjective acc.sg. (ε 319, Hdt. 7, 130; see
Bechtel 1914 s.v.), later adverbial (Arat.); únoßpúxios (h. Hom: 33, 12); εpißpúxos
'engulfing' (S.). Secondary ẞpúxa 'depth of the sea' (Opp. H. 2, 588).
•ETYM One would have to start from a noun *ßpú, ßpuxós 'water, depth (of the
sea). On the formation of úлóßpvxα, úñoßpúxios, see Schwyzer 1950: 532.

=== page 147 ===

246
Bpuxós
Connection with ẞpéxw is phonetically impossible, and the meaning is different as
well. There seems to have been a connection with ßuxάoμα by popular etymology.
ẞpuxós →ẞpúкOÇ.
Bpúxw →ppúkw.
ẞpów [v.] 'to swell, teem with' (II.). <?>
•VAR Only pres. (but ẞpúσaç Procop.).
●COMP Old ¤µßpvov [n.] 'new-born (lamb)' (1 245), ‘foetus' (Hp.), type žµnɛdos,
Éyképados.
●DER ßpúσɩ (Suid.), ßpvσµós (Arc.), also PN as Bpúaç, Bpúσwv. Also ẞpvá¶w with
ßρváσoµαι· ávaẞakxeúoquial fetá tivos kɩvýσɛwę ‘burst into Bacchic frenzy with a
certain movement' (H.; uncertain åvεßpúačav Ar. Eq. 602) together with ßpvaσµós
'voluptuousness' (Plu.), Bρváкτηs epithet of Pan (Poet. apud Stob.). Bpúov [n.] 'tree-
moss, etc.' (Hp.) with ßpuwdns, ßpóε (Nic.); ẞpvwvn, ẞpvwvía 'black, white vine'
(Nic., Dsc.; see Chantraine 1933: 207f.). See ẞpuaλíčov. Denominative ẞpvóoμat 'to
be grown over with ẞpúov' (Arist.).
ETYM No etymology.
ẞpwμos [m.] 'stench' (LXX, Gal.). <?>
VAR Sometimes ẞpóμoç.
•DER ẞpwμa ordure' (?; Ev. Marc. 7, 19); ßpwµwdns, ßpoµwdns 'stinking' (Str.);
Вpwчéw (-o-) 'id.' (Al.).
•ETYM No etymology. The word has been supposed to be identical with ẞpóµos
'noise' (Kretschmer Glotta 9 (1918): 222f., Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 98, Hatzidakis
Glotta 22 (1934): 130-3). Differently, Kalitsunakis Glotta 12 (1923): 198. Lat. brōmus,
brōmōsus, exbrōmō is borrowed from the Greek. The word lives on in the chemical
element (Fr. brome, E. bromine, etc.).
Búãç [m.] ‘eagle-owl, Strix bubo' (Arist.). <ONOM▷
•DER Verb ßúčw (Búaç ëßvše D. C., see Schwyzer 716). Deverbal ßūčα = ẞúaç (Nic.).
⚫ETYM Derived from the onomatopetic ẞu after the nouns in -ãç (Schwyzer: 461,
Chantraine 1933: 27f., 30). Similar instances of onomatopoeia are e.g. Arm. bu ‘owl'
(= Georg. bu), MoP bum 'id.', Lat. būbō, Bulg. buh (Pok. 97f.; Schrader-Nehring
1917(2): 216; André 1967: 45). Cf. ► þúktng.
ẞúßλoç [m.] The Egyptian papyrus, 'Cyperus Papyrus; papyrus stalks, bark, roll, paper'
(Hdt.). <PG?>
•VAR Bíẞλoç, ẞiußλç; Bíµßλvos (or -ivwv). εldos oïvov кai yévoç àµлéλov v páкn
kaì ó naλaiòç olvos. 'Eñíxapµos dè åñ³ ópŵv Bɩßλívwv. čσti dè Opḍkns ‘kind of wine
and vine in Thrace, also old wine. Epicharmus [uses it as] from the B. mountains. It
is from Thrace.' (H.).
●Der þúßλivos (Od.), ßíßλivos (pap.) ‘made of papyrus'; (both) also a kind of wine,
see DELG; also ẞíußλivos (LSJ Supp. and H., see above). Bußλiá (on the accent see
Wackernagel and Debrunner Phil. 95 (1942): 191f.) 'plantation of papyrus' (Tab.
Heracl.; but see Scheller 1951: 47). Bußλiov, ßißλiov (see Kretschmer KZ 57 (1930):
Budós
247
253) ‘paper, book' (IA). ßißλídov with strange long ɩ, ßíµßis, -80s 'cords of ß.”, cf.
ßißλídεç· τà ßißλía ½ σxoιvía τà ¿к ẞíẞλоv лεлλεуμévα (EM 197, 30).
•ETYM The papyrus rind was supposedly named after the Phoenician harbor Byblos,
from where it was shipped to Greece. Since the name of this town was Gbl in
Phoenician, next to Akk. Gublu, and Hebr. Gebāl, we would need to assume the the
initial gu- was interpreted as gu- by the Greek, or that distant assimilation g-b> b-b
took place. However, E. Masson 1967: 101-7 concluded that the word is of unknown
origin and that the town was named after it and Alessio Studi etruschi 18 (1941): 122f.
assumed that the word was Pre-Greek. Fur.: 364 offers evidence for v/ 1 in Pre-Greek
(the forms with -- appear to be old, not due to late assimilation; cf. Kretschmer KZ
57 (1930): 253). Pre-Greek origin is also strongly suggested by the prenasalized forms
(which are hardly expressive). Cf. ►лáлupoç.
ßvßóc [adj.] = ‘µeotós, rλýpns, µέyaç' ‘full, great' (Sophr. 115 apud Suid. and H.).
<ONOM➤
•DER PN Búẞwv Masson Verbum 18 (1995-6): 319 (Euboea), so the word is old.
⚫ETYM Familiar word, from ẞuvéw, Búw, etc., either with reduplication or with
-Bos. On words in -ßós, see Chantraine 1933: 261.
Butós [m.] 'depth (of the sea)' (A.). <PG►
•COMP äẞvσσos 'bottomless' (Hdt.), substantivized fem. 'abyss, underworld' (=
Hebr. təhōm, LXX, NT, pap.; cf. Schwyzer RhM 81 (1932): 203); ßvσσodoµɛúw ‘build
in the deep > brood over (in the deep of one's soul), ponder deeply' (Od.), metri
causa for ẞvσσodoµéw (Eust., Suid.) like oikodoµέw, etc., see Chantraine 1942: 368.
●DER ẞúɩos ‘of the depth' (late), fem. ßvðītis (yáшoç, AP). Denominative ßví(w
'sink' (S.); ptc. ẞvłówσa (píšα) ‘going in the deep' (Nic. Th. 505). Further ẞvσσós
[m.] 'depth of the sea' (II.), Buσσó0εv (S.). Also ẞúσσа (Оpp.; after ẞñσσa? so
probably secondary); further ẞúσoaλo ẞópo 'pits', BuσσaλεÚоvτ· τ ẞυAQ
έqɩкvovµέvų ‘reaching the depth' (H.); also ßv¤µós. ävtpov, äv◊µýv, kaì ßvеµýv
'cave, bottom', perhaps corrupt.
•ETYM A base form *Butós or *Buσós, for Buσσós (Frisk), does not inspire
confidence, since this would presuppose that the word is epic (Aeolic): *-di- and
*-Ts- would give IA -σ-. In order to connect the word with Babús (and ßñσσα), a
labiovelar has bee posited, but then the straightforward connection of Babús with
ẞévôoç must be abandoned. Moreover, assuming a labiovelar would mean that the ß-
is irregular (one would expect yu-): it would have to have been introduced from
ẞñσσα, which remains a guess. A connection with yubiσowv. Stopúσowv 'digging
out' (H.) would pose the same problem; the form is better left aside. The earlier
attempts to connect þaðús and ßñσσα (with α, as opposed to u) are most improbable,
and should now be abandoned. Butós - Buσσós shows a typical variation in Pre-
Greek words; see Fur.: 248-263, e.g. ävηov/ ävησov. The conclusion is confirmed by
Buσoaλ-, with a typical Pre-Greek suffix; cf. кópudoç beside кopúdaλoç/кopvaλλóç
(Fur.: 254). One may also compare the glosses äµvσσoç. кñτoç 'sea monster' and
ápudóv. Badv.

=== page 148 ===

248
Bukávn
Van Windekens KZ 100 (1987): 307 connects Hitt. akkuš(š)a- ‘Fangrube', which is
quite improbable (“ß au lieu de -к- sous l'influence de ẞvoσós”).
Buкávη [f.] 'trumpet, horn' (Plb.). <LW Lat.>>
•DER ẞukaváw 'to blow the horn' (Plb.), Bʊкavητýs̟ (Plb.); ßuкaví(w (Eust.)
Bukaviotńs (Plb.), ßvкavoµós (Nicom.).
ETYM A loan word from Lat. būcina; for the suffix, cf. māchina : µηxavý
(Niedermann IF 37 (1916/1917): 147f. contra Cuny 1908: 108ff.: from unweakened
*būcana). A more exact rendering is ßov-; ßovkiváτwp (Lyd.) = būcinātor and the
hybrid form ẞoUKIVĹľw (S. E.) are directly borrowed from Latin. See also
▶ BOUKOVIOTńpLov.
þúкtns [adj.] / [m.] only ẞuкráwv ávεµwv (к 20), also substantivized as 'stormwind'
(Lyc.). <ONOM➤
•ETYM If the word means évεóvtwv, qvontŵv (i.e., ‘blowing'), as the ancients
suggested, it may be compared with ẞɛßuкãoα· лεлρñóðàι ‹ларȧ> Оετταλoç
'blow, kindle (Thess.)' (H.), and further with ẞuvéw. According to Fraenkel 1910:
19', the word is connected with ẞúčw, þúčaι 'to hoot (like an owl)' (see ►ẞúãç). See
the discussion on k-enlargements of onomatopoeic bū- and bu- in Pok. 97f. and 100f.
Buvéw [v.] 'to stuff (Hdt.). <?>
þú\w
•VAR Also Búvw (Hdt.), Búčw (Aret., H.); Búw, aor. Büσaι, fut. þúσw; ßéßvσµai (Od.),
BioOnv, (rapá) Buotos.
•COMP Often with prefixes diα-, έñɩ-, ñɑpα-, épo-.
•DER ẞúσμa 'plug' (Hp.), þúστpα ‘id.' (Antiph.); þúčŋv [adv.] (< *ßúσ-Sŋv, see below)
'closely' (Hp.), together with Bulóv. лukvóv, ovvetóv, yaûpov dè kaì µέya ‘compact,
intelligent, haughty, big' (H.). Also ßulλá þɛßvoµéva H., with denominative
ßɛßvλλwo¤ai. ßɛßúσðaɩ (H.). Fur.: 213 54 suggests that ßovvós. στßáç ‘mattress',
Kúлρioι (H.) is derived from Buvέw.
⚫ETYM Like Kuvέw, ßvvéw could represent a continuation of a nasal present *ẞv-vé-o-
w, with ẞuv- perhaps from a zero grade Buv-σ- (e.g., in the 3pl. *ẞúvσovtɩ, see
Schwyzer: 692). Alternatively, it could go back to *ẞuo-véw with secondary -éw.
Buvéw has been compared with Alb. m-bush 'fill' and words for 'pouch', e.g. MIr.
búas (< *bousto-), ON posi, OE posa, OHG pfoso, PGm. *pésan- (< *béson-).
However, this connection fails on the necessity to assume a root with PIE *b- (the
material collected in Pok. 98ff. is too heterogeneous). Cf. Bußóc, ▸ßoußáv,
►ẞúτava.
Búvn 1 [f.] 'malt (for brewing)' (pap., Aët.). <?►
●VAR ßúvɩ, -ɛws [n.] (after kikɩ, kóµu, etc.).
►
⚫DER Doubtful ẞvveúç. okevaσµá τɩ кpíеɩvov 'dish made of barley' (H.; Lagercrantz
1913: ad PHolm. 15); constructed from a gen. ẞúvɛws?
⚫ETYM Unknown; of foreign origin?
Búvn 2 [f.] · Đáλaσσa 'sea' (Euphor. fr. 127), лɛúêò ‘pine' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM The meaning 'sea' fits well to the homophonous name of Leucothea (Ino) in
Lyc. 107, but its etymology is unknown.
BÚotaE
Búvηtos an Egyptian garment (Hdn.). <LW? Eg.>
⚫ETYM Unknown.
249
ẞúptov [n.] ẞúpiov· оïкημа 'abode'; ẞupióеεv. oïкоev 'from home' (H.). Cf. εúßúpiov.
τò εоιкov ερηται, öτɩ кατά τǹу ßaupíаv ½ кατά Mɛσσалíovs σnuaíve oiкíav
'comfortable to inhabit, because ẞ. means "house" in Messapian' (EM 389,25); and
ẞavpiółɛv = oľkoеɛv ‘from home' (Cleon Sic. 2). <LW Messap.➤
•DER Perhaps ẞupµóç· στaðµós ‘stable' (H.), s.v. von Blumenthal 1930: 3.
•ETYM Messapian word, also seen in Germanic: ON búr [n.], OHG, OE būr [m.]
‘cottage, room' (PGm. *būra-); cf. Pok. 149. With a different ablaut are ►ẞaupía and
►ẞāpiç. See Krahe IF 57 (1940): 116. The words are supposed to be r-derivatives of
the root for 'live, be'; see ▸ qúw.
•
ẞuppós [m.] · Kávěαpos. Tuppηvoí ‘dung-beetle, drinking cup (Etr.)' (H.). <LW? Etr.➤
•ETYM The word is believed to derive from the color, from Gr. лuppós = Lat. burrus
'deep red' (Paul. Fest. 31). See Fohalle 1925: 157f. and Kretschmer Glotta 16 (1928):
166. However, this is hardly appropriate in the case of a cup. Fur.: 213 connects it
with μúpoos 'basket' (Call. fr. anon. 102; H.), Etr. murs; the word lives on in Otrant.
vurro, Toscan. borraccia (Alessio 1955: 736).
Búpσa [f.] 'skin, hide' (Hdt.). <PG?>
●COMP ßupoodÉ™ns (Ar.).
●DER ßupσíç (H.); ẞúpσivos ‘of leather' (D. C.), ßupσtkós ‘id.' (Gp.), also ‘used by
tanners' (Hippiatr., to ßupσɛús), ßvpowdŋs ‘id.' (Gal.). Bupσɛús ‘tanner' (Act. Ap.) for
older ßupoodéyns (Ar.); ßupoɛúw ‘tan' (H.), ßupσɛãov ‘tan-piť' (sch.). Denominative
ẞupoów to cover with skins' (Ath. Mech.). Old is only ẞupoívn ‘leather thong' (Ar.
Eq. 59, 449).
⚫ETYM A technical term without etymology (Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 271, see further
Frisk). The word may be of Pre-Greek, as argued by Fur.: 65, etc., who also compares
άшpróváτov 'cloth' (H.).
ßúσσa [f.] a bird (Ant. Lib. 15). <?>
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown.
Búσσos [f.] "Byssos", flax and the linen made of it (Emp.); later also referring to cotton
and silk. <LW Sem.>
⚫DER BÚσσivos 'made of ẞ.' (Hdt.); ẞúσσшμα 'net from ẞ.' (AP; on the formation see
лелλшμα, etc., Chantraine 1933: 187).
⚫ETYM The word is supposed to have been borrowed by Greek from Eg. w:d 'linen'
via Semitic (Hebr., Aram. būs; see E. Masson 1967: 20ff.; Szemerényi Gnomon 43
(1971): 661).
Buσoós -Bubós.
Búσtaž [m.] ‘moustache' (Antiph. 44.4 apud Ath. 4, 143a). <PG>
•VAR Cf. Búστayа. лúушvα 'beard' (H.).
•ETYM The explanation of þúσταε as adapted from µúστα after ẞuvέw is highly
improbable. Rather, it is evidently cognate with чúστα, the words being of Pre-

=== page 149 ===

250
Bútava
Greek origin because of the alternation ẞ ~ µ (Fur.: 116, 218; cf. K/ Y, see also Güntert
1914: 128). For further variants, see ►µúotač.
.
Búτava [n.pl.] кovúλoɩ knuckle'. oi dè ßpúτava (H.). <PG?►
.
.
⚫ETYM A formation in -avov (Chantraine 1933: 197ff., Schwyzer: 489f.). Although the
word has been connected with ẞуτеóу ·лλñео 'crowd' (H.) and ►þúττоç·
yuvaιкòç aidoiov 'private parts of a woman' (H.), this is only a superficial
resemblance in form. The variant with ẞp- points to a Pre-Greek word; further
examples are adduced by Fur.: 330.
ßvτðóv [n.]? • µλñеoç 'large number, crowd' (H.). <?>
•ETYM The word has been connected þúτava and þúττoç, for which there seems to
be no rationale.
•
ẞutivŋ [f.] · λáyʊvoç i àµíç. Tapavτīvo 'flask or chamber-pot (Tarantian)' (H.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. Att. лŪτívη 'flask covered with plated osier' (Poll.), title of a comedy of
Cratinus (Ar. fr. 880 K.-A.).
ETYM The interchange / ẞ proves Pre-Greek origin (the variation voiced/ voiceless
being extremely frequent in such words; Fur.: 101-200). The suffix -iv- is also
frequent in Pre-Greek (see Pre-Greek, Suffixes). VLat. butina is borrowed from the
Greek, and the Latin is in turn the source of e.g. OE byden, OHG butin, MoHG Bütte
(Fi. putina, Ru. bódnja, etc. are again borrowed from Germanic; see Vasmer 1953
s.v.).
Búttos [m.]? · yuvaɩкòç aidoĩov ‘female genitals' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•var Cf. µuttós. tò yuvaɩkɛĩov ‘id.' (H.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 218 connects the gloss with μ-, which shows that the word is Pre-Greek.
Szemerényi refers to Hubschmid 1955: 76.
ẞwẞóc [adj.] name of a handicap, acc. to H. = xwλóç, ëŋpós (ëτopóç cod.) ‘lame,
disabled'; by Plu. Fr. inc. 149 used together with кwoóç; in MoGr. it means 'dumb'.
<?>
•DER PN Bwẞãs, Bouẞãç, L. Robert 1963: 30-33.
•ETYM Cf. Koλoẞós, kλaµßós, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 261).
ßwλŋvý [f.] äµлελoç 'grape-vine', growing in Bithynia (Gp. 5, 17, 5). <PG (or LW
Anat.)>
ETYM Fur. 219 compares μwλaž, a Lydian name for wine.
ẞwλntηs [m.] 'fungus, especially mushroom' (Ath.). <LW? Lat.▷
•VAR Also BwλÍTηs (Gp., Gal.), also 'root' of the lychnis.
•DER ẞwλTIOV 'saucepan', ßwλητáрια лшváкiα (рap.), ßwλŋτīvos ǎpτoç (Ath.), after
the form.
⚫ETYM Borrowed from Lat. bōlētus (Sen.), which was named after the Spanish town
Boletum (Niedermann IF Anz. 29 (1912): 31f.). ßwλiτηs is remodelled after the
derivatives in -íτns, and borrowed into Latin (Plin.) again (Redard 1949: 70); its
meaning 'root' is due to influence of ẞwλoç.
Bwtiávelpa
ẞwλos [f.] ‘lump, clod of earth' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Also [m.].
•COMP Épíẞwλos, ¿pißwλał (II.).
251
⚫DER Adjectives ẞwλwdŋs (Thphr.), Bwλivos (H.); adverb ßwλndóv (Dsc.); ßwλwoię
'formation of lumps' (pap.). Old is ßwλa} [f.] = ßwλos (Pi.; cf. on -a Chantraine
1933: 379; ßwλáкios (Pi.). Bwλíç. µáηç εldóç TI EV Taïç Ovσiais kind of ball in
sacrifices' (H.); unclear the gloss on ßwλóval (H.).
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown; hardly connected with Boλẞóc.
ßwµós [m.] ‘step, stand (for chariots), base (of a statue)', most frequently ‘altar' (Il.).
<IE *g"oh₂-mo- ‘stand'>
•COMP ẞwμoλóxos 'one that waited about the altars to steal the meat, ribald'.
•DER ßwµís ‘step' (Hdt.; on the word CEG 6), ßwμíσкos technical term (Hero.);
þãµał. ó µiкpòs ßwµós, úrokopiotikŵç ‘small altar (hypocor.)' (H.). ẞwµïtic (sc. yñ)
'sacred land' (Pergamon). ßwμíστpiα 'priestess' (Nic.; on -íστpia Chantraine 1933:
106); ßáµãž· ßwμoλóxos H., see Chantraine 1933: 381f.; on -aε see Björck 1950: 263'.
Adjectives Bouos (S.), also month name (Lamia); ßwutaños (S.). Note Boμηvev.
wμoσε 'swore' (H.) from *ßwμaívw 'swear (with the hand on the altar)'.
•ETYM Verbal noun *g"oh₂-mo- to ε-ßη-v (ε-ßã-v). For the meaning, cf. þáσis and
OP gāðu- 'place, throne' (from gā- = ßā-, ßn-).
Bwvitng →Bouvós.
Bwpɛúc [m.] 'mullet' (Xenocr.). <LW Eg.>>
•VAR ßwpídiov [n.], also ßoupídiov (Alex. Trall.).
•DER On the PN with Bwp- (Bwpoç, Búρaкoç, Bópчos) see Boßhardt (below).
⚫ETYM Boẞhardt 1942: 61 derived the word from ẞwpo· óеaλμoí 'eyes' (H.), just as
Strömberg 1943: 42f., but ẞopot is probably from *Fwpol (see ►ópáw). Connected
with Copt. bori, Arab. būrī; see Thompson 1947 s.v. and Hemmerdinger Glotta 46
(1968): 247.
ẞwoiov [n.] a utensil (pap.). <PG?>
•DER ẞwoldía (pap.). Also ßwτápiov (Zos. Alch.); ẞwordia is probably bad
orthography for -ídia.
•ETYM From ẞwtíov. σtaµvíov ‘wine jar' (H.) with tɩ > σɩ; see Olsson Symb. Oslo. 4
(1926): 62f. The word may be related to ▸ Bouτ(T)ɩç.
ẞwσ τpέw [V.] 'to call (to aid)' (Od.). <GR>
•VAR Only present.
•ETYM The word is connected to Boáw just as έλaστpέw (Il.) to έλaúvw, έλá-σai
and кaλɩστpéw (Call.) to кaλéw. It is an expressive formation, based on the nominal
suffixes τεp-, τpo- (cf. Risch 1937: 310), but details remain unclear.
ßwtáčɛiv →yatáλai, ovtáw, and wtadý.
ßwtiáveipa •var ßwtwp, etc. →ßóokw.

=== page 150 ===

r
1
}
ya⇒yɛ.
yáẞadov [n.] τpußλiov 'cup, bowl' <LW? Sem.>>
.
•VAR Also Kaẞała (accent unknown; pap. III³); also fem.sg. (Edict. Diocl.). And
Çáßaτoç. лívač ³×¤vŋpòç лapà Пaçíois 'a trencher for fish (Paphian)' (H.).
•ETYM Semitic origin has been assumed (E. Masson 1967: 75, which could also
account for Lat. gabata. Alternatively, we may consider Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 187
assumes that it is a Mediterranean loan). Cf. ►yáßɛva, ‣ káßos.
yáßɛva [n.pl.] · òžvßáqia, ñtoi tpvßλía 'small vessel; cup, bowl' (H.). <?, PG?>
•ETYM On the basis of MoGr. forms, Moutsos Orbis 18 (1969): 535-540 argues that
yáßɛvov < *yaßɩvov < *кaßɩvov, a derivative from кáßoç. Fur.: 116, etc. compares the
word with ▸yáẞa0ov, which is certainly a possibility.
уayáτηs [m.] (sc. Míos) 'lignite' (Orph., Plin., Dsc.). <LW Anat.>
●VAR Also yayyĭtıç or yayyñtıç AíƉos (Str.); this form may have been influenced by
the adjective of the Ganges'. And έyуyaуìç лéτpα (Nic.) = yayátŋs.
•ETYM According to Pliny 36, 141, the word derives from Táyaç or Tάyyaɩ, a town
and river in Lycia. The forms with yayy-, with prenasalization, confirm its Anatolian
(= Pre-Greek?) origin. Lat. gagātēs, with MoFr. jais, MoHG Gagat, etc., was
borrowed from the Greek.
.
yayyaivɛɩv [v.] ·τò µετà уéλwτоу прoσлαíšεv ‘playing with great laughter' (H.).
<ONOM
•VAR Cf. yayyaλídɛç yɛλaσīvoɩ 'front teeth; dimples'; yayyaλãv, yayyaλíɛαɩ.
ñɛσðαɩ ‘to enjoy oneself; yayyalos. ó evµetá¤etos tŋ yvwµñ kai evµetáßolos
'fickle in belief; changeable'.
●ETYM yayyaívɛɩv is a reduplicated expressive form, which has been taken to belong
together with Skt. gañjana- ‘despising', which in turn was connected with OE canc
‘insult'. As the Skt. form appears only in MInd., the connection remains very
uncertain. Neither is the word related to Lat. ganniō, etc. Cf. ►yoyyÚ¶w.
yάyyaшov [n.] 'small round net for catching oysters' (A.). <PG?►
•VAR yayyáµŋ [f.] (Str.); yayyάµŋ. σayývη ½ díкτUOV άλɩευτкóv. кai okɛños
yɛwpyɩкòv 'drag-net or fishing-net; also an agricultural tool (S öμ кρεáуą
'similar to a flesh-hook') (H.); yάyyaμov. Síктvov. кai tò nɛpì tòv ò̟µqaλòv ‘fishing-

=== page 151 ===

254
yayyitis
net; also that which is around the navel' (H.); yayуaчovλкоí· σaуηvɛvτaí 'dragging
an oyster-net' (H.).
•DER yayyauɛúç. áλɩɛúç, ó τñ yayуάu εpуóμεvos 'fisherman, he who handles the
y.' (H.); yayуaдεvτ ‘id.' (conj. EM).
•ETYM Technical term, certainly of foreign origin and probably Pre-Greek. Not
related to уévão ‘he took'. Neumann 1961: 100 connects it with Hitt. kānk-¹ ‘to
hang'; this is most uncertain.
уayуñτɩç →уayáτnc.
yayyλíov [n.] 'tumour on a tendon, or the head' (Gal.); the nerve knots now called
ganglia have been compared to such a tumour. <PG?>
•DER yayyλɩwdns ‘like a y.' (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The word is mostly connected with ►äyλıç, yéλyıç, ►уáλɩɩ,
► Yελivot. It is most probably non-IE, and possibly Pre-Greek (Fur.: 129).
yáyypaɩva [f.] 'gangrene', an illness that eats away the flesh (Hp.). <PG?>
•VAR Cf. yáyypalva. payédaiva 'cancerous sore, cancer'. oi dè кapкivoç lobster', etc.
(H.).
⚫DER yayуpaιvóoμaɩ, yayуpaiνwσiç, etc. (Hp.).
⚫ETYM For the suffix, cf. ► payédaɩva. The basic form is uncertain, for a discussion of
which see Chantraine 1933: 108f.; it is perhaps *yάyypwv, *yάyypos, or *yáyypa.
Alexander Polyhistor in St. Byz. s.v. Táyypa gives this word as a name for 'goat'. In
antiquity, it was compared with ypάw ‘to devour' (thus also Frisk), but this is
certainly incorrect. It is most probably a Pre-Greek word (a-vocalism, -atva,
prenasalization?). Cf. ► кapkivos.
yáðaσµov [n.]? ¿vηpóσov 'rent for corn land'. <GR?>
VAR Ms. yaλaσiov corr.
•ETYM Latte Mnem. 3/10 (1942): 9110 reads yádaσμov for yaλaσtov in the manuscript
on the basis of a comparison with daσµós ‘renť.
yadń [f.] · kißwtós ‘box' (H.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Cf. yávdiov. кißáτIOV (H.; Belardi Rend. Acc. Linc. 8: 9 (1954): 620). Because
of the prenasalized variant, the word is Pre-Greek. Because of the deviant semantics,
Lat. gandeia, an African vehicle, is not related.
yados 1 [m.] name of a fish, also called ovos (Dorio apud Ath. 7, 315f.). <PG(V) ►
•VAR yádapos (Diogenian) = yaïdápiov (pap. VI-VII³), MoGr. yaïðapóчapov (see
Thompson 1947 s.v. Övos and Saint-Denis 1947 s.v. asellus. Very unclear, see DELG.
•ETYM There is a variety of names for the övoç-fish: yaλíaç, yaλλɛpías, kaλλapiç,
Xελλapínç, etc. (Strömberg 1943: 130f.). Fur.: 339³, 254 adds yášaç. ¡×¤ùç лotós ‘a fìsh’
(H.), assuming Pre-Greek origin. DELG explains yaïdápiov as a loan from Arabic
(Andriotis, Etym. Lex. s.v.), but disassociates it from yádoç.
yádos 2 →yávdos.
yáša [f.] ‘(royal) treasury' (Thphr., OGI 54, 22 [IIIª]). ◄LW Pers.➤
W
t
yaiw
•COMP yao-qúλa 'guarding the treasury' (LXX).
255
•ETYM According to Pomp. Mela 1, 64 and others, yáša is of Persian origin, cf. MP
ganj (ultimately going back to Median; see Mayrhofer KEWA 1: 315 with references).
Arm. ganj was likewise taken over from Iranian. Lat. gaza, and probably Syr. gazā,
were borrowed from Greek.
yálag = yádoc 1.
yáðɩa [f.] · ảλλavtía 'small sausage' (H.). <PG▷
•ETYM Unknown. See Belardi Ric. ling. 4 (1958): 196. Fur. (index) connects the word
with youλíc, ȧyabíç.
yaĩa [f.] ‘earth' (II.).
•COMP Dor. yatάoxoç, Lacon. yaiάFoxoç, epic yaɩnoxos, epithet of Poseidon, also
► ¿vvoσiyaɩoç (Il., s.v.). ȧvoyatov ‘upper floor of a house, granary'; also ávókalov.
vñépu̟ov, ypáqɛtai kai ávwyɛwv H.; perhaps the form with -o- is original, the other
variants being due to folk etymology.
●DER yaƖŋsios ‘from the earth' (Od.; with -½ïoç, Chantraine 1933: 52); yaɩwv ‘heap of
earth' (Tab. Heracl. 1, 136) beside yaɛŵv (IG 14, 322: II 83, Halaesa); yaɩów ‘change
into earth' (Tz.).
•ETYM Unknown; see ▶ yñ.
yaɩnoxos [m.] Epithet of Poseidon, secondarily of Zeus, etc. (II.), mg. uncertain,
mostly taken as ‘earth-shaker' (= ►¿vvoσiyaɩoç, s.v.). <?>
•VAR Dor. yataoxos, Lacon. yaɩáfoxos.
⚫ETYM yaɩnoxoç is a compound with yata as the first member, but the interpretation
of the second member is debated. The solution of Borgeaud KZ 68 (1944): 221f. that
the word means ‘bringing home (i.e., the husband of Gaia' (viz., ПoσɛƖdwv) is
impossible. Kretschmer Glotta 5 (1914): 303 interpreted yaɩnoxoç as Taĭav óxεúwv
'mounting Gaia' or гαía óxоúμεvoç, basing himself on the myth that Poseidon ïç
had intercourse with the earth goddess Demeter. However, Lacon. yatáƑoxos shows
that the second member started with F-, for which there are no indications in the
case of oxέw and oxɛúwv. Alternatively, Nilsson 1941: 419 understood 'faring
below the earth' (with Poseidon as a river, after Hesychius, “ó éлì τñу уñs
oxoччεvos”), which is implausible, too. Most scholars follow Meillet 1924 and
connect the second member with Go. gawigan 'to set in motion'. Cf. further alyioxos
(s.v. ► aiyíc).
yaiσos [m.] a Gaulish javelin (Ph. Bel.). <LW Lat.>>
•VAR Also yaiσov [n.].
⚫DER yaɩσãτai/-ot 'mercenarii' (Plb.) is a loan from Lat. gaesātus.
•ETYM Like Lat. gaesum, the word is from Gaulish, but via Latin: cf. the PN Gaesāto-
rīx, Gaeso-rīx, Vandal. Gaise-rīcus, Go. Rada-gaisus. We can compare OIr. gae, Co.
gew ‘javelin', and OHG and OS gēr, OE gār, ON geirr [m.] 'spear'. See further s.v.
► Xaloç.
yaiw = yávvfia, yndéw.

=== page 152 ===

256
уaкoú nбú, уλUкú 'sweet' (H.). <?>
•
•DER уакovлwνη
•ETYM Unknown.
yakoú
dлóηs fond of drinking' (H.).
yáλa [n.] 'milk' (Il.). ◄ IE *glkt(-) ‘milk'>
•VAR Gen. уáλaкtoç. Rare forms: dat. yάλaкı (Call. Hek. 1, 4, 4), gen. yáλaτoç
(pap.), τou yáλa (Pl. Com.). Also yλáyoç [n.] (B 471). Other forms: yλaк@vtɛç·
µεστoì уáλaкτoç ‘full of milk' (H.); кλáyoç. yáλa. Kρñτɛç (H.), see below; with
hypocoristic gemination yλaккóv. yalaŋvóv 'sucking (milk)' (H.); and yλaкτo-
opάyos ‘living on milk' (Il.); these forms may be due to simple assimilations (or
metathesis).
•COMP Old is yaλa-On-vós ‘sucking milk' (Od.) from yáλa and ¤ñσða; on the suffix
cf. άyavóç, etc. (Schwyzer: 452), also tɩðývη. Also yaλakto-rótŋg ‘drinking milk'
(Hdt.), etc. On yáλa as a second member see Sommer 1948: 83.
=
•DER yaλaktíç (лéτpα) name of a stone (Orph.) = yаλαкτíτηs (Dsc.), both also as
plant namestiеúµαλλoç (Aët., gloss.; after its juice, see Strömberg 1940: 58); yáλaž
name of a white shellfish (Arist.; Strömberg 1943: 109; cf. Chantraine 1933:379);
►yáλov s.v. Adjective уaλaкτwdns (Arist.). Denominative verbs: yaλaкτí(w,
yaλaktóoµai, yaλaktáw. With § (from τ assibilated before 1) yaλažias (kúklos)
'Milky Way' (D. S.; see Chantraine 1933: 95; also уaλaкτíaç Ptol.); yaλážia [n.pl.]
name of a festival for Cybele (inscr., Thphr.), from which Faλažióv month name on
Delos (inscr. IIIª). Independent is уaλaτµóv. λáxαvov äyptov 'wild herb' (H.; cf.
yáλov); perhaps from *yaλaкɩ-µóv (Strömberg 1940: 58); Fur.: 374, 389 compares
áðaλτóµov. See on yáλayya. From yλáyoç derive the late forms yλayɛpóç,
уλayóɛɩç; also лɛpiyλayńc (II 642) and yλayáw (AP).
⚫ETYM Outside Greek, only found in Lat. lac (De Vaan 2008 s.v.) and Armenian (see
below). The basis of the Greek forms is *galakt- or *glakt-; the latter is seen in
уλaкτo-qάyos (N 6). As an alternative to assuming a proto-stem with two variants,
we may consider the possibility that yáλa goes back to *glakt (from *glkt) with loss
of the final consonants and development of a secondary vowel in the nom./acc. (cf.
yuvn). In that case, yλaкто- (see above) would be the expected outcome for the
oblique cases, whereas уáλαктоç would have analogical yáλ- instead of yλ-. Since in
the nominative the final consonants must have been lost in subsequent stages, i.e.
*galakt > *galak > yáλa, the intermediate stage could have yielded the t-less forms
like yλáyoç. The Armenian forms, class. kat'n and dial. kaxc', have been explained by
Kortlandt (following Weitenberg) as from acc. *gļkt-m, gen. *gļkt-s via an
intermediate *kałt‘- with al < *Į (Kortlandt REArm. 19 (1985): 22). MIr. lacht, etc.
were borrowed from Lat. lac. The derivation of Szemerényi KZ 75 (1958): 170-184
from *mlg/k- (from the root of auéλyw) is impossible, as this root was *h₂melg-. Not
related is Hitt. galaktar 'soothing'; see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. kalank-' 'soothe'.
yáλayya [?] 'galingal, Alpina officinarum' (Aet.). <LW Sem.>
• ETYM From Arab. khalandjan, itself of Chinese origin. See André 1956 s.v. galenga.
yáλaç yñ ‘earth'. napà Evкλíτų (H.). Corr. Evкλw? (PW 6, 1055). <?►
素
*
E
j
!
ya入ńvn
257
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. The word is Mediterranean, according to Belardi Doxa
3 (1950):200.
ya入áorov →yádagiov.
yaλéŋ, yaλñ [f.] ‘weasel, marten' (Batr., Ar.); also a fish name (Ael.), see Strömberg
1943: 108.<?>
=
●COMP yaλɛ-áykwv (Arist.), also yaλı-áyкwv (Hp.; after the frequent first members
in -t: åpyɩ-, kudɩ-, etc.; see below), properly “with arms like a weasel", i.e. ‘with short
upper arm', cf. Solmsen 1909: 225f.; yaλɛó-ßdolov [n.] “weasel stench", 'dead nettle',
substantivized bahuvrīhi, yaλoч “weasel eye" (Dsc.); on the names see
Strömberg 1940: 138f., Lehmann IF 21 (1907): 193'. Denominative yaλiáw =
ȧкoλaστaívw 'be licentious", "ce qui serait sémantiquement satisfaisant"(?) DELG.
•DER yaλɩɗɛúç ‘young weasel' (Crat.), after Auк-idɛúç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 364; see
below); yaλɛwtŋs ‘gecko lizard (Ar.), ‘weasel' (Luc.); on the formation see Schwyzer:
500; also 'swordfish' (Plb.), cf. s.v. ► yaλɛóç.
•ETYM The formation of yaλéŋ shows that the word originally indicated the skin; cf.
åλwnɛk-éŋ, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 91) and Lat. galea below. yaλéŋ has been
connected with Lat. glis 'dormouse' and Skt. giri-, girikā- [f.] 'mouse'. However, the
Skt. word is only attested in lexicons and probably did not really exist (Mayrhofer
EWAia 1: 488). In spite of its deviant meaning, the Latin could perhaps be related if
yaλ reflects *glH-V-, Lat. glīs possibly going back to *glHi- (Schrijver 1991: 242).
yaλén is not related to MW bele 'weasel' (pace Schwyzer: 299; cf. De Vaan 2008 s.v.
fēlēs). The original meaning 'weasel-skin' is found in Lat. galea ‘leather helmet, cf.
Kuvén properly 'dog-skin'. For a possible connection of 'weasel' with yaλówc
'husband's sister', see there.
yaλɛós [m.] 'dogfish, shark' (Pl. Com.), also = yaλén (Aret.). <?►
•DER yaλɛwdŋs ‘like a shark' (Arist.), yaλɛwτŋs 'swordfish' (Plb.; see below), also
yalažiac = yalɛós (Gal.); connection with yaλağíaç ‘milky way' unclear; remarkable
compound yaλɛwvчμoç = уaλɛóç (Phylotim. apud Gal.), cf. also кaλλóvчμoç name
of a fish, see Strömberg 1943: 108f.
⚫ETYM Strömberg l.c. maintained that the dogfish was named after the weasel, but
the formation of yaλɛóç is unclear (a back-formation from yаλɛóτηs after
άokalaßwtŋs : dokáλaßoç?). On yaλɛóç, see Thompson 1947 s.v. For yaλɛwvvµoç
etc., Frisk and DELG (s.v. yaλέn) suggested contamination and tabu-formation,
which remains gratuitous.
yaλnvŋ [f.] ‘stillness of the sea' (Od.); also ‘lead sulphite' (Plin.), see Chantraine RPh.
91 (1965): 203-5. ◄IE *ģlh₂-es- ‘laughter'>
•VAR Dor. yaλávā.
•DER yaλǹvɛia (yaλávɛa) = yaλývò (Eur.), after oaqývɛa?; not from yaλŋvýc (only
Arist. Phgn. 811b 38); yaλŋvaíŋ (A. R.; cf. ȧvayкaíŋ beside άváукη), уaλnvaïos (AP).
yaλnvóc still' (E.). After the numerous adjectives in -po- (not an old r/n-stem):
yaλnpós (H.); after the adjectives in -ɛpoç: yaλɛpós (H.).

=== page 153 ===

258
⚫ETYM Similarly to σελvη, the variants yaλývη and yaλavā derive from *yaλaσ-vā,
in turn from an s-stem that is also seen in yέλws, yɛlao-tós, etc. Because of its e-
grade, yɛλývŋ (termed Aeol. by Jo. Gramm. Comp. 3, 1) is perhaps to be ranged with
the latter words. yaλývη must originally have meant 'cheerfulness'; cf. yɛλɛïv.
λáµлɛv, ávšɛïv ‘to shine, flourish' (H.). For the ablaut grade *glh₂-es-, cf. Arm. całr
'laughter'. See yɛλáw, ► yλývŋ, ► yλñvos.
=
yaλiáукwv yaλén.
yaλíaç →yádoç.
yáλɩvðoɩ [m.pl.] · έpéßɩvðoɩ. oi dè yáλɩɩ ‘chick-peas; elsewhere yáλ1001 (H.). <PG➤
•VAR Also yελɩvoɩ· έpéßɩvoɩ (H.).
•ETYM Pre-Greek (note the suffix -ɩvoç with a variant without prenasalization, as
well as the interchange a/ɛ). Not related to ▸ yελyıs.
yáλtov [n.] 1. ‘bedstraw, Galium verum' (Dsc. 4, 95) and 2. 'dead nettle' (Plin. 27, 81).
<GR➤
•VAR The first also (ibid.) yaλátov (cf. άλάτov ‘salt') and yaλaiptov (unclear).
•ETYM In the sense 'bedstraw' etc., yáλtov is related to yáλa because it was used as
rennet (Dsc. 1.c., cf. Strömberg 1940: 108). In the sense 'dead nettle', we should rather
compare yaλén in view of other words for 'dead nettle': yaλɛóßбoλov and
ya入ńons.
yaλλapíaç •VAR yaλλɛpíaç. →кaλλapíaç.
yáλlapos [m.] 'member of a Dionysiac cultic society' (inscr. Philippopel, II³).
yáλλapos. Þpvyiakòv övoja rapà Aάкwoɩ ‘a Phrygian name, acc. to the Laconians'
(H.). <LW Phr.>
⚫ETYM See Dunst KZ 78 (1963): 147ff. Cf. ►yáλλoç.
yáλλia [n.pl.] · ëvτεpa ‘intestines' (H.). <?►
•ETYM As *Ƒáλλia, the word is perhaps from *Fáλvia, related to εiλów ‘wind, turn,
etc.' (Lidén KZ 61 (1934): 22f.). Cf. ON vil [n.], viljum [dat.pl.] 'viscera', IE *uel-io-.
On the development, cf. Lesb. Thess. στáλλα, from *σtáλvā.
yáλos [m.] 'a priest of Cybele, eunuch' (inscr, Epict.). <LW Phr.>
•COMP yaλλoμavýç, yaλλɩαµßiкóv metrical term (not in LSJ).
•DER yaλλaños of a y.' (Rhian.), yaλλȧw (Schwyzer: 633, 12).
•ETYM In antiquity, the word was believed to be Phrygian. Probably, ▸yáλλapos is
related.
yaλówç [f.] 'husband's sister' (II.). <IE *glH-ōu-s 'husband's sister'>
•VAR yaλów [gen.sg.], yaλów [dat.sg.] and [nom.pl.], yaλówv [gen.pl.] (with metrical
diectasis). Also yáλıç yaλaós (H.), see below.
•DIAL Also Att. yáλwc, -w (acc. to Hdn. Gr.).
1
!
1
1
1
1
yállia
259
•ETYM The Greek forms derive from *yaλ-aƑ-o- (not *yaλ-wf-o-; Beekes MSS 34
(1976):13ff), a thematicization of *glh₂-eu-, which is probably an oblique stem of
*g(e)lh₂-ou-s (formation as in лάτрƒç, µкτрƒç). The PIE term denoted the
ñátpws, ▶µýtpws).
unmarried sister of the husband, cf. Lat. glōs 'husband's sister' (secondarily 'brother's
wife'; the loss of the laryngeal in Latin is difficult to account for, see Schrijver 1991:
131). Further cognates are Arm. tal ‘id.' (i-stem), which has initial t- for C- after taygr
'husband's brother' (see Sanp), and Slavic words like OCS zölʊva, Ru. zólva,
zolóvka, which must reflect *-uu- instead of *-u-, probably through adaptation to
-uh₂- after other feminines. yéλapos. ȧdeλqov yuvý, Þpvyiotí (H.) is unclear (for
*yéλafoç? Hermann Gött. Nachr. (1918): 222f.). Oettinger 1998: 649-654 points out
that in Romance languages and dialects, 'weasel' and 'aunt' are often homonyms,
because of the behaviour of the aunt; for the same reason, the IE terms may have
been identical. The nature of the laryngeal is difficult to determine, unless the
Hesychius gloss has *yaλaƑ-os < *ģlh2-eu-os. yáλıç could represent *ģlH-i-.
yaшßpós [m.] 'son-in-law, brother-in-law (sister's husband)' (II.). ◄IE *ģ(e)mH-
'marry'>
•DER Rare and late: yaµßpotidɛúç ‘son of a yaµßpóc' (Iamb., after λɛovüdɛúç, etc.),
yaußpεúw form connections by marriage' (LXX).
⚫ETYM Outside Greek, one compares Skt. jámātar- = Av. zāmātar- (with secondary
-tar-); cf. Av. zāmaoiia- (< *-mavya-) 'brother of the son-in-law' and Skt. jāmí-
'related', fem. also 'daughter-in-law', Lat. gener, Alb. dhëndërr, dhāndër(r). The
formation of the BSl. terms is isolated: Lith. žéntas, OCS zęt. The BSl. and Alb.
words, as well as Lat. gener, must have been influenced by *genh,- (yiyvoµai),
although even then Latv. znuôts remains difficult, as it seems to go back to *gneh3-
to-. The Greek and Indo-Iranian forms must belong together, the Greek requiring
*gm-ro-, the Indo-Iranian forms *ģomo-; yauέw might have been formed
secondarily, or else the resemblance may be due to later influence yaμéw (cf. Viredaz
IF 107 (2002): 152-180).
yaµέw [v.] ‘to marry' (Il.). ◄IE *ģ(e)m- ‘marry'>
•VAR Fut. yauέw (yaµw), aor. уñµαɩ, perf. уɛyáµŋкα, -ŋuaι (Att.); late yaμnow,
έyάuŋσa, ¿yauηOηv; isolated fut. уaμεσσεται I 394 'give in marriage' (Aristarchus
reads уɛ μáσσετal).
⚫DER Back-formation yáµoç [m.] 'wedding' (II.). From yaµέw: yaµετý ‘wife' (Hes.);
from yáµoç: yaµétŋs ‘husband' (A.). yaµýλɩoç ‘nuptial' (A.) with the month name
Taµŋλóv (Arist.). A suffix -1- also in yáµɛλa [n.pl.] 'wedding offerings' (Delphi V³)
and гaµéλoç months name (Dodona). Desiderative yaµŋσɛíw (Alciphr.).
•ETYM There are no cognate verbs outside Greek. The connection with yέvão,
űууεµoç = ovλλaßn, yέµw is uncertain. Probably connected with yaußpós.
yáччa [n.] name of the letter (X.). <LW Sem.>
•VAR уεµµа (Democr.).
⚫ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. gimel and the word for 'camel': Hebr. gāmāl, Aram.
gamla (Schwyzer: 140).

=== page 154 ===

260
yaupn入ai
yápkav
261
yauqŋλaí [f.pl.] 'jaws of animals' (Il.). <PG?>
•VAR yvaμqaí. yváеoɩ ‘jaws' (H.).
•DER Backformation yauqaí (Lyc.).
•ETYM Cf. τpáxηlos 'neck, throat', etc. Generally connected with youpos and
youpíos, but the a-vocalism is problematic. Neither a popular word, a zero grade
*yaq- with restored nasal, nor influence from youós or уvaµлtýð (CEG 1) seems to
be a sufficient explanation. The suffix -- occurs in Pre-Greek (see Pre-Greek), so
the word may be Pre-Greek. Pedersen (see WP 1: 534) pointed to Ru. gubá ‘lip', etc.
yaµyós [adj.] ‘curved, crooked' (Ar.). <PG?►
•COMP yaµy@vvš (11.), yaµywvvxos (Epich.) 'with curved claws'.
●DER yaшóðμai (Arist.), yaµywλń (H.).
•ETYM It seems evident to connect the word with yváµw. On the assumption that
yauvós is a back-formation from yaшчóvux(o)-, the absence of the -v- was
implausibly explained as the result of dissimilation (Leumann 1950: 156). Equally
unattractive is it to assume a contamination of yváшntw and káµëtw (Güntert 1914:
115f.). We rather have to connect yaшpós with (a variant of) ►кáµлτw, and possibly
► уváµлτw is related as well. If so, all of these words may well be Pre-Greek.
yava •VAR Cod. yával. → aïvw.
.
=>
уávdoç [m.] · ó лoλλà ɛiðŵç кai лavoūpуoç. τívεç dè yádos 'a villain who knows
much; some authors have yádoc' (H.). <PG>
•VAR Cf. yáσoç. ó ảлατéwν. ó лоλλà ɛiðŵç кai лανoupyoç 'a deceiver; a villain who
knows much'.
ETYM The prenasalization proves Pre-Greek origin; see Fur: 254, 288. This
conclusion is confirmed by the variant with σ.
уaviτaι [?] . Sáлаvоι, ǎσшτоι 'еxtravagant men; spendthrifts' (H.). <?>
1
•ETYM DELG hesitantly and unconvincingly suggests a connection with Lat. ganea
‘underground house', which implies some relationship with ► yávoç 2.
yávos 1⇒yávvμal.
yávoç 2 [m.] · лаpáðɛσoç ‘garden' (Cyprian, acc. to EM); уávɛa. кýлovç ‘gardens'
(H.). <LW Sem.➤
⚫ETYM From Semitic (Hebr. gan 'garden'); see E. Masson 1967: 74.
yávos 3 yλávoç.
yávvua [v.] 'to brighten up, be glad, rejoice' (Il.). <IE *geh₂u- 'be bright, be glad">
•VAR Present; further only fut. yavúσσoµai (E 504); late perf. yɛyávʊµaɩ.
•COMP Tαvv-undŋç, etc.
•DER уаvýдаτа ȧpτúματα 'seasonings' (AB), yavúσμaτa (Paul. Sil.), from which
(with rhotacism) уavúpμаτа H.; yavupóv. AɛUкóv, ǹdú, iλapóv 'white, sweet,
merciful' (H.; yavɛpóv EM), уavʊτελεīν. уavυлελεïv, ǹdúσµata лoɛiv 'bring joy'
(H.), yávos 'brightness, joy' (Sapph.), with yávwμа = уávos (Ph.), yavwdns
(Thphr.), Sunyavéç· λαµлpóv bright' (H.) and yavóoμa (Anacr.) with yávwois
i.
(Plu.). Denominative yavɛiv. AɛUкαívɛLv 'to become bright' (H., EM). Pres.
уavúσкoμαι (Them.). Homeric ptc. уavówντεç, уavówσal, etc. 'glitter, gleam' (II.),
innovations after the verbs in -aváw (see Risch 274, Chantraine 1942: 360), late
present yavówσtv (Arat. 190) and yaváσσaɩ· σµñžαɩ, ǹdñvaɩ ‘wash clean, rejoice'
(H.). yaíwv in кúdɛɩ yaíwv (Il.) ‘rejoicing in splendour' vel sim.; yaiɛσkov. xaɩpov
'rejoiced' (H.).
•ETYM yάvvμaɩ is an old nasal present *gh₂-n-u-, cognate with yaíwv, from *yăƑ-ɩw <
*gh₂u-iō. Possibly further related to ►yañpoç (*geh₂u-ro-) and ►yŋłéw.
yanɛleïv [v.] · àµελεïv 'to have no care for' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Without any additional support, Bechtel KZ 44 (1911): 354 connected the word
with the PNs Arg. Tavíaç, Delph. Táчwv (cf. Kretschmer Glotta 5 (1914): 307). It has
also been proposed to correct this entry, i.e. to *уαлελεïу for уηлελεïν (Whatmough
Class. Phil. 53 (1958): 203f.). Alternatively, Fur.: 391 convincingly adduces ȧлαλεīv
auɛɛiv (H.): because of the variation in the initial, a very promising indication of
Pre-Greek origin.
yáp [pcl.] 'for, since' (II.).
ETYM From yɛ ►äp. See Schwyzer 1950: 560.
•
yápya [f.] aïyɛɩpos 'black poplar, Populus nigra' (H.). <PG?►
•ETYM Fick 1905: 82 compares the Attic Deme called гapуηττós and Tápyapa
(Troas).
yapyaλi'w [v.] ‘to tickle' (Pl.). <ONOM▷
•VAR yayyaλíĞw (Phryn.), with yayyaλides. yɛλaoïvoɩ front teeth; dimples' (H.) and
yayyaλiáw (H.).
⚫DER Backformation yápyaλos (Ar.), yapyáλn (Com.).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic formations with reduplication (for *yaλ-yaλ-); cf. Schwyzer:
259 and 647.
yápyapa [n.pl.] 'heaps, lots (of people)' (Com.). <ONOM>
•VAR Dissimilated уáруаλа· лλñеоç, лоλλá ‘a multitude, many' (H.).
●DER yapyapiç. Đópußoç ‘tumulť (H.), yapyaipw ‘swarm' (Com., Sophr.); yapyáptai.
XíƉoɩ avtoqvɛiç ‘natural stone' (H.)? With another vowel yέpyɛpα. лoλλá (H.).
•ETYM Reduplicated onomatopoeic formation. Not related to ayɛípw, ►άyoσtós.
Comparable independent formations are seen, for instance, in Lith. gurgulỹs ‘tangle
of threads, swarm (of birds)', gùrguolė 'mass (people, bees)'.
yapyapi\w [v.] ‘to gargle' (Orib., sch.). <ONOM▷
•DER Deverbal yapyapɛwv [m.] ‘uvula', also ‘trachea' (Hp.); cf. avɛpεwv. With
different vocalism yέpyɛpos. ßpóyxos 'windpipe' (H.), cf. on yápyapa.
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic formation with intensive reduplication; see Schwyzer: 423.
yápкav [?] · þáßdov. Maкedóveç 'rod, wand (Maced.)' (H.). <?>
•
•ETYM Reminiscent of ▸yáppa · þáßdos; ‣yápσava · ôpúyava. Kpñtεç ‘stick (Cret.)'
(H.) and yέppov. However, the words can hardly be cognate, even if they are from

=== page 155 ===

262
yápvov
Pre-Greek. Not related to ẞpáкoç. кáλαчoç (pace Pisani Acme 1 (1948): 312; Belardi
Doxa 3 (1950): 200f.; Kalléris 1954: 136f.; see also Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 253f.).
•
yápvov [?] · τò čow tñs nλýµvns σidýpiov, ö tòv äčova τpíßɛɩ ‘iron implement in the
nave of a wheel, which pounds the axle' (H.). <?►
•VAR Pollux 1, 145 writes уáрkov.
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown.
yápos [m.] 'sauce or paste made of brine and small fish' (A.). <?>
•VAR Also ntr. (pap.), yápov (Str.).
•DER yapápiov, yapηpóv bowl for y.' (pap.); уapɩɩкóç (pap.); yapīvos and yapíσкoç
fish names (Marcell. Sid.); Strömberg 1943: 41 and 88.
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown; Lat. garum is borrowed from the Greek (see DELG).
yáppa →yéppov.
yappɩwµɛða [v.] · λodopoúµÐα 'we are reproached' (H.). <?►
•ETYM An expressive form which recalls Lat. garriō, ‘to chatter'. The connection with
► уñpuç is doubtful. Bechtel 1921, 2: 369 opts for Laconian origin.
yápoava →yέppov.
yáoos #yávdoc.
yaστnp [f.] 'belly, paunch, womb' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Gen. -τpós, -τépos (for the inflection see Schwyzer: 568, Chantraine 1942: 96
and 215).
•COMP As a first member yaστp(1/0)-. Old òyáστwp (H.).
●DER yáotpa, -ŋ ‘belly of a vase' (Il., inscr., cf. µýτpa); yáotpwv ‘pot-belly' (Alc.).
Denominative yaσtpi¶w (Ar.).
•ETYM yaστηp is often derived from *ypaσ-τp as "glutton", which would be a
derivative of ypáw; the word would be matched by Skt. grastar- ‘eclipser', an
astronomical term (allegedly from “devourer”). However, the semantics are far-
fetched since the belly is not an “eater”, nor is DELG's comment convincing: "le
ventre de femme en tant qu'elle conçoit et porte un enfant”. If yévτa should be
related, we might think of a *gnt-tēr with tt > st, but this remains quite uncertain.
yaτáλaɩ [f.pl.] · ovλaí 'barley-corns' (H.).
⚫ETYM Mostly corrected to yaτɛλaí and, as *Fατεiλaí, connected with ►wτɛiλŃ.
yavλós [m.] ‘milk-pail, water-bucket, beehive' (Od.). <?>
•VAR yauλoç, with different accent (see Hdn. Gr. 1, 156), a (round) freighter (Epich.,
see Chantraine 1928: 7).
⚫ETYM A connection with ywλɛóç and yúaλov (q.vv.) and, outside Greek, OHG
kiol, ON kjóll 'ship' has been considered. Alternatively, yavλós could be borrowed
from Semitic, cf. Hebr. gullā ‘vase for oil'. Specifically Phoenician origin cannot be
proven with the gloss yauloi кai τà Þolvikiкà лλoĩа yañλoɩ кαλovται also
Phoenician ships are called y.' (H.); see E. Masson 1967: 39ff. Lat. gaulus is borrowed
from the Greek.
!
1
yéywva
263
уavváкηs [m.] a thick cloak, Persian or Babylonian? (pap., Peripl. M. Rubr., Clem.
Al.). <LW Pers.>>
•VAR Also Kauváкηs (Ar.) and кavvákŋ [f.] (pap.).
⚫ETYM Borrowed from a Persian word that reflects older *gauna-ka- 'hairy' (cf. Av.
gaona 'hair'). Assyr. gunakku, a garment, is borrowed from the same source,
whereas Lat. gaunaca (since Varro) was taken over from the Greek (see Schwyzer ZII
6 (1926): 234ff.). Alternatively, Fur.: 119 assumes a 'vorderasiatisches Wanderwort'
(see R. Schmitt Glotta 49 (1971): 102-105).
yaupos [adj.] ‘haughty, exulting in' (Archil.). ◄?►
●DER yaúpη§ ‘braggart' (Alc.), yaupóτηs ‘exultation' (Plu.). Denominative yavpiάw
'bear oneself proudly' (Cratin.); yavpóoµaɩ ‘id.' (E.).
•ETYM Mostly connected with yávvµaɩ, yŋеéw. MIr. gúaire 'noble' (< *gaurios?)
has also been cited as a comparandum. Cf. ►ȧyaupóç.
yaúσaлoç [m.] ‘shaggy woollen cloth, frieze' (Str.). <LW Balkans?>
•VAR уavσάлηs (Varro).
•ETYM For a suggestion, see Fur.: 119, who compares кavoía 'Macedonian felt hat'
(NB: forms like *yaudaлoç, which he often cites, e.g. 229, are ghost forms). Lat.
gausape(s), -a, -um (Lucil.) is borrowed from the Greek. уaúσαлоç is not borrowed
from from Assyrian guzippu, kuzippu 'cloth' (Lewy KZ 58 (1931): 26ff.).
yavoós [adj.] 'crooked, bent outwards' (Hp.). <PG?>>
•VAR Or yañσoç? (DELG; the accent varies).
•DER Thence yavσádaç yevdńs 'false' (H.; see DELG); denominative yavσów (Sor.).
Also έyyavσov. vσкaµßov ‘crooked' (H.), cf. Strömberg 1946: 127.
⚫ETYM For the suffix, cf. Bλatós, λošós, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 434). yavσós has been
compared with yauλós, which is semantically improbable, and with yupós, yúaλov
(from a PIE root *geu- 'curve, etc.'), which is formally impossible. The origin of the
word is rather to be sought in Pre-Greek.
yε [pcl.] 'at least, at any rate' (Il.). <IE *ģe emphatic pcl.>
•VAR Dor. Boeot.
ya.
⚫ETYM Combinations like εuéyɛ, σέyɛ invite a comparison with Go. mi-k, þu-k,
although mik could be influenced by ik 'T'. The particle -X has a comparable
function, cf. Skt. hí (from *ghi), and also Skt. ha (from *g'e) and ghã (from *g'o), and
further Lith. ne-gù, ne-gi 'not', OCS ni-že 'neque', ToA -(ä)k, ToB -k, Hitt. ammuk
'me', etc.
yέyɛɩos [adj.] ‘antique' (Hecat.). <?►
⚫ETYM DELG remarks that the word never means ‘of the earth', so that connection
with yñ is improbable. However, the meaning could actually derive from ‘earth-
born' (LSJ).
yéywva [v.] 'to shout so as to make oneself heard' (Il.; on the meaning Wackernagel
1916: 156f.). <?>

=== page 156 ===

1
264
yeloov
•VAR Old perfect, with preterite (plpf.) (¿)yέywvɛ, ¿yɛywvɛɩ, ¿yɛywvɛvv (-ɛov), inf.
yεywvéμεv, -εiv, ptc. yɛywvéoνTES (Chios V³); imp. yέywvɛ (A.), yɛywvɛiτw (X.),
зsg.pres.ind. yɛywvɛĩ (Arist.); new aor. yɛywvñσaɩ (A.), Fut. -now (E.). Unclear
yɛywvaí. ai óµλía 'intercourse' (H.).
•DER Yɛywvnoɩs (Plu.). From the ptc. yɛywvws the adj. yɛywvós, -óv 'loud-sounding'
(A.). Recent yɛywvíσкw (A.).
•ETYM Often connected with ytуváσкw, but the lengthened vowel was usually left
unexplained (see Schwyzer 770). Hackstein 2002: 187ff. assumes a desiderative PGr.
*ge-gon-s- from an IE root *gh,en-, also seen in ToA ken- 'call. On this proposal, see
now Vine 2007: 343-357.
yɛĩσov [n.] ‘projecting part of the roof, cornice' (E.). <PG?►
•VAR Often yɛioσov, yɛĩσos [n.] (LXX, Hell. inscr.).
•DER Yɛiowμa 'penthouse' (Poll.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 186f.); yɛiσwσis. tò tñs otéyns
Exov 'projecting part of the roof (H., EM), from yɛtσów (EM), but see Chantraine.
1933: 288.
•ETYM A Carian word, acc. to Steph. Byz. s.v. Movóyɩσσa, who compares Car. yioσa
'stone' (which does not fit very well semantically). Fur. 117 compares Georg. kviša
‘gravel, etc.; cf. further kioŋpis ‘pumice-stone' (Arist.). In any case, the word is a
loan, like many other terms for building, on which see Schwyzer: 62; the term could
be an Anatolian LW or (= ?) Pre-Greek.
yɛitwv, -ovos [m., f.] ‘neighbour', also as an adj. (Od.). Also y<ɛ>ítovaç. tà dúo
aidoĩa 'the two genitals' (H.), also in MoGr. (Pontos, Koukoulés Apx. 27, 61ff.).
<IE?
•COMP As a second member in tà Mɛtayɛítva a festival in Miletus (Vª), with the
month name Mεуε (IA), beside Пεdayɛíτoç, etc. (Rhodos, Cos,
Chalcedon).
•DER Late fem. уɛíτaiva (AB, cf. τéктаιvα, etc.). With уɛƖτOV-: уεɩτovía
'neighbourhood' (Pl.) with yɛƖτovέw (A.), yɛitoveúw (Hp.). With yɛƖtv-: yɛitviáw
(S.), yɛitvia, yɛitvios (pap.), yeɩtvέw (pap.), etc.
•ETYM If the ablaut in the suffix is old, yɛíτwv cannot be a recent creation. However,
it lacks a good etymology (in any case, not related to yɛĩσov).
.
yeλavdpóv [adj.] · чvxpóv ‘cold' (H.; in wrong position). ◄?►
•ETYM yɛλavɗpóv is reminiscent of Lat. gelidus. Contrary to what Frisk argued, the
unusual formation of the Greek word does not prove that the entry is corrupt;
rather, its correctness is corroborated by the French dialect word jalandro from the
region of Grenoble (Hubschmid Vox Romanica 3 (1938): 130). If we assume substrate
origin and a pre-form *yɛλad-po- with prenasalization, all three words could be
related (perhaps the ultimate source is Galatian).
yɛláw [v.] 'to laugh' (Il.). ◄IE *gelh₂- ‘laugh'>
•VAR Aor. yɛλáo(o)al, with yɛλáσoμaɩ, ¿yɛλáσðŋv, yɛуελασμaι (Att., etc.).
{
yếu
265
•DER yέλaσμa laughing' (A., see below), yɛlaστús ‘id.' (Call.), yɛλaστns ‘laugher,
sneerer' (S.), έyyɛlaστńs (E.), yέlaσıç (EM). yɛλaoïvos '‘laugher' (Ael.), plur. 'the
front teeth' (Poll.). Also yɛλáσкw (AP) and yɛλaσɛíw (Pl.).
Beside yɛλáw stands yέλws, -wτos (epic acc. yéλw for yέλwv, yéλov, Att. gen. yέλw)
[m.] 'laughter' (Il.), with yɛλów (Od., see Chantraine 1942: 365f.) and yɛλotoç (B 215,
where yɛλoos metri causa, cf. Schwyzer: 467 and Chantraine 1942: 168) with
denominative yɛλoiάw, yɛloιášw (LXX). yɛλaσ- in ά-yέλaσ-τos (0 307), also in
yeλāvýc (Pi.) < *yɛλaσ-výç? Also in yɛλapńs. yaλývŋ. Aάкwvɛç 'calm of the wind
(Lacon.)' (H.) < *yɛλao-pńs; also in yɛλáw, yɛláσ-σaɩ <*yɛλaσ-i̟w. Aeolic o-stem
yέλos [m.] (cf. pws : έpos: ¿paσtós).
•ETYM Beside yέλws (*gelh₂-ōs) stands Arm. całr, gen. cału 'laughter' (with ci-całim
[v.] laugh'); cf. Clackson 126-132. For the ablaut, cf. yaλ- < *glh₂- in yaλnvη. The
'physical' meaning is preserved in уɛλɛïv· λáµлεν, àveεiv 'glow, flower' (H.). Cf.
► yaλývn, ► yλńvn, ► yλñvos.
yέλyŋ [n.pl.] 'frippery' (Eup., Luc.). Acc. to H., (ó i̟ò̟ŵños kaì) Báµµata, kai ätpaktol,
Kai кTÉVεç '[petty wares and] dyes, and spindles and combs'. <?>
•DER уελуɛ· ẞαлtíšɛ, xpwµaτíšɛɩ 'dip, tinge' and уéλуɩα. лýуη, σлáðŋ, кovρáλia
'woof, blade, coral' (H.).
•ETYM No etymology. Hardly connected to yελyıç.
yéλyıs [f.] ‘garlic', or its cloves (Thphr.). <PG▷
•VAR Gen. -īdoç, -ios; plur. yελyɛis, yéλyɩbes.
•DER уɛλyɩбóo̟µal ‘change into y.' (Thphr.), yɛλɣðɛúɛiv· áƒ¤τηloyɛv 'to speak
deceivingly (vel sim.)' (H.).
•ETYM The obviously related synonym ►äyλıç suggests that yέλyıs is to be analysed
as a reduplicated *ye-yλuç. Evidently, the variation ȧ- ~ zero or ȧ- ~ yε- cannot be of
IE origin. In addition, Fur.: 123, 127 (etc.) adduces σkɛλλíç, -ídos (Plu.; also σкελíç
Alex. Trall.) with the same meaning; this form cannot be separated from yέλyıs, and
so further confirms Pre-Greek origin because it adds, e.g. the interchange y ~ к. The
suffix, too, with a long vowel i, is typically Pre-Greek. Any connection with
► yayyλíov is a mere guess.
уéλɛvoç [?] · ȧσлóðɛλoç, vápкiσσos 'asphodelus, narcissus' (H.). <PG>
K.
ETYM Fur.: 138 compares oxελivoç. ȧурíα кʊлáρɩσσos 'wild cypress' (H.); see his
comments.
yέµw [v.] ‘to be full (of)' (IA). <IE? *gem- ‘take, seize'>
VAR Only present.
•DER yóuos 'freight, cargo' (IA) with factitive yoμów load' (Babr.); poet. yέµos [n.]
'load' (A.). Deverbative with causative value (Schwyzer: 717): yɛµí¶w ‘to fill, loaď
(A.); also yɛμów ‘id.' (pap.).
•ETYM Probably related to U kumiaf [acc.pl.f.] ‘gravidas' whence, as a loan, Lat.
gumia [m., f.] ‘glutton'. Connection with Lat. gemō is difficult (see E-M: 'be full' <
sigh?). Cf. Szemerényi ZDMG 101 (1951): 219. The word has further been connected
with ▸yévτo 'took', which is semantically not evident.

=== page 157 ===

266
Yɛvɛά
1
Yεpas
267
yɛvɛά VAR yεvεn. →yíуvoμaɩ.
yévɛƖov •VAR Yεvelás. → yévus.
yévvá [f.] 'descent, birth' (Pi.). <IE *genh,- 'beget'>
●DER yɛvvádāç [m.] 'noble (of birth)' (Ar.), Att. yɛvvýtηs ‘member of the yέvos'
(Is.); yɛvvɩкóç ‘noble' (Com., Pl.); yɛvvýɛ ‘begetting' to yɛvváw, see below. Old is
yevvaios of good origin' (II.) with yɛvvaɩóτηs (E.). Beside yévva and yɛvvaĩoç, we
find the verb yɛvváw 'to beget, generate' (Pi.) with yévvŋua (S.; yévŋµa after yέvoç),
etc., yévvησ, yɛvητns 'begetter' (S.); yεvvýτwp (A.) and yεvητp (App.) ‘id.',
yɛvvηtɛɩpa (Pl.), yεvvýτpiα (Phryn.). From yɛvváw also yɛvvητiкós (Arist.) and
yɛvvýɛɩç (Emp.).
•ETYM yέvva and cognate forms are obviously related to root represented by yέvos
and yiyvoua. However, problematic is the origin of the geminate vv, which is
certainly not expressive (pace Meillet BSL 26 (1925): 15f., Chantraine 1933: 46). If the
verb yɛvváw is primary (as argued by DELG), we could perhaps explain the vv as the
result of a restoration of the root yev- (for instance after yέvos) in a vā-verb (like
Sáµvnµi, Saµváw). On the other hand, yɛvvatos seems to be an old formation, which
in turn suggests that its basis yévva is old as well (as argued by Wackernagel KZ 30
(1890): 300 and 314; for yɛvvaïoç, Schwyzer Glotta 5 (1914): 195f., has suggested that it
actually stands for *yevεaños). As none of the above solutions is really convincing,
we should rather consider some kind of irregular, for instance analogical
development of *nja; after all, yévva ends in short -a, which seems to presuppose -ia
< *-ih₂. See ➤ yiyvoμai.
yέvos →yíyvoμai.
уévτα [n.pl.] 'intestines' (Call.); кρéα, σлλáуxvα 'meat, innards' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM No etymology. According to Eust., it is a Thracian word. Szemerényi WuS NF
1 (1938): 156f. connects it with yaστnp, which is theoretically possible if the latter
reflects *gnt-tēr.
yɛvɩɩavý [f.] a plant, ‘gentian' (Dsc., Hp.). <?>
●DER yɛvtɩàç píša (Androm. apud Gal., Dsc.), for *yεvτɩαváç, Chantraine 1933: 353.
⚫ETYM According to Dsc. 3, 3, the plant is named after the Illyrian king Gentis, which
has been associated with the fact that the plant was prominent in the Alps; cf.
Strömberg 1940: 135. On the form of the name of the Illyrian king, Gent(h)ius, see
Krahe 1929: 53f. Compare also Venet. xe.noe.i [dat.].
yévto [v.aor.] ‘he took' (0 43). <IE? *gem- ‘seize, take, etc.’➤
•ETYM Like λéкto he laid down', yévτo is either a med. root aorist, or an s-aorist that
lost its -σ- (*λék-o-to, *yέµ-σ-to; on the μ, see below); cf. Schwyzer: 751 Zus. 2. If
they are root aorists, both verbs have analogical full grade. To yévto < *yέµto, we
can probably further add the ipv. άлó-уɛµε· ǎs̟ελкɛ. Kúлριoι 'draw away (Cypr.)'
and y-yεчoç. σvλλaßý. Zaλaμívio 'grip, hold (Salam.)' (H.). From other languages,
comparisons have been made with MIr. gemel 'fetter', Latv. gùmstu, gùmt seize, etc.',
as well as OCS žmo̟, žęti ‘σoíууɛɩv, comprimere'. The word has furthermore been
1
compared with Gr. yέuw 'be full', which could be the thematic present beside the
athematic (sigmatic) aorist yévto. Not connected to yauέw, nor to ➤yáyyaшov
'net'.
yέvus, -vos [f.] ‘jaw', also ‘edge of an axe' (Il.). <IE *ģenu- ‘chin’▷
•VAR Sometimes u metri causa.
•DER yέvɛƖov (< *yεvεF-tov) 'chin, beard' (II.), with yɛvɛtás 'beard, cheek' (Od.);
yevelátns, -ýtns, fem. -ãtis, -ñtiç 'bearded' (Theoс., cf. úëηvýτηs), yɛvɛtóλns ‘id.'
(Hdn.); yεvεɩαστp 'chin-strap' (Poll., cf. ẞpαxioviστnp). Denominative verb yɛvɛtáw
'to get or have a beard' (Od.), etc. Also yεvηïç ‘edge of an axe' (S. Ant. 249 gen.
yevidos).
•ETYM The u-stem has parallels in OIr. giun, gin 'mouth', MW gen ‘cheek, chin', plur.
geneu, Go. kinnus 'cheek', ToA śanw-e-m [du.] 'cheeks', and further Arm. cnawt and
Skt. hánu- [f.] ‘jaw-bone' (with an unexplained h- for j-, Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 801),
whereas Lat. gena ‘cheek' is reshaped after māla (but the u is preserved in dentes
genuīnī molars'). Compare also Av. *zanauua (written zanuua), MoP zanax, Khot.
ysanuva 'jaw'. Not connected to yváłoç.
yepávdpvov [n.] ‘old tree-trunk' (Thphr.). ◄GR➤
•ETYM A Hellenistic innovation: a substantivized adjective yɛpávdpvos (Thphr.,
etc.), modelled after μɛλáv-Spvov 'heartwood' (Thphr.; cf. τò µéλav Spvóc § 14); see
Strömberg 1937: 99. Cf. also yɛpávdpuɛç (H.), from Spüç. See yέpwv and ►Spüç.
yέpavos [f., m.] ‘crane' (II.), also metaphorically of various kinds of apparatuses, and a
fish name (see Strömberg 1943: 120). <IE *gerh₂-en-/-eu- 'crane'>
•DIAL Myc. ke-re-na-i [dat.pl.] /kerenāhi/, see RPh. 73 (1999) 84 (doubtful).
•DER yɛpavíç kind of bandage (medic.). yɛpavītɩç name of a stone (Plin.), yɛpavíaç
‘with a crane (neck)' (Phryn.), yɛpávov ‘geranium', also called yɛpavoyέpwv
(Strömberg 1940: 54 and 159). See also Thompson 1895 s.v.
•ETYM Beside the o-stem yέpavos (*ģerh₂-n-), we have an n-stem in yépŋv or yɛpýv
(H.) < *ģerh₂-ēn. Old name of the bird ‘crane', with a suffix -n- or -u-, seen in Arm.
krun-k; Celtic, e.g. Gaul. tri-garanos 'with three cranes', MW garan; Germanic, e.g.
OE cran, OHG kran-uh; Lith. garnys ‘heron, stork'. The u-stem appears in Lat. grūs,
Lith. gérvė (*ģerh₂-u-), OCS žеravú (*ģerh₂-ōu-) with BSl. *g- by depalatalization from
the zero grade *ģrh₂-.
yépaç [n.] 'gift of honour' (II.); originally 'old age', see ▸уñpaç. <IE *ģerh₂- 'old'>
•VAR Gen. -aos or -ws.
DIAL Myc. ke-ra /geras/.
•COMP Compound ȧ-yέpaσ-τoç 'without gift of honour' (Il.).
•DER yɛpatós 'old' (Il., accent like in лaλαóç); yεpáσμios honouring, honoured,
ageď (h. Merc., cf. Schwyzer: 493); denominative yɛpá(w 'honour' (EM). Beside
yépaç stands yɛpapós 'honourable' (Il.; hardly an old r-stem as per Benveniste 1935:
16; different Schwyzer: 516), fem. yέpaipa (Il. [v.l.], see Bechtel 1914), and yɛpaipw
'honour, distinguish' (Il.).

=== page 158 ===

268
yñ
269
ETYM Cf. Skt. jarás- [f.] 'old age'. yépwv, уñpaç, and ypaus are cognate.
Perhaps also connected with yɛpp.
yɛpyέpquos [?] a kind of olives (Call.). See H., Suid., Ath. 56 d. They are Spʊлεлýç, i.e.
ripe on the tree. <LW Sem.>
•ETYM Semitic origin seems possible: for a connection with Hebr. gargerīm 'ripe
olives', see Hemmerdinger Glotta 48 (1970): 41. Therefore, the word is rather not
related to yέpwv, etc.
yɛpdios [m.] ([f.]) 'weaver' (pap. IIª). <LW?>
•VAR Accentuation unknown. Also yέpdɩç.
•COMP уɛpɩopαßdiotńs (pap.), yepdoroióv (gloss.).
•DER Feminines yɛpdía (Edict. Diocl.) and yɛpdíaɩva (pap.). yɛpdɩakós and yɛpdɩwv
'weaving-shed' (pap.).
•ETYM Identical with Lat. gerdius (since Lucil.); further unknown. Was it borrowed
into Latin from Greek? Hebr. girdā'ā ‘weaver' is also from Greek, acc. to Bauer in
WH s.v. As the word is very late, a loan is probable. See Frisk Supp.
=>>
yεpoios •VAR Yɛpoíτav, yέpuç. yépwv.
yέppov [n.] different objects of wickerwork: 'shield' (Hdt.), 'wattles, booths, body of a
cart' (D.), ‘stake, arrow' (Eup.), = tò aidoĩov ‘genitals' (Epich.). ◄EUR➤
•COMP Yɛppoqópos 'shieldbearer' (Pl.).
•DER yɛppádia• otpwtŋpídia ‘crossbeams' (H.); cf. Chantraine 1933: 72, Schwyzer:
487. Here also yépσчμov· äкpov áλiεvτIкoŨ кαλáμov 'point of a fishing rod' (H.)? (cf.
yéppov = 'stake'), variants yévoчov (H.) and кépσчov (sch.), see below; not to
ȧyɛípw as per Latte. On yáppa and yápσava s.v. ►yápσava.
•ETYM yέpσvµov (not to be corrected to yέpσчμov, contra Latte), which is found next
to yέvʊɩov and кépoчov, points to a substrate word (interchange ε/ a, k/ y, ɩ/ v).
Probably, Arm. car 'tree', plur. 'shrubs' is also to be compared, as well as perhaps ON
kjarr [n.] ‘shrubs' (PGm. *kersá-), and ON kass ‘basket' (PGm. *kársa-). Within
Greek, yάpoava and yappa may be related. The whole group of words probably
derives from a European substrate; see Fur.: 117. Lat. gerra [f.] 'wicker-work' is
borrowed from the plural yέppa.
yέpwv, -ovtos [m.] ‘old man'; also as an adjective ‘old' (Il.). ◄IE *ģerh₂- ‘be(come) old,
ripen'>
•VAR As an administrative term oi yέpovτεç 'the elders'.
•DIAL Myc. ke-ro /gerōn/? ke-ro-si-ja /geronsiā/?
•DER yɛpoúσɩos 'concerning the elders' (Il.), yɛpovoía 'council of the elders' (in
Sparta, Carthage, etc., D.; on these forms see Collinge Glotta 49 (1971): 218-229),
yɛpovσías 'member of the y.' (Sparta), yɛpovσiaστns ‘id.' (Plb.; Chantraine 1933:
316ff.), уɛроvσιɩaкóç. Diminutive уɛрóντоν (Ar.), уɛрóуτεо (Ar.), etc.
yɛpóvτov
yɛpóvtɛlоç
Denominative yɛрoντεÚш 'be a senator' (Sparta), with yɛpovτɛíα (Ephesus).
Yɛpovτiáw 'get older' (D. L.). Beside yépwv, yépovτ- there are a few formations with
yɛpu-: yέpus and yɛpúτaç. yέpwv (H.), cf. лрéσßuç and лрεσẞúτaç. Also PNS
Tεpúλoç, Пépuλλoç, гɛpuç, -udoç hypocoristic? (Bechtel 1917a: 15). Of the forms with
1
1
-ol-, yɛpoítav. ráллov. Kpñtεç ‘grandfather' (H.) is inverted writing for yɛpúτav;
yɛpoĩa [n.pl.] ‘old stories' (Corinn.), if correct, is perhaps after the adjectives in -oчos
(see Bechtel 1921, 1: 304). Unclear is yɛpwvía (H.), see Latte, despite Scheller 1951: 33².
yɛpwxía (Ar. Lys. 980) is perhaps graphic for Lacon. yɛpw'ía (von Fritz AmJPh. 66
(1945): 196f.; but see Wackernagel 1916: 208²; also Schwyzer: 218). yɛpáτηs 'old', of a
horse (POxy. 6, 922; DELG refers to yɛpatía; not in LSJ).
•ETYM In its formation, yέpwv is identical with Skt. járant-, Oss. zærond ‘old (man)'.
One may further compare Arm. cer, -oy 'old man' (o-stem) and MoP zar 'id.'. Cf.
► yέpac, ► yñpaç, ► уpañç.
yεvoμaι [v.] 'to taste' (II.); yɛúw, yɛñσa 'give a taste' (Hdt.). <IE *geus- 'taste'>
•VAR Aor. yɛúσaσðaɩ, fut. yɛúσoµaɩ, perf. yέyɛvµaɩ; secondary athem. form yɛúμεÐα
(Theoc. 14, 51).
•DER yɛчµa ‘tasting' (IA), yɛσs ‘id.' (Democr.), yɛvėµós ‘id.' (Nic.), yɛúστηs
(Chios), yevστpiov (Com.); yevotıkós (Arist.).
•⚫ETYM The compound ǎ-yɛvσ-toç 'not tasting, inexperienced' (Att.) points to a basis
*yɛúσ-oμal, which agrees with Go. kiusan, ON kjósa 'taste, choose', OHG OS kiosan;
further, with Skt. jusáte, -ti ‘id.' and Lat. gustare = OHG OS kostōn 'taste', as well as
Go. caus. kausjan from *ģous-eie/o-.
yéqūpa [f.] 'bridge'; on other mgs. in Homer see below (II.). <PG>
•VAR Boeot. Béqupa, Cret. Séqupa, Lacon. Sípoupa (H.).
•DER yɛquρíç. лópvŋ tɩç ènì yɛqúpaç, wç 'Hpaкλéwv 'whore on the bridge' (H. also
with another mg.); denominative yɛqupów 'make a bridge' (IA; II. ‘dam up', see
below') together with yɛqúpwois (Str.), yɛqúpwµa 'bridge' (J.), yɛqupwτnç 'bridge-
builder' (Plu.); yɛqupi\w ‘abuse' (Plu.), acc. to H., “¿nɛì ¿v’Eλevoĩvɩ ènì tñs yeqúpas
toiç µvotnpíolç kaƉɛšóµɛvoi čokwétov toùs rapióvτaç” because the people sitting
at the bridge in Eleusis during the mysteries used to mock at the passers-by'; thence
yɛqupiσµóç (Str.), yɛqupiσtis (Plu.).
•ETYM The variation of the first consonant between y-, B- and 8- suggests a
labiovelar *g, although the reflex y- is then difficult to explain. The evidently
cognate Arm. kamurj 'bridge' would also pose unsurmountable problems if the word
were IE. Beekes Glotta 78 (2004): 12-21 follows Fur. 97, etc., who sees it as a loanword
from Anatolian, connecting Hattic hammuruwa 'beam'. An original meaning 'beam'
fits all passages in Homer and, notably, the expression лoλéµoo yɛqúpaç, where it
has the same meaning as phalanx ('tree, beam'). The Lacon. form with -- and -ov-
points to non-Greek origin as well.
yn [f.] 'earth' (II.). <PG>
•VAR Dor. yā, Cypr. (a is uncertain, see Lejeune BSL 50 (1954). Ion. plur. yéau is an
innovation (Schwyzer: 473, Schwyzer 1950: 51, Meister 1921: 172, 253).
●DIAL In the Thebes tablets we find maka, interpreted as /Mã Gā/ 'Mother Earth'
(e.g. Avrantinos-Godart-Sacconi, Thèbes (...) Les tablettes, 2001):
•COMP Often as a first member y₁- (ya-), mostly yɛw- from yη-o- (late also yɛ-n-
from yn-, yɛ-o- and yɛo- after yεtos < -yn-os): yn-yεvns 'earthborn' (IA), yn-
Aopos (Pl.), yɛw-λopos (X.) 'earthen hill', yɛwμετpía, -íŋ 'surveyeing of lands' (IA),

=== page 159 ===

270
Y
yɛwpyós 'peasant' (IA) < yŋ(-0)-fopyós or -fɛpyós, cf. yaßɛpyós. <ó> ȧypoũ
μσеwτηç. Аáкшveç 'tax farmer (Lacon.)' (H.).
●DER Diminutive yńdiov (Ar.); adj. yñïvos ‘earthen' (IA), Dor. yáïvoç, yewdns (Pl.),
yɛŋpós (Hp., cf. s.v. ¿yyapoûvtɛç); rare yýtns (S. Tr. 32) ‘peasant', cf. yaɩɩaɩ. yɛwpyoi
(H.), Redard 1949: 36; denomin. yɛóoμa 'become earth' (D. S.)
ETYM No IE etymology; the hypothesis of Meier-Brügger MSS 53 (1992): 113-6
(connecting *ģenh,- ‘to beget') is incorrect. Probably related to yaĩa, which is a Pre-
Greek word as well. On possible Aa ‘Earth', see ▶Sã and ►Aŋµýtyp, as well as
►Пoσɛdáшv; however, this is rather doubtful. For the interchange 8-/ y-, cf.
yéqupa/ Séqupa and Fur. 388f. The word is likely to go back to *gaya, which was
contracted to *gā at a very early date. See Pre-Greek under the suffix -at-. Cf. ► ala
and ▸yέyɛɩoç.
yŋ(y)уýλɩ [?] · ó ǎyptoç μüç 'wild mouse' (H.). <PG>
VAR Also ynуpoç.
•ETYM There is no reason to correct yŋ(y)yńλı into yɩyyıλ-. A suffix -p(o)-, as seen
in the variant ynλypos, is well-known from Pre-Greek; likewise, уnуу- shows
typically Pre-Greek reduplication and prenasalization, for which yiyyλuμos and
yάyyaчoç may be compared. Without doubt, the word is of Pre-Greek origin.
yneźw [v.] 'to rejoice' (II.). <IE *geh₂d"- 'be glad' (?)►
•VAR Perf. yεynеα, aor. уηеñσai (Dor. yāéw, уéуāеα, уāеñσα); late presents
yńƉoµai, yŋßw (Dor. yá¤w).
•DER_yŋþoσúvη (Il.), yŋþóσuvos (Il.); late yñƉoç [n.] (Epicur.) and yŋþaλéos
(Androm., apud Gal.). Also yãσσav· ǹdovýν ‘joy' (H.), if with Baunack Phil. 70
(1911): 376 from *уā0-дav.
•ETYM Because of Lat. gaudeō, gāvīsus sum, a pre-form *yāƑ-ɛ0-έw was reconstructed
for ynéw (see Schwyzer: 703), but the contraction then needed would have to have
been very early and have spread even to the perfect (Chantraine 1942: 429).
Moreover, the present *geh₂u-ed-eie- would be an isolated formation within PIE.
Recently, the word has been compared with ToA kātk-, ToB kātk- ‘be glaď (<
*geh₂d-sk-), which has yielded the reconstruction *geh₂dh- for Greek (LIV², Adams
1999: 150). The same root is found in ► yaíw < *yăƑ-ɩw and ▸ yάvvµai.
yn0v\\íc, -ídos [f.] name of an onion (Epich.); cf. Strömberg 1937: 84. ◄ PG(V)►
●VAR Also yńþvov [n.] (Ar.), yýtɛov [n.] (Ar.), kötíov (Cratin.), yaɩv\\ádaı (H.).
Fur.: 187, 253 further adds yáα. áλlávτα 'sausage' (H.), άyaov\\iç ‘Ferula
marmarica' (Dsc. 3, 84). ȧyaðíç = oŋσauís ‘sesame' (H.).
DIAL Dor. yaev\\íç.
⚫ETYM Because of the many alternations, e.g. t/0/ σ, α/ αɩ, y/к, уηouλλíç is obviously
of Pre-Greek origin. The suggestion of DELG that уnτεov was remodelled after
yneéw (which would explain the variation T/ 0) is implausible in itself and does not
account for the other variants. The folk-etymological suggestion of Kalén 1918: 103ff.
to analyse yn-Ovλís as ‘Erdsäckeľ, with *Oúov 'sacculus' (as found in ynvov) is of
course to be abandoned.
yiyydiav
yñpas [n.] 'old age' (Il.). ◄IE *ģerh₂- ‘be old, ripen'>>
•VAR Gen. -aos, -ws.
271
•DER уpaчós 'old' (Hes.; cf. yɛpaiós s.v. ►уépas), yöpaλéos ‘id.' (Anacr.; after the
adjectives in -aλéoç), yηpáɛç ‘id.' (Alc., see Chantraine 1933: 272f.). Further ynpεtov.
‘thistledown' (Arat.) and yηpávov. yɛpav<oyέpwv> H.; cf. Strömberg 1940: 159';
ypáчwv H., glossed as (*)ypáča.
Further yηpáσкw 'to get old (Il.), 3sg. aor. ¿yńpa, ptc. yŋpás (II.), inf. yŋpávaɩ or
yŋpāvaɩ (A., cf. Schwyzer 682); aor. έyńpaσa (Hdt.; also as a causative like qvσa:
Equv, Schwyzer: 755y); fut. yŋpáσoμai, -σw (IA), later yɛyńpaкα, έyŋpáðŋv. New
present yŋpáw (X.); aor. yŋpɛis (Xenoph.) after dauɛíç. From yŋpáσкw: ynpáoчios
getting older' (Tlos), and yńpavois (Arist.) after vyíavois (Chantraine 1933: 281).
⚫ETYM The word stands beside yέpaç, with a remarkable long vowel which has been
explained as deriving from the s-aorist, but this cannot be proven. On έynpa as the
reflex of an old s-aorist, see Barton Glotta 60 (1982): 32-49 and Harðarson 1993a. 72-
76. Cf. ►yέpaç, ➤ yέpwv, ➤ypañç.
yñpuç [f.] 'voice, speech' (II.). <IE? *geh₂r- 'voice, sound'>
•DIAL Dor. yāpus, -vos.
•DER Yηpúw, yapów ‘sing, speak' (h. Merc.), yńpчµa (A.).
•ETYM Comparable forms are found in Celtic and Germanic, which, however, often
have a short vowel, e.g. Go. kara [f.] 'care, solicitude' and OE cearu [f.] ‘id.', OHG
chara [f.] ‘lament(ation)', and OIr. ad-gair < *gar-et. LIV connects the Celtic verb
with Oss. zæl- 'resound' and reconstructs an IE root *gar- ‘tönen, rufen' with *a,
ablauting with *ā for forms like yñpuç, OIr. gáir [f.] 'cry', W gawr 'crying, battle'.
However, a-vocalism, and certainly a :: à ablaut, is of course impossible in PIE: the
evident reconstruction is *gh₂r-, *geh₂r-. The zero grade *gh₂r- explains the Celtic
forms with -a-, and theoretically also the Germanic ones, although the latter are
perhaps better kept apart because of their deviant meaning. Forms with -rr-, like Lat.
garriō, and Gr. yappiμεðα are rather not related (LIV suggests onomatopoeic
origin).
yiyapτov [n.] ‘grape-stone' (Simon.); cf. Strömberg 1937: 140 for the names of kernels.
<PG?>
●DER yɩyaptis. otaqis ‘grape' (H.), yɩyapτódŋs ‘'stone-like' (Thphr.); yɩyapτóvoV
'unripe grape' (Dsc.)
⚫ETYM Reduplicated formation. It is often connected with Lat. granum, MoHG Korn,
Kern, which is formally improbable (Greek would have a different suffix and
reduplication). The word is rather non-IE, that is to say a Pre-Greek loan.
yɩyyís, -ídos [f.] kind of turnip, French carrot (Alex. Trall.). <PG?▷
•DER Yɩyyidov a plant, Daucus Gingidium (Dsc.); уɩууɩкídov (schol. Nic. Al. 432).
ETYM Solmsen 1909: 213f. assumed *yɛyyís, with assimilation, connecting the word
with yoyyúloç. However, it is rather a Pre-Greek word.
yɩyyλíav [f.] · káλva kepaλñç épεoūv 'woollen hood for the head (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.

=== page 160 ===

272
Yiyydiouós
273
yɩyy\ɩσµós [m.] · уapyaλɩσµòç åïò xɛpŵv, yέλws ‘tickling by the hand; laughter' (H.).
<ONOM
⚫ETYM DELG compares кixλσµóç (hardly influenced by yiyypoc). Neither is it
related to yiyyλupos.
•
yiyyλos [m.] vāvos 'dwarf (H.). <ONOM?>
•ETYM Unknown.
yiyyλvµos [m.] ‘hinge, joint, pivot, gudgeon' (X., Epid.). <PG➤
•VAR Also yɩyyλvµóç; and yúyλ- (ap. Frisk), yɩyλúµшov (ap. Frisk), not in LSJ.
•DER Yɩy(y)λúдov (Anthem.), дs (Arist.), yɩyуλчдwτó (Ph.),
yyyXvwdns
уó (Нp.).
•ETYM Technical term of unknown origin (cf. Schwyzer: 423). Not related to OIr.
glún 'knee', etc. (as per Petersson 1922: 8f.). Probably Pre-Greek (note the
prenasalization and interchange 1/ v).
yiyypos [m.] name of a Phoenician flute (Men.). <PG or LW Phoen.>
●VAR Also -ov H., -ãs [m.]. yiyyλapos (Poll.), yɩyyλápiov (AB) by dissimilation?
•DER Thence yɩyypάïvos ‘'like a y.' and yɩyypavτós ‘(made) for a y.' (Ath.); yɩyypíaɩ•
avλoì µiкpoí, ¿v olç épŵτov µavěávovσiv ‘small flutes, on which they first learn',
paσós os 'sound', yɩyypí. έлqávŋµá tɩ έлì кaτaµwkýσɛ λɛуóμɛvov. кai
εidoç avλou an interjection in case of mockery; also a kind of flute' (H.).
⚫ETYM According to Ath. 4, 174f., the word is from Пíууpηs, the Phoenician name of
Adonis, but it is actually rather an expressive onomatopoeic formation (not related
to yñpus or yέpavos). Lat. gingrina ‘genus quoddam tibiarum exiguarum' (Paul.
Fest.) is borrowed from the Greek.
yiyvoμaι [v.] 'to be born, become, arise' (II.). <IE *ģenh,- 'beget, arise'>
•VAR Ion., etc. yívoμai (Schwyzer: 215), Thess. Boeot. yívu̟μαι, Сret. уívvo̟дaɩ; aor.
yɛvέoðaɩ, perf. yέyova, yɛyaɲɛv, yɛyawç, med. yɛyévŋuai (recent), fut. yɛvýσoµai;
recent are yεvηеñvaɩ and yεvηеñσoμaι (Att., etc.); trans. s-aorist yɛívaσa (epic,
etc., from *yɛv-σ-; Schwyzer: 756, Wackernagel 1916: 175), also yɛɩvóµæða, -µεvos
(either for yí(y)voμaι, Schwyzer: 715, or for yɛv- with metrical lengthening); athem.
root aorist yεvto (Hes.; analogical innovation, see Schwyzer: 678f.).
COMP -уvn-τos in e.g. ►кασíуvητos 'brother' and -yv-oç in vɛo-yv-ós 'newborn' (h.
Hom.), with a suffix -to- in oμó-yv-10s ‘of the same origin'.
•DER Action nouns: 1. yέvos [n.] (yεvɩкós, -yεvýs) and yóvos, yový (yovɛús ‘parent').
2. yɛvɛá (Ion. -ǹ) ‘lineage' (Il.; see Chantraine 1933: 91). 3. yɛvé-Ðλŋ (II.) and yévɛ-
Olov (A.) 'id', together with yɛvéλos and (rare and late) yɛɛaкóç, yeveðλídios,
уεvελíwμа, уεvεά(w. 4. уεvε-τn 'birth' (Hom.); hypocor. TεvεTUλλíç name of
Aphrodite as a protectress of birth (Ar.). 5. yéve-ous ‘birth, origin' (Il.). 6. ► yévvă.
Agent nouns: yɛvé-twp (Ion. Dor.) and yɛve-τýp (Arist.) 'begetter'; on the difference
see Benveniste 1948: 46; fem. yɛvétɛɩpa (Pi.); yɛvé-tŋs (Ion.); thence yɛvéσɩa [n.pl.]
‘parentalia' (Hdt.). yvýσios ‘of real descent' (Il.) from yvŋtóç. Cf. further ►ïyvŋtɛç;
уvwτós, -τn 'relative' belongs to yɩyvwoкw.
•ETYM The reduplicated pres. yiyvoμat is also found in Lat. gignō [act.] ‘to beget’, and
the aorist έyévεto corresponds to the Skt. root aorist ájani, whereas the perf. yέyova
matches Skt. jajána. Nouns include yέvos (= Skt. jánás-, Lat. genus) and yóvoç (Skt.
jána-), yevétwp, yevɛtýp (= Lat. genitor, Skt. jánitar- and janitár-), yevétɛipa (= Skt.
jánitrī, Lat. genitrī-x); yévɛoɩs (with e-grade) corresponds to Skt. jātí- ‘birth, family',
Lat. nāti-ō, OE (ge)cynd (all with zero grade). Gr. -yvηtos is from *gnh,-to-, while
-yv-os in compounds shows loss of the laryngeal, as in Lat. prīvi-gn-us ‘born
separately' 'stepchild'; furthermore, note the correspondence vɛoyvóç: Go.
niuklahs ‘as a child' (dissimilated from *-kna- < IE *-ģnh,-o-).
=
yɩyváʊkw [v.] ‘to come to know, perceive' (Il.). ◄IE *gneh¸- ‘recognize, get to know'>
●VAR Ion., etc. yivwokw (cf. yīvoµaɩ beside yiyvoµaɩ), Epidaur. yvwσкw, aor. yvwvat,
perf. yvwka, fut. yvwσoμa; with analogical -σ-: yvwσеñvaɩ, έyvwσμai; later s-aor.
yvwσaσðaι (Man.).
•COMP Many compounds.
•DER yvwσɩ ‘inquiry, knowledge' (IA), often in compounds, e.g. àvá-yvwOLS
‘recognizing, reading' to ava-yɩyvwoкw 'recognize, read'; yvwµŋ ‘thought,
judgement (Thgn.); rare yvõµa ‘token, opinion' (Hdt.); usual yva̸µwv [m.] ([f.])
'interpreter, expert, etc.' (IA); yvwτós ‘known' (Il.), often with -σ- yvwotós (A.;
äyνwστos Od.) like in yvwστηp 'surety, witness' (X.), yvwotŋs ‘id.' (LXX), etc. With
a suffix -p- we find yvwpчμos 'well-known, familiar' (Od.), yvwpíšw 'make known,
become acquainted with' (IA), yvwpiσis, yváρioμα, уvós, yvwpiotńs, etc.
With unexplained vocalism ayvoέw 'to fail to perceive or recognize' (Il.; ǹyvoiŋσa
with 'false' -ot-; see Chantraine 1942: 99) together with άyvoíã, äyvotă (Att.); after
voέw and compounds: avoíã, ǎvotă, etc. (in any event, not derived from *ǎyvo-fos,
which would be a related to άyvwç, ȧyvŵτos 'unknown', Od.).
•ETYM уɩуváσкw matches Lat. (g) nōscō, OP xšnāsa- in xšnāsāhiy 'you shall
recognize' (subj.), etc., and probably Alb. njoh, although these forms have full grade
*gneh 3-, whereas Greek probably has a zero grade *gnh3-sk-. Likewise, the *to-ptc.
yvwτós corresponds to Lat. nōtus, Skt. jñātá-, as well as OIr. gnáth 'known' and ToA
ā-knats, ToB a-knātsa 'fool', where the Greek form points to *gnh3-to- (as does
perhaps Tocharian). Cf. further OCS znati 'recognize', isg. znajo, Arm. aor. can-eay
'I recognized', Go. kann, pl. kunnum, ptc. kunþs 'known'. On ȧyvoέw, see above; on
► yέywva, see there. Hitt. kane/išš-zi 'to acknowledge', which was thought to reflect
*ģnēh3-s- (with Eichner's Law, i.e., that a laryngeal does not color an old lengthened
grade), can be accounted for with a conventional reconstruction *ģn(e)h¸-s-
(Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). Nevertheless, the vocalism of OE cnawan 'know' (< PGm.
*knē-) and ToА kñasu 'I have recognised' (<*knēs-) remains difficult. For yvwpчμoç,
cf. Lat. gnārus < *gnh3-ro-; Gr. yvwoiç, Lat. nōti-ō and Skt. -jñāti-, however, may be
independent formations.
yıλós [adj.] · Étɛpóóðaλµos 'one-eyeď (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Perhaps connected here is the PN ríos, Tiλλíç (but see on vɛóyiλλoç, as well
as Bechtel 1902: 64).
уɩvɩлtάpiov [n.] ‘broom' (P: Leid. X, 19). <?>

=== page 161 ===

2"
274
yívvos
yλénw
275
•ETYM Perhaps for *уiviστnpiov; cf. Lat. genista.
yívvos [m.] 'offspring of a mare by a mule' (Arist.). <PG?>
VAR Also yivos (Ialysos). LSJ (and Supp.) give the accentuations yívvoç, yɩvvóc and
yivos. Also ivvós (H.) and "vvos.
•ETYM Unknown; see DELG. The forms without y- or with u may well be late. It can
hardly be from yбyvoчa. The word is probably Pre-Greek. Cf. ►őVLVVOS.
yĭtov [n.] uncertain; 'comestibles'? (UPZ 89,14, IIª). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
yλaßpηvn [f.] Cretan plant name (unknown poet III³). <PG>
•ETYM See Neumann 1967: 229-235. Probably a local name, i.e. Pre-Greek.
yλáyos →yáλa.
yλάчw [v.] ‘to sing aloud (µέλoc)' (Pi. Fr. 97). ◄?►
•VAR cf. yλayyáчei. лtepúooetai, kéкpɑyɛ ‘he flaps the wings, shrieks' (H., Cyr.).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic; cf. ►кλášw. But von Wilamowitz (following the sch.) reads
ué; thus, does it mean 'suck'?
yλaɩvoí →yλývη.
yλáµwv, -wvos [adj.] 'blear-eyed' (com.). <PG?➤
•VAR Also yλauvpós ‘id.' (Hp.). From yλáµoç· µúča 'mucus' (H.) after adjectives in
-wv and -vpós (qɛyupós ‘inflamed', Chantraine 1933: 231). Denominative yλaµáw
(Poll.) Anuáw (which LSJ does not give), yλáµvžoç = yλaµvpóç together with
yλaµvžiάw (EM), for yλa[µo]-μvεoç? y\nµwdns = yλauvpós (Gal.), after Anµwdns
'full of rheum'?
=
•ETYM Unknown. The comparisons with Lith. glēmės, gléimės [pl.] 'slime' (not
related to MoE clammy 'sticky') and Alb. ngjomë 'humid, fresh' (Pok. 361) are very
doubtful. The word may be Pre-Greek. From Greek comes Lat. glamae = gramiae
'viscous humor that collects in the corners of the eyes'.
yλávos [m.] ‘hyena' (Arist.). <PG?>
•VAR Cf. yávoç. ǹj úaɩva, úñò Þpvyŵv kai Bivvõv H.; also yávvos ‘hyena' (Phlp. in
GA).
•DER Hence the fish name yλáviç, -los (-ews), -idos [m.] ([f.]) ‘Silurus, sheat-fish'
(Com., Arist.; yλávios Hdn.), thus called because of its voracity and the sound it.
makes, see Strömberg 1943: 70 and Thompson 1947 S.V.
⚫ETYM Unknown. The word may be Pre-Greek.
yλapis, -ídos [f.] ‘chisel' (S., Delos III³). <?>
•ETYM For the formation, cf. the semantically related ypaqiç, yλuqiç, koлiç, etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 338).
yλavкós [adj.] in Hom. (ПI 34) and later poets of the sea, post-Hom. always the color
'blueish-green or grey' (II.); see Pötscher RhM 141/2 (1998): 97-111. <PG?➤
DIAL Myc. ka-ra-u-ko /Glaukos/.
•DER Yλauкoç name of a fish (Com.; see Strömberg 1943: 23f. and Thompson 1947:
48); yλavкía ǹ yλavkiov. Botávŋ tis ‘a planť (H.: Plin.); also ‘juice of the horned
poppy' (Dsc.) and name of a duck (Ath.), both after the color; yλavкídavov name of
an eye salve (Gal.). Denominal ptc. yλavкiówv ‘gleaming?' (Il.), but acc. to Pötscher
Glotta 72 (1994): 105-8) 'with the green, brilliant eyes of an owl', yλаvкóομαι 'bе
affected with glaucoma' (Hp.), yλaúкwµa ‘glaucoma' (Arist.), yλavoow ‘shine' (H.)
cf. Aɛvкóç: Aɛúσow. Several PNs: Пλañкoç, Пλαúкη (Il.), гλаúкwv, -íwv, etc. See
►уλavк@лç.
•ETYM Hardly connected to yaλývŋ, yɛláw. Improbably, Leumann 1950: 148ff.
(with incorrect analysis of yλavкŵлɩç; see Chantraine 1966: 193ff.). No etymology.
The word is hardly IE, as *gleh₂u-ko- would be an unusual formation; therefore, it is
rather Pre-Greek.
yλavêŵnıç [adj.] 'with the bright eyes of an owl (II.), epithet of Athena. On the mg.
Pötscher Phil. 141/1 (1997): 3-20 (not to yλavкós 'blue'). ◄GR➤
•ETYM The owl was associated with Athena. Its eyes are remarkable for their 'éclat
nocturne. Cf. Bошлç еpithet of Hera. See yλauž.
yλavvós [m.] a kind of chiton (Poll. 7, 48). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
yλavž, -kóç [f.] ‘little owl, Athene noctua' (com., Arist.). <PG?➤
•VAR LSJ gives yλaúε. Besides, there is a word yλaúε 'wart cress' (Dsc.), which is also
given as yλáž (Hdn. Gr. 1, 395, etc.).
⚫ETYM Derived from yλauкóç by the ancients, which is rejected by Thompson 1895
s.v. as a folk etymology. Thus also Pötscher Phil. 141/1 (1997): 3-20 (see on
►уλаvкшлç). Some bird names with the k-suffix are provided by Specht 1944: 204;
note лépôɩ and the many Pre-Greek words in - (see Pre-Greek on word end). The
etymology is unknown. The variation in the word for 'cress' may point to a Pre-
Greek word (which is probable anyhow), but it is not sure that ‘owl' and 'cress' have
the same origin.
ylaqupós [adj.] ‘hollow(ed)' (Il.), ‘polished, smooth, refìned, elegant (Ar.). <?►
•DER yλaqupótηs ‘neatness, elegance' (Ph.) and yλaqupía ‘id.' (Plu.). Rare is yλáqu
[n.] 'cavern' (Hes. Op. 533) and yλáow 'hollow out' (Hes. Sc. 431), also (late)
'engrave' (dayλáyaσa, see Class Rev. 12 (1898): 282 [Coptos IIP]).
⚫ETYM Dissimilated from -vλós, according to Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 223², which
would be derived (cf. Atyupóc: Atyúc) from a u-stem that is perhaps represented by
yλáqu. In the sense 'hollow out' (attested only once), yλáow may be secondary.
Later, when this verb means 'engrave', it looks like a cross between yλúow and
ypáqw. The development to 'smooth', etc. probably went via ‘engraved' and
‘polished'. DELG thinks that yλaqv- was dissimilated from *y\uqu- (see ► yλúqw);
this is doubtful.
=>
уλéлw •VAR yλéqapov. → ßλéлw, ßλέqapov.

=== page 162 ===

276
yλńvŋ [f.] ‘eyeball' (Hom.; also in a reviling sense ①164), also ‘pupil of the eye' (Ruf.
Onom., H.), metaph. 'socket of a joint' (Gal.), 'honeycomb' (AB, H.). <PG(V)►
=
•DER yλývɛa [n.pl.] 'gaudy things, trinkets' ( 192), 'stars' (Arat.); sing. yλñvos
yλývŋ (Nic.), = qáos (H.). y\nvís (IG 5(1) 1447: 9 [Messene III-IIª]) mg. unknown.
Artificial is Hell. yλv = yλývη (Hermesian.), cf. Schwyzer: 584 A. 6. Also PNs:
Пλñνoç, гλñvíç, Fλŋvó, Tλŋveús. Unclear is the mg. of τpí-yλŋva (ëpµata, Hom.);
tpíyλŋvoç also as an attribute of Hecate (Ath.).
•ETYM The basic meaning of the word is probably 'shining' (see DELG), whereas
'socket of a joint' seems secondary. One may compare yaλývη 'calm weather' and
yλaɩvoi• tà laµñpúojata tŵv repikɛqaλaiwv, olov åστépɛç ‘ornaments of head-
bands, like stars' (H.), which last word is known only from this gloss.
Comparison of yλavoí with OHG kleini ‘gleaming, elegant, fine, small', OE clæne
'clean' is quite uncertain, since we would then have to separate the other Greek
words without --. For yλývη, Lamer IF 48 (1930): 231f. assumes a basic meaning
'puppet', opting for Pre-Greek origin. If yλatvoí is indeed related, this conclusion.
seems most probable, since a/ at is frequent in Pre-Greek words (cf. ynovλλíç /
yaevláda; pace DELG, which remarks that this variation would render an
etymological comparison 'imprudent').
y入ńxwv →入ńxwv.
yλía VAR yλívn, yλíov. →yλotós.
yλīvos [m.] ‘Cretan maple' (Thphr.). <PG?>
•VAR Also yλɛĭvos.
⚫ETYM No etymology. See Amigues RPh. 73 (1999): 84.
yλíσxpos [adj.] ‘sticky, penurious' (IA). <?►
•DER Yλíσxpwv ‘niggard' (Ar.), yλɩoxpótns (Arist.), y\iopía (sch.). Denominative
yσxpαívoμa 'be sticky' (Hp.), yλíσxpaσμа ‘glue' (Нp.); у\σxpεúοµαι 'be niggardly'
(M. Ant.).
•ETYM To ►уyλíxoµaɩ, yλoɩóç. The formation is unclear; cf. Chantraine 1933: 225.
Fur.: 297 thinks the -σ- of yλíσxpos points to a Pre-Greek word. See the conclusion
under ▶yλotós.
yλotó [m.] ‘glutinous substance, gum', also the oil and sweat scraped off by athletes
(Semon.); secondarily also [adj.] (pap.). ◄EUR➤
•DER Yλowns (Pl.); уλotás ǹ какo̟é̟е½ ïллоç кai лoλvdýкτηу ларà ΣочокλεĬ
'horse with bad character and biting according to S.' (H.), yλoins, -nos [m.]
'slippery, shifty' (Hdn.; see Chantraine 1933: 267). Denominative yoιóoµai become
sticky' (Dsc.), yoάw 'twinkle with the eyes' (Hp.). Also yλía ‘glue' (EM) and yλívn
(EM) together with yλɩvwdns (Dsc.), yλíov. ɛűtovov, ioxupóv ‘well-strung, vigorous’
(H.), perhaps also уλɩãται· лαíšɛ, άлατα 'plays, deceives' (H.), yλwoai. tò railɛiv
'play' (EM). Further уλíττov. уλoιóv (H.). Verb yλíxoμa, properly stick to', so 'long
for (Hdt.), only present except for έyλžáµŋv (Pl. Com.); deverbal yλxós (H.), yλixw
(EM). The semantic development is not always clear (see DELG). See yλíσxpos.
YλUKÚÇ
277
ETYM If from yoчfós, the word agrees with Ru. (dial.) glev 'slime of fishes' (Slav.
*glěvú < *gloi-uo-). If, however, it derives from *yλouós, the word may correspond to
OE clæg 'loam, clay' (PGm. *klaiįa-). The n-suffix in yλívŋ, also in CS glěnú ‘slime' <
*gloi-no- and in Ru. glína ‘clay, loam' < *glei-neh₂-, is explained as from a nasal
present seen in OIr. glenim (*gli-neh2-mi), OHG klenan 'stick, smear'. The gloss
уλíττov (H.) is best explained, like Lat. glittus ‘sticky', with a geminated variant of
the t-suffix seen in Lat. glüten [n.] ‘glue' (< *gloi-t-en-?; it is not an old r/n-stem, as
per Benveniste 1935: 104) and Lith. glitùs ‘sticky'. yλía is compared with Ru. glej ‘clay,
loam' (< *glújú). There is no cognate for yλíxoμa, analyzed as a X-present in
Schwyzer 702. See Pok. 362f. Not all comparisons are convincing. Most words cited
are from BSI. or Gm., which suggests European substrate origin.
youpós [m.] ‘gold' (AP); cf. yloúpɛa. Xpúσɛa, Þpúyes 'golden items (Phrygian)' (H.).
<LW? Phr.>
•ETYM This word recently turned up in a Phrygian inscription from Dokimeion in
the form youpɛos (Brixhe Kadmos 43 (2004): 7-26). It clearly represents the
Phrygian reflex of PIE *glh-ro-. Cf. ►x\wpóc.
youτós [m.] 'buttock', also dual (X.) and plur. (II.). <PG?>
•VAR yλovtá (sch. Theoc. 6, 30).
•DER yλoúτia ‘id.', also medullary tubercles near the pineal gland of the brain (Gal.).
Diminutive yλoveíov?
•ETYM Compared with Sln. glûta, glúta ‘lump, swelling' (if < *glout-); further, with
OE clūd [m.] 'mass of stone, rock' and MoE cloud, which are semantically less
evident. Without t-suffix Skt. gláu- [m.] 'round lump, wen-like excrescence'; see
Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 511. Schwyzer: 501¹º and 577" considers a secondary τ(0)-suffix
(cf. лрwкτóç). The IE material (in Pok. 361) is not very convincing. If the -0- is
reliable, the word is rather Pre-Greek.
Yλuкúç [adj.] 'sweet' (Il.). <IE? *dlku- 'sweet'>
•VAR On yλukiwv, yλúσowv, yλvkútepos, yλuk(e)lótεpos see Seiler 1950: 48ff.
•DIAL Myc. de-re-u-ko perhaps /dleukos/.
•DER Yλúkwv individualising (Ar. Ec. 985), also PN, together with Пλuкóvεoç
(Heph.); yλuкóεç (Nic.). Diminutives: yλuкádiov 'sweetmeat, vinegar' (Choerob.;
for the mg. cf. doc = öt̃os), yλvkídiov (pap.). yλvkív(v)ās [m.] ‘cake made with
sweet wine' (Seleuc. apud Ath., Cretan [H.]). уλUкÚτηs (Hdt.). Denominative.
yλvкaívw (Hp.), yλúkvσµa (Lib., Sch.), with yλúkavʊiç (Thphr.), yλukavtikós (S.);
yλvкášw (LXX), etc.; yluкaσía 'family-love' (Sammelb.); yλvкí(w (Pagae, Gp.),
yλukioµós (Callix.); έy-yλúσow 'be sweet (Hdt. "yyλuкuç Dsc.; yλúžıç ‘sweet wine'
(Phryn. Com.); yλɛūšis. oivos žynµɑ <xwv> ‘wine [containing] musť (H.), cf.
уλɛŪкoç. Also yλuкɛρóç (Od.), the fem. Tλuкépa (with retracted accent) as a PN,
with Tλuképtov. With geminate: yλUккóv. уλUкú and yλúккα. ǹ yλvкútηs (H.). Plant
name уλúкη. ẞotávn tis édwdiµoç ‘an edible plant' (H.) and (strange) yλuкuµý
Yλvкúppiča (Hp. apud Gal.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 63. yλɛûkoç [n.] 'sweet wine'
(Arist.), yλɛúкɩvoç (Dsc.), yλɛvкíτηs (olvos) = yλɛñкoç (Arist. comm.); yλevkńσaç
yλevkitys
=

=== page 163 ===

278
y入ópw
'stunned by sweet wine' (H.); also yλeúkŋ = yλukútns (sch.) and yλɛūšɩç, see yλúğıç
above.
•ETYM If the word is to be connected with Lat. dulcis, we should reconstruct *λ-.
The Mycenaean form seems to confirm this idea, but the v in the root is unexpected.
On Arm. k'ałer 'sweet', see under ►ñdúç. The full grade уλɛυкoç looks like a late
innovation after the numerous neutral s-stems, but ȧyλɛvкýs (Epich.) seems to be an
old form.
yλúow [v.] 'to carve, cut out, engrave' (IA). ◄IE *gleubh- ‘cut, carve, split'>
•VAR Pres. always v; aor. yλúyaɩ, fut. yλúчw, aor. pass. ¿yúŋ/ ¿y\úqŋv, perf.
yéyaopian.
•COMP εpμoу\vôɛãov ‘statuary's shop' (Pl.); τpíу\upos, an architectonical element.
●DER yλvoń ‘carving' (D. S.), yλúµµa ‘engraved sign' (Eup.), yλvqíç, mostly -ídɛç
[pl.] 'notches, especially at the end of an arrow' (II.), chisel, etc.' (J.), cf. áкíç for the
suffix; yλúpavoç ‘knife' (h. Merc.); yλvqɛĩov (Luc.); yλuqɛús ‘carver, sculptor' (J.),
YAUQEυτns 'id.' (pаp. VI³); уλυлτρ = ylúpavos (AP), уλúлηs ‘carver' (API.),
уλvétɩкóç (Poll.). Adjective yλvoiкý (téxvij; Thrace).
*
•ETYM Germanic has the ablauting verb, e.g. OHG klioban ‘cleave, spliť, pret. kloub,
opt. klubi. Lat. glūbō ‘bark, peeľ probably represents the old full grade
-eu-. Also
related is Ru. glýboko 'deep', etc.; see Vasmer 1953 s.v. Some compare ▸yλaqupóç.
yλwpóv [?] · vóµov ‘custom, law' (H.). ◄GR?►
•ETYM Kukules 'Apx. 'Eq. 27 (suppl.) 76 compares MoGr. (Karpathos, Cyprus)
yλwpóc = x\wpóc; Xλwpovóдu ‘grass'. Differently, Latte.
yλãoσa [f.] 'tongue, language' (Il.), ‘rare, dialectal word (Arist.). <IE *glōgh-s, gen.
*glgh-ós 'point'>
•VAR Att. уλãττα; Ion. also уλáσσa (see below).
●COMP yλwσσ-apyoç ‘garrulous' (Pi.), from yλwσσ-aλyoç ‘id.'; from here σtóµapyoç,
see Strömberg 1944: 31; different (to apyós 'quick') Willis AmJPh. 63 (1942): 87ff.
•DER Yλwσσápiov (Dsc., pap.), yλwooídiov (Zen.); yλwooŋua 'point of an arrow' (A.)
retains the original mg.; see Chantraine 1933: 186), also 'rare word (Quint.),
yλwoonµatikós (D. H.); yλwoowdns 'talkative' (LXX), yλwσσóç ‘id.' (Hdn.); yλwooíç
'inflammation of the tongue' (Hippiatr.). yλwɩɩíç ‘end of a pipe, glottis' (Hero), also
a bird (Arist., see Thompson 1895 s.v.); yλwttikós (Arist.); denominative yλwττí(w
'kiss with the tongue', yλwttioµós (AP).
⚫ETYM Originally “provided with a point”, a derivation in -ta from yλwxɛç. Ion.
yλáσσa points to a paradigm *y\wx-, *yλax- which can be explained as nom. *glōgh-
s, gen. *glg-ós. (see Beekes 1969: 246).
yλwxɛs [f.pl.] ‘beard of corn' (Hes. Sc. 398). <IE *glōgh-s, *glg"-ós ‘point'>
•DER See ▶ylwσσa. Also yλwxic, acc. yλwxiv, gen. -ïvoç (Hdn. 2, 431, 437) [f.] ‘end of
the yoke-strap, barb of an arrow, etc.' (II.). Thence yλwxivwtós (Paul. Aeg.).
⚫ETYM Yλwxiç continues *-ih₂-s, with different development before a consonant than
word-finally (in yλwooα). There are no certain cognates. The connection with CS
yvotépa
279
glogo 'thorn' (Bezzenberger & Fick BB 6 (1881): 237) is doubted by Machek Ling.
Posn. 2 (1950): 145.
yvα0μós [m.] 'jaw' (Hom.). <PG>
•VAR yvá os [m.] (Hp.). Note yvauαí (H. acc. to LSJ, but not in Latte).
•DER PN of a parasite гváðwv, with гvalóvɛtoç, гvaewvidŋs, гvawvápiov (Plu.).
Denominative yva0ów 'hit the jaw' (Phryn. Com.).
•ETYM уvaеµóç is formed from yváðos, after λaчuós, ßpexµós, óóðaλµóç. The word
has always been compared with Lith. žándas ‘id.', Latv. zuôds ‘chin, sharp side'.
However, the Lith. acute accentuation either points to a laryngeal, or it may have
been caused by a following d (Winter's Law). In neither case can we connect the
Greek word: a preform *gnh₂d"- would have given **yvātos, and *gnh₂ed"- gives
**yavabos; therefore, the Lithuanian, with its entirely different structure, cannot be
cognate. Actually, -vă- cannot be derived from any other PIE form either, and the
word must therefore be non-IE, i.e. Pre-Greek (this also excludes further connection
with yévuç, as the latter is of course IE). Macedonian кávadot σlayóvεç, yváеoι (H.)
has often been compared as well; it may well be related, but only as a Pre-Greek
word (perhaps it stands for *кvadot with epenthesis, see Fur.: 378). кávadoɩ has also
been connected with кvwdwv, кvwdaλov.
yvaµntoúç [adj.] · xaλvoús ‘bits or bridles' (H.). ◄PG➤
•VAR Also yλauчoi. xalivoì otóµatoç 'bits or bridles for the mouth' (H.).
•ETYM The word is typically Pre-Greek: first, it displays the variation л/у (see Fur.:
263) as well as v/λ (see Fur.: 388), and second, the structure yvaC- cannot be IE (see
also under yváе).
yváµлtw [v.] ‘to bend' (Il.). <PG>
•VAR Aor. yváμчaɩ, verbal adj. yvauntós.
·
•DER уναμлτηр 'jaw' (Androm. apud Gal.), cf. yvataí s.v. yaλai; yváµyıç
‘bending' (EM). Without second nasal (dissimilated?) yvántɛ• káµëtɛi and yvartós
= уνаμлτóç (Н.).
•ETYM The etymology of уváµëτw is unknown. Although it is commonly assumed
that it was influenced by кáшлτш (cf. кváµлτw; e.g. Frisk s.v.), yváμлτw does not
have the к- of кáµëɩw, nor can the -v- have been taken from there. An Indo-
European etymology seems excluded because уvaшл- cannot have a PIE preform
(see under yváеμoc). However, an alternation yv-/ к- (as in уváµлtw : кáµлtw) is
not typical for Pre-Greek either. If the insertion of the v could be explained, we could
perhaps assume voicing of kv- to yv-. Cf. also Guilleux RPh. 70 (1996) s.v. уváшлτw.
уváлτw •VAR уváqaλλov, yvaqεÚS. → Kvántw.
yvńolos →yiyvoial.
Tvíqwv →Kviqwv.
yvópos →8vópos.
уvoτέpa [f.] the fish ẞaλλwτn, Ballota nigra (Ps.-Dsc. 3, 103). ◄PG(V)►

=== page 164 ===

280
yvúеos
yóda
281
•VAR Also yvwτέpa.
•ETYM Fur.: 370 compares άyvwτídɩov, a variant with a prothetic vowel. Thus the
word is Pre-Greek.
yvúðos [n.] ‘pit, hollow' (Lyc.). <PG?>
•VAR Also msc. (H., also yvulós).
•ETYM Formation like ßáðos, ßv¤ós. Note yvvqaí. váлaɩ ‘vales' (H.). Fur.: 390 points
to σкúчoç / σкúеoç. The word is probably Pre-Greek.
yvú [adv.] ‘with bent knee' (Il.; Erbse Glotta 32 (1953): 240ff.). ◄IE *ģenu- ‘knee'>
•ETYM From ►yóvu with zero grade and analogical -ε after лúž, λáž, etc. (Schwyzer:
620). Although the zero grade of yóvu does not recur in уvʊл-, contrary to
common belief, it is in fact found in лрóуvυ ‘kneeling; utterly' (Il.), where,
admittedly, the aspiration is not well explained (cf. Av. fra-šnu- 'with the knees
forward'; Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 585). The zero grade *gnu probably occurred in the IE
paradigm of 'knee', e.g. Hitt. ganut [instr.sg.] and Av. žnubiiō [dat.-abl.pl.].
уvʊл- [v.] 'to be depressed' (Men.). <PG>
•VAR Also уvʊл(ε)ɩ-. уvúлwvεç. στvyvoí, katŋöɛïç, äτolµo, napɛµévoɩ. kai
µaλakoí, áñò toũ ɛiç yóvu neлtwкévαɩ ‘hateful, downcast, spiritless, those who have
been passed over; also faint-hearted; after “being on one's knees” (H.) with the
verbal forms yvʊлóvá (leg. yvʊлоvл) and from *уvʊлów: ¿уvʊлwµέvov.
taλaírwpov. katŋôés ‘miserable, downcast and έуvuлáðŋ · tpvqặ. kai tò ¿vavtíov
'with delicacy; also the opposite' (H.) and кατεууулшµεvov (Plu. Mor. 753c), -µέvwç
(Men. 857). With уvʊлɩ-: уvʊлtεïv. άoðεvεïv. µаλαкíεσα to be weak, show
weakness' (H.) and уvʊлτшv. (cod. yvvwv) vwėpaívwv ‘sluggish' (H.). From
*уvʊлτów: кατεуννлτãσðα = кατεστvуvãσðaι (H. s.v. уvúлετоι). With anaptyctic
vowel: уvúлετо• έкτεταμεvo, dɛɩλoí, ǎllo de кατηqεis 'stretched prostrate,
wretched; miserable' (H.). Here also уvʊлɛσóу· ápyóv, oi dè ěkλuτov ‘brilliant;
buoyant' (H.) with interchange τ/ σ.
●ETYM Fur.: 315 has correctly observed (following Latte; see now LSJ Supp. s.v.
ууʊлτów) that this is a separate verb with the variants уvʊл- and уvʊлт-, as well as a
variant YVUNET- with anaptyxis; the variation л/ л, etc. is well known in Pre-Greek
(Fur.: 307ff; Pre-Greek section 5.5).
yva̸pɩµoç •VAR yvwpí¶w. →yıyvWOKW.
yvwtÓ¢ =yíyvWOKW.
yoάw [v.] 'to groan, weep' (Il.). <IE? *g(") ou(H)- 'call, cry'>
•VAR Fut. yońσoμai (late -ǹow), aor. yoñσaɩ (Amorgos), isolated preterite yóov [3pl.]
Z 500 (see Chantraine 1942: 392').
•DER yóns, -ŋtos [m.] 'sorcerer' (IA), yoŋτɩкóç (Arist.), yoŋτɛúw 'bewitch' (Pl.), with
yoŋteía, yońtevµa (Pl.), yońtevois (Plot.), yoŋtevtikós (Poll.), yoŋtɛútpia (Eust.);
fem. yoñtıç (AP). yóos [m.] ‘lament' (Il.). yoɛpós ‘wailing' (A.), analogical yoŋpós
(Lyc.), yowɗns ‘id.' (Pl.), also yoɛdvós (A.), after oloqudvós, oµepdvós, etc. (cf.
Schulze 1933a: 398); also yoημwv (API.).
•ETYM Like ẞoáw, μνкáομаι, etc., yoáw is probably a deverbative intensive; yóoç is
deverbal. We may compare OHG gi-kewen 'call', OE ciegan ‘id.' < PGm. *kaujan, the
Skt. intensive jó-guv-e 'speak out loudly', as well as an r-derivation in OCS govor
'noise' with govoriti 'make noise' (Ru. also 'speak'), see Derksen 2008 s.v. Pace
DELG, the connection between yoάw and Boάw is attractive. The different initials
can be explained from paradigmatic split, i.e., an original *g"- was lost before a zero
grade *gu- in the preform of yoάw; the semantic differentiation can easily be
secondary.
yóyypos [m.] 1. ‘conger eel' (Antiph.); 2. ‘tubercular disease in olive trees' (Thphr.).
<PG?>
•DER yoyypíov (sch. Opp. H. 1, 113); also yoyypwdns (H.: yoyуpódŋs τñs ¿λaíaç
EкQUσiç as an explanation of yóyypoc); also yoуypoɛns (Arist.); yoyypovn
'excrescence on the neck' (Hp.; cf. Xopás ‘id.', from xoipos 'pig'; suffix like in
kpotvn).
ETYM The botanical-medical term is just a metaphorical use of yóyypos = 'conger-
eel': the fish is round, thick, and voracious, like in кapкívoç, Lat. cancer. The fish
name is often considered to be Pre-Greek (e.g. Fohalle 1925: 157ff.; cf. Kretschmer
Glotta 16 (1928): 166). Pace DELG, yoyyúλoç is not related. Lat. conger (gonger) is
borrowed from Greek.
yoyyúчw [v.] ‘to murmur, grumble' (LXX). <ONOM➤
•DIAL Ionic acc. to Phryn.
•DER уoуучσμóç (Anaxandr.), yóyyvσis (LXX); agent noun yoyyvoτńs (Ep. Jud.,
Thd.), yóyyuσos (Thd.; see Chantraine 1933: 435); уoууʊστɩкóç (Erot.). In H. also
yoyуpúчεv and yoyуpúσa ws xoipos qwvñσa 'sound like a pig', after ypúεɩv.
•ETYM An onomatopoeia without certain cognates. Skt. gangūyati ‘cry loudly',
guñjati 'hum' are only parallel onomatopoeic formations, and the same is true of
► yayyaivɛiv.
yoyyúλos [adj.] 'round' (A.). <?>
⚫DER Substantivized (with change of stress) yóyyulos “the round one” = 'kóvduλoç,
the clenched fist' (sch.), ‘öλuvos, wild fig' (Nic.). yoyyulis (com.), yoyyúλŋ (Str.)
'turnip', also 'round bread' (Ar.), yoyyvλíðɩov ‘pill' (medic.); yoyyvládŋs ‘round
(sch.); denominative yoyyúλw [v.] 'to make round' (conj. Porson Ar. Th. 56 for
yoyyuλíw after yoyyú\<\>ɛv• σvoτpέqɛv 'to condense, become compacť H.);
yoyyvλɛúµata. otρоууvλɛúµατα ‘globular things' (H.). Isolated yoyyvláτns ‘who
hurls balls of fire'(?) epithet of Zeus (Lyc.).
•ETYM Next to yoyyúlos, we find στpoуyúλos 'id.' (cf. also ȧyкúλos, kaµñúλos with
similar meaning). The etymology is unknown: a connection with ON kokkr 'clump'
(< PGm. *kanku- < *gongu-) is highly doubtful, as is the comparison with Lith.
gungulys 'ball'; nor does a relationship with yɩyyis, yɩyyíðtov ‘a kind of turnip' seem
probable.
.
yóða [n.pl.] · évtɛpa. Makɛdóveç ‘intestines (Maced.)' (H.). <?►

=== page 165 ===

282
yoSãv
•ETYM yóda has been compared with MLG kūt 'weak parts of an animal' and Skt.
gudá- 'intestine, vagina' (Pok. 393), but this connection is problematic because the
required root structure with two unaspirated voiced stops was not allowed in Proto-
Indo-European. Latte reads yóλa instead, connecting xoλác, xóλı. His suggestion is
adopted by Fur. 141, who also adds кóλov 'id.'.
yodāv [v.] · kλaiɛv. Kúлpio 'to cry (Cypr.)' (H.). <?>
•VAR yodóv. yónta ‘sorcerer' (H.).
•ETYM The reconstruction * Fod- has been assumed, but is not certain. Connection
with avon is impossible. Latte reads *yoāvai.
yoɛdvóc ⚫VAR yoɛpós. → yoάw.
yoīta [?] · olç‘sheep' (H.). ◄?►
•VAR Cf. yoτáv. vv. Maкɛdóvɛç 'wild swine (Maced.)' (H.).
•ETYM Fick BB 29 (1905): 200 read the word as us and conjectures that it is from you
you, the grunting of a pig (AP 11, 327). This is a mere guess.
.
yolová [f.] x\wpá. ĥ yoλová ‘pale; name of a planť (H.). <PG?►
•ETYM The suggestion of Grošelj Slavistična Revija 4 (1951): 263f. to connect OCS
zeleno 'green', etc. is phonologically impossible (see Xλón). Although Latte assumes
that this entry (and the following, yoloµévŋ. Botávη) is corrupt, we should rather
take the form at face value: it is obviously related to yoλová, the variation o
the vocalism pointing to Pre-Greek origin.
.
yoλúpɩov [n.] · kéλvqoç. oikeĭov Tapavτívois ‘pod, shell (Tarantian)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Only worthless guesses have been made.
yóµos [m.] · Zwµós ‘soup' (H.). <?>
~
o in
•ETYM Latte reads Owµóç. von Blumenthal 1930: 15¹ thinks the word is Messapian,
related to xéw (from *gh (o)u-mo-). There are mere hypotheses.
yóµqos [m.] 'peg, bolt, nail' (Od.); also a fish name (gloss.; Strömberg 1943: 36), ‘tooth'
(H.). <IE *ģemb¹- ‘bite', gomb¹o- ‘cutting tooth'>
●DER yoµqios (ódwv) ‘molar' (IA), yoµíτŋs ‘kind of styrax' (Aët.), youчápɩov fish
name (sch.). Denominative youqóo̟µai, -ów ‘to fasten with bolt or nails' (A.) with
yóμчwσ (Gal.), yóμoшμα 'framework, peg' (Plu.); yoдowτηp 'shipbuilder' (AP),
youчwτηpiov 'tenon' (Delos III³); you wτiêǹ τéxvη ‘shipbuilding' (Pl.). yoµqiá¶w ‘to
have toothache, gnash the teeth' (LXX) with youqiaoµós (LXX) and yoµqiaσıç
(Dsc.).
•ETYM Old word for ‘tooth', probably ‘cutting tooth': Skt. jámbha-, Alb. dhëmb, OCS
zo̟bo, Latv. zùobs, ToA kam, ToB keme. Cf. кóμßovs. ódóvtas yoµqiovs (H.),
Illyrian? (Krahe IF 60 (1952): 297). Forms with a metaph. meaning include OHG
kamb 'comb' and Lith. žambas ‘sharp side'. On the deviant meaning in Greek (from
the use of the cutting teeth as pegs), see Porzig 1954a: 184f. Verbs include Skt.
iterative jambháyati 'grind' and Lith. žembiù, žeňbti 'cut' and OCS zębą 'tear up'; on
the meanings, see Narten KZ79 (1965): 255ff.
yovń •VAR yóvos. → yiyvojai.
yopyupa
283
yóvu [n.] 'knee' (Il.); also 'joint of plants' (Hdt.; cf. Strömberg 1937: 101). <IE *ģenu,
gonu 'knee'>
•VAR Gen. (*yóvf-atos >) yóvatoç, epic Ion. yoúvatos, epic also youvós (< *yovf-
ós), plur. yóvata, yoúvata, epic also yoûva.
●DER yovatwdŋs ‘with joints' (Thphr.); denominative yovvášoμa ‘clasp the knees'
(as a suppliant) (Il.) with yoúvaσμа (Lyc.), youvaoμós (Eust.), also yovvóoμa ‘id.';
уovaτóoμα get joints' (Thphr.), yovaτí(w 'bend the knee' (Cratin.).
⚫ETYM yóvu derives from the PIE word for 'knee': Skt. jánu, Av. zānu-drājah-, MP
zānūk (pointing to PIE *o, lengthened by Brugmann's Law); Hitt. genu, Lat. genū,
ToA kanwe-m, ToB keni-ne 'knees [du.]', Arm. cun-r, plur. cun-g-k'; Gm. words like
Go. kniu < PGm. *knew-a-, with the zero grade from the gen. *gneu-s (for the zero
grade *gnu- cf. further ►yvú, s.v.). On Hom. Oɛwv έv yoúvaσɩ keĭtaɩ, see Schwyzer
1923b: 283ff. Cf. also ywvía. Cf. also ▸iyvún.
yoos →yoáw.
yopyós [adj.] 'grim, fierce, terrible' of look, gaze (A.), later also 'vigorous, lively'. <?>
•VAR Topyú, acc.pl. Topyoús (Hes.)
COMP yopуww, уoруwлós (A.).
●DER_yopyótŋs ‘rapidity' (Hermog.), yopyía = agilitas (gloss.), denominative
yopуóoμa 'to be spirited', of horses (X.), yopyεúw (pap., Sm., H.).
Topyw, -oñç [f.] (II.) name of a female monster with a petrifying look, whence Topy-
ɛíŋ kewaλń (Il.); on the formation see Schulze 1892: 254; plur. mostly Topyóvɛs
(Hes.), with new singulars Topyóva (acc.), etc. (E.), whence Topyóvelos (A. Pr. 793,
etc.), Topyóvn (Hdn.), Topуovódns (sch.) and the plant names Topуóvɛlov and
Topуoviás (Ps.-Dsc.; see Strömberg 1940: 101). Also Topуádɛç (S. Fr. 163), explained
by H. as aλádɛç; and Topуídɛç. ai nкɛavidɛç (H.). PN Topуvíwv (302) and
Topyías with Topyíɛtos 'Gorgias-like' (X.) and yopytáčw 'to speak like G.' (Philostr.).
•ETYM According to Frisk, yopyós is not related to OIr. garg(g) 'raw, wild', OCS
groza ‘shiver' (as argued by Osthoff 1901: 44ff.), nor to Arm. karcr ‘hard (pace
Pedersen KZ 39 (1906): 379). With Topyó primary to yopyós, Leumann 1950: 154f.
took the former to be a back-formation from yopуwy (yopу@лs), уорушлóç (on an
implausible connection with yopyupa, s.v., see Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 663).
yopyupa [f.] 'underground drain', sometimes used as a prison (Hdt. 3, 145, EM, H.); cf.
ápdália. toùs rvėµévas twv kepaɑµídwv, oüç vɩɩ yopyúpaç kaλoñσiv 'the base of
roof-tiles, which some call "yopyúpas" (H.) which LSJ translates 'water-pot, trough'.
Cf. also kopкóбpva. údpópva 'water-course', perhaps to be read as *кopкópɛα.
údpop(p)óa (Fur.: 141, which would fit the word order). ◄PG(V)►
VAR Yɛpyupa (Alcm. 132); accent unknown.
•DIAL KOρxupéα (Corc. IIª). Cf. yépyɛpos. ßpóyxos (H.) [DELG].
•DER yopyúptov ‘subterranean channel (LSJ Supp. Sparta).
•ETYM Perhaps related to yapyapiw, as per DELG. yopyupa, with all its variants, is
definitely of Pre-Greek origin: variations к/ Y/ X and ɛ/ o; ending -έa (see Chantraine

=== page 166 ===

284
youvós
1933: 91f.); suffix -up- like in yéqupa (see Pre-Greek). Thus also Neumann 1961: 91, on
words for drainage, etc.
youvós [m.] ‘hill' (II.), acc. to EM and Orion = \òs tóños ‘elevated place'. <PG(V)►
⚫DER From Пóvvoç, *Toñvoç perhaps the name Touvɛús B 748, see Boßhardt 1942:
111f.
⚫ETYM youvós is not related to the Thessalian PNs гóvvoç, гóvvot, and lovvoσσα
(the alleged *yovƑos would probably not yield the attested forms, see Buck 1955: §54),
nor to yóvu, with which it was compared since antiquity (EM; equally
unconvincing is the comparison with Ru. gumnó ‘threshing-floor' see Derksen 2008
s.v.). We should rather compare yovos (H.) and xwvos (H.), which implies that the
word is Pre-Greek in view of the variation. Fur.: 138 mentions additional material
from Sardinia (Gonnos, Gonni), Berber, Basque, and Caucasian.
youpoç [m.] a cake (Sol. 38, 3). <PG(V)►
•ETYM The word can be compared with ǎyyoupos. ɛidos éλakoûvtos ‘'kind of cake',
with prothetic vowel and prenasalization (cf. кúvwy/ ȧyxúvwy [which is not from
*ava-!]). Therefore, it is of Pre-Greek origin. Perhaps further connected to ‣ yūpis,
▶ yupívn.
youτápiov [n.] 'tomb' (inscr. Phrygia). <Lyd.>
•ETYM This is probably the same word as yoúvτη (inscr. Lydia III³). Probably
somehow connected with Hitt. kuntarra- (Neumann 1961: 66f.); from Hurrit.
kuntari-?
youtτãτov [n.] a cake (Chrysipp. Tyan. apud Ath. 14, 647c). <LW Lat.>>
•ETYM From Lat. guttātus, -um ‘sprinkled' (Martialis), in turn from gutta 'drop'.
ypάai [f.pl.] marine animal (Peripl. M. Rubr. 38). <(LW) Ind.►
•ETYM An Indian word; cf. Skt. gráha-, grāhá- ‘crocodile, alligator, snake, etc.'. See
Goossens Le Muséon 59 (1946): 621ff.
ypáßav [f.] · okaqíov, þóðpov ‘small bowl or basin, hole' (H.). <LW Gm.>
.
•VAR MoGr. (Laconia, etc.) ypáẞα = τpwyλŋ 'hole', often in place names, see
Georgacas ByzZ 41 (1941): 360f., Rohlfs 1930: 461.
•ETYM Kretschmer Arch. slav. Phil. 27 (1905): 234 states that the word is from Gm.,
e.g. Go. and OHG graba 'ditch'. Or is it perhaps from/via Illyrian? See also
Hubschmid ZRPh. 77 (1961): 432. Cf. ►ypáẞɩov.
ypáẞiov [n.] 'torch, oakwood' (Stratt.; also S. Fr. 177 [cod. ypaqious]?). <EUR?>
⚫ETYM From an (Illyrian?) word *grabu for 'beech, oak', seen in U Grabovius, epithet
of Jupiter; the word is also found in MoGr. ypáßos (Epirus), yάßpos (Arcadia).
Further compared with Ru. grab ‘hornbeam', etc. and OPr. wosi-grabis. See Vasmer
s.v., Georgacas ByzZ 41 (1941): 361f., and Porzig 1954a: 148. These comparisons are
rejected by Garbini 1969: 391ff.; cf. also Restelli 1969: 820.
Fur.: 169 compares yoẞpiau pavоí, λаµлτñрεç 'bright, torches' (H), which cannot be
ignored; he concludes that the word is a non-IE substrate word, perhaps from the
Balkans. See кpáßßatos.
ypaĩa •VAR ypäïç. →ypañç.
ypápw
285
ypáñıç [adj.] ‘ò èpputɩdwµévos, wrinkled' (EM), ‘cast slough of a serpent' (H.), in S.
Ichn. 177 the mg. is unclear; name of a bird (H.). <?>
•DER уpάлτηs 'wrinkled' (Eust.), ypañívηs. olvos τpaxúc ‘harsh wine' (H., EM). Not
here, as per Frisk, ypatóoμat 'become old'; see yρauç.
ETYM Unknown. Not related to уpauç, уñрaç. DELG suggests that уpáлç is a
hypocoristic of yрáлτηs 'wrinkleď' cited by Eust., which may derive from ypáqw.
ypáσos [m.] 'smell of a goat' (Ar.). <GR?>
•DER ypάowv 'id.' (M. Ant.; cf. yvá0wv beside yváðos, Leumann Sprache 1 (1949):
207¹³), ypaowvia = ypáσos (Archig. Med.).
•ETYM ypáσoç is supposed to be a word for ‘he-goat' = “gnawer” from ▶ypáw 'to
gnaw'. On -σo-, see Chantraine 1933: 433ff.
ypaus [f.] 'old woman' (II.); a sea-crab (Artem., H., see Strömberg 1943: 95, thus also
ypaĩa [Epich.]); said of the scum of boiled milk (Ar.). ◄IE *greh₂-iu- ‘old woman'▷
•VAR Gen. ypãós (Schwyzer 574).
•DIAL Ion. ypηüs, ypnūs.
•DER Enlarged to ypaĩa (Od., also adj. ‘old') < *ypāƑ-tă; coll. ypaιßía ǹ ypaɩtía (i. e.
урачƑíα). лаvýуvpiç. Tapavtīvo 'assembly, festival (Tarent.)' (H.); see Scheller 1951:
32. Another enlargement in ypäïç, -ídos (Charito), Dor. уpañɩç (Call.).
From ypaus: ypawns like old women' (Chrysipp.); from ypaĩa: ypaιoléas.
лоуηрàçóλεеpíaç ypaías 'poor and wretched old women' (H.) (cf. the adj. in
-óλns, but see DELG; the translation ỏλɛ¤píaç is folk-etymological).
Denominative verb ypaïw 'to remove the ypaus from the milk' (Ar.); from ypaĩa:
уpaιóoμa 'to get old', of wine (AP).
•ETYM From the root *gerh₂- in yέpwv, yέpaç. Probably from *ypα-v- < *ģreh₂-iu-,
with -v- like in vúç 'son' (plur. viεs); the element -iu- has nothing to with *h₂oiu-
(see aiwv), pace Szemerényi. See ▶yépwv, yépaç, ▸yñpaç.
ypáqw [v.] 'to scratch, write' (Il. [aor. only]). <IE *gerb¹- 'scratch, carve'>
•VAR Aor. ypával.
•DIAL Ypóow (Melos).
⚫COMP Often with prefix: ȧvα-, επ-, συv-, etc. Many compounds with -ypáqoç as a
second member (e.g. Aoyoypáqos 'writer of speeches'); the proparoxytona are
passive, e.g. aypapos 'not written'.
•DER уpaлτúɛç [f.pl.] 'scratching' (w 229); ypaqń ‘id.' also 'prosecution' (IA; ypoqá
Epid.), ypaqıкóç; ypáqɛa [n.pl.] = ypáµµaτa (Arcad., El.); ypáqŋµa = ypáµµa (AB);
ypauun 'line' (Pi.), уpaµµкóç 'linear, geometric' (Gal.), ypaμμaños ‘id.' (Dam.),
уpaμчwбns (Thphr.); уpaшшστnр a chirurgical instrument (medic., cf. ẞpaxiov-
ɩστýp) and уpαµµστós (Eust; ypaµµíw uncertain in Eust. 633, 63). ypáµµα, plur.
-ɑɑ ‘line, writing, letter' (IA); also ypáσσµa (Arc.; < *ypáq-σµa), ypá¤µata (Arg.)
and уpóллατα (Aeol., Balbilla); see Schwyzer 317 add. 1 and 523f. On dɩáуpaµµа
Bikerman Rev. de phil. 64, 295ff. From уpáµµα: уpaµµátiov (Luc.), ypaµµápiov
'weight of 2 oboles' (Aët.); уpаμμaτεúç 'writer, secretary' (Att.) with уpaµµаτεúш

=== page 167 ===

286
Ypavaiog
and уpaµµ¤τεt̃ov ‘writing table, etc.', уpaµµατ(ε)íðɩov; уpaµµаτεía 'secretariate'
(pap., Plu.); ypaшμτкó, уaкúμα (AP); fem. ypaµµatiký (téxvn)
‘grammar, etc.'; yраμμаτστηs 'secretary, teacher' (IA), уρаµµατíчw (rare; Herod.,
Messen., Boeot.); уρаµµατστкý ‘elementary education' (Phld.). ypaµµós 'writing'
(Hdn.). ypaqɛús (Dor. Arc. also ypoqɛúc) ‘painter, writer' (Emp.), ypaqɛĩov ‘writing
instrument' (Arist.); уpaлτηp 'writer' (AP), ypatɛús (sch.). ypaqis 'slate-pencil'
(Pl.; ypopis Epid.); уpapíσкoç medical instrument (Cels.). εлуpáßdηy 'scraping the
surface' (II.) shows the original meaning. Desiderative deverbative payɛíw (gloss.).
⚫ETYM All forms can be explained from the root form ypaq- < *grbh-. The principally
Doric variant ypoq- (ypoqá, -ís, -ɛús, -ɛúw, σúyypoqos, etc.) does probably not
represent old o-vocalism, but rather an inner-Greek variant of pa from a zero grade
(DELG). Outside Greek, we have PIE *gerb-, seen in Gm. (OE ceorfan 'cut, carve',
MHG kerben 'id.'), and further in Slav., e.g. OCS žrěbii (*gerb"-) ‘allotment' (prop.
*carved stick??). ►уpuppãσat is problematic.
ypaчaios [m] = kápaẞoç 'crab' (Diph. Siph. apud Ath. 3, 106d). <PG>
⚫ETYM Not from ypάow, as per Chantraine RPh. 91 (1965): 211-214. As Frisk states,
the origin is unknown; perhaps it is a Mediterranean word. He compared кápaẞos
(Epich.). Fur.: 123, 154 adduced other forms for 'beetle' and 'crab': Lat. scarabaeus,
which presupposes *σкapaßaños (note the agreement with our word), σкopóßulos
(from *σкopẞ-), and σкopлíoç. So we have prothetic *s- and the variations α/ o, ß/ л.
All of these point to Pre-Greek origin. Fur. assumes that ypay- stands for *yapy-
(but the is difficult). This gives a word (s) kar P-. Furthermore, he compares
кapáuẞioç (Fur.: 109), кapßápɛoι· кápaẞoι H.; кapaßídɛç (169); кηpaopic and
KεpáµßvĚ, Kεpáµẞηλov (with the interchange ε/ a and prenasalization). Frisk points
to the “allgemeine Ähnlichkeit mit ital. (g)ravosta, nhd. Krebs, Krabbe und anderen
germ. Wörtern ebenso wie mit кápaßos”. See ‣ kápaẞos.
▶
ypów [v.] 'to gnaw, eat' (Call. Fr. 200). <IE? *gres- ‘gnaw, eat'>
•VAR Only impf. ypaɛ. Athem. ipv. уpáσ (Cypr.), them. (contracted) ypã. qáyɛ.
Kúлρo ‘eat! (Суpr.)' (H.). Also ypαívεɩv. σíε ‘eat' (H.).
•DER уpáστɩç [f.] 'green fodder' (pap., Hippiatr.); more common кpáʊtiç (Ar.),
probably due to folk etymological connection with another (unknown) word;
уpaστíw 'feed at grass' (Gp., Hippiatr.), ypaσtiσµóç (Hippiatr.); кpaσtíšoµai ‘graze'
(Sophr.), кpατýpιov ‘mangar' (Poll.). Also ypáσσ (PHamb. 39 II, II³). With prefix
кaуpā. кαταчaуãç. Σaλauívio (H.), see Bechtel 1921, 1: 421 and 446.
⚫ETYM The word has been compared with Skt. grásate 'devour' (in which case ypáw
would be from *grs-e/o-). Cf. also ypáσoç. Connection with yáyypaiva, ypwvoc
is improbable. Cf. ► yaστńp.
yonyopéw →èyeipw.
ypñvos →àypnvóv.
ypivtns →pīvos.
уpчлoç [m.] 'fishing basket, creel' (AP, Artem.). <PG(V)►
E
Ypóopos
287
•VAR = ypĭqoç [m.] (Plu.), mostly metaph. 'riddle' (Ar.; see Chantraine 1928: 20),
secondarily as adj. ‘obscure' (Hdn. Epim. 16).
⚫DER ypɩpóτns 'obscurity' (Hdn.). уpɩлεúç 'fisherman' (Sapph.), уpɩлεúw (Zonar.),
уρɩлïç (τéxvη, AP); уpíлwv ‘'id.' (AP); denominative уρɩлέw (Syria), уpıлíw (Lib.,
H.), урíлouа (EM, Zonar.). yptowns 'enigmatic' (Luc.), ypiqɛúw 'give a riddle'
(Ath.). Also уpлшµεva· σvvελкóµeva kaì oraoµwdŵç ovµñaðoñvta, oi dè έyyíčovτa
'contracting and undergoing spasms; approaching' (H.); yɛypıqŵç. ó toĩs xepoìv
ȧλɩɛúwv ‘fishing with bare hands'. Several lemmata in H.
•ETYM The variation π/ Q is typical for Pre-Greek words; such an origin for a
fisherman's word is quite understandable. Comparison with MHG krebe [m.]
'basket', ON kjarf, kerfi [n.] ‘bundle' (from *e) or Skt. grapsa- ‘bundle' must therefore
be rejected. There is no reason to connect the word with ▸ yέppov.
ypiowv, -wvos [m.] ‘swine' (Hdn. Gr. 2, 249, H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Although ypiowv is generally considered to be onomatopoeic, cf. ypūλoç s.v.
► уpu (and ►уpoµác), this lacks support.
•
ypɩãσðaɩ [v.] ypáчɛɩv, oi dè žúεɩv кαì áµúσσεɩv. Aάкwvɛç 'to write; to scratch,
scrape (Lacon.)' (H.); уpιowµεvα àλуnµατα 'sufferings' (Hp. Prorrh. 1, 100, Erot.);
the definiens ypачóµεvα, ½ εлаvελоúμεvа 'being written or unrolled in H. is
unclear. <?>
⚫ETYM ►σkapiqάoμat has been compared. Perhaps also connected are ►ȧypɛiova,
ȧypion 'harrow'.
ypoµác, -ádoc [f.] · úç naλaiá, σкpóα 'old swine' (H.). <ONOM>
⚫VAR Also ypóμчic, -toc [f.] (Hippon., H.), ypóµqaɩva [f.].
•DER ypoμчáčw ‘grunt' (gloss.).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic words. Cf. ypú(w, and also στoµášш 'speak loudly'. Lat.
scrōfa 'sow' is perhaps a loanword from Greek. Note the absence of the nasal (i.e.
prenasalization?).
ypóvðoç [m.] ‘fìsť (PAmh. 2, 141, 10, IVP, sch., gloss.), ‘breadth of a hand (Aq.), also
grasp, spoke of a machine'. <?>
•DER Ypóvdwv. ávapvonors, ñv pútnv uavdávovolv av入ntai Kai Kidapiotaí
'upward stream of air, which flute players learn first' (H., Poll.), with which was may
perhaps connect уpovеwvεúεται (cod. -Оov-)· ечμоυται 'becomes angry' (H.).
⚫ETYM The suffix -00ç used to be distinguished (cf. µaσðóç, ßpóxƉoç, Kúσłoç), which
admitted comparisons with ON krumma [f.] 'hand', OHG krimman 'press', and Lat.
gremium lap, womb'. Lith. grùmdau 'von oben gewaltsam stoßend stopfen' belongs
to the productive iterative-intensives in -dau (cf. grumiù, grùmti ‘press into, fill'). All
of these comparisons, however, are quite uncertain.
ypóσqoç [m.] 'throwing spear' (Plb.); oi уpoσчoµáxoɩ 'javelin-fighters' = Lat. velites
(Plb.). <?>
•VAR кpóσqoç (Eust.).
ETYM A technical term borrowed from an unknown source; note that the word is
late.

=== page 168 ===

288
ypi
i
yÚadov
289
ypu [n.]? usually with negation: a 'small quantity', often of sounds (Ar.); acc. to sch.
Ar. Pl. 17 of the grunting of a swine (clearly onomat.); = ó úлò τ Ŏvuxi púлoç 'the
dirt under the nail' (H.; also ypúε) and = ypúτη; a small coin (Suid.). <ONOM➤
•VAR Indeclinable.
•DER Ypúw, aor. ypúžaɩ ‘grunt' (Ar.), уpvσµós (Agathocl.); ypuλoç, expressive
gemination púλos ‘pigleť (Ath.), metaph. ‘eel (Diph. Siph.; because of its
thickness and sound, see Strömberg 1943: 68f.); ypuλiwv. Xoĩpos ‘pig' (H.); as a PN
гpuλoç, -wv, etc. (Bechtel 1917b: 581); ypūλíw (Ar.; ypuλλíw rejected by Phryn.);
уpūλσµóç (Arist.); ypúλλn vwv qwvn 'sound of pigs' (H.). yoyуpúчay, yoуpúσ
(H.) were influenced by yoyуúčεv.
•ETYM For onomatopoeic ypú(w, compare Lat. grunniō, grundiō, OE grun(n)ian,
OHG MOHG grunzen. A difficult comparison is that with ypwvádes. Oǹleiai oveC
'female pigs' (H.), which has been thought to represent the Laconian pronunciation
with [u]; cf. MoGr. youpoúvɩ 'swine' (is yέwva H. an error?) and see Kretschmer
Glotta 13 (1924): 135. Cf. further ➤ypúλλos 'caricature' and ypuλλioµós a dance.
Ypúλos [m.] 'caricature' (Plin. HN 35, 114). <?>
•DER ypuλo-ypaqέw ‘draw caricatures' (Phld.). Also a dance (Phryn. PS p. 58 B.);
thus also ypuλoμóç, with уpúλλoç = ó ópxoúµεvos (ibid.).
⚫ETYM Deemed an Egyptian (i.e. Hellenistic) word by Phrynichos; see Latte Glotta 34
(1955): 190f. It is not from the PN гpúλos (Plin.); see Latte ibid. See further Page
Class. Rev. 7 (1957): 189-191 and Maas Greece and Rome 5 (1958): 71. There is no
relation between уpúλλos and youλoç. DELG thinks the connection between the
dance and 'caricature' is evident.
ypūμέa [f.] 'bag or chest for old clothes' (Com., Phld.). <PG>
•VAR Codd. often youμaía; also уpu̟µɛĩɑ, уpu̟µεíɑ. уpúτŋ [f.] ‘trash, trumpery,
woman's dressing-case, vanity-bag, frippery' (Sapph., pap.); ‘small fry' (Gp.).
●comp уpvµεorwλnc (Luc.); yputorwλnc (Cos, pap.); ypvto-dókn (AP).
⚫DER Diminutive уpʊτápiov (Zen., раp.); урυτεúεται· лараσкεvášεται 'to prepare,
put on make-up' (H.).
•ETYM In origin, the word probably denoted small things of little value, later also the
chest, etc. The formation of ypvµέa is rare; together with the variants -aía, -ɛía, it
suggests a non-Greek (= Pre-Greek) formation, on which see Pre-Greek on the suffix
-at/(1). Perhaps connected to you as ‘something small. The comparison with Lat.
grūmus 'heap of earth, hillock' is unconvincing; better, but still doubtful, is that with
OE cruma ‘crumb'. From ypvµća probably comes Lat. crumīna ‘bag, purse'; see
Pfister IF 56 (1938): 200ff. Likewise, ypúτη may be the source of Lat. scrūta [n.pl.]
'trash, frippery'.
ypuvóv [n.] = σíkus äyptos ‘kind of wild fish' (Ps.-Dsc. 4, 150). <?►
⚫ETYM André Ét. class. 24 (1956): 10 connects the word with уpúσ = εɩ (Arist. Pr.
876b 15) because of its fluid contents; this is most uncertain, as the verb itself is
unclear.
ypūvós [m.] 'dry wood, torch' (Hom. Fr. 18, Lyc. 86, 294). <?►
•VAR Ypouvós [m.] (v.l. and Call. Fr. anon. 84).
•DER Ypúvη. Aẞavwτós 'frankincense' (Theognost. Can. 108). Cf. the TN гpúvεtov,
Пpūvo (Aeolis), Fick BB 23 (1898): 22 and 213.
•ETYM Unknown.
уpūлóç [adj.] 'hook-nosed, curved (Pl.). <PG(V)►
•DER уpʊлóτηs (X.). Denominative урʊлóоμа 'bеcome hooked, of nails' (Hp.),
урúлwσɩç (medi.); further уpúлτw, уpυлαívш and уρчμлαívε. уpлoσðα,
σvукáµлτεу 'bend together' (H.). Them. aorist уpʊлov (like εктuлov) 'become
wrinkled', of the earth in an earthquake' (Melanth. Hist. 1); thus yāv εуρчддενav
(Gortyn); idem уpʊлavíш (Antiph. Soph.) and уpʊñávɩoç (ib.); уpvлáλɩov.
yepóvtɩov. † ypvrávov (H.), ypuévóv· σtvyvóv ‘abhorred (see DELG). Root noun
уpбч, -лóç [m.] the mythological ‘griffin' (Aristeas apud Hdt., A.), later the real
'lammergeier' (LXX); cf. уúч, σкáч, уλαuε; also уpυлαι· ai vεoσσial τwу уʊлwv. oi dε
уūлα 'the young of vultures; vultures' (H.). ypuẞós. ypów (H.) after the nouns in
-Bos? (Chantraine 1933: 261). Metaph. уpūлεç. μépos τŵν τñу vεwę okɛvwv kai
äуkupai 'part of the ship's tackle and anchors' (H.).
⚫ETYM A connection with OE crumb, OHG krump 'crookeď is not very probable (the
nasal is difficult). The nasal in ypvµлαívw could be a Pre-Greek prenasalization, but
could also be of inner-Greek origin. The long u is difficult to account for in IE (it
requires *-uH-). Güntert 1914: 132f. thought that you was you, influenced by
урʊлóç; this is unconvincing. Grimme Glotta 14 (1925): 17 assumed a loan from
Akkadian (karubu 'griffin, cherub'; cf. Hebr. krūb and Lewy 1895: 11f.) through
Hittite. From the archaeological perspective, origin in Asia Minor (and the Near
East: Elam) is very probable, for discussions on which see DNP s.v. Greif, and
Hemmerdinger Glotta 48 (1970): 51f. (note that it is not connected with Akk.
karību), Wild Wien. Ak. Sb. 241/4 (1963): 3-28. It is not certain that ypów is related to
уpʊлóç. The adjective makes the impression of a Pre-Greek word (уpчµë-), thus this
would be true of the mythical bird as well (whatever its ultimate origin); note
ypuẞóc, which may prove a Pre-Greek alternation of stops. Fur.: 175 assumes further
variations on the basis of the Latin forms. Note also ypuvoç. уpú H., which fits in
his system as showing л/ F (236). Through Lat. gryphus, the word entered the
Western Eur. languages (griffin, Greif).
ypúч →уpūлóç.
ypwvos [adj.] ‘hollow, cavernous' (Lyc.). <?►
•DER Ypovη 'hole, kneading trough' (Nic., AP), ypávous (H.) in several specific mgs.
•ETYM The usual reconstruction *ypwσ-vos vel sim. (to ►ypáw) is quite uncertain, as
the verb shows no ablaut; the meaning hardly fits, either.
yúaλov [n.] 'hollow (of a cuirass), vales, dells' (Il.), also of the hand, cf. ¿yyvaλí(w; see
below. <IE? *gou- ‘hand'; *gu(H)- ‘bend' (?) ►
●DER yvaλós epithet of Míos (Call. Fr. anon. 331), with different accent yúaλos [m.]
‘cubical stone' (EM 243, 12); yváλaç 'cup' (Megara and Macedonia, Ath. 11, 467c; see

=== page 169 ===

290
yuyaí
Solmsen 1909: 216). ¿y-yvaλ-í(w hand over' (Il.; see Schwyzer: 736). Independent
Eyyúaλov (Orion) = yкoλov. Also уυελoу· кóλлоу 'lap' (H.).
ETYM For the formation, one might compare àукáλŋ, ò̟µaλós (Chantraine 1933:
245ff.). For ¿yyvaλí\w, the meaning 'hollow of the hand' has been posited. Cf. YAv.
gauua- ‘hand'; see ►έyyúŋ. Mostly connected with ►yúŋc, ► yvĩa s.v.
уvyaí [?] · лáлèo 'grandfathers' (H.; cod. лáµлo). ◄LW? Anat.>
●ETYм If лáëëα is correct, this is an Anatolian word cognate with Hitt. huhha-
‘grandfather', HLuw. huha-, Lyc. xuge-; see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. Brandenstein 1954b:
65 connects it with the name of the Lydian king Túyŋs. Cf. Heubeck Lydiaka (1959):
62f; however, Neumann 1961: 69ff. connected it instead with the bird yúyns. The
same word as Lat. avus, Arm. hav 'grandfather', i.e. *h₂euh₂o-. See ►кOKÚAL.
yúуns, -ov [m.] a waterbird (Dionys. Av. 2, 16). <?>
⚫ETYM Perhaps onomatopoeic, after its sound; see Thompson 1895 s.v. Lidén 1892:
92f. connected the word with Lith. gúžas, -útis 'stork', ON kjúklingr ‘chicken', etc.
yúns, -ov [m.] a. ‘the curved piece of wood in a plough (Hes. Op. 427, 436), äpotpov
аúτóуvov 'plough whose yúŋs is of one piece with the λчμa and iστoẞoɛúç, not
fitted together (лηêtóv)' (Hes.); b. ‘lands' (trag.), mostly plur., also a measure in
τετрá-уvoç 'of four y.', etc. (Hom.); sometimes fem., cf. уúŋ. μετроν лéеро
'measure of 100 ft./10,000 sq. ft.' (H.); also yúos [m.] (pap.); c. 'the system of
ȧστpáуaλo' (H., Poll.); d. -yvos with e. àµíуvoç. <IE? *gou- 'hand'; *gu(H)- ‘bend'
•COMP ȧupí-yvos of lance and javelin (II.), 'with a limb at each end'? (Trümpy 1950:
59); metrical lengthening àµyʊŋεç, said of Hephaistos, 'crippled on both sides'(?);
τετpá-уvoç 'of four y.' (land measure).
⚫ETYM This word belongs to a difficult complex. It probably consists of: (1) yúaλov,
(2) yvĩa, (3) έyyún, which I have treated separately, which correspond to 1, 4, and 2
in DELG s.v. yúŋ(s) . Here, yúŋ(s) (DELG nrs. 3, 5) is treated.
The basic form *yu(n)- 'curve, curving' has been assumed. For comparison, we have
MoP gōšā ‘corner' and Av. gu- ‘hand'; the other forms in Pok. 393-8 are hardly
relevant.
Here probably ▸yúaλov, yuĩa; see also yupóç. Hardly to ▸yuλióç.
yvīa [n.pl.] ‘limbs' (Il.), also ‘lap' (µntpòs yvĩa, h. Merc. 20); rare sing. yuĩov ‘hand'
(Theoc. 22, 121); 'body' (Pi.). ◄IE? *gou- ‘hand'; *gu(H)- ‘benď (?)►
•DER Yuɩów 'cripple' (II.), with yuós ‘lameď (Call.).
⚫ETYM Connected with yúŋs and ► ¿yyúŋ.
yvλɩós [m.] ‘knapsack' (Ar.); also an animal, ‘hedgehog?? (Sophr. 73; see also sch. Ar.
Pax 527). <?>
•VAR Also yúλIOS.
●DER Also yúλλiov. άyyɛt̃ov éλekτóv ‘plaited vessel' (H.), and the fish names
yvλλíokol. ¡XĐúeç лoloí (H.), yvlápiov = µvšivos (sch. Opp. H. 1, 111). The gloss
yvλλáç ɛldoç лoτηрíov, ларà Maкεdóσ 'kind of drinking cup (Maced.)' (H.) will
be a mistake for yváλaç (s.v. yúaλov).
1
3
yuvń
291
⚫ETYM Unknown. ON kýll 'bag for victuals, OHG kiulla ‘bag' < *keula- have been
compared; see WH s.v. vola. Further related to yúaλov? Fur.: 120 compares yuλápiov
with Kúλapoç.
yuλλóç [m.] mg. unclear, 'block of stone' (Milete VI-V₁) carried in a procession for
Apollo (Nisson, Gr. Rel. 1,189); кúẞoç, † tetρáywvoç λítoç 'cube or cubic stone' (H.);
yv\\oí· otoλµoí ‘equipment, apparel (H.; Latte: corrupt). <?►
●DER yúλλɩva• ¿peioµata, yɛïooɩ ‘prop, projecting part of the roof (H.). On yvλλáç·
ɛidos rotypíov, napà Maкɛdóσɩv, yúλλɩov. áуyɛt̃ov лλεкtóv (H.) see ➤ Yvλlós.
⚫ETYM No etymology. Lewy KZ 55 (1928): 72f. connects the word with Hebr. gōlēl
'Rollstein'.
yvµvós [adj.] ‘naked, unarmed (II.). <IE *nog"-no- ‘nakeď➤
●Var áлóvoчov. άлoyúµvwσv ‘stripping bare' (H.).
●DER yuµváç, -ádos [f.m.] ‘nakeď (E.); 'trained' (E., Att.); collective = 'trained men'
(Amorgos, Astypalaia, Cos). yчμvns, -ñtos [m.] ‘light-armed warrior' (Tyrt.), with
ykó (X.), youvηotos (Arist.), yчµvητεúw (Plu.), youνητɛía 'light-armed men'
(Th.), 'nakedness' (Corn.); yoшvitys, fem. -ñtiç ‘naked' (Lyc.). учμviкóç (ȧywv)
‘gymnastic' (opp. iëлɩкóç) (Hdt.). yuµvηlós 'poor' (H., EM, after voonλós, etc.).
yvµvótns [f.] (LXX). Denominative yчvó̟ò̟дaɩ to strip' (Il.), -ów (Hdt.), yúµvwois
(Th.). yчµváčoµai 'to exercise (naked)' (IA); yчµvaσtńs ‘trainer' (Pl.), yuµvaotikós,
ǹ yu̟µvaσtiкý (tέxvη) ‘gymnastics' (IA); уúμvασμа 'training' (D. H.), уúµvaσç ‘id.'
(Poll.); yuμváσчov 'training' (Pi.), 'school for exercise, gymnasium' (Att.),
учμσ (Cic.); yчuvaσía; on -σtov, -oía Schwyzer: 469f. yuдvaσídov (Arr.) and
удσ (Gal.). yuuviɛúw 'to be naked' (P. Ross. Georg. 3, 28, IVP).
⚫ETYM Old inherited word. With a dental suffix, we have Lat. nūdus (< *nog"od"o-
per Schrijver 1991: 274f.), OIr. nocht, Go. naqaþs, OHG nackt, and ON nøkkviðr.
Without a suffix are Lith. núogas, OCS nago (with acute lengthened vowel according
to Winter's Law); with a suffix -no-, Skt. nagná-, Av. mayna- (dissimilated); with -n-,
Gm. forms like ON nakinn, OFr. naken, probably modelled after the n-participles.
Hitt. nekumanza (with e-vowel) is modelled after the adjectives in -uant- (becoming
-mant- after u). With e, we also have Arm. merk < *meg"ro- (cf. Av. mayna-). The v
is from *o like in vúε after a nasal and before a following labiovelar; the -μv-, from
*-gn- (cf. àµvóc). We also find Avμvós (H.), with dissimilation of *vu̟µvóç, as well as
áлoλúуµatoç áлoyúµvwoiç. Kúлpioɩ (H.), with preserved -y-. The essential point,
the initial y-, was explained by Kortlandt (ap. Beekes Orbis 37 (1994): 91) as an
assimilation *noŋ"no- > *ŋoŋ"no-. The initial [ŋ-] was reanalyzed as /y-/, since ŋ was
not a phoneme in Greek.
yuvń [f.] ‘wife, woman' (II.). ◄IE *g"en-h₂ 'woman'>
●VAR Gen. yuvaιкós. Boeot. Bavá (Corinn.), plur. ẞavñкaç. yuvaîкaç H.; Cypr.
*Bova does not exist (O. Masson 1961: 298). Voc. yúval from *yuvaik, see Schwyzer:
582f. The stem yuv-aiк- probably derives from an adj. *g"neh₂-iko- (Szemerényi
AION 2 (1960): 13-30; against Lejeune REA 63 (1961): 435).
DIAL Myc. ku-na-ja /gunaia/.

=== page 170 ===

!
292
yúnn
•COMP On the forms of yuvý as a second member ä- ávdpó- katá- µioó- qiλóyuvos,
á- juu- Ka入入- ópon- cpidoyÚvar², àyývaikos,á- jul- kako- Kata- iloo- modv-
quλoyúvalos, á ávбpo- μ- VεO- лоλυ- qiλoyúvηs see Sommer 1948: 62f.
Exceptional yúv-avdpos hermaphrodite', and yuvai-μavns (II.). Survey in DELG s.v.
●DER Diminutive yuvatкáptov (Diocl. Com.), yuvaíкiov (Longos), yuvaιкíσкɩov.
raidiokɩov (H.); yuvaiкíaç [m.] 'womanish man' (Eup.; like vɛavías); yUVAIKWVĪTIS
'women's room' (Lys.), rare yuvaiкóv (X., like ȧvdpwv).
Adjective yuvaк½ïoç, -ɛãoç (Оd.; as ȧvôpηïoç, -ɛчoç), yuvaιкɩкóç (Arist.; like
ȧvбpiкóc), yuvaιкwdns (Plb.: ávdpwdns), yuvaiênpós (Diocl. Com.; after лovòpóç,
etc.).
Denominative verbs yuvaιкí(w, -oμa 'to behave like a woman' (IA) with yuvaíkıσıç
(Ar.) and yuvaiкioµóç (Plb.); yʊvaɩкóoμaι, -ów 'to be, make womanish' (Hp.).
Not derived from the extended stem yuvaik-: yúvvıç, -ɩɗos ‘womanish man' (A.) and
yúvalos [adj.] (cf. Sεíλaιoç), yúvalov [n.] 'woman'.
•ETYM yuvń derives from the PIE word for 'woman', *g"en-h₂, e.g. Skt. (Ved.) gná-
'woman, goddess', Av. gǝnā 'woman'. An exact match with yuval- is offered by Arm.
kanay- in the plur. kanay-k' [nom.], etc.; the element -к- is seen further in Messap.
gunakhai 'yuvaiki'(?) and NPhr. кVALKAV, KVAIKO.
The labiovelar also appears in Go. qino (n-stem), OIr. ben (ā-stem) 'woman', both <
*gwen-. The full grade, replaced by the zero grade in Greek, is seen in e.g. Arm. kin,
OPr. genna, OCS žena, Skt. jáni-, ToA śäm, ToB śana. The zero grade is found in
OIr. ban- (in compounds), gen.sg. mná < *bnās. A lengthened grade is seen in Go.
qens (i-stem) 'woman'.
The word was originally a proterodynamic h₂-stem: nom. *g"en-h₂ (seen in Skt. jáni-,
ToB śana), gen. *g"n-eh₂-s (in OIr. mná). The Greek u-vocalism probably goes back
to a zero grade *g"nh₂-V-, although this would normally be expected to give *ẞav-,
which is the form attested in Corinna.
Оn μváqμαι 'to woo for one's bride', see μvýσкw. The full grade may be
preserved in ►ßɛvéw, a variant of ►ßivéw (acc. to De Lamberterie RPh. 65 (1991):
149-160).
yúлŋ [f.] · koiλwµa yñs, Baλáµŋ, ywvía. 'cavity in the earth, den, corner' (Call. Aet.
Oxy. 2o8o, 73). “EURE
•VAR yúñaç• kaλúßaç, kaì Đaλáµaç. oi dè yuлŵv vɛoσσtás ‘hut, den; nest of young
birds', referring to yúy through folk etymology. oi dè tàç katả yñc oikńoeis, oi dè
σnnala 'a habitation below the earth, caverns'... (H.).
•ETYM The word is connected with a Gm. word for 'room, cave, etc.': ON kofi, OE
cofa, MoHG Koben, etc. These words may be European substrate words; see Beekes
KZ 109 (1996): 223-227. Av. gufra- 'deep' is probably unrelated; see Mayrhofer
EWAia s.v. gabhirá-. On уʊлápiov, see yúч.
уúлwvɛç [pl.] dancers in Sparta (Poll. 4, 104): oi è уúлшvεç vλívwv кwλwv
εлɩẞaívovτεç wρxoñvτo, diaчavñ τapavtvídia àµлεуóμεvoɩ 'some say the уúлwvεç
danced upon wooden limbs, putting on tarantinidia, translucent dresses'. <?>
•COMP ÚлоуÚлшvɛç (ib.).
1
j
i
!
•ETYM Unknown.
ywdeós
yupyaƉóç [m.] ‘wisker-basket, creeľ (Ar.). <PG➤
293
•VAR Accent after Hdn. Gr. 1, 145. Also yúpyalov (BGU 1092, 29) and yέpyałos
(POxy. 741, 5).
•DER yupуáðɩov (PHolm. 18, 17).
•ETYM Technical word. Connected with ger- ('plait??) in yέppov? The word looks
Pre-Greek.
yupĭvos →yupós.
Yūpıç, -ɛwç [f.] 'the finest meal' (Dsc.). <?>
•VAR Also yúpios (PSI 4, 428, 44, IIIa).
●DER yupívη kind of cake (Luc.), yupítŋs (äptos) ‘bread from y.' (Ath.), yuplotŃplog
(gloss.).
► youpoç.
•ETYM Unknown. Perhaps connected with ➤
yupóc [adj.] 'round, curved' (t 246: уupòç év wμooty ['round in the upper arms', i.e.,
‘muscular’?]). <IE? *gou- ‘hand'; *gu(H)- ‘bend' (?) ►
•DER yupoç [m.] 'rounding, circle' (Thphr.) with yúptos ‘forming a y.' (Anon. apud
Suid.), yupaléos (Opp.). Denominative yupów ‘make round, make a circle' (LXX,
Nic.) with yúpwoɩç (pap., Gp.); also yupɛúw ‘walk in a circle' (Str.). yupiotós ‘curveď
(sch.), yupτóv. кuqóv ‘hunchbackeď (H.). Also yupīvos [m.] ‘tadpole' (Pl.; but with
short v) with yupivwdns (Arist.). Here also PIN like гupaì лéτpaι (8 500), see Bechtel
1914 S.V.
⚫ETYM Connection with *gou- 'hand', *guH- 'curved' (see Frisk) seems quite possible.
See ▶yúng, ▸yúaλov.
yúy [m.] ‘vulture' (Il.). <PG►
•VAR уūлóç.
•DER yvëɩáç (лé¨τpα) ‘where vultures live' (A. Supp. 796 [lyr.]; cf. ópɛστ-iás, etc.
Schwyzer: 508); yúлɩvoç ‘belonging to a vulture' (Luc.), yʊлɩañoç ‘id.' (Tz.), yvñwdns
‘vulture-like' (Arist.). yʊлápɩov ‘nest, cranny' (yʊлapioɩç kαì лupуiðíoɩç Ar. Eq. 793).
⚫ETYM Monosyllabic bird name like σкwy, yλavž, etc. The usual connection with
*geu- 'bend' (see ▶yupóç, ▸yúalov, etc.) is quite uncertain. The word is no doubt
Pre-Greek.
yúwos [f.] ‘gypsum, chalk, cement' (Hdt.). <LW Sem.?>
•DER Yuчíov (pap.), уʊчшкη 'tax on plasterers' (pap.), уúчлvoç (EM), yʊчwdns (Sor.);
denominative yuysów ‘plaster with gypsum, chalk over' (Hdt.) with yúywois (Gp.)
and yoчwτns (EM); youчíčw 'id.' with yoɩɩσµós (pap.).
ETYM From Semitic? See Muẞ & Arnolt TAPA 23 (1892): 70.
ywλɛós [m.] 'hole' (Arist.), ywλ<>ɩoí· σnýλaια. кai ai лрòç еáλασσαν katadúσɛiç
'caverns; descents towards the sea' (H.); plur. ywλɛ(1)á (Nic.). <?>
ETYM The word has been compared with Lith. guolis, Latv. guoļa ‘lair, nest' (Lith.
guliù lie down'), and Arm. kałał ‘hole, hiding-place'. However, this comparison
must remain uncertain and IE origin is not very probable. We have to reckon with

=== page 171 ===

294
ywvia
influence from qwλɛóc (Fraenkel KZ 71 (1954): 40); cf. also the remote similarity
with yúaλov, etc.
ywvía [f.] ‘corner' (Hdt.), also ‘leader' (LXX). On its use in geometry see Mugler 1958-
1959. GR➤
•COMP As a second member -ywvos in tpí-ywvoç, etc. (like -ßißλos to ßißλíov, etc.),
see Debrunner IF 60 (1952): 40ff.; σvyywvíos (RPh. 73 (1999) 84).
•DER ywvidiov (Luc.); ywvaños (Pl. Com.), ywv½ïos (Delphi), ywvwdns (Hp.),
ywvɩakóç (Procl.); ywvios (pap. VI³).
ywvάw (Porph.) with ywvaσµós (Ar.); ywvɩóoµai (Dsc.) with ywvíwµà (Eust.) and
ywvíwoɩç (Archig. Med.). For лapaywví(w see RPh. 71 (1997): 155f.
•ETYM Generally connected with yóvu. Since the paradigm of *ģonu- contained no
lengthened grade and mathematicians were Pythagoreans, the long w must be
explained as the regular Doric development of *yovF-ía; the long a in Skt. jānu arose
from short o in *gonu by Brugmann's Law and is irrelevant. Alternatively, Hamp
MSS 43 (1984): 19f. explains the long w from the type tpí-ywvoç.
ywoç [m.] дvημεiov 'memorial' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. For a suggestion, see von Blumenthal 1930: 15 A. 1, who considers
the word as Messapian (or Macedonian), deriving it from IE *ghōuo- beside *ghouo-
in Gr. XoŨç.
yŵñaç [acc.pl.] · кoλoloúç. Makɛdóvɛç ‘jackdaw (Maced.)' (H.). ◄PG(V) ►
•ETYM According to Lesny KZ 42 (1909): 297f., уwлaç is identical to yũ´aç;
according to Hoffmann 1906: 47, it is to be connected with σкшлаç (both hypotheses
doubted by Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 307). See oкwy, which could be yet
another variant (Fur.: 110).
ywpūτós [m.] ([f.]) 'quiver, which was also a bow-case' (54). <LW Iran.>>
•VAR Hesychius' ✗wpuτós will be due to ancient folk-etymology, as appears from Ap.
Soph. (лapà tò ….. Xwpɛiv), while yopuτóc (H.) may be just a mistake.
•ETYM According to Benveniste 1937b: 42ff., a loanword from a Scythian compound
(see under τó ov) that contains the word for 'cow' (see ►ẞoûç), Iran. Tw- in Tw-
ẞápηs, etc., as a first member. The interpretation of the second member is totally
unclear however, since (pace Benveniste) we can hardly identify it with MoP rūda
'intestine and interpret the whole compound as 'cow-hide' (Morgenstierne KZ 61
(1934): 29f.). If the second member cannot be 'hide', the first member need not be
'cow-' either. Alternatively, Lubotsky suggests that ywpûτóç may derive from
*varūtra- ‘something that protects' (Skt. varūtár-), with v- > g- as in later Iranian.
For the Greeks, the pronunciation of the initial may already have resembled g(w)-,
and a substitution of -va- by ō is trivial. Note that this etymology additionally
explains the long u.
i
!
Sa- [pref.].e.g. in Sa-qoivóc 'very red' (II.), especially of animals, and Sά-σкtoç 'very
shady' (Od.). <GR➤
•ETYM_From_dia-, Aeol. (a-, although the conditions are unclear (metrical
explanation in Chantraine 1942: 168, see also Sjölund 1938: 25f.). See ▶ dáσkioç.
dā [interj.] (trag.) in lyrics, e.g. A. Eu. 874 oioĩ đã qɛñ. <?►
•ETYM According to sch. Ag. 1072, EM 60, 8, the word is Doric for yã, yñ, which
Kretschmer finds in Dor. Aаµátnp (see Anuýtηp) and in Dor. Hotεdáv (see
►ПoσɛSwv). However, it is probably only an exclamation. On the accus. Aãv, see
►Zεús.
dãyús, -ñdos [f.] ‘puppet' of wax (Theoc. 2, 110). <PG(S)►
•ETYM Technical word of foreign origin. Etymology unknown. Probably a Pre-Greek
word (suffix -üd-).
Sadúσσoμai [v.] 'to be distracted' (Sophr. 117, H.). <?>
•VAR Also SaiSúσσεσαι· λкεσa 'to be drawn, pulled' (H.) and daidŋσσovσi (for
*Saidúσσovσi?). ẞaσavíčovoɩ 'they put to the test'.
•ETYM Since Roscher-Osthoff IF 5 (1895): 282 (and, later, LIV² s.v. *deuk- ‘ziehen'),
the word has been connected with Lat. duco 'lead', Go. tiuhan 'draw' (cf. ► ȧdevкńs,
►évбuкéwc), assuming intensive reduplication *Sat-Suк-to-. However, different from
that tradition, DELG notes that the word has "pas d'étymologie". Indeed, if Sa- is
not a late notation for dat- (as argued by e.g. Schwyzer: 841 and Frisk), the variation
Sa-/Sat- may point to Pre-Greek origin.
.
Saɛyw [interj.] oldα, ¿лíσταµαι ‘I know, understand (H.). ◄ GR➤
ETYM Latte and Pearson read Saɛíw (a subjunctive, acc. to DELG), for which I see
no support. Alternatively, MoGr. (Cappadocian) Sayw ‘I know', from olda έyw
(Schwyzer: 769), has been compared (Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 215), which is
more probable.
Aάɛipa [f.] name of a chthonic goddess in Attica, to whom a pregnant sheep was
sacrificed (Pherecyd. 45, Lyc. 710, inscr.); also Aaîpa (A. Fr. 277, inscr.). ◄PG(S)►
•DER Aaɛipitns [m.] name of a priestess (Poll.).
ETYM Formerly compared to formations like кudi-ávɛpα and connected with
►Sañvai, Skt. dasrá- ‘effecting miracles' (cf. ►Saï-oppwv) but this is semantically
unattractive. Nilsson Arch. f. Religionswiss. 32 (1935): 82f. and Kern in PW 4: 1980f.

=== page 172 ===

}
296
Sañval
assumed a feminine of danp, so properly "sister-in-law", which is not convincing
either. More probably Pre-Greek (where a suffix -ɛtpα occurs more often).
Sañvai [v.] 'to learn' (II.). <IE *dens- 'learn'>
•VAR Epic also intr. aor. Sanueva, fut. Sañσoμai, perf. dɛdáŋka, dɛdawç (Od.), med.
dɛdáŋµai (h. Merc.), redupl. aor. (with caus. mg.) dédaɛ ‘taught' (Od.), dέdaov [3pl.]
(H.), inf. Sɛdáaσðaɩ (for dɛdaéσðai?) (л 316), secondary dáɛ, έdaɛ (A. R.), da[i]ñoai.
dɩdážaı ‘learn' (H.); present ►didάokw.
•DER Sańµwv ‘knowing' (II.) with Saŋµoσúvη (A. R.); privative ȧdańc; dánois
(EM); » Aáspa.
•ETYM The stem da- derives from the zero grade of IE *dens-. The full grade is seen
in Av. dīdaiýhē < *di-dens-hei and in nominal forms like Skt. dasrá- 'effecting
miracles'. The aor. Sé-da-ɛ is from *de-dns-e-t. Cf. ► Sńvea, ▶didáσkw, ▶Saïqpwv.
Sanp [m.] 'husband's younger brother, brother-in-law'. <IE *deh₂i-uer- 'brother-in-
law'>
2
•VAR Acc. -épa, voc. Sãɛp, gen. plur. dãépwv 769 (verse initial) and 762 (II.), Hell.
and late also the accus. and dat.sing. Saipa, Saipí, nom.plur. Sépɛc (Lydia), gen.sg.
Sipos (Bithynia).
•DER Aάɛipa is rather not related.
⚫ETYM Old kinship term, agreeing with Skt. devár-, Arm. taygr, Lith. diever-is, OCS
děver-b; thus it derives from *SaчƑηp. Is daɩpí from *Sαчpí, and *SαчƑpwv for
metrically impossible Sãépwv? See Schwyzer: 266 and 568. Lat. lēvir was transformed
after vir and has l- for d- and è for ae from the colloquial language.
Sai [interj.] always after interrogative τí, лŵç daí ‘what, how then?' (a 225, w 299 [both
doubtful]; Com.; often false for dέ). ◄GR►
ETYM Innovation to Sn after vý: vaí. See Schwyzer 1950: 5633; 570.
Sat [f.] 'in battle' (Il.). <?►
●DIAL Myc. da-i-qo-ta /dā(¹)i-kontās/, Aniqóvtns.
●COMP daiktaμέvwv † 146, 301. PNs Дáллоç (Milete), Aaiкpátηs (Olbia), Aaïλéwv,
Aaquévns (Athens).
⚫ETYM Isolated epic dative (also Hes. Th. 650, A. Th. 925), formerly derived from a
root noun *Saûç. However, the Myc. form without -w- shows that this
reconstruction is untenable, so it is rather not related to Saíw. New accus. Sáïv
(Call. Fr. 243). See ► Sñïoç.
Saudáλw [v.] 'to work artfully, embellish' (II.). <PG?>
•VAR Only present stem.
•DIAL Myc. da-da-re-jo-de /daidalejon-de/.
•DER Saídaλµa ‘work of art' (Theoc.). Saídalov [n.] ‘id., ornament' (II.); Aaídalos
name of a mythical artist (II.), Saídaλos ‘artful' (A.); dadáλɛoç (Il., cf. µapµaípw:
μаρμáρɛoç, etc.; acc. to Leumann a metrical variant to лоλv-Saídaλos 'rich in
ornaments'); also daɩdalóɛıç (Q. S., like лaлɑλóɛç). Denominative daudałów (Pi.),
Saidaλɛvoμaι (Ph.) with daidaλɛúτpiα ‘artful female artist' (Lyc.).
1
]
!
}
Saíoμai
297
•ETYM The relation between SaiSáλλw, Saídaλos, and Saídaλov is debated. Leumann
1950: 131ff. started from a Mediterranean word Saídaλov ‘ornament', from which
Saudáλw and the compound лоλv-daídaλoç 'rich in ornament' would be derived.
Others have taken da dáλλw, which was thought to be an intensive reduplicated
formation, as the starting point (cf. Schwyzer: 647 and 725). Within Greek, ► déλtos
and ŋλéqµαɩ have been compared (see s.vv); further, dáλλε· кakoчpyɛi ‘do
wrong' (H.) and Sóλwv; see also Sóλoç. Not related are several words for 'build,
split' in other IE languages, e.g., Lat. dolāre ‘hew', Skt. dár-dar(i)ti 'split', Olr. delb
'form' (< *del-wā-), etc. Instead, we should consider Pre-Greek origin, for instance
through a connection with the PN Aaídaλoç. Assuming that the verb is primary,
Saudáλw may have to be interpreted morphologically as a reduplicated *dal-dal-.
Saidvσσoða→dadúoσoµai.
Saw [v.] 'to cleave, pierce' (Il.). <GR
VAR Aor. Saičai, perf. ptc. Sɛdaïуμεvoç.
•DER SaïкTηp "divider", of Ares (Alc.), also of yóos (A. Th. 916); also dαкτwρ (уáμoç
A. Supp. 798); daïyµóç (EM); daïкτaç in e.g. μηλodaïкταç (B.); кαρлo-Sασται
(Gortyn) is rather from daíoμat with analogical -σ-, like in dɛdaloµévov, Salobɛiç
(E.).
⚫ETYM Deverbative from Saíoμa (see Schwyzer: 736).
daiµwv, -ovoç [m., f.] 'godlike power, fate, god' (II.). <IE *deh₂-(i-) ‘cut, divide'>
●DER Adjective Saчóvoç 'belonging to a daíµwv' (Il.); on Saшóviε see Brunius-
Nilsson 1955; ntr. Saчuóvtov 'godlike power' (IA); Saчµoviкóç ‘id.' (Plu.); daчµovaкóç
‘id.' (PMag. Osl. 1, 143); daчovwdns 'like a 8.' (Ep. Jac., Procl.). Rare and late
daчovíç (Procl.) and daшµóvɩσσa (PMag. Leid. W. 16, 48). On daчµový (Alcm. 69?)
see Schwyzer: 524. Denominative Saчováw 'be possessed by a 8.' (A.), Saчováw
'id.' (Phld.), Saчovηtiα. Saчovíčεται. Kρñτεç H., after verbs of disease in -áw, -láw
and -ŋτáw (Schwyzer: 731f.); Saчovíčoµa ‘id.' (Philem.) with Saчovσµóç (Vett.
Val.), 'become a goď (S. Fr. 173, H.); Saчµovášoµαɩ = daчoviάw (pap.). Often as a
second member of compounds: bahuvrīhi (ẞapv-, Svσ-); substantives (ayao-,
ȧvершло-); see Frisk s.v.
⚫ETYM The word is connected with daíoμa as 'divider' (cf. von Wilamowitz 1931:
363); for the semantics, cf. OP baga-, OCS bog 'god' beside Av. baga- 'part', Skt.
bhága 'id', related to bhájati 'divide' (the meaning has not developed from
"Zerreißer, Fresser (der Leichen)"). See Nilsson 1941: 216ff. and (on its development
in modern languages) Chantraine CRAI 1954: 452-5.
Saíoμa [v.] 'to divide', med. 'to feast' (II.). <IE *deh₂-, *deh₂-i- 'cut, divide'>>
•VAR Saívvut, aor. Saioa, fut. Saiow, Salobɛiç.
•DER Abstracta Saíç, -tóç [f.] ‘portion, meal (II.), compounds åßpó-, óµó-; daítn
‘meal' (II.); daɩτúç, -úoç [f.] ‘id.' (X 496; Chantraine 1942: 96) with Saltvµáv, -óvoç
[m.] ‘guest' (Od.); Saitvµoveús (Nonn.); dañoıç ‘division (of property)' (Gortyn) with
Saloávn éɩɩσávη (EM), Saíσчμov (-чov EM). ¿dóчov 'food' (H.); daßµó
'division, divided land' (inscr.). Nomen loci: Satτηpiov (EM). Agent noun: Saiτpós
=

=== page 173 ===

298
Sáios
'divider, carver' (Od.) with daiрoσúva [pl.] 'the arts of the carver³ (л 253);
denominative Saτpɛúw 'to divide, carve' (Il.) with Saɩɩpɛía (Hdn.); Aaíτwp as a PN
(☹ 275), ovvdaíτwp ‘conviva' (A.); daɩpóv ‘part, portion' (A 262); daítŋs title of a
priest (E. Fr. 472, 12), as a second member in λayo-daítaç (A.). Isolated is daɩtaλɛús
‘banqueter' (A.), cf. daιταλáoμa 'to banquet' and daτaloupyía (Lyc.). An
enlargement of Saíoµat is Saï¼w. See ▸ daiµwv.
ETYM Saíoμa (with analogical --) agrees morphologically with Skt. dáyate 'divide'
< *dh₂-eie-. Other forms of this Skt. root go back to *deh2- or *dh₂-, e.g. dá-ti 'to
mow, cut off, di-tí- 'dividing', d-yá-ti ‘divide' < *dh₂-ie-. Also connected is ▸Оñµoç
(Dor. Sãoc). From Gm. and Arm., the word for 'time' has been connected: OE
tīma, ON tími ‘hour, time', PGm. *ti-man- < *di-mon-; OHG zit 'time', Arm. ti 'old
time' < *dī-t(i)-. Alb. daj ‘divide, cut', aor. dava may be related, too. See LIV² s.v.
age,
*deh2(i)- ‘teilen'. Cf. ►Saτéoμαι and ▸ Sáлτw.
Sáios=Sńios.
Saσávη =лτσávη (EM 264) 'peeled barley'. <?>
•ETYM Unknown. See Fur.: 255, 337.
Sappwv [adj.] artful, experienced'; 'brave' (II.) by secondary connection with Saï 'in
battle'. IE *dens- 'high mind, power'>
•ETYM Compound with opηv (s.v.; cf. a-opwv); the first member is perhaps from
*Sah--, related to Skt. das-rá- 'effecting miracles', with i and ro alternating as in
kudɩ-ávɛɩpa and кudpós (Schwyzer: 447). Note that this would presuppose that *s > h
in the Greek outcome of clusters *-nsV-. On ȧuo' 'Odvoñï daïopovi daiɛtai ñtop (a
48), see Risch 1947: 88.
Saíw [v.] 'to kindle' (Il.). ◄IE *deh₂u- ‘burn'➤
●VAR intr. perf. Sédŋa ‘burn', ptc. dɛdavµévos (Semon. 30 B), Sáŋtai (Y 316, ℗ 375),
aor. dañvai, ¿кdaßñ (= -Ƒñ)· ¿êêav³ñ. Aáкwvɛç ‘let it be burnt out, lit (Lacon.)' (H.).
•COMP Compounds with ava- (A.), кατα- (H.). еεσлɩ-dãéç (лŨρ, M 177, etc.)
'flaming godlike' (rather to the aor. Sañvai than to Sáoç?).
=
•DER Sáo¢ [n.] (< *dáƑoc) ‘torch' (Hom.) together with dãvós < *daƑɛσ-vós 'fit for a
torch, dry' (o 322, Ar. Pax 1134 [lyr.]). Sāλóç [m.] ‘firebrand (Il.) < *dãƒɛλóç (=
daßɛlós dalós. Aákwveç H.), Saɛlós (Sophr.); *SáƑos: *Safeλ-ós like vέqos: veqέλ-
ŋ; further dauλov. ǹµíqλektov čúlov half-burnt wood (H.). Diminutive Săλíov
(Ar.); Sãλós also = µελávovpos ix¤ús 'fish with a black tail (H.), metaph. ‘burnt out
old man' (AP), with hypocoristic gemination daλλw. ǹ áñónλŋktos. oi dè tǹv
¿½wpov rapеévov ǹ yuvat̃ka kai épɛoßvtέpav ‘dumb woman; an over-aged maiden
or woman' (H.). daïç, -ídoç [f.] ‘torch' (Il., on Att. Sάc, dadós see below) < *Safiç,
whence the diminutive Sadíov (Ar.); Sadís ‘torch-festival (Luc.), dάdivos ‘ptng. to
the torch, made of pine-wood (Gal.), Sądwdŋs ‘resinous' (Thphr., Plut.), to dάc
'resin-glut', name of a disease in pines (Thphr.); Sadóoμa 'become affected with
resin-gluť together with dάdwois (Thphr.), see Strömberg 1937: 167. Compounded
Sadouxos holding a torch'. Saúakes. Ovµáλwñeç ‘pieces of burning wood' (H.), cf.
Bechtel 1921, 1118, Grošelj Živa Ant. 2 (1952): 206. Saɛpóv. µéλav. kai tò kalóμevov
1
i
Sákpu
299
'black; burning' (H.), perhaps also Emp. 90 for dalɛpós. Saŋpóv. Оɛpµóv,
kavµatnpóv, λaµiëpóv, époqavés “warm, very hot, glowing, shining forth' (H.).
Saŋłµóv. ¿µrproµóv ‘burning' (H.), on the formation see Chantraine 1933: 137f.;
Latte (with Voẞ) corrects it to daiеµóv. dañкoç · ó Opaσúç. кai ẞotávy tię KontiKŃ
'bold; also a Cretan plant' (H.) is rather PG. Not here Saï 'in battle', because Myc.
has no -w-.
.
⚫ETYM As shown by dɛdavµévos, daiw goes back to *SαƑ-чw. Att. Sάc (dāis < *Saif-is)
originates from a metathesized *SaiƑw (cf. Cor. AidaiƑwv). The perfect dédŋa < *dé-
SāƑ-a resembles Skt. du-dāv-a (gramm.), to which the present du-nó-ti ‘to burn' is
related (for *dunáắti, acc. to LIV² s.v. *deh₂ų- ‘in Brand geraten'). OIr. dóim ‘to burn'
and OHG zuscen ‘id.' may have to be connected as well. Cf. Peters 1980a: 37. See
► Sún and ▸ Snïoç.
Sákvw [v.] ‘to bite, also ‘to sting (of insects), wound (Il.). ◄IE *denk- ‘bite’▷
•VAR Aor. Sakεiv (Il.), dñžαɩ (Luc.); fut. dážoµai (Hp.), noμα (E.); perf. Sέdŋyµai
(Ar.), dɛdayuévos (Pi.), dédηxa (Babr.), dédaкa (AP); aor. pass. ηxеñvαι (S.),
Saкчvai (Aret.); vb.adj. ä-Sηêtoç (Hes., Hp.).
•COMP Compounds with ảµôɩ-, àva-, àvt-, etc., also Оvµodaкýs (Od.).
=
●DER Sάkoç [n.] ‘bite, stitch', often ‘biting animal' (Pi.) = Sakɛtóv (Ar., cf. ¿pëεtóv),
Sayuós ‘bite, stitch' (Ruf.), Sáyua ‘id.' (Nic.), Sáкia. τà äуpia ópvɩðápia 'wild birds'
(H.); dá = ódá (Opp.) together with Sa-aσμós ódayµós (Ti. Locr.; after
µapaσµóc, etc., see Chantraine 1933: 141f.). From dŋê-: dñyµa ‘bite, stitch' (A.),
Snyuós ‘id.' (Hp.), Ôñší ‘id.' (Hp.); S½кτηs ‘biter, biting' (E.) with Sŋktńpios ‘id.' (E.)
and Sηкτɩкóç (Arist.); dŕž, dŋкóç ‘'worm in wood' (Tz.) after σon. Saкvádŋs ‘biting,
stinging' (Hp.), Saкvηpós 'id.' (Phld., cf. oduvηpós), daкvíç ópvéov ɛldoç ‘kind of
bird' (H.), Saкvãç 'biter' (Phryn.). Expressive Saкvá(w (A.), Sayкávw (Hdn.).
⚫ETYM The aorist Sakɛiv agrees morphologically with the Skt. present dáśati 'bites';
the perfect dadámśa and nouns like dámśa- 'bite' show that the root was denk-.
Therefore, Snк- in d½½oμαι, etc. is a secondary full grade of daкɛiv, after λýчo̟μ:
Aaẞɛiv. Probably we should connect ToB tsākª- ‘bite' (Adams 1999 s.v.), whereas in
Gm. we find nouns like OHG zangar ‘biting, sharp', ON tong 'tongs' (perhaps Alb.
danë 'tongs' is related, too). Further forms in LIV2 s.v. *denk- 'beißen'.
Sáкpu [n.] 'tear, drop' (II., also Peripl. M. Rubr. 30 = 'resin', cf. ẞpá0v). <IE *drk-
h₂kru- 'eye-bitter' > 'tear'>
•VAR Dat.pl. Sáкpvσɩ; also dáкpvov [n.] (Il., from the plur. Sáкpva).
•COMP лαрá-dαкpu plant name (Ps.-Dsc.); many bahuvrīhis in -Saкpuç.
⚫DER Diminutive Saкpúdiov as a plant name (Ps.-Dsc.); daкpv-óεɩç 'rich in tears'
(Il.); daкpvwdŋs 'running' (of wounds, Hp.); denominative Saкpúw 'weep (over)'
(Il.) with Sáкpõµa ‘mourned for' (Orac. apud Hdt. 7, 169), ‘tear' (A.).
⚫ETYM Old word for 'tear'. Also seen in Arm. artasu-k' [pl.] (< *draku-, see below),
sing. artawsr (< *draku-r); Gm., e.g. OHG zahar, Go. tagr; Celt., e.g. OBret. dacr,
OIr. dér < *dakr(0)-. In addition to these forms, there is also OHG trahan < PGm.
*trahnu- < IE *draknu-. It has been supposed that earlier *drakru- gave these various
forms by dissimilation. But the eastern languages have similar words without initial

=== page 174 ===

HLA 2
300
SάKTUλOS 1
consonants: Skt. áśru-, Av. asrū-, Lith. ašarà, ToA äkär, ToB akrūna [pl.] (see
Pinault 1997: 219-233). To explain all different forms, Kortlandt AAL 6 (1985)
assumes a compounded form *drk-h₂kru 'eye-bitter', where the first element is from
*derk- 'to see' and the second element from 'bitter'. For Hitt. išḥaḥru- [n.] 'tears',
Kortlandt (l.c.) reconstructs *sk"-h₂kru (from *sek"- 'see'). A Hell. form *бáкρчμα is
often assumed to be the source of Lat. dacréma, lacrĭma, but see now the discussion
in De Vaan 2008 s.v. dacruma.
Sáкtvλoç 1 [m.] 'finger' (also as a measure, etc.), ‘toe' (IA). ◄PG▷
•VAR Boeot. Saккúλoç (Tanagra).
•COMP Compounds like τετрαбáкτvloç ‘four-fingered'; pododáкτuloç ‘rose-
fingered'.
•DER Rare diminutives: Saкtvλídiov (Ar.), Saktuliokos (Lebadeia), Saktulis (Steph.
Med., Plin.); Saкtúlios [m.] (-ov [n.]) ‘(finger) ring' (Sapph., Hdt.) with the
diminutive SaкTUλídiov (Delos III, pap.), also Saктuλídpiov, -ipvov (pap.,
dissimilated from -údptov [Chantraine 1933: 72f.]), Saкτúηpov (Them.; cf.
Chantraine 1933: 373), Saктvλńеpa 'glove with fingers' (X., Chantraine 1.c.).
daktvλītɩç plant name (Dsc.; after the root which is thick like a finger, Strömberg
1940: 37), Saкτvλɛúc name of a sea-fish (Ath.). Adjectives: Saкtvλ-taños 'as thick as a
finger' (Hp.), Saкtvλikós ‘ptng. to the finger' (Ath.), daкτvλwτóç ‘with fingers'
(Ion.). Denominative Saкτvλí(w 'to count with the fingers, etc.' (H.) together with
Saktvliotńs (pap.), an unknown profession.
⚫ETYM No etymology. Because Boeot. Saккúλtoç can hardly have its -кк- from -кT-, it
is rather from *Sáτкvλoç. A form *Sατк-vλ- looks perfectly Pre-Greek: cluster -кT-
(<-TK-) and a suffix -vλ-. Not connected to OHG zinko; the relation to Lat. digitus is
unclear.
SáкTUλOÇ 2 [m.] 'date', the fruit (Arist.). <LW Sem.>
⚫ETYM From Semitic (Arab. daqal, etc.), reshaped to SáкTuλoç by folk-etymology
because the leaf resembles a hand; see Lewy 1895: 20f.
Saλáyxav Báλaσoa.
daλńs [adj.] · µwpós ‘dull' (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
•VAR daλaïç oi àµaεîç 'those who are ignorant' (sch. Theocr. 9, 33e).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 255 connects the word with Caλaívw. μwpaívw 'be dumb' (H.).
Sálλei →Sŋλéoµiai.
=
8ã入óg →8aiw.
Saµáчw➡dávn
daµáλnc, -ov [m.] ‘tamer', said of Eros (Anacr.), 'younger bull (still to be tamed)'
(Arist.). IE *demh₂- 'tame'>>
•VAR Fem. Sáμaλis (A.); Saµáλn (E.) ‘young cow'.
⚫DER Diminutive Saчáλov (pap.); Sáμaλos 'calf? (Hdn.); denominative Saμaλíw
'to tame' (Pi.). On Aάuaλiç as a PN see Schmid Phil. 95 (1942): 118123.
!
Sãvákn
301
⚫ETYM Connected to Sávηu, daμáσat; see Chantraine 1933: 236f. Cf. WH s.v.
damma ‘buck, doe, etc.'.
dáµap,-aptos [f.] ‘wife' (Il.; on the meaning, see Gernet 1937: 393ff.). <PG?►
•VAR Sóµoptiç⋅ yuvń ‘woman' (H.; perhaps Aeol.).
•DIAL Myc. da-ma-te, du-ma-te [dat.sg.] /damartei/, /dumartei/?
•DER No derivatives.
•ETYM Etymology unknown. Since Schulze KZ 28 (1887): 281f., it has been derived
from the word for 'house' (see dáñedov, deσñótŋs, and dóµos) and the root ȧp- in
ȧpapíσkw with a dental suffix; likewis, dóµop-t-iç (Schwyzer: 4513). Others have seen
an old neuter in -p in dάμap; see Benveniste 1935: 30 and Lejeune 1972 §294. Ruijgh
Lingua 51 (1980): 90 connects the word with τauía, which might point to Pre-Greek
origin.
Sáμvnu [v.] 'to tame, subdue, conquer', especially of horses (II.). <IE *demh₂- 'tame'>
•VAR Also pres. Sativa [3sg.] (for Aeol. Sáuvā, according to Schwyzer: 694), aor.
Saμáo(σ)α, intr. Saµñvaɩ, perf. dédµŋuai (all Il.); to daµáσ(σ) at a new present
daµá¼w (A.), fut. Saµáσow, 3sg. daµã (Il.), aor. pass. Saµa-σ-¤ñvai (Il.), also (after
Sédμnual 'I have built³) Sµηеñvai (Il.).
•COMP Compounded with vπo-. As a first member in dáµv-ïos (Orph.).
•DER Sµŋtýp (ïëлwv) ‘tamer' (h. Hom., Alcm.), fem. Sµýteipa (II.), dµñois (innwv)
‘taming' (II.); à-dµńs, -tos [f.m.] ‘untamed, unmarried' (Od.), also ǎ-dµŋ-τos ‘id.'
(Il.) and ȧ-Sáμα-σ-τoç (II.), à-dáµα-τoç (trag.), dµãτéα (Dor.). Saµaστéα (H.);
-άdáμaç. Isolated are Saα- and daµv- in: Aαμaños 'tamer', of Poseidon (Pi.),
Saµátɛipa (AP), náv-daµáτwp ‘all-tamer' (Il.), late fem. „avdaµátɛipa; dáµaσiç and
daµaotikós (sch.), Saµáσtŋs ([Epich.] 301 [?], gloss.); daµvñtiç. Saµášovoa, tifiwpós
‘avenging'; dáμvos. ïñños. Tuppηvoí (H.). Saµaσwvov and Saµvaµévŋ plant names
(Dsc., Ps.-Dsc.; a love potion acc. to Strömberg 1940: 92). See further ► Saµáλŋs. Not
here ▸ Suwç.
•ETYM The present dάuvu, Aeol. Sáμvāчu agrees morphologically with Olr.
damnaim 'to bind, tame (horses)' from *dm-n-eh2-mi, from a root *demh₂- seen in
Sauá-σat, where the expected *Sεμα- was reshaped to Sauα-, partly after -Sauo- <
*dmh2-0-; the zero grade *dmh₂- is found in dµŋ-¤ñvai (Dor. Sµā-). There are many
representatives in other IE languages, e.g. Hitt. damāš-zi 'he forces, urges'. Gr. лаν-
Saµáτwp, Lat. domitor, and Skt. damitár- may be independent parallel formations.
As a second member in compounds, i̟ëëó-dαµos (II.) is reminiscent of Skt.
arim-dama- ‘conquering the enemy' (though the latter rather reflects *domh₂-o-);
(ǎ-)Suntos is from *dmh₂-to- (Lat. domitus is an independent formation).
dāvắкη [f.] name of a small Persian coin; ¿λéyɛto dè kaì ó toĩs vekpois didóµevos
oẞolós 'an obol offered to corpses' (H., Call., Poll., EM). <LW Pers.➤
•ETYM From Persian, cf. MoP dāna(k) ‘quarter of a dram (drachme)'. See Eilers Welt
des Orients 2 (1959): 333.

=== page 175 ===

302
Aavaoí
Aavaoi [m.pl.] 'Danaans', a Greek tribe (Argos), used by Homer as a general name for
the Greeks. According to an ancient tradition, they took their name from king
Danaos, who came from Egypt. <PG>
•ETYM Kretschmer Glotta 24 (1936): 15ff. sees in the Danaoi the people of the
Scythian king Tanaus, who in the 15th c. came to Argos. Kretschmer also compared
the river namesTanais and Donau, and the Indo-Iranian ethnonym Dânu-, etc. This
is untenable; the name is certainly Pre-Greek. A country Danaja (T/Dnjw), with a
city Mukana, is mentioned in inscriptions from Egypt, from Amenophis III (1390-
1352 BC) and earlier from Tuthmosis III (1437 BC); see DNP s.v. Danaos and Latacz
2001: 150-165.
.
da(v)daívɛv [v.] · àτεvíšεv, povíεv, µερчvāν to look intently, consider, ponder'
(H.).
•ETYM Sa(v)Saívw has nothing to do with devíλw; it may be Pre-Greek (*da(n)-
dan-yw).
Savdaλides dɛvdaλiç.
dávdaλos [m.] · ó έpiðkaós, tò öpvɛov ‘robin, redbreast'. <PG?>
•ETYM Unknown.
dávôn, -ŋkoç [m.] name of a big dog (Ps.-Callisth. 2, 33 cod. B). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Cf. the other forms with -к- in Pre-Greek.
Sávos [n.] ‘gifť (Euph. 42), ‘loan, debt' (Call. Epigr. 48). <IE? *dh₂-no- 'gift'▷
●DER Sávɛtov [n.] ‘loan' (D.) with davɛaкós (Cod. Just.), denominative Savɛíčw,
-oμa ‘loan, give credit' (Att., Hell. also daví(w), from which dávɛσµa ‘loan' (Th.),
Savεσμó loan, credit' (Att., Arist.) and Savεiστηs 'usurer, believer' (LXX,) with
SavεIOTIKÓS (Thphr.). Unclear is Sávaç µεpídaç. Kapúστio 'portion' (H.).
⚫ETYM The suffix is just as in äpεvоç, ктñνоç, etc. Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916: 1,
256 connects it with Saτéoμat, i.e. IE *dh₂-no-; cf. Skt. diná- 'divided'? Not directly
related to Sidwμ, as *dh₂-no- would give *Sovoç. Alternatively, the word could be
foreign.
Sá =Sáкvw.
Sáža [f.] Oálaσσа. 'Нлεршται 'sea (Epir.)' (H.). <?>
.
•ETYM Unknown.
Sάos →Saíw.
Sanávn →8ántW.
Sánɛdov [n.] 'ground' (Od.). <IE?►
•VAR Čáлεdov (Xenoph., Paros).
•DER No derivatives.
ETYM Possibly a zero grade of *dem-, seen in deσ-лóηs and dóμ-os (and Sáμap?),
compounded with лédov. ON topt, (O)Sw. tomt ‘building place' have been
compared, which would continue PGm. *tum-feti- (= *dα-лɛdɩ-); further, can we
1
7
}
)
Sápda
303
compare Lith. dim-stis 'court'? The form чáлεdov is explained (see Frisk) as an
inverted writing of da- after the intensifying prefix (α- / Sa-; this is hardly
convincing. Cf. Čaкópos and perhaps àλλóбαлоç.
dáлıç, -idos [f.] ‘carpet, rug' (com.).
•DER Diminutive Saлídov.
ETYM Güntert 1914: 151 assumed a folk-etymological reshaping of τáлç after
Sáлεdov 'ground', but the word is rather a variant of ► τáлŋç.
Sáлτш [v.] 'to devour, consume' (Il.). <PG?►
VAR Aor. Sávai.
•COMP Compounds with ȧло-, Siα-, кατα-, whencе кαταdαлávη and кαταdалavάw
(Hdt., X.).
==
•DER Saлávη 'cost, expenditure' (Hes. Оp. 723; cf. σкáлτw : σкαлávη) with derivative
Saлávulla (Corc.); daлavηpós 'spendthrift' (Pl.) with daлavηpía (Arist.);
denominative daлaváw ‘spend, consume' (Hdt.) with daлávŋua (X.), darávnois
(Aristeas) and Ɛañavéstiкós ‘consuming' (S.); daлavηtýs EM; deverbal dáлavos
dañavŋpós (Th.); isolated Saлavoúчeva (Andania Iª) as if from dañavów or -źw.
Sáлτη 'eater' (Lyc.) from the present stem, unless = Sáл-τηs; from the aorist stem
Say- with a suffix -λ-: Say-1λns 'abundant' (Ion., Arist.; Sautλóc Emp. may be older
acc. to Solmsen IF 31 (1912/13): 461ff.) together with day (Arist.) and
Saчλɛvo̟μa (LXX). See ▸dapdáлtw.
•ETYM If dáлτw is formed from a root daл-, this may be compared with Lat. daps
'(sacrificial) meal', and perhaps with the ToA pret. and subj. tāp- ‘eat', ToB tāpp-
‘consume' (?), although the Tocharian initial t- from *d- is problematic (Adams 1999
s.v.). Further connections have been proposed with Lat. damnum 'expenditure, loss'
and ON tafn 'sacrificial animal, meal', which could be from *dap-no-m, as well as
with Arm. tawn 'feast' (< *dap-ni-). Skt. dāpayati 'divide' is a productive causative-
formation from da- 'divide', and is therefore not connected. In spite of the proposed
cognates, which do not convince on the semantic side, we may also consider Pre-
Greek origin for Saл(τ)-/ daч-, especially if it should be related with dɛïëvov (Fur.:
325). Lat. dapinō is a loan from Saлaváw.
dapátaɩ [f.pl.] name of the kitchen, which is offered by a phratry at a matrimony
(Delphi V-IV³). <?►
•VAR Also Sapatos [m.] name of a Thessalian bread (Seleuc. apud Ath. 3, 114b);
Sapatov [n.] (Coropa VI-Vª; not quite certain).
•ETYM The comparisons with Skt. dúrvā- and MoDu. tarwe 'wheat' and MoE tare, or
that with Lith. dirvà 'field, floor' (see Fraenkel 1955 s.v.), are very doubtful. See
Kalléris 1954: 147-151. DELG refers to Sápov (H.). Cf. ► Spáµuç.
dápda [f.]? · µélioσa ‘bee' (H.). <?>
ETYM Perhaps reduplicated: Skt. dardurá- 'frog, pipe', Lith. derděti 'rasseln,
schwatzen' and Olr. dardaim 'to roar (of a deer)' have been compared. See also
Belardi Doxa 3 (1950): 202 (Aápdavo, etc.). Fur.: 391 considers the word as Pre-
Greek.

=== page 176 ===

304
SapSaívei
Sapбaívɛ [v.] · μoλúvε 'stains', ávεdáрdavε àvεμóλvε (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Specht KZ 66 (1939): 203f. unconvincingly analysed Sap-d-aívw, -ávw,
connecting a word for 'excrement' seen in OE tord [n.] 'excrement', ON torðyfill
'dung-beetle', as well as in Latv. dirst 'cacare', Lith. dirse 'back'. As this is mere
speculation, the etymology is still unknown. Cf. ► Sápda.
Sapбáлτw [v.] 'to devour' (Hom.). <?>
•VAR Only present except Sapdáyn (Opp.), Sapdáyai. þñžai, onapáčaɩ 'break, tear'
(H.), dɛdáρdaqɛ. кαταßέßpшкɛ 'he eats up' (H.).
•ETYM Intensive reduplicated formation with unclear -p-, perhaps connected to
Sáлτw (Fur.: 326). See Frisk for older litt.
Sapávw [v.] 'to fall asleep'. <IE *der- (?) ‘sleep'>
•VAR The simplex as a present only Hierocl. in CA; aor. Spaßov (v 143); mostly
кaτa-dapеávw (Pl.), also έyкατα-, έлiкατα-, σvукατα-, and άло-, πapα-, aor.
-Spaßɛĩv (Od.), -dap¤ɛĩv, perf. -dɛdáp¤ŋka (Att.), later aor. -Sapеñval (see Schwyzer
759). Mostly as a suppletive aorist to the pres. [ka0-] εúdw‘sleep'.
•DER No derivatives.
⚫ETYM Sapávw bears a certain resemblance to Skt. drá-ti 'to sleep', Lat. dormiō ‘id.',
CS drěmati 'slumber' (from *drēm-). Theoretically, the 0 could be a secondary
formant (cf. Benveniste 1935: 191 and Chantraine 1942: 329).
Sáp[ɛ]ɩp [?] · τò åлò τoñ µεуáλov daктúλov ¿лì tòv µukpòv diáσtημα 'the distance
from the thumb up to the little [finger]'; also Sáptv. orðaµýv. Apkádɛç ‘span
(Arcad.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM DELG assumes rhotacism in the first gloss and thinks it is Laconian, and
borrowed from the Arcadian form. See Swpov 2.
Sápka [?] kind of кaσía (Dsc. 1, 13). <PG?>
•VAR Sákap (v.l.).
•DER Sápkavos
=
Epupóбavov (Ps.-Dsc. 3, 143); for the formation cf. ǎkavoç,
páqavos, etc. (Strömberg 1940: 144).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The form бápкavoç might confirm the reading of the lemma. Is
the word Pre-Greek?
8ápres →8páooofial.
Sápëŋ [f.] · σapyávŋ, kópɩvoç ‘basket (H.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 261 connects τáрлη and бápη and, further, σáрлovç· кɩẞWTOÚÇ, BIOUVOI
dè žvlivovs oikiaç ‘boxes; wooden dwellings (Bith.)' (H.) This proves Pre-Greek
origin. Note that the word is also attested in Anatolia (Bithynia). Older suggestions
(see Frisk; Güntert IF 45 (1927): 347: cross of táрлη s.v. and *бápon = Skt. darbhá-
‘grass-bundle’; Bechtel 1921, 2: 289: 8- “vulgar” for T-) have therefore become
obsolete.
Sác =Saío.
Fatéoual
305
SáσKoç [m.] an unknown fish (Arist. HA 591a 14: Téρлεταi τ ßopßópw kai kónpw
['it enjoys filth and excrement']). <?>
•ETYM Wood AmJPh. 48 (1927): 303 derived it from dá-σкtoç ‘shadowy', which is a
mere guess.
daσлλñτɩç [f.] of unknown meaning; used of the Erinyes, Hekate, the Eumenids, etc.
(0 234, Theoc.). <?>
•VAR Also Saσлλýç, -ñτoç [f.] (Simon., Euph., Nonn.; -ñτε as a msc.du. in Nic.),
Saσnλnτηs [m.] (An. Ox.).
ETYM Unknown. The formation is like Xερуñτiç, кuvηуéτɩç, etc. (Schwyzer: 451).
There are several explanations. An analysis as daσ-лλñτ looks nice formally, but a
connection with лŋσíov, ä-λŋãoç, Dor. ǎ-лλãτoç ‘unapproachable', nλāts
'spouse' (Bechtel 1914) seems strange. The first member must then be connected
either to daσús (Osthoff MU 2 (1879): 46ff.), or to *Sa- 'house' in dá-лεdov.
Differently, Solmsen RhM 60 (1905): 497ff.; Schwyzer: 451.
daoús [adj.] ‘hairy'; ‘aspirated' as a grammatical term (Od., IA). <?►
•COMP Compounded with aµopí- (Hom.), ¿v- (Dsc.), ¿ní- (Thphr.), úлép- (X.), únó-
(Dsc.).
●DER daσúτŋs ‘hairiness, aspiration' (Arist.), Sáσos [n.] ‘thicket, shagginess' (Men.),
Sáσvμa eye-disease = τрά×шдα (Sever. Med.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 186f.); daovλλíç [f.]
hypocoristic of bears (EM 248, 55); Aaσúlios epithet of Dionysus (Paus.; acc. to EM
l.c. ларà τò Saσúvεν τàç άμлéλoç, because vine-branches are rough').
Denominative Saσúvoμaι, -w 'become, make hairy' (Ar.) with daouvτns, -τкÓS
'aspirating' (gramm.), daσvoμós (Dsc.). Note Saoкóv. daσú (H.); unless from
Sáσkiov as per Latte. On Sáoкiλλoç, see s.v.
ETYM The old connection with Lat. dēnsus depends on the development of -0- after
sonantic n. Hitt. daššu- 'heavy, strong' used to be added here too, but it is now rather
connected with Gr. Sɩdáσкw ‘learn' by Kloekhorst 2008, who reconstructs *de/oNs-
u- (cf. also ► dañvai). A pre-form *dntu- vel sim. was proposed because of PNs like
Delph. Aatus and Phth. Aaτvov, but the -Tv- in these names cannot reconciled with
the -ov- in Saσúç: the latter cannot reflect *-tu-.
datéquaɩ [v.] ‘to divide' (Il.). <IE *dh₂- ‘divide'>
•VAR Aor. Sáσ(σ)aσðaɩ, perf. dédagμat; from the aor. the new present dáσow (Call.
Fr. anon. 145).
•DIAL Myc. e-pi-de-da-to /epi-dedastoi/, e-pi-da-to /epi-dastos/.
•COMP Compounds with ava- (ávadaoμós 'redistribution'), ȧлo- (-dáσo,
-Saσμóç), diα-, εV-, кατα-, лоτ-.
●DER _datŋtýs‘divider' (A.), daτηpo 'dividing' (A. Th. 711; haplological for
*Satntýpios), Sárŋois (Poll.). Saσµós ‘distribution, tribute' (Il.) < *Sa‍t-qµós,
dáσμɛvoɩç ‘distribution' (X.), dáσµãτã. µɛpíóµãτa ‘parts' (H.); daστηp name of an
official (Aetol.). Lengthened present daτúσσεv. λaçúσσεv, ¿σðíɛv ‘to lap, eať (H.),
iterative preterite daσáσкετо (I 333).

=== page 177 ===

306
SaÜkog
•ETYM No exact parallel. The verb contains the zero grade Să- < *dh₂- of the root of
►Sñµoç, dāµoç, and Saíoμai. For the present formation, cf. лατéqµα and
Schwyzer: 705f. and 676.
бañкoç [m.] name of several Umbellates (Athamanta Cretensis, Peucedanum
Cervaria, Daucus Carota; Hp., Dsc., H.; see Andrews Class. Phil. 44 (1949): 185).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also Sauкov (Thphr.), Saúкɛtov (Nic.), Savкíov (Gp.); also dañxos (below),
Savxuós 'Cretensis' (Nic.), see also on ▸dávŋ 'laurel'.
●DER davkiτns (olvos), see Redard 1949: 96.
•ETYM The plants are characterized by their sharp smell and the bitter, burning taste
of the root, such that a connection with daíw 'kindle, burn' has been proposed; see
Frisk for older lit., where the scholia to Nic. Th. 94 on Savxчóç (v.l. dañкoc) are
mentioned: IIλoúτаρxoç лλɛíova µév qnoi yévn tñc Botávns elval, tò dè koɩvòv tñc
Svváµɛwç idíwμa §pчù кaì лvρñdɛç ‘Pl. says that there is more than one species of
the plant, the common peculiarity of the meaning being “sharp and fiery". However,
the name of the Daukos plants rather derives from their gummy sap, which is
collected from certain species and which burns with a bright flame; cf. Savxµóv.
EUKAVσTOV ÚλOV Sáqvns 'well-burning wood of the laurel'. Note the form кauкov in
Ps.-Dsc. 2, 139, which was influenced by кáw, кañσa. Mediterranean origin is quite
possible. Under Sάovn, it is argued that this is one and the same word; in addition,
Sauкoç and Sauxos are actually identical, too: Saúкov. τò μéνται Saúкov кai Saúxov
ypáqetai, ènì tivwv dè kai yλúkov H.).
davλós [adj.] 'thick, shaggy' (A.). <?/PG>
•VAR Saulos (Paus. Gr.).
•COMP Evdavλov. λox<µ>wdεç, daσú 'overgrown with bushes, rough' (H.).
•DER Aavlíç in Phocis?
•ETYM Cf. the antonyms чwλós, vós for the suffix (Chantraine 1933: 238). Direct
connection with daoús is impossible. If a suffix -- is assumed for Saσús, then
Savλós <*dnsu-lo- could remain with Lat. dēnsus.
Saúw [v.] 'to sleep' (Sapph. 83), davσεv• ¿кoчµÝßŋ ‘he fell asleep'; ådaúws. ¿ypŋyópws
'awake' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Improbably, Güntert 1914: 163. No better is the hypothesis of Bechtel 1921, 1:
118 (that the word is related to Skt. dosá- 'evening'). See under dɛíɛλoç.
Sáqvn [f.] 'laureľ (Od.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Variants: Xáøvn. Sáøvn. HIɛpyaчo (H.) and Saúxva (Thess., Cypr.) with
Aavxvatos (Aetol.); also Sauxμós 'Cretensis' (Nic., H.; see Sauкoç).
⚫DER Saqvíç 'laurel (Hp.; cf. кɛdpic and Chantraine 1933: 343), Saqvwv 'laurel wood'
(Str.), daövĩüç ‘Kassia of laurel, etc.' (Dsc.), -íτns (oĭvos, Gp.), epithet of Apollo in
Syracuse (H., EM). Adjectives: Saqvwdŋs ‘laurel-like' (E.), Sáqvivos 'from laurel'
(Thphr.), Saqviaкóç (AP), Saovýεç 'rich in laurels' (Nonn.), Saqvaños 'belonging to
the laureľ (Nonn.), also an epithet of Apollo (AP, Nonn.), Aaqvaía epithet of
Séελos
307
Artemis in Sparta (Paus.), also Aaqvía (Olympia, Str.). Aάoviç [m.] PN, Aaqvouc
TN.
•ETYM While it is obviously in some fashion related to Lat. laurus, dávŋ is a
typically Pre-Greek word that showing several types of variation. The variants Saq-
v- or Savк/x-(v/)- can be explained by assuming a proto-form *dak"-(n)- (note that
there is no *λavo-, see Pre-Greek B 1). Thus, Sapv- and Savк/x-v/μ- were one and
the same word originally.
daqoɩvós →da- and qoɩvós.
dayı入ńs →8ántW.
Sé [pcl.] adversative and copulative: 'but, and' (Il.). <IE *de deictic pcl.>
•VAR Myc. -de, e.g. da-mo-de/dāmos de/ 'but the people'.
•ETYM Probably from ▸d by means of vowel reduction, following the functional
bleaching, as per Leumann Mus. Helv. 6 (1949): 85ff. Because of Myc. -de, the
connection as *ge with OCS že ‘Sé' (as defended by e.g. Delbrück 1893-1900(2):
502ff.) is impossible.
-de [postp.] local (deictic) postposition governing the accusative of direction,
originally accentuated dé (A. D. Adv. 179, 5; 181,13, Hdn. 1, 498), later enclitic as
opposed to Sé 'but' (Il.). <IE *de deictic pcl.>
DIAL Myc. ku-do-ni-ja-de /Kudōnijān-de/; a-mo-te-jo-na-de /harmoteiōna-de/ 'to
the wheelwright'
⚫ETYM Identical with (ablauting) OCS do 'towards', Gm., e.g. OE to, OHG zuo 'to'
(IE *do); further, Lat. in-de and en-do, indu. The deictic function of -8ε is also
observed in ŏ-Sɛ, etc. See also Sεupo.
Séατo [v.] 'seemed', isolated imperfect 3sg. (242). <IE *deih₂- 'shine'>
⚫VAR Besides Sɛáµŋv. εdoкíµačov, έdóžačov 'I approved, supposed' and Séατα-
qaívɛtaɩ, dokɛī ‘it appears, seems' (H.); Arcadian subj. Sɛɑroɩ and (aor.) Sea[on]toɩ.
Here perhaps also the aorist Soáσσατo 'seemed', subj. SoáσσεTα (Hom.) for
*Sɛáσσɑto, -ɛtai after doε he expected' (Wackernagel 1916: 61f.), but cf. τpo×ášw
'I run quickly' from τpέxw 'I run'; see Ruijgh 1957: 130.
⚫ETYM The disyllabic root *deih₂- is continued in Séǎ-τo and in the adjective ▸ñλoç
< *Séa-λoç. There has been some debate on whether, in *-ViHC-, the laryngeal
assimilated to the yod or not (cf. the thematic optative in -ot-). If so, then our form
may continue a thematic verb in *deih₂-e-to. Sanskrit has di-de-ti ‘shines', ipv. di-di-
hí. See Sios, ►Zɛúc, ► déɛλoç.
8é8ae →8añval.
=
Sédia ⚫VAR Also dεdíσкoμaι, dɛdítτoµai. → dɛidw.
Séɛλos [m.] ‘binding'(?), only K 466. ◄IE *deh,- ‘bind▷
•var déelos. deoµóç, äµµɑ ‘band, bond' (H.).
•ETYM Although déɛλos has traditionally been identified with the adjective Sños
'clear', even since the ancient grammarians, Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 319 (see

=== page 178 ===

308
Sɛi
► Sñλoç) has convincingly argued that this is wrong. According to him, it is rather a
noun in the passage of the Iliad. Séɛλos is derived from Séw 'to bind with the suffix
-ελo-; its meaning could have been ‘tie' (cf. the gloss by H.; for another, less plausible
option, see Ruijgh 1.c.).
=>
dɛĩ → déw 2, déoμial.
dεidíσкoμα [v.] 'to greet, welcome' (Hom.). <IE [188] *deik- 'show'>
●var dɛidéxatai, -to, dɛik-vý-µεvoç, dɛiк-avówντo and dε(1)-diσк-óμεvoç.
•ETYM These forms were corrected into *Sŋdéxaτaι, etc. by Wackernagel BB 4 (1878):
268ff., who connected them with Skt. dāśnóti and wanted to restore the (supposed)
intensive reduplication in the Greek form (see Beekes 1969: 114). On the use of the
different forms, see Tichy Glotta 54 (1976): 71-84. Forssman Sprache 24 (1978): 3-24
showed that Set-, consistently found in the texts, is the correct reading. The form deɩ-
SEX- is the most difficult and replaces Set-diк- (Forssman $31). The other forms
replace *SEL-SIк-; the original meaning was 'to show'. Cf. also dηбéxatai.
dɛidw [v.] 'to fear' (II.). <IE *duei- 'fear'>
•VAR Old perfect continuing *dé-dƑoi-a; plur. dɛídiµɛv < *dé-dfɩ-µεv, with a new
sing. Sɛídia (Il.), Att. dédiµεv, dédia; new perfect Hom. dɛídoiкa, Att. dédoika < *dé-
SFO-Kα (doubtful is dɛdpoiкwç [for dedƑoi-]· <de>doɩкŵç H.?), with a new present
dɛdoíkw, fut. dɛdoɩknow (Sicily); sigmatic aorist dɛñoai (Il.) < *dƑɛî-σai (éddɛioɛ < **-
Sƒɛɩ-σɛ), them. root aor. in ëɛpì yàp díɛ (E 566, etc.) and Síov (X 251) < *SƑí-e, -ov
(11.); see on Síεµai; fut. dɛiooµai (Il.).
•DER To dɛídw: Sεid-ýµwv (П 56, Nonn.) after the adjectives in -nµwv (dań-µwv, etc.).
To dɛiσa: Sεiσíos dailós 'wretched' (H.); to dédoiкa: dɛdɛíkɛλov. ȧɛì чoẞоúμεvov,
Sɛóv 'frightened all the time' (H.) Expressive deverbative dɛdíσσqμa (epic), Att.
dεdítτoμai, aor. dɛidížαoðaı, dɛdíaσða 'be frightened', first < *dεdƑкoμα, unless
analogical after the verbs in *-(1)σσw. Innovation after the σк-verbs dediokoµai (Ar.).
Cf. also ▶déoç, ► deîµia, ► deilós, ► delvós.
•ETYM Sɛídw is related to Av. duuaēdā ‘threat', and, with an s-extension, Skt. dvéṣṭi
'hate'. Possibly, Lat. dīrus 'fearful' is to be connected (if a dialectal form from *duei-
ro- or *du̟eis-o-; cf. De Vaan 2008). Further related to ► díç ‘twice', ► dúw 1 ‘two’; see
Benveniste Word 10 (1954): 254f. The comparison with Arm. erknč'im, etc. 'to fear' is
rejected by Kortlandt AAL 10 (1989): 43-52.
dɛíɛλos [adj.] ‘of the afternoon, of the evening', [m.] ‘evening' (Od.). <?>
•VAR -óv Hdn. Also dɛíɛλov [n.] 'evening meal' (Call.); denominative Sɛɛλinσaç
‘after the evening meal' (p 599; after έστñσaç).
•DER Sɛíλn [f.] 'afternoon, evening' (also 111, unless to be read Sɛiελn, Wackernagel
1916: 166; Hdt.) with devós (LXX), dɛɛivós (Theoc.). Doubtful denominative
SENETO (289; read by Aristarchus for SúσεTO); see Schwyzer 722f. Uncertain
ɛɛoç (Alc. POxy. 2165 I 3), of Xópoc; see Gentili Maia 3 (1950): 255f. Cf.
309
•ETYM The word is not related to Skt. doșă- ‘evening', etc., nor to dñλoç. Ruijgh
Lingua 25 (1970): 319 argues that dɛiɛλoç must be connected with Myc. e-u-de-we-ro
/eu-deiwelos/.
Seikavówvto →dndéxatai.
бεíкvчд [v.] 'to show' (Il.). <IE *deik- 'show'>
•VAR Also them. Sɛikvów; Ion. Sékvyµ, Cret. Síkvuti, aor. Sɛižai.
•COMP Often with prefix: åño-, ¿v-, ¿nɩ-, kata-, napadɛíkvyµ, etc.
•DER dɛî\ıç, frequent compounds åлó-, év-, éëí-dɛɩɩç, etc. (IA); dɛчyµa ‘proof,
napá-, év-, éñí-deуµа, etc. (IA), with лapa-dɛyµatikós, dɛiyµatíšw, dɛiyuatioµiós,
etc. (Arist.). Agent nouns: dɛíкτηç, ¿v-, пpo-dɛíktηç, etc. (Hell.) with dεiktikóç, áño-,
EV-SELкTIкÓç, etc. (Att., Arist.). Nomen loci: Sεктηpιoν 'scene' (pap., EM) with
dɛiktηpiás [f.] ‘mime' (Plb.). Isolated Sɛíкηlov ((mimic) performance, picture,
sculpture' (Hdt.; see Chantraine 1933: 242, Schwyzer: 484) with dɛikηlíktās (Dor.)
‘actor, úлoкpiτńs̟' (Plu.); also dɛíkeλov (Democr.) and Sɛíкavov (EM). See on ►Síкn.
•ETYM With the exception of Cret. Síкvʊt and the noun díkŋ, the Greek vv-present
with secondary full grade has ousted all other ablaut forms. Outside Greek, we find
thematic presents, e.g. Lat. dīcō (old deicō) 'speak', Go. ga-teihan 'show, make clear',
OHG zihan, MoHG zeihen 'accuse', Skt. diśáti 'show, demonstrate'. Other
formations are the Sanskrit intensive dédiște, the Iranian yod-present Av. disiieiti
'show', and deverbatives as Lat. dicāre, OHG zeigōn 'show'. Cf. in general Gonda
1929. Hitt. tekkuššije/a-zi 'to show' is not related (see Kloekhorst 2008). See also
·Sndéxatai.
Seiλn ⚫VAR Also Sɛíλɛτo. Sɛiɛλoç.
=>
dɛɩλós [adj.] ‘cowardly, miserable' (Il.). ◄IE *duei- ‘fear'>
•COMP ǎ-, Opaσú-, лάν-, лερí-.
•DER SEIλía 'cowardice, uselessness' (IA) with Setλtáw 'fear' (LXX), άлo-dελáw (Pl.)
and (áлo-)dɛilíaσis (Plb.); dɛilóτηs (H.) and denominative Setλaívw 'be fearful'
(Arist.), Sɛλóoμai (S. Ichn. 150?, LXX); dɛiliaívw 'make fearful' (LXX). Expressive
Sɛíaos 'wretcheď (Emp.), dɛλαóτηs (sch.); dɛíλaкpoç (Ar.; Frisk 1934: 63f.),
Sɛiλakpíwv (Ar.), deiλakpivas (EM).
•ETYM Usually analyzed as *SƑɛi-λós or *Sfei-eλós, a stem in -λo- beside *SƑɛños >
Séoç, comparable to the pair vɛqέλn: véqoç. However, Kuiper Glotta 75 (1999): 63-67
finds the meaning 'cowardly' only in N 278; elsewhere in Homer, it means 'vile,
worthless, miserable, wretched'. Moreover, the initial 8- does not make position, and
out of 36 instances, detλóç is never found in hexameter-initial position, which shows
that it was probably *Sɛɛλóç. Therefore, he prefers a connection with Skt. dīná-
'weak, minor, miserable' < *dih,-no-; dɛɩλós then reflects *deih,-(e)lo-.
Seчua [n.] 'fear' (Il.). <IE *duei- 'fear'>
•DER Sɛчaλéoç ‘timid' ([Arist.] Phgn., Mosch.; cf. apσaléos, quεpdaλéos, etc.),
Sεчματóε (AP), dɛчµaτηpós (A. D.), dɛчατódŋç (Aret.), Aɛчμaτíaç epithet of Zeus
(D. H.), Aɛíµaç PN (cf. Schwyzer: 526). Denominative dɛquaívw 'be afraid (h. Ap.),

=== page 179 ===

310
Seiva,ó(n, tó)
dequatóoµai, -ów ‘to get, make frightened' (Hdt.) with dɛµáτwσiç. Often personified
as Aɛчµoç 'Fear' (II.).
•ETYM From *dƑεч-µa, related to ► dɛidw.
deĩva, ó (ǹ, tó) [?] ‘N. N., mr. so-and-so' (Att.). <?>
•VAR TOU SƐivoç, oi dɛivɛç, etc., sometimes indecl. τou dɛīva (more forms in
Schwyzer: 612), always with the article.
⚫ETYM Unknown. The explanation from plur. *τádε žva (cf. ¿кɛĭvoc) 'this (and) that'
> *τadɛīva, with analogical ó Sɛïva, has now been abandoned: the singular forms are
much more common than the plural forms. Biraud 1994: 57-69 proposes that it
consists of *de (proximate deixis) + pronominal *en- (with distant deixis) and final
adverbial -a, lit. 'Mister-this-or-that-way'.
dɛɩvóc [adj.] 'fearful, terrible', also 'awesome, strong, extraordinary', etc. (II.). <IE
*duei-no- 'fearful➤
●COMP лáv-, лεpí-, úñép-.
•DER Sεivóτηs (Att.), especially as a rhetorical term. Denominative Sɛvów 'to
exaggerate, magnify' (Th.), together with dɛívwoɩs (Pl.) with dɛivwtikós (Corn.) and
dɛívwµa (Phld.); dɛvá (w 'to be in fear' (LXX). PN AƑèvías (Cor.). Expressive
Aɛváкwv (inscr.; Schwyzer: 417).
•ETYM From *SFat-vóc, related to » ÔeíÔc. The pair khavóc (< *k\eFeo-vóc): a-
Kλε(F)ns enables an alternative analysis of davóc beside *à-dƑεińc (> à-deńc):
namely, from a basis *SFɛɛσ-vóc, with early contraction.
бεчлvov [n.] 'meal' (II.). <PG?>
⚫COMP With -бεлvоν as a second member: 1. substantives àpiστó-, λoyó-, чɛvdó-; 2.
Bahuvrīhis in -dɛлvоç like ǎ-, σúv-, qiλó-. As a first member: dɛiävηotos (-óc), scil.
kaɩpóç ‘time for eating' (p 170), from dɛлvov and 8- ‘eat' (with compositional
lengthening), with To- as in Soряηστó (s.v. ►Оópлov) and ǎpiστov; also
бεлνηστÚç 'id.' (H.).
•DER Diminutive dεлvíov (Ar.), §εɩлvápιov (Diph., AP). Sɛinvītis (στoλý) ‘cloth for
meal' (D. C.). бεiлvooúvη = dɛïëvоу (Matro; parodizing); Aɛлvεúç [m.] a hero in
Achaia (Ath.). Denominative бεлvéш 'to have dεлvoν' (II.), whence dεη
'guest' (Plb.) with dεлуητкóç (Аг.) and бεлуητηрov ‘dining room' (J.). dɛiñvíčw 'to
entertain (a guest)' (Od.) with dεɩɩστηрov 'dining room' (Mantinea I³); on
Sεɩлvéш and бεɩлvíчw seе Schwyzer: 736.
⚫ETYM No etymology; perhaps of Pre-Greek origin. Fur.: 339 assumes that it derives
from *Saɩлvov and compares dάïτw, Lat. daps, damnum, etc.
dɛɩpáç, -ádoç [f.] 'height, mountain ridge' (h. Ap.). The exact mg. is uncertain; see
DELG. PG?(S)►
●DIAL Cret. Sŋpás.
•COMP As a second member in vyí-dɛipoç.
•DER Without suffix (or from depη; see below): Sɛpañoç ‘hilly' (Lyc.). Also dɛîpoç.
Aóчoç. kai ávávτηс τóлоç 'ridge; steep place' (H.); derived from úví-Sapoç?
8éka
311
⚫ETYM On the assumption that dɛpáç goes back to *Sɛpσáç, it was connected with
Skt. dṛṣád- ‘rock, millstone', but this etymology must be abandoned because *-ad- is
not an IE suffix (Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 741f.). Alternatively, Ehrlich KZ 39 (1906):
569f. posited a pre-form *g"erio-, relating it to ẞopéac, etc. (s.v.; also Forbes Glotta
36 (1958): 248). However, Miller Glotta 54 (1976): 159ff. showed that the Attic word is
epic, and probably Homeric in origin, so that it can reflect depƑ-ad- (which also
matches Cret. Snpác), which makes a connection with Att. Sépη 'neck, ridge'
possible (for the semantics, cf. the gloss Sɛipoç. Xópos H.). Although there are no
other indications, the suffix may point to Pre-Greek origin. See dépn.
Sεlpý → Sépŋ.
deiptāv [v.] · Aoɩdopeĩobai. Aákwveç ‘to abuse [Lacon.]'; dɛipɛïoɩ oídopo ‘railers'. oi
avτoí; Sɛpía. Aodopía 'reproaches' (H.; Bechtel 1921, 2: 370 corrects into deptāv,
Sepiatol.; van Herwerden 1910: 192 into Sηpiñv, etc.). <?>
•ETYM Bezzenberger BB 16 (1890): 248 and Zupitza 1896: 78 have implausibly
suggested connections with Skt. járate ‘crackles, roars, sounds', OHG queran ‘tipple',
etc.; so far, the word remains without etymology. See also ▸ AoiSopέw.
Sɛoa [f.] 'slime, filth' (pap. IIª, Suid., EM), Sɛíσ-očoç 'having a bad smell' (AP). <?>
●COMP Compound ädetos. åkáðaptoç. Kúrpioi ‘filthy (Cypr.)' (H.) with loss of -σ-,
as is regular in Cypr.
•DER detσaléos (Clem. Al., Suid., H.), Saσalía = áкaðapσía (Thd., H.); cf.
Debrunner IF 23 (1908-1909): 23f. and 38.
⚫ETYM Unknown. Solmsen 1909: 236f. connects the word with OCS židok succosus,
údapóc' and Ru. žídkij 'thin, fluid, slim'. See also Lasso de la Vega Emerita 22 (1954):
89.
dɛiσíaç [acc.pl.f.] кpɛwv ‘of meat' (IG 2², 1356 [Attica IVa init]). <?➤
•VAR Also deiσiáda. tǹv µoîpav ‘lot', oi è чpíav 'double share' (H.), cf. Sixás
'half, uováç 'unit', etc. (Chantraine 1933: 358).
•ETYM Unknown.
Sέka [num.] ‘ten' (Il.). <IE *dekm 'ten'>
•COMP 'eleven', 'twelve': "v-, 8w-, also Svw-, Svó-.
•DER Inherited (see below) Séкaτoç (Arc. Lesb. Séкoτoç, cf. Arc. Suwdeкo) 'tenth';
fem. бɛкáτη (sc. μεpíc) 'the tenth' (IA) with dɛкατɛúw 'to exact tithe' (IA), with
Sεкáτεvμα (Call.), deкάτevσç (D. H.), dɛкаτɛíα (Plu.), dɛкaτεvτnc (Harp.) and
dekatevtýpiov ‘custom house' (X.); rare dɛкατów ‘id.' (Ep. Hebr.); dɛkatóç
‘sentenced to a fine of one tenth of one's property' (Cyren.), haplological for
deka[tw]tós or deka[tev]tós; dekáτŋ (scil. ŋµépa) ‘the tenth day of the month or
after the birth of a child, when the name was given' (IA) with dɛkataĩoç (Pl.) and
SEкατσταí (Bithynia; see Chantraine 1933: 318f.). Sɛkás, -ádoc [f.] ‘decade, group of
ten, especially soldiers', dɛкadɛúç 'member of a decade' (X.) also 'president of a
college of ten men' (Troezen), dɛкadıкóç (Herm. Alex. in Phdr.), dɛкadiotńs, -iotpia
(Delos) = dεкατiστýs; Thphr. Char. 27, 11. Sɛkavós ‘decurio, surveyor' with dɛkavía,
Sɛкaviкóç (pap., cf. Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 88), Macedonian (von Wilamowitz 1932:

=== page 180 ===

312
Sekálw
SελQiç, -ivoc
313
4012). Isolated denominative ‣deкáčw ‘to bribe (the judges)' (Att.) whence dɛkaσµós
(D. H.). Uncertain OAtt. Sɛкãv (IG 12, 919).
•ETYM Gr. Séka, Lat. decem, Skt. dáśa, Go. taihun, etc. derive from IE *dékm. Besides
this, there is a collective formation in -t- (Sommer 1950: 21'; also on Sekákis, -iv),
seen in Skt. daśát, Lith. dēšimt, OCS desętь, and Alb. dhjetë ‘ten', as well as in the
ordinals Séкατoç, Lith. dešimtas, OCS desęto, Go. taihunda, etc., IE *dékmto-. Lat.
decimus, OIr. dechmad, and Skt. daśamá-, however, derive from *dekmHo-. The
collective dɛкáç is a Greek innovation: on the suffix (= Hitt. -ant/d-), see Sommer
MSS 4 (1954): 1ff. See also ɛiкoσι and εкατÓV.
dɛká¼w [v.] ‘to bribe (a judge)' (D. H.). <GR►
⚫ETYM From Séкoμat, in the sense to make accept?? See Oldfather in PW 13: 2398 and
Szemerényi 1964: 126-8.
dékouai → déxopai.
dektǹ [f.] · xλaïva, xλavíc ‘upper-garment' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. von Blumenthal 1930: 25' implausibly assumed dissimilation of
*TεкTη, which would then be related to Lat. tegō, toga.
délɛap, -atos [n.] 'decoy, bait' (IA). <IE? *g"elh,-ur➤
•VAR Plur. Sɛíλaτa, also déλevpa (see below).
•DER Denominative dɛɛά(w 'entice' (IA) with Sεléασµa (Ar.), delɛaoµátov
(Philox.), Sɛɛασµós (Arist.) and the instrument names dɛλɛáστpa ‘baited trap'
(Cratin.), Sɛλéαστpov ‘id.' (Nicoph.); with dɛλaστpɛúç 'fisher with baited trap' (Nic.;
metri causa for *Sɛɛa-, see Boßhardt 1942: 68). With the same mg. dɛílaτa [pl.]
(Call. Fr. 458), Seλýτov (Sophr.; deλñti. deλéati H.), бéλɛτpov (Numen. apud Ath.,
Opp.; after the instr. names in -τpov), déλos (PMagPar. 1, 939, Eust.; innovated after
the neuters in -oc).
•ETYM The plural déλɛvpa (Ath.) suggests that déλɛap goes back to an original r/n-
stem *Séλɛ-Ƒap; cf. the plur. äλɛupa to *äλε-Ƒap. The root form dɛλɛ- also occurs in
delýtiov < *delɛátɩov and in recent déλɛtpov (see Chantraine 1933: 332f.). Late
Sεíλata, the only deviating form, may derive from *Sελ-Fατα. Besides Sελε-, we find
the root form Bλη- in ßλñρ (Alc.), from *ẞλñ-(F)ap or *Bλé-(F)ap. The pair ẞλñp ~
Séλɛap points to *g"(e)lh,-ur with initial *g"-, but further cognates are unknown.
Any connection with Biẞpwoкw (s.v.; allegedly with p > λ dissimalation) can be
excluded because that word has a root-final h3 instead. Hardly better is the
suggestion to connect Arm. klanem, aor. ekul 'to devour', Ru. glotáť ‘to swallow', Lat.
gula, gluttio 'to devour'. On the basis of the similarity in form, one might consider a
connection with Báλw instead (p.c. M. de Vaan).
=>
Séλetpov 1 → Sélɛap.
SÉλετpov 2 [n.] 'torch' (Timach. apud Ath. 15, 699e, H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Osthoff ZONF 13 (1937): 6 connects the word with Skt. jválati 'to burn fiercely,
blaze'; this is correctly rejected by Hofmann (ibid.).
dɛλkavóç [m.] an unknown fish (Euthyd. apud Ath. 3, 118b). ◄GR➤
⚫ETYM From the river Aéλкwv? Cf. Aέλкoç. λíμvη ¿xОvocópos rɛpì τǹv Opάкηу ‘a
creek rich in fish around Thracia' (H.); cf. Strömberg 1943: 85.
Séð×¢ [f.] · σqñkeç, i Čiov öµo
.
(H., Hdn. Gr. 1, 89). ◄PG?►
wasps, or an animal similar to a bee'
•DER SEλλíеiα. ȧvеpηvia. oi è кηpía 'wasp's nests; others honeycombs' (H.).
•ETYM The formation is reminiscent of opvi-0εç. There seem no reason to connect it
with Bɛlóvŋ. The geminate λ could continue a phoneme l, in which case the
word would be Pre-Greek. Forms from Lower Italy are mentioned in Rohlfs 1930:
520.
Séλτα [n.] 'the letter delta, delta of a river'. <LW Sem.>
•VAR Gen. SéλτατоS Democr. 20; further uninflected.
•DER SEλτwτós 'formed like the déλτα' (Arat., Eratosth.).
•ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. dāleth, properly 'gate'; see Schwyzer: 140 y.
Sέλtoç [f.] ‘writing tablet' (IA). <LW Sem.>
•DIAL Cypr. SáλTOS.
•DER SEλtíov (Hdt.), deλτápiov (Plb.). Denominative dελτóqμa 'write on a tableť
(A. Supp. 179). See ►ådɛaλτwhaιɛ.
ETYM Note that ẞúẞλos 'papyrus' is also fem. (Schwyzer 1950: 344). The old idea to
connect Saidά\\w, Lat. dolāre (and even e.g. OHG zelt ‘tent' < PGm. *teldá- [n.]),
which takes Cypr. Sáλτoç as an old zero grade variant, is obsolete; the difference in
meaning is too large. Semitic origin is mostly accepted now (Lewy 1895: 171, E.
Masson 1967: 61-65). The Cypriot form confirms this. Hebr. has delet ‘gate', plur.
'columns of writing', as well as ‘tablet' (Lachish); cf. also Ugar. and Phoen. dlt. Were
SάλкιOV. лVáкιov, оľov уρашματídiov both 'small tablet' (H.) formed after лváкιov?
Latte corrects it to Sáλτov, which is better.
déλqaž, -akoç [f.] ([m.]) ‘mother swine', as opposed to xoчpos 'young pig' (IA). <IE
*gelbhu- 'womb'>>
•DER Diminutive Sɛλoáкiov (Att.) and dɛλqakis (pap. and Ostr.); also deλqakívn
'id.' (Epich. 124, 2; Chantraine 1933: 204), adjective deλáкεoç (Pherecr.).
Denominative Seλчакóоμаι 'become a 8.' (Ar. Ach. 786).
ETYM For the suffix, cf. кópač, σкúλač (Schwyzer: 497, Chantraine 1933: 377ff.), but
otherwise the exact origin is unclear. Probably from a word for 'womb' (dɛλqúc,
*Séλqoç? See ► ådeλqóc). Cf. ► deλpis, ▸ Aeλpoi.
8É入prE → Ae入por.
deλqiç, -īvos [m.] ‘dolphin' (Il.). ◄IE *g*elbhu- 'womb'>
•VAR Late nom. -ív.
DIAL Lesb. BéλQIVES (EM).
●Der deλqiviokos (Arist.) and delivάpiov (Hero). Aɛλqivos “dolphin-god”, epithet
of Apollo (h. Ap.); Aɛloívov temple of Ap. Delphinios in Athens (Att.); also
Aɛλqídios (Knossos). Seλoívov and Seλqiviás (Ps.-Dsc.) plant name (after the form

=== page 181 ===

314
Ae入poi
of the leaves, Strömberg 1940: 42); delivɛos (Cyran.) and Sɛqıvíç (Luc.).
Denominative Sɛλoví(w 'to dive like a dolphin' (Luc.).
•ETYM Cf. άкτíç, yλwxic, etc. for the inflexion. Connected to a word for 'womb'; see
►Sɛlqús and ►ådɛλqɛóç. Thus, the dolphin was named after its anatomical
characteristics.
Aɛλqoí [m.pl.] name of the inhabitants of Delphi (also attributive) and of the town
itself (h. Hom.). <IE *gelbu- 'womb'>
•DIAL Aeol. Beλqoí; secondary dialectal forms are Aalooí, Aolqoi, Aɛpqoí
(Schwyzer: 205, 213, 275).
•DER Fem. Aɛλqiç 'Delphian' (Delph., S.), adjective Aɛλqiкós (S.); déλqıε, -ĭkoç 'table
made after the Delphic tripod' (Plu., EM), = Lat. (mensa) Delphica.
⚫ETYM Acc. to Lundahl Namn och bygd 31 (1943): 42ff., the place was originally called
*Aɛλquç 'womb' after the shape of the land. The inhabitants were called *Aελof-oí >
Aελqoí (cf. *åστF-ós to ǎσTv); this form was then later used for the place as well.
deλqúc, -vos [f.] 'womb' (Hp.). <IE *g" elbhu- 'womb'>>
•VAR Dor. Sɛλqúa [f.] (Greg. Cor.; after µýτpa ‘womb’?).
•DER Also Soλqóç. ǹ µητpα ‘id.' (H.).
•ETYM Beside the feminine word for 'womb', there is the zero grade neuter Av.
gǝrǝbuš- ‘young animal'; therefore, for dɛλqús an s-stem may be considered as well
(Schwyzer: 516). Soλoós corresponds to Skt. gárbha-, Av. garǝßa- [m.] 'womb'. The
Greek form with a labiovelar (*gelb-u-, *golbh-o-) does not accord well with the *k-
in Gm. forms like OHG kilbur [n.] 'ewe lamb', OHG kalb 'calf, etc., which therefore
have to remain apart, unless we assume dissimilation g™ > g.
Séμaç → Séμw.
dɛµɛλéaç [acc.pl.f.] ‘leeches' (Epid.). <?>
•DER Also Sεμẞλεïç· ßdéλλai ‘leeches' (H.; with -μẞλ- from -μλ-). But the gloss stands
between Séμεɩ and déμvia, so perhaps with Bücheler and Latte for (*)dεµɛɛïç?
•ETYM Unexplained. There are attempts to connect the word with Lat. lumbricus
'intestinal worm' in Bq and WH. Connection with Alb. dhem je 'maggot' is doubtful.
déµvia [n.pl.] ‘beď (Il.). <?►
•VAR Rarely sing. -tov.
•ETYM If déµva originally indicated the connective elements of the bed, we can
consider a connection with кpη-бεμvov 'headband'. Then Séμvia could be a
derivation in -to- to an n-stem *Séµa (see déw 'bind'). Séµw 'to build has also been
adduced (Meister BB 11 (1886): 176).
déµw [v.] ‘to build' (Il.). <IE *demh,- 'build'>
•VAR Aor. Sɛчuaι, perf. med. Sédµηµai, Dor. Sédµāµai.
•DIAL Myc. de-me-o-te /deme¹ontes/ ptc. fut. to-ko-do-mo /toiko-domos/, na-u-do-
mo/nau-domos/, e-te-do-mo /entesdomos/?
SévSpεov
315
•COMP Old compounds vɛó-dµãτos, vɛó-dµn-tos (Pi.). See also μεσódµŋ. Agent
noun oiкodóμoç, to which oiкoбoμέw 'to build'; adjectival vao-, луo-dóμ
'building of temple, fortifications'.
●DER Séµaç (only nom. and acc.) ‘bodily shape, outward appearance' (Il.) with
analogical -aç, Soµý ‘id.' (A. R.), also = 'tεixoç, oiкodoμη (H., uncertain J. AJ 15, 11,
‘teixos, oikodoµý
3) with doµañoç ‘useful for building' (A. R.); see also on ▶ Sóµoç, ► dŵµa, ► dŵ.
Deverbative aor. Swµñoai, -ŋoaoðai (A. R.; Swµýσovoiv. oikodoµýσovoɩ H.), from
*Swµáw (or *Swµέw?, Schwyzer: 719), with Sóµŋua (Lycia), έvdwµnois (Smyrna IP,
etc.), Swµnoiç, Swµntús H., Swµýτwp (Man.). A short vowel appears in some late
forms: doμéovɩɩ oiкodoµovtɩ H., dεdoµηµévos (J., Aristid.) with Sóµnoiç, dóµnua
(J.), Soµýtwp (Anon. Prog. in Rh.); from oiкo-doµέw (IA)?
⚫ETYM The present déµw has a parallel in the Gm. verb Go. ga-timan, OS teman,
OHG zeman 'to befit'. Dor. vɛódµātoç, dédµāµai are hyperdorisms, as the root had
-h,- see Beekes 1969: 291 add. to p. 202, who adduces spellings with ŋ in Pindar;
likewise Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 316, who points to Myc. de-me-o-te. Further
connected is HLuw. ta+mi-ha ‘I builť.
:
Different from the reconstruction that the Greek data require (in my view), is that of
LIV² with *-h₂ (s.v. 1. *demh₂-). See further ▸dɛσñóτηs.
Sév [n.] 'something' (Democr. 156). ◄GR►
•VAR Gen. Sɛvóc (Alc. 76; uncertain).
•ETYM From ovdév, µŋdév; cf. Leumann 1950: 10868.
devdalis, -idos [f.] 'kind of barley-cake' (Nicopho, Eratosth.); Sevdalídas. oi µèv
ǎvôos tɩ, äλλa tàs λevkàs káxpus, oi dè tàs έntioliévas kpiðàs npò toù ôpvyñval, oi
dè tàç έк кpiðŵv µášaç yɛvoµévaç 'flower; white parched barley; winnowed barley
corns for roasting; cake produced from barley corns' (H.). The a is short in
Nicophon. <PG?(0) ►
VAR Also Savdaλíc H., Pollux.
⚫ETYM Cf. σεμídaλiç 'fine wheat flour'; further unknown. Nevertheless, the last word
is probably from Akkadian samīdu. One may consider a reduplication da/e-n-dali-
with prenasalization, in which case Sevdaλís could be Pre-Greek.
dɛvdíλλw [v.] ‘to turn the eyes to, glance quickly' (I 180, A. R. 3, 281, S. Fr. 1039). <?►
•DER Sεvíε• σкαpdaµúττε, diavɛvel, oŋpaivεi, átiµášɛi, okwлτε 'he blinks,
winks; nods, beckons; indicates; does not respect; jeers at (H.). Here Aévdiλoç,
Decourt 1995: nº 50, 40?
•ETYM Although dɛví\\w certainly has intensive reduplication, its etymology is
unknown. For suggestions, see Wood Class. Phil. 9 (1914): 145, Charpentier KZ 47
(1915): 183, Fraenkel Gnomon 22 (1950): 239, and Grošelj Živa Ant. 2 (1952): 66f.
Sevdiλw has nothing to do with da(v) daivw, which may be Pre-Greek (from
*da(n)-dan-yw).
Sévбpɛov [n.] 'tree' (Hom., Pi.). <IE? *doru, dreu- 'tree'>>
•VAR Also Sévɗpov (Att.); dévɗpoç [n.], also [m.], (Ion. Dor.; see below); gen.
Sèvdpɛos (Hdt.), see Schwyzer: 583.

=== page 182 ===

316
SεvSpúw
COMP 1. substantives like кapvó-, ó-, podó-, στaquλó-dɛvdpov; 2. many
bahuvrihis in -Sεvбpoç.
●DER Sɛvɗp-úqɩov (Thphr.; see Schwyzer: 471), Sevdpíov (Agathocl.). Sevdpwdns
'rich in trees' (Hp.), devdpηes ‘rich in trees' (Od.), dɛvdpítns, -ītis ‘belonging to the
tree', also name of a stone (Thphr.), rare devdpútηs, -ŵtis ‘grown with trees' (Hdn.,
E.); dɛvdpikós ‘belonging to a tree' (Thphr.), dɛvdpíakós ‘id.' (AP), Sévdpɩvos ‘id.'
(gloss.), SevSpañoç 'from trees' (Nonn.), dɛvdpás [f.] ‘id.' (Nonn.). SɛvSpwv and
SévSpwua 'thicket' (Aq.). Denominative dɛvdpóoμat, -ów 'to grow to a tree, change
into a tree' (Thphr.) with dévdpwots (Thphr.). On dɛvdpválw see dεvd púw.
⚫ETYM The form dévôpoç is modelled after the plural forms dévdpɛa, -éwv (to
SévSpɛov). The usual Attic form dévdpov is also secondary (cf. ȧdeλpós from
ådɛλqɛóç?); see Wackernagel 1916: 109f., Shipp 1967: 21f., 55. dévdpeov < *dévdpefov
agrees with the Gm. word for 'tree': Go. triu, OE trēow ‘tree', etc., PGm. *trewa- < IE
*dreu-o-. But the form of the Greek reduplication is rare (not comparable with
► yάyypaɩva, as per DELG). See further ▶Sópu, ▶Spūç. Janda 1997 assumes *dem-
dreu-om 'tree planted near the house', and similarly Strunk 1995: 357-63. However, a
compound with such a meaning strikes me as utterly strange.
Sevɗpúw [v.] ‘to dive into the water' (Epid.). <?►
•DER Lengthened dɛvôрváčɛv. τò katadúvɛiv kai кρúлтɛσðαɩ, кvρíws ɛiç tàç dpûç,
kataxpnotikŵs dè kaì ènì toũ ánλŵç dúvɛiv kai kpúлτяν ‘duck and hide, mainly in
the woods, but also misused for diving and hiding in general' (EM 255, 55); similar H.
and Paus. Gr. Fr. 119: tò Spvoi okénɛoðai kai tò kað’ üdatos dúɛoðaɩ êtλ. ‘to hide
among trees, also to dive under water, etc.'.
⚫ETYM Intensive reduplication of Spúετaι· кpúлτετаι 'hides', Spáσai.
katakoλvµßñoai ‘dive down' (H.; not shortened from <dev>dpúetal, <dev>dpváσal,
as per Latte). Spúɛtat is often considered to go back to *vpúɛtaɩ, which would make
a connection possible with Lith. neriù, nérti 'to dive, slip into', CS vб-nьro, vб-nrěti
'ларεiσdúεσðaι', etc. (which require a set-root *nerH-). See Frisk Eranos 40 (1942):
81ff.
Sévvos [m.] 'reproach' (Hdt., probably also Archil. 65 [cod. davoïç]). <?>
•DER Further devvá¼w (cf. кvdá(w) 'abuse, revile' (Thgn.); Sevvóv. какoλóуov
'slanderous'; Sevvαστóν· кαταуέλаστov, opоú
кTAYέλWTOS
'ridiculous, reproached with absurdity' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown. Untenable suggestions are contained in Bq., Pok. 466. The
geminate is not expressive; see Hoffmann 1898: 583.
dežaµevý →déxopai.
Sɛžióç [adj.] ‘(to the right (side)' (Il.). ◄IE *deks- ‘right’>>
•DIAL Myc. PN de-ki-si-wo /deksiwos/; also Pamphyl. dɛƑoç (Masson Glotta 39.
(1960): 111f.).
•COMP With ȧ-, àμ-, àµτεpo-, etc.
●DER dežiá, Ion. -in ‘the right hand (Il.); dɛžitɛpós ‘on the right side' (Il.). dežiótŋs
'dexterity, cleverness' (IA). εtóoµat 'to take by the right hand, welcome, greet, etc.'
8épkozial
317
(h. Hom., Att.) together with dɛíwous 'greeting' Ph.), dɛчiwτɩкóç 'welcome' (Eust.),
dɛžíwµa ‘id.' (S.; v.l. dežíaµa); dešiάoμaι 'to welcome' (LXX, pap.) after άonášoµai.
•ETYM If it is from *dɛžiƑós (Wackernagel 1897: 11; cf. ►λalós, ► okaιós), the word is
identical with Gaul. Dexsiva dea (see Porzig 1954a: 138). Celt. and Gm. have forms
with a suffix -ụo-, but without -i-, e.g. OIr. dess, Go. taihswa, OHG zeso, zesawer
'right', IE *deks-uo-. IIr. and BSI. have a derivative in -n-, e.g. Skt. dákṣiņa-
(dakṣiná-), Lith. dēšinas; Albanian has djath-(t)ë, etc., perhaps from *deks(i)- (see
Demiraj 1997 s.v.). dɛžitɛpóç = Lat. dexter. Further, see ▸déxoμai.
déoμai → Sźw 2.
déos [n.] ‘fear' (Il.; on the mg. Schadewaldt Herm. 83 (1955): 129ff.). ◄ IE *duei- ‘fear’▷
•DER As a second member e.g. in å-dens ‘fearless' (Il.), Oɛovdńs ‘godfearing' (Od.)
from *0εo-dƑens, Att. PN ☹ovdñs.
•ETYM From *SƑεños, a verbal abstract of dɛídw.
déñaç, -aoç [n.] ‘goblet (Il.; on the meaning see Brommer Herm. 77 (1942): 357f.,
364f.). <PG➤
•DIAL Myc. di-pa /dipas/, di-pa-e /dipa¹e/ [du.].
•DER Poetical lengthening déлαστpov ‘'id.' (Antim.) with dɛлαστрαños (Lyc.), see
Chantraine 1933: 333f.
•ETYM Pre-Greek, like many other words for cups, etc. The interchange ε/ 1 is
frequent (Fur.: 353ff., Hester Minos 6 (1958): 24-36). On -еpov/-στpov, see Fur.: 30237
and 30339. Perhaps the same word as HLuw. tipas- 'heaven'.
Sépn [f.] 'neck, throat' (Att.). <?>
●VAR Ion. Seɩpń (since Il.). Poetical innovation dɛipɛa [pl.] (Euph.), after µéλɛa
‘limbs', undɛa ‘genitals', Xεíλɛa ‘lips', etc.; also dépię (Alciphr., H.), cf þáxis 'spine',
etc.
•DIAL Arc. Sepfa, Lesb. Sépa (Sapph.).
•COMP Several poetical bahuvrīhis only with -Sɛpos, as a first member only
Sɛpaxons (AP), бεчрокúлελλov (Luc.), dεрóлаç (Lyc.). Epic compound
(àлo)Sεipoτoμéw 'to cut off the neck', as if from *delpo-tórios.
⚫DER Diminutive dɛpádov (Poll.); Sépatov 'necklace' (E.), from лεpɩбép-aɩov ‘id.'
(Ar.); Séptov ‘id.' (Charis.); depηtýs = otpovłós (Nic. Fr. 123), depßiotýp [= depf-]
(EM), dɛp[p]ɩotńp. repidépaiov ïллov 'collar of a horse', dep[p]ɩotýs. kuváyxn
nepiavõévios ‘dog's collar' (H.); cf. ẞpaxioviotýp s.v. ► ßpaxiwv.
•ETYM Sépŋ and daɩpn, which reflect PGr. SepƑā (= Arc.), have been compared with
Skt. grīvā-, Ru. gríva (originally ‘neck'; cf. Ru. grívna 'collar'), Latv. grīva 'mouth of a
river'. Apart from the highly problematic 'extension' with -i-, this etymology,
requires a reconstruction *ger-ueh2-, but Aeol. Sɛpa (instead of the expected *ẞεpa)
excludes original *g". For the same reason, ßißpwσкw cannot be related. A much
better etymology is offered by SɛƖpás, which fits the meaning well.
Séρкoμαι [v.] 'to look, cast the eye (on)' (Il.). <IE *derk- 'see'>
•VAR Aor. Spaкεĭv, with “passive” forms έdpáкηv (Pi.), έdép×¤ŋv (A.), perf. (with
present mg.) dédopka.

=== page 183 ===

318
Sέpw
SεÚTεpos
319
⚫COMP Prefixes ȧi-, ȧvα-, etc.
•DER Sépyμa 'glance' (A.), dɛpyµós ‘id.' (H.), dépšɩç 'sense of sight' (Orac. apud Plu.,
H.); with zero grade Spákoç [n.] ‘eye' (Nic. Al. 481). Verbal adjective as a PN
Aέpкɛtoç (Crete), dvo-dépkɛtos (Opp.). Cf. also §páкwv, ►úñóðpa. Lengthened
verbal form Sɛpкiówvται (Hes. Th. 911 at verse end; artificial?); innovation to
Sédopкa (Schwyzer: 735): Sopкá(wv• лɛpißλéлwv looking about' (H.). See also
►Sopkáç.
⚫ETYM The perfect dédopкa 'I see' is morphologically identical with Skt. dadárśa, Av.
dādarǝsa. The aorist Spaкov, with the old athematic form Spaкévτ- (Pi.; Forssman
MSS 17 (1964): 17-19), is matched by Skt. á-drś-an [3pl.], etc. Since Indo-Iranian has a
suppletive present, Skt. páśyati, Av. spasiieiti (related to oкéлt̃oµai), dépkoµai is
probably a Greek innovation (on which Sɛpxеñvai, dépo̟μaι, etc. were built; see
Schwyzer: 758). The verbal adj. Aέpкɛτos may be compared with Skt. darśatá-
'visible'. Further related forms are e.g. OIr. ad-con-darc 'I have seen', Go. ga-tarhjan
'σnμεov, characterize', OE OS torht, OHG zoraht ‘light, clear', Alb. dritë 'light' (<
IE *drk-teh₂-). More forms are recorded in LIV² s.v. *derk-.
Sépw [v.] 'to skin, flay' (Il.). ◄IE *der- ‘flay’►
•VAR Also Sɛipw, aor. Sɛipaɩ, fut. Sɛpw, pass. Sapñvai, dapēñvai, perf. dédapuai.
•COMP With prefixes àлo-, ¿к-, etc.
•DER Sépμα (slayed) skin, leather' (Il.) with diminutive dεpμάτov (Pl.); adjective
Sɛpµáτivos ‘of leather' (Od.), Sεpµatiкóç ‘of skin' (Arist.) with Sepµaτíkov a cloth
(pap.), depµatwdns ‘skinlike' (Arist.), depµatnpóc in depµatnpá [f.] ‘tax on hides'
(pap.), dépuntes. oi ¿¿ ¿qńßwv nepíñoloi (cod. rɛpioσoí) 'the patrolmen out of the
epheboi' H., cf. yyµvñtes, koúpitεs, etc. Rare denominative άлo-dεpματów 'to flay'
(Plb.; бɛбεрμаτwμévα as an explanation of ioxaλшдévα H.), àлño-dεpµaτí¶w
(medic.), dɛpμúλλε· aiσxpoñoεï, oi dè éкdépɛɩ 'to act filthily; strip the skin off from'
(H.), Sch.; see Schwyzer: 736. Further Sápua (Delph.; from dépμa, Schwyzer: 274; but
ȧлобáρματα Hdt. 4, 64 with ablaut?).
Sépos [n.] = Sépμа (S.); also Sépaç ‘id.' (Chios, E.); Sáрoç. τò Воυτúлoу 'ox-butcher'
(H.). Sopá 'flayed skin' (IA); with Sopɛús 'flayer', also a throw with the dice
(Herod.), Sopis ‘sacrificial knife' (Com.), Sopiкós ‘of skin' (Hp.), Sopów 'smear'
(inscr.) with Sópwσis, dopwoiµos (pap.), ¿vdópwµa (inscr.). Sopós ‘leather sack' (ẞ
354; 380). Séppiç [f.] ‘skin', especially as a technical term for screens, etc. used in a
siege (Th.), from *Sép-σɩç; here déppɩov. tpixivov σaкíov ‘small bag of hair' (H.),
Seppíσkoç (Att.).
Regular zero grade Sápois (Gal.). Sépτpov 'caul, membrane' (λ 579, etc.), and Séτpov
(H., Et. Gud.). Sɛptov (accent unknown) ‘flayed sheep' (Mykonos). Sápτns 'flayer'
(gloss.). Verbal adj. Spaτós († 169), dapτós (Milete Va); with Sáрτɩvov. лεлλov
Avoũv ‘linen cloth' (H.). See also on ►Sñpıç ‘battle' and ► Sópkai.
⚫ETYM Sépw is related to e.g. Go. dis-, gatairan 'to tear up, destroy', OHG (fir-)zeran
'id.', MoHG (ver)zehren; Lith. derù, dirti (dirti) 'to flay', OCS dero, durati 'to flay',
and further Sanskrit with a root aor. dárt [3sg.inj.] 'to split' and a na-present dṛṇāti.
For the formation, we may compare the aorist dɛɩpɑ < **dɛpσɑ with Skt. dárṣat
[subj.]. Also, Sápσiç is matched by Skt. dŕti- 'sack', Go. ga-taurþs 'destruction', and
1
Ru. dert' 'newly cleared land'; and likewise, Spaτóç, Sapτós with Skt. drtá-. A yod-
present (cf. Sɛipw) is found in Lith. diriù 'flay' and Skt. díryate. Further forms are in
LIV2 s.v. *der-.
dεσлóτη, -ov [m.] 'master (of the house), lord' (Pi.; on its absence in Homer
[Sεσлovα Od.] see Wackernagel 1916: 209 A. 1). <IE *dems-pot- lord of the house'>
•COMP In compounds with first member aúτo-, oiкo-, qiλo-.
•DER déσлovɑ ‘mistress of the house, lady' (Od.); dɛσлovкóç ‘in service of the
queen' (PMasp. 88, 10, VIP); also dɛσñótiç ‘id.' (S.), rare dɛσлóτεрa (S. Fr. 1040),
dɛσлóτpia (sch. E. Hec. 397); on the feminine forms Fraenkel 1912: 27; on MoGr.
dɛσлviç Schwyzer: 133. Rare diminutive dɛσлоτíoкos (E.), dɛσлotídiov
(Aristaenet.). Adjective аɛσлóσuvos belonging to the lord' (Tyrt., h. Cer.), with
бεσлоσúvη lordship' (Hdt.); dɛσлóσoç ‘id.' (A.), бɛσлоτiкóç (Pl.), dεσлóτεo
(Lyc.). Denominatives: 1. бɛσлów 'to be lord, rule' (IA); déσлoσμа (Man.). 2.
dɛσñotéw ‘id.', mostly pass. 'to obey a S.' (A.). 3. Seσñotɛúw ‘id.' (LXX); deσñoteia
(Pl.).
•ETYM Cf. Skt. dám pati- (also, in two words, pátir dán), Av. dōng paitiš ‘lord'. In
Greek, it became a fixed compound, which changed its flexion from an i-stem (see
►лóσç) to that of an ā-stem (cf. ȧукvλo-µητηs beside дñτç; Schwyzer: 451).
аεσлоvα is from *бεσ-лоτ-vдα. The first part, IE *dems (whence Gr. Seσ-, Skt.
dam-), is the genitive of a word for 'house' (see ►dóµoc).
Seτaí → Séw 1.
devкńs→ ȧdevkŃS.
=>
Sεvoμαι VAR Sɛúw. → Sew 2.
=>
Sɛupo [adv.] (to) here', also as interj. and imperative ('come here'). <IE *de-u-ro? '(to)
here'>
•VAR Here belongs the plur. SεŨτε (II.); rare sing. Sɛupe (Att. inscr.; after the
imperatives in -ε); also Sɛupí (Ar., And.) with deictic -i; Aeol. Sɛupu (Hdn.) like
äλλv-(dic) 'from elsewhere', dɛúpw I 240 (Hdn.) after лpóσ(σ)w 'forwards'.
•DIAL Myc. de-we-ro-(a-ko-ra-i-ja), perhaps containing /dewero-/, a part of the
kingdom of Pylos.
⚫ETYM The Greek word starts with the demonstrative adverb *8 (cf. the postposition
-SE). Cf. further Lacon. лédɛυpα· üστεpα 'later' (H.).
Regarding the second part analyzed as -u-ro, the Greek form recalls the synonymous
Lith. aurè and Av. auuarǝ (see Nyberg in Boëthius 1932: 237ff.). Compare further
Arm. ur (to) where?', from *ure (cf. ure-k' 'to some place'), and U uru 'illo'. See
Ruijgh Minos 12 (1972): 441-50 for a Greek derivationas *de-u + *-(e)ro-, which is
taken up by DELG Supp.
dɛúrɛpoç [adj.] ‘second', in order and time, also in status (II.). <GR>
•DER Sevτɛpaños 'belonging to the second day' (Hdt.; from ǹ devτépa [ñµépa], cf.
Schwyzer: 596); Sevtepeĩa (sc. å¤la) [n.pl.], later also -ov and as an adjective (Hdt.;
after åpɩotɛĩa); devtepias (olvos) ‘bad wine, made from the draff (σtέµqvλa)'

=== page 184 ===

320
Seów 1
(Nicopho [?], Dsc.; after the wine names in -íaç, Chantraine 1933: 94f.; also
Sevτεpívap (Lacon.) (H.); Sevτépiov 'afterbirth' (Aq.). Denominative SɛUTεpεúw 'to
be second' (Plb.), Sɛvτɛpiá¶w ‘id.' (Ar. Ec. 634); SEυτεpów 'to repeat' (LXX) with
Sevtépwois (LXX) and devτépшµа (Eust.). Beside dɛútɛpos rarely the superlative
Sɛúτατos (T 51, Mosch.).
•ETYM Although dɛútɛpoç is usually analyzed as a comparative of dɛvoµai (see ► dźw
2), so originally 'who stays behind, the following', Ruijgh Lingua 28 (1971): 317f.
argues that it is improbable that -Tεpoç should have been added to a verbal stem, and
suggests that it was added to an adverbial stem *Sɛv instead (perhaps seen in dɛûtɛ).
Sɛów 1 [v.] 'to make weť (II.). <?>
•VAR Aor. Señσal.
⚫COMP SEVσOлOLÓs 'steeped in color, fast', metaph. 'imperishable' (Pl.).
●der devoµios (τóлоç Sch. M 21), from *dɛσç (Arbenz Die Adj. auf -quoc), or
directly from devσat; uncertain dɛúµаτа кρεŵν (Pi. O. 1, 50); also devτýp 'kettle'
(auct. apud Poll. 10, 105). Sεvσoлоέw and dεvσoлoúía (Alciphr., Poll.); devσo-
poúσios (PMasp.VI³; cf. poúσios [from Lat. russeus ‘reddish']). "ηodevotέw ‘to
make mortar' (Att.) from *лηλo-devotns.
⚫ETYM Unexplained; Staívw has been compared. Could the word be connected with
Súw 'to dive, enter' as 'to immerse' (Van Beek p.c.)?
Sεvw 2 ⇒ Sέw 2.
Séqw [v.] 'to soften (with the hand), masturbari' (Ar., Eub.). <PG>
●VAR Also med.; aor. ¿déyato (Hippon.)? See Scheller MSS 6 (1955): 88ff. Present
Sévɛi (-ɛï?) [3sg.] (Hdt. 4, 64); aor. ptc. Seyñoas (µ. 48).
•Der deqidaotai [m.pl.] members of a guild of fullers (Argos), with -aσtńs, -lotŃS
denoting membership (Chantraine 1933: 317ff.), otherwise unclear; via *dɛqis, *-idos?
Séwa 'tanned skin' (Suid.); àdéчntos (v 2; 142, etc.).
⚫ETYM The present déчw (cf. Eч/w) beside décow seems to have an s-enlargement, but
the other instances in Schwyzer: 706 are not completely comparable. Petersson KZ
47 (1918): 285 compared the Arm. denominative top'em 'to beat' and SCr. dépati ‘to
butt, slay', Pol. deptać 'to tread', which, however, are semantically rather distant and
do not correspond phonologically. Sɩépa has also been compared, which, if
connected, certainly points to Pre-Greek origin, as does, in fact, the variation
between -o- and -- (cf. especially déya; Fur.: 263, etc., who also connects diopáw).
Lat. depsō, -ĕre is borrowed from Greek.
=>
déчw → Séqw.
Séxoчaɩ [v.] 'to take, accept, receive, etc.' (Att.). <IE *dek- 'take, accept'>
•VAR Sékoμaɩ (Ion. Aeol. Cret.), aor. Séασða (Il.). 3pl. déxατaɩ (M 147), epic aor.
ptc. бéуµεvoç, isg.ind. ¿déyµŋv, etc. (metrically conditioned), épotí-dɛyµai.
лpoσdéo̟α ‘I am received (H.; cf. Debrunner 1956: 77ff.; on the analogical voiced
aspirated and voiced stop see Schwyzer: 772 and 769).
•DIAL Myc. de-ka-sa-to /deksato/, de-ko-to /dekto/; ra-wo-do-ko /lawo-dokos/, cf.
Aaddokog (1.).
!
Séw 1
•COMP With prefixes: ȧvα-, άло-, εiσ-, etc.
321
•DER Numerous derivatives, especially with prefix: 1. -Sóкoç as a second member in
compounds (Il.; also Att.), e.g. lo-Sóкoç 'receiving arrows' (epic), Swpo-SóкOÇ
'accepting presents, corruptible' (Att.); also the simplex Soкós ‘beam'; Soxós
'container' (Thphr., H.). 2. Soкáv. O½кηv ‘case' (H.); also in ȧv-Soкá ‘surety' (Cret.),
έo-doká ‘contracť (Arc.), etc., (ava-, έk-, etc.) Soxń (Att.) with doxaños (Nic.),
Soxiкóç (pap.); ȧvбoкεúç 'guarantor' (H.; Dor., cf. Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 91);
(εк-, úлo-, etc.) Soxɛús 'receiver, etc.' (Hell. and late); лavdoкɛúç ‘innkeeper'
(retrograde formation); to doxεúç: (εк-, úло-, etc.) doxεov 'container' (Hell. and
late). 3. (ȧлó-, εк-, etc.) déis 'reception' (Hdt.) with de quos 'acceptable' (pap.). 4.
(εк-, diα-, etc.) déкTwp 'who accepts' (A.). 5. (ȧлo-)бεкτηp 'collector', an official (X.)
with the fem. Séкτpia (Archil.). 6. déкτηç ‘beggar³ (§ 248); àлo-, úño-déktηs
'collector' (Att., Hell. and late); with (ávα-, úлo-, etc.) SɛкTIкóç 'fit for accepting'
(Arist.); úлodéžioç ‘id.' (Hdt.), úлodeεiŋ 'friendly reception' (I 73). 7. ȧpt-► Sεiketos
s.v.; 8. ► dešaµevý ‘water collector' (ptc. dɛaµévη with oppositive accent).
See also on ▸ Sóкiµoç, ‣dóxµŋ; for dóкava, doкávη see on ▶ Sokóç.
Deverbative verbs: doкéw, doкá¶w, лpoσ-doкáw, etc., see on Soкɛúw. On
Sεкavãτaɩ ȧσлáжεταɩ 'welcome, salute' (H.) see dεidíσкoμα. See further ► Seкá(w
(from Sɛкác) and ► Sέka.
•ETYM There are several forms from IE *dek-, dok- which can be compared with
dékoμa: Lat. decet ‘it is fitting' with decus [n.] (~ Skt. *dáśas- in daśas-yáti ‘honor',
MIr. dech 'the best'; cf. also dεió), dignus, doceō, etc. Therefore, déкoμaɩ may
originally have meant to consider something appropriate'.
From Armenian, compare tesanem, aor. tesi 'to see' (cf. Soкɛúw for the meaning),
but the appurtenance of Arm. ancay 'gift' and Slavic and Germanic words like OCS
dešą, desiti 'to find' (see Snw), OHG gi-zehōn 'to order' is uncertain.
Skt. dāśnóti, dáṣṭi, dáśati 'to bring a sacrifice, honor' also belongs here, being an
originally reduplicated present *de-dk- (there is no need to assume an old
lengthened grade). From within Greek, we can connect the word with dečióc, from
*deks- with a zero grade s-suffix (cf. Lat. decus), with an adverbial loc. *deksi ‘right'.
See also Soкεúw under Sokέw.
Sέw 1 [v.] 'to bind' (Il.). <IE *deh,- ‘bind’>
●VAR Aeol., etc. Síðŋ (see below), aor. dñσaɩ, perf. med. Sédɛµaɩ (Il.), with dédɛka
(Att.), aor. pass. dɛ¤ñvai (Att.).
•COMP Often with prefixes like ȧvα-, кατα-, úло-, σuv-, etc.
•DER Verbal nouns: 1. -Snua (as a simplex [= Skt. dáman-, see below] only sch. A. R.
2, 535) notably in úлóðŋuα 'shoe, sandal' (Оd.) with úлоηшáτ (Нp.),
úлodŋµaτápios ‘shoemaker' (Hypata II³), diáðŋµa ‘'band, diadem' (X.) with
Saηaτía (Aq.); secondary zero grade in Séμa (Plb.). 2. Sɛσμóç, plur. also
dɛoµá, déoµata ‘band, fetter' (Il.) with several derivatives: Séσµoç ‘fettered (trag.),
deoµins. µaotуíaç, ös äšiós σ εσμ a worthless slave, who deserves
imprisonment (H.), dɛσµíç (Hp.), dεσµídov (Dsc.), бεσµáτov (sch.), dɛσµµaτa
[pl.] 'fetters' (A.); dεσμшτηs 'prisoner' and dɛσμwτηptov 'prison' (IA); denominative
Sεσμεúw 'bind, fetter' (Hes.) with rare dεσμετs (sch.), dɛoµεutikós (Pl.),

=== page 185 ===

322
Séw 2
deoµevtýpiov (pap.), déσµεvois (pap.); dɛoµéw ‘id.' (Hell. and late) with déσµŋua
(Tz.); άvadéσµŋ ‘band for the hair of women' (X 469), déoµŋ ‘bundle' (Att.). 3. Séσiç
‘binding, etc.' (Pl.), especially úлó-dɛous ‘binding of shoes, sandals' (IA). 4. Sɛtaí [pl.]
‘torch, fire' (A 554, Ar. V. 1361, H.); rather verbal noun ‘binding, bundle' than from
Sɛτóc (Opp.); diminutive dɛtíç (Gal.). 5. dŋtoí [pl.] 'bundle' (Sammelb. 1, 5, IIIP). 6.
-detńp, -détŋc in άµαλλo-dετñpεs 'binders of sheaves' (Σ 553, 554; see Chantraine
1933: 323), àµαλλo-déτai (Theoc., AP) as iñño-détŋc (S.), knpo-détas (E. [lyr.]), etc.
On ► déµvia, ►кpýdεµva, see s.vv.
•ETYM Gr. Sɛtós (in diá-detos A., Sɛtós Opp.) and Skt. ditá- ‘bound' correspond
directly, just as Sñµa (úró-dŋµa, etc.) and Skt. dáman- ‘band, although they could as
well be parallel formations. Of the Greek presents, Sídŋµ (A 105) is probably an
innovation on the basis of Snow, dñσαι, etc. after Оñow: tíðŋµi (but, according to
LIV² s.v. *deh,-, following Rasmussen and Tucker, a relatively old innovation). The
ε-vowel in Sέw, déσiç, dɛtóç, etc. (like that in τí-0ε-µεv, Оéσiç, etc.) must be the zero
grade *dh, beside the full grade *deh,- in Snow, etc. Furthermore, we have Skt. pres.
-dyati (á-dyati) ‘bind' from *dh,-ie-ti and perhaps Hitt. tiịa [impv.] (Melchert apud
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
Séw 2 [v.] 'to miss, lack, be in need of, med. also ‘to ask'. <IE *deu(s)- ‘miss, want,
need'>
•VAR Séoµai (IA), dɛúw, dɛvoμai (Aeol., epic II.), impersonal dɛi, dɛvɛɩ, aor. dɛñσaɩ,
dɛŋßñvaɩ, epic ¿dɛúnoev (1 483 = 540; dñσev Σ 100 is, if correct, an innovation to dɛĩ),
fut. Sɛvýσoµai.
•Der déŋois ‘need, request' (Att.) with deŋtkós (Arist.), déŋµa ‘requesť (Ar. Ach.
1059). To εлбéw, -oµαι, èлdεúo̟µαi 'need': лdεýç, εлɩdɛvý ‘in need of (Schwyzer
513); to έvdéw, έvdɛī, ¿vdéoµai ‘need': έvdens (IA) with vбɛα (Att.) < *vdéɛiα,
Évбénua (pap.).
•ETYM Sέw, Sɛúw may derive from *SέF-w, but are probably also the regular
development of *Sεvo-w. In the latter case, we could directly connect Skt. dosa- 'lack'
< IE *douso-, although this is doubted by LIV2 s.v. *deus- and Mayrhofer EWAia 1:
749 s.v. doș-. Perhaps ►Svo- belongs here; on dɛĩ, see Goodell Class. Quart. 8 (1914):
91ff. and Bernardette Glotta 43 (1965): 285ff.
ɗý [interj.] ‘even, indeed, right', emphatic pcl. (Il.). < IE? *de>
•VAR Like Sé, mostly in the second position of the sentence; also in more or less fixed
connections like ¾-dŋ, éлei-dý, dñ-Оεv, §ñτα, etc.; see Schwyzer 1950: 562f.
•ETYM Perhaps a case form (instrumental?) of a demonstrative; it would be identical
with Lat. dē, Olr. di 'away from'. See de Vaan 2008 s.v. dē. Sé arose by weakening of
Sn. See also Saí.
Sŋaí [f.pl.] ‘barley corns' (EM 264, 13: dŋai époσayopeúovtai úïò Kpytŵv ai kpiłaí).
<PG?>
•Var dŋttai· ai έлtioµévai кpiðaí 'winnowed barley' (H.).
⚫ETYM Schulze 1892: 2884 (p. 289) interprets the word as diaí, i.e. ►Çɛaɩ, which would
indeed be possible in Cretan, according to DELG. Latte mentions datŵvai. Čɛiaí H.;
1
Snλéoμai
323
therefore, Pre-Greek origin remains a serious possibility as well (thus also Fur.: 337,
etc.).
=>
dndéxatai ⇒ dɛidiokopai.
=>
òndá ⇒ 8ńv.
Anïávɛipadnïoç.
Snïos [adj.] ‘inimical, terrible', of лõρ ‘fìre', also of лóλεµos ‘war³, ávýð ‘man' (Il.); by
false connection with dañvai: ‘able, experienced' (API.). <?, PG?►
•DIAL Dor. Sáïoç, dãoç.
●Der Sŋïotýs, -tñτоç [f.] (on the oxytonesis, cf. Schwyzer: 528) ‘battle, struggle,
death' (Hom.); partly as if from dŋïów (Trümpy 1950: 136ff.). Denominative Sŋïów,
Snów 'slay, kill' (Il.), 'destroy' (IA); isolated S½ïáασкov (A. R. 2, 142) after epic
-αaσк-. Thence S½ïoñσa epithet of кóvεov “the killing" (Ps.-Dsc.; cf. Strömberg
1940: 64). Instead of dŋïów, Wackernagel 1916: 170f. proposes to read in the epic Snïw
(S½ïov for Snovv E 452, etc.), as A. R. 3, 1374 and H. have dñéɩv· лodeµeïv, poveúelv
‘to make war, murder', which can be a denominative of *Sŋïs in Aŋï-qoßoç, etc. (cf.
Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 49f.). Among the PNs in Aŋï- note Aŋï-áveɩpa (S., etc.),
formed after ►ávtiáveipa, kudi-ávɛɩpa, etc., with verbal reinterpretation of the first
member: 'killing the man'; cf. Sommer 1934: 41.
ETYM The frequent epic expression doу лбр (verse end) and лupòç dŋíoιo
(combined with Оεσлðαèç лỹρ [M 177, etc.]) suggests a meaning 'burning', which
makes a connection with Saíw 'burn' likely. However, Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 318
observes that Myc. Da-i-qo-ta (cf. Aŋóvíηs) has no -F-, so it must have had an -h-,
Dā³i-, which shows that the word is non-IE (see Chantraine 1942: 107 and
Leumann 1950: 129).
*Sŋkavówvto •Var *dŋkvúµevoç. → dɛidiokopai.
•
Snλavyws [adv.] · ǎyav qavɛpwç 'very conspicuous' (H.), Ev. Marc. 8, 25 (v.l.). <GR>
⚫ETYM For *Tηλavywc, influenced by Sñλoç. See Blass-Debrunner-Funk 1961 $119, 4.
Sŋλéoµai [v.] ‘to hurt, damage' (Il.). <?, PG?►
•VAR Aor. Snλnσaσðaι (dāλ- Theoc. 9, 36; 15, 48); El. кα-Saλéoтo, кα-daλžμεvo
(кα-aλ-), perf. Sedýλnµai.
●DER Sλŋua 'damage, destruction' (Od.; on the mg. Chantraine 1933: 183), and
Snλnuwv 'damaging, ruin' (Hom.); dŋois 'damage' (Ion., Thphr.); S
‘destructing' (Nic.), after nominal aiyλýɛç, etc.; dnλntipios ‘id.' (Teos Vª, etc.), -tov
'poison' (Hp. Ep.); Sηλητηp only Hom. Epigr. 14, 8; SnAntypiwdns (Dav. Proll.).
•ETYM Schwyzer: 720 took ŋλéoµaɩ as an iterative-intensive deverbative. A root
variant with short a is found in oppεvo-daλns 'destroying the mind' (A. Eu. 330 lyr.),
Sáλλɛɩ kakovpyɛi 'does evil' (H.), as well as in лav-dáλntos “destroyed' (Hippon. 2);
and further, but with unknown quantity, in adaλés. vyɩés ‘healthy', dáλav. Xúµŋv
'maltreatment', dаλñ. какovρуñ, daλñσaσα. λvµývασðαι, áðɩкñσa 'maltreat, do
injustice' (H.). Coversely, the connection with ►á-los (Alc., s.v.) is doubtful.
Under the assumption of an original meaning ‘split', dŋλéoµα was connected with

=== page 186 ===

324
Snλoμai
Saudáλw, SéλTOS and derived from IE *del- (cf. Lat. doleō, dolor). However, the
ablaut forms are incompatible, and long *ā can hardly be derived from PIE (a
hyperdorism in Theoc. is improbable); therefore, the verb is probably non-IE, i.e.
Pre-Greek. Hackstein 2002: 219f. implausibly argues that the long a is a secondary
lengthened grade, created within the history of Greek.
=>
Sλoчa VAR Dor. for Boúλoμat. → ẞoúλoμai.
dñλoç [adj.] 'clear' (Od.; čкôηλoç E 2). <IE? *deih₂- shine'>
•VAR Besides Séελoç 'visible' (K 466).
⚫DER Denominative Snλów 'make clear' (IA) with Silwois, diλwμa (Att., etc.),
Sŋλwτiкós (Hp.). Often with prefix: ȧpí-dnλos (with, through inverted writing [cf.
(α- Sa-], ápí-loc), čк-, Ĕv-, εлí-, каτá-dηλoç, etc. with έкdηlów, etc. See
Strömberg 1946 (index). dɛFalwσa (BCH 1988, 283f., Mantinea IVª) has
hypercorrect F (RPh. 71 [1997] 156).
=====
•ETYM The glosses díaλov. pavεpóv and diáλaç. τàs dŋlaç kai pavɛpás H., dialectal
for Sɛa-, show that Sños continues *Séaλoç < *deih2-(e)lo-, cognate with ▸ Séaτo <
*deih₂(-e)-to. This also fits кdηos in E 2 (Bechtel 1914: 98). Differently, Schulze
1892: 244 A. 2 and Chantraine 1933: 242. See also Séɛλos and ►ɛúdɛíɛloç.
Anuntηp [f.] the Greek mother goddess (II.). See further Schwyzer: 567f., Sommer
1948: 147. <?>
•VAR Gen. -Tεpoç and -τpoç.
•DIAL Though one might expect the name in Mycenaean, it happens not to have been
found so far. Aaμáτηp (Dor., etc.), also Аwµáτηp, А¤µµáτɛpi (Thess.).
●DER Aŋµýtpios ‘belonging to A.' (A.), also as a PN; thence the month name
Anµntpióv (Attica); Aŋŋtpíɛia [pl.] 'festival for Demeter' (Samos [IVª], after
Аσкλŋëíɛɑ, etc.), Aŋµistpia [pl.] also 'festival for Demetrios'; Anuntpiaσtaí name of
the worshippers of Demeter (Ephesus), cf. Алol\wαστaí, etc.; Anuntpiakós
'belonging to Demeter or Demetrios' (D. S.); Auτpɛo [pl.] name of the dead
(Plu.). Denominative Sаµατpíεv. τò σʊváyε tòv Aŋµηtplaкòv kapróν. Kúлρɩɩ
'to collect the harvest belonging to A.' (H.). Short form Anó (h. Cer., etc.), whence
Anos and Anwïvn 'daughter of A.'.
ETYM Taken as "Mother Earth" (Kretschmer Wien. Stud. 24 (1902): 523ff.,
Kretschmer Glotta 17 (1929): 240), and consisting of Sã, assumed to be a Pre-Greek
word for 'Earth', and µýτηp. However, there is no indication that dã means
‘earth', although it has also been assumed in the name of Poseidon. Derivation from
*Аασ-μάτηρ <IE *dms-, a supposed genitive of *dem- 'house' (cf. dεσлóτηs) by
Ehrlich 1912: 62ff., should be rejected.
Pisani IF 53 (1935): 28ff. and Georgiev 1937: 9ff., 20ff. both consider the word to be
Illyrian (like Aaµía, Aµía, etc.) and compare Alb. dhe ‘earth' (see ►xwv); rejected by
Kretschmer Glotta 27 (1939): 31.
Cf. Messap. damatura, probably name of a goddess (Krahe 1955: 82); the Messapian
word must be an adaptation of the Greek name; cf. Aεɛлáτupoç s.v. ►ZɛÚç.
Heubeck 1961: 75-8 starts from 'Phrygian' Пdav-μava/ гdavμaa, and sees in the first
element a cognate of Gr. x0wv; he suggests that the form Awμáτηp goes back on
"
Snuós
325
*ɗ¹għōn-. However, his further connection with his Minoan-Minyan hypothesis
(which would be a separate IE language) is unconvincing.
Sŋuovpyós [m.] ‘handicraftsman' (Att.). On the mg. Bader 1965. Originally a creator,
in the Dorian world it designated a magistrate. See further Palmer TPS 1954: 18-53.
<IE? *deh₂-mo- 'people'>
⚫VAR Sηoεpуós (Od., Hdt.).
⚫DIAL Sμopyós (Ion.), Saшopyós (Dor., NWGr., Arc., Boeot.), Sauwpyós
(Astypal.), Sauɛpyós (Astypal., Nisyr.) name of an official.
•DER &qutoupyis, SmuloÚpyrov, &quioupyia, &quioupyiróc, Squlovpyelov; antioupyéw
with oúpa.
•ETYM From *бηµo-fɛpyós, in turn from dijµα εpya with verbal reinterpretation of
the second member after the types vão-лoµñóç; partly from -Ƒopyós. Further, see
►Sñμoç.
dñµoç [m.] ‘land, territory' (as opposed to the town), 'people' (II.); in Athens also a
part of the phylai, a deme. <IE *deh₂-mo- 'people'>
•DIAL Dor. Sãuoç.
•COMP Numerous compounds, e.g. Sηµoкpaτía ‘government of the people' (IA),
after oɩyapxía, µovаpxía (dηµαpxía = 'the office of diapxos'); further see
Debrunner 1947: 11ff.
•DER Doric forms are not mentioned separately:
Substantives: Snµídiov, diminutive dŋµaкídiov (Ar.); Sŋµóτηs, Dor. also daµétaç
(Carpathos) 'man of the people' (IA, Dor.) with two normal adjectives: Sµóσos
'belonging to the people, state, public' (IA) with Snμootɛúw intr. 'serve the state', also
trans. 'make public' and Sημoσiów 'confiscate, make public' with dŋμoσíwσiç.
Snμoτкóç belonging to the people, useful for the people, democratic'; on the
difference between dŋµóσios and dŋµОτкóç Chantraine 1933: 392; fem. dŋµótiç;
denominative potevoµai ‘be dŋµótηs, belong to a demos' (Att.).
Adjectives: Sqµos belonging to the people, public' (Od.), ó dµos (euphemistic)
‘executioner' (Att., Benveniste Sprache 1 (1949): 121), dŋµwdns ‘according to the
people' (Pl.), Sŋµóovvos epithet of Artemis (Athens IV-IIIª), Sŋµóτεpos 'belonging
to the people' (Call.; after ȧypóτɛpos).
Denominative Sŋuɛúw [v.] 'to make public, confiscate' (Att.) with Snuevous and
dŋµɛtai ai tŵv dýµwv σvστáσεç 'meetings of the people' (H.); Sηµóoμa 'sing or
explain publicly' (Pi.) with Saµwµata. tà dŋµooíą ¿dóµɛva ‘which is sung publicly'
(Ar. Pax 797); Sŋuíчw act as friend of the people' (Ar. V. 699). Adverb Squóεv
'from the people, on communal costs' (Od.).
⚫ETYM A morphological match is offered by Celtic: OIr. dám 'followers, crowd', OW
dauu 'cliens', W daw(f) 'son-in-law', OCo. dof 'gener'; but since these are ā-stems,
PIE *deh₂mos was perhaps originally feminine (Pedersen 1938: 52). If the word is an
m-derivative of the verb 'divide' (see Saíoµat), which requires the analysis *deh₂-
mo-, it must originally have meant 'part'. On Snoуó, seе s.v.
dŋuós [m.] ‘fat of animals and men' (Il.). <?►
⚫DER No derivatives or compounds (probably because of the identity with бñμoç).

=== page 187 ===

326
Sýv
ETYM The word has been compared with Alb. dhjamë ‘fat, pork, tallow', but
Demiraj 1997: 161 thinks it may be non-IE. It hardly means just 'fluidity, wetness' (as
per Frisk s.v.), so the connection with the IIr. word for 'fluid', e.g. Skt. dá-nu- 'drip,
dew', Av. da-nu- 'river, stream', Oss. don 'water, river', is not convincing either.
Sny [adv.] 'long', also 'far' (Il.). <IE *dueh₂-m 'long'>
•DIAL Dor. Sáv, Soáv (see below).
●DER Sŋvatóç, Dor. Sāv- ‘living, lasting long' (Il.) with dŋvatótηs (Democr.) and
Aŋvatov month name (Erythrai) (not containing an element *aufos to aiŵv).
•ETYM Like ►лλýv, Dor. лλáv prop. *near³, Sny is the old accus. of a root noun
*SƑā-, also seen in ▶Sŋpóc, ► Sŋ¤á. The notation Soáv (Alcm. 135) just renders SƑáv.
The form daóv· лoλupóνov 'lasting a long time' (H.) can be *SƑã-чóv, perhaps also
*Safóv, and belonging directly to OCS dav-бn 'old' (Latte gives Sa<val>óv). For
further cognates, see ►Snpóc.
divɛa [n.pl.] ‘counsels, plans' (Il.). <IE? *densos- 'counsel, skill'▷
•VAR Sñvos (H.).
•COMP Several compounds, mostly only known from lexicographers: άdŋvýc. ǎkakoç
'guileless' H., EM (from where Semon. 7, 53 for traditional ȧλŋvýc), ȧdŋvéws (Chios,
H.), àdavéç àлроvóητoν 'unpremeditated', ådŋvɛíŋ àлɛpíɑ 'lack of skill',
лovéα· лúẞoulov 'of many counsels' (H.).
roλvdivéa•
⚫ETYM Brugmann Sächs. Ber. 49 (1897): 187 (also Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1,
518) assumed *Sávoɛa, with analogical a from dañval, daïoppwv for older
*dévoɛa, *dévoos = Skt. dámsas- [n.] 'wonderful craft', Av. daŋhah- [n.] 'dexterity',
IE *dénsos- beside *dês- in dα-ñvai, Sa-í-qpwv. However, one would rather expect
replacement by *Sáoç; see the objections in Bechtel 1914: 99 and Lasso de la Vega
Emerita 22 (1954): 92, who also sees semantic problems. Wackernagel KZ 29 (1888):
137 prefers connecting Snw, which is nothing better. Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970): 319f.
considers the word Mycenaean, with *dens- giving dŋv- (comparing tελn-(Ƒ)evt- <
*Tελεσ-FEVT-). See also R. Schmitt 1967: 161.
Sñpıç, -10¢ [f.] 'battle' (Il.; cf. Trümpy 1950: 141ff.). <IE? *der- 'split'>
●DER Denominative Spioμa (Pi.), aor. Sŋpioavão (О 76), act. Sŋpĩσaι (Thgn.), pass.
Snpivðýtyv (II 756) as if from *dηpivw; perhaps for Sŋpiðηtηy (Schwyzer: 761; see
Chantraine 1942: 404), бηpшvеñva (A. R.), present metrically reshaped in
Spiówvto, Spiάaσat, etc. (Hom.; Schwyzer: 727, Chantraine 1942: 359); ptc. act.
Snplwvτwv (Pi. N. 11, 26; for -óvτшv acc. to Schulze 1892: 384 A. 3), Snpiówντεç (A. R.
1, 752; see Schwyzer 1950: 234, partly metrically determined). Spíττεv. Épíεv to
contend with' (H.). Privative adjective ȧ-Spi-τos 'without battle' (P 42; ǎ-dŋpiç AP);
as a verbal adj. to Sŋpíoμa ‘indomitable' (A. Pr. 105), ‘undisputeď (Plb.).
⚫ETYM Formally, Sñpiç seem to correspond to Skt. -dari- 'splitting' (as a second
member in epic), but the Skt. word is attested only rather late, which makes the
comparison uncertain. See also ► Sέpw.
Snpós [adj.] 'lasting long' (Il.). <IE *dueh₂- 'long'>
i
diarta
327
•VAR Dor. Sāpóc, mostly dηpóv, dãpóv [adv.] 'long'. On the use Björck 1950: 126,
208, 210.
⚫ETYM Related to Snv, 8(F)άv, from *8Fα-póc. The same root occurs in Hitt. tuua
[adv.] 'far', tuuala- [adj.] 'far from' (Benveniste BSL 33 (1932): 142f.), OP duvaištam,
Av. dbōištǝm diutissime', Arm. tev-em 'to hold out' (cf. Kortlandt 2003: 102:
derivation of tew), and Skt. dū-rá- ‘far', Lat. dū-dum 'for a long time', etc. Not related
to Arm. erkar 'lasting long', according to Kortlandt 2003: 92f.
=>>
dñta → 8ń.
dýw [v.] ‘I shall find (Il.); the future mg. is based on the perfective aspect of the verb
(Schwyzer 1950: 265). <IE? *des- 'find, look after'>
•VAR Only present (except εdηεv. εupεv H.) with future meaning.
•ETYM Remarkable lengthened grade thematic root present. It has been compared
with OCS dešą, desiti 'find' (Pedersen IF 5 (1895): 47) and Alb. ndesh ‘meet' (Jokl
Wien. Ak. Sb. 168: 1: 60ff, Pok. 190). See also Vasmer 1953 s.v. desitv. Narten KZ 78
(1963): 63 compared Skt. abhi-dāsati (the subj. aor. of ³da- 'be hostile').
Sɩá [adv., prep.] ‘in two, apart, through' (Il.), as a prep. ‘through' (Il.); on the mg.
Schwyzer 1950: 448ff. <IE *dis 'apart'>
•VAR Thess. Sié, Lesb, Čá (< diα). Epic Sa-; also Siaí (A.; after кαταí 'downwards',
лараí 'bеsidе', úлaí 'under').
•COMP Note Sɩαμлεpéç, diáνdiɣa; dɩαлρó, diéк.
⚫ETYM Probably from *Sıh-a; related to Lat. dis-, OS, OE te-, OHG zi-, ze- (whence
zir-, zer- through contamination with ir-, er-), Alb. ç- ‘apart'. Greek has added -a
after µɛtá, napá, etc. Cf. ► díç.
diaẞiτng [m.] 'circle' (Ar.), 'compass' (Pl., Plu.), later 'siphon' (Colum., Hero) because
of the formal similarity. <GR>
⚫ETYM From Siaẞaivɛv, 'spread the legs' (see Kalbfleisch PhW 64 (1944); contra
Strömberg 1944: 89). The meaning ‘diabetes' is modern. See ► ßaívw.
.
Siάyyapov [adj.] · Siкéopaλov 'two-headed' (H.; alphabetically at the wrong place). <?>
•ETYM Schmidt and Latte consider this word corrupt. von Blumenthal 1930: 24
attempted to identify it as Illyrian.
diášoµai⇒ättopai.
Staívw [v.] 'to make (the eyes) wet, cry' (Il.). <?>
VAR Aor. Siñval.
•DER Siavτóc (Arist.), diavτкòç (Arist.); Síavois (Gal.). On ►Siɛpós (Hes.), see s.v.
⚫ETYM Unknown. See Bechtel 1914 S.V.
Síaɩta [f.] 1. ‘mode of life, prescribed way of life, dwelling' (Pi., Ion., also Att.; on the
mg. ornaments' in LXX Del Medico ByzZ 44, 413ff.); 2. 'arbitration' (Att.). <GR>
⚫DER Siaitάoμai 'feed onself, live somewhere, be somewhere' (IA), -άw 'treat as a
physician' (Hp.); 2. Sɩɩτáw 'to distinguish, be arbitrator' (Pi., Att.). Siaítŋua (mostly
plur.) ‘way of life' (Hp.) with dɩatηliatwdng; diaítnous ‘way of life' (Hp.); diaitntýpia

=== page 188 ===

328
SLÁKOVIV
[pl.] living room' (X.); diaitytikós ‘belonging to the food' (Hp.), and 'belonging to
the arbitration' (Str.); uncertain dattí[a = diaítŋou (epist. Hadr.; Hesperia 3, 41).
Sɩɩ ‘arbiter' (Hdt.), Siαιατắp (Olympia VIª) and diaɩtýσчµoç ‘belonging to the
arbiter' (Is.; after ¿qέoчµoç; cf. Arbenz 1933: 69f.); tò diaitytikóv 'decision of an
arbiter' (pap.). Siaítwµa (Delph. II³) = Síaita, see Chantraine 1933: 187.
⚫ETYM Like ȧpτáw from *å(Ƒ)εpτáw beside primary άɛípw, so dɩ-αɩτáoμαι, -á
stands beside primary aïvvμai (see Schwyzer: 705f.); thus, it originally meant 'take
out, divide', whence 'divide food, feed oneself, live' and, on the other hand, 'decide'
(with reference to jurisdiction, like ►αtioç; cf. also alσa). Síaɩa is a retrograde
formation from the verb. Only in the medical sense of 'treat as physician' is diaɩtáw
a denominative of díaɩta.
•
diákovɩv [m.] · Svokívytov. Kpñtes 'difficult to move (Cret.)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
.
бiαкóvov [n.] µáša ǹ ‹wµòç, кai ǹ кρηäìç toû ñλакобντоç 'barlеy-cake or soup or
sauce; bottom of a type of flat cake' (Pherecr. fr. 156), oi dè néµµata έšantóµeva tñs
εipɛσlwvns 'sweetmeats fastened on a wreath' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
diakoviç [f.]? · έлì úôñ‹ ¡µaτíov ȧvwµálov, ö qaµɛv kovíčɛɩv, kaì ävеpwños ó µǹ
лUкVÓç a coarsely-woven tunic; also a man who is not shrewď (H.). <?>
•ETYM Latte Mnem. 3:10 (1942): 82 recalls the gloss кekovoµévoç. ovvæεnλeyµévos
from a sch. on Theoc. 1, 30, but this remains unclear.
Stákovoç [m.] 'servant, diaconus' (IA, etc.). <IE *ken- ‘hasten'>
●VAR Ion. Sɩýkovoç; secondary diákwv (pap.).
●DIAL Myc. perhaps ka-si-ko-no if /kasi-konos/ 'worker, companion'.
●DER Fem. Siaкóviσσa (late; see Chantraine 1933: 110). Siaкovía 'service' (Att.),
diaкoviкóç (Att.). diakovéw (din-) 'to serve, be servant' (IA) together with
Staкóvηua 'service' (Pl.), Staкóvηnois 'service' (Pl.), diaкovistikós (Alex. Aphr.).
⚫ETYM If the formation is to be compared with that of auoiлoλoç, Stáкovoç derives
from a verb lost otherwise, or else it could be deverbal derivation of Siaкkovéw, which
would be an iterative-intensive deverbative like ►¿ykovéw ‘hurry'. Sɩa- may have
meant 'from all sides, completely'; its long vowel might have to be explained from
lengthening in compounds, were it not that according to Ruijgh Lingua 25 (1970):
320 only the first vowel of the second member can be lengthened. On the meaning,
see Lidén 1906: 52. Cf. also diŋvEKŃS.
Sɩãкóσɩɩ [num.] 'two hundred' (collective τǹv daкoσíɑv iллov ‘two hundred horse'
Th. 1, 62). <IE *dui-dkmt- ‘two hundred'>>
•VAR Ion. Sinкóσiot, Dor., etc. Siakátioi.
⚫DER SiakoσIOσtós 'the twohundredth' (D. H.), ǹ Saкooioστη name of a half percent
tax in Ptolemaic Egypt (pap.); Staкooιáкıç (Herod. Med.); Siaкoσιάлршτоι name of
the highest class of taxpayers (Aphrodisias; after dεкá-лрwτoι); daкoσlová-XOvç
'twohundredfold' (Str.; after έкatovτá-xovç, etc.), cf. diakoσiovtákıç (Alex. Aphr.).
J
}
Sianpianov
329
⚫ETYM The original form of the second member is -кátɩɩ, which became -кóσLOL
with regular assibilation > σ and analogical -o- after -кovτα, -коσtóç; dtā-, din- is
for Si- (see Sic) after tpiā-, tpin-kóσiol, etc. See ►εKOỜI, ►ÉKATÓV.
.
Siaкovpáleσaι [v.] ȧτεvèç ẞλéлεу 'to behold intently'. Sià τò τоÙÇ óóеαλµÙ
kópaç λéyɛσðaɩ ‘because the eyes were called к.' (Suid., EM 267,24). ◄GR►
⚫ETYM Unknown.
Stáкτopoç [adj.] epithet of Hermes (Hom.); by later poets, who understood it as
'messenger', also used for Iris, Athena, the Eagle of Zeus, etc. (Call.); finally also as
adjective (diáкτopa yxɛa 'swords' Nonn.). Secondary diáкτwp (AP, H.; cf.
diáкwv = diákovoc). <?►
...
•ETYM The meaning was lost at an early date; it was used as 'diákovoç' by A. Pr. 941,
and later simply interpreted as 'messenger': àëò τoũ diáyɛiv tàç ảyyɛλíaç 'because
they carry over messages' (H.). The gloss continues, however: ½ olov Statópwę kai
oaqŵç dɩaλɛyóµεvos 'or like: said loudly and clearly'. Bechtel 1914 relates it as diá-
ktopos to ktέpaç: “one who disposes of treasure”(?); Östergaard Herm. 37 (1902):
333ff. takes it as god of death, based on connection with êtépɛs. veкpoí 'the dead'
(H.), but this is probably a guess by grammarians to explain кτépɛα as 'honors of the
dead' (Solmsen IF 3 (1894): 98). Thieme 1952: 52f. objects to these explanations, and
analyzes *Siα-aкT-Topoç as "transmitting to the other side [of Persephoneia]"; Frisk
deems this "mehr kühn als überzeugend". Janko Glotta 56 (1978): 192-195 follows
Hesychius in assuming that the form was thematicized secondarily and that it meant
ŋуεµwv ‘leader'.
.
diaµevotás [acc.pl.] · àλašóvaç ‘charlatans, cheats'; diaµevtýs. yeúotns, áñateŵv ‘liar,
cheat' (H.). GR?>
ETYM From *Sɩ-аμεúομαi; sее ► ȧμεúσ.
Siaquuoipndá →uoipa.
diaµñáž [adv.] ‘right through, through and through' (trag., X). ◄GR➤
●ETYM From diá, άvá and -лá‹ in äлaε; perhaps modelled after diaµnεpés.
Sɩαμлεpéç [adv.] 'through and through, right through', local and temporal (II.). <GR>
•VAR Also with tmesis: Sià d'àµлερέç (Schwyzer 1950: 426).
●der diaµñepńs [adj.] ‘piercing' (Hp.); dɩαµлɛpéws (Hp.), from there àµëɛpέwç.
dɩaµлáž ‘right through' (H.).
●ETYM From Sɩá and àµñɛipw; cf. àµëɛíðavíɛç ‘having pierced B 426 (dɩaµñɛipw [Q.
S.] is a secondary formation after diaлɛipw). The root vowel is the same as in dia-
лɛрáw, лɛpóvŋ, etc., as well as in the adj. in -ns (Schwyzer: 513). The combination
Sɩ(á)-ává, or rather -ȧN-, occurs also in dɩávdixa (Hom.); see ► díxa. Cf. Strömberg
1946: 140f. and Luther 1935: 154f. See also synonymous ►diaµлáž (A.).
Sαлрúσov [adv.] 'going through, piercing', especially of sounds, 'far stretching'
(Hom.). <IE? *Sɩα-¯p-v-t-?>
•VAR Also -íws [adv.] (D. S.).

=== page 189 ===

330
Siápaia
•ETYM diαлpúσιos arose from diaлpó ‘through and through', to which *-tyo- was
added (see Forssman KZ 79 (1965): 144). For the unclear v-vocalism, Aeolic origin
has been proposed (Chantraine 1942: 25; for other suggestions, cf. Bechtel 1914 s.v.;
Schwyzer 1950: 505; Schwyzer KZ 63 (1936): 60¹).
Siápara →充Čepáw.
Sɩɩɩάw [v.] 'to sieve' (Att.). <IE *kieh₂- ‘sieve'>
•VAR Perf. ptc. pass. diettŋuévos (dinttquévos Thphr. as if from dɩ-attáw); as a
simplex σwoɩ [3pl.pres.] (Hdt. 1, 200), ¿ttiqµévos (Pherecr., Att. inscr.), ¿σσŋµévos
(Delos III*, with Ionic -σσ-). A present in -0- is ►σnow.
●COMP ảλevpó-ttŋσiç ‘flour-sieve' (Poll.), 'sieved flour' (Suid.).
•DER Verbal noun diáttŋois (Plu.), also (deverbal) Síattos. ǹ áλevpót<t>ijols, tò
KÓσKIVOV 'flour-sieve, sieve' (H.).
•ETYM Formerly, *(diα-)τƑaíw was posited, and the word implausibly compared with
Skt. titaй- 'to sieve'. Puhvel has connected Hittite kinae-zi 'to assort', which fits
excellently both formally and semantically (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. for a critical
note, though). We have to reconstruct a root *kieh₂- 'to sieve' (thus LIV²), from
which Greek probably formed a yod-present (see also most recentlyRPh. 72 (1998)
124).
Sißolos [adj.] 'with double point', of a halbert or a cloth. <<GR>
•DER Siẞolía 'halbert' (Ar.), ‘cloth' (Plu.); dißoλéw ‘harrow' (pap.).
⚫ETYM DELG compares Báλλw.
Síẞos [m.] name of a square on the draughtboard (AP 9, 482). <LW Lat.>>
•ETYM Loan from Lat. dīvus; however, the t is short.
didάokw [v.] ‘to teach, instruct' (Od.). ◄IE *d(e)ns- ‘teach'>
•VAR Aor. Sıdážαɩ (like áλúσкw: άλúčaι), perf. med. Sɛdidá×¤; post-Hom.
didaokñσai (Hes.), didá¥w (A.), dedídaxa (Pl.).
•DER didáσкaλos [m.] ([f.]) ‘teacher' (IA, h. Merc.) with Sidασкalía 'lesson,
education' (Pi.), Siðaσкáλov 'knowledge' (Hdt.), late in plur. 'tuition fee',
Sidασкαλiкóç 'ptng. to the teacher', didaσкaλeñov 'school' (IA). SiSaxn 'education'
(IA), Sídağıç ‘id.' (E.), Sídayµa ‘id.' (IA), for which cf. τapáčαι: τapaxń, tápačic,
τápayµa; dɩdayµoσúvŋ ‘id.' (astrol.). Síðaкτpα [pl.] ‘teacher's fee' (Theoc.; cf.
Chantraine 1933: 332); didaктýpιov ‘proof (Hp.); didaktikóç ‘suitable for teaching'
(Ph., NT).
⚫ETYM Reduplicated σк-present of dañva with factitive meaning < *dah-ñvaɩ.
Since the root was obscured, the reduplication (and partly also the σк-suffix) spread
to the non-presentic forms. See Debrunner 1937: 251ff.
Sidnu →Sźw 1.
didpáʊkw [v.] ‘to run away' (άлodpáç Od.; but see "Apηotos below). ◄IE *dreh²-
'run'>
•VAR Аor. άл-έбpāv, perf. àлodédpaкa. Also έк-dɩdpáσкw; the simplex is hardly
attested, see DELG.
}
Sidwµi
331
●DER åлódpãσiç ‘escape' (Hdt.), Spã¤µóç ‘flighť (Hdt.). äбpãστoç 'who does not run
away' (Hdt.), also as a PN "Aбpηotos, -Spaστo (Il.); fem. Adpáστɛα, name of
Nemesis: 'from whom one cannot flee' (A.); also Adρηστivη. Lengthened verbal
form Spaσкáw = ȧлоdidрáσкw (Lex apud Lys. 10, 17; Zen.), ȧлоdраoкášw (Tz.);
Spáσkaσis (H.).
Spāлéτη [m.] 'runaway (slave)' (Hdt.), with unclear -л- (cf. DELG), whence several
derivatives like Spалετεúш [v.] 'to run away'. Note Spay (Ar. fr. 768).
•ETYM The athematic root aorist &-Spα-v corresponds morphologically to Skt. drāntu
[3pl.impv.] ‘run', from a root *dr-eh₂- beside *dr-em-, seen in Spaµɛiv, ▶ Spóµoç.
See ▸ȧлоdiбрáσкw.
Sídvuoç [adj.] ‘double', substantivized plur. ‘twins' (Il.), ‘testicles' (LXX). ◄IE *dui-du-
A
•DIAL Myc. PN Di-du-mo /Didumõi/.
=
•DER SiSvμάove [du.], -oσiv [dat.pl.] 'twins' (Hom.), as an adj. in Nonn., both plur.
and sing., = dídvμoç; built on dídvµμoç after óлáwv (Chantraine 1933: 163, Schwyzer:
521); dúo Síduos (Sammelb. 1068); medical terms didúшa, SiSvμaïa [pl.]
'testicles, etc.' (Нp.); divµшτó 'forked' (Cyran.); Aiduμóóv month name in
Alexandria (Ptol.). Sídvµótŋs ‘duality' (Pl.). Denominative dɩdvµεúw 'to bear twins'
(LXX). didvµā-tóкos (-11-) ‘bearing twins' (Theoc.) with compositional (metrical)
lengthening for didvμo-τóкoç (Arist.); from the former diduμn-τoкéw (-0-).
•ETYM Reduplication from dúo with a suffix -µo- (έtvµoc); cf. áµqí-dvμoç 'double' (S
847). Analogical formations like τpí-dvµoç (D. H.) show that diduμos was connected.
with Siç ‘twice', at least at a later date. Cf. also Gonda 1953: 48.
Sídwu [v.] ‘to give' (Il.). <IE *deh,- 'give'>
•VAR Fut. Swow (Sidwow v 358, w 314), aor. Swкα, Souvai (see below), pass. Soñval,
perf. Sédwka, dédoμai. Cypr. opt. Swкot from Swкw (from the aor.).
DIAL Myc. di-do-si /didonsi/ 'they give', di-do-to /didontoi/ [3pl.ind.pass.], do-se
/dōsei/ 'he will give', jo-do-so-si /jō-dosonsi/, o-do-ke /hō-dōke/ [ind.aor.], a-pu-do-
ke /apu-dōke/, a-pe-do-ke /ap-edōke/, de-do-me-na /dedomena/ [perf.ptc.pass.]; a-
pu-do-si /apu-dosis/, do-so-mo /dosmos/, do-so-mi-jo /dosmios/ 'consisting of
contributions', do-ra /dora/ 'gifts'; PN te-o-do-ra /the "odōra/.
•COMP Often with prefix: ȧva-, åνɩɩ-, άлo-, dα-, etc. As a first member Swot- in
Awoí-0ɛos, etc.; cf. Knecht 1946: 11; see also below.
•DER Swc [f.] 'gift' (Hes. Op. 356 < dw-ç or *Swτ-C, see below); (ává-, ȧvτí-, àлó-,
etc.) Sóσ 'gift' (II.) with dooídiov (inscr.) and dóσчoç, often from compounds with
έлɩ-, ¿v-, ñɑpα-; dŵτç, uncertain; acc. to Fraenkel 1910: 105 twice in the
Amphiktyon-law of 380ª for λwtıç; also dŵttıç. dŵs, qepvý ‘gift, dowry' (H.),
probably a mistake, see Latte; Swτívŋ, -ä, ‘gift, present, rent' (Hom., also Argolis; but
cf. Leumann 1950: 279f.), with Swτivά(w 'collect gifts' (Hdt. 2, 180); ȧлv-doσµóç
'selling' with aлuðóσдoç (Arc.); -Soμа in ȧлó-, §ɩá-, лрó-doµа, etc.; cf. Wilhelm
Glotta 14 (1925): 70f.; on Swpov see s.v. Further (¿ê-, ¿лɩ-, etc.)dotηp ‘giver³ (Il.),
fem. Sóτεipa (Hes.); Swτwp 'id.' (Od.); on Soτnp: Swτwp see Benveniste 1948: 46 and
49; Swτúp ‘id.' (Оeoì dwtñpes ¿áwv 0 325, etc.; see below); dótŋs = doτýp (LXX); first

=== page 190 ===

332
Síεμai
only in compounds, e.g. лpodótηç, fem. -ɩç ‘'traitor' (IA) with лpodoσía ‘treason’
(IA); Swτns (Hes. Op. 355, beside à-dwtŋc; cf. Swç above and Fraenkel 1910: 118, Frisk
1948: 20), έridwτηs epithet of Zeus in Mantinea and other gods (Paus.) with
'Eлɩdótɛɩov name of a tempel (Epidauros); Awτw name of a Nereid (Il., Hes.; see
below). Sotɩкóç, often prefixed with έл-, μετα-, etc. (Arist.). Desiderative
deverbative (лapa-, &v-, etc.)Swoɛíw (Th.), iterative preterite Sóσкov (epic).
⚫ETYM Sídwµ goes back to the widespread PIE root *deh3-/dh3-. Except for the
reduplication vocalism, Sídw-μ corresponds to Skt. dádāti, Av. dadāiti; i-
reduplication is also seen in Italic, e.g. Osc. didest 'he will give', Vest. didet 'dat', and
perhaps also in Lat. reddō, if < *re-di-dō. Other correspondences are with the medial
root aorists oτo, Skt. ádita, Venet. zo-to < *dh-to; and with the participles
(-)Sotóç, Lat. dătus, Skt. -dāta-, Av. dāta- (but zero grade in Skt. -tta- <*-dh¸-to-; as
a simplex it has new dattá-). The active aorist -Sw-к-α (with -к- after εОηкα, ñкα,
acc. to Schwyzer: 741) replaces the root aorist **-dw-v (cf. -στη-v), seen in Skt. á-dā-
t, Arm. et 'he gave' <*h,é-do-t. Cypr. SoƑeval is often equated with Skt. dāváne [inf.]
'to give' (see Benveniste 1935: 129); however, an element *ų is also found in Cypr. opt.
Supávol, Lat. duim 'dem', Lith. dovanà 'gift', dāvė 'he gave', and other forms (see
LIV² s.v. *deh¸u-). Hom. Att. Souvat is from *So-éval. Among the nouns, compare
Sóτwp = Skt. dátar-, with zero grade Lat. dător; Soτýp : Skt. dātár-; Sóσɩç = Lat. dăti-
ō; dŵç, if < *dwt-ç = Lat. dōs, -tis (if the latter is from IE *deh¸-t- and not *deh¸-ti-).
As a first member, Awoi- = Skt. dāti-vāra- ‘who loves giving, liberal'.
diɛµaɩ [v.] trans. ‘to hunt, pursue' in diɛσða (M 276, etc.), intrans. ‘to run' in diɛvtaɩ
(475) and Siɛoαɩ (M 304). <?>
●VAR Subj. Síwµai, Sintai, Siwvtai (O 681, etc.), opt. Síoito (p 317); act. έvdiɛσav (see
DELG). Active preterite forms Síov 'I fled' (X 251; on die see Chantraine 1942: 388),
Évdiɛσav 'they pursued' (Σ 584); note лεpì yàp díɛ (E 566, etc.) 'he was afraid', see
below. Rare forms in A.: Siouat with inf. 'I feared' (Pers. 700f. [lyr.] bis), Sɩóµεvoç
'driven away' (Supp. 819, Eu. 357 and 385 [lyr.]); in Gortyn έddíŋtat (< έod- = έkd-),
εлíε00α, -Sóμεvoç 'to chase away, pursue' (SGDI 4997-8). See on dɩwkw.
⚫ETYM Siɛ 'was afraid' rather belongs to dédouкa, Sɛídw. Since the only active forms
remaining are the hapax legomena Síov and ¿vdiɛσav, these may be secondary after
lɛvtaɩ, ĭɛσav; moreover, a PIE *dih,- could hardly have become Sɩε-, which also
suggests that these two forms are analogical. Consequently, the verb was thematic.
Cf. further diɛpós 'quick'. The appurtenance of Skt. diyati 'fly' is not certain. From
other languages have been compared OIr. dían 'quick' and Latv. diêt 'to dance' (LIV²
s.v. *deih, dahinjagen'). See Sīvos, ►díčnµai, ►Čntéw.
diɛpáw [v.] ‘to filter through' (Plu.). <?►
•DER Siépaμa 'funnel, strainer' (Plu.); in the papyri often used as a technical term of
Egyptian transport, mg. not quite clear and probably influenced by Staipεiv
'transport', cf. the notation Staípεμа; thence diεраμаτíτη name of an official of
transportion. Note Sɩápaμa next to diεpāv; thence Siapaμaτía name of a liturgy.
j
!
1
SiOúpaμẞos
333
⚫ETYM Beside Siépauα, diépασis (pap.), also Staípaσiç. See Frisk 1931: 28ff.; also,
Redard 1949: 242, who adduces diápηµa = λéµßos ‘kind of ship' (Procop.). See
►ȧлεрáw and ►ɛpáw.
Siɛpós in Hom. a qualification of ȧvýp 'man' (( 201 ȧvǹp diεpòs ẞpoτóç), and of лoÚÇ
'foot' (143); in Diog. Laert. (AP 7, 123) epithet of oλó 'flame, fire'. In Anaxag. 4, 12
the opposite of Empós 'humid' (A.). <?>
•ETYM The meaning was unknown even in antiquity, as is clear from the
incompatible translations in H.: diɛpós λɑµépós, Čŵv, repiqavýs ‘brilliant, alive,
apparent'. Connection with Siεμat is only possible if the word is from *dih,-ero-.
Schulze (see Bechtel 1914 S.V.) reads ( 201 as *Spiɛpós 'to be feared', related to
► dɛídw; semantically, this is not convincing (cf. DELG). The word has also been
connected with Staívw (Frisk); this is also not convincing (as it is not from an r/n-
stem).
díľa [f.] · αïž. Aáкwvɛ¿ ‘goat (Lacon.)' (H.). <LW? Illyr.>
•ETYM The word has been compared with Sía < *Sty-ta, with Arm. tik 'sack' from IE
*digeh₂-, related to OHG ziga 'goat'. Schmitt-Brandt Kratylos 13 (1968): 3 compared
Alb. dhi 'goat' (rejected by Demiraj 1997). Latte thought the word was Illyrian.
Perpillou BSL 67 (1972): 115-122 supposes that the word was originally *aia, perhaps
seen in Myc. az-za (see now DELG Supp.).
Sinua [v.] 'to search, seek out, desire' (Il.). <IE *ieh₂- 'pursue'>
•Var dišnoóµeð (ë 239; subj. aor., cf. Chantraine 1942: 455), fut. Sišnoɛai (Parm. 8,
6), aor. ¿dičnoáµŋy (Heraclit. 101); new present díoμa (Herod.; see Schwyzer: 689).
●DIAL Att. has 【ntéw.
•DER Síčnσis (Parm.), cf. Porzig 1942: 197.
⚫ETYM It was thought that Sínua goes back to *ɩ-₁α-µaɩ, reflecting a verbal stem
further occurring in ►ñλoç and nτéw. However, García Ramón (see Zŋτp) has
shown that the basic root is *ieh₂- ‘to pursue, avenge, etc.'.
Silw→Siç.
Sunyavés →yávuzial.
Sɩŋveкns [adj.] 'uninterrupted, definite, exact' (Il.; on the mg. Luther 1935: 64f.). <GR➤
•VAR Artificially Attic (Dorianized) dɩāvekýs (Schwyzer: 190), -ćws.
•ETYM From dɩ(α)-εveк-ǹs with compositional lengthening (cf. лod-ŋvekýc) to
Évɛykɛĭv, ¿vεx-¤ñvat; see Schwyzer: 513. The simplex ηvεкýs (Emp.) arose by
decomposition. See also Soupηvekýs (s.v. ► dópv). On the long -11-, see Bonfante Riv.
fil. class. 97 (1969): 189.
dintavés [adj.] · Aitóv, Siatetaµiévov 'simple, stretched (out)' (H.). <GR>
⚫ETYM From Siά and tɛívw, tavúw with lengthening of the a (cf. Sivekńs).
dĩ¤úpaµßoç [m.] name of a song at the festival for Dionysus (Archil.), also said of the
god (E. Ba. 526 [lyr.]). <PG>
•VAR Sеupaμs on a vase (SEG XVI (1959) no. 40).

=== page 191 ===

334
dünetńs
●DER dɩðvpaµßwdŋs (Ph.), -tkós (Arist.), -tos month name (Gonni), dɩðvpaµßéw ‘to
sing dithyrambs' (Hell.).
⚫ETYM Like ĭauẞoç and Оpíaμẞoç, dīОúpaµßoç is Pre-Greek (thus also Frisk and
DELG). See also Kretschmer Glotta 27 (1939): 219f., contra Brandenstein IF 54 (1936):
34ff., who connects the word with Skt. ánga- 'member'.
dɩīnetńs [adj.] ‘fallen from heaven', then 'heavenly' (h. Ven. 4, oiwvoí 'birds', perhaps
from the root *peth₂- 'fly'), 'light, clear' (Emp.); see Leumann 1950: 311. <GR>
•VAR Hom. only in dūretéos rotaμoão (verse end).
⚫ETYM The older form for dɩлετη may have been dɩɩлετηе (as also suggested by
ancient sources such as sch. Od. 4, 477), like Atɛɩτpέons (inscr.) after Alfɛi-qıλoç
(epic Supλoc), where the dative was correct. See Bechtel 1914 s.v. On the verbal
second member, cf. Fraenkel 1910: 63, Risch 1937: 82. See also Schmitt 1968: 221f.
dikaσróλos [m.] ‘judge' (Il.). ◄GR➤
•DER Rare and late Siкασлoλía and diкaσſoλéw.
•ETYM Formation like ▸aiñóλoç, ► ßouкóλoç, but here with a remarkable acc.pl. as
the first member. Ôiкαoкóлoç (Mytilene, Cyme, IV-III) is formed after diкασлóλoç.
There is no relationship with Go. spillon 'to proclaim', etc. (pace e.g. Lagercrantz
1938: 59). See L Sikn.
Sikɛiv [v.] 'to throw' (Pi.) also 'to aim (on high)' (E. HF 498) with ävdike. áváppiyov
'throw!', avdiкá ó Bóλos 'throw, cast', áνdíкτηs. tò àvapitóµevov tñs µváypas
úλov 'the sprung holding bar of a mousetrap' (Call.; H.). <PG>
⚫DER ►SíкTVOV and ▸ Síoкoç.
⚫ETYM Connection with Sɛíкvvu is defended by Brugmann IF 39 (1917-1921): 144ff.
and Gonda 1929: 216ff., but this is semantically problematic. See under ► Síкtvov and
►Síoкoç. Fur.: 297 compares Mixážai. piyai, þaλɛĩv. Kpñteç ‘throw (Cret.)' (H.),
which points to a Pre-Greek word. LIV² s.v. 2. *deik- ‘werfen' connects the word with
Khot. diśś- werfen'.
Síкελλǎ [f.] a two-pronged fork (trag., Delos IIIa). <PG>
•Der SikeλXítŋs (Luc.).
•ETYM A technical term without established etymology. A connection with µáкɛλλa,
µaкéλŋ (Il.) requires an analysis as Sí- and µá-кɛλλa, which is possible only for Sí-
kɛλλa: a prefix µa- (allegedly from IE *sem-) does not exist. The variation -ɛλλa/-
Eλn, as displayed by μáкελλа, μакéλη, is best explained from Pre-Greek *-ala vel
sim. Therefore, µákɛλλa, µakéλŋ is probably of Pre-Greek origin, and we can
reasonably assume the same for Síkɛλλa.
Síкn [f.] 'custom, right, judgement, justice, lawsuit, trial, punishment' (II.). ◄IE *deik-
'show'>
•COMP ► dɩкασлóλoç ‘judge' with an acc. pl.
●DER Diminutive diкídiov (Ar.; see Fournier 1946: 116). Síkaιoç ‘just, lawful (II.); with
dɩkałóτηs ‘justice' (X.) and Siкatoσúvη ‘id.' (IA; see Porzig 1942: 225), secondary
Siкaιóσuvos (of Zeus); denominative Sikatów 'consider to be right, claim, sentence'
(IA) with Siкaíwμα ‘act of right' and Sukaiwσis lawsuit, punishment'; also
}
SíKTVOV
335
Siкαιwτηpiov 'place of punishment' (Pl. Phdr. 249a; like dɛσµшτηplov, etc.) and
Siкalwτns 'judge' (Plu.). Siкaviкós 'belonging to trials', often depreciative (Att.); the
base form only in H.: Siкavoúç. τoùs nepì tàs díkaç dɩατpíßovτaç 'those who occupy
themselves with justice' (H.). The long à (Ar. Pax 534) is from vɛāvɩкóç acc. to
Chantraine Anales de filología clásica 6 (1952): 45ff.; see also Björck 1950: 256f., 279f.
dɩкaïкóç ‘rightly' (M. Ant.). Denominative diкά(w ‘to judge', med. 'to go to law' (Il.;
ɩadıкáw Att.); from it diкαστns ‘judge' (IA) with dɩкaστɩкóç 'belonging to a
judge/justice' (Pl.) and Siкαστεía 'office of Siкαστη' (inscr.); rare Siкαστηp 'id.'
(Locr., Pamph., etc.), fem. Siкáστpiα (Luc.), with diкαστηpιov ‘law court' (IA) with
the diminutive diкαστηpídiov (Ar.) and diкαστηpiaкóç (Phld.); from diкáw also
SiкαστÚç (Epigr. Samos; Fraenkel 1910: 32²), diкασμóç (Ph.), diкaσía (Aq.; diadiкaσía
Att.), Siadíкaoua (Lys.), díкaσιç (sch.). Privative compound ǎdiкoç 'unjust' with
ádɩкía and ádɩkéw, whence ádíkŋua (all IA). On the hypostasis ádiкíov ‘because of
unjustice' see Wackernagel 1920-1924(2): 288; on ådíкtov Wackernagel and
Debrunner Phil. 95 (1942): 190f.
⚫ETYM Although it is morphologically identical with epic Skt. diśā- 'direction, part of
heaven', Síкn is an independent formation. It is probably an extension of the root
noun seen in Skt. díś- 'cardinal point' and preserved in Lat. dicis causā (Wackernagel
in WH 1: 860). Pace Kretschmer Glotta 32 (1953): 2, the association with 'right' must
be old, as it is also found in Lat. dicis causa, iudex, and in Germanic; see Sɛíkvuļu.
Siкλídɛç [f.pl.] 'double folding' (Oúpal 'doors', лúla ‘gates', etc.) (Il.); also
substantivized (Theoc.). <GR
•VAR Late also sing.
•ETYM Compound of di- (see ►díc) and kλɩ- in ►kλivw, kλi-σiç. Cf. díkλɛiç, s.v.
►KAɛÍÇ.
Síкpoos [adj.] 'forked, cloven' (IA; cf. Ilberg Arch. f. Pap. 4, 281f.). ◄IE *(dui)-kr-ou-o-
'two-horned'.>
●VAR Gen. Síkpovç. Also diкpóoç, gen. Siкpoñç, or (with hyphaeresis) díкpoç.
•ETYM Síкpooç goes back to *Sí-кpoƑ-os 'two-horned', from di- (see ►díc) and a
word for 'horn'. Nussbaum 1986: 2-18, assumes that there were forms without
laryngeal (e.g. Skt. śṛnga-, кápvos H.) to explain the discrepancy between Siкpoos
without reflex of *h₂ and кɛpa[Ƒ]-ós 'horned' (beside Lat. cervus ‘deer', Av. srū-
'horn') from *kerh₂-uo- with *h₂. Note that кópuç, кópчμẞα, etc. are not related, but
rather of Pre-Greek origin.
Síкταшvov [n.] plant name, 'Origanum Dictamnus' (Arist.). <PG>
•VAR Also SíкTαшov (Arist.).
●DER diktaµvítηs (olvoç, Dsc.); cf. Redard 1949: 96. Note the town Аíктαµ(v) ov on
the north coast of Crete.
•ETYM Formation like σpévdaµvoç, kápdaµov, etc. (Schwyzer: 524 and 494), and
therefore Pre-Greek (Fur.: 396). Chantraine 1933: 216 hypothesizes that the word is
from Aíкτη, mountain on Crete, which is possible; cf. Strömberg 1940: 126.
Síкτvov [n.] 'net, strick' (Od.). ◄ PG(V)►

=== page 192 ===

336
SIKTUS 1, -VOC
Alóvigos
337
•DIAL Myc. de-ku-tu-wo-ko /dektuworgos/.
●COMP Sɩктv-ßólos (AP, Opp.) beside diкτvo-ẞólos (Poll.) after diкτv-αpxέw
(inscr.) with elided -o-?
⚫DER Diminutive diкτúdiov (Poll.); Sɩкτvɛúç 'fisher (with a net)' (Str.) with SiкTVɛíα
'fishing' (Ael.); also diкTuïα, see Scheller 1951: 41. - diктvódηs like a net' (Hp. Ep.),
SIкTUWτóç 'forming a net' (LXX); from diкtvóoμai? (LXX). PN AíкtuÇ.
•ETYM Usually derived from an older u-stem derivative of Siкɛɛ̃iv ‘throw' (díkτU
only EM 275, 27; from the plural díкtva, Schwyzer: 460f.). However, the verb need
not be related, and the Mycenaean form has -e- as a variant of -i-, which points to
Pre-Greek origin (see Bader 1965: $23; Chadwick 1964: 19-21; see under Síoкoç; on
Pre-Greek u-stems, see Heubeck 1961: 36). Not with Chantraine REGr. 80 (1967): 1-5
or Ruijgh 1988: 450 should we explain the Mycenaean form from *deiktu-. The
connection of Van Windekens KZ 100 (1987): 311f. with Hitt. ekt-, ikt- (catching)
net', which the initial 8- to be from diкɛiv, is implausible.
SÍкTUS 1, -voc [m.] name of an unknown Libyan animal (Hdt. 4, 192). <LW Libyan>
⚫ETYM Unexplained. See Gsell 1913: 128 and Gsell 1915: 97f.
dÍKTUS 2 [m.] · Ó Åktīvos väò Aakwvwv ‘kite (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. Fur.: 392 connects iкtīvoç, assuming a Pre-Greek word with
S/zero. However, iкtīvoç is rather an IE word. Síкτuç 1 probably refers to a
different animal.
Síla ápía, τò quτòv. Aάкwvεç (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR With prothetic vowel in MoGr. ȧČíλaкɛç 'querens' (Fur.: 374).
•ETYM The word is Pre-Greek on account of the variant with a prothetic vowel.
Sílaσ(σ)ov [n.] name of an article of clothing (BGU 814, 25; 816, 27 [II³]). ◄GR►
•DER tetpá-λao(σ) ov as attribute of λévti<o>v (PSI 8, 971, 17 [III-IV³]), of flax (Ed.
Diocl. 28, 61).
•ETYM The second member is perhaps connected to λáσtos ‘hairy'; cf. tetpá-ßißlos
from Biẞliov, s.v.
Siváкw [v.] 'to change, correct?? <?>
•VAR Opt. Sivaкoι (Del.³ 412, Elis).
⚫ETYM Unknown. See Bechtel 1921, 2: 863 and Schwyzer l.c.
Sivn [f.] 'whirlpool, eddy' (II.). <PG?>
DIAL Myc. qe-qi-no-to /gweg"inōtos/, qe-qi-no-me-no /g"eg"inōmenos/ 'endowed
with life'.
•COMP ẞαеvdívηs (Il.).
•DER SɩvýɛƖç ‘whirling' (Il.), Dor. Siváɛiç, Aeol. Sivváɛis (Alc.); Sīvos [m.] ‘id.', also
'round vessel' (IA, etc.) with Sɩvódŋs ‘eddying' (D. C.) and Sɩvwτós ‘with d.,
rounded, covered with circles' (Hom.; Sɩvów only Eust.).
Verb Sivéw, aor. Sɩvñσaɩ, etc., also divεúw, (divvηvτεs ptc. pl. Sapph. 1, 11; cf. below)
'turn around' (both trans. and intr., Il.) with divnois (Arist.), Sívnua (Man.), Sívεvμa
(conj. in Ar. Th. 122 and X. Eq. 3, 11; Orph.); rare dɩvéµɛv (Hes. Op. 598), divoµévyy
1
(Call.), ȧлo-бvwvT [subj.] 'thresh' (Tab. Heracl.; uncertain, to be changed to
άлodidŵvɩɩ?); Aeol. Sívvw (Hdn.; Avoчés Alc.), diválw (Artem. apud Ath.).
Perhaps Atvov month name (when the corn is threshed).
•ETYM Perhaps an old nasal present *di-n-eu- (cf. kīvéw beside kivyµaɩ < *ki-n-(e)u-),
of which the nasal was generalized (cf. кλívη: кλívw); the Aeolic form Sívv- is from
-VF-.
According to García Ramón 1999b: 237-248, the Mycenaean forms are not related,
but belong to ẞíos instead, because they mean 'endowed with life' and because St-
is not the expected reflex of *gi-. The Homeric form dɩvwτós does not derive from
the verb Sɩvów; it simply meant '‘ornamented, enlivened' and belongs to ßíos as well,
acc. to García Ramón (with replacement of the reflex of the initial *g"- to avoid
association with ßɩvéw ‘futuere').
The initial element St- has nothing to with Siεμal, because the connection is
evident "ni pour la forme, ni pour le sens" (DELG). In view of the lack of a good.
etymology, we should rather consider the possibility of Pre-Greek origin.
Síoos •VAR Sičóç. → díç.
Síov
=> ►Sɛidw.
Atóvñσoç [m.] name of a god (II.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Dialectal Aóvvoos (epic, lyr.), Atóvvvσos (Thess., Cret.), Zóvvvσos (Aeol.),
A₁Evvσos (Amorgos), Aɛúvvoos (Anacr.). Hypocoristic vocative Atovu (Phryn. Com.
10); cf. dɩov(v)úç. ó yuvaɩkíaç kaì лapáðŋ\uç ‘weakling, effeminate' (H., EM);
SɩovvÚç. n yuvaɩкeía kaì Oñλvę żołns 'womanish clothing' (Eust.).
DIAL Myc. di-wo-nu-so-jo [gen.?] /Diwo¹nusoio/, di-wo-nu-so [dat.].
⚫DER ALOVÚσLOS PN, fem. Atovvoiáç; tà Aiovúσia [n.pl.] 'festival for A.' (Att., etc.),
Atovvotaкós (Th.); diminutive Atovvσíoкoç, denomination of a person with bone-
like outgrowths on the temples (medic.); denominative Sovvotάw [v.] 'to celebrate
the A.' (Luc.), ovvσαστaí [m.pl.] worshippers of A. (Nisyros, etc.), cf.
Ano入入wvnaotaí s.v. ▶ Anó入入wv.
•ETYM The forms seem to point to *Aloσ-vuoos. Acc. to the tradition, Dionysus
would have come from Thrace, and his father would be Zeus, his mother ▶Σquéλŋ.
As the first member seemed to be the genitive of the Thracian Zeus, Kretschmer
1896: 241f. assumed in the second member a Thracian word for 'son' (found in
Thracian names like Nuσa; further Nuσat, Núσtat the nymphs who cared for him)
and Nusatita (PN). This interpretation finds no support, however (see on vuóc).
Dunkel 1995: 1-21 assumed that the name contains *suH-nu- 'son', of which s and n
were metathesized; this is improbable too.
García Ramón Minos 20-22 (1987): 183-200 concludes that Atevvvoía can represent
an old genitive *diues, whereas Alovvuotav continues *diyos. For the variants.
Alvuσoç and Aivvuσoç, no definitive interpretation can be given.
Fur.: 250 recalls the PN Atovuτãç (beside -σãç on a coin from Teos; see Meyer 1896:
381) and stresses that the variation τ/σ points to a non-IE = Pre-Greek word. Since all
attempts to find an IE etymology have failed, we have to accept that it is a foreign
name.

=== page 193 ===

338
Síoлos ⚫ETYM From Sɩέлw; see ►εлw.
Sionog
dĩoç [adj.] ‘belonging to heaven, godlike' (II.), also 'belonging to Zeus' (trag.); often as
a month name (Thessaly, Macedonia, etc.). <IE *dieu- 'heaven'>
•DIAL Myc. di-wi-jo, di-u-jo /diwjos/; di-wi-ja, di-u-ja /diwja/.
•ETYM Old adjective, identical with Skt. divyá- /div()yá-/ 'heavenly', Lat. dīus
'godlike', IE *diu-iHo-; see ►Zɛúç. The adjective may replace the genitive of the basic
word; see Schwyzer 1950: 176ff. The feminine was dĩa < *díƑ-чă, which first appeared
in the substantival function 'daughter of heaven, goddess', e.g. Sĩa yuvaɩк@v 'goddess
among women'; thence, dĩa Oɛáwv, etc.; see Schwyzer 1950: 116. The meaning
'belonging to Zeus' is preserved well in tragedy, and probably in I 538 (DELG).
dɩoσkéw [V.] 'to spy around constantly' (Anacr. 3, 3; not quite certain); acc. to H.,
diaßlénɛiv ovvexws tǹv öpaoiv µetaßá\\ovta, tíðetai dè kaì ènì toũ diaqopɛiobai
tų owμiati kai tñ ч/Xñ 'to stare at sth. which continuously changes its appearance; to
be weakened in the body and the soul'. <GR>
•ETYM See Schwyzer: 5417. DELG proposes *-ok"-sk-.
Alóσkovpoι [pl.] 'sons of Zeus', name of the young gods Castor and Polydeuces (Ion.
Hell.). <GR>
⚫VAR Att. Aloσkópw [du.]; also Atóσkopol.
⚫DER ALOσKO(Ú) Pεlov, -ptov 'temple of the A.' (Att., etc.), τà Aloσкo(ú)p(ε) ia 'festival
of the A.' (inscr.), also -½ïa (after ßaoλ½ïa, etc.), Aloʊkovpiaσtaí name of the
worshippers (pap.), cf. Alovvoiaσtaí; Aloσkovpiás TN.
●ETYM Univerbation of Alòs кoupoɩ (or kópw), cf. Schwyzer: 427 and 445. See on
► Zɛúç and ►kópos 2. The Dioscuri are the sons of Tyndareos and parallel to the
Indic Aśvins. They are saviors and rescuers from danger, both at sea and in battle. In
Lithuanian, they are called Diēvo sunēliai, sons of God. See the most recent
treatment of the Dioscuri in West 2007: 186ff.
§ɩóσлupov [n.] 'fruit of the nettle-tree', name of the cherry-like fruit of the Celtis
australis (Thphr.). <GR>
•VAR Also Sióσлvρoç [m.] = \ɩðóσлεрμоу 'gromwell' (Dsc.).
•ETYM Univerbation of Alòs лυрóç with transition to the neuter gender, as in
bahuvrihi compounds like Boúyλwoσov. Semantic parallels are recorded by
Strömberg 1940: 128.
Síлλaž, -кoç [adj.] 'in two layers, double' (Il.); as a fem. substantive ‘a mantle' (Hom.,
A. Pers. 277 [lyr.], Lyd.). <IE *dui-plk- 'two-fold'>
•DER Cf. τρíлλαε 'threefold' (II.).
⚫ETYM Identical with U tuplak [n.] ‘duplex' = 'furca', Lat. du-, tri-plex 'two-, three-
fold. The word is a bahuvrihi compound, the second member of which was
considered unclear by Frisk, who compared лλáε ‘flatness', лλŋуń 'hiť (cf. à-лλŋуíç
'single mantle' [Herod.], dɩ-лληуís 'double mantle' [Poll.]). However, the word is
more probably connected with лλéкw 'to twine'; see De Vaan 2008 s.v. duplex. Cf.
►Síлλoç and ►ɩлλáσoç.
Síσkoç
Sлλáσιoç [adj.] 'twofold, double' (Thgn.). <IE *dui-pl-to- 'two-fold'>
•VAR Also Sɩлλaoíwv (Arist.); Ion. dirλýoios.
339
•DER Sɩлλασiáw [v.] 'to double, reduplicate' (Att., etc.), whence diлλασασμóç and
Sɩлλaσíaσiç, diñλaoiaσtikós.
•ETYM From a verbal adjective *Sí-лλατoç, extended after the adjectives in -10- (like
áµßpóσios from äµßpotos, diqáoios from diqaτos, etc.; Schwyzer: 466, Chantraine
1933: 41). The basis is a verb meaning 'to fold' (IE *pel-; cf. áлλóoç, etc.).
Additionally, Go. ain-falþs 'one-fold > simple' and other Gm. formations also
contain a word for 'fold', e.g. ON faldr < PGm. *fálþa- < IE *pól-to-. Ion. Sɩrλñotoç is
an innovation after лαрαлλñσоç, etc.; Hell. Sɩлλασíwv, after the comparatives in
-íwv (Schwyzer: 598, 536); and dɩлλádios (AP, pap.), after dix¤ádioç, etc. (Schwyzer:
467). Cf. ► Síñλaε.
SɩлλÓое ⚫VAR Sɩлλoñç. →άлλóоs.
Sipkaia [f.] = kipкaíα, 'Vincetoxicum nigrum' (Dsc.). <PG?>
•VAR Sípкatov [n.] (Ps.-Dsc.) = ►Savкoç and στрúууov úлνшτɩкóv, 'Withania
somnifera'.
DER Sipkoç [m.] 'seed of pine' (Paus. Gr.).
•ETYM According to Dsc. 4, 75, the plant was named after the sorceress Circе, εεǹ
dokɛi ǹ píša qiλtpwv elvai nointikη 'because the root seems to produce philtres'. We
do not know which of the two forms is original. Supкat- may derive from the source
Aípкn. See Strömberg 1940: 93 and 152. Fur.: 255 points to Pre-Greek names in -ato-.
Siç [adv.] 'twice' (Od.). <IE *dui-s- 'twice'>
•VAR As a first member dɩ- ‘two-' (Il.).
•COMP As a first member dixo-.
⚫DER Denominative Siw hesitate' (II 713, Orac. apud Hdt. 1, 65). Further diós
(Ion.), Stoσós, Att. Siττós 'twofold, double' with doσaxoυ, -ττ-, etc. (see below);
Sixa [adv.] ([prep.]) ‘apart, separated' (II.) with dɩxí, díxov, etc.; dɩxác [f.] ‘half,
middle' (Arat.; after μováç, etc.) and the denominative dɩxάw ‘distribute' (Pl.) with
dixaoµós, dixaois (Hell.), dɩxaσtñpes ódóvtes ‘the cutting teeth' (Poll.); also Sixáw
(Arat.), Sixaiw (Arat.). Six¤á ‘apart, in two' (Hom.) with Sixádios 'twofold, double'
(Hom.), dɩx¤ás [f.] (as an [adj.]) ‘double' (Musae.). Isolated dokážetαι· diaqépetai
‘quarrels [or: carries over, vel sim.] (H.); for *dɩášɛtaɩ, or dissimilated from
SlotáČetal?
ETYM In its formation, Siç is identical with Skt. dvíḥ, Lat. bis (OLat. duis), MoHG
zwir 'twice'; as a first member, *di- = Skt. dvi-, Lat. bi- (cf. on Súo), Go. twi-, Lith.
dvi-. Examples include dí-лovç, Skt. dvi-pád-, and Lat. bi-pēs. The velar derivation is
unclear; beside Gr. Síxa, we have Skt. dví-dhā 'twofold', the dh of which might be
found in Si-x-0a. Sižós and dioσós also presuppose velar derivatives: *Six-10-, Six-
10-? See Schwyzer: 598. After díxa, Sixеá were formed τpíxα, τpix¤á, etc. (Schwyzer
ibid.). See further ► Siá, ▸ Soloí.
Síoкoç [m.] 'discus' (Il.). <PG?>

=== page 194 ===

340
SLσGÓC
•COMP Compound Síoк-oupa [n.pl.] (523) 'throwing distance', from Síoкov oúpa
(Y 431), see ►oupov 2.
●DER Diminutive Stoкáptov (Orib.); further dɩokɛúç name of a comete (Lyd.; see
Scherer 1953: 107). Denominative Sɩoкέw 'to throw the discus' with díoкnua 'throw,
what is thrown' (cf. the nouns in -(11) μa in tragedy, Chantraine 1933: 184ff.); also
Sɩokɛúw 'id.' with diσкετns (Arist. comm.). Unclear бíσкελλα· σлuρíç 'large basket'
(H.), for which a Latin suffix (Frisk: cf. synonymous fiscella) seems improbable.
⚫ETYM Fur.: 297 pointed out that the traditional derivation of *Síк-σkoç from diкɛīv
'throw' (Frisk, DELG) is hardly possible: the suffix -σкo- is rare. in nominal
derivation, and an σк-present from which it could have been taken is not attested.
Therefore, Furnée concluded that we have to start from *Siкo-, a variant of diк-εiv,
which has Pre-Greek origin. See under ►Síktvov.
SIσσÓS VAR SITTÓç. →díç.
diστάw [v.] 'to hesitate, be uncertain, doubt' (Pl.). <IE *dui-s- 'double'>
•VAR Fut. SiσTάow.
•DER Analogical dɩστayµós (Agatharch.), Síoτayµа (Phld.), Аɩστаktikós (A. D.),
diστážчµoç (Ptol.), Sɩσtaσµós (Thphr.).
⚫ETYM Since Solmsen KZ 37 (1904): 20f. and Solmsen IF 14 (1903): 437, the word has
been considered to be a denominative of *Sɩ-στ-oç = Skt. dvi-ṣṭh-a- ‘double', ON tvi-
st-r 'sad', properly *split in two', from IE *dui-sth₂-o-, containing *dui- (see Síc)
and *steh₂- 'stand' (see σμ); cf. Súστηvos. However, it could also be a
derivation of Siw; cf. εpлvστáw beside ερлúчw, кλαστálw beside кλáw, etc.
(Schwyzer: 706).
Síστролov [n.] name of a vase for libations (pap.). <?>
•ETYM Unclear.
.
dittáµevov [n.]? ȧpvoúµεvov. Kρñτεç 'refusing, denying (Cret.)' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. See Bechtel 1921(2): 783.
Siqaкos [m.] • ɛidos ßotávŋs ‘kind of planť (H.). ◄?►
•ETYM Fur.: 326 connects the word with Siya ‘thirst', but this is uncertain.
Siqάoios [adj.] 'twofold, double' (Hdt.); cf. τpáσtos 'threefold' (Hdt.), also explained
by H. as τpíqwvos 'three-voiced. <?>
•DER Síqatov. Sipáσiov, diooŵs λɛyóµεvov 'said ambiguously' (H.) and τpíçaτoS
'threefold' (Nic. Th. 102).
•ETYM Based on dí-, τpí-qaτos (cf. dλáσoç), but the second member is
uncertain. On the basis of diooшç λɛуóμεvov and τpíoшvoç in H., a connection with
quí could be suggested (e.g. von Skutsch IF 14 (1903): 488ff., who refers to Lat.
bifariam), whereas Brugmann IF 17 (1904-1905): 367 and Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-
1916: 1, 186 rather connected лεvεïv, póvoç, Bɛívw, as in åpŋï-qatos ‘killed in battle',
i.e. 'slayed twice' (cf. on ðíлλαε). However, in either case are the semantics
compelling. No better is the connection with paívw as 'twice visible' (Walde 1910: 90,
Sippos
341
Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916: 2, 71) since one would rather expect *Síqavτoç, like
ăpavtog (I1.).
Siqáw [v.] 'to search after' (II 747). <PG(V)►
•VAR Only present, except [ɛ]ɩoavtes. ynlaqńoaτεs ‘one who searched after'
(H.).
●DIAL Also Siqέw (AP).
•DER Sɩqaléos ‘searching' (Hymn. Is. 10), diqńτwp (ßv¤wv) ‘who explores (the
depths) (Opp.), ȧστpo-dions 'astronomer' (Herod.). Denominative Supadεú<o>εi•
*ελεTTα 'will take out, choose' (H.), from *Supáç? Cf. quyadɛúɛv: quуáç.
Further Sipas 'a snake' (Artemid. 2, 13), Síqα<v>• τòv öчɩv. Kρñτεç ‘serpent (Cret.)'
(H.); Sípaτov öqiv (cod.; corr. Salm.); Latte comments ad loc.: “scil. a rimas
scrutando appellatus”. Also díßav. öôív. Kpñtés (H.); cf. the snake name лapɛíaç and
the other names of animals in -aç, -ŋs in Chantraine 1933: 30f.
•ETYM Siqάw has no established etymology. The restoration of the H. entry to
Sípa<v> is uncertain: Fur.: 325 prefers to maintain Sípaτov of the manuscript.
Rather than being a mistake, the ẞ of diẞav is to be taken at face value; the variation
between ẞ and suggests Pre-Greek origin. However, a connection with dέow (as
suggested by Fur.: 315, 355) lacks semantic justification, whereas the appurtance of
► Síчakoç remains in any event uncertain.
Sipoépa [f.] 'prepared skin, hide, leather', also of leather objects (IA). <PG(V)►
DIAL Myc. di-pte-ra (also di-pte-ra3) 'leather' /diphthera(i)/; di-pte-ra-po-ro
/diphthera-phoros/(?).
⚫DER Diminutive Suppέptov (Theognost.); 10ɛpic = dépα (AP); dépшμα 'id.'
(Thd.); ɩɛpíaç ‘man dressed in leather, farmer, etc.' (Com.); fem. dɩößɛpîtiç
(Poll.); dɩößɛpápios 'parchment maker' (Edict. Diocl. Asin.); dɩépivoç ‘made of 8.,
of leather' (X.). Denominative Sɩ0εрóομα 'to be dressed in hides' (Str.). Note
Sápa. Séλτoç, oi dè diépa 'writing-tablet; piece of leather' (H.). (cf Schwyzer:
326).
~
⚫ETYM Possibly, Sup0épa is with De Saussure MSL 7 (1892): 91 related to ► Sέow and
Séчw, but the alternations & and 40 ~, typical for Pre-Greek, are proven by the
variant diwapa in any case (Fur.: 308, 326). On Iranian loans from dɩ¤épa, like MoP
daftar ‘office', see Bailey TPS 1933: 50. Lat. littera, too, ultimately derives from the
Greek, perhaps via Etruscan (cf. ɛpaó. уρaµµаτoddáσкαlos rɑpà
Kuлрíоç 'teacher of writing in Cypr.' [H.]).
Síopos [m.] ‘seat, chair, chariot-board, chariot' (Il.). ◄IE *dui-b³r-o- ‘two-bearer'>
●DER Diminutives: dipiʊkoç (Ar.), dɩopíov (Tim. Lex.), dɩopídiov (EM). Siqpaž
'chair' (Theoc.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 379), Siopaкov ‘id.' (Samos IVª; see also
Chantraine 1933: 384); díopiç. ó εdpaĩoç, кaì кaðýµεvoç ȧεí, olov ȧpyós 'sedentary,
sitting all the time, as in idle' (H.).; cf. τpóxi ‘runner', etc. Adjective Síopios (AP).
Denominative Suppɛúw 'to drive in a car' (E.) with dɩopeτns 'chariot-driver' (S.),
SippεUTIкó (Ephor.), duoppɛía 'driving a chariot' (X.); more common Suppp-nás
(Pi.) with Suppηatéw and dipy\aoía.

=== page 195 ===

品
342
Sixa
⚫ETYM Properly meaning "two-bearer" (from Sic and opέpw), the Si-opp-o-s was
originally a chair with two handles carried by two people (one on each side); later it
came to be used for the box of a chariot (cf. Fraenkel 1923: 282). The initial dɩ- (<
*SFI-) of Sippos never makes position in Homer (Solmsen 1901: 211f.), which may be
due to dissimilation from the following labial q, or to the fact that as a vernacular
word, Sippos (like idpwc; Schwyzer: 2225) originally was not part of the epic
language.
díxa •var dɩx¤á. →díç.
Sivă, -ns [f.] 'thirst' (II.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Rarely Siчn (A. Ch. 756), also diyos [n.] (Th.), after лviуoç ‘stifling', piyos
'frost', etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 420).
●DIAL Myc. di-pi-si-jo and di-pi-si-je-wi-jo (from *Siyievs?).
•COMP лoλv-díчios 'very thirsty, arid', of Argos (Hom.); metrical for *лoλú-diyoç.
●DER Síɩoç ‘thirsty, dry' (trag.), Sɩyŋpós ‘id.' (Hp.; after aúxuŋpós), dɩywdns ‘id.'
(Hp.), dɩyaλéos ‘id.' (Hell. and late; after å(aλéos, etc.), dɩyác [f.] ‘id.' (Thphr.), also
name of a snake, whose bite caused a strong thirst (cf. Chantraine 1933: 354f.).
Síчakoç [m.] the name of diabetes (medic.), because of the drinking of the patients,
Strömberg 1944: 89; also the plant name 'Dipsacus silvestris' (Dsc., Gal.), see
Strömberg 1940: 78, with чaкɛpóç 'thirsty' (EM), acc. to H. = ταλαíлwpoç
'suffering'; diyoσúvŋ = diya (Orac. apud Porph.).
Verbal forms: ptc. Siyắwv (X 584), inf. Sшñv (Hdt.), 3sg. dɩñ (Pi., Pl.), Hell. also
dɩyāv, -ã; also dɩyéw (Archil.) and diyów (Tryph.); with diyŋoɩ (Ath. 1, 10b;
doubtful) and Siyŋtıkós (Arist.).
Beside these, there are forms with dɩ-, like díqaç ‘a kind of snake' (Artemid. 2,13),
Sípaτov and Síẞav. öчiv. Kρñτεç ‘serpent (Cret.)' (H.); see ▸ Sipáw.
⚫ETYM For Siyawv, §ɩчñν, comparе лεɩváшv, лεvñу, which are close in meaning; the
forms dɩчáwv, лεɩváш might be (Aeolic?) analogical formations based on the
normal epic ending -άwv, whereas dшñу and ляуñу are unexplained (Chantraine
1942: 21 and 362, Leroy 1954: 288f.; improbably, Meister 1921: 89 on dɩyñv, лεɩvñv; cf.
further Fraenkel 1937: 376f.). Under an analysis §íл-σα, the final element can hardly
be IE. Therefore, it is probably a Pre-Greek word, which is further made likely by the
variants with op and ß (Fur.: 326).
dĩyai [v.] · ßλáya 'to damage' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM DELG suggests that the form was coined by grammarians to explain díytov,
which was explained as ßλaлτкóv (H.) or ßλaßɛpóv (Ap. Soph.); Chantraine adds:
"cf. encore Hsch. sous Sitov "Apyos avec S. fr. 296."
Siw Sɛidw and diɛµai.
=
Siwкw [V.] 'to pursue, drive away, prosecute' (II.). <?>
•VAR Aor. Sıŵžai, dɩwx§ñvai, fut. diów, etc. (post-Hom.).
•COMP Compounds with ảлo-, έк-, έлɩ-, etc.
•DER Síwyµa ‘pursuit, what is pursued (trag., Pl.), dɩwyµós ‘pursuit' (trag., X.) with
Swyiτns policeman' (inscr. IIP; cf. Redard 1949: 45), Swуuτɩкá = persecutiones
8vópos
343
(Cod. Just.); Siwis 'persecution' (Att.), Siwкτúc ‘id.' (Call.; cf. Benveniste 1948: 72).
Agent noun dióкτηs 'pursuer' (NT), in yvwµudiwktys (haplological for yvwµudio-di-
Cratin. 307), see Fraenkel 1912: 81'; dɩwкτńp ‘id.' (Babr.). Siwкtós (S.), Siwktikós
(lamb.). Lengthened dɩwкáv (-εïv?), έdiáкαеov (Att.); cf. Schwyzer: 7036
(Swkadeiv?).
⚫ETYM Sɩwkɛt stands beside Siεuai as Fióкet (Cor.) beside Fíεμα (see εμα). The
origin of the w is unclear (unconvincingly, Meillet MSL 23 (1923): 50f.). A к-
enlargement is also found in έpú-кw, óλé-кw, etc.; see Schwyzer: 702.
=
Sɩwλúyıoç [adj.] uncertain (Pl. Tht. 162a, Lg. 890e); Sɩwλúytov 'immense', acc. to H. :
ηãoν εлì пoλú, µéya, kai σqodpóv, diατεταμεvov 'resounding much, heavily, etc.';
acc. to the sch. on Pl. = repißóŋtos 'much discussed' and σкoτεvóç 'dark, obscure',
i.e. connected with oλoλuyn 'loud cry' and ǹúyη 'shadow'. <?>
•ETYM The occurrences in Plato (diwlúyios plvapíα and µýкη Sɩwlúyia) are
ambiguous.
dµws, -wóc [m.] ‘slave, servant' (Il.; see Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 71f.), ◄IE *dem-
'house', *dm-ōu->
•VAR Also thematicized duwos (Hes. Op. 430; also Call. Hec. 1, 4, 15 acc. to
Gomperz); Suw-aí (dµwaí) [f.pl.] ‘slave-women' (Il.), secondary sing. Sµwń (Q. S.),
for *Sµŵ-ɩă, *Sµḍa? For the accent, cf. ǎyvia: άyvai and Wackernagel Gött. Nachr.
1914: 118f.; also dµwïç (A.) and Sµwïác, dµwác (Q. S.).
•COMP On the compound vлo-dµáç § 386 see Sommer 1934: 26.
●DER Adjective Sµw-ïos (AP). Abstract µvó-tα (μvo-¨α, μvúα) serfs in Crete (Str.)
with μ‰ïη, μoïηs, μτηs (Hermon apud Ath. 6, 267c, Poll.; cf. Bechtel 1921, 2:
790); on dµ > µv cf. µeσó-µvη < µeoó-dµŋ; see Schwyzer: 208.
•ETYM Related to dóµos ‘house', with the same formation as in ëáτpws (õu-stem;
Schwyzer: 479f.). See also Fraenkel Glotta 32 (1953): 23 and De Vaan 2008 s.v. domus,
dominus.
Svoлаλíw [v.] 'to shake, fling down' (A 472, 512, etc.). <PG?>
•VAR Fut. бvолαλíчw.
•Der Svoлáλišis (sch. Opp.).
•ETYM The word has been analyzed as formed from the roots of Sovέw and лáλλw,
respectively, but the type of formation required is very improbable (see Schwyzer:
645'). Rather, I take the group Sv- as typical of Pre-Greek words; perhaps we have to
analyze as бvoл-αλ- instead. See also Chantraine 1942: 340.
Svópos [m.] 'darkness' (Simon.). <PG>
•VAR In Hell. times yvópoç, etc. with Sv > yv (Schwyzer: 208, Niedermann WuS 8
(1923): 64'; Bq. s.v.; Lejeune 1972: 784).
•COMP Compound Svooo-ɛiuwv 'in dark clothes' (Attica IIP).
●DER Svoqɛpós ‘dark' (II.), also Svópeos (B.), Svocóets (Emp.), dvoqwdns (E.), cf. S.
Schmid 1950: 48.
· •ETYM A form *Svéqos [n.] is presupposed by io-Svεons ‘violet-dark' (8 135, ɩ 426; cf.
Porzig 1942: 300), but it is further isolated. The word recalls (ópos as well as

=== page 196 ===

344
Soáv
► kvέqaç and ▶yéqaç, but these words have not been explained (see Güntert 1914:
112ff.; Petersen AmJPh. 56: 57ff.). Note Svóy. xitwvos ɛldos þaðéos ‘kind of depth (?)
mantle', thus Latte (H.) As in ▸Svoлaλí(w, the group Sv- seems to point to Pre-
Greek origin.
Soáv→8ńv.
Soáσσaτo Séaro.
So0iv, -ñvoç [m.] 'small abscess' (Hp.). <PG>
•VAR Also Sofiúv, -óvoc (medic., Hdn. Gr.).
•DER SOðvɩкóv ‘medicine against 8.' (Paul. Aeg.).
⚫ETYM Cf. Aεxv, áðńν, лupýν, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 166f., Schwyzer: 487) and
Bovßáv, µvwv (Chantraine 1933: 162, Schwyzer: 488); the word is further unclear. See
Solmsen 1909: 137f. The retention of A (as opposed to the development in e.g.
µéσ(0)os < *µéð¹oc) suggests borrowing. Fur.: 172¹8, 355 plausibly points out that -ŋv
is frequent in Pre-Greek words, and compares Solɛwv. ó Soɩýv (as a variant
deriving from *dod-).
doídvž, -ūkoç [m.] ‘pestle' (Ar.). ◄PG(S)►
●COMP As a first member in doɩduкo-лotós (Plu.) and in parodizing doɩɗvko-póßa
(Luc.).
•DER Denominative diadolduкiw 'clench the fist like a pestle' (Com. Adesp.),
ávadoιdvкív ávαταрáσσяv 'to disturb' (H., EM).
•ETYM No etymology. The suffix -ūк- is typical of Pre-Greek (Pre-Greek, suffixes).
Soloi [pl.] 'two, both' (Il.). <IE *duoi- 'twofold, double'>
•VAR Soiw [du.].
DIAL Myc. PN du-wo-jo /dwoios/.
●DER Sotós [sg.] ‘double' (Emp.). Sotás [f.] ‘group of two' (gloss.; after µováç, etc.)
and denominative dotá¶w, -oμαι, aor. Sotážaι, also Soáσσaι (through blending with
Soáσσaτo) linger, deliberate', also (after Soáσσato) ‘imagine, believe' (B.). Fixed
expression έv Soñ 'in dubio, in hesitation' (I 230), whence έvdotáw hesitate' (Th.)
with έvdolaσtóc, -wç ‘doubtful (Ion., Th.) and late derivations ¿vdoíaoiç, -áoiµos,
-ασμóç, -αστýç, -aσTIKÓÇ.
⚫ETYM Sotoí is an old derivative of Súo (related to Síc), in its formation identical
to Skt. dvayá, OCS dvojь 'twofold, OHG zweiio, Go. twaddje, ON tveggja [gen.pl.],
IE *duoiHó-. The retention of the intervocalic 1 in Greek, the short a of the Skt., and
the Germanic "Verschärfung" (Go. ddj, ON ggj) point *-iH-.
=>
Sóкava •VAR Sokávŋ. → Sokóç.
Soкéw [V.] 'to seem, be of the opinion' (II.). <GR>
•VAR Aor. Soкñσal, fut. Soкnow (Od.), Sóžaι, Sółw (Pi., h. Merc.; see below), perf.
Sεdóкηµαι (Pi.), Sédoучaι (Hdt.), Soкεi μo 'it seems to me' (Il.); Sokɛúw [v.] 'watch,
observe' (II.); лpoσ-dокáш, aoг. лроσðокñσαι 'await' (Hdt.).
●DER Sókŋσıç ‘belief, opinion, appearance' (Hdt.), Soкnoi-déžios, -vous, -ooqos
‘appropriate [etc.] in one's own opinion' (Com.). Sóкŋµa ‘image, delusion' (E., see
Solixóc
345
Chantraine 1933: 184ff.), 'decision' (Argos). Sóyua ‘opinion, decision' (Att., Hell.; to
dóžai, dóчw after τážai, τážw : τáуµа, etc.) with Soyμаτкóç 'dogmatic', doyμaτíaç
'who pronounces бóуμаτа', Sоуμаτíw 'give an opinion' (Hell. and late). Further
Só a ‘opinion, consideration, excellence, glory', dóğıç = dóža (Democr.; after yvwoɩç,
Schwyzer: 505). Soкw [f.] ‘id.' (E. El. 747; Chantraine 1933: 116), Sókoç [m.] ‘id.'
(Xenoph.), Soкn ‘id.' (Hdn.). Sóкчµoç ‘reliable, approved, distinguished, etc.' (IA,
Dor.); compounds εv-, à-бóкчμоçs; with doкíμov, dокчµεãoν 'proof (Pl.) and the
denominatives Soкíµwµi (Aeol.), dokɩµów (Parm.) ‘to believe', doкшášw ‘to try,
approve (IA) with doкчuaσía 'test' (Att.), Soкчμаστ, doкчаστρ, -pɩov,
Sokipaotós, -ikóç (Att., etc.); also deverbal doкчµý ‘test, proof (Ep. Phil., Ep. Cor.).
εvбoкчμεw 'to have a good reputation' (Thgn.) with εúdoкíµŋσç (Pl.). dokiкŵ =
Soкw (Hermipp. 12) humorous extension, cf. Bechtel Glotta 12 (1923): 211. From
лpoσdoкáw : ”poσdoкía 'expectation' also лpoσðóкèµа (Pl. Phlb. 32c), npoodókiµos
(IA).
•ETYM Soкéw (and лроσðокáш) are deverbative derivations of primary
(лроσ-)бéкоμαι (see déxoμat). Like all secondary verbs, it originally occurred only
in the present; for the other tenses, the primary verb was used. Só aɩ, dóчw could
belong to that primary verb if they have their -o- after Sokéw and derive from older
*Sé₹αi, *dé&w (Wackernagel KZ 33 (1895): 37; further, Schwyzer: 718). Because of their
meaning, dokɛúw and Soкá(w ‘to await' (Sophr., S. Fr. 221, 23) might alternatively
rather belong together with -Soкáw, déxoµai. The semantic relations are difficult to
account for in detail. Sokéw agrees with Lat. doceō 'learn' (causative IE *dok-éie-).
On Soкéw in general, see Fournier 1946 passim, especially 166f. For other IE
cognates, see Séxoμaι and Soкkóç.
Soкós [f.] 'bearing-beam' (Il.). <GR, PG?>
•VAR Late also msc.
●DER Sokíç (Hp.), Soкíov (Arist., Delos IVª), doкídiov (Harp.). Sokias (Phlp.), dokɛús
(Heph. Astr.) name of a comete (like Soкóç, Soкíç; Scherer 1953: 107). Soкwбns like a
beam' (gloss.). Soкóoμαι 'to be fitted with beams' (pap., S. E.) with dóкwσię (LXX).
From Soкóç also Sóкava [n.pl.] name of two upright beams constructed with a
cross-beam (Plu.), dokávať ai σtáλikes, als ïotatai tả λíva, ǹ káλaμoɩ 'stakes on
which hunting nets are fastened, or reeds' (H.); cf. tool names in -avov, -ávŋ in
Schwyzer: 489f., Chantraine 1933: 198f.
⚫ETYM Connected to Séкoμaι as an agent noun, so properly "which takes on [the
covering]". Benveniste RPh. 58 (1929): 127, thinks that Soкóç and Sóкava are Pre-
Greek.
Soλxóc [adj.] 'long' (Il.). <IE *d(o)lh,g"ó- 'long'>
•DIAL Myc. PN do-ri-ka-o /Dolik³āōn/, do-ri-ka-no /Dolikh-ānōr/.
•COMP Often as a first member of compounds; note doλó-σкios (Hom.) 'with a
long shadow', of yxos 'lance'.
•DER With regular accent change (Schwyzer: 420) dólixos [m.] 'the long course'
(Att., etc.) with doλɩxɛúw ‘run a long course', dolixɛús long course runner' (Sparta
IIP); on Sóλixos as a plant name (Thphr.) see Strömberg 1937: 107', Strömberg 1940:

=== page 197 ===

346
Sóλos
24. Poetical form with metrical lengthening dovλixóɛ (AP); TN Aixíσtŋ, island
before Lycia, properly a superlative, and Aouλíxtov island in the Ionic Sea (Hom.), cf.
Seiler 1950: 101.
⚫ETYM Within Greek, we may further compare έvdɛλεxn's 'continuous' (Att., etc.),
together with evdeλéxeia, ¿vdeλexéw, -í(w, -toµós (like ¿v-teλýs, ¿µ-µελýç, etc.).
Soxós is related to Skt. dīrghá-, Av. darǝya-, OCS dlög, Serb. düg, Lith. ilgas (with
unexplained loss of d-), Hitt. talugi- (on the vocalism see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.
*taluki-), which derive from PIE *d(o)lH-go-. Further related are e.g. Lat. indulgeō
be kind, indulgent', Go. tulgus 'firm, steadfast', and Alb. glatë, gjatë 'long' (with
secondary -të?).
Sóλos [m.] 'bait, any trick or device for catching, trick' (Il.). <PG?>
⚫DER Sódios deceiving, tricky' (Od.) with Soλióτηs (LXX), doliεúoμα 'deceive'
(LXX) and Soltów ‘id.' (LXX); dolɛpós ‘id.' (IA), dolóɛç 'cunning' (Od.).
Lengthened dóλεvμa 'trick' (Aen. Tact.; see Chantraine 1933: 186f.). Denominative
Solów 'to beguile' (Hes.) with Sóλwois (X.) and dółwμa (A.; Chantraine 1933: 186f.);
also Soliw 'to falsify' (Dsc.). Here also doλía = кúvɛιov 'hemlock' (Ps.-Dsc.), cf.
Strömberg 1940: 64; cf. Latte ad loc.; Soláva. µãστpoлós. ‹Лάáкwvɛç> ‘pimp
(Lacon.)' (H.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 199); also Sóλола· кατάσколоv, μаστролóу sрy,
pimp' with бoλолεúε· εлßоvλεúεɩ, évɛdpɛúεɩ 'plots, lies in wait for' (H.). On
Soλewv. 6 Sony 'small abscess' (H.), see Sobinv.
ETYM The identity of Sóλos and Lat. dolus, Osc. dolom, -ud [acc., abl.] seems
evident; yet the Italic word might have been borrowed from Greek. A group of
Germanic words, ON tál [f.] 'deception, trick', OE tæl [f.] ‘blame, slander, derision',
OHG zāla [f.] ‘danger', which would require a lengthened grade *dēlā (see
Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916: 1, 153f.) is rather not related. Likewise, a connection
with Saudáλλw is quite hypothetical. Given its concrete basic meaning, it could well
be a Pre-Greek word. The gloss dóλoç. лáσσаλoç ‘stake, penis' (H.) is unclear (cf.
Specht 1944: 157 and 219); cf. further Sóλwv.
Sóλлаι [f.] лλαкоúvτα шшкρà. Koot 'little flat cake (Coan)' (H.). <PG?>
.
•VAR Cf. Soλẞaí. Oúµata. oi dè µкtà лλaкoúvɩɩα ‘[sacrificial] cake; mixed, little flat
cake' (H.).
⚫ETYM Neumann 1961 compares Hitt. turpa 'kind of cake' (for offering); Anatolian or
Pre-Greek origin thus seems likely.
Sóλwv, -wvoc [m.] 1. name of a front sail (Plb., D. S.) or the spar on such a sail (Poll.),
Lat. loan dolō (Liv.); adj. doλwviкós (pap.). 2. 'secret weapon, stiletto' (Plu. TG 10).
<GR/?>
•DER Diminutive Solíσкoç. Sóλwv, napažıqíç ‘dirk' (H.); Lat. dolō ‘id.' (Varro).
•ETYM In the meaning 'secret weapon', dóλwv (2) could be derived from ► dóλoç. In
the meaning 'sail', the origin is unclear; in any event, the connection with SέλTOS,
MoHG Zelt 'tent' is very weak. DELG unconvincingly argues that Sóλwv 1. and 2. are
actually the same word. Cf. Rougé 1966: 59.
Sóµoç [m.] ‘house, living, room' (Il.), also ‘layer' (Hdt.). <IE *dōm, *domo- 'house'>
Só a
•COMP Compounded substantives like ò̟ëσðó-, éрó- and adjectives like άyxí-, iσó-.
●DER doµóoµai ‘be supplied with a house' (pap. VIP).
347
•ETYM Sóμos is related to Skt. dáma- [m.] 'house' and Lat. domus. Beside this
obviously secondary o-stem, an old u-stem is found in Skt. dámū-nas- [m.]
'roommate' and Arm. tanu-tēr ‘house-lord'. However, the u-stem inflexion of Lat.
domus replaces older o-stem inflexion because of its feminine gender (De Vaan 2008
s.v.). See also Sμws. The root noun *dom, gen. *dems, found in dɛσлóτηç,
►dáлɛdov (but less certainly in Sáμap), is archaic. Originally, dóµoç (just like
► Sãµa) is an adaptation of this root noun rather than a verbal abstract from ► déµw.
A(a)uía, Mvía s.v. ►Аŋµýτòp are unclear.
Sóva [m.] 'pole-reed, what is made of it, shaft of an arrow, pipe' (II.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Also Swvač, Soûvač, gen. -aкos (see below).
•DER Sovakɛús 'thicket of reeds' (Σ 576 -кña, lengthening at verse end?; cf. Boßhardt
1942: 21f.), also ‘bird-catcher' (Opp. K. 1, 73), deverbal to Sovaкεúoμaɩ ‘catch birds
with a lime-stick' (AP); Sovaкúv 'thicket of reeds' (Paus.); Sovaкýµατα· аúλýµаta
'compositions for the flute' (H.); see Chantraine 1933: 178. dovaкwdns 'rich in reed'
(B.), dovaкóɛıç 'id.' (E.), dováкivoç (H. s.v. кɛρкídaç; uncertain); Sovakɩtıç ‘made of
reed', also plant name (AP; Strömberg 1940: 36); dovaкηdóv ‘reed-like' (A.D.).
Uncertain Aováктαç epithet of Apollo (Theopomp. Hist. 281), perhaps for
Aovaкíτns (Redard 1949: 208).
⚫ETYM Frisk (with lit.) explains the variants Suva (Theoc. 20, 29 beside Sóvač, Ep. 2,
3 and Pi. P. 12, 25) and Soûvač (AP) as hyperdialectisms (for Soūva, Schulze 1892:
205 has proposed metrical lengthening as an alternative). However, this can hardly
be correct: more plausibly, they all are variants of a Pre-Greek word (see Pre-Greek
6.1 on vowels, where we find o/ ou and ou/ w). Pre-Greek origin is further confirmed
by the suffix -a. Non-Greek origin was already advocated by Nehring Glotta 14
(1925): 181. A connection with Sovéw 'to shake' (see the parallels in Strömberg 1940:
76f.) is most doubtful, whereas Latv. duonis 'reed' cannot be compared because it
require long *ō (incompatible with dóvač, which cannot have its short o from
Sovéw). Nor is Go. tains 'twig', etc. related. As a semantic variant, dóvač may also
refer to the fish owλýv (Ath.).
Sovéw [v.] 'to shake' (II.). ◄?►
•VAR Aor. Sovñoal.
•COMP As a second member e.g. in áλí-Sovos 'driven around on sea' (A.).
•DER Sóvηua (Luc.).
ETYM No etymology.
dóža [f.] ‘opinion, glory, splendour' (Il. since K 324). ◄IE? *dek- ‘accept', PG?>
⚫DER Diminutive Sotápiov (Arr.); denominative Sočáчw 'to deem, praise' (trag., Th.)
with dóžaσµa, dožaσµós, dožaσtýs, -aotós, -aotiкÓç (Att., etc.), also dočaσía (D.
C.) and Sóžaσıç (Simp.); dožóoμa 'to have the name' (Hdt.).
•ETYM The word is connected with Soкέw, but of unclear formation. Leumann 1950:
˚ 173ff. rejects the older proposals *Sók-tiă, *Sók-σā, but his own theory is also

=== page 198 ===

348
Sopá
improbable (see Fraenkel Gnomon 23 (1951): 374). With its short final -a, the word
could be Pre-Greek (cf. Pre-Greek: C 3.1). Cf. Szemerényi 1964: 376+.
dopá [f.] = Sokóç ‘beam' (H.). ◄?►
ETYM The gloss Cret. Sopá = Soкóç (EM, H.) is considered uncertain; see Latte.
Derivation from Sópu is difficult to maintain.
Sopíaλos [m.] (Ar. Fr. 367) čoti dè tò yuvaiketov aidot̃ov έq' üßpεi tpayɩdoлolOŨ
Aopílov 'female genitals with reference to the insolence of the tragic poet Dorillos'
(Et. Gen., Et. Gud. 375,8, EM 283, 46). H. has Sopúa\\oç. <?>
•VAR Also Sópiλoç.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. See Maas KZ 58 (1930): 127f. and Taillardat 1962: $105. The
name of the poet is given as Aoptãos in the life of Euripides of Satyros (P.Oxy. 9,
1176).
Sópkaι [f.] . кovides ‘eggs of lice, fleas and bugs, nits' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown. Frisk compared бɛρкúλλεv• αiµолоτεïу 'suck blood' (H.; beside
dɛpµúλλɛiv from dépµa).
Sopкás, -ádos [f.] 'a kind of deer, roe, gazelle' (Hdt. 7, 69). <LW Celt.>
•DER Other forms: Sóp (Call.; acc. Sópkắv E. H. F. 376 [lyr.]; Sópka Dindorf),
Sópkoç (Dsc.), dópêwv (LXX); also Čopкác (Hdt. 4, 192), Čóp℃ (Call.); ïopkos (Opp.),
Topкεç, ľuρkεç (H.). Diminutives: Sopкádiov (LXX, Delos IIIª), also a plant (André
1958 s.v.); Sopкaλíç (Call.; on -aλ-18- Chantraine 1933: 251f., 344); Sopкaλīdɛç 'dice
from the bones of 8.' (Herod.; on -id- see Chantraine 1933: 346f.); dopkaλídɛç.
Öpуavóv εστɩ коλαστIкÓν τε. ½ μάστɩуεç αi áлò чµáντшν аоркádwv 'a corrective
instrument; whips from the leather straps of deer' (Suid.); Sopкádɛ(1) oc 'made from
the bones of S.' (ȧστрáyaλoç, Thphr., inscr., pap.; see S. Schmid 1950: 52), SÓPKεLOS
(Theognost.), Sópкtoç (Edict. Diocl.). PN Aоpкεúç, etc., see Boßhardt 1942: 130.
•ETYM Like Sópкoç and dópкwv, dopкáç (built like кεµáç, etc.) was derived from the
root noun Sóp. If we start from the forms with (-, it agrees with a Celtic word for
'roe', Co. yorch, Bret. iourc'h 'roe', MW iwrch 'caprea mas', which points to IE *iork-
o-. The 8-forms are perhaps folk-etymological, after dépкoµai; lopкoç, etc. may
Celtic (Galatic) LW. See Sommer 1905: 147f.
Sópлov [n.] ‘evening-meal' (II.). ◄LW?>
•VAR Hell. and late also -os [m.].
DIAL Myc. do-qe-ja /dork"eja/?
be a
•DER Sóρлov 'time for dinner' (Hp. Epid. 5, 22 v.l.), Оópлoç ‘ptng. to the S.' (Nonn.);
Аopлñïα [n.pl.] ‘food, meal' (Nic.; cf. §εvýïα), Аopлía [f.] ‘evening before a festival,
especially the Apaturia' (Hdt.). Denominative Sорлéw 'take the evening meal'
(Hom.), dopлáčɛv. dɛëvɛîv ‘to take a meal' (H.; cf. ovµrooi-ášεiv). Soprŋotós [m.]
(scil. кaчpós) ‘time for dinner' (Hp.), cf. Sårvηoτós s.v. ► dɛirvov.
•ETYM Sópлov could be combined with Alb. darkë ‘evening (meal)' as a hypothetical
*dork-o- (Mann Lang. 26 (1950): 384f., Porzig 1954a: 178). Further connections are
unknown. The limited distribution of the word (only Albanian and Greek) suggests
that it is a borrowing of some sort.
Soulos
349
Sópu [n.] wood, tree (trunk), spear' (Il.; on the epic use Trümpy 1950: 52ff.). <IE *doru
'tree, wood'>
•VAR Gen. Sópaτoç (Att.), dopós (trag.), Soupós and doúpaτoç (Hom.); dual Soûpe
(Hom.), plur. Sópata, Soñpa, doúpata.
●COMP As a first member in several compounds (many PNs), beside Sopv- (dopato-,
Soupo-) also do(v)pt-%; as a dative (instrumental) in Soupɩ-kλεɩτÓç, etc., also
analogical without case function. Note Sopu-σσóoç 'throwing a spear' (Hes. Sc. 54; to
σεíw), Sovρηvεкés < *dopƑ-ŋvεкéç [adv.] 'a spear's throw distant' (K 357, to έvɛyкɛTV,
cf. Suveкnc). Also Swpt- in PNs, e.g. in Awpí-μaxos (Dor., Boeot.), Awpi-кλñç (Arc.,
Dor.); also ►áσxé-dwpoc, s.v.; (-)dwp- is regular for -Sopf-os in some Doric dialects,
and these names were probably borrowed by the other dialects.
•DER Diminutives Sopáτiov (Hdt.), Sopúdiov (auct. apud Orib. 47, 17, 5), opúλλov
(Suid.); adjectives Soupáτɛos 'wooden' (Оd.; of ïллоç, etc.), also doúpɛios (E. Tr. 14),
Soúpios (Ar. Av. 1128), Sopηïos (AP 15, 14); epic reminiscences, see Schulze 1892:
102516.
Denominative verb Sopaτíčoμa 'fight with the spear' (H.) with Soраτσμós (Plu.).
Uncertain Sopá (< *Sopf-á) = Soкóç. PNs Aopúlaoç, Aopíμaxos; with Doric
lengthening upon loss of F: Awpíuaxoç, Аwpiкλñç (see above). Short names: Aoupıç,
Aoping, etc.
•ETYM Sópu is related to Skt. dáru, Av. dāuru ‘wood', Hitt. tāru ‘wooď and ToAB or
‘id.' (with loss of *d- in forms with *dr-), which reflect PIE *doru, gen. *dreus. Beside
this old neuter originally denoting only 'wood', there was a feminine word for 'tree,
oak': Spüç. Cf. also Spuμá and ▸►SévSpɛov.
►
Sopúкvov [n.] plant name, 'Convolvulus oleofolius', etc. (Dsc.). <PG(V)►
•DER Diminutive Sopuкvídiov (Gal.).
⚫ETYM No etymology. Fur.: 183 compares στpúxvov, τpúxvov (Nic., Gal.; see s.v),
-os (Theocr.). He remarks that, after σ-, we often find the voiceless variant. On the
epenthesis, cf. (σ)KÓVUČα/ KvÚČα, koλvµßáç/ kľúßatɩ (ibid. 183º); thus he assumes
that this word stands for *Spuк(X?)VLOV.
Soulos [m.] 'slave, servant', also as an adjective with compar. Soulóτεpos (Hdt.);
Soún [f.] 'slave-woman, maid' (II.); on the spread see E. Kretschmer Glotta 18
(1930): 74f. <PG?>
•VAR Swλoç Cret.
•DIAL Myc. do-e-ro, do-e-ra /dohelos/, /dohelā/.
•COMP Many substantival and adjectival compounds.
•DER Sovλíç [f.] (Hyp.; cf. Schwyzer: 127 and 465) with dovλídiov (H.), dovλápiov
(Ar.). Sovlooúvη ‘servitude' (Ion., Od.) with Sovlóσuvos (E. Hec. 448 [lyr.]); see
Frisk Eranos 43 (1945): 220. Soúlioç, -ɛoç 'slavish, of a servant' (Hom.), Soúλɛoç 'id.'
(A. R.), Sovλiкós ‘id.' (Att., etc.), dovliká (owµatα) [n.pl.] ‘slaves' (Peripl. M. Rubr.,
pap.).
Denominative verb dovlɛúw 'to be a slave, serve' (IA) with dovlɛía, Ion. -ŋŋ
'servanthood', Soúλεvµа ‘id.' (trag.; see Chantraine 1933: 186), dovlεútpia ‘female

=== page 199 ===

350
Soñμoç
servant' (Eust.); dovλóoµai, -ów 'to be made servant' (IA) with doúlwois (Th.) and
SovλwτIкóç (Plu.).
•ETYM The Mycenaean forms point to *Sóɛλos, probably from *Sohɛlos. Soulos is
certainly not inherited (pace e.g. Neumann 1986: 489-496), although a borrowing
from Carian or Lydian (as argued by Lambertz Glotta 6 (1915): iff.; Benveniste
RELat. 10 (1932): 438f.) is difficult to account for chronologically, since the word
appears already in Mycenaean (Risch Kratylos 29 (1984): 96f.). Conversely, Pre-
Greek origin is a good possibility.
Soчμoç [m.] an Anatolian religious community, connected with the Magna Mater
(Hippon., inscr., AP). <LW Phr.>
⚫ETYM A Phrygian word; it has been connected with Gr. Owμóc 'heap' and Gm.
words like Go. doms ‘judgement', but without further confirmation. Cf. Wikander
1946: iff. Masson found the word in Hipponax (ed. 123). Cf. bibliogr. Bull. Ep. 1992 n°
202. The idea of Neumann 1999: 345-353 that the word primarily indicated the
building in which the meetings are held is rejected by Lubotsky 1997a: 124-125.
Soблоç [m.] 'dull, heavy sound' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
●COMP In έpí-dovлoç, also έpí-уdovлos ‘thundering loud' (II.); anlaut yɗ- also in
έydoúrŋoav (A 45) and μаσíуdovлov ßaoiλña. µɛyalónxov 'with heavy sound, …..
(H.), and also in ȧλí-, þapú-, µελí-уdovлoç. Other compounds have -dovitoç.
•DER dovnέw, aor. Sovíñσaɩ, perf. ptc. dɛdovéótos [gen.sg.] (¥ 679; innovation, see
Schwyzer: 771) ‘sound heavily', secondarily (through misunderstanding doúnŋσev dè
nɛowv, Leumann 1950: 217) ‘fall in battle' (Il.).
•ETYM Sovŋéw is an intensive like ßpoµέw, etc. It shows some resemblance to Latv.
dupêtiês 'sound dead', SCr. düpiti 'slay (with sound)', and ToAB täp- 'give a loud
sound, announce', but the initial *gd- (found in the compounds) is not known from
PIE. Therefore, the word is probably Pre-Greek. Cf. ►кtvnéw, ►кTÚNOÇ.
Soxuós [adj.] 'oblique, slanted' (II., Delphi IIª). <IE *dh g³mo- 'oblique'>
•DER Sóxшoç 'id.' (Ar.), also in metre 'versus dochmius' (Choerob.) together with
гoxдакó, оxдкóç, doxaкóç, doxάw (sch.). Sóxμ or doxμý breadth of the
hand', from ‘oblique'. Denominative oxμó (oxμwɛíc) 'to turn sideways'
(Hes., h. Merc.), aor. act. and med. doxμwσaɩ, -woασa (Nonn.). Soxµaλóv.
xaµaíčnλov, tanɛvóv 'low' (H.), after xеaµαλóç.
ETYM In its formation, Soxμós is identical to Skt. jihmá- ‘oblique', from PIE
*dh3g"mo-. In Skt. jihmá-, the j- from d- must be due to assimilation to the velar
(PIIr. *jij³má- <*dij"má-; see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. jihmá-).
Spayaτɛúw [v.] probably 'to oversee a land with cereals or a vineyard' (Thess. IIIª).
<?7
•ETYM From Spaуáτηs *cutter, laborer in the fields', MoGr. ‘id.' (àpxidpayátns,
Ankyra IIP); connected by Zingerle Glotta 15 (1927): 70ff. to Spáσσo̟μα after
εpуατεúμα pуáτηç. Zingerle adduces Spa wv. év Ziкɛλíą iɛpóv ..., ɛiç ö oi
yɛwpyoì ɛvxàç ënεµitov, öðεv kaì Spažóves (Spaσovtes cod.) ¿klý◊ŋoav ‘temple in
Spáµis
351
Sicily, to which farmer sent prayers; because of that, they were called 8.' (H.); see
Latte ad loc. See Georgacas Orbis 4 (1956): 91ff.
dpafeōs [acc.pl.f.] name of something dedicated to Athena (SGDI 1537, Phocis [VI³]).
<?>
•ETYM The word has been compared with Spaιóv. μáкpav, „úελov ‘bath tub, trough’
(H.) and Spoíτnη, but this is quite hypothetical.
Spáкwv, -ovtos [m.] ‘dragon, serpent' (Il.), also a fish, ‘Trachinus' (Epich., cf.
Strömberg 1943: 121f.). <IE *drk- 'look at'>
•VAR Fem. Spáкaiva 'female dragon' (h. Ap., A.) with Spaкavíc a fish name (Com.);
see below.
⚫DER Diminutive Spaкóvτov (Delos IIIª), also a plant ‘Arum dracunculum' (Hp.;
after the color, Strömberg 1940: 38); Spaкovτíç name of a bird (Ant. Lib.; see
Thompson 1895: 91); Spaкovτíα a plant (Ps.-Dsc.); Spакovτíαç (лupóç, σíкuç,
лɛɛáç, Thphr.); Spaкovτíτηs (λios; Ptol. Chenn., see Redard 1949: 54).
Spaкóvɩɩos and Spaкovτwŋs like a dragon' (E.). Spaкovτíaσiç name of a disease
(Gal.) as if from *Spaкovτiáw, after the words in -íaσıç, cf. Holt 1941: 137³.
•ETYM On the assumption that the dragon was named after his paralyzing sight
(despite doubts by Fick BB 18 (1892): 99), Spáкwv is probably related to Sépkoμai. It
could then be an original n-stem (cf. Spáкaiva) of a root noun *Spá(k) = Skt. dŕś-
'view' (cf. ►úлó-Spα s.v.), whereas the nt-stem was formed after the participles
(Schwyzer: 526; Chantraine 1933: 268).
Spáλaɩva [adj.] ·λaµvpá. Kot full of abysses (Coan)' (H.). <?►
•DER PN Apaλãs (Maeonia) and Apáλios (Ceos, Schwyzer: 764).
•ETYM Unknown.
Spauɛiv [v.aor.] 'run' (II.). <IE *drem- 'run'>
•VAR Fut. Spaµoñµα (IA), perf. dédpoµa (Od.), dɛdpóµāкa (Sapph.; see below),
deSpáµiŋka (IA); aor. to τpέxw.
•DER ►Spóµoç ‘course' with Spoµń (Hdn.), Spáµŋµa ‘id.' (Hdt.), also Spóµnµa (API.).
Deverbative Spoµáaσкε (Hes. Fr. 117 v.l.); Spoµýσaσa (Vett. Val.); SɛSpóµãкɛ [perf.]
(Sapph., fr. 31 LP; Aeolic zero grade?), Spoµáσσεv· τpέxav ‘to run' (H.); also Spwµα.
τρεxε and Spшμíσσоvσа· τρéxоvσα (H.); see Schwyzer 718f.
•ETYM The aorist and perfect stem Spaμ-, Spoμ- are found beside Spā- in -Spā-v,
etc. (see ►àño-dɩdpáσkw), just as the present stem ßav- < *ẞaμ- in Baívw is found
next to ẞā- in -ẞn-v. Outside Greek, a good match is offered by Skt. pres. dramati
(gramm.), intensive ptc.med. dandramyamāṇa- 'run'. However, the connection with.
OE trem 'footstep', etc. is uncertain. Thus, we have IE *drem-: dreh₂- like *gem- :
geh₂-; see Baivw. A third variant is seen in Skt. drávati ‘run' < *dreu-. As a present
of Spauεiv, Greek has τpéxɛɩv; on the aspect, see Benveniste 1935: 120.
Spáμs [f.] kind of bread, Macedonian acc. to Seleuc. apud Ath. 3, 114b. <?➤
•ETYM The word is reminiscent of ▶Sapáτai; further details are unknown. Cf. Pisani
Rev. Int. ét. balk. 3 (1937): 11, and Kalléris 1954: 158f.

=== page 200 ===

352
Spanéτns
Spεnw
353
Spanétng →8i8páokw.
Spáσσoμai [v.] 'to grasp, take handfuls' (Il., IA). <IE? *dreg"- (LIV² 126) ►
•VAR Att. Spátτoµaɩ; aor. Spážασðaɩ, perf. Sédpayɩai.
•COMP Compounds with Sia-, έv-, kata-.
•DER Spáудa 'handful, especially of corn stalks' (Il.), together with Spaуμεúw 'collect
sheaves' (Σ 555) as if from Spayμóс (E. Cyc. 170) for metrically impossible
Spaуuаτɛúw (Eust. 1162, 17); also Spaуuíç 'small handful' (Hp. Morb. 2, 55, v.l. of
Spaxíc), Spaуun ‘id.' (EM); on Spаxµý s.v.; Spáубny grasping with the hand'
(Plu., Q. S.). Retrograde formation Spáž, -kóc [f.] ‘handful' (LXX); with metathesis
Sápkeç⋅ déoμaɩ ‘handful' (H.). On ►Spayatɛúw (Sparwv), see s.v. Unclear Spaкtóv
'small vase' (inscr.).
⚫ETYM Spάσσoμat is a yod-present from a root *Spaк- or *Spáx-, of which the zero
grade was generalized throughout the paradigm. A relationship with Arm. trc'-ak
'Reisigbündel' has been considered, where the original word-final -c' is supposed to
continue a sequence of velars; an IE ē or ō (PArm. i or u) must have disappeared
between t- and r (or between r and c). OCS po-drago ‘edge, border of cloth' is not
related (rather, to Ru. dërgat' ‘pull, tug' and OE tiergan ‘annoy', etc.). LIV² s.v.
*dreg"- connects the word with Av. dražaite ‘holds', etc., and analyzes the Greek as a
formation *dr-n-g"-ie- or *drg"-ie-. The latter solution seems the most attractive. See
under ▸ Spaxμn.
Spaxun [f.] 'drachm', weight and coin (IA). <PG?>
•VAR Sαpxµa (Arc., El., Cnossos), Sapкva (Gortyn, /-k³nā/, < -xµá Schwyzer: 215f.).
•DER Spαxaños 'worth a 8.' (Att., etc.; after nuwẞoλiaïoç, etc., see Chantraine 1933:
49), also Spaxμaños, -ñïoç (Nic.); Diminutive Spaxíov (Aristeas).
⚫ETYM Usually taken as a verbal noun in -(σ) un/ã from Spáσσoμal, properly
meaning grasp of the hand, handful' (of oboles), based on comparison with
σrðaµý, žvyµý, etc., with Spax- and Sapx- in the zero grade. However, the two
variants Spax- and Sapx- suggest that this is not a zero grade from PGr. *drk"-, and
therefore, that it is a Pre-Greek word (cf. also Sápкɛç s.v. ►Spáσσoµai); this is not
noted in Fur.: From Spaxun comes Arab. dirham, Arm. dram, etc.; see Bailey BSOAS
13 (1949-1950): 128f.
Spaw [v.] ‘to make, do' (Od.; Att. prose has лράττw and rotέw). <?►
•VAR Aeol. 3sg. Spañσɩ, aor. Spãσaɩ, etc.
•COMP Compounds with ȧva-, ȧvti-, έñɩ-, napa-, ovv-, ÙÃO-.
•DER Spãµa ‘action, spectacle, drama' (A.) with diminutive Spaµátov (Plu.) and
Spaμaτкóç 'dramatic' (Arist.); with analogical σ (cf. Spηστηp below): Spaσµáτwv.
лаvoυруηµáτwν ‘tricks, villanies' (H.) and Spασµατikós = Spaσtýpios (Cat. Cod.
лavovpyŋµátwv
Astr.); lengthened form Spaμoσúvη 'holy service' (Attica IV), beside Spησμoσúvη
'id.' (h. Cer. 476) from *Spησµwv, cf. Chantraine 1933: 174. Spãσiç ‘action, strength'
(A. D.) with τò Spáσчov (A. Th. 554). Wwith analogical σ (Schwyzer: 531): Spnotńp,
fem. Spστɛipa (Od.), Spńotns, Spáotns, Spáotaç (Archil., Pi.) 'servant (maid)'
(Fraenkel 1910: 167f.) together with Spaστηpios ‘active' (A.), Spaσ™ηpiótns (Eust.)
and Spaστpiwns (Gal.), Spaστiкóç 'active' (Pl.), Spηotoσúvη 'obligingness' (0 321);
denominative Spŋotɛúw ‘to serve (at a sacred act)' (Lesbos). Desiderative Spãσɛiw
'want to do' (S.). Beside Spáw, we find Spaívw (formed after Baivw, paivw, etc.)
'want to do, can do' (K 96, Herod.; an Ionism acc. to Bechtel 1914, Chantraine 1942:
343) with ỏɩyo-Spăvέwv 'who can do little' (Il.; from ólíya Spaivɛv to óλɩyŋnɛλéwv,
cf. Schwyzer: 724, Chantraine 1942: 349; different analysis in Bechtel 1914 s.v.
óɩyoɗpavéw), with oɩyodpăvía (A.), ólɩyodpăvýs (Ar.); innovation άdpăvýs
(LXX, Arr.) with ảdpávɛta (Hdn.), ȧdpavín (A. R.), ådpavéw ‘be inactive (Arat.),
ådpaví¼w ‘id.' (sch.); as backformation Spávoc. pyov, „pāčiç, öpyavov, ǎyalµa,
kataokeúaoµa, dúvaчuç 'work, action, tool, sculpture, work of art, ability' (H.; also
MoGr. Spáva 'tendril'?, Bogiatzides Apx. 'Ep. 27 (1888): 115ff.), Spavɛiç. Spaσtikoi
'active' (H.).
•ETYM If Spaívw is a younger form, then the root was Spã- (cf. кpã-, tλã-, etc.).
Connection with Baltic words like Lith. darau, darýti, Latv. darît ‘do, make, build is
quite uncertain (cf. Schwyzer: 675): Fraenkel 1955 (s.v.) considers darýti to be a
causative of derù, derëti ‘be useful', and further connects Skt. dhár-ma-, dhāráyati
'hold', etc. On Spáw, Spāµa, see Snell Phil. Suppl. 20:1 (1928): 1ff. and Snell Phil. 85
(1930): 141ff.
Spáw 2 [v.] 'to see' (A.D. Adv. 139, 8, EM 287,7). ◄ GR➤
•Der Spãσis = ßléyiç; oi dpatoí = óðaλμoí.
ETYM These forms were invented by grammarians to explain úлódрa.
Spéлw [v.] 'to pluck, cut off (Od.). <IE? *drep- 'pluck'>
•VAR Aor. Spέyai (also Spaлóv Pi., Spóñwoɩv [subj.] Alc.); pres. Spέñτw (Mosch.).
•COMP Compounds with ȧvα-, άлo-, έπ-, katα-. In composition often -n- for -o-,
e.g. Spεлavη-qópos 'sickle-carrying' (X.); cf. Schwyzer: 438f.
•DER Spɛлávη (Il.), аpéлavov (Od.) 'sickle' (Spáлavov epigr.) together with
Spεлavηiç 'id.' (Nic.; Chantraine 1933: 346), брεлávov (Seleuc. apud Ath.); Spεnaviç
the bird ‘Alpine swift' (Arist., after the shape of the wings, Thompson 1895 s.v.; H.
also has dpañavides. ɛidos ópvéov ‘a kind of bird'), Spεnavádηs ‘sickle-shaped'
(Agath.). Spéµµ¤· кλεµµα (“about stealing fruit?", von Blumenthal 1930: 35, unless
for kλñµa), oi dè кλáoµa ‘fragment (H.). Spenteïs (H.), Speñɛïç (EM) = tpvyntai,
'vintagers', see Boßhardt 1942: 81. Beside Spéлw stands (with lengthened grade)
бpŵлa [m.] ichthyol', together with Spшлαкí(w 'apply a depilatory' and
Spwrakioliós, -lotńc, -íotpia (medic.). Also Spóлηs. nλavýtns, ittwxós ‘wanderer,
beggar' (H.) ?
•ETYM The lengthened grade of Spшл- is matched by a Slavic word for 'scratch, tear³, ·
e.g. Ru. drápať (secondary drjáp-), Pol. drapać, SCr. drâpām, drápati, etc. (the ō-
grade points to an old root noun, which may be secondary in Slavic); the zero grade
(Spaлwv, etc.) occurs in Bulg. dórpam, SCr. dŕpām, dŕpati. Very uncertain is the
relation with ON trof [n.pl.] 'fringes', etc. (< IE *drop-) and Gallo-Rom. drappus
'cloth, linen', etc. аpéлw might be an extension of dépw as *dr-ep-; compare ► τрεлw,
►кλéлτw. A parallel of Spεnávη is Arm. artevan, -anac' 'eyebrow' (named after its
shape); see De Lamberterie REArm. 17 (1983): 21f. and discussion in Clackson 1994:
109-112 (an old loan from Greek?). Alb. drapën 'sickle' is a loan from Greek.

=== page 201 ===

354
SpnoteÚw
11
355
Spηoτεúw ⚫VAR Sproτnp, etc. Spáw.
Spiλos [m.] 'circumcised man', = verpus in Latin glosses (AP, Amphissa; on the mg.
Diels & Brugmann IF 15 (1903-1904): 4-6). <?>
•DER Spíλakes. ßλa ‘leeches' (H.; Chantraine 1933: 380).
•ETYM No etymology. M. Scheller (in Pok. 208) adduces Spiάovσav. Oállovσav
'flourishing' (H.), which, like Spiáɛvτα. Xλwpá, is based on Spíoç, plur. Spía ‘bush,
shrubs'; the supposed meaning 'swelling' (whence both ‘circumcised man' [: ‘penis’]
and leech') is a mere guess. See Kretschmer Glotta 14 (1925): 229, contra H.
Petersson (Arm. titern 'crocodile'). Other suggestions can be found in von
Loewenthal Wus 10 (1927): 186 and Sapir Lang. 15 (1940): 185. See also ►кpoкódiλoç.
Spчuús [adj.] 'sharp, sour, bitter' (Il.). <PG?►
●COMP Spiµvλéwv as a philosophical nickname (Gal.).
•DER Spчuúλoç 'piercing' (Mosch.; diminutive, cf. dúλoç, etc., Chantraine 1933: 250);
Spyłótnc, -ntoc [f.] 'sharpness, etc.' (IA). Denominative Spчuvσow 'cause a biting
pain' (especially medic.; Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 243) with Spíµvšiç ‘smarting' and
Spчuvyчóç 'pungency'; also Spчμεúw 'to itch' (Anon. in EN).
•ETYM The old interpretation (Persson 1912(2): 779) as 'splitting, cutting', from
*Spio-μús (replacing *Spio-µóc), is not convincing. Since the word has no
etymology, we might consider Pre-Greek origin.
Spíos [n.] ‘bush, shrubs' (§ 353; cf. älσos ‘grove', táppos ‘thicket', etc.). <?►
•VAR Plur. Spía; Spiσt [dat.pl.] (IG 14, 217: 43).
•DER Perhaps Spiwv 'devdpwv (“thicket”)' in έv Spiŵvaç (Meineke; cod. ¿vdpiwvac).
Spóμoç лαρеévwv v Аaкεdaíμovɩ 'maidens' race in Laconia' (H.).
⚫ETYM Pedersen 1909: 80 compared OIr. driss 'vepres' (suffix -st-); this is unclear.
The word is often combined with ▸ Spûç, etc.; the formation remains unclear in any
case. Not connected here (as per Osthoff 1901: 156ff.) is Spíç. Súvaшç 'potential' (H.).
Also unclear are Spáɛvτα. Xλwpá 'green' and Spiάovσav. áλlovσav 'flourishing'
(H.).
Spoiτŋ [f.] bathtub' (A.), also 'cradle' (Alex. Aet.), 'coffin' (Parth.), name of a dance
(H.; see Lawler AmJPh. 71 (1950): 70ff.). <PG?>
•Var Cf. Soĭtpov· лúελov ‘trough', σкáqηy ‘trough, tray' (H.), dissimilated from
*Spoiτpov?
⚫ETYM Although the word has no good etymology, its suffix -ɩτa suggests Pre-Greek
origin (Fur.: 2384). Not attractive is the connection with OE trīg, MoE tray ‘flat
trough, dish' (from PGm. *trau-ja-, IE *drou-io- of 'wood'); indeed, any relationship
with Spuc) is probably due to secondary association. For example, the younger
form Spúτη could be due to the pronunciation u for oɩ, or else result from influence
of Spüç. Lat. durēta 'wooden bath tub' is probably borrowed from the Greek
(Schwyzer KZ 62 (1935): 199ff.).
Spóμos [m.] 'run, race, course' (Il.);
below). <IE *drem- 'run'>
=
yuμváσtov 'school' (Crete; cf. on Spoµεúç
1
1
●DER Spoµεúç ‘runner' (Att.), “qηßos' (Cret.); Spoµác [f.] (also [m., n.]) ‘running’
(S., cf. Schwyzer: 507, Chantraine 1933: 354), also used for the camel (D. S.), as a loan
Lat. dromas with dromedarius, whence Spoµεdápios, Spoµadápios 'dromedary'
(pap.); Spoμaños ‘running' (S.), Spoμкóç 'for running, quick' (Pl.) with Spoμкóτη
(Simp.); Apóμoç epithet of Hermes (Crete), Apoμñïos month name (Crete); late and
rare Spouías name of a fish and a crab (Eratosth.; see Strömberg 1943: 51f.,
Thompson 1947 s.v. Spóµwv); Spoµalós epithet of laywóç ‘hare' (H.), Spóµwv 'light
ship' (Procop.), ó μµiкρòç кapкívos 'the small crab' (H.), cf. on Spoµíaç; póµаž
‘good at running' (of кáµηλoç ‘camel', Gp.); Spóμov ‘running match' (Tab. Defix.
Aud., Rome IV-V³). Spoµý = Spóµoç 'run, race, course' (Hdn. Gr.).
=
⚫ETYM Derived from ▸ Spaµεïv.
Spóžчµa [n.pl.] ‘uncooked, raw fruits' (pap. V-VI³). <?►
•ETYM = τpóžɩµa ‘id.' (from τpwyw), via a folk-etymological reshaping after Spóσos
'dew', Spoσɛpós 'fresh' (e.g. of Máxava ‘vegetables' Ar. Pl. 298)?
Spoóv [adj.]. ioxupóv. Apyɛão 'strong (Arg.)' (H.). <IE *drou- 'wood'>
•ETYM From *SpoƑ-óv, properly ‘made of heartwood', from the word for ‘wood in
►Sópu, ▶ Spûç. Compare OE trig ‘tray' < IE *drou-io- (see Spoíτη); also, Go.
trauan. The same word is supposed in PN Apoúðov [gen.], Telos IIª. έvdpola. kapdía
Sévбpov кai τò μéσov 'heart of the tree, the middle part' (H.) may stand for evôpva.
See Osthoff 1901: 145ff.
Spóσos [f.] 'dew', often of several fluids (Hdt., Pi.); in A. Ag. 141 (lyr., pl.) = ‘young
animals' (\ɛóvtwv), thus Call. Hec. 1, 2, 3; acc. to Bechtel 1914: 139 and Benveniste
BSL 45 (1949): 102' metonymic; different Leumann 1950: 258"; cf. on pσal. <PG>
VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 324, 34'.
•DER Adjectives mg. ‘dewy, fluid': Spoσóɛi (Sapph.), Spoowdŋs (com.), Spoσepós
(E.), Spoσivós (AP), Spóσчµoç (Plu.). Abstract Spoσía (Orac. apud Luc. Alex. 53, Cat.
Cod. Astr., also MoGr.; on the mg. see Scheller 1951: 54f.). Hypocoristic Spoσaλλíç
name of a Bithynian wine (Gp.); see Chantraine 1933: 252. Denominative Spoσí(w 'to
sprinkle, make dew' (Ar.) with Spoσσµós (Olymp. Alch.); Spoσóοµαɩ ‘to be
sprinkled with dew' (Anacreont.).
⚫ETYM The word is probably of Pre-Greek origin (note the intervocalic -σ-; for older
views, cf. Bq; Sapir Lang. 15 (1940): 185).
*Spotñta (ПI 857, etc.) → ȧvýp.
Spváσai → Sevdpúw.
Spчµá [n.pl.] 'wood, forest' (Il.). <IE *dru- 'wood, tree'>
•VAR Late also Spūµá, see below.
•DER Spuμós 'bush, thicket' (SIG 57, 28 [Vª]); Spyµádηs 'forested', Spúµos 'who
passes a forest' (Cyprus); Spvµíovs. toùs katà τǹу xáраν кαкоñoloñvtɛç (i.e.
‘brigands living in the woods'); Spvµɛītis (read -ìtıç?) scil. yñ ‘forested country'
(pap.); Spчuwv-wvos 'forest' (J.). Spvµíç -ídos = Spvác (An. Ox. 1, 225).
1

=== page 202 ===

356
Spuziáoow
11
SporaE
357
ETYM Neutral collective of *Spůμóç = Skt. druma- [m.] 'tree', Ru. drom 'thicket,
forest', an IE derivation in -m- of the word for 'wood, tree'; see Sópu and ►Spüç.
The length of the vowel, seen in the sing. Spỹμóc and the masc. plural forms only, is
taken from Spûç; see Wackernagel 1916: 184ff. On the ntr. plur., see Schwyzer: 581.
Differently, Machek Listy filol. 72 (1948): 71.
Spvµáσow [v.] ‘to tear up, crush', intrans. ‘to creak' (= λŋkɛïv Poll. 5, 93), also obscene
uses; cf. H.: Spvµážeis. kvpíws µèv orapážɛiç. xpwvtai dè kaì è̟nì toũ ovvéoɛɩ kai
po “commonly: retching; also used for coition and sexual intercourse'
(Com. Adesp. 986); брудáσσεν кaì dρvµážai. τò TÚлTεу EÚλOÇ 'to beat with clubs'.
εdpúμаžεv. čеpavσεv, čσpažɛv 'he shattered, slayeď. áðрúμαктоν· кalapóv 'clear,
clean'. <PG?>
•VAR Att. -TTW; aor. Spvдážaι, fut. Spvμáчw.
⚫ETYM Expressive formation. Nevertheless, a cross of бpúлτw with another verb (e.g.
µáσow, i̟µάoow, as suggested by Frisk) does not seem probable. Rather, a derivation
in -αк- from бpúлτw, with -μ- for -л- (see Fur.: 224f., and cf. 326 on Spv-, Spч-).
The explanation of ‘τúſtяv žúλoç' (H.) is probably folk etymological (based on
Spuriós?).
Opiuós → Spðuá.
dpvлeñýs [adj.] ‘having ripened on the tree', about black olives (Ar. Lys. 564). ◄GR➤
•ETYM From Spv- and лénwv. Spúлoç, said of äуpos (IG 9(1), 61), is unclear; so too
is Spúлεлa (AP 6, 191), which may be an isolated innovation. The same holds for
Spúñлa (AP 6, 299); can it be a Latin form? Note that Ath. 56 said that the accus.
plur. Spуллαç is Roman. Apулετηs would be a later change in the form; it may have
existed because of §pväɛtéïç. åлò dévdpov nentwkvíaç 'fallen from the tree' (H.).
Spúлτw [v.] ‘to scratch', especially as a sign of mourning (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. Spúval, opt. ȧño-Spúqoɩ (¥ 187 = N 21), probably pres., cf. Spv‹póµevol·
pеεpóμεvo (H.).
⚫DER ȧuqi-Spvons, àµoí-Spvqpos 'scratched on both sides (cheeks)' (Il.); Spuniç [f.]
name of a thorn-bush (Thphr.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 76. Only lexical Spvcpý. àµvxý,
кaτažvσµý ‘scratch', Spucpádes övvxeç, katažúoµаτα ‘talons, scratchings'. λuna,
ódúvaɩ ‘pains'. ǹ tà áïò nλŋyŵv neλɩwµata ‘livid spots from blows', Spúqn. Féoµata
‘abrasion' (H.). Spv‹pážaɩ· еaкɛïv ‘to sit' (H.). With -s-: Spúчala leaves', Spúчɛλa.
nétała Spvwdŋ ‘tree-like leaves' (H.), Spúчa ‘shavings'; Spvyónaida. tǹv laµvpáv
'impudent female' oi dè áлaλóлaida ½ ελɛɛvóv 'delicate child; pitiable' (H.);
Spчoуéρovτaç toùs átónovs npɛoßútaç kai olovɛì átíчovç ‘remarkable seniors, as
if dishonored' (H.).
⚫ETYM Expressive form, usually connected with Sépw, Spéлw. However, the word
was hardly reshaped after ▶Оpúлw. The variants Spvcp-, Spvy-, and ▶Spyµ-áσow
clearly point to a Pre-Greek word (and therefore it is improbable that it derives from
IE Sέpw); see Fur. 326, 348, etc. Neither is the word Iranian (Schwarz 1970: 386).
Spũç, -vóc [f.] ‘tree', especially ‘oak' (Il.). <IE *doru, gen. *dreus 'wood, tree'>
•DIAL Dialectal sometimes also [m.], see Schwyzer 1950: 372; Myc. du-ru-to-mo /dru-
tomoi/ 'woodcutters'.
•COMP ►ǎdpva 'upright pieces', áµádpva ‘sloe', yɛpávdpvov ‘old tree or stump',
ěvdpvov · kapdía dévdpov, kaì tò µéσαßov heart of the tree; leathern strap' (H.), also
Hes. (see below); µελávdpva ‘hearts of oak', also 'slices of tunny'.
•DER Spúïvoç 'oaken' (Od.), Sputvāç name of a snake living in oaks (Nic.); Spuïτηs
kind of cypress (Thphr.), name of a precious stone (Plin.); Apvás 'Dryad, tree-
nymph' (Plu.), also name of a snake (Androm. apud Gal.; cf. Spuïvac); them.
lengthening in Spúov [gen.] ‘bush' (POxy. 7, 1044, [7]; 8; 12, II-III³); but the them.
endings in μελáv-Spv-ov 'heart-wood', v-Spv-ov ‘oaken peg' (Hes. Op. 469) belong
to Sópu. The same holds for Spú-oxoɩ [m.pl.] ‘ribs of a ship' (Od.; cf. Wackernagel
1916: 186), Spň(0)-кoλáƒ™η ‘woodpecker' (Ar.), etc.; parallel mgs. in Schwentner KZ
73 (1956): 112f.; short form (after animal names in -oч) Spúoч (Ar. Av. 304); also as a
PN (Y 455) and as a people's name, see von Wilamowitz 1931: 52'. On ▸ Spúpaкtoι,
see s.v.
•ETYM Apart from the vowel length, which can be explained as from the feminine
gender (Wackernagel l.c.), Spuç is identical with Skt. dru- 'wood', found e.g. in dru-
sád- ‘sitting on wood (on a tree)', su-drú- ‘of good wood'. Other cognates are OCS
drova [n.pl.] 'wood', Alb. dru [f.] (< *druu̟ā) ‘wood, tree', and Go. triu < PGm.
*trewa- < IE *dreu-o-. The feminine Spûç (gender after other tree names; cf.
Wackernagel 1920-1924(2): 17) arose from the oblique case forms of the word for
'wood', Gr. Sópu, Skt. dáru- (gen. drú-n-aḥ next to dró-h). Janda 1997 assumes a
collective *druh₂- (with -s in the nom.). The meaning 'firm, strong', found in Greek
in Spoóv loxupóv, is frequent in Gm., e.g. OE trum 'firm, strong, healthy'
(formally = Spňµá ‘wooď, Skt. druma- ‘tree'), Go. triggws (< *trewwa-, IE *dreu(u)-
o-) 'true, faithful.
▸
.
Spúчaкτoι [m.pl.] 'railing or latticed partition, balcony, bar (in court)' (Ar.). <GR➤
●VAR Rarely sing. -oç; also Spú‹ppaktoɩ (Lib.) with restored p, and tpúðaktai (Hell.
and late inscr., Hdn. Gr.), with τ- acc. to Schwyzer: 257 from regressive assimilation,
but alternatively (Frisk) after τpuôn ‘delicacy' by folk etymology; doubtful.
•DER Denominative Spuoáσow 'fence in' (Lyc.), Spv‹ážaɩ• ++ dakɛīv ‘to bite' (H.; at
wrong alphabetical position). Also Spuеαкτów.
•ETYM Generally taken as a combination of Spů- (in ► Sópv) and ▶opáσσw with a
suffix -to- (cf. e.g. ȧкµó-0ε-τov). However, the t- is hard to understand as
assimilation.
•
Spwлáɛɩv [v.] ·εμẞλéлε 'to look in the face' (H.), A. D. Adv. 139, 8; Spóлτεу.
[Siaкóntεiv ] diασколεiv. Alσxúlos Yuxaywyoïç '[cut through]; examine well [in
Aeschylus's Psychagogoi]' (Fr. 278) (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Frisk suggests a cross of бépкoμαι, Spαкεiv and öлwлα, öчo̟μαɩ, which is not
very convincing. Comparable is Spwktášeis (Spok-). nɛpɩßàéñɛç, for which Latte
adduces the PN Apoкulos (Argolis), but this may stand for Apaкuloç. See ▸ Spáw 2
=ópáw.
Spora² →8pétw.
!

=== page 203 ===

358
Spáry
1
Svo-
359
Spwy [m.] äveршлоç 'man' (H.). <PG>
•ETYM Thought to be a compound *vp-wy 'with manly face' (see ►ảvýp), but the
absence of å is strange. Acc. to Latte, it is a creation of the grammarians. Kuiper
1956: 224f. accepts the gloss as Pre-Greek, explaining ävеpшлоç as arising through.
prenasalization and prothetic vowel. His solution is supported by Beekes Glotta 73
(1995-1996): 13-5. Pisani Rev. Int. ét. balk. 3 (1937): 11f. considers Spŵy to be
Macedonian (connected to τpέqw).
dúßpıç [?] · katà yλãσσav ǹ ¤áλασσa 'sea [gloss]', sch. Theoc. 1, 118c. <?►
•ETYM If the word is Illyrian, one could connect Latv. dubra ‘pit, marshy place', OCS
dobrú 'abyss', as well as MIr. dobur 'water' and other words for 'deep', like Lith.
dubùs, Go. diups, etc. See Krahe 1955: 47. Acc. to Szemerényi Archiv. Linguist. 5
(1953): 77, also Lat. Tiberis (as Illyrian) is related. Cf. ► Súntw.
dúŋ [f.] ‘misery, anguish' (Od.). <?>
•VAR Dor. Súa.
•COMP As a first member in duŋ-лaðýs (A. R.).
•DER Súïoç 'unhappy, painful' (A. Supp. 829 [lyr.]), Suɛpóc ‘id.' (metr. inscr., Attica);
causative present Svówσ [3sg.] 'cause misery' (v 195), perf. ptc. dedvŋuévn.
кεкαкwμεvη 'distressed' (H.), with derivations.
⚫ETYM If it originally meant 'burning pain', dúŋ might derive from a zero grade of the
root *deh₂u- 'burn', seen in Skt. dunóti ‘burn (trans.), torment' and OHG zuscen
'burn'. In Greek, this root is perserved in ►Saíw < *dau-i̟e/o- and ► d½ïoç. However,
this remains uncertain, of course.
Myc. du-ma
•ETYM Probably the name of an official, on which see Fauth KZ 102 (1989): 187-206.
dúvaµai [v.] ‘to be able, be equal to; to signify' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Aor. Suvηoaσðaι, dvvaσėñvai (Il.), Svvηėñvai (trag.), fut. Svvýσoµai (Od.),
perf. Sɛdúvηuai (Att.).
•DER_dúvaµç [f.] 'strength, power' (Il.; cf. Oεµuç and below) with duvaµкós
'powerful, effective' (Hell. and late), duvaµɛpós ‘id.' (medic.), Suvaµooτóv a fraction
(Dioph.); Suvauów 'make strong' (Hell. and late), with Suváμwotę, duvaliwtikós,
Súvaσis 'id.' (Pi.). Suváστηs [m.] 'lord, master' (IA) with SuvαστIкóç (Arist.),
Suvaστɛúw (IA), with Suvaστεíа, Suvάστεvμа, Suvαστευτιкóç; fem. SuváσTIC
(Demetr. Eloc.), Svváσteipa (Tab. Defix. Aud. III³). Svváσtwp ‘id.' (E. IA 280 [lyr.]).
Verbal adj. Suvatós ‘able; possible' (Sapph.) with Suvatέw 'be strong' (2 Ep. Cor. 13,
3); Suvηtiкóç ‘potentiaľ (A. D.).
•ETYM Probably to be analyzed as dú-v-α-µαι, a present with generalized nasal infix
(Sv-v-á-σðŋv for *Svá-00ŋv, cf. Xívaµai : Máσðŋv), Sv-v-ýσoµai for *dvý-σoµai, etc.,
as well as in nouns like Súvaчuç, etc. An -σ- was added in Suvá-o-Оnv, dvvá-o-tnc.
LIV² reconstructs *deuh₂- 'zusammenfügen' and connects the word with ToB tsuwa
[3sg.pret.] ‘join, adjusť and Go. taujan ‘make'. This disyllabic root formally agrees
with that of Sny and Sŋpóc but, semantically, a connection is difficult. Cret.
vývaµaɩ (Gortyn) must be the same word. The v- may simply be due to assimilation.
ļ
{
dvvdeкáτη [num.] · ŋµépą dwdeкátη 'on the twelfth day' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM According to Schulze 1892: 178, SuvбéкατOÇ was formed after έvdéкατoç, but
Latte implausibly corrects to dvodεкάτη, contrary to the alphabetical order.
Súo [num.] 'two'. <IE *duyo, *duų-eh₂ (?) 'two'>
•VAR Epic eleg. also Súw, Lacon., etc. also Sú(F)ε (after кúv-ɛ, etc.), oblique forms.
Svoiv (Att. Svɛiv since IV-III³), Suwv, Svoio(1), Suoí; also indeclinable (Il.); see
Schwyzer: 588f.
•DIAL Myc. dwo; du-wo-u-pi /dwōup¹i/.
•COMP As a first member (beside usual St-, see díc) e.g. in dvo-лotóç 'making two'
(Arist.), and in univerbations like Svo-kaí-dɛka (Il., etc.).
•DER SVOσTóc 'half (sch.), after ɛiкOστóç 'twentieth', etc.
•ETYM The final short vowel of Súo is also seen in Arm. erko-tasan 'twelve' and in the
Skt. derivative dva-ká- ‘in pairs' (Lat. duo is due to iambic shortening). *duчo is also
found in Go. twa and wit 'we two', as well as in OIr. da; see Cowgill MSS 46 (1985):
13-28, who demonstrates that the *duuo originally was an indeclinable next to the
dual Sów (= Skt. duvá, OCS dúvα [m.]). A monosyllabic *duo(u) is reflected in
S(F)w-deka, Skt. dvá(u), Hitt. dā- in dā-yuga- 'two years old, dān ‘a second time'.
Svoxoĩ [v.] · лwµatíšɛi лapà Aŋµokpitw (Fr. 136), ŕtoi rwliášel, okεлáчε to cover
(with a lid) [Democr.], to protect or shelter'; Svoxwoai• лwµáoai (H.). <?►
•ETYM The explanation as from *Svoxos 'lid' is rejected by DELG, both because the
meaning would not fit and because a compound with Su(ó)- instead of Sw- is
improbable. Chantraine suggests reading *Spvoxoĩ from Spúoxoc, which is 'the
props or shores upon which the frame of a new ship is laid', or (LSJ Supp.) ‘the ribs
of a ship' (DELG s.v. Spuc); it is then the same as Spúαкɛç (H.). However, this does
not seem to fit well for the present gloss.
Súлτш [v.] 'to dive in', mostly intr. (Antim. [?], Lyc., A. R.). <?►
VAR Aor. Súa.
•DER SÚлτηç [m.] 'diver', especially as a bird name (Call.); cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.
•ETYM From ▶Suw, perhaps modelled after ▸кúлw; cf. also þúлτw (s.v. ►ßántw).
Súpoμa [v.] 'to lament, bewail' (trag.). <?►
•DER лάv-dup-τoç 'wailing about everything' (trag. [lyr.]).
⚫ETYM A variant of ódúpoμai, perhaps as a rhyme with μúpoμai (Güntert 1914: 150).
Svo [pref.] inseparable prefix, 'mis-, un-, etc.' (Il.). Details in Schwyzer: 432,
Wackernagel 1920-1924(2): 295ff. <IE *dus- 'wrong, mis-'>>
•COMP E.g. Svoμεvic, see DELG.
⚫ETYM Old element, also seen in Indo-Iranian (Skt. duş-, dur-, Av. duš-, duž-). Some
compounds are found in both branches, like dvσ-µεvýs = Skt. dur-mánas-, Av. duš-
manah-; see also under ►dúotŋvos. The element is also found in other branches, e.g.
in Germanic (Go. tuz-werjan ‘hesitate', ON OE tor-, OHG zur-), Celtic (OIr. du-,
do-), and Armenian (t-, e.g. t-gēt ‘unknowing'). The Slav. word for 'rain', OCS dáždí,
Ru. dožď, etc. is often connected with it (from “bad daylight” vel sim.); see Derksen

=== page 204 ===

}
360
Svo-āńc
2008 s.v. *dózdjú (dóždjú). IE *dus- is mostly connected with dɛvoμαι ‘lack' (see
► Sέw 2).
Svo-āns [adj.] 'blowing violently, stormy' (II.). <GR➤
•VAR Ntr. -és.
•ETYM From Svo- and ǎŋ with metrical lengthening. Cf. úлepāńs (of äεlla, A 297).
dvoßńpns [adj.] · ó dúσßaτoç 'impassable' (EM 291, 43); Svσßipés. dúoßatov,
Svoxɛpés ‘impassable, intractable' (H.); dvoßñpeç. oi dúoßɑta tóra ‘inaccessible
places' (Suid.). <GR>
ETYM Acc. to EM, the form is syncopated from dvoßatýpŋs; however, it is rather
directly from ẞчva after the adjectives in -pηs. Otherwise, is it a mistake for
Svoñpeç. Svoxεpés (Suid.)? Such a solution is not in accord with von Blumenthal
1930: 3 (that the word is Illyrian, connected to qέpeɛiv).
=
Súσyw →Súw 2.
•
Súσɛa [n.pl.] · toû toixov tà répiε. Kúлpioɩ ‘that which is around the wall (Cypr.)'
(H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained. See Solmsen 1909: 245.
Svonxns [adj.] of лóλεμo 'war' and ávaτos 'death', so perhaps ‘that which causes
great pain, grief to äxos 'distress', ävчдα 'to be distressed' (with Ap. Soph.). In
h.Ap. 64 'of bad reputation'. Later mg. 'that which causes great noise'. <<GR>
•ETYM From ►ǎxos or from ►ǹxń.
dúσêŋλoç [adj.] ‘unquiet, agitated'? Of xwv ‘earth' (A. Eu. 825 hapax), opposite to
EÜкnoç 'still' (see кηoc). <IE *uek- 'want'>
⚫ETYM See ►кηλos. Not connected with кnλéw 'to bewitch'; see sch.
Súσkoλoç [adj.] ‘discontented, troublesome' (Hp., Att.). <?►
⚫DER SVOKOλía 'discontentedness'. Opposite εÜкoλoç 'content' with εvкoλía.
⚫ETYM Unknown. Unconvincing are connections with ►кéλo̟µα, ►лéλoµai, etc.
Svoкpāns →εvкpańs.
Svooi w [v.] 'to wail, be in fear' (A. Ag. 1316, E. Rh. 724 and 805). <?>
•VAR Svσoíel Svσxɛpαívεɩ, úлovoɛi. Aάкwvɛç 'be unable to endure; suspect
(Lacon.)' (H.), Svσoíšɛiv. poßɛioła, úƒoƒtεúεv ‘be afraid; be suspicious' (H.);
Svσoíšovtos. oiwvišoµévov kaì ǎyav úñortevovtos ‘who takes [things] as omens
and is very suspicious'; dúσoкτoç. Svoßpývòtos ‘loud-wailing'; dúσoža. únεvónga
'he suspected' (H.).
⚫ETYM Perhaps the explanation in H. with úлovoɛïv, úлonteúεiv, olwvíɛσðaɩ is based
on an erroneous connection with oчqua. Because of the nominal prefix and the
augmented aorist, we should start from SúσoкTOÇ, which comes either from olкTOS
or from *oiкτóç to oï(w (A. D.). See Debrunner GGA 172 (1910): 7 and Fraenkel 1950
ad 1316.
:
Súw 2
361
dvoñéµqɛlos [adj.] of the sea (II 748, Hes. Th. 440), sailing (Hes. Op. 618), a man
(Hes. Op. 722), etc., perhaps 'stormy, rough, raw'. <?>
•ETYM Expressive word without etymology. The word recalls néµqiš, noµqós,
лоμчóλ, which are also semantically relatable. Further suggestions are found in
Bechtel 1914 s.v. and in Schwyzer: 423, who assumes reduplication.
Súσtŋvos [adj.] ‘unhappy, wretched' (Il.; cf. von Wilamowitz 1889 ad 1346); Svotnvía.
μоxеmpía 'bad condition' (H.). <IE? *steh₂- ‘stand’>>
•VAR Dor. Súσtavos.
●DER ►äστηvos 'miserable', s.v.
ETYM Probably 'who has a bad standing', from Suo- and *στñ-v-, *στã-v-,
corresponding to Skt. sthắna- [n.], Av. OP stāna- [n.] 'stand, position'. Slavic has an
old u-stem, e.g. CS stand ‘lair', Ru. stan 'stature, standplace, camp'; other forms are
mentioned in Derksen 2008 s.v. *stânú. The form dúotos = dúotyvos, given by Hdn.
Gr. 1, 217, may derive from *dus-sth₂-o-. See Osthoff 1901: 126, Bechtel 1914 s.v.
Súσtηvoç.
Svoxepns [adj.] 'discontent, annoying, vexatious, unpopular' (IA). ◄IE *gher- ‘desire’▷
●DER Svoxépɛia ‘annoyance, disgust' (Att., Hell.), denominative Svoxɛpaívw ‘to be
displeased with, be disgusted at' (Att., Hell.; see Leumann 1950: 111) with Svoxépaσµa
(Pl.), Svoxεpaσµós (Phld.), Svoxέpavoɩs (Hell. and late), Svoxɛpavτikós (M. Ant.). -
Opposite Exεpns 'tractable'.
⚫ETYM Not related to Xɛip; see Leumann Phil. 96 (1944): 161ff., who correctly
connects the word with xaipw. We must depart from a form with -ε-, like *xépos
(cf. Svσ-μεvýç to μévoc), or from a full grade of the verb, which is not preserved in
Greek.
Suτn [f.] mg. uncertain, 'pit'? <IE? *deu- 'enter'>>
•VAR Accentuation unknown. Also Sută (Thebe, Troezen IV-IIIª).
•ETYM Perhaps the word must be connected with ä-Suτov ‘place one may not enter,
most sacred', from Súw, dúoμα ‘enter'. See Frisk 1938: 16f. This contradicts the
hypothesis of von Blumenthal Glotta 18 (1930): 154, who relates it to Oúw as an
Illyrian word for “place for sacrifice".
8Úw1→8Ú0.
Súw 2 [v.] 'to enter, dive', trans. 'to plunge', intrans. 'to get into, slip into, put on' (II.).
<IE *deu- 'go in, enter'>
●var dúoµai, Súvw, aor. Sñσal, dúσaσðaɩ, Sỹvaɩ, perf. Sédūka, aor. pass. Svēñvai, fut.
Súσw, Súσoμai, Süßσoµαι, unclear epic pret. Súσετo (cf. Chantraine 1942: 416f.); if
trans. (Súw, Suσαɩ, Súσw) mostly with prefix ȧлo-, ¿к-, ¿v-, katα-Súw; otherwise
intrans. (dúoμai, Súvw), often with prefix ȧvα-, ȧлo-, vлo-dúoµai, -dúvw, etc. (but
rarely -Súw).
•COMP Often with nominal first member in compounds like τpwyλo-dúτηs 'cave-
dweller' (Hdt.) with -dutikós, -dutéw, Awno-dútŋs ‘one who goes in other people's
clothes, thief (of clothes)' (Att., etc.) with -Sutéw, -Svoiov (dikn), -dvoia; cf. Fraenkel
1910: 225f.

=== page 205 ===

362
Sw
●DER Súσɩç ‘setting of sun and stars, West' (Hecat.) with duτɩкóç; often to the
prefixed verbs έê-, žv-, katá-dvoiç, etc. in different mgs.; dũµa (POxy. 6, 929, 8; 15,
II-III³) = vôvμα ‘garment' (Va), also úлóðu̟μα. Súτηç 'diver' (Hdt. 8, 8); in different
mgs. ¿v-, Úƒεv-, ¿к-dútŋs, etc. with кdúσia [pl.] name of a festival in Crete (Ant.
Lib.); Evduτp for putting on' (S. Tr. 674 of лéлλoç) with έvduτηpios (S.), also
úлodvτηpia [pl.] (Str. 14, 5, 6; v.l. vñodekt.). Svoµaí [pl.] (rarely [sg.], see Schwyzer
1950: 43) ‘setting of sun and stars, West' (IA) with Svσкóç (Str.); also Sv-Qµaí, -Qµý
'id.' (Call.; on the suffix Chantraine 1933: 148f.). Cf. further Suτη. Suτīvoç name of a
waterbird (Dionys. Av.; like iкtivos, kopakĭvoç, etc.). Svτкóç ‘suitable for diving,
westerly' (Arist.). Verbal forms with extension: ►Súntw; dúoyw. ánodów ‘to put off
(H.), after μíoyw 'to mix' (Wackernagel KZ 33 (1895): 39); cf. also qúoywv (Alc.,
POxy. 18, 2165; see Specht KZ 68 (1943): 150).
•ETYM Sów is related to the rare Sanskrit verb upā-du- 'to put on' (only gerundive
Ved. upadútya-); see von Schroeder WZKSM 13 (1899): 297f. and Brugmann IF 11
(1900): 274. The same root is possibly found in Sɛíɛλoc, etc. On the intransitive
nasal present Súvw, see Schwyzer: 696 and Schwyzer 1950: 230. Cf. also ► ȧλißdúw.
Sw [n.] 'house' (Il.). <IE *dōm ‘house'>
•VAR In Hom. always at verse end, always as accus. (ηµéτεpov dã, ¿µòv ñotì
Xaλкoßατèç dã, etc.) except a 392 dã / ȧovɛtóv, where it has the nominative; further
Hes. Th. 933 Xpúσɛa dã 'golden houses' [acc.pl.] (innovation).
•ETYM The ancients saw the word as a shortened form of dŵµa (dã. Swµa, oïknµua,
σлηλαov H.). Schmidt 1889: 222ff. derived it from *dōm, the root noun belonging to
► Sóµoç, etc.; thus, Schwyzer: 569 and (hesitantly) Chantraine 1942: 230, as well as
Bartholomae 1895: 214 (*dom = Av. dqm as an old locative). Fick 1874-1876(1): 458
and Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916: 1, 136, as well as Risch 1937: 359f., thought it was
a local particle (adverb); cf. ηµéτεpóv de = ŋµétɛpov Sw), thus *do 'to(wards)', seen
in OS tō, OHG zuo, and perhaps even in Lat. en-do. In Greek, it is simply a
substantive. Cf. ► dŵµa.
Súdɛкα [num.] 'twelve' (Il.). <IE *duoHdekm 'twelve'>
•VAR Epic Ion. Dor. also Svwdɛka, Arc. Svōdɛko; Hell. also dɛkadúo.
•COMP Svwdeкá-ẞotos 'worth twelve cows' (Il.), etc.
•DER Swdźkatos (dvw-; on ►Suvdekάτ s.v.) ‘the twelfth' (II.) with dwdekataïos ‘of
twelve days' (Hes.) from dwdeкáτŋ (ŋµépa), and Svwdekateús (µýv) ‘the twelfth
month' (Tauromenion); dwdeкác (dvw-) [f.] 'group of twelve, the twelfth part' (Pl.)
with dvwdɛkadıkós; dwdekaïs, -ŋïs (duw-) 'sacrifice of twelve animals', also name of
a festive deputation (Delphi Va, etc.; cf. IIvaïc); dwdɛкεÚç· XoεÚç a measure, 'twelve
cotylae' (H.); Swбɛкáкıç 'twelve times' (Ar.).
ETYM From *SFW-Sεka
duodecim. See ▸ Súo.
=
Skt. dvá-daśa. It also appears as duwdɛкα, as in Lat.
Swua [n.] 'house, home, temple', often plur., see Schwyzer 1950: 43 (Il.; also Arc.
[Tegea Va] as 'temple'). <IE *dem- 'house'>
⚫DER Swμάτov 'small house, room, chapel' (Att.); Swµatítηç, fem. -îτç 'belonging to
the house' (A.); Sшματóομαι 'provide with houses' (A. Supp. 958).
!
1
Supov 2
363
•ETYM Derived from IE *dem-, also seen in dɛσлótŋs. The nearest cognate is the
Arm. n-stem tun 'house' < *dōm, gen. tan. See also ▸ Sw.
=
Swμáw →Sźμw.
Swpáкivov 'kingstone', a kind of peach (Gp. 3, 1, 4). ◄LW Lat.➤
•ETYM From Lat. dūracinum. See André 1956 s.v. MoGr. has pwdáкivov.
Awpiɛiç [m.pl.] ‘Dorians', since τ 177 -téɛs, which is metri causa acc. to Debrunner
1923: 33¹. <?>
•VAR Att. -ɩñç. Sing. Awpiɛús, as a PN (Hdt.) and as an adjective ‘Dorian' (Pi.);
thence Awpiɛta (Cnidos), Awpɛta (Cos) [n.pl.] names of festivals.
•DIAL Myc. do-ri-je-we /Dōriēwes/.
●DER Awptos (Pi.), dwpikós (Hdt.), Swpłaкós (Orac. apud Th. 2, 24, metrically
determined), see Chantraine 1956a: 107; fem. Awpíç (Hdt.); Swpíšw ‘to speak Dorian'
(Theoc.), Swpioµós, dwpiστí; dwptáčw 'to clothe oneself like the Dorians'
⚫ETYM Some older proposals started from the IE word *doru for 'wood, tree', or (in
Greek) 'spear' (see Frisk s.v.), but this may be doubted.
Supov 1 [n.] 'gift, present' (Il.). <IE *deh,-ro- 'gift'>
•COMP Swpo-Sóкoç 'accepting presents, corruptible' (see εxoμa) beside
Swpodokέw 'accept presents, be corruptible' (IA) with dwpodóкηµa, dwpodokia
'corruption'.
●DER Diminutive Swpúqiov (pap.). Denominative Swpéoµaɩ, dwpéw ‘give presents'
(Il.; on the diathesis Schwyzer 1950: 234) with dépηua 'present (Hdt.) and
Swpŋuatikós (D. H.), Swpητńs ‘giver, benefactor' (Nesos IVª) and Swpistikós (Pl.),
Swpητηp ‘id.' (AP), Swpητós 'prepared to accept presents' (I 526), 'presented' (S.).
Also Swρúττоμα (Theoc. 7, 43; ad hoc formation; Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 242f.);
perhaps also Thess. Soúppavτa = Swpησavτa like Hom. qilaτo beside quλɛiv
(Fraenkel Glotta 35 (1956): 91f.)? Beside Supov and Swpéoμat stands Swpɛá, older
-ɛá (Attica Va), Ion. -εn 'gift, present' (Hdt.) with unclear formation; thence
Swpɛaкós ‘official of a fief (pap. IIIª), Swpeaotikóç, -petɩkós ‘concerning presents'
(pap. VIP).
⚫ETYM Old word, identical with Arm. tur, OCS daro 'gift', from PIE *deh,-ro-. It also
appears with a suffix -no-: Lat. dōnum = Skt. dána- [n.]. For further details, see
► Sidwμu.
Supov 2 [n.] 'breadth of the hand' (Nic., Milete). <?►
•COMP As a second member in εкkaidɛká-dwpoç ‘sixteen hands long' (A 109), dɛкá-
Swpoc (Hes. Op. 426), ópó-Swpov ‘length of a hand' = 'the distance between the
root of the hand and the finger ends' (Poll., acc. to H. also = σлеаμη 'span between
thumb and pinky').
●DER dápiv• σëɩðaµýv. Apkádes (i-stem) and ►dáp[ɛ]ɩp.
•ETYM The word has been compared with Alb. dorë (see La Piana IF 58 (1942): 98),
which is, however, rather related to Xεip (see Demiraj 1997). Further Celt. words,
like OIr. dorn, as well as Latv. dùre, dûris ‘fist', have been connected, but both
branches point to PIE *u, which excludes any relationship with Supov.

=== page 206 ===

1
E
[interj.] expressing pain (trag., com.). <ONOM➤
•VAR Also repeated ε ε, ε
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic formation. Cf. Schwyzer 1950: 600.
- [pref.] the augment (II.). ◄IE *h,e- augment➤
●VAR Rarely ǹ- (see below).
•DIAL Rare in Mycenaean, only a-pe-do-ke /ap-e-dōkel.
•ETYM Old element indicating the past tense, also found in Indo-Iranian a-, ā- (<*a
+ root-initial *H-), Armenian e- and Phrygian e-, e.g. -qɛpɛ = Skt. á-bharat, Arm. e-
ber; cf. further OPhr. e-daes, NPhr. ε-daɛ кε'. See Schwyzer: 651ff.; on the
variant -, see Rix 1976: 226ff. Greek often gets a long vowel by contraction: *h₁e-
h₂eg-e-t > ñyɛ. From cases like еελov < *he-hd³el- next to pres. (¿)Đέλw, long
augments arose analogically, e.g. in ẞovλóμηv. Probably all long augments are
analogical; see Ruijgh Lingua 28 (1971): 166.
, ε [refl. pron.] 'se', epic also ‘eum, eam, id', 3sg. accus. of the reflective (and enclitic)
anaphoric pronoun (II.). <IE *se, sue himself>
•VAR Lesb. Fε, Pamph. Fhε, epic also έέ; gen. ou (ov), epic čo (εio), εʊ (έo, εú), ëƉεv,
Lesb. féðɛv, Locr. Ƒéoç; dat. (and gen.; Schwyzer 1950: 189 with lit.; cf. Latte Glotta 35
(1956): 296) oi (oi), epic also έoĩ, Lesb., etc. Foĩ, Cret. (Gortyn), etc. FIV, Boeot.
(Corinna) έív. For the plur. see opɛis.
•DER Hence the possessive őç, epic also έóc, Dor., etc. Fóç 'suus, one's own' (also
referring to the first and second person), ‘eius'.
•ETYM The epic forms έ, εv, εv, oi, where we find no trace of a digamma
(Chantraine 1942: 146ff.), have been supposed to derive from an IE reflexive stem
*se-, as seen in Lat. sē, OCS sę ‘se', and Go. si-k. Additionally, it was thought that oi <
*soi corresponds to OP -šaiy, Av. hē, Prakr. se; on the other hand, έo would be from
*se-so (cf. téo < *k”e-so to ►tic).
=
However, it is now maintained that IE had only *sue; see Petit 1999: 126-8. In Greek,
we find Fhε, Foĩ < *sue, *suoi Skt. sva- 'himself (only in derivations and in
compounds, e.g. sva-já- ‘born from himself). A disyllabic full-grade variant seems to
be found in έé < *seue. Adjectivized *sue, *seue gave rise to the possessive *su-o-,
*seu-o-, which yielded Ƒóç, έós = Skt. svá- 'suus', OLat. sovos > Lat. suus.
Further details are in Schwyzer: 600off. Cf. ►έavtoũ, ►έkás, ►ěkaotos, ► σqɛĩs and
► σú.

=== page 207 ===

366
ěa
èáw
367
ža [interj.] expressing surprise and rejection (trag.). <GR>
•ETYM Originally just the 2sg. ipv. of έáw, but later taken as an independent
interjection. See Schwyzer KZ 60 (1933): 141f.
έáv [conj.] ‘if (Att.), Hell. and late also modal pcl. = ǎv. <GR>
VAR With crasis av (Att.), nv (epic Ion.; also Att.?).
⚫ETYM From univerbation or crasis of ►ɛi and ►äv. The long vowel in έáv can be due
to a contamination of έắv and ǎv; see Lejeune 1972: 323.
Éǎvóc 1 [m.] a woman's cloth (II.). <IE *ues- 'wear clothes'>
•VAR Verse-initially ɛiavós (II 9); late also έāvóç.
•DIAL Myc. we-a₂-no-i /wehanoi¹i/ [dat.pl.].
•ETYM From *FEσ-avós, a verbal noun of ►εvvyμt; for the suffix, cf. στéqavos, etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 196ff.).
έāvós 2 [adj.] of clothes (λɩtí, лεñλoç, ¡µátov), also of tin (Il., inc. auct. apud Greg.
Cor., see Sapph. fr. 156). Mg. uncertain: 'supple'? Or 'fine'? <?►
⚫ETYM No etymology. Cf. ►iavoyλéqapos.
žap 1, -pos [n.] ‘blood', metaph. ‘sap' (Call.; Cyprian acc. to H.). ◄IE *hesh₂-r ‘blood'>
•VAR Also εlap, ñap.
●COMP As a first member in ɛiaporótŋs. aiµorótns, yvxorótys 'blood-drinker,
breath-drinker³ (H.); acc. to sch. T, ɛiaporŵtıç is v.l. for ǹepoqoîtic (Epivúc) T 87
(Fraenkel 1910: 114).
•DER None
⚫ETYM Old word for blood: Hitt. ešḥar, gen. išḥanāš, Skt. ásṛk, gen. asnáḥ, Lat. aser
(gloss., Paul. Fest.; form uncertain), ToA ysär, ToB yasar, Latv. asins. An extended
form occurs in Arm. ar-iwn (Kortlandt 2003: 131f.: < *esar-). The original r/n-stem is
maintained in Hitt. and Skt. The length in ɛlap, ñap is metrical (but archaic, acc. to
Schulze 1892: 165f.). Like in Greek (s.v. ►ažµa), the word was replaced in Latin and
Sanskrit (sanguis, rudhirám; cf. under ►έpulpóc), though Lat. san-guis probably
contains the oblique stem *h,sh₂-en- as its first element (cf. De Vaan 2008).
*ap 2 [n.] 'spring' (Il.; cf Schwyzer: 251). <IE *ues-r- ‘spring'➤
•VAR Gen. čapoç, also ñpos, dat. ñpi (Att., also Ion. and Alc.), with new nom. ñp
(Alcm.).
•COMP As a first member in έapí-dpεлtos ‘plucked in spring' (Pi.), έapo-tpeqńs
(Mosch.), etc.
•DER έapɩvós (also εi-, ǹ- like εapos through metrical lengthening), poet. also ǹpivós
'belonging to the spring' (Il.); likewise έápτɛpos (Nic. Th. 380, with contrasting
-Tεpoç, Schwyzer 1950: 183); έapídaç. tàç kavðapídas ‘beetles' (H.); on the semantics
Strömberg 1944: 13. Denominative verb έapíšw 'to bloom as in spring, etc.' (Pl.).
⚫ETYM Both the form yέap. čap (H.) and Homeric prosody (Chantraine 1942: 128)
point to older Féap, from PGr. *wéhar, an old r/n-stem: Av. loc. vaŋri < *vasr-i ‘in
spring', Arm. gar-un ‘spring', Lith. vasar-à ‘summer'; OCS, etc. vesn-a ‘spring', Skt.
vasan-tá- 'id.' (cf. heman-tá- 'winter'; see Xεqv). On the Celtic forms, see
Matasović 2008 s.v. *werr- / *wesn-. Beside IE *ues-r-, *ues-n-, we have Lat. vēr and
}
ON vár [n.] (o-stem). Porzig 1954a: 110f. suggests that Lat. and Gm. created *uēr-
after the word for ‘year', IE *iehr- (see ►pa). The formation of έapivóc is mirrored
in Lith. vasarinis ‘of the summer' and Lat. vernus (like hibernus, hornus).
Eapa [pl.]? Mg. unknown (IG 12(3), 450: a1 [Old Theraean]). <?>
•var Cf. έapóv· λovtñpa ǹ „póxovv ‘washing-tub or vessel for pouring ouť (H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. See Sommer 1905: 119, who connects the word to U vestikatu
'libato'.
έāvτoû [refl. pron.] himself (IA), 3rd sing. and plur. (but also referring to the first
and second persons). <GR>
•VAR Fem. -τñç; dat. -τŵ, -τñ, etc., Ion. έwvtoÛ (εwtoÛ), wútoũ, Att. also ãúτoû, etc.,
Hell. also εατoũ, átoũ, Cret. Fiavtov.
●DER Ɛautótŋs ‘being oneself (Procl.).
⚫ETYM A univerbation of the reflexive ►ε, εoĩ, etc. and aúτÓS, -τóv, etc.: čo avtoũ >
Ion. EwuτoŨ, Att. EauτoÛ, έoĩ avτ > Ion. Ewuτ, Att. Éаυτ, etc.; thus also
¿μiewvtov, σεwvtov, έµãvtov, σ(ε)āvτoÛ, etc. (Hom. ë aúτóv, čµ³ aúτóv, čo aútoÛ,
¿µoì avtŵ, etc.). Details are included in Schwyzer: 607 and 402 and Schwyzer 1950:
193ff. A remarkable parallel is found in Phrygian: OPhr. ven avtun, NPhr. oɛ avtaɩ.
¿áqŋ [v.aor.] Mg. uncertain (of åσnìç kai kópuç N 543, I 419). <IE? * seng wh_ 'sing'>
•ETYM The word was already unknown in antiquity: it was explained as ‘ñóðŋ' by
Tyrannion (ap. sch. A); Aristarchus connected it with лo̟µa; acc. to H. = ¿кáµôеŋ,
¿ßλáßŋ. All of these are just speculations. Modern scholars proposed different
explanations: that the word is connected to ►iáлτw (Meister 1921: 110²), to Go. sigqan
‘to sink', etc. (Schmidt 1895: 62ff.). Meier-Brügger MSS 59 (1989): 91-96 explains the
forms from the root *sengh in µ 1 'song'. So it meant 'they sang', said of a
shield and helmet. In a similar vein, ►ǎâлtoç would mean 'unsingbar'. None of
these proposals is very convincing.
¿áw [v.] ‘to let (go), allow, leave alone' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Ipf. ɛiwv, aor. ¿ãσαɩ (ind. ɛïασα), fut. έáσw (originally έáo(σ)ai, resp. ¿ắo(0)w?,
see below); younger perf., etc. εïãкα, ɛťaµai, ɛiáðŋv (D., Isoc.).
•COMP Rarelу лαρ-, ɛiσɛάw.
•DER None.
...
⚫ETYM The glosses ẞaσov• *aσov. Σvpaкóσioι (H., EM; Σvpαкoúσtoi <kai Aákwveç>
Latte) and εűα. a (H.) assure a digamma for έáw; the diphthongal augment
points to an initial consonant (so probably σ-), but the absence of aspiration is
unexplained (cf. Lejeune 1972: 934). We have to assume a disyllabic root *(σ)εFă-,
like έλǎ-, τελǎ-, etc., within the aorist *(σ)εƑắσα > εắσal, or έắσσal with analogical
-σo- (like λáo(o) at, etc., after Tελéσ-(σ)al, etc.), fut. έắσ(σ)w, forms that can be
found in Hom. (εắσovσɩv § 233, εïǎσεv K 299 as v.l.); thus, one could read έáσσa for
έãσai (▲ 42), etc., like έáσσw (v. 1.) in Parm. 8, 7. Additionally, έáσo̟µɛv, čaσov in
Hdt. are understandable (cf. ŋoov. έaσov H.). The length in έãσal, etc. would then
be from the denominatives in -áw. Therefore, the unique form εă (E 256) would be
the 3sg. of an athematic Aeolic eǎ-u. Previously, έáw was traced to IE *seuH-, with
Q

=== page 208 ===

368
Booinkovta
Skt. savi- in savi-tár- 'impeller, etc.', pres. suváti ‘impel', but the semantics do not
really fit. Now Nussbaum 1998 reconstructs a root *hueh₂- and connects the word
with Lat. vānus 'devoid', Gr. ɛviç 'bereft' (although the latter seems phonetically
difficult). He explains forms with initial ɛia- as renditions of older *EA-, with
metrically long E; cf. 0ɛíoμɛv for OEOMEN, from older *0nouεv (> Att. 0źwμεv). Cf.
on ► εiaμεvη.
εẞdoμŃкovτα [num.] 'seventy' (Hdt.). <IE *septm-dkmt- 'seventy'>
•VAR Dor. (Delphi, Tab. Heracl. IVª) έßdɛµ-.
COMP As a first member e.g. in éẞбоμηкоvτ-áрoupos (pap.), etc.
•Der έßdoµnkootóç ‘the seventieth' (Hp.), ¿ßdoµnkovtákıç seventy times' (LXX).
⚫ETYM From *εẞdµýкovτα, in turn from IE *sebdm-dkmt-, where the vocalic -m-
followed by the (glottalic element of the) preglottalized -d- yielded -μn-, just like
-mh. See Kortlandt MSS 42 (1983): 97-104. See further under ►έßdoµoç. Cf.
► έvεvýкovτα and ► έkatóv.
¤ßdoµos [num.] ‘the seventh' (Il.). <IE *s(e)ptm-os ‘seventh’▷
•VAR OCor., Delph. έßdέµã(v).
•Comp έßdoµ-ãyέτηs 'leader of the seven'; εẞdoμα-yεvns 'born on the seventh day',
epithet of Apollo (Plu. 2, 717d).
•DER έßdoμaïoç (εßбεμ- Epid.) 'appearing on the seventh day, seventh-day fever'
(Hp., etc.), -aiov [n.] name of a festival for Apollo (Chios, Milete); εẞdóμεoç
'honoured on the seventh day' (of Apollo, IG 2, 1653), εßdoµεúομa 'to receive a
name on the seventh day' (Lys.). ¿ßdóµατoç (Il.) after déкaτoç, έßdɛµátai [dat.f.]
(Argos; Herzog Phil. 71 (1912): 6). ¿ßdoµác [f.] ‘number of seven (days, etc.)' (Sol.,
Hp.) with έßбoчadiкóç ‘belonging to the week' and έßdoµá¼w ‘to keep the sabbath',
εßdoµáкıç ‘seven times' (Call.).
•ETYM The ordinal εßdoµoç, εßбεμoç is from earlier *sebdmos with a Greek prop-
vowel; the cluster -bd- arose by assimilation from *s(e)ptmos to *septm 'seven'. The
same form is reflected in OCS sedmo 'seventh'. With influence of the cardinal, we
have Lat. septimus, Skt. saptamá-, and Hitt. šiptamija- (a drink, < *septm-io-; see
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.); with loss of the *t and pm > km OLith. sēkmas. Cf. ►έntá.
ẞEvoc [f.] 'ebony (tree)' (Hdt.). <LW Eg.>
•VAR Also msc.; rarely also έẞévη [f.].
•COMP &ẞεvó-TPIXov = åðíavτov (Ps.-Dsc.; cf. Strömberg 1940: 38, 158).
•DER Eẞévivos 'of ebony' (Str.), èẞevīτç ‘kind of germander, лóλov τò opɛivóv❜ (Ps.-
Dsc.; see Redard 1949: 71).
•ETYM From Eg. hbnj ‘ebony’, ultimately perhaps Nubian (Spiegelberg KZ 41 (1907):
131); thence, Hebr. hobnim (Lewy 1895: 35f.). From εẞevos comes Arab. 'abnūs and
Lat. ebenus, whence OHG ebenus, MoE ebon(y).
¿ßpatáynoev [v.] · ¿yóqŋσev ‘produced a sound (H.). <?►
•ETYM Cannot be separated from þáðayos. τápaxos wópos (H.), but further
details are unclear.
...
¿yyús
369
¤ßpos [m.] - tpάyos þátŋs. kai rotɑµòs ①páêòç ‘a he-goat that treads; a river of
Thrace' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM No etymology. Cf. Wahrmann Glotta 19 (1931): 186f.
¿yyapɛúw •var Also -έw, -ía. →äyyapos.
έyyapoūvτɛç [v.] mg. uncertain (Inscr. Olymp. 335). <?>
ETYM Acc. to Dittenberger
=
=
έndŋµoûvteç, as a denominative of *yyapos
yyɛoç; thus, Schwyzer: 482. Bechtel Gött. Nachr. 1920: 247f. prefers to identify
-yapos with Ion. (Att.) yɛŋpós ‘earthly'. DELG holds that the meaning was
'transporting' and supposes it could be from the verb έyyapɛúw, as do Ernaut-
Hatzfeld REA 14 (1912): 279-82.
#yypavlıç, -ews [f.] kind of anchovy (Ael., Opp.), also called yкpaσíxoλoç. <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Strömberg 1943: 68 starts from a verb *¿y-ypavλíšɛɩv, beside
ypuλí av grumble'; thus, "yypaulic would mean "the grumbling one" (several
examples of such fish names are found in Strömberg 1943: 63ff.). However, the
variation av v is not convincing. The MoGr. name is yaupoç; see Hatzidakis Glotta
2 (1910): 298.
Éyyva入iČw #yÚa入ov.
¿yyún [f.] 'surety, guarantee; nuptial contract' (Od.). ◄IE? *g(") ou- ‘hand▷
●COMP In úл-éууvos ‘under surety, responsible' (A., Hdt.), лpo-éууvos, épŵyyvos
‘guarantee' (Heraclea, etc.) with лpo-εууváοµαι, éрwууvεúш, éрoεyyúŋσɩ and in
qpɛp-éyyvos giving surety, guaranteeing' (Hdt.), ex-éyyvos giving surety, reliable'
(S.).
•DER έyyváw, -άoμal give surety, be surety, guarantee marriage, get engaged' (Od.),
also dɩ-, ¿-ɛyyváw, etc., with έyyúnois (di-, ¿§- ~) ‘surety, engagement, etc.' (D., Is.),
¿yyúŋµa (dɩ- ~) ‘id.' (pap.), ¿yyvntés ‘surety' (IA; cf. Fraenkel 1910: 183 and 226f.),
fem. ¿yyvńτpia (pap.); ¿yyʊŋtý ‘engaged' (Att.); έyyvŋtikós ‘ptng. to the surety'
(Heph. Astr.); deverbal čyyvos [m.] ‘guarantor' (Thgn., inscr.), as an adjective
‘guaranteed' (Them.; see below). Beside έyyváw also έyyvɛúw (Delph.).
⚫ETYM It is usually assumed that &yyúŋ and έyyváw contain the preposition έv and a
lost word for 'hand', which is preserved in YAv. gauua- 'hand', as well as in úлó-
yu(t)os 'imminent, sudden', prop. 'under the hands, at hand?' (IA). The YAv. form is
ambiguous, however, as it can also continue *gabha- and be related to Skt. gábhasti-
‘hand, forearm'. This makes the etymology doubtful. Further, Greek has ▶yúaλov,
► yúng, ▸ yuĩa, and from other languages, we may adduce Lith. gáuti ‘get, obtain'. On
the meaning of ¿yyúŋ, έyyvos, ¿yyuŋtηs, cf. Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 89f. and
Gernet 1937: 395. See also ►έyyÚS.
Eyyús [adv.] 'near', both spacial and temporal (Il.). <?>
•VAR Compar. and superl. ¿yyvtépw, -tátw (-útepov, -útata), also čyyɩota, ˝yyɩov
(see Seiler 1950: 107ff.); late adjective έууúτεpоç, -τατоç (LXX).
•DER Eyyú 'nearby' (Il.), ¿yyúεv 'from nearby' (Il.); ¿yyúτns [f.] ‘proximity' (A.
D.); yуúdiov. žyууɩоν, лλησíоν, лроσñкоу 'nearer, near, at hand (H.) after the

=== page 209 ===

370
έyɛipw
diminutives in -úðɩov; denominative ¿yyí\w [v.] ‘come near', trans. ‘bring closer'
(Arist., Hell.).
•ETYM Adverb in -s like εúúç, äλis, etc. (Schwyzer: 620). In view of Lat. comminus,
scholars often see in έyyús an old word for 'hand' (in accordance with Bezzenberger
BB 4 (1880): 321¹³), also attested in ¿yyúŋ, -άw. The first syllable seems to be the
preposition (adverb) év, but further interpretation is uncertain. Pisani RILomb. 73:2
(1939-40): 47 connected the word with Baívw as "colui che va innanzi". This may
chiefly be correct, but the second element is rather the neuter (= absolutive) of the
root *geu- 'to go', “en allant vers, au milieu”; cf. De Lamberterie 1990: 326-37, who
compares ►με(σ)onyú(c).
żyɛipw [v.] 'to awaken, rouse, raise'. <IE *h,ger- 'awake'>
•VAR Aor. έyɛīpaɩ, fut. έyɛpw, late perf. έynyɛpкα; med. έyɛípoμat, aor. ¿ypéσat 'rise'
with new present уpoµaι, ½уpw (E.), perf. ¿ypηyopa ‘I am awake' with epic forms
ipv. έypηyopеε, inf. -Oat, 3pl.ind. -Оãσɩ, ptc. -opówv (see Chantraine 1942: 429 and
359; Schwyzer: 8008 and 5404); new pres. уpηyopέw (Hellenistic; Schwyzer: 768), also
Єypηyopέw (Debrunner IF 47 (1929): 356).
⚫COMP Often with prefix: ȧv-, di-, εε-, π-, etc. As a first member in έypɛ-кúdoчoç
(Hes.), ¿уpε-µáõāç (S.), etc.; cf. ¿yɛpσɩ- below.
•DER EYɛpσiç 'awakening' (IA) with εуépσчoç (üлvos Theoc. 24, 7; Arbenz 1933: 102),
often with prefix ȧv-, di-, εε-, εл-εуεpσɩç; also as a first member in late compounds
like έyɛpoɩ-µáxās (AP); ¿yɛptǹpiov ‘awakening' (Ael.); ¿§-ɛyέptŋs ‘who rises' (pap.);
(di-, έn-)¿yεptikós ‘raising' (Pl.); ȧv-ɛyέpµwv ‘vigilant (AP); ¿yɛpτí [adv.] ‘id.'
(Heraclit.). From the perfect: έypńyopσɩ ‘watch' (Hp., Arist.), ¿ypŋyopikós
'watching' (Arist.), έуpηуopóτw [adv.] ‘id.' (Plu., Luc.), ¿ypnyopos ‘id.' (Adam.),
εуpηyopτí [adv.] ‘awake' (K 182). Enlarged present έypnσow 'to be awake' (лávvvxo
έуpησσovτεs A 551) after the verbs in -σσw likе лτησσш, кνóσσw; sеe Chantraine
1942: 335 (doubtful Schwyzer: 648³).
•ETYM The perf. έypηyopa is an old formation, parallel to Skt. jāgāra, YAv.jayāra 'is
awake', from *hg(r)e-h.gor- (perhaps -yp- from the aorist έypéσat?). Uncertain is
Lat. expergīscor. The word has also been connected with Alb. ngre ‘rise'. See LIV² s.v.
*hger-'erwachen'.
€уkap [?] = qƉɛip ‘louse' (Eust. 757, 27). ◄GR?►
•ETYM Uncertain. From the word for 'head'?
€укapoç [m.] 'brains' (AP, Lyc.). <GR>
•ETYM Scholarly hypostasis from έv and ►кápā, кápη 'head', after έykέqalos :
kɛqaλń. Cf. ►ïyкpoç.
¿уkápoɩos →έлkápolos.
Єykás [adv.] 'deep inside' (Hp., Gal.). <?>
⚫VAR Also yкaç.
ETYM Related to yкaτα; formation like ȧyкáç, ενтʊлάç, etc. (Schwyzer: 631).
DELG considers an analysis in èv- and -кaç, as in ë-kaç, àva-káç.
èykpic, tidog
371
šyкaτa [n.pl.] ‘intestines' (II.). <GR?>
•VAR Dat.pl. yкãσɩ (A 438); as a back-formation later sing. yкarov (LXX, Luc.).
●DER έykatóɛiç ‘containing intestines' (Nic.), ¿yкaτwdŋns ‘like intestines' (sch.).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. Leumann 1950: 158¹ derives it from *укατos 'interior', which
contains ev- just as εσxατo contains εε-; *укaσɩ would then be an innovation based
on yoúvaσɩ, etc. Lacon. укUτov. укατov (H.) is folk-etymological, based on кÚTOC
'skin, trunk, body'.
Eyкíaqov [?] • oúpá 'tail', also yкıλλov. oúpáv (H.). <?►
•ETYM The word has been compared with кiλλós 'grey' (кílλoç 'donkey, i.e. the
grey one'), or кí\\\<o>poç· σεσлuуíç 'wagtail' (H.). On poc, see Chantraine
1933:264.
•
¿укλíç [f.] · ŋ кαукελλwτǹ Oúpа ‘entrance furnished with a railing', (EM 518, 22).
<GR➤
•ETYM Related to yкλívw, with the same formation as in dikλíç; see ▸ dikλídɛç. Cf.
also Strömberg 1944: 15.
έукoaкíσaι [?] · έyxéau λáеpa 'pour in secretly' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Grošelj Živa Ant. 4 (1954): 169 compares кoía. кλéyŋua (H.).
żykowτai [f.pl.] scil. Sapкvaí, 'deposited money' (Gortyn).
ETYM Derived from *έyкotów, -óoμat, which is probably a denominative from
*укotos, which belongs to кolov. évέxupov ‘pledge' (H.). See there for further
etymology.
έykovéw [V.] 'to hurry, be quick and active in service' (II.). <IE *ken- 'be active'>
•DIAL Perhaps here Myc. ka-si-ko-no.
•DER έykovηtí [adv.] 'quickly' (Pi.), έyкovíç 'servant' (Suid.). Beside έykovéw stands
Stakovéw (with Stáкovoç, s.v.); further perhaps àукovéw 'hurry' in Ar. Lys. 1311;
thence ȧyкóvous. Siakóvovs, doúλous servants, slaves' (H.). The simplex only in H.
kóvel oneûde, tpéɣɛ ‘hasten, run [ipv.]' and кovɛɛ̃v• ¿ñɛiyɛoðaɩ, ¿vepyɛɩv ‘to hurry
oneself, be in action' with кovηtaí. Oɛpárovtεs ‘attendants'. Note кovapóv.
Spaστηpiov and кovαрwτɛрov. Spаστкбτεроν 'more efficient' (H.). Uncertain is ȧ-
kovití (Olympia, Th.); cf. on кóvIÇ.
⚫ETYM Iterative-intensive verb, mostly connected with Lat. cōnor, cōnārī 'exert
onself, try' (see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). Tremblay Sprache 38 (1998): 14-30, connects
these words with the root *ken- 'to rise', assuming a lengthened grade adjective for
Latin. Other comparanda come from Celtic, e.g. MW digoni 'to make', W dichon,
digon 'can' (Pok. 564).
¿ykpaoixoloç [m.] ‘kind of anchovy' (Arist.). <GR➤
•ETYM So called because the intestines are attached to the head? See Thompson 1947
S.V.
żyкpíç, -ídos [f.] 'cake made of oil and honey' (Stesich., com.). <?>
•COMP έукpιdo-лwλns seller of ε.' (com.).

=== page 210 ===

372
¿YKUTÍ
ETYM A back-formation from εукεрávνчμ, έукɛpáσα 'mix in' is formally
impossible. Neither is it connected to έyкpívɛɩv (Strömberg 1944: 15).
ЄYKUTÍ [adv.] 'to the skin' (Archil., Call.). A compound of έv and кúτоç, formed after
other adverbs in -(T)í-(c).
•VAR έykutis (Hdn.). → kútoç.
¿ypnoow→¿yɛipw.
¤yxɛλvç, -voç [f.] ‘eel' (II.). ◄PG(0)►
•VAR Att. plur. -ɛs (to which nom.sg. -λs [Arist.]?).
•COMP έYXελvo-τрópos 'nourishing eels' (Arist.), yxελv-wлóç 'with eyes like eels'
(Luc.).
●DER Diminutive yελúdov (middle com.), YXελɛwv, -vwv ‘eel-trap' (Arist.),
έyxéλɛɩoç ‘of an eel', mostly substantivized -ɛɩα [n.pl.], scil. kpéa, teµáõŋ, etc. (com.).
•ETYM Gr. šyxɛλus recalls other words for ‘eel', like Lat. anguilla, Lith. ungurỹs, etc.,
but no IE pre-form can be reconstructed. Acc. to an old interpretation, yxελus is a
cross between exɩs and a word like Lat. anguis (whence anguilla) ‘snake'. Katz 1998
assumes taboo transformations. Note further Lesb. ïµßŋpiç ëуxɛλvç. Mηеvμvañoɩ H.,
beside which there is λéßηpis 'skin of a snake'. The words are no doubt non-IE. Cf.
further Pok. 43ff. and Thompson 1947 s.v., as well as Strömberg 1943: 10ff.
Eyxɛσíμwpoc [adj.] usually understood as 'famous for his spear' (Il.). <IE *meh,-ro-
'great'>
•DER Cf. ió-μwpoc, epithet of the Apуɛчo (A 242, E 479). Imitation in úλaкó-μwρoç,
of кÚVEÇ (29, π 4; cf Porzig 1942: 239); see also σváµшpoç.
•ETYM The second member is usually connected with Celt., Gm. and Slav. PNs like
Gaul. Nerto-mārus, OHG Volk-mār, Slav. Vladi-měr, from IE *-moh,-ro-, *-meh,-
ro-. Further one compares a denominative Gm. verb for 'proclaim', Go. merjan, etc.
with waila-mereis [adj.] ‘ɛüqŋµos', OHG māri ‘famous', etc., and a Celt. adjective for
'great', e.g. OIr. már. The ō-vocalism in Greek and Celt. agrees with the type ǎ-oppwv
oppy (Schwyzer: 355). The form of the first member may be metrically conditioned
(cf. ¿уxεσлαλoç s.v. ►yxoc). Ruijgh 1957: 93 wonders whether this compound could
contain μwpós 'foolish'. Cf. Leumann 1950: 37 and 272¹8.
.
yxídlov [?] yylov 'nearer'; ¿yxódia. à0póa 'crowded together' (H.). <?>
ETYM The former word could be a cross of eyyúç and ȧyxídios, the latter that of
Єyyús and ȧyxoŨ, -óɩ, acc. to Baunack Phil. 70 (1911): 379f., but this does not explain
much. Latte considers these forms to be mistakes.
yxos [n.] ‘spear, lance' (II.), also ‘weapon' in general (Pi., S.); on the mg. Schwyzer
Glotta 12 (1923): 11, Trümpy 1950: 52ff. <PG?(0) ►
•COMP As a first member in έyxéσ-лαλos 'spear drilling' (Hom.), -opópos 'carrying a
spear' (Pi.); ►¿yxɛσíµwpoç; after it έyxɛσí-µapyoç. ɛ̃yxɛɩ µalvóµɛvos ‘raging with a
spear' (H., EM), ¿yxεoí-xεipes [pl.] 'weaponed with a spear' (Orph. Fr. 285, 18).
*SεOλov
373
•DER Also εyxεiŋ (Hom.), probably formed after εεyxεiŋ: εyxos, òveidein :
Övεidos, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 86f.). Different Tovar Emerita 11 (1943): 431ff. Unclear
is 'Eyxú. ǹ Σɛuéλŋ oűτwę έкaλɛīto.
•ETYM No etymology. See Schwyzer Glotta 12 (1923): 10ff. (to áкaxµέvos), as well as
Tovar Emerita 11 (1943): 431ff. The word is possibly Pre-Greek.
żyw [pers. pron.] 'T'. <IE *h,eg- + -e/oH, -h,-om 'T'>
i
•VAR Lesb. epic Dor. also έyúv, Lacon. Tarent. έywvn, Boeot. iw(v), iwvɛɩ (i-?).
⚫ETYM Beside ¿yú = Lat. ego, we find Venet. exo (length of the -o uncertain), Lat. ego
with secondarily short final vowel, as in the Gm. forms, e.g. ON ek (but see below);
neither is there vocalic auslaut in the Balt., Armen. and Hitt. forms: OLith. eš, Arm.
es, Hitt. uk (though in Armenian, -ỗ may have been lost). Indo-Iranian and Slavic
have forms in IE *-h,-om, e.g. Skt. ahám (aspiration from *-ģ- + -H-), OP adam, OCS
azz (lengthening by Winter's Law); enclitic ON -(i)ka (like proclitic ek, ik?), perhaps
from IE *h,egom. Were the variants *h,eģō, *h,egh,om reshaped after the 1sg. verbal
endings -ō (thematic), -om (secondary), or is -om a particle which is frequent in Old
Indic (cf. tavám 'thou', etc.)? Gr. έywv seems to be a compromise between -ō and
-om (or is it shaped after yvwv, **Swv, etc.?); in έywv-ŋ (or έyw-vη? Cf. τúvn), -vη is
a deictic element; cf. έyw-yɛ. See ► ¿µέ.
Édavós [adj.] of λatov E 172 (λaíų / àµßpoσíų εdavõ). <?►
⚫ETYM De Lamberterie 1999 adduces a second attestation in Nic. Alexiph. 162, 181,
where έdavós qualifies two kinds of wine, and the gloss έdavós. ɛldos àµлélov,
perhaps to be corrected to έdavós. The meaning 'sweet' is quite possible for these
contexts. De Lamberterie then proposes a reconstruction *sueh₂d-no- with IE loss of
laryngeal before voiced (= glottalic) stop plus resonant (cf. Lubotsky's Law in Indo-
Iranian). A parallel case in Greek would be кɛSvós < *keh₂d-no-.
daqos [n.] 'ground, bottom' (ε 249; see Richel 1936: 212ff.), also 'text' (Gal.) as
opposed to the commentary. <?>
•COMP Sαчo-лotέw 'equalize the ground' (J.).
•DER Late: dápiov 'text' (Arist.); daqiкós belonging to the ground' (pap.),
εdaquaños 'id.' (sch., Tz.), daqiτηs (Tz.). Denominative verbs: daqiw 'to equalize,
give a foundation' (Arist., Hell.); dapów in ǹdás̟wτal. кatýkɩσται 'has been
established' (H.).
•ETYM For the nouns in -(a)pos, see Chantraine 1933: 262ff. and Schwyzer: 495. Is the
word to be connected to εdos (see ►žšoµai)?
édéατpoç [m.] 'seneschal at the Persian court, steward'. <?>
•VAR Also accented -τpóç?
•COMP ȧpx-εdéaτpos ‘upper seneschal at the Ptolemeian court' (Hell.)
⚫ETYM Reformation of ¿λέaτpoç (see ►ɛóv) after εdw. See Güntert 1914: 155 and
Kuiper Glotta 21 (1933): 272ff.
Sεov [n.] 'ground, bottom, foundation' (Antim.; probably also A. Ag. 776 instead
of σ0λá; or čσ0λa, from *ε8-0λa?). <GR➤
•DER Also Séλov ‘id.' (Call.).

=== page 211 ===

374
"Sva
ETYM From the verb for 'sit' (see oμai), with a suffix -ɛ0λo- (Schwyzer: 533,
Chantraine 1933: 375) and breath dissimilation.
¤dva [n.pl.] ‘dowry' (Il.; on the mg. Köstler Wien. Ak. Anz. 81 (1944): 6ff., Theiler Mus.
Helv. 7 (1950): 114). <IE *hued- ‘dowry'.>
•VAR Hom. also ɛdva (see below), rarely sing. εdvov (Pi., Call.).
●COMP ȧváɛdvoç ‘without ?.' (Il.; on the prefix Schwyzer: 432, Chantraine 1942: 182).
⚫DER Also ǎεdvov. ǎчερvov η лоλúpɛpvov 'without dowry; richly dowered' H.; έdvo-
popέw 'bring dowry' (Eust.). Old denominative έdvóoμαι (εεdv-), -ów 'to give dowry
to one's daughter' (ẞ 53) with έɛdvwτns 'bride's father' (N 382). Several glosses in H.:
ĖÔVIOS XLTV. ÖV TPTOV ń víun tạ voupíc SíÔov ‘first thing the bride gives to
the bridegroom'; ¿dváç. ǹ ảïò tŵv ëdvwv έdŋtús 'food from the wedding-gifts',
εSvεúεɩv. Évεxupáčεv 'to take a pledge from❜.
•ETYMέdva, dvov, from IE *hued-no- (on the aspiration, see Schwyzer: 227), can be
compared with a Slav. and WGm. word for 'bride-price', e.g. ORu. věno < *h,ued-no-
(lengthening due to Winter's Law); OE weotuma, OHG widomo m., from PGm.
*wet-man-, IE *hued-mon- (the Gr.-Slav. suffix -no- may reflect -mno-,
thematization of -mon-). This old word for 'bride-price' is often derived from a verb
meaning 'to take home, to marry (of the man)', seen in Lith. vedù, Ru. vedú (from
*ued"- because of the short e), and OIr. fedid, and to which Skt. vadhú- 'bride, young
woman, daughter-in-law' also belongs. However, this is impossible because of the
*dh. It is clear that εdv- is the younger and εdv- the older form. The 'prothesis'
(from *h) must be old, while the -α- in ȧváɛdvoç is somehow secondary (vowel
assimilation is impossible).
€dos →μal.
¤dpā [f.] ‘seat, abode (of the gods), temple' (Il.). <GR➤
•COMP Many compounds: кaßέdpa 'seat, chair' (Hp.); also ¿qέdpa, Ion. ¿ñédpη
‘siege' (¿q-έoμat), ¿védpa ‘ambush, postponement (¿v-éšoµai, ¿v-iávw), see Risch
IF 59 (1949): 45f.; but ¿‹-édpa ‘seat outside the house' (E., Hell.). Bahuvrīhi with
adverbial first member co-εdpos 'who sits by the side, reserve' (Pi.); thus лáp-εdpoç
‘assistance' (лap-ét̃oµai), év-ɛdpos ‘inhabitant', oúv-ɛdpos ‘id.'; -ɛdpoç ‘far from
his residence' (S.); лоλú-εdpoç 'with many seats' (Plu.).
●DER From ¤dpa: έdpaños ‘sedentary, fixed, steady' (IA) with έdpaιóτns and έdpałów,
¿dpaiwµa, -woic; έdpiкóç ‘belonging to the anus' (medic.), έdpítŋs ‘fugitive' (Suid.,
EM); épwtokaðɛdpíτηs 'president' (Herm.). Denominative verbs: εdp-tάoμai to sit
down' (Hom.), -táw 'id.' (Theoc.); see Schwyzer: 732, Chantraine 1942: 359; έdpá¶w
'to set, fix' (Hell. and late) with έSpaσµóç, édρaστiкóç, ȧv-édpaστoç; dpaσµa = dpa
(E.), after στéуaoua (see Chantraine 1933: 177). But έo-, έv-, лар-, ovv-εdpɛúw from
*q-εSpoç. In H.: ¿dpǹɛσσa· ßɛßaía 'steady', after τελnεσσа; see Schwyzer: 527, έdpíaç
άεì лvéшv 'always blowing', after wind names in -íaç; Spiα- ovvédpia, εdpíç. εdpałoç.
After words in -ăvov arose εdpăvov = εdpa (Hes.); εdpavŵç = στεpɛŵç (Eust.).
⚫ETYM Derivative in -pā of oμai (*sed-reh₂-); cf. Xopa. No exact parallel
formations.
Edw [v.] 'to eat' (Il.). <IE *hed- ‘eat'>
Ě入&oual
375
•VAR Athem. inf. dµɛvai (Hom.), fut. doµai (Il.), perf.ptc.act. ¿dŋdús (P 542), med.
έdǹdoτaι (X 56; after лéлoταɩ), with act. ¿dńdoka (Att.); aor. pass. ǹdéσðŋv, perf.
med. ¿½dε(σ)µai (Att.); new pres. žσ0w (11.), έσðíw (Od.).
•COMP With prefix кατ-έdw, -ɛσðíw (-έow), -έdoμαι 'to eat up' (Il.), ȧл-ɛσðíw,
-εdoμαι ‘id.' (Att.).
•DER ɛidap < **8-Fap 'food' (Il.; on εdap. ẞpwμа H. see below). εdwon 'food, meal'
(Il.), dúdчuoç edible' (Hdt.; see Arbenz 1933: 50f.), èdwdóç 'usable as food' (Hp.).
Ednτúc [f.] (only gen. -τvoc) 'food' (Hom.); -n- unclear, but cf. Bonτúç, àуopητúc; see
Porzig 1942: 183f., Benveniste 1948: 67. dɛσµa ‘food' (Att.) with έdeoµátiov (Procl.);
dεστ 'eater' (Hdt.). εddwv. payédaiva 'cancer' (H.), cf. dŋdwç.
ETYM The old athematic present, seen in the inf. duɛvat, in the fut. = subj. d-o-μai,
and perhaps also in the ipv. σ (p 478?; see Chantraine 1942: 292), is found in
several languages: Hitt. edmi [1sg.] ‘eat', Skt. ádmi ‘id.', 3sg. átti, Lat. ēst, Lith. ësti,
OCS jasto 'to eat'; all of these are from IE *ed-mi, -ti, with lengthening in BSl. acc. to
Winter's Law. On younger thematic forms (cf. Go. itan, 3sg.pres. it-ib), see Chantr.
1.c. Acc. to Schwyzer: 7136, the secondary presents σow and σíw developed from
the ipv. čσ0ɩ (= Skt. addhí), but Hamp Glotta 59 (1981): 155f., simply derives εow
from 8-0. The other forms are Greek innovations: Séσ0ŋv, έdηdε(σ)μαι (after
έτεléσðŋy); thence εdεσµa, ¿dεστýs (cf. wµnotńs), έdeστós. As a suppletive aorist,
Greek used payɛiv. The r/n-stem ɛldap < *ëdƑap, plur. εïdaτα can be compared with
Skt.vy-advar-á- m. 'rodent' and agrādvan- 'eating first' (agra-ad-van-). See also
ǎpiστov and dɛinvηotos (s.v. ► dεлvov). Further, ►ódoúc (ódwv), ►ódúvŋ, and
►wdíç are traditionally connected with "dw, which is incorrect.
έdwλia [n.pl.] ‘seat (especially of rowers in a ship); thwart, habitať (Hdt.). <IE *sed-ōl
'seat'>
•VAR Rare sing. -tov.
⚫DER Backformation Edwλa 'thwarts' (Lyc.). Reshaped after the nouns in -wλn is
Edwλń (Naucratis). Denominative έdwiάw [v.] 'to provide seats' (Delos IIIª,
Lycurg.). Also έdwlós. λóxos Aakedaiµovíwv oűtwę έкαλɛt̃τo ‘name of the Spartan
camp' (H.).
⚫ETYM An l-derivative from the verb 'sit' (see ►εoμal) is known in several languages:
Lat. sella (<*sed-leh2-) 'chair' = ελλa кabédpa. Aάкwvɛç H.; Gaul. caneco-sedlon
(unknown first member); Go. sitls, OHG sezzal ‘seat' (PGm. *set-la-); cf. also Arm.
ett 'place, position' (the Slavic word, e.g. ORu. sedov-lo, Ru. sedló 'saddle', is a
borrowing from Germanic; cf. Derksen 2008: 443). The basis is an ablauting 1-stem.
*sed-ōl, oblique *sed-l- (Schwyzer: 483), of which Greek has preserved both ablaut
grades.
έλdoµaɩ [v.] ‘to desire, want, long for' (Il.). <IE *h,ueld- ‘wish, desire'>
•VAR Only present stem.
•COMP Compound ¿ëɩ-éλdoµai (A. R. 4, 783).
•DER ¿έλSwp [n.] (only nom.acc.) 'desire, wish' (Il.; λdwp Hdn., H.), also ¿éλdw [f.]
(Ibyc. 18; if correct).

=== page 212 ===

376
εoμai
⚫ETYM From έ(F)ελdouaι (Chantraine 1942: 133 and 182). No cognates outside Greek.
Homer has λ8- only three times (E 481, 122, 16); these may have undergone
influence by ελлoμα. The form with 'prothesis' is the original one, as is proven by
¿ÉλSwp; see Beekes 1969: 63f.
oμa [v.] 'to sit (down)' (Il.). <IE *sed- 'sit down'>
•VAR With terminative prefix (see Brunel 1939: 83ff., 257ff.) кað-ét̃oµaι (II.) 'to sit
(down)'. Fut. кaðεdoñµαι (Att.), later кaðɛσðýσoµαι (LXX), кαеεdýσoµai (D. L.);
aor. кαеɛσеñvαι (Paus.); other presents (w, i\ávw (Schwyzer 700) 'to make sit, set',
with ïŋoa, ïnka (late), prefixed kα-íw (Il.), Ion. кατ-í¶w, кαÐ-i¶ávw, Aeol. кaτ-
1σdávw ‘to put down, sit down', med. кað-íšoμαɩ ‘sit down', with fut. кałɩw (D.),
kaðíow (Hell.), katiow (Ion.), kałɩžŵ (Dor.), med. кałíšýσoµai (Att.), kaðɩoñµal
(LXX), кαеíσоμα (NT., Plu.); aor. кaеio(σ)αl, кaßio(σ)ασðaι (X., wrong for
кaćσ(σ)α in Hom., see below), кατíσαι (Hdt., for кaτέσαι), kačičaι (Dor.),
кañσαι (late.); late perf. кɛкáеɩкα, late aor. ptc. pass. KαÐÍČηēɛÍç.
Beside these present forms and the aorists, there is a sigmatic aorist εlσa 'I set', inf.
€σ(σ)αi, med. ɛiσáµŋv, ëσ(σ)ασðαι, кað-ɛïσα, кað-éσ(o) a (thus also in Hom. to be
read for кatio(o)αɩ; and also кatéσaɩ for katíσaɩ in Hdt.); also fut. kałέow (Eup.);
see Wackernagel 1916: 63ff.
•COMP Often with prefix: ȧva-, έv-, εл-, napa-, ovv-, etc.; these were also prefixed to
kaƉét̃oµai, kaƉí¶w, which were considered simplices (see Schwyzer: 656, Schwyzer
1950: 429).
•DER Edos [n.] 'seat' (see on ɛúpuódɛiα). The verbal nouns are largely independent
from the verb, see on ►εdpa, ►έdwλia, ►λλa; also dapos and dεlov; note
čoμa 'stalk, pedicle' (Arist.) < *sed-sm-. Probably unrelated is ►öloç. Cf. also
▶idpúw.
⚫ETYM Both ouμα and "w are IE formations; Coμal is a thematic yod-present *sed-
ie/o-, also found in Gm., e.g. ON sitia, OS sittian, OHG sizzen ‘to sit'; "(w derives
from reduplicated *si-sd-e/o- = Lat. sīdō, U sistu 'sidito', Skt. sidati. As the preterite
εóμny is often an aorist in Homer, it might derive from a reduplicated aorist *se-sd-;
it could even represent zero grade *he-sd- with an augment and secondary
aspiration. In Homer, a present is furnished only by εɛαɩ (к 378). Cf. Schwyzer: 6525
and 7163 and Chantraine 1942: 336. The aorist ɛloa from IE *h,e-sed-s-m (with
secondary aspiration) agrees with Skt. ní ... sát sat [subj.]. As a resultative perfect of
(kað-)ët̃oµial, (kað-)ï‹w, Greek uses ►žµaι, кáð-è̟µαι (see Schwyzer 1950: 258).
*ɛɩpaɩ [f.pl.] 'manes of a horse, crest' (II.), 'hair on the head', also sing. (h. Ven., Pi.);
'manes of a lion, bristle of a boar', etc. (Theoc.). <?►
•COMP Xpvσo-éεɩpoç 'with golden hair' (Archil.), ɛv-éðɛɩpa [f.] (Anacr.), etc.
•DER ¿ðɛƖpádɛç ‘hair of the beard' (л 176 v.l. for yɛvɛládɛç); ¿Ðεipά(w 'to have long
hair' (Theoc.); also Оɛípετα 'is covered (with scales)' (Orph. A. 929; see Schwyzer:
722f.).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. Taken with Owv 'pushing, tossing' vel sim. as "that which
waves", formally likе лíɛρα to лíwv. Frisk s.v. assumed a connection with the r-stem
found in pıç, and further connected öη oppovτic, wpa, póßoç, lóyos 'worry,
*Ovos
377
care, fear, consideration' (H.), comparing Lat. iuba, crista, crinis for the meaning.
This is very unlikely. Perhaps the word is rather from *ued"-, as per Chantraine 1942:
151 and DELG s.v.
20ɛipw [v.] Mg. unknown, mostly taken as 'to care for (see H.: εОεipη εлμελεíaç
ȧžiwon 'deem worthy of care'), or 'to work, cultivate'. <?>
•VAR only 347 Xaipei dé µv (sc. àλwýv) öotis έ0ɛípŋ.
•ETYM Etymology unknown. On εípετal is covered', see εɩpaɩ. See also
Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 203.
¿0źλw [v.] 'want, wish' (II.). <IE *h,gwhel- 'wish'>
•VAR With aphaeresis Oέλw (Aeol. Ion. Hell.; in Hom. only o 317), aor. (¿)ελñoaɩ,
fut. (έ)еɛλńow (Il.), perf. ǹеéλŋкa (X.), tɛ¤éλŋka (Hell.).
•COMP As a first member in ¿ɛλo-кaкέw 'to play the coward, resign to the enemy'
(Hdt.), 'to deliberately do wrong' (Ph.) with ¿ɛλoкáknois (Plb.), cf. µvnoi-kakéw,
etc.; ¿¤ɛλó-dovλos ‘voluntary slave' with -Sovλɛía (Pl.), ¿Ðέλ-ɛX¤pos (Crat.), etc. PNs
'EOελo-кρáτηs, etc. (inscr.).
•DER (ε)еελŋµós 'voluntary' (Hes.), (¿)Оɛλýµwv ‘id.' (Pl.) with εληµooúvať [pl.]
(PMag. Par.); Оέλŋµa 'will' (Antipho Soph.; Oελ½µm Theognost.) with Оɛλŋµáτiov;
-tikóç, Đéλnoiç, -ntýs, -ntós (LXX, etc.). From the ptc. stem ελovt-: ¿ελovtŃS
‘volunteer' (Hdt.) with -τýv [adv.] (Hdt.); rarely ελovτýs (Hdt. v.l.); Hom. has
¿Ðελovtñpas (ß 292); ¿ɛλoúσios voluntary' (X., after έkoúσtos). Adverbs ¿ðɛλovtí,
-tŋdóv ‘voluntarily' (Th.), ¿ɛλóvτws (sch.). Isolated: Oέλɛos à¤Éλɛos 'volens nolens'
(A. Supp. 862 [lyr.]), poetic formation after the adjectives in -ɛoç.
•ETYM (E) 0έλw is a primary thematic present indicative, which was extended by -11-
in all non-presentic forms. It corresponds to OCS želėją, -ěti ‘wish, desire', from
*high el-. The gloss paλíε· λε (H.) is unclear.
wh
¿Ðµý [ƒ.] · átµóç, kanvòs λentós, átµý 'vapor, fine smoke' (H.). <?>
ETYM No etymology.
¿¤µoí [m.] · лo\\oí, deoµoi, rλókaμo 'multitudes, bonds, locks (of hair)' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Lagercrantz KZ 35 (1899): 273 assumed *ued-mo-, related to Go. ga-widan
'Ou Evyvúval, to connect', etc.
Ovos [n.] ‘group, crowd, swarm' (of people, animals; Hom., Pi.), 'class, people' (Hdt.),
'foreign people' (Arist.), τà Оvη 'the pagans' (NT); on the mg. Chantraine BSL 43
(1946): 52ff. <?>
•COMP As a first member in ¿0v-ápxns 'governor, prince' (LXX, J., NT), as a second
member in oμo-εvns 'belonging to the same people' (Hdt.), ȧλλo-εvýs (Hell.), etc.
•DER έðvɩкóç ‘belonging to a (foreign) people, national, traditional, heathen' (Hell.),
cf. yɛvɩкóç to yέvos; ¿ðvíτηs belonging to the same people' (Eust., Suid.), ¿ðvʊtaí· oi
Éк TOŨ αÚτоÛ vous 'those who are from the same tribe' (H.); εеvчµáv mg.
unknown (Hdn. Gr.; after Saiτvμáv?); ¿еvηdóv [adv.] ‘per people' (LXX).
⚫ETYM Etymology unclear. If -vos is a suffix (cf. Epvoç, σµñvoç; see Chantraine 1933:
420 and Schwyzer: 512), we may compare foc and reconstruct *sued"-nos-, which
may be based on the reflexive *sue (see ►ε, έ). The word has also been connected

=== page 213 ===

378
€005
with ovɛños 'foreign, alien' (Democr., Pl.) as 'belonging to the Ovos' (Fraenkel
Gnomon 22 (1950): 238); but in this case, it can hardly be from *sue-. The word could
be of foreign origin.
From Ovos (pronounced "Ovos) comes Copt. hεvoç, Arm. het'anos, and also Go.
haipno heathen' (whence the other Gm. words).
0os [n.] 'custom, usage' (IA). <IE? *sued"- 'custom, character'>>
•DER Old only ¿lás [m., f.] ‘used (to)' (Hp., Th.); late чuos ‘usual' (Amorgos Iª, D.
S., etc.; after vóμo, Arbenz 1933: 99), ¿еɩкóç ‘usuaľ (Plu.), ¿ðýµwv ‘id.' (Musae.)
with έ0ŋuo-λoyέw 'to collect as usual' (AP), ¿Оηчoσúvη (H., Suid.). Denominative
verb iw (not with Schwyzer 716 from **Ow, see Owv and εiweα) with o
'usage' (Pl.), εσμós 'custom' (Arist.).
•ETYM If we assume *Ƒέoç, from IE *suedos (with dissimilation by Grassmann's
Law), the word can be compared with Skt. svadha- 'custom, nature'. Further, there is
the Gm. word for 'custom', Go. sidus [m.], etc., which goes back to IE *sedu-.
Additionally, Lat. sodālis ‘comrade' has been compared as a reflection of *sued¹- with
an Italic suffix -ālis. The basis of sued"-, sedh- may be the reflexive *s(u)e (see ► ½, ε);
the enlargement *d" may derive from the root *dheh,- 'to put, situate' (see τíеu).
tíðŋlu).
See ɛiwa, еoç; also ετηs and ►ěτapoç.
¤¤pɩs [adj.] · toµíaç, кpιóç ‘castrated ram' (H.). <?>
•VAR Cod. 0píç; cf. ïОpiç· σñáðwv, toµíaç, eúvoñxos ‘eunuch' (H.) and äpıç (Suid.),
öpıç (Zonar.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally, the word has been compared with Skt. vádhri- 'castrate'. Some
suppose an r/n-stem, seen in Skt. vádhar-, Av. vadar- [n.] the weapon of Indra, but
Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 498 rejects the connection with vádhri-.
Frisk assumed that the fluctuating vocalism was due to the non-literary character of
the word. He thinks &- is old, while ó- was created after woέw, and ȧ- by
association with privative ȧ-. Finally, i- is explained away by vowel harmony. This is
hardly credible. Given the variation of the initial vowel, it seems conceivable that the
word stems from Pre-Greek. Both ε/ 1 and a/ o are frequent in such words. See
"Owv.
¤¤wv [adj.] in xλoúvòv σũv äypɩov ….. öç kaкà пóλλ' épdeokev ë¤wv Oivños áλwýv (I
540), plur. σqηкɛσOIV ÉOIKÓTES ..., oüç лaïdes épidµαívovσv ovτεs (II 260). <?►
ETYM Acc. to sources from antiquity, it means ẞλáлτwν 'damaging', qɛípwv
'destructive', or pεí ovτεç 'annoying'; additionally, there is the gloss ε• Qεípεɩ,
Epεíε (H.). Others analyzed it as a present ptc. of εiwa 'to be used to'. Contrary
to the last interpretation, it can be stated that the old perfect ε"wea, indicating a
situation, has no present form; moreover, a present in the same meaning would be
rather strange. Also, the construction conflicts with that of εiwa, and the translation
‘acting in conformity with one's character' is a bit strange in these passages (of a
swine and wasps).
The hypothesis of Schmidt KZ 45 (1913): 231ff., which connects
present to włέw, is doubtful. Cf. also Leumann 1950: 212f.
connected Ow to ɛïweα, 0oç.
wv as a primary
Bechtel 1914 S.V.
eidouar
379
DELG prefers the interpretation ẞλάлтшv (which seems, however, to conflict with
Epiбuaívovoi). Not related to PLC.
Ei [pcl.] 'if', introducing a wish, condition, or question (IA, Arc.). <?>
•VAR Aeol. Dor. ai, sometimes ɛiк, aik (after ov: ovк); Cypr. Dor. n.
⚫ETYM Uncertain. For interjective origin of ai (partly also of εi), see Schwyzer 1950:
557 and 683. Perhaps a demonstrative εi 'then' also existed (Brugmann-Thumb 1913:
616), with which compare εl-ta, and which would originally be a locative of the
demonstrative *h,e-, ho- (Schwyzer: 550). See Schwyzer 1950: 557 and 683.
ɛia [interj.] adhortative 'hey, come on' (Att.). <ONOM▷
•VAR See Hdn. Gr. 1, 495, 14.
•DER ɛiάw 'call ɛia' (E. Fr. 844; cf. aiά(w).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic; comparable with Lat. (h)eia and other cries. Cf. ►ɛlév.
ɛiauɛvý [f.] 'lowlands, humid pasture' (II.). <PG(V)►
•VAR ťaµvoɩ [pl.] ‘id.' (Nic., H.). Cf. iaµɛvý, -aí, also ɛiaµévov. vývεµov, košλov,
Boτavódŋ without wind, hollow [valley], herbaceous' (H.).
•ETYM Frisk s.v. and others assume a participle, with accent shift as in ► dɛžaµevý. Is
initial ɛi- for i- metrical? The word is probably Pre-Greek, given the variation -µɛv-/-
μv-, which could not occur in a participle.
εißw [v.] 'to drip, spill', med. 'to trickle down' (II.). <PG?►
•VAR Mostly кατ-εíßw, -oμai; only present.
•DER Beside this (itacism or ablaut?) iẞávη. кádos, ȧvτλητηpiov 'vessel for water or
wine, bucket'; iẞavov. кádov, στашvíov, xαλкíov ‘id., wine-jar, copper vessel' with
iẞavɛi (for a?) ȧvτλɛi 'draw water' and iẞavaτpís. чunτηpiov 'rope of a draw-well'
(all H.); also iẞons 'peg to let out the water' (Eust.).
•ETYM Frisk suggests a cross of ɛíßw and ▶ikµás with *ɛľкw. See Güntert 1914: 148,
Walleser WuS 14 (1932): 165f. All of these are rather improbable guesses. "ß may
be unrelated, given the meaning. Is εßw Pre-Greek, with its ẞ, interchange εt/ 1, and
suffix -av-?
ɛidáλɩµoç =ɛldoç.
ɛidaλíç [?] · öpvɩç лоóç 'kind of bird' (H.). <?>
•VAR Also idáλLOÇ.
•ETYM Unexplained.
εidap →dw.
ɛïdŋua •var ɛïdnois.
=>
oida.
εidoμaι [v.] 'to appear, seem, resemble' (Il.). <IE *ueid- 'see'>
●var Aor. ɛïσaσðaí (ptc. also έ-(Ƒ)εtoάµevoç, Chantraine 1942: 182).
•COMP Sia-ɛídoua with factitive fut. Sia-ɛíσoμa 'make appear' (535; see
Chantraine 1942: 442).

=== page 214 ===

380
eidw入ov
•DER ɛidos 'appearance, species, form, etc.', εidúλov 'poem, single song', εidáλчuoç
'with beautiful appearance'; εïdwλov 'picture, image', -λάτpηs 'who reveres idols',
ɛidáλλɛtai. qaívεtal 'appears' (H.).
•ETYM Beside (F)εídoµaι and the s-aorist, there is the thematic aorist idɛīv and the
perfect ►oida, both of which are old. There is no exact equivalent of εïdoμal in other
branches; comparable are Celt. and Gm. forms like OIr. ad-féded 'narrabat', Go. fra-
weitan 'to revenge', both from IE *ueid-, but with rather different meanings.
Semantically, eïdoμai agrees well with inherited εldoc, by which it may have been
influenced (or is it a back-formation from εldos?). εldos itself corresponds exactly to
BSI. forms like Lith. véidas 'face' and OCS vido 'appearance', as well as to OHG wisa
'way, manner' and other Gm. words, which were built on the IE s-stem *ueid-s-.
Formally identical, but semantically farther off is Skt. védas- 'knowledge, insight'.
The form σáμεvos is found only in the formula (verse initial) τ µv έ. лpooέqŋ; it
is therefore probable that an accident led to this unusual form: the formula must
have had To Sε Ƒε Ƒεσáµεvоç. See Beekes 1969: 59f. Incorrect analysis in RPh. 71
(1997): 157. Cf. also ivdáλλɛτai.
eidw入ov → eidouan.
Elev [interj.] 'okay, alright!' (Att.). <ONOM➤
•VAR On the interaspiration, indicated by grammarians and the cod. Rav. of Ar.,
Schwyzer: 219 and 303.
•ETYM Froehde BB 10 (1886): 297 connected the word with Skt. evám 'okay', but
perhaps this rather belongs to ɛla; was the ending taken from µév? Differently, von
Wilamowitz 1889: 320; cf. Barrett 1964: 297.
ɛiðap [adv.] ‘immediately' (Il.). <?>
⚫ETYM Was the word originally a neuter noun in -ap? It is difficult to connect it with
10úc, which has a long i-; see Schwyzer: 350 and 519 and Schwyzer 1950: 70.
Incorrectly, Pok. 892; there is no etymology.
ε0 [pcl.] 'utinam, o that', in wishes (Il.). <IE *(h,)e(i) dem. pron. + *gwhe pcl.?>
•VAR Also aïeε (see ►εi).
⚫ETYM From Ei, ai (see εi) and a particle -0ε; however, the latter has no clear
etymology. Meillet MSL 8 (1894): 238 compared the particles Skt. gha and OCS že;
thus, is it from IE *ghe? Further, see Schwyzer 1950: 5612.
Єikáчw [v.] 'to picture, compare, suspect' (IA); on the mg. cf. Brunel 1939: 71, 155, 174,
184. IE *ueik- 'resemble'>>
•VAR Lesb. žïkáσdw; aor. ɛiкáσαi, fut. ɛiкáσw, perf. pass. яïкασμai (-).
•COMP Prefixed especially with ȧл-; also with εε-, εл-, лρоσ-, еtc.
•DER (åл-)ɛikaσía ‘picture, comparison, conjecture' (IA; on the formation Schwyzer:
469) with εiкáσчµoç ‘aestimabilis' (gloss.; Arbenz 1933: 99), (åл-)εкασµа
‘representation' (A., Pl.), (àл-, έл-)ɛiкaσµós ‘supposition' (D. H., Str.); ɛiкaστńs
'conjecturer, diviner' (Th. 1, 138; see Fraenkel 1912: 73f.), 'who represents' (D. H.);
εiкαστóç 'comparable' (S., etc.), ɛiкαστɩкóç ‘ptng. to portraying' (Pl., etc.).
eikw
381
⚫ETYM Like the synonymous Hom. (F)ε(F)íσкw, tetrasyllabic iкáσdw presupposes an
original *FEFIKάw. Both formations are recent factitive presents of the perf. (F)é-
(F)OLK-a 'be like, resemble', with zero grade in (F)έ-(F)IK-τov [du.], (F)έ-(F)IK-TO
[plpf.med.] (Schwyzer: 735). See ►čoka on the etymology.
=
zikág → cikooL.
Єiк₁ [adv.] 'just so, without deliberation', late also 'in vain' (IA). <IE *ueik- ‘resemble,
seem'>
●COMP As a first member in ɛiкo-ẞolέw ‘shoot just so' (E.) with ɛiкoßolía (Phld.).
•DER ɛikałoç 'without plan, at random' (S.) with ɛiкαɩóτη (Phld.) and εiкαιoσúvη
(Timo). Cf. σлоυdí, кошðñ, etc.; so a nominal dative (Schwyzer: 622).
⚫ETYM Incorrectly, Wackernagel 1916: 137' who, based on Indic parallels, assumes **-
Ƒεкη arbitrarily from ►έкúv; this is impossible because of the prothetic vowel
assumed. Ruijgh Lingua 28 (1971): 169 starts from *ueik- 'resemble, seem', which
seems possible.
εiкoσɩ [num.] 'twenty'. <IE *dui-dkmt-i(H) ‘twenty'>>
•VAR Hom. also έɛíкoσ (see below), Dor. Fíкati.
•COMP As a first member often ɛikoσα-, е.g. έɛкoσáßolos 'worth twenty cows' (Od.;
after εлτα-, τετρα-, etc.). On εiкoσLVÝρiτOS (X 349) see ►výpiτoç.
⚫DER EIKOσάkıç 'twenty times' (II.), ɛiкoσáç [f.] 'twenty pieces' (late; cf. ɛiкáç below),
(ε) εiкOστós (Boeot. FIкαστós) 'the twentieth' (II.); fem. яiкoστý 'the twentieth' with
εikoστaios 'belonging to the twentieth day' (Hp.; like dɛvτɛpañoç, etc.); also ɛiкáç [f.],
Dor. ikάç, Ther. hiкáç 'the number twenty, the twentieth day of the month' (Hes.),
after dɛkáç, tpiaкáç, etc. (not an original formation to (ε) Ïкατɩ, as per Schwyzer:
597); from here εiкadɛiç the members of a society that met on the 20th, eponymous
founder Eikadɛúç (Athens; Fraenkel 1912: 71 and 180, von Wilamowitz 1932: 368¹),
εiкadiστaí epithet of the Epicureans (Ath.), cf. dɛкadiotaí to dɛkás (see ► déka).
•ETYM Hom. ɛíкooɩ stands for έ(F)ĺкoσ (the prothetic vowel derives from the
glottalic feature of the *d-; see Kortlandt MSS 42 (1983): 97-104). It was graphically
influenced by contracted εкoot; likewise, Heracl. Ƒεíкατɩ. The o-vowel in εкoσt is
difficult to account for: it may have been taken from ɛiкoστós (differently, Meillet
MSL 16 (1910-1911): 217ff.; see Schwyzer: 344), which itself took it from τpiaкoστóç,
etc., with -o- as in tplákovta, etc.
PGr. ❝fikati, fikαστós gave Dor., Boeot. Fiкατɩ after the loss of the first laryngeal
by dissimilation; see Kortlandt MSS 42 (1983): 97-104. The word is identical with Av.
visa'ti, as well as with Skt. vimśatí- [f.], which has secondary nasalization and i-
flexion, as well as secondary stress. The -g- in Lat. viginti is difficult to explain; see
Kortlandt MSS 42 (1983): 101, who states that it results from voicing after a nasal in
the words for '70' and '90', and subsequent analogical introduction in the other
decades.
The dual IE *dui-dkmt-i(H) properly meant 'two decades', from IE *dui- 'two' and
► Séкa. See also under ►ÉKATÓV.
Eikw [V.] 'to give way, yield'. <IE *ueig- 'give way, yield'>

=== page 215 ===

382
eikov, -óvog
•VAR Aor. εižai (*(Ƒ)εɩžɛ Alcm., yīžaɩ [i.e. Ƒɛïžαí]· xwpñσa 'to give way' H.), fut. ɛïw,
-oμa (Il.; cf. Trümpy 1950: 229f.), perf. ptc. ¿ɛкós (Chron. Lind.).
•COMP With prefix: úл(o)-, лαр-, σUV-εíкw, etc. Lengthened form (úл-, лαρ-)εiкáðεɩv
or -ɛiv (S., Pl.; Schwyzer: 7036).
•DER Üŋɛğıç ‘yielding' (Pl.; cf. Holt 1941: 164; εɩ Plu.) with úлɛıktıkóç (Arist.;
ЄIKTIKÓS Phld.).
ETYM Among the many verbs based on IE *ueik-, there is no semantically.
convincing connection. Semantically, however, Skt. vijáte (younger vejate) 'flee, give
way' and the Gm. pres. OS wican, OHG wihhan 'give way, etc.' agree very well with
(F)εíкw. As the former must go back to PIE *ueig-, not to *ueik-, we should assume
that the different velar was generalized from forms with consonantal endings (cf. the
Skt. aorist forms vik-thās, vik-ta) or from the σ-aorist. Thus, Frisk s.v. and LIV² s.v.
*ueig-. ToAB wik- 'disappear; abstain from' belongs here as well. See also ▸ έлíɛiкtoç.
ɛikwv, -óvoç [f.] ‘representation, picture, resemblance' (IA). <IE *ueik- 'resemble'>>
•VAR Cypr. FEIкova, Ion. also εiká, -oñç [f.].
•COMP As a first member in ɛikovoλoyía 'speaking in resemblances, figuratively'
(Pl.).
●DER Diminutive ɛikóvov (Hell.) and -ídlov (late); ɛikovɩkóç ‘picturing' (Hell.),
εiкováηs (gloss.). Denominative verb (-)εiкovíčw 'imitate, record in documents'
(LXX, pap., Plu.; cf. Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 146) with ɛiкóviσµα = ɛiкóv (S. Fr. 573; cf.
Chantraine 1933: 188), εiкоνσμóç 'picture; description of persons' (pap., Plu.),
ЄiкOVIστnç name of an official, 'registrator' (pap.).
•ETYM Formation in -óv (Chantraine 1933: 159f.) as an agent noun related directly to
Coкa, with the same vocalism as in ɛikwç, -óç, εkɛλoç. On the innovation εikó, see
Schwyzer: 479.
ɛiλaµídɛç [f.pl.] name of two cerebral membranes (Poll. 2, 44). ◄IE *uel- ‘turn, wind’▷
•DER Diminutive of *εauos (as лλóкαμоç, еtc.).
•ETYM The word is related to εiλéw‘turn, winď, “ötɩ nepì µvelòv eiλovaɩ” “because
they were wrapped around the marrow', with εi- (for *Ƒέλ-aµoç) as in ► ɛiλɛóç.
ɛiλaлívŋ [f.] ‘drinking-bout, festive eating' (II.; Ael. ¿λ(λ)aлíva Hoffmann 1893: 487).
<PG(S,V)►
•DER ɛiλañɩvášw ‘to feast' (Il.; only present) together with ɛiλarivaotýc (P 577).
•ETYM No etymology. A cultural word that may well be of Pre-Greek origin; cf.
under ►Sɛvov. Initial ɛi- is perhaps due to metrical lengthening; a suffix -α- can
hardly be IE.
E
ɛiλap [n.] probably ‘parapet, protective wall', ɛlap vɛwv [vnwv Leaf] te kaì avtŵv
'shelter of the ships and of themselves' (H 338 = 437; Е 56 = 68, of лúруoɩ, and
τεчxoç), кúµατоç εlap 'protection of a foetus' (ε 257, piлεç olσúïvat 'mat of wicker-
work'); in H. also λap. Bońεia 'aid'. <IE? *ueru- 'defend'>
•VAR Only nom. and acc.
•ETYM Often considered to be an action noun *Ƒέλ-Ƒap (with dissimilation to *\\-
Fap?). Perhaps from εiλéw 1, aor. (F)έλoat 'press together', but this does not fit very
▶
ei入Św 1
383
well. Note ẞnλnuµа· кáλvµα, öρáyµa έv noτaµó̟ ‘impediment, defence in the river'
(H.). Neither is it related to ɛiλéw 2 'roll, wind'. See Schulze 1892: 121, Bechtel 1914
s.v., Chantraine 1942: 131, and Porzig 1942: 348. Blanc RPh. 70 (1996): 115f. proposes
to derive the word from FεPF-ap, to εpv-μα, etc.; however, the dissimilation to A
would then be difficult to account for. Cf. also Blanc BAGB 1 (1996): 4-5.
Eiλɛívia [f.] name of the goddess(es) of birth, often in plur. (IA). Also 'Eλɛívia (Pi.,
inscr.), Elλnovia (Call., Paus.), 'Eλɛúvia (Cret.), 'Eλevin (Paros), 'Eλɛveía, with
assibilation 'EXɛvoía (Lacon.), and other variants. Short form 'Elεvew (AP) and
(quite different) Elλóvɛa (Plu. 2, 277b; is it correct?). On the forms see Kalén 1918:
8. <PG(S)►
•DIAL Myc. E-re-u-ti-ja.
•DER EIλɛv(1)aïov 'temple of E.' (Delos), 'Iλútov (ibid.).
⚫ETYM It has been assumed, starting from the assumption that 'Eλɛúvia is the old
form, that 'Eλɛíva would have arisen by dissimilation and thence Eilívia with
metrical lengthening. Schulze 1892: 260f. then connected λev0- with έλɛúσoμaι,
Avov. Wackernagel too started from 'EXɛúvia, but he considered it to be Pre-
Greek because of the PN'Eλεvépva. Güntert 1919: 383, 258 also takes E(i)λɛívia as
Pre-Greek, with secondary adaptation to λεúw to bring' (Dor.), in the sense 'she
who brings forth'.
Beekes 1998: 24f. shows that the suffix -va is Pre-Greek.
ɛiλɛóç [m.] 1. as a medical expression intestinal obstruction, Bauchgrimmen' (Hp.;
Lat. ileus); 2. (rarely) name of a vine (Hippys Rheg. [Va?]); 3. ‘den, hole of animals,
especially of snakes' (Theoc. 15, 9, Arc., Poll.). <IE? *uelu- 'turn, wind, cover,
protect'>
•VAR ÎA ÓC.
⚫DER From 1: εiλεwdŋs 'ptng. to intestinal obstruction' (Hp.).
•ETYM Formation like owlɛóç, Kolɛóç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 51). An original
meaning 'winding' (cf. H.: ɛidɛós. ǹ toñ Oŋpíov katádvoiç kai otpópos ‘lair of a wild
animal, cord'), from ɛiλéw 'to roll, wind', explains meanings 1. and 2. Also, the 'den'
can be combined with 'winding'; however, note that ɛiλvóc (A. R.), like synonymous
εiλveμóc, is based on εiλów 'to envelop, cover'.
ɛilέw 1 [v.] 'to press together, draw together, fence in' (Hom.). <IE *uel- ‘press
together'>
•VAR Epic Delph. also equal in ɛilóµεvoç, εilέow(v), Dor. El. Fηλéw, Att.
sometimes λw, Eiλλw (cf. below), aor. λoat, ééλoa (Ep.), med.-pass. ȧλnueva,
ȧλñvaɩ, ȧλɛíç, perf. med. ελμaι, -μévoç (Ep.), perfect preterite έóla? (Pi., see
below); thence the new forms εiλñoaɩ, ɛiλñow, εiλŋµaɩ, εiλýеηy (Ion. Hell.).
•COMP With prefix ảñ(0-), e.g. àño-fŋλéw (El.); ¿‹-, e.g. ¿y-fnλnßiwvti (Her.) = ¿‹-
ɛɩλŋßwoɩ; kat(α)-, e.g. кaτα-Ƒελµévos (Cret.); also лрoσ- (лроτ-), ovv-eiλéw,
-(E)λw, etc. with various shades of mg.
•DER Most of the derivatives have become formally and semantically independent:
►ắlýc, ►ảollýc, ►έčovλý, ►ïλŋ (εŋ), ovlaµóç. Further: Bλŋuα. кwλvµa,
opáyµa ¿v notaµ ‘impediment, defense in a river' (H.), i.e. Ƒηληµа; Mеss. ηλημα,

=== page 216 ===

384
ei入Éw 2
кat-, ovv-ɛíλŋσis 'pushing together, what is pressed' or 'what is drawn together"
(Epicur. or Ael.), ɛiλŋ¤µóç (ɛid- cod.) ovστpooń, quyn 'mass [of people], flight' (H.).
From (F)iw probably Fouos [gen.] 'adversity' (Pamph. IVª); unclear iλáç
'pressed together (?)' (S. Fr. 70, E. Fr. 837), cf. on ɛiλéw 2; lengthened iλíɛɩ, see
ibid. See also εiλap.
•ETYM A nasal present *Ƒελ-véw can be posited on the basis of ɛiλéw, fŋλéw, and also
on account of åлε\\ɛïv (?, cod. -ɛɩv) άñoкλɛíɛv ‘shut out (Aeol.)' (H.). This *Ƒɛλ-
véw may be a variant of ɛïλw < *Ƒέλ-vw (Schwyzer: 720, see also 693, and Chantraine
1942: 130). Moreover, there is reduplicated w< *Fi-Fλ-w (mostly froọm ►ɛiλéw 2,
like iλóμεvos A. R. 2, 27). For ελλw, a prothetic vowel used to be assumed (so *¿-
FÉλ-vw or ε-FÉλ-tw), but this is no longer possible. It is probable that there was
simply (graphical) influence by εiλéw. Originally, the non-presentic forms were
primary, as is to be expected: aor. (F)éλ-σai, perf. *(F)έ-(F)oλa in έóλa (op)pressed'
(Pi. P. 4, 233; a conj. by Boeckh)?, middle with secondary full grade (Ƒ)é-(Ƒ)ε\-µaɩ,
intrans. aor. with zero grade (F) aλñ-val; these forms were replaced by the
innovations εiλñoα, etc. Within Greek, it is not always possible to distinguish ɛiλéw
'press (together)' from ɛiλéw 'wind'. On the whole group of words, see Solmsen 1901:
224ff., 285ff. Many IE words contain an element *uel-, but there is no obvious
counterpart to ɛiλéw 1. For example, Balto-Slavic formations like Lith. veliù, vélti
(Ru. valját' 'to felt, full', Ru. válom [ins.] 'in mass' (from a noun *való), Lith. su-valýti
‘to collect (grain), reap (together)' require a set root, for which there is no evidence
in Greek. LIV² s.v. 1. uel- 'einschließen, verhüllen' remarks that "Eine detaillierte
Untersuchung aller *uel-Wurzeln wäre hilfreich". They connect Skt. var- [2] 'to
cover, enclose, ward off, but Lubotsky 2000a pleaded against this connection.
because the Indo-Aryan evidence points to an initial laryngeal.
Eiλéw 2 [v.] 'to roll, turn, wind, revolve' (mostly Hell.). <IE *uel- 'turn, wind, revolve'>>
•VAR Aλw, εiλw (Att.; see below). The non-presentic forms, most of which are
compounds, are based on the presents: εiλñoa, εiλnow, εlλŋкα, etc.; from "^\\w only
¡Máµnv (IG 5(2), 472: 11; Megalopolis II-III³).
•COMP Often with prefix, especially έv- and лɛpi-εiλέw (X., Hell.), -(ε)íλw (Th. 2, 76;
codd. Ar. Ra. 1066), also ȧл-, §ɩ-, ¿§-, έn-, kat-, nap-ɛiλéw (Hell.), ¿§-, kat-íλλw (X.,
Hp.).
ós
•DER From ɛiλέw : ►ɛilɛós (s.v.; secondarily adapted?); further (¿v-, &§-, Èπ-, KAT-,
лερɩ-)ελŋσç 'winding, etc.' (Pl.), (εv-, лεpɩ-)εïλŋµа ‘id.' (J., Poll.), лроσεíλημа
(кεчαλñç) 'turban' (Creon Hist.); εiετíaç kind of reed (Thphr.), ɛiλŋτápiov
'winding, roll' (Aët.), ɛiλŋdóv [adv.] 'in windings' (AP). From λw:
'squinting' with many derivations; iλác [f.] 'snare, rope' (N 572; Chantraine 1933:
351) with iii. dɛoµevel, ovoτpéqɛi, ȧyɛlášɛi fetters, presses together, drives
together' (H.). (also to "\\w 1); unclear iλádaç yováç. ++ȧyɛλɛiàç kaì ovotpoqás
'herds; dense masses' (H.: S. Fr. 70 and E. Fr. 837); probably to ɛiλέw 1. Here also
belong several nouns that have become independent from the verb: see ɩ},
►ölµos, ► oʊlos 2; further perhaps ►ảλɩvdéw, ► έlávŋ, ►εïlɩyyos; finally the u-
enlargement Eiλúw with many derivatives. Not here λus, εληpα, λwµа,
► εvλń, ►αióλoç.
A
E
eillyyos
385
⚫ETYM As in ɛiλéw 1 and (ε)i^λw 'press', a nasal present is also continued in ɛiλέw
‘roll, turn' < *Fɛλ-véw; a reduplicated formation *Fi-Fλ-w is found in λw. The
formal coalescence often led to semantic interference as well; for example,
¡λóµevoç, in A. R. 2, 27 λéwv ….. ¡λλóµevós rep dµíλw, must have been identical with
the ptc. in 1, 129 dεσμoïç iλóμεvoç, even if it originally did not mean 'surrounded',
but 'pressed'. In the other branches, there are many words that go back to the
unstable notion 'turn, wind, revolve', etc.: e.g., OIr. fillim 'to turn, bend' (see
Matasović 2008 s.v. *wel-n-o-). A special group are the u-enlargements; see ►ɛiλúw
and LIV² s.v. 2. *uel- ‘drehen, rollen'. Further, cf. Arm. gelum, aor. 3sg. egel ‘turn' <
*uel-.
1.
εiŋ 2 [f.] 'warmth, heat of the sun' (Ar. Ve. 772 [v.l. čλŋ], Luc.). ◄IE *suel(H)- ‘burn,
singe'>
•VAR Also ελŋ, ëλn; Béla (=féλa). ñλios, kaì avуý, úñò Дaкávwv 'the sun; sunlight
(Lacon.)' (H.; likewise to λa); unclear is the appurtenance of yέλav (=féλav?).
avyǹv nλíov 'light of the sun', because of yɛλεïv. λáµлεv, άvôɛïv 'to shine, to bloom'
(H.), perhaps rather to yɛláw, yaλnvη; but yɛλoduτía. ǹodvoía 'sunsets' (H.)
belongs to FÉλa.
•COMP As a first member in εiλŋ-0εps 'warmed by the sun' (Hp., Gal.), ¿λałɛpés.
ǹλɩoðaλ´éç ‘warmed by the sun' (H.), rather to Оépoμal then to ¤épos (see Schwyzer:
513); from there εiŋɛpéw, -éqμa warm (oneself) in the sun' (Hp.); ►ɛiλikpivýs,
►εiλóлεdov. As a second member in лрóç-ελoç 'exposed to the heat of the sun,
sunny' (A.), ε-εtλoç ‘id.' (Ar.), ä-εtos ‘sunless' (A. Fr. 334).
•DER εiληïov. Év ǹλíų Оɛpµavеév heated in the sun' (H.; false explanation of 'Inïov
558?); denominative verb Elλéw 'warm in the sun' (Eust.), pass. aor. ptc.
ɛiλŋßévtɛç; also λāα· ǹ\\\τа 'is exposed to the sun', fut. þε\[\]άσετα.
ǹλɩwońσεται (H.).
•ETYM From PGr. *hƑέλa, whence Ƒéλā, ëλā, beside which a form with a prothetic
vowel used to be assumed (*¿-Ƒhéλā > eïλn, eïλn), which however is impossible.
These belong as a verbal noun to a verb 'to singe (intr.), burn without flame', which
still exists in Gm. and Balt., e.g. OE swelan, MoHG schwelen (with full grade), Lith.
svìlti (with zero grade of a root *suelH-), with many derivatives. The Greek forms
exhibit iλ- beside ελ-. There is no explanation for this, as a by-form *huel- from a
root *suel- is hardly possible. Unless there is an unknown phonetic development, the
problem cannot be solved. Could there have been an analogical spread of εiλ-? From
Greek, ►ȧλéa 1 (ȧλ-) 'heat of the sun' can also be connected. OHG swelzan 'to burn',
OE sweltan 'to die', and ON svelta 'to starve, die' belong to an independent root IE
*sueld- (also Arm. k'ałc).Cf. also ►ños 'sun' and ► ελávη ‘torch'.
ayyo [m.] 'dizziness', often plur. (Hp., Pl.), 'whirl(pool)' (Peripl. M. Rubr., A. R.).
<?>
•VAR εiλy, -yyos [m.] (D. S., etc.); also iλ-, -.
•DER Denominative verb siλyy-táw (iλ-) 'get dizzy' (Ar.); with ɛiyyɩwn 'dizzy'
(gloss.).

=== page 217 ===

386
εiλɩкpivŃS
•ETYM Form in -tyy(o)- (Schwyzer: 498, Chantraine 1933: 398ff.), either directly from
►ɛiew 2 'to turn, wind or via an unknown noun. Initial ɛi- was taken from the
present (cf. ►ɛiλéw 2); it is superfluous to assume a prothetic ε-. On iλ- for εiλ-, cf.
►λn. ToB wai walau 'vertigo' (cited by Frisk s.v.) is a mistake for waipalau, from
wip- ‘shake'. On account of the suffix, one could separate the word from ɛiλέw as
Pre-Greek.
ɛiλɩkpɩvýs [adj.] 'pure, absolute, genuine' (Hp., Att.). <?>
•VAR Also εi-.
•DER ɛiλɩкpívɛia ‘purity', ɛiλɩкpɩvéw ‘purify' (Hell.), ɛilikpivótηs (gloss.).
•ETYM Expressive word without a convincing etymology. It is mostly taken as a
compound of кpívw and ɛïŋ (with compositional -t? Schwyzer: 447f.), in which case
it would properly mean "distinguished in/by the sun" (Frisk); one should then take
εŋ not as heat of the sun', but as 'sunlight'. However, such a meaning is only
known for Dor. Féλa and cannot be old. This makes the proposal highly improbable.
Connection with ɛiλéw (1 or 2) seems to make no sense either. DELG s.v. offers a
difficult hypothesis.
eidioveg →dé入IOL.
ɛiλíñovę [adj.] mg. uncertain, in Hom. only dat. and acc.pl. -лóðεσσv, -rodas of þóɛç;
later (Anacr., Eup.) also of other nouns. <?>
•VAR εiλлódηs (Nonn.); on the formation see Schwyzer: 451.
⚫ETYM Because the meaning is unclear, the proposed etymologies are uncertain, as
well. As ȧɛpσíлodεç ïллoi (Σ 532) 'foot-lifting horses' suggests a contrastive use as
'dragging the feet', Osthoff BB 22 (1897): 255ff. assumed that the first member
contained an element related to Lith. selù, selëti ‘drag', Skt. tsárati ‘to sneak, steal';
thus, εiλíлovç would mean 'with sneaking feet'. This interpretation, however, is not
as convincing as the inner-Greek connections. There seems to be no trace of
digamma (Chantraine 1942: 132); however, see Shipp 1967: 60 (who suggests that it is
a late formation without an old tradition). One might think of 'pressing the feet'
(from ɛiλéw 'press') as 'turning the feet' (from ɛiλéw 'to turn'; thus also H.: Sià tò
έλíσoɛv toùç módas katà tǹv nорεíαν 'because of their turning the feet in their
mode of walking'). ɛi- can be metrical or taken from the present. On the -ɩ in
compounds, see Schwyzer: 447f. and Knecht 1946: 31. The unclear gloss åveλλíñovs.
ó tois noơi µǹ áλ<λ>óµevos, itоɩ ✗wλós 'not leaping with his feet, limping' (H.)
does not help. See also εiλTEVĤç.
eiλɩtevýs [adj.] said of äypwʊtɩs (i.e. 'dog's tooth grass'), mg. unknown (Theoc. 13,
42).<?>
•ETYM Poetic formation, modelled after εiλɩ-кpivýs, -ñovs; the second member is
probably related to ►τɛívw (cf. áτεvns), while the first member has been connected
with ɛiλéw ‘turn, wind (Frisk), but “die sich windend ausdehnende” is just a guess.
Differently, Osthoff; see εiλíлoç.
忄
ei入Úw
……
387
ɛiλóñɛdov [n.] in ŋ 123 ảλwó̟ ….. 'vineyard' / τñs εtepov µév O' eilóñedov ….. / tépoetai
ǹeλiw 'dry up in the sun', read by Doederlein (details in Bechtel 1914, Leumann 1950:
44), for traditional εóлεdov. <?>
•ETYM Analyzed in antiquity as 'sunny spot', with εin heat of the sun' as a first
member. The reading εóлεdov (thought to be false; see Frisk) was already
accepted in antiquity (AP, Dsc.); thencе Оελолεбεúw to wither in the sun' (Dsc.).
See also Ure Class. Quart. 49 (1955): 227. Nonetheless, an inscription in Mylasa has
еελoлε[, which rather suggests that εóлεdov was the correct reading after all; see
Dubois RPh. 71 (1997): 162. See εiλŋ.
eï入n.
εiλvσлáqμα [v.] 'to sneak like a snake or a worm' (Hp., Pl.). <GR➤
•VAR Also iλ-.
•DER εiλúσлασιç and -σñaσtiкóç (Arist.).
⚫ETYM Expressive verbal dvandva-compound from εiλúоμα and σлáομαι (Schwyzer:
645).
εiλŏqάw [v.] 'to roll, whirl about' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Only ptc. -pówv, -pówντεS (A 156, Hes. Th. 692, trans.; Nonn. D. 30, 81 intr.),
-üqάw only present (Y 492 trans.; Hes. Sc. 275 intr.).
•ETYM Iterative-intensive formation in -áw with lengthening to -άw (Schwyzer: 734,
Chantraine 1942: 337), from εlλúw, though unclear in detail (ɛiλúw: *εiλúлτw :
εiλvoάw like ǎлτw: ȧqάw?). Schwyzer 1937: 662 incorrectly believes that it consists of
ɛiλúw and voάw; neither did it arise via an intermediate noun in -qoç, -on (Solmsen
1901: 235, Bechtel 1914). The varying length of the -v- is metrically conditioned
(Chantraine 1942: 360).
Eiλúw [v.] 'to wrap around, envelop, cover' (Il.). <IE *uel-u- ‘envelop, cover'>
•VAR (Arat. 432; кαταɛíλvov ¥ 135 v.l. for -vuov, -vuσav), perf. med. ελüμai, fut. кàd
dé... ɛiλúow 319, aor. кατ-εiλúσavtε (A. R. 3, 206); εiλúoμai 'to wind itself and
curl, crawl forward' (S. Ph. 291 and 702), 'to swarm' (Com.), aor. pass. ελúoеn
'rolled', voɛiç ‘ducking' (Il.; Theoc. 25, 246 has ɛivɛís instead; A. R. 3, 296
ei入vLévos).
•COMP Some prefixed compounds: кατ-яλúw (Hdt.), Sɩ-ɛvσðɛĩσa 'sneaking
through' (A. R. 4, 35), ¿‹-εiλvo¤évτεs (Theoc. 24, 17), ovv-aλúw (EM 333, 42).
•DER From ελŬ-: λŬ-τpov 'envelope, shell, container' (IA) with ελvτpóoμαι (Hp.);
λчμa plough-beam' (Hes., secondary length, see below), in H. also = vúσσa
'turning point' kai tò įµátiov ‘mantle', cf. &\uμa; λчμos a Phrygian pipe (S., Com.),
in H. also 'envelope²; λvota. äµлελoç µéλava ‘dark vine' (H.; -o- like in έλúσŋ, see
below); deverbative έúσσɛ· ɛɛīτaɩ 'draw oneself up' (H.). From ɛiλū-: ¿ïλūµa
‘envelope' (【 179, etc., cf. λчµα); εiλv¤µós hiding-place, hole' (Nic.), in H. = čλкoç,
τρóμoç 'wound, trembling', to εiλúμα; εivó = ►ɛiλɛóç s.v.; εïvoσiç 'sneaking
forward' (sch. on εiλúoμα); εiλúταç, έλλúτaç name of a cake' (inscr., H., έλúτŋs
gramm.; see Fraenkel 1910: 171f.); deverbative eiλúσσετα εiλεiтai (H.), cf. ελúσσεi
above, with silvστplov (gloss.). From ȧλŬ- (zero grade): ►älvσiç, àλúτaç. See
also лÉλUτрov and yoλúptov.

=== page 218 ===

388
εiλw
!
eipyw
389
ETYM The gloss уελoυτрov. λυτроν, йуouν λεлυрov 'pod' (H.) points to PGr. FéλV-
τpov, identical with Skt. varu-tra- [n.] 'over-garment' (gramm.). Theoretically, εiλúw
could derive from PGr. *Ƒɛλ-v-ú-w and agree with Skt. vṛṇóti ‘envelop, cover' < IE
*ul-ne-u-ti, but the Greek word is late and rare, which makes the identification less
probable; even less so, when we consider that the Skt. root contains an initial
laryngeal (see Lubotsky 2000a). Disyllabic Fε\v- in (Ƒ)ελú-σ-0ŋ, etc. (with analogical
-σ-; Schwyzer 761) is also found in Arm. gelu-m 'to turn' (formation uncertain) and
in Lat. volvō; an iterative formation in Go. walwjan, OE wealwian 'to revolve' <
*uolu-eie-. Note (F)ελ-μα, with the same secondary long vowel as in Lat. volumen;
further, Arm. gelumn ‘turning'. In the formation of the Greek system, the perfect
εiλñµαι < *Ƒé-Ƒλб-μα (with long vowel; initial F- is uncertain, on which see
Chantraine 1942: 131 and Schwyzer: 649e) played an important role; the late forms
εiλñσaɩ and εiλvoɛis and the many nouns in ɛiλu- are derived from it. See LIV² s.V.
1. and 2. uel-.
ei入w →ei入Éw 1.
sinaëvvuu.
eiµádes [pl.?] · noчiévwv oiкíai ‘houses of shepherds' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Formation like Sɛpás, etc.; is the word derived from *Ƒεчμα = Lat. vīmen ‘rod,
wickerwork'?
ɛчu [v.] 'to go' (perfective; cf. Schwyzer 1950: 265). <IE *hei- ‘go’➤
•VAR Only present active; inf. iéval.
DIAL Myc. i-jo-te /iontes/.
⚫COMP Very often with prefix: äv-, ǎл-, dí-, ɛïσ-, ε‹-, etc.
•DER From the simplex: 1-0μaτα [pl.] 'step, pace' (E 778 = h. Ap. 114, of doves), = 'feet'
(Call. Cer. 58); on the formation Schwyzer: 492¹², 523); ►io¤µóç, also itaµós, ►ľtns;
cf. oitos, olµoç. From the compounds: ɛiσ-í-¤µŋ ‘entry' (( 264, Opp.; cf. Qμaτα and
Porzig 1942: 283); ¿§-í-tŋos ‘perishable' (IA), acc. to H. ˝tŋλov. tò žµµovov, kaÌ oỶk
ššíτŋλov ‘abiding, not going' (A. Fr. 42); ɛiσ-í-tŋµa ‘revenue' (Delos, Delphi); ɛiσ-,
-, кat-i-τpios (D.); di-, σuv-I-TIкóç (Arist.). On άµα--τóc, see s.v.; on the
univerbation ȧτaprítós see ▶åτpaлóç. Iterative iτáw in itηtέov ‘eundum est' (Att.)
and εлανɩταкúp εлavεληλvwç (Elis); thence ɛiσ-τητpiα [n.pl.] 'initiation
sacrifice for an official' (Att.; also εlσ-τpiα, see above), εiσ-τητós ‘accessible'
(Alciphr.) and iτntikós = itaµós (Arist.). As a verbal noun to εчu, especially to the
compounds, serves ódós (äv-odos, etc.), Schwyzer 1950: 75, Porzig 1942: 201. See also
▶ portáw.
=
⚫ETYM Old athematic root present with exact correspondences in several languages:
ɛl-µɩ, ɛi (< *ɛỉ-hi), ɛl-σɩ = Skt. é-mi, é-și, é-ti, Lith. ei-mì, ei-sì, eî-ti, Hitt. pāi-mi, pāi-ši,
pāi-zi (with preverb pe-, pa-), Lat. i-s, i-t (replacement of isg. with eō < *ei-ō), all of
which are from IE *ei-mi, -si, -ti. 1pl. -μev: Skt. i-más; ipv. ï-01 = Skt. i-hí: Hitt. i-t;
impf. Hom. niα = Skt. ayam from IE *h,e-h,ei-m. Iterative itάw = Lat. itāre, MIr.
ethaim. Further details are in Schwyzer: 674, etc. On the relation between εlu
po̟μα-ov
pxoчaι - λov and other verbs of going, see Bloch 1940: 22ff.
{
Eiui [v.] 'to be'. <IE *hes- 'be'>>
●VAR Inf. ɛĭvaɩ (IA), Dor. ηµí, inf. ηµεv, Aeol. чu, inf. žµчev, -αɩ; only present stem
(with future).
•COMP Often with prefix: ǎn-, év-, ë§- (éšeoti), én-, náp-, oúv-, etc.
●DER έot-w [f.] (to έστí) = ovσía (to wv) ‘substance' (Archyt. Philos.), åл-εστó
'absence' (Hdt. 9, 85; σUV-εσTW 6, 128 v.l. to ouvεσtin), see Schwyzer: 478,
Chantraine 1933: 117; cf. also on εvεotá; áñeσtús. ɑñoɣápŋσiç ‘retreat; voidance' (H.;
Chantraine 1933: 291). From the ptc. ❝v, övτ-oç: ovoía (see above) with ȧл-, -,
лар-, σuv-ovσíα, etc. from ȧл-úv, etc.; thence e.g. ovvovσiάw with σvvovσiaσtηs,
-αστIкóç, etc.
•ETYM Old athematic root present with exact correspondences in several languages:
ɛií, ɛi (epic and Dor. ¿σσí), ¿σtí = Skt. ásmi, ási, ásti, OLith. esmi, esi, ēsti, Hitt. ešmi,
ešši (eši), ešzi, Go. im, is, ist, Lat. es(s), est (sum is an innovation), IE *es-mi, *esi (<
*es-si, sometimes restored by analogy), *es-ti; 3pl. with zero grade ɛioí, Myc. e-e-si
/e¹ensi/, Dor. ¿váí (with psilosis after ɛiµí, etc.) = Skt. sánti, U sent, Go., etc. sind, all
of which are from IE *h,s-enti. Hom. ña [ipf.1sg.] = Skt. ásam, IE *h,e-h₁es-m, Dor.
Aeol. Arc. Cypr. s [3sg.] = Skt. (Ved.) ás, IE *he-h,es-t. Further forms are
mentioned in Schwyzer: 676ff.
ɛivaτépɛç, -épwv [f.pl.] 'wife of the husband's brother' (II.) <IE *(H)ienh₂-ter- 'wife of
husband's brother'>
VAR Also sing. εvατηp, -τpι, -τεpa (late Anatolian inscr.), voc. εivατεр, gen. -τεpoç
(Hdn.).
•ETYM Old, disappearing kinship term denoting a member of the extended family
(see Risch Mus. Helv. 1 (1944): 117). Epic ɛiv- is a metrical lengthening of psilotic ¿v-.
The acc. tavατɛpa is not Phrygian, but Greek.
The etymon is also seen in Lat. ianitrīcēs (after genetrīcēs, etc.; the vocalization -a(n)-
in the root is not quite clear), OLith. jentė, CS jatry (ending after svekry 'mother-in-
law'), and in Skt. yātar- (with zero grade of the root: *inh₂-ter-). Arm. ner (also nēr),
gen. niri is difficult to explain; see Kortlandt 2003: 120 and 163 on this word.
ɛivooiquos➡VOσLS.
ɛiлov [v.aor.] ‘say, speak' (II.). <IE *he-ue-uk"-om 'I said’>
•VAR Epic εлov, Ion., etc. also εlna, inf. ɛinɛïv, ɛiñaɩ, Cret. Ƒɛîñaɩ.
•COMP Often with prefix, e. g. ȧл(o)-, εε-, µετ(α)-, лαр-, лρо-(Ƒ)εлεÏV, -(Ƒ)εÏлαι
⚫ETYM The Skt. aorist á-vocam 'I spoke', from *h,e-ue-uk"-om, points to a Greek pre-
form *e-weuk"om, whence by dissimilation *eweik"om > ε(Ƒ)εлоv. Оn an uncertain
trace of the digamma in an antique edition of Homer, see Kretschmer 1923: 190ff.
Further, see лоç. On the meaning, use and inflexion, see Fournier 1946: 3ff., 99f.,
227ff.
Єipyw [v.] 'to fence in, shut out' (on the mg. Brunel 1939: 27f., 122). <IE *h,uerg- 'shut
in, press'>
•VAR Also ɛïpyw; εpyvu̟µ, epic έépyw, έέpyvчµ, epic Ion. εpyw, ɛ̃pyvo̟µ, s-aor.
ɛt̃pt̃aɩ (also ɛip-, εp-, p-), them. aor. кατ-EƑopyov (Cypr.), pass. ɛip×¤ñvaɩ (ɛip-,

=== page 219 ===

390
cipepov
etc.), fut. εpчw (εïp&w, Heracl. ȧq-, ¿q-épšovtɩ, ovv-hέpšováɩ), perf. med. ɛt̃pyμaɩ,
žɛpyµɑɩ (ëpyµaɩ), epic зpl. pxαται, -ατo with artificial extension έpxatówvão & 15
(see Leumann 1950: 179ff.), lengthened pret. ɛipyaƉɛīv (-áðɛƖv?; Schwyzer: 703).
•COMP Often with prefix: ȧл(o)-, àq-, dɩ-, ɛiσ-, ¿q-, ¿§-, kat- (kað-), ovv-, etc.
•DER ɛipktń (¿p-), often plur. 'enclosure, prison, women's apartments' (IA); εipyµóç
'prison' (Pl.); (oúv-, кáð-, č‹-)ɛip is 'shutting in, etc.' (Pl.) with -εipкtiкóç; ǎq-
ερкτOÇ'shut out' (A. Ch. 446 [lyr.]).
--
•ETYM Except for the zero grade thematic aorist Cypr. кατ-ÉƑopуov (-έ- or -ń-;
Schwyzer 653 ẞ), all forms, including the nouns, go back to a full grade ε-(F)έpyw,
ε"pyw; acc. to Sommer 1905: 127f., the aspiration in ɛt̃pšαɩ, épчw, ɛïpyw, etc. arose
before voiceless p in έpêt-, ¿pε-(?). Details are included in Solmsen 1901: 221ff. There
are no directly comparable formations in the other languages. Av. vərəziiąn [opt.]
'they should fence in' is perhaps cognate; Lith. veržiù, veřžti ‘to narrow in, string' is
not, but rather from *uergh- (see LIV² s.v. *uerg-). Further, there are some related
Indo-Iranian nouns: Skt. vrjána- [n.] 'enclosure' = Av. vǝrǝzāna-, varǝzāna-
'community', OP vardana- 'town'; Skt. vrajá- [m.] 'fence' (as if from *hureg-o-). It is
unclear whether to connect it with an Irish word for 'wall, etc.': Olr. fraig, Molr.
fraigh 'wall of wickerwork, roof, fence'. Within Greek, the word has been compared
with Myc. we-re-ke /wreges/ 'fences'; see Tichy 1983: 286 with fn. 163. This would
presuppose that the prothetic &- is secondary.
Єipɛpov [acc.] 'imprisonment, servitude' (0 529). <?>
•ETYM Etymology uncertain. Frisk Eranos 50 (1952): 6ff. argues against the
connection with Lat. servus, instead suggesting a basis *FεpƑεpov, and connecting the
word with Arm. gerem 'to take prisoner'. It is probably not related to ►εúpíσкw 'to
find' or ►àpúw 'to draw water', although based on the meaning the word has been.
compared with Skt. gráha-, gráhaṇa- 'taking, emprisonment, scooping'. Other
suggestions are in Bechtel 1914 and Brugmann IF 19 (1906): 382ff.
ɛipɛσía →épéτng.
ɛipɛσióvŋ [f.] 'an olive or laurel twig adorned with red and white bands and decorated
with fruits', as a symbol of fertility (Ar.), 'a song when carrying this twig around'
(Hom. Epigr., Plu.), 'wreath (of honour)' (Hell.). <?>
⚫VAR Also Єipvouwvn (Delos Ia), folk-etymological reshaping after ɛipúoμai 'protect'.
•ETYM For the formation, cf. the plant names in -úvη in Chantraine 1933: 207f.;
Strömberg 1940: 81 points to laσióvη, but further comparanda are unknown. The
word is often derived from εipos, but without much reason. Chantraine thinks of
'Epéσчoç epithet of Apollo (H.); cf. Myc. We-we-si-je-ja /Werwes-/. Differently,
Schönberger Glotta 29 (1942): 85ff. and Grošelj Živa Ant. 1 (1951): 122f.; cf. Meid IF 62
(1956): 27722.
=
*ɛipŋ [f.] taken as 'place of speaking or gathering', acc. to H. ¿pwtnois, pýµn,
KAŋdwv questioning, speech, omen', acc. to EM 483, 3 = εккλησíα ‘assembly' and
μаvτεía 'prophesying'. <?>
•VAR Only ɛipáwv Σ 531 (verse-initial), also ɛipéaç Hes. Th. 804 (conj. εpaɩç, εpaç).
!
!
zipoai
391
⚫ETYM Traditionally connected with έpw, εïρηкα (εipw) 'say', but with an unclear
base form; is the nom. *ɛipa < *Ƒép-дa? See also εipηvn.
sipny [m.] name of the full-grown youths in Sparta, ‘kópoç téλɛoç' ‘full-grown boy'
(H., IG 5(1), 279, Plu. Lyc. 17, etc.; on the mg., etc. Solmsen IF 7 (1897): 37ff.). <?►
•VAR Also Epηv, pηv, -v; gen. -évoç.
●COMP As a second member in μελλ-εípηу a youth becoming εipηv' (Plu. Lyc. 17)
together with μɛɛpɛvɛia (Sparta), tpitɩpeves [pl.] 'third-year ɛipéves' (Messen.).
•ETYM Uncertain. Acc. to Solmsen IF 7 (1897): 37ff., the word is from *¿pov, and
therefore differs from Ion. ►εpoŋy ‘man, male' only in accent; the loss of *s with
compensatory lengthening would be due to the oxytone accent (Wackernagel KZ 29
(1888): 127ff.). However, as a strictly Laconian form, one would expect *ηpv, as
Bechtel 1921, 2: 370f. notes. Neither related to ñpi ‘early', nor to ɛipńvij.
ɛipývŋ [f.] ‘peace, time of peace' (Il.), cf. Trümpy 1950: 183ff., later ‘peace treaty', in the
LXX also '(wish) of blessing' as a Hebraism (Wackernagel IF 31 (1912/13): 263f.); as a
goddess, daughter of Zeus and Themis (Hes.). <PG?>
•VAR ipáva (Dor., Boeot., Arc., etc.), also ipŕva (Gort. IIª: x[i]pývas [gen.] with
secondary aspiration), ipɛíva (Thess.), εipηva (Delph. IVª, Pi., B.), ɛipáva (NWGr.,
etc.), ɛpηvă (Aeol., gramm.), Eipýva, -ávŋ (PN, Lycia).
•COMP As a first member in εipηvo-rolós (X.), etc.
●DER ɛipηvaños ‘peaceful' (Hdt.), ɛipηvкóç belonging to peace' (Att., Hell.; after
лоλεμкóç; Chantraine 1956a: 151); denominative εipηvɛúш [v.] 'keep peace, live in
peace' (Pl.) with ɛipŕvevois (lamb.), εipŋvéw 'id.' (Arist., after лоλεμéш). On the
Lacon. PN Fεipáva see Kretschmer Glotta 7 (1916): 332, Bechtel 1923: 155.
•ETYM The many dialectal forms cannot be combined under one form, but must be
loans with incomplete adaptation (Leumann 1950: 277). The original anlaut is
perhaps, according to the hesitant suggestion of Wackernagel IF 25 (1909): 327', open
ip- in Ionic and elsewhere, which was first rendered in Attic by &-, later by εip-; the
Attic orthography became dominant. The occurrence of -prvη (also Att.) versus
-pāvā was explained by Whitney Tucker TAPA 93 (1962): there was an early
dissimilation of *æ to *ē before * in one of the following syllables. This prevented
the so-called Attic Rückverwandlung of *re to pa. No etymology; Pre-Greek origin
is very probable, principally because of the ending (cf. Aðývη, Muкývŋ, etc.); thus
also Chantraine 1933: 206.
ɛpoчaɩ [v.] ‘to ask' (II.). <IE *h,r(e)u- ‘ask, inquire'>
•VAR Also έpέoμµaɩ, ¿pέw (epic), subj. (with short vowel) ¿pɛíoµεv, imp. med. εpɛLO
(from *pɛvo? Chantraine 1942: 297), aor. ¿péσαι (Od.), fut. ɛipησoµai (Od., Ion.),
έpησoµαι (Att.). See Chantraine 1942: 394.
•DIAL Myc. e-re-u-te-re /ereutēres/.
•COMP With prefix: àv-, di-, -, Éπ-.
•DER Agent noun έpevtaí Instytαí, inquirers', name of the state exactors on Crete
(inscr.); secondary presents pɛɛívw, ¿pɛvváw, ► έpwτáw.
•ETYM The verbal noun έpɛv-taí beside pɛve. ¿pɛúva 'search (Aeol.)' (H.) and the
subjunctive épɛíoμεv (A 62, from *εpéƑ-o-μεv) lead to the reconstruction έpέ(F)-w,

=== page 220 ===

!
392
sipos
athematic **pεv-μ. Therefore, εpoμa is derived from zero grade **pf-oμai; for the
aorist épéσal, one also supposes *pF-éσ0α (with Attic development): both of these
are from IE *h,ru-e-. The shifting accentuation (Epεσa beside épεσ0α, but also εл-
Epéσ0α) shows the uncertainty of the speakers regarding the function of the zero-
grade forms.
There are no direct cognates outside Greek. The form is perhaps seen in ON raun
[f.] 'attempt, test', IE *h,rou-neh₂-; further, see ►¿pɛvváw and ►¿pɛɛívw.
εipos [n.] 'wool' (Od.), also a plant name = yvaqáλλov 'cotton weed' (Ps.-Dsc.; on the
name Strömberg 1940: 105) and name of a fever (Hp. apud Erot.; because of the
temperature?, cf. Strömberg 1944: 74ff.). <IE *ueru-os- 'wool'>
•DIAL Myc. we-we-si-je-ja /werwesieiai/ 'women who work the wool', from we-we-si-
jo(-) /werwesios/.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ɛiρо-лóкоç 'with woollen fleece', -kóμoç 'preparing
wool (both II.). As a second member in ɛű-ɛpoç (Hp., AP), Att. ɛű-ɛpos (with ɛvɛp-
ía [Pl. Com.]) 'with beautiful wool', εл-εpoç ‘'sheep' (Del³ 644, 15, appr. 300ª, Aeolic
Asia Minor); on the phonetics Schulze 1933a: 367f., Forster 1950: 41; on the second
member (for *εv- and *εл-εpηc) see Sommer 1948: 112; on uncertain ɛɛɩpaç acc. pl.
f. (S. Fr. 751, v. k.) Fraenkel 1910: 130.
●DER εplov (epic Ion.), Att. Cret. εptov 'wool', pɩ (Hell. poet) with artificial
abbreviation (Schwyzer: 5846); thence εipívɛos 'of wool, Att., etc. ¿pɛoÛç, ¿peloûç (for
-touc) 'id.', with cross έpεivous (pap. V-VI³); èpέa 'wool' (Hell.; after alyéa et al.;
Chantraine 1933: 91); on the derivations Schwyzer: 468.
⚫ETYM Most interesting among the words compared with ɛipos is Lat. vervēx, -ēcis
'wether', a derivation in k- of ueru- (see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). ɛlpoç ultimately
continues *FÉPFOC, a form now proven by Myc. we-we-. See further ► ápýv.
tipoy →hépoy.
εipw 1 [v.] 'to string, attach' (Pi.). <IE *ser- 'string together'>
VAR Mostly present; aor. ɛipal, poα (IA; cf. Schwyzer: 753), perf. med. ptc.
¿epµévos, eipµévos (Ion., etc.), plpf. čɛpto (Hom.), perf. act. dɩ-ɛîpêa (X.).
•COMP Mostly with prefix, especially ovv-ɛipw 'connect'; also with ¿v-, ảv-, di-, ¿§-,
etc. (IA).
•DER εpματα [pl.] ‘earrings' (Od.), 'sling' (Ael.), also кαеéρματα (Anacr.); vεpois
(Evɛipw) 'insertion, fitting' (Th. 1, 6), diɛpois ‘sting through' (Hell.); from the present
ɛipuós 'connecting' (Arist.; on the spiritus asper see below), ouvεpμós (Demetr.
Eloc. 180); with o-grade öpμoç 'chain, collar', whence ópµá, ópμaеóç.
⚫ETYM Beside the full grade yod-present εipw (as a simplex only in Pi. and Arist.),
Latin has a thematic present serō, and Arm. y-erum 'to tie, link, string together',
which probably derives from *ser-s- or *ser-nu- (Martirosyan 2010 s.v.). This
etymology presupposes that εipw lost the spiritus asper; this can be understood from
the fact that the simplex is rare in comparison with σuv-ɛípw, etc. An aspirated ɛipw
is mentioned by EM 304, 30 (see Solmsen 1901: 2922); the verbal nouns may also have
the old aspiration. Further traces of the verbal root and nouns are found in Italic
(Osc. aserum asserere'), in Celtic (OIr. sern(a)id 'serit', a nasal present which
1.
!
{
į
}
ε"pwv
393
coincided with sern(a)id 'sterniť'; see Thurneysen 1946: 133), and in OLith. sėris
'thread'; further, ON sørvi [n.] 'collar' < PGm. *sarwija-, which belongs to the old
Gm. word for 'weapon, equipment', e.g. Go. sarwa [n.pl.] < PGm. *sarwa-, IE *sor-
uo-. évɛpois and Lat. insertiō are due to parallel innovation.
εipw 2 [v.] 'to say'. <IE *uerh,- 'speak (solemnly)'>
•VAR only isg. pres. (Od.) and 3sg. εlpɛv as an aorist (B. 16, 20; 74), but ερετo (A
513), -OVτO (λ 342) rather mean ‘asked' (cf. Chantraine 1942: 341³), ɛpetai (Arat.) for
ɛpŋtaɩ like sporadic Hell. εpɛкa for ɛpŋka (to ¿ppéðŋy), fut. epic Ion. ¿pέw, Att.
¿pŵ, perf. med. ɛpŋtai (Il.; Arg. feƑpŋµévos, Cret. Ƒɛpŋµévos), with fut. pass.
εipησoμa (epic Ion. Il.), perf.act. ɛpòкa (A., Ar.), aor. pass. ptc. pŋłɛíc (Od.),
εipény (Hdt.), rather after εpηα (Lejeune 1972: 1574) than from *Ƒpεеη
(Schwyzer: 654); Att. έppηηv, Hell. innovation έppέ¤ŋy, fut. ¿½¤ñσoµaι (Att.). As
an aorist, εlлov is used, as a present, quí, λéyw, Hell. also έpw (Schwyzer: 784') with
ipf. pεov (ε-) 'said' (Hp.).
•COMP Often with prefix: лpo-, лрoσ-, кat-, also ȧv-, ån-, di-, ¿n-, ovv-, úñ-ɛpŵ, etc.
•DER Action nouns: pñσiç (IA & 291), Arc. Ƒpñσiç pronunciation, speech' (on the mg.
Chantraine 1933: 283, further Holt 1941: 87f.), often to the prefixed verbs: àvá-, àлó-,
diá-, è̟ní-, katá-, napá-, ñpó-, épóσ-pŋois (cf. Holt, see index); þñµa ‘statement,
word, story' (Ion. Archil.), as a grammatical term 'predicate, verb', also άnó-, ¿ní-,
лpó-, лpóʊ-pηµa; pŕtpa, -n (§ 393, X., Dor.), El. Ƒpáτpа (Schwyzer: 679), Cypr. with
dissimilation FPτα (from where εƑрητáσатu) 'agreement, treaty, law,
pronunciation' (Chantraine 1933: 333), with pητpɛúw ‘pronounce' (Lyc.); on the
suffix -τpä- cf. pytńp, pŕtwp.
Agent nouns: pηp 'speaker' (I 443), pητwp 'speaker', especially 'orator' in state.
affairs (trag., Att.).
Verbal adj. pŋtós ‘agreed, settleď (Þ 445) < *urh,-to-; cf. Ammann 1956: 20, 'what
can be said (A., S.), often opposed to appηtos (e.g. Hes. Op. 4), ảnó-, ¿ní-, пpó-
pistos; rapa-ppηtóc 'convincing' (Il.; to лaрá-o̟ηш, -εлεv). Adverb Siα-ppηSηv
'expressly' (h. Merc., etc.; Schwyzer 1950: 450), εл-рρηηу 'opеn' (Hell.), ondηv only
A. D., EM (from Sta-pp.).
Note the juridical and official mg. of many of the nouns (cf. the outer-Greek
cognates below); see Porzig 1942: 265f., Fournier 1946: 5ff., 94ff., 224ff.
•ETYM All forms derive from a disyllabic root *uerh₁-, including (Ƒ)ɛípw < *uerh,-ie-
by Pinault's rule (loss of laryngeal in the sequence *CHIV), to which we may
compare the Hitt. yod-present ueriie/a-zi 'to call, name, order'. Hitt. also has the
particle wa(r) that indicates direct speech, properly 'said (he)'; additionally, Ru.
vrat', isg. vru 'to lie' (< *voro, *vrati) has been connected. Among the nouns,
compare Av. uruuāta- [n.] 'pronouncement, order', from IE *ureh,-to-? See also
▶eipwv.
εipwv [m., f.] 'who suggests not to know what he does' (Ar., Arist.; cf. the description
in Thphr. Char. 1, 1). <?>
•DER ɛipwvikós ‘like an ɛipwv' (Pl.; cf. Fournier 1946: 88); denominative ɛipwvεúoμα
[v.] ‘simulate' (Att., Arist.) with ɛipwvɛía ‘irony' (Att., Hell.; cf. Büchner Herm. 76

=== page 221 ===

!
394
Eic
(1941): 339ff.), ɛipwvɛúµaτα [pl.] ‘id.' (Max. Tyr.), εipwvevtýs = εïpwv (Timo) and
ЄipwVEUTIкós (sch.); also ɛipwview 'id.' (Philostr. VS 7, 1; v.1).
⚫ETYM Substantivizing and individualizing fomation in -wv (Chantraine 1933: 161; see
also Hoffmann MSS 6 (1955): 35ff.) from an unknown basis. Solmsen 1901: 263
connected the word with ɛipw 'say' as “one who only says sth. (but does not mean
it)"; is it derived from the present? Taken by Prellwitz 1892 as “one who asks", from
εipoμaι 'ask'.
Єiç [prep., adv.] 'towards' (epic II., IA, Lesb.). <IE *h,en 'in'>
•VAR Epic Ion. also έç < èvs (Cret., Arg.); details in Schwyzer 1950: 455f.
•ETYM Exists beside έv as ε beside έk, and was perhaps formed based on this
opposition. Hence εľσ-w, čσ-w [adv.] 'towards' (Il.), with added -w (cf. ǎvw s.v.
► ȧvá).
ɛiç [num.] 'one'. <IE *sem- 'one'>
•VAR Dor. ñs; fem. lúa, ntr. ëv, gen. Ėvóc, quãs, etc.
•DIAL Myc. e-me dat./hemei/.
⚫ETYM The pre-form **vs (still visible in Gort. εv[8] 8- < vs 8-) derives from *чu-s
IE *sem-s, beside which is a zero grade fem. ►μía < *sm-ih₂. The gen. έv-óc replaced
*εμ-ós after **vç, ěv. An old numeral, found in Lat. sem-per in one stroke, ever' and
(though unclear in detail) in ToB se(me), A sas [m.], etc.; in Gm., it probably occurs
in Go. sin-teins 'daily', etc., as well as in Arm. mi 'one' (generalized from the
feminine). An ablauting variant is ►óµóc, àµóc, ►äµa with derivatives; note further
yyɩa. ɛiç. Háqɩɩ H., with a velar suffix as in Lat. singulī.
¿íσkw→olka.
εσa 1⇒oda.
εťσoμα 3 [v.fut.] 'set oneself in movement, hurry'. <IE *uei(H)- 'track down' (?) ►
•VAR Aor. (é)ɛíoato.
•COMP Also with prefix: έлɩ- ‘hasten against', кατα- ‘hasten down', μετ- 'drive
inbetween' (Hom.).
ETYM Originally from (F)iεμal, acc. to Bechtel 1914 S.V., so perhaps the word must be
understood as (F)ĺσoμαι, ε(F)ĺσατO, (F)íσατo; the loss of the digamma facilitated the
(semantic) connection with ɛqui 'go' (Chantraine 1942: 293 and 412). See
LIV² s.v. *ueih, sein Augenmerk richten auf, trachten nach'.
=>
εlow •VAR Eσw. → ɛiç.
εiτα [adv.] 'then, thereupon'. <IE *h,e(i)- dem. pron.>
•VAR Ion. Mess. Boeot. εiτεv; also л-εɩτα, Ion. Dor. ën-eite(v).
εμαι and
•ETYM From ►ɛi and an adverbial element -τα, -Tε(V); there are no direct parallels
outside Greek. Cf. Schwyzer: 629.
εTE 'sive - sive, whether - or', etc. (Il.).<IE *h,e(i)- dem. pron.➤
-
•VAR Dor. aitε; often repeated εitε – EÏTE.
!
!
1
*KAOTOS
•ETYM From ►εi (Dor. ai) and enclitic ►τɛ <*kwe.
Eiweα [v.] 'to be used to, use' (Il.). <IE *sue deh,- 'character, custom'>>
395
•VAR weα (see Wissmann MSS 6 (1955): 124ff.), Lesb. ɛwa, plpf. ɛiwav, Ion.
¿woɛa.
•ETYM Old intransitive perfect of state. The denominative (w (from Boc)
functions as a transitive present with a complete inflexion (aor. ¿íσal, etc.); on
supposed intr. **Ow, see Owv. H. offers the unclear glosses εvéwкεv· εïw0εv (from
**0ów?, Bechtel 1921, 1: 88; 369; from *εƑƑε0-), εóкατı ɛióbaσiv; cf. Schwyzer: 775.
The unexplained long vowel in *σé-σFw0-α, whence "wa (with Grassmann's
dissimilation), etc., is also found in yέ-ywv-a 'I can be heard', which is old, too. The
long vowel also appears in ▸ños beside ▸oç. Cognate verbs are unknown, but the
same univerbation of *sue 'self and *deh,- 'to posit' is found in nominal formations:
Lat. sodālis 'member of a fraternity' and Skt. svadhá- [f.] ‘custom, peculiarity, etc.'.
ÈK →.
ÉKάɛpyoç [adj.] epithet of Apollo (II.), also of Artemis (Ar. Th. 972 [lyr.]). <GR>
⚫ETYM Interpreted by the ancients as 'protecting at distance' or 'working at distance'
(εкáç and ɛpуw or έpyov), but the word rather means ‘freely working': i.e., it is a
bahuvrihi compound of *čka < *Ƒéкă, an adverb in -ă (σápa, etc.) of ►έкúv, and
Epyov. See Bechtel 1914 S.V., as well as Schwyzer: 4398. Cf. ►έkηßóλoç. έkα- appears in
a few PNs, such as‘Eka-µýdŋ (Hom.) and 'Eкá-los (Teos) (but Boeot. Fhɛká-dãµos,
together with Thess. Ƒɛкé-Sãµoç and Att. Aкádŋuos is rather Pre-Greek).
¿кάç [adv.] ‘far, far away', both local and temporal (Il.); ßɛkáç· µaкpáv ‘far' (H.). <IE
*sue-kns?
■COMP Compar. έкαστέpw, superl. ÉкaσTάτw.
•DER *kǎ-0εv 'from afar' (Il.; cf. ¿кά-τεpoç), ȧó-εкáç far off (Nic.).
•⚫ETYM Cf. ȧvбpa-кáç 'man for man' (v 14); the word is from the reflexive/anaphoric
pronoun ►ε, ε, so properly ‘on itself? The same distributive suffix also occurs in
Sanskrit, e.g. parva-śás 'limb by limb', śata-śás 'in hundreds, hundred by hundred'
(AV+); cf. Schwyzer: 630 and Klingenschmitt 1975. The word εкadı [dat.] (Dura,
Hell.), name of an estate, is unclear; see Cumont RPh. 48 (1922): 104.
кασtos [pron.] ‘every one' (II.). <GR➤
•VAR FÉKασTOS (Gort., El., NWGr., Arc.).
in every
•DER Several adverbial derivatives: εкάστоτε ‘every time' (IA), έкáστo
place' (y 8), éкαστаXoυ 'everywhere' and several formations with a suffix -X-, further
Éкαστάкiç 'on every occasion' (Corc.), etc.
⚫ETYM The solution of Wackernagel KZ 29 (1888): 144ff. is probably correct (see also
Schwyzer: 6304): viz., that the word is from *εкáç üç ‘every one for himself (cf. εiç
Tɩç 'unusquisque'). From *έкáç τɛo > έkáσtov, *έkác tự > έkáσtw, the other cases
(like škaστoç, etc.) were formed, along with the superlative in -1στoç. When έkaσtos
was analyzed as кα-στoç, this led to the creation of έkátepos (IA), fekátepos (Gort.,
Delph.) each of both' (based on ätepos, nótεpos, etc.), with several adverbial
derivatives like έкatépwłɛv, -wÔɩ, -wσɛ (IA, etc.); note the form έкάτεpε(v) ‘on both

=== page 222 ===

!
396
'Eкáτη
sides' (II.), based on üлɛpðεv, évεpðεv, etc., for metrically awkward έкατέpwεv. See
Schwyzer: 627f., Lejeune 1939: 223f., Mastrelli Stud. ital. fil. class. 27 (1956): 8, and
Lazzeroni Ann. Pisa 2:25 (1956): 136ff.
‘Eкáτŋ [f.] popular goddess originating from Anatolia (Hes. Th. 411ff.; h. Cer.), more
specifically from Caria, and identified with Artemis (E. Supp. 676 [lyr.]); cf. Nilsson
1941: 722ff. ◄ PG>
•DER 'Ekataloç 'belonging to H.' (S., D.), also 'Eкatýσioç and 'Ekatiкóç ‘id.' (late);
'Eкáτaιov [n.] effigy of Hecate, which was put up in front of houses or on three-
forked roads (Ar.), 'Eкaτησιov 'id.' (Plu.), 'Eкατηjoiα [n.pl.] festival in Cos. Several
Anatolian PNS: 'Eкataïoç, 'Eкaτývwp, 'Eкατãç, etc. (Bechtel 1917b: 150f.).
•ETYM Originally an epithet, assumed to have resulted from a cross of ▸έkatηßólos
or ►έкηẞóλoç. However, I see no reason to assume that it had an initial digamma.
More probably, of Pre-Greek origin.
ékatnßelétŋs [adj.] epithet of Apollo (A 75, Hes. Sc. 100, h. Ap. 157; always in gen.
-Éτão). <GR►
•VAR After this έkatŋßeλétis (Theol. Ar.).
-
•ETYM Either from the old full-grade aorist stem *g"elh,- of þáλλw, or (better) for
older **кaτη-ẞελns, with enlarging -τηs as in aiɛt-yɛvétŋs, for *aiɛɩ-yεvnç, etc. after
the example of cases like ȧкaλα-ppefé-tnjs (> åkaλappeitns), veqeλ-nyɛpé-ta, etc.;
cf. Schwyzer: 451f. The synonymous εкatη-þóλoç, Dor. -ā- (II.) is a compound with
Báλλw. The word έкatηßεétηs was already compared with έк-ẞólos by the
ancients, and interpreted as 'hitting from afar' or as 'with a hundred shots'. Contrary
to the latter sense which was proposed by Wackernagel IF 45 (1926): 314ff., who
translated 'hitting hundreds' - it must be objected that one would rather expect
εкατoμ- as a first member; cf. the old word έкατóμ-ßη. The attractive connection
with Eкn-ẞólos suggests that εкατη-ßελετη, -ßóλos are metrically lengthened
"Streckformen", perhaps adapted to έкaτóv. The word εкατη-ẞóλoç could be a cross
of εкn-ẞóλos and the Apollonian epithet "Eкaτoç (II.); compare e.g. "Iqi-toç for 'Iqı-
kpátns, -kλñs, etc. Acc. to von Wilamowitz 1931: 325, “Ekaτoç, 'Ekáτŋ are from an
Anatolian language and adapted by the Greeks to έkatnþóλos, éknþóλos; however,
έкá-ɛpyoç is certainly Greek. See further Schwyzer: 4398 and Kretschmer Glotta 18
(1930): 235f.
¿katóµßŋ [f.] name of a large, official festive sacrifice (II.). <IE *dkmtom-gu-eh₂-
'sacrifice of hundred cows'>
•DER 'Ekaτóµßaia [n.pl.] (Delph., Arg.) with the month name 'Eкatoµßaiwv, -ŵvos
(Att., etc.), also 'Eкаτоμßεúç (Lacon.); Eкaτóμẞatos epithet of Zeus and Apollo (H.,
EM).
⚫ETYM Collective bahuvrihi of εкατóv and the zero grade of ßous, gen. Bo(F)ós, with
a suffix -ā (Schwyzer: 450, Sommer 1948: 76); originally, *έкατóµ-ßƑ-ā. A
counterpart is found in Indo-Iranian, e.g. Skt. śata-gu- 'possessing hundred cows',
possibly through *śata-gv-a-, śata-gv-ín- ‘id.'; counterparts with a thematic vowel are
the PNs Dáśa-gv-a-, Náva-gv-a- 'having ten (nine) cows'. The word is traditionally
explained as the 'sacrifice of a hundred cows'; cf. Oettinger 2008b. Differently,
Ékexeipia
397
Thieme 1952: 62ff., who translates it as 'winning a hundred cows' (scil. Saís). On the
form, see Wackernagel IF 45 (1926): 319. After έkatóµßŋ was built the late (Jul.)
xư có un
Éкατóv [num.] ‘hundred'. <IE *dkmtom 'hundred'>
•VAR Arc. EKOTÓV.
•COMP As a first member in many compounds, like έkatóµ-redos ‘measuring one
hundred feet' (Y 164; see Sommer 1948: 28ff.); also έкατovτα- (after -кovtα-), e.g.
Éкatovta-étŋs ‘one hundred years old' (Pi.).
⚫DER έKATOσTÓS 'the hundredth' (IA) with έкατоστús 'the hundred (X.); éкατoστý
[f.] 'contribution of one percent' with έкατoστ-ηpios, -ŋpía, -ιaños, -εúw (Att.).
•ETYM Based on the comparison with Skt. śatám, Av. satǝm, ToB kante, Lat. centum,
OIr. cét, Go. hund, Lith. šimtas, and OCS sǝto, we arrive at IE *kmtóm. It is likely,
however, that this had an initial *d- because of the relationship with *dekm, etc. ‘ten'
(see Séкa), so properly *dkmtóm. This *d- was a preglottalized stop (*d-), which
was reflected as ε- in Gr. Éкατóv (on Arc. έкOTÓν, see Schwyzer: 88, 344); see
Kortlandt MSS 42 (1983): 97-104. The aspiration was then taken from Ev ‘one' (see
▶Bońkovta).
έкɛi [adv.] (over) there, to there' (Hdt.). ◄IE *(h,)e-ke(i)- ‘there'▷
•VAR KET (Archil., Herod.), кñ (Sapph.), an old instrumental. From there (ε)кɛеɩ,
кñеɩ 'id.', (ε)кεiеev 'from there', (ε) Kεiσε 'to there'.
⚫ETYM Ending as in лɛĩ, лñ ‘where?”, tɛi-dɛ, îñ-dε 'here', etc. (Schwyzer: 549f.) and,
like these, probably an old locative/instrumental. The basis is a deictic particle, IE
*ke, *ki, seen e.g. in Lat. ce-do, hi-c, ci-s and with pronominal function in Hitt. ki
'this', Lith. šis 'this', etc. (see also τηµεpov); the 3rd person deixis must then be a
Greek innovation (cf. ►¿кɛĭvos). The initial &- (cf. ¿-keïvos, ¿-x¤és) is an inherited
demonstrative particle, as well: Oskc. e-tanto ‘tanta', Ru. é-tot ‘this', Skt. a-sáu ‘that'
(see ▶OUTOC).
¿кɛīvoç [dem. pron.] 'that one (over there), ille' (Il.), on the use Schwyzer 1950: 208f.
<IE *h,eno- 'that'>
•VAR Also KƐTVOÇ (Il.), кñvoç (Aeol., Dor.; Dor. also τñvoç); with added deictic pcl.
EKEIVOσ-í (Att.).
●DER έkɛívwç, -vη; ккvo-еεv (Alc.), τηvε(v) (Dor.) “кεiv', material adjective
EKɛív-ivoç 'from that material' (Arist.).
•ETYM The formation consists of several demonstrative elements: *¿-ke-evos (or *¿-
кɛɩ-ɛvoç, acc. to Ruijgh Lingua 28 (1971): 169); the last element *h,eno- also occurs in
the frozen form vn 'the third day', OCS on 'that', the Hitt. demonstr. pron. aši-,,
uni-, and Lat. enim ‘for' (De Vaan 2008 s.v.). On έ-kƐ-, SEE ► ÈKEI.
¿кɛxɛɩpía [f.] ‘truce, festive time' (Th., Att. inscr., etc.). <GR➤
•VAR Dor. εкεxηpía.
•DER Hence εкEXεipo-pópos 'who transfers an έкεxɛƖpía, mediator' (Max. Tyr., Poll.).
Backformation (cf. ►ẞíßλoç) ¿кéxεipov, -ηpov [n.] 'travel permit when transferring

=== page 223 ===

398
éknBó入os
a truce' (Hell.), also έкɛɛiptov (Hell.); also ¿v-ɛкεxɛipov, -xηpov ‘id.' (Hell.); and
µεt-ekέxηpov ‘period between two festive times' (Olympia 24ª).
•ETYM From xɛɩv xɛīpaç, with the suffix -ía (cf. Schwyzer: 441; on the dissimilation,
261). Cf. Sommer 1948: 118f.
¿êŋßóλos [adj.] epithet of Apollo (II.), later also of Artemis (S.), again later of objects.
<IE *uek- 'wish, want'>>
•VAR Boeot. Fɛкaẞóλoç.
⚫DER Éкηẞoλín, -a (E 54 in plur.; Call., Str.) and denominative εкηẞoλéw (Max. Tyr.).
Also έкηẞελÉTηs 'id.' (Orph. Fr. 297, 11; cf. εкατηßελétns).
•ETYM Metrical lengthening for *έкă-ßóλoç, taken with έкáç in antiquity and
interpreted as 'shooting/striking from afar' (thus Belardi Doxa 3 (1950): 203f.). It is
rather from έkúv, as 'striking at will' (see ►έkáɛpyoç); ¿кŋßoλíŋ means ‘accuracy,
precision', but was probably already taken as 'shots from afar' by the poet of E 54
(Trümpy 1950: 114; see also Porzig 1942: 204 and 210).
˝êŋλos [adj.] ‘untroubled, at one's ease, quietly'. <IE *uek- ‘wish, want’▷
•VAR Dor. čкāλoç.
●DER Also εкŋλoç, ɛűkāλos (II.). From it έênλía. qiλoτŋσía ‘of friendship”, ɛvкaλía.
nouxía 'quietness', εúкαλεÏ· άτpεµíšɛ 'keeps quiet' (H.).
•ETYM Uncertain. The word is best taken, as per Buttmann 1825:1: 141, as *fékālos (=
уéкaλov. ňσuxov H.; on the digamma, see Chantraine 1942: 129f.), from *Féкǎ in
► εкάɛpуoç, etc., with suffixal -äλos, -nos (Chantraine 1933: 241f., Schwyzer: 484).
Thus, it would properly mean “at will”. ɛкŋλos was formed after the numerous
compounds with εú-; Súσкηλos was modelled after it. The semantically attractive
connection with Skt. úcyati 'to find pleasure, be used to', ókas- [n.] ‘abode,
residence', etc. would be fine for εкηλoç (root *h,euk- 'get used to', see LIV²), but
does not explain the form кηλos.
*кητɩ [adv.] 'by the will of, for the sake of (Od.). <IE *uek- ‘wish, want'>>
•VAR Also ❝кĀTI.
•COMP ȧÉкITI 'against the will' (Hom.).
•ETYM Related to έka-, έкúv and ảέkwv, but the formation is unclear. See Leumann
1950: 251ff., who states that it was created after (Oεwv) lótŋti for (ewv) ȧɛkóvtwv.
зклαуλoç [adj.] ‘terrible, surprising, tremendous' (Il.). ◄GR►
•DER έклαуλεoμα 'be surprised' (Hdt., trag.).
⚫ETYM Both клауλоç and еклλαуóτηta. ¿žaiσióτητα (H.) are usually derived from
*зклλαу-λоç, related to εклλαу-ñva 'frighten' with dissimilatory loss of the first λ;
this is quite possible.
еклобóv [adv.] 'out of the way, away, far' (IA). <GR>
⚫ETYM From к лобшν with a shift of accent (Schwyzer: 389 and 625). Cf. ►έµлodóv.
έktɩkós [adj.] ‘regarding the ɩs, i.e. the situation, the state of the body, regarding the
state, usual, skillful' (Hell.); also name of a continuing (literally "hectical") fever
(medic.; cf. Strömberg 1944: 85f.). <GR
}
Ék-p入vvdávw
●DER έktikevoµai ‘suffer from ¿ktikós (rupetós)' (Alex. Trall.).
⚫ETYM From ěčiç, related to ►xw.
¿кτóç [adv.] and [prep.] 'outside, far from' (Il.). <IE *h₁eg"-s 'out'>
•VAR έ×¤ós (Locr., Delph.), [&] к0ós (Arg.).
399
•DER έkto-01 ‘id.' (Il.), έkto-0ɛv (Od.), čktoσ-0ε(v) (Il.) 'from outside', čкto-σɛ ‘(to)
outside (277); έ×00-daлós 'foreign, inimical' (Pergam. IIP, after åλλo-daлóç;
associated with exos, ¿xеpóc?), ¿×¤óσ-SIкoç Síкα 'trial against a foreigner' (Arc. IIIª;
cf. Schwyzer 1950: 538); exo 'outside' (Epid.; after oïкoɩ, etc.), εx0w = w (Delph.).
¿któ-tng, -ntos [f.] 'absence, being far away' (Gal.).
•ETYM From έk, shaped after έv-tóç; ¿x¤ós derives from *¿ko-tóç. See Schwyzer: 326
and 630 and Lejeune 1939 (see index). Cf. ►¿ and ►¿xеpós.
"EкTwp, -opos [m.] son of Priamos and Hekabe, the greatest hero of the Trojans (II.).
<IE *seg 'hold'>
•DER'EKTópεoç 'regarding Hektor' (Il.), perhaps Aeolic for -pios (see e.g. Wathelet
1970: 159ff.). Patronymic'Ektopídŋs = Astyanax (Il.).
⚫ETYM Derived from the root of xw, and identical with the agent noun έêtwp (see
on ►xw). The root originally meant 'to overpower, keep in check', thence 'to hold'
in Greek.
έkupóç [m.] 'father of the husband, father-in-law' (II.). ◄IE *suekuro- 'father-in-law'>
●DER έkupά, -ń ‘mother of the husband, mother-in-law' (II.). Denominative Boeot.
ÉKoupɛúw 'be father-in-law' (Corinn.).
⚫ETYM Old kinship term, preserved in many languages: Skt. śváśura- (assimilated
from *svaś-), YAv. x'asura-, Lat. socer, OHG swehur, Lith. šēšuras (assimilated from
*seš-), all of which are from IE *suékuro-; the original anlaut can still be seen in the
meter: qíɛ (Ƒh)έкupέ г 172 (cf. Schwyzer: 304 and Chantraine 1942: 146). The
oxytonesis must be a Greek innovation (after έкupά; cf. also лεvėɛpós). To έkupá
corresponds Arm. skesur (< *kuekurā- with assimilation from *suek-), with the ā-
stem replacing an older u-stem; cf. Skt. śvaśru-, MoP xusrü, Lat. socrus, MW chwegr,
OHG swigar, OCS svekry, and IE *suekrúH- [f.]. Another innovation is Go. swaihro
= ON sværa (ōn-stem), whence the new msc. Go. swaihra. In other languages, as
well, the word for 'father-in-law' is sometimes derived from that for 'mother-in-law':
thus clearly in Arm. skesr-ayr, lit. 'husband of the mother-in-law', MW chwegr-wn,
MOHG Schwiegervater from Schwieger(mutter); and probably in OCS svekrv. This
explains the oxytonesis in έkupóç. The word probably contains the reflexive *sue (cf.
►ȧéλo); however, the ending is obscure. On úкɛpóc, -ά with vowel metathesis
(Lydia), see Schulze KZ 52 (1924): 152.
oкέλλw; further forms are
oλúw 1. See also ▸ Qελλóc,
έk-qλñvaɩ [v.aor.] ‘bubble forward' (E. Fr. 470). ◄IE?? *b^leu- ‘flow’▷
•ETYM Cf. the opposite άлo-σкλñvaɩ ‘dry up', related to
unknown. The word has been connected with oλéw,
pλŋvów s.v. ►λŋvaqάw and ►¿к-qλvvdávw.
¿k-qλvvdávw [v.] 'to break out, burst up' (Hp.). →λúw 1.

=== page 224 ===

400
ÉKÓV
KX
Ě入aÚvw
401
έêúv [ptc.] ‘deliberate(ly)'. <IE *uek- ‘wish, want'>
•VAR Cret., Locr. Ƒɛкúv; fem. έкoñσα (Cyren. IVª έкaσσα, Cret. Ƒɛкα0<0>α in
yɛkaðá. έkoñσa ‘willing' H.), ntr. έkóv; opposite åźkwv, Att. ǎkwv, áékovoa, ǎkovσa
(Dor. άékaσσa in <ảέ>kaσσa· äkovʊa H.), áékov, dkov ‘involuntary, unwittingly'
(II.).
●DER EKOÚσɩoç [adj.] 'voluntary' (IA) with έкovσióτηs (late), έkovolášoµaι ‘(be)
sacrifice(d) voluntarily' with έкovσiασµóç voluntary sacrifice' (LXX); άεкoÚσιoç,
ȧkoúσιoç 'unvoluntary, reluctant, forced' (IA); έкovt-í, -ýv, -ŋdóv 'voluntarily'
(post-classical), έkovτη [m.] 'volunteer' (Epict.), like ¿ελovτý; Denominative
άekašóµevos [ptc.] (Od., h. Cer.), after άvayкašóμεvos (Wackernagel IF 45 (1926):
314²).
⚫ETYM Old participle (cf. Wackernagel 1920-1924(1): 283 and 286), identical with Skt.
uś-ánt-, fem. us-at-í (cf. Cyren. έкασσα < *Ƒεк-уτ-α) except for the root vocalism
(on the spiritus asper, see Schwyzer: 227). The Greek full grade must originate from
the lost indicative *Féк-u = Hitt. uekmi, Skt. váśmi ‘want, desire'. The origin of εкa-
(*uek-nt-?) is unclear. Cf. ► έкáɛpyos and ► čêntɩ.
Eλaía [f.] 'the olive (tree)' (Od.), rare λatos [m.] '(wild) olive' (Pi. Fr. 46, S. Tr. 1197).
<PG➤
•VAR Att. also λáa, Ion. ¿λain; Cypr. λaifov (Kadmos 3, 1965, 148).
•DIAL Myc. e-ra-wa, -wo /elaiwa/, /-won/.
●COMP Many compounds, especially since Hellenistic times. As a first member
¿λato- does not only refer to λatov, but also to έλaía, e.g. ¿λaió-qutos ‘planted with
olives' (A.). As a second member in bahuvrihis like ǎv-ɛλatos 'without oil (olives)'
(Thphr., Str.); in determinative compounds like ȧypɩ-éλalos ăyprog EXaiog
(Thphr., etc.), xaμ-ɛλaía 'Daphne oleoides' (Nic.), cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 257,
Strömberg 1940: 110; yλUк-éλatov 'sweet oil', údp-éλatov "water-oil", i.e. 'oil mixed
with water' (late).
=
●DER λαov [n.] ‘olive oil, oil in general' (II.); on the pair λaía (-os) : λatov
(distinguishing the tree from the product), see Wackernagel 1920-1924(2): 17,
Schwyzer 1950: 30. Substantives: έλãïç [f.], ¿λḍdaç [acc.pl.] 'olive trees' (Att.; see
Chantraine 1933: 344), diminutive έládov (-ídov) ‘small olive tree', also (from
Eλalov) a little oil' (Com., pap.); ¿λawv, -wvoç [m.] 'thicket of olives' (LXX, pap.),
'the olive mountain' (NT, J.), diminutive λauwvídiov (pap.); λαεúç ‘id.' (Chalkis;
see Boẞhardt 1942: 21f.). Adjective έλaïïvoç, ¿λáïvoç ‘of olive wood, belonging to the
olive' (II.), 'of olive oil (Orph. L. 717); -ívɛos ‘of olive wood (1320 and 394; metrically
convenient contamination of -ɩvos and -ɛoç, Risch 1937: 122, S. Schmid 1950: 38);
ελaкóç of olive' (Aristeas, pap.); λainpós 'regarding oil' (Hp., Pl., pap.; see
Chantraine 1933: 232); έλawdŋç ‘oily' (Hp., Arist.); ελanεç belonging to the olive'
(S.; on the formation Schwyzer: 527). Denominative verbs: λaïw 'to cultivate olives'
with λaτp, -τns 'collector of olives' (Poll.) and λaiστηpiov 'olive press' (Mylasa);
ελaчóoμa 'to be oiled' (Arist.) with έλaiwotę (Zos. Alch.).
ETYM Lat. olīva, which was borrowed from Greek, proves a basic form *λaífã, with
λaчfov (which is now found in Cypriot) corresponding to Lat. oleum. All other
European forms derive from Latin (see WH 2, 205f.). The word is no doubt Pre-
Greek. Arm. ewł‘oil' may derive from the same source.
¿λaíayvoç [m.] name of a shrub, Salix Capra (Thphr. HP 4, 10, 1; 2; Boeot.). ◄GR➤
•VAR Also λÉ- (H.).
•ETYM Perhaps a determinative compound from έλaía and ►ǎyvos; cf. Bechtel
1921, 1: 305 and Strömberg 1937: 72.
έλávŋ [f.] ‘torch from reed, reed bundle' (Hell.). ◄PG(S,V)►
•DER Also ελεvη. λaµñáç, detý ‘torch, reed' (H.), also a twisted basket containing the
sacred utensils for a festival of Artemis Brauronia, the so-called 'Eλevηopópia (Poll.);
to this έλévɩoç. ȧyуɛïov xwρoûν τéτаpτov 'vessel containing a quarter' (H.).
•ETYM The plant name έλévov is uncertain; see Eλévη. For the instrument suffix
-ávŋ, cf. okanávŋ, éλektávŋ, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 199). Since -évη is very rare (only
in wλévη and Aeol. qɛpɛva), assimilation from ελávŋ was assumed (Schwyzer: 255f.).
Because of the meaning 'reed-bundle, twisted baskeť, έλávŋ, -έvη is usually related
to ►ɛiλéw ‘turn, wind', which can also account for the meaning ‘torch' (cf. deτaí
λªµñádɛç, Spáуµaτa³). Nevertheless, this etymology must be wrong, as έλávŋ is
most probably a Pre-Greek word (suffix -av-, variation a/ɛ, meaning).
šλavos [m.] · iktīvos ‘kite' (H.). ◄PG?►
⚫ETYM Unknown. It is hardly related to έλaúvw, thus probably Pre-Greek.
.
ελápyɛɩ [v.] · λaßev, έñóp<0>ŋσev, кabɛiλɛv 'took, destroyed, reduced (H.). <?>
●ETYM Acc. to von Blumenthal 1930: 35, the word is a denominative of *λapyós = Lat.
largus (?). Unknown.
laoãç [m.] "chaser”, name of an unknown bird (Ar. Av. 886). <PG?>
•VAR Accus. -ā.
•ETYM Acc. to W. Petersen Class. Phil. 32 (1937): 129, the word is a formation in -āç
from λáσal, just as τpɛσãç, õɛσãç; it is hardly from **λa-σoç (Solmsen 1909: 245,
Fraenkel 1912: 15f., Schwyzer: 461). Possibly Pre-Greek. DELG thinks that the word
was coined by Aristophanes. See ►έλéa.
¿λátŋ 1 [f.] ‘pine, fir', metonymical ‘rudder, ship', etc. (Il.). <?►
•DER έλátɩvós (metrical lengthening εiλ-) 'made of fir' (Il.), ¿λατŋïç [adj., f.] 'like fir'
(Nic.; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 345f.).
⚫ETYM No certain etymology. If we reconstruct *h Inteh₂, ελáτη might be connected
with OHG linta ‘linden', Lith. lentà ‘board, plank', Lat. lentus 'pliant, flexible', etc.
(cf. De Vaan 2008: 335).
*λáτη 2 [f.] 'the fruit enclosed by the spathe of the palm' (Dsc. 1, 109, 5). <?>
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. See DELG, Supp.
ελατivη 'cankerwort, Linaria spuria' (Dsc. 4, 40). <?>
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown.
¿λaúvw [v.] ‘to drive, push, forge (metal)', intr. 'to drive, ride' (on the mg. in the Epic
see Trümpy 1950: 95f., 115f:). <IE *h,elh₂- ‘drive, move'>

=== page 225 ===

402
Ě入apos
•VAR Also λáw in έλáāv [inf.], ¿λáwv [ptc.]; impf. λwv (Hom.), ipv. čλa (Pi.),
¿λáτw, -ávτw, -áoðw (Dor. inscr.), etc. (further Schwyzer: 681f.); aor. έλláσ(σ)al,
-ασðaι, fut. ¿λáw, perf. med. ¿λnλaµai (Il.), -aσµai (Hp., etc.), act. έλńλaкa (Hdt.),
aor. pass. ¿λa(σ)¤ñvaɩ (Hdt.).
•COMP Often with prefix: ȧn-, di-, εio-, ¿‹-, én-, nɛpɩ-, ipoσ-, etc.
=
⚫DER Action nouns: λaσiç 'march (of an army), ride, expulsion, etc.' (IA), often to
the prefixed verbs: §ɩ-, εε-, εл-, лεрi-ελασiç, etc.; rare ελaoía 'ride, march' (X.) with
άл-, -, εл-ελaσía (Hell.), after ẞo-nλaoía, etc. (from ẞo-nλaτéw, -áτηs), cf.
Schwyzer: 468f., Chantraine 1933: 83f.; λaσua 'chased metal, tin, (medic.) probe'
(Ph. Bel., Gal.) with έλασµáτov (Delos IIª, Dsc.); έλaσµós Ě入agla,Ě入aoG
(Aristeas); λατpov 'flat cake' (Milete Vª), cf. ελατηp. Agent nouns: λaτp 'driver'
(11.) with λaτpios 'driving off (A. Ch. 968 [lyr.]), normally 'carrying away,
purging', ntr. 'purgative' (Hp.; see Andre Les ét. class. 24, 41); λaτp 'flat cake'
(Com.); λáτηs 'driver' (E. Fr. 773, 28 [lyr.]) from ẞoŋλátŋs (with ẞoŋlatéw, -oia,
see above), iллηλáτηç, Fraenkel 1912: 31f.; ελáσTwp 'id.' (App. Anth. 3, 175); λαστ
‘id.' (EM); λατpeús. ò tpítŋv ñúpwoiv ëxwv toũ σidýpov лapà toĩç µeta\\eñoɩV
'thrice-forged iron' (H.); see Boßhardt 1942: 82f.; also as a PN (0 111); see Boẞhardt
1942: 120. Verbal adjective: ¿λatós ‘malleable, beaten' (Arist.), ¿½-½λatoç ‘beaten' (M
295; several compounds like iлл-ýλatos, de-ýλatos (IA); έlaσtós ‘id.' (pap.).
Desiderative λaσɛíw (Luc.), iterative pret. ελáσασкEV (B 199). Cf. also ► έλaσãç and
►Eλáστεpoç.
•ETYM The verbal root is έλă- < *h₁elh₂-; έλaúvw derives from a verbal noun *λa-
Fap, λa-vv-os (related to λá-w like *àλe-Fap, àλé-(F)ατα to ȧλéw; s.v.). A
secondary formation is έλaστpέw (see Eláστɛpoc). There are no certain cognates;
connection with Arm. ełanim 'to become' is improbable, whereas Arm. elanem 'to go
out, go up' belongs to the verbs in -anem = Gr. -ávw. The Celtic na-present OIr. ad-
ellaim 'to go to, visit' could belong to лíλvaμα. Other Celtic forms point to *(p)el-.
¤λaqoç [m., f.] ‘deer, deer cow' (Il.). <IE *h,el-en- 'deer>>
•COMP Note έλan-ßólos (with rhythmically preferable -n- for -o-, Schwyzer 438f.)
'killing deer' (Σ 319, etc.) with έλaqηßoλía 'deer hunt (S.), ¿λαôηßólia (sc. iɛpá)
[n.pl.] name of a festival for Artemis (Phocis), whence the month name
Elaqηßoliov (treaty in Th. 4, 118). As a second member in determinative
compounds like τpay-έλaqoç buck deer' (Ar., Pl.; cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 56), also
¡лn-, òv-, tavp-έλaqos (Arist.).
●DER Diminutive λáqtov (Ar. Th. 1172), έλaqivηs 'young deer, deer calf (Aq., H.;
see Chantraine 1933: 203); λaqñ 'deerskin' (Poll.); λaqia oi τwv έλáqwv
άστpáуaλoɩ 'the neck vertebrae of the deer' (H.); λaqis name of a water bird
(Dionys. Av. 2, 11); see Thompson 1895 s.v.; έλáqεios ‘of a deer' (X., Arist.); ¿λáqɛov
and έλaqiкóv as plant names (Ps.-Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 118, Strömberg 1944: 50.
On Elaphe as a name of a kind of snake and on MoGr. dialectal forms λaqiátηs, etc.,
see Georgacas 1956: 119f., 124f.
⚫ETYM The by-form έλóç 'deer-calf (T 228, Ant. Lib. 28, 3), which (with Aeolic
development?) may stand for *λ-vos (Lejeune 1972: 153, Schwyzer: 284), can be
connected with a widespread name for ‘deer': Arm. ełn, gen. etin, Lith. élnis, OCS
ė入áw
403
jelenь, MW elain, the Gaulish month name Elembiu (: 'Eλaqηßoλióv?), ToA yäl, ToB
yal ‘gazelle'. Note also vɛλoç vεẞpós (H.) (if metathesized from *elen-); the n-stem
is probably also in λaqos < *heln-bo- (cf. Skt. výṣan- vṛṣa-b¹á- and see Schwyzer:
495 and Chantraine 1933: 263).
:
¿λaqpós [adj.] ‘light, nimble, quick, small' (Il.). <IE *h,leng™³-ro- ‘light (of weight,
movement)'>
•COMP As a first member in λappo-τoкía 'low rate of interest' (Pergamon II³).
•DER ¿λapóτηs ‘lightness, speed' (Pl., Plu.); λaopía ‘lightness' (NT); 'Eλάopios
(μnv) month name (Cnidos); denominative verbs: λaqpí(w ‘enlighten, lessen', intr.
'be quick' (Archil., E.); λaqpúvw ‘enlighten' (late; after ẞapúvw; Debrunner IF 21
(1907): 84); λappoτai H. as an explanation of aλɛyúvεtai.
⚫ETYM Identical with a Gm. word: OHG lungar, OS lungor 'quick', OE lungre [adv.]
‘quickly, soon' < IE *h,lngwh-ro-. The root is also found in Skt. rārahāṇa- < *h,le-
hlng (García Ramón Sprache 34 (1988-90): 30); see further λaxúc. Krahe 1955:
94 connects the Illyrian HN Lambros (Upper Italy) = ¿λaqpós.
έλaxúc [adj.] 'small' (Call. Hec. 3 K.). <IE *hlng-u- 'light, quick'>
•VAR λáxɛα h.Ap. 197 (on the accent Wackernagel Gött. Nachr. 1914: 115f.,
Schwyzer: 379; 116, K 509 as a v.l. to λáxɛa; cf. Leumann 1950: 54), έλaxú (AP); msc.
also λaxos (Call., see Leumann 1950: 54).
•COMP As a first member in ελaxυ-ntépv§, [¿λa]xú-vwtos (Pi.).
•DER Grades of comparison: λάoowv, -Tτwv [compar.] (II.), ¿λάxiσtoç [superl.]
(IA). From λáσσwv, -ττwν (Schwyzer: 731f.): denominative λaσσóoμiai, -ttóoμai
'to become smaller, be inferior, be damaged' (IA), -ów ‘to diminish, damage' (Lys.,
Isoc.) with λáττwσɩç 'diminution, disadvantage, want, loss' (Antipho Soph., Pl. Def.,
Arist.) and ελαττшτɩкóç 'not insisting on his rights, diminishing' (Arist.), έλáσσwμa,
-ττшµα ‘id.' (D.). From λaσσov-, -Tτov- : έλattov-άkiç ‘less often' (Pl., Arist., after
nλeov-ákis), ¿λattov-ótŋs be inferior' (Iamb.; beside µεšov-óτηs); ¿λaooov-έw,
-ɩɩovέw 'have or give less, to be defective' (LXX, pap.), έλατtov-ów ‘diminish'
(LXX). From ¿λáxiotos: ¿λaxiot-ákiç ‘very rarely' (Hp.), ¿λaxiot-ɩaïos ‘of smallest
size, infinitesimal' (Diog. Oen. 2).
⚫ETYM Old adjective, identical with Skt. laghú-, raghú- 'quick, light, small', YAv.
rǝuui- [f.] ‘agile, fast, quick' (< *rayui-), all of which are from an IE zero grade
*hlng(w)-ú-. The full grade of the root *h,leng wh- is found in Av. rǝṇjiiō [compar.], in
Lith. lengvas, in Go. leihts light, easy' (if it derives from PGm. *linxta- [IE *h,leng™h_
to-]), and in ToB lankutse 'light'. A form without the nasal and with short e is Lat.
levis light, small, quick'; with problematic root vocalism, OCS lúgó-kú ‘light'; with a-
vowel, Celt., e.g. OIr. laigiu ‘smaller, worse' [compar.] < PCI. *lag-iōs. There is no
uniform explanation for all these forms, although it seems that the nasalless root is
the oldest (cf. De Vaan 2008). We then have to assume that the forms with nasal
were influenced by the old nasal present seen in Skt. rámhate 'hastens', Olr. -ling 'to
leap'. In Greek, the long vowel in λάσσwv is secondary; see Schwyzer: 538 and Seiler
1950: 43f.
=>
Ě入áw → Ě入aÚvw.

=== page 226 ===

404
Ě入douar
Ě入elóg
7
405
Ě入&oquar →É入douan.
¿λéa [f.] kind of singing bird, perhaps 'reed warbler, Salicaria arundinacea' (Arist. HA
616b 13). See Thompson 1895 s.v. <PG?>
•VAR λɛα (Call. Fr. 100c 14), έλɛāç [m.] (Ar. Av. 302; on the formation Schwyzer:
461, Chantraine 1933: 31); also λaчos [m.] (Alex. Mynd. apud Ath. 2, 65b).
•ETYM Formation and origin unclear. Compared with the Italo-Celtic name of the
swan, Lat. olor, OIr. elae, as well as MoSw. al(l)a, al-fågel 'Fuligula glacialis' (Lidén
Arkiv f. nord. Fil. 13 (1897): 30f.). Other European words for 'swan' have also been
adduced, such as Ru. lébeď and OHG albiz, of which the analysis is unclear. If the
latter really contained an element *al-, one may assume European substrate origin
(acc. to De Vaan 2008 s.v. olor). However, the word is probably Pre-Greek (note ɛ/
el/ai).
=>
主入éatpog → è入eóv.
λɛyaivɛɩv [v] = лαрачpovεïv, άσɛλyaívɛv, áкoλασταívяv 'to be beside oneself,
behave licentiously, be licentious', EM 152, 51; 327, 6. <PG?>
⚫ETYM Reminiscent of Aéyal, an attribute of yuvaчкɛç (Archil. 179), which was
connected with Máyvos by Solmsen 1901: 111. The word was subject to folk-
etymological influence by λɛyoc; cf. EM 327, 6: kai tò έλeyɛïov µétpov ȧïò toútov
кλŋŋvaι tɩvès vouícovotv 'the elegiac meter was also named after this, according to
some', but this is a mere guess. The word is probably Pre-Greek because of the
prothetic vowel (Fur.: 376).
λɛyos [m.] 'mourning song (accompanied by flute)' (E., Ar.). <PG?>
•COMP Compounds iaµß-éλɛyos and έλɛy-íaµßoç, names of verses (gramm.); see
Risch IF 59 (1949): 284f.
•DER έλɛyɛĭov a verse, 'distichon', and a poem following this scheme; poetical
'inscription' (Att., etc.) with εуε-лypácos (Arist.); diminutives
ελɛy(ε)ídɩov and εy(ε)1dápiov (late); adj. ελɛyɛaкóç (D. H., Ath.); also έλɛyɛía
(Str., Plu.) and, as an adjective, έλeyɛtov (diotixov, Ael.); also a fish, έλɛyīvos (Arist.
HA 610b 6), named after its sound? See Strömberg 1943: 74.
•ETYM Anatolian (Phrygian?) origin was considered by Hommel RhM 88 (1939): 194.
Incorrectly, Theander Eranos 15 (1915): 98ff. (who believes the word is related to
ελɛɛũ, óλoλúчw); cf. Kretschmer Glotta 9 (1918): 228 and Kretschmer Glotta 12
(1923): 220. From έλɛyɛĩov was borrowed Lat. ēlogium (influenced by λóyos); see
WH s.v. The word is probably Pre-Greek.
¿λέyxw [v.] 1. ‘to revile, disgrace' (Hom.); 2. 'to cross-examine, bring to proof, accuse,
question' (Hdt., Pi., Att.); on the mg. Daux REGr. 55 (1942): 252ff. <◄IE? *h,leng"-
'revile'?>
•var ¿λéyžaɩ (Il.), fut. ¿λéy\w, aor. pass. έλεXеñvαɩ with λɛуx¤ýσoµaɩ, perf.
έλýλɛyµaɩ, 3sg. -yêɩαι (Att.).
•DER TO 1. EλEYXos [n.] (like övɛdoc) 'revile, disgrace' (Hom., Hes., Pi.), plur. also of
persons, ‘coward'; msc. ¿λeyxées (A 242, 239; but see Bechtel 1914 S.V. έλεYXÝS,
Frisk 1935: 19f., Sommer 1948: 137); superlative ¿λéyxɩotos (Hom.; Seiler 1950: 83f.);
from λɛyxos also έλɛyxɛiŋ ‘id.' (Il.). To 2. λɛyxos [m.] (like λóyoc) ‘proof,
refutation, examination' (Hdt., Pi., Att.); čλɛyšıç ‘id.' (LXX, NT, Philostr.) together
with jocular εyšīvos (D. L.); ¿λɛyµós ‘id.' (LXX, NT); ¿λɛукτηp 'who proves'
(Antipho; Ionic? See Fraenkel 1912: 52); έλɛукτɩкóç 'fit for ελέyxεv' (Att., etc.).
⚫ETYM The word used to be connected with λaxúc, which is possible semantically
(MoHG schmähen, 'disgrace', OHG smāhen 'make small', from smāhi 'small'), but
phonetically, the etymology would imply that ελέyxw (for **¿λéµqw < IE *h,lengwh-)
has its -X- from έlaxúc, έláσowv (< *¿λáx-❗wv), ¿λáxɩotos. This is not very likely.
Nowadays, it is mostly accepted that Hitt. li(n)k-zi 'to swear' is related (see
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.), as well as OHG ant-lingen ‘to answer' (Tischler).
¿λɛdwvŋ [f.] a kind of octopus (Arist. HA 525a 17), cf. Thompson 1947 s.v. <PG▷
•VAR Also λ-. Further deλedávη. ó μúλoç xúc ‘the fish Sciaena umbra'.
●ETYM Formation in -óvη (seen in plant names; cf. xeλwvn, yoyypwvò, etc.); further
unknown. "Ohne Zweifel Mittelmeerwort" (Frisk).
έλɛīv [v.aor.] ‘to take, seize', med. 'to take for oneself, pick out, choose' (II.). ◄IE *selh,-
'take'>
•VAR Iterative preterite λɛokov.
•COMP Often with prefix: ȧq-, ȧv-, ε-, лpo-, etc. As a first member in έλέ-(t)oɩç
'conquering cities', epithet of Helena (A. Ag. 689 [lyr.]); also name of a siege
machine (Ph. Bel.); έλéva<v>ç (A. ibid.) with reference to Helena.
•DER λwp [n.] (only nom.acc.sg. and pl.) 'plunder, capture, booty' (Il.); also έλwptov
‘id.' (Schwyzer: 4704).
•ETYM As some attestations suggest an initial F- (differently, Solmsen 1901: 251¹),
Chantraine 1933: 219, Chantraine 1942: 152 has proposed an alternation *suel-/ sel-
and connection with ¿λíoкoµaɩ, Lat. vellō, but this is impossible since the aor. έáλwv
points to *-h3 (see LIV² s.v. *uelh3-). Beside ελɛīv, Gm. has a yod-present in Go.
saljan 'to offer, sacrifice', ON selja 'to render, sell', OHG sellen 'to render, give up',
etc. with the deverbal nouns ON sal(a) 'rendition, sale', OHG sala 'rendering', etc.
Because of its meaning, this Gm. word is generally considered a causative of έλεīv
("nehmen machen"), but this is unnecessary; cf. αľvμa 'to take' next to related
ToA e-, ToB ai- 'to give', and also e.g. ON fá (= Go. fahan) ‘to take' and 'to give'. The
appurtenance of OCS solati 'to send' and Lat. cōn-silium "counsel' is possible; see
Derksen 2008 s.v. *súlàti and De Vaan 2008 s.v. consulō, as well as LIV2 s.v. *selh,-
'nehmen'. As a suppletive verb of έλεiv, Greek has aipéw. Acc. to Schrijver 1995:
437, OIr. selb and W helw 'possession' are perfect cognates of Gr. ελɛiv. De Vaan
(ibid.) also mentions Olr. ad-roilli, do-slí 'to earn', MW dyrllid 'to earn', Co. deleth
'to be appropriate', and MBret. dellit ‘to earn' (< *tu-ari/ro-) < PCI. *-slije/o- (<<
*s(e)lh,-e/o-).
λóç [m.] 'a kind of dormouse, Myoxus glis' (Arist. HA 600b 12); also = eidoc
iépa koç 'kind of hawk' (H.) (?). <PG?>
•VAR Also Eλ-.
•DER Beside it öλios. σkiovpoç, έλɛós ‘squirrel, έ.' (H.), together with lower Ital.
oddío, etc. 'id.'; Rohlfs 1930: Nr. 621.

=== page 227 ===

406
•ETYM Unknown. Probably Pre-Greek.
¿λɛλɛû [interj.] cry of pain (A. Pr. 877), battle cry (Ar. Av. 364: ¿λɛλɛλeû), cry in
general (Plu. Thes. 22). <ONOM▷
•DER έλελí\w, aor. εía 'raise a cry of pain or of war (εεευ)' (Ar., E.); also
¿λɛλúσdw (Sapph. 44, 31 LP; v.l. óλolúodw).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic interjection; cf. ȧλaλá, -á¼w, and oλoλú(w. See Schwyzer 716
and Schwyzer 1950: 600f.
¿λɛλí¶w [v.] 1. ‘to shake', med.-pass. ‘to tremble, be shaken', 2. ‘to turn round (trans.
and intr.)' (II.). <IE *h,leig- ‘tremble'>>
•VAR Aor. ¿λɛλížai, pass. ¿λɛλɩxОñvaɩ, 3sg.pret. έλéλikto, perf. med. ¿λéλɩyµaɩ (Hell.).
•COMP As a first member (cf. Schwyzer: 444: 3) in έλελí-✗Owv ‘shaking the earth' (Pi.
P. 2, 4), 'earth-shaker', epithet of Poseidon (Pi. P. 6, 50), of Dionysus (S. Ant. 153);
also in λɛλíoqaкoç, -ov.
•ETYM To be distinguished from ελεí(w 'to raise a cry' (see ελεÛ). Two verbs
seem to have merged in the aorist forms λελiα, ελɛλí×¤ŋv: 1. a reduplicated present
¿λɛλí¼w ‘to shake'; 2. an augmented *¿-Ƒéλiša from the present (F)ε\íσow ‘to turn’
(see ►λ). The pret. ¿λéλiкto refers to a snake in A 39 and therefore belongs to 2. as
*ƑɛƑéλikto ‘twisted itself; the expression yxos ... σeióµevov ¿λéλikto N 558 may
represent the turning or whirling, as well as the shaking movement. It is no longer
possible to distinguish the two. Cf. Chantraine 1942: 132, as well as Bechtel 1914 s.V.
ελελíw. In the meaning 'to shake', ελɛλížα, ελελíw is connected with Skt. réjate 'to
tremble, shake', réjati 'to make tremble', Khot. rriys- 'to tremble', Go. laikan 'to
jump', etc.; it presupposes that -a, -iw is part of the root, on which see Risch 1937:
298ff.
Formerly, a reduplicated aorist έ-\-\₁}-α was reconstructed, to which the passive
aorist -λελíx-ηy was formed, but the έ- in the present έ-λελí(w cannot be explained
in this way; the root had an initial laryngeal, *h,leig-. The reduplication may be a
Greek innovation. Note the similarity in the formation of Skt. rejata kṣaḥ 'the earth
quaked' (RV) with Gr. ελελí-xewv.
¿λελíoqaкos [m.] kind of sage, 'Salvia triloba' (Thphr.). <GR➤
•VAR έλελíσQaкov [n.] (Dsc.). On the gender see Sióσupov.
•DER έλελiσqakítηs (olvoc; Dsc., Plin.; Redard 1949: 96).
ETYM Properly "trembling sage-apple", related to εiw, because of the
trembling fruits (Strömberg 1940: 76). On the apocopated form λɛλíσqakoç (Dsc.)
and MoGr. áλiopaкiá (after äλç 'sea'), etc., see Strömberg 1944: 44.
=
ë入eflog →Ě入bios.
'Eλévη [f.] daughter of Zeus and Leda, sister of the Dioskouroi, wife of Menelaos (Il.).
<?>
•VAR 'Eλévεia. εoptǹ áуoµévé úãò Aaкwvwv 'a festival celebrated by the Laconians'
(H.).
•ETYM Nilsson 1941(1): 315 assumes that Helena is an old Minoan goddess of
vegetation, who was connected with the tree-cult. The plant name έλévov (Thphr.,
ελεσлidaç
407
Dsc.) was derived from this use, acc. to Strömberg 1940: 130. Connection with the
appellative ελεvη (see εlávŋ) is rather uncertain. See e.g. Linsay 1974: 209ff. De
Simone Glotta 56 (1978): 40-42 argues that the form had a F- and goes back to *suel-
(Skt. svarati 'lights'), with a variant with *s-.
*λɛóv [n.] 'table on which the roasted meat was put' (I 215, 432 ελɛoчov, Ar. Eq. 152,
169 TOỦλɛÓV). ◄?►
•COMP λεO-SÚτηs 'cook at the Delian sacrifices' (Ath. 4, 173a: Sià tò toïç ¿Àɛoĩç
úлоdúεσðaι diαкovoñvtes ¿v taïç Ooivais 'because they dive under the έλɛoi when
serving at the meals'.
•DER έλéατpoç seneschal, steward (pap. IIIª), ɛiλéaτpoç (Pamphil. in Ath. 4, 171b,
metrically lengthened?), or oxytone -τpóç as in daiτpóç, etc.
•ETYM Technical word without etymology. On the formation, cf. kolɛóv, oteλeóv,
Oupɛós, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 51); on the meaning, Kuiper Glotta 21 (1933): 272ff.
λɛoç 1 [m.] 'compassion, pity' (II.); acc. to Schadewaldt Herm. 83 (1955): 131ff. rather
'pain, lament, commotion' than 'compassion'; criticism by Pohlenz Herm. 84 (1956):
49ff. <IE? *h,leu- 'compassion'?>
•VAR Hell. also ntr., see Schwyzer 1950: 38.
●COMP As a second member in vnλ(ε)ns, -és 'without compassion, mercilèss' (Il.) <
*n-h,leu-es-; beside it av-nλens 'id.' (And., Hell.).
=
•DER έλɛóv [adv.] 'pitiful' (Hes. Op. 205), ελ(ε)εvós 'rousing compassion, plaintive'
(Il.), (after aλ(ε) yɛɩvóc and the adjectives in -ɛvós (Chantraine 1933: 195f.) rather
than from late τò ελɛoç; έλεýµwv 'compassionate, pitiful (ε 181, Att., Hell.), from
¿λɛɛw (cf. Chantraine 1933: 173), with έλεŋµoσúvη 'compassion' (Call.), ‘alms' (LXX,
NT); with internal shortening εó giving alms' (LXX); έleŋtikós
λɛŋµwv (Arist.; from έλɛέw). Denominative verbs: έλɛέw, aor. έλεñσɩ 'show
compassion' (II.) with έλeŋtús = ëλɛos (§ 82, p 451; Porzig 1942: 182; on the semantics
Benveniste 1948: 66); ¿λeńµwv, ¿λentiкóç see above; έλɛaípw ‘id.' (Il.; έλéŋpa A. R. 4,
1308) after exaípw etc. (Risch 1937: 286; not from *ελε-Fap as per Benveniste 1935:
112 and Schwyzer: 724); ẞλɛɛpɛi oiкtɛipɛi. Bowτoi 'to pity (Boeot.)' (H.), mistake for
É入eaipei?
•ETYM No etymology. Origin as an interjection (cf. ►έλɛλɛũ, ►óloλú¼w, etc.) is
possible (see Pok. 306).
ελɛóç 2 [m.] an owl (Arist. HA 592b 11, see Thompson 1895 s.v.). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Onomatopoeic? Cf. e.g. Lat. ulula and ►έλɛλɛũ, ► ỏλoλÚTw.
ελεoлídaç [acc.pl.] of лíσɛα, perhaps 'marsh-lands, swamp lands' (A. R. 1, 1266). <?>
⚫ETYM The analysis in λoç 'swamp' and a root noun *σïíç (*ελɛ[σ]-σлíd-), which
would be cognate with σлídioç, àσлds, and even with ►άσлíç, is
morphologically far from convincing. See Bechtel 1914 s.v. άσлíç and Schwyzer: 507.
The connection with the gloss λéσлv. µεуáλŋv, údpηλýv ‘large, moist remains
unclear. Aídvμoç tǹv katadvoµévny ɛis néλayos néτpav. oi dè τǹv voτɛpáv ‘In D. a
rock submerged into the sea, others: a wet [rock]'. äλλo è σлíðа (leg. λéσлda?)
Babɛiav 'a deep cave[?]'. oi è λóxμηv 'a lair' (H.). See Taillardat REGr. 73 (1960): 13.

=== page 228 ===

408
¿λεÚOεpoç
Perhaps -лd- is the same element as contained in лíða 'source, geyser' (Van Beek
p.c.). See ►λoç.
¿λɛúðɛpoç [adj.] ‘free, free man', opposed to douλoç ‘slave' (Il.). <◄IE *h,leud¹- 'grow up,
come out'>
DIAL Myc. e-re-u-te-ro /eleutheros/.
•COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. έλεvеεрó-στoμoç 'with free mouth' (A.); as a
second member e.g. in åл-ελεúеεpos 'freed man' (Att.), mostly taken as deverbal to
άл-ελεvεрów 'liberate, make into a freed man' (Pl., Arist.); Schwyzer: 421,
Strömberg 1946: 39f. with litt.
•DER έλEvɛpía 'freedom' (Pi.) with έλεvεpiwτIкós 'proclaiming freedom' (Him.);
denominative verbs: Evɛpów 'liberate' (IA) with έ\ɛvеép-wois, -wµa, -włńs;
\εvɛpɛσɛíç (Thess., Schwyzer 736 with lit.); ¿λεvėέpios 'as a free man' (IA), also as
an epithet of Zeus (Pi., Hdt., because of the victory on the Persians) with 'Eλɛɛpiwv
month name (Halicarnassus); έλεvεpióτη open-heartedness, liberality' (Pl.) and
the denominative EλEvɛpiάw 'speak and act as a free man' (Pl.); EvεPIKÓÇ
'belonging to a free man' (Pl. Lg. 701е beside бεσлоτкоç; 919е beside the bahuvrīhi
ȧv-ɛɛú0ɛpoç; cf. Chantraine 1956a: 146). Cret. λoú0ɛpos with secondary voalism
(Schwyzer: 194).
=
=
ETYM An adjective in the meaning 'free' is also found in Lat. līber, -era; as a
theonym Venet. Louzera, Pelign. loufir, Osc. (Iúveis) Lúvfreis = (Iovis) Līberī; cf.
Falisc. loferta liberta, OLat. loebeṛtāt-em = Falisc. loifirtat-o. The starting point was
an old word for 'people', which is found in Gm. and BSl.: OHG liut ‘'people', liuti
[pl.], OE leod 'people', Lith. liáudis lower people', OCS ljudije, Ru. ljúdi [pl.] ‘men,
people', all of which are from IE *h,leudh-o-, -i-; from the same root with different
suffixes are also Burgund. leudis 'a free man', OCS ljudino 'free man', so that
έλεúƉɛpoç, līber (< IE *h,leud¹-ero-) must originally have meant 'belonging to the
tribe', as opposed to subjected peoples. The root is probably the same as that of
►λɛúσoμai; see LIV2 s.v. *h,leudh 'steigen, wachsen', who assume a development
'frei' 'rechtsmündig' ← *erwachsen' for ελɛú0ɛpoç. A reflex of the initial laryngeal
←
is also seen in Skt. vi-rúdh- ‘plant', anū-rúdh- ‘growing along' (Mayrhofer EWAia 2:
467ff.). Of foreign origin, but perhaps reshaped after έλεúεpos and with oppositive
accent, is the PIN 'Eλɛveɛpaí, whence 'Eλɛɛɛúç as an epithet of Dionysus; cf. on
Eiλɛivia and'Eλevois. On the semantics, see Benveniste 1969:1: 321ff.
¿λɛú0w →λεúσoμai.
¿λɛvooµai [v.fut.] 'come, go' (epic Ion., trag.). <IE *h,leud- 'grow up, come out'>
•VAR Аor. λvov, perf. ɛiλnλova ('Attic reduplication' from *h,le-h,loud"-, with
metrical lengthening), ptc. ε(1)\n\ovłws (epic), ¿½\va (post-Hom.), plur. also
ελλvµεv, -τε (Att. Com.), Cyren. ptc. кατ-εληλεvvia (Fraenkel Glotta 20 (1932):
Ě入斤入vuev,
88f.). Rare trans. (factitive) forms in Doric: λevoíw. oïow 'I shall carry' (H.), 3pl.aor.
έλɛúσav (Ibyc.), έn-eλevoei, έn-eλεñσa (Gortyn) 'bring'. As a present, pxoμat is
used.
•COMP Often with prefix: àv-, àл-, di-, εÌσ-, εε-, кατ-, etc.
¿λéqās, -avtos
409
•DER λevoɩç ‘arrivaľ (Act. Ap. 7, 52), also from the compounds (mostly rare, all late),
e.g. ovv-, εл-ελεvous. Older the common noun (λvσɩ 'walk, way' (E.), ‹‹-, nɛpɩ-
nvois (Hdt.), etc. (cf. Holt 1941: 58 and 149) with compositional lengthening (voic
after the compounds), and the same vowels as in the compounds vé-ŋλuç, -doc
'newly arrived' (Il.), ëï-ŋλuç ‘immigrated, foreigner' (Hdt., ¿ï-ŋ\ú-tηs Th.), etc.;
пpoσ-ǹ\v-toç ‘newly arrived, proselyte' (LXX, NT), etc.; further the abstracts л-
ŋλvoiŋ (h.Hom.), kat-, ovv-n\voin (Hell.).
•ETYM The best agreement (semantically and formally) to this old ablauting verb is
found in Celtic, with the OIr. preterite lod, luid 'I, he went' (< *h,lud"-om, -et :
λvov, -ε); formally as good, but semantically less convincing, is the further
comparison with Skt. ró(d)hati, Go. liudan 'to grow, rise' (whence the old word for
'people', OHG liut, etc.; see έlεúɛpoç). One must assume that -0- (IE *-ď³-)
disappeared analogically in λvoç, ελĤλчµεv, -τε as well as in (vé)-, (époσ)-\vtoš
¿λýλvµev,
(in other words, these are built secondarily on λεúσoμai); cf. Schwyzer: 7042, 7697. It
seems less probable that the dental of Celtic, etc. was a secondary enlargement.
Connection with Arm. eluzanem 'extract' is further possible. Cf. also ► ¿à¤ɛĩv.
¿λɛqaípoдaι [v.] 'to deceive' (Y 388, τ 565), also 'to damage, destroy' (Hes. Th. 330).
<?>
•VAR Aor. ptc. λeqŋpáµevos.
●DIAL Myc. PN e-re-pa-i-ro /Elep¹airōn/?
⚫ETYM In H. there are also active forms (ελɛqaipɛɩv, ελεñpaι), explained with
(εε)αлατãν, ẞλáлτεν, ȧdкεïу 'deceive, damage, do injustice'. Old, rarely occurring
epic expression with unstable meaning, of unclear formation und uncertain
etymology. The ending -aípw seems to point to an r-stem (**λεpap?), but could also
be suffixal. The stem recurs in PN'Eλeq-vwp, but possibly stands for *Eλεηp-vwp
with dissimilatory shortening (Sommer 1948: 170²). Within Greek, it is compared to
oloquios 'deceitful, noxious', which itself is unclear.
An acceptable connection would be with Lith. vilbinti ‘allure, befool'. Cf. Bechtel
1914 s.v. and Schwyzer: 724. Gotō 1995: 365-370 suggests that it be connected with
Skt. upa-valhate 'to puzzle, confuse by means of riddles', if Skt. -valhate goes back to
*-valbhate. However, if the Mycenaean PN is related, the comparisons with Skt. and
Lith. are impossible (Myc. has no initial ụ-).
¿λéqāç, -avtoç [m.] ivory, elephant tusk' (II.), ‘elephant' (Hdt.), also as the name of a
disease λɛqavτíaσiç, see Strömberg 1937: 193. LW Eg.➤
=
•DIAL Myk. e-re-pa, e-re-pa-to, e-re-pa-te /elephans/, etc.
•COMP As a first member in both mgs., ¿λeqavtó-nous 'with ivory feet' (Pl. Com.), ~
-μáxos 'fighting elephants' (Str.).
•DER Diminutive έλεqavтíσкiov 'young elephant' (Ael.); adjectives &λɛávtivos ‘of
ivory' (Alc., Att.), -ívɛos ‘id.' (inscr.; on the formation cf. Chantraine 1933: 203),
ελεчávτ-εios 'belonging to an elephant' (Dsc., Opp.), -wdns 'elephant-like' (medic.),
-twdns 'suffering from [the disease] -.' (medic.); substantives ελεчаντστŃS
elephant driver' (Arist.), also 'shield from elephant skin' (App.), èλεqavτεÚç ivory
worker' (pap.). Denominative verbs: 1. ελɛqavτ-iáw 'suffer from [the disease] ε-.'

=== page 229 ===

410
Ě入Oïv
(Phld., medic.) with -íaσıç, also -taσµóç (EM); 2. -ów ‘inlay with ivory' with -wτóç
(inscr.).
•ETYM Like Lat. ebur, έλéqaç is a foreign word. Except for the vt-suffix, the final part
recalls Eg. āb(u), Copt. &ẞ(0) ‘elephant, ivory'; the beginning recurs in Hamit. eļu
‘elephant' (whence through Egyptian mediation [article p-] MoP pil, Arab. fil); the
details remain unclear. From λéqaç comes Lat. elephās, elephantus, whence the Gm.
and Romance forms. See Lokotsch 1927: Nr. 605 and Mayrhofer EWAia(3): 28.
Eλ0ɛiv [v.aor.] 'to come, go' (II.). <?>
•VAR Ind. λov, epic lyr. also йλvov (seе ►λεúσоμα), subj. λ0w, etc.'
•DIAL See also on Dor. ► ¿vėεïv.
•COMP Often with prefix ȧv-, åл-, di- ɛio-, ¿‹-, kat-, etc.
ETYM Because of their semantic and functional identitity, λov and λov can
hardly be separated from each other. As λvov is limited to the epic and lyrics, and
has an acceptable IE etymology, it is generally regarded to be the original form.
Improbable suggestions about the origin of ov are given in Frisk s.v. (by
Johansson, Wackernagel, Schulze). Szemerényi 1964: 3 takes λεiv to be syncopated
from ελvεïv. It is often believed that the u was lost in the imperative έλ0έ, which
had oxytone accent. The form éveεiv probably arose by a dialectal Doric
development, but it has also been connected with Skt. ádhvan- 'road', OAv. aduuan-
(both from *h,ndh-uen-).
ελíкη 1 [f.] 'willow' (IG 12, 864: hopoç hɛλiкηs Att.); acc. to Thphr. HP 3, 13, 7,
Arcadian for iτέa. <?>
•DIAL Myc. e-ri-ka /helikā/.
•DER 'EλIкwv, -@vos (Hes. Op. 639, Fελ- Corinna) “willow-mountain, Viminalis”
(Boeotia) with 'Eλikwv-10s, [f.] -iás, -ís (Y 404 'Eλikóvios ávač, of Poseidon, s.v. von
Wilamowitz 1931: 213 and 336², Nilsson 1941(1): 4476) Hes., Pi.; on 'Eλıкwviάç as a
plant name Strömberg 1940: 126.
⚫ETYM Boeot. FEAкúv precludes the connection with Lat. salix. Furthermore, the
comparison with an old WGm. word for 'willow', OE welig, OS wilgia, MHG wilge, is
impossible because of the Mycenaean form. DELG reconstructs *suel- / *sel-, which
solves nothing.
=
É入in 2 →ë入LE.
έλíкwu̟ [adj.] said of the Axator (Il., verse-final). <GR?>
•VAR Always plur. nom. or acc. -wπεç, -wлαç, fеm. έλiкŵriç, -idoç (A 98 кoúpη, Hes.
Th. 298 vúuon; also Sapph., Pi.).
⚫ETYM From ►λε and wл- (on the second member, see Schwyzer: 4264 and Sommer
1948: 1), so properly 'with eyes that constitute a winding', i.e. 'with winding eyes',
formed like εAIкo-ẞλécapos (h. Hom. 6, 19, etc.) and expressing beauty (cf. H.
¿λikoßλéqapos. kaλλ₁ßέapoç)? See Bechtel 1914, Düntzer KZ 12 (1863): 17.
Differently, Prellwitz Glotta 15 (1927): 128ff. reads "with curls" (comparing H.
¿λíkwties. ovλótpixεs ‘curly-haired').
¿λíxpvooc
411
On the basis of έλíкwñɛç as µελavóóðaλμo 'black-eyed' in H., an adjective έλIKÓç =
μελaç was coined; thus not only H., but also Call. Fr. 299, etc., on which see
Leumann 1950: 152126.
čλĭvos [m., f.] ‘tendril, vine' (Hell.). <◄PG(V)►
•VAR έλevoi• kλýµata tà tŵv àµñελwv 'twigs of vines' (H.).
•ETYM The word has been connected with λ₁, λµus, έλévŋ, etc. and ►ɛiléw 2 'turn,
wind', from an t-stem; cf. yελiv (= F-) ópшáv fishing line of horse hair' (H.).
However, the interchange / rather points to a Pre-Greek word.
¿λīvów [v.] ‘to rest, pause, stop doing something' (Ion.). ◄PG?(V)►
●VAR Aor. έλɩvõõαι, fut. ¿λɩvúσw. Cf. òλɩvúɛi. Aŋyɛt, ȧpyɛï 'to stop, be idle' (H.).
•DER Eλvúεç [f.pl.] (scil. nµépα) ‘festive days' (Plb. 21, 2, 1, = Lat. supplicatio).
έλɩvúɛs
ETYM Etymology unknown. All earlier proposals are impossible or highly
questionable. The variant in Hesychius may point to a Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 376).
žλɩž, -koç [f.] ‘convolution, volute, tendril, curl, spiral' (II.); also as an adjective of ẞóεs
et al. (лоταμóç, Spóμoc), see below. <PG?>
•COMP As a first member in ελikwi, ελiк-áµ˜vě (Pi.), έλiкo-στéqavos (B.) et al.,
also (referring to έλíσσw) έλ- in έλí-tpoxoç ‘turning a wheel' (A. Th. 205 [lyr.]); cf.
further ελíxpvooç. As a second member in tɛtpa-éλ₁ kind of thistle (Thphr., H.),
also in ɖµqɩ-éλoσa, epic adj. of vòûç (Hom.), later also of other things (e.g.
чuáσλn), properly ‘forming a ελ on both sides'.
•DER ►έλíêŋ 1 ‘willow' s.v.; έλíкη 2 ‘spiral, turning' (Arist.), also name of the Great
Bear (because of its turning movement; cf. Scherer 1953: 133, but not as an adjective);
3. Eiλкóɛiç provided with coils' (Nic., Opp.; metrically lengthened). Denominative
verb έλioσw, -íɩɩw, Ion. also ɛiλíσow after ɛiλéw (not with Solmsen 1901: 230ff. from
*ε-Fελíσow), aor. ¿λížαɩ, ɛiλížαı ‘make a turning, wind, turn' (Il.); also with prefix &v-,
лεpɩ-, etc.; from there έλɩyµóç (ɛi-) ‘turning, whirl' (Hdt.), Myµα (εï-) ‘bracelet, curl'
(Sapph. [?], Com.), is turned binding, turning' (medic.), ελкτýp 'ear-pendant'
(Att.), -ɛλíк™ηs in compounds like чµavɩ-ɛλíкtaι ‘turner of straps' (Democr.), see
Fraenkel 1910: 244; ε\íydŋy (εi-) [adv.] 'turning'. Cf. ►λεíw in its second mg.
•ETYM Formation like ñàíč, XóλĚ, SÉλ et al. (Chantraine 1933: 382f.), so probably
from a noun, which was perhaps derived from ɛiλéw (*Fελ-vé-w) 'turn, wind'. The
epic epithet ε is probably (cf. Bechtel 1914 s.v. and Risch 1937: 162) a shortened
compound (*ελкó-лоυç, -кpαιpα?). Note that the suffix -Iк- mostly makes Pre-
Greek words (like -vк-; cf. on кñρvě).
É入itpoxoc →ë入LE
¿λíxpvoos [m.] plant name 'Heliochrysum siculum, goldflower' (Alcm., Ibyc.); also
Éλεlóxpuσos (Thphr.). <GR?>
VAR Also -ov [n.] (see on BoÚτuρov).
•ETYM Named after its golden yellow flower (Strömberg 1940: 25). Like e.g.
ÉεLOσÉVOV, Éλεtóxpσoç is understandable as a compound of ελεoç and xpuσóç
(related to λoç?), after the compounds in ȧypt(o)-, e.g. ȧypi-éλaιoç = ǎypio
(see Risch IF 59 (1949): 257). The form έλ- is a further shortening after ǎypɩ-, aiyı-,

=== page 230 ===

412
Ě入KOS
кaλλɩ-, etc. Strömberg 1940: 153 thinks it is a loan. The locus in Alcman (16) has no
digamma; cf. Solmsen 1901: 146. DELG considers the variant εɛtó- either a mistake
or an 'étymologie populaire déraisonnable'.
λкoç [n.] ‘wound, ulcer' (Il.). ◄IE *h,elk-os 'ulcer'>
•COMP As a first member in ελкo-лoιós ‘making wounds' (A.) with ελколоέw
(Aeschin.).
●DER Diminutive έλkúdpiov (Hp., Ar.; on the suffix Chantraine 1933: 72f.); έλkwdŋs
'ulcerated' (Hp., E.), έλкýяç ‘id.' (Man.); denominative verbs: έλкóoμαι 'to fester',
-ów 'to wound' (Hp., E.; also with prefix: ȧv-, ȧq-, -, έ-, кαе-, лрo-); thence (aq-,
ε-, έq-)ελкwσiç 'festering' (Hp., Th.) together with ελкwτIкóç, ελкwμa 'wound,
ulcer' (Hp., Thphr.) with έλкwμаτкóç; from έqελкóоμα also εελкíç 'scab of a
wound' (medic.); έλкaívw 'fester' (A. Ch. 843) with deverbal λкαvα- τραúματα
'wounds' (H.); also έλkavŵσa. ǹλkwµévn i ǹ\koroiquévy úrò rupós ‘wounded by
fire' (H.; Schwyzer: 700).
•ETYM Old noun, identical with Lat. ulcus, -eris (< *h,elkos-) ‘ulcer', Skt. árśas- [n.]
'haemorrhoids'. Is the spiritus asper from ελкw 'draw'?
λкw [v.] ‘to draw, drag' (Il.). ◄IE *selk- ‘draw'>
•VAR The non-presentic forms show three stems: 1. a lengthened stem ελкη-:
ελкnow, ελкñσaι, ελкηОñvαι (Hom.), with ipf. ελкɛov (P 395; cf. Chantraine 1942:
348; see also below); 2. AкU- (after synonymous εpσai): ελкúσal (Pi., Att.),
ελкvoñvaι, εAкvoμai (IA), ελкúσw (Hp.), εiλкUкa (D.); 3. ελк-: fut. λw (A.) and
late aor. Eat, EλX0ñvai; details in Schwyzer 721.
•COMP Often with prefix: ȧv-, ȧó-, ¿§-, лap-, etc. As a first member in the epithets
έλke-xitwveç, έλкεσí-лεлλoç, and ελкɛ-τpíẞwv (Pl.), έλкɛσí-Xεpos (AP); on
ελкε(σ1)- Knecht Tεpчíµßpoτoç 29.
•DER From έλk-: (éq-)ëλšis ‘drawing, dragging' (Hp., Pl.) with (¿q-)έλktikós (Pl.)
and the plant names έλžívη, ¿À¾ïtɩç 'bindweed' (Dsc., Ps.-Dsc., Redard 1949: 71), also
έλкíva [acc.?] (Ps.-Dsc. 4, 85), čλkчos 'what can be drawn' (Olymp.; cf. Arbenz 1933:
76, directly from λкw); with o-vocalism óλкóç, óλкn, see s.v. From ελкη- (old but
rare) έλêŋ¤µós ‘the drawing' (Z 465; cf. Benveniste 1935: 201, Porzig 1942: 236f.), `
ελкηµα 'what was dragged, booty' (E. HF 568; Chantraine 1933: 178), ελкηеpov
'coulter' (Thphr. HP 5, 7, 6; Strömberg 1937: 170); ελкητýp ‘drawer' (AP 6, 297);
έλкŋdóv [adv.] ‘drawing' (Hes. Sc. 302). From ελKU-, mostly late: (άq-, ¿q-,
лαр-)λкvσiç 'the drawing' (LXX, Aret.), ελкvσμα = ελкημα (Man.), also 'dross (of
silver)' (Dsc., Gal.), (¿‹-, ¿q-, di-)έλкvσμóç 'attraction, etc.' (Chrysipp., medic., pap.);
EλкUστηp 'drawer', 'instrument for drawing out, etc.' (Hp.), λкστрov ‘id.'
(Apollod. Poliorc.); ελкúσчoç, ελкvoτηploc; secondary verb ελкvστά(w 'draw' ( 187
§ 21), expressive form after þvσtášw (Schwyzer: 706, Risch 1937: 298).
ETYM A cognate verb is ToB sälkä- 'to draw out' (pret. sälkāte; innovated nasal
present slanktär); nominal formations are found in Arm. hełg 'slow' (a-stem), Lat.
sulcus 'furrow' (see ►óλkós), and OE sulh 'furrow, plow'. An old iterative is perhaps
reflected in Alb. helq, heq ‘draw (off)', if from IE *solk-eie-; cf. Porzig 1942: 236f. Not
related to aλo.
=
i
Madwλia.
oч, -oo
413
Éléßopos [m.] 'hellebore, Helleborus, Veratrum album' (Hp., Ar.; on the mg.
Dawkins JHS 56 (1936): 3f.). ◄PG➤
•VAR Ion. λ-.
•COMP As a first member in ελλεßopoлoσía ‘drinking έ.' (Hp.); έ\\ɛßopo-oýµata
plant name = λεчvov (Ps.-Dsc. 4, 16), an original bahuvrihi: 'plant that shows
symptoms of Helleborus', Strömberg 1944: 51.
•DER ελεßopívη 'Herniaria glabra' (Thphr., Dsc.), εεßopiτηs 'кεvταúpεɩov τò
þкpóv³ (Ps.-Dsc.), also name of a wine (Dsc., Plin.), cf. Redard 1949: 71 and 96;
denominative verb ε\\ɛßopí\w 'treat with hellebore, bring to sense' (Hp., D.) with
EMɛßopioµós (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Taken as "eaten by deer", from ¿ÀÀóc (¿ÀÀóc) and ßißpwoкw (see ►ßopá); see
Strömberg 1944: 48ff. (full discussion). The compositional -ε- remains problematic.
Amigues RPh. 72 (1998): 125, stresses that the plant is fatally poisonous. It has been
suggested that the first element be identified with oλóc; Girard 1988 assumes
original λo-, which is hardly correct. The traditional etymology seems very
doubtful; the word could well be non-IE, i.e. Pre-Greek. The double -λλ- may then
represent the phoneme --, which at the same time explains the two first έ's: /a/ was
pronounced [ä] in contact with the palatalized I, and [ä] is reproduced by ɛ; after the
ẞ, it may have been realized as o, which gives us a pre-form /alabar-/.
¿λλɛdavoí [pl.m.] 'band for binding corn sheaves' (Σ 553, h. Cer. 456, Hes. Sc. 291).
IE? *uel- 'press'>
•VAR Or -á [n.]? All attestations have dat.pl. v έ\\ɛdavoĩσɩ, but H., Suid. have -oí,
-ós.
⚫ETYM From Aeol. *έλλéw < *Ƒελvéw 'turn, wind' (see ɛiλéw 2) with suffixal -davós,
possibly via *\\ɛdwv (cf. tvqedŵv beside tuqɛdavós). See Solmsen 1901: 244 and
Schwyzer: 530. Chantraine 1942: 131 objects that there is no evidence for F-.
ɛpa [adj.] said of pya (Call. fr. 434); acc. to Hes. Ex0 pá, лoλé̟ua, ädiкa
'unfriendly, ptng. to war, unjust', acc. to Suid. póvia, ɣαλεлά, кαкá 'murderous,
troublesome, bad'; details in Pfeiffer 1949-1953 ad loc. <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained. DELG adds that the etymologists explain the word as öλλupa or
入入Úvta.
MεTε = εppεTε (Call. fr. 1, 17 [Pf]). *ppw.
É入入óg 1 →ë入apoc.
É入入óg 2 →ë入入ov.
lloч, -oños [m.] 1. poetical epithet of ixus (Hes. Sc. 212), in this function also
ελλoños (Emp. 117) and λóc (S. Aj. 1297, Ath. 277d); also of кoúpa (Theoc. Syrinx
18); 2. poetical for 'fish' in general (Lyc.); 3. name of a large, rare and expensive fish,
which is compared (and identified) with the sturgeon (Arist.); in this mg. usually
written λoy (Epich., Archestr., Plu.), Lat. (h)elops; 4. name of a snake (Nic. Th.
490). <PG➤

=== page 231 ===

414
Múτaç
⚫DER Denominative oлεów [v.] 'fish' (Theoc. 1, 42); note λódaç [acc.pl.]
(Crat. 408 acc. to H.; -odɛç EM 331, 53), acc. to H. and others = τoùs otpovĐoùs i
vɛottovs öqews 'sparrows or the young of a snake'; unclear is àλλoлiŋs, epithet of
τpáxoυpos (Numen. apud Ath. 7, 326a).
•ETYM The ancients explained the word either as 'dumb' or as ‘scaly', the former by
means of impossible etymological connections. The meaning 'scaly' is interpreted as
ελλoл <*v-λoлоç, a prepositional bahuvrihi of λoлóç 'scale'; the shortened form
Eλou would have been adjusted to animal names in -o (metri causa?); a second
analogical shortening (cf. allow aißóc) would then have given λλóc. Then the
single λ in λov, Lat. (h)elops remains; as this notation seems to indicate a special
fish, λoy could be of foreign origin. Acc. to Frisk, this could point to a cross of a
foreign fish name with an inherited adjective. Cf. Thompson 1947 s.v. and Strömberg
1943: 30f. However, the interchange \/\ is frequent in Pre-Greek (Fur.: 387);
further, we find ɛ/α and π/ß in åλ(\)áßns (Str. 17, 2, 4; Ath. 7, 312b; PTeb.) and έλay
(Gp.). An interchange of the suffix -αß-/ -oл- is well known in Pre-Greek; see Fur.:
107. In a similar vein, άλλoлins can be understood. Therefore, we probably have a
pre-Greek word for a great fish. In Pre-Greek, I reconstruct *ala/op-.
εúτaç [m.] name of something baked, a kind of cake, 'pretzel' vel sim. (Thera).
<PG?>
•VAR λλutíç (for -τηç?). πλaкoûç tɩç ‘a flat cake' (H.), εiλúτaç [acc.pl.] (Boeotia),
ελúτηs (gramm.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally connected (see Frisk) with eiλów, either from the verbal stem
(F)Eλv- or from the present stem *Fελvv- or the perfect stem *ƑεƑλu-. Other attempts
to accomodate the different forms by Solmsen 1901: 240, as well as Bechtel 1921, 1:
304. The connection with ɛiλúw may well be wrong, however; the interchange \/\\\
rather points to a Pre-Greek word, in which case the word had initial *el-.
λµıç [f.] ‘intestinal worm, parasitic worm' (Hp., Arist.); MoGr. forms in Rohlfs ByzZ
37 (1937): 56f. PG(S,V)>
•VAR Gen. λuvos (to which a new nom. λuvs Hp.), also ελuyyos, etc.; further
acc. λuba (epid.); nom.pl. λμε (Dsc.); λíμvеεç· ελuvеεç. IIάio (H.).
•COMP As a first member in ελuvo-ẞóτavov 'herb used against worms' (medic.).
⚫DER Diminutive ελµív-tov; -wdns [adj.] 'worm-like', -táw [v.] 'suffer from worms'
(Hp., Arist.).
•ETYM Traditionally connected with two other names for 'worm', Skt. kŕmi-, Lith.
kirmis, Olr. cruim, etc. < IE *k*rmi-, on the one hand, and Lat. vermis, Gm. *wurma-
on the other. Greek would have innovated its form by folk-etymologically adjusting
it to the root *uel- ‘turn, wind' (see ɛilέw 2), which gave two further forms for
'worm', Evλn and Ƒáλŋ (spelled váλn). It seems obvious, however, that the latter
forms are clearly unrelated to us. Our word is not IE, as per Fur.: 290. It is unclear
why Fur: and DELG hesitate to take the -v0- as an indication of Pre-Greek origin.
Note that the form λuyyos also shows typical Pre-Greek prenasalization (cf. acc.
λµuðα IG 4²(1), 122: 10], Epidauros). The form λíµives also suggests a Pre-Greek
variant. Was it *lmi(n)t-, with prothetic vowel a- which became e- before the palatal
1
415
1 (see Beekes 2008)? Note that the MoGr. forms λɛßíða, -ídɛç confirm the vowel after
the 1 (see DELG).
=
ελžívŋ •var έλ}ītis. →ëλkw.
Eλos [n.] 'marsh meadow, marshy ground' (Il.). <IE *selos- 'marsh'>
•VAR Ëλŋ• σúvdεvdpoɩ tóлoɩ ‘thickly-wooded places' (H.); cf. the etymology below.
●COMP As a first member thematically lengthened in ελεó-Оpεлτо grown on
marshy meadows' (B 776), έλɛo-σελivov 'celery from marshy meadows' (Thphr.,
Dsc.), also εto- by contraction from λaov σéλ.; also in ελɛo-ßáτηs 'traversing
(living in) marshes' (A. Pers. 39 [anap.]), from tà έλɛa or with metrical lengthening;
with elision in ελɛopέw 'be a surveyor of marshes' (Erythrae IV; or 'forester'? See
below), from *έλɛo-(Ƒ)ópoç. Unclear ►éλɛoñíðaç; cf. also ►έλíxpvσoç.
•DER λɛɩoç ‘marshy' (IA), 'Eλɛía epithet of Artemis (Cos), έlwdns ‘id.' (Hp., Th.),
Eλεíτηs growing in marshes' (Dion. Byz.), also an epithet of Apollo (Cyprus; cf.
Redard 1949: 12, 24, 208; on the formation see Schwyzer: 500); ελε-ýtns (Aéwv, Call.
fr. 748).
⚫ETYM Inherited word, identical with Skt. sáras- [n.] 'pond', IE *sélos-; Gr. λɛioC =
Skt. sarasiya-. Not related to Lat. silva or üλŋ, in spite of H. and Thess. úλopéwv
exists beside Erythr. έλɛopέwv; see Wahrmann Glotta 19 (1931): 165.
Ě入oy → Ě入入ov.
ελлoµɑ [v.] ‘to expect, hope, suppose' (Il.). <IE *uelp- ‘expect’▷
•VAR Act. ελлw 'make hope' only ß 91 = v 380 лávɩaç µèv (Ƒ)éλéɛ. Epic also
εελлоμα (see below), perf. (with present mg.) oλлα, plpf. εóλлε (for *(F)ε(F)Óλлεɩ,
see below and Debrunner Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 199, Chantraine 1942: 479f. with Add.
et corr.).
•COMP As a second member in ǎ-ελл-τоç 'unexpected, unhoped for' with ȧελлτ-íα,
-έw (II.), also à-ελл-ηç (ε 408); as a first member in 'Еλл-ηvæр (Od.; on the
formation Schwyzer: 441, Sommer 1948: 175 with lit.).
•DER έλлwpń ‘hope' (Od.; for wλn?; cf. Porzig 1942: 235); ¿λníç, -ídoç [f.] ‘id.' (ë 101 =
τ 84; cf. Porzig 353; on the mg. Martinazzoli Stud. ital. fil. class. N.S. 21 (1946): 11ff.)
with εÜ-, ǎv-ελлç, etc.; denominative ελлí [v.] ‘id.' (IA) with ελлσtikóç, ¿λmoµiós,
ελлσμα (Arist.). Оn ελлíç, ελлоμα see Myres Cl. Rev. 63: 46.
⚫ETYM There is no counterpart to (F)ελлоμа (sеe Chantraine 1942: 133 and 182) and
the old perfect with present meaning (Ƒ)έ(Ƒ)oλлa in the other languages; Homer has
a few forms from έέλлo̟αɩ, after doμ (Beekes 1969: 64). A verbal adjective
connected with Gr. ελлíç is supposed in Lat. volup est ‘it is pleasant to me' (whence
volup-tas); IE *u(e/o)lp-i-.
ελлоç [n.]?
.
λαov, στéαp, εveŋvía ‘olive oil, rendered fat, abundance'; λopoç.
Воúτрov. Kúлрor 'butter (Cypr.)' (H.). <PG(V)►
•DER Оn ►öλлη ‘oil-bottle', see s.v.
•ETYM The word has been compared with an IE word for 'fat', *selp-: Skt. sarpíṣ- [n.]
'molten butter, lard', ToB salype 'fat, oil', PGm. *salba- 'salve', as well as Alb. gjalpë
'butter'. Nevertheless, one would expect a spiritus asper in Greek. The variation л/
'

=== page 232 ===

416
Ě入Ú&plov
!
417
rather points to a Pre-Greek word. Cypr. λqoç is unexplained; see DELG. The word
öλлη indicates a bottle, and therefore has nothing to do with the word for ‘oil, fat'.
¿λúdpiov [n.]? = Xελ₁dóvov, ‘celandine' (pap.). <?►
⚫ETYM Formation in -údpiov (Chantraine 1933: 72f.). It has been connected with
►λos 'marsh' ("somit nach dem Standort benannt", acc. to Frisk), but this has
spiritus asper.
Eλvμos 1 [m.] 'millet' (Hp., Ar.). <?►
•VAR In H. also ε σлép öлεр εчovτεç Аáкwvεç έσеíovσiv 'seed which the
Laconians boil and eat'. Frisk (s.v. εiλúw) notes that the word also means 'container':
kai ǹ tñç kiðápaç kai tov tóžov 0½кη 'case for the kithara and the bow' (H.; s.v.
€).
•ETYM Unknown (see Schwyzer: 494). Connection with ölupa 'rice-wheat' and
ovλaí ‘barley groats' is uncertain. Fur.: 246 suggests connection with έ¿λíµap. kéyxpw
öµolov [¿àɩvý] ½ µeλívy úrò Aakwvwv ‘millet (Lacon.)' (H.), assuming Ƒ- > µ-;
however, this is very unclear. Perhaps Pre-Greek. See ►ɛiλúw.
žλvµos 2. [f.(m.)] name of a Phrygian pipe (S.). <?>
•ETYM There appears no reason for connection with ► ɛiλúw.
*λwp→ελεĬv.
=
èupádes → Baívw.
*μẞpvov →ẞpúw.
ué [pron.] 'me'. <IE *h,me 'me'>
•VAR Encl. µε [acc.] 'me', ¿oí (Dor. Phoc. εuív), encl. µoi [dat.] (also gen.) 'to me'
('mine'); varying genitive forms: Ion., etc. ¿µέo (Hom. also quεĩo), ¿µεû, µev, Att.
contr. ¿μou, μov; Dor. also εµέoç, ¿µɛûç, etc.; Lesb. Hom., etc. εμεev; more in
Schwyzer: 602.
•⚫ETYM Old pronoun: for µɛ, cf. Lat. mē, Skt. mā, Go., etc. mi-k (after ik 'I'; not = *µέ
yɛ), IE *mě; µoɩ = Skt. me, Lat. mī (used as vocative), OLith. -mi, etc.; quív after ďµív,
etc. The genitives are all innovations: ¿uéo (whence uεão analogically or with
metrical lengthening), modelled after tέo, etc. (gen. of ►τíc), whence ¿µéo-ç, ¿µé-0ɛv
(like oкo-0εv, etc.). Adjectivized έué gave the possessive έµós ‘meus'; likewise, Av.
ma-, Hitt. -miš, Lat. meus. On the acc. *h,me, see Beekes, Sprache 33 (1987-9): 7-12; it
is also seen in Arm. im [dat.] 'mei'.
¿μέw [v.] 'to vomit'. <IE *uemh,- 'vomit'>
•VAR Aor. ¿µεo(σ)ai (Il.), perf. ¿µýµeкa (Hp., Luc.), fut. ¿µéow (Hp.), ¿µm̃, ¿µoñµai
(Att.), pres. èéОw (Hdn.).
•COMP Prefixed with ảл-, εε-, εv-, úлɛp-, etc.
⚫DER Verbal nouns: εчετOÇ 'vomiting' (Ion., Arist.) with the bahuvrihis ȧv-, Svσ-, εv-
Éç (Hp. et al.; also, directly from εuéw, duo-, -, -),
kompiýµetos (Hp.); to vлεpεµéw: vnepéµetos (Hp.). From ¼µετoç: ¿μɛσía ‘qualm,
inclination to vomit' (Hp.), èµεt-iкóc, -wdŋc, -ńpios, -táw (Hp., Arist. et al.); εμεσç
h
and чεσμа id.' (Hp.); quías "spitter" (Com.; see Chantraine 1933: 93). See also
►εμúç and ▸лεрinμεкtéw.
•ETYM In Skt., there is the athematic vámi-ti; additionally, Lat. vomit, vomimus
(beside vomi-tus), which were reinterpreted as thematic forms, with which compare
reg-i-mus. The disyllabic root is also represented in Lith. vémti (new yod-present
vemiù). The root also occurs in North Gm., but only in metaphorical meaning, e.g.
OSw. vami [m.] 'disgust'. Schwyzer: 2225 sees an element of the living language in
Eμéw, which would explain why the verb does not show a F- in Homer (a similar
explanation exists for lack of Ƒ in ►idpwç, as well as in ►Síœpoc).
šµļāvis →µñvis.
¿µµaлéwç ‘immediately' (epic since Il.).
•ETYM From *μaný ‘grasping', to *¿µ-µañɛïv. See ▸ panéɛiv.
LatéwateÚw.
žpylotos →fotós.
¿µлášoµai [v.pres.] ‘care about something, for something' (Il.; mostly with negation).
<IE? *peh₂- 'protect, feed'>
•COMP Act. кατ-εμлáчw 'take hold of (óлóταν ✗pεw σɛ katɛµnášŋ Nic. Th. 695).
•ETYM No good etymology. Connection with ►¤µлηç 'in any case' is semantically
difficult. In view of the MoSw. expression for care for something', fästa sig vid något,
properly “to attach yourself to”, one may consider (as Frisk does) an original *¿µ-
Táy-quat, to cu-răyñvai (Ion. năK-TÓÇ, TÖKTOŪV). The gloss Ėuaotñpa, lúav-
notwtác, µáptvpaç ‘confirmers, witnesses' (H.) is unclear; Latte corrects it to
*¿µñoτñpaç. Blanc RPh. 70 (1996): 1996 connects it with *peh₂- ‘protect' (Beekes
1969: 173); however, cf. Pok. 787 *peh₂k/g- 'fit together'.
žµñaɩos 1 [adj.] ‘bursting in, sudden' (A. Ag. 187 [lyr.], also Emp. 2, 2?). <GR?▷
•ETYM From μлaíw 'burst in' (S. El. 902; see ►πaíw); cf. Schwyzer: 452: 2.
¤µñalos 2 [adj.] ‘experienced, skillful (v 379, Q 400; Lyc. 1321). <GR?>
•ETYM Not well explained. Schwyzer: 4676 and 620 derives it from ¼µŋs as *‘fully
master of (related to εμ-лάoμα; see лáoμαι). Differently, Lagercrantz KZ 34
(1897): 395; see also Sommer 1905: 80f.
Bluedog médov.
finelpog → neipa.
μлŋs [adv.] ‘in any case, really, all the same, nevertheless' (II.). <GR?>
•VAR Dor. žuлãç, also εµлαν, εµǎ.
⚫ETYM Origin uncertain. Acc. to Brugmann IF 27 (1910): 274ff., prop. a nom.-acc.ntr.
'validity, reality, truth', related to El. ¿µлáш (εµã‚ εл-εµ˜ýτƒ) ‘execute (a fixed
punishment), realize', лéñāµa, nāç, etc. It is improbable that έu- is from IE *sem- in
Els (Schwyzer: 620). The ending of ¼µлă is like ǹpέµă, átpéµă; éµnav (ã or ǎ), as in

=== page 233 ===

418
εμлÍç, -ídoç
ǎлav (Brugmann IF 27 (1910): 274ff.); see also Björck 1950: 123f. Radt 1958: 200-208
suggests έvлãoɩv'in all cases'.
¿µriç, -ídos [f.] ‘gnat' (Ar., Arist.). <GR➤
•ETYM Popular derivation from εµлívɛv ‘to drink oneself full (of blood)'; cf. e.g.
Suclides from кλívεv. See Strömberg 1944: 14 for full argumentation. Older
interpretations, all wrong, are recounted in Strömberg and Bq. Cf. Gil Fernández
1959: 26. Differently, Szemerényi 1964: 143'.
εμлλατíα [f.] name of a kitchen (IG 5(2), 4 [IVª]). <?>
•VAR Only Arc. чл-.
⚫ETYM Perhaps related to лλáτоç 'breadth', from εμлλατη (only Аnon. in Tht. 30, 1)
or to μлλατúvεv 'broaden' (LXX). It has been compared with εлíлλατoр.
tλakoûvtoç eidos ‘kind of flat cake' (H.), but is this really useful? Cf. on ►лέλavoç.
→.
εμлodáv→лúc.
¿µлoλý [f.] ‘trade, trade goods, purchase, profit' (Pi., Att.). ◄IE? *kwel- ‘turn, move’▷
•VAR Arc. ivлoλa (IVª).
•COMP Compounds: on åлεµлoλn see below. Also with prefix: ȧn-, di-, ¿§-, nap-,
лρоσ-.
•DER Note εμлελwpoç. ȧyopavóμoç 'clerk of the market' (H.; probably for εμлoλ-;
for Chantraine's opinion, see below). εµлoλαчoç ‘belonging to trade, etc.', epithet of
Hermes (Ar.), εµñoλɛúç ‘buyer' (AP). Denominative verb εμлoλáw, -άoμai ‘trade,
buy, sell, win' (Od.), with impf. ǹμлóλwv, aor. ǹµлóðσɑ (¿vεñóλŋoa Is.),
ǹµñoλýðŋv, perf. ŋµñóðŋka (¿µñeñóλŋкa Luc.), med. ŋµñóðŋuai. ¿µñóλŋµa ‘goods,
profit' (S.), (ȧл-)εµлóλησç (Нp., Рoll.), àлεμл 'seller' (Lyc.); deverbal
άлεμлоλýу· ȧлαλλaуýv, пρãσɩv, έμлорíаv 'deliverance, sale, trade' (H.).
•ETYM Also (-)εµлoλéw ‘id.' (Herod., J.). Cf. Evτoλý, ¿vtoµý, etc.; based on a verb
*εμлελw, -oμαι. It has been compared with the iterative (with lengthened grade)
лшλέw 'sell'. εµлоλáш is a denominative, as appears from the augmented and
reduplicated forms. Connection with лéλoμα, -w 'turn, move' (root *kel-) is
semantically possible; ¿µлoλý would then be ‘traffic'. However, IE also has an old
root *pel- ‘sell, earn, etc.' in several nominal derivatives, e.g. Skt. paṇa- [m.] ‘salary'
(with paṇate 'trade, buy'), Lith. pelnas 'wages, salary', OHG fāli, ON falr 'sal(e)able';
it has been connected with лwλέw, as distinct from εµлoλý. See Schwyzer: 720³. On
εμлоλý, εμлоλάw, see Chantraine RPh. 66 (1940): 11ff. with various suggestions
(лελálw, лéλαç, etc.). Recently, De Lamberterie has argued for connection with
*kel- and лwλéoдat (see DELG Supp. s.v. лwλéw).
зμлоpоç [m.] 'who travels on a ship, passager' (Od.), 'traveller' in general (B., trag.),
usually 'merchant' (IA; on the mg. beside кáлηλoç, vaúкληpoç Finkelstein Class.
Phil. 30 (1935): 320ff.). <GR➤
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. ovv-, o¡v-, þµкρ-έµñopoç.
!
1
εvavta
419
•DER εμлopía 'sea-trade, wholesale trade' (Hes.), εμлóрov 'commercial town' (IA),
εμлоριкóç 'belonging to a merchant (to trade)' (Stesich., IA; see Chantraine 1956a:
115); denominative verb ¿µñopεúoµai ‘be žµñopoç, travel, trade' (IA), also ‘be (more)
cunning' (2 Ep. Pet. 2, 3), with ¿µлópevµa, -etov, -evtiKÓÇ.
ETYM Hypostasis from ¿v лópu̟ (wv), “being in transit”; see лópоç and Porzig
1942: 258. See De Lamberterie RPh. 71 (1997): 159.
"Еμлovσα [f.] name of a popular phantom (Ar., D.). <PG?(S)►
'
•ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek figure, see Fur.: 1975; for the use of the suffix, cf.
aldovga, ăyxovga, kádovaa, vńdovoa, Aridovoa; Kn入ovoa = Kń入wgga.
Ěumpoode(v) ·VAR Lrpoola. →丌póadev.
Y
¿µrvpißýtnc, -ov [m.] 'which goes into the fire', of a τрíлoυç ¥ 702. <GR>
•ETYM Compound of the prepositional phrase έv лupí and ßñ-vαɩ, with suffix -τη-; cf.
Schwyzer: 452. Cf. луρуßτη Аrat. 983, a false archaizing form. On the matter, see
Brommer Herm. 77 (1942): 366f.
¿µús, -údos [f.] ‘freshwater tortoise' (Arist.) (in LSJ only in Suppl.) <PG?>
•VAR Also έ- (LSJSuppl.), msc. and fem. Also άuúç ‘id.' (Archig. apud Gal. 12.575).
•ETYM See Chantraine 1933: 126 and 347; origin unknown. Sommer 1905: 100 derives
it from έuéw because the animal, when breathing out below the surface of the water,
continuously releases air bubbles. However, *-ud- is not an IE suffix, so the word is
probably Pre-Greek; see Chantraine 1933: 348: лηλαμús “sans doute préhellénique”,
Xλauúc "arrangement d'un mot emprunté." Cf. also Pre-Greek on the suffix -v8-. It
has apparently escaped researchers that there are two forms; this probably points to
Pre-Greek origin (cf. Fur.: 346f.), where the variants ȧ-/ ε- are different reflexes of a
single Pre-Greek phoneme. There is no support for the suggestion that ëŋλâµúç
contains εμús as a second member, but this makes no difference for our
interpretation.
v [adv., prep.] ‘in, within' (Il.), as a preposition usually with the dat. (loc.) to indicate
the rest at the attained goal; in NWGr., El., Arc., Cypr., Thess., Boeot. also with
accus. indicating the direction, for which the other dialects have έv + C, see ► ɛiç. <IE
*h,en(i) 'in'>
•VAR Also ěvɩ; as a preposition ¿v, poetic έví, metrically lengthened ɛiv(í), Arc. Cypr.
Cret. iv.
⚫ETYM Old adverb, also seen in OLat. en (> in), Osc.-U en, Gm. (e.g. Go.) in, OIr. in,
OPr. en, Arm. i, etc., all from IE *h,en, *h,eni (identical with the loc. in -i, like лɩ,
лéρɩ, etc.?). On vɩ as a copula (certainly since V-VIP), whence MoGr. Elvaɩ (ɛlvɩ, ëvɩ,
etc.) 'is, are', see Debrunner Mus. Helv. 11 (1954): 57ff.
Evayxos →ăyx.
Éva入íyios →å入íykios.
vavta •VAR έvavtɩ, έvavtioç. ⇒ävta and ávtí.
:

=== page 234 ===

}
420
=>
Évavtißrov → Bia.
ÉvavtBLov
Evapa [n.pl.] 'the weapons of a fallen opponent' (Il., Hes. Sc. 367). <?>
•COMP As a first member in έvapo-кτávταç, of death (A. Fr. 151 [lyr.]), ¿vapŋ-qópos
'carrying the ε.' (API.); also έvapo-pópos epithet of Ares (Hes. Sc. 192), also name of
a hero (Alcm.) with σ in the compound after έууεσлáλos (Leumann Glotta 15 (1927):
155f., Schwyzer: 336).
⚫DER Denominative verbs: vaipw, aor. Evapɛïv (- Hes. Sc. 329) 'take away the ε.',
euphemistic for 'kill' (Il.); also εvαpí-μßроτоç ‘killing men' (Pi.; after ɛσí-
μußpоτoc); (younger) ¿vapíšw, aor. ¿vapiai (Il.; in Hom. often ε-; also άл-, επ-,
кατ-) 'id.'.
⚫ETYM Unknown. Schwyzer IF 30 (1912): 440f. compared Skt. (1x) sánara- (RV 1, 96,
8), of uncertain meaning. Connection with Skt. sanóti 'win' (cf. ►ǎvчµ) would
impart vapa the original meaning 'gain, booty'; one would have to accept psilosis.
Hardly an r/n-stem, as per Schwyzer: 518. On the meaning, see Trümpy 1950: 86ff.
See also Evtea.
¿vapyńs, -és [adj.] 'clear, visible, recognizable, living' (II.); on the mg. Mülder RhM 79
(1930): 29ff. <IE *h₂erg- ‘shining, white'>
•DER έvápyɛia 'clearness' (Pl., Hell.), έvápуnua ‘outward appearance', also in plur.
-nματα 'recognizable facts' (Hell.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 190); ¿vapуóτηs (Poll.); also
Evapуwdns (Aret.).
⚫ETYM Formations like ¿v-τελns from Téλoç demonstrate for the second member of
Év-apync an s-stem *äpyoç 'shining', which is also found in ȧpуεστns and ȧpyεvvóc
(see ►άpyós 1 and Schwyzer: 512). Further details are difficult to ascertain, but it is
probably a bahuvrihi with adverbial first member: 'having äpyos, having splendor'.
See Strömberg 1946: 118f.; differently, Sommer 1948:`108.
εváτηp →εivaτépes.
évavλíoμa →ěvavλos 3.
žvavlos 1 [m.] ‘bed of a stream, torrent' (Il.); post-Hom. 'hole, grotto, ravine' (Hes., h.
Ven. 74, 124, E. [lyr.]), also in sea (Opp.). <IE *h₂eulo- ‘tube, longish hole’▷
ETYM Properly 'with avλóc', so 'hollow area', from avλós 'hole, tube'. For the
meaning 'torrent', cf. the analogous development of xapádpa (properly related to
Xépados ‘gravel').
Evavlos 2 [adj.] 'accompanied by the flute' (Att.). <IE *h₂eulo- 'tube, longish hole'>
⚫ETYM Bahuvrihi compound of avλóç and adverbial ►ěv.
vavlos3 [adj.] 'sleeping in the open air' (E.). <IE *h₂eu- 'pass the night'>
•DER Also έvaúλios with the substantive έvaúλov ‘abode' (Hell.).
⚫ETYM Hypostasis of έv avλñ (v) living in the open air'; also, of NÉOVTEC (E. Ph. 1573
[lyr.]).
¿vdáros [adj.] ‘indigenous' (Hell.). ◄ GR▷
阜
}
Evdov
421
⚫ETYM From vdov, modelled after åλλodaлóç, τηλεdaлóç, etc., and reshaped after
the adjectives in -ɩos (¿vtóïoç, etc.). Cf. Schwyzer: 625.
=
Évdedexńs→80入xós.
vdɩva [n.pl.] ‘intestines'. <IE? *h,endo- ‘in(side)'?>
•VAR Only évбívwv [gen.pl.] (Y 408).
•ETYM Derived from "vdov with a suffix -tvo-. Metrical lengthening (as per Schulze
1892: 253)? Cf. Chantraine 1933: 204 and Meid IF 62 (1956): 27516. Vendryes MSL 15
(1908/09): 358 accentuates έvdivos like ȧyxiστīvos, etc.; differently, Brugmann-
Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 176 (accent as in Evτɛpα).
Evdios [adj.] 'in (of) the afternoon' (II.), as a substantive -ov [n.] (-oc [m.])
‘(after) noon' (Call., A. R.); rarely ‘belonging to heaven, coming from heaven' (üdwp,
Arat. 954), 'in the air' (AP 9, 71); in Hom. i, later (from εüdios?) also ĭ, see Sommer
1948: 75° with litt. <IE. *dieu- ‘bright sky'>
⚫ETYM Hypostasis of *¿v dɩƑí (: v-difi-oç, cf. ¿v-vúxi-os), locative of the word for
'bright sky, day' (see ►Sioc, ►Zɛúc). Whether the expression "vdiov üdwp (Arat.),
etc. contains a trace of 'heaven' is doubtful; it rather arose by blending with Sĩoç.
evdeawkóta →Bioc.
=
Evбotáw SOLO.
vdov [adv.] ‘inside, at home' (Il.). <IE *h,endon ‘inside'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in έvdo-µáxãç 'fighting at home' (Pi.), έvdó-µvxoc
'who has his hiding place inside' (S.), -µεvía, έvdouxía 'furniture, movables' (Plb.;
¿vdчµɛvía Phryn., pap.; after dúoµai ‘enter'?).
=
●DER έvdo-0ɛv (like oкo-0εv, etc.) 'from inside, from the house' (Il.), čvdo-0ɩ
Evdov (Hom.); on ¿vdo¤ídios see below; ¿vdoσε (acc.?) = εlow (Keos), čvdw (Delph.;
after (w). Compar. and superlative έvdoτέpw (Hp., post-classical), -τáτw
(postclassical); late έvdótɛpoç, -tατоs (VIP). By confusion with évtóc arose έvdóc
(Dor.; cf. Kretschmer Glotta 27 (1939):11) with έvdoσídia [pl.] 'intestines' (Epidaur.),
with Cretan development évdobídios living at home' (Gort.), ¿vdóσia (LXX) =
Evτóσia. After oкoι et al. vdot (Lesb. Dor.; see Solmsen 1909: 114); on έvdáлoç
s.v.; unclear is έvdúλw. Evdoεv (H.), like дккúλoç, Spчúλoç? See Baunack Phil. 70
(1911): 383. On ►¿vdɩva, see s.v.
⚫ETYM EvSov is identical with Hitt. andan 'within'; also, anda ‘id.' = Lat. endo. Often
explained as 'indoors', from év and an endingless locative of the root noun for
'house' found in Sáлεdov, бεσлóτηs, Sóμoc; the expression Alòs ěvdov
ȧуηуépατo (Y 13) has been adduced, but the genitive can just as well be elliptic, on
which see Vendryes MSL 15 (1908/09): 358ff. See Schwyzer: 625f., Schwyzer 1950:
546f., Lejeune 1939 (see index), and Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:2, 723.
DELG rejects this view: it fits neither the form nor the meaning. Cf. Meid AAHG 27
(1974): 54. Leumann 1977: 562 assumes that endo was borrowed from Greek: indigena
would be a calque on Gr. ¿vdoyεvns, after which endo became separated. Acc. to De

=== page 235 ===

422
*vdopa
Vaan 2008 s.v. endo, this “seems unlikely in view of the recent date of indigena, and
because of the generally archaic look of the words indi/u- is combined with."
vdopa [n.pl.] properly 'what is wrapped in the skin [when sacrificing] (SIG 1025, 48;
1026, 8); Cos: Evdopa έvdépεταi. <IE *der- 'flay'>
ETYM From évбépoμα wrap in the skin', referring also to Sopá; note the
explanation of vdpaτα (after yкata?) in H.: τà ¿vdepóµeva oùv tý keqaλñ kai toĩs
лоσí 'what is wrapped in the skin together with the head and the feet'. Stengel Herm.
54 (1919): 208ff. explained it as σлλάуva ‘internal organs'; however, his connection
with Sépτpov 'retina' is correctly rejected by Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 220f. The
word is a hypostasis of ev Sopa, acc. to Jones Class. Rev. NS 9 (1959): 132. See Sépw.
*vdpvov →Spüç.
¿vɗukέws [adv.] ‘careful' (Il.), explained in Hp. as 'continuously'. <?>
•DER Also ¿vduкéç (Nic. Th. 263, H. [beside έvdúкiov]; probably also A. R. 1, 883 for
metrically impossible -έwc).
⚫ETYM Perhaps related to άdεuкns with uncertain analysis; both a verb *έv-Sukɛīv
and a noun *бúкη are possible. Cf. Strömberg 1946: 90; on the meaning, see
Leumann 1950: 311f., who explains its use in Hp. as from a false interpretation of
Homer.
¿vɛykɛīv [v.aor.] 'bring', resultative (Att., Pi., B., Hp.). <IE *h,nek- bring' and *h¸nek-
'attain, reach'>
•VAR Also έvéykaɩ; aor. pass. ¿vε×еñvaɩ with fut. ¿vεxеñσoµɩ, perf.act. ¿vývoxa,
med. έvývεyμαч; as a present there is oέpw, as a fut. oïσw.
•COMP Often with prefix: ȧл-, εiσ-, ¿‹-, kat-, пpoʊ-, etc.; As a second member with
compositional lengthening in St-, dovρ-, ►лodηveкnç, etc. (cf. also dópv).
•DER Verbal noun ►öyкoç, s.v.
•ETYM Beside ¿yk- (old zero grade *h,nk-), there is also έvεк- (old full grade *h,nek-).
With old o-grade, Attic reduplication, and aspiration, we have vývox-a < *h,ne-
h,nok (but no reduplication in кατ-voка H.). The crossing of έyк- and έvɛк-
yielded έv-vεyкtal; influence of έvεika resulted in έv-ývεtyк-τai, žvεlykav, etc.
(Att. inscr.). There are no exact parallels in other languages: Skt. has the reduplicated
perf. ān-ámś-a 'I have attained' (*He-Hno(n)k-); however, an additional problem is
that there were probably two roots, *h,nek- ‘carry' and *h₂nek- ‘reach, attain' (see
LIV² s.vv. for various forms in the separate branches).
There is a fundamental discussion of the separation of these two different roots and
their respective semantics in García Ramón 1999a: 47-80. The Greek verb derives
from *h,nek- bring, carry', like a BSl. verb (Lith. neš-ú, OCS nes-o̟ ‘I bring'), while
most Indo-Iranian forms (Skt. náśati ‘attains' < IE *h₂nek-, aś-nó-ti 'reaches' <
*h₂nk-) derive from the second root meaning 'reach, attain', as do Go. ga-nah ‘àpkɛĩ,
it suffices, "es reicht”, OIr. t-ānac ‘I came' < *(-)h₂e-h₂nok-, Lat. na-n-c-iscor (nasal
infix present), nactus sum ‘attain', and Arm. has-anem, aor. has-i 'reach'. ToB enk-,
ToA ents- 'take' (LIV² s.v. *h,nek-) have also been included with the etymon *h,nek-,
although the semantics are not straightforward. Gr. ►Stāvɛкýs probably belongs to
}
Évɛóc
423
*hnek-. The aorist vɛyкɛīv is most difficult. A basic form *h,ne-h,nk-o- would
develop into ¿vεyк- with shortening of the vowel by Osthoff's Law; cf. Beekes MSS 38
(1979): 18ff. See LIV² s.v. for further litt.
Evεikaι [v.] 'to carry (off)' <IE *h,nek- 'take away'>
•VAR Aor. ind. vεɩкα (Il.), also ηviкα (Lesb. Dor.; partly = йviкα for vεкα) subj.
with short them. vowel έvíкεt (Cyren.); sigmatic 3pl. εiviεav (Boeot. for vεžav); aor.
pass. ¿v(ε)ɩxеñvaɩ, perf. med. ¿vývaryμai. Also ouv-εvεíкoμaι (Hes. Sc. 440).
•COMP Also with prefix: ȧv-, ȧл-, εiσ-, εε-, etc.
⚫ETYM Derived from ¿v-ɛкaɩ (related to ►ikw) by Frisk et al.; see also Chantraine
1942: 395. However, έvɛĭкat is discussed by Meier-Brügger KZ 100 (1987): 313-322. He
concludes that evɛyk- is the original form, and ¿vɛк- a secondary development,
pointing out that nominal derivations are from Evɛyк-. The root is now
reconstructed as *h,nek- 'to take away', and the Greek form reconstructed as a
reduplicated aorist *h,ne-h,nk-> *enēnk-, in which the long vowel was shortened by
Osthoff's Law. On demarcation against *h₂nek- 'to reach', see García Ramón 1999a:
47-80.
évɛka [postp.] ‘because, because of (Il.), with gen. On the mg. in Hom. see Porzig
1942: 169; on the final -a cf. εlta: εitev, ëneita: ëneiTε(V); εvεкov after vdov et al.; by
crossing Evεкo, -kav, see Schwyzer: 627, 406, Schwyzer 1950: 552. <?>
•VAR EVEкEV (especially postclassical); εivɛкα, -кεv (Ion.), Evvɛкα (Aeol.; see below);
Hell. also vεкε, -KO(V), -kav.
•DIAL Myc. e-ne-ka.
•ETYM The analysis as εv-Ƒɛкα, related to έкwv, etc., is refuted by the Mycenaean
form. Note the interchange ev-, v- (is vv- hyperaeolic? or a metrical lengthening?).
See Schwyzer: 228, Chantraine 1942: 161, and Bolling Lang. 30 (1954): 453f. The form
oűvɛka = vɛka especially in Att. poets, by reanalysis of a preceding genitive in -ov:
TOÚTOŰVEKα was conceived of as τоÚTOV OŰVεкα (Schwyzer: 413). Since it is
Mycenaean, there is no etymology; connection with *h,nek- has been suggested.
Evελoç [m.] vɛẞpós 'young of the deer, fawn' (H.). <?>
•ETYM From Eveλos comes Lat. inuleus 'young deer' (WH s.v. hinuleus with lit.);
further uncertain. Niedermann IF Anz. 18: 78f. thought it was a metathesized form of
*λɛvoç, related to ►έλós, ► λaqos.
έvevýkovta [num.] ‘ninety' (B 602). <IE *h,neun->
•COMP On the ŋ see ▸έßdoµýkovta.
•DER hεvεvηкovτa (Heracl.; like hoуdoŋкovτα after hɛßdɛµŋкovta), έvykovta
(Delos, Phocis [III or IIª]; probably haplological); uncertain έvvýkovta (t 174);
innovation after έvvéα, évvñдap, etc.; gen.pl. évεvηкOVτшv (Chios; Aeolizing).
ETYM Acc. to Kortlandt MSS 42 (1983): 99, a pre-form *h,neun-dkomt- regularly
developed into *έvεƑvýкovτα, in which the -F- was lost at an early stage. See ►évvéa.
¿vɛóc [adj.] ‘speechless, dumb, stupiď (IA). <PG?►
•VAR Also Evveós.
COMP As a first member e.g. in έvɛo-στaσin 'speechlessness' (A. R. 3, 76).
2

=== page 236 ===

424
ëvepde(v)
Mèveiv
425
•DER έvεótŋs ‘dumbness' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM The form recalls кɛvɛóç, but has no etymology. Acc. to Brugmann 1912: iff., it
is related to εoviç, etc.; this is correctly rejected by Kretschmer Glotta 6 (1915): 305.
Fur.: 392 recalls vεvóç. ɛúñeŋç 'meek, silly' (H.), and further vɛvinλoc (also έvínλoc),
but does this prove Pre-Greek origin?
Evɛpoε(v) [adv., prep.] '(from) below, below'. <IE *ner-(ter-o-) 'the lower one'>>
•VAR Also vέpeε(v) (Hom.), vεpa (Dor. Lesb.).
•COMP Also Ûл-, εл-évεpε(v). See Lejeune 1939, especially 341ff.
⚫DER *vepot 'those below, those below the earth', of the dead below the earth and the
chthonic gods (Hom.), compar. ¿véptepos, véptepos 'below (the earth)' (Hom.),
superl. ¿véptatos 'the lowest' (Emp.).
ETYM Cf. the opposites üлεр-0ε(v), úлép-tεpoç, -τατoç, from ►úлεр; also, üлεрov,
Úлépα. A good formal agreement with vépτεpos is found in Italic: U nertru ‘sinistro',
Osc. nertra-k 'a sinistra. It has been cmopared with further Gm. words for 'north',
e.g. ON norðr [n.], which require zero grade: PGm. *núrþra-, IE *nr-tro-, with basic
meaning 'region where the sun is below [the earth]', or 'left side of someone who
turns to the east when praying'. Another formation in Arm. ner-k'-in 'the one below'
(cf. i nerk'oy, i nerk'ust '[from] below'). Also different is Skt. naraka- 'hell'
(Wackernagel-Debrunner 1954: 150). Without consonantal suffix, there is ToB ñor
‘below' < *nēr- (see Adams 1999). As Armenian has no *e-, this is probably a Greek
innovation. Further, one connects Lith. neriù, neŕti 'plunge, slip into', etc. (see
► SεvSpúw); see also vɛƖpóç. The Gr. έ- may be compared with that of έkɛi.
¿vetý [f.] ‘pin, brooch'. <IE *(H)ieh,- 'throw; make, do'>
•VAR έvetάp, -ñpos [m.] 'clyster syringe'.
⚫ETYM Verbal noun of έv-ínu; see ►ïnu.
έvéwpa [adv.] acc. to Baunack Phil. 65 (1906): 637f. 'in the air' (inscr. Milete),
comparing μετέwpa (cf. ►µετéwpoc). <GR>
⚫ETYM Hypostasis of ȧεp-?
¿vŋ [f.] sc. ŋµépa, only in adverbial expressions mg. 'the day after tomorrow'. ◄IE
*h,eno- 'that one'>
•VAR e.g. Eç T' aupιov s τε vηi (Hes. Op. 410), with surprising hiatus; vηs, ɛiç
žvηv, τñ čvη (Att.), vas (Theoc.), Evap (Lacon.). έ τpíτηу 'on the third day',
εлεvap. ɛiç tɛtáрτηv. Аáкwvεç 'on the fourth day (Lacon.)' (H.).
•ETYM Old pronoun, seen in ►έкETVOÇ.
Evnns [adj.] 'mild, soft, benevolent' (IG 14, 1648: 8; metrical tomb inscription). <IE?
*heu-'enjoy, desire', or *h,euH- 'help, assist'>
•VAR Gen. and acc.sg. vηéoç, -éα (Hom., Hes.), nom.pl. -ñɛç, -éɛç (Opp.).
●DER ¿vŋɛíŋ ‘mildness, benevolence' (P 670, Opp.).
•ETYM Uncertain. Formations like ¿v-teλýs (from tέλos) point to a second member
*ños, which can be PGr. *ǎƑos or * Ƒos, the latter of which would differ only in
ablaut from Skt. ávas-, Av. auuah- [n.] 'favor, benevolence, help' (*h,euH-os-), in
which case Evηns would properly mean "having benevolence". However, it is rather
1
i
:
perhaps related to Lat. aveō ‘be eager³, Skt. āvay- ‘consume', etc. with initial *ā-. For
the ablaut, it has been compared with ǎyos beside Skt. ágas- (from decomposition?).
It has additionally been compared with åïτηs (s.v. ►ā³ïτāç), from *ä(F)os with short
a-.
èvńvodev →èveiv.
¿vηpóσov [n.] 'rent on ploughed land' (Delos, Halic.; since IV³) <IE *h₂erh¸- ‘plough'>
•VAR In the same mg. έvapáτiov (Rhodos IIIa).
•ETYM Hellenistic technical term, hypostasized from έv ȧpóτw or ȧpáτw (cf. on
Apáτvoc) by means of a suffix -to-: "[rent] on the ploughed land"; the -n- is from
compositional lengthening. Likewise, лpo-ηpóσó “before the time of ploughing'
(Hell.).
Eva [adv.], demonstrative and relative ‘there, here, where', first local, but secondarily
also temporal; also 'to there, to here; where to' (on the use Hom. see Bolling Lang. 26
(1950): 371ff.); <IE *h,eno- 'there>>
•VAR Eveεv 'from there, from where' (Il.). On the difference between Eva and veεv
see Lejeune 1939: 375ff.
•DER Évá-dε 'to there, here', ¿v0év-de from here' (II.); also vivos 'from here'
(Megar.; cf. Bechtel 1921, 2: 204), ¿vðádios. ¿vтóлoç 'local' (H.). From crossing of
žvėα and aúτá (with elision or shortened from *¿vēãuτα) arose Ion. ¿vðañta (cf.
toĩa : tolaũta); with transfer of aspiration after ev-0α, εv-0εv arose Att. έvτα-a
(and έvtευ-0εv) ‘there, (to) here' (since I 601; cf. Wackernagel 1916: 23; Att. inscr.
also έvēαña, -oĩ); secondary loss of aspiration (after v) in Arg. évτáde, El. ¿vtañta.
Ion. έvēεŨτεv, Att. ¿vτεеεv 'from here, from there' (T 568) is cross of vðaτa and
Eveɛv (Wackernagel IF 14 (1903): 370¹); different Schwyzer: 628³: *έvēāvτa >
*¿vēŋuta > *¿vðɛvτα: ¿vεŨτεv. After τOÛTо, etc. έvτouеa (Cyme, Oropos).
⚫ETYM No parallel formations in other languages. For εv-0εv, cf. лó-еεv, etc. An old
suffix -0a is found in ►iayεvns, but other material ( Arm. and 'there', OIr. and
'there', Lat. inde, OCS kodu 'from where?') is doubtful; see WH s.v. inde and ēn. It
has been compared with the deictic element *h,eno-; see ►žvη.
Évoεiv [v.] 'to come, go' (Dor., Delph., Arc). <IE? *h,ned"- 'come about'>
•VAR Aor. ind. ñvov, ptc. ¿váv, etc. Compare the epic perf. and plpf. forms:
ávývoßev (A 266), of alµa; ¿vývo¤ev (p 270), of êvíoŋ (v.l. áv-); ¿ï-evývořε (B 219, K
134 of λáxvn; 0 365 of έλaιov), kaτ-εvývoеεv (Hes. Sc. 269 of кóvɩç; h. Cer. 279 of
кóμαι [pl.]), лαρ-εvývoеε (A. R. 1, 664 of µñτç); the mg. is perhaps 'to bubble up,
spring' or 'to spread out'.
•ETYM Since εveεiv is widespread in Doric, it is not from ελεv (with a limited
dialectal development λτ > vτ). There is no good verbal connection for έvεv
outside Greek. The forms έv-, ȧv-voε have been compared with ¿vēɛīv (ablaut
ÉvεÐ- : Évoе- : Èv0-); άvývoεv could go back to *av-εvývoεv by haplology.
Formally, we may reconstruct a root *h,ned"- 'to come about' vel sim. The Indo-
Iranian group of Skt. ádhvan- 'road', OAv. aduuan- [m.] ‘id.' < *h,nd-uen- is
1

=== page 237 ===

426
*VOLVOS 1
probably related. The connection with ON ondurr 'snowshoe' seems more dubious.
Not related to ►ävoç.
žvėɩvos 1⇒ëvða.
Evolvos 2 [adj.] 'godlike', vopкóv τε... Kai veɩvov (Hierapytna, Crete). <GR>
1
•ETYM Contaminated from vƉɛos (Cret. **vētos) and Oεïvos (Cret. *0í-ivoç > Đivos;
built after άvерóлvos). Cf. Bechtel 1921, 2: 724.
¿vôovolá¼w [v.] ‘to be possessed by a god' (Pl., Hell.). <GR▷
●VAR -táw (A., E.), aor. ¿vovoiáσal, -āσaι.
⚫DER ¿vovoiaσç (Pl., Ph.), ¿voσσμó (Democr., Pl.), ¿vovoía (Procl.;
deverbal); voυσιασтIкÓç 'possessed' (Pl., Arist.), -αστns 'somebody who is
possessed' (Ptol.); ¿vovσións [adj.], -dwc [adv.] 'possessed' (Hp.).
⚫ETYM From Eveεoç, after the verbs in -σtá(w (Ovσiά(w, etc.) and the verbs of illness
in -táw (Osthoff MU 2 (1879): 38); on εo > ou, see Schwyzer: 251. On ěvěɛoç, properly
"in whom is a god", see Schwyzer: 429 and 435 and Strömberg 1946: 115.
•
Évúσкεɩ [V.] TYάvε 'meets with'; άлоеú<σ>кεɩу· àлоτуxávɛv 'to miss';
ovvðúžw. ovvavtησw 'I shall meet with' (H.). <IE *dheugh- 'fit'>
•ETYM From *¤úx-ok-ɛɩ to tuxɛïv (see Tuyxávw). See Schwyzer: 708; doubts in
Brugmann IF 9 (1898): 348¹.
v=v.
Évɩavτós [m.] 'anniversary, year' (Il.; Risch Mus. Helv. 3 (1946): 254). <?>
•DER Éviaúσios, Delph. Coan -τios ‘(one) year, a year long, every year' (л 454),
έviavσiat̃oç ‘a year long' (Arist.; see Chantraine 1933: 49); denominative verb
¿viavtičoµai, -í【w ‘pass a year' (Pl. Com.).
●ETYM A new expression for 'year', properly ‘anniversary' (cf. Bechtel 1914 s.v.). For
the formation, cf. kovɩ-op-tóç, ßov-\v-τóç, etc. (Schwyzer: 501); it seems to contain a
word voç ‘year' (H., Sch. Theoc. 7, 147), seen in several compounds : diɛvoç ‘two
years old' (Thphr.), έëτáεvov· έëtaetñ H., tetpáɛvos (Call.); as an s-stem, in
τετpáɛvɛç [n.] (Theocr. 7, 147), neveç. eiç tetáptηу H.; see also ñviç. The same
word also perhaps occurs in Baltic and Gm., e.g. as a second element in Lith. pér-nai
'last year' (*per-h,n-, with acute from the laryngeal), perhaps in Ru. loní < *ol-ni ‘of
the past year', Go. fram fair-nin jera 'from the past year'. The second member seems.
to contain laúw, either the present-stem ¿v-tav-tós (Meillet MSL 23 (1923): 274f.) or
the verbal root (cf. кovɩ-op-τós, etc. above), in which case -- would be a
compositional vowel: ¿v-t-au-τóç (Schwyzer: 424, 448). This is hardly probable;
neither are the semantics (*" pause of the year"?) evident. Acc. to Brugmann IF 15
(1903-1904): 87ff., Brugmann IF 1 (1892): 319f.), and many others, it belongs to
Eviaúw as *"Rast-, Ruhestation der Sonne, Jahreswende"; a to-formation from a
present would, however, be remarkable.
žvɩot [adj.] ‘some, a few’. <IE? *h,eno- ‘that'▷
]
èvvéa
427
•DER έvío Tε 'sometimes', εvaxñ, -ou ‘in some places, sometimes', originally Ionic
words (only in prose), that were taken up in Attic; late Dorianizing reshaping έvíoka
(Archyt.), also eviάкıç 'sometimes' (Sor.; after лоλλάкɩç, etc.).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. The explanation by Ebel (KZ 5, 7of., taken over by Schwyzer 614),
starting from ěvɩ oi, žvɩ ÖTE = ËσTIV OÏ, čσð öτε, must be given up: vi in the function
‘is, are' is ascertained only since V-VI³ (see ►ěv). The best solution seems to be the
hypothesis of Benfey, further advocated by Wackernagel 1907: 6, assuming ev ‘one'
(like HG einige to eins and MoE some to *sem); the psilosis would be Ionic. For the
ending, cf. µúpɩɩ, xíλio; then έviotɛ, ¿vaxñ, -oû would be formed after öte, nótɛ,
ñoλλaxñ, -oû, etc. Improbably, Brugmann IF 28 (1911): 355ff. connects it with the
demonstrative *έvos in vη 'the third day', ¿кεчvoç, etc.
2:
εviлý [f.] 'reproach, menace, threat' (II.). <IE? *h,eni-h₂k"- 'reproach'>
•DER Beside it the yod-present έvioσow, aor. ¿vévĩлov, ǹvíлaлov (Schwyzer: 648 and
748, Chantraine 1942: 398), new present έviлτw (Il.; έviлτw also A. Ag. 590, cf. on
►еvvεлw) 'reproach, revile'; lengthened present évлτάчw (A. R.). Here also the river.
name'Еvɩлεúç (Нdt.) as "rager" (Boßhardt apud Frisk)?
•ETYM As a verbal noun of έvíσow, εviлη must have had a labiovelar *k". Brugmann
connected it with óлiлεúw, Skt. ikṣate 'see', etc. (root *h3k"- 'see'), which he
substantiated (IF 12, 31) by referring to öлç ‘reverential look', also 'retribution,
punishment'. Likewise, Porzig 1942: 228: ¿vý as 'malign look'. Brugmann further
connected it (in a rather unclear way) with "yao, ïчɛεtai (see Ïñoμai) ‘to oppress,
punish' vel sim. This in turn has been connected with ►iáлτw ‘'shoot, hurt, etc.' <
*h₂i-h₂ek"-ie/o-; thence iлτоμαι from *h₂i-h₂k"- (Kuiper Glotta 21 (1933): 282ff; Kuiper
MKNAW 14: 5 (1951): 25'), and evч-лη from *h,eni-h₂k"-.
¿vvéa [num.] ‘nine' (Il.). ◄IE *h,n(e)un ‘nine’►
•VAR Also hɛvvéa (Heracl.; after έлtá, óкtá), ¿vvñ or -ý (Delph., Cyren., etc.; cf.
Fraenkel Glotta 20 (1932): 88).
•COMP As a first member beside έvvɛa- (e. g. Hom. évvɛá-ẞotoc) also older έva-, Ion.
ɛiva-, e.g. Hom. ɛivá-ɛtɛç [adv.] ‘nine years long', sivá-vuxɛç 'nine nights long', Eva-
Kóσιoι (εiva-) nine hundred'.
•DER In derivatives: vα-τos 'the ninth', Ion. εvaτoç, Argiv. Cret. Évaτoç, Aeol.
žvotos; ɛivác [f.] ‘the ninth day' (Hes. Op. 810) beside έvvɛác “set of nine' (Theoc.);
Éváкıç (εi-) ‘nine times' et al.; but έvv₁чap 'nine days long' (A 53), see Sommer 1950:
28f., 33 with details, e.g. Boeot. évaкηdɛкáτη and évvαετηpw (Hes. Op. 436). On
► έvεVÝкOVτα, see s.v.; on vaτоç cf. бéкατоç s.v. ► déкa.
•ETYM The Greek form exists beside Skt. náva, Lat. novem (with -m after decem,
septem), Go. niun, Lith. devyni, OCS deveto (with d- by dissimilation from -n- or
after dēšimt, desętь), etc., all from IE *h,neun. The *h,- is reconstructed because both
Gr. ¿vvé(F)α, *vƑα- (*h,nun, whence ɛiva-, ¿va-, etc.) and Arm. inn (= inən,
disyllabic) show forms with initial vowel. Thrac. Evεa is unclear (von Blumenthal IF
51 (1933): 115). A special problem is presented by the geminate in évvéa. Acc. to Ward.
Lang. 24 (1948): 50ff., it was caused by the syllable length in έлτά, ŎкτW
(improbable); acc. to Sommer 1950: 27, *¿v|Fα- changed *έ|véƑα to *εv||véfa (which

=== page 238 ===

428
¿v(v)éлw
is improbable). Differently, Wackernagel KZ 28 (1887): 132ff.); see Schwyzer: 591.
Connection with vέos 'new' is impossible in view of the *h,-. Incorrectly,
Szemerényi 1964: 107-118 (who does not accept the laryngeal).
¿v(v)έлw [v.] ‘to say, recount, announce' (Il.). On the mg. Fournier 1946: 47f. ◄IE
*sek"- 'say'>
•VAR Аor. ¿vσлεt̃v, ipv. pl. čoлεtε (epic), fut. ¿voлńow (e 98), ¿víyw (H 447; for
*évéww? Chantraine 1942: 443), new present έvíлτw (Pi. P. 4, 201; cf. s.v. ► έviñý).
■COMP Also with preverb: εε-, лρоσ-, лαр-, еtc.
⚫DER ►ǎσлεTOç; also еεσлéσоç, Оéσлç. Notе лроσ-εчíα (cod. -tǎ; leg. -ɩç?).
лроσαуóрεvσιç 'greeting' (H.). On ►έvoлη, sеe s.v.
⚫ETYM The imperative εvvεлε is identical with Lat. inseque, insece 'say, recount' (with
inquam, inquit); -vv- in this form is attributable to metrical lengthening (Solmsen
1901: 35, Chantraine 1942: 100f.), or rather to Aeolic assimilation from -vo- (e.g.
Schulze 1892: 128 A. 2, 173 and Lejeune 1972: 128; also, Schwyzer: 300)? The zero
grade of (σ)εл- (IE *sek"-) is found in the aorist εv-σл-eïv (ipv. čonete < *ëv-on-
εTε). On the preverb έv-, see Chantraine RPh. 68: 117 and Schwyzer 1950: 457. A
verbal noun appears in OIr. insce 'discourse' < IE *en(i)-sk"-iā; Celtic has other
forms like OW hepp ‘inquit'. In Lith., there is only dialectal sekù, sèkti 'say', but
otherwise this formation was replaced in Balto-Slavic by Lith. sakaŭ, -ýti ‘say', Ru.
sočíť ‘indicate' < caus. *sok"-eie-, which is also found in Gm., e.g. ON segja, OS
seggian, etc., PGm. pres. *sagje- < IE *sok"-éie-. OHG sagen is an innovation. The
future ¿víw arose from *h,eni-sk"-s-ō, with dissimilation of the first s (not from
*¿vέww, which is not authentic); see Waack-Erdmann MSS 41 (1982): 199-204.
Evvɛoiai [pl.] 'counsels, plans' (Il.), only dat. -ŋot(v) (E 894) except A. R. 3, 1364 (gen.
-áwv). <IE *Hieh,- 'send, throw; make, do'>
•ETYM Prop. ‘inspirations' (“in-givings”), from ¿v-íŋ with metrically necessary
double -v- (Chantraine 1942: 100). On the suffix -oin (instead of -σic), see Schwyzer:
469, Risch 1937: 124, and Porzig 1942: 99. Likewise, ɛoin (Hom.) 'sending out,
message', from ε-íŋµ. See ►ïnµ.
¿vvótios [adj.] ‘humid' (Call. Fr. 350). ◄GR►
•ETYM Acc. to Leumann 1950: 51f., the form arose by false division from A 811 кατà
Sε vvótios péεv idpwc. However, other explanations are possible: that it is a cross of
VÓTɩos and v-vypos vel sim.; or a bahuvrihi of èv and voτíα, on which see Strömberg
1946: 124.
Evvчui [v.] 'to clothe, dress (oneself)' (Il.). <IE *ues- 'cloth'>
⚫VAR Med. -μat; Ion. εïvчч, -μα, impf. кατα-ɛívvov Y 135 (v.l. -vuoav, -λvov; cf.
Eiλúw), aor. čσ(o)al, -aσbal, fut. σ(σ)w, -oμai, Att. àµow, -oбμаt, perf. med. eluaɩ,
čoσal, ɛital or čotaɩ, ɛiµévoç, plpf. čστo, čɛσto (Il.; cf. below), Att. ǹµôíɛoµaι,
ŋµqiɛσµévos, poet. àµôεµµévoç, aor. pass. ptc. àµqiɛoðɛíç (Hdn.).
•COMP Often with preverb, especially άuo- (always in Attic); also έñɩ-, kata-, ɲɛpɩ-,
άлaμôɩ-, etc. New presents: àµqi-é¶w, ► àµqiá¶w.
!
¿vopyεíaç
429
⚫DER ► εavóc name of a woman's cloth s.v.; εiµατα [pl.] (rarely sing.) 'clothes, cover'
(Il.), Aeol. (F)éuµata (yéµµata. ¡µáτα ‘clothes' H.), Cret. Ƒñµà (уñµa. ¡µátov H.),
also Fηuaç [gen.sg.] to Ƒñµã [f.] (cf. yvõµa ~ yváμn et al.); often as a second
member, e.g. εU-, kako-ɛíµwv. Diminutive ɛiµáτɩa [pl.], Att. ►¡µátiov, often plur. -ta,
with qµatídiov, -ɩdápiov, įµatíšw, ¡µaτσµóç, etc. Further σ00 [n.] ‘clothes, dress'
(94, Ar. [lyrical and Dor.]), formation like äxoç, лλñеоç, etc. (Schwyzer: 511,
Benveniste 1935: 199); denominative perfect σηual, mostly in ptc. σðŋµévos (¿-)
‘clothed' (Ion.) with σ0½µατα [pl.] 'clothes' (trag., Th.), ¿σðŋσɛs ‘ïd.' (Ath.); cf.
Fraenkel 1910: 106f. More usual than čσoç is έσ0ŋs (Pi. ¿σ¤áƒ), -ñtoç [f.] ‘ïd.' (Od.);
attempts at an explanation by Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 527, Schwyzer IF 30
(1912): 443; lengthened dat.pl. 00ñσɛσ (Hell.). yéσtpa (= féσtpa; cod. yɛσtía, see
below). žvduσiç, σtoλń, ¡µátia ‘putting on, apparel, clothes' (H.); see Latte; to έ-
resp. àµчi-évvчμ: ¿qɛστpíç [f.] ‘upper garment, coat' (X.), àµqi-εστpíç [f.] ‘coat,
sleeping garment' (Poll.); on the formation Schwyzer: 465, Chantraine 1933: 338.
From άuqi-évvvμɩ fürther åµíεσµa (IA), -íɛσɩç (sch.), -ɩɛσµós (D. H. 8, 62; v.l.
-taσuós, from ►àµqiάw).
=
•ETYM The present εvvʊμ, εïvчµ < *Ƒéσ-vv-µ (Att. -vv- from restored -ov-;
Schwyzer: 284, 312, 322, Lejeune 1972: 123) is identical with Arm. z-genum 'to put on'
(aor. z-gec'ay, med.). Beside this nu-present, there is also an athematic root present
in Indo-Iranian and Hittite: Skt. vás-te ‘clothes himself, Hitt. impv.act. 2pl. ųeš-ten,
ind.pres.med. 3sg. чeš-ta. Exactly parallel are the Greek perfect forms isg. ɛiµaɩ <
*Féσ-μai (to which belongs analogical 3sg. εltα), 2sg. σ-σαι (Od.), зsg. εлí-εσται
(Hdt. 1, 47 Skt. vás-te); these are perhaps reinterpreted old presents (cf. ptc.
ɛquévoc); see Chantraine 1942: 297, Schwyzer: 767. For the Greek σ-aorist, cf. ToB
pret. wässäte 'he put on'. The nominal derivatives could be old: έavós [m.]: Skt. vás-
ana [n.] cloth'; εlua Skt. vás-man- [n.] ‘cloth'; Ƒéστpã : Skt. vás-tra- [n.] ‘id.',
MHG wes-ter christening dress'. Except for uncertain yɛσtíα (see above), Greek
does not have the normal derivative in -t- seen in Lat. ves-ti-s, Arm. zges-t (u-stem),
Go. wasti. The idea that IE *ues- 'dress, wear' is a derivative of *h,eu- 'put on', seen in
Lat. ind-uō, etc., is impossible because of the initial *h₁-.
=
εvóлaι [f.pl.] ‘ear pendant' (S. Fr. 54). <GR➤
•ETYM Hypostasis from év óлαîç, properly “in the holes"; in the same meaning,
Sióлα (Attica, Ar.), from Si' óлwν "(fitted) through the holes". With oppositive
accent, Sí-oлоç 'with two holes' (Epid., Ath.), a bahuvrihi. See further μετóлη and
►òлń.
voлn [f.] 'cry, battle cry, sound(s), voice(s)' (Il.; on the mg. Trümpy 1950: 154f., but
hardly all correct). <IE *sek"- 'say' or *uek"- 'speak'>>
•ETYM A connection with έv(v)εлw 'say' (cf. Schwyzer: 460) is perhaps better than
that with ►лoç, etc. as *¿v-Ƒoл-½ (Brugmann KZ 25 (1881): 3062) for semantic
reasons; however, DELG holds that a connection with έvvéлw is impossible, and
prefers the other etymology. This presupposes a verb with v-; cf. Lat. in-vocō, OPr.
en-wackēmai 'we invoke'. Cf. Porzig 1942: 251.
¿vopyɛias [f.] · tàs veoooeias. Kpñteç ‘breedings, nestlings (Cret.)' (H.). ◄GR►

=== page 239 ===

}
430
EVOS
⚫ETYM Acc. to Bechtel 1921, 2: 784 (who writes ¿vopyía), it is abstracted from Evopyoç
'who is έv ópyñ, i.e in the rutting season'. See ►ópyń.
*vos [adj.] 'old' as opposed to 'new', only in fixed expressions about fruits and officials
of the past year, also of the last day of the preceding month, indicating the new
period (Hes.; vη the first day of the month, with Ion. psilosis?); in the last sense
mostly εvη kai véa (sc. σελývη; Att. since Solon). <IE *seno- 'old'>
•ETYM The common IE word for ‘old', *sénos, is still found in most branches, in
opposition to 'new': Gr. voç, Arm. hin, Skt. sána-, Lith. sēnas, OIr. sen; here also ON
sina [f.] 'withered grass of last year' (cf. Evoc Blaσtóc, etc.). Some languages also use
it in opposition to 'young': thus e.g. Celtic and Lithuanian, but also Gm., e.g. Go.
sineigs ‘ñpeoßútns', as well as Iranian, Av. hana- ‘old, grey'; nevertheless, Skt. sána- is
not used in this way. The latter meaning became dominant in Italic: Lat. senex, Osc.
senateis 'senātūs'. In the Eastern languages, *sénos was replaced in this meaning by
derivatives from the root of yέpwv. Cf. Porzig 1954b: 343ff.
Evoσiç [f.] 'shaking, quake' (Hes., E. [lyr.]). <?>
DIAL Myc. e-ne-si-da-o-ne, with a difficult -e-.
•COMP As a first member in the epic compounds évoσí-xwv, έvvoσí-yaɩos 'earth-
shaker', epithets of Poseidon; in the same mg. évvooídac (Pi.; with dα- in Aα-μáτηp
(see Anunτηp and von Wilamowitz 1931: 203); after this ɛivooí-quλλoç ‘shaking off
foliage' (Hom.; έvv-, ɛiv- with metrical lengthening; cf. Chantraine 1942: 100); cf.
Knecht 1946: 26.
•DER & VOσIČεtai tpéµɛɩ, oɛiɛtai ‘tremble, shake' (Cyr.).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. The explanation as *v-F00-Tɩç from wéw (see also Owv,
►εpα) by Pott, followed by many scholars, meets with several objections: the
sequence-0-- should have given -στ- (cf. e.g. лúσ-τɩç bеside лευ-σç); the o-grade as
in ä-qpwv: opηv is not expected in a Tɩ-derivative (and refuted by Mycenaean
anyway); finally, a prefix ¿v- is not well explained (“bump against”?). If čvoσt is
indeed a primary π-derivative (cf. Holt 1941: 94f.), we would rather expect a
formation like "po-σis; however, Evoσts may have been derived from the
compounds. Incorrectly, Janda 1999: 183-203 (followed by Stüber 2002: 88), who
assumes a root *h₁enh₂- 'to move', with which he connects Skt. ánas, Lat. onus
'burden'). However, no such root is attested: the Lat. o-grade points to *hen- and the
apparent lack of Brugmann in Skt. is explained by Lubotsky 1990: 132. Kloekhorst
2008: now connects anije/a-zi 'work, produce, etc.' with these words as *h3n-ie/o-.
Finally, the root meaning of *hen- would rather be 'carry on a cart or an animal',
which does not seem adequate for Greek; neither does it solve the problem posed by
Mycenaean. Thus, the Greek words remain without etymology.
Évoxepw →¿noxεpw.
Evτañеa ⚫VAR ÉVTεÛОεV. →va.
ĚVTE →ĚOTE.
E
車
VTÓC
431
vtɛa [n.pl.] ‘equipment', especially 'defensive weapons' (Il.; cf. Trümpy 1950: 79ff.).
<?>
•VAR EVTOS [sg.] (Archil. 6).
•COMP As a first member in ε (also ετε-). εμлε ö
‘experienced with tools/weapons' (H.), further in ¿vteσi-ɛpyoús [acc.pl.] ‘working
harnessed'(?), epithet of nuóvovç ( 277).
•ETYM Beside vτɛa, there is έvτúvw, -oµaι, ¿vτúw, aor. ¿víõvaɩ ‘to equip, prepare’
(Il.). As it recalls åpτú(v)w, it may have been built after this verb (Porzig 1942: 338).
A basic noun *vτúç could be assumed. Connection with ►ävu̟u, ávúw is impossible
(see Frisk). Compare ►vapa and aúОévτηs (on the psilosis, see Chantraine 1942:
186).
¿vɩɛλéxɛa [f.] philosophical notion created by Aristotle, 'completion, fullness'
(opposed to Súvaµis). ◄GR?►
•ETYM Compound from ¿vtελès exεɩv (cf. ouvéxεia, vovvέxεia, etc.), hardly from the
rare and doubtful έvτελεxηs; the resemblance to ¿vdελεxns, -εα has led to mistakes
in the mss.
vτɛpa [n.pl.] ‘intestines, bowels', also sing. ‘gut' (Il.). <IE *h,entero- ‘inside part'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in έvtepo-kýλŋ breach of the intestines, hernia' (Dsc.,
Gal.; see Risch IF 59 (1949): 285, Strömberg 1944: 69).
•DER Diminutive vτɛpídia (Com.); also vτéplov (M. Ant. 6, 13?; form and mg.
uncertain); Evτεpivη 'inside of a fruit, heartwood of a plant or tree' (Hp., Thphr.;
Strömberg 1937: 127f.); formation like iaσɩwvŋ, ɛipɛoɩwvŋ (Chantraine 1933: 208);
évtɛpóvɛia (Ar. Eq. 1185) mg. unclear; acc. to H. and Suid. = ¿vtɛpióvŋ ‘innermost
parť'; adjectives έvtεpiкós ‘of the ε.' (Arist.), ¿vtépivoç 'made from bowels' (sch.);
denominative verb &vτεpεúw 'gut fishes' (Com.).
•ETYM Old word for intestines, identical with Arm. ander-k' [pl.], -ac' [gen.pl.] and
with ON iðrar [pl.] < PGm. *inþerōz. Hübschmann 1897: 447f. suggested that the
Arm. word was borrowed from Greek. The original adjectivial meaning is preserved
in Skt. ántara-, Av. antara- 'being inside', with Osc. Entraí [dat.sg.] *Interae', name
of a goddess; in Latin, it was replaced by interior. IE *h,enter-o is an adjective derived
from an adverb *enter, preserved in Skt. antár 'inside', Lat. inter ‘between'. Besides
OHG untar, there is also Osc. anter ‘under' = ‘amongst from the zero grade *h,nter.
At the basis is the adverb *hen (see ►v) with the comparative suffix -ter; see
Benveniste 1948: 120f.
ÉVTO入ń →TÉ入入W 1.
vtos [n.]=ëvtea.
Evτóc [adv.] and [prep.] 'inside' (Il.). <IE *h,en-tos (from) inside'>>
•DER EVτoσ0ε(v), rare vτoεv (after vdoεv, Ễкτoεv, etc.) ((from) inside' (epic
Ion., Il.;) with evτóσðiα and έvτtoσðídia [n.pl.] 'intestines' (Hp., Arist.; cf. Chantraine
1933: 39), with the adjective vτóσios, -ídios of the intestines' (medic.); cf. below.
Compar. ¿vτóτεpoç ‘inner' (LXX).

=== page 240 ===

432
w
433
•ETYM Identical with Lat. intus ‘(from) inside'; IE formation in -tos (e.g. Skt. i-táḥ
'from here', Lat. peni-tus ‘[from] inside') from the adverb *hen; see ►ëv. Cf. also
►¿któs. ¿vtóσðla is not (as per Vendryes REGr. 23 (1910): 74) from *¿vtóσtia (after
EVτoσ0ε) = Skt. antastya- [n.] 'intestines'; the word belongs to Skt. antár 'inside' (see
► Vτεpov) with regular replacement of -r by -s- in sandhi before the suffix -tya-.
¿vtporaλíšoµai [v.] 'to turn around (often), turn back' (Il.). ◄IE *trep- ‘turn’➤
•VAR Only ptc. -óμεvoç. In the same mg. also μετατpoñaλíčɛo [impv.med.] (Y 190).
ETYM Expressive formation from τролéo̟μαι, τРéлоμαι, modelled on these like
στpoчaλíw on σtpoqέw, σtpέqw and кpoταλíšw on кpoτέw. The original starting
point was a noun in -aλ(o-); cf. кpótaλov, otpoqáλty\. Chantraine 1942: 340. An
adjective vτpoлαλós 'shameful, afraid' is attested in MoGr.; cf. Schwyzer: 32.
Differently, Bechtel 1914: 318f.
švtvßov [n.] ‘andive' (Gp.). ◄LW Lat. (Sem.)►
•VARITUẞos (Edict. Diocl.); "vτouẞos (Ps. Dsc.).
•ETYM The Latin word seems to be a loan from Semitic (see André 1956: 170,
Hiltbrunner 1958: 174-177, and Hiltbrunner Archiv für das Studium der neueren
Sprachen 197 (1960): 22f.).
EVTÚVW •VAR ÉVTÚw. →VTɛa.
¿vtvлás [adv.] uncertain, but probably 'wrapped in' (№ 163 ó d' év µéðσolol yɛpalòs ||
¿vturàs ¿v xλaívŋ kɛkaλvµµévoç; later A. R., Q. S.). ◄IE? *tup- ‘squat’?➤
•DER EVτUлαбíα H; έуτετúлασται is wrapped (in)' (BSA 16, 107 [Pisidia]).
•ETYM The meaning was already uncertain in antiquity, as appears from the
explanations in Hesychius: ¿vτʊлás. ¿vteturwµévoç. ¿ykεkaλvµµévos tò rpóowroν
tā iµatiw, tǹv xεчрα ε×шν лрò τоб лроσшлоυ. η кεкUQúç 'formed, molded. With the
face wrapped in the mantle, holding the hand before the face. Or with the head down.
(in shame)'. Mostly (with the schol.) connected with τÚлτш, τÚлоç and taken as
'well enveloped in', i.e. in such a way that the outline of the bodily members and the
head could be distinguished. Taken by Kurschat apud Prellwitz as ‘squatting', related
to Lith. tūpti, tupëti ‘id.'. On the adverbs in -aç, see Schwyzer: 631 and Chantraine
1942:251.
výdɩov ‘earring' (Att. inscr. since 399ª; Meisterhans 1900: 65 and 79), often dual
(Schwyzer 1950: 47).
•ETYM Hypostatic diminutive formation from *¿v-ov(σ)-ídɩov, with transfer of the w
from coτα, etc. (Wackernagel Phil. Anz. 15 (1885): 199ff.; see also Schulze 1892: 38¹).
Since Hellenistic times, it has instead been έvάτioν, fully adapted to wτa (inscr.
Delos 279, etc.) with the new diminutive έvwtídiov (inscr. Delos, Tanagra); further,
Evwτápiov after wτápiov (H. s.v. ẞoτpúdia). Beside it exists a formation in -ádiov in
εwẞádia. ¿váτiα. Aάкwvɛç (H.), from *-wvh-ádia; cf. Schwyzer: 520). See ►oç.
¿vшлα [adv.] ‘in the face, openly; against' with gen. (O 320, Orph. L., Epigr.).
Univerbation of εv coлα, cf. ►ěvavτα and Schwyzer: 619. <IE *h₂ek"-'eye'>
•VAR Only in кaTεVÕлα (кAT' εVшлα, кατενwлα).
•DER έvwña-díwç ‘face to face, in the flesh' (¥94), -dís (A. R. 4, 351), -dóv (Q. S. 2, 84)
'id.'.
•ETYM The form εvóл-оç 'in the face, visible' arose by hypostasis, mostly in its
neuter form εvóлov as an adverb and preposition (with gen.) ‘in person, face to
face' (Hell.), кatεváлov ‘id.' (Hell.). Additionally, there is ¿váлa [n.pl.] ‘front wall,
outside wall, front of a house' (Hom.), also in sing. (Delos IIª); 'face' (A. Supp. 146
[lyr.]). The form εvшлñ ‘in the face, openly' (E 374), an isolated dative, is from εvшÁŃ
'look, face' (only in ¿vwèñç yλývea Nic. Th. 227; simplex wл½ A. R.), if not a
reformation of έvшлα after the adverbial datives in -ñ (σлovôñ, etc.; Schwyzer: 622);
cf. Chantraine 1942: 249. See wy, and cf. ►лрóσшлov and ▸µετwлov.
Évátiov⇒έvýdlov.
=>
[adv., prev., prep.] ‘out' (II.). Details in Schwyzer 1950: 461ff. <IE *h,eg-s 'out' (or
*hek-s)►
•VAR Before consonant έк (¿y, εX), dialectally έs (Boeot. always έ(σ)c).
•DER €\w [adv., prep. with gen.] 'outside' (cf. ävw, εlow); thence wɛv ‘from
outside' (IA), etc. Variants: εĩ. εw (H.) with locative ending, Cret. ɛžoɩ, Delph.
ɛoç; on ěžovėα, ɛσα see Lejeune 1939: 329, 355. Cf. ►¿x0ós (Locr., Delphi) from ě.
•ETYM Exact agreements with ε are found in Italic and Celtic, e.g. Lat. ex (ē, ec-),
MW ex-, OIr. ess-; further, in Baltic and Slavic forms with unclear i-, e.g. Lith. ìš, ìž,
OCS is, iz; doubtfully, Arm. i, y- 'out, from' (beside i, y- 'in'). Because of the aspirates
in šσxatoc, ¿x¤óc (= ¿któc), etc., one has posited an IE pre-form *heģª-s instead of
*hek-s. This assumption is unnecessary for exóc, but seems unavoidable for
►čσxaτoç. Cf. also ►έxОpóç.
[num.] 'six'. <IE *sueks 'six'>
•DIAL Myc. we-pe-za/wekspeza/, see Viredaz SMEA 23 (1982): 310-313; Dor., etc. féε.
●COMP As a first member, beside rare εε-, ¿к-, usually ¿§α- (¿§á-µetpoç, ÉŽA-KÓOLOL,
etc.) after εлτα-, τετρα-; εεĤ-кoντα aftеr лεуτη-коутα; on second members -кovτα
and -kóσto see on SiãкóσLOL.
•DER εžíτns (scil. Bóλos) 'throw of six in the game of dice' (Epigr., Poll.); έžāç, -āvtoç
[m.] (Sicil.) formed after Lat. sextans, together with έávτov (Epich.). Ordinal кTOÇ,
Cret. Ƒéktoç; adverb ¿§άкıç (after лoλλáкıç, etc.); collective έεáç [f.] 'number of six'
(Ph.) with αбikóç.
•ETYM The IE numeral 'six' has two variants: Lat. sex, Germ., e.g. Go. saihs, Lith. šeš-
ì, OCS šes-tú, Alb. gjash-tē, ToA säk seem to go back to IE *seks. On the other hand,
Gr. Fé, Arm. vec', Celt., e.g. MW chwech, Skt. sás-, Av. xšuuaš point to *sueks.
However, although some details remain unclear, the form with -- is certainly
original, while the loss of -- may have been triggered by 'seven', *septm. Gr. ë (Dor.
FÉε) continues *sueks with loss of the digamma or the aspiration; on Boeot.
(beside FIкαστñ), see Schwyzer: 226.
The ordinal кTOS, FÉкTOS is probably from *suek-to-s, as *sueks-to-s would give
**-xe-. An original sequence *-kt- also seems necessary for certain Germanic forms,
OHG sehto (beside sehsto), ON sétti. Other forms, however, show -s-: Lat. sextus, Go.
saihsta, ToA skäṣt. Yet other forms are ambiguous: Skt. şaṣṭhá-, Lith. šēštas, OCS

=== page 241 ===

434
*αITOS
šesto; note Gaul. suexos. On unclear έστpi кpiðń. ǹ έαστixoç. Kvídio H., see
Schwyzer: 269, 590. See Lubotsky 2000b on the IIr. and IE reconstruction.
Eaton alvial.
¿žaiqvns →έžanívns.
žalos [adj.] 'out of the sea, far from the sea' (^\ 134 = 281), weakly attested v.l. for
ȧλóç; also Emp. 117 (¡×еúç; from ¿¿áάλλoμa?) and Hell. <GR>
•ETYM Hypostasis of ε ȧλóç. Hardly correctly, Leumann 1950: 5524.
řáving →ävta.
¿žaлívŋs [adv.] ‘suddenly' (Il.). <PG>
•VAR Dor. -ǎç; Hell. εεáлivă (after the adverbs in -ă).
•DER αлvaчoç, together with the adverb -aíws 'id.' (Hp., Th.).
⚫ETYM Formation like aíovηs. These words clearly have something to do with.
►ǎoap, ►äqvw: Fur.: 158, etc. recognized that the whole group is Pre-Greek (л/q).
The variants --/-л- show that the i is part of the consonant, so we may assume a
PG phoneme *p for these forms (Pre-Greek: B 1). For the same Pre-Greek
phenomenon, cf. кушлεÚе / кIVÓлTV, лτó; also, ►άкpaιový /
► ►лIVUTÓС;
► άкρалvηs. See further alya, ➤ aiñúç.
ëžaotis, -10s [f.] 'hem of a fabric' (Samos IVª), plur. 'threads coming out of a fabric',
especially 'selvage of linen' (medic.). <IE? *h₂et-ti- ‘stitching'>
•VAR Also Eσtıç (Gal.).
•ETYM Derived by Schmidt 1895: 89¹ from * -av-στ-ɩç, a verbal noun from
žavíστηu, for which he assumed apocope and loss of the nasal like in Epid. ȧ-στáç
= ȧv(a)-στáç. However, apocope is unmotivated in a Ionic word, and the ending -iç
is unexpected.
Boisacq considered connection with ǎτтo̟μа 'to set the warp in the loom', äqua
'warp', etc. Given the new etymological proposal for ǎττоμα, this is quite
attractive, as aστɩ may simply mean 'what sticks out'.
žavστηp →αw 2.
¿žavτñç [adv.] ‘immediately' (Hell.). <GR▷
⚫ETYM Probably from έ αúτñç τñç ódov; see Wackernagel 1916: 414.
¿ɛpάw →ȧл-ɛpάw.
Eetálw →Tálw.
εns [adv.] in a row, one after the other' (Od., Att.). <GR>
•COMP ¿q-ɛšñç, Ion. ¿л- ~ ‘id.', кα¤-ɛ§ñç ‘id.' (Ev. Luc. 1, 3, Plu., Ael.).
•DER Also έεins (Hom.), ¿q-, kαð-ɛɛiŋs (Orph., Opp.); έav (Dor., accentuation?)
'id.'.
•ETYM The adverbial genitive εñç must derive from a nominal formation of exεσα
'connect, follow', but the details are uncertain. Schulze 1892: 293 detects in εñç and
εav forms of a noun *ă with the same inflexion as µíă, µãç, µíăv; Bechtel 1914 s.v.
435
starts from an adjective *έóc. Solmsen 1909: 240¹) supposes that εñ≤ was contracted
from earlier εins (metrical lengthening for *εens?); however, this does not explain
Dor. av. ε(i)ns is from an adjective *ε(1) oc (cf. ¿½ɛĩα· τα ¿¿ñ¢ H.); is this in turn
from ɩç? The synonymous ¿ïexés (Arg.), ¿nexɛî (Delph.), and лotεxɛĩ (Heracl.) are
from έл-, лoτ-έɣεσðαɩ. See ►εxw.
ɛžɩotwv [adj.] ‘fringed'? Adjunct of ✗Iτwvíσкov [acc.], together with кtevwtóv (IG 2ª,
1514: 30, 1516: 9 [middle IVª], in lists of clothes given to Artemis, containing several
technical words). <GR>
•ETYM Without a doubt for ε iστwv 'consisting of six woven pieces'; on the matter,
see Preisigke 1925 s.v. iστóc.
¿žovoµaкλýdŋv [adv.] 'by name' (Hom.). <IE *klh,- ‘call'>
•ETYM Also έk ♂ óvoµaкλýdèv, a hypostasis of the expression ovoμa kaλɛīv (tɩva)
‘to call (sbd.) by name' with кλńɗηy (I 11) and έ as in έovoµαívw (-ά(w). See
► Kaλéw.
έžový [f.] ‘ejectment, dispossession' (Att.), almost only in ouλñs díкη; rarely
έžovλýv and -ás. <IE *uel-(H)- ‘press together'>
⚫ETYM Juridical term, from *к-Foλvá from *¿к-Ƒɛλvéw 'push out' (see ►ɛiλéw 1); cf.
also on ắλns and ovλauós. On the oxytonesis, see Wackernagel and Debrunner
Phil. 95 (1942): 178f.
εw →εε.
¿žwo̟ákaɩ [pl.] ‘a kind of outward Haemorrhoid knots, resembling lentil fruits'
(Cyran.). <EUR?>
⚫ETYM Related to paкós ‘lentil'; cf. ► áôáкη.
OIKα [v.] 'to resemble' (Il.); see Chantraine 1942: 424f., 479f., Schwyzer: 769, 773, 541.
<IE? *ueik- 'be fitting?>
•VAR Epic du. кτov, Att. pl. έoíкaμεv, pret.sg. ÉкɛƖv, epic du. ¿ïкτηу, Att. pl.
¿úкɛσav, epic med. žïкto, ½ïкto, ptc. ɛiкwç (Þ 254, Att., beside έoкwc), fem. ¿ïkvĩa,
ntr. ɛikóç; 1sg. olkα, ptc. olкwç (Hdt.).
•COMP Also with prefix εл-, àл-éoɩкα, etc.
•DER Innovation factitive ɛiкá(w and σкw (Il., only present stem, ipf. loкε(v), ptc.
"σкovτ-) 'to equate, compare, suppose'.
ETYM The old intransitive perfect čoƖka (whence by hyphaeresis olka, etc.;
differently, Schwyzer: 766f.) continues *fé-foik-a, du. *fé-fik-tov, plpf. *(¿-)Ƒe-foik-
ɛɩ (> έýkɛɩ), which is shown by the meter (Chantraine 1942: 129). Innovations were
*FE-FÍK-OK-W (> εÏσкw), *Ƒε-FIK-ά¶w > žïкá¶w, ►ɛiкáľw. A form *Fíк-σк-w without
reduplication is supposed in "oкε(v), Ïσкovτ' (e.g. Schwyzer: 708; Chantraine 1933:
317). No reduplication in ɛiкóv; for ɛiкúc, however, a reconstruction *FE-FIK-FWS
instead of *FEIк- is also possible. On εкɛλoç, see Ïкελoç; on ►εлɩεкηç sее s.v. There
are no certain cognates outside Greek. The comparison with the Baltic root of Lith. į-
vỹkti ‘to occur, happen, get reaľ, pa-véikslas ‘example', etc. is doubtful.
¿óλɛɩ [v.3sg.] 'oppressed' (Pi. P. 4, 233, conj. Boeckh). <IE *uel- 'press together'>

=== page 242 ===

436
Єop
•DER Hence εóλNTO 'be surrounded, oppressed' (A. R.).
•ETYM See Eiλέw 1.
čop [f.] · Ovyátηp, ávεчiós 'daughter, cousin' (H.). <IE *suesor- 'sister'>
•VAR Ễоρεç• лρоσńkovteç, ovyyevεïç 'kinsmen, relatives' (H.).
•ETYM Old relic of the IE word for 'sister', seen in Skt. svásar-, Lat. soror,
Germ., e.g.
Go. swistar, all from IE *suésor-. The Greek forms must come from a psilotic dialect;
top seems to be a vocative. In Greek, the word was replaced by adελoń, like opáτŋp
by ȧdeλpós.
ěopya →Ěpdw.
έópyn [f.] ‘topúvn, stirrer, ladle'. <IE *uerg- 'work'>
⚫DER Denominative έopуñσα τоpuvñoa 'to stir' and εоpуíčετα τорuvāτai (Poll.,
H., Eust.). Further εvépуn, εúεpуétɩç (Poll., H., EM). Semantically and formally close.
is ópyά av 'to weaken, knead, tan' (Att.), cf. εvεpуns of apτos 'well-kneaded loaf in
Andromachos (apud Gal. 14, 38, 9).
•ETYM The formation έópyŋ (accent for *copyń like dɛíλŋ, dépŋ? See below), like έd-
wd-n, etc., may derive from reduplicated *Ƒε-Ƒopy-11. The variants εvέpyŋ, -έtis seem
to be folk-etymological reshapings (cf. Evεpyns above). The form opyά(w replaced
original ópyáw (Schwyzer: 718). The words belong to pyov, pdw; for the
meaning, cf. HG (Teig) wirken = ‘knead'.
έoptń [f.] ‘feast, religious festival' (Od.). <?>
•DIAL Ion. ópτn (with hyphaeresis).
•COMP As a second member in Qiλ-έoptos (Ar. [lyr.]), etc.
•DER Adjectives έopτaïos ‘ptng. to the festival' (D. H.), έopτwdŋs ‘festive' (J., Ph.)
and denominative έopτá‹w, ópτáčw 'celebrate a festival' (IA) together with έópτaσiç
(Pl.), os (J.), εóτσμα (LXX), έopταστηs (Poll., Max. Tyr.), έopτaστiкóç
'appropriate for a festival' (Pl. Lg. 829b, etc.).
•ETYM Traditionally analysed as a verbal noun in -tý (e.g. *fe-fop-τ½), but without
further cognates. Also taken as related to ►εpoτiç, ► pavoç; not, however, to ►ñpa.
Éóc →ë, ¿.
¿лavý [adj.] adjunct of Persephone (Hom.), late also of other goddesses (Hecate,
Demeter). <?>
⚫ETYM Perhaps arisen by false split (in I 457?) from έπ aivǹ II. ‘and also the terrible.
P.'. See Buttmann 1825:2: 101, Leumann 1950: 72, and Schwyzer: 102.
¿лāλýs [adj.] epithet of oxη (Hes. Оp. 493 έлaλéα λéoxnv). <?►
⚫ETYM Connected with aλéa 'heat of the sun', or (alternatively) with đλýc as
'pressed together'. Chantraine rejects the latter interpretation for a number of
reasons: aλns is said of persons or things, not of places; the prefix εл- is difficult to
understand; and a reading επ' makes no sense. However, this does not mean that the
other interpretation is correct. See Bechtel 1914: 129.
ëлaλ´voç [adj.] 'pleasant' vel sim. (Pi. P. 8, 84, from vóστoç). <?>
ĚTapog 2
437
⚫ETYM One hypothesis derives it from ►àρлαλéоç <*åλлαλéoç, and connects it with
*аλлστо (sее ►äλлуστоç), which would derive from an r/n-stem *äλлар, gen.
ǎλлvоç. The word would then be a bahuvrīhi with adverbial prefix; this is
improbable.
εлávτηs, -εs [adj.] ‘steep' (Th. 7, 79). <GR>
•ETYM Like άv-, kat-ávtηs, etc., from a noun ȧvɩ- ‘front', seen in ►ävta, ► άvtí, with
adjectivial s-stem inflexion; thus, it properly means 'facing frontally, head-on.
εnapɛτéw [v.] 'to take in service, in use' (PTeb. 5, 182; 252; IIª; ktývη, πλoĩa, of officials,
etc.). <GR
⚫ETYM From ȧpετ½ in the sense of 'service', with εлí as in εл-xεɩρ-εw, εл-Оvμ-εw,
etc.
'Елáρɩɩ [pl.] name of the soldiers of the Arcadian League (X., Ephor.), originally =
εлíλεкτOι 'those selected' (D. S. 15, 62). <IE *hri- 'count'>>
ETYM Compare the PNS IIεd-ápiτoç (Arc., Lac.), 'Ел-ηрιτоç (@ 306), Mετ-ηрιτOS
(Ion.), and further the adj. ►výpiτoç from *ṇ-h₂ri- ‘uncoountable, countless', from a
verbal root *h₂ri- 'count', seen in åpɩ-0µóc, and prefixed with εл- as in έ-λέyɛv ‘to
select'. See Leumann 1950: 247, Schwyzer: 502.
έnaooútepoɩ [pl.] ‘one after the other, as a group' (epic since II.). <IE *ki-eu- ‘set in
motion'>
•VAR Also sing. -os.
•COMP As a first member in έлασσvtepo-tpißńs ‘following one another quickly' (A.
Ch. 426 [lyr.]).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. Some (see Frisk) derived it from an adverb *εл-av-(σ)σú of *έл-
av(a)-σσɛvoμai hurry after one another', comparing àvá-σσutoç 'rising' (Hp.), έní-
σOUTO urging' (A., E.), and лаv-σv-din full of impulse'; Ehrlich RhM N.F. 63.
(1908): 109 proposed haplological shortening from εлασσν[τó]-τερоç. Acc. to Risch
1937: 95 and Seiler 1950” 44, however, it is a contamination of *άyxútɛpos and
άσσoτέpw; thus also Baunack Phil. 70 (1911): 387, who asserts that it is a
contamination of åσσoτέpw and έyyútɛpos.
¿ñavpiʊkw [v.] ‘to touch, participate, enjoy' (II.). <?>
•VAR Mostly med. -oµɑɩ; èлavpɛĩ (H. Op. 419), aor. εлαυpɛïv, -έσðαɩ, fut.
Šnavpńooual.
•DER έлαúpɛσiç 'pleasure, gain' (Hdt., Democr., Th.).
ETYM No etymology. Schwyzer: 709³ proposes *εл-α-Ƒp-, related to ɛúpíσкw. A
form with another prefix occurs in άлаvрíσкоμat 'derive nourishment' (Hp. Nat.
Puer. 26).
ëлaqoç 2 [adj.] adjunct of ǎµлελoç; meaning unknown (PAvrom. 1 A 26, 1 B 27; Iª).
<?4
•VAR Also -ov.
•ETYM Perhaps with ảoń, i.e. grip', 'supported, bound up' (Moulton JHS 35 (1915):
55).

=== page 243 ===

438
εлεí [conj.] 'as, when, because' (II.). <IE *h,ei 'when'>>
•VAR Also with added particles, e.g. εлεí τɛ (epic Ion.), ¿nɛì dý, ¿ñadý (II.), epic also
¿ñɛì ñ (¿ñeiń); with äv: ¿ïɛì ǎv, έлɛáv (Ion.), ¿ëýv (IA), έ˜áv (Hell.); ¿лɛì ♂' äv,
εлεdáν (Att.).
•ETYM From εл-ɛí (see ►ɛi); probably originally a demonstrative, like ɛita, čn-ɛita.
Details in Schwyzer 1950: 658ff.; also, Chantraine 1953: 258f.
¿nɛíyw [v.] ‘to press, urge; hurry' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Also med.; impf. ëлɛyov (Od.), éлéуov (Pi., S.); the non-presentic forms are a
minority: aor. ηлɛížα (Hp. Ep. 17), pass. ǹrεí×¤ŋv (Th., Pl.), fut. ¿лεížoµai (A.), perf.
med. ηлεɩуμαι (J.). Hdn. Gr. 2, 436 notes έлoíуw as Aeol.
COMP Also with prefix, notably кατ-εлεíуw (Att.).
•DER лεç 'pressure, hurry' (J., Plu.) with εлεíчoç 'urgent' (POxy. 531, 9, IIP);
¿лɛiktηs ‘who urges, urgent' with έëɛкtkóç ‘urgent' (EM, Sch.); εлɛɩywλń ‘hurry'
(EM); 'ЕлεуεÚç PN (II 571).
•ETYM Uncertain. Acc. to Brugmann IF 29 (1911-1912): 238ff., it is related to oyvчµ
'open' (from *Fo-(ε)ty-?, Lesb. oεiynv).
Ëлεɩτα •VAR εлεItε(v). →ɛita.
Énevńvode =èveiv.
¿лevnétw [v.impv.] uncertain, perhaps 'put upon'? Elis, see Schwyzer: 409. <?►
•VAR εлεvлoι [opt.].
⚫ETYM Unknown. Cf. Bechtel 1921, 2: 864.
εлεpеα [adv.] 'above' (Alc.). <IE *h,epi ‘upon'>
•VAR кατ-Éлερеεv.
•ETYM From ►εлí, modelled on ►ëvεpðε(v), -ða, üñερеε(v), -еa. Cf. also έлέpτɛpa.
µɛíw kai vyŋλótɛpa 'more and higher', which is analyzed by Mastrelli Stud. ital. fil.
class. 27-28 (1956): 272ff. as εлεр-τɛpα, but which may also be a mistake for úлép-
Tεpα (DELG).
εлερoç [m.] 'ram' (Aeol., Asia Minor, Schwyzer: 644, 15). <IE? *ueru-os- 'wool'>
•ETYM Not related to кάлроç, Lat. aper, etc. (as per Meillet Rev. ét. slav. 5 (1925): 9).
Neither, as per Mastrelli Stud. ital. fil. class. 27 (1956): 1ff., relatd to έñépτɛpa. µɛílw,
кaì vчŋλótɛpa 'more and higher' (H.), Alb. epërë 'what is up high'. DELG translates
'who has wool on him', and connects it with ɛipos.
έлɛσßóλoç [adj.] 'throwing words, reviling' (B 275, A. R., AP). <IE *uek"-os- 'word'>
•DER also έлεσẞoλin 'slander' ( 159) and εлεσßоλéw 'revile' (Lyc., Max.).
ETYM Compound of εлoç and Báλλetv, with e-vocalism of the s-stem and o-vocalism
of the second member (Schwyzer: 440 and 449).
εлÉτoσσε [v.aor.] = “εлéτʊxɛ, hit, reached'. <?>
•VAR έióσσαiç [ptc.sg.m.] (Pi. P. 4, 25; 10, 33).
•ETYM Unexplained; cf. Schwyzer: 755².
*лεqvov=0εívw.
ÉnntŃs, -oũ
439
¿ëýßolos [adj.] 'who gets something, participates, has possession of (Od.), also
‘attainable' (A. R.). <IE *g"elh,- 'throw'?>
•VAR ɛлaßoλa [f.] 'share' (Gortyn), έëηßoλý· µépoç 'share' (H.).
•DER Cf. εлηẞoλía. ovvηẞolía 'occurrence' (EM 357,29). кατηßoλŃ τò εлẞáλλov
'which is put upon' (E. Fr. 614, 750).
•ETYM Verbal nouns from επ-, кατα-þáλλw, with -n- after εn-, kat-ýkoos, ¿π-
nμoßós, etc. (lengthening in compounds). See Brugmann Sächs. Ber. 53 (1901): 103.
έлŋykɛvídɛç [f.pl.] 'part of a ship' (ε 253). <IE *h₂enk- 'bend'>
⚫ETYM Acc. to Doederlein (see Bechtel 1914 s.v.), "what rests on the ȧyкóvɛç 'ribs of a
ship'?", i.e. 'the planks', thus a noun in -id-ɛç with compositional lengthening, for
which σavidɛs has been compared (cf. äyкoivat). The factual meaning remains
unclear.
¿nŋetavós [adj.] probably 'sufficient, rich, everlasting' (Od.). ◄IE? *uet-os- ‘year'>
•Var έéŋtavós h. Merc. 113, Hes. Op. 607.
•ETYM Properly ‘lasting the whole year' (like εл-έt-elos, Én-et-Ĥolos), with -n- as in
►εлηßoλoç, etc., and suffixal -avoc as in σŋτávioç. It is unnecessary to suppose
haplology from *-Ƒεtɩ-tavos or *-ƑεTO-τavoç. Acc. to Benveniste 1935: 45, an old
suffixal interchange with τaλov, s.v.
έnλvyáčoµai •VAR έ˜ñλvĚ. →ǹλúyn.
=
ënŋlvs →¿λevooμai.
έлpɛα [f.] ‘bad treatment, offence, threat' (Att.). <?>
•DER έлηpɛάw 'to treat presumptuously, revile, threat' (Hdt., Att., Arc.), also -- in
IG 5(2), 6: 46 (Tegea [IVª]) ¿ëŋpɛaσµós (Arist.), -aʊtýs (Sm., pap.), -aσtikós (Com.
Adesp. 202, etc.).
•ETYM Abstract of an adjective *εл-ŋpŋs, for which relationship with ápɛý, ►ȧpý
is suggested. However, if the form from Tegea is genuine Arcadian, this connection
is impossible because it presupposes PGr. *-ēr-, not *-ār-. Acc. to Wackernagel KZ 33
(1895): 57, it belongs to **pos, which he finds in ►εpɛoxηλéw. Blanc RPh. 71 (1997):
159 thinks the basic meaning is 'to look for problems' and connects it with ►έpέ0w,
Epε0i w, but gives no further details.
¿nýpetuos →¿péσow.
¿ïŋtó̟s, -oñ [adj.] ‘sedate, behaving well, benevolent' vel sim. (v 332, σ 128; A. R. 2, 987;
cf. Fraenkel 1910: 32²). <IE? *sep- 'care, honour'>
•var έëŋtées [f.pl.].
•DER έлntús [f.] ( 306) 'good behaviour, benevolence'.
ETYM Uncertain. Acc. to Wackernagel 1916: 422, it is from εлw in the meaning of
Skt. sápati 'care, honor', with n-enlargenent as in έd-ŋ-τúç, as well as psilosis.
Teffeteller Dale Glotta 60 (1982): 207-214 suggests that the word is derived from лoç
and εлετÚç 'conversation, good at speaking'.

=== page 244 ===

440
šnýtpipoi
έnýtpiµoi [adj.] 'near one another, in heaps' vel sim. (Il., A. R., only plur.; in Q. S. and
Opp. sing. 'prominent, powerful'). <?>
⚫ETYM Connected with ητplov 'warp' by the ancients, which is further explained by
Bechtel 1914 s.v. Doubts to this are expressed by Arbenz 1933: 25f. Comparable
meaning in ►εлaσσÚτεpol.
Eл [adv.] 'on it, at it' (II.). <IE *h,epi 'on'>
•VAR εлí [prep.] 'on, at, by, at the same time, because' with gen., dat. and acc.
•DIAL Myc. e-pi.
⚫ETYM IE adverb *h,épi: Skt. ápi, Av. aipi, OP apiy ‘also, at it; by, in', Arm. ew 'also,
and'. Ablauting oлɩ- occurs in ►öлеεν, also dialectal. *л- (Lith. -pi) is supposed in
►лέw and ▶ëτʊуη, but this seems improbable, as a zero grade *h,pi would also
have given εлɩ in Greek. On the different forms, see the extensive discussion by
Hamp MSS 40 (1981): 39-60.
'Елíaσσα [f.] epithet of Demeter (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Old ptc.with zero grade = εл-чoñσα (like čaσσα = (ε)ovσα, žкασσα = εкoñσa)
ɛ̃kaσσa Škoùga)
from the root *hei- ‘go', parallel to Skt. yati ‘going' < IE *h,i-nt-ih, beside *hi-ont- in
lóvτoç, etc. This etymology is doubtful, as it finds no support on the semantic side.
лɩẞdă [f.] 'the day after the festivaľ (Pi. P. 4, 140); mostly in plur. εлißdai or έníßdai
(Cratin. 323, Aristid., EM 357, 54); in H. άлò τоυ εлɩ<ß₁>ßáčεσÐαi τaïç έopτaïç oÚK
ovσaιçavτwv (meaning unclear to me). <IE *ped- 'foot'>
⚫ETYM Properly 'following the trace', with assimilated zero grade of the word for
'foot' (see ►лоúç, as well as лεdá), like in Skt. upa-bd-á- 'trampling', Av. fra-bd-a-
'front foot'. The formation of лßda is not clear: Schwyzer: 475 pleads for a suffix
-α- with lost yod; Solmsen 1909: 269 thinks that ɩßdă is a secondary shortening for
*èni-B8-ā.
¿лɩɩкηç [adj.] ‘proper, fitting, suitable; solid' (Il.). ◄IE *ueik- ‘be fitting'?>
•DER also лεiкɛα 'equity, reasonableness' (IA) and лεкεúоµαι (LXX 2 Es. 9, 8
[v.l.], H.).
•ETYM Opposite ά-εɩkýs (see ►áïkýs), related to έлέoɩka; full grade as in ►ɛikóv.
Beside this also exists л-εíкελos 'comparable' (Hom., Hes.) after εкɛλoç; cf.
Strömberg 1946: 91 and Schwyzer 1950: 466.
=
¿ñíɛktos [adj.] mostly with negation, oк εлíεкτov (µévoç, σðévoç, лévеoç)
'invincible, unindulgent' (Hom.); also = ¿лεкýs ‘fitting, suitable' (0 307, late). <IE
*ueik- 'give way'>
•ETYM As there is no compounded verb *εл-(Ƒ)εíкw ‘yield', Schulze 1892: 495'
connected the adjective with Lat. vinco 'conquer', Go. weihan, OIr. fichim 'battle', for
which he compared EM 638, 39: оÚк εлÍεктOV = où vкúμεvov. However, there is
► εľkw (DELG).
èn-eidoqian →eigoual 1.
εлapéw [v.] 'to rush upon, press on' (E. Ph. 45, Rh. 441 [codd. here -Çátɛ]), Arcadian
acc. to Eust. 909, 28. <?►
ETYM No convincing etymology.
лɩáqɛλoç [adj.] 'vehement, violent', of fury (Xóλoc I 525). <PG?>
441
•VAR Also adverbial -wç (xαλεлαívεv, μεvεaívεɩv, έpɛɛivɛv I 516, ( 330, h. Merc. 487;
on the shift of accent Schwyzer 618), -ov (кOτéovσα A. R. 4, 1672).
•DER With archaising suppression of the prefix (áqɛλos (Nic. Al. 556, EM), Čaqɛléc,
-ws (H.), -ns (Suid.).
⚫ETYM Expressive word without etymology. (a- is probably the Aeolic form of dia-; it
is further unclear. Not better, Strömberg 1946: 89. Fur.: 176 suggests connection with
►Čáy ‘surf, and takes it as Pre-Greek.
έлɩńpavo¿ 1 ‘welcome'. →лíŋpoç.
έлńpavos 2 ‘ruling, governing'.
pavos.
εлinpoç [adj.] 'graceful, pleasant' (Emp., Epich., etc.).
•VAR έлínpov [n.sg.] Marc. Sid. (Glotta 19, 176); otherwise έлíŋpa [n.pl.].
•DER Compar. ¿ëiŋpéotɛpoç; as an adverb = Xápɩv (Antim. 87, etc.), ¿ñíŋpa déxðai
(AP 13, 22), qépɛσðaɩ (A. R. 4, 375), qέpovτα (S. OT 1094 [lyr.]).
•ETYM From лì ñpa qέpwv (A 572, etc.) by univerbation; thence ►έлкpavos 1
'charming, welcome' (t 343). See Sommer 1948: 139 with litt. See further ►ñpa.
¿ñíðvµßpov →¤ýµßpa.
=
лɩкápσιoç [adj.] 'transverse, crosswise, at a right angle' (170, of ships, Hdt., Plb., etc.).
◄ IE *(s)ker- 'cut▷
•ETYM Also occurs as έyкápoios (Th.), after έvavtíos? Secondary simplex kápotov.
лλάуov ‘athwart, sideways' (H.), -íws Suid. Ultimately related to kɛipɛɩv, έnikɛipeɩv
‘cut', but unclear in detail. Strömberg 1946: 92 starts from a verbal adjective
*лíкapτoç, whencе έлкáрσιоç like außpóσtos from äußpоτоS (see also on
Sлλáσoç). Derivation from the root IE *kers- (in коρσóv. коρμóv H., ȧ-кερσε-
кóμηç; seе ►кópon) seems less likely. The overall resemblance with Lith. skersas
'transverse', OPr. kirscha 'across', Ru. čérez 'through, across' can be explained as
parallel formations of the root (s) ker- ‘cut'. Not from *èì kapσí, a plur. of έлì кáp (ПI
392) 'on its head', as supposed by Bechtel 1914 s.v. See ►кɛipw.
εлíкɛρaç [n.] plant name = Tλç, 'Trigonella' (Hp. apud Gal. 19, 99). <IE *kerh₂s-
'horn'>
•ETYM Called 'horn-like' or 'with horn', after its long sickle-shaped shell. See
Strömberg 1944: 33. On the retained ending -aç, cf. náуêpɛaç (s.v. ►кpέaç) and
►épvσíлελaç.
εлɩкOккάστρiα [f.] adjunct of ηxw, 'mimicking, reverberating' vel sim. (Ar. Th. 1059).
<ONOM
•VAR έTIKOKKAστýs (uncertain conj. in Timo 43).
•ETYM Formation in -τplă (frequent in the language of comedy; Chantraine 1933:
106) as if from *εлкоккáčш (Aг. Byz. apud Eust. 1761, 26); onomatopoeic.

=== page 245 ===

442
ttoo
443
ÉлIKÓKKOVPOS [m.] · ó rapatηpytǹs έv otadiw rapà Aάкwσiv 'spectator at the race-
course (Lacon.)' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown. There seems no basis for Latte's "an έлкo̟µµατшрóc, scl. pugilatus
legitimi custos?".
¿ñíkovpos [adj., m.] ‘helper', 'support; helping, protecting'; plur. ‘auxiliary troops'
(Il.). <IE *kṛs- 'walk’➤
●DER έrikovpikóç ‘consisting of auxiliary troops' (Th., Pl.), έлiкoúpios ‘coming to
help' (Рaus.), εлкoυρíα, -íŋ 'help, support' (IA), denominative εлкoupέw [v.] 'to
come to help, support' (E 614; cf. Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 98f.) with
έnikoúpnois, -ŋfia, -ntikós.
⚫ETYM The word stands completely isolated within Greek. Probably for *лíкopσoç,
from a lost verb equivalent to Lat. currō 'walk, run' (< *krs-e/o-). Cf. the related
Celtic word for car', OIr. carr, MW carros (whence Lat. carrus, Arm. kař-k' [pl.]
'wagon'; from Galatic). Further perhaps related is σápσaɩ· ǎµažα as Illyrian
(Lagercrantz IF 25 (1909): 367); doubtfully, MHG hurren 'move quickly'.
¿nɩλäïç, -ídos ⇒лoλãïç and λãaç.
¿лшýðɩov [n.] a plant (Dsc., Gal.). <?>
•ETYM Named after the plant μndov. The parasitic nature of the plant may also
have given rise to the name; cf. synonymous áμaµnλís and ►óµoµnλís.
¿nɩµnλis, -idos [f.] ‘medlar, mespilus germanica' (Dsc., Gal.).
⚫ETYM Derived from µñλov, because of the similarity with the apple tree (Strömberg
1944: 32f.). See ►µñλov, ►ériµýdiov.
έлivηtpov →véw.
¿лížɛvoç 1 ‘foreigner'. ―évoç.
•
¿níževos 2 [m.] · έл×¤óvoç ‘upon the earth' (H.). ◄IE *d½għem- ‘earth'?>
•ETYM Unclear. Acc. to Hoffmann 1921: 80, it is from x0wv with a special
development; cf. Schwyzer: 326. Because of εvwves. oi ȧvdpwvεç úлò puyŵv
'men's appartments (Phrygian)' (H.), Pisani AnFilCl 6 (1953-54): 213 considered it to
be Phrygian, which is rejected by DELG.
¿лížŋvov [n.] ‘chopping block, hangman's block' (A., Ar., Eust., H.). ◄IE? *kes- (*kses-)
'cut, split'>
●DER Cf. žŋvós = ‘kopµóç, trunk' (Suid.) from ►éw ‘carve, polish'.
•ETYM εлívov is rather from aívw, modelled on εлкóлаvоу 'chopping-block'
(Hell.), than from εл-εεw.
εлíоρкoç, -ov [adj.] 'perjurious' (T 264), later msc. 'perjurer' (Hes., Gortyn, etc.).
< GR➤
•VAR In Hom. only in εлíоркov óμóσσa 'to swear a false oath'.
●DER έлopkéw [v.] ‘to break an oath, perjure' (since T 188), together with έлopкía
‘perjury' (D., X.), έopkoσúvη ‘id.' (AP).
ETYM As the verb έлopкéw is frequent, it is obvious to consider the much rarer
εлíоρкoç 'breaking the oath' as a back-formation from the verb (thus Strömberg
1946: 86ff.). The form έлоpкέw derives directly from öpкoç, with έл- like έлОvµέw
from Ovμóç, εxεpέw from xɛip, etc.; έлopкéw then properly means 'act against the
oath' (opposite εvоpкéw keep the oath' from εÜоρкoç [since Hes.]); on the
preservation of the -t-, see Fraenkel 1910: 237. Differently, Leumann 1950: 79ff. (with
discussion): the expression εлíоркov óµóσσαι ‘perjure' (whence εлоρкέw) would be
due to a false analysis of epic εлì öpкov óµóσσαɩ ‘swear an oath on top'; against this
view, Luther 1954: 86ff. with a different explanation; see also Fraenkel Gnomon 23
(1951): 373 and Bolling AmJPh. 76 (1955): 306ff., who start from (ó) έлì öpкw (ßác).
Leumann 1950: 88 is similarly inclined to see εлíоρкоç as a back-formation from
εлopкέw. See ►öρкoç.
éniovpos →őpouai.
¿лɩovσtos [adj.] of ǎpτos (Ev. Matt. 6, 11, Ev. Luc. 11, 3), translated with 'quotidianus'
in the vulgate, afterwards as 'daily'; also έлovσч[wv (Sammelb. 5224, 20; economic
message), meaning unknown. <GR▷
•ETYM The most obvious interpretation as ǹ εлoñσα (ǹµépα) suggests 'for the
coming day', but this seems improbable. If we start (just as Debrunner Glotta 4
(1913): 249ff.) from έë tǹv oðσav (nµέpav), we get the more acceptable translation
'for the day in question'. See Blass-Debrunner-Funk 1961 §123 and Koerster in Kittel
1935:587-595.
¿ninaktis, -idos [f.] 'rupture wort, Herniaria glabra' (Dsc. 4, 108); Pliny has epicactis
(13,114), see André 1956 s.v. <?>
•ETYM From *έлíлăкtoç fixed, closed', related to έллýуµ (cf. έлɩлăкτów ‘to
close'), because of its healing function. Cf. the plant name лηкτý = σúµquτov and
Strömberg 1940: 89. On the short a in (έë)ñaкtów, see Wackernagel 1916: 11.
εллατρóчov [n.] 'father's name' (Schwyzer: 462 rem. 28, Tanagra III³). <GR▷
⚫ETYM Univerbation of *¿лì лατрóqɩ with a suffix -10-; cf. Schwyzer: 551 and 451. See
Morpurgo Davies Glotta 47 (1970): 46f.
злɩлλα [n.pl.] 'movable goods, utensils' (IA). <IE *kwel- 'turn'>
•VAR Rarely-
-OV.
•ETYM Old expression, probably as εл-лλ-α, properly “what has been added” as
opposed to fixed possessions, from έëɩ-лέλoµaɩ; for the formation, cf. Si-op-os and
Schwyzer: 449. Because the word was not transparent, reshapings like εлíлλoα (Нdt.
1, 94, pap.; modelled on έääλɛïv, for which cf. on ►έñíñλoov) and èéíñoλa (Dodona;
modelled on εллоλη, for which sее ►εллоλñ) occurred.
¿лíлλoov [n.] 'fold of the peritoneum, omentum' (Ion., Hell.). <IE *pleu- ‘swim'>
•VAR Also -00 [m.].
⚫ETYM The word has been compared with Lith. plėve 'fine, thin skin' (on milk, below
the egg-shell, etc.), Ru. plevá ‘id.', Sln. pléva ‘eyelid'; however, the prefix then
remains unexplained. So it is probably a purely Greek creation: a verbal noun from

=== page 246 ===

444
¿niotapiai
445
εлɩ-лλεчv 'swim upon' (see Strömberg 1944: 65f.); εлíлλoov is then 'the organ that
floats on top'. The form εлɩлólov (Eub. 95, 3) arose from connection with
εлɩóАaç; seе ► έriñoλñç.
εллоλñç [adv.] and [prep.] 'on top of, above' (IA). <?>
⚫DER έлɩлóλαιоç 'on top of (Hp., D.), εллоλáш 'be on top, have the upper hand, be
usual' (Hp., Att., Arist.) with εллóλασiç, -ασμóç, -αστɩкóç; also έллоλý [f.] 'surface'
(Argos IIIª, Aret., Gal.) with έллoλεúw 'be at the surface' (Ael.).
•ETYM Probably from *¿лì лoλñs (Schwyzer: 625), thus from a noun *лoλ½. A
connection with лéλojai, róλos, télλos is not semantically evident: *лoλń like tέλos
(yovń: yέvoc) would then properly be the ‘turning point' > 'culminating point' or
'walking around, place where one walks'? Better connections seem to be with MoSw.
fala [f.] (treeless) plain, heathe', OCS polje 'field' from ORu. polo ‘open, free'
(Persson 1912(1): 228); additionally,'Елɩлоλαí [pl.] name of the heights near Syracuse
(Th.).
Eлippo0oç [m.] and [f.] 'helper, helping' (A 390, 770; Hes. Op. 560); 'abusive
language' (S. Ant. 413, Fr. 583, 10), as an adjunct of ódóc = 'where the cars rage' (AP
7,50).<?>
•VAR As an adj. also -ov [n.].
●DER έлppoðέw ‘shout in answer, rage against' (trag., D. H.). Not to be separated
from półos 'noise', połέw ‘rage'; in the epic 'come with noise to somebody'
'coming to help with noise', cf. Brugmann BPhW 39 (1919): 136ff.
=
ETYM Acc. to Schwyzer Glotta 12 (1923): 15f., εлippoos 'helper' is wrong for usual
►εлɩτάppoƉoç in Hom.
¿nioɩov [n.] = ¿½ßatov, euphemistic designation of the pubic region (Hp., Arist.).
<?>
•VAR εлεÍσιOV.
•ETYM Unknown.
лσкбvov [n.] 'skin of the brows' (Il.), metaph. ‘proud, severity' (Plb. 25, 3, 6). ◄IE
*sku(H)- 'cover'>
⚫ETYM If the simplex σкúvia [n.pl.] 'eyebrows' (Nic. Th. 177, 443, Poll. 2, 66) was not
derived from εлσкÚνоν, the word would come from *εл-σкúvos 'upon the brows'.
In any case, we have to start from a nominal stem *oкuv-, which belongs together
with OHG scur 'protecting roof, Lat. ob-scür-us *covered', dark', so that an r/n-stem
is supposed. With a suffix -1-, there is okú-λoç [n.] 'flayed skin of an animal', σкõλa
[n.pl.] 'spolia'. Perhaps the root is seen in Skt. sku-nā-ti, sku-no-ti 'cover'. Differently
on obscurus, De Vaan 2008`s.v.
εлíσкupoç 1 [m.] name of a ball-game (Н. = ó чετà лоλλшv σσμós 'playing ball
¿ñiokupos
µetà noλλŵv
with many people', Poll. 9, 103, sch. Pl. Tht. 146a); also called εлíкovоç. <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Identical with ► έniokupos 2?
Éлíσкuρoç 2 [?] uncertain word in Call. Fr. 231 (see Pfeiffer 1949-1953: 567) and Fr.
anon. 135; explained by H. with ǎpxwv, ßpaßẞevτýs, ßoŋós, éлíσколоç, εоρos,
εлηкooç 'ruler, arbiter, assistant, guardian, overseer, witness'. <?>
ETYM No etymology.
→σµvyɛpós.
ëлooɑɩ [f.pl.] ‘later born daughters' (Hecat. 363 J.); H. also εлioσov. tò vσtεpov
yεvóμɛvov 'the later-born'. <?>
⚫ETYM For the formation, cf. μéτασσa [f.pl.] 'lams of middle age' (1221); perhaps also
the geographical names "Auqoσα, "Avτσσα. Derivation uncertain; perhaps suffixes
--10- or -к-to-. Acc. to Giles Class. Rev.3 (1889): 3f., εлɩ-σσα would be analogical
after µét-aσσaɩ = µɛt-oñσaɩ with archaic disappearance of the zero grade of the fem.
ptc. See Schwyzer: 472.
εлσσoqoç [m.] name of an official (Thera, Schwyzer: 227, 199). <?>
•DER Perhaps [εл] σ0εw (IG 9(1), 691: 15 [Corcyra]).
⚫ETYM Unknown.
εлíσσwτpov [n.] 'metal hoop upon the felloe, tyre of a wheel' (Il., Poll.). <?>
⚫ETYM Derived from σwτpov 'felloe' (Poll.), also in έü-σσwτpoç (Hes. Sc. 273; v.l.
578); further σwτpeúµiata. tà toũ tpoxoû žúλa. kaì ó έnì toútoiç oídŋpos έniowτpov
(H.); on the enlargement -(εv) μα see Chantraine 1933: 186f.
Usually derived from σεvo̟μaɩ, σσuto 'to hurry', but the long root vowel that has
to be assumed in the reconstruction *kiō(u)- is problematic. One compares Skt.
cyautná [n.] enterprise, deed' = Av. šyao9na- 'deed', which are then taken as
thematicized enlargements of a noun in *-tr, -tn-. Doubtful.
έniotaµai [v.] ‘be assured, know how' (II.), also 'believe' (Heraclit., Hdt.), first intr. as
in έmotáµievos µèv äkovti O 282. <IE *si-steh₂- 'stand'>
•VAR Fut. лστησoμα (II.), aoг. ηлστ½Ð½у (Нdt., Att.).
COMP Also with prefix, e.g. -, ovv-eñíotaμiai.
⚫DER лστμw 'knowing about, expert' (Od.) with εлστηчovкóç 'of the
¿лotηµwv', usually ‘ptng. to knowing, to knowledge' referring to έotýµŋ (Arist.),
έriotquooúvn (Xenocr.); also έлíστηµos (Hp.; Chantraine 1933: 152); denominative
verbs, both rare and late: εлσtηovíčoµa (Al.), έoηµóða (Aq.) 'become
¿niotýµiwv'. ¿nioτ½µŋ ‘understanding, knowing, knowledge' (IA); the -n- of the
derivatives was favored by the adjectives in -nuwv, or by µvý-µð, o̟é̟-μn respectively
(Chantraine 1933: 173, 148; Schwyzer: 522); likewise in the verbal adjective. έrotηtós
'what can be understood' (Pl., Arist.).
⚫ETYM From *лɩ-híσταμαι with early loss of the breath and vowel contraction
(hyphaeresis). Through the semantic development *stand before something' > 'be
confronted with sth., take knowledge of sth.'; likewise, OHG firstān, OE forstandan.
The word лíστaμα was also formally separated from iστaμaɩ, which already in
Homer had lead to a new verb έo-íσταμα 'stand at'. Acc. to others, it is an old
fomation without reduplication (litt. in Schwyzer: 6752); acc. to Brugmann-Delbrück
1897-1916 2:3, 160, it is a recent formation from an aorist εлɩ-στάμεvos, -σtaiµinv.

=== page 247 ===

446
¿NÍOTŃS
έnioτns [?] 'prop' (inscr. Delos 340, 11, IIª). < GR➤
ETYM Probably from ►στη.
¿ñíσtɩov [n.] ‘staple-town, slip or shed for a ship' (( 265). <?►
⚫ETYM Term from shipbuilding, explained by Aristarchus as кατάλчµα and identified
with ¿qέσtios, -ov as Ionic; from iστíov, acc. to the sch. on the passage. Schwyzer:
425 suspects enlargement of a root noun *εл-στã (comparing OP upa-stä 'help').
The phrase лívovσα τǹу εлíστov (Anacr. 90, 4), the joking name of a drink, is
unclear.
εлoxɛpó [adv.] 'in a row, one after the other, uninterrupted, gradually' (Il., Simon.).
<IE *seg 'hold'>
⚫DER Besides voxɛpú (A. R. 1, 912) and, in two words, év oxɛpų (Pi.) 'id.'; so a
compound of εлí and an instrumental oxɛpú (Schwyzer: 550 and 625).
⚫ETYM From the middle voice of the noun *σx-ɛpós (on the formation, see Schwyzer:
482 and Chantraine 1933: 224; *σxɛpóv [n.] 'continuum³), i.e. σx-éσðaɩ, éxɛσðaɩ ‘join,
follow²; cf. ¿¿ñç from the same stem. With an s-stem, there is oλo-oxεps 'complete'
(Hell.; Schwyzer: 513); thence a derivation Exɛp-ín, "uninterrupted coast, continent"
vel sim., name of the land of the Phaeacians (Od.).
¿nitáppoƉos [m.] and [f.] 'helper' (Hom.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. Resembles the synonymous εлippooç; is it a cross from this and
another word, or a “Streckform" (cf. on ►ékatηßeλétns, -Bólos)? Acc. to Schwyzer
Glotta 12 (1923): 15f., a compound of *¿π-τáppo-00¢ = tapʊų (-oïç, -ov) έлеéwv,
-0ćovσa [meaning?]; however, -pp- for -po- remains to be explained. The solution of
Brugmann BPhW 39 (1919): 136ff. is no better: *εл-10ά-рpoеoç, from 10a- in ita-
yεvns. The form táppoos (Lyc.) is secondary.
Énítež, -ekoç [f.] 'close to delivery' (Hp., Hdt., Gortyn). <IE *tek- 'give birth, bring
forth'>
●var Acc. ¿ñítok-a (Andania, Hdt. 1, 108 as a v.l.).
•ETYM From εлí (επ) and an unattested second member, probably a root noun *τε,
either as a hypostasis of ¿ïì *τεk-í [dat.] (Schwyzer: 424), or as per Sommer 1948: 111
and 115 as a bahuvrihi of the type veɛoç: “with the delivery approaching". Modelled
on this form is late άyxí-τε ‘id.' (Theognost.). The o-vowel in εлíτок-α is rather
from later εлí-τокоç than old ablaut. Further, see ▸ Tíкτw.
έлτŋdéç [adv.] probably of set purpose, deliberately' (A 142, 0 28); on the
proparoxytonon Schwyzer: 380. <?>
●Var érítŋdes (IA), έnítādes (Theoc. 7, 42).
•COMP εлÍTηdɛç ‘id.' (IA).
⚫DER Adjective τ (Att.; Ion. -ɛoc) 'appropriate, suitable, fitting' with
ηdó (IA); denominative verb εлτηбεúw 'do sth. on purpose' (IA) with
έntýdevµa, čitηdɛvσɩ 'profession, action' (Att.; on the meaning Röttger 1937:
22ff.), Cret. ¿étádovµa; éntndev(µa)tikós (Hell.).
⚫ETYM Presupposes a noun *τñdoç, *τādos; no further connection.
1
ETOS
εηíç, -ídos [f.] 'horned poppy, Glaucium flavum' (Nic. Th. 852). <?>
447
ETYM So called because of the resemblance to τñλç 'Trigonella'; see Strömberg 1944:
33. Cf. on ►έπµýdiov.
εлíτuρov [n.] 'confection of olives', only as a Lat. LW epityrum in Cato RR 119, Plaut.
Mil. 24; acc. to Varro LL 7: 86, a Sicilian delicacy. <GR>
•ETYM From τupóç, because it was eaten together with or after the cheese.
εлɩwyai [f.pl.] 'places of shelter for ships' (ε 404, A. R. 4, 1640 [sg.], Opp. H. 1, 602).
<IE *uhg- 'break'>>
•ETYM As a verbal noun from επ-(Ƒ)άуvчμαι ‘break against sth.', so properly 'place
where wind and waves are broken'; comparе кчμаτшyń < *кvµaτo-fayń (Hdt.), and
ßopéw vπ' iwyñ (§ 533), properly “under the breaking of Boreas", i.e. 'protected
against Boreas'. The latter has the reduplication *FI-Fwy-ŋ, *ui-uoh¸g-; thus, έπwyń
is probably from *лƑɩƑwуń. Bechtel 1914 s.v. prefers *επ-Fwyη without
reduplication, beside Fayń. On the formation, see Jacobsohn Gnomon 2 (1926): 384.
εлo̟μαι [v.] 'to follow, accompany'. <IE *sek"- 'follow'>
●var Ipf. ɛiñóµŋv, fut. чo̟μαɩ, aor. εσлóµηy, inf. σлéσðaɩ (Il.); έon-éoðaɩ, -óµevoç,
-oчμny certain only since A. R., who also has the innovated present εσлεται (see
Braswell Glotta 58 (1980): 205-213).
•DIAL Myc. e-qe-ta /hek"etās/, e-qe-si-jo /hekwesios/, see Gérard-Rousseau 1968: 91-
94.
=
•COMP Also with prefix ¿q-, лap-, ovv-, µεð-.
•DER έnέtās ‘who accompanies' (Pi.) Myc. e-qe-ta; -τɩç [f.] (A. R.); further
derivatives ►άoσσέw, ► óráwv, ► óñá‹w; cf. ►órndós.
•ETYM Identical with Skt. sácate, Av. hacaitē (= ënɛtaɩ, IE *sek"-e-toi); further, to Lat.
sequor = OIr. sechur, Lith. sekù, sèkti 'follow'. The Gm. word for 'to see', Go. saihan,
etc. deviates semantically - perhaps 'to follow with the eyes'? See LIV² s.v. *sek"- "sich
anschliessen'. It has mostly been assumed that the aorist εσлóμηу stood for *-σл-,
with secondary aspiration after εлoμα (likе εiлóµηv), and that the form εσлéσðαɩ,
which was considered certain only for Hell. times, was secondary. However, Braswell
(l.c.) shows that Pindar has some non-indicative forms with έσл-, so Frisk and
Chantraine mistakenly reject the form.
=>
¿ropiádios →ŵµoç.
лоç [n.] 'word, speech' (II.). <IE *uek"- 'speak'>
•VAR Plur. also 'song, epic poem' (Pi., Hdt.; on meaning and use Fournier 1946:
212ff.).
•DIAL El. Cypr. féitos.
•COMP As a first member in ►εлɛσßólos, ¿ito-nolós (with analogical compositional
vowel); as a second member e.g. in ► άtoeñýs.
•DER έлÚλλov ‘small song, small verse' (Ar.; after this other diminutives in -útov,
Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 214 and 225); έлкóç 'belonging to epic poetry' (D. H.).
⚫ETYM El. and Cypr. Ƒéлoç is identical with Skt. vácas-, Av. vacah- 'word'; IE *uék"-
os- [n.]. Greek further has the root noun *öy (in ►öл-α [acc.], etc.), in addition to

=== page 248 ===

448
лoч, -ло
►öσσa and probably ►¿v-oлó̟, as well as the aorist ɛlлov. A primary athematic
verb is preserved in Skt. vák-ti ‘he speaks'.
žnou̟, -oños [m.] ‘hoopoe, Upupa epops' (Epich., Ar.), also čлoñoç· öpvɛov ‘birď,
εлwлα· åλεкτρvóva äyptov 'wild cock', äлaçoç. έñoу tò öpvɛov ‘hoopoe', after the
animal names in -qos (H.). <ONOM➤
⚫ETYM Formation like Spúoy, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 259) on an onomatopoeic basis;
сf. έлo̟лоî, лóлo̟ло of the call of the bird (Ar. Av. 58 resp. 227). Parallel names exist in
other languages: Arm. popop, Lat. upupa, Latv. pupukis, etc. The word probably
cannot be called Indo-European. On εлoч, see further Thompson 1895 §.v.
εлτά [num.] 'seven' (II.). <IE *septm 'seven'>
•COMP As a first member in copulative εлταкαíбεкα, in έлтaкóσɩɩ (cf. on diāкóσio)
and in several bahuvrīhis like εлτα-ßÓεоç.
•DER εлTάкι(S), -tv 'seven times' (Рi.), εлτǎ×ǎ 'in seven parts' (434), εлτάç [f.] ‘a
group of seven' (days, years; Arist.); έëτadɛúw ‘belong to the έëtά² (Olbia IIIª).
•ETYM Gr. εлτά, Skt. saptá, Lat. septem, Arm. ewt'n, Gm., e.g. Go. sibun, etc. go back
to IE *septm (accent after IE *októ[u] > ỏкíó, aṣṭáu). Cf. also έßdoµýkovta,
▶郯oog
εлw 1 [v.] 'to care for, occupy onself (Il., Ion., Hell.); in the epic sometimes confused
with čлo̟αɩ, or semantically influenced by it (Chantraine 1942: 309¹, 388). ◄IE *sep-
'occupy with, care for'>
•VAR лovτa Z 321; further only with prefix (adverb): àµ(1)-, St-, ¿q-, µεð-, ñɛpi-
εлw, mostly present stem, further future and aorist forms like ¿q-έуw, ¿N-ÉσNOV, ÈNI-
σлεt̃v, µεtα-σлάν.
•DER » ÓTłov, ≥ Síortos, probably also E Ėnths, -TÚC.
•ETYM Old thematic root present, identical with Skt. sápati 'care, honor'; Iranian
features athematic forms, viz. Av. haf-šī [2sg.], hap-tī [3sg.] 'hold (in the hand),
support'. An old enlargement is Lat. sepeliō 'bury' = Skt. saparyáti 'honor'.
εлw 2 [v.] 'to name'. <GR➤
●VAR in лovσɩv (Nic.).
•ETYM Artificial present of εiñov.
¿nwtides [f.pl.] ‘catheads of warships, beams projecting like ears on each side of a
ship's bows' (E., Th., Str.). <IE *h₂ous- ‘ear'>
•ETYM Forms based on oʊs, wτóç, like έлwµíç ‘upper part of the shoulder' on wμos
and έɩɗopatíç ‘point of a lance' on Sópu, etc. (Strömberg 1946: 99). Thus it is
properly tips of the ear', because of their projecting position. Differently, Forster
1950: 70.
лxατo [v.] only in M 340 лãσαɩ yàp έñúxato (scil. núλα) ‘they were all closed'. <IE
*h3ueig- 'open'>
⚫ETYM Perhaps a зsg.med.plpf. to εл-oчуvóval in the meaning 'close', with aspiration
of the velar. For the meaning, cf. especially (τǹv Oúpav) époσέwšev ‘they shut (the
door)' (LXX Ge. 19, 6). Wackernagel 1955(1): 127ff. also discusses the analysis as a
Ě pavos
449
plpf. ¿лóуato (the inferior reading in the mss.) derived from έлéуw. See also Bechtel
1914 s.v. ►oуvuku.
*pa [f.] explained by Erot., Str., etc. with yn 'earth', in pace, Dor. *paσde 'on the earth'
(Il.); έpas. yñs (H.). <IE? *h,er- ‘earth'>
•COMP The word is further assumed in compounds, e.g. as a second member in
лоλú-ηρоç· лоλváрovрoç, лλоúσiоs 'with many fields, rich' (H.), as a first member
in ¿peoi-µýtpyv. tǹv yɛwµɛtpíav ‘geometry' (H.); on the last Hoffmann 1921: 82ff.,
who wants to read in H. εpaç. уñ and takes the word as a neuter; pa(ε then from
*ěpao-de.
●DER έpávaɩ• ßwµoí ‘altars' (H.; Schwyzer: 489; very doubtful); denominative verb in
► ȧл-εpáw, etc. Cf. also on vεpol.
•ETYM A general resemblance is shown by a few Gm. and Celt. expressions for ‘earth,
etc.': OHG ero ‘earth', ON jorvi ‘'sand(bank)', MW erw 'field', all with a suffix -ụ-
(old u-stem?); with, a suffix -t-, Go. airþa, ON jorð, MIr. ert 'earth'. Arm. erkir ‘earth'
is unclear.
pauai [v.] 'to desire, love' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Lengthened form έpáaσε П 208 (cf. Chantraine 1942: 83); IA ¿páw; aor.
¿páσ(0)aσðaɩ, ¿paσ¤ñvai, fut. ¿paσðýσoµaι (epic Ion.).
•DER Verbal adj. έpaτós 'desired, loved' (II.), with 'Epaτó [f.] name of one of the
Muses (Hes.) and paτíw 'desire' (A 551); lengthened form έpaτεɩvós 'lovely' (Il.;
after the adjectives in -ɛvóc, e.g. ȧλуεɩvóç; лоеεvóç; Pi.); on έpaστóç see below.
Further pws (Il.), gen., etc. -wτoç [m.] (Hdt., Pi.), epic also poc [m.] '(carnal) love,
the god of Love', with several derivatives: beside the hypocoristics 'Epwt-lov, -ápiov,
-íokoç, -ɩdɛúç also έpwtikós ‘ptng. to love' (Att.), ¿pwtúλos ‘lovely, darling', ¿pwtíç
[f.] ‘id.' (Theoc.); ¿pwt-iádes (Núµqαι; AP); έpwτídia (-ɛα, -αια) ‘festival for Eros'
(Ath., inscr.); denominative verb έpwt-táw ‘be sick of love' (Hp.). From ěpos: ¿póɛis
(Hes., h. Hom.); cf. Treu 1955: 245. From a stem έpao-: Aeol. épavvós 'lovely,
charming' <*paσ-vóc (Il.), ¿páσoç 'id.' (Semon., Anacr.; cf. Schwyzer: 493,
Chantraine 1933: 43), ¿paστηs lover' (IA), also in compounds, е.g. лaid-epaotǹs,
fem. ¿páσtpia (Eup.); ¿paσtós = ¿paτós (Att., etc.); denominative verb έpaʊtɛúw
páw (A. Pr. 893 [lyr.]). The frequent formations in -σ-, which can hardly all be
analogical, point to an original s-stem έpwç, paσ- (like yέλwç, yελao-), which was
subsequently enlarged by -- or thematicized.
ETYM No etymology. Thus Pre-Greek?
=
pavos [m.] 'meal on joint account, meal of friends' (Od., Pi.); 'contribution,
benefactory society' (Att., Hell.). <PG?>
•COMP Compounds: έpav-ápxηs 'president of an *pavos' together with -έw [v.]
(pap., etc.), also ȧpx-εpavos = àpx-εpaviστns together with -iw [v.] (inscr.).
•DER έpavíкóç ‘regarding an εpavos' and denominative έpavi(w, -oμα 'collect
contributions' (Att., Hell.) with έpáv-lois (Pl.), -toµós (D. H.), ¿pavots participant
or member of an pavos' (Att., Hell.), also έpavεστns (Achae.) after кηdeotýs, etc.
•ETYM Uncertain. Traditionally grouped together with poτ ‘feasť' (Cypr., etc.)
and ► έoptη, and combined with ►ñpa ‘service'; the latter connection is phonetically

=== page 249 ===

450
Ěpaxos
improbable, however. We should assume the basic forms *Fέpa-vos, *Ƒέpo-tis, but
their origin is unknown: so is the word Pre-Greek?
špaxos [?] · tò Spáyμa. Bowτoí 'handful (Boeot.)' (H.); also έpaxáτai oi degµevovtes
'the fettering ones'. <?>
•ETYM See Bechtel 1921, 1: 305f.
épáw1 →Ěpaiai.
*èpáw 2 →ài-epáw.
pyov [n.] 'work, labour, work of art' (Il.). <IE *uerg- 'work'>
•DIAL Myc. we-ka-ta/wergatās/.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in έpyo-λáßos 'undertaker'; further PN 'Epya-μévηs
(Bechtel 1917a: 23f.; cf. ¿pуá-τηs but also Аλкaμévηs); very often as a second member
-ɛpyós (or -opyós), e.g. yɛwpyós 'farmer' (see ►yñ), ► Snulovpyós.
=
•DER έpywбns laborious, heavy' (Hp., X.). ¿pуáτŋs [m.] (from the plur. pya;
Schwyzer 500; cf. ¿pуášoμα) ‘labourer', especially 'farmer'; also adj. ‘laborious' (IA),
fem. ¿pyátɩç, with έpyaτɩкós ‘ptng. to an ¿pyá‍rŋs, laborious', ¿pya-tívns = ¿pyátŋs
(Theoc.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 203, Schwyzer: 490), diεруáτvоs (Mytilene),
έpуaτησιoç 'profitable' (Plu. Cat. Ma. 21; uncertain; cf. Chantraine 1933: 42); έpyaσía,
to ¿pyášoµaɩ, see below; denominative verb έpyατɛúo̟µaɩ, -ɛúw 'work hard with
épуaτɛía (LXX, pap.). 'Epyávŋ, Delph. Fapyáva epithet of Athena (Delphi VI-Vª,
etc.), also pyaσía (pap., H.); pyava, Fépyava (written yépy-). έpyaλɛia (H.);
Épyaλεiov, usually plur. -ɛĩa, Cret. Fɛpy- 'tool, instrument' (IA); there is no **pyaλov
(cf. Chantraine 1933: 60). Denominative verb έpyáčoμa 'work' (Il.; Schwyzer 734),
Cret. Fɛpyάddoμat, often with prefix ȧn-, ¿v-, etc.; several derivatives: έpуaστɩкóç
'busy, productive, labourer' (IA); έpyaσía, Cret. Fεpy- ‘(heavy) labour, fieldwork,
profession' (IA) with έpуáσчoç in business, cleared (land)' (also to έpуášoµaι; cf.
Arbenz 1933: 44f.); έpyασ τúp ‘field labourer' (X.), ¿pyaστns ‘id.', also ‘negotiator? (A.
D., Rom. inscr.); εpуαστηpiov 'workshop' (IA; cf Chantraine 1933: 62f.; thence [after
vinculum] Lat. ergastulum, though acc. to Leumann Sprache 1 (1949): 207", from
Epуaσ τpov) together with pyаσтηрiакós labourer' (Plb.), diminutive
εруαστηpídiov (pap.); pуαστpα [pl.] 'wages' (pap.; Chantraine 1933: 332).
Desiderative ptc. έpyaσɛíwv 'who wants to do' (S.).
•ETYM Dor. Fépyov (thence regularly El. Fápyov) is identical with Av. varəzəm [n.],
OHG werc, ON verk [n.] 'work'; IE *uérgo- [n.]; with secondary o, Arm. gorc id.'
(from deverbative gorcem 'work'). Connecion with W vergo-bretus 'highest official of
the Aeduans' is uncertain. Primary verbs from this root are pdw and pέ(w; see
LIV² s.v. 2. *uerg- ‘wirken, machen'. See further ►öpyavov, ►öpyia, ►έópyn.
Ěpyweipyw.
Epdw [v.] 'to do, make, finish', also 'to sacrifice'. <IE *uerg- 'work'>
•VAR Aor. pα (Cypr. Ƒεpεα), perf. kopya (II.), med. έ] pyдévos (B. 12, 207;
uncertain), fut. pчw (Od.).
•DIAL Myc. wo-ze/worzei/ continues the original zero grade.
¿pεOw
451
•COMP Rarely with prefix åл-, époσ-, σvv-. In prose replaced by roiέw, épátɩtw,
εpуáčoμaι, etc.
•DER έpуµa “deeď (h.Hom., Archil.), εpкτwp ‘perpetrator' (Antim.).
ETYM The present (F)épdw (Cret. Bépon; cf. Schwyzer: 224; on the digamma, see
also Chantraine 1942: 135; on the secondary aspiration in pdw, ibid.1, 187f.) can go
back to *Ƒépуɩw via *Ƒέpzdw, and differs only in ablaut grade from the zero grade
yod-presents Av. vərəziieiti = Go. waurkeiþ, OHG wurchit, all from IE *urģ-ie-. The
full grade could be taken from (F)έpyov; likewise, OS wirkiu after werk; cf. Schwyzer:
716². The non-presentic forms show the expected full grade, with regular o- in the
perfect. Cf. ► þéľw.
¿pέa →ɛipoç.
épéaç • t'éкva. Oɛσσαλoí 'children (Thess.)', épéɛσopi• téкvois (H.). <IE? *h,(e)r- 'arise'>>
•VAR έpéwv [gen.pl.], "pɛσσ [dat.pl.] (Puchstein Epigr. Gr. p. 76).
•ETYM With the exception of έpέaç, all forms can be explained from *pos [n.],
which together with έpvos 'sprout' may belong to öpvμ. So it is probably to be
corrected to ëpɛa. Note that one expects generalized òp- from *h¸er-, however, so
that the e-vocalism of the s-stem nouns must be secondary. A msc. *έpns would be
difficult, in spite of Bechtel 1921, 1: 205.
épéßɩv¤oç [m.] ‘chickpea' (II.). <LW Eastern Mediterranean?>
•DER Diminutive έpεßívėɩov (pap.) and ¿peßivð-ódŋs (Thphr.), -ɛos (Zen.), -tałos
(Dsc.), -vos (H., Phot., Suid.).
•ETYM Related to ►öpoßos ‘id.' with the Pre-Greek suffix -v0oç. Further related to
Lat. ervum ‘a kind of vetch', to which some Celt. and Gm. words for 'pea, etc.' are
compared: OHG araweiz, arwiz ‘pea', MIr. orbaind ‘grain', etc. The word may come
from the eastern Mediterranean area; see WH s.v. ervum. Skt. aravinda- [n.] ‘lotus
flower' does not belong here; cf. Mayrhofer KEWA s.v.
*pɛẞoç [n.] 'the dark of the underworld' (Il.). <IE *h,reg"-os- 'darkness'>>
●DER έpɛßɛvvós, Aeol. < *¿pɛßɛσ-vós properly ‘belonging to εpεßoç, dark' (Il., Hes.);
more common ¿peµvós < *¿peß-vóc (cf. Risch 1937: 99; see also on Sɛɩvóc) ‘id.' (Il.);
épɛßwdŋç ‘id.' (late).
•ETYM Old word for 'darkness, etc.', also found in other branches: Skt. rájas- [n.]
'dark (lower) air, dust', Arm. erek, -oy ‘evening', Go. riqiz, ON røkkr [n.] ‘dark, dusk',
all from IE *h,rég"-os- [n.].
Épéylata →èpeikw.
épɛɛivw [v.] 'to interrogate, hear out' (epic since Il.).
VAR Only present.
•ETYM Like in the similar case of ȧλɛɛívw (see ►ȧléa 2), a denominative formation
has been assumed: an r/n-stem *εpεF-εv-. The form εpoдat is a primary present.
Cf. also ► έpεvváw, ►έpwτáw.
Épéew [v.] 'to stir, provoke' (II.) <?►

=== page 250 ===

452
¿pɛidw
•VAR Also pres. έpεí(w, with aor. ¿pɛíσa (A.), pass. ¿pε0-100ñvaɩ, -100ɛĩç (Hdt.),
-iai (AP), perf.pass. ǹpé¤-iσµαι, -σµévos (IA), act. ηpéОiкα (Aeschin.), fut. -low, -tw
(Hell.).
•COMP With prefix ȧv-, di-, -, лpoσ-ερεðí(w, etc., also έε-, кατ-ɛpéеw.
•DER From pɛ¤í¼w: ¿pε¤µós (Hp.), ¿péеoµа (Ar.) 'provocation, irritation',
Épεστn 'agitator' (LXX), -στкós ‘irritating' (Hp.) From έpé0w perhaps *öpołoç
in ►ópołúvw.
•ETYM The present έpέw may have a formantic -0-, like aλéw, plɛyéеw, etc.
(Schwyzer: 703, Chantraine 1942: 327ff.); the primary verb from which it is derived is
unknown. Note the forms in H., peto. wpµý◊ŋ, εpoɛo. Siɛyɛipov, and εpon. ópµnon,
that might have formed the basis of έpέ0w.
Epɛídw [v.] 'to prop, support'. <?>
•VAR Also med. -oμat; aor. ¿pεĩσaɩ, -ɛíσɑσðaɩ, pass. έpεɩσñvaɩ (Il.), perf. med.
εppεiσμα (Il.), зpl. έpηpédαται, -édaτo (Hom.) for -ídaτal, -ídaτo (Aeolism?, cf.
Schwyzer: 106), pó̟pεivtal, ǹpó̟peito (A. R.; Schwyzer: 671), act. ouv-, лρоσ-άрεкα
(Hp., PIb.), (лрoσ-)έpýpεкa (Dsc., Plu.), fut. ¿pɛíσw, -oµaɩ (Arist.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. àvɩ-, àл-, έπ-, „poσ-, σvv-, úл-, etc.
•DER (-)ëpelois, (-)εpεioµa, (-)¿pεioµós, (-)¿peiotikós. Cf. ávτηpíç, Szemerényi 1964:
143.
•ETYM No certain correspondences outside Greek. Connected with Lat. ridica [f.]
‘stake, wine prop' by Froehde KZ 22 (1874): 263, which is deemed ‘very uncertain' by
De Vaan 2008 s.v. One could mechanically reconstruct *h,reid-.
Єpɛíkŋ [f.] ‘heather, Arica arborea' (A., Eup.). <?>
●COMP As a second member probably in úл-épɛkos [f.] (Nic.), -ov [n.] (Hp., Dsc.;
written úлερкóv) 'Hypericum'; Strömberg 1944: 42.
•DER έpɛíкia [n.pl.] ‘heather plants', ¿pɛíkɩvoç 'made of heather' (pap.), ¿pεiкηpós
‘id.' (medic.), έpeɩkatov (scil. µέλ) [n.] 'honey from heather' (Plin.). PN 'Epɛíkɛiα
with EpεкɛɛÚç (Attica IV; written'Epiк-, probably itacistic; cf. Meisterhans 1900: 42
and 53), 'Epɛkoûç λóqoç (Asia Minor IVª), 'Epεкoûσσa island near Sicily (Str. et al.).
•ETYM Celtic and Balto-Slavic designations of heather resemble έpεíkŋ (supposing
that this derives from *Ƒɛpɛikā), but they do not agree completely: OIr. froech, MW
grug < IE *uroiko-; Latv. virši [pl.], Lith. viřzis, Ru. véres, véresk, etc. with unclear
final velar. Acc. to Machek Ling. Posn. 2 (1950): 158f., ¿pɛiêη and véres, etc. were
borrowed from a common source.
έpɛíкw [v.] ‘to break, bruise, crush, burst' (Il.). <IE *h,reik- break, tear off? (cf.)►
•VAR έpεɩкóμεvoç intr. (N 441), aor. йpiкε (P 595, intr.), pɛia (IA), perf.pass.
épŕρiуμαι, -μévos (Hp., Arist.).
•COMP Rarely with prefix кat-, di-, úπ-.
●DER έpeikides [pl.] (Gal.), ¿pɛikás (H.) ‘pounded barley, groats', ¿peikiov ‘crumbly
pastry' (Gal.; formation like ¿pεíria), ¿peikitas (äpτoç, Ath.; Redard 1949: 89), all
often itacistically written έpıк-; thus έpíyµaτα [pl.] (Hp.), ¿piyµŋ (sch.) ‘bruised
beans' instead of έpεry-; in the same meaning with unexplained ɛ: ¿péyµata (Thphr.,
Erot.), ¿pɛyµós (pap., Gal., Erot.) together with έpέyµuvos (Dsc., Orib.).
¿pεoxnλéw
453
•ETYM With the full grade root present έpɛíкw and the clearly old weak grade aorist
pɩкɛ, there are no formal and semantic agreements in other branches. The nearest
relations are Skt. rikháti, likháti ‘scratch' (with aspirated velar), Lith. riekiù, riēkti
'cut loaf, plough for the first time', Skt. riśáti, liśáti ‘pluck, tear away'. One might
consider connection of nominal forms like OHG rīga, MHG rīha ‘row, line', Lat. rixa
'quarrel', and perhaps also rīma 'cleft, crack' (see De Vaan 2008: s.vv.).
εpɛíлw [v.] ‘to ruin, tear down' med. 'to collapse' (Il.). <IE? *h,reip- 'throw down,
dash'?>
•Var Aor. έpɩεv (Il., intr.), ¿pɛĩчaɩ (Hdt., Pi.), ¿pɩnévtɩ [ptc.dat.] = έpiñóvti (Pi. O.
2, 43), pass. ¿pɛɩßɛíç (S. Aj. 309), perf. ¿pýpine (₹ 55, intr.), plpf. ¿pépinto (E 15);
ÉpĤpiµµal, ñpíóðŋv (Arr.); fut. ¿pɛiyw (S.).
•COMP With prefixes έε-, кaτ- et al.
•DER έpɛíña [pl.] ‘ruins' (Hdt., Arist.; on the formation Schwyzer: 470, Chantraine
1933: 55), adjectivized έpεíños (oiкía Ph.; ¿pɛíñɩoç yñ· ǹ xépσos ‘dry land' Suid.);
Epεшчлç of unclear meaning (Att. inscr.) with pεíччμoç 'ruined' (E. IT 48),
έpeɩɩñúλās [m.] (B.), -toixos (A. Th. 883 [lyr.]) ‘'tearing down towers, especially
walls'; with zero grade έpíлvai [pl.] 'broken cliff, steep ascent' (E., A. R.; sg. Nic.); on
the suffix cf. кpηuvós, épaɩvós and Chantraine 1933: 192.
=
•ETYM Beside full grade έpɛiлw, we have ON rífa 'to tear down' (trans.), like έpɛíлw
also of buildings; with verbal noun, Lat. ripa 'steep border, shore' (cf. épíлvα and
èpeitios yñ Xépooc, i.e. 'shore'); additionally, ON rip ‘upper side of a boat',
East Fris. rip(e) shore', MoHG rif 'id.'. Analysis of pεíлw and έpɛíкw as IE *(h,)rei-
p-, *(h)rei-k- (Pok. 857ff.) is too far-fetched. See LIV² s.v. *(h,)reip-.
ερéлτoμαι [v.] 'to devour, eat', of animals and men, properly 'tear away, snatch away'.
<IE *h,rep-? 'catch, snatch away'>
•VAR Only ptc. έpεлτóµεvos (Hom., AP; εpéлτwν Nonn.). With ȧv- the aor.3pl. ȧv-
épéyavto (Hom.; codd. everywhere -pε-; corrected by Fick; thus also A. R. [beside
-pɛw-], Orph.), ptc. àvapɛyaµévη (Hes. Th. 990, cod. Ven.). ávεpεyáµɛvo (AB 401,
27); àvɛpéчato (Pi. Pae. 6, 136) ‘snatch away'.
•COMP With ảv-.
•ETYM The yod-present εpεлτоµal resembles Lith. ap-repti ‘take, catch' (which
mechanically requires *(H)reh,p-) and Alb. rjep 'tear off, rob'; cf. Lat. rapiō, -ere ‘tear,
snatch' with a-vocalism, on which see De Vaan 2008 s.v. It has also been compared
with ►ápлáчw. See Szemerényi 1964: 203-5 and Beekes 1969: 35-7; LIV² s.v. *(h)rep-.
¿peoxŋléw [v.] ‘to joke, tease' (IA). <PG?>
•VAR Only present; also -Xɛλéw v.l.
•DER From the verb: ¿pɛoxηlia, -Xελía (pap., EM 371, 1, Suid.). Also έpíoxη\os.
AoiSopos 'slanderous' (EM, Parth. Fr. 18).
⚫ETYM Like Blaσqημέw, probably from a nominal first member and a verbal
second member; further derivation unclear. Acc. to Wackernagel KZ 33 (1895): 57,
épɛσ- is a neuter synonymous with pic and is also found in εлηрεia; he compares
the second member with ηλεúεv. pántɛiv, rλékɛiv ‘sew, stitch; braid' (H.); ¿pɛσ-

=== page 251 ===

…
454
¿pétns
Xnλɛiv would then mean 'start a feud'. Fur. (index) considers ε/η Pre-Greek; note
also the form with &pt-, though this could also be analogical based on plç.
εpετηs [m.] 'rower' (Il.). <IE *h,erh,-, h₂reh,- 'row'>
•VAR Myc. e-re-ta /eretās/; inf. e-re-e /ere en/ (Perpillou Minos 9:2 (1968): 208-212).
•COMP As a second member in ➤ vänpétns.
•DER έPETIкÓS 'concerning the rowers' (Att.); collective abstract ɛipɛoin, -ía 'the
rowers' (Od.), where the metrical lengthening ɛi- was maintained in prose);
denominative verb épéσow, rare Att. έpéττw, aor. έpéσ(σ)au 'row' (Il.).
Further the instrument noun ¿petµóv [n.] ‘oar' (Il.) with έpetµów [v.] 'to equip with
oars' (E.), PN 'Epετµεús († 111), also the TN 'Epéτpiα as “the rowing (town)".
Formally isolated are the nouns in -pηs and -εpos, -opos, like τpɩ-pηs 'trireme'
(IA), ȧ-pns 'rowing the sea' (кóлη E. Hec. 455 [lуr.]), лεуtηkóvt-epos,
лεуτηкÓντ-ороç 'ship with fifty oars' (IA), etc., see below.
⚫ETYM The agent noun έpé-τη points to a disyllabic primary root *h,erh,-/ *h,reh,-
'row', like synonymous Skt. ari-tár- (which would be Gr. *pε-τnp, perhaps in
'Epéτp-ɩā). In Greek, this verb was replaced by the denominative έpéσow (uncertain
Myc. e-re-e), but it is still present in other languages: Lith. iriù, irti (from zero grade
*hrh,-), Gm., e.g. ON róa, Celt., e.g. OIr. imb-rá 'row, sail' (both from *rō-, as
opposed to re- in Lat. rēmus, and go back to *h,reh₁- versus *h,roh,-). Traces of the
verb in Greek occur in τpi-pηs, etc. (with compositional lengthening and ending
after the s-stems), лεväηкóvt-εpoc, -opos, etc. (after the o-stems, with root vocalism
-o- after -yovos, popos, etc.; there is no vowel harmony, as per Schmidt KZ 32
(1893): 327). Perhaps, with a suffix -τo-, (Lesb.) τéppytov. tpińpng H., if haplological
for *tepp-épntov < *tpi-épitov as per Brugmann IF 13 (1902-1903): 152f. The form
¿petчóv is reminiscent both of Skt. arí-tr-a- ‘oar', Lith. irklas ‘oar' < *h,rh¸-tlo- and of
Lat. rēmus, which perhaps has *-smo-; see De Vaan 2008 s.v.
épɛúyoμaι 1 [v.] 'to belch out, disgorge, discharge, vomit', also metaph., e.g. of the sea
(Il.). <IE *h,reug- ‘belch'>
•VAR Pres. also έpvyyávw (Hp., Att.); aor. puyov (Ar., Arist.), ǹpevčáµŋv (Procop.),
fut. έpεúžoμαι (Ev. Matt. 13, 35).
•COMP Also with prefix ȧv-, ȧл-, ¿§-, έï-, кat-, époσ-, etc.
•DER PEUČIÇ, Épεvуµóç, also pušis, ¿puуµóc, εpuyua together with έpuуματwŋc
(also pεvуματwns); έpvyń ‘belching out, etc.' (Hp.).
⚫ETYM The word έpεúyoμal (the nasal present έpuууávw like лuvеávoμα beside
лεúеo̟μαι, etc.) belongs to an expressive group of words found in several languages,
e.g. Lat. ē-rūgō, Lith. riáugmi, riáugėti, Ru. rygát' (iter.) 'have belches, ruminate’; with
zero grade as in " puyov: OHG ita-ruchjan 'ruminate', OE rocettan (< PGm.
*rukatjan-) 'belch', Arm. orcam (< o-ruc-am < erucam, corresponding to Gr. ¿-);
also, MoP ā-rōy 'belch'. Cf. ►épɛúyoµaɩ 2.
...
¿pɛúyoµaɩ 2 [v.] in Hom. only of the sea έpɛvyoµέvns åλòs (P 265), kūµa Servòv
épɛvyóµεvov (ε 403), (kúµata) ¿peúyetaɩ ŋƒεipóvde (ε 438); to be translated with
'roar' in the last two passages (cf. E 394 кỹµа... ẞoáα лoτì xépσov), but here, like in
P 265, a translation 'belch out' (= ►εpεúуoμα 1) is also possible. The sense of
èpeuváw
455
'roaring' seems certain in the aorist épvyεv (ˇ 403f.): ňpuyev ws öte taupos ˝pvyev,
406 τóv у' έpuуóvτa λíñε ... Ovμóc; thus also in Theoc. 13, 58. The present and future
are also used in the meaning 'roar' in LXX (σкúµvos έpevyóµevos, Xéwv ¿peúžetai).
◄IE *h,reug- ‘belch' (also ‘roar??) ►
•Der έpúyµnλos Σ 580 (from ¿pvyµý H. or *¿pvyµɛïv) is also used as an adjunct of
Taupoç 'bull'; differently, EM 379, 27 έpvyµλŋ (H. εpvуηλ). εлíеετov paqavíov,
ľows ảnò tñs ¿pvуñç ‘epithet of the radish, perhaps called after the belch'. H.
mentions also pvуµаívovσα. ǹ ẞous (ruminator'? Cf. on έpεúуoдaɩ 1). кai ó
ταūpos žρvyμaívwv, àñò τñç έpvуµñs also the bull, after ε., and εpvynτwp. Bontńs
'clamorous'.
•ETYM Clearly, ¿pɛúyoµaɩ 1 and 2 are not always kept apart in Greek, e.g. ŋµépa tñ
ŋµépu̟ ¿pεúyɛtaɩ ¿ñµa (LXX Ps. 18 [19], 2), ¿pεúžoµai kɛkpvµµéva (Ev. Matt. 13, 35),
where 'to belch out' is used expressively for 'to cry', etc. Nonetheless, opvµaydóc
and wρūуń, wρvуµóç (see wρбoµat) clearly refer to 'roaring'.
Other languages have comparable words in the meaning 'roar': Lat. rūgio ‘to roar';
with a different auslaut (IE *-k-), OCS rykati ‘roar', OE rỹn ‘id.' (PGm. *rūhjan-),
OHG rohōn <PGm. *ruhōn-; in Latin, the expected form would be *rucāre, but we
instead have runcāre ‘to snore' (s.v. ► þéykw).
Єpεú0w [v.] 'to make red, paint red' (Il.). <IE *h,reud'- 'red'>>
•VAR Aor. Épεvσal.
COMP Also with prefix ouveε-, кAT-.
•DER έpεvos [n.] 'redness' (Hp., Ph.) with έpevens 'red-colored' (Str., Arat.),
furthermore the poetical pε (-tóɛc) ‘id.' (A. R.), ¿pevðaλéos ‘id.' (Nonn.),
probably innovation, like PN 'Epɛvaλíwv (Hom.; cf. Aɛvкaλíwv, IIvyµaλíwv et al.),
'Epɛvaλía town in Argos (sch.; cf. Oixaλía). Denominative verbs: έpεvéw 'get red'
(Luc., pap.) with έpεúðŋa (Gal.), ¿pɛvětáw ‘id.' (Hp.; after the verbs of disease). On
the plant name έpεvέdavov [n.] 'red dye, Rubia tinctorum' (Hdt., Thphr.), also
έpupóбavov, see ►έpuеpóç.
•ETYM The word έpɛúðw is identical with ON rjóða ‘to make bloody', OE rēodan 'to
paint reď; špɛvėoç may also have an equivalent outside Greek, i.e. in Lat. rōbus,
rōbur, -oris 'heartwood' (with ō <*eu, a non-Roman dialectal trait; see De Vaan 2008
s.v.), as heartwood is more red or brown than sapwood. Forms from an s-stem have
been assumed in Greek, but see discussion on έpvoißŋ ‘rust'. An old formation is
►έpv0pós.
¿pɛvváw [v.] ‘to search for (after), inquire' (Il.). ◄IE *h,reu- 'search, inquire'>
•VAR Hell. (LXX, pap., NT, etc.) also έpavváw with ev> av (cf. Schwyzer: 126 and
198); aor. έpεuvñoal.
•COMP Also with prefixes ȧv-, St-, εε-, кατ- et al.
•DER (dɩ-)έpevvηtýs ‘'inquirer' (X.) with ¿pevvýτpia [f.] (Corn.), (di-)épeúvnois
‘inquiry' (Str.), (Sɩ-, ¿¿-)έpevvistikós (Str.). Also the back-formation pɛuva [f.], late
also pavva (cf. above) ‘id.' (S., E., Arist.).
•ETYM Like ►έpɛɛívw, ¿pɛvváw is derived from a verb ɛpoμαɩ, έpέ(Ƒ)-w ‘ask' via a
noun *¿pɛƑ-(ε)v-, and modelled on the verbs in -váw. A transformation of this noun

=== page 252 ===

456
¿pεqw
could be seen in ON raun [f.] 'attempt, test, inquiry', from IE *h,rou-n-eh₂-. Further
see εpoμai, ►έpwτáw.
épéqw [v.] 'to cover, provide with a roof (Pi., Ar.). <IE *h,reb- 'cover, roof>>
•VAR Also έpεлτw (Pi., B., Cratin.); aor. ¿péiai (Il.), fut. ¿pέww (A., E.).
•COMP Sometimes with prefix άop-, εл-, кατ-; as a second member e.g. in vч-ópodos
'with high roof (Hom.); also -epeqńs, -ŋpeqńs ‘id.' (Hom.), кατ-ŋpeqńs ‘with a
roof, vaulted' (Il.), netp-ŋpeoǹs ‘vaulted with rocks' (A., E.) et al.
•DER *pεчç 'roofing' (Thphr.) with έpéччoç (Pl.); with ablaut öpoqoç [m.] 'cover,
roof (Orac. apud Hdt. 7, 140, A.), also 'thatch for a roof (N 451), opocń [f.] ‘roof,
especially 'ceiling' (IA, Od.) with opopias name of a snake (Ar. V. 206), = öqiç tŵv
кaτ' oiкíav H.; cf. Georgacas 1956: 126; ópóqivoç 'covered with thatch' (Aen. Tact.),
opo-lało, -10, -Iкóc 'ptng. to the opoon (opopoc)' (Att., Hell.); denominative verb.
ópopów 'roof, cover' (Hell.) with opówµa, ópóqwoię.
•ETYM The only correspondences are the second member in OHG hirni-reba 'skull'
(properly "brain-cover") and the Gm. word for 'rib' (as "cover of the breast"): OHG
rippa, rippi, OE ribb, ON rif [n.], IE *h,reb¹-io-, and also Ru. rebró ‘id.' < *h,reb¹-ro-.
Both opoon and öpocos contain two o-grades, the first of which must be secondary
(double ablaut?); there is no vowel assimilation.
=
'Epεx0εús EpixÓLOS.
¿pέx0w [v.] ‘to rend, break' (Y 317, & 83, h.Ap. 358). ◄ PG(V)►
•VAR Only present.
•DER Plant name έpεx¤ïtiç = ǹpiyέpwv (Ps.-Dsc.); see André RPh. 45 (1971): 216f.: 'the
one that breaks'. On 'Epεxεúc, Att. vases Epɛxσεç, etc. see 'Epix óvioÇ.
⚫ETYM Connected with Skt. rákṣas-, Av. rašah- 'destruction, damage', YAv. rāšaiiente
[3pl.pres.] 'damage'. Semantic objections are voiced by Kretschmer KZ 31 (1892):
432f. The connection is ‘unglaubhaft' to Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 423 and Gunnarsson
NTS 24 (1971): 64ff. Improbable analysis of -xe- from *-ks-dh- by Lipp, followed by
LIV² s.v. *(h,)reks-.
Epέw 1 'ask'. →εpoμaɩ.
έpéw 2 [v.fut.] 'say'. →ɛïpw 2.
Ép₁чos 'lonely, uninhabited, deserted', of places and things, people and animals (Il.).
<IE *h,r(e)h, loose, rare, separate'>
•DIAL Myc. e-re-mo /erēmos/ describing land. Younger Att. εpηuoç.
•COMP Also in compounds, е.g. εpηo-vóчo living in loneliness' (A. R.), late. As a
second member in лαν-, qλ-, úл-éρημoç et al.
•DER Poetical derivatives εpημ-años (Emp., A. R.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 49), -ɛToç
(Mykonos); fem. έpŋµás (Man.; Chantraine 1933: 354f.). Abstract έpquía ‘loneliness,
solitude, lack' (IA) with έpŋutns, ¿pŋukós ‘id.' (LXX). Denominative verbs
épчóμa, -ów 'to become or make desolate, destroyed or looted' (Pi., IA), together
with έpηuwσis (LXX), ¿pηµwτns (AP); also with prefix άл-, εε-, кατ-, with ȧлéрημ
(sch.). ¿pηµá¼w [v.] 'to live in solitude' (Thphr.).
èpidákn
457
⚫ETYM The Greek form mechanically requires *hreh,-mo- (zero grade would have
given two short vowels, cf. Ŏvoμa < *h3nh3-mn-); the root would agree with Lith. irti
'disintegrate', isg. yrù. It has been connected with Lat. rārus, which would have to be
from *hrh-ro- (Schrijver 1991: 310f. is undecided between zero grade and full grade,
but the latter would require *Hreh₂- which would not be compatible with the Greek
evidence); Lat. rēte 'net' could be from *hreh,-t- (Beekes 1969: 36), but is now also
connected with Lith. rētas ‘rare, thin, slow' et al. (see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). Skt. ṛ-té
'with exception of, without' is unclear; see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.
έpŋτów [v.] 'to keep back, hinder'. <<?>
•VAR Aor. ¿pηtσaɩ (Il.; rare S., E.), ¿pατúε S. OC 164 (lyr.), έpátoðɛv (= έpýtvеev B
99)· ávεлaúσavτão 'they stopped' (H.), on which cf. Schwyzer: 182, Hoffmann 1891:
166; 283, Bechtel 1921, 1: 401; DELG thinks it is not Cyprian.
•COMP Also with ảл-, кατ-.
•ETYM No etymology. Cf. on έpwń, ►έpwéw. If the -a- is reliable, we could
reconstruct *h,reh₂-tu-.
.
*pеεɩ [v.] • Qеεyуεται ‘utters' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
Epi- [pref.] 'very, high' (II.). <IE *ser- 'high'>
•DIAL Perhaps in Myc. e-ri- /eri-/.
•COMP Especially in bahuvrīhis like έpí-(y)Souлоç, -σðεvýc, -tiµos, -aúxηv; also έpi-
Bpeµétns, -Sµātoç (A. Ag. 1461 [lyr.]) et al.; cf. Chantraine REGr. 49: 406.
⚫ETYM Willi KZ 112 (1999): 87-100 follows Heubeck in connecting Hitt. šēr 'high, up',
and separates apt-. Some semantic traces of this etymology may be found, e.g. έpt-
aúxηv 'with the neck high, in height', etc. (ibid.: 96f.).
Epinpes [adj.] perhaps 'faithful'. <IE *ueh,r- 'true'>
•VAR Acc.pl. -aç; secondary sing. έpíŋpos, said of έtaĭpoç (Hom., formulaic), also of
ảo Ôóc (a 346, 0 62 = 471).
•ETYM A bahuvrīhi compound of йpa and εpt-. It has also been compared with
ßpiŋpov. µɛyáλws kɛxapioµévov (H.).
¿pɩðákŋ [f.] ‘bee bread' (a kind of wax) (Arist. Varr. Plin.). ◄PG?►
•ETYM Hesychius comments: ǹ viò tŵv µeλooŵv rapatiðɛµévi tpoqń kai tò
έykoíλlov tŵv ix¤úwv tŵv µaλaкŵv. kaì tà tŵv úŵv žµßpva, ‘the food provided by
bees; the intestines of fish; the young of swine'. DELG remarks: "The gloss gives two
informations: on the one hand the meaning 'interior of crustaceans', which arose
from the resemblance between the two materials, explains the adjective έpiaкwdns
'full of epiláкn', epithet of ypaña 'crabs' (Epich. 61); on the other hand, it appears
that the 'bee-bread' was (be it wrongly) considered as food of the bees [in reality they
use it to close openings in the walls of the bee-hive], which would explain the
connection with pios.” The latter remark is not very clear; perhaps Chantraine
refers to the fact that έpiaкiç means 'drone'. Pre-Greek, acc. to Nehring Glotta 14.
(1925): 183. See piОoç.

=== page 253 ===

458
èpidakog
έpíðakoç [m.] name of a bird, probably 'robin redbreast, Erithacus rubecula' (Arist.),
see Thompson 1895 s.v. <PG?>
•VAR έpɩ0ɛÚç (Thphr.), ¿píðuλos (sch.).
•DER Adj. ¿piłaкwdns (ypaña Epich. 61; meaning unclear; see
piάкn).
⚫ETYM Connection with pios suggested by Frisk, but DELG does not understand
why. See Boẞhardt 1942: 67ff. and Thompson 1895 s.v.
¤pīłos [m., f.] ‘day-labourer', of reapers, sheaf-binders (Σ 550, 560), 'spinner' (S., D.
with folk-etymological connection with piov), 'servant, etc.' in general (h.Merc. 296,
etc.). <PG>
•COMP Comp. σuv-épi0oç [m., f.] 'helper, labourer' (Od.), qıλ-épios 'who loves
spinning' (Theoc., AP). With the familiarizing suffix -к-: έpiðaкíç [f.] (Theoc.).
•DER Denominative verb pεúoμa (rare -εúw, also with ε(-) 'to be a day-labourer,
work for wages, try to obtain a favour or a job' (LXX, Arist.) with έp10ɛía 'trying to
get a position' (Arist.), ¿pievτóç “bribed' (Creta, Delphi). Unclear 'Epiláσεoç epithet
of Apollo (Attica IV³).
⚫ETYM No etymology; in the same semantic sphere as Souλoc, thus Pre-Greek? Cf.
the suffix -10- (Pre-Greek: suffixes).
Epivɛóç [m.] 'wild fig-tree, Ficus caprificus' (Il., Hes., Arist.), opposed to σvкñ; cf.
Strömberg 1937: 166'. <PG>
•VAR épivós [m.] (Stratt., Theoc., Delos, etc.; cf. àdɛλqɛóc -póc), Att. also έpivɛws
(Delos, Com.; after other tree-names in -ɛwc).
•DIAL Myc. e-ri-no-wo, -wo-to /erinwos, -otos/.
●DER έpɩvɛóv, -vóv 'wild fig' (com., Arist., Thphr.); έpivás [f.] = ¿pɩvɛós (Nic.; like
кotɩváç, etc.; Chantraine 1933: 353); adjective έpívɛos, -vous 'belonging to a fig-tree'
(Epich., E.), pivεwdŋs 'full of fig-trees' (Str.); denominative verb έpivá¼w ‘to
caprificate”, with ¿pivaσµós (Thphr.): to hang branches of wild fig near the cultivated
one, so that insects will bring over pollen (see Thphr. s.v. v; Perpillou RPh. 71
(1997): 160 adds: “le figuier sauvage serait alors le figuier-bouc, fécondateur
considéré le mâpe de l'espèce", but this is hardly understandable as an etymology).
⚫ETYM Recalling Messen. τpáуoç = εpivɛóç (Paus. 4, 20, 2) and Lat. caprificus,
Prellwitz BB 22 (1897): 284f. compared an old word for 'he-goat', which is also found
in pupos. This is now accepted by Perpillou. Acc. to Chantraine 1933: 203 and
Schwyzer: 491, however, the word is Pre-Greek (cf. кóτvoç 'wild olive'; öλuvoç
'wild fig').
pīvos [m.] plant name (Nic., Ps.-Dsc.). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. See André 1956 s.v. erineos.
'Epivuç, -voç [f.] name of an avenging goddess; as an appellative 'revenge, curse' (Il.),
name of Demeter in Arcadia (Antim., Call., Paus. 8, 25, 6). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR On the length of the u see LSJ. Epivvuç is rejected by LSJ.
•DIAL Myc. E-ri-nu.
•DER έpivvwdns like the E.' (Plu.); έpívów = Оvµã xpñσα (Arc., Paus. l.c., EM), cf.
Bechtel 1921, 1: 390.
1
¿pioonλos
459
⚫ETYM A connection with the mythical stallion'Epíwv (Apiwv, 'Opifwv; Bechtel 1921,
1: 349) requires further demonstration. Pre-Greek origin can be expected, cf. Herter
Lexis 3 (1954): 232 and Arena Helikon 6 (1966): 144f.
Neumann Sprache 32 (1986): 43-51 proposes an IE reconstruction *eri-snh,-u- ‘who
provokes struggle', from *sneh,- as in vɛupov. This would give, however, *eri-san-u-
> *eri-(h)anu-; this could be avoided by assuming that the laryngeal was lost in the
compound. However, does provoke struggles' fit the Erinyes? Heubeck Glotta 64
(1986): 164 states that such a meaning "zwar nicht restlos geschwunden, aber doch...
weitgehend zurückgedrängt worden ist".
In sum, there is no good IE etymology and the word is probably Pre-Greek. For an
Indo-European etymology, the ending -üç would have to be from -uH-s, i.e. -u-h₂-,
but a "Motions-femininum" of this type is not known in Greek. Thus, the ending.
seems to be Pre-Greek. Moreover, the variation v/vv may represent a palatalized
phoneme n' (cf.ly in Axiλ(\)εúc; for the phenomenon see Pre-Greek: B 1).
Ěprov →eipo.
¿poúvηs [adj.] of Hermes (Y 34, 0 322), late of Oɛoí (Ant. Lib. 25, 2), vóos (Orph. L.
199). <?>
●VAR έptoúvios (Il., h.Merc., Ar. Ra. 1144).
•ETYM The ancient scholars wrongly associated this word with various simplicia,
connecting it with different qualities of Hermes: e.g., oűvns. kλértng, ovvios. [eðviç,]
Spoµeús, kλéntηs 'runner, thief (H.); cf. Leumann 1950: 123. Better glosses are
oůvov. [úyɩéç.] Kúлρ Spóµоν 'course' and ovεɩ (for ovŋ?). Sεñpo, Spáµε.
Apкádɛç 'Over here! Run! (Arc.)'. Here further belongs the Cypr. PN Diλovviou
[gen.], cf. Dóбpoμoç. Would'Epi-oúvηs, -oúvios then be the quick messenger of the
gods? Thus Latte Glotta 34 (1955): 192ff., but doubted by O. Masson 1961: 256'. See
also Ruijgh 1957: 136, 142.
Epic, -1doç [f.] 'strife, quarrel, contention' (Il.); on the mg. in Hom. Trümpy 1950: 139ff.
<?>
•VAR Acc. also -tv.
•COMP As a second member in Súσ-ɛpis (Att.), also with compositional lengthening
Súσ-ŋpis (Pi.) arousing [bad] struggle'.
•DER Denominative verbs: ¿pí(w 'to fight, wrangle, quarrel' (Il.; enlarged from *¿pí-
w?), whence pɩσμa ‘quarrel' = ‘object of the quarrel (A 38), ¿poµóc ‘id.' (Timo),
Épiστкóç 'quarrelsome' (Pl., Arist.), piστns 'quarreler' (LXX Ps. 138 [139], 20; v.l.).
Epidaívw 'id.' (Il.; only present beside unclear εpidσaσa Y 792; cf. Chantraine
1942: 416). έpidμaívw 'to provoke, irritate' (II 260), = èpidaivw (Hell.); after the verbs
in -µ-αívw like ëημ-aívw; see Schwyzer: 724.
•ETYM Unknown etymology. Because of the PNS Aμo-, Av-pi-tos (Bechtel 1917a: 7;
also -ɩσtos), piç must be an original t-stem; therefore, connection with έpɛídw 'prop,
support' is excluded. Neither is there evidence for relation to ►ópívw, ►¿pé¤w,
►'Epivúc. Hardly related to Skt. ári-, arí- [m.] ‘stranger, enemy, etc.'.
¿píσqŋloc [adj.] epithet of Heracles (Stesich. 82). <?>

=== page 254 ===

460
•DER Beside it äσqŋloi. åσßeveïç. σqŋlòv yàp tò ioxupóv 'weak, for σòv means
strong' (H.), but the mg. does not fit.
•ETYM Unexplained; ►σoάλλw has an entirely different meaning.
Epiqoç [m. f.] 'young goat, kid' (Il., Crete); in plur. name of a constellation of stars
(Democr., Theoc.; see Scherer 1953: 124f.). <?>
•DER Hypocoristic diminutive épiqov (Athenio Com.) with épiqiµata. piqɩ.
Aάкwvɛç kids (Lacon.)' (H.; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 178, Schwyzer: 523);
adj. épiqetos belonging to piqoç' (Com., X.); 'Epiquos epithet of Dionysus in
Metapontum (Apollod.; cf. on Eipaqiwτns); έpiqέas (for *¿piqiaç?). Xiµapos ‘he-
goat' (H.).
⚫ETYM Formation like ►λapos 'deer' et al. Resembles a word for 'goat, deer' in Olr.
erp (erb), probably < PCI. *erba-; see Matasović 2008 s.v.; Arm. oroj ‘agnus, agna' <
*er-oj, also erinj 'young cow' (unclear) and Lat. ariēs, -ētis, U erietu 'arietem' are
much farther away. In ►έpivɛós ‘wild fig', an old word for 'buck' has also been
supposed.
'Epix¤óvɩoç [m.] name of a hero and king of Athens, son of Ge, father of Pandion (A.,
E.); also name of a Trojan, son of Dardanos, father of Tros (Y 219, 230). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. 'Epɛxßɛúc (B 547, ŋ 80), which is also an epithet of Poseidon (inscr.); on
Attic vases 'Epexoεs, together with 'Epɛxеnïç [f.] name of an Att. phyle (D., inscr.),
'Epɛɛïdaɩ [pl.] name of the Athenians (Pi.). These names were taken to mean 'who
tears apart, shaker [of the earth]', but see below. Also 'Epixεus (Pape and Benseler
1911: 379). Note the soothsayer Epixow in Thessaly (Luc. Phars., see also Ov. Her. 15,
139), which confirms (Pre-)Greek origin.
•DIAL Att. vases Epεxσɛs (Schwyzer 326) a hero and king of Athens (B 543, ŋ 81).
•DER oi'Epixovídaɩ =’Epɛx0ɛïdaɩ (IG 3, 771; poet., Roman times).
•ETYM Probably a very old name; already the fact that Erichthonios is called the son
of the Earth, points to Pre-Greek origin. There is no good explanation for the
coexistence of 'Epεxεús and 'Epixovios, cf. the by-form in -wv of Hermes, and cf.
'Epvoixwv. Is the form with -xo- an Atticism, or does it have a wider spread?
Connection with èpéxow is improbable. 'Epɛx0ɛúç, etc. are rather short forms of
'Epix óvios, and were later connected with pέx0w by folk-etymology. 'Epεxεús /
Epɛxσɛç is clearly a Pre-Greek name; more forms are given by Fur.: 263. It continues
a pre-form *Erekteu-, cf. the alternation in μópoxos / ► µópošos.
Єpiwλn [f.] 'whirlwind, hurricane' (Ar. Eq. 511, A. R.). <?>
•VAR On the accent see Hdn. Gr. 1, 324.
•ETYM Unexplained. Perhaps from *Ƒελt-Ƒwλŋ] (from ɛiλéw ‘roll, turn, wind), with
intensive reduplication and dissimilation λ-λ > p-λ?
Epкoç [n.] 'fence, enclosure, courtyard; net' (II.). <IE? *serk- 'twine'>
•COMP As a second member e.g. in εv-εpкns 'well-fenced' (Il.); as a first member in
Épкo-Oηp-iкós 'ptng. to the hunt with a net' (Pl. Soph. 220c).
•DER έpkíov 'fence' (Il., cf. tɛxiov: tεixos et al.); εpкɛios, έpkɛios (after oikɛtoç et al.)
'belonging to the pкos, court-yard', especially as an epithet of Zeus protecting the
2
!
i
Ě pia
461
house, whose altar is in the courtyard (X 935); ¿pkítŋs ‘a slave belonging to the place'
(Amer. apud Ath. 6, 267c, H.).
Further έpкávò ‘fence' (late) from cross with ópкávη ‘id.' (A., E.), which has o-grade
like ►öpkoç; cf. Chantraine 1933: 198. Glosses εpкατos' opayµós ‘fence', ¿pkátŋ
quλaкń ‘watch, guard' (H.), "Оpкατos locality in Calymna (inscr. IIª; cf. Fraenkel
1910: 147); on the suffix cf. opxατoç; see also pуατoç.
•ETYM Apparently a verbal noun (like Télos, yέvoc, etc.), but there is no
corresponding verb. Meringer IF 17 (1904-1905): 157f. connected it as *wicker-work'
with Lat. sarciō, -īre 'to twine, restore', properly *to sew together'; cf. sartum tectum
'unviolated, complete', properly *twined and covered', sarcina [f.] 'bundle'. Lat.
sarciō belongs to Hitt. šar-nin-k- (nasal infix present) 'to restore damage, make
amends'. On εpkoç ódóvτwv, see Humbach MSS 21 (1967): 24ff. (it denotes the lips,
not the teeth).
ëpµa 1 [n.] ‘prop, support', of the stones or beams put under the ships when drawn
ashore (in plur., Il. and h.Ap. 507); metaph. of men, 'support, column' (Il.);
'underwater cliff on which a ship gets stuck' (Alc. Supp. 26, 6, Hdt. 7, 183, Th. 7, 25);
'stone (or any other weight) that can serve as ballast' (Ar., Arist.); 'heap of stones' (S.
Ant. 848 [lyr.], AP 9, 319). <?►
•DER έpuís (or -ív), acc. έpuiva, dat.pl. -ĭov 'post of a bed' (0 278, 198, Hdt. 3, 16; cf.
¿ŋyµĭv- from þñyμa, στaµìv-, etc.); cf. Hdn. Gr. 2, 431 with etymological
speculations. εpuaε [f.] 'heap of stones' (Nic. et al.), MoGr. εpµaкiá (ȧp-) 'wall of dry
stones', many derivatives in the dialects of lower Italy, see Rohlfs 1930: 78f.; čpµakes.
чαλoɩ лéτpαι 'rocks under the sea' (H.: cf. λíðaε, µúλαž, etc.). εpµεŵv. σwpòç λí☹wv
'heap of stones' (H.), cf. Bolɛwv s.v. þáλλw, etc. εpµatítŋs rétpos ‘stone serving as
ballast' (Lyc. 618). εpµατкóç 'fixed' (кpáßßατoç, PGen. 68, 10; IVP). εpμatos λópoc
'heap of stones' (л 471; uncertain, cf. on 'Epμñs). Denominative verbs: έpµáчw 'to
support, make stable' (Hp.) with pµaoµa, -σµós (Hp.), pµaσis (Erot., also Troezen
IVª [-oo-]; cf. Fraenkel 1910: 149); εpµατíš ‘'id.' (Hp.). See ►Еpµñs (Epµɛiaç,
(Epuáwv).
•ETYM Formally, εpμa seems to be a verbal noun in -ua with regular e-vocalism of
the root. For an etymology, one might think of Lith. sveriù ‘weigh' and relatives, in
which case it would originally mean 'heavy weight, stone', from IE *suér-mn.
However, because of the divergent meanings, two or three different words have been
assumed: thus, pμα 'cliff was considered a separate word and connected with Skt.
várṣman [n.] 'height, hill, top, point' (e.g. in WP 1, 267). However, this etymology
disregards the fact that cliffs under the sea surface are denoted. On the other hand,
εpμa has been connected as ballast of a ship with Lith. 1sg. sveriù ‘to weigh', svarùs
'heavy', OHG swār(i) ‘heavy'. In the meaning 'support, prop', words for 'pole, etc.'
have been connected, e.g. Skt. sváru- 'sacrificial post', OE swer 'post, column', Lat.
surus 'twig, sprout, pole'. However, it is doubtful whether εpua ever meant 'pole'. An
attempt to combine all meanings was made by Porzig 1942: 266: the original
meaning would be 'stone [for supporting a ship]', whence 'stones for ballast', and on
the other hand, sarcastically, also 'cliffs under the sea'. Kretschmer Kleinasiatische
Forschungen 1 (1927): 4 thinks that pμα is Anatolian, pointing to the Lydian river

=== page 255 ===

462
Ěpuata 2
}
EPTW
463
“Epµos (ñoλvyńqida лað³ “Epµov Orac. apud Hdt. 1, 55) and to Lycian PNs in Erm-,
Arm-. Chantraine Ant. class. 22 (1953): 69 is also in favor of non-IE origin. There
seems no reason, however, to assume foreign origin.
Ěplata 2 →£ipw 1.
=
épµŋvɛús [m.] ‘interpreter, translator' (Pi. O. 2, 85), also ‘interpreter' in general (IA).
<PG?
•VAR έpμavεúç (Pi.).
•DER Denominative verb έpµŋvɛúw (-µav- Epid.), also with prefix di-, - et al.,
‘interpret, translate', also 'explain' (IA) with several derivatives: έpμŋvεía
'interpretation, explanation, way of expression, style' (Pl., X., Arist.); έpµývevõis ‘id.'
(D. C., Longin.); έpµŋveúµata [pl.] ‘id.' (E., Ph.); έpµnvevtýs = έpuŋvɛús (Ph Plt.
290c, LXX Ge. 42, 23, Poll. 5, 154; cf. Fraenkel 1912: 63) with έpµŋvεútpia [f.] (sch.);
épµnvevtikós ‘ptng. to interpretation' (Pl.), cf. Chantraine 1956a: 134 und 137.
•ETYM Technical expression without etymology, probably of Anatolian origin (so
possibly Pre-Greek); cf. Boßhardt 1942: 36f. and Krahe Die Antike 15 (1939): 181.
Wrong attempts at an IE explanation, connecting it with to ε"pw 'string, attach', ε"pw
'say', Lat. sermō, are found in old dictionaries like Bq. See also Epµñs.
‘Epµñs, -oñ [m.] Hermes, son of Zeus and Maia; also 'herm, head of a herm² (Il.). <PG➤
•DIAL Myc. E-ma-a₂ (dat.), 'Epµɛias, -éas, ‘Epuɛins (Call.), 'Epµās (Dor. Boeot.),
'Epμáwv (Hes.), 'Epμáv, -āvos (Lac. Arc.), 'Epuάov, -áo, -ã (Thess. dat.), 'Epuaοv
(Cret. acc.).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in έpµo-y\vôɛĩov (Pl.) with backformation ¿pµoyλvq-
εús, -ikós, -os (Luc. et al.), see yλúqw.
DER Hypocoristic diminutive 'Epµídiov (Ar.), -ádiov (Luc.; also 'small herm'
[Lydia]), after the nouns in -ídiov, -ádiov. 'Epµaños ‘belonging to H., of H.', also as a
month name (A., S.), probably also Epμaños λóqoç (л 471), if not from ►ëpµa; ntr.
"Epμatov 'temple of Hermes' (Ephese), on the accent Hdn. Gr. 1, 369; plur. "Epμata
(iɛpá) 'festival for Hermes' (Att.); as an appellative εpμatov [n.] “gift of Hermes”, i.e.
'chance find, unexpected advantage' (Pl., S.); also a plant name (Strömberg 1940:
129); fem. 'Epμaïç (Hp.); 'Epμawv name of a month (Halicarn., Keos); 'Epμaïστaí [pl.]
name of the worshippers of H., Mercuriales (Rhodos, Cos, Delos), cf. e.g.
Алоλλшviασταi and Chantraine 1933: 317; 'Epµaïкóç (late). 'Epµɛĩa [pl.] mg. uncertain
(Str. 8, 3, 12).
•ETYM 'Epμñs derives from epic ‘Epµέaç < 'Epµɛíaç; cf. Aivɛíaç. Myc. e-ma-a,
/Hermāhās/ shows the original form, and excludes an old form with the suffix
*-άFwv, which has been suggested for e.g. 'Epμáv and 'Epµáwv (Hes.). Thus,
connection with pua 1 should be rejected, since the model for a suffixation in
-āhās is unclear. The Mycenaean form shows that it is an unanalysable Pre-Greek
name. See Ruijgh REGr. 80 (1967): 12.
pvos [n.] 'sprout, offshoot', originally of trees, also of men (II.). <IE? *h,er- 'go'?>
•VAR Also Epvos with secondary aspiration.
!
•COMP As a first member in έpvɛoí-лεлλоç (Огph. H. 30, 5; after ελкεσÍ-nεлλoç),
έpvoкóµwv. лapadεioapiwv 'gardener' (H.). As a second member in εv-εpvns 'with
good offshoots' (E., Str.), Svo-εpvns (Poll.).
●DER Diminutive έpvíov (Hell.); έpvwdŋs [adj.] ‘like a sprouť (Dsc.), έpvóoµaɩ [v.]
'to sprout' (Ph.); two glosses in H.: εpvατɩç· άvadɛvdpás 'vine that grows up trees'
(see Schwyzer 464) and έpvuτaç. εpvη, ßlaστó̟µaτa, kλádoι sprouts, offshoots,
shoots broken off, wrong for "pvuyas (Arist. Po. 1457b 35; after ëτépv§, etc.;
Schwyzer: 498).
⚫ETYM Formation in -vos (Schwyzer: 512, Chantraine 1933: 420), commonly derived.
from the root of ▸öpvчµ, etc. (to which belongs synonymous öpμεvoc), but this had
h3- (and not h₁-), which means that the initial ε- would have to be secondary.
Alternatively, simply from *her- 'go', for the semantics of which one might compare
MoNw.run(n)e ‘twig' to renna ‘'to run, shoot up, grow'. On the separation of *h₁er-
and *her-, see opvчμ. One is further reminded of έpέ0w and ►έpέaç. For the
suffix -voç, cf. ► tέpxvos. Formally, pvos agrees with Skt. árṇas- [n.] ‘flood, stream',
but the reminiscence is probably secondary.
Ěpos →Ěpaiai.
εpoτç [f.] 'festival' (Aeol. acc. to H., Cypr. acc. to Eust.), epigraphically of king
Nicocreon (Kaibel 1878: 846); perhaps in Chalcedon (SIG 1009); E. El. 625; ¿potý
(P.Oxy. 2084); on the use Bechtel 1921, 1: 119 and 447. <?►
•ETYM Perhaps related to pavos and ►čopτý. “Aeolic" in Hesychius may mean
"Arcado-Cypriot”.
зрлç [?] 'wine' (Hippon. 79, 18, Lycophr.). <LW Eg.>
ETYM As the scholia indicate, this is the same word as Egyptian irp 'wine'. See
Masson RPh. 88 (1962): 46-50.
ερлw [v.] 'to crawl, slink, go on all four', in Dor. also ‘go' in general (Il.). <IE *serp-
'crawl'>
•VAR Аor. ερлúσai (Att.; cf. ¿pëúšw below), ëpчai (LXX), fut. ¿pyw, also ¿pëúʊw,
Dor. εpчw.
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. ȧv-, εio-, -, -, лроσ-. As a first member in
ερл-άкаvеα = ǎкavoç (Ps.-Dsc.).
épn-ákavda
●DER έpëɛtóv [n.] ‘animal that goes (or crawls) on all fours' as opposed to birds
(лɛɛvá) and men (IA, & 418; Aeol. öpлετoν with zero grade, on the formation see
Vine 1998: 73f., who thinks the zero grade is secondary in this form); εpanc, -ntos
[m.] 'shingles' (Hp.), ¿pлýv, -ñvos [m.] ‘id.' (Ph.; after λaxηv, etc.; also έp˜ývη EM)
with έpëηvwdns (Ph.); ëpëŋla a shell-fish (Ath.; form uncertain); έprŋdwv, -óvos
[f.] 'crawling' (Nic.; Chantraine 1933: 360f.); εржηστηs 'crawling animal (Nic., AP;
rare like tɛvxŋotηs et al.; Chantraine 1933: 317); ëρëvλλoç [m., f.] ‘tufted thyme'
(Com.; after this Lat. serpullum) with εpлúλλ-tov, -áptov 'id.' and ερлvλλíç
‘grasshopper' (H.); uncertain έpévšń (Dsc. 3, 69). pè 'crawling' (Pl., Arist.). An
expressive enlargement is épíú(w to crawl' (II.; cf. Chantraine 1942: 336), to which
belongs the Attic aorist εprúσα (after έpúσaι, ελкúσai?); thence εpяvʊtikós (Hp.,

=== page 256 ===

464
Eppaos
Arist.) and rare and late εprvσiç, -voµós, -votýp, -votýc, -votášw. See also ►öpяη
'sprout, twig'.
•ETYM The word εpлw is identical with Skt. sárpati ‘id.', Lat. serpō ‘id.'. Several
languages have derived the name of the snake from this root: Skt. sarpá- [m.], Lat.
serpens, Alb. gjarpër. On meaning and spread of ερлw, see Bloch 1940: 71ff.
*ppaos [m.] ‘ram' (Lyc. 1316), 'wild boar' (Call. Fr. 335). <?►
•VAR H. has έppa<o>ç• kpiós ‘ram'.
ETYM No etymology. See Meid AAHG 27 (1974): 53-55.
έppevtí [adv.] unknown (Alc. Fr. 407 L.P.); cf. Hdn. Gr. 1, 505, 7 åïò toũ ëppw ½ έppŵ
nepionwµévov ǹ µetoxǹ éppeís, ¿ppévtos ws napà tò ¿éλovtos ¿Đελovτí 'from ppw
or έppo, with perispomenon, the participle έppɛíç, έppέvτoç, and like έελovτí to
ÉÉλOVTOS'. <?>
•VAR Cf. έpóvτι μáλα, λíaν, лávʊ 'very, much, certainly' (H.).
⚫ETYM See Brugmann IF 17 (1904-1905): 11 and Schwyzer: 623.
'Eppηópos ȧppηópos and εpon.
”Eppoç [m.] · ó Zɛú¢ (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unclear. Earlier proposals: to *uorso- in oúpavós; or 'the god of Dew', an
Att. msc. corresponding to "Epon 'Sister Dew'. Cf. also 'Epσaños. ǎкpios Zɛúc (H.).
ppw [v.] 'to go (away), disappear, go to ruin', mostly perfective 'to sod off, get lost
(Il.), mostly ipv. and in imperatival expressions. <IE *uert-ie/o- 'turn'>
●VAR Locr. Fɛppέtw [ipv.], El. Ƒáppev [inf.] (in imperatival function); non-presentic
forms are rare: fut. έppnow (h.Merc. 259, Com.), aor. йрpησα (Com.), perf. ɛio-
бppηкα (Ar. Th. 1075).
COMP Also with prefix ȧv-, ȧл-, εiσ-, εε-, лɛρɩ-.
⚫ETYM Expressive word of the common and the poetic language, unknown to prose.
The geminate -pp-, common to all dialectal forms, excludes derivation from *uers-.
A reconstruction *Ƒέpσ-дw and connection with Lat. verrō ‘sweep', OCS vrácho̟, vrěšti
'thresh', Hitt. чarš- ‘reap, harvest, wipe' is semantically and formally difficult.
Forssman 1980: 180ff. therefore proposes a pre-form *uert-ie/o-, together with a new
proposal for the development of the cluster *-rti- (as opposed to *-rs-).
pσaɩ [f.pl.] ‘young animals, small lambs' (1 222).
⚫ETYM Probably simply metonymic for ►εpon ‘dew'; cf. the use of Spóσos in A. and
Call. Cf. also µŋtépes yakaλoûxoi (S. Fr. 793) to yákaλov (Ar. Byz.), from yaкáç
‘fine rain, drops'; more details in Bechtel 1914 s.v. εpoŋ. Acc. to Leumann 1950: 25",
Spóσos in the meaning 'young animal' in A. and Call. stems from imitation of 1 222;
εpσal would be a homonym of poŋ 'dew'.
*pon [f.] 'dew', plur. ‘dewdrops' (Il.). <IE *h,uers- ‘rain'▷
•VAR Epic poet. έépon, Dor. εpσā, Pi. N. 3, 78 čɛpσǎ (see Solmsen 1909: 240¹); with
different anlaut ǎεpσαν. τǹу Spóσov. Kρñτεç 'dew (Cret.)' (H.), ȧépony (PLit. Lond.
60 [Hell.]).
COMP As a second member perhaps in AITUépons, s.v.
pupós
465
●DER έpoŃeis, ¿epońɛis ‘dewy' (II., AP), έpσaĩa. έapivá, véa, ánalá, Spoσwdŋ 'vernal,
young, tender, dewy'; έppηεvτα. Spoσwdŋ, кataч/vкTIкά 'dewy, cooling' (H.) with
Att. -pp-, as against the hieratic Ionicism in "Epon, name of the daughter of Cecrops;
Épowdns 'dewy' (Thphr.).
•ETYM The name 'Eppηopópot is unclear; acc. to H., oi τñ "Epσŋ ετελoÛντεç tà
voμчóчεva 'who give to E. what is due', together with έppηoopέw; also, έpondópol,
-pía beside appη-qópot; s.v.; see Nilsson 1941(1): 441. The normal form is έ(F)έpon <
*h,uers-; forms like άέpoŋ cited above are unexplained, as is poaɩ. Sanskrit has
varṣá- [n.] ‘rain' and várṣati [v.] ‘it rains', IE *h,uérs-e-. Beside it exists the iterative-
intensive *h,uors-eie-> Gr. ovpέw 'urinate' (euphemistically), with deverbal oúpov;
the laryngeal may have been lost here before the o-vocalism (Saussure effect); see
also on oupavós. Because of the accent and because of the ε-vowel, εpon cannot be
a verbal noun (one would expect *oupá < *чorsā); rather, it is a collective deriving
from a neutral noun *h,uer-os-, h₂uer-s-, and further cognates in e.g. MIr. frass 'rain'.
The words ǎpoŋy and Skt. vŕṣan- 'masculine, man, bull, stallion' are not to be
connected (T. Pronk fthc.). Cf. DELG Supp.
*pony →ǎponv.
žptic [?] • kpnµvós 'overhanging bank' (H.). <?►
⚫VAR Acc. to DELG, the plant is meant in H.: кpчuvoúç. λɛvкáç tɩvaç ẞoτávaç 'any
pale grass'.
•DIAL Myc. e-ti-we / herti-went-/ and a-e-ti-to /a-¹erti-to-/.
•ETYM See the discussion in DELG Supp., referring to Duhoux 1993: 103, and in RPh.
74(2000): 257.
¿pvyyávw →¿pɛúyoμaɩ 1 and ¿pεúyopai 2.
¿pvėpós [adj.] ‘red' (II.). <IE *h,reud¹- 'red'>
VAR Myc. e-ru-to-ro, e-ru-ta-ra /erutros, -ȧ/.
•COMP As a first member, e.g. épuеpó-лous 'with red feet' (bird-name, Ar.); -
Épuepos 'reddish' as a sign of illness (Hp., Arist.), Aɛuк-έpupos 'white-red, flat-red'
(Arist.; Risch IF 59 (1949): 60).
•DER έpvėpiaç [m.] “the red one”, epithet after the red color (Arist.), cf. wxpíaç, etc.
and Chantraine 1933: 93; έpu pivoç, also έpuivos (with dissimilation or after
épvaivoμal, see below) name of a fish (Arist.; Strömberg 1943: 21); 'Epvēīvo [pl.]
name of a town (B 855; cf. 'Epupai below); ¿pußpóðavov, -os plant (Dsc.), also
Épεvέavov, see εpεúеw; έpvpaños = έpv0pós (D. P.); έpuеpóτηs 'red color'
(Gal.). 'Epv0paí [f.pl.] town in Ionia (Hdt.; after the red-colored rocks inside the
town), together with’Epvеpaïкòv σatúpiov plant-name (Dsc., Plin.), also έpvėpóvɩoV
(Ps.-Dsc.; after 'Ióviov and other nouns in -óvɩov); 'Epuеpaïкóç also from ǹ Epuěpá
(Оáλaσσa; adjunct of kvßepvýtηs, inscr. I³).
Denominative verbs: έpv0piáw 'to become red' (Att.; after the verbs of disease in
-táw; Schwyzer: 732) with pupíaσiç, -ŋoiç (Hp., H.); εpvеpaívoμα, -w 'to become,
make red' (X.). Also pubαívoμα, -w, aor. εpúОηva ‘id.' (II.) together with εpúеŋμa
'becoming red, redness' (Hp., Th.); see below.

=== page 257 ===

466
èpikw
•ETYM Old adjective in -ro-, a suffix also encountered in Lat. ruber, CS rúdúró, ToA
rtär, ToB ratre, Skt. rudhirá- (reshaped after rudhi- in rudhikrá- name of a demon);
ON roðra [f.] 'blood'. Other languages have a different stem: ON rjóðr, OE rēod have
the same vowel as the verbs rjōða resp. rēodan (= εpεú0w, s.v.) and may therefore
be secondary. Lith. raūdas, (dialectal) Lat. rufus, rōbus, OIr. rúad, Skt. lohá- 'reddish'
[m./n.] 'red metal, copper, iron' probably continue IE *hroudho- rather than
*h,reudo-, because of the vocalism found in most Gm. forms: Go. raups, ON rauðr,
OE read, OHG rōt. Together with έpulpóc, the old denominative έpuαívoμaɩ points
to an original r/n-stem *rudh-r-, *rudh-n-. Perhaps a neutral s-stem *h,réudh-os-
Epεvoc) existed, as well as a verb *h,réud¹-e/o- (= έpɛú0w). Cf. also έpvoiẞn.
έpбкw [v.] 'to hold back' (II.). <IE *ueru- 'ward off, defend'>
•VAR Aor. έpûžaɩ, epic also ǹpúкaкov, έpukakéɛɩv (Chantraine 1942: 398).
•COMP Also with prefix, notably ȧn-, kat-.
⚫DER KATEρUKTIкóç 'holding back' (pap.). Enlarged presents puкávw, -aváw
(Chantraine 1942: 316 and 360).
⚫ETYM Enlargement with -K- like in óλé-кw, Siw-кw et al. (Schwyzer: 702, Chantraine
1942: 329), from εpчμαι, εpúομαι 'ward off rather than from púw 'draw'.
pvчaι [v.] 'to keep off, protect, save' (Il.). <IE *ueru- (or *uruH-) 'ward off, defend'>>
•VAR Inf. *pvσeat; impf. pυ-τo, -σo; them. εpúoμai (épúɛσðαι, ¿púετo), also púομαι,
inf. pūσa, aor. έpúσ(o)aσa, púσaσa, fut. ¿púσσoμαι, þúσoμai; also with
anlauting ɛi-: ɛρūτo, εipúαται, -ατo, -vão, perhaps reduplicated perfects with
present-meaning (inf. εpvoα); thence, or through metrical lengthening,
εipúσσaσðaι, ɛipúσσovtai, ɛipúoµat; cf. also below; aor. pass. ¿ppúσðηv (Ev. Luc. 1,
74, 2. Ep. Ti. 4, 17, Hld. 10, 7).
•DIAL Myc. -u-ru-to /-wru(n)toi/ or /-wrusthōn/.
•COMP As a first member: έpu- in'Epú-λaoç,'Epú-μaç, -μηλoç (also Eupu-, either after
εúpúç or from Fεpu- (?); see below); ¿pɔ̃σɩ- in ¿рvσíлτоλiç 'protecting the town' (Z
305 et al.), Epvoíx¤wv; Aeol. Eúpvoí-λaos (cf. above). þñσí- e.g. in þñσí-ñoλıç (A.
Th. 129 [lyr.] et al.).
•DER έpõµa [n.] ‘defence' (Il.), diminutive ¿pvµátov (Luc.); from there ¿puµv-ós for
defence, protected' (IA) with έpvµvótŋs ‘defensive force' (X., Arist.), ¿pyµvów
'defend' (Agath.). έpvoµós defence, protection' (h.Cer. 230). épíσчov (ɛi- by
metrical lengthening), name of a kind of mustard (Thphr., Dsc.), because of its
protection (Strömberg 1940: 81); from **pu-σiç or directly from the verb. poτýp [m.]
'protector, watcher' (p 187, 223), þúτwp ‘id.' (A. Th. 318 [lyr.], AP). púσtoç 'saving' (A.
Supp. 150 [lyr.], AP), after the adjs. in -otos (Chantraine 1933: 41) or from pūσç
‘saving' (Epigr. Gr. 200 [Cos], LXX). ¿õµa ‘defence' (Hp., trag.).
•ETYM The Skt. nouns varū-tár- [m.] ‘protector³, várū-tha- [n.] ‘defense, protection”
(with vṛṇóti ‘avert', Go. warjan ‘ward off, etc.) speak in favor of the assumption of
original *Fépv-μai. Doubts arise because of the absence of a trace of the digamma in
Homer; attempts at a solution are in Solmsen 1901: 245ff. Therefore, we have two
ablaut grades, FEPU- and FρU-, the latter of which is certainly in εpūtai < *Ƒε-Ƒpū-τal,
etc. (cf. above), but with otherwise unclear distribution. The initial vowel in the Ionic
èpów,oual
467
present εipúoμai and in Evpvoí-λaoç form an unsolved problem. Hackstein 2002:
123-131 offers a new interpretation. He derives the forms from the root *su̟erh¸-,
which he reconstructs for ópáw. Essential to him is the assumption that the zero
grade *surh,- became *sruh-> *sru-, according to the rule that in some cases, -ur-
was metathesized to -ru- (like in *kwetuṛ- > ketru-). I suppose that he assumes that
*seru- arose secondarily from *sru-. In Myc. -u-ru-to /-wruntoi/, sru- was restored to
wru-. Myc. o-ro-me-no would represent an athematic *surh¸-, which according to
him gave *suoro- (but he also speaks of o-vocalism in this form, p. 128). This
hypothesis is difficult to assess.
έpvoißŋ [f.] ‘rust in plants' (Pl., X., Arist.; long 7 in Orph. L. 600). ◄PG▷
•DER έpvoißwdns ‘eaten by rust' (Arist., Thphr.), έpvoißios epithet of Apollo in
Rhodos (Str.). Denominative verb έpvoißáw, -óoμai 'suffer from rust', also factitive
-ów (Thphr.). There is an epithet of Apollo 'Epubiẞios (Str. 13,1,64, v.l. 'Epɛðíẞioç;
with έpɛά(w), 'Epɛ¤íquoç, 'Epɛdíµos (inscr. Rhodes), 'Epɛчµáw (Lyc. inscr.); further
Epvoiẞn epithet of Demeter (Et. Gud. 210, 25); Str. 13, 1, 64 says: 'Pódio de 'Epveiẞiov
Aлóλλwvos xovσɩ v τη xpą iɛpòv, τǹv έpvoißŋv kaλoñvtes épv¤íßŋv ‘The
Rhodians, who say εpíß instead of puσißηy, have a sanctuary of Apollo
'Epvíẞios on their territory'. See below.
•ETYM Popular word with a suffix -ß- (Chantraine 1933: 260ff.). The stem έpvot- is
also found in ►épvσíлελaç and in the plant name έpvσí-σкηëτpov (Thphr., Dsc.). It
recalls verbal first members of the typе τεpч/íµßoτ (Schwyzer: 443), but it has also
been considered an old s-enlargement of the word for 'red' (see ►έpupóc,
►épɛú0w), which may also be found in Lat. russus (but see De Vaan 2008 s.v.), Lith.
rausvas 'red', OCS ruso 'reddish blond', Gm. words like OHG rost 'rusť, etc.; IE
*h,reud-s- (h,roud-s-, hrud¹-s-) derived from the s-stem in pεvos? However, Fur.:
214, 255f. correctly saw that the word is Pre-Greek, because of the alternations of
dental (0, 8) with s and ß/µ (ibid. 248-263 and 203-221). The long i is also typical for
Pre-Greek word formation (Pre-Greek: suffixes -iß-, -¡y-, -id-, îð-, -īк-, -īv-). The
word must have been folk-etymologically influenced by Gr. έpv0-.
épiafiov →Ěpuai.
¿pvoiñelas, -tos [n.] name of a skin disease, 'Erysipelas'. <PG▷
•VAR Often in plur.
•DER Adjective -ατódŋs (Hp., Gal.).
⚫ETYM Medical term of unusual formation; a learned compound? The first member
also occurs in ►έpvoißŋ (?) and in the plant name έpvσí-σêηëτpov (Thphr.); a word
лέλaç is further unknown, but cf. however on лελµa. Therefore, properly “what
reddens the skin" (Schwyzer: 4435)? Of course, it may also be of Pre-Greek origin,
like the beginning of the word (there seems no reason for the suggestion by Fur.:
21460 that it would be from έpúw).
¿púw, -oµai [v.] 'to draw, tear, draw towards one' (Il.). Details in Chantraine 1942: 30,
136f., etc. IE *ueru- 'draw' ?>

=== page 258 ===

468
*ppos
•VAR εi- (Hdt., Hp.), inf. ɛipúμεvai (Hes. Op. 818, verse-initially; cf. Chantraine 1942:
294), aor. ¿púσ(σ)αɩ, -ασðaι (also ɛi- Hdt., Hp.), pass. έpvσðñvaɩ, εi- (Hp.), Dor.
Ƒɛpvoάtw [ipv.] (Delphi IVª; uncertain), fut. ¿púw, -oµαι (Hom.), ¿púow (Opp.),
εpúσσw, -oμαι (Orph.; as a v.l. in 176), perf. pass. εïpūμαι, εiρбαtal.
•COMP Also with prefix ȧv- (ȧƑ-), ¿‹-, kat-, ñpo-, etc. As a first member in έpňσ-
ápματε [лл] [horses] drawing the chariot' (Hom.); on the formation Sommer
1948: 11f.
•DER Rarely Épu-: pu-σiç 'the drawing' (Max. Tyr.), ¿pů-τnp 'the drawer' (Nic.), έpv-
σ-tóç (S.). Various old words have þù- (þň-): þù-týp [m.] ‘rein, rope' (Il.), also ‘bow-
stretcher, archer' (Od.); þú-τwp ‘bow-stretcher' (Ar. Th. 108 [lyr.]); pō-µós [m.] ‘pole
of a chariot, etc.' (II.); pō-µa ‘that which is drawn' (A., X.); pú-un 'force, pressure'
(Hp.); pū-τós 'drawn' (putoĩoɩ \áɛσ01 ( 267; § 10), pū-tá [n.pl.] ‘reins' (Hes. Sc. 308);
with a suffix -10- púσtov, Dor. pútov *what is drawn forth', i.e. 'deposit, retribution'
(II.); see further pňτíç ‘fold, wrinkle', ▸pūσóç ‘wrinkly'. Enlargement þvστášw to
draw to and fro, maltreat' (Hom.) together with puσTAKTÚÇ (σ 224), þúστayµа (Lyc.
1089).
•ETYM In the perfect, *Ƒé-Ƒρυ-µαι gave εpūµαɩ. For the initial digamma in (Ƒ)ɛpúw,
note especially epic (Aeol.) avɛpúw = ȧf-fepúw, ȧv-fepúw, ßputñpes = putñpes (A.
D.). This undoubtedly old verb has no certain correspondences outside Greek. On
ambivalent Lat. rūdēns 'sail of a ship', see WH and E-M s.v.
poos [n.] ‘skin' (Nic. Al. 248, Th. 376). <?►
•ETYM Rhymes with better known otέpqos, tépqos ‘id.' (A. R., Nic., etc.), but further
unclear. Perhaps a cross of σtépqos and ěptov? Güntert 1914: 139f. suggests that
*ppoc is a younger reshaping of (σ)τépos to *pεqos (from έpέow 'cover [with a
roof]').
•
pxατos [m.] ppayuós 'fence' (H.). <?>
•VAR Also Epкatos. ¿payµós, épкátη. quλaкý 'watch' (H.).
▶
⚫ETYM In itself, the change к/ X might point to a Pre-Greek word, but the words may
also have been influenced by Epкos. Other forms are εpкávη, ópкávη. Latte
corrects έpкάτη to έpкávη, but this remains uncertain. Cf. also öpατoç 'orchard';
perhaps adapted to έpxatówvão (§ 15), which belongs to ɛipyw; s.v. Fraenkel KZ 72
(1955): 193ff. compares Lith. sérgėti ‘to protect, guard.
pxoμai [v.] 'to come', also 'to go, traveľ (II.). ◄IE *h₂ergh-, *h₂er- 'move, go'▷
•VAR Only present stem.
•COMP Very often with prefix ȧл-, ɛiσ-, έε-, кat-, etc.
•ETYM One has compared OIr. eirg [ipv.] ‘go!', regaid [fut.] ‘he will go', and Skt.
rghāyáti ‘tremble, rage', and within Greek as an iterative ▸ópуέo̟μα ‘dance'.
Alternatively, one has connected it with Skt. rccháti 'to reach, arrive at', Hitt. arške/a-
zi [iter.] 'to reach repeatedly, make incursions'. This presupposes that Epxou
continues PIE *h,r-sk-e/o-, which seems quite possible; thus Rix MSS 27 (1970): 79-
110. Unrelated to op- in ►öpvчμ, which requires *h¸er-.
Epwdióc [m.] 'heron' (K 274). <?>
èpwtáw
469
•VAR Thus Hdn. Gr. 2, 924 and most mss.; also έpwdiós (mss. and pap.); also pwdɩwę
(Hippon. 63) and ȧpwdiós (LXX as a v.l.). Worthless is the gloss ++έpwyás. ¿pwdiós
(H.).
⚫ETYM Ending like in aiywλtóc, aiуʊлóç, xapadpiós, and other bird names. The
resemblance with Lat. ardea 'heron' cannot be coincidental; one has further
compared Serb. róda ‘stork'; very doubtful, however, is ON arta ‘teal'. Is the writing
with iota subscriptum secondary (after the nouns in -ídios)? The word could be Pre-
Greek because of the variants (without or with different prothetic vowel).
¿pwn [f.] 1. 'rush, impulse, force, throw', in the Il. mostly of spears (Soupós, ßɛλéwv έ.),
also of men (ȧvdpóc, Akuntñpos, Invελéoto), after Hom. of other objects (лετpáшv
A. R. 4, 1657, лuрóç AP 9, 490, yaστpós Opp. K. 3, 175, пɛpì Kúлρɩv AP 10, 112). 2.
‘withdrawal, rest', in the II. of battle (лoλεµov II 302, P 761), thus Theoc. 22, 192
(µáxηs), also Saкpúwv (Mosch. 4, 40), also ‘rescue' (D. P. 601). ◄IE *h,reh₁-(u-) ‘rest',
*h,reh,s- 'impulse'>.
•DER Beside it &pwéw, aor. έpwñσaɩ, also in two meanings: 1. 'draw back, withdraw,
leave, rest from' (intr.), also with ảл-, εε-, úл-, mostly with ablatival gen. лоλεμoо,
Xápµns (II.), kaµáτolo (h. Cer. 301) et al., also absolutely 'escape a disease' (Nic.); 2.
trans. 'force back, push back' (N 57, Theoc., Call.), also ‘quit' (Theoc.); also of blood
alµa keλaivòv ¿pwŋoei repì dovpí (A 303 = л 441), translated with 'flow, stream'.
From έpwéw: ¿pwïa [f.] ‘respite, rest' (Theoc. 30, 9); from åлɛpwέw: ɑnepweús ‘who
hinders, who frustrates' (¿µãv µεvéwv, ℗ 361).
⚫ETYM Two homonyms are distinguished: 1. pwn 'impulse, etc.' with έpwéw 'flow,
stream' (A 303 = л 441) from IE *h,roh,s-eh₂- in Gm. *rōsā: MLG rās [n.] 'strong
flow', OE ræs [m.] 'run, attack', ON rás [f.] 'run'; also, ON rasa 'to fall down' with
ras [n.] ‘falling down', MoHG rasen, IE *h,rh,s-. Perhaps Lat. rōrāriī [pl.] ‘lightly-
armed skirmishers who start battle with slings' from *rōsā ‘impulse, throw' = ¿pwń;
2. ¿pwń ‘resť’ with έpwéw ‘rest, etc.', probably from IE *h,roh,-u-eh₂- = Gm. *rōwō in
OHG ruowa, OE row, ON ró [f.] 'rest', beside OHG rāwa ‘id.' < PGm. *rēwā-. Note
that έpwn 'impulse, etc.' and the verb έpwéw 'to rest, etc.' are much more frequent
than έpwn 'rest' and notably έpwéw 'flow'.
Ěpwg →Ěpafian.
¿pwτáw [v.] ‘to ask, question' (Od.), Hell. also ‘to request’. <?▷
•VAR Epic Ion. ɛipwτáw, after Hom. also non-presentic forms like έpwτnow,
Єρwτñσaι, etc.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially έ-. On the use see Fournier 1946: (index).
•DER έpwτŋµa (εл-) 'question, demand' (IA) with έpwtŋµa-tikós (D. T.) and -τíw
(Arist.); pwτηoç (εл-) ‘questioning' (IA); έpwτητкóç 'pertaining to questioning,
clever in q.' (Pl., Arist.); ȧv-ɛpwτíw (Telecl. 52).
⚫ETYM The present έpwτáw, Ion. ɛipwτáw < *έpfwtάw replaced primary **pf-oμαι >
Ion. εpoμaι, especially in Attic. Vine Glotta 78 (2002): 203-221 explains the
formation from *erowōtó- to *h₂rów-o- ‘questioning, inquiry', which was replaced by
*erwōtó-, whence the agent noun *erwōtā-. Other secondary presents of this root are
► έpɛɛivw and ► έpεvváw.

=== page 259 ===

470
éotia
471
és [prep.]=εis.
*σons •VAR Eσoç. →ëvvvµɩ.
Eσ0íw •VAR εσ0w. →Sw.
200λós [adj.] 'good, brave, stout, noble' of men and objects (II.). <?>
•VAR Aeol. Pi. žoλoc, čoλóc, Arc. ¿σλóc.
COMP As a first member in oλо-Sóτηs (Man.).
•DER σλóτηS (Chrysipp.).
•ETYM Unknown. Some have connected it with Skt. édhate ‘thrive' (< *azdh-), Av.
azd-iia- 'well-fed, stout', from IE *Hes-dh-. Schwyzer: 5335 prefers a compound *Hes-
d¹¹-ó- ‘àyaƉoɛpyóç', from èσ- in έüç and a zero grade variant of OCS dělo ‘deeď' (IE
*dheh,-lo-; see ►τíonut). This analysis remains improbable.
čoкov [v.] ‘I was' (Hom.). <IE *h,es- ‘be’➤
•VAR Also augmented ñoкε (Alcm.).
•ETYM From **σ-σкov, an iterative preterite of εiuí with the same suffix as in OLat.
3sg. escit, plur. escunt 'will be' and in ToB skente ‘they are' < *h,s-sko-nto. Most
uncertain is Thrac. ŋoкo ‘I am(?)' (Kretschmer Glotta 7 (1916): 89).
oμa →oal.
éoμós [m.] 'swarm (of bees)' (IA). <IE *(H)ieh,- 'throw'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in εoμo-τóкoç producing swarms of bees' (AP).
●DER εσµov. vóστчov ‘ptng. to return' (H.; does it belong here?), also àqɛσµóç
'swarm' (Arist. HA 629a 9) as a cross with äppeσuç 'id.' (Arist. HA 625a 20; plur.).
⚫ETYM From "nu (or ȧo-íŋu) with a suffix -opo-. Derivation from Coµαι (cf. DELG)
does not seem probable, as a swarm does not sit down.
žσƒɛpos [m.] ‘evening' (Od.), adjectival ‘of the evening, western', also substantivized
'the evening star' (Il.); έσлέpa, Ion. -pη [f.] ‘evening, west' (Pi., IA, after ǹµέpa). ◄IE
*ue-k" sp-er-o- 'to(wards) the night, evening'>
●COMP As a second member in ¿qεσлεpoç ‘western' (S. OC 1059 [lyr.]), åкp-éσnepos
'on the edge of evening, at nightfall' (Arist., Theoc., Hp., etc., -tos AР), лое-εσлεα
[adv.] (Theoc.), лpoσ-ɛσñépioç (Arist.).
•DER έσлέpios ‘of the evening, western' (Ø 560), substantivized 'Eσлεpía ‘the West,
Hesperia' (Agathyll. apud D. H. 1, 49), Ƒεσлápioɩ name of the western Locrians (Vª),
fem. εσлɛpíç, especially in plur. as a PN ‘the Hesperides' (Hes.); later έoñɛpɩvóç ‘id.'
(X., LXX); εσлεριкóç ‘id.' (Juba), εσлεpítηs, -ītis (xwpa; D. L.). Denominative verb
εσлερíчw to pass the night' (Doroth.; MoGr. σлεрí(w) together with εσлépiσµa (Lex.
apud Ath. 1, 11d).
⚫ETYM Inherited word, identical with Lat. vesper, 'evening'; further, with Lith.
vākaras, OCS večero ‘evening', which derive from *uekero-, and also found in Celtic,
e.g. MW ucher, and in Arm. gišer. The difficult puzzle of reconstructing this word for
PIE has recently been solved. Armenian had *e which became ei > i before š, ž. The
-š- can derive from a cluster -k(w)s- (cf. vec‘‘six' < *ueks beside veš-tasan); see Beekes
2004: 59-62. Combined with the -k- and -sp- reconstructed for the other languages
above, this points to a group -k(w) sp-. It has been identified with Skt. kṣáp- ‘nighť, of
which the zero grade has been found in Hitt. išpant- 'night'. MW ucher may
continue *ue- followed by ks(p) or sp. The first element had been connected with Lat.
uē- in uē-sanus 'mad' et al., but this is now rejected (see De Vaan 2008). The
meaning may have been ‘(stretching) towards night'. The suffix -er- is also found in
words connected with time like Gr. VUKTεpóç.
ëonete →¿v(v)énw.
έoońv, -ñvos [m.] name of the priests of Artemis in Ephesus (inscr. IV-III³, Paus.),
also 'prince, king' (Call.); acc. to Hdn. Gr. 2, 923, 8 = оiкιστηç, acc. to EM 383, 30
oikiotǹs,
properly 'king-bee'. <PG>
●DER έoonvía, έooŋvɛúw (inscr. Ephesus).
•ETYM Formation in -v like Baλ(\)ńv ‘king', knov ‘drone', etc. (Schwyzer: 487,
Chantraine 1933: 167f.). Probably Anatolian and Pre-Greek; see Frisk for
bibliography with proposals for substrate and IE origin. Nouns in -ŋy are discussed.
by Fur.: 172118
ëʊtɛ [conj., adv., prep.] ‘until', later also ‘as long as' (since Hes. Th. 754, not entirely
certain; also Ion., southern Dor., Aetol., trag. and X.). <IE *h,ens ‘in'>
•VAR Boeot. *TTE, Locr. Evτε, Delph. hévtɛ (also εσtε mid IV³), Dor. ëσTε (EM 382, 8;
v.l. in Theoc.). On the use Schwyzer 1950: 675f. Cf. čσкε (Archil. 13, if for εiç ő kε).
•ETYM From *v(σ)-Tε, clearly containing *h,en(s) ‘in(to)', but the final element -Tε is
ambiguous, as DELG remarks: it may derive either from -τε (in ötε 'when', Myc. o-
te, so IE *-te), or alternatively from IE *-ke, for which the form oкε would plead
(see above). IE *-kwe is also found in Lat. dōnec 'until, while' < *dō-ne-ke. Cf.
Monteil 1963: 316f.
έστía [f.] ‘hearth, fireplace, altar', metaph. ‘house, family, etc.' (Od., Att., Pi., Delph.,
etc.), later identified with Lat. Vesta (Str.). ◄PG➤
•VAR Ion. iotin, Aeol. Boeot. Locr. Dor. Arc. iotia.
●COMP As a first member e.g. in εστ-oxoç 'containing the hearth' = 'domestic',
‘protecting the hearth' (trag., etc.); as a second member in ¿q-éotios, Ion. ¿r-íotioS
'located by the hearth, belonging to the hearth' (B 125), ȧv-éσTIOç 'without hearth' (I
63), ovv-, óµ-éoτios, etc.; on Att. -έστoç in Homer see Wackernagel 1916: 9ff.,
Chantraine 1942: 15; diff. Solmsen 1909: 214.
•DER Iστiŋïa [n.pl.] 'monetary means of an Ioτin-temple' (Milete Vª); εστiшτS
'belonging to the hearth (house)' (S. Tr. 954 [lyr.]); 'Eσt-iασtaí [m.pl.] name of
worshippers of Hestia (Rhod.; cf. Ало\\wv-αστai et al.); čσtios ‘belonging to the
hearth' (Hld., after óμéστioç et al.). As a translation of Lat. Vesta, Vestālēs: 'EσTiaiov
'Vesta-temple' (D. C.), 'Eστiádɛç [pl.] 'Vestales' (D. H., Plu.). Usual denominative
ÉσTIάw, iστiάw (augmented ɛio- in ɛiστíwv [Lys.], etc.), also with prefix, e.g. ouv-,
'receive at the hearth, feed, receive as guest' (IA, Dor.) with several derivatives: ÉσTÍ-
aoɩç, -āµa, -aσµós ‘entertainment', έotiátwp (iot-) ‘hosť', with έστɩatópiov (iotia-,
iotin-), also έotiατηpiov (after the nouns in -n plov) ‘dining room'; έotiatopía (iot-)

=== page 260 ===

472
ÉσTW, -OÛÇ
'party'. Also Eστióoμai (E. Ion 1464 [lyr.] dwua) 'to be provided with a hearth, get
settled'.
•ETYM As a collective or abstract formation in -ía (cf. especially oik-ía, kλɩo-ía),
Éστía presupposes a noun έστo-, -ā vel sim. For the etymology, an important
question is whether the word had an anlauting F-. In favor of F- speak FIσtiav (PN,
Mantineia IVª) and yɩστía. έoxάápŋ (cod. -τn) (H.). However, there are dialectal
forms where - fails; see Solmsen 1901: 213ff. Therefore, the old, but still often
defended connection with Lat. Vesta is probably incorrect. Moreover, &> t is unusual
and unexpected, whereas an interchange ɛ/ 1 is frequent in Pre-Greek. Alternatively,
one has proposed that iσtía, -iŋ may have arisen secondarily after i̇σëŋµ, but this
remains a conjecture. The most probable conclusion is that the word is of Pre-Greek
origin. Cf. Fur.: 358, A. 2. Other explanations, such as connection with έoxápa
(Solmsen l.c.) or Slav. jestěja ‘hearth' (Machek Ling. Posn. 5 (1955): 59ff.), are
unconvincing.
¿otá, -oñç →ɛiµí.
ëσtwp 1, -opoç [m.] ‘peg at the end of a chariot pole (§ 272, v.l. ěktopi after ëxɛv;
Aristoboul.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Frisk lists a number of proposals, of which only that of
Schwyzer 1939: 531¹² makes sense: that the word is an agent noun of *sed- ‘sit”. As
DELG remarks, the suffix -Twp is surprising in an instrument noun.
*στwρ 2 [m.] 'founder' (IUrb. Rom. 1155.88). <IE *sed- 'sit'>
•ETYM From ►čšoµai.
toxάápa [f.] 'hearth, house, sacrificing hearth' (II.), metaph. 'platform, stand (Ph. Bel.,
etc.), in medical language 'scab, eschar on a wound by burning' (Hp., Arist.). <PG➤
•VAR Ion. -pη.
•DIAL Myc. e-ka-ra.
•DER έoxapíç, -ídos ‘pan of coals, brazier' (Com., Plu.) with -íðɩov (Delos III³),
έoxápiov ‘id.' (Ar.), also ‘platform, stand (Plb.) beside έoxapεĭov ‘id.' (Attica);
Eoxap(E)wv 'stove' (Delos IV, Theoc.; after the indications of place in -(ε)wv,
Chantraine 1933: 164); έoxapɛús 'ship's cook' (Poll.); έoxapítηs (äptos) 'bread baked
over the fire' (Com., LXX); ¿oxápios 'belonging to the hearth' (AP). Unclear
σxápɩvov name of a dance in Sparta (Poll.). As a medical term, basis of the
denominative oxapóoμα form an έσxápa (eschar)' with έoxápwσiç, -wµa, -wtikós;
in the same sphere also έoxapwdns (Poll., Gal.). On the fish-name ▶oxapoç see s.v.
⚫ETYM Formation in -pā (like xúpā, τéopā), but without cognates. Fur.: 376 points
out that oxápa (gloss.) may have lost the first vowel secondarily. As there are no
cognates and as an IE proto-form can hardly be posited, the word is most probably
Pre-Greek.
oxapos [m.] name of a fish, = кópis, perhaps a kind of sole (solea; Com., Dorio apud
Ath. 7, 330a). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Derived from έσxápη as 'frying fish' (Strömberg 1943: 89)? See also
Thompson 1947 s.v. The word may be Pre-Greek.
Étaipos
473
šoxaτos [adj.] ‘the uttermost, last' (Il.). ◄IE *h,eg¹s ‘out’▷
•COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. έoxató-ynpws (-os) ‘in the last age' (Hell.), лap-
Éσxaτos 'the last but one' (Ph.).
•DER έσxatiά, -in uttermost part, frontier, extreme position' (Ion., Hes., Att.);
poetical enlargement έσxáτios (Nic.). Denominative verbs: έoxατáw 'to be the
uttermost, the last', only in έoxaτáwv, -ówv [ptc.] (Il.; cf. Shipp 1967: 62); έoxateúw
‘id.' (Arist.); σxaτí(w 'to come too late' (LXX).
•ETYM Adjectival derivative of εε, but unclear in detail. The opposite ►укατα (to
►¿v) points to a formation *½½-кατoç, for which the aspirate X then requires a proto-
form *xσ-кατoç. This is taken to point to an IE basis *h,eg's for ε; however, note
the notation xσ = } in older alphabets (Schwyzer: 210), which suggests aspiration of
any velar before σ. The suffix -кaτoç would consist of a velar element (cf. πpó-kα,
Lat. reci-pro-cus; *exo-кo- 'what is outside') and a dental element (µéo(0)-atos, tpít-
ατoç, etc.).
Eτáчw [v.] 'to examine, test' (Hdt. 3, 62 v.l., Democr. 266, Pl. Cra. 410d, LXX). <IE *set-
'be stable'>
•VAR Aor. Tάσai.
•COMP Most frequent ‹‹-ετá‹w, aor. έžɛτáσαɩ, -ážaι (Theoc.), etc. 'find out, inquire
exactly' (IA); also with prefix, e.g. ¿л-, ovv-, пpo-ε§εtá‹w; Arc. nap-hɛtá¶w in rap-
hetažáµevos, rap-ετáέwvσɩ have approved' (Tegea IVª; unless from лap-íñ
‘approvе', лáρ-εtoc).
•DER Étaσiç, έtaσμós 'proof, test' (LXX), ταστη = ετ- (Lampsakos). Éτασiç
štaois,
¿žétaσiç
'enquiry, test' (Att.), -oía ‘id.' (Astypalaea, imperial period; cf. Schwyzer: 469),
ετασµóç ‘id.' (D.); εταστ inspector, controller' (Aeschin., Arist., inscr.; cf.
Fraenkel 1910: 227) with εταστηpov 'inspection' (Samos IIª), ¿½εtaσtikós ‘ready
for control, belonging to control (X., D.), 'E½ɛτaσtéwv PN (Bechtel 1917a: 22).
⚫ETYM Denominative of έτóc, which is only found in ¿τá· áλŋ¤ñ, ảy¤¤á ‘true, good'
(H.); therefore, properly 'verify, check the truth'. Formerly, it was suggested that
Éτóç is a verbal adjective of εquí 'to be' (one has compared e.g. ON sannr < PGM.
*sán þa-, Skt. satyá- 'true'), from *¿tós < IE *s-e-tó-. However, the correct pre-form
in laryngealistic terms would be *h,s-nt- or *h,s-eto-, which would not produce the
Greek words. De Lamberterie RPh. 71 (1997): 160, following Pinault, assumes a stem
*set-u-. See on ► έtɛós and ►ŏOLOS.
εTaipoç [m.] 'comrade, companion, friend'. <IE *se- reflexive pronoun>
•VAR Also proparoxytone τaɩpoç; fem. έtaípa (Ion. -pη) ‘female comrade' (II.); also
rapos (Il., Dor.), fem. έtápŋ (A 441).
•COMP As a second member e.g. in quλ-éτapos 'loving his friends' (Att.) with
Qɩλετaip-ía et al.
•Der έtaipŋïoç, -ɛãos (on the formation Chantraine 1933: 52) ‘regarding the friend'
(IA), έtaipikós ‘id.', -óv [n.] ‘political society' (Th., Hyp., Arist.), έtalpóovvos
'friendly' with -oúvη (late); fem. έταipiç = ετaipα (X. HG 5, 4, 6 v. 1.), έtaipídiov
Étaipis έtaípa
(Plu.); εταpŋŋ, -pɛía, -pía 'comradeship, friendship, political society, etc.' (IA).
Denominative verbs: &τα(1) pí\w, -oμai 'be(come) comrade' (II.), late 'be prostitute',

=== page 261 ===

474
Tαλov
štýtvµos
475
=
with έταípioμα, -loµós, -loτns (late); also εταчpioτpia Tpiẞás (Pl. Smp. 191e;
contemptuous); έτaipέw keep company with' (Att.) together with έtaipŋσç;
Éταчpεvoμai 'prostitute oneself (Hell.).
⚫ETYM The different forms can be understood as follows: from tapoç, a fem. *ëtaɩpă
was first made with a suffix -1α- (cf. e.g. xíμapos: xíμaipa), which was reshaped into
έtaipŋ, -pa and then gave έτaîpoç, ëtaɩpoç; after έtaîpoç: štapos, a form έtápŋ was
ultimately made beside έtaipŋ (Schulze 1892: 82). As ετapos, etc. show no trace of a
digamma (Chantraine 1942: 150, Solmsen 1901: 203), the connection with fétŋs
'relative, friend' (see ►τns) must be abandoned. We have to start from the reflexive
*se (see, ε), with an enlargement -t- like in OCS po-sětiti ‘visit' (from *sětǝ 'guest',
IE *s(u)et-o-, cf. Lith. svēčias [m.] 'guest'), beside *sue-t- in Féτηç. For the p-suffix, cf.
e.g. vɛapós, yɛpapós (partly from p-stems). See now Pinsent 1983: 311-328. De
Lamberterie connects the word with èτɛóç and öσtos; see DELG Supp.
τaλov [n.] a young animal, 'yearling' (Del.³ 644, 18; Aegae IV-IIIª). <IE *uet- 'year'>
•VAR Also ĚTEλov (ibid. 252, 11; Cos IIIª: τoυ µèv έτéλov as opposed to τou dε Tελεíov
'full grown animal').
•ETYM Identical with Lat. vitulus ‘calf, U vitluf ‘vitulōs' (with irreglular i for e),
except for the gender. The starting point is the IE word for 'year' (Gr. ►čtoc), IE
*uét-os-, to which belongs Skt. vats-á- ‘calf. For the pattern τoç: ëtɛλov, štaλov, the
word has been compared with e.g. véqoç: veqéλŋ, äykoç: άyкáλŋ, suggesting that the
change aλo-: -ελo- could be old. See on εлηεtavós, s.v. An r-stem is found in
Gm., e.g. Go. wiprus (one-year-old) lamb', MoHG Widder, from IE *uet-r(u)-.
ëtɛlıç [m.(f.)] name of a fish, ‘gilthead' (Arist. HA 567a 20, H.)? <?>
•VAR Also accented έtɛλíç.
⚫ETYM Lat. attilus 'a fish like a sturgeon in the river Po' (Plin.; also *atillus), shows a
general resemblance; it is probably Gaulish, perhaps a Ligurian word. Farther away is
the name of the turbot, Latv. āte, Lith. atis; see WH s.v. attilus, Pok. 70. Strömberg
1943: 39 rather envisages derivation from τελov (►τalov). DELG calls both
suggestions improbable.
¿τɛóç [adj.] ‘true, real', mostly in sing.ntr. έtɛóv (ètɛá [pl.] Y 255, reading quite
uncertain); also adverbial 'really' (Hom., Theoc.); in interrogative sentences 'really'
(Ar.); èτɛñ [adv.] ‘in reality', also έteń [nom.f.] ‘reality' (Democr.). ◄IE *set- ‘stable,
true'?>
•DIAL Myc. PN e-te-wo-ke-re-we-i-jo, to’Etefokλéfns.
•COMP Often as a first member in names like 'Etɛó-kpŋtes [pl.] ‘Cretans in a strict
sense, original Cretans' (T 176), 'ETε-ávwp (Thera VII³), 'EτéƑ-avбpos (Cyprus VII³),
cf. Sommer 1948: 185 and 199; 'ЕTεо-кλñÇ (Tegea, etc.; probably rendered in Hitt.
Tauag(a)lauaš; cf. Schwyzer: 79); also έτɛó-кpɩos [f.] 'real barley' (Thphr.;
determinative compound formally adapted to a bahuvrīhi; cf. Strömberg 1940: 28f.).
•DER Beside it τvµos ‘true, real (Il.; prose has åλη¤ńs) with ¿tvµó-Spvs [f.] ‘real oak'
(Thphr.); tò štvµov 'the true (original) meaning of a word, the etymology' (Arist.);
as a first member in έτvµo-λoyέw 'discover the true meaning' with έtvµoλoyía,
-λoyɩкós (Hell.; formally after yɛvdo-λoyέw et al.; cf. Schwyzer: 726); ¿tvµó-tns = tò
τvµov (Str.). Reduplicated formation with lengthening of the original initial
syllable: τnτvμos 'true, real, authentic' (Il.; the form remains surprising, cf.
Schwyzer: 447²), together with έtŋtvµía (Call., AP). Lengthened form ¿tvµávov.
ȧλŋés H.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 42f.
•ETYM When we compare the ending of кevε(Ƒ)ós ‘empty, idle', ¿tε(Ƒ)ós presupposes
an original u-stem, the zero grade of which is seen in enlarged tv-μoç. Beside this u-
stem, we have έτά【w and ¿τá· åλŋßñ, áуaðá (H.), which seem to point to an o-stem.
Further analysis is uncertain; see τá(w. De Lamberterie RPh. 71 (1997): 160 follows
Meillet in assuming *set-u- (also supposed in Arm. stoyg 'real'); he further connects
the word with ►öσtos from *sot-.
ëtɛpos [adj.] ‘one of two; the one (...) the other' (II.). <IE *sm-tero- ‘one of two'>
•VAR ǎTεpos (Dor. Aeol.; also Att. in crasis ẵτεpoç, еắτɛpα, etc.); cf. Dor.
aɩpoñavíaç Bourguet 1927: 117; Meillet BSL 28 (1927-1928): 116f assumed a zero
grade as in ȧλλóτpies and Lith. añtras.
DIAL Myc. a-te-ro /hateros/.
•COMP With negation oúd-, µŋd-étεpos, -áτɛpos 'none of both' (Hes., IA, Dor.).
Very frequent as a first member in bahuvrīhis with various meanings, e.g. ¿tɛp-
αλкns 'who helps one of two parties' (Il.; cf. on åλé\w), έtep-ŋµepos ‘living day by
day' (303 of the Dioscuri; Ph.), étεpó-лtoλiç 'coming from another town' (Erinn.
5).
•DER ÉTÉρ-woεv, -wеi, -wσε, -wτα 'from the other side', etc. (Hom.); έTεpoчoç 'of
another kind' (IA; after τoчoç, àλoĭoç et al.) with έtεpolótis (Pl., Ph.), étɛpolóμal,
-ów [v.] 'to become different, change' (Ion., etc.), -oiwois 'change' (Hell.); étɛpótŋs
'being different' (Arist.).
•ETYM From IE *sm-tero-, the zero grade of *sem- in ►ɛis ‘one' (cf. further►äna§),
with the same comparative suffix as in ►ápiotɛpós, etc.; cf. especially Skt. eka-tara-
‘alteruter'; the ε-vowel in ετɛpos is rather after εis or after ►ε, έ than by vowel
assimilation. An identical formation is probably represented by a Celtic word for
'half: MW hanther, Co. Bret. hanter; see Gonda 1953: 33f. Gonda also tries to connect
the Gm. group of Go. sundro 'on itself, кaτ' idíav', OHG suntar 'separated; however',
etc. (cf. ►äτεp).
*τns [m.] 'clansman' (Hom., only plur.), 'citizen, private person' (El., Dor., also A. and
E.); on the meaning see DELG. <IE *sue-t- 'own, relative'>
•DIAL Dor. Eτaç, El. Féτaç.
•ETYM Beside fέtãç, Slavic has a word for relative by marriage', e.g. ORu. svatú, QIE
*suōt-o-, and Baltic a word for ‘guest', Lith. svēčas, IE *suet-io-. These are derived
from the reflexive *sue (Gr. F(h)ε, see ►ε, ε), enlarged with a suffix -t-, thus IE *sue-
t-. On the Greek psilotic anlaut and loss of digamma, cf. Fraenkel 1912: 125 and
Chantraine 1942: 150 and 185. Therefore properly meaning "one's own", whence
'belonging to the (own) clan', 'private person'. On the formation, see Schwyzer: 500,
Chantraine 1933: 312, and Bechtel 1914. See also ►éτaïpos and ►ïdɩoç.
¿týtvµos →¿teós.

=== page 262 ===

476
ěTL
ETɩ [adv.] 'still, also, further', of time and grade (Il.). <IE *h,eti ‘(and) also'>
⚫ETYM Old adverb, also preserved in Indo-Iranian, e.g. Skt. áti ‘id.', in Italic, Lat. and
U et 'and', and in Germanic, e.g. Go. iþ ‘Sé, кaľ, all from IE *h,éti, which might be
the loc.sg. of a root noun from *h,et- seen in Skt. at- 'to wander'.
Eτvos [n.] 'soup of beans' (Ar., Hp.). <?>
•COMP As a first member in έτv-npuσis 'spoon for soup' (Ar.; cf. on ►ȧpúw 1), έTVO-
Sóvoç ‘stirring the soup' (of topúvη, AP).
•DER &TV-ŋpós 'like soup' (Ath.; Chantraine 1933: 232f.), ¿tv-ítns (äptоç; Ath.).
•ETYM Etymology unknown. On the connection with Celt., e.g. MIr. eitne 'kernel'
(Pedersen 1909: 160), see the objections in Pok. 343. Arm. und 'soup, corn' can not be
connected phonetically with τvoç.
έtoчµos [adj.] ‘prepared, ready, certain' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Younger toчoç.
•COMP As a first member in éτoquo-Оávaτoç 'prepared for death' (Str.); as a second
member in ȧv-éτoчoç ‘unprepared' (Hes. Fr. 219, Hell.).
●Der έtoqµótŋs ‘willingness, readiness' (D., Plu.); έtoчµášw ‘prepare' (Il.) together
with έToчuaσía (LXX, NT).
⚫ETYM No etymology. Acc. to Kuiper Glotta 21 (1933): 278ff., it is from a locative *έτoĭ
to *¿tós = ¿tóc, with a suffix -μo-; this is a mere guess.
¿τóç 1 [adv.] only with negation oỦк έτóç 'not in vain' (Att.); beside it &τwσoç [adj.]
'useless, fruitless' (Il.). <?>
•ETYM Though the formation is unclear (cf. Chantraine 1933: 42, Schwyzer: 466, and
Mezger Word 2 (1946): 229), έtwoios for *Ƒetwotos is probably an adjectivizing
enlargement of τó (cf. лεpióσos beside лεрí). The latter stands for *Fετóc, and
formally belongs to the adverbs in -tóç (►¿vtós, etc.). Further unclear; semantically
close is Alb. hut 'useless, empty, idle', which was derived from IE *uto- (Jokl Wien.
Ak. Sb. 168: 1: 31). The connection of aüτwç in the meaning 'idle, useless' is formally
impossible. Others have connected Skt. svatá-, Av. x'ato 'by itself, automatically' (IE
*sue-tó-), which seems possible in spite of the difference in meaning ('of itself >
'without an outside cause??).
ETOS 2 [n.] 'year' (Il.). <IE uet-os- 'year'>
•VAR Dial. FÉTOS.
•DIAL Myc. we-to [acc.], we-te-i [dat.].
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. tpi-etýs (tpi-étŋc) ‘three years old' (IA) with
τpiɛtía 'space of three years' (Hell.), τpiɛτíšw be three years old (LXX); also tpi-ét-
ŋpos 'three years old' (Call.) together with -npís [f.] 'every third year (inclusive)', i.e.
‘in alternate years' (εopτη; Pi., IA; after the nouns in -ŋpós, -ŋpíç; Chantraine 1933:
346); thence τpiεtηpiкóç 'belonging to a τpiɛtηpíc' (late).
•DER TƐoç 'yearly, lasting the whole year, one year long' (Pi., A.); by hypostasis
έnétɛlos ‘id.' (IA, from έπ ëτoc); ¿τńσoç ‘ïd.' (Att.; after the adjectives in -τnσios;
Schwyzer: 466, Chantraine 1933: 42) with έτŋσíaɩ [m.pl.] 'periodic winds' (IA, Arist.);
also έntetσios ‘id.' (ŋ 118, Th.); ► έitnetavós, s.v.
477
ETYM An old word for 'year', preserved in several languages. An exact agreement is
Alb. vit 'year', plur. (also sg.) vjet, from IE *uetes- (Mann Lang. 26 (1950): 383). As a
second member, the neutral s-stem is preserved in the zero grade in Skt. tri-vats-á-
‘of three years'; the full grade of the suffix is supposed in Messap. atavetes (perhaps =
ɑʊtó-ɛtɛç ‘in the same year'; Schwyzer: 513³) and is also found in Hitt. šaudišt- /
šāuitišt- 'nurseling' (*" of this year"; details in Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). Beside the latter,
Hitt. has a root noun uitt- < *uet- ‘year'. Thematicizations of the s-stem appear in
HLuw. usa/i-, CLuw. ušša/i- 'year' < *uet-s-o- (Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. uitt-). A
semantic problem is Lat. vetus 'old', which formally equals Féτoç; for an explanation,
cf. Beekes 1985: 59-61 (previously, Benveniste RPh. 74 (1948): 124ff.). Old
enlargements of the s-stem are found in words for (one-year-old) animals: Skt. vats-
á- ‘calf, Alb. vic‘‘calf' (IE *uetes-o-), Celt., e.g. Ir. feis ‘swine' (PCl. *wessi < *uet-s-i-,
Matasović 2008). By itself stands a Balto-Slavic word for 'old', Lith. vētušas, OCS
vetбchб, IE *uetus-o- (here also Lat. vetus?). A new name for 'year' in Greek is
►Viavτóç. See also τalov, véwτα, oiɛτéaç, ▶népvoi, ►oñtes.
Éttŋuévos →diattáw.
ETULOG →TEÓG.
ÉTWOLOG →TÓG 1.
ε ⇒ÉÚç.
ɛvāyńs [adj.] ‘bright, clear, in full view' (Parm., Pi., A.). ◄GR►
•ETYM For ɛv-avyńs (v.l. Pi. Pae. Fr. 19, 25 et al.), from ɛ and avyń ‘beam of light,
with transition to an s-stem and compositional lengthening. The second u was lost
through dissimilation. By decomposition arose άyéa (kúкλov Emp. 47, of the sun);
cf. Björck 1950: 148 A. 1. A poetical enlargement appears to be found in ɛváyŋtov
(qúσiv Ar. Nu. 276 [lyr.], of the clouds which are visible from afar); see Björck 1950:
148 A. 1.
εváчw [v.] ‘to cry ɛvα, ɛvať (S. and E. [lyr.], AP). <ONOM➤
⚫DER Together with εváσμаτα [pl.] (E. [lyr.]), ɛvaσμóç (Hell.); εúаστns, -τp with
εváσTειpa, εvaσTIкóç (late).
ETYM From the interjection εða æµµò Аŋvaïкòç кαi μvστкóç 'word
belonging to the Bacchanal rites and to the mysteries' (H.), ɛvaí (-ai) ‘cry at the
festival of Bacchus' (Ar.); also, ɛváv (E. et al.), ɛvoí, -oĩ (Ar. et al.). Additionally, with
intermediate aspiration, εvaï, εväv, εvoï (D. T., Hdn.). Borrowed as Lat. euhoe,
euhan. The same call also appears in Lat. ovō, -āre ‘to exult, jubilate', which cannot
be a borrowing, as it reflects the PIt. change of *eụ > *ou̟ (De Vaan 2008). Cf.
►ɛiάw, ▸alálw and Schwyzer: 303.
Evdɛíɛλoç [adj.] epithet of places (since Od.), in the Od. almost only of Ithaca, also of
Kpion (h. Ap. 438), of the mountain Kpóvov (Pi. O. 1, 111), etc. <?>
•VAR Further εüdεtλov (Alc. G I 2, POxy. 2165 I 2; unclear. The emendation [λópoc]
by Gallavotti is uncertain).

=== page 263 ===

478
eidia
⚫ETYM One previously posited metrical lengthening of *εv-déeλoç 'well-visible', from
Séɛλoç (K 466). However, see now on Sɛíɛλoç, dɛiλn 'evening' which are mostly
connected with εúdɛíɛλoç, which would mean 'with beautiful evenings' vel sim.
Evdía [f.] 'bright weather, calm (of wind), quiet (of the sea)' (Pi., trag., IA). <IE *diu-
'day'>
•VAR Also -ín.
●DER ɛúdɩāvóç ‘calm, bringing rest, of qápµaкov (Pi. O. 9, 97); ɛúdíaɩos of the fish-
name τpɩyóλaç (Sophr. 67), 'caught in beautiful weather'(?) with εúdiαítepos (X.); as
a msc. substantive ‘outlet in the bottom of a ship' (Plu., Poll.); ɛvdiɛvóc ‘bright, calm,
quiet' (Hp. Aph. 3, 12 v.l. beside εüdioç, Pl. Lg. 919a, X. Cyn. 5, 9, Arist.; after qaɛivóc,
ȧλɛɛɩvóç); εdio ‘id.' (Hp., Hell.; to ɛúdía after aißpía: aïopios). Denominative verbs:
Evdiáw 'be quiet, calm', of the sea and weather (A. R., Arat.; only ptc. εúdiówv);
εvdiάw 'calm down, be quiet' ([Pl.] Ax. 370d, Ph.).
•ETYM Compound (collective bahuvrihi) of ε and the zero grade of an old word for
‘day, heaven' (see Zɛúc), thus εv-díƑ-ã. Cf. εкatóµ-ß(ƒ)-ã, µeσó-dµ-ŋ for the
formation with zero grade. An old counterpart is Skt. su-dív- 'bringing a beautiful
day' with su-div-á- [n.] ‘id.'.
ɛüdw [v.] 'to sleep' (Il.). <?►
•VAR The simplex is only found as a present, except for ɛvdŋow [fut.] (A. Ag. 337).
•COMP With prefix ¿v-, ouv-, especially кał-ɛúdw (Il.), ipf. кað-ɛñdov, -ŋúdov, Att.
also έ-кáðɛvdov, fut. кað-ɛvdǹow (Att.), rare aor. кað-ɛvdñσaɩ (Ion.); also with
double prefix, е.g. εv-, εлɩ-, ларα-, σvу- каеεúdw, etc. As an aorist we find
(kata-)Sapēɛïv, (-)Spaßɛïv, see ►Sap¤ávw.
•ETYM Several unconvincing suggestions: 1) related to Go. sutis 'quiet, calm', and
further to Lat. sūdus 'soft' (cf. Mayrhofer KZ 73: 116f.), but the latter is now
reconstructed as *suoid-o- by Nussbaum 1999: 381. 2) from IE *seu-d- beside *su-ep-
in Skt. svapiti ‘sleeps', etc. (Benveniste 1935: 156f.; cf. on ►üлvoc), which is very
unlikely because of the Schwebeablaut involved; 3) related to OE swodrian 'to sleep
tight' (Grošelj Živa Ant. 7 (1957): 42).
ɛɛчoç →Xw.
Evŋyɛvns [adj.] see below (A 427, 481 with-v.l. ɛúnoεvýc, h. Ven. 229, Theoc. 27, 43, IG
14, 1389: 1; 29. <GR
•ETYM The reading εúŋyɛvýc = εvyεvns (mss., Aristarchus) is strongly suspected to
be a misreading for ɛvŋqevýc in Hom. (as a PN in IG 12(8), 376: 14), a compound
from ǎqɛvos which apparently was not transparent. Secondary εúŋyɛvǹs was
supported by several forms in -yɛvýs with a preceding -ŋ-, and taken over by post-
Homeric poets. On εúnoεvic, see Bechtel 1914 s.v. and Leumann 1950: 11783. See on
► ǎqɛvoc and Masson RPh. 91 (1965): 239f.
ɛúðɛvéw [v.] ‘to thrive, flourish', of animals and plants, also metaph. of towns, peoples,
etc. (A., Arist.). <?>
•COMP As a first member in εvеη-áрxη 'commissioner of (corn) supplies',
together with -apxέw, -ia, -ikós (pap.; also εvεv-).
}
εÚÐÚS
479
•DER ɛvévɛia, -ía (-in inscr. Iª) ‘state of prosperity, fullness, supply' (Arist. as a v.l.
beside εvenvía, pap. of Roman times) with eveεviαкóç (pap.).
Also ɛúðŋvéw ‘id.' (h.Hom. 30, 10, Hdt., Hp., LXX) together with εúðŋvía = ɛv0éveia,
-ía (Arist. as a v.l., LXX, late inscr. and pap.); rare and late adjectives: εúεvýc.
εúлaðoñσα, iσxvpá ‘enjoying herself, strong' (H.) whence εεvéσταtos (pap. VIº),
Eveŋvós 'thriving' (Hdn. Epim. 175, Lyd. Ost. [VI³]).
•ETYM The explanation depends on the relation between these forms. If the forms
with -- in the root are original, then ɛɛvéw is a denominative of eveεvns, from
which the abstract ɛúðévɛia, -ía was made. We would have to start from a noun
*0évos beside ►qóvos in the hapax qóvov aïµatos (ПI 162), if this means 'mass of
blood' - but this is uncertain. This would give an analogy *Оévos: εúðεvýs : evĐévela
: εvƉɛvέw like μέvos : εúµεvýs: εỷµévεia: εúµεvéw. However, εúεvýc is rare and late,
while Eveɛvéw is older. Therefore, the agreement with Skt. ā-hanás- 'thriving, full', IE
*-gwenes- becomes doubtful. With the IE root *gwhen- supposed in ā-hanás- and ɛv-
Oεvns, one scholar further connected Skt. ghana- 'solid, thick, full of (epic and class.;
very doubtful RV 1, 8, 3), MoP ā-ganiš ‘full', ā-gandan ‘fill on'; from Balto-Slavic,
Lith. ganà 'enough', OCS goněti ‘be enough' have been adduced; finally, Alb. zânë
'solid, thick' (Jokl 1937: 131) and Arm. y-ogn 'multum, very, much'. The PNs in
-qóvtŋs like Kpɛo-qóvtis (cf. on ►kpátoc), Hoλv-qóvtŋs are unclear, as is qavāv.
Đếλɛɩv ‘wish, want' (H.). Unclear ►ǎqevoç must be separated, as well as rapēévoç.
Secondary lengthening of -ŋ- in εúðŋvέw, etc. cannot be excluded. If we assume
original -ŋ- <*-eh,-, however, ɛúðɛvéw could either be after σ0évoç (Sommer 1905:
66) or a zero grade *-dhh,n-. A hypothetical Gr. *0ñvoç has been compared with Lat.
fēnus interest' (related to fe-lix; see Оñλuç and еñσα), root *deh,- 'suck, be fed
with milk', which could be phonetically and semantically identical if the connection
with Skt. ā-hanás-, etc. is given up.
Eveús [adj.] 'straight', also metaph. 'just'; εúúç, -ú also adverbial (beside εvéwc)
'straightaway, directly', of place and time (Pi., Att.). <?>
•VAR Fem. -ɛĩa, ntr. -ú.
•COMP Very frequent as a first member, e.g. in ►εvvwpía.
•DER εúðúτηs straightness' (Arist.) and the denominative εúðúvw ‘straighten, direct,
steer, chastise, punish' (Pi., Att.) with several derivatives: εuvois 'straightening'
(Arist.), εvevoμóc ‘id.' (Ph.); ɛúðuvτηp 'director, corrector' (Thgn., A., Man.) with
EVOUVτηpios 'straightening, directing' (A. Pers. 764), εvеuvτηpíα [f.] 'the part of a
ship where the rudder was fixed' (E. IT 1356), 'base wall, base' (inscr.), -tałoç
(Didyma); Evеuvtýs = ɛűðuvos (Pl. Lg. 945b, c), -tikóç (Arist., D. H.). More common
are deverbal expressions like εüuvoç [m.] ‘revisor of the state' (Pl., Arist., inscr.
since Va, etc.), also ‘judge, punisher' in general (A., E.); ɛuva [f.] ‘public
responsibility, revision' (Att.).
•ETYM No correspondences outside Greek. It may have taken the place of 10úç 'id.'.
Perhaps a cross of εleap and 10úc with assimilation εt: > εv: v (see Schwyzer:
256). The word εúpúç is semantically farther. DELG suggests influence of ε 'good'
(s.v. DĖúc).

=== page 264 ===

480
εÚÐÚQOLOS
EŪVIS, -L(S)OS
481
εúðúqlolos [m.] 'straight-barked', a kind of oak (Thphr. H.P. 3, 8, 2). ◄GR►
•ETYM From Evev- and ►qλotóç? Also ȧλíqλotos, from ►äλıç?
ɛúðvwpía [f.] ‘straightness, straight direction' (Pl., Arist., Aetol., Cret., etc.), almost
only in adverbial expressions like (áv³, кατ³) εúðvwpíav, εvvwpią ‘in straight line,
directly'; also εv¤úwpov [adv.] ‘id.' (X.). ◄GR►
•VAR Heracl. -wpɛía, Arc. -opfía, Epid. -opía; Ion. ivwpiŋ (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Expression from the language of surveyors, from ►εúúç (10úc) and ►öpoç,
öpfos 'boundary' as a bahuvrīhi: 'with straight boundaries, along straight lines'. The
long vowel may be due to compositional lengthening, or to Doric influence,
(development of -opf-). Incorrectly, Bechtel 1921, 1, 345: related to Av. auruua-
'quick', etc.; Ev0vwpos would then properly mean 'hurrying straight'.
eűkŋlos →ëkndos.
ЄÜKOλOÇ →SÚσKOλOÇ.
εvкpāns [adj.] ‘temperate', epithet of tónoι (Arist. Mete. 352a 7), of ảńp (Thphr. CP 1,
11, 6; 2, 3, 3), of έpws (Opp. H. 4, 33); but also 'blowing well', of oυpos and äveµos (A.
R. 2, 1228; 4, 891); also v.l. for ȧкpańs (299, Hes. Op. 594). ◄IE *kerh₂- 'mix'>
•VAR Also έÜкpäŃç.
⚫ETYM Reformed from εúкpáç (related to кερávvчш) after the s-stems, perhaps by
influence of ǎŋш, which at any rate influenced the meaning in A. R. At the same
time, in opposition to άкp-āns 'sharp blowing' (properly blowing on the heights'), it
was analyzed as ά-кpāŃç; cf. Marxer 1935: 46f. - On this basis, Svσкpāńs (Opp.).
εvλákā →ǎλoč.
Evλn [f.] 'worm, maggot' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Mostly plur. -aí. Cf. ɛvλáčɛi. σaлpiã, okwληкią 'make rotten, be worm-eaten'
(H.). Sometimes, also úάλη. σкóλn 'worm' (H.) is mentioned, supposedly standing
for vaλ; it is doubtful that this form is cognate.
•ETYM Taken by Frisk et al. as an old verbal noun from ►ɛiλéw 2, ►λw ‘turn, wind,
properly meaning ‘that which winds or coils'. However, a prothetic vowel *έ-Fλ-n is
no longer possible, unless one assumes *h,uel-; however, *h,ul- would give vλ-. It is
improbable to assume metathesis from *Fελ-1 (cf. on ɛúpúc). The word may well
be Pre-Greek. The recent attempt by Balles 2007: 15-24 is pure speculation. Cf.
►ε.
Eλŋpa [n.pl.] 'reins' (Y 481, Q. S.). <PG►
⚫DIAL Dor. avλnpa (Epich. 178, H.).
•DER Unclear is εvλŋрwσíwv. лληушν 'strokes' (H.; perhaps from *Evλnpwois, to
*eŮ入npóozial, -ów).
ETYM One scholar has assumed *ε-Fληp-o-, *ȧ-Ƒλnp-o- (Schwyzer: 224) with
prothetic vowel, combining Lat. lōrum 'rein', Arm. lar 'strick, rope, band', from IE
*ulēr-, *ulōr-, *ulHr-, supposed to be a derivation in -r- from a primary verb for
‘turn, wind, twine' in ɛiλéw 2. Given the variation, which cannot be explained in IE
terms, the words are probably Pre-Greek. For the interchange ȧ-/ ¿-, cf. àµúç/¿µús
and Fur. 347ff. See also Awμa.
ɛvµapýs [adj.] ‘light, without pain' (Alc., Pi.). ◄IE?►
●DER ɛvµápɛia, -(ε)íŋ, -ía ‘ease' (IA), ɛúµapótŋs ‘id.' (Callistr. Soph.), ɛúµapέw have
easy access' (B. 1, 175).
•ETYM Bahuvrīhi of ►ɛʊ and ►µápη ‘hand, which yielded a stem in -σ- (Schwyzer
513). Blanc REGr. 105 (1992): 548-556 rejects this explanation and assumes a meaning
'accordé en abondance', from *smer- in μεípoμal 'accorder comme part'; this is
uncertain. His comparison with the reduced grade in εv-τpαons does not work, as
one would rather expect -μεps beside μɛípoμai and μépoç.
vµāpiç, -180¢ [f.] name of an Asiatic shoe or slipper of deerskin (A. and E. [lyr.], AP
7, 413 [ǎ], Poll.); ɛvµāpídas [acc.pl.] as attribute of ȧσкépaç, so probably adjectival
(Lyc. 855). <?>
•VAR Acc. -LV.
•ETYM Foreign word of unknown origin; cf. the foreign names for shoes in Schwyzer:
61, as well as Björck 1950: 68.
ɛvvý [f.] ‘ʻlair, beď (of animals and soldiers), ‘bed, matrimonial bed', metaph.
'marriage' and 'tomb', as a nautical expression in plur. ‘anchor stones' (Il.). ◄?►
•COMP As a first member in ɛúvouxos [m.] “protector of the bed”, ‘chamberlain,
eunuch' (IA; on the mg. Maaß RhM 74 (1925): 432ff.) with ɛvvouxílw, -íaç, etc. As a
second member in xaчa-ɛúvηs et al. (on the formation Schwyzer 451), fem. -Evvác
‘having its bed on the earth' (Hom.); also xaμ-εvvás ‘id.' (Lyc.), as a determinative
'bed on the earth' (Nil. Th. 23); in this mg. further xaμ-ɛúvη, -α (trag.) with
Xaμεúvov (Pl.), -ɛuvís (Theoc.), -ɛvvía (Ph., Philostr.).
-a
•DER εvvatos belonging to the εúvŋ' (trag.), ɛűvɩa [pl.] = εvvý (App.), εúvétηs
'bedfellow, wife' (E.), -étc [f.] (Hp., A. R.), ɛúváτaç ‘id.' (E. Med. 159, conjecture),
ɛʊvɩç [f.] (S., E.). Denominatives: εúváοµai, εúvηеñvαɩ, -áw ‘lie down, go to bed,
sleep' especially ‘bring to rest' (Il.) together with ɛúvýµata [pl.] ‘marriage' (E. Ion
304; cf. Chantraine 1933: 184ff.), εúvýτwp, -ắtwp, -ntó̟p, -ãtýp = evvétns (trag.), fem.
εúvýτεɩpα, -áτεɩpα, -τpiα (trag.), εúvατýpιov 'sleeping room' (A.). εúváčoμαι,
εúvaσeñval, εúvá(w 'id.' together with τȧ εúváσчua 'sleeping places' (X. Cyn. 8, 4;
after iллáσчoç et al., cf. Arbenz 1933: 48), εúvαστýρ = εúvéτηc (Lyc.), εúváστεɩpa
Aíos (Opp.), εúvaσtýpov Evατpiov (S., E.). Details on the tragedians in
Fraenkel 1912: 17, Björck 1950: 139f.; also Chantraine REGr. 59-60 (1946-1947): 227f.
•ETYM Unexplained. Lidén IF 19 (1906): 320f. compares OIr. (h)uam 'hole' and Av.
unā [f.] ‘hole, slit (in the earth)'. Arm. unim 'to have, own' remains far.
Unconvincing recent attempts are Balles 2007: 15-24 and Ziegler KZ 117 (2004): 1-12.
ɛʊvɩç, -1(d)os [adj.] 'robbed, lacking' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Acc. -tv.
=
•ETYM The word has been compared with adjectives starting in *u(H)- or *uä-: Skt.
uná-, Av. йna- 'deficient, lacking', Arm. unayn 'empty' (anlaut uncertain; IE *eu- is

=== page 265 ===

482
εÚVOŨXOS
also possible), Lat. vānus 'empty, idle', Go. wans 'defective, missing', etc. However,
*h,euh₂-n- would have given *ε(F)av-.
eivoùxog →eivn.
EvoX0oç [adj.] epithet of daчτεç (B. Fr. 18, 4), ẞopá (E. Ion 1169), yñ (Hom. Epigr. 7, 2),
perhaps 'rich, luxuriant, fruitful. ◄ PG▷
⚫DER Denominative verb εvoxéw 'to be rich, luxuriant', of people (Hes. Op. 477,
Rhian. 1, 9).
•ETYM Connection with oxoc, öxen height, steep shore' is semantically
unsatisfactory. Either ɛoxos must be separated, or öxos had an additional,
unknown, meaning. Fur.: 127 connects άкτý ‘corn' with oxos, which is quite
acceptable (cf. άкτý / öxеŋ ‘cliff, etc.).
εvлéµлɛλoç [adj.] easily dismissed', of the μoipa of the Eumenides (A. Eu. 476: oỦк
εúnεµлελov). ◄ GR➤
•ETYM The second member is derived from ►лεµлw with a suffix -ɛλo-.
Ùnetńg nintW.
ɛúpáž [adv.] mg. uncertain, in σtñ ♂ ɛúpáč (A 251, O 541), perhaps ‘near, at the side';
further Lyc. 920 Aλaíov Iaτapéws άvaкτópwv 'near the temple of A. P.'; as an interj.
in Ar. Av. 1258 ɛúpáč, лaτáž. <?>
⚫ETYM Uncertain. For the formation, cf. λáž, ódáε, µovváε, Аɩαµлáε, etc. (Schwyzer:
620). It has been connected with ɛúpús and explained as έк лλαyíov, i.e. 'from the
side' (e.g. by H.). Acc. to Bq, it is to be read as dε Fρáε, and to be understood as 'en
heurtant, from þátteiv, þáσoeiv, þýσσɛɩv 'nudge, bump'; on the meaning, cf. ►
'near' and the parallels mentioned there.
Еöpiлoç [m.] 'straits, narrows' (X., Arist.); especially the straits between Euboea and
Boeotia (h. Ap. 222, Hdt.); later also ‘canal' in general (D. H.); ‘ventilator, fan' (Gal.
10, 649) is probably a homonym, derived from puτý in the sense 'blow'. ◄PG(S)►
•DIAL Myc. TN E-wi-ri-po.
⚫DER εÚρɩлwdηç 'like straits, like the Euripos', etc. (Arist.); εúpiлíεns name of a wind,
blowing from the Euripos (E. Maaß KZ 41, 204), also PN; εúρшлкń (σxoчvoç Dsc.,
Plin.); Evρíлoç. Пoσεdwv (H.).
•ETYM The etymology 'with strong current', from ε and piлý (since Fick) must be
rejected, even if the straits between Euboea and Boeotia are well known for their
strong currents of water and wind.
Forssman MSS 49 (1988): 5-12, explains the form from *euru-h₂p-o- 'breite
Wasser(läufe) habend'. The assumed dissimilation of the second u in *eurū-po- does
not convince; neither does the meaning fit for a narrow strait. The word may well be
Pre-Greek, cf. already Ruijgh 1967a: 172374. Note that the long i in this position is
typical for Pre-Greek forms, cf. Pre-Greek s.v. -iß-, -iy-, īd-, -ï¤-, -īv-).
εúpíσкw [V.] 'to find, uncover' (t 158). <?►
•VAR Aor. εúpɛiv, ind. ɛupov (Il.; later also ŋupov), fut. εúpnσw (h. Merc. 302, IA),
perf. εüpηкα, -ŋai (ŋüp-), aor. pass. εúpε0ñvα with fut. εúpε¤ýσoµαι (IA).
εúpúç
483
●COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àv-, èε-, èq-. As a first member ɛúpŋot- (later εúpεσt-)
in ɛúpŋol-entǹs 'who finds εëη, epic poet' (Pi.), ɛúpŋoɩ-λoyéw ‘find reasons, find
excuses' and -λoyía ‘ability to find reasons, eristics, creation of empty words' (Hell.;
after the compounds in -λoyéw, -λoyía); with ɛúpηoσí-λoyos (Corn. et al.).
•DER Derivatives, also from the prefixed verbs (not indicated): ɛüpŋua, later εűρεµa
(Schwyzer 523) 'invention' (IA), ɛüpεσɩ 'discovery' (IA; ɛűpŋσiç Apollod.); εüpετpa
[pl.] 'finder's reward' (Ulp.); ɛúpετn 'discoverer' (Att.) with fem. súpetíç, -étis (S.
Fr. 101 [uncertain], D. S.); also ɛúpétpia (D. S., pap.; Chantraine 1933: 104ff.);
Eúpéσoç epithet of Zɛúç = Iupiter Inventor (D. H.; after ‘Iкéσioç et al.); ɛúpɛtikóç
'ingenious, inventive' (Pl.), εúpεtós 'which can be found' (Hp., S.).
⚫ETYM Given the perfective meaning of ɛúpíσкw, the aorist supov is probably old. An
old perfect seen in εüpη-кα probably existed next to it. After this, εúpηow arose, and
the latest member of the paradigm (beside ɛúpɛðñvaɩ) was the present ɛvpíokw
(quantity of the unknown). The aorist εupov may be a thematic root formation
standing for the augmented ind. **-FP-ov; on this form, see Vara Emerita 61 (1993):
177-9. The aspiration is perhaps secondary after εεiv etc. Alternatively, was it a
reduplicated aorist *ue-ur-e/o- from *ue-urh,-e/o-, with dissimilatory loss of the
anlauting F- and secondary aspiration, in which case, according to Beckwith Glotta
72 (1994): 24-30, the root-final laryngeal was lost in a reduplicated formation?
A reduplicated formation is also found in the OIr. preterite -fúar ‘I found < IE *ue-
ur- (pres. fo-gabim); the pass. -frīth ‘inventum est' agrees with *Ƒpη- in -fé-fpn-ka (>
ɛüpŋкα) as IE *urh₁-to-. IE *ureh¸-t- has also been supposed in OCS ob-rětú ‘I founď.
A full grade *uer- is seen in Arm. gerem (with secondary aorist gerec'i) ‘take
prisoner'. Taillardat RPh. 34 (1960): 232-235 assumes *suer-, with *sesure > εupε.
ɛvpváyvɩa⇒äyvia.
ɛúpvódɛta [adj.] only in åлò xovòs εúpvodɛins (Hom., always verse-finally). <IE *sed-
'sit'>
•ETYM Schulze 1892: 487f. (followed by Bechtel 1914 S.V.) reads εúpv-εdεíŋs 'with
broad seats' (i.e. places for settling, doc), recalling Simon. 5, 17 εúpvεdoñç
x0ovóc. Thus also R. Schmitt 1967: 246ff.
...
ɛúpúoлa [acc.] = [voc.] epithet of Zñv (Kpovídηy), also in nom. and voc. εúpúолα
Zɛúç, ZɛŨ (Il.), later of кñpvž, кéλados, λos; bahuvrīhi of őл-å- ‘with far-reaching
sight, far-seeing'. <IE *h¸ek"- 'see'>
⚫ETYM The formula was adapted to formulae like кvavoxαчτα, with a vocative in -a <
*-h2. In the case of εúрúолα, we are probably dealing with an old accusative. Thus
Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 416f. and Beekes 1969: 148-150.
Eúpúc [adj.] 'broad, wide' (Il.). <IE *h,urH-u- (?) 'broad'>>
•VAR Epic also acc. -éa (under formulaic pressure).
•COMP Very often as a first member.
•DER εúpúτηç 'broadness, width' (Hp.) and denominative εúpúvw 'broaden, widen' (0
260; on the formation Schwyzer: 733). Also ɛupos [n.] 'breadth, width' (A 312), as a
second member in loo-ɛupns 'with the same breadth' (Phot.).

=== page 266 ===

484
=
Evpŵç, -ŵtos
•ETYM Indo-Iranian has Skt. urú-, Av. vouru- ‘broad', and Skt. váras- [n.] 'breadth',
from which ɛúpúç and ɛupoç differ only regarding their anlaut. We have to start
from IE *urH-ú- and *uérH-os-, which should have given Gr. *Fapúc, *Fépoc; cf.
Bapús Skt. gurú-. It has been assumed that ɛúpúç has a prothetic vowel from *h,-,
*¿-Ƒpú-ç, but then one would rather expect *¿Ƒ(a)pvç < *h,ur(H)us. Alternatively, it
has been supposed that it stands with metathesis for a secondary full grade *Ƒɛpúç
(after the primary comparative, Skt. várī-yān ‘broader'); εõpoç, beside Skt. váras-,
could also be explained in this way, if not secondary after ɛúpúç (cf. ẞápoc, Báðos,
τáxos, etc.). ToA wärts, ToB wartse 'broad' contain a suffix -ts, -tse and reflect a
preform *war(ǝ). The reconstruction remains problematic.
εvpwç, -wτoç [m.] 'mould, dank decay', also 'rust'? (Thgn., Simon.); on the mg. Aly
Glotta 5 (1915): 63ff. <PG?>
•VAR *pẞwç. εÜρws 'fair-flowing' (H.).
⚫DER εupwɛiç 'mouldy, musty' epithet of the underworld (Hom., Hes.), also of лηλóç
(Opp.); ɛúpwτiáw ‘to be mouldy' (Ar., Thphr.).
•ETYM Ɛúpŵɛɩç (see Schwyzer: 527 and Chantraine 1933: 274) should not be changed
into nɛpóɛç; see the remarks by Solmsen 1901: 121f. Based on comparison with iSpwç,
yéλwc, pwç, etc., an original s-stem has been concluded (Schwyzer: 514). No.
convincing etymology. Etymologies assuming a prothetic vowel (see Frisk) must be
discarded. Fur.: 242 refers to the form given by H. and thinks the form is Pre-Greek,
which seems quite plausible.
¿úç [adj.] ‘good, brave, strong (in war)' (epic since Il.), only of men, never in fem.; ntr.
εü, ε 'good' (A., E.), mostly as an adverb 'well' (II.). <IE *uesu- 'good', and/or
*h,(e)su- 'good'>
•VAR Also ŋüç, nü (see below), gen.sg. ¿ñoç, ε-, gen.pl.n. έáwv (verse-final, e.g.
8wtipes éáwv 325).
•DIAL Myc. names with e-u-, e.g. e-u-me-ne /Eumenēs/.
•COMP Very often as a first member, both adjectical and adverbial.
•DER έvτýs (cod. ¿ŋtýc). ȧyaðótns ‘goodness' (H.); on the accent see Wackernagel
and Debrunner Phil. 95 (1942): 177. Note further nεa. ảyaðá (H.).
⚫ETYM The Greek forms present several problems. As for ηüç beside εüç, old ablaut is
highly improbable, and a metrical solution has been sought (ηüç occurs mostly in
verse-final expressions). In combination with the analogical introduction of the
length from compounds where metrical lengthening was necessary (e.g. ǹü-коµоç),
this is certainly possible. Metrical lengthening could also be assumed in έñoç, if this
stands for *¿éoç; often, ¿ñoç (thus most mss.) seems to represent *èño = *¿ɛïo, *¿éo
‘sui', from ►ε, & ‘se²; cf. ¿µεão = ¿µéo from ¿µé. The comparison of έv- with Skt. su-
points to *h,su-, with which Hitt. āššu- ‘good, useful, pleasant', ntr. 'goods,
possession, prosperity' is also ultimately connected. On the other hand, there is also
Skt. vásu-, Av. vohu- 'good', to which further Gaulish PNs like Bello-vēsus and Ir. feb
[f.] 'eminence' belong, as well as Illyr. Ves-cleveses [gen.] (cf. Ev-kλéŋç, Skt. vásu-
śravas-). Further, there is the expression Swτñpεs (dŵtop) έáwv, which may have a
pendant in Skt. dātā vásūnām (beside dátā vásu [acc.]). Unambiguous traces of the
i
}
eiyoual
485
digamma fail, as ετεpos dè έáwv § 528 is young. We must also reckon with the
merger of IE *esu- and *uesu-. See Chantraine 1942: 201; 254; 274. Not related to
►úying, which is rather from *hiu-. Hoffmann 1975-6: 593-604 suggests that έñoç
continues hysterodynamic *h,uesu-os. On the ablaut of the compounds, see Zimmer
MSS 55 (1994): 157-171.
Ùownia →OLwnáw.
EUTE [conj.] (as soon) as', rarely causal 'because' (Il.); also as a compar. adverb 'like',
see ▶ ηüτɛ. <?>
⚫ETYM Debrunner IF 45 (1927-1928): 185ff. suggested it was in origin a paratactic
exclamation ε τε 'and rightly!'. Acc. to Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:2, 731f., it is
from ǹ or εi and *vtε; see ▸ηüτε. Cf. Monteil 1963: 286-290.
εȧτрáлελоç →τpέnw.
evtpóxalos →tpέxw.
ɛvôpóvŋ [f.] ‘night' (Hes. Op. 560, Pi., A.). ◄IE *g™³ren- ‘diaphragm'>
•DER Patronymic Evopovídŋs (Epigr. Gr. 1029, 6, Cios).
•ETYM Properly 'the benevolent', a substantivation of εüqpwv; cf. 'Hyεµóvŋ epithet of
Artemis (Call.) and PNs like 'Hptyóvη, 'Héóvη; also, Mvaµóva (Ar. Lys. 1248) for
Mvηдoσúvη; and Svoppovéwv [gen.pl.] v.l. for -oouvéwv Hes. Th. 102. See further
►oppńv.
evxepńs →dvoxepńs.
εxoμαι [v.] 1. ‘proclaim, boast' (Il.); 2. 'promise solemnly' (Il.; also e.g. Pl. Ph. 58b); 3.
'pray' (II.). <IE *h,uegh_ 'speak solemnly'>
•VAR Aor. εžaσðaɩ, pret. εйктo (see below).
●DIAL Myc. e-u-ke-to (= εxεται) ‘declares'.
•COMP Often with prefixes like ȧл-, έл-, кαɩ-, пРoσ-, σuv- et al.
"
•DER EXOS 'glory' (cf. кλéoc), rarely and secondarily 'fulfilment of a prayer' (Il.);
EUXwλn 'proclamation, cry of joy, boast, vow, prayer' (Il.; also Arc.-Cypr., see Bechtel
1921, 1: 391 and 447) with ɛxwλao 'bound by a vow' (Hdt. 2, 63; cf. Chantraine
1933: 49); ɛỦxń ‘vow, prayer' (к 526); ɛʊyµaτa [pl.] ‘boasts' (X 249), 'vows, prayers'
(trag., Call.); cf. pýµata; npóo-evšis ‘prayer' (Orph.). Verbal adjective εúktóç ‘asked
for (E 98 ɛÚкτá [n.pl.]), ‘desireď (Att.); together with ảл-evкtóç, noλú-evktos (A.);
also άл-, лоλv-εúxετoç (A., h. Cer., etc.); εÚкτaïoç 'containing a prayer' (trag., etc.);
EÚкTIKÓÇ 'belonging to a prayer', ǹ EÚкtiký (čуKλoic) = (modus) optativus (Hell.);
EUкTηpιoç 'belonging to a prayer', -tov [n.] 'house of prayer' (Just.); on -τɩкóç:
-τpios Chantraine 1933: 13. Multi-interpretable is the first member in Ex-nvwp (N
663), see Sommer 1948: 175. Lengthened forms of the present stem ɛɛtówνto,
-táagdal == εxovτo, -εσðα (Il.); explanation uncertain, see Leumann 1950: 182ff.,
Chantraine 1942: 358. On εʊxoç, εxη, εxwλń, etc. see Porzig 1942: 231f., 235,
Chantraine 1933: 183, 418f.; also Steinkopf 1937, Greindl 1938, Benveniste 1969:2: 237-
243.

=== page 267 ===

486
εÜW
•ETYM Greek εÜXoμa is identical with Av. aojaite ‘proclaim solemnly, invoke', Skt.
óhate 'boast, praise', from reduplicated IE *h,é-h,ugh-e-toi (with *gh > X after v). It is
an old term of the religious language. Beside it stands the athematic preterite 3sg.
EUкTO (Thebaïs Fr. 3), which corresponds to OAv. aogadā, LAv. aoxta, and perhaps
also the 1sg. εyµŋv (S. Tr. 610). Lat. voveō ‘to promise solemnly, implore', Skt.
vāghát- 'the vower, who prays', Arm. gog [impv.] 'say!' show an unreduplicated
formation, so the regular full-grade was IE *h,uegh (cf. LIV² s.v. *h,ụeg™h_). Arm.
uzem ‘I will', y-uzem 'I search' is semantically divergent.
εow [v.] 'to singe' (II.). <IE *h,eus- 'burn'>
•VAR Aor. Evσal.
•COMP Also with prefix ȧq-, ¿q-.
•Derɛvotpa (ɛvo-) [f.] ‘place for singeing' (Ar. Eq. 1236), ‘roasted barley' (PTeb. IIIª),
'id.' (Paus. Gr.); εỦσTóv (εvσ-) [n.] 'singed sacrifice' (Miletus IV-III³); εσavα =
εукаúματа 'sores from burning' (Poll., H.). Very unclear Eupoç, S.V.
-EV-
•ETYM An old verb which was ousted by kaíw. Like other verbs with a diphthong -
(see yɛvouat), it lost its ablaut. Gr. ɛüw is identical with Lat. ūrō 'burn', Skt. óṣati
‘id.', so it may have metathesis of aspiration from older *ɛűhw < IE *h,éus-e/o-. The
-σ- returns in εỦσ-τóv (with secondary full grade against Skt. us-tá- = Lat. us-tus
'burned') and in ɛüσ-τpα (with analogical aspiration; on τpä-, cf. Schwyzer: 532 and
Chantraine 1933: 333), and was introduced in ɛvσ-ava based on these forms. On the
aspiration, see DELG s.v. The root occurs elsewhere, too, e.g. in the Gm. zero grade
l-derivative ON usli [m.], MHG usel(e) [f.] 'glowing ashes'.
ɛvwvvuos [adj.] ‘of good name, of good reputation, renowned' (Hes. Th. 409, Pi.); ‘left’
(Ephesus VI-V³); τò εúúνчμov (кéρac) = 'the left wing' (Hdt., Th.). ◄GR➤
⚫ETYM Euphemistic replacement of older oкatós, λatóç, as well as άpiστɛpóç. Cf.
▶ǒvofla.
εvwxéw, -éoμai [v.] 'to treat, regale', med.-pass. 'to get satisfied, feast, be treated' with
Evwxía 'entertainment, feasting' (IA); σvvεvwxéo̟µaɩ to feast together' (Arist.). <IE
*seg 'hold, have'>
VAR Aor. -ñσai, -ηеñvaι, -ñσaσbai.
•DER SUσwXEĭv. Svσxεpaívɛiv 'be unable to endure' (H.).
•ETYM Long grade deverbative of intransitive ε έxw ‘I am in a good state' with
causative meaning (cf. Schwyzer: 720), an expression which was perceived as a unity,
whence it became univerbated, perhaps under the influence of expressions like
εÚлоρέw (from εйлоρоç).
¿qelɩwuévos [adj.] epithet of oxen, of unknown mg. (Mitylene Iª). <?>
•VAR -- in DELG.
⚫ETYM DELG suggests MoFr. 'tacheté as a meaning. Perhaps related to ►čopηλiç,
with ε instead of ŋ?
¿qέtaɩ [m.pl.] 1. ‘commander' (A. Pers. 79 [lyr.]); mostly 2. name of a board of judges
in Athens (Att.). <IE *(H)ieh,- 'throw'>
•DER έqetµý, mostly in plur. 'command, order' (Il.); cf. ¿pétns : ¿petµóv.
èplá入tns, -ov
=
487
•ETYM In the meaning ‘commander', it was derived from ¿qiɛµiaɩ ‘order, command;
in the juridical meaning, probably from ¿qinui 'decide something (about
somebody)'. See DELG.
¿qŋlis, -ɩdos [f.] technical term of uncertain mg., 'rivet, clinch' vel sim.? Acc. to H.
Éqλidεç. лεрóvaɩ ‘pins', čлηλiç. tò nŵµa tñç λápvaкoç 'the lid of a coffer' (S. Fr.
1046, Hell.); usually metaph. as the name of a rash (Nic.), in this mg. mostly in plur.
(Hp., Thphr.), also explained as 'freckles' and connected with foc, cf. ai toñ ñλíov
εлкαúσεiç 'burns from the sun' (H.). <?>
•VAR Also oxytone -íç, -ídoç, plur. also -εıç.
•Dial Ion. ëëŋλiç, -1805 [f.] (barytone acc. to Hdn. Gr. 1, 91).
•ETYM On the stem in -1(8)-, see Schwyzer: 450, 464f. and Chantraine 1933: 113f.
Morphologically uncertain because of the unclear meaning. Proposals: 1. as a
hypostasis of ε³ ñλov (v): a) ‘what is upon a ñλoç (‘pin³)'; b) ‘upper (part of a)
ñλoç³. 2. as a bahuvrīhi: ‘equipped with a ñλoç². 3. deverbal of έôηλoûv ‘pin down,
fix': 'what has been pinned down'; cf. ηλoç. ó ηλwμévoç 'sharpened' or 'callous
person' (Suid.). See also ►ηoç.
¿qŋlos [adj.] ‘(equipped) with a ños, of people (and eyes?) that have a certain eye
disease (LXX, Call. Fr. anon. 106, Ael.). <GR>
•DER έonλóτns [f.] name of that disease (S. E.).
•ETYM From ñλos in the meaning ‘wart, callus'; see Strömberg 1944: 93 and Forster
1950: 44. Cf. also H. cos. (...) έóó̟lidas ws ñlovs ëxwv eiç tǹv öɩ (the gloss
may be partly corrupt). Cf. oηic.
¿qiáλtηc, -ov [m.] 'nightmare, phantom' (Phryn. Com., Dsc.). <PG?>
•VAR Also лάλτns (Alc. in Eust. 1687, 52); in the same mg. also ηлáληç, асс. -ηta
(Sophr.), ǹëóλŋç (Hdn. Gr.). As a PN: 1. 'Eœáλtηs (Eл-), a mythical figure, son of
Aloeus (or of Poseidon) and Iphimedeia, famous for his unusual size and strength (E
385, λ 308, Pi. P. 4, 89); 2. regular PN (Hdt., etc.).
•DIAL Myc. E-pi-ja-ta (?).
•DER έqiαλTIкóç 'suffering from nightmare' (medic.), plant name εQiáλτov, -τíα
(Ps.-Dsc., Aët., because of its prophylactic use, Strömberg 1940: 90).
•ETYM No etymology. The name of the 'nightmare', originally being the name of a
demon, is clearly identical with the mythical name (cf. Nilsson 1941(1): 226). In
antiquity the name was connected with έqάλλoμa 'throw oneself onto sbd.'; cf.
¿qiáλtns. ¿ ¿ninŋdãv ‘assaulting' (H.). This explanation is not without problems
phonetically and must therefore be considered to be folk-etymological. Leumann
1950: 8045 defended the suggestion that έquáλτηе саme from ηлíαλoç, name of a
fever, which was reshaped via εлíaλoç, whence έáλτη, to έáλτη, by folk-
etymology after éάλλoμa. Acc. to Frisk, this is not very probable because of the
difference in meaning. Leumann separates the PN'Equáλτηs from that of the demon
and connects it with έл-ɩáλλɛv (but this does not explain the -o-). The forms
ǹлáðŋs, -óðŋs are based on crossing with лíαλoç. Other folk-etymological
reshapings (¿qέλns, έnwqέλns, etc.) in H. s.v. εлáλŋs. If the name is identical with

=== page 268 ===

488
¿xevnïs
the noun ηлíαλoç, as Leumann 1950: 80% and Fur.: 159, 258, 342 assume, it is Pre-
Greek, which is what one might expect for such words.
¿xevnïç [adj.] ‘detaining or holding back ships' (A., Arist.); a fish, Lat. nemora. <GR➤
•ETYM See Keller 1913: 378f., Thompson 1947 s.v.
¿xεлevкýç [adj.] epithet of ẞéλos (A 51, A 129), of σμúpva or píča (Nic. Th. 600 and
866), of ȧütun (Orph. L. 475). <IE *peuk- ‘sting'>
•DER Beside it лepiñevkýs (A 845), also of ẞéλos, and έµлεvкýs (Nic. Al. 202), of
ònóg.
•ETYM Compound (Schwyzer: 441) of έxεv and a noun *лɛûкoç vel sim. In any case,
it has close relatives in лεúкη, лεvкɛðavóç, and лεvкάλчoç. The meaning 'bitter'
(Eust.), also found in Nic., clearly derives from 'sharp, stinging'. The proper meaning
of εxε-лεvкns therefore is probably 'having a point'. For cognates outside Greek, see
► лεÚкη.
主XÉT入n →EXw.
EXOÉS →XеÉS.
έx¤odoлέw [v.] ‘to make oneself hated (to somebody), become enemies'. <IE *heģħs
'out'>
•VAR Only aor. έ×¤odoлñσαι (A 518).
•DER έ×¤odoлóç ‘hated, inimical' (S.).
ETYM For the formation, cf. olvoxoéw (Schwyzer: 726); εxеоболéw presupposes a
noun éxodoлóç, which indeed exists, but the form may be rather deverbal because
of its late appearence. If it stands for εxodαлóç (Pergam. IIP; here probably an
innovation for ε×Ооболóç), it must be compared with лобαлóç, ȧλλоАαлóç, and
should then be from xóc ‘outside', ε×еo-Soлóç properly meaning ‘located outside,
foreign', and exodoлέw ‘to become a foreigner to sbd.'. Bechtel 1914 s.v. compares
кvdoidorāv (Ar. Pax 1152, Nu. 616) ‘make a hubbub' and assumes an unknown verb
*depō, which is not very convincing. See ►xoç.
*x0os [n.] ‘hatred, enmity' (II.). <IE *h,eg's-to- ‘outsider'>
•COMP As a second member in (piλ-εxons 'who is inclined to hatred' (Theoc. 5, 137).
•DER Expóc [adj.] 'hated' (thus always in Hom.), 'hateful', substantivized [m.]
'enemy' (Hes., Pi.); grades of comparison έxíwv (A.), Xiστ (II.); ×еpa, Ion. -pη
[f.] 'hate, enmity' (IA, Pi.; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 226). Verbs: Exеoμα
(only present stem) ‘to be hated' (Od.), act. Exew ‘to hate' (trag.); åл-ε×¤ávo̟µàι (ß
202), aor. άл-ε×éσða (11.), fut. àл-exеñσoµαι (Hdt.), late present åл-é×¤µα
(Theoc., Lyc.) 'to make oneself hated' with άлεxОns hated' (S., D.), åлéxеεα 'to be
hated, hate' (Att.), ȧлéxеµα ‘object of hate' (E. Tr. 425; cf. Chantraine 1933: 177f.);
Exеaípw, aor. Expα (also with ảл-, úлεp-, συv-) 'to hate' (Il.); έxеpaívw, aor.
Exеpāvaι (X.) 'to be an enemy, hate' with expaσµ¤· ×еpα (H.); έ×еpɛúw ‘to be an
enemy' (LXX, Phld.).
⚫ETYM The relation of the words cited is not always clear. Clearly, ex paívw and
Expɛúw are late derivations of Expós; ¿xaípw is much older and also a
!
Exupós
489
denominative of exepós (Schwyzer: 725). Also, ȧл-ε×еávoμαι could be related to
Exopós with interchange -r/n- (Benveniste 1935: 16), although it could just as well be
a nasal enlargement of εxoμα, åл-εxеéσеαι (Schwyzer: 700, Chantraine 1942: 315f.).
Acc. to Schwyzer: 725, exеoµaι is a back-formation from έ×¤aípw, but it is better
taken with Exos, like σévw to σévos (Schwyzer: 723). More difficult is the
interpretation of exoc and Expóc, for which we may compare aloxos: alσxpóc,
küdoç: kuɗpóç. If we start from expóc and consider exoc (together with exoμal,
EXOíwv, EXOTоc) to be an innovation, perhaps modelled on кudpóç, кudíwv,
KÚSIσTOÇ, TÓ KÜбoç, we can connect expóc with Lat. extra 'outside', exterus 'being
outside', and so also with ε×0óç = εкτóç 'outside'; exеpós would then properly mean
‘located outside, being in foreign territory, foreigner, enemy' (cf. Lat. hostis).
*xɩdva⇒xɩs.
έxīvos [m.] ‘hedgehog', also ‘sea urchin', and metaph. as a technical term in several
professions, e.g. 'vessel', especially 'vessel to keep juridical documents', 'the third
stomach of ruminants', 'the rounded part of the Doric capital (IA). <IE *h,egħi-
'hedgehog'>
DIAL Myc. e-ki-no /Ekinos/.
●COMP As a first member in exɩvoµýτpa ‘the greatest kind of sea urchin, Echinus
melo' (Arist.; cf. Strömberg 1944: 23).
•DER Diminutives: έxivís ‘vessel' (Hp.), -íσкoç ‘id.', also 'hollow of the ear' (Poll.);
Exívov plant-name (Dsc.); Exivéα, -ñ 'skin of the hedgehog' (Hdn.), also a vessel
(Delos III³); Exɩvéɛç [m.pl.] a kind of Libyan spinous mouse (Hdt.); 'Exival or -ádɛç
[f.pl.] name of a group of islands in the Ionian Sea (B 635). ¿xivwdns ‘rugged' (Arist.,
Str.).
•ETYM Probably derived from exɩs 'snake' with suffixal -ĭvo- (i.e. -iHno-), so properly
“snake-animal” = “snake-eater”, as a taboo word for xnp. A suffix -n- is also found
in Arm. ozni ‘hedgehog' (IE *h,og¹-i(H)-n-), with o-grade; beside it, we find Gm.
words with --, e.g. OHG igil < PGm. *egila-, which could replace older *egina-.
Balto-Slavic has a derivative in -io-, e.g. Lith. ežỹs, SCr.CS ježv, IE *heģ³-io-. The
interpretation of Phr. εiç (= εic?) remains uncertain.
*xis, -ews [m.] ([f.]) ‘viper' (Att.). <IE *h₁eģ¹i- ‘snake’▷
⚫DER Diminutive Exídiov (Arist.) and the plant name extov (Dsc.; because of the
resemblance of the fruit to the head of a snake, Strömberg 1940: 54), Exiɛtov (Nic.);
further exiñεç [pl.] = xɛç (Nic. Th. 133, only a metrical variant?); exitɩç [f.] name of
a stone (Plin., after the color; cf. Redard 1949: 54). Fem. exiôvă 'viper' (IA, Hes. Th.
297), mostly considered to be a derivative in tα- from *¿xidvós (Schwyzer: 475),
together with exɩdv-años and -ýεis (Hell.); but this is not very probable, as -dva is a
typical Pre-Greek suffix; éxıdvă must have been a loan from Pre-Greek.
•ETYM If the interpretation of exivos is correct, exɩs must contain a palatal gr.
Similar words for 'snake', Skt. áhi- = Av. aži- and Arm. iž, should rather be
connected with öqis (*hegi-), since Av. and Arm. exclude a palatovelar.
Exupós [adj.] 'strong, tenable, secure' (Th., X.). ◄IE *seg"- ‘hold, have'>

=== page 269 ===

490
ĚXW 1
•COMP EV-Exupov [n.] 'pledge, security' (IA), hypostasis of ev exupų); besides
έvɛxvpά\w [v.] ‘to take a pledge' with ¿vɛxup-aσíα, -ασμа, -αστns et al.; also
εvεxupów [v.], -wµa [n.].
•DER ¿xvpótŋs ‘tenability, etc.' (Ph.), ¿xupów [v.] ‘to fasten' (Phot., Suid.). Oxupós
‘id.' (Hes., A., E.), ȧv-wxupos 'not fortified' (X. Ages. 6, 6, SIG 569, 7 [IIIª]) with
compositional lengthening, beside oxupóτηs (Plb.), oxupów (X., Arist.) together with
óxúρ-wμα, -wμátiov, -wolę, -wtiKÓÇ.
⚫ETYM Skt. sáhuri- 'victorious, strong' (RV) seems to be comparable; an old stem in
-u(s) is found in Gm., e.g. OHG sigu [m.] 'victory'. Beside the rebuilt u-stem in
ỏxv-, èxv-p-ós, there is the neutral s-stem in Skt. sáhas- ‘power, might, victory', Go.
sigis ‘victory', IE *ség¹os- (would be Gr. *xos). The adverb ox-a 'widely, by far❜
belongs here as well (cf. τaxúç: τáxα et al.; Schwyzer: 622f.). The interchange ox- :
EX- may be due to old ablaut, but secondary influence of "xw is also possible. See
► εxw.
Exw 1 [v.] 'to possess, retain, have', aor. 'to conquer, take (into possession)', frequently
also intr. 'to hold oneself, med. 'id.'. <IE *seg"- 'hold, have'>
•VAR Also pres. "σxw, aor. σxɛiv, čσxov, fut. εw, σxnow (II.), perf. act. σxηкα (Pl. Lg.
765a), med. žσxηa, aor. pass. σxé¤ŋv (late).
•DIAL Myc. e-ke /hek¹ei/.
COMP Very often with prefix in various mgs., е.g. ȧv-, ȧл-, εε-, εл-, кαT-, μεt-,
époσ-, ovv-. As a first member in e.g. ¿xé-qpwv, ¿x-éyyvos, ► ¿xeñevkŃs, ► ¿kexeɩpía;
also ioxέ-Oupov et al. (Hell.); cf. Schwyzer: 441; as a second member e.g. in лрoσ-,
σuv-εxηs with лpoσ-, ovv-éxεia.
•DER With e-grade (= present-stem): Exμα 'obstacle, support, defence' (Il.) with
Exuáw (H., sch.; cf. oxuálw below); Myc. e-ka-ma? is 'attitude, state, situation,
etc.', often in derivatives of the prefixed compounds, e.g. лрóσ-, кáð-ɛčiç from
époʊ-, kat-éxɛv (IA); together with (лpoσ-, кαе-) ►ÉKTIKÓç; ÉŽÑS S.V.; ¿xé-tàn,
-Tλov plough handle', cf. the explanations кai ǹ avλaž, kai ǹ σráðŋ toũ ápótpov
‘furrow; the blade of a plough' and ¿xελɛúεv· åpoτpiãv ‘to plough' in H.; ëktwp
‘holder' (Lyc. 100; also Pl. Cra. 393a as an explanation of the PN [s.v.]; Sapph. 157 as
an epithet of Zeus); ►έxupós. From εů έxεv: εúεžíα 'good condition' (IA; opposite
кaxɛžía from кaкwç εv) with ɛvék-tηs, -TIKÓS, -τέw, also -τía (Archyt.);
retrograde formation ɛɛžoç. ɛvquns 'well-grown' (H.). From the reduplicated
present (see below): loxás [f.] ‘anchor' (S. Fr. 761, Luc. Lex. 15); lengthened forms
ioxávw, -váw (Il.). From the zero grade (= aorist stem): oxéσuç 'situation, character,
relation, restraint' (IA), often in derivatives from prefixed compounds, e.g. àvá-,
έní-, vñó-, katá-σxɛσiç from áva-oxɛĩv, -éoðaɩ, etc.; σxñµa (cf. ox-now) ‘attitude,
form, appearance' (IA; Schwyzer: 523); secondarily oxέµa (H.), Lat. schěma [f.]
(Leumann Sprache 1 (1949): 206); besides onμaτíšw, with oxŋµát-lois, -ioµós, etc.;
verbal adjective ä-σXετoç 'uncontainable, irresistable' (II.); abstract formations like
Eлoxεσin 'attitude, pretext' (o 71), úлоσ×εσíη 'promise' (N 369, A. R.) also derive
from virtual verbal adjectives, cf. Schwyzer: 469, Holt 1941: 86f.; here also belong
*σxεpós (see ►¿лoxepw), ►oxedóv, ➤oxétλios, ‣oxolý, ►σкɛßpóç; further ►ioxúc.
From the o-grade: oxoɩ [m.pl.] 'keeper, container' (λчéves vnwv öxoɩ e 404); ỎXÓC
B
!
évia
491
‘firm, certain' (Ph. Byz.), further in verbal adjectives to prefixed compounds like ε-,
кát-, µétoxos (from ε-éxɛv, etc.); oxń [f.] ‘holding, support' (Call., Lyc., Ath.); to
the prefixed compounds σvv-, μεt-, ¿‹-, έn-oxý, etc. (from ovv-éxεɩv, etc.); óxεúç
"holder", 'strap of a helmet, clasp, bolt of a door, etc.' (Il.; cf. ►óxɛúw 'to mount',
etc.); oxavov 'holder of a shield' (Anacr., Hdt.), also oxávη (Plu.; cf. Chantraine 1933:
198); óxupóc, see ►¿xupós; öxµoç ‘fortress' (Lyc.), öðµ¤· лópëŋµɑ ‘garment fastened
with a buckle-pin' (H.) with óxµášw 'hold fast' (A., E.); adverb oxa 'widely, by far'
(őx ǎpiστos Il.), oxa in front of (ε. лávτwv Il.). Reduplicated formation:
► άvoкwxń, also (¿v) ovvεoxµâ? With compositional lengthening ►ɛvwxέw. See
further σUVOкWXÓTε (B 218).
•ETYM The present xw, reduplicated ï-ox-w (< *i-ox-w < *(σ)í-σx-w), has an exact
agreement in Skt. sáhate [pres.3sg.med.] 'overpower, conquer³ < *ség¹-e-). The zero
grade aorist and the other verbal forms are isolated, however (cf. LIV² s.v. *segh-
‘überwältigen, in den Griff bekommen'). In Greek, the word group underwent a
strong development of meaning; cf. Porzig 1954a: 115f. Moreover, the neutral s-stem
of Skt. sáhas- 'force, strength, victory', Av. hazah- ‘id.', Go. sigis (cf. on ►¿xupóc) is
missing in Greek. The root is also represented in Celtic, e.g. in the Gaulish names
Zɛyo-Souvov, Sego-vellauni.
Exw 2 [v.] 'to transport'. <IE *ueg"- ‘transport, drive'>>
•VAR Pamph. FEXετw, Cypr. aor. εƑεε (also Pamph. io-fɛčē?).
•DER From there xεσɩv. äpμασ 'with chariots' (H.), also oxos ‘chariot, carť,
►öxloç, ►òxetós, ► òxéw.
ETYM An old verb, represented in several IE languages, of which Greek preserves
only traces. Several parallel forms exist: FEXÉτw = Lat. vehitō; Skt. váhati = Av. vazaiti
= Lat. vehit 'carries, rides' (IE *uég¹-e-ti), Lith. vežù = OCS vezo̟ = Lat. vehō; Cypr.
εFεε corresponds with the old s-aorists Lat. vēxī, OCS věsú, Skt. ávākṣam. Some Gm.
words are also connected, e.g. ON vega 'move, weigh', Go. ga-wigan ‘move', etc.; less
certain are ToB wäsk- ‘stir' and Alb. vjedh ‘to steal', as alternative derivations can be
given. See Ŏxos for further formal correspondences. LIV² follows Schlerath SII 20
(1996): 379-87 in assuming an original meaning 'float, be suspended', whence 'be
carried (on a vehicle, boat, etc.)', which I find doubtful.
έvía [f.] ‘joy, play' (S. Fr. 3, Nic. Th. 880). ◄PG(V) ►
•VAR Ion. -ín. Also чa (EM 406, 8), ȧvía. έopτaí. Aάкwvɛç 'festivals (Lacon.)' (H.);
viá (H.), чiáddεiv = лαíεv (Ar.). Perhaps чivoç. τépч₁ç ‘enjoyment' (H.).
COMP As a second member in quλ-éчios (com.), óμ-εчo (AP). Also чεα. лαíуvɩa
‘playthings' (H.) [n.pl.], čyia (EM). Deverbal from чiáqµaí, -áσασðα [v.] (also with
άq-, έó-, кað-) ‘to enjoy, play' (Od.).
•DER Without anlauting vowel: чáðdɛv = лaí¶ɛɩv (Ar. Lys. 1302 [lyr.], H.), viά.
xapá, yɛλoíaσμa, лaíуva ‘joy, laughter, plaything', also (see DELG s.v. yiáddovti):
чíŋs µáкapoç, ɛεúdaíμwv blissful, happy'; víɛσσa. εúdaíμwν, μакаpía; чiɛvta. τà
avτá 'id.' (H.).
•ETYM Formation like the “verbs of disease" in -táw (Schwyzer: 732). Note the
variations: -, -, ȧ, the varying accentuation and чá (H.), чádav. For these

=== page 270 ===

492
€чw
reasons, the word must be Pre-Greek (Fur.: 139, 352, 376). Meier-Brügger MSS 50
(1989): 91-96 assumes a noun *seng wh-ti- ‘singing', with *чç from *μчç, but one
must wonder why *μч was not retained. This view does not explain the attested
variations, and there is no reason to assume that the word primarily referred to
music. Acc. to Dettori Glotta 74 (1996): 159-163, the gloss лроσεчá· лроσауóрεvolç,
kai ǹ rpós tɩva ò̟judía ‘greeting, also a gathering with sbd.' (H.) belongs here as well.
Dettori stresses the oxytone accent and the gloss oμlía, so that the word does not
belong to ¿v(v)εлw. The word would belong to the informal language; Scheller 1951
assumes that the initial vowel was lost due to the final accent, but the variation
would be better explained under the assumption that the word is Pre-Greek. The
forms чiɛσσa, viɛvτα (with a beside ε) may be explained if we assume a palatalized
cluster *ps-.
Eww [v.] 'to boil, seethe' (IA). <PG(V)►
●var Aor. ¿чñσal, fut. ¿yńow (IA), perf. ñ½ηкα (Ph.); new presents &чέw, -άw.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧq-, ovv-.
•DER č√ŋµɑ ‘what has been boiled, meal, soup' (IA) with Ɛyŋµatwdns (Dsc.), Hell.
ëуεµa (LXX; cf. Schwyzer 523), yŋoɩ ‘cooking' (IA); έyntńp, -týplov, -tŃs, -tikós
(Hell.); płóc 'boiled' (IA; with ǎл-εóðöç et al.), εчηtós ‘id.', also name of a fish (Ar.,
X.; cf. Strömberg 1943: 89), avós boiled, to be boiled' (Hp.), έyaλéos ‘id.' (Nic.;
after óлταλéоç [Hom.] et al.); also έéïva [n.pl.] of unclear mg. (PLond. 3, 1177, 217;
II³). From ǎлεçoç MoGr. åлóxτɩ (via àëóóðɩ(ov)) ‘dried food' (Crete), 'salted meať’
(Cyprus), see Hatzidakis Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 72f.; from έavós MoGr. чavós 'which
is roasteď, чávŋ ‘wheat', see Georgacas ByzZ 41 (1941): 380f.
•ETYM Cannot be separated from Arm. ep'em 'cook'. However, as Arm. p' can hardly
represent IE *ps (Pedersen KZ 39 (1906): 428), a pre-form IE *seph- has been posited,
which would have had an s-enlargement in Greek (Schwyzer: 706). Yet PIE did not
have a phoneme *ph. This means that the word is from a substrate, probably Pre-
Greek (cf. Fur.: 327, who compares Séqw/ Séчw 'soften').
This Greco-Armenian isogloss ousted old лéσσav. Cf. Porzig 1954a: 156. Another
expression for 'boil, seethe' is (έw.
Ewę 1 [f.] 'dawn, break of day' (II.). <IE *heus-ōs 'dawn'>
•VAR Acc. -w; Ion. (also Hell.) ǹwc, -oñç, Dor. áƑŵç, àƑŵp, gen. áƑŵ, Aeol. aűwç.
•COMP As a first member in έwo-pópos, Dor. ȧwo-qópos ‘bringer of dawn, morning
star' (Y 226, Pi. I. 4 (3), 24); see Wackernagel 1916: 100ff., where Hom. ¿wo-qópoç is
considered to be an epic Atticism; see also Chantraine 1942: 72 and (with improbable
hypothesis) Schwyzer: 440³.
•DER έwïoç, Éçoç, ñoños, nãos (see Wackernagel 1916: 106f.) 'of the morning, eastern'
(Il.), wλos 'belonging to dawn, a night long', of food, etc. (Att., etc.; on the
pejorative suffix -λ- Chantraine 1933: 239); adverb wɛv, epic ηwεv, Dor. ȧwev
'from the morning on, early in the morning' (II.) with έwvós ‘of the morning'
(Hdt., Hp.; cf. Wackernagel 1916: 104, Schwyzer: 490); Hom. ǹwеɩ in ǹã¤ɩ ëρó ‘early
in the morning'; explanation uncertain, cf. Schwyzer: 6286, Chantraine 1942: 246.
*WS 2
493
•ETYM Wackernagel 1955(2): 1151ff. thinks that the barytonesis in ɛ̃ws (as opposed to
ηws) can be explained from frequent weɛv, where it is regular (Schwyzer: 383). The
initial aspiration would be due to metathesis, as in ɛw (Schwyzer: 219; however,
acc. to Sommer 1905: 11f., it was taken from έo̟лépα). PGr. **àvhws < IE *heusós is
identical with Lat. aurōr-a (except for the added -a; cf. flōs: Flōr-a). With zero grade,
we find Skt. uṣás- [f.] 'dawn'. A corresponding r-stem, IE *heus-r-, hus-r-, is seen in
►aupiov, together with ayx-aupos 'near the morning' (A. R. 4, 111), in Lith. aušr-à
'dawn', Skt. usr-á- 'of the morning', usar-búdh- 'waking at dawn'. Of the other
cognates, OCS za ustra 'at dawn', Gm., e.g. OHG ōst(a)ra, -ün 'Easter' should be
mentioned. A full grade *h₂ues-r- with Schwebeablaut is found in e.g. Skt. vasar-há
(RV 1, 122, 3) epithet of the wind, meaning uncertain, vāsar-á- ‘of the morning', and
in Celt., e.g. MIr. fáir 'sunrise', IE *huōs-r-i-. There is a verbal root in Indo-Iranian
with sk-present: Skt. uccháti = Av. usaiti ‘lights up (of the morning), appears', from
IE *hus-sk-é-ti, and a full-grade athematic root aorist a-vas-ran. LIV² s.v. *hu̟es-
'(morgens) hell werden' connects Lith. aūšta, aūšti 'to dawn, break (of day)'. Cf.
▶ jikavós.
*ws 2 [pcl., prep.] ‘until, as long as' (Il.); prep. with gen. (rarely acc.) ‘till' (Hell.). <IE
*ieh,uot 'as long as, until'>
•VAR Epic noc (written εws, wc, see Chantraine 1942: 11, but also West Glotta 44
(1967): 135), Aeol. ǎoç, Dor. ǎç, Hom. also demonstr. 'for some time'.
⚫ETYM From PGr. *ǎƑos and identical with the Skt. relative yávat 'as long as', except
for the final consonant (adverbial -, which was added in Greek, but not always in
Doric; see on ŵs 1). See ►τέws, ►ös 1.

=== page 271 ===

1
i
Z
Çά- 'very', mostly strengthening in epic compounds like ►Čańç, (á-0ɛoç 'very godlike',
(ά-кoτoç 'very angry', Zá-λɛuкoç PN. < GR➤
ETYM Aeolic form of diá. Under unclear conditions, we find Sa- for (a-, but
conversely we also find (with inverse spelling?) (a- for expected da-, like in ά-лεdov
for dá-лɛdov, Ça-kópoç for *da-kópos, and probably also in ►Çakpvóɛɩç.
Çáукλŋ [f.] ‘sickle' (Nic. Al. 180). <?►
==
•VAR Čáyklov [n.] (Th. 6, 4, Call. Aet. Oxy. 2080, 73); бáукλov. Sρéлavov ‘id.' (H.).
•DER Čάyкλiov σкoλióν acc. to Str. 6, 2, 3. Záyкλŋ is also the name of a town in
Sicily (later Meσonvη), after the sickle-like shape of its harbour (Th. 6, 4); Zayêλañoɩ
'inhabitants of the town' (Hdt.).
⚫ETYM A Sicilian word (Th. l.c.) without etymology. According to Niedermann (see
WH and E-M s.v. falx), it is a Ligurian word, from which Lat. falx would be a loan as
well (doubted by De Vaan 2008 s.v. falx).
János adjunct of λaïqos ‘garment, rug' (Alc. 18, 7), perhaps ‘transparent. <GR➤
•ETYM Probably = dɩá-dŋλoç, 'transparent' = 'perforated', as per Wackernagel Glotta
14 (1925): 52, who pleads against connection with Sŋλéoµai. See ► Sñλoç.
Táɛɩ [v.] · ßiveĩ. kaì ëveĩ. Kúnpioɩ ‘has intercourse, breathes (Cypr.)' (H.). ◄IE *g″eiH-
'force'>
•ETYM In its first meaning, explained from *giá-įei (Kretschmer KZ 31 (1892): 383), a
denominative of *giá (Skt. jyá) beside ßíã < *g*íi̟ā ‘force' (see ►ßivéw), but this
requires a high age for the separation from ßía. In the meaning лvεч, the gloss is
supposed to stand for láŋ = *di-ά(F), from ǎ(F)ηµi with thematic inflection (litt. in
Frisk).
Cans [adj.] 'blowing strongly' (II.). <IE *h₂ueh,- 'blow'>
•VAR Also acc. -v (see Chantraine 1942: 209), gen. -oç (AP 9, 290).
•ETYM From *Siα-ans, with contraction of diá and the root of aŋµ, or with
compositional lengthening of the ā after Svo-anç.
Cake入tic → Čeke入tic.
,
Çakópos [m., f.] ‘temple servant' (Att. inscr. Vª, Hyp., Men., etc.); úño-Šakópos [f.]
'subaltern temple-servant' (Hdt.), ȧpxı-Çaкópoç 'higher temple-servant' (Laodiceia).
<?>
•VAR The accentuation is probably more correct than Çáкopoç; see below.

=== page 272 ===

496
Čakpvóεis
497
•DIAL Myc. da-ko-ro.
•DER Čαкoрεúш, úло- 'be a temple servant' (Delos, Thebes).
⚫ETYM Hieratic professional term. Semantically related and formally comparable is
vɛw-kópos ‘temple-guardian', which makes the analysis in (α-kópos very probable.
Here, (a- may stand for Sa- (cf. on (á), as in Çá-лεбоν for бá-лεdov; then (α-кóрoc
would properly mean “cleaner of the house” (related to ►kopέw; Solmsen IF 31
(1912/13): 453ff.)? This seems rather doubtful. In antiquity, the word was analyzed as
*Siα-kopoç; cf. the prefix in Stá-кovoç. The word must in any case be Aeolic; cf.
Solmsen IF 31 (1912/13): 453ff.
Çaкpvóɛiç [adj.] adjunct of Bávaτоç (Alc. Supp. 12, 8 = LP B 2a 8), probably replacing
Saкpvóɛç ‘with many tears' (influence of кpvóɛs 'horrible'). ◄GR➤
•ETYM See on ►Čá and Risch Mus. Helv. 3 (1946): 253ff.
Jáλn [f.] 'whirlwind, whirlpool, downpour' (Pi., trag., Pl.). <?>
•VAR Čáλos ‘whirlpool' (Nic. Th. 568).
•DER Denominative ptc. (alówσa (xáλača, Nic. Th. 252). Here also Čáλakɛç. έxĭvoi
'sea urchin; a vessel' (H.)?
⚫ETYM Poetic word without etymology. Bq connected it with Sívn, etc.; this is
formally difficult. In MoGr., it merged with σáλoc; cf. Hatzidakis IF 36 (1916): 301.
Jánɛdov [n.] = dáлεdov (Xenoph., Paros). ◄GR▷ →Čá and Čakópoç.
Taxpηns [adj.] ‘rushing violently, furious' (Il.); verse-initially always plur. ◄IE?
*greh₂u- 'oppress'>
•VAR Also written -xpεt-. Verse-initial (axpŋés (Nic. Th. 290), -āńs (Epic. in Arch.
Pap. 7, 6 Fr. 3, 1).
•ETYM From intensifying (a- < dɩa- and a second member belonging to the aor.
Expǎ(F)ov 'to assault, oppress'. If -ŋεiç, -ŋwv are replaced by (axpǎéɛç, -αéwv (cf.
Čаxpáσɛç αлvaíoυç 'sudden' [H.] which may stand for -aέaç), immediate
connection with the zero grade aorist may be obtained. Otherwise, it is necessary to
assume a full grade noun *xpñƑos (*xpāƑos) or a full grade verbal form. See Bechtel
1914 s.v. and Chantraine 1942: 41.
Cáv [f.] 'surf (Hell. poetry). <PG?>
•ETYM Expressive word. The supposed contamination of (áλŋ and λalay is an
improbable guess. Cf. Fur.: 176: Pre-Greek?
*Jaw = (ww.
ɛtaí [f.pl.] 'one-seeded wheat, spelt, Triticum monococcum' (Od., Hdt.), Hell. and
late also sing. (εtá (Thphr.), Čɛá (Čέα), -ŋ (pap. IIIª, D. H.; Dsc. and Gal. as a v.l.). <IE
*ieuh,- 'wheat, spelt'>
•COMP As a first member in (ɛí-Swpoc 'giving spelt (wheat)' (Il.; of ǎpoupa), (ɛó-
лʊpov n. 'kind of Triticum' (Gal.); as 2. member in quoí-Coos 'producing wheat'
(Hom., Orac. apud Hdt. 1, 67; of ala), Oiσɛ-léa PN (Lesb.). Both as a first and a
second member (ε-, -Coos were early (Emp., A.) associated with Čñv, (wń and
understood as 'lifegiving'.
!
•DER Čñvoç = Čéïvos ‘of spelt' (pap. IIª)?
•ETYM Related to Skt. yáva-, Av. yauua- [m.] ‘wheat, etc.’, Lith. plur. javai ‘wheať,
sing. jāvas. If the diphthong in (ɛaí is real, we have to start from PGr. *ČεƑ-чǎ, so a
tǎ-derivative of IE *ieuo- found in Skt. yáva-, etc. The monophthongal forms would
be secondary. However, if aα has metrical lengthening for (ε(F)aí (and if the epic
orthography was retained in this word, which was rare and probably exclusively
literary), then the Greek word agrees with the Indo-Iranian and Lithuanian forms.
The second member -(O(F)os (with regular o-grade of the root) contradicts a чă-
derivative. The first member (a- may stand for (ε(F)ε- (from *ieuh,-). See Bechtel
1914 s.v. Čɛídwpos and Chantraine 1942: 31. Cf. also Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 404; DELG
s.v. is unclear. Cf. ► Sŋaí.
Jɛlyápŋ [f.] · ó téttiž napà Zidýtať ‘cicala (Sid.)' (H.). <PG?, LW➤
•ETYM Pamphylian? See Gil Fernández 1959: 126. Onomatopoeic, acc. to
Brandenstein Kratylos 6 (1961): 169f. Not related to cicāda (Dressler Arch. Orbis 33
(1965): 185) as a Mediterranean word. Neumann 1961: 42 connects it with ►σiyaλooí.
Cf. Fur. index.
Cɛpá [f.] 'long robe kept by a belt', worn by Arabs and Thracians' (Hdt. 7, 69, 75).
<LW▸
•DER Cf. Čεipopópos (Antim. 98, Wyss).
ETYM Probably a loan. Latte refers to (rɛpalov [sic] λõлоç in an Arcadian
inscription, SEG 11, 1112.
.
ɛɩpaτiç [m./f.] ·чµáτióν τɩ Σúρiwv 'Syrian garment' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown.
TEKEλTidεç [m./f.] Aeol. for yoyyuλides 'turnips' or кoλoкúvтαι 'gourds' (Nic., apud
Ath. 369 a). PG➤
⚫ETYM Unknown. Cf. Çaкɛλτídɛç = (εкελτídɛç (Amerias and Timachidas apud Ath. 9,
369 a), Čaкɛλtídɛç кoλoкúvται, η yoуyuλídɛç (H.) and (aкuvėídɛç· кoλoкÚvται (H.).
Fur: 256 compares Oкéλov. τηv уoyyvλída. Aáкwvɛç (H.), and believes the word is
Pre-Greek. Is (ε- from *d'a- (with influence of the palatal on the vocalism)?
чεúуvч [v.] 'to bring under the yoke, harness; to join, unite? (II.). <IE *ieug- 'yoke,
connect'>
•VAR Also them. -úw; aor. (ɛužαɩ, pass. 【vуñvαι, Čεv×¤ñvaι, fut. Čɛúžш, perf. pass.
Čɛvyµaɩ (Il.), perf. act. (εvxa (Philostr.).
•COMP Often with prefix, like ȧva-, ȧño-, diα-, εñ-, кατα-, σv-, úло- et al.
●DER 1. Čɛñ¾ıç ‘yoking, bridging' (Hdt.), often with prefix, e.g. σú-, diá-, ¿ní-Zevčis
(IA). 2. úло-, ȧvα-, ларα-, àлo-čvyn, etc. (since Va), as a simplex only pap. (IV-VIP)
meaning ‘pair³. 3. (εūуua 'what is used for joining, bridge of boats, canal lock, etc.'
(Th., E., Plb.) with чɛvуµατɩкóν ‘payment for passing through a canal-lock with a
ship' (pap.). 4. (ɛúyλŋ part of the yoke ('yoke-cushion, collar³, cf. Delebecque 1951: 60
and 179), etc. (Il.; see below). 5. ►Čɛûyoç, s.v. 6. ►Čuyóv, s.v. 7. -Čuč, see ►Čuyóv. 8.
(EUкτnpιos 'fit for yoking, connecting', ntr. ‘yoke' (A.), Čɛvкτηpía [pl.] 'ropes for
strapping up a rudder' (Act. Ap. 27, 40); later 9. ČɛUкTηp 'connector' (J.), fem. -ɛɩpa

=== page 273 ===

498
Geiyos
(Orph.); cf. Chantraine 1933: 45, 62f. and below. 10. (Siα-, etc.) (EUкtıkóç (Hell.). 11.
Čεvкτós (Str., Plu.; see below).
•ETYM Beside the athematic vu-present Čεúуvчμ (with full grade, for which cf.
► Sɛíкvч), the other languages have forms with nasal infix, e.g. Skt. yunák-ti ‘yokes,
connects' (athem.), Lat. iungō (them.), Lith. jung-iù (yod-present) 'id.', or forms
without nasal, like Av. yaog-at [3sg.pret.] (athem.), yuj-yeite [3sg.pres.] (zero grade.
yod-present). Most other Greek forms also show a full grade: the future and the σ-
aorist, in addition to the late agent noun (εvкτηp (cf. Skt. yoktár-), the tɩ-derivative
Çεūšis, and the late verbal adj. Çɛvktós (as against Skt. (prá-)yukti-, yuktá-). The only
exceptions are the pass. aorist úуηy and the nouns in -Tuyn. The A-derivative (ɛúy-
An is unconnected with Lat. iugulum ‘throat' and Skt. yúgalam ‘pair'.
(ɛñyoç [n.] ‘yoke, team, pair' (Il.). <IE *ieug- ‘yoke, unite'>>
•DIAL Myc. ze-u-ke-u-si [dat.pl.] ‘men who look after the span'.
●COMP As a first member e.g. in (ɛvyo-tpópos ‘who keeps a pair' (Att. inscr. IVª,
etc.), (evy-nλátns 'driver of a span' (S., X.).
•DER Čɛvyíτηç, fem. -tɩs 'owner of a span', name of one of the Solonic classes (Arist.),
also 'walking in a span', etc. (Hell.); thence (evyiotov 'tax of the (ɛvyĭtať (Arist.).
Cevyiov 'door panel (Hell. inscr.); (evyis [f.] 'knoť (pap.). Denominative verb
Čevyi w 'yoke together, unite' (LXX, pap.).
•ETYM The plur. Jɛúyɛa, -yŋ is formally identical with Lat. iūgera, -um (secondary
sing. iūgerum) and MHG jiuch ‘a land measure'. For the meaning, cf. MoHG Joch,
Juchert as a measure of land; properly 'the amount of land a span can plough in one
day'. Beside the s-stem IE *iéug-os- (whence also OLat. plur. iouxmenta > iumenta,
sing. -um 'span'), there is also an l-stem in (ɛúy-λŋ (see ►【ɛúyvu̟); cf. on ►štalov
for the change of suffix. See further ►Čuyóv.
Zɛúc [m.] Zeus (Il.). <IE *dieu- ‘heaven'>
•VAR Boeot. Lac., etc. Aɛúç, voc. Zεū, gen. Al(F)ós, dat. (loc.) At(F)í, dat. also Alfɛí
(e.g. Aifɛi-qiλoc), Myc. di-we, acc. Zñv, since Hom. also Aí-a and Zñv-a (whence
Zηv-óc, -í); nom. Zv (A. Supp. 162 [lyr.]; or perhaps voc.), Záv (Pythag., Ar.), Zác
(Pherec. Syr.), gen. Zavós (inscr. Chios IV [?] etc.); note Aãv (Theocr. 4, 17); more
forms in Schwyzer: 576f., Leumann 1950: 288ff.
DIAL Myc. dat. di-we /diwei/.
•COMP As a first member in univerbations: with gen. Atóσ-кoupoɩ, also Atεσ-
koupídov (Priene etc.), with dat. Aɩfɛí-qɩdos, with various stem forms e.g. in Sɩo-
yεvns; also Zŋvó-Sotos (for Atóσ-doτoc), etc. As a second member in ►ěvdioç,
► εúdía, etc., see also avτódiov.
•DER See on Sios.
▶
⚫ETYM The old Indo-European word for 'heaven' and name of the god of heaven and
of daylight, preserved especially in Anatolian, Indo-Aryan, Greek and Italic: Zɛúç =
Skt. dyáuḥ (god of) heaven, day', Lat. Iovis, from IE *diēus. Also related is Hitt. šīu-,
šīuna- 'god' (on which see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.), with cognates Pal. tiuna- 'god', Lyd.
ciw- 'id.'.
Céw
499
Other old correspondences are ZεÜ лάτεp = Lat. Iupiter, Zñv = Skt. dyám, Lat. diem
(whence a new nom. diēs, Diëspiter). The other oblique cases Auf-óc, -εi, -i, and Aia
agree with Skt. diváḥ, divé, diví, dívam, of which Aía and dívam are parallel
innovations.
Recent formations in Greek are Zñva (after Aía), whence Znvóc, -í, which continues
the old acc. *die(u)m with early loss of the *u, which is also seen in Skt. Dyam. The a
in Záç, Záv, Zavós spread from Elean Olympia, where η became ā, see Leumann
1950: 288ff. (following Kretschmer Glotta 17 (1929): 197).
It is has been assumed that IE *dieu- is an agent noun of the verb seen in Skt. dideti
'shine', Gr. Séaτo 'shone'. However, this is doubtful as the verb was *deih₂-, with
final laryngeal, which is absent from *dieu-. Beside *dieu-, there is an old appellative
for 'god' in Skt. devá-, Lat. deus, Lith. diēvas, etc., all from thematic IE *deiuo-, which
probably meant 'the heavenly one', as a derivative from the noun for 'heaven'. It is
probable that this thematization started from an older nominative *dei-u- (see
Beekes 1985: 85); we are dealing with an original hysterodynamic u-stem. After
separating the suffix, it is possible to compare IE *di-n- 'day' as well, as found e.g. in
Proto-BSI. *d(e)in- ‘day', Lat. nün-dinae 'market-day', Skt. madhyám-dinam ‘mid-
day', etc.
(équpos [m.] 'west wind', also personified (II.). <IE? *h¸ieb"- 'futuere'>
•DIAL Myc. ze-pu₂-ro; uncertain is the interpretation of ze-pu₂-ra3 (see Aura Jorro).
•COMP As a second member in 'Eлεчúρɩɩ Аoкpoí name of the western (Italic)
Locrians (Hdt.), also ε-(équpos lying towards the west, western' (Hell.); both
hypostases from εnì Téqupov; qiλo-équpos loving the west wind' (AP).
•DER CEQúpios belonging to the west wind' (Od., Arist.); with the same meaning
Čεqup-кóç (Arist., Thphr.), -nos, fem. -ηis (Nonn.), -íτηç, -îτɩç, also epithet of
Aphrodite as the goddess of cape Zɛôúpιov äǎкpov in Lower Egypt (Call.);
patronymic Zɛqupídns (Thasos; Bechtel 1921(3): 140).
•ETYM Perhaps, as per Buttmann 1925: 1144; related to Jópos ‘dark, west, which
DELG calls ‘certain'; see ►Çópoç. Likewise, Risch Mus. Helv. 25 (1968): 205-213, with
a suggestion for the formation. Peters 1980a: 96f. counters that Schwebeablaut
*heibh beside *hieb- has no motivation, but Cheung 2007 now suggests a
reduplicated present *he-hibh-. However, a development *Hi-> (- is unlikely, as
most evidence rather points to the contrary (note vyɩns < *hiu-gih,-). The root
*hieb is found in Skt. yábhati 'copulate', Ru. jebú ‘id., ToB yäp- ‘enter', etc.
Alternatively, is the word Pre-Greek, with PG *a turning up as ε after the palatal *dy?
Çew [v.] 'to boil, seethe' (mostly intrans., see Brunel 1939: 198f.). <IE *ies- 'boil, foam'>
•VAR Aor. (ε(σ)σat (II.), late forms (évvv (to éσα after oẞéσai: oẞévvvμ et al.),
ECeoquan, GéoOnv.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àva-, άлО-, Èк-, εл-, ÛÑερ-.
•DER (ává-, čк-, Ůлép-)(éσɩç ‘seething, boiling' (Pl., Arist.); (¿ní-, áñó-)\éµa ‘boiling,
decoction' (LXX, medic.), also àлó-чεσµа ‘id.' (PHolm.); čк-(ε(σ)µα 'eczema'
(medic.); άvá-εσμos ‘boiling up' (Aët.); verbal adj. (ék-, úñép-)εστós ‘boiled,
seething, hot' (Arist., Str.) with (εστóτηs 'heat' (Paus.). With ablaut, but nevertheless

=== page 274 ===

500
ñlos
probably late: Cón. tò έnávw toũ µελτоç H., according to Eust. 906, 52 'foam on the
milk'.
•ETYM The thematic root present (éw, from PIE *ies-oH (cf. Čɛσ-tóç, (éo-µa), is
identical with Skt. yasati (gramm.) ‘seethe, boil and Gm. verbs like OHG jesan
'ferment, foam'. In Skt., a yod-present yás-ya-ti and a reduplicated yéṣati < *ia-is- are
found; Av. yaēš-iia- (in yaēšiiantīm [ptc. acc.sg.f.]) 'boil' seems to be a mix of these
formations. The verb is also found in ToA yäs- ‘boil', 3sg.pres. ysäṣ, ToB yayāsau
[ptc.pret.]; further, in Alb. ziej < IE *ies-eie/o-), according to Mann Lang. 28 (1952):
38. Celtic has nominal formations, e.g. Gallo-Rom. *iestā ‘foam', MW ias 'boil, foam'.
Çñλos [m.] ‘zeal, emulation, jealousy' (Hes. Op. 195). ◄IE? *ieh₂- ‘pursue, avenge’▷
●VAR Dor. Čāλoç (late also ntr.; cf. Övɛdoç, µãσoç et al.; see Schwyzer: 521, Schwyzer
1950:38).
•COMP As a first member in (λó-tʊños ‘formed by zeal, jealous' with -tuïéw, -tvñía
(Att.); often as a second member, e.g. ä-, kakó-Šŋλoç, Dor. IIoλú-Čaλos PN.
•DER ČŋλŃµwv ‘jealous' (ε 118, Call., Opp.; after the adj. in -nuwv, see Chantraine 1933:
173), together with ŋŋµσúvη (Q. S.); Čηλaïoç ‘id.' (AP); (ηλoσúvη = Čñλos (h. Ap.
100; cf. Porzig 1942: 227); Čŋŋ [f.] 'female rival' (X. Eph. 2, 112, Aristaenet. 1, 25
codd.). Denominative verbs: 1. (nów 'vie with, emulate; admire, praise' (IA since.
Hes. Op. 23) with \\wσ ‘emulation, zealous pursuit, jealousy' (Th.), Čńλwµa
‘emulation, object of ambition' (E., D.), (½λwτns ‘emulator, zealous admirer',
“zealot” (Att., Hell.), -wtiкóç ‘emulating' (Arist.); 2. (ãλéw ‘be zealous for' (Delphi
Iª); 3. Čŋλɛúw = (nów (Democr. 55 [v.l.], Simp. in Epict. [VIP]), -ɛvτýs (Eust.).
⚫ETYM Belongs to ►【ŋtéw, díčŋuai, etc.; see Zητp for an etymology.
nuía [f.] 'loss, damage, penalty' (IA). <?►
•DIAL Dor. Čāμía.
•COMP As a second member in ȧ-, ¿n-è̟é̟µos (-ā-) et al.
•DER 【ŋµwông ‘damaging' (Pl., X.) and the denominative (ŋutów 'damage, punish'
(IA) together with Čŋµíwµa ‘penalty, fine, loss' (Pl., X.), -wots 'punishment' (Arist.),
-wτnç 'executioner' (Eust., Sch.), -wτIKкóç 'subject to a .' (Vett. Val.).
⚫ETYM Sommer 1905: 157f. analyzed it as (n-μíα and connected it with ►ñλoç,
► Intéw, ► dílnuai; for the semantics ‘zeal', 'fìne', cf. OE anda ‘zeal' with OHG antōn
'punish'. Connection with Skt. dīná-, Gr. ► Sɛiλóç from IE *deiH- (Kuiper Glotta 21
(1933): 281f.) is quite uncertain. See also Zηtnp.
ñτα [n.] the sixth letter of the Greek alphabet (Pl.). <LW Sem.>
•ETYM From Semitic, cf. Hebr. zajit, Aram. zētā (Lewy 1895: 169f.; see Schwyzer:
1404). The idea that (ñτα continues Hebr. zajin and was subsequently reshaped after
Bita, ita, Oita is unnecessary.
【ŋτέw [v.] 'to search, research, inquire, investigate' (E 258). <?>
●var Aor. Čistñoal, Čntηßñvai (IA), perf. ¿Čýtyka (Din.); Dor. ptc. Čáτɛσα (Theoc. 1,
85).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àva-, έni-, ov-Čistéw.
Gigáviov
501
•DER Also Tεúw (Hes., h. Hom.), (ατɛúw (Alcm.). Derivatives: (άvα-, εк-, εл-,
ov-)τnois 'search, query, inquiry, consideration' (IA) with ητýolµos (X.);
(E)τηua (object of) inquiry' (IA) together with ηηµáτ (Arr., Lib.),
【ητηµατiкóç (sch.); (έk-, ov-)\ηäηtés ‘researcher', in plur. the name of a juridical
official in Athens (Att.), together with (èn-, ov-)\ntηtiкóç ‘leaning towards inquiry'
(Att.). Cf. further ► Zytýp.
•ETYM Formation like aitέw, daτέoµai, ápτáw, etc. (Schwyzer: 705f.), thus derived
from a nominal form in -to-; cf. especially Arc. Čaτós (IG 5(2), 4: 22). The primary
verb is found in reduplicated ►Sínua, and the root left traces in (ños, ►Čnuia.
For the etymology (from the IE root *ieh2-, as established by García Ramón, in:
Isebaert 1993: 71-84), see Zητηp.
.
Znτńp [m.] • Zɛú<ç> ¿v Kúлpó (H.). ◄IE *ieh₂- ‘search, inquire'>
•VAR Zaτηp; further 【ýtwp in Čηtópwv. Čistoúvtwv. уpáqovσɩ dè viol (ŋtijtópwv
(H., Phot.); tрóv. τòν SηµóкOLVOV 'executioner' (H.) with (ατрεúw. έv μvλ@vi
Baoavi w 'to labor in a treadmill' EM 408, 12 and pε‰ov. τò τŵν doúλwv
кoλαστηplov instrument for correcting slaves' (H., Phot., com., Herod.; (τpεov
acc. to Hdn. Gr. 1, 372, 7; 515, 24); details in Fraenkel 1910: 144f.
•ETYM The gloss is interpreted admirably by García Ramón 1999c: 77-96, who shows
that 【ητýp means ‘avenger', just like Ved. yātár- (I 32, 14ab). The latter is derived
from yā- 2 'to ask, pray, require, desire'. This meaning agrees well with that of (ητέw,
and further Čñλos and 【ŋuía ‘punishment'. The PIE root was *ieh₂-. See ►Síčŋuaι,
►Čñλos, ►Čŋuía, ▶Čŋtéw.
Tyyißepi [n.] 'Arabian spice-plant, ginger' (Dsc., Gal.). <LW Ind.>
VAR Also is [m., f.] (Edict. Diocl.).
⚫ETYM From MInd. (Pāli) singivera- ‘id.', Skt. śṛngavera- [n.], in turn from Tamil; see
Turner 1966 n°. 12588. From Lat. zingiberi came French gingembre, whence MoE
ginger.
.
iyyos [noun] ó τшν µεàσσшv ñ×оç, ½ τãν óµоíшv 'the sound of bees, or of like
animals' (H.). <ONOM>
•ETYM Onomatopoeic; see Schwyzer: 331. It is probable that (tyyów 'to drink'
(Nicostr. Com. 38; Cilician) belongs here as well. D'Arcy W. Thompson Class.
Quart. 40 (1946): 44 reads µuñv for óμoiwv, and refers to Lat. zinzala ‘gnať.
yvic, -ídos [f.] a kind of lizard (Arist. HA 604b 24). <PG(V)►
•VAR v.ll. Číyvns, Čiyvúc, diyvúc; deчuvúç may be a simple mistake; see below.
•ETYM Unknown. The variants with us, -ns may be unimportant, but the form with
8- may be a (real, spoken) simplification of original *d'ign-. Clearly a Pre-Greek
word. Is Sɛчμvú a mistake for *Sч or dy?
ávov [n.] 'darnel, Lolium temulentum' (Ev. Matt. 13, 25, Gp., EM). <LW Orient.
(Sum.)>
ETYM A loanword; cf. Lewy 1895: 52. Strömberg 1944: 43f. recalls the plant name
Závŋ (Zapdɩavý; Hippiatr.) and άµašavídeç. ai µndéaɩ ‘apple trees' (H.). DELG states

=== page 275 ===

502
Čilupov
that the word entered Greek from the Jews and Christians, and thus ultimately goes
back to Sum. zizan 'wheat' (as the plant resembles wheat).
Tiupov [n.] 'a tree of which the fruit is the jujube, Rhamnus jujuba' (Colum., Edict.
Diocl., Gp.). <LW Orient.>>
⚫ETYM Of unknown origin. MoFr. jujube (from MLat. jujuba) derives from Greek, as
well as perhaps Syr. zūzfā; see Sommer 1905: 154, WH s.v. jujuba. I see no reason for
Szemerényi's suggestion (from Durante AION-L 8 (1968): 25f) of original *\v\upov.
Acc. to Barnhart 1988, it is from MoP zayzafun. It could be Pre-Greek (cf. σéσvqoç,
Zioupos).
Çóp* = Sopxác.
Tópos [m.] 'darkness, west' (II.). <?>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in (ooo-dns 'dark-colored' (Hp.).
•DER \oqɛpós 'dark' (Hes., Hp., Arist.), (oqwdŋs ‘id.' (Hp., Arist.), also (ócios (AP),
(ópɛos (v.l. Nic. Al. 501). Denominative verb (opóquat, -ów 'to get, make dark' (AP,
Hld.) with (óqwʊis (sch.). Cf ▸(équpos; cf. yvópoc, ▸dvóyoç, etc.
•ETYM Improbable hypotheses from Vendryes REGr. 23 (1910): 74 and Petersen
AmJPh. 56: 59. There is no IE etymology. It is often connected (DELG) with (équpos,
which seems possible but is not certain; Svócoç has also been compared.
Tuyóv [n.] ‘yoke' (Il.), also metaph., e.g. of a crossbeam, of the rowing benches
connecting the two ship sides, of the tongue of a balance, of a pair, of a row or a rank
of soldiers (oppos. στoîxoç), as a land measure. In western Eurasia, from antiquity
until quite recently, a single pole was used with a crossbeam at the end, i.e. the yoke,
which originally "joined" two draught animals. The oldest use of yokes was for
"paired draught" of oxen. <IE *ieug- 'connect'>
•VAR Hell. mostly -ós [m.], rarely earlier, see Schwyzer 1950: 37.
•COMP Often in compounds, e.g. лoλú-\vyoç ‘with many rowing benches', (uyó-
Sεσμov 'yoke-strap' (Il.), also Čvyŋ-pópos 'carrying a yoke' (A., metrical beside (uyo-
pópos; Schwyzer: 439¹).
•DER Several derivatives: 1. (úytov 'rowing bench' (Hell.). 2. Čuуíσкov (IG 22, 1549: 9
[Eleusis approx. 300], meaning unclear). 3. Túyaiva the hammer-headed shark
(Epich., Arist.; after the shape of the skull, Strömberg 1943: 35). 4. (vyiç 'thyme' (Dsc.;
naming motive unknown, Strömberg 1940: 56). 5. Čoúywvɛp (= *(úywveç). Bóɛç
έpyátai. Aάkwves 'working oxes (Lacon.)' (H.). 6. Švyítηs name of a rower (sch.),
fem. Čuyiτıç Hera as goddess of marriage (Nicom. apud Phot.). 7. Čvyía 'maple'
(Thphr.) properly “yoke-wood” (see Strömberg 1937: 114), because the hard maple
was mainly used to make yokes (even in southern Italy to our day), see the refs. in
Frisk; different Strömberg 1940: 56 (after the fruits attached in pairs). 8. (úyaστpov
'wooden cist, chest' s.v. ►σíуiστpov. Adjectives: 9. (úyios ‘of the yoke, etc.' (Att., etc.;
also as a nautical expression, Morrison Class. Quart. 41 (1947): 128ff.). 10. чúyччoç 'id.'
(Plb.). 11. Čuуıкós of the tongue of a balance' (Nicom. Harm.). Adverbs: (vy-ádŋv
(Ph.), Čuy-ndóv (Hld.) 'pairwise'. Denominative verbs: 1. (uyów 'to yoke, connect (by
a crossbeam); to shut, hold the balance' (A., Hell.) with (úyшµa ‘bar, crossbeam'
i
\wάypia
503
(Plb.), úywous 'balancing' (Hell.), *(úywepov in the denominative aor. ipv.
Čuywopioov (Ar. Nu. 745; meaning uncertain, 'weigh' or 'shut'?). 2. (vyέw 'to form a
row or rank' (Plb.). Beside (uyóv, as a second member, the root noun -【vž, e.g. ǎ-‹vě
‘unconnected, unmarrieď, óµó-, σú-(v yoked together, connected' (also ä-, ò̟µó-,
σú-uyoc), see Chantraine REGr. 59-60 (1946-1947): 231f.
•ETYM Old name of a device, retained in most IE languages, e.g. Hitt. iugan, Skt.
yugám, Lat. iugum, Germ., e.g. Go. juk, IE *iugóm; more forms in Pok. 509f. and WH
and E-M s.v. iugum. The root noun -u also in Lat. con-iux 'spouse', Skt. a-yúj- 'not
forming a pair, uneven' (formally = ǎ-(vε except for the accent), sa-yúj- 'connected,
companion', etc. Cf. (εúуvч and ►Čɛūyoç. Rix 1976: 60, 70 suggests Hi-, but more
likely seems plain *i- on account of the reflex of *Hi- in ►vyɩńs.
uos [m., n.] Egyptian or northern [LSJ] beer' (Thphr., Str.; the Egyptians did not
know wine acc. to Hdt. 2, 77, A. Supp. 952f., but this is wrong, see Masson RPh. 88
(1962): 50). <LW? Egypt.>
•VAR Pap. almost only (ūτoç (-ú-; see LSJ); the v is long in verse, LSJ.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in Šuto-rolós, -έw, -ía 'beer-brewer, brew, brewing'
(pap.).
•DER (úðɩov· åλqítov ñóσɩç ‘drink from barley' (H.), \uτãç ‘brewer³, (uτŋpá 'beer-
tax', Šutikóç, ntr. -óv ‘id.' (pap.).
•ETYM The meaning suggests Egyptian origin (Sommer 1905: 153, Peruzzi Humanitas
1 (1947): 138f., Nencioni Stud. ital. fil. class. 16 (1939): 212). The comparison with (úµn
might point to IE origin (Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 143). The variation 0/τ seems to
point to Pre-Greek, but there is no confirmation. A Greek suffix -0os is doubtful; cf.
Chantraine 1933: 365-8. Henning (Henning BSOAS 11 (1943-1946): 720 and Henning
BSOAS 28 (1965): 245) thinks that the word was taken from Scythian; cf. Sogd. zwtk
(read: zute) 'alcoholic drink, beer', as in the case of άkiváкns.
Tõµŋ [f.] ‘leaven, beer-yeast' (Arist.). <IE *iuHs- ‘mix, bring in movement' ?>
●COMP Compounds like (uμ-oupyós 'who prepares leaven' (pap.), ä-\u̟µoç
'unleavened' (Pl., Hp.).
●DER Švµítns (äptos) ‘leavened bread' (Cratin. 99 [?], Hp., X.); \vµwdŋs 'like leaven'
(Arist.). Denominative verbs: 1. Ču̟µóo̟μai, -ów ‘to be leavened; ferment' (Hp., Plu.)
with Cúμwσiç 'fermentation' (Pl. Ti. 66b usw.), ľúµшμα 'fermented mass' (Pl. Ti. 74b,
Nic.); uμ-wτóc fermented', -wτIкóç ‘inducing fermentation' (Diocl. Med.). 2. Čuμíčw
'be like leaven' (Dsc.).
•ETYM Like ǎλ-μn 'salt water' et al. (Chantraine 1933: 148), (úµη may be derived from
a noun: an IE word for 'fermentation, soup', Skt. yuṣ-, Lat. iūs [n.]. Thus, Greek
would continue QIE *iuHs-meh₂ (on the phonetics, see Schwyzer: 333). Other
derivatives (or reshapings) of this s-stem are Skt. yüṣ-án-, yüṣ-á- ‘id.', Lith. júš-é 'fish
soup, bad soup', SCr. júha 'soup', Finn. juusto, ON ostr 'cheese' (PGm. *jus-ta-), etc.
At the basis is probably a verb with the meaning ‘mix', Skt. yáuti, Lith. jáuju, jáuti
(jaūti). See also ►Čμóc.
Twάypia [n.pl.] ransom for a living person' (II.). <GR➤
•DER (wάypios pertaining to a ransom' (Babr.).

=== page 276 ===

504
Twμós
•ETYM Formed like ȧvdp-áypia 'what is taken upon the capture of a man, exuviae'
509), μox-áуpiα 'fine for a caught adulterer' (0 332), et al.; see Wackernagel KZ 33
(1895): 47. Univerbation from (wòv åypɛïv with the suffix -to-. Thence also the verb
(wypέw ‘take somebody prisoner, grant a prisoner his life', in Hom. (Il.) only pres.
(wypɛɩ, -ɛitɛ, aor. ¿(wypŋσa, -ñ³ŋv (IA; Hom. has (woùs &λov, (wòv ëλɛ). From
(wypέw: 1. (wypía, -in 'take sbd. prisoner alive' (Hdt., Plb., Str.) with (wypiãç [m.]
'who was taken prisoner alive' (Ctes.); 2. (wypɛiov 'cage, especially for fishes' (Aq.,
Str., Plu.). Here also (άypη 'pit to catch animals? See Zaypɛúç. Cf. Chantraine
1956a: 51 and Janni Quaderni Urbinati di Cultura Classica 4 (1967): 3, 20:
Twµós [m.] ‘sauce, soup' (Asios, Ar., Arist.). <?>
COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. εv-(wμov [n.] ‘Eruca sativa' (Thphr.; properly
'making good sauce'; cf. Strömberg 1940: 107).
⚫DER Diminutives (wμíov (pap. IIa), -ídiov (Ar.), -áptov (med.); (wµíλη· ävηov 'dill'
(H., Phot; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 249). Denominative verb (wμɛúw boil
into soup' (Ar., Hp.) with (wµɛúμaτα [pl.] 'soups' (Ar. Eq. 279; cf. Chantraine 1933:
188).
•ETYM Generally connected with (úµŋ, but ablaut ō(u) : ū (Schwyzer 346) is
improbable. On the suffix -μo-, see Schwyzer: 492 and Chantraine 1933: 132ff.
Differently, Bréal MSL 12 (1903): 314f. (to (έw). See discussion on úμun. Connection
with (έw presupposes that *ios-mo- developed into (wμós regularly.
Zwvvvu, -pai [v.] 'to gird' (II.). <IE *ieh¸s- ‘gird'>
VAR Aor. Coal, -aσbai (Il.), fut. (wow, perf. med. (w(σ)μα, aor. pass. (wσñval,
perf. act. wka; -úw (Hp.).
•COMP Often with prefix: Siα-, úло-, лερɩ- еt al.
•DER 1. (diá-, лεрí-, vлó-, σú-)‹ãµa (Hell. also woμa; see below and Schwyzer: 523)
‘girdle, loincloth' (II.) with лɛpèwµáτiov ‘id.' (Hell.) and rɛpišwµatíaç ‘forming a
girdle' (of erysipelas; Orib.). 2. Cóvn 'girdle', also 'waist' (II.) with the diminutive.
(ávov (Ar., Arist.), -ápiov (comm. Arist.); (wv-taños 'with the size of a girdle' (Ath.
Mech.; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 49), (wvĭTIC 'striped' (кaduɛía; Dsc.);
лεpiávɩov, -íðɩov 'dagger worn on the girdle' (Hell.). 3. (woτnp 'warrior's belt' (Il.;
see von Wilamowitz 1889 313, Trümpy 1950: 89), often metaph., also as a name of a
promontory on the west side of Attica (Hdt.) with Zwoτnpios, -α epithet of Apollo
and Athena (inscr. Va [Athens, Delphi], etc.). 4. (woτpα [pl.] 'girdle' (38), (dia-,
nepi-)\wotpa [f.] ‘loincloth, headbanď (Hell.). 5. (wtúc (or (wyúc). Oúpač ‘armour'
(H.). 6. (ǎ-, ɛű-, etc.) (woτóç '-girdedď (Hes.).
•ETYM The verbal adjective (wσtóç has an exact parallel in Av. yāsta-, Lith. júostas,
all from IE *iehs-to-. In Balto-Slavic, we find yod-presents Lith. júosiu (inf. júosti),
OCS po-jašą (inf. -jasati) ‘gird'; in Iranian, a secondary formation aißi-iāŋhaiiāṇte
[3pl.pres.med.] 'id.' (IE *iehs-eie-). A relic of the athematic root present is perhaps
found in ovσw. (wvvúow (Thess.) (H.); it agrees with OLith. juos-ti [3sg.pres.].
The Greek nasal present (ovvvμt is a recent formation after the aor. stem. Further
close correspondences are (õua (< IE *i̟ehs-mṇ) and Lith. juosmuō ‘girdle' < IE
(ww
505
ieh¸s-mỗ[n], (wvη < *iehs-neh, and Ru.CS po-jasnú ‘id.' < iehs-ni-); cf. further Skt.
rāsnā- ‘girdle' for *yāsnā- after raśaná- ‘knot, girď.
\wpós [adj.] ‘vehement, strong, unmixed, of wine (I 203). ◄IE *ieh¸-ro- (or *ioH-ro-)
'strong'>
●COMP E.g. (wpo-лóτηs ‘drinker of unmixed wine' (late), ε-(wpos 'completely
unmixed' (IA).
⚫ETYM Solmsen IF 14 (1903): 426 compared it with OCS jaro 'strong, hard, serious',
which seems unobjectionable. See also εл(αpéw.
\wpvai [pl.] (IG 4, 823: 46 [Troezen]) = Siwpuyaí. ◄GR➤
⚫ETYM See von Blumenthal Glotta 18 (1930): 154². Cf. (@pv = Sɩwpv (pap.). So is it
simply a dialectal form?
ww [v.] 'to live' (Il.). <IE *gweih¸-, *g″ieh¸- ‘live’▷
•VAR Homer has only uncontracted forms: (ww, (wɛis, (wet, inf. (wéµev, (wovt-;
*Cáw is a grammarians' construction.
•DIAL Myc. PN zo-wo, zo-wi-jo, probably /zowos, zōwios/. Cret. Sw-w, Att. Tā, Čñç,
, wμɛv, etc., ipf. ë‹wv (ë(nv), ë‹nc, -ŋ, inf. Čñv, fut. (now, -oµα (beside Biwσoμai),
aor. Čñoai, (woaɩ, ßɩwoai), perf. ëŋka (Arist.), ptc. ¿wкóta (Kyzikos) for ßɛßíwкa
(Att.).
•COMP Sometimes with ava-, Sia-, εл-. From (wós: ZwƑó-ɛµs (Cyprus Va; Masson
Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 8 (1957): 161ff.); (wypάcos ‘painter'.
•DER (wn (Od.), also ţón, Dor. (cá, Çóa, Aeol. Koïa (Theoc.) life’. 2. Kós (šoóc, (s)
'alive' (Il.). wïov, Cov (from (wc; Leumann Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 7) 'living being,
animal'; woчuoç 'viable' (late); (ává-) Čño 'reviving' (Theol. Ar., Dam.). Ašŋoía (S.
Fr. 981), Ačoσía (Epid.) epithet of Demeter (?), Fraenkel Lexis 3:1 (1952): 59f.
•ETYM Derived from the root *gweih¸- / *gieh¸- (see the reflexes under Btw-).
Homer has only uncontracted forms (we/o-. Attic, etc. Tŵ, Čñç, ëľŋσa must be
innovations; cf. DELG on ŋσa.

=== page 277 ===

H
1 [pcl.] certainly, really' emphasizing and interrogative particle (II.), mostly
combined with other particles and adverbs, e.g. ñ ápα, ñ уáp, ñ лov, ñ μýу,
sometimes in second position: εлεì ñ, tí (öti) †, (ó)TIŃ, etc. <IE? *he '?'▷
ETYM Origin unclear; perhaps identical in origin with the interjection ►.
Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:3, 983 connects it with Skt. á (affirmative, after
nouns and adverbs), OHG ihh-ā ‘T', nein-ā ‘no', et al. as the instr.sg. of the
demonstratives *h₁e-, ho- (cf. ►εi).
=>
2 [v.] 'said he'. nuí.
3 [pcl.] interjection expressing dissatisfaction and impatience (Ar. Nu. 105, Ra. 271,
E. HF 906 [lyr.]). <IE? *he vocative pcl.>
⚫ETYM It has been compared with Lat. ē- in ēcastor 'by Castor'. Cf. Schwyzer 1950
600 and WH s.v. ēcastor.
"
4 [pcl.] disjunctive and comparative particle: 'or', also ‘as', n either.... or' (II.),
contracted from nε, ñε (epic). <IE *h,ē-ue>
•ETYM For *ǹ-Ƒé, *ñ-Ƒε, univerbation of deictic ñ (see ►ñ 1) and a disjunctive particle
found in Lat. -ve and (with long vowel) Skt. vā, OIr. vá ‘or' grown together. Skt. iva
‘like, as if, etc. diverges semantically (see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.).
=>
15 'if (Cypr. Dor.). El.
nßauós [adj.] 'little, small', in the Il. only with the negation od nẞaóv 'not even a
little' (5 times), ovď ǹßaiaí (≤ 141), later also without negation (1 462, Opp.). <GR?▷
ETYM According to Leumann 1950: 50, it arose by false split from ou dǹ ẞatóv
(perhaps ovde ẞatóv). A prefix ǹ- is improbable.
nẞn [f.] 'youth, prime, vigour of youth, sexual maturity', also as a PN 'Hebe', daughter
of Zeus and Hera (II.). ◄IE? *(H)iēg"-eh₂- ‘youth, (youthful) vigour’▷
VAR Dor. ẞa, hyperaeolism (?) äẞa.
•COMP As a second member e.g. in čq-ŋßos (IA, Dor.; hyperdorism (?) ¿q-aßoc)
'fullgrown youth', hypostasis from ¿q³ ñßès (v) or a bahuvrīhi (‘on whom is ïß³Ë³),
with έonẞ-áw (after ǹßáw), -ɛúw, -ikóç, -ɛloç, etc.
●DER 1. ñßητĤs (h. Merc. 56), ǹßatás (Locr. Vª), ɛißaτáç (Thess.), ȧßatás (Call. Lav.
Pall. 109) 'being a youth, youth' with ǹßητкóç (X.); Hell. poets have ñßητŃ, ñ³Ýτwp
(cf. Fraenkel 1910: 121) as if from ßáw. 2. ñßηdóv [adv.] 'being fullgrown' (Heraclit.,
Hdt.; see Benveniste RPh. 81 (1955): 9). 3. ñßоτá 'youth' (Pamphyl., after Bioτn

=== page 278 ===

508
according to Fraenkel KZ 43 (1910): 207ff.). Denominative verbs: 1. nẞáw (Il.), epic
also ẞww (with metrical lengthening according to Chantraine 1942: 76 after
Wackernagel; different Schwyzer: 730), Cret. ßíw (< -έw) 'be in one's prime, be full-
grown', also with prefixes like ȧv-, &v-, έop-; thence άvηßητηpios 'rejuvenating' (E.
Andr. 552), vηẞητηpiov 'place of amusement' (Hdt. 2, 133), ñßητηpiov 'id.' (Plu.); on
ǹßηtúp, -twp see above. 2. ǹßáσкw ‘become mature, become a man' (Hp., X.; after
yŋpáσкw, cf. s.v. and Schwyzer: 708). 3. ñßvλλíáw in ǹßv\\ɩwσat (ópxnotpídeç, Ar.
Ra. 516; kópaɩ, Pherecr. 108, 29) ((female dancers) in the prime of youth',
hypocoristic formation of the language of comedians after the diminutives in
-úλλov (μεipαкúλλov et al.); hypothesis in Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 215.
•ETYM One usually reconstructs a preform IE *iēg"-eh, vel sim. on account of Lith.
jegà 'power, stength', Latv. jēga 'power, sense'. However, one may doubt the
connection with Baltic (cf. Derksen 1996: 136-7) on account of the Greek forms with
initial ȧ-. On the other hand, there are also Doric and Aeolic forms with ǹ- and εt-.
Lat. Iegius = Osc. Ieíis are unclear (see WH s.v.). The word ȧßpós is not related.
ßolos [adj.] in ẞoλov ñµαp. кαеò ȧлαντ@σv ɛis taútóv, ½ ɛűкaɩpov, iɛpóv
'opportune (of time or place), hallowed' (H. = Call. Fr. anon. 170). ◄ GR➤
•ETYM Probably an archaizing shortening of ¿½ßoλoç. Differently, Prellwitz Glotta
19 (1931): 126 (see on ►åßoléw).
ǹyáðɛoç [adj.] ‘most holy' (II.). <GR➤
●var åyáðɛos (Pi. P. 9, 71).
•ETYM From ȧyá-0ɛos with metrical lengthening; cf. ǹvεµóεç from ävɛµoç
(Schwyzer: 104 fn.1, Bechtel 1914 s.v., Chantraine 1942: 98).
ǹyavés [adj.] · кaðapóv, véov ‘pure, young' (H.).
•VAR ǹyáv<ε>os vɛavíσкoç 'little boy' (H.).
⚫ETYM Shortened from Sinyavés.
nyavov [n.] 'casserole' (Anacr. 26). <GR>
•DER Thence nyávea• réµµata tà áлò τηуávov ‘dressed food from a pan' (H.).
⚫ETYM From τnyavov by false split (taken as τ' nyavov); see Schwyzer: 413.
ŋyέoµaɩ [v.] ‘to lead, direct', post-Hom. also 'to suppose, believe'. <IE *seh2g- 'trace,
search'>
•VAR Dor. ȧy-, aor. ǹуñσασðaɩ, fut. ǹуñσoµαι (Il.), perf. ňуŋµaɩ, äу- (Hdt., Pi.), aor.
pass. ñуñеηv (Pl. Lg. 770b).
•COMP Very frequently with prefixes, in various meanings: St-, ɛiσ-, ¿‹-, kαð-, nɛpɩ-,
vo-, etc. As a first member in governing compounds like 'Hynoí-λɛwc, Ayŋoí-λaos
(Hdt.; also as an appellative). Also as a second member in formations in -τηc, e.g.
кUV-ηyετηs “leader of dogs", 'hunter' (Od.), ȧpx-ŋуyétŋs, fem. -tis 'who is in charge,
originator³ (Hdt.), partly beside -ŋyós and connected with äyw, see Chantraine
1956a: 88ff., Sommer 1948: 12'. Another compound with s-stem is лερɩ-ŋуnç 'forming
a circle' (Emp., A. R.).
●DER_Many derivatives, also from the compounds (Dor. forms are not given
separately). Action nouns: 1.ŋo ‘guidance, direction' (LXX), older and more
ndoual
509
usual ɛiσ-, ¿§-, dɩ-, nepi-, vq-ýynois, etc. (cf. Holt 1941: index); 2. éуŋµa ‘guidance,
opinion' (LXX, Pergamon), older and more usual ȧq-, εio-nуnua, etc. together with
-nynpátiov, -nynμаτɩкóç. Agent nouns: 3. ηуæv, -óvos [m.] 'leader' (Il.; on the
formation Schwyzer: 522, Fraenkel Glotta 32 (1953): 25f.; also from compounds, e.g.
кαеŋyεµáv) together with nyεμovɛúw ‘lead, rule' (Il.; like ẞaσıλɛúw), rarely -έw (Pl.;
cf. Fraenkel 1906: 184f., Schwyzer: 732), ηуɛµov-íα, ηуεµóvεv-µ¤, éуεov-ɩкóç, etc.;
fem. ǹyɛµóvŋ epithet of Artemis, etc. (Call.; Schwyzer: 4904, Sommer 1948: 145). 4.
´Нyńдwv Att. PN (cf. ňуyηµα). 5. ñyńtwp, -opos [m.] ‘id.' (Il.), Ayńtwp epithet of Zeus
in Sparta (X.), also name of the priests of Aphrodite in Cyprus (Kretschmer Glotta 18
(1930): 87). 6. ǹyntáp, -ñpos [m.] ‘id.' (Pi., S.; also ú-, лрo-, кαð-ŋynτýp [trag.])
with (лрo-)уnτɛipa (A. R.), -τýpios (Ath.). 7. ñуnτýs ‘id.' (A. Supp. 239), usually
ɛiσ-, -, di-, кαе-, épo-nyntýs (IA); on semantic differentiation of ŋyńτwp, -ŋtúp
see Benveniste 1948: 46; on ñуητηs Fraenkel 1912: 13. Adjective: 8. (εε-, di-, etc.)
ηуητɩкós (Hell.). On ►ñуηλášw, see s.v.
•ETYM An iterative present yoμal, άyέoµat, from which all other forms were
derived. It has a close correspondence in the yod-presents Lat. sāgiō ‘to trace, track
down' = Gm. *sagie/o- in Go. sokjan 'search, attack', etc., as well as in OIr. saigim, -id
'trace something, search', probably a yod-present (from *sh₂g-), on which see
Thurneysen 1946: 354; for the vowel, cf. Lat. săgāx. Hitt. šāgāi- / šāki- ‘sign, omen' <
*seh₂g belongs here as well, but šākk-' 'know' is from *sekh,- (Lat. secare); see
Kloekhorst 2008: s.vv. The root may derive from the language of hunters, and
properly mean 'search, track down'. See ➤ǹyŋλáčw.
nyεpέOOVTO ⚫VAR ηуεpéОovται, -0ɛσ0α. → ȧyɛipw
=
ŋyŋλáčw [v.] ‘to lead, drag' (кaкòv µópov 'bad fate', ßíoτov ßapúv ‘heavy life', etc.; \
618, p 217, A. R. 1, 272, Arat. 893, Orac. apud Zos. 1, 57). ◄GR▷
⚫ETYM An enlargement of ηyéoμai. Perhaps (thus Bechtel 1914 s.v.) by univerbation
with έλáw, with productive -ά(w, rather than via a noun *ñó, *ñуñλŋ (thus
Chantraine 1942: 338 et al.). However, compare άyéλn to ►äyw.
ndé [pcl.] 'and' (Il.), with or without preceding ηuév. ◄GR>
•VAR Also ndè kaí, τ'ηdé, etc. (II.).
⚫ETYM From ► ½ 1 ‘really' and ►dé. See Ruijgh 1957: 55-57.
ödŋ [adv.] ‘already, immediately, (precisely) now' (Il.). <GR►
⚫ETYM From 1 'really' and Sn 'even'.
ždoµaι [v.] ‘to rejoice'. <IE *sueh₂d- 'sweet'>
•VAR Dor. ǎd-, Boeot. (Corinn.) Ƒád- (yádetai· ödбεταɩ H.), aor. ñóðñvaι (IA), fut.
ŋσeńσoμai (S., Pl.), aor.med. ñσaτo (1353).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially ouv-; rarely active dш, ñσal, now 'gratify'
(Antipho Soph., Hell.; after τépлw, etc. acc. to Schwyzer 1950 228). As a second
member, -ŋds may be connected either with ǹdús or with †doµαí: á-ŋdńs
‘unpleasant' (IA), µελi-nds (as sweet as honey', Ovμ-ndýs ‘pleasing the heart', etc.
•DER 1. бoç [n.] 'pleasure' (II.; on the absence of aspiration and the doubtful traces
of the digamma Chantraine 1942: 184 and 151); in the meaning ‘vinegar' a back-

=== page 279 ===

510
ħdúc
formation from ►ýðúc, s.v.; 2. údový, Dor. ȧdová ‘pleasure' (IA, Dor.) with ǹdovíc =
aqúdov (Cyran. 18), ǹdoviкós (Arist.). 3. ádoσúva. ηdový (H.). 4. кσеŋµа 'ïd.'
(Eup.). 5. ηστɩкóç ‘pleasant' (S. E.).
⚫ETYM An exact formal counterpart is the Skt. hapax svādate 'becomes tasteful' (RV
9.68.2; of soma); much more usual however is svadate 'enjoy, taste well', svadati
'make savory, sweeten'. On the -a-, see Lubotsky MSS 40 (1981): 133-8. The second
member -ŋŋ agrees with Skt. prá-svādas- 'pleasant'; the nasal suffix in ǹd-ový is
seen in Skt. svád-ana- ‘making tasteful'. See ►ñdúç and ► ảvdávw, also ► ådŋµovéw.
ndús [adj.] 'sweet, tasteful, pleasant, pleasing' (II.). <IE *sueh₂d-ú- 'sweet'>
•VAR Dor. ȧdúç, El., etc. Ƒadúç.
•COMP Very frequent as a first member, e.g. ǹdv-εлs 'with sweet words, sounding
nice' (II.); as a second member -ŋdís, see ►édošaɩ. On ñdíwv (rare and late
ǹdú tepos), idiotTOS see Seiler 1950: 57f.
•DER ñ¿vµoç ‘sweet, comforting', dactylic variant of ǹdúç, said of üлvoç (Il.; in Hom.
always incorrectly viduμoç, see Bechtel 1914 s.v., Leumann 1950: 44f.), also "Aduμoç
as a PN; cf. Tuμos and Schwyzer: 494, Chantraine 1933: 151f.; ηdúλos 'id.',
hypocoristic enlargement (A. D., EM) with ǹdvλi w 'flatter, tempt' (Men.), ndulíoai.
ouvovoláσai, dvλσµós. σvvovoía H.; also as a PN with 'Hovlivn (Attica IV³),
'HSúεos (Delos IIIª); further 'HỒτó (Attica Vª; after 'Epaτó et al.), 'Hdápiov
(Rhodes; after the diminutives in -áptov). Backformation dos vinegar' (Ath.), cf.
yādos (= F-). yáλa, äλλoɩ öžos ‘milk, others: vinegar' (H.), cf. Pisani KZ 68 (1944):
176f. (where unclear Arm. k'ac'ax 'vinegar' is discussed). Denominative verb ndúvw
'sweeten, make tasteful, savour' (IA) with ηSvσµα, -μάτoν 'spicе' (IA), ǹdvoµóc,
†Suv-TÓS, -TIKÓS, - týp ‘spiced, etc.' (also of salt).
=
⚫ETYM Old word for 'sweet', identical with Skt. svādú-, Gaul. Suadu-rix, -genus, IE
*sueh₂d-ú-; reshaped in Lat. suāvis, Gm., e.g. OHG suozi, OE swēte 'sweet'. The full
grade perhaps comes from the comparative ðíwv, Skt. svádīyas- (cf. also idiotos
svádiṣṭha-). The zero grade occurs in Lith. súdyti ‘to spice, salt, Skt. sūdáyati, perf.pl.
su-şūd-imá 'make tasteful'. See ñdoµai, ►ávdávw.
né ‘or'. → 4.
▶
nεpébovται [3sg.pres.med.] 'they float in the air' (II.). <IE *h₂uer- 'bind, hang'>
•VAR Ipf. -VTO.
⚫ETYM Related to dɛípw 'raise' like ηуερéОovτо, -τai to ▸ȧyɛípw.
ǹépɩos [adj.] 1. ‘early, of the morning', connected with ñpi ‘early, in the morning' (e.g.
A. R. 3, 417: opposed to dɛiɛλov wpŋy); 2. ‘misty' = ŋɛpóɛç, ‘in the air, airy' (Simon.
114, Hp. Vict. 1, 10, A. R., Arat., Opp.). ◄IE *h₂euser- ‘morning’▷
•ETYM An etymological distinction used to be drawn between ►ẳńp ‘air' and épɩ
‘early' (e.g. Frisk). However, Kiparsky Lang. 43 (1967): 619-635 has shown that both
words derive from the root for 'dawn', ȧnp < *h₂eus-ēr still meaning 'mist, haze' in
Homer. He convincingly shows that apη 'breeze' still means 'morning misť in ɛ
469. Therefore, we have to start from an adverb *εpi (cf. 'Hepi-Bola E 389); see ►ñpl.
See further aupa.
ña 2
ŋɛpóɛɩ ‘misty, cloudy'. •VAR ǹεpoɛidńs. →άńp.
ǹepóqwvos [adj.] Σ 505 kηpúkwv
...
511
ǹɛpoqwvwv, after this Opp. H. 1, 621 yɛpávwv ..
ǹ., properly ‘whose voice(s) sound(s) through the mist (in the air), loud crying',
µɛyaλoqwvwv, nλnpoúvtwv qwvñs tǹv ảépa (H.). <◄GR>
⚫ETYM Ahrens Phil. 27 (1868): 590 proposes (after Alcm. 26, 1) to write iɛpoqwvwv.
ŋoέw [v.] ‘to sift, strain' (IA). <IE *seh,- ‘strain'>
•VAR Аor. ηеñσαi (ptc. ňσaç Hp. apud Gal. 19, 103), perf. pass. ηеηµαi.
•COMP very often dɩ-½еéw (εк-, лрoσ-Subέw, etc.), also άit-, ¿§-ŋĐéw.
►
=
•DER ñеµóƒ (hε¦µos Sigeion VIª, Hdn.) 'filter, strainer' (Att.) with ǹ¤µápɩov.
Swoτpiov 'filter' H., dinμεúoVTEC S.V. divλíšovtes; (di-)†¤nois 'straining'
(Arist.), (ȧл-, -, лαρ-)ηеηµα 'what has been strained' (medic.), ηηvov. ηеávov,
ñ¤µóc H.; ñðŋtηp (Marc. Sid.), -τηplov (Str.) 'strain'; ½½τó 'strained' (pap. IIIª),
OŋTIкós 'fit for straining' (Thphr.).
•ETYM Starting from the aor.ptc. ňσaç and the noun ǹðµóç, one may suppose an
older present **еw. Then we have ηОέw beside *ηеw, just as σtepέw beside otέpoµal,
etc. (Schwyzer 721). If we separate the -0- (as in ȧλn-Ow : áλé-w, ñλń-Ow : πλñ-to et
al., on which see Schwyzer: 703; also ǹ-0µóç, like pv-0µóc, etc.?), we may connect the
OCS yod-present pro-sějo̟, inf. -sějati ‘strain', from which Lith. sijóju, -ti 'id.' cannot
be separated. These presuppose a present *seh,i-. Cf. also σnow with the same.
meaning.
ñoç [n.] 'custom, usage' (Hes., Pi.), plur. ɛα ‘accustomed place, haunts' (Il.). ◄IE?
*sued 'custom, use'>>
•COMP As a first member, with analogical compositional vowel, e.g. in ño-žolós
‘edifying' (Arist.), as a second member e.g. in кaкo-ýеns with bad habits' (IA).
•DER Oεios 'reliable, beloved' (Hom., Hes.), also ηaños (Pi., Antim.), after yɛvvatos
et al.; ǹ¤ác, -ádos [m., f.] ‘usual, reliable' (Hp., S.) with ǹádios ‘id.' (Opp.); ǹеikós
'ptng. to the character' (Arist.); ηaλéos ‘usuaľ (Opp., Epigr.).
•ETYM Differs from ►os only by its long vowel; the ō-grade appears in ►ɛïwła (s.v.
for further etymology). See Petit RPh. 73 (1999): 87, who refers to Schindler 1975: 259-
267. For traces of the digamma, see Chantraine 1942: 150.
ïa 1 [n.pl.] 'provisions for a journey' (N 103, Od.); = ẞpúματα, ǎxυpа 'food, chaff, see
► ñïa 2, έpódia 'travelling supplies' (H.). <?>
•VAR Also ňa.
ETYM Uncertain. Acc. to Thumb KZ 36 (1900): 179ff., it belongs with ïoç.
лорεúσч passable; able to travel (H.). Vendryes REGr. 23 (1910): 74 compared
Skt. sasyá- [n.] ‘produce of the fields', which is formally unconvincing. Froehde's
comparison (see Bechtel 1914) with Skt. avasá- [n.] 'food' is mistaken (as it rather
belongs to ávati ‘protect, refresh, etc.'; see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.).
ňa 2 [n.pl.] ‘heap of husks or chaff (ε 368, Pherecr. 161), = äxupa H.; cf. ɛỉaí• τŵv
ỏσлpíwv tà áлokαеáрματα what has been cleansed off the pulse'; εla. ò̟onpiwv trà
кaеápσia (H.). Here also ½ïα кpiðάwv = äλɛvpa ‘flour' (Nic. Al. 412), but “le sens ne
s'impose pas", as DELG rightly remarks. <?>

=== page 280 ===

512
•ETYM Unexplained.
niε
ε [voc.] epithet of Doiẞe of unknown meaning or origin (O 365, Y 152, h. Ap. 120).
<?V
•ETYM Several hypotheses (see Frisk). From the interjection ", like iŋïos from in
(LSJ); cf. ïoç. лаιаνστηç 'chanter of paeans' (H.) beside лорεúσчµоç (see ñïα 1).
Not from ηws (cf. ½ï-кavóc) as ‘shining in the morning' (Ehrlich KZ 40 (1907): 364).
Nikolaev 2005 now connects the root *h₂ns- (Skt. ásu-ra-, ON áss, etc.), claiming that
Lex Rix did not operate before nasals. If this is correct (which seems implausible), we
would have an old vocative of the word for 'god'.
ŋïðɛoç [m.] ‘unmarried youth' (Il.; see Leumann 1950: 305 and 316f.), rarely also
‘unmarried young woman' (Eup. 332), in this meaning also ñïéŋ (Nic., AP). <IE
*h,uideu- 'unmarried'>>
•VAR Also εos (or ñïðɛoç?; B. 16, E. Ph. 945; ά0ɛos Cerc. 9, 11, see below).
•ETYM An old and poetic word, connected with Skt. vidhávā, Ru. vdová, etc., Go.
widuwo, etc., Lat. vidua, from a pre-form *h,uid¹eu-. A masculine expression for
'widowed, unmarried' was made from this pre-form, like in Lat. viduus, Ru., etc.
vdóvyi, but perhaps only in the separate languages. Greek ɛoç presupposes an
earlier feminine, which was replaced by Xnpa in prehistoric times. Anlauting ǹ- is
easily explained as a metrical lengthening of a prothetic έ- from *h,-; the ȧ- in Cerc.
is a hyperdorism (cf. ɛoç Sapph. 44, 18). See recently Beekes KZ 105 (1992): 171-6.
ŋïkavós [m.] · ó åλεкτрáv 'rooster' (H.). <IE *hues- 'lighten' + *khn- ‘sing'>
•ETYM Properly early-singer', a compound from - (from PGr. *awhi-, an old loc. of
*heus- 'dawn'; cf. wc) and a verb 'to sing', found in Lat. canō, MoHG Hahn, etc.
On the accent, see Wackernagel Phil. 95 (1943): 182f. Synonymous formations with.
cognate elements are found in Skt. (Lex.) uṣā-kala- and ON ár-gali [m.] 'cock'.
ŋïóɛç [adj.] in έñ' ñïóevti Σkaµávdpw E 36 (verse end); after this as an adjunct of
Пlávopμoç, of лεdíov (Q. S. 1, 283; 5, 299), and of кóλλoupoç (name of a fish, Marc.
Sid. 22). <?>
•ETYM In later antiquity, the word was connected with ηïóv ‘shore' and interpreted
as 'with (high) shores, on the shore'; cf. ñïóɛvɩɩ. ñïóvas éxovú ‘having shores' (H.).
This is formally impossible, as there is no trace of the -v-. Others take it as 'with reed'
and arbitrarily connect it with ►ña 2, or even as ‘'fertile' (and suppose connection
with ▸nia).
=>
ñïos → nie.
niwv [f.] 'shore' (B 561). <?►
•VAR ηúv E. Or. 994; Dor. åïúv, -óvos.
•ETYM Names in -óv may refer to features of the landscape (see Chantraine 1933:
164). Of unknown origin. See also ▸► ηïóεɩç.
Пкα [adv.] 'slowly, quietly, a little' (Il.). <IE? *seh,k- (or *sēk-?) 'slow' ?>
•VAR Grades of comparison: ττwv, Ion. ñσowv ‘smaller, weaker' (II.), sup. ˝kiotos
'slowest' (¥ 531), ékɩota [adv.] ‘not at all' (IA), éкiσtos ‘weakest, worst' (Ael.).
!
ηlaкáτη
513
•DER Derived from ñкα: žкαλoç = άкαλóç (Call.), ηкαλéov yɛλówσα. лpáwç, oʊк
εσкvерwлαкvĩα mild, not looking angry'; ǹкaïov· àσ0εvés ‘weak' (H.). From ησowv,
ñτtwv: ñoσáoµai, ǹττάoµαι [v.] 'to be less, be weaker' (after viкάoμai), with the
back-formation ñoσa, ñíτα [f.] 'defeat' (trag., Th., IA); Ion. (Hdt., Herod.) has
εσσóoμαι, from *εσowv, an innovation after кpéσowv.
•ETYM With ñêα (with epic psilosis like ňкɩστoç; cf. Chantraine 1942: 187), we may
compare кa and other adverbs in -ă (cf. Schwyzer: 622). It has been connected with
Lat. segnis 'slow' < *sēc-ni-, but see the doubts in De Vaan 2008 s.v. Frisk compares
the alternation in éúк-ɑ : éʊк-vós, as does Benveniste 1935: 89f. Discussed in Seiler
1950: 65ff.
Пкεστоç [adj.] only in ηviç ηкéσταç (ẞouç, Z 94 = 275 = 309), meaning uncertain. <?>
•ETYM Based on comparison with ǹkéotŋs. ádáµaʊtos (Suid.), éкeσtos is mostly
taken as 'undomited, uncontrolled', from kevtéw, kévoaɩ (“unincited”) with metrical
lengthening for *ä-кεστoç. This explanation should be rejected; instead, Schwyzer
RhM 80 (1931): 213 assumes original (ẞoυv) ηνу vηкéotnv (like vij-kepdńç, etc.), with
single writing of the v and false split. Others translate 'full grown', connecting it with
άкμaчoç, ►ηкý. Improbable suggestion by Szemerényi Sprache 11 (1965): 6-12.
ǹký [f.] · ảкwký, έridopatís, ákµý ‘arrowhead, poinť (H.); ǹ ošútns tov oidýpov
'sharpness of iron' (EM 424, 18 following Archil. 43: στη кατ ǹкǹу кúµаτóу TE
kávéμov). <IE? *h₂ek- ‘sharp'>
•COMP As a second member in the epic epithets ȧµØ-ηкηç 'cutting on both sides',
τavu-nкηs 'with a thin edge': perhaps a secondary s-stem, and the -- can be due to
compositional lengthening. Backformation from the compounds: ηкέç. óžú (H.), see
Leumann 1950: 111f.
•DER ηкáðа vбpшµévηу уuvaiкa 'mature woman' (H.) ; on the formation
Chantraine 1933: 351f., on the meaning cf. áкμałoç.
⚫ETYM Appears to be a form with lengthened grade beside άкý, ǎкpoç, etc.; an o-
grade is found in reduplicated άкwкŃ.
кw [V.] 'to have come, be present' (IA, also Dor.; Hom. only E 478, v 325; elsewhere
ĭkw). <?>
•VAR Hell. also with perfect inflexion: žкa, žкévaɩ; fut.ŕšw (A.), Dor. ñ³w (Theoc.),
aor. nai (late).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. кað- (кατ-), ëρoσ- (лоð-), áν-, лpo-, лаp-ńкw.
⚫ETYM Beside ňкw with perfective meaning stands ►êw with present meaning (epic,
Dor., Arc.). It is difficult to connect the two, however, since the ē-vocalism cannot be
easily accounted for (IE *sēik- is impossible), nor can the aspectual difference. Ample
discussion in Johansson 1890: 62ff. No cognates (incorrectly, Pok. 893). LIV² posits
*seh,k-, but disassociates iк-.
ǹlaкáτŋ [f.] ‘(wool on the) distaff, also metaph. of comparable objects (Z 491). <PG?>
•VAR ǹλɛkátŋ (Delos, Cyrene, etc.), Aeol. ȧλaкáτα (Theoc. 28, 1; but λaкáta E. Or.
1431 [lyr.]) and xpvσāλaк. (Pi., three times), εvaλáкaτoç (Theoc. 22).
•DIAL Myk. a-ra-ka-te-ja [nom.pl.f.] 'spinsters'.

=== page 281 ===

514
入áokw
•COMP As a second member e.g. in xpvσ-½λáкaτos (-āλ- Pi.) ‘with golden distaff
(II.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Solmsen 1909: 121f. assumed an Anatolian loan, but it is probably
just Pre-Greek.
náσкw [v.] 'to wander, stray, roam' (B 470, N 104, Emp.). <?>
⚫DER By a cross with aλaívw arose nλaívw 'id.' (Theoc., Call.).
•ETYM ηλάσкw (called expressive by Frisk) differs from ȧλáoμai by the length of
the initial vowel, something which cannot be explained within Greek or Indo-
European. The etymology is therefore unclear. Connection with λεó, ío, etc.
is not very likely.
Пéкτwρ [m.] name of the sun and adjunct of 'Yлεɛрíwν (Z 513, T 398, h. Ap. 369; and
Emp. 22, 2). <PG?>
•VAR Acc. -τopa (Euph. 110), dat. -τwp₁ (Epic. in Arch. Pap. 7, 4), gen. -τwpoç
(Choerob.).
•DER ǹλektpís [f.] adjunct of the moon (Orph. H. 9, 6); ηλεкtpov [n.], -os [m., f.] (on
the gender cf. LSJ and Schwyzer 1950: 344) ‘gold mixed with silver, amber' (Od.) with
'Hλektpides vñooɩ 'the amber islands' (Str., Plin.), ǹλektpwdŋs like amber' (Hp.,
Philostr.), λéкτρivоç (Dor. ȧλ-) ‘of amber' (Call., Luc., Hld.), ηλεкτрóоμαι 'become
η. (Zos. Alch.); nλéktpai• tả ¿v toiç kalvóroσi tŵv σð öµµα (Phot.). Several
PNs:'Hλékτpa, 'Aλεкτpúvα (Rhodos), 'Hλεкτpúшv (after Aµqitpówv; cf. Bechtel 1921,
2:656).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. von Wilamowitz 1931: 255 assumed Carian origin, but without
sufficient grounds. Improbable IE etymologies in Bq. There seems no basis for
DELG's statement that the word is IE. Leroy and Halleux Glotta 52 (1974): 36-52
stress that λεкτpov has two meanings: 'white gold', i.e. gold with a high percentage
of silver, like the Lydian gold from which the first coins were made, and ‘amber'.
However, λéкτwp cannot mean ‘brilliant', as amber is not brilliant, and the
meaning and etymology of this word are unknown. They then derive the word
λεкτроν from the verb àλéyw, which they interpret as Aéyw 'count' plus
copulative ά-. This is wrong: see there. The word has nothing to do with the verb, as
its meaning does not fit. Thus, the word remains without etymology. On the words,
see also Ruipérez 1972: 231ff.
ń入Équatos → ń入eós.
ǹλɛós [adj.] ‘distraught, crazed' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
●var Also ǹλé [voc.] (Il.); àλɛós (-ai- cod.). ó µátaloç, äqpwv. Aloxúλos 'foolish'
(H.), àλɛóчршv. ларáчрwν (H.).
•DER Denominative verb åλɛwσσε• μwpaivε be foolish' (H.). Abstract oσúvη
(Nic., late Epic; Pfeiffer Phil. 92 (1937): iff. and 8), Aeol. áλooúva (Theoc. 30, 12),
probably metrical for λεo-, àλɛo-. Further α [adv.] 1. 'very much, exceedingly'
(Hom. always еα лоλλ(v); A. R.), 2. 'in vain, to no avail (Call., A. R.); the
formation has a parallel, be it incomplete, in the local and temporal adverbs in -0a
(ěvða, dηðá, µívuveα) and in the numeral adverb Sixá, etc. Thence níos (Dor.
}
{
j
ĦALĘ
515
åλ-) ‘idle, vain, foolish' (Pi., IA), hελiðtov [adv.] (IG 1², 975 [VIª]), ŋλiðɩ-wdns
(Philostr.), -óτηs (Att.), -ów (A.), -áčw (Ar.). Here probably also ηλéµatos (Aeol.
Dor. åλ-) idle, foolish' (Sapph., Alc., Theoc.), of unclear formation, but improbable
is haplology for *ηλεµóματо (Bechtel 1921, 1: 44). Difficult to analyze are the verbs
ȧo-opovéw 'to be senseless' (Hom., Hdt.) and ȧλλo-páσow 'to be delirious' (Hp.).
Acc. to Fick (see Bechtel 1914 s.v. ȧλλoqpovéw, ηλɛóc and Leumann 1950: 11682), the
first member contains an Aeolic variant of λɛóc, i.e. *\\os < *λos (whence voc.
*åλλɛ = ǹλé O 128); cf. åλɛó-oppwv above. Later it was construed as derived from
äλos (thus Hdt. 7, 205). As the medical expression ȧ\\ooάσσw cannot be Aeolic, it
must have been formed after åλloopovéw or contain the pronoun äλλoç; see
Leumann 1950: 30982.
⚫ETYM Formed like έvɛóç, кɛvɛóç, έtɛóç, etc., ǹλɛóç recalls λáσкw, ► ȧλάoμαι, but
has no further cognates. Lat. ālea ‘game of dice' does not continue Dor. *άλɛά. The
variants λɛóç, ȧλatós (H.) point to a noun with PG suffix *-ay-(os), with *ay > *ey>
*e; see Pre-Greek: suffixes (6. at/ɛt). Moreover, the suffix -10- is Pre-Greek. The form
ȧλλ(o)- seems to have been derived from *al(o)- with palatalized --, which resulted
in -λλ-; however, the relation between alay- and al- remains unclear. Does it derive
from *alyo-, a reduced form of *ālayo-?
ŋλtaía [f.] ‘supreme court at Athens'. →άλýs.
ǹλíßatos [adj.] Meaning unknown (II.), in Hom. always (and later frequently) of
лéτpη (-a) ‘rock', but also of several other objects, e.g. Spúεç, ävτpov, Tápτapoç,
êõµa; interpreted as ‘steep, high, deep', later also as ‘enormous, big', see Buttmann
1825:2: 176ff. ('steep' or 'slippery'), which may all easily be later guesses. <?>
•VAR Dor. áλ-.
•DER Beside it nλißátās (tpάyos, Antiph. 133, 3).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Another unclear epithet of лéτрη is alуíly. Cf. also ǹɩtevǹs
лéτρα- úчηλ 'high' (Suid.). Acc. to Buttmann 1825:2: 176ff., it is from *₁₁τó-ẞατoç,
meaning äßaτoç, dúoßatos vel sim. (by comparison with ñàɩó-µŋvos), with
"Silbendissimilation".
α VAR λíðɩoç. →λɛóç.
ǹλíкoç [adj.] ‘as old, as large', relative and indirect interrogative pronoun (IA). <IE
*kweh₂-li- ‘how (big)?’►
•VAR Dor. åλ- (Theoc.).
⚫DER Beside it the demonstrative τηλíкoç, Dor. τāλ- 'thus old, thus large' (II.) with
trλikóσde, trλikoŪTOS (Att.) and the interrogativе лηλíкоç 'how old?, how large?"
(IA).
ETYM From the relative stem ó-, ắ- (see ►öç 1), after ►лηλíкoç and ►τηλíkoç. A
parallel formation is OCS je-liko (tantus) quantus'. See also on ►ñλɩε.
П [m., f.] 'of the same age, as old' (σ 373). <IE *sueh₂-lik- 'as old">
•VAR Dor. ǎλε.
•COMP As a second member in лav-aq-ñλı ‘without any companions of his own
age' (X 490). Mostly only as an indication of age, e.g. óµ-ñàí ‘of the same age' (Il.;

=== page 282 ===

516
λios
with dµŋλik-íŋ ‘age group, generation' (Il.), á¿-ñλɩš, Ion. ȧл- 'beyond youth, elderly'
(h. Cer. 140), but also 'youthly' (Phryn. Com.).
•DER Abstract ηλɩкía, -íŋ ‘group of the same age' (ПI 808), ‘manhood; ñlikiwtns,
fem. Tç of the same age' (IA), Cret. Faλiкióτaç (ẞ-τns cod.). ovvéonẞos ‘id.' (H.).
On λ, nλкía see especially Chantraine 1956a: 155ff.
⚫ETYM Cret. Faλiкióτaç points to original *σƑāλıε, from the IE reflexive *sue (in phe;
see ►ε, έ) with the same suffix as in λíкoç, ‣tŋlíkos, ‣uηλíкoç. Thus it is
properly “who is of the same kind”. For the semantics, cf. Skt. sva-ka- ‘relative,
friend' and ►τηs, as well as ►άέλLOL.
nos [m.] 'sun' (II.). <IE *seh₂u-el- 'sun'>
•VAR Epic ηελoç, Dor. Aeol. Arc. àéλios, Dor. (trag.) also äλtos.
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. in plant- and animal names like ηo-τрóлov,
-kávðapos (Strömberg 1940: 48 and 75, Strömberg 1944: 11).
•Der ħlɩwtns (ǹeλ-), fem. -üç ‘'belonging to the sun' (S., AP), ǹλiaкós (áλ-) ‘id.'
(Hell.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 393f.); 'Hλɩádes [f.pl.] ‘daughters of the sun' (Parm., A. R. ;
also sing. as an adj. [Luc.]) with masc. 'Hλiádŋs 'son of the sun' (Str., D. S.); see
Chantraine 1933: 356 and 362f.; λwdns 'sunlike' (Chaerem.), 'Hλov [m.] month
name (Termessos), is (Xios Dam. Isid. 233). Denominative verbs: 1. nóμa
'be in the sun, be sun-struck' (IA) with nλíwoię (Hp., Thphr.), -ów 'to expose to the
sun' (Aët.). 2. ǹášoµ ‘bake in the sun' (Arist.), -á\w ‘id.' (Str.) with ǹλíaσç
'exposure to the sun' (Gal., D. C.), ǹλαστηpov ‘place in the sun' (Str., pap.). 3. ħλiáw
'expose to the sun, be like the sun' (Arist.).
•ETYM Cretan àßéλɩos in H. (Pamphyl., acc. to Heraclid. Mil.; cf. Bechtel 1921, 2:
667), i.e. áƑέλɩos, points to an original *σāƑéλɩoç, differing only in ablaut from Skt.
súrya- ‘sun' (beside súra-). Both languages have an l-stem, IE *seh₂u-el-, *sh₂u-l- (cf.
Skt. svàr [n.] < *suHỊ < *sHul) with a personifying suffix *-io-. The full grade is also
found in Lith. sáulė, MW haul; the zero grade, e.g. in OIr. súil ‘eye'. The basis is a
neuter l/n-heteroclitic, still seen in Av. huuara, gen. x'āṇg (< PIIr. *suHan-s), as well
as in Germanic in the interchange between Go. sauil, ON sól, OE sōl, and Go. sunno,
OE sunne 'id.'. Connection with IE *suel- 'burn' (see εin) is formally impossible.
ǹAɩtóµnvoc [adj.] properly “missing the right month" (Schwyzer: 442; thus Vos Glotta
34 (1955): 290ff.), i.e. ‘born prematurely' (T 118; after this AP, Plu.). <IE *h₂leit- ‘make
a mistake, miss'>
•COMP Late analogical formations are τo-εpуós (AP), ó ó µátny
Eykaλwv 'who brings in a charge in vain' (H.), -μntiv (Epic. in Arch. Pap. 7, 5, Fr. 1 R.
49; see ad loc.).
⚫ETYM Verbal governing compound from the aorist åλɩɩɛïv (see ►ȧλεítŋc) and µýv,
with metrical lengthening of å- to ǹ- (åλítóševos Pi. O. 10, 6).
nov [n.] plant-name, = ẞpáßuλov or коккúμηλov (Seleuc. apud Ath. 2, 50a). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained.
λos [m.] 'nailhead; wart, callus' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Dor. ǎλos.
jua
517
●COMP E.g. ȧpyupó-ŋλos ‘adorned with silver nails' (Hom.), ¿λo-кóлoç ‘nailsmith'
(pap.).
•DER Diminutive λápiov (pap.); ǹλïç adjunct of λεïíç (Dsc., Aët.); denominative
verb nλów, mostly with prefix, e.g лρоσ-, εα-, кαе-nλów 'nail on' (IA, Hell.) together
with kadń入w-ois, ia.
•ETYM Because of уáλλo ñλoɩ, which may stand for Aeolic Fáλλoɩ, λoç may be
derived from *Fáλvos, *Ƒáλoos, vel sim. (cf. on HS), and could be equated with
Lat. vallus 'pole, stake of a palisade' (Wackernagel KZ 25 (1881): 261; thus still
Schrijver 1991: 170). There are no certain traces of the digamma in Hom., as ȧpyupó-
nos can be metrically conditioned; see Chantraine 1942: 155f.
núyn [f.] 'shadow, darkness' (Ar. Ach. 684, H., Erot. s.v. έéŋ\vyášovtai). ◄PG?►
•VAR Also ñλvě (Choerob.); note Avyaños (S., E.).
•DER ηuyaños 'shadowy, dark' (Suid.), ǹλvyoµévos. kekpvµµévos, ¿neokiagµévos
‘hidden, overshadowed' (H.). More usual is εηvyášoµai, -íšoµai (-\w) ‘to
overshadow, cover up' (Hp., Th., Pl.), whence εлηλvуɩσµóç (H. s.v. nλúyn); further
εлnuya [acc.] 'overshadowing' (of лéτраν, E. Сyc. 680; deverbal?), εлηλúуαɩoç
'shadowy, dark' (AB, H.).
⚫ETYM TO núуn belongs the poetic adjective Auyaños 'dark' (S., E.), which differs in
anlaut; an explanation remains to be found. As núη is much rarer than
έлŋ\vyášoµai, perhaps we should start from the verb. In this case, the -n- could be
secondary, like in ►¿½ßoloç, ►έëŋεtavós, etc. There is no convincing etymology.
Fur.: 378 assumes a prothetic vowel -, for which, however, there is little or no
evidence. Nevertheless, the co-occurrence of Auyaños and ηλuyaños is remarkable
(was it *alug-? with lengthened prothetic vowel ā-?). The word might be Pre-Greek.
'Hλúσчov [adj.] epithet of лεdíov (8 563, A. R. 4, 811, Str., Plu.), also without a head
substantive (IG 14, 1750); rarely'Hλúσç λεчµáv, xwpos (Luc., late inscr.), the abode
of the Blessed after death. <PG>
•DER 'HAÚσLOS 'Elysian' (aupaɩ, etc., IG 14, 1389). Also έv-núσtos. ¿µßpóvtitos,
kepauvóßλntos ‘struck by lightning' (H.), ¿vòλúσia (A. Fr. 17). tà kataoknqðévta
Xwpía (H.)? taken as “being in Elysion", as those hit by lightning acc. to folk belief
would come in a higher form of life (thus Cocco, see below). In the same mg. also
the simplex núσia [n.pl.] (Polem. Hist. 93).
⚫ETYM Traditionally analyzed as Pre-Greek (on Elysion as a Pre-Greek conception
see Nilsson 1941(1): 324ff.). However, it was often connected with ελεúσoμαι, ηλvеov
too (e.g. Campanile 1969: 30ff.), but against this view was argued by Wackernagel
1889: 5, Güntert 1919: 383. Explanations from Semitic (e.g. Lewy 1895: 219ff., Cocco
Biblos 31 (1955): 401ff.) are also to be considered wrong. Beekes 1998: 19-23 argued
against the idea that somebody struck by lightning would go to Elysion (against
Burkert Glotta 39 (1961): 208-213). The word is a derivative in -to- from a
geographical name *Alut- or *Elut-, with a long initial vowel which may be
metrically conditioned.
=
ŋµɑ ‘dart'. →ïŋµɩ.

=== page 283 ===

518
ŋµaɩ [v.] ‘to siť (epic, Hdt.). <IE *h,eh,s- ‘sit’▷
●VAR 3sg. ñotai, çpl. ɛïatai (for ñatai), čatai, ipf. ñµŋv (II.); IA has кáð-ŋµai (kát-),
káðŋtaɩ, 3pl. káðŋvtai, kat-éatal, ipf. (¿-)kaðýµŋv.
•COMP With prefix q-, rarely äo-, εv-, µéð-, öö-ŋuai (Il., Od.). A second prefix was
frequently added to кáеημαι, because it was seen as a simplex: e.g. εy-, έлɩ-, пpo-,
σvу-кáеŋµαι (IA).
⚫ETYM Old verb for 'to sit', also found in Indo-Iranian and Anatolian: Skt. áste, Av.
ǎste = ŋστai < IE *heh,s-toi, Skt. ásate = ñατaι < IE *heh,s-ntoi (Av. åŋhǝnte is a
secondary thematization); with (probably more original) stative inflexion, Hitt. 3sg.
eša(ri), 3pl. ešanta(ri); for the other Anat. languages, see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. eš-ª(ri) /
aš-. Anatolian also has an active in the meaning 'to sit', e.g. Hitt. ešzi. This suggests
that the root is identical to *h,es- 'to be (present)'. The aspiration comes from oμαι,
iTw.
nuαov [n.] Name of a coin, acc. to H. = nuwẞéλov. Siwßоλov ларà Kušikηvoiç
ŋµiwßéliov.
(Herod., Phoen., Rhodes, etc., Bechtel 1921(2): 654 and 1921(3): 301). <?>
•ETYM Related to (or connected with) nu-, with remarkable elision of the 1- (cf.
Schwyzer: 434); further unclear.
ŋuap [n.] ‘day' (II.). ◄IE *Heh₂mer ‘day'➤
•VAR Cypr. åμatɩ-άματi 'day after day' (cf. Myc. we-te-i-we-te-i).
●DIAL Dor., Arc. άµap, -aτoç; note Arc. äµɑτα лávτα ‘all days'. Myc. a-mo-ra-ma
/āmōr-āmar/ 'day after day', di-wi-ja-me-ro perhaps /dwi-ameron/ 'period of two
days', see De Lamberterie BSL 94 (1999): 264.
•COMP As a second member e.g. in ¿vv-, ¿§-, aút-, nav-, лpo-ñµað ‘nine days long',
etc. (Hom.); on this type of compound see Leumann 1950: 100f. (against
Wackernagel Glotta 2 (1910): 1ff.). As a first member e.g. ŋµɛpó-koɩtos ‘sleeping by
day' (Hes.); as a second member e.g. in έo-nµɛpos (Pi., IA; -épios Od.) 'living only a
day, transient, daily' together with ¿qŋµɛpíç, -ía, -ɛúw, -εvτηpιov.
•DER ηµáτios 'daily, at day' (Hom., Hes.).
Lengthened form ǹµépa, Ion. -pŋ, Dor., etc. àµépa, Locr. àµápa ‘id.' (Il.). See also on
· týµepov, ►µeoŋµßpía. Thence: ŋµépɩos (àµ-) ‘living only one day, daily' (trag.),
nuεpivós 'belonging to the day' (IA; Chantraine 1933: 201), nµεpolos (or -íoчoç? See
Debrunner Glotta 13 (1924): 169) ‘lasting one day, belonging to the day, daily' (IA),
ημεpaчoç 'id.' (pap.), nµεpoúσoç [adv.] 'daily' (pap. IVP; after έлoúσoc; Debrunner
Glotta 13 (1924): 169). Denominative verb nuɛpɛúw 'to spend the day', also with
prefixes -, лαv- (IA); thence nuεpεvσiç 'spending the day' (Aq.).
⚫ETYM A cognate of ñuap is Arm. awr ‘day' < *āmōr. The ending -wp, like in τéкμap:
-μwp, is also supposed for the first member of Myc. a-mo-ra-ma. The word is not
found in any other branch. The extension ηuépa, on which see Chantraine 1933: 228,
may have its aspiration from εσлépα (Schwyzer: 305, Wackernagel 1916: 45). On
ñµαp and ñµépη in Homer, see Debrunner Mus. Helv. 3 (1946): 40ff.; on ñµap used
as a plural, Leumann 1950: 100, who considers it to be an innovation. See further
Clackson 1994: 96f.
ŋuedañós [adj.] ‘of our land, native' (Att.). <IE *nsme- 'we'>
ï
nui-
519
•ETYM The synonymous form Skt. asmad-íya- ‘our' points to a suffix -αлoç (cf. on
ảλλodaлóç). On the stem of nuεd- = asmad-, cf. ►ǹµɛîç. Szemerényi KZ 73 (1956):
59f. assumes old ablaut.
ŋµɛïç [pron.pers.] ‘we, us' (II.). ◄IE *ne/os ‘we’>
•VAR Accus. ηµãç, Ion. ǹµéac, Dor. åµés, acc. άµé, Aeol. ǎµµeç, acc. äµµɛ.
•DER Possessive nµé-tɛpoç, Dor. àµé-tɛpoç, àµóç, Aeol. àµµé-tεpoç, äµµoç ‘our'.
⚫ETYM The accusatives чµé, ǎµµε go back to *nsme (see below) and, by adopting
nominal inflexion, they resulted in the paradigm nom. aµéç, ǎµµεç, later also µɛïç <
-Éɛç, with a new accus. ηuéaç, and with irregular contraction nµãç. Then came the
genitives ñµwv, ŋµέwv, ẵµéwv, åчµéwv. On the datives ñµïv, etc., see below.
The archaic forms ắµé, äµµe < *ảoµe agree exactly with Av. ahma ‘us'; in Skt. asmán
'id.', it received the nominal ending. Other forms like Skt. nas (enclitic), Lat. nōs, Go.
uns (< IE *nos, *ns) show for *ảσµε = Av. ahma IE basis with added element -(s)me:
*ṇsme < *ns-sme. The spiritus in aµ-, ηµ- could be analogical after vμ-. The dative
ŋμiv, Dor. quiv, Aeol. ǎµµ(v), from *ou(v), recalls the Indo-Iranian
demonstratives and interrogatives Av. ahmi, ásmin 'in eo', Av. kahmi, Skt. kásmin ‘in
quo?; cf. Cret. öτɩ-µ, µndi-µ. The long -iv is an innovation (after the long-vocalic
endings in nµ-wv, -ɛïç, etc.?).
Like Latin and Celtic, Greek lost the specific nominative for 'we', Go. weis, Hitt. uēš,
Skt. vay-ám, etc., and used the accusative.
ŋµév [pcl.] in ŋµév ….. ǹdε ..., 'both ... and also ...' (Il.). ◄IE *h,e ?►
ETYM From 'really' and μév. Cf. on ▸ndé.
ŋμεpoç [adj.] 'tame, civilized, cultivated' (o 162, also Tab. Heracl. 1, 172; codd. Pi. and
A. wrongly äu-). <?>
•COMP Negated ȧv-nµεpos 'uncultivated, rough, wild' (A., Hell.). As a first member
in ŋµɛpó-quλλos “with improved leaves”, “improved (¿λaía; Isyll. 20).
●DER ηµεpíç (sc. äµлελoç) ‘improved vine' (ε 69) with nuɛpídns 'regarding the nuεpíç'
(olvoç, Atóvvooç; Plu.); ŋµɛpótŋs ‘tameness, gentleness, cultivation' (IA), nµɛpía ‘id.'
(pap.); denominative verb nuεpów 'tame, cultivate, improve' (IA) together with
nuép-wois 'improvement, cultivation' (Thphr., D. S.), -wμa 'cultivated plant'
(Thphr.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 186f.), -wτns 'tamer' (Max. Tyr.). On the accent cf.
Eλɛú0ɛpoç; like this (: ǎyptos) expressing an opposition.
⚫ETYM Unclear. Several hypotheses (litt. in Frisk): (1) related to Skt. yámati ‘tame,
subdue'; (2) to Skt. sāntva- [n.] 'gentleness', MoHG sanft, etc.; (3) to a WGm. word
for 'sad, sorrowful': OHG jāmar, etc. The form äµɛpoç is a hyperdorism (Forssman
1966: 41ff; Bonfante Riv. fil. class. 99 (1971): 68 denies this).
nui [v.] 'to speak' (II.). <IE *heh,ģ- ‘say'➤
●VAR 3sg. ǹσí, Dor. ηtí, almost only in ipf., especially 3sg. ñ 'he said' (to isg. ñv).
•ETYM New forms were built in Greek on the petrified form ñ < *ñê-t < IE *h,eh‚g-t,
after onµí, qnoí, čoŋv. Cf. also ablauting ►ävwya 'command, order'.
- comp. element ‘half (Il.). <IE *sēmi- ‘half▷

=== page 284 ===

520
Tropos
•COMP In compounds, e.g. ηµσú-τpitov [n.] 'the third half = one and a half (Archil.
167), ŋµitvɛkto [gen.] ‘half a έêtɛúç' (Cret.).
●DER 1. ñµlovs (-τuc) ‘half, properly substantival [m.] (ó ñµʊvç toñ ápi¤µoñ; plur.
ŋµíoels Ø 7), tò ñµov (Il.; after tò öλov), adjective fem. ǹµíσɛɑ, Epid., Ther. ǹµítɛta
(Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 447). With regressive assimilation nuvoUS
(Erythrae Va, etc.). Lesb. aquσɛwv is a reverse spelling for ŋu-, see Hodot 1990: 71.
An o-stem μσσov [n.] ‘half < -tƑ-ov, found in Dor. and Arc. Denominative verbs
ŋμσɛúw 'halve, cut in half with ηuíσεvµа half (LXX), with aphairesis μíσεчμα ‘id.'
(Perga); ǹµoiá¼w [v.] 'to halve, cut in half (Hero; cf. the verbs in -tá(w in Schwyzer:
735). 2. ǹµíva [f.] ‘half (Cret., Cypr.; Bechtel 1921, 1: 448), also as a measure (Sicily;
thence borrowed into Lat. hēmīna); for the formation cf. Swτivη and Chantraine
1933: 205. 3. nuixa. ñµlotatñpa (H.), cf. ► díxa.
⚫ETYM Old expression for 'half, also in Skt. sāmi-, Lat. sēmi-, Gm., e.g. OHG sāmi-
'id.'. The functional identity is reflected in parallel compounds (that need not be
inherited, however): Skt. sāmi-jiva- = Lat. sēmi-vīvus, cf. nµí-ßios and OHG sāmi-
queck "half-living", half-dead'. An old locative of the root *sem- 'one' (see ɛĬC),
thus properly meaning ‘in one half (of two)'.
nuopos [adj.] äμopos 'bereft' (H.). <IE *smer- 'receive as a share'>>
•VAR Thence ηuopis. kevý, čotepŋµévò ‘empty, bereft'. Aioxúlos Nɩóßη (Fr. 165);
ŋµópíšεv· äµopov έлoiŋσɛv ‘made possessionless' (H.).
•ETYM The regular Ionic-Attic outcome of *ä-oμopos, and identical with Hom.
(Aeol.) ǎ-µµopoç; see ►µεíρoμaι (µópoç, ►µoчpα) and ► кáµµopoç.
=>
nuos 'when, while'. →τñµoç.
nuúw [v.] 'to bow down, perish' (Il.); rarely transitive 'sink, ruin' (A. R., Musae.). <?>
•VAR Aor. nuñσal.
•COMP Also with кατ-, έл-, Ůπ-.
•DER Also ǎuúw ‘id.' (Hes. Fr. 216). Here probably also the perfect лεµvýµÑкε (X
491) for *úл-εµýµõкɛ (with metr. length.), see Bechtel 1914 s.v. ǹµúw.
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
v [interj.] interjection calling attention: 'hey!, look over there', also ǹvídε (ηv ïdε), ηv
idoú (Ar., Herod., Hell.). Added in Argiv. tad-év, tōvdɛōv-čv. ◄IE? *hēn ‘see there'>
•ETYM Acc. to Frisk, the formally identical Lat. én is a Greek loan, at least in part.
ńvekńs → diqvekńg.
=>
vía [n.pl.] ‘reins, bridles' (Hom., Hes., Pi.). <IE *h₂ensieh, ‘rein'>
•VAR ǹvíaι [f.pl.], also -ía [sg.] (post-Hom.), Dor. ȧv- (àv-).
●DIAL Myc. a-ni-ja /an¹iai/, anijapi /an¹iāp¹i/ [dat.pl.f.]. Is the Homeric neuter
secondary?
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ǹví-oxos “driver”, ‘charioteer' (Il.; epic also -ña,
-ñɛç, metrically conditioned) with ǹvox-ɩкós, -έw (epic -ɛúw), -ŋoiç, -ɛía. As a
second member e.g. in xpuσ-ǹvos 'with golden reins'.
hravã
521
ETYM As Lacon. ȧvoxíöv = ηvioxέwv (IG 5(1), 213) seems to point to original
psilosis (the origin of the aspiration is unknown), avía may go back to *avoia and be
identical with a Celtic word for 'rein', MIr. éis(s)i [m.pl.] < *ansio-. It has further
been connected with Lat., Balt. and Gm. expressions for 'grip, handle': Lat. ānsa =
Lith. ąsà; semantically more doubtful is ON æs [f.] < *ansiā ‘hole for shoe-strings'.
ηvíka [conj.] 'when, at the time when' (X 198). <IE *io- relative pron.>
•VAR Dor. Aeol. (Pi., Theoc.) ávíкa, also ȧv-. A form without -ka in koinè-Cypr. a-ni
/hani/ (Kafizin 267).
•DER Beside it τηvíka, nòvíka; cf. on ►ǹλíkoç.
•ETYM From the relative ó-, å- (see ►ős 1) with the same adverbial ending as in aútí-
кa, ő-ka. The element -v- is found in the Arc. dem. ó-v. For the *-eh₂-, cf. ►ñλɩ§.
vīs [acc.pl.] epithet of ßoûç, ßoûv (Hom.). <?>
•VAR ñvîv (ñvv?) [acc.sg.] Hom., "vios [gen.sg.] A. R. 4, 174.
⚫ETYM Probably with sch. A 1 'yearling, one-year-old', for which Wackernagel
1955(2): 1171 suggested a lengthened grade formation of a word for 'year' also seen in
► έviauτóc, with criticism of other ideas. Not very probable; criticism by Szemerényi
Sprache 11 (1965): 6-12.
ivopén =àvńp.
žvov, -oлoç [adj.] of xaλкóç (ПI 408, Σ 349 = к 360), of oúpavóç and лupóç (Call. Fr.
anon. 24, 28); also PN (II.). Meaning debated, already in antiquity, cf. ηvoлa.
λaµépóv, návʊ ëvòxov, dɩaqavñ (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Formation in -oy, but further unclear; originally *Ƒñv-oч (Chantraine 1942:
152). Cf. vwp-ow, ale-ow, which are also said of xaλкóç, but remain without clear
interpretation. Older literature in Frisk.
vvoτpov [n.] ‘the fourth stomach of ruminants, rennet stomach'; also a dish (Ar.,
Arist.). <PG?>
•VAR έv- (LXX).
⚫ETYM The form with έv- perhaps arose under the influence of vτεpα, έykoíλia (but
it is late in any case). Assuming *Fηvvotpov, žvvotpov is traditionally connected
with a NGm. word for 'rennet stomach', e.g. MoNw. dial. vinstr [f.], but it differs
regarding the quantity of the first syllable and the color of the intermediate vowel
(although Gr. -v- might be analogical after votέpa). As a pre-form, IE *uĕnes-tro-,
-trā- has been assumed. Further, with a different suffix, there is OHG wanast ‘belly',
also 'the first stomach of ruminants', Skt. vaniṣṭhú- [m.] 'entrails' vel sim. (used as an
offering). However, a digamma is uncertain, and the connection with the Germanic
and Sanskrit words seems most improbable, as the forms are not well comparable. I
think the ending in -στpov is Pre-Greek (Pre-Greek: suffixes s.v. -σtp-). Fur.: 25842
points to the variation ε/ 1], for which he gives parallels.
ǹлavã [v.] and ǹnavɛt̃· àñopeĩ, onavíчεɩ, àµŋxavεt̃ ‘is at loss, is in need of (H.). <?>
•DER Further ǹлavía. áлopía, oлáviç, àµŋxavía H., EM 433, 17; conj. in AP 5, 238.

=== page 285 ===

522
Ŕrioç
523
⚫ETYM Reminiscent of лаvíа 'лληoμoví, so metrical lengthening for *ȧ-лavíα (WP
2,8) has been suggested. However, cf. σлavía 'lack, shortage'. DELG wonders how -
can reflect anȧ- privative.
ǹлάou̟aɩ [v.] ‘to mend, repair' (Hes. Fr. 172, Ar. Fr. 227, Gal., Aristid.). <?>
•VAR Аoг. лησaobat, perf.ptc.рass. ηлημεvoç.
•DER ηлητ 'mender, repairer' (X. Cyr. 1, 6, 16 [worse v.l. ȧкɛσταí], Batr., pap.;
rejected by Atticists, cf. Fraenkel 1912: 15), fem. ǹлýτρα (рap.); ÄÄηɩpα [pl.]
'mender's wages' (pap.), ηƒ½τýрov 'mender's instrument, needle' (Ael. Dion.).
•ETYM For the formation, cf. πηdáw and other deverbatives with lengthened ē-vowel
(Schwyzer: 719); further unclear. The root shape is reminiscent of Hitt. happ-zi 'to
join, attach' (connected with Lat. aptus by Puhvel).
Плαр, -ατоç [n.] 'liver' (Il.). <IE *(H)iek"-r 'liver'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ǹлatoσкoëέw ‘inspect the liver' (to predict the
future)' (LXX).
•DER ηлάτɩov name of a dish (Ar.); ǹлατîτɩç [f.] ‘belonging to the liver' (Hp.), also
name of a stone and a plant (Plin., Ps.-Dsc., Strömberg 1940: 41); ǹлαt-Ikóç, -Iałoç,
-íaç, -ŋpós ‘ptng. to the liver' (Нp.); ñлατoç [m.] name of a fish (com., Arist.;
Strömberg 1943: 45f.; acc. to Thompson 1947 s.v. Egyptian [?]).
⚫ETYM The IE word for 'liver', *iek"-r, gen. *iek"-n-és (-ós), is also retained in Skt.
yákṛ-t, yakn-ás and indirectly in Lat. iecur, iecin-or-is. In other languages the r/n-
stem led to a paradigm split: e.g., OAv. yākarə, MP jakar, MoP jigar (but Pashto
yina, and perhaps Old Iran. huyāyna-, for *ha-yākana-, properly “of common liver”,
acc. to Krause KZ 56, 304ff.), or Lith. (j)ēknos ‘fish egg; calf; (plur.) spawn', Ru. ikrá
‘id.' < *(H)ik"-r-. In some branches, we find initial */-, which may have been taken
from the word for 'fat' (cf. on λíлоç): Gm., e.g. OHG lebara, Arm. leard (with the
ending of *iek"); attempts to connect the l-forms with *iek" by assuming an anlaut
*li- have failed (Schmidt 1889: 198f., Benveniste 1935: 132). Hitt. li-i-ši is probably a
loan (Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). Szemerényi KZ 73 (1956): 191 suggested that the Greek
long vowel must be secondary, e.g. from top; this is also advocated by Kortlandt.
ŋлɛdavós [adj.] 'weak, light, slight, halting' (II.). <?>
ETYM Formation like piyɛdavós, лευкɛбανóç (Chantraine 1933: 362, Schwyzer: 530,
Risch 1937: 106), but further unclear, like several emotional adjectives. An Ionic
word, acc. to DELG. Pokorny maintains the uncertain comparison with Lith. opùs
'soft, receptive, invalid' (beside which *ñлoç [n.] has been assumed, like piyos to
þɩyɛdavóc); it has also been compared with Skt. apuvá- ‘mortal fear' (see Hoffmann
1955: 80ff., who also connects it with OP afuvā and *h,ep- 'to seize').
лεpoç [f.] 'continent' as opposed to the sea and the islands, 'coast', also in opposition
to the inland (II.), as a TN Epeiros. <IE? *Heh₂per- 'shore'>
•VAR Dor. ǎлεpoç, Aeol. äлεppos.
•COMP As a first member in ηлεpo-yεvηs 'born on the mainland' (A. Pers. 42).
•DER ηлερwτηs, fem. -τıç ‘inhabitant of the continent, of Asia Minor, of Epeiros'
(IA; on the formation Fraenkel 1912: 128 n. 1) with ǹrɛipwtikós (X.); denominative
!
verb ǹлεрóðµαι, *ów 'become (part of the) continent, connect with the mainland'
(Th., Arist.).
•ETYM Except for the suffixal yod, PGr. *ãлɛpoç agrees with the WGm. word for
'shore', OE ōfer [m.], MoHG Ufer, etc., PGm. *ófera-, which points to IE *ápero- <
*Heh₂pero-. Arm. ap'n ‘shore' (Benveniste 1935: 13) cannot be compared phonetically
(so is it a substrate word?).
Плερолεúç [m.] 'cheat, deceiver' (λ 364, A. R. 3, 617, AP 9, 524, 8). <PG(S)>
•VAR -nic [f.] (Hom., apud Str. 1, 2, 4).
●DER ǹлεpoƒεúw (only present stem) ‘cheat, deceive' (Hom., Hes.) together with
ηлεролετк (only voc. -τá П 39 = N 768, h. Merc. 282, etc.; on the formation
Fraenkel 1910: 20f., Fraenkel 1912: 34) and ǹƒεрóлevµa (Critias).
•ETYM Because of the rarity of the attestations, ηлεpoлεúç could be a back-formation
from ηлεролεúш. The basic form *ηлεр-ч, *ηлεу-Олóç, -ǹ that was assumed.
received various explanations (see Frisk). Kuiper's connection (Kuiper Glotta 21
(1933): 283f.) with άлάτη is semantically attractive, but an IE reconstruction is
excluded in this case. A loan from Pre-Greek is quite possible (thus also DELG),
especially in view of suffixal -op-.
ηлíαλoç [m.] 'ague, ague from fever' (Thgn., Ar., Hp., etc.; on the meaning Strömberg
1944: 82ff.); 'nightmare'. <PG(V)>>
•VAR έлíαλoç Alc. apud EM 434, 6 (probably after έ´í). Cf. ǹëíoλoç ‘moth' (Arist. HA
605b 14; v.l. -óλnc) with ǹóðɩov. þɩуoëupétiov ‘ague' (H.).
•DER ηлαλádŋs ‘ague-like' (Hp.), ηлαλéw 'suffer from agues' (Ar., Arist.), -
ŋëɑλóðµɑɩ ‘turn into an ague' (Hp.).
ETYM Acc. to Strömberg 1944: 82ff. (with parallels), it is from клоç, so properly
"mild fever", which would be a taboo paraphrase. This seems an improbable
hypothesis. On the suffix -aλo-, see Chantraine 1933: 246f. The word ηлíоλоç 'moth'
(better, -óλnc; after the nouns in -óλns) should not be separated from ηлíαλoç, as is
shown by the words adduced by Bugge BB 18 (1892): 166: Lith. drugýs 'fever, malaria,
butterfly, moth' (related to Ru. drožáť ‘shiver'), Alb. ethe 'fever' with ethëzë 'moth'
("feverbird"). In folklore, butterflies, etc. bring fever (Frisk). Given the variation a/ o,
it is probably a Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 258, 342). See also on ►¿qiáλtns.
ñлɩoç [adj.] ‘friendly, gentle, kind, mild, soothing' (Il.). <IE? *h₂e-h₂p-i- ‘friendly’►
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ǹлó-qpwv ‘with mild intention' (Emp.).
•Der ŋäótŋs ‘mildness' (Hell.) and the rare denominatives ηлóоμa 'to become
mild' (Phld.), лαívw 'id.' (Arist. Mu. 397b 1; uncertain).
ETYM Mostly connected with Skt. apí- 'friend'. Floyd Glotta 71 (1993): 10-16
confirms this connection and compares the uses in Homer and the Rigveda,
especially the turn of phrase лατǹр éç ηлоç. As Pinault LALIES 6 (1987): 111-128
convincingly shows, the central meaning of лoç in Homeric Greek is 'favorable,
well-disposed' (French propice, favorable), not 'mild'. Van Beek (p.c.) suggests that
we should reconstruct *h₂e-h₂p-i- 'fitting, allied' (of the type Skt. cákri- 'doing' <
*kwé-kwr-i-) on the basis of Greek and Sanskrit; this is more convincing than a

=== page 286 ===

524
npiov
525
lengthened grade locative *hep-i 'proche', from which Pinault departs, a formation
which would be isolated.
ǹлúw [v.] ‘to sound loudly, cry loudly' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Dor. Arc. άúш, aor. ǹлñσAI.
•COMP Also with άv-, έπ-; ßpi-it-os 'crying loudly' (N 521).
•DER ηлúτǎ 'cryer', as an epithet (H 384, Q. S., Opp.), 'Hлτíðŋs name of a herold (P
324).
⚫ETYM It is possible that ηлúw is based on a noun *ñлuç 'loud cry' (Fraenkel 1910:
165). On the ending, cf. ynpú-w, oiú-w, ȧv-σai; further unclear. The comparison.
with Lat. vāpulō ‘to be beaten' (probably properly ‘lament, cry') and Gm. words like
Go. wopjan 'cry' (which suppose a deviating labial) supposes an initial digamma.
However, there is no trace of it in Homer. Improbable comparison by Fur. 236 with
► auw 'to cry, call'.
pa [acc.sg.] (or [n.pl.]?) ‘service, favor' in (εлì) ñpα épεv 'do a favor' (II.); post-
Hom. as a postposition with gen. = Xápiv 'for the sake of, on account of (B., Call.).
◄IE *ueh,r- 'true' ?>
•DER ►έpiŋpes [pl.] 'faithful', also εлíŋpos (perhaps a reinterpretation of εлì ñpα
qpépɛiv in e.g. A 572 and 578). Also ẞpiŋpóv. μεуáλwç kɛxapiσµévov ‘highly charming'
(H.; perhaps ẞpt- is a mistake for έpí-); PN Пoλ-pηs, etc. The appurtenance of
Lesb. npwva and ►εлηpavos ‘pleasant' is doubtful.
•ETYM A pre-form *Ƒñp-α (on the digamma, see Chantraine 1942: 152; on the
formation, Sommer 1948: 138) can be connected in several ways. First, with words for
'friendly': Lat. sevērus ‘earnest', if < *sē vērō “without friendliness" (but see now
Nussbaum 1998 apud De Vaan 2008 s.v. sevērus on this word), Gm., e.g. ON værr
'friendly', OHG ala-wāri 'friendly'. Alternatively, it can be connected with the word
for 'true': Lat. vērus = Olr. fir = OHG war, OCS věra 'faith', etc., from *ueh,-ro-.
Within Greek, some have tried to connect it with ►έoptη, ►εpavos, ► ěpotis.
"Hpa [f.] Hera, the wife of Zeus (Il.). ◄PG➤
•DIAL Myc. E-ra, Ion. "Hpn; Cypr. Epai [dat.] (see Del.³ 681, 4).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in 'Hpα-кλéŋç, -кλñç (Il.), explanation in Kretschmer
Glotta 8 (1917): 121ff., with ẞíŋ 'Hpaкλŋɛíŋ (probably an Achaean formula, see Ruijgh
1995: 82f.), also -кλ½ïoç, -кλяoç and'Hρaкλεídŋs (II.).
•DER 'Hpaños 'belonging to H.' (IA); fem. -aía, -áa place name (Arcadia VIª) with
‘Hpaɩɛúç inhabitant of Heraia; also EpƑaño (El.); ‘Hpa(t)wv month name (Tenos,
Eretria).
⚫ETYM The Mycenaean, Cyprian and Arcadian forms without digamma make El.
Epfaōto suspect. Therefore, the connection with Lat. servāre, etc. is quite
improbable. Other proposals are highly doubtful: e.g. to IE *Hieh,-r- 'year' (see
►őpa). As with most theonyms, Pre-Greek origin is most probable.
Пpávеεμov [n.] "spring anthemon" (Dsc.). <GR>
•ETYM From čap ‘spring'; cf. Strömberg 1940: 72. On the formation, see Risch IF 59
(1949): 53f.
pavos [m.] 'keeper, lord, helper' (Hell. poetry), in H. = Baoiλɛús, äpxwv, oкonóç,
qúλa 'king, ruler, overseer, guardian'. ◄?►
•VAR Found as εлɩ-ηрavos 'powerful, ruling, protecting' in earlier sources (Emp., Pl.
Com., AP).
•DER pavéwv. Boŋßwv, xapióµεvos 'helping, charming' (H.).
ETYM For the suffix, cf. Koipavoç. Since Fick 1874-1876(2): 270, it has been
compared with Skt. vāraka- 'who wards off, opponent' (or, rather, vāraṇá- 'averting,
strong' RV), from the root of ►ëpu̟µαɩ. Frisk compares εлɩ-ǹpavos with έɩ-
Bouкóλos and asks whether pavos is an archaizing simplex. Connection with ▸ ñpa,
► εлíŋpoç seems semantically improbable.
ǹpéµã [adv.] ‘quietly, gentle, slowly, a little' (Pl., Ar., Arist.); also ǹpέµăc (A. R. 3, 170;
antevocalic), -µí (Ar. Ra. 315). ◄IE? *h,remH- ‘rest, be quiet’▷
•DER Comp. ηpεμéotɛpos (X., Thphr.; innovation, not an old s-stem to Go. rimis),
together with pεfalótns (Hp.); "peµos ‘id.' (Thphr.; back-formation from ǹpεµέw)
with ǹpɛµóτŋs (late); further ǹ pεµaños ‘quiet' (Pl., Hp.). Denominative verbs: 1.
npεuεw 'be quieť (Pl., Hp., etc.) with ǹpέuŋois 'rest' (Ti. Locr., Arist.), also ǹpεμía
‘id.' (Arist.; after the typе εлηéw: ¿лdηµía; Schwyzer: 469; cf. also pεчoç [:
лído]); 2. pεµíчw 'calm' (X., Arist.) with ǹpéuσμа (Comm. Arist.); 3. ηpεμάw
'be quiet' (LXX).
•ETYM See Schwyzer: 622 on the formation: ηpéµăç, like àτpéµăç (ibid. 620); on
ŋpεµi (-εí), ibid. 623. The word ηpεμa cannot be separated from a widespread group
for 'rest, quiet': e.g., Skt. rámate ‘to rest, etc.', Lith. rimti ‘to be quiet' (the acute
accent pointing to a root-final laryngeal), Go. rimis [n.] 'rest', OIr. fo-rimim 'to set,
lay'. A prefix - cannot be assumed (cf. nẞalóc); neither is a lengthened prothesis
attractive (the archaic epic word ɛ, with metrical lengthening, is not a
parallel).
Пpi [adv.] 'early' (II.). <IE *h₂eus-er-i '(early) in the morning'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ǹpi-уévɛα 'born early' (II.), epithet of 'Hwc, also as a
substantive denoting dawn; later also -ns (A. R.); ǹpi-yέpwv "early grey", also the
plant 'Senecio' (Thphr.; Strömberg 1940: 56).
•ETYM Seems to stand for *éεpɩ (cf. ǹépioç, 'Hepí-ßota). This used to be explained as
from *ǎɩɛpɩ as a locative with lengthened grade, beside a full grade *aier-i seen in
Greek in ►ǎpiσtov 'breakfast', as well as in Go. air, ON ár [adv.] ‘early'. The noun is
seen in Av. aiiarə, gen. aiian ‘day'. However, the lengthened grade assumed for
Greek is found nowhere else. Kiparsky Lang. 43 (1967): 624-6 convincingly derived
the form from a locative *aus-er-i 'in the early morning, belonging to the root
*h₂eus- of wc, to which nuкavós also belongs. The old explanation should be
rejected.
npíov [n.] 'burial mound, barrow' (¥ 126). <?>
•COMP As a first member in ǹpt-εpyńs• tuµßwpuxos ‘grave digger' (H.).
•DER Not here the river name'Hpidavóc.
•ETYM Formation like кöpíov : кηpós, µnpía : µnpós, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 59). By
the ancients, it was connected with pa ‘earth' (cf. Schwyzer: 424, where unclear

=== page 287 ===

526
Пpos
roλúŋpoç. rodvápovpoç, „λoúσios ‘having much farmland, rich' [H.] is adduced),
but given µέya ǹpíov in Y 126, we should rather reconstruct *Fηpíov. Often derived
from a root *uer- 'cover', with reference to Gm. words like ON vor [f.] ‘hill or bank
of stones or gravel', ON ver [n.] 'dam' < IE *uorio-, which derive in the first place
from a verb for 'avert', Go. warjan, etc. This is not convincing, as it supposes a
lengthened grade for Greek.
npos [m.] with nрíσкoç of unknown meaning (Delos IV -IIIª). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
npvyyos 1 [f.] name of a thistle-like plant, ‘Eryngium' (Nic. et al.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Mostly npúyytov (Thphr.), also ǹpúyyn (Plin.) and ǹpuуyíτηs (Plu.).
•DER puyyis [f.] 'belonging to E.' (Nic.).
ETYM Formation like εyyos and лíσvууoç; the suffix -Vyy- is much more
frequent in athematic forms like pápuy, etc. Acc. to Strömberg 1940: 72, it derives
from čap, ñpos ‘spring', as “spring flower". Clearly a Pre-Greek word.
npvyyos 2 [m.] 'goat's beard' (Arist. HA 610b 29). <PG(S)►
•ETYM Although the meaning ‘goat's beard' is unexplained beside those of "puyyos 1,
the word is clearly Pre-Greek.
npwva [f.] 'consecrated object' = iɛpwvía (inscr. Thermi near Mytilene, IG 12(2), 242,
cf. also 251).
•ETYM For iɛpwvía, a Lesbianized form. See Hodot ZPE 49 (1982): 187-9.
npws [m.] lord, hero' (II.). <PG>
•VAR Gen. -woç, rarely -wvos, -wvɩ, -wtɩ, etc. (details in Schwyzer: 479f., 557, 582).
●DIAL Myc. ti-ri-se-ro-e /tris-ērō¹es/.
●DER ǹpa̸ïoç, ǹpos 'heroic' (Pi., Pl.) together with ǹpwïov, -wov ‘sanctuary of a
hero' (IA); ǹpwïkóç ‘id.' (Att., Arist.). Several feminine formations (cf. on ßaσiλɛúc):
1. ǹpwïç (Pi.); 2. ǹpwïvn, ǹpøvn, ǹpoïva (Ar., inscr.); 3. ǹpwïσσa, ǹpãσσa (A. R.,
inscr.); 4. npwaσσa (Creta); 5. npus (Lilybaeum II³), probably an innovation (after
Oñλuç or уpηüç?); ǹpwïaστaí, ǹpwïστaí (-oïστaí, -woraí) [pl.] 'adorer of heroes'
(inscr. IV); after the nouns in -αστýs, -στs, see Fraenkel 1910: 175ff.; npwïoμóç
'adoration of heros' (Mytilene); the verb pwïw only in Eust. 4, 1 in the sense of
'write epic poems'. PN "Hpulλa (Chantraine 1933: 252).
•ETYM Not from ǹpwƑ-, as previously assumed, because of the Mycenaean form.
Probably a Pre-Greek word.
'Hoíodos [m.] PN Hesiod (since Pi.). <?>
•DER HOLÓSELOS (Pl.).
•ETYM Solmsen 1901: 81 supposed a governing compound to iŋµ *Fodηv to start a
song'. See on ➤aúdý; further Knecht 1946: 48f. A survey of the proposals is given by
Meier-Brügger Glotta 68 (1990): 66-67.
ñovxos [adj.] ‘quiet, silent, slow' (Hes.). <?►
●Var Also ñσúxios (Þ 598), ñoúxiµoç (Pi. O. 2, 32; analogical to ǹouxía, Arbenz 1933:
77), ñovxaños (Att.; to ǹov×ñ).
“Hpalotog
●DIAL Dor. äovx- is not a hyperdorism, see Forssman 1966: 48ff.
527
•DER ñσvõñ, -ñ [adv.] ‘quiet, softly, secretly' (IA; Schwyzer: 550); ǹovxía, -ín ‘resť (o
22); ǹovxášw, -áσaɩ ‘be quiet, rest, bring to rest' (Att.) with ǹovxaσɩɩкóç ‘calming'
(late).
•ETYM Unexplained. A hypothesis by Osthoff and Brugmann is given in Pok. 890
and WH s.v. sinō: that it is from the root *seh,- in Lat. sēmen. This is now viewed as
impossible, as the word had initial hä-.
τα [n.] the seventh letter of the alphabet (Hp., Pl.). <LW Sem.>
ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. heth. See Schwyzer: 140.
ñtop [n.] ‘hearť (Il.); on the meaning Bolelli Ann. d. Scuola Norm. di Pisa 17: 65ff. and
Biraud LAMA 10: 1-32. <IE *heh₁t-r ‘heart, intestines’➤
•VAR Only nom.-acc. except τоpi (Pi., Simon.).
•COMP As a second member in μɛyaλ-nτwp, -opos 'magnanimous' (II.).
•DER τpov [n.] ‘abdomen' (IA; on the formation Schwyzer: 461) with τpiaños
'belonging to the abdomen' (Ar.); cf. e. g. vɛop-iαios and Chantraine 1933: 49.
•ETYM Old r-stem with Aeol. -op from zero grade *-r. The word is also found in Gm.
and Celt., e.g. ON æðr [f.] ‘vein', OHG ād(a)ra, MHG āder ‘vein', plur. ‘intestines',
OIr. inathar (< *en-ōtro-) ‘intestines'. On the meaning ‘heart' ~ ‘intestines', cf. e.g.
OE hreðer 'breast, belly, heart' next to OHG herdar 'intestines'. See also кñp,
►Kapdía.
τpчov [n.] 'warp' (Pl., E., Theoc.). <?>
•VAR ǎτpiov Theoc. 18, 33 (better -íov?).
⚫ETYM For the formation, cf. píov. Semantically, connection with ǎττoμαι 'set the
warp in the loom' is probable; cf. the derivatives ǎoua, díaσua with related meaning.
It is difficult to give a precise derivational model, however. The word εлητрчµ.
'closely woven, thronged' perhaps also belongs here.
†ττwv •VAR Ion. ñoowv. →ñкa.
ŋüτε [pcl.] ‘as, just like' (Il.). <IE *h‚ē ‘or’▷
•ETYM From ň, ǹ(Ƒ)έ ‘or' and *(H)ute, found in Skt. utá ‘and, also'. See Schwyzer
1950: 564 and 576. Cf. ► εutɛ.
“Hoaσtos [m.] the divine smith, god of fire, also meton. for ‘fire' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Dor. Aeol. "Aq-, "Aq-, Att. vases Hεqaστos (Schwyzer: 276; on the form of the
name also Kretschmer Glotta 30 (1943): 115ff.).
•DIAL Myc. A-pa-i-ti-jo PN /(H)āp¹aistios/.
•COMP 'HoaiσTÓ-TEUкTOS 'made by H.' (S.), ȧv-noαισtos without H., without
warmth' (лŨρ, E. Or. 621).
●DER'Hqaíσtioç, -twv month-name (Thess.), 'Hoaiσtītis (scil. MíƉoç) name of a stone
(Plin.). ‘Hqaíσtɩa [pl.] 'festival for Hephaestus' (Att.), -ɛov ‘temple of H.' (IA), also
-ɩɛïov (pap. Iª, after Аoкλη-ɛov), etc.; -tác ‘a plaster³.
•ETYM A Pre-Greek theonym; the form without -i- shows a typical Pre-Greek
variation (Fur.: 296, 336) and points to original s³.

=== page 288 ===

528
nxn
nxn [f.] 'sound, noise' (Il.). ◄ IE *(s)ueh₂g"- 'sound'>
•VAR Dor. ȧxá.
•COMP As a second member e.g. in vy-ŋxýs ‘with high neighing' (ïnnos, Il.); ävt-
nxos sounding towards' (Ph.), to ǹxý, ñxos or ǹxéw.
•DER ǹnεis 'sounding, making noise' (Il.; with shortening ǹXεεvτa Archil. 74, 8; see
Schwyzer: 246). xó [f.] 'sound, noise' (Dor. άxw), also personified (h. Hom., Hes.
Sc., Pi., A.). xos [m.] (secondarily [n.], Schwyzer: 512) = xn, together with ηxwdns
(Hp., Hell.); also as a PN fãxos (Arc.), short name like Ƒãxus (Cor. Chalcid.). Verb
ǹέw, aor. ǹñσal, often with prefix, e.g. àvɩ-, úл-, 'sound, rustle, give a sound'
(Hes.); with avτ-nxnua, -úxnois, ǹxétŋc, -tă (àx-) ‘who sounds, cicada' (Hes.; also
from xos, Schwyzer: 500, Fraenkel 1910: 165), ǹntηs Hes. with ǹäntikós ‘sounding’
(late), xεiov 'drum' (Ph., Plu.). See also on iáxw, ► iaxń.
•ETYM ǹxń (from *Ƒãxά), ǹxó, and secondary Éxos (cf. kóµños, tápaxos) continue a
root noun or an uncharacterized verb. These were replaced by innovations ǹ½ and
deverbative (or denominative?) εw. Beside it stands a primary zero grade
reduplicated present FI-Fάx-w; see iάxw.
The forms nxnnxéw have no exact parallels in other languages. The closest are Lat.
vāgīre 'wail' (though with IE *-g-) and a few Baltic and Germanic words with initial
*su̟-, e.g. Lith. svagiù, -ėti ‘to sound (IE *-g(h)-), OE swōgan ‘sound' (IE *-g"- as in
iXń).
Oaɩpóç [m.] ‘pivot of a door' (M 459, Q. S., Agath.), also ‘axle of a chariot' (S. Fr. 596).
<IE *dhuer- 'door'>
⚫COMP Baιpoбúτai. oi έv tó̟ (vyų daktúλioi, di' wv oi þvτñpɛç ‘the rings on the yoke,
whence the reins' (H.).
•DER Baipaños (Poll.)..
•ETYM A technical term, which Brugmann IF 17 (1904-1905): 356ff. derived from
*0Ƒap-tó-ç (thus IE *dur-ió-) as “Türgänger”, from Oúpa and iéval 'to go'. The
form reconstructed for Greek would rather contain the suffix *-io-, thus *d³ur-io-.
This remains uncertain. MoNw. (dial.) darre 'pivot of a door, small standard in the
corner of a sledge' (Falk & Torp 1910: 178) is remotely related at best.
Оãкoç [m.] 'seat, chair' (Att.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Epic Ion. Dor. Owkoç (since Il.), lengthened Oówкoç (ẞ 26, µ 318 verse-finally;
see below).
•COMP As a second member e.g. in σúv-еaкoç, -Owкos 'who shares his chair with
someone else' (S., E.).
⚫DER Denominative verbs: 1. 0áσow, epic aáσow (only present stem) 'sit' (Il.) <
*0aFaк-iw, see below; 00ά(w for *Đoáσow; 2. Oãкéw, Owkéw (also with prefix, e.g.
ouv-, ¿v-) 'sit' (post-Hom.) together with Оáкηµα ‘sitting' (S.), ¿vřákŋoɩ ‘sitting'
(S.), έvēαкη ‘ambush' (Pompeiopolis; deverbal), Oakɛlov ‘seat' (Attica IVª; cf.
ȧpxεĭov, Chantraine 1933: 61). 3. Baкεúw 'go to stool' (Plu., Artem.). On oάw, see
S.V.
•ETYM From еáẞaкov. ¤ãкov † Оpóvov H., it appears that *Oãкo was contracted
from *¤á(Ƒ)akoç; Oŵkoç would then come from 0ó(Ƒ)ākos (not from ¤ŵ(Ƒ)αкoç, as
per Frisk et al.), shortened *06(F) aкos; it yielded 0ówкoç after diectasis. Details on
Đãкoç, Owкoç in Björck 1950: 349ff. Connection with *dheh,- (comparing Owμ-óc
'heap') as zero grade and ō-grade is impossible because of *OaƑaк-oç. In accordance
with Schulze 1892: 435, *ОáƑaкoç has been explained as assimilated from *0óƑαкoç,
but this is most improbable. The word must be Pre-Greek, as was observed by Fur.:
342. A suffix -aк- is frequent in Pre-Greek (Pre-Greek: Suffixes); the variation *-af-/
-OF- is normal in substrate words.
Báλauos [m.] 'inside room at the back of a house' (as opposed to µéуapov, Swµα);
room for women and bedroom, also a room for provisions (Il.; on the meaning.
Wace JHS 71 (1951): 203ff.), in mariners' language 'the lowest deck of a ship' (Timae.,
Poll.). <PG(V)►

=== page 289 ===

530
Aá入agoa
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ðaλaµŋ-ñóλos [f.], late [m.] ‘chamber maid, lady's-
maid; eunuch' (Od.; -n- metrically conditioned). Oaλáµn [f.] ‘lair, den, cavity of the
body' (ɛ 432, E., Hp., Arist.), as a nautical term = Đáλaµoç (Luc.); on Đáλaµos ~ -µn
see Porzig 1942: 284.
•DER Baλauá 'oar hole' (Hdt. 5, 33), also 'oar at the lower deck' (Ar. Ach. 533, inscr.);
Baλauías [m.] 'rower in the Oáλauoç or aλaµá' (Th. 4, 32, App., Them.), in this
meaning also aλáµā (Ar. Ra. 1074) and aλaµíτηs (sch. ad loc.). From еáλaμoç
also the rare aλaµ½ïoç (Hes. Op. 807, A. R.), Oaλaµaños (Ph.), Đaλaµíç (An. Ox.)
and denominative aλaμεúоμα, -ɛúw [v.] 'to (be) take(n) into the Оáλaμoç, as a
wife (Ph., Hld. et al.) with aλaµεútpia = vvµqeútpia (Poll.); еaλáµεvµα = Đáλaµos
E. Ba. 120 (lyr.), cf. Chantraine 1933: 185; Đaλaµevtós (Tim. Pers. 245).
•ETYM Reminiscent of ▸ólos ‘circular building', but further unknown; Pre-Greek
origin is quite possible, as its structure (CaC-aC-) is typical for such words. It could
be cognate with Đóλoç (Fur.: 342). Not related to oóðaλµós.
Báλaσσa [f.] 'sea' (II.). <PG(V)►
•DIAL Att. Оáλαττα, Late Cretan áλa00a (Buck 1955: $81b), Lacon. in σaλaσσo-
μédoσα Alc. 84.
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. еaλaσσo-кpáτwp (Hdt., Th.), àµqı-еáλασσoç
'surrounded by the sea' (Pi.; bahuvrīhi); often in hypostases, mostly with -10
(-ídoc), e.g. εn-, лαрα-0αλáσσιоç, -ídios (IA).
•DER αλáσσios belonging to the sea, maritime' (Hom.), -ía [f.], -tov [n.] as a plant
name (Dsc.; Strömberg 1940: 114), alaσσ-ídios (Hdt.), -años (Simon., Pi.) ‘id.',
Baλaσowns 'sea-like' (Hanno Peripl.), aλaσσɛpós [m.] 'kind of eye-salve' (Gal.);
Baλaσσíτηs (olvoç Plin.). Denominatives: Baλaσσ-ɛúw 'be in the sea' (Th.), -óoμaι,
-ów 'to be filled by sea water, turn into sea' (Arist., Hell.) with aλáσowσiç
'inundation' (Thphr., Ph.), -iw 'to be like sea water, wash in sea water' (Ath., pap.).
•ETYM For the notion of ‘sea', the Greeks did not use the stem *mor-i-, limited to the
European languages (Lat. mare, MoHG Meer, etc.), but they used old words in a new
meaning (äλs properly ‘salť', лóvτos properly 'path'), or borrowed words from Pre-
Greek, like ελayos. The latter is the case for ¤áλaσσa. It belongs to the gloss Maced.
(?) Saλáyxav. Báλaσoav (H.). Fur.: 195 notes that it is uncertain that daλáyxav is
Macedonian (Kalléris 1954 does not give it). The word, with its prenasalized variant,
is typically Pre-Greek. Fur. further connects σáλoç, (áλoc, which seems possible but
remains uncertain. Acc. to Lesky Herm. 78 (1943): 258ff., Báλaσσa was originally a
foreign word for 'salt water'. See Beekes fthc. [on PG *ky].
¤á\\w [v.] ‘to flourish, grow' (Hes., h. Cer. 402). <IE *d¹(e)h₂-l-, d½h₂l- ‘flourish.
green'>
•VAR Them. aor. Oǎλov (h. Hom. 19, 33, Hell.), perf. with present meaning téðŋλa,
Aeol. Dor. τé¤ãλa (II.); later forms s-aor. ȧv-éÐ½λa (Ael.), fut. ȧva-0ăλýσoµai (AP).
•COMP Also with prefix (áva-, etc.).
•DER 1. From the root aorist: Đáλos [n.] 'sprout', only metaph. (II.) with ảµqɩ-ðaλńs
'surrounded by Đáλos (álɛa), rich' (X 496; also to aλεīv); adj. fem. Đáλɛia
'flowering, rich' (Il.; on the accent cf. ¿λáxεa, see ►¿λaxúc), while *¤aλúç [m.], -ú
Baλukpós
531
[n.] is found only in Baλéwv [gen.pl.] (X 504); instead of it we find aλɛpós (II.), like
Yλukɛpós to yλukúç. Baλía, -íŋ ‘flower, abundance', plur. ‘festival' (Il., Hdt.; Scheller
1951: 39 with different analysis) with aλáw [v.] 'to amuse oneself (Plu.). PN
☹áλns (-ñs), gen. ☹álɛw, ☹álŋτoç, etc. (Schwyzer: 461f.). See also on ►ðalúσia. 2.
From the present: Ballós [m.] ‘green twig, especially of the olive; sprout', also
‘(festive) gift' (p 224) together with aλ\ía [f.sg.] 'foliage' (Thphr.), Oaλλía [n.pl.]
'gifts' (pap.), Oáλλivos 'consisting of aλor' (Rhodes). Oaλw [f.] 'goddess of
growth' (Iusi. apud Lycurg. 77, Paus. 9, 35, 2).
Secondary presents: 1. to the root aorist: 0ǎλ-éw (Il.; see Chantraine 1942: 327, Shipp
1967: 39); 2. to the perfect: Onλéw, Bāλéw, aor. Oŋλñσaɩ, āλ- (II.), together with epi-
Onλns richly growing' (Il., Hes.), etc. (but cf. Ep10aλíç. ɛidoç dévdpov 'kind of tree'
H., erithales [n.] Plin. to ¤áλoc). Lengthened from Oŋλéw: τηλɛ¤áw, old only the ptc.
Tηλɛáwv (Il.; Chantraine 1942: 359).
⚫ETYM Ascertained correspondences are found only in Albanian and Armenian:
present Alb. dal 'to sprout' < *dhal-n- (which may even be identical with Oάλλw, cf.
on Báλλw), aor. dol(l)a < IE *dheh₂l- as in τéãλα, and the Arm. adjective dalar
'green, fresh', which has been compared directly with aλɛpós. The Celtic material
(MW deillyau 'to emanate, proceed, etc.'), and the Germanic even more so (see Pok.
234), is best considered separately. See LIV² s.v. *dhalh,- (which cannot be the correct
reconstruction, however).
Clackson 1994: 118ff. argues concerning the comparison Arm. dalar: Oaλɛpós that
-ar- is a productive suffix in Armenian and that 'the semantic development may be
independent'.
еáλлw [v.] 'to warm', rarely intr. 'to be warm' (Od.). <PG>
•VAR Aor. Oáλwai.
•COMP Also prefixed with ȧvα-, εл-, συу-, Úло-, еtc.
•DER еáλлоç [n.] 'warmth' (IA) with Suσ-0aλлns 'with bad warmth, shivery' (P 549);
or from еáλлw; еaλлwpη 'refreshment' (Hom.); 0άλчç 'warming' (Hp.); еαλлvóç
'warming' (Pi.; cf. τερлvóç; Chantraine 1933: 193); еαλлεvý ‘Iris' (Strömberg 1940:
82); PN Оáλлоç B 620. Lengthened ptc. pres. Oaλŋówv ‘warm' (ɩ 319, Arat. 1073; on
the formation see Risch 274).
•ETYM Connection with 0άλλw as 'make flourish' is improbable. The root is also
found in aλuкpós, *dhal-uk-; the syncopated form, without -u-, yielded Оáλлw.
Thus Kuiper Lingua 21 (1968): 270-275 and Fur.: 384, 391. On syncope in Pre-Greek,
see Fur.: 378-385.
¤αλvкpóç [adj.] 'warm, glowing' (Call. Fr. anon. 69, AP 5, 219), in H. = iτaµóv,
λаμлрóv, ẞλoσvрóv, ávaιdéç, лavoupyov 'rash, splendid, hairy, shameless, knavish',
with Baλuкpéovται· чɛúdovται 'they are deceived' (H.). <PG➤
•DER ðaλú<лt>ɛσðaι· pλéyɛσðaι ‘to be burnt [up]'; aλúчai. Báλyai, pσαι 'to
[soften by] heat, burn'; Baλvoσóμεvoç. qλεуóµεvoç 'who is burnt (up)' (H.).
•ETYM Beside the present aλúσσoμaɩ, the aorist had aλúa (Schulze GGA 1897:
874; Schwyzer: 704). Brugmann connected it with Oáλлw 'to heat', assuming that
-π- represents *k*, and that its labial element found as -v- in aλúσσoµaɩ, etc. in the

=== page 290 ===

532
Oaλúσia
preceding syllable, after which -к- was retained. Although (as Frisk remarks) this is
not convincing from an IE point of view, such mechanisms are well-known for
substrate words. Both еáλл- and Oaλúк- can be explained as from *tal-uk"-, while in
Oaλuкpós we have retention of k after u. See on еáλлw. The form ȧλuкpós is
unclear; see aλέa 1 ‘warmth'.
¤aλvoia [n.pl.] ‘offerings of first fruits' (I 534, Theoc. 7, 3). ◄IE *d½hl- ‘flourish, grow
green'>
•DER Oαλúσios ǎpτos 'bread from the first corn' (Ath. 3, 114a; cf. on apуnλia),
Baλvoiàçódós 'the road to the Th.' (Theoc. 7, 31); patronynicon Oaλvoládys (A 458).
•ETYM From 0άλλw, etc., first from an adjective *0aλúc, -ú (found only in Oaλéwv
[gen.pl.] and Báλɛia [f.], of daïç, έopτń), as was observed by Solmsen 1901: 37 and
Solmsen Glotta 1 (1909): 80. On the formation, see Fraenkel 1912: 124 and Chantraine
1933: 41f. On the Thalysia see Nilsson 1941(1): 468.
Oquá [adv.] 'often' (Il.). ◄?►
•Der Baµákis (: лoλλákıç) ‘id.' (Pi.). ¤¤µvá ‘id.' (Pi., Hp.), adjective aµvós
'crowded, close-seť (Call.; cf. лʊкɩvá, -tvóc) with ¤¤µvákıç (Hp.); also ¤¤µɛivós after
ɑiñɛvóç (h. Merc. 44). Next to aµá stands the u-stem *¤¤µús (τáxα : taxúc) in
Oaμéɛç [pl.] 'close-set, crowded', aµɛtaí [f.] (Hom.; on the accent Schwyzer: 385); cf.
also Oaμv-кλñs PN (Bechtel 1917b: 197). Compar. еаµúνтεραι· лʊкvóτεpaι (H.), cf.
iúvτata. Here also Oάuupię (H.), probably after лavηyupię, by which H. glosses it;
also as a PN (B 595, inscr.); cf. Bechtel 1917a: 25f.; further ódoùç Đaµvpoús. tàc
Aɛwpópous highways'; ¤¤µʊpíšε· áðpoíšɛ, ovváyɛɩ brings together' (H.); also intr.
(BCH 50, 401, Thespiae). Denominative of Oaµá: еaui w [v.] 'to frequent' (Il.; cf.
Schwyzer: 736).
•ETYM It was previously assumed that Oaμ-ά was a reduced grade beside Onμwv,
▸ Owμóc, but this is impossible, since the latter two derive from On- in τí-On-u. This
had a zero grade 0ɛ- < *dhh,-, as in Ouɛ0λa, 0éμiç. Therefore, the etymology
remains unknown.
Oάußos [n.] 'amazement, fright' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•COMP As a second member e.g. in à-Đaµßns fearless, undaunted' (Ibyc., B.) with
à außia, -in fearlessness' (Democr. 215); back-formation ǎaußos 'undaunted'
(Democr. 216), also as a PN (Delphi); cf. čкaµßos below; see Schwyzer: 469.
•DER Baμẞaλéos (Nonn.). Denominative verbs: 1. Оaµßéw, -ñσαɩ, also with prefixes.
like к-, 'be amazed, be frightened' (Il.), Hell. also trans. 'amaze, frighten' (LXX),
together with ¤áµß-nois, -nµa (Aq.), čк¤¤µßos (Plb.). 2. Gaµßaívw intr. ‘id.' (Pi.). 3.
¤¤µßɛúw trans. ‘id.', together with -ɛvíýs (Aq.).
•ETYM Beside áµßoç, Greek has an archaic-looking perfect τéðŋëɑ ‘I am
perplexed' with the thematic root aorist τaqεïv (taqúv, táqe; Il.); from the latter
derives τápoç [n.] = ¤áµßoç (Od., Ibyc.). Secondary to τéеηлα aге еηлw. εлеμш,
Oavчáw; also, Owy. However, a nasal did not voice a following stop in Greek;
Barton Glotta 71 (1993): 1-9 incorrectly assumes a complicated series of
developments; oupaλóc disproves the rule ND < ND³, and ävеpшлоç is a Pre-Greek
word; the rule has been rejected on several occasions. Moreover, there is no evidence
Aávatog
533
for e-vocalism (viz. *dhembh-), as we would expect if the word were of IE origin, so
the whole approach thus far has been wrong: Đáµßos and τéŋлα cannot be
genetically related. The group is further isolated; Go. af-dobn [ipv.] 'become
speechless' cannot be connected. Just as doubtful is the connection with a Germ.
group for 'hit', e.g. ME dabben 'hit softly', MoHG tappen. The variation еал-/ τα-/
Gauß- (with Pre-Greek prenasalization), to which *ОaƑ- in ¤añµa, etc. also belong,
cannot be IE. The rare form Ошл- is a variant of *Оauл-. The whole group is of Pre-
Greek origin; thus already Kuiper 1956: 225 and Fur. passim.
Оáµuž [?] · àλóлη 'fox' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Improbable hypothesis by von Blumenthal 1930: 36ff.; see WH s.v.
Báuvos [m.] 'bush, shrub' (II.). <PG>
•VAR Also [f.], after other tree names.
•DER Diminutive aµvíσкoç [m.] (Dsc.), ¤¤µvĩτç ‘shrub-like' (Nic. Th. 883),
Bauvwdns 'id.' (Thphr.), Oaµvás = pica (EM). Beside it 0άuvn (-a) [f.] 'wine from
pressed grapes (?)' (Herod. 6, 90, Gp.).
•ETYM The word 0άuvos exists next to quivós and ¤¤µá just as éʊкvóç next to
лuкɩvóç and лúкα; the barytonesis is caused by the substantivization (cf. Schulze
1933a: 124¹). For the meaning, cf. the explanation in H.: 0άuvo· Sασéα кαi лʊкvà
SévSpa dense and thick trees'. Not, as per Alessio Studi etruschi 18 (1941): 414,
related to Lat. tamnus; see WH s.v. With its ending in -auv(oc), the word seems Pre-
Greek; its meaning makes this quite possible.
Bávaτos [m.] 'death' (Il.). <IE *d(u)enh₂- 'die'>>
•COMP Compounds like ȧ-Оávaτos ‘immortal' (Il.), еavatη-qópos 'death-bringing'
(A.; -1- metrically and analogically conditioned, Schwyzer 438f.).
•DER Adjectives: avάoчuos 'bringing death, going to die' (IA; on the formation
Arbenz 1933: 17 and 7of.; rarely avaτñσчoç, op. cit. 78f.); also avaτwdns (Hp.),
Đavatóɛiç (S., E.), Оavatýσios (Afric.; after ßiotýolos, Bpotńolos), Bavatikós (D. S.,
Plu.), еavατηpóç (Eust.); Оavaτovσia (sc. iɛpá) [pl.] 'festival for the dead' (Luc.; after
yɛpoúσloc). Denominative verbs: 1. Oavaτów kill, bring to death, sentence to death'
(IA) with Baváτwoiç; 2. Oavatáw 'like to die', also 'be dying' (Pl.); 3. Оavaτiáw 'id.'
(Luc.). Old perfect τéОvηкα 'I am dead', plur. τéеvăµεv, ptc. τεðvηúç, TεOvεwç, Aeol.
inf. Tεеváкηy, with the thematic root aorist avov 'I died' (Il.), the fut. Oavouμa
(Il.) and a present Ovηoкw (inscr.), Ovýσкw (mss.), Aeol. Ovatσкw (Hdn. Gr. 2, 79);
in prose mostly åлo-Оvýσкw; also with other prefixes, e.g. kata-Övýokw, -Đavɛiv,
-τéеvηкα (all Il.); on the function of the prefix see Schwyzer 1950: 268f. Verbal
adjective Ovηtós ‘mortal' (Il.). Thence Ovηoчuos (only Arg. to S. OT 7) with
Ovηoчuaчov 'cadaver' (LXX); in the same meaning also Ovãoídov, Ovnσ(ε)ídiov
(Lesbos, Ael.; Schwyzer: 270). Verbal subst. Ovñoɩ ‘dying, mortality' (medic.),
Evеvnoчμoç preparing a soft death' (A. Ag. 1294) from ε Ovýσкεv; cf. ɛúðávaτoç,
-Tέw, -σía.
•ETYM The comparison with the Skt. aorist á-dhvani-t 'he disappeared' and the ptc.
dhvān-tá- ‘dark' previously led to a reconstruction IE duenh₂-, but this etymological
connection is not certain. The Greek forms av-(εv) and ¤áva-(ros), Ovā-(tóc)

=== page 291 ===

534
Oánta
point to a reconstruction *dhnh₂-, *dhnh₁-e- beside *dhnh₂-C-. LIV₂ therefore.
combines them under a root *dhenh₂- 'sich in Lauf setzen, sich davonmachen', to
which also belong Indo-Iranian forms like Ved. dhánvati 'flows', prá dhanvati (YV)
'dies', as well as ToA tsnäntär [subj.] 'flow'. Semantically, this is possible, but not
wholly convincing.
Đáлta [f.] · µvĩa, Kpñτeç ‘fly (Cretan)' (H.). ◄PG►
•ETYM Fur.: 388, etc. compares λáττα < *λαлτα (glossed as μvĩa, Hoλuppηviot H.),
Sáлτηе (Lуc.), and Lat. tabānus 'horse-fly'. However, see Оáлτw on Latte.
еáлτ [v.] 'to bury' (Il.). <IE? *dhemb¹- ‘dig, bury'>
•VAR Aor. Oάyai, pass. τaqñvaɩ, also -Оñvat, perf. pass. τé¤¤µµαi.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ¿v-, OUV-, KATA-.
DER Tάqoç [m.] 'burying, tomb' (II.), τaqń ‘id.' (IA); derived from this the
hypostases εv-, εлɩ-táqios ‘ptng. to a burial' together with ¿vτaqiášw, ¿vtaqiaotýs
(LXX, pap.); ¿ñɩtɑqέw [v.] ‘to attend a burial' (inscr.); τaq½ïoç ‘ptng. to a burial'
(Od.), τaqɛúç ‘grave-digger' (S.), τaq(ε)w ‘(place) of a tomb' (inscr.), taqiкóv
'burial costs' (pap.). τάopoç [f.] (on the genus see Schwyzer 1950: 34') 'ditch (for
fortification, etc.)' (Il.) together with τappɛúw 'make a ditch' (Att.), whence τapp-
ɛía, tápp-evµa, -evoiç, -evtýc; rare tάopŋ ‘id.' (Ion.); τpáqoç (Tabl. Heracl. I, 130).
Uncertain Оáл<p>α• µvñµà (cod. µvĩα). Kpñtéç ‘monument (Cret.)' (H.); see Latte
Glotta 34 (1955): 196f.
•ETYM It has traditionally been compared with Arm. damb-an 'tomb', starting from
IE *dmbh. Greek would also have generalized the zero grade еαл-, taq- < *Ɖaq-,
and the full grade *dhembh- would have been eliminated in both languages. However,
Clackson 1994: 120f. doubts that the words are old. Armenian and Greek could well
be borrowings; IE origin is uncertain.
Oapynia [n.pl.] Ionic-Attic festival before the harvest, connected with the cult of
Apollo (Hippon., Archil.), also Tapyńλia (Milete). ◄PG(V)►
•DER apyηλiwv (Tapy-) month name (IA), apynλios (Tapy-) PN (Ion.). Beside it
Bápynos, acc. to Crates apud Ath. 3, 114a name of a bread, which was otherwise
called Baλúσios (ǎptoc) (s. Baλúσia), also name of a pot (XÚτpα) with cooked fruits,
which was considered a symbol of fertility (Suid., H., EM 443, 19).
•ETYM Pre-Greek origin is demonstrated by the variant forms with T-.
Đápvvμαι →Ɖopós and Općoμai.
=
Đápσoç [n.] 'confidence, courage, audacity' (II.). <IE *dhers- 'bold">
•VAR Att. Báppos (partly a reshaping of Hom. Oápoos, etc. acc. to Leumann 1950:
115); Aeol. Oépoos.
●COMP E.g. εv-0apons of good courage' (A.), Оɛpoɩ-εл½s ‘talking courageously' (B.;
on the first member Schwyzer: 448).
•DER Capoaλéos, -pp- 'with confidence, courageous' (II.; on the formation
Chantraine 1933: 253f.), Oεpoíïns PN (Hom., etc.), apońε 'courageous' (Call.,
Nonn.; innovation, see Schwyzer: 527); denominative verb apoέw (-pp-), aor.
Gapoñσai 'be courageous' (Il.; cf. Schwyzer: 724, Chantraine 1942: 349; hardly from
Đá os
535
ɛvapoέw as per Leumann l.c.) together with appηúkós (Arist.). Beside Oápσoç,
Oépoos we have the adjective Opaσús 'audacious, courageous, bold' (since Il.), often
as a first member, e.g. Opaσvкápdios with audacious heart' (II.), Rhod. Oapoú-ẞios,
Ther. Ohap(p)ú-μaqhos (more forms in Schwyzer: 284); thence Opaσútŋs ‘'boldness'
(IA), Opaow epithet of Athena (Lyc.), denominative verb Opaσúvw, Bapσúvw, -pp-
'encourage' (II.) with Oápouvos 'with confidence' (Il.; deverbal; cf. Schwyzer 491);
compar. Opaoíwv (Alcm.), Opaσútɛpoç, superl. -útaτos (Att.); see Seiler 1950: 55f. Cf.
also ȧτáσ0a\os.
•ETYM An exact correspondence to Opaσús would be Skt. dhṛṣú-, but the latter is only
attested in grammarians; the typical form is dhṛṣṇú- ‘bolď (RV), from dhṛṣṇóti
[3sg.pres.] 'be audacious'. The s-stem Oέpoos (for which secondarily Đápσoc, Opáσoc
by influence of Opaσúc) has no parallel in Sanskrit. Greek has only the denominative
verbs apoέw, apoúvw, while other IE languages have primary formations: Skt.
dhrs-n-ó-ti, perf. da-dhárșa, Go. ga-dars 'dare, toλμw', Lith. drįsti 'dare' (with infixed
nasal, cf. OPr. dyrsos [adj.] 'courageous, skillful').
=>
Báσow 'sit'. VAR Oaáσow. Оãкoç.
Báσowv 'quicker'. •VAR Att. Оáττwv. →taxúç.
Baчua [n.] 'wonder, astonishment' (Il.). <PG>
•VAR Hdt. et al. Owμа (mss. also ешчμa; see below).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in Oaчματо-лоóç 'wonder-worker = juggler' (Pl., D.).
•DER еaчματós 'wonderful' (Hes. Sc. 165, h. Hom., Pi.) with Oavµáσios ‘id.' (IA;
Schwyzer: 466), from which avµаσióτη (Нp.); еavματóεç ‘'id.' (Man.); aúμaç,
-avτos (Hes.; Schwyzer: 526, Chantraine 1933: 269). Denominative verbs: 1. Gavμaívw
'wonder, admire' (0 108, h. Ven. 84) with Dor. Owμávτaç (Phleius); 2. Oavµáčw ‘id.'
(Il.; on the formation Schwyzer: 734) with avμaστns 'admirer' and еavμαστiкóç
(Arist.), еavμασµós ‘admiration' (Hell.), ðaúµαкτpov probably 'money paid to see a
conjurer's tricks' (Sophr. 120; cf. Chantraine 1933: 332); 3. еavµατíšo̟μαι. ¿krλýttopai
'I am astonished' (H.). PN wμwv (Boeot.); cf. yvõμα : уvóμшv et al.; see Bechtel
1917b: 214.
•ETYM The word aūμa belongs to the group of 0áµßoç, τéðŋa, etc. with Pre-Greek
labial F (Fur: 228-33). This also explains Owμa with av/w, beside which (with
"etymological" notation) there is also Owuμa in Hdt.; the variation cannot be
explained in IE terms. Thus Kuiper 1956: 225 and Fur.: 236, 242. It is possible, though
by no means certain, that auµa, etc. are verbal nouns of a word for 'see, observe' in
►Béa 'looking at', Oεáoμa 'behold', etc.
Đáyos [f.] name of a plant, ‘fustic, Rhus Cotinus', used for dyeing yellow (Theocr.).
<LW?
•VAR Also Bavía píša (Thphr.); avía [f.] ‘deadly carrot, Thapsia garganica' (Arist.,
Thphr.).
•DER Đáчvos yellow-colored' (Ar.).
•ETYM Identical with the name of the peninsula Thapsos (on the eastern coast of
Sicily), or derived from it. See Strömberg 1940: 127.

=== page 292 ===

536
Oća [f.] 'sight, aspect, spectacle' (IA). <PG►
éa
•VAR Ion. Oέn (Syrac. Oάa?; see Kaibel 1899-1901(1): 200).
•COMP As a first member in Oɛwpós spectator, envoy at a festival”, s.v.
•DER PN ©ãïç [f.] (D. S.). Verb 0εáoμαí, Ion. Оŋέoμaɩ, Dor. Oаéqµɑɩ (with еáµɛðα
[Sophr.] and other contracted forms; see Bechtel 1921, 2: 191) 'to look at, behold' (II.),
also with prefix, e.g. έк-, кατα-, σuv-. Several deverbal nouns: 1. Oéaμa, Oέnua 'sight,
spectacle' (Semon., A.); 2. Oéασiç 'contemplation, insight' (Gal., Porph.); 3. еaτúç
(Dor. < *ðaaτúç). "кptov (= ‘bank in a theatre'), Oɛwpɛïov, έs Batúv. eiç Oɛwpíav H.;
4. Oέatpov, Đéŋtpov place for spectators, theatre' (IA) with several compounds and
derivatives, e.g. àµôɩ-Оéâτpos [adj.] ‘having place for spectators around' (e.g of
iллódpoµç, στá), substantivized -ov 'amphitheatre' (D. H., Str.), еεατpiкóç,
εατpíчw, εατpoµós; 5. Deatńs, Oεnts 'spectator' (IA) with еɛατikós (Arr.); 6.
Annτúp ( 397), еaτýp (B. 9, 23) ‘id.'; 7. Oɛnµwv ‘id.' (APl.).
ETYM At the basis of 0έa, etc. is *¤ãƒã. In Ionic-Attic, *0ά Fã gave 0έa, where one
would expect contraction of two like vowels after loss of F (see the discussion in
Peters 1980a: 301f.). Other primary nouns are probably ¤ñßos (= ¤ñƑoç)· еаúµα and
Onyɛia (= OnƑεia). Đavµãoτá, yevdñ and Oŋtaλá (= OnƑaλá). еavµaotá, yeúdɛoiv
öμota (all H.). The verbs ã(F)éoμаι, Оŋ(F)εoμαι (with ao > ɛo) and the development
giving ɛάoμat are discussed in Szemerényi SMEA 3 (1967): 71-72. They can be taken
as denominatives, or alternatively as deverbatives (Schwyzer: 720) with Oέŋ, Oέa as
back-formations (this direction seems to be indicated by the chronology of the
attestations)? No IE cognates; the word is Pre-Greek, as is proven by the variations
(see Bañua, 0άußoc). Incorrectly, Szemerényi Glotta 33 (1954): 256, who traces
*¤áƒã to IE *d³msu̟ā.
Оεiλóлεdov ⇒εiλónεdov.
Oɛívw [v.] 'to slay', also ‘to kill' (II.). <IE *gwhen- ‘strike, slay'>
•VAR Reduplicated aor. лε-v-ɛïv (II.), med. ¿éqaτo (cod. ȧл-)· åлéеavεv 'he dieď
(H.); beside it also, probably as an innovation, the thematic root aor. Oɛvεïv (E., Ar.)
and the ptc. Oɛivas of the s-aorist (Y 481); fut. Oεvw (Ar.), 3sg. perf. pass. „éqataɩ, inf.
лɛôáσðaι (II.), together with fut. pass. лεóñσεtai (О 140, etc.).
•COMP The verbal adjective as a second member in compounds, e.g. ápη-paτoç (see
also on ►Sipáσios).
⚫DER Beside it ►póvos [m.] ‘murder', s.v.; cf. also 'Apyeïqóvtns.
•ETYM From this root, Indo-European formed an athematic root present: 3sg. Skt.
hánti = Av. jainti = Hitt. kuen-zi 'he slays, kills', IE *gén-ti. This was replaced by a
thematic root formation: YAv. janaiti ‘kill', Lith. genù 'to drive (cattle), hunt', OCS
ženo 'to drive, pursue', as well as perhaps Arm. jnem 'slay' (which may instead be
denominative from jin 'stick'). Other formations are OIr. gonim 'to wound, kill'
(iterative) and Lat. -fendō in dē-, of-fendō (with a suffixal -d-). The reduplicated
aorist is also found outside Greek, e.g. in Indo-Iranian: Av. auua-jaynat (if not an
intensive) 'he struck' = εovε. The perfect formations also correspond: Skt. 3sg. ja-
ghán-a < IE *gwhe-gw³on-; лé-qα-τα and Skt. 3pl. ja-ghn-úḥ < *g™he-gwhn-. Verbal
adjectives: Skt hatá- = Av. jata- = -ατoç, IE *g™³n-to-. The full grade thematic yod-
Oελεμóv
537
present ɛívw was connected (cf. Frisk) with Lith. geniù (inf. genëti) ‘to prune
branches' (< IE *gwhen-iō), beside OCS žúnjo̟ (inf. žęti) ‘to reap, mow'. However, as
Derksen 2008 s.v. *žėti II remarks, the Balto-Slavic words point to a root-final
laryngeal. Arm. jnjem ‘to wipe off, clean' could belong here phonetically as well, but
differs in meaning. Connection with Alb. gjan ‘to hunt, follow' is very doubtful. On
the meaning of the IE root, see recently García Ramón 1998: 139-154.
Oɛov [n.] 'brimstone' (Il., IA). <IE *dhues- 'smoke'>
•VAR Epic Oεεlov, also Onïov (X 493).
•DER Diminutivum 0ε(1)άqtov (H., Tz.; Oéapos Eust.), adjective εuwdŋç 'sulphuric'
(Str., medic.); denominative verb Oɛtów, Oɛów, epic ɛɛtów (also prefixed with dia-,
¿к-, ɲɛpɩ-) ‘treat with sulphur' (Od., medic.); thence Оɛwµata. τà ɲɛpikaðapτýpia
'purificatory offerings' (H.).
•ETYM The basic form was 0εtov, whence Oεtov by hyphaeresis and, by further loss
of the 1, Oɛów, Oɛálov. The hapax Onïov arose by metrical lengthening and change of
suffix. Perhaps Hom. Oéɛtov derives from *0 Féhɛtov; it would be a substantivized
adjective from a noun *0Ƒéhoç [n.], properly 'smoke', formed from a verbal root
*dhues- 'smoke, breathe' (cf. LIV² s.v.) in Lith. dvěsti breathe, blow'. Not connected
to 0ɛós. Cf. ► Oúw 2.
Oɛчoç [m.] 'uncle, father's or mother's brother' (Att.). <ONOM▷
⚫DER Innovations are лрóеεоç 'great-uncle' (Laodicea; after proavus) and Oɛía [f.]
'aunt' (pap.; for τneis acc. to Schwyzer 1950: 31).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic *0n, with a suffix -ɛoç? Cf. reduplicated τηеŋ. From Oɛoç
came Ital. zio ‘id.'.
Oελyw [v.] 'to enchant, beguile, cheat' (Il.). <?>
•Var Aor. Oźλžaɩ, pass. Оελ×¤ñvaɩ, fut. Оέλ\w (Od.); iterative ipf. OέλyɛOK' (Y 264).
•COMP Rarely with prefix (diα-, έлɩ-, kata, napα-). Oλ§1- as a first member in
governing compounds, e.g. Оελ§ɩ-εлýs with enchanting words' (B.), Oɛλ\í-qpwv
'enchanting the mind' (E. [lyr.]); see Schwyzer 443.
•DER Оελкτηp ‘enchanter, etc.' (h. Hom. 16, 4) with ελкτηpιov 'charm' (Il.), adj.
еελкTηpios enchanting' (A., E.); ОελкTwp ‘'id.' (A. Supp. 1040 [lyr.]); еελкτpov =
Đɛλktńpiov (S. Tr. 585), Оéλуητpov ‘charm, spell' (E.); 0έλyµa ‘id.' (sch., H.); еéλкταp
(cod. Oέpкaλ). Oέλyua (H.), Fraenkel Glotta 32 (1953): 29; (кaτá-)\\₁ç 'charm'
(Plu., Luc., Ael.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Several unconvincing hypotheses: that it is related to Lith.
žvelgiù 'look at' (de Saussure MSL 8 (1894): 443, who connects it as ‘enchanting by an
evil look'); to Skt. hvárate 'go obliquely' < *guel- with Gr. enlargement -y- (Ehrlich
1910: 29); to Gm. words like OE dolg, OHG tolc 'wound' (Havers IF 28 (1911): 190ff.;
see also on àσɛλyńs).
Oɛλɛµóv [adj.] epithet of лãµα 'drink' (A. Supp. 1027 [lyr.]) of unknown meaning,
glossed by H. as oiкτpóv, ňovxov 'pitiable, quiet', connected with 0έλw by Hdn. Gr.
1, 171. PG?>

=== page 293 ===

538
-ελvvo
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Cf. ελ(v)ά (τɛ кαì στεрεшлά) Еmp. 21, 6; taken as
"supporting, basic", on which see Solmsen 1909: 63. See discussion on -ελчμvoç.
Fur.: 317 thinks the word is Pre-Greek (due to suffix -εµoç).
-еελvμvoç [adj.] in лρo-Оελчµvoç, epithet of dévSpɛa (I 541), of xaiτai (K 15), of σáкoç
(N 130); post-Hom. of various objects (Spūç, kapńata). <PG>
●COMP Also in tεtpa-Oέλvµvos epithet of σáкos (O 479 = X 122); cf. τpiðéλvµvos
τpíïívɣoç (Eust. 849, 5).
=
•DER The simplex is unknown, but Sturz read it in Emp. 21, 6 for traditional
BEλnu(v)á (Diels and others: 0ελεuvá).
ETYM We may compare the prefix in лро-Оéλчμvоç with лрó-рpicos 'of which the
root is gone, uprooted', Lat. prŏ-fundus 'of which the bottom is removed, deep', Skt.
pra-parṇa- 'whose leaves have fallen off, stripped of the leaves'. The second member
of лpo-¤¿λvµvos, which can be reconstructed as *0έλvμa as well as *ελvµvov (-os),
has been interpreted as 'base' since antiquity. Thus, éρo-Оελчµvos would mean 'the
base (bottom) of which is removed; without foundation', which might fit in all
occurrences except N 130 (after this Nonn. D. 22, 183; 2, 374). Improbably,
Wackernagel 1916: 237ff. (with criticism of older views), who recognizes in лpо-
Oελчuvos a variant of τετрα-0ελuuvos 'with four layers', with лpo- as the Aeolic
parallel of τpα- from *лτƑрα- (cf. τρá-лε(α). The glosses of H., à¤έλчµvoɩ kakoí;
άеεληчov ǎкоvσμа· какóν are unclear, as is Oέλεμvov. öλov εк piŵv (Latte apud
Mayrhofer KEWA 2: 94 fn.). Krahe Die Antike 15 (1939): 181 thinks the word is Pre-
Greek. This is without a doubt correct, because of the suffix (-uuvos). Older attempts
(e.g., Wackernagel above, or the comparison with Sanskrit dharúṇa- [n.] by
Mayrhofer) should therefore be discarded.
=
é入w →$0É入w.
Oεμεα [n.pl.] 'fundaments, base', also metaph. (Il.). <IE *dheh,- 'put, make'>
•DER Also εμεíλta [n.pl.] ‘id.' (Il.), a metrically lengthened form of 0ɛµελa, adjective
εμéos belonging to the fundaments', as a substantive (sc. Míos) 'foundation-
stone' (Att.) with εμεów lay the foundation' (X.), Oεµελiwσis 'fundament' (LXX).
A poetical-archaizing back-formation is ¤µɛλov (AP) with the same meaning, -a
(verse inscr. Adana).
•ETYM Formations with eo- and λo- from a nominal m-stem. Cf. Оεµoúç s.v.
▶0εμów. On the formation of 0εuελoç, see also Frisk Eranos 41 (1943): 51ff. Cf. also
►Оɛµépη, ►Оéµç. See also Rix 1994: 35-53.
¤εμépŋ [adj.] · ßεßαía, σεµvý, εvσταеns firm, revered, well-based'; Оéµεрov. σεμóv.
ά oб кαì τò σεчú
úɛσ0a revered; hence, σ. 'to be revered' is also
called 0.' (H.). <IE *deh,- ‘put, make >>
•COMP As a first member in Оεμεршлç, еpithet of Apμovín (Emp. 122, 2), of aidwç
(A. Pr. 134 [lyr.]); Oεµɛpóœpovaç⋅ ovvetoús, owopovaç ‘understanding, wise' (H.).
●DER As a simplex only Оɛµépα óлí (v.l. Pi. N. 7, 83), Oɛµɛ[pwtɛ]pa (IG 14, 1018: 3
[IVP], if supplied correctly).
Aeuów
539
•ETYM Beside Oέµεpos (or Bεµεpós) 'solid, firm' stands *¤µσtos in ☹ɛµoto-kλñç
(cf. Apiστo-кλñc), like кρáτiστoç from кpaτɛpós (Frisk Eranos 48 (1950): 6). The
basis would be nominal 0εu-, as found in 0ɛμoúç (s.v. ►Оεµów), ОéµεÐλα, Оεµéλɩα.
It is doubtful that we should assume a separate word 0éuɛpoç in the meaning oεó
‘revered'. The IE etymology, too, is not without doubts.
Oźчuç [f., n.] 'justice, law, custom', also goddess of justice (Il.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Different oblique forms: gen. Оéµστoç (ẞ 68; Thess. inscr.), dat. -ɩστɩ (О 87;
Thess. inscr.), acc. -1στα (E 761, Y 4); Оéµdoç (A. Pr. 18), Оéµτos (Pi. O. 13, 8); rarely
also éμos (Hdt. 2, 50; v.l. -180c), Oεµews (inscr. Metropolis); acc. Oέµv (Hes.), voc.
Oεu (0.93). Plur. Оéµστεç, acc. -σtaç, etc. ‘statutes, (divine) laws, oracles' (Hom.,
Hes., Thgn., Pi.).
•DIAL Myc. te-mi, gen. ti-mi-to; cf. Ruipérez Minos 5 (1957): 176f., 181ff.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in Оεµ-σкóлоç ‘guarding justice' (Pi.), Оɛµσ-кpéwv
'ruling through justice' (Pi.), Оεμσто-лóλоç 'protecting the laws, obeying the oracles'
(h. Cer. 103, inscr. Delphi III³). As a second member e.g. in ǎ-0ɛuiç ‘lawless, unlawful'
(Pi., E.), à-¤éµtoç ‘id.' (Hdt.), à-Оéµɩotos ‘id.' (Il.), also à-Оεµíστios (Od.; metrical
variant).
●DER εµotós (A. Th. 694 [lyr.]; after à-Оéµστos); Oεµítós in où ɛµitóv = où ĐéµiS
(IA); ☹ɛµíσtios epithet of Zeus, 'Lord of the μστƐç' (Plu.); also month name
(Thessaly); εµσtɛños ‘regarding the 0.' (Pi.); Оεµστooúvai = Oéµiotes (Orph. H. 79,
6). Denominative verbs: 1. Оεμστεúш 'to proclaim the laws, oracles' (Od.) with
Oεμστεíα 'oracle-giving' (Str.). 2. Oεμ₁τεúш 'to behave lawfully' (E. Ba. 79 [lyr.]). 3.
Oɛµičétw. µaotiyoúτw, voµоðετεíτw. Kρñτɛç ‘to flog, frame laws (Cret.)' (H.); to be
changed in *0εμσσετw (= Paus. Gr. Fr. 202) acc. to Bechtel 1921, 2: 786; aor. ptc.
еεμσσáµεvoç (Рi.). Several PNs, e.g. ☹εµσto-кλñç (see on ►Оéµεpoç).
•ETYM In Av. dā-mi- [f.] ‘creation', also ‘creator' ([m.] and [f.]), we seem to have a
formation corresponding to 0εµç. Cf. the same difference between 0é-olç, -0ɛ-toç as
opposed to -dā-ti-, dā-ta- ‘basis, justice, law' (= 0έµs). The remarkable formations
Déµiotes, Béµiotos, etc. are problematic; the explanation by Schulze as a compound
of εµ- and στã- 'stand' leads to unsurmountable difficulties, acc. to Frisk s.v.
However, C. J. Ruijgh suggested (pers. comm.) that interchange between i-stem
forms and forms in -(σ) T- seems to point to Pre-Greek origin. Acc. to Fraenkel, the
occasional neuter forms originated from synonymous expressions like déov, kaλóv,
лρoσñкov; this is possible, but this may be an inheritance from Pre-Greek as well.
On the meaning of µç, see Vos 1956.
εμów [v.] only aor. Оéµwσɛ in (vña) ... ôépε кõµα (...), Оéµwσɛ dè xépσov iкéσðaɩ (1
486, 542). <?>
•DER_Denominative verb to εμós, which is only found in εú éσLS,
лαрαιvéσεç 'dispositions, exhortations' (H.) and in the PNs Oεμ-avdpoç, ☹εµó-εo
(Bechtel 1917b: 201f.).
ETYM The usual rendering with 'to cause, enable' or simply 'drove ashore
(landwards)' (LSJ) is too abstract; for a denominative verb, we would rather expect
'to provide with Oɛuóc' vel sim. The etymology remains unknown.

=== page 294 ===

540
Oεvap, -apoc
Oźvap, -apos [n.] 'palm of the hand' (also metaph.), 'sole of the foot' (Il.). <IE *dhen-r
'palm of the hand'>>
•COMP Also as a second member, e.g. óлiσОévαp [n.] 'back of the hand' (Poll.) for
*óлσðо-Оévαp, ларαiðévατα· τà àñò τŵν µкpŵν §акτúλwν ларà τò Оévαp, йуouv
¿ïì tòv kapëóv ‘what [runs] from the small fingers along the palm, or rather up to
the wrist' (H.).
•DER_Denominative verbs: Oεvapíšε· τúлτε strikes'; vεvapíɩ• έyxɛɩpɛi
'undertakes, attacks' (H.).
•ETYM Old word for 'palm of the hand', also found in Gm.: OHG tenar [m.], tenra
[f.] 'id.' (thematic derivations of the r-stem). Hypothetical further combinations in
Pok. 249.
OεOкóλoç [m.] 'servant of a god, priest' (Dyme IIª). <IE *k"el- 'turn, move around'>
⚫VAR Also Oɛnкóλos (Schwyzer: 438).
•DER Denominative Oɛoкoλéw [v.] (also εn-); -ía, -εwv (Hell.).
•ETYM Innovated on the model of Bouкólos 'cow-herd', but occasionally, the
expected form 0εо-лóλoç, -έw is found (Pl. Lg. 909d, Phot., Suid.; cf. ai-лóλoç).
еεолрóлоç [m.] 'fortune-teller, seer', also as an adjective 'prophetic'. <IE *prep-
'appear'>
●DER еεoлpoñéw (only ptc.) 'prophesу' and еεoлрóлov, -ía 'prophecy, oracle' (Il.).
•ETYM From ▶Đεó 'god' and лрεлεу to catch the eye, be conspicuous'.
Semantically analyzed by Bechtel 1914 s.v. as “the one who appears from god".
0ɛóç [m., f.] 'god, goddess' (II.). <IE *d"(e)h,s- 'god'>
•COMP Myc. te-o /the hos/. Very frequent in compounds, e.g. ä-0ɛoç, Oɛo-eldŃc; Oɛóσ-
Soτoç after Atóσ-Soτoc; on the form 0ɛσ- see Оéσкελoç, Оéσriç.
●DER 1. Oɛá [f.] ‘goddess' (epic; see Wackernagel 1920-1924(2): 25; on Oɛά and Oɛóç [f.]
in Hom. see Humbach MSS 7 (1955): 46ff.). 2. Oéaival [pl.] 'goddesses' (after
téktaɩvaɩ et al.; in Hom. as metrical filling; not an archaic form as per Chantraine
REGr. 47: 287¹). 3. Oɛños ‘divine' (Il.; cf. below) with ɛwdwę [adv.] (pap.), Oɛiótns
'godliness' (LXX, NT, Plu.), Oɛtáw prophesy, worship as a god' (Th.), also with
prefix, e.g. ¿ñɩ-0ɛɩá\w ‘swear by the gods' together with (εлɩ-)Оɛãoµóc (Th.) 4.
Оɛüкóç ‘id.' (late). 5. Denominative verb 0ɛów, -óo̟μa ‘turn into a god, become a god'
(Call.), mostly with prefix, e.g. άло-Оɛów ‘id.' (pap., Plb., Plu.) together with
άлoέwσç (Str.).
⚫ETYM The connection with Arm. di-k' [pl.] ‘gods' < *deh,s- seems to be generally
accepted. The old etymology *0Fεσ-óc with Lith. dvasià 'spirit', MHG getwas 'ghost'
has been abandoned, as there is no trace of the F in Greek and since the Armenian
word contradicts it. To *deh,s- further belong Lat. feriae 'festive days', festus 'feastly',
fānum 'temple' < *fasnom < *dhh,s-nom; see Rix Kratylos 14 (1969 [1972]): 179f. and
more recent literature in De Vaan 2008: s.vv. We must assume thematicizations of
an old s-stem *dh,-s- from the root *dheh,-, since Arm. and Lat. presuppose a full
grade, while Greek requires a zero grade *dhh,s-. The -s- is preserved in Oέσ-кελoç et
al. as well as in ɛños < *Оéσ-los.
¤ɛovdńs [adj.] ‘god-fearing, devout' (Od.). <GR➤
•DER Oɛoúdɛiα [f.] 'fear of god' (A. R. 3, 586).
541
⚫ETYM Contracted Att. PN ovdñç, ovdiádov. The form stands for 0ɛ0-8Ƒns <
*0ε0-SFεins, which is derived from *SƑɛños > ▸déos 'fear'. The meaning 'like a god'
(in late poets) arose from confusion with Oεo-εidns.
Оεлτavoç [adj.] · άлτóμεvоç touching, [here:] set on fire' (H.). <IE *dhegh- 'burn'>
ETYM Compared with Lith. dègtinas 'what has to be burned', which is derived from
degù, degti 'to burn'. Cf. on τécoppa 'ashes'. However, acc. to Maas ByzZ 37 (1937):
381 and Latte Glotta 34 (1955): 198f., it is corrupt for ¤εлtaívwv. åлtóµɛvos (Cyr.),
which Latte corrects to 8(ε) tyyávwv. On the origin of suffixal -τavoç, Lith. -tinas (IE
*-tnHo-?), see Benveniste 1935: 107f.
Oεpáñwv, -ovtos [m.] ‘attendant, servant; companion' (Il.). ◄PG➤
•VAR Aeol. (gramm.) gen. -ovos (see below); also apaл- (see Threatte 1980 (index)
and Fur.: 352), probably recent.
●DER Diminutive Ɖɛpañóvtiov (D. L.). Oɛpáñaiva [f.] ‘servant, maid' (IA), together
with ɛpañaιvíç, -ídiov (Pl., Men.); also Оɛpáлvη ‘id.' (h. Ap. 157; see below) together
with Оɛpanvic (AP); unclear is Oεралovτíç, еpithet of (pɛpvý (A. Supp. 979). Also
еéрay, -αлоç [m.], mostly plur. id.' (E.) together with Оεрáлov (Hyp.), -лíç (Pl. Mx.
244e). Denominative verb Оεрαлεúw 'serve, honour, care for, heal' (since v 265) with
several nouns: Oɛpañɛía, Ion. -ŋïŋ, Oɛpáñevµa ‘serving, etc.' (IA), Oɛpáñɛvoiç ‘id.'
(Рhld.); еεрαлευτý ‘servanť (IA) with еεралεutikós (Pl., X., Arist.), also
еεрaлεvτηp (X., Aristox.; probably Doric, Fraenkel 1912: 54f.) together with
еεрαлεvτрíç (Ph.), -ɛúτpiα (EM); Оεрαл½ïoç = Оεpañεvtiкós (AP), -ŋïç [f.] (Orac.
apud Jul. Ep. 88b).
⚫ETYM Except as 'servant', Оεpáлvη also occurs in Eur. and successors in the meaning
'dwelling, habitation' (Оεрáлvαι· аúλ@vεç, σταеμoí H.), which is reminiscent of
Souλoçoiкía (H.); one might assume a meaning 'house', whence a collective
'servants'. We can hardly separate the Laconian TN Оεрáлvα, -vai from Оεрáлvη
'house' (cf. also τépaµva with the same meaning); this points to Pre-Greek origin of
the whole group. The form еεрáлνη can be derived from an n-stem 0εpáлwy; the nt-
stem may be secondary (cf. Оεpáлαɩvα). Van Brock Rev. Hitt. As. 1959: 117-126
compares Hitt. tarpašša-.
Oźpµos [m.] ‘lupine, Lupinus albus' (middle com., Thphr.). <IE *gher-mo- 'warm'>
•DER Оέpµov ‘id.' (pap.), Оépµvos 'from Lupine' (Luc., Dsc.).
ETYM Identical with Oɛpμós 'warm', with a regular shift of accent upon
substantivization. See Strömberg 1940: 82. See Oεpμóç.
Oεpuós [adj.] 'warm' (II.). <IE *gher-mo- 'warm'>>
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. OεрμО-лúλα (Нdt.; see Risch IF 59 (1949): 267).
On ǎ-, čк-, žv-0εpμoç, etc. see below on 0έpun and Oεpμaívw.
•DER A. Substantives: 1. Oέpun, also -чǎ (see Chantraine 1933: 102 and 148) [f.]
‘warmth, heat, heat of fever' (IA) with ǎ-0ɛpµos ‘without warmth', v-0εpµos ‘having
warmth inside, warm' (Strömberg 1946: 95); 0εpμíčw [v.] 'to be feverish' (Euboea). 2.

=== page 295 ===

542
époual
еεрμóτηs warmth, heat' (IA). 3. Oɛpµwλń ‘id.' (Hp.; Frisk Eranos 41 (1943): 52). 4.
Oɛpµéλŋ. ǹ Oépµŋ Suid. (Strömberg 1944: 79). 5. Оépμаσσα = кáшvоç 'oven' (Hdn.
Gr. 1, 267; formation unclear, cf. Schwyzer: 525f.).
B. Adjectives: 1. Oεpµwdηs lukewarm' (Aret.); HN Oεpμwdwv, -OVτOÇ (Boeotia,
Pontos; see Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 2 (1950-1951): 236; 3, 162). 2. εpµηpós
epithet of лоτηpov (H. s.v. кελéßη; to Оépµn?).
C. Verbs: 1. еépμετo ipf. 'became warm' (Il.), Oέpµεtε [ipv.] (0 426; after it Ar. Ra.
1339); on the formation cf. Schwyzer 722f.; 2. Oɛpµaívw, aor. Oɛpµñvaɩ ‘warm up' (II.),
often with prefix, e.g. ¿к-0εpμαívw 'heat up completely' (Hp., Arist.) with deverbal
кеεрμоç 'very hot' (Vett. Val.); from there Оépμavσiç heating' (Arist.) with
еερμαντɩкóç 'suited to warm' (Pl., Arist.), Oɛpμaσía 'heating, warmth' (Hp., Arist.; cf.
Schwyzer 469), Оépμаσμа 'warming cuff (medic.; see Chantraine 1933: 176),
Оεрμáστрã (see εpµá(w below); Оεpµаvτηp “warmer", kettle for boiling water'
(Poll.) with εpμavτýpios ‘warming' (Hp., inscr.). 3. Оɛpµášw ‘id.' only aor.opt.med.
еεрμáσσα (Nic. Al. 587) together with Оɛpµáστpα [f.] 'furnace' (Call.; also to
ɛpμaívw); also written Оɛpµɑúστpa, by confusion with Oɛpµavoτpís (Oépµ-), ‘fire-
tongs' (Arist., H.), cf. лup-ɑúƒ¨τpα ‘id.' (avεv ‘scoop fire'); also metaph. as the name
of a dance (Poll., Ath.) with Oεрμаvστрí(w (Critias, Luc.); from еεpμáστρα:
Oεpµaoτpíç (Оépµ-) = Oɛpµavtýp (Eup., LXX); the forms in -αστp-, -avʊτp- are not
well distinguished, cf. Schulze 1933a: 189; by dissimilation épuαστɩç meaning
unclear (Attica IV³) with еεpμáσTIOν (Aen. Tact.).
⚫ETYM Inherited adjective, identical with Arm. jerm 'warm', Thraco-Phr. germo- (in
TNs, e.g. Tέpµn), IE *gher-mo-; also, in substantivized function, Alb. zjarm, zjarr
'heat'. With o-vocalism, originally substantival, IE *ghor-mo- in Skt. gharmá- [m.]
'heat', OPr. gorme ‘id.'; secondarily, also adjectival in Av. garǝma-, Lat. formus, MoE
warm. See ▶0έpoμαι, ▸Оépoç.
Đépou̟ai [v.] ‘to become warm, warm oneself (II.). <IE *g™her- ‘warm’▷
VAR Rarely act. Oέpw 'to warm' (A. R., Nic.), only present stem except aor. pass.
subj. Oɛpéw (p 23; for *0εpn-w), fut.ptc. Oɛpσóμεvoç (τ 507).
•COMP As a second member e g. in εiλŋ-0ɛps, but see on ▸εiλŋ.
•DER Oépoç [n.] 'summer' (II.), 'harvest' (IA). Thence épɛtos belonging to the
summer', fem. Oɛpɛíα, -ŋ (scil. wpa) 'summer' (Pi., Hdt.), Oɛpivós ‘id.' (IA; after
Xεчɛpivó etc., Chantraine 1933: 201), Oɛpóɛ ‘id.' (Nic. Al. 570; poetic formation,
Schwyzer: 528), Oεpiaкós fitting for the summer' (iµáτa 0. pap. VI³; after λiaкóç et
al.); Oɛpídɩov ‘summer residence' (Jul.), Oépɛtpov ‘id.' (Hp.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 332).
Denominative verb Oɛpí(w, aor. Oɛpíσα harvest, mow down' (IA), also intr. 'pass the
summer' (X., Arist.), with Oɛpioμós ‘harvest' (Eup., X.), Oɛpiστηs harvester' (Att.)
with -ɩστɩкós (pap.), also -tστηp ‘id.' (Lyc. 840), -ɩστ½ pov ‘sickle' (LXX); Оépiστpov
'summer tunic' (LXX, pap.), -íστpov 'id.' (Theoc.; Wackernagel KZ 33 (1895): 50);
еépiστpα [pl.] 'reward for harvesting' (pap.).
•ETYM Formally, Skt. háras- [n.] 'heat' < IE *gwhéros- corresponds exactly with Oέpos,
like Arm. jer ‘id.'. The meaning 'summer' is a Greek innovation ('heať = Oέpµŋ,
еáλлоç). In the sense of 'harvest', Oέpos may be from 0ɛpíw *to do summertime
work'. The thematic root present Oépoμat agrees with OIr. fo-geir 'warms, heats'. The
j
еεσлÉσLOC
543
other languages have different formations: Arm. jeř-nu-m, aor. jeř-ay 'warm oneself
(Skt. ghr-no-ti lights, burns' [gramm.]; cf. ghṛ-ṇá- [m.] ‘glow, heat'), OCS grěti sę,
1sg. grěją sę ‘to warm oneself (gorjo, gorěti ‘burn'), etc.
Oćσɩç [f.] ‘situation, position, adoption, custom, etc.' (Alc., Pi.). <IE *dheh,- 'set,
make'>
•COMP Very frequently as a derivative of prefixed verbs, e.g. Siá-, oúv-, úñó-ðɛσiç
(from diα-τíðŋµɩ, etc.).
=
●DER -Оéσчoç in ëapa-, ñɛpɩ-, èk-, áлo-Оéσчµoç (from лapáðɛσiç, etc.; cf. Arbenz
1933: 91f.).
•ETYM Greek ćσis corresponds to a Skt. formation which is found only in
derivatives and compounds: -(d)hiti-, e.g. ápihiti- = εлíðɛσç (from api-dhā- = ¿nɩ-
On-), úpahiti = úлóðɛσɩç (from upa-dhã- = vло-еn-); cf. apihi-ta-
ènide-tos,
upahi-ta- = úлóðɛ-τoç; with Av. tarōi-di-ti- (-i- secondary) 'putting aside, etc.' from
tarō-dā- (= Skt. tiro-dhā- ‘id.', ptc. tirohi-ta-); also, late Lat. con-diti-ō 'foundation'
(after condi-tus, -tor from con-dō). Additionally, one finds various full grade forms
(IE *deh-ti- as opposed to *dhh,-ti-): Go. ga-deds 'putting, adoption' (du suniwe
gadedai > ‘ɛiç vioƉɛσíav' Eph. 1, 5), missadeþs 'crime', OHG tāt, Av. -Sāiti in ni-dāi-
ti- (from ni-dā- lay down'), etc., Lith. dětis 'load', OCS blago-dětь benediction', and
probably also Lat. *fe-tis 'settlement, treaty' in fēti-ālis 'war-messenger'. A verbal
noun of Tinu; cf. also 0εσμóc and other derivatives.
Béσkɛλos [adj.] ‘marvelous, wonderful' (II.). <IE *dheh,s- 'god-, holy'>
ETYM Compounded from *0ɛσ- 'god' (see εóc) and кéλoμat 'drive', thus
properly 'moved by a god'. On the e-vocalism of the second member, see Schwyzer:
449³. Сf. ►еεσлéσios, ► féσqatos.
0ɛouós [m.] 'settled agreement, law, custom' (4 196). <IE *dhh,-dhmo-? 'agreement,
custom'>
•VAR Dor. Tεeμóc, Lacon. Arc. Locr. also ε0μóç.
•COMP E.g. 0εσμo-Đétai, ¿vðεgµoç.
•DER Оéσµoç, τéµ, µ ‘lawful, customary' (IA, Dor., etc.); εσμσúvη
'lawfulness' (AP).
•ETYM Synonymous Celtic words (OIr. deidmea, MW deddf [f.]) require a pre-form
*dhed³mo- (-ā-). Reduplicated *dhe-dhh,-m-o- is impossible for Greek, because this
would give **τε0εµóç vel sim. Rather, 0ε- could be the same form of the root as in
0-σɩs et al., to which suffixes -0μ- or -σμ- were added within Greek. In εµós, the
result of Grassmann's Law was removed by influence of Béσiç.
еεσлéσoç [adj.] 'divine, superhuman, enormous, wonderful' (Il.). <IE *dh,s- 'god'
and *sek"- 'speak'>
•COMP As a first member, e.g. Оεσлɩ-Оαеç (лŨр, Пl.; see on Saíw) and as a PN.
•DER Thence Оɛσлí‹ƒ, aor. Оɛσлíσαt, -iat (Theoc.) 'prophesy, give an oracle' (Hdt.,
trag.) with Оεσлíðµɑτα [pl.] (rarely [sg.]) ‘oracle' (trag.), Оεσлστés fortune-teller,
prophet' (Man.). Also Оéσriç, los, -v, -18a ‘id.' (Od.). Here also εσлαí [pl.] town in
Boeotia and other TNs.

=== page 296 ===

544
Aegoadia
ETYM Like e.g. àµßpóσtoç from äµßρоτоç, еεσлéσɩоç derives from *Оεσ-σл-ετоç, a
compound of *0εσ- 'god' (see ɛós) and the verb (¿vɩ-)σлεv ‘to proclaim' (see
► ¿v(v)έлw), with a suffix -ετo- (cf. ǎ-σл-ετoç). Thus, it properly meant 'proclaimed
by a god'. It is thought that Оέoлç was from *еεσ-σл-¹ç; however, Hamp MSS 43
(1984): 50f. explains that εσл- is the Caland form of 0ɛσƒɛσo, and therefore arose
by decomposition.
Oɛoσalía [f.] 'Thessaly' (Hdt.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Att. OεTταλ-; Thess. Iετеαλ-, Boeot. Þett-.
●DER -ós (Hdt.), PN (B 79, son of Heracles, father of Pheidippos and Antiphos); -ɛo
(Gal.); fem. -ís 'Thessalian' (S.); -@τç (Hdt.); -кós (Hp.). -iкétηs 'serf in T.'
(Philocr. Hist.); -w [v.] 'to imitate the Thessalians, speak Thessalian' (Ael.);
⚫ETYM No doubt a Pre-Greek name, probably from *K*ett'al-. This explains all the
variants, notably σσ/ ττ/ τе. Connection with 0ɛσσáσαι 'to pray' is rejected by
Chantraine s.v.
wh
¤éσσaσðaι [v.aor.] 'pray, ask'. <IE *ghed¹- 'pray'>
•VAR Ptc. 0εσσáμɛvos, зpl.ind. Oéσσαντо (Hes., Archil.); glosses éσσɛσ0α aiτɛĭv,
ikɛtɛvɛiv ‘to ask (for), supplicate'; Оɛσσóµɛvoç. deóµevos, Intoúµevos, iketeúwv
'wanted, sought for, supplicating' (H.).
•COMP As a second member in лoλú-Ɖɛστoç et al., probably also in ►ȧлó-еεστоç, PN
Ayλw-еéστηs (Fraenkel 1910: 14 n. 2).
•DER OEσTopídnc, Oεστópelos; Oεστwρ "entreater", father of Kalchas, etc. (II.).
⚫ETYM A sigmatic aorist beside лоеéw ‘entreat'. Together with the Boeot. PN 1ó-
QEσTOC, this points to IE *ghed"- + -σaoba. OIr. has a subjunctive in -s-, ipl.
-gessam (recalling 0έoσaσat), and an indicative guidiu 'pray' = лoеéw. Iranian has a
yod-present in Av. jaidiieimi = OP jadiyāmiy ‘pray', which may be identical to the
supposed present éσσɛσα (IE *ghed-i-). Cf. also the EN Oɛσσaloi.
Оéσqaτoç [adj.] 'decreed by a god, decided' (Il.), also 'enormous' (ȧúp ŋ 143; cf. ȧxλùç
Оɛσrɛoín ŋ 42; different Schwyzer Glotta 12 (1923): 10). <IE *d¹h,s- ‘god, holy'>
•DER Also ȧ-0έσqatos (öµßpos, Báλaσσa et al.; Il.), properly “what has not been
decided by the gods”, i.e. “what does not fit in a given order” (Fraenkel 1923: 281f.).
Perhaps a pleonastic privative ȧ-, like in ȧ-ẞéλτεpoç, but cf. the analysis in
Benveniste 1969(2): 140ff.
•ETYM Compound from *0εσ- 'god' (see Oɛóc) and the *to-ptc. of qŋuí. Cf. ä-qa-
TOÇ, as well as diáσioç, etc.
Oźw 1 [v.] 'to run' (Il.). <IE *dheu- 'run'➤
•VAR Fut. Oεúσoμαι, ipf. еéεσкov (Hom.), later aor. Oεvσa (Vett. Val.).
•DIAL Myc. pe-ri-to-wo/Peri-towos/ (in IIɛpí000c, εt by metrical lengthening).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àva-, кατα-, ñãρα-.
•DER ɛñσɩç ‘running' (Corn. ND1), Đoós ‘quick' (Il.) with ☺óaç, -avtoç PN, also HN
(Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 2 (1950-1951): 236; 3, 162), ☹ówσa [f.] PN (Od., Emp.);
Ooá w 'bring in quick movement, move quickly' (E.) together with 0óaσμa 'dancing
place' (Orph. H. 49, 6). On ►ßoŋ¤óos, -Oέw, see s.v.
!
Anyw
545
⚫ETYM The thematic root present 0ε(F) w (cf. Oεv. dɛūpo, tpέxε ‘Over here!, Run!'
[H.]) is identical with Skt. dhavate ‘stream, flow', except for the diathesis. Skt.
dhávati ‘run, stream' with lengthened grade has no counterpart in Greek; epic Oεín
and Oɛɛiv have metrical lengthening, and the latter may stand for *0ε(Ƒ)εµεv (cf.
Chantraine 1942: 102; 346; 492). The Germanic word for ‘dew' remains uncertain:
OHG tou [m.], ON dogg, gen. doggwar, PGm. *dawwa-, etc. < IE *dhóuo-, -á (would
be Gr. *06(F)oç, *00(F)n). The gloss äddɛɛ· ¿nɛiyov 'hurry!' (H.) is also unclear.
Oźw 2 [v.] 'to glow', only in ódóvτwv λevkà Đɛóvtwv (Hes. Sc. 146); thence by imitation
üλŋ xλwpà <0>oúoŋ (Theoc. 25, 158) and лoíηy ... ✗\wpà Béovσav (Epigr. Gr. 1046,
83). IE? *dheu- 'glow', GR
•VAR Cf. Ooóv. λaµлрóν bright' (H.; also explained as oчú, σкOTεIVÓV, iσxupóv,
τaxivóv bright, dark, strong, swift'); owσa övαι, λαµлρva 'blaze, make
brilliant' (H.).
•ETYM For λɛvêà 0ɛóvτwv, Wackernagel 1955(2): 852ff. attractively reads one word
AɛUкaеɛóvτwv (from Aɛvкabéw for *λɛvкáеw = λεUкabí(w). If this is correct, Oéw 'to
glow' would cease to exist. The explanation of oóc, Ɖoŵσαι as λªµлрóç, λaµépűvai
probably goes back on the same tradition. From *λεvкáеw also comes the name of
the goddess AɛUкabéα (Wackernagel 1955(2): 852ff.).
Oɛwpóç [m.] ‘spectator, envoy to a festival or to an oracle' (IA, post-Hom.), also name
of an overseer (Mantinea, Thasos). <IE *uer- 'observe'>
•VAR As a loan from Attic, adapted to the local dialect, Dor., etc. Oɛāpóç, Arc. also
Oɛaopóç; Ion. also ɛopós (Paros), Oɛupóç (Thasos).
•COMP As a first member in 0ɛapo-Sóкoç 'who receives the 0.', together with -Sokéw,
-Soкía (inscr.).
●DER 1. Oɛwpíç (sc. vauc) [f.] 'ship of the 0.' (IA); 2. Oεápios epithet of Apollo as an
oracle-god (Troezen), Oɛápiov 'meeting place of the 0.' (Pi.); 3. Oɛwpikóç ‘reserved
for the spectators', Tò 0. 'contrbution of the spectator' (Att.). 4. Oɛwpía, -in, Oɛapia,
Boeot. awpía (hybrid form) perception, awareness; mission to a festival'. 5.
Bɛwpoσúvη 'id.' (Man.). 6. denominative verb: Oɛwpέw 'be Oɛwpóc, observe,
contemplate' (IA), together with еεшρητiкóç 'contemplative, etc.' (Arist.; Oεwpητńs
Phld.), еɛŵpηµɑ (Att., Arist.), -nois (Pl.; Röttger 1937: 17f.), -ŋτ½pιov et al. On
Oεápiστos Zucker Maia 11 (1959): 162.
•ETYM Properly "who watches a show”, *0εã-(F)opóc, *Ben-(F)opós > Oɛ(ɛ)wpós with
quantitative metathesis and hyphaeresis; also, 0ɛopós > Oɛupóc, probably after -opos
(as in popoc). See Buck 1953: 443f. and Szemerényi Glotta 33 (1954): 250². Koller
Glotta 36 (1958): 273ff. connects Oɛwpós with Oɛóc, which is implausible; see the
objections in DELG. The meaning 'theory, theoretical, etc. is not found until after
Aristotle, and developed from 'contemplation of a Form' (cf. Festugière 1936).
Onyw [v.] 'to sharpen, whet; to excite' (Il.). <IE *dehg- 'whet, sharpen'>>
•VAR Also Onyávw (A. Ag. 1535 after H.), aor. еña. With ō-vocalism: téеwкtai
τɛƉúµwτaι ‘to be provoked'; τεеwyµévol. teƉvµwµévoɩ who are provokeď (H.); less
certain are wai (also ãα). μεеúσα, лληрwσa 'to make drunk, make full';
τεеwyμεvoɩ (also τεð¤µév)· µµεðvσµévoι 'drunken' et al., (H.).

=== page 297 ===

546
•DIAL Dor. Oάyw.
Ajkn
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. лαрa-, σvv-, úño-.
•DER Onyávη 'whetstone' (A., S.; H. also Onyavov) with Oŋyavíτηs λíos 'id.' (IG 14,
317, Sicily); Onyaλéos 'sharp' (AP, Chantraine 1933: 253); in H. also Onŋyávɛov, Anyóv.
óžú, ηкovηµεvov, άкovητóv 'sharp, sharpened', Оñžic. poný, otiyuý, táxoç 'decision
[weight], point [of time], speed'.
•ETYM From IE *dheh₂g-oH, with the Arm. instrument noun daku, gen. pl. dakuaµ
‘axe', probably from an u-stem IE *deh₂g-u- 'sharp'. See Lidén 1906: 55. LIV²
(following Clackson 1994: 116ff.) calls this connection with Arm. uncertain.
Onкη [f.] 'case, chest; tomb' (IA). <IE *dheh,- ‘set, make’▷
•COMP Very frequently as a second member, both prefixed (diα-, úло-, oʊv-, etc.)
and with nominal first member (Biẞλio-, xaλкo-еńкη).
•DER Diminutive Oŋkíov (pap.) and Onкaños 'for the tomb' (Hdt.); thence again
several derivatives.
⚫ETYM Often connected with Skt. dhāká- [m.] ‘container, etc.' (gramm.), but perhaps
independent formations; see tíðnµi.
Onλéw [v.] 'to flourish'. 0áλw.
=
Onλn [f.] 'mother's breast, nipple' (IA). <IE *dheh,- ‘suck(le)’►
•COMP As a second member e.g. in ǎ-, ɛű-, vεó-¤ηdos (-Onλńs).
•DER Oλw τpoóc, thО½ 'nurse, grandmother' (H., Plu.). Denominative verb
Onλá w 'to suckle, suck' (IA, Dor.) with Onλaoua, Onλaσµós 'suck(1)ing' (Plu., pap.),
еŋλáστpiα 'wet-nurse' (S., Com.); also еŋλaµáv ‘id.' (Sophr., Thespis), probably to
Onλá-σa after tελá-σαι τελα-μóv et al.; here aшvo vεovou 'new-born';
¤ýλavto. ¿½λaσav ‘they suckled' (H.; correct?); cf. Bechtel 1921, 1: 361. Uncertain
Onλový ‘wet-nurse' (Plu. 2, 278d).
•ETYM A counterpart to Onλn is *fēla ‘mother's breast' in Lat. fēlāre ‘to suckle', IE
*deh,-leh₂. From similar pre-forms stem Latv. dệls ‘son' < *deh,-lo-, properly
"suckling", and U feliuf [acc.pl.m.] 'sues lactantes, i.e. 'sucklings' (Untermann 2000:
271f.); Lith. dėlė 'leech'.
Various languages have forms with an i-extension, which comes from the present of
the verbal root, *dhh,-i-: Lat. filius ‘id.' < *d"(e)h,i-l-io, Latv. dile 'sucking calf (IE
*dhhi-l-), MIr. del 'nipple', OHG tila [f.] 'female breast'. Unclear is Arm. dayl, dal
'Biestmilch'; Hübschmann 1897: 437, Pedersen KZ 39 (1906): 406. On Lat. fēlīx
'fertile', see the comments in De Vaan 2008 s.v. Cf. ►Оñλuç and ►Оñσðal.
Oñλuç [adj.] 'female', also metaph. (II.). <IE *deh,- 'suck(le)'>
•VAR Fem. -ɛα, ntr. -v; also a fem. subst., cf. Chantraine 1942: 252.
•COMP Compounds like Onλv-yεvýs, µižó-Onλvs.
•DER Oŋλudpíaç ‘woman-like man' (Hdt., Arist.), from *Ð½λúdprov (Chantraine 1933:
72); Onλuкós 'womanly, womanish' (Arist., Hell.; cf. Chantraine 1956a: 165), Onλwdns
'womanish' (Ar.), Oŋwτç [f.] ‘id.' (Prisc.); Oλúτηs 'womanhood' (Arist.);
denominative verb Onλúvw 'make womanish' (Ion., Hell.). On the comparative
Onλúτɛpoç see Benveniste 1948: 117f.
1
:
Ons, Ontós
547
ETYM A formal counterpart to Оñλuç < IE *deh,-lu-, except for the accent, is Skt.
dhārú 'suckling. The Skt. form may directly derive from the verb 'suck' (see
►Оñσðαɩ) with a suffix -ru- or -lu-, while for the Greek form we may assume an
intermediate nominal l-stem.
=>
Oñua ⚫VAR Onuŵv. → tíðŋµi.
Onv [pcl.] 'indeed, certainly, without a doubt', in ñ Oŋv, oű Oŋv et al. (II.). <?►
•ETYM Unexplained.
¤ǹp, -pós [m.] ‘wild animal, beast of prey' (Il.). ◄IE *għueh,r- ‘wild animal▷
•DIAL Aeol. pnp (Pi.).
•COMP E.g. Onpo-póvos ‘killing wild beasts' (Thgn.), ☹mpe-qóva (Paus. 5, 3, 3; on the
compositional vowel -ε- see Schwyzer 438); v-Oŋpos 'full of wild beasts' (trag.), ǎ-
Ompos (Hdt., A.) 'without wild beasts', also 'without hunting' (from Onpa; Sommer
1948: 149f.).
•DER Onpíov 'wild animal, hunted animal' (Od.; Wackernagel 1916: 218; originally
diminutive); post-Hom. also ‘animal', with several derivatives: diminutive Onpídiov
(Thphr.), Onpáqov (Damocr. apud Gal.; Wackernagel Glotta 4 (1913): 243f.);
Onpapos 'spider' (Cyren. 62), probably a back-formation; Oŋplaкós ‘regarding the
animals' (medic.), Oŋping 'full of wild animals, animal-like' (IA); Oŋpióτηs ‘animal
being' (Arist); denominatives: 1. Ompióμai, -ów ‘to turn into an animaľ (Pl., Eub.)
with Onpiwois (Luc.); beside it Onpíwµa 'malignant ulcer' (medic.) from Onpíov ‘id.';
2. Oŋpáčoμai 'id.' (Corp. Herm. 10, 20). Opεoç 'ptng. to wild animals' (IA).
Denominative verbs: 1. Ompáw 'to hunt' (A.), perf. рtc. лɛɛрáкOVτεç (Thess.);
thence Oŋpaτp, -áτwp (-pïï-) 'hunter' (II.) with Onpatipios (S.); also Onpaτns 'id.'
(Ar.) together with Oŋpatiкós (X.); Оnpaμa ‘hunting booty' (E.), Оn paτpov 'hunting
device, net' (X.); Oŋpáσчµos ‘worth hunting, worth trying' (A. Pr. 858). Here also
belongs the back-formation Onpa ‘hunt, booty' (II.) together with Oŋpooúvη ‘id.'
(Opp., AP), Onpótis. Onpeútpia (H.), after åуpóτiç. As a second member -Ońpaç, e.g.
opvi00-0ńpaç 'bird-catcher' (Ar., Arist.). 2. Ompɛúw 'to hunt' (T 465) together with
Oŋpεvτns hunter' (Il.), Oŋpevtkóç (Ar., X., Arist.), also Oŋpevτýp (Opp.), fem.
еŋpεúτpiα (pap.), Оnpεvμa 'catch' (S., E., Pl.), Opɛvσiç 'hunt' (Ph).
•ETYM Lat. fĕrus 'wild' underwent pretonic shortening from *fēró- (cf. Schrijver 1991:
343), which makes a reconstruction *guehr- possible. The plural forms Оñpεç,
Onpwv have exact counterparts in Eastern Lith. žvėres, žvėrų, < IE *għueh,r-es, -om.
Most BSl. forms were transferred into the i-stems: nom.sg. Lith. žvėris, OCS zvěrú
'id.'. Also related is ToB śerwe 'hunter' < *gueh,r-uo-.
Ons, Oŋtóc [m.] ‘serf, bondsman; hired labourer' (Od.). <PG>
•VAR Fem. Oñoσa, Att. Оñττα (E., Posidipp.). Also ¤ãτaç. Oñτas (Oátas. Oútas
'sacrificers' cod.), toùç doúλovç. Kúлρoι 'slaves (Суpr.)' (H.).
●DER Oŋtiкóç ‘of a serf (Lex. apud D., Arist.), Onτεúw 'be a serf; work for wages' (II.)
with Oŋtɛía ‘wage-earning' (S., Isoc.), Ontɛïov‘wages' (Ath.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Argumentation against connection with Oέw 'run' in Fraenkel
1910: 872). Acc. to Aßmann Glotta 9 (1918): 96, it is a loanword from West Semitic.

=== page 298 ===

548
Onσavpós
See E. Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 79f. on the meaning, etc. The original form was
*that-, thus it was probably Pre-Greek.
Oŋoavpós [m.] ‘treasury, warehouse, receptacle, treasure' (Hes.). <PG➤
•COMP E.g. Onσavpo-qúλa 'guard of the treasury' (Hell.).
•DER Oŋσavpikós ‘belonging to the treasury' (pap.), Oŋoavpwdns 'full of treasures'
(Philostr.); noavpí(w 'save, collect' (IA) together with Onσaúpioua 'savings, store,
treasure' (Democr., trag.), Onσaupioμós 'storage, preservation' (Arist., Thphr.),
-1στns 'who preserves' (Poll.) with -10 TIкóç (Arist.).
ETYM No etymology, but probably a technical loanword, without a doubt from Pre-
Greek. The appearance of the word could suggest a pre-form in *-ar”-o-. From
Greek, Lat. thesaurus, thesaurizō.
Oñoat [v.inf.pres.] 'suck' (889). <IE *dheh,-i- 'suck, suckle'>
•VAR Aor. 3sg. Onσato (№ 58, Call. Jov. 48), Onσáµevos (h. Cer. 236); Oñσaτo 'suckleď'
(as opposed to sucked', h. Ap. 123); act. Оñσaι· Opéчai, Oŋláσai 'to feed, suckle' (H.).
•ETYM IE has a root *deh,-, found in Greek On (O½½, Oñlus, tɩðývn, yaλaðŋvós,
Ovov. уáλa H.) and in Sanskrit (inf. dhátave, dhātrī 'wet-nurse', etc.).
Correspondences to Оñ-σ0α have a yod-present: OHG tāen, 1sg. tāju; Latv. dêt, 1sg.
dêju 'to suck'. Although it seems athematic, a yod-present *0-1ε-σ0α may be
assumed for Oñσa as well; it is perhaps an innovation after the aor. Onσaτo (Frisk).
Beside these formations, there was an i-present *dhh.-(e)i- in Skt. dháyati, which
agrees with OCS dojo and with Go. daddjan, OSwed. dæggja ‘suck' (with
"Verschärfung" [gemination] of the yod). Further forms belonging to this present:
Skt. dhitá- 'sucked', dhenú- 'milch cow', MHG dien 'suckle'. See LIV² s.v. *dheh,(i)-
'Muttermilch saugen'. Discussion of Anatolian forms like Lyc. tideimi ‘child' in
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. tēta(n)-. Unrelated is τiaσóç.
Onτα [n.] the eighth letter of the Greek alphabet (Ar.). <LW Sem.>>
•Var Gen. Ońtatos (Democr. 20), Lat. tetates [pl.] from О½τatɛç; further uninflected.
ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. tēth. See Schwyzer: 140.
Oiaσos [m.] 'Bacchic revel; religious guild' (IA). <PG>
•DER ασw™ηs participant of a 0.' (IA), fem. -@tis (Opp.) together with -wτɩкóç;
also aσíτns 'id.' (Ion. and Hell. inscr.) together with -TIкóç; Otaσwdŋs '0.-like,
belonging to a 0.' (Nonn.); aσwvɛç olкo, èv ois ouvióvτes dεлvоÑσ oi еíασo
'halls in which the companies took their meals communally' (H.). Denominative
verbs: 1. Otaσɛúw 'introduce in a 0., participate in a 0.' (E., Str.) with aσɛía (Procl.);
2. back-formation Aɩášw in ¿½ɛ¤íače. Xopeias énetéλa was performing dances';
ÈneƉíačev. ¿xópevɛv 'was dancing', aor. Máσa xopεñσai (H.).
•ETYM Formation like Oúpσos et al. An expression of the Dionysiac religion, and as
such suspected of foreign origin: probably Anatolian (= Pre-Greek?), in spite of
older interpretations in Indo-European terms (see Bq).
Oiẞıç [f.] basket of papyrus' (LXX). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Nom. also Oíßis, íß; gen. -εws, also Oíẞwvoç• kißwtoñ, Kúrpio 'coffer (Cypr.)'
(H.).
į
f
OLWτns
549
•ETYM A loan from Semitic, Hebr. tēbhāh, which itself is a loan from Egyptian db:t
'box'; see E. Masson 1967: 76.
¤ɩßpós [adj.] meaning uncertain (only in Alexandrian poets); epithet of Kúлpıç (Call.
Fr. 267), of Σɛípaчus (Euph. 81), of wεa xελúvηs (Nic. Al. 555), and of óóíwv кñρ
'snake-poison' (Nic. Th. 35). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also чẞpós (Nic. Th. 35 v.l.).
•DER The Spartan name Oiẞpwv is often found as Oiμßpwv in the mss. (Harp., Phot.,
Su.). Besides Oippov. τò τpuqɛpóv (Theognost.).
ETYM Explained gropingly by the ancients as ‘hot, soft, etc.'; cf. H.: 0ẞpóv.
τpuчɛрóv, кαλóv, σεμνóν, áлαλóv 'delicate, beautiful, revered, soft'; ßpv.
qiλókoσµov, kaλλvvtikýv .... kai лapà µèv Niкávdpu̟ tǹv žµлupov kai kavotikýv,
tivès dè xaλenýv. Although the etymology is uncertain, the prenasalized form points
to Pre-Greek origin. Therefore, not related to poiẞoç (as per Ehrlich 1910: 33, who
derives it from IE *gig"-ro-, based on comparison with Slov. žigra 'tinder').
ɩyyávw [v.] 'to touch with the hand, occupy oneself with' (Ion. Dor. Arc.; not in Attic
or in Hom.; see Wackernagel 1916: 222). <IE? *dheigh- 'smear, knead'>
•VAR Aor. Oyɛiv (Lacon. σɩуñv Ar. Lys. 1004), fut. med. лpoσ-еíčη (E. Heracl. 652;
codd. -εç), τεížoμai (E. Hipp. 1086), aor. pass. еixеñvai (S., E.).
•COMP Also with prefix like лpoσ-, ¿Ñɩ-, Ùƒо-.
•DER Oížiç touch' (Hp., Arist.), Oiyua ‘id.' (Pergam.), еɩуµáτшv. μασμάτwv 'stains'
(H.); uncertain Oíуŋuа (AP 12, 209; cod. ½µατα) and Aɩyáva 'cover?' (Delph.,
Labyadae inscr. C 39).
•ETYM The form ɩyyávw has been analyzed as a nasal present of the IE root *d½eigh-
(see τεчxoc), with supposed parallels in Lat. fingō ‘to spread, knead, form, etc.',
Arm. diz-anem 'to heap up' (for further forms, see LIV² s.v.). The -y- would have
spread from the present to the aorist yεiv (for *τɩуεiv). This etymology
presupposes, however, that original IE *g" became y after nasal, but this is incorrect,
as is shown by öμчaλos (see Оáµẞoç).
Oiç, Oīvóc [m., f.] 'heap (of sand), beach, dune, shore' (Il.). <PG?>
•DER άлоеvóμa 'silt up' (Plb.). As a second member in åкpo-¤ívia (-va) [pl.]
(rarely [sg.]) 'the upper part of a heap, offering of first fruits' (mostly post-Hom.
poetry), a compound from äêpos ¤ís and a suffix -to- (differently, Risch IF 59 (1949):
289).
•ETYM Without explanation. Wackernagel 1916: 82 A. 2) compares Skt. dhíṣṇya-
[adj.] 'put on a heap of earth', substantival 'heap of earth with sand', which would go
back to an n-stem IE *dhisen-, d'isn-. Thence he derives Gr. *Owv, *0v, 0iv-, of
which the nom. Ois would be an innovation. Improbable. Often compared with
MoHG Düne and cognates, but this is formally impossible. There have been
unsuccessful attempts to relate is to the root of tiŋu; the word is rather a loan
(from Pre-Greek?).
еɩwτηs of ǎpτos (pap. IIP). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown.

=== page 299 ===

550
入áoLS
λáσлç [f.] 'shepherd's purse, Capsella bursa pastoris' (Hp.). <?>
•VAR Gen. -10, -ɛwç; Оλáσл [n.] (Dsc., Plin.).
•DER Oλασлíбiov (Ps.-Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Unknown; folk-etymological derivation from 0λáw by Dsc. 2, 156 (see
Strömberg 1940: 155). A neuter in -t is extremely rare in Greek.
Oláw [v.] 'to crush, bruise' (Il.). <?>
VAR (Arist., Herod.), aor. Oλáo(o)at (Il.), pass. Oλaσñvai, fut. Oλáσw (Hp.), perf.
Téλaσμaι (Alex., Theoc.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àµqi-, kata-, ovv-.
•DER Oλáσiç 'crushing' (Arist.), Oλáσua 'bruising, bruise' (Arist.), Oλaστós (Com.);
άστη 'crusher' = ¿µßµvoðλáðtηs (medic.), aστкóç ‘crushing' (Arist.); adíaç
[m.] eunuch' (LXX, Ph.) with λadiáw (H.) = pλadiáw; from *0λádoc, *Oλadɛiv, cf.
p入adeiv.
•ETYM No certain connection. Cf. ► Oλíßw and pláw.
Oliẞw [v.] 'to press, bruise' (p 221). <?>
VAR Aor. Oλiyai.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ¿к-, σuv-, ¿v-, άño-.
⚫DER Oλiчiç pressure' (Arist.), also prefixed (K-, etc.); λчµµóç 'id.' (LXX, Aq.); àлó-
чuua 'what is pressed out, sap' (Hp.), also with čк-; (¿к-)λ₁ßń 'pressure' (LXX,
Gal.) together with ßɛpós (Paul. Aeg.), λißwns (Aq.); ßías = 0λadíaç (Str.).
⚫ETYM It has been proposed that it is cross between Oλáw and oλißw (also τpiẞw?)
(Walde IF 19 (1906): 105, Güntert 1914: 149).
Оvýσкw 'die'. →Оávaτoç.
=
=
Ooά(w1 'sit'. ⇒Оáσow.
Boάw 2 'move quickly'. →0έw.
Boívn [f.] 'meal, banquet, feast' (IA, Dor., Hes. Sc. 114). <PG?>
•VAR Dor. Ooiva, Hell. Ooiva.
•COMP Ooivodoτέw 'to host a banquet' (Crete Iª-IP), foivapµóστpia [f.] 'mistress of
the banquet' (inscr.).
•DER Ooivātiкós (v.l. -vητ-) ‘of a banquet' (X. Oik. 9, 7). Denominative verbs: 1.
Đoɩváw, -άoµaɩ 'to entertain, feast' (8 36) together with Ooívāua ‘entertainment,
banquet' (E. [lyr.], Posidon.), Botvaτp 'host' (A. Ag. 1502) with Botvaτplov = oívη
(E. Rh. 515), Ootváτwp ‘hosť (E.), -ǹτwp (AP), Ooivatás ‘id.' (Kallatis I³); on Doric a
see Fraenkel 1912: 16f., Björck 1950: 140ff. 2. Ootvá(w 'to entertain' (X., Ael.). 3.
Gotvíσal v.1. for Botvñoa (Hdt. 1, 129).
•
woai · Saívvoðaι,
wσασðaɩ, Ow¤ñvai);
⚫ETYM Previously derived from *Owl-va, and connected with
ovãσa (A. Fr. 49), Оãται· εúðŋvɛital, Ooivātai (H., also
Owσoúµɛða (Epich. 139), Owoτńpia. ɛvwxηtýpía (Alcm., H.); see Frisk. However, the
verb has no etymology; Pre-Greek origin of the group (including Awç ‘jackaľ?)
seems possible.
Bóλos [f.] 'round building with conical roof, rotunda', 'round bath' (Od.). <PG>
i
:
Đópußos
551
•VAR Hell. also [m.]; see Schwyzer 1950: 324, 34². On σaλía, alio- see below.
•DER Diminutive Boλídiov (Att.). Ooλía 'conical hat with broad brim' (Theoc. 15, 39),
also ‘chest with conical lid' (Poll.); cf. σaλía (σ- < 0-)• nλéyµa kaλáðu̟) öµolov, ő énì
tñs kepadñs qopoñσɩv αi Aάкaivai. oi dε olía 'something plaited, like a basket,
which Laconian women wear on the head; others: 0.' (H.); see also H. еαλioлoоí,
which Latte corrects to *0a\\околоιоí. еоλwτós 'provided with 0., with conical
form' (Procop.), Boλкóç 'id.' (Suid.).
ETYM A technical word without explanation. The comparison with a European
word for 'valley, etc.', e.g. Go. dal(s) [m., n.] ‘pápay, Bóðuvos', ON dalr ‘valley,
arch', OCS dolo ẞápaðpov, λákkoç', Ru. dol 'valley, lower part', MW dol [f.] ‘valley',
should be discarded. The connection with 0áλapos (e.g. Maaß RhM 77 (1928): 1ff.)
makes more sense; the variation a/o is typical of Pre-Greek.
Đoλóç [m.] ‘mud, dirt, ink of the cuttlefish' (Hp., Arist.; on the accent Schwyzer: 459),
also adjectival 'troubleď (Ath.). <?>
•DER Ooλɛpós 'troubled' (IA), oλwdŋs ‘id.' (Hp., Arist.), Ooλów 'make turbid,
unclean' (IA) together with 06λwots ‘making turbid (Arist., Gal.).
ETYM The word has been connected, as *0 Foλóc, with some Gm. terms for
turbidness of the mind: primary verb OS for-dwelan ‘neglect, forsake', OHG gi-
twelan 'be deafened, linger', with several verbal nouns (ON dvol [f.] ‘lingering', OS
dwalm, OHG twalm 'stupefaction', Go. dwals 'stupid'). These may or may not be
connected with a Celtic word for 'blind', e.g. OIr. dall. There is no indication,
however, that these IE forms (more in Pok. 265) are cognate. Fur: 391 compares
oλóc 'the dark sap of the cuttlefish' (Hp.).
=>
00ós 1 'quick'. Oέw.
Boós 2 [adj.] 'sharp', in vησoσɩ εллpoéŋkɛ ☹oñoɩv (o 299); cf. Str. 8, 3, 26 Ooàç dè
ɛïpŋkɛ tàs Ožɛíaç кτλ. (Bechtel 1914 S.V.); said of yóµqoɩ, ódóvtes, medékeis, žiqos
(Hell. and late: A. R., AP). <?>
DER Factitive aorist 0ówσa 'I made sharp' (1 327), pass. perf. ptc. τεowμévoç (Nic.,
Opp.).
•ETYM No certain connection; probably not related to Skt. dhárā 'cutting edge, blade
(of a sword)' (compared by Schulze 1933a: 370).
=
Oopós masculine seed'. →0pwoкw.
Oópuẞos [m.] 'noise, crying, tumult, confusion' (Pi., IA). <PG>
•DER Oopuẞwdns 'full (of) noise, etc.' (IA) and denominative Oopußéw (also prefixed
with άva-, εлɩ-) ‘make noise, stir, confuse' (IA); Ɖopußηtiкós ‘noisy' (Ar.) and
Oopúẞηepov plant name = λɛovτoлéταλoν (Ps.-Dsc.); on naming motive Strömberg
1940: 80, on the formation ibd. 146.
⚫ETYM Formation like öτoßoç, кóvaßoç, qλoïoßoç, et al. (Chantraine 1933: 260). The
reduplicated form τov-0opú-(w (see Tichy 1983: 215f.), Tóvеpuç is comparable.
Perhaps Opu-λéw, Opu-λoç also belong here; see also Opéoμat. The variation Oopuẞ-
(from *tarup-?), Tov-Оpv-, 0p(λ)- suggests a Pre-Greek word (cf. Fur.: 229, 381).

=== page 300 ===

G
552
Hoüpos
Boūpos [adj.] 'rushing, impetuous, furious' (II.). <IE *derh₂- 'jump, mount'>
●DER ¤oñpiç, -ɩɗos [f.] (Hom., H.), Coupás (Nic., Lyc.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 354f.);
extended in Ooúpios ‘id.' (trag.); also Coupałoç, ovpńɛís et al. (H.); denominative
ptc. Coupwσai [nom.pl.f.] 'rushing towards' (Lyc. 85), from Coupáw + accus.
•ETYM From *0óp-FOs, either directly from the aorist Oopɛiv or as a transformation
of an u-stem *0óp-v-s (cf. µavós < *µav-f-ós, otevós < *σTEV-F-ós, etc.). Not related
to ►áðúpw, as per Persson 1891: 59.
Opāvos [m.] ‘bench, supporting beam' (Att. and Hell. inscr., Ar.). <PG?➤
DIAL Myc. ta-ra-nu/thrānus/.
⚫DER Diminutive Opavíov ‘id.' (Ar.) together with Opavídiov (Ar.); Opavíτηs 'rower
of the upper of the three rows' (Th., Ar.), see Morrison Class. Quart. 41 (1947): 128ff.;
fem. еpavīτiç (кóлη; Аtt.); ерανTIкÓS (Callix.); Opavíaç [m.] (Marcell. Sid.), Opãviç
or -ís (Xenocr.) = \iopías 'swordfish', after the shape of the upper jaw, cf. Thompson
1947 S.V.
Denominative verb Opavɛúw 'to stretch to the tanner's board' (Ar. Eq. 369), also
Opavεúετaι σvvτрíßεται 'was rubbed together' (H.), àерávευτоν· äστршτоν 'bare'
(H. = E. fr. 569); cf. ovv-pavów and ▸ Opavúσσw.
еpñvuç, -vos [m.] 'footstool' (Hom.), cf. Hermann Gött. Nachr. (1943): 8; Chantraine
1933: 118; Benveniste 1935: 56), also Оpñvvč, -vкoç (Euph.), Opãvvě (Corinn.) with a
secondary к-enlargement; see Chantraine 1933: 383.
•ETYM If vo- or vv- is a suffix, we can connect the aorist inf. Opñσaσðaɩ, which is
usually translated as 'to sit down' (only Philet. 14 [IV-IIIª]: еpýσaσðαi rλatávo̟
у<p>aiŋ üло).
This group of words is often connected with Opóvos, whence the assumption that
Opāvos, Opñvuç originally meant 'support'. Recently, De Lamberterie 2004: 236-253
has argued that Opóvos is a younger form of *0ópvos (Myc. to-no, Cypr. Đópva§ H.).
He assumes a root *derh₂- 'support, hold', found in Skt. dhar-, assuming *d"orh₂-no-
for *0ópvos, with loss of laryngeal by the Saussure Effect. This would mean that
Opāvos, Opñvuç derive from the zero grade of the root. The fact that the Indo-Iranian
root is aniț is problematic for this account, however. The existence of variants Oópv-
and Opóv- could also be an indication of Pre-Greek origin. See Оpηoкεúw.
Opāvúσow [v.] 'to crush'. <?>
•VAR Only aor. ptc. Opavúžavτεs (Lyc. 664); ouv-Opãvów ‘id.', only perf. pass.
ovvte◊pávwtai (E. Ba. 633; = ovµnéïtwke ‘has dashed together' H.).
•DER Cf. also Opavεúεtal· σvvτpíßeτai 'is rubbed together' (H.).
⚫ETYM Connection with a hypothetical noun *0 pavo-avó-s from Opaúw 'shatter'
inspires little confidence (cf. Sommer 1905: 64f.). Acc. to Frisk, more probable is
connection with Opavɛúw 'stretch on the tanner's bench', which H. glosses as
ovvɩpíßɛtai. One hypothesis posits the meaning change ‘tan (torture)' > ‘crush',
together with formal adaptation, perhaps to aμúσσw, vúσσw, etc. (Sommer 1905:
64f.). Thus also DELG. See ▶Opãvoç.
Opáσos •VAR Opaσús. → Jápoos.
:
!
1
Općoμai
553
Opáσow [v.] to trouble, disturb' (Pi., Hp., Att.). <IE? *dreh₂g"- 'irritate'>
•VAR Att. Opάττw; aor. Opāžai (A., E.), pass. ¿ОpáxОn (S. Fr. 1055); perf. τéτpηxa intr.
'be troubled, agitated' (Il.).
•COMP Sometimes with prefixes έV-, ÚÑO-, ¿Ñɩ-.
•ETYM The form Opáσow is a primary yod-present from *0 pãx-iw, beside the old
perfect *té-Оpā×-a. The rare aorists Opãчaɩ and ¿páxon could be innovations after
the type лрáσσw : лpãžaɩ for older τapáčat (like Saμáσat), from which the present
► τapáσσw was formed, which has the same disyllabic stem form as tapax and may
be a denominative of it. The form τapax should not be explained as from *d"rh₂-
eg, since the verbal forms point to a full grade *dreh2g"-. Therefore, the only
possibility seems to be *dfh₂gh-, with secondary accent (see Rix 1976: 73f.), in spite of
earlier objections (cf. Dev. 206ff.). The form τpaxús ‘raw, hard is a primary
nominal formation. The words for 'dregs, sediment' (e.g. ON dregg [f.], OLith.
dragės [pl.], Alb. drā, Lat. fracēs [f.pl.]) should be kept separate from Opáσow. The
same holds true for the Baltic group of Lith. drāgės, dérgti ‘soil, defile, etc.'; the acute
accent does not point to a laryngeal (with unattractive **derh₂g"- next to *dreh₂g"-),
but rather to PIE *derg-, where the acute is a result of Winter's Law. A possible
comparison is that with the Slavic group of OCS raz-dražiti 'incite, provoke', which
(like Greek) could point to *dreh2g"-. However, Derksen 2008 s.v. *drāžiti objects
that the Slavic accent does not point to a laryngeal. Lit.: Tichy 1983: 171f.
еpãττα [f.] name of a small sea-fish (middle com., Arist.). <?>
•DER Diminutive Оpḍττídiov (Anaxandr.).
⚫ETYM Acc. to Strömberg 1943: 86, properly “the Thracian"; see pã. Otherwise, it
could be a deformation of Opioσa (s.v. ► Opíč).
ерavлαλos [f.] name of a plant, ephedra campulopoda (Thphr.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
Opavлíç, -ɩdoç [f.] name of a small bird (Arist. HA 592b). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
Opaów [v.] 'to break in pieces, shatter, enfeeble' (IA). <?>
•VAR Aor. Opañσai, pass. еpavσеñvat, perf. pass. τépavσμai.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, nεpl-, ovv-.
•DER (ȧлó-, σúv-)0pañσiç 'breaking, etc.' (Arist.), acc. to H. also = σoupa, ǹ τoÙÇ
σôūpa, toùs
Bwλovs Opavovoa ‘hammer breaking the earth', from which MoGr. dial. (Chios,
Ikaros) Opáчa (Kukules 'Apx. 'Eqp. 27: 61ff.); еpañµа (A., etc.), also еpañσμa
(Agatharch., Arist.) ‘fragment, crushing, wound'; Opavoμós breaking' (LXX),
еpavστηpios 'appropriate for breaking' (Aët.); Opрavστós breakable, broken' (Ti.
Locr., Thphr.); Opauλov. кóλoupov 'truncated' (wrong von Blumenthal 1930: 38),
еpaupov. τpαуavóv, Opavóµεvov 'broken in pieces' (H.; see Schwyzer: 282).
⚫ETYM The a-vocalism is unexplained. Bechtel 1914 s.v. connects it with Opvλíw,
►*Opvλíσow (Opvλíxеn, Opvλížai), etc. See there and s.v. ►ерúлτw.
Općoμai [v.] 'to cry aloud, shriek, proclaim' (A., E., always of women). <IE? *dreu->

=== page 301 ===

.
554
Opñvos
•VAR Only present except Opεúετo (poet. inscr., Epid. IV³), artificially formed after
еpεчµαι (A. Th. 78); on the imperfective aspect see Fournier 1946: 90 and 228.
•COMP Very frequently as a second member, e.g. àλλó-Opoos 'with another man's
voice, with foreign language' (Od.).
•DER Opóos, Att. Opoūs [m.] 'noise, murmur, rumour' (A 437, Pi. N. 7, 81, Th., X.).
Iterative deverbative (or denominative) verb Opoέw 'cry, proclaim, speak' (trag.),
with aor. Opoñσat; rarely with prefix dɩα-, лрoσ- et al.; pass. Opoɛīσеaɩ, еponеñvai ‘be
drowned, confused, frightened (LXX, NT); from there ouve póŋσiç 'confusion,
shyness' (S. E. M. 9, 169).
ETYM Beside the thematic root present Opέ(F) oμαι, which points to IE *d³reu-o-,
Armenian has an athematic root present erdnum, aor. erdu-ay 'swear', from QIE
*dru-neu-mi (cf. OLat. deicō next to Gr. Sɛíкvvµ). See Frisk 1944: 8ff., where
relation with Oάpvʊτaι as 'speak' (ηoĩ τǹу Sià λóуwν EVτεU (IV H.) is also
considered. Non-IE words like Oópuẞos, Opvλéw, Opñλos must be kept separate. Pok.
255 contains much Greek material of non-IE origin. Cf. also ►Оpñvos and
►TOVеoρÚČw.
Opñvos [m.] 'dirge, lament, lamentation' (IA, 721; on the meaning Diehl RhM N.F.
89 (1940): 90 and 112). <PG?>
•COMP Compounds like Opηv-wdós 'who sings a lament' (Alciphr.), together with
Opηv-wdéw, -ía (E., Plu.); v-еpηvos 'full of lament' (pap.).
⚫DER Opηvwdns 'like a lament' (Pl.), Opηvwμα = 0рñvos (pap. Iª, cf. Chantraine 1933:
186f.). Denominative verb Opηvéw, aor. еpηvñoαι 'start a lament, lament, wail for (
722), also prefixed, e.g. έлɩ-, кatα-, with several derivatives: Opηvηµa ‘lament' (E.),
Opnvn-týs, -ntúp (A.) ‘lamentation', also Opηvýτwp (Man.); Оpηуηikós (Arist.);
εлеpηv-ŋois (Plu.).
⚫ETYM In the first place, Opñvoç should be connected within Greek with ablauting
Opávač кηov. Aάкwvɛç 'drone (Lacon.)' (H.) and reduplicated τεvеprvη 'hornet'
(cf. also on ȧvepηdov; see Kuiper 1956: 221f.). In other languages, we find words.
denoting sounds of similar appearance: Skt. dhráṇati 'sounds' (gramm.) and the Gm.
word for 'drone', e.g. OS dreno, and Go. drunjus 'sound'. These are rather
independent onomatopoeic formations. We are probably dealing with a Pre-Greek
word.
=>
еpñvv •VAR еpñуvç, ОpñσασÐαι. → Opāvos.
Opŋσкɛúw [v.] 'to perform or observe religious customs' (Hdt.), 'to worship' (LXX).
<PG?>
•DER Opηokɛía, Ion. -ŋŋ holy service, religious practice' (Ion.), also еpηoкεvµα,
-ɛvoɩ ‘id.' (Hell.); Opŋoкevτýs 'worshipper' (late); deverbal Оpñoкoç fear of the
gods' (Ep. Jac. 1, 26) with Opηoкádŋs ‘id.' (Vett. Val.); Opηokia [n.pl.] 'religious
customs' (POxy. 1380, 245, IIP, OGI 210, 9, Nubia III³).
On the history of Opŋokɛúw, -ɛía see van Herten 1934.
•ETYM As еρñσкos is clearly deverbal, another starting point for Opησкɛúw must be
found. Another oк-present is found in the glosses Оpησкw. vow 'to think of and
Opídač, -akoç
555
Opάokeɩv. ávaµµvýokáv ‘to remember' (H.); Opηokɛúw could be an enlargement of
these. The glosses would point to Ionic origin for еpησкεúw.
Beside the present Opησкw, we also find a gloss έvėpɛïv· quλáσσεv 'to guard,
observe' (H.). However, if we explain this as a zero grade thematic aorist, then
Opηoкw, which must derive from *drh₂-ske/o-, becomes unexplainable. Perhaps,
then, the word is Pre-Greek.
The relevant nominal gloss à¤ɛpés. ávóŋtov, ávóglov 'stupid, unholy' (H.) could
point to a neuter *Oέpos or an aorist *0ɛpɛīv.
Further connection with Opóvos, Opāvos is improbable.
Optai [f.pl.] Nymphs on the Parnassos who fed Apollo; also name of pebbles that
served as lots of an oracle (Philoch. 196, Call. Ap. 45; uncertain conj. h. Merc. 552).
See the texts in Amandry 1950: 27-29. <?>
•VAR Also Opĭal.
●COMP еpɩoßóλoɩ [pl.] 'who threw the 0.' (Epic. apud St. Byz. s.v. Opia, Suid.).
⚫DER OpiάČεiv. Évovσtāv, évеovotά(av 'be inspired, be possessed by a god' (H.) from
S. (Fr. 466) and E. (Fr. 478) together with Opiaσis (Suid.); also Opiãσеαι· μаντεúεσеal
'to divine' (AB 265).
•ETYM Origin unknown. von Wilamowitz 1931: 379ff. thought it was originally
identical with Opĩa leaves of the fig. See Amandry 1950: 62, 133 and Fur.: 191
(uncertain). There seems little reason to connect it with Opiaµßoç.
Opíauẞos [m.] name of hymns sung at festivals for Dionysus (Cratin. 36), also said of
the god (Trag. Adesp. 140 et al.); also a Hell. rendering of Lat. triumphus (Plb., D. S.).
< PG➤
•DER Оpiaµßiкós = triumphālis, Opιαµßɛúεɩv = triumphāre.
•ETYM Formation like Si0úpaµẞos, aµßos and, like these, probably Pre-Greek.
Since Sommer 1905: 58ff., it has often been connected with the numeral 'three'
("Dreischritt" vel sim.), which is impossible. Acc. to Sturtevant Class. Phil. 5 (1910):
323ff., it is from Opiálw, Opiaσic, by influence of "außoç. See also Theander Eranos 15
(1915): 126. Fur.191 connects it with τpiάw 'to conquer'.
Optykóç [m.] 'topmost course of stones in a wall, cornice, frieze', also metaph. (Od.),
'fence' (E., Ar.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Mostly plur., late also pɩyxós (SIG 1231, 6 [Nicomedia III-IV³], H., sch.),
Opɩyyós (v.l. Plu. 2, 85f.), Optyxós (v.l. Dsc. 4, 85).
●DER Optykiov (Luc., App.), Opiyкwdns 'like a coping' (H.) sub aiµaσiaí; Opiyków [v.]
'to provide with a 0., crown, complete' (§ 10 et al.) with еpíукwμα = еptykós (J., Plu.),
see Chantraine 1933: 186f.
•ETYM A term of construction; see discussion on yɛữσov. The forms τplyxós and
Optyyós may show old variation or more recent developments. The form στplyxós.
teixíov, otpiktópiov, otepávy Swµatos little wall, crown of a building' (H.) may be
a cross of τpiуxóc and στρiктóριov (= Lat. strictōrium). The word is without a doubt
Pre-Greek.
Opídaž, -akoç [f.] 'lettuce' (Epich., Ion., Hell.). <PG(V)►

=== page 302 ===

556
Opiva², -akos
=
•DER Opidaкívη ‘id.' (Att., Hell.; Chantraine 1933: 204) together with -īvíç [f.] (Stratt.),
Opiбaкíoкa (Alcm. 20; Chantraine 1933: 407), Opidáкiov (Plu.); also Opidaкíaç
µavdpayópaç Oñλuç (Dsc., Chantraine 1933: 94) and the adjective Opɩdaк-ŋïç [f.]
(Nic.), -wons (Dsc.) 'lettuce-like'. Several by-forms: 0ídpa (Arr., H.) together with
Oɩɗpakívη (H.; metathesis of liquids, see Schwyzer: 258), Opúdač (pap.; after Opúov?),
Opóda (H.) together with Oodpáкiov (Choerob.).
•ETYM Acc. to Nehring Glotta 14 (1925): 151, it is Pre-Greek. Because of the typical
leaves, Strömberg 1940: 39 thinks of Opiov 'fig-leaf, leaf in general' and compares
oldač ‘unripe figs'. By folk-etymological association with τpɩ- ‘three' arose tɛtpakivŋ
= Opidaкívη (Hippon. 135). For the interchange of 1, cf. Topvía. στaqvλn beside
еpivía äμлελoç (Fur.: 392).
Opīvaž, -aкoç [f.] 'three-pronged fork, trident' (Ar., Tab. Heracl. 1, 5, Nic.). <PG(S, V)
⚫DER Thence pivaкín [f.] “fork-island", name of a mythical island (Od.), later
identified with Sicily, and changed to Tpivaкpía (τpía ǎкpa) by folk etymology; also
Opivaкíç [f.] (Str.); adj. Opiváкios 'Sicilian' (Nic.).
ETYM Technical word in -ǎ (Chantraine 1933: 377ff.). Mostly interpreted as a
compound with τpɩ- ‘three', but the attempts at finding an IE etymology have failed
(see examples in Frisk). Fur.: 189 compares τpívaε ‘an instrument in agriculture',
with / 0; note also the suffix -aк-, frequent in substrate words. Another comparison
has been with Opiov 'fig-leaf (because of the form), with Оpivíα. ǎшлεdos év Kpýtŋ
'vine on Crete' (H.); very unlikely.
Opí [f.] 'hair', especially the bodily hair in opposition to кóμŋ, the well-groomed hair
of the head (II.). <?►
•VAR Gen. Tpixóc.
●COMP E.g. τpixó-quλos 'with leaves like hair' (Thphr., of a pine forest), ovλó-pi
'with curly hair' (Hdt., etc.).
•DER 1. Opíoσa, Att. Opííía [f.] < *0 píx-la 'Clupea alosa' (middle com., Arist.), a kind
of anchovy called after its hairlike bones (Strömberg 1943: 47f.; also Thompson 1947
s.v.); diminutive Optoσíov (pap.); in the same meaning also τpixíç, -ídos [f.] (Ar.),
tpixídiov (Alex.), tpixíaç [m.] (Arist.). 2. Diminutive τpíxtov (Arist.). 3. tpixwdns
'full of hair, hairlike' (Hp., Arist.). 4. τpixwτóc hairy' (Arist.; cf. τpixóoμα below). 5.
tpixivos of hair' (Pl., X.). 6. τpιxitic, -ɩdoç [f.] sort of alum (after its fibrous
structure; Dsc., Plin.). 7. τpixía 'knot' (pap.). 8. τpixioμóc hairline split of a bone'
(Paul. Aeg.), as if from *τpixí(w; cf. Chantraine 1933: 143ff. Denominative verbs: 1.
tpixóoriai, -ów ‘to (be) provide(d) with hair' (Arist.); thence τpíxшua ‘hair growth'
(Hdt., E., X.) together with τpɩɣwµátov (Arist.); épíɣwoɩ ‘hair growth' (Arist.). 2.
tpixiáw ‘to suffer from a hair disease' (Hp., Arist.) together with pixiaσɩç, name of
some hair diseases (medic.). 3. *τpixíšw cf. tpixiσµóç above.
ETYM The words for 'hair' are different in most Indo-European languages. The
comparison with MIr. gairb-driuch 'bristle' (from garb 'raw' and *drigu- or *driku-)
is better abandoned. Lith. drikà 'threads hanging from the loom' (Fraenkel 1955 s.v.
draikas) presupposes *d(h)rik-, and therefore cannot be connected.
Apóva
557
Opiov [n.] fig leaf, secondarily also ‘leaf in general; mostly as the name of a dish from
eggs, milk, and honey in fig leaves (Ar.). <?►
•COMP As a second member in λεëtó-Оpios ‘of fine leaves' (Nic.) with metrical
shortening of -ĭ-.
⚫ETYM No etymology; a Mediterranean word (Frisk)? Cf. Оpivíα. äµлελoç év Kρýτη
'vine (Cret.)' (H.), and see also Opīvač and Opídač.
Opíoaι [v.] 'to cut off (Archil., E., Dsc.). <IE
•VAR Also ȧлo-еpížαι, -aσðaι (v.l. E. Or. 128, Ael.), after Opiε(?); aor. еpiσ dóμov
(A. Ag. 536), mostly derived from ȧлo-Оεpíσαι. Also σuvé piσε ovvéteµe, λentà
έroíŋoev. ånò toũ Opíoai, ö ¿oti teµεïv ‘was cut down, made small; from 0., which
means to cut' (H.).
•ETYM Mostly taken as a syncopated form of ȧлo-еεpíσα (LXX, Ael.), belonging to
Oɛpíчw to mow down' (s.v. ►0 époμa); the syncope is supposed to be metrically
licensed, but it was hardly influenced by еpaúw, ерúлτw (as per Frisk). Cf. ► Opiy.
Opių [m.] 'woodworm' (Thphr., Men.). <PG?▷
•VAR Gen. еρīлós.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in Oршл-ηбεστоç 'еaten by woodworms' (Ar., Hyp., Att.
inscr.), from dɛστóc with compositional lengthening).
•DER еpiлwdns 'full of woodworms' (Thphr. HP 3, 8, 5; v.l. Оpiлηdéστατoç), together
with еρлwdźστATOS.
•ETYM Cf. ľ¼, кvíy, σкvíų. Güntert 1914: 134f. assumes a transformation of *0 púy
based on these words, which would belong to Оpúлτw ‘crumble, rub'; unlikely. See
Gil Fernández 1959: 114f. Probably a Pre-Greek word.
=>
Opoέw 'call, proclaim, speak'. Općoμai.
Opóuẞos [m.] 'clump, clot, curd', especially of blood (IA). <PG?>
•DER еpoμßíov (Dsc.), еpoμß½ïov (Nic.), еpoßwns 'full of clumps' (IA),
еpoμẞóoμa 'form 0., congeal' together with Opóμßwσis 'curdling, thrombosis'
(medic.).
•ETYM Compared with MoIc. drambr [m.] ‘knag, knot for the reconstruction IE
*drómbo-. However, deaspiration of stop after nasal (thus Schwyzer: 333) did not
occur in Greek (see especially aµí and ỏµqaλóç; cf. on ►áµẞos), so a direct
connection is impossible. The same holds for the comparison with the group of Lith.
dramblys, dremblys 'fat belly', Latv. dramblis 'glutton'. Within Greek, Opóμẞoç is
generally connected with τpέow as 'make congeal', med. τpέqɛσaɩ, them.aor.
τpaqɛiv 'to congeal'; Opóußos would then mean "curdled mass". The verb later
received the specialized meaning 'make thick, feed', and had its proper development
in Greek. Since τpέoш does not have a convincing IE etymology, the present word
would be of Pre-Greek origin as well (Fur.: 274 takes no decision).
Opóva [n.pl.] 'flowers', as a decoration in woven tissues and embroidery (II.), as a
medicine and charm (Hell. poets). Acc. to the sch. on Theoc. 2, 59, the Thessalians
used Opóva for colorful embroidered figures (лεлoкɩλµéva (wa), and the Cypriots
for variegated clothes (äveɩva iµáτiα); H. glosses Opóva both as 'flowers' and as

=== page 303 ===

558
Opóvos
'colorful embroideries' (Opóva. ävðŋ, kai tà έk xpwµátwv roikíλµατα); cf. Bechtel
1921, 1: 448; Bowra JHS 54 (1934): 73. <PG(V)►
⚫COMP лоιкιλÓ-ерovoc as an epithet of Aphrodite (Sapph. 1, 1), probably after Opóva
локíλα (X 441); likewise Xpuσó-, ȧpyupó-Opovoç et al., see Lawler Philological
Quarterly 27 (1948): 80ff.
=
⚫ETYM Many desperate attempts at finding an etymology: for example, Lidén 1897:
67f., 95f. compared Alb. drë-ri, drê-ni [m.] ‘deer' (PAlb. *drani- 'variegated'?,
Illyrian Spavíc [corrected for ȧp-]. λapos 'deer' [H.]), from IE *droni-. Solmsen KZ
35 (1897/98): 474f. compared Opóva as 'herbs, flowers' with Ru. dërn ‘lawn, grass', etc.
(rejected by Vasmer 1953 s.v. dërn). Fur.: 189 compares τpóvα. àyάλµata, ½ þáµµata
ǎveiva statues, colorful stitchings' (H.), which proves Pre-Greek origin.
Opóvos [m.] 'throne, seat', also ‘chair of state, judge's seat'. <PG?>
●DIAL Myc. to-no /thornos/, to-ro-no-wo-ko /thorno-worgos/.
•COMP Xpuσó-Opovos 'with golden throne' (Il.).
⚫DER Diminutives Opovíc [f.] (Them.), Opóviov (EM, Ptol.); further Opovíτns (cod.
-τIC) лршτστое 'principal' (H.); еpovτкóç 'throne-like' (Sidyma); denominative
verb Opoví oμai 'be placed on the throne' (LXX) together with Opoviστns 'enthroner'
(liter. pap.), Opovoμós enthronisation' (D. Chr.); also Opóvwois ‘id.' (Pl. Euthd.
277d; as a rite of the Corybantes), as if from *Оpovóoμat; cf. Chantraine 1933: 279.
•ETYM The formation has been compared with that of кλóvos, which would belong
to кέλoμα; the root is assumed to be *der- 'to hold, support', found in Skt. dhar-,
perf. dādhára. Within Greek, this root has been recognized in vepεiv. Quλáσσεv 'to
guard' (H.) (see О pησкεów). The original meaning Opóvos would then be
'supporter, bearer'.
A number of formal problems persist, however. First, a suffix *-ono- does not seem
to have existed in Indo-European or in Greek: there is no certain instance of IE *CC-
on-o- (as opposed to the normal thematic type *CoC-no-). Since Greek has only a
few forms in nom. -ovos (next to the frequent types in -wv, gen. -wvos and -wv, gen.
-ovos; see Chantraine 1933: 159ff.), derivation from *der- with such a suffix is
improbable. No other words for 'chair' are derived from the root *der-, nor does
Greek have a certain derivative from this root (see Pok. 252f.).
Secondly, the connection with Opāvos 'bench' and Opñvuç 'footstool' (see De
Lamberterie 2004) is problematic, as there are no indications for a set root *derh₂- in
PIE. Neither is there any indication that ▶Opηoкɛúw has anything to do with Opóvoç.
A related form within Greek is 0ópvač. úлonódiov. Kúлpioi. ǹ iɛpòv Añóλλwvos év
τñ Аaкwviкý ‘footstool (Cypr.) or a sanctuary of Apollo in Laconia' (H.), for which
one assumes metathesis from *0 póvač, which is perhaps derived from Opóvoç.
Greek words in -ovoç are suspected to be of Pre-Greek origin; cf. also xpóvoc and
Kpóvos with a typical consonantal variation. This may be the case for Opóvos as well.
Opóos 'call, voice'. •VAR Att. Opous. → Apέoµai.
=
Opvaλis [f.] 'wick', also the plant name 'plantain, Plantago crassifolia' (Thphr., Nic.),
the leaves of which were used to make wicks (hence it was also called Auxvĭtɩç,
Strömberg 1940: 78 and 106). <PG(S) ►
Opúov
559
•DER From Opváλλic or from the diminutive Opvaλλídiov (Luc.) as a back-formation
Opúaλλov [n.] 'shower of smut?' (Vett. Val. 345, 22).
⚫ETYM Cf. quoaλλíç, ouкaλλíç; see Schwyzer: 484 and Chantraine 1933: 252 and 346.
The suffix occurs mostly with plants or birds, so the word is probably Pre-Greek. Cf.
► Opúov.
*Opvliσow [v.] ‘to crush, smash'. <IE *dreus- ‘crumble'>
•VAR Or *Opūλíw? Only in Opuλíxeŋ dè µéτwñov (¥ 396), Opuλíčac (Lyc. 487).
•DER Opúλɩyμa 'fragment' (Lyc. 880).
ETYM May be analyzed as a denominative verb from *Opulos 'fragment', which
would belong to MW dryll 'fragment', Gallo-Rom. *drullia [pl.] 'waste', and go back
to IE *drus-lo- vel sim. The primary verb is seen in Germanic, e.g. Go. driusan 'fall
down', properly *crumble (down)'; Lat. frustum 'morsel' is probably derived from
this verb, like Latv. druska ‘morsel, crumb' with velar suffix. It is doubtful whether
Opvλ[\]εi τapáσσεt,.oxλɛi 'agitates' (H.) belongs here; it may also be an occasional
use of Opuλεiv 'brag, boast' (Frisk). Another hypothetical connection is with ▸ Opaúw
(Bechtel 1914 s.v.), but then its vowel would remain unexplained, as one would
expect *dreh₂-u-; one might also compare ▸Оpúπτw.
Opulos [m.] 'murmer' (Batr., Orph., pap.). <IE? *dreu- 'murmur, drone, rumble' (or
PG?).➤
•VAR Also Opúλλoç.
•DER Further Opvλéw (-\\-) [v.] ‘to boast, brag' (Att.), also with Sia- and other
prefixes; лoλv-еpúλ\(\)½-τos 'much discussed (Pl., Plb.), еpúληµα 'gossip, boast'
(LXX); also Opvλíw produce a false tone on the cithara' (h. Merc. 488; cod. Opvaλ-
[would be metrically better] = Opuλλ- ?), together with Оpuλiσµós, -tyµós (D. H.).
•ETYM While it seems most obvious to assume that Opuλέw was derived from Opuλos,
both the dates and the frequency refute this. Rather, Opuλéw was formed after the
many (denominative, deverbative or primary) onomatopoeic verbs in -έw, e.g.
коμлέw, кελαбéw, ßоµßéw, Аоvлéш, poiẞdéw (see Schwyzer: 726), from which the
rare and late Opulos was a back-formation. It seems obvious that Opulέw is
connected with Opέoµai, Оópuẞoç, τovеopúчw. It has been suggested that it is a zero
grade derivative of IE dreu- (Pok. 255), but this root is not well attested (though
there is Gr. Opέoμat). As Frisk remarks, it is questionable whether one should
analyze an onomatopoeic word in such a purely grammatical way. The frequent
notation -- may be an expressive gemination, but it may also point to Pre-Greek
origin. Fur.: 237, 281 separates the word from the IE forms and connects it with
Oópuẞoc, with variant *0puf-.
Opúov [n.] 'reed, rush' (Il.). <PG(S,V) ►
•COMP As a first member in ерvo-лóληs 'seller of reed' (pap.).
•DER Opvóɛiç 'rich in reeds' (Nic.), fem. Opvóɛσσα place on the Alpheios (A 711), also
called Opúov (B 592); Opvwdns ‘id.' (Str.); Opúïvoç 'made of reeds', Opvïùç ‘grown
with reeds' (of yñ, pap.). Fur. 135 adduces Opúσtos (EM 456, 31) and Opúσis (sch.
351). On Opvaλλíç, see s.v.

=== page 304 ===

560
Opúntw
•ETYM Formally, one may compare ßpúov, but further details are unclear. Sommer's
connection (Sommer 1905: 60f.) with the Balto-Slavic group of OCS trústú [f.] ‘reed,
cane', Lith. tr(i)ušis ‘id.' (which presupposes IE *truso-) is impossible because of the
anlaut. The variants with -σ- (see Fur. above) point to a Pre-Greek word, and this is
not unexpected in the case of a plant name.
еpúлτw [V.] 'to break in pieces, crumble, enfeeble, weaken', med. 'to be effeminate or
prudish, be enervated' (IA). <EUR
•VAR Aor. еpúчai, pass. tpvqñvai (Il.), later Opvô¤ñvaí (Arist.), Opvßñvai (Dsc.),
perf. med. τéеpчäliai.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. Sia-, év-.
=
●DER 1. τpúqoç [n.] 'fragment' (8 508, Hdt., Pherecr. et al.). 2. τpuôý ‘softness,
luxuriousness, wantonness' (Att.); τpuôɛpós 'soft, wanton' (Att.; after aλɛpós,
уλʊкɛpóç et al.) together with τpvqɛpótŋs (Arist.); τpuôŋλós ‘id.' (AP); tpvqaλís
τpoqaλiç and transformations of it (Luc.); τpúчa 'wanton, debauchee' (Hippod.);
denominative verb τpuoάw, also with prefix, e.g. v-, with εvτpvôńs = τpvqεpós
(Man.), live softly, luxuriously, be wanton' (Att.) with τpúηuа 'wantonness,
luxuries', also concrete (E., Ar.), épvontńs ‘voluptuary' (D. S.). 3. еpúµµα ‘fragment'
(Hp., Ar.) with Оpvµµaτíç [f.] a kind of cake (middle com.), perhaps also Opu̟µíç.
¿õеñç лoιóç ‘a kind of fish' (H.). 4. еpúчç ‘tiring out, softness, debauchery' (X.,
Arist.) with Op = ɛpós 'dainty' (Theognost., H.), after μεíxos
(Chantraine 1933: 404). 5. From the present: Оpuлtкóç ‘mellow, crumbling' (Gal.,
Dsc.), 'softness' (X., D. C.), ерúлτакоν· кλáσµа ǎρτov. Kρñτεç ‘morsel of bread
(Cret.)' (H.).
⚫ETYM The word ерúлτш may continue a pre-form *drub-ie/o-, and is compared to
Northern European forms: Latv. drubaža ‘piece, fragment', drubazas 'splinter', OS
drūbōn, drūvōn 'to be sad', OIr. drucht 'drop' (PCl. *drub-tu-). Latvian also has
forms in p, e.g. drup-u, drup-t 'crumble', and in Germanic we find variants too: ON
drjúpa [v.] 'to drip' (dropi [m.] 'drop'). It is probable that Spúлτw was modelled on
ерúлτw. We are probably dealing with a non-IE substrate word from Europe of the
type discussed by Kuiper NOWELE 25 (1995): 68-72.
►
Opwσкw [v.] 'to spring, leap upon, rush, dart' (Il.). <IE *d½erh¸- ‘leap, mount▷
•VAR Opoкw (Schwyzer: 710, Chantraine 1942: 317), aor. Oopɛīv, fut. Ɖopoñµaí (Il.),
Opwa (Opp.), perf. ptc. fem. Tεopvíŋs (Antim. 65); after Oopεiv the pres. Оópvμα
(Hdt. 3, 109, S. Fr. 1127, 9, Nic. Th. 130) for original Оápνvσеαι = кvÏσкεσðaι 'to
conceive' in H.; there also thematic Oаpvεúε· óxεúε 'covers'; see also on еpéoμai.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧvα-, εк-, εл-, úлεр-.
•DER 1. From Opw-: Opwσµós (Оpwσµóc) ‘springing, rising' (K 160, A 56 = Y 3; A. R. 2,
823); Opwσiç 'cord, line' (Theognost., H.). 2. From the aorist: Oopós [m.] (Hdt., Hp.,
Arist.), Oopń [f.] (Hdt., Alcmaion) 'masculine seed', properly "spring, jump”; from
there Oopiкós of seed' (Arist.), opaños 'containing seed, etc.' (Nic., Lyc.), opwdns
'id.' (Gal.), opóεs 'consisting of seed' (Opp.); denominative verb Oоpíσкo̟μι to
receive semen' (Ant. Lib.; cf. кuσкоμαι). On ouρoç, see s.v.
Aveía
561
•ETYM The only plausible comparison is found in OIr. -dair* ‘to leap upon', together
with the nouns der 'young girl' (< PCl. *derā) and MW -derig 'rutty'. The ablaut
pattern is identical to that of Bλwoкw, µoλɛïv, чoλoчμα. The root was *dherh3-,
with *drh, giving Opw- before a consonant; Oopń contains an o-grade *dorh₂-; the
forms with apv(εu)- go back to an old nasal present *d³r-n-(e)h3- > *¤apvw-µ,
which was regularly transferred into the class of vu-presents. The form 0ópучдa has
analogical op for ap after Oopov (cf. Harðarson 1993a: 218). The fut. Oopέoμαι may
back to *0ɛpo- < *d½erh¸- with metathesis (Ruipérez Emerita 18 (1950): 386-407);
the aorist may have its vocalism from here.
go
Oúapos [m.] 'darnell, Lolium temulentum' (Ps.-Dsc.). <PG>
•ETYM Formation in -apos like кóµapoç, kiσłapoç, et al. (Strömberg 1940: 58).
Connected with Oúw ‘rage, seethe' by comparison with, e.g., Ru. durníca ‘id.' from
dur' [f.] 'stupidity'. However, the form in -apos rather points to a Pre-Greek word
(cf. the sequence -v-ap-), and connection with Oúw is a mere guess.
Ováw 'be rutty'. Oúw 1.
=>>
Ovyátnp, -tpós [f.] ‘daughter' (Il.). <IE *d¹ugh₂-ter- 'daughter'>
DIAL Myc. tu-ka-te, tu-ka-te-re, tu-ka-ta-si /thugater, -eres, -arsi(?)/.
•COMP Rarely in compounds, late as a first member, e.g. Оvуατро-лoшa 'adoption of
a daughter' (Cos, Rhodos).
●DER Diminutive Ovуáτpiov (Com., pap.); Ovyatpidoñç, Ion. -déos [m.] ‘daughter's
son, grandson', Ovуατρíðñ [f.] 'daugher's daughter, granddaughter' (IA), also
Ovуatɛpɛïç [f.] (Magnesia; after patronymics in -íc); Ovyaτpí(w 'call daughter' (com.;
cf. Schwyzer 731').
⚫ETYM Old word for 'daughter', preseved in most IE languages: Skt. duhitár- (nom.
duhitá; on the accent, see below), OAv. dugǝdar-, Arm. dustr, Osc. futír, MoHG
Tochter, Lith. duktė, OCS došti, ToB tkācer, ToA ckācar, all from IE *dhugh₂tér-. New
evidence has come from Anatolian: HLuw. tuwatra/i- ‘id.', Lyc. kbatra- ‘daughter'.
According to Kloekhorst 2008, these forms point to an old full grade of the root, and
he reconstructs *duetr- < *duegtr- < *duegh₂tr-. The ablaut pattern of Greek
(barytone Ovуáτηp) would confirm this reconstruction; it is, then, unnecessary to
explain Ovyáτηp as opposed to Skt. duhitá by analogy after the vocative Оúуaτεp.
Ovɛía [f.] ‘mortar' (Com.), also ‘oil-press' (pap.). <IE? *duH- 'fly about, dash’?>
•VAR Also -ɛín (Nic. Th. 91); late also itacistic -ía, -ín; also Ovɛiov [n.] 'id.' (pap.).
•DIAL Myc. tu-we-ta /t¹uestās/.
•DER Diminutive Ou(ε)ídiov (Ar.); back-formation (?) Ovïç, -ídos [f.] (Damocr. apud
Gal.). Further Ovéστηs [m.] 'pestle' (Dionys. Trag.).
•ETYM Formation like έyxɛín (to Yxos), etc., which points to *Ovεo-íā as a derivative
in ía from Ovoç 'burnt sacrifice' (Solmsen 1909: 250 fn.). We may compare other
words in -ía for concreta, especially names of vases like údpía, ávτλía (Scheller 1951:
48ff.). The meanings 'mortar' and 'oil-press' are supposed to have developed from
vase for pounding the incense', which is rather strange. The neuter Ovɛtov is

=== page 305 ===

562
Ove入入a
Đúuov
563
reminiscent of the vessel name ȧyyɛov. On the formation of Ovεσ-τηc, see
Chantraine 1933: 312f.
Búεa [f.] 'thunderstorm, hurricane' (Il., Arist.). <IE *dheuh₂- 'storm, rage, dash'>
•COMP OUελλÓ-ПOυç (Nonn.) after άελλó-ло(v)ç ( 409) et al.
•DER OvεÀλwdŋs (sch. S.) like åελλwdŋc (sch. Il.).
•ETYM From Oów ‘storm, rage, dash', perhaps based on äɛλλa, in which the suffix
in -- was inherited.
Ounn [f.] (part of) a victim sacrificed in a burnt offering' (I 220). <IE? *dheuh₂-
'storm, dash'>
•DER Lengthened form (Chantraine 1933: 186f.) Ovŋλýµata [pl.] (Thphr. Char. 10, 13;
beside σtéµµata). Cf. further: 1. Ovăλýµata [pl.] ‘id.' (Milete Va), lengthened from
*Ováλŋ (type ȧукáλŋ: ǎукoç) or after äλŋua, лαлáληµа? 2. Ovλµατα [pl.]
'sacrificial cake' (Com., Thphr.), from an λ-derivative to Oúw. Ovλéqμa (Porph.) is
a back-formation from Ovλnμaτα.
•ETYM Formation like yaµŋλaí (but this is not from ►yóµqoç; s.v.), åкavðŋlý (:
ákavða, Hdn.). Other comparanda are some barytones like vŋŋ (to ävðos,
ávféw), Seiknλov (from dɛíkvyµ), tpáxŋλos (from tpέxw, τpoxós). The form Ounλý
would then be derived from Oúoç or (less probably) directly from Oúw 'to sacrifice'.
Đúλakoç [m.] ‘sack, bag', mostly made of leather (IA). <PG►
•VAR Ovλλíç• Oúλakos (H.), Ovlideç. oi Oúlakoi (H.); also ¤ñλaš (com.), perhaps a
back-formation from OuλáкioV.
•COMP As a second member in лapσovlaкip (= лаpaðvlakíç). tòv tpíßwva, ötav
уévητaι wç Oúλaкoç 'a threadbare garment, as it came to be like a sack' (H.; Lacon.).
⚫DER Diminutives: Ouλáкiov (IA), Ouλaкíç [f.] (Ael.), Ovλaкíσкoç [m.] (com., Dsc.).
Other derivatives: Ovλaкý 'scrotum' (Hippiatr.), Ovlaкódŋs (Thphr.), Ovλakóɛiç
(Nic.) 'like a sack'; Ovλaкīτɩç in plant names (Dsc.): 0. μńкwv (after the capsules of
the seeds), 0. vápdos (after the acorn-like stock of the root; Strömberg 1940: 36);
Ovλakíšeɩv. tò àлaiteïv ti εróµevov µεtà Ovlákov. Tapavtīvoι (H.). Short form,
possibly with hypocoristic gemination: Ovλ(\)ís (H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Like σáккoç, probably foreign. The suffix -aк- points to Pre-
Greek origin (Pre-Greek: Suffixes). A form *00λ(o)-, obtained after removing a suffix
-K(o)-, has been compared with Lith. dundùlis 'puffed, big-bellied', but this is only
speculation.
The forms aλλís. µáðσлos µaкpós ‘long bag' and Оáλλiкα· σáккov ɛldoç 'kind of
bag' (H.), with different vocalism, are unexplained.
Đúμaλoç [m.] name of a fish 'Thymallus vulgaris, Salmo thymallus' (Ael.). <PG(S)►
ETYM Formation in -aλλos (Chantraine 1933: 317 compares кopúd-aλ(^)oc et al.),
which has been connected with Oúμov 'thyme' because of the scent (Strömberg 1943:
6of.; doubts in Thompson 1947 s.v.).-- However, as the suffix is Pre-Greek, it is
improbable that the basic word was of inner-Greek formation. Via Lat. thymallus,
the word was borrowed as Ital. temolo, etc.
Ovµáλwy, -wños [m.] probably 'piece of firewood, charcoal (Com., Luc. Lex. 24).
<PG(S)►
•ETYM Formation like aiµáλwy 'mass of blood, blood clot' (Hp., pap.), vuкtáλwy
'seeing in the night' = ‘day-blind(ness)'; secondarily ‘night-blind(ness), based on
which ŋµɛpáλwy was created. Since the present word has nothing to do with 'seeing',
we are probably dealing with a Pre-Greek suffix -Aww. Cf. also ȧyxíλwy, aiyiλwy,
which no doubt derives from a Pre-Greek word as well.
Oúußpā [f.] name of a sweet-scented plant, 'savory, Satureia Thymbra' (com., Thphr.,
Dsc.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also еúμẞpov (Thphr.) and Ovμßpaía (Hp. apud Gal.; after other plant names
in -aía). By metathesis (or adaptation to ерú-лтw?): еpúµßη (Gp.).
•DER Ovµßpwdŋs like 0.' (Thphr.), Ovµßpítns olvos 'wine spiced with 0.' (Dsc.).
•ETYM Hardly derived from Oúμov, úμos 'thyme' (Strömberg 1940: 149), in which
case the -- could be epenthetic between μ and p. Persson 1891: 564 proposed a
derivation from τúow in -p-, with nasalization and deaspiration. This is most
improbable, unless the word is Pre-Greek (where prenasalization is common); there
was no deaspiration after nasal (cf. àµí). The proposal is rejected by DELG.
Niedermann Glotta 19 (1931): 14 recalls Anatolian TNs like úµßpη, Oúμẞpiov, and
on the other hand Tuppηστós (southern spur of the Pindos, named after Oúußpa?).
Clearly a non-IE Greek plant name, probably Pre-Greek; note the metathesized
form. The ending -ata is remarkable. The Anatolian toponyms could stem from a
language related to Pre-Greek.
=>
Ovμéλŋ 'hearth'. ⇒ Oúw 2.
Ovuάw [v.] 'to produce smoke, fumigate' (IA). <IE *deuH- 'smoke'>>
•VAR Aor. -tăσaɩ, Ion. -ñσai; lengthened forms: Ovu-άw, -ατílw (Gp.), -aívw
(gloss.), -αTɛúw (sch.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àva-, Èк-, ÈÑɩ-, ÚÑO-.
•DER (Ionic forms unmarked): Ovuíaσis, mostly from the prefixed verbs (àvα-, έлɩ- et
al.), ‘fumigating' (IA); Ovµíαµа, also from the prefixed verbs, 'incense' (IA);
¿лðvuaτpóç ‘fumigator' (Ephesus), Оvíατpov 'vessel for fumigation' (Milete,
Hell.), also Оvµɑτpíç (Dam.), mostly pov (IA); deverbal Ovµín = -íŋµa
(Aret.); Ovшuaτós 'fir for fumigation' (Hp., Arist.), -tɩkóç ‘id.' (Pl.).
⚫ETYM Formation in -táw (after кOVI-áw, etc.; Schwyzer: 732) from Ovμóç in its old.
meaning 'smoke', which was lost in the Greek base form.
Oúμov [n.] 'thyme' (IA). <PG?>
VAR Rarely-oc [m.].
•COMP As a first member in Ovμ-ελaíα [f.] name of a plant, perhaps 'Daphne
Cnidium' (Dsc., Plin.; cf. on λaía) together with -aïτηs (olvoc) 'wine spiced with 0.'
(Dsc.); еvμ-o-áλun [f.] 'drink from thyme, vinegar and brine' (Dsc.).
==
•DER Оúμшov = σλaž, also large wart' (Hp., Dsc.; cf. Strömberg 1940: 97), Ovµíτns
'spiced with 0.' (Ar., Dsc.), Оúµvov (μελ) 'made of 0.' (Colum., Apul.), Ovµóɛç ‘rich

=== page 306 ===

564
¤ūµós
in 0.' (Choeril.), Ovµádŋs ‘0.-like' (Thphr.). Denominative verb Ovµíw ‘taste 0.' (sp.
medic.), Ovuxeɛíç. лкpavėɛíç ‘bitter' (H.).
•ETYM Primary derivative in -μo- from Oúw 2 ‘smoke', named after its scent
(Strömberg 1940: 27)? This is doubtful. A variant of Ouμóç with short *u seems.
impossible in IE terms. As a local plant name, the word is liable to be of Pre-Greek
origin. Cf. further the fish name Oúµaλλoç.
Ouμóç [m.] 'spirit, courage, anger, sense' (II.); on meaning and use in Hom., etc. Marg
1938: 47ff.; also Magnien REGr. 40 (1927): 117ff. (criticism by Wahrmann Glotta 19
(1931): 214f.). IE *dhuH-mo- 'smoke'>>
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. Ovμo-ßópos ‘eating the heart' (II.), Ovµ-ŋyɛpéwv
‘gathering one's spirit, coming to oneself (η 283; Leumann 1950: 11683, Chantraine
1942: 349), Ovµāpýs, Ovµýpηs 'delighting the heart' (Il.; Bechtel 1914 s.v., Leumann:
66); лрó-ечµоç бprepared, willing' (IA) with лpoðvµía, -íŋ ‘willingness' (B 588) and
-εoμα [v.] (IA).
⚫DER Diminutive Ovμídiov (Ar. V. 878); adjectives Ovμкós and Ovµáðŋs 'passionate,
vehement' (Arist.); denominative verbs: 1. Ovuάw 'fumigate' together with Ovuíŋ
'incense'; 2. Ovμóoμa 'get angry' (IA), rarely -ów ‘id.' (E. Supp. 581), together with
Оúμшμa ‘anger' (A. Eu. 861, Epigr.), Oúµwσiç ‘id.' (Cic. Tusc. 4, 9, 21); 3. Ovµaívw ‘be
angry' (Hes. Sc. 262, Ar., A. R.).
•ETYM Identical with Skt. dhūmá-, Lat. fūmus, Lith. dūmai [pl.], OCS dymo 'smoke';
the meaning 'smoke' is preserved in Ovμáw. On the meaning of Оñµóc, see
Chantraine 1933: 134. OHG toum 'steam, vapor', with an IE diphthong *ou, has been
cited. Cf. ►Đúw 2. DELG compares Oúw 1 'rush in, rage', because derivation from
'smoke' is judged to be difficult.
Oúvvos [m.] 'tunnyfish' (Orac. apud Hdt. 1, 62, A. Pers. 424, Arist.). <PG➤
•VAR Fem. Oúvvă or *-ŋ, gen. -ŋs (Hippon. 26, 2 W, see LSJ Supp.); also -íç, -ác
(com.).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in Оuvvo-σкóлоç 'watcher for tunnies' (Arist.), -έw
(Ar.) together with -ía, -εiov (Str.).
●Der ¤úvvāž, -ākoç [m.] (com.; affective formation, see Björck 1950: 62); Ouvvítns
'tunny fisher' (inscr. Varna), Oúvvɛtos, Ouvvaños ‘of tunny' (Ar.), Ovvvádŋs ‘tunny-
like' (Luc.), Ovvvɛĩa [pl.n.] ‘tunny-fishing' (Troezen), Ouvvɛutiкós ‘belonging to
tunny-fishing' (Luc.; as if from *Ouvvεúw, cf. also ȧλiεUTIкóç et al.); denominative
verbs Ouvváw 'catch tunny' (Ar.), also -iw (Suid.).
⚫ETYM Mediterranean word, often compared to Hebr. tannin 'big water-animal,
whale, shark' (Lewy 1895: 14f.), but this is rejected by DELG. See Strömberg 1943:
126f. and Thompson 1947 s.v., also on folk etymologies (from Oúw, Oúvw). Borrowed
as Lat. thynnus, thunnus, whence the Romance forms are derived. The fem. in short
-a could point to Pre-Greek origin (see Bq.).
Oúvw 'rush in'.
=>
→ Oúw 1.
Oúpa
565
Oúov [n.] name of a tree, the wood of which was burned for its good fragrance:
‘arborvitae' (ε 60, Hell.), 'Callitris quadrivalvis'. DELG also gives 'Juniperus
foetidissimus' (s.v. Đúw 2). ◄?►
•VAR Also Ovía, Oúa.
•DER Ovĭov 'resin' (Thphr.).
⚫ETYM It has been suggested that it is a primary derivative of Oów 2. The relation of
these forms is not clear; it does not seem very probable that two distinct trees had
nearly identical names.
Ovos [n.] 'burnt offering', mostly in plur. Oún (II.). <IE *dheuH- ‘smoke'▷
•DIAL Myc. tu-we-a /thue"a/ 'aromatic products'.
●COMP As a first member in Ovoσкóoç, Avo-dóкoç ‘accepting burnt offerings' (E.),
ðuŋ-лóλoç ‘making offerings, priest(ess)' (A., E.), together with -έw, -ía (Ovŋ- after
the plural?).
●DER Ovóels, Ovýε rich in incense, etc., fragrant' (Il.; Ovwev• εvwdɛç ‘fragrant' H.);
еváμаτα [pl.] 'incense, spices' (Ion.), lengthened from Oúos (cf. Chantraine 1933:
187) rather than from a denominative *Ovóoμat, -ów, though such a verb seems
presupposed by the ptc. τɛ0vwμévos 'with odour' (I 172 et al.), to which also Ovw0év
(Hedyl. apud Ath. 11, 486b); Ovïσên (LXX, J.; v.l. -os), also Búσên, -os [f.] (pap., Suid.,
EM) 'censer', after кadíσkoç et al.; Ovïtys (\íðos) [m.] name of an Ethiopian stone
(Dsc., Gal.).
▶
•ETYM Primary derivative of Oúw 2. Thence Lat. LW tūs, tūris [n.] ‘(frank)incense'.
See further
Ovɛía.
еvoσкóos [m., f.] name of a sacrificial priest, probably "observer of sacrifices" (Hom.,
E.), also as a translation of Lat. haruspices (D. H.); adjectival Ovoσkóa ipá (IG 14,
1389: 12; verse inscr.). <IE *(s)keu- 'observe'>
⚫DER Ovookɛiv. iɛpoïç лapéčɛσðaɩ, 1 Oɛois 'to attend to a sacrifice' (H.); еvooкεiç
[2sg.] (A. Ag. 87; -кɩvɛiç codd.); on the hyphaeresis from *Ovoσкoɛīv cf. Boŋeεiv from
Bondóos.
•ETYM An analysis of Ovo-σкóoç as containing a second member *σkoƑóç is
attractive. This seems to be found as well in Go. un-skawai (for *us-skawai?) sijaima
= vowμev. The Gm. iterative OS skauwōn, OHG scouwōn 'see, perceive' is certainly
connected, being parallel to the Greek iterative Koέw 'to note, perceive' with s-
mobile (s.v. and LIV² s.v. *(s)keuh,- for further cognates). Cf. also ►ávAKŴÇ.
Oúpa [f.] 'door, doorleaf, mostly plur. ‘gate' (II.). <IE *duer- 'door'>
•VAR Ion. Oúpη.
•DIAL Myc. o-pi-tu-ra-jo /opi-thuraiōi/ 'doorkeeper'
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. Oupă-wpós (X 69), Aup-wpóc, -oupócs (Sapph.)
'doorkeeper' (cf. on ópáw), as a second member with thematic enlargement, e.g.
лрó-Оup-ov 'place before the gate, forecourt' (Il.).
⚫DER Diminutive: Oúptov (Att.) and Oupídiov (Gp.), Oupís [f.] 'window (opening)'
(IA) with Oupidɛús 'window frame' (Delos IIIª; cf. the names in -ɛús in Chantraine
1933: 128), Ovpidów ‘provide with a window' (pap.) together with Oupidwτós (inscr.).
Further upɛós [m.] 'door-stone' (: 240, 313), name of a long shield = Lat. scutum

=== page 307 ===

566
Oúpσos
(Hell; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 51), together with Oupɛów 'cover with a
shield' (Aq.); Oúpετpα [pl.] '(frame of a) door' (epic), together with Oupετpiкóç
(Chios); Oúpwμa, often plur. -óµατα 'doorway' (IA; cf. Chantraine 1933: 187); Ovpwv,
-wvoç [m.] ‘hall, antechamber' (S.). Adjective Oupatos, Aeol. Oúpaos 'belonging to
the door, standing before the door, outside, foreign' (trag., Hell.). Denominative verb
Oupów ‘to provide with doors' (Att.) together with Oúpwotę (Epid.), Ovpwtós (Babr.).
Oupavλéw [v.] 'to sleep before the door' is from a compound with aúλý; *Ovpáyµata.
άчodɛúµaτa ‘excrements' (H.; in wrong position), as if from Ovpá¶w.
=
•ETYM Starting from Oúp-da. εw. Apкádɛç ‘outside (Arc.)' (H.), 0úσ0εv for *ðúp-
σ0εv = 0úpα-0εv (Tegea), and from Oúpače 'outside, outdoors' < *0úpǎç-dɛ, we can
reconstruct a consonant stem IE *dur-, which is attested in many other languages:
OHG turi = Tür (properly plur.) < IE *ď½úr-es; Lith. dur-is [acc.pl.], dùr-ų [gen.pl.],
Skt. dúr-aḥ [acc.pl.] < IE *d³úr-ṇs (on the anlauting d- instead of dh-, cf. Mayrhofer
EWAia s.v. dvár-). This root noun is frequently replaced by suffixed formations, e.g.
the i-stem in Lith. dùr-y-s [nom.pl.], dùr-i-ų [gen.], the o-stem in Go. daur [n.]
MOHG Tor, etc., by an n-stem in Arm. dur-n, by a h₂-stem in Gr. Oúpa, and also in
Arm. dr-a-c' [gen.dat.acc.pl.], dr-a-w-k' [instr.].- - Beside the zero grade *dur-, we
find the full-grades *duer-, *d"uor-, e.g. in Skt. nom.pl. dvár-aḥ, acc.pl. dúr-aḥ (see
above), which were often generalized as in Lat. for-ēs, ToB twere. Enlargements: Skt.
dvár-a- [n.], OCS dvor- 'court', Lat. for-is 'outside', for-ās (towards) outside'. A
zero grade *dur- has been supposed in após 'pivot of a door', but its
appurtenance is not certain. The thematic enlargement of лpó-ðup-ov also occurs,
e.g., in Skt. śatá-dur-a- ‘with a hundred doors' (Sommer 1948: 131). Cf. Benveniste
1969:1: 311ff.
Oúpoos [m.] 'the thyrsos-wand', wreathed in ivy and vine-leaves with a pine-cone at
the top (E.). <LW Anat.>>
●COMP E.g. Oupσo-qópos, ä-Bupσos (E.).
⚫DER Diminutive Oupoíov (Hero), Oupσápiov (Plu.); plant name Oúpotov (Ps.-Dsc.),
Đúpσis (Cyran.), Oupo-ivy and -ítns (Dsc., see Strömberg 1940: 50; the last also name
of a stone, Redard 1949: 55); Oupoiwv name of a dolphin-like fish (Ath., Plin.; see WH
s.v. tursiō). Denominative verbs: Oupoάw 'flourish the 0.' (Ar. Lys. 1313; Lacon. ptc.
Ovpσaddwãv = -ačovσwv), Aupσów ‘use as a 0.' (D. S.). Does Oupεúc, epithet of
Apollo in Achaea (Paus. 7, 21, 13), also belong here? See Boßhardt 1942: 77.
ETYM Loanword from Anatolia; cf. HLuw. tuwarsa- 'vine' (Laroche BSL 51 (1955): p.
xxxiiif., Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 271f.). See Heubeck 1961: 80.
->
Ovpwpós 'doorkeeper'. → Oúpa and ópáw.
Ovσāvos [m.] 'tassels, fringe' (Il.). ◄PG(S,V)►
VAR Usually plur. -ot; on Ovoσavóɛiç see below.
•DER Ovσσavóεiç (Il.; on -σσ- see below), Ovσavшτós (Hdt., J.) 'framed with tassels',
Ovσavwdns 'tassel-like' (Thphr.), -1dóv [adv.] ‘id.' (Ael.).
•ETYM Technical word in -avos (Chantraine 1933: 200). Acc. to Persson 1912(1): 45, it
is from *0úσσa < *0ú0-1α, which would be identical with Latv. duša bundle of straw,
etc.' < IE *dhud³-ih₂. A primary yod-present is found in Оúσσɛται· τɩvάσσεται 'shakes'
Oúw 2
567
(H.), but Latte states that the word is an invention of grammarians in order to
explain Oúσavoç. Skt. dúdhi- 'tempestuous' and several Gm. words (Pok. 264f.) are
unrelated because of their meaning; therefore a separate IE pre-form *dhud- can
hardly be reconstructed. The variation σ/σo rather points to Pre-Greek origin (Fur.:
387, who refers to e.g. 'Odvo(o)ɛúç. This would be understandable for a word of this
meaning.
Oúσa [n.pl.] 'the sacred implements of Bacchic orgies' (Z 134), secondarily 'sacrifice'
(Lyc.; influence of ▶Oúw 2). <PG>
•ETYM The form Oúσ-a has been derived from 0ów 1 by means of a suffix -o-
(Chantraine 1933: 375). This derivation does not seem adequate: it presupposes a
much more general meaning than the very specific one of the present entry. It is
rather be a loan, either from Anatolian or from Pre-Greek. Hardly related to Oúpσoç
(as per Benveniste 1935: 203).
Oów 1 [v.] 'to rush in, storm, rage' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Also Ovíw (Hom., h. Merc. 560; cf. Chantraine 1942: 51 and 372), Oúvw (Il.), ipf.
also 20úvɛov (Hes.), aor. Ovσa (Call. Fr. 82).
•COMP Rarely with prefix, e.g. àvα-, úлερ-.
•DER ¤v(1)ác, -ádos [f.] “the storming one", 'thyiade, Bacchante' (A., Tim.), also Ovĩa
[f.] (Str. 10, 3, 10 [and S. Ant. 1151, lyr.?]; cf. Fraenkel 1910: 95); Ovĩa [n.] name of a
festival of Dionysus in Elis (Paus. 6, 26, 1), Ovĭoç name of a Thessalian and Boeotian
month (inscr.); vwvn epithet of Semele (h. Hom., Sapph., Pi.); also Oúστα. Ovĩα and
Avotάdeç. výµqai tɩvés, ai žvėɛoɩ, kai Báкxaι 'maidens that are possessed, Bacchae'
(H.); Ovστηpios epithet of Bacchus (EM); Oūvos. „ódéµos, óppµý, Spóµoç ‘war,
assault, race' (H.; from Oúvw; not = Skt. ptc. dhūna-); Būσiç (Pl. Cra. 419e as an
explanation of Ovµós). Deverbative: Ováw be rutty (of swines)' (Arist.; after ßaкxáw,
μаруáw et al.; see Schwyzer: 7262). Unclear Ovwėɛíç. µavɛíç, öpµńσaç 'frenzied,
inspired' (H.). On úεlla and úσa, see s.vv. Here also Ováкται [m.pl.]
(Troezen II), if = 'mystae sive thiasotae'; cf Fraenkel 1910: 174; DELG shares this
under Oúw 2.
•ETYM The form Ovw has been analyzed as an old vu-present *0ú-VF-w (with
Úvɛov < *-0ú-vεF-ov), and identified with Skt. dhünóti 'shake'. It is unclear,
however, what 'to shake' has to do with the meaning of this verb. A stem Ovσ- has
been posited for Ovσtádɛç, Оúσðλa, and also for Ovíw, if this derives from *0úσ-iw. It
is uncertain, however, that this supposed *Ovσ- has anything to do with our verb
(Lat. furō is better left aside; see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). See also Oów 2. The hesitation
between Oów 1 and Oúw 2 shows how uncertain the interpretation is. One can hardly
even rule out that *Ovσ- is of foreign origin. Note rare forms or meanings, such as
Oúota, Ovtádes, Ováw. Pok. 261ff. gives an enormous amount of forms and
meanings, but no close parallel for the meaning of Oów 1. In the present situation,
without further research, nothing can be said.
Oúw 2 [v.] 'to offer by burning, sacrifice, slaughter' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Fut. Oúow, aor. Oñσαɩ (Il.), τúðñvai (Hdt.), perf. τéðňka, téðňµai (Att.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ¿к-, кatα-, ëρo-, övv-.

=== page 308 ===

568
Ovwpós
•DER Derivations partly show the older meaning of 'smoke, incense' (see below): 1.
Oμa sacrifice' (IA, etc.); 2. čк-, лpó-Övoiç from έк-, лρo-Оów (late); 3. Ovoía see
below on úτηs; 4. ►Oúos [n.] with Ovεστηs et al. ‘incense'; 5. ►Oúov ‘life-tree'; 6.
Ovŋτá [n.pl.] ‘incense' (Aret.; on the formation cf. s.v. Ouλ); 7. Ov(ε)ía [f.]
'strong-smelling cedar, thuja' with Ovĭov [n.] 'resin' (Thphr.); to ►úos? 8. Oútns
[m.] 'sacrificer' (Hell.; ¿к-Оúτηs from έк-0úw E.); Oúτaç (Thess.), together with
OUTEчov 'place for the sacrifice' (Aeschin.), OUTкóç belonging to the sacrifice' (Hell.,
directly from Oúw), Ovoía 'ceremonial offering' (h. Cer.); from there Ovolá w
'sacrifice' with Ovoíaσµa, -aσtýpioç, -ov; 9. Ovtýp [m.] ‘id.' (trag.) together with
Ouτnpiov 'sacrificial animal' (E.), also ‘altar', name of the constellation Ara (Arat.;
Scherer 1953: 192); 10. Oúotaç. ò iɛpeùs rapà Kpŋoí ‘priest (Cret.)' (H.), fem. Ovστáç,
-ádos belonging to the sacrifice' (A., S.); 11. Oúστpα [n.] = еúματа (Cos); 12.
Ov<o>typíoils. Ovµiatηpíois ‘censer³ (H.); 13. Ovoµкóç ‘regarding the sacrifice' (čτoç;
Paros, Tenos). See also Ounλn, Ovμóç; not in ►Оúμov, Оvµáλwy. Unclear Oчμéλŋ
'hearth, altar' (trag.), with Ovμελiкóç.
⚫ETYM The verb was probably thematicized in Greek. We find a yod-present in Latin
suf-fiō 'fumigate', explained as from *-duH-ie/o-. Ragot RPh. 75 (2001): 144 connects
Hitt. tuḥhae-zi to sigh' from *dhuh₂-, which would be very far semantically. However,
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. tuhhae-zi now asserts that the meaning is 'to produce smoke' in
Hitt. as well (said of volcanoes). Tocharian has a verb twasastär [3sg.med.] 'to ignite',
which Hackstein 1995: 354 connects with our root. It is often supposed that 1. Oúw
and 2. Oúw were originally identical. A semantic core like 'rush, rage, whirl, make
dust, smoke' vel sim. has been assumed, but this is far from compelling. The
different languages show a mass of formations and meanings which can no longer be
neatly interpreted; see Pok. 261-267 (and 268-271) for all material. See also τúpoμα.
On the other hand, Оávaτos, oλós and ȧúpw, which were connected with our verb
by Frisk and others, are unrelated.
Ovwpós [m.] table for offerings, ‘iɛpà τpáñεšα' (Pherecyd. Syr., Call.). ◄IE *uer-
'observe'>
•VAR Also Ovwpis [f.] (Poll.).
•DER Ovwpitŋs. τpañɛšítηs ‘banker' (H.), metaph. in Lyc. 93; Ovwpía 'ceremonial
offering' (Didyma), Оvwpεīσα· εvwxεiσa 'to relish' (H.).
⚫ETYM From *0vo-Fwpós (cf. Ovwpóv. τpáñεľav tǹv tà Oúŋ qvláσσovσav H.); see
also Oupwpós (but Ovo- is difficult). By association with Oɛóc, Oɛwpía, etc., the
spellings Oɛwpíç, Oɛwpía arose (Poll., Didyma, imperial period). Not from *Ovɛ-wpos
< *0v-ãƑopoç, as per DELG s.v., as this is semantically implausible.
Own [f.] 'penalty' (N 669, ẞ 192). <IE? *dheh,- 'put'?>
•VAR Owïń, Owuń (Archil., Ion. inscr., Call.), 00á (IG 1², 114: 42; Att.).
•COMP As a second member in ȧ-0ŵos ‘unpunished, innocent' (IA) with ảłwów
'declare somebody innocent' (LXX).
•DER Denominative verbs: 00áw (IG 1², 4: 7; 12), fut. Đoáσɛ (IG 2², 1362: 14; Att.),
Owéw (Delph.), 00έw (Locr.) with à¤óŋτos· à¶ηµíшτos ‘immune from penalties'
(H.), 00aíw (Cret.), 0Оá\w (El.) ‘fine, punish'; thence Owïaσiç (Delph.).
Owσ0al
569
•ETYM Formation in -tá (cf. στwiά, σto(1)á, etc.), often derived from tíðŋµ as “the
settled penalty" with o-grade of the root; a rather simplistic solution.
=>
O koç → Oãкoç.
OwKOS
* Đăkoş.
Owµy, -tyyos [f.] 'cord, string; bow-string' (Hdt., trag., etc.). <PG(S)►
⚫DER Denominative Оwµíσσε vúσσε, dɛσµεúε 'to pierce, fetter' (H.), wµxεíç
(Anacr.).
•ETYM Formation in -tyy-, which proves Pre-Greek origin.
Owμós [m.] 'heap' (A., Ar., Thphr.). <IE *dheh,- ‘set, lay'>
•DER Denominative Ошµεûðɑ· σvµµížaɩ, ovvayayɛɩv 'mix together, gather together'
(H.).
•ETYM Probably identical with a Gm. word for 'judgement, opinion, situation, etc.',
Go. doms, ON dómr, OHG tuom. An old verbal noun of IE dheh,- 'set, lay' (see
►τíе), thus it properly means 'setting', etc.; cf. ► Oéois, ▶ Onpwv.
Owpa [m.] 'cuirass' (II.), 'trunk, chest' (Hp.). <PG➤
•VAR Ion. Oúpη, hyper-Aeol. plur. Oóppaкɛs (Alc.).
•DIAL Myc. to-ra-ke [n.pl.].
•COMP E.g. Owpaкo-pópos 'wearing a cuirass', Xαλкɛo-еópη 'with bronze cuirass'.
•DER Owpakɛiov (A., inscr.), Owpáкtov (Plb.) 'breastwork, parapet'; Owpηкτns 'soldier
with cuirass' (Il.; on the formation Trümpy [see below]), Owракíτηs ‘id.' (Plb.);
Owpakiкós belonging to the trunk' (Aët.), Owpakaãos ‘with cuirass (?)' (Delos IIª).
Denominative verbs: 1. Owpýσσoµaɩ, -w 'to put on a cuirass, armor oneself (II.), also
metaph. 'to strengthen oneself (with wine, ovų, etc.)' (Hp., Thgn.) with Owpηšis
'drinking to intoxication' (medic.). 2. Owpaкí(w 'to armor' (Th., X.) together with
еwρaкioμóç (LXX).
•ETYM Technical word without etymology; probably a loan. Unrelated to Skt.
dharaka- 'container', but compared with Lat. lōrica as a loanword. As a medical
term, the meaning 'trunk, etc.' is probably secondary from 'cuirass, armour'. Ample
treatment by Trümpy 1950: 10ff. See also Hester Lingua 13 (1965): 354. Most probably
a Pre-Greek word; Fur.: 30235 points to a v.l. Oúpač, which would prove Pre-Greek
origin. Fur. gives more examples of w/v; Pre-Greek *u was often rendered by Greek
w. The suffix -āk- is very frequent in Pre-Greek.
Owc, Owóc [m., f.] ‘jackal, Camis aureus' (Il., Hdt., Arist.); on the meaning (also a
ferret?) see Körner 1930: 17f. <PG?>
•COMP No compounds or derivatives.
⚫ETYM Several hypothetical explanations (see Frisk). Fraenkel IF 22 (1907-08): 396ff.
interpreted it as "glutton", related to woα, oívn. Probably a loanword;
perhaps Pre-Greek.
Owoα [v.] 'to eat. <PG?>
•DER Owotńpia [pl.] = ɛvwxnτýpiα ‘offer-food' (Alcm., H.; cf. Kukula Phil. 66 (1907):
226ff., Bechtel 1921, 2: 374).
⚫ETYM Connected with Ooívn; Pre-Greek origin seems quite possible, however.

=== page 309 ===

570
*Owσow
*0woow [v.] ‘to make drunk, intoxicate', in α• µɛðúoaɩ, ëλŋpwσaɩ ‘to intoxicate,
make full', ãžaι· μεеúσαι; τεÐµ
µeµɛðvoµévoɩ, tɛðayµévoɩ· µɛµɛðvoµévoi
...
(all H.), Owxeɛis (S. Fr. 173; contracted from Owpηxeεíç? See Schwyzer: 16'), etc. <?>
⚫ETYM The traditional connection with Onyw is doubted by WP 1, 823; instead, they
connect it with Boí-vò (as *00(1)άк-ɩw, *00(1)-a). DELG thinks the connection with
enyw is folk-etymological.
Owüσow [v.] 'to bark, bay, cry aloud, call aloud' (trag.). <?>
•VAR Aor. OwÜžai.
•COMP Also with prefix: ȧva-,
-, ÙÑO-.
•DER Agent noun OwÜкτηp (API. 4, 91).
⚫ETYM Formation in -úσow; further details unknown. Perhaps derived from Ows *cry
like a jackal'?
Owy, Owлóc [m.] ‘flatterer', secondarily also as an adjective (IA). ◄PG?►
•DER Оwлкóç ‘flattering' (Ar.), Owлɛów [v.] 'to flatter' together with Оwлɛíɑ,
еóлεvμα 'flattery', diminutive ешñεvµátia [pl.], Owлεvτiкóç (Att., etc.); Оáлτш [v.]
'id.' (A.).
⚫ETYM Hardly a root noun of τé-еηл-α, Оáµßоç, as per Saussure 1879: 156, since this
is a Pre-Greek word. Cf. Owy. кóλаž, ó µετà Ðаvµãσµο ¿укшµãστns 'flatterer,
praiser' (H.), which may be due to learned analysis.
I
-í [pcl.] particle added to pronouns, mostly of demonstrative value. ◄IE *-iH
'demonstrative pcl.>
•VAR Att. ód-í, OÚtoσ-í, vvv-í, etc.; also El. To-ï, Boeot. Tav-í, etc., rarely -ív.
⚫ETYM Comparable with the enclitics Skt. OAv. im, i, and -i in Hitt. aši, uni-, ini-
'that (one)'; perhaps also seen in Lat. utī. Gothic has a deictic element -ei.
[f.] 'she', anaphoric/reflexive pronoun (S. Fr. 471; also ♫ 608?). <IE *sih₂ ‘she’➤
ETYM Identical with Go. si, OIr. sí, Skt. si-m [acc.]. See Ruijgh 1996: 335-352.
ïa [f.] ‘one and the same', also ‘(the) one' as opposed to ‘the other' (Il.); ‘that one'
(Gortyn). <IE *i- pron. 'he, she'>
•VAR Acc. ĭav (Il., § 435). Incidental forms, partly doubtful, in Lesb., Thessal., Boeot.
[Corinn.] and in Hp. (Morb. 4, 37), gen. iñç, dat. iñ (Il.); further dat. n. io (Z 422),
acc. m. lóv (IG 5(1), 1390: 126 [Messen. Iª], after Z 422; not quite certain), dat. m. ių
(Gortyn).
⚫ETYM An old pronoun without certain correspondences outside Greek, originally
only feminine, and adapted to µía in inflexion (Frisk). It probably continues an
inflected form of *h,i-, rather than a reflex of *smih₂, gen. -ieh₂-s (the latter option
was recently defended by J. Katz, lecture at the ECIEC 2007). Ruijgh Lingua 28
(1971): 172 separates the Cretan pronoun lóç èкεivos' and thinks that Homeric i
(only Z 422) is an artificial form.
ia [f.] 'cry, lament, voice' (Orac. apud Hdt. 1, 85, A., E. [lyr.]). <ONOM▷
•VAR Ion. in [f.].
•DER As an interjection, laí (S., Ar.) and in (A. [lyr.], Ar., Call.); inos, epithet of
Apollo “who is invoked with i½ (лatóv)” (Pi., trag. [lyr.]); also ‘lamenting, saď (S., E.
[lyr.]); denominative verb iά(w 'cry aloud (Theognost.).
•ETYM Elementary formation like iw, ioú, etc.; the noun arose from the interjection.
Cf. ►ióμwpoi, iάλɛµoç, also "Iwvɛs and ▸iw.
iaívw [v.] 'to (make) warm, delight, heal' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Aor. lavaι (Ion. iñvai), pass. ia vēñvai.
•DER On iŋdovéç. εúépoσúvé, ééеvμía, xapá 'joy, desire' (H.) see Latte, who reads
ndovais.
⚫ETYM In Skt., we find a yod-present iṣaṇyáti 'to urge on, incite' that might
correspond to laívw as *Hisn-ie/o-. The etymology has been doubted because of the
deviant meanings. If correct, laivw and iṣaṇyáti may be derivatives of an *r/n-stem

=== page 310 ===

572
iáλεμos
(cf. Ved. işán-i, and perhaps also iɛpós), which was based on primary íṣ-yati, iṣ-ṇāti
'bring in quick movement' (with the root-noun is- 'refreshment, comfort'). See van
Brock 1961: 255ff. and Ramat Sprache 8 (1962): 4ff. Comprehensive suggestion by
García Ramón; see on iάoμai. Cf. ► iɛpóç.
iáλɛuos [m.] lament, dirge' (trag. [lyr.], Theoc.), 'tedious, dull person', also adjectival
'slow' (Hell.; cf. below). <PG>
VAR inλεμoç (on the distribution Björck 1950: 16).
•DER laλɛµwdns 'pitiful' (H., Phot., Suid.), laλɛµéw, -íw (in-) [v.] ‘to lament' (Hdn.,
Call.) together with inλεµíστpiα [f.] 'wailing woman' (A. Cho. 424, lyr.).
•ETYM It is improbable that this expressive word derives from the interjection ►in.
The suffix is found only in кoάλεμoc, which may have influenced the later meaning
of láλɛμoç. Zacher IF 18 Anz.: 86 assumes Thraco-Phrygian origin for láλεµoç. Since
кoáλεμoç is probably Pre-Greek, the same must hold for the present word (Fur.: 151,
317).
iáλw [v.] 'to send forth, stretch out' (Il.; also Th. 5, 77, Dor.); intr. 'flee' (Hes. Th.
269). IE? *sel- 'set in movement'>>
•VAR Aor. iñλat, Dor. (Sophr.) iäλai, fut. laλw (εл- Аг. Nu. 1299).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. εл- (ε-, see below), лро-.
•DER'Iάλμεvoç PN (II.), see below.
•ETYM A reduplicated yod-present *i-aλ-w; the reduplication has spread to the non-
presentic forms. If the aspiration in iάλλw (Hdn. Gr. 1, 539; also in quaλɛîç [Ar. V.
1348] and qɩαλoчµεv [Ar. Pax 432] for (ε)лαλ-) is original, iáλλw could belong to
►äλλoμa 'jump' (Leumann 1950: 80 n. 45). The connection with Skt. íyarti [pres.]
'to incite, set in motion' (Frisk) is impossible, as this continues *hi-her-ti. Narten
MSS 26 (1969): 77ff. connects it with Skt. sísarti 'stretch out, draw out', and separates
sisrate [3pl.med.] 'to flow, run'. Within Sanskrit, this root is synchronically distinct
from sar- 'to stretch out', but probably etymologically related. Further cognates of
this root are ToB salāte [pret.med.] ‘jumped', ToB salamo, ToA salat ‘flying' (see
LIV² s.v. 1.*sel- sich losschnellen, springen'). Connection of Lat. saliō ‘jump' seems
probable, but see the objections in De Vaan 2008 s.v.
auẞos [m.] name of a metrical foot and a verse, ‘iambus, mocking verse' (Archil.,
Hdt., Att.). <PG➤
•COMP Е.g. iаμẞо-лоóç (Arist.), xwλ-iaußos 'choliambus' (Demetr. Eloc.; cf. Risch IF
59 (1949): 284f.).
•DER lauẞiкóç iambic, mocking' (Arist., D. H.), laußwdns 'mocking' (Philostr.),
iaμẞúλos mocking poet' (Hdn.), iaµßúкη name of an instrument (Eup., H.; cf.
oaµßúkn), iaµßɛĩoç ‘iambic”, iaµßɛïov [n.] ‘iambic verse' (Att.). Denominative verbs:
iaµßí¶w, -tá¶w ‘speak, mock in iambi' (Gorg., Arist.) with iaµßioτns 'mocking poet'
(Ath.).
⚫ETYM Like Sıúpaμẞos and еpíaµẞoç, außoç is doubtless of Pre-Greek origin. See
Hester Lingua 13 (1965): 354f. For the formation, cf. ►Оvµẞoç. See ▸dīšúpaµßoç.
"auvoɩ lower land, humid meadow'. →ɛiaµɛvý..
iáveɩvoc [adj.] 'violet-colored' (Str., Plin., Aq., Sm.). <<GR>
573
•DER Backformation ľavoç [m.], -ov [n.] = ïov (H., Theognost.).
⚫ETYM Properly 'violet-flowered', from äveɩvos (see ►ävoc) and determinative first
member "ov 'violet'. Differently on lavoç, Deroy Glotta 35 (1956): 193.
lavoyλéqapos [adj.] 'with violet-blue eyes' (Alcm. 13, 69, of girls). <GR>
•VAR Cf. lavoкpη
violet' (H.).
öу τò έлкрáνσμα 'head-dress that resembles a
⚫ETYM Extended from io-yλéqapos (Pi.) after comparable compounds with kuavo-
(e.g. -xaíτns, etc.). The word кuavoßλéqapos first occurs in AP 5, 60; note also
àyavo-ßλéqapos (Ibyc.). With different second member: lavócpvs (PMich. 11, 13),
modelled on кvavóopus. On iavoyλέqapos, see Taillardat RPh. 79 (1953): 131ff. and
Treu 1955: 265 and 285. Not related to έavós.
iáoμa [v.] 'to heal' (II.). <?>
•VAR Aor. iáσaσaɩ, Ion. iñσaσðaι (II.), pass. iáðŋv, iýðŋv (IA), fut. láσoµai, iýσoµai
(Od.), perf. "aμα (Ev. Marc. 5, 29).
DIAL Myc. i-ja-te.
•COMP Rarely with prefix (εε-, εл-).
●DER 1. ľaμa, Ion. "ŋua [n.] 'medicine, healing' (IA) together with iaµatikós (Cyran.);
2. laσis healing' (IA) together with láσчoç ‘curable' (Arbenz 1933: 71f.), probably
also laσiwvn plant-name, 'Convolvulus sepium (?)' (Thphr., Plin.); Strömberg 1940:
81 because of its medical use (though this is unknown); 3. 'Iaow [f.] name of a healing
goddess (Ar., Herod.), from laσıç or from the aor., cf. Kaλvyw. 4. iaτηp 'physician'
(Il., Cypr., with intɛipa [adj., f.] ‘healing' (Marc. Sid.), iατηpov 'medicine, healing'
(medic., Q. S.); 5. láτwp ‘id.' (Alcm., Thess. inscr.) with laτopía 'medical art' (B., S.
[lyr.]); 6. iaτýs ‘id.' (LXX) with laτкóç (Str.) 7. iaτpós ‘id.' (II.), with laτpikós, ǹ
iatpiký (téxvn) ‘art of healing' (IA), láτpια [f.] ‘midwife' (Alex.), latpívŋ ‘id.'
(imperial period), laτpɛúw ‘heal' (Hp.) together with laτpɛía, -ɛĩov, látpevois, -evµa,
-evtikóç; 8. ľatpa [n.pl.] 'payment for healing' (Epidauros, Herod.). More on laτnp,
iáτwp, iaτpóç in Fraenkel 1910-1912 (index); on the difference laτúp : láτwp see
Benveniste 1948: 46. Here also'Iάowv?
⚫ETYM Schwyzer: 681 and 683 explains iάoμai as a transformation of earlier athematic
*ǎ-μa (seen in 'Iα-μεvóv M 139, 193 and in Cypr. ijaoba?). Doubts on the
connection with laívw in Schulze 1892: 381f. On the quantity of the i- (i- in Hom.,
later also ĭ-), see Schulze l.c. and Sommer 1905: 9f. See also van Brock 1961: 9ff.
García Ramón 1986: 497-515 derives the verb from the root *h,eis- (Pok. 509) 'move
strongly, drive on, comfort'. The root may have the form *hi(e)sh₂-. The root-final
*h₂ is apparent from iváw and Skt. iṣṇāti, while he supposes that the long i spread
from the reduplicated athematic present *hi-h,ish₂-, which gives PGr. *īhamai. He
also connects laivw from *h,is(h₂)n-ie/o-, like Skt. iṣanyáti.
->
'Iάovɛs → "Iwvεç.
IáoveG
'Iαлετóç [m.] Iapetos (Il.). <PG(S)►
VAR I metrically lengthened.

=== page 311 ===

574
iánTW
•ETYM The name was connected with the biblical Japheth, see e.g. West 1978: 134.
The idea seems most improbable for a god thrown into Tartaros by Zeus. Further,
the name is often connected with láлτw as “the one thrown off" (℗ 479, Hes.), with
'Пαлετovídηs (Нes.).
The interpretation seems improbable to me (it is a mere guess). It seems obvious
that the name, of a pre-Olympian god, is Pre-Greek. A suffix -ɛτoç is found in Pre-
Greek, Pre-Greek: Suffixes 42. Fur.: 1552 mentions a demon "Aσßετós (which he
compares with "Aƒƒεçoç. ó Аxillɛùç έv 'Hлεípu̟ H.); it is also found in TNs, cf.
Taúуeτov, Taλεtóv.
iáлtw [v.] ‘to shoot, send on, hurt, wound (Il.). <?►
•VAR Aor. iάyai (Il.), pass. iácoŋ (Theoc.), fut. iáyw (A.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. лpo-.
•DER Оn ►Пαлεtóç, see s.v.
•ETYM For the range of meanings, see ẞáλλw. There is no reason (as per Schulze
1892: 168³, Bechtel 1914 s.v. Ïëτoµat, LSJ) to assume two different words with the
respective meanings 'shoot' and 'hurt' (this is still maintained in the Supplement to
LSJ; the meanings given there are rather different from those in Frisk and DELG).
The reduplication was generalized from the present to the other tenses. Etymology
unclear. Often combined with *л, at 'squeeze, oppress', but this is
semantically difficult. It is uncertain whether the original present of láчa is
contained in láσσεv (cod. -ɛïv). еvμoñσðαι, Sáкvɛv 'to be angry, bite' (H.); one
could assume *hi-h₂ek"-, but again the meanings are difficult to combine.
iaσióvn plant name. → iάoμai.
=>
iάoun [f.] ‘jessamine, Jasminum officinale' (Aët.). <LW Iran.>>
•DER láσuvov [n.] ‘oil of jasmine', also laσμ-éλatov [n.] (Aët.).
•ETYM From Iranian; cf. MP yāsman, MoP yāsaman, yāsam, yāsamīn, etc.
ľaσnıç, -ɩdos [f.] ‘jasper' (Pl., Thphr.), also the plant-name (Dsc.), probably from the
color (Strömberg 1940: 26). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Acc. -LV.
•COMP As a first member in laσл-aɣáτŋs ‘jasper-like agate' (Aët., Plin.) et al.
•DER laσлi w 'be like jasper' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Oriental LW. Cf. Hebr. jāšpe, Akk. jašpu name of a stone; originally Egyptian?
See Lewy 1895: 56 and E. Masson 1967: 65f.
iaów [v.] 'to sleep, rest, spend the night' (II.). <IE *h₂eu-, h₂u-es- 'pass the night'>
•VAR Rare aor. lañσai (λ 261, Call.) and fut. lavow (Lyc.).
•COMP Also with έv-, лαρ-, εл-.
●DER lavеµóç ‘sleeping-place, bed', μn-avеµós sheep fold' (Lyc.), ¿viavėµóç ‘abode'
(EM; uncertain Call. Fr. 127); doubtful ľavoç. кoíτη ‘beď (H.).
•ETYM Reduplicated present (secondary lañσaɩ, iaúʊw) of the root seen in að-λıç, av-
λn, and ȧéσкw, from *h₂i-h₂eus-ié/o-. Peters 1980a: 34ff. (followed by Hackstein 1995:
220f., LIV² 293 s.v. *h₂ues-) reconstructs *hus-ié/o-, and thinks that the reduplication
is a secondary addition within Greek. This suggestion must be rejected, since the
{
iBiokoc
575
development of *h₂u- to Greek av- is unacceptable. There is also unreduplicated avai
(Nic. Th. 263, 283). Cf. the related aorist äɛσa < *hu-es-. The glosses ǎies and
aléσkovτo in H. are unclear; see Latte. See ▸aúλý.
iáxw [v.] 'to cry aloud, shout, shriek, resound, roar' (Il.). <IE *u(e)h₂g"- 'cry, sound'>
•VAR Aor. laxñσai (h. Cer. 20), pres. also laxéw with fut. laxnow (trag.); perf. ptc.
àµιaxvīα (B 316), to which ȧuqiáxw (Orph., Q. S.).
•COMP Also лερɩ-, εл-άxw (Hom.), ȧvτ-taxéw (Theoc., A. R.).
TEPL-,
•DER laxń 'cry, noise' (Il.; cf. Porzig 1942: 228) with avíaxoч; iáxημa 'id.' (E. [lyr.],
AP; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 186); see ➤ "Iaкxoç.
•ETYM From reduplicated *FI-Fάx-w (on the digamma, see Chantraine 1942: 139f.). A
thematic aorist *Ƒaxεïv, *Ƒáxε is supposed for Homeric taxε, which functions as an
aorist (see Chantraine 1942: 393 and Schwyzer: 748). The present may derive from
the aor. laxñσat or (less probably) be denominative from laxη. On the
unreduplicated ptc.. ȧuqi-(F)axvia, see Schwyzer: 767 and Chantraine 1933: 1, 421.
The long scansion of the a, which occurs once in a while in the tragedians, may
result from expressive gemination of the velar (cf. ► ”Iaкxos), but influence of the
present axéw has also been assumed. See also nxn.
iẞávn [f.] 'water-bucket'. <?>>
●VAR Also "ẞavov [n.]. LSJ does not give a form *ẞavos (DELG s.v. ¡ßávn). ïßdns
'cock, plug in a ship's bottom',
•ETYM Usually connected with εïßw; doubts in Bq. The word seems to live on in
Tsakon. quávi bucket to scoop water'; see Kukules Apx. 'Eqp. 27: 61ff., as well as on
quáç. See also Fur.: 220f. - The word "ßdŋs can hardly be IE. Fur.: 307 compares Hitt.
impa 'load'. Though it has to do with emptying a ship, it is not evident that it belongs
to the word iẞávn.
.
ïßŋvoɩ [m.pl.] • [σopoí, Añkal, dotpákivai, kißwtoí] ɛöðvµoɩ ‘urns, cases, earthenware,
box; cheerful' (H.). <?►
•VAR There is also ßèvos. ïñoµový ‘satiety' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown.
ißŋpís, -ídos [f.] plant-name, 'pepperwort, Lepidium' (Damocr. apud Gal., Aët. apud
Ps.-Dsc.). <?>
⚫ETYM Probably named after its native environment, 'Iẞηpía (Strömberg 1940: 124f.).
Alessio Studi etruschi 15 (1941): 205ff. thinks the name is Aegean, like ►iẞíσkoç,
iẞávn, et al.
"ẞic [f.] 'ibis, Egyptian bird' (Hdt., Ar.). <LW Eg.>>
•DER iẞiov 'chapel where ibises live' (pap.).
•ETYM Eg. hb, hīb; see Roeder in PW s.v. Ibis 813.
iẞíoкoç [m.] a kind of mallow, 'marsh mallow = àλBaía' (see on ►àλaívw). <PG(V)►
•VAR V.l. in Ps.-Dsc. 3, 146, Erot. Also ẞíσкoç (Gal., Aët.).
==
ETYM Formed like other plant names, e.g. synonymous àλеíσкoç (Chantraine 1933:
407). Further unclear; it seems to be identical with Lat. (h)ibiscum (also eb-, -us),

=== page 312 ===

576
iú
which is attested earlier (since Verg.). Given the form of the suffix, it was perhaps
taken from there, in which case Celtic origin is possible (WH s.v.). Cf. also on
►iẞŋpis. Fur.: 355 thinks the word comes from Greek and is of Pre-Greek origin,
where ɛ/ is frequent.
iẞú [pcl.] Interjection or adverb (H., Phot. from Telecl.). <ONOM; LW Anat.>
•DER ¡ßúɛɩ• túлτε, þoα ‘strikes; cries' with deverbal iẞús. εvqnuía, otiyuý
'auspiciousness; spot' (H.). A velar suffix is shown by the glosses in H.: "ẞuč. opvéov
Eidos, kai iẞıç kind of bird, also an ibis' (see Thompson 1895 s.v.), iẞúкη. εvoηuía
and iẞuкτnp 'singer of a march-song on Crete' (cod. iẞηк-). Perhaps also "Iẞukoç PN
(Radermacher Glotta 16 (1928): 135f.). The gloss iẞukivñoai. ¿ñevóŋuñoai, Boñoai
'sing praises to; cry' (H.; iẞuкηvíσal EM) is a cross with Buкivíčw, Bukavičw (Eust.;
see ẞuкávη). Details in Kock ad Telecl. 58. With a dental suffix ißudñvaç⋅ toùÇ
εúôŋµoñvtaç ‘using auspicious words' (H.), cf. the sound-imitating nouns in -doç,
like kéλadoç, etc.
•ETYM Onomatopoeic word; Lydian (iẞú) or Ionic (ißuкivýσavtεs), acc. to H. It
was also used as a cry of surprise, which explains why it is glossed with τò лoλÙ кai
μεya by H. It is unclear how the meanings túлtεv and στy should be understood.
Cf. Búčw and iúw.
ïydıç, -ews [f.] ‘mortar' (Sol., Com., AP). <PG?►
•VAR Also "ydn [f.] (Hdn. Gr., Hp.).
•DER Diminutive lydíov (Gp., Paul. Aeg.), verbal noun ydɩσµa (as if from *¡ydí\w ‘to
pound the mortar') name of a dance (EM, Suid.; cf. Lawler ClassJourn 43 (1948): 34).
•ETYM The form is reminiscent of Míydos ‘mortar' (Güntert 1914: 158). As a technical
term, it is most probably a loan. It can hardly belong to ►ľkτap, ►ε, nor to ▸aixun.
Fur.: 351 believes it is of Pre-Greek origin (note -yd-); on the variation λ-/zero, see
Fur.: 392, 7.
"yкpos [m.] • ¿yкέqaλos ‘brain' (H.); also Hdn. < GR>
•ETYM For *yкpos with 1 < & before nasal (see Schwyzer: 275), a hypostasis of έv and
the zero grade of кápā, кápη ‘head'; cf. "yкapos and άкapós. See Nussbaum 1986:
index.
tyvŋtes [pl.] ‘avėɩyɛvɛïç, native' (A. D., H.), also as a name of the old inhabitants of
Rhodes (Simmias 11, H.). <IE *genh,- 'procreate'>>
•ETYM From *v-yvŋ-tɛç, a compound of έv and the root *ģenh,- in ►yiyvoµaɩ (cf.
yvnσtos from *yvŋ-τó- < *ģnh,-tó-) with a suffix -T-.
iyvún [f.] 'hollow of the knee, ham' (Il.). <IE *genu- ‘knee'➤
•VAR ¡yvúa (Arist.), also forms pointing to *lyvús (iyvúσɩ h. Merc. 152, ¡yvúwv, -úv
Arist.).
⚫ETYM A hypostasis *èv-yvú-n 'place in the knee'. The stem lyvúc was formed after
išúç, oσquç and other body-parts in -úç. See Solmsen 1909: 214f. See yóvu.
iyvús 'dust'. →iKVÚÇ.
idavós [adj.] ‘fair, good-looking' (Call. Fr. 535, H.). <IE *uid- ‘see’▷
idios
•COMP Idavó-Xpoos 'with beautiful colors' (Ep. Alex.).
577
•ETYM Primary derivative of idɛïv; cf. лðavós, ikavós et al. (Chantraine 1933: 196f.).
'18ápvaç[m.].óèktoquiag, oi 8è Báppapov. oi 8è qiávtewg ővoqua·oi 8è nóuv tis
Kapias εival 'Idáρvηy, кai àëò τaútŋs toùs µávtɛiç λéуɛσðaι 'eunuch; barbarian;
name of a diviner; name of a city of Karikos, whence the name of the diviners' (H.).
<LW Anat.➤
•ETYM From the Carian town'Idάpvn; further details in Maaß RhM 74 (1925): 432ff.
idé [conj.] 'and' (Il.), ‘(and) then' (Cypr.). <IE *h₁(e)i- ‘he, that'➤
•ETYM Perhaps from the deictic pronoun *hi- and Sé ‘and, but'. Details in Schwyzer
1950: 566f. Cf. ►ŋdé.
idéa [f.] ‘appearance, form', whence in philosophical terminology ‘idea, prototype,
category' (IA). <IE *u(e)id- 'see'>
•VAR Ion. -én.
•ETYM Verbal abstract from ▶idɛiv. For the formation, cf. ►ảλéa ‘warmth of the sun'
et al. in Chantraine 1933: 91. On the meaning, see Brommer 1940, Wersdörfer 1940:
43ff., Gillespie Class. Quart. 6 (1912): 179ff., and Baldry Class. Quart. 31 (1937): 141ff.
idɛiv [v.aor.] ‘behold, recognize' (II.). <IE *ueid- ‘see, know'>
•VAR Ind. Eldov (idov).
•COMP Often with prefix, àл-, εio-, kat-, ovv-, etc.
•DER On idéa, idavós, see s.vv. Also idaviкòç кóσμоç 'realm of ideas' (Ti. Locr.
97d). Note that i̟óç = óößαλµóç (H., e.g. s.v. žлλλ) does not derive from IE
*uid-lo- (von Blumenthal 1930: 36), but was created from ëëààoç· лapáσtpaßos,
¡\λónteiv. otpaẞív et al. Cf. on ►¡λλóç.
•ETYM Old thematic root aorist, formally identical with Arm. egit and Skt. ávidat 'he
found', IE *h,e-uid-e-t. Cf. also Lat. videō. The perfect was olda ‘I know'. As a
present, Greek used suppletive ópáw; cf. Kölligan 2007: 274-285. See also
► ¡vбáλλoμα, ►εμα, εdoç.
Sn [f.] 'wood, wooded hill' (Hdt., Theoc.). <PG▷
•VAR Dor. (Theoc.) "da.
•DER As a TN ”Iεŋ wooded hill in western Mysia (II.) and on Crete (D. P., Paus.);
thence "I8n0εv, 'Idaïos (II.).
⚫ETYM Pre-Greek word without further etymology.
ïdɩoç [adj.] 'own, private' (Od.). <IE *sue- reflexive pronoun>>
•VAR Dor. Fídios, Arg. hídioç.
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. idio-yevýs ‘of one's own kinď (Pl. Plt. 265e;
opposite Koɩvo-yevńs), Hell.
•DER 1. ¡dɩwτηs [m.] 'private, layman, uneducated man' (IA; on the formation
Chantraine 1933: 311) with the fem. idɩñtis (Hell.); thence idɩwτiкós 'belonging to an
idɩwtηs, common, ordinary, vulgar, vile, uneducated' (IA; Chantraine 1956a: 120 and
123) and idɩwτɛúw ‘act or live on one's own, be uneducated or without esteem' with
iSiwtɛia 'private life, uneducatedness' (Att.); also idɩwtiw pronounce in a special

=== page 313 ===

578
iSiw
=
way' (Eust.). 2. idiótns, -ntos [f.] ‘specific character, peculiarity' (Pl., X.). 3. idɩkós :
dios (late). 4. idɩóoμaι [v.] 'to make one's own, appropriate' (Pl.) with idiwμa
'specific character, pecularity' (Hell.), iSiwots 'isolation, appropriation' (Pl., Plu.). 5.
idiά w 'be peculiar, live on one's own' (Arist.) with idiaστýç, idiaσµóç (late).
ETYM As is shown by Arg. Fhεdiεστaç = idióτηs (cf. кndeo-týc, El. teλeo-ta), ïdioc
goes back to original *Ƒhεdios, derived from the reflexive Ƒhε = ε (IE *sue) (on ε > ɩ,
see Schwyzer: 256). A different etymology connects it with Skt. ví ‘separate', in which
case Arg. hídios would have its aspiration after εavτoŨ, εкαστoç, etc. However, an
equivalent of Skt. ví is not found elsewhere in Greek.
idíw [v.] 'to sweat (v 204, Hp., com.). <IE *sueid- 'sweat'>
•VAR Aor. idiσaι (Arist., Thphr.).
•COMP Rarely with prefixes èε-, ȧv-.
●DER [doç [n.] 'sweat' (Hp. Coac. 105), 'heat' (Hes. Sc. 397, Emp.) with idáλчoç
'causing sweat' (Hes. Op. 415; after εidoç ɛidáλчoç, Arbenz 1933: 29); ȧv-18-ití
'without sweat' (Pl. Lg. 718e).
⚫ETYM The glosses εldoç· кαчµα and ǹεïðîç· лvĩуos (H.) point to an s-stem *Fεidoç
from IE *sueid-os-, beside *suoido- [m.] in Skt. svéda-, OHG sweiz 'sweat'. The form
iSoc shows Ionic psilosis and itacistic notation (favored by i8pwc). The verb idíw =
ɛidíw (after кηкíw etc.) represents older *εidw = Skt. svédate 'sweats', IE *sueid-. Cf.
Rix 1985: 339-43. Other derivations are Skt. svídyati = OHG swizzit ‘id.' < IE *suid-ie-
ti, and a ske/o-present in Latvian and Iranian (Leumann IF 58 (1941): 120).
"dμwv ‘knowing'. →olda.
iбvóoμα [v.] 'to bend oneself, double oneself up' (Hp.). <?>
⚫VAR Aor. iSvweñvai (Hom.), act. idvów (Hdn. Gr. 1, 451).
•ETYM From a verbal adjective *[F]id-vós 'curved'? The comparison with Skt. vedá-
[m.] bundle of grass' is uncertain; see Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 581. WH s.v. compares
Lat. vidulus 'twined basket'; doubtful. The lemma *ueid- (Pok. 1124) should be
dismantled. Cf. ►ïtvç, ►ɛiµádɛç; also ►ĭpıç and ►olvoç.
"Spis 'expert'. →oida.
iSpów [v.] 'to make sit down, settle, establish, found (Il.). ◄IE? *sed- 'sit' >>
•VAR Aor. iSpuσaɩ, pass. idpuvēñvai (Ã 78, H 56), perf. pass. ïdpñµai (A.), Act. ïdpvka
(Arist.).
●COMP Often with prefix, especially кað- (whence again έy-kaðɩɗpúw et al.).
●DER “Spu̟µa 'what has been established or founded: statue, temple' (IA), ïSpoi
'founding, settlement' (Hp., Pl., Str., Plu.).
⚫ETYM Frisk followed Schwyzer in positing a noun *ipu-, which would ultimately
reflect a derivative in -r- (comparing Spa) of the root *sed- in ►ëчoµai, ►ï¿w. The i-
was explained as from "(w or as a reduced grade of ε, but the latter is impossible. See
now Manessy-Guitton 1970, who departs from s০d- with reduced grade; Meier-
Brügger 2000: 90f. posits *s°d-wr-y-.
idpwc, -wτoç [m., f.] 'sweat', also metaph. of other moisture (II.). <IE *sueid- 'sweat'>
:
1
iépāč, -āros
579
•VAR Epic dat. -, acc. -w (cf. below).
•COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. iSpwão-лoɩéw (Arist.), Svσ-ídpwę ‘with bad sweat,
having difficulty sweating' (Thphr.), also with transition to a thematic stem, e.g. кáð-
Spoç 'covered with sweat' (LXX).
•DER Diminutive idрóτov (Hp.); i8pwεs 'sweaty' (B.), idpwdns 'accompanied by
sweating' (Hp.), idpшτiкóç 'sudorific' (Hp., Thphr.); idpwa (?) pl. 'smallpox' (Hp.
Aph. 3, 21; reading uncertain) together with iSpw-τápia, -tídes ‘id.' (medic.; cf.
Strömberg 1944: 102); iSpálov 'sweat-towel' (pap.); iSpoσúval [pl.] ‘efforts that cause
sweat' (poet. inscr. Phrygia, imperial period). Denominative verbs: idpww 'sweat'
(II.) together with "Spwois 'sweating' (late) and idpwτpiα [pl.] ‘sudorifics' (Paul.
Aeg.); iSpóττw 'id.' (Gal.).
•ETYM Gr. iSpós corresponds to Arm. k'irtn 'sweat', which goes back to an r-stem
*suid-r-. This formation is also found in Latv. sviêdri [pl.], Alb. dirsë 'sweat'. This r-
stem was combined in Greek with a stem in -ōs-, which is found in Lat. sūdor, if
from *suoidōs. Like yέλwç, pwç, et al., idpwç was later transformed into a stem in
--. The old s-stem is still seen in epic idpw [acc.] (perhaps to be read as -óa;
Chantraine 1942: 54), perhaps also in iSp✪ [dat.], if for -oi (doubtful; see Chantraine
1942: 211), and in several derivatives: idpw-w, idpwɛis (*-os-uent-; see Ruijgh Lingua
28 (1971): 173), iSpárov. On the absence of the digamma in Hom., cf. ►żuéw (other
explanations are no better; Chantraine 1942: 156). Cf. ►idíw.
idvĩoɩ [m.pl.] idñoɩ 'witnesses' (µáptupes, ovviotopɛç, Lex Solon. apud Ar. Fr. 222,
Paus. Gr. fr. 151, H.), also oi τàç Qoviкàç Síкaç кρívovτɛç 'who are in charge of
murder trials' (H.). <IE *ueid- 'know'>
⚫ETYM For *Fiduĩo = Lacon., etc. ►ẞidu(1)ot; see also Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930):
91f.
чεμα [v.] 'to move forward, hasten, be eager, desire' (Il.). <IE *uei(H)- 'move towards,
go for, desire'>>>
•VAR Aor. (E)εíoato, fut. ►ɛïσopai.
⚫ETYM The form *Ƒĺεμα (on the digamma, see Chantraine 1942: 142), as a middle of
ŋµɩ, was taken at an early stage as an old athematic formation (e.g., Chantraine 1942:
293). The word belongs to the widespread group of Skt. véti, 3pl. vyánti ‘to pursue,
drive', Lith. výti, 1sg. vejù ‘hunt, pursue', and perhaps also Lat. vis 'you want' (Meiser
1998: 224), in-vi-tus 'unwilling'. Cf. Ruijgh Lingua 28 (1971): 170f. Harðarson 1993b:
159ff, assumes a reduplicated *ui-uih,-entoi, which was contracted to *uijentoi, from
which a stem *uïie- was abstracted. The aspiration was taken from in. Cf. further
►iwкń (unclear -K-), as well as iέpa (appurtenance unclear), ►'s (possible),
► ołµoç (certainly) and ► lótŋs (unclear).
iépāž, -āкoç [m.] 'hawk, falcon' (Alcm. 28, E., Ar., Arist.); also a name of a fish (Epich.
68; Strömberg 1943: 113f.). <IE? *ueiH- 'pursue' or PG?>
•VAR Also pη, -ŋкos (epic Ion. since Il.).
•COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. iɛpako-ẞooкós falconer' (pap.).
•DER Diminutive iɛpaкíσkos (Ar.); iɛpaкídiov, -ádiov 'statuette of a hawk' (Delos IIª;
on the mg. Chantraine 1933: 70), iɛpaкɛïov ‘hawk-temple' (pap. IIª), iɛpakɩdɛús

=== page 314 ===

580
iɛpós
'young hawk' (Eust.; like åɛt-idɛúç et al.; Boßhardt 1942: 78f.); iɛpaкápios 'falconer'
(Cod. Cat. Astr.); iɛpαкiτηs name of a stone, after its color (Plin., Gal.), iɛpáкiov, also
-íα, -ɩáç, -ĭτɩç plant-name, 'hawk-weed, Hieracium' (Ps.-Dsc.; on the unclear naming
motive Strömberg 1940: 118). iɛpák-eios, -wdŋs 'hawk-like' (late).
⚫ETYM Though "pη in Hom. shows no digamma (Chantraine 1942: 156), the glosses
ẞɛipakɛç iέpakɛç and ßɛɩpáкŋ. ǹ ápлaкtiкý (H.) point to an original *Fīpā, with
-āк- as in several other animal names. Ebel KZ 4 (1855): 164f. started from an
adjective (or noun) *Ƒipoc, which he connected with (F)íεμa. The secondary form
tépa would then be folk-etymological based on iɛpóç. Possible but uncertain;
alternatively, the suffix -ãк- could point to Pre-Greek origin.
iɛpóç [adj.] “holy”, “dedicated to a god, divine', also used in a glorifying way: ‘glorious,
excellent, strong, quick, etc.' (II.). <IE *ish,ro- 'holy'>
•VAR Dor. and NWGr. iapós, Ion. poet. ipóc, Aeol. Ĭpoç. Substantivized: iɛpóv [n.]
'consecrated area, temple' (post-Hom.), iɛpá [n.pl.], rarely sing. 'votive offering,
(animal) sacrifice' (II.).
•DIAL Myc. i-je-ro, i-je-re-u, i-je-re-ja, i-je-ro-wo-ko /(h)iero-worgos/.
•COMP As a first member in many compounds, not mentioned here.
•DER Dialectal forms are often not mentioned separately: 1. iɛpɛús (Il.), Arc. Cypr.
iɛpns, Ion. also iέpɛws (hardly taken from ȧpxiépɛws, Sommer 1948: 129) [m.] 'who
performs sacrifices (tà iɛpá), sacrificer, priest' (on mg. and spread Kretschmer
Glotta 18 (1930): 81f.). From iɛpɛúc: a) several feminines (cf. on Baoiλɛúç): iépɛia (II.),
Cypr. iɛpnƑija, Ion. iɛpéŋ, -ñ; iɛpŋïç (Megar.), iépɩσσa (pap. IIª); b) the nouns iɛpɛía
'priestly office' (Thyateira; cf. Bechtel 1921, 1: 311), iɛpεïov, -nïov 'sacrificial animal'
(Il.), iɛp(ε)woúvη ‘priestly office' (IA) with iɛp(ε) wouvos 'priestly' (Hell.); c) the
adjective iɛpɛutikóç ‘priestly' (pap.); d) the denominatives iɛpɛúw [v.] ‘to offer,
consecrate' (II.) with iépɛvois (sch.) and iɛɛúσчµos (Plu. 2, 729d, besides úσчoç;
Arbenz 1933: 94), or from iɛpós, iɛpá; iɛpɛwoµaι, iɛpɛwσασðaι [v.] 'to be priest'
(Hell.). 2. iɛpólas = iɛpɛús (S. Fr. 57; uncertain; on the formation see Chantraine
1933: 238). 3. iɛpīτν· каеαрμоб бɛoµévηy, iкétɩv (H.: A. Fr. 93). 4. iɛpατiкóç 'priestly,
hieratic' (Pl. Plt. 290d, Arist.; cf. also iɛpaτɛúw, iɛpaτɛíα below). 5. “Iɛpuç PN
(Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 220). 6. Several denominative verbs: a) iɛpɛúw; b)
iɛpάoμa 'to care for the victims (iɛpá)' (Hdt., Th.); c) iɛpá\w ‘id.' (Ion. islands),
Boeot. iapɛláddw, probably from iapɛía; d) iɛpów 'to consecrate' (Att., Locr., etc.)
togehter with iέpwµa 'consecration' (Cret., Epid., etc.), iɛpwτós (Thess.); e) iɛpíšw =
Kalaípw 'cleanse' (H.) (see ȧyvíτŋs) with iɛpioτns 'who cares for the iɛpa' and
iɛpioμós 'holy service' (Hell.); f) iɛpaτɛúw 'be priest' with iɛpatɛía, iɛpáτevµa,
iɛpatɛiov; iɛpitεúw 'id.'; iɛpwτɛúw 'id.' with iɛpwτɛía; all dialectical, Hell.; on the
formation Schwyzer: 732, Solmsen Glotta 1 (1909): 80.
=
⚫ETYM The different meanings and the formal variation induced many scholars to
split iɛpós into two or even in three words. Thus, a separate Ƒiɛpóç ‘rapid, quick’
(whence iέpa 'hawk', s.v.) was assumed because of the long anlaut in iɛpòv ixеúv II
407, iapòç öpvɩs (Alcm. Fr. 26), and iɛpòs öpvis (AP 7, 171). This length can easily be
explained as metrical lengthening. In the meaning 'strong, forceful', however, iɛpós
would be identical with Skt. işirá- ‘strong, active'. A third iɛpós 'holy' would have
}
1
581
connections with Italic and Germanic words like Osc. aisusis 'sacrifiis', Palign. aisis,
U erus 'dis', OHG ēra 'honor'. Duchesne-Guillemin 1937: 333ff. supported the old
comparison with Skt. iṣirá- by pointing to the agreement between iɛpòv μévos and
Skt. iṣiréna mánasā [ins.]. See R. Schmitt 1967: 111-114 on this correspondence.
Further literature: Wülfing von Martitz Glotta 38 (1960): 272-307 and Wülfing von
Martitz Glotta 39 (1961): 24-43; Locher 1963. Formally, the Greek dialects show three
different forms: iεpóc, iapóc, ipóc. Ramat Sprache 8 (1962): 4-28 connects it with Skt.
iṣṇāti ‘set in movement', which means that the root contained a laryngeal. García
Ramón 1992b: 183-205 assumed a pre-form *hish₂-ro- because of the connection with
►iváw. He also assumed that the laryngeal was lost between *s and r. Lesbian [poç,
then, continues the regular pre-form *isro-, while Dor. iapóc and Att. (etc.) iɛpós
replaced the suffix with -apo- or -ɛpo-. On the meaning (against äyɩoç, ȧyvóç), see
Nilsson 1941(1): 61ff.; also, Bolkestein 1936, Palmer Eranos 53 (1955): 4ff., and
Defradas RPh. 81 (1955): 208ff.
=>
"w 'sit down'. ⇒εšoµ‚αɩ.
=
in ⇒ inɩos.
iŋłɛvéovoa [adj.] · ¿knenλŋyµévŋ, kaì áлopoñσa; iaƉevei• diaropeï ¿ní tivi kaki. Kwoi
'driven away, looked away from; be in difficulty in some harm (Cos)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unexplained. DELG suggests that the glosses may be corrupt. Fraenkel KZ 77
(1961): 188 proposes to change in-, la- into the privative particles vη-, vä-, based on
comparison with ɛv0ɛvéw 'be strong'.
inïoc [adj.] epithet of Apollo, who is invoked by the call in (лaiwv) or i½ïɛ лaιáv. Also
said of ẞoá, yóoç, кáµατoι, ‘accompanied by laments' (Pi., trag. [lyr.], A. R.).
<ONOM
•DER Here also iάw 'cry' (Theognost.).
⚫ETYM From the interjection in (A., Ar., Call.), to which iñτɛ (Pi. P. 6, 120) was taken
to be a plural (Wackernagel Phil. 95 (1943): 184), but the latter is rather a form of
inu. The same holds for in (Call., H.Ap. 103); see Strunk Glotta 38 (1960): 79-82.
¿½ïoç has been incorrectly derived from iŋµɩ by the ancients (“åïò τñs àqéoews kai
tožɛíaç” H.). Cf. ► ñïɛ and ► Eʊioç.
ïŋuɩ [v.] ‘to send (away), let go, throw, hurl, etc.' (Il.); details on the inflexion in
Schwyzer: 686f., 741, 770, 775. ◄IE *(H)ieh,- ‘throw'>
•VAR Aor. čŋka, ñêa, inf. čµɛvaɩ, ɛlvaɩ, med. ɛïµŋy (ǹkáµŋv), inf. čσðaɩ, pass. ¿ïðŋv,
εОñvaɩ, fut. ŋow (Il.); perf. med. ɛlμal, act. εlкα (Att.), εwka (Hell.).
DIAL Myc. (jo-)i-je-si /(hō) hi-en-si/; i-je-to /ietoi/
•COMP Mostly (in some forms exclusively) prefixed, e.g. ȧv-, ȧq-, έq-, кað-, лρo-,
ouv-, úq-, etc., in several mgs.
•DER Many derivatives, almost only from the prefixed forms: 1. nua 'throwing, throw
(of a javelin)' (Y 891), ñµwv ‘throwing (a javelin)' (¥ 886); кáðŋua, Hell. -ɛµɑ
(Schwyzer: 523) ‘collar' (Antiph., LXX); µεеýµwv ‘negligent' with -μoσúvé (Hom.),
ouvnuwv 'companion' (A. R.) with -μoσúvη 'treaty, companionship' (Il.). 2. ►έoµós
'swarm (of bees)'. 3. ǎv-, äq-, -, -, кáð-ɛσiç, etc. (IA; εous only Pl. Cra. 411d, 420a

=== page 315 ===

582
idayevńs
as an artificial formation, EM 469, 49) together with àéσчoç et al. (Arist.); 4.
έvvɛσíaɩ ‘advice' (Il.), ¿ɛoíŋ ‘sending out' (Hom.), ávɛoía leaving off (Cratin.); on
the formation see εvvεσíat. 5. Evετη 'clasp, needle' (II.). 6. ¿v-, ȧó-, кαð-ɛτýp (Hp.,
Hell.) together with -ετηpioç, etc.; kałɛtηpíšw, -ioµóç (medic.). 7. ►¿qétai, ► ¿qetµý;
άpéτηs 'sender, hurler' (Plb.). 8. Ouvετós 'sensible' (Pi., IA, beside σúvεσç
'comprehension'), äv-, äq-, кáð-ετoç, etc.; ȧv-, éρo-etikós (: äv-, épó-εσɩç; X., Arist.,
Hell.).
ETYM The pairs ëОηкα : Lat. fēcī and ëŋka: Lat. iēci point to an archaic formation
with k-extension. On the original distribution of these forms, see Untermann 1993:
461-8. Latin innovated the present iació 'to throw', whereas Greek kept the old
reduplicated athematic present. Further cognates are found in Anatolian: Old Hitt.
pe-iezzi 'sends away', u-iezzi 'sends hither' contain prefixes and preserve the old
meaning. It has also been connected with Hitt. ie/a- 'to do, make' (LIV² s.v. *Hieh,-),
but see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. ie/a-for objections to this view. For the initial laryngeal,
cf. Peters Die Sprache 22 (1976): 157-161, who shows that Aristophanes consistently
has iŋµ < *Hi-Hieh,-mi. Kortlandt thinks that PIE *h, originated from an Indo-
Uralic velar phoneme, and that the *k alternating with *h, in ë¤ŋкα (and perhaps
Enka) might be a remnant of the old situation.
iðayɛvýs [adj.] ‘born here, born in lawful matrimony' (§ 203, Ion., A., Arist.). <IE
*idhh₂e 'here'>
•VAR Secondary layevns (Schwyzer: 448).
⚫ETYM Formation like aveɩ-yɛvnç: a bahuvrīhi of yévoç, possibly with an inherited
adverbial first member 10a- = Skt. ihá, Prākr. idha, Av. ida ‘here', as well as Lat. ibī
'there'. The same pronominal stem *hi- is found in Cypr. ►"v, and the same suffix in
ěv-a.
=>
iapós [adj.] 'cheerful, bright'. •VAR iðαívw = εvqpovw (Hsch.). → aiðńp.
Oματα [n.pl.] 'steps'. →ɛīµ.
=
i0oviç [?] name of a fish (BCH 60, 28; Boeot., IIª). <PG?►
⚫ETYM Thought to be a mistake for ioulis (see "oulos), but adding a 0 by mistake is
not very probable. Fur. 391 argues for a 'regular' variation in Pre-Greek words.
Opis → Opis.
=
Ovuẞos [m.] name of a bacchic song with dance; one who performs this dance (Poll.
4, 104, H., Phot.). <PG▷
•ETYM Formation like "aµßoç, dɩðúpaµßoç, etc., and like these probably a loanword
from the substrate.
iðvëtíwv [adj.] ‘flying straight (of a lance)' (Ø 169, verse-final). <IE *pet- ‘fly, fall' or
*pieh₂->
•VAR Only accus. µελíŋv ¡ðvлτíшva.
•ETYM Analyzed as a compound of 10ús and the zero grade of лετочμal, with ending
after the nouns in -wv, -íwv (кατалúуwν, oúpavíшv, кvλλолобíwv), for older *10ú-
iKÉTNS
583
л-los (type óµóyvios). Hackstein Glotta 70 (1992): 154-167 proposed a meaning
'striking straight' with zero grade *pih₂- and analogical л-; sее ►лTĤσOW.
iOús [adj.] 'straight, jusť (Il.). ◄?►
•VAR Also adverbial 'straightforward' (Il.), beside rare iОú, 10źwç; cf. on ►ɛúðúç.
Superl. iеúvτaτα (Hom.), perhaps after iðúvw.
•COMP Often as a first member (see Strömberg 1946: 156), e.g. i0v-wpín, for which see
►εvvwpía; also i0v-ẞéλaa epithet of Artemis 'whose arrows go straight' (ZPE 88,
1991, 70 l. 11, Iª).
•DER 1. 10úç [f.] 'straight direction, course, enterprise', only accus. άv' 10úv, лãσav έл
10úv, etc. (Hom.); explanation in Schwyzer: 463, Frisk Eranos 43 (1945): 221; 2. ¡ðútns
[f.] ‘id.' (Aret.). Denominative verbs: 1. iðúw, aor. iðõσαɩ (also with εлɩ-) ‘go straight,
strive, aim (for)' (Il.); 2. iðúvw, aor. ¿ðõvaɩ, pass. i☹uvēñvai (also with prefixes dɩ-, ¿‹-,
επ-, кατ-1еúvw, etc.) 'straighten, direct, steer, lead' (Il.) together with i0uvτnp 'who
steers, leader' (Theoc., A. R.), fem. iОúvτɛƖpα (Orph. A. 352), adj. -τpios 'steering,
leading' (S. Ichn. 73); also iúvτwp (Orph.), iúvτηs (H.) 'id.'; deverbal "Ovva =
Euva (Chios V-IV).
ETYM The comparison with Skt. sadhú- 'straight, just', sádhati, sädhnoti 'reach the
goal' is obsolete, as the zero grade in sídhyati ‘id.' and ptc. siddha- is due to the
vocalization of a laryngeal, viz. *seHdh- beside *sHdh-. Therefore, earlier
reconstructions with a long diphthong can now be forgotten. A Cret. fem. ɛiɛĩa
confirms the existence of a form *ɛißúç (De Lamberterie 1990: 287f.). Willi KZ 114
(2001): 117-146 proposes connection of both iOús and ɛv0úc with *Hieudh-, for which
root he assumes a basic meaning 'make right' (*Hieu-dh-?). Cf. further εiap.
iкavós 'enough'. ⇒ïкw.
=
"кɛλos [adj.] ‘comparable, resembling' (Il.). ◄IE *ueik- ‘resemble’▷
•VAR Also εKEλoç (after ɛikwv, εiká(w, etc.; originally perhaps for metrically
lengthened Kελoç, Leumann 1950: 306 A. 76)
●COMP As a second member in 0ɛo-(ε)íkɛλoç ‘god-like' (Il.) et al., and in έ´ɩ-, époʊ-
(ε)íkɛλoç 'resembling' (Hom., Hdt.) from εл-, лроσ-έolкa; cf. also on ÉMELKÝÇ.
•DER IKEλów 'make identical' (AP).
•ETYM Old formation on the basis of the zero grade of the root of ►čoɩka, with a
suffix -λo- (Chantraine 1933: 243). Cf. ά-ïкýs beside ά-ɛikýs.
iкéτηs [m.] 'suppliant', also attributive 'seeking refuge' (Il.). <IE *seik- 'reach, grasp the
hand'>
•VAR Fem. ikétɩç, -180s (Hdt.).
•DER 1. iкéσios ‘of the iкέτηs, etc.', epithet of Zeus as a protector of suppliants (trag.,
etc.); 2. iкɛσía 'request for protection, supplication' (E., Aeschin.); 3. iкɛtησioç =
ikέσɩoç (v 213), after poσios, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 41f.; Fraenkel 1912: 151f.);
beside this iкTηpios from iкτηp (see (kw); a cross is iкετηpíα (scil. páßdoc),
properly 'the twig (of laurel or olive) of the suppliants', 'request' (IA), ikεtñpεç =
iкéτaι (S. OT 185; lyr.), iketŋpiç [f.] (Orph. H.); reversed ˝кτηs (Lyc. 763); 4. ikɛtikóç
= ikέσios (Ph., Aq.). 5. 'Ikétvλλoç PN (Att. inscr.; Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 219 and
}

=== page 316 ===

584
225). Denominative iкɛτɛúш [v.] 'to be a suppliant' (II.) together with iкɛτɛíα (Att.),
also iкéτεvμa (Th.), ikétɛvous (Suid.) = ikɛσía; ikɛtevtikós (sch.).
•ETYM From ►ïkw, ikéσðaɩ. Several details on the formation in Fraenkel 1910-1912
(see index); on the meaning, see van Herten 1934.
ikµaµévos → aixµý.
iêµáç, -ádoç [f.] ‘wetness, moisture, secretion' (P 392, Hdt.). <IE *seik- 'pour out' (not
from *seik"-)►
•COMP As a second member (transformed to an o-stem) äv-, v-, dúσ-iêµos (Hp.,
Arist.), as a first member in iкμó-ßwλov [n.] 'moist clump of earth' (Dsc.; on the ntr.
gender cf. on Sióσrupov).
●DER ikµadwdns (H. s.v. ïêµεvos), ikµatwdŋs (Ach. Tat; after aчμαtwdŋc) ‘moisť';
also iêµaños (A. R.), êµoç (Call.), ikµwdŋs (sch.), ikµaléos (Hp., Opp.); iкµaívw
‘moisten' (A. R.). kµap. votíç ‘moisture' (H.). Here also the back-formation "kuŋ
'duckweed, Lemna minor' (Thphr.; different on the formation Strömberg 1940:113);
also 'Iкμάo τ 57? Speculations by Lacroix Collection Latomus 28 (1957): 309ff.
⚫ETYM Formation in -ád- like vɩás et al. (Schwyzer: 507f., Chantraine 1933: 349ff.)
from an μ-stem. A primary aorist was perhaps retained in §α. Sɩñßñσaɩ ‘filter' (H.).
Outside Greek, there are several relatives, e.g. Skt. siñcáti 'pour out' (nasal present),
OHG sihan 'strain, filter', OCS súčati ‘urinate' (iterative). The reconstruction *seik™-
in Pokorny and LIV² does not work for Greek, nor for Germanic. The root is *seik-,
with a pure
velar.
iêµáw ‘winnow'. →λikµiáw.
кµɛvoç [adj.] epithet of oupos 'wind' (A 479, Od.). <IE? *seik- ‘reach, grasp'>
ETYM Old athem. ptc. like ǎpμεvos, ǎσμεvoç, etc. (Schwyzer: 524, Chantraine 1942:
384), probably derived from "кw, ikɛσðaɩ ‘arrive', but the proper meaning is unclear.
Perhaps “mit dem man gut vorwärts kommt” (Schwyzer), thus "with which one
advances well", i.e. 'favorable'. Others (Schulze 1892: 493, Bechtel 1914, et al.) suggest
that the word meant 'desired' (comparing Lat. flatus optati), and connect it with
лpo-Ïкtηç, iкεtεúw, etc. They derive this group from a verb 'ask' (Go. aihtron; also,
aiкáče кαλɛi H.) instead of from "кw 'come'. Casevits Eos 83 (1995): 27-32 proposes
that the word belongs to čoɩka ‘resemble', *Ƒíkµεvos meaning 'qui convient, adapté
à', but I find the assumed development of meaning unconvincing.
iкvéoμаι 'come'.
-
"kw.
iкvúç, -úoç [f.] ‘dust, ashes' (Cyrene). <PG(V) ►
•VAR Cf. "KVUOV. Kovíaν, σμñµа 'dust, soap' (H.) and lyvús 'id.' (Hp. Nat. Mul. 88).
⚫ETYM Like previous authors, Fur.: 118 compares Myvúc 'smoke, soot', but without
referring to his p. 391 on the alternation λ/zero. The variation (also к/Y) proves a
Pre-Greek word. Fur. further compares λyvús with ảλɩoyέw ‘pollute' (298), which is
formally difficult.
"кpia [n.pl.] 'half deck' (Hom., B.), ‘platform, stage, benches' (Hdt., com., inscr., etc.,
cf. Beare Class. Rev. 53 (1939): 54f.); sing. 'mast' (Eust. 1533, 31 [?]). <?>
iktivog
•VAR Probably - (Ar. Th. 395, Cratin. 323).
585
⚫COMP iкριO-лOιέw [v.] 'to build a platform' (Hell. inscг.); εл-íкpιov [n.] 'yard-arm' (ε
254, 318, A. R.), properly a hypostasis 'what is on the "кpia'; as an adjective perhaps in
Nic. Th. 198.
•DER Denominative verb iкptów ‘to provide with "кpia, construct a platform' (Att.
inscr., D. C.), whence iкpíwμa 'support, framework' and iкpiwτñpes [pl.] ‘uprights,
flooring of a deck' (Att. inscr.; often written hik-).
⚫ETYM Technical term without etymology. On the meaning, see also Martin RPh. 83
(1957):72-81.
iкταívw="кταp 1.
кταp 1 [adv., prep.] ‘near, near by' (Hes., Alcm., A.), with gen. or dat. <PG?(V)►
•VAR ÏKap. ¿YYÚç, kaì nap' ólíyov toñ ¿qɩêvɛĩσðaɩ ‘near; to reach at' (H.).
•ETYM Acc. to Schwyzer: 630f., the same formation is found in äqap, ►εiap, etc.
Like these, "кTap could be a verbal noun in -(t)ap. It has been connected with Lat.
īcō 'to strike', comparing the Skt. adverbs ghanám and taḍítas 'near', from han- 'beat'
and taḍ- 'strike', for the semantics. The expression úлερiктαívovтo лódɛç (¼ 3) is
unclear in meaning; Aristarchus interpreted it as äуav έлáλλovτo; this is often
connected with кταρ. A v.l. úлoaкταívovтo is glossed with ετpεµov by (H.); see
Bechtel 1914 s.v. iêtaívw. If the variant in H. is reliable, the word is Pre-Greek (kt/ k).
See уdiç, aixµń.
iкταp 2 [n.] 'genital parts of a woman' (Hp. Mul. 2, 174). ◄PG?►
•ETYM Correction for ñлаp, acc. to Erot. and Gal. 19, 105. Most probably a Pre-Greek
word; see Fur.: 1347.
"кταp 3 [m.] name of a small worthless fish (Call. Fr. 38, Eust.). <PG>
•VAR Iкτápa (H.), also кτápα. ixеuç ẞраxúτερоç лáνтшν 'shortest fish of all' (H.),
ȧкτápа (sch. Opp. H. 1, 762).
•ETYM See Thompson 1947 s.v. Given the variants, the word is clearly Pre-Greek
(Fur.: 376f.).
"кtɛpoç [m.] ‘jaundice' (Hp.), often plur.; also name of a bird, Lat. galgulus (Plin.),
named after its color. <PG?>
●DER İKTEPIKÓS, İktepwdŋs ‘jaundiced, regarding jaundice' (medic.), also iktepiwdns
'id.' (Hp., Dsc.; after iкTεpiάw) and iкτɛpóɛç ‘id.' (Nic.); iкtεpīτç [f.] 'rosemary' (Ps.-
Dsc.; used as a remedy, see Strömberg 1944: 29), -ítηs ‘id.' (gloss.); iкTεpíaç name of a
yellow stone (Plin.; like кαлvíαç et al., Chantraine 1933: 94). Denominative verbs
iкτερóομαι (Hp., Gal.), iкTɛpiάw (M. Ant., S. E.) [v.] 'to suffer from jaundice'.
ETYM The formation is reminiscent of üdɛpoç, Xoλépa (Chantraine 1933: 228), but
further details are unknown. The connection with кtɩç, iкtīvos is defended by
Grošelj Živa Ant. 6 (1956): 236f., who assumes a color root iк- 'yellow, green', and
compares iкμaλéov. Xλwpóv, vypóv ‘green, moistť' (H.). This remains speculative.
Acc. to Fur: 321, the group -кT- points to Pre-Greek origin.
iкTĪVOS [m.] 'kite' (IA). <IE *tkiH-in- 'kite'>>
iкtīvos

=== page 317 ===

586
ÏKTIS, -ISOS
VAR Also (secondary?) iкtív (-íc), gen. -ivos (com., Paus.), after deλqiç acc. to
Thompson 1895 s.v.
ETYM For the formation, exivoç has been compared (Chantraine 1933: 204), but
iкtivoç is probably inherited and identical with Arm. c'in 'id.'. Skt. śyená- [m.] ‘eagle,
falcon', Av. saēna- name of a big bird of prey are rather deviant. For the
reconstruction *tkiH-in-, see Beekes in Kortlandt 2003: 200. See ►űktɛpos.
IKTIG, -180ç [f.] 'marten' (Ar., Arist.). <?>
•VAR Also iкTíç, gen. -ídoç.
•DER KTÍDEOS (iktídɛos Suid.) in ktɩdéŋ kuvéŋ ‘helmet of marten skin' (K 335, 458),
with apocope of the first vowel; artificial back-formation кτíç in H. s.v. кtɩdéα.
ETYM No etymology; see on кTεPOÇ.
"кw [V.] 'to come, reach' (Hom., Pi. Dor. Arc.). <IE *seik- ‘reach, grasp (with the
hand)'>
●VAR iкávw (epic), iêvéoµαɩ (Od., almost only prefixed, see below), with aor. iкéσðaɩ,
fut. чoμα (Il.); epic aor. ε, ov (Chantraine 1942: 418f., Leumann Glotta 32 (1953):
213), perf. Iyua (Od.).
●COMP Often with prefix (in prose almost exclusively), especially ȧq-, åл- (whence
εiσ-, σvv-aq-iкvεoμai, etc.), also ε-, -, кα-, etc. (see Fraenkel Glotta 35 (1956):
88ff.).
•DER 1. Ïžıç (išıç) ‘passage, direction' (Hp.); from ȧqıкvéoµai, etc. äqığıç ‘arrivaľ (IA),
rarely čo-, káe-, dí-ığıç; 2. ïktwp, iktýp = ikétŋs, ikéσɩoç, also лpoσ-, άq-íкtwp ‘id.'
àð-íktwp
(trag.) together with iкτńpios (S.); 3. ►ikéτŋs together with ikɛtɛúw, etc.; beside it
(лρоσ-)кτηs (Hell. poetry); 4. лóе-к-εç [pl.] 'лpoσńкovτεç, relatives' (Tegea Vª); 5.
ikavós 'enough' (IA prose), cf. леаvóç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 196f.); see also
▶ikuevog, ▶ apoi.
⚫ETYM The verb кw has been compared, but the point of the comparison is
unclear. The forms in long vowel (iкw, lyμaι) may be secondary morphological
creations of Greek. All other forms have short vocalism, including iкavós and other
nominal formations. The full grade was thought to occur in ►évεiкαɩ 'carry off, but
this is now connected with vεykɛĩv; in any case, it was semantically deviant from
ïkw.
An acceptable connection is provided by Lith. siékiu, siékti 'reach with the hand,
swear', at-siékiu 'reach with the hand', ToB pres. siknam, subj. saikam 'set foot', for
which IE *seik- is reconstructed. See LIV² s.v. *seik- ‘erreichen', where the form U
pru-sikurent 'confirm' is also adduced, but this is uncertain. The Lithuanian acute
accent is unexplained under this reconstruction, however.
=>
iNáspa, ï入aog, ilapós, News → [入áokoual.
iλáσкoμaι [v.] 'to propitiate, appease, reconcile', intr. perf. and aor. pass. 'to be
merciful' (II.). <IE *selh₂- 'reconcile'>
•VAR Rarely auαι (h. Hom. 19, 48; 21, 5; inf. Daσða Orph. A. 944; on the quantity of
the anlaut see below), iλάovτai (B 550, iλáɛσaι A. R. 2, 847); aor. ilάo(o)aσðaɩ (II.),
iλážaσða (Delph., A. R.), pass. i̇laoеñvai (LXX); fut. ¡λáσ(σ)oµai (Pl., Orac. apud
!
i入áoKozial
587
Paus. 8, 42, 6), iλážoµαι (A. R.); Aeol. perf. ipv. \\ãēɩ (gramm., B. 10, 8), plur.
λλǎtɛ (Call. Fr. 121); besides iăɩ, Năτε (Theoc., A. R.), ɩ (y 380, л 184), cf.
below; subj. iλńкyoɩ (§ 365), opt. Dýkoι, etc. (h. Ap. 165, AP, Alciphr.).
COMP Also with prefix, especially εε-.
•DER έžíλασiç, (-)iaσµó (LXX), ilaoía (inscr. imperial period), (¿‹-)îaσµa
‘appeasement, expiatory sacrifice' (LXX), ilάσчoç ‘appeasing' (M. Ant.; after
iáoчμoç, etc., Arbenz 1933: 93), ilaστηpios ‘appeasing', -tov 'propitiatory gift' (LXX,
pap.), also analogical Datηpiov (Chron. Lind.), ilaστýs ‘appeaser' (Aq., Thd.) with
λαστIкóç (Corn.).
Older formations: 1. Waos (epic, Arc.; on the quantity of the a see below), news
(Att., also Ion.), iɛos (Cret. since IIIª, also Hdt.), hiλēƑōɩ [dat.] (Lacon., IG 5(1), 1562
[VI-V³]), aos (Aeol., gramm.) 'merciful, benevolent'; Arc. 'appeased';
denominative verb iλaóoμai (MAMA 1, 230), iλɛãµaι, ilɛóoµaι (A. Supp. 117 [lyr.],
Pl.) 'to appease', together with iλéwois (Plu.), iλewtηpiov (Phot., Suid.). 2. ¡λapós
'cheerful, glad', also = news (Ar., X.) together with iλapóτns, ¡lapia, ¡lapów, -púvw,
-pɛúoµaι (Hell.); Lat. loan hilarus, -is. 3. ¡\\áɛiç, -evtos (Alc.), ilãç, -ãvtos (Hdn.
Gr., H.), lengthened from iλaos, aos (cf. Schwyzer: 527). 4. iλáɛpα [f.], said of
pλó and σελývη (Emp.; on the varying quantity cf. below), also έλáɛpa (sch., Steph.
Byz.) and EAEPA (Kretschmer 1894: 208; see also Schulze 1933a: 716), innovated after
лíɛɩpα, кτɛάτɛɩpa, Aάɛpα, etc., see Chantraine 1933: 104, Schwyzer: 543.
•ETYM The Aeol. imperative λλaɩ, λλatɛ is decisive for the interpretation of these
forms, from older *he-hla-t'i, -te. They may therefore be analyzed as old perfect
forms, cf. τéτλαði, žσtaði, dɛídið. The length of the a in λãɩ (B. 10, 8) must bẹ
secondary; perhaps the Attic form was seen in εini. Dλews yívou be merciful' (H.),
which was remodelled after opávη01, etc., presumably because the reduplication was
no longer recognizable.
Another source of innovations was the reduplicated present iλáσкoμαι < *si-slh₂-
ske/o-, with short -ǎ- perhaps analogical after the s-aorist. The anlauting long vowel
was introduced into other forms: into the perf. subj. and opt. ¡λýkŋow, iλýkoɩ instead
of expected *εiλ-; perhaps also into iλă¤ɩ, -τε and Hom. ^ (cf. εiɩ H.).
The was further introduced into the aorist and future: iλáo(o)aobai, iλážaσal,
íláσσoμaι, iλážoμat; beside these, there is a short vowel in láσσɛɑɩ (A 147),
λaσσáμεvo (A 100), aμaι (h. Hom.; but "λaσa Orph.), iλάoμat, as well as in
iλapós and iλáɛipa (Emp. 85). Because the short ĭ- cannot be understood in terms of
ablaut, it may replace an older e-grade (in έλάɛpα, *ελaμαι, *ελapóç). The forms
Anfos, λews (secondary Dǎos) are from reduplicated *si-slh₂-yo-.
The discussion by Klingenschmitt MSS 28 (1970): 75-88 is fundamental, showing that
Arm. ałač'em 'to pray' < *slh₂-ske/o- is the closest cognate. The Greek form goes back
to *si-slh₂-ske/o-; the aorist would have been *selh₂-s-, but the beginning has taken
over the i-vocalism from the present. This explains the forms with short ĭ-. LIV² s.v.
*selh₂ and Clackson 1994: 173-4 are somewhat sceptical about this proposal. Lat.
sōlārī 'to comfort' is related too, but has an obscure lengthened grade sōlH- (see De
Vaan 2008 s.v.).

=== page 318 ===

588
an
"ŋ [f.] 'band, troop', especially a division of the Spartan youth; troop of horses = Lat.
turma (Pi., S., X.). <IE? *uel- 'turn, winď➤
•DIAL Dor. a.
•COMP As a first member in iλ-ápxns, also apxos (Hell.) together with iλapxέw, -ía,
Boeot. Fiλapxíw. H. has Betλápxaç as an explanation of ßελαpμоστáç (Tarent.).
•DER λadóv 'in squadron' (B 93, Hes. Op. 287, Hdt.), which was metrically easier
than *λnóv.
•ETYM The gloss illai. tážεiç, ovotрoqαí (H.) could point to original *ƑíƑλaɩ, and be
derived from "λλw ‘press together' < *u̟i-ul-e/o- (see ►ɛiλéw). If this is correct, iŋ
would show an unexpected reduction of the geminate with compositional
lengthening. Solmsen 1901: 227' departs from *Fíλ-vã, comparing лíλvaμα for the
vocalism. However, in the latter form, the is explained as an analogical schwa
secundum.
.
ia [n.pl.] μópia (dupa cod.) yuvaɩкɛia; ov· τò tñs yuvaikòs ¿qńßaɩov dŋλoi. kai
кóσμov yuvaιкεioν лαрà Kóоιç female private parts; the female pubes; a woman's
ornament (Kos)' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM In the last meaning, "Ata has been connected with ►ɛlλéw 2 ‘turn, wind', with
for a like perhaps in in. The Greek gloss may also be a loan from Lat. īlia, -ium
[n.pl.] 'the soft, the lower part of the body, intestines, womb' (cf. on ►ičúc).
=>
yos •VAR y}. →ɛïλɩyyoç, ɛÏλɩyĘ.
"Ioç [f.] 'Ilios, the city of Troy' (II.); tov only O 71, always in tragedy (E.). <LW
Anat.➤
ETYM In a treaty between the Hittite king Muwattali II (1290-72) and Alaksandu
(which must be Homer's Alexander) of Wilusa, Wilusiya, a small state in the far
north West of Anatolia. First considered by Kretschmer Glotta 13 (1924): 205-13, it
has in recent years been generally accepted that this refers to Schliemann's ruins. See
e.g. Latacz 2001: 98-119. There is no agreement on the interpretations of the Greek
form Fíos (as the -s- would normally have been preserved; so this form must come
from a variant without -s-). The F- is ascertained by Homer. On Troy see ▶Tpoin
(which originally only denoted the land).
=>
¡Más → ɛiλéw 2.
iós [adj.] 'squinting' (Ar., Sophr.). <IE? *uel- 'turn, wind', PG?>
•VAR Fem. íç. otpeßlý, dieotp¤µµévη 'twisted, distorted (H.). Note ós
óчеαλµóç (Poll. 2, 54).
=
•DER ¡Àλwdŋs ‘id.' and iλaívw (Hp.), ¡λλóïτw (com.), ¡\\í¼w (Suid.) [v.] ‘to squint,
look askance', also wous 'squinting' (Hp.) as if from *\\ów. PN 'Iλɛús (see
Boẞhardt 1942: 132).
•ETYM From λw 'turn, wind'? Or from Pre-Greek? See εiλéw 2.
Mw 1 'press together'. Elλéw 1.
Aw 2 'turn'. ⇒ɛiλéw 2.
1
Fiλois 'distress'. →ɛiλéw 1.
iquás,-ávTOG
589
iλúç, -úos [f.] ‘mud, slime, dregs, impurity' (Ion., Il., Arist.). <IE *(H)iHlu- ‘mud,
dark'>
•VAR The i- is long; on the length of the v see LSJ.
•DER ivwdns (Hp., Hell.), ivóɛç 'muddy' (A. R., Nic.); iλúwμa. ¿ppúлwµαi (H.).
Further iλúμaτα (Gal. 13, 45) as a cross with λúματα. Adjective iλú (cod. εiλú). μéλav
'black, dirty' (H.).
⚫ETYM Formation like åxλúç, etc. (see Schwyzer: 495), and identical with a Slavic
word for 'mud', e.g. OCS ilʊ, gen. ila (old u-stem); also in Latv. īls ‘very dark'.
quaλá [f.] heap of flour, abundance', glossed by H. with τò έлíμετpov twv ȧlɛúpwv.
Buyévvnia àdetpidoc. kaióànò twv àxÚpwv Xvoic. kai reprovdia the excess of
wheat-meal; surplus of a grinding woman; dust from the chaff; abundance'. <?>
•DER чuaλíç, -ídos [f.] 'yield (of flour), etc.', in H. = vóotos,8Úvails, Étukaptia,
údový, ánapxǹ twv yɩvoµέvwv ‘yield, quality, profit, enjoyment, first-fruits of that
which is produced'; thus Trypho apud Ath. 14, 618d (Doric word); also 'song of the
mill, ¿nµúos ¿½ (H., Poll.) and as an epithet of Demeter in Syracuse (Polem.
Hist. 39).
Adjective quáλoç, in H. = лoλúç, ikavós, vóσtiµoç 'much, sufficient, abundant', etc.,
also a month name in Hierapytna (SGDI 5040, 4).
⚫ETYM Popular terms of agriculture that rarely occur in literature. For the ending of
¡µaλiá, we should first compare àpµaλiá ‘distributed food, portion', áxvpµiá ‘heap of
chaff, quτaλiá 'plants in the garden', etc. On the other hand, quaλíç is reminiscent of
τpopaλis 'fresh cheese' and μoλußdic ‘clump of lead' (Chantraine 1933: 342ff.).
Frisk assumes a derivation in -μaλ- from the root seen in
doubtful, because ablaut *sēi- / si- does not exist. See on
'finest flour of wheat', see σεµídadıç.
чµavýОpŋ [f.] ‘well-rope' (Herod. 5, 11). <?►
new 'sieve'; extremely
apuaλiá. On Lat. simila
⚫ETYM Formation like кoλvμßηеpа (related to кoλvμµßáw), àλvdýеpα (to àλivdéw,
àλívdw), et al. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 373f.), which would presuppose a verb *iμaváw
(Bechtel 1921(3): 304) or *¡µaívw; see on ►quás (especially qµová).
¡µás, -ávtos [m.] leather strap', for drawing, lashing, etc., ‘thong' of a sandal, of a
door, etc.; as a term of construction, 'beam' (Il.; Delebecque 1951: 63, 187f.). <IE
*seh₂i-m(n) 'rope'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in quavɩ-ɛλíкtai [pl.] “pricker of tapes", name of the
Sophists in Democr. 150; ¡µavtελɩyµóç, name of a game (Poll. 9, 118); compounds of
¡µávτaç έλíσσɛiv, cf. Fraenkel 1910: 244.
•DER Diminutive чµávτov (Hp.), чµavτ-ápiov (Delos IIª, etc.), -ídiov (EM), -íσkoç
(Herod.); adjective чµávτvos ‘of ropes' (Hdt., Hp.), ¡µavτwdŋs ‘rope-like' (Pl., Dsc.,
Gal.); denominative verbs: 1. quáσow, aor. quáσat a) 'lash' (II.) together with iμáση
'lash, whip' (Il.); also µáσηs (perhaps cross with µáστi, cf. on μаíoμα); b)
'provide with quávtɛç, i.e. beams' only in quaσoia 'beams?' (IG 4, 823: 26 [Troezen
IV³]; see Fraenkel 1910: 149, Bechtel 1921, 2: 510). 2. чµáσкw 'thrash, wallop' (also 'to

=== page 319 ===

590
iquáTLOV
fetter' in Del.³ 409, 7? Cf. Brugmann IF 29 (1911-1912): 214). 3. įµavτów ‘provide with
чávτεç, i.e. bed-straps' in quavτwμévηy kλívηy (H. s.v. лvž‹ívηv>); thence iμávτwσiç
(LXX, Poll.), чuávτшµа 'hawser' (H.). Independent of quác, but cognate with it: 1.
¡µaños (sc. ¿dń), ¡µaïov (µéλoç, þoμa) 'song while scooping water' (Call., Tryphon,
Suid.) with quaadós (haplological for quaio-aodós) 'who sings an quaĩov' (Poll., H.);
2. чáw ‘to draw (water) with a rope (from a well)', also metaph. (Arist., Ath.),
usually áv-, кað-чáw (Ar., X.) together with quýp (kádoc, Delos IIª), quŋtýpios
(H., see iẞavaτpíç), àv-, kað-íµnois (Plu.); 3. ¡µová ‘well-rope' (com., Ph., Luc. et al.;
Scheller 1951: 75f.); 4. ►чµavýеpη ‘id.'.
⚫ETYM As a secondary formation in -vτ-, quáç presupposes a noun *iuā or *iμa 'rope',
which is also continued in quάw, quaños. An n-stem is continued by чμová and by
KAƉ-, KAT-чlovεvɛi. kaðiŋoɩ, kaðɩɛĩ ‘lets go' (H.), which probably derive from *iuwv.
Likewise, quavý pŋ may go back to *¼µávŋ (via *quaváw, or perhaps *quaívw; cf.
лλektávη, áptávŋ), or to *µa.
Note the variable quantity of the anlauting vowel: long in i̟µová, įµavýеpη, кaðчµáw,
but short in quaños, and most of the time also in quás (except 544, K 475 etc.; see
Schulze 1892: 181, 466¹) and its compounds and derivatives. This variation cannot go
back to old ablaut (as Frisk stated), but rather continues *sh₂i-, which gives a long
vowel after metathesis to *sih₂m-, and a short vowel without it; regarding the
conditioning, see Schrijver 1991: 519ff., who supposes that stressed *Hi resulted in the
long vowel.
The form *чuwv reconstructed above exactly matches a Germanic word for 'rope':
ON sími, OS simo [m.], and also Skt. sīmán- [m., f.] ‘skull, boundary' (although this
has a slightly deviant meaning), all from IE *sh₂i-mon-, sh₂i-men- (note that for Gm.,
*seh,i-m- is possible too). A suffix -m- is also found in Irish sim 'chain'.
The primary verb meaning 'to bind' is still found in Indo-Iranian, Baltic and Hittite,
e.g. Skt. syati < *sh₂-ie/o-, sináti < *si-neh₂-ti, ptc. sita- < *sh₂-to-, Lith. siēti, 1sg. sienu
<*sh₂ei-, Hitt. išḥai-'.
García Ramón Minos 29-30 (1994-1995): 335-346 connects Myc. a-ja-me-no-
/ai (haimeno-/ inlaid', with a semantic specialization from 'put on' < ‘attach, bind'.
чuάτov [n.] 'outer garment, dress, cloth', often plur. -ta (Att.). <IE *ues- 'clothe'>
•VAR Ion. ɛiµátiov (εatios inscr. Ceos), Dor. ǹµátiov (Cyrene IVª).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in quatio-лwληs 'cloth-seller' (Critias, pap.).
•DER Diminutive quaτídiov, -idápiov (Ar.) and denominative чµatíšw [v.] 'to clothe'
(pap., NT), whence qµatioµós (εiµ-) ‘clothing, wardrobe' (Thphr., Plb., inscr.).
•ETYM An informal diminutive of εчµа, Cret. ƑÃµа (see ►ëvvчµ), with early
transition of ε /e/ to i. See Wackernagel IF 25 (1909): 330.
=
=>
iμάw 'to draw with a rope'. quás.
.
{µßŋpis [?] • ¿yxeλvç. Mŋеvµvañoɩ ‘eel (Methymna)' (H.). ◄PG?►
⚫ETYM The ending is reminiscent of λɛßηpíç 'snake-skin' (Muller 1926: 30). Do we
therefore have to read чuẞηpíç?
The word resembles some Balto-Slavic words for ‘eel', e.g. Lith. ungurys, Ru. úgor'. A
pre-form IE *Heng"- has been reconstructed, with ε > before nasal (but this is not a
}
"
I'v
591
general rule in Greek) and Aeolic development of the labiovelar. No IE proto-form
can be reconstructed for these words. The ending, which is also seen in λɛßŋpíç,
rather points to a Pre-Greek word. On -mp-, see Pre-Greek: Suffixes. If one assumes
interchange initial λ-/zero as well as prenasalization, the words could be identical.
Note that ε/ is frequent in Pre-Greek. The relation to yxελuç, Lat. anguilla, etc. is
unclear.
L
*(F)чußw? [v.] 'to yoke, harness (horses)'? <?, PG?>
•VAR Aor. чµyaç Čɛúžas. Oɛttaloí ‘having yoked (Thess.)' (H.).
⚫DER" σяdwv ó Zúуios Poseidon the Yoke'; yчßávaι (= F-)· Čɛúyava (H.).
Bechtel 1921, 1: 206 adduces the Boeot. PN Ƒчллíðαç.
•ETYM Two hypotheses have been advanced: that the word is related to Lat. vinciō ‘to
wind around', vicia ‘vetch' with labiovelar auslaut (followed by LIV2 s.v. *uiek"-); or
to Go. bi-waibjan 'to wind around', etc. In both cases, the semantic connection does
not seem to be very strong. There seems no reason to connect the two glosses iyóv.
Sεσμwτηpιov 'prison' (but see also on Iлoc) and lyчóv. τòv кɩσσóv. <o>úptol. ivy'
(H.). Note that the gloss "Iμios has -μy-, although it is not an aorist. This could be a
Pre-Greek variant. See Latte on yчuẞával.
*чpos [m.] longing, yearning, love' (II.). ◄IE? *seh₂i-mr, *sh¸i-men- ‘bond’>
•COMP EQ-íμεpoç 'filled with yearning, lovely' (Hes., Archil., A.), quεpó-yɩoç 'with
lovely limbs' (B.).
•DER чµɛpóɛç longing, lovely' (Il.), ¼µɛpwdns ‘id.' (Callistr.); iµɛípw, -oµɑɩ [v.] (also
with έQ-) 'yearn, desire' (II.), together with quɛpτós ‘longed for, lovely' (since B 751).
•ETYM The old connection with Skt. iṣmá- ‘spring, (god of) love' (lex.), which
belongs to iccháti (< *h₂is-ské-ti) ‘to wish', may be semantically possible, but it leaves
the formation of the Greek word (secondary suffix -ero-?) unexplained. Another
proposal by Bally MSL 12 (1903): 321 assumed a reconstruction *si-smer-o-, and a
yod-present *si-smer-ie/o-, by comparison of Av. hi-šmarǝnt- 'well-conducted' to Skt.
smárati 'to remember' (< *smér-e-ti). As remarked by Weiss HSPh. 98 (1998): 47ff.,
the problem with these proposals is that they lead us to expect Aeolic *{µµεpos, while
we consistently find чµɛpos, ¡µéppw in Sappho and Alcaeus. Weiss convincingly
derives чuɛpos from *sh₂i- ‘to bind instead, as found in Skt. syáti, Hitt. išḥai-¹: he
reconstructs a heteroclitic *seh₂i-mr, *sh¸i-men-, with a suffix *-mer/n- also found in
τéкµap and ñµap (Weiss ibid.: 54 points to jμépa as a formal parallel for iμεpos); he
also compares aïuwv. This means that чquepos may originally have been a bond or
spell. See aчuova.
=
чová 'well-rope'. → ¡µáç.
iunataov → nantaivw.
v [pron.] · aúτýv, aútóv. Kúлpioi ‘her, him (Cypr.)' (H.). ◄IE *h,i- ‘he'➤
•ETYM Identical with OLat. im ‘eum', from the IE demonstrative *h,i- seen in Lat.
and Go. is, etc. See also ▶iva, and on uv, VLV.

=== page 320 ===

592
iva
ičóc
593
iva [adv., conj.] 'where, to where' (Hom., also IA); as a final conjunction 'that, in order
that, etc.' (Il.). ◄IE *hi- ‘he', etc.➤
⚫ETYM Origin unclear. For the ending, we may compare Skt. instrumentals like yéna,
téna 'by which, by thať, OHG hina (< *-nā), OIr. cen ‘on this side' (from IE *ki- in έ-
Kεi), etc. The stem i- is perhaps cognate with the IE relative *Hio- (see ►öc), or was
formed after interrogative *tíva. On the use, see Schwyzer 1950: 672ff. and Gonda
1956: 92, 126f., 141. See also Monteil 1963: 376-384 and Ruijgh Lingua 28 (1971): 171.
iváw [v.] 'to empty, purifу', also лроïεσða 'to be sent forth' acc. to H. s.v. ivãσðal. <IE?
*Hish₂-, *His-neh₂->
•VAR -άoµaɩ (also -έw, -ów gramm.), fut. med. ¿výσoµai (Hp.).
•COMP With prefix vлɛp-ɩváw ‘empty excessively, vehemently' (Hp. apud Erot.)
together with dñɛpívŋois (Hp. Loc. Hom.) and úлépɩvoç 'excessively emptied,
exhausted' (Hp. Epid. 6, 5, 15, Arist., Thphr.).
•DER ¿vηеµós ‘emptying, cleaning' (Hp. Loc. Hom.), "vŋσis ‘id.' (ibid., Pherecyd. Hist.
VI³). Uncertain εлváw (comm. Arist. VIP); on лεpívalo (-εoc), etc. s.v.
⚫ETYM Assuming that 'send forth' was the original meaning and that the i- was long,
iváw was compared by Meister KZ 32 (1893): 136ff. (cf Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916
2:3, 301 and Bechtel 1921(3): 304f.) with Skt. iṣṇāti 'to bring in quick movement', also
'to spurt out' (cf. on ►iaívw). This is followed by García Ramón 1986: 497-514, see on
►iáoμai. The reconstruction is taken over by LIV² s.v. *h,eish₂-.
ivбáloμai [v.] 'to appear, seem' (Il., Att.). <PG?>
•VAR Only present stem except ivdáλ¤ŋv (Lyc., Max.).
●DER ivdaλµós ‘appearance, image' (Hp.), ïvdaλµa ‘id.' (LXX).
•ETYM For the formation, one hypothesis has compared άyáλλoµai and posited a
noun *ívdaλov vel sim. Frisk states that it must eventually belong to ▶ idɛĩv, ► ɛldos,
comparing εdwλov for the λ-stem, and citing Chantraine 1942: 142 on the
digamma. The nasal is supposed to have spread from a nasal present, and is also
recognized in Skt. vindáti 'find' and in several Celtic forms, e.g. Olr. ro-finnadar
'finds out', and nouns like OIr. find 'white', Gaul. Vindo-(magus, -bona) < PCI.
*uindo-. However, note that these supposed cognates have a different meaning. The
conclusion of Indo-European origin is drawn too quickly. The formation in -al-
(and -aλµoç) is non-IE: for σxivdaλµós and ►óóðaλµós, this becomes evident
from their variants with σx-/ σк-, -ɩvd-/ -18-, and -aλ(a)µoç. Therefore, the word is
rather Pre-Greek. The apparent agreement in form and meaning with *ueid- is just
like that between óαλµós and *h,ek"-: such coincidences may be expected to
occur every now and then.
.
"vdovpos [m.] · àσлáλaž ‘mole³ (H.). <PG▷
•ETYM The similarity with Skt. undura- 'rat' is rather accidental; see Mayrhofer
KEWA s.v. (not mentioned in Mayrhofer EW Aia 3: 34f.). For the ending, we may
compare σkioupos 'squirrel', which must be a loan, perhaps from Pre-Greek.
ivıç [m., f.] 'son, daughter' (A., E. [lyr.], Lyc., Call., also Cypr. inscr.; cf. Leumann 1950:
27421). <ONOM?>>
•VAR Accus. -tv.
⚫ETYM Acc. to Walde Glotta 13 (1924): 127ff., it is from **v-yv-iç with Cypr. tv < εv
and assimilation to the nasal with compensatory lengthening like in yivoμat. This
would confirm the Achaean character of the word. OIr. ingen, Ogam inigena
'daughter' have also been compared, as well as vɛo-yv-óc 'newly born'. Alternatively,
we may compare the expressive forms "vvoç (ïvvηv· кóðηу þкρáv, ïvvovs. naidaç
H.), Byz. and MoGr. viví 'child, pupil' (older litt. in Frisk). See now Masson REGr. 88
(1975): 1-5.
"vvos 1 'child' (H.). •ETYM See on ►ĭvıç ‘son, daughter'.
ivvos 2 [m.] (young) mule', = yívvos (Arist.); more on the mg. in H. s.v. and Meister
KZ 32 (1893): 143ff., with a wrong etymology. ◄?►
•COMP As a second member probably in ►övivvos name of an animal.
•ETYM A foreign word without explanation, like yivvoç. Borrowed as Lat. hinnus,
with h-after hinnīre. Cf. on ►övoç.
=>
vtBog → EvtBov.
[m.] name of a worm that damages the vine (Alcm. 43). ◄PG?>
•VAR Gen. Ikóç.
•ETYM See Gil Fernández 1959: 115f. Probably related to "y as a substrate element.
aλoç [m.] ‘(castrated) he-goat' (A 105, AP; on the mg. see Maaß RhM 74 (1925):
464f.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. ¡oxaλwµévai dεdεpµατwµévai ‘skinned?' (H.), and loкλaɩ ai ɑïyɛɩaɩ
unλwτai 'goatskins' (H.).
•DER išaλñ [f.] ‘goatskin' (Hp. Fract. 29) with several orthographic variants: loάλn
(sch. Ar. Nu. 72), iτλŋ (Poll.), ittέλŋ (Poll.), ioσελŋ (Theogn.), iσσέλa, iσλñ,
iτеéλα (H.), etc.
•ETYM Older scholars like Solmsen and Bechtel considered the variations as evidence
for Anatolian origin. The word is Pre-Greek, acc. to Fur.: 129, 286, 349, 379, 393. The
form with "okλ- shows syncope of the a/ɛ; that with loxaλ-, metathesis. The variation
a/ɛ is well known in Pre-Greek words. I suggest that the word had *ikt' al- with a
palatalized as its second consonant. See Pre-Greek: 5.5, also Heubeck 1961: 66 and
80.
iós [m.] 'mistletoe, the birdlime prepared from it', metaph. of all kinds of sticky
substances (Hp., E., Ar., Arist., Thphr.). < EUR➤
•COMP As a first member e.g. in io-ßópos name of thrush, 'Turdus viscivorus'
(Arist.).
⚫DER Ižía 'misteltoe' (perhaps derived from ióç in the mg. 'birdlime', cf. Strömberg
1937: 114), also name of a thistle, 'Xαμαιλéwv λεvкóç, Atractylis gummifera' (in this
mg. also išívŋ [Thphr., Strömberg 1937: 86]), name of a disease: 'varicose vein'
(Arist., Thphr.), cf. Scheller 1951: 42; išias [m.] a thistle, 'xquiλév µéλaç,
Cardopatium corymbiferum' (Dsc.), išɩóɛiç ‘made of išias' (Nic.); išov ‘leaf of the
Xaµaiλéwv λɛvkóç' (Gal.); išódŋs ‘sticky' (Hp., Luc.). Denominative: 1. iɛúw 'catch

=== page 321 ===

594
ľúc, -vos
with birdlime' (Artem., Poll.); from there iɛvτnç birdcatcher' (LXX, Bion) together
with ɛutɩкóç, also ľɛvτýp (Man.), fem. -ɛúτpia (Plu.; Túxŋ išɛútpia = Fortuna
viscata); 2. išóoµat ‘be smeared with birdlime' (Thphr.).
•ETYM An old cultural word, identical with synonymous Lat. viscum (viscus). It has
been compared with Germanic and Slavic names for the cherry (also used for
preparing birdlime), e.g. OHG wihsela ‘morello', Ru. víšnja 'cherry'. DELG wonders
whether the word is IE, but given the structure, it is rather a European loanword.
išúç, -voç [f.] ‘waist, loins' (ε 231 = к 544, Hp., Hell. poetry). <PG(V)►
•DER Adverb ivóðɛv (Arat.); also išúa, -ŋ (EM).
•ETYM Formation like ỏσqús, vòdús, dɛλóúc, etc.; itúa was created after deλqúa,
iyvún, et al. (Schwyzer: 463). Etymological relation with Lat. ilia [pl.] 'side of the
body' is improbable. Fur.: 393 proposed to connect loxíov 'hip'; if correct, the word
is Pre-Greek because of the variation.
ióμwpot [pl.] epithet of the Apyεoɩ (A 242, E 479). <?►
•ETYM The explanation by the scholia as 'famous for their arrows' is incorrect,
because the i- is short (see ►ióç 2). The epithet åлελáwν áкópητol in the second.
part of the verse suggests connection with lá, in 'crying', as do the expressions Bonv
ȧyaеóç and vλakó-µwpoi (kúveç § 29, π 4). The sense of the second member has also
been unknown since antiquity; cf. Leumann 1950: 37 and 27218. On the second
member, which derives from *moh,-ro- 'great', see уxεσíμwpoç.
"ov [n.] 'violet' (Hom., Thphr.). <LW Medit.>>
•COMP Determinative compound Aɛukó-ïov = ľov λevкóv ‘stock, gillyflower' (Thphr.;
Risch IF 59 (1949): 257); often as a first member, e.g. io-dns 'violet-colored' (Il.; of
róvtos), io-otéqavos ‘crowned with violets' (h. Hom. 6, 18, Pi., Thgn.), ló-кoλлoç
'with violet bossom' (Sapph.; Treu 1955: 171); on io-Sveins see ▸ Svócpoc; on
►iáveɩvoç s.v.
•DER lóεiç 'violet-colored' = 'deep blue' (σidnpos Y 850, Báλaσσa Nic.); iwviá 'violet-
bed', also a plant name (Thphr.), after podwv-iá, Onµwv-iá (Scheller 1951: 70f.);
iovtītis [f.] plant name = ȧpiσtolóxεa (Dsc.; after kλŋµatītiç?, Redard 1949: 72).
•ETYM The gloss yía (for Fía). även ‘flowers' (H.) and the epic metrics confirm the
initial F- and the connection with Lat. viola. Both probably come from a
Mediterranean language; see WH s.v.
"ovos [m.] 'young, downy hair', usually ‘eruption on the face which accompanies the
first growth of the beard' (Hp., Arist., Phld.). <IE? *ui-uond¹-o- 'facial hair'>
•DER Lovewdns like ".' (Thphr., Gal.) and loveás [f.] 'hairy, beard-like', of a 'goat' (
50; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 354).
⚫ETYM May belong to a word for 'hair', etc., which appears in Celtic, Germanic and
Balto-Slavic: MIr. find 'hair', OHG wint-brawa 'eyelash' <IE *uend-o-; with a
different formation, MIr. fès 'hair', OPr. wanso [f.] 'the first beard', CS os
'moustache' (IE *uend-s-o- or *uond-s-o-). The Greek word would have to
represent a reduplicated formation *Fí-Ƒovoç. The words have been interpreted as
verbal nouns of IE *uend"- 'to wind'. For the meaning, cf. ►"oulos within Greek.
=
Topкoç 'roe, gazelle'. → Sopкáç.
iós 1 'one and the same'. → "a.
ióτns
iós 2 [m.] ‘arrow' (Il.), see Trümpy 1950: 67. ◄IE *(H)isu- ‘arrow'>
•VAR Plur. ioí, also lá (Y 68).
595
•COMP As a first member e.g. in io-Sóкoç 'receiving arrows', of qapέτpη (Hom.), -1
[f.] 'quiver' (A. R.); on ioxέaipa s.v.
•ETYM Compared with Skt. íṣu- [f., m.], Av. išu- ‘arrow' < *(H)isu-; Greek iós <
*ihwo must be a thematization of this word. Meier-Brügger MSS 49 (1988): 75-77
thinks that tá is the ntr.pl. of PGr. *ihu, and that lóc is a secondarily thematicized
singular derived from it.
iós 3 [m.] 'poison' (Pi., trag., Plu.). ◄IE *uiso- 'fluidity, slime, poison'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in lo-ẞópos 'eating poison' (Nic., Opp.).
⚫DER iwdns 'poisonous' (imperial period).
•ETYM Old word for 'poison', replaced in many languages by other (and in most
cases euphemistic) expressions, like Gr. pápμaкov, Lat. venēnum, German gift,
French poison, etc. Besides Greek, the word is still present in Tocharian, Indo-
Iranian and Italo-Celtic: ToA wäs, ToB wase 'poison, venom' < *uisó-, Skt. vis̟á- [n.],
Av. viša-, Lat. vīrus [n.], MIr. fí < IE *uïso-. Tocharian and Skt. clearly point to a
reconstruction *uiso-; the length in Latin, Irish and Greek should then be explained
as secondary. Matasović 2008 s.v. *wisu- assumes an old root noun nom. *ueis, gen.
*uis-os, which was levelled in various ways in the daughter languages. This could
explain the occurrence of athematic forms like Av. viš- ‘id.'. Szemerényi 1989: 91
argues that tóc underwent secondary lengthening in hiatus, whereas De Vaan apud
Matasović 2008 suggests a secondary formation *uis-io-. Forms with deviating
meaning are perhaps found in Skt. vis- 'faeces', Lat. vīrus in the meaning 'viscous
liquid, slime, sap', W gwyar 'blood'. For this reason, the present entry has been
identified with ▸lóc 4.
iós 4 [m.] ‘rusť on iron, 'verdigris' on copper, bronze (Thgn., Hp., Pl., Theoc., SIG
284, 15 [Chios IVª]). <?►
•DER iwdŋs 'rust-colored' (Hp., Thphr.).
⚫ETYM Given the varying meaning of IE *uis(o)- (see on tóc 3), the present word
has been identified with it. It could be due to different technical uses.
ióτŋs [f.] ‘will, decision' vel sim. (Hom), in Oɛwv ióτηtɩ, etc. On the use in Homer see
Krarup Class. et Med. 10 (1949): 13. <IE? *h₂eis- ‘wish'>
ā
•VAR Only dat. lótŋti (Hom., A. R.); lóτατι (Alc. à 309 LP, A. Pr. 558 [lyr.]), except
for lóτητα O 41.
•ETYM Etymology uncertain. There are two hypotheses: 1) related to Skt. iṣ- ‘to wish’
(pres. iccháti), either from *hiso-teh₂t- or *h₂isto-teht- from the ptc. *histó- = Skt.
iṣṭá- 'wished' (Chantraine 1933: 294); 2) to ïεμαι 'to hasten, desire', in which case we
would have to posit *Ƒió-τηs (or, with haplological shortening, *Flotó-tŋs from
*Fíoτos wishing' = Lat. (in-)vitus, for which see on εuai). However, чεμα has a
“ɛµaɩ
long i-. Improbable suggestion by Leumann 1950: 127ff., who explains tó™ηtɩ as from

=== page 322 ===

596
Lovλoc
a false split of Silotñti (-toc) ‘enmity' into dǹ ióτŋtɩ, -toç. The Boeot. PN εto-
Fíoτoç strongly speaks in favor of original *fiótŋtı.
"oulos [m.] 'down, first growth of the beard, etc.; corn sheaf; catkin'; also name of a
centipede-like worm (λ 319, A. Th. 534, Arist., Thphr.). ◄IE *uel- ‘turn, wind'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in lovλó-лεoç “with feet like an "ovλos", also of a ship,
i.e. 'with many rowers' (Lyc. 23).
●DER_lovλíç [f.] fishname ‘Coris iulis' (Arist.), because it resembles a centipede
(Strömberg 1943: 125; also Thompson 1947 s.v.), also called "ovλos (Eratosth.); 'Iovλw
[f.] "goddess of the corn sheaf", i.e. Demeter (Semus 19); thence the back-formation
Toulos 'song for Demeter' (ibid., Eratosth.), also кaλλíoulos (for кaλλ-íovλoç,
Semus); lovλwdns like a centipede' (Arist.); denominative verb lovλí(w 'get down'
(Tryph.).
•ETYM From reduplicated *Fí-Folvos (cf. ►ľovos), related to oblos 'woolly, fuzzy'
and ► ɛiλéw 2 (< *Ƒeλvéw) ‘turn, winď.
ioxέaɩpa [adj.] epithet of Artemis, also used as a substantive (Hom.; Pi. P. 2, 9 [with
shortening of the i-], poet. inscr.), also of the papéτpα (AP 6, 9); also name of the
viper (Nic. Fr. 33). <IE *Hisu- 'arrow' and *ghesr- 'hand'▷
⚫ETYM Since antiquity, this epithet has often been explained as 'shaking out arrows,
she who shoots arrows', from lós 'arrow' and xέw 'to pour', by comparison with
Soúpaτ' Exεvav E 618. However, Heubeck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 7 (1956): 275ff. more
convincingly derived it from lós and xɛip as 'who has arrows in her hand; this is
supported by Skt. formations like iṣu-hasta- 'who holds an arrow in the hand', śūla-
hasta- 'holding a lance in the hand'. See also R. Schmitt 1967: 177ff., Hagen Glotta 76
(1998): 53-58, and especially Peters 1980a: 223-228 with an extensive discussion.
"лvη [f.] name of a bird (Boios apud Ant. Lib. 21, 6). <?>
⚫DER Also ллα (or rather * лτα, with Vossius, because of the alphabetical order),
ĭtta. Spvoкóλay, ¿еviкŵç 'woodpecker (dialectal)' (H.).
⚫ETYM The form itta recalls ►σítτη; further unclear. Cf. Solmsen 1909: 173².
iлvóv [n.] =ллoupis (Thphr. HP 4, 10, 1), a plant. <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
invóc [m.] 'furnace', also 'kitchen' and 'lantern' (IA). <IE? *sp-nó-, *sep- 'boil, bake'>
DIAL Myc. i-po-no.
•COMPлνо-лλáðos 'oven-maker' (Pl.), "Е-лvоç· Zɛùçέv Xíw ‘Zeus in Chios' (H.).
●DER Diminutive iлvíov (medic.); iлvóv (Delos IIIª³), iлvóv (Gortyn) ‘kitchen’;
invítns (äptos) ‘bread baked in an oven' (Hp.); "лvos belonging to an oven³, ävα.
τà кaðάρματα τoυ iлvoυ 'the offscourings from an oven' (H.) (Call. Fr. 216); invεúw
[v.] ‘to bake in an oven' (H.; hɩëvɛ[úɛσðaɩ] IG 1², 4: 15) together with invevtýs
furnarius (gloss.).
⚫ETYM The form lлvóç may have developed from *iлvóç (cf. "E-лvoç and
hɩлvε[úεσðαɩ] IG 12, 4: 15). It has been compared with a synonymous West Germanic
word: OE ofen, OHG ovan 'oven', also ON ofn, from PGm. *ofna- < *úfna-.
However, these words cannot be combined because of the vocalism (and the Greek
597
aspiration). The same holds true for the forms with velar: Go. auhns, OSw. oghn,
from PGm. *oxna-, *ozna- < *úxna-, *uzná-. Neither is there any possibility to
connect it with Skt. ukhá- [m.], ukhá [f.] ‘pot, cooking-pot'. A new proposal, which
seems the most promising to date, has been advanced by Vine 1999a: 5-30: derivation
from the root *sep- of ww as *s°p-no-, with a secondary zero-grade yielding --. The
formation, an adjective in -nó- with active sense, must be old.
¡лoç [f., n.] 'press', of a fuller, or for medical purposes; 'weight (in a mouse-trap, etc.)'
(Pi., Archil., Hp., Ar.). <?>
•VAR The primary aorist vaσat, with fut. чεται (A 454 = II 237, B 193), rather
means 'to squeeze, oppress' than 'to damage' (ɛīpaɩ, ßλáyai H.); pres. "лτw =
Вλάлτw only EM 481, 3.
⚫DER Denominative verb iлów 'to press' (Hdt., Hp., A.), also with ȧл-, εε-; лwσiç
'pressing, pressure' (Hp.), iлwtýpov ‘oil-press, wine-press' (pap.), ‘bougie' (medic.),
iлwτpíç ‘pressing' (σлáðŋ, medic.), εεɩлwτкóç ‘pressing out' (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. One could compare iчóv. Sɛσμшτý pov 'prison' (H.).
гллоç [m., f.] 'horse, mare' (II.), collective fem. 'cavalry' (IA). <IE *h,ekuo- 'horse'>
•DIAL Myc. i-qo /hikkos/, i-qi-ja /hikkia/ 'chariot'.
●COMP Very frequent in compounds: bahuvrīhis (λεÚк-ллоc), governing
compounds (i̟ллó-daµ-os, inπ-nλá-tŋc), determinative compounds (iñño-točótŋc),
compounds with transformed second member (iллo-rótaµoç, ïëï-aypoç for ïëïoç
á, poç, see Risch IF 59 (1949): 287; on iлло-коρуστηу sеe ►кópuc); with
metrically conditioned iллo- for iлло- in iлло-ɣαítns, -xápuns (epic). As a first
member also augmentative, especially in plant-names (iлло-λáлαеov et al.,
Strömberg 1940: 30).
●DER A. Substantives: diminutive iлápov (X.), iллíσкoç ‘(small) statue of a horse'
(Samos IV), etc., iллíðov as a fishname (Epich.; Strömberg 1943: 100). inrótŋs [m.]
'horseman, chariot driver' (Il.; in Homer always iллóτă), fеm. iллóτç (Nonn.);
iллεúç 'chariot fighter' (Il.), ‘horseman' (Sapph., A., Hdt.), ‘knight' as a social class
(Hdt., Ar., Arist.); thence iллεúш, see below; also as a name of a comet like iллíαç
(Plin., Apul.; Scherer 1953: 107); iллóу 'stable' (Att. inscr., X.); iллάкη 'cheesе of
mare-milk' (Hp.), also a plant name (Strömberg 1940: 136; formation like έpiáкη,
áλwvákŋ et al.); ïллεрoç “horse-fever” (Ar., like "кτepos, üdepos); innoσúvò ‘art of
driving, cavalry' (Il.).
B. Adjectives: iллáç [f.] ‘belonging to a horse, status and census of the knights in
Athens' (Hp., Arist.); ïллεоç 'belonging to a horse' (II.); ллoç ‘id.' (Alc., Pi., trag.),
often as an epithet of gods (Poseidon, Athena, etc.); thencе 'Iллóν as a month name
(Eretria); iлкóç ‘id.' (IA; Chantraine 1956a: 141); iллódηç 'horse-like' (X.).
С. Verbs: 1. ллáčoμai (also with aq-, -, кα-, etc.) 'drive horses, serve as a riding-
horse' (II.) together with iллασíα, iлnáoiµoç, innaσtýp, -άotpia, išaotŃc, -aotikós,
innaoµa, innaoµós. 2. inneúw ‘id.' (IA), originally from iëëɛúç, but also referring to
чллоç; also with prefix, e.g. ȧq-, кαе-, лαр-, συv-; thence iллευtýp, -týs, inneía,
ллεvσç, ллεμa; details in Boßhardt 1942: 34f. Countless proper names, both full
and short names (Iллóλu̟τç, Ïñíαç,"Iллη, etc., etc.). See Delebecque 1951.

=== page 323 ===

598
⚫ETYM Derives from the inherited word for 'horse', represented in Skt. áśva-, Av.
aspa-, Lat. equus, Venet. ekvon [acc.], OIr. ech, OE eoh, OLith. ešva 'mare', ToB
yakwe, as well as perhaps the Thracian PN Bɛτεσлоs and Arm. ēš ‘donkey'. All these
forms derive from IE *h,ekuo-. According to Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. *ekku-, the
Anatolian evidence (Hitt. phonetic complements in -us, -un, HLuw. aśu-, Lyc. esb-)
points to an athematic stem *h,eku-. This form must have been thematicized in PIE
to *h,ekuo- after the separation of Anatolian. From this form, we expect an outcome
Gг. *зллоç, sо one problem is the vocalism i-, for which Mycenaean origin has been
suggested. A second problem is the initial aspiration. Connection with wкúç cannot
be demonstrated. A form with geminate velar is found in i̇êkoç (EM 474, 12), ”Ikkoç
PN (Tarent., Epid.); see Lejeune 1972: 83'. A recent discussion of the origin of the
type iëлɛúç is found in De Vaan JIES 37 (2009).
=>
лτаμαι 'flу'. rétojai.
=>>
*лτоμαι 'press'. → noç.
ipŋv •VAR ipńv. → ɛipńv.
īpıç, -180ç [f.] ‘rainbow' (II.), also of the halo of the moon, etc. (Arist., Thphr., Gal.), as
a plant name 'purple Iris', etc. (Arist., Thphr.), see Strömberg 1940: 49; also name of
a stone (Plin.). As a PN Ipic,.-180c, -tv daughter of Thaumas and Elektra, messenger
of the gods (Il., Hes.). <PG(V)►
"
•VAR Acc. -a, -iv.
DERĭpivos (com., Thphr., Plb.), -ɛoc (Nic.) 'made of the Iris'; ipw8ns 'like a rainbow'
(Arist.), ipitis [f.] name of a stone (Plin.), see Redard 1949: 55; denominative ipiw
[v.] 'to be iridescent' (PHolm. 7, 6).
•ETYM Evidence for the original form Ƒîpɩç comes both from an inscription from
Corinth and from the epic metrics (see Chantraine 1942: 152).
The name of the goddess is no doubt identical with the appellative. This appellative
has been derived from the root *ueh,i- ‘bend', which is also seen in iτéa and ►ŕtvç;
a suffix -r- is also seen in the Germanic group of OE wir, ON vírr ‘metallic wire,
twisted ornament' (Kretschmer Glotta 2 (1910): 354).
Fur: 356 compares εpidaç⋅ τàç èv oúpavo "pidas (H.), and concludes to Pre-Greek
origin; does Elpis (formerly explained as "E-Fipic with prothetic vowel, which is
impossible for an IE word) point to the same? Against the traditional etymology, it
must be said that a pre-form PIE *uh,i-r-i- is hard to motivate.
iç 1 [f.] 'power, strength' (Hom., Hes.). <IE *uiH- 'strength'>
VAR Accus. Ïv(a) (3 times, only before vowel, see below), instr. Io.
•DER "Qı-oç 'strong' (íqiα µñλa Hom., D. P.) with PNs like fɩqiádaç, fiqitos (Boeot.,
Cor.), 'Iqıç (I 667, etc.; pet name); ► чos does not belong here.
ETYM The gloss yíç (= fíc). ... ¡oxúc (H.) confirms the identity of (F) is 'strength'
with Lat. vis 'id.'; the expected accus. (F)iv = Lat. vim can be restored from iv', which
is always antevocalic.
599
ç [f.] 'sinew, tendon' (Hom., Hp., Archil., Ar.), 'tendon of the neck' (P 522), 'muscle
fibres, fibrin, fibre of plants, ribs of leaves' (Pl., Arist., Thphr.); details on the
botanical usage in Strömberg 1937: 129ff. <IE? *uiH- 'tensile force'>>
•VAR Gen. Ivóc; mostly plur. Ivɛç, dat. "vɛσɩ, late loív, ľvais.
●COMP ǎ-, лoλú-ïvoç ‘without, with many ĭvɛç', etc. (Thphr.).
•DER ivíov [n.] 'the tendons at the back of the head, the neck' (Il., Hp., Arist.), cf.
кpavíov, and see Chantraine 1933: 59; ivwdns 'sinewy, fibrous' (X., Arist., Thphr.);
probably also ivaía. Súvaµis 'power, capacity' (H., uncertain conj. Peripl. M. Rubr.
46); denominative verbs: ivów 'to provide with Ivɛç, stengthen' (Hdn.), è̟-tvów
'remove the Ivεç, make powerless' (Lyc.), also έ-víčw, -iviάw (Gal., Peripl. M. Rubr.
et al.).
•ETYM It is debatable whether is 'sinew' (which seems to have had initial F-) is a
concretization of "s 'strength', or if it was originally a separate word. We may
compare the meaning 'tensile force' in Skt. váyas-, which also means 'power, etc.'. It
is mostly assumed that the n-stem inflexion ĭva, ĭvɛç, etc. arose from an accus. (F)īva,
with -a added like in Zñv-a. This is quite possible. Scheftelowitz IF 33 (1913/1914):
158f. assumed an independent word (F)íc, (F)ĭvóc ‘sinew' (cf. yíç. quáç ‘strap' H.)
from a verb bow, bend', seen in iTuç, Ipıç.
iσāчu [v.] 'I know'. <GR>
•VAR Inf. Fioάuny (Gortyn).
ETYM A Doric innovation (Theoc., Cret., etc.) starting from the 3pl. σavτɩ = Att.
Toaσi, based on Ïσταντi: Ïστãμ. Rejected by Floyd KZ 90 (1976): 166-177.
ioάτiç [f.] name of a blue-coloring plant, 'woad, Isatis tinctoria' (Hp., Thphr., Samos
IV) <?>
•VAR Gen. -dos, -LOS, -EWS.
●DER iσatwdŋs ‘woad-like' (Hp., Aret.).
•ETYM Lat. vitrum ‘id.' and OHG weit, OE wād ‘woad' have been adduced, as well as
MLat. waisda (Prellwitz 1905 s.v.); these seem too far off, but perhaps all these words
are loans from a common source. The plant was probably named for its glass-like
color (see De Vaan 2008 s.v. vitrum).
io¤µós [m.] ‘small entry, spit of land, strait of earth or sea, neck', especially as a TN of
the strait of Corinth (IA). <PG?>
VAR Also fem., after ǹ ódóc, etc. (cf. Schwyzer 1950: 342).
•COMP As a second member with a suffix -to- in the hypostasis лap-íσ0μα [n.pl., sg.]
'fauces, tonsils' (Hp., Arist.).
•DER 100μos belonging to the Isthmos' (Pi., trag.), to oμov 'collar' (σ 300), τà
Toμa fauces' (Hp.); 100 μov also metaph. from the neck of a flask (Cypr. word in
Pamphil. apud Ath. 11, 472e; different Leumann 1950: 271); τà”Ïσμa name of the
Corinthian games (Pi., Simon., Ar.) together with 'Iσ¤µo-víêηs, -vɩKoç 'winner at
these games' (B.), 'Iσ¤µαστaí ‘spectators of the games' (title of a play of A.; like
Алоλλwviαστaí, etc., Chantraine 1933: 317); iσ0µáw (Suid., H.), also 'σµãτ
(Delos II); iσ0μкóç, -taкóç 'belonging to the Isthmos, the Isthmian games' (Ar.,

=== page 324 ===

600
ioíkiov
iotia
601
Str.), iouwdns 'isthmos-like' (Th.). Denominative iσ0μaívw = àσ¤µαívw, with ïσеμа
oμa
= äσ¤µa ‘panting' (H.), arose as a cross of iσ0 μós with ảσ¤µaívw.
⚫ETYM Derivation from ɛчu ‘go' with a suffix -0µo- has been assumed, by comparison
with the by-forms 'Iеµóç, 'Iеµo-víкa (inscr.) and (-¤µa, ɛiσ-í-¤µŋ. In derivatives of
this root, the meaning ‘strait' is also found in ON eið [n.] ‘strait of land, from IE
*Hoi-do- (or *Hoi-to-). However, the -σ- is unexplained, and as a basic form *Hidh-
d³mo- cannot be accounted for. Chantraine 1933: 137 therefore assumes adaptation of
a local loan; likewise, Fur.: 2949.
iσíкιov [n.] 'a dish of mince-meat' (Ath. 376 b, pap.). ◄LW Lat.➤
⚫DERĭσIKOÇ 'id.' (Alex. Aphr., Pr. 1, 22), iσiкiápios and lσiкioμáyɛɩpoç 'butcher'.
⚫ETYM From Lat. insicium
"okaɩ [f.pl.] ‘fungus growing on oaks and walnut-trees (Aet. 7, 91, Paul. Aeg. 6, 49).
<PG(V)►
⚫VAR Üσkal, uncertain reading Aet. 7, 91.
⚫ETYM Unknown. If the variant is reliable (Fur.: 367), it would point to a Pre-Greek
word.
=
Tokλat 'sheep-skin'. →ïaλoç.
"okw [V.] 'to make like, imitate, think like, interchange' (Hom.), also 'to imitate, feign'
(T 203 with Aéywv; cf. Lat. simulāre), 'to suppose by mistake' (X 31, after τ 203);
thence to suppose' (Simon. 130). In Alexandrian poets (where also isg. "σkov, ptc.
Toкwv) 'to speak, say' (Theoc., A. R., Lyc.). <IE *ueik- 'resemble'>
•VAR Only 3sg. ipf. loкε(v) and ptc. ľσкOVτεç, ľσкOVσA.
•ETYM Probably from *Fíк-σк-w; see on kolka, as well as Bechtel 1914 s.v. and
Chantraine 1942: 317.
toos [adj.] 'equal' in number, strength, size, status, etc. (Il.). <IE? *ueid- ‘see, know'>
●VAR Epic looç, fem. ¿ïoŋ (see below), Arc. Cret. Boeot. fiofos (H. yioyov· ľσov).
•COMP Very frequent as a first member, e.g. iσó-0ɛos ‘god-like' (Il.), hypostasis of
loos Oɛ or a bahuvrīhi having gods as equals' (Risch 1937: 186; cf. Sommer IF 55
(1937): 195²), iσó-лεdov ‘plain' (Il.), iσó-лεdos ‘of the same level, as high as' (Hdt.,
Hp.; cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 15), io-nyopíŋ, -ía ‘equal right to speak, political equality'
(IA; a compound of loov ȧyopãoα); on iσoqapi w s.v. As a second member e.g.
in ä(v)-100c unequal, unfair' (IA).
•DER iσóτηç ‘equality' (Pl., Arist.), iσάkıç ‘as often' (Pl.), ioaxwç 'in as many ways'
(Arist.); denominative verbs: iσášw ‘make, be equal' (Il.) with iσaσµós (Epicur.) and
ioaσtikóç (Eust.); iσóoµai, -ów ‘to become (make) equal' (since † 212); iʊaíoµai ‘to be
(made) equal' (Nic., Arat.).
•ETYM Formally, fíoƑos > epic loos (on the digamma, cf. Chantraine 1942: 144; the
apparent prothetic vowel in ε-(F)ion is artificial; Beekes 1969: 65f.), Att. looç. The
development corresponds to that in *μóvƑoc> epic μоvoç, Att. μóvоç, and *öλƑоç >
epic ovλoç, Att. öλoç, etc.
*
As IE -su- was not retained in Greek, the comparison with Skt. visu- 'to several
sides' must be given up. Phonetically, a basic form *uituo- would do, but the
morphological connection to a zero grade *Ƒɩdo- from εidos 'shape' (thus
Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 205) is hypothetical. An ingenious but probably
incorrect analysis as dúw 'two' + thematization of a suffix -tv- by Meillet BSL 26
(1925): 12f. Extensive discussion by Ruijgh Minos 20-22 (1987): 533-544.
iooqapi w [v.] 'to match oneself against, measure oneself with' (Il., Hes., Simon.,
Theoc.); 'to make equal' (Nic. Th. 572). <GR
•VAR Only present.
⚫ETYM With comparable meaning, there is also avτɩQερíчw 'to oppose somebody'
(II.), after ȧvti-pέpw. The word avτoqapíšɛiv. aútoµaτεiv 'to act spontaneously' (H.)
arose after the example of loopapí(w. This probably stands for *looqopi\w = iσa
pépɛiv, from hypothetical *ioo-pópos, but the a-vocalism is unclear. Perhaps after an
unknown example (type looẞaphs)? However, note that the a is also found in
papÉtpa.
ĭσσασÐαι · кληpoñσa 'to be appointed by lot' (H.).
.
⚫ETYM See Bechtel 1921, 1: 120 and Luther 1935: 70. See ▸aloa.
iστávw [v.] 'to arise, acquire'. <GR▷
•VAR Hell. present for στηu (Plb., pap., inscr.), formed to the inf. iσtával.
⚫ETYM A parallel case is that of Cret. στavúw 'install' (лóλν σταvvéσ0wv SGDI 5040,
66), which has been compared with Av. fra-stanuuanti ‘they gain an advantage'. In
reality, the Cypr. form is rather a thematic enlargement of a primary present of the
type aïvчμαι, probably after Tavów et al. See Schwyzer: 696f., 698f.
ïotŋuu [v.] ‘to make stand, set up, take position, bring to a standstill, etc.' (Il.). <IE
*steh₂- 'stand, set'>
•VAR Med. σταμα 'to stand up, etc.', aor. στñσαι, στησασðαι, fut. στησw, aor. pass.
σταеñvαι (Оd.), fut. σταеησоμα (Att.); intr. aor. στñvα with fut. στησoμα 'take a
stand, arise', perf. εστηкα 'to stand'.
•DIAL Dor. iστāļu
•COMP Very often with prefix, ảva-, kata-, ảño-, ¿‹-, µɛta-, etc.
•DER Several (partly inherited) derivations are iσtós, ▶otaðµós, ▶otaµīveç,
▶otáois, ►otatńp, ► otýli, ►otýµwv, ▶otoá, etc. See also ►σtáµvos, ‣ otavpós.
ETYM The intr. athem. root aorist στηy neatly corresponds to Skt. ásthām < PIE
*h,é-steh₂-m. Beside this, Greek innovated (already in Hom.) a transitive s-aorist
στŋσa, like quσa beside εquv, etc. The intr. future στǹσoμai was originally built
from čστηy, but became associated with the s-aorist later. Also, the trans.
reduplicated athematic present στη is limited to Greek; one may compare tíðŋµɩ,
ŋ, ßiß. Both Indo-Iranian and Italo-Celtic have thematic formations: Skt.
tíṣṭhati ‘stands, Lat. sistit (both < *-sth₂-e-ti). The intr. perf. čσtŋêa, plur. čotăµev is
old (leaving aside the enlargment in -к-), and together with Skt. tastháu, plur.
tasthimá, Lat. stetimus it continues an IE perfect formation. The verbal adjective
στατós (II.), also in Skt. sthitá- 'standing', Lat. status, ON staðr, etc. < PIE *sth₂-to- is
old as well. For more different IE formations, see LIV² s.v. *steh₂-. See also ➤iotávw.
iστía ‘hearth'. •VAR Ion. -íŋ. →έotía.
=

=== page 325 ===

602
İƠ TÓC
iστóç [m.] ‘beam (of a loom), loom, tissue; masť (Il.). ◄IE *steh₂- ‘stand, set'>
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. iσto-dóкη 'support of the mast' for the mast
when let down (A 434), iσto-лédŋ hole in the keel for stepping the mast' (µ 51 = 162,
Alc. Z 2, 6); cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 26; iστo-Boɛús 'pole, thill' (Hes. Op. 431, 435, A. R.
3, 1318 and Orac. apud Paus. 9, 37, 4), metrical enlargement of *iσtó-ßoos = iσtòs
BóεLOC, Bowv (cf. улло-лóτаµое) after the instrument names in -ɛuç; also iστo-ẞón
(AP 6, 104, after -dóкη, etc.).
•DER iσtíov, mostly plur. -ía 'sail' (Il.), also ‘curtain' (LXX), 'piece' as a measure
(pap.).
⚫ETYM Formation like poptíov ‘load, wares' et al. (Chantraine 1933: 59). Belongs to
στaµ (or a lost present of the type Lat. si-st-ō) as “stand”; originally used for the
(standing) beam of the loom; cf. Chantraine 1928: 14 and Hermann Gött. Nachr.
(1943): 7. See also ►ťotni, ▸otýliwv.
486
ïσtwp, -opos [m.] 'knowing, expert' (h. Hom. 32, 2, Heraclit., B., S.), 'witness' (Hp.,
Boeot. inscr., Att. oath for ephebes in Poll. 8, 106), in unclear mg. Σ 501,
('witness' or 'arbiter'?), also Hes. Op. 702. <IE *ueid- 'see, know', *uid-tor->
•DIAL Boeot. FíσTwp.
COMP With prefix in σuv-iσTwp 'witness, conscious' (to σúv-oda; trag., Th., Plb.)
with σuvστopέw 'to be conscious of a matter' (Hell.); εл-íστшр 'knowing
something, familiar with' ( 26, A. R., AP et al.), úлεp-íσ-τwρ 'knowing all too well'
(S. El. 850 [lyr.], momentary formation); ά-ïστwp ‘unknowing' (Pl. Lg. 845b, E. Andr.
682), лoλv-ïστwр ‘polyhistor' (D. H., Str.), qiλ-íστwp 'who loves knowledge' together
with qσTopέw (Str., Vett. Val.).
•DER iσtópiov 'testimony' (Hp.), loτopía (see below). Denominative verb iσtopέw
(also with prefix, e.g. àv-, (-) 'be witness or expert, give testimony, recount, get
testimony, find out, search' (Ion., trag., Arist., Hell.) together with iστópηual
'account' (D. H.); usually iστopía, -in 'knowledge, account, (historical) account,
history, search, investigation' (IA, Hell.), which formally derives from lστwp, but was
functionally associated with iσtopέw. Adjective iστopiкós ‘regarding iσtopia or
iotopεiv, historical' (Pl., Arist., Hell.; cf. Chantraine 1956a: 134-136).
⚫ETYM From *uid-tōr, an agent noun of oldα, "σμεv. The word itself, but especially
the derivations iσtopέw, iστopiŋ that arose in Ionic, have spread over the Hellenic
and Hellenistic world together with Ionic science and philosophy. The aspiration is
probably not original; explanation in Schwyzer: 226 and 306. Unsuccessful attempt
by Floyd Glotta 68 (1990): 157-166 to derive the word from "(w ‘sit, seat' as
'convenor'. On the history of the concepts loτwp, iotopέw, iσtopin, see Kretschmer
Glotta 18 (1930): 93f., Fraenkel 1910: 218f., Snell 1924: 59ff., Keuck 1934, Frenkian
REIE 1 (1938): 468ff., Leumann 1950: 277f., Muller Mnem. 54 (1926): 235ff., and Louis
RPh. 81 (1955): 39ff. See ►oida.
ioxíov [n.] ‘hip-joint, haunches' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•COMP As a second member e.g. in ε-íoxios 'standing out from the haunch' (Hp.),
Ev-ioxios 'with beautiful hips' (Hell. poetry).
ioxis,-voc
603
•DER Diminutive ioxápiov (Hero); iσxtaкós ‘belonging to the hip' (Thphr.); ioxiác,
-ádoç [f.] (scil. vóσoc) 'pain in the hip' (Hp.) with ioxiadiкóç (medic.), as a plant-
name = λɛvкáкavea (Dsc., as a remedy against loxiác, Strömberg 1937: 194); iσxiãσiç
= loxiác (medic.; as if from *loxiάw, see Schwyzer: 505 and 732); denominative verb
ioxiάw (ioxiάddяv H.; Lacon.) 'bend the hip-joint' (Procop., Suid., Phot., H.;
uncertain Gal. 18 [1] 786).
•ETYM No etymology. If "σxt óσqús loins' (H.) is correct, the formation corresponds
to that of aλqi and μéλt. Skt. names for body parts like sákthi 'thigh-bone' (which is
unrelated to ioxiov) and ásthi ‘bone' seem to have a similar formation, but these
probably have -i < *-H. Latte thinks that "σxt is simply a mistake for loxíov. Fur.: 393
connects it with is, which seems quite possible if one assumes consonant
metathesis in ioxiov. One might assume a Pre-Greek pre-form *ikt'-; cf. on aλoç.
Pre-Greek had several words ending in -t, which is very rare in inherited Greek (Pre-
Greek: 3.1b).
ioxvóc [adj.] ‘dry, arid, languishing, lean' (IA). <?►
●COMP E.g. ioxvó-qwvos 'with dry (weak) voice' (Hdt., Hp., Arist.), often connected
with ïoxw (v.l. ioxó-qwvos; cf. below on iσxvaívw) and understood as ‘having an
impediment in one's speech'; *v-toxvos ‘a little dry' (Nic. Al. 147; cf. Strömberg 1946:
128).
●DER loxvótŋs ‘dryness, etc.' (Hp., Arist.); denominative verbs: 1. ioxvaivw (also with
prefixes like кat-, ȧл-) 'dry up, make lean' (IA) with loxvaoía, -in 'dried up state,
leanness' (Hp., Arist.), ioxvaoμós (Hp.), oxvavois (Paul. Aeg.) 'emaciation',
iσxvavɩɩкóç 'fit for reducing' (Arist.); 2. iσxvóμα to get dry', -ów 'to make dry',
also with ảл-, ¿‹-, etc. (Hp., Arist.), together with "oxvwoię, -wtikós (medic., etc.).
Further ioxaλéos ‘dry, barren' (τ 233, Man.) and loxác, -ádos [f.] ‘dried fig' (com.,
Arist.) with derivatives iσxado-лwλnç, ioxádiov, etc. (com.).
•ETYM The pair ioxvóc, ioxaλéos does not show an old interchange v: λ (which is no
IE category, though it does have a parallel in σµɛpdvós : oµepdaλéoc). One might
have expected a verb loxaívw (cf. kɛpdaλéoç: kɛpdaívw), which incidentally is often
found as a v.l., but this may also be a cross with ioxávw 'to hold back'. A cognate u-
stem has been assumed in Av. hišku-, MIr. sesc 'dry', IE *si-sk-u-(o-). These are
derived from a root *sek- 'wither' (see Pok. 894). For loxvóc, an ad hoc base form *si-
sk-sno- has been assumed (Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 475). The derivational
basis for iσxác is unclear; given olvás, kotivás, qutáç, µuptáç, etc., one would expect
a noun.
ioxus, -vos [f.] ‘power, strength, might' (Hes.). <PG?>
•COMP Compound ǎv-toxus 'powerless' (LXX). As a first member e.g. ioxvpo-roléw
'strengthen, fortify' (Plb.), as a second member in ȧv-íσxupos 'powerless' (Hp., Str.),
úлεр-íσxupoç 'extremely strong' (X., Arist.).
⚫DER Denominative verb loxúw, aor. ioxuσa (also with prefix, e.g. ¿v-, έε-, кat-,
Úлεр-) have power, be strong' (Pi., Hp., Att.) together with "oxvois (LXX).
Adjective ioxupós 'powerful, strong, mighty, vehement' (IA); thence iσxupiкós
'strong' (Pl. Tht. 169b), see Chantraine 1956a: 147, with denominatives: 1. loxupícou

=== page 326 ===

604
itaμós
'to prove one's strength, exert oneself, proclaim emphatically, etc.' (Heraclit., Att.),
also with prefixes like di-, àл-, ȧvt-, together with the desiderative ioxupi-ɛíw 'to
venture to affirm' (Hp.); 2. кατ-1σxуρεúομа 'to be violent' (Aq.).
PN'Ioxúλos (inscr.).
•ETYM The glosses (Lacon.) Bioxuv, yɩoxúv. ioxúv (H., also Hdn. Gr. 1, 509) point to
PGr. *Foxúc, which was connected with Skt. vi-ṣah- ‘to have in one's power' by
Brugmann IF 16 (1904): 493f. and Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 209. The latter
word belongs to the root * segh- (s.v. oxeĭv, ►xw) with a prefix *ui- ‘apart, asunder',
but this prefix does not exist in Greek, so the etymology fails. However, Myc. i-su-
ku-wo-do-to has no digamma, which means that the F- in the glosses may be
secondary after *Fís 'power' (thus Meillet BSL 27 (1927): 129ff., though with false
explanation of the i- as "prothetic"). The connection with EXεɩv seems rather
improbable. On the й-stem (like лλŋðúc, vndúç, etc.), see Schwyzer: 463f. and Meid
IF 63 (1958): 19, who assumes an abstract formation from an adjective *FI-OX-Úç
‘resisting' (-v- like in έxu-pós), which is not very convincing. Chantraine Emerita 19
(1951): 134ff. considers connection with iúç, loxíov. Pre-Greek origin seems quite
possible.
itaµós [adj.] ‘headlong, hasty, eager, bold, reckless' (Att.). <?►
⚫DER Also ÏTηc, -ov [m.] ‘id.' (Ar., Pl.), and itηtiкóç = iτaµóç (Arist.); from iτáw? See
►εчu. Further iτaµótns (Pl., Plb.), iταµía (LXX) ‘vigour, effrontery', ταчεúμα 'be
it.' (Jul. Or. 7, 210c; interpolated).
ETYM Mostly, "-Tηs is derived from iéval 'to go' (Chantraine 1933: 318) as
"Draufgänger" (thus already in antiquity, e.g. Pl. Prt. 349e, 359c), though most other
oxytones in -aμós are substantives (лoτaµóç, etc.). Probably a word from the Attic
popular language (incorrectly, Fraenkel 1912: 58f.).
Iτéa [f.] 'willow' (350), also 'shield made of willow' (E., Ar.; cf. Trümpy 1950: 73). <IE
*ueh,i- 'bend', *uh,i-tu->
•VAR Epic Ion. itéŋ (-ɛí- A. R. 4, 1428, with metrical lengthening?).
•COMP Compound itɛó-quλλos ‘adorned with willow-leaves' (Halic. IIIª).
•DER iτÉïvos ‘of willow' (Hdt., Thphr., pap.), iτεúv 'willow forest' (Gp.).
•ETYM Formation like ëτɛλéɑ and other tree names (Chantraine 1933: 92). From a
noun parallel to (Ƒ)íτuç, which derives from *ueh,-i- ‘bend'; cf. yɩtéa (= fitéa). itéa
(H.). See on "Tuç for further etymology. Itacistic writing has been assumed for the
initial i-
i- on account of the Att. deme name Eitέa (cf. on olσoc).
"tov [n.] Thracian name for a kind of mushroom (Thphr. fr. 167, Plin. H.N. 19, 36).
<PG(V)►
•VAR OỦ TÓV TÒ ÚT’ Ėvív olTÓV (H.).
⚫ETYM Probably FITÓV (thus DELG). Fur.: 110, 184 connects it with Üdvov, ÜTVov
'truffle' which has variants oldvov, oltvov. Furnée is mistaken to assumes a prothetic
ó-, since o- and ov- just indicate F-, a bilabial [w]. So we have *wit- and *wid-n-, with
a suffix beginning with n-, and voicing before the nasal (cf. Fur.: 110 on σлikavos,
σлуvóç; on the suffixes with a nasal added after a consonant, see Pre-Greek: Suffixes,
L
iútw
605
-v-). Moreover, in ütvov, the became v after the w, which itself disappeared before
the v (so wit-> wut- > ut-).
τplov [n.] name of a cake (IA), made from sesame and honey acc. to Ath. 14, 646d.
1?7
•VAR Usually plur.; long initial syllable in Ar. Ach. 1092.
•COMPτρι-лλns (Poll.) 'seller of iτpiov'.
⚫DER iτpívɛoç 'like "τpiov' (AP).
⚫ETYM Unknown; probably a loanword.
•
TτOV [n.] Ev. Kρñτεç 'one (Cret.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM See Latte 1953, who notes that Solmsen BB 17 (1891): 135 reads Síttov.
"TUç, -voç [f.] 'felloe, rim of a shield, also metaph. ‘shield' (Il.). ◄IE *ueh,i- ‘bend',
*uh,i-tu->
•ETYM Aeol. Fítus (gramm.; cf. also Chantraine 1942: 144) proves that the connection
with iτéa, olσoç, ipuç is correct. It therefore properly means 'bend, curve' (whence
first 'willow'?), a derivative in -tu- from a verb 'bend, twist', seen in Lat. vieō ‘to bind,
twist', Skt. vyáyati ‘wind, wrap, envelop', ptc. vītá-, Lith. výti, 1sg. vejù, ptc. výtas, Ru.
viť, ısg. vju ‘to turn, wind'. Greek Ƒítus corresponds exactly to Lat. vitus 'felloe' (also
vitūtus 'provided with a felloe', concluded from Biτwτós Ed. Diocl.), but the latter is
rather a loan (WH s.v.). Elsewhere, there are also traces of tu-derivatives, both in
Greek and in Balto-Slavic: iτéa, olσos next to OPr. witwan 'willow', OCS větví, Ru.
vítvina 'twig, rod'.
ivyń •VAR "vyµa, ivyµós. →iúľw.
ivyž, -yyoç [f.] name of a bird, ‘Iynx torquilla' (Arist., Ael.), which was bound to a
turning wheel during incantations to win back a lost love; thence the meaning 'spell,
charm' (Pi., Ar., X. [cf. Gow JHS 54 (1934): iff.] and Theocr. 2, 41 [cf. Kretschmer
Glotta 26 (1938): 63]); also (mostly in plur.) name of certain Chaldaic gods (Procl.,
Dam.). <PG(S)>
•DER'Iúyylos month name in Thessaly (IG 9(2), 258: 5); to'Ivyyins ó Atóvvσos (H.)?
Cf. on iúčw; ivyуɩкós 'belonging to the "vyyεs' (Dam.).
⚫ETYM Formation like лŵvyš, στpíуž, σúpɩyč, and other names of birds and musical
instruments (Chantraine 1933: 3 and 398). It has been connected with ivw, after the
crying of the bird (e.g. Osthoff MU 4 (1881): 1852). However, it was without a doubt
originally a loanword that was adapted to iú(w by folk etymology.
iów [v.] 'to cry aloud, howl' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. lúčaι (Pi. P. 4, 237). Also ảv-túľw (Q. S.). Cf. åßшuкτov (cod. -ŋktov). ¿'
Oʊ OÚK ¿yévεto Boǹ áлo\\µévov (H.), and ¿кßɩoúčeɩ. Opŋveĩ µetà kpavyñç ‘bewails
with crying' (H.); DELG explains the F as analogical after iάxw, but this seems
unnecessarily complicated; see below.
•DER ivyn (Orac. apud Hdt. 9, 43, S., Nic.), ivyµóç (Σ 572, A., E.) 'crying', also
·ľúуµaτα [pl.] ‘id.' (A. Dict. in PSI 11, 1209, 17); ľúкtŋs [m.] ‘howler, flutist', only in
ľúкtă (Theoc. 8, 30; after ǹëúta, ǹõέta, Fraenkel 1910: 223).

=== page 327 ===

606
ixwp, -wpos
607
With prenasalization ivyкτóv. τopóv 'piercing' and ¡vyyodpoµεïv· ékßoŋfɛīv.
Bowτoi 'to march out to aid (Boeot.)' (H.), after Bondpoμεīv; perhaps a mistake for
ivyo-? Also 'Ivyyins. Atóvvoos (H.), with the Thessalian month name'Iúyyioc; details
in Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 98.
⚫ETYM A verbalized interjection, cf. l (Hdn. Gr. 1, 506); or is the latter a back-
formation from iú(w? We also find ioú, iw, iau, but these may have had another
initial. From the interjection also "Ivos, epithet of Dionysus (Lycaonia; cf. Robinson
AJA 31 (1927): 26ff., Wahrmann Glotta 19 (1931): 161). See further ►ľvyč.
The forms ȧẞívкtov (cod. -ηktov). έQ' oʊ ovк έyévεto ßoǹ àлoλλvμévov (cf. Latte
ad loc.) and кẞioúšei. Opijvei µetà кpavуñç (H.) point to *Fiúчw (cf. Fur.: 277). With
its prenasalization, the word is typically Pre-Greek; note the vocalism of -ßiovεi.
qчos [adj.] ‘powerful, strong, vigilant' (Hom., Theoc., D. P.). <PG>
•ETYM Uncertain etymology, as the meaning itself is uncertain. The absence of a
digamma (Chantraine 1942: 143) makes connection with iç, lo impossible. Kuiper
Glotta 21 (1933): 289ff. and Kuiper ZII 8 (1930): 249f.) connected it with obávw and
Skt. kṣáyati 'possess, dominate'; doubts in Schwyzer: 326'. Athanassakis Glotta 49
(1971): 1-21 explains the word as from *ɩqɩ-ɩɩµ-oç (with τч- 'honor³), but syncope
does not occur on a regular basis in Greek, so this must be wrong. The word is non-
IE and therefore probably Pre-Greek, just as Fur.: 318 assumes (following Ruijgh
1957:1553).
"Qios =ïç 1.
iqvov [n.] kind of lavender, 'Lavandula Spica' (Ar., Epich., Thphr.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 391 connects típiov [n.] 'Scilla autumnalis' (Thphr.), (see Strömberg
1940: 155f.) with "quov as a variant without τ- (for which there are only few examples,
however). Nevertheless, a Pre-Greek word is probable a priori.
ixaváw [v.] 'to desire, try, crave' (Hom., Babr., Herod.). <IE *h₂eh2g"-, h¸i-h¸g"-
'desire'>
•VAR Often med. -άoµai.
•DER Also ixaívw ‘id.' (Call. Aet. 1, 1, 22).
ETYM Probably an innovation after voaváw: úqaívw et al. (see Schwyzer: 700).
More details on the formation in Risch 1937 (par. 112e) and Chantraine 1942: 360. An
alternating r-stem may be seen in Ixap 'desire' (A. Supp. 850 [lyr.]). For the
connection with Skt. ihate 'desires', Av. iziieiti 'longs for', see ► άxnv.
ix¤ñç, -úoç [m.] ‘fish' (II.). <IE *dg¹uH- ‘fish'>
•COMP Often as a first member, mostly with added o, e.g. ixеvo-лóληç 'fish seller'
(com.) beside ix0v-ßóλos (A., AP; -ẞoλɛúç Nic., Call.). As a second member in ǎv-,
εÜ-, лoλú-ïç (Str.), also лоλv-ïxеvos (h. Ap. 417; metrically convenient).
•DER Diminutive ixoúdiov (com., pap.), probably from -v-ïdiov > -бdiov; later -Ŭ-
(Schwyzer: 199 and Fraenkel 1912: 177f.; different Chantraine 1933: 70).
Other substantives: i×¤úã, Ion. -úŋ ‘dried fish(skin), fishery' (medic., pap.);
ix◊výµata [pl.] (rarely sing.) 'fish-scales' (Hp.); ixovïa ‘fishery' (Procl.); ixovεtov 'fish
market' (Nesos; uncertain); ivóvɛp. ix@vaywyoí H.; cf. Schwyzer: 487.
Adjectives: ivóεç ‘rich in fish, consisting of fish' (Hom.); ixðvwdns ‘rich in fish,
fish-like' (Hdt.); ixunpós 'consisting of fish, scaly, polluted' (Ar., Ph.), ixOvnpá [f.]
‘fish-taxes' (pap.); ix¤vïkóç ‘regarding fish, fish-like' (LXX), -ɩкń ‘fìsh toll' (Magnesia,
Ephesus); ixovaкós ‘id.' (Aq., Sm., Thd.); ix¤úïvoç ‘id.' (Ael.).
Verbs: ixováw 'fish', also intr. ‘behave like a fish' (Od.), also i×еvášoμaɩ ‘fish' (AP).
Cf. the derivatives of äλç (áλ-ɛúc, -ɛúw, -ɛía, etc.), which compete with the group of
ixous.
ETYM On the accent, see Schwyzer: 377f. and Berger MSS 3 (1953): 7. An old word for
'fish' in general, also found in Armenian and Baltic: Arm. jukn (acc. to Kortlandt, -k-
is a reflex of the laryngeal, like in mu-kn < *muH-n- beside µñç), Lith. žuvis, žuvų
[gen.pl.], Latv. zuvs. For the "prothetic" vowel i-, cf. on ►iktīvoç and ►x0έç. The
word is now reconstructed *dguH-, the long vowel in the nom. being caused by a
laryngeal. The western languages (Latin, Celtic, Germanic) had a different word for
'fish': Lat. piscis, OIr. íasc, MoHG Fisch.
ixλa [f.] name of a sea-fish. <PG(V) ►
•VAR кíxλa, кíxλŋ (BCH 60, 28 [Boeotia IIª], H.); cf. ixáλŋ = εσкεvaσµévos ¿xbūç. i
ÉOkevaoquévog ñ
kixλŋ tò öpvɛov ‘a prepared fish; thrush', and "xλa. кíxλα (H.), also ïσ\λai = kíxλai
'thrushes' (H.). Nasalized кíyкλoç.
•ETYM See Lacroix 1938: 52f. The variants show that the word is Pre-Greek; see Fur.:
130, 297f., 379. On the initial к-, see Fur.: 391.
xvos [n.] 'footstep, trace, track, sole of the foot' (p 317). <?►
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ixvo-σкoлέw look at the track (or traces)' (A., S.,
Plu.).
•DER "Xviov 'id.' (II.), with úл-íуvos 'what is under the sole' (Q. S.). Denominative
verb ixvɛúw 'to trace' (X 192), also with prefix, e.g. ȧv-, &ε-, St-; thence ixvεutýc
'bloodhound, Ichneumon' (Hdt., S.), also ixvεuτip ‘id.' (Opp., Nonn.; cf. Fraenkel
1910: 134f.) and ixvɛútɛpa (Corcyra); ixvεúµwv, -ovos [m.] “tracer”, name of an
Egyptian kind of weasel, ‘Ichneumon', also metaph. of a kind of wasp (Arist., Eub.);
xvεvμa 'trace' (Poll.); ixvevtikóç ‘good at tracing' (Ph., Arr.). Also έ‹-ixvɩášw ‘to
trace' with ɩvaoµós (LXX, Aq.), from "xvoç after the verbs in -tá(w (cf. Schwyzer:
735) rather than from "xviov. 'Ixvaín epithet of ☺έµüç (h. Ap. 94) derives from the TN
"Ixvai in southern Thessalia.
•ETYM Formation in *-nos- like "pvoç, êtñvoç, etc., but of unclear origin. Perhaps
related to oïxouat, which is doubted by DELG s.v. Different explanations by Wood
Class. Phil. 16 (1921): 65 and Wood Class. Phil. 21 (1926): 72. Perhaps the form "xματα-
xvia (H.) stands for iеματa (related to ɛчu). West Glotta 77 (1999): 123f. reads
ï¤µata ►
"Xματα in N 71.
ixwp, -wpos [m.] ‘juicy, watery part of blood' (Hp., Arist.; from the poetic language,
see Leumann 1950: 310), 'blood of the gods' (E 340, 416), secondarily of the blood of
the Giants (Str. 6, 3,5), blood in general (A. Ag. 1480 [anap.]). <?►
•VAR Acc.sg. ix≈ (E 416).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ixw(po)-ppoέw [v.] 'to run with serous matter'
(Hp.).

=== page 328 ===

"
608
•DER ixwpwdns 'serous' (Hp.).
Ty, inós
ETYM Without an exact morphological parallel (cf. Schwyzer: 519 and 569,
Chantraine 1942: 212), and probably a foreign word. Several unconvincing
explanations have been proposed: a loan from Hitt. ešḥar (which is related to cap),
e.g. Heubeck 1961: 81 and Neumann 1961: 18; comparison with iкµáç (Pisani RILomb.
73 (1939-40): 492ff.); or with ixap, ixaváw (Bolling Lang. 21 (1945): 49ff.), etc. All of
these and other previous proposals are rejected by DELG, which continues by stating
that the word is probably Indo-European; this is far from certain, of course. Acc. to
Jouanna and Demont REA 83 (1981): 197-209, we should start from the technical,
medical conception, and not from the poetic one.
у, iлóç [m.] name of a worm that eats horn and wood, notably vines ( 395, Thphr.,
Str.). <PG(V)►
•COMP❜Плo-кτóvos name of a god in Erythrai (Str. 13, 1, 64).
●ETYM Rhyming with Opíy, kví¼, oкví; Frisk suggests a cross of one of these with
►. Traditionally connected with "ασða (seе ►лоç). See also Gil Fernández 1959:
116. Rather, i and ly reflect one and the same Pre-Greek word *ik"-, which was
adapted in two different ways.
"чoç [m.] a tree, 'cork-oak, Quercus Suber (?)' (Thphr. HP 3, 4, 2). <?>
•VAR Also ivóc; ivóv. tòv kɩσσóv. ☹<o>úptot 'ivy (Thurii)' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Some compare *(F)iμẞw.
iw [exclam.] 'alas!' (A.). <ONOM> •DER iwn 'cry, noise (Il.), iwá (A.). →iń, iñïos.
iwyn → ènwyai.
iwkń [f.] 'rout, pursuit' (Il.). <PG?>
•VAR Acc.sg. iwкa (A 601); see Chantraine 1942: 231, Egli 1954: 12f.
•DER iwxµóç ‘id.' (Il., Hes., Theoc.; cf. Trümpy 1950: 160), ľwžiç. diwžię ‘pursuiť (H.),
лaλíwчıç ‘pursuit in turn' (Il., App.), whence лpoiwεis (Hes. Sc. 154).
•ETYM Primary formations from Ƒɩwкεɩ 'pursues' (Cor.), so for (Ƒ)ɩwêń, ñaλɩ-
(F)iwic, etc. On traces of the digamma, see Chantraine 1942: 143; lwxuós (with
metrically lengthned i-) is from *iwк-σμó-. For the relation between Fɩwкet (only
inscr. Corinth, see LSJ) and Ƒíεμai, see Siwкw. The verb may be Pre-Greek.
”Iwvɛç [m.pl.] ‘Ionian', one of the four Greek main tribes (since N 685 'Iάoves
ÉλKEXITWVEC). <?>
•VAR In epic poet. mostly plur. 'Iάovec, rarely sing. "Iwv, 'Iάwv.
DIAL Myc. I-ja-wo-ne.
•COMP As a second member in Ilav-iwvɛç (Eust. 1414, 36), a back-formation after
Hav-éλλŋves from Havóvov [n.] ‘temple of all Ionians', -ta [pl.] name of the
festival (Hdt.), Ilavɩóvios [m.] epithet of Apollo and others (inscr.).
•DER 1. 'Iάç, -άdoç [f.] ‘Ionian woman, Ionic' (Hdt., Th.), 'Iaкóç (Plb.), formed to
"Iwves after "EAŋvɛç: 'Eλλáç. 2. 'Iaóvios 'Ionic, Greek' (A. [lyr.]), 'Iaovíc [f.] (Nic.);
late 'Iovios 'id.' (Philostr.), 'Iwvís [f.] (Call., Paus.), 'Iwviác [f.] (Nic., Str.); here'Iwvía
‘Ionia' (A. Pers. 771), 'Iaovíŋ-0ɛ (Nic. fr. 74, 2). 3. 'Iwvɩкóç ‘Ionic' (Hdt., Th.). 4. ó
i
1
"WY, -WHOC
609
³Ïóvoе (кóλло) [m.] 'the Ionic Sea' (between Epirus and Italy). 5. 'IávεoS
patronymic (Thess.). 6. iwvíoкos [m.] Ephesian name of the fish xpvσópus ‘gilt-
head' (Archestr.), cf. Strömberg 1943: 86.
Denominative verb iwví(w [v.] 'to speak Ionic' (A. D.).
Uncertain is the appurtenance of lawλêóç, 'Iwλêóç town in Magnesia on the Pagasaic
gulf (since Hes. Th. 997), which could properly mean 'port of Ionians' if it derives
from *Iafo-oλкóç.
⚫ETYM The foreign adaptations of the tribal name, Eg. jwn(n)', Hebr. jāwān, OP
yauna, etc., point to a pre-form *IάƑovɛç, but a further analysis of this form is
uncertain. A shorter form *"Iov-εs is supposed in 'Ióvios (Jacobsohn KZ 57 (1930):
76ff.), if it is not a reshaping after x¤óvios (Beaumont JHS 56 (1936): 204 connects
'Ióvɩos with 'Iw). In any case, 'Iάs and’Iawλкóç can be explained from’Iάovɛç, ”Iwvɛç.
Unclear Iάvwv (anapestic in A. Pers. 949f. [lyr.]). Acc. to Vendryes BSL 25 (1924): 49,
the accent in "Iwvεs shows the Attic shift as in "ywyɛ.
As the proper meaning is unknown, the name remains without a clear etymology.
An interesting attempt was recently made by Nikolaev 2006, who suggests an
original meaning 'die Kräftigen', starting either from *uiH- 'force' or from *h,ish₂-, to
which a suffix*-awon- was added.
See also Ruijgh Minos 9 (1968): 109-155 and Heubeck MSS 48 (1987): 139-148.
iwpós [m.] mg. uncertain (A.D.). <?>
ETYM Acc. to A. D. Pron. 55, 26 Att., = ó aúτñs tñs ñóλews qúλač, wrongly
connecting the pronoun ĭ. Cf. Hdn. 1, 200: Ó уvñσios qúλač; Suid. gives iwpós.
Oupwpós, pÚ入ač· kai napolia. oùd'évtdg iwpoi.kaióvóuosónap’’Adqvaious
EKTòç iwpoŨ ÉKÉλevev elval toùs àvdpooóvous. (App. Prov. 4, 39), so a ban (¿vτòç,
Èкτòç iwpoŨ) on a killer, taken as 'house' by H.; cf. also iwpós. tò óp<e>ɩvòv xwpíov,
kai tò Ŏpoç. kai olkoç, kai ó toútov qúλač (H.). Boisacq posited *FI-Fwpó-ç, related
to ópáw, wpa, Hom. oúpos 'guardian'; this is purely hypothetical.
iwτa [n.] the ninth letter of the alphabet (Pl. Cra. 418b). <LW Sem.➤
•VAR Indeclinable.
•DER iwτaкiσμóç 'repetition of the iota' (Quint.), after σoλoiкioμóç, áttiкiσµóç, etc.
ETYM From Semitic, cf. Hebr. jōdh; see Schwyzer: 140 and 313.
iw¥, -wños [m.] name of a small fish (Nic., Call. in Ath., Ael., Hdn. Gr. 1, 247).
<PG(S)►
•VAR Boeot. Fiwi (BCH 60, 28, IIª).
•ETYM Thompson 1947 s.v. No doubt a local word for small useless fishes, i.e. a Pre-
Greek word (cf. on ►"кtap 3). I therefore think that it started with *wy-, like e.g. iú¶w.

=== page 329 ===

!
Kα [pcl.] → Kε.
K
i
ļ
кaẞaða →yáẞalov.
Káẞatoos [m.] 'gluttonous fellow' (Cratin. 103), also PN (IG 5(2), 271: 9 [Mantinea
IV³]). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Káẞaσoç (Poll. 6, 43 v.l.).
•ETYM In antiquity, the word was analyzed as a compound of кáßos and alσa, which
is of course nonsense. For the ending, cf. Ayópaɩσos (SGDI 3269, 12; 3386, 36;
Schulze 1933a: 665). The meaning and structure of the word point to Pre-Greek
origin. Fur.: 214 points to the v.l. káßaσoç. If we combine these variants, we arrive at
a Pre-Greek form *kamas. He further connects кaµãσóç. ẞápαеpov 'abyss', which
is possible but uncertain; the comparison with kaµaσýv ‘'fish' is even more uncertain.
кaẞánc, -ov [m.] 'workhorse, nag, έруάτηç ïллоç' (Plu., AP, H.). ◄LW Anat.>
kapá入入ns,
=
=
•DER Kaẞáλλ(E)Lov [n.] 'id.' (inscr. Callatis, H.), also metaph. ǹ épútη toñ
τpiкλívou kλívη. dià tò ávákλitTov 'the first couch in a dining-room with three
couches' (H.). Further кaßaλλάτoν (< Lat. *caballatium) plant name,
кuvóyλwσσov (Ps.-Dsc.; cf. the plant names in iллo-, Strömberg 1940: 30);
кaßaλλápios (Teucros Astrol.) Lat. caballarius ‘groom' (gloss.), kaßaλλapikós
(μúλoç, τáлηç Edict. Diocl.).
=
⚫ETYM The PN Kaẞaλλās (IVª, Rev. Arch. 1925, I 259) shows that the word is old in
Greek. Like Lat. caballus, W PN Caballos, кaßáλλns (with technical and popular -ŋs;
Chantraine 1933: 30f.) is an Asiatic loan or a Wanderwort, perhaps originally an
ethnicon like Wallach et al. It has been compared with Turk. käväl epithet of at
'horse', MoP kaval 'second class horse of mixed blood', and further with Ru. kobýla
'mare'. Connection with the Anat. EN Kaẞaλɛiç (Kaßŋλéɛs Hdt.) is uncertain, as is
the appurtenance of káßŋdos, káλŋßos. åreσkodvµµévos tò aidoiov (H.), cf. on
Bákndog.
kaßßaλikós [adj.] 'good at throwing somebody to the ground', said of a fighter (Gal.
Thras. 45). <GR➤
•DER Compar. кaßßaλikótepos (Plu. Mor. 236e, M. Ant. 7, 52).
•ETYM Laconian for kataßλŋtikÓS.
Káẞapvoɩ [m.pl.] name of the priests of Demeter on Paros (IG 12(5), 292 [III³], H.).
●der Káßapvıç, poetic name of Paros (St. Byz.).

=== page 330 ===

612
•ETYM See KáẞEɩpol
-Kaẞdaλos
→ avτoкáẞdaλoç.
-kaẞdalos
кáẞɛɩoç [adj.] · véos. Ilácio 'young (Paph.)' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM The word has been corrected to *кáßεpoç, which is possible but uncertain. It
has been suggested that it refers to the fact that the Kabeiroi are often children. The
word is probably Pre-Greek.
Káẞɛpoɩ [m.pl.] name of chthonic gods, especially on Samothrace and Lemnos, as
well as in Boeotia (Pi., Hdt., inscr.). <PG>
•VAR Káẞɛipoι kapкívoɩ 'crab, pair of pincers' (H.); whether there is any relation
with the gods, is unknown.
•DER Kaẞɛipides (výµqai); Kaßeipw mother of the C.; Kaßɛiptov sanctuary of the C.
⚫ETYM Not related to Skt. Kúbera- (Wackernagel KZ 41 (1907): 316ff.), see Mayrhofer
KEWA s.v. The root of the name is clearly the same as that in Káẞapvot. This root
must have been Pre-Greek *kabar"-. The palatalized consonant explains both *a > ε
and the 1; before the v, the palatal character was neglected. See Beekes Mnem. 57
(2004): 465-477. See Hemberg 1950.
кáẞos [m.] measure of grain: 4 έσται (LXX). LW Orient.>>
•ETYM From Hebr. qaħ. Cf. also Eg. ķb, see Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 247. See
▶ yápadov, ▶ kapada.
Káẞoupos [m.] 'crab' (Eust.), see Rohlfs 1930: 94f.834. <PG
•DER Kaẞoupãç 'crab-fisher' (Inscr. Ephes. 4282).
ETYM MoGr. has кáßoupos 'crab'. The word is no doubt Pre-Greek; cf. on
▶ okioupog.
кáукaчov [n.] name of the 'resin of an oriental tree' (Dsc.). <LW Orient.>>
⚫ETYM Related to Arab. kamkām, but
Hebr. karkōm, Akk. kurkānu. Cf. on
кáукaμov (since Plin.).
not to the word for 'saffron', Arab. kurkum,
кpóкoç. Lat. cancamum was borrowed from
Káyкavoç [adj.] ‘arid, barren' (Il.). <PG>
•DER Kaykávɛoç 'id.' (Man.). Denominative кayкaíva. Đáλnɛ, Eŋpaívɛi 'heats, dries';
also kaykaλća. katakɛkavµéva ‘what has been burnt up' (H.), which is probably an
innovation after the many adjectives in -aλéos meaning ‘arid, dry' (ášaλéoç,
avaλéoç, etc.). Without a suffix: кαуkoµévns. Enpãs tŵ qóßu̟ (H.) and лoλv-kaykýs
epithet of Siva 'thirst' (A 642), perhaps formed to a present *кáукoμαι.
⚫ETYM Words for 'hunger, pain' are traditionally connected with the group of
Káykavoç: the full grade primary verbs кέукɛɩ· лεɩvḍ ‘is hungry' (Phot.); from other
IE languages: Lith. keñkti, 1sg. keñkia ‘to ache' (*‘burns, withers'), secondary ON há
‘to tease, pain' < PGm. *hanhōn, and the verbal nouns Lith. kankà 'pain', Go. huhrus
'hunger', denominative huggrjan 'to hunger'.
If this comparison is correct and if we reconstruct a root *kenk-, the ablaut of
кáyкavoç, etc. must be secondary. Schulze KZ 29 (1888): 269f. connects the glosses
кαкions ǎτpoos äμлελoç 'untended vine', кaкıç xαλεлó, чŋpés 'harsh,
i
1
Kaduïλoc
613
hungry', кakıеá λчµŋpá (H.), the second member of which would belong to aïow,
10aívw; but if so, the first member could also be кaкóç, as DELG s.v. notes.
Because of the root structure (nasal and a-vocalism), the word is suspect of Pre-
Greek origin. The words compared mean 'hunger, pain', and not primarily 'arid,
dry'.
Káyкελ(^)oɩ [m.pl.] 'railings, barrier, starting gate' (pap., inscr., imperial period; sch.),
also as a measure (µέtpw tŵ kayкέλλw, etc.) in pap. <LW Lat.>
•VAR Sometimes sing. -os, ntr. -ov.
•DER KAYкɛλ(\)wτń ‘provided with lattice', of diaßápa, Oúpa (pap., sch.).
•ETYM From Lat. cancellī [pl.] ‘id.' (Cic.); likewise, кaykɛλλápios (Lyd. Mag., pap.
VIP) Lat. cancellarius (since IVP).
=
.
кayкúλaç [acc.pl.] кηкíðaç. Aioλɛiç 'mussels (Aeol.)' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Cf. кoуXúλaɩ‍ kykïdes (H.) and koyxúλia. tà őσtpɛa. kaì лopqvpat. Oettinger
General Linguistics 40 (2003): 71ff. concludes that кaук- is just a mistake for кoyк-.
However, the variation a/o is typical for Pre-Greek, as is к/ X. Therefore, there seems
no reason to reject the attested form. Of course, the word has nothing to do with
MoHG Hengst, etc.
kaypã(s) [m.] · kataqayãç, Σalaµívɩo ‘gluttonous (Salaminian)' (H.). ◄ GR►
•ETYM From кατα- and ypáw (Bechtel 1921, 1:, 421).
кayxaλáw [v.] ‘to rejoice, exult' (Il.). <GR►
•VAR Only pres. and ipf. кayxaλáαokɛ (A. R., Q. S.).
COMP Also with prefix: εл-, лερɩ-.
•DER Kayxaλíčετai xaipɛɩ, iλapúvε 'rejoices' (H.).
⚫ETYM Expressive verb of onomatopoeic character. If one compares кaкxάw and
кayɣáľw, -aláw may be considered as a lengthening, comparing άoxaλáw,
Bavкaláw (see лашoаláw). However, Apollonius and Bechtel 1914 reject the
derivation from кayxálw, and connect it with xaλáw 'to relax, let go', assuming
intensive reduplication. Further arguments in favor of the former view are given by
Tichy 1983: 222f.
.
кádaμoç [adj.] · Tuoλóç. Σaλaµívio 'blind (Salamis)' (H.). <PG>
•ETYM If reliable (see Schmidt ad loc. and van Herwerden 1910 s.v.), it may belong to
Hom. Kɛкadáv, кɛkadýσɛɩ ‘to rob'. Not related to Lat. cadamitās (which is secondary
for calamitās; see WH s.v.). One gets the impression of a Pre-Greek word (a-
vocalism), and it is preferable to abandon attempts at an inner-Greek or Indo-
European etymology.
Kaduλos [m.] one of the Káßɛɩpoɩ, son of Kabeiro and Hephaistos; he is the
younger man, beside an older one and the Mother Goddess. <PG>
•VAR Also Káσoç, Káµλλoç; on the forms of the name see Beekes Mnem. 57
(2004): 466ff.
•ETYM The suffix of this name has been compared with Muršili and Troilos, and
Morinail (of the Lemnos inscription). As a whole, it may be identical with that of

=== page 331 ===

614
Káduos
Hasammil(i/as), a Hattic god. Was it originally *Hat mil? It is probably a derivation
of Kadmos, though there is no tradition that confirms this.
Káduos [m.] name of a hero, the founder of Thebes (Od.) < PG(S)►
•VAR Kaσσµos (vase Rhegium).
⚫DER Kαбμεoç, Kadµnos [adj.] (Hes.); Kaduεía 'the hill of Thebes' (X.); Kadμεivεç
'the inhabitants of Thebes' (II.); kadµɛía (уñ) ‘cadmia, calamine' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM The connection with кéкaσμa is certainly wrong. The name is found for a
river in Thesprotia and for a mountain and a river in Caria. Therefore, the word is
without a doubt Pre-Greek, and of unknown meaning (Beekes Mnem. 57 (2004):
465ff. and Beekes Kadmos 43 (2004): 172f. This is confirmed by the name Kadμλoç
which has a suffix -1λ-, which is well known in Anatolia. The structure of the name
agrees with that of Пátµoç, Лáτµoç, Aáкµoç. There is no further support for the
gloss кáбдoç. бópv, λóqoc, ảσníc (H.). Cf. on ►Kadμλoç.
кádos [m.] 'vessel for wine and other fluids'; also a measure (IA). <LW Sem.?, PG?>
●DER Diminutive кádiov (LXX, Delos IIIª, Cyrene II-III³), кadíσkoç, also 'voting urn'
(Att.); with hypocoristic gemination and familiar suffix -X- (Chantraine 1933: 404)
кáðdɩxoç, as a measure 'half a έкtɛúÚç' (Lac., H.), together with кEкaddío0aι (-1x0ai?)
'to be rejected by a vote' (Lac., Plu. Lyc. 12); also кáðði (Heracl.), probably after
Xoчvɩ and ǎ (Ar. Fr. 709); hypercorrect кaτadíxiov (Tauromenion) for
*кaððíxiov as if from кatá and díxa. See Wackernagel 1907: 11f., Bechtel 1921, 2: 374f.,
Fraenkel Phil. 97 (1948): 163.
•ETYM Generally considered to be a loanword, probably from Semitic, cf. Hebr. kad
'bucket' (Schwyzer: 64 and152 and E. Masson 1967: 42-44). From кádoç, Lat. cadus
and Arab. kādus were borrowed (Lokotsch 1927: N° 988). Fur.: 130 compares addiĘ,
with interchange к/ zero, and suggests that the words are Pre-Greek.
.
kádovσa [f.] · ɛldos otaquλñç ‘a kind of vine' (H.). <PG➤
ETYM The word is most probably Pre-Greek (Fur.: 1735).
kádvpos [m.] · káлpos ävopxis boar without testicles' (H.). ◄PG►
⚫ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 39 connected it with Hom. кɛкadwv, kɛkadŋσɛi ‘to rob’.
Cf. Perpillou 1996: 112-124. The connection seems improbable; the element -up-
rather points to Pre-Greek origin.
кαðαлτη [ƒ.] name of a vessel (PSI 4, 420, 26 [IIIª]). <GR➤
•ETYM Named after the strap through its handles (Bonner AmJPh. 62 (1941): 453ff.);
as an adjective, kaеαлτóç means 'connected with' (E. Fr. 752).
kaðapós [adj.] ‘clean, spotless, pure, unmixed, white (of bread, linen)' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
⚫VAR Dor. Kołapós (Heracl. et al.), Aeol. кóðapos (Alc.).
•DER Kαеápεios (-10c) 'pure, elegant' (Arist., Men., Plb.), adverb кałapɛíws (X.), after
ȧστɛioç; on ka¤ápullos (of äpτoç, etc., com.) cf. Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 2193.
кaðapóτηs 'purity' (Hp., Pl.), kalap(ε) ₁óτηs 'purity, refinement' (Hdt.).
Denominative verbs: 1. Kalaípw (кo0- Heracl.) 'to purify' (II.), aor. кaеñpaɩ (-āpaɩ),
often with prefix, e.g. ávα-, àño-, dia-, έk-, nɛpi-; thence кáðapσis (IA; kół- El.)
1
į
KalÉTa
615
'purification', kaеapμóç atonement' (Hdt., trag.), кáеаρμа (often plur.)
'purification, refuse' (Att.); кaаpτns 'purifyer, conciliator' (Hp., S.), -τp 'id.'
(Man., Plu.), -τýpιos (D. H.); кaеápσios (to кałapτýs, káłapois, kałapτós)
'purifying' (Hdt., trag.), kałaptikós ‘id.' (Hp., Pl.). 2. кaеapíšw 'to purify' (LXX),
also with prefixes åño-, dia-, ¿k-, nɛpɩ-, with kaßapioµós (LXX), kałápiois (pap.),
etc. 3. Kalapɛúw 'to be pure' (Ar., Pl.) with кalápɛvσis (H., EM); also кaƉapi-ɛúw
(Paus., gramm.). 4. kałapɩ-ów ‘to purify' (LXX).
•ETYM No etymology, see Frisk and DELG for unsuccessful older attempts. The
variation a/o points to Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 391 even connects it with ả¤apńs, but
this is doubtful). Alternatively, Peters 1993b: 95ff. takes up the old connection with
Skt. śithirá- ‘loose', reconstructing *kṛth₂-ro-, but this etymology needs too many ad
hoc assumptions: independent dissimilatory loss of the first r in both branches,
doubtful laryngeal aspiration *tH > 0 (лλατúç is a strong counterexample, and
cannot be explained away by лλaτâµáv), and too complicated semantics.
kaðɛlotóv [n.] · ɛldos qiλýµatos ‘kind of kiss' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Mistake for кλεστóv? Latte suggests кαеελÀKTÓV.
Kálidoι [m.] ⚫ údpía. Apкádɛç 'vessels (Arc.)' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Hoffmann 1891: 103 considers reading кávdpo 'those filled with water' or
kávdoι 'id.' (from üdoç; cf. údaλéoc). For -- instead of -v-, Thurneysen Glotta 12
(1922): 146 compares Mετídpiov = Mε0údpiov. See кηĐíç.
Kai [conj.] also, even; and' (Il.). <IE *kmt- 'along with, downwards'>
•DIAL Arc. Cypr. kaç (secondarily ka).
•ETYM From *кαt (cf. Hitt. katti) > *kaσı > káç, kaí (Ruijgh 1967a: $293). Also found
in ►kaσíyvŋtoç. Acc. to Klingenschmitt MSS 33 (1975), kaí, Arc. Cypr. kaç ‘also,
even; and and -kάç in άvdpa-kás may all derive from *kṆs(-i).
katάdāç [m.] 'pit or cavern at Sparta, into which people sentenced to death (or their
bodies) were thrown' (Th. 1, 134, Paus. 4, 18,4, D. Chr. 80, 9). <PG>
•VAR Gen. -ou, Dor. -ā.
●DER Also kαιáτaç, -έtaç ‘id.' (Eust. 1478, 45); kaɩεtóç ‘fissure produced by an
earthquake' (Str. 8, 5, 7), кaíaτα· óρúуµаτа· ½ τà úлò σεσµãν кaτаррауéντа Xшрía
'pits; places split by earthquakes' (H.).
ETYM The connection with Skt. kévața- [m.] 'pit' must be rejected (Kuiper 1991: 27),
and we cannot reconstruct PIE *kaiur-t-; cf. Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. The form кαιETÓS
may be a reshaping after oxεtóc, (σ) кάлετоç, etc., and кaιádaç does not necessarily
contain an old variant with -8-, since glosses like yaɩádaç. ò dñµoç лò Аакúvwv
'people (Lacon.)', yavoádas. yevdn's 'false' (H.) show that Laconian extended the use
of the suffix -Sã-. The forms кαιάταç, -éταç are secondary.
It seems clear that the word is Pre-Greek. A pre-form *kaw'at- would probably give
*KaчFα/εT-, where the ε is from a after a palatalized consonant; the 8 can also be
interpreted as a normal variant of t. See Fur.: 180, 349 and on кηtweσσav.
kaiéta [f.] · kaλaµívěŋ. Boɩwτoí ‘mint' (H.). ◄PG➤

=== page 332 ===

...
616
kalkiaç, -ov
•VAR кαɩɛταç (without accentuation, Apollon. Lex. s.v. кηtwɛσσav), kalatŵv
[gen.pl.] (Anon. Lond. 36, 57). Also кaíata(c).
•ETYM Has been connected with kaiw, because of the burning taste (Fraenkel 1910: 62
A. 2, Bechtel 1921, 1: 306). The word is rather Pre-Greek, though a direct connection
with кaládãç is not evident.
kaɩkiaç, -ov [m.] 'northeast wind' (Ar., Arist.). <?>
ETYM For the formation, cf. áлαρкτíαç, 'Оλчμлíαç, and other wind names
(Chantraine 1933: 95); basis uncertain. Already Ach. Tat. Intr. Arat. 33 (cf. von
Wilamowitz 1931: 2652) explained it as "(the wind) coming from the Käiкoç”, a river
in Aeolis, comparing the similar names 'Оλчμлíaç, 'Еλησлоvτíαç, etc. Others (Pisani
KZ 61 (1934): 187, Huisman KZ 71 (1954): 99) take it as "the blind one" = "the dark,
obscuring one" from the word for 'blind, one-eyed': Lat. caecus ‘blind', OIr. caech
'one-eyed', Go. haihs 'id.', Skt. kekara- 'squinting'. Lat. aquilō 'north wind', from
aquilus 'dark', has also been compared. Not very probable.
kaɩvóç [adj.] ‘new, newly found, unexpected' (IA). <IE *ken- 'new, fresh'>
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. in кαιvo-τoμέw (: кαιvà τεµ vεiv), properly an
expression of mining: 'cut out a new (type of) stone', metaph. 'introduce innovations
(in the state)' (Att.), together with -τoμía, -τóμоç; кαιуо-лоιéw introduce
innovations, renovate' (S., Plb.) together with -лошα, -лoτýу (see Fraenkel 1912:
90f.).
•DER Abstract kαɩvóτηs 'innovation' (Att.). Denominative verbs: 1. Kaιví(w 'to
innovate, inaugurate' (trag.), also with prefix, especially àva- (Isoc., Str., Plu.), ¿y-
(LXX, NT); thence (έy-)kaíviois, -toµós (LXX); deverbal έykaívia [pl.] 'consecration
of a temple' (LXX, NT). 2. kaɩvów 'to innovate, inaugurate' (Hdt., Th.), àva- (NT,
etc.), whence (ava-)kaívwσiç (J., NT). PNs Kaivíaç, Kaívioç, etc. (Bechtel 1917b: 229),
Kaivɛúc together with Kaiveïdns (Boßhardt 1942: 128, Debrunner 1923: 32).
•ETYM Comparisons have been made with YAv. nom.sg. kaine ‘girl, acc. kainīnəm,
Skt. gen.pl. kaninām ‘id.', full grade kanyà 'girl' (reinterpreted as an a-stem), and the
adj. kanina- 'young'; grades of comparison kánīyas-, kániṣṭha-. Another cognate is
Lat. recens 'fresh, new, young', which must derive from re-cen-t(i)-, from a verb 'to
rise, begin' seen in OIr. cinim 'to originate', OCS -čęti, isg. -čúno̟ ‘begin' < IE *ken-.
The appurtenance of OW cein 'beautiful' is doubtful (cf. Matasović 2008 s.v. *kani-.
See Pok. 563f. and LIV² s.v. *ken-.
kaivuµai [v.] ‘to overcome, surpass, exceľ (Od.). ◄GR?>
•VAR IN ÉкaívUTO (Y 282, Hes. Sc. 4), ȧлε- (е 127, 219; A. R. 2, 783), nεpι-кαívuτai
(Nic. Th. 38), act. ipv. кαιvúτw (Emp. 23, 9).
⚫ETYM Perhaps analogical from ►кékaσµaɩ, ►кéкασται after daívvμαι, εdaívuτo,
which were connected with dédaσμai, dédaστα (Brugmann 1886-1900 2: 1012,
Brugmann 1913: 339; also Hester Lingua 13 (1965): 373).
kaívw [v.] ‘to kill' (trag., Timocr. 1, 9, Theoc. 24, 92). <◄GR➤
•VAR Aor. Kavεiv (кαvñу Theoc. l.c.), fut. кavw, perf. кéкovα (S. Fr. 1058).
•COMP Also with кaτα- ‘id.' (X.).
kaipos
617
•DER Kovaí póvoť ‘murders' (H.).
•ETYM By-form of кτɛívw with the same simplification of the anlaut as in xauaí
beside xwv (Schwyzer: 326). It was supposed that кaívw, кavεiv arose from кαta-
kavɛīv by dissimilation from кατα-кɩavɛīv (Kieckers IF36 (1916): 233ff., Chantraine
Sprache 1 (1949): 1423), but it is difficult to connect this with the chronology of the
attestations.
kaínɛtos [m.] · άžívη ‘axe-head' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Stands at an alphabetically wrong place in Hesychius. Specht KZ 52 (1925): 90
compared CS cěpiti 'split'. It is rather a Pre-Greek word (in which -εTO- exists as a
suffix).
kapós [m.] 'right measure, (right, decisive) point of time, (favorable) opportunity,
time of the year, time' (Hes.; cf. Kaipios below). <?>
•COMP kaipo-quλaкéw [v.] 'to guard (at the right time)' (D., Arist.), ǎ-, ɛ-кαιpoç
with ȧ-, εv-kaιpía, -έw, etc.
•DER кaípios ‘finding its mark, decisive, deadly' (Il.); 'coming at the right time,
convenient'; кαιρɩкóç ‘at the right time, belonging to certain times', kaipчoç 'deadly'
(Macho apud Ath. 13, 581b; not quite certain), 'matured', of wine (PFlor. 143, 2; III³),
after opчuos (Arbenz Die Adj. auf -чµoç: 55 and 59).
⚫ETYM Uncertain. Several proposals: related to кɛípw as 'decisive moment' or '(a
certain) time', for which compare Lat. discrimen (Persson 1891: 107, Brugmann
Sächs. Ber. 52 (1900): 410¹); to кɛрávvчμɩ 'mix' (Brugmann IF 17 (1904-1905): 363f.;
morphologically complicated; similarly, Benveniste 1940a: 11ff., who asserts that it is
properly “atmospherical mix”); to kúpw ‘meet, meet accidentally' (Bq, phonetically
difficult); to Skt. kālá- ‘time' (Güntert 1923: 232; phonetically impossible, on which
see Mayrhofer KEWA s.v.). On the meaning of кaιpóç, see Wersdörfer 1940: 54ff.
and Pfister 1938: 131ff.
kaчpoç [m.] 'row of thrumbs (on the loom), to which the threads of the warp are
attached (Ael. Dion. Fr. 440, Phot. 304, EM); the exact construction remains
unknown. <?>
toũ
=
•DER Kaipwoię (Poll. 7, 33, H.), acc. to H. = τо στηµovoç oi σúvdεσμo 'the fastenings.
of a warp', a collective abstract from *кaɩpów ‘to provide with кaчpot'; kaipwµa
Kaipos (Ael. Dion. 1.c., see Chantraine 1933: 187), also 'texture' (Call. fr. 295);
kaipwtidɛç (-woτ(p) idɛc) 'female weavers' (Call. fr. 356, H., Suid.). Note кaιpoσέwv,
epithet of oovéwv (ŋ1 107) for kaipovσσέwv (on the explanation Wackernagel 1916:
84f. against Kretschmer Glotta 13 (1924): 249 who sticks to his interpretation), gen.pl.
of кaιpóɛσσα, fem. to кαɩpóɛɩ which properly means 'provided with кaîpoɩ'; exact
meaning uncartain. Cf. kaipía, mostly ►кɛipía (-ŋ-, --).
•ETYM A technical expression of unclear meaning, and therefore etymologically
difficult. According to H. Petersson (see Pok. 577f.), it is related to Arm. sarik' [pl.],
gen. sareac 'sling, rope', as well as to sard, instr. sardi-w 'spider'. Clackson 1994:139-
140 pleads for a different origin of the Armenian sari-k', which rather means 'chain,
fetter', also 'band'. Cimochowski Ling. Posn. 5 (1955): 194 connected it with Albanian
thur ‘twine, weave'.

=== page 333 ===

618
Kaiw
Kaiw [V.] 'to kindle', med.-pass. 'to burn' (Il.). ◄IE? *keh¸u- ‘burn’➤
•VAR Att. кáw, aor. кañσal, epic (also Att. inscr. IG 12, 374: 96; 261) кñαι, pass. кañvai
(epic Ion.), кavеñvai, fut. kavow, perf. kékavka, kékav(0)µai (IA).
•DIAL Myc. a-pu-ke-ka-u-me-no, pu-ka-wo/pur-kawos/ (vel sim.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. Sia-, ¿k-, kata-, vño-. Among the compounds, note
žуkav-µa, -σiç, -(σ)týc, -σtýpiov, -σTOV (> Lat. encaustum; the red purple with
which the Roman emperors signed, from where Fr. encre); also úлóкav-olç, -o'tns,
-σtýplov, -σtpā, etc.
●DER 1. кañµa ‘fire, heat, glow' (Il.) with kavµat-wdns (Hp., Arist.), -ŋpós (Str.), -íaç
(Thphr.; of the sun) ‘burning, glowing', кavµаτíw ‘burn, singe' (NT, Plu., Arr.). 2.
Kauσiç (уkavos, etc.) 'burning' (IA) together with (εy-, кατα-)кαúσчoç
'inflamable' (Pl., X.). 3. кαñσoç [m.] 'causus, bilious remittent fever, etc.' (Hp.,
Arist.), from кañσaɩ, or rather with a suffix -σ0- (Strömberg 1944: 87f.)? Thence
kavoía 'Macedonian hat against the sun', кaúσwv ‘id.', also 'heat, hot wind, etc.'
(LXX, NT, medic.), кavσwdŋs 'burning, hot' (Hp., Thphr.), кavσóoμaι, -ów 'to have
causus, burn; to heaten' (medic., NT, pap.) together with кaúσwμa 'heating' (Gal.). 4.
kav(σ)týp [m.] ‘burner, burning iron' (Pi., Hp.), fem. gen. kavʊtɛipñç, epithet of
µáõηs (II.) or кaμívov (Nic.), from *каúστειpа (Schwyzer: 474, Chantraine 1942: 192;
note the switch of accent); кavτýptov ‘branding iron, brand(mark)' (LXX, D. S.,
Str.), diminutive кauτηpídiov (Gal.), denominative verb кavτηpiá¶w ‘to brand (Str.,
NT). 5. kaúʊtŋs [m.] ‘heater, etc.' (pap.). 6. kavotpā [f.] 'place where corpses were
burnt' (Str., inscr.). 7. kavotikóç, rare kavɩ- ‘burning, inflamable' (Arist.). 8.
кaveμóc scorching (of trees), firewood' (Thphr., pap.). Beside these formations
there are older ones whose connection with кaíw became less clear due to phonetic
developments: кãλov 'wood', ►кŋλéos ‘burning, blazing', ►кnwdns, ▶knweis
'smelling', кnvα mg. uncertain; луρкαιá, луρкαíη, adj. -tóç.
⚫ETYM All forms go back to a root kav-, kaƑ-: Kaiw (whence Att. Kaw) derives from a
yod-present *кáƑ-tw, while the once enigmatic form ½-кη-α is now explained from
ekawa < *h,e-keh₂u-s-m by Kiparsky Lang. 43 (1967): 627-8. This form is often
incorrectly written with -ɛt-, as in кɛíavão, etc. (see Chantraine 1942: 9), and in Att.
Kéαvτos with quantitative metathesis. The full grade also occurs in epic кηλéoç,
кηwбns, and in Delph. кnuα, which shows a PGr. кηF- beside кǎF-.
For an etymology, we have to rely on Baltic material: Lith. kūlės 'Brandpilze,
Flugbrand, Staubbrand des Getreides', kūlėti ‘brandig werden', Latv. kūla 'old, dry,
grass of last year' (cf. Fraenkel 1955 s.v.). These would represent a zero grade kū- <
*kHu-, beside a full grade *kehus- continued in Greek кηƑα, and zero grade *kh₂u̟-
in *káƑ-ɩw, кañ-µa.
kákaλa [n.pl.] · τεíxn. Aiσxúλos Nɩóßη (Fr. 166) 'walls' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Uncertain hypothesis by Solmsen 1909: 215: related to лodo-кáкêη ‘piece of
wood in which the feet of prisoners were tied' (Leges apud Lys. et D., Pl. Com. 249,
sch. [not in LSJ]), also written -кáкη (perhaps after кaкóç). Chantraine comments:
"rapprochement en l'air".
кakiðńs [adj.] · ätpoqos äµreλos ‘a withering grapevine' (H.). <?►
!
Kakó
⚫VAR Also KaкIOÉç, kakiðá (H.), kaкień (Theognost. Can. 109).
619
ETYM Acc. to Collinder Eranos 67 (1969): 210, it is itacistic for кaк[0-]ηеŋç. See
►Káykavoç.
кaккáßŋ 1 [f.] ‘three-legged pot' (com.), acc. to Ath. 4, 169c = Xúτpα. <PG?>
•VAR Also кakáẞŋ, kákaßos (Gal., Alex. Trall.), káккaßoç [m.] (Nicoch., Antiph.)
⚫DER Diminutive кaк(к)áßt(o)v (Eub., pap.).
⚫ETYM Technical LW of unknown origin. Semitic origin proposed by Lewy Glotta 16
(1928): 137 and Grimme Glotta 14 (1925): 19 (who compares Akk. kukubu); rejected
by E. Masson 1967: 83-83, but defended again by Szemerényi IF 73 (1968): 194f. In the
meaning 'kettle', it could be a metaphor of 'partridge', acc. to Hemmerdinger Glotta
48 (1970): 53. Lat. cac(c)abus, diminutive cac(c)abulus (= кaкovẞaλovμ in Ps.-Dsc.;
André Latomus 14 (1955): 518) are borrowed from the Greek. Cf. WH s.v. cac(c)abus.
Given the variations and the variant in Lat. cascabus 'cacabus grandis' (gloss.), cited
by Fur: 298, the word is likely to be Pre-Greek.
Kaккáẞη 2 [f.] 'partridge' (Ath. 9, 390a). <LW Anat.>
•VAR Kakkaẞíç [f.] (Alcm. 25).
•DER kakkaẞíšw 'to quack', of a partridge (Arist., Thphr.), of owls (Ar. Lys. 761; v.l.
-ßá¶w; cf. kikkaßášw); also кaккá¶w, of hens (H.).
⚫ETYM For the ending, Chantraine 1933: 260 compared öτoßoç, kóvaßos, Bópußos;
further onomatopoeic. Lat. cacabāre ‘quack' was borrowed from Greek. One may
compare Lat. cacillare ‘id.', MoHG gackern, MoDu. kakelen, Ru. kokotáť', etc., all
onomatopoeic for 'to quack'. On the other hand, Hitt. kakkapa-, Akk. kakkabānu
'partridge' have also been compared (Benveniste 1962: 7); see also Szemerényi IF 73
(1968): 94 and Cardona Orbis 16 (1967): 161-164. Neumann 1961: 60 suggests Lydian
origin.
kaкkáw [v.] ‘to shiť (Ar. Nub. 1384, 1390), káкêη ‘human ordure' (Ar. Pax 162).
<ONOM
•ETYM Lallwort from the language of children with expressive gemination, like Lat.
cacāre, MIr. caccaim 'to shit', cacc ‘ordure', Du. kakken, Ru. kákať, Arm. k‘akor
'dung', etc.
кaк(K)αλía name of several plants (Dsc., Plin.).
•VAR Kakaλíç. vápкiσσoç 'narcissus' (H.). áкaкaλíç.
Kaкóç [adj.] 'bad, awful, worthless' (Il.). <IE? *knk- ‘slight', PG?>
•VAR Grades of comparison: кaкwtɛpos (II.), kakiwv, kákiσtoç (Il.), after ǎpiστoç
acc. to Seiler 1950: 100f., but see now DELG Supp.
DIAL Myc. ka-zo-e /kazohes/.
•COMP Often as a first member (in opposition to ε); also as a second member, e.g.
bahuvrihi ǎ-kaкos 'who does not know what is bad, unguilty' (Sapph., A.); also à-
кáкãç (Dor.), epithet of Hades (Megara), of Darius (A. Pers. 855 [lyr.]), cf.
Chantraine 1933: 28.
•DER Abstracts: 1. кαкóτηs 'badness' (Il.); 2. Kaкía ‘id.' (Thgn., Att.; on kakótηs :
Kakía see Porzig 1942: 212); 3. кáкη 'bad character, cowardice' (A., E.); after лáðŋ,

=== page 334 ===

620
KάKTOS
Bλáẞn, cf. Frisk Eranos 43 (1945): 221; as a second member in στoμa-кáкη a disease
of mouth and teeth (Str., Plin.).
Denominative verbs: 1. кaкíw 'to revile', -íčoμa 'to behave badly, be a coward' (II.),
with kakiσuós (Phld., Str.), кáкiσIÇ (Vett. Val.) 'scorn'; 2. кaкów 'to revile, damage,
ruin' (II.) together with кáкwσiç 'maltreatment, damage' (IA), кaкwτńs ‘damager',
кαкwτIкóç 'damaging, harmful (Ph., Vett. Val.); 3. какúvoμαι 'to prove to be bad or
cowardly', -úvw 'to damage' (E., Pl.).
•ETYM No clear etymology. Neo-Phrygian кaкo(u)v is a loan from Greek, acc. to
Solmsen KZ 34 (1897): 52+ and others. De Lamberterie (see DELG Supp.) compares
OAv. kasu- 'small, slight', with grades of comparison kasiiah-, kasišta- 'smallest'.
However, if this is accepted, his reconstruction of a PIE root *kak- may be altered to
*knk-. Another option is comparison with the root of Lith. kenkti 'to ache' < *kenk-,
and the Germanic group of Go. huhrus 'hunger'. Alternatively, the word could be
Pre-Greek.
кάкτoç [f.] ‘a kind of thistle, cardoon, cactus' (Epich., Theophr., Theoc.). <PG?>
•ETYM Foreign word of unknown origin (cf. Strömberg 1937: 102). See André 1956
s.v. cactus. Lat. cactus was borrowed from the Greek. Fur.: 321, 371 thinks the -кτ-
points to Pre-Greek and compares άkakía.
кaкxadíaι . ioxvóqwvot 'wth weak voices' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Schmidt corrects it to кσxañdaɩ, which would be contracted from кai
iσxañdaï; cf. σxañdai (= ioxañdai)· iʊxvóqwvoi (H.).
кaλaẞoñτoι [?] · ¿v tŵ tñç Aepeátidos iepų Aptéµdoç áðóµεvoi üµ voi 'songs sung of
Artemis in the sanctuary of D.' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM On a suggestion by Laum, see Wahrmann Glotta 17 (1929): 242f. M. Schmidt
suggests reading *кaλaßoídia; see кaλaoídia. Latte reads -Buτat.
kadaßÚotas →àoká入apog.
kalaßwτns →ảoкáλaßoç.
кaλadía [f.] puкávη 'plane-tree' (H.). <?>
.
•ETYM Acc. to von Blumenthal 1930: 39, it belongs to kλadapóç, kλádos (?).
kaλáčeɩ [v.] · ỏykoûtaɩ. Axaɩoɩ ‘is elated (Achaian)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
кáλaƉoç [m.] ‘basket' (Ar., Arist.), also metaph. of various objects, e.g. ‘capital of a
pillar' (Callix.), 'reservoir of an oil-lamp' (Hero). <PG?>
●COMP As a first member e.g. in kaλaðŋ-qópos [f.] ‘bearer of a к.' (Ephesus IIIP),
Kaλanpópo title of a comedy by Euboulos. On -11- see Schwyzer 438f.
•DER Kaλa íσkoç (Ar., Lys.), -ov [n.] (Delos IIª); кαλáеov (Poll. Orib.); also
кaλáеwσiç ‘coffering of a ceiled roof (gloss.).
ETYM For the formation, cf. yupyalós (yúpyaßoç), кúaboç, ópµałóç, etc.
Connected with кλwow by de Saussure 1879: 267, which is formally impossible.
Probably Pre-Greek.
}
}
káλaμoç
621
кaλáïvoç [adj.] ‘blue-green, bluish', of stones, earthenware, etc. (PSI 4, 396, 9 [IIIª],
Peripl. M. Rubr. 39 [cod. kaλλɛavóc], AP, Dsc.). <?>
•VAR Also Kaλλ-.
⚫ETYM An adjective in -ɩvoc, seemingly derived from кáλλaiç 'blue-green stone,
turquoise' (Plin. NH 37, 151), but this could also be a back-formation. Comparison
with Káλatov 'cock's comb, the feathers of a cock' and кaλaïç 'hen' is
improbable.
кaλaïç [f.] ‘hen', msc. 'cock' (IG 42(1), 40: 5, 41: 6 Epid. [Vª]). <?>
•VAR Only acc. -ida.
ETYM No etymology. Mostly taken from кaλéw. Bechtel 1921, 2: 510f. posits
*кaλafíç, a fem. of *кaλafóc, which would properly mean "the calling one", by
comparison with Skt. uṣā-kala- '‘cock', "who calls early” (see ►½ïкavós). However,
we cannot obtain *kaλa- from kaλέw, as the root ended in -h,. Pagliaro Arch. glott.
ital. 39 (1954): 145ff. identifies кaλaïç ‘hen' with кáλλaïç ‘turquoise' (and with кáλaïç.
τò iσtíov H.), кaλáïvoç, and perhaps with кáλλatov. Fur.: 125 fn. connects it with
Lat. gallus.
kaλaµívðŋ [f.] name of an odoriferous plant (Hp., Ar., Arist.). ◄PG(S)►
•VAR Also -μivea (Philum. Ven., Phot.), -uivos (Nic. Th. 60).
⚫DER кaλauvеívn 'id.' (medic.; after pητivη, etc., Chantraine 1933: 204),
кaλaшvšíτηs (Dsc., of oivos), кaλaµvádŋs full of к.' (Str., Apollon. Lex.).
Kaλauívoc name of a frog (Ar. Batr. 224).
●ETYM Unknown. The formal agreement with кáλaµos and µívéŋ does not permit a
conclusion. The assumption of a pre-form *kaλaµo-µívеŋ with dissimilation is
unconvincing. A derivation кaλáµ-1v0os from кáλaμos (Schwyzer: 526) and the
assumption of a foreign word, with popular adaptation to кáλaµos and µívеŋ,
remain hypothetical as well. Cf. Chantraine 1933: 370. A Pre-Greek word is most
probable because of the suffix and the meaning.
кaλaµívdap [?] · лλátavos ǹdovieĩs (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
káλaµos [m.] ‘reed, grass-stalk', often metaph. of objects made of reed, ‘flute of reed,
fishing rod, reed pen', etc. (h. Merc. 47 [cf. Zumbach 1955: 5], Pi., IA); on the
botanical mg. see Strömberg 1937: 100f. <IE *kolh₂-m-, klh₂-em- 'reed, straw'>>
•VAR Kαλáµŋ [f.] 'stalk or straw' (Hom., Hdt., X., Arist.).
•COMP Especially in botanical terminology (Strömberg 1937: 112), e.g. μоvo-кáλαμоç
'with a single stalk' (Thphr.), кaλaun-qópos 'with reed' (X. HG 2, 1, 2; v.l. -o-, cf.
Schwyzer: 526), kaλaµŋ-τóµoç ‘cutting off stalks' (A. R.).
⚫DER Diminutives кαλaчíoкoç (Ar., medic.), кaλáшov (pap.); кaλaµíç [f.] name of
several objects made of reed (Hell.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 342f.); collective кaλaμía
(-εía) 'reed' (pap.); kaλaµwv ‘id.' (lit. pap.); кaλaµápiov 'reed-case' (pap.).
кaλaμɛúç 'fisher' (Pancrat. apud Ath.); also кαλаµεvτý ‘id.' (AP; as if from
*кαλaμɛów, cf. Chantraine 1933: 318); кαλαµíτηs 'provided with кáλaµoç, etc.' (D.).

=== page 335 ===

622
Káλavбpos
кaλάuvos ‘made of reed' (IA), kaλaµóε ‘of reed' (E. [lyr.]), kaλaµwdns 'full of
reed, reed-like' (Arist., Thphr.), kaλaµкóç ‘id.' (pap.).
kaλaµów [v.] ‘to provide with reed, splint (a bone) with reed (Gal.) together with
каλаμwτη 'fence of reed' (Eust., H.); кaλauílw 'blow a reed flute' (Ath.).
From кaλáun кaλauaía [f.] 'kind of grasshopper' (Theoc. 10, 18), кaλaµañov [n.]
'kind of cicade' (Paus. Gr., H.), cf. Gil Emerita 25 (1957): 315f. and Georgacas Glotta
31 (1951): 216), kaλaµáoμaι 'collect grain-stalks, gather ears (of corn)' (Cratin., LXX,
Plu.) with кaλáµµa (Thd.).
ETYM An old word for 'reed, straw', with cognate forms in Latin culmus, Germanic
(e.g. OHG halm), Balto-Slavic (e.g. OPr. salme 'straw', Latv. salms, Ru. solóma, SCr.
slama). Except for кáλαшoç, -μη, all these forms can go back to IE *kolh₂-mo-, kolh₂-
meh. Therefore, кáλaчoç has been explained as from *кóλaμos (comparing
лotaµóç, лλókaµos) by vowel assimilation, but this unsatisfactory solution is
unnecessary, as the proto-language may have had a paradigm *kolh₂-m, *klh₂-em-,
i.e. an m-stem, which was thematicized in the separate branches. From кáλaμoç, Lat.
calamus and Skt. kaláma- 'writing reed', Arab. qalam > Osman. kalém > MoGr.
кaλéμ were borrowed (Maidhof Glotta 10 (1920): 11).
кáλavôpoç [m.] ‘kind of lark' (Dionys. Av. 3, 15). <PG>
•ETYM Ending like τápavd(p)oç, Maíavdpoc; origin unknown. Thence Ital. calandro
lark' (Meyer-Lübke 1911-1920: N° 1486). See also WH s.v. caliandrum. No doubt
either Pre-Greek, or a loan from Anatolia.
•
kaλaoídia [f.] · àуш εлτεúμεç Аρτéшð ларà Лákwoty 'contest in honour of
Artemis (Laconian)' (H.). ◄ GR?►
ETYM Acc. to Fraenkel Glotta 4 (1913): 35, a univerbation of кaλɛiv and άɛidɛɩv. Acc.
to Frisk, it is rather a derivation in -to- from kaλaì ảoɩdaí.
кaláлovç [m.] ‘shoemaker's last', кalapĭvɛç. oxετoí. Aάкwvɛç ‘water-pipes
(Laconian)'; kaλappuyaí. τάopoɩ ‘ditches' (H.). ⇒кãλov.
кaλápis [m.] a small bird (Arist. HA 609a). <PG?➤
•ETYM Unknown.
kaλáoipiç, -105 [f.] an Egyptian garment with tassels or fringes at the bottom (Hdt. 2,
81, Cratin. 30; a Persian garment in Democr. Eph. 1), also worn at the Mysteries in
Andania (Messenia) (IG 5(1), 1390: 17; written -σnpic); Kalaoipiɛç [m.pl.] name of a
kind of Egyptian soldier (Hdt. 2, 164; after the garment or vice versa?). <LW Eg.►
•VAR Also -σnpls.
•COMP As a second member in τpuvôo-кαλáσчρiç name of a women's garment (Ar.
Fr. 320, 6; cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 269).
⚫ETYM Egyptian word without certain etymology; cf. Spiegelberg Zs. f. ägypt. Spr. 43
(1905): 87ff. On the notation, see Schwyzer Glotta 11 (1921): 75f. Further discussion in
Drioton-Vandier 1962: 572f.
кaλañρoч, -oños (f.] name of a herdsman's staff, which was thrown to drive back the
cattle to the herd (Y 845, Antim., A. R.). <PG(V)►
}
ka入éw
623
•VAR Also кoλópoßov (Hipparch. Ptol.; written кoλλwpoẞov in BGU 59.13), =
кopúvη ‘staff (H., who has кoλλopóẞov), see Fur.: 145f.
•DER кαλαvρóлov (Artem.). Unclear is kaλavpóqię. Baktηploqópos 'staff-bearer'
(H.), at an alphabetically wrong position; Fur.: 14618 suggests that it is a mistake for
*кαλavρоло-чopic.
•ETYM Explained as an Aeolic compound кaλα-Fpoч by Schwyzer: 224 and
Chantraine 1942: 158, but with unexplained second member. The comparison of the
first member with Skt. śalá- 'stick' (cf. on кñλa) or with кλáw, кλáσai must be
forgotten.
It is a typical Pre-Greek word, containing a labialized phoneme rw, from a pre-form
*kalar"-ap-, where the labial element was anticipated in кaλauport-, and colored the
following *a into o. In кoλλop-, the preceding *a was colored to o as well, and the
first *a was assimilated to the following o or w (which may have been contracted
from av). Compare ǎλoε for the phenomena described here, which are typical of
Pre-Greek loans.
кaλéw [v.] ‘to call, call by name, name' (Il.). <IE *klh₁- `call' ➤
VAR Epic also кIкλńσкw, Aeol. кάλŋµ, Cypг. кαλń(w, aor. кaλéσ(o)at (II.), pass.
кληеñvaι (Archil.), fut. кaλéw (IA since I 383), кaλw (Att.), кaλéow (young Att.,
Hell.), perf. med. кéкλημαι with fut. кɛкλýσoµαι (Il.), act. кéкληкα (Ar.).
•COMP Very frequently with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, έv-, ¿к-, έñ-, пapα-, лро-, éроσ-, σv-.
As a first member in кaλɛσσí-xopoç ‘calling to the dance' (Orph. L. 718; Schwyzer:
443f.); cf. ►óµoкλý (also óµ-), óµo-kλéw, -áw.
●DER With a disyllabic stem: 1. кαλýτwp ‘Caller', epithet of кñpv§ (§ 577), also as a
PN (O 419), with Kaλntopídns (N 541); kaλŋ- as in kaλý-µevaɩ (K 125; athem. Aeol.
formation?) 2. Kaλýσios (Z 18); 3. káλeoiç = kλñois 'nominative' (gramm.).
With a monosyllabic stem: 4. кλñoɩç 'call, invitation, summon, etc.' (Att. Hell.), often
to prefixed verbs, e.g. ¿ñíкλŋ-σiç ‘surname' (II.); 5. -kλŋµa, e.g. έykλn-µα ‘reproach,
accusation' (Att.) with έукλýµwv, -µatikóç, -µatíšu, etc. 6. kλŋtýp, -ñpoç ‘herald,
witness' (A., Att.); óµokλŋ-τýp ‘who calls' (Il.) from ►óµokλý, -éw; ȧvakλntýpia
[n.pl.] ‘festival when a king is nominated' (Plb.); 7. kλýτwp, -opos ‘witness', also PN
(Hell.), after кλntηp (Fraenkel 1910: 17f.; on кaλńτwp : кλητýp see Benveniste 1948:
29, 40, 46). 8. кλŋτóç 'called, invited, welcome' (Hom.; Ammann 1956: 14 and 21)
with кAηTɛúw 'call to justice, etc.' (Att.), (ava-, etc.)-кλη-τɩкóç; often from the
prefixed verbs, e.g. έккλŋ-τos 'called in' (IA, Dor.) with the collective abstract
έккλŋoía ‘(called) meeting' (IA), ‘community, church' (LXX, NT); with έkkλŋoi-á¶w
and -aστýç, -aσµóc, etc.; with nominal first member in лоλú-кλη-τos 'often called',
i.e. 'called on from many sides' (A 438, K 420). 9. kλý-dŋy by name' (I 11; cf.
έžovoµakλýdnv); 10. έлíкλη-v ‘with (sur)name' (Pl.; Schwyzer: 425). Deverbative
formation кaλiστpέw = кaλéw (D. 47, 60 from Harp., Call.; probably first from a
noun, cf. λαστpéw, Schwyzer: 706). On kλnïïw, kAndWV (KAEN-, KANN-) see ►кλέoç.
ETYM The disyllabic verbal stem in кaλéσα (analogical кaλéσσα), beside кλη- in
Kékλŋμaι, KIKλŃσкw, кλητóç, points to a root *klh,- (кaλɛ- going back to *klh,-e-).
Latin has cla- (clamare, clārus) beside cala-re, both from a zero grade root. The

=== page 336 ===

624
Káλn
present kaλéw may be an innovation after кaλéσai; differently, Harðarson 1993a:
8298.
Cognate verbal forms include Lat. calāre ‘to announce, summon', U kařetu < *kalē-
tōd; further, OHG hellan 'to resound' and OS halōn 'to call, fetch' (= calare), OE
hlōwan ‘to low', Hitt. kalliš-zi / kališš- ‘to call, summon'. Noticeable among the
nominal forms are Skt. usa-kal-a- 'cock' (see on ηüкavós) and Lat. clārus 'sonorous,
bright' <*klh,-ro-, MOHG hell 'id.'. Kéλadoç 'noise' is not cognate.
кáλŋ ‘tumour'. →kýλŋ.
káλŋßos · áñeσkoλvµµévos tò aidoiov 'with cut off private parts' (H.). →ßáknλoç, as
well as кaẞáλλns.
Kaλiá [f.] 'hut, barn, granary, nest' (Hes.). <?>
VAR Ion. -in; кaλióç [m.] 'hut, scale' (Epich., Cratin.).
●DER Diminutive kaλídiov (Eup.); kaλiác, -ádoc [f.] ‘hut, nest, chapeľ (Attica IVª, D.
H., Plu.) with кaλiádiov (Delos IIª).
⚫ETYM The word kaλiá differs from other oxytone words in -tá by its ĩ, which is long
almost everywhere (but short in Theoc. 29, 12). Etymological connection with
►кαλúлτw, etc. is extremely doubtful.
kaλídia [n.pl.]? · εvτεpa. Kúлpio 'entrails (Cypr.)' (H.). <PG?(V)►
•ETYM Lidén KZ 61 (1934): 23ff. connected it with Arm. k'ałird ‘intestines (of
animals), with -rd after leard 'liver', and Lith. skilvis 'stomach'. Fur.116 compares
yáλλia. Evτεpα (H.) and considers the word to be Pre-Greek.
kaλɩvdéoµai [v.] ‘to roll about, wallow' (IA). ◄PG►
•VAR Only present stem.
•COMP Also with έv-, лρо-, лрoσ-, ovv-.
•DER кaλivбnepα 'place for horses to roll' (Ael.), kaλívdŋois 'name of a throw of the
dice' (Alciphr.).
•ETYM Perhaps (but not quite certainly) the aorist dɩα-кaλīσαι ‘transport by rolling'
(SIG² 587, 158) belongs here, together with diaкádios (Hermione); also, έσ- and лap-
кáλσιç (Epid.); however, cf. on кāλov. For the formation, cf. åλɩvdéoµaɩ and
кvλvбéoμαι (Güntert 1914: 131f.); DELG thinks it is a cross of these two. Fur.: 391
reminds of the alternation к-/ zero in Pre-Greek words.
kaλλaßiç, -ídos [f.] name of a lascivious dance (Eup. 163, Phot.). <PG?>
•VAR Also kaλaßis (H.) = tò repioñāv tà ioxía, ǹ yévos òpxýσews ảoxnµóvws tŵv
ioxiwv kuptovμévwv.
•ETYM The word seems to be derived from *кáλλaßos; it would belong to the group
of popular, lower class words in -ßos (cf. Chantraine 1933: 260ff.). Acc. to Bechtel
1921, 2: 375, it derives from *кαταλaßic, but this is semantically unexplained. Fur.: 343
compares кóλaẞpoç, a song that accompanies the кoλaßρiσμóç.
kādov
625
кáλλαɩov [n.] 'wattles' (Ar., Ael., Paus.), 'cock's crest' (Arist.), 'cock's tail feathers'
(Ael. Dion.). <PG?>
•VAR Usually plur. -a.
ETYM Unknown. The connection with кaλaïs 'cock' was rejected by WP 1, 444.
Probably Pre-Greek. See кaλáïvoç, ►кaλaïç.
káλλaïç, -180¢ [f.] 'blue-green stone, turquoise' (Plin.). →kaλáïvoç.
kaλλapíaç [m.] a kind of cod-fish (Archestr., Opp., H. s.v. λašívnc). ◄PG➤
•Var yaλ(\)apíaç. ix¤ús, ó óvíσkoç ‘cod-fish' (H.), yallɛpiac, yɛλapins (Dorion)
and Xελλapins = óvíσкoç (Dorio apud Ath. 3, 118c).
ETYM Acc. to Frisk, formed from кάλλoç with a suffix -íaç (Chantraine 1933: 94).
The
synonymous yaλ(^)apías is sometimes connected with yaλɛós 'dog-fish' (?); see
Strömberg 1943: 130f., as well as Thompson 1947: 97. The variants clearly point to a
Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 140); the two variants with e's and the geminate -λλ- suggest a
pre-form *kalar-.
Kaλλíãç [m.] 'monkey' (Din., Herod., H.). <GR>>
•VAR Ion. -inc, Dor. -íap (H.).
•DER PN Kaλλías.
•ETYM Perhaps a euphemistic usage of the PN (cf. Gal. 18: 2, 236 and 611), which has
been connected with кáλλoç. Cf. Kretschmer KZ 33 (1895): 560 and Kretschmer 1909:
122. A semantic parallel from Indic is given by Schulze KZ 56 (1929): 124: MInd. su-
mukha “nice face”, as a way of addressing an ape. Cf. also Spitzer KZ 57 (1930): 63.
kallißávtes [?] · öµola σudíoiç kai yalioiv, èv als tàs dypũs kooµoñoɩv ai yuvaïkeç.
[ǎven.] [† yévos ópxýσews áoxnµóvws tŵv ioxíwv kpatovµévwv] (H.). ◄PG?(S)►
•ETYM Unknown. Words with the suffix -(1ẞ)avɩ- are mostly Pre-Greek.
Kaiɛpéw [V.] 'to bring кaλà iɛpá', i.e. 'to sacrifice favorably' (IA); intr. impersonal
(of a sacrifice) 'to be кaλà iɛpá, work out well' (Hdt.). <GR▷
•VAR Aor. кaλλiepñσaɩ (IA), perf. kɛkaλdiépŋka (X.).
•Der kaλλiépnois (Attica), -ŋua (H., EM); Dor. кaλλiapia (Cos; from *kalλiapέw).
⚫ETYM Compounded from кaλà iɛpá (cf. Schwyzer: 726), with adaptation of the first
member to nominal compounds with кaλλt-. See ►кaλóç.
Kaλkúptoι →KIλλIKÚPIOL.
kaλλový •VAR káλλoç, kaλλúvw. ⇒kaλóç.
кãλov [n.] 'wood, logs (for burning), timber' (h. Merc. 112, Hes. Op. 427, Ion. trag.,
Call., Cyrene), also 'wood for ships' = 'ship' (Lacon. in Ar. Lys. 1253, X. HG 1, 1,23,
Plu. Alc. 28.). <PG?►
•VAR Mostly plur. -a.
•COMP As a first member in кaλоτúлоç· ó Spvoкoλάлτηу 'woodcutter' (H.), кaλo-
лédɩλa [n.pl.] “wooden shoes", fetters for the feet of a cow (Theoc. 25, 103); кaλó-
ñovç, -ñodoç [m.] “wooden foot”, i.e. ‘shoemaker's last' (v.l. in Pl. Smp. 191a and Poll.
2, 195; Edict. Diocl.), also кαλá-лоυç (Pl. l.c., Poll. 10, 141; after τετρά-лç?), with

=== page 337 ===

626
Kaλós
the diminutive kaλoródiov (Gal. 6, 364 [v.l. -aл-], Suid.); as technical expressions,
кɑλóñovç and kaλoródiov entered into Eastern languages, e.g. Arab. qālib, whence
Osman. kalyp 'form, model' > MoGr. τó кαλоúл ‘id.', MP kalapad, MoP kālbud
(Maidhof Glotta 10 (1920): 11; Bailey TPS 1933: 49). Of doubtful appurtenance is
кaλap<p>úa ‘canal, water conduit' (Ambracian acc. to sch. Gen. Ø 259), kaλappvfai
(cod. -yaí). τáqpol. Aμεpías 'ditches' (H.), acc. to Schwyzer: 438ª properly "wooden
water conduit"; similarly кaλapivɛç. ÓXεToí. Aάкwves 'water-pipe (Lacon.)' (H.); cf.
pɩvoñxoç ‘canal, etc., see Kretschmer Glotta 4 (1913): 335.
•DER Kάλɩvoç ‘of wood' (Epich., Lyc., A. R., Cyrene); diminutive (?) кálov (-íov?).
Evλápiov, þaкτηpídiov 'small piece of wood; small staff; кaλúpiov (-úqlov?).
Suλnqov 'piece of wood' (H.).
ETYM The word has been connected with кaíw, кañσat as 'firewood', by
comparison with the synonymous dāλóç ‘fire-brand' < daƑ-ɛλóc (to ►Saiw), under
the assumption that кãλov would represent *káƑ-ɛλov. However, since Dor. кāλov
cannot be derived from it, it was necessary to assume *кáƑ-aλov (Schwyzer: 248,
Lejeune 1972: 263). Nevertheless, in the case of a pre-form *кαƑ-αλ-, Pre-Greek
origin is much more likely. The connection with ►кaíw is not certain at all. From the
plur. кāλa, Latin borrowed cāla [f.] 'dry wood, firewood'. See кñλa.
kaλós [adj.] ‘beautiful, noble, good' (Il.); on the mg. Smothers Traditio 5 (1947): 1-57,
also Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934): 261. <?>
•VAR Primary compar. кaλλiwv (Alc. ntr. кáλtov [see below], El. кaλíτɛpos
[graphic?], rarely kaλwtepos, kalliwtɛpos), sup. káλ\iστos; Dor. adv. (Alcm. 98)
кaλλá; cf. Wackernagel 1916: 87f.
•DIAL Epic Ion. kāλóç, Boeot. кαλƑos (Del.³ 538 [VIª]).
•COMP Rare as a first member (for кαλλɩ-, εv-), e.g. кaλó-qu\\os 'with beautiful
leaves' (Thphr.; after µaкpó-, λɛtó-qu\\oç, etc.); as a second member e.g. åлɛpó-
kaλos 'not knowing what is beautiful (Pl.; from τò кaλóv). Note especially
кaλokȧyaƐía (orators, X.), univerbating abstract of kaλòç к(aì) ảyaðóc (IA; see
Berlage Mnem. 60 (2007): 20ff.).
•DER kaλótŋs ‘beauty' (Chrysipp. Stoic. 3, 60). With geminate: 1. кáλλos [n.] 'beauty'
(II.), as a second member e.g. in лεpɩ-кαλληs 'very beautiful' (Il., bahuvrihi); thence
кáλλчoç 'beautiful' (Od., h. Hom.; after кúdчµoç, see Arbenz 1933: 10ff.), kaλλúvw
'give beauty, make beautiful, sweep' (S., Pl., Arist.) with кαλλuvτns 'sweeper' (pap.
II), Káλλuvτpov 'broom', also name of a shrub (Arist.), кáλλuvеpov 'duster' (LXX,
pap.), kaλλvvtýpia [n.pl.] name of a purificatory festival (Phot., EM), kaλλúoµata
[pl.] 'dust' (Ceos). Fom кáλλoç also кaλλový ‘id.' (cf. ǹdový), kaλλoσúvŋ ‘id.' (E.). 2.
compar. кaλλíwv, káλλiσtos (Il.); thence кaλλtóoμa 'be made more beautiful'
(LXX), кaλλoτɛúш, -oμl be the most beautiful' (Ion.) with кaλλloteĭov,
кαλλíστεvμα sacrifice of the most beautiful, price of beauty, price of honour' (S., E.,
inscr.). 3. кaλλ- as a first member (Il.); e.g. кaλλi-yúvalк-α, -os, - 'with beautiful
women' (cf. Sommer 1948: 62), also in PNs, whence short names like Kaλλíaç, etc.
⚫ETYM Att. Kǎλóç and Ion. кāλós both derive from кaλƑóç; the noun кáλλos, the
compar. forms кaλλíwv, кáλλσTOS and the first member кaλλ- differ from these by
their geminate -λ-, an explanation of which is still wanting. One proposal has been
KG入 TIOG
627
a basis *кáλ-voç or *кáλ-дoç for кáλλoç (and кαλλíwv, кáλλiσtoc, while кaλλɩ- may
be analogical?), but this does not inspire confidence, as кáλλoç seems to be a Greek
innovation (cf. Chantraine 1933: 416f.), and there is no good explanation for кaλλ-
either. The assumption of expressive gemination (Chantraine l.c.) is an ad hoc
hypothesis and not a solution. Beside кaλ-Fós (with an old suffix *-wo-), one would
expect кaλ- as a first member (is it retained in Alc. кáλtov?), which Wackernagel KZ
61 (1934): 191ff. recognized in Skt. kaly-áṇa- 'beautiful'. Pinault BSL 98 (2003)
assumes that the original Skt. form was fem. kalyāṇi- 'with beautiful hips', the
second part of the compound being Skt. āņi- ‘axle-pin, linch-pin'; 'part of the leg
above the knee'. Schwyzer: 447° derives кaλλ- from antevocalic *кaλ-, whence
кaλλ- and (as a back-formation) кáλλoç, etc. Differently, Risch 1937 (par. 62a): -λλ-
is from a compar. *кáλλwv < *кαλ₁wv, whence кáλστos, etc. Similarly, Seiler 1950:
68ff.: a neuter comparative *кáλλov < *кáλдov was interpreted as a positive, and
resulted in a new comparative кáλλov, кaλλíwv (whence кáλσTOÇ, etc.).
кáλлŋ [f.] ‘troť (Paus., Plu., Hippiatr.). <PG(V)►
•DER kaλлášw ‘to troť (A. Fr. 145A, Aq., Suid.) with кαλлaσµóç (Philum. apud
Orib.).
⚫ETYM Technical term of horse riding without etymology, perhaps originally
onomatopoeic ("clapper"). Brugmann (e.g. Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 1: 260,
572) connected it with OPr. po-quelbton 'kneeling', Lith. klupti 'to kneel, stumble',
Germanic (e.g. Go. hlaupan 'walk'), but these forms cannot explain the Greek -α-.
The same holds for the comparison with кέλŋs, koλuôpóv. ¿λaqpóv ‘nimble' (H.).
Fur.: 379 compares okaλnášɛiv. þeµißwdŵç ßadilɛiv ‘to walk around at random' (H.),
okaλanáčɛi þéµßɛταɩ ‘id.' (H.) with prothetic σ-, which suggests that the word is
Pre-Greek.
káλлıç, -ɩɗoç [f.] 'pitcher' (n) 20; on the mg. Brommer Herm. 77 (1942): 358 and 365).
<PG?>
VAR Acc. -v, -ɩda.
•COMP кαλло-чópos 'carrying a pitcher' (epigr.).
•DER кάλлη (кáλлηу v.l. for -лу Plu., Hdn.) name of a constellation (Vett. Val.;
Scherer 1953: 173 and 190); кáλлos. notŋpíov ɛidos kind of drinking vessel' (H.).
Diminutive кάλлov (Pamphil. apud Ath. 11, 475c).
•ETYM Without a certain explanation, like many other vessel names. Most often
connected with a Celtic word for 'urn, bucket, e.g. OIr. cilornn (< *kelpurno-), but
this does not explain the -a-. Acc. to others, it is connected with Assyr. karpu 'vase,
pot' or with OHG hal(a)p handle'. Lat. calpar (formation unclear) was borrowed.
from кáλлη. Fur.: 146 connects it with кɛλέßŋ, for which there seems no reason. Still,
кáλлç is possibly Pre-Greek.
кάATIOS [m.] 'shoe' (Rhinth., Plu., Edict. Diocl.). <LW Lat.>>
•VAR Also кáλτoι (for кáλτ<>0₁?). úлоб½µατа кoiλα, èv olç iллεúоvσ 'hollow
sandals, in which horsemen rode' (H.).
•ETYM A Sicilian loanword from Lat. calceus (kaλikioι Plb. 30, 18, 3).

=== page 338 ===

628
karún
кaλúßŋ [f.] ‘hut, cabin' (Hdt.); 'bridal bower' (A. R.); ‘sleeping-tent' (PFlor. 335, 2).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kaλuẞóc (Epigr. Gr. 260, Cyrene), кoλußóç· εлavλiç 'farmstead' (H.).
⚫DER Kaλuẞíτns 'living in a hut'; кaλvßo-лéoµα [v.] 'to make oneself a cabin' (Str.).
⚫ETYM The variant кoλuẞóç, adduced by Fur.: 343, shows that the word is Pre-Greek.
Pre-Greek has a rule a - u> ov; see Fur.: 340.
káλvyes [?] · tà ¤¼µßpva ‘embryos' (H.). <PG►
⚫ETYM The structure of the word (kaλ-vy-) is typically Pre-Greek.
.
kaλvdiλa [?] · yéqupa ‘'bridge' (H.). <PG?►
•ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word.
Kaλúdpiov [n.] 'a small cable' (BCH 29, 543, Delos II). <PG?>
•ETYM Unknown. Probably a Pre-Greek word.
Káλvž, -ĎKOÇ [f.] 'cup, calyx of a flower, husk, shell, pod, rosebud', also metaph. for the
ornament of a woman (Σ 401). <PG(S)►
•COMP As a first member e.g. in кaλvкoσtέqavos ‘crowned with buds' (B.).
⚫DER Diminutive кaλúktov (Dsc., H.); kaλvкwdns ‘k.-like' (Thphr.), kaλÚKELOS ÀÍƉos
name of a stone found in the fish called σάλлŋ (H.); also кάλuчiç. kódµios tis ėk
pódwv 'an ornament made of roses', кaλúžɛç þódwv кaλúкia 'rosebuds' (H.),
Kaλúkwσiç 'rosebud?' (Aq.), as if from *кaλúσow, or *кaλvкów; cf. the formations in
Chantraine 1933: 288 and кαλuкíčεv. ȧvеɛïv 'to blossom' (H.).
•ETYM On the ending -vε, cf. Chantraine 1933: 383. The word resembles Skt. (class.)
kalikā- ‘buď, but must probably be kept separate; see Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. Cf.
► кúλi§ and ► okaλλíov. Both root and suffix look Pre-Greek (kaλ-vk-).
кαλúлτw [V.] 'to cover, hide' (II., IA). <PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. кaλúчyaɩ, perf. med. кɛkáλvµµaɩ, etc.
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. àµiqi-, kata-, лεpɩ-, ouv-, also with άvα-, άло-, Èк-
in the mg. 'to open up, reveal'.
•DER 1. See ►кalúßŋ; 2. kalvoý ‘submerged land with ảлoкáλvqos (aiyıalós,
ǎpoupa) land that can be cultivated after inundation' (pap.), nepikalvoý
'envelopment' (Pl. Lg. 942d); on -ẞn and -on beside кαλú-лтш Schwyzer: 332f. 3.
(лρо-, лαрα-, etc.) кáλчµµа 'cover, veil, etc.' (Il.) with кαλvátov (Ar.). 4.
ovykaλvµµós ‘cover' (Ar. Av. 1496). 5. έy-, кaτα-, åлo-кáλvчiç ‘cover, etc.' (Hell.);
here, probably as an endearing name Kaλvyw [f.] “one who covers” (Od.), properly
a goddess of death acc. to Güntert 1919, see also Bérard REGr.67 (1954): 503f. 6.
кαλνлτηр, -ñρоç [m.] 'cover, tile' (Hp., Arist., Att.), кαλvлτηрíчw 'cover with tiles'
(inscr.), fem. кaλúлтερα 'veil' (AP); εл-, εу-, ȧvαкаλυлтηрιоv, ta 'concealing;
ceremony of unveiling' (Arist.). 7. kɑλúñτpα, -pŋ [f.] 'veil, cover' (Il.). 8. čк-
kaλvittɩkós ‘revealing' (Stoic., S. E.).
ETYM The word has been compared to кpúлτw for the formation. In Western
European languages, a full grade thematic root present *kel-e/o- is found, e.g. in Olr.
celim, Lat. *celō, -ere (in occulere), OHG helan 'to hold back, hide'. Further, with a
кaμápa
629
lengthened grade, deverbative Lat. cēlāre, 'to hide', and a zero grade yod-present in
Germanic, e.g. Go. huljan 'to veil, conceal'. Cf. ►кÉλvqos.
However, in this way neither the Greek a-vocalism nor the element v + labial can be
accounted for. In view of the variants, the root кαλuß/л/q- is clearly Pre-Greek. Cf.
on ►кaλúẞŋ, which proves Pre-Greek origin in a different way.
кáλxŋ [f.] 'murex, purple flower, Chrysanthemum coronarium' (Alcm., Nic., Str.),
metaph. as a term of construction ‘rosette of a capitaľ (Att., Hell., inscr.). <PG?►
•VAR With metathesis of aspiration xáλкη (Meisterhans 1900: 103f.), also xáλxn.
⚫DER Denominative verb кaλxaívw 'to be purple' (Nic. Th. 641), originally medial,
metaphorically trans. 'to ponder deeply' (čлoç, S. Ant. 20), intr. 'to be unquiet,
excited' (E. Heracl. 40), 'to long for' (Lyc. 1457).
●ETYM A loan of unknown origin. The poetic meaning 'to ponder, be excited may
have arisen after лоpôúpα : лорôúpш, which were secondarily connected with
each other. It cannot be decided whether the name of the seer Káλxaç belongs here
as well.
кáλws [m.] ‘reefing rope, cable, rope in general' (ε 260). <PG?►
●VAR Acc. -w, -wv; káλos (ε 260 and Hdt.), Hell. plur. -wɛç, -waç, -woi
•COMP кαλw-στрóçoç ‘rope-twister' (Plu. Per. 12).
⚫DER Diminutive кαλ@diov, also кaλoídiov (com., Th., inscr., pap.).
⚫ETYM No etymology; probably a technical loan. The IE etymologies that have been
proposed (see Frisk) are untenable.
kaµáv [f.] · tòv ảуpóv. Kρñτяç 'field (Cretan)' (H.). <?>
•DIAL Myc. ka-ma a plot of land, ka-ma-e-u 'tenant of a ka-ma' (see below).
⚫ETYM Unknown. An interpretation /kamas/ has been proposed; see Lejeune RPh. 42
(1968): 233f. and Ruijgh Lingua 58 (1982): 208.
káµaž, -akoç [f., m.] 'pole to support the vine, bar, shaft of a spear' (Σ 563). <PG(S)►
●DER кaµáкiov (sch.), кαµáкɩvoç ‘made of one bar' (X.), kaµakiaç σītos corn with a
stalk that is too long' (Thphr.; cf. Strömberg 1937: 91).
•ETYM Formation like dóva§, лîvaž, kλîµaž, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 377ff.). Several
languages have similar words for 'bar, wood, stick, etc.', but they are all different: Skt.
śámyā ‘stock, nail', Av. simā ‘part of the harnass of the wagon for horses', Arm. sami-
k' [pl.] 'wood of the yoke', Gm., e.g. MHG hamel ‘bar, bobbin'. Fur.: 221 compares
áµákiov. káµaž (H.), with alternation к/zero (see ibid. 391). The suffix -aк- is highly
frequent in Pre-Greek. See кaμаońv.
kaµápa [f.] ‘vault, vaulted room, wagon and bark with vaulted roof (Hdt., LXX, Str.).
<LW?>
•DIAL Ion. -pη.
●DER kaµápiov (inscr.), kaµapía. koɩtwv кaµápaç ëxwv ‘having a vaulted chamber of
beds' (H.), кαμαρpiкóç 'vaulted' (Ath. Mech.).
Denominative verbs: 1. кaμapów ‘to provide with a vault' with кaµápwoiç ‘vaulť
(Hell.), kaµáp-wµa 'vault' (Str., Gal.), -wτóç ‘vaulteď (Str.), -wτιкóç ‘used in
vaulting' (pap.); 2. кaµаpɛów [v.] 'to accumulate, exert oneself (H.). Further

=== page 339 ===

630
káiapoc 1
kaµápns. déoµns ‘package, bundle’, kaµápai Jŵvai otpaɩɩwtikai ‘belts for soldiers',
кaμaρíç. кoσμáριov yuvaɩкɛчov 'women's ornament' (H.); cf. below.
⚫ETYM The form кaµápa recalls Av. kamarā ‘girdle', with a different meaning that is,
however, found in the glosses кaµápŋ, kaµapis (H.). Lat. camurus, -a, -um ‘curved
(of horns), vaulted' has also been adduced. Comparisons with other languages
remain uncertain: e.g. Skt. kmárati 'to be curved' (gramm.; see Mayrhofer KEWA
s.v.), Gr. кuéλɛ0pov if from *кμερεе pov (?), the Gm. word for 'heaven', e.g. Go.
himins. It is rather a loan, perhaps from an eastern language (from Carian, acc. to
sch. Orib. 46, 21, 7). From the Greek word, Lat. camera was borrowed; thence it was
borrowed into Germanic and Balto-Slavic. See ► кáµɩvoç.
кáµapos 1 [m.] name of a poisonous plant, kind of Aconitum (?), also = dɛλqívov,
'larkspur' (Hp., Stratt., Nic., Dsc.). <EUR
•VAR Also кáμμаpoç.
⚫ETYM It has been compared with the Germanic and Slavic word for 'hellebore':
OHG hemera, Ru. čemerica (from CS čemer 'poison', properly 'hellebore'), and
Lith. kēmeras hemp agrimony (Eupatorium cannabium), burr marigold. The
notation кáμμopov (Dsc., Erot.) can be folk-etymological after кáμμopoç 'unhappy'.
Given the distribution, the word seems to be a loan from a European subtrate
language (see Beekes 2000: 28). From кáµµapoç: kammári 'spurge' in Lower Italy;
see Rohlfs ByzZ 37 (1937): 53, Rohlfs 1930: N° 877, and Dawkins JHS 56 (1936): 4.
káµapos 2 [adj.] = ȧoqaλýs (Apollon. apud sch. Orib. 46, 21, 7). <?►
•ETYM The word would be Carian. Further unknown. See ▸кaµápa.
kaμaońv, -ñvos [m.] name of an unknown fish (Emp., AP, Hdn. Gr., H.). <EUR➤
⚫ETYM Given the fish name ηλaкаτýу (from ηλαкáτη), one would posit a basic form
*кáμaσoç for кaμaσny, with suffixal -ασoç like in лétaσoç, kóµлaσоç (Chantraine
1933: 435; unclear). It has been connected with Balto-Slavic words for the 'sheatfish':
Lith. šāmas, Latv. sams, Ru. som, etc. Further, connected with кáµaž ‘pole, bar' by
Solmsen 1909: 122f.; on the naming motive, see Strömberg 1943: 36. Probably a loan
from the European substrate. Fur.: 214 connects it with кáßα(1)σoç, kaµaσóç, but
without evidence.
káµŋlos [m., f.] ‘cameľ (Hdt., A., Ar.). <LW Sem.>
●COMP As a first member e.g. in kaµŋλo-rápdaλiç [f.] ‘giraffe' (Agatharch., LXX;
Strömberg 1944: 12); also in кαµηλáτηs for *кaµŋλ-ελáτηs 'camel-driver' with
кaµŋλ-áσɩov ‘camel-driver's wages' (pap.), -aoía ‘camel-driving' (Dig.).
⚫DER Diminutive кaunλov; adjectives каμηλειоç, кaμηλкóç 'belonging to a camel',
кaunλwdns like a camel' (Gal.); nouns кaµηλíτηs (Arist.), кaµŋλápios 'camel-
driver'; Kaunλóv 'camel stable'; verb кaunλíw 'to resemble a camel' (Hld.).
⚫ETYM From Semitic (originally Babylonian?; Grimme Glotta 14 (1925): 17); cf. Hebr.
gāmāl (= yaµáλ. ǹ káµŋλos rapà Xaλdaíos H.), with (Ionic?) development of a to
in -nλoc; cf. Tavyáµηλa = кaµýλov olkoç Str. 16, 1, 3 (Kretschmer KZ 31 (1892): 287).
From кáunλoç come Skt. kramela- (after krámate 'stride'), Lat. camēlus, and the
European forms.
Káuiopos
káµuλoç [m.] ‘rope, cable' (sch. Ar. V. 1035, Suid.). <LW Sem.>
631
•ETYM From Semitic, acc. to Lewy 1895: 154, who compares Arab. gamal ‘id.'. Others
argue that it arose from the v.l. káµλoç for кáµŋλos Ev. Matt. 19, 24, Marc. 10, 25,
Luc. 18, 25 (káµŋlov dià tpýµatos paqídos dieλ0ɛïv ‘a camel going through the eye
of a needle'), as 'rope' would fit better.
káµīvos [f.] ‘furnace for smelting, baking, burning, etc.' (Hom. Epigr. 14, Hdt., A.).
<PG?(S)►
VAR Also -n (pap. VIP).
•DER Diminutive кαµívov (Gp., Olymp. Alch.). Other substantives: кαшvà уpnūs
'furnace woman' (σ 27; Chantraine 1933: 116); кauvɛúç name of an artisan working at
a furnace, e.g. 'smith' or 'potter' (D. S.; Boßhardt 1942: 76); кaшvíwv 'id.' (Tegea IIP);
kaµvítns äptos (Philistion apud Ath.).
Adjectives: кaμívɩos ‘belonging to the furnace' (Thphr.); kaµvaños ‘id.' (Ezek.) with
кашvaíα = кáшvos (LXX; cf. Chantraine 1933: 86); кαшvádηç like a furnace' (Str.).
Kalvaia
Verb кauvɛúw 'to burn or smelt in a furnace' (Arist., Thphr., Str.) with kaµvevtýs =
kaµvɛús (pap. IIIª, Luc.), kaµvevtηp (avλóc) ‘pair of bellows in a smithy' (AP), fem.
-ɛúτpia (Aristarch.), кaшvɛía (-ía) 'burning, smelting' (Thphr., Gal.). All derivatives
are rare, most of them late.
⚫ETYM On the gender, see Schwyzer 1950: 34. A technical loan of unknown origin.
The comparison with кauápa has little value; that with OCS kamy 'stone' is possible.
Is it a loan from the north or from the east? From káµvos, Lat. camīnus, to which
MHG kamin, etc. are related. Note that -iv- is a Pre-Greek suffix.
кáµµаpoç 1 [m.] 'kind of crab' (Epich., Sophr., Rhinth., H.), on the mg. cf. Thompson
1947 S.V. PG(V)►
•VAR кaμчapíç ‘id.' (Gal.); кoµµápαι ½ кoµáρpai. кapídɛç. Maкɛdóvɛç ‘shrimps
(Maced.)' (H.).
ETYM Has been compared with ON humarr, LG and MoHG Hummer. However, the
variation a/o points to a Pre-Greek word (which may in turn be a loan from
elsewhere). Skt. kamáṭha- [m.] 'turtle' is unrelated in any case. From кáµµapoç, Lat.
cammarus was borrowed.
káquiapog2 → káiapos.
kaovíŋ [f.] ‘perseverance, successful defense' (X 257, ¥ 661, APl.), on the mg. see
Trümpy 1950: 201f. <GR
•ETYM For *кατaμovín, with Aeolic treatment of the preposition, either as an abstract
of каτáμovoç (Hell.), or with a metrically conditioned change of the suffix for
*кαшдový = кατаμový (Hell.), belonging to кατaμεvεν. Sее ►кáµµоρoç.
·káuiopog.
кáшчopoç [adj.] 'unhappy' (Od., A. R.). <GR>
•ETYM Aeolic for metrically unfit *кατá-µopoç (via *кáτ-µopoç), a hypostasis for
кατà µópov (µópov) 'who is subject to µópoç, fate'. Beside it exists the older form
кáσμopoç. Súστηvoç 'unhappy' (H.), = *кáσσμоρоç < *кát-σµopoç.

=== page 340 ===

632
cauva
káµvw [v.] ‘to toil, labor, build; to get tired, die, be in danger, be in need (II.); the
euphemistic meaning 'to die' almost only in epic oi кaµóvtɛç, Att. oi kekunkótes.
<IE *kemh₂-'exert oneself, get tired'>
●var Aor. kaµɛïv, fut. kaµoñµaɩ, perf. кékµŋêa, Dor. (Theoc.) kékµāka, epic ptc.
Kekinic.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àлo-, έк-, σvу-. As a second member in compounds: à-
кáµatos ‘without fatigue' (II.). ȧ-кáµaç, -avτoç ‘indefatigable' (Il.); more usual -êµŋ-
t- (-kµā-t-), -kµn-to- (-kµā-to-), e.g. à-kµýs, -ñtos ‘id.', ä-kuntos ‘id.', rodú-
кμητoç 'prepared with much labor'.
•DER Verbal noun káµatos [m.] ‘labor, much demanding labor, fatigue, pain' (Il.);
кaµaτwdŋs ‘tiring' (Hes., Pi.), kaµaτηpós ‘tiring, tired' (Ion., h. Ven. 246), after
áviŋpós, etc.; kaшaτŋdóv ‘with fatigue' (Man.); also the verbal forms кaµaτŵv.
колŵν 'weary', кá μετà каколаðεíaç εipуáσατо 'he labors with
perseverance' (H.), to kaµatáw, -teÚw.
•ETYM Beside the thematic nasal present кάuvw, which is a Greek innovation,
Sanskrit has an athematic nasal present: e.g. med. śamnite 'to exert onself, labor'. The
disyllabic root *kemh₂- is also seen in the ipv. śamişva and in the agent noun samitár-
'who prepares'; Gr. káµatos < *kmh2-eto- is a different formation (on the type, see
Vine 1998. The thematic aorist кaµov, škaµε is parallelled by Skt. aśamat, both from
zero grade *kmh₂-e/o-; the full grade sigmatic aor. áśamiṣṭa (RV) points to an older
athematic root aorist *(h,e-)kemh₂-t. The Greek zero grade is кµη-, PGг. кµā- <
*kmh₂-C- (in кéкµŋ-ka, äkµŋtos), which gave Skt. śän-tá- [ptc.]; see Rix 1976: 73.
Traces of the root in other languages have not been found with certainty; perhaps in
some Celtic nouns, like MIr. cuma 'trouble', cumal 'female slave'. See ▸koµέw,
► KOµí¶w.
кáµлavoç [m.] ‘weighing-machine, steelyard' (pap. VIP). <LW Lat.>
•ETYM From Lat. campana.
кάμлη 1 [f.] 'caterpillar, silkworm' (Hp., com., Arist., Thphr.). <?>
•COMP лτVо-кάμлη 'caterpillar of the pine woods, Gnethocampa processionea'
(Dsc.; also ai лτúïvai káµnai).
⚫ETYM Related to кάшлτш, in the sense of 'curve'? However, note Skt. kapaná
'caterpillar', Latv. kâpe, kâpars larva of an insect, caterpillar'; if cognate with kapaná,
кάμлη was adapted to kaµný, káµíτш by folk etymology (Frisk). The explanation in
Strömberg 1944: 9 is unclear. See Gil Fernández 1959: 147 (who refers to Arist. IA
706b and 709a). The etymology seems doubtful.
кάμлη 2 [f.] 'sea monster' (Epich. apud H., D. S., Nonn.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also кáµлoç [n.] in Libya (Lyc.; H.), after кñtos ‘id.'?
•ETYM It has been compared with iллo-кαµñoç. Fur.: 119 mentions кéµµop· µéya
кητοç (< *кεµÑлор?) and уεшлóç· коττоç, уεшлúλoυç τоÙÇ i×ебç, τàç лηλαμúdaç
'tunnies' (H.); this would show that the word is Pre-Greek.
káµñtw [v.] ‘to bend, curve, turn' (Il., IA). ◄PG?(V), EUR?►
kávapos
633
•VAR Fut. káµyw, aor. кáµyαɩ, pass. кашôеñvαι (A., Th.; v.l. I 158), perf. pass.
кεкáμqеaι (Hp.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, kata-, ¿ñɩ-, nεpɩ-; σvv-; as a first member e.g. in
kaµí-лovç epithet of Epivús (A. Th. 791 [lyr.]), mg. uncertain.
•DER Substantives: 1. (άvα-, επ-, nεpɩ-, ovу-)kaµлý ‘curve, curvature' (IA) with
кáμлчоç 'bent' (E. IT 81, at verse end; after лоμлý: лó, sеe Arbenz 1933: 81);
елкάμл-чоç 'forming an εлɩкаμлη, bоw, bend', military and architectonical
expression (Ph. Bel., Plb.). 2. (àvα-, кατα-, εл-, συу-, etc.)кáµчiç bow, curving' (IA);
3. kaµлtýp, -ñpos [m.] “bender, curver", as a military and sports term, curve,
turning-point of the racecourse' (X., Arist., Herod.) with кaµëτýpios (sch.). 4.
лεpiкáµïtηç ‘tergiversator' (gloss.).
Adjectives: 5. кaµлúλoç 'bent, curved (Il.; after ȧyукúλoç, Chantraine 1933: 250) with
кaµлúλŋ [ƒ.] ‘crook, crozier' (Ar., Plu.), кαµлovλip (= kaµëvλíç). ¿laías ɛidos.
Aάкwveç 'kind of olive tree' (H.), кαшлλóτη 'curvedness' (Hp., Arist.), кαµлúλλw
'curve' [v.] (Hp.), ȧlso кαшлλεúоμ, кaшó (medic.), кαшлvλáчw (Phot.,
Suid.); poetical lengthening кaµëvλóɛ (AP; Schwyzer 527). 6. ¿µ-, nepi-kaµiñýs
‘curved, from εni-, nepi-káµittw. 7. kaµitikós ‘flexible' (Arist., Poll.). 8. kaµyóv.
кaμлúλov ‘bent, curved' (H.); after yaшóç? (cf. Stang Symb. Oslo. 23 (1944): 46ff.).
●ETYM A non-ablauting verbal stem kaµë-, with primary formations kaµëý (and
кâµ´úλoç?), and a yod-present кáµлτw. In other languages, we find scattered
nominal formations, partly in metaphorical meanings (so that the comparison is
often uncertain: Latv. kampis 'curved wood, hook for a kettle', Lith. kampas 'corner,
side, hidden place', also 'curved wood at the collar (of a horse)', which remind of Lat.
campus 'field' (properly 'curve, depression'?), OCS ko̟tɩ [m.] 'corner' and a
Germanic adj. 'mutilated, lame', e.g. Go. hamfs. Baltic has several words for 'curved,
etc.' with u-vocalism: Lith. kumpas 'curved', Latv. kùmpt 'become bent, etc.
Lat. campsāre 'to sail around, bend off was perhaps borrowed from кáµчαɩ; and
from кαμη were borrowed Lat.-Rom. camba, gamba and Alb. këmbë ‘leg, foot';
from кαµлúλoç, Osman. kambur ‘hump, humpy' > MoGr. кaßoúpηs. Amantos
(apud Kretschmer Glotta 16 (1928): 179) assumes a noun *уáшμα, *кáμμа in Bуz.
yaμчaτíw = кáµntw, -oµai.
Most parts of Frisk's discussion have been maintained here, as it nicely illustrates
how unreliable the material is: the words adduced with their alternations are rather
from a substrate language. Add to this the fact that an IE reconstruction would
require a form *kh₂mp-, a root structure that is suspicious. The conclusion can only
be that кαшл- is of Pre-Greek or European substrate origin. Cf. on yaμɩós and
►уváшлτw, for which the same conclusion is reached.
кávaẞos [m.] ‘wooden framework around which artists molded wax or clay; block-
figure; mannikin; lean person' (Stratt., Arist., Poll., H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also кávvaßoç; кívvaßos (Suid.) [f.l. acc. to LSJ 953], kɩvaßɛúµata.
лаvouруημаτα 'crimes' (H., Phot.; uncertain Ar. Fr. 699).
●DER kaváßios, -ɩvos 'belonging to a к., like a к.' (AP, H.).
ETYM On the formation, cf. words in -ẞos like кáккαẞoç, кóλlaßos, oíttußos
(Chantraine 1933: 262); perhaps from ►кávva ‘reeď, if properly a ‘reed frame'.

=== page 341 ===

634
kávadol
However, given the variation v/vv, the word would be Pre-Greek; note Lat. canaba,
cannaba.
kávadoɩ [m.] · σlayóvɛç, yváðoɩ ‘cheeks, jaws' (H.). <EUR?, PG?►
•ETYM See on yváеos s.v. ►уvαеµós.
кavaxń [f.] ‘noise, sharp sound' (II.). ◄PG?(V)►
•DIAL Dor. -ά.
•COMP As a first member in кavaxη-лovç, Dor. -xá- ‘with noisy feet' (Alcm.).
•DER kavaxέw, aor. -ñσaɩ (τ 469, Cratin., A. R.), lengthened кavaxišw (M 36, к 399
v.l., Hes. Sc. 373) [v.] 'to ring, clash' (cf. Schwyzer: 736, Porzig 1942: 231); aor. Sia-,
έy-, έk-kavážaι of gurging and gulping sounds (E. Cyc. 152 and 157, Ar., Eup.),
кavážai acc. to Poll. 10, 85 = τò έккεVшσαι †† έклεйν 'to emptу, drink up'; кaváčas.
έyxéas 'pouring' (H.); кavaxηdá ‘with noise' (Hes. Th. 367 et al.), -ŋdóv ‘id.' (D. P.,
Aret.) and the hapax кavaxńs (A. Ch. 152 [lyr.], of dákpv), kavaxós (Nic. Th. 620; of
þáτpaxoɩ 'frogs'), both first from кavaxέw; кavaxiσµós (Orac. Chald.) from
kavaxiČw.
•ETYM Explained as an expressive formation like στovaxη (related to στεváxw; cf.
Chantraine 1933: 403), derived from a verb 'to sing, etc.' seen in Lat. canō = Olr.
canim, whence names for 'cock' like Gr. ►ηïкavóç, Go. hana, etc. are derived. Fur.:
343 compares кóvaẞos and concludes that the word is Pre-Greek.
kávdapos [m.?] · ävepaε 'charcoal, coaľ (H.). ◄ PG▷
•ETYM Generally connected with Skt. candrá- 'glowing, light', Lat. candor 'white
glow', candeo 'to glow'. This etymology must be wrong: how could a stem form
кavd ever arise? Fur. 391 connects кávdapos with ave pač (with alternation к-/
zero), which is not evident. Still, Pre-Greek origin seems certain.
кávdavλoç [m.] a Lydian meal or sauce (com., Men.). <LW Lydia>
•VAR Also Kávdūλoç.
ETYM Loan from Lydia?
кávduç, -vos [m.] a mantle with sleeves, worn by the Persians (X.). <LW Orient.>
⚫ETYM From OP *kantu-: see Szemerényi 1991: 2034f.; also, Happ IF 68 (1963): 99.
kavdútāves [?] ‘chest where precious clothes are kept ◄LW Iran.>
•VAR kavɗutával, kavdúλai.
⚫ETYM From OP *kandu-dāna-. See de Lamberterie in DELG Supp. (also RPh. 70),
who cites Szemerényi connecting the first member of the Persian word with a root
*kam- 'to cover'. Extensive discussion, with various explanations for the second
member, in Brust 2005: 290ff.
кávňapos [m.] kind of (dung-)beetle, Scarabaeus pilularius', also metaph. of a
drinking cup, canoe, fish (Strömberg 1943: 123f.), and a women's ornament (IA).
<PG, LW Sem.>
•COMP As a second member e.g. in λto-, kukvo-kávðapos (com.).
•DER kavеápiov name of a cup (Att. inscr., Plu.); kavēapíç a beetle, also name of a
fish and a plant (Hp., Arist.); кaveάpɛwę name of a vine (Thphr.; -ɛwç like in
kavóc
635
εpɩvɛwç; see on ► έpiveós), kavðapítηs olvos (Plin.), both of the Kavápɩoç äкpa on
Samos (Str.), (also called "Аμлελоç, Redard 1949: 97); kavēapíaç name of a precious
stone (Plin.); кavеapóбns like a к.' (sch.).
⚫ETYM Not well explained. Connected with the name of the ass (kávеwv, кavеýλio)
by Strömberg 1944: 10f., with the same suffix as in Xiчapoç, кkiσσapoç, et al.
(Chantraine 1933: 226f.). Hardly probable. On the plant name кavlapíç,
ȧvτкávеapov, see Strömberg 1940: 140. DELG s.v. points out that there are
anthroponyms (Bechtel 1917b: 582 and 589) as well as toponyms like Kávéapoç, a
port of Piraeus, and concludes from this that the term may be from Pre-Greek, with
is likely. As an Akkadian word kanda/uru- 'cup' exists, it would be a loan in this
meaning; see Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 672.
кavðýλia [n.pl.] 'panniers on both sides of the pack-saddle' (Ar., Artem.), also 'curved
pieces of wood at the back of a ship', which were used when a tent was drawn up'
(H.). <PG(V)►
VAR Also lov [acc.sg.] 'rafters' in architecture (IG 22, 463: 73); Övoç кavеoç
'pack-ass' (Pl., com., X.).
●DER kavēŋλikóç belonging to the pack-basket or pack-ass' (pap.). Also kavēíaι
σëvpídɛç ‘creels' (H.), kávðwv = övos kavšýλios (Ar., AP), kavēíç. òvíc ‘dung of an
ass' (H.).
•ETYM The relations of these words among each other and to other similar
formations are unclear, due to their specialized technical meanings. Formally, we
may compare каvеnλа with кεчýλα, уaдλoç; also note τpáxηλoç, yaдoηλaí, and
other words with a suffix -nλ-. The form кaveia could be another derivation
without A. The form (övoc) кaveno 'ass' is secondary to кavenλia 'pack-baskets'
(Debrunner IF 54 (1936): 55); кávěwv and кavеiç could be short forms (like Lat. cabō
to caballus). Lat. cant(h)ērius 'castrated stallion', also 'rafters', which has a different
suffix, cannot be separated from кavеnia, -10. However, there is no Indo-
European etymology; acc. to Deroy Glotta 35 (1956): 190f., it is a Mediterranean
word. Fur.: 130 connects it with ávěrov (Charax), with alternation к-/ zero, and
assumes Pre-Greek origin; he further connects it with кavеíaɩ· σлupídɛs and with
кáðoç. σñvpíç (Fur.: 290). See ►кávðapos, ► kavēóc, ► kavðúλŋ.
кavós [m.] 'corner of the eye' (Arist., Nic., Gal.); poet. 'eye' (Hell.); acc. to H. also
'opening in the roof for the smoke, funnel, кaлvoбóкη' and 'pot, kettle, Xτρóлoç'
(Sicilian). <PG➤
•COMP Hence the hypostasis έykávěɩos 'which is in the кavėóç' (Dsc., Gal.) with
έyкavėíç [f.] ‘tumor in the inner angle of the eye' (Cels., Gal.), acc. to Poll. 2, 71 =
'inner corner of the eye'; also εлкavеíç ‘id.' (Hippiatr., v.l. in Poll. l.c.).
•DER kavеwdŋs ‘rounded' (Call. Fr. 504 conj. Hemsterhuys; codd. кaðv-, kukv-).
•ETYM Not well explained. кavewŋs in Callimachos does not allow us to assume an
original meaning 'curve'. It has been compared with Celtic words like W cant ‘iron
band, brim', Gallo-Rom. *cantos, and a Slavic word for 'corner (of a farm), etc.', e.g.
Ru. kut. However, this comparison is problematic, since Gr. -0- remains
unexplained, and because the Slavic words are suspect of western European origin.

=== page 342 ===

636
KavOý入n
The material accumulated by Belardi Rend. Acc. Linc. 8: 9 (1954): 610ff. and Belardi
Doxa 3 (1950): 209 needs to be sifted. Since there is no IE etymology, and since an IE
pre-form is impossible (*kh₂nd- would have given *кa0-), the conclusion must be
that the word is Pre-Greek.
кavðúλŋ [f.] ‘swelling, tumor', only in кavðúlaç. τàs ávidos. Aloxúlos
Zaλajuviais (Fr. 220) 'swellings' (H., at an alphabetically incorrect place). <PG(S,V)►
⚫VAR Also кovenλaí ai avoidσε (H.).
•ETYM The comparison with a Germanic word for ‘ulcer, pus', e.g. OHG gund, Go.
gunds 'yáyypaiva', would require that кovė- is original, or that кave- is secondary
for *ka- (which is highly unlikely). Strömberg 1944: 94 derives кavеúλŋ from the
name of the ass (кávеwv, кavеos), which is semantically unconvincing. The
variation a/ o is clearly Pre-Greek, as is the suffixation (Fur.: 201¹).
Kávva [f.] 'reed, Arundo donax, reed-fence, -mat' (Com., inscr., Plb.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Often plur. Further forms see below.
•DIAL Myc. ko-no-ni-pi /konōni-p¹i/. Ion. кávvŋ.
•COMP As a first member in кavn-qópos [f.] ‘female carrying a basket' (Ar.),
kavnpop-éw,-ia, Ikós.
⚫DER 1. Kávηs, -istos [m.] 'reed mat' (Solon. Law in Plu. Sol. 21, Crates Com., D. H.)
with кαvуητо-лочóç (Hippon. 116). 2. кávvηкɛç· лλéуµаτα τарσwv 'windings of
wickerwork' (H.). 3. кavov, Ion. Kávɛov, epic also -εov [n.] 'reed basket, dish' (Il.;
substantivized adjective). Diminutive кavíσкoç, -íoкiov (Ar.), кavídiov (pap.);
further кávaστpov (Hom. Epigr., Nicophon, Attica, Crete; cf. on (úуaστpov), also
-avστpov (like Ɖεpµa(ú)στpa; see εpµós), -oτpov, -vστpov (inscr., pap., Poll.;
Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 283) = Lat. canistrum; thence кavαστpaña. кoîλá tɩva
ȧyyɛia 'any hollow vessels' (Suid.); кávaσov (Naucratis). Cf. also ►кávaẞoç,
▶ kávvalpov, ▶ Kavóv.
•ETYM From Babylonian-Assyrian qanû ‘reed', which may come from Sumerian-
Akkadian gin ‘id.', Ugar. qn, Punic qn'. See E. Masson 1967: 47. The word кávva was
borrowed as Lat. canna 'reed, etc.'; see WH s.v. Fur.: 303 points out that кávaðpov,
etc. are clearly Pre-Greek formations, so the word may have been of Anatolian
origin; note further the Mycenaean form pointing to variantion a/o, which is also a
sign of Pre-Greek origin.
кávvaßıç [f.] ‘hemp, Cannabis sativa' (Hdt., S., Dsc., Gal.). <LW Orient.>
•VAR Gen. -10, -ɛwç. Also кávvaßos (Poll. 10, 176).
•DER Kavváẞiov ‘id.' (Ps.-Dsc., Gp.), кavvaßíç, -ídos [f.] 'dress of hemp', plur. 'hemp
seeds burnt and used at a steam-bath' (Hdt., Ephipp. Com.); thence кavvaßɩóðñvai.
пpòç tǹv kávvaßiv έžidpwoai kai nupiασðñvαι (H.); кavvaßíσka [n.pl.] 'hemp shoes'
(Herod. 7, 58); kavváßivos ‘from hemp, hemp-like' (AP); kavvaßápios member of a
professional organization = stupparius (Ephesus, gloss.; Wahrmann Glotta 22 (1934):
42f.).
•ETYM Loan of unknown eastern origin, perhaps Scythian or Thracian (Hdt. 4, 74f.);
cf. also Sumer. kunibu 'hemp'. From кávvaẞiç comes Lat. cannabis; the word
Kanáva
637
reached Germanic (OE hænep, OHG hanaf, etc.) before Grimm's law. Fur.: 343
connects it with кóµẞos, on insufficient grounds.
кávvaеpov [n.] ‘cane or wicker carriage' (X. Ages. 8, 7, Plut. Ages. 19, H., Eust.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also Káva pov.
⚫ETYM Perhaps from кávva 'reed' with a suffix -8po- (cf. Chantraine 1933: 373f.).
Lidén 1924: 227ff. assumes a compound from кávva and a word for 'wagon box' in
►ǎеpaç ǎpμα. 'Pódio (H.), which is highly improbable. The gloss is considered to
be corrupt by Latte. On the suffix, see Fur.: 30339.
kaváv, -óvos [m.] 'straight rod, bar, stave or grip to handle the shield, directive, rule,
model, etc.' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•DIAL Myc. ko-no-ni-pi /konōni-phi/.
●DER Diminutive кavóvov (Ph. Bel., Hero); кavoviç ‘ruler, frame, etc.' (Arist., Ph.
Bel.); kavovins [m.] "straight man, like a rod' (Hp. Aër. 24); кavoviкós 'belonging to
the кavov' (Hell.); кavovwτós provided with кavóves' (pap.). Denominative verb
кavovíčw to measure, decide' (Arist.) with кavovσμoi [pl.] (Man.), kavóvioµa (AP),
kavoviotikós (Choerob.).
⚫ETYM Most often connected with кávva as * stave of reed'. The variation α/ o shows
that it is a Pre-Greek word. The Semitic etymology by Lewy 1895: 133 (Hebr. qānoeh
'measuring reed, balance') is not to be preferred.
KAVWлKÓV 1 [n.]? = лtoñσσα or лτúovσα, 'spurge' (Dsc. 4. 165). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
кανшлкóv 2 [n.]? 'kind of cake' (pap.). <LW Eg.>
•ETYM Probably derived from the TN Kávшлоç in Lower Egypt. See Kávwлoç.
кávwлov [n.]? ‘elderflower, elder bark' (Alex. Trall. 12). ◄?►
•ETYM No etymology. See André 1956 s.v. canopus.
кαлávα [f.] Thessalian word for 'wagon' =ȧлvη (Xenarch. 11, H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also -1] ‘crossbar of the wagon (?)' (Poll. 1, 142), kaлãvaɩ (kanalai cod.).
qάτvaɩ ‘mangers' (H.).
•DER кaлávač ‘side-piece of the wagon box' (Poll. ibid.; cf. Síopak from díopoc);
кαлανкάτερα еpithet of OεTTαλкά (Оεлvα) in Ar. Fr. 492, in Ath. 9, 418d =
άµažiaĩa ‘filling a wagon', acc. to H. as an alternative = ✗оρταστɩкwtepa, ảnò tñs
Xoptaσtikwtɛpa,
páτvηs 'more foodful, more plenteous (after q. = manger)', from кarávŋ = кánŋ.
Unclear кaлávη. τívé кvñ 'helmet of hair', калávα. áрлεdóvεç 'cords',
kanaλíšɛi. (ɛvynλatɛĩ ‘drives a yoke' (H.). Perhaps also Kaлavɛúç PN (Boßhardt
1942: 121)?
•ETYM Assuming an original meaning ‘chest, box', a formation in -āvā from ►кáлŋ,
►кάлтw has been assumed (Chantraine 1933: 206), especially comparing áлývη.
However, Kuiper 1956: 2139 compared άлvη in the light of the alternation к-/ zero,
which would mean that the word is Pre-Greek. This seems most probable. Fur. 2249
further compares уáлos. öxημα. Tuppηvoi 'wagon (Etruscan)' (H.). кαлáva is

=== page 343 ===

638
Káravol
further reminiscent of Gallo-Romance capanna (Alessio Studi etruschi 19 (1946-
1947): 17534).
кáлavoɩ [m.] · åλqíτwv ɛldos ‘barley-groats' (Phot.). <?►
•DER One connects the PN Kалavāç, L. Robert 1963: 1714.
•ETYM Unknown.
kanétis, -ɩos [f.] a Persian measure, 1/48th of an åpτáßŋ (Polyaen. 4, 3, 32) = Xoivič
(H.). ◄LW Iran.➤
•DER Also кaлíðŋ [f.] a Persian measure = 2 Xoívɩкɛç (X. An. 1, 5, 6) = 2 Att. кoτúλαι
(H.).
⚫ETYM Persian words, so a connection with кáлτw is improbable. They are certainly
not from a Persian cognate of кáлtw, as DELG assumes. Others reference Skt. kapați
[f.] 'two handfuls (?)' (lex.), on which see Mayrhofer EWAia 3 s.v. and Lagarde 1866:
198. Frisk (Supp.) refers to MoP qafiz (also Arab.), a measure.
=
KάNETOS⇒σKÁMETOS.
KÁлŋ →KÁNTW.
кάлηoç [m.] 'merchant, innkeeper' (IA; on the mg. cf. on чµлoрoç). <PG?(S)►
•DER Secondarily as an adjective = кαлηλɩкóç (A., Com. Adesp., D. H.). Fem. кαлηλíç
kannλikós kaëŋλíç
'female merchant or innkeeper' (com., pap.), кaлýλiσσa (sch.); кaïŋλɛïov ‘shop,
tavern' (Att.); кaлŋλiкós ‘belonging to a кáëŋλoç' (Pl., Arist.); кaïŋλɛúw [v.] ‘to be a
retail trader' (IA) with кaлηλɛíα 'retail trade' (Pl., Arist.) and кαлηλEVTIKÓS
кαлηλкós (Ph Lg. 842d).
=
⚫ETYM Derivation from кáëŋ ‘crib, manger' has been considered, assuming that the
word could mean 'chest' ("who sells from a chest"); highly improbable. As
loanwords, Lat. caupō ‘innkeeper', etc. have been compared (WH s.v.). Fur.: 257
considers Hitt. happar 'purchase, price' as a comparandum. As there is no
etymology, the word could be Pre-Greek (the suffix does occurs in Pre-Greek; see
Fur.: 115).
кαлvóç [m.] 'smoke, steam' (Il.). <PG?, EUR?>
DIAL Myc. ka-pi-ni-ja.
•COMP кaлvo-dóкη 'flue (of a chimney)' (IA), Súσ-кαлvoç ‘with an unpleasant
smoke' (A., Thphr.).
•DER Substantives: 1. кáлνη (com.), short form of кaлvodóкη; also = кarvatos λíƉos
(PHolm.; see below); 2. кαлvíα for кáлуη (Moеr. 292, gloss.; cf. Scheller 1951: 56); 3.
кaлvíaç [m.] (a) a wine that got its special taste by fumigation (com.), (b) a kind of
jasper (= kaïvítηs), after its color (Dsc., Plin.), (c) of the poet Ekphantides (Ar. V.
151), dià tò µŋdèv λaµ˜pòv ypάq 'because he wrote nothing clearly' (H.). 4.
кαлvíτη [m.] name of a stone, after the color (Alex. Trall.; Redard 1949: 55),
кαлvīτɩ [f.] plant name, 'fumitory, Fumaria officinalis', after its smoke-colored
leaves (Ps.-Dsc.), also called кáлνos and кaлvós (Strömberg 1940: 27).
Adjectives: 5. кάлvε(1)os (scil. äµлελoç) [f.] 'vine with smoke-colored grapes' (Arist.,
Thphr., pap.); 6. кαлvódηs 'smokey, smoke-colored' (Arist., Thphr., Plb.); 7.
639
кaлvηλóç ‘like smoke' (Nic. Th. 54); 8. кαлvαîos λíos ‘smoke-colored quartz'
(PHolm.).
Denominative verbs: 1. кαлví¶w ‘to smoke, produce smoke, be smoke-colored' (Il.),
aoг. кαлvíσ(σ)αι (also with prefix àño-, лɛρɩ-, úño-), кáлνισç 'еxposure to smoke'
(Аrist.), кáлνσμа 'incense' (AP), кαлуσтηрιоν perhaps 'steam-bath' (inscr. Priene);
2. кαлvóμαι to vanish into smoke' (Pi., E.); 3. кαлváw 'to smoke a bee-hive' (A. R.
2, 131), after Ovμιάw; 4. кαлvεíw 'to make vanish into smoke, burn' (Nic. Th. 36).
Beside кaлvós, there is an aorist áлò (dè чv×ǹv) ¿кáлυσσεу 'he breathed forth' (X
467; кάлσσεν Q. S. 6, 523), with a present кαлúσσшν· έклvéшν 'breathing out' (H.);
the supposed base form seems preserved in кάлʊç· évεñµa ‘breath, spirit', also
кáños. Ÿvxý, πvεчµa (H.). Uncertain is the gloss кaлuêтá· évέovta ‘breathing' (H.,
at an alphabetically wrong place); is it connected with кαлúσσwv? Cf. aλúw beside
aλúσow. The stem with -v- also in кαлuрós 'dry, etc.'; uncertain is the
appurtenance of ▶kéknqe · téðvŋke ‘is dead' (H.), ►кɛkaçŋóta (Hom.).
⚫ETYM A pre-form *kwap-nó- has been assumed in view of the comparison with Lith.
kvapas 'breath, smell, kvēpti, 1sg. kvėpiù 'to gasp, breathe', Latv. kvêpt, isg. kvêpstu
'to smoke, smell'. This group is close to Go. af-hapjan 'to suffocate, extinguish', af-
wapnan 'to extinguish', but this has root-final -p instead of expected -f or -b. It is
unclear whether Lat. vapor ‘vapor, smoke' is cognate with these words, with its v-
instead of expected qu-. Schrijver 1991: 260f. assumed a laryngeal in view of the
Latvian word and posited *kuh₂ep-, but it is improbable that such a form would
result in Gr. *кFαл-. Frisk remarks: "Man hat somit in den verschiedenen Sprachen
mit zahlreichen, nicht unerwarteten Entgleisungen zu rechnen". At any rate,
Mycenaean does not have a -w-. This has been explained as a dissimilation PGr. *k* -
p> *k - p, cf. Schwyzer: 302 for more examples, but most etymologies adduced there
are doubtful.
Indo-European origin is improbable. *kap- is unprobelematic for Pre-Greek; an u-
stem (кáлuç) is frequent in Pre-Greek (see Heubeck 1961: 31-39), as is a suffix -n-
after consonant (Pre-Greek: Suffixes). However, in view of the similarity of the Balto-
Slavic material and of Lat. vapor, it may be best to assume a European substrate
word.
кάллα [n.indeсl.] the tenth letter of the Greek alphabet (Callias apud Ath. 10, 453d).
LW Orient.>
⚫ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. kaph. See Schwyzer: 140.
кάллαρɩç [f.] 'caper plant, Capparis spinosa' (Hp., Arist.). <LW Orient.>>
•VAR Gen. -EWS, -LOS.
•DER Diminutive кαл(л)ápov (pap.). кáëëɑpos [m.] a fish (PCair. Zen. 83, IIIª),
after the way of preparation, see Strömberg 1943: 88.
•ETYM Berger MSS 9 (1956): 13ff. connected the word with MoP kabar 'id' and
Burušaski čopuri, čopəri.
кáлρоç [m.] (wild) boar', also epithet of ouç (II.); as a fish name = 'Capros aper'
(Arist.; after the sound, Thompson 1947 s.v., Strömberg 1943: 101). <?>

=== page 344 ===

640
Ká丌TW
•DER Diminutive kaлpídiov, -íσkoç (com.); fem. кáлpαɩvɑ of a lewd woman (com.);
кαлрíа [f.] 'the ovary of a rutting sow' (Arist.); кαлрáν 'pigsty' (Delos IIIª); (σuc)
кáлpios = (σÛç) káлpoç (II., A. R.); кάлριoç 'having the form of a boar' (Hdt. 3, 59),
кάлρεoç 'belonging to a boar' (Nonn.).
Denominative verbs: кaлpáw 'to go to the boar', of a rutting sow (Arist.), also
kaлpiáw (Arist. v.l., Ar. Byz.), on the formation see Schwyzer: 731f.; kaлpí¶w ‘id.'
(Arist.); кaлpάšoμai 'to rut', of the boar (Sciras Com.).
•ETYM Agrees with a Italo-Germanic word for ‘he-goat', Lat. caper, U cabru
'caprum', and in Germanic e.g. ON hafr. An uncertain trace of the word in Celtic is
supposed in Gallo-Rom. *cabrostos 'honeysuckle, privet'. The newly created Greek
name of the he-goat, τpάyos, made another use possible for *kapro-. The word was
probably first used appositively with σuç, as in Homer. Lat. aper 'boar' took the
vowel of caper, but is further unrelated.
Briand 1997: 91-115 analyzes the attested forms as continuing an old adjective
'devouring (greedily)' from the root *kap- ‘to take' (Lat. capio ‘id.', G happen 'to
swallow, snatch'). The root was used for a snatching way of eating (Hom. кáлη 'crib',
кάлτw 'to gulp down', cf. τpáуos 'goat' beside τpwyw), and the adjective lexicalized
in the separate languages, where it came to denote different male animals. See DELG
Supp. If the root was Indo-European, it must have been *kh₂p-, not *kap-;
alternatively, it was borrowed from the European substrate. See ▸кάлTW.
кάлτш [v.] ‘to gulp down' (Hdt., Herod., com., Arist.). ◄IE *keh₂p- ‘seize' (?) ►
•VAR Fut. Káчw, perf. -кéкaqα, -KÉKANTAI.
•COMP Also with ȧvα-, έу-, úло-.
•DER (ȧvá-)кáчлç 'swallowing' (Arist.); кáµµατα [pl.] 'what is supped up, sacrificial
cake' with кauμatídɛç [pl.] ‘laurel leaves, for supping up' (Nicocl. 2); čуkaqoç 'what
you have in your mouth' (Eup. 330). Further кáлŋ [f.] 'crib' (© 434, § 40, S. Ichn. 8,
Lyc. 95), кáлŋßev (Suid.).
⚫ETYM The present кάлтш might be identical with Lat. capio 'to take' and the Gm.
verb Go. hafjan 'to raise'. In use and meaning, however, it corresponds much better
to popular MoLG (= MoHG) happen 'to swallow', MoDu. happen 'to snap'. These
belong to IE *keh2p- 'to seize, etc.', which has several variants. The form кáлη 'crib' is
rather an old formation than a direct derivation from кáлτw (cf. кóлη).
кaлupóç [adj.] 'dry, brittle, crackly, clear-sounding' (Hp., Epich., Antiph., Arist.,
Theoc.). <PG?, EUR?>
•DER кαлúpiα, -ídia [pl.] 'kind of cake' (pap.); калuρóομαι 'to be dried, singed,
crackly' (Str., Orib.), кaлupíšw ‘make noise, drink' with кaлupiotǹs ‘drinker' (Str.).
•ETYM Derived from the u-stem in *кaлúw (кáлuç), so properly ‘giving smoke,
burnt'; on the meaning, see Legrand REGr. 20 (1907): 10ff. and Bogiatzides Aŋvã 26
(1914): 109ff. See ► karvóç.
Kanýgoal → Karvóc.
Káp [n.] indecl. 'head', only in εлì кáρ 'on its head, topsy-turvy' (II 392) and ȧvà káp
'upwards' (Hp. apud Gal. 19, 79). → kápā.
kápa
kάpā [n.] “heaď (trag., Cratin., Eup.). ◄IE *krh₂-(e)s-n- ‘head'>
•VAR кápη (epic).
•DIAL Myc. ka-ra-a-pi [instr.pl.] /krā¹at-phi/.
641
⚫DER As a first member in kapā-toµέw 'to behead' (E., J.) with кapáτoμoç 'beheaded'
(S., E.), apparent basis кapaτóµoç 'beheading' (Lyc.), cf. on dεpоτoµεw s.v. ► dépη;
кapηẞapéw (-άw) 'to feel heavy in the head, be sleepy, have a headache' with
kapηßapía, -in, etc. (Hp., Arist.); from there Lat. caribaria > Fr. charivari, (WH 1,
854); on ►кapadokέw s.v. Cf. ►кpάoredov, ▶ kpnoqúyetov, ‣kpýdeµvov.
Other forms: A. recent analogical formations to kápā, kápŋ: dat. t☎ kápą (A., S.),
kápŋ (Thgn.); kápŋs, -ŋv (Call., Nic.), kápāv (Anacreont.).
B. Older disyllabic forms: epic кap-ατoç, -ατ, plur. -ατα; also кápη-τoç, -tɩ; a new
nom.sg. кápηap (Antim.) was made to kapñata.
C. monosyllabic forms: кpá-ατoç, -ατɩ, pl. -ατα; usually contracted (also trag.)
кpāτóç, -tí, plur. кpāta (Pi. Fr. 8); further isolated forms: кpáτɛσqi (K 156; probably
sg.), kpáτwv (X 309), кpāσív (K 152), kpātas (E.); kpāta accus.sg. († 92, trag.),
nom.sg. (S. Ph. 1457); new nom.sg. кpáç (Simm. 4).
D. кápã (antevoc.) as a nom.pl. (h. Cer. 12), kápā [pl.] (?, Sannyr. 3). On ►кápηva
see s.v. and below.
•ETYM The origin of the Greek forms has to be judged by the Skt. word for ‘head'.
The oblique forms are, e.g., śīrṣṇ-ás [gen.sg.], adverbial abl. śīrṣa-tás, which represent
a zero grade root sīrṣ-n- < *kṛh₂-s-n-, i.e. an s-stem enlarged with -n-. The disyllabic
nom.-acc. śíras- (also Av. sarah-) derives from *kṛh₂-os. Therefore, it appears that Gr.
кpάatoç represents earlier *krāhatos (which may also be found in Myc. ka-ra-a-pi) <
*kṛh₂s-ṇt-os, which by contraction gave кpātós (kpäτós, acc. to Zenodotus). The
antevocalic form *krāsn- is continued in кpävíov. The explanation of the Greek
disyllabic forms has to start from the plur. кápηva < *karasna < *krh₂-es-n-h₂, which
formed the basis for the creation of the singular forms кapηaτoç, -ατɩ (for earlier
*karahatos, -ti), if these were not innovated from the sg. кápη. This nom.-acc.sg.
may go back to analogical *кápaσ-a (like ővoµa); from кápη, the forms kápŋ-Toç, -ti
were constructed.
Beside the old s-stem, there are isolated forms without -s-: εлì кáp ‘on its head',
žykapos, ľykpos. ¿ykéqaλos ‘situated in the head and кatà (åïò) кpñеev from the
head down' (Hom., Hes.), ►кpηdεµvov ‘head-band'. The explanation is debated:
кατà кρñеεv (whence àлò кpñеεv) may stand for кατ' äкpηеεv (see especially
Leumann 1950: 56ff.), but this seems unncessary; έykapos has been interpreted as a
learned innovation of кápη after кɛqaλń: ¿yкéqaλoç; on кρηбεµvov, see s.v. An s-
less form кáp is supported by Arm. sar 'hight, top' < *kṛh₂r-o-. Very extensive
treatment by Nussbaum 1986 (review by Beekes Kratylos 34 (1989): 55-59). Perpillou
KZ 88 (1974): 230-234 analyzes the form *krh₂-s-r/n- 'head' and discusses the
possibility of a suffix -uer, -uen-. See кapów 1, ▶kapó, kapwtóv, ▶képas,
►кpávoç, ►кpLÓÇ.
kápa · aï‹ ñuepos Hoλuppývioť úïò Пopτvvíwv…..äλλoɩ dè ñ σvêñ. ”Iwveç tà пpóßata,
кal τηv кɛQαλýv 'tame goat (Polyrrenian); others: fig-tree (Gortynian); cattle, head
(Ionian)' (H.). <?►

=== page 345 ===

642
kápaẞoç
•ETYM The gloss is partly corrupt; see Latte. The meaning at seems to be confirmed
by kapavá; see on ►kápòva.
kắpaßos [m.] 1. ‘a prickly crustacean' (Epich., Ar., Arist.; cf. Thompson 1947 s.v.),
metaph. a light canoe (EM); 2. ‘a horned beetle' (Arist.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR σкopóẞvλoç. кávěαpoç ‘kind of beetle' (H.).
⚫DER Kapaẞíç 'kind of sea-crab' (Gal., Sch.), кapáßiov = εpóλкiov 'small boat towed
after a ship' (H. s.v. ►έóλкiα, sch.); probably also кapaẞaía. Síкpovv úλov 'forked
timber' (H.). Further кηpaçíç = кapaẞíç (Nic. Al. 394), secondary after the names in
-(0)-, and ŋ an epic imitation for a?
•ETYM Cohen BSL 27 (1927): 100 gives several similar Arabic words. Boisacq s.v.
suggests that -ẞos is Macedonian for Gr. -pos <IE *-bho-.
Fur. (index) connects it with several other words: кapßápεoι· кápaßoɩ (H.),
additional prenasalized forms kapáµßios (Ar. Byz. Epit. 9, 11; v.l. Arist. HA 551b 17),
►kepáµßvž (Nic. Fr. 39, H.; s.v.), and kɛpáµßŋlov (H.); the suffix -o- is well-
known in Pre-Greek. These forms cannot be derived from кépaç, as assumed by
Frisk. Fur. further posits *σkapaẞatos on the basis of Lat. scarabaeus, which seems
unavoidable. The form σкopóẞuλoç perhaps continues *σкapaß-vλ-, where both a's
turned to -o- before the -v- in the following syllable (Fur. 340 discusses the
phenomenon, but did not see that it operated here); thus, we have evidence for
Okapaẞ-. Then there is ypayaios (Diph. Siph. apud Ath. 3, 106d) = кápaßos, which
Fur. assumes to stand for *yapчaños (doubtful). The word ►σкоρлíоç does not seem
to belong here.
In conclusion, it is clear that we are dealing with a Pre-Greek word *(s)karab- with
several of its usual variants. From кápaẞos came Lat. carabus 'crab', also 'small boat'
(also Romance, e.g. MoFr. caravelle) and a Slavic word for 'ship', e.g. Ru. korábľ.
•
kápayoç [m.] ⚫ ó τpaxús vós, olov лρióν 'raw sound, like a saw' (H.). <GR?>
⚫ETYM Related to кéкpāуa, like τápaxos (-xńĤ) to téτpηxα. See кpáčw. Alternatively,
is it Pre-Greek?
kapāбokéw [v.] 'to await the outcome of something (µáõη, лóλεµoç, etc.), wait for
something, take care' (Hdt., E., Ar., X., Plb.); in Hdt. perhaps an Atticism; cf.
Wackernagel 1916: 3'. ◄GR▷
•COMP Also with άлo-, Siα-.
•DER (ȧлo-)kapadokia ‘eager expectation' (Aq., Ep. Rom., Ep. Phil.).
•ETYM On the use of кapadokέw, cf. Aly Glotta 15 (1927): 104f. Acc. to the traditional
assumption, properly 'expect something with the hand strechted out', which is
neither factually nor formally very convincing. Given Swpo-, Evo-Sokéw, etc. (ódol-
Sokéw after ódoш-лорέw), one would expect кapã- to be the object of Sokéw. DELG
remarks that kάpā 'head' may have been used in the sense of 'end, outcome' here, for
which we may compare кpaíαivw 'to accomplish'.
кapákaλλov [n.] 'cap' (AP, Edict. Diocl.). <LW Lat.>
•DER Kapaкáλλov (pap. V-VIP).
⚫ETYM From Lat. caracalla. Probably originally Gaulish; see WH s.v.
i
1
kápdalov
кápavvos •VAR кápavoç, etc. →kápŋva.
кapßáv [?] ‘outlandish, foreign'. <LW Orient.>
•VAR Acc. -āva (A. Supp. 129 [lyr.], H.), kápßāvos (A., Lyc.).
643
●DER kapßáčeɩv, kapßaïlɛiv, kapßavišɛɩv = ßapßapíšɛv ‘to behave like a foreigner'
(H.).
•ETYM Unknown. Acc. to Kretschmer Glotta 31 (1951): 250, it is from the toponym
Qarbana (Herakleion) in Egypt, whence the captive Danaeans escaped to the
Peloponnese. Acc. to Hommel Phil. 98: 132ff., Kapẞáv is identical with Hebr. kopẞáv
(NT), properly 'sacrificial gift', which became an epithet for Phoenician merchants,
but this is hardly convincing; see E. Masson 1967: 107. Perhaps there is a relation
with the name of the east wind in Cyrene, Kápßaç. Arist. (Vent. 973b) has ảïò τŵv
Kapẞavшv τŵν кaτà Þolvíkηv. Phoenician, acc. to Thphr. Vent. 62. Acc. to
Neumann 1961: 92f., it is from Hitt. kureu̟ana- ‘foreign state that is not a vassal' (on
the meaning, see Puhvel s.v.).
kapßátivos [adj.] ‘made of skins' (Ph. Bel.). ◄EUR▷
•VAR кapẞátɩvat [f.pl.] 'shoes of unprepared leather' (X., Arist.); also кapлátɩvov.
ȧypo<i>KIкòv úлóðŋµа µovódæðµov 'one-layer farmer's sandal' (H.).
⚫ETYM Formation like dɛpµáτivos, etc.; it has been compared with words for 'shoe,
etc.' in Balto-Slavic, Germanic, and Celtic, e.g. Lith. kùrpė 'shoe', Cz. krpě ‘id.', ON
hriflingr, OE hrifeling 'id.', OIr. cairem 'shoemaker', but the formations differ among
each other. Further, Lat. carpisc(u)lum 'kind of shoe' (IVP), which is considered to be
a loanword because of its late attestation. In yet other respects, these words seem to
be technical loans; cf. Beekes 2000: 28. From кapßάtivos came Lat. carpatinus ‘of
raw leather'. See ► кpηïíç.
kápßis [?] · µaotporós ‘pimp' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. DELG notes: cf. Lat carissa?
cápÔapov [n.] ‘nose-smart, ‘Lepidium sativum (X., Ar.). <PG?(S)
•VAR Аlso лаρбаµáλŋ (Phot.).
•COMP As a first member in kapdáµwµov, haplological for кαpdaµ-áµwµov [n.]
'cardamom' (Thphr., Dsc.; on the formation Schwyzer: 263).
:
●DER kapdaµíç = кápdaµov (Nic., Plu.), after kɛdpíç, etc. acc. to Chantraine 1933: 343;
кapdaµívn 'id', also = σσúμẞpiov, etc. (Dsc.; Chantraine 1933: 204); кapdaµáλŋ
'Persian cake from кápdaµov' (Trypho apud Ath.; as άµvydáλŋ, etc.); кapdaµí¼w “to
talk cress", i.e. 'to talk nonsense' (Nic. Th. 617). By-form кapdávη ‘id.' (gloss.), after
Botávn?
=
•ETYM Among the plant names in -aμov (Schwyzer: 494, Chantraine 1933: 133), there
are several clear loanwords, and the same holds for кápdaμov. Doubtful suggestion
in Strömberg 1944: 38: from *кápdoç кpádoç 'twig' in кapdídiov, àva-,
кaτaкáρdiov. The solution of Grošelj Razprave 2: 41 is no better: related to
►σkópodov. The suffix -auov is known from Pre-Greek (Fur.: 64269). The word has
been connected with Hitt. karšani 'an alcalic plant' (Fur.: 252).

=== page 346 ===

644
Kapdía
кapdía [f.] ‘heart', metaph. 'soul, spirit' (Il.), also 'cardiac orifice of the stomach' (Hp.,
Th.), 'heart of wood' (Thphr., pap.; Strömberg 1937: 125ff.). <IE *kēr(d), gen. *krd-
(i)os 'heart'>
•VAR Ion. -ín, epic mostly кpadín.
•COMP As a first member, e.g. kapdı-aλyέw 'to suffer from heartburn', together with
-ńc, -ía, -ɩкóc (Hp.); very often as a second member, e.g. Opaσv-kápdios ‘with daring
spirit' (Il.).
●DER кápiov [n.] ‘heart-shaped ornament' (Delos III³), кapdiкóç 'belonging to the
heart' (pap.), кapdɩātɩç [f.] Pythagoraean name of the number of five (Theol. Ar.);
кapdiwσow, Att. -wττw = каpdiaλyéw (Epich., Hp., Ar., Arist.) with кapdɩwyμóç
-WTTW
(Hp.), also кapбiáw (кapdiówντα Nic. Al. 581); кapdiów 'to revive' (LXX). Beside it
кñp (epic), кέap [n.] (Pi., B., trag.), kñpí [dat.], kŋpółɩ [adv.] ‘in the heart', together
with êηpaívw [v.] ‘to be afraid' (E., Max., Ph.).
•ETYM The word кapdía may be compared with other body parts in -ía, like koɩλía,
ȧpτηpía, λavкavín. The starting point is a monosyllabic neuter кñp < IE *kēr(d) with
ablaut: cf. Lat. cordis < IE *kṛdés, which would have resulted in Gr. *kapdóç or
*кpadóc. We often find an i-stem, which is probably old, in the genitive: Hitt.
kardiaš [gen.] next to nom. ke-ir /kēr/. The i-stem also appears in Lith. širdis (but
this is expected for an old root noun), Arm. srt-iw [instr.] beside sirt [nom.] < IE
*kērd, and in Skt. the -i is found in the nom.-acc. hárdi, while the gen. is hṛdás, like
Lat. cordis.
Disyllabic kέap was created by poets as a false archaism of кñpɩ, based on εap (ñp):
Пp 'spring'. On the accent of кñp, see Schwyzer: 377 and Berger MSS 3 (1953): 3.
Further, e.g., Olr. cride < krd-io-, OCS srod₁-ce beside OCS srěda 'middle' < PSlav.
*serdà, Go. hairto, gen. hairtins (transformed into an n-stem like augo 'eye', auso
'ear', etc.), Skt. hŕd-aya- [n.] = Av. zǝrǝd-aē- [n.]. The Indo-Iranian word shows a
secondary * instead of *ć- < IE *k-, probably by contamination with another word,
while the original *ć- is preserved in śraddha- 'to trust'. See now the collection of
different formations in Wodtko et al. 2008: 417ff. Cf. also on кpadáw.
кápdoлoç [f.] ‘kneading-trough' (com., Pl., Hom. Epigr., Nic.; for the fem. gender, cf.
the instances in Schwyzer 1950: 34²; on kapdóëŋ [Ar. Nu. 678] see ibid. 28¹). <PG►
●DER Diminutive кαрdóлov (Delos IIª); кapdoлεov 'cover of a trough' (H.; cod.
-tov), also 'muzzle' (Ar. Fr. 301); also кápлodoç (H.), with metathesis?
•ETYM No clear etymology. Fur.: 25738 suggests Hitt. harduppi with uncertain
meaning. No doubt a Pre-Greek word.
кápŋva [n.pl.] ‘heads, tops, mountain tops' (II.). <◄IE *kerh₂- ‘head, horn’, *krh₂-es-n-
h₂►
•VAR Secondary sing. кápηvov (h. Hom.), kápāvov (A. Cho. 396 [lyr.], Mosch. 1, 12).
⚫DER Hence Kápavvoç. кɛкpúqaλoç, кρηбεдvov 'headband', Aeol.; кapavá. τǹу alya.
Kρñτεç 'goat (Cretan)' (H.); Lacon. кápāvos 'chief (X. HG 1, 4, 3) is a Persian
loanword from *kārana- 'leader of the kāra-', acc. to Testen Glotta 69 (1991): 173f.;
unclear is Kópavvoç. Baoiλevç Maкɛdovíaç probably an appellative. Denominative
}
kápkapov
645
verbs: kapavów 'to crown, complete' (A.); *кapavičw 'to behead' in kapaviσtñpeç …….
Sikai oqayai te (A. Eu. 186), kapaviʊtǹs µópos (E. Rh. 817).
ETYM From *karahna < *krh₂-es-n-h₂, which is also continued in Skt. śīrṣā. OHG
hirn(i), MDu. hersene ‘brain' (from *kerh₂snio-) also belong here. The alternating r-
stem is found in kapápa. кɛoaλń ‘heaď (H.) < *karasra, and probably also in Lat.
cerebrum ‘brain' < *keras-ro- < *kerh2-(e)s-ro- (but see also Nussbaum 1986: 243).
Further relatives are ►кápā, ►кpavíov, кpaívw; see also ►кépaç.
kapłµoi · kɩvýgets 'movements' (H.). →okaipw.
Kāpis [f.] name of small crustaceans; see Thompson 1947 s.v. <PG?>
•VAR Gen. -ídoç (Anan., old com.), -îdos (middle com.); also koupíç, kwpís (Epich.,
Sophr.).
⚫DER Kapídiov (Arist.), kapıdápiov (Anaxandr.); кapidów (τò σшμα) 'to move (the
body) like a кapíc; to wriggle, twist about like a shrimp' (Anaxandr.).
⚫ETYM Ath. 3, 106b sауs άлò τоŨ кápa• tò лλɛĩσtov yàp µépos toũ đáµatos ǹ kepadǹ
άлηvéукατo, which is clearly folk-etymological. Ehrlich KZ 39 (1906): 556f. derived
kāpiç from *kapois and кoupíç, кwpíç from *кopσís, but there is no evidence for such
a form (cf. on ►кópon). Acc. to Frisk, it rather belongs to кápaßoç as a popular short
form. koupíç and кwpíç are unexplained; Chantraine (see DELG) pleads for
association with кúpa, koúpa ‘girl', but this is hardly understandable. The variation
may well point to a Pre-Greek word. Cf. Ačaryan 1937: 4, who considers кapis
together with Arm. karič ‘scorpion' as an Asiatic loan.
kapkádwv, -wvos [?] ‘the price paid to Charon by the dead for their passage' (Phot.,
Suid.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
кapкaipw [v.] only in Y 157 кápkaɩpe dè yaĩa ñóðɛσoiv ópvvμévwv, explained in
antiquity as έкpadaíveтo, σεíετo 'trembled', or as εчópa 'roared' (details in Fraenkel
1910: 132', though with a wrong explanation). ◄IE *kerH- ‘praise (loudly)'>
•VAR έkápkaipov. yópov tɩvà ánetέλouv ‘produced a noise' (H.).
•ETYM A yod-present with intensive reduplication (Schwyzer: 647), of onomatopoeic
origin. Sanskrit has an athematic reduplicated form car-kar-ti 'to mention with
praise'. Not related to ► кñpvε.
kápkapoɩ [adj.] · τpαxεïç ‘coarse, rough' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Seems to agree with Skt. karkara- ‘hard', but this is a late form; cf. Mayrhofer
EW Aia 3 s.v. On the other hand, cf. ►кápxapos and кapкívoç. Fur.: 130 adduces
►Képxvoç 'raw voice, hoarseness' and 'raw surface', which would be a Pre-Greek
variant, with the interchanges a/ & and к/ X.
кápkapov [n.] 'prison' (Sophr. 147). ◄LW Lat.>
VAR Also -os (D. S. 31, 9), -ov or -os (Vett. Val. 68, 26); кáρкаpoi dɛσμoí 'fetters'
(H.), also кápкapα, explained i.a. with дávбpa 'enclosed space', but the gloss is
corrupt.
•ETYM From Lat. carcer; see WH s.v.

=== page 347 ===

646
Kapkapíç
1
Kapów 2
647
.
kapkapiç [?] · žúλwv opvуávwv qoptíov 'timber; a load of firewood' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM DELG supposes it is a mistake for kayкavíç; see ►кáykavoç.
кapкívoç [m.] ‘crab' (Epich., IA), metaph. ‘ulcer, pair of pincers, kind of shoe, etc.',
also name of a constellation (Scherer 1953: 167f.). On the mg. also Thompson 1947
S.V. <PG(V)►
●DER Diminutive кapкívov (Arist., Hp.), also ‘kind of slipper' (Herod.), kapkiváç,
-ádos [f.] (Gal., Ael.); кapкivíaç [m.] name of a precious stone (Plin.; after the color;
like кaлvíaç, etc., Chantraine 1933: 94); kapкivevτý 'crab-catcher' (Artem. 2, 14;
after ά, óvɩðετ et al.); кαρкɩvádηs ‘crab-like' (Arist., medic.).
Denominative verb кapкivów ‘bend, crook one's fingers' (Antiph., Thphr.; cf.
Strömberg 1937: 65), -óoµαi ‘become cancerous, suffer from cancer' (Hp.) with
kapкívwμa 'cancer' (medic.), кapкívwσiç 'formation of dangerous growth' (Aët.);
Kapкivw pov (codd. -aepov, -nepov) plant name, 'Polygonum aviculare' (Dsc. 4, 4;
after Strömberg 1940: 147 properly "Krebsmittel”, but rather after the roots spreading
like a crab.
•ETYM Clearly connected with Lat. cancer 'crab', Skt. karkața- ‘id.', but not all
morphological details are clear. Like Lat. cancer from *car-cro-, кapкívoç may also
have undergone a dissimilation of r-sounds, and later added the suffix -tvo-. The
etymological connection with Skt. karkața- is doubted in Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 64
and by Fur.: 129. A loan from кapкívoç is Skt. karki(n)- 'the crab in the zodiac'
(perhaps karka- 'crab' [lex.] is a back-formation).
Connection with the adjective for 'hard' (see
кáρкαpoç, кρáτоç) was deemed
possible by Frisk, but this is a substrate word, like the present entry. Fur. connects it
with kápxaɩ kapkívoi, kaì <k>óxλoi. Σikɛλoí (H.), not mentioned in Frisk or DELG,
which is completely self-evident. The interchange к/ X proves Pre-Greek origin. Fur.
doubts the appurtenance of Lat. cancer < *karkro-, and prefers to connect it with
уáyуpava, уáyуλtov. For кapкívoc, he also adduces (op.cit. 130) the PN Kɛpкívos
and the HN KερкivεÚç (Thessaly), with *кɛpкiv-. The suffix -tvo- can also be Pre-
Greek (Fur.: 12954; Pre-Greek: Suffixes).
kápvn [f.] · Čŋµía ‘punishment' (H.). <?►
•VAR aÚTÓкapvoç. αúτočшoç 'self-punished' (H.).
⚫ETYM It has traditionally been compared with Lat. carināre 'insult, ridicule' (Enn.,
gramm.) and (without an n-suffix) several Celtic, Germanic and Balto-Slavic words:
OIr. caire ‘blame', OHG harawēn ‘mock', Latv. karinât ‘tease', Ru. kor ‘insult, scoff;
perhaps also TOAB kärnª- probably 'to strike, afflict'. Note that kapv- can hardly be
explained in IE terms (*r would give pa), which means that the word may be Pre-
Greek. The word kápavvos hardly belongs here, although glossed as (nuía by H. (cf.
DELG), or *kapaví v 'to behead' in кapaviστnp, -ths, which is derived from
Kápavov (see ►káρηvα). Seе ►кεptoμέw.
kápvos [?] · q¤ɛíp, ßóoknµa, пpóßatov ‘louse, beast, cattle' (H.). ◄PG?; GR?>
•ETYM In the meaning oɛíp, it is related to кópɩç, etc. (see also ►кápov 1 and kapós);
in the sense ẞóσкηµа, пρóßατov' perhaps with the group of кépaç? Fur.: 371,
however, connects it with ảкapí ‘mite'. On Kápvɛtos [m.] epithet of Apollo on the
Peloponnesus, see Nilsson 1941(1): 532f. and Robert REGr. 80 (1967): 31ff.
kápoɩvov [n.] name of a sweet wine (Edict. Diocl.: kapoívou Mɛovíov; Hippiatr.,
gloss.). <?>
•ETYM Grimme Glotta 14 (1925): 19 assumes a loan from Semitic: Akk. khurunnu
'sesame wine' (first from Hitt.); this is doubtful. Note oivos кapúïvoç (Gal.; from
Maeonia); also, ȧẞóλλŋç, xitàv кapóïvos (pap.), perhaps for кapúïvoç 'nut-brown'?
кápov 1 [n.] plant name ‘cumin, Carum carvi' (Theb. Ostr. 135 [IP], v.l. Dsc. 3, 57). ◄?►
•VAR Also kapw [f.] (Dsc. l.c., Orib., uncertain Ath. 9, 371e; popular formation acc. to
Chantraine 1933: 116).
•ETYM Perhaps from кáp. oɛip (H.), because a corn of cumin would resemble a
louse.
.
кápov 2 [n.] · μεуáλŋ àкpíç ‘'big locust' (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kápvos (see Fur.: 371).
⚫ETYM See Gil Fernández 1959: 148. Fur.: 341 compares ȧкopvóç = óкopvós (H.), and
further лáрvoç. Thus, it is clearly a Pre-Greek word.
kapós [gen.] only in τíw Sé дuv v кapòç aïση (I 378), indicating something useless.
<?>
•ETYM The word kapчoípovç also perhaps belongs here, explained by H. in two
ways: τoùç év α íα, ó 'serving for wages'. Most often
interpreted as “(cut off) piece, futile” and connected with kɛipw, but perhaps rather
from кáp 'louse' (H.), which acc. to Frisk would be more visual and expressive.
Moreover, we cannot obtain kap- from the root of кɛipw, which did not have a
laryngeal.
kapów 1, -óoµa [v.] ‘to plunge into a deep sleep, stupefy, anasthesize' (Hp., Antipho
Soph., Arist.), med. 'to be stupefieď. <?➤
•COMP Also with úлo-.
●DER kάpwʊɩç ‘heaviness in the head, drowsiness' (Hp.), кapwτɩкóç ‘stupefying'
(Arist., Gal.), kapódŋs ‘id., drowsy, soporific' (Hp.; on the formation cf. úлvádŋç
and the verbal derivations in -dns in Chantraine 1933: 431); Kapwτidεç (ȧpτηpiai)
[pl.] 'carotid arteries' (medic.), also sg.; deverbal kápoç [n.] ‘torpor, drowsiness'
(Arist., Phld., A. R.), cf. kapós. кwyós, oi dè okotódɩvos 'deaf, numb; dizzy' (H.).
•ETYM The word is often taken as a denominative of кápa, кápη 'head': “to have a
heavy head”, like кapηẞapéw. This is doubtful. The verb was originally intransitive,
and later joined the class of factitives in -ów. Cf. кapwłɛíç. τǹv кɛqaλǹv σɛɛíç,
µɛðvoðɛìs 1 Bapreεís 'shaken in the head, drunk or heavy' (H.).
Kapów 2 [v.] 'to estimate'. <?>
•VAR Only ptc. aor. кapоúσavτεç (IG 9(2), 1229: 25 [Thessal. II³]) and kapoσðα-
wvɛiσai 'to buy', каρоúμεvоç· шvησáμεvos 'bought' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Cf. Bechtel 1921, 1: 206f.

=== page 348 ===

648
kapraia
кapлaia [f.] name of a mimetic dance in arms of the Thessalians (X. An. 6, 1, 7, Ath. 1,
15f.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Also кaлpía. ɛidos ópxńσews 'kind of dance' and кápëɛɑ· öpõŋois Makedoviký
'Macedonian dance' (H.).
ETYM The description of the dance in Ath. 1.c. (and in Max. Tyr. 28, 4 without
mention of the name) does not allow a comparison with кαрлóç 'fruit' or with
каρлóç 'root of the hand'. The variation -ala / -ɛa/-ta points to substrate origin; see
Pre-Greek: Suffixes: -at- / -ɛ(1)-.
kapráλquoç [adj.] 'swift, eager' (Il., h. Merc. 225, Ar. Th. 957 [lyr.], A. R.), epithet of
лódεç, of уévvεs (Pi. P. 12, 20). <PG➤
•VAR Adv. кαρлaλiµws (II.).
•ETYM On the formation, see Arbenz 1933: 28f. The etymology is unknown. Schrader
KZ 30 (1890): 473 connected it with кαρлóç ‘root of the hand' as “handy”, with
further connection to OHG hwerban 'turn', etc.; see кαρлóç 2. Solmsen KZ 30
(1890): 602 does not connect it with кαρлóç and starts directly from the meaning 'to
turn'. Others recognize the base form in кáλлη 'trot' (with dissimilation of λ - λ to p
- λ). A first syllable кαρл- can hardly be of IE origin.
кáρлασov [n.] name of a plant with poisonous sap: 'white hellebore, Veratrum album'
(med., Orph.). <PG(V)►
•DIAL Myc. women's names Ka-pa-si-ja, Ka-pa-ti-ja.
●СOMP ò̟лo-кápлaσov (Dsc.; Lat. opocarpathon) = òròç kapráσov ‘sap of the ê.' (=
Lat. sucus carpathi, Plin.), after óло-ßáλσaµov; žvλo-кápлασov (Gal.) after uλo-
Báλoauov (Risch IF 59 (1949): 287).
•ETYM Lat. carpathum with th instead of -σ- points to foreign (Mediterranean)
origin. Both forms already existed in Mycenaean. A form with dental is found also in
the name of the island Kápлαеоs, which was named after the plant (Bogiatzides
A0ŋvā 29 (1917): 72ff.); the TN карлаσíа (Суprus) also belongs here. The s-form
also entered Latin (carpasum, carbasa). Derivation from кαρлóç (Brugmann Sächs.
Ber. 51 (1899): 185) is not feasible. The variation 0/σ is typical for Pre-Greek and
points to a palatalized phoneme -ty-.
кáρëãσoç [f.] ‘a kind of fine flax' (D. H. 2, 68, sch. Ar. Lys. 736), 'cotton' (Peripl. M.
Rubri 41). <LW Ind.>
•VAR Also a [n.pl.] 'sails from linen' (AP 9, 415, 6; after ioτía). Also кáλлaσoç
(pap.).
•COMP чεvбo-кάpлaσoç [m.] = ► кáxpu (Ps.-Dsc.; s.v.).
●DER кapëáσov ‘Spanish flax' (pap. III³), kapráσivos 'made of к.' (LXX, Str., D. H.)
Lat. carbasinus. λívov Kαpлáσιov 'from K. on Cyprus' (Paus. 1, 26, 7).
=
•ETYM Reminiscent of Skt. karpása- [m.] ‘cotton bush', but the exact relation is
unknown. The word кáρлασоç is usually thought to be a loan from Indic (cf. also
Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.), but acc. to Porzig ZII 5 (1927): 272ff., the origin is a
Mediterranean or Anatolian language. Lat. carbasus, -a was borrowed from
кáρлασоç, -α (either directly or indirectly); see WH and Fohalle 1925: 172-175. There
is no connection with the plant кáρлaσov. Оn ‘cotton', see also ►ẞaußákios.
kaprÓC 2
649
кαρлησιоν [n.] name of an aromatic plant from Anatolia, 'Valeriana Dioscoridis'
(Gal., Alex. Trall.). <PG?>
•VAR kapëŋoia = кápлãσoç (Paul. Aeg.; not -ov as given by Frisk).
•ETYM On the meaning, see Thiselton-Dyer Journal of Phil. 34 (1915): 310f.; on the
ending -ǹotos, see Chantraine 1933: 41f. The etymology is unknown. Fur.: 349
comparеs кéρлαðоç (Uran. 12), a kind of incense. The word can hardly be IE; thus,
probably Pre-Greek.
кapлóçı [m.] ‘fruit, fruits of the earth, corn, yields' (Il.). ◄EUR➤
•DIAL Myc. ka-po/karpos/.
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. карло-чóроç, ǎ-кαρñoç.
=
●DER Diminutive кapëíov (Thphr., pap.); adjectives: кápëчoç ‘giving fruit' (trag.,
com., Hell.; cf. Arbenz 1933: 45 and 47), кαρлóðηç 'rich in fruits' (imperial period).
Denominative verbs: 1. кapлóoµαi ‘to reap fruits, exploit' (IA), -ów 'to offer, produce
fruit' 'to bring (burnt) sacrifices' (A., LXX) together with кápлшμa 'fruit, sacrifice'
and кάρлwσɩç ‘use, profit, sacrificе', кαρлóσчos (Hermipp. Hist.); cf. Bechtel
1921(1): 449 and 1921(2): 550. 2. кαρлíčoμα (-íw Paros; Hell. inscr.) 'to reap fruits'
(E., Hell.), -iw 'to fertilize' (E. [lyr.]); кαρлσµóç 'уields' (Arist., Thphr.). 3. кapпɛúw,
-εvoμa 'to reap fruits' (Hyp., Hell.) with кαρлεíα 'profit, income', каρлεчоν 'id.', also
= кαρлóç.
⚫ETYM Commonly compared with the root *kerp- of Lat. car po 'to pluck (off)', Lith.
kerpù 'to cut with scissors', Hitt. karp(iie)-zi 'to take away, lift, pluck', which would
imply that кαрлós originally meant 'what is plucked or reaped'. Another
comparandum is the Germanic word for 'autumn', e.g. OHG herbist (*karp-isto-
"best time to pluck"). However, the assumption is that the a in кapëóç may
represent vocalic *r. Yet, in classical Greek, *r would normally have given -pa-, and
the Mycenaean form proves that there was no *r in Proto-Greek, as its normal reflex
between two stops is Myc. /-or-/ (see García Ramón Minos 19 (1985): 195-226). This
has led to the assumption that PGr. *karp- is a secondary zero grade, but this seems
unlikely. DELG posits an “a populaire", which means that the word is a loan,
perhaps from a European substrate? The connection with ►кpóлov is probably
wrong (the word is Pre-Greek).
кapëóç 2 [m.] ‘wrist' (II.). <?>
•COMP As a first member in кαрлó-deoµov, -deoµoç, -déσµov 'bracelet' (pap., Luc.),
hypostasis úло-кάρлоç 'under the wrist' (Aristaenet.).
•DER кαρлwτóç ‘reaching to the wrisť' (LXX); кαpлíšo̟µɑɩ [v.] ‘to be taken by the
hand', i.a. as a sign of manumission, εлì ¿λεvɛpíα = 'adseror in libertatem' (gloss.);
каρлστηç 'еmancipator' (Arr.), kαрлσμóç, -ιστíα 'vindiciae' (gloss.).
•⚫ETYM Has been connected with a Germanic verb for 'turn, etc.', e.g. Go. hairban,
OHG hwerban, hwerfan ‘to turn (intr.), whirl (see on кapëáλчµoç). In this case,
the basic form would be *k"rpo-, from an IE root *kwerp- 'to turn' (cf. Schwyzer: 302
for the dissimilation *k" - p > k - p). However, the fact that the verb is limited to
Germanic makes the connection uncertain. Michler Herm. 94 (1966): 314-319
assumes that it is the same word as кαρлóç 'fruit'; see the remarks in Frisk Supp. s.v.

=== page 349 ===

650
káppov
Káppov [n.] 'wagon with four wheels, car' (LXX, pap., Edict. Diocl.). <LW Lat.➤
VAR Also -oç (Ed. Diocl.).
•COMP As a first member in кappo-уóç, -лó (gloss.).
⚫DER Diminutive кappiov (gloss.) and кαрршкòç yóμos 'load of a wagon' (Palmyra
IIP).
•ETYM From Lat. carrus (the Greek gender is after &pµa; late Lat. also -um), which
itself comes from Celtic. Further details in WH s.v. carrus.
кápσɩov [adj.] · лλáуoν 'sideways' (H.). <GR►
VAR Also -íws (Suid.).
ETYM Taken from έy-, εлкápσioç.
кáρτα [adv.] 'strongly, very' (Ion., trag.). <GR>
káptiotos);
⚫ETYM From *кαptúç = кpatúç (cf. kaptɛpós, kápτɩστоç); see on кpáτoç. On the
ending -a, see Schwyzer: 622f.; on the ablaut type, see Ruijgh 1980: 189-198.
кαρτáчwvoç [m.] Indian word for the rhinoceros (Ael, N.A. 16, 20). <LW Iran.>
⚫ETYM To be corrected to *кapyálwvoc; cf. MoP karyadan. See Benveniste 1929: 371-
376.
кaptaiлoç [n.] ‘larger cattle, beasts' (Gortyn). <GR>
•VAR Plur. kapτaí-лоdа (Gortyn) like τετρá-лоðα (sing. τετρáƒоç Gortyn).
⚫ETYM Innovation of msc. *кapτaαi-лwç for каpτaí-лoυç (Рi.) = кpаταí-лoυç 'with
strong feet (Hom. Epigr.). It also bears a short form, káptŋy (for -tav). tǹv ßoñv.
Kρñτɛç (H.); see Bechtel 1921, 2: 787, Fraenkel Glotta 35 (1956): 86ff., and Fraenkel
1956a: 101; however, the gloss is probably corrupt (see Latte s.v. and p. 815).
кápταλoç [m.] 'basket with pointed bottom' (LXX, Hell., Ph., H.). <PG(V) ►
•VAR Rarely-aλoç.
⚫DER Diminutive кapτáλλov (Hell.).
•ETYM Technical or popular word in -aλλos (cf. Chantraine 1933: 245ff.), which was
formerly connected with a root *k(e)rt- ‘turn' (Pok. 584), “aber im einzelnen dunkel”
(Frisk). It was also supposed in кúρτоç. However, the variant with single -λ- rather
points to a Pre-Greek word, and this would not be surprising, given the meaning.
DELG and Fur.: 352 suggest to connect кαρταλáдшov and кερτúλλLOV.
кαρτóç [adj.] 'cut', epithet of лрáσov ‘onion', кρóµµvоν 'garlic; τò кapτóv 'chive'
(Dsc., Gal., Gp.); also of clothes, perhaps ‘(finely) cuť (IG 2², 1514: 39f.; of xλavíc,
Xλavíσkiov). <GR▷
•VAR KAPTOĺ. KEKоυρευдiеvo 'who have had the hair cut' (H.).
•ETYM Zero grad verbal adjective of Kɛipw. For the connection with onion, cf.
MoHG Schnittlauch ‘chive' from schneiden ‘to cut', and Knoblauch ‘garlic', from
OHG klobo-louh, related to OE clufu ‘onion' and OHG klioban 'to split'; cf. also Lat.
sectīle porrum ‘chive'. The vocalization кapτ- is analogical after the full grade kɛp-.
кǎpúкη [f.] name of a Lydian 'soup of blood and spices' (Pherecr., Ath., Plu., Hdn.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also -ÚкKIJ.
i
káppw
•COMP As a first member in кapuкo-eɩdýs (Hp.), -noɩéw (Ar.).
651
⚫DER KapÚKIVOÇ 'K.-colored', i.e. 'dark red' (X.); denominative verbs: 1. Kapuкɛúw 'to
provide with K., prepare' (Alex., Men.), also 'to mix, confound' (Erot., H.), with
кapuкɛía (Ath.), карúкεчда (Рoll., comm. Arist.); 2. кαpuкáčεу· τарáτтяу 'to
agitate' (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Frisk suggested Lydian origin; but the variation points to a Pre-
Greek (Pre-Antolian) word; see Fur.15038. The structure кap-vк- fits the picture of
Pre-Greek (see Pre-Greek: Suffixes).
кápvov [n.] ‘nuť (Epich., Ar., Thphr.). <PG(V)►
⚫COMP кapvo-vaúτηs who sails in a nut' (Lyc.); kapvó-quλλov 'dried flower-bud of
the clove, Eugenia caryophyllata' (medic.), acc. to Maidhof Glotta 10 (1920): 11 folk-
etymological adaptation of a loan (Skt. kațuka-phala-).
●DER 1. kapúa [f.] 'walnut-tree', especially ‘hazel, Corylus avellana' (S., LXX, Thphr.,
etc.; on the gender Schwyzer 1950: 30). 2. Diminutives: kapúðɩov (Philyll. 19) with
Kapudów 'castrate', кapúdwσiç (Hippiatr.); кαρυÏσкoç (LXX). 3. Adjectives: kapú-
ïvoç of nuts, nut-brown, etc.', -wdŋs, -ŋpós ‘nut-like' (Hell.); kapuwτóç 'with nut-
like hump or fruit' (= 'date-tree'), kapvāτıç [f.] ‘kind of date' (Hell.); substantive
кapviτηs 'kind of Euphorbia' (Dsc.; Strömberg 1940: 53, Redard 1949: 72). 4. Adverb:
kapuŋdóv ‘like nuts' (medic.). 5. Verb: кapvaτíšw ‘play with nuts' (Ph.; after the
verbs in -ατí(w). A lengthened plural form in kαρvýµατα. кáρva. Aάкwvɛç 'nut
(Lacon.)' (H.; aftеr τραуηματα et al.; Chantraine 1933: 178).
•ETYM Several words have been compared, but they all differ from кápvov and from
one another: Lat. carīna 'ship's keel (since Enn. and Plaut.), 'shell of a nuť (Plin.);
Skt. karaka- [m.] ‘(shell of the) coconut' (lex.), 'jar for water'. For Lat. carīna, a
Greek loan (from кapúïvoç = *like a nut-shell' > 'ship's keel?) has been supposed
(WH s.v.); for karaka-, the priority of the meaning 'coconut' beside ‘water-jar' is
doubted by Mayrhofer EWAia 3: 59 (later form).
Beside kápvov, we find äpvα. τà 'Hpakλewtikà kápva (H.), which points to a Pre-
Greek word (interchange к-/ zero; Fur.: 391). The connection with a group *kar-
'hard' (Pok. 531f.) is completely hypothetical.
kápqw [v.] 'to dry up, wither, wrinkle' (Od.). ◄PG?(V) ►
•VAR Aor. Kápчaɩ, fut. kápчw.
•COMP Also with кατα-, уло-.
●DER 1. kápqoç [n.] ‘arid stalk, twig, halm, hay' (IA); diminutive кapoiov (Dsc.),
кappηpós 'consisting of arid stalks' (E. Ion 172; cf. aúxµŋpós, avστŋpóç et al.,
Chantraine 1933: 232f.), kapqítns ‘id.' (AP), kapowdŋs 'full of к.' (gloss.), kapqɛia
[n.pl.] = kápoŋ [pl.] (Nic. Al. 118); каpóоμαι (AP) = кapчúvεσðαι· paívɛoðaι,
kapqúvɛoðai.
pɛípɛσa 'to dry up, perish' (H.); see Fraenkel 1906: 294. 2. Kápoŋ [f.] ‘hay' (X.,
Arr.). 3. kapqaλéos ‘ariď (Il.), like avaλéoç; perhaps from кápooç, cf. Chantraine
1933: 253f. 4. кατакарons 'withered' (Nic. Fr. 70, 9).
•ETYM There is no correspondence in the other IE languages to a zero grade thematic
root present kápów (does кápooç stand for older *кépqoç?). A widespread group in
Balto-Slavic and Germanic has been adduced, e.g. Ru. koróbiť' 'to curve, bend', refl.

=== page 350 ===

652
kapxaλéos
‘to writhe', beside which (with anlauting s-) skórbnuť ‘to writhe', Lith. skrèbti, 1sg.
skrembù 'to get a thin crust, get stiff, Molc. herpa-st 'to draw together convulsively',
ON skorpna 'writhe, wither', etc., from a root IE (s)kerbh-, (s)kreb¹- (Pok. 948f.).
Within Greek, we also find the glosses кopowç. έλaqpws 'light, small' and képẞaλa.
άσ0εvñ 'weak' (H.). The problem with this Indo-European etymology is the
consistent a-vocalism of the Greek words. The comments by Frisk are illustrative
("Die expressive Wortgruppe hat offenbar lautliche Entgleisungen und
Verschränkungen erlitten"), as are those of DELG ("Les rapprochements proposés
par les étymologistes ne donnent satisfaction ni pour la forme ni pour le sens"). It
seems, then, that the word is non-IE and it may well be Pre-Greek. In this context,
note the vocalism of kopowç.
кapxaλéoç [adj.] ‘arid, scorching, biting, sharp' (❤ 541 [v.l. kapq-], Nic. Th. 691 [v.l.
кapq-], A. R.). <?►▷
•ETYM A cross of кápxapos and кapqaλéoç? DELG remarks that the oldest sources
attest to the sense ‘arid', which could mean that the readings with -- are to be
preferred. See кápow, кápxapos.
kápxapos [adj.] ‘biting, sharp, raw' (Alcm. 140, Lyc., Opp.). <PG(V)►
•VAR With reshaped ending кapxapέos (EM).
⚫COMP kapxapódwv (-os), -OVτoç 'with sharp teeth' (Il., Hes., Ar., Arist., Thphr.; cf.
Sommer 1948: 93).
•DER kapxapíaç [m.] ‘kind of shark' (Pl. Com., Sophr.; cf. Thompson 1947 s.v.,
Strömberg 1943: 45).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic reduplicated formation (Schwyzer: 423; cf. Tichy 1983: 174²º),
which has been compared with Skt. khara- ‘hard, raw, sharp', MoP xār(ā) ‘rock,
thorn'; however, Skt. kh- does not correspond to Gr. -X-. Acc. to Leumann 1950: 156,
kάpxapos was taken from Hom. kapxapódovtɛç. An unaspirated form appears in
▶ kápkapoɩ · τpaxɛïç kaì déσµoɩ (H.).
Blanc REGr. 107 (1994): 686-693 thinks that the word is connected with xápa
'pointed pole' and xapáσow 'to sharpen, engrave, etc.'. Fur.: 130 rejects the IE
comparison (see Mayrhofer EWAia 3: 139). The comparison with кápкapoɩ rather
points to Pre-Greek origin; Fur. refers to Urart. ḥarḥar 'heap of stones', Arm. karkar
'slippery rock'.
кαρxýσιov [n.] ‘a drinking vessel which is narrower in the middle', metaph.
'masthead, top', also ‘cage or chamber in a torsion engine' (Sapph., Pi., IA). <PG?►
•VAR -άσιov (Pi.).
●DER kapxñσios [m.] ‘halliard of a ship, rope in generaľ (Gal.).
•ETYM Foreign word of unknown origin; cf. Schwyzer: 470, Chantraine 1928: 3, and
Hermann Gött. Nachr. (1943): 1f. Borrowed as Lat. carchēsium (see Friedmann 1937:
20ff.), whence Sp. carquesia, Ital. calcese > MoFr. calcet. The word could be Pre-
Greek.
kapú [f.] ‘cumin, Carum carvi' (Dsc., Gal., Orib.). ◄PG?►
•DER Kapwτóv [n.] 'carrot' (Ath. 9, 371e? Uncertain); Lat. carota (Apic.).
!
Kaσiyvηto
653
⚫ETYM A form of the word кápov. Derived from кápŋ 'head', like кɛqaλwτóv 'kind of
onion' from кɛqaλn, by Frisk. However, the form in -w seems Pre-Greek.
-кáç adverbial suffix. → έкáç.
кaσaλẞáç, -ádos [f.] 'strumpet' (Ar.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Kaσoaßáç (EM).
==
•DER кaσáλẞiov brothel' (sch. Ar. Eq. 1825 v.l.), kaσaλßá¼w (Ar., Hermipp. Com.).
Also кaσwpis with кaσwpɛúw (Lyc.) and кaσwpiτç ‘id.' (Hippon., Antiph.),
кaσúplov (Ar. Eq. 1285) = кαowρiкòç dóμoç (uncertain conj. in Hippon. 74);
kaʊwpikòç dóµos
kaσaúpa. kaʊwpiç, лópvò ‘strumpet, prostitute', also кaσaupáç, with kaσavpɛĩa [pl.]
(H.). Short form кáσσa (Lyc.).
⚫ETYM Vulgar words. There seems no reason whatsoever to connect it with кaσās
'blanket'. The form кaσ-wp- continues кaσ-aup- (a well known development in Pre-
Greek; see Fur: 30132). In turn, the form кaσaup- may continue кaσaß-, with ẞ
varying with u, F. The relation between кaσaλẞ- and кaσaß- is unclear; Fur.: 305f.
thinks that the is secondary, but he gives only little evidence. I am inclined to think
that the \ is old, and suggest that кaσaλẞ- originates from *kasal"-, with a labialized
phoneme that may easily have become w> b.
кaσaç [m.] 'horse-cloth' (Agatharch., X. Cyr.). <LW Orient.>
•VAR Acc. -āv, acc.du. -ã. Also кασñç (PTeb.), also кáσσoç (Hdn. 1, 208), acc. to H.
¡µátiov raxù kai τpaxú, rɛpißólaiov ‘thick and coarse cloth, covering cloth', and
káç.... Sépμa 'skin' (H., PLond. 2, 402 V 5).
•COMP As a first member in kaσ(σ)o-лoós (pap., Ostr.).
•DER Kaσwτóç epithet of co0ns (Diog. Oen.).
ETYM An oriental loanword; cf. Hebr. kisse' and kesut, properly 'cover, over-
garment' (Cuny MSL 19 (1915-16): 193f. and Nyberg in Björck 1950: 295). Borrowed
from Greek as Lat. casula; see Kramer AfP 45 (1999): 192-204 and Kramer AfP 46
(2000): 62-64.
Kaσía [f.] 'cassia, Cinnamomum iners', a kind of cinnamon (Sapph., Melanipp., Hdt.,
Thphr.). LW Orient.>>
•VAR Ion. -ín (rarely -σσ-).
●DER kaσσíšw ‘to smell or taste cassia' (Dsc.).
•ETYM An oriental loanword; cf. Hebr. q'si'ah, Assyr. kasia. Originally Austro-Asiatic
(Kretschmer Glotta 27 (1939): 250 after Gonda). Cf. E. Masson 1967: 48f. and Welles
1934:342.
kaoiyvntos [m.] 'brother (of the same mother)' (Il.). ◄IE *kmt-i- + *ģnh₁-to- ‘born
together'>
•VAR kaoɩyvýtη [f.] ‘sister, cousin' also Corc., Cypr., Lesb. (cf. Bowra JHS 54 (1934):
65), Thess. кaτíуVELTOS [m.].
•COMP auto-kaσiyvntos (II.), -ýtη (к 137), лatpo-kaoíyvytos, -ýτη 'uncle, aunt'
(Hom.), μаτpo-кaσɩyvñtaɩ [pl.] ‘uterine sister' (A. Eu. 962); σvy-kaσlyvýtŋ ‘(own)
sister' (E. IT 800).

=== page 351 ===

654
KAOKάVSIĘ
•DER Short form (see below) káoɩis, -ɩos [m., f.] ‘id.' (trag., Call., Nic.), σúу-кασɩç
‘(own) sister' (E. Alc. 410 [lyr.]). Also káσto (for -ɩeç?). oi ¿ê tñs aútñs ȧyéλns
ådɛλqoí tɛ kai ávɛyioí. kai έñì Oŋlɛiwv oűtws έλɛyov Aάкwvɛs ‘brothers and
cousins who are from the same band; the Laconians also say it in the case of females'
(H.); cf. Leumann 1950: 307, where кáσiç, кaσíуvηtos are questionably taken from
poetical language. Unclear are кaσɛv (Lacon. Knabeninschr.; see Kretschmer Glotta 3
(1910-1912): 270ff., Schwyzer: 6255 [for кað v?]) and кaιvíτα. ȧdελoń, kaivítaç
ådeλqoùs kai ådeλoás (H.), perhaps Cyprian < кãσɩyvη- (with itacism)? See von
Blumenthal 1930: 22.
•ETYM From **kmti-ģnh,-to-, so ‘born together', i.e. from the same mother. On kaσɩ-
< *katɩ-, see on ► кaí. See Ruijgh 1957: 137f and Beekes 1969: 219f.
KAOKávdiž [?] · ǹ yη\\ís kind of onion' (H.). <PG(S) ►
•ETYM It has been connected with σkávdiž, -īkos ‘cherviľ, okávdvž, -ūkos (v.l. Dsc. 2,
138), assuming reduplication and dissimilation of σkк - σк (Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-
1916 1: 856, Schwyzer: 260). The word is Pre-Greek, in view of the a-vocalism and the
suffixation.
Kaσkós [m.] · ó µikpòç dáktvλos ‘small finger' (H.). <?>
•VAR Also Kaкkós ‘id.' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown.
káoµopos • dúotηvos ‘unhappy' (H.). →кáµµopoç.
Kaoσávdpa [f.] daughter of Priamos (Il.). <IE *(s)kend- 'raise', *keNs- 'order'>
•DIAL Ion. -n. Also Kaσávdpa (first syllable always long), Kɛσávбpa (Cor., Tarent.
vases.), Katávôpa (Att. amphora). On the forms Sommer 1948: 189f. Cf. also Myc.
ke-sa-do-ro /Kessandros/, ke-sa-da-ra /Kessandra/.
⚫ETYM Heubeck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 8 (1957): 272-274 suggested derivation from a
root kaσ- in kέkaσµai. DELG Supp. suggests to connect the Myc. PN ke-sa-me-no
and the root *keNs-.
García Ramón 1992a follows Heubeck in connecting кéкασμaι, but reconstructs a
root *(s)kend- for this form. The name would be a Motionsbildung to Kassandros,
which is then a τεpчíµßоτ compound, i.e. *knd-ti-, which we find in Kaστɩ-
ávɛpa and Kaσσ-ắvõp, the group -tị- yielding -σσ-. The Myc. PNs in /Kess-/, on the
contrary, would be derived from the root *keNs-, and are not cognate.
kaooitɛpos [m.] ‘tin' (Il.). <PG➤
•var Att. kattitepos.
•COMP As a first member in кασσɩεpo-лoιóç ‘tinner' (Ptol.).
●DER KAσOITÉPIVOs (кatti-) ‘made of tin' (Att. inscr., Arist.); Kaσσɩτεpides vñooi “the
tin-islands”, probably South-West of Britain (Hdt. 3, 115, Str.); кaooɩtepãç [m.]
'tinner' (pap.); kασσιτɛpów 'tin' (Dsc.).
•ETYM Elamitie origin has been suggested, from *kassi-ti-ra “coming from the land
of the Kassi" (whence Kaσσíτipα island in the Indian Ocean [Dion. apud St. Byz.]?).
Further, Celtic names like Cassi-velaunus were also connected, with the
Kaooitepides vñσot giving their name to the metal (cf. e.g. Kúлpoç: copper), or vice
!
i
1
KáσTwp, -opoç
655
versa. More recently, Freeman Glotta 75 (1997): 222-225 pleaded for Near Eastern
origin, referring to Kaσσítɛpa in Steph. Byz.
The Greek word spread widely: Lat. cassiterum (after ferrum, aurum et al.), OCS
kositer, Skt. kastira-, Arab. qazdir, etc. The group σσ / TT is typically Pre-Greek, so
the word would have come from Greece or Western Anatolia, like the word for
'lead', uóλvẞdoç.
кaσσúw [V.] ‘to stitch, sew together like a shoemaker' (Nic. Fr. 85, 6). ◄PG➤
•DIAL Att. кαττúw (com., Pl.).
•COMP Also with έv-, εлɩ-, лαрa-, ovv-.
•DER кáσovμα (Нp.), кáτтυμа (com.) 'sole of a shoe', кαττúç [f.] 'piece of leather'
(Ar. Fr. 285).
⚫ETYM The form кαττÚç is not the basis (as per Kretschmer Glotta 1 (1909): 52f.), but
rather a back-formation from кαTтúw. The "foreign phoneme" σσ / TT, in
combination with the a-vocalism, shows Pre-Greek origin.
kάotava [n.pl.] ‘sweet chestnuts' (Mnesith. apud Ath. 2, 54b, Gal. Dsc. v.l.). ◄PG?(S),
LW Anat.?
•VAR Also kάστavoɩ (Gal.); sing. káσtavov (Gp.), -os (H. s.v. kapúai), kaotavíai
(Dsc.).
●COMP As a second member in Baλavo-káσtavov = þáλavos kaotavikós (thus Gal.)
and ẞoλẞo-káστavov 'earth-nut' (Alex. Trall.).
●DER кaστávala, -ɛα [pl.] = кάστаvα (Att. inscr.), кaστavéŋ 'chestnut tree',
кaστavɛwv 'chestnut forest' (Gp.), каστανкóç (Gal.; see above), кαστаvαïкòv
Kápvov (Thphr.); Kaστaviç ala land in Anatolia (Nic. Al. 271; cf. Kaστavéa = ródiç
Mayvŋoías EM).
•ETYM The ŋ in кαστηvoñ (gen.) ‘chestnut-tree' (Nic. Al. 269) is unclear. An
Anatolian word? Except for the TN mentioned, cf. Arm. kask ‘chestnut', kaskeni
‘chestnut-tree'. From кáσtavov, -ávɛta comes Lat. castanea (cf. e. g. picea), whence
OHG chestinna, and, via new borrowing, MoHG Kastan(i)e. Further, see WH s.v.
castanea. Fur.: 389 has a variation к / τ, but there is no Pre-Greek material for this
(the k in Armenian may be due to assimilation). The variation -ata / -ɛα may,
however, be a Pre-Greek feature (Pre-Greek: Suffixes 6. -at-/-ε(1)-).
KάσTOV [n.]? • žúλov. Alaµãveç 'timber (Athamanian)' (H.). <PG?>
ETYM Fur.: 164 compares ǎкαστov. ǹ σdavo ‘maple', noting that the hard
wood of this tree is excellent for building; he further compares кóσTOV 'wooden part
of a carrier' (343). Several other proposals can be found in Frisk.
кáστwp, -opoç [m.] 'beaver' (Hdt., Hp., Arist.). <?>
•DER KAσTÓρ(ε)10s 'belonging to the beaver' (Pi., X., Dsc.), кαστóр(ε) lov [n.] 'castor
(= Bibergeil)' (pap., Plu.); kaσtopídɛs [f.pl.] ‘Laconian race of dogs, initially elevated
by Castor' (AP, Poll.), 'beaver' (Opp., Ael.); kaσtopí(w 'to be like castor' (Dsc., Vett.
Val.).
•ETYM Since Kretschmer 1909:121-3, it has been assumed that the name Káσtwp, who
was known as σwτp of women, was transferred to the beaver, presumably because

=== page 352 ===

656
KaσÚTAÇ
of the medicinal effect of castor for women's diseases. This idea has been uncritically
taken over, and in fact Kretschmer gives no specific argument. Gantz 1993: 323-328,
who discusses the Dioskouroi rather extensively, mentions nothing about a relation
with the beaver, so Kretschmer's idea should be abandoned.
Schrader-Nehring 1917: 138 point out that the animal no longer existed in Greece; the
word would be foreign. It is first mentioned in Hdt. 4, 109 in the North Pontic area,
which is close to the supposed homeland of the Indo-Europeans, so the word could
in principle be inherited. A Pre-Greek word for 'beaver' may have been λátaž.
кάστwp was borrowed by Latin, and thence it spread to the other European
languages. From кαστóρ(ε) tov comes Skt. kastūrī [f.] 'musk'.
kaoútaç [?] · Evpiaкòv Boτávov 'Syriac plant' (H.). <LW Sem.?►
•VAR Also кadútas (Thphr. CP 2, 17, 3) ‘Cassyta filiformis'.
•ETYM From Arab. kašūth; cf. Grimme Glotta 14 (1925): 19. Fur.: 256 remarks that the
assibilation to -ou- does not prove anything, and that the plant probably came from
Anatolia.
kaowpiç → kaσaλßás.
káta [adv., prep.] ‘down(wards), against, along, through, over, across, concerning'
(II.). <IE *kmt- 'down, with, along">
•VAR As a prep. with gen. and acc.
●DER Also кatα- in kataι-ßataí (v 110), kataι-ßáτŋs epithet of Zeus, etc. (Thera,
Melos, Thasos, trag.); cf. ►кaταitvε.
⚫ETYM Identical with Hitt. kattan [adv.] 'below, underneath', katta [postpos.] 'along
with' (for further distinction in Old Hittite, see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.); the old Celtic
word for 'with', e.g. OW cant, OIr. cét-, may belong here, too. The IE base form is
then *kmt-, possibly with further connection to IE *kom in Lat. cum, etc. (see
►Koιvós). The by-forms кατα- and Arc. кaτú are best explained as analogical after
лαрαí and άлú.
кαταбíxιov [n.] name of a vase (IG 14, 427: I, 15, Tauromenion). <GR▷
⚫ETYM Hypercorrect form of *kaddíxiov. See ►kádos.
KATAĬTVĚ, -VYOS [f.] name of a leather helmet without páλos or λópos (K 258). ◄?►
⚫ETYM Formally reminiscent of ǎvτuž. The explanation by the sch. лapà tò кáτw
TεTÚXαι. λóчov yàp ovк exε is useless, as it is clearly constructed from the text; see
Trümpy 1950: 45. A loan, acc. to Bechtel 1914 s.v.; Semitic connection proposed by
Lewy KZ 55 (1928): 29f., unconvincing according to Frisk.
Kat’ăkpas
•VAR Ion. кat ǎkpns.
•ETYM See ► ǎкpoç; on kat äkpŋßɛv, see ► кápā.
katappáktŋs. [m.] 'down-swooping, sheer, waterfall, portcullis, movable bridge,
sluice'; also name of a bird, 'cormorant' (Hdt., S., Ar.). <GR>
•VAR Ion. -ppýkTNS.
•ETYM From кatα-ppátτw, -ppńσow; see on ▸ pắσow.
Kavač
Kataokɛve [v.subj.] 'he kills' (SGDI 4998: 1, 14f., Gortyn). <GR>
657
•ETYM Equivalent to Att. кατα-кτεívη, with a special phonetic development of the
consonant group кɩ- (Schwyzer: 325f., Strunk 1967: 99).
katevõлa •VAR katévwña. ⇒¿võita.
katñlių, -1q0s [f.] mg. unknown, perhaps 'ladder, roof-beam, upper story' (Ar. Ra.
566); iкpíwμa 'scaffold' (H.). <?>
=
⚫ETYM For the formation, aiyiλy, ǎλy have been compared; further unexplained.
katŋons [adj.] ‘with downcast eyes, ashamed, sad' (w 432, Hp., E.). <GR?>
●DER katǹqɛa, epic Ion. -ɛíŋ 'being downcast, etc.' (Il., Th.). кatηoέw (E., Arist.),
aor. -ñσa 'to be downcast, be ashamed, etc.' (II.); is кατηons a back-formation? By-
forms: кατηóvεç = кατηo̟éεç ( 253; see Schwyzer: 487, Chantraine 1933: 160);
katŋqóvεs katnyées (N
katηqiάw = katηéw (A. R., AP, Plu.), after the verbs in -táw.
•ETYM Uncertain. Acc. to Schwyzer 1908: 247ff., it is from άo̟é̟, äлɩw as ‘having the
view downwards'; to the contrary, Kretschmer Glotta 5 (1914): 309. Blanc 1988: 33-48
(see DELG Supp.) connects the group of еáµßoç, etc., and assumes *kata-tnońs
'completely stupefied'; one would rather expect *-Оŋŋç, however.
katiáç, -ádoç ‘surgical lancet' (Heliod. apud Orib. 44, 14, 4). ◄GR➤
●DER кatiádiov (Aret., C. D. 1, 2).
•ETYM Probably from kašíŋµɩ ‘to let down (into)'; the psilosis does not surprise in
Ionic.
кατOúλā [f.] juridical term of unclear mg. <?>
•DER Katovλέw.
⚫ETYM Cf. ovλń (Schwyzer: 668).
katovlás, -ádos [adj.] epithet of the night (S. fr. 433, A. R. 4, 1695). ◄ GR➤
•ETYM From кατεéw. Connected with oλon by A. R. (folk etymology).
katpeúc, -éws [m.] name of an Indian peacock (Clitarch., Nonn.). ◄LW Ind.?►
•ETYM Unknown, probably Indian; for the formation, cf. ¿piɛús, xλwpɛús, etc.
(Boßhardt 1942: 20). It hardly belongs to the Cretan town name Katpeúç, Kátpŋ, as
per Boẞhardt op. cit. 74. Cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.
кάττα word for 'cat', which replaced aloupos (Ar. Pl. 693). <?►
⚫VAR KάTTOÇ (sch. Call., H. Dem. 110a, p. 79 Pf.).
⚫ETYM Origin unknown, but the word is found in Latin and most other languages of
Europe.
katŵttov [n.] ‘lifeboat' (pap.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
•
кavalós · μwpołóyos 'speaking foolishly' (H.). <PG➤
•ETYM Perhaps related to кóẞaλos.
.
кavač · λápoç (H.), name of a sea-bird, perhaps 'seamew, tern' (see Thompson 1895
S.V.). <PG(S)►

=== page 353 ===

658
KaÚNS
•VAR KaúnĚ, -ŋkos [m.] (Antim., Hell.), also кýž [f.] (o 479) and кñ¨ž [m.] (Babr.,
Dionys. Av.).
⚫ETYM Ending like in iέpač, pη, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 380). Has been compared
with bird-names like MW cuan ‘screech-owľ and other Celtic words, whence Lat.
cavannus 'id.', OHG (with regular sound shift) hūwo ‘owl'. Within Greek, one also
finds forms with internal velar: Kaukαλíaç öрviç лоιóç 'kind of bird', кaukiáλŋs. …..
öpvɩç H., with which are compared Lith. kaukỹs [m.] name of a crying bird and
primary verbs like Skt. káuti 'cry', Lith. kaūkti ‘to howl, moan', etc.; cf. on кwкúW.
Is каúаž· лаvоupyos 'criminal' (Suid.) a term of abuse from comedy? See
Kretschmer KZ 31 (1892): 354. The word with -aк- is probably Pre-Greek (the second
velar does not belong to the root). Cf. on ►кwẞač.
кaúŋs [m.] name of a priest(ess) in Sardes (Hippon. 2). ◄LW Lyd.►
•VAR Acc. -ŋv [f.] (IG Rom. 4, 1755 et al.; written -εtv).
⚫ETYM A Lydian word; cf. Latte Phil. 97 (1948): 43. From Lyd. kaveś, acc. to Masson
Jb. f.kleinas. Forsch. 1 (1950-51): 182-188 and O. Masson 1962: 107f.
kavkaλiç, -idos [f.] an umbelliferous plant, Tordylium apulum' (Thphr., Nic., Dsc.,
Gp.). <PG?>
•VAR Also kaukov (Ps.-Dsc. 2, 139) and кavкiáλŋs. Botávŋ tis, óµoía kopiw (cod.
Kwp-) 'a plant like coriander' (H.).
⚫ETYM On the suffix-aλíc, see Chantraine 1933: 251f. The plant was also called SauкOS
äypios (Dsc. 2, 139); see Strömberg 1940: 153. Further hypotheses in Nencioni Riv.
degli stud. or. 19 (1940): 101f. Is it Pre-Greek?
кañкoç [m.] ‘cup' (gloss.). <?>
⚫DER Diminutive кauкíov (pap. VIP, AP 9, 749 in lemm., Just.). Also кauкáλov 'id.'
(Alex. Aphr. Pr. 1, 94; after ẞavкáλiov).
•ETYM Identical with Lat. caucum [n.] ‘id.' (Script. hist. Aug.), but further unknown;
cf. WH s.v. Schrijver 1997: 295 compares Olr. cuach 'cup'.
Kavλós [m.] 'shaft, stalk, quill of a feather' (II.); on the botanical and anatomical mg.
Strömberg 1937: 95ff. and 49. ◄IE *keh₂ulo- ‘shaft'>
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. µovó-кavλos (Thphr.; Strömberg 1937: 104f.),
rarely as a first member, e.g. in kavλo-kɩvápa ‘the shaft of the artichoke' (Gp.); see
Strömberg 1944: 7.
⚫DER Diminutives: кavλíov (Arist.), кavλíoкoç (J., D. S., Dsc.); further кavλεĭov =
Kavλós (Nic.; after ȧyyɛãov et al.); Kavλías 'sap of the shaft' (Thphr.), like pučiaç
'root-sap', cf. Strömberg 1937: 91, Chantraine 1933: 94f.; кavλívηs fish name = xλwpòs
кwẞiós (Diph. Siph. apud Ath. 8, 355c), after the color, acc. to Strömberg 1943: 26;
formation like Aloxívns; further kavλikós, kavλwdŋs ‘like a stalk' (Thphr.), kaúλivos
'consisting of a shaft' (Luc.), кavλwτóç 'with a stalk' (Eudem. Phil. IVª; like avλwτóc,
etc.); Kavλndóv 'stalk by stalk' (Opp.).
Denominative verb кavλíčoμai 'to have a shaft' (Ar. Fr. 404); Siкavλéw 'to have two
shafts', ¿ккavλéw 'to grow out in one shaft' (whence έккαúλησ, -ŋuα) and
kayáiw
659
Éккavλíw 'to remove the shaft' (Thphr.) derive from virtual *dı-kavλoç, *ěk-kavλoç,
etc. (Kavλéw only Suid.).
•ETYM Old inherited word, also found in Latin and in Baltic: Lat. caulis [m.] ‘shaft'
(secondary i-stem); Lith. káulas 'bone, cube', Latv. kauls 'id.', also 'shaft', OPr. caulan
'bone'; Olr. cúal 'faggot, bundle of sticks' < *kaulā. Not related to Skt. kulyá- 'ditch,
canal' and the Gm. word for 'hollow', ON holr, Go. us-hulon 'to hollow out'.
Kavváng → yavvárns.
kauvós [m.] · kakós, okλnpós, kλñpos ‘bad, hard, lot' (H.); in the last mg. also Cratin.
194 and Ar. Fr. 660 (see Kock ad loc.). <?>
•DER Siakavviáσai = diaкλnpwσai 'to assign by lot' (Ar. Pax 1081).
ETYM In the meaning кaкóç, кauvóç has been compared with a Balto-Germanic
word for ‘humble, shame, etc.', e.g. Go. hauns 'lowly, humble', MoHG Hohn, Latv.
kauns 'shame, contumely'. However, the text of Hesychius is very uncertain; the
form σкλŋpós (in this meaning taken as related to Kaiw by Schulze KZ 29 (1888):
270) looks like a dittography (with σ- from кaкós) of the following кλñpoç. DELG
splits the word in two, but this too is unclear. See Fur. 237
кañpos [adj.] = kakós (S. Fr. 1059, Phot., H.). <?►
•ETYM Güntert 1914: 131 assumes a cross of лañpoç and kavvós = kakóç. Frisk thinks
that a cross of какóç and лабpos is possible. There is no support for these
suggestions.
kavσia [f.] name of a royal felt hat among the Macedonians (Hell.; see Hoffmann
1906: 55ff.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained; a suggestion was made by Sapir AmJPh. 60 (1939): 464. DELG
connects it with кaíw. Fur.: 119 refers to уaúσалоç and yavσáлηç; also, Lat. gloss on
gausape.
kavɣáoµai [v.] ‘to boast, be proud' (Pi., Sapph.). <?>
•VAR Aor. кavxnσaσðaι (кavxáσ[a]τo Sapph. Supp. 4, 21), fut. кavxσoμai, perf.
kɛkaúxŋuai (2 Ep. Cor. 7, 14).
•COMP Also with έк-, έv-, кαta-.
•DER kaúxa [f.] ‘ostentation' (Pi. Nem. 9, 6; back-formation), кañxos [n.] ‘object of
boasting' (Syria VP; back-formation); кaúxηµα, -āµa ‘id.' (Pi.) with кavõŋuaτíaç
'boaster' (Ptol., sch.) and кαvуημαtiкóç (sch.), кaúxnois 'boasting' (Hell.); кavxnμwv
‘boasting' (Babr.); kavxηtýs ‘boaster' with kavõŋstikós, kavxntiáw (sch., EM).
•ETYM There is no direct parallel in the other languages; the connections with Arm.
xausim 'to speak' and Lith. šaūkti, 1sg. šaukiù ‘to cry, call loudly' cannot be
substantiated. The -au- remains unexplained.
kaqwpŋ →σkaчwpn.
кaxάšw [v.] ‘to laugh loudly' (IA, Theoc.). <IE *kha kha ‘ha ha’▷
•VAR Also кaкxášw, кayxášw (on the gemination and nasalization see Schwyzer: 315
and 647), aor. кaxáσαι, fut. кaxažw (Theoc.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, έк-.

=== page 354 ===

660
kayezia
•DER кaxaσuoí [pl.] (Ar. Nu. 1073, v. 1.), кaкxadíaι. ioxvóowvot 'thin-voiced' (H.).
⚫ETYM Reduplicated sound word with comparable forms in several languages: Skt.
(gramm.) kákhati, OCS xoxotati, OHG kachazzen ‘id.', Arm. xaxan-k' [pl.], Lat.
cachinnus ‘resounding laughter', with cachinnō, -āre. Genetic relation of these forms
remains uncertain. See also *кNKÁČW.
кaxɛžía [f.] ‘bad condition of body or mind' (IA). <GR►
•DER back-formation кaxέкτηs [m.] ‘in bad condition, ill, ill-disposed', whence
KAXEKTIKÓS, -TÉW, -τɛúoµai (Hell.), also кaxεns (Phld. Rh. 1, 36 S.; uncertain).
Opposite εvεčia with -έкτηç, etc.
⚫ETYM A compound of кαкwç εXELV.
kaxetaɩpiŋ [f.] ‘bad company' (Thgn. 1169). < GR➤
•ETYM From kakoì έταīpoι 'bad companions'. Cf. Porzig 1942: 212f.
кaxλášw [v.] ‘to splash, bubble', of water (Pi., A.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Almost only present and imperfect.
•COMP Rarely with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, únɛp-.
●DER кaxλaσµós (Zos. Alch., gloss.), ávaкáxλaoïç (sch.). Rare by-form кoxλášw
(PHolm. 3, 1; conj. in Plu. 2, 590f.) with кóxλασµа (Н. s.v. åлóßрασμа, roµpóλvž).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic word with intensive reduplication (Tichy 1983: 252f.); cf.
►лαчλáчw. It has been compared with кáxλn. There is no IE etymology, but the
variation a/o (кóxλaσμα) is typical of Pre-Greek.
káxλnž, -ŋkos [m.] ‘small stones, gravel in a river-bed', also collective (Th., Str., J.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also кóxλaž, -ākos (LXX); äxλaž· кáxλn (Suid.), cf. Fur. 391.
•ETYM Formation in -ŋ§, like τpáëη§, vápðŋ§, et al. (cf. Björck 1950: 261f.). The word
has been connected with the Germanic word for 'hail', OHG hagal [m.], ON hagl
[n.], etc. However, the alternations a/ o and к-/ zero rather point to a Pre-Greek
word. Güntert 1932: 28¹ and Porzig ZII 5 (1927): 269f. are also in favor of foreign
origin.
кáxpvç [f.] ‘parched barley' (IA), 'winter-buď (Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Gen. -voç, in Dieuch. apud Orib. also -udos; acc. -vda. Also кáxpv [n.] 'fruit of
the frankincense-tree, also the tree itself (Hp., Thphr., Dsc.).
•COMP As a first member кaxpvo-pópos 'with winter-buds' (Thphr.), kaxpv-qópos
‘bearing кáxpʊ' (Nic.; epithet of Mißavwtic).
=
кaxpuôópos (Nic.);
●DER kaxpvwdns ‘like winter-buds' (Thphr.), кaxpvóels
кaxpúðɩa [pl.] ‘chaff of the кáxpus' (Arist.; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 70),
кaxpvdíaç [m.] ‘кáxpʊç-likе' (лυрóç, Thphr.), 'made of кáxpus' (ǎpτoç, Poll.);
кaxpvdiášoµai ‘bud in winter' (Cat. Cod. Astr.).
•ETYM Connected with кéyxpos 'millet' since Persson 1891: 103 and 124), but the
meaning of the present etymon rather points towards 'parched, dry', which suggests
connection with кáyкavoç ‘arid, barren'. Genetic connection is prohibited by the
-X- of кáxpuç, but we may think of a substrate element *ka(n)k-. Fur.: 277 points to
the variant кáyxpus (also -údiov, -udíac) found in the mss. This would point to
Keálw
661
*ka"kru- (with prenasalization); he also connects кéyxpoç, but see s.v and the
objection above.
káva [f.]? • kiotŋ, Oýky ‘basket, chest' (Suid., cf. Phot.). <PG(V)►
•VAR кáμуa. еńкη, уλшσσокоμεïov 'chest, casket' (H.).
•DER кayάpios (inscr.), кaµ¼íov (pap.), кα(µ)wáкns (LXX), кαчáкɩov (pap.),
кaчáкιov. уλwσσóкоμоу 'сasе' (H.), кαшιкóç (pap.).
⚫ETYM DELG comments that it is a borrowing from Lat. capsa 'box'; however, as the
latter has no etymology, it is rather a loan from Greek, where the prenasalization
points to a Pre-Greek word. For the structure of the word, cf. Siya (note the short
-a).
kayoi [?] · oi toixoɩ ‘walls' (H.). <?>
ETYM No etymology.
кáw 'burn'. ⇒kaiw. .
кε [pcl.] modal particle (Aeol. Cypr.), equivalent of IA, Arc. äv. <IE *ken, kn modal
pcl.>
•VAR KEV (Hom.); кa (Dor.; poetic кā).
•ETYM Gr. ka is reminiscent of Ru. -ko (after the dative of personal pronouns and
after the imperative), also -ka (like кā). Further, the pair кα : кε is compared with ya
yɛ. In this line, the final nasal in кɛv has be explained as an Ionic v έQEλKUσTIKÓV.
Alternatively, connection with the Skt. particle kám and the Slav. preposition kʊ
(both from IE *kom) may be envisaged; note the comparison nú kam : vú кev. The
form кɛv has been connected as a full grade, beside the zero grade кa < *kη before
consonant, and in Arcadian кav before vowel; кɛ has, in this view, been reshaped
after кa (Palmer 1962: 90-92). The phrase ov кáv may have been changed to ovк ǎv.
See Forbes Glotta 37 (1958): 179-182 and Lee AmJPh. 88 (1967): 45-56.
кɛáчw [V.] 'to split, pound, rub to pieces' (Il.). <IE *kes- 'cut'>
•VAR Aor. Kεáσ(σ)αɩ, pass. кεασеñval, perf. ptc. pass. kɛkɛaσµévoç.
•DIAL Acc. to Palmer 1963: 186-8, Myc. ke-ke-me-na (ko-to-na) is also related in the
sense of 'divided (land)' (cf. also on ► kɛĩµaɩ).
•COMP Also with àµqɩ-, dɩα-.
•DER ɛỶкέατoç ‘easy to spliť (ε 60, Theoc. 25, 248), kéapva. oídŋpa tektovká
'carpenter's axe' (after σкéлαpvov); uncertain Kɛádao [gen.] (B 847).
⚫ETYM The disyllabic aorist кɛáo(σ)al (with facultative analogical -σ0-) is formed like
¿λáo(0)al, netáσ(σ)al, etc., and has been taken to derive from a root PGr. *kesa- <
PIE *kesh₂-; the other forms (e.g. кɛά(w) are then recent creations. This supposed
PGr. *kesa- has been compared with Skt. śasi-syati 'he will cut', but the value of this
form is doubtful, as the root sas- 'to cut' is aniț. An alternative assumption would be
that the ά(w-present is a Greek invention, and that the other forms are based on it
(thus LIV² s.v. *kes-). Another present formation is perhaps seen in кɛíwv (§ 425,
verse-final), if for keŵv < *кɛáwv (Schulze 1892: 434). ·

=== page 355 ===

662
663
Gr. Kɛo- and Skt. śas- show a full grade *kes-, as opposed to a zero grade in Lat.
castrō, -āre ‘cuť, where a is explained as an anaptyctic vowel in a sequence of four
consonants (Schrijver 1991: 496).
кɛßλń [f.] ‘heaď (Call. Fr. 140, EM). <IE *gheb¹-l- 'head'>
•VAR Also Kεẞaλń (H., EM), Macedonian for кɛqaλń.
•COMP As a first member in кεẞλn-yovos 'born from the head', epithet of AτρUTÓVη
(Euph. 108) and of the moon (Nic. Al. 433).
●DER kɛßλývŋ. ǹ opiyavos ‘organy' (H.), from the three buds close to each other of
the Origanums (Grošelj Razprave 2: 42); кέßλoç. kuvokéqaλos, kñлоç kind of
monkey' (H.).
•ETYM On кɛẞ(a)λn, see Pisani Rev. Int. ét. balk. 3 (1937): 14ff., and especially
Kretschmer Glotta 21 (1933): 162 and Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934): 100ff.; also, Krahe
IF 60 (1952): 297, who assumes Illyrian origin. Acc. to Mayer Glotta 31 (1951): 114ff.
and Mayer Glotta 32 (1953): 72) the Illyrian TN Cibalae is to be included here as well.
See also Chantraine BSL 61 (1966): 158 and 153. See on ►кεqαλn.
кεẞληлuριç name of an unknown bird (Ar. Av. 303); also used as a nickname of
Themistocles (Hermipp. Com. Vª). ◄?►
•ETYM Connection with ►кɛßλǹ and лõp (redpoll, ‘Hänfling') is not comprehensible;
cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.
кέyxpos [m., f.] mostly plural, ‘millet, grain of millet', metaph. 'spawn of fish, small
ball, speck in the eye, etc.' (Hes. Sc. 398, Sapph. 5, 13 [?], Hecat., Hdt., Arist.). <?►
●COMP As a first member e.g. in кεуxpo-ópos (Str.). With metathesis or
dissimilation (cf. below) кépxvos (Anaxandr., Gal., H.); also the TN Kεpxvεía?
●DER 1. KɛyXpíç [f.] = кéyxpos (Hp.), also name of a bird fattened with millet, Lat.
miliarius (Ael.; cf. Thompson 1895 S.V.) 2. KEYXpíaç [m.] 'millet-like protuberances'
(ερлηç, Gal.) with -18íaç ‘id.' (Dsc.). 3. кεуxpívηs [m.] 'snake with millet-like spots'
(Nic., Lyc.); cf. кέyxpɩvos below. 4. kɛyxpítŋs ‘id.' (Aët.), -îñç ioxáç ‘dried fig' (AP).
5. kɛyxpaµíç [f.] ‘kernel of a fig' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.), after kaλaµíç, onoaµís et al.;
not a foreign suffix as per Schwyzer: 494; also -1dwdns. 6. keyxpwµaτα [pl.] 'small
openings on a shield, used as visors' (E. Ph. 1386, cf. Chantraine 1933: 186; see also on
KÉPXVOC). 7. KEYXpɛwv, -wvos [m.] ‘place where iron is granulated' (Docum. apud D.
37, 26). 8. кεуxp-años of the size of a millet corn' (Luc., Dsc.; Chantraine 1933: 49). 9.
Kéуxpivoç 'made of millet' (Dsc., Gal.). 10. кεyxpwdŋs 'millet-like', of eruptions
(Hp.), of plants (Thphr.). 11. кεуxpwτós 'with corns, drips' (pap.). 12. Kɛyxpɛai [pl.]
TN.
•ETYM Mostly derived from reduplicated IE *gher-gr-o- "pulverized", with old
dissimilation r-r>n-r (or r - n), and further connected with Xépua, Xεpáç 'pebble,
gravel', etc. The word кáxpus has also been adduced, to which MHG grūz 'corn of
sand or grain', Lith. grùdas 'corn', etc. can be connected. Niedermann 1927-1928:
111ff. assumes *кépxvoç (with metathesis) < *kerk-sno-, connecting it to OHG hirso
'millet' < *hirhso; this is improbable. The etymology remains unclear. See on
► Kάxpus, which is argued to be Pre-Greek. However, if кéyxpos is Pre-Greek as well,
one would also expect forms without prenasalization (*кexp-os), and these do not
occur.
KÉуxpwv, -wvos [m.] 'name of a wind on the river Phasis, which is described as ẞíaιoç
кaì xαλεлǹ кai Оεpμn 'violent, troublesome, warm' (Hp. Aër. 15). <?>
ETYM Acc. to Pisani RILomb. 73 (1939-40): 496 (with von Wilamowitz), it is from
Képxvoç 'hoarseness', with metathesis. Schwyzer: 487 considers foreign origin.
keiáooal → okedávvuul.
кédµaτa [n.pl.] (Hp.); acc. to Gal., Erot. and H. = ai xpoviwτεpai diabéσEls voowdels
лερì τà äpеpα 'chronical limb-diseases'. <?>
•DER Kεdµα τwdηs (Hp. apud Erot.; uncertain).
ETYM Connected with кɛdáσ(σ) at 'to tear apart' by Prellwitz, but one would expect
-кεбáσματа. The explanation is neither formally nor semantically satisfactory
(DELG).
Kɛdvóç [adj.] 'careful, trusty, cared for, noble, cherished, dear' (II.). <IE? *keh₂d-no-
'cared for'>
•DER KEбvoσúvη (IG 3, 1370; metrical inscr., imperial times; cf. Wyss 1954: 64).
⚫ETYM A connection with кndoμaɩ, Dor. кādoç, epic кɛкǎdóv < *k(e)h₂d- has been
considered impossible because of the -ε-, but De Lambererie 1996 tries to revive this
proposal in the light of Lubotsky's Law for Indo-Iranian: loss of a laryngeal before a
glottalized PIE stop (*d, g, ġ, g") plus a consonant. If this is true, a pre-form *keh₂d-
nó- lost its laryngeal before it colored the neighboring vowel to *a. Fur.: 195
compares σкεеpóç.
kédpoç [f.] ‘cedar-tree' (ε 60). <?>
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. kɛdp-ελatov 'cedar oiľ (Aët.), óšú-кεdpos [f.] ‘prickly
cedar' (Thphr.; cf. Strömberg 1940: 35).
•DER Kɛdpíç [f.] ‘juniper-berry' (Hp., Ar.); кédpov [n.] ‘id.' (inscr., EM, H.); кɛdpíα
'cedar oil' (Hdt., D. S.), also кɛdpéα (pap., medic.; after µηλéa, ovкéα, etc.). kɛdpítηç
(olvos) 'wine with juniper flavouring'; kédpɩvoç ‘of cedar-wood' (Hp., E., Arist.), also
kɛdpívɛoç ‘id.' (Nic.; metrical reshaping), kɛdpwτós 'made of cedar-wood (E. [lyr.]),
Kedpeätis, -idos [f.] name of Artemis in Arcadian Orchomenos (Paus. 8, 13, 2; after
Tɛyɛātıç, etc.). kédpwotic, -ews [f.] 'bryony' (Dsc. 4, 182; after äypwotic, s.v.).
Denominative verb кɛdpów 'to lay in cedar resin, embalm' (Posidon., Str.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. The similarity with Baltic names of the juniper (e.g. Lith. kadagys)
is limited to the first syllable; connection with Ru. čad 'vapor', OCS kaditi 'smoke' is
also quite hypothetical. Borrowed as Lat. cedrus. Acc. to Fohalle 1925: 157ff., a
Mediterranean word for 'cedar', Lat. citrus 'Thuia articulata', and Gr. kέdpoç would
have been adapted to each other; doubtful. See also кitpov, -kitpiov.
Kεчuαι [v.] 'to lie, be somewhere, happen, etc.' (II.). <IE *kei- 'lie, rest'>
●VAR 3sg. kɛĭtaɩ, зpl. кéaτaι (Att. kɛīvɩaɩ), inf. kɛãoσa, etc. (further forms in
Schwyzer: 679).
•DIAL The interpretation of Myc. ke-ke-me-na is highly uncertain.

=== page 356 ===

664
•COMP Very frequently with prefix in different mgs., àvá-, кατá-, лaрá-, čу-, čк-,
εлí-, σúу-кεчμαι, etc.
•DER 1. KOTTOÇ [m.] 'layer, bed, sleep' (Od.), кoíτη [f.] ‘id., matrimonial bed, nest,
parcel, lot' (Od.); often in compounds, e.g. àëó-, σúy-, ŋµepó-koltos, à-, napa-
кoíτηs (cf. on áкoítŋs). From koĭtos, koitŋ: koltís [f.] ‘box' (Men., J.; cf. Schwyzer:
127) with кoτídov ‘id.' (sch.); кolτápiov ‘beď (sch.); koɩtóv [m.] ‘sleeping room'
(Ar. Fr. 6, Hell.) with кoɩτávov, -wviokos, -wvítηs, -wvikós ; koltatńpiov ‘id.'
(Cyrene; cf. εσταtýpiov s.v. ►éoτíα); кoιταïоç lying on the layer' (Decr. apud D. 18,
37, Plb.), кoιτápios 'belonging to the bed' (Edict. Diocl.). Denominative verb
кoιτάoμα lay down, nest' (Pi., Hell.), -á(w 'bring to rest, lay down', also 'partition
the land' (from коíτη 'parcel'), Hell. Hence кOLTаσía 'living together' (LXX),
koɩtaσµós ‘folding the cattle' (pap.). 2. *кoíµŋ or *кoчµoç, whence denominative
кoчáw ‘to lay to rest, put to bed', kкoчáo̟µαι ‘to go to bed' (II.); thence koµŋoɩ lying
down, sleep (of death)' (Pl., LXX, NT), кoíµηua 'sleep, sleeping with' (S.),
кoчnτηpιov 'sleeping room, place of rest or burial' (inscr.); also кoчμí‹ƒ = кoчµáw
with koíµiolç, -ɩoµÓS, -LOTŃs, -LOTIKÓç; rather reshaped from koчµáw. 3. kelµýλlov [n.]
'valuable, precious thing' (Il.), secondary -tot [m.pl.] (Pl. Lg. 931a; apposition of
natépes i µntépɛc); derivation in -nλ- from a neuter *кɛчμa (Frisk Eranos 38 (1940):
42 and Frisk Eranos 41 (1943): 52). In the same mg. кεμηλov (Alc. G 1, 8)? Specht KZ
68 (1943): 145 (after *¤¤µýλiov, éµŋa); but see on ►кɛµáç. Cf. also ➤kõµa and
кwµŋ. Verbal derivatives: iterative (napε)-кéoкεto (§ 521, 41); desiderative or
future forms кɛiw, keléµev, keiovteç, etc.; late lengthening кaτεкεíaðεv. katekolµýðŋ
'went to sleep' (H.), after Hom. µεtekiałev.
⚫ETYM The full grade middle athematic present кεчται, pl. кéαται may be compared
with Skt. 3sg. śaye, 3pl. śere, which goes back to an old stative paradigm sing. *kei-o,
plur. *kei-ro. Beside the stative, there was a regular middle, as evidenced by Skt. śéte
(Av. saěte 'lies') and Anatolian, where we find Hitt. 3sg. kitta < *kei-to, next to Lyc.
sijēni, sijeni ‘id.' << *kei-o.
The nominal formations in -t- and -m- are also found outside Greek: Bret. argud
'light sleep' < *are-koi-to-, Go. haims ‘village, home' < *koi-mo-, Latv. sàime 'family',
Lith. šeimýna ‘id.', OCS sěmúja ‘id.', OIr. cóim ‘dear'. Other derivatives of the verb
are seen in Lat. civis, Go. heiwa-frauja 'lord of the house', Skt. śéva- 'trusty, friendly,
dear', and in Arm. sēr 'love' with denominative sirem 'love'.
kɛɩµýλɩov→kɛĩµal.
KEɩpía [f.] 'girth of a bedstead, bandage (for wounds, dead), tapeworms' (Ar. Av. 816,
LXX, pap., medic., Ev. Jo. 11, 44). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Often plur. Also кipíα, кηpía, kaipia.
•ETYM Connection with кaчpos 'string, snare' or the like seems obvious, but then the
most common notations, к(ε)ip-, кηp-, remain incomprehensible. Cf. Scheller 1951:
57f. The variation is probably Pre-Greek: a before a palatalized consonant is realized
as at, which becomes ε and/or η (cf. Aaibapyoç, Anapyos). See Fur.: 235, 352 (who
had not yet seen the mechanism).
Kekadwv
665
kɛipw [v.] ‘to cut (off), shave', especially of hair; ‘to mow off, cut down, ravage' (Il.).
<IE *(s)ker- 'cut'>
⚫VAR Aor. Kεipat, epic also кépσaι, pass. кαρñvαι (кapеévτɛç with v.l. кɛρеévτɛç Pi. P.
4, 82), fut. kɛpéw, kɛpw, perf. pass. kékapµaɩ, new act. kékapka (Hell.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. åлo-, dɩα-, nɛpɩ-. Compound ȧ-kɛpσɛ-kóµŋs ‘with
uncut hair' (Y 39), also å-keipe-kóµāç, -ŋs (Pi.); on the form Schwyzer: 442, on the
mg. Fink Phil. 93 (1938): 404ff.
•DER 1. képµa [n.] ‘cut-off piece, especially a small piece of money, change (Emp. 101,
1 [not quite certain], com., Hell.) with кερµáτov (Hell.) and кεpµατí(w 'to change in
small money' (Att., Arist.); from it кερµατστηs 'money-changer' (Ev. Jo. 2. 14),
кερμаτσчóç 'cut into little bits' (Olymp.); кεpμаτóομai = -íčoμai (Procl.). 2. кopμóç
кɛpµatσµóç ‘cut kepµatóoμai
kopµós
[m.] 'cut-off piece, bobbin, trunk' ( 196) with кopμíov (Hell.), кopµηdóv ‘in pieces'
(Hld.), кopµášw 'saw into pieces' (D. H.). 3. ►kovpa. 4. ►кaptóç. Cf. also ►
►Kópon,
► Kópls, ► keptoµéw, ► kéλwp 2.
•ETYM kɛipw < *kεp-чw belongs to a widespread IE group of words, but there are no
exact correspondences to the Greek verbal forms. The nearest are Arm. k'erem 'to
scratch, shave', Alb. sh-qerr'tear apart' (pret. sh-kora < IE *kēr-); further, Hitt. karš-zi
'to cut off (with s-enlargement like in Koupá). Forms with initial *sk- are frequent:
OHG sceran 'to shave', Lith. skirti, 1sg. skiriù 'to separate', OIr. scar(a)im 'id.'. Skt.
kṛntáti separates' shows an enlarged root *kert- (infixed nasal present; perfect ca-
kart-a); such a reconstruction would be possible for the aorist кεpσα (Risch 1937:
249).
The number of nominal derivatives in the separate languages is enormous; most of
them are independent innovations. Thus, formal agreement exists between кεpμa
and Skt. cárman-, Av. carǝman- [n.] 'skin, hide', OPr. kērmens [m.] 'body' (IE *kér-
men-); and only difference in ablaut grade between кopμós and OCS króma [f.]
'steering oar, back part of the ship', Ru. kormá ‘puppis'.
=>
Kɛíw 1 desiderative or future forms of ►кɛчµaɩ.
•VAR KεIÉμεV, Kɛiwv, кɛioντƐç, etc. →кεчμαι.
kɛчμaɩ.
Kɛíwv 2 'splitting' (§ 425). →кɛá¶w.
кɛкadóv [ptc.aor.act.] 'robbing' (A 334). <?►
•VAR кɛкadησε [fut.] 'he will rob' ( 153 = 170), кɛкadñσαι. ßλáyaι, kaкwσaι,
kɛkadŋoɛɩ
入áyal,
qɛíσaoðaɩ, otεpñoαɩ 'to damage, maltreat, spare, rob' (H.); further med. úлò
кεкάбOVτо 'they receded' (A 497 = ○ 574) and the intr. plpf. ÉKEKýdel.
Úлε<кε>Xwρηкεɩ 'had withdrawn' (H.).
⚫ETYM The difference of meaning between the active-transitive and the middle-
intransitive forms may perhaps be explained from the diathesis. The glosses
kádvpoç. káлpos ävopxis (suffix -up-) and кáðaµoç. tvoλós. Σaλaµívioɩ (H.) rather
seem Pre-Greek.
Connection with кndw to care for, etc.' is possible (see LIV₂ s.v. *keh₂d-), but
semantically not evident; úлò ... кεкádovτo is sometimes connected with Lat. cadō,
in which case the intransitive middle ‘to recede' < 'to fall back' would be primary, the
active meaning 'to rob' going back to a factitive 'to make fall' (LIV² s.v. *kad-, where

=== page 357 ===

666
KÉKaguat
we would prefer a root reconstruction *kh₂ed-). The connection with xáčoµat is
phonetically impossible.
kékaoµai [v.] ‘to surpass, excel' (Il.). <IE? *kend- ‘excel'>
•VAR (έ)KÉKAσTO, kɛkadµévos (Pi. O. 1, 27).
•DER kádµoç⋅ dópu, λópos, ảoníç. Kρñτɛç ‘stem, crest, shield (Cretan)' (H.), i.e.
‘equipment' (see Bechtel 1921, 2: 787)? Cf. also Kádµ.oç.
ETYM A synonymous active perfect is found in Skt. śāśadúḥ 'excel', ptc. śáśadāna-
(though note that Kümmel 2000b: 512-4 argues that the Skt. meaning is different).
Quite uncertain is the connection with MIr. cá(i)d 'holy', Gaul. caddos 'sanctus'.
Within Greek, a present кaívuμal was created analogically from кéкασμαɩ after
daivyµai : dédaotaαi. The root кad- could be from *kend-, seen in Sanskrit chand- ‘to
appear' (see García Ramón 1992a: 239-255). Heubeck BNF 8 (1957): 274-277 had
argued earlier that кaσ- is from *kms- (root *keNs- proclaim, honor', LIV² s.v.). The
gloss on кádμoç seems unreliable; the proper names are also quite unclear.
kɛkaqŋóta [ptc.perf.act. acc.sg.m.] with Ovµóv (E 698, & 468); the mg. ‘exhausted,
tired' is certain in later authors, and is also found in Homer; cf. Nehring Class. Phil.
42 (1947): 113ff. <IE *keh₂bh- 'get tired, be exhausted, die'>>
•VAR In later epic (Opp., Nonn.) constructed with yuĩa, déuaç or absolute; also
-ŋóταç (Nonn.) and -ŋóτ (of Ovµ, τapσw; Opp., AP).
•ETYM The indicative is attested in kékŋqe. téðvŋkɛv ‘is dead' (H.); on the ptc. in
-ŋws, see Schwyzer: 770 and Chantraine 1942: 428. Further connections are
hypothetical: relation to έкáƒσσev (чxýv X 467), ¿ykáлtei• ¿këvɛĩ ‘exhales' (H.),
etc. (see on кαлvóc); or to кηońv, кwoóc ‘deaf (Solmsen 1909: 123, Bechtel 1914.
s.v.).
kekñvaç [?] · λaywoúç. Kpñtɛç ‘hares (Cret.)' (H.). ◄IE *k(e)h₁-s- ‘grey’►
⚫ETYM Uncertain. For the n-stem, cf. λяxηv, кwλńv, et al. (Chantraine 1933: 167f.,
Schwyzer: 487). Skt. śaśá- ‘hare' cannot be separated from the widespread name of
the hare (in Germanic, e.g. OHG haso, also OPr. sasins, W cein-ach < *kasni).
Lubotsky 1989: 56f reconstructed keh,-s-, *kh,-s- for this word, with *kh,s-no- > Lat.
cānus 'grey'. A dialectal assimilation of *k - s > *k - k has been assumed for Indo-
Iranian (Skt. śaś-) and Greek (кεк-), but no trace of such a development is found in
Modern Iranian and Pamir forms (e.g. Pashto sōe, Wakhi süi; see Morgenstierne
1927: 66). This means that it is difficult to relate the Greek word.
кεкpúчaλoç [m.] 'hair-net of a woman, envelopped by the ȧvadéσμn' (II.), also 'part of
the head-stall of a bridle' (X., Att. inscr.), 'pouch of the belly of a hunting-net' (X.,
Plu.); ‘the second stomach of a ruminant, reticulum' (Arist.; Strömberg 1944: 63f.).
See Marinatos 1967: B 22. <PG>
•ETYM Technical word of unknown, perhaps Asiatic origin, that may have been
reshaped after кpúðα, кpúлтw. Unacceptable IE (кρúлτш, коρvoń, кρóкη) and
Semitic etymologies in Bq. No doubt Pre-Greek.
Kéλadoç [m.] 'sound, noise, sharp sound' (Il.; on mg. and spread see Trümpy 1950:
155).<?>
Ke入én
667
•COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. кελado-dpóµos ‘who runs in the noise' (Orph.; of
Artemis), Svo-kéλados 'with terrible noise' (II 357); on’Ey-kéλadoç s.v.
•DER KEλadεivós (Aeolic -ɛvvós Pi.) 'noisy, sounding' (Il.; Chantraine 1933: 195f.);
kɛλadñtıç ‘id.' (yλwσσa, Pi. N. 4, 86); keλádwv, -ovτoç ‘id.' (Il.), also a river name (H
133; see Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 2 (1950-1951): 236; Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch.
3 (1951-1952): 162), rather a secondary formation in -vτ- (cf. on чµác) than from a
denominative *кεládw (Schwyzer: 723, Bechtel 1914 s.v. Kéλadoç). Denominative
kɛλadéw ‘to sound, make noise' also transitive 'to sing of (Il.), aor. кελadñσaɩ, with
кɛλádŋµa (E.).
•ETYM Formation like öµados, xpóµados, poïßdos, etc. (Schwyzer: 508, Chantraine
1933: 359f.). Not related to кaλéσaɩ, кλŋτóc, which is from *kelh,- and would give
-EλE-. It has been compared with ►кɛλapúčw.
кɛλaɩvós [adj.] ‘black, dark' (II.). <?, PG?►
•COMP As a first member e.g. in haplological кελaι(vo)-vεons with black clouds', of
Zɛúc (Hom., Pi.); also of alμa (Hom.), of лεdíoν, σкóτоç (Pi.); explanation in
Leumann 1950: 202ff.
⚫DER Denominative verbs: кEλalvóoμa 'to get dark' (A. Ch. 413, lyr.), Kɛλαiviάw 'to
be black' (Opp., Nonn.), after the verbs of disease in -táw, Schwyzer: 732.
•ETYM Morphologically isolated and therefore difficult to assess. For the ending, cf.
лερкνóç, ερεμνóc, et al., but кελα- remains unclear. Assuming a suffix-to-, we arrive
at an n-stem *kel-n-, which may be found in Lat. colum-ba 'dove' (after its color). See
further knλiç. One might think of Pre-Greek *kelan'-o-, with a palatalized nasal.
кɛλapúчw [v.] ‘to babble, murmur', of water (II.). <?>
•VAR Only present stem except aor. кɛλápužɛ (Lyr. Adesp. 90, 1).
•DER KEλápvσμa 'murmuring' (Opp.), кɛλápučiç ‘id.' (H.).
•ETYM Expressive sound-word in -(p)ú(w, like τovеopúчw, yoууúчw, óλoľúčw,
Kλúčw, probably related to кéλwp. qwvń 'voice' (H.) (also кελwpúɛɩv, -púσaç H.),
first from an adjective *кɛλapóç, -ńs (as üdwp : údapńs; see Bechtel 1914 s.v.), or from
a by-form *кéλap (cf. tékµwp : téкµαp; cf. Bq and Benveniste 1935: 17); otherwise,
from кéλados? Certainly not related to kaλéσai.
кελεα [f.] name of an agon for youths in Sparta (Lacon. inscr., imperial period), cf.
Bechtel 1921, 2: 376. <PG>
•VAR Also ntr.pl.? Also -α, -a, -oɩa; kaiλoĩa, -va.
•ETYM A hypothesis by Laum in Wahrmann Glotta 17 (1929): 242. The variation
suggests a Pre-Greek word; cf. on Kɛipía. See DELG s.v. Kελoĩa.
kɛléßŋ [f.] ‘vase with a big opening, kind of mixing bowl (Anacr., Theoc., Call.).
<PG?
•DER KEλεßηïov (Antim. 17).
•ETYM Hebr. koeloeb ‘vase' was compared by Lewy 1895: 104, but the Semitic word
does not exist; see E. Masson 1967:107f. Cf. also Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 284. Acc.
to Güntert 1932: 27², it is related to Lat. calpar; see on ►кáλлç. Schröder Germ.-rom.

=== page 358 ===

668
Kελεẞpá
Monatsschrift N.F. 10 (1960): 184 compares λéßηs with ‘movable к-'. More probably,
the word is Pre-Greek (though a suffix -ɛß- is unknown).
keλeßpá [n.pl.] · λentà kaì vekpà kτývη ‘weak and dying herds' (H.). <?►
•ETYM The gloss is reminiscent of кɛvéßpɛia. Is it corrupt?
=>
kɛλɛïç · άžívŋ ‘axe' (H.). →кɛλɛóç.
-kɛλɛµv- →άµqɩkéλeµvov, keλéovTES.
keλévdpuvov [?] · Spúivov, keλatóv. Aéyɛtai dè kai µvokéλevdpov (?)· kaì tò µakpóv
(H.); kɛλɛvdpúova. ảïò toũ keλéovtos kai tñc Spvòs ŵs µakpòv kaì daσú (Phot. 154,
4). <PG?
⚫ETYM These glosses are probably corrupt. The word(s) look Pre-Greek.
KελÉOVTεç [m.pl.] 'the beams of the standing loom' (Ar. Fr. 795, Antipho Fr. 11, Theoc.,
Ant. Lib.), acc. to H. also τà óлwσoûv µaкpà žúλa, Sokoí, iστoí ‘wood that is long in
some sense, beams, masts or looms'. <IE?>
⚫ETYM Acc. to Frisk IF 49 (1931): 97f., originally a pres.ptc. of *кελéw, which would be
a denominative of *кéλos and mean "rising up" vel sim. Formally, the latter could be
compared with OCS čelo 'forehead', and further connected with кoλwvóç. It does
not belong to кɛλoí = úλα (H.); cf. on кɛɛóç. Fur. 245 assumes a pre-form
žúλa
*кελÉƑOVTƐç as a variant of *кελεμos, which stands beside -кελεμvo- seen in
► àµqikéλeµvov.
кελɛóç [m.] 'green woodpecker, Picus viridis' (Arist.). <PG(V)►
=
ETYM For the suffix see Chantraine 1933: 51. Perhaps it belongs to ►кoλάлτw,
·KO入ártw,
►кóλos, together with Kɛλoi úla (H.) as "chopper, cutter” vel sim. (see
►KEλÉOVTEC)? Some recognize a diminutive in кελεïç· àžívŋ (H.), “hacking". Bechtel
KZ 44 (1911): 357 connected Lith. kùlti 'to thresh', but acc. to Huber 1921: 16, the
variae lectiones кαλióç, кoλóç, etc. are a sign of foreign origin. It is probable that
these variations are due to Pre-Greek origin.
кελéτpα [f.] a term of land (IG 9(2), 521 [Larissa IIIª]). <?►
⚫ETYM The precise meaning is unknown. Frisk Symb. Oslo. 11 (1932): 64ff. analyzed it
as 'drove', connecting it with кéλoµai, ► kέλλw. Unclear.
kéλɛvƉoç [f.] ‘road, path, course, journey' (Il., also IG 5(2), 3: 23 [Tegea IVª]). <?►
•VAR Also ntr.pl. -a.
•COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. кελεvео-лоιóç 'making a path' (A.), more often
as a second member, е.g. iлло-кéλɛvеoç 'making the road on a chariot, chariot-
fighter' (Il., of Patroclus); ►άкóλovos 'following, attending'.
•DER Kɛɛúðεɩǎ [f.] 'goddess of the road', epithet of Athena in Sparta (Paus. 3, 12, 4),
after the nouns in -ɛɩǎ; кελεvėɛías. τàs ¿vodious daíμovas 'the divinities [whose
statues were situated] on the way' (H.); кελεvеτη 'voyager' (AP 6, 120), after
άуuńτηç, лоλýτηç et al.
ETYM The difficulty of finding a parallel for the suffix -0- within Greek resulted in
attempts to connect кÉλɛvoç with the root λεve- (in έλɛúσoµaɩ, etc.). For these old.
Kελác
669
attempts, see Frisk s.v. Specht 1944: 254 and 280 suggested direct connection with
кɛλɛúɛɩv, comparing th in Skt. pánthāḥ 'road' (see on ►лóvτoç) and in Lith. keliūta
'road'. Since the latter is clearly built on kēli-as ‘road, street, course', it has no direct
connection with кéλɛvos; cf. Fraenkel KZ 72 (1955): 177. The word therefore
remains without etymology. On кéλεvos and its relatives, see Ruijgh 1957: 123f.
Kɛλɛúw [v.] 'to urge, drive on, exhort, command' (II.). <?>
•VAR Aor. KɛλεÑσAɩ.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. лαрα-, diα-, εл-, εv-.
⚫DER Derivations from compounded verbs are frequent, but are not indicated
separately here: кέλε(σ) µа 'exhortation, command' (IA), also 'call of the
keλevotĤs', keλevoµós (IA), keλevoµoσúvη (Hdt.), kéλɛvõis (Att.) ‘id.'; keλevotńs
'commander of the rowers' (Att.; on the mg. see Richardson Class. Quart. 37 (1943):
55ff.); keλevotikóç ‘exhorting' (Att.). Enlarged ptc. кελεVτIÓшν, -ówvɩɛ (-áwv,
-άovτε) 'stimulating, inciting' (N 125, M 265), the model for which is unclear, cf.
Schwyzer: 7325.
⚫ETYM If from ►кελoμai 'to incite, set in movement', the -v- remains unexplained; it
may be the same element as in кéλɛvoç 'road', and perhaps also in TɛλEUTη, but
we do not know.
Kελɛqóç [adj.] 'leprous' (Cat. Cod. Astr. 8 (4), 189). ◄LW Sem.>
•COMP As a first member in кελupo-коμεчov 'hospital for lepers' (BMus. Cat. Copt.
MSS. p. 453, Nr. 1077).
•DER KEλEQía 'leprosy' (Cyran. 15).
⚫ETYM Synonymous àλqós ‘lepra' has the same word-ending. Benveniste RPh. 38
(1964): 7ff. argued that the word was taken from Semitic, e.g. Syrian qǝlāfā ‘cortex,
squama, putamen', qǝlā fānā ‘lepra'. Strömberg 1944: 99 thinks it is just a phonetic.
variant of кéλupos 'shell' (with oppositive accent), which is semantically possible but
seems improbable to me. See ▸ KÉλUQOÇ.
kéλns, -ntos [m.] 'runner' (1371), cf. Delebecque 1951: 49f.; also a fast-sailing ship (IA).
<IE? *kel- 'run'>
•VAR Also Lacon. кéλn 'runner' (IG 5(1), 213 [Sparta Va]).
⚫DER KEλnτIOV 'sloop, shallop' (Th., App.); кɛλŋτíw [v.] 'to ride on race-horses' (O
679), kɛλŋtɩāv kкελŋtíčεv, iллεúɛv 'to be a horseman' (H.).
•ETYM Perhaps a derivation in -ŋ- (or -ŋk-) from ►кéλoμaι ‘to incite'. From Greek,
Lat. celēs, celōx (after vēlōx) 'fast-sailing ship' was borrowed.
кɛλλás [adj.] · µovóóеαλµoç 'one-eyed (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM A remarkable semantic identity as well as formal similarity are found in Olr.
coll, Skt. kāṇá- ‘one-eyed'. These may represent IE *kol-no-. The geminate -λλ- may
go back to -λv-, which in turn could be derived from an n-stem. The ending of
кɛλλáç is different; Frisk and DELG suggest that it could be the feminine of кɛλλóç,
which H. glosses as στрεßλóç, лλáуɩos 'twisted, athwart'. The fact that the proposed
cognates have o-vocalism casts doubts on the comparison (or could it point to an old
n-stem?). Fur.: 354 connects it with кíλλ (H.), which is rather improbable.

=== page 359 ===

670
Ke入入ipas
KEVεWV
671
=>
kɛλλißaç → kıλλißaç.
kéλλw [v.] ‘to drive, incite' (both trans. and intr.), ‘to pull (a ship) ashore, to land
(Od.). <IE? *kel- ‘drive, incite'; (ó)KÉ\\w PG?►
•VAR The present only attested in grammarians. Aor. кéλσai (Od.), fut. кéλow (A.,
E.), Kελw (H.).
•COMP One asssumes a prefix ó- in óкέλw [v.] 'to pull ashore' (IA), aor. Óкεĭλaι,
but this is unlikely (see ỏ-). Rarely with preverbs π-, έy-, ɛiσ-, σvy-kéλσa (epic,
Hp., Ar.); επ-éкεɩλa Act. Ap. 27, 41.
•DER кέλoµαɩ [v.] 'to drive on, exhort, call' (II., Dor.) rarely with έ”-, napa-;
reduplicated aor. (ε) kékλɛto (II.), to which a new present кéкλoμai (A. R.), also aor.
(έ)keλñoato (Pi., Epich., Epid.), fut. keλýσoµai (k 296). Athematic кévão (Alcm. 141)
<*кÉλTO with dialectal Laconian devopment. See also кÉλŋç, кελɛúw; doubtful is
the appurtenance of кλóvoç.
•ETYM It is often assumed (e.g. DELG) that кελλw 'to spur' and кέλλw 'to drive
ashore' (in unprefixed form; the latter occurs only in grammarians) are cognate, and
that okέ\\w continues an old prefix ó-, also assumed in ŏcoç 'branch' <*Hosdo-. For
the meaning 'to call' of кéλoμαι, one has to assume that it secondarily developed.
from 'to drive on, summon, request'. However, this meaning is also reminiscent of
кaλɛiv, so we may also envisage two separate words for Greek: 1) (0) KÉλλw 'to haul
ashore', which is Pre-Greek ("prothetic" vowel, and a technical term), and 2) кελ- 'to
drive, summon'. The question remains, then, whether some or all forms of the latter
derive from *kelh,- 'to call' (thus, LIV2 s.v. *kel- connect the reduplicated aorist
(E)KÉKλETO with kaλέw).
Connections with other languages are scarce and rather doubtful. Semantically, the
secondary present Skt. kalayati (kāl-) 'drives' is close to Greek, but its appurtenance
is uncertain (it could belong to *kerH- 'to strew', acc. to LIV² 1.c.). In Tocharian, we
find PTo. *kǝl- relflected in ToB 3sg.pres.med. kalṣtär ‘goads' (only twice in this
meaning), from which perhaps the pres. ToB kalṣām ‘to bear, endure', pret. keltsa
developed. Not connected is PTo. *kǝl- 'lead, bring' from *k"elh,- 'to turn'; although
it fits well semantically with the present root, its set-character precludes comparison
with кéλλw 'to drive'. A comparable nominal formation is Lat. celer 'quick'.
The meaning of (ó)кέλλw 'to run a ship aground', the usual way of landing (except
in a harbor), is so concrete that I would assume a separate Pre-Greek verb; but I see
no further indications for substrate origin.
KÉλūчoç [n.] 'husk or skin of fruit, skin of an onion, eggshell' (Ar. V. 545 [lyr.], Arist.,
Thphr., AP). <PG(S,V)►
●DER Kελútov (Arist.), кελúpavov ‘id.' (Lyc., Luc.), kɛλvoavádŋs ‘like a shell'
(Thphr.); also кolúpavov. plotós, λɛлúpiov ‘bark; husk, skin., etc.' (H.), perhaps
with -o- after кoλɛóç, etc.
•ETYM For the neutral gender, which is rare in derivations in -8-, cf. the synonyms
σKŪTOÇ, váкOÇ, dépoç, etc. On account of the semantic and formal similarity,
кéλuqoç has been connected with the group of кaλúлτw. Since the latter is Pre-
Greek, the same must be true of the present entry. Note -vq-, which may be a Pre-
Greek suffix. Cf. on ►кoλéov.
Kέλwp 1, -wpoç [m.] 'descendant, son' (E. Andr. 1033 [lyr.], Lyc.). <◄IE? *kelH- ‘rise',
*kel H-ōr>
•DER кελwριov. лadíov 'young child' (H.).
⚫ETYM The ending (cf. λwp, τéкµшp) suggests an original neuter 'descendance'.
Perhaps it arose from *кépwp by dissimilation, from the root *kerh₂- 'to grow, create'
in Arm. ser generation, descendance' (cf. ►кopévvʊµɩ and ►кópŋ). Alternatively,
Fur: 21250 suggested Pre-Greek origin, comparing other forms in -wp like äxwp,
ixwp, ẞiáτwp, λɛíτwp, чówр, but there are no further indications in this direction.
Indo-European origin seems likely, and derivation from *kelH- 'to rise' seems quite
possible, cf. Lith. kiltis ‘clan'.
KÉλwρ 2 [m.] Eέктоμíαç, уáλλоç, σлáðшv 'eunuch' (H.). <PG?>
.
⚫ETYM If dissimilated from *кépwp, the word may derive from кɛipw 'to cut'.
However, given the meaning, one would rather expect a foreign word.
кέλwp 3 [?] · Qwvý ‘voice' (H.).
•DER kɛλwpúɛɩv• кɛкpayévαɩ, þoãv ‘to cry aloud, shouť (H., Phot.), kɛλwpúσaç.
qwvǹoas, Bońσas having produced a sound, cried alouď (H.). →кɛλapú¶w.
keµás, -ádos [f.] 'young deer, young dog' (K 361, A. R., Call.). <IE *kemh₂- ‘without
horn'>
•VAR Also кεµµás (Q. S., AP, H.; hypocoristic gemination?) and кɛµyás (H.),
perhaps after the animal names in -oác, -poç, like уpoμчáç.
●COMP кεµado-σσóos 'hunting young deer' (Nonn.).
⚫DER KEμŃλoç epithet of Dionysus (Alc. G 1, 8); other interpretations in Risch IF 33
(1913/1914): 195 (see also on кεчµÝλov). Note also кéµwv.
•ETYM A derivation in -ác, probably from an o-stem *кéμoç = Skt. śáma- 'without
horn' (cf. Aíos beside λác). Cf. the Germanic word for 'hind, doe', e.g. OHG hinta
[f.] < PGm. *hin-ði < IE *kem-ti- (enlarged like hund 'dog' < PGm. *hun-ða- < IE
*kun-tó-; see on ►кúwv). Lubotsky 1988: 76 assumes a root *kemh2-. The zero grade
of the root is found in Lith. šmulas ‘without horn'.
.
kéµµɛpos [m.] · áxλúç, óµíxλŋ 'mist, fog' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
kéµwv [adj.] • ¿tɛpóλμo 'one-eyed' (H.). <IE? *skem- ‘mutilated'(?) ►
•ETYM Unknown; cf. perhaps Pok. 929 *skem- ‘mutilated'. DELG suggests it is a
mistake for кéλλwv; cf. on ►кɛλλάç.
кεvéẞpɛɩα [n.pl.] 'carrion, especially of dead cattle' (Ar. Av. 538, Erot., Phot.); also
'dog-meat market' (Erot.). <PG?>
•VAR Also sg. (Ael. NA 6, 2).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Cf. ►кiváßpa. It looks like a Pre-Greek word.
KEVɛwv 'hollow between ribs and hip, flank'. KEVÓC.

=== page 360 ===

672
Kevós
Kεpaïç
673
кɛvós [adj.] ‘empty, idle' (Att.). <IE *ken- 'empty', *ken-u->
•VAR Epic kevε(Ƒ)ós (also IA, Cypr. and Epid.), epic Ion. Kɛtvós (since Il.).
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. кɛvɛ-auxéɛç [voc.pl.] (230), -ća (AP), kɛv-
avxns (Plu., AP) ‘empty, vain' (the second member belongs to aúxéw 'to boast', if it
was not reshaped after this for earlier -ɛuxéɛç after ɛʊxoç, ε; see
Wackernagel 1916: 65); kév-avdpoç ‘empty of men' (A. Pers. 119 [lyr.], S. OC 917),
whence -ía (A. Pers. 730 [troch.]), cf. Sommer 1948: 191; кev-εµßatέw lit. “tread on
emptiness”, ‘lack a solid foundation, reach a cavity', whence кɛveµßátnois (Plu.,
medic.), as if from *кεv-εµßάτηs (after other derivatives in -ẞatéw derived from
compounds with -ßáτŋs).
⚫DER KEVEŃV, -Vos [m.] 'the hollow space between hip and ribs' (epic Ion., X., LXX);
keveótns (-vótns) [f.] ‘emptiness' (IA); кεvýpιov = кεVOτάqov (Hell.), probably
kevotάqov
after piov, if not composed with it; thence ev½ptov ‘id.' (Lyc.). Denominative
kɛvów, -vɛów [v.] 'to empty, make desert' (IA), whence kévwoiç, -véwoɩ 'emptying'
(Ion. poet., Att.), кεváσчоç (Anon. apud Suid.), кévwμα, -véwμα [n.] 'empty space'
(Hell.), KEVWTIкóc [adj.] 'emptying' (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Att. Kɛvóç and Ion. кɛvóc, both from *кEVƑÓç, may be compared with
σTEVFÓç. Further, кεvɛƑóç is reminiscent of εTεƑóç. We should assume an old v-stem
*Kεvúç (it is not found in De Lamberterie 1990: 187f.). Ruijgh Minos 20-22 (1987): 537
compares the ablauting pair with ỏλoós << *ol-ewo- and ouλos < *ol-wo-. The root
correspondence between кɛvóc and the Arm. o-stem sin, gen. sn-oy ‘id.' < IE *ken-o-
is noteworthy. See Clackson 1994: 138-9 on this lexical correspondence.
KEVTέw [V.] 'to sting, goad' (Pi.). <IE *kent- ‘sting'>
•VAR Aor. Kévσai († 337), кεντñσαι (Hp.), кévτãσα (Theoc. 19, 1), pass. kεvtηßñvai
(Arist.), fut. кεvτη¤ýσoµai (Hdt.), kevtĤow (S.), kekévtŋuai (Hp.).
•COMP Also with prefix, е.g. кατα-, лαрα-, ȧлo-, diα-.
●DER 1. kévoaɩ < *kévt-σaɩ points to a root кɛvɩ-, which developed to kɛσ- before
dental. Thus кɛσ-tós < *Kevt-tóç 'stitched' (epic); кéσ-τpov 'pointed iron' (Plin.),
kɛotpwtóç and kéotpwoię (H.), presupposing *êeotpów, kéo-tpos ‘kind of arrow,
etc.' (Plb., D. H., H.), diminutive кεστрíoν (Attica) and кéστрεov 'stock of arrows
(?)' (Delos IIIª); кéo-ɩpa [f.] ‘sharp hammer, arrow' (S., Ph. Bel., Hero), also a fish
name= σpúpava (Ar.; after the shape of the body, see Strömberg 1943: 35); kɛσtpeús
‘mullet' (IA) and кɛotpĭvoç, -tvíʊkoç ‘id.' (com.). 2. кévτpov ‘sting', as a geometrical
technical term also ‘leg of a compass, centre of a circle' (Il.), perhaps a reshaping of
кÉστρov after кεVτéw; thence many compounds and derivatives, e.g. kεvtp-ηvεkýc
'driven by a goad' (Il.; cf. Soup-, nоd-ηvεкń); substantive кévτpwv; adjectives like
KEVTPIKÓS, KEVTpwdns, kevtpýelç; fish and plant names like кɛvtpívns, kevtpiokOÇ,
kɛvɩpítŋç; denominative verbs кɛvɩpów ‘to provide with a sting, to sting' (IA),
кεvτρíчw 'to sting' (X.); from кévτpov as a back-formation кévτwp [m.] 'stimulator,
driver' (Il., AP). 3. From kevtéw (kevtñoal, -ow): kévτηµa stitching, mosaic' (Arist.,
inscr. Smyrna [imperial period]), кevτητýs ‘mosaic-worker' (Edict. Diocl.),
kevtηtýpiov ‘picker' (Luc.), kevtηtikós ‘stingy' (Thphr.), keväηtós ‘stitched, with
mosaic' (Epict., pap.). 4. кovτóç [m.] 'pole, crutch, staff to spur on cattle' (1 487),
which was borrowed into Lat. contus, percontor; thence кovτá-кIov, -ápiov, -Doç,
i
-Wτóc, etc.; кOVτóç 'short' (Adam.) arose by reanalysis of кOVτо-µáxos, -ẞóλoç,
-Boλéw, where кovτóç was taken as 'short'; likewise in кovτо-лорεíα (Plb.).
•ETYM The sigmatic aorist кévoaɩ < *kévt-σaɩ is old; the formation of the present
KEVTέw is unclear (one would expect *кovτéw); thence кevtñσaɩ, kevτnow, etc. were
created. Other languages have only isolated nominal formations: OHG hantag
'pointed', derived from PGm. *handa- (identical formation with кovtóc), Latv. sīts
'hunting spear' <IE *knt-o-. Celtic words like Bret. kentr 'spur', W cethr 'nail' were
probably all borrowed from Lat. centrum.
=
кévτpov ‘sting, goad, etc.'. →кενtéw.
KÉVTPWV 1, -WVOç [m.] ‘rogue' (S. Fr. 329, Ar. Nu. 450).
•ETYM From kέvtpov; see kevτéw. Originally meant “who bears the mark of the
KÉVTPOS”.
KÉVτPWV 2, -wVos [m.] 'piece of patchwork' (Hell.). <LW Lat.>>
●DER kevtpwvápiov (pap. -ópiov) mg. unknown (POxy. 2, 326 [IP]).
⚫ETYM From Lat. cento ‘id.' and adapted to кévτpov. It cannot be established whether
►кÉVτpwv 1 had any influence.
кéлчoç [m.] name of an unknown water-bird, mostly identified with the stormy
petrel, Thalassidroma pelagica, but without sufficient reason (Arist., Thphr., Lyc.,
Nic.); also metaph. of a simple man who can easily be deceived (Ar., Call.). ◄PG(V)►
•Der kɛrqóojai ‘to be deceived easily, be simple' (LXX, Cic.).
•ETYM A by-form is kɛµäóç. koñçoç, έλaqpòs ävршлоç 'stupid person' (H.), where
the prenasalization shows that the word is Pre-Greek. For the semantics, cf. the
description of the bird кéлoоç in H.: ɛldos óрvéoυ коυчоτάτOυ, etc., so ‘a
featherlight kind of bird'. Solmsen IF 30 (1912): 7' compared Lat. hebes 'blunt', but
the bird name is no doubt primary. See Thompson 1895 s.v. See ‣ káµiñoç.
Kɛραïw [v.] 'to destroy' (II.). <IE *kerh₂- 'damage', intr. 'fall apart'>
•VAR Aor. кɛpaïσαɩ (Hdt.), -αɩ (Nonn.), fut. inf. kɛpaï¿éµev (П 830 for kɛpα¨ïšéµεv
acc. to Bekker).
•COMP Also with έк- (Call., AP).
•DER Kɛpaïστns ‘destroyer' (h. Merc. 336; Zumbach 1955: 7), kepaïoµós ‘destruction'
(D. H.).
⚫ETYM The secondary present кɛpαw, which stands at the basis of the group, may
have replaced an older primary verb. Skt. retains a nasal present in śṛṇāti ‘breaks’,
but the etymological connection (thus Frisk) with Olr. ar-a-chrin 'to fear, perish' is
not followed anymore in Matasović 2009. The disyllabic stem кɛpα- has an exact
counterpart in the Skt. aorist aśarīt and in the Olr. preterit do-cer 'he fell', from IE
kerh₂-. In Greek, this stem is also seen in ȧ-képaloç ‘unhurt', and possibly also in
►άкηpaτoç ‘id.' (ŋ perhaps by metrical lengthening; cf. s.v.). The form ►кɛpauvóç is
an independent formation; кnp does not belong here.
►
кɛpɑïç [f.] ‘black radish', acc. to Thphr. a medical name of the wild radish, pápavos
ȧypía. <LW Balkans>>

=== page 361 ===

674
KεpāÏç
•VAR Only acc. kɛpαïv (Thphr. HP 9, 15, 5; cerain Plin. HN 19, 82); the accent given
by Frisk is probably wrong.
•ETYM The agreement with the Slavic word for 'horse-radish, Cochlearia Armoracia'
(e.g. Ru. xren, Cz. křen) is due to a loan from a common source. See Schrader-
Nehring 1917(2): 55.
kεpāïç [f.] 'a small bird' (Lyc. 1317). <IE? *kerh₂-u- 'horn'>
•VAR Acc. -da
ETYM Acc. to the sch., the name of a small bird that was put beside Medea in the
passage cited. The gloss кɛpαïç кopávη (H.) also refers to this. Originally a feminine
of Kɛpaóç 'horned', and therefore a bird of the Bucerotidae, says Frisk. However,
note that this pre-form would have to yield a short -α-, while DELG gives a long a
(s.v. кɛpäïç, but not s.v. kɛpaós).
kɛpáµẞvž, -vкoç [m.] 'longicorn beetle' (Nic. Fr. 39, H.); on the mg. see Goossens Ant.
class. 17 (1948): 263ff. <PG(S,V)►
•ETYM Cf. σǹpaµßoç, kóλvµßoc, kópчµßoç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 261) and þóµßvž,
öpτ, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 383 and 397). Another formation is kepάµßηλov,
glossed as кávapos 'beetle' by H. and others; cf. лétndos, kißdndos, etc. The form
cannot be derived from кépaç ‘horn'. If the word has prenasalization, which seems
probable, it is of Pre-Greek origin. Moreover, -nλ(o)- and -Uк- are Pre-Greek
suffixes. Fur. (passim) compares kápaßoç, кapá(µ)ßios, and кapaßidɛç, as well as
*σkapaẞaños (all names of beetles); the form with кɛpα- may have been adapted to
Képaç by folk etymology.
Képaμoç [m.] 'potter's earth, tile, earthen vessel, jar, wine-jar, pottery' (II.), in E 387
denoting a (subterranean) dungeon, a use which is Cyprian acc. to the scholiast (on
this topic Leumann 1950: 270¹, 273, and Latte Glotta 34 (1955): 200ff., who compares
σρóç лíð, εσwτηpov large wine-jar, prison' (H.) for the semantics. <PG?>
•DIAL Myc. ke-ra-me-u /kerameus/.
●COMP kɛpaµovpyós ‘potter' (Hell.).
•DER A. material adjectives: кɛpá-дuvoç (Hdt.), -μкóç (IA), -μεоç (Pl.), -μεоÜç (Att.;
after έpɛouç to Épéα), -чoüç (Hell.), -μaños (Plb.), -μoç (Str.), -µñïoç (Nic.), -µīτç
(Hp., Plu.). B. Substantives 1. Kɛpaμεúç ‘potter' (Il.), to which Kɛpaµɛikóç [m.]
"potter's market” (X.), also as an adjective = -µкóç, kepaµevtikós ‘belonging to the
potter' (D. S.), кεpаµεчov 'pottery' (Att.), кεpаμεúw [v.] ‘to make out of potter's
earth, be a potter' (Att.), with кɛpaµɛía 'pottery' (Pl.). 2. кɛpάшov ‘earthen jar, vase'
(IA), kɛpaµúλλov 'small pot' (Delos, pap., IIIª). 3. kɛpaµíç [f.] ‘roof-tile' (IA),
kɛpaµídiov (late) and kɛpaudów [v.] ‘to cover with tiles' (Arist.). 4. kepaµ(e)wv
'pottery' (Ar. Lys. 200, Hdn. Gr. 1, 32; 40). Denominative verb kɛpaµów [v.] ‘to cover
with tiles' (Att. inscr.), whence кεpaµwτóç (Plb., Str.), кɛpáчwσç (Epid. IV³).
ETYM No certain etymology. Connection with кɛрáσαι, кɛрávvчu 'to mix' is
formally unproblematic, but semantically not very convincing. A verb *kerH- 'to
burn, glow' (Pok. 571f.), which is found in several Baltic and Germanic nominal
derivations, e.g. Lith. kárštas ‘hot, glowing, burning', Go. hauri [n.] 'coals', OHG
herd 'hearth', would be better from the semantic side. However, among the words in
кερávvvμι
675
-(a)μo-, several are suspected of being loans (Chantraine 1933: 133f., Schwyzer: 493f.).
Therefore, this technical term for tile-making may well be Pre-Greek (or Anatolian).
The Carian TN Képaчos should be noted in this connection (Kretschmer Glotta 11
(1921): 284, Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 694).
kepavížaɩ [v.] · koλvµßñoai, kußiotñσαɩ ‘to dive, tumble head first' (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
⚫VAR Also кpavíčaɩ• ènì kɛqaλǹv áлоррiчa 'to throw away on the head' (H.).
⚫ETYM The last word seems to be a denominative of кpavíov, and kɛpavíčaɩ would
then be a reshaping after кépaç. This seems improbable. The variation might point
to a Pre-Greek form. There is no (direct) connection with Lat. cernuus 'head
foremost'.
кɛpávvvµɩ [v.] 'to mix, mix up' especially of wine with water, 'to temper', of the
climate, etc. (com., Hyp.). <IE *kerh₂- 'mix'>
•VAR Also Kɛpavvów (com., Hyp.), кɛpaíw (I 203, Delph. Vª), кɛpáw (Od.; subj.
képwvtai ▲ 260), kípvηu, -váw (Od.), aor. кɛpáσ(σ) aɩ (Il.), also (εлɩ-)кpñoal (n 164,
Hp.), pass. кpã¤ñvaɩ, кpηеñvai (IA), also кɛpασеñvai (Att.), perf. med. kékpāµiai,
-кpŋ- (Sapph., Pi., IA), also kɛképaσµaɩ (Arist.), fut. kɛpw (Att.), kɛpάow (Them.),
pass. кρãеησoμаι (Att.).
•DIAL Myc. ka-ra-te-ra /krātēra/.
COMP Also with prefix, especially ovv-.
⚫DER A. From monosyllabic кpα- (kpη-): 1. kpāʊiç, kpñois (oúy-, etc.) 'mix' (IA),
with *кpãσíov > MoGr. кpaσí 'wine'. 2. кpāчa (rarely also кpáччa, after ẞáччa, etc.),
Ion. кpñµa, ‘mix, alloy', also ‘mixed wine' (Ion., Hell.), whence кpaµátov (Dsc.) and
кραµµáτvos consisting of an alloy' (pap.). 3. kpātýp, kpytýp [m.] “mixer”,
'mixing bowl', also metaph. 'crater' (II.), whence кpατηpíα ‘id.' (Dsc.) and the
diminutives кpατýpιov, кpη- (Нp.), кpατηp-ídiov (Boeot., J.), -íσкoç (Delos IIIª,
Ath.); кpατηpíw [v.] “to drink a bowl", 'to intoxicate oneself (Sophr., D.). 4.
compounds like ǎ-кpā-τoç (-ŋ-) 'unmixed' (II.), aúτo-кpη-ns "mixed with itself”, i.e.
'unmixed' (Nic. Al. 163), aúτó-кpaç 'id.' (Poll.).
B. From disyllabic kɛpă-: kata-képaσɩ ‘mixing (with water)' (Arist.), кépaσμa ‘id.'
(Hell.), ovy-kɛpaoµóç ‘id.' (gloss.), kepaotós (ev-, ¿y-kép.) ‘mixeď (D. H., Plu.,
APl.), кɛpaστýs 'mixer' (Orph.), έлɩ-, кατα-кεpaσɩɩкóç 'causing a (real) mix'
(medic.), µɛtá-kɛpaç [adj., n.] ‘tempered, lukewarm' (com.), aútó-kɛpaç [adj., adv.]
'unmixed' (Poll., Phryn.; cf. on aúτoкpηηs). See also άкýpaτoç 2. In the mg.
'unmixed' (olvoc; Dsc. 5, 6, 10), àкépatoç is a reinterpretation of ȧкépatos
'undamaged'; see ►ȧкηрατoç 1.
ETYM The set-character of the root *kerh₂- is apparent from the verbal adjectives
(ǎ)-кpāτos and corresponding Skt. á-śir-ta- 'mixed'. Gr. кípvηu is from *kērnāmi,
which contains a schwa secundum and therefore did not vocalize the *r. The nasal
present found in Skt. śrīṇāti rather belongs with *kreiH- ‘to shine, excell', acc. to
Narten KZ 100 (1987): 270-96. On the other hand, Av. sar- 'to unite does belong
here, e.g. OAv. sārǝṇtē [3pl.pres.]. The old aorist кɛpáσat gave rise to analogical
innovations кɛpаíw, кɛpάw, кεрávvч, just like кɛpш, кɛpáσw, кεрασеñval,
kɛképaσµaɩ (with analogical σ); older forms are кpāṁñval, kékpāµiai.

=== page 362 ===

676
кɛpaóç [adj.] ‘horned', secondarily 'made of horn' (Il.). <IE *kerh₂- ‘head, horn'>>
•ETYM *кɛpaƑós is identical with several words for 'deer' and other horned animals:
Lat. cervus (like kɛpaós from IE *kerh₂u-o-), MW carw 'deer' < IE *kṛh₂u̟-o-, Alb. ka
'ox', Ru. koróva, SCr. kräva 'cow' < *korh₂ueh, with centum-treatment of *k from the
zero grade, which must consequently have been present in the paradigm), Lith. kárvé
‘id.'; also, with palatalisation and zero grade, OPr. sirwis 'roe'. We have to assume an
original paradigm *kerh₂-u-o-, *krh¸-eu-o-. A parallel formation is the Germanic
name of the deer, e.g. OHG hiruz, from QIE *keru-d-. All words derive from a word
for 'horn', e.g. Av. srū- [f.]; see Nussbaum 1986: 19-47 and 139-157. See ►кépaç.
Képaç [n.] 'horn for blowing and drinking', metaph. 'branch (of a river), part of an
army, top, etc.'. <IE *kerh₂-s- ‘horn, head'>
•VAR Gen. epic -paos, Hdt. -pɛoç, Att. -pws, -pāτoç, dat. epic -pαï, Hdt. -pɛï, Att.
-pa, nom.acc.pl. epic -pa(a), Hp. and Att. -pāτa, gen. epic -páwv, Att. -pwv, -päτwV,
dat. -păσɩ, epic also -páɛσσ; late epic gen.sg. -páaτoç, nom.acc.pl. -páaτa (further
forms in Schwyzer: 515).
•DIAL Myc. ke-ra-a /keraha/ [nom.pl.].
●COMP As a first member in кɛpaσ-pópos 'with a horn' (trag.), also кɛpato-pópos
‘id.' (Arist.); kɛpao-\óos polishing horn' (A 110, AP), thematically reshaped e.g. in
кɛpo-pópos (E.), also kɛpe-aλkýs 'with strong horn' (A. R.). As a second member
mostly -кɛpwę [m., f.] < -кɛpα(σ)-oc, seen in vчí-, ä-кɛpwc, etc.; special feminine.
form ч-, кαλλɩ-képαv [acc.] (B.); isolated -кépäτoç, e.g. à-képatoç (Pl., Arist.; τñç
άкεpáτov beside τǹу åкépшv Pl. Plt. 265b, c), also ȧ-képшτoç (AP), -кɛpoç e.g. in vý-
кɛpoɩ [pl.] ‘hornless' (Hes. Op. 529); dí-kɛpaç [n.] 'double horn' (Callix.) and the
plant names alyó-, ßoú-, τavpó-kɛpaç [n.] (after the shape of the fruit, Strömberg
1940: 54); also aiyo-kέpwę ‘Capricornus', with metrically conditioned gen. -кεpñoç
(Arat., Q. S.).
•DER Diminutives: кɛpátov ‘little horn' (Arist., Hell.), ‘name of a weight and a coin,
"carat" (Hero) = Lat. siliqua (inscr. and pap.); τà кεрάτα 'the fruits of the carob-tree'
(Ev. Luc. 15, 16, Dsc.); thence кεpaτíα [f.] 'carob-tree' (Str., Plin.), also -τéα (pap.,
Gp.; after other tree names in -έa), kɛpwvía ‘id.' (Thphr., Plin.), contaminated form
кɛpaτwvía ‘id.' (Gal., Aët.).
Further substantives: kɛpaσ-τýs [m.] 'horned being' (S., E.; of λapos, IIáv, etc.),
name of a snake 'Cerastes cornutus' (Nic.), fem. -σtís (A; cf. Fraenkel 1912: 209); also
epithet of the island of Cyprus (Hdn. 1, 104, 15: åлò toũ roλλàç äкpaç έxεɩv, 'because
it has many capes'); kepatītɩç (µýкwv) ‘kind of poppy' (Thphr., Dsc.); кεpaïτηs [m.]
= Lat. cornicularius (Lyd. Mag.), кɛραiτç [f.] “Hornpflanze" = τñλiç (Redard 1949: 41
and 72, Strömberg 1940: 54); кεpaïtŋs and kɛpäïïtɩç, however, rather belong to Kɛpaía
(see below); кɛpatías [m.] name of Dionysus (D. S.), also name of a comet (Plin.;
Scherer 1953: 107); Kɛpaía [f.] name of several horn-like objects, e.g. 'yard, beam,
cornucopia', as a sign of writing = Lat. apex (Att., Hell.); diminutive kεpάdiov
(Attica, Delos; or кεpaïdɩov?); кɛpatŵv, -ŵvos [m.] name of an altar on Delos
(Hell.); originally “place adorned with horns"; after the place names in -óv.
Adjectives: kɛpátɩvoç 'made of horn' (X., Pl. Com.), kɛpatívŋs [m.] ‘the fallacy called
}
j
Kεpauvóc
677
the Horns' (D. L., Luc.); kepaτwdns ‘hornlike' (Thphr.); кɛpóɛç ‘horned' (Anacr.,
Simon.); Kɛpéïvos 'id.' (Aq., Sm.).
Denominative verbs: 1. кɛpατí(w 'to but with the horns' (LXX); thence кεpatiσtηs
(LXX), kɛpátiσiç (Apollod. Poliorc.); кɛpatiσµóç 'loss upon exchange of solidi in
ceratia', as if from кɛpατí(w *to change in ceratia' (pap. VIP, Lyd. Mag.); 2. Kɛpaτów
'to change into horn' (Ael.); 3. кɛpáw 'to provide with horns' (Arat.), 'to form a wing'
(Plb.). Cf. also kepaós, ▶kepaïs, ▶kepavíčal, ▶kepovtiáw, ▶képva.
•ETYM Beside the full grade root in kέpaç ‘horn' < *kerh₂-es-, we find a zero grade in
*кapaσ- in кápā, кápηva 'head, top' < *krh₂-es-, which also gave Skt. śíras- [n.]
'head', and *кpãσ- < *kṛh₂s- in кpāvíov 'skull'. Cf. on кápā. The s-stem was
enlarged with a suffix *-ro- in Lat. cerebrum 'brain' < *keras-ro- < IE *kerh₂(e)s-ro-.
Full discussion in Nussbaum 1986. The original meaning was probably 'horn',
whence horned animal-head' and 'head' in general. Further related forms are
discussed s.v. ►кápā, ▶kpāviov, ►кpýdeµvov, ►кpávos.
képaσoç [m., f.] 'bird cherry, Prunus avium' (Xenoph., Thphr.). <PG?>
•VAR кɛρασóç (acc. to Hdn. Gr. 1, 209).
•DIAL Myc. PN ke-ra-so /kerasō/ [f.], see Heubeck Kadmos 4 (1956): 138-145;
Chantraine 1968: 575.
•DER Kɛpaσía, -έa ‘id.' (Gp.), cf. kɛpaτía, -έa s.v. ►кépaç; кɛpáσιov 'fruit of the к.'
(Hell.), *кɛpáσιvos [adj.] in Lat. cerasinus 'cherry-colored', as a subst. кɛpáσɩvov [n.]
'cherry-colored paint' (PHolm.).
ETYM As the improved cherry came from the Pontos area (cf. Kɛpaσous "rich in
cherries", town on the Pontos), the name is probably Anatolian as well. Given its
intervocalic σ, the form must be Anatolian or Pre-Greek. For the suffix, cf. ► Oíaσoç,
►кάρлασoç, which too are of foreign origin. Assyr. karšu has also been adduced. Cf.
on ►кpávov 'cornelian cherry'. Gr. képaσoç, -ía, kεpáσtov were borrowed into many
languages: Asiatic names of the cherry-tree and the cherry, like Arm. keřas, Kurd.
ghilas, and in the West, Lat. cerasus, -ium, VLat. *cerasia, *ceresia, -ea; from Latin
came the Romance and Germanic forms like MoFr. cerise, OHG chirsa > Kirsche.
Lit.: Olck in PW 11: 509f. and Hester Lingua 13 (1965): 356.
kɛpavvóç [m.] ‘thunderbolt, lightning' (II.). ◄IE *kerh₂- 'shatter, smash'>
⚫COMP ►τερл-кépaʊvoç, έyxεi-кépauvoç 'who has the thunderbolt as a spear' (Pi.),
after уxε-ẞpóμos 'who thunders with the spear'; also кεpauvo-εyxns 'id.' (B.).
●DER Kɛpaúvios [adj.] 'belonging to the thunderbolt', also struck by a thunderbolt,
hurling the thunderbolt' (trag.), also кɛpauvaios (AP 7, 49; Steph. -ɛoc); kepaúviov
name of a mushroom 'Tuber aestivum' (Thphr., Gal.), conceived as protecting
against thunder, or as arisen from a thunderbolt; likewise кɛpavvía = àɛí¶wov µɩkpóv
(Ps.-Dsc.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 79f.; also name of a stone кɛpauvias, -vítŋs (PHolm.,
Clem.). Denominative кεpαvvóομα [v.] 'to be struck by lightning', -ów 'to slay with
a thunderbolt' (Hes.); кɛpαúvwσis 'thunderclap' (Str., Plu.).
ETYM Thematic transformation of an r/n-stem *кερα-Ƒαρ, кερα-vv- 'shattering',
from a verb 'to shatter' that was replaced by кɛpαï(w. For the formation, cf. on

=== page 363 ===

678
Képpepos
►λaúvw. Not to be included here are Skt. sáru- 'arrow' and Gm. words like Go.
hairus 'sword'.
Képßɛpos [m.] ‘name of the dog that guarded the underworld' (Hes. 311, where he has
fifty heads). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Traditionally connected with Skt. karbara-, śárvara- 'spotted', as an adj.
śabála- of the two dogs of the lower world (RV 10, 14, 10). This is doubted by
Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. karbaraḥ, where, after Kuiper, an Austro-Asiatic origin is
considered for the Skt. word (see also Mayrhofer EWAia 3: 297). Thus, it has nothing
to do with the Greek word. Lincoln JIES 7 (1979): 273-285 follows Schlerath, who
showed that there were two hellhounds in the IE conception; this is most clear in
Armenian, where Spitak 'white' is the dog of life, Siaw 'black' the dog of death. He
ends with unfounded speculations. The dog may come from the East, he may as well
be Pre-Greek; for neither do we have any evidence.
кépdoç [n.] ‘cunning, wiles; desire to win, gain, profit' (II.); plur. also 'good advice'
(Hom.). <IE? *kerd- 'cunning'>
●COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. kɛpdo-pópos ‘bringing gain' (Artem.), as a
second member in alσxpo-kεpdns 'full of lowly craving, greedy' (IA).
•DER Diminutives kɛpdápiov, kɛpdúciov (gloss.). Further кɛpdoσúvη ‘ruse' (Hom.,
Cleanth. Hymn. 1, 28), кɛpdw [f.] "the cunning one", i.e. 'fox' (Ar., Babr.); PN
Képdwv, -wvos (D., Argolis), whence Lat. cerdō ‘ordinary artisan'; also Kɛpdέwv
epithet of Hermes and Kɛpdɛiŋ Пð (Herod. 7, 74); Kɛpdãos epithet of Apollo
(Thessal., Lyc.), after Aŋtãoç; also of Hermes (Plu., Luc.), also said of the fox
(Babr.); kepdŋtikós 'greedy' (gloss.). Further кεpdaλéos 'greedy' (Il.) and kɛpdaívw
[v.] 'to gain, have profit' (Pi., IA), aor. кɛpdñvαɩ, -dāvaɩ, -dñσal. Comparative forms
kɛpdíwv 'more profitable' (Il.), кéρdɩστоç 'the most cunning' (Hom.). The positive.
has now been recognized in кopdÚç.
•ETYM The only connections outside Greek are a few Celtic words: OIr. cerd 'art,
handwork', also 'aerarius, figulus, poeta' < IE *kerd-h2-, MW cerdd 'song'. The gloss
kýptea• tà képdŋ (H.) is doubtful. R. Schmitt Glotta 51 (1973): 94-95 convincingly
connected it with кoρdúç· лavoũрyos ‘crafty' (H.).
кÉρеɩos [m.] name of a small bird with a clear voice, perhaps ‘treekreeper, Certhia
familiaris' (Arist. HA 616b 28). <PG?►
!
•ETYM Unexplained; the word hardly belongs to ►кpέ. Perhaps Pre-Greek.
.
Képka [?] · áкpíç 'locust' (H.). <PG?>
•VAR képkaž. iέpa ‘hawk, falcon', képêvoç. iépaε ½ åλεкτρvóv ‘cock' (H.).
•ETYM Fur.: 127 compares кɛp-к- with ȧ-кp-18-, comparing for the morphology yɛλ-
y-10- beside a-yλ-10-; doubtful at best. The words hardly belong to KÉρkoç 'tail', as
per Frisk. The word is rather Pre-Greek.
kepkás [?] · kpè₹ τò öpvɛov 'ruff, corncrake' (H.).
•VAR Kɛpkɩðaλíç• ¿pwdiós ‘heron' (H.). →кpéč.
1
Képkovpoç
679
Képkηpię, -ɛwç (?) name of a water-bird (PCair. Zen. 388b, IIIª, BGU 1252, 30, IIª), Lat.
cerceris (Varro LL 5: 79). <?>
•DER Cf. ► kɛpkiwv [m.].
⚫ETYM Compared with Lat. querquedula, which is paraphrased with кεpкýdηs (gloss.
3, 319, 13, etc.). It is uncertain whether кépкηpiç belongs to кépкoç or to the group of
kpéE.
kɛpkiç -ídos [f.] ‘weaver's shuttle' (Il.); metaph. of comparable objects, e.g. 'great bone
of the leg, tibia' (A. R., Heroph. Med.), 'wedge-shaped division of the seats in the
theatre' (Hell.); as a tree name ‘asp, Populus tremula, etc.' (Arist., Thphr.). The mgs.
are discussed by Martin REGr. 80 (1967): 319f. ◄ PG?>
●COMP As a first member in кɛpкidorouký (téxvn) ‘the art of a kɛpkidorolós'
(Arist.); as a second member in лαрa-kɛpkíç [f.] ‘splint-bone' (Poll.).
⚫DER Diminutives кερкídɩov (pap.); кερкιdiαĭov 'wedge-shaped spool' (Attica);
Kɛpki w [V.] 'to use the weaver's shuttle' (Pl., Arist.), KÉPкIσç 'weaving' (Arist.),
kepkiotikŃ (téxvn) 'art of weaving' (Pl.), képkiσtpa [n.pl.] 'weaver's wages' (pap.).
Further also kεpkáda [pl.] 'the weavers', name of a society of weavers (Argos).
•ETYM Unclear. A technical word that seems to be Pre-Greek. Vendryes REGr. 25
(1912): 461 took it as a diminutive of ►кέpкoç, assuming an original meaning 'stave,
rod'.
Kɛρkiwv [m.] name of an Indian speaking bird, kind of mynah (perhaps Acridotheres
tristis or Gracula religiosa; Ael. NA 16, 3; see Thompson 1895 s.v.).
•ETYM The suffix of kɛpkíwv is found in лopoupíwv, åкav¤íwv, and other bird and
animal names. Frisk derives it from кépкoç, following Ael., who argues έлεdǹ кai
avτòç diaσɛiɛtai τòν öрpov, шç лоovται oi кíукλot 'because it wags its tail itself
too, like the к. do'.
Kepro入Úpa → kpÉkw.
кɛpкopwvovç [acc.pl.m.] name of an unknown Indian bird (Ael. NA 15, 14). <?►
•ETYM Thompson 1895 s.v. assumes haplology for *кερкo-kopávη.
Képкoç [f.] 'tail of an animal' (com., Pl. Phdr. 254d, Arist.), 'penis' (Ar., Herod.). <?>
•COMP KEρKO-qópos 'with a tail', ä-Kɛpкoç ‘tailless' (Arist.); on кépкoupoç and
►KÉPKWY S.V.
●DER_Diminutive кɛpкíov (Aq., Sm., Thd.); cf. ►кɛpкíç. Also the animal names
► Képka • ȧkpíç 'locusť' (H.), кɛρкóлη name of a cicada (Ar.), see Strömberg 1944: 16
and cf. on Képкшлεç, probably also ►képkaš · iépa§ (H.) and ►кépkvos · iépač, ǹ
ảλektpvwv (H.). képкwσɩç ‘tail-like growth' (medic.); kepkétŋs. tò µiкpòv äηdádiov
small rudder' (H., Paus. Gr. Fr. 118).
.
•ETYM As opposed to oúpá, kέρкoç seems to come from the lower stratum of the
language and may originally have meant ‘stave, roď (but see on ►kɛpkís). Origin
unknown.
Képкoupoç [m.] 'light vessel' (Hdt., Hell.), originally Cyprian; also name of a sea-fish
(Opp.; cf. Strömberg 1943: 48). <?►

=== page 364 ===

680
KéPKWTES
•COMP Compounds τaupo-кépкoupoç, кερкouρo-σкán names of different vessels
(Hell., pap.).
⚫DER Diminutive кερкoúpιov (AP 5, 43; also [f.] PN); кɛρкoupíτηs 'sailor on a к.'
(Hell., pap.).
•ETYM Properly a bahuvrīhi, ‘having a képkoç-like back', unless it is a folk-
etymological adaptation of a foreign word (cf. the animal names in -oup-, Pre-Greek
(suffixes). Semitic hypothesis by Movers in Lewy 1895: 152. See Chantraine 1928: 13f.
Latin borrowed cercūrus as a fish name (Ov., Plin.).
Képкwлɛç [m.pl.] 'name of two mischievous dwarves', which were fettered by
Heracles (Hdt.), metaph. [sg.] ‘teaser, rogue' (Aeschin.); name of a long-tailed ape
(Manil.). <PG(S)►
●DER kɛpкwñía ‘trickiness' (Semon.), kɛpкwñíšw [v.] ‘to tease, joke' (Zenob., H.).
Also, with a-stem-enlargement, кepkwnŋ. téttiĘ O½λεα µǹ óvoñσa 'female cicala
producing no sound' (H.).
⚫ETYM Interpreted as 'with tail-like figure', from ►кépкoç and -wy (Schwyzer: 4264).
Gil Emerita 25 (1957): 312 considers кepkwaŋ ‘tétti}' to be a compound *кεpko-fwπ-
n'with shrill voice', but this does not fit H.'s explanation above. Rather, -wл is the
ending of several Pre-Greek names.
képva 1 [n.pl.] ‘transverse processes of the vertebrae' (Poll. 2, 180). <?>
•VAR Also -vai [f.pl.].
•ETYM Mostly analyzed as *kers-nā (cf. кápηva < *karasna). An exact parallel to this
form seems to be found in the Germanic word for 'brain', e.g. OHG hirn(i) (< IE
*kers-n-iįo- beside ON hjarsi < *kers-on-). However, the formation was *kerh₂-s-n-
with root-final -h₂, which makes this derivation impossible. See Nussbaum 1986: 192.
It is semantically tempting to compare кépva with ON hvern 'the two boat-shaped
white bones in the brain of a fish', but like Go. Ivairnei 'skull', this derives from
initial IE *k”- and belongs to ON hverna 'cooking utensils', etc.; cf. on ▶ képvoç.
Képvα 2 [?] · ȧžívn 'axe-head' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Acc. to von Blumenthal 1930: 40, it is from кɛipw, and to be separated from
kέapva (see on ►kɛášw). DELG even proposes to read kέapva here.
Képvoç [n.] ‘earthen vase with nipples all around, used in mystery cult' (sch. Nic. Al.
217; Ammon. and Polem. apud Ath. 11, 476f and 478c; H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Plur. képvɛa• tà tỹ µòtpì tŵv еεwν εлеvóµεvα 'that which is sacrificed to the
mother of the gods' (H.); also -va (Poll. 4, 103); on the mg. Nilsson 1941(1): 128, 270f.,
726.
•COMP As a first member in кɛpvo-pópos (Nic., Ath.), to which kɛpvo-popέw (sch.);
short form кɛpvāc (AP 7, 709).
⚫DER Diminutive кɛpvíov (Att. inscr., Theognost.).
⚫ETYM Several unsuccessful IE etymologies have been proposed: relation to кépaμoç,
Skt. carú 'kettle', ON hverna 'cooking utensils'; to Lat. scrinium 'chest', to Skt.
śárāva- ‘plate' (see the relevant litt. in Frisk). The by-forms кépxvos (IG 1², 313: 17,
!
KÉPXVOS
681
314: 23), with кɛpxviov (IG 22, 1533: 19; 23), show that the word was Pre-Greek, as
Chantraine already saw (DELG).
KEPOVTIάw [V.] 'to toss the horns or head' (Ar. Eq. 1344). <IE *kerh₂- 'head, horn'>>
⚫DER Kεpovτiασµóç (Phot.).
ETYM A denominative in -táw from *кεробττа 'provided with horns', which is
genuine Attic for кεpoñσσа (S., E.) or кɛρóɛσσα (Anacr.), an epithet of the deer. It
may originally have meant “to behave like a кɛρоūσσa (λapoc)". On the formation,
where we expect *кεpaτ-, see Nussbaum 1986: 153.
Képσa [?] . Aσιavòv ovoμa 'an Asiatic name' (H.). <LW OP>
•ETYM Schmitt 1999: 53-57 states it is a loan from OP krš, a Persian weight, which
perhaps derives from *kwels- 'to draw furrows'.
kɛptoµéw [v.] ‘to taunt, insult, mock, ridicule' (almost only poetic, Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Аor. кερτоµñσaι (rare).
•COMP Also with εл-. Compound qiλo-képtoµos loving mockery' (X 287, Theoc.,
API.).
•DER képτoμoç ‘insulting, slandering' (Hes. Op. 788, poet.), with кερτoμíαι [pl.]
'mockery, slander' (Hom.); also with suffix -10-кεpτóμιoç 'id.' (Hom., S. [lyr.]),
keptóµnoic (S. Ph. 1236). From εлiкεptoµéw: ¿лiкεpτóμ-ηµа (Demetr.), -nous (Hdn.)
and, as a back-formation, εлкéρτоμоç (Q. S.).
⚫ETYM Prellwitz assumed a univerbation of кɛipɛv and τéμvɛv, a type of formation.
which remains hypothetical. Fur: 349 refers to каρτошστη· ✗λεvaστns 'mocker'
(H.). The varying vocalism points to Pre-Greek origin.
The root has been connected with Lat. carināre, and the words cited under кápvn
'punishment'. Schrijver 1991: 429 is right to connect it with the group of σкεpẞóλλw,
-Boλéw, Kepẞóλlovσa 'to insult, mock, slander', which in turn is connected with
(o)Képaqoç, oxépaqoç. All these words are clearly Pre-Greek, a conclusion which
Schrijver also reaches. It is unknown what the second elements were, or even if the
words were compounds at all. Fur.: 34946 suggests comparison with Hitt. kartimiie/a-
zi 'to be angry', kartiminu- 'to make angry', which is possible, though the meanings
are not the same. For a different but less likely proposal: Perpillou RPh. 75
(2001):145f.
кɛpxvηïç, -ídoç [f.] a kind of falcon, probably 'kestrel, windhover, Falco tinnunculus'.
<?>
•VAR Also -, -ñdoç (Ar. Av. 304, 589); also кεyXpηïç, -pís (Arist., Ael.), кéуxpη
(Arist.), кépxvη (H.).
•ETYM From Képxvos 'raw voice, hoarseness', with the same variation as in Xλwpnïs
epithet of the nightingale (to Xλwpóc), etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 345f.). Also кέρxvη
after the feminines in -1-. Did кɛуxpηis, etc. arise through metathesis? Hardly after
Kéyxpos 'millet' (defended by DELG); see Thompson 1895 s.v. кεуxpηïs.
кépxvos [m.] 'raw voice, hoarseness' (Hp., S. Ichn. 128), 'raw surface, rough
excrescence' (S. Fr. 279), also = ó tŵv ȧpyvpíwv кoviоpτóç 'silver dust' (Poll. 7, 99).
<PG?>

=== page 365 ===

682
KÉσKEOV
•COMP ǎ-KEPXvoç 'without hoarseness' (Aret.), aiµó-кεpXvov [n.] 'cough with bloody
sputum' (Hp.; substantivized bahuvrīhi). From ǎкɛpxvos and кépxvw the adjective
KÉPX VOC (KEPXVóc?) raw (of the voice), hoarse' (Gal.) [??].
•DER Kερxvwбns 'raw, hoarse' (Hp.), кεpууασμóç rawness, hoarseness' (Gal.).
Denominative кεpỵvóoµαι [v.] 'to be raw or uneven', -ów ‘to make uneven, engrave'
(H.), whence кεpуváματα [pl.] 'unevennesses, elevated, embossed work' (H.); to be
read as well in E. Ph. 1386 for кɛуõpшµãσɩ - cf. on kέyxpos; kɛpxvwτós 'embossed,
engraved (H.); also kέpxvw [v.] 'to be or make hoarse' (Hp.). кεpxaλéos ‘raw,
hoarse' (Hp.), also кɛpуvαλéos (Hp. v.l., Gal.). On ►кɛpxvηïç, see s.v.
⚫ETYM The derivation кépxvoç < *кépк-σvoç has been proposed, but the bird name
кpé hardly seems comparable. Perhaps the word is onomatopoeic in origin; cf. Skt.
ghar-ghara- [m.] 'crackling, rattling', as well as, independently, Lat. hirriō 'to
grumble', OE gierran ‘to crack, creak, coo', etc. (Pok. 439). If we connect these, we
could assume képxvos < *gher-għr-o-; kɛpxaλéos would be analogical after loxvós :
ioxaλéoç vel sim. Fur. 340 compares кápxapoç. If the word is Pre-Greek, it could
simply be *Kerk-no-, with automatic aspiration before the *n (cf. Fur. 110).
KÉσKEOV [n.] 'tow' (Herod. 9a). <PG?(S)►
•VAR kéσki<ov>• σtväɛlov, tò ảлoktévioµa toũ Aivou 'what is combed from flax'
(H.).
•ETYM Mostly analyzed as *kes-kes-o-, from a root *kes- ‘to comb, hackle, scratch' in
OCS česati, 1sg. češo̟, Hitt. kiš-zi 'to comb, card', with the verbal nouns Cz. pa-čes
'tow', Lith. kasà 'plait, braid' < IE *kos-h₂-, Olr. cír [f.] < *kēs-rā (for the apparent
lengthened grade, see the discussion in Matasović 2008 s.v. *kisrā). See also ►éw,
►žaívw, ►čúw. A reduplicated formation *kes-kes- is an improbable structure in IE
terms. Word-final -ɛov may be the Pre-Greek suffix *-ay- (Pre-Greek Suffixes sub
-α1-/ ε(1)-).
=
кεσTÓS [adj.] 'stitched'. KEVτéw.
кɛúðw [v.] ‘to conceal', also 'to be hidden' (Il.). ◄IE (s)keu-d¹- ‘conceal, hide’▷
•VAR Also Kεveάávw (г 453), кuvеávɛ· кρúлτε 'hides, conceals' (H.), fut. кɛúσw, aor.
Kεūσαι, also кÚÐε (y 16), reduplicated subj. кɛкúеwσi ((303), perf. kékεvła.
COMP Also with εл- (εv-, àµqɩ-).
•DER кɛÛƉoç [n.] ‘hiding, cave, depth' (II.), often plur. -ɛa; кεvеµáv, -µŵveç ‘id.'
(Od.), кɛvеµóç, -μoí ‘id.' (N 28, Lyc., Call.); also кevðñveç. oi kataxdóvioi daíµoves
'subterranean deities' (Suid.).
•ETYM A close relative to кɛú0w is found in Germanic in the OE yod-present hydan,
MoE hide. A further comparandum is Arm. suzanem 'to dive, hide', but this would
presuppose an initial palatal *k, which does not fit with the other words adduced,
like Skt. kuhú- [f.] 'new moon' ("the hidden one"), kuhara- [n.] 'cave', etc. (rejected
by Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. kúha). Beside the words from IE *keud-, several forms
with root-final *t are found; see кÚτOÇ. See also on кúσłoç, ►кúστɩç, and
►σкŨτOS and ► σкúλa.
kɛo̟aλý [f.] ‘head, the uppermost or top part, source, etc.' (Il.). ◄IE *għeb"-l- ‘head’▷
1
i
683
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. кɛqaλ-aλyía ‘headache' (Hp.), also -apyía (Luc.) by
dissimilation; ẞov-кéqaλoç 'with cow-head' (Ar.); also as a plant name (Strömberg
1940: 54); as a PN Bov-кɛqάλāç [m.] the personal horse of Alexander the Great (Str.,
Plu.).
⚫DER Diminutive кɛqάλov (Att. inscr.), -ídiov (Poll., pap.), кɛqaλíç [f.] 'bulb of an
onion, toe-cap of a shoe, capital of a column, etc.' (Arist.), kɛqaλìç ßißλíov 'scroll'
(LXX); кɛqáλαιov [n.] 'the main thing, capital (Pi., Att.); rarely adjectival kεqάλaos
(Ar. Ra. 854, PMasp. 151, 16, VIP), with kɛqaλaɩwdns (adv. -wdws) 'regarding the
main point' (Hp., Arist., Hell.) and the denominative кɛqaλaɩów [v.] ‘to summarize
(the main points)' (Att.), whence кεчаλaíшμа 'sum, total' (Hdt. 3, 159), -aiwoiç
'summary' (sch.), -aшwτns = Lat. capitularius, also -tía (pap. Rom. Emp.); Kɛqaλaía
[f.] chronic headache' (medic.); кεчaλwdŋs head-like' (Thphr.), kɛqaλikós
'belonging to the head, to life' (pap., Dsc.); keqaλitng Aλíos cornerstone, headstone'
(H.), keqaλitŋs yλnxwv probably ‘Mentha aquatica' (Hippiatr.); кɛqalivη root of
the tongue' (Poll.); кèqaλīvos fish name = ßλɛvías (Dorio apud Ath.), see Strömberg
1943: 41, also kέqaλoç ‘Mugil cephalus' (Hp., com., Arist.), on which extensively
Thompson 1947 S.V.; кεчάλwμα 'sum' (Messen., Delph.); after ȧváλwμa acc. to
Bechtel 1921, 2: 156, but cf. also кɛqаλаíwμа above; кɛqaλwτóç 'with a head' (Arist.,
Hell.), as a plant name 'thyme' (Ps.-Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 50; -wτóv (sc.
лрáσov) ‘onion' (pap.); keqaλŋdóv 'per head' (Priene IVa). Denominative к]ɛqaλíw
[v.] 'to behead' (BGU 1, 341, 9); in a different mg. кɛqaλioµós ‘table of multiplication'
(Arist.); Kɛqaλów in кɛкɛqaλwμévos 'provided with a head' (comm. Arist.);
kɛqadɩów in ¿kɛqaλiwσav (Ev. Marc. 12, 4), which may mean either 'to beat the
head' or 'to behead'. Furthermore hypostasеs лроσ- (Dог. лоτ-), бло-кεáλαιov
'head cushion' (IA), àлокɛqαλíw [v.] 'to behead' (LXX, Phld.), -toµós, -ioµa, -10τc.
•ETYM Old word for 'head', also found in Tocharian and Germanic: ToA spal 'head',
OHG gebal [m.], MHG gebel 'skull', OHG gibilla [f.] 'id.'; additionally, in the sense of
'front', OHG gibil [m.], Go. gibla [m.] (n-stem), and ablauting ON gafl [m.] 'side of a
facade'. This points to an IE l-stem *geb-1-, but it is unclear from which root it is.
The Greek suffixal -a- is difficult to explain. Cf. also yaẞaλáv. ¿yкéqaλov i keqaλýv
(H.) and Macedonian (Illyrian?) кɛß(a)λń s.v. ► keßλŃ.
Kéws, -w [f.] one of the Cyclades (inscr., Str.). <PG(V)►
•DER KɛToç, Ion. K½ïos inhabitant of Keos (IA); Kéos [f.] place on Salamis (Hdt. 8,
76).
•ETYM Solmsen 1901: 125 suggests derivation from *êñƑoç ‘fire' (to ►кaíw), which
must be wrong, as it is a Pre-Greek name. Fick 1905: 59 compares Kéws Kńios Kɛłos
with Téws Trios and Kówç Kwιos and Cret. Aάtwę Aάτioç, and notes as older forms
Kńws Tńwę Kwwę.
кñẞoç [m.] 'monkey with a long tail' (Arist., Str., Gal.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also кПлоç (Аgatharch., v.l. in Str. 16, 4, 16, Ael., where also кεчлоç) and
*кηQoç because of Lat. cephus (Plin. Nat. 1, 18, 28 and 8, 70; cef(f)us Sol. 30, 22); in
Lat. also ceppus (Pol. Silv.), cae pus (v.l. Plin. Nat. 8, 70 = *кaïлoç?); cf. Fur.: 176, 232,
235.

=== page 366 ===

"v
684
Kñdos
•ETYM The Greek, but also the Latin variants (see Fur.: l.cc.) point to a Pre-Greek
word. It was previously compared with Skt. kapi-, Hebr. qöf, Old Eg. qefi ‘ape of the
land Punt' and assumed to be a loan from an unknown source (acc. to Frisk, the
vowel suggests Egyptian origin), see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. kapí-, E. Masson 1967:
875, and Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 244.
кñdoç [n.] ‘care, mourning, funeral rites; connection by marriage, affinity' (II.). <IE
*keh₂d-s- 'care, grief; hate'>>
⚫VAR Dor. kādos. Primary superlative кηdiστoç 'closest, most dear' (Hom.).
•COMP As a second member in ȧ-ködýs ‘careless, unburied (Il.), to which ȧкndεiα,
-íŋ, άкŋdéw, -iάw; also ȧ-кýбεσ-τоç ‘'id.' (Il.), лρоσ-кηdýs ‘careful, related by
marriage, friendly with' ( 35, Hdt. 8, 136, A. R.); on formation and mg. see Sommer
1948: 110², Levin Class. Phil. 45 (1950): 110f. As a first member in Kηdi-kpátηc (IVª),
perhaps after AλKI-, see Bechtel 1917b: 236.
•DER 1. кηdeσtŃs [m.] 'relative by marriage' (Att.), кηdεστ(ε)íα 'connection by
marriage', kŋdéoτpɩα [f.] 'nurse' (pap.); also кηdéστwp ‘educator' (Man.). 2.
Adjectives: кndε(1) os 'worth caring for, beloved, relative' (Il.), ¿лкýdεos belonging
to a corpse, belonging to grief (E., Pl. Lg. 800e), кödóðuvos ‘dear' (E. Or. 1017) and
кηdoσúvη (dat.pl. -σúvησ) ‘grief (A. R.). 3. Denominative кŋdɛów [v.] 'to care for,
bury, marry' (Att.), to which кηdεvμa 'connection by marriage' (S., E.), -ɛvoiç ‘care'
(Ael., Plot.), -Evτns 'who cares for' (Arist.), -ɛía 'relatedness, burial' (E., X.), whence
kŋdɛtakóç ‘who buries the dead' (Pergam. II³).
Primary verb кndoμa 'to care, be cared for' (II.), aor.ipv. кýdɛσαι (A. Th. 139 [lyr.]),
fut. кɛкαdησoμαι (353), perf. кéкηda (Tyrt. 12, 28); also with prefix, е.g. лεрɩ-, лрo-;
also act. кndw, fut. кηdηow 'be grieved' (II.); кηбεμóv 'who cares for, educator,
protector' (Il.), after ǹуε-µúv (Schwyzer 522), to which êŋdɛãovía ‘care', -µoviкóç
'caring for' (Hell.), -μovεúw [v.] 'to be protector' (Just.); metrical enlargement
êŋdɛµoveús (A. R., API.).
•ETYM A related r-stem is supposed in Av. sādra- [n.] ‘grief, pain, disaster', so from
PIE *keh₂d-s-, *keh₂d-ro-. Thieme 1938: 158f. recognized the s-stem in the obscure
word Skt. riśádas-, which he took to mean 'caring for the foreigner'. This was
recently defended by Pinault Bulletin d'études indiennes 17-18 (1999-2000): 466ff.,
but remains uncertain. Further nouns have been adduced from Italic, Celtic, and
Germanic: Osc. cadeis 'malevolentiae' [gen.sg.], MIr. cais ‘hate, love' (perhaps from
older 'care'), MW cawdd 'offensa, ira, indignatio', Go. hatis [n.] 'hate, anger'. The
Germanic words all have the zero grade of the root, so we have traces of a PIE s-stem
with root ablaut. There is no parallel to the verb кýdoµat in the other languages.
kŋðiç, -ídos [f.] ‘ballot box, dicebox' (Poll. 7, 203; not quite certain). <PG(V)►
•DIAL Perhaps Myc. ka-ti /kāt¹is/, which Neumann Glotta 39 (1961): 176 thinks is
Luwian.
•DER Diminutive formations: кnov, -ɛov, -íov (Hermipp. 27, Poll., H.), kŋðáplov
(Ar. V. 674), кηeídov (Poll.); also with metathesis of aspiration Xεítov beside
Kɛítov (Eust. 1259, 36), and with loss of aspiration кηtíov (Alciphr. 1, 39, 8, Ath. 11,
:
685
477d). Cf. кáðoç. σлupíç ‘large basket, creeľ (H.), also ►кáðɩdo (for -ídɛç?). údpiai
'jars' (H.).
⚫ETYM Comparison with кw0wv 'beaker' is improbable. If кηtíov is reliable, it points
in the direction of Pre-Greek origin. The change of aspiration is Ionic, but the
interchange / ε is also typical of Pre-Greek (see Fur.: 352).
*êŋкá¶w [v.] ‘to abuse, revile', only aor. subj. кηкáσŋ (Lyc. 1386). ◄ONOM➤
•VAR кnкadɛi (-ášεi?). Aoidopɛĩ, xλevά(ε 'abuses, scoffs' (H.).
⚫DER кηкασμóç 'abuse, scorn' (Lyc.); kŋkáç, -ádoc [f.] 'abusing, scorning' (y\woon
Call. Fr. 253), also as an epithet of aλón (Nic. Al. 185).
•ETYM Originally onomatopoeic; cf. the bird name кýš (see ►кavač) and ►кaxáčw;
see also кaкóç and *kāk- in words for 'crow, raven' (Pok. 521). The comparison with
OHG huohōn 'to mock, scorn', huoh 'mockery' (Frisk) is senseless.
kŋkiç, -ïdos [f.] ‘anything gushing forth, ooze', of blood, purple, pitch, fat (A., S.), ‘dye
from oak gall, oak gall' (Hp., D., Thphr.). ◄PG(V)►
•DIAL Dor. Kaкiç.
●DER Diminutive кöкíðɩov (medic.). kŋkíw [v.] ‘to gush forth' (Il.), kaкíw• idpoûv
ǎpxoчaι. Аáкovεç ‘begin to sweat (Lac.)' (H.), only present-stem, also with ava-. It
appears to be a denominative to an t-stem.
⚫ETYM Traditionally compared with Lith. šókti 'to jump, dance', as if from IE *keh₂k-.
The gloss кaукúλaç кηкidaç. Aioλɛiç is compared with Lith. šankus 'nimble', but
this cannot be connected here if the root was IE *keh₂k-. The form кηкíç, -īdoç is
either from an *iH-stem (suffix -ĭd-, but this is also a Pre-Greek suffix), or a back-
formation from кηкíw. At any rate, the connection with šókti must be abandoned,
and the word is Pre-Greek, because of the prenasalization in кayкúλaç. Thraco-Phr.
oiкIV(v)ic dance of the satyrs in honor of Dionysus' (S., E.) does not belong here
either.
кñλα [n.pl.] 'arrows, projectiles (of the gods)' (Il., Hes., Pi., Orph.). <?>
⚫ETYM It has been compared with some Skt. words meaning 'cane, arrow', like śará-
[m.], śárya- [n.], śáryā- [f.], śalyá- [m., n.], and further MIr. cail 'spear', ON hali [m.]
'tail' (n-stem). However, all these words go back to a root with short vowel, as
opposed to кñλa with long vowel. Connection with кāλov 'wood' is rejected by
Frisk and DELG. For further suggestions, see Pok. 552f.
кnλāç, -ā [m.] name of an Indian stork, 'Marabu, Leptopilus argala' (Ael. NA 16, 4).
<LW Ind.
⚫ETYM Formation like àττayāç, έλɛāç (Chantraine 1933: 31f.), probably from Indic
(cf. perhaps Hindi hargēla). Thompson 1895 s.v. suggests that the word was reshaped
after кýλŋ ‘tumor, hump', because the bird had a great crop. On the accent, see
Björck 1950: 63².
Knλás → knλís.
kýλaστpos [f.] 'holly, Ilex aquifolium' (Thphr.). <PG>

=== page 367 ===

686
Knλéos
•VAR Also -ov [n.]; кŋλáστpaι σkaчíðεç, àууεïа лo̟εvкá. † dév§ра bowls, vessels
of shepherds; trees' (H.).
⚫ETYM Formation like Séлαστроν, кávαστρоv, úуaστрov; the suffix is Pre-
Greek (see Pre-Greek: Suffixes).
кηλéoç [adj.] ‘burning' (Hom., Hes.). <IE? *keh₂u- ‘burn'➤
•VAR Only in лupì кηλέw (disyllabic), always verse-final except in 217 and O 74
(лvρì кηλɛíw).
•Der rɛpí-kŋλos (Od.), knλóv. čŋpóv 'dry' (H.) and kavaλéov i kavaλés. únò
Aioλéwv τò aïoç, i katakɛkavµévov кTλ. 'fire (Aeolian); burnt completely, etc.'.
•ETYM If Delph. ►кva is correctly compared (which is quite uncertain; s.v.), kòλéos
has to stand for *кηƑaλéos (Shipp 1967: 54 suggests that кηƑαλéov лúρ was originally
verse-final, like aiðóµεvov лõр, etc.); Aeol. *кafaλéos would then have a different
ablaut grade (perhaps *keh₂u- beside *kh2u-). The form кηλɛíw may have replaced.
the suffix -ɛos with -ɛoç. The forms лεрí-кηλоç and кavaλés were reshaped as well,
after the adjectives in -λo- and -nc. See further ►кaíw and ►кηwdns.
кŋλéw [v.] ‘to charm, bewitch' (IA). <IE? *keh₂l- ‘enchant, deceive'>
•VAR Aor. кηλñoaɩ.
•COMP Also with kata-, úñɛp-, ¿K-.
•DER Verbal nouns: кηληеµóç 'enchantment' (^ 334 = v 2), kýλŋσiç ‘id.' (Pl.), kýλñµa
‘charm' (Ibyc., E.), кýληеpov ‘id.' (Phryn., H.); Köλŋdóves [f.pl.] name of mythical
singers who resembled the Sirenes (Pi.), кηλ½τwp ‘enchanter' (Orph.), -ǹteipa [f.]
(Hes. Op. 464 εÚкηλýtεipa; = novάστpiα 'she who soothes' H.), кnantýplos
‘enchanting' (S., E.), -ŋtikós (Ath., Ael.).
⚫ETYM Bugge Curtius Studien 4 (1871): 331f. compared a Germanic deverbative with
deviant meaning: Go. (af)holon 'to slander, ouкopavtɛïv', OE hōlian ‘id.', OHG
huolen 'to deceive' < *keh₂l-, from which we may also mechanically derive the Greek
verb. Lat. calvor, -i 'to deceive', calumnia 'trickery, false accusation, malicious
prosecution' is formally different, but semantically it matches the Germanic words
well. Schrijver 1991: 95, 113 reconstructs *kh₂l-u- for Latin, while LIV² s.v. *kelh,-
'verlocken, betören, betrügen' assumes a Narten present *kēlh,- / *kelh,-, presumably
because they want to connect it with *kleh,- 'to call', which is unwarranted.
kýλŋ [f.] ‘tumor; rupture, hernia' (Hp., AP), ‘hump' (Eup., Arist.). ◄IE *keh¸u-l-
'tumor, stalk'➤
●DIAL Att. káλŋ (Arist., gramm.).
•COMP As a first member in кηλo-τoμía ‘operation for hernia'; as a second member
in έvτεpo-, σapкo-кηλη (medic.).
•DER кηλńτηs [m.] 'hernia patient' (Str., Gal., Phryn.), Att. кαλŔτng; (¿vtepo)-
кηλкóç (Dsc., Gal.); кáλαμа· öукoç 'distension' (H.), see Chantraine 1933: 186f.;
denominative verb кaλáčɛ. ỏукoûταi. Axatoí ‘is distended (Achaean)' (H.). On
Knλãç bird s.v.
⚫ETYM The difference between Ion. кýλŋ and Att. кáλŋ (where the a is long, acc. to
gramm.) is unexplained. ‘Rückverwandlung' of PAtt. 11 > à cannot be accounted for,
and it is unattractive to assume different ablaut forms *kāƑ-eλ-ā > kýλŋ, *kǎf-eλ-ā >
}
Knμós
687
кάλŋ as late as Proto-Ionic-Attic. Björck 1950: 70 therefore suggested that káλŋ was
taken by Attic from another dialect, but there is no proof for this.
A remarkable correspondence is found in the Germanic term for 'groin rupture', ON
haull [m.], OE hēala [m.], OHG hōla [f.] < PGm. *haula(n)-, -ō(n), and in Balto-
Slavic: CS kyla, Ru. (dial.) kilá (which also means 'knag on a tree'), Lith. kúlas 'navel
rupture', kúla 'thickening, swelling, knag'. All forms mentioned must go back to an
ablauting -stem *keh₂u-l-, *k(e)hu-el-, kh₂u-l- (cf. on noc). The precise
derivation of the Greek forms, however, remains unclear.
▶
kηλíç, -ïdoç [f.] 'stain (of blood), spot, defilement' (trag., Antipho, X., Arist.). <IE?
*kehl- 'white spot'>
•DER Kηλidów (kaλ- Ecphant. apud Stob. 4, 7, 64) ‘stain, soil' (E., Arist., Ph.),
kŋλıdwtóc (Suid., gloss.). Further кnλác, -ádoc [f.] epithet of storm clouds (Thphr.),
acc. to H. also εqµɛpivǹ ñµépa ‘stormy day' and aï‹, ŋtis katà tò µétwrov onpetov
Exεɩ tuλoɛidés 'goat having a knob-like sign on its forehead'; also köλývý. µéðaɩva
‘black; (also) name of a disease' (H.).
•ETYM Formation like кλŋïç, кvηuís, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 347), derived from a
noun. In Italic, we find an adjective with comparable meaning: Lat. calidus 'with a
bless on the head' = U (buf) kaleřuf 'boves calidos', where it is unknown whether the
Lat. a is long or short. To the same semantic sphere also belongs Lith. kalýbas, -ývas
'white-necked (of dogs)' and OIr. caile 'stain' < IE *kh₂l-io-. Nussbaum 1999: 381f.
suggested that the Latin word was borrowed from a Greek pre-form *kālad-.
*кñλov 'arrow, projectile'. →кñλα.
кnλwv, -wvos [m.] ‘stallion, male ass' (Archil., Cratin., Ph., H.) often metaph. 'swing-
beam (for drawing water), swipe' (Delos III, pap.). <?>
•DIAL Dor. кáλwv.
•COMP As a first member in кnλwvo-στáσιov 'support or base for the swing-beam'
(PBerl. Leihg. 13, 14).
•DER кηλwvεiov (Ion. -nïov) 'machine for drawing (water)' (Hdt., Ar., Arist.),
кŋλwvɛúw [v.] ‘to turn the swing-beam' (Hero, Ath. Mech.).
•ETYM A secondary formation in -wv (Chantraine 1933: 161f.). Vendryes REGr. 25
(1912): 461 proposed to start from кñλov in the unattested sense of 'penis', but this
cannot be further substantiated.
kŋµós [m.] ‘muzzle, plaited lid of the balloting urn, fyke for fishing, cover for nose and
mouth, etc.' (A., S., Ar., X.); on the mg. Schenkl WuS 5 (1926): 172ff. <PG(V)>
•DIAL Dor. kāμóç.
•COMP As a second member in ɛúkaµía. ǹovxia, ǹto ɛvôŋµía ‘quiet, silence' (EM,
H.), as if from *εкāμoç.
•DER кŋµów [v.] ‘to muzzle' (X., 1 Ep. Cor. 9, 9, sch.), kýµwois. qiµwois ‘silencing'
(H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Connection with Arm. k'amem 'to press (out)' (LIV² s.v. *kem-)
is formally possible, but is incompatible with the probable basic meaning of the
Greek word, 'wicker'; the same holds for the Balto-Slavic and Germanic group

=== page 368 ===

688
meaning 'to press, etc.', e.g. Lith. kāmanos pl. 'harness with bit', Ru. kom 'clump',
MHG hemmen, hamen 'to restrain, bind, hamper'. Fur.: 220 connects the adjectives
xaẞóc and xauós (both H.); the connection with xáẞos 'muzzle' is self-evident, and
the interchange µ/ ẞ points to Pre-Greek origin (see Fur.: 203-227). It seems evident
to connect кημós as well, and all variants derive from a pre-from *kām-. Lat. cāmus
'muzzle' was borrowed from Dor. кaµóç; Osman., Arab. ģem ‘bit, mouth-piece of the
harness, bridle' (which later gave rise to MoGr. τò yέµɩ ‘bridle') are from кηµóç. See
►кбµοç, ►кáµvç.
кñµos [f.] a plant, λεovτoлódov or Evax (Dsc., Orph.). <?>
⚫ETYM No etymology. See André 1956 s.v. cēmus.
=>
KI→ Kavač.
кñлоç 1 [m.] 'garden, orchard, plantation' (II.), 'uncultivated piece of land' (Cypr.).
<IE? *keh₂p-'enclosure', EUR?>
•VAR Dor. калoç.
COMP Often as a first member, e.g. кηлоυрóç 'gardener' (Att., Hell.) < *кηло-Ƒорóc,
also кηt-wpós (Archipp.), probably after Oupwpós (see Oúpα); кηло-λáуαvov
‘garden of vegetables' (pap.) of the tуре iлло-лóταμоç, sее лло and Strömberg
1944: 7, also кηo-λaxav-ía ‘id.' (pap.); кηл-ɛруóç 'gardener' (Corycus), for -oupyóc
(Poll.) after pyov. Also as a second member, e.g. лɛpí-êηëoç [m.] ‘garden around
the house' (Ptol. pap., D. S.), probably after ɛpí-xwpoc; ȧypó-kijos (Att. inscr.,
Rom. Emp.), ȧypo-кýлov (Str.) ‘field worked as garden'.
•DER Diminutives кηлíoν (Halic. Vª, Th.), -лíðɩov (Plu., D. L.), -лádov (pap.);
кηлαчoç ‘of the garden' (Arist.), кηлεúç ‘gardener' (Philyll. Com. 14, AP), Dor.
kanɛúç; kŋnidɛç Núμqa ‘garden Nymphs' (Aristainet.). Denominative кηлεúш [v.]
'to work in the garden, cultivate' (E., Eub., Arist.), whencе кηлɛĩαι [f.pl.] 'gardens'
(Pl. Lg. 845d), pluг. кηлεúµατα ‘products or fruits of the garden' (Ar. Av. 1100),
KNAEVTŃS = KNTEÚç (gloss.), körevoчoç ‘grown up in a garden' (Alex. Trall.), after
Quτεúσчμоç, sее Arbenz 1933: 86.
ETYM Except for the ending, PGr. *kāpo- could be identical with a WGm. word of
comparable meaning, OHG huoba, OS hōba, MoHG Hufe, Hube [f.] 'piece of land of
a certain size, MoDu. hoeve 'farm', from IE *keh₂p-h2-. Alb. kopshtë ‘garden' (with
suffix -shtë-) also belongs here. Further connections are either uncertain or wrong
(►кáлɛτоç, Lat. capiō, OHG habaro ‘oats'). Could the word be from a European
substrate language?
кñлoç 2 ‘apе'. →кñßoç.
кýp, кηpós [f.] 'death, doom, goddess or demon of death' (Il.), plur. ‘types of death,
accidents'. <PG>
●COMP кŋpɛσσɩ-qópŋtos ‘driven (into death) by the Keres' (Q 527), knpi-tpeqeïs
'brought up for death' (ävepшлoɩ, Hes. Op. 418), кηpo-tpóqos 'deadly' (öqıç, Nic.
Th. 192); лí-кηроç 'fallen to death' (Hp., Arist., Hell.); also άкpaτos, with
άкηpáσιos and άк½pios ‘unharmed', see ►áкýpatos 1 and Sommer 1948: 152.
Kηpós
689
•DER köpéσɩov. òλéplov, vooŋpóv 'deadly, diseased' (H.), after Оεσréoloc; knpaivw
[v.] ‘to damage, destroy' (A. Supp. 999, Ph.), after ëηuaívw; knpóoµai [v.] ‘to be
injured' (EM).
⚫ETYM The main question is whether the long a in Alc. (kāpi B 6 A 7) and Alcm.
(kāpa Fr. 56; Kápav was handed down) points to PGr. *kár. We may compare the
glosses кáp. Oávaτos 'death' (H.), кapiwσαι áлoктɛîvaɩ ‘to kill', and έkapiwσaç
ȧлéкτεvαç (H.), where a was probably long. Further evidence is provided by the
Attic proverb 0úpaše Kāpeç, ovk ết' Avðɛotýpia. It has been suggested that Kāpɛç
meant 'Carians', i.e. ‘slaves', but this is clearly an aetiological story made up in order
to explain the a. See also Brunel RPh. 41 (1967): 81-104. On the other hand, кñpɛç and
кp occur both in Pi. Fr. 277 and in the choral songs of tragedy. In order to explain
this, an ablauting paradigm кép, *кǎpóç has been suggested, from which a secondary
nom. *kắp was formed, but this cannot be maintained. The most likely conclusion is
that the long a is original, and that the IA development η spread over a large area.
Since there was no IE root *kār-, the most likely conclusion is that the word is Pre-
Greek. See Beekes MSS 63 (2003): 7-10.
кñp 'heart'.кapdía.
npapis → kápapos.
кŋpós [m.] ‘wax' (Od.). <PG?►
•COMP Frequent as a first member, e.g. кŋpó-dɛτos 'fixed together with wax'
(Theoс.), кηро-лλάστη 'wax sculptor' (Pl.), кηpo-τaкiç [f.] 'hot plate' (to keep wax
paints hot) (PHolm. 6, 33; cf. Lagercrantz 1913: ad loc.).
As a second member e.g. in лσσó-кηpoç [m.] 'propolis, a mix of resin and wax by
which bees stop up their hives, bee-bread' (Arist., Plin.); also кηрó-лσσоç 'ointment
from wax and resin' (Hp.), cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 58, µελí-кηpoç ‘'bee-wax' (pap.);
µελɩ-кýpιov ‘honeycomb' (Sm.), µελɩ-кηpíç ‘id.', metaph. 'cyst or wen' resembling a
honeycomb (Hp., pap.), the same metaph. in µελí-кηpå [f.] 'spawn of the murex'
(Arist.).
•DER 1. кηpiov 'wax-cake, honeycomb' (IA, h. Merc. 559), knpídiov (Aët.), knpiwdns
'like a honeycomb' (Thphr.), кηpíwµa 'tearing eyes' (S. Fr. 715), kŋpiášw [v.] ‘to
spawn', of the murex, as its spawn resembles a honeycomb (Arist.). 2. кnpivoç 'of
wax' (Alcm., Att.), kŋpívη (sc. éµëλαστpoç) name of a plaster (medic.); 3. kúpivłos
[m.] 'bee-bread' (Arist., Plin., H.); 4. кηpíwv, -wvoç 'wax-candle, -torch' (Plu., Gal.);
5. kŋpwv, -ŵvoç ‘bee-hive' (sch.); 6. kòpíç fish name, perhaps = kippis (Diph. Siph.,
Alex. Trall.; see ►кippóc), probably after its yellow color; cf. Strömberg 1943: 20f.,
Thompson 1947 s.v. 7. knpītis (\íos) 'wax-like stone' (cerae similis, Plin. HN 37,
153); 8. *кηpoñσσa in Lat. cērussa 'white lead' (Plaut.).
Denominative verbs: 1. кηpóομαι [v.] 'to be covered with wax', -ów 'to cover with
wax' (Hp., Herod., AP), whence kŃpwoiç ‘bee-wax' (Arist.); кýpwµa ‘wax-ointment,
-plaster' (Hp.), cf. Lat. cērōma, with -µatikóç, -µatítng, -µatiotýc; knpwtń ‘id.' (Hp.,
Ar., Dsc.), кηрwτáptov 'id.' (medic.); 2. кηpíw [v.] 'to look like wax' (Zos. Alch.).
⚫ETYM Baltic has a similar word for 'honeycomb': Lith. korys, Latv. kâre(s); however,
these point to a pre-form *kāri-, and comparison with кηpós is doubtful because all

=== page 369 ===

690
Greek evidence points to PGr. *kēro-. As there is no evdience for Indo-European
apiculture, we have to reckon with foreign origin for кηpóç, cf. Chantraine 1933: 371.
From кηpóc, Latin may have borrowed cēra (details in WH s.v.); from Lat. cēreolus,
Greek took кnpioλos 'wax candle' (Ephesus IIP). The word кúpivoç 'bee-bread'
seems Pre-Greek.
кηρúλoç [m.] name of a bird, identified with or compared to the kingfisher ȧλкvóv
(Alcm., Archil., Ar., Arist.); see Thompson 1895 s.v. <PG?(S)►
•VAR In Ar. Av. 299f. it is written кεɩρúλoç, as a nickname referring to kɛipɛiv.
•DER кηpúλoç. ǎpoηy öρviç σuvoυσιαστIкóç 'Sociable male bird' (H.).
⚫ETYM No etymology. With the root кηp- (or perhaps кηλ- with dissimilation), it has
been compared with Skt. śārá- ‘motley', śári- a kind of bird, but such comparisons
amount to nothing. The suffix -vλo- occurs in Pre-Greek words.
кnρuvos [m.] a throw of the dice (Eub. 57, 2). <PG?►
•VAR Also Kápuvvos (Phot.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Probably Pre-Greek.
кýpuš [m.] ‘herald, messenger', also ‘trumpet-shell' (Il.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Accented кñpv§ in Hdn. (cf. Schwyzer 391); Dor. Aeol. кápvě, -ŪKOÇ.
•DIAL Myc. ka-ru-ke /kārūkes/.
•COMP As a second member e.g. in Spoµo-кýpuε 'courier' (Aeschin.).
•DER 1. Feminine: кηpúкαɩva ‘heraldess' (Ar. Ec. 713), cf. Chantraine 1933: 108; 2.
Patronymic Kηpuкídat [m.] ‘descendants of the Athenian family of the Kýpuкεç'
(Poll.). 3. Adjectives: кηрúкεos 'belonging to the herald' (S.), mostly ntr.
кηρúк(ε)lov, Dor. кãp-; Ion. кηрUкηïov 'herald's wand' (IA Dor.); borrowed into Lat.
cādūceum, -eus, cf. WH s.v., also as a constellation (Scherer 1953: 200); 'auctioneer's
fee, tax on auction sales' (Hell. inscr. and pap.); KapuкńƑios Boeotian name of
Apollo (Tanagra, Thebes, VIª); kŋpukɩkós ‘regarding the herald' (Pl.), -ɩvos
'belonging to the herald' (pap., Suid.), -wdns 'like the trumpet-shell' (Arist.).
Denominative verbs: 1. köpúσσw ‘to be herald, broadcast, announce' (Il.), Att. -útτw,
Dor., etc. kāp-; Kýpuуμа 'herald's cry, announcement' (IA), кηpvуµóç (sch.), kŃpvčię
(D. C.) 'id.'; 2. кηρкɛúш [v.] 'to act as a herald, announce' (Att.), whence кηpuкεía,
-ŋŋ herald's service' (IA), кηрúкεчμа 'announcement' (A. Th. 651), -ɛvσiç ‘id.'
(Suid.).
•ETYM Traditionally compared with Skt. kārú- ‘singer, poet'. However, Beekes 2003:
109-116 showed that Greek does not have an ‘enlargement' -к- (the examples in
Schwyzer: 496 are few and doubtful); furthermore, in this manner, the long u could
not be explained. Words in -Ūк- all have very different meanings and are probably
non-IE. Therefore, the word is most probably Pre-Greek. In this way, the gloss.
кoρúуηç кñρvε. Awpiɛic (H.), hitherto unexplained, can also be understood: Pre-
Greek *a interchanging with *o before a following *u. The *a that we must assume
for the gloss was short, so this is another variant of the same word.
кñtoç, -ɛo¢ [n.] 'big sea-animal, sea-monster' (Il.), 'whale' (Arist.); also name of a
constellation (Arat.; Scherer 1953: 187). <PG?>
knońv, -ñvos
691
•COMP кηtó-dopлoç (σvµôopá) ‘giving the кnτεα their evening meal' (Lyc.); µɛya-
kýtŋs with big кýτɛα' (Hom.), epithet of лóvτоç, also of deλopis = '(being) a big
кñτOÇ', thence also of vaus (cf. Sommer 1948: 184f.), ßaðv-kýtns (лóvτos) ‘having
кτɛα in the deep' (Thgn. 175), лоλv-кýτηs with many кýτεα' (Theoc. 17, 98).
⚫DER KŃTELOÇ 'belonging to the кñτоç' (Mosch., Nonn.), кötódŋs ‘belonging to the
whale' (Arist.); êŋtɛía [f.] ‘catching of кýτεα (tunnies)' (Str., Ath., Ael.), after άλiɛía;
кτηuα 'salted tunnies' (Diph. Siph. apud Ath. 3, 121b; uncertain), кηtývs. rλotov
µéya ŵç êñtos ‘large ship, like a sea-monster' (H.) (cf. áëývη ‘wagon', and the ship
name Пɛtývn); kητóðµαι [v.] 'to become a кñtos' (Ael.). See ►кntwɛσσav.
•ETYM Unexplained. Probably a Pre-Greek word.
kŋtwɛooav [adj.] epithet of кoíλŋy Aakɛdaíµova (B 581, § 1; verse-final), generally
taken as 'full of crevices, abysses', later said of the wooden horse (Q. S. 12, 314) and,
by confusion with кητειоç, кñτоç, said of лúɛα, qáλay (Nonn.). <PG>
⚫ETYM Not well explained. Zenodotus (sch. on 8 1) read кαιετάεσσav in its place, and
understood it as 'кαλαµvеóðŋ', derived from кatiéta. kaλaµívėŋ. Boɩwtoi (H.) or
кαιɛταç (unaccented, Apoll. Lex. s.v. кητбεσσav) = кaλauíveŋ, a sweet-smelling
plant. Call. (fr. 639 Pf.) calls the river Eurotas кαιετάяç. Other informants (see Str. 8,
5, 7 and Eust. 1478, 41) connected it with the gloss кαιετoi oi àñò tŵv σɛoµŵv
pwxчoí 'clefts due to earthquakes' and кaɩéτaç = ►кaιádaç. This may be a learned
guess, but it is difficult to explain кητ- from it. Bechtel 1914 s.v. assumed a word
кñτoç ‘crevice, abyss'. For кητwεσσav, a metrical lengthening of *êŋtóɛσσav was
assumed, but this is unnecessary if we follow Ruijgh Lingua 28 (1971), who posits a
pre-form *кητoo-Fεvt-, with Achaean was a result of the first compensatory
lengthening.
It seems evident to connect кaιéτaç, кaιádaç ‘crevice in Sparta'. Fur.: 1806 points to
the gloss äμvσσos. kñtos. Aákwvɛs (see ►ẞúƉos), which shows that a crevice could
be called кñτOÇ.
кηvα [?] in Ovεv...
<GR?
tpiktevav kŋvav (Delph., IG 22, 1126: 34 [IVª]), meaning unclear.
•ETYM τpiктεvav could belong to τpiτo(i)α, τpiкTúα 'sacrifice of three animals'.
Then кηvav may be an adjective belonging to kaiw 'to burn', perhaps from *кηF-αv
'destined for burning' (cf. кηódŋs and kýïa, kɛĩa. кαðápµατα H.). The opposite
analysis (кηva as a substantive) may also be considered; cf. Schwyzer: 459', 349
(assuming *кF-a). Unclear.
=
кйüname of a sea-bird. кavač.
kno̟ńv, -ñvos [m.] 'drone', often metaph. ‘lazy vagabond' (Hes.), also used for Asiatic
peoples by the Anatolian Greeks, e.g. for the Persians (Hdt. 7, 61), like in Slavic
languages, Némec 'German' originally means "someone dumb". <PG(S)►
•VAR Also Kaqáv (H.).
⚫DER Diminutive кηovov (Arist.); кηoηуódηs 'drone-like' (Pl.). Further Knoεúç
(Hdt.) and several short names like Kñqıç, Kāçıç, Káqwv, Kaqw; differently Bechtel
1914 S.V.
KEкaqηwç.

=== page 370 ===

692
KПXOS
•ETYM Perhaps a substantivization in -v, -áv of an adjective *kāqós, whence kwoós
‘dumb, deaf with ablaut. Mechanically, one could reconstruct a root *ke/oh₂b¹- or
ghe/oh2bh. However, it is impossible to connect Lat. hebes 'dumb', not only because
of its e-vocalism (as opposed to ā, ō in kapáv, kwo̟óc), but also because of the vowel
quantity (gHb"- would vocalize as hab- in Latin). DELG notes that ablaut *ä/ō is
rare in Greek; note that a suffix -āv is rare, too. The insect name may well be
original; the chances are high that the word is Pre-Greek. Cf. on ►кɛKAQŋÓTA.
êños [?] only in the question лоĩ кños, which acc. to some grammarians stands for
лоч уñç, acc. to others for лоi εn (Ar. Fr. 656, Pherecr. 165). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also кñуXOS, KNXÓS
ETYM The prenasalization clearly shows the Pre-Greek character of the words.
kηwdns [adj.] ‘full of perfume, sweet-smelling' (Z 483, after it D. P. 941). ◄IE? *keh₂u-
'burn'>
•VAR By shortening of the vowel кɛwdŋs. kałapós ‘clear, pure'; kɛwɛv öleɩ evwdeî
(H.).
•DER Kηwɛiç (Hom., AP, Nonn.).
•ETYM For earlier *кηƑóðŋs and *кηƑóɛ (with metrical lengthening), the words
have been derived from a neuter *êñƑoç ‘fìre, incense', from the root of kaiw.
However, provided that this etymology is correct, the lengthened grade *kēu-
assumed by Frisk and DELG is wrong; the word is based on *kāwV-> *keh₂uV-.
Beside the s-stem *kāwos-, Greek also had *kawion in кnia and in кɛĩa. кaðάpμaτa
'purifications' (H.), cf. tɛïxos : tɛxíov, and further, a form with -1- in ►кηλéos
'burning'. For the interchange of suffixes, cf. ►τoç / ►štalov, ►äykos / ► ảykáλŋ.
KIάow → Kĺw.
=
кíßŋλoç [adj.] 'false, fake, tampered' (of gold, coins, etc.), 'deceitful (Thgn., Pi. fr.
70b 3, IA). <PG?>
•VAR Fur. 316 quotes kíßaλoç. ó λŋoτńs ‘pirate' (Su.) (but = diákovoç ‘servant' H.);
the connection is unclear (not mentioned by DELG).
•COMP Negated ȧ-kíßdŋλoç ‘untampered' (Hdt., Pl. Lg.).
•Der kɩßdŋλia, -in 'falsification, deceit (Hp., Ar.); denominatives: 1. Kɩßdŋλeúw [V.]
'to falsify' (E., Ar., Arist.), whence кɩßdýλevµa, -λɛía 'falsification' (Pl. Lg.);, 2.
kißdŋλiáw [v.] ‘to look like forged gold; to have jaundice' (Arist.), after the verbs of
illness in -táw. Besides кíßбηç. каkoūpyoç, <кá>ñ½λos, xepotéxic malefactor,
huckster, artisan' (H.), кiẞdwvεç = μεταλλεïç 'miners' (Poll., Moer.), kißdwveç
µɛtadλɛïç
(Phot.). The basis is kíẞdoç 'dross of metal (Poll.); in the same mg. also kíßdŋλiç
(H.), see кißбn@vτaç; on the suffix -no- see Chantraine 1933: 242.
•ETYM It remains uncertain whether кißaλos belongs here. In spite of Frisk, there
appears no basis to connect кíßov · ¿vɛóv. Пáqɩot 'dumb (Paph.)' (H.). Of course,
the word is Pre-Greek (Fur.: 316); on the suffix -1λo-, see Fur.: 1155. In the root кiß-,
-ẞ- was most probably one phoneme, for which we propose (the voiced
representative of) PG *p. A final -doc is also found in Aúydos 'white marble' and
Kiykdoc
693
►μóλvßoç ‘lead'. Von Blumenthal finds a related verb in кiyɛɩ kakoлoɛî ‘does
wrong' (H.).
kíßioɩç [f.] ‘sack, pack' (Hes. Sc. 224, Pherecyd., Call.). Acc. to H. Cypr. for ëýpα
'leather pouch'. < PG▶
•VAR Also kiẞŋos (Suid., Orion), кúßɛσɩç, кußŋσía (H., see Fur. 365); besides,
probably as a popular hypocoristic form with gemination, кíßßα· лýрα, Aitwλoí (H.,
see Fur. 305); further кipßα. л½рα (cod. лɛïpa), dipέpa. Airwλoi ‘leather pouch
(Aetolian)' (H.), MoGr. кipẞéλλa 'small sack'; see Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 247.
⚫ETYM Given the variants, most probably of Pre-Greek origin. See ▸ кɩẞwτóç.
кißápiov [n.] ‘seed-vessel of the Egyptian water lily (кoλoкaσía)'; metaph. ‘cup; tomb’
(Hell.). <LW Eg.>
•ETYM Probably a loan from Egyptian (thus H.), but not attested there; see Meyer
1896: 140, Nencioni Stud. ital. fil. class. 16 (1939): 11. Lat. cibōrium was borrowed
from the Greek; cf. E-M s.v.
Kiẞwτós [f.] 'wooden chest, box, cupboard' (Hecat., Simon., Att.), also of Noah's ark
and of the alliance (LXX). <PG>
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 34².
•DER Diminutives кɩßáτiov (Ar., Arist.), -ídov (Delos IV³), -áptov (Hero).
•ETYM Perhaps cognate with кißious ‘sack', thus probably Pre-Greek. A shorter
form kíẞoç (кiẞoç?) is found in Suid. Semitic hypotheses in Lewy 1895: 99f. From
кiẞwτóç, Syr. qēbūthā and MoP kēbūt 'box' were borrowed (cf. Bailey TPS 1933: 50).
Lat. cibus perhaps also belongs here; see WH s.v.
KÍуKaσoç [?] · Kußeutikós tis þódos ‘a cast of dice', also kikkaσoç. …..kaì þóλov óvoμa
'name of a cast of dice' (H.). <PG(S)►
•ETYM Fur.: 281 assumes that the interchanges are due to "spätgriechische
Geminatenauflösung", referring to Schwyzer KZ 61 (1934): 230. Still, the word must
be Pre-Greek because of its suffix.
kɩykλíç, -ídos [f.] ‘latticed gate', especially those through which knights or counsellors
entered the court of justice or the meeting hall (Ar., Luc., Plu.), also Oupo-kɩYKλídεç
(Attica). <PG>
•VAR Mostly plur. -ídɛç.
⚫ETYM Technical word without a certain etymology. Strömberg 1944: 15 assumed a
back-formation from кɩукλíčяv 'to wag the tail, change continuously' (Thgn. 303);
see on ►кiykλoç. It seems to be a reduplicated form with prenasalization kɩ-y-kλıd-.
Probably Pre-Greek.
кíукλoç [m.] ‘dabchick', acc. to H. öpvɛov лʊкvŵç tǹv oỷpàv kɩvov ‘a bird often
wagging its tail' (com., Arist.); details in Thompson 1895 s.v. <PG(V)►
•VAR Also as a fish name кíykaλos (Numen. apud Ath. 7, 326a), perhaps after the
color, cf. Strömberg 1943: 116.
COMP As a first member in кɩyкλo-ẞáτãç 'going like a dabchick' (pueμóc, Ar. Fr.
140).

=== page 371 ===

694
kidadov
•DER KIYKλíčw [V.] 'to change constantly' (Thgn. 303), perhaps originally “to move
like a dabchick", with regard to the tail (cf. H. on kíykλoç: KɩYKlíčev, ő éoti
Sɩaσɛíɛσaɩ ‘which means: to be shaken'), also trans. with dia- (Hp., Ar.) and лotɩ-
(Theoc. 5, 117); thence кiyкλios (Hp.), -tσµós (Hp., Men.). Cf. on кιуKλiç.
•ETYM The variation кí(y)X\oç, kíykados, kéykλoç, etc. in the tradition shows that
the word is Pre-Greek. Not from *кéукλoç, related to Skt. cañcala- 'movable,
uncertain', which rather derives from *cal-cal-a- (with dissimilation), and belongs to
cálati = cárati 'to move' (see лéλojai).
kíðaλov [?] · кpóшov ‘onion' (H.). <PG?►
•ETYM Cf. σxiστά• τà уρáшaτα. кaì τà кρóμчvа letters, also onions' (H.); the words
are probably Pre-Greek.
Kidapιs [f.] name of a turban-like headgear, worn by the Persian kings only (Ctes., Ph.,
Plu.), also of the turban of the Jewish high priest (LXX); name of an Arcadian dance
(Ath. 14, 631d). ◄LW Orient.>>
•VAR Also KIT(T)apıç; gen. -ɛWç.
⚫ETYM Grimme Glotta 14 (1925): 16 supposes Hittite or Oriental origin; Szemerényi
Gnomon 43 (1971): 63 mentions Hebr. ktr mlkwt and Aram. kitrā.
kidaqoç [?] = åλóñη\ 'fox' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Fem. kɩdáôŋ; also kivdáqŋ, kɩ(v)dápios; further σkivdaqoç [f.] (Ael.), okidáqŋ
(Arc.).
•DER Adjectival: кídaqoç = Sódios cunning', к₁(v)dápios = лavoбруoç 'knavish'
(H.). Denominative кɩdaqɛúɛν· лavoυpyɛiv 'play the knave' (H.).
•ETYM Animal name in po- (see Chantraine 1933: 263); the adjectival function is
clearly secondary. Wood Class. Phil. 3 (1908): 76 compares it to Lith. skiedžiu, skiesti
'separate', etc. as "the cunning one". Another variant is kipaqoç; all these variations.
show the Pre-Greek character of the word.
kidvaaɩ ‘to be spread out'. →σкedávvyµ.
kɩdvóv [adv.] · ¿vádɛ. Iápio ‘(to) here, (to) there (Paphian)' (H.). ◄IE? *ko, ke
'this'>
•ETYM From the deictic particle PIE *ki in Lat. ci-s, Gr. ►¿кɛĩ, etc., but unclear in
detail. Bechtel 1921, 1: 349 assumes a derivative in -no- from a neuter *kid, by
comparison with Go. und hit-a "wç äpτi'. Pisani AnFilCl 6 (1953-54): 213ff. identifies
*Kɩd with Go. hita as well, but -vov would be from võv 'now' (cf. Hitt. kinun 'now')
with Cyprian development of u to o. Blanca Prósper KZ 108 (1995): 75-83 explains the
word as from *ki-dinom ‘at this day here'.
=>
kidpar → xīdpov.
kiéλAŋ [f.] · qéyyos, aủyý, qŵs. náxvη. óµíxλn 'light, sunlight; hoarfrost, frozen rain;
mist' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
кɩðápa [f.] ‘lyre' (IA). <PG>
KÍKIVVOS
•VAR Ion. -pn; also кíðapıç, -toç [f.] (Il.).
695
•COMP кɩеapo-αordós (com.), usually contracted кɩłapudós (IA) lyre-singer',
whence kılapwdéw [v.], etc.; ȧ-кíapıç 'without lyre' (A.).
•DER Kiapos [m.] 1. ‘thorax' (Hp. Loc. Hom.; after its shape); 2. name of a flatfish
(com., Arist.; after the shape); кiðápiov (Ptol. Euerg.); also кiðapwdós name of a fish
in the Red Sea (Ael.; after the patterning of the colors; Thompson 1947 s.v.,
Strömberg 1943: 38).
Denominative Kiеapíšw [v.] 'to play the lyre', also of string instruments in general
and of the accompanying songs (Il.; on the mg. Diehl RhM N.F. 89 (1940): 96f.), with
several derivatives: кiðαpiστúç [f.] (II.), кiðápiσiç (Pl.), -tσµós (Call.) 'playing the
lyre, the art of the lyre'; attempt at semantic differentiation in Benveniste 1948: 69,
see also Porzig 1942: 181; кiðápiσua 'piece of music for the lyre' (Pl.); кiðαpiστńs
lyrist, etc.' (h. Hom. 25, 3, Hes.), -íστpiα (Arist.), also -tστpíç (Nic. Dam.), -totikóS
(Pl.), -ɩσtńpios (Hell.) ‘belonging to lyre-playing'.
•ETYM Pre-Greek. Earlier explanations from IE and Semitic in Bq. are incorrect.
кíopa [f.] a vase for preserving grapes (Herod. Med.). <GR➤
•ETYM See Rh. Mus. 57: 100 and 110. On кúеpa, see ➤ Xέw.
kikǎµa [acc.pl.n.] name of a plant, acc. to H. (cod. kikaµía) similar to the kavkadiç
(Nic. Th. 841). <PG➤
⚫ETYM Formation like ßáλσaµov, σýσaµov, etc.; further unknown. No doubt Pre-
Greek.
kīkɩ [n.] ‘castor oil (Hdt. 2, 94, Pl. Ti. 60a, pap.), which is oil from a tree, the ‘wonder-
tree, Ricinus communis' (Str., Dsc.). <LW Eg.>
•VAR Gen. -10ç, -ɛws; indeclinable in Mayser 1906-1938, I: 2: 24; also кíki (Hdn. Gr. 1,
354; 2, 766). In the last mg. also kikéα (Aët., Paul. Aeg.); after ovкća, etc.
•COMP As a first member in e.g. кIKIO-qópoç 'producing ricinus oil', of yñ (pap.).
⚫DER KIKIVOS 'originating from the ricinus', of λatov (Dsc., Gal.); кíкiov 'the root of
the ricinus tree' (Gal.).
•ETYM An Egyptian word, acc. to Hdt. 2, 94; cf. Hehn-Schrader 1911: 207 and Mayser
1906-1938, I: 1: 37. Perhaps the Egyptian word was têqi; cf. Hdt. τñкɩ (Loret in
Legrand [ed. Hdt.] ad loc.). See also Nencioni Stud. ital. fil. class. 16 (1939): 9.
кɩкíßαλoç [m.] a kind of shell-fish (Epich. 42); reading uncertain. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR kikoßavλitides. koyxvliov tɩ yévos µéλav. kaì tà έk otéatos okwλńkia species
of dark mollusk; little worm-shaped cakes of flour or spelt' (H.).
•ETYM Pre-Greek. The variants point to kikVbal"-it-.
KÍKIVVOS [m.] 'curly hair, lock of hair' (com., Theoc., AP). <PG(V)►
•DER PN KIKɩvvãs, L. Robert 1963: 268.
•ETYM See Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 420, who assume a foreign cultural word.
(Aegaean or Anatolian). From Greek came Lat. cincinnus (cf. WH s.v.). Fur.: 278 is
probably right in assuming a prenasalized form *Kıyкivvoç as a source for the Latin
word. Pre-Greek origin must be asssumed.

=== page 372 ===

696
Kikippos
Kíkɩppoç [m.] ·ȧλεкτρυúv 'cock'; кíккα- ȧλɛктopíç ‘hen'; кɩккóç. ȧλεкτρvwv 'cock'
(H.). <ONOM
•DER PN Cicirrus, see WH s.v.
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic words; cf. MoHG kikeriki, imitating the natural sound of the
cock, etc. Osc. Cicirrus, cognomen of Messius (Hor. Sat. 1, 5, 52), probably originally
meant game-cock', referring to the cock-masks used in lower Italy (WH s.v.).
kikкaßañ [exclam.] natural sound of the screech-owl (Ar. Av. 261). ◄PG(V)►
●DER kikкáßη ‘screech-owl' (sch.) and кiккaßášw [v.] 'to cry like an owl' (Ar. Lys.
761, conj. Dobree for кakкaßášw, -ßíšw). Further кikkáßŋ (gloss.), kíkuļos, -vßos
(H.), кιкvμwïç (Call. fr. 318), -wvís acc. to Latte ‘id.'; cf. Heubeck Würzb. Jb. 4:2
(1949-1950): 208ff. Notе кIкUμwvεïv. vσßλεлτεу 'to see badly' (H.). Further
кíкччoç à¤µлτρ 'lantern' " yλauкóç. óµoíwę кai кíкuẞos little owl, Athene noctua'
(H.).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic words; on the suffix -ẞ-, see Chantraine 1933: 261. Cf.
►kaкkáßŋ and ►кíkɩppoç; see also ►kikkaẞos and ►кúµvdɩç; also, WH s.v. cucubiō,
the sound of the screech-owl. The words кIкUẞ/μos show the Pre-Greek interchange
ẞ/ μ (note, however, the doubts in Fur.: 221). There is also Lat. cicuma 'screech-owl'.
There is no explanation for the interchange a/ v in, e.g., кIкк-αẞ- / KIK-VII-.
кíккaßoç [m.] comic name of a small coin in the Underworld, an eighth of a ww¤ía =
three obols (Pherecr. 1, 167 apud Poll. 9, 83); also ‘niggarď (Phot. s.v. кíµßikas). <?>
•Der kikkáßi(0)v• ¿λáxiotov, oúdév 'very small, nothing' (H.).
•ETYM Ending like in кóluẞos with related meaning; as per Pisani Paideia 6
(1951): 291ff., it is perhaps derived from the screech-owl, кIккαẞau or кiккáßη, after
the owl which was depicted on the back of the Athenian coin. The word *кíккOS
'shell of the pomegranate' is based on a conjecture for unclear кɩкaчoç in H.; see
Pisani l.c.
Kíккασoç [m.] ⚫ oẞóλov övoдa 'name for an obol' (Phot.). <PG>
•VAR Cf. кíkкaσos. ó έk tŵv лapaµηpíwv idpwę pέwv, kai þóλov övoμa 'sweat
flowing from the inside of the thighs; name for a cast of the dice' (H.).
⚫ETYM DELG doubts the first gloss, and for the second, compares ►кiykaσoç (for
which Fur.: 281 refers to ‘spätgriechische Geminatenauflösung'; Schwyzer KZ 61
(1934):230).
кÍккη [f.] · σUVOvoía, ǹ áñò tŵv aidoiwv σvvoσµía 'sexual intercourse, emitting the
same smell(?) from the private parts' (H.). <PG>
•ETYM See ► kíkKAOOÇ.
KIKAŃσкw 'to call, name'. kaλéw.
.
←
KÍKOVÇ [?] · Ó VÉОç τÉTTIε 'the young cicala'; кíčioç· τéτTĚ ‘cicala' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Acc. to Gil Fernández 1959: 126f., it is onomatopoeic, reminiscnet of Lat.
cicada. The variation к/ rather points to Pre-Greek origin.
kikpiẞivτiç ȧvdpáxvη ‘purslane' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
KI入入óc
697
•ETYM Cf. Lat. cicirbita, a plant. The prenasalization points to Pre-Greek origin. See
Fur.: 273.
KIKVµWÏÇ →KIKKaßañ.
KIKUÇ, -voç [f.] 'strength, power' (λ 393). <PG?>
•COMP ǎ-KIKUÇ, -vos 'without strength, weak' (Od., Hp.).
•DER KIKÓW = ioxúw (Hdn. Gr. 2, 533).
⚫ETYM Meier-Brügger (apud DELG Supp.) assumes a reduplicated form of *kueh,- 'to
be strong' in kvέw, kỹµa. This is accepted by de Lamberterie in DELG, but the long i
cannot be explained in this way.
*Kíкw ⚫VAR in šкiža. →кixávw.
Kíλкεç [pl.] 1. 'Cilicians, inhabitants of the province in the south-east of Anatolia; 2. a
people in the valley of Thebes, Onẞη, the town of Eetion, the father of Andromache,
south of Troy (Il.). LW Assyr.?>
VARSg.msc. Kíλ, fem. Kíλσσα (A.).
•DER KɩɩкÍČɛσ¤· кαкoηеíεσι (H.), ¿yкɩɩкíšɛatɩ• kakoŋƉevetaɩ, kakorolɛl·
dießéßλŋvto yàp έñì novŋpią oi Kíλikes (H.); kidikiov ‘a coarse cloth of goat's hair'
(Procop.). Kíλiž mythical name; Kɩɩкāç PN (Cyprus, see O. Masson Kvëpiakai
Σrovdaí 32 (1968): 9ff. Kɩɩкía ‘Cilicia' (Hdt.). кıλkɩoµóç ‘Cilician behaviour, i.e.
drunken butchery (Theopomp. Hist.).
•ETYM The country Cilicia (in Hittite times Kizzuwatna) was called Hilakku by the
Assyrians since 858 (but the name may be local); later there were local kingdoms
where hieroglyphic Luwian was used. The Greeks arrived in the 8th-7th c. On the
Greek kingdom of Mopsos = Musa/us and its king Hiyawa, see now Oettinger 2008b.
кɩλλíẞāç, -avτos [m.] 'three-legged stand, frame' (Ar. Ach. 1121, Poll.). <PG>
•VAR Usually plur. -avtɛç; also кελλíẞaç (pap.).
•ETYM Perhaps from кíλλoç ‘ass', with a suffix as in the synonymous óкpíßaç (cf.
Schwyzer: 448). For the development of meaning cf., e.g., övoç, óvíσkoç ‘winch',
MoFr. chevalet 'support', MoHG Esel, Bock ‘id.', etc. The suffix may be Pre-Greek;
connection with ẞaívw is probably folk-etymological.
.
KíAAɩĘ 1 [?] · σtáµvos ‘jar' (H.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 132 connects it with кúλε 'id.'; the interchange ^/ ^^ points to Pre-Greek
origin.
кíÀÀɩ§ 2 [adj.] · ßoñç tò ¿v képas éxwv dieotpaµévov 'cow with one twisted horn'
(H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 356 connects it with кελλóv. otpeßλóv. лλáуov ‘twisted, athwart (H.).
KIλλós [adj.] 'grey' (Eub. 103, Phot., H., Eust.). <?>
●COMP As a first member, e.g. kiλλ-aktýp· óvnλátŋg, kuvŋyós ‘donkey-driver' (Poll.,
H.; Dor.), Kiλ-άкτwp PN (AP 5, 28; 44). As a second member perhaps in
Macedonian'Елó-кɩλλoç (with έлo- = Gr. ïëïo-).

=== page 373 ===

698
Kíλλ<o>upoç
DER With shift of accent кíλλoç [m.] 'ass' (Sammelb. 5224, Poll. 7, 56, H.), metaph.
'cicada' (H.), after its color, cf. Strömberg 1944: 11, Strömberg 1943: 100, Gil
Fernández 1959: 100. Derivative кíλλoç 'ass-colored, óváypivoc' (Poll.), probably
also кiλ<>íaç στрovеòç ǎрσηу 'male sparrow' (H.). See ►кíλλ(o)upoç.
•ETYM For the root vocalism, we may compare лλvós 'grey' beside лελóç ‘id.'.
Formally, Kiλλóç is reminiscent of кɛλavóc, if this is from *kel-n-io- (but see s.v.),
and if the geminate \\\ derives from *-ln- (though its most straightforward
explanation would be from *-lj-). In sum, there is no convincing etymology.
kíλA<o>vpo¢ [?] · σɛσoлvуíç ‘wagtail (H.). <PG?(S)►
•ETYM Schrader BB 15 (1889): 127f. connected it with a Baltic word for ‘wagtail', Lith.
kielė, Latv. cielava, OPr. kylo, which would be derived from a verb 'to move' (seen in
►kɩvéw, ▶kíw); Lith. kielė could then be identical with Gr. *кíλλa < *кɩλ-α, if this
was the first compound member. Another possibility is that the wagtail was named
for its grey color (see on кiλλóc). In both cases, the second member would be oúpá
'tail', but note that the o is only a conjecture. Moreover, -oupos is also a frequent
suffix in Pre-Greek words. DELG connects kíykλoç, analyzing *êɛλ-kλoç, but this is
completely uncertain. On unclear Lat. mōtacilla 'white wagtail', see WH s.v.
kɩußáčeɩ · otpayуɛɛτaɩ ‘loiters' (H.). →okiµßáčw.
KÍµẞIĘ, -IKOS [m.] ‘niggard, skinflint' (Xenoph., Arist., Plu.). <PG(V)>>
•DER кчẞiкíα. лаvovруíа, εvбoιασμós (corrected to ¿vɛaσμóc) ‘villainy, perplexity'
(H.); also кuẞ(E)ía 'stinginess' (Artist., H.).
⚫ETYM Reminds one of the gloss σкIлÓÇ σкVIÓç, ó μкpoλóуoç ‘dim-sighted,
penurious' (H.), and of σkipía (H.) as an explanation of кчßɛía. These variants, as
well as those found s.v. ►кvíy in the meaning 'niggard', point to a Pre-Greek word
(prenasalization, interchange of stops, etc.).
Kiváẞpa [f.] 'smell of a (male) goat' (Luc., Poll.). <PG>
●DER kivaßpáw [v.] ‘to smell like a goat' (Ar. Pl. 294).
•ETYM Unexplained. Doubts about the usual connection with кɛvέßpɛoç in
Schwyzer: 350. No doubt a Pre-Greek word.
kivaẞεúμaτα [n.pl.] ·лavovpуɛúµaτα (H., see also Phot. кávva). <PG(V)►
•VAR кɩVαQεÚεɩν. лаvоυруεúεσеαι 'to fabricate by ruse' (H.).
●DER Kɩvaßɛúɛσðaɩ (-ßp- codd.). τò okɛvwpɛĩσðaɩ ‘fabrication, fraud (Phot.).
•ETYM The variants show that it is a Pre-Greek word; see Kuiper 1956: 245 and Fur.:
169f., who assumes a Pre-Greek word *kinapo- 'deceiver, fraud'.
kivados, -ɛos [n.] Sicilian word for 'fox' (Call. Com. 1 D., sch. Theoc. 5, 25), 'beast,
monster' (Democr. 259), of people 'cunning, rogue' (Att.); acc. to H. = Oŋpiov, öqiç
'wild animal, serpent'. <PG?>
⚫DER Diminutive кivádiov (Harp.). PN Kɩvádŋç, Kivádwv (Bechtel 1917b: 582).
kɩvádpa. áλórη§ ‘fox' (H.).
•ETYM Not related to кvádaλov. Reminiscent of kidaqoç ‘fox'.
кɩváɩσμα [n.] 'noise, rustling', of flying birds (A. Prom. 124 [anap.]). <PG?>
KÍVSUVOS
699
•DER Kɩvaðσμóç ‘id.' (Phot.); from кɩvαðíčɛɩv. iðɩáčεiv, áлoðŋσavpíčɛiv katà µukpòv
σvλλéуovτα. žvo þvíčε кai кɩvεiv 'to devote oneself to, to hoard up for a small
collection; to complain in a low voice; to move' (H.). кívałoç. Após
'accumulation' (Phot.), кivalíaç кρʊлτóç 'hidden' (H.).
•ETYM For the initial syllable, cf. ►кivupóç. Probably Pre-Greek.
kivaɩdoç [m.] ‘lewd man, catamite' (Pl., Herod.), also name of a sea fish (Plin.), a bird
(= кivaídiov, Gal.). <PG?>
•COMP In compounds, e.g. Kivaido-λoyέw (Str.).
●DER kɩvaídiov (-10c) name of the "vy (H., Phot.), the wagtail (sch.), etc.; kɩvaɩdiaç
[m.] a stone found in the fish кívaɩdoç (Plin.), -ía ‘lewdness' (Aeschin.), -wdŋs ‘like a
K.' (sch.); Kivaιdíw [v.] 'to be a к.' (Antioch. Astr.), Kɩvαíðiσμа (Eust.); also -dεvoµai
(sch.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Acc. to Archigenes apud Gal. 12, 800, it is a Syrian word.
Probably Pre-Greek.
кɩvápα [f.] ‘artichoke' (Hell.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Also Kúvapa (S. fr. 348; also other plants); кúvapos 'white rose' (S. fr. 718).
⚫COMP Kɩvapη-payos (Juba).
•DER Kɩvapέwv (pap.) 'bed of artichokes'.
•ETYM Unexplained. Does the variation 1/ v point to Pre-Greek origin?
kívdaž [adj.] · ɛvкívητoç ‘easily moved' (H.). <PG>
•VAR Kívбaкaç. EÚкIVÝTOUS (H.).
●COMP ÓVO-Kívdios (Eup.), -das (H.) ‘ass-driver'.
●DER kɩvdavɛi (kivdávɛt, see Taillardat REA 58 (1956): 189ff.). кiveĭtai, kɛpatíšei
'move, butt with horns' (H.), Kivdwv name of an oooáyos (Ath. 8, 345c).
•ETYM Explanations from Indo-European, assuming a form with nasal infix *ki-n-d-,
should be discarded. Fur.: 291 compares σкívač, implying that the word is Pre-Greek.
This nicely illustrates that some forms of substrate words may closely resemble
inherited material. For the variation v8/v, cf. Kuiper 1956: 216, e.g. à0p / àvеépiĘ,
kídaqoç / kivdáqŋ. See ▸kívduvos.
kívɗuvos [m.] ‘danger, risk' (Thgn., Pi., IA; on the mg. Mette Herm. 80 (1952): 409ff.).
On кívduvoç = εv лpópa σελíç bench in the prow of a ship' (H.), whence MoGr.
(Naxos) 'bed', see Andriotis Glotta 25 (1936): 19f. ◄ PG➤
•VAR Dat. -uvi (Alc. Z 92); also gen. -uvos (Sapph. 184)?
•COMP As a second member e.g. in έл-кívdʊvoç ‘connected with danger' (IA).
⚫DER KIVSUvwdns 'dangerous' (Hp., Plb.), кivSuvɛúw [v.] 'to wage, take a risk' (IA),
whence кivбúvεvμa 'risk' (S., E., Pl.), -EUτns 'dare-devil' (Th., D. C.), -ευτкÓS
'dangerous, adventurous' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM The connection with кívdaž, óvo-кívdios (which do not belong to ▸ kivéw;
s.v.) is formally attractive. For the semantics, Prellwitz 1892 and Vendryes REGr. 25
(1912): 461f., compare Lat. solli-citus ‘to be in danger' < *to be wholly stirred'. See
also Taillardat REA 58 (1956): 189-194.

=== page 374 ===

700
KIVέW
Kiča入入nss-ov
701
Attempts at an IE etymology should be given up (thus still, e.g., Knobloch Glotta 53
(1975): 78-81), and the old etymology *kun-du-no-, кúwv being an unlucky cast of the
dice (older litt. in Frisk), should be discarded. The Pre-Greek character is clear in
view of the ending -ūv- in kívdūv (Alc., Sapph.), with its long u, as seen by Kuiper
1956: 217. Debrunner in Ebert 1924-1932: 526 and Kretschmer KZ 55 (1928): 90f., too,
are in favor of foreign (Pre-Greek or Anatolian) origin. Cf. Chantraine 1933: 208.
Kivéw [V.] 'to set in movement, drive away, shake' (II.). <IE *keih₂- set in motion'>
•VAR Aor. Kivñoal.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àva-, diα-, μετα-, ларα-, ovv-.
=
●Der kívnµa, kívηois 'movement, agitation' (IA), лapa-kivηµatikóç (Ph.), kivηtikós
'moving, movable' (IA), see Chantraine 1956a: 101; Kɩvηеµós movement' (Pi.), on the
mg. Benveniste 1935: 201; Kivá кívnσiç (Emp. 123, 2; Doric acc. to H.); кɩvητηp
'mover, agitator' (h. Hom., Pi.), of Poseidon; cf. Fraenkel 1910: 108; 153; Benveniste
1948: 39 and 42; thence кivητηpios (A.); кivητýs ‘id.' (Ar., Plb.); kívηepov (Poll.),
-ηpoν (Eust.) (stirring) spoon'; кɩvητýpιov 'brotheľ (Eup.; from кɩvɛĭv in an
obscene sense). A back-formation from ȧлo-кɩvεiv is árókɩvos [m.] name of a comic
dance (com.). Further кívvµai [v.] ‘to move (oneself), kɩvéoµať (Il.), only present
stem, incidentally with ¿v-, ¿л-, úлo- (Q. S.); an intensive enlargement in
кɩvúσσoμαι [v.] 'to be heavily moved, be excited' (A. Ch. 196; Schwyzer: 716), whence
кívuyua 'movable or light object, ball, toy' (A. Pr. 158 [anap.]).
ETYM Because of the athematic middle кívuμal, a pre-form *кivéƑ-w << *кi-vεv-f
has been assumed for the active Kivéw. The present кívuчaι is a poetic medium
tantum and means 'to move to and fro, to shake (intr.)' in Hom. (see García Ramón
1993b: 125-139), while the active кivéw occurs only in Attic (see Kölligan 2007: 35).
The non-presentic forms кɩvñσaι, etc. are analogical formations. LIV² s.v. *keih₂-
'sich in Bewegung setzen' follows Harðarson 1993b: 192 in assuming root final *h₂
account of the gloss кíατo. ÉкIVEĬTO 'moveď' (H.) and Hom. μεT-Eкía0ov 'followed'.
See Kiw, as well as ► σɛúw.
kɩvváßapɩ, -ɛws [n.] ‘cinnabar, vermilion' (Arist., Thphr.). <LW Orient.?>
on
•VAR Also -15 [m.] (Anaxandr. 14, Ps.-Dsc. 3, 143) ‘serpent's blood' (painter's color);
as a plant name = έpv0pódavov (Ps.-Dsc.).
⚫DER Kivvaẞápiov name of an eye ointment (Gal.), -ápivos 'cinnabar, vermilion'
(Arist.), -api w [v.] 'to be vermilion' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Foreign word from an unknown (but probably Oriental) source; cf. Schrader-
Nehring 1917(2): 701f. From Greek, Latin borrowed cinnabaris, whence MHG
zinober, etc. A remarkable by-form is τyуáßapı (Diocl. Com. 9, 10, Theognost. Can.
120, H.) with τууaßápivos (Dam. Isid. 203), perhaps with ki- > ki- > tsi-?
кɩváддov [n.] usually taken as 'cinnamon' (Hdt., Thphr.), but acc. to Hennig Klio
32 (1939): 325ff. some other kind of sweet-smelling substance. <LW Phoen.➤
•VAR Rarely -v-, also кívvaµov (Plin.), -v- (Nic. Th. 947).
•COMP As a first member in кivvaµwμo-pópoç (Str.), of yñ; кɩvvaµo-λóyos [m.]
"cinnamon-gatherer", name of a mythical bird (Plin.), also called кɩvváμwμov
(Arist.); see Thompson 1895 s.v.
●DER kɩvvaµwµíç [f.] a lesser kind of cinnamon (Gal.), kɩvvaµáµvos 'prepared with
cinnamon' (Antiph.), -µíw [v.] 'to be similar to cinnamon' (Dsc. 5, 121).
•ETYM From Phoenician (Hdt. 3, 111); cf. Hebr. qinnāmōn 'id.'. The ending was
modelled on that of the spice-plant äuwμov, or due to folk etymology, on that of
ǎuwμoç 'blameless'. See Lewy 1895: 37 and Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 695f.
=>
кīvu̟μα to move (intr.)'. → kivéw and кíw, as well as σɛúw.
кɩvúpa [f.] name of a stringed instrument (LXX, J.). ◄LW Hebr.➤
•ETYM Borrowed from Hebr. kinnōr 'cither' and adapted to kivupóç. See Lewy 1895:
164; also, Grimme Glotta 14 (1925): 19 and E. Masson 1967: 69².
kɩvupós [adj.] mg. uncertain; epithet of Boûs (P 5), of yóos (A. R. 4, 605), of rétηla
(Nonn. D. 38, 95). ◄?►
•DER Kɩv[v]upídeç. τà µiкpà ópvɩðápia (H.), apparently 'wailing, lamenting'; Kıvvpíšw
[v.] 'to wail, lament' (I 612, acc. to Zenodotus), кivúрoμαι [v.] 'to gnash, lament' (A.
Th. 123 [lyr.], Dict. 804, Ar. Eq. 11, A. R., Call.). PN Kivúpns (A 20), -pas (Tyrt.).
•ETYM The meaning was already unclear in antiquity; cf. H. on P 5: кivupŃ. ȧлaλń,
véa, λexw, oikτpá, Opyyytiký ‘weak, young, woman in childbed, pitiable woman,
inclined to lament' and (on A. R. 4, 605) KIVUρóv. λentóv, kaлupóv, ošú, oiktpóv
'small, crackly (of sound), i.a., sharp, pitiable'. The parallelism between kivupóç,
kivvpíšw, kɩvúpoµ and pó, µvúpíší, þýðµa 'to twitter, complain' is clear.
Other mixed forms are кɩvαíεɩv, -lõµós, ►кɩváɩσμа and кɩvαpúšɛσðaɩ. Opŋvɛïv
µετà τo уoууú v 'to lament together with grumbling' (H.), perhaps after
Kελapúчεiv (see Leumann 1950: 24137). Given the age of the attested forms, Leumann
(l.c.) considers only кivupóç and μvpíчw to be old; the other forms would have
arisen by contamination, as did μúpoµai.
kivúσoμa →KIVÉW.
кɩváлetov [n.] 'venomous animal, especially a snake' (Call. Jov. 25, Nic. Th. 27 and
195). <PG(V)►
⚫COMP кɩVшлηστns, -o [m.] ‘id.' (Nic. Th. 141), see below.
⚫ETYM Endings like in éρлετóν, аакεтóν, and ερлηστηç. Probably related to кvWY
'venomenous animal' (thus Persson 1891: 177). The vocalism points to Pre-Greek
origin; cf. on лIVUTÓÇ.
кižánc, -ov [m.] 'highway robber, pirate, thief (Democr. 260, SIG 38, 19 [Teos V³],
H.); Jo. Gramm. (in Hoffmann 1898: 208) has кɩττáλŋs = kλéntŋs (on the phonetics
see Schwyzer: 318). <PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. Kĺžaç. Toùç έv ódų Aŋσtaç 'thieves on the road' (Phot.).
•DER kı§aλλɛúw [v.] 'to commit robbery' (SIG l.c.), kıžaλλia. nãoa kakotɛxvía ‘any
malpractice' (H.).
•ETYM The formation is reminiscent of кaßáλλns, daµáλns, etc. Acc. to Hoffmann
1898: 612, the word was Anatolian (Carian/ Lycian), but it is a clear example of a Pre-
Greek word (alternations \\/ λ, ττ/ §). We could reconstruct PG *kikal-. See Fur.:
286.

=== page 375 ===

702
Kípa
Kíσłos
703
kípa [?] · áλónη§. Aάкwveç 'fox (Lacon.)' (H.). <PG➤
•VAR Kípaqoç. ȧλóлηĚ (H.).
⚫ETYM Frisk IF 49 (1931): 98f. connected it with кɩρpóç = лupρóc, έpupóç, žavós
'red, yellow', suggesting that it was adapted from кídaqoç. The form кipaqoç is from
kipa, extended by the animal suffix -qoç.
кípßa [f.]? · лýpa 'leather pouch' (H.). <PG>
⚫VAR MoGr. Kıpẞéλλa 'small sack'.
⚫ETYM Probably Pre-Greek; see Fur.: 305.
kɩpkaía [f.] scil. píla, 'black swallowwort, Vincetoxicum nigrum' (Dsc., Apollod.).
<PG➤
⚫VAR = ►Sipkaía.
•ETYM Probably Pre-Greek; see dipkaia.
Kipkιoç [m.] = Opaσкíaç, the north-northwest wind (Agathem.), = Lat. circius. <PG?>
•DIAL Kipкíaç (conjecture Arist.), also кépкιoç (v.l. Arist. Mu. 394b 31), Lat. cercius
(Cato).
•ETYM Unknown. Pre-Greek because of the variation? See Fur.: 356.
KíρKoç 1 [m.] a hawk or falcon (Hom., A., A. R.); see Thompson 1895 s.v. <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown; cf. on ►кpέ§.
Kípкoç 2 'circle, ring'. →кpíкoç.
kipvηµɩ → kɛpávvvu.
->
Kippiç →ȧkipíç.
Kippós [adj.] 'red-yellow, yellow-brown', said of olvoc, véкtap (Hp., Nic.), fem. Kippác
(Nic.). <?>
●COMP úлó-kɩppos (Hp., Dsc., Gal.), έy-kippos (Dsc.), kippo-εidńs (Apollod. Myth.).
●DER kɩppwdŋs (Hippiatr.); kɩppíç [f.] a sea fish (Opp.); cf. kòpíç s.v. ►knpós (kippá
[for kippa?] H.); also = ɛldoç iέpaкos ‘kind of hawk or falcon' (EM 515, 15); cf. kɛîpls.
öpvɛov, iépač, oi dè áλкvóva bird, hawk or falcon, kingfisher' (H.), whence Lat. cīris
'sea-bird', see WH s.v.; also кípis. ... opvɛov (H.).
⚫ETYM The geminate -pp- also occurs in лuppóç. Unexplained. The comparison
with Lith. širmas, šiřvas 'grey' is problematic, since Lith. -ir- is from a zero grade.
The group of CS sĕre 'grey' (see Derksen 2008 for a reconstruction), MIr. cíar 'dark',
etc. cannot be connected either for phonetic reasons.
Kɩpσóç [m.] 'varicocele' (Hp., Philostr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kpiσσóc (Hippiatr., H.), кpiós (Poll.).
•COMP As a first member in кipσo-кnλη 'varicocele', кɩρσo-τoµέw [v.] 'to operate a
varicocele', whence -ía.
●DER kɩpowdŋs ‘varicose', кɩpσóομαι [v.] 'to become varicose', act. -ów (causative
mg.), whence кipowʊis (med.).
⚫ETYM The variation σ(σ)/ \ shows that the word is Pre-Greek.
{
i
кíptos [adj.]? mg. unknown; corrected to σкipτos (Simon. 624 P). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
kipwv [adj.] · ȧdúvatos éρòç ovvovoíav. kai aidoiov ßλáßη. кaì àлɛokoλvµµévos kai
kupiws µèv ó oάtupos, kai évtεtaµévos, ó yuvaiкíaç, kai µǹ dvváµεvos xpñoðaι
‘unable to have intercourse; injury of the penis; stripped off; mainly used of a lewd
man, one who has a penile erection, a weakling, one who is unable to use iť (H.).
<?7
⚫DER DELG cites the PNs Kipoç, Kipwv, Kipwvidŋs (cf. Bechtel 1917b: 497).
•ETYM Unknown.
-KIÇ multiplicative suffix, in лoλλá-кı(s) ‘often' (Il.), tετpá-кɩ(s) ‘four times' (ε 306),
лεντá-кɩ(S) 'five times' (Pi.), etc. <IE *ki- 'something'>
•DIAL Epic, lyr., Dor. also -кt; Lacon. -кIv; Tarent. àµátis ‘once'.
•ETYM The word лоλλá-к(s) agrees in meaning with Ved. puru-cid 'often'. The
forms can be combined if we assume that the plural лoλλá ‘often' replaces older
*лoλ (which is unlikely), after which *k" was delabialized in Greek. This hypothesis
is confirmed by Tarent. άµá-τiç ‘once' = Cret. àµá-кıç (H.).
From лоλλáк(s), the forms in -к- spread to the numeral adverbs τετрáкι(S), etc.; cf.
tεtpáki(s),
also ovкí. The final consonant of -кıç, Skt. cid reminds one of the correspondence
Ews 'until': Skt. yávat (see on ►ws 2); Greek added adverbial *-s (cf. díc, tpic).
Etymologically, -k₁/ -ɩɩ = Skt. cid are identical with the indefinite pronoun à
'something'; see ►τíç.
KIÇ, KɩÓÇ [m.] ‘weevil' (Pi. Fr. 222, Thphr., gramm.). ◄ PG?►
•VAR Acc. Kiv; also nom. кíç (Hdn. Gr. 2, 925). On the accent see Schwyzer: 378 and
Berger MSS 3 (1953): 8; on the quantity of the 1 in kɩóç, etc. Schwyzer: 571.
L
●COMP άkiwτatoɩ least damaged by weevils' (Hes.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Skt. kīṭá- [m.] 'worm, insect' is unrelated; see Mayrhofer
EWAia s.v. Probably Pre-Greek.
кioŋpɩç [f.] ‘pumice stone' (Ar., Arist., Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kionis (pap., Luc.); gen. -ɛws, -idoç.
●DER_kɩσńpiov (EM), kionpo-eidńs and kioŋpwdys ‘like к.' (Diog. Apoll., Hell.);
kɩonpóoµai [v.] ‘to be changed into к.' (Thphr.), -pí(w [v.] 'to smoothen with к.'
(Nic. Dam.).
⚫ETYM On the matter, cf. Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 146. Fur.: 117 compares Car.
yíσσa and Caucasian (and Basque) forms. Without a doubt Pre-Greek, in view of the
variation p/ λ.
кíoƉoç [m.] ‘cistus', family of low shrubs, of which the seperate types often produce
the resin-like substance Andavov (Dsc.). <PG>
⚫VAR ALSO KIσOÓS (Eup., Mnesim.) and кíστoç (Hp., Gal.), кíσðapoç [m.] (Dsc.)
•DER ÚTOKIσðÍS (-τíc) f. ‘Cytinus hypocisthis', hypocist (Dsc., Gal.).
⚫ETYM The suffix of кíσðapos may be compared with кóµapos, кíσσapos, and other
plant names (Chantraine 1933: 227). The Cistus is a typical plant of the
mediterranean world. Fur.: 190, 25736 compares Ligurian kústi, MLat. custrus.

=== page 376 ===

704
KiσIPVIS
KIXávw
705
.
Kíσчpvɩç [?] •öpvɩç лotós 'kind of bird' (H.). <PG>
•VAR Cf. Kíσσɩɩs. ɛldos ópvéov ‘kind of bird' (H.); also kíσɩvdıç (Su.).
•ETYM Unknown. Pre-Greek has additional words with a nasal added after p; see
Fur: 48126, 21562, and 387.
кíσлpa [?] · „кpà tò ñƉos, naλíукoτoç. Koɩ ‘bitter disposition, spiteful (Cos)' (H.).
1?7
⚫ETYM Bechtel 1921, 2: 599 compares (with due reservation) Osc. kaispatar, of which
the meaning is unknown. Pre-Greek?
Kíσσα 1 [f.] 'jay, Garrulus glandarius', also 'magpie, Pica caudata' (Ar.); see Thompson
1895 S.V.; also ¿õеñç noós ‘kind of fish' (H.); on the motivation of the name
Strömberg 1943: 115. <ONOM▷
•VAR Att. Kitta.
=
•DER KIσσaßí¢w (-ɩɩ-) [v.] ‘to cry like a jay' (Poll.), cf. tittvßíčw, etc.; also kɩσσάw, see
· kioga 2.
•ETYM By comparison with vñσσa 'duck' and other animal names (Chantraine 1933:
98), one scholar reconstructed PGr. *kikia, derived from an onomatopoeic root. For
this sound-imitation, bird names like Skt. kiki- (lex.), kikidīví- [m.] (RV 10, 97, 13,
TS) 'blue jay', and Gm. names like OE higora 'magpie' can be compared; the latter
were apparently not restored after Grimm's Law.
Kíσσa 2 [f.] morbid longing of pregnant women, craving for strange food (Dsc., S. E.,
Sor., Gal.). <GR➤
•VAR Att. KITTA.
●DER KIOσάw, KITTάw [v.] 'to suffer from к.' (Ar., Arist.), 'to become pregnant' (LXX),
whence кioσnois (Gal.). kiσowdns 'full of кioσa' (Dsc.).
▶
•ETYM The age and frequency of the attestations suggest that кíσσa 2 is a back-
formation from кɩσσáw. The form кɩσσάw itself is a denominative of кíσσa 1 ‘jay,
magpie', and refers to the well-known gluttony of the bird (öpvɛov ádŋoáyov kai
лaupáуov, sch. Ar. Pax 496); thus, кɩσσάw originally means 'to behave like a
magpie'. The connection with Skt. kéta- ‘will, desire' must therefore be given up. The
gloss кoitaι yuvaкãν εлеvíαι longing of/for women' is only an incidental use of
коíτη 'marital bed, sexual intercourse'.
кɩσσós [m.] ‘ivy, Hedera helix' (IA). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Att. KITTÓC.
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. кɩσσo-o̟ópos 'having ivy' (Pi., Ar.); also as a
second member, e.g. кaτá-кɩσσoç 'crowned with ivy' (Anacreont.).
⚫DER Diminutive Kɩσσíoν = ȧσкληлáç (Ps.-Dsc.); кíσσɩvos of ivy' (Pi., E.), kɩσσŃɛis
‘id.' (Nic., Nonn.), on the formation Schwyzer: 527; kɩoowdŋs ‘enveloped with ivy’
(Nonn.); кɩσσɛúç epithet of Apollo (A. Fr. 341); кɩσσóv 'forest with ivy' (Hdn. Gr.),
kioσapos = kiooós (gloss.). Denominative кɩσσów (Att. -ɩɩ-) [v.] 'to crown with ivy'
(E., Alciphr.), whence кíττwσιç (Attica).
•ETYM Pre-Greek. See Fur.: 256, who compares кɩápa in the sense of ‘ivy' (Ps.-Dsc.);
and ibid. 25736 on the suffix -apos in Pre-Greek words. We may reconstruct a form
PG *kity-.
кɩσσúßɩov [n.] name of a wooden drinking-cup (Od., Theoc., Call.), on the matter see
Brommer Herm. 77 (1942): 358 and 365f. <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kiσσútov (IG 2², 1424a: 265), acc. to Frisk after the diminutives in -úqtov,
but see below.
⚫ETYM The ancients connected it with кɩσσóç, either after the material (Eumolp.
apud Ath. 11, 477a) or after the ornamentation (Poll. 6, 97). The word is Pre-Greek
because of the variation / Q, as seen by Schwyzer: 316 and 470; see also Debrunner
in Ebert 1924-1932 4:2, §46 and Fur.: 170.
кÍστη [f.] 'basket, chest' ((76, Ar.). <EUR>
•COMP As a first member in кɩστα-pópоç 'basket bearer', -έw [v.] (Thrace,
Macedon.), KIσTO-εidns 'like a chest' (H. s.v. oyкíov).
●DER Diminutive kɩotís [f.] (Hp., Ar.), kiotídiov (Artem.).
ETYM MIr. cess [f.] 'basket, causeway of wickerwork, bee-hive', OW cest [f.] gl.
fiscina point to a pre-form QIE *kisteh₂-. If these are conneted with Gr. кíστη, the
most likely scenario is a European loanword. From кíστη was borrowed Lat. cista,
whence most European forms, e.g. Ir. ciste [m.], OHG kista, etc.
кíτpɩov [n.] ‘citron tree (Citrus medica), citron' (Juba, J., Epidauros II³, Dsc.). <LW
Lat.
•VAR Also Kíτpov 'citron' (Pamphil. apud Ath. 3, 85c).
●COMP KIṬpio-Eldńs (Gal.), kitpó-µηλov ‘id.' (Dsc., Gp.).
•DER KÍτpivoç 'belonging to the citron tree' (D. C.), also кíτpɛos (pap. VI³); kitpέa
[f.] 'citron tree' (Gp.), after unλéα, etc.; кɩτρãτov 'citron drink' (Alex. Trall.).
•ETYM From Lat. citrium, citrum, citreus, citrātus, which all go back to citrus 'citron
tree', which itself is somehow connected with Gr. ►кédpos and perhaps came from
Greek via Etruscan. See WH s.v. citrus with litt.
кíqoç [n.] Messenian for σtéqavos (Paus. 3, 26, 9). ◄PG?(V)►
●COMP σkiqa-tóμos 'who cuts σкíqa' (IG 5(1), 212: 63 [Sparta Iª]), perhaps palms, for
Vivo OtÉpavol.
⚫DER σKIQívov. nλéуµa έк qoívɩкoç 'plaiting of palm' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained; perhaps Pre-Greek because of the varying anlaut.
кɩxάvw [v.] ‘to reach, attain, hit, meet with' (II.). ◄IE *gheh,- 'leave, abandon'>
•VAR Att. Kiyxắvw; several aorists: a) athem. (¿кíxηv), -xels, (¿)kixnuev, subj. kɩxɛiw,
opt. -xεíŋv, inf. кɩx½µεvαι, -xñvαι, ptc. кɩxεíç, -è̟é̟µεvos; b) them. 3sg. čкixεv, 3pl.
čkɩxov, subj. kíxw, kíxŋoɩ, inf. kɩxɛĩv, ptc. kɩxŵv; c) sigmatic кixǹσaτo, act. ptc.
kixńoas (B. 5, 148); d) Dor. čкižε = ŋvɛyкε (Simm. 26, 7), ánékičav (Ar. Ach. 869;
Boeot.), кíεavτεç ελóτεç, лорεετε having come, been driven or carried',
kížato. ɛūpev, ëλaßεv, ηvεyкεv ‘found, took, broughť (H.); fut. кixñσoµai.
•DER кíxησiç η Añчç 'taking hold' (H.).

=== page 377 ===

706
KĺXAN
•ETYM From a reduplicated root present *кinμ (likė τíðŋµ), found in кíxημεv,
kixýtnv, etc. (¿kixɛis after ¿tíðɛis), which were taken as aorists when the new present
кIXάvw arose. Innovations are the them. aor. кɩXεv, etc. and sigmatic кɩxησατo,
whence fut. кixnσoμa (Il.). Doric created a different s-aorist in кiɛ. The form
KIXάvw arose at a recent date after the analogy of qávw to еηy, σo; the
nasal infix in kɩyxávw was modelled on λaußávw, etc., on which see Schwyzer: 6885,
698, as well as Chantraine 1942: 300, 392, 415, 446.
Except for the reduplication vocalism, *êíxηµµ < PIE *ghi-gheh,- corresponds nicely to
Skt. jáhāti 'to leave (behind), abandon', Av. zazāiti ‘to let go'; Skt. also has an old
root aorist ahās. It is unclear whether the Gm. verb for ‘go' belongs here: OHG, OE
gān, ON gá (the same development of meaning is found in Skt. med.3sg. jíhīte, 3pl.
jíhate 'to go on, go away'). Remote cognates from the same root are supposed in
► xášoliai, ‣ xatéw, ►xńpa, ‣ xwpos. Ruijgh and Van Krimpen Mnem. 22 (1969): 113-
136 read the older meaning 'to abandon' in Myc. ke-ke-me-na /khekhemenǎ/ 'deserted
(land)'. They suggest that the transition in meaning occurred in sporting contests,
where a runner reaches and leaves, i.e. passes, another runner. LIV² considers кixávw
together with Arm. gam 'I come', OE gan 'to go', and the other Gm. words under
*gheh,- 'kommen, erreichen' (with plain velar because of Armenian). This seems less
attractive than the connection with Indo-Iranian, which is formally and semantically
impeccable.
Kixλn [f.] 'thrush' (X 468); also name of a fish, a kind of wrasse (Epich., Arist.), because
it changes its color with the seasons, like the thrush; see Strömberg 1943: 116.
<PG(V)►
•VAR Younger Kixλă (Alex. Trall., Gp.), see Solmsen 1909: 260; Dor. кixnλa (Epich.
157, Ar. Nu. 339). Cf. ïxλa. кíxλa (H.). and ĭoкλaɩ = кíxλai (H.).
•DER KIXÀí\w [v.] ‘to giggle, laugh' (Ar., Theoc., Herod.), kixλioµóç; kixλid-iáw [v.] ‘to
have a desire to giggle' (Com. Adesp. 1038; not quite certain).
•ETYM Hardly belongs to Xελidwv. A by-form is "xλa (H.); the initial variation
points to a Pre-Greek word. See Thompson 1895 s.v. (also on the different names of
the bird), as well as Fur.: 130 on кixńλa.
кíxopa [n.pl.] 'chicory, Cichorium intybus' (Nic. Al. 429, where i verse-initially). <?,
PG?>
•Var kɩxópŋ [f.] (Thphr.), кɩxópiov [n.] (Thphr., Dsc., Plin.), -ta [pl.] (Ar. Fr. 293),
perhaps for -ɛα = Lat. cichorea [pl.]?
->
ETYM No etymology. See DNP s.v. cichorie, stating that the plant grows in the
Mediterranean area. Is the word Pre-Greek? However, one type of chicory comes
from Egypt.
кíxpηu [v.] 'to lend', med. 'to borrow from' (D., Plu.). <?►
•VAR Impv.3sg. кIXρέτw, etc. (Delph. IV³), ¿σкɩxpεμev [inf.] (Thess. IIIa); also
kívõpŋtɩ ‘gives an oracle' (Cret. IIª), med. kíxpaµaɩ (Thphr., Plu., AP), aor. Xpñσaɩ,
Xpσaσaɩ and fut. Xpηow, -oµai (IA), perf. кéxpèкa (Hell.), -ŋµai (D.).
•COMP Rarely with prefix diα-, εлɩ-, Éσ'-.
●DER kíxpŋois (Tz.).
į
kdayyn
707
•ETYM Like Sídŋu next to dñoai, dńow (see ▸déw 1), the presents кíprµi, kixpaµai
arose as innovations of the aorist xpñσal and other sigmatic forms. We must start
from a middle aorist xpησασða with original mg. 'to use', from which a factitive
active xpñσa 'to give in use' = 'borrow' was created; later, xpηoaσat also came to
mean 'to borrow from'. See XPN.
Kíw [V.] 'to set in movement', intr. 'to start to move, move away' (Hom., A.). <IE
*keih₂- 'set in movement'>
•VAR Present 2sg. кíɛç (A. Ch. 680), further only preterite and non-indicative forms:
ĚKɩε (Kĺε), кíoμεv, кíov, ipv. кíɛ, subj. кíηç, opt. кíoɩ, ptc. кióv. With enlargement -0-:
µet-ɛkíaðɛ, -ov ‘followed after, visiteď. (II.), with ĩ by metrical lengthening; for the
vocalism cf. кíατo· έкivεĭto ‘moved (intr.)' (H.).
•ETYM Except for two occurences in Aeschylus, the verb is only epic. Originally a
thematic root aorist, interpreted as an imperfect, kiɛ received incidental present
forms (see Chantraine 1942: 392f.), and it came to serve as a metrical variant for the
imperfect of εчu (Kölligan 2007: 162f.). The nasal present ►кívuμat, kivέw was felt
to be closely connected with oɛúw. On kɩα- < *kih₂-e-, see on Kivéw. Cf. Strunk
1967: 88, 100, 114. Outside Greek, the root is only found in Latin, which has a to-
derivative citus quick', originally 'set in motion' (for which cf. con-citus, solli-citus,
etc.), while the present cière (next to (ac)cire) probably developed from a causative;
see De Vaan 2008 s.v.
Kiwv, -ovos [m., f.] 'column, pillar', also metaph. (Od.); as a medical term 'cartiledge,
wart' (Hp.). ◄IE *(s)kiHu- ‘shin, post’▷
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer: 486, Schwyzer 1950: 37.
•COMP As a first member in кlovó-кpavov 'capital of a column' (v.l. in Str. 4, 4, 6; D.
S.) beside earlier and more usual кtó-кpāvov (Pl. Com., X., Delos IIIª, etc.), by
haplology. Further άкpо-, τετрα-, μετα-, лро-кóν-чov (Ph.).
⚫DER Diminutives кtóvtov (Ph. Bel.), -íoкoç (Hero, J.), -íç ‘uvula' (medic.).
•ETYM Identical with Arm. siwn 'column' < *kiwōn-, which like Greek reflects an n-
stem. One of the traditional exclusive correspondences between Greek and
Armenian, but the word has now also been recognized in other branches (see
Lubotsky JAOS 112 (2002)): Skt. aṣṭhīvánt- [m.] ‘shank, shin'; YAv. ascuua- [m.]
‘shank, shin' < *asciua- reflect a compound PIIr. *ast-(s)čiHua- < QIE *h¸est-
(s)ki Hu-shin-bone'; further, OE scia [m.] 'shin, leg', scinu [f.] 'shin' and MHG schie
[f.] 'post', OHG skena, skina [f.] ‘id.' can be traced back to a PGm. paradigm *skiō,
*skinaz (Kroonen 2009); finally, Balto-Slavic forms like Lith. šeivà [f.] ‘spool,
forearm, shin' and SCr. cijev ‘tube, spool, shin-bone' point to PIE *koiH-u-, with
depalatalization of the initial *k- due to the s-mobile. Note that WGm. *skinō is
reminiscent of the n-stem in Gr. and Arm.; still, the semantic shift to 'pillar' may
point to a common development.
кλayyń [f.] ‘(shrill) sound, cry of an animal, etc.' (Il.). ◄ EUR?, ONOM?►
•VAR Also kλayyóv ‘id.' (Babr.); dat. also kλayy-í (Ibyc. 56; see below).
•DER kλayyŋdóv ‘accompanied by crying' (B 463), kλayywdŋs 'full of sound, shrill’
(Hp., Gal.). Further кλá¢w [v.] ‘sound, resound, cry' (Il.), also with prefix, e.g. ȧva-,

=== page 378 ===

708
Kλadapós
έk-; aor. кλáyžαɩ, also kλayɛïv (B. 16, 127, h. Hom. 19, 14, E., et al.), fut. кλάyšw (A.),
perf. kekλýyovtes (Aeolizing) and kekλnyws, -wtes (Hom.), see Chantraine 1942:
430f.; кéкλāya (Alcm. 7), кéкλayya (Ar., X.), perfect future кεкλáyžoµaι (Ar.).
Isolated presents: кλayyaívw (A. Eu. 131), -ávw (S.), -éw (Theoc. Ep. 6, 5), -á¶w (Poll.,
Porph.). To кλayɛīv: кλayɛpóç 'crying' (AP).
ETYM As a yod-present, кλáčw may derive from *кλáyу-дw, from a root noun.
Kλáyy-seen in the dat. Kλayy-í (or is this an innovation?). However, perhaps we are
dealing with a primary nasal present, which took (w from other sound-verbs
(óλoλú¶w, oiµw¶w, etc.; cf. Schwyzer: 716). The non-presentic forms kλáyžaɩ,
kλáyłw, kékλayya are innovations in any case. Kλayyn functions as a verbal noun. It
is possible that kλауyɛīv and кéкληya are original primary forms without a nasal
infix, but analogical innovation with loss of the nasal is possible too.
Material for comparison is provided by Lat. clangō 'to cry' (almost only present),
which has a counterpart in ON hlakka ‘to cry' (kk < *nk). Note that a pre-form *klag-
is impossible (PIE did not have *a, and *klh₂g- would have resulted in Greek *кλāy-).
Schwyzer: 692 assumes expressive nasalization, but this does not help, as *кλǎy-
cannot be explained in this way. Cf. Fur. 274.
Wrong analysis in Pok. 599 and LIV²; the alternations cannot be accounted for in an
Indo-European framework. The root must have been adopted from a non-IE
language. See кλww.
kλadapós [adj.] ‘invalid, infirm³, of dopátia (Plb. 6, 25, 5; beside λεлtá), of káµakes
(AP 9, 322 beside äkλaσtoɩ; v.l. klaµapaí), of ypaµǹ (wŋyópos (in palmistry, Cat.
Cod. Astr. 7, 241). ◄PG(V)►
•COMP As a first member in кλadapópuуxos 'kind of peewit' (Ael., H.),
kλadapóµiatoi. evoelotoi tà őµµiata liable to shaking in the eyes (?)' (H.).
•DER Further кladáσaι· σɛt̃σaɩ, kladáɛɩ· σɛíɛɩ, kɩvɛi ‘shakes, moves' (H.);
kladáσσqµai [v.] ‘to rustle, bubble, vel sim.', of sweet blood (répɛv aqua) through
the members (Emp. 100, 22); but Lobeck 1843: 899 corrects into kλvdáσσoµai;
Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 224 assumes influence of tapáσow.
ETYM For the suffix, compare other expressions for 'invalid, weak', like лλadaрóc,
yaqapós, xaλapós, λaлapós (Chantraine 1933: 227); кλadapós to кλadáw is like
лλαбарóç to лλadáw, xalapós to xaλáw, etc. Ultimately, it might be related to
►кλάdoç, as well as to кpadáw. The gloss кpádaλoť kλádo ‘branches' (H.) then
suggests that these words are Pre-Greek, with interchange p/ λ.
кláбoç [m.] 'branch, twig, sprout' (IA, Arist., Thphr.). <PG?, IE? *kļdo- '(piece of)
wood'>
•VAR Also a few cases of monosyllabic кλad- in кλad-í, kλád-a, -aç, and of an s-stem
in kλádɛoɩ, -éɛσσɩ, -έwv (perhaps after dévdpɛσi).
•COMP ỏλɩуó-kλados (Thphr.), kλado-toµéw (pap.).
●DER Diminutives кλádiov (Lib., pap.) and kladioкoç (Gal.); kladɛwv (Orph.),
kλadóv (H.) = kλádoç; kλadódne ‘full of branches' (sch., Eust.), кλádivoç = rameus
(gloss.). Denominative кλadɛúw (v.] 'to cut off branches, clip' (Artem., -έw Arr.),
whence кλάdevoç (Aq., Sm., Gp.), кλadɛía (Gp.) ‘cutting off branches, clipping',
i
}
kλaμapáv
709
kλadevtýpia [pl.] ‘pruned leaves' (gloss.), kλadevτýs ‘pruner' (gloss.), kladevtýpiov,
-ta 'pruning knife, pruning festival' (H.).
⚫ETYM Connection with *kelh₂- 'to hit, cut off (see kλáw) cannot explain the Greek
form, which presupposes a root *kld-. Connection with the Germanic word for
'wood', ON OE holt [n.], etc., to which also belongs the Slav. group of CS klada, Ru.
kolóda 'log, block of wood', suggests itself. However, it may be accidental that all
forms can be derived from *kļdo-, since кλádos can also be connected within Greek
with ▸кpadáw, which points to an interchange p/ λ and therefore to substrate origin.
Kuiper 1956: 121f connected кládos with кlóv, кλwvač, with nasalization
(replacement of a stop by the nasal of that series) of the d; cf. кλŵvač: кλádoc (H.).
Lat. clādēs 'destruction, etc.' requires *klh₂-deh,- and is therefore unrelated.
Independent of кλádoç is the d-formation of кλadapós 'invalid'; further, kaλadía.
έukávò ‘plane' (H.; LSJ and Frisk s.v. give puкávη ‘plane-tree', but this lemma does
not exist), with different ablaut grade.
кλάw 'to sounď. → kλayyń.
Kλaíw [V.] 'to lament, bewail, weep over' (Il.). <IE?, PG? *klau- 'weep'➤
•VAR Att. also kλάw, aor. кλañσai (II.), pass. кλav(σ)еñvaι (Lyc., J.), fut. кλaúσoμαι
(Il.), kλavow (Theoc.), kla(1) now (Att.; cf. Chantraine BSL 28 (1927-1928): 15),
perhaps also kλavσoúμεеa (Ar. Pax 1081; cf. Schwyzer: 786), perf. кéкλavμaι (A., S.),
-σai (Lyl., Plu.), fut. кεкλαúσo̟μαi (Ar.).
•COMP Rarely with prefixes, e.g. μεta-, ovv-.
●DER 1. Kλavėµóç ‘weeping' (Il.), with several derivatives: кλavеµádŋs broken as if
by weeping' (Hp.), кλavеµŋpós ‘weeping' (sch.), кλavеμóv 'place for weeping'
(LXX); кλavеμvpíšoµai, -íw [v.] ‘to moan' (Hp., [Pl.] Ax.), a cross of кλavеμóç and
μúpoμα, with suffixation after the verbs in -íoμa (cf. Schwyzer: 644), to which
кλavеµvpiσµós (Is., Plu.). 2. кλαúμаτа [n.pl.] 'moaning, lamenting' (Att.),
кλaúσματα (Porph.). 3. kλavµovaí [f.pl.] ‘id.' (Pl. Lg. 792a; acc. to Stob. kλavėµovaí),
cf. ŋµovaí. 4. kλañoɩ ‘weeping' (Hell.), whence кλavoiáw [v.] ‘to long to weep' (Ar.
Pl. 1099), kλavoí-yɛλws [m.] ‘weeping combined with laughing' (X.). 5. kλavotĤp
‘crier' (Man.) and kλavotiкós (Apoll. Lex.); kλav(σ)tós (A., S.). Highly uncertain is
the present кλaúðovtai (PTeb. 3, 7; epigram), perhaps an ad-hoc poetic formation,
cf. Schwyzer 703.
•ETYM The present derives from *кλáάƑ-дw, as is obvious from кλαú-σoμαι, кλav-
Quóc, etc. Alb. klan, qan 'to weep' from *klau-n-io, with a combination of nasal and
yod-suffix, is the only comparison that suggests itself; cf. Mann Lang. 26 (1950): 381.
If the word is IE, we may mechanically reconstruct *kleh₂u-. However, since there is
no further connection with any IE language, the word could be Pre-Greek.
.
kλaµapáv [acc.sg.f.]? • ëλaðapáv, à¤¤εvñ ‘weak, feeble” (H.). <PG?►
VAR Also кλauаpaí as a v.l. for кλadapaí (AP 9, 322).
•ETYM Belonging to the same semantic group as kλadapóç, kλaµapós has the
appearance of an expressive innovation. The comparison with Skt. klámyati ‘to get
tired' and other words mentioned in Pok. 602f. is not very attractive.

=== page 379 ===

710
Kλaμẞóç
KAEIÇ
711
кλaµßós [adj.] ‘cocked, cropped' (of wτa, Hippiatr.). <PG>
•ETYM Formation like кoλoßós ‘id.”, σкaµßós ‘crooked', etc. (Chantraine 1933: 261).
The similarity with Lith. klumbas limping, stumbling' (to klùbti 'to stumble'), OE
lempi-healt 'limping', which Specht 1944: 130f. connected wih кλaußóc, is probably
accidental. The word is typically Pre-Greek; cf. on σkaµẞóç.
кλαчvστñσαι [v.] ·ẞoñσaι, кaλéσai 'to cry aloud, call' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM The formation in -vo-τέw could be denominative from -vστós, ppp. to
*кλaμúчw, which would be formed like кɛλapúčw, yoyyúчw, etc. This form was
connected with Lat. clāmāre 'to call loudly, cry', OHG hlamōn 'to rustle', but this is
not possible since the Greek a is short. The word looks rather Pre-Greek.
Kλavíov [n.] 'bracelet' (pap. imperial period). <PG(V)>
•VAR Also Kλávov, кλáλtov (after чéλov? rejected by Fur. 13160); кλavía⋅ чéλia
ẞpaxióvwv 'bracelets for the arms', also кλap<i>a. yéλia armlets or anklets' (H.),
probably by dissimilation. Cf. Xλavíaι· лɛpißoλaí ‘garment' (Fur. 131 objects that this
word belongs rather to Xλavic) and Xλavítidɛç. oi öpμoɩ лаpеέvwv 'maidens'
necklaces' (H.).
•ETYM Connection with кλáw seems improbable, in spite of кλaστós 'frizzly head',
εукλαστpídia earring'. The forms with X- have been explained away by assuming.
association with xλavíc ‘upper garment', but see Fur. 131, who argues that xλavítɩdeç
cannot be explained in any such way. The variation between voiceless and aspirate
shows the Pre-Greek origin of the word. Fur. 388 further compares éλavíç. tò tñS
výµés xvσov dɩádnµa ‘golden headband of the bride' (H.).
кλáлaι [f.pl.] ‘wooden shoes' (D. C. 77, 4, Suid.); also euphemistically ‘stick', as a
means of punishment (sch., Tz.). <?>
VAR Also -o [m.pl.].
•ETYM No etymology. Perhaps sound-symbolic, after the clattering?
Kλắw [V.] 'to break (off)' (II.). <PG?>
•Var έvi-kλāv, kat-ékλwv (Il.), aor. kλáo(σ)al, pass. кλασ¤ñvaɩ (II.), athem. ptc.
ảлo-kλáç (Anacr. 17), fut. кλάow, perf. pass. kékλaσµai (IA).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, kata-, ɲɛpi-, oUV-.
•DER Kλáσıç 'breaking' (IA), кλáoµa 'broken piece' (Att.) with кλaσµáτov (Delos
IIIª), àva-кλaσµóç ‘bending back' (Heliod.), кλáστηs. àµлελoυруóç 'vine-dresser'
(H.), also oστo-кλάστηs (Cyran.), etc., кλαστηplov knife for clipping the vine'
(Delos IIª); secondarily kλaστášw [(v.] 'to clip the vine', metaph. 'to chastize' (Ar. Eq.
166). On кλwv, kλwvóc [m.] 'sprout' (Att.), see s.v.; on кλμaž, ȧлóкλwμа see
below. With different ablaut grade: ►кλñµα 'twig, tendril of the vine', кÀñpoç
(kλãpoc) ‘lot, ► kλwμαε heap of stones', áлóкλwµα. άñoλoyía ¿ïì tò xεipov 'defense
on behalf of an inferior' (H.). Very doubtful is the appurtenance of Kλa oµεvaí TN
(Anatolia), which acc. to Fraenkel KZ 42 (1909): 256; Fraenkel KZ 43 (1910): 216
would be a "place where the waves break" (just fantasy).
•ETYM The verbal system is based on *kla(s)- and may be the result of analogical
developments. There is an IE root *kelh₂- 'to hit, strike' (LIV² s.v.), to which belong
Lith. kálti, 1sg. kalù 'to beat', Latv. kalt ‘id.', OCS klati, 1sg. koljo 'to kill', Ru. kolóť' 'to
prick, stab', which point to Proto-BSl. *kolH-, as well as Lat. -cellō ‘to hit' < *-k(e)l-n-
h₂- (De Vaan 2008 s.v.). LIV² states that άãoкλάç may have been built on the
generalized stem *klā- and replaced older athematic *kalant- < *klh₂-ent- (cf.
Taλavτ-), but there are no indications for this within Greek, so it should be rejected.
It is unclear how we can derive any of the above forms from a root *kelh₂-.
Chantraine 1942: 354 considers the present кλáw to be secondary as opposed to the
aorist кλάoa. The passive aorist кλασva seems to suggest a root *klad-
(Schwyzer: 761), but analogical extension of the aorist stem kλaσ- is more likely
(Chantraine 1942: 404f.). Since there is no good etymology, the verb may well be
Pre-Greek. See кλaðapóç, ►кládos, ► kóλoç.
=
кλɛɩvós 'famous'. → kλćoç.
Kλɛíç [f.] 'bar, bolt' (secondarily 'rowing bench', Leumann 1950: 209), 'hook, key,
collar bone' (Att.). <IE *klehu- 'lock'>
•VAR Gen. kλɛdóç, acc. кλɛiv (late kλɛīda), older kλýs, kλŋdós, kλñАα (on the
notation Schwyzer: 201f.), epic Ion. kλŋïç, -ïdoç, -ïda, Dor. кλäïç, -îdos beside -ídos
(Simon., Pi.; perhaps Aeol., cf. Schwyzer: 465); also кλά (Theoc.), gen. kλaɩkoç, acc.
-кa (Epid., Mess.).
•DIAL Myc. ka-ra-wi-po-ro /klawi-phoros/.
●COMP кλε-OXOs (or кλnd-) [m., f.] 'key-holder' (inscr.), кatα-кλɛíç, -kλŋïç lock,
case, quiver' (Att.), from кατα-кλɛíw.
•DER Diminutives кλadíov (Ar., Arist.); кλεdãç [m.] ‘locksmith' (pap., inscr.,
imperial period); late denominative кladów (Smyrna, pap.), whence кλɛidwoɩç
(sch.), -wμa (Suid.).
Old denominative kλɛíw [v.] 'to shut, block' (often with prefix, especially àлo-,
кaτα-, σvv-), OAtt. кληw, Ion. кλ½ïw (Hdt.), late kλýšw (Hymn. Is., AP), Theoc.
кλάw, aor. epic Ion. кληsioαɩ, кλησσαι (Оd.), OAtt. кλñoαι, Att. кλɛīσαι, pass.
кλŋïo¤ñvaι (Ion.), kλŋośñvaɩ, kλɛio¤ñvai (Att.), kλασñvaι (Theoc.), fut. кλnow
(Th.), кλɛíow, perf. кéкληкα (Ar.), кékλɛкa (Hell.), med. кékλŋuai (-ý¨ïµai),
кéкλεчμαι, Dor. кéкλavτaι (Epich.); after this Dor. aor. кλααɩ, кλāžaɩ, pass.
kλαɩxēɛíç, fut. kλάšā (Theoc., Rhod.), backformed present ƒot-kλάyw (Heracl.).
Thence кλ½ïеpov, кÀÃ¤ρov, кλεïеpov, kλã¤pov ‘lock, block' (IA, h. Merc. 146, Dor.),
кλεеpíov (Hero), кλaеpía 'keyhole' (Luc.), kλáïσtpov (Pi.), kλɛïotpov (Luc.) 'lock',
kλñolç, kλɛioɩç (Th., Aen. Tact.), кλɛt̃oµa, kλɛoµóç (Hell.); also ȧлóкλησɩç, etc. from
ало-кλɛíw, etc.; verbal adj. кλŋïotós, kaŋotós, кλяστóç (еpic IA), кλαιкτóç
(кλαкTÓC) 'what can be locked' (Argiv., Mess.). On кλεσíov see кλívw.
•ETYM IA kλŋ(Ƒ)ī-d- and Dor. kλā(F)ī-к- are enlargements of an i-stem that is still
found in denominative кλniw. Att. кλɛiv can be explained as analogical to кλɛíç <
кλýs (after vaūç: vauv, etc.). A corresponding formation is found in Lat. clāvus ‘nail,
pin', next to clāvis ‘key, block', with the same meaning as the derivation кλŋïç. The
Latin forms presuppose an old root noun *kleh₂u-, while Greek made an i-stem
*kleh₂u-iH-, just as кvηuí-8- is based on кvηµη, and Xεpi-d- on xɛip (cf. Chantraine
1933: 346f.). Further, there is a Celtic group, perhaps borrowed from Latin, or simply

=== page 380 ===

712
k入eloiov
inherited (which is equally possible): OIr. cló, plur. clói ‘nail', MW clo [m.] 'lock,
bolt'. Slavic has a number of words pointing to *kleu-, which has to replace *klaHu-:
OCS ključu 'key', SCr. kljuka 'hook, key, clamp', etc. The original meaning of the
word was probably 'nail, pin, hook', instruments that were traditionally used for
locking doors.
=
кλɛσíov ‘hut, sheď. → кλívw.
кλετopíç, -ídos [f.] 'clitoris' (Ruf., H., Suid.). <IE *klei- 'lean'>
•DER kλeitopiá【w [v.] 'to touch the clitoris' (id.).
•ETYM A medical term, formed like åλɛкτopíç from ȧλéкτwp, άкɛστopię from
άкéστwp, etc. We may assume an original meaning “small hill”, from *кλɛíτwp ‘hill'
(known as the name of an Arcadian town), a verbal noun from ►кλívw ‘to lean,
incline'. For the semantics, cf. кλɛttúç ‘slope, hill, Lat. clīvus 'hill'. See Grošelj Živa
Ant. 3 (1953): 201; also, Schwyzer: 5312 and Benveniste 1948: 34.
кλετÓS 'famous'. → Kλúw.
KAɛíw 1 'to celebrate'. → Kλéos.
=>
KAɛíw 2 'to lock'. → Kλɛíç.
кλεµµú, ú¢ [ƒ.] 'turtle' (Ant. Lib. 32, 2, H.). <PG(V)►
ETYM The formation is similar to that of synonymous Xελuç, èμúc. Probably a
foreign word; speculations in Frisk about folk-etymological adaptation to кλεµµα,
кλелτw 'to conceal', because turtles can hide their body under their shell. Acc. to
Güntert 1914: 144, it is a cross of εµús and unattested *кλwµóc, which would
correspond to Skt. kūrmá- ‘turtle', with -µµ- from кλεµµα. This is too far-fetched.
Fur.: 131 compares кpέµuç ‘a fish with a hard head' and xpéµuç. ó óvíσкoç ixеús kind
of gadus or coď (H.); these variants confirm that the word is Pre-Greek. On
geminates in substrate words, see Fur.: 387, where this word can be added.
Kλéos [n.] 'rumour, fame, renown, reputation' (II.). <IE *kleu-s- 'word, fame'>
•VAR Phoc. KλÉFOS.
●COMP Especially in PNs, e.g. Kλɛo-µεvès (shortname Kλćoµ(µ)₁s), with transition to
the o-stems, beside Kλε-00évηs (from *KλεƑεσ- or *KλEFI-σ0évès), Tчo-кλéƑNS
(Cypr.), etc.; see Fick & Bechtel 1894: 162ff., Bechtel 1917b: 238ff.; on -kλéaç for
-кλéns in Thess., etc. see Kretschmer Glotta 26 (1938): 37.
⚫DER Adjective Kλεvóç, Aeol. кλéɛvvos (< *кλεƑεσ-vóc) 'famous' (Sol., Pi.), with PN
Kλɛvíaç, etc. Enlargement after the nouns in -(11) dwv (cf. Schwyzer: 529f.,
Chantraine 1933: 361): кλɛŋdwv, -óvos [f.] (Od.), kλnndwv (8 312; metrical
lengthening), кλŋdóv (Hdt., trag.) ‘fame, (divine) pronouncement', by contraction
or adaptation to KλÝŠw, KIKλĤoкw; thence кληdóvios (sch., Eust.), кλndovíчoµai, -í¶w
[v.] (LXX), -tou, -ó.
Denominative verbs: 1. Kλɛiw (II.), kλéw (B., trag. [lyr.]) [v.] 'to celebrate, praise,
proclaim', Hell. also 'to call' (after кλ(w, see below), кλéoμa 'to enjoy fame, be
celebrated' (202), Hell. also 'to be called'; mostly derived from *кλεƑεσ-чW >
*кλε(F)έw, whence кλɛíw, kλéw by hyphaeresis; but see Frisk GHÅ 56 : 3 (1950): 3ff.,
!
-
KλÉπTW
713
discussing the possibility that кλéw (whence, only in epic poetry, кλɛíw by metrical
lengthening) is a back-formation of кλéoç after yɛúdw: чɛūdoç. Alternatively, kλéw,
кλéoμaɩ would be an old primary formation *kleu-e/o-, see Chantraine 1942: 3463 and
DELG. From Kλɛíw, kλéw as an agent noun: Kλɛw, Kλɛw, -oûç [f.] "she who gives
fame", name of one of the Muses (Hdt., Pi.). 2. кλεïw [v.] (Pi.) ‘to celebrate, praise,
proclaim', also 'to call' (after кiкλńokw, kaλéw; thence the notation кλŋ-), also
εỦкλɛï™w from ɛÚкλeńs (Sapph., Tyrt.); forms: кλŋï¼w (Hp., Hell.), kλýšw (Ar.), aor.
kλɛïčaɩ or kλŋïoai, kλñoai, kλeioai, fut. kλeï¿w, kλŋïow, кλĤow, etc.; probably from a
basis *KAEFEσ-iw with hyphaeresis.
⚫ETYM Old s-stem of the root *kleu- 'hear', found in several languages: Skt. śrávas-
[n.] 'fame' (кλéoç äoiτov: ákṣiti śrávaḥ), Av. srauuah- [n.] 'word', OCS slovo [n.]
'word'; also, Olr. clú and ToA (ñom)-klyu, ToB (ñem)-kälywe ‘fame', Illyr. PN Ves-
cleves (= Skt. vásu-śravas- having good fame'; cf. Eú-кλñs). The denominative
Kλε(i)w, if from *кλεƑεσ-дw, corresponds to Skt. śravasyáti 'to praise', and may
therefore be old. Further forms s.v. ► Kλúw.
kλénas [adj.] · votepóv, inλwdes, ǹ daoú, ½ úypóv ‘moist, muddy or clayey, bushy,
wet' (H.). <?>
•VAR KÀÉÑOS. Úyηλóv, votepóv, Saoú ‘high, moist, bushy' (H.).
⚫ETYM The meaning voτεpóv suggests connection with OIr. cluain 'meadow' and the
Baltic group of Lith. šlapti 'to become wet'. Acc. to Matasović 2008, PIE *klopni-
would have regularly given PCI. *klowni-. Still, the formation of the Greek gloss does
not match that of the proposed cognates, which makes the etymology uncertain.
кλεлτw [V.] 'to steal, conceal, do secretly, cheat, deceive' (II.). <IE *klep- ‘steal'>
•VAR Aor. кλéчai (Il.), pass. kλɛç¤ñvaι (Hdt., E.), кλαлñvaɩ (Th., Pl.), ptc. кλεлɛíç
(pap. II³), fut. kλéysw (h. Merc.), perf. кékλoqa (Att.), ptc. кɛkλɛßws (Andania Iª, but
cf. Schwyzer: 722), med. kékλɛµµai (S.), kékλaµµai (Ar.).
•COMP Also with prefixes like ȧлo-, έк-, dα-, úño-. As a second member in Bou-кλEY
(S. fr. 318), as a first member in governing compounds, e.g. kλɛyí-œpwv ‘guilefuľ (of
Hermes, h. Merc.); from кλéчal, cf. Knecht 1946: 38, Zumbach 1955: 21; on
►кλεчúбpа s.v.
•DER A. With ε-vocalism: кλéπoç [n.] 'theft' (Sol. apud Poll. 8, 34). 2. кλéµµa 'theft,
deceit, ruse of war' (Att.), кλεµµádios 'stolen' (Pl.), after åµáðɩoç, кpurtádioç, see
Chantraine 1933: 39. 3. кλεлíα. кλoлη ‘thefť' (Phot.). 4. кλéëτηs [m.] 'thief (II.),
superl. кλεлτíστατos (Ar.), see Leumann Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 10ff. Diminutive
kλentiokos (Eup.), -táptov (Charis.), jocular patronymic kλertídŋs (Pherecr.); fem.
кλεлτç (Alciphr.), кλелτрια (Sotad. Com.), formally from кλεлτηр, see Fraenkel
1910: 75; kλɛntikós [adj.] ‘thievish' (Pl., Luc.); кλεлto-σúvη 'thievishness' (τ 396,
Man.). 5. кλεлτηp 'thief' (Man.). 6. кλéлчµоç ‘smuggled' (pap. IIIª), hardly to the rare
word кλéлoç, as per Arbenz 1933: 100, but rather from кλóлчоç with ε from кλéлtw;
7. кλεччañoç ‘acquired by theft' (LXX), a juridical term.
E
B. With o-vocalsim: 1. кλoлý ‘theft, secret act' (trag., Att.), кλoлaños ‘acquired by
theft' (Att.), кλóлчoç ‘id., thievish' (Ps.-Phoc.), -чuaños = кλɛyчaïos (Luc., Ant.
Lib.), see above; кλoлкóç ‘thievish' (of Hermes, Pl. Cra. 407e; cf. Chantraine 1956a:

=== page 381 ===

714
Kλεчúdpa
142); εлí-кλолоs 'deceitful' (Il.), εлкλолíη] (Nonn.); 'Елкλóлεoç epithet of Zeus
(H.); on úлó-кλолоç see below. 2. кλолóç 'thief (h. Merc. 276, Оpp.), кλóлOS
'deceitful, thievish' (v 295, AP, API.). 3. кλолεúç 'thief, secret author' (S.), кλoлεúw
[v.] 'to plunder' (Аpp.), кλолεíα (Str.; v.l. -w-), -εiov 'stolen good' (Max.). 4. iterative
present ло-кλoлέɩо 'to hide' (X 382), cf. Úло-кλεлτεν (Рi.), úлó-кλолоS
‘deceitful, false' (B.) and Schwyzer 1950: 524.
C. With w-vocalism 1. Kλwy ‘thief (Hdt., E., X.), whence кλшлкóç 'secretly' (E. Rh.
205 and 512), see Chantraine 1956a: 119, kλwï½ïoç ‘id.' (A. R., Max.), кλwлɛúw [v.]
(X., Luc.), -ɛía (Att.); 2. iterative present кλшлάoμαι = кλéлτoµαi (H.)..
⚫ETYM Not related to кαλúлтw. The s-aorist кλéчat is paralleled by Lat. clepsi, but
кλεлτw is probably recent for an older thematic root present found in Lat. clepō, Go.
hlifan 'to steal', although a pre-form *klép-ie/o- is also presupposed by the ToB subj.
kälyp 'to steal' (acc. to Adams 1999 s.v.). Isolated nominal derivatives may have
been preserved in MIr. cluain 'deceit, flattery' < *klop-ni- and Slavic, e.g. CS po-klopб
'cover', za-klepo ‘closure'. With a different anlaut, there is Lith. slēpti ‘to conceal',
slepiù, perhaps from *skl-, or alternatively influenced by other words with sl-; the
root was preserved in Baltic, as shown by OPr. au-klipts 'concealed'. It is possible
that *klep- ‘to steal' is a special development in the Western languages of a root
*klep- that is probably found in ToB klep- 'to grab, touch with the hand and kälp- ‘to
get, obtain'; see Adams KZ 102 (1989): 242-3.
Kλεчúбpα [f.] 'water clock', constructed like a sandglass (IA). <GR➤
•VAR Ion. -pη.
1sg.
⚫ETYM A governing compound from кλéyai (кλɛy-) and dwp, with zero grade of
the second member (as in ävʊdpoç, etc.) and derivation in -a (on which see
Schwyzer: 452).
KAźw 'to celebrate, call'. →кλÉOÇ.
=>
кλndwv 'fame, call. → Kλéoç.
кλńеpα [f.] ‘alder, Alnus glutinosa' (Od., Thphr.). <?>
•VAR Ion. -pη.
⚫DER KAń pivoç 'of alder' (Ath. Mech.).
⚫ETYM It has been connected with MoHG (dial.) lutter, ludere, ludern 'Alpine alder,
Betula nana', as if from QIE *klädhra-. Cf. Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 259, who
comments on other IE names of the alder. Unclear.
=
кληw 1 'to lock'. •VAR кλÝČw. →Kλɛiç.
кληw 2 'to celebrate, call'. •VAR KλÝŠW. → KλÉOS.
кλñµα [n.] ‘twig, sprout, tendril (of the vine)' (IA); also as a plant name 'Polygonum
aviculare' (Dsc.), see Strömberg 1937: 184). <PG?>
•Var Aeol. кλãµµa (Alc.), with geminate μ, see Hamm 1957: §73c). Inscr. kλaµa [n.]
'fragment, кλáσua' (Aigina Va), rather кλãµa than кλáµa.
●der kλŋuatic, -ídos [f.] ‘twig of the vine, faggot (IA), also name of several plants,
like 'Clematis vitalba' (Dsc.); кληµatīùç [f.] plant name (Dsc.); кλŋµátivos
kaißavoc
715
'consisting of (vine-)twigs' (Thgn.), кλŋµatóɛç ‘id.' (Nic.), кλŋµaτódŋg full of
twigs, like vine-branches' (Dsc., Ġal.), кληµατкóç belonging to a vine-branch'
(gloss.). Denominative verbs: кληματóoμа [v.] 'sprouting' (S., Thphr.), Kλnµatičw
[v.] 'to clip vines' (LXX).
⚫ETYM Connected with кλáw, but the meaning 'break' does not fit a sprout. For
кλáw, we do not find evidence for a long a, and must conclude that this verb is
rather of Pre-Greek origin. The form кλάσµα may rather belong to кλáw. Cf. on
▶ k入ñpos.
кλñpoç [m.] ‘lot, allotment, inheritance, piece of ground' (Il.), ‘(Christian) clergy'
(Just.). <PG?>
•VAR Dor. Kλapoç.
•COMP кληpo-vóµos 'heir' (IA; Dor. also кλāpo-), whence -vouέw, -voµía, -voµikós,
etc.; ǎ-kλŋpos 'without lot, without inheritance, poor' (λ 490); but vaú-kλŋpos,
-кλāpoç arose by dissimilation from vaúкpāpoç (s.v. ►vαúкληpoc). One also derived
óλó-kλnpoç 'complete' (IA) from *óλó-кpāpoç (Debrunner Phil. 95 (1943): 174ff.),
but it was rather derived from the present entry, see den Boer Mnem. 3:13: 143f.
●DER Diminutives kλŋpíov (AP, pap.), Dor. кλāpiov ‘notes for debt' (Plu. Agis 13);
kλŋpikós [adj.] ‘belonging to the кλñpoç³ (Vett. Val.); denominative verb kλŋpów,
kλāpów [v.] ‘to cast lots, choose by lot', med. 'to draw lots, obtain by loť (IA, Dor.),
whence кλpwσts ‘election by loť, kλŋpwτńpiov ‘urn for casting lots, room for
voting', кλŋpwτóç 'who is elected by lot' (IA).
⚫ETYM Originallly a shard of stone or a piece of wood that was used as a lot. Formally
identical with a Celtic word for 'plank, etc.': Olr. clár, OW claur; also, as an
expression of the cartwright Bret. kleur pitch-fork of a wagon'. However, the
relationship is doubtful for semantic reasons. The word is usually connected with.
► Kλáw 'to break off, with the same ablaut grade as in кλñµα, but see doubts s.v.
кλñoɩç ‘call. •Var kλŋtýp, kλýtwp 'herald, witness', etc. → kaλéw.
kλißavoç [m.] ‘baker's oven', properly an earthenware or iron pot, less wide on top
and provided with air holes, in which bread was baked; metaph. of comparable
objects, e.g. 'pot for drawing water, rock hole, etc.' (Hdt., Epich., LXX, pap., NT).
<PG? (V)►
•VAR Also кpíẞavos [m.] (com.), кpíẞavov [n.] (Str., Ael.), probably with λ > p, see
Schwyzer: 259.
•DER Mostly from kλiß-: kλißávios, -кós ‘of the baker's oven' (pap.), -tov oven for
baking' (pap.), -ítns (äptos) ‘bread baked in a к.' (com.), kpißavwtós ‘(bread) baked
in an oven' (Alcm. 20, Ar.), кpiẞávas. nλakoūvtás üvαç ‘flat cakes' (H.); kλɩßavεús
'baker', -ɛiov 'bakery' (pap.). Hypostasis елкλẞávios (Oɛá) 'ruling over the oven'
(Carneades). кλẞavápios (IVP) is from Lat. clībanārius (thus Frisk; short i acc. to
DELG) armored knight', and may derive from the soldiers' language, or perhaps it is
after Aram. tanûr ‘oven, armor', cf. Schwyzer: 39. Acc. to Rundgren Orientalia
Suecana 6 (1957): 49f., the Latin word has nothing to do with the Greek group, but
derives from MP grībān 'coat of arms' (comparing grīva-pāna- ‘neck-protector').

=== page 382 ===

716
kdivw
•ETYM A technical loan in -avos (see Chantraine 1933: 200 and Schwyzer: 489f.), of
unknown origin. Unconvincing proposals: Walde 1910 s.v. lībum suggested
connection with the Germanic word for loaf of bread', Go. hlaifs, etc., as a loan from
the north; Lewy 1895: 105f. proposed Semitic origin. It is unknown whether p or \ is
original; Fur: 387 lists the words among examples of the interchange of p and λ in
Pre-Greek words. Substrate origin is probable.
Kλívw [V.] 'to bend, incline, lean on, sink' (II.). <IE *klei- 'lean'>>
•VAR Aor. кλīvai (Il.), pass. кλɩ¤ñvai (Od.), kλɩvеñvai (Il.); see Chantraine 1942:
4042, Schwyzer: 761; also kλɩvñvai (Att.), probably for *кλɩ-ñvat, see Schwyzer 760;
fut. kλĭvw (Att.), perf. med. кékλĭµa (Il.), to which act. kékλĭka (Plb.).
•DIAL Myc. ki-ri-ta-de, /klitas-de/ [acc.pl.], ki-ri-ta-i /klitā¹i/ [dat.-loc.pl.], see Meier-
Brügger Glotta 68 (1990): 167.
•COMP Very frequent with prefix, e.g. ávα-, кatα-, napα-, ¿v-, àño-.
•DER 1. From the root with suffix -d-: diкλídɛç [f.] 'two-winged [doors]', έукλíç. ǹ
кαукɛλλwτǹ Oúpa 'railed door' (EM); лаpα-, εу-кλdóv ‘turning aside, inclining'
(Od.). 2. From a prefixed present, with ending after the s-stems (Schwyzer: 513):
кατα-, εлɩ-, άло-, εк-, συу-кλɩνηs, etc. 'bending downwards, slanting, etc.' (Hp., A.),
to which ¿ëкλív-ɛta (Heliol. Med.), ovykλɩv-íai [pl.] (Plu.). 3. Compounds with
suffix -τη-: ïapa-, σvу-кλí-τηs 'who lies beside or together [at the table]' (X., Plu.),
-кλív-τη 'moving to the side' (Arist.). 4. KλɛτÚç (also кλiτúç after кλívw), -úoç
[f.] 'slope, hill' (II.), on the notation see Schwyzer: 5067). 5. kλɛïtoç [n.] (A. R. 1, 599),
KAITOS [n.] (Lyc., LXX, AP) 'slope, side'. 6. Kλíσiç, mostly in prefixed compounds, e.g.
άvá-, kaτá-, ȧлó-кλɩɩç ‘leaning back, etc.' (IA). 7. Kλíua [n.] 'inclination, slope,
quarter, land' (with Hell. ĭ for εt, see Schwyzer: 523), also укλ-µμa, etc. (Arist.);
thence кλчuaτíaç ‘inclining' (Heraclit., Amm. Marc.), кλчaτɩкóç ‘belonging to a
given compass point' (Vett. Val.). 8. kλîµαž, -αкoç [f.] ‘staircase, ladder, climax, etc.'
(Od.), whence кλiµákiov (IA), -íç (Att. inscr., Hell.), kλakíσкo лáλασµa лoóv ‘a
kind of grip in wrestling' (H.); кλчµαкíчw [v.] 'to use the grip called кλчuaε in
fighting', metaph. 'to bring down' (Att.); кλчµакwτós (Plb.), -wdns (Str.) 'like a
stairway'; also кλчμαк-τηp 'rung of a ladder' (IA), 'critical point of a man's life'
(Varro), to which kλɩaktypikóg, -τηpíšw (Gell., Vett. Val.); on the formation of
кλчua (with i from кλivw analogical for *кλεi-μα) Rodriguez Adrados Emerita 16.
(1948): 133ff.; on кλчµαкτηp Chantraine 1933: 327f. 9. kλɩoµóç ‘armchair' (Il., Ion.
poet.), whence кλiσµíov, -áкiov (inscr., Call.), ‘inclination, slope' (Arist.). 10. ȧvá-
кλipov 'back of a chair' (Ptol.). 11. кλíτα. στoαí 'roofed colonnade, storehouse',
kλítav (kaì táv cod.). σroáv (H.), originally "“leaning”; thence кλioía, Ion. -íŋ ‘pile
dwelling, barracks, chapel; armchair, resting place, tomb' (II.), кλiotov 'annex, stoa'
(w 208, Delos IIIª), 'annex, shed, chapel' (Lys., Paus.); often written кλεtσíov (inscr.),
also кλɛσía [f.] ‘tavern' (epic), perhaps by adaptation to kλɛíw 'to lock'; thence
KAεioιádɛç (Oúpat) 'doors of the кλ(ε) toiα, of the кλ(E) toίov' (Hdt., Ph., D. H., Plu.);
details on кloin in Frisk Eranos 41 (1943): 59ff., Scheller 1951: 61. 12. (¿y-,
¿k-)kλitikós ‘inflecting, etc.' (gramm.); to (ếy-, čк-)kλɩʊiç. From the present: 13.
кλívη ‘layer, bed, litter' (IA), cf. Chantraine 1933: 192, whence кλivíç, -ídɩov, -íov,
-áptov (com.), kλívɛos 'belonging to a кλívò' (D.), -pηs 'censorius' (Ph., J.); as a
KλÓVOS
717
second member in σúy-кλivos bedfellow' (Men.). 14. кλivτýp, -ñpoç [m.] ‘id.' (Od.),
whence кAVτpiov, -ídiov, -íσкos (Ar.), ávaкλiv-τp 'neighbour at table' (Ps.-
Callisth.); napaкλív-τwp 'id.' (AP); ȧvá-, εлí-кλv-τpov 'back of a chair, etc.' (Erot. in
Poll., Ar., inscr., etc.).
•ETYM The yod-present кλivw < *klin-je/o- (a Greek innovation) goes back to an
older nasal present, which is found in various forms: Lat. clīnāre 'to bend', Gm., e.g.
OS hlinōn, OHG hlinën > MoHG lehnen ‘to lean', Balt., e.g. Latv. slìet, 1sg. slìenu,
Eastern Lith. šliñti, ₁sg. šlinù ‘to lean', Av. srinu-, ptc. srita- ‘to lean' ( Arm. linim 'to
become, be', given by Frisk, is now derived from *kwel(h₁)- ‘to turn').
=
On the question of what the original form of the nasal present was (*kli-n-eH-, *kl-n-
i-, vel sim.), see LIV² s.v. Indo-Iranian and Baltic have a thematic root present, Skt.
śrayati OLith. (also dialectal) šlejù 'to lean'. The nasal, which was originally only
presentic, conquered the entire inflexion in Latin and Germanic, but did not reach
the perfect in Greek (кéкλτα; cf. Skt. śiśriyé). The Greek nominal derivations are
innovations except for the following: the to-ptc. (ǎ)-кλiτoç = Skt. śritá-, Av. srita-
'leaning', кλious which is formally equal to Lith. šlitis 'shove-shed', kλítov, which
matches OHG lit 'cover' and MoE eye-lid. The full grade of kλɛ-τúç is found, e.g., in
ON hlíð [f.] 'slope'.
KAOιós [m.] 'collar for dogs, iron collar for prisoners' (com., E. Cyc., X., Babr.). <PG?>
•VAR Also Kλwós (Ar. V. 897, E. Cyc. 235).
●DER Kλowτη ó dεσμτηs 'prisoner'; кλowτά. бɛσµïç λµµévα arrested in
chains' (H.).
⚫ETYM Probably from a preform *klōwjó-, but without a good connection. Often
connected to кλεïç 'key'. Alternatively, the word could be Pre-Greek.
Kλóviç, -10¢ [f.] ‘haunch' (Antim. 65). <IE? *klouni- 'buttocks, hip'>
•DER Kλóvov. loxíov, þáxis, ỏσqús 'hip-joint, chine, loins' and кλovστηp.
rapaµńpios µáxaipα, лapíσxiov ‘dagger worn at the hips' (H.), cf. Lat. clūnāc(u)lum
'cultrum sanguinarium ..., quia ad clunes dependet' (Paul Fest. 50).
•ETYM The word resembles an old IE word for 'buttock, hip', found in Skt. śróņi-,
Lat. clūnis, MW clun, ON hlaun, Lith. šlaunis, all from IE *klouni-. Phonetically,
кλóviç cannot be combined with these forms, but the word may have been folk-
etymologically adapted to кλóvoç (sch. A. Pr. 499: às̟'où кai кλóviç óvoµážetai dià
τò ȧякívητov, scil. oσqús has been compared). Cf. Schulze 1892: 105' and Schwyzer:
38¹; doubts in Pok. 608. Different hypotheses in Petersson IF 35 (1915): 269ff. and
Holthausen IF 62 (1956): 157.
Kλóvos [m.] excitement, throng, turmoil (of battle)' (Il.), on the mg. see Trümpy 1950:
157f. <PG?>
•COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. ǎ-кλovoç 'without excitement, quiet' (Gal.), of the
pulse.
•DER Denominative kλovέw [V.] 'to excite, urge', pass. 'be pressed, get in excitement'
(II.), mostly present, also with prefixes like úлo-, σvv-, εлɩ-; thence кλóvŋσiç
'excitement' (Hp.).

=== page 383 ===

718
•ETYM Mostly derived from кéλoμat, with a formation кλ-óvos that is also assumed
in Opóvoç. This explanation is doubtful: words in -ovoç are rare, and the analysis of
Opóvoc is also uncertain. Rather a Pre-Greek word.
кλолη 'theft', etc. ⇒ kλéntw.
=>
кλotoлɛów [v.] only T 149 together with dɩατpißεɩv; the mg. was uncertain already in
antiquity, cf. кλotoñɛúɛiv. rapaλoyíšeoĐai, ȧratāv, kλɛyɩyaµɛïv, otpayуɛɛσðaɩ 'to
misreckon, deceive, seek illicit love, loiter' (H.), who further cites kλotorevtýs
¿žaλλáktŋs, áλaľov ‘vagrant, charlatan'. ◄ PG(S) ►
•ETYM Kuiper Glotta 21 (1933): 287ff. thought that the word was Pre-Greek, and
compared ηлερ-Ол-εúш for the suffix *-op-. The suggestion in DELG, that it is a
cross of кλεлτw, кλолη and τóлоç, τолάчw, is useless.
=
кλúẞaτıç [f.] plant name
aspera' (Nic., Dsc.). <PG(V)►
Eλívn, 'bindweed, Convulvulus arvensis and Smilax
•VAR By-form Kovλvßáτɛα [f.] (Nic.), perhaps for *кoλußατεa? See Fur.: 181. Cf.
also кoλúμẞατos [f.] a plant (Gp.) and кoλvμẞáç, -ádoc = σtoißń (Gal. 14, 18).
•ETYM Fur.: 207 further compares кλúµεvov (Dsc. 4, 14) with dissimilation ß-v> μ-v.
The inserted -o- may derive from PG *a, i.e. a pre-form *k(a)lu(m)p-at-.
Kľúčw [v.] ‘to wash (away), clean', pass. (intr.) 'to wash, surge, drench' (II.). <IE
*kluH-, *kleHu- 'wash, purify'>
●VAR Iter. ipf. kλúČεσкov (Y 61), aor. pass. кλvo¤ñvai (Il.), fut. kλúσ(σ)w (h. Ap. 75,
Pi.), aor. act. кλúσai (IA), perf. kékλvka, kékλvoµai (Att.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ¿π-, kata-, nεpi-, époσ-.
•DER Kλúσɩç ‘washing' (Hp.), mostly to the prefixed verbs: ¿лíкλvoιç, etc. (IA);
кλúσμа (also кατáкλvoμaа, etc.) 'liquid by which something is rinsed, clyster', also
'surge, shore' (IA); кλvσμάτιov, -μатιкóç (Нp.); (επ-, кατα-, etc.)кλvoµóç
'inundation, etc.' (IA); кλvστηp, -ñpos [m.] 'clyster-pipe' (Hdt.), whence -τnpiov,
-τnpídiov. Further σúy-кλuç, -dos 'washed together, thrown together' (Th., Pl.),
кλúd-a [acc.sg.] 'beating of the waves' (Nic. Al. 170; perhaps an archaizing
innovation), kλúd-wv, -wvoç [m.] ‘undulation, surf, turmoil (µ 421), кλvdwvov (A.,
E.), kλvdwv-íšoµat [v.] 'to be thrown around by the waves' (LXX, J.), kλvdwvioµós
(Hdn.), -ɩσµa (Suid.). Expressive enlargement (¿y-, ouy-)кλvdášoµαí ‘to splash, etc.’
(Hp.), -áτtoµaι (D. L.), to which кλvdaoµós, (¿y)kλúdažıç, ¿ykλvdaotikós (Hp.).
Further кAvdáw 'to be soaked, soft, moldable' (Arist.), of σταiç, лηλóc, probably after
p入vdáw.
ETYM The present кλúw is either derived from nominal forms with -6- (кλúda,
кλúSwv), i.e. denominative *klud-je/o-, or arose as an independent enlargement in
-(w, in which case kλúðwv, etc. should be analyzed as back-formations (which is the
preferable explanation). Germanic also had an IE enlargement in *-d-, e.g. Go.
hlutrs, MoHG lauter < *klūd-ro-, but we find forms without -d- in Celtic, Latin, and
Baltic: W clir 'clear, pure' <*klū-ro-, and OLat. cluere 'to purify' (hapax Plin. 15, 119),
cloare 'id.' (glossed in Servius, hapax), the reconstruction of which is debated (see
the discussion in De Vaan 2008 on the derivation of clo(u)āca 'subterranean drain,
:
KAWTW
719
sewer³). For Lith. šlúoti, 1sg. šlúo ju ‘to weap, wipe', one would like to reconstruct PIE
*kloHu-. In Greek, there is no evidence for long u, which also makes a reconstruction
*kleHu-, *klHu- preferable. Greek would have generalized the zero grade *klHu-
(which under certain conditions, apparently, did not undergo metathesis to *kluH-).
кλów [V.] 'to hear, understand, obey' (II.), also (with ε, кaкws) ‘to have a (good or
bad) reputation' (trag.). <IE *kleu- ‘hear'>
•VAR Pres. since Hes. Op. 726; aor. kλvov (II.); athem. forms ipv. кλñßɩ, -tɛ (Hom.,
Pi., trag.), kéкλvůɩ, -tɛ (Hom.), also кÉKAŬкε (Epich. 190), ptc. кλбµεvoç ‘famous’
(Antim., Theoc.), PNS Kλúμεvoç, Kλvµévη (Hom.).
COMP Rarely with prefixes ε-, ÚлO-.
●DER KAUTÓS [m.] (also [f.], see Schwyzer 1950: 325) 'famous' (Il.), often as a first
member, e.g. кAUTÓ-τoчoç 'with famous bow' (of Apollo), кλvτó-лwλoç 'with famous
foals' (of Hades); also Kλvtai-µñoτpa, -pŋ (II.), with second member derived from
µýστwp, and the first member reshaped after Kpaτal-, Halal-, etc. (see Schwyzer:
448, Sommer 1948: 147¹). With different ablaut kλετóç ‘famous' (Hom., Pi.) from
*KAεFεTÓC (see below).
•ETYM The present kλúw is an innovation of the thematic root aorist ékλvov, which
corresponds to Skt. śruvam [aor.]. Both languages innovated this thematic aorist
from an older athematic aorist, which is still seen in Hom. ipv. кλUе, -Tε and ptc.
кλúµɛvoç. An exact counterpart of кλ (which is always verse-initial and has
metrical lengthening for *кλú) is Skt. śrudhi. In Greek, кλŨτƐ was innovated after
кλ, perhaps for older *кλεUTE = Skt. śróta. Reduplicated кÉкλ, -τε may be
innovations after τéτλă¤ɩ, etc.
The to-ptc. кAUTÓç seems to be an old formation, preserved in several languages, e.g.
Skt. śrutá- 'heard', Lat. in-clutus 'famous', Arm. lu 'known', Olr. cloth [n.] 'fame', PIE
*klu-tó- (Gm. words like OHG hlut 'loud' and ON hljóð 'hearing, etc.' continue a full
grade formation *kleu-tó-). The forms *kλefetós > kλeiτós (cf. Schwyzer: 502) and
the old verbal noun Kλéos continue an ablauting full grade *kleu-eto-. The other
languages have various present formations, e.g. a nasal present in Skt. śṛṇóti, Av.
surunaoiti, ToB kalnem 'to resound'; note the stative in Lat. cluĕre 'to be called'.
Further, Greek has a denominative кλéw 'to celebrate, praise'; see on кλéoç.
кλwßós [m.] ‘bird-cage' (AP, Babr.). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Also Kλovẞßós (POxy. 1923, 14 [V-VI³], where mg. uncertain, Tz., gloss.).
⚫DER Diminutive кλwßiov (-ov-) 'small cage, twined basket' (Hdn. Epim., pap.).
⚫ETYM A Semitic loan; cf. Hebr., Syr. klub 'bird-cage'. See Lewy 1895: 129, Grimme
Glotta 14 (1925): 19, and E. Masson 1967: 1084.
кλwdɩç [m.] • kλéntŋs ‘thief (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. Latte thinks it could be a mistake for ► кvwy.
кλwчw [v.] ‘to cackle, clack' (D., Alciphr., Poll.). <ONOM➤
•VAR Only present stem; also кλwoow (Suid. s.v. qwλác, uncertain, perhaps a back-
formation from кλwyчóç, see Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 248).
•DER кλwyμós (Cratin., X.), also кλwσμós (Ph. 2, 599 beside -y-, Harp.) 'cackling'.

=== page 384 ===

720
кλwеw, -oμαι
•ETYM For кλww, cf. kλáľw (►kλayyn) and, on the other hand, ►кpów. Like these,
Kλww is onomatopoeic.
кλáðw, -oµai [v.] ‘to spin' (Il.). <PG?►
•VAR Aor. kλwσal, -woɑobai (N 525 and Od.), pass. kλwoßñvai (Pl.), kékλwoµai
(com., LXX); Kλwoкw (H.), cf. Schwyzer: 708.
COMP Also with prefix, especially επ-.
•DER Kλwłɛç [f.pl.] 'spinsters' (11 197), Kλwow [f.] "the spinster", one of the Moirai
(Hes.); кλwoτnp, -ñpoç [m.] 'yarn, clew, spindle' (Att., Theoc., A. R.), кλwστηpiov
‘band, yarn' (Ostr. 1525 [?], Suid.); kλwotás [m.] ‘spinner' (Sparta); kλwoµa ‘thread,
clew' (LXX, Nic.), kλwotę ‘id.' (Lyc.), 'spinning' (Corn., M. Ant.).
⚫ETYM The supposed connection with кáλaboç 'basket' cannot be supported in any
way. Connection with Lat. colus 'distaff has also been considered (see WH s.v. and
cōlum). The word is probably Pre-Greek.
kλwkvdá [adv.] · tó кaðñoðaɩ ¿n' àµqotépos nooív 'to be placed or seated on both
feet' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM DELG reminds us of oкλá(w, but the word can hardly be cognate with this. It
could be Pre-Greek.
kλŵµaž, -ākoç [m.] heap of stones, rock' (Lyc. 653). <PG(S,V)►
•DER кλwμaкóɛσσa 'stony, rocky' (B 729), of I0wµn.
•ETYM Formation like λía, Bwλaž, etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 379). It is usually
connected with kλáw (kλñµa, kλãpos) 'to break', by assumption of a verbal noun.
*кλшμoç 'crack, split' and comparison with лεрiкεкλαoµévos lying on uneven, rocky
grund', said of τónol, itóλeis, oikiaι (Plb.). This is unlikely, especially given the by-
forms кpwµaž ‘id.', кpwµaкóɛç кpηuvádŋs 'precipitous' (H.), кpwμаkwłóç (Eust.
330, 40; Paphlagonian). Belardi Doxa 3 (1950): 210 connected it to Lat. grūmus 'heap
of earth, hill' as a word from the Aegaean substrate (i.e. Pre-Greek). The form with
could show Pre-Greek variation p/ \ as well.
Kλwv, -wvós [m.] 'sprout' (Att.). ◄PG(V)►
P
•DER Diminutives кλwvíov, -ídiov, -ápiov, -íσkos (Thphr., Hell. inscr., Gp.), further
кλwvíτηs ‘with sprouts' (Hdn.), kλwvaž = kládos (H.), kλwvíšw [v.] ‘to clip' (Suid.).
⚫ETYM Not from *кλa-óv (Schwyzer: 521), as a sprout can hardly be called 'broken'.
Kuiper 1956: 221f. connected the word with кλádos 'branch'. See further кλáw.
KAWσow →Kλww.
=
кµéλɛðpa [n.pl.] ‘beam' (Pamphil. apud EM 521, 34, H.). <PG?>
•ETYM The resemblance to
suggests substrate origin. Cf. on
кvadáλλetai ⇒ -kvaiw.
=>
μéλapov can hardly be accidental and strongly
kaµápa.
-кvaíw [v.] 'to scrape, scratch' (Hp., trag. [lyr.], Att.). <IE? *kneh₂- 'scratch, plane',
PG?>
KVá ITW
721
•VAR Only with prefixes Sα-, àло-, έк-, кατα-кvαíw; Att. inf. кvñv, кvñσеαι (also
exists as a simplex), 1 and 3sg. pres. кvw, кvñ, ipf. εлì ... кvñ (A 639), also кvāv
ènì
(Hdt.), кvãσðaι, кva (Hell.); further кvýеw (Arist., Hell.), also with кατα-, ¿v-, εлI-,
etc. Non-presentic forms: -кvaữσaɩ, -кvαισеñvaɩ, -kvaiσw, -kɛkvatoµévos (Ar., E.
[lyr.], Pl., Theoc.); more usual (both as a simplex and in compounded verbs) is
кvñσaɩ, Dor. kváσato [opt.med.] (Theoc.), kvηóðñvai, kvýow, kékvnoµai (IA).
●DER Action nouns: 1. кvñσɩç ‘scratching, tickling' (Pl.), whence кvŋotáw [v.] ‘to wish
to tickle' (Ar., Pl.), also kvηotiáw ‘id.' (Gal., Jul.), after other verbs in -tiáw; kvŋłiáw
'id.' (Hdn., EM), after кvηow (cf. Schwyzer: 732). 2. кvñσµα ‘id.' (Hp., X.), rarely
кíñµα; 3. кvový ‘id.' (medic.), cf. лñµα: ëηµový, etc.; 4. кvηoµós ‘id.' (Hp.,
Arist.), кvnouwdns affected with itching' (Hp., Arist., Str.). 5. Kvηеμós itching'
(Nic.). Agent nouns and instruments: 6. кvñστç [f.] 'knife for scratching, cheese-
grater' (A 640, Nic., Opp.), also 'spine' (K 161; cf. ►äkvŋotis s.v.), perhaps from
*kvýotns [m.]; 7. kvηotýp ‘scratching knife' (Nic.). 8. kvnotis -ídos [f.] ‘hollow
hairpin' (Plu.). 9. кvñστpov ‘stinging plant, Daphne oleoides, Ovuελaía' (Hp., Dsc.);
кvηoτpíov ‘scraper', (Edict. Diocl.). 10. kvηotikós [adj.] ‘scratching, itching' (sch.).
⚫ETYM Of the presents, кvýεv may be an innovation from кvñσαι, etc. after лλñσα:
лλýеw, Añσai: λnow, etc.; the pair кvñv: кvαíε matches the formation of the
semantically close чñv: чaíяv 'to rub, etc.'; -кvaíw is probably secondary. The form
kvnv, which originally was probably athematic (see Schwyzer: 675f. and Chantraine
1942: 297 and 307), is usually connected with Baltic, Celtic and Germanic: e.g. Lith.
knóti ‘to peel, tear' < athematic *kneh₂-, OHG nuoen 'to make smooth by scratching,
to make fit together' and OIr. -cná 'to bite, gnaw' < yod-present *kneh₂-ie/o-.
It has not been proposed that the words could be Pre-Greek. We may compare
кvadáλλεται кvýеεται (H.), to which belong, as variants, yvápaλλov, yvópaλov;
these are clearly Pre-Greek (see кváлτw). Is кvαd- a variant of кvηе-? For кvαб-,
no PIE pre-form can be reconstructed (cf. on yvá0oc). The formation of кvnowv
'scratcher' (inscr. Delos IIª, see DELG) is reflected in the Latin loan cnāsonas [acc.pl.]
‘scratching nails' (Paul. Fest. 52), which must have been borrowed from Hell.
*кvάowv (cf. the gloss кvãσaι óléσaɩ, λvлñσai ‘to perish, grieve' (H.), and see
Leumann Sprache 1 (1949): 207). Verbs with a formation in -aíw are further
unknown in Greek. See further кvéwpos, ► кvýŋ, ►кvwdaλov.
кvάлτw [V.] 'to card, comb, full (cloth)' as a technical term, also metaph. ‘to mangle,
tear to pieces' (IA). <PG(V)►
•VAR Rarely кváµitw, cf. ▸yváµëτw and Güntert 1914: 115f., уváлτw (late Att.,
Hell., Ion.).
DIAL Myc. ka-na-pe-u/knapheus/.
⚫COMP Sometimes prefixed with ȧvα-, εлɩ-.
•DER Late Att. has yv- for кv- in most derivatives: кváqoç [m.] 'fullers' teasel', also
'tangle; carding comb (an instrument of torture)' (Hdt., Hp., com.), kvaqɛúç ‘fuller'
(IA), also as a fish name (Dorio; on the motive see Strömberg 1943: 93); kvaqɛãov,
-½ïov ‘fuller's shop' (IA), kvaqevtiký (téxvò) ‘art of fulling' (Pl.), кvaqɛúw [v.] ‘to
full' (Ar.) and, as a late feminine formation, кváquoσa 'female fuller' (pap.), see
Chantraine 1933: 110; кvaqıкóç 'belonging to fulling' (Dsc., pap.). yváчis ‘fulling'

=== page 385 ===

722
kváy
(Pl.), уváлτwρ = кvαqɛúç (Man.). yváqaλlov 'cushion of wool (pap. and ostr.),
with yvaqaλ(\)wdŋs ‘like a y.', yvaqáλλiov, -aλλíç plant name 'Diotis maritima'
(Dsc., Plin.), see Strömberg 1940: 105; also кvéqaλλov 'cushion' (com., E.; v.ll. кvaq-,
yvaq-) and yvópaλlov (Alc. Z 14, 8), beside μóλеaкov. Verbal adjectives: ǎ-уvaлτoç
(Pl. Com., Plu.) and ǎ-yvapos (NT, pap.) ‘unfulled, new³, εлí-уvaços ‘fulled again',
of clothes (Poll.), to εл-уváлτw.
⚫ETYM The initial sequence has been compared with -кvaíw, кvñv, ► кvíľw, ► кvÚw;
the ending with рáлτw, which also denotes a technical operation of the clothing
industry (кváqoç is reminiscent of pacń, etc.). The forms with yv- cannot be
explained in an inherited word (even if they are mostly younger), so they point to
Pre-Greek origin. Note that Schwyzer: 414 unconvincingly took кvάлτw as
assimilated from уváлτw, and also the typical o for a in yvócaλλov (Alc.) and the ε
in кvéqaλλov, which can hardly be due to old ablaut (cf. Schwyzer: 343).
Outside Greek, a Celtic word for 'fleece' has been cited as cognate, e.g. MW cnaif
[m.], Olr. cnaí [f.] < PCl. *knawi (cf. Matasović 2008, who considers a relationship
with PCI. *kna-ie/o- 'to chew, bite' probable); forms in Germanic and Baltic are
semantically farther away, e.g. ON *hnafa, pret. hnof 'to cut off, Lith. knabénti 'to
pick (with the beak)'. However, the variation к/ y, a/ o rather points to Pre-Greek
origin (not in Fur.). See ►кvýôη, ► KVWY.
Kváч [?] = Sáλos piece of half-burned wood' (Hdn. Gr. 1, 404). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
кvéqaç [n.] 'evening twilight, dusk, morning twilight' (Il., X.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Gen. -aoç, -ouc, etc. (on the inflection Schwyzer: 514f.); secondary nom.acc.
KvéQoç (H., Suid., Phot.), perhaps from кvéqouç, -EL.
●DER kvɛçaños ‘of the dusk, dark' (trag., com., Hippon.); kveôáľw [v.] ‘to become
dark' (A. Ag. 131 [lyr.]).
⚫ETYM Often connected with the Indo-Iranian word for ‘night', Skt. kṣáp-, Av. xšap-,
which belong with Hitt. išpant- 'id.'; nevertheless, it is unknown how this
comparison would work. The word чéqaç is a rhyming formation; cf. also
►Svópoç. The word is no doubt Pre-Greek, but the variation is not known from
other examples.
êvéwpoç [m.] name of a stinging plant, ‘Daphne, Thymelaea' (Thphr., Dsc., Plin., H.).
< GR➤
•VAR Also -ov [n.]; cf. perhaps к<v>ewpeïv• naoxntɩãν 'to feel (unnatural) lust' (H.),
as per Fraenkel Glotta 4 (1913): 42.
•ETYM Connected with кvñv, like synonymous кvñστpov. Perhaps from a pre-form
*knā-ḍro- (i.e. *кvý-oupoç, containing the plant suffix -oupos), with quantitative
metathesis. See ►-kvaíw.
Kvýow-kvαíw.
кvñкoç [f.] 'safflower, Carthamus tinctorius' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.). <?, IE? *knh₂kó-
'yellow (like honey, gold)'>
●DIAL Myc. ka-na-ko /knāko-/.
кvnμós
●COMP As a first member e.g. in кvηko-ôópos ‘carrying safflower' (pap.).
723
•DER Adjective кvykóç, Dor. kvāкós ‘yellow, safflower-colored', usually of a goat
(Thespis, S. Ichn. 358, Theoc., AP), but also of the wolf (Babr.). кvýкiov ‘clover,
σáμчoxov (Dsc., Ps.-Dsc.); кváкwv, -wvoç [m.] 'he-goat' (Theoc.), kvāкíaç [m.]
'wolf (Babr.); кVÝкIVOÇ 'from safflower' (pap., Dsc.), кvηкódηs 'safflower-like'
(Thphr.); кvηкíτηs (λíños) name of a yellowish stone (Hermes Trism.); kvηkíç, -ïdos
[f.] ‘bleak spot, especially in heaven (Call., Plu.), cf. кηλís and Chantraine 1933: 347;
also name of a kind of antelope (H.).
⚫ETYM Skt. kāñcana- [n.] 'gold', OPr. cucan brown', and the Germanic word for
honey, OHG honag, etc. resemble words for 'yellow, etc.' or yellowish material; but
the varying vocalism is unclear. The Greek word was probably originally an
adjective; the plant was probably (Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 270) introduced from
Egypt. The appurtenance of the Skt. word is doubted by Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.
("nicht überzeugend erklärt"), and a PIE paradigm cannot be reconstructed.
êvýµŋ [f.] ‘part between knee and ankle, leg, shank' (Il.), ‘tibia' (Gal., Ruf.), metaph.
'stem between two joints' (Thphr.), see Strömberg 1937: 48, ‘spoke of a wheel (Hom.,
etc. in compounds, Poll., Eust.). <IE *konh₂-m, *knh₂-m- 'bone, tibia, shank'>
•VAR Dor. kváμã.
•COMP As a second member e.g. in óкτá-кvηµos 'with eight spokes' (Il.), лaxú-
кvηuos 'with thick shanks' (Ar.). Substantivized hypostasis: ȧvτкvýμ-ɩov [n.] ‘what
is over against the shank', i.e. 'tibia' (IA).
•DER kvηµís, -ïdos [f.] ‘greave' (Il.), Aeol. kvãļus, kváµides [pl.] (Alc.); also êvnµídia
[pl.] (Att. inscr.; mg. uncertain); see Trümpy 1950: 19f.; кvηuía [f.] 'spoke' (Lys.),
plur. = τà τñç άµážŋç лépíðéµãτa 'what is put around the wheel' (H.), etc.; кvημ-
(1)años 'belonging to the shank' (Hp., Gal.).
⚫ETYM кváμā corresponds with OIr. cnáim ‘leg, bone' (i-stem), both of which derive
from *knām- < IE *knh₂m-. A different ablaut grade is found in a Germanic word for
‘shank, back of the knee': OHG hamma, OE hamm, ON họm, which may have
assimilated from hanma-. We may therefore assume an ablauting paradigm nom.
*konh₂-m(-), gen. *knh₂-m-os, which was thematicized in different ways. On
► кvηó, sеe s.v.
êvŋµóç [m.] geographical term (Hom., h. Ap. 283, Orph. A. 465), e.g. ”Idŋs év kvnuotoi
(II.), mg. uncertain, probably 'projecting part, shoulder of a mountain'; dŋµóσioç
кvηчós public grove' (TAM 2: 1, 64, Telmessos; not quite certain); also = ópíyavos
(Arg., Eust. 265, 40). <IE? *knh₂-m-, *konh₂-m- 'mountain-forest'>>
⚫DER Denominativе кvημшσα· лεpixŵσai, páčαɩ, qеɛīpaɩ, кλɛĩσαɩ, ελɛïv 'to be
exceedingly angry, fence in, destroy, enclose, comе²; кvηµµа· еεípoμaι 'perish',
êvηµwēñvai. qłapñvaɩ ‘id.', dɩekvηuwoato. diéqßeipɛ 'ruined completely' (H.). In
the sense 'encircle, etc.' cf. кvηós 'grove'; in the sense of qɛipat it remains unclear
(cf. кvηµíaι qеopaí 'destruction' H.).
•ETYM The meaning of кvηµós recalls MoLG hamm ‘mountain forest' (cf. Fick KZ 21
(1873): 368), but this word rather belongs with MLG ham 'fenced in piece of land',
MOLG hamme 'fenced in field', and therefore can be explained differently.

=== page 386 ===

724
KVĤV, KVÑOTIS
Connection with кvýjuη as “shank of a mountain" (Eust. 1498, 42 explains it as 'what
is above the foot') remains uncertain.
=>
кVÑV, кVñστɩç → -кvaiw.
кvnon [f.] 'itch' (LXX De. 28, 27, H. s.v. чoμα, Suid. s.v. 'Aqpodí™). <PG?>
•DER KVηoáw = prurio (gloss.).
•ETYM Connected with кvñу 'to scratch, itch' with a suffix -q-, for which one
compared ►ȧкaλnon. Direct connection with кváάçoç, кváлτw is improbable. Note
кviqɛa. кvidaç (H.), with an -- that is explainable by analogy with kvíðŋ, ►кvíčw.
The word oкvña (probably for άкαλña) as an explanation for кvīdaι (H.) is
doubtful; if it is correct, we may compare oкvių beside кvių for the variation.
kvidŋ [f.] 'nettle, sea-nettle' (Hp., Arist., Theoc.). <PG?>
•DER кvídɛoç ‘of a kvíðŋ' (Theognost.); kvidātai (kvηd- cod.). Sákvetal, lowç åñò
τñу лóаç be stung, perhaps by a grass' and кvidŵvtes (-dovtεs cod.). кvídŋ
µaʊtɩyoûvteç ‘whipped by a nettle' (H.); kvdwoɛç [pl.] ‘itching, caused by a nettle’
(Hp.), as if from *кvidów; cf. the numerous formations in -(w)σɩ in medical and
technical terms. See Chantraine 1933: 284ff.
•ETYM Taken with ►кvíčw ‘to scratch, sting'; yet the i of êvídŋ is long, which may
point to Pre-Greek origin. See кviσa.
кvíšw [v.] ‘to scratch, pound, chop up, provoke' (Pi., IA). <IE? *knid- ‘scratch'>
•VAR Aor. Kvíσal, pass. кvɩσеñvαι, fut. кvíσw, perf. pass. кéкvioμiai.
•DIAL Dor. aor. Kvíčaι (Pi.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, кατα-, úлo-.
●Der kvoµós, kvíσµa 'scratching, provocation, etc.' (Аr.), àлóкvσµа ‘piece' (Ar.),
ɑnó-, è̟ní-kvoiç ‘scratching' (Thphr.). As a back-formation *êvíç, acc. kvíða (Opp.),
plur. кvídɛç (LXX) ‘nettle', kvíša ‘id.' (gloss.). Compound with a verbal (aoristic)
second member Qiλó-кviσoç 'desirous' (AP), also кVσÓτερоç (Ath. 12, 549a).
•ETYM The basis is кvd- or кvt-, aor. кvσ-, which points to a root that seems to be
found in Baltic and Germanic verbs, e.g. Latv. knidêt 'to itch, geminate, creep', ON
hníta, pret. hneit 'to push against', both from root final *-d- (also in MIr. cned
'wound' < *knidā). A root-final -t- (which may also be continued by the Greek
forms) is found as well, e.g. in Lith. knisti, 1sg. knintù, pret. knitaŭ, ‘to scratch, itch,
tickle'; a root-final -s- occurs in Lith. 1sg. knisù 'to grub up'. The forms ►кvidŋ,
►кviσa, with a long vowel, are probably not cognate.
Kvīσa [f.] 'steam and odor of fat, smell and savor of burnt sacrifice, fat caul' (Il., Arist.,
Hell.). <IE? *kniHd-s- 'fumes'>
•VAR Epic кvion; also kvĩσos [n.] (Com. Adesp. 608, sch.), after λíños, etc.
•COMP лоλÚ-кVσoos with rich smell of the sacrifice' (A. R.).
•DER KVIƠNεIÇ (K 10, Pi.), кvσwτós (A. Ch. 485), кvoηpós (Achae. 7) 'smelling of fat',
кvowdηs 'id., fat' (Arist., Gal.), кvσαλéoç (H.), кvσóç (Ath. 3, 115e), = кvɩσŃεɩç.
KVIOŃELS.
Denominative verbs: кvoάw 'to fill with the smell of fat' (E., Ar.), кνσóодаι 'to be
changed into the smell of fat', -ów 'to give the smell of fat' (Arist., Ph.).
KvÚČα 1
725
•ETYM Often compared with Lat. nīdor [m.] ‘smell of roasted meat, vapor, smoke',
which may continue *knīdōs. This points to a neuter s-stem *knīd-s-h₂ [n.pl.] for
кvion, whence secondarily кvĩσa (Solmsen 1909: 238), so it is ultimately from IE
*knidos- [n.] (cf. on ►εpon). Close to this form is ON hniss [n.] 'strong smell, bad
taste in eating', from IE *knid-to-. This word belongs to hnitan 'to push against' (cf.
Go. stigqan 'to push' = OHG stincan 'to stink'), and one assumes a comparable
origin for nidor and кvioα, i.e. connection with кvíw. However, for кvidŋ, кvioa,
and nidor we have to start from a form with long vowel, which is quite problematic
for IE.
кvíч, кvɩлóç [m.] name of unknown insects (small ants acc. to Arist. Sens. 444b 12),
that infest several trees and plants (Ar., Arist., Thphr., LXX). <PG?>>
•VAR Also σкvíy, okvĩnós, plur. also σкviqεç.
•COMP As a first member in кvло-λóуoç [m.] name of a woodpecker, σкуло-qayos
‘eating oêvîñɛç' (Arist.).
●DER кvíлɛoç “belonging to a кvíy' (Zos. Alch.). Several expressive words have been
put in connection to кví, σкví, rarely found in literature, that indicate especially
avarice or different eye diseases: кviós (AP), okvлóç (Anon. in EN, H.), okvɩôós
(Phryn.) 'niggard'; кvлɛúw [v.] 'to be stingy' and кνлɛíα (Doroth. Astrol.); further
in the mg. 'feeble-mindedness, etc.': кvлóç (Semon.), σкvóóç (H.), úлó-oкvñoç,
-OKVIÇOS, -OXVɩQos 'slightly short-sighted' (pap.), кvëά· лtíλŋ ‘[female] suffering
from a disease of the eyelids' (H.); with к⌁лóτηç ‘eye-inflammation' (Hp. Loc. Hom.
13, Erot.), кvñóoµaɩ [v.] ‘to be inflamed, of the eyes' (H. in kɛkvñwµέvoɩ), also ‘to be
infested with mildew', of fruits' (H. ib.). Beside the names for eye diseases, etc., there
are expressions for 'dark': σкvoaños (v.l. -лaños) adjunct of ódíτηs 'who walks in the
darkness' (Theoc. 16, 93), perhaps after кvɛqaĭoç; σкvīqoç. tò okótoç ‘darkness' (H.).
Further two denominatives: кvлεt̃ν· σɛíεv, žúεɩу μελαера кαì Sokoús 'to shake,
scratch or scrape balks and beams' (H.), perhaps originally of the кvчлεç; σкуíлтƐLV.
vúσσav 'to pierce' (H.).
•ETYM Formations rhyming with kvíy, okvíy are ▶Opíy and ▶y. Both (σ)êvíw and
the words for 'niggard' could go back to the idea of pinching and stinging (cf.
►σкvíлτw). Perhaps the terms for diminished sight come from closing the eyes, or
perhaps from plant diseases caused by êvîñç (see ►кviñóoµɑɩ). It has been
compared with words for 'pinching, etc.' in Baltic and Germanic, e.g. Latv. kniêbt,
knipêt, MLDu. nipen, but these are rather European substrate words. The whole
picture is that of a Pre-Greek word: very small animals, the long i, the variation π/Q,
prothetic σ-.
KVÓOÇ, KVoUÇ [m.] 'the grinding sound of the wheel against the axle', also (A. Fr. 237)
'the sound of feet when marching'; also (by confusion with xvón) 'axle-box, nave'
(H., Phot.). <?>
⚫ETYM Not well attested and therefore hard to judge. It is most often considered to be
a full grade noun from ►кvúw 'to scratch'.
кvúča 1 a plant. → кóvučα.
=>
...

=== page 387 ===

726
KVÚČα 2
kópadoc
727
кvúča 2 'scratch'. → kvów.
=>
кvvšέoµaɩ [v.] ‘to whine, whimper', of dogs and children (S., Ar., Theoc., Opp.,
Nonn.). <ONOM?>
•VAR Also -Čάoμαι, -Čoμαι; also act. -έw.
⚫COMP Rarely with лρoσ-, úло-.
•DER KVUČŋеµóç 'whining', also of wild animals (л 163, A. R., Opp., Ath.); кvúčηµa
'whimpering of children' (Hdt., Him.).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic; coincidental similarity with Lith. kniaūkti 'to miaow'. See
►KVUČów.
KVUČów [V.]◄IE? *kneu-g-, -k- 'become somber'>
•VAR Only кvuwow (v 401), кVÚČwσɛv (v 433), of the eyes of Odysseus, that, while
earlier лɛpɩкaλλέa έóvτα, were made dim and dark by Athena.
ETYM The basic form seems to have been preserved in кvuoi oi τà õµµατа
лоVоÛντεÇ 'who have trouble with the eyes', кvυ(óv. ȧépα εлvéελov кai
лvevµatódŋ ‘cloudy and windy air' (H., unclear Anacr. 87); cf. Büchner Herm. 75
(1940): 156¹. Connection with кvýšα ‘scratch', кvúw is quite probable; the
correspondence with кvučάoμat is therefore probably accidental. A remarkable
parallel gives Lith. kniáuktis ‘to get cloudy, cover oneself (of heaven), take a gloomy
aspect' beside kniaūkti 'to miaow'; niaūras 'cloudy, somber, troubled' is comparable,
as well as 'grumbling, nasalizing', niauróti [v.] 'to growl, of bears'. The word can be
of independent (onomatopoeic or other) origin or show semantic analogy; this can
hardly be decided.
кvów [V.] 'to scratch' (Ar. Th. 481, Men. 1021). <IE? *knu- 'scratch'?>
•VAR ŋɛpɩ-kvúw ‘to scratch round abouť (Phot.).
●DER кvõµa [n.] ‘scratching (Ar. Ec. 36, Gal. 19, 112) and ‘scratch'; кvúoç [n.] (Hes. fr.
29, 1), кvñσa [f.] (Herod. 7, 95 as a term of abuse; cf. dɛĩσα, µúžα, etc.), кvúča (Philox.
Gramm. apud EM 523, 2, Eust.), cf. ǎša, okúša, кvíšα, etc. Note the glosses in H.
kvúðoç. ǎкavða µкpá ‘small thorn', kvvðóv. σµêpóv ‘small' (cf. tutłóç, -óv and
plant names in -0oc, Chantraine 1933: 367f.); back-formation кVŨ. Tò έλáxiστOV
'smallest', like ypu, ßpĩ. On ►кvÓOÇ, KVOÛÇ, SEE s.v.
ETYM Like in the case of -кvαiw, кvñν, ►кVάNTW, ►кVÍČw, words formally
comparable to кvúw can be found in Germanic and Baltic: OHG hniuwan 'to
squash', ON hnjóða ‘to push, hit, etc.' < *kneu-, Latv. knūdu, and knūstu ‘to itch’.
кvádalov [n.] 'wild or harmful animal' (p 317). <PG>
•DER kvwdaλwdŋs (Tz.). kvwdāž, -ākoç [m.] 'pin, pivot', also 'sockets for an axe'
(Hero, Ph. Bel.), kvwdákiov, kvwdaki【w [v.] ‘to hang on pivots' (Hero). кvwdwv,
-ovtoç [m.], plur. ‘teeth of a sword or a javelin', sing. ‘sword (S., X.).
⚫ETYM The pair kváðαλov: кváбwv recalls pairs like ȧукáλη: áукáv, óμqaλós: Lat.
umbō (Chantraine 1933: 246). Given the meaning ‘teeth', кvwdov-t- may well be
secondary for *кvwdov- after odovτ- (cf. Schwyzer: 526). Frisk assumed that
Kvóбaλov and кvódwv, кvádač go back to a verbal noun *кvwd(o-) meaning 'tooth,
biter, gnawer', belonging to кvñv, etc. (see -кvaíw). The glosses кávadol. σlayóvɛç,
yvá o jaws', кvadáλλεται· кvýеεταi 'gnaws' (H.) belong here too. The words do not
belong to Lith. kándu ‘to bite', as this is formally impossible (see on yváðos); they
are no doubt Pre-Greek, since кvad- cannot continue an IE pre-form. I am not sure
that кvóda belongs with the other words. See also ▸kvww.
кváσow [V.] 'to sleep, slumber' (8 809). <?►
•VAR Only present stem.
•COMP Also with έvɩ-, кατa-.
⚫ETYM Like ►ɛüdw, without etymology. Formally, cf. the opposite έypnσow (A 551),
related to yɛipw.
KVÁY, кVWÃÓS [m.] a wild animal, of snakes, etc. (Nic. Th.). ◄PG(V)►
●Der kvwéɛúç. ǎpktos. évɩol kvovéɛúç ‘bear' (H.); also kuvoñïeç. äpktos (for -ol?).
Maкɛdóvɛç 'bear (Maced.)' (H.). Further also кɩvóлετоν 'poisonous animal, snake'
(Call., Nic.), with anaptyctic vowel.
ETYM Not a cross of кvódaλov and another word (e.g. кλwy, кvíš, σé̟w), as
suggested by Frisk. The variant forms point to a Pre-Greek word. On secondary
vowels in Pre-Greek, see Fur.: 383f.
=>
кOαкτηρ [m.] name of a servant in the Spartan mysteries. → Kolov.
кoάλεμoç [m.] 'blockhead' (Ar., Plu.), also name of a demon of stupidity (Ar. Eq. 221).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. кavaλós. μwpolóyos 'speaking like an idiot' and кóaloi. þápßapoi
'foreigners' (H.).
⚫ETYM Ending like in ►iáλɛuoc; on the phonetics, see Schwyzer: 302. Björck 1950: 46
and 258 refers to onomatopoeic кo-. The word is clearly Pre-Greek because of the
variants. See кóßaλos.
Koά interjection imitating the croaking of frogs (Ar. Ra.). <ONOM▷
•ETYM A sound imitation, like MoHG qua(c)k, quaken. Lat. coaxāre [v.] ‘to croak'
(Suet.) is probably a literary imitation of кoá (cf. WH s.v. coaxo). See ►кoÏ, ►кoÏ™w.
кóaλoi [m.pl.] · ẞápẞapot ‘barbarians' (H.). <PG>
⚫ETYM Perhaps related to кavalóç or кóẞaλoç. See ▸кoάλεμoç.
Kóẞaboç [m.] a vessel (PLond.). <PG>
ETYM Fur.: 346 compares кúßεpov 'beehive' (H.) and кúaboç 'vessel, scoop'. If
correct, the word is Pre-Greek.
кóẞaкτpα [n.pl.] · кoλакεúµаτα, лаvоυруηµаτа 'рieces of flattery, knavery' (H.).
< PG➤
•VAR káẞaž. лavouρyoç 'crafty, knavish' (H.).
•ETYM The element кa/oẞ-aк- is clearly Pre-Greek.
Kóẞāλoç [m.] 'rogue, mischievous knave', also (parodic) of mischievous genies (Ar.,
Arist., D. C.). <PG➤
•VAR As an adjective кóẞaλov, -a [n.] 'knavish tricks' (Pherecr., Ar.).

=== page 388 ===

728
kóBeipoc
•DER koẞaλɛía (Din.), кoßáλεvμa (Et. Gen.) 'roguery'; (k)кoßaλikɛúoµai [v.] ‘to
swindle, deceive' (Ar. Eq. 270), кoßaλiкɛúµaτa [pl.] (Ar. Eq. 332), derived from
*кoßaλikóç (кoßaλɩкoчσɩ is a conj. in Timocr. fr. 1, 7 Diehl). Also кoßaλɛúw [v.] ‘to
transport (pap., EM), MoGr. кouẞaλw ‘id.”, koßaλɩoµós ‘transport (pap.).
ETYM Words from the vulgar language of comedy. Björck 1950: 46f. and 258f.
assumed an original meaning 'porter, transport worker', whence contemptible
'rogue'. This original meaning would have been introduced into koine as a non-IA
element. Against connection with Lat. caballus (Grégoire Byzantion 13 (1938): 287ff.;
cf. on кaẞáλλnc), see Björck l.c. The word is probably Pre-Greek.
Kóẞɛɩpoç [adj.] . yɛλolaστýç, σkwäτýç, λoidopiστηs jester, scoffer' (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Kóẞɛipa. yɛλoĩa 'jests' [n.pl.] (H.).
⚫ETYM Hemberg 1950: 326 refers to the grotesque pictures of the Kabeiroi in Thebes.
Since a may vary with o in Pre-Greek words (Fur. 341-5), our word must be identical
in origin with ▶Káßɛɩpoç.
kóyxn [f.] 'mussel, cockle', also as measure and metaph. of several shell-like objects,
e.g. 'hollow of the ear, knee-cap, brain-pan, case round a seal, knob of a shield, etc.'
(Emp., Epich., Sophr., IA). <PG?, LW?>
•VAR Also Kóуxos [m., f.].
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. кoyxo-0ńpās [m.] 'mussel-fisher' (Epich.).
=
⚫DER 1. Diminutives кoyxíov (Antiph., Str.), кoyxáptov (Str., Aret.). 2. Koyxwτóç
'provided with a knob' (pap. IIIª). 3. кoyxíτηs (\íos) 'shelly marble' (Paus.). 4.
коужаλíčɛу· лεлointai áñò toñ ňуov τwν кóуyxwv '[a form] created after the sound
of the mussel-shell' (H.), possibly after кpotaλíčɛv: кpót-aλa: кpótoç (Frisk); 5. As a
back-formation кóy interjection, used for the sound of the sherd falling in the
voting urn, etc. (H.). 6. кoyxíšw [v.] ‘to paint purple', whence кoyxiσtηs ‘painter' and
koyxɩotikń ‘trade of purple-dyeing' (PGrenf. 2, 87), for *кoуxvλí(w, etc. (see below).
7. кoубov [n.] ‘mussel', the animal and the shell, also ‘murex, purpura' (Epich.,
Sophr., Hdt., Hp., Arist.), from кoуXúλn (which only occurs as a v.l. in Ph. 1, 536 and
AP 9, 214); from кoуXÚλov: кoyxuλíaç (Ar.) and кoуáτη (X., Philostr.)
кoуXiτη (io), see Redard 1949: 56); кOYXvλuwdŋs 'like a к.' (Str.), кoуxúλoç
'purple-colored' (pap.), кoyxvλlatós, -ɩwtóç ‘painted with purple' (pap., gloss.); also
кoyxvλɛúç ‘purple-worker' (Korykos), either for *koyxvλiɛús or from кoyxúλŋ, to
which koyxvλevtés ‘murex fisher' and koyxvλeutɩký ‘trade of murex fishing' (Just.).
●ETYM The word кóyxos is compared with the similar Skt. śańkhá- [m.] ‘musseľ, but
a common pre-form cannot be reconstructed. Latin borrowed concha, conchỹlium,
conchita from кóуõη, кoуÚλov, koуxíτns. The word is clearly cognate with кóxλoç,
which suggests that the forms are Pre-Greek (prenasalization); this is confirmed by
thevariants кoкáλtα, v.ll. -кк- and кwкáλia (Arist. HA, see Fur.: 131). Alternatively, if
the comparison with Sanskrit is correct, the word may be a common loanword (Fur.:
278). See ►кóxλos.
kódaλa [?] · ¡×¤ñç, keσtpeús ‘fish, mullet' (H.). <PG?>
Kółoupoç
•VAR Kodaλɛúɛσai vdov diατpíßev 'to waste away inside', кodaλaú év
729
'to lie hidden', кodaλevoµévŋ. ápɛokevoµévi, áñpayoñσa ‘obsequious, subservient;
remaining quiet (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Perhaps Pre-Greek.
kodoµɛúç [m.] ‘one who roasts barley' (Poll., H.). <PG?>
•VAR Special feminine forms кodoµý and -µεútpia (also Phot. and Suid.). Remarks
on the relation between these words in Boßhardt 1942: 84.
●DER kodoµεúw (v.] 'to roast barley', кodoµɛía and кodoμεчov ‘pot for barley' (Poll.,
H.).
⚫ETYM Comparison with the Slavic word for 'smoke', e.g. OCS kaditi, cannot be
upheld. A similar meaning is found in кíðvaι ai έyxwpoɩ лεуµévai кpiðαí 'barley
roasted on the countryside' (H.), but this has a different vowel. Probably Pre-Greek.
кобúμαλov →кvdwvia.
=>
kodwvea · oñka xɛчµɛpɩvá ‘winter fruits' (H.). → kvdwvia.
koέw [v.] ‘to remark, learn, hear' (Anacr. 4, 14, Hellad. apud Phot.). <IE *(s)keuh,-
'note, see, hear'>
•VAR Probably also in H. [cod. Kołεî].
•DER Also Koάw, in koặ• ảkovɛɩ, nεúðɛtαɩ ‘hears, takes notice'; ¿кoãµeç. ǹkoúσaµev,
εлvеóμεеа; εкоáеη. εлεvoеη, εqwpáеη 'was contrived, discovered'; кoãσal.
aio éσ a 'perceive' (H.); έкóŋσεv (Call. Fr. 53). A primary verb seems to be found in
εкo̟μεν• εdoμεv, εpшε, óµɛ0α 'saw, watched, perceived' (H.), see below.
Verbal adjective in ►ávaкuç. Aao-кówv, εúpv-кówσα 'who learns from afar' (Euph.
112, H.), etc. (cf. Bechtel 1917a: 37f.).
•ETYM On кoíŋç, etc., see ►кoĩov. The form кo(Ƒ)έw is identical in origin with Lat.
caveō ‘beware', which derives from *covēre < PIE *kouh,-éie- by Thurneysen-Havet's
unrounding of oụ in pretonic position; see now Vine KZ 119 (2006) on Thurneysen-
Havet. A zero-grade primary formation is seen in Skt. ā-kúvate 'to have in view';
further forms in LIV² s.v. *(s)keuh,- 'wahrnehmen, schauen'. The gloss ȧкεúεl. Tηpεi
(H.) rather belongs to ȧкoúw; εкoμεv is unclear, on which see Schwyzer: 72110 and
740. Additionally, there was (s)keuh,- with s-mobile; see ▸ Ovoσкóoç.
кóƉopvoç [m.] 'high boot, footware with high base for actors, tragic cothurn' (Hdt.,
Ar.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Lydian, acc. to Jonkees JHS 60 (1940): 80, but more probably Pre-Greek.
kółovpoç [adj.] epithet of кηov or the drone, 'without sting' (Hes. Op. 304). <?>
•VAR KÓBouρiv (cod. -oυ-). ȧλóлεкα ‘fox' (H.).
•ETYM The formation recalls кóλoupoç, fem. -pıç 'with cut (short) tail', said of the
fox, etc., which is a compound of kóλos and oúpá. Frisk connects kółoupos “ohne
Zweifel❞ with кoеá. ßλáßŋ 'damage' (H.), which is further unclear. In H., we also
find кopew. ẞláßη, which led to the assumption that кóðoupos stands for *кopе-
oupos, and that кow was back-formed from кóеoupos. Comparison of this kopow
with Skt. krdhú- 'shortened, mutilated, invalid' is formally impossible (*krd"-u-

=== page 389 ===

730
Koi
KÓÏч, -ÏKOÇ
731
would have given **кpα0-v- in Greek). Fur.: 198 connects кovτós, kovdós with a
similar meaning (s.v. ► kevtéw).
кoï interjection, imitating the sound of young pigs (Ar. Ach., Hdn. Gr.). <ONOM➤
•DER KOÏČEV [v.] 'to squeak' (Ar. Ach.).
•ETYM Like MoE squeak, Ru. kvičáť ‘id.', and other sound-imitations in various
languages. Cf. ►кoá§ and ▸ypũ, ypú¶w.
кolaкτýp mystery servant in Sparta. → koĭov.
KOIKÚλλw [V.] 'to gape about' (Ar. Th. 852). <?►
⚫DER KOLKUλiwv PN (Ael.).
⚫ETYM Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 96 suggested relation to кúla ‘bags under the eyes,
eye socket'. Cf. the synonyms devdiλλw, Savdaívw, лaлτaívw, etc., which are of
similar formation. Tichy 1983: 298 corrects the meaning to ‘im Selbstgespräch die
Lippen bewegen, munkeln'. This would mean that the connection with kúλa is folk-
etymological.
кoчoç [adj.] ‘hollow, hollowed out, spacious, deep' (Il.). ◄IE? *keuH- ‘hollow'>
•VAR кóïλoç, see below.
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. кoɩλo-yάστwp ‘with an empty stomach, greedy'
(A.); on the formation see Sommer 1948: 150.
•DER A. Substantives: 1. Kolλía [f.] 'abdomen, belly, body cavity in general' (IA),
кoɩɩwdŋs ‘like a belly' (Arist.), kotλiaкós ‘belonging to the belly, suffering from
diseases of the belly' (Plu., medic.), KOLλTIкŃ (vóσos) 'disease of the belly' (Cat. Cod.
Astr.); diminutive кotλídiov (Str.). 2. kolλáç [f.] 'hollow, ravine' (Hell.), adjectival
'hollow' (Tryph. Ep.). 3. kolλótŋs 'hollow' (Arist.). 4. kotlíσkoç [m.] ‘hollow, scoop-
shaped knife' (medic.), cf. ypaqiσkoç and other names of instruments in Chantraine
1933: 408. 5. Koiλwμa (Arist., Hell.), koiλwʊis (Hp.) 'hollowing, deepening', cf.
кoιλóμαι below.
B. Adjectives (to τò кoiλov 'hollow, cavity'): 1. Kotλwdns 'rich in cavities' (Babr.). 2.
Koιλaïoç = koiλoç (Gal.).
C. Verbs: 1. Koλaivw 'to hollow out, excavate' (IA), aor. кotλãvai (-ñvaɩ), perf.
кɛкoíλaσμaι, whence кoilavσis (Alex. Aphr.), кoíλaσμа (LXX, Hero), kotλaoía
(Hero) 'excavation, etc.'. 2. кotλóoμat, only in кɛкoɩwμέvos 'holloweď (D. S., Dsc.);
also koiλwµa, koiλwoɩs (if not directly from кoîλoç, see above).
•ETYM кóïλoç can be or must be trisyllabic at all Homeric attestations, except verse-
initially at X 385. The basic form *кófɩλos is probably a derivative in -λo- from the
root found in kool. tà xáoµata tñç yñç, kaì tà кoλшμаτα 'the depths of the earth,
cavities' (H.) and Lat. cavus 'hollow' < *kouHo-, MIr. cúa 'hollow', and other Celtic
forms. Other cognate derivatives in -l- are Arm. soyl‘cavity' < IE *keu-lo- (vel sim.),
PGm. *hula- < *kuH-ló- (with pretonic shortening), found in ON holr, OE, OFri.,
OS, OHG hol 'hollow' (G. Kroonen p.c.). The root is reconstructed with a laryngeal,
because this is required by the cognate formation кúap ‘eye of a needle, orifice in
the ear' <*kuH-r. Alb. thellë 'deep' may, like Greek, derive from a pre-form *kowilo-
(thus first Pedersen KZ 36 (1900): 332), but could be a loan from Greek. The word
►Kúλa is probably not connected. See ▸ Koç.
Koiλv [n.sg.] Tò кaλóv 'sth. good or beautiful' (H.). <?>
.
⚫ETYM Connected with a word for 'whole, unhurt, healthy' with representatives in
Germanic and Balto-Slavic, e.g. Go. hails, OCS cělá 'whole', OPr. kailūstikan [acc.sg.]
'health' PIE *keh₂i-lo- or European substrate *kailo-. Frisk and DELG rightfully
doubt the appurtenance of the Greek gloss, since the definition is open to many
interpretations (does it stand for кolλov, with Latte?).
koчuάw 'to lay to rest'. •VAR кoчuí¶w. →kɛīµai.
koɩvá · Xóptos ‘pasture, fodder' (H.). ◄IE? *koino- ‘grass, hay'▷
ETYM The gloss corresponds nicely to a Balto-Slavic word for 'hay': Lith. šiēnas,
OCS sěno Xóρτоç'. However, Latte supposes that Xópτos should be taken in the
sense of 'common ground'; in that case, it is simply a form of Koɩvós.
KOLVós [adj.] 'common, public, usual, impartial', tò кolvóv 'the community, common
good, public, leading authority, league' (IA, Hes.); Hom. has žuvóc. ◄IE *kom 'with'>
•COMP Numerous compounds.
•DER 1. *Kolvάwv (see Chantraine 1933: 163) > Dor. Arc. кováv, -avoç [m.] (Pi.,
Locris, Tegea), Att. koɩvɛwv, -wvoç [m.] (E. HF 149, 340), koɩvwv, -ŵvos [m.] (X.
Cyr.) 'fellow traveler, companion', after кoɩvwvέw, etc.; thence Dor. Kotvavέw (Dor.
treaty apud Th. 5, 79, 1; Argos, Delphi), Att. кoɩvwvέw [v.] 'to be a participant,
participate (for *кoɩvɛwvéw), кovavía (Pi.), Att. Koivwvía 'community, share',
KOLVwvóc 'companion, etc.' (probably a back-formation, see Leumann 1950: 224);
thence koιvavɩкóç (Archyt.), кOLV@VIKÓS (Att.) 'common, social'; кoɩvwvчaïoç
'regarding the community' (pap.; Chantraine 1933: 49); from кolvwvéw also
кovávηua (Pl., Arist.). Further nominal derivations: 2. kolvótŋs [f.] 'community,
affability' (Att., Hell.); 3. koɩvɛãov ‘public hall, community, etc.' (inscr.); 4. kotvápioV
diminutive of koɩvóv (written cynarium CIL 13, 10021, 199). Denominative verb
koɩvów, -óoµaɩ ‘to make communal, share', also ‘to make profane', med. 'to act as
member of a community, participate, ask for advice' (IA), aor. Koɩvãσaι (Pi.),
коívшμα, -μáτιov 'joint, band' (Ph. Bel.), Koivwσiç intercourse' (Plu.).
⚫ETYM The word кoɩvós may be related to the preposition and prefix found in Lat.
cum, com- (con-), Gaul. com- 'with, together with', Gm. ga-, from IE *kom 'together,
with'. We have to assume that an adjective *kom-ió- > *koni̟ó- was formed (see Rix
1976: 67).
кóïч, -ïкoç [m.] a kind of palm, 'Hyphaene thebaica', and a basket made from its leaves
(com., Thphr.). <PG?, LW Eg.?>
•VAR Kóïç (Epich., BGU 972, 5).
•DER KOTKIVOÇ ‘made of к.' (Str.).
⚫ETYM Fraenkel Phil. 97 (1948): 170 thought that σкoíкιov 'vessel, receptacle' (Cyrene,
Hell. pap.) was derived from this word, but it is improbable that the σ- was taken
from σkεuoç or σnupíç. This interchange o/zero rather points to Pre-Greek origin. A

=== page 390 ===

732
koiov
KokÚal
733
by-form is ►KOUкɩ [n.] (pap., Plin.), which may point to Egyptian origin, see
Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 214.
Koτov [?] Kúïov• ¿vέxupov ‘pledge' (H.). <LW?, PG?>
•VAR Also Kova, кwα. évéxupα (H.).
•DER KOLÁČε• Vεxpάε 'takes a pledge from', кováσαι évεxupiáσai, kwáɛv.
¿vɛxvpášɛɩv, kwaßɛiç. ¿vεxupiaσɛíç (H.). As an agent noun кo(1) aкτηp, name of a
mystery servant in Sparta (IG 5(1), 210ff.), meaning ¿vexvpao-týc (Fraenkel 1910: 158
after Meister)? Alternative explanations in Bourguet 1927: 112f.
•ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 41 analyzed it as *кóƑ-tov, related to koćw ‘to remark,
pay attention', with the same semantic development as in Lat. caveō, from ‘to regard,
take care of to 'to serve as a surety'. He also connects koiŋç, kóŋç iɛpɛùç Kaẞɛipwv,
ó кafaípwv qovéa 'priest of the Kabeiroi, who purifies a murderer' (H.) with
kolóλns. d iepeúç (H., Suid.), koiātai iɛpātai, koiwoato. ɑqiɛpwoato, kałiɛpwoato
(H.). However, cf. also Lyd. kaveś (Masson Jb. f. kleinas. Forsch. 1 (1950-51): 182ff.).
DELG tentatively adds кwταруns 'priest' (Didyma). Even more uncertain is kołoç =
ápɩ¤µós (Ath. 10, 455e) which is supposed to be Macedonian. The group could well
be Anatolian or Pre-Greek. The hypothesis connecting Hebr. kōhēn ‘priest', etc.
(Lewy 1895: 258) is now abandoned.
koipavoç [m.] ‘ruler, commander, lord' (Il.). ◄IE *kor(i)o- ‘war, army'▷
•COMP Rarely as a second member, e.g. лoλv-кoipavos ‘ruling many' (A. fr. 238, lyr.)
with noλUкoчpavín lordship over many' (Rhian. 1, 10) but B 204 = 'the presence of
many rulers' with the first member as a subject, and the second member as a verbal
noun to koipavéw.
•DER KOιpavidaι [pl.] 'sons of rulers, members of the ruling house' (S. Ant. 940);
koɩpavños and кoɩpavкóç belonging to the ruling house' (late poets); koɩpavíŋ
‘dynasty' (D. P., APl.); koɩpavéw [v.] ‘to rule' (Il.).
⚫ETYM Derived from a word for ‘army, host of warriors' found in Go. harjis ‘army',
Lith. kārias ‘id.', MIr. cuire [m.] ‘crowd, group', Gaul. ENs Tri-, Petru-corii
"consisting of three/ four tribes", from IE *korio-. The Greek word seems to have a
close counterpart in ON herjann, epithet of Odin, and in the Old British EN
Coriono-tōtae (see Peters 1980a: 170ff., with an attempt to clarify the derivational
history of these words). It is debated whether the suffix *-no- is old in the type Lat.
dominus from domus, Go. þiudans 'king' from þiuda 'people', etc. In Greek, the base
form *korio- still existed in proper names like Koɩpó-µaxoç, Kopatádaç. Beside IE
*kor-io-, there was *kor(o)- in Lith. kāras ‘war', OP kāra- ‘army, people'. In Greek,
the old word koipavos was replaced by the substrate words ►ávač and ► ßaoiλɛús.
кOK(K)áλia [n.pl.] 'small crustacaeans (Arist. HA 528a 9). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also KWK-.
⚫ETYM On the meaning, see Thompson 1947 s.v., who points to similar Italian names
like cocciole, cozzule. The word should be connected as Pre-Greek together with its
variant ►кóyxn.
KÓYXN.
1.
кÓKKOÇ [m.] 1. ‘kernel of fruits, especially of the pomegranate' (h. Cer., IA), cf.
Strömberg 1937: 185; 2. 'berry (gall) of the kermes oak, scarlet, kermes oak' (Thphr.,
Gal., Dsc.), see Michell Class. Rev. 69 (1955): 246; 3. metaph. 'pill' (medic.). <PG?>
⚫COMP KOKKO-ẞaqns 'painted with scarlet' (Thphr.), kaλλí-кoккoç 'with beautiful
kernels' (Thphr.); kokkó-daqvov, daqvó-kokkov (medic.) = кóккoç dáqvns, daqvis
(Strömberg 1944: 7).
●DER Diminutives kokkíov, kokkáptov (medic.); kÓKKwv, -wvoç [m.] ‘kernel of the
pomegranate' (Sol., Hp.), 'mistletoe berry' (H.), kókkaλos [m.] 'kernel of the stone-
pine' (Hp., Gal.), see Chantraine 1933: 247; Kokkidɛç [pl.] ‘scarlet slippers' (Herod.),
-ída ayɛipov 'black poplar' (H.); kókkɩvos ‘scarlet' (Herod., pap., Arr.), whence
KOKKIVI™w [V.] ‘to be scarlet-coloredď (sch.), koкképós 'made of scarlet' (Edict. Diocl.),
cf. olvηpós, apóç; kokkíčw [v.] ‘to take out the kernel' (A., Ar.).
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. Alessio Studi etruschi 18 (1945): 126 adduces Span.
cuesco 'nut' and considers a Mediterranaean loan *kosko-, from which кókкos would
also derive; this is rejected by Fur.: 2934. Probably Pre-Greek.
=>
KokpÚdwv → kopdic.
kóêêũ [interj.] cry of the cuckoo; also a cry in general (Ar.). <PG?, ONOM▷
●COMP As a first member in kokku-þóaç öpvıç name of the cock (S. fr. 791; codd.
Eust. KOKKO-).
⚫DER KOKKU W of the cry of the cuckoo and of the cock (Hes.), коккvσμóç 'shrill cry'
(Nicom. Math.), kokkvotńs ‘crier' (Timo); kókкvč, -ūyoç [m.] ‘cuckoo' (Hes.), -vyoç
[nom.] (Alc.), also metaph., e.g. as a fish name (Hp., Arist.), a fig (Nic.); see
Strömberg 1943: 116, Strömberg 1940: 73. From кóккuč: Koккúytov name of a
mountain (Paus.); kokkuyía. ávεµávy. Kpotwviātai ‘poppy anemone (Krotoniate)'
(H.), "cuckooflower” acc. to Strömberg 1.c.; kokkuyέa ‘Rhus cotinus', a tree (Plin.;
conj. in Thphr. HP 3, 16, 6). With labial suffix the PN KÓккUч, Kоккovẞíaç (Boeot.),
cf. Bechtel 1921, 1: 262f. Here perhaps also кóккuç λópos (H.), if to be interpreted as
'cock's comb'.
⚫ETYM Cf. ►кOккúμηλov. Onomatopoeic, like Skt. kokilá- 'cuckoo', kukkuțá- ‘cock',
Lat. cuculus, MoE cuckoo, etc. On кóккuž, see Thompson 1895 s.v. The word could
well be Pre-Greek.
кOккÚµηλov [n.] ‘plum' (Archil.). <PG?►
⚫DER KOккvμηλéαa [f.] 'plum tree' (Arar. Com., Thphr.), -µnλóv [m.] 'plum garden'
(gloss.).
•ETYM Connection with кóккOÇ as 'stone fruit' seems probable (see Schrader-
Nehring 1917(2): 182); the -v- would have to be folk-etymological after kókêvč, but
no motivation for the replacement is indicated (cf. Strömberg 1940: 73). Note кodú-
µaλov (s.v. ► кvdóvia). The word could be Pre-Greek.
кokúaɩ [pl.m., f.] ‘forefathers' (AP, Call., H.). <?►
•VAR V.l. KOKK-. Cf. kovkā• nánπwv ‘of ancestors' (H.).
⚫ETYM Grošelj Razprave 2: 12 and Schmidt ad loc. compared yuyaí ·лáллo (H.).
Cf. also Pfeiffer 1949-1953 ad Call. fr. 340.

=== page 391 ===

734
KÓKXOS
Koλíaç
735
KóкXOS [?]= Lat. coculum 'a vessel for cooking' (PHamb. 12, 36). <LW Lat.>>
•ETYM From the Latin word, which is derived from coquo ‘to cook' (DELG).
kóλaßpos [m.] name of a song which accompanied the dance кoλaßpioµós (Ath.), =
Xoчpídiov 'little pig' (H. [cod. кoλídiov], Suid.). <PG(V)>
•VAR кαλαẞpiσμóç (v.l. codd. Ath. 14, 629d). Cf. кoλóẞplov 'little pig' (Ar. Byz. apud
Eust. 1817, 19), Fur.: 343.
•DER KOλaßpíεv. σкɩρτāν 'to leap, bound' (H.), pass. 'to be derided' (LXX),
кolaßpiσµós (Ath., Poll.); кoλaßpevoµévŋ. kwloiç áλλoµévη ‘twitching with the
limbs' (H.). See Lawler and Kober Class. Phil. 40 (1945): 98ff. with hypotheses on the
etymology.
•ETYM Poll. 4, 100 calls the dance Thracian or Carian, so the word is probably
foreign. Cf. Suid. кoλαßρσεíη. Xλɛiaσðɛiŋ, éкtiva×¤ɛíŋ, áτaσðɛíŋ. kóλαẞρoç yàp
ó μкρòç xoчpoç 'was mocked, kicked out, dishonored; for a к. is a small pig'. Fur.:
343 compares кoλóẞptov 'little pig' (Ar. Byz. apud Eust. 1817, 19), which means that
the word is Pre-Greek. For the dance, he compares кaλλaßíç 'a passionate dance';
note the v.l. kaλaßpoμós (codd. Ath.).
-
Koláчw 'to chastize, punish'. → KÓλoç.
kólaž, -ākos [m.] ‘flatterer, fawner' (Att., Hell.). <PG(S)►
•COMP Often as a second member (com.), e.g. кvσo-кóλač; see Risch IF 59 (1949):
277.
•DER KOλakɛía (Democr., Pl.), кoλaкíç [f.] (Clearch., Plu.), кoλaкıкóç 'flattering'
(Pl.) and кoλaкɛúw 'to flatter' (Att. Hell.); koλáкɛvα (X.) ‘flattering', koλakevtikós
'id.' (Pl.), кoλaкεvtýç = kóλaž (gloss.).
⚫ETYM A word from Attic everyday language without established etymology. As the
suffix-ak- originates from Pre-Greek, the same probably holds for this word.
коλάлτш [v.] 'to peck (of birds), strike, carve, engrave' (IA, Aeol.). <PG>
•VAR Aor. Koláчai.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially ¿v-, έk-.
•DER έy-kóλays 'inscription', έк- ‘obliteration' (inscr., Arist.), ¿у-кóλαшia
'inscription' (LXX, Priene), (èy-)коλαлтоç 'carved out' (inscr., LXX); коλαлτηр [m.]
'chisel' with Sta-kоλαлτηрíш 'to engrave with a chisel' (Lebadeia); also Spu(o)-
коλάлτ-[T]ηs 'woodpecker' (Ar., Arist.; see further ►Spuc), a compound of Sópu and
коλάлτяν with suffixal -τη, similar кρävо-коλáлτη name of a venomous spider
(Philum.).
•ETYM Frisk and DELG assume that кoλáïèw derives from an IE root *kelh₂-, and
that it replaces a primary verb by adding -άлw after verbs with similar meaning, like
okántw, dapdánɩw, кóлɩw; the resultant form perhaps replaced a primary verb
preserved in Lith. kálti, isg. kalù 'to forge, hammer', OCS klati, koljo 'oqάττεv', Ru.
kolót' 'sting, split, chop'. Several other Greek words have been connected with this
root; see discussion on Kóλos, ► keλɛós, ► kláw. Cf. LIV² s.v. *kelh₂-. However, as
long as the origin of the labial enlargement is not further clarified, it is best to
assume that кoλáлτw is derived from ►кóλaqos and, therefore, of Pre-Greek origin.
!
i
i
B
кóλaqoç [m.] ‘punch, buffet' (Epich. 1 as a name of a raidotpíßŋç, H., EM). <PG▷
•VAR KÓλaqoç. Kóvduλoç 'knuckle' (H.).
•DER KOλaqiw 'to punch, to box on the ear' (NT, Sammelb. 6263, 23); Kolaqidiov
Att. woman's name, see Fraenkel 1912: 86³).
▶
•ETYM A lowly word without clear etymology. For the formation, it has been
compared to кpóταqoç (Chantraine 1933: 264). Frisk and DELG argued that
Kóλaqoç derives from коλáлтш as a back-formation, if the two are cognate, but it
remains unclear why they do not consider кóλapos as basic. The word is no doubt
Pre-Greek, with кoλáлτw as the accompanying denominative. Latin borrowed the
word as colap(h)us (Plaut.); see Ernout RPh. 77 (1951): 155f. It received a wide
distribution in Vulgar Latin and in the Romance languages (VLat. colpus, Ital. colpo,
MoFr. coup, etc.); it perhaps also appears in Go. kaupatjan ‘koλaçíčεɩv'.
koléa [f.] · noiá tɩç öpxŋσiç ‘kind of dance' (H.). <PG?(S)►
•VAR KOλía. ópxǹσɛws ɛldos ‘id.' (H.).
•DER кoλiáσaι ópησaσða ‘to dance' (H.), ipf. ¿кolíače (IG 12 Supp. 244; cf. Latte
Glotta 32 (1953): 39f.).
•ETYM The variant in -έa suggests Pre-Greek origin.
koλekávoɩ [m.pl.] · toñto ¿ïì µýkovs oùv λertótyti έtáσoeto ‘used in the case of
length combined with thinness' (H., citing Strat. 64). <PG?►
⚫VAR KOλOKάVOL. ɛvµŋkɛïç kaì λɛnτоí 'tall and thin, narrow' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown; probably Pre-Greek.
кoλɛóv [n.] 'sheath of a sword' (II.), see Trümpy 1950: 62. <PG?►
•VAR Also -óç [m.], lengthened kovλ-.
•COMP Also in compounds, e.g. коλεó-лτερоç 'sheath-winged (of beetles)' (Arist.),
σɩSŋpo-kóλεoç 'with iron sheath' (pap. III³).
•DER Denominative koλɛášovtes. włoûvtes eis kolɛóv, repaívovtes ‘thrusting into
the sheath, penetrating' (H.) (likewise Ath. Mitt. 59, 66; Syrus Vª), кoleaoµós. tò
лεрαívɛσðαɩ ‘penetration' (H.). It is unlikely that кóλvėpo [pl.] ‘testicles' (Arist.)
belongs here too; кóλvеpov, -τpov also means 'with ripe figs' (Ath. 3, 76f.); cf. on
▶okódvdpov.
•ETYM The suffix recalls ►ɛiλɛós ‘hole, den, etc.'. Acc. to Meillet BSL 30 (1930): 115',
Koλɛóv comes from a Mediterranaean language, like Lat. culleus ‘leather sack'; cf.
WH s.v. Therefore, it is probably Pre-Greek. Connection with кαλúлτw, ► кéλūчoç
as an inherited word (*кoλεƑóv) is formally impossible; these too are substrate
words.
кoλετpάw [V.] 'to trample on' (Ar. Nu. 552). <PG?>
ETYM Acc. to H., a term from oil preparation: ȧлò τŵν τàç ελαíαç лatoúvтwv, ö dǹ
Aéyovʊɩ koλetpāv ‘after those treading olives, which is called k.'. This presupposes a
substantive *kóλɛtpov or *koλétpa, which could be an instrument noun or nomen
loci, but the meaning of which remains unknown. Connection with кóλoç, кoλáлtw,
etc. does not help much. Probably a technical Pre-Greek term.
кolíaç [m.] name of a mackerel-like fish, 'Scomber colias' (Epich., Ar., Arist.). <?▷

=== page 392 ===

736
•DER Diminutive кoλídov (medic.).
Kó入入ǎ
•ETYM Formation like άкavėías, piac, and other fish and animal names
(Chantraine 1933: 94); further unexplained. Cf. Thompson 1947 s.v.
Kóλλă [f.] ‘glue' (Emp., Hdt., Hp., E.). <PG?, IE? *kol- ‘glue'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in koλλ-ɛyós ‘glue-boiler' (Att. inscr., Poll.); as a
second member in tavpó-, ¿x¤vó-koλλa ‘bull-, fish-glue' (Plb., Dsc.); but notí-, σúy-
кOλoç, etc. (Pi., A.) are back-formations to лоτ-, σvу-кoλλáw, etc.
•DER KOλλnεvτα [n.pl.] (O 389 žvoτá, Hes. Sc. 309 ǎpμaτα) 'well-fixed', cf. кoλλητóç
below; кoλλwns 'gluey, sticky' (Pl., Arist.). Denominative verb кoλλáw 'to glue,
stick together, make one, unite' (Pi., Emp., IA), often with prefixes like σvv-, лpoσ-,
¿v-, kata-; kóλλŋua 'what is glued together, etc.', plur. 'papyrus leaves that form a
scroll”, kóλλŋσiç ‘glueing together, soldering' (IA) with (σvy-)кoλλñoчµoç, -ov ‘glued
together' (pap.); (ovy-)ko\Antýs ‘who glues together' (Ar., pap.); кo\\ŋτpιov ‘glue'
(Ph. Bel.); кóλλnτpα [pl.] 'cost of soldering' (pap.); кoλλητóç 'glued together, well-
fixed' (II.), Ammann 1956: 16, кoλλŋtiкóç (Dor. -äτ-) ‘gluey, gluing together' (Arist.,
Epid., pap.), кoλ\ŋtiкà pya ‘plumber's work' (pap.). As a second member in the
back-formation лршτó-коλλоν [n.] 'the first fixed (glued) leaf of a papyrus scroll'
(Just.). Rarely έëɩ-кoλλaívw ‘to stick to' (Thphr.), кo\\i\w (Gp.), ko\\iotńc (gloss.).
•ETYM кóλλã may be a derivation in -ia from a root *kol-, but further details are
obscure. The similarity with a Slavic word for ‘glue' (e.g. CS klějú, klejú, Ru. klej <
PSI. *klějб; *klбjб) is only apparent (there is no evidence for *kolějú, *kбljб with
reduced vowel). The Germanic verb MDu. and MLG helen ‘stick' < PGm. *haljan is
limited to a small area, and is hard to connect with кóλλa. Because of the geminate
-\-, the Greek word could be Pre-Greek in origin, i.e. *koľa. It was taken over by
Romance, e.g. Ital. colla, MoFr. colle, etc. See yλolós.
кóλλaßos [m.] a kind of bread or cake (Ar., Philyll.); also = кóλλoy (Luc., Iamb., H.).
<PG➤
•DER KOλλaẞi w "to play кóλλaßoç”, i.e. one holds his eyes, while the other strikes
him, and asks him to guess by which hand he has been struck (Poll. 9, 129); the
naming motive is obscure.
•ETYM Popular word in -ßos (Schwyzer: 496, Chantraine 1933: 261f.) and, like so
many words of the same formation, without etymology. Could the word originally
mean 'buffet'? See кólloy. Cf. further кóλλ and кoλλúpa. The word is no
doubt Pre-Greek; cf. also Guilleux RPh. 75 (2001) S.V.
kóλλiž, -īkos [m.] 'round, coarse bread (Hippon., com.), ‘tablet' (medic.). <PG▷
•COMP KOAIKO-qáуoç (Ar.).
⚫DER KOλλÍKIOS ǎρτоç (Ath.), коλλíкiov (Greg. Cor.).
•ETYM The word is no doubt Pre-Greek, because of the suffix -ĭk-.
кoλλópoßov →kaλañpoy.
Kóλoupoç [m.] name of an unknown fish (Marc. Sid. 22). <PG(S)►
•DER KOλλoupíç 'marshmallow' (gloss.).
Koloẞóc
737
⚫ETYM Strömberg 1943: 48 proposes that the word replaced *кóλ-oupos 'with stump
tail', with expressive gemination; as a marsh-plant, the mallow would have been
called after the fish (ibd. 25). André RPh. 45 (1971): 216f. separates кoλλoupíç from
the fish and and connects it with кoλλ(o)úpa 'small, round flat bread', given the
similarity of the fruit of the mallow with a cake. Probably Pre-Greek, given the
geminate -- (which is not a sign of expressiveness) and the suffix -oup(oc).
кóλλoч, -oлоç [m.] 'peg or screw by which the strings of the lyre were tightened' (o
407, Ar., Pl., Luc.); ‘thick skin on the upper part of the neck of oxen or pigs' (Ar. fr.
646 and 506, 3); 'bar by which a windlass was turned' (Arist. Mech. 852b 12); metaph.
‘avdpóyvvos, cinaedus' (Hell. com., AP). <PG(S,V)►
VAR Also Kóλλaßos (in the first mg.).
•COMP кoλλoлo-dɩwêtés (sch. Ar. Nu. 347, Eust., Suid.).
•DER коλλолεúw ‘to be a кóllow' (Pl. Com.); other denominatives: кoλλoлíεv.
kaƉέλkɛv ‘to draw. or carry down' and kolλorwσai katakoÀÀñσaɩ ‘to glue upon’
(H.), with folk-etymological connection with кóλλa.
•ETYM A technical term, which was analyzed by H. as dɩà tò ɛiç kóλλav ɛúƉɛtɛïv
(referring to the thick part of the neck of animals). Others have proposed relation to
Lat. callum ‘thick skin, callosity'; Bq suggested to connect it with oкóλoy ‘pole'.
The word is clearly Pre-Greek because of its suffix; this is further confirmed if
кóλλaßoç is a variant (-oл-/ -απ-/ -aß- is a Pre-Greek suffix variation).
кóλλvẞoç 1 [m.] ‘small change' (Ar., Eup., Call.), ‘small gold weight' (Thphr.); 'rate of
exchange' (Hell., inscr., pap., Cic.). ◄ PG(S)►
•VAR Also -ov [n.] (Poll. 9, 72).
•DER KOMUẞLOTηs 'money changer' (Men., NT, pap.), from *кo\\uẞíw;
KOλλuẞiσTIкóç and кoλλußiστηpiov 'exchange office' (pap. and ostr.).
⚫ETYM Explained as Semitic by Lewy 1895: 119f., who compared Hebr. ḥālap
'exchange'. However, the element -uß- (which cannot be explained from the Hebr.
word) rather points to a Pre-Greek word.
кoλλúpa mg. uncertain, probably 'cake, tablet' (Ar., Thphr., LXX, pap.), cf. кÓÀÀɩĚ
and кóλaßoç. <PG(S)►
•VAR Also Koλλoúpa.
●DER Diminutives koλλupíç and koλλúpiov (-oú-) (LXX, pap.); koλλúptov (-oú-)
usually 'eyesalve, salve in general', in the form of a tablet (Apoc., Arr., medic., inscr.
and pap.); кoλλʊpikóç ‘made from кoλλõpaι (Plaut. Pers. 95), koλλvpíšw ‘to bake к.'
(LXX), кoλλupιóoµat in kɛkoλλupiwµévov (cod. -póµevov). λevêõ kexploµévov
‘anointed with white' (H.); ko\\vpíwv [m.] name of a bird, probably ‘thrush' (Arist.);
also kopuλíwv (H.), naming motive unknown (cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.).
ETYM Like other words in -üpа (äyкüpα, уéquрα, λéлüрov), probably Pre-Greek
(see Pre-Greek: suffixes). If the variation v/ ou is old, this also points to Pre-Greek
origin.
=>
кoλoßáqɩvos •VAR Xoλoßáqivoç. ⇒ xolń.
кoλoẞós [adj.] 'curtailed, maimed, short' (Pl., X., Arist., Hell.). <PG(S)►

=== page 393 ===

738
KOλOLÓC
•COMP As a first member e.g. in koλoßó-kɛpкoç ‘with docked tail' (LXX).
●DER KOλóẞtov [n.] ‘jacket without sleeves' (pap.), also кoλóẞač (gloss.); кoλoßáns
'stunted, stumpy' (Polem. Phgn. [v.l.]), кoloßóτηs 'stuntedness' (Plu.).
Denominative verbs: 1. Koloẞów 'to stunt, shorten', кolóßwois 'mutilation',
Koλóẞwua 'maimed, amputated member' (Arist.); 2. кoλoßíčw ‘id.' (Thera Iª-IP).
⚫ETYM An enlargement of кóλoç ‘id.'; see also on кλaußóç. Since the suffix -(0)ẞo-
cannot be explained in IE terms, the word is probably Pre-Greek.
KOλoιóç [m.] ‘jackdaw, Corvus monedula' (Il., Pi., Ar., Arist.). <PG(V)►
●DER kołoɩwdŋs (Plu.), koλotáw (Poll. 5, 89), -wáw (B 212) ‘to cry (like a jackdaw)',
Koλwéw 'id.' (Antim. 37); back-formation кoλwóç 'screeching' (A 575, A. R. 1, 1284),
Koλotń. Qwvý ‘voice' (H.).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic origin cannot be further substantiated; neither does the word
belong to kaλéw. It would be highly unsatisfactory to separate кolwάw, -wóc from
koλotáw, -otós, but an explanation of the notation with -w- (in έкoλwa B 212) has
not been found (cf. the hypotheses in Frisk and DELG). Cf. also кoλovāv. Oopuẞεiv
'to make noise' (H.). These variants may be of Pre-Greek origin. See кoλoiqpvč.
koloɩtía [f.] tree that grew on the Liparian islands ‘Cytisus aeolicus', also ‘sallow, Salix
cinerea' (Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Koλovτéα, кoλuτéα [f.] 'Colutea arborescens' (Thphr.), whence Lat.
colūtea [n.pl.] 'its fruits'; in H. also кoλoitéα, кoλwτéa, koiλwtéa. dévôpov tɩ 'a tree'.
⚫ETYM Clearly a Pre-Greek word, given the variation. Cf. on кoλoкúvеŋ.
Koλoiqpv [?] • Tavaypaτoç ȧλεкτpvwv. кai öpoç Bowτíaç 'Tanagrian cock; mountain
in Boeotia' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM The second element is not in any way related to qápvč. Probably Pre-Greek.
koλókvµa [n.] ‘large heavy wall' before it breaks, said of the threats of Cleon, only (Ar.
Eq. 692). <?
⚫ETYM Explained in various ways since antiquity: кóλov кỹчa ‘blunt wave' (sch. ad
loc.); τuolòv or µакpòv кõµа ‘blind or high wave' (H.); кwoòv kỹµa kaì µǹ
лɩкαxλáčov 'silent wave, not gurgling' (Suid.). See the suggestion by Taillardat 1962:
$343 in DELG s.v.
Koλoкúvеn [f.] 'round gourd, Lagenaria vulgaris' (Hp., com., Arist., pap.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Att. -τη, later -uvēǎ, -uvτă (Solmsen 1909: 263), late also -Uvoç (-UVTOÇ,
-IVTOC) [m.].
•COMP KOλOKUVеapúτaiva [f.] 'spoon from к.' (pap.).
•DER Diminutives кoλoкÚvτov (Phryn. Com.), -uvėíç ‘кoλóкuvėα ȧypía' (Dsc.,
Gal.), -úvěɩvoç (-úvtivos, -ívðɩvos) ‘made with к.' (pap., Luc.), -vvětás [f.] ‘id.' (AP),
-óv 'plantation of к.' (pap.); άлокоλокúνтшσιç 'transformation into a pumpkin'
(Seneca, D. C. 60, 35). Koλoкuvеw [f.] PN; see Schulze 1933a: 309f.
⚫ETYM The suffix -vv0oç, -v0oç, frequent in plant names, points to Pre-Greek origin.
Cf. also KúкUOV. TÒV σIKVÓV, KUKÚïšα. уλuкɛĩa кoλóкuvτα 'sweet gourd' (H.). An
informant in Ath. 2, 58f. says that it was introduced from India, but the comparison
739
with Skt. kālinda- [n.] 'watermelon' and Kurd. kalak ‘melon' is not very informative.
On the names of the gourd and cucumber, see Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 652ff.
кólov [n.] 'large intestine, ileum' (Ar. Eq. 455, Arist., Nic., Poll.); name of food
preserved in a pot (PSI 5, 535, 39; 46, III), acc. to Ath. 6, 262a = Tτpoon 'food'. <?>
⚫ETYM No convincing explanation. Bq hesitantly pointed to кuλλóç 'curbed', кελλóv.
στpεẞλóv 'twisted' (H.); others have connected it with кaλídia εντερα. Kúлριоι
'entrails (Cypr.)' (H.). Late Greek had the form кwλov, influenced by кwλov
'member'. Fur.: 131 connects Xoác ‘intestines', and further xóλɩкɛç, yóla. évtɛpa.
Makɛdóvɛç (yóda codd.), yáλλia. έvτɛpa, yáλlos = xóλ; none of these is really
convincing.
.
kóλoç [adj.] ‘hornless, with stunted horns', of cows and goats (Hdt., Theoc., Nic., H.),
of a spear 'without point' (II 117), of battle 'broken off (sch.), as a name of book .
<PG?>
•COMP As a first member in кóλoupos 'with short tail' (Plu.), as a mathematical and
astronomical term 'blunt' (Hipparch. Astr., Hero, Nicom.); koλovpaños 'broken off,
steep' (of лéτpα, Call.), koλoúpa 'hill, etc.' (Hermione, Epid.), кoλoupią. tā ȧrotoµią
‘in a piece?', koλovpītiç. yñ. Likeλoí ‘earth (Sicilian)' (H.), koλoúpwσiç = kodóßwois
(Iamb.); Lat. LW clūra ‘(kind of) monkey' (WH s.v., Leumann Sprache 1 (1949):
2068).
●DER kóλ-ɛpoç ‘with short-sheared fleece' (Arist.), opposed to ε-, εл-εpoç, perhaps
after кóλoupoç; see on ɛlpoç; further кoλóxεɩp. Xɛípapyos (H.). Derived from
кóλoç or closely related are two verbs: 1. koλášw ‘to wring in, chastise, punish, cut'
(IA), aor. кoλáσat, rarely with σuv-, àνπ-, лро-; thence probably denominative
Kóλaσıç 'chastisement' (IA), -aσuа (Ar., X.), -aσμóç (Plu.) ‘id.'; кoλaστnç 'punisher'
(trag., Pl., Lys.), also кoλαστp 'id.' (Arr.), fem. коλάστρiα (Ezek.), кoλáστɛipα (AP);
кoλaστηpiov ‘punishment', -oç [adj.] ‘punishing' (X., Ph.), kolaσtikós ‘punishing’
(Pl.). 2. koloúw 'to mutilate, limit' (II.), aor. кoλoñσat, sometimes with лɛpɩ-, katα-,
άлo-; formation unclear (cf. Schwyzer: 683, Chantraine 1942: 374 and see on
►кwλów). From it кóλovσiç ‘docking, cutting short' (Arist.), кoλoúσµata. kλáoµata
'fragments' (H.).
⚫ETYM The archaic word кóλoç was replaced by кoλoẞóc, and also by kóλoupoç. It is
usually taken as a verbal noun from a Balto-Slavic primary verb: Lith. kálti, 1sg. kalu
'to beat, forge', OCS klati, 1sg. koljo 'to butcher'. In Greek, the root may have left
some traces in kλáw, but see s.v. In any case, connection with ►кɛλɛóç and
►кoλáлτw is improbable. The barytone accent may be connected with the passive
meaning (Schwyzer: 459); perhaps кóλoç was originally a substantive. The fact that
кoλáлτw and Koloúw are of unclear formation might point to a Pre-Greek
complex.
koloʊʊóç [m.] ‘gigantic statue, colossus' (Hdt. [only about Egypt], Hell.), also 'statue'
in general (A., Hell.), ‘figure, puppet representing someone absent' (Cyrene, SEG IX,
72, 117 and 122), cf. Buck 1955: 112. <PG>
VAR TT (D. S.), -σ- [f.] (Cyrene).
⚫COMP As a first member e.g. in кoλоσσо-лоιóç (Нero).

=== page 394 ===

740
●DER koλoσσaños (D. S. [-tī-], Ph., pap.), -ɩкós (D. S. [-tī-], Str., Plu.) 'having the
size of a K., colossal'.
⚫ETYM Ample discussion of the word by Benveniste RPh. 58 (1929): 118ff. The
element -σσ- typically points to Pre-Greek origin: it could represent PG * or *k³,
like in ►áλaσoa. Bq compared кoλɛкávoɩ (also -ok-) ‘tall, meager man' (Stratt.,
H.), which is possible if we start from *kolok- / *kolok-n-, with depalatalization
before the nasal.
koloovptós [m.] 'noisy rabble, tumult, uproar' (Il., Hes., Ar.). <?>
⚫DER KOλOσUPTEï· Oopvẞɛĩ, τapáσσя 'makes troubles, agitates' (H.).
⚫ETYM Frequently analyzed as кoλo-σup-τós (cf. кovioptós, ájačitós, ẞovλutós for
this use of the suffix -τó-), of which the second member would be from ►σúpw ‘to
draw, sweep' (Suid. s.v.), and the first member remain unexplained.
Koλovia [n.pl.] 'gastropod mollusks' (Xenocr. apud Orob. 2, 58, 79). <PG?>
VAR Also in Lat. coluthia (Plin. NH 32, 84, 147).
•ETYM Unknown.
KOλOÚw →KÓλOÇ.
koloqáv, -ŵvos [m.] 'summit, top, pinnacle', only metaph. (Pl., com. Adesp., Str.),
acc. to H. also = кoλiós ‘green woodpecker' (i.e. ►кɛλɛóç; s.v.) and is aλáσσo
'sea fish'. <PG>
•DER KOλoqpwvéw [v.] 'to crown a work' (Steph. in Hp.). Also a TN, town in Ionia;
Koλoqpóvios 'from K., inhabitant of K.'.
⚫ETYM A connection with кoλwvós ‘hill' via an analysis *кoλapóv < IE *koln-bho- is
highly doubtful; the Anatolian toponym rather points to substrate origin. See
Chantraine 1933: 162.
кóλлоç [m.] 'bosom, lap, gulf, bay, vale, womb' (Il.), also 'fistulous ulcer under the
skin', = кoλлáρov 'id.' (medic.). <IE *k*elp- 'curve, vault', *k"olp-o->
●COMP As a second member e.g. in þaðú-кoλлoç 'with folds of the garment falling
down deep' (II.).
●DER кoλлúdŋs ‘bosom-like, full of bays' (E., Plb.); кoλлíαç ‘puffing up' (лéïλoç, A.
Pers. 1060), ‘wind blowing from the bay', ¿укoλлíaç ‘id.' (Arist.); Koλлíτŋs [m.] old
name of Phoenicia (Steph. Byz.), plur. "inhabitants of the coast", name of an
uncivilized people living by the Red Sea (Philostr.), cf. below on dαкоλлτεúш;
коλлóo̟μα, -ów 'to puff up' (B., Hp.), кóλлwσiç, -wµа 'puff, -wτóç. Several prefixed
forms in various functions, of which most are Hell.: έy-, εл-, úло-кóλлoç, ȧva-, ¿y-,
εл-коАлów, εу-, кατα-, лερɩ-коλлí(w, etc. However, note (Siα-)коλлτεÚw 'to
smuggle' (PTeb. 709, 9; 14 [IIª]), which hardly belongs to кóλлoç ‘bosom, etc.', but
rather with the ethnonym Koλлīτaɩ “inhabitants of the coast" (see above); likewise
žλalov koλrtikóv (PTeb. 38, 12 and 125 [IIª]) 'smuggled oil'.
•ETYM If we connect кóλлоç with MoHG wölben as a verbal noun to the primary
verb preserved in ON holfinn 'vaulted', causative ON hvelfa, OHG (h)welben 'to
vault', we have to assume dissimilation *kw p > к … ï for Greek (see Schwyzer:
302, Lejeune 1972: $723). Germanic also has a verbal noun ON hvalf, OE hwealf [f.]
...
...
!
KOλwvη
741
'vault', which would be identical with кóλлоç. The comparison of OE heofon-hwealf
'vault of heaven' with aiеéрoç кóλлоι (Рi. О. 13, 88) is not compelling, as the Greek
expression could be based on the image of a bosom and the Germanic on that of a
vault. Vulgar Latin borrowed кóλлoç as colphus > Ital. golfo, MoFr. golfe, etc.
kóλσaσðaɩ · ikɛteñσαɩ 'to supplicate' (H.). →kwλov.
KOλúẞdaiva [f.] 'kind of crab' (Epich. 57). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Cf. кoλúμẞaɩva ‘id.', see on ►кóλчµßoç. A typically Pre-Greek word, with
interchange ẞS/ ẞ and prenasalization. There is no reason to assume influence of
μoλúßdava 'bull of lead'.
Kóλvẞoç Kaλúлτw.
=>
=>
Kóλvopoι 'testicles'. →кoλɛóv and σkóλvеpov.
kóλvµßos [m.] ‘little grebe, Podiceps minor' (Ar.), see Thompson 1895: 158, also a
back-formation of ►кoλvµßáw. <PG(V)►
•VAR Note кoλvμpáw (EM 526, 2). In the same mg. koλvµßís [f.] (Ar., Arist.), -áç [f.]
'id.' (Ath.), but more commonly of olives pickled in brine (Diph. Siph., pap.);
кoλúμẞaιvα = кoλúẞdaiva (Archig. apud Gal.), кoλúμẞατоç name of a plant (Gp.),
naming motive unknown, cf. Strömberg 1940: 113, and кoλчдßáç name of a shrub
(σToiẞn) in Gal.
•DER Denominative verb кoλчμẞáw 'to dive, submerge, jump into the water, swim'
(Att., Hell.), often with prefix, e.g. έк-, кaτα-, ávα-, diα-, коλчµßηеpα 'bathing place,
pool, cistern' (Pl.), кoλúμßησç 'diving' = 'pearl fishery' (Peripl. M. Rubr.), back-
koλúµßŋow
formation кóλчμẞos = koλúµßnois (Str., Paus., Plu.) and -½ pa (Hero); kolvµßytýp
(A.) and -ŋτýs (Th., Pl.) ‘diver' (cf. Fraenkel 1912: 14 and 17f.), koλvµßntiký (téxvn)
'art of diving' (Pl.); also коλчµßσtýs (sch.); koλvµßiteúw (= -ŋteúw?) 'to throw into
the water' (pap.).
•ETYM Lat. columba ‘dove' is similar, but a common pre-form would make no sense.
Apart from the suffix -vuß-, the variant кoλчupáw proves that the word is Pre-
Greek. The variation μß / ßd is most easily explained from *p, the palatal feature of
which was lost after prenasalization, giving µß (cf. Fur.: 307", although µóλvßdos /
plumbum must now be given up).
kolúµqatos [?] · qλotós, λerídiov ‘bark, capsule' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Referring to a part of a plant, the gloss must be identical with кoλúµẞaτos
(seе ►кóλчμẞoç), with well-known Pre-Greek variation.
кoλvτέa plant name. →koloɩtéa.
кOXIкóv [n.] name of a venomous type of saffron, 'Colchicum speciosum' (Dsc.).
<GR
•ETYM Named after its homeland, Koλxíç; see Strömberg 1940: 122.
KOλovn [f.] 'hill, height, heap of stones, mound, etc.' (Il., Pi., S.), also as a TN (town in
Troas, Att. deme). <IE *kolH-n- 'rise, height'>
VAR KOλwvóc [m.] (h. Cer., Hdt., X., A. R.).

=== page 395 ===

742
Kodwós
kóun
743
•COMP As a second member in Kaλλɩ-koλóvη hill near Troy (Il.), úч-kóλwvos
'towering high' (Opp.).
•DER KOλwvía. Tάqoç. 'Hλɛt̃o ‘funeral rite, tomb (Elean)' (H.), alphabetically
misplaced, so perhaps for -úva (Schmidt); Koλwvéτa [pl.] EN derived from the
deme-name (Hyperid.).
⚫ETYM The forms кoλóv-η beside кoλwv-ós point to an old n-stem. This is also seen
in Lith. kálnas 'mountain', Lat. collis ‘hill' < *kolnis, OE hyll, MoE hill < PGm. *huln-
i-. The n-stem *kolH-n-, *klH-n- belongs to a primary verb 'rise up', from which Lat.
-cellō < *-kel-nH- forms a nasal present (see De Vaan 2008), and for which Lith.
kélti, 1sg. keliu 'to lift' proves a root-final laryngeal. On the suffix -óvη, -wvóc, see
Chantraine 1933: 207f. and Schmeja IF 68 (1963): 36ff.; they probably arose by
extending the vocalism of the nominative to the other cases.
Koλwós 'screeching'. → koλotós.
koµáktwp, -opos [m.] mg. uncertain (Rhinth. 9, Inscr. Magn. 217 [Iª]). ◄LW Lat.➤
•ETYM Probably from Lat. coactor ‘exactor pecuniae' (Fraenkel 1912: 70f.). Not from
Osc. *comahtor, as per von Blumenthal Glotta 18 (1930): 149.
кoμapídɛç [acc.pl.f.] 'a fish' (Epich. 47). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown.
kóµapos 1 [f., m.] ‘strawberry tree, Arbutus unedo' (com., Thphr., Theoc.). <PG>
⚫VAR Also Kúμapos (H.).
•DER_kóµ(µ)apɩ [n.] ‘red paint from the root of the plant Comarum palustre'
(PHolm., Alchim., etc.), also -pıç [f.], -pov [n.]; cf. Lagercrantz 1913: 197f.; the i-stem
reminds of кivváßapi(s), etc.
⚫ETYM Strömberg 1940: 58 derives it from кóμn 'crown of a tree', with an added suffix
-apo-, for which he compares кíoðαpoç to кiσłóç. However, the variant with кúμ-
shows that it is a Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 362).
=>
кoµ(µ)ápai → kaµ(µ)ápos.
kóμẞa [f.] • kopávη. Пoλuppηviot 'shearwater, crow (Polyrrhenian)' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•ETYM Bechtel 1921, 2: 788 connects it with кóμẞησav. лòv ñãov άnetéλeoav
'produced a certain sound' and koµßakevetai. kóµñovç λéyɛ ‘brags, boasts' (H.). It
has been compared with кóµлоç ‘loud noise, bragging' and ẞóµẞos, which are
sound-imitating words, but at the same time Pre-Greek variants. If the bird name
► кúμẞη 3 is related, it is yet another variant.
кóμẞoç [m.] 'band, belt' (Anon. apud Suid.). <PG>
•COMP As a first member in кoμßoλútŋs. Baλavtotóµoç 'cutpurse, footpaď (H.),
коμẞoеŋλɛíα [f.] 'buckle' (sch.), from кóµßоç еñλç (or Oλεα); also коμло-еηλαía
'band, belt' (sch.) and коμло-еηλυкα [pl.] (Hippiatг.), v.l. for лóρлαкαç, which were
thought to be influenced by кóμлоç 'boast', but see below.
•DER кoμẞíov = лεрóуη 'buckle' (Eust., Sch.), кoμßwσaσÐα· στoλíσaσ0α 'to equip,
dress', kóµßwµa. στóλiσµa ‘garmenť (H.), koµßáµata = kaλλwrioµata, etc. (Suid.,
H.). Better attested is the hypostasis ¿укo̟µßóοµ [v.] ‘to bind on, put on' (Epich.,
Hell. Com., 1 Ep. Pet. 5, 5), whence έукóµßшμa “protecting upper garment worn by
slaves' (Longus, Thd.); further avaкoµßóοµαι [v.] ‘to gird on (intr.)' (Gp.).
⚫ETYM The old comparisons with Balto-Slavic words for 'hang', e.g. Lith. kabinti 'to
hang, hook on', kibti ‘to hang oneself, hook on', CS skoba 'fibula', Ru. skobá 'iron
hook, clamp', and, within Greek, with σкaußós 'crooked (legs)', are quite dubious.
As Frisk remarks, "Das Resultat dieser Vergleiche ist offenbar eine sowohl lautlich
wie begrifflich wenig befriedigende Approximation". MoNw. hempe ‘string, strap,
handle' can hardly be separated from hamp 'hemp'.
The forms кoμẞoðŋλɛía, koµñoðnλaía, koµroðýλvкa clearly show that there was a
variant with -л-, which points to Pre-Greek origin (confusion with кóµлoç ‘noise,
bragging' is improbable). Also, note the variation in the suffix: -ɛta, -aɩa, -vka, which
are found more often in Pre-Greek (Pre-Greek: suffixes -a/-ε(1)).
кoμέw [v.] ‘to care for, ply' (II.). ◄IE *kemh₂- ‘get tired’>>
•VAR Only present-stem, with iterative ipf. koµéɛσkov; prefixed with ảµqɩ- (AP);
further кouw [v.] 'to care for, attend, look after, loot, save, fetch, bring, transport'
(II.), aor. кoμíσ(σ)at, -aσat, Dor. (Pi.) кoµížαι, pass. кочшσеñvαι, fut. кo̟w, -oμα
(since o 546), see Schwyzer: 785, Chantraine 1942: 451; Hell. кoµíow, -ioquai.
•COMP Very frequent with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, ȧño-, ɛiσ-, έk-, kata-, napa-, ovv-.
•DER (ávα-, åлo-, etc.)кoшdń ‘attendance, care, support, loot, rescue, supply, escape'
(Il.); dat. кoµdñ [adv.] ‘exactly, definitely, certainly' (IA); koµotýp, -τns ‘who takes
care, provider' (E.), fem. koµíστpia (AB, Orph.); кóµotpa [n.pl.] ‘reward for saving
or transportation' (trag., inscr.); kоμшστкóç 'fit for care, for transporting' (IA); έк-
коμσчóç 'export, burial' (Str., Phld.), μετα-кóшσç, εiσ-кóµσμа, etc. (sch., gloss.).
As a second member in several compounds -кóμoç, е.g. εipo-кóμоç 'processing wool,
spinner ( 387, АP), iллокóμоç 'who takes care of horses, groom' (IA). On the
semantic development of кoμíw and derivatives see Wackernagel 1916: 219f.,
Hoekstra Mnem. 4:3 (1950): 103f.
ETYM Iterative deverbative кoμéw from primary кάuvw (type popέw; see
Schwyzer: 719), which was enlarged to кoµíчw, whence as a back-formation koudý
(Schwyzer: 4213). See further s.v. ► кáµvw.
kóµŋ [f.] ‘hair' of the head, also of the manes of a horse (Il.), metaph. ‘foliage', also of
growth in general (Od.), ‘tail of a comet (Arist.). ◄?►
⚫COMP Bahuvrihi iллó-кo̟µоç “covered with horsehair', of a helmet (II.), opposed to
governing улло-кóμоç, sее коμεw; коμα-τρоéw [v.] 'to grow one's hair'
(Amorgos, Str.), also with compositional -o-.
⚫DER Diminutives коμíσка (Alcm.) and кóчov (Arr.). Further кounτns [m.] ‘with
(long) hair (IA), 'comet' (Arist.). see Scherer 1953: 105 and 107f., also a plant-name
'Tеúμaλλoç, Euphorbia' (Dsc.); кonε 'with leaves' (Orph.). Denominative koμάw
[v.] ‘to have long hair, show off (Il.), Ion. -έw; late with άvα-, кατα-, etc.
•ETYM Not explained with certainty. The word kóµŋ may be taken as "well-tended
hair”, in opposition to Opíž, and connected with ► koµέw ‘to take care of. Thus, it
would originally mean 'care'. Schwyzer: 7250 considers a back-formation from
кoμáw, which could be a by-form of кouέw. However, since кoμάw is always

=== page 396 ===

744
A
kóvdulog
745
connected with hair and is never used in a different sense of ‘to care', the assumprion
is not very probable. Borrowed as Lat. coma; see WH s.v.
кóµµɩ [n.] ‘gum² (Hdt., Hp., Arist., Thphr.). <LW Eg.▷
•VAR Indeclinable, but also declined -ɛws, -εt (-181).
●DER кo̟µíðɩov (Hippiatr., sch.), кo̟µ(d)ádŋs ‘rubber-like' (Arist., Thphr.),
кo̟úчw [v.] to be like k.' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM From Eg. kemai, kema, kmjt, Copt. kommi (see Schrader-Nehring 1917(1):
417). From кóμu, Latin borrowed cummi(s), younger gummi. The other European
forms came from Latin. Independent loans from Egyptian (as assumed by Fohalle
1925: 171; cf. Kretschmer Glotta 16 (1928): 166) would hardly have resulted in the
same form in both languages.
кoµµóoµaι [v.] ‘to embellish, adorn oneself (Eup., Arist., Them.). <PG?>
•COMP With εлɩ- (Them.).
•DER кóμμwμа ornament' (Luc.), -wσis 'ornamentation' (Ath., H.); back-formation.
kojµióç. repiepyos kóguŋσiç ‘elaborate adornment' (Suid.); -wτńs ‘dresser' (Arr.,
Luc., Plu.), кowtí¼w. ¿nµieλoûµa 'to take care of (Suid.), -wτpiα [f.] ‘servant-girl'
(Ar., Pl.), -óτрɩov ‘cleaning product' (Ar.), -wτкós ‘belonging to cleaning,
polishing', -wτкń (τéxvη) ‘art of cleaning' (Pl., Hell.); кo̟µá· ½ коσµoñoa tò ëdos
tñç Afŋvās iépeia ‘priestess arranging the (seated) statue of Athena' (AB).
•ETYM As a typical culture word, кoµµów is suspected to have been a fashionable
innovation or a loan. The similarity with кóσμos and кoμчóç led to unconvincing
attempts to connect these two words. Solmsen RhM 56 (1901): 501f. assumes that
кoμчw is the oldest form, derived from *кoμw (to кoµɛïv) with hypocoristic
gemination. For lack of a clear solution, it seems best to assume that we are dealing
with a substrate word.
kóµros [m.] ‘echoing noise, clattering when something is struck, any loud noise,
bragging' (II.). <ONOM>
•COMP Úлερ-коμлoç 'extremely noisy, bragging' (A., Men.).
•DER коμлáðηs ostentatious' (Th., Plu̟.), кo̟µлóç [m.] 'resplendent, vaunting' (E.),
on the accent see Schwyzer: 459), кoµлηρóç ‘ringing loudly' (comm. Arist., sch.).
Denominatives: 1. koµëέw [v.] ‘to clash, ring' (M 151), ‘to rattle, strike' (D. L.), usually
'to flaunt, boast' (Pi.), on the formation see Schwyzer: 726³. 2. кoµлáčw [v.] 'to flaunt,
boasť (B. and A.), ‘to strike (a pot) to try its quality' (pap.), whence кo̟µлáoµata
[pl.] 'boasting' (A.), rarely sg., кoµлaσµós ‘bragging' (Plu.), кoµлaσíɑ ‘rattling,
striking' (pap.), koµñaσtýš ‘parader' (Ph., Plu.), koµñaσtikós (Poll.), kóµлaσoç
(Нdn.), Kоμлаσɛús ‘belonging to the district of Kóµños (Ar.). 3. кoµróqµai [v.] to
show off (D. C.).
•ETYM Probably onomatopoeic; cf. on ẞóµßoç, кóvaẞoç and ►кóμẞα. Fur.: 380
compares кóvaẞos with interchange a/ zero, but there appears to be no basis for this.
koµyóç [adj.] ‘fine, elegant, to the point, cunning' (Att.). On кo̟µyóç as a stylistic
notion see Wersdörfer 1940: 105f., 127f. <PG?>
⚫COMP лεрí-коμчoç 'very fine' (Ar.).
!
!
•DER кoμчóτηs ‘elegance' (Pl.), koµчεúo̟µãι [v.] 'to be cunning or clever' (Pl.), also
-εúw, with кoμчɛía (Pl., Luc.), кóµμчεччa (Arist., Luc., Gal.) 'sth. to the point, clever
remark'.
•ETYM The old connection with Lith. švánkus ‘decent, reasonable, etc.', as if from
*kuonk"-so-, is meaningless, since etyma in this kind of meaning are never old (thus
Fraenkel 1955 s.v.), and since there is no suffix *-so-. The latter objection also
excludes connection with кoμéw ‘to take care', кo̟μμóομ to adorn' (as per
Chantraine REGr. 58 (1945): 90ff., DELG s.v.). The word can hardly be IE, so Pre-
Greek origin is probable.
Kovaẞéw [V.] 'to din, ring, clash, resound' (AP). <PG?>
•VAR Aor. Kovaßñσai (Hom., Hes.), кovaẞíčw (II., Orph.), only ipf. On the metrically
conditioned use of the different forms see Schwyzer: 105 and 736, Chantraine 1942:
340 and 350.
•DER Probably as a back-formation кóvaßos [m.] ‘clang, clash' (к 122, A. Th. 160
[lyr.]); kovaßŋdóv 'with clattering' (AP).
•ETYM The ending recalls other sound-words like ȧpaßéw (to äpaßos), óτoßéw
(ÖTOẞOC), Bopuẞéw (Bópuẞoc), etc. (Chantraine 1933: 260, Schwyzer: 496). Fur.: 343.
assumes a Pre-Greek sound-word, comparing кavaxη 'clattering, rattling, etc.' with
the interchanges a/ o and X/ ẞ.
•
kovapóv [adj.] · ɛútpaqñ, ríova, Spaσtó̟piov ‘well-fed, fat, active' (H.). ◄?►>
⚫DER Kovapwτεpov· Spаστɩкwτεрov 'most active, efficacious'; кovápixov. yλaquρóv
'hollow' (H.).
•ETYM In the sense of Spaστηploc, probably related to έy-кovéw. It is unknown
whether the glossеs εúτрαчñ, лíova refer to a different word кovapóv; they could be
different suggestions for an obscure passage. On the Thessalian PN Kóvapoç, see O.
Masson 2000: 145.
kóvdaš, -ākoç [m.] name of a gambling game, played with a blunt dart (AP 5, 60 [sens.
obsc.], Cod. Just. 3, 43, 1, 4). ◄PG(S) ►
⚫ETYM A different name for the game is кovdo-μovóßoλov (Cod. Just., ibd.). Cf.
kóvdoɩ kɛpałaɩ ‘horns' (H.), кovdoкέpατos 'with short horns'. The word кóvdač
must be Pre-Greek, in view of the suffix -āк-; the structure (prenasalized consonant)
fits this supposition well. On кóvdoi· ȧστpáуaλoi 'vertebrae', see кóvỒVÀOÇ.
kóvdu, -voç [n.] ‘name of a drinking-vessel (Hell.); acc. to H. = лоτηpiov ẞapßapikóv,
кчμẞíov ‘foreign drinking-cup, small cup'. <LW Sem.?>
⚫DER Diminutive кovбúλov (Hell.).
•ETYM Like many words in -u, it is a loan (cf. Chantraine 1933: 119). Fur.: 181
compares кotúλŋ ‘beaker'; cf. kovdúλtov. Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 674 refers
to late Babylonian kandu 'vessel'.
кóvбňλoç [m.] knuckle, joint, bony knob, clenched fist, swelling of the gum, etc.' (IA).
<PG(S,V)►
•COMP As a second member e.g. in μovo-, St-кóvduλos (Arist.).

=== page 397 ===

746
kovian
●DER kovdvládŋs like a knuckle', kovdúλwµa, -σiç ‘hard swelling, tumor' (Hp.),
кovduλwτóç 'with к.' (Att. inscr. [IV³]), кovdvλóoμai [v.] 'to swell' (Aspasia apud
Aët., H.). кovбv\íw [v.] ‘to hit the face with the fist, buffet, maltreat' (Hyp., LXX),
кovбvλσμós (LXX).
⚫ETYM Other body parts in -vλoç are Sáктuλoç and σpóvulos (cf. Güntert 1914:
116ff.); the bare stem is seen in кóvdo. άστpáуalo 'vertebrae' (H.). Most
connections outside Greek, like Skt. kanda- [m.] ‘tuber', kandúka- [m.] 'playball',
kanduka [n.] 'cushion' can be rejected straightaway (cf. Mayrhofer KEWA: s.vv.,
who considers Dravidian origin). Lith. kánduolas ‘kernel belongs to kýsti ‘to bite’;
see Fraenkel 1955 s.v. The word is probably Pre-Greek because of its structure, кovd-
vλ- < *ka^t-ul-. Moreover, the gloss kavēúλaç. τàç ávoidýσeis. Aioxúlos Zaλajuviais
(Fr. 220) ‘swellings' (H.), may show variation a/o and 8/0 (Van Beek p.c.).
кoviλŋ [f.] a kind of aromatic plant, ‘Origanum, marjoram' (Nic., medic., Dsc.).
<PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Formation like wλŋ, μapíλn, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 249, Schwyzer: 483);
further unclear. Borrowed into Latin as cunila, for which Fur.: 361 assumes a Greek
variant *Kuviλn, given that o remains before n in Latin. He further compares (1972:
120) yovávŋ. ópíyavos (H.), and perhaps yovýc, kwvntes. Oúpool (H.) (op. cit. 121),
with variation y/ к. On -îλ- as a Pre-Greek suffix, see Pre-Greek: suffixes.
kóvɩç [f.] ‘dust, ashes' (II.). <IE *konis- ‘ashes'>
•VAR Gen. -10ç, -ɛws (-ɛos); dat. -ɩ, -ɛl.
•COMP As a first member in кovi-opτóç [m.] 'cloud of dust' (IA), from öp-vuμɩ with
suffixal -To-, MoGr. kopviaxτóç (Hatzidakis Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 70ff.); Kovi-σaλoç
[m.] (= koviσ-oaλoç, cf. below) 'cloud of dust' (II.), 'dust mixed with oil and sweat of
a wrestler' (Gal.), also name of a priapic demon (com., inscr.) and a lascivious dance
(H.); kovi-rodɛç [m.pl.] 'kind of shoe' (Ar. Ec. 848, Poll.), name of the slaves in Epid.
(Plu.); French parallels in Niedermann KZ 45 (1913): 182.
⚫DER Denominative verb кovíw (-íoµai) 'to cover with dust, cover oneself with sand'
(Il.; on the formation below), also with έv-, Sta-, etc.; fut. Koviσw, Hell. кovioчμαι,
aor. kovīσai (koviσσat), perf. med. kɛkóvɩ(σ)µaɩ. Further кóvчµa (Delphi IIIª), -ɩoµa
(Cythera) 'dust of the wrestling arena', кóvɩσiç ‘production of dust, training at the
wrestling arena' (Arist.), ¿vкovσtás [m.] mg. unclear (inscr. Thebes), koviσtpa
(Arist.), кoviστýpov (Pergam. [IIª]) ‘wrestling arena', koviʊtikós ‘fond of rolling in
the dust' (Arist.). Enlarged form кovíšɛσðaɩ kvλíɛσðaι, płɛípɛσðaɩ, kovɩoptoσða
'to roll, be destroyed, be covered with dust' (H.). Further derivatives: кóvios 'dusty'
(Pi.), 'creating dust' (Paus.), epithet of Zeus, кoviwdns 'like ashes' (Hp.). кovía 'dust,
ashes, sand' (Hom., Hes. Sc., A., E.), ‘alkaline fluid (Ar., Pl., Thphr., medic.), 'chalk,
whitewash, plaster' (LXX, Hell.); epic Ion. -íŋ, metrically lengthened -íŋ, cf. kóvva‍
σлodóç ‘ashes' (H.), which might be Aeolic. Thence кoviáw [V.] ‘to plaster,
whitewash' (D., Arist.), кovíaчa ‘chalk, plaster' (Hp., D., Hell.), koviaσıç 'whitewash'
(Hell. inscr.), kovɩατηp 'whitewasher' (Epid. IVª), кovaτýs ‘id.' (inscr., pap.);
кovaτós ‘whitewasheď (X., Thphr., pap.), koviatikά (εpyα) ‘stuccowork' (pap.,
inscr.). Also Kováčoμαι [v.] 'to be covered with ashes' (Gp.).
kóvula
747
⚫ETYM The form кóvɩç differs from Lat. cinis, -eris [m., f.] < *kenis- by its o-vocalism.
The s-stem seen in ciner-is and cinis-culus can also be assumed for кovíσ-σaλos,
Kɛkóviσ-μai, kovíw < *konis-je/o-, кoví-a < *konis-h2. The word may be an original
neuter is-stem, of which ToB kentse ‘dust' < *koniso- is a thematisation. The basis is
unknown, but -кvaíw is unrelated.
koviç [f.] ‘eggs of lice, fleas, bugs' (Arist., Antyll. apud Orib., Hdn.). ◄IE *knid- ‘eggs of
lice'>
•VAR Mostly plur. кovidɛç.
⚫DER кovidiσμóç 'disease of the eyelids' (Cyran.; on the formation Chantraine 1933:
142ff.).
ETYM The closest cognate is Alb. thëni 'louse', which also goes back to IE *konid-;
the Gm. group of OE knitu, OHG (h)niz ‘nit' goes back to *knid-. Cf. further the BS1.
group of Ru. gnída, Latv. gnīda, which may have gn- from kn- by regular
development, thus *knid- (the Slavic forms with Winter's Law). Lith. glinda 'id.' has
-l-, perhaps by dissimilation from *gninda. Other forms: Lat. lēns, lendis ‘id.”, MIr.
sned [f.] 'id.'< *snidā, Arm. anic 'louse' < *Hnid-s-, ON gnit 'louse'. Because of folk-
etymological, euphemistic or taboo changes, no uniform proto-form can be
reconstructed for PIE. Connection with кvaíw, кví(w poses a problem for Alb.
thëni, which has an initial palatal.
кóvvapoç [m.] name of a thorny evergreen shrub, 'лaλíoupoç, Zizyphus Spina Christi'
(Theopomp. Hist.). <PG?>
•VAR kóvvapov· kapëòs dévdpov öµolos (òµoíov?) raλoúpu̟ 'fruit of a tree like the
л.' (H.).
•ETYM Formation like ► кóµapoç, etc.; otherwise obscure. Probably Pre-Greek.
Kovvέw [V.] 'to know, understand. <PG?>
•VAR Only in кOVVƐIÇ, KOVV≈ (A. Supp. 130 and164) and кovvɛiv. ovvɩéval,
εлíστασðαι 'understand, know²; koVVOÑσɩ· YɩVa̸σKOVσɩv ‘know' (H.).
•ETYM Similarity with кóv. ɛidóç ‘appearance' and εкoµεv· εdoµεv, ¿wpŵµɛv,
ŋσóµɛеα 'know, see, perceive' (H.), as well as with Koέw 'to remark, learn', has
been noticed, but the details of any of these comparisons remain unclear. With its
geminate, the verb looks non-IE, and might well be Pre-Greek.
кóvvos [m.] 'beard' (Luc. Lex. 5), acc. to H. = ó лúуwν, ½ úлývη, ½ xápis ‘beard,
moustache, grace', similar in mg. to σкóλλvç, µαλλóç. <?>
•DER Further plur., beside yέλλa, as the name of an ornament for girls (кóvo Plb.
10, 18, 6, -vv- Suid.). PN Kóvvoç, Kóvvov, Kovvãç, see L. Robert 1964: 168.
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
=>
кOVτóç 'pole'. KEVTÉW.
кóvučα [f.] name of a plant with a strong scent, ‘fleabane, Inula (viscosa, graveolens,
britannica)' (Hecat., Arist., Thphr., Dsc.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Also σкóvuša (Pherecr.) and кvúšα (Theoc.), giving MoGr. (Calabr.) kliza
(Rohlfs ByzZ 37 (1937): 53, Rohlfs 1930 s.v.).

=== page 398 ===

748
кÓЛIÇ
•DER KOVUČηEIÇ 'like the к.' (Nic.), кOVUČÍτηs (oÏvoc) 'seasoned with к.' (Dsc., Gp.).
•ETYM Formation like other plant names, such as µáλvšα, µávvšα, öpvša, kópvča,
etc. The assumption that it was formed from кoviç with this suffix -vča, with
dialectal кvúča remodelled after кvów, is unwarranted. The form кvúča has also been
analyzed as *knug-ja, and compared with ON hnykr 'stench' < PGm. *hnuki- < IE
*knugi-. The variation rather points to a Pre-Greek word; note the prothetic σ-. See
Fur.: 183, 381.
=>
кóлç 'prater, liar'. → кóлτw.
кóллα [n.] ‘name of the character q, which originally stood between è and P in the
alphabet' (Parmeno 1); also a sign for '90' (pap.). <LW Sem.>>
•DER кoллατíαç [m.] 'horse with a кóллα burned into it' (Ar.), with allusion to
kóntw, cf. otiyµατíαç; also коллα-ôópos (Luc.).
⚫ETYM From Phoenician; cf. Hebr. qōph.
кóлρoç [f.] 'excrement, ordure, dung, filth' (II.). <IE *kok"-r ‘dung'>
•COMP колро-λóyos ‘dung-gatherer' (Ar.), кoлpo-popá loaf of dung' (Amorgos
IV³).
•DER A. Substantives: kóлpov = кóлpos (Heraclit., Hp., inscr., pap.) with korpiódŋs
'dung-like, full of dung' (Hp., Thphr., pap.), koëpiakós ‘belonging to dung' (pap.);
кóлpava [pl.] ‘excrements' (Hp., Aret.); кoлpía ‘dung-heap' (Semon., Stratt., Arist.);
кoлpáv (Ar.), -ɛwv (Tz.), -twv (Gortyn) 'privy'; кoлpoσúvý ‘manuring' (pap. VI³);
Koлρεú herald of Eurystheus (O 639); Koлpɛaïos jocular PN (Ar.); кoлpíαι [pl.]
'buffoons' (D. C.), whence Lat. copreae.
B. Adjectives: Kóлрεiоç 'belonging to the demos Kóлроç' (inscr.), also referring to
кóлроç (Аг.), Kóлpioç ‘id.' (Is.); кóлρɩvоç 'living in к.' (Hp.); кoлрóðŋç 'dung-like,
dirty' (Hp., Pl., Arist.).
C. Verbs: кoлpέw 'to manure', only fut. ptc. koëpǹσovtes (p 299; v.l. korpioσovtes);
(¿к-, εл-)кoлpí¶w ‘id.' (p 299 v.l., Hp., Thphr.), whence кóлpiσɩç, -toµós ‘manuring'
(Thphr., pap.); кoлpów 'to defile with dung' (Arr.) with кóлpwσɩ 'manuring'
(Thphr.), έкколрów and -wσɩç (Нp.); кoлρεów = колрíчw (Chios V-IV³), колρεσα-
QUτεvσai 'to plant, bring forth' (H.).
⚫ETYM A thematization of an old r/n-stem PIE *kok"-r, preserved in Skt. śáky-t, śakn-
áḥ 'dung'. A primary verb is assumed in Lith. sikti, 1sg. šiku 'to shit' from a root
*kek"-. See also on σkup, which is an old collective *sk-ōr with a similar formation.
кÓлτw [V.] 'to strike, smite, hew, hammer, disable, tire out' (Il.). <IE? *kop- 'strike,
smite, hew'>
•VAR Aor. кówai (Il.), pass. кoлñvai (Att.), perf. кéкooα (Att.), epic ptc. кɛкoлa̸ç (N
60 with v.l. -qws and -лúv, which may be Aeolic, Schwyzer: 772, but see Chantraine
1942: 397), med. kékoµµai (A.), fut. ków (Alc., Hippon.).
•COMP Very frequent with prefix, in various shades of mg., e.g. àлo-, ¿к-, éρo-, éεpɩ-,
OUV-.
•DER 1. кóлоç *stroke' (thus perhaps E. Tr. 794 for mss. кτúлоç; cf. also A. Ch. 23),
'pain, trouble, labor' (IA); колódns 'tiring' (Hp., Arist., Hell.), колηрóç ‘id.' (Hdn.);
Kopá入入iov
749
кoлóo̟μaɩ, -ów ‘to get tired, tire' (J., Plu., etc.), кóлwσiç (LXX), кoлášw [v.] ‘to get
tired, leave off (Ion. Hell.), whence кóлаσµа (Tz.), кoлáw (έу-, σvу-, лρо-) [v.] 'to
get tireď (IA), кoëapós ‘tiring' (Arist., Thphr.), кoлáτηs ‘excavation worker,
digger' (Cod. Theod., Just.), кoлwdng = колóðηs (Нp., Arist.), колíα. novxiai
‘quietness' (H.). 2. (ȧло-, εк-, ларα-, лро-, еtc.)колη 'hewing, etc.' (IA), кóлαιov
(Alciphr.), кoлádiov (gloss.) 'piecе', кoлápov ‘kind of probe' (medic.), (¿y-,
¿к-)koлɛúç ‘oil stamper, chisel' (Hell.). 3. кóµµa (also with dɩá-, ȧлó-, nɛpí-) ‘stamp,
coinage; piece' (IA), коµµάτov small part' (Eup.), коµµаτíаç 'who speaks in short
sentences' (Philostr.), -ατкóç ‘consisting of short sentences' (Luc.); 4. кo̟µµóç
'beating the breast in lamentation, dirge' (A., Arist.). 5. kółɩç, -ɩɗoç [m.] 'prater'
(Heraclit. 81 [?], E. Hec. 132 [lyr.], Lyc.), cf. ¿tokoлet̃• kɛqaλaλyɛɩ, ¿vox\ɛi \aλŵv
'suffers from (or causes) a headache, troubles by talking' (H.), and the expression
kóлteɩv tǹv åкpóασɩv, dηµо-кóлoç = dηµñуópos (H.), “hitting the ears of the
dŋµo-кÓMOS Sunyópos
public", etc.; hence (or perhaps from кóлоç) колĺСεv. ɛúdɛσa 'to be deceived'
(H.); 6. кoлíç, -ídos [f.] ‘butchering knife, curved sabre' (Att.), also name of the meal
on the first day of the Hyacinthia in Sparta (com.), whence кoлíšw ‘to celebrate the
K.' (Аth.); 7. коñáç, -ádos [f.] ‘pruned, lopped' (Thphr.), 'bush' (Hell. pap.), εл-
кoлáç ‘land cleared of wood' (pap.). 8. koretós = koµµós (Eup., LXX, Act. Ap.). 9.
лрó-, åлó-, лрóσ-кочç, etc. from лро-колтεу, etc. (Sapph., Hp., Arist.). 10.
кóлavov 'butchering knife, axe' (A. Ch. 890), 'pestle' (Eust.), whence кoraviчw ‘to
pound' (LXX, Alex. Trall.), кoлavioµós, koravotýpiov (H.); ¿ñkóravov ‘chopping
block' (Hell.). 11. кoлτós pounded' (Cratin., Antiph.); кorτý (σŋoaμíc) 'cake from
pounded sesame' (Hell. epic), 'squill, Оαλáσσоу лрáσoν' (Аth.), which Fur.: 3185
considers to be Pre-Greek, also 'pastille' (Dsc.); 12. εë-kóƒτηs ‘satirist' (Timo), ëɛpɩ-
'stonecutter' (pap.), Пρoкóлταç = Пpokpoúσtηs (B. 18, 28); 13. (àло-, лapα-, époσ-,
etc.)кortiкós (medic.). 14. кóлτpα [pl.] 'wages of a hewer' (pap.); 15. koлtýpiov
'threshing place' (Hell. pap.). 16. Two plant-names: кoлíσкoç = λíßavoç qµiλiwtóç ‘a
kind of frankincense-tree' (Dsc. 1, 68, 1), кóлηеpov. qutòv laxavwdes äypiov 'wild
plant of the vegetable kind' (H.). Further verbal nouns like åлó-, έní-, napá-, vñép-
колоs and compounds like dηµo-кóños (cf. on 5. above).
•ETYM The present кóлτш may correspond to Lith. kàpti, 1sg. kapiù ‘to hew, fell’,
intr. nasal present kampù, pret. kapaй 'to be cut down, get tired, and umlauted Alb.
kep ‘hew' < *kop-eie-. Lith. and Greek point to an IE yod-present. Further, there is a
secondary formation in Lith. kapóti ‘chop, hew', Latv. kapât 'id.', and the Slav. group
of Ru. kopáť, 1sg. kopájo 'to hew, dig'. Alternatively, if related to σкáлτw,
►σкέлαρvoç, etc. the word might be from the Pre-Greek or European substrate, with
interchange a/o.
кopáλtov [n.] 'coral' (Peripl. M. Rubr., Dsc.). <PG? (V), LW Sem.?>
•VAR Kopáλov (S. E.), Koupáλov (Thphr.), кwpáλ(A)tov (Att., acc. to Hdn. Gr. 2, 537).
•DER Kopαλλкóç ‘coral-like' (Ps.-Democr.), -iw 'to be like к.' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 628 considered univerbation from кópη (коúρn)
ȧλóc "daughter of the sea", which would be a calque of a similar Indian expression.
The varying notations kop-, koup-, kwp- are ascribed to association with кópŋ, etc.
Semitic etymology in Lewy 1895: 18f. (Hebr. gōrāl ‘small stone'); criticized by E.

=== page 399 ===

750
Kópaε, -akoç
Masson 1967: 110, although it looks convincing. See L. Robert 1963: 277-283. From
Greek, Latin borrowed corallium, cūralium; cf. WH s.v.
kópaž, -akos [m.] ‘raven' (Thgn., Pi.), also Kópakoç nét̃pŋ ‘raven rock' (v 408), often
metaph. 'hook (of a door), grappling-iron, etc.' (Hell.); also as a fish name (Diph.
Siph.) and the name of a constellation (Eudox.), see Scherer 1953: 191. ◄IE *kor-
'raven'
●COMP kopako-εdýs ‘raven-like' (Arist.), óžv-kópaкos 'with a sharp hook' (Paul. Aeg.).
DER Some fish and plant names, acc. to Strömberg 1943: 114f., Strömberg 1940: 119
after their color or voice, or after the place where they grow: diminutives kopákov
‘small hook' (pap.), the plant iɛpáкtov (Arist.), kopaкíσkoç (gloss.), kopakīvos [m.]
'young raven' (Ar.), but usually a fish name 'Sciaena nigra' (Epich., Ar., Arist.), fem.
kopakɩvíç (Gp.), diminutive -tvídiov (com., pap.); Lat. LW coracīnus > Ital. coracino,
etc.; kopakíaç [m.] 'chough, Pyrrhocorax alpinus' (Arist., H.), Kopаkiai [pl.] TN on
Delos (inscr. III), with oppositive accent; кopaкɛúç. ɛldoç ix¤úoç ‘kind of fish' (H.);
kopákɛwç [m.] = kopávɛwç 'fig-tree with raven-black fruits' (Hermipp. 51), cf. on
Épɩvɛws s.v. Épɩvɛóç; kopakŋoía plant name (Pythag. apud Plin.), Kopaкýσlov TN
(Pamphylia), -nσios, -ŋσiwtiкós (pap. IIIª); on -notos Chantraine 1933: 42, Schwyzer:
466; kopakódŋc ‘raven-like' (Arist.), kopačós ‘raven-black' (Str.), kópažoç fish name
(Xenocr.), with a suffix -σ0- (Schwyzer: 516, Chantraine 1933: 434); (kata-)kopaków
'to lock (with a door hook)' (Mon. Ant.), кopáčαι· äуаν лроσλлaρñσai. лeñoíηtai
rapà toùç kópakaç 'to persevere excessively, built on кópa (H.), probably with
original mg. 'to hook oneself onto'; back-formation кópaкos [m.] ‘plaster' (Paul.
Aeg.)? σкopaкíw originally "to wish to go to the raven (έç кópaкaç)", 'chase away,
revile' (Att., Hell.) with σкopакiσµóç ‘revilement, curse' (LXX, Plu.), cf. Schwyzer
413. Extensively on кópač, kopaкíaç, kopaкīvos Thompson 1895 and Thompson 1947
S.VV.
⚫ETYM Cognate with the different formations in Lat. corvus ‘raven', Gr. кopóvη, Lat.
cornix 'crow', Gr. kópaqoç bird name (H.). Greek -a is a productive suffix, so there
is no need to derive it from *-n-k- and connect it with the nasal in Lat. cornix, Gr.
кopóvη. T. Pronk (p.c.) suggests that the same formation is found in Balto-Slavic,
e.g., Ru. soróka ‘magpie', both branches continuing *korh₂k-. The alternation.
between suffixes (containing) *-n- (кopávη, cornix) and *-u- (corvus) is often found
in animal names. See ▸кopóvn.
кópdãž, -ākos [m.] name of a dance in old comedy (Ar., Thphr.), also in the cult of
Apollo (Amorgos) and Artemis (Sipylos, Elis; Paus. 6, 22, 1). <PG>
•⚫DER Kopdáka [f.] epithet of Artemis in Elis (Paus. l.c.), кopбaкiкóç 'like к.' (Arist.),
kopdaкíšw [v.] ‘to dance the к.' (Hyp.), whence -ɩσµós (D.), -ɩσµa (H.), -lotýs
(Amorgos, pap.).
•ETYM A Doric word (Björck 1950: 61) of uncertain origin. It is reminiscent of
►кpadáw 'to swing' and derivatives. Note that the ending -α is typical of Pre-Greek.
кopбúλŋ [f.] 'tumor, swelling' (Semon. 35, EM); name of a hairdo = Att. кpwẞúλoç
(Creon apud sch. Ar. Nu. 10, EM); ‘club, kopúvŋ, þóñaλov' (H.). Frisk notes that the
mg. is the same as that of τúλŋ. ◄PG(V)►
кoρέvvvμ
751
•VAR Also σkopdúλŋ (Arist.) and kopúðûλiç (Numen. apud Ath.).
•COMP As a first member (with haplology) in kopdv-ßaλλwdεç (лédov, Luc. Trag.
222) 'pavimentum'; 'young tunny' (Str.), cf. in Lat. cordyla (Plin., Mart.), cordula
(Apic.), on the mg. see Thompson 1947 s.v.
⚫DER Denominative ptc. έукεкоpбvàŋµévos évtεtλуµévoç, wrapped up' (Ar. Nu.
10).
► ►
•ETYM Formation like кavðúλŋ, oxεvdúlŋ (see Chantraine 1933: 251). The mg.
'younger tunny' may go back to 'club'; see Strömberg 1943: 36. Proposals like those
by Güntert 1914: 117f., who assumes a cross of кóvduλoç 'swelling' with кópuç,
kopuoń, kópoŋ, or кoρúvη, are mostly incorrect. The prothetic σ-, the suffix -ñλ-,
and the anaptyctic v (Fur.: 384) point to Pre-Greek origin. The form кopd- might be
from *kard- with o <*a before *u.
kópdvloç · Ðaláσσios ixôús. žvioɩ kopdúλŋ ‘a sea fish' (H.). ◄PG►
⚫ETYM The suffix -vλ- and the meaning make Pre-Greek origin plausible.
кopбúλoç [m.] probably water-newt, Triton palustris' (Arist.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also Koupбlos (Numen. apud Ath.).
⚫ETYM Perhaps related to кopdúλη 'swelling', after the crest on the back. Probably
Pre-Greek.
коρбúç [m.] лavouρyoç 'crafty' (H.). <IE? *kerd- 'cunning'>
.
•ETYM Fur.: 362 proposed connection with кoкpúdwv. Aŋotŵv, kλentŵv ‘robbing,
stealing, but this should be forgotten since Schmitt Glotta 51 (1973): 24f. argues that
кopdúç is the Aeolic positive of képdɩov (which also means 'more cunning'), kopd-,
coming from *krd-. This is accepted by Minon RPh. 74 (2000): 271. See ►кépdoç.
кopέvvv [v.] 'to satiate, fill, be satiated' (epic Ion.). <IE *kerh3- 'feed, grow'>
•VAR The present (also -μat) only Them., Orph.; other presents кopέw, kopέσкw
(Nic.), кopíσкoμaɩ (Hp.); aor. кopéσ(σ)aɩ, -ασðaɩ (Il.), pass. кopeσėñvai (Od.),
perf.ptc.act. (intr.) kɛkopŋws (Od.), perf. med. kɛkópŋµai (II.), kɛkópeoµai (X.), fut.
kopέw (II.), kopέow (Hdt.).
•COMP Sometimes prefixed with úлɛp- (Thgn., Poll.), ȧлo- (gloss.). As a second
member in ä-kopos ‘insatiable, untiring' (Pi.), άkopía ‘unsatiated condition,
moderation' (Hp.), ‘insatiability' (Aret.). diá-, katá-, npóσ-, úñép-kopoç ‘satiated,
etc.' (IA); also as an s-stem ȧ-, diα-, лρoσ-кopηs, whence the verb лрoo-kopíšoµai ‘to
vex, annoy' (sch.). As a privative also ά-kópŋtos (Il.), à-kópɛ(σ)τoç (trag.).
Uncertain the appurtenance of Aiyɩ-kopɛïç [m.pl.], Aiyıkopíç [f.] name of one of the
old Ionic phylai (E., inscr.), cf. Hdt. 5, 66.
•DER With lengthened grade: kúpa. üßpıç ‘excess, insolence' (H.). kópos [m.] ‘satiety,
surfeit, insolence' (Il.). On kópos (epic koũpoç, Dor., etc. кwpoc) ‘youth' see ► kópŋ
'young girl'.
•ETYM The starting point of the whole paradigm was the aorist кopέσat: thence pass.
коρɛσеñvαι (Chantraine 1942: 406), pеrf. кεкóрηual, -ɛσμα (Schwyzer: 773), fut.
kopέw, -έow, and finally also the presents kopíσkojai, kopéw, -éoкw, -évvvu, which
are sparsely attested and late. The formation of кopε- (with o-vocalism) is also found

=== page 400 ===

752
Kopźw
in στоpéσαι, oрεïν, μоλεïν, лоpεiv, and is mostly explained from root-final *-h3.
This gave rise to the aorist *kero-s-, which apparently underwent a metathesis of
some sort to yield Kopé-σ-.
In other branches, we find Lith. šérti 'to feed', the acute accent confirming the
laryngeal, and Arm. ser ‘origin, gender, offspring' < *kér-o-, serem 'to produce'. It is
uncertain whether Lat. creō 'to procreate, etc.', crescō 'to grow', and Cerēs 'goddess of
the growth of plants' should be connected (see De Vaan 2008 s.vv., in which Cerēs is
connected and the two verbs are separated).
Kopźw [V.] 'to sweep out, purify' (v 149, com.). <?>
•VAR Also *kopí¶w, in kɛkopioµévos ‘purified' (BGU 1120, 40 [Iª]); aor. kopñσal.
•COMP Mostly with έк-, rarely with άvα-, лαрα-, áñо-. As a second member in σŋko-
кópos 'groom' (p 224, Poll.), vεw-kópos (Att.), Dor. va(o)-kópos 'warden of a
temple' (inscr.), whence derivations in -kopέw, -ía, -ín, -ɛĩov, -ov (Att., Hell.).
■DER Kópηua 'dirt, broom' (com.), кópηopov 'broom' (Luc.), as a back-formation
also kópos 'broom' (Bion, H.). On Čaкópoç, see s.v.
ETYM An iterative deverbative verb, lacking a good etymology.
кópη [f.] 'young girl, daughter' (since h. Cer. 439), metaph. 'pupil', in architecture
'female figure', also name of the daughter of Persephone (IA, Arc.). <IE *kerh¸-
'grow'>
•VAR Epic Ion. Koúpη (II.), Dor. кúpa, кópa, Arc. Cor. кópfα.
•DIAL Myc. ko-wo /korwos/, ko-wa/korwā/.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. kopo-лλáðo¢ [m.] 'sculptor of female figures' (Att.).
•DER Several diminutives: кóptov, Dor. (Megar.) кúptov (Ar., Theoc.), kopídiov
(Delphi, Naupaktos); кopíσкη (Pl. Com.), -íσktov (Poll.); also Kopíσkoç [m.] name of
an arbitrary man (Arist.), also as a PN (D. L.); кopáσov (Hell.), whence -acídiov
(Arr.), -aois (Steph. Med.), -aσɩwdns (Com. Adesp., Plu.); кópiλλa, Kópɩvva
(Boeot.), see Chantraine 1933: 252 and 205; кopúdiov (Naupaktos).
Adjectives: koupídios (Il., Ion. poet.), original mg. ‘of a young lady, untouched,
thence matrimonial, lawful' (äλoxos, nóσiç, λéxos, etc.; on the mg. see Bechtel 1914
s.v., on the formation Schwyzer: 467, Chantraine 1933: 40; koupńïos ‘of a young lady'
(h. Cer. 108); Kópɛlos ‘of Kópŋ', Kópɛov ‘temple of Kópŋ', -a [pl.] ‘festival of K.'
(Attica, Plu.); kopañoç ‘of a girl' (Epic. in Arch. Pap. 7, 8), кopιкóç ‘id.' (Hell.).
*Kopíτns (-τic) 'servant of Kópη' in Kopɛτñaɩ [pl.], which may stand for *Kopitεial
'service of Kópn?' (Lycosoura).
Verbs: kopεvoμαι [v.] 'to pass one's maidenhood' (E.), 'to lose one's maidenhood’
(Pherecyd.), Kópεvμa 'maidenhood' (E.), kopɛía ‘id.' (D. Chr., AP); кopíšoμαι 'to
caress' (Ar.), originally “treat like a child”, úлo- 'to call by endearing names, address'
(Pi., Att.).
Beside кópη, or perhaps derived from it (see below): kópos (trag., Pl. Lg., Plu.; also
Dor.), epic koūpos, Theoc. кwpoç [m.] 'youth, boy, son' (II.). Compounds, e.g. ǎ-
Koupos 'without son' (1) 64), кoupo-τрópos educating youths' (Od.); on
►ALÓσкoupoι s.v. Derivatives: koúpŋtɛç [m.pl.] ‘young warriors' (II.), Koupñτεç,
Dor. Kwp- (Hes., Crete, etc.) ‘Kuretes', name of divine beings who dance in armor
kópous, -voc
753
around an infant Zeus (Hes. Fr. 198, Crete, etc.), whence коυρητкóç, -ñτIS,
кovρητεúw, кovρητiσµós (Hell.); on the formation of коúρητεç see Schwyzer: 499,
Chantraine 1933: 267. From кoupoç also кovρwdηs 'boy-like', probably also koúpios
'youthful' (Orph. A., Orac. apud Paus. 9, 14, 3), Kovpoσúvη, Dor. -α 'youth' (Theoc.,
AP), -σuvos ‘youthfuľ (AP). кovpí(w ‘to be a young man or maiden' (X 185), 'to
educate a youth' (Hes.), кovρióµε úµεúµεvos 'singing the wedding-song'
(H.).
•ETYM The more limited attestation of msc. koūpos, kópos, compared with general
koúpŋ, kópŋ, seems to indicate that the msc. was an innovation from fem. PGr.
*korwā. However, the Mycenaean evidence shows that the masculine is old as well.
In the meaning 'boy', Greek also had лaчç and vɛavíaç.
It is generally accepted that кópƑα and *кópƑoç derive from the root of кopέvvuμɩ,
but the exact semantic development is difficult to reconstruct. Perhaps an abstract
formation "growth, flourishing"? The rare meaning 'sprout, branch' is hardly old for
kópos (Lysipp. 9, Hp. apud Gal. 19, 113), and may have developed from ‘son' or the
like; alternatively, it may derive from кɛipw, for which see кoupoç. Note кópu.
vɛavíσкoç 'boy' (H.) (beside кópy ‘id.' and Kópy Boeot. PN; see Bechtel 1917a:
29f.), which could continue the u-stem from which Myc. ko-wa, ko-wo were derived.
See ▸ kopέvvvμl.
кopеíλαι [pl.] in кoρеíλaç лoɩεïv (IG 2², 2493: 16 [IV³]), of garden work, but exact mg.
unknown. <PG?>
•VAR Cf. Kopíλaç кal кópеiv. ToÙÇ σwpoúç. Kai τǹу σvστроoηу 'heaps, mass' and
кoρеέλαι. σvστрoqaí, σwpoí 'masses, heaps' (H.).
ETYM Connection with (the root of) Xópτoc is most certainly wrong. Probably a
Pre-Greek formation; cf. ► кópłuÇ.
.
kopíλoç [m.] ⚫ öpviç, öv tɩveç þασiλíσкov 'a bird,' (H.). <PG?>
•VAR Kópе- (cod.).
•ETYM Formation like τpoxíλoç, σлoруíλos, and other bird names (Chantraine 1933:
249). Related to kópеɩç, кopеíλai? Fur.: 195 derives it from кópuç ‘helmet'. The form
looks Pre-Greek.
->
kóplug → kopdi入au.
кópłuc, -vos [f.] 'heap (of grain?), sheaf (?)' (Theoc. 10, 46: Kóp¤vos à toµá); cf.
kópеvaç. τà кat' ólíуov Spáуμаτα 'handfuls little by little' (H.); 'heap, σwpóc' (EM
530, 3), of sand, äччov кópеυç (Anon. apud Suid. s.v. кopеÚετα). <IE? *kerd"-,
skerdh 'herd'>
○ ●DER кopеúoµαι (кỹµa I 7, üdwp A. R. 2, 322) 'to form a heap or sheaf(?), rise up';
Kopеúvw 'to raise high', aor. кopеñσaɩ, in: Zɛùç kópðuvev έòv µévos (Hes. Th. 853);
ετε με ечμòç кopеúση (Hymn. Is. 150).
⚫ETYM Frisk assumes that кópuç and ►кopеíλat are related. Related to Skt. śárdha-
[m.], śárdhas- [n.] 'band, troop, host', and Gm. words like Go. hairda 'herd'.
Connection of MW cordd [f.] 'troop, band, family' is less probable, as this may also
derive from PCelt. *koryo- 'troop, tribe' (Matasović 2008 s.v.).

=== page 401 ===

754
kopíavvov
kópudoc
755
kopíavvov [n.] ‘coriander, Coriandrum sativum' (Anacr., com., Thphr.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also kopíavdpov (gloss.), dissimilated кolíavdpov (Gp., sch.); кopíaµßλov
(H.); shortened кóptov (Hp., Nic., pap.).
●DIAL Myc. ko-ri-ja-do-no, ko-ri-a₂-da-na /kori¹adnon, -na/.
⚫ETYM It is doubtful that the forms in -avdpov and -außλov are folk-etymological, as
Frisk supposes. Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971): 674 points to the comparison with
Akk. huri'ānu ‘id.', but this does not explain the Myc. -d-. The cluster -dn- rather
points to a Pre-Greek word. It is possible that PG *koria"dro- dissimilated to
*koria"dno-, with subsequent (post-Mycenaean) assimilation -ndn- > .-nn- in the
classical form.
kopíažoç [m.] ‘a kind of fish?? (Alex. Trall.); acc. to Strömberg 1943: 115 rather 'spiced
meat'. <PG?➤
•ETYM If 'spiced meat' is the correct translation, does it belong to кópLOV,
► Kopíavvov? However, the formation remains unclear in any case. Probably Pre-
Greek.
kópis, -10s [m., f.] ‘bug, Cimex lectularius' (Ar., Sor., Phryn.); also a fish (Dorio, Boeot.
inscr.), see Lacroix 1938: 52; called after its flat shape acc. to Strömberg 1943: 124. As a
plant name 'Hypericum empetrifolium' (Dsc., Aët.), after the shape of the leaves acc.
to Strömberg 1937: 50. <IE *(s)ker- 'cut'>>
•VAR Gen. also -180, -εws.
⚫DER Denominative кopíw [v.] 'to be full of bugs' (gloss.).
•ETYM The i-stem also occurs in tpółɩç, tpóqis, τpóxis, etc. (Schwyzer: 462).
Identical with Ru. kor' [f.] ‘moth', and traditionally analyzed as an old verbal noun
from *(s)ker- shave, split, cut' seen in kɛípw, etc. (s.v). However, an old isogloss is
highly improbable for a word of such a specialized meaning. Literature: Jouanna
RPh. 50 (1976): 32-40; Gil Fernández 1959: 109.
•
kopкópaç [?] · öpviç. Пɛpуaчo 'bird (Pergaian)' (H.). <LW Anat.?>
•ETYM Neumann 1961: 42 connects it with Hitt. kallikalli- 'falcon', with a borrowed
as o and interchange of 1 and r.
Kopкopuyń [f.] 'dumb sound, battle cry' (A., Ar.). <ONOM, PG?>
●DER (dia-)kopkopuyέw [v.] ‘to fill with noise, storm, rumble' (tǹv yaσtépa, Ar. Nu.
387 with sch.); кopкopvуµóç ‘rumbling in the belly' (Ps.-Luc. Philopatr. 3).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic word with reduplication; the ending like in popßopvyń, -yuós,
ó\o\vyń, -yµós (see Chantraine 1933: 401). See Tichy 1983: 275f.
=>
кopμóç ‘piece cut off, clump, trunk'. → kɛipw.
кópvoy, -oлos [m.] ‘'locust'. →лápvoy.
кópos 1 ‘satiety, surfeit, insolence'. → kopέvvvu.
=>
кópos 2 [m.] 'youth, boy, son'. •VAR Ion. кoupoç. → Kópŋ.
кópos 3 [m.] name of a measure of capacity for grain, flour, etc.; acc.to J. AJ 15, 9, 2 it
equals 10 Att. medimnes (LXX, J., Ev. Luc., pap.). <LW Sem.>
⚫ETYM A loan from Semitic; cf. Hebr. kōr, originally a round vessel (Lewy 1895: 116).
kópoŋ [f.] 'temple, hair on the temple', metaph. 'parapets, etc.' (II.); mainly poetic,
except in Att. expressions like лατáσσεiv, túлtεiv, þañíšɛv èïì кóppηs; prose usually
has кρóταqoç 'temple'. <IE *(s)ker- 'cut'>
•VAR Att. кóppη, Aeol. кópσa, Dor. kóppa.
•COMP лурσóкоpσoç "with red temples (hair)", i.e. 'with red manes' (λéwv; A. Fr.
110), yɩλo-kópons [m.] ‘bald-headed' (Call., Hdn.); kopσo-eidńs (Xiños) "with the
color of the temples”, i.e. ‘gray' (Plin.); cf. MiGr. kopσíτηs, see Redard 1949: 56;
Koppí-μaxos (Thess.), see Kretschmer Glotta 2 (1910): 350.
⚫DER kopσɛĭa, kópσɛɑ [pl.] ‘temples' (Nic.); кopońɛis = kopσoeidńs (Orph. L. 498
[?]).
•ETYM Probably from *kors-ó- 'that which is shaven' (H. has кopσóç• kopµós ‘cut-off
piece' and кopσòüν. кɛípɛv 'to shave'; cf. the -s- in ά-кɛpσε-кóµηç, s.v. ►кoupá).
This interpretation goes back to antiquity, e.g. Poll. 2, 32: kai kópʊas tivès ékáλeoav
tàs tpíxas dià τò кɛipɛσðαɩ 'some called hair kópσas because it was shaven'.
However, 'hair' is not the original meaning; we have to start from ‘haircut (at the
temples)'. For parallels, see Frisk 1951: 14ff. Cf. Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 191-205.
KOPσÓç, -ów, kopowτηp, etc. → кovpá.
=>
Kopúẞavτes [m.pl.] 'Corybantes', priests of the Phrygian Cybele (E., Ar., Str.), sg.
Kopúẞaç. 'Péaç iɛpɛúç (H.); also Kúpẞavτεç, sg. -αç (Pherecyd., S.). <PG(V)►
•DER kopuẞávtƐoç ‘Corybantian' (AP), -avɩɩkóç ‘id.' (Plu.), -avtíç [f.] ‘id.' (Nonn.),
-avtwdŋs ‘C.-like' (Luc.), -avɩɛĩov [n.] ‘C.-temple' (Str.); kopvßavtiáw [v.] ‘to be
filled with frenzy like the C.' (Pl., Longin.) with -ɩασµós (D. H., Longin.);
kopvẞavtíčw [v.] 'to consecrate in the C. rites' (Ar. V. 119, lamb.) with -ɩσμóç
кáеapσiç μavías (H.).
⚫ETYM Formation like "Aẞavτεç, àλißavτεç etc. (Schwyzer: 526, Chantraine 1933: 269).
Given their origin, a Phrygian word would be the first guess. However, the variation
shows that the word was originally Pre-Greek, so Kretschmer's IE etymology
connecting ON hverba 'to turn (intr.)' must be abandoned. For Kretschmer, the
Phrygians were the only IE people in Anatolia; he liked to find Indo-European
Phrygian etymologies, forgetting that the Phrygians borrowed much from earlier
peoples in Anatolia.
-
-
It is very difficult to establish which of the two forms was original; Kretschmer
thought is was Kúpẞavτεç (whence Kopúẞ- would have arisen by adaptation to
Kópuç, which seems improbable to me). Fur.: 359 holds that a sequence v v became
ov in Pre-Greek. Therefore, he also thinks that Kúpẞ- was original (giving *Kupuẞ-
> Kopuẞ-). Rejecting the traditional etymology from кoupoç, he assumes a form
Kopv-ß- as the stem of kópvy. vɛavíʊkoç and thus explains Kopúßavtɛç. However,
in this way he seems to forget that he took Kúpẞavτεç as the original form.
kópudos [m., f.] ‘(crested) lark, Alauda cristata' (Ar., Pl., Arist.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Also -Sóc; enlarged forms with suffixes -v- and -\(\)- (see Chantraine 1933:
360f. and 246f.). With different vocalism кápudoɩ· кapúðaλoɩ (H.). Cf. forms with

=== page 402 ===

756
kópula
-0- (like in кópuð- ‘helmet³): кópułos. els tis tŵv τpoxíλwv 'one of the Egyptian
plovers' and kopú0wv. ȧλεкτрvwv 'cock' (H.).
●DER KopudŴveç [pl.] (Arist. HA 609a 7), кopúðaλ(\)os (Arist.; v.l. -alλóc), -allós
(Theoc., Babr.), -aλλá (Epich., inscr. Sicily), -aλλíc (Simon., Theoc.). PN Kópudoç,
-údwv, -vdaλóc, -udɛúc (see Boßhardt 1942: 132).
⚫ETYM The connection with кópuç 'helmet' may be correct, but only as a variant of
the same Pre-Greek word. A suffix -So- did not exist in Greek, and therefore the
comparison with the Gm. word for 'deer' (OS hirot, OHG hiruz < QIE *kerud- vel
sim.) does not work. On кópudoç, etc., see Thompson 1895 s.v. Kopúðaλos. The form
kápudos is the older one: PGr. *a often gives o before a following u (so there is no
need to correct the form; Fur.: 345 had not seen the rule); therefore, derivation from
Kópuç is impossible. Note that -aλ(A)- is the Pre-Greek suffix *-al-; see Beekes 2008.
See ►Kópuç.
кópv【a [f.] ‘mucous discharge from the nostrils, rheum' (Hp., Gal., Luc.), metaph.
'stupidity' (Luc., Lib.). <PG?>
•DER KOρuwdŋs 'with a cold' (Hp.), кopušāç ‘id.' (Men. Fr. 1003; cf. Körte ad loc.),
-Cáw 'to have a chill, be stupid' (Pl., Arist., Plb.), kopvšiα. pipitat (gloss.). With
intensifying ẞov-: Bov-кópuča = ǹ µɛyáλŋ kópuča (Men. Fr. 1003 from Suid.),
Bouкópulos àvaíoðŋtos, áσúvetо 'without sense, witless' (H.). Further kopúvai
and кpoñµaι µúžaɩ ‘mucus' (H.).
•⚫ETYM Ending like in ►кóvuša, but without certain connection. It has traditionally
been compared to a Gm. word for 'mucus', e.g. OE hrot, OHG (h)roz 'mucus', which
is a verbal noun of OE hrútan, OHG hrüzzan 'to grumble, snore' (see Pok. 571, 573).
If Pre-Greek, it is from *karuta.
kópvµßos [m.] ‘uppermost point of a ship' (I 241), 'top of a mountain' (Hdt., A.),
'cluster of the ivy fruit' (Mosch., Corn., Plu.), 'hair knot; = кpwẞúλoc' (Heraclid.
Pont.). PG(S,V)►
•VAR Plur. -a (next to -ot). Also кóρчшvа· кóσдç τç уʊvαɩкεÏоç лεpipaxos
'women's ornament worn round the neck' (H.).
●COMP кopu̟μẞo-qópos ‘bearing fruiť (Longos), dɩ-kópuµßoç ‘with two tops' (Hell.
poetry).
•DER kopúµßŋ [f.] ‘hair knot' (Asios), ‘hairband' (Antim.). кopúµßiov ‘grape' (Dsc.);
kopvµßíaç (Thphr.), kopúµßηλos (Nic.), кopvµßńеpa (Ps.-Dsc.) ‘ivy, Hedera helix';
cf. Strömberg 1937: 91, Strömberg 1940: 53; kopyµßítŋs (kɩooóc) ‘id.' (medic., Plin.,
see Redard 1949: 73); кopчµßádηs 'grape-like' (v.l. Dsc. 3, 24); коpu̟шßóα [v.] to
be tied together in a hair knot' (Nic. Dam.).
ETYM Related to кopuoń, with a by-form of the suffix.
кopúvη [f.] 'club, mace, knobby bud or shoot, penis' (Il.). <PG?>
•VAR The quantity of the u varies.
•COMP коpuvη-ópos 'club-bearer' (Hdt.).
•DER кopuvητηs [m.] 'who uses a club' (Il., Paus.); кopuvádηs 'knobby' (Thphr.),
kopuvióɛç ‘id.' (v.l. Hes. Sc. 289); kopuváw [v.] ‘to put forth knobby buds' with
кopúvŋσɩç (Thphr.).
Kopupń
757
•ETYM Perhaps related to кópuç, referring to the thick end of the instrument in
question? For the formation, cf. instrument names like topúvŋ, ßɛλóvŋ (Chantraine
1933: 207f.). The frequently suggested connection with кopuoń, кóρu̟дẞoç is
undoubtedly wrong; the word is probably Pre-Greek.
кoρúлτw 'butt with the head (the horns)'. → kopvoń.
Kópuç, -v0oç [f.] 'helmet' (Il.). <PG(S)>
•VAR Acc. -v0α, -vv.
●DIAL Myc. ko-ru-to /korutos/ [gen.sg.]; ko-ru-pi /korut¹p¹i/ [ins.pl.]. Also Lac.
kópup. Opɩykóç ‘topmost stone' (H.).
●COMP кopvе-áïž ‘shaking the helmet' (X 132), from ►åïσσw; -aióλos ‘id.', mostly of
Hector (Il., A. R.); accent after Hdn., Eust., codd. Ven.), kopvеýky [f.] ‘helmet case’
(Delos IIª; haplological for кopuło-¤ýkη); tpí-kopus 'with triple plume' (E. Ba. 123
[lyr.]), also tpɩ-kópvłoç ‘id.' (E. Or. 1480); xαλкo-, i´ño-кopvστýs ‘with bronze/red-
haired helmet' (Il.)."
•DER 1. Diminutive кopútov (gloss.). 2. кopvoτýs [m.] ‘helm-bearer' (Il.). 3.
Kópvłos. EĬs tɩç tŵv tpoxíλwv, nɛpɩkɛqaλaía ‘one of the Egyptian plovers, helmet'
(H.); to Kópu(v) os as an epithet of Apollo see below. 4. кopúеwv. åλɛкτpvwv 'cock'
(H.). 5. kopvðáλŋ, -adís = ɛipeoiwvn ‘maypole' (EM), Kopułaλía epithet of Artemis
near Sparta (Polem. Hist., H.), also = кopuеáλn (H., gloss.); кopulaλíστpiai ai
Xopεvovσaι τ Kopułaλią 0ɛα 'women dancing for the goddess K.' (H.), after the
fem. in -(1)στpia, cf. Chantraine 1933: 106. 6. Denominative verb кopúσσw, -oμa 'to
raise high, rise', also in general 'to arm oneself (Il.), originally 'to take a helmet'; aor.
кoρúσσaσða (II.), кopúčασðaι (Ath. 3, 127a; also Hp. Ep. 17?), ptc. perf.
kɛkopvēµévos (Il.), verbal adj. kopvotós ‘heaped up', of a full measure (Attica);
kopv<o>tóv. ¿níµɛσtov ‘filled up' (H.). Kópv(v)Ɖos epithet of Apollo in Messenia
(inscr., Paus. 4, 34, 7), appurtenance uncertain; кopuvеɛúç. кóqɩvoç, кáλaboç.
ȧλεкτpuóv 'basket (narrow at the base), cock' (H.), cf. кopú0wv above. On кópuç
and derivatives see Trümpy 1950: 40ff., Gray Class. Quart. 41 (1947): 114ff.
⚫ETYM Most often connected with кépaç ‘horn', but the differences of meaning and
the morphological problems render this improbable. Chantraine 1932: 165ff.
therefore considered Mediterranean origin for кópus; we now know that this must
be correct, since the alternating suffixes in кopvчń, ►кópu̟µẞoç, ►кópudoç,
► kopúvη, kopud-áv, -aλ(\)os all point to a Pre-Greek word (cf. Fur.: 195).
kopvoń [f.] ‘top, skull', also metaph. (Il.). ◄PG(S,V)►
•VAR Dor. -qά.
●COMP E.g. kopuoā-yεvýs ‘born from the head', properly of Athena, metaph.
(Pythag. in Plu. 2, 381f.), di-kópvqoç ‘with two summits' (E., Arist.).
●DER kopvqaños [m.] ‘the main figure, leader of the chorus' (IA), secondary ‘at the
head' [adj.] (Plu., Hdn.), кopvqaιóτηs 'leadership' (Corp. Herm.); кopuqatov 'the
upper part of a hunting-net', -paía 'head-stall of a bridle' (X., Poll.). Kopuqwdns
'with summits' (Hp.). kopvôác [f.] ‘edge of the navel (Hp. apud Gal.); -qpic, -qwv =
kopuoń (gloss.), kópvqos [m.] = kopvoń (Epid.), = kópvµßos yuvaikɛĩoç ‘hair knot
of a woman' (H.); kopúqaiva [f.] name of a fish, ïëлoυpis (Dorio apud Ath.); on the

=== page 403 ===

758
kópxopos
naming motive Strömberg 1943: 59, on the suffix ibd. 137; kopúqia [pl.] kind of
mollusks (Xenocr. apud Orib.). Koρучιστηρ = коруqañov (Poll.), also ‘headband
Kopvqiotýp
(sch.), cf. ẞpaxioviστnp (Chantraine 1933: 328); -1στńc ‘id.' (H.).
Denominative verbs: 1. кopupóομat ‘to rise up high' (Il.), 'to count together, sum up'
(Hell.), -ów 'to bring to the top' (medic.), кopúшμa 'summit' (Ath. Mech.), -woic
'top of a pyramid' (Nicom.). 2. кopúлτw 'to butt with the head (Theoc.), kopurtidos
'butting' (Theoc.), after τpoxilos, σлоруílos (Chantraine 1933: 249), probably
hypocoristisc; also kopúrtŋs, -tóλlŋs ‘id.' (EM, H.); έkopuëtíaç. ¿yavpías (H.).
ETYM Long recognized as Pre-Greek, due to the alternation of kopuq- with
prenasalized kopvµß-. See ➤кópväßos.
кópxopos [m.] plant name, ‘blue pimpernel, avayaλλìs ǹ kvavñ, Anagallis caerulea';
on the mg. Thiselton-Dyer Journ. of Phil. 33 (1914): 201. <PG(V)►
•VAR Kópкopos (Ar. V. 239, Nic. Th. 626). Msc. in Thphr. and Ps.-Dsc.
⚫ETYM A reduplicated Pre-Greek formation (see Strömberg 1940: 21).
кopxupέa [f.] ‘subterranean drain' (IG 9(1), 692: 8 [Corcyra IIª]: nɛpɩ tav
kopXupɛ[av]). ◄PG(V)►
⚫ETYM Dittenberger ad loc. IG 9(1), 692: 8 refers to yopyupa, yépyupa, yopуúpiov
'id.' (Hdt. 3, 145, H.; cf. s.v.) and кoρкóðρvα (кoρкoppóa Lobeck). údpópva 'drain'
(H.); the variation points to a Pre-Greek word.
kopávŋ [f.] 'crow', also 'shearwater', 'Corvus corone, cornix, frugilegus, Puffinus
yelkuan' (Od.). Often metaph. of all kinds of curved or hook-formed objects (cf.
below): 'tip of a bow' (Il.), 'grip of a door' (Od., Poll.), 'tip of the plough pole' (A. R.),
'back of a ship' (Arat.), 'pathological tumor of the elbow, etc.' (Hp.), 'kind of crown'
(Sophr. 163, H.). <IE *kor-u/n- 'crow, raven'>
•COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. Kopwvo-ẞólos 'shooting crows', tpi-kópwvos
'have three times the age of a crow' (AP).
●DER kopwvidɛús [m.] 'young crow' (Cratin. 179); kopávɛws [f.] 'tree with raven-
black figs' (Ar. Pax 628), cf. on έpivɛwç s.v. ►έpivɛóç. kopwviç [f.] ‘curved, with tail',
of ships (Hom.), of cattle (Theoc.), as a noun 'crown' (Stesich.), 'curved line,
ornament' at the end of a book, etc., as an orthographic sign ‘end' (Hell.); also
kopwvóc [m.] 'curved, etc.' (Archil., Hp., EM), also PN Kópwvos (B 746), кopwvóv
[n.] ‘knob of bone(s)', tà kópwva ‘elbow' (medic.); kopávios. µŋvoeidñ éxwv KÉPATA
ẞous ‘bull having crescent-shaped horns' (H.), also a month name (Knossos),
kopávov [n.] plant name (Ps.-Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 42; kopwvíns [m.] ‘who
proudly bends the neck³ (Оfïллоç; Semon.), whence kopwviάw [v.] 'to bend the neck
proudly, be proud' (Hell.), also 'to curve oneself (kopшvióшντα лéτηλа Hes. Sc. 289;
metrically conditioned). Denominative verb кopwví(w 'to end, finish' (of kopwvíç;
Pontos); also of кopávη as a basis of кopwviotaí [pl.] “crow-singer”, kopwvíoµata
[pl.] "crow-songs", i.e. ‘singing beggar', 'begging songs' (Ath.). On кopóvη see
Thompson 1895 s.v.
⚫ETYM The Italic words for 'crow' (Lat. cornix, U curnaco 'cornicem') suggest that
кopávη also continues an old n-stem *kor-ōn, *kor-n-os. The root is also found in
► кópač and ► кópaçoç. A u-stem alternating with this n-stem is seen in Lat. corvus
KÓσμOS
759
(MIr. crú raven' is perhaps a ghost word; see De Vaan 2008). As a name for curved
objects, kopávŋ, kopwviç, kopwvós are sometimes separated from kopávŋ 'crow'
and connected with кupτós ‘curved, hunchbacked', but the unique formation of
the Greek word speaks against such a separation. Moreover, the metaphorical use of
kopávη 'crow' is nothing remarkable given the use of its cognates (kópač, Lat.
cornix, MoFr. corbeau, MoE crow, etc.): the metaphors may have originated from the
shape of the beak or the claws of the bird. From Greek comes Lat. corōna, corōnis,
whence Western European loans like MoE crown.
KÓσKIVOV [n.] 'sieve' (Semon., Democr., Att.). <PG?>
•COMP A few compounds, e.g. коσкIVо-лоιóç 'sieve-maker' (com.), TUρo-кÓσкIVOV
kind of cheesecake (Chrysipp. Tyan. apud Ath. 14, 647f).
•DER Diminutive кOσкívov (Chrysipp. Tyan.); кoσкívwμа 'fencing' (Sm., Thd.);
кOσкIVηбóv [adv.] 'like a sieve' (Luc.). Denominative verbs: 1. KOOкIVEÚw 'to sieve'
(Democr., pap.), whence кOσKIVεV-týs ‘siever', -tikóv ‘fee for sifting', -τnpiov 'place
for sifting' (pap.); 2. KOσкIví(w ‘id.' (medic., Aq., Sm.), whence -ívɛσuç 'sieving'
(pap.).
⚫ETYM No etymology; perhaps Pre-Greek (Chantraine 1933: 203).
кoσкvλµáτiα [n.pl.] 'cuttings of leather', metaph. of the flattering words of the tanner
Cleon to Demos (Ar. Eq. 49). <GR?>
⚫ETYM Uncertain. A reduplicated formation *(σ)кo-σкUλ-μάт-α (Schwyzer: 423) has
been assumed, related to σкúλλw 'to dishevel, maltreat'. The similarity with Lat.
quisquiliae [pl.] 'waste, dirt' may be accidental (Walde assumed a loan from Greek).
кóσμoç [m.] 'order, propriety, good behavior; ornament' (II.), 'world-order, world'
(Pythag. or Parm.; Kranz Phil. 93 (1938): 430ff.), ‘government' (IA); name of the
highest officials in Crete (back-formation from кoσµéw acc. to Leumann 1950: 285f.;
against this Ruijgh 1957: 109). <IE *keNs- 'order'>
=
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. коσμо-лошα “creation of the world' (Arist.), кoσμó-
ñolɩç [m.] name of an official of the town (Hell.), properly a governing compound
ó кoσµŵν лóλv; independent is kоσμо-лоλíτη citizen of the world' (Hell.); ε-
кoσчoç in good order' (Sol.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives кoσμ-ápiov, -ídiov, -apídiov 'small ornament' (late); 2. кóσμоç
'well-ordered, decent, quiet' (IA), 'regarding the world' (Plu., Arr.), whence
кoσшóτη 'culture, civilization' (Att.); 3. коσμкóç 'worldly, earthly, of the world'
(Hell.); 4. коσμшτós ‘changed in a world' (Hell.); 5. Koσµw [f.] name of a priestess
(Lycurg.); PNs Koσµíaç, Koσµãç, etc. 6. Denominative verb кoσµέw 'to order,
govern, adorn' (II.), with several derivatives: кooμηtós 'well-ordered (ŋ 127);
kógµŋoiç ‘order, ornamentation' and kóσµŋµɑ ‘id.' (Att.); кoσµýτwp 'who orders,
commander' (II.) and кoσµητηp ‘id.' Epigr. apud Aeschin. 3, 185), fem. кooµýtɛipa
(Ephesus, Orph.; -ýτpia H.); кooµnts 'orderer, commander, who orders, adorns',
also name of an official (Att.), whencе коσшητεúш (-τέw) 'to be кoσµntηs' (inscr.,
pap.), τɛía (pap.); коσµητηpιov 'place with toilets' (Рaus.), кóσшηpo 'broom'
(sch.); kooµntikós belonging to adorning' (Pl., Arist.).

=== page 404 ===

760
kóoovpos
⚫ETYM The most probable reconstruction is *koNs-mo-. This implies that the word is
related to Lat. cēnseō ‘to estimate', cēnsiō ‘assessment, rating', etc., OCS sęto 'said he',
and the Indo-Iranian group of Skt. śams- ‘to praise', OP 9ah- ‘to declare, announce'.
Acc. to Schumacher apud LIV² s.v. *keNs-, MW dan-gos- 'to show, point out is
related as well. It is probable that the element -кás in ►ékás, ávdpaкáç, Skt. sahasra-
śás [adv.] a thousand times' (RV+) is also related. The original meaning was
probably 'to put in order (by speaking)'. The meaning 'to adorn' is probably
secondary within Greek. On the semantics of this root, see García Ramón 1993a: 109-
15; he also connects (ibid.: 120) Myc. PNs like ka-e-sa-me-no /kahesamenos/.
kóσovqos [m.] ‘blackbird, Turdus merula' (Arist., Matro, AP), metaph. as a name of
the cock (Paus. 9, 22, 4; Tanagra); also a wrasse (Numen. apud Ath. 7, 305c, medic.,
Ael.), because it changes colors with the seasons, like the blackbird; or perhaps
named after their sounds (Strömberg 1943: 116).
•VAR Att. -ɩɩ-, gloss. -Uкoç. Also KÓYAXOS (-IKOS, -UKOS) [m.] (com. since Ar., Suid.,
Moer.).
●DER KOσσvôíšw ‘to sing like a к.' (Hero). Fem. Koσoúpa, Doric name of a hetaira
(Schulze 1933a: 7079).
•ETYM Previous scholars connected ►кóчxos with the Slav. name of the blackbird,
CS kos, etc., from *kopso-. Meillet MSL 18 (1914): 171ff. explained кóσσvqoç by
assuming a dissimilation from *кoчuqoç. However, this does not explain the
phoneme expressed by σσ/τ, so the explanation must be given up. Knobloch Glotta
55 (1979): 76f. connects the verb кóлτw, which beside 'to blow, strike' also means 'to
dig', like in OCS kopati, which would fit the bird. However, there is no element *-so-
that would create agent nouns, as he states, so the formation remains obscure. Given
the variants, the word is clearly Pre-Greek. Not in Fur.
kóσtaí [f.] ‘a fìsh' (Diphn. Siphn. apud Ath. 357a), occurring in a list of fish. ◄?►
•VAR KOστíaç Koiλias kóµopos (= кáµµapos?) (H.).
ETYM No etymology.
кÓσTOÇ [m.] name of a plant and of its root, which was used as a spice, 'Saussurea
lappa' (Thphr., D. S.). <LW Skt.➤
•VAR Also -ov [n.].
⚫DER KOOTÓÏVOS 'made of к.' (pap.), cf. Kalbfleisch RhM 94 (1951): 345.
⚫ETYM From Skt. kúṣṭha- [m.] ‘id.'. Lat. costum, -us was borrowed from кóστoç (-ov).
See Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.
koʊvß[át]aç [m.] 'sacrificer' (Gortyn V-IVª, SEG 1, 414, 10).
•VAR koσ<ú>ßatoi (-þátai?). oi ènì Ovoiŵv te tayµévot ‘appointed for sacrifices' (H.)
(v added, because it stands after коστíαç). →кoσúµßn.
=>
кoσúµßŋ [f.] name of a cloak which acc. to D. Chr. 72, 1 was used by herders and
countrymen; by EM 311, 5, H. and others is was explained with έyкóµßwµa ‘kind of
apron' (see кóμẞoc), by EM 349, 15 called an avaẞoλý 'mantle'; the mg. 'кpwẞúλoç'
in Poll. 2, 30 (different readings) must be a hybrid with кópuμẞoç. <PG(V)►
KÓTTαẞOÇ
761
•VAR Also KÓTOUẞoç, a piece of military equipment, perhaps лεрíчwμα? (Rev. Arch.
1935 : 2, 31); cf. also кoσußáτaç, which confirms the form without nasal (Fur. 283).
Further Lat. gossypion, (Plin. N.H. 19, 14), -inum (ibid. 1, 12, 21, etc.), which point to
*уоσσυлоv. Also кóσчµßoç [m.], which acc. to H. (with -σσ-) = кoσ(σ)úµẞη; also
'hair-net' (LXX Is. 3, 18); thence кoovμßшτós (Ex. 28, 35, Xitŵv; v.l. кóσvμẞoç), acc. to
H. = кρoσσwτóc, i.e. 'with fringes'.
⚫ETYM Lewy KZ 58 (1931): 26ff compares Assyr. guzippu, kuzippu ‘a cloak', Arab.
korsuf 'cotton'. Pre-Greek origin is likely, given the prenasalization and the variants
with -σ-, -σσ/τ-, etc. This does not exclude that the word is found in Semitic too,
since it may be an old culture word (Fur.: 283).
KÓTÖVßOS →KOσúµßn.
KOTOV [n.] mg. not certain, probably name of a vessel to preserve things (inscr.
Delos 1429 B II 25 [IIª]). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Unexplained. The formal similarity with vulgar кóτɩλOV, кOTÍλλIV (Latte gives
кOTÍλOV). ȧvбpòç aidoiov 'male private parts' (and кóðŋµa. ¿лì to aidoíov, also
кÓTOV H.) cannot be denied. The variation in кoTɩλ(^)- points to a Pre-Greek
word.
кÓTIVOS [m., f.] 'wild olive, ȧypiɛλaía' (Ar., Thphr.), on the name Strömberg 1937: 166'.
<PG?>
•COMP As a first member in кotɩvη-qópos ‘carrying wild olives' (Mosch.), etc.
●DER kotivás [f.] ‘the fruit of the wild olive' (Hp.), ‘(olive) grafted upon a wild olive'
(Poll.); on the formation see Chantraine 1933: 353.
⚫ETYM Probably a loan, perhaps from Pre-Greek. Cf. Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 131.
From Greek was borrowed Lat. cotinus 'Rhus cotinus' (Plin.).
кóτoç [m.] ‘grudge, hatred' (II.). <?►
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. bahuvrīhi "y-kotos ‘grudging' (A.), whence
denominative έyкoτέw [V.] 'to be full of grudge' (A.); thence έyкótnua, -nois (LXX)
and, as a back-formation, čyкotos (Hdt.) 'grudge'; also έyкóτιoç [adj.] (Salamis on
Cyprus).
●DER kotńɛç ‘grudging' (E 191); -ŋεɩ analogical for кotóɛ (A. D., EM); further
(probably a denominative, see below) кOTέw, -έoμa 'to grudge' (II.), aor.
Kotέσσaσðaɩ, -έσαι, fut. кoτéσσo̟μal, perf.ptc.dat. kɛkotŋót; also кoτaívw ‘id.' (A.
Th. 485), after Oччaívw, etc., see Fraenkel 1906: 18 and on ►ðvµós.
⚫ETYM It has been compared with a Celto-Germanic word for 'struggle, fight', e.g. W
catu- in Catu-riges, OHG hadu- in Hadu-brand, ON họd [f.] 'battle, contest' and,
with a different suffix, MHG hader 'quarrel, fight', as well as perhaps Slav., e.g. CS
kotora 'fight'. Further, perhaps, with palatal anlaut, Skt. śátru- 'enemy'. Machek 1958:
49f. additionally compares Cz. katiti se 'to be annoyed'. If кóτos were an old s-stem
(Fraenkel KZ 43 (1910): 193ff.), it would fit the u- and r-stems in catu-, hader better.
All in all, not very clear.
кóτταẞoç [m.] name of a game (Anacr., Pi., trag., com., Hell.) from Sicily, in which the
player throws the rest of the wine from a cup against a target, either against a slice

=== page 405 ===

762
Kóttava
Koupá
763
that is in balance on top of a stick, which falls (Soc. кóτταßоç каταктóç), or against
an empty saucer, which floats in a basin with water, and sinks when hit (к. ¿v λekávy
or di' ožuẞáqwv). However, кóτταẞoç indicated not only the game itself, but also
several objects and movements used in it. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Ion. -σ0-.
•COMP As a second member in μεðvoo-kóttaßos [adj.] ‘drunken while playing к.'
(Ar. Ach. 525).
●DER kottaßiç [f.] ‘cup with two handles for throwing' (Hell.); kottaßeĩov (-ßiov)
‘kottabos-basin, -stander' (Dikaiarch., Hell.), also 'winner's prize at к.' (com.);
kottaßikǹ þáßdoç ‘k.-bar' (Hell.). Denominative verb кotτaßíšw ‘to play к.' (Ar.,
Antiph.), euphemistic for 'vomit' (Poll., EM), also with ȧлo-, кατα-, ouv- (X., com.);
thence kottáßiois, (ȧro-)kottaßioµós (late).
•ETYM As the original meaning of кóτταßoç is unknown, all etymologies are
necessarily uncertain. Formally, it has been compared with кoττiç ‘head, back of
the head', кÓTTεу· τÚлτяν 'to hit, stamp' (H.), кóττоÇ 'кúẞоç, etc.'. For various
hypotheses, see Frisk. Lat. cottabus 'slapping blow' (Plaut.) was borrowed from
Greek; cf. Friedmann 1937: 46ff. The variation ɩɩ/σσ points to a Pre-Greek word. See
► KOTÚλN.
kóttava [n.pl.] kind of small figs (Ath., H.). <LW Sem.➤
•ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. qāṭān, q‘ṭannīm ‘small' (Lewy 1895: 22). Also to be
connected is кotávva [f.], acc. to H. = лapеévos лapà Kpŋσí ‘maiden (Cret.)'; cf.
Hebr. qātōn, fem. qṭannā ‘small, young', also 'immature boy, girl' (Lewy 1895: 65).
Lat. LW cottana [pl.] 'kind of small Syrian figs' (Plin.).
kottávŋ [f.] ‘name of a fishing device (Ael. NA 12, 43). ◄ GR➤
⚫ETYM From кóττоç, name of a river fish; see on ►kottiç.
kottiç, -ídos [f.] ‘hairdress with long hair on the forehead', Doric for кɛqaλń (Poll.,
H., Phot.). <PG?>
•VAR Also кotíç (Hp.), = ¡viov, napɛykɛqaλíç ‘occipital bone, cerebellum² (Gal.), tñç
кεчaλñç ǹ кopvqn 'top of the head' (Erot.).
•COMP As a second member in лpokottíç. ǹ xaitη ‘loose, flowing hair' (H.) and
лрокóττα [f.] (Dor.).
•DER KÓTTIкOι• αι лεрiкεчpαλαïαι 'head coverings'; кoτtápia. τà äкpa τñç kέyxpov
'ears of millet' (H.). Further кóττоÇ = кúßoç (Cod. Just.), KOTTÓç (KÓTTOç)· öpviç. kaì
kottós (kóttos).
oi åλektpvóveç kottoì dià tòv ènì tŋ kepalñ lóqov ‘bird; cocks, because of the
crests or tufts on their heads' (cf. MoGr. кóττα ‘chicken'); кoτtoßoleïv. tò
лараτηрεу τɩva öpvv 'observing a certain bird' (H.). On кóτтOÇ as a name of a river
fish (Arist. HA 534a 1) see Strömberg 1943: 119 (named after the cock). PN KOTτíç,
Kóττaλoç, -áλŋ (Herod.).
•ETYM Connection with кoτúλŋ ‘bowl, dish' is a mere guess. Fur.: 362 connects
кOT(T)ĺç, (лρо)кóττα with σкúτη. кεqaλń 'head' (H.); the geminate is not expressive,
but rather points to Pre-Greek origin.
кOTÚŋ [ƒ.] ‘bowl, dish, small cup' (Il.), on the mg. Brommer Herm. 77 (1942): 358 and
366, also as a measure for liquids and dry materials, = 6 кúaðoɩ or = 0,5 žέotns (IA),
metaph. 'socket, especially of the hip-joint' (Il., Hp.), ‘cymbals' [pl.] (A.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Also кÓTUλos [m.] 'id.' (Hom. Epigr., com.).
•COMP кOTUλ-putos to be scooped with cups' (Y 34), ǹµ-kotúλŋ ‘half a к.' (pap.),
Si-кÓTUλoç 'measuring two к.' (Hp., pap.).
⚫DER Diminutives кOTUλiç 'socket' (Hp.), кOTUλíσкoç, -íoкη, -íoкlov 'small cup'
(com.), кOTUλíбiov (Eust.). кOTVλŋdwv, -óvos [f.] name of different cup-like holes
(on the formation Chantraine 1933: 361), e.g. 'sucker, suction cup' (ε 433, etc.), also as
a plant name, probably 'Cotyledon umbilicus' (Hp., Nic., Dsc.), after its leaves like
suckers, Strömberg 1940: 44f., whence кOTUηdovwdns 'nipple-like' (Gal.).
kotvǹlaños, -lɛños ‘measuring a к.' (Hell.), Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 95; kotvλwdns
'cup-like' (Ath.); кOTÚλwv, -wvos [m.] 'drunkard' (Plu.). Denominative verb
кoτví w ‘to sell per k., i.e. in small quantities' (IA), whence kotvligµós, -LotŃs, -Lotí
(Hell.).
ETYM A close relation is Lat. catīnus (flat) dish'; the deviation in vowel and
formation suggests that they are independent loans from a third party. A loan is
probable in the case of a vessel. Fur.: 101, 181 adduces кóvdu ‘a cup', as well as
кovúλov; he notes (op. cit. 205¹) that -vλn is a well-known suffix in Pre-Greek.
Kovẞapis, -idos [f.] 'wood-louse' (Dsc. 2, 35 tit.). <?>
•DER Diminutive of кóẞapoç. Ŏvos ‘id.' (cod. äveршлоç, i.e. ävõç) (H.). Another
diminutive formation is MoGr. Kouẞápı ‘clew' (Kukules Aɛε. "Apx. 5: 34), with the
denominative Kovßapíšw (v.l. -táľw) = µŋpúοµαι ‘to wind (together)' (sch. Theoc. 1,
29, also MoGr.).
•ETYM Acc. to Kukules (see also Strömberg 1944: 12), the animal was called this way
because it can roll itself together. The group itself remains unexplained.
кOйкɩ [n.] name of a palm-like tree, ‘Hyphaena thebaica', also used for its fiber
(PBaden 35, 23 [IP], Plin.). <LW Eg.>
⚫COMP KOUKIOQópov dévdpov (Thphr.).
⚫DER KOÚKEOV 'fruit of the kouki-tree' (Ostr.); кOÚKIVOç 'of the kouki-tree; made from
its fiber' (pap.).
ETYM Foreign word, perhaps of Egyptian origin (but see on кóïε). Cf.
Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 244.
►
KoukoÚQaç, -ατoç [m.] Egyptian name of the лoу (Horap. 1. 55, PMag. Berol. 2, 18).
<LW Eg.➤
•VAR Also кOKK-.
●DER Diminutive koккopádov (PMag. Lond. 121, 411), cf. Dölger ByzZ 38 (1938): 213.
•ETYM Onomatopoeic word. Comparable with Skt. kukkubha- ‘Phasianus gallus', Lat.
cucubiō, -īre from the cry of the screech-owl. Cf. on ➤ kikkaßañ.
Koupá [f.] action noun 'cropping', of hair, beard or wool; 'lopping, cutting' of trees and
grass; also lock of hair, virgin wool, fur' (IA); ‘cut-off end, slips of wood' (Ph.). <IE
*kers- 'shave'>

=== page 406 ===

764
•VAR Ion. -pń.
KOÚPηTεç
⚫DER Nouns: 1. Koupɛúç [m.] 'shaver, barber' (Att.); also name of a bird (H.), after its
sound; thence koupɛiov 'barber-shop' (Att.), кoupɛaкóç 'talkative' (Plb.), on the
formation Schwyzer: 497; also koupεvτýs ‘id.' (gloss.), fem. кoupεútpia (Plu.),
koupɛutikós ‘used for shaving' (sch., Olymp.). 2. koúpɛlov (-ɛov) [n.] ‘sacrifice of
hair, etc. on the Apaturia (S., Is., inscr.), Koúpɛtos epithet of Apollo (Teos),
koupeñtis, -idos (ǹµépa, έoptý) [f.] 'the third day of the Apaturia, on which the hair
of the young boys and girls was sacrificed' (Pl., inscr.); Koupɛwv (-ŋïwv), -wvos [m.]
month name in Magnesia on the Maeander (inscr.). Perhaps also in aчμa-koupíaι
[pl.] 'sacrifice of blood to the dead' (Pi.), with faded second member. 3. коúρчμоç
'belonging to cropping; shaved (trag., Plu.), also кoυрεúσчμoç (sch.) as if from
*koúpevois (koupεúoμai); see Arbenz 1933: 79f. 4. Koupiкóç ‘used for cropping'
(pap.). 5. koupíç, -ídos [f.] ‘id.', of µáxαчpa (Cratin.), also ‘cleaning girl' (com., Plb.).
6. koupíaç [m.] 'who has his hair shaveď (Luc., D. L.). 7. koupás. ǹ ¿v tois
ópoqwµaoi ypaqý, òpoqikòs nívač´ writing on the roofs, plank for a roof (H.); also
żyкoupás (A. Fr. 142, H.). 8. кovρiτç [f.] plant name, 'лεрστεрεà üƒτç, Verbena
officinalis (Ps.-Dsc., Ps.-Apul.); naming motive unknown.
Denominative verbs: 1. Koupiάw 'to need cropping, to have long hair' (Pherecr., Plu.,
Luc.), after the verbs of disease in -táw, see Schwyzer: 732; 2. Koupíw 'to shave, cut'
(Thphr., H.), aor. -íεαч; 3. кovρεúo̟μα to take the tonsure, have the hair cut' (Just.,
sch.). On ►кoūpos and ►кoupíž, see s.vv.
•ETYM As a primary verbal noun, koupá continues *korsắ; the verb is seen in Hitt.
karš-zi 'to cut off, Lyd. fa-karsed 'cuts off, and in ToAB kärsa- 'to know, understand,
as well as ToA kärṣtä-, ToB kärsta- 'to cut off, destroy'. Traces of the same verb (but
with a different development of -rs-, ultimately depending on the accent) are found
in Gr. à-kepʊe-kóµŋs ‘with uncut hair' (Y 39), Kópoŋs nickname of a smooth-shaved
man (Chrysipp.), кopσóç· кopμóç 'cut-off piece' (H.), коρσoйν. кɛipɛv 'to shave'
(H.), with кopσās [m.] (pap.), kopow-tńp (Call., Poll.) ‘barber', -τɛúç ‘id.' (Ath. 12,
520e), -týpiov ‘barber-shop' (ibd.). Further details under ►кópoŋ and ► kɛipw.
KOÚPŋTEÇ •VAR KOUPÍDLOG. →Kópn.
koupí [adv.] in pvσáv té дuvɛïow к. 'draw him inside к.' (X 188), K. έλkoµévη 'being
drawn к.' (A. R. 4, 18), к. aivuμévous ‘taking к.' (H.); meaning uncertain. <GR>
⚫ETYM From Koupá, after the adverbs in -(i) & (Schwyzer: 620, Chantraine 1942: 250).
Acc. to Aristarchus, it means τñ≤ kóµns éridaßóµevoɩ, ‘taking by the head of hair',
which would make perfect sense, though koupá in the sense of 'head of hair' raises
some doubts. Others have assumed an original mg. holding the hair like when
shaving', which fits the usual meaning of Koupá better.
кoūpoç [m.] probably collective ‘loppings, twigs lopped from a tree' (IG 2², 1362: 6
[end IVª]): žúλa ….. кoupov ... opúуava ... quλλóßola. ◄GR➤
•ETYM Verbal abstract from *korsó-, like koupá from *кopσá; cf. Forbes Glotta 36
(1958): 238. The form kópos ‘twig, sprout' does not show a trace of *-s- and therefore
rather belongs to ▸кópη, etc.
KoXvdέw
765
кoñqoç [adj.] ‘light, easily movable, nimble, vain, empty' (N 158 and 0 201: кouqa and
KOUчóτεpov as adverbs); on the mg. Treu 1955: 76, etc. <?>
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. kovoó-vooç 'with a nimble mind' (trag.), úñó-kovôoç
'rather light' (Dsc., Plu.).
•DER Kovooτns [f.] ‘lightness' (Hp., Pl.), accent after ẞapuτns, Wackernagel Gött.
Nachr. 1909: 59, Schwyzer: 382; кovoɛĩa [pl.] probably 'vase shards, debris?? (PTeb. 5,
199 [IIª]), кoñqov кεpάшшov also ‘empty vessel'; MoGr. (àypto-)кovqítŋs [m.] plant
name 'Fumaria' (Redard 1949: 68 and 73). Denominative кovoí(w [v.] 'to lighten,
mitigate, cancel, nullify' (Hp., Att.), rarely intr. 'to be light' (Hes. Op. 463, Hp., trag.),
whence кoÚQLσIÇ (Th.), -чσμа (E.), -toµós (Hell.) 'mitigation'; кovqiσp 'ring-pad'
(to lighten the pressure; medic.); кOUQIσTIкóç 'mitigating' (Arist.).
ETYM Unknown. The full grade of the stem and the barytonesis are remarkable in
the case of an adjective (Schwyzer: 459), which suggests that it could originally have
been a noun. The form кouôoç replaced or pushed back the old forms έλaxúc,
ελappós, which in the process assumed a different meaning.
KóQIVOS [m.] 'big basket' (Att., Hell.), on the mg. Schulze Berl.Ak.Sb. 1905: 727f., also
as a measure of capacity = 9 Att. Xoívɩkɛç (Boeot. inscr.). <PG(S,V)►
•DER Diminutive кoøívov (pap.); koqivwdŋs basket-like' (sch.), -ŋdóv ‘per basket
(EM); кoqɩvóoчai [v.] 'to have a basket put over one's head' (Nic. Dam.).
ETYM Borrowed as Lat. cophinus, whence MoE coffin, MHG koffer, etc. Fur.
compares кópoç, probably 'basket-load', as well as кowía- Xúτpa ‘earthen pot' and
Kóчa. úspía 'water bucket, urn'; on the suffix, see Fur.: 12954.
кóxλos [m., f.] shell-fìsh with a spiral-shaped shell, ‘sea-snail, land-snail', also 'purple-
snail, kohl' (E., Arist., Theoc.). <PG(V)►
⚫DER Several diminutive formations: кoxλíç [f.] (Luc., Man.); also name of an Arabic
stone (Plin.); кoxλíα = iqúdpiα 'shell' (H.); кoxλídiov (pap., Epict.), -ádiov (sch.).
Further кoxλíaç [m.] 'snail with spiral shell', often metaph. 'waterscrew, spiral stair,
etc.' (com., Arist., Hell.); borrowed as Lat. coc(h)lea, cf. Ernout 1954: 54f.; koxλiós
‘id.' (Paul. Aeg., Aët., gloss.); кóxλã} [m.] = káx\n} (LXX, Dsc.); Lat. LW coclāca
(Orib. lat.), cf. Ernout l.c. Unclear кoxλiá§wv (-á【wv), -ovτos [m.] kind of machine-
screw (Orib.), perhaps after ǎ wv? From Lat. coc(h)lear, -āris [n.] (derived from
coc(h)lea), Greek borrowed кoxλtáptov 'spoon', also as a measure (Dsc., medic.);
originally name of a spoon, of which the sharp end was used to draw the snail from
its shell; cf. WH s.v. coc(h)lear.
ETYM Connection with кóyxos, кóyxn is evident; it has (Pre-Greek)
prenasalization. Note also the vocalic variation in кóxλač/ ká-.
koxvdέw [v.] 'to stream forth copiously' (Pherecr. 130, 4). <GR?>
•VAR Ipf. кoxúdɛσкEV (Theoc. 2, 107; v.l. кOXÚεσкεv), pres. also кoxúčεɩ (Stratt. 61;
cod. KOKKÚČEL).
⚫ETYM Explained by Frisk as an intensive reduplicated formation from xúηy (on the
dissimilated vowel, see Schwyzer: 647), with back-formations кoxú. ñolú, ñλñpeç
'much, full' (H.), кóxoç 'mighty stream' (sch. Theoc. ad loc.). Are the latter words

=== page 407 ===

766
KOXwVN
learned contructions to explain the unclear forms? Reduplication from an adverb
seems very strange in Greek.
кoxóvη [f.] 'buttocks' (Hp., com., Herod.). <IE? *gheng"- ‘step'>
•ETYM The almost complete identity with Skt. jaghána- [m., n.] ‘buttocks' can hardly
be a coincidence, but the further analysis remains hypothetical. Since Schmidt KZ 25
(1881): 112 and 116, as well as Schmidt KZ 32 (1893): 373f., кoxa̸vò has been explained
as assimilated from *кaxáva, with *кax- equivalent to Skt. jagh- as the zero grade of
jánghā [f.] ‘lower thigh-bone' (to Go. gaggan 'to go', IE *g"eng"-). Objections by
Specht KZ 66 (1939): 197ff., who separates кoxóvη from jaghána-, etc. because of
лρoxшvαɩ buttocks' (Archipp. 41), and compares Xάoкw and cognates. However,
„poɣ@vaɩ could be a comic distortion of кoxúvη after лpwêïóç (acc. to Güntert 1914:
122). Notice, too, that the Skt. word shows no trace of Brugmann's Law. Mayrhofer
EWAia 1: 563 finds no solution either.
кóчɩxoç [m.] 'blackbird'. →кóσσvqoç.
kpaaivw → Kpaiaívw.
кpáßßatos [m.] ‘couch, mattress' (Rhinth., Criton Com., Arr.). <LW Macedonian?>
⚫VAR кpáẞατTOS, кρáẞατоç, also -αкτоç, -ov (so-called 'reverse writing?? See
Schwyzer 317¹).
•COMP кραẞατо-лódiov = εpµíç ‘leg of a bed' (sch.).
•DER Diminutives: кpaßátov (Arr.), -άкτov (pap. V-VI³), kpɛßattápiov (Ed.
Diocl.), MoGr. kpeßßátɩ. kpaßaktńpios [adj.] (pap. VIP). Unclear кpaßáτpɩoç,
perhaps chamberlain' (IPE 2, 297).
•ETYM Cf. Lat. grabātus (-attus). Acc. to Kretschmer 1921: 91ff., it is a loan from a
Macedonia-Illyrian word for ‘oak', *ypáßos, which is seen in ▸ypáßtov. Fur.: 126ª¹
calls this semantically arbitrary. On anlauting к- for y-, see Schwyzer ZII 6 (1926):
242. See further Kramer AfP 45 (1999): 205-216; the word would have been adopted
independently by Greeks and Romans (likewise Fur.: ibid.). Hardly related to
▶ yápadov.
кpáẞvoç [m.] name of a shell-fish (Epich. 42). <PG?>
•ETYM Probably a substrate word; for -vos, see Schwyzer 472³ and s.v. ►кóvučα. Acc.
to Strömberg 1943: 121, it stands for *кpaßó-ẞučoç, from кpáßoç. ó λápos 'mew' (H.)
and ßuчa ‘eagle-owl' (Nic.); highly unlikely. Fur.: 238, 283 connects it with кpáµẞoç
'dry', for which there seems no reason.
кpayya̸v, -óvos [f.] name of a small crustacean, probably ‘Squilla mantis' (Arist. HA).
<PG?>
•VAR кpayúv, кpáyyŋ (v.ll.).
ETYM On the formation in -wv, see Chantraine 1933: 159. The meaning suggests a
loan. The connection with Skt. śŕnga- ‘horn' (which belongs to кépaç, etc.) is
rightly rejected by Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 508. Instead of кpaууóv. кíσoa
'jay', von Blumenthal 1930: 41f. proposes to read кpayóv, i.e. "crying bird” (to
1
kpá\w
767
►кpá(w), and to change кpayóv. εvudpov (wov 'water animal' to кpayуúv, which
would fit the alphabetical order.
кpadáw [v.] ‘to swing, brandish', med. 'to tremble, be agitated' (post-Hom.). <?►
•VAR In Hom. only ptc. кpadáwv and кpadaívw (Il.). Also кpadɛúεɩv (H.) as an
explanation of кpadaívɛɩv.
•COMP Rarely with prefix: έл-кpadáw (A. R., Opp.); εл-, Siα-, σvу-кpadaívw (Tim.
Pers., Arist.); ȧvakpadɛúɛi. σɛiɛɩ, σaλɛúɛt 'shakes, causes to rock' (H.).
•DER кpádŋ [f.] 'spray at the end of branches, twig, especially of figs' (IA, Hes. Op.
681), áлo-кpádios ‘plucked from a fig tree' (AP), àño-кpadíšw [v.] 'to pluck from a
fig tree' (Nic.); also 'diseased formation of small shoots in trees', whence кpadáw [v.]
‘to have кpáðŋ' (Thphr.); also name of a contrivance that shows actors hovering in
the air (Poll. 4, 128, H.). Also кpádos ‘blight in fig-trees' (Thphr. HP 4, 14, 4), after
Thphr. l.c. also a name of the twig. Further кpadŋoítŋs papµakós ‘scapegoať, ó taîç
кpádaiç ẞaλλóµεvos 'who is being hit with a branch' (H.); кpadins [m.] ‘prepared
with fig twigs, provided with fig twigs' (H., Hippon.); кpadiatoç 'made of fig-shoots'
(Orph.); кpádalo кλádo 'branches' (H.); кpadaλós 'trembling' (Eust.). On
кpadɛvtaí see ▶kpatɛvtai.
ETYM It seems certain that кρádŋ and кρádos belong with кpadáw, of which
кpadaívw is an enlargement. It is probable that кpadáw is a denominative, so an
original meaning 'swinging' may be assumed for кpádŋ. This fits well with the
meanings 'crown (of a tree)' and 'suspension-machine' (cf. Fraenkel 1906: 19f.).
Alternatively, кpadáw could be a zero grade iterative, derived from a lost primary
verb, with кpádŋ, -os as back-formations. Acc. to Schwyzer: 682 and Chantraine
1942: 356, kpadáw is an old (originally athematic) root present, but this can hardly be
correct. The word ►кópdāε, name of a dance, is unrelated. The connection with Lat.
cardō remains hypothetical. Schulze KZ 57 (1930): 75 supposed that the IE word for
'heart' (Gr. ►кñρ, ►кapdía) is a very old root noun from кpadáw, but this must
remain uncertain.
кpáčw [v.] ‘to croak, cry' (individual attestations since Ar.). <ONOM▷
•VAR Perf. kéкpāya (trag., Ar.), to which pret. έкέкpayov (LXX), fut. kɛkpážoμai
(com., LXX), кεкpayŋoeɩ kpavyáoɛɩ 'will cry aloud (H.), aor. kɛкpāžaɩ (LXX); aor.
kpǎyɛĩv (§ 467, Pi., Antiphon, Ar.), later кpăžαı (Thphr., LXX) with fut. kpáłw (AP,
Ev. Luc.).
■COMP Also prefixed, especially with ȧva-.
•DER KEкpáкtηs [m.] 'cryer' (Hp., Ar., Luc.), кéкpауμа (Aг.), кεкραуµóç (E., Plu.)
‘crying'; kɛkpaži-dáµaç [m.] 'control by crying', comic epithet of Cleon (Ar. V. 596),
after Aλкi-Sáμaç (see Sommer 1948: 174); кpāyétaç [m.] 'crier' (Pi.), кpǎyóç ‘crying'
(Ar. Eq. 487 кpayòv kekpážetai), kpáktηs ‘id.' (Adam., Tz.), кpákɩpia (H. s.v.
λaképvča), kpaktɩкós ‘crying, making noise' (Luc.).
•ETYM The original system had a thematic root aorist кpǎyεĭv beside an intensive
perfect kéкpāya with present mg. (Schwyzer 1950: 263f.). The central position of the
perfect is testified by the derived verbal and nominal forms кεкpáčoμαi, kekpáktyg,
etc. Later formations are the rare present кpά(w and the aorist кpāžαɩ, etc.; a further

=== page 408 ===

768
kpataívw
.
innovation was έк-, έy-кpayуávw (Men., H.). As an original onomatopoeia, kέkpaya
and êpayɛĩv show similarity with ►кpów ‘to croak'. The form ►кápayos · ó tpaxùS
wóчoç, olov лριóv 'raw sound, like a saw' (H.) is not a regular disyllabic form beside
кpay-. See кópač, ►кpavyń.
kpaɩaivw [v.] ‘to complete' (Il.), intr. 'to end' (medic.), ‘to rule' (0 391, S., E.). <IE
*krh₂-s-n- ‘head>
•VAR кpāaivw (v.l.), aor. кρηñvαi (Il.), кpaāvaι (H.), pass. кpāαvēñval (Theoc.),
perf.3sg. kεкpάavτal (Od.), verbal adj. ȧ-кpάavτoç (Hom.); кpaívw (Od., medic.),
fut. кpăvéw, -w (Emp., A., E.); ¿ëɩ-кpāvɛi (A. Ag. 1340), intr. кpăvéɛσðaɩ`(I 626), aor.
кpñvaι (O 599), кpāvaι (A., S.), pass. кpαvеñvαι (Pi., trag.), perf.3sg. kéкpavtai
(trag.), ǎ-кpαv-τoç (Pi., trag.).
•COMP Also with έɩ-.
⚫DER From Kpaívw: кpávτwp, -opoç 'ruler' (E. [lyr.], AP), 'who fulfills' (epigr. apud
Paus. 8, 52, 6), with dissimilation кávτopes oi кpaτoŨντεç 'who are ruling' (H.);
кpαντηp, -ñpos 'ruler' (Orph.), plur. 'wisdom teeth', originally "completer" of the
tooth row (Arist.), sing. ‘tusk' (Nic., Lyc.); fem. kpávɩεpa ‘governess' (APl., Orph.);
on кpávτwp, -τηp see Benveniste 1948: 46f.; кpávτηs 'fulfiller' (Lyc.); кpavτηpioι oi
kpaívovtes, kai έniteλoûvtes ‘who are fulfilling, completing' (H.). Compound aútó-
кpavos 'completing itself, self-evident' (H., EM; also A. Fr. 295f.); acc. to H. also =
кíwv µovóλƉoç ‘'stone pillar', but in the last mg. rather to кápā 'head'; see -кpavov
and кpavíov.
•ETYM The variant reading кpäaívw points to an old denominative *krāhṇ-je/o-,
from the old n-stem found in gen. кpάaτos < *krāhṇt-os << PIE *krh₂-s-n-ós (cf. on
►Kápā 'head'), like óvoμaívw to ►övoua. The original meaning must have been 'to
crown' (cf. Kapāvoñv 'to complete' to кápavov 'head'). Beside кpãaívw, the aorist
кpηчvaι shows Ionic phonetics. It was contracted to кρñvαι, and from this a new
present кpaívw was made (cf. qñvai to paívw), whence кpăvéw, etc. The form
кpaιaívw may owe its root syllable кpa- to influence of the later form кpaívw
(Leumann IF 57 (1940): 157).
кpαɩлáλŋ [f.] ‘hangover, headache' (Hp., Ar.). <PG?>
●COMP ά-kpaíñaλos 'without intoxication, liberating' (Arist., Dsc.), кpainaλó-kwµios
'rambling in drunken revelry' (Ar.).
•DER кραιлαλwбηs 'prone to drunkenness' (Phld., Plu.), кραшлαλáw [v.] 'to have a
hangover' (Ar., Pl., Plb.).
⚫ETYM For the formation, cf. ȧykáλŋ, µaoxáλŋ, σкʊτáλη, etc. (Chantraine 1933:
245ff.); further unclear. Connection to кραшлvóç with interchange v/ \ cannot be
excluded semantically, but it is not evident. Latin has a LW crăpula ‘id.' (yielding
MoFr. crapule) with long ã, which might continue the Pre-Greek variation aɩ/ ā (for
which see Fur.: 336ff.). See also André Ant. class. 33 (1964): 92f.
кpαɩvóç [adj.] 'swift, rushing' (II.); cf. Treu 1955: 6f. <PG?>
●COMP кpaɩлvó-outos, -qópos ‘swiftly rushing, leading' (A.).
•ETYM Unknown. Cf. on кpaɩáλŋ. Could it represent a Pre-Greek pre-form *krap-
n- (cf. on ►žaíqvns, ► ¿§anivns)?
!
kpáuBos
769
кpaĭpa [f.] · ǹ kepaλý, kai ákpooτóliov ‘the head, terminal ornament'; also кpaĭpoɩ.
στóλ vεшν, μετшлα, кεчαλαí 'pгows, fronts, heads of ships' (H.). <IE *kerh₂- ‘head,
horn', *krh,-s-r-ih,>>
•COMP Further only as a second member: ópó-кpaipa 'with upright standing horns
or beaks' (Hom., verse-final), in Bowv, vɛwv ópoкpaιpáwv; έÜ-кpαɩpα ‘with
beautiful horns', e.g. ßovoìv έüкpaípŋoiv (h. Merc. 209); ǹµí-кpapa ‘half the head or
face' (com., inscr.); µɛλáy-kpaɩpa ‘with black heads' (Lyc., [Arist.] Mir.); dí-kpaɩpa
'forked' (A. R.). Thematicized εű-кpaipos [f.] (A., Opp., Tryph.; v.l. in h. Merc. 209);
ópłó-kpaipos [f.] (AP); τavú-кpaɩpos [m., f.] 'with long horns' (AP, Opp.); Sí-
кpaɩpoç [m.] ‘two-horned' (AP); Bo̟ó-, iσó-, dµó- кpaчpos (Nonn.). Reshaped after
the nouns in -s, -ntos: evkpaipns (Max. 84).
•ETYM The apparent simplices кpaчpa and кpaĭpos have clearly been taken from
compounds. The only old form is the feminine second member -кpaipa. This
extremely complicated form was extensively discussed in Nussbaum 1986: 222-247,
as well as in Peter's 1980a: 228-286. It has been recognized for a long time that
-кpaipa belongs to ►kέpaç (►kápā). As a basic form, we may posit *krh₂-s-r-ih₂ >
*krāh-ar-ja, where the contraction product -ā- was regularly shortened before -rj-.
After the other compounded adjectives, Greek created a thematic form -кpαιpoç,
indifferent to gender, which eventually survived.
кpáµßŋ [f.] ‘cabbage' (IA). Up till now, the word was mentioned under ►кpáµßoç, but
it has nothing to do with it. Cf. also RPh. 71 (1997): 165, where it is noted that a
reading *yάußpη is wrong. Fur. did not split the words either (see on кpáµßoç).
<?7
►
•COMP As a first member e.g. in кpaμßo-кéqαλoç 'cabbage-headed' (pap.).
⚫DER Diminutive кpaшßídov 'id.' (Antiph.), кpaußẞíov 'cabbage soup' (Hp.; MoGr.
forms, part of which has yp-, in Georgacas ByzZ 41 (1941): 362); кραµßíç ‘cabbage-
worm' (Ael.), see Strömberg 1944: 9; кpaµßñεiç ‘cabbage-like' (Nic.), кpaµßítas [m.]
'greengrocer' (Thess.).
•ETYM No etymology. Strömberg 1940: 24 connected the word with кpáµßoç,
assuming that the plant was called after its shrunken leaves; however, the connection
with the Gm. group of OHG (h)rimfan 'to shrink' must now be forgotten. Borrowed
as Lat. crambe (Plin.), MoP karamb 'cabbage'.
кpáµẞoç [adj.] = кaлupóç, čŋpós ‘loud or clear, dry', of sounds (Ar. Eq. 539, H., Suid.).
<PG(V)►
•DER кpaµẞaλéos 'dry, roasted' (Ath.), after avaλéos, etc.; кpaµßaλíčovoɩv.
кaлupíšovσɩ ‘reveľ (H.); кpoµßów [v.] ‘to roast, bake' (Diph.). кpαµßótatov otóµa
'loudest voice' (H., Suid.); as a msc. subst. blight in grapes, when they shrivel before
they are ripe' (Thphr.), see Strömberg 1937: 167. One also connects кpáµßaλa.
μvημεа monuments' (H.), supposing it denotes the urn with ashes, but this is
uncertain. Further kpáµßwtov. iktīvos tò (@ov ‘kite, the animal' (H.) (perhaps after
its claws, but see Thompson 1895 s.v.).
ETYM For the structure, cf. σкaußóç, кλαµßóç. The accent is remarkable and may
point to original substantival function.

=== page 409 ===

770
kpavaós
The word has been compared with OHG (h)rimfan ‘to wrinkle, curb, etc.', as if from
IE *kremb-, *kromb-. However, Fur.: 238 compares ►кpaupos 'dry, frail, fragile',
assuming it is a form without prenasalization and with ụ for ẞ (on which see Fur.:
228-242). This seems convincing; note Frisk's comment s.v. ►кpaupoç: "ebenfalls
mit bemerkenswerter Barytonese." Fur.: 343 further adduces кóμẞoç. ó кóvduλoç. кai
ó кaлupóç ‘ball, swelling; also dried, parched'; кρоμẞóτаτоν· кαлршτατоν.
кaτaкεкovбvλwμévov 'very dry, swollen' (H.). Further, кpáẞučoç may perhaps be
added. Therefore, the word is without a doubt Pre-Greek. The further connection of
кpáµßwτov ‘kite' with кpáµßoç. λápos 'mew' (H.), Fur.: 283, is uncertain,
кpavaós [adj.] ‘hard, raw, rocky' (II.), also of Athens and the Athenians, called
Kρavɑà лóλɩ and Kpavaaí (Ar.), or Kpavaoí (Hdt.); also Kpavaós, a mythical king
of Athens. <?>
●COMP кpavaý-лεdos ‘with rocky soil' said of Delos (h. Ap. 72), -1- metrically
conditioned (Zumbach 1955: 18).
⚫ETYM Evidenced by comparison of кεpα(F)óc and τava(F)óc, it probably derives
from *кpavaƑóç. No convincing etymology. The traditional connection with words
for 'hard' (see кpáτoc) makes no sense, as long as the formation has not been
explained.
кpāvíov [n.] 'skull, brain-pan', also of the head in general (84, Pi. I. 4, 54, Att.). On
the long ã in Hom. see Wackernagel 1916: 225, Chantraine 1942: 18, Shipp 1967: 21.
<IE *kerh₂- 'head, horn'>>
COMP As a first member in кpаvió-λεtoç 'bald-headed' (Com. Adesp. 1050); quite
frequent as a second member, especially in medical expressions, e.g. óлσðo-кpávov
‘occiput', ¿y-кpávov ‘cerebellum' (after έy-kéqaλos), but also ßov-кpávɩov ‘oxhead'
(EM), also a plant name (Ps.-Dsc., Gal.), see Strömberg 1940: 47. Adjectival
hypostasis εpι-кpávioç 'round the skull' (Plu., medic.). Older and more common is
-кpāvov, e.g in εлí-кpavov 'capital, headband' (Pi., E., inscг.), лоτí-кpavov 'cushion'
(Sophr., Theoc.), óλé-кpavov 'point of the elbow' (Hp., Ar., Arist.), KLO(vó)-кpavov
(see kiwv). Also adjectives like Boú-, έλaqó-, di-, tpí-, xaλkɛó-, òpðó-kpavoç.
Rarely as a first member: кpαvo-кoлέw [v.] ‘to cut off the head' (pap.); on кpavo-
koláлtηç see ▶kpávov.
•DER Denominative verbs: кpavížai. ènì keqaλǹv áлoppiчa 'to throw (down) upon
the head', кpηvшv· кαpηßapшv 'being heavy in the head' (H.); hypostasis
άñoкpavíšaɩ ‘to tear from the head' (AP), 'to cut off the head (Eust.).
⚫ETYM The secondary formation кpāvíov goes back to a nominal basis. It seems best
to start from the old oblique stem *krān- < *krh₂-s-n- of кápη, which was later
replaced by *krāhṇt-. In this context, note the gloss кpáva. кɛoaλń (H.). See further
► кápa and ► кépaç.
кpávov [n.] 'Cornelian cherry' (Thphr., medic.). <IE *ker- 'cornel'>
•VAR Also кpávos [f.] (pap., Gp.).
•COMP As a first member perhaps in кpavo-кoλáëτη name of a spider (Philum.
Ven. 15, 1, sch. Nic. Th. 764), see Strömberg 1944: 22.
kpatevtaí
771
•DER More common and attested earlier is кpávɛta [f.] 'cornelian cherry' (Hom., E.,
Thphr., Hell.), also кpavía (Hp., Dsc.), -ća (Gp.). Hence кpávɛov (-tov) ‘id.'
(Thphr., Gal.), кpavéïvos 'of cornel wood' (Hdt., X.), also кpaváïvoç ‘id.' (Hp., X.,
Str.), after λáïvoç; кpávɩvos ‘id.' (Paus.).
•ETYM Lat. cornum, -us, with the same fluctuation as to the gender, has been
compared to reconstruct IE *krno-. Lith. Kirnis name of a ‘god who protects cherries'
is of doubtful appurtenance. Mediterranean origin is also possible, which has to be
assumed for képασoç in any case.
кpávos [n.] ‘helmet' (IA), see Trümpy 1950: 45f. <?>
•COMP As a first member in кpavo-лоέw 'to forge helmets', whence -лoïɑ, -лoós
(Ar.).
⚫DER Diminutive кpavídiov (Att. inscr.).
•ETYM The word кpávos must be connected with the group of words for 'head,
horn', but cannot contain a laryngeal. Connection with ►кápvov, ►кpavaós, etc. is
less probable.
кpañataλλóç [m.] name of a worthless fish (Hdn., H.); also metaph. = μwpós 'dull'
(H.), see Strömberg 1943: 952, and as a name of a coin (= Spaxμn) in Hades (Pherecr.
apud Poll. 9, 83). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also -aλλós (Hdn. 1, 158).
•DER кpañataλías. áveµwdns kaì ảoßevýs. kaì ávíoxupa λéywv, äµεivov dè Anpwdns
‘vain or idle and weak; speaking without foundation, or better: frivolously' (H.)
(Pherecr. 99).
⚫ETYM A formation in -aλ(A)óc with variation ^/^^ (not noticed by Chantraine 1933:
245ff.). Therefore, clearly a Pre-Greek word in -al- (see Beekes 2008).
кpáσлεdov [n.] ‘edge, border of a cloth', metaph. of a country, a mountain, also of an
army = 'wing of the army' (S., E., Ar., X., Theoc., NT). <?>
•Der kpaoïeditns 'hindmost person in a chorus' (Plu.), opposed to the кopuqałoç;
крασлεбóομαι [v.] 'to be bordered' (E.).
•ETYM Analyzed as an old compound of кápa 'head' (in the form кpão-) with a faded
second member лédov ‘plain, ground', for which Skt. dru-padá- [n.] 'wooden post' is
compared. The first member would point to an original meaning ‘upper border', acc.
to Risch IF 59 (1949): 14. However, Nussbaum 1986: 71 is very sceptical; there is no
indication whatsoever that it would contain the word for 'head'.
кpáσtɩç ‘green fodder'. → ypáw.
kpátaɩyos [m.] ‘hawthorn, Crataegus oxyacantha' (Thphr.). <?►
•VAR Also -atyúv, -óvoç.
•ETYM Connection with кpaτúç ‘hard' and aiy- in aiyíλwy explains nothing. The
etymology therefore remains unknown.
кpatɛvtaí [m.pl.] 'stone or metal blocks on both sides of the altar, on which the spits
resteď (I 214, Eup., Att. inscr.), see Chapouthier REA 43 (1941): 12ff.; also ‘supporting
stone of the pavement' (Lebadea). ◄PG(V)►

=== page 410 ===

772
kpáτOC
•VAR кpadevτaí (Att. inscr.), Solmsen KZ 42 (1909): 221ff.
⚫DER KραTEUTŃpia [pl.] 'id.' (Poll. 6, 89), after the instrument nouns in -τnpiov.
•ETYM The formation in -ɛvtā- is remarkable, but it does not help to assume a verb
kpatɛúw = кpatúvw 'to strengthen, prop'. The rare by-form кpadevτaí (Att. inscr.)
can hardly be explained as a folk-etymological transformation after кpadáw, nor
does the form in -- point to folk etymology after кpaτúç. Fur.: 181 is right in
concluding to a Pre-Greek loan with 8/ T; cf. on ẞaσкεvτai for the formation.
кpátos [n.] ‘strength, power, authority' (II.), on the mg. Trümpy 1950: 202ff. ◄IE *kret-
s- 'strength', *krt-u-, *krt-ero-➤
•VAR Epic Ion. (Dor.) also кápτoç, Aeol. kpέtoç.
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. ȧ-кpατηs 'without strength, powerless', opposed
to έy-кpaτnç 'having power over, controlling (oneself)', whence έукpáτɛia, -έw, etc.;
аúτo-кpατns 'having power over oneself, independent'; more usual αúτo-кpáτwp
'with unlimited power' (Ar., Th.); also -кpéτηs in Aeol. and Arc.-Cypr. PNs, e.g. Σw-
kpétns.
•DER Beside the noun kpátos, kpétos, several adjectives exist:
Аpyeïqóvtnc;
1. кpaτúç 'strong, powerful' (Hom.); only verse-final кpατùç Apуɛïöóvτηç; кpατúvw
'to strengthen, consolidate, rule' (II.), epic also кapτ-; thenceе кρаτvσμóç
'strengthening', кρατντηpιoç ‘id.', -Tкóç ‘id.' (medic.), кpατúvτwρ 'controller'
(PMag. Leid.).
2. кpatɛpóç (II., A. Pr. 168 [anap.]), kaptɛpóç (Il.) ‘id.' (IA); also as a first member,
e.g. kpatɛpó-qpwv (Il.). Thence кaptɛpέw [v.] ‘to be steadfast, hold out, overcome
onseself (IA), also with prefix, e.g. Sia-; thence кaptɛpia (Pl., X.), -pŋoi (Pl.)
'holding on, firmness', -pikóç (Att.); kaptɛpów [v.] ‘to strengthen' (Aq., Herm.).
3. кpaτaιóç ‘id.' (II.), also as a plant name (Ps.-Dsc.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 82; rarely as
a first member, е.g. кpαταιó-oppwv (PMag.). Thence кρаταιóτη = кpáτoç (LXX),
кpατaιów 'to strengthen' (LXX, NT), кpαταíwµα, -wσis (LXX). Fem. кpaτaшç (Od.),
see Schwyzer: 385.
4. Grades of comparison: comp. kpɛittwv (Att.), кpɛíʊʊwv (epic) with secondary -ɛɩ-
for кpéσσwv (Ion., Pi.); Dor. кáppwv < *kṛt-iōn, Cret. кápτwv; denominative
kpɛittóqµai [v.] 'to have excrescences', of wine, whence kpɛittwois (Thphr.). Superl.
kpátɩotos (Il.), epic кápτ-, whence кpatiotɛúw [v.] 'to be the best, surpass' (Pi.,
Att.); also -(e)ía '‘highness' (pap.), as a title. 5. Adverb кápta ‘in a high degree, very'
(Ion., trag.). 6. As a first member often кpαται- (кaptai-), e.g. kpatα-уúaλoç 'with
strong breast-pieces' (T 361). Further Kpατɩ-, Kаpτɩ- in PNs, e.g. Kρατí-dημoç,
Kapτí-viкoç; also Kρατ(o)-, Kρατε-, etc. (Bechtel 1917b: 256). Short hypocoristic
names Kρatīvos, Kpaτúλoç, Kpátvλλoç, Kpatiεúç. On Kpɛσôóvtηs see below.
7. Verb: кpaτéw 'to control, possess, rule, conquer' (II.), Aeol. кpɛtéw, aor. êpatñσai
(post-Hom.), кpétŋoai (Sapph.), often with prefix, e.g. ¿ïɩ-, kata-, ëɛpɩ-; thence
(εлɩ-, etc.) кpátŋoɩ ‘power, rule' (Th., LXX), (dia-, èñi-) kpatytiкós 'controlling'
(late), (diα-)кpáτηµа 'support, grip' (medic.); кpατητý possessor' (Procl.);
кρατñрαç τоÙÇ кρατобνтαç 'who are in power' (H.), for кρατητñрαç (Lewy KZ 59
(1932): 182). But έукpατéw from έу-кρατηç, vαv-крατέw, -τíα from vav-кρατnç, etc.;
see above. Also kaptaivɛiv. kpatɛïv ‘to rule' (H.).
i
!
кpαчpoç
773
•ETYM The full grade in Aeol. кpéέtos interchanges regularly with the zero grade in
кpatúc, kápta (the distribution of ap and pa in this root is not well understood;
discussed in Schwyzer: 342). Both кpátos, káptos and the compounds Dor. Káppwv
< *kápσ(σ)wv < *kápɩɩwv, káptwv arose analogically beside the old full grade
KPÉσOWV < *KPÉTчwv (details in Seiler 1950: 53ff.). A zero grade of the s-stem кpέtoç is
supposed in Kpɛσ-qóvtηs < *Kpet-σ- (see Kretschmer Glotta 24 (1936): 237 and
Heubeck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 5 (1954): 26).
The derivational history of the forms is unclear in some cases. The adjective
kpatɛpós, kaptɛpóc was supposed to contain an r-stem alternating with the s-stem
(Benveniste 1935: 17), but it may also be a Greek formation in -ero- (cf. e.g. Oaλεpóc,
yλuкɛpóc). For кápta, cf. e.g. táxα, äµa, and see Ruijgh 1980: 189-198. The first
member кpatα- may have been modelled after лаλα-; thence perhaps кpατalóc,
like лαλatóç. Acc. to Risch 1937: 126, however, кραταιóç is a back-formation from
кpataιń for *кpáτaiα, the old fem. of кpaτúc (comparing Пatataí to nλatús).
An exact correspondence to the group of кpáτoç is not found in other IE languages.
The closest are Skt. krátu- [m.] ‘(magical) power, mind, will', Av. xratu- [m.] ‘id.'
(for the semantics, cf. OE craft 'force, physical strength, power', but also ‘insight,
craft, etc.'). The Germanic word for 'hard', Go. hardus, etc., which is usually
adduced, has Schwebeablaut (*kortú- as opposed to *krtú-, *kret-); the connection is
rejected by Strunk MSS 34 (1976): 169f.
кpavyń [f.] ‘cry, loud crying' (Att.). <IE *krau-g- 'cry'>
•DER кpavуíaç· ïññoç, ó úñò êpavyñs kai yóqov tapaσσóμevoç ‘horse that is stirred
by a shout and noise' (H.) and кpavyós. Spvoкoλáƒtov εldoç ‘kind of woodpecker'
(H.). Denominative кpavyάw [v.] 'to cry, crack' (unknown poet apud Pl. Resp.
607b, D., Hell.), кpavуaσμóç 'crying' (Diph.), -aστns 'cryer' (AB), -áσtpia [f.] (H.),
-αστɩкóç 'crying' (Procl., sch.). Also кpaúуaσoç 'crier' (gloss.), see Schwyzer: 516,
Chantraine 1933: 435; Kpavyaoidŋs (Batr.), кpaúyačos (Ptol.). A different formation
кpavyavάoμaɩ in кρаvуaváμεvov (Hdt. 1, 111), v.l. -youεvov, cf. Schwyzer: 770;
uncertain sch. Call. Aet. Fr. 1, 20. Further the PNs Kpañуıç, Kpavžídaç, Kpavyaλidai
(Bechtel 1917b: 496).
•ETYM The form кpavyη could be an action noun pointing to a primary verb,
corresponding to several forms in Germanic and Balto-Slavic. Thus, ON hraukr ‘sea-
raven' could be directly equated with кpavyóç; further, with ablauting, ū Go. hruk
[acc.sg.] 'crowing' and hrukjan 'to crow'. A voiceless root-final stop is found in Lith.
kraūkti, 1sg. kraukiù 'to screech', and Slav. words like Ru. kruk ‘raven' (*krauk-o-).
Note further, with palatal final, Skt. króśati = Av. xraosaiti 'to screem, cry'. Like the
comparable sound imitations кpáľw, ►кpółw, кpavyń is probably an old
onomatopoeia.
кpαupoç [adj.] 'dry, brittle, fragile' (Pl., Arist., Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•DER кpaupóτηs 'frailty' (Thphr., Gal.), кpavρóoμαι [v.] 'to become dry' (Ph., D. C.).
Further кpaupos [m.] (Arist.) = кpañpa [f.] (Suid., Phot., perhaps Gortyn, see Collitz
5001) 'feverish disease of swine and cattle', whence кpaupáw [v.] 'to suffer from K.'
(Arist.).

=== page 411 ===

774
kpέaç
⚫ETYM A Pre-Greek variant of ▸кpáµßos, with interchange F/ ẞ and prenasalization.
кpéaç [n.] 'meat, piece of meat' (II.). <IE *kreuh₂- 'flesh'>
●VAR Gen. кpέwç (secondary кpέaτoç; Att. inscr. 338ª); plur. nom. кpέă (Il.), which
must be an innovation; very uncertain кpέατα (Od.); gen. кpɛŵv (IA), also кpɛɩwv
(Hom.), probably for кpɛέwv, кpɛáwv (h. Merc. 130), dat. кpéãσɩ (Il.), also кpéɛool
(Orac. apud Hdt. 1, 47), кpɛáɛσσɩ (late Ep.).
•DIAL Dor. кpñs.
•COMP As a first member usually кpεo- (after the o-stems), e.g. кpεo-кoлεw [V.] 'to
cut meat' (A., E.), also кpɛw- (after yɛw-, New-, etc.) as a v.l. and e.g. in кpεw-daítηc
'meat distributor' (Phld.), кpɛ-áypa 'meat pincer' (Ar.), with elision from кpɛo-;
кpεā-vóμoç 'distributing meat', whence -éw, -ía (E., Is., Hell.), after ȧyopā-vóμoç;
thence кpɛã-Soτéw, -oía; kpɛŋ-qayέw [v.] 'to eat meat' (Hp.), analogical beside
кpɛo-qayέw. Details on the inflexion in Schwyzer: 516, Chantraine 1942: 209f.; on the
shape of the first member Solmsen 1901: 23'. Rarely as a second member: лáу-кpεaç
‘sweetbread, pancreas' (Arist., medic.), yλukú-kpɛos 'with sweet meat' (Sophr.), etc.
⚫DER Diminutive кρεάdov (IA), кρεïσкоç (Alex. 189), кρεÚλλov (Theognost.);
кpɛwdŋs 'meaty' (Arist., Thphr.), кpεiov 'butcher's stall' (I 206), кpηïov (H.), after
άyyɛĩov, etc.; quite uncertain êpŋotýpiov (Attica IVª).
⚫ETYM Except for the accent, кpéαç is identical with Skt. kravíṣ- [n.] 'raw flesh', from
a base form *kreuh₂-s- [n.]. An s-stem is probably also continued in Lat. cruor, -ōris
'blood from a wound', as well as in OIr. crú [n.] ‘gore, blood' and OCS kry 'blood',
which derive from zero grade *kruH-s. Further forms: Skt. krür-á- 'raw, bloody' <
*kruh-ro-, Skt. kravyá- [n.] 'raw flesh' = OPr. krawian [n.], Lith. kraujas [m.]
'blood', all from *kreuh₂-i-. See ►кpúoç.
kpɛittwv →kpátos.
kpɛíwv, -ovtos [m.] ‘ruler, prince' (Il.). ◄IE *kreiH- ‘splendour'>
●DIAL кpέwv (Pi., A. [lyr.]), -ovtos.
●Der Fem. êpɛíovoa (X 48), kpćovoa (B.) ‘ruler, princess'; PNs Kpέwv, -ovoa (post-
Hom.), patronymic Kpetovtádns (T 240).
⚫ETYM An inherited word from Indo-European poetic language. For example, Gonda
KZ 73 (1956): 153f. compared εúpù кpɛíwv with Skt. pṛthu-śrī- 'with broad śrī-'. The
Greek nt-stem (after ǎpxwv, µédwv, etc.) probably replaced an older n-stem.
In Indo-Iranian, we find a noun Skt. śrī- [f.] ‘magnificence, riches, splendor, fame' <
*kriH-. Narten KZ 100 (1987): 270-96 points out that the oldest Greek forms must be
those in PNs in -кpéwv, e.g. Þiλo-kpέwv (Cyprus). Therefore, the old connection of
epic кpɛíwv with the Indo-Iranian comparative Av. sraiiah- 'more beautiful', Skt.
śréyāms (with secondary e for a) 'more shining, superior' is untenable. Instead,
Greek has a plain n-stem *kreiH-ōn, and the epic form кpɛíwv may have metrical
lengthening for кpέwv. Cf. also Peters 1993b: 106-8.
кpέкw [V.] ‘to weave, strike a stringed instrument with a plectrum', metaph. 'to
produce a sound, raise (a song)' (Sapph., Pi., Ar. [lyr.], AP). <IE? *krek- 'strike>>
•VAR Aor. кpéčαι (late).
•COMP Rarely with úлo-, dα-, ʊʊv-.
kpéuBada
775
•DER KPOк- [f.] in кpóк-α [acc.sg.] (Hes. Op. 538), кpóк-ɛç [nom.pl.] (AP 6, 335), кpóč
[nom.sg.] only H., Theognost.; further кρóкη (IA) 'thread which is passed between
the threads of the warp, woof, (woollen) cloth'. From kpókij: kpókiov 'woollen band'
(Anticl. 13), кpoкíç [f.] ‘sundew, fly-strap, Drosera' (Apollod. apud Plin. HN 24, 167),
kpoкúc [f.] 'flock of wool' (IA), кpoкúdiov (Gal.), кpoкvdíw [v.] 'to pluck off flocks
of wooľ (com., Gal.), -toµóc (Gal.); kpoków [v.] ‘to weave, envelop in wooľ (Dionys.
apud St. Byz., Phot.) ; кpoкiσµóç ‘cloth' (sch.); as if from *кpoкí(w. kpɛyµós [m.]
'sound of stringed instruments' (Epich., A. R., Poll.).
•ETYM Originally a term of weaving, кpéкw was also transferred to the playing of
stringed instruments. The present кpéкw is isolated, though Germanic has several
nouns pointing to a primary verb: ON hræll [m.] 'staff to fasten the cloth' < PGm.
*hráhila-, OE hrēol ‘reeľ < PGm. *hréhula-. A trace of Verner's Law exists in OE
hrægl [n.] ‘cloth, garment', OHG hregil [n.] ‘indument, spolium'. Several Balto-Slavic
words have also been compared: Lith. krēklės 'rags, tatters', Latv. krekls ‘shirt', “Stuhl,
der Teil des Spinnrockens, in dem die Beine ruhen", as well as words for 'loom', e.g.
Ru. krósno. Further Slavic expressions for 'strike fire, etc.': Ru. kresíť, 1sg. krešú, SCr.
krèsati, 1sg. krěšēm (thus LIV² s.v. *krek-), which seems the most promising
comparison.
кpeµávvvu [v.] ‘to hang', intr. ‘to be suspended' (Att.). <IE *kremh₂- ‘hang’➤
•VAR Other presents кpíuvηu and кpýµvηµ, -άw (Pi., Hp., trag., com.), also
кρεμavvбw and кpεµáw (Arist.), кpεµáčw (LXX), кpεμváw (Demetr. Eloc.); intr.med.
кpéµaµaɩ (II.); aor. кpεµáσαι (II.), pass. кpεµãσðñvaι (Hdt., Att.); fut. кkpɛµów (H 83),
кpɛµŵ (Att.), кpεµáow (com., LXX), pass. кpεµýσoμai (Ar., Hell. pap.); perf.
kɛkpéµaka, -aµaɩ (late).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àva-, kata-, Èk-.
•DER кpɛµáеpa [f.] ‘hammock' (Ar.), 'rope hung from a hook' (Arist.; v.l. -áστpa, see
below); кpɛµáç [f.] ‘beetling, precipitous' (A. Supp. 795 [lyr.]); кpéµaσiç, -aσµóç
(Hp.), aoua (sch., Eust.), -aoía (gloss.) 'hanging'; кρεчаστηр namе of certain
muscles (medic.), ‘stalk by which a grape cluster hangs' (Gp.), -áστpa ‘stalk by which
a flower hangs' (Thphr.), Strömberg 1937: 116; έк-, άло-, iepɩ-kpeµýs ‘hanging down,
hanging all around, from έê-êpeµávvvµ, etc.
•ETYM The original situation in Greek seems to be that of an active aorist кpεµáσai
'to hang' (trans.) beside a medial athematic present кpέµãσðαι ‘to be suspendeď
(perhaps reshaped after the aorist?). Several secondary active presents arose
subsequently: кpíµvηµ, кpýµvηµ (perhaps after кpηµvóc), kpeµávvvµɩ, as well as
кρɛμάw, -áчw, кρεμváw. However, кpηuvóc is unrelated.
Sanskrit has a root śram'- 'to become weary, tire' with a root aor. Ved. śramat 'will
tire me' and a ptc. śrānta- ‘tireď. The oldest meaning could be 'be flaccid, weak'. Go.
hramjan 'to crucify' is better left out (it belongs to OE hremman 'lock in, hinder',
ON hremma 'grasp, clench'; Pok. 623f.). See LIV² s.v. kremh₂-.
кpéμẞaλa [n.pl.] 'clapper, castanets' (Ath. 14, 636c, Carm. Pop. 3); on the realia Weber
RhM 82 (1933): 194f. <PG?

=== page 412 ===

776
кpεμvš
•DER кpɛµßaλiá¶w [v.] ‘to play the ê., clapper' (Hermipp. 31), Schwyzer: 735; thence
кpɛµßaliaoτús (h. Ap. 162), see Zumbach 1955: 8, Porzig 1942: 181, and cf. on
▶ Bau Baivw.
•ETYM The suffix -aλo- is also found in кpóταλα, рóлaλov and other loans; cf.
Chantraine 1933: 245f. Connection with the group of sound-words with anlauting
*(s)kr- (Pok. 569f.), e.g. Lat. crepō 'to creak', Lith. skrebëti, isg. skrebù 'to rustle', Ru.
kropotát' 'to growl', is impossible, as Gr. ẞ cannot be due to the preceding nasal (as
per Schwyzer: 333). This nasal rather points to a non-IE word, quite possibly Pre-
Greek (prenasalization?). A word of this meaning is likely to be a loan.
kpéµvs →kλεµµús.
'
kpéž, kpekós [f.] name of a long-legged bird, perhaps 'ruff, Machetes pugnax', or
'corn-crake, Rallus crex' (Hdt., Ar., Arist.); also metaph. of a noisy braggart (Eup.).
<IE? *kerk- 'bird'>
ETYM As the identification of the bird is uncertain (see Thompson 1895 s.v.), all
etymologies remain hypothetical. Onomatopoeic origin is quite possible. It has been
compared with other bird names, like Skt. kṛkara- a kind of partridge, MIr. cercc
‘hen', OPr. kerko ‘diver', Ru. kréčet ‘gerfalcon' (Pok. 568). Cf. also kɛpкás. kpÈ₹ tò
öpvɛov, kɛpкιÐαλíç. έpwdiós 'stork' (cf. aiyilaλoc), képkoç. áλektpυúv 'cock' (H.);
also, képкvoç. iέpaε ½ άλɛкpuóv hawk or cock' and képkač. iépač (H.). About the
possibility of confusion with кépкoç 'tail of an animal', nothing can be said.
кpńуvoç [adj.] ‘appropriate, right, useful' (epic poet.) and, by misunderstanding in A
106, also 'true' (cf. Leumann 1950: 33f.). <?>
•VAR Dor. Koáyvoç.
•DER Adv. kpnyúws (Call.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Schwyzer Glotta 12 (1923): 18ff. thought it was a compound
from kápā, кpŋ- ‘heaď (see ►кpýdɛvov) and yʊĩa ‘members', as well as ‘hand' (sg.),
in which case it would mean 'having head and hand'; highly doubtful. Fur. 105
considers the word to be Pre-Greek. See ► кápā.
кpýdɛµvov [n.] 'women's head-dress, veil', metaph. 'battlements, cover, lid (of a jar)'
(II.), cf. Leumann 1950: 2966, Haakh Gymnasium 66 (1959): 374ff. ◄IE *kerh₂- ‘head,
horn'>
•VAR Often plur.
•DIAL Dor. kpá-.
⚫ETYM A compound from кápā ‘'head' and the root of Séw 'to bind', but unclear in
detail. The first member could stand for кpηvo- by dissimilation, i.e. thematic
enlargement of the zero grade of кápā (see ►кpāviov), but acc. to Frisk it may also
have arisen from кpησ- with loss of σ before 8 (this seems unlikely, and is rejected by
DELG). The word ►кpáσлɛdov is probably unrelated. The second member -Sεμvov,
-a contains a derivation *dh,-mn- of Sέw 'to bind', for which we may compare
Béλεuva for the suffixation (see ►ẞáλλw) and ▸Séµvia.
кpñðɛv in kaτà (àëò) кpñеεv ‘down from the head' (Hom.), probably false for кat'
ăkpndev. → kápā.
!
kprivn
кpñ¤µov [n.] 'samphire, Crithmum maritimum' (Hp., Call., Nic., Dsc.). ◄PG?>
•VAR Also -os [m.], kpɩð- and kpítaµov.
777
•ETYM Unexplained. Probably a foreign word; cf. Chantraine 1933: 133. Acc. to
Amigues RPh. 75 (2001): 272, the plant obtained its name because it has its grains like
barley (thus already Dsc. II 129).
kpŋuatis, -idos [f.] name of an instrument, probably a cup (IG 7, 3498: 15; 20 [Oropos;
temple inventory]). <?►
•COMP In кpημo-opópol (beside oivo-xóa IG 22, 1425: 358), the first member could
stand for *кpηuаτido-cópoι, if it is not from кpñua.
⚫ETYM A diminutive of кpñµа (Att. кpāµa) ‘mixing, mixed drink²; cf. лɩwµatíç ‘cup
that falls down (without foot)'.
кpηuvóc [m.] 'steep incline' (II.). <?>
•COMP Often as a second member, е.g. àлó-кρημνоs 'inclined, steep' (IA), Baú-
кpηuvos 'with steep inclination' (Pi.); rarely as a first member, e.g. кpηuvo-poßεoμai
[v.] 'to be afraid of chasms' (Hp.).
•Der kpnµvwdns ‘slanting' (Th.); (kata-, etc.)kpηuví¼w [v.] 'to have a steep slope'
(Att., etc.), -чσµós, -lois (late).
•ETYM Traditionally considered an old verbal noun from ►êpεµávvy, with ablaut
кpŋµ-: kpɛµa-; however, this is impossible if the root was *kremh₂- (a zero grade
*kṛmh₂- would give *кpaµα-). DELG notes that the è is proven by Pindar, which
makes the case even worse: a h₂ can never result in PGr. *ē. The present кpηµvηu is
rather influenced by кpηuvós than the other way around. The present entry
therefore remains unexplained.
кpývη [f.] 'source, fountain' (II.); on the mg. as against луη see Wycherley Class. Rev.
51 (1937): 2f. IE? *krs- 'spring, flood'>
VAR Dor. Arc. кpáva, Aeol. кpávva.
•COMP Compounds like кaλλí-кpavos 'with beautiful springs' (Pi.).
●DER Diminutives: kpηvíc, -ïdos [f.] (E., Call., D. H.; Chantraine 1933: 347), also as a
TN (Str.); кpηvíov (Delos IIIª, Str.), -íðtov (Arist.). кpòvaños ‘of the/a source' (since p
240), кpηvýïos ‘id.' (Orac. apud Dam. Pr. 344); výµôα Köηvádes (A. fr. 168
[hexam.], after opεστiádɛç), cf. Chantraine 354f.; кpηvītis [f.] ‘of the/a source' (Hp.).
TN Kρavvoúv (Thess.).
•ETYM The different dialectal forms (see above) point to PGr. *krasnā-. Att. -pη- for
-pā- has been explained variously (Proto-Ionic-Attic dissimilation, an Ionism or a
hyperatticism; see Schwyzer: 189f.). Since Whitney Tucker TAPA 93 (1962), it has
generally been accepted (as by Peters 1980a) that the dissimilation assumed for
кpηvη was regular.
One hypothesis connects кpýуη with кpouvós ‘spring', кpouvai· кpívaι τéλεial
(H.). The IE base forms would then be *krosno- and kṛsneh₂-, respectively; but note
that all dialects have the vocalization *-ra-, so the etymon probably did not have
vocalic *r. Therefore, the explanation remains uncertain. The words кpouvóc,
кpoйvat may correspond to a Germanic word for 'wave, flood', except for the accent:
ON hrọnn [f.], OE hræn, hærn [f.], from PGm. *hraznó, IE *krosn-éh

=== page 413 ===

778
kpitis,-idog
779
кpηлíç, -īdo¢ [f.] 'man's high boot, half-boot' (X., Theoc., Plu., Poll.), also
‘groundwork, foundation, quay' (IA, Pi.). ◄PG?, IE? *krh₂p-ih₂►
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. óлσðо-кρηíç name of a shoe (Att. inscr., Poll., H.).
•DER кpöïídia [pl.] 'bordering stones' (Didyma IIª), кpηädaïov (Lys.), -ɛĭov (Ostia)
'foundation of a house', кρηädao of the foundation' (Att. inscr.), on the
formation see Chantraine 1933: 49. Denominative кρηлdów [v.] 'to give a basis,
found, support' (D. C., Plu.), -wµa 'foundation' (inscr., D. S., Aq.).
ETYM Derived from a nominal base form (like кvηuíç and Xεipíç), or perhaps кρηлis
just took over their ending. The technical meaning suggests a loan (Chantraine 1933:
347, Schwyzer: 465). The connection with words for 'shoe', e.g. Lith. kùrpė < *krHp-
ih, is formally impeccable (see кαρßáτvoç) but is rejected by Fraenkel 1955 s.v.
Borrowed as Lat. crepida 'half-boot', crepīdō 'stone basis, etc.'. Note that the suffix
-ĭd- occurs in Pre-Greek.
кpŋoέpa [f.] ‘fìne sieve' (Ar. Ec. 991, medic., Poll.). <?, IE? *kreh,(i)- ‘sieve'>
•VAR Ion. -pη.
•DIAL кpaǎpa. kóσkɩvov ǹ öpuyµa ‘sieve; ditch' (H.), Elis.
⚫DER Diminutive кpησέpov (Poll.), -píτηs äpτos 'bread from fine-sieved meal'
(Diph. 26).
•ETYM Isolated words in -épa (like ► Sɩðépa, ► àσкépa, ▶xoλépa, ▶kvoćpŋ) are
likely to be loans. Theoretically, derivation from a old noun *кpñσɩç 'sieving' <
*kreh,-ti- is possible, which would belong to ➤кpívw < *krh,i-n-, and have the same
ablaut grade as Lat. excrēmentum and crēvi.
кρησúуετov [n.] 'place of retreat, refuge' (Hdt., D. H., Luc.). <?>
⚫ETYM Wackernagel KZ 33 (1895): 56f. posits *xpηεσúуετov, with contraction and
Grassmann's Law. It would be a compound with suffix -ετo- (DELG), from quyɛïv
and Xpños ‘debť, so originally “fleeing from debt”. Chantraine calls this proposal
more ingenious than convincing. The connection with кápä ‘head (Kretschmer
KZ 31 (1892): 410, Solmsen RhM 53 (1898): 155f.) is semantically hardly convincing.
To be rejected, Kapsomenos Glotta 40 (1962): 43-50.
кpißavos →kλißavoç.
kpi w [v.] 'to scream, creak' (Men. 879). <IE *krik- 'cry'>>
•VAR Perf. ptc. кɛkpłyótɛç (Ar. Av. 1521), them. aor. úлo-кpĭуεïv (S. Ichn. 171 [lyr.]),
sigm. aor. (vлo-)кpîžai or -ížaɩ (Ael. NA 5, 50, H.); also them. aor. кpíkɛ (H 470), of
【vyóv. Cf. кpɩddéµev = yɛλāv (Stratt. 47, 7; Boeot.).
●DER Verbal nouns кpłyń (Hippon. 54), кpłyµós (Zonar.) ‘screaming, creaking';
кpɩуń. η yλauε 'the shrieking little owl' (H.).
•ETYM The system kékpīya: kpĭyɛĭv: kpíšw: kpîšaɩ corresponds nicely with kéкpāya:
kpǎyɛĭv: ►kpá¶w: кpāžαɩ. The word кpíšw has a direct cognate in the root present
ON hríka 'to creak' < IE *krig-. Lith. krykti (krykšti), 1sg. krykiù ‘to cry, creak’, and
the Slav. group of Ru. kričáť ‘to cry', krik 'cry' show root-final -k. An old isolated
nominal formation is the Germanic name of the heron, e.g. OHG (h)reigaro, heigaro
(with dissimilation), MoDu. reiger.
кpɩðń [f.] ‘barley-corns', usually plur. 'barley' (Il.); also metaph. = 'swelling on the
eyelid' (medic.), see Strömberg 1937: 192, Strömberg 1944: 63. On the mg. of кpień,
луρóç, σчτоç sее Moritz Class. Quart. 49 (1955): 129ff. <?>
⚫VAR Short form кpi [n.], see below.
•COMP кριеó-лuрov [n.] 'mix of barley and wheat' (pap.; cf. on Аióσлрov),
εÜкpoç 'rich in barley' (Theoc., AP).
•DER Diminutives: кpiðíov (Luc., Longos), кpiðídiov, also 'decoction of barley' (Hp.,
Posidon.), кpiеápiov (pap.). Further substantives: кpiaía 'barley soup' (Hom. Epigr.
15,7), after àλμaía, etc., Chantraine 1933: 86; кpiðavías [m.] name of a kind of wheat
(Theophr. HP 8, 2, 3, beside σɩtavías), perhaps after vɛavíaç (Strömberg 1937: 91),
see also Chantraine 1933: 94. Adjectives: кpíivoç 'of barley' (Ion., Hell.), кpiеáμiv
‘id.' (Polyaen.), after oŋoáµivoç; kpɩðɩкós ‘consisting of barley' (pap.), kpɩłwdŋs ‘like
barley, full of barley-corns' (Hp.).
Denominative verbs: кpiáw 'to feed oneself with barley' (A., S.), also кpiɩáw
(Arist.), after the verbs of disease in -táw, Schwyzer 732; thence кpɩðíασıç ‘surfeit
caused by overfeeding with barley' (X.); кpiеí¶w ‘to feed with barley' (Aesop., Babr.).
TN Kρiðáτŋ (-wτ½) name of a spit of land in Acarnania (Krahe IF 48 (1930): 223ff.).
Epithet Kpiwv (H.) from кpiеń = лóσðŋ (Ar. Pax 965); see Schulze KZ 29 (1888):
263.
•ETYM The epic by-form кpi [n.], occurring only in the nom. and acc., points to an
original root noun *krīt, from which кpi-n is an enlarged form. Attempts to
connect кpĭ with Western European words for 'barley', Lat. hordeum, OHG gersta,
have failed thus far. The word кpĩ corresponds better with Alb. drithë, ‘barley,
wheat', of which the -ri- may come from IE *-r-. Further, Arm. gari, gen. garwoy
'wheat' IE *grio- also recalls кpi, and a similar word appears in Georgian qeri
‘barley'; cf. Deeters IF 56 (1938): 140f. We may be dealing with a Wanderwort.
Egyptian origin has been considered too (Schwyzer: 61, Debrunner in Ebert 1924-
1932: 4,525).
кpíкoç [m.] ‘ring' at the end of a carriage-pole, on a sail; 'curtain-ring, arm-ring,
finger-ring, etc.' ( 272, Hdt. 2, 36, Arist., Thphr., Hell. inscr.). <?>
•VAR Acc. кpíka. кpíkov (H.). Also кípkoç (Hell.), cf. kipków below.
•COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. in кpiк-ηλaoía ‘trundling of hoops' (Antyll.
apud Orib. 6, 26. 1).
•DER Kɩpkíov small ring' (Delos IIª), кpiкéλ(\)чov ‘id.' (Alex. Trall., sch.), like
\έλ(\)tov, and cf. Lat. circellus; кpiкwłóç ‘consisting of rings' (Hell.); cf. kpikóoµai
'to be fastened with a ring' (Str.), кpíкwσɩç (Heliod. apud Orib.), -wµa (Eust.);
кipków 'to fetter with a ring' (A. Pr. 74). Several glosses in H.: kpikádɛia. tò
έvaλážai τovç аактúλoυç шσлεр (†) кρуßоúç; έукριкádεα⋅ ovvαǹ xɛɩpwv ɛiç
τOÙлÍσw; ¿Yкpíкia· žúλa kɛkkaµµéva. See also on кipσóç (and кpiσσÓS, KPIČÓS).
ETYM The form кípкoç would have an impossible root structure in PIE, and, on
chronological grounds, кpíкoç must be original as well. Further analysis remains
hypothetical. Lat. circus ‘circle' is probably a loan from кípкoç (thus De Vaan 2008);
from the former, and from circulus, derive all Western European words for 'circle'.

=== page 414 ===

780
kpifuvov
кpíuvov [n.] 'coarse barley-meal, coarse bread', plur. also 'crumbs' (Hp., Herod., Eup.,
Arist., pap., Lyc.). <?►
•VAR Or -ĭ-? The length of the t is unclear.
⚫DER кρчvádηs (Hp., Ar.); кpчµvíτηs äpτos 'coarse bread' (Iatrocl. apud Ath. 14,
646a); кpiµvñotiç лλaкoûνtoç ɛidos ‘kind of flat cake' (H.), cf. on кuλλñotis.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The connection with кpi, кpion is formally unwarranted, and an
analysis as кpι-μv-ov (to кpivw) does not seem preferable. Fur.: 245 compares кpívov
'kind of bread' (Ath. 3, 114f., not in LSJ), assuming *kriwno-.
кpчuvós [m.] 'purple color?' (PHolm. 8, 43[written кpччоν, acc.], Ps.-Demiocr. Alch. p.
42B. [cod. кpηuvóc]). <LW Orient.?>
•VAR кpɩµvoúç· λevkás tivas Botávaç ‘light pastures or plants' (H.).
ETYM From Arab. qermez 'scarlet'; see Amigues RPh. 74 (2000): 272 (with
complicated details).
кpívov [n.] ‘white lily' (IA), also name of a dance (Apolloph.), see Lawler AmJPh. 65
(1944): 75ff. <?>
⚫VAR Plur. кpívɛa, -ɛσɩv.
•COMP Some compounds like кρɩv-ávеεµov ´houseleek, ηµεpoкαλλéç' (Hp., Ps.-
Dsc.), kaλaµó-kpɩvov ‘kind of кáλaµos that is reminiscent of кpívov' (Aët.), see
Strömberg 1944: 13.
●DER кpívɩvoç ‘of lilies' (pap., Gal.), кpivwτóç ‘ornamented with lilies' (Aristeas);
kpivwviá 'bed of lilies' (Suid.), ‘lily' (Thphr.); see Scheller 1951: 71, and also iwvá (s.v.
►ľov).
⚫ETYM Foreign word; cf. Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 11 and Hehn-Schrader 1911: 245.
KpivW [v.] 'to separate, choose, select, decide, judge, condemn, accuse, apply' (II.); úлo-
кpívoμa 'to answer' (II.), 'to answer on stage (of the choir), to be an actor' (Att.);
άло- 'to answer' (Att.). <IE *kre(h,-)i- 'separate, distinguish, sieve'>
•VAR Aor. кpival, pass. кpiеñva (epic also кpivе½µεvα for metrical reasons,
Chantraine 1942: 404), perf. med. kékpiµai, act. kékpika (Pl. Lg.), fut. êpɩvã, epic Ion.
кpivέw, Dor. -íw.
●DIAL Thess. kpɛvvéµɛv, Lesb. aor. kpívvai.
●COMP Very frequently prefixed, e.g. ávα-, кατα-, dia-, έк-, σvv-, etc.
•DER 1. (ȧлó-, diá-, etc.)кpíσç 'decision, judgement, tribunal, etc.' (Pi., IA), кρíσчµоç
'decisive, critical' (Hp., Arist.), áлокρσιáрιоç 'secretary' (pap. VIP). 2. (ànó-, è̟ní-,
oúv-, лpó-)kpíµa ‘decision, etc.' (Hell.), кpĩµa = êpeĩµa (A. Supp. 397); σúykpiµa
'body formed by combination' (Hell.) with σvyêpµátov ‘small body' (M. Ant.),
-µatiкóç (Gal.). 3. (áv-)кpiτýp ‘judge, examiner' (Dor.), кpivτýр ‘id.' (Gortyn),
kpitńs ‘judge, arbiter' (IA), often from prefixed compounds, e.g. úrokpitýę ‘actor,
etc.' (Att.); кpιτýptov 'distinguishing mark, tribunal' (Att., Arg.), εл- 'court of
justice' (Crete); έyêpɩtýpios ‘for admission' (Corinth IIP); further details on kpitýp,
-τns, -τnplov in Fraenkel 1910-1912 (index). 4. кριτós selected, excellent' (II.), PNS
Kpíτwv, Kpítvλλa; also čк-, σúу-кριτоç, etc. (IA); (diα-, εл-, σvv-)кρITIKÓç 'of Kρíσiç
(judgement), etc.' (Pl., Arist.). 5. -кpidóv, e.g. diaкpidóv ‘separated' (II.), Siaкpidá
‘id.' (Opp.). 6. On ►кpíμvov, see s.v.
KpóK7 1
781
•ETYM The present кpivw derives from PGr. *krin-je/o-, unless it was innovated from
the aorist кpivaɩ. It has a nasal suffix which originally belonged only to the present,
but was later extended to the other aspectual stems (this also happened e.g. in
►кλivw). Italic and Celtic have corresponding nasal presents in Lat. cernō ‘to select,
discern' < *kri-n-oH, MW go-grynu 'to sieve' < IE *upo-kri-n-oH. The verbal adj.
кpɩτóç matches Lat. certus 'decided, certain' < *kr(H)i-tó-, but in other respects the
two languages behaved differently: the lengthened grade in (dē)crēvī, excrēmentum
‘separation' < *-kreh,- (which is an argument for reconstructing the root as *kreh,-i-
rather than *krei-) perhaps lives on in isolated ►кpŋσépa ‘fine sieve', but was
otherwise lost in Greek.
The Greek paradigm results from large-scale levelling; only Att. кpчµa could
continue an older full grade кpεчµa comparable to Lat. dis-cri-men. Other languages
have numerous nominal formations, especially Latin, Celtic, and Germanic: e.g. Lat.
cribrum 'sieve', Gm., e.g. Go. hrains 'pure', originally 'sieved'. The root must have.
been used specifically for sieving in PIE, given the many derivations pointing in this
direction.
кpióç [m.] 'ram' (Od.); on the mg. as opposed to apvɛtós see Benveniste BSL 45 (1949):
103, often metaphorical, especially in the sense of ‘battering ram' (X., Plb., Hell.
inscr.); also name of a plant, a kind of chick-pea (Thphr., Hell. pap., Dsc.), and a sea-
monster (Ael., Opp.), see Strömberg 1943: 102. <?>
•COMP кριо-лρóσwлоç 'with a ram's face' (Hdt.), ȧvτí-кριoç 'enemy battering ram'
(Aen. Tact.).
●DER кpɩwdŋs ‘ram-like' (Ph.); кpíwμa 'kind of ship' (Aq.), also 'battering ram'
(Apollod. Poliorc.?); on the formation Chantraine 1933: 187.
•ETYM The word points to something like *kriH-uo-. Connection with кépaç 'horn' <
*kerh₂-s- is formally impossible. Another attempt connected it with the Germanic
name of the reindeer, ON hreinn, OE hran < *kroi-no-, but this too is formally
awkward. Closer are some Balto-Slavic words for 'curved', e.g. CS kriv ‘σкoλIÓS',
Lith. kreīvas, kraīvas (Eastern dial.) ‘oblique, curved, bent' (cf. on ►кpotós). In case
these words are related, the ram would have been named after its curved horns.
Forssman IF 101 (1996): 304 recently suggested connection with Go. hrisjan 'to
shake, dally', from *kris-io-. Formally, this is quite possible (there is in fact no trace
of a wau). As the name of a kind of chickpea, кpιóç has nothing to do with Lat. cicer
(Pok. 598), as the plant was named after its curved shells; see Strömberg 1937: 50.
кpoaívw 'to push, stamp'. →кpovw.
кpoɩós [adj.] acc. to H. = voowdns, áσ¤εvýs ‘sickly, feeble'; acc. to Theognost. Can. 21
koλoẞóç ‘curtailed'; also in Att. inscr. (IG 2², 244: 63 [IVª], cf. Apx. 'Eq. 1923: 39), of
building stones (λiot). <?>
=
•ETYM Compared with Lith. kraivas 'oblique, bent', etc. by Solmsen IF 31 (1912/13):
466f.; cf. on кptóç. It is probably better to posit *krow-jo- 'cut off, broken off and
to connect it with ►кpoúw.
=
кρóкη 1 'thread of the woof. →кpέkw.

=== page 415 ===

782
Kpókn 2
783
кpóкη 2 [f.] 'rounded pebble on the seashore' (Arist., Lyc.). <?►
•VAR кpoкáλai [pl.] (E. IA 210 [lyr.], AP, Agath.) is attested earlier; unclear is
кρокáληv [acc.sg.] (AP 7, 294), which could be adjectival.
•ETYM No etymology. Connection with Skt. words like śárkarā [f.] ‘grit, gravel or
kŕśana- [n.] 'pearl' (cf. Mayrhofer EW Aia: s.vv.) is meaningless. See ►кρoкódiλoç,
► σáкxap.
кpoкóðïλoç [m.] ‘lizard, crocodile' (Hdt., Arist.). <?>
●VAR Also kopê- (pap.), кpoкúð- (Hippon.), кpeкúd- (Et. Gen.).
•COMP As a first member in кpoкodiλo-τáqiov 'burial place for crocodiles' (pap.).
•DER KPOкodiλÍTηs [m.] (Chrysipp.), of Móyos = Lat. crocodilina ambiguitas (Quint.),
"crocodile syllogism”, a kind of fallacy; кpoкodíλɛov (Dsc., Gal.), -Stλiás (Gal., Alex.
Trall.) 'Eryngium maritimum, sea-holly'; -dića ‘excrements of the кpoк. xɛpσaños',
used as an eye-salve (Plin.).
•ETYM Acc. to Hdt. 2, 69, it was originally the Ionic name of a lizard, which was
transferred to the crocodile and the alligator. Frisk's etymology as a compound from
кpóкη 'gravel and Spiλos 'worm' (with dissimilation) should be forgotten. See Diels
& Brugmann IF 15 (1903-1904): 1ff. and Solmsen BPhW 1906: 758f. on variant
spellings of the word, especially the itacistic writing with -εt-.
кρóкoç [m.] ‘saffron, Crocus sativus' (since E 348). <LW Sem.?>
⚫COMP E.g. kpoкó-лεлλoç 'with saffron-colored cloth' (Il.), see Treu 1955: 244 and
258, Capelle RhM 101 (1958): iff.
•DER Especially adjectives of color: кpókɛoç ‘saffron-colored' (P. [v.l. -óɛɩc], E. [lyr.]),
-ŋïoç 'id' (h. Cer. 178), metrically conditioned, see S. Schmid 1950: 48, Zumbach 1955:
14; -óɛıç ‘id.' (Tyrt., Sapph., E., Ar.), see Treu 1955: 268); кρóкɩvoç ‘of saffron, saffron-
colored (Stratt., Hell.), -wdns ‘id.' (Dsc., medic.), -ŋpós of saffron' (Gal.), after
olvηpós, etc., see Chantraine 1933: 233; кpoкíaç [m.] 'saffron-yellow stone' (Plu.), like
кαлvíαç, etc., Chantraine 1933: 94; кρокшτóç [adj.] 'saffron-yellow' (Pi.), [m.]
'saffron cloth' (com., Att. inscr.), whence -útov (Poll.), -wτídiov (Ar.), -wτivOS
(pap.); кpoкwv [m.] ‘saffron-beď (Hdn.); кpoкãτov [n.] ‘saffron-yellow parchment
(Edict. Diocl. Asin.), from Lat. crocātus, see below. Denominative verbs: кpoкí(w 'to
be saffron-like' (Dsc., Plu.), кpoкóoµai (kiʊʊw) ‘to be surrounded with saffron-
colored ivy' (AP).
•ETYM Identical with the Semitic word for ‘saffron', e.g. Akk. kurkanu, Arab.
kurkum, Hebr. karkōm, and with Skt. kunkuma- 'id.' (which is MInd. for
*kurkuma-); further details on the origin are unknown. Acc. to E. Masson 1967: 50,
the Semitic words could be loans themselves. From кρóкoç came Lat. crocus, as well
as crocōta [f.] 'saffron-cloth' (from кρокшτóç) and crocōtinum 'saffron cake' (:
кpokŵtɩvoç); there is Lat. innovation in crocātus ‘saffron-yellow' (> Gr. kpokãtov,
see above). Another word for the same notion is ►káykaµov.
=>>
кpouẞów 'to roast, bake'. кpáµẞoç.
кρóµµvov [n.] ‘onion, Allium Cepa' (IA). <EUR?>
•VAR Also кpóμvov (A 630, τ 233, Philem. 122), кpóµßvov (pap.) < -µµ-, cf. Schwyzer:
231.
⚫COMP кρодμvо-лóληç ‘onion handler' (pap.).
•DER Diminutive кpoµµ)údov (Gp., sch.).
•ETYM A similar word for onion and garlic is attested in Celtic, Germanic and Balto-
Slavic, e.g. MIr. crim, MW craf 'garlic', OE hramsan [pl.], MoE ramsons 'wood-
garlic, MoHG (Bav.) rams ‘id.', Lith. kermušė ‘wild garlic', Ru. čeremšá ‘Allium
ursinum'. The e-vowel of Celtic and Balto-Slavic is also found in кpέµvov (H.) and in
the TN Kρεдчváv (also Kpo̟µµ-, near Corinth). Therefore, Schmidt KZ 32 (1893): 346
assumed vowel assimilation кρεμ- > кρоμ-, but this is hardly acceptable; see Van
Beek fthc.b. Note that Gm. also has *hram- < *krom-.
It is difficult to reconstruct a PIE pre-form, given the alternations pointing to
*kremus-, *kromus-, *kermus-, and also the Greek geminate -μμ-. Beеkes 2000: 29
therefore considers the word to be non-IE. The interpretation of Cremōna near
Venice (Krahe 1955: 104) as an Illyrian TN is speculative. On the distribution, see
Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 710ff.
кρoµлoç [?] a piece of land. <PG?>
•VAR With secondary prop vowel коpoμло dat.sg. (Arcadian Orchomenos, 369ª),
see Del.3 664, 12; 16.
•ETYM Connection with OHG hrimfan 'to wrinkle, curb', OCS krop ‘small', Lith.
krumplys 'finger-knuckle', etc. (Fraenkel 1955 and Pok. 948f. apud Frisk) hardly
makes sense. Fur.: 381 considers the word to be Pre-Greek, because of the anaptyctic
vowel (see also Fur.: 378-385).
кpóσσaɩ [f.pl.] ‘stepped copings of parapets' (M 258, 444), 'courses, steps of the
pyramids' (Hdt. 2, 125); лρó-кρоσσo 'arranged in rows, ranks' (E 35, Hdt.). <?>
•COMP кρoσσoí [m.pl.] 'tassels, fringes' (Gal., Poll., H.); Sí-кpoσσoç 'double-
bordered' (Poll., EM), whence diкpóσσiα [n.pl.] (Peripl. M. Rubr.).
⚫DER Diminutive кpoσσíov (Hdn.); also as a plant name (Ps.-Dsc.); also кpoσσwτóç
'with fringes' (LXX, Lyc., Plu.), 'with steps' (Lyc. 291?), v.l. kopʊ-.
•ETYM Frisk's suggestion that the expression originally derives from weaving
(connecting кpół, кρóкη 'thread of the woof [see кpéкw]) is not likely. As he
notes, it seems that кpoσσoí (which is late and rare) was back-formed from
кpoσσwτóc, which is attested much earlier and better. The word кpoʊʊwτóç (also
Síкpoσσol, Siкpóσσα) was formed to the original кpóσσα after OvσavwτÓS
'provided with tassels, fringes', and was transferred from the sphere of architecture
to that of tailor-work. From кpoσσwτóç, the back-formation кpoσσoí was formed
(cf. Oúσavot from Ovσavwτóc).
The word кpóσσal itself is a technical expression of unknown origin. Derivation
from *krok-jai and connection with Balto-Slavic words for 'bar, rod, rafters' (e.g.
Lith. krākė 'rod, staff, which formally matches кpóσσɑ, krēklas ‘rafters', Ru. krókva
'bar, club, rafters') seems rather speculative. Fur.: 257 connects кópon 'temple',
which is unwarranted.
кpótaqos [m.] ‘temple', metaph. ‘side, profile, steep mountain slope' (Il.). ◄PG?►

=== page 416 ===

784
KρóτOC
•VAR Usually plur. By-forms with metathesis: кópraços (EM, Et. Gud., perhaps also
Pl. Com., see Maas KZ 46 (1914):159), kótpaqos (PMag. Osl. 1, 152).
•COMP лоo-кρóτaqoç 'with gray temples' (℗ 518).
•DER кpotaqiç [f.] ‘pointed hammer' (Att. inscr., Poll., H.), on the mg. see below,
кρоτάios of the temples' (Gal.), кρоταíτηs 'temple muscle' (medic.), -ítɩdeç
лλŋyɑí [fem.pl.] (Hp.). Denominative кpotaqíšw [v.] 'to hit on the temple, box on
the ear' (pap.), кρoταшiστηç (gloss., H. s.v. kóẞaλoc).
⚫ETYM Often derived from кpóτоç as "beating (of the veins in the temples)". In this
case, kpótaqoç would refer to the sound that is heard after being hit on the temple.
Fur.: 257 connects it with кópoŋ ‘temple' (like Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 258ff.) and
remarks that it is unsatisfactory, from a semantic viewpoint, to separate kópoŋ and
кpóτaqoç from кpóσσαɩ.
кpótos [m.] ‘stamping of the feet, clapping of the hands, of the oars, etc.; clapping,
applause' (Att.). <IE? *kret- ‘shake >>
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. μovó-, dí-, τρí-кρoτoç 'with one, two, three
rows of rowers' (E., X., Plb.), see Morrison Class. Quart. 41 (1947): 122 ff.; iллó-
кpoτoç trodden by horses, resounding of the hoofbeat of horses' (Pi., E.), àлó-
кpoτos 'well-pounded (Th., X.).
•DER кpoτéw [v.] 'to rattle, beat, stamp' (O 453, IA), also prefixed, especially with
ouv-, in various mgs.; thence кpótŋua (S., E.), -ŋoµós (A. Th. 561), perhaps after
ópxnoμóc, Chantraine 1933: 141; -ŋois (Pl. Ax., Ph. Bel.), -ŋtiкós (Dosith.). кpótaλa
[n.pl.] ‘rattle, castanets' (h. Hom., Pi., Hdt.), [sg.] 'boaster' (Ar., E.), кpotáλia [n.pl.]
(clappering) ear-rings' (pap.), MoGг. кρоταλíaç, -íτηs 'rattlesnake' (cf. Redard 1949:
83), кρоταλíw 'to rattle' (A 160, Hdt.), -íστpiα, -1στpíç 'castanet player' (pap.).
⚫ETYM Cf. ►кpóτaqoç, -qíç. The earlier and more frequent attestations of кpoτέw, as
compared with кpóτoç, point to priority of the verb. The comparison with a Gm.
verb, OE hrindan, hrand, ON hrinda, hratt 'to push' (Pok. 621) should probably be
rejected; note that it has an inner nasal which need not be an infix. LIV² s.v. *kret-
compares OHG redan 'to sieve', Lith. krěsti, 1sg. krečiù ‘to shake' and OCS krotiti,
1sg. kroštą ‘to tame'. Although formally impeccable, the semantics are not wholly
satisfactory. See LIV² s.v. *kret-.
kpotáv, -ŵvos [m.] 'tick, louse of a sheep, Pediculus ovis, Ixodes' (Arist., Dsc., Plu.),
also 'tree of castor oil, Ricinus communis' and its seeds (Hp., Thphr., Hell.); acc. to
Dsc. 4, 161 dɩà tǹv ŵs пpòc tò (s̟ov toñ oлépµatos ¿µqépeiav 'because of the
likeness of the seed to the animal', cf. Strömberg 1937: 50. <?>
•COMP E.g. кpоτшvо-ópоç, of уñ (Hell. pap.).
•DER кρоτúvη [f.] ‘knag, pathological excrescence on the stem (of the olive tree),
fragments of bronchial cartiledge' (Thphr., Hp., Gal.); for the formation cf.
Chantraine 1933: 207.
•ETYM Unexplained.
kpoúvai [f.pl.]? • tà äqopa dévdpa ‘barren trees' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 120 compares ypuvós ‘faggot, firebrand' and ypouvós 'dry wood, torch’,
so the word is clearly Pre-Greek.
kpoúa
785
кpovvós [m.] ‘source, fountain, stream, torrent, also as a TN (Il.). <IE? *kros-n- ‘wave,
flood'>
•COMP E.g. 'Evvɛá-кpouvoç name of a source on the Hymettos (Hdt., Th.).
⚫DER Diminutives кpouviov (Hdn.), -íσkoç (sch.); further кpouv-ɛïov a cup (com.),
-wua 'flood' (Emp. 6, 3), -ítidɛç (výµчaɩ, Orph.), -ŋdóv 'like a spring' (LXX, Ph.);
кpovvíw [v.] 'to bring forth a stream', -oμa 'to catch a stream with the mouth'
(com.), -tσµós ‘gushing, spray' (Aq., medic.), -ɩoµa ‘stream², -toµátov ‘small nozzle
or spout' (Hero). kpoñvai• kpíval téλɛɩɩ ‘perfect springs' (H.).
•ETYM Probably from *kros-nó-; to which the group of ON hronn < PGm. *hraznō- <
*kros-neh₂- is compared. Within Greek, it has been connected with ►кpývη (see s.v.
for details).
кpoúлɛčaɩ [f.pl.] 'wooden shoes to press olives or to indicate the rhythm of a dance'
(Paus. Gr., Poll., Phot.). <GR?, PG?>
•VAR Also -【a [sg.]. By-forms кpoúлaλa (S. Fr. 44), for which cf. кpótaλa; kpoúrava
(H.), after instrument names in -avov; кpoúñeta (H.), example unknown.
●COMP кpovrεšo-qópoɩ [pl.] name of the Boeotians (Cratin.).
⚫DER Diminutives кρovлεчiα [pl.] (Poll., H.) and кρоυлεоúμεvоç 'provided with K.'
(H.).
⚫ETYM A governing compound, analyzed as τòv лóða (τs̟ лodì) кpoúεv 'to bump
the foot, stamp with the foot' (Frisk s.v.), where the second member is modelled after
ȧpучpó-лεα, etc. The variant forms may also point to substrate origin: we have
*krou-pan/l-, -pet-. It is not a priori certain that these are due to folk etymology.
кpoúw [v.] ‘to strike, stamp, knock' (Hp., Att.). <IE *krou(s)- ‘push, bump, strike,
break'>
●VAR Aor. кpoñσaɩ, pass. -σðñvaɩ, perf. med. kéêpov(σ)µa, act. kéкpovka.
•COMP Very frequent with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, diα-, έк-, лapα-, σvv-.
•DER Special mgs. from the prefixed compounds are not especially noted: кpoчμα,
-σua 'sound made by striking: tone, melody' (Hp., Att.), кpov(σ)-µatiкóç (Hell.),
кpoñσɩ striking (especially of the strings), string music' (Hp., Att.), kpovσµós ‘id.'
(Hell.); ȧvaкpovoía. raidiās eidos έлì σqaípaç ‘kind of ball game' (H.); εлкρoúστɩov
name of a rnedical instrument (medic.), -τnpiov 'hammer' (gloss.); кρоvσTIкóç 'good
for striking' (Hp., Ar., Arist.); Пpoкpoúσ-τηs name of a mythical brigand (X.).
Instead of кpoów, Homer has the enlargement кpoaívw (Z 507 = 0 264 кpoaívwv
O
'stamping, gallopping'), imitated in Opp., Philostr.; cf. Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 43.
Cf. ►кpolóc.
•ETYM The Greek verbal system, including nominal derivations, is based on a root
кpovσ-. The present may derive from *krous-ie/o- or be analogical after the aorist.
Cf. on aкoúw. Acc. to Frisk, it is unnecessary to assume a root variant without -s-,
as he explains кpoaívw in the same way as άкoń < PGr. *akowsā (however, note that
Homer still has άкový without shortening in hiatus). The form кpotóc may go back
to *krou-io-, if it was derived after the present had already developed to *krowwo-.
The form кpoów is from IE *krous-, and corresponds to a Balto-Slavic verb built on
*krous-eie/o- (cf. LIV² s.v. *kreus-): OCS sv-krušiti 'ouvτpíßεɩv, Opαúεɩv, кpoúεɩv', Ru.

=== page 417 ===

786
kpuapós
krušíť; Latv. kràusêt 'to stamp (off)', Lith. kraušýti ‘id.'. Zero grade *krus- is found in
nominal derivations, e.g. CS króxа, Ru. kroxá ‘morsel, crumb', Lith. krušti, 1sg. krušu
'to stamp, push (apart)'; an e-grade also appears in Lith. kriaušti ‘to sting'.
=>
кpuɛpóç ⚫VAR кρчμóç. →кρúоç.
кpúoç [n.] icy cold, frost' (Hes. Op. 494, A. [lyr.], Arist., Jul.). <IE? *kreus- ‘shiver',
*kruh₂- 'bloody'>
,
●DER кpvóɛɩç ‘horrible, sinister' (Il., Hes., Pi.), ‘icy-cold' (A. R., AP, Orph.), with
analogical -o-; see also on oкpvóels; kpuwdŋs ‘id.' (Plu., Poll.); further кpvɛpós
‘horrible, sinister' (Hom., Hes., Ar. [lyr.]), ‘icy-cold' (Simon., Ar. [lyr.]); cf. below.
Independent formation from кpúoç: êpũµós [m.] ‘frosty cold, frost, horror' (Ion.,
trag., Hell.), кpuμwns icy-cold' (Hp., Ph., AP), кρччаλéοç ‘id.' (S. E.), see
Chantraine 1933: 254; кpuµaívw [v.] 'to make cold' (Hdn.), -woow 'to be stiff out of
cold' (Theognost.). On ►кpúσταλλos, which is Pre-Greek, see s.v.
•ETYM The etymology is difficult to assess, as there are two alternatives. The most
obvious connection for кpúoç is that with ON hrjósa 'to shiver', OHG hroso 'ice,
crust' from *kreus-. This means that кpúos may represent *krus-, derived from the
root *kreus- 'to stamp, strike'. Lat. crusta has often been compared with кpúoç; acc.
to De Vaan 2008 s.v. crusta, the Latin word can be explained from a basic meaning
'hardened part' (by beating or pounding). Semantically, connection with ToB krośce,
etc. 'cold' (Adams 1999 s.v.) is perfect for the Greek group, but the ToB -o- is difficult
(did it arise by umlaut < *kreus-tōn, as Adams suggests?).
Alternatively, the group of Av. xrüma- 'horrible', which must be reconstructed as
*kruh-mo- and connected with the group of *kruh₂- 'blood', could agree with
кpũµós (кpúos going back on *kruh₂-s-). This group is represented by e.g. Skt. krūrá-
Av. xrūra- 'wounded, raw, bloody, horrible' < *kruH-ro- (Lat. crūdus 'raw' is
probably from not *crūrus, see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). The form кpuɛpós is probably a
recent formation after the adjectives in -ɛpóc.
кpúлτw [v.] ‘to conceal, hide' (II.). ◄PG?►
●VAR Fut. кpúyw, aor. кpúyaɩ, pass. кpvôеñvaɩ (Il.), -ôñvaɩ (S.), -ß³ñvai (LXX), fut.
-ßǹσoµα (E., LXX), perf. med. кéкρчччαι (Оd.), act. кéкpuôα (D. H.), iter. ipf.
кρÚлτασкε (☹ 272), see Risch 240, -εσкε (h. Cer. 239), late pres. кpúẞw, ipf. čкpuẞov,
-pov.
•COMP Often prefixed, e.g. with ảño-, ¿v-, έíɩ-, kata-.
●DER 1. кpuлtóç ‘hidden, secret' (Е 168), кρu̟лτáðɩoç ‘id.' (Il., A.), after àµádios;
кpurtiкós ‘concealing' (Arist., Alex. Aphr.), кpʊлtívda лaíšɛv ‘to play hide-and-
seek' (Theognost.); kpuïtɛúw [v.] ‘to hide' (E., X.), кpʊлτɛía ‘secret service at Sparta'
(Pl., Arist.). 2. (ếy-, ảnó-, ¿ní-)kpúy ‘hiding' (E., Arist., Plb.). 3. кpvätάp “hider”,
name of an instrument (Delos IIª, sch.), -τpios 'serving as a hiding place' (Orac.
apud Paus. 8, 42, 6), кpúлtηs ‘member of the кpулτεía' (E. fr. 1126[?]). 4. кpvôñ, Dor.
-ôã (Pi., S., X.), кpúôă (Th.) [adv.] 'secretly'; thence кpvpádāv (Corinn.), -ádiç
(Hdn.), nóv (Od., Q. S.), -avdóv (H.) ‘id.' (Schwyzer 550, 626, 631); кpupaioç
'secret' (Pi., trag., LXX), кpúçãσos name of a throw of the dice (Poll.), see
Chantraine 1933: 435. 5. kata-, ȧño-кpvo̟é̟ ‘hiding place' (S., LXX); кpúqɩoç 'secretly'
KPWBú入oc
787
(Hes., Pi., trag., Th.), on кpúqios to кρúñɩw see Schulze 1933a: 362; kpvqia [f.]
‘hiding place' (PFlor. 284, 8 [VIP]), кpúqчios = kpúqios (Man.), -чµaños ‘id.' (Ephesus
[IV³]), -ɩwdŋs ‘id.' (Eust.); άлó-, ¿ñí-, éу-, úñó-кpupos 'concealed' (Pi., Hdt., E.),
from åñoкpúлɩw, etc.; kpvyós (kpúoos) ‘hiding' (Emp. 27, 3, LXX), 'secret' (conj. Pi.
O. 2, 97), see Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 164f.; ¿yкpuqías ǎptos 'bread hidden under
the ashes, i.e. baked' (Hp.), èукpuqiálw [v.] 'to hide' (Ar.); кpuqiaστns 'interpreter
of dreams' (Aq.). 6. kpúßdă = кpúqa (Σ 168, A., Pi.), кpúß♪ηv, Dor. -dāv (Od.). 7.
(ȧлo-)кpußη 'concealment' (LXX, Vett. Val.), кpuẞñ = -qñ (LXX); кpuẞηλóç⋅
кρулτò [лúρуoc] 'hidden [tower]', кpúẞɛç. Vɛкpoí 'the dead' кpußητaç.
tetɛλevtŋkótas ‘the dead', кpußnσta vɛкúσια 'festivals of the dead', кpvßáčei.
άлoкpúštε ‘hides (from)' (H.).
•ETYM The word кpúлτw is formally and semantically reminiscent of ▸кaλúлτw; the
verbs may have influenced each other. The variation л/ / ẞ may be partly
analogical; cf. Schwyzer: 333, 7052, 737. Although there is no formal match with
кρúлτw, it does recall the Balto-Slavic group of OCS kryti ‘кpúлτw, åлокρúлτw³,
Lith. kráuti, 1sg. kráuju 'to pile up' (on the meaning, see Schulze KZ 50 (1922): 275).
However, since there is no good IE etymology, the word could be Pre-Greek. This
seems confirmed by the frequent variations in the root-final labial stop.
кpúσταλoç [m.] ‘ice' (II.), also 'rock-crystal' [f.] (Str., D. S.), with gender after λíoç.
<PG(V)►
•VAR kpóσtaλλos. ɛldos úéλov ‘kind of crystalline stone' (H.), where Latte notes “h.e.
kpúota\\os (kpoúot- S.)”.
⚫DER KρUσTάλλov 'id.' (PHolm.), also plant name = чúλov (Dsc.), because of the
cooling effect, see Strömberg 1940: 83); кρυστάλλvos 'icy-cold' (Hp.), 'of rock-
crystal' (D. C.), -wdns icy, crystal-clear' (Ptol., PHolm.); кρvσταλλóομαι 'to freeze'
(Ph.), iw 'to glow like crystal' (Apoc.); further кρvσταívo̟μαι 'to freeze' (Nic. Al.
314), probably a free analogical formation to кpúστaλλoç, after other cases of the
interchange v/ \ (differently, Schwyzer: 706). ·
•ETYM The word has been connected with Lat. crusta 'bark, crust', but this is wrong,
as the Latin word has a quite different meaning: 'the hard surface of a body, the rind,
shell, crust, bark, which protects it' (Lewis and Short). The collocation with flumen,
indicating a covering or crust of ice, is just an incidental use. The etymology with
кpúos must therefore be given up. As Kuiper 1956: 215¹ remarked, the word is Pre-
Greek because of the suffix -aλλo-. All Greek words in -α\\o- are of Pre-Greek
origin; there are no Greek words of IE origin with this suffix. The suffix is not -aλ-
with expressive gemination (as Chantraine often states), but goes back to *-al-. This
is confirmed by the variant кpóσt-. The word means ‘ice' and was also used for rock-
crystal, because it is transparent, and in this respect looks like a piece of ice. Pliny
(37, 23) still thinks it is ice. We now know that rock-crystal is a mineral; it is quartz, a
silicate (SiO2). The semi-precious amethyst and agate are varieties of it. See Beekes
2008 and also on ► кpúoç.
кpwßúλoç [m.] ‘roll or knot of hair on the crown of the head' (Th., X., Antiph.), on the
mg. see Hauser Jahresh. d. Österr. arch. Inst. 11 Beibl.: 87ff. <PG?>

=== page 418 ===

788
kpww
KTEĺVW
789
•VAR The accent after Hdn. Gr. 1, 163.
●DER kpwßvλwdns ‘k.-like' (Luc. Lex. 13); кpwßúλŋ [f.] ‘hair-net' (Hdn. Gr. 1, 323,
Serv. ad Aen. 4, 138).
⚫ETYM Semitic explanation in Lewy 1895: 89; cf. Knauer Glotta 33 (1954): 116'. Rabin
Orientalia 32 (1963): 123f. points to Late Bab. karballatu and Hitt. kariulli. Fur.: 205
points to -úλn as a common Pre-Greek suffix.
кpów [v.] ‘to croak, creak' (Hes. Op. 747, Ar.). <IE? *kroh₂k-➤
●VAR Aor. кpwžai, fut. kpółw.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ¿ëɩ-, katα-, úño-.
•DER кpwyμóç 'croaking' (AP, Jul.), кpŵyµa ‘id.' (Hdn. Epim.).
•ETYM Originally an onomatopoeic word, which differs only in the auslauting stop
from Lat. crocire, CS krakati, isg. kraču. Cf. also Lith. kr(i)ōkti, 1sg. kr(i)okiù 'to
ruckle, grumble' and (with -g-) kriogúoti, 1sg. kriogúoju ‘to speak or cry with hoarse
voice'. IE *-g- is also found in the Gm. group of ON hrókr 'crow'. Cf. ►кpáčw,
► кpavyń, ►kópač.
кpшμакíσкoç [m.] 'young pig' (Antiph. 215, dubious). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
=
кpŵµaž →кλŵµač.
кpárov [n.] ‘sickle, scythe' (Pherecyd. 154 J.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Better -íov; in H. also кpúßiov (cod. also кpóл- and кpóß-).
•ETYM Probably derived from a noun (*кpóч vel sim.), in view of forms like Auxvíov,
Xaλкíov, ȧkóvtιov, and other instrument names in -tov (Chantraine 1933: 58).
The Greek word recalls the verbal root in Lith. kirpti, 1sg. kerpù 'to cut, shave', Lat.
carpō ‘to pluck off; see on кapëóç 1, as well as on σкopëíoç and ►okéлapvoç.
Further compared with Skt. kṛpaṇa- 'sword', MIr. corrán 'sickle'. However, this is
not even a root etymology, in view of the Schwebeablaut *kerp- / *krōp- involved.
Given the variation, the word must be Pre-Greek. Fur.: 148 refers to Hurrit. hurubbi
'sword'.
кpwσσós [m.] 'water pail, pitcher, salve bottle, cinerary urn' (trag., Theoc.). <PG>>
•VAR Also [f.] after Anкvoç, etc.
⚫DER Diminutive кpwσσíov (AP).
•ETYM The element -σσ-, as well as the technical meaning, points to a Pre-Greek
word. Previously, Celtic and Germanic words for 'jar, pot' were compared, e.g. MIr.
crocán, OE crocca, OHG kruog; see Pok. 389 and Vendryes REGr. 32 (1932): 495ff.
Fur: 369 compares Hurr.-Hitt. aḥrushi 'incense-pot'.
кtάoµaɩ [v.] ‘to acquire, win', perf. ‘to possess' (Il.). <IE? *tkeh,- ‘rule, gain, acquire'>
⚫VAR Ion. ipf. ¿кtéεto (v.l. Hdt. 8, 112), aor. кτησασðαι (Il.), pass. кτηеñναi (Th., E.),
fut. кtýσoµai (post-Hom.), perf. ěktŋuai, kéktŋuai (Hes., Att.).
⚫COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àva-, εv-, εл-, лроσ-.
●DER (prefixed compounds are not indicated seperately): 1. dat.pl. ktɛáteσoɩ (Hom.,
Pi., E.), sg. кτéap (Hell.) ‘(acquired) goods, possessions, property', whence ktɛatíšw
[v.] ‘to acquire' (Il.), ktɛatioµós (Man.), cod. кtɛav-. 2. ktćava [n.pl.] ‘id.' (Hes., also
Hp.), secondary and rare -ov [sg.], qiλo-kteavwtateε [voc.] (A 122), see Sommer
1948: 69; noλv-ktćavos (Pi.). 3. ktýµata [n.pl.] (II.) ‘goods, landed property', also
'domestic animals' (also [sg.], o 19), кτηµáτoν (Alciphr., pap.), -ídiov (pap. VI³),
-ɩкóç ‘rich' (Hell.), -ítŋs ‘id.' (Lycurg.); as a second member, e.g. in лoλv-кτýµwv
'rich in possessions' (II.), whence -μoσúvη (Poll.). 4. ktývɛa, -vn [n.pl.] 'domestic
animals (especially Ion., Hell.), rarely -vos [sg.], probably directly from кτáoμaι
with a suffix -nos- (Chantraine 1933: 420); thence êäövŋdóv ‘like beasts' (Hdt.),
ktηvúdpiov (pap.); often as a first member, e.g. кtηvo-τpópos ‘cattle-keeper' (Hell.).
5. êtñσɩ ‘acquisition, possession' (II.), ktńσios ‘regarding possessions', Zevs Ktýolos
as a protector of possessions (IA); diminutive кτησ(ε) ídiov (Arr.). 6. ktɛátɛipa [f.]
'who possesses' (A. Ag. 356), archaizing for -кtýtɛpa, -τpia, which are found in лpo-
кτητpiα 'former possessor' (pap.), after кtɛátɛσσɩ, etc.; ktýtwp [m.] 'possessor' (D.
S., pap., Act. Ap.), ktηtopiкós (pap.); details in Fraenkel 1912: 29f., 1, 183', Schwyzer:
474³. 7. Þiλo-kτŃ-τηg PN (II.), compound from píoç and кτάoµαɩ with suffix -T1-;
Att. Dookýτns (cf. Kretschmer Glotta 4 (1913): 351). 8. Verbal adjectives: ktηtós
‘acquired' (I 408); usually έíktηtos ‘newly acquired (IA); ktηtikós ‘of acquisitions'
(Att.). 9. Unclear is áêtñveç. révistes, ǹpynkótes ‘poor, unemployed' (EM 55, 11), for
which Solmsen 1909: 143 proposed *ȧ-кτη-ñvεç.
⚫ETYM All forms have кTη-, except for the present кτάoμαι, but this is relatively rare
and late; укτασiç is a hyperdorism after εµлãσç; see лéлāµαɩ. Tichy Glotta 56
(1978): 237-245 has shown that the forms Hdt. έкτέατо, έкTέεTO are due to
palaeographical difficulties. An old heteroclitic stem PGr. *kte-war, -w(a)n- must be
assumed for кTεátɛσσɩ, кtéɑp, and кτéavα, whence secondarily кτéαvov.
The old comparison with the Indo-Iranian present Skt. kṣáyati, Av. xšaiieiti, -te ‘to
rule, order, have power' is semantically attractive. We have to assume that Skt.
kṣáyati continues *tkH-ei-, and that Skt. kṣa-trá- [n.] = Av. xša-Oram 'dominion,
rule' was formed after a root *kṣa- had been extracted from the present *kṣa-ya-. If
this is true, the root-final laryngeal must be *h,, which is confirmed by the fact that
the Greek forms almost exclusively show -n-. Since the equation of the formations of
ktáoµaɩ and Skt. kṣáyati is less evident, LIV² (s.v. 1. *tek-) gives up the etymology,
and suggests that кτάoμaι is denominative from a noun *tk-eh₂- 'possessions'. See
also Meier-Brügger Glotta 56 (1978): 224-236.
ktɛívw [v.] ‘to kill, put to death' (Il.). <IE *tken- ‘injure'>
•VAR Att. pres. also ktɛívvµ, -úw, Aeol. ktévvw (Hdn.), fut. êɩevw, epic also -έw,
ktavέw, aor. ktɛĭvaɩ, Aeol. ktévval (Alc.), and кtavɛĩv, epic also кtáµεv(αɩ) and
med.pass. кτáσ0αι, pass. 3pl. кτα0εv (epic), Hell. кτav(0)ñvαι, pеrf. ȧл-, кατ-έкτOVA
(Hdt., Att.), Hell. also åл-ektóvŋka, -ékta(y)ka, pass. -ɛktávðaɩ.
•COMP Att. prose mostly with ȧло-, poet. also with кaτα-. As a second member
-кtóvoç, e.g. лatρo-кτóvoç 'who kills his father' (trag.), whence -кτovéw, -ía; rarely
in passive sense: vɛó-кτovos recently killed' (Pi.); the simplex кτóvoç (Zonar.)
probably from the compounds; also -кτασíα, e.g. ȧvôpo-кτaσía [f.] 'murder of men'
(Il.), usually -ía [pl.], as if from *åvdpó-ktatos.

=== page 419 ===

790
KTEIÇ
KTI W
791
⚫ETYM The present кτεívчμ (incorrectly, -εvv- and -tvv-) has a secondary full grade
êtéívýµɩ
after кτεvα (cf. dɛíкvvµ to ědɛiα, etc.). It replaces a zero grade *êɩávvµ,
corresponding to Skt. kṣaṇóti 'to injure' (the sense 'to kill' of кTεívw is euphemistic).
The Greek system seems to be based on an athematic root aorist sg. *kten- (cf.
Gortyn subj. кατaσкévε, with σк for кT; Schwyzer: 326), pl. and med. *ktn-, which is
directly continued by εкτατо (Il.). The present *kten-je/o-> кTεívш, the thematic
aorist кτavov, and sigmatic ктεvα go back to this formation. The ptc. *-кτα-τos
(assumed for ȧvdpo-ктασía) corresponds to Skt. ákṣata-, OP. axšata- ‘uninjured'.
Without a doubt, ►кaívw is related too, but it is unclear under which circumstances
the initial *t- was lost.
Literature: Harðarson 1993a: 186. Opposed to connection with Skt. akṣata is Strunk
1967: 99265.
ktɛíç [m.] ‘comb, comb in the loom', often metaph., e.g. ‘rake, rib, finger' (Att. inscr.).
<IE *pekt-en- 'comb'>>
•VAR кTηv (Jo. Gramm. [VIP]), кtevós (IA).
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. ктεуо-лшληç 'comb-handler' (Poll.), nevté-ktevos
‘with five teeth' (com.).
•DER KTέvov 'id.' (Epich., pap.), кτενшτóç 'with teeth' (Att. inscr.), кtεvāç [m.]
'comb-maker, wool-carder' (Corycus), кTεvwdwç 'comb-like' (gloss.); KTεví(w [V.] 'to
comb, card' (IA), -toµós 'combing' (E.), -1στηs 'comber, hairdresser' (pap., Gal.),
-Lστɩкóç 'belonging to combing' (pap.).
• ETYM Because of Lat. pecten 'comb', the Greek word is explained as from *pkt-en-
with zero grade root and loss of the initial *p-. Several Modern Iranian forms, e.g.
Pashto žmanj, MoP šāna, point to *pk-en- (Morgenstierne 1927: 106; see Charpentier
Acta Orbis 7 (1929): 197 with a remark by Morgenstierne ibd. 199). It may be that the
root was originally *pek-; see on ➤MÉKW.
кtépaç [n.] ‘gift' (K 216, § 235, A. R. 4, 1550). <?►
•VAR Sing. only nom.; usually plur. кtépɛa, -éwv ‘gifts for the dead, sacrifice' (II.); see
Chantraine 1942: 210.
•COMP As a second member in ȧ-кτεрnç 'unburied' (Orac. Sibyll., H.).
•DER кɩɛρɛïw 'to bring gifts for the dead, bury ceremoniously' (Il.), fut. -í\w, aor.
-ía (see Ruijgh 1957: 83), also with έv-, έл-, ovv-; also кtɛpíšw (Il.) ‘id.', fut. -ɩw, aor.
-íσaɩ; thence кtɛpíoµata [pl.] = ktépea (S., E.), -iotaí (H.) = taqñes, á-ktépiotos (S.,
Lyc.), -έïotos (AP). ktépes vekpoi ‘the dead' (H.) is probably a constructed back-
formation (Solmsen IF 3 (1894): 98 in spite of Fraenkel 1910: 68); further probably
IIoλú-кτwp (Hom.), after which ľavú-кτwp (Plu., Paus.), where the second member
may originally mean 'giving presents' (Fraenkel and Solmsen l.cc.). Uncertain
▶ &láktopog.
⚫ETYM No etymology. See Arena RILomb. 98 (1964): 3-32.
кτηdúv, -óvos [m.] 'line of fissure, grain of wood, layers' in the body, wood, stone, etc.
(medic., Theophr.). <IE? *pekt-en- 'comb'>
•VAR Mostly plur. -óvɛç.
•COMP EÚ-кTŃбwv, -ovos 'with strong fibres' (Thphr.); not here εv-кτéαvoç ‘id.'
(Theophr., Plu.).
•ETYM It has been compared with the glosses εvv-кtéavov. iðù requkuĩav, ɛiç ópłóv
‘grown straight, iðv-ktéavov. tò ¡¤ù requkòç kaì óp¤òv dévdpov ‘upright tree' (H.).
Amigues 1989: 151f. derives it from *[л]кɩ-ŋdwv 'in the way of a comb',
metaphorically of the fissures of wood, etc.
кτidɛoç of marten'. →кTIÇ.
кτíšш [v.] ‘to found, establish, build, create' (Emp.). <IE *tk-ei- 'settle, found’>>
•VAR Aor. кTíσ(σ)ai (Il.), pass. кτισеñvαι (IA), fut. кτíσw (A.), perf. med. ěкτσμai
(Hdt.), act. ěкTIкα (Hell.); on the reduplication see Schwyzer: 649.
DIAL Myc. 3pl. root present ki-ti-je-si /ktijensi ‘they cultivate', ki-ti-me-no
/ktimenos/ cultivateď, ko-to-(i-)na /ktoinā/ ‘part of land', a-ki-ti-to /a-ktitos/ mg.
unclear. Also (me-ta-)ki-ti-ta /meta-ktitai/, perhaps ‘(transported) settlers'?
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. σuv-, έit-, άva-.
●DER кtíσiç [f.] ‘foundation, creation' (Pi., IA), ktotúç [f.] ‘foundation' (Hdt. 9, 97),
кτíσμа 'foundation, colony, building' (Hell.), кτσμóç 'foundation' (Asia Minor
[imperial period]); кτíστwρ 'founder' (Pi., E.), кɩɩστηр 'id.' (Corinth [IV₁]), fem.
кτíστpiα (Asia Minor [imperial period]), кτíστηs 'founder, builder' (Arist.), кτíστov
(-εov) 'temple of a founder' (pap. [IV³]), older ovукtiσtŋs ‘co-founder' (Hdt. 5, 46);
küʊtós ‘laid out, founded (h. Ap. 299, pap.), see Zumbach 1955: 26; subst. ktotóv
[n.] 'building' (pap.).
Several formations have the intransitive mg. 'to live, abide': εÜ кτíμεvоç 'where one
can live well' (Hom.); лɛpi-ktí-ovɛç [pl.] 'those living around, neighbours' (II.), àµqı-
кTÍ-ovεç 'id.' (Pi.), also as a PN (Att. inscr. Va), also -кTÚоvεç (Hdt., inscr. IV³) with
unclear v (cf. Hoffmann 1898: 290); лερшкτíται [pl.] ‘id.' (\ 288), after which the
simplex кtítaι ‘id.' (E. Or. 1621), кTÍTηS кτíστηs (Delph. IIª); έÜ-кττоÇ = έÜ
ktíµevos (B 592), òpɛí-ktɩtos ‘living in the mountains' (Pi.); but e.g. Oɛó-ktitos
'founded by the gods' (Sol.).
=
Rhod. Kτoíva (also лτoíva with unexplained л-) designates an administrative region
in Rhodos and is also found as a cadastral term in Myc. ko-to-(i-)na. Thence
Ktoιvātal, -étal (see Lejeune REGr. 78 (1965): 13ff.).
•ETYM The Mycenaean athematic root present ki-ti-je-si corresponds with Skt. 3sg.
kṣéti, 3pl. kṣiyánti, Av. šačiti, šiieinti 'to live', which is only used intransitively.
Probably, the root *tkei- should be analyzed as continuing an older i-present *tk-éi-
ti, *tk-i-énti of the root *tek- 'to procreate'. The transitive meaning 'to cultivate,
found (a Greek innovation) first arose in the aorist кtíσ(σ)αɩ, which developed
beside an intransitive root aorist still preserved in athematic кτíµεvos (cf. žotŋoa to
žotηy; see ïotµɩ). The form кtí(w, whence most derivations developed, was built
on кtíσ(o)al. The formation of лεршкτíται and Myc. pe-ri-ki-ti-ta recalls Skt. pari-kşi-
t- 'living round about', and the to-ptc. -кττоÇ is mirrored by Av. (ana)-šita-
'uninhabited'. The form кτíσç has a parallel in Skt. kṣi-tí-, Av. ši-ti- ‘dwelling,
residence', but the deviant meaning suggests an independent formation from кτíČw.

=== page 420 ===

792
KTINOS
Finally, кτoíva can be compared with Arm. šēn, gen. šini ‘inhabited (place)', if the
latter continues *kti-n-. See ➤ KTÍλOS.
кTíλoç [adj.] ‘obedient, tame', also msc. 'ram' (II.), acc. to H. = ó лроηуoúµevos tñs
лоíμη кριóç 'the ram taking the lead of the flock'; cf. Thompson Class. Rev. 46
(1932): 53f. <IE *tki-lo- ‘of the dwelling place'.>
•Der ktɩλíç• tɩðaoós, пpãos, ŋyeµwv ‘tame, leader' (H.) and the denominatives
έêɩɩλwσavto ‘they tamed' (Hdt. 4, 113), έktiλwµévos 'tamed' (Paus. Gr.), ktɩλɛúovtai
'they are being tamed' (Pi. Fr. 238).
⚫ETYM Connected to кτí(w as 'belonging to the dwelling place'. The suffix is found
in xwλóc, pauloc and various expressions for defects (Chantraine 1933: 238).
ктÚлоç [m.] 'strong noise, cracking, stamping' (Il.). <PG(V)>
•COMP Very frequent as a second member, e.g. Bapú-êɩuños ‘with loud noise' (h.
Cer.).
●DER ktuïéw (Il.) ‘to crack, rumble', trans. ‘to make rumble', probably intensive; aor.
кtväñoaι (S., E.), also them. aor. кɩɩлɛƖν (Il.), cf. Porzig 1942: 25, often prefixed
(late), е.g. εл-, кατα-, úло-. Thencе ктúлηµα = ктúлоç (Critias, E.), -ηtis ‘one who
makes noise' (Suid.), кtvлía. ó ¿æðaλáµos кτúños ‘the nuptial din' (H.).
•ETYM Reminiscent of Soûлoç, dovлέw, but further details are unknown. No doubt
of Pre-Greek origin, with variation between voiced and unvoiced stop; see Fur.: 120.
A prefix к-, as assumed by Meillet BSL 28 (1927-1928): 117, followed by Ruijgh 1957:
148, is unknown.
Kúα0oç [m.] 'ladle for drawing wine' (IA). <PG(V)►
•DER Diminutive кvá-tov (Pherecr.), -ís (Sophr.), -íokos (medic.); kvaß-wdŋs like
к.' (Eratosth.), -ałoç 'measuring a к.' (comm. Arist.), -óτηs 'the idea кúałoç' (Pl.),
-iw 'to scoop with a к.' (com., Plb.).
•ETYM The ending appears also in Anкuoc, yupyalós, etc. Lat. LW cyathus
(Plaut.). Often connected with кúap (opposed to this, Chantraine 1933: 367; yet it is
accepted in DELG s.v.); cf. on кúαμoç. Szemerényi Gnomon 43 (1971) compares
Ugar. qb't, Hebr. qubba'at ‘cup'. However, the word is clearly Pre-Greek: Fur.: 237
compares the variants кóẞałoç ‘a vessel' and кúẞεеpov 'beehive'. The sequence -va-
is also typical of ‘foreign' (i.e. Pre-Greek) words.
kúaµos [m.] ‘bean' (Il.), ‘lot', in which those who drew white beans won (Att.),
metaph. 'swelling of the paps' (Ruf., Poll.), 'woodlouse' (Gal.), name of a coin
(Taurom. I). PG(V)►
•VAR Also лúαvos (H.); kúµnxa. kúαµov (H.) also лúavos (H, Poll., Phot.).
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. кvaμo-τpúε 'bean-eater' (Ar.), voσ-кúaμoç 'henbane'
(Hp., X.), see Strömberg 1940: 31 and 155.
•DER Diminutives кváшov (Nubien, Eust.), -ídɛç. fabacia (gloss.); кváµ-vos ‘of
beans' (com., Gal.), -taños ‘as large as a bean' (Dsc., Luc.); kvaµ-íaç [m.] 'stone like a
bean' (Plin.), like кa´víaç, etc., see Chantraine 1933: 94), -ítnc [m.] 'god of beans
chairman of the bean market' (Paus.), -ĭτç (άyopá) ‘bean market' (Plu.), cf. Redard
===
Kußepváw
793
1949: 193 and 108; кvaµwv, -wvoç [m.] 'field with beans' (Thphr.), -wvíτηs 'laborer of
the bean-fields' (pap.), see Redard 1949: 37).
Denominative verbs: кuαчɛúw 'to draw a lot with beans' (Att.), -i(w 'to be ripe for
marriage' (Ar.). Beside кúaчoç also лúаvоç (H., Poll., Phot.), acc. to Heliod. Hist. 3 =
óλóлρoç, whence compound Пvav-éчa, -óчa [n.pl.] name of a Ion.-Att. festival,
whence the month name Пvavεчáv, -oчóv; also Kvav-εчлáv, -o- (Ceos, Asia
Minor) and Пav-óчла (non-Att. acc. to Lycurg. fr. 84).
•ETYM Since no IE suffix -am- is known, кúαчoç cannot be derived from kvέw (root
*kuh,-). The word кúαчoç has often been considered foreign (Chantraine 1933: 133,
Schwyzer: 494, Kuiper 1956: 21519). The variation in кvάчоç: лúαvоç, as well as the
forms suffixed with --, -o-, point to Pre-Greek origin. Fur., following Kuiper l.c.,
remarks that the variation between кuaμ- and кчμ-ηX/к- proves the Pre-Greek
character of the word. On the variation л-/к-, seе Fur.: 388.
кúavoç [m.] name of a dark blue substance, ‘enamel, lapis lazuli, blue copper
carbonate' (II.); also a bird name (Arist., Ael.), see Thompson 1895 s.v.) and a plant
name 'blue cornflower' (Plin.). <?>
●DIAL Myc. ku-wa-no 'smalt', also ku-wa-no-wo-ko /kuano-worgos/ 'smalt-worker'.
•COMP Often as a first member, е.g. кʊavó-лpæрos 'with a dark blue prow' (Hom.,
B.), -лрópɛo with metrical lengthening at verse end; -Xαíτηs 'with dark hair'
(Нom.), -лεлλоç 'with dark cloth' (h. Cer., Hes.), cf. Treu 1955: 244.
⚫DER KUάvɛOÇ (u metrically lengthened) 'made of к.', usually 'dark blue' (Il.); on the
mg. Capelle RhM 101 (1958): 10 and 35.
•ETYM Perhaps a loan from Hitt. kuuanna(n)- '(blue as) copper, ornamental stone'
(Friedrich 1952 s.v.). Danka & Witczak JIES 25 (1997): 361ff. derive it from *kwṇHo-,
which seems unlikely.
кúap [n.] 'eye of a needle, orifice of the ear' (Hp., Poll.). <IE *kuH-r/n- 'swelling,
hole'>
.
•ETYM An old r/n-stem, which is found thematicized in Av. sūra- [m.] ‘hole, lacuna'
< IE *kuH-r-o-, as well as in Arm. sor 'hole' if from IE *kou-er-o-; a thematic n-stem
occurs in Skt. śūna- 'swelled up, grown up', śúna- [n.] ‘emptiness, lack', śūnyá-
‘empty, hollow'. An l-stem is supposed in кúla ·τà úлoкáτw tŵv ßleqápwv
кoιλwματα holes under the eyelids' (H.), but see s.v. and under кoiλos 'hollow' <
*kou Hi-lo-. The words are generally connected with the group of ►кvéw 'to be
pregnant' < 'to swell', assuming a basic mg. 'curvation', whence both 'hole' and
'vaulting'.
kvßáßda · aíµa, Aμabovσto 'blood (Amathousian)' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Unknown.
kußɛpváw [v.] ‘to steer, head for', metaph. ‘to govern, rule' (y 283). ◄PG>
•VAR Аor. кuẞερvñσαɩ, Cypr. inf. кvµεpñvai; Aeol. кvµepvýtns.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. Sia-.
●DER KUẞερvητηp, Dor. -ατp [m.] ‘steersman, coxswain' (0 557, Pi.), fem. -τεɩpa
(AP, Nonn.) and -ŋtípios (Orac. apud Plu.); кußɛpvýtŋs (Aeol. kyµepvýtns [-átas]

=== page 421 ===

794
Kuẞéλn
acc. to EM 543, 3) ‘id.' (Il.) with fem. -ñτɩç (pap.) and -noia [n.pl.] festival of the
steersmen in Athens, in memory of Theseus (Plu.); кußépvησiç, -āσiç ‘steering,
government' (Pi., Pl.); kußepvnstikós ‘belonging to steering' (Pl.); kußepvioµós
kuẞépvnois (Aq.).
=
•ETYM From кußɛpváw, Lat. gubernō was borrowed; see WH s.v. Given Cypr.
кчμερчvaɩ, the form кußɛpváw has been thought to be due to dissimilation μ-v> ẞ-v
(Lejeune 1972: 152). See also Neumann KZ 100 (1987): 64-69, Neumann KZ 105
(1992): 188, and Neumann Kadmos 13 (1974): 146-155, who reconstructs a
denominative from *kurb-na- from the root *kerb- ‘to turn' in кúpẞiç. This is highly
doubtful.
As Frisk remarks, the word has no cognates. The comparison with Skt. kúbara-, -rí
'pole (?)' and with Lith. kumbras ‘grip on the steering oar', kumbryti ‘to steer' must
be given up; see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. and Fraenkel 1955 s.v. kumbrys. Foreign
origin is probable; see references in Frisk s.v. The group -pv- is typical for non-IE
material.
Kuẞéλn [f.] Anatolian goddess (Pi. fr. 8 Snell, Ar.). <LW Anat.>
•VAR Kußηßη (Hippon. fr. 127 M, Charon of Lamps. F.Gr.H. 262 fr. 9, Hdt. 5, 102).
•ETYM In Old Phrygian, she is called Matar Kubileya or Kubeleya. The exact meaning
of the adjective is unknown; does it refer to a mountain? The goddess originated in
Karkhemish, around 1200, where she was called Kubaba. See Laroche 1949: 113-128.
Her Lydian name was Kuvava. From Locri Epizephyrii we have her name as Qubalas
(end 7 th c.). See now Rein 1996: 223-237.
kúßŋlis, -ɛws [f.] acc. to H. µáxaipa, ǎµεivov dè лéλekus, ✪ tàc ßoñç kataßáλλovoi.
tɩvès tǹv tupókvŋotív qaσiv ‘large knife, properly an axe, with which cattle were
slain; cheese-grater' (com., Lyc.). <PG?>
•Der kußŋλikós ‘regarding a к.' (com.), kußŋlíoai. nɛɛкíσɑɩ ‘cut off with an axe,
behead' (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. On ɑyɛpʊi-kúßŋliç, see Chantraine, REGr. 75 (1962): 390.
Probably Pre-Greek.
kußiotáw [v.] ‘to tumble head-first' (Il., Pl., X.). ◄PG➤
•VAR Also -έw (Opp. K. 4, 263).
•COMP Also with prefix, ¿ê-, kata-, nɛpi-.
⚫DER KUẞɩσTηTHρ 'who tumbles head-first' (Hom., E., Tryph.), also with haplology
кUẞIστηp (H.) and кußiστns (Delos; uncertain; cf. Fraenkel Glotta 2 (1910): 31 n. 2
and below); кuẞíσtnois (Plu., Luc.), -nua (Luc.) 'cartwheel, somersault'.
•ETYM One may consider a pre-form *кvßíčoμαι for кußɩστnç, if this is old; thence
perhaps кuẞiστάw. Further, a few words in EM are compared: kúßŋ = kɛqaλý
(kvßiotáw = eiç keqaλǹv ròdŵ ‘to jump on the head'), kúßnßos = ó katakúyaç ‘bent
down, stooped', kußŋßāv = kupiws tò ènì tǹv keqaλǹv þíñtev properly ‘to throw on
the head' (acc. to H. = ɛopopɛiσaι, kopuẞavτãv ‘to be inspired by a god, be
enthousiastic'); further, кußητíчw. ¿ñì kɛqaλǹv píyw, kvßŋoívda. ènì keqaλýv, i tò
qopεiv εлì vútoυ, ½ каτа váτоυ 'on the head; bearing on one's back; in rear' (H.).
kudatoual
795
Frisk considers connection with кúẞos ‘dice' and кuôóç, кúлтш 'to stoop',
assuming that the words with -ẞ- are from a northern source (Thracian or
Macedonian), with ẞ instead of q. However, they may rather be Pre-Greek variants,
like kúµßŋ ‘heaď (EM 545, 27) and кúµßaxoç ‘head firsť³, ávaкvµßαλá¶w ‘to tumble’
(see Kuiper 1956: 213f.), which are prenasalized forms clearly containing the same
word. Then there is a variant with кuμ- in кuμíνбаλа· каταστроoη. Tapаvτivol
'rotation (Tarant.)' (H.). The variants are clearly of Pre-Greek origin.
kúẞitov [n.] ‘elbow' (Hp. Loc. Hom. 6), Sicilian acc. to Ruf. Onom. 72 and Poll. 2, 141.
<LW Lat.
•DER KUẞITĺw 'to push with the elbow' (Epich. 213). Also Kúẞwλov ‘id.' (Poll. l.c.),
which would be a cross with wλévò acc. to Bq, not an independent derivation from
Kúẞoç (Solmsen 1909: 7).
•ETYM From Lat. cubitum (pace Bechtel 1921, 2: 284).
кúẞoç [m.] ‘dice' (IA), also of the eyes of the dice (E., Pl.) and the gaming table
(Hermipp. 27, pl.); metaph. of dice-like objects, ‘cubus' (Ti. Locr.), ‘cubic number
(Pl., Arist.), 'dice-like block of stone or wood' (Hell. pap. and inscr.), ‘cake, piece of
salted fish' (com.); also 'vertebra' (Rhian. 57; after åστpάyaλos) and 'hollow above
the hips of cattle' (Ath. 9, 399b). ◄PG?►
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. quλó-кuẞoç 'who loves the dice' (Ar., Arist.).
⚫DER 1. Kúẞiov 'fish salted in кúẞor' (com., pap.), кuẞtáptov name of a pot related to
кúẞiov (pap.) 2. Kußíaç 'kind of tunny' (Opp.). 3. Kuẞoστóv [n.] name of a fraction
(Dioph.), after ɛiкoσtóv, etc. 4. Kußɛwv [m.] ‘gambling house' (Tz.). 5. kußikós
‘quadrangular' (Pl., Arist.). Denominative verbs: 1. Kußɛúw [v.] ‘to dice, gamble'
(Att.), also 'to deceive' (Arr.), whence кußɛía ‘dice', kußeutǹs ‘gambler”, -tikóç,
-týpiov (Att.). 2. Kußíšw [v.] ‘to raise to the cube' (Hero), whence кvßioµós (Theol.
Ar.). 3. кußα (H.) as an explanation of лεττεúε 'to play л.'.
⚫ETYM Words for dice are often loans (Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 423). Acc. to Hdt. 1,
94, the Lydians claimed to have invented the game of кúẞoç. Lat. cubus is from
Greek. In view of the incidental meaning 'hollow above the hips of cattle', kúẞoç was
wrongly connected with the Germanic group of Go. hups 'hip'. Lat. cubitus 'elbow' is
probably derived from -cumbāre; see De Vaan 2008 s.v. On kúßos = tpúßλɩov ‘cup,
bowl' (Paph., H.), cf. the words s.v. ► кÚлελλov.
kvdášoµai [v.] ‘to revile, jeer at (A. Fr. 94, S. Aj. 722, A. R. 1, 1337). <PG?►
•VAR Act. -w (Epich. 6; 35, 6); aor. кvdáσσaσðaɩ.
•DER Further кúdos [m.] ‘scorn' (sch.), probably a back-formation. On ►кudoчóç
‘din of battle', which is formally unclear, see s.v. Glosses κvdáyxaç. µáxaç, Noidopiaç
'battles, slanderings'; кudαуxóμεva. λoɩdopoúμεva ‘jeers'; кudáττεv. εлqwvɛïv 'call
by name, exclaim'.
ETYM Words for 'blame, revile' are found in Slav., e.g. OCS kuditi 'uéuqɛoal, to
blame', Gm., e.g. MHG gehiuze 'noise, crying, derision, insult', and in Skt. kutsȧyati
'blame, revile' (rejected by Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 365), MoP ni-kühidan 'blame, revile'
[Pok. 595]). In view of the glosses with structure кud-ayx-, the Greek words are

=== page 422 ===

796
kÚdapos
probably Pre-Greek. Moreover, кud-ayx- could be the prenasalized form of *кud-ax-
seen in кudattεV. See on кvбoчóç, ► küdoç.
кúdapoç [m.] name of a small ship (Antiph. 321). <?>
VAR Also -ov [n.] (pap., AB, EM).
⚫ETYM Origin unknown.
kvdíaç [?] · tà även 'flowering' (= εžavеnµατα eruption') τwv ódóvτwv 'of the teeth'
(H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Hypotheses in Pok. 956, who translates ‘Zahnkeim', a tooth which has not yet
erupted.
кvdoɩdoлáw to make noise, bring about confusion'. →êvdoчµóç.
kvdoquós [m.] ‘din of battle' (II.), see Schwyzer: 492 and Trümpy 1950: 158f. <PG▷
•DER KUбoчμεw [v.] 'to rage, confuse' (II.). Unclear кuðоιболáw 'to make noise, bring
about confusion' (Ar.), cf. on exodoлéw.
⚫ETYM Unknown, but given the unusual formation, the words are without a doubt
Pre-Greek. Frisk and Chantraine discuss it under кudáčoμaι 'to insult', but there
appears to be no semantic relation.
kūdos, -ɛos [n.] ‘fame, honor, glory, renown' (Il.), see Trümpy 1950: 196ff., Greindl
RhM 89 (1940): 220, Benveniste 1969:2: 57ff. <IE *keud-s- 'miraculous power'>
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. ¿ï-kudýs ‘famous' (II.); very often in PNs,
e.g. Depε-кúdnç, Kudó-viкoç (Bechtel 1917b: 269f.).
•DER Caland-forms: 1. kudi-ávɛipa [f.] conventional epithet, interpreted as ‘in which
renowned men partake' (Il.), of µáxŋ, thence of ảyopá; see Schwyzer: 447, 474;
Sommer 1948: 181; with -1- further кúdчµoç ‘famous' (Hes., h. Merc., Pi.). кvdiáw [v.]
'to boast, be proud' (Il., Hes. Sc., h. Cer., h. Hom. 30, 13, A. R., Q. S.), many forms
with diectasis, cf. Chantraine 1942: 359.
2. Kudpóç ‘famous' (II.), to which кudpóτɛpos (Xenoph., B.) beside primary кúdiσtos
(II.), see Seiler 1950: 76, and кúdiov (E.); also кuбéστεpos (Plb.) and кudíστατoç (Nic.
Th. 3), Tε [voc.] for кúðiσte (II.). Late denominative кudpóoµαι [v.] 'to boast' (Ael.,
Polyaen.).
3. Kudaívw 'to honor, glorify' (II.), aor. кvбñvaɩ; also pres. кudávw ‘to glorify, boast'
(Il.), see Chantraine 1942: 315; Kudvós = kudpós (v.l. in Hes., IG 14, 2117). Here also
кvбáλчµoç = кvбpós (II.), for which Arbenz 1933: 27 suggests a cross of *кudaλéos
and кúdчµoç; кvdýεç (AP, Man.), Dor. -ãɛσσa (Epid.) are late analogical formations;
Úлερ-кúdãç [ptc.] 'boasting' (II.), only -avτa(s); probably analogical, see Risch 1937:
23189. Perhaps here the deme name Kudavτídat (Wackernagel Glotta 14 (1925): 54)?
•ETYM The word кūdos is connected with a Slavic word for ‘wonder, miracle',
OCS čudo, gen. -ese, SCr. čudo (acute). Ablaut *keuHd-os- next to *kuHd-es- has
been assumed, which would give Gr. *kūd-es- (cf. Porzig 1954a: 170). However,
assuming a root *keuHd- seems superfluous, especially given that the Slavic acute
accentuation can be due to Winter's Law. Meier-Brügger 1992a: 269 assumed that
Greek replaced the old ablaut pattern *eu / u with *ū / u, like in the nasal presents.
Thus, кud- is a morphological full grade replacing older *keud-. As far as the
e.g.
KVέW
797
meaning is concerned, the Slavic group has the connotation of sorcery (e.g. ORu.
kudes [m.] 'magic, sorcery'; Ru. (dial.) kudesá [nom.pl.] 'miracles performed
through an evil force'). The Greek words denote the "force rayonnante des dieux ou
celle qu'ils confèrent" (DELG, following Benveniste 1.c.). Any further connection
with the verb 'to learn, understand, hear' found in OCS čują, čuti, Gr. ►кoćw is
gratuitous, as this has no root-final *-d.
kvdwvia (µāλa) [n.pl.] ‘quinces' (Stesich., Alcm., com.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kudóviai µnλídes (Ibyc.).
•DER kvdwvéa (-ia) [f.] ‘quince tree, Pirus Cydonia' (Hell. pap., Dsc.), -ítns (oľvoc)
‘wine from the quince' (Dsc., Colum.), -ãtov ‘drink of quince' (Aet., Paul.Aeg.), -táw
[v.] 'to swell like quinces' (API.). kvdwvó-µɛλɩ [n.] ‘mead from quince' (Dsc., Orib.),
cf. Strömberg 1944: 30).
⚫ETYM From an older Anatolian word still retained in кodú-μaλov (Alcm. 90); Greek
connected the word with the famous city of Kudwvía (on the north coast of Crete)
by folk etymology. Cf. also the town Kuτóvtov on the Lydian border. The
interpretation by H. in кodávɛɑ• σка õεчµεpɩvá. Kai кapúwv εidos Пεpσɩкwv
'winter-figs; kind of Persian nut' is based on confusion with ►кóττavov. Lat.
cydōneum quince-juice, -wine' (Ulp.) is from Greek; Lat. cotōneum ‘quince' (Cato)
also belongs here, but probably as an independent loan. The Western and Eastern
European forms derive from cotōneum and cydōneum, e.g. Ital. cotogno, MoFr. coing
(> MoE quince), OHG chutina, MHG quiten, ORu. gdunja. See Hehn-Schrader 1911:
241, Trump Herm. 88 (1960): 14-22, and Berger MSS 9 (1956): 8ff.
KUEW [v.] 'to be or become pregnant' (Il.), with tɩvá or tí 'with a young'. <IE *keuh,-
'swell'
•VAR KUńow (Hdt.), кúñσαι (IA), kɛkúŋka (Hell.), kvŋ¤ñvai, -¤ýσeσ (late); older
aorist Kúσaσa (II.), causative active кõσa (A.); younger present кów (since Arist.,
LXX); also кviσкoµal, -w (IA).
•COMP Sometimes with prefix, e.g. εлɩ-, áƒo-, σvу-кvéoµai, -kviokoµai (-ÍOKW), ÚNO-
kvʊaµévò (Il.). Compounds, e.g. kvo-qopέw [v.] ‘to be pregnant, be with young',
whence -popía, -nois (LXX, med., etc.), -pópos (pap., EM); "y-кuoç 'pregnant' (Ion.,
Arist.); Kú-oupa [f.] name of a plant that was used to procure abortion (Stob.), see
Strömberg 1940: 95.
DER Verbal nouns: кúŋua 'foetus, embryo' (IA), -ŋois 'conception, pregnancy,
embryo' (Pl., Arist., Thphr.), кúoç [n.] = кúŋµa (Ar. Fr. 609, inscr. Ceos), кυóεç
(Сos [IIIª]); άлоkuŋtikós ‘capable of giving birth' (Astrol.), kvŋtýpios promoting
pregnancy' (Hp.), kvńτwp ‘begetter' (Cyran.), of a bird; kuŋpóv. čykvov, áñalóv,
ẞλαστóv 'pregnant, tender, offspring' (H.). See on ► кŨµA, ► KÚPLOS.
•ETYM The present кvέw can be equated with Skt. śváyati ‘to be or become strong,
increase' < IE *kuh,-éie-. As LIV2 s.v. *kueh,- remarks, the Ved. aorist áśvat may be
an innovation based on the pair hváyati: áhvat. More forms s.v. Kúpιoç. The words
▶ kúaµoç, ▶ nãç, лéлãµαɩ are not related. On the supposed connection to words for
'hollow, empty', see ►кúap.

=== page 423 ===

798
KUOvóv
!
KUANBIG
799
kvOvóv [adj.].tò ăkvov pápflakov. kai no入ýkvdva nodýonepia. kvdvòv yàp tÒ
σлéрμа 'seed' (H.). <?>
ETYM Because of άкuητηpιov. qάρμАкoν лρòç τò µǹ кʊɛïv yʊvaiкɛlov 'philter for
contraception' (H.), a correction to <ǎ>кuevov (LSJ) was assumed necessary. Frisk
does not consider it necessary, and instead assumes a euphemistic ellipsis of the
negation. DELG supports the correction, and refers to aкuoç (Call. H. Ap. 52),
connecting ►кεúеw (unclear).
KUKάw [V.] 'to stir, mix, bring in confusion' (II.). <PG?>
•VAR Aor. кuкñσai, -ŋðñval.
•COMP Also with ava-, Sia-, ovv-, etc.
●DER KUKƐWV, -ŴVos [m.] ‘mixed drink' (post-Hom.), poet. also -ɛ(1)w [acc.] (A 624,
641), which may be after the comparatives in -w, but acc. to Risch 1937: 147 and
Chantraine 1942: 212 it is an old s-stem); Dor. кuкāv, -āvos (Epid.); instrument noun
KÚкn pov 'stirring spoon', metaph. 'turbulent person' (Ar.); action noun кúkŋσiç
(Pl., Epicur.), -σчó (S.), -еuós (Max. Tyr.) 'mixing'; also кúкηча· τáраxos
'disorder', KUкnepav. τapaxηv 'disorder' (H.).
⚫ETYM Intensive formation in -áw (cf. Schwyzer: 719) without etymology. Pok. 597
connects it with Lith. šaukštas 'spoon', which seems unlikely. Fur.: 305 compares
·кupкaváw (with further examples of insertion of a liquid) and concludes to a Pre-
Greek form.
кÚкλoç [m.pl.] ‘circle, ring, wheel', also metaph. of circular objects, e.g. ‘circular
square, wall around the city' (II.). ◄IE *ke-k"l-o- ‘wheel, circle'>
•VAR Also Tȧ KÚкλa, originally a collective.
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. kukλo-tepǹs ‘made round, round' (Il.), cf. on ► tɛipw,
EU-KUкλoç 'forming a beautiful circle' (Il.); also in hypostases, e.g. &у-кúкλoç 'going
around in a circle, circular; general' (Att. Hell.), on the mg. Koller Glotta 34 (1955):
174ff.; on Kúкλwy S.V.
⚫DER A. Substantives: 1. diminutives кUкλ-íσкoç (medic., Ptol.), -íσKIOV (Dsc.). 2.
-íoτpia [f.] 'cyclic danceress' (Att. inscr.), after кɩapíσtpia, etc. 3. kukλá-µvos [f.,
m.] plant name, ‘Cyclamen graecum, Lonicera periclymenum' (Thphr., Dsc.), also
-auíç (Orph.), after the circular radical tuber (Strömberg 1940: 36; formation after
σησáчuvoç, etc.). 4. Kuкλɛwv, -wvos [m.] month name (Ceos [IV]), after the festival
τà Kúкλ(ε)iα. 5. KUKλɛÚç PN (Ael.), Boßhardt 1942: 130.
B. Adjectives: 1. KUKλáç [f.] 'forming a circle', also KUкλádɛç [pl.] TN “circle-
islands", the Cyclades (IA), Lat. LW cyclas name of a circular cloth; kuкλiάç [f.]
epithet of τupós 'cheese' (AP). 2. KÚкλ-tos 'circular' (Att.). 3. -ɩкóç ‘circular,
belonging to a circle' (Arist.), 4. -óɛç (S. [lyr.], AP). 5. -wdns (Hp.) ‘id.'. 6. kukλ-ɩaïoç
‘turning in a circle' (Att. inscr.). 7. -lakós, in tà kukλtaká, title of a treatise on the
circle (late); 8. KUкlaτóç 'shoď', of horses (pap. VIP).
C. Verbs: 1. кUкλéw 'to turn in a circle, surround' (H 332), whence кúкλŋois
'revolution' (Pl.). 2. KUKλów 'to make circular; surround' (IA), whence -wμa
'rounding, round object, wheel, etc.' (E.), -wots 'surrounding' (Th., X.). 3. KUкλɛúw
'to surround, go in a circle', e.g. of a water-wheel, 'to irrigate' (Hp., Str., pap.),
whence кúкλ-ɛvμa 'water-wheeľ, -evtýpiov ‘id.', -euτn's watcher of a water-wheeľ
(pap.). 4. KUкλíw 'to turn around' (Agatharch.), -toµós (comm. Arist.). 5. kvkλáče.
Kúkλw nεpiέpxεtα 'goes around in a circle'. 6. KUкλαívɛ· στρоууvλoĩ 'is round' (H.).
⚫ETYM Old name of the wheel, preserved in several languages: Skt. cakrá- [m., n.],
Av. caxra- [m.], Gm., e.g. OE hwēol [n.] (also hweowol, hweogol) > MoE wheel, from
reduplicated IE *kwe-k"l-o-. With u-coloring of the reduplication vowel, due to the
surrounding labiovelars, Gr. кúкλoç and ToA kukäl (B kokale) 'wagon'. Related, but
unclear in detail, is Phr. кíкληу. τǹу äркτoν τò äστрov (H.), originally 'wagon' (cf.
Porzig 1954a: 183). An archaic formation with full grade and without reduplication is
found in ON hvel (beside hjól = OE hwēol) and OPr. kelan, from IE *k”élo- [n.]; o-
vocalism, in OCS kolo, gen. -ese 'wheel, wagon'. The word is derived from the root
*kwel(H)- 'turn'; see лéλoμа. Given that the meaning 'wheel' (> ‘wagon') is
represented almost everywhere, one may wonder if the meaning 'circle' is secondary.
An original meaning 'turning, turner' is suspected for the Baltic word for 'neck', e.g.
Lith. kāklas < IE *ko-k"l-o- (?).
KÚKVOÇ [m.] 'swan' (II.), also name of a ship, after the front part (Nicostr. Com.), and
of an eye-salve, after its color (Gal.), whence kukvάptov ‘id.' (Aët., Gal.); also as a PN
(Pi.). <IE? (s)keuk- 'lighten, be white'>
●DER KÚкvɛƖos ‘of the swan' (Pi., S., Hell.), fem. -ītis (S.); kukviaç [m.] name of a
white eagle (Paus.), cf. kopaкíaç, etc., Chantraine 1933: 94.
•ETYM Abundant discussion on кúкvoç in Thompson 1895 s.v. Connected with Skt.
śócati ‘to lighten, glow', śukrá- 'light, clear, white'; the root is now reconstructed as
*(s)keuk- by Lubotsky Inc. ling. 24 (2001) (formerly *keuk-).
kukúɩča · yλvkɛĩa кoλóкuvτα 'sweet кoλóкuvτα' and kúkuov· tòv õiкvóv 'cucumber'
(H.). →σíkvoç.
кúλα [n.pl.] ‘the parts under the eyes' (Hp., Sor.), cf. kúλa• τà úлokátw tŵv ßλeqápwv
koiλwµata. tà úrò toùs óóðaλµoùs µñλa. tà úñónα ‘the cavities under the eyelids;
the swellings under the eyes; the parts of the face under the eyes' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Var. lectio koɩλ- (cf. LSJ s.v.). Also кúλλia· úñŵria µéλava ‘black eyes' (H.),
кúλλаẞоι úлшлα 'parts of the face under the eyes' (H.).
•COMP As a first member in кuλ-ordiάw 'to have a swelling under the eyes' (Ar.,
Theoc.), compound of kúla and oidéw (oldos) after the verbs of disease in -táw;
kvλoláčeɩv. tò toùç óóðaλµoûç érikкλívεν Xλεváčovτα 'scornful shutting of the eyes'
(Theognost. Can. 21).
•DER Diminutive кvlídɛç, -ádes (Poll., Eust.); εл-кvλíðɛs 'the upper eyelids' (Poll.),
probably a hypostasis. PN Kúλwv (Argos), Kúlaσoç (Larisa), Kúλahos (Argos), see
Solmsen 1909: 88f.; on Kvλwïdaç, -ïádas (Delph.) see Bechtel 1917a: 31ff.
•ETYM Not related to кúap, for we would expect long û from *kuh₁-l-. The
connection with Lat. super-cilium 'eyebrow' is probably wrong: cf. De Vaan 2008 s.v.
cilium, connected with the root *kel- 'to hide'. The variants with Kuλλ- rather show
that the word is from Pre-Greek *kuľ-.
kvλnßić · koloßý ‘curtaileď. ⇒кúÀÀŋßis.
=

=== page 424 ===

800
KUλivSw
кvλívɗw [v.] ‘to roll, turn over' (Il.). <PG>
●VAR Also intr. med. -oµai; -éw, -έoµai (Att.), fut. kvλĺow (Att.), kvλivdńow (late),
aor. кvλĩσaɩ (Pi., IA), pass. -ɩσ¤ñvai (Il.), -ɩvdŋ¤ñvai (Str.), perf. med. kɛkúλioµai
(Luc., Nonn.); secondary present кuλíw (Ar.) to кvλīσai < -ívd-σal.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. лpo-, ék-, ¿v-, áµiqi-.
●DER 1. KÚλɩɗpos [m.] 'rolling stone, tumbler, cylinder, etc.' (Democr. 155, Hell.),
whence Kuλívdp-10v, -íσкoç, -Iкóç, -ów (Hell.). 2. Kúλiσç 'rolling, turning over'
(Arist.), -toμóc ‘id.' (Thd.), -toµa 'roll, etc.' (Sm.), -íστpa 'place for horses to roll in'
(X., Poll.), -σtóc [m.] ‘roll of papyrus, packet' (pap.); tpi-kúλiotos (Epicur. fr. 125)
with unclear mg., see De Witt Class. Phil.35 (1940): 183. 3. кUλívdŋσıç ‘rolling' (Pl.,
Plu.).
•ETYM The same element -v8- is found in the synonyms ►ȧlívdw, -έw,
►kaλɩvdéoµai; further unclear. Most often connected with ►кuλλós ‘curved, lame’
"zu einer allumfassenden Wurzel (s)kel- 'bent, curved' (s. кwλov, σкέλoç)". The
word is hardly IE.
KÚλiž, -ɩkoç [f., m.] ‘(drinking) cup' (post-Hom.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Note кUλíσkn, -ixvn.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. kvλik-ǹpvtos ‘scooped with a cup' (Call.), ɛv-kúλikoç
'with beautiful cups' (AP).
•DER Diminutives: кUλíкiov (Thphr.), кvλíσкη (D. H., Poll.), hardly from -ɩк-íσкη
(Schwyzer: 542), -íσkiov (Poll.); -íxvη (Alc., Ar.), Chantraine 1933: 195; Lat. LW
culigna; -íxviov (Ar., Hell.), -txvis (Achae.); further кUλк-εov 'cup-stander' (com.,
pap.), -ɛtoc 'belonging to a cup' (Poll.), -wdns 'like a к.' (sch.).
•ETYM The word looks similar to Lat. calix 'deep bowl, cup', but a variation *a/u is
unknown in Indo-European words. For the same reason, ►кáλvž ‘seed-vessel, husk'
is not identical with our word. One might assume a pre-form *k*lH-ik- in order to
explain both Greek and Latin, but this is an improbable formation for PIE.
With anlauting sk-, U skalse-to 'ex patera' has been connected (by comparison with
·σкaλλíov), but it does not belong here for the same reason. As with so many names
of cups, etc., we must reckon with loans. See Fur. 110, 132, who points to кvλí-σк-η
and кuλíxv-tov, etc., with aspiration before the nasal. As this feature is non-IE, the
word may be Pre-Greek; note that -ɩк is a typical Pre-Greek suffix (Pre-Greek:
suffixes), and that кUλ-к- is a typical Pre-Greek structure.
кúλλα · σкúλaĘ. 'Hλεo 'puppy (Elis)' (H.). → okúλač.
KÚÀÀŋßɩç · KOλoßóv[τa]. oi dè τà kéρaτα кoλóßia пaр' 'Пллóvактɩ 'short horns' (fr.
122). <PG➤
•VAR KUλnẞíç. KOλoßń ‘curtailed' (H.). Cf. Theognost. 21, 19.
⚫ETYM Unknown. The glosses are unclear, but a variation typical for Pre-Greek may
be recognized in kvλ(\)ŋßiç• koλoß- (note \/\\\).
кvλλóç [adj.] ‘deformed, crippled, crooked', of hands, feet, etc. (IA). <IE? *(s)kel-
'bend, crook'>>
3
KÚμẞη 1
801
●COMP As a first member in кʊλλo-лodíwv (-ov [voc.]) epithet of Hephaistos, ‘with
crippled feet, limping' (II.), from кυλλó-лoÛç ‘id.' (Hell.) after the nouns in -íwv
(Schwyzer: 487).
•Der kvλλóo̟µaɩ, -ów [v.] 'to be crippled' (Hp., Gal.), -wʊiç, -wµa; kvλλaívw (intr.)
'id.' (S., Ph.). Also кúλλαιoç. þóστρuxos 'lock of hair' (H.).
•ETYM Probably connected with keλλóv. otpeßλóv, лλáуov 'twisted, athwart' (H.);
see ►кɛλλάç. The word ►кuλívdw does not belong here, nor do Skt. kuņi- ‘lame (of
the arm), kuṇḍá- [n.] ‘jar'; see Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. The form was recently
explained differently by Meier-Brügger KZ 103 (1990): 20-23, who derives the word.
from *kwel- 'turn' as *kwl-no- 'turned outward or inward'. Vine 1999b: 566 accepted
the etymology of the root, but assumed *kol(H)-ió-, according to a variant of
Cowgill's Law (*o > v before *-li-). In view of its semantics and problematic IE
etymology, the word may as well be Pre-Greek (cf. Fur.: 354").
kūμa, -atos [n.] 1. 'wave, breakers', also metaph. (Il.); 2. = кúηµα 'foetus, embryo' (A.,
E., AP), 'young sprout' (Thphr., Gal.), see Strömberg 1937: 79. <IE *kuh,- 'swell'>
•COMP kyµatwyń < *kvµato-fayń ‘breaking of the waves, beach' (Hdt.); ά-kúµwv
‘without waves' (Pi., trag.), also ‘without foetus' (E.), opposed to έy-кúчwv (Att.);
also ǎ-кчµoç (E., Arist.), áкúµατos (Trag. Adesp.) 'without waves'.
•DER Diminutive кчµάτov 'the volute on the Ionic capital' (inscr.); kyµat-ins, -iaç
[m.] 'causing waves, stormy' (Ion. poet.), -wdŋs (Arist.), -óɛç (Arist., Opp.), -ŋpós
(gloss.) 'full of waves'.
Denominative verbs: 1. кuμaívw 'to rise in waves, swell' (II.), 'to become pregnant'
(уaστépα; late Epic), also with к-, etc.; thence кúμavσiç (Arist.); 2. кччatóorial, -ów
‘to rise in waves, cover with waves' (Th., Luc., Plu.), whence -woɩç (Str.); 3.
kvμatíšoµai to roll with the waves' (Arist.).
Here also belongs Kuµw [f.], name of a Nereid (Hes.); also Kúµŋ (Kretschmer Glotta
24 (1936): 277ff.)?
⚫ETYM In the meaning 'foetus', кuμα is clearly a verbal noun of кvéw. The meaning
'wave', which is more common and older, may also derive from 'swelling' (cf. olduα).
kúµßaxos [adj., subst.] 1. adjectival, ‘falling head-first' (E 586; imitated by Call., Lyc.);
2. substantival, probably 'crest of a helmet' (O 536). <PG(V)►
ETYM Acc. to Leumann 1950: 231ff., the divergent meanings should be explained
from an original substantival, technical sense. The formation favors this as well; cf.
especially oúpíaxos ‘end of a spear', στóµaxos originally ‘end of the mouth’, i.e.
'throat'. The form кúμẞη ‘'drinking cup' has been taken as the basis, but this is
unconvincing. Others, e.g. Kuiper 1956: 213f., have started from a nasalized form of
► кúßŋ ‘head', ► кußɩστáw: these forms in кuẞ- without prenasalization show that the
word is Pre-Greek.
кúµßη 1 [f.] ‘cup, bowl' (Nic., Ath.), ‘boat' (S. fr. 127). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also кóμẞoç = tò ëкëwµa ‘drinking-cup' (H.), but does it really belong here?
●DER кúμẞoç [m., n.] 'hollow vessel' (Nic., H.); кuµßíov (-ɛi-) [n.] ‘small cup' (Att.,
Hell.), 'small boat' (H., Suid.). Also кúμẞαλov [n.], usually -a [pl.] 'cymbal (Pi., A.,
X.), cf. кpóτalov, whence the diminutive кuußáλov (Hero) and denominative

=== page 425 ===

802
KÚun 2
кʊµßαλíčw ‘to play the cymbals' (Hell.), -ioµóc, -iotńs, -ioτpia (late). Probably
ávεкuµẞaλíašov ‘they clashed together like кúμßaλa', of dispoɩ (II 379), also belongs
here.
•ETYM Previously connected with Skt. kumbhá-, Av. xumba- [m.] 'pot', and Celtic
vessel names like MIr. comm, cummal. More forms in Pok. 592, WH s.v. cubō.
Because of the sequence *kumb(h)- (either with *b, which did not exist in PIE, or with
both voiceless and aspirated stops *k - bh, which is an impossible root structure in
native Indo-European words), the word cannot be inherited. It is rather a
'Wanderwort', which fits a vessel term very well. From кúμßη, Lat. borrowed cymba,
cumba ‘ship' (acc. to Plin. HN 7, 208 it is Phoenician). Fur.: 284 compares кúëŋ ‘ship,
etc.' (H.) and considers the word to be Pre-Greek; likewise, DELG. Seе ►кúлη.
кúμẞη 2 [f.] =кúẞη 'кεqαλη' (only EM 545, 27). <PG(V)►
•Der kvµßŋtiáw ‘to fall head first' (ibd.); cf. kvßηtí¼w, etc. s.v. ► kvßiotáw.
•ETYM Perhaps identical with кúµßη 1 ‘cup' (cf. Lat. testa > Fr. tête, etc.). The
prenasalization in the pair кúμẞη / кúßη proves Pre-Greek origin. Of course,
кúμẞaxos 'head first' belongs here too.
кúµßŋ 3 [f.] name of an unknown bird, in лτεpoßaμoσi kúµßais (Emp. 20, 7). <PG?>
•VAR Cf. кóµßα. кopávη. Пoλuppηvio 'crow, shearwater (Polyrrhenian)' (H.);
кúμẞaç öρvɩðaç ‘birds' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. See Thompson 1895 s.v. If кóдßα is a variant, the word is Pre-
Greek.
kýµuvdıç, -106, -ɩɗos [f., m.] name of an unknown bird (E 291, Ar. Av. 1181, Arist.).
<PG(V)►
●VAR KÚßɩvdıç (v.l.); this form was borrowed into Latin (Plin. N.H. 10, 24), see André
1967 s.v. cybindis, also as cibinnus (Pol. Silv.). In Greek also кußηvaιç [read
Kúẞɩvdiç?]. yλauε[ac] 'little owl' (H.) (thus Fur.: 21667); v.l. кóдuvdic (Procl.).
•ETYM The sch. on Ar. Av. 291 identified the bird with кɩкuµwïç (Call., cf. кíкuµoç,
-ußoc H.); therefore, it was understood as 'owl'. Clearly a loanword, because of the
suffix -v8-; perhaps of Anatolian origin, or Pre-Greek, which may amount to the
same.
kúµīvov [n.] ‘cumin' (Hp., Sophr., com.). <PG?>
•DIAL Myc. ku-mi-no /kuminon/.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ku̟uvo-épíστηs “cumin-splitter”, i.e. ‘skinflint'
(Arist., com.).
•DER кvµɩvádŋç ‘like к.' (Thphr.), -tvoç ‘of k.', -ãç ‘K.-seller' (inscr. Jaffa), -ɛúw 'to
besprinkle with K.' (Orac. apud Luc.).
⚫ETYM Thought to be a loan from Semitic; cf. Hebr. kammōn, Akk. kamūnu, etc.
(Lewy 1895: 38), although Kretschmer KZ 29 (1888): 440 rather saw these reflected in
the plant names кάμwv (Nic.) and σкaµ(µ)wvía, -úviov (com., Nic.) 'kind of
bindweed'. Frisk suggests that the word may have been borrowed from Semitic
twice. See also Masson 1967: 51.
言
KUtáplooog
803
However, Ruijgh Lingua 58 (1982): 209 suggested that the word, with its typical Pre-
Greek suffix -iv-, was in the first place a loan from Anatolia (or the Aegaean);
Semitic could have taken it from the same source; cf. Fur.: 18718 on ßpáðu. Borrowed
as the Lat. LW cuminum, whence the modern European forms (Schrader-Nehring
1917(1):655).
kvváµva [f.] ‘dog-fly' (II.), usually as a term of abuse. <GR▷
⚫VAR Later кuvó-μvα (LXX, AP), with analogical -o-.
•ETYM Frisk assumes older *кvá-μva from IE *kuu̟ṇ- > Skt. śuva-, with -v- from
кuvóç, etc. This seems improbable, but no other solution is apparent. For the
meaning, cf. Lith. šun-muse ‘id.'; further, Risch IF 59 (1949): 59.
кúvбaλoç [m.] 'wooden nail' (Poll., H.). <PG>
•VAR Plur. both -ot and -a.
•COMP кuvdaλo-лaíкtns (Poll.), -лaíotηs (H.) ‘k.-player'.
•DER кuvdaλσµóç ‘the game of к.' (Poll.), also called кuvdáλŋ (H.).
•ETYM The formation recalls that of the synonymous лáσσαλoç. The word has a
typical Pre-Greek appearance: prenasalization(?) and the structure *CuNC-aR-.
kuvέw [v.] ‘to prostrate (oneself at), to kiss the ground, to honor by prostrating'
(Hom.), also 'to throw kiss-hands' (cf. Marti Lang. 12, 272ff.). Mostly poetic (prose
uses quλéw). IE *ku(e)s- 'kiss'>
•VAR Aor. кúσ(o)aɩ (Hom.), fut. kuvýσoµai (E.), kúʊʊw (Babr.).
•COMP The compound лроσ-кʊvéw occurs in prosе: аoг. лроσ-кυvñσαι (IA), -кúσal
(S., Ar.), fut. -кvvýow (Hippon., Pl.), -kekúvηka (LXX.). Thence лpookúvn-σis (Pl.,
Arist.), -µa (Hell.) ‘prostration, reverence', -τns ‘adorer' (oriental inscr., NT), -τýp
'footstool for prayer' (Mon.Ant.).
•DER From the simplex only кuvη-τívda (лαíčεv, Crates Com.).
⚫ETYM Interesting for the interpretation of the Greek is the Hittite verb kuuašš-zi 'to
kiss'. As remarked by Kloekhorst 2008 s.v., it is consistently spelled with a geminate
-šš-, which acc. to him points to an IE pre-form *Kuens-. The Greek nasal present
Kuvέw, which seems to go back to *ku-ne-s-, may somehow reflect the same archaic
formation, though admittedly the Schwebeablaut is difficult. This means that the
root may be reconstructed as *kues-, not *kuas- (Eichner in LIV² s.v. *ku̟as-). As has
been remarked by Puhvel HED s.v., the word may be onomatopoeic in origin. This
may explain the deviating initial in the Germanic word for ‘kiss', e.g. OHG kus,
kussen, which escaped Grimm's Law (it may also be unrelated). A formally identical
root *kues- (perhaps even *kuns-; cf. Kloekhorst ibid.) is found in Skt. śvas- 'to hiss'.
kvñápioσos [f.] ‘cypress' (× 64). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Att. -ITTOÇ.
●DIAL Myc. ku-pa-ri-se-ja [n.pl.] ‘made of cypress-wood', probably the ethnic name
ku-pa-ri-si-jo.
•DER Diminutive -íττov (Alciphr.); further -íooɩvos, -íτuvos of cypress-wood' (p.
340), tooíaç 'Euphorbia aleppica' (Dsc.; Strömberg 1940: 35), -100wv, -wvoc [m.]
‘cypress forest' (Str.). Town name Kuлápɩσσoç (in Phocis, B 519), also -ɩσσoÛç,
i

=== page 426 ===

804
KÚÑAσƠIÇ, -ƐWS
-100ía, -1001aí, -ɩʊʊńɛ (of Elis, B 593), кuqapiσoivos (inscr. Aegina); also
Kvapíσσoç epithet of Apollo (Cos), Kuqapiσσía of Artemis (Lacon., IG 5(1), 977),
Kupapiσσitas of Pan (Crete).
•ETYM Clearly a Pre-Greek word, because of the 'foreign phoneme' -σσ-/-ɩɩ-, and
notably the variant Kuo- in the toponym and the epithets. Latin has cupressus (note
the -e-). Perhaps Hebr. gōfer is from the same source. See Fur.: 159f., index. On other
names of the cypress, see Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 671.
кÚлασσι, -εw [m.] name of a (short) frock, also worn by women (Alc. Z 34, 7, cf.
Hamm 1957: 53, Hecat., Ion Trag., AP). <LW Anat.>>
VAR Plur. -1бeç (Alc.).
•DER Diminutive -íoкos (Hippon. 18).
•ETYM An Anatolian loanword, connected with Lydians and Persians in our sources
(cf. Gow Class. Rev.69 (1955): 238f.). A striking agreement is shown by Hitt. kupaḥi-
(von Blumenthal 1930: 27ff.), which however seems to indicate a headgear; see
Friedrich 1952.
кúлερov [n.] name of a meadow-plant with an aromatic root, ‘galingale, Cyperus
longus, rotundus' (Ø 351, § 603, Thphr.), cf. Strömberg 1937: 79f. <PG(V)►
•VAR Also -os [m.] (h. Merc. 107, com., Thphr., Theoc.); kúлɛpoç [m.] (Ion., Dsc.,
Plu.), кúлαчρоç (Alcm. 16), кúлεрα· τà σxoɩvíα Èк кʊлεíроυ лεлλεуµévα 'the cords.
plaited from the galingale' (H.).
•DIAL Myc. ku-pa-ro /kupa(i)ros/.
●DER Diminutive кuñapíσkoç (Alcm. 38), kuñεpíšw ‘to be like the galingale' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM A foreign Pre-Greek word; on the varying form, cf. Schwyzer 471f. Cf. on
►кúлρoç 1. The word probably reflects *kupar-, which explains the variants
кʊлα(1) po- and кʊлε(1) po-; the *a was phonetically colored to ε before a palatal
consonant, which also explains the lack or presence of t. Cf. on ▸ Káẞɛipol. See
Mayer RILomb. 94 (1960): 316 and E. Masson 1967: 111f.
кúлελλov [n.] ‘bulbous drinking vessel, beaker, goblet (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Note Kúpε\\a 'hollows of the ears' (Lyc.).
●DIAL Myc. [ku]-pe-ra (uncertain, cf. Palmer 1963: 364).
●COMP Some compounds, notably ȧμ-кúлελλov [n.], epithet of déñaç (Hom.),
literally "with cups at both sides", i.e. 'double beaker'; acc. to Aristarchus (EM 90, 43;
cf. Ath. 11, 783b) 'double-handled'; cf. Kretschmer Glotta 20 (1932): 248, Brommer
Herm. 77 (1942): 358f., 366.
•ETYM Acc. to a witness in Ath. 11, 483, a кúñελλov was known to both Cyprians and
Cretans; cf. Bowra JHS 54 (1934): 73. In the traditional interpretation, -ε\\o- is a
combination of suffixes -\- and -10- (cf. Chantraine 1933: 253 and Schwyzer: 483).
One may then connects кúлη· τрwуλn 'hole' (H.), with corresponding forms in Lat.
cupa 'vať', Skt. kúpa- [m.] 'pit, hole', etc.; see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. kúpa-. However,
Furnée compares not only кúл (H.) in various meanings (Fur.: 121), but also кúẞoç
... τpúẞλov (H.) and кúµßη 'cup', кúμẞoç ‘id.' (op. cit. 176 and 284). The word was a
widespread 'Wanderwort', but given the variants it was probably Pre-Greek.
Moreover, -ɛ\\\o- rather continues the Pre-Greek suffix -al-.
KÚNTW
805
=
кʊлpivoç [m.] ‘carp' (Arist., Opp.). ◄PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Formation like άτταуīvos and other fish names (see on ►άɩɩayãç and
Strömberg 1943: 41), derived from ►кúлρoç ‘henna' after the color (cf. Strömberg
1943: 20ff.). Other names for the carp are not connected (e.g. Skt. śaphara- [m.]
Lith. šapalas, or OHG karp(f)o, etc.). The suffix -iv- is well-known in Pre-Greek.
кúлpoç 1 [f.] ‘henna, Lawsonia inermis', also a salve made of it (Thphr., LXX, Dsc.).
<LW Sem.>
⚫DER кúлρivov (of μúpov, λαov, Dsc. Aret.); кúлρov. τò ȧрvóуλwoσov 'plantain'
(H.). Denominative verb кuлpíw 'to bloom', whence кʊлρσμóç 'blooming' (of olive
or vine, LXX, Eust.). On кʊлрvoç, see s.v.
⚫ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. kōfer (Lewy 1895: 40f.). The word ►кúлεɩpov, -oç does
not belong here. See also E. Masson 1967: 52.
кúлρоç 2 [m.] a corn measure (Alc., inscr.); nuí-кUлроу (Hippon.), acc. to H. = nov
μεSiuvov 'half a medimnus'. <?>
⚫ETYM Persson 1912(1): 1044 compares кúлελλov, кúлη; rather a loan. Lewy 1895: 263¹
recalls Hebr. kepōr ‘beaker'.
Kúлpoç 3 [f.] the island Cyprus (Il.). ◄?►
●DIAL Myc. ku-pi-ri-jo /Kuprios/.
●DER Kúrpiç, -ɩɗoç, -ɩda, -ɩv [f.] name of Aphrodite (Il.); Kúлpios 'Cyprian' (IA),
Kuлραкóç ‘id.' (D. S.).
•ETYM The similarity with Sumer. zabar 'copper' (“gleaming stone"), whence Assyr.
si parru > Elam. čupar ‘id.', is accidental, see Ipsen IF 39 (1917-1921): 232ff.
Neu 1987: 181f. (see also Neu 1988: 37, Neu Glotta 73 (1995): 1-7) points to Hurr.
kab/pali- from a root kab/p- 'copper' as the possible origin of the name. It is
remarkable, though, that this word has no -u-. The word might come from a
substrate language. The word is found in a Middle-Hittite text from 1400 BC, where
kup- may stand for kab/p.
Cyprus was famous for its copper in antiquity. In the Bronze Age, the island (or a
part of it) was called Alaš(h)iia; the name lives on in the epithet Alaσióτηs of
Apollo.
It was borrowed as Lat. cuprum, older (aes) cyprium 'copper'. From Latin originate
MoFr. cuivre, MoE copper, MoHG Kupfer.
кÚлτш [v.] 'to bend forward, stoop, to run with the head down' (IA). <◄PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. Kúчai (Il.), fut. кúчo̟µαι, -w (Att., Hell.), perf. kékōqa (IA).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, кατα-, εлɩ-, лαрa-, úno-, únεp-.
●Der έití-, katá-, itapá-, itpó-kvynç ‘stooping' (medic., Hell.); σvуêúлtaɩ [pl.] ‘rafters,
sloping beams' (Ath. Mech.), лараkvittɩkóç ‘looking inside, inspecting inquisitively'
(Cod. Iust.). Adverb кúßda bent forward' (Archil., com.). Enlarged present кvítá¶w
‘to keep stooping, go poking about' (com.). Besides кuôóç ‘bent forwards,
hunchbacked' (ẞ 16), with several derivatives: кúowv, -wvos [m.] 'bent yoke of the
plough; pillory; one who has had his neck in a pillory; curved beam., etc.' (Thgn.,
Archil., com., etc.); кuoóviov a kind of salve (Alex. Trall.), -toμós 'punishment by

=== page 427 ===

806
kupẞaσía
the к.' (sch.); кuoóτηs 'being bent' (Hld.), кŨçoç [n.] 'hump, hunch' (Hdn.).
Denominative kupóоμαι 'to be bent, hump-backed', кúowσiç ‘being hump-backed',
-wμa hump' (medic.); кúow, in кúчovτα óóðαλμоis 'with downcast eyes' (LXX),
perhaps a back-formation (to kuoós or kékuqa?). With factitive mg. кʊлów 'to
overthrow', only in (ȧvα-)кυлóσas (Lyc., Nic.); perhaps after τúлTW: TUлÓW?
•ETYM The formation of кūoós is isolated within Greek, and therefore it may contain
the original root shape. The word kuôós has been compared with Skt. kubhrá- [m.]
‘humpbacked bull”, kubjá- ‘humpbacked, crooked, but for these Munda origin has
also been claimed. A direct comparison of кũôoç [n.] with Av. kaōfa- [m.]
'mountain, camel-hump' (Brandenstein 1956: 53) is deceptive, as кuQoç is late and
was derived from kupóç within Greek. Other branches of IE show words with root-
final *-p-: Lith. kuprà ‘hump', OHG hovar 'id.', etc. Glosses like кúqepov i kuqýv.
keqaλýv. Kpñtes ‘head (Cretan)' (H.) probably do not belong here; see ►кúµßŋ 2. It
has also been compared with words for ‘pot, jar', like Skt. kumbhá-, Av. xumba- [m.]
(cf. Sturtevant Lang. 17 (1941): 10). The variation кuq-/ kuñ- (in kuñów) points to a
Pre-Greek word. Cf. on ►кúлελλov, ► кúµßŋ 1, ► кúßos, ► kvyéλn.
Kupẞaσía [f.] name of a Persian hat with a pointed crown (Hdt., Hp., Ar.), acc. to H. =
ópеǹ τápα ‘upright tiara'. <LW Pers.>
⚫ETYM Grošelj Živa Ant. 4 (1954): 172 compares Hitt. (Hurrit.) kurpiši- 'part of a
helmet, helmet' (precise meaning uncertain).
Kúpẞɛiç [pl.f., m.] name of rotating pillars or columns, in the form of a three-sided
pyramid, on which the laws of Solon were inscribed in Athens; also used of other
inscribed tables (Att., Arist.). <PG?>
•VAR Also -LEC, gen. -εwv; rarely кúpßɩs [sg.].
⚫ETYM As a technical expression, suspected of being a loan (perhaps Pre-Greek?). Of
course, the older connection with ►кαρлóç ‘hand-root' is unacceptable. Fick BB 29
(1905): 239 and Kretschmer Sprache 2 (1950-1952): 68 also adduced the ▸ Kúpẞavτεç,
which would have been named after their whirling dances. Discussion in Jeffery 1961:
53f.
Kupńẞia, -iwv [n.pl.] 'husks, bran' (Crat., Hp., Ar.). <<?>
•DER kupηßio-лwλŋs [m.] 'seller of clay' (Hp., Ar., Epicur.). Kupηßíwv, -iwvos [m.]
epithet (D., Ath.).
•ETYM Formation and origin both unknown. Fur.: 271 connects it with Hitt.
kurimpa- ‘residue, dregs', but there seems little reaon for this. On кupnßáľw, etc., see
►KUPÍTτw.
kúpɩos [m.] ‘lord, ruler, possessor', also as an adjective ‘ruling, decisive, valid, decided'
(post-Hom.). <IE *keuh,- 'swell, be strong'>
•VAR kupía [f.] ‘(lady) who rules' (Hell.).
•DER Kupía (from Kupi-ía) [f.] 'control, possession' (Arist., Hell.), kupłótng [f.]
'lordship, rule' (Christian literature); кupιaкóç 'belonging to the lord (= Christ), to
the emperor' (imperial period); kupiεúw [v.] 'to be or become lord, to possess, obtain
power' (X., Arist.), whence kupiɛía, kupɛía (Schwyzer: 194) ‘possession, proprietary
j
i
KÜpos
807
rights' (Hell.), KUPIεUTIкóç, -кwç 'regarding the proprietary rights' (pap.). кupów 'to
become or make lawful (IA), aor. pass. кupшеñvαι, act. кupwσat, whence kúpwσiç
'ratification' (Th., Pl.), кupwτns 'who ratifies' (Att. inscr.); back-formation кupoç [n.]
‘authority, confirmation' (IA). ǎкūpoç 'without authority, invalid' (Att.), whence
ȧkupów [v.] 'to render invalid' (Din., Hell.), whence ȧкúpwσiç, -wτos, -woía (late).
⚫ETYM ǎ-kup-oç 'without authority' presupposes an r-stem also found in kúpιoç
(another example is äv-up-os 'without water', based on üdwp). A trace of this r-
stem is probably found in "y-кvap 'pregnant' (Miletus [VIª]), from *кúap ‘foetus' <
*kuh,-r (Kretschmer Glotta 8 (1917): 250). Beside кúpioç, there may have been a
simple thematic derivative *кupoç, which would correspond to Skt. śúra-, Av. sūra-
'hero': cf. the Skt. words for 'sun', súr-ya- and súr-a-, derived from the ntr. súvar- (an
old l-stem; see on λoc). From this *kupoç [m.], кuρшеñvαι and кupów may derive
as well; however, кupш0ñvaι can also be derived directly from the r-stem (cf.
áv§pw§ñvai to ȧvnp). Other derivations: Skt. śávīra- ‘strong, powerful' (*keuh₁-ro-),
Celtic, e.g. Gaul. Kavapoç, W cawr ‘giant'; the appurtenance of Kvápη. ǹ Aðŋvā (H.)
is uncertain. Further details s.v. ► kvέw.
kupitɩw [v.] ‘to butt with the horns' (A., Pl., Arist.). <PG?►
•VAR Fut. Kupišw.
•COMP With prefix: ȧykupíttɛl. µetaµéλetai. Kpñτεç ‘repents (Cretan)' (H.); cf.
Bechtel 1921, 2: 777.
●DER Kúpišıç (Ael.), кupítτɩλoç. кopúrtys, rλýktys ‘one that butts with the head,
striker' (H.). Also кupíw (EM); cf. кupíšɛσƉɛ· τpíßεσ0ε are rubbed (down), worn
out' (H.). An unclear by-form is кupηẞáčw (Ar., Cratin.), aor. med. -áσaσal,
whence кupnẞaσıç, -σía (sch.); metaphorically, it also means Adopεīσα 'to
slander': kupŋßátŋs kai kúpnßos. ó ảoɛlyǹs ¿v tŵ loɩdopɛïv ‘sbd. brutal in
slandering' (H.).
•ETYM The old connection with ▶кopúлτw, ►кέpaç does not explain the formation.
Frisk follows Curtius and Prellwitz, who connected кúpw 'to hit, meet with,
obtain', but this seems improbable (thus also DELG). Cf. Fur.: 363, who gives no
solution; the suffix -ŋß- in кupηßácw is hardly inherited.
kupkaváw [V.] ‘to stir, mix, contrive' (Hp., Ar., Epin., EM). <PG?>
•COMP Also with ouv-.
⚫DER Backformation кuρкávη = τapaxń (EM, Hdn. Gr.); also кυρкaíŋ (Suid. s.v.
"Oμmpos) for кupẞaín, epithet of µáča (Hom. Epigr. 15, 6).
⚫ETYM Expressive enlargement of кUкáw (cf. Schwyzer: 700) with infixed p; cf. τúpß³η
or qúpw. The inserted p may be a Pre-Greek element; cf. Fur. 305.
•
kúpvoι [m.] oi vóðo 'bastards' (H.), acc. to Phot. Macedonian; also as a PN (cf.
Solmsen 1909: 104). <PG?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Fur.: 363 compares кopivaños ‘id.' (Marsyas Phil., 24 J.), which is
also called Macedonian. Perhaps the two forms can be explained from Pre-Greek
*kur'n-?
кupoç 'authority'. →kúpιoç.

=== page 428 ===

808
Kupoáviog
KÚTLVOG
809
кupσávɩoç 'young man'.
ETYM Laconian for σkupáλoç.
кUρτóç [adj.] 'vaulted, rounded, bulging, hunchbacked' (Il., Hell.). <?>
●DER kupτóτηs ‘vaulting, rounding, lumpiness' (Arist., Str., Plu.). Denominative
verbs: kuptóqμal, -ów 'to form a vault, belly out' (\ 244, X.), kúptwµa (Hp.), -wois
(medic., Vett. Val.) 'vaulting, bellying out', кupτwtóç ‘hunchbacked' (Vett. Val.);
кuρτaívw 'to form a vault, rounding' (PMag., Suid.).
ETYM The word remains without direct agreement. The comparison with Lat.
curvus 'vaulted, bellied, crooked' presupposes that кuρτóç continues a reduced grade
*kr-to- with u-coloring. As a u-colored reduced grade is difficult, it is doubtful
whether this comparison (and others) is valid at all. Schrijver 1997: 297 assumes an
IE root *kur-, but such a root structure is foreign to IE. The comparison with
➤ kopávη (Frisk, DELG) is also unfounded, as this does not continue *kor-ōu-n-.
кÚρτоç [m.] 'weel, lobster pot' (Sapph., Pl., Arist., pap.), also 'bird-cage' (AP).
<PG(V)►
•COMP KUρTO-ẞóλos 'fisherman' (Smyrna).
•DER kúpτη [f.] ‘bird-cage' (Archil.), ‘bow-net' (Hdt., D. S.), ‘strainer' (Nic.).
Diminutives кuptis 'strainer' (Nic., Dsc., Opp.), -ídiov 'strainer' (Dsc.); also кupτíov
name of an unknown part of a chariot (Poll. 1, 143). Further кupτía 'wicker shield'
(D. S.), кupτεúç 'fisherman' (Herod., Opp.), кupτευτηs ‘id.' (AP) and кupτεía 'fishing
with the bow-net' (Ael.), from *кUρτεúw or analogically after áλ-Evτnç, -εía. Here
further kupoɛpideç. tà tŵv µeliooŵv ȧyyɛĩa, kvyeλides 'honeycomb, beehives' (H.),
pointing to *kupσépa, but this was rather not formed after кpησépα 'fine sieve' (as
per Grošelj Živa Ant. 3 (1953): 202).
•ETYM There is no convincing etymology. ►кápτaλλos, which was connected by
Frisk and DELG, is clearly Pre-Greek. Müller-Graupa Glotta 31 (1951): 132
implausibly suggested that кúpτos properly means 'wicker-work', and is a
substantivized form of kuptóç ‘curveď. IE *kṛt-o- (Schwyzer: 351) was traditionally
assumed, based on comparison with Skt. káța- [m.] ‘wicker-work, mat' (phonetically
impossible) and a European term for ‘wicker-work, hurdle': OHG hurt, plur. hurdi
and Lat. crātis; however, this comparison formally points to a disyllabic root *krH-
ti-. The Greek word is excluded from such a reconstruction, and there is no further
evidence for a root *krH- in this meaning in Indo-European (*kert- ‘to plaiť, in the
Skt. nasal present kṛṇátti 'to spin', is formally deviant from the Latin word). In
Baltic, we find OPr. corto 'hedge', which is unclear. If кupo-ɛp- belongs here, the
word could be Pre-Greek; see Fur.: 258, who also tentatively compares Hitt. kurtal(i)-
'container of wood or wicker-work'.
kúpw [v.] ‘to hit (upon), meet with, attain, obtain' (II.), cf. Trümpy 1950: 118. <?▷
•VAR Aor. kúpσa (II.), fut. кúpσw (Democr., S.); later pres. Kupéw (A., S.), кupñσai
(Hes.), кupnow (Hdt., A.), кεкúрηкα (D. S.). On the inflection see Chantraine BSL 28
(1927-1928): 26f. and 38.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ¿v-, έëɩ-, époσ-, σvv-.
{
!
!
•DER Few derivatives: kúpua 'catch, booty' (Hom.); συу-, лроσ-, έy-kúpnois, ovy-
kúpηua 'meeting, concurrence, etc.' (Hell.), ouy-кupía 'coincidence' (Hp., Ev. Luc.).
•ETYM No etymology. Not related to ▶kaɩpós or ►кvpittw.
KÚσoç 1 [m.] 'pudenda muliebra' (Eup., Ar.). <PG(V)►
•VAR KUσÓç. ǹ луń. ½ yʊvaɩкɛïov aidoiov 'buttocks; pudenda muliebra' (H.), also in
the sense of кúσtɩç (Herod., Call.), with long u acc. to Pfeiffer 1949-1953 ad Call.
191, 98.
•COMP кUσеo-кopávη = vúμon, ‘clitoris' (Com. Adesp.); кvσoλαµлíç. ǹ
repidaµñoµévy tais vuši kavēapís ‘beetle lighting up at night' (H.); cf. Strömberg
1944: 13f.; кvσo-ẞakkapıç· ó tòv kuσóv µupíšшv ‘who is rubbing the к. with ointment'
(Com. Ades p. 1062); KUσO-λáкwν = лаισεраστηу 'pederast' (Com. Adesp. 1066);
лaloɛpaσtýs
кvσo-víлtηç. лópvoç 'catamite' (H.); кvσo-xývη (H.); kvoo-daкvặ. \wpiα 'has the
itch, scab or mange' (from dáкvw, with -táw after other verbs of disease); also
кúσσapoç ‘anus' (Hp., Gal., Erot.); on the formation Chantraine 1933: 226; cf. also
▶ KÚttapog.
●Der kvolḍ• naoxηtiã ‘feels lust'; kvʊavíšɛɩ (H.).
•ETYM The previous explanation, as a derivation *kud¹-do- from ►кɛúеw 'to hide', is
doubtful, as it does not explain ►кvσóç. The alternation of kúσło- with kuσó-
suggests a Pre-Greek word. Perhaps кúτταроç is a further variant. Cf. the variation
in μaσеóç, μαчós, μаστóç 'breast'.
kúσłoç 2 [n.] of unclear mg. (PHolm. 22, 42; 23, 2), see Lagercrantz 1913: ad loc.
<PG?(V)►
VAR Also XÚσTOÇ.
⚫ETYM Unknown. If кúσło
variation -σ0- / -σT-
=
XÚστoç, the word is probably Pre-Greek, with
kúσtiç, -ɛwç [f.] 'bladder, pouch, small bag' (II.). <IE? *kues- 'hiss, sigh'; PG?>
•VAR Gen. also -чoç, -idoç; also кúστɩуč (Hp. apud Gal. 19, 116), perhaps after Quoty
(Chantraine 1933: 400, Schwyzer: 498).
●Der kúσtŋ. äptos σñoyyítηc ‘sponge-like bread' (H.) and kúσtov. tò áλikákkaßov
(H.), a plant name, after the shape of the fruit.
•ETYM Wackernagel 1916: 227 analyzed it as a suffix -τt-, added to the zero grade of a
root 'to blow, hiss', found in Skt. śvas-iti, ptc. śuṣ-ántam [acc.] < PIE *kues-. The
further comparison of this Skt. root with Lat. queror is far from evident (see De Vaan
2008 s.v.). The connection is possible, but not evident; as an alternative, the suffix
-ty could point to a Pre-Greek word. Not to be connected are кúσðOÇ, KUσÓç, etc.
kútɩvoç [m.] a flower, properly the calyx of the pomegranate (Thphr., Dsc., Gal.) also
'Cytinus hypocisthis' (Dsc. 1, 97), because of the similarity with the flower of the
granate. PG(V)►
●DER kutivwdns (Thphr.).
•ETYM Because of the mg. 'calyx', the word has been connected with кúτoç ‘hollow,
vesseľ (like äveɩvos with ävðos). However, Fur.: 182 compares кútapov. (wµńpvois
‘spoon', кúdapos, ov ‘small ship', ►kúttapos ‘cell of a honeycomb', as well as 'calyx

=== page 429 ===

810
KÚTLOOG
of the Egyptian bean' (Thphr.), 'calyx of an acorn' (Thphr.), кuttoi ‘receptacles',
kúʊtɛpoɩ = ảyyɛĩa tŵv µelioowv ‘honey-comb' (H.). This points to a Pre-Greek
word (variation ï/ 8/ ɩɩ, etc.).
kútɩoos [m., f.] ‘cytisus, Medicago arborea' (IA). <PG➤
•DIAL Myc. ku-te-so /kutesos/.
⚫ETYM A foreign word, like ►кépaσos. The variation e/i shows that it is Pre-Greek.
кvτμíç, -ídos [f.] a soothing salve prepared from the fat of goats (Luc. Alex. 22, 53).
<PG?
⚫ETYM Diminutive formation. Origin unknown; probably Pre-Greek.
кÚτoç [n.] ‘rounding, vault of a shield, of a cuirass or a vessel, etc.', '‘vessel, trunk, body'
(trag., com., Pl. Ti. and Lg., Arist., Plb.). <IE? *(s)kHu-t- 'cover, skin, etc.'>
●DER ►έykutí ‘to the skin'. Uncertain is кutíç ‘cupboard, box' (sch. Ar. Pax 665),
which may stand for koɩtíç.
•ETYM Best connected with the group of σкɔ̃τoç ‘leather, skin', Lat. cutis ‘skin', the
Gm.
group
of OHG hut 'hide', as well as OPr. keuto ‘skin', Lith. kiáutas 'shell, rind'
*keHu-to-, ToA kac probably 'skin' < *kwāc < *(s)kuHt-i-/-es-. The variation of long
and short u in oкÜτоÇ next to кÚτоç is problematic, but may be explained by
assuming a root *(s)kHu- and pretonic shortening of the resulting long vowel in
Latin (see Schrijver 1991: 239f.). In Greek, the sequence would undergo metathesis
only in accented position, thus *sk(e)Hu-t- > σkõτoç, while *kHu-t-és- [obl.] and
*-kHu-tí- would yield кúτоç and έукUτí.
The word is sometimes split in two: 1. ‘skin', 2. ‘sth. hollow', with connection of the
second group to the group of кvéw (see Frisk), but this has to meet the difficulty
that it would have to show long u < IE *kuh,-, which it does not. There seems no
reason to connect кvéw.
kúttapos [m.] ‘cell of a honeycomb, pit in the receptacle of the searose (Nelumbium
speciosum), the calyx in which the acorn is located, the male flower of the pine' (Ar.,
Arist., Thphr.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Also Kúσσapos ‘anus'.
●DER Diminutive kuttápiov ‘bee-cell' (Arist.).
•ETYM Uncertain, but probably Pre-Greek. кúσσapos may be the Ionic form of
kútτapoç, but in any case the most likely option is that both are variants of
► KÚTIVOS, KUσÓç, and ► кúσƉoç.
кúqελa [n.pl.] 'hollows of the ears' (Lyc.), 'clouds of mist' (Lyc., Call.). <PG▷
•ETYM An Alexandrian word. Probably the same Pre-Greek word as кúлελλov
(variation л/ q). The meaning 'clouds' is explained by reference to Lat. cava nubes,
umbra (Persson 1912(1): 195).
KUPóç →KÚNTW.
кúxpaμoç [m.] name of an unknown migratory bird, which accompanies the quail
(Arist.); see Thompson 1895 s.v. <PG(V)►
●VAR Also kέ-, kí- (v.ll.); kɩykpáµaç. öpvɛov ‘bird (H.).
B
i
Kwas
•ETYM Unexplained. Clearly a Pre-Greek word, because of the variants.
811
кvyέλŋ [f.] ‘chest, box, beehive' (Hdt., Ar., Plu.), ‘earwax' (com.), 'hollow of the ear'
(Poll., H.). PG(V) ►
•VAR Also -áλŋ (pap.), cf. Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 22.
●DER KUчÉλɩov ‘beehive', -ɛλíç ‘bird-nest' (Arist.), ‘earwax' (Ruf., Aret.), with
kvчeλítηs púnos (EM), see Redard 1949: 112; back-formation кúчελoç [m.] name of a
bird like the swallow (Arist., H.), cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.
⚫ETYM Not related to кúлη, etc. (s.v. ►кÚлελλov), nor derived from кúлτш 'to bend
(forward), stoop'. Fur.: 327 compares kvyéλov. kúßeptov µε\σσŵv ‘... of bees' (H.),
etc. Clearly a Pre-Greek word, given the variants; cf. also кußελη 'hollow'.
Kúwv [m., f.] 'dog, bitch' (II.). <IE *kuon- 'dog'>
•VAR Gen. Kuvós, acc. кúva.
●DIAL Myc. ku-na-ke-ta /kun-(¹)āgetās/.
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. Kuv-nyétns, Dor. -āyέtaç, -āyós “leader of dogs”,
'hunter' (1 120); see Chantraine 1956a: 83ff.; άлó-кuvov plant name 'Marsdenia erecta'
(Dsc., Gal.); see Strömberg 1940: 65 and 143; on кuváµviα s.v.
•DER Diminutives кUv-íσкoç (Hdt.), -íσкη (Ar.), -ídiov, -ápiov (Att.); кuvá [f.]
'female dog', also as a PN (Hdt.); кuvén 'dog's skin' (Anaxandr.), 'cap, helmet',
originally made of dog's skin, later from other materials (cf. aiyɛín, xaλkén, etc.;
Schwyzer: 37, Trümpy 1950: 40ff.); kuvás [f.] ‘belonging to a dog, dog hair, etc.'
(Theoc.); кúvɛƖoç, -ɛos 'belonging to a dog' (Ar.), 'shameless, impudent' (Il.), kuvɩkóç
‘dog-like, cynical (X., Men.), Kuvádŋs ‘dog-like' (Arist.); comp. and superl.
кÚVτερOÇ, -ov, -τατоç 'more shameless, impertinent'; кuvηdóv [adv.] 'like a dog' (S.,
Ar.); kuvi w "to play the dog", i.e. 'to live as a cynic', KUVσμós (Apollod. Stoic.).
⚫ETYM The name of the 'dog' is preserved in most IE languages: e.g. nom. kúwv, Skt.
śvā, Lith. šuō, gen. Kuvóç, Skt. śúnas, Lith. šuñs, etc. (the Gr. accentuation is oldest),
from IE *kuō(n), gen. *kun-ós, etc. For Lat. canis, Schrijver 1991: 461 assumes that a
development *wo > *wa in open syllable yielded an acc.sg. Plt. *kwanem. The word is
also found in Anatolian: Hitt. Lukuyan- [c.] 'dog-man', gen.sg. kūnaš, HLuw.
swan(i)- [c.] ‘dog'. The paradigm is strange because of the lack of an old e-grade in
the ablaut pattern.
кwa • ¿véxupa ‘pledges' (H.).
•VAR Also Kúïov. ¿véxupov (H.).
⚫ETYM See on ► koĭov.
кwαç [n.] ‘soft, hairy skin; fleece' (Il.). ◄PG?►
•VAR кws (Nicoch. 12); plur. кwɛa, -ɛoi.
●DIAL Myc. ko-wo /kōwos/.
●DER Diminutives кød-tov (Att.), -áptov (com.); кwdãç, -ãtos [m.] ‘dealer in fleece'
(pap.).
⚫ETYM Without etymology. If the group of ►кúτoç < IE *(s)kHu-t- is connected, it is
unnecessary to assume a lengthened grade, since *koHu-es- or *kehu-es- would do
for the oblique forms. However, this does not explain the nom. in -aç. The inflection

=== page 430 ===

812
KoBas
is unusual: the -- would fit the Myc. nom. ko-wo, but -aç can hardly be explained by
analogy. Perhaps these inflectional irregularities can be understood if we assume that
the inflection of a Pre-Greek word was adapted to Greek.
кŵßaž [m.] · ¿ µéyaç tétti§ ‘the large cicala? (H.). ◄PG➤
ETYM Acc. to Gil Emerita 25 (1957): 321f., it belongs to кavač, etc. with ẞ for F. In
any case, it is a Pre-Greek word.
Kwßiós (-íos) [m.] name of a fish like the goby or gudgeon (IA). <LW Akk.?, PG?►
●DER Diminutive -ídtov (com., Arist.); also as a plant name ‘τiðúµαλλoç, Euphorbia'
(Dsc., Plin.); кwẞītɩ ‘kind of ȧqúŋ' (Arist.), see Redard 1949: 83; kwßiwdŋc (Plu.).
⚫ETYM Probably a loan from a Mediterranean language, perhaps from Pre-Greek.
Lat. gōbius (c-), gōbiō (c-) is borrowed from Greek. Fur.: 3282 compares Akk. kuppu,
gubbu name of a fish.
kwdɛɩa [f.] ‘poppyhead, capsule of the grape hyacinth, etc.' (E 499, Nic.), also other
plants and comparable objects. <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Variants кwdɛa, -via, -úã, -ía (Delos, Att. inscr., Arist., Thphr.).
⚫DER KWSvov 'head of purse tassels' (Thphr.), like kápvov to kapún.
•ETYM No cognates. Kalén 1918: 24 has shown that кódva is the oldest form, but this
does not necessarily imply that the variants are secondary analogical creations. Fur.:
195, 198 showed that the variants point to Pre-Greek origin; he compares words for
‘cup', e.g. ►кwdwv 'bell', кOτúλη ‘cup', кóvdu, кówv, but also Etr. qutum. Cf.
Beekes 1998: 25f. and Pre-Greek: Suffixes sub -at-/-ɛ(1)-.
kwdwv, -wvos [m., f.] 'bell, (sound of a) trumpet' (IA). <PG(V)►
●COMP kwdwvo-qopέw 'to carry the bell round (of inspection of the guards), etc.'
(Ar.).
•DER Diminutive kwdwviov (J.); kwdwvíľw [v.] ‘to test a coin by its sound (Ar.). Cf.
Kádaλos PN (Hippon.), Nehring Sprache 1 (1949): 166.
•ETYM Previously taken as a formation like ǎußwv, кwеwv from кwdɛtα, -via,
analogous to aïowv: aïovia (Kalén 1918: 26). As Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 232
remarks, there is no corresponding verb, which makes the construction doubtful.
The word has been shown to be Pre-Greek by Fur.: 198f.; see on ►кwdɛia.
KwOwv, -wvoç [n.] name of Laconian drinking utensils (Archil., Ar., X., inscr.),
'drinking-bout, feast' (LXX, Thasos), = кwßióç (Sicilian; Nic., Apollod. apud Ath. 7,
309c); also name of the inner harbor of Carthage (Str., App.). <PG?➤
•COMP кWеwνO-лλúταɩ [pl.] ‘washers of the fish кwwv (?)' (Sophr.).
⚫DER Diminutive кw0wvtov (inscr. Vª, etc.); кw0wvía 'deep potation' (Aret.), Scheller
1951: 41; Kwеwvíčoμα 'to drink hard, carouse' (Arist., Hell.), кw0wv-loµós, -lotĤs,
-στptov (Arist.). Also кшеα· лоτpiα 'drinking-cups' (H.).
ETYM Fur.: 199 compares кwdwv. He further compares Mingrel. koto 'cup' and
Georg. kotoxi ‘'id.'. The word is probably Pre-Greek.
.
кúкαλov [adj.] ·лαλαòv кai εidoç ȧλεкτρvóvoç 'old; kind of cock' (H.). <?>
⚫DER PNs like Koкaλoç, Kwкoç, Kwкãç, etc. (L. Robert 1963: 312ff.).
1
⚫ETYM Unknown.
813
KWAŃw
KWкúw [V.] 'to lament, wail' (Il., late prose). <PG?>
•VAR Aor. KWKÑσAI.
•COMP With prefix, e.g. àva-, εnɩ-.
●DER_kwkŨtós [m.] (Il.), kókūµa (trag.) ‘lamenting, wailing'; Kóкutos name of a
river in the underworld (K 514, etc.).
ETYM It has been assumed that the verb has intensive reduplication, by comparison
with Skt. káuti, kokuyate 'to wail' (intens.), but these are only attested in
grammarians; as argued by Tichy 1983: 266, the word is non-Indo-European.
kwλakpέtàɩ [m.pl.] name of financial officers in early Athens, chairmen of the main
treasury (inscr., Ar., Arist.). <GR>
•DER KwλaкpεTέw [v.] 'to be a к.' (inscr.).
•ETYM From earlier *кwλ-aуpéτα with assimilation, thus originally "collector of the
Kwλa", i.e. the sacrificial pieces, and an old sacral expression; for the second
member, see on ȧyɛipw. See further ► кwλov.
кwλov [n.] 'member (of animal or human being), body part, especially the leg' (IA),
also metaphorical, e.g. of part of a period (Rhet.), often plur., e.g. in the mg. 'corpse'
(LXX, NT). <PG?>
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. loó-kwλos 'with equal members' (Arist.), άкpo-
Kwλia 'extremities', úлo-кóλɩα 'thigh of an animaľ.
●DER Diminutives кwλápiov (Ael.), kwλúqtov (Phryn., Plaut.), cf. Lat. cōlyphium;
kwλća, -ñ (Att.), kwλýv, -ñvoc [f.] (IA), kwλɛóc [f.] (Epich., Hp.) 'bones of the hip
together with its flesh, ham' (Solmsen 1909: 124); кóληу, -ηлоç [f.] 'hollow of the
knee' (Y 726, Nic.); with a different suffix кwλη\ ‘id.' (sch.), which shows that the
second member probably does not contain the root of ǎлτш, as assumed by Bechtel
1914 s.v.; kwλwtηs [m.] ‘lizard (Hp., Arist., Babr.), cf. Lat. lacerta ‘lizard' to lacertus
‘upper arm' (see WH s.v.). Denominative кwλíšoμai ‘to be arranged in кŵλa' (late).
⚫ETYM No obvious cognates. The Balto-Slavic group of OCS kolěno 'knee', Ru. koléno
‘knee, stem, lineage', Ru. člen ‘member, body-part', Lith. kelỹs ‘knee' (root *k"el(H)-
'to turn' or *kelH- ‘to raise') can hardly be related because of the Greek vocalism.
Specht KZ 55 (1928): 19 presumed that an o-grade aorist was found in кóλσaσ0α.
iкετεñσαι 'to supplicate' (H.), but is this form cognate at all? The word oкéλoç is
unrelated. It should be noted that Pre-Greek has a suffix -n (as in vápеně, кúµně).
Kwλúw [V.] 'to hinder, prevent' (Sapph., Pi., IA). <?>
•VAR Aor. Kwλñσai.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. dɩa-, katα-, ảлo-.
•DER кwλчμа obstacle' (IA), кwλчμάτoν 'catch, clutch in a machine' (Hero);
kwλúµŋ (Th.), kwλúσɩ ‘'hindering' (Pl., Arist.); kw\vtýp (Archyt.), -tńs (IA) ‘who
hinders', кwλuτηpios (D. H.), kwλvtɩkóç (X., Arist., Hell.) ‘hindering'.
⚫ETYM One hypothesis (which goes back to Meillet) starts from from *кwλoç in the
sense of 'wooden pin': the word would originally mean "to fasten with a pin", to
hinder the freedom of movement of animals; the ending would have been reshaped

=== page 431 ===

814
after Aów (hardly credible). Others (Meillet MSL 16 (1910-1911): 244, Fraenkel 1937:
357) connected it with кoλoúw 'to mutilate'. There is no etymology.
kõµa [n.] ‘deep, sound sleep' (Il.), ‘lethargy, coma' (medic.). <◄?►
•DER kwµatwdns ‘lethargic'; kwµaívw, kwµatíšoµai [v.] ‘to lie in a coma’, kwµóoµai
'to fall into a coma' (medic.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Brugmann's proposal (Brugmann-Thumb 1913: 317) to connect
it with kɛчμai as *kōi-mn is unacceptable because of the lengthened grade. Cf.
Porzig 1942: 281.
kwµŋ [f.] ‘village', as opposed to a strengthened лóλç, also 'district, part of a city'
(Hes.). <?>
•COMP E.g. кwμó-лоλiç 'town with the position of a кóμŋ, market town' (Str., NT),
cf. Schulze 1933a: 523².
•DER Diminutives кáµov (Str.), kwµápiov (H.), -údpiov (Porph.); further kwµýtŋs
(IA), kwµétas (Mycenae IIª) ‘inhabitant of a village or districť, kwµŋtikóç 'belonging
to a кwµŋ (or a кwµń™ηs)' (pap.); kwµaĩoç ‘regarding a к.' (St. Byz.); kwµndóv ‘per
village' (Str., D. S., D. H.).
⚫ETYM The reconstruction of a lengthened grade form *kōi-m-h₂, connected with the
Germanic group of Go. haims 'village' and the Baltic group of Lith. káima(s)
'(farmers') village', kiēmas 'farmstead' has now been abandoned, because such
lengthened grade formations cannot be accounted for in PIE terms. Thus, the word.
remains unexplained.
kuμoç [m.] 'revel, carousal, merry-making of youths, Dionysiac festive procession and
festive songs, festival' (post-Hom.). <IE? *komso- 'praise', PG?>
●COMP kwµ-wdós ‘singer of a кãµos' (Att.), ‘comic player' (Hell.) with -έw, -ía, etc.,
σúу-кwμoç 'comrade of a к.' (Att.; rather back-formation from σvy-кwµá¶w).
●DER KWµIKÓç = kwµwdikós “belonging to a comedy' (Aeschin., Arist., Hell.); kwµášw
‘participate in a кõµoç, drink' (post-Hom.) with кwµaσía ‘festive procession',
кwµaσtýs ‘drinker, member of a festive procession' (Att., pap.), кwµαστýpιov 'place
where кwμασταí assemble' (pap.), кwμαστiкóç 'belonging to a кwμαστηç or a кwµoç'
(D. H., Ph.).
ETYM As the precise development of the meaning of кwµoç is uncertain,
etymological suggestions remain highly hypothetical. Recently, connection with Skt.
śámsa- ‘praise, judgement' has been assumed; see e.g. Schlerath RPh. 74 (2000): 273
(discussion in Hackstein 2002: 190). I suggest that this is a Pre-Greek word.
kwµvç, -ñƉoç [f.] 'bundle, truss of hay' (Cratin., Theoc.), also = dáqvn, ñv iotwoi
<лpò> τŵv évλŵv ‘laurel, which is put in front of the gate' (H.), 'place where the
reed is closely grown with the roots' (Thphr.). <PG(S) ►
⚫ETYM The formation with the suffix -00- clearly points to Pre-Greek origin.
кóvɛtov [n.] 'hemlock, Conium maculatum, hemlock drink, poisonous drink' (IA).
<PG(V)►
●DER кwvɛiášoµai 'to be dosed with hemlock' (Men., Str.).
!
Kón
815
•ETYM The word can hardly be separated from ►кwvoç. The plant may owe its name
to its narrow leaves with pointed teeth. On the European names, see Schrader-
Nehring 1917(2): 294f.; on the many Greek epithets of the plant, see Strömberg 1940:
64. Fur.: 121 connects not only кŵvoç, but also кový and ► áкóvĩτov, so it is a Pre-
Greek word.
кwvoç [m.] 'fruit of the pine cone, cone' also ‘pine' [f.], 'top' (Democr., Arist., Thphr.,
Theoc.). PG(V)►
•VAR кÚVηTEÇ Oúpσot 'thyrsoi' (H.), кóvηs 'the stave of Bacchus and the Bacchantes,
ending in a pine cone'. Further cf. yovýc. vápkiσσoç τò quτóv 'narcissus' (H.); kõva
= лíσσα 'pitch'; кóvα- þéµßiε ‘whipping-top' (H.).
•COMP E.g. Kwvo-qópos [f.] 'conifer' (Thphr.), кwvo-кóλovpoç ‘truncated cone',
beside koλoupó-kwvoç ‘id.' (Hero), cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 284, Strömberg 1944: 8.
•DER Diminutive кwvíov, -tov (Posidon., AP), kwviç. údpíokη ‘little water vessel'
(H.); kwvītis ríoσa ‘pine resin' (Rhian.), kwvíaç (olvos) 'resinated wine' (Hp. apud
Gal.; Chantraine 1933: 94 f.); Kwváw 'resinate, pitch', also 'spin' (Ar., H.), with
кúvησiç 'resinating, pitching' (Arist.), -ŋTкóç 'suitable for pitching' (pap.); лεpɩ-
Kwvéw 'smear with pitch' (Ar.).
⚫ETYM Often identified with Skt. śāṇa- [m.] 'whetstone, touchstone' (assuming
MInd. n for n), derived from a verb 'to whet, sharpen' in Skt. śíśāti < *ki-keh¸-. To
this root also belongs Lat. cōs, gen. cōtis 'whetstone' and catus ‘sharp, clever', Olr.
cath 'wise, able', etc. Schwyzer: 458, however, considered foreign origin; this is
confirmed by the variants adduced in Fur.: 121 (most notably ► áкóvĭtov).
kwvwy, -wños [m.] ‘gnat, mosquito' (A., Hdt. 2, 95. Arist.). <PG(S)►
•COMP кWVшло-paç öpví ó кwvwлaç Oŋpɛúwv 'bird hunting gnats or
mosquitoes' (H.).
⚫DER Diminutive кшνóлov (Gal.), usually 'couch with mosquito curtains' (LXX);
also -ɛwv, -wvoc [m.] 'id.' (AP 9, 764 tit.).
⚫ETYM As Frisk already remarked, the connection with кovoç and wч (ou) is far
from evident semantically, and formally it is also improbable. Spiegelberg KZ 41
(1907): 131 derives it from Eg. hamś ‘gnat', with adaptation to кwvoç. The form
кшvблoν would have been remodelled by folk etymology from earlier *кαváлov,
the Egyptian town Canōpus; see WH s.v. cōnōpium. Since there is no good
etymology, and since the suffix-wit- is frequent in Pre-Greek words, substrate origin
is the only plausible option.
кŵoç [m.] ‘cavern, prison' (Str., St. Byz.). <?>
•VAR Usually plur. Kwot.
•ETYM A variant with long vowel of кóoɩ· τà xáσµata tñs yñs ‘clefts of the earth'
(H.); see on кoiλoç.
кóлŋ [f.] ‘grip (of a sword, an oar), oar, stalk' (II.). ◄IE *k(e)h₂p- ‘take, hold">
•COMP Some compounds, е.g. кшл-pηs 'provided with oars' (trag., Th.).
⚫DER Diminutive кшлíоν (Aг.); кшлηяç 'with a good grip' (Il.), see Trümpy 1950: 62;
кwnɛïç [m.pl.] ‘wood fit for making oars, spars' (IA), кwлεáv, -wvoç [m.] ‘id.'

=== page 432 ===

816
кWлŃ, -OÛÇ
(Thphr.); кwлητýp, -ñpos [m.] ‘leather thong for the oar' (cf. Bergson Eranos 55
(1957): 120ff.); кwлɛúw [v.] ‘to row³ (AP), кwлáw (-έw) in perf. med. kɛкwäŋtai ‘is
provided with oars' (Att. inscr., H.). Оn ►кwлá, see s.v.
•ETYM Old verbal noun from ►кáлτw, so IE *koh₂p-h₂- (without a lengthened grade,
cf. Hamp MSS 43 (1984): 51f.). For the meaning, cf. Lat. capulus 'grip'.
кwñó, -oñç [f.] ‘wreathed staff used in the Daphnephoria' (Boeot.; Procl.). <GR➤
•DER Also as a PN.
⚫ETYM Personification in -w (Schwyzеr: 478) of кóлη. Not related to кñлoç ‘garden”,
as per Schönberger Glotta 29 (1942): 87ff. and Pisani RILomb. 77 (1943-44): 558ff.
кÓρUкoç [m.] 'leather sack' (Od.). ◄PG►
●DER кwpuкíç (com., Thphr.), кwpúkiov, -ídiov (Poll., Suid., H.) and kwpukwdŋs
'sack-like' (Thphr.). Cf. the TN Kúpuкoç, a promontory in Cilicia.
⚫ETYM The resemblance with Lat. corium, etc. (Pok. 939) is deceptive. Fur.: 328"
compares Hitt. kurk- ‘to retain'. The word is no doubt Pre-Greek, with the suffix
-UK-.
Kúpuкoç [m.] a promontory in Cilicia (h. Ap.). <PG>
⚫DER Also años; also Kwpúкioν ävτрov a cave on the Parnassos, with Kwpúkiai
výµqaɩ, etc. (Hdt., trag.).
•ETYM The structure of the word looks like Pre-Greek. It could represent *kāruk-, for
which see кñpv, but I see no way to connect 'messenger'; neither does it belong to
the leather sack'.
kwtíλos [adj.] ‘chattering, babbling' (Thgn., Arist.). <?►
•VAR Also -áç [f.] Boeot. name of the swallow (Stratt.).
●DER Kwτíλλw [v.] ‘to chatter' (Hes., D. H.); кwτiλíšw ‘id.' (Call.); kwτɩλía ‘chattering'
(gloss.).
•ETYM Formation like локíλoç, etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 248), but without
etymology.
кwo̟ós [adj.] ‘blunt, dumb, mute' (Il.), post-Hom. also ‘deaf (h. Merc.). <IE?, PG?►
●COMP Е.g. Úлó-kwqoç ‘hard of hearing' (IA).
=
⚫DER кwoóτns 'deafness' (IA), кwoɛús ‘deaf man' (Call.), кwoíaç [m.] kind of snake
τuqλías (Ael., H.); кwoɛúw [v.] 'to be silent' (LXX), кwo̟áoµαι (-áw) 'to become
(make) blunt, etc.' (Clearch., Opp.), кшóñσαι· кoλoñσαι 'to cut short', кwoŋols.
kóλovσɩ ‘cutting shorť (H.); кwo̟óðµa 'to become silent or deaf, -ów ‘to silence”,
whence кwówμα, -wois (Hp.).
ETYM To be connected with ►knoýv, ▶kekayηóτa; the vocalism could be
reconstructed as ablauting *k/g"(e/o)h2b^-, but there is no IE comparandum. If knoýv
is Pre-Greek, the same probably holds for this word.
Kwч 'owľ'. →σKWY.
Aa- prefix with intensifying function. <?>
A
•COMP Only in isolated and rare words: λã-кαταлúуwv (Ar. Ach. 664, λa- rhythmical
lengthening?), Aα-кατápατoç (Phot.; λaкк- cod.), λалτuηр. σodρŵç лτúшv,
Aάqwvo (Latte: Nápovoi?). Aíav äqwvo (H.); λato- in λαíσлαiç· þоúлαiç. Aɛvкádio
(H.), also λáσлαιç (Latte, codd. λαoëα); λ- in Алóvypos. Xíav rovòpós (H.); cf. on
►λíav. at- in PNs, e.g. Aαι-кλñç, Aaɩ-σлodías (Bechtel 1917b: 273, Bechtel Herm. 50
(1915):317).
•ETYM Unknown. Does λato- represent Pre-Greek *las³-?
Aãaç [m.] ‘stone' (Il.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Case forms: gen. λãoç, -ɩ, -av (-a Call. 11, 4), plur. λā-ɛç, etc.; also as an o-stem
λãoç, -ov, etc. (Hes. Fr. 115[?], S., Cyrene, Gortyn), details in Schwyzer: 578. Late also
fem.
•DIAL Myc. ra-e-ja /lähejä/ and Cypr. la-o-se show that the word did not have a *-w-.
●COMP Compounds like λã-róμos (beside uncontracted or restored Aao-) 'stone
cutter', with λãτoμ-íαι 'quarry' (Arg., Syracus., Hell., see Ruijgh 1957: 125f.), = Lat.
lātomiae beside lautumiae < *λao- (see WH s.v.); λa(o)-ó(o)s with λažɛúw, etc.
(Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 165f.), λατúлoç; as a second member in kpataí-λɛws (<
*-λŋos or *-λãos, see below) ‘with hard rock' (A., E.), probably also in úлo-λaïç,
-ídos (H. also -λŋïs) [f.] name of an unknown bird (Arist.); cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.;
see also Aatós 2.
•DER As a TN (Laconia) Aãç and Aā (Th., Paus., St. Byz., et al.), with Aắāv [acc.] (B
585). Further λáïyyɛs [f.pl.] ‘small stones' (Od., A. R.); λáïvoç, -ïvεos (made of)
stone' (Il.); uncertain λataí [f.pl.] (Arist.), Aɛĩa (Gal.), Aɛía [sg.] (Hero) 'stones used.
as weights to keep the threads of the warp straight in the upright loom'; unclear are
λαíεται кαταλεÚετα 'is lapidated' (H.) and lavoτnp. μоxеηpós troublesome' ... "
Oikov Aaúpa 'alley [or privy] of a house', λaúστpavov. tɩvès Àúkov (in the sense of
'hook', see LSJ), tivès qpéatos äpnaуа ‘the hooks of a well (for drawing up buckets)'
(H.).
⚫ETYM The unique stem formation of λāaç is unexplained. An old neuter has been
supposed, with secondary transition to msc. (later fem.) gender after λíðоç, лετρoç.
An IA form seems to be reflected in кpα ταí-λɛwç, but it may be an epicism.
Since the Mycenaean and Cypr. forms show that the word had no -w-, all earlier
hypotheses starting from a pre-form with *-F- can now be forgotten (unless the F
was lost between like vowels at a very early stage). The relation to ▶λɛúw, ▸λaúpa

=== page 433 ===

818
入apá
has therewith become unclear; all we can do is assume a stem *lāh-. See Heubeck IF
66 (1961): 29-34. Fur.: 239 compares λéлaç 'rock'; he considers λaiven. λápvaε λiðívη
(Cyr.) to be proof of Pre-Greek origin.
Non-Greek correspondences to λãaç are all doubtful, e.g. Alb. lerë, -a 'stone, heap of
stones, stony plain, rockslope' from PAlb. leurā (Demiraj 1997), OIr. líe, gen. líac <
PCI. *liuank- (taken up by Matasović 2008 s.v. *līwank-).
λaßá [f.] · σtayŵv ‘drop' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown. Macedonian for λoßá, acc. to von Blumenthal 1930: 18f.
•
λaßáßŋp [?] · λaкavíσкη 'small dish' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown. Lewy KZ 59 (1932): 187f. considers it a loan of Lat. lavābrum
'bathing-tub' by Palestinian Jews (otherwise unknown).
λáßda [n.] the eleventh letter of the Greek alphabet (Att.); later (with secondary nasal)
λáußda (Ar., Arist. as a v.l.). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Indeclinable.
⚫DER λaẞdaкiσμóç [m.] 'special use or pronunciation of the X' (Quint.); cf. s.v. iwτa
on iwτaкiσμóç.
ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. lamedh. Gr. Aaßd- corresponds to Sem. lamb-; see
Schwyzer: 140, 826 and Schulze 1933a: 283f. Doubts in Kretschmer Glotta 6 (1915):
307.
Aáßpos [adj.] 'furious, boisterous, violent, fierce; gluttonous' (Ion. poet., late prose).
<PG?(V)►
•COMP λaẞp-ayópηs 'fierce boaster' (¥ 479), кatá-λaßpos 'very furious' (Eup. 293),
after кaτα-λaẞɛiv?
•DER Fish-names: λáßpā, -ãкos [m.] 'bass, Labrax lupus' (Alc., com.), see
Chantraine 1933: 381, Björck 1950: 262, Strömberg 1943: 34f.; Thompson 1947 s.V.;
thence λaẞpákov (com.); λáßpixos (Boeot. [II]); see Lacroix 1938: 51.
Abstracts: Aaßpoσúvη 'furiousness, fierce conversation' (AP, Opp.), λaßpóτns ‘id.'
(Ath.) with aẞpoσiáwv. Xopτð áкóσμ 'disorderly feeding' (H.).
Xoptaoioi ákóopov
Denominative verbs: 1. λaßpεúoчat [v.] 'to discuss furiously' (Y 474 and 478),
probably after ȧyopɛúw (Risch 1937: 333) or μшμεúw, έлɩ-λwßɛúw (Debrunner Mus.
Helv. 2 (1945): 199); 2. λaßpóоμα [v.] 'to rush violently' (Lyc.); 3. λaßpáčw
λaẞpɛvoμai and λaßpóoμa (Nic., Lyc.), whence λaßрáкτηs = λaßpaуópŋs (Pratin.
Lyr. 5); 4. λaßpúσσɛi. λaßpɛvɛɩ, dɛaívɛ is a coward' (H.); cf. λaqúσow, etc.
(Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 244).
=
⚫ETYM The traditional connection with λaßɛiv, λáčoμat is improbable. Fur.: 208
compares λauvpós 'gluttonous', and further λaqúσow 'to swallow' (op.cit. 177) and
Aaūpos (as an orthographic variant of λáßpoc, op.cit. 242). This is uncertain, because
these alternations do not conform to a known pattern. If λáßpa beside λáßpixos is
typical, the word seems to be Pre-Greek.
=
入áppus →入apÚpiveos.
Aaẞpúviov [n.] 'a large, wide cup' (Men., Diph., H.). <?>
入ayaiw
•VAR Also λaẞpwvios [m.], -ía [f.] (Eust.).
819
ETYM Acc. to Ath. 11, 484C, έклшμаτоç Пεрσɩкой εidоç áлò τñç έv tó̟ ñívεLV
Xaßpótŋtos wvoµãσµévov ‘a kind of Persian cup, thus called after the greediness
during drinking. Folk-etymological explanation?
λáßvšos [f.] an unknown spice plant, used by the Persian king (Dinon Hist. [IVª] apud
Ath. 12, 514a, H. s.v. kíðapıç). ◄LW Ind.>
ETYM The hypothesis by Petersson KZ 46 (1916): 146f. (a Persian word, related to
Skt. líbujā ‘liane, climber') is untenable. Acc. to Charpentier MondOrbis 13 (1919):
32ff., it is rather an Indic LW, related to the Pāli plant-name labuja-. See Brust 2005:
378ff.
Aaẞúpivoç [m.] ‘labyrinth', a great building with many corridors and turns, in Egypt
(Hdt., Str.), Crete (Call., D. S.), Anatolia (inscr. Miletus), etc.; metaph. of
complicated thoughts (Pl.). ◄PG(S,V)►
•DIAL Myc. da-pu₂-ri-to-jo /dap¹urint¹oio/.
•COMP λaẞupivеwdns ‘labyrinth-like, complicated' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM A Pre-Greek word in -tv0oç. The traditional connection with λáßpus (acc. to
Plu. 2,302a Lydian for лελεкυç), and interpretation as "House of the Double Axe" (a
sign of royalty), is speculative. Perhaps the Carian god Aaßpauvdoç also belongs
here. Connection with λaúpa as a substrate word is possible, but that with Aãaç is
difficult, as it has no -w-. Cf. Fur.: 397f.
Aayaíw [v.] 'to release' (Crete). <EUR?►
•VAR Aor. Aayáσai; λaуáσσaɩ àqɛīvai 'let go' (H.).
•COMP Also with άлo-.
•DER ȧлоλáуağıç 'release' (Crete).
Several nouns, not directly depending on the verb: 1. Aλayapós ‘slack, emaciated, thin'
(IA), whence λayapóτηs 'slackness, etc.', Mayapóoμaɩ [v.] 'to get slack' (AP) with
Aayapwois (Eust.), of στixa λayapoí; also λayapíšoμaι mg. unclear (com.). 2.
Aáyavov 'thin cake' (Hell.) with λayávov (late) and λayaví(w (?; Hp. Morb. Sacr.
13).
A nasal suffix is also found in semantically deviant 3. Aάyvos, -vns lascivious,
voluptuous' (on the barytone accent see Schwyzer: 489), with λayvɛúw [v.] ‘to be
lascivious, be lecherous', λayvɛía 'the act of coition, etc.' (IA). 4. *λayos (*láč)
'slack, thin' in λayóvɛç [f.pl.] (also msc.), rarely -óv [sg.] 'the hollows on the side,
flanks' (IA), and also in ►λayws 'hare'.
•ETYM Disyllabic λayáσa (: λayapós) has a model in the synonym xaλá-σai (:
Xaλapóc); λayaíw is an innovation like кɛpaíw, άyaíoμaι (see ►кερávvчµɩ and
► ȧya-). A different ablaut grade is usually recognized in Anyw, ►λwyávov.
A direct correspondence to *λayos, if from *slago- (see on Anyw), yields a
Germanic adjective for 'slack': ON slakr, OS slac, OE slæc, etc., with initial - MLG
lak ‘id.'. In Celtic, we find OIr. lac ‘id.'. The formal identity of λayóv and MoNw.
lake 'flap' on the one hand, and of λáyavov and OS lakan, OHG lahhan 'cloth' on
the other, rests on parallel innovations in the separate languages.

=== page 434 ===

820
入ayyálw
Further, Aayapós is compared with ToA släkkär 'sad'. Beside it exists Lat. laxus
‘slack, weak, etc.' with an s-suffix; perhaps also Skt. ślakṣṇá- ‘slippery, meagre, thin’
(if assimilated from *slakṣ-).
However, as *slh₂g- would have given *slag-, and since Indo-European had no
phonemes *a, ā, the above correspondences have not been explained. Perhaps it is
necessary to assume a secondary zero grade for the Greek forms. Alternatively, we
may be dealing with a European substrate word.
λayyάw [v.] 'to slacken' (Antiph., Phot., AB [= ¿v- Sídwµ]); \ayyášɛ• ókvɛĩ ‘is slow',
oi de λayyɛi (H.); λaууáσαι· лεрiquyɛiv 'to flee' (H.). <PG?(V), EUR?>
•DER Other formations in H.: λayуεúε· Qεúyεɩ, λayyaváμεvos. replotáµievoç,
σταууεvóμε 'avoiding, hesitating', λayyapɛi. ȧлоðiðрáσкε 'runs away'. λayyóv
(for λáyywv?). ò εú¤ùç λavеávwv toñ ảyŵvos kai tov qóßov (EM 554, 15, cf.
Chantraine 1933: 160). With -o-: ►λoyyá(w, λoyyáσaɩ.
⚫ETYM Expressive and popular words, which correspond formally and semantically
to Lat. langueō, -ēre ‘to be faint, slack' (with secondary -u-) and, like the latter, can be
understood as nasalized present formations from layáσai (►λayaíw). The same
problem as with λayaíw holds here: the pervasive a-vocalism. Do the forms with
-o- point to substrate origin? It is quite possible that the variation λay-/λayy- is due
to Pre-Greek pre-nasalization.
We must separate several Baltic words in the meaning ‘to rock, sling, vacillate', like
Lith. langóti, lingúoti; see Fraenkel 1955: 331 (s.v. láigyti). The same holds for Gm.
words like OHG slinc 'left', MoSw. linka, lanka, lunka 'to limp, go slowly, etc.'.
Aάytov [n.] 'kind of cup or vessel' (Delos IIª). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Fur.: 121 compares λýкvƉoç, but this is uncertain. Kronasser
1956: 225 compares Hitt. laḥan(n)i, Akk. lahannu, etc. See ▸λáyūvoç.
.
λayкpúšɛoðaɩ [v.] · λodopɛσa 'to be slandered' (Phot.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM A prenasalized form beside λaкɛpúšɛσðαɩ ‘id.'; see λaкépuča s.v. ►λáoкw.
Therefore, clearly a Pre-Greek word.
入áypiata →入aíyuata.
入áyvos →入ayaíw.
λáyūvos [m., f.] ‘flask with a small neck', also as measure (Arist. Fr. 499, Hell.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also --.
•COMP τpi-λáуuvos 'containing three λ.' (Stesich. 7, pap.), layuvo-opópia [n.pl.]
name of an Alexandrinian festival (Eratosth.).
•DER Diminutive λayúvov, -uvís (Hell.); Aayuvápios 'manufacturer, handler of
flasks' (Corycos), Aayuvíwv [m.] name of a parasite (Ath.).
•ETYM Many names for vessels are loans. This one is probably Pre-Greek, because of
the interchange ů/ü. Puhvel HED 5: 6f. compares Hitt. lahan(n)i, Akk. laḥannu, etc.
From Aάyuvos was borrowed Lat. lagūna, -ōna; also, lagēna, from which was taken
λáyηvos (Gal.). Cf. ►λáytov.
Aayus
821
Aayxávw [v.] 'to obtain by lot' (an office, the right of a lawsuit), 'to obtain one's share'
(Od.). <IE? *leng- ‘obtain (by lot)'>
•VAR Aor. λaxɛîv (Il.), caus. Aɛλaxɛïv (Il.), perf. λéλoyxa (\ 304), lélǎxa (Emp.),
Enxa (A., Att.), fut. λážoμaι (Hdt.), λnoμaι (Pl.), perf. pass. εyμα, aor.
Anxeñvai (Att.).
•COMP Also with prefix, е.g. ȧло-, dia-, ȧvti-, ovv-.
•DER 1. With old o-grade: Móyxn [f.] 'share' (Ion.), with ɛ"-λoyxos = ε-μopos
(Democr.) and Evλoу<X>εīv· εúμɩpɛiv (H.). 2. With zero grade: λážıç portion, share
(of land)' (Hdt., Miletus), Алóλağıç (Eretria); Aάxɛσıç [f.] name of one of the Moirai,
also as an appellative 'share, lot' (Hes., Pi.), perhaps after yévεσɩç, Néµɛσɩç; younger
formations are λáxos [n.] ‘'lot, share' (Thgn., Pi., A.; also Arc.) and λáxn (λaxń?) [f.]
‘id.' (A. Th. 914, H.); cf. on λaxaívw; PN Aáxns, -ŋtos [m.] (Th.); \axµóc = λáxos
'id.' (sch., Eust.). 3. With a secondary full grade (see below): λñšiç (σúv-, diá-, ávtí-)
'allotment, written complaint' (Att.).
•ETYM Old forms are the o-grade perf. Aéλoyxa, λóyxn and the zero grade aor.
λaxɛïv, λážıç. Later, ɛïλŋxa, λýžoµai, λñžiç, etc. arose as innovations by analogy with
ɛ'ïλŋqa, λŋyoµai, λñчis (after λayxávw: λαµßávw, λaxɛïv : \aßɛïv). No known
cognates exist. A noteworthy agreement with Aάxɛσ is Messap. Logetibas [dat.pl.],
to which belongs Aáyɛσɩç. Đɛós. Σɩкɛλoí (H.); if correct, it must be an old loan; cf.
Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 278ff.
Aayov 'the flanks'. •VAR Plur. -óveç. →λayaiw.
Aayus [m.] 'hare', also metaph. of a bird (Thompson 1895 s.v.; cf. Maywïs below), of
several sea-animals (Thompson 1947 s.v., Strömberg 1943: 111), of a constellation.
(Scherer 1953: 189, 192), and of a bandage (medic.). <◄GR►
•VAR Att. also λayws (on the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 314); gen. λayw (-w), acc.
Aayúv, analogical -w (-w), etc.
•DIAL λaywós (epic, Arist.), λayós (Ion., Dor., poet.).
•COMP As a first member in Mayo-Saitāç [m.] ‘hare-devourer' (A.), λayw(0)-ẞólov
[n.] 'stick for flinging at hares' (Theoc., AP), etc.
●DER Diminutives: λayódiov (Ar., pap.), λaywdápiov (Ph.); Máytov (X.), λayídiov
(M. Ant., Poll.), λayıdɛús (Str.). Adjectives: \ay@os ‘ptng. to a hare', tà λayḍa ‘hare-
meat, delicacy' (Hp., com.), λaywɛos ‘id.' (Opp.), λayóvɛa. λayou кpέa 'hare's
meať (H.), cf. taŵv(ɛ)ɩoç from taŵç, -ŵç; λáyɛios (of кpέaç, Hp.), λáyɩvos ‘ptng. to
a hare' (A.). Bird-names: \aywïç [f.] (Hor. Sat. 2, 2, 22; leporini coloris Porph.; cf.
WH s.v.). λaywïvns. öpviç molós (H.), cf. кɛyxpívηc, ελaqivns, etc.; Maywdíaç = wτoç
a kind of owl (Alex. Mynd. apud Ath. 9, 390f); cf. кaxpv-8-íaç, Chantraine 1933: 203.
•ETYM Traditionally analyzed as *\ay(0)-w[vo]-ós ‘with flabby ears', an adjectival
bahuvrihi of *λayo- (see on Mayaíw) and ovç. Cf. Oss. tærqus 'hare', properly
“long-ear”, MoP xargōš ‘id.', properly “donkey-ear”, Berber bu tmezgin “the animal
with the long ears" (litt. in Frisk). Probably a taboo word from the language of
hunters (e.g. Schwyzer: 38, Havers 1946: 51f.). By contraction and analogy arose
Aayus, λayós (Schwyzer: 557¹).

=== page 435 ===

822
入ádas
Szemerényi SMEA 3 (1967): 85ff. shows that the compound formation *λaywƑns
'having flabby ears' (which is more probable than an o-stem) can actually be restored
in Homer, and that it accounts for the Attic forms as well. DELG calls this plausible.
Nádas [?] · žλaqos vɛßpías ‘a deer dappled like a fawn' (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
•DER Also PN (Paus. 3, 21, 1).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 195 connects it with Añov· ßaλióv‘dappled (H.).
Aǎdpέw [v.] 'to run, flee', of the μυкτñpεç, nostrils (Sophr. 135). <?>
•ETYM Uncertain. Fur.: 199 compares λaτpaßóç, λaidpóç, λaеpov, λaißapúšɛiv.
Aãεpτη [m.] name of the father of Odysseus. <GR?>
⚫ETYM Connected with the root of pετo. wpµηη 'was incited' (H.). DELG adds:
"C'est l'homme qui met en mouvement le peuple.” For the meaning, one compares
the Myc. PN e-ti-ra-wo, which is interpreted as 'Eptɩ-λaƑos (Palmer 1963: 78). Acc. to
Ael. NA, it is the name of an insect (a bee or an ant), which we cannot explain; see
Gil Fernández 1959: 193.
λášoµaɩ [v.] ‘to seize, grasp, take hold of (Il.). ◄IE *sleh₁g"- ‘seize, grasp'>
●var Also λášvaɩ (h. Merc. 316), also Megar., Thess. Aaddovon, outo-\addovvəŋ,
only present stem.
•COMP Also with άvtɩ-, ávα-, лρоσ-.
ETYM The more recent formation λáчμα was probably created after aïvvua
(Schwyzer: 698, Fraenkel IF 60 (1952): 132). As a yod-present, λáčoμat may continue
a pre-form *lag-ie/o- or *lang-ie/o-; given λaßɛiv, ε-Maßε (see λaµßávw), from
which λášoчα can hardly be separated, a labiovelar must be reconstructed: IE
*(s)leh2g"-ie/o-. Connection with the isolated OE læcc(e)an 'to seize, grasp', MoE
latch, seems possible.
=
Aắ¤apyoɩ [m.pl.] 'bit of leather' (Nic. Th. 423), acc. to H., tà žvóµeva àñò tñs ßúpons
úлò τŵν áρþýλwv 'what is carved from the hide with a cobbler-knife'; also
σкwλŋkɛç 'worms' (H.). <PG?(V)►
•ETYM Technical term without a clear origin. Fur.: 374 connects it with λaíłapyos,
and Anapyos with λáłapyos (Phryn. PS 87 B.), but these have a quite different
meaning. See λaíapyoç.
入aOundńs, 入áOpa →入avOávw.
λắ¤upos [m.] ‘a kind of pulse, chickling, Lathyrus sativus' (Hell.). ◄PG?(S)►
•VAR Plural also -a.
●DER λaƉvpíç [f.] name of a purging plant, 'Euphorbia Lathyris' (Dsc., Gal.); hence
Lat. (gloss.) latridus [f.] (see André Ét. class. 24 (1956): 41f.).
ETYM No etymology. Only a remote resemblance with the word for 'lentil' (Lat. lens,
OCS lęšta, Ru. ljača). The structure (suffix -up-) could point to a Pre-Greek word
(not in Fur.).
Aatai 'stones of the weaver'. →λãaç.
Аaiλay, -αлоç
823
Ааíуμаτα [n.pl.] · лéµµаτα, oi dé σñлéрµατα, ¡ερà àлáруματа 'cakes, others: seeds, holy
firstlings' (H.); λaĩyµa• tò iɛpóv (Theognost. Can. 9). ◄PG(V)►
●DER Cf. λáyµata (Cyr., Phot.), λaîτµα· Оõµα ‘sacrifice' (H.), cod. λαɩτµáðŋµa; also
as a v.l. (cod. Ven.) in Ar. Av. 1563 beside λaчua, in an uncertain mg.; thus also Suid.
with many interpretations (alua, λaчµóç, etc.).
⚫ETYM The variation λa-/λat- points to a Pre-Greek word.
λaɩɗpóç [adj.] ‘bold, impudent, shameless' (Hell. poet.: Call., Nic., Max.). <PG?▷
•ETYM Stem vowel and suffix as in aɩdpóç, aiσxpós. Fur.: 199 connects it with
λaτpaßóç, λaеpoñv, λaiðαpúšw, λaiеvpá¼w, λadpéw; uncertain. Origin unknown,
but possibly Pre-Greek. Note the rather late attestation of the word.
Traditional etymologies do not have much to recommend themselves: Krahe 1955:
129ff. connects Messapian / Illyrian PNs like Ledrus, Laidius, Σкɛpdı-λaïdaç, as well
as the semantically unclear laidehiabas (adj. of Logetibas; see layxávw), Po-
laidehias. Another suggestion is Lith. pa-láidas 'loose, free', pa-láida 'looseness',
assuming that laudpós properly meant ‘loose, elated”. A different root grade is found
in Lith. léisti 'release'. On the Baltic group, see Fraenkel 1955 s.v.
Aατóv 'townhall' (Su.).
⚫ETYM See Aηïτov s.v. ►λaóç.
Aaibapyos [adj.] 'guileful, treacherous', of dogs which bite unexpectedly (S. Fr. 885,
Orac. apud Ar. Eq. 1068); also λauðápуw лodí (Trag. Adesp. 227), explained by H. as
Aapaiw. PG(V)►
•VAR λaеapyoι кúves kpvqiws dáкvovτεç 'dogs that bite unexpectedly' (H.).
•ETYM Frisk and others consider it to be identical with Anapyos 'forgetful,
lethargic' and take it as a reshaping based on popular words in λα- (λapós,
Aaiμapyos, etc.). However, the variation aɩ/η rather points to Pre-Greek origin (Fur.:
338, 374). Acc. to DELG, the gloss λáapyo 'dogs which bite unexpectedly' in H.
arose from confusion with λaíapyou, but it may also be a different variant. See also
▶入ádapyo.
λaɩapúɛɩv ·λаµvρãσαι, Аɩαлрážασðαι 'to be wanton, get something done (by
seduction?)' (H.). →λατpaẞóç.
λaɩкá¶w [v.] ‘to wench' (com.). ◄PG(V)►
⚫VAR fut. Aaikáσoμαi.
•DER λaikáστpia [f.] 'strumpet' (com.), also λaiкαστns [m.] (Ar. Ach. 79); back-
formation Aaiкáç [f.] (Aristaenet. 2, 16; not quite certain); also λaiкaλéoç (Luc. Lex.
12).
⚫ETYM Resembles Anкáw, of which λaiкálw is probably only a variant (cf.
►λaíapyos). The variation a/η is typical for Pre-Greek; cf. Pre-Greek: section B 6.
λaiλay, -aлos [f.] 'furious storm, hurricane' (Il., Hell.). <PG?(S)>
⚫VAR On λaîλaμ see Fur.: 287 Anm. 4.

=== page 436 ===

824
λaчμa
•DER Аαλαлwdηs 'stormy' (Hp.), λαλαлετóç = λaiλay (sch. A. on A 495), after
Úετóç, etc. Denominative λaλαлíw [v.] 'to quake by storms' (Aq.). λaiλaqétŋc [m.]
'sender of storms' (PMag. Leid. W. 8, 21), haplological for λaiλan-aqétŋç.
•ETYM Probably Pre-Greek, with intensive reduplication. Fur.: 225 refers to λáλaµiç.
Aaiλay (H.); the corrections by Latte are unnecessary.
入aiqua →入aiyuata.
Aaчuós [m.] 'throat, gullet' (Il.). <PG(V)►
●COMP As a first member in λaчuo-τóμoç 'cutting the throat' (E.); on λaíμapyoç see
below.
-ɩɩw
⚫DER Denominatives: 1. λaчuáσow, -ττW [v.] 'to be voracious' (Ar., Herod.) with
λαíμαστpov voracious animal, as a term of abuse (Herod.), cf. on Cúyaotpov; 2.
λaчµwσow [v.] ‘id'. (Nic. Al. 352 as a v.l.); 3. λaчáw [v.] ‘id'. (Hippon.); 4.
λaчμáčovσv. σíovσv àµéτрws 'eat without a limit' (H.); λaquíw [v.] 'to cut the
throat, slaughter' (Lyc.).
Nouns: Aaчuá [n.pl.] = λaµvpá 'voracious, greedy' (H.; Men. 106, codd. λaчµα, λñμα),
probably a back-formation to aquáw, -á¶w, -áσow; λαчµwpη. ǹ λaµvpíç (Theognost.
Can. 9, Suid.); cf. especially лληеúрn (on the accent Wackernagel and Debrunner
Phil. 95 (1942): 181f.).
A compound that became unclear as such is λaíμapyos voracious, carouser' (Arist.,
Thphr.), from *ачμó-µαуoç (cf. especially yaστpí-μapyos); see Georgacas Glotta 6
(1958): 165.
•ETYM There seems no basis for the comparison with λaîτua. Fur.: 225 compares
Aaчuós ‘gefrässig' with λapós and Aapáσow, which proves Pre-Greek origin. Does
λαчлoç belong here, too?
λalvóxeɩp · okλnpóxɛp ‘with a hardhand' (H.). <GR?>
•ETYM The first member is probably λáïvoç ‘of stone'; see λãaç. There is no
context, so further analysis is uncertain.
λaïov [acc.sg.] name of a part of the plough, probably ‘ploughshare' (A. R. 3, 1335).
<?>
⚫ETYM No etymology. The -at- remains unexplained by the comparison with a Gm.
word for 'sickle', ON lé, MLG lē, lehe [m.], from PGm. *leuan-, IE *leuon-. Further,
Skt. laví- [m.] (Uņ. 4, 138), laví-tra- [n.] (Pāņi. 3, 2, 184) ‘sickle', from a pres. lunáti ‘to
cut' (see ►λúw).
λatós 1 [adj.] ‘left' (poet. since Tyrt., A.; late prose). ◄IE *leh¸iuo- 'left'>
•VAR ý λaiá 'the left hand'.
■DER Diminutive λaídiov. àpiστɛρóv, εúúvчμov 'left' (H.).
•ETYM Old word for 'left', identical with Lat. laevus, OCS lěvú, Ru. lévyj, from IE
*leh₂i-uo- (or *lh₂ei-uo-?). Comparison of λaíßα. àσïíç, néλtŋ 'shield' (H.) as *λaífa
"carried in the left hand” is unlikely. On spread and use of λatóç, σkalós, áplotepós,
see Chantraine 1956b: 61ff.
Xawynpóc
825
The attempt by Fur.: 339 to compare λaqós. ò àpiσtepḍ xeipì xpwµevos 'who uses the
left hand' (H.) and establish a substrate etymon should be neglected: Xalóc cannot be
separated from Lat. laevus, etc.
Aatós 2 [m.] a kind of thrush, 'Petrocichla (cyanus, saxatilis)'. <GR?>
⚫ETYM Perhaps from λãaç 'stone'; cf. MoGr. лετро-кóσσs 'thrush'. See
Thompson 1895 s.v.
Aaionïa [n.pl.] a kind of shield, made of raw skins (E 453 = M 426 λaιoŋïá te
лτερóεντα, Hdt. 7, 91 μoßоés лεочévα), used by the Cilicians. <PG(V) ►
•ETYM For the ending, compare the instrument names in -½ïov, -εчov; it recalls
Aάotoç 'rough', but is further unclear. See Trümpy 1950: 38f.
Fur.: 182 compares λaît̃ɑ· лéλ™η ‘shield' H., λaídas. ǹ ảonís ånò ßúpons ‘shield made
of a hide' (Theognost. Can. 9, Zonar.), as well as λādos, etc. 'light, cheap cloth',
although the latter is not very convincing. The gloss λaiσáç. ǹ лaxɛĩa έчwµíç ‘thick,
one-sleeved tunic' (H.) should probably be excluded as well. If the comparison with
λaïta and λaídas is correct, the word must be Pre-Greek.
Аaчτua [n.] 'depth, gulf of the sea' (Il.). <?>
•ETYM Connected with λaquós ‘throat', assuming suffixes -τ-μα (like in äɛ-τ-µ-α,
Chantraine 1933: 180). If this connection is correct at all (the semantics are not
compelling), it rather points to Pre-Greek origin, from a pre-form *lať'm- (Fur.:
32269 rather connects it with the obscure word λaчua [n.] [Ar. Av. 1563]).
Aaiqa [?] ȧoníç (H.); cf. λaißa· àσníç, néλτŋ (H.). <PG(V)►
.
⚫ETYM Given the variant, the gloss is clearly Pre-Greek. Note also λaíaç àσлídaç
(H.); cf. Fur.: 238. Fur.: 170 compares λañqoç, λaion ‘old garment, sail', but he gives
no further explanation. One may imagine that the sails were made of skins, like the
shield.
Aapáσow [v.] 'to swallow, gulp down' (Nic. Th. 477); λaιáσσoνtes yŋdaqoñvteS
'groping' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM A cross between λaчµáσow and λaqúσow has been proposed, but such crosses
are posited too easily, and can hardly be demonstrated. If correct, the gloss
λapáσσovτɛç is after ȧpáσσovτεç. On the other hand, the variation o/u is well-
known in Pre-Greek words. The meaning of λaqaí. ȧvaidɛis, Opaoɛis, otvyvai,
Toλunpai 'shameless, bold, hated, daring' (H.), where Schmidt reads λaidpaí,
deviates too much. The word λаúç. Аáлаvоç Bopós 'extravagant, gluttonous'
(H.), which too is uncertain, looks like a back-formation (acc. to Maas ByzZ 37
(1937): 380, it is an error for λáquž).
Aaipos [n.] 'ragged cloth, old garment' (Od., h. Hom.); 'cloth, sail' (poet. Alc. Z 2, 7; h.
Ap. 406). <?>
•VAR λaiqŋ [f.] 'id.' (Call.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Fur.: 170 unconvincingly compares ►λaîqa · àσñíç.
Aapós [adj.] 'swift, quick, nimble' (Il.). <?►
•DERλayŋpá [adv.] (E.; perhaps also X 24, see Leumann 1950: 165f.).

=== page 437 ===

826
入akál w
•ETYM The analysis as an expressive transformation of aiчmpós after e.g. λáßpos
'violent, boisterous' may be possible, but it is not evident. Frisk compares Zéqupoc
... λáßpoç B 148 beside ȧvéµwv λaïηpà кéλevða ‘the quick paths of the winds', E 17.
Another possibility is a compound of λa- and aiynpós.
λaкáчw •VAR λaкɛiv, λaкépučα, etc. →λáσкw.
λakápa, -ŋ [f.] tree-name, probably bird cherry, Prunus avium' (Thphr.). <?>
●VAR v.ll. Aɛvkápa, λaкáðŋ. Cf. the gloss λaкápτη <i> λakápη. Sévdpov tɩ (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained.
and
[ra-]ke-da-mo-ni-jo
Аaкɛdaiμwv, -ovos [f.] town and country on the river Eurotas (II.). <PG?>
•DIAL Myc. ra-ke-da-mi-ni-jo /Lakedaimnios/
/Lakedaimonios/, cf. Lejeune RPh. 68 (1994): 165-168.
•DER Aαкεdaчμóvɩos [m.] ‘inhabitant of L.' (Hdt.), also as adj. (fem. almost only
Aάкaιva, see ▸Лáкwv); λaкɛdaчovíšw = λakwvíšw (Ar. Fr. 95).
•ETYM The meaning of the appellative is unknown, so the name remains without
etymology. Several proposals: a) to λакɛdáμα. üdwρ ȧλµvpòv áλσì лεлoμévov
[äλкɩ лкεxчμévov Latte], ő лívovσɩv oi τwv Maкεбóvwv áуpoiкol 'bitter water
[poured over groats] which the M. countrymen drink' (H.); b) the second member is
Saíuwv in the sense ‘part' (Bechtel 1921, 2: 370); c) dissimilated from *Aaкɛv-aíµwv,
to Aάкwv and another ethnonym Aïµwv (Szemerényi Glotta 38 (1960): 14ff. with
ample discussion).
Acc. to Fick 1905: 90, however, it is rather a Hellenisation of a Pre-Greek word. Frisk
thinks that Aάkwv is a shortened form of Aaкε-daчóvos; the element Aakɛ- is
found in Aáкɛ-0εv, a deme of Eretria.
λaкépvчa ‘sbd. who cries'. →λayкpúšɛoðai.
λakis, -ídos [f.] ‘rent, rag, tatters of clothes' (Alc., A.). <IE? *lh₂k-►
⚫VAR Often Aaкídɛç [pl.].
•DER Denominative λaкíw (also with лɛpɩ-) [v.] ‘to tear' (Lyc., AP) with λaкíoµata
‘shreds' (E.), λaкiσtós ‘torn to shreds' (Antiph.); also λakid-óoµai [v.] ‘to be torn (to
shreds)' (Dsc.). Besides λáкη þáкη. Kρñτεç ‘rags' (H.), λáкηua 'rent, fragment'
(pap.), cf. on λáσкw.
▶入áokw.
►
⚫ETYM The plural λάкη may belong to the s-stem *lacus, supposed in Lat. lacerāre 'to
tear' (cf. vulnerāre: vulnus), unless it is a recent innovation from páкη. The adjective
lacer, -era, -erum ‘torn', which is attested later, would then be a back-formation. For
λakis, one could assume both a nominal (*λákos?) and a verbal basis (Chantraine
1933: 338, Schwyzer: 465), and likewise for λáкηuα (cf. Chantraine 1933: 178). The
only trace of an old primary verb (which was replaced by λaкí(w) is áñéλŋka.
ȧлéррwуα. Kúлрiо (H.). Latin, too, has given up this verb in favor of denominative
lacerāre. The Latin n-stem lacin-ia [f.] ‘edge of a garment' belongs here too. An n-
stem is surmised in MoP raxna 'rent, cleft' (Benveniste 1935: 15; doubted by WH s.v.
lacer).
It is difficult to posit an IE root for λak- and related forms: perhaps *lh₂k-?
入a入Éw
λáккoç 1 [m.] 'pond, cistern, pit, reservoir' (IA). <IE? *loku- ‘lake, pond'.>
827
●COMP As a first member e.g. in λaккó-лλouτos [m.] 'who hides his wealth in a
cistern', epithet of Callias, etc. (Plu.); as a second member in the hypostasis лpo-
λákк-tov (Arist.), лpoσ-λákk-iov (Gal.) 'pre-, side-cistern²; cf. лpo-áσt-lov.
•DER λakk-aĭoç 'sprung from a λ.' (Hell.), -wdns ‘full of X'. (Gp.), -ápios 'guard of a
λ.' (gloss.), -í¢w [v.] ‘to dig a λ.' (Suid.). Aaккíov name of the small harbour in
Syracuse (D. S.).
•ETYM Perhaps from IE *loku-; see Schrijver 1991: 422ff, 475. Greek would have to go
back to a zero grade *kuo-.
Beside the o-stem λáккoç, there are several western and northern languages with an
u-stem: Lat. lacus ‘lake, pond, pit, etc.', OIr. loch ‘lake, pond', OS lagu ‘lake, water',
OCS loky Nákкoç'. It has been assumed that λáккoç stands for *λáкƑ-oç, but the
development of *-ku̟-> -кк- is unexpected.
λáккoç 2 [m.] ‘kind of dye, lac' (Peripl. M. Rubr. 6). <LW Ind.➤
•DER Aaкków [v.] 'to dye with lac' (PLond. 2, 191, 10 [IIP]: σкOÚτλiα úλva
入edakkwfléva).
●ETYM From Prākr. lakkha < Skt. lākṣā ‘lac’.
入akratÉw, 入aktilw→入áE.
λaкxá [f.] a plant-name, = ǎyxovσa (Ps.-Democr.). ◄LW Ind.▷
•DER λaкxáïvos (Edict. Diocl.).
⚫ETYM A foreign word, probably from Prākr. lakkha ‘lac' (see ►λáккoç 2); cf. the
explanation of the borrowing into Lat. lacca(r) in Plin. Val. 2, 17: herba quaedam
unde vermiculatae pelles tinguntur, 'certain herbs by which vermiculated skins are
painted'.
Aάкwv, -wvos [m.] 'Laconian, Lacedaemonian', name of an inhabitant of Laconia
(Lacedaemon), also as an adjective (fem. also Aaкwvíc) 'Laconian, Lacedaemonian'
(Thgn., Pi.). <PG?>
•VAR Aάкaiva [f.].
•COMP Few compounds like Aaкwvо-μаvéw 'imitate Lacedaemonian manners', μσo-
λáкwv 'enemy of Sparta' (Ar.).
●der Aakwvikós ‘Laconian' (IA), Aaкávov name of a female cloth (pap.); λaкwví(w
'behave, be minded or speak like a Laconian' (Att.) with Aaкwv-ɩotaí [m.pl.]
'supporters of the L.', -toμós 'Laconian-friendly behaviour' (X.).
ETYM Acc. to Dittenberger Herm. 41 (1906): 196, hypocoristic for official
Аaкɛdaчóvɩoç, which is why the fem. Aάkaiva (for Аaкɛdaчovía) is found almost
everywhere. Krahe IF 57 (1940): 119 supposes the name to be Illyrian and connects.
Lacinium, a promontory in southern Italy, Iuno Lacinia.
Fur.:
.: 1717 thinks that the suffix -atva is Pre-Greek.
\aλέw [v.] ‘to talk, chat, prattle' (Att.), 'to speak' (Arist., Hell.), MoGr. also ‘to drive'
(of cattle, etc.), properly 'to talk into going'. <IE? *lal- ONOM
•VAR Aor. λaλñoai.
•COMP Also with prefix, è.g. Siα-, kata-, nepi-, ovV-, ÈK-.

=== page 438 ===

828
入auBávw
•DER Backformations: 1. λáλos ‘chattering' (Att.) with aλio-TεроÇ, -τατоç, also
кατáλαλoç from кata-λaλéw; poetical transformations aλióc, λaλóɛıç ‘id.' (AP); 2.
λáλŋ [f.] ‘chatter' (Com. Adesp., Luc.).
Other derivations: 1. Aaλiá 'chatter, talk' (Att., Hell.), also with кατα-, ovv- from
kata-λaléw. 2. λáλŋµa, λáλŋois ‘id.' (Att.). 3. \aλŋtós ‘able to speak' (LXX),
лερɩλáλητoç 'much discussed' (Agath.); λaλητкóç 'chattering' (Ar.). 4. \aλntpic [f.]
'gossip' (AP), λáλŋpos 'twaddler' (Lyc., AP), cf. στwµúληpoc, Chantraine 1933:
372f. 5. With extension -y- (cf. ouаpayέw, oiµwчw, the suffix -wyn, etc., Chantraine
1933: 401): Aaλayéw [v.] 'to babble, chirrup, chirp', of unarticulated sounds (Pi.,
Theoc., AP), also λaλášw, -ážαi [v.] ‘id.' (Anacr., H.); also aλay-ý, -ŋua, -ŋtýS
(Opp., AP, H.); Máλayes: xλwpoì Bátpaxoi oi dè ópvέov ɛldós qaσı ‘pale green
frogs, others: a kind of bird (H.). With geminate: λáλλai [f.pl.] ‘pebbles' (Theoc.,
...
H., EM).
...
•ETYM The ending is like in σuapayéw, kɛladéw, ßoµßéw and other sound-verbs (cf.
Schwyzer: 726). An onomatopoeic elementary formation, like e.g. Lat. lallāre, Lith.
lalúoti, MoHG lallen.
λaµßávw [v.] ‘to take, grasp' (post-Hom.). <IE *sleh2g"- 'take, grasp'>
•VAR Aor. Aaẞɛiv (Il.), reduplicated med. λɛλaßéσa (8 388), pass. λaqеñvai (Ion.),
Сŋôеñvai (Att.), \ŋµóðñvai (Hell.); fut. λáчoμa (Ion.), λá[µ]yetaɩ (Alc.), see
Hamm 1957: 145, 2sg. λayñ (Dor.), λýчoµaí (Att.), λýµyoµai (Hell.); perf. ɛïλŋqa
(Att.), Ellaqa (Dor.), λɛλáßèкa (Ion. Dor. Arc., also Att.), med. εŋµµai (Att.),
Aéλŋµµai (trag.), λéλaµµai, λɛλáóðaɩ (Ion.).
•COMP Very often with prefixes in various mgs.: ȧva-, кatα-, έлɩ-, пapa-, ñɛpɩ-, ovv-,
Úло-.
•DER Many derivatives are technical words with specific mgs.:
A. From Maßɛiv: 1. λaßη grip, point of application, etc.' (Alc. [λáẞa], IA),
compounds like ovλλaßη ‘grip, syllable, etc.' (A., Att.); λaßíç [f.] ‘grip, clamp,
tweezers' (Hell.) with λaßídiov (Dsc., Gal.), ávɩɩ-, kata-, nepi-λaßɛús ‘handle of a
shield, peg, etc.' (H., medic.), λáßtov ‘grip' (Str.), άлoλáßɛov ‘clamp' (Ph. Bel.). 2.
-λáßos in compounds like έpyo-λáß-os [m.] ‘contractor', whence -έw, -ía (Att.,
Hell.). 3. -λaßńs, e.g. εv-λaß-ńs (to ε λaßɛiv) ‘careful', with -éoμaɩ, -ɛia (IA). 4.
AhaẞETOS PN (Att. epigr.).
B. From full-grade forms (Anyoμaι, Аηеñvαi): 1. Аñµµа (ává-, etc.) 'acceptance,
assumption, etc.' (Att.). 2. Аñчлç (ȧvá-, etc.), Hell. Añµчç 'capture, apprehension,
attack of a disease' (Hp., Att.), àлó-, diá-λªµуç = áñó-, Stά-λŋy (Mytil. and Cyme,
etc.). 3. -λη(µ)лτшр, е.g. σvλ-λл-τwр with ovλληлτр-α 'participant, assistant'
(Att.). 4. άva-, кατα-ληл-τηр 'scoop', 'clamp', resp. (Hell.), ávα-ληлτρ-íç [f.]
'connection' (Gal.). 5. ñαpα-λý(µ)л-η ‘tax collector' (Нell.), лроσшro-λýr-tys
'who looks after the person' (NT). 6. Aŋätkós ‘receptive' (Arist.), further in
compounds like ¿ïλŋätiкós ‘epileptic' (to ¿íŋıç, Hp.). 7. ovλ-λýß-dŋy [adv.]
'taken together' (Thgn., A.).
On Máẞpos, see s.v.; on ȧuqi-λans see ►λáqupov.
•ETYM From Aegin. Ahaßwv, Att. AhaßЕtos and ɛna (as well as Hom. ¿λλaßov),
we have to infer IE *sl-. The Hom. present Xáčoμаι (λaμßávw was an innovation)
入áurw
829
points to IE *-g"-, so the root must have been IE *sleh2g"-. The aspiration in εnpa
may be secondary (cf. Schwyzer: 772); however, perhaps another verb for 'grasp' (see
►λáчupa) was involved; some other forms may have been influenced by this verb as
well.
The zero grade λaß- must be secondary anyway, for *sh₂g"- would have yielded a
form with long ȧ. LIV² connects OE læcc(e)an 'to seize', but this presupposes two
secondary developments: loss of s-mobile and creation of a-vocalism in the present.
See LIV² s.v. *sleh₂g"-. See λášoμαι.
入áußda →入áp8a.
=
λáшa →λaμvpós.
λáµлŋ [f.] ‘foam', e.g. on the surface of wine, ‘phlegm, mucus'; metaph. 'filth, decay',
of the underworld (A. Eu. 387, Dsc., Plu.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also λáлŋ (Hp., Diph.). Fur. 316 adduces λaлtýs· λantǹv ëλɛyov tòv naɣùv
άopóv ‘thick foam' (H.), etc.
•der \α(µ)ñádŋs (also -л-) 'covered with foam' (Hp., Erot., Gal.), λaµëŋpós ‘id.'
(Hp. apud Gal.).
▶
⚫ETYM The connection with λáµлw (see Frisk) does not explain the forms without
nasal. These point to a Pre-Greek word. Grošelj Živa Ant. 2 (1952): 212 connects it
with λéлw. See ►λéuqoç.
λªµлývη [f.] ‘a covered wagon' (S. Fr. 441, Hell., com., LXX; acc. to Polem. Hist. a
Tegeatan word, acc. to others Thessalian). Also Spa, Opóvos (Porphyr. in Ptol. 49).
<PG(S,V)►
•VAR Also λалívη. ǹ äµača ‘wagon' (Su., Lex. Ambr. ined. 137), probably itacistic for
*λaлývò (Fur.: 285).
•Der λaµäηvikaì ǎµažai (LXX).
•ETYM Ending like in áлývò, kanάvā. The word is evidently Pre-Greek, because of
the prenasalization and the suffix -ývn.
λáμлw [v.] 'to lighten, glow', act. also ‘to illuminate' (II.). <IE? *leh₂p- 'glow, light'>
●VAR Aor. λáµyai, fut. λáµyw (IA), perf. зsg. λéλαµлɛ with present mg. (E.), aor.
pass. λaupeñvai (J.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, Èк-, εV-, εл-, Ûло-.
•DER 1. λªµлáç, -ádoç [f.] 'torch, torch-race' (IA), also poet. adj. 'lit by torch' (S.);
Сªµлádiov ‘small torch' (Att.); λaµ˜ad-íaç [m.] name of a comet and of the
constellation Aldebaran (Chrysipp.), see Scherer 1953: 121f., -íτηs ‘torch-runner'
(Pergamon III); λaµ˜áð-чos ‘ptng. to a torch' (pap.), -tɛños ‘id.' (Delos IIIª), see
Chantraine 1933: 93; -кóç ‘id.' (sch.); λаµлadεãov ‘torch-holder' (Eleusis IV³), cf.
Auxvɛtov. Denominatives: a. λαμлабíчw [v.] 'to participate in a torch-run or a torch-
procession' with λaµñadiotaí [pl.] 'participants in a torch-run' (Delphi IIª); b.
Ааμлабεúоμαι, -ɛúw [v.] 'id., to treat as a λαμлáç' (D. S., Ph.) with λаμлаdɛía 'torch-
procession' (Priene III-IIª). 2. λαμлτýð, -ñpos [m.] ‘lighter, torch, lantern' (Od.),
with λαμлτηpα [n.pl.] name of a festival (pap.). 3. λáµчç [f.] 'lighting' (LXX, Ph.),
especially in compounds like diáλaμчç (Arist.), etc. On λaµчávŋ ‘cabbage,
►

=== page 439 ===

830
入aqiupós
Brassica arvensis', see s.v. 4. λαμäŋdwv, -óvoç [f.] ‘lustre, glow' (Epicur., D. S.). 5.
λªµлupíç [f.] ‘glow-worm' (Arist.), with λaµлvpíšw [v.] ‘to shine like a glowworm',
also 'to illuminate' (Thphr., pap.), perhaps dissimilated from *λαµл-vλíç? 6. λaµépóç
'shining, gleaming' with λªµ˜рóτηç, λªµлpúvw ‘to illuminate', med. 'to show' (IA),
with λaµïpvv-týs (late); as a first member with dissimilation in Лáµлovpoç name of
a dog (Theoc.), -oupic [f.] 'fox' (A. Fr. 433, Lyc.). 7. úло-, лερι-λαμл-ηç 'shining
below, around' (Hes. Sc., Ph., Plu.). 8. Lengthened verbal forms: λaµлεtáwv (-ówv)
[ptc.] 'shining' (A 104); explanation uncertain, see Schwyzer: 705, Leumann 1950:
181f., Chantraine 1942: 358; λαμлá‹w = λáµлw (Man.). 9. Several PNS: Aάμл,
Aáµños,
Aapinetiòng, Aaqinetin, Aáimtos, -tw, Aaqinad-iwv,-ioros,Aaqin(t)peÚg; see
Bechtel 1917b: 621, Fraenkel 1910: 236, Schwyzer: 337.
ETYM Both the verbal and the nominal forms derive from the nasal present λáμлw.
Without a nasal, we find Hitt. läpp-zi / lapp- 'to glow, flash'; with a long vowel (from
IE *leh₂p- or *loh2p-), some Baltic words for 'torch, flame': Lith. lópė, Latv. lāpa, OPr.
lopis; with short a-vowel, but deviating in auslaut, we find OIr. lassaim ‘flame', W
llachar 'glow', which can go back to *laps-. LIV² reconstructs *leh2p- 'aufleuchten',
but it is doubtful whether this material proves IE origin. Cf. ►λaµávŋ and loqvíc.
Is it possible to explain λαшлηdáv, λαµлvρíç as Greek formations? The nasal present
is difficult, for what would be the outcome of *lh₂mp-?
λauvpóc [adj.] 'voracious, avaricious, eager, coquettish' (X., com., Hell.). <PG(S,V)►
•DER λaµvpía ‘voluptuousness, coquetry' (Plu.), λaµvpíç [f.] ‘dewlap' (sch. Luc. Lex.
3), λavpwoα H. s.v. λaiαpúčεiv. Further λáqua [f.] name of a man-eating monster
(Ar.), of a shark (Arist.); in this mg. also λáµvă or -vη (Opp.); (tà) λáµua = xáσµaτa
'chasms' (EM, H.); cf. λaμupà Báλaσoa (EM 555, 57). Name of a hero Aάuoç (к 81).
Lycian TN Aάuvpa (Ãµvpα), HN Aάuvpoc; suggestion in Heubeck Beitr. z.
Namenforsch. 1 (1949): 281.
•ETYM For the formation of λquvρóç, cf. yλaqu̟pós, ßdɛλupós, etc. λáµ-tă has
retained -ɩă, like лóτуα (see Chantraine 1933: 98). There seems no basis for the
comparison of λaµvpós with Lat. lemurēs 'roaming ghosts of those who died at a
wrong time, or who died a violent death'.
From λáчua was borrowed Lat. lamia [f.] 'vampire'; perhaps also lamium [n.] 'dead
nettle', from *λáчov? The form λauós cleft' (sch. Hor. Ep. 1, 13, 10; λáµoç LSJ) does
not exist.
The word (note the suffix -up-) is probably Pre-Greek, and related to lapúσow 'to
swallow' with interchange μ/q; see Fur.: 225. Perhaps aчóc is also related. Fur.:
further connects λáßpos, which is possible but uncertain.
λaµyávŋ [f.] ‘kind of cabbage, Brassica arvensis' (Dsc., Gal.; pap.), acc. to Strömberg
1940: 24 because of the gleaming color. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also Aaч-, λey-. Further λaчávη. τwv ȧypíwv λaxávwv έσ0μεvη edible wild
vegetable' (H.). and λáya. yoyyuλíç. IIɛpyaĩoɩ ‘turnip' (H.).
⚫ETYM The variants prove Pre-Greek origin (note the different vocalism in λɛ-),
while connection with λáµлw remains doubtful.
1
入GE
831
Aav¤ávw [v.] to escape notice, be unknown or unnoted; to make sbd. forget sth.',
med. 'to forget' (Il.+). <IE *leh,- 'remain unnoticed or hidden'>
•VAR Also Anew (λŋßávw ŋ 221), aor. λaßɛiv, λɛλaðèïv, -éσðaɩ (èл-λñoαi v 85), fut.
Anow (Il.), perf. λna (IA), med. λéλaσμa (Hom.), λéλŋoµai (Att.), late aor.
入noaoda, 入noOval, Dor. Aeol. 入ãow, 入áow, 入ãoal, 入é入āda.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially εл-.
•DER A. from λaɛïv, -éσðαi: 1. λá¤pŋ, -ã [adv.] ‘secretly' (II.), λáðpă (h. Cer. 240)
with λaеpañoç ‘secret' (IA); λáеpios (S. Ichn. 66 [lyr.], Hell.), -ídios, -чµaños (late)
'id.'; Aapádav [adv.] (Corinn.), like кpuoådāv; λaеpη-dóv, -dá, -díç (late); as a first
member Aapo in compounds like λaеpó-vuμqoç 'secretly married' (Lyc.), instead
of the older variant Aǎ0- in forms like Aα01-кηбns (X 83), properly "hiding sorrow",
but also 'making forget sorrows'; cf. λãēt- sub C. 2. Aαеητкóç 'which escapes notice'
(Arist.), λáðŋσıç (sch. Gen. A 36) ; 3. λáðoç [n.] ‘forgetfulness' (MoGr. for *λñßoç,
Aaboç sub B.).
B. From Aŋßɛɩv: 1. λýðŋ, Dor. λáða 'forgetfulness' (B 33) with Anеaños 'forgetful'
(Call., Lyc.), also Сŋŋμwv, Аŋwdns, Añßios (H.). 2. λãoç [n.] = λñoŋ (Theoc.);
Anon
λaðoσúva [f.] ‘id.' (E. IT 1279, uncertain). 3. Aŋßɛdwv, -óvos [f.] ‘id.' (AP, APl.) with
入ndedavós = Anbaños (Luc.). 4. čк-λη-σç (w 485), εлí-λã-σɩç (Pi. P. 1, 46)
'forgetfulness', from έк-, ¿л-λýеεv; from the simplex further λño-tɩç ‘id.' (S., E.),
which is typologically older. 5. Añσ-μwv 'forgetting, forgetful (Them.) with
Аŋσдoσúvη (Нes. Th. 55, S. Ant. 151), after μvημоσúvη; έлλýσ-µwv ‘id.' (Att.) with
έmλŋoµov-ý, -µoσúvη (Crat., LXX), ¿mλŋoµov-έw (late), Aŋoµov-έw (MiGr. and
MoGr.); details in Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 167f. (not always correct).
C. As a first member in verbal governing compounds: 1. Aŋoí-µßpotos ‘taking men
by surprise, deceiver' (h. Merc.); 2. λãеí-лоvоç 'forgetting (or: making forget)
sorrows' (S.), cross with Aǎ0-; 3. Aã¤-ávεμoç 'escaping the wind' (Simon.).
Cf. also àλnens and ǎλαστoc; unrelated is Antw.
⚫ETYM At the base of the Greek system stands the present λnow, λáow. Beside this are
found, from the earliest sources on, the thematic zero grade aorists λăεîv and
λελǎɛiv, -éσαι together with the perf. med. λéλaσμα and some isolated nominal
derivatives, especially the couple λápā: λα- (Beckwith KZ 112 (1999): 78-85 argues
that the reduplicated thematic aorist of the type λéλadov is a Greek creation).
The nasal present λavávw (beside Anow, which is better attested in Hom.) is
perhaps an innovation after μaεīv: μаvеávw. Though parallels (лúеш: лúоç, ßρíеw
ẞpiapóc) are not very strong, the -0- must be a presentic element in Anew. A form
without dental enlargement indeed seems to be found in Añτo. εлελáеετо, beside
\ýlto. ¿ne<λá>0ɛτo (H.) (on the -- see below). Lat. lateō ‘to be hidden' is probable a
denominative from *lato- 'hidden'.
The combination with ToB lät- 'to go out, emerge' is wrong, both formally and
semantically (see Adams 1999 s.v.), while the comparison with OCS lajati
“Evεdpεúεɩv, to ambush, lie in wait for' and OCz. lákati ‘id.' is now once again
defended, e.g. by LIV² s.v. 3. *leh₂- (see also *leh₂dh-) and Derksen 2008. The words
►λailapyos and Anapyos are Pre-Greek.
λáž [adv.] ‘with the heel or foot (Il.). <PG?►

=== page 440 ===

832
入aóg
VAR Also (very rare) subst. (secondary back-formation) = λáкτσµа (H.), 'sole of
the foot' (sch. A. R. 2, 106), see Thierfelder Sächs. Abh. 43:2: 42³.
•COMP As a first member in λaк-лaτέw ‘to tread (with the foot), trample underfoot'
(Pherecr. 136, S. Ant. 1275 v.l.; cf. Xew-nátytos s.v. 入eios).
•DER λáy-dŋv = λáε (S. Fr. 683, 3). Denominative verbs: 1. λaкtíšw [v.] 'to kick with
the foot or the hoof (Od.), also with prefix, e.g. ȧvτ-, έк-; rather after the verbs in
-τíw than from *λaкτɩ, as per Schwyzer: 620; thence λáкτσμа (A., S.), λáкτa
(pap., H.); (èк-)λαкτσµóç (H.) 'treading, pushing'; -toτns 'who kicks with the foot'
(X.), -1σTIкn, scil. τέxvη (in boxing; late). 2. λážaç = λaкτíσaç (Lyc. 137), λáčɛv.
εußpív to break out, go crazy' (H.) with λaxµós = λaktσµóç (Antim.); λáku̸ç [f.]
'pounder' (Call., Nic.), back-formation from λaкtí¶w (see Schwyzer: 270)?
•ETYM Formed like лúž, yvúð, ódáž, etc., but without a certain explanation. The
connection with Lat. calx 'heel' is semantically adequate, but even assuming
dissimilation from *кλáž, formal problems remain. Within Greek, the gloss Aŋкāv.
tò rρòç ŵdǹv ópxεiσa 'dance on a song' (H.) could be compared; further, Anкñσai,
λαкñσαι• лατáža 'strike, beat, knock, etc.' (H.) and several expressions for 'limbs',
like Lat. lacertus 'upper arm'. Semantically, none is very convincing. Since a good IE
etymology is lacking, we may ask whether the word is Pre-Greek. See on ►òdáč.
Aaós [m.] (the common) folk, crowd, the military, tribe' (Il., Dor., Hell.), in the NT
especially 'the Jewish people', plur. 'the military, servants, subjects, serfs', also 'laity'
(LXX); sing. 'follower' (Hecat. 23 J.); elaborate discussion of use and spread by
Björck 1950: 318ff. <IE? *leh₂-uo- ‘band of people', PG?►
•VAR Ion. Aŋós (rare), IA Aɛws (archaic and rare).
•DIAL Myc. ra-wa-ke-ta /lāw-āgetās/, cf. Chantraine 1956a: 88¹.
•COMP Many old compounds: АαƑО-лóεç, Fɩó-λaƑos (Cor.), λayéτaç [m.]
'leader of the people' (Pi.) from XãƑ-ãуετãç (see Myc. above), Aãéptηc, λao-σσóoç
'urging the men' (Hom.), from σɛúw, Aao-, Aɛw-pópos 'carrying the people,
public', of streets, as a subst. 'road' (Il.), Mɛvéλaos (II.), -λews Att. (cf. Björck 1950:
104ff.), etc.
•DER Few derivatives (in part due to the synonym dñμoc, in part to homonymous
forms of λãaç 'stone'): 1. λaïkóç ‘of the people, common' (Hell.). 2. λawdŋs ‘popular
(Ph., Plu.). 3. Aýńïtos PN (II.), A½ïtov [n.] (on the very rare suffix -ɩo- Schwyzer:
504), 'town hall' among the Achaeans (Hdt., Plu.) with the IA form for λáïtov. tò
ȧpxɛiov 'town hall, λaïtwv. tŵv dŋµooiwv tóлwv ‘place of public affairs' (H.); other
glosses: Antov (cod. Anτóv). Sηµóσiov, Aŋïtŋ, oi dè λýτη (cod. Aŋtý). iépɛia; cf.
Aαετóv 'townhall' (Su.). λɛτóv. ßλáσqημov (H.). Fur.: 23845 objects that -10- is a
Pre-Greek suffix (cf. ibid. 163, 187). Derivation Aŋai. ǹyeµoviai, otpatɩai ‘leaders'
(H.).
As an adjectival first member in Aŋtovpyέw (Aɛt-) [v.] 'to fulfill a public office on
private means, provide a (public or ecclesiastical) service', with Anτoupy-ia (Aɛit-)
'service, liturgy' (Att.), -óc, -ŋua, etc. (Hell.), compounded *λŋïto-fεpy-έw to *λńïta
Epуa, cf. Sημopуóç; also λýτ-apxos [m.] 'public priest' (Lyc. 991). Cf. also
►λɛiTwp.
►►
λani w
833
⚫ETYM Like the Gm. word for 'people' (OHG liut, OE lēod), λã(F)ós was originally a
collective; from this form, the plural λa(F)oí arose (just like liuti, lēode), from which
the sing. Anós 'follower' was built, like liut 'man'.
Most often connected with Hitt. lāḥḥ- 'campaign' and OIr. láech 'warrior'. On
λńɩτov, etc., see Gschnitzer Glotta 55 (1977): 190-207. Gschnitzer assumes that the
writings and & instead of a show that the form came from the IA area. For the
etymology, he follows Heubeck and assumes that λn-t-To- is a compound 'von den
Leuten betreten', i.e. 'publicus'. This interpretation is not convincing, as the PN
Anɩτoç (II.) cannot be explained in this way. The form λaóc is rather Pre-Greek, and
has a Pre-Greek suffix -(0)-, which was recognized as such by Fur.: 163, 238, 303f.,
etc. This suffix is also found in e.g. ßápßitos, þóλ(ß)itov, rófitov.
The word Aɛía 'booty' is not related.
λáлαеov 1 [n.] 'monk's rhubarb, Rumex acetosa' (Epich., Thphr.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Also -os [m., f.]; -ŋ [f.].
•COMP Also in compounds, e.g. óžv-, iñño-, ßov-λáлaðov (Dsc.).
•ETYM Because of the formation (cf. ävηßov), foreign origin is suspected. The gloss
as ẞoτávη кεvшTτкń 'purgative plant' (sch. Theoc.), with λáлaðα [pl.] 'faeces' (sch.
Gen. E 166), recalls λaлáσσw.
λáлałoç 2 [m.] pitfall for wild animals' (Democr. 122, plur.). <PG(S)►
VAR Also -ov [n.] (H., Phot., Suid.).
•ETYM Words in -Oos are often Pre-Greek; cf. ►λáлaðov 1.
λaлapós [adj.] 'weak, slack, hollow' (Hp., Arist.). <◄PG?►
•der λañɑpótŋs 'weakness' (Hp.); λaлápŋ [f.] ‘the weak flanks', plur. ‘the flank(s)'
(II.).
Further λaлáσow, -ττw (-\w Ath., H.) [v.] 'to weaken, hollow out, empty' (Hp.), also
'destroy' (A.), aor. λαлážαɩ, fut. λαлáчw; thence λáлažıç ‘evacuation' (Arist., medic.),
Аалαуμшν. εккεvwσɛwv 'emptying' (H.), λалαкɩɩкÓç 'evacuating' (medic.). On
►Аáлaеov 'pitfall', see s.v.
⚫ETYM For the formation of λaлαрóc, cf. Mayapóc, xaλapóç, лλα-Ɛapóç, etc., all with
similar meaning (Chantraine 1933: 227). A basic primary verb may have been
retained in λawa. diéqðɛipa. Kúлpiot 'weakened, destroyed (Cypr.)' (H.).
It is usually assumed that λaлάσσw, -ττw is an extension of this, perhaps after
μаλάττw (cf. λαлáττwν· µαλáττшν, λауарòν лошv H.). The meaning 'to hollow out'
arose in the medical language from 'to weaken', referring to the stomach and the
intestines.
In the sense 'to destroy', λaлážɛv, -α agrees with àλaлá¶w, the relation of which to
λαлáσσw, -w has not been explained before, but the ȧ- could well be the Pre-Greek
prothetic vowel (see on ►åλaлá‹w). Cf. Fur.: 350 and 371, who also combines forms
with λεлα-.
λáлη 'foam'.λáµäŋ.
λani w [v.] 'to boast, swagger' (S. Fr. 1062, Cic. Att. 9, 13, 4, AB, Phot., H.). <PG?(O)►

=== page 441 ===

834
入ásrTw
•DER Аάлσμα 'boasting' (Cic. l.c.), λamστns 'swaggerer' (LXX, H.), -íστpia, -iкτńs
(Phot., H.).
•ETYM Compared with Skt. lápati ‘to chatter' and the Slavic group of Ru. lepetát' 'to
stammer', etc. (Pok. 677f.). However, a root of the shape λaл- is rather Pre-Greek
than cognate with Sanskrit.
λάлτш [v.] 'to lap with the tongue, drink greedily, gulp down', especially of dogs, etc.
(Arist.). PG?, ONOM
•Var Fut. Xáyw (II 161, Ar.), -oµai (Ar.), aor. λávaɩ, -aσðaι (Ar., Pherecr., LXX),
perf. Méλăqa (Ar. Fr. 598).
•COMP Also with ảлo-, ¿ê-, nɛpi-.
•DER λártaç toùç poчoūvτaç ‘gulping down' (H.); also supposed in λaττauviα-
Ioλup<p>nvioι (H.) by Latte Glotta 34 (1955): 197, who reads λάττα<ç> (Cret. for
Аáлταç). μviα 'fly'; further λáviç 'gulping down' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM An onomatopoeic word. In other IE languages, we find Alb. lap ‘id.', of dogs,
cats, Ru. lópať' 'to devour', Lith. lapènti 'to absorb greedily' (of swines), OE lapian,
MHG leffen 'to gulp down', MoHG lappen, MoFr. laper ‘id.'. Since λáƒτw, λελaçã
may be secondary to λáчw, λáyaι, Schulze KZ 52 (1924): 105 (= Kl. Schr. 372) refers
to BSI. synonyms with k, like Lith. làkti, Ru. lokáť Náлtɛv³, to which λáyw, λáyai
(if with IE *k") may correspond. However, as PIE had no *a, the word is rather Pre-
Greek. See Aaqúσow.
▶入apÚoow.
Aápdos [m.] 'salted meat' (pap. IV³). ◄LW Lat.➤
•COMP λapɗnyós 'supplier of λ.' (Abydos V-VIP).
⚫ETYM From Lat. lardum 'id.'; gender after tάpixos [m., n.]? See ►λāpīvóç.
Aāpīvós [adj.] ‘fattened, fat' (Xenoph., Ar., Eratosth.). ◄?►
•DER λαpɩvεúoμat 'be fattened' (Sophr.).
•ETYM Unclear. Athough it is remarkable that λāpīvós has final stress and a long ī, it
recalls Lat. läridum > lardum (see on λápdoc) 'bacon, salted meat'.
Aapɩvós [m.] name of an unknown sea-fish (Opp. H. 3, 399, H.). <?►
•Der λapivevtýs• άλiɛús ‘fisher', λapivaĩov kúptov ‘fishing net’• oi àdiɛis tòv ¿k
λɛ<v>кéaç, η µéyav (H.).
⚫ETYM Both the long ã and the meaning refute the connection with λápoç 'sea-gull'
(as per Strömberg 1943: 120).
λápкoç [m.] ‘charcoal-basket' (Ar.). <?►
•COMP λapk-aywyós (E. Fr. 283), Aapko-popέw (D. C.).
•DER Aapkíov (Poll.) and -ídiov (Ar.).
⚫ETYM Because of vapкíov. áσкóv ‘bag, wineskin' (H.), it has been derived from
*vápkoç by influence of λápvaž. Doubtful. On vapкíov, cf. vápкn. Fur.: 30546
compares váкoç 'fleece', which is semantically far-fetched.
λápvaž, -ākoç [f.] 'chest, box, coffer, coffin' (II.). <PG(S)►
•COMP λapvaкoq¤ópos ‘killing in a λ.' (Lyc.).
•DER Aapvákov (Sm.).
入áoapov
835
•ETYM The suffix is seen in other instrument names, like лívαž, káµaž, kliµač,
Síoppa. Note the gloss vápvač. кißwτós ‘id.' (H.) with dissimilation. There is no
etymology and the suffix is typically Pre-Greek. This means that the word itself is
probably Pre-Greek. Nehring Glotta 14 (1925): 185 points to Aápvaʊʊoç, which is an
old name of the IIάpvaσσos acc. to EM 655, 5 et al.
Aápos [m.] name of a rapacious sea-bird, perhaps ‘sea-gull' (Thompson 1895 s.v.),
often metaph. of demagogues (ε 51, Ar., Arist.). < ONOM?►
•DER Cf. λapíç [f.] ‘id.' (AP); perhaps also in σɩσíλapoç. лépdɩ§. IIɛpуaïoɩ 'partridge'
(H.).
•ETYM Often considered to be onomatopoeic, e.g. by Pok. 650. Cf. Arm. lor 'quail',
with a different vocalism. Perhaps the same word as Xapóç. See ►λñpoç.
Aāpós [adj.] ‘delicious, sweet, fine' (Il.). <?>
•ETYM Blanc Glotta 76 (1998): 162-167, connects this word and λapivóc with
►ȧлoλaúw 'to enjoy, have the benefit of. Aapós means 'invigorating, reinforcing'.
The superlative λapóτατоç shows that the word was contracted from *λaƑapos or
*λafepos (the first syllable can be replaced by two short syllables everywhere;
Chantraine 1942: 33). The form λāpīvós may simply be derived from λāpóç.
The root is given by Pok. 665 as *lau-, but cognates are unclear: Slavic lov
'dexterous' is hardly cognate on account of the meaning, while W llawen 'merry'
points to *lau̟-, which itself points to a non-IE word rather than to *lh₂eu-.
λápvyš, -vyyoc [m.] ‘upper part of the windpipe' (Hp., com., Arist., Gal.). <PG(S,V)►
•DER Diminutive λapúyylov (Gal.), -кóç ‘rapacious' (Pherecr.) and a few
denominatives: 1. Aapvyy-iw [v.] 'to cry loudly' (Ar., D.); 2 -táw ‘id.' (AP); 3.
λapúɛ. ßoã áлò τоυ λáрvýуoç 'cries; after the λ.' (H.); also 4. Aapúval, of the dove
(Stud. it filcl. 1, 95; 3, 496). Backformation λapuyуós μаταιoλóуoç 'talking idle' (H.).
⚫ETYM The suggestion of a cross between opάpuy and λaчuóc, which have earlier
attestations, is found in Strömberg 1944: 59ff., who discusses the meaning.
Nevertheless, such crosses should not be posited at random.
Formerly connected with Lat. lurco(r) 'to devour, carouse', MHG slurc 'throat' (Pok.
965f.). Frisk concludes, in accordance with Güntert 1914: 119: “If this analysis is
correct, then λápvyž must have been reshaped after qάpuy in any case." However,
in addition to the suffix -vyy-, the by-form λápuyos [gen.] (EM 788, 37) confirms
Pre-Greek origin (secondary origin is far from convincing; cf. DELG).
Aάoava [n.pl.] 'tripod or stand of a pot', usually 'nightstool' (Hp., com.). <PG?>
•VAR Rarely sing. -ov.
•COMP λaσavo-qópos [m.] name of a slave (Plu.).
•DER Aaσaviτns Siopos (pap.), mg. unclear; λάavα- εлíστατоν 'support, stand' (H.).
•ETYM Instrument name in -avov (Chantraine 1933: 199), but otherwise obscure.
Borrowed as Lat. lasanum. On λáσa. tpáñeľa nλŋpeσtátŋ ‘overfull table' (H.), see
►Aάotoç. Perhaps Pre-Greek.
λáσapov [n.] ‘òñòç σλqíov, asafoetida' (Aët., Alex. Trall., H.). <PG?►
•VAR Also -ap.

=== page 442 ===

836
●DER -ápiov (Aët.).
入áoon
⚫ETYM Unexplained foreign word. Cf. André 1961: 208f. Probably Pre-Greek.
λáσðŋ [f.] ‘insult, mockery' (Hdt. 6, 67, AP 7, 345, H.). <PG?>
•DER Cf. the glosses, all from H.: λáo¤w and λaσáσ¤w· Xλɛva¢éτw ‘scoff; λáσðaι.
лαíšɛv ‘to joke', oliуwpɛiv ‘neglect', odopεiv 'revile'; \áσ0wv. кaкoλoywv
‘speaking badly'; λáσðov. aiσxpóv ‘shamefulľ'; λáσðaç· ovµyopáç ‘misfortunes”.
λaσеaívɛv кαкoλoуɛiv (H.).
⚫ETYM Connection as λáo-On with a root *las- as in Lat. las-cīvus 'wanton, luxuriant,
lascivious', Skt. lā-las-a- ‘greedy' is semantically inadequate. Perhaps Pre-Greek?
Aάotos [adj.] 'shaggy, woolly, overgrown with' (II.). <?>
⚫COMP Compounds like λaσt-aúxηv 'with a hairy neck' (h. Merc.).
⚫DER Aασiúv, -wvoc [m.] 'thicket' (Nic.), also as a TN; λασɩшτıç, epithet of üλn (Epic.
Alex. Adesp.), cf. devdpŵtis (E.), etc.
⚫ETYM If it is from *Ƒλat-¹oç, λáσios can be connected with words for hairy things, as
in Olr. folt ‘hair' < IE *uolto-, OPr. wolti ‘ear (of corn)', Lith. váltis 'bunch of oats',
Ru. vólot' 'fiber, ear; panicle', SCr. vlât ‘ear' < IE *uolti-; acc. to Solmsen KZ 42
(1909): 2144, the Gm. group of MoHG Wald 'forest' < IE *uóltu- belongs here as well.
If from *uļtio- < IE *ult-io-, λáσios would differ from the words mentioned in root
ablaut. Speculations by Blanc RPh. 73 (1999). See Máxvn.
λáσкw [v.] ‘to ring, crack' (only for λǎкɛīv), ‘to splash' (-Aŋkéw), ‘to bang' (λākéw), ‘to
shout, scream, speak loudly' (A., E., Ar.); for the mg. see Björck 1950: 280ff. <?>
•VAR Lengthened λaσкáče olvaрɛĩ, еwлεúεɩ 'talks nonsense, flatters' (H.), εлI-
Aŋkéw (0 379), (dia-)λāкéw (Ar. Nu. 410, Theoc., Act. Ap. 1, 18), λăкáčw (A.), also
Aάw in (où) Aáwv? (cf. s.v. ►λáw), aor. Aǎкɛīv (Il., trag.), λɛλǎкéσai (h. Merc.),
λăкñσaɩ (Ar. Pax 382), -λākñoaɩ (Ar. Nu. 410), fut. λakýσoµai (Ar. Pax 381, 384),
perf. λεληкa (X 141), λéλāкa (A. [lyr.], E., Ar.).
●DER 1. From λaкeïv: λákos. ñxos, wópos ‘cry'; λakεpóv· ǹxaïov ‘resounding, cod.
ɛikaĭov (H.), λaképv(α ‘screaming', of кopóvη (Hes.), also кúwv; secondarily -Çoç
(Schwyzer: 473, 472³); thence λaкɛρúчw, -oµαι (EM, H., Phot., Suid.), but see on
λayкúčeσai; λakétāç (λāk-?) ‘kind of cicada' (Ael.; cf. Gil Emerita 25 (1957): 318);
Aάкnua 'fragment' (cf. Björck 1950: 282). 2. From Aŋкéw, λāкéw: Aакητηp spit of
land of Cos (Fraenkel Nom. ag. 1: 162); Aŋkýtpia [f.] name of a goddess (Lyc. 1391)
belongs here too, acc. to Schwyzer RhM 75 (1926): 448 (codd. Aŋktnp-); Ankitýs
'cryer' and λākɛdóveç [f.pl.] ‘shouting' (Timo).
•ETYM The system was created starting from the pair λǎкɛīv: λéλāka, -ŋka (cf.
кpǎyɛīv: kéкpāya, etc.). From λǎкɛīv: λáoкw < *λáк-σкw, λǎкálw, λăкñoai,
λɛλǎкéσa; from λéλāкα, -ŋкα: Aākéw, Aŋkéw, λāкñσαɩ, as well as perhaps ►λáw.
The form λaкnooμat admits both interpretations, as the quantity is uncertain.
No etymology.
λáσται [f.] лópval 'whores' (H.). <PG(O)►
.
•DER Further λάστaupoç 'кívaιdoç, catamite' (Theopomp., AP), nu-λáσtavpoç
(Men.). Shortened form λáστpıç (EM 159, 30).
入átpov
837
•ETYM λάσταupos was hardly formed after кévτaupos (as per Frisk), in spite of the
gloss кévτaupoι ... kai oi raidɛpaʊtai (H.). Fur.: 383 connects \ασɩtóç. kívaɩdos and
Aeoitós. ñópvi. The element λao-/λaσt-/\εot- is clearly Pre-Greek, and probably
represents *lat- or *las-. Therefore, it is unrelated to ▸λaíoμai.
λắτaž 1, -ayos [f.] 'drop of wine, dregs of wine (also in the game of kottabos)' (Alc.,
com.). <PG(S)>
•VAR Mostly plur. -ayɛç, sing. also -άyn.
•DER λatayéw (Luc. Lex. 3), λaτáσσw (Dor. vase-inscr.) [v.] 'to throw away the dregs
(=λáτayɛç)', λaτауεov 'vase into which the λ.s fall' (Suid.).
⚫ETYM Borrowed as Lat. latex, -icis 'fluidity', and reshaped after other nouns in -ex.
The -σσ- in latάσσw may be analogical and does not necessarily point to a variation
Y: K (Schwyzer 496). Still, the word is probably Pre-Greek, in view of the suffix -ay-
and the semantic field (viticulture).
λáτaž 2, -ayos [f.] name of a quadruped that lives in the water, perhaps 'beaver' (Arist.
HA). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Perhaps somehow connected with λáτaž 1? Cf. Keller 1909: 186.
Like its homonym, this word is probably Pre-Greek.
λatuevɛía [f.] · Sovλɛía 'slavery' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Contamination of aτμεvía and λaτpɛia has been assumed, e.g. in Fraenkel
Glotta 32 (1953): 24. Such proposed cross-forms are doubtful. Fur.: 392 points to
other instances of variation λ- / zero; therefore, the word is most probably Pre-
Greek.
λaτpaßós [adj.] · λaμvpós ‘gluttonous, lascivious' (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also ατpαẞwv. ȧλašovεvóµεvos 'boastful' (H.); έλατpáßíčov. tò
ßwµoλoxɛɛɩv kai navovpyɛīv λatpaßíεɩv λɛyov ‘to play low and villainous tricks’
(H.); Aατpaßiɛiу· εσлovασμεvwç кai ȧσńµwę λaλɛiv 'to talk hastily and [therefore]
meaningless' (H.); cf. λατpañía. λаμvρíа μετà έpv0piáσɛwç 'voluptuousness with.
blushing' (H.). Also λátpay. vetós ‘rain, shower' (H.), cf. λaîλay with similar mg.
●ETYM Fur.: 199 proposes to connect the following as well: λatpáčɛiv. ßapßapíšɛv ‘to
speak incomprehensibly' (H.), λαеpov. þλáлτεяу 'to hinder, damage' (H.),
aapuεv. λαμµvpwoai, diaлpášaσa 'to be wanton or gluttonous, get something
done (by seduction?)' (H.), and apάw. These attempts are uncertain. However,
the forms with λατрαß/л- are clearly Pre-Greek, because of the interchange they
display.
λάτpov [n.] 'payment, hire' (A. Supp. 1011), = µσóc (Suid., EM). <PG>
⚫DER Aάτpic, -10¢ [m., f.] 'hired servant, handmaid' (Thgn., S., E.); λáτpios ‘ptng. to a
hired servant or to the payment, etc.' (Pi., Man.); λaτpɛúw, El. -ɛíw [v.] 'to serve (for
wages), serve a god (with prayer and sacrifice)' (Sol., Olympia VIª, trag., Isoc., X.),
with λaτpɛía (trag., Pl., LXX, Ep. Rom., etc.), λatpeúµata [pl.] (S., E.) ‘service,
worship', \aτpɛv-tós (LXX), -tikós (Ptol.) ‘ptng. to a servant, obedient'; λaτpɛúç
‘servant' (Lyc.), from λatpɛúw or λátpov; Aatpwdns ‘obedient' (Vett. Val.).

=== page 443 ===

838
入athogonal
ETYM As a North-West Greek word, λáτpov and derivatives were originally
unknown in Aeolic and Ionic, and even in Attic (see Bechtel 1921, 1: 207, Kretschmer
Glotta 17 (1929): 79). There is no convincing IE connection. Usually, λá-τpov is
considered to contain a zero grade of words in Gm., BSI., and IIr., which go back to a
full grade IE *lē(i)- 'provide, gain' (Pok. 665). However, this is impossible, as a root
*lē- = *leh,- could never yield Greek λa-. Therefore, we can be quite sure that the
word is of Pre-Greek origin.
From Hell. *\άτpwv was borrowed Lat. latro 'hired soldier'.
Аaτúσσoμa [v.] 'clap, strike with the wings' (Opp.). <?>
⚫ETYM Expressive formation in -voow (cf. aivooш, лτεрúσσоμα), but otherwise
unclear. The word λaτáσσw (see λáτaž 1) is conceptually too far off.
λavкavín [f.] 'throat (II.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Later usually Aɛv-, see below.
⚫ETYM Formation like ȧpτηpía, etc., from an unattested *λaúк-avov (or -avoc, -ávn).
An aspirated by-form appears in λavxávη. уλwσσa 'tongue, language' (H.). Since
there are no certain correspondences (Lith. liaukà 'gland' has been proposed, but
does not convince), and as there is a variant with -X-, Pre-Greek origin is almost
certain. The form in λɛvк- (v.l. in Hom.) may be folk-etymological after λɛvêóç, but
may also be due to substrate origin.
Aaúpa [f.] 'narrow street, narrow passage, alley, quarter' (II.). <PG>
•VAR Ion. -pη.
•COMP diáλavpoç. oiкía µεуáλŋ лavτaɣóðεv λaúpais dienµµévη ‘a large house
surrounded by narrow streets on all sides' (H.).
•DER Perhaps Aаúpεov (-εov, -tov) [n.], a mount in Attica with famous silvermines
(Hdt., Th.), after the mine galleries?; in H. also λаupov. μéτаλλov áруúрov лαρà
Aŋvaíoɩç ‘a silvermine (Athens)'. Adjective Aaupε(1)wtikós 'belonging to A.' (Ar.).
ETYM Used to be connected with λãas 'stone', and further with Alb. lerë, -a ‘rock-
slip', but this comparison must be dropped, as λãaç did not have a -w-. Doubts
already in Schwyzer: 481 and 578¹. The word is no doubt Pre-Greek (note the name
of the mountain).
Aáqūpa [n.pl.] 'booty' (IA). <PG(S)►
●VAR Also -ov [sg.].
•COMP As a first member in e.g. λaqupo-лwλns [m.] 'who sells booty' (X.).
●DER λaqupɛúw (LXX), -έw (Aq.) [v.] 'to plunder'.
⚫ETYM The traditional analysis as a suffix -p-, added to a u-stem from the root of Skt.
lábhate 'to take, seize', is wrong. The word has the suffix -up-, which is Pre-Greek
(Pre-Greek: Suffixes).
λaqúoow [v.] ‘to swallow, gulp down' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. Aaqúčaɩ.
●DER λaqvуµós (com., AP), λáqušis (Ath.), laчúуµаτа [pl.] (epigr.) 'gluttony';
λaqúкτηs 'gourmand' (Arist.); also λaqúστioç 'gluttonous, devoured' (Lyc.), cf. Zevç
i
Xáxvn
839
Aaqúoτios (Hdt. 7, 197; from Aаqúστiov öpoç in Boeotia), in whose cult human
sacrifices occurred.
•ETYM Formation in -úσow related to λάлτш as a Pre-Greek word. Fur.: 225 also
connects it with aλay 'storm, hurricane', λaµupós 'voracious, eager', and the
family of após ‘impudent'.
Aaxaívw [v.] 'to dig' (A. R., Call., prefixed since w 242). <PG?(S)►
•VAR Aor. λaxñvai.
●COMP Also with ảµqɩ-, ¿ê-, dɩα-.
●DER Aάxavov [n.], usually -a [pl.], ‘garden-herbs, vegetables' (IA); often as a first
member, e.g. λaxаvо-лwληç 'greengrocer' (Critias, pap.).
Thence: 1. diminutives λaxávov (D. L., pap.), -ídtov (H.). 2. λaxaviкý, -óv ‘taxes on
vegetables' (Inscr. Magn., Sammelb.), Naxavápiov. herbarium (gloss.). 3. laxav-āç
(Hdn. Gr.), -ɛús (Procl.) 'greengrocer'. 4. λaxav-wdŋs (Arist., Thphr.), -ŋpós
(Thphr.), -10¢ (Jul., Ostr.) ‘ptng. to vegetables'. 5. Aaxavɛúw [v.] ‘to plant, cultivate,
harvest vegetables' (pap., Str., App.) with λaxavɛía ‘cultivation, etc. of vegetables'
(LXX, pap., J.), also λaxav-tá ‘gardenbeď (H., sch., also pap., but cf. Scheller 1951:
68f.); λaxávɛv-μa 'cultivation of vegetables' (Procl.), -τns 'greengrocer' (pap.). 6.
λaxavíčoμaι, -w (v.] 'to harvest vegetables, graze (of horses)' (EM, Hippiatr.), with
-toµós (Th., pap., Hippiatr.). Doubtful is λaxη in A. Th. 914 (lyr.): τáqwv natpó̟wv
Aaxaí 'the digging of the forefathers' graves' (sch.), which should rather be read as
Máxai to λayxávw, s.v.
⚫ETYM The substantive for 'vegetables' is probably of Pre-Greek origin, as suggested
by the suffix -avov. The denominative simplex λaxaívw, which has only late
attestations, is probably a back-formation from compounded forms; cf. especially
àµqɩ-\axaívw (w 242). See the remarks by Perpillou in DELG Supp. and Perpillou
RPh. 73 (1999): 96.
λáxɛa [adj.] epithet of vñσos ‘islanď (1 116), áкtý ‘cape' (к 509), v.l. έλáxɛia (see
λaxúc for the accent; cf. Schwyzer: 474', Chantraine 1942: 191). Mg. uncertain,
explained by H. as εüσкaçoç кai ɛüуɛoç, лapà τò laɣaívɛoðaι, ő éσtɩ okárteσðai
лкvwç ‘easy to cultivate, with good soil, after λ., which means to dig in dense rows'.
<?>
ETYM The commentary by H. is folk etymology. The connection with a Gm.
adjective for 'low, flat' (ON lágr, MHG læge) must be wrong, as these presuppose IE
*lehg, from which form the Greek -a- cannot be understood. Following this
etymology, modern interpreters have understood λáxɛɑ as 'low, flat', which does
not fit ȧкτn at all. In sum, no etymology.
λáxvŋ [f.] ‘woolly hair, down' (II.), metaph. of leafage (Nic., Opp.). ◄IE *u(o)lk- ‘hair’▷
•VAR Rarely λáxvw [dat.sg.], of the wool of a sheep (1 445).
●COMP λaxvó-yutos 'with hairy members' (E.).
●DER λaxv-ñɛiç, -ắɛs (Il., Pi.), -wdns (E.), -años (AP) 'woolly, hairy, shaggy';
λаxvóoμα [v.] 'to become hairy' (sol., AP) with Máxvwσiç (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Reconstructed as *λak-ov-ã and corresponding with an Iranian and Slavic
word for 'hair' via a pre-form *Fλaк-σv-ā < IE *ulk-sn-eh: Av. varǝsa- [m., n.], MoP

=== page 444 ===

840
入áw
gurs, OCS vlaso, Ru. vólos, all from IE *uolk-o-. Less probable, because of the
meaning, is the connection with OCS vlakno, Ru. voloknó ‘thread', Skt. valká- [m.]
'bark, sap-wood', from IE *uolk-. See ▸λáσioç.
Aάw [v.] mg. unclear, cf. Xáɛ. ¿yópŋoev, oi dè ¿qféyyɛto ‘cried, uttereď, λaŋµɛvái and
λaíɛiv. qеéyyɛσaɩ, but λáɛtε· σкoneïte, ßλénete ‘look, see' (H.). <?>
•VAR Only ptc. λáwv (τ 229 kúwv, h. Merc. 360 aiɛtóc), ipf. Náe (t 230 KÚWV).
•ETYM The ancient interpreters of T 229f. hesitated between 'see' (ẞλéлwv) and 'bark'
(úλáwv). In modern times, Lobeck has proposed a meaning ‘grasp' and two different
verbs: 1. 'seize' (T 229f., completely isolated), 2. 'see' (h. Merc. 360), the last of which
was also seen in ►åλaóc and in Skt. lasati (epic class.) 'to glow' (see Bechtel 1914 s.v.
á入aós).
Leumann 1950: 233ff. takes óžù láwv (h. Merc., 'crying loudly') as an innovation
from óžù λɛλŋkwę (KIPKOS X 141), which was wrongly analyzed as λɛ-Aŋ-kws (but
belongs to λáσкw), and then interpreted as 'having sharp sight' on the one hand,
and connected with a barking dog on the other.
Aɛßŋpiç 1, -ído¢ [f.] 'skin or slough of serpents' (Hp., J.), acc. to H. also = tò λéлoç toÛ
XÉTOS
кváμov ‘skin of a bean'; proverbially of empty or thin objects (com.), cf. H. tɩvèç dè
ävdpa λéßŋpiv yevéσðaɩ éɩwxóv ‘beggar'. <PG(S)►
•ETYM The IE analysis in Frisk seems misplaced. It is rather a Pre-Greek word,
because the suffix is also found in чußηpic and кúлηруç (S.V. ►кúлαчроç). Notе
λéẞivo (cod. -íveto)· épéẞivot 'chick-peas' (H.); see also Aɛßíaç and ►λéßns.
Aɛßŋpíç 2 [f.] ‘rabbit' (Str. 3, 2, 6); Massaliotic acc. to Polemarch. apud Erot. <LW
Iberia➤
•ETYM Of Iberian origin, like Lat. lepus and laurex, see WH s.vv. with litt. See also
Fur.: 347.
Xéßns, -ntos [m.] ‘kettle, cauldron' (Il.), on the mg. Brommer Herm. 77 (1942): 359
and 366f., also a monetary unit (Crete), see Leumann 1950: 282ff., Ruijgh 1957: 107.
<PG(S)►
⚫COMP iлvoλéẞηs 'kettle' (Luc., Ath.).
●DER Diminutive λɛßýt-iov, -iokos (IVª), -áptov (Poll.); Aɛßnt-wdns ‘kettle-shaped'
(Ath.); -íw [v.] ‘to cook in a kettle' (Lyc.).
⚫ETYM On the suffix, see Fur.: 172¹8. Pre-Greek origin is most likely; cf. ► kɛλéßŋ.
Aɛßíaç, -ov [m.] name of an unknown freshwater fish (Hell. com.); acc. to H. also = τà
λenidas éxovta tapíxη 'dried meat of a fish having scales'. <PG?(0) ►
•ETYM Formation like åкavėíaç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 94); otherwise unclear.
Thompson 1947 s.v. recalls the Eg. fish ȧλ(\)áẞns (Str., Ath.), but see ►å\\áßŋs.
Perhaps Pre-Greek.
Aéyvov [n.] 'colored edging, hem of a cloth' (Poll., H., sch.), also of the side of the
womb (Hp.). <PG?➤
●VAR Also -vn [f.].
Xɛyw
841
•DER λɛÿÿwτós ‘provided with λ.' (Call., Nic.), Aɛyvwdɛiç. roikilaç ‘varicolored',
λɛуvãσαɩ· лoкîλαι (H.).
•ETYM No etymology. Perhaps Pre-Greek.
Aɛyaɩ epithet of yuvaĩêɛç (Archil. 179). ◄PG?►
•ETYM LSJ cite it as Aέyos lewd'. Fur.: 346 connects it with Máyvos. Is it Pre-Greek?
See ►ελεyaivεɩv.
Aέyw [v.] ‘to collect, gather' (Il.; Att. prose only with prefix), 'to count, recount' (Il.),
'say' (post-Hom.). On use, mg. and inflexion see Fournier 1946: 53ff., 100ff.,
Chantraine BSL 41 (1940-1941): 39ff., Wackernagel 1916: 220ff. Beside it stand the
synonymous and suppletive verbs άyopɛúw, qŋµí, ɛinɛïv, ¿pŵ, ɛïpηka (see Seiler
Glotta 32 (1952): 154f.). <IE *leģ- ‘collect'>
•VAR Aor. λéžai, -aσða (epic έλéyuny, λéкto), pass. λε×¤ñvαι, fut. λεчw, -oµai, perf.
入É入eyuan, Si-eideyuan, ouv-eidoxa (el analogical).
•COMP Very often with prefixes like dɩa-, ¿ê-, ¿n-, kata-, ovv-.
•DER 1. Móyoç [m.] 'computation, account, esteem, reason; speech, word, statement'
(O 393, a 56); see Fournier 1946: 217ff., Boeder Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte 4 (1959):
82ff.; also from prefixed compounds, e.g. diá-, katá-, έñí-, σúλ-λoyos (to diaλéyoµai,
etc.), also in hypostases like ȧvá-, napá-λoyos (to àvà, лapà λóyov).
From Móyoç: a. diminutives: Xoy-ídov, -ápiov (Att.), -apídiov (pap.). b. adjectives:
Aoyás [m., f.] 'selected', substantivized 'choice soldier, etc.' (IA), semantically rather
to Aéyw, cf. Chantraine 1933: 351; Móyios 'notable' (Pi., etc.), τò λóytov ‘oracle' (IA);
on the development of mg. E. Orth, Logios (Leipzig 1926); λóyчuoç 'worth mention,
notable' (Hdt., pap.), usually ¿λóучµoç (to ¿v λóyw); λoyiкós 'regarding reason, etc.,
logical' (Philol., Hell.); λoyatos ‘chosen' (Str. 1, 3, 18; after Ibyc. 22), perhaps to λoyń,
see 2.; c. Aoyádŋv [adv.] ‘by accidental selection' (Th.; cf. λoyác). d. substantives:
Aoyɛús [m.] ‘orator, prose writer' (Critias, Plu., sch.) with loyɛtov ‘speakers' place,
scene' (Delos IIIª); kata-, ¿k-, ovλ-λoyɛúç from кatáλoyos, έkλoyń, etc.; e. verbs:
λoyíчoμaι [v.] 'to count, calculate, consider, estimate' (IA), often with prefix, àva-,
etc., with Aoy-toµós, -loµa, -lotýc, -loteŃw, -lotikóç, etc.; Aoyɛúw [v.] 'to collect
taxes', also with л-, ¿к-, (pap., inscr.), with Aoyɛía, λóy-evµa, -evtýs, -evtńpiov.
2. Aoyń [f.] 'reasoning, way' (= MoGr.; only late pap.; LSJ and DELG translate
'attention, heed'); isolated from compounds with έк-, кατα-, σvv-, dia-, etc. (IA,
etc.)?
3. Xéžiç [f.] ‘reason, way of speech, diction, style, (specific) word, phrase', also with
Siα-, έк-, кατα-, (Att., etc.); thence λɛídov, -εí- (Arr., Gal.), Lat. lexīdium; see
Leumann Sprache 1 (1949): 205; λɛžíкóv (scil. þ₁ßíov) 'containing εaç, lexicon'
(AB, Phot.).
4. λéyµa. tò ɛiŋɛïv ‘speaking' (H.), εлíλεуµа ‘excerpt (pap.), кaτá-λɛyμa 'tragic
song' (Sm., Al.), cf. кαταλéуɛσðα. ¿dúpeσðai tòv τεОvεwτα 'to bewail the deceased'
(H.).
5. diáλektos (to dia-λέyoμai) 'speech, dialect' (IA) with (diα-, ¿к-)λɛktikós ‘capable
of speaking, etc.' (Att., etc.: λéšiç, Aéyw).

=== page 445 ===

842
入eía
•ETYM The thematic root present λéyw, from which all stem forms and nominal
derivatives are derived, is identical with Lat. legō ‘to collect, etc.'. Also related is Alb.
mb-ledh 'to collect, harvest', which points to a palatal -g-. A synonymous root *les- is
found in Germanic, Baltic, and Hittite, e.g. MoHG lesen, Go. lisan 'to collect,
harvest', Lith. lèsti, 1sg. lesù 'to pick, eat picking' (beside lasýti 'to collect, select'),
Hitt. lešš-lišš- 'to pick, gather', (Hitt. līšāe-zi is unclear; cf. Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.),
but the relation between *les- and *leg- is unclear. See ▸λwyn.
Aɛía [f.] 'booty, spoils', especially of plundered cattle, of war, of hunting, also 'cattle,
herd' (Att.); cf. Edgerton AmJPh. 46 (1926): 177f. <IE *leh₂u- 'capture, seize'>
•VAR Ion. Aŋŋ, Dor. (Pi. O. 10, 44) Mάa [f.]; also λŋïç (Dor. λaïc), -ídos [f.] (Il.).
•COMP Compounds like λε-ηλaτéw [v.] 'to drive away prey, especially cattle; to
pillage' (Hdt., S., E., X.), after ẞo-, iñë-ŋλatéw, etc. from ßo-, iлл-ŋλá-τŋc) with
Aɛnλao-ia, -in (X., A. R.), -átŋois (Aen. Tact.); ảyɛ-λɛíŋ [f.] epithet of Athena: ‘who
provides booty' (Il.).
●DER Aŋïáç [f.] ‘the seized or captured one' (Y 193, A. R.); Aŋïtis [f.] ‘åyeλeiŋ' (K 460),
Aniác' (A. R., Lyc.); Anïdios 'belonging to the booty, captured' (AP, API.).
Denominative verb λŋïšoµai, λɛïšo̟μα to seize, plunder' (Il.), whence several nouns:
1. Aŋïotós, Aεïotós 'to be carried off as booty' (I 406, 408); 2. Aŋïσtúç [f.] ‘capturing,
plundering' (Hdt. 5, 6); 3. *Antoµós in λŋ(1)σµadía. aixµáλwtoç, λeλŋioµévŋ ‘captive,
prisoner of war' (H.); 4. Aŋïoτńp, \ŋotńp [m.] ‘plunderer, pirate, robber', fem.
AñστɛƖpα (Ael.), Aŋotpis (D., Herod.), with λŋστpikós ‘plundering' (IA), cf. λŋot-
ikós below; Aŋotη-piov, Dor. λασ- ‘gang or den of robbers, robbery' (Att., Cret.),
λaστnpɩɩ [pl.] ‘pirate' (Hell. poetry); 5. Aŋστwp, λño- ‘id.' (o 427); 6. Anïotńc, Ano-,
Aao ‘id.' (IA) with ληστɩкóç (often interchanged with Аŋστpiкóç); \ŋστɛúw [v.] 'to
rob, plunder', with Anστɛíα 'robbery' (Att.).
⚫ETYM The abstract Aɛía, Anin (from *λaƑ-ía) and the 18-derivation Anis (from *λãƑ-
(8-) that exists alongside it may either go back to a noun *λãƑ(-0)- vel sim., or
directly to a verbal root, the zero-grade of which is supposed in ►άлoλaúw. See
further λapós and ►λñïov.
λɛißw [v.] ‘to pour, drip, make a libation' (Il.). ◄IE? *leh,-i-, *lei- ‘pour out, drip'>
•VAR Aor. Aεiчal.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. кata-,
εTI-.
•Der A. λɛißñvoç. ¿ Atóvvσos (H.), Aɛißŋеpov (\íß-) [n.] ‘wet place, gutter' (Eup.
428), Aɛíẞdny 'in drops' (EM).
B. Ablauting: Aoɩßý [f.] ‘libation' (Il.) with oß-ɛov (Plu.), -íç (Antim., inscr.),
-áσlov (Epich.) 'vase for libations', -años ‘ptng. to libation' (Ath.); λoчẞãtai. onévdel,
Oúɛɩ 'makes a libation, sacrifices' (H.), cf. below.
C. Zero-grade: 1. *λys [f.] ‘libation, drop', only in gen. Mßós, acc. λíßa (A., A. R.),
with ẞηpós 'wet' (Hp. apud Gal.); 2. Xíys, Xißóc [m.] “the dripper”, name of the
rain-bringing southwest or west wind, also of the point of the compass: 'southwest,
west' (Hdt., Arist.), with ßiкós ‘(south) westerly' (pap.). For λíys. … ééέtpa, ás̟' ñs
üdwρ στáčɛɩ ‘rock from which water drips' (H.), cf. aiyiλy. 3. From Mių: Aßác,
-ádoc [f.] ‘spring, etc.' (trag., etc.), diminutive Aßádiov (Str., Plu.), also 'xwpíov
...
入ellóv, -Wvog
843
Boτavādɛç', i.e. 'wet meadow' (H., EM); λßáčw, -áčoμα [v.] 'to drip' (AP, Poll.),
with ảлo- metaph. 'to throw away, remove oneself (com.). 4. Xíßos [n.] = \ißás (A.
Ch. 448 [lyr.], Gal.). On ißpós, see s.v.
•ETYM The zero grade primary noun λíu is unexpected beside the regelar full grade
thematic Aɛißw, whence λɛyaɩ. One compares vɛiqɛɩ vioa, while evidence of the
gloss λißeɩ oñévdɛ, έkyúvɛɩ ‘libates, pours out' (H.) must be considered uncertain.
Lat. lībāre pour out, spill' may either be a borrowing from Greek (LIV² s.v. 2.
*leiH-), or be unrelated in case it derives from the root *h₂lib¹- 'to anoint' (De Vaan
2008 s.v. lībō). In the former case, the root is considered that of OCS liti, 1sg. lujo̟,
lějo 'to pour', Lith. líeti, isg. líeju, assuming that the Greek -ß- is secondary, e.g. after
► ɛïßw ‘to drip'. λaßá· στayúv ‘drop' (H.) may be a mistkae for Noßá (DELG).
Aɛíµaž, -akoç [?] 'slug', only H. s.v. λɛíµakɛç (cf. λɛiµáv): čσtɩ dè кaì чãov öμoov
koxλía, ö kaλoñσɩ λɛчμaкa 'there is also an animal similar to the snail, which is called
λ.'. <IE? *lei->
⚫ETYM Identical with Lat. līmāx (Pl.) 'id.' (which is probably a Greek loan), but also
with Ru. slimák 'snake' and other Slavic words. Thus, it has to be a derivative in -āk-
of the m-stem seen in Gm. (ON slím ‘slime', also OHG, OE; Lat. līmus 'id.'. Since IE
did not have a suffix *-eh₂k-, it is highly improbable that there is a direct connection
between the Slavic and Greek forms.
Aɛчµwv, -wvoç [m.] ‘moist, grassy place, humid meadow' (II.), metaph. of flowered
surfaces and objects (Ach. Tat., Philostr.). <IE? *lei-mōn, acc. *li-men-m, gen. *li-mn-
OS>
•COMP ẞavλεíμwv (Pi.), -λɛчµoç (II.), with transition to the o-stems, 'with grassy
meadows'; ȧ-λíμεvoç 'without harbour or refuge' (Att.).
⚫DER Aεчuovios of the meadow' (A., Arist.), fem. -tác (S., A. R.), -íc (D. P.), -tov [n.]
plant name, 'Statice limonium' (Dsc., Plin.); λɛчv-чáτη λíеos name of a stone
green as grass (Plin.). With change of suffix (after лīdaž, þŵλaž, etc.): λɛчµaž, -akoç
[f.] ‘meadow' (E. [lyr.]), ‘garden' (Pherecr.), with -αкwdŋs 'meadow-like, grassy'
(Hp.), -akides výµqaɩ (Orph. A. 646; uncertain; codd. λųµvakidwv).
With different ablaut: Au̟ýv, -évos [m.] ‘harbour, protected creek', also metaph.
'refuge' (II.), 'gathering place, marketplace' (Thess.; acc. to H. also Cypr.; cf. Bechtel
1921, 1: 450f.). Diminutive Aчuévɩov (Str.; MoGr. λчávɩ is from Osman. liman; see
Maidhof Glotta 10 (1920): 14); λчévios 'belonging to the harbour' (Paus.), Aquɛvítŋc,
fem. -îτɩç ‘inhabitant of a harbour' (Corycos), of Priapos and Artemis, respectively,
as deities of the harbour (AP, see Redard 1949: 23), Aiµev-ntikà xpýµata ‘harbour
taxes' (Cod. Just.), with analogical -ŋtɩká, if not itacistic for -ɩtiká), Aquɛv-í\w [v.] ‘to
build a harbour' (Polyaen.).
With a zero grade suffix, enlarged after the ã-stems: Xíµvŋ [f.] 'stagnant water, pond,
lake, marsh' (Il.), Auva [pl.] place in Athens, in Sparta, etc. (Att.); compounds like
E-Aчuvoç 'with many lakes' (Arist.). Thence many derivatives: 1. diminutive Aчuvíov
[n.] (Arist.). 2. Aчuvaños living in lakes, etc., belonging to the lake' (IA); 3. λųµvás [f.]
‘id.' (Theoc., Paus.). 4. Aqµvýtŋg, -tɩç (-îtc) ‘id.' (Theoc., Paus., inscr.), λµvɩtiká
[n.pl.] name of a tax (pap.). 5. λчuvádŋs ‘like a lake or marsh' (IA). 6. plantname :

=== page 446 ===

844
Aɛtoc
λчv-σov, -ŋσía, -notis, -notpov, -ŋστpię (Dsc., Gal.). 7. Denominative verbs:
λчµváčw ‘to build a λ.; to stagnate, put under water' (Arist.), with λчµvaσµóç ‘flood,
inundation³, -aστýs surveyor of the inundation', -aστɛía 'inundation works' (pap.),
-aoía 'marshy ground' (Arist.); Aчuvóoµαι [v.] ‘to build a λ.' (Thphr., Str.).
•ETYM The primary formations aчµóv and Aчµýv, λíμvŋ show old ablaut in both
stem and suffix. They are isolated in Greek, and have no outer-Greek counterpart.
One might start from an old paradigm nom. *lei-mōn, acc. *li-men-m, gen. *li-mn-os.
For the etymology, only suppositions are at hand. Starting from the idea ‘moistness,
standing water, etc.', it has been connected with Lat. līmus ‘mud', to which may
belong the words mentioned under Aɛiua with anlauting sl-. Also, words mentioned
s.v. ►λɛíßw, e.g. Lith. líeti, might be considered as well. Pok. 309 defends connection
with Lat. līmus ‘oblique', līmen 'threshold', and without m-suffix, e.g. Latv. le ja ‘dale,
valley', assuming a basic sense of *dip, low place, bay'.
Aɛчoç [adj.] ‘level, smooth', of the soil, of surfaces, etc. (Il.), also ‘rubbed, well-ground'
(Delos, pap., Dsc.), cf. Aε(1)aivw, -ów below. ◄IE? *lei- 'smooth'?>
•VAR Aɛíwc [adv.] (also λéwę after τɛλéwç, ǹdźwç, etc., cf. also Aɛ(1) aívw below)
'smoothly', also metaph. 'completely, totally' (IA), cf. Lat. plānē, MoHG glatt.
•COMP Frequent as a first member, like in λató-qλotos with smooth bark' (Thphr.),
also with adverbial value (with -w- after Aɛ(i)wc), e.g. Aɛwλŋs = лavwλŋs (Rhodos
VI³), λεw-кóvτos ‘turned into fine dusť', -кópηos 'swept clean', i.e. ‘utterly
destroyed (Theognost., H., Phot.), λεw-лátηtos ‘completely trodden down' (S. Ant.
1275 with v.l. λαк-rátytos, see ►λáč); cf. further Newруóç = лavoñруoç, kakoρyoç
(Archil. 88, 3, A. Pr. 5, X.), see Chantraine Glotta 33 (1954): 25ff.
⚫DER εóτη [f.] 'smoothness' (Att.), Aɛía 'beardless boy' (EM, H.); two
denominatives: Aε(1)aívw [v.] 'to smoothen, grind' (II.), also with έK-, ovv-, ȧño-, etc.
Thence Aε(i)av-σiç, -týp, -tikóç, εкλεα-σµóç, etc. (Arist.); further Aɛtów [v.] 'id.'
(Arist.), also ouv-, àлo-, etc.; thence Aɛíw-ua 'powder' (Thphr.); -oɩ ‘grinding'
(Gal.).
•ETYM Beside the o-stem in *λεчƑoç, Latin has an i-stem lēvis ‘smooth', which may
have replaced an older u-stem (cf. brevis). Schrijver 1991: 283f. proposed that *λεifoç
and levis go back on a u-stem *leh,i-u-, with secondary thematicization in Greek. The
root is also found in λitóc and cognates (see λic 2), and probably in ►λɛíµač.
λɛíлw [v.] 'to leave (behind)', intr. 'to be wanting, disappear', med. 'to depart' (II.). <IE
*leik"- 'leave behind'>
•VAR λчμлάvw (Sapph., Hp., Th., v.l. A 604), fut. Aɛíчw, aor. Aлεïv, perf. λελoлα,
med. Aéλɛчuμα (all Il.+), aor. pass. Aɛioеñva (h. Merc., Pi.), aor. Aɛiyaɩ (Ar.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, ¿k-, ¿v-, katα-, ȧлo-. As a first member in several
governing compounds, partly with privative mg., like Алó-τɛкvoç 'childless' (Pi.),
see Schwyzer: 442. On the formation of the stem see Sommer 1948: 124f. Also with
inversion of the members, like in σapкo-λлýs (AP) for λñó-σapкoç (Hp.). Also
note ɛ(1) in λy-dp-íα 'lack of water' (Thphr.), etc.
Aεíτwp, -opos
845
⚫DER Substantives: 1. Аεчµµα (úлó-, кaτá-, λ-, etc.) ‘rest' (IA, Arist.). 2. Aɛiyiç (ěk-,
άлó-, etc.) ‘leaving, continuing absence' (IA). 3. Aɛíчavov, mostly plur. -a
‘remainder' (E., Ar., Pl.). 4. ¿êλɛn-ia ‘lack' (J.).
Adjectives: 5. λoñós (also úró-, katá-, etc. from úão-λɛíïw, etc.) ‘remaining' (post-
Hom.), with (úлo)λoñ-áç [f.] ‘rest' (pap.), åñoλoë-ɑσíɑ ‘id.' (Hero, pap.). 6. ¿ê-,
¿v-, úño-λiñ-ýc, etc. (v.l. -λɛлηc) ‘lacking, remaining, etc.² (Att.). 7. ¿к-, ¿v-, napa-,
úño-λɛintikóç ‘regarding the кλç' (Hell.).
Apart stands íσσwµεv· έáσwµεv ‘let us leave/depart' (H.); the explanation is
dubious, cf. Schwyzer: 692.
•ETYM The thematic root aorist -λɩë-ɛ has exact parallels in Arm. e-lik', Skt. áricat,
from IE *h,é-lik™-e-t 'he left'. An old perfect *(le-)loik"-h₂e is continued in Skt. riréca,
λελoɩлα, and (without reduplication) in Germanic (e.g. Go. laih) and Lat. līquī. The
nasal present λчμлávш best resembles Arm. lk-an-em < IE *lik™-n-; nasal presents of
various formation are found elsewhere too, e.g. Skt. riņákti, Lat. linquō. The thematic
root present λεíлà corresponds to the Gm. verb in e.g. Go. leihvan, OHG lihan 'to let,
lend', and to Lith. lieku 'to let'. The last stands for older athematic liekmi. The Gm.
present may go back to a nasalized *linhu-, which would correspond to Lat. linquō.
For the various formations, see now LIV² s.v. *leik"-.
The correspondence of λoлós with the substantives Skt. ati-reka- [m.], Lith. āt-
laikas, OCS oto-lěk ‘remainder' < IE *-loik"-o- is noteworthy.
Aɛíptov [n.] ‘lily, Lilium candidum' (h. Cer. 427, Hp., A. R., Thphr., Dsc.; AɛípioV
ǎvēεчov Pi.), also ‘narciss' (Thphr., Dsc.). <PG(0)►
•COMP As a second member in the PN IIoda-λɛipios (Il.).
●DER Aɛipɩvos ‘prepared from lilies' (Dsc., Gal.), also ‘lily-like' (ǎvoç, Thphr. HP 3,
18, 11; not entirely certain), Aɛipt-wdns ‘lily-like' (Thphr.), -óɛç 'ptng. to the lily' (Nic.
Al. 406). Aɛipióɛɩs also of the skin (N 830), of the voice or the singing of cicadas (I
152), of the song of the Muses (Hes. Th. 41, Q. S. 2, 418); Aɛípios of the voice (A. R.,
Orph.), also of the eyes (B. 17, 95), Aɛipós, Aɛipá [n.pl.] of the song of the cicadas (IG
14, 1934: f6, metr. inscr.).
•ETYM Like Lat. lilium, the word comes from an eastern Mediterranean language; a
comparable word for 'lily' is found in Coptic: hrêri, hlêli (Eg. ḥrr-t). We also find
several like words for 'flower', Hamit. ilili, alili, Alb. lule, Hitt. alil-, alēl; see WH s.v.
lilium, Benveniste BSL 50 (1954): 43, Fur.: 369.
The poetic word Aɛpióɛic and (later attested - probably back-formations) Aɛípios
and Aɛpóc, as epithets of the skin and the voice, can be understood as derivatives of
Aɛiptov ‘lily-white, soft as lilies'; see Wærn Eranos 50 (1952): 19f. Leumann 1950: 27f.
doubts that intermediate phases can be reconstructed. Others (see Frisk) connected
the gloss ɛpós (cod. -wc). ¿ loxvòç kai wxpós ‘thin and pale' (H.), arisen by
dissimilation from *λaλóc, which would belong to Lith. leilas 'thin, slender'.
Improbable.
Aeitovpyéw (Anït-), -ía, -ós →λaós.
Aɛíτwp, -opoç [m.] 'priest' (post-class. Att. inscr.). <PG(V)►

=== page 447 ===

846
入elxiv, -ñvos
•VAR Óμo-λεíτwρ = σvλ-λεIτOUрyós (Att. inscr. IIP), Aɛíτopɛç. iépεiαι (H.); Aŋτñрεç.
iɛpoì στεavηópot. Aеαµãvεç (H.), fem. Antɛipaι. iépɛiαɩ τwν σεµvæv 0εwv (H. =
Call. Fr. 123), Aɛítɛipŋ. iépɛiai (Boeot. apud H.); uncertain Arc. Aɛtopo<ç> (IG 5(2),
405).
⚫DER Denominative AεTopεúw [v.] 'to be λɛíτwp' (Thess. since IIª; perhaps also Eg.,
see Wilhelm AfP 9: 214ff.). Details on the distribution in Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930):
83f., also Fraenkel 1910: 145, Bechtel 1921, 1: 207f., Benveniste 1948: 47fn. Cf. also
άλńtwp. iɛpeús (H.); further λεTwp 'priest' (inscr. Arc.).
ETYM Because of the form Aŋτñрεs, which is ascribed to the northwestern
Athamanes, and (if correctly explained) because of Arc. AɛTopo<<>> Thess. and
Boeot. Aɛt seem to represent PGr. An-. Att. Aɛíτwp may then perhaps be a loan from
Boeotian. For the same reason, the semantically attractive connection with λ½ï-tos,
Aŋŋ and Aτη 'iépɛia', and also with AεToupуós (see aóc), presents difficulties.
Moreover, Twp, Tp (instead of tηs) is remarkable as a secondary suffix. Other
hypotheses (see Frisk): relations to λáτpov; and to λioσoµai, Aitaí. To my mind, the
prothetic vowel seems to point to a Pre-Greek word.
λɛxĤv, -ñvos ‘lichen'. →λɛíxw.
Aɛíxw [v.] 'lick' (IA). <IE *leigh- 'lick'>
•VAR Aor. λɛižai, fut. λɛízw.
●COMP Also with лéεpɩ-, dia-, ávα-, έк-, etc. As a first member in Aɛx-nvwp and other
parodising PNs (Batr.).
•Der λɛxýv, -ñvos [m.] “the licker", ‘lichen, moss, rash' (A., Hp., Thphr.), with
λɛɩxýv-ŋ plantname = µuptáкavšos (Dsc.), -wdŋs ‘lichen-like”, -ɩкóç ‘ptng. to moss'
(medic.), Aɛxηv-táw [v.] 'to suffer from λ.' (Thphr.). škλɛy-µa (to ¿к-λɛíxw) ‘tablet,
candy', èкλεк-Tóv 'id.' (medic.).
Ablauting: 1. Axavós (dáкtvλoc) [m.] 'forefinger' (Hp., pap.), with oppositive accent
(Schwyzer: 380) Xixavoc [m.] 'the string struck by the forefinger' (Aristox., Arist.);
Axác, -ádoc [f.] 'the distance between the forefinger and the thumb' (Hero, Poll.),
after dɩɣáç, лεуτάç, etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 358) for expected *λxaváç. 2.
\xµáoµai, -áw [v.] ‘to lick' (since © 123; on λελixµótɛç Hes. Th. 826 see Leumann
1950: 218), also with άлo-, лερɩ-, etc. Thence λxµ-ýµwv, -ńpns ‘licking' (Nic.) and
Axµáç. Opīvaž. kaì ȧnalǹ nóa kaì xaµaiñetýc, ñv tà èpëɛtà èñɩλɛíɣovot ‘trident, also
a delicate herb on the ground which snakes (animals) lick' (H.). Lengthened forms:
Axμάw (Hes. Sc. 235, Nic.), -alvw (Opp.) ‘id.' 3. Mixvos 'fond of sweets, greedy,
gluttonous, tasty' (Att., Hell.) with Axvwdŋs ‘id.' (Ael.), Axvótŋs ‘greediness' (sch.);
denominative verb λxvɛúw, -oμai 'to be greedy, swallow' (D. H., Ph., Plu.), also with
¿ïɩ-, nɛpɩ-; thence λívεvμa 'delicacy' (Sophr.), Axvɛía ‘dainty, rapacity' (Pl., X.).
•ETYM Beside the thematic root present λɛixw, from which all other Greek forms
derive, the related languages show several formations: a full grade yod-present in
Lith. liežiù, OCS ližo̟; nasal present in Lat. lingō; iterative formations in Go. bi-laigon,
Lith. laižýti < IE *loigh-; several full grade formtions in Arm. liz-um, -em, -anem; zero
grade in Olr. ligim, gemination in OHG lecchōn, etc.
λéμpos
847
An athematic present with old ablaut is retained in Skt. léhmi, lihmás [1pl.] < IE
*léigh-mi, *ligh-més. Greek too once had zero grade verbal forms, as evidenced by
nouns like Axavós (cf. леavós), Xixvos and the denominative xuάo̟μα, which
presupposes an μ-stem λX-μ- (Schwyzer: 7259). See now LIV2 s.v. *leigh on the
various types of formation.
Aɛкávŋ [f.] 'basin, dish' (Ar., inscr., pap.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR λakávη (Hell.), -íσкn (H.).
•DER Aɛkáv-tov (Ar.), -ídiov (Poll., Eust.), -íç [f.] (Ar., Plu., Luc.), -íoкŋ [f.] (com.).
Also λékoç [n.] ‘id.' (Hippon.) with Aɛkáptov (Hell.), Aɛkís [f.] (Epich.), -íokoç [m.]
(Hp.) ‘id.', -íσкiov as a measure (Hp.).
•ETYM For λεкávŋ, cf. natávŋ, oúpávη, and other names of utensils in -ávŋ, -avov
(Chantraine 1933: 197ff.); also note λékos beside the vessel name ǎyyoç. The pair
λéкoç λɛкávη is comparable with στέqoç: στɛávη, ερкoç: ερкávη (though the
latter is late; see on ρкoç).
Outer-Greek connections that were proposed (see Frisk) are almost certainly wrong;
the word is Pre-Greek (thus already E-M s.v. lanx). The variants with λaк- are not
due to a (late) assimilation, but rather point to substrate origin. See Fur.: 352.
The word Aɛкávη was borrowed as Arab. leken, Osman. lejen, which in turn was
borrowed as MoGr. tò Aɛyévɩ ‘bowl, dish' and Ru. legin 'kind of vase'.
λéкɩboç [m.] 'gruel or pulse of cereals' (Hp., Gal., com.), fem. 'yolk' (Hp., Arist.).
<PG(S)►
●DER λɛкílov [n.] (PHolm. 19, 41), λɛkɩð-wdŋs ‘color of yolk' (Hp., Thphr.), -ítŋs
ǎpτos 'bread from leguminous plants' (Ath.).
•ETYM Because of the suffixes and the meaning, the word is clearly of Pre-Greek
origin. DELG recalls the TN Aɛкíеŋ.
λέкτpov ‘bed, couch', etc. →λéxos.
AɛƖŋuévos [adj.] ‘longing for' (Il., Emp., A. R.). <?>
•VAR Late finite forms λελin-to (A. R.), -σal (Theoc., Orph.).
•ETYM An isolated perfect formation, traditionally connected with aíoμαι;
ɛλɩŋuévos is then taken to be analogical after tɛtɩŋuévos; critique of this in Tichy
1983: 2307. She suggests connection with Xíŋy, or an epic “Streckform" for
*λελημεvoç to λñv 'want'. Uncertain.
Aέußos [m.] 'small fast-sailing galley' (D., Anaxandr., Hell.). <LW Illyr.?>
•DER λεµßŵdεç лλoĩov (Arist.).
ETYM Lat. lembus is a loan from Greek. A foreign word without etymology; perhaps
Illyrian (see the litt. in WH s.v. lembus).
λéuqos [m., n.] 'mucous discharge from the nostrils, kópvča, µúža' (Lib., Moer., H.,
Tz.); plur. also 'putrescent carcasses' (Phot., Eust.), metonymic 'simple man' (Men.).
<PG(V)>
⚫DER λεμowdŋç 'snivelling' (sch.).

=== page 448 ===

848
AÉTIC
•ETYM Fur.: 160 recognized that it is the same word as λáµлη, which shows
characteristic Pre-Greek variations.
入ÉES→入éyw.
Аɛóларdoç [m.] 'leopard' (Gal., Edict. Diocl.). <GR>
•VAR Also λεолάрбαλç (see Wessely Glotta 6 (1915): 29f.).
•ETYM Starting from the Iliad, the normal word for leopard' was ►лápdalıç.
Probably, λɛóлapdos was formally influenced by Lat. pardus, leopardus, or even a
borrowing from Latin (DELG). The analysis as a compound of λéwv and лápdoç is
doubtful, because лápdoç is only attested in Ael. NA 1, 31 (v.l. лáрdaλos), and λɛo-
instead of Aɛovτo- is rare, e.g. Aɛo-Spáкwv, name of a mythical being (Crete IV³).
λéлadvov [n.] ‘broad leather strap, fastening the yoke to the neck and the girth' (Il.,
A., Ar., AP, pap.). ◄PG(S)►
•VAR Mostly plur. -va; also λéñava (Apollon. Lex.), with Sv > µv (Schwyzer: 208).
•DER λεлadv-1σTŃp [m.] 'end of the λ.' (Poll.), like ẞpaxiov-lσtηp, кopu-lσTŃp, etc.
⚫ETYM Frisk's connection with λεлáç, -ádoç ‘limpeť' (adducing óлd-vós, naid-vós;
Chantraine 1933: 194) is semantically strange: the λéлadvα would cling to the neck
like snails (he compares Ar. V. 105 woлεр λεлàç itpodexóµevos to кíovɩ 'clinging to
the pillar like a snail'). Without a doubt, a Pre-Greek word.
λéлaç [n.] 'bare rock, mountain' (Simon., A., E., Th.). <LW Medit.?>
•VAR Only nom. and acc. sg.
•DER λɛлaïoç ‘rocky' (E.); λɛлáç, -ádos [f.] ‘limpeť (Alc. Z 36, 2 [uncertain], Epich.,
com., Arist.), as the animal clings to the rock (cf. H. λenádes. tà npòs taïs nétpais
kekoλλŋµéva koyxúλia 'mussels sticking to the rocks'), but alternatively, derived
from λéлoç, λɛлiç 'shell, scale'.
From λéлaç: λεлaotý (-áotŋ) [f.] ‘limpet-like drinking cup' (com.) with λɛлαστíç,
-ídos 'id.' (vase-inscr., H.); on the formation Schwyzer: 503; borrowed as Lat. lepista,
-еsta; λéлαστроv. okɛñóç tɩ άλiævτIкÓV ‘a fisherman's instrument' (H.), cf.
аεлαστроv, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 333f.); λεлadεvoμα [v.] 'to collect λ.s' (H., Phot.).
⚫ETYM The similarity between λéπaç and Lat. lapis, -idis [m., f.] 'stone' is hardly
accidental; a Mediterranean borrowing is most probable.
λeñaotý (-áotn) →λéñas.
Аéлw [v.] 'to peel (off)' (Il.). <PG(S,V) ►
•VAR Aor. Aéyal, fut. Aéyw (II.), perf. med. ȧлo-λéλε (Epich.), aor. pass.
άлελéŋ· áñελεñíσðŋ (H.); ablauting λéλαчa (Att. inscr. around 330ª), έк-λαлñvαι
(Ar. Fr. 164).
•DIAL Myc. re-po-to /leptos/.
•COMP Sometimes with ȧлo-, έк- (see above), лερi-, Èni-.
•DER A. With e-grade (from the present): 1. λεлτós (cf. στpεлτós) ‘peeleď (Y 497),
‘thin, lean, weak, fine, delicate' (II.), often as a first member. Poetic and lengthened
Аεлτ-αλéoç 'weak, fine' (II.), see Chantraine 1933: 255; λɛnt-akɩvóç ‘id.' (AP), perhaps
from *λéлτα (Bechtel 1914 s.v. (pučaкivóc); further λεлτíoу 'mug' (pap.) from
入ÉTW
849
Аεлτóν (scil. кεрάuov) 'thin earthenware' (pap.), λεлτάуioν a kind of vase? (PHib. 1,
47, 13; III), acc. to the editors perhaps = λεлτóуɛov 'barren land'; λεлτάρioν name
λɛлtáptov
of a medical instrument (Herm. 38, 282); λεлτíτdεç кpiðαí kind of barley (Gp.);
λertótŋs [f.] ‘thinness, leanness, etc.' (IA), λεлτоσúvŋ ‘'id.' (AP); λεлτúvш [v.] 'to
make thin, etc.' (Нp., X., Arist.), λεntvoµós, Aéntuvois (Hp.), -vvtikós (Dsc., Gal.).
2. λεлpós ‘scaly, leprous, uneven, raw' (Hp., Hippon., Hell.), fem. λεлpáç (Theoc.,
Оpp.); λéлpa (Ion. -pn) ‘leprosy' (Ion., Arist., Hell.), both probably first from an p-
stem (cf. Schwyzer: 481); λεлpódŋs ‘uneven, leprous' (Ael., Dsc., medic.), λɛñpikóS
'relating to rash or lepra' (Dsc., pap.); denominative verbs: λɛлpáw [v.] 'to become
scaly or leprous' (Ion.), also λεлр-táw (Dsc.), after the verbs of disease in -táw;
λεлрóομα ‘id.' (LXX, pap.) with λéлpwσ = λéлpα (Tz.), λεлрúvoμa 'to become
scaly, uneven' (Nic.). 3. λéлoç [n.] (Alex., Nic., Luc.) with λéлov (Нp.), usually λεлíç,
-ídos [f.] (Ion. Hell.) ‘scale, shell, pod, metal plate' with diminutive λεлídov (Hero),
also as a plant name 'pepperwort' (Dsc., Gal., Ath.; as a remedy against rash),
λɛrdíokη ‘id.' (Imbros IIª); further λεлd-wτóç ‘scaly' (Hdt., Arist.), with λɛnɩdóoµai
'to become scaly' (Hp.); other denominatives: λεлí¼w (to λéños or λεлíc) [v.] 'to
remove the scale, to peel off (Hell.), with λéлσμα 'scale' (LXX, Dsc., Gal.); έλéлovv.
olov ελéлov... (H.); note λéлaσμа 'pod, skin' (sch. Nic. Th. 184); rather lengthened
from λéлoç than from *λɛлά(w. 4. Оn λεлáç, λéлαç sее s.v. 5. λéлüрov 'shell, poď'
(LXX, Batr.) with λɛлpódηs like a shell' (Thphr.); λɛлúp-tov ‘id.' (Hp., Arist.,
Theoc.), -ɩwdŋs ‘id.' (Arist., Thphr.), λɛñvpíšoµai [v.] ‘to be contained in a husk or
shell' (sch.), λεлupiwoai. ¿§axvpɩwoat (H.); besides λεлúpós 'contained in a shell'
(Nic.). On itself stands λεлúxavov 'skin of an onion, rind of fruit' (Theopomp. Com.,
Plu., Dsc.).
B. With o-grade: 6. λолóç [m.] 'peel, rind' (t 233, Hp.) with λóлчдoç 'easy to peel off,
(Nic., Gal.), λóлчча· кáστаvα chestnuts' ... (H.); diminutive λoлáç [f.] 'dish', also
name of a crustacean and of a botanical disease (com., Thphr., Luc.), with λoлád-tov
(com., pap.), -íσкoç (sch.); λoлíç 'scale, dish, etc.' (Ar., inscr.) with λoлíðɩov (Delos);
denominative λortáw [v.] 'to flake off, let the bark peel off (Thphr.), λoníšw ‘id.'
(Thphr., pap.), Noëŋtós [m.] ‘time of bark peeling off (Thphr.). 7. On oч, see
S.V.
C. With lengthened grade: 8. Awлη 'pod, coat' (Od., Theoc., A. R.), λшлоç [m.] 'id.'
(Alc. [?], Hippon., Anacr., Herod.); as a first member in λwлo-dú-τηs [m.] “who
dresses in other peoples' clothes", 'thief of clothes' with λwлоdvτ-έw, etc. (Att.);
without a suffix λwy. xλauúç 'mantle, cloak' (H.). Diminutive λóлov (Arist., inscr.);
denominative àπo-, nɛρi-λwni w 'to undress, put off (S., Hyp.).
•ETYM The primary thematic present λéлw, from which all verbal forms were derived
(λελαчα, -λαлñvaɩ are innovations after στpαчai, otpaqñval, etc.), has no direct
correspondences outside Greek. There are a few nominal formations resembling the
Greek forms: Lith. lapas 'leaf, Alb. lapë 'rag, leaf, peritoneum' (~ λoлóc), Lith. lōpas
'rag, piece' (~λшлоç), together with Ru. lápot' 'shoe of bark', lapotók 'rag, piece'. The
form λéлoç was also compared with the s-stem Lat. lepōs 'grace', and the extension in
Ru. lépest 'rag, piece, leaf of a flower'.

=== page 449 ===

850
λéσqos
However, we may safely conclude that the verb is non-IE (and Pre-Greek): there is
hardly any exact correspondence, and the semantics are not very convincing. Note
the forms λɛлáyɩov, λenakivós, λénaojia, λérvpov, λεлúɣavov, λérpa, λŵy, Aŵños,
etc., with suffixes and/or alternations of Pre-Greek appearance.
Aéoqos smooth'. λíσлоç.
Aéσxn [f.] lounge' (σ 329, Hes.), 'resting-place, grave' (Rhodos), 'public building'
(Dor., Att.), 'talk, gossip' (Ion. poet.). <PG(S) / LW Anat.?>
•COMP \-\εσxos 'subject to gossip' (Hdt. 1, 153), from ¿v λéσxŋ; ˜pó-λèσxoç ‘eager
to talk' (A. Supp. 200), cf. лpó-xεipoç, etc.; on ►ådoλéoxys see s.v.
•DER λɛσxĤv, -ñvos [m.] ‘chatterer' (Timo 46); \ɛoxyveĩ· óµλeĩ, µvôo\oyɛĩ (H.).
Aeoxałos. ¿Enyntýs, dµλntýs (H.); λɛσxápaι· olov ai σxolaí ... (EM 561, 17), see
Solmsen 1909: 124f. Two month names of unclear formation: Aɛσxaváσios (Tegea),
Aɛσxavópios (Thessal., Gortyn); also Алóλλwv Аεσηópios (from the λéσxαɩ which
were under his protection?).
•ETYM Most often connected with λéxos 'bed' as PGr. *lek"-skā-. However, Greek had
no nominal suffix *-sk-, so a σk-present *λéx-ok-ɛtai > *λéoxetai has been assumed
to underlie Aéσxn. However, there is no trace of this verb. OHG lescan (MoHG
löschen) ‘to disappear' (supposed to derive from 'to lie down') and OIr. lesc 'lazy' are
uncertain.
As the σxη was not necessarily a room for lying down, the whole etymology (even
granting that *λeσXετα really existed) is improbable. Long ago, the agreement with
Hebr. liškāh was observed. This cannot be ignored. It was assumed that Greek took
the word from the East (cf. West 1997: 38), and not the other way round, and as the
word is isolated in North West Semitic; Schrader 1911: 469 already assumed that both.
languages took it from Anatolia, which seems the most probable interpretation. This
is accepted by Fur.: 295, 257, who points out that the suffix of ɛσxápal is non-Greek;
he also points to the variant Hebr. niškāh, which may point to Anatolian interchange
Un, as in Fur: 388.
Aɛvyaλéos [adj.] ‘wretched, unhappy, sore, baneful, etc.' (Il.). ◄IE? *leug- ‘break'>
•DER Avypós ‘id.' (Il.).
•ETYM The pair Aɛvyaλéos : Avypós has a (late) parallel in ¿pɛvaλéos : έpvłpós.The
word Aɛvyaλéos is isolated and archaic, and may derive from a noun (perhaps
*λεuyoç, like pεvos, and cf. ȧpyaλéoç: äλyoç, Bapσaléoç: Bápσoç, etc.; Schwyzer:
484). The word Avypós is isolated, as well (perhaps it derives from a primary verb;
see below).
The Greek adjectives have no direct correspondences in other languages, but there
are several cognate forms, of which Lat. lūgeō ‘to be sad' is semantically closest. This
can be understood as an iterative-intensive secondary formation, or as a
denominative (to *lūgus < IE *lougo-, beside *λɛũyoç < IE *leug-os-?).
Connection with primary verbs for ‘to break' may be envisaged: Skt. rujáti ‘to break,
torment', Lith. lúžti 'to break' [intr.] (semantically, compare širdis lúžta 'the heart
breaks'), OHG liohhan 'to tear, draw', Arm. lucanem 'to set free'. LIV2 s.v. *leug-
Aɛúσow
851
reconstructs a plain velar because of forms like YAv. uruxti- [f.] ‘breaking'. See
► ȧλvкτoлédη.
Aɛvkavíŋ ‘throat. →λavkavín.
Aɛvкóç [adj.] 'clear, white' (II.). <IE *leuk- ‘white’>
•COMP Many compounds (some prefixed), like Sɩá-, лαрá-, εлí-, úлó-λɛvкoç
(Strömberg 1946: 161).
●DER 1. Substantives with oppositive accent: Aɛúêŋ [f.] ‘white rash' (IA), 'white
poplar' (Att., Hell.), whence λɛúкɩvoç 'made of white poplar' (Arist., Hell. inscr.),
Aɛvкaчoç epithet of Zeus (Paus.), λɛvкaía (-έa) ‘white poplar, etc.' (pap.); λɛŨкoç
[m.] name of an unknown fish (Theoc.) with AɛUкíσkoç [m.] 'white mullet' (Hikes.
apud Ath., Gal.), see Strömberg 1943: 22f., Thompson 1947 s.vv. 2. λɛvкáç [f.] 'the
white one' (Nic.), name of rocks and of an island (w 11), also plant name 'Lamium'
(Dsc.). 3. Further substantives: AεUкÓτη [f.] 'whiteness, the color white' (IA),
λɛvкíτaç [m.] name of a he-goat (Theoc. 5, 147), Aεúкηеpov plant name (Dsc. 3, 96;
v.l. λáкη pov; see Strömberg 1940: 147); Aɛúкapos (< -alos?), -apíwv PN (Epich.,
inscr.), see Schulze 1933a: 115³, perhaps also Aɛvкαλíwv with a different dissimilation
(see Schulze l.c.).
4. Verbs: a. Aɛuкaívw 'to make or paint white' (μ 172), Aɛúкavoç (Arist.), Aɛvкaσía
'bleaching, whitening' (PHolm., Cyran.); also as a HN in Messenia, Arc. TN
Aɛvкáσιov; Aɛvкavτηs, -τɩкóç ‘one who makes or paints white' (gloss., sch.). b.
Аευкóομα to become white', -ów 'to make white' (Pi., Att.), whence λɛúкwμα
‘whitened tableť (Att.), 'white speck in the eye' (Arist., pap.), -wµatikóc, -wµatwdns,
-wμatíoµa (medic., sch.); Aɛúкwoiç = λevkaσía (PHolm. 3, 6), -wτńs (or -wtóç? Att.
inscr., mg. unknown). c. Aɛvкαеέw, only in λɛvкaðɛóvτwv [ptc.gen.pl.] 'gleaming
white' (Hes. Sc. 146), metrical reshaping in verse-final position for λεvкα óvτwv
from Aɛvкáłw, acc. to Wackernagel Glotta 14 (1925): 44ff.; Aɛvкaеéα, with secondary
o-vowel AɛUкoća (Od., Pi.) name of a goddess, τà Aɛvкáðɛα festival on Teos, -0εúv
month name (Ion.); lengthened form λɛvкαí(w 'to gleam white' (Hdt., LXX), also
-aveiw (imperial period), after äveoç, Wackernagel Glotta 14 (1925): 44ff.
•ETYM Originally a verbal noun, identical with Skt. rocá- ‘bright' from rócate ‘to
shine, radiate, etc.'. Another old verbal noun is seen in Lat. lūcus 'wood, forest,
properly 'glade', Lith. laūkas ‘field', OHG lōh 'overgrown glade', Skt. loká- [m.] ‘free
space, world', IE *louko- [m.]. In Greek, ►λɛúσow, ►λúxvoç, ►λoñσσov also belong
to this large group of words.
Aɛvpós [adj.] ‘open (of fields), spacious, even, smooth' (since n 123). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Connection with Lat. lēvis (as defended by de De Lamberterie
1990b: 420f.) is improbable, as this rather belongs with ▸λɛoç.
Aɛúσow [v.] 'to see (clearly), look, examine' (II.), cf. Ruijgh 1957: 132. ◄IE *leuk-
'(become) light'>>
•VAR Present stem only, except for the isolated and late aorist forms λɛúσσatε,
Aεúσσεε(v); on mg. and construction Treu 1955: 64.
•DIAL Arc.λɛúow, but see on ➤λevtōv.

=== page 450 ===

i
852
•COMP Rarely with έл-, εiσ-, лρσ-,
AEUTōV
-.
⚫ETYM Beside the full grade yod-present Aɛúσ(σ)w from *λɛvк-iw, Sanskrit has a full
grade thematic root present lokate 'to discern, perceive' (also locate, with locana- [n.]
'eye'), which differs slightly from rócate 'shine' (see AɛUкóc). An athematic middle
present is preserved in Hitt. lukk-ta 'to become light, dawn' < *leuk-to; Lat. lūceō
‘make light, dawn' = Skt. rocáyati 'to make shine' is from IE *louk-éie/o-, iterative-
intensive or causative; ToA lkām ‘I see', ToB lkāskau ‘id.' are from a sk-present,
beside a full grade in ToB lyuketrä ‘he is illuminated'. The meaning 'to see' arose
from 'to light up'. See λúxvoc, λouσσov.
Aɛvtōv [nom.sg.] 'negligent', 'seeing'? (Arc. IG 5(2), 3). <◄?►
⚫ETYM Dubois 1988: 77-78 follows the traditional interpretation that the è is a special
way of writing the (old) affricate of Aɛúσowv. A different interpretation is suggested
by Morpurgo Davies Minos 20-22 (1987): 459-468: she reads λɛvtovtɛç in IG 5(2), 16:
10, basing herself on the squeeze (though the back side of the squeeze does read
Aɛvσovτεç, as she remarks op.cit. 468). This would eliminate Arcadian evidence for
Aεúσ(o)w, and she tentatively reconstructs a root *leut-, at least for the two Arcadian
forms, but perhaps also for Aɛúσ(o)w itself (*leut-ie/o- instead of *leuk-ie/o-).
Aɛúw [v.] 'to stone, lapidate' (IA). <?>
•VAR Aor. Aεuσal, aor. pass. λɛvσßñvaɩ, fut. λɛúσw.
•COMP Also with кατα-.
•DER \evotýp [m.] ‘lapidator' (Orac. apud Hdt. 5, 67, trag.), λevoµós [m.] ‘lapidation'
(A., E.), (kata-)λεúσчos 'connected with lapidation' (after avάoчoç), Aɛvotá. …..
Aoẞóλητa 'hit by stones' (H.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally considered to be a denominative of λãaç ‘stone', but it now
appears that λãaç had no -F-. Pedersen 1926: 45f. proposes relation to ON ljósta,
pret. laust 'to slay' from IE *leus-t-.
λéxetai [v.] • koɩµãτaɩ ‘lies down in bed' (H.). <IE *leg"- 'lie'>
●VAR Also perf. ptc. \ɛ\o[y]xvĩa. \ɛxà yɛvoµévò lying in childbeď (H., also Antim.
in PMilan. 17 II 10), кaλéxɛç. кatákɛσo. Iláqɩɩ ‘lie down (Paph.)' (H.), to which
belong the epic aorist and future forms λéкto, λéčo, -λéxеαι, -λéуµεvos (< λɛx-to,
-σo, -σðaɩ, -µεvoç, Chantraine 1942: 296); λéšaoðai, lét̃oµαɩ (also with apa-, kata-,
лроσ-) 'to lie, lie down'; act. aor. Aεžov, čλɛža 'to lay down, put to sleep' (II.).
•DER 1. λéxos [n.] ‘lair, bed', especially ‘bridal bed', also ‘deathbeď (Il.); as a first
member in λε×ε-лoíŋs ‘having grass as a bed' (Il.), as a second member in e.g. òpɛt-
Aɛxns having his lair in the mountains' (Emp.); with Aɛxaños belonging to the lair'
(A. Th. 292 [conj.], A. R.), λexýpηs ‘bedridden' (E. [lyr.]), λɛxw [f.] ‘woman who has
just given birth' (E., Ar., Cyrene), also λɛкxó (Delphi), with expressive gemination
(Schwyzer: 4783 and Fraenkel Glotta 32 (1953): 18), with λɛxwïoç; Aɛxwíç = λexw (A.
R., Call.), see Schwyzer: 465.
2. \óxos [m.] ‘childbeď, but usually ‘ambush, band (in ambush)', military ‘armed
band' (II.), often as a second member, e.g. ä-λoxos [f.] 'spouse' (II.); as a first
member e.g. in λox-ãyós leader of a λóxos' (Dor.; S., Th., X.). Several derivatives:
Aóxios 'ptng. to birth' (E., Ar.), ǹ Aoxía epithet of Artemis (E., inscr.), τà λóxiα
1
!
-
Xéxplos
853
'discharge after childbirth' (Hp., Arist.); \oxɛños (E. [lyr.], Plu.), Aoxaños (Arat., AP)
‘id.'; \oxítŋs [m.] ‘sbd. belonging to the same λóxos, fellow soldier' (A., S., X.); Noxw
(-wc, -óc) = Aɛxw (LXX, Dsc.). Transformation Xoxεós ‘ambush' (Hes. Th. 178), after
qwλɛóc, etc.; λoxń = λóxµn (late epigr.).
Denominatives: a. λoxάw, -oµai [v.] 'to lie in ambush' (epic Ion., Hell.); after кoчuάw,
-oμai; thence óxnois, -ntikós (late). b. λoxεúw, -oμα [v.] 'to give birth, deliver',
pass. 'to be delivered, be born' (h. Merc., trag., etc.) with λóxɛvµa 'that which is born'
(A., E.), Aoxɛía 'process of birth' (Pl., E.), \oxɛútpia [f.] ‘woman who has just given
birth' (sch.). c. λoxíw 'to lie in ambush, to distribute men among companies' (Hdt.,
Th.), with λoxioµós ‘the setting of traps' (Plu.). 3. λéktpov, often plur. -a 'couch,
bridal bed' (II.); compounds like кOιvó-λεкτρоs 'sharing a bed, matrimonial,
bedfellow' (A.); λektpítŋ Opóvw. άvákov ovú ‘leaning back against the bed'
(H.). 4. \óxun [f.] ‘lair of wild beasts, thicket, bush' (T 439, Arist.), perhaps after
кwμŋ (Porzig 1942: 289; cf. also *кoíµŋ in кoчµáw), with λoxµaños 'living in the bush'
(Ar. [lyr.]), tos ‘id.' (AP), -wdns ‘overgrown with bushes, etc.' (Th., Thphr.),
λoxuáчw [v.] 'to make up a thicket' (Pisand. Ep.).
The whole group of words was restricted in its use in Ionic-Attic (instead, кɛчµαɩ or
(kata)-kλívoμaι was used), see Ruijgh 1957: 153f.
•ETYM The thematic present λéxεtal is exactly paralleled by ToB lyaśäm 3sg. 'lies
down' <*leg-e- and by Go. ligan 'to lie', which is suspected to be an innovation for
the yod-present dominant in other Gm. and Slav. languages (e.g. OCS ležo̟), like
sitan ‘to sit'. A primary present, originally probably a yod-present too, is also found
in Celtic: Olr. laigid ‘lies down'. Italic once had this verb too, as appears from Falisc.
lecet 'iacet'. Hitt. 3sg. lāki ‘to fell, lay down' < *log"-eie-.
Nominal formations comparable to Greek verbal nouns: ON lag [n.] 'position', plur.
log ‘law', Ru. log ‘valley, cleft, fallow land', SCr. lôg ‘lying', Pol. od-łog ‘fallow field',
Alb. lagje 'band, group', all from IE *log-o- and formally identical to λóxos; OCS
lože ‘kλívn, koitŋ = bed'; OHG lehtar ‘uterus' = λéktpov. In Slav., OCS ložes-no, plur.
-na ‘µητpα, uterus' probably shows the s-stem of Nέxos. For ǎ-λoxos, cf. Serb.CS su-
logб 'σúу-кOLτOÇ, spouse', CS su-ložь. Also, ToB leke, ToA lake 'lair'. See LIV² for
further forms.
Aéxpios [adj.] 'slanting, crosswise' (S., E., X.). <PG(V)►
•DER λéxpis [adv.] ‘id.' (Antim., A. R.), after äxpɩs, µεxpis, Schwyzer: 620; also
Aкpiqiç crosswise, sideways' (λ. άïšaç E 463, τ 451). Glosses: Aкpoi. oi öšoi tŵv
¿λaqɛiwv kɛpάtwv 'the branches of the antlers of deer' (H.), with a variant λɛkpoí;
λí(y)· лλáуios ‘sideways, athwart, etc.' (H.).
•ETYM As a basis of λéxpios, one formerly posited a p(o)-stem *exp(o)- of unknown
meaning, for which a pre-form *λɛεк-σ-p- was reconstructed on account of λкpoí/
Aɛкpoí (without -σ-). The form with -σ- is also seen in λočóc ‘slanting' (cf. Schwyzer:
327).
However, the forms λɛкpoi/'λкpoí, λɩкpiqiç and the gloss (y) display typical Pre-
Greek alternations (interchange ε/ ɩ, к/ X and prenasalization). It is much more
difficult to depart from IE forms with and without -σ- side by side, than to assume
Pre-Greek origin. Note that the interchange ε/ 1 is not the consequence of vowel

=== page 451 ===

854
Aεwv, -OVOS
assimilation, as Frisk still assumed for Auкpiqiç, following Schwyzer: 256 et al. See
►λožóc.
Aźwv, -ovτos [m.] 'lion' (Il.). <LW Sem.?>
•VAR Dat.pl. also Aɛíovo (II.), on the supposed metrical lengthening of -εl-
(Chantraine 1942: 102) cf. Wyatt 1969: 237³.
•DIAL Myc. re-wo-pi /lewont-phi/ [instr.], re-wo-te-jo /lewonteios/.
•COMP Compounds like λɛоνтó-лoυç 'lion-footed' (E., inscr.) with Aεoνão-лóðɩov
plant name (Dsc.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 42; Xαμα-λéwv kind of lizard, 'chameleon'
(Arist.), see Risch IF 59 (1949): 256, also as a plant name (Thphr., Dsc.), because of
the varying color, Strömberg 1940: 110; on -λέwv, -λέwvos in PNs (secondary) see
Bechtel 1917b: 277. Сf. on λεóлaρdoç.
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: Aɛóvτ-tov (Theognost. Can., Med.), -áptov (inscr., pap.), also as
a fem. PN (Epicur), -ís lion-like ornament' (Lydia), -ɩdɛús ‘young lion' (Ael.). 2.
Aɛovtén, -tñ [f.] ‘lion skin' (IA). 3. Adjectives: Aɛóvτ-ɛtos ‘of a lion, lion-like' (A.,
Theoc., AP); -wdŋs ‘like a lion' (Pl., Arist.), -ɩêóç ‘of a lion' (Porph.), -tavós ‘born
under the sign of the lion' (Cat. Cod. Astr.). 4. λεovτ-ŋdóv [adv.] ‘like a lion' (LXX).
5. Aɛovt-iάw [v.], whence -íaσiç name of a disease (medic.), cf. λεavt-iáw, -íaσiç.
6. PNS AɛOVT-εÚç, -íaç, etc. (see Boßßhardt 1942: 72, Bechtel 1917b: 276f., Bechtel 1917a:
36). Fem. Aéaɩva ‘lioness' (Hdt., A., Ar.).
•ETYM Judging by λéaiva, λéwv was perhaps originally an n-stem, like Spáкwv.
However, the fact that Myc. already has an nt-stem casts some doubt on this
supposition.
λéwv is a loan from an unknown source; Semitic origin is probable, but Hebr. lābī”,
Assyr. labbu, Eg. labu are quite different phonetcally. Lat. leō, -ōnis was borrowed
from λéwv (the n-stem is a Lat. innovation). Thence were borrowed, either directly
or indirectly, European forms like OIr. leon [gen.pl.], OE leo, OHG lewo (whence the
Slavic group of Ru. lev, together with Lith. lēvas).
On itself stands λïç [m.] ‘lion' (also Xíc), acc. Aïv (II.), which is often compared with
Hebr. lajiš 'lion'.
Aɛwpyós 'criminal'. •VAR Aέws (Aɛíwc) 'completely'. →λɛños.
Anyw [v.] 'to cease, stop' (Il.), incidentally trans. 'to make stop, pause' (epic); on the
mg. Porzig 1942: 48ff. <IE? *sleh,/2g-, PG?(V)►
•VAR Аor. Añaι, fut. λńw.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially katα-, àño-.
•der Añšis (ánó-, кatá-, etc.) ‘cessation' (A., A. R., Ph.), as a grammatical term
‘ending, desinence' (Demetr. Eloc., A. D.); as a first member in governing
compounds like Aŋšɩ-лúpετoç ‘allaying fever' (medic.); άлóληудα border of a cloth'
(Aq.); ǎ-(λ)ληкτоç 'incessantly' (еpic); Аŋкτɩкóç ‘terminal', кατα- 'coming to a
premature end, incomplete', of a verse (grammatical and metrical).
⚫ETYM In view of ǎ-λληкτоç, кατα-λλ½εαν (μ 224) and other forms, an original root
*σλny- is probable. The thematic root present *σλny-w, whence all the above forms
are derived, has no direct counterpart in other languages. However, a zero grade
nasal present is supposed within Greek in ►λayyά(w ‘to slacken' and Lat. langueō ‘to
1
!
!
入noapyos
855
be slack' (for the formal difficulties, see s.v.). Besides, we find the primary zero grade
aorist λayáσa (with the present λayaíw 'to release') and several nouns, e.g.
►λayapós. A full grade form is retained in North Germanic, e.g. ON slókr. More
forms in Pok. 959ff.
A pre-form IE *sleh₂g- is possible; see Pok. 959. Joseph Glotta 60 (1982): 112-115
reconstructs *sleh₁g-. However, one could also conceive of a Pre-Greek variation
Any-ayy (long vowel alternating with prenasalization), cf. μnxavý / μáууavov
and кηkíç / кayxúlaç.
See Awyávov, ►λoyyášw.
Anda [f.] mother of the Dioscuri and Helena (A. Ag. 914). ◄LW Lyd.?>
•VAR Andŋ (epic).
•ETYM Perhaps from Lyc. (not Lyd.!) lada ‘wife, spouse'. See ▸Antw.
Andavov [n.] name of a resin-like substance, from the shrub called кíσ0oç (Hdt.,
medic., pap.). <LW Sem.➤
•VAR Also λádavov.
•DER Backformation λñdov [n.] = кíσƉoç (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM A loan, originally from Semitic; cf. Arab. lādan > MoP lädän, Assyr. ladunu
(λńбavov, τò кaλéovσi Apáßioi λádavov Hdt. 3, 112). Borrowed from Greek into Lat.
lēdanum, lādanum (back-formations lēda, lāda ‘Cistus cyprius'), Ru. ládan 'sweet-
smelling resin, incense'. See Masson 1967: 553. See ►λwτóç.
Аŋdɛīv [v.] · кoлāv, kɛkuŋкévai ‘to be tired'; Andoaç kekµinkws, koлáσaç ‘tired'
(H.). <IE *leh,d- 'let (go)'>
⚫ETYM Because of áŋdñσaɩ· кoлɩáσal, kaµeïv; áŋdéoµεv· koлiwµεv; áŋdýc⋅ koriwdŋs,
ỏкvηpós reluctant, sluggish', the correctness of Aŋdeïv, Andñoas has long been.
doubted (cf. Maas ByzZ 37 (1937): 380).
If correct, however, the glosses may be compared with Alb. lodh 'to make tireď,
lodhem 'to get tired' < IE *leh,d-, Lat. lassus 'weary, tired' < zero grade IE *lh,d-to-,
and Gm. forms like Go. letan < IE *leh₂d- ‘to let', lats 'weary, slow'.
Andɩov [n.] a light cloth = τpißávov (kind of garment) or qμáτiov εútελés ‘cheap
garment' (H.). <PG(V)►
●VAR Also Aŋdíov (Att. inscr. IVª), Añd-, Andíov, Añid- (Men.). Basic form λñdoç in
Dor. Aãdos (Alcm.), λados, λai- (H.) 'τpißávov'.
•DER Diminutive Andápiov, v.l. Aŋd- (Ar. Av. 715, 915). Adjective Anidiwdes
tpißwviwdeis (cod. -ídɛc) (H.).
l
•ETYM The variation between forms with and without I shows that the word is Pre-
Greek.
Anapyos [m., f.] ‘lethargy, lethargic fever' (Hp., Arist., Chrysipp. Stoic.), as an
adjective also 'forgetful' (Men., AP). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also plur.
•DER Aŋеapу-ɩкós ‘affected by lethargy, lethargic' (medic., AP), -wdŋs ‘id.' (Dsc.,
Gal.), -ía ‘lethargy' (Com. Adesp.), -έw [v.] ‘to be forgetful (pap., inscr.). Unclear is
ȧλńеapуoç POxy. 1381, 100 (literary, II³).

=== page 452 ===

856
入ńon
•ETYM Probably an original adjective (scil. vóσoç, лupeτós). Cf. ►λaíðapyos, which
shows that the word is Pre-Greek. The word, or at least its meaning, seems to have
been influenced by Ane-, λa0- 'to forget', and perhaps also by py- 'work'.
λńеŋ •VAR λńеw, etc. →λavеávw.
Aniчouai ⚫VAR Also Aŋïŋ, Aŋïç. →λɛía.
Anïov [n.] 'standing crop' (Il., Arist.), 'cornfield' (Theoc.). <?>
•VAR Dor. λáïov, Aãov (Sophr., Theoc.).
•COMP Compounds like λão-toµέw [v.] ‘to reap corn' (Theoc.), лoλv-λ½ïos ‘rich in
crops' (E 613, etc.), cf. Bechtel 1914 s.v. άλñïoç.
•ETYM If λáïov is a real Doric form, Anïov may belong to άлoλaúw 'to enjoy',
assuming a pre-form *lāw-io- ‘gain, produce'. For the formation, cf. ►λɛía which
derives from *lāw-iā-. The connection with the group of λúw would seem to require
PGr. *lew-, but it is semantically not convincing.
Anτov 'town hall'. →λaós.
Aŋkáw [v.] ‘to have intercourse' (com., H.), acc. to H. also = τò éрòç ŵ¿dǹv ópxɛĩoðaɩ
'to dance to a song'. <IE? *lek- 'jump', PG?(V)►
•VAR Aor. λŋкñoal.
•COMP Also with úño-.
•DER Aŋкnµaτα [pl.] (Epicur. Fr. 414); λŋкó. τò µópiov 'genital part' (H.); also
Anкívdα лaíεv 'to beat time, drum with the fingers' (Luc., A. D.).
•ETYM Iterative-intensive formation like лηdáш (Schwyzer: 719), and as such
identical with Latv. lēkât, 1sg. lēkâju 'to fly, jump, hop'. Of course, the meaning
'Bivɛiv, to have intercourse' is euphemistic and secondary. The primary verb is seen
in Lith. lēkti, 1sg. lekiù ‘to fly, run', Latv. lèkt ‘id.'. Alternatively, we may consider the
fact that Greek also has λaiкá(w, which points to Pre-Greek variation aɩ/ŋ.
AŃKubos [f.] 'casket for oil or perfume' (Od.), also metaph. 'rhetorical bombast' (Cic.,
Plin.), Lat. ampulla. <PG(V)►
=
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 34².
•DIAL Epid. λákvеOS (IVª).
•COMP auto-λŃкvłos 'who carries his own oil-casket' (out of poverty) = 'poor man,
beggar' (Att.).
=
⚫DER Diminutive Aŋкúеov (Att.), Aŋkvðiádeç. évúτiα лoά ‘earrings' (H.), Anкuτíaι
[pl.] Anкvo (pap.). Denominative Anкvíw [v.] 'to declaim in a hollow voice (as
though speaking into a λ.)' (Call., Str., Phryn., Poll.), Aŋкvе-στηs 'who recites with
hollow voice, koλóqwvoç' (S. Fr. 1063, H.), -toμóç 'speaking in a hollow voice' (Plu.);
also as a back-formation λýkvłos. tò µetažù toũ λavkavíou kaì avxévos ǹxwdes ‘the
resounding part between the throat and the neck' (Clearch.).
•ETYM Also TN Anкvos (Macedonia). Evidently a Pre-Greek word. Fur.: 121
connects λáyūvos, λáytov 'cup, vase', which seems convincing.
Aŋµŋ [f.] ‘humour in the corner of the eye, rheum', also metaph. (Hp., Ar., Plu.).
<PG?(O)►
Añvos, -ous
857
•VAR A Doric form seems to be found in λáµaç· µúžaç ‘slime' (H., cod. λaµás. µñç
'mouse').
⚫DER Diminutive Aŋµíov (Hp.), Aŋµúðpiov (Gal.); Аŋµ-aλéos (Luc.), -ŋpós (Heliod.),
-wdns (Alex. Trall.) ‘'full of λ.'; Anµ-ótŋs (sch.), -wois (medic. pap.), cf. wσiç,
kvídwoic; Anµ-áw [v.] ‘to have bleary eyes' (Hp., Ar.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Connection with Lat. lāma 'puddle, marsh, mud', Lith. lōmas
'pit, hollow, lower spot' is semantically unconvincing. Rather Pre-Greek than IE.
Anuvíoкoç [m.] 'woollen tape, bandage, compress' (Hell.), acc. to Varro (in Plin.)
originally made of lime-bark. <?>
⚫ETYM Utensil name in -íoкoç (cf. Chantraine 1933: 408), Syracusan acc. to H. (τàç
taɩvíaç ‘headbands'. Σvpakoúσiot). Connection with the name of the island
► Añµvoç? Suggestion on Etruscan origin in Müller Phil. 78 (1923): 264f.
Añuvos [f.] a Greek island <PG▷
●DIAL Myc. ra-mi-ni-jo /lāmnios/ 'man from Lemnos'; ra-mi-ni-ja /lāmniai/
'Lemnian women'. Dor. Nãμvoç.
●DER AĤuvios, Aŋuvaкós ‘Lemnian’.
•ETYM No doubt a Pre-Greek name, note the suffix -μvo-.
Añv [v.] 'want'. ⇒λw.
Añvaɩ [f.pl.] ‘Bacchantes' (Heraclit., Str.), Arc. acc. to H. (who has λŋvaí). <?►
●DER Anva [sg.] as a PN (Ambracia, Aitolia); Anvís 'Bacchante' (Eust., Suid.). Also
Anvata [n.pl.] name of a festival in Athens and elsewhere, with Aŋvalóv, -wvos [m.]
month name in Ionia (Hes. Op. 504, inscr.), Anvatov [n.] name of a district in
Athens dedicated to Dionysus (Ar., Pl.), Aŋvaïkós ‘belonging to the Lenaians' (Hell.),
Anvaτns 'id.' (Ar.); Aŋvaïw [v.] 'to celebrate the Lenaians' (Heraclit.); PN Anvaños,
Aŋvats. Aŋvɛús (Myconos) and Anvaños (D. S.) epithet of Dionysus, AnvεúovƠI.
Baкxɛvovoɩv (H.).
⚫ETYM If λñval (in H. and as the title of Theoc. 26) are real dialectal forms, the word
cannot belong to Anvóc 'winepress', which would otherwise be the most obvious
solution. A better explanation has not been found.
Anvóc [f.] 'trough (for pressing wine), winepress, sarcophagus, socket into which the
mast fitted, etc.' (h. Merc. 104). <?>
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 34². Dor. λavós
•COMP Rare compounds like Aŋvo-ßáτηs ‘one who treads the wine cask' (late), ǎ-
Anvos 'not pressed', of almond oil (Aet.).
⚫DER Diminutives Anvíc, Anvídiov (pap.); further Aŋv(ɛ)óv, -wvos [m.] ‘place where
wine is pressed' (pap., Gp.), Anvāç, -ādos [m.] (late inscr.; Anatolia), probably =
Anvoßáτηs, see Schulze 1933a: 300.
•ETYM Unexplained. Perhaps a technical term from the substrate. For Anvata,
Aŋvatov, see on ►λñvai.
Añvoç, -ovç [n.] 'wool, fillet, fleece' (A. Eu. 44, A. R. 4, 173, 177). <IE *h₂ulh₁-neh₂-
'wool'.>

=== page 453 ===

858
入ñposi
•ETYM Except for the ending -os (which is perhaps an innovation after ɛt̃poç, ëέкoç,
Frisk suggests), Añvoç is the old inherited word for 'wool', which is preserved in
several languages: e.g. Lat. lāna, Lith. vilna, Ru. vólna, Go. wulla, Av. varənā, Skt.
úrṇā-, all of which may go back on IE *(h₂)ulh,-neh₂-. An initial laryngeal is
reconstructed on the basis of Hitt. hulana-, Luw. *hulani- 'wool', but Kloekhorst
2008 s.v. hesitates to reconstruct *hulh₁-n- (see also Peters Sprache 33 (1987): 115f.).
Celtic forms like MW gwlan, OIr. olann (pointing to a vocalisation PCl. ulănā- < IE
*ulhneh₂-) deviate.
The word probably belongs, as a verbal noun in -nā, to a verb for 'tear, pluck'
retained in Lat. vellō 'pull out' (but not related to åλíσкoμα); Lat. vellus [n.]
'shaved wool' < IE *Huél-no- and Arm. gełmn ‘id.' < IE *Huél-mn- (?) belong to this
root as well. If we reconstruct an initial laryngeal, it must have disappeared in Greek
at an early date, giving rise to a preform *ulh,-n- after revocalization.
Añpos 1 [m.] 'trash, nonsense' (Att., Hp.). <ONOM, IE? *leh₂- 'howl'>
•DER Aŋp-wdns 'silly' (Pl., Arist.) with -wdía (Hdn.), -wdéw (Phot.), -ádŋµa (Suid.).
Besides, probably as a denominative, Anpέw [v.] 'to be foolish, silly; to speak
nonsense' (Att., Hp.), aor. -ñσαɩ, also with prefix likе лαрα-, àло-, кατα-; thencе
(лapα-)λńp-ŋµα (Pl.), -ŋois (Hp., Plu.); back-formation ´apá-λŋpoç ‘delirious' (Hp.,
Ph.). Also Anpaívw [v.] ‘id.' (Ph., H.), after åoppaívw, etc. (Debrunner IF 21 (1907):
57), Anpeia = Ańpŋois (Phld.), as if from *λŋpɛúw.
•ETYM An analysis as λñ-pos offers the possibility to connect a widespread group of
words with *lā-, e.g. Lith. lóti, 1sg. lóju, OCS lajati, 1sg. lają ‘to bark, revile, abuse',
Arm. lam 'to cry', Lat. lāmenta ‘wailing'. Perhaps, the root is onomatopoeic, but we
may also reconstruct *leh₂- 'to howl'.
With short vowel, we encounter λápos, λáoкw; also, λaíɛv, λaŋµɛvai.
qeέyyɛσai 'to utter' (H.), but these are not necessarily related.
Añpos 2 [m.] ‘golden ornament on women's clothes' (Delos IIª, AP, Luc., Poll., H.).
<?>
•VAR Or Aŋpós, Boeot. Aɛipos (IG 7, 2421).
⚫ETYM Unknown. A special use of λñpoç 1 'trash' is rather improbable.
入ntoupyéw, -ia, -óc →入aós.
ANTÓ [f.] Leto, mother of Apollo and Artemis (II.). <PG?>
•VAR Gen. -óos, -OÛÇ.
•DIAL Dor. Aaτw. Myc. ra-to /Lātō/, ra-ti-jo /Lātios/.
●COMP As a first member in Aŋto-yɛvýs (Aato-), fem. -yévɛta 'son (daughter) of
Leto' (A., E. [lyr.], AP).
•Der Antoïdns, Aaτoïdaç 'son of Leto' (h. Merc. 253); Antãos (Aαt-) (A., S.), fem.
-wa, -wïç, -wïác (Hell. poetry) 'born of Leto'; tò Antov 'temple of Leto' (Arist.), Tà
A-a 'festival of Leto' (Delos IIIª).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Traditionally derived from Lyc. (not Lyd.) lada 'wife, spouse',
together with Anda. Kretschmer Glotta 32 (1953): 187 and 196f. assumes Pre-Greek
Alapós
859
origin, comparing Caucas. (Awar.) ladi. Pre-Greek origin also assumed by Bethe
1923: 20f. and Chantraine Ant. class. 22 (1953): 68.
Sources from antiquity tell that it was originally a name of the 'night'; hence the
Semitic etymology by Lewy 1895: 230ff. as well as the IE one (to Lat. lateō) by Osthoff
IF 5 (1895): 369; both are unconvincing. Borrowed as Lat. Lātōna, see WH s.v. See
also Fur.: 186.
Máчoμai [v.] 'to collapse, incline, recoil, sink' (II.). <?>
⚫VAR Aor. Aaσeñvai. Rare and late active forms (cf. Wackernagel 1916: 131) Málw
(Lyc., H.), Máσat (H.), Míaσoε v.l. Y 879 for Miaσ0εv; nasal present λívаμаι· τрεлоμ
'turn' (H.), verbal adj. àλíaστoç ‘inescapable, inflexible, obstinate, incessant' (Il.,
Hes.), on the mg. cf. Erbse Glotta 32 (1953): 236ff.
•ETYM The meaning is not very explicit, and may have changed through literary
influence. This leaves much room for etymological speculations and makes a secure
interpretation difficult.
The present Máčoμai (whence hapax Miaσσε) are innovations to aσ0ñva. The nasal
present λívaμai (taken by Frisk to be an old formation) was supposed to correspond
to Skt. lināti (gramm.) ‘to lean against' and to OIr. lenaid 'to follow', but the latter is
from *h₂leiH- ‘to stick' and the Skt. attestation is doubtful.
Semantically better is connection with a Germanic group: Go. af-linnan ǎoxwεv,
to go away, cede', OHG bi-linnan 'yield, stop, leave off, with -nn- from -nu-. LIV²
s.v. *leih₂- chooses for this connection, assuming that -nH- yielded the Germanic
geminate, but this development is highly controversial; they also connect Ved. -liyate
'is (re)solved'.
A third option is Skt. láyate 'to hide (intr.)', which also presupposes a root *leiH-.
The appurtenance of Hitt. ulae-zi, ulēšš-²i ‘to hide' to this root (defended by Oettinger
1979: 364) is very uncertain, as there is almost no trace of a prefix u- in Anatolian
(Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. ulae-zi).
See further Autós.
Aíāv [adv.] ‘very much, exceedingly' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Epic Ion. Aínv (†).
●DER Here λášɛv [v.] 'to be over-enthousiastic' (A.D., Phot.).
•ETYM Like dǹv, µλýv, etc., Xíāv is a petrified accusative with an unknown basic
meaning. A form λi is cited from Epich. 223 (Str. 8, 364), and also occurs as a first
member in λ-лóvηроç· λíαν лоvηpós 'extremely worthless' (H.); see also Anv. Aíav
(H.). Connection with the intensifying adverb λa-, λat- is uncertain. Has also been
compared with λínqos. deivós (H.).
Etymologically unclear. Chantraine Glotta 33 (1954): 28 considers a remote
connection with ➤λɛños ‘level, smooth'.
Alapós [adj.] 'tepid, mild' (II.). <?>
•ETYM Note the similarity with synonymous Xapóç; cf. Güntert 1914: 147. Other
semantically close formations in -após are given by Chantraine 1933: 227.
Unexplained. The comparison with Außpós by Fur.: 240 is useless.

=== page 454 ===

860
入ipavos
\íßavoç [f.m.] ‘frankincense' (Sapph., Pi., E.), ‘frankincense tree' (Hdt., Melanipp.,
Thphr.). LW Sem.>>
•VARλɩẞavwτós [m.] (or [f.]) ‘id.' (Sapph., IA).
•COMP Some compounds like ẞavocpópos (Herakleid. Com.), Aẞavwto-pópos
(Hdt.).
•DER 1. From Aiẞavoç: diminutive Außavidov (Men.); adjectives: Aẞav-wdns like
frankincense (Philostr.), -ivos 'with the color of frankincense, made of frankincense'
(pap., gloss.); ßavās [m.] ‘trade of frankincense' (pap.), λßavīüç [f.] epithet of
Aphrodite (Luc.), as she was venerated with incense; verbs: λßavóoμa 'to be mixed
with frankincense' (LXX), ßavíšw 'to smell like frankincense' (Dsc., Gal.). 2. From
λißavwtóç: λißavwtiç [f.] ‘rosemary, Rosmarinus' (Thphr., Nic., Dsc.), after the
smell (Strömberg 1940: 62), also ‘censer' (Delos, Hell.) like Aɩßavwtídiov (Delos IIª)
and ßavwτpíç (Anatolia, imperial period), after names of utensils in -τpíç
(Chantraine 1933: 340f.), Aẞav-wτɩкóç 'consisting of frankincense' (Hell. inscr. and
pap.), τvoç prepared with frankincense' (medic.); ßavwτíw [v.] ‘to incense,
smell like frankincense' (Str., Dsc.).
⚫ETYM A loan from Semitic, for which one compares Hebr. l'bōnā ‘frankincense' and
Phoen. lebōnat, etc. ‘id.' (from the root laban 'to be white', probably after the white
color of the sap of the tree. The meaning 'tree' is secondary to ‘frankincense' itself. It
was thought that the name of mount Aiẞavos (= Lebanon) had influenced the Greek
vocalization (details in Lewy 1895: 44f., Masson 1967: 53). Acc. to Müller Glotta 52
(1974): 53-59, however, the word was taken from Southern Arab libān. The form in
-wτ
comes from the plural libānōt 'the grains of the resin'. The word is derived
from the adjective Ibn 'white' (Arab laban ‘milk'). This is confirmed by the fact that
people from southern Arabia came to Delos.
Aẞpós [adj.] epithet of oλós 'turbid liquidity' (AP 15, 25, 1), of vúč (EM 564, 49), 'dark'
or 'humid, of σéλaç (Trag. Adesp. 232); explained by Erot. as σкotɛɩvòç кai µέλaç
(on Hp. Aër. 15, where the codd. have diɛp and oλεp, said of ηp). <?►
•var λɩµßpós (EM 564, 52; Suid.).
•ETYM Fur.: 28768 notes that the prenasalization could be due to late Greek/Byzantine
nasalization. The merit of his comparison with após (ibid. 240, 287) is doubtful.
The comparison with λɛißw (Frisk, DELG hesitantingly) does not seem to make any
sense.
Míуdŋv [adv.] ‘touching superficially, grazing' (X 278), έлλíóðŋv ‘id.' (P 599). ◄IE?
*sleig- 'slide'>
•DER \íydoç [m.] ‘mortar' (Nic., also S. Fr. 35?), 'mould made of earthenware or of
clay, funnel' vel sim. (Poll., Ael. Dion., H.), 'lye' (Eust.), λíуða. ǹ áкóvηŋ, kai ǹ kovía
'whetstone, plaster' (H.). Denominative verb Aydɛúεɩ· àлŋßɛï 'filters' (H.).
•ETYM For Aíyda, cf. ǎpdă, ëшßdă and Solmsen 1909: 269. The suffixal agreement
between the adverb λíуdŋy and the substantives Nydoç, -da is not accidental (cf.
Chantraine 1933: 360), but the adverb was first. As the semantic connection between
Aydos and λíуdŋy is not immediately clear, note the phonetic similarity of Nydos
with its synonym ►ïydɩç.
入ikuáw
861
As a basis, a verb Miw (otherwise unattested) was assumed by Eust. 1926, 37, "wç ȧò
toŨ λíšɛɩv, λéžɛws wvoµatoñεñoiμévηs", which he probably thought up. A verb
with an original meaning 'to smear, glide, etc.' is compared: OIr. (fo)sligim 'to
smear', also 'to beat' (from *to brush'), OHG slīhhan ‘to steel, creep' from 'to go
gliding'; several nouns, e.g. Olr. slige ‘comb', ON slíkr ‘smooth', slíkisteinn ‘rubbing
stone', and from Slavic e.g. Ru. slízkij ‘slippery, slimy'. This points to a root *sleig- ‘to
slide'. See further ► Noσós.
Aɩyvús, -úos [f.] ‘thick smoke, smoking fire' (A., S., Ar., Arist.). <PG?(V)►
•DER Atyvvwdns (Hp., Gal.), Ayvvóɛis (A. R.) ‘smoky❜.
•ETYM Fur.: 118 compares iкvúç ‘dust, ashes' (^-/zero), which is conceivable; but his
comparison with aλoyéw (ibid. 292) is mistaken.
Ayús [adj.] ‘clear, resounding, shrill' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Fem. Niyɛta (on the accent Schwyzer: 474, Chantraine 1942: 191), ntr. Aɩyú.
•COMP Frequent as a first member, e.g. Myú-pwvos 'with clear voice'; adverbs λiya,
Ayéws (II.).
•DER With extended suffix Ayv-pós (perhaps dissimilated from -v-λóc?) ‘id.' (Il.).
Denominative verb Ayaívw 'to cry, resound or sing with a clear voice' (Il.), with
Aɩyávtap (= Ayavtýp). eidos téttiyos. Aákwveç ‘a kind of cicada' (H.), see
Strömberg 1944: 18. An old nasalized formation is the aor. Niyε 'twanged (of ẞiós
bow' A 125); cf. Níyyw. ηxw 'resound' (Theognost. Can. 16).
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
Aíos [m., f.] 'stone, boulder, rock, precious stones' (Il.). <?>
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 376, Shipp 1967: 76.
•COMP Compounds like o-ẞólos [m.] 'stone-thrower' (Att.), μvó-
'consisting of one stone' (Hdt.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: A0-ídov (Pl., Arist.), -áptov (Thphr., Hell. inscr.), -apídiov
(Alex. Trall.). 2. collectives: Aеáç, -ádoç [f.] 'shower of stones, throw of a stone'
(Od., A., Nic.), see Chantraine 1933: 352; Adía 'rock' (Hell.), cf. Chantraine 1933: 81. 3.
\íða} [f.] ‘stone' (ɛ 415 [attributive], Hell. poetry), Aðaкóç ‘id.' (Stesich.), Chantraine
1933: 384; i = 0íaσiç (see below; Hp.). 4. Adjectives: Aiɛoç (Hom.), Mitoc
(Thess.), -10 (sch.) ‘of stone'; \iivoç ‘id.' (Pi., IA), λiðiкóç ‘ptng. to a stone' (Hell.).
AOwns stone-like, stony' (IA), Awdía (Eust.). 5. Verbs: 0άw 'to throw with
stones, lapidate' (Arist., Anaxandr.), with aσ-µóç, -τηç, -τIкÓS (A. D., sch.);
Abóoμa 'to be turned into stone' (Arist.), with Aiwois (Aristeas, Plu.); MOάw
(-0áw) 'to suffer from the stone' (Hp.; after other verbs of disease in -táw), whence
Abiaois (Hp., Gal.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
•
AIKEPTIεIV [v.] σкiρτāv 'to leap, bound' (H.); Frisk wrongly gives лηdǎv. <PG?>
⚫ETYM Connection with ►λáž, ►λaкtíw is impossible. Pre-Greek origin is likely.
Aкµáw [v.] 'to separate the grain from the chaff, winnow', metaph. 'to crush, destroy'
(E 500, B., X., LXX, pap.). <IE *neik- 'swing (cereals) for winnowing'>
•VAR Aor. λкμñoai.

=== page 455 ===

862
ALKOLOIS
•DER AкμηTηp 'winnower', λкμητpic 'winnowing fan', also λкμητwp, -tńc; -istńplov
'winnowing fan, shovel'; -ŋτóç 'winnowing, scattering'; -ŋτкóç ‘ptng. to winnowing'.
Probably a back-formation is Aкμóç 'winnowing fan', Aкuaía epithet of Demeter,
Aкuí e àλoḍ 'threshes, crushes' (H.), Míкvov [n.] 'winnowing fan' (Arist.), also a
sacred basket with the first fruits in the cult of Demeter (S., AP); Aiкvocópos also
‘cradle' (h. Merc., Call.), Aкvítŋs epithet of Dionysus (Orph., Plu.), -îτiç, of tpoqń
(S. Ichn. 269), Aкvíľw = Aikµáw (pap.).
With a different initial: v(ε)íкλov. τò λíкvov (H.), iкµãν· λкµãν, oīτov кaðαípɛv 'to
cleanse grain'; iкµwvto. ¿σɛíovto, έлvέovτo 'to shake, blow' (H.), ávкµáµɛva (Pl. Ti.
53a; v.ll. ȧvaλiкváμεvα, ávαλкµáµεva), áñ-iêµñoai, di-ikµwvtai (Thphr.). Further
from H. εv<ví>kµnto<v>• evλí<к>µŋtov, áviкλáμεvov. ávaкabaιpóμεvov (cf. on
ávɩкμáμεvα above), and without a suffix viкα. Aкµα; vкɛīv (for -кāv?). λкµāv,
veikɛoev. ěkpɩvev ‘sieveď, ɛúvɩкéç• ɛÚкpɩvéç ‘well-sieveď, vεкηtýp. Aikuntýp.
Meyapeic.
ETYM Aíкvov and viкλov, and probably also viкµãν (in εúvíкμητov), can be
understood as dissimilated from *víkvov, *viêvāv. Perhaps, λɩкµãv and, with loss of
the anlaut, iкμãv, derive from vɩкµãv. Cf. Danielsson Eranos 5 (1903-1904): iff. on
the dark form άлоλεкαι (inscr. Milete).
Starting from *vík-vov, it is attractive to connect the full grade verb Lith. niekóti, 1sg.
niekóju 'to winnow (corn)', Latv. niekât 'to swing groats in a mill'; cf. suffixless Greek
glosses like viką.
Alkpiqiç →λéxpios.
Aɩλaíoµai [v.] ‘to desire, vehemently long for' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Only present; the perf. ►ελŋμévoç does not belong here.
•ETYM A reduplicated yod-present, which has been connected with Skt. laṣati ‘to
radiate, be pleased' (either a thematic root present with secondary s for s, or from
*la-ls-a-ti with reduplication and zero grade). However, the nouns λáστai. лópvai
'whores' (H.) and λáστaupos (see ►λáσtai, as well as λáσðŋ and λñval) point to Pre-
Greek origin in view of their suffixes.
From other languages, comparisons have been made with, e.g., Lat. lascīvus
'luxuriant, wanton' (from *las-ko-, cf. Ru. láska ‘caress, affection'), Skt. lā-las-a-
‘desirous', etc. Unrelated because of the deviant vocalism is the Gm. group of Go.
lustus 'lust'.
An IE root *las- is hardly possible. LIV2 s.v. *las- states that the appurtenance of the
Skt. (epic class.) verbs lasati and lasati to the Greek verb is uncertain.
Aíußos [adj.] Aixvoc, desirous, fond of sweets' (comm. Arist., H.). <?>
•VAR Also λчuẞós.
•DER Aчµßɛúw [v.] Axvɛúw, to be desirous' with Außɛía = λxvɛía (Hdn. Epim., H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
Aчuny 'harbour'. →λɛчµáv.
Aíµɩv0×ç [?] · *λµvēɛç. Máqɩɩ ‘intestinal worms' (H.). <PG(V)►
⚫ETYM A Variant of
入ívov
863
λμvɛc, where the idea is discussed that Au- goes back to a
Pre-Greek sequence *lm-. Influence of Aчuós 'hunger' seems improbable.
Aiµóc [m., f.] ‘hunger, famine' (Il.). <?►
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 37³, Solmsen 1909: 109.
•COMP λчμ-αуx-έoμat 'be weakened by hunger' (Hp.) from *λiu-ayx-os (to ǎyxw, cf.
Schwyzer: 726); on Boú-λчμoç see on Bovλчuíа; on лоúλч 'strong hunger'
(Boeot.) see Schulze KZ 33 (1895): 243f.
•der Aɩµ-wdŋs ‘hungry' (Hp.), -ŋpós ‘hungry, ptng. to hunger' (Theoc., AP), -aλéos
= þvoós, λentós (H.), after avaλéos, etc. Verbs: Aqµaívw, λчµñvai ‘to suffer from
famine' (Hdt.), Aчµáttw, -woow ‘id.' (Str., J.), with Aiµwğıç (late).
•ETYM A primary formation compared with λūµóç is suspected in λoчµós ‘plague',
where the long i is sometimes explained by Saussure's Law: loss of laryngeal after o-
grade root. For após see λɛipiov.
入unávw →入einw.
Aчµqós [m.] · ovkopávtis. † unvʊtǹs лapavóµwv ‘a denunciator, or accuser of illegal
acts or people' (H.). <?►
•der λɩµqɛúɛiv. åлaτãv ‘to deceive' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
入ivaquan →入iáČoqia.
Aívбoç [m.] an aromatic plant (Mnesim. Com. 4, 63 apud Ath. 9, 403d, Eust. 315, 18).
<?>
•ETYM Named after the town Lindos on Rhodes? Cf. the plant name ¤áros (after the
spit of land and town of the same name) and other cases in Strömberg 1940: 121ff.
Avɛúc [m.] fish name = кɛστpɛúç, 'mullet' (Call. Com. 3 apud Ath. 7, 286b, Phot., H.).
<GR?>
•ETYM Connected with Xívov 'fishing net', as a back-formation from Aɩvɛúw [v.] ‘to
catch fish with a λ.' by Boßhardt 1942: 50; cf. the description in Thompson 1947: 109
(s.v. кεστрεÚç). Hardly related (as an inherited word) to Balto-Slavic names of the
'tench': Lith. lýnas, Ru. lin', etc.
Aívov [n.] 'linen, flax, linen cloth, thread, cord, fishing net' (Il.). ◄EUR?>
•DIAL Myc. ri-no /lino-/.
•COMP Several compounds like Aivo-0wpn with linen cuirass' (Il., AP), Avó-(wσTIS
[f.] 'mercury, Mercurialis' (Hp., Dsc.), from a compound *Avo-woτ, cf.
Strömberg 1940: 148; AɛUкó-λvov [n.] 'white flax' (Hdt.).
⚫DER Diminutives: Aváptov 'thread, net' (Delos IIª, D. Chr.), Avoúdiov 'linen cloth'
(pap.), probably from tò Aɩvoñv (iµátiov); also Aivoútov (pap.; cf. below).
Adjectives: Nívɛoç, -oûç, -ós (IA); \ɩvéa, -aía [f.] 'cord, noose' (Hell.), Xívivos
(Tanagra IIIª) ‘linen', Avaños ‘id., made of flax' (Hp., pap.), Aɩviký [f.] ‘tax on flax'
(pap.).

=== page 456 ===

864
Xívos
Verbs: Avɛúw 'to catch with nets' (Peripl. M. Rubr.); also late hypostases: Siα-, έк-,
En-Avάw to slip through the net, escape from the net, inspect the net' (Phryn.,
Eust., H.), ¿к-λvícw 'to escape from the net' (Byz.). On λivɛúç = кɛσTPεÚç, SEE s.v.
⚫ETYM Aívov has been compared with BSI. forms like Lith. linai [pl.] 'flax, linen', Ru.
lën, gen. lná ‘id.', which go back on a short vowel. Opposed to this is Lat. līnum with
long vowel, whence OIr. lín 'net' and other Celtic words, and Alb. li-ri, lį-ni ‘linen'
were borrowed. The Gm. group of Go. lein, OHG līn (also ON, OE) also agrees with
Lat. līnum, and can therefore be considered loans from it, too.
Original identity is possible, however, since the cultivation of flax in Central Europe
is very old. Still, it is more probable that λívov and linum derive from a
Mediterranean word. The word is unknown in Indo-Iranian (but the concept is, of
course).
Fur.: 375 cites the gloss кai λīvos лapà Kʊëpíoç (H.), a variant with long vowel. See
also λīta and ►λíç 2.
Aivos [m.] name of a song (Σ 570, Hdt. 2, 79, Pi. Fr. 139, 5), also personified as a name
of a mythical singer (Hes. Fr. 192, Theoc. 24, 105, Apollod. 1, 3, 2). <?>
•ETYM Foreign word from an unknown oriental source. Cf. alvos, which is the
source of the PN Aívos, acc. to Güntert 1921: 64. Acc. to Eißfeldt 1939: 161ff., aλivov
(whence perhaps λívos as a PN, as opposed to Xívos 'song' = \ívov ‘linen') is from
Phoenic. 'ij Alijan, a lamentation for the god of vegetation Alijan.
λíлa [adv.] 'fat, gleaming' (II.). <IE *leip-‘stick'>
•VAR In Hom. in elided form only: (aλɛíчaσ0α) λin' έλaiw, etc.; unelided λíлα in
Hp., Th. (cf. Leumann 1950: 309f.).
●DER λɩлapóç ‘fat, gleaming (of oil or unguent), fruitful (Il.), together with λɩлapíα
'fatness' (Dsc.) and Auαívw 'to make fat, anoint' (IA) with λíлavσiç ‘anointing'
(med.), Aavτкóç 'good for anointing' (sch.), λлασμóc ‘anointing' (Dsc.), λíñaσµа
'fat substance' (Hp., Hell.). Other verbs: λлáw 'to be sleek from unguents' (τ 72,
Hell.), trans. 'to anoint' (Nic.), λɩлáš ‘id.' (Nic.). Innovated s-stem: \íñoç [n.] 'fať'
(A., S., Arist.) with λódŋs ‘fatty, oily' (Thphr.); also λíñaç [n.] ‘id.' (Aret.), after
kpéas?
⚫ETYM A formal correspondence to λíл-α, probably a derivative from a root noun, is
found in Skt. rip- [f.] 'defilement, deceit'; λларóç looks like Skt. rip-rá- [n.]
'defilement, dirt', and λíñоç like Skt. répas- [n.] 'stain, dirt', but both could be
independent formations. Appurtenance of Alb. laparós 'to defile' is doubtful.
The other languages show different formations: nasal present Skt. li-m-p-áti
[3sg.pres.] 'to smear', with 3pl. aor. med. alipsata, Lith. lìpti, 1sg. limpù ‘to stick, be
sticky'; yod-present in OCS pri-lúpljo̟, inf. pri-lúpěti ‘to stick'. A deviant meaning is
found in the Gm. group of OHG bi-līban 'to stay, remain'. Unrelated is ► άλɛíqw 'to
anoint', which requires *h₂leib". The comparison with Hitt. lip(p)-i 'to lick' should
be discarded, because it is an onomatopoeia (Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). See ▸λíπτw.
Aлapéw to persist'. →λíлτw.
Aíç 2
865
Airepvýs, -ntos [adj.] mg. uncertain, perhaps ‘poor, deserted, orphaned' (Archil. 50
[лоλiται], BCH 11, 161 [Caria], gloss.). <PG(V)►
•VAR AQεpv-ouvɩaç (see below).
•DER Also -τns (AP 9, 649, EM), -ñτiç [f.] (Call. Fr. 66e, Epic. Oxy. 1794, 17, Suid. [=
лτшxn]), together with Autεpvoυvτaç· лεvуроúç 'poor, needy' (Suid.), which has a
variant Qεpvovτaç (J. AJ 2, 5, 5), of στáxvaç, parallel to dσ0ɛvεiç, opposed to
Kapnpapoivtaç.
•ETYM The suggestion by Suid. and EM 566, 50: лapà tò λɛíñɛσðai έpvéwv, ő έoti
qutwv 'leaving behind the sprouts, i.e. the plants', is clearly folk-etymology. The
variant with aspiration points to a Pre-Greek word. For the structure, cf.
▶ kußepváw.
Niños 'fat'. λíña.
λíлτш [v.] 'to desire' (A. R., Lyc., Nic.). <?>
!
VAR Perf. med. Aɛλчuuévoç 'desiring' (A. Th. 355, 380).
•der Cf. Xí¥• ¿ñiðчµía ‘desire' (H.), further λiñapéw [v.] 'to persist, ask persistently
or repeatedly' (IA), with λapín ‘persistence, endurance' (Hdt.) and λɩлapés
'persistent, persisting, earnest' (S., Ar., Pl.).
•ETYM λíлτw is traditionally compared with Lith. liēpti, 1sg. liepiù ‘to command,
order, organize', OPr. pallaips ‘order'. Alternatively, λiëɩw and λiñɑpéw may belong
to λína, napóç; but a serious problem is the length of the i. See Aupovpía.
Aĭpós [adj.] ‘bold, shameless, lewd' (Call. Fr. 229, Alex. Aet. 3, 30). <?►
•COMP Compound p-óμos 'with lewd eyes' (Suid.), Aɩpo-кλñ≤ PN (Ion.
inscr.).
⚫DER Aчpaívεi. ȧvaidɛúɛτai 'shows shameless behaviour' (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Fur.: 240 is unconvincing.
Aiç 1 'lion'. •VAR λíç. →λéwv.
Aís 2 [adj.] epithet of лépη ‘rock' (µ 64, 79) and of σɩvdwv ‘cloth' (SGDI 5702, 19;
Samos IV): smooth'. <IE? *lh,i-t- ‘smooth'>
DIAL Myc. ri-ta pa-we-a /līta pharweha/ 'smooth clothes'.
●DER 1. acc.sg. (also taken as pl.) λĩτ-α, dat. Aɩt-í ‘smooth linen' (Hom.). 2. λītóç
'simple, plain' (since IV³), Mitwę (Alc. F 7, 2; context unknown) together with
Atóτηs [f.] 'simpleness' (Democr. 274, Thphr.). 3. Moσós (Crete IIIª, also TN), fem.
Moon (Od.), Moσáç, Boeot. Aττáç (Corinn., A., E., Theoc., A. R.) 'smooth, bare', also
metaph. ‘naked, insolvent' (Crete); hence Moσóqµaɩ in [o] owέvτwv [ptc.]
'becoming insolvent' (Crete IIIª) and in Niσowμa (bald spot on the) crown',
Niσowσis ‘bald-headedness' (Arist.); cf. Moσoús. dɛoµévous ‘lacking, in neeď. kai
τoÙÇ ηovxñ чaλaкpoúç 'slightly bald' (H.). On Moσávios, see s.v.
•ETYM The basis of these words was the τ-stem -T-, seen in λí-s and in the
substantives Air-α, AT-í. Thematic enlargement gave AT-ó-ç; beside this, there was a
a-derivative in fem. *λīσσa < *λ˜˜-дα, with a new nom. Aσon from the originally
ablauting gen. Mσσñs, and a new msc. Moσós. For λíç: Xioσa, compare e.g. Ons :
Añoσa, Kpńs : Kρñσσα. The form λɛños ‘level, smooth' can hardly be separated

=== page 457 ===

866
Mσyápιov
from Xíc; this points to a reconstruction \īt- < *lhi-t- beside full-grade *leh,i-u-
(Schrijver 1991: 283f.).
Mσyápiov [adj.] 'spade, mattock' (sch. Theoc. 4, 10, Suid. s.v. σkaqɛidɩov). <PG?►
•DIAL MOGr. Moyápi.
•ETYM A diminutive derived from *Moyos, which is unexplained itself. Several
hypotheses have been advanced: from *λíy-σкoç to Lat. ligō 'mattock'; from *Mid-
σKoç or *Mid-yos, related to λíστpov. Fur.: 294 objects to a suffix -σк-, referring to
Schwyzer: 541. So the word is rather Pre-Greek.
λσлoç [adj.] probably ‘smooth, polished, flat' (Ar. Ra. 826, of yλwoσa); ai λionaɩ as a
word for the halfs of a dice, used by two friends as a tally (Pl. Smp. 193a), also oi
λíσлo (Suid.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Aspirated by-form \ioqos (Attic acc. to Moer. and Tz.), Míoqaɩ = tà ioxía ‘hip
joints' (EM 567, 20). Cf. Níoqos = ǎлvyoç; also λéσqos (EM 567, 21).
•COMP Compounds àσлó-лʊуoç (-лvε) 'with smooth (flat) buttocks' (Phryn., Poll.,
sch.), úлó-λσños (-os) 'smooth, polished or flat underneath', especially of the
buttocks and hips (Ar. Eq. 1368, Philostr., Poll.).
•DER Denominative σowσaσa. ¿λαɩɩшσασðαι ‘to reduce, diminish' (H.).
⚫ETYMλíoqos and λéopos are by-forms typical of a Pre-Greek word.
Moσávoç [adj.] only in Moσávie (Ar. Lys. 1171; v.l. Avoσ-), a form of address of
unknown mg., explained by H. and Phot. as ȧyalós (cf. & 'yaé). <?►
⚫ETYM A Laconian word without etymology. The analysis as a compound pursued by
Frisk fails to convince.
λíσσoμaι [v.] ‘to beg, pray, implore' (II.). <IE? *leit-➤
•VAR Aor. Atéσai, λíσaσa (Il., epic poet.), new pres. λítoμa (h. Hom. 16, 5, Ar.
[lyr.], AP).
●DER 1. Aɩtaí [f.pl.], rare ɩ [sg.] 'prayer' (Il., Hdt.) with Aτaïoç epithet of Zeus
(Bithynia IP), Aτσio 'praying' (Nonn.), after iкεtýσios (Chantraine 1933: 42);
λɩtášoµaι [v.] ‘to pray, beg'. 2. With a suffix -v-: Aɩtavós 'begging, suppliant' (A.),
Aɩtaívw [v.] ‘to implore, beg' (E.), Aɩtavɛúw ‘id.' (II.); Aɩtavɛía [f.] ‘appeal, entreaty'
(LXX, pap., D. H.), -ɛvtiкós ‘ptng. to prayer' (sch.). 3. λτñpα ¤¤λλóv. tòv ikéσiov
(H.). 4. Verbal adjective -Motos in compounds: τpí-, лoλú-, ä-\\στos implored
three times, much prayed for, etc.' (II.), on -λλ- (also in -λλíσσετо, etc.) see
Chantraine 1942: 176. An adj. *λTóc 'begging' does not exist, see Chantraine RPh. 79:
16ff.
•ETYM Unclear. Connection with Baltic words for ‘touch', like Lith. liësti, lytëti is
semantically unconvincing, that with ảλívw formally impossible. LIV² (s.v. 2. *leit-)
defends the connection with the Baltic words: "Im Gr. über ‘an den Knien berühren'
zu ‘anflehen' weiterentwickelt, vgl. hom. Moσέokɛto yoúvwv”. Does the borrowing
Lat. litāre 'to sacrifice under prosperous omina' from *litā < Gr. Aɩtý?
Aσoós 'smooth'. →λíç 2.
\íστpov [n.] 'tool for levelling, spade, shovel, etc.' (X 455, Lyc., Mosch.). <?►
•VAR Also -os [m.].
入opós
867
●DER Diminutive \στpov [n.] (Ar. Fr. 809, inscr. Lebadea), στpwτós 'flattened,
smoothed' (Nic.) with Aστpów (Eust.), Aστрɛúш [v.] 'to dig up' (w 227), \στpαívw
'id.' (Suid.).
⚫ETYM An instrument name in -τpov without explanation. Assuming *\íτ-τpov, it
may belong to Xic, ALT-ós 'smooth, even'. Comparisons with Latv. lîst, 1sg. lîdu, Lith.
lýdyti 'to dig up, unearth, smoothen' and with Lat. līra 'furrow' have been given up.
Aíoqos 'smooth'. λìσлoç.
Aĭτa 'linen', dat. Tí. •VAR AIτós ‘simple'. →λíç 2.
Airaí ‘prayer(s)'. →λíσσoµai.
Airapy w [v.] 'to slip away' (Ar. Pax 562, Nu 1253, both fut.); Aταpуíčεv. τpoɣáčɛv to
run quickly'; áлoλlitapyíoai. taxéws ảñodpaµɛïv ‘to run off quickly' (H.); <?►
•VAR Fut. -ɩw.
•COMP Also with άлo-.
•Der Aɩtapyɩoµós (sch. Ar. Nu. 1255), Aítapyos ‘running quickly' (An. Ox. 2, 236, EM
567, 38), perhaps an invented back-formation.
•ETYM Unexplained. The ending recalls apyós ‘quick', but the beginning is unclear
(ATÓS 'simple'?).
Aiτpa [f.] 'pound', as a weight and coin; as Sicilian silver money = half a mina or 50
drachmes (Epich., Sophr., [Simon.] 141, Hell.). <LW Western Medit.>
•COMP Compounds like Sɛкá-λτpos 'worth ten pounds' (Epich., Sophr.), Aτpo-
σкóлоç 'money-changer' (S. Fr. 1065).
•DER Aτpaños (AP, Gal.), also λtp-ɩaños (Gal.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 49) 'worth or
containing a pound'; \τpíw [v.] 'to weigh, deliver by weight' with Aɩτpiσµós (pap.);
also Aɩtpaoµós ‘libratio' (gloss.).
•ETYM A Mediterranean word, originating from Sicily and identical with Lat. lībra
'balance, pound'. As common basic form, *līprā has been postulated; on the
phonetics, see Schulze KZ 33 (1895): 223f., Schwyzer: 206, and Pariente Emerita 20
(1952): 389ff. The shortness of the ɩ in λiτpα, which would be Doric acc. to Hdn. Gr.
2, 546, 12, is unexplained. Details in WH s.v. libra. Fur.: 182 further compares
Spíov. τpúßλov 'cup', also a measure (H.).
λxαvós •VAR λxµáðµαι, λíxvoç. →λɛixw.
入iy, 入upós →入eißw.
Ayovpía [f.] 'desire to urinate' (A. Ch. 756). <GR?>
ETYM Abstract formation in -ía from a supposed *Aup-oupéw or *λíч-oupoç, a
governing compound from *λupa ‘desire', related to λíлτw, and oчpov. Was this
the origin of the gloss λí. εлчμía (H.)?
Aoẞós [m.] 'lobe, lap, slip', a designation of various lap- or slip-like parts of the body
or of plants, especially 'lobe of the ear' (E 182), also of the liver (Hp., A., E., Pl.), of
the lung (medic.), etc.; ‘leaf of the elder' (Thphr.), ‘capsula with seeds, pods of

=== page 458 ===

:
868
Aoyádec
leguminous plants'; also these plants themselves; 'pod, seedbox, skin of fruit'
(Thphr., Dsc., Gal.). ◄ EUR?▷
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. лpó-λoßos [m.] 'crop of birds, Adam's apple'
(Arist., LXX), but лpo-λóßiov 'the front part of the lobe of the ear' (Poll., H.); čλ-
Aoẞos in a pod, having a poď (Thphr.), lengthened λoß-wdns 'id.' (cf. Strömberg
1937: 164), but λ-λóßiov ‘earring' (Luc., S. E.); ȧvτi-λóßiov, -ẞis 'part of the ear-lobe
opposite to the époλóßov' (medic.); ¿rtλoßís. µépos τoù éƒâτoš “part of the liver'
(H.); as an adjective in ǹ ¿λoßis yλwσσa lobe of the liver', a sign of soothsayers
(PAmh. 2, 14, 21; III-IV³); as a term of construction кataλoßɛús [m.] ‘cornice,
crossbeam' (Epid., Hierapytna); ò\v\oßéw ‘τò taxέws ɑkoúw hearing quickly'
(Suid.), from *očú-λoßoç, see Strömberg 1937: 164.
•DER Diminutive λóßtov (Gal, Dsc.).
=
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. The connection with MoHG Lappen ‘piece, rag' is
semantically attractive, as is that with its cognates, e.g. OE læppa [m.] ‘tip, lap', ēar-
leppa 'ear-lobe'. It sometimes appears without gemination, as in MoNw. lape 'to
hang down', MLG ōr-lepel 'ear-lobe'.
A deviating vocalism is shown by Lat. labāre 'to waver', beside which with a long
vowel labor, lābi 'to glide'; both may derive from a root *(s)leh₂b- (in which case they
are unrelated). With initial sl- we find e.g. MLG slap ‘slack', OCS slabú ‘slack',
probably continuing *slob-. The fact that all these words show IE *b points to
European substrate origin.
Aoyádɛç [f.pl.] ‘white of the eye, tà λɛvкà tŵv óóðaλµ@v' (Sophr. 49, Call. Fr. 132, Nic.
Th. 292), also 'eyes' (AP 5, 269). <GR?>
=
•VAR In Poll. 2, 70 sing.
⚫ETYM Metaphorical use of λoyádes (Aλio): 'picked, chosen', i.e. 'unworked stones,
pebbles' as opposed to 'cut stones' (Paus. 7, 22, 5); cf. also λoуádny by accidental
selection', of stones (Th.), A100-λóyos (-έw, -ía) ‘who works with unworked stones'
(as opposed to ßo-tóµos, -ovpyós). Note the alternative explanation of λoyádas as
yńqovs Aevkás ‘white pebbles' in H. Likewise, Sw. ögon-sten ‘eye-ball', properly
"eye-stone". See also Aéyw, and on λwyáλto. Fur.: 363, etc. connects loyádes
with Aúydos 'white marble', but this not evident semantically.
Aoyyά¶w [v.] ‘to linger, hesitate, abide' (A. Fr. 112, Ar. Fr. 811). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. Aoyyáσai.
•DER λoyyáσia [n.pl.], H. also -oín [f.sg.], originally “abode”, ‘stones to fix cables of a
ship' (H., Phot. s.v. λoyуáčɛv).
⚫ETYM Formation like youváσtov, -σíα to yчµváčoμal, etc. (Schwyzer: 469f.); further
Aoyywves [m.pl.] ‘id.', which acc. to EM 569, 42, is Syracusan, a shortened form after
the place names in -(ε)wv.
It cannot be separated from the synonym ►λayyáČw; the variation a/o points to Pre-
Greek origin. Cf. also Fur.: 274 (on Lat. langueō).
入óyos, 入óylog →入éyw.
Móyxn [f.] 'spearhead, javelin, lance' (Pi.). <?>
λoчós
869
•COMP Compounds like Aoyxo-pópos ‘lance-bearer' (E., Ar., X., Plb.), dí-λoyxos
'with double lance' (A.).
•DER Diminutives: λoyx-íov (Hell. inscr.), -áptov (Posidon., Luc.), -ís (Hell. [?]),
-ídia (H. s.v. Čiẞúvvia).
Adjectives: λóуxчos belonging to the lance' (A.), cf. µáxчç; Сoушτós 'provided
with a lance (B., E., Hell. inscr.) with loyxóqual, see below; Xoyxons ‘id.' (E.),
\oyxaïos. µetà tñs λóyxns (Suid.).
Substantives: λoyxitŋs [m.] ‘lance-bearer' (Hdn.), Aoyɣītıç [f.] plant name (Dsc.,
Gal.), after the form of the seeds (Strömberg 1940: 55).
Verbs: Aoyxóoμat 'to provide with a lance' (Arist., Str.), probably a back-formation
from λoyxwτós (above), rare λoyxεúw [v.] 'to pierce with a lance' (AP 9, 300 in tit.),
Aoyxáče (H.) explaining SopáεI.
⚫ETYM Unexplained; all previous hypotheses are unconvincing: comparison with
Aayxávw as "the reaching one"; analysis as “the long one", related to Lat. longus;
more in Frisk.
Aoɩyós [m.] ‘ruin, havoc, death' (Il.). <◄IE *leig- ‘illness'▷
•COMP As a second member in ẞpoto-λolyós 'destroying men', of Ares (Il.), also in
άop-λolyós "destroyer of chaff", 'winnowing-fan' (Od.).
•DER λoiyios 'destroying, bringing disaster' (Il.), also λoys, -ńs ‘id.' (Nic.),
poetical transformations, cf. Schwyzer: 527 and 513); Aoiɣíotpia. óλoßpeútpia (H.), to
oλopɛúw 'to destroy'.
•ETYM Properly an agent noun “destroyer" (cf. Porzig 1942: 307) of a primary verb
preserved in Lith. liegti ‘to be very ill, be ailing' (IE *leig-), to which also belongs the
zero grade action noun ligà, Latv. liga ‘illness, plague'; further perhaps Alb. lig 'bad,
meagre and (with IE *k) OIr. líach 'miserable, unhappy'. Unrelated are oλiyos
'slight, small' (Saussure Effect is unlikely, especially in initial position), and Arm.
ałk at 'poor' (see Martirosyan 2010 S.V.).
Aoidopέw [v.] 'to slander, abuse, reprove, revile' (Pi., IA). <?►
VAR Aor. Aotdopñσal.
•COMP Sometimes with prefixes like άлo-, σʊv-, époσ-.
•DER odopía 'slander' (Att.); also oɩdóp-nois (Pl., LXX), -noµós (Ar.), -ŋµa (Arist.,
Plu.), -ŋµátov (Ar.); -ŋtiкós ‘abusive' (Arist.), -ɩotǹs (H.) as an explanation of
кóẞɛɩpos (after ȧywoτηs, etc.); as a back-formation λoídopos ‘abusive, slanderer'
(E. Cyc. 534, Arist., Hell.).
•ETYM Taken as a formation comparable to лоλ-оркéw, dɛipo-τoμεw, oivo-xoέw,
etc., but further details are unclear. It is doubtful to compare the first part with Lat.
lūdus 'play', Míčɛ• лaíè̟ɛɩ ‘plays' (H.), as is done by Perpillou 1996: 112ff., who also
adduces the gloss λívɛσα· áµˆˆão a 'to contend', and proposes haplology from
*λodo-dopέw. Note that several terms with this meaning are Pre-Greek (cf.
▶ Keptouéw).
Aoчuós [m.] 'plague' (A 61), metaph. 'pernicious man' (D.), also in adjectival function
(LXX, christ. lit.). <?>
•VAR λoíµn (H.), probably for λúµn.

=== page 459 ===

870
dotóg
●DER λoчµwdŋs ‘like the plague' (Hp., Th.), λoчµкós 'belonging to the plague' (Hp.,
Hell.; Chantraine 1956a: 121), λoíµos epithet of Apollo in Lindos (Macr.); Aoqµótns
‘plague-like situation' (LXX); \очμεúoµaɩ [v.] ‘to be contaminated with the plague'
(LXX), λoчμwσow, -wττw 'to suffer from the plague' (Gal., Luc.).
•ETYM Most often taken as ablauting with λчµóç. The form λolyós has also been
considered as a root-cognate, and a third suffixal variant was seen in λoτóç. λoчμó
(H.). The form oɩóç is taken by Schmidt s.v. as a mistake for λoɩyós, and with good
reason. A cross of чóc and oɩyós has also been suggested, but this is a desperate
attempt to explain everything.
λoлóç 'remaining'. →λɛíлw.
Aoioboç 1 [adj.] 'the last, utmost' (Y536). <?>
•DER oíσos (Pi., trag., Theoc., A. R.), (τò) loíolov [adv.] 'at last. Noonïoç
'regarding the lasť', (τà) λoσÐ½ïα 'the last prize' (Y785, 751), like ȧplotnïov, -ïa;
λoíošnµa. téλos, лépaç ‘end, border' (H.). Unclear are the glosses oíσēwvaç. toùç
àkpateīs nepì tà à podíσia ‘the weak ones regarding sex' (H.) and Aoiσłwvŋ. †
Opaσɛia 'the bold one' (Suid.).
•ETYM No etymology. All suggested explanations are unconvincing (for literature see
Frisk): from *λothio-OF-os "the weakest in the course”, related to łέw and Gm.
*laisiz 'less' in MoE less, etc.; from *λothio-Toc; related to Lith. léidžiu, léisti ‘let', Lat.
lūdus 'game', etc.; from *λohio-Tos to Go. las-iws 'weak, powerless', etc. (Solmsen IF
13 (1902/03): 140ff.). The problem is that the -0- causes difficulties. Scheftelowitz KZ
56 (1929): 179 tried to get around this by positing *sloid-to- (to OCS po-slědnj
“σxατoç, utmost, lasť' ~ slědé ‘trace', Lith. slýsti, 1sg. slýdau 'to glide', Gr. óλioðávw,
etc., from IE *(s)leidh 'slippery, glide'), but it is unlikely that the cluster preserved its
aspiration for such a long time.
Aoīσ005 2 [m.] ‘beam' (IG 2², 1673: 17 [IVª]), also an epithet of dópu, ‘deck beam' vel
sim. (E. Hel. 1597). <?►
⚫ETYM MoGr. λoστós 'lever' seems to presuppose a pre-form λoïσóc, see Georgacas
Glotta 6 (1958): 168. Further unclear.
Aoitŋ [f.] · táqos 'tomb' (H.). <IE *leit- 'go away, pass away'>
•VAR λOLTEÚεɩv. Оáлτεу 'to bury' (H.).
⚫ETYM Derived from an old verbal root *leit- 'to go away, pass away' found in
Germanic, e.g. Go. (af)leipan, ON líða, OHG līdan > MoHG leiden 'to suffer', with
the causative ON leiða ‘to carry, conduct, bury', OHG leiten 'to lead, carry, etc.', to
which also belong ON leiði [n.] 'burial place', OHG leiti [f.] 'conduct, exequiae'. In
Iranian, the verb also remained as a euphemistic expression for 'pass away, die': Av.
raeo-, pres. irioiieiti. Tocharian preserves the older mg. 'go away', e.g. ToA 3pl.pres.
litantär, ToB 3sg.subj. laitam, pret. lita.
•
AOLTÓS 1 λoчμóç (H.). →λoчμóç.
AOLTOS 2 [adj.] epithet of vóoç, perhaps = áyvóc (Supp. Epigr. 8, 716, 14 [Balbilla]). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
λopdós
871
λóкaλoç [?] name of an unknown bird, perhaps a stork (Arist. HA 504). <?>
•ETYM Fur.: 345 Anm. 3 compares Georg. laglagi, laqlaqi, lakvi, (East Caucasian)
Tsakhur lägläg 'stork', MoP laglag, laġlaġ ‘id.'.
λóккη [f.] Xλαμùç, ¿чaлtíç (garment names) (H.). <PG(V)►
ETYM Fur.: 344 compares λáккoç ‘a garment' (Peripl. M. Rubr.). Given the
interchange a/o, the word is probably Pre-Greek; compare Lat. lacerna 'mantle-like
overcloth'.
Aóla [f.]? name of a plant (pap. Byc.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
AoAλw word of child language (Hermipp. 89). <?►
•VAR Cf. AoλAoûу· τà лαιбíα τòу лóλτоу 'porridge in child language' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown.
Aožós [adj.] ‘bent to the side, slanting, oblique', metaph. ‘ambiguous' (IA). <?►
•COMP Late compounds like λočo-кÉλɛvoç 'with oblique paths' (Nonn.), лapá-
Aožoç 'slanting, oblique' (Sor.), cf. лapα-λožαívoµai below.
•DER Aožíaç, Ion. -ins [m.] epithet of Apollo as a prophesying god (B., Hdt., trag.),
also of the ecliptic (astron.), Ao\w [f.] daughter of Boreas (Call., Nonn., EM 641, 57).
AOŠIKÒÇ KÚKÀOÇ ‘the ecliptic' (astr.), λožóτŋs ‘obliquity, ambiguity' (Str., Plu.).
Denominative verbs: λožóoµaɩ ‘to be oblique' (Sophr., Hp., Herod.), also -ów, also
with л-, лo-, whence λówσus 'inclination, obliquity (of the ecliptic)' (Epicur.,
Str.); (Siα-)λoɛúw 'to make aslant or ambiguous' (Lib.), with λožεúµατα [pl.]
'obliquities' (Man.); лαрα-λožαívoμat 'to be placed obliquely' (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Several adjectives with comparable meaning also have a suffix -σ0-: yavσóç,
kaшóc, cožó, puσóc, etc. Connection with λéxploc, and further with λɛкpoí (see
Aoкpoí) seems probable, but it seems impossible to make a reconstruction. The o-
vowel seems to point to a nominal base form.
Further connections are not very clear; words for ‘elbow, arm' and other curved
body parts have an initial vowel (e.g. Lith. alkúnė ‘elbow', Ru. lókoť ‘id.' < PSl.
*ölkút-, Arm. olok' ‘shin-bone') and should therefore be kept separate.
Aoµßpós [adj.] an indecent dance (Poll, 4, 105). <?►
•ETYM It has been compared with λoµßoúç. τoùƒ áƒεσko\vµµévovs ‘stripped off.
Bechtel 1898: 61 gives the PN Aóμẞaž. Etymology unknown.
λолóç 'shell, bark, scale'. •VAR λолáç, -íç, etc. →λεлw.
Aopdós [adj.] 'bent backwards, so as to be convex in front', also sens. obsc., opposite
Kuqóc (Hp., Arist.). <IE? *lerd- 'curve'>
•DER Aópdwv, -wvos [m.] name of a demon (Pl. Com. 174, 17, beside Kúẞdaσoç from
kúßda); λopdóoµaɩ, -ów [v.] ‘to bend supinely' (Hp., com.), whence λópd-woiç, -wµa
'curvature of the spine inward' (Hp., Gal.), opposed to кúo-wois, -wμa; also
λopdaivw = -ów (Hp.).
•ETYM Isolated in Greek. Cognates in Armenian have been supposed, as well as in
Celtic and Germanic. Semantically, a neat comparison exists with Arm. lorc-k' [pl.]

=== page 460 ===

872
入oÚuata
(i-st.) = óлσеóτоvoι (Pl. Ti. 84e), i.e. 'spasmodic inward curvature of the upper
body' (cf. Aópdwσiç, -wμa above); however, lorc'-k' must be derived from IE *lor(d)-
sk-(i). A corresponding formation may be found in Celtic Gael. loirc [f.] 'deformed
foot', which also admits of an IE basis *lor(d)-sk-eh₂-. Further we have, without a
suffix -sk- and deviating in ablaut, MHG lerz, lurz ‘left, sly' < ‘crooked' (cf. lürzen 'to
deceive' = ME bi-lurten 'id.'), from IE *lerd-, *lrd-.
λoúμаτα ‘chaff. →λoúw.
Aouσσov [n.] 'white pith of the fir-tree' (Thphr. HP 3, 9, 7); details in Strömberg 1937:
126, 128, 166. <?>
•ETYM May continue * Novк-tov as a derivative of a root noun, as is seen in Lat. lux
'light', if from IE *louk-s. Further derivatives from this root are OCS luča [f.] ‘ray,
beam' with a suffix *ih₂. An o-derivative IE *louk-o- is seen in Lat. lucus 'forest', etc.;
the verbal adj. λɛvкós and the yod-present λɛúσow belong there, too, as does
►λúxvoç. The etymology remains rather improbable, though.
λoúw, -oµai [v.] ‘to bathe, wash (the body)' (II.). ◄IE *leuh¸- ‘wash, bathe’▷
•VAR Also loέw (ipf. Nóɛov 8 252). Nów (ipf. Nó [k 361], Aóov [h. Ap. 120], inf.
λóɛσðɑɩ [Hes. Op. 749]); further \oñσðaι († 216), λoñvtaɩ (Hdt.), Aoúµevoç (Ar.);
Dor. (Call. Lav. Pall. 72f.) Awvτо, λwovτo; aor. λoñσal, -σασðαι (11.), epic also
λoéσ(o)ai, -éσσaσbat, Dor. Awσáμɛvos (Cyrene), pass. λovеñva (Hp.), -σñvaι
(LXX, pap.); fut. λoúσw, -oµαι (IA), \oέσσoµai (§ 221), perf. ptc. λɛλovµévos (E 6).
•DIAL Myc. re-wo-te-re-jo /lewotreios/, epithet of bathtubs.
●COMP Also with prefix, especially ảлo-, έê-. As a first member e.g. in λoɛtpo-xóos
'pouring bathwater' (Hom.) = Myc. re-wo-to-ro-ko-wo, see below.
•DER 1. Aouτpóv, Hom. Noɛτрóv, Dor. Awτpóv (H.), usually plur. (always in Hom.)
‘bath, bathing site' (II.); λoúτpiov [n.] ‘bathwater' (Ar., Luc.), ȧñoλoútpios ‘already
used for washing' of water (Ael.), λovτpwv, -wvoç [m.] 'bathroom, public baths' (X.,
Hell.) with -wviкóç ‘ptng. to a bathing site' (Cod. Just.), λovípíç [f.] ‘ptng. to the bath'
(Theopomp. Com., H., Phot.), Novtpikós (H. s.v. Švotpoλýkvšov), Aovtpóoµai [v.]
'to bathe' (Euboea). 2. Noúτpa [f.] 'sarcophagus' (Corycos), for the mg. cf. µáкpa
(from µáкτpα) bathtub, coffin'. 3. λovτýp [m.] bathtub' (LXX, inscr.), -nptov [n.]
‘id.' (Antiph., inscr.; λwτ- Tab. Heracl.), whence diminutives -ηpídiov (Hero, pap.),
-ŋpíoкos (gloss.); έkλovtýpios ‘for washing out' (Aegina); ¿ylovστpís [f.] ‘bathing
trunks' (Hell. pap.). 4. Xovotŋs [m.] ‘who loves bathing' (Arist., M. Ant.). 5. λoñσɩS
'bathing, washing' (late pap., inscr.), άлóλovσç 'washing' (Pl.). 6. Aoûµa [n.] 'stream'
(Sardes); probably also λoúματα (cod. άoúμаτα). τà τŵν ëɩɩσσoµεvшv кριешv äxυpa
Kúлpio 'the chaff of the barley-corns that are winnowed' (H.); cf. àлóλovµа
άлокáеαρμα (sch., Eust.); was the chaff drenched in water before feeding it? 7.
λovτáw [v.] 'to wish to bathe' (Luc. Lex. 2), after έµεt-iáw : ¿µéw, etc.
=
•ETYM The aorist λo(F) έoat is of the same type as кopéσaɩ, σtopéσaɩ; the rare present
AO(F)έw can be explained as an innovation. The form Aouσat may have arisen from
*λoféσai by contraction, and hence λoúw may have been formed. In Homer, the
uncontracted forms can often be substituted, e.g. Nóεσεv, etc. for λoñσɛv, etc., as well
as λoéɛσbai for λovɛσ0ai (Z 508 = O 265).
入ópos
873
Both ouσal, etc. and the isolated forms λó', λóov, λóɛ00aι are understandable if we
start from a thematic verb *λóƑw; the last forms however, could also be due to
hyphaeresis (cf. Schwyzer: 252f.). Likewise, λoñσaι, λоÛνται, λоúμεvoç admit of
basic forms *λóƑ-εσðai *λóƑ-ovtaɩ, *λoƑ-óµεvoç, but they may alternatively be
explained from λo(Ƒ)éeσ-0at, \o(Ƒ)éovtai, λo(f)εóµevoç.
A correspondence to the vocalism of *λóƑw is found in Lat. lavō, lavere, the a-
vocalism of which Vine KZ 119 (2006): 239 explains from a pre-form *lou-V- that
originated in the frequent prefixed verbs (Lat. lavāre is mostly found as a simplex). It
remains uncertain whether Arm. loganam, aor. logac'ay 'to bathe' has a disyllabic
root too, given the productivity of the Arm. verbs in -anam.
Myc. re-wo-to-ro-ko-wo and re-wo-te-re-jo deviate in root vocalism from the
Homeric and later forms; it is thought that their e-vocalism is original, and that
Aоετpóv, etc. arose by metathesis of *lewo-. The Celt. and Gm. nominal derivatives
show the same vocalization as the Homeric forms, e.g. Gaul. lautro bathing place',
Olr. lóathar 'basin', ON lauðr [n.] 'lye, soap foam', OE leapor 'soap foam', which
may go back to IE *louh¸-tro- and be identical with \o(Ƒ)etpóv.
Hitt. lahu lahu- 'to pour, cast (metal), overflow' points to *leh₂-u- and can
therefore not be related to Noúw.
Aoqviç, -ídos [f.] ‘torch' (Lyc., AP, Cleitarch. gloss. apud Ath. 15, 701a [cod. \oqida]).
<?>
•DER λoqvídia. λaµñádia ‘small torches' (H.); also \oqvía [f.] ‘id.' (Anon. apud Ath.
15, 699d; Kaibel Noovida); cf. Scheller 1951: 56.
•ETYM Formation in -íç or -ía derived from *λóovoç, -vn. Because of the description
in Ath., tǹv ¿ê toũ qλoloũ tñs åµnéλov λaµëáða ‘torch made of the bark of the
vine', it may derive from *lop-sn-, related to λéлw ‘peeľ, λoñós ‘shell, bark'; the suffix
is also seen in Aúxvos, with comparable meaning. Still, I find this solution rather
improbable.
Aópos [m.] 'neck of draught animals and men, crest of a helmet, crest of a hill, ridge'
(Il.), also 'tuft on the head of birds, crest of feathers, cockscomb' (Simon., Hdt., Ar.,
Arist.). <IE? *lobh-o- 'crest, top'>>
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. yn-, yɛw-λoqos ‘(earthen) hill' (Pl., X.); rarely
as a first member, e.g. (tà) λópoupa 'having a crest-like tail', of draught animals and
animals of burden (horses, asses, τà úло(úуiα) as opposed to ruminants (Arist.,
Thphr., Hell. inscr.). λóon [f.] 'comb' (D. S.), perhaps after кóun?
●DER 1. Diminutives: Xóqtov 'small crest of the helmet' (sch.), Aocídiov 'small hill'
(Ael.). Other substantives: 2. λoquá, Ion. -in [f.] ‘manes, bristly back, dorsal fin, etc.'
(t 446, also Hdt., Arist.), cf. Scheller 1951: 72f.; 3. Noqɛiov 'crest case' (Ar.), also λopic.
лερɩкɛaλaías OŃкη 'chest around the head', i.e. 'helmet' (H.). 4. λopias [m.] 'fish
with dorsal fins', denomination of the oáypos (Numen. apud Ath.), like ȧkavēíaç,
etc., Chantraine 1933: 94, also 'the first dorsal vertebra' (Poll.); in the last mg. also
Aoqadías (Poll.); Aoqiýtys [m.] ‘inhabitant of a hill' (AP, of Pan, after лoλýtηc). 5.
Aóqwois [m.] crest ornament' (Ar. Av. 291); cf. ȧéτwσis (see alɛtóc). 6. Adjectives:
Aoqwdns 'crest-like, hilly' (Arist.), λoqóɛs ‘crested, hilly' (Tryph., Nonn.). 7. Verbs:
:

=== page 461 ===

874
入óxun
Aoqpáw 'to be crested' (Babr., Ar., H.), after кoµáw, Leumann 1950: 30777; \oqiw [v.]
'to raise the A.' (Zonar.); λopóoμα [v.] 'to tower, form a hill' (Eust.). 8. Hypostasis:
кαταλopádɛα [adv.] 'hanging down from the neck' (K 169 with metrically
conditioned -ɛta, cf. katwµádios, kaτwµadóv; Chantraine 1933: 39, Chantraine 1942:
101 and 176).
•ETYM As both Alc. (Z 65) and Hdt. (1, 171) consider the crest of the helmet to be a
Carian invention, Schulze 1892: 257, 4 considers λópos to be a Carian loan in this
specific sense, which he separates from λópos 'neck'. This is untenable.
An acceptable connection is that with ToA lap 'head' (Schulze 1933a: 252), the
semantics of which are understandable if the Greek meaning was originally 'crest,
crown'. However, ORч. lbб 'skull', together with OCS lbып belonging to the
skull' (also Ru. lob 'forehead'), cannot be connected, since they point to *lub"-. Illyr.
PN Otto-(Atto-)lobus is uncertain (Mayer Glotta 32 (1953): 83).
λóxun lair of wild beasts'. •VAR λóxos [m.] 'ambush, childbed', etc. →λéxɛtai.
Avyaños ‘dark'. →ŋλúyn.
Avyyoúpɩov [n.] ‘a kind of amber' (Thphr., Delos IIIª, Str.). <PG?, EUR?>
•VAR Also Ayy, λyк-; note λvyкoúpiov. tò ňλektpov ‘amber' (H.).
•ETYM Analyzed as a substantivized bahuvrīhi of λúy and opov, as the stone was
thought to be the urine of the lynx. However, Auyyoúptov has variants Aoyoúptov.
Üελoç, Aάкwveç 'glass, crystal' (H.) and Aoyoúptov. üaλoç ‘id.' (H.), which rather
show that it is a foreign word. Therefore, the explanation as urine of the lynx is just a
folk-etymological fantasy. See Fur.: 2784³. See ►λúyč 2.
Aúydoc [f.] (white) marble' (D. S., Peripl. M. Rubr., AP). <PG?>
•DER Aúуd-ivoç 'made of marble, marble-white' (Babr., Philostr., AP, Cyrene), -ívɛoç
‘id.' (AP). Xúydŋ. tò dévdpov ǹj Aeúкŋ ‘white poplar' (H.).
⚫ETYM Ending as in μóλvßdoç, кíßdoç, etc. and, like these, without etymology. A
connection with λɛvкós and cognates is morphologically hard to explain, as the
suffix -doç is not productive (except in sound-words like ►кéλados, s.v.). Fur.: 307
connects λoyádɛç, but this is improbable. Still, the word is probably Pre-Greek.
Aúyos [f.(m.)] ‘flexible branch, twig which is suited for twisting' (Il.). <IE? *leug- ‘bend,
twist'>
•COMP Some compounds like Avyo-déoµa [f.] “bound with willow-twigs", Laconian
epithet of Artemis (Paus.).
•DER Aúylov 'twig' (sch.), Auyéa 'willow' (Eust.), Aúyivoç 'made of λ.' (Heph. apud
Ath.), Avywdns 'like a willow' (Dsc., Eust.), Avyów ‘twist, bend' (AP, APl.). Also
Avуíčoµα, -w [v.] 'to turn, wind, bend' (Hp., Att., Theoc., AP), with Avуσμóç
‘turning, bending, of wrestlers, dancers, etc. (Ar., Luc.), λúyɩoµa ‘sprain' (Dsc.),
-LσTIкóç 'supple, flexible' (Poll.).
•ETYM Interpreted as verbal noun, λúyos can be connected with isolated formations
in other languages: Lith. lùgnas [verb.adj.] 'supple', together with the denominative
yod-present ON lykna < PGm. *lukn-jan 'bend the knee'; Lat. luxus < *lug-s-o-
'sprained' (cf. Aúyoua). Cf. also the frequentative Lat. lucto(r), luctāre 'to wrestle'
!
i
Audóç
875
(back-formation lucta [f.] 'wrestling match'), originally *"to turn (intr.)"; cf.
入vyLofiós.
The original meaning of Aúyos would be “turning, bending"; perhaps λvyíčoμaɩ,
which is attested at a later date, retained a sense of this meaning.
Aúy 1 'hiccup'. →λúw.
Aúуž 2, Avyкóç [m., f.] ‘lynx' (h. Hom. 19, 24, E., Arist., Thphr., Ael.). <EUR➤
•VAR Also gen. Avyyós (E. fr. 683).
•COMP As a first member in Auкó-λvy 'wolf-lynx' (pap. in Sb. Heidelb. 1923: 2, 14,
13); on ►λvyyoúptov (also λvyk-, Aɩyê-, etc.) [n.] a kind of amber (Thphr.), see s.v.
●DER Diminutive Avyкíov (Callix.), Aúyyɩos ‘of the lynx' (Edict. Diocl.). On the
ambivalent PN Avукεúç (Hdt., Pi.) see Boßhardt 1942: 130f.; thence AvукɛÚç name of
an eye-salve (medic.).
•ETYM Old name of the lynx, found also in Arm., Gm., and BSl. Except for the nasal,
Aúy has a counterpart in the Lith. consonant-stem lūš-ų [gen.pl.], which is found
beside the innovated i-stem lúš-is. The same change of declension occurred in the
Slav. group (which received an initial r- by influence of another word, e.g. *rysʊ
'sotted, red'): Ru. rýs', etc.
Transformations have occurred elsewhere as well: with thematic vowel in MoSw. lō
lynx' (PGm. *luh-a-, IE *luk-o-); with an s-suffix in West-Germanic: OHG luhs, OE
lox (cf. MoHG Fuchs, OE fox); with an n-suffix in Arm. lus-an-un-k' [pl.], which also
presupposes an old full grade IE *leuk- or louk-. The Arm. n-formation might be
connected somehow with the Greek nasal infix, which reappears in Lith. dial. (Žem.)
lųnšis.
Fur: 121 argues, on the other hand, that the word is of non-IE origin. It has been
connected with the root *leuk- 'to see'; it would have referred to the sharp sight of
the animal. However, this cannot explain the long ū of BSl., nor the -n- of Arm. nor
the g of Gr. Aúyytos. So the word is non-IE, and probably a loan from a Eur.
substrate language. There seems no reason to connect the gloss λovvóv· λαμлрóv
'shining' (H.). The PN Auукεúç may be cognate or not.
Lockwood Glotta 72 (1994): 41-43 thinks the name refers to the light color of the
animal's skin. He simply declares that the nasal is secondary, and also connects the
mythical name Aúукɛúç, but DELG Supp. (where Lockwood's interpretation is
accepted in its entirety) thinks that the name rather comes from the geographical
names with Avyк- mentioned by Lockwood, which indeed seems possible (these
names may refer to the lynx or not, and they may well be of Pre-Greek origin).
Therefore, there is as yet no conclusion to this discussion. Cf. Fur.: index. See
▶duyyoúplov.
Avypós miserable, unhappy'. →λɛvyaλéoç.
Aūdós [adj.] ‘Lydian' (Alc.). <LW Luw.➤
•DER Aúdios ‘of Lydia, Lydian' (Pi.), Avdía (Hdt.), Avdikós (Hdt.), Avdíèw ‘speak
Lydian' (Hippon.), Audioτí 'in Lydian' (Cratin.).

=== page 462 ===

876
入ów
•ETYM The name derives from Luwiy-a- 'Luwian'. The Lydians came from the north
and were originally called Moves. Then coming southward, they occupied Luwian
territory and thereby received the name of the older inhabitants. In Lydian, -y- > -d-,
while -i- was syncopated. Thus *Luwiy-a-> *Luwd- gave Lüd- (with long й). The
change of name is mentioned by Herodotus (1, 7; 7, 74); it is not found in Homer.
The later Lydian territory had a Luwian substrate. See Beekes Kadmos 42 (2004):
47ff., where the thesis is put forth that the Lydians were driven south on the arrival
of the Phrygians, around 1200ª; see also Beekes BiOrbis. 59 (2002): 205-242 (441f.).
Aúчw [v.] 'to hiccup' (Hp., Ar., Arist.). <IE *sluk/g- ‘swallow'>
•VAR Aor. λúyžαı (Gal.).
•COMP Sometimes with ava-, εñɩ-, Úño-.
•DER Avyuós 'swallowing' (Hp., Arist., Nic.), also = óλoλvучós (H.), with λvyµwdns
Àvyµós
'accompanied by swallowing' (Hp.); λúyôŋy [adv.] 'swallowing' (S., AP). Also λúy,
Avyyós [f.] ‘id.' (Hp., Pl., Th.) with Avyywdns = \vyµwdns (Hp.), Avyyavóµevov.
Aúčovτa ev tų kλaíɛv ‘during crying' (H.), Avyкaívw [v.] 'to swallow' (Suid.).
•ETYM For λúw : λúyč, compare iúčw : ľvyĚ, Kλáčw : kλayyi, as well as ßñσow : ßýš. It
cannot be decided whether the verb or the noun is more original. Morphologically,
Aúy can be a back-formation from λú¶w < *\v(y)y-tw, but also its base form.
Cognates are found in Celtic and Germanic, e.g. OIr. slucim 'to swallow' <*slu-n-k-,
W llyncu id.'; MLG slūken ‘id.' < IE *slūg-, MHG slūchen 'id.'; and with geminate
MHG slucken 'id.', together with iterative MHG sluckzen 'to sob'. This means that
Gr. - is from *sl-, but there are forms without *s-, e.g. Pol. łkac 'to swallow'. LIV²
distinguishes two roots *sleuk- and *sleug- with identical meaning, which seems to
call for a solution.
Aúepos, -ov 'clotted or thick blood'. →λūμa.
=
λvкáßaç, -avtos [m.] attested since τ 306 161, A. R. 1. 198, Bion Fr. 15: 15; grave-
epigrams (imperial period) from Arcadia and Ionia. Time-indication of uncertain
mg., usually explained as 'year' and used in this sense by later authors, who seem all
to be based on τ 306; acc. to Leumann 1950: 2124 rather 'new moon' (against this
Ruijgh 1957: 147). The supposed Arcadian origin (AB) probably refers to the late
Arcadian inscriptions, see Leumann: 273. <PG(V)►
•VAR Also acc. -ẞav, also λvkaµaç (inscr. Amorgos, Kretschmer Glotta 2 (1910): 319).
•DER AUкaẞavτides wpai (AP).
⚫ETYM Unrelated is the TN AUкaßηττóç. All existing explanations are unconvincing:
e.g. original meaning "light-circle", from *λúк- 'light' (see on Aúxvoc) and äẞa.
τpoxós 'wheel' (H.); or originally "Lycian king (or priest, god)", i.e. Apollo, so
elliptical for 'festival of Apollo', and a Lydian word. More dated suggestions are
found in Frisk (with lit.). Recently, Koller Glotta 51 (1973): 29-34 explained the word
from *λúka þávτa ‘das weggegangene Licht', so the moonless night of the new
moon. This cannot be correct: the variant with u and the suffix -avt- clearly point to
Pre-Greek origin.
入ÚKOS
877
Avкáчoç, -óç [f.] name of a poisonous plant, 'Echium italicum' (Nic., Dsc.). <PG? (S,
V)►
●VAR v.l. λúkoчos (Dsc. 4, 46).
•DER Also Aukavíç.
•ETYM Frisk explains, following Strömberg 1944: 100f. on xopdayós, that it originally
meant “attacking wolves", because it was poisonous (like Auкo-któvov, etc.,
Strömberg 1940: 66 and 70f.). However, the suffix also occurs in σkıvdawóç and in
the town Galepsos, so it is more probably a Pre-Greek form (note the interchange
a/o).
AUкnyεvns [adj.] epithet of Apollo (A 101, 119). GR>
ETYM Like for Aúкɛoç (A.), for Auкη-уεvns several connections have been
attempted: with the wolf, the Lycians, and earlier also with light (cf. on λúxvoc).
There is little doubt now that it means 'born in Lycia', see e.g. Beekes JANER 3
(2003): 15f. The antiquity of the formation appears from the lack of the
compositional -- in Avkt-.
Aúкiov [n.] 'dyer's buckthorn, Rhamnus petiolaris', also a decoction from it (Peripl. M
Rubr., Dsc., Gal.). <GR?>
•ETYM Perhaps originally “the Lycian (plant)", named after its place of origin: cf.
Dsc. 1, 100 Qúετai dè лɛt̃oτov έv Kaллadokią кai Aukią ‘it grows mainly in
Cappadocia and in Lycia', though with the addition: кaì έv äλλoɩ dè tónois noddois
'but also in many other places'. Cf. Strömberg 1940: 122.
Aúкos [m.] 'wolf (Il.); often metaph., e.g. as the name of a kind of daw (Arist.; v.l.
Aúкios, cf. Thompson 1895 s.v.), of a fish (Hikes. apud Ath.; Strömberg 1943: 105), =
'hook, sting' (Plu., Poll.), etc. <IE *ulko- ‘wolf>
•COMP Compounds like Auкó-(F) opуos > Auкoupуoç PN, properly "warding off
wolves" (sipyw), AUкoσ-oúpa town in Arcadia; cf. Auкayós (also λúк-) [m.] and
-wis [f.].
●DER Feminines: λúkaiva 'she-wolf (Arist.), after λćaɩva, etc., with -aívov (Poll.), of
a woman; Auкó name of the moon (PMag. Par.); diminutives: Avkidɛúç [m.]
'younger wolf (Sol. apud Plu., Theoc.), Auкíoкos. ǹ µǹ éxovσa ážovíσkov τpoxaλía,
τρñµα dε µóνov 'pulley without a bolt, but with only a bolt-hole' (H.); also PN
(Schwyzer: 542).
Further: Avkén, -ñ ‘wolfskin' (K 459, etc.), λúкɛtoç dopάá ‘id.' (E. Rh. 208),
substantivized Avкɛía [f.] (Plb. 6, 22, 3); Avкódŋç ‘like a wolf (Arist.), Auкηdóv 'id.'
(A.), λvêη¤µós ‘howling of wolves' (Anon. apud Suid.), after µvкηßµóç; Avkóoµai
[v.] 'to be lacerated by wolves' (X.). On ►λúσσa, see s.v.
•ETYM An exact formal correspondence with λúкoç is found in the North-Germanic
name of the lynx, MoSw. lō < PGm. *luha- from IE *luko- (see ►λúy 2). However,
one would of course prefer to connect the widespread name of the wolf, which is
preserved in e.g. Skt. vŕka-, Lith. vilkas, OCS vloko, Go. wulfs, Alb. ulk. λúкoç can be
derived from IE *ulko- if we assume metathesis. A comparable problem is found
with Lat. lupus.

=== page 463 ===

878
Аūμα, -ατo
For the name of the wolf, taboo may have played a role (Havers 1946: 37ff.), causing
phonetic irregularities. For IE *ulko-, such a taboo origin is possible as well;
however, the interpretation as 'lacerater' (from *uel(k)- ‘to lacerate') can hardly be
maintained, as that root has no labiovelar.
Añµa, -atos [n.] ‘dirt, waste, garbage', metaph. 'contamination, defamation' (A 314
and E 371, Hdt.); on the mg. Sinclair 1953: 330ff. (who wrongly connects λów). <IE
*luH- ‘dirt, pollute'>
•VAR Mostly plur. -ατα. Also λúµŋ [f.], often plur. -al, 'maltreatment (e.g. mutilation,
flagellation), damage, violation, revilement' (Ion. poet., also Hell. and late).
●DER 1. From λũµa: λúµakes. ñétpαɩ ‘rocks' (H.), at an alphabetically wrong position;
cf. ẞwλač, λíač, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 379); каτα-λvдαкóοдαι [v.] 'to be covered
with λúµaкɛç (i.e. dirt)' (Tab. Heracl. 1, 56); also Aúµāž, -koç [m.] Arcadian HN (cf.
þúāž, σúpчāž, etc.; Chantraine 1933: 381f.), acc. to Paus. 8, 41, 2 because of the
afterbirth (Aúμaτα) of Rhea that was thrown into the river, but in fact probably
because of the ooze. 2. From λúμŋ: Avµεáv, -wvos [m.] 'destroyer' (S., E., Tim. Pers.,
Isoc.), like άлατεwv (Chantraine 1933: 163), with Avμεv-εúдα [v.] 'to play the λ.'
(Plb.); Avµáxη (-xĤ?). ǹ ɛiç dɩaç¤opàv λúлη 'grief because of destruction' (H.), after
τapaxη or στоvaxn? A transformation of λõμα, λúµŋ is λñµap (Max. Astrol.), cf.
Schwyzer: 519. Denominative Auμaívoµai [v.], aor. Avµývaσðaɩ (rare λvµñvai, -āvai),
in two meanings: a. derived from λuua 'to purify, remove dirt' (Hp.), usually ȧлo-
λчμαívoμαι ‘to wash, purify' (A 313f., A. R., Agath., Paus.) with ảлoλчµav-týp ‘table
cleaner' (p 220, 377); b. more often from λúμn 'to maltreat physically, damage,
destroy, violate', also with diα-, кατα- (IA, Arc.); on the mg. see Schulze 1933a: 169,
Fraenkel 1906: 49); λччavτηp 'destroyer, violator' (X.), \чµávτwp (Timo, Epigr.
Cyrene), τns (S.) 'id.' with Auμav-τpios (A.), -τкóç (Ph., Arr.) 'destroying,
violating'.
Aúepoç [m.], also -ov [n.] 'clotted or thick blood' (Hom. [only dat. -pw], Hp. Ep.),
with Avepwdns 'bloodstained' (LXX, AP).
•ETYM For λũμa : λúµŋ, cf. уvõµа : уván, xáμα : -µŋ, ßpшµа: -µŋ, etc. To λñµa,
-μn corresponds Alb. lum 'slime, muď < IE *lum-; an match for λúpos is perhaps
found in the Illyr. TN Ludrum (with IE dh or d), and Alb. ler 'mud' (IE *leu-dr-) is
also close.
=
The nouns mentioned derive from a primary verb meaning 'to pollute, contaminate',
lost in Greek and replaced by Avдaívoμα. This verb lives on in Lat. pol-luō < *por-
luō and led to the verbal noun Lat. lutum OIr. loth excrements, dirt'. Other
derivatives are Lat. lustrum ‘puddle, marsh' and German river names like Lune and
Lienz (from *Luantia); cf. Aúµač. On the geographical names, see Krahe Beitr. z.
Namenforsch. 6 (1955): 106ff. and 242ff. and Eisenstuck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 7
(1956):53ff.
λúлn [f.] 'pain, grief (IA). <IE? *leup- ‘peel'>
•COMP As a first member in λuлo-tókos ‘bringing grief (Halicar.).
•DER λvлŋpóç ‘painful, distressing' (IA); besides λuлpóç ‘id.' (trag.), often of the soil,
opposed to εúpεĩa (v 243), лɛdiáç (Hdt. 9, 122), also opεivý (Arist. HA 556a 4),
入ýooa
879
‘unfruitful, frugal' vel sim.; compounds лαрá-λʊлpoç (Str.), λvлpóуɛwç, -xwpoç,
-Bios (Str., Ph., App.); λvëpótŋs frugality', of the soil (Str.).
Denominative verb λvлέw 'to cause sorrow, pain or distress', -έoμa 'to be distressed'
(Hes., Sapph., IA), after åλyéw acc. to Debrunner 1917: §194, with λúñ-ŋµa ‘sorrow'
(Antipho Soph.), -ŋτiкóç 'full of sorrow' (Arist., Plu.).
⚫ETYM Without a certain explanation. In the same way as Aɛvyaλéos and relatives
could be related with Skt. rujáti 'to break', it was suggested that λúлη could belong,
as a verbal noun, to synonymous Skt. lumpáti, lupyáte 'to break, tear apart'; however,
lup- is rather dialectal for rup- in Skt. rúpyati (which is related to Lat. rumpō < IE
*Hru-n-p-).
Other words going back to IE *lup- rather mean 'peel off vel sim., e.g. Lith. lupti 'to
peel, fleece, flay', Ru. lupíť' 'to peel', OHG louft, loft 'bark' (where IE *lub"- is also
possible). In view of the semantics, this etymology must be considered uncertain. In
λuлρóç, an old primary derivative independent of Xúлη may have been preserved.
Avrtá [f.] · étaípa, лópуò ‘whore' (H.), in an alphabetically wrong position. <PG(S,V)►
⚫ETYM Connection with Skt. lubdha- 'avaricious, desirous, eager' (to which belong
Lat. lubet, libet, MoHG lieb, etc.), is phonetically impossible. Fur.: 316 compares λúлη
'id.', also λoúлα 'id.'; he also connects λiлτw. For the ending, cf. Oáлtα. Therefore,
the word is Pre-Greek.
Aupa [f.] 'lyre', four-stringed (or seven-stringed) instrument like the cithara (h. Merc.
423). <PG➤
•VAR Ion. λúpη.
●COMP Compounds like λupo-лotós ‘fabricator of lyres' (Pl.), ávtí-\upos like the
lyre' (S.).
•DER Diminutives λúptov (Ar.), Aupíç (Hdn. Gr.); further λupiкós ‘ptng. to the lyre;
lyre-player' (Phld., Plu.); \vpíčw [v.] ‘to play the lyre' (Chrysipp.), cf. Schwyzer: 736;
instead, kɩapíw is usual; thencewith Aupiστns lyre-player' (Plin.), -ioτpia [f.]
(sch.), -toμóc 'playing the lyre' (sch.).
•ETYM Technical loan from the Mediterranian area; cf. кiápa. IE etymologies
should be rejected. Borrowed as Lat. lyra; OHG lira > MoHG Leier, etc.
Avoiτελns [adj.] 'useful, profitable, advantageous' (IA). <GR>
•DER AVOITEλéw 'be profitable, useful' (IA), -τéλɛα 'profit, advantage'.
⚫ETYM Properly "paying the costs", a governing compound of λúяv and τà téλŋ.
Avooa [f.] (martial) rage, fury, frenzy' (II.), 'rabies' (X., Arist.). <IE *leuk- 'light', GR
AUK- 'wolf>
•VAR Att. λútta.
•COMP Some compounds like Avσσo-μavý 'mad for rage' (AP), ä-λvoσos 'healing
Avoσa' (Paus.), ǎ-\voσov [n.] name of a plant, the seeds of which were used against
rabies (Strömberg 1940: 91).
•DER Àvʊʊás [f.] ‘raging' (E.), Avoo-wdns (N 53, etc.), -aλéos (A. R., Man.), -ýpës
(Orph., Man.), -ŋɛɩç (H.) ‘id.'; \voondóv [adv.] (Opp.). Denominative verbs: 1.
Avooάw, -Tτáw [v.] 'to rage, rave, be mad' (Hdt., Ar., S., Pl.), with Avσontηp epithet

=== page 464 ===

880
AÚTTEL
of кúwv (℗ 299; cf. AP 5, 265), and Avσontis, Dor. -ατás (Anth.) ‘raging', \voo-
ŋtɩкós ‘id.' (Ael.), -nµατα [pl.] ‘attacks of rage' (E.); 2. Avoσaívw [v.] ‘to rage, rave'
(S.); 3. Avσσóo̟µai [v.] 'to become raging' (Ps.-Phoc.).
⚫ETYM Formation like öσσa, yλwoσa, alσa, etc., so a derived feminine. It has often
been explained as "she-wolf" and identified with Skt. vrkiḥ, ON ylgr 'id.'; acc. to
Wackernagel-Debrunner 1930: 171, it is rather an abstract like oúča 'flight, rout'.
Specht 1944: 344 and 387, rather connects Skt. rúc- [f.] 'light' (the rage is called after
the sparkling eyes) and recalls the expression Aɛvkaïs qpaʊív ‘with white/lighting
pv (Pi. P. 4, 194), λevkai opévεs. µaïvóµεvaɩ ‘raging' (H.). Pok. 687 agrees with
this.
АÚττε [v.] лоλλà λaλɛï 'is talkative' (H.). <?>
•
•ETYM Cf. λúčɛı ‘eructat' (Latte).
AÚττоç [adj.] = vynλós (St. Byz. s.v. AúкTOÇ, H.). <?>
•ETYM Acc. to St. Byz., also the name of a town in Crete “dɩà tò kɛiołaɩ έv µetewpu̟
τол” because of its elevated location', = Aúкτoç; thus, as an appellative, it probably
also has Cretan assimilation kë > ɩɩ (Schwyzer: 316). Etymologically isolated, but see
Fur.: 307.
Aúxvos [m.] (portable) light, lamp' (τ 34), also a fish name (Str., H.), cf. Lat. lucerna;
perhaps called after its fluorescent organs, or after its shape Strömberg 1943: 55f.)?
<IE *leuk-sn-eh₂- 'moon, stars', etc.>>
●VAR Plur. also τà λúxvα, to which the sing. Xúxvov was formed (cf. Schwyzer 1950:
37, Sommer 1948: 88).
•COMP Several compounds like Auxvoñxoç [m.] ‘lamp-stand' (com.), also as a second
member, like in Oεpμó-λvxvov = λuxv-éλatov 'lampoil' (Att. inscr.).
●DER 1. Diminutives: Auxvάptov (pap.), λuxvíσкoç fishname (Luc.). 2. name of the
candlestick: Auxvatov (com., Arist., Hell. inscr.) with Auxvɛídiov (-ídiov), Auxvíov,
-tov (Antiph., Theoc., Luc.), also ‘lamp' (pap.), Auxvía, -έa, -ɛía (Hell.). 3. name of
the ruby that emits light: Auxvías λíos (Pl. Com.), Avxvíτηs (Str.), also name of
Parian marble, because lamps were made of it (Varro apud Plin.; see Redard 1949: 56
and 2443), Auxvɛús (Callix., H.), also 'lighter' (Ath.), Aúxviç [m.] (D. P., Orph. L.),
Auxvís [f.] (Luc.; cf. 4). 4. plant name: Auxvíc [f.] 'rose campion, Lychnis coronaria'
(Thphr., Dsc.), because of its crimson color, acc. to Strömberg 1940: 49, Xvxvītis [f.]
'candlewick, Verbascum' (Plin., pap., Dsc.), because the leaves were used as a
candlewick (Strömberg 1940: 106, Redard 1949: 73; cf. on Opúov). 5. Other
substantives: Auxvɛwv, -wvos [m.] ‘place to store lamps' (Luc. VH 1, 29), λúxvwµa
'lint' (sch. Ar. Ach. 1175, = λaµíádiov), with a nominal basis (Chantraine 1933: 187).
6. Adjectives: Auxv-años (Procl.), also -ɩaños (S. E., Gal.) ‘ptng. to a lamp', -wdns
'lamp-like' (Heph. Astr.). 7. Verb: Auxvɛúw [v.] 'to light sbd.' (Areth. in Apoc.).
⚫ETYM Beside Aúxvoç < *λúк-σv-os we have, with full grade, Av. raox-šn-a- 'light,
gleaming', OPr. lauxnos [pl.] 'stars', Lat. luna = Praen. Losna, OCS luna 'moon', MIr.
luan 'light, moon', all from IE *louk-sn- or *leuk-sn-; acc. to Frisk, the deviating zero
grade in λúxvoç may be related to a reluctance of Greek to use ov-diphthongs.
!
入ów
881
The words mentioned are all transformations of an old noun with suffixal -sn- from
the verb for 'shine, gleam', which is represented in Greek by λɛúσow. An s-stem
probably served as an intermediate form (Av. raocah- [n.] 'light' < IE *leuk-es-, Lat.
lūmen from *leuk-s-men-, etc.). Uncertain is the appurtenance of λovvóv. λaµrpóv
‘brilliant' (H.). The suffix -sn- is also found in synonymous Skt. jyótsnā- [f.]
'moonlight'.
A zero grade noun *λvê- (= Skt. rúc- [f.] ‘light') appears in the hypostasis áµqɩ-λúk-ŋ
epithet of the night (H 433) ‘dawning', also as a substantive 'twilight, dawn' (A. R.,
Opp.); and based on this, also in Avê-avyńs ‘of the grey twilight' (Luc.), Auk-ó-qwc,
-wτoç [n.] 'twilight' (Ael., H. s.v. AuкOεidéoç, sch.); see also on ►λúσσa.
Aúw [v.] ‘to loose, untie, release, (re)solve, destroy, pay' (II.). ◄IE *lhu- ‘cut off,
release'>
•VAR Aor. Auσal, fut. Now, perf. med. λéλňµat, aor. pass. λõ¤ñvai (Il.), aor. med. also
Aúµŋv, λú(v)to (Hom.); perf. act. λéλūka.
=
•COMP Very frequent with prefix, like ȧvα-, åло-, §ɩα-, ¿к-, кατα-, лαрα-. As a first
member Auσ(1) in governing compounds like Avσi-лovoç, AvσitελŃ, PNs like
Avoí-μaxoç, short name Avoíaç, etc.; as a second member in BouλUTÓS.
•DER 1. Aúσiç 'solution, deliverance' (655 and 1 421), from the prefixed verbs also
άлó-, ȧvá-, dɩá-, кatá-, čк-\vσiç, etc. (Thgn., Sol., IA); thence (кατa-, áлo-)λúσчoç
‘fit for solving, etc.' (trag., Pl., Arist.); also λúσtos ‘bringing release', epithet of the
gods, especially Dionysus (Pl., Plu.). 2. λúµατα [pl.] évéxupa 'pledge, security'
(Suid.); but кaτáλň-µa [n.] ‘inn' (Hell.), together with -µáτov (Hell. pap.) derived
from kata-λúw in the mg. 'to lodge, visiť'. 3. Aeol. Dor. Aúa [f.] (Alc., Pi.), Aún (Hdn.
Gr.) 'dissolution, separation, στáσɩs'; thence, but with deviating mg., Avaños, -aía
epithet of Dionysus or the Great Goddess (Anacreont., IG 5(2), 287 [I-II³]; Tim. Pers.
132), borrowed as Lat. Lyaeus. 4. (ávα-, кατα-)λu̟tó̟p, -ñpos [m.] ‘deliverer, arbiter'
(A., E., Hell. inscr.) with (εк-)\Uτηpios rescuing, liberating' (Hp., trag.); Auτηpιov =
Aúτpov (Pi., A. R.), but кαταλʊτηрioν = кατáλvµа (Poll., see above). Fem. Aúτɛpa
(Orph.), also Avτnpiás (Orph.). 5. Sɩa-λúτηs ‘deliverer', кatα- ‘lodging guest', ava-
‘rescuer', ouv- 'reconcilor' (Th., Plb.); also (after Aúσiç, λúw): (áva-, kata-, έk-,
napa-, etc.)\vtikóç ‘fit for releasing or solving, etc.' (Pl., Arist.). 6. λúτpov ‘ransom’
(usually plur.), 'substitute, retribution' (Pi., IA), together with (алo-, лαрα-,
εк-)λυτρów, -óоμa [v.] 'to release in exchange for ransom, etc.' (Att.), whence
(-)\útpwois, Avtpwol-µos, Avtpwtýs, ȧro\vtpwtikós (Hell.).
(-
•ETYM The regular Greek verbal system apparently resulted from levelling. The
athematic aorist λú-µŋy, λú-τo with short vowel is archaic; a more recent form is the
thematic present λúw, originally with short v (Hom.), but later also long (Att.;
sometimes also Hom.), probably by influence of Añσaɩ, etc. (cf. Schwyzer: 686 and
Chantraine 1942: 372).
Correspondences to Aúw are Lat. luō 'to make amends, pay', to which belongs solvō
(from *se-luo) 'to loose, release'; the long vowel in solūtus and in the verbal adjective
Skt. luna- 'cut off agrees with that in ẞov-λu-τóc, and points to a laryngeal in the
root. Since λúto, λúσiç, etc. have a short root vowel, the root must have been *lh,u-,

=== page 465 ===

:882
入ū
Awdi, -IKOS
883
perhaps to be further analyzed as a u-present *leh,-u-. This is oncfirmed by the
accentuation of Lith. liáuti 'to stop' and PSI. *lěviti ‘to diminish, weaken'.
The Skt. verb deviates formally (the nasal presents lunáti, lunoti are not found
elsewhere, while the other finite forms are of much later date). Germanic has a verb
with s-enlargement, e.g. Go. fra-liusan 'to lose' < IE *leus-, fralusts 'loss' < IE *lus-ti-,
fra-lus-nan 'to be lost'. See LIV² s.v. *leuH- for further forms.
Au [v.] 'want, wish' (Epich., Ar., Theoc., Dor., El. inscr.). <?>
•VAR Pres. 2sg. Añç, 3sg. Añ, ¹pl. λwμεç, etc., El. opt. Eoτav, Cret. opt. AE(1) ot,
AELOLEV, subj. Etшvτɩ, ptc. AЕlovτoc, -a, etc., inf. (conj. by Ahrens Th. 5, 77) λñv; the
gloss λewu (H.) looks Ionic.
•DER 1. λñµa [n.] ‘will, spirit, courage, audacity' (Hdt.), with Aŋµária. qpovýµata,
ẞovλɛúµata ‘thoughts, resolutions' (H.), Aŋµatíaç [m.] ‘high-spirited, daredevil' (Ar.
Ra. 494), Chantraine 1933: 93; v.l. Aŋuatiαç, as if from *λŋµatiáw; Aŋµatóoµai in
Aɛλŋµátwµai. Añµa ëxw ɛiç tò ɛ̃pyov ‘I am desirous of work' (H.); 2. λñois. Boúλnois,
aipɛσiç 'will, purpose' (H.), to which one adds Anís ... Kai Boúλnois (H.), for which
Laconian loss of intervocalic sigma is assumed (DELG).
⚫ETYM Connection with Aλaíoμai (root *las-) and λíav (no etymology), found in
older dictionaries, is impossible. According to DELG, we could start from a pre-form
*lē-įō, which would enable derivation from IE *uelh,- (Lat. velle, MoHG wollen) as
*ulh₁-ie/o-. It is not clear, however, if this formation would vocalize to give *Ƒλn-. Cf.
Awïwv.
Awßŋ [f.] ‘outrage, dishonour, damage, mutilation' (Il.), 'kind of rash' (Gal.). ◄IE
*sleh₂g"-"seize'>
•COMP ¿nti-λwßos ‘bringing damage' (Vett. Val.), -ns ‘id.' (Nic.).
●DER Awßŋtós ‘laden with Awßŋ' (N 531, Hes. Sc. 366, S.; Ammann 1956: 21), Awßń-eis
(A. R.), -μwv (Nic. Al. 536; v.l. -τwp) 'outrageous'. Denominative verb λwßáoμai
(-άw), rarely with prefixes like ȧлo-, ¿к-, dɩα-, ‘outrage, maltreat, mutilate' (Il.), or
rather deverbative like wτá-oμαι, vwµáw?; with λwẞnτnp 'slanderer, corruptor' (Il.;
on the mg. Benveniste 1948: 38 and 42), fem. -τɛpα (AP); also -τwp (Opp., AP),
-ntýs (Ar.); Awßnois = Awßn (Ptol., sch.). Rare Awßɛúw ‘mock, ridicule' (Od.; like
ȧyopɛúw, Chantraine 1942: 368; also Shipp 1967: 120: to avoid contracted forms).
•ETYM Formerly analyzed as a lengthened grade formation like кóëη, Awnŋ, Awyn,
but such ad hoc lengthened grades can no longer be accepted.
Traditionally connected with a Baltic word for 'aggravation, objection, burden,
nuisance, damage', Lith. slogà, Latv. slāga < IE *sloHg"-eh₂-, a verbal noun to Lith.
slėgti ‘to (op)press, aggravate', Latv. slêgt 'to shut, close'. Recently, Ragot RPh. 76
(2002) convincingly suggested, on the basis of Homeric evidence, that λwßn
originally meant 'seizure' and that it is connected with λášoμα to seize, take holď <
*sleh₂g"- as a regular feminine o-grade derivation.
Fur.: 30235 compares Außáčev. λodopɛiv 'slander, abuse' (H.), which (if correctly
compared) would point to a Pre-Greek word *lub-.
Awßně, -ŋkos [m.] · yúy ‘vulture' (Cyran. 28). <PG(V) ►
•VAR λoúñŋs = iкtīvos ‘kite, Milvus regalis' (Hierocl., Facet. 257, Hdn. Epim. 46),
λоúллç 'milvus' (gloss.).
⚫ETYM See Fur.: 148, and cf. Lat. lupio 'to cry, of the kite' (Suet. Fr. p. 251). Thus, a
Pre-Greek word with interchange *lub/p-.
Awyáλɩoɩ [m.]? • ảστpáyaλoi i stópvot 'dice or fornicators' (H.). <?►
•ETYM In the first meaning, it has been connected to λέyw in the sense “die
Aufgelesenen", with a lengthened grade as in Awyn, for which one also compared
►Aoyádɛç (λío1) 'accumulated stones'. However, such lengthened grades are
unacceptable. In the sense of stópvoɩ, it is related to Awyác; see λwyávov.
Awyávov [n.] 'dewlap (of oxen)' (Luc. Lex. 3, sch.), also Awyáλtov (H.) and λoyávov
(Suid.). <?>
•ETYM Perhaps from λayaiw, λayapós in the sense “(skin) hanging down";
intermediate forms (*λwyavov, *λwyn?) cannot be determined, however. The gloss
►λwyás nópvη ‘whore' (H.) also belongs here.
•
Awyás nópуn 'whore' (H.).
⚫ETYM Related to Máyvos lewd' and to Awyávov (Persson 1912(1): 134 and 2, 939).
Awyaσoç [m.]? τavpɛía µáστ ‘whip made of ox-hide' (H.). ◄PG(S)►
•ETYM Pre-Greek, on account of the suffix -aσos.
Awyn [f.] · kaλáµn. kaì ovvaywyǹ oítov ‘reed, gathering of food (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM In the last meaning, clearly related to Aéyw; a lengthened grade is also found
in λwy λɛyɛv (H.), with Dor. contraction of the ending, from the deverbative
Awyάw; the explanation кaλáµŋ can also be understood as a collective, e.g. 'straw'.
Awwv [adj.] 'better, more desirable, more agreeable' (Semon. 7, 30). <?>
•VAR Att. Awwv; ntr. Awïov (II.), Att. Apov, plur. Awia, Awa (Thgn., Theoc.), gen. twv
Awwv (Chalcis IIP), also msc. sing. Aŵos (Hdn. Gr.); Awîtɛpov (Od.), -ɛpoç (A. R.),
-έpn (Call., AP).
Superlative Motos (Thgn., trag.), ♣ Aσte (Pl.); details in Seiler 1950: 88ff.
•ETYM The neuter Awïov, which is the first attestation, can be interpreted both as an
o-stem and as a n-stem; the o-stem is ascertained only in rare and late forms: Awïa,
Awa, Awwv, Aãos. The n-stem is ascertained in Awtwv and Awovos, -1 (S.); the s-stem
alternating with it appears in Aww [acc.sg.f.] (S., Pl.) and Awous [acc.pl.f.] (S.). From
these data, Leumann Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 7ff. concluded that the o-stem forms arose
as analogical formations from the neuter Aïov, and that Awïov is an old n-stem
form.
As primary formations, Awïwv and Acσtos may go back to a verb as well as a noun
(cf. Seiler 1950: 88ff.). Two possibilities are mentioned by Frisk: connection with λñv,
1sg. ►λw ‘wish, want', or derivation from *lau- seen in anoλaúw, ▶λɛia, ►λāpós,
for which we could reconstruct *loh₂u-is-, perhaps connected with Arm. law 'good,
better'.
Awdi, -ɩkoç [f.] 'woven cover' (Peripl. M. Rubr., pap.). <LW Lat.>
•DER Also diminutive Awdíкtov, etc.

=== page 466 ===

884
•ETYM From Lat. lōdīx, which itself might be taken from Celtic; see WH s.v.
Awµa [n.] ‘hem, fringe, border of cloths' (LXX Ex.). <?>
•DER \uáttov (AP); acc. to EM = TÒ Yuvalkelov, Ô ÚTÒ ATTIKv ở Đoßos léyetal ..
kai tò eis tò katwtepov tov iµatíov έлíßλŋµα ‘woman's dress, which is called ő. in
Attic... also the embroidery on the lower part of the dress'; acc. to H. also = paoń
'seam, stitch', kλwσµós (a clucking sound).
Further ȧσú\\wToι, of wμo 'shoulders' (Call. Dian. 213), properly 'not tied together',
i.e. 'uncovered'; εÜλwστо· εvqɛis 'well-woven', Сшστоí· εррαдμεvo stitcheď,
ǎλwσtoi ǎppaqo 'unstitched', Awiσµóv. Añµa (H.); see Danielsson IF 4 (1894): 162ff.
⚫ETYM Aμa has been connected with ɛüλŋpa, aüλŋpa ‘rein', Lat. lōrum ‘id.', Arm.
lar 'noose, cord', but ελŋpa is Pre-Greek. Connection with the root *uel- ‘turn,
wind, twist' is hardly possible, as it does not explain the w in λwµa. Both proposals
are unconvincing. See Awτic, ➤λwotus.
λúлη 'cove, mantle, cloth'. λéлw.
Awotus [f.]<?>
•VAR Only AwσTvos [gen.sg.] (Apx. 'Eq. 1923, N° 123, 39 and 68; Oropos [IVª]).
•ETYM Meaning end etymology unknown; cf. Kretschmer Glotta 16 (1928): 169.
Awτiç [f.] mg. unknown (SIG 145, 26; Delphi IV³); acc. to Danielsson IF 4 (1894): 164ff.
designatin of a ‘cloth with trimming and ornament woven and sewed on it', and
related to Awμa, á-σúλ-λwτoç, etc. (see ►λwµa). <?>
•DER The reading \]wtɩ (SIG 243 D 15) is uncertain, cf. Dittenberger ad loc.
•ETYM Related to Awσtus?
Awτóc [m.] lotus', name of several nutrimental plants, 'Trifolium, Melilotus,
Trigonella, etc.' (Il.), also of the Egyptian water lily, 'Nymphaea' (Hdt.), of the libyan
lotus tree, 'Celtis australis' (1 93 f.), and a flute made of it (E.); on the mg. Strömberg
1937: 184, Carnoy REGr. 71 (1958): 95f., Economos Class. Journ. 30 (1934-1935): 424ff.
<LW Medit.➤
●COMP EN Awτo-qáyoɩ (Od.), µɛλí-\wtos [m.], -ov [n.] 'Melilotus' (Sapph.).
•DER Awτóɛç 'rich in lotus', probably in λwτɛυvτα, -oʊvτa for -óɛvτα, of лεdía (M
283), see Chantraine 1942: 35 and 351, Chantraine REGr. 63: 283; Awτivoç 'consisting
of A., made of λ.' (Sapph., Anacr.); Awτápiov 'lotus flower' (medic.), Awtał ‘avλntýs,
flute player' (Zonar., Eust.).
Denominative verbs: 1. λwτíšoµαι ‘to pick the flower, i.e. take the best part (A. Supp.
963), -w (H.), àлo-λwτí¼w [v.] ‘to take the flower from sbd.' (E.), with λóτσµa 'the
flower, best part of sth.' (A. Fr. 99, 18, E. Hel. 1593). 2. Awτéw [v.] ‘to play the flute'
(Zonar.); hardly in Awtɛûvta (M 283), see above.
•ETYM A Mediterranean word. Acc. to Lewy 1895: 46, it was borrowed from Hebr. lōṭ
‘στaкtη, oil of myrrh' (LXX Ge. 37, 25; 43, 11); cf. also Arab. lādan > λádavov,
►Andavov. Hyllested 2004 assumes *luh 3-to-, with vocalization of the laryngeal, but
the evidence for such a development is too limited.
入wpáw
885
Awopάw [v.] ‘to recover, take rest, let go' (Pl. Phdr. 251c), also trans. 'to quench, relieve'
(poet.); on the mg. see Fowler AmJPh. 78 (1957): 176 and 179. ◄?►
•VAR Also -έw (Hell.); aor. Awoñσat (since 1459), fut. Awonow (292, etc.), perf.
λɛλwoŋкa (Th., Pl.).
•COMP Rarely with prefix, e.g. кata-.
•DER Awqŋσiç ‘cessation' (Th.), Awqap. λwoηua (H.), Awonïoç 'relieving, expiatory'
(A. R. 2, 485).
•ETYM Formally, cf. the typе лшτáðμαi, vwµáш, στpwoάw, which means that it is
probably a deverbative (Schwyzer: 719). Etymology unknown; connection with
έlaqpós, ¿λaxúc, etc. is impossible because these have an initial laryngeal. The
comparison with the Germanic group of OHG labōn 'to quench, refresh'
(Bezzenberger BB 5 (1882): 318) is doubtful; these may also be considered borrowings
from Lat. lavāre 'to wash'. Not related to IE *sleub"- hang down' (as per Schwyzer:
7194, followed by Pok. 964).

=== page 467 ===

Leiden Indo-European
Etymological Dictionary Series
Etymological Dictionary of Greek
Edited by
Alexander Lubotsky
VOLUME 10/2
By
Robert Beekes
With the assistance of
Lucien van Beek
VOLUME TWO
SUB
UTA
LEGIDE
68
PALLAS
BRILL
LEIDEN BOSTON
2010

=== page 468 ===

This publication has been made possible by the financial support of the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Beekes, R. S. P. (Robert Stephen Paul)
Etymological dictionary of Greek / by Robert Beekes ; with the assistance of
Lucien van Beek.
p. cm. — (Leiden Indo-European etymological dictionary series ; v. 10/1-2)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-90-04-17418-4 (hardback: alk. paper) 1. Greek language-Etymology—
Dictionaries. I. Beek, Lucien van. II. Title.
PA422.B44 2010
482.03-dc22
Preface......
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VOLUME ONE
Pre-Greek loanwords in Greek..........
2009036652
ISSN: 1574-3586
ISBN Set: 978 90 04 17418 4
ISBN Volume Two: 978 90 04 17419 1
Copyright 2009 by Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill, Hotei Publishing,
IDC Publishers, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers and VSP.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission from the publisher.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use is granted by Koninklijke Brill NV
provided that the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Suite 910, Danvers, MA 01923, USA.
Fees are subject to change.
PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS
Abbreviations and symbols.
The Greek etymological dictionary A-A.……………………………..
... vii
XV
xlv
VOLUME TWO
The Greek etymological dictionary M-
.887
Bibliography......
.1687
.............
Indices
1747

=== page 469 ===

M
μá [pcl.] asseverating 'really, indeed' (II., IA), adversative = dé 'but' (Thess.). <IE
*(s)me(h₂) (?) ►
•ETYM Might be cognate with Skt. små [pcl.] ‘really, truly' and/or with Hitt. -ma
[encl.] 'but'. It is unclear whether µá continues *mh, or *mn. See μnv 1.
µã [f.] ‘mother', in µã yã voc. = µñτερ уñ 'Mother Earth' (A. Supp. 890, 899 [lyr.]), and
also as a woman's exclamation (Hdt., Theoc.). <IE, ONOM➤
⚫ETYM Nursery word like Skt. mã 'mother' (lex.); likewise, лãç = ►лaτηρ 'father'. See
►µaña, ►µýt, ►µáµµð.
µáyadıç, -ɩɗoç [f.] a stringed instrument, ascribed to the Lydians, but also to the
Thracians (Alcm., Anacr.); also a Lydian flute (Ion Trag., Anaxandr.). <LW Lyd.>
•VAR Acc. -IV.
●DER µayadí¶w ‘to play the μáyadıç, imitate the µ., i.e. sing scales' (Theophil., Arist.),
cf. Schwyzer 736. Further μayás, -áðos [f.] ‘the bridge on a stringed instrument'
(Ptol., Philostr., H.), with μayádiov (pap. Iª, Ptol.).
•ETYM A foreign word from an unknown, probably Lydian source. Others have
proposed Semitic origin (Lewy 1895: 162f.). Fur.: 122, 226 reconstructs a pre-form
*μaydıç, comparing лηкτíç, also a Lydian stringed instrument, with which it would
be identical, according to Aristox Fr. Hist. 66 and Menaichm. 4 J.
μаyаpíç [f.] μкрà σлáеη 'small blade' (H.). <LW Sem.?>
.
⚫ETYM Lewy KZ 59 (1932): 192 compares Hebr. megērā 'saw', gārar 'draw, pull', which
remains questionable. Latte considers it a mistake for μaτapíç, comparing µadápɛiç.
τàç лατúτεραç λóуxaç τŵv кɛpáτwv. Kελτoí; see DELG s.v.
µáyyavov [n.] ‘philtre, charm' (Heracl. All., H.), 'block of a pulley' (Hero Bel., pap.
IIIP), 'iron peg, bolť (sch.), µ. лоλεµкóv ‘catapult, ballista, tormentum' (gloss., H.), ·
yayyaμov 'fishing-net' (H.). <PG(V)►
⚫DER μayyavápios 'enchanter' (pap. IIIP), 'mechanic' (Papp.) is probably a loan from
Latin. Denominative verb μayyavɛúw 'to deceive by machinations, bewitch, play
tricks' with μayyav-ɛía 'trickery' (Pl. Lg., Ph.), -ɛúμµаτα [pl.] 'trickeries, quack
medicines' (Pl., Plu.), -ɛvτns 'impostor, quack' (Suid., Phot.), -evtikǹ téxvn ‘magical
art' (Poll.), -ɛúτpiai [pl.] (H. s.v. ßaµßakɛútpiai), -εvτǹpiov haunt of impostors'
(Them.).
ETYM As a loan, the word became widespread: Lat. manganum 'machine' (whence
Ital. mangano 'sling'), with the by-form mangō 'fixer' (from Hell. *µáуушv?), whence

=== page 470 ===

888
Mayda入iá
mangōnium 'the touching up of wares for sale'; a number of European languages
may have borrowed the word from Latin: for example, Alb. mangë ‘hemp brake,
hackle', mëngji 'medicine'; MHG mange 'catapult', MoHG Mange(1) 'wringer for
laundry' (whence e.g. Lith. mañgalis ‘mangle'); MIr. meng ‘deceit, cleverness, ruse’.
Skt. mañju-, mañjula- [adj.] ‘beautiful, sweet, charming', mangala- [n.] happiness,
salvation, good omen' (all epic and class.) were proposed as cognates of µáуyavov,
but this is not credible, as they are semantically too far off (Dravidian origin was
considered by Mayrhofer KEWA: 547, 553 and Mayrhofer EWAia: 3: 379f.). Such an
isolated comparison of Sanskrit and Greek words carries little weight. Oss. mæng
'deceit', MP mang ‘id.', Sogd. mnk ‘id.' are unclear. Connection to the group of
►μáσow 'knead' is unconvincing too.
As Van Beek (p.c.) suggests to me, μáyyavov recalls unxavý both semantically and
formally. Although the Greek form cannot be derived from an IE root *meng- (as per
Pok. 731), the pair of words shows prenasalization and interchange of y and x, which
both are typical reflexes of a Pre-Greek word. For the change in vowel quantity, we
may compare ►кaykúlaç · kŋkidaç. Aiodɛîç (H.).
As regards the semantic development, Frisk assumes that the word originally
denoted a concrete technical object. However, the technical meanings diverge
strongly, and are attested at a later date. Rather, the connection with unxavý shows
that the oldest attestations depart from a meaning 'ruse, trick' (see unxavý). Later,
the word was used to denote all kinds of special tricks, and the divergent technical
meanings, e.g. yayyaμov 'fishing-net' (H.), can only be understood in this way.
µaydaλiá late for ȧñoµaydaλiá. →µáσow.
µáydwλoc [m.] ‘watchtower' (pap., H.). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Or wλoc? Also μaydwλ, -wλos.
●COMP µaydwλo-qúλa ‘watchman' (pap., H.).
•DER Eg. town name Máydwλos (Hecat. 317 J.), Maydŵλa (pap.).
⚫ETYM From Sem.; cf. Hebr. migdal 'tower' (also as a TN). Fur.: 312, 321 considers a
non-IE loan in Hamito-Semitic (adducing Berb. mogador 'watchtower' and Akk.
madgaltu 'id.').
µáyɛɩpoç [m.] ‘slaughterer, butcher, cook' (Att., Hell. and late). <PG?(V) >
•VAR Dor. μáyipoç.
•COMP As a second member in ȧpx₁-μáуεчpos 'chief cook' (LXX, J., Plu.).
•DER Rarely fem. μауɛípaɩva (Pherecr. 84; nonce form), μayɛipioσa (LXX).
Diminutive μayɛɩpiokoç [m.] (Ath.), with magiriscium 'small figure of a butcher'
(Plin.). Adjective µayɛipikóç ‘of a cook or butcher' (Ar., Pl., Arist.) with -ɩкóv, -ɩкń
‘art of cooking, butcher taxes, etc.'; µayɛipwdŋs ‘like a butcher' (Eun.). Denominative
µɑyɛɩpɛúw [v.] ‘to be cook or butcher' (Hell.) with µayɛƖp-ɛïov ‘'butchery, soup
kitchen' (Arist., Hell.), -ɛía [f.] 'boiled food' (Cato, Hdn. Epim.), -nia [f.] 'butcher
taxes?” (Eresos), -εvµα = -ɛía (H., Eust.), -ɛvtiкóç (late). Probably also Алóλλwv
Mayipios (Cyprus).
⚫ETYM As an element of higher culinary culture, the profession μáyɛɩpoç seems to
have entered Attic from Doric (for older dauτpós?). The earlier history of the word is
Hadáw
889
unknown. Pisani Rev. Int. ét. balk. 1 (1934): 255ff. supposes Macedonian origin,
connecting μáxaɩpa ‘big knife, butchery knife'; Schwyzer: 471¹ recalls Lat. mactāre.
Not related to µáσow ‘to kneaď', as earlier authors assumed.
The word looks non-IE, because of the alternations εt / ī and (if μáxaɩpa belongs
here) y/x. Is it Pre-Greek, deriving from *mak-ar-? Aeol. μáyotpos, mentioned by
LSJ s.v., is only attested in Greg. Cor., which is not a trustworthy source. See
·iáyaipa.
µáyoç [m.] ‘member of the Median caste of priests, Magus', as an appellative
‘interpreter of dreams, sorcerer, deceiver' (Hdt., Heraclit., S., E., etc. [Mãyos A. Pers.
318]), as an adjective 'magical, enchanting' (Philostr., AP). <LW Iran.>
•COMP ȧρxi-μáуos 'chief Magus' (Epigr. Hypaipa; cf. Wikander 1946: 49f.).
●DER μayıкós ‘belonging to the Magi, magical' (LXX, Plu., etc.), μayɩavós ‘magical,
enchanted' (pap. Iª; after Aσtavós), чауéτav aúλóv. τòν дауεúоVτα τOÙÇ
άкpowµévovs H.; μayɛúw 'perform as a Magus, enchant' (E., Hell.) with µayɛía (-ía)
'teachings of the Magi, magic' (Pl. Alc., Thphr., Act. Ap.), µау-εúµαta [pl.] ‘id.' (E.),
-evtýs = µáyos (D. C.), -evtikós ‘regarding the Magi, regarding magic' (Pl.).
⚫ETYM From Iranian; cf. OP Maguš (Av. moyu-), name of a Median tribe with
priestly functions. As the appellative meaning is unknown, the etymology cannot be
established. See Schmitt Glotta 49 (1971): 105-107; recent discussion in Brust 2005:
385ff.
µayúdapıç [f.] ‘blossom, seed, root (and the sap obtained from it) of the plant called
σíλpiov and of a related plant' (Thphr., Dsc., H.). <?►
•VAR Late дayódapis (Gp. 2, 35, 9 codd.).
•ETYM Foreign word of unknown origin (Libyan or Syrian?); cf. the litt. in WH s.v.
magūdaris (Pl.).
µadáw [v.] ‘to drip, melt, be moist' (Thphr.; concerning a disease of a fir-tree), also 'to
fall out', of hair. <IE *meh₂d- ‘be moist, drip'>
•VAR Аor. чadñoal.
•COMP Also with ȧло- (Нp., Ar., Arist., LXX).
•DER µádŋoɩ ‘hair loss' (Hp.), µadaños ‘moisť' (Poet. de herb.), after iêµañoç?
Factitive чadíw [v.] 'to remove hair, pluck or singe' (medic.), also with ȧлo-; thence
μadiστηpiov 'instrument for removing hair, place where depilation is carried out' =
εÜστpα 'place for singeing slaughtered swine' (Halicarn. Iª, sch.), dlo-µádiotos
'completely bald' (Cyran.), also µáðiσos (see below); as an iterative µadáσкoµaι [v.]
'to drip, become moist' (medic. VIIP). Expressive enlargement μa[y]dá\\ei• tí\\eɩ,
Eσ0iɛ plucks, eats'; μa[y] SáλloOVTEC. TiλOVTEC, 200íoνTES (H.), cf. кvadáλλεтal-
кVÝBεTαι 'scratches' (H.) and Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 91.
=
Further: µadapós [adj.] 'wet' (Hp., Arist.), ‘bald' (Luc.) with µadapótŋs baldness,
loss of hair and of the eyelashes' (Hp., Gal.), μadapów 'to remove hair' (LXX Ne. 13,
25, v.l., Crete IIª), µadάpwσis -óτns (Gal., Vett. Val.), probably directly from
µadapóç; µadap-táw [v.] 'suffer from hair loss' (Cleopatra apud Gal. 12, 405). Also
µadɩ-yévɛɩoç ‘with bald chin' (Arist.); cf. xaλapós beside xaλí-oppwv. Note µádoç, -ov
(back-formation?) = äµreλos λevкÝ (Dsc.), because its root was used for depilation;

=== page 471 ===

890
uádpua
haliáw
891
=
rendered as víλwepov by H., which may indicate the same plant. Further μadwváïç
vuuqaía 'water-lily' (Boeot. according to Thphr. HP 9, 13), but Bechtel amends to
μadwvía. Also μádiσoç· díкɛλλa. oi dè µadißóç (H.), probably from μadilw.
⚫ETYM For the shift of meaning from 'flow away' to 'fall out', compare έкpέw 'to flow
away, fall out' and Lat. defluo 'to flow down', also 'to fall out', of hair. For the pair
μаdáw μadaрóc, cf. Xaλáw 'slacken' beside xaλapós loose' and лλadáw 'to be
moist beside лλadapós 'wet' (rhyming), which are both semantically close. The aor.
µadñσaɩ is an innovation as compared to xaláσat (which behaves like λayapós :
λayáσal, etc.); it is unclear how the present stem μada- was derived. The root is also
found in Lat. madeō 'to be moist, drip, be drunk" (after the intransitives in -ēre), Olr.
maidim 'to break (out)' (intr.), 'to fall to pieces' (< *to flow out or away' vel sim.;
possibly formally identical with madeō), Skt. mádati 'to be intoxicated'. On the
reconstruction *meh₂d-, see Lubotsky MSS 40(1981): 133-138. See further ►μаστóç,
·ńdea.
μáбpvα [n.pl.]
<PG(V)►
=
kokkúµŋλa, ßpáßula 'plums, sloes' (Seleuc. apud Ath. 2, 50a).
⚫VAR Also άuádpvα· кoккúµηλα. Σtкvwviot (H., Phot.). Also ǎSpva, in Σɩкɛλoì dɛ
ǎεpva λéуovσɩ τà µñλα 'applеs'. лαрà dè Аτtiкoïç ȧкpòdpva 'fruits grown on upper
branches of trees' (H. and Ath. 3, 83a). Maybe also ßádpva, but see Fur. 221.
•ETYM ȧµáðpva did not originally mean 'belonging to a tree', as tree names in áµa-
meant ‘blossoming at the same time as'. Rather, initial /h-/ was added by folk
etymology to *ǎ-μádрvα, a form with (non-IE) prothetic vowel. This form
(a)μádpva must be a Pre-Greek etymon. If ẞadpva is reliable, we also have variation
μ/ẞ, to which Ƒ may be added in order to explain ► ädpva.
F
µãчa [f.] 'barley-cake' (IA), ‘(metal) nugget, mass, ball' (LXX, J., pap.). <IE? *meh₂g-
'knead'>
•VAR Accent acc. to Hdn. Gr. 2, 937; Att. acc. to Moer. Also μáčα (Hell. acc. to
Moer.), Megar. uµãdda (Ar. Ach. 732, 835).
•COMP Compounds: µašo-vóµos (pap. III³), -vóµov (Hell. inscr.), -vóµov (Callix. 2),
-voμεчov (com.) ‘trencher for μ.'; óλó-µašos ‘with its whole mass, from top to
bottom' (Hero Stereom.).
•DER Diminutive µač-íoкη (Ar.), -íov (Phryn. Com. et al.). Adjective µač-ŋpós
'belonging to the µãчa' (Poll.), for the formation cf. oitŋpós; µačeivóç (for µáčivoç?)
BoÛçó ¿ àλчíτwv 'of barley groats' (H.). Denominative µačáw [v.] 'to knead barley
dough' (pap., H.), úлεр-µаčáш 'to be overfed' (Ath., Luc.); also μačáw (Suid.), cf.
кpiðάw. Unclear µašúytov [n.] (beside µačúç [f.]) ‘amalgam' (Zos. Alch.).
⚫ETYM Derived from μау-ñvaɩ, pres. µáσow with a suffix -α-; cf. µãša µɛµayµévn
(Archil.). The long a would then be secondary. Borrowed from µáča: Lat. massa
‘clump, mass' (Plaut.). Not a Semitic loan word (Hebr. maṣṣāh ‘unsoured bread' is
rather from Greek). The comparison with OCS mazati 'to salve, smear', mažą
[1sg.pres.] points to *meh₂g-. In this case, the long a may also represent an old full-
grade.
µačós 1 [m.] ‘nipple, breast'. →μaσtós.
μačóç 2 [?] a fish (Epich. 69). <PG?(S)>
⚫VAR Also μačεaç = the fish ηлατоç (Xenocг. apud Orib. 2, 58); μаčεvóç or μаžεvóc
(Doris apud Ath. 315f).
•ETYM See Thompson 1947 s.v. The variation has no parallel, but rather points to a
Pre-Greek word. LSJ notes: "probably for μačívηs in Thphr. Fr. 171.2”.
µaðadis, -idos [f.] ‘name of a cup, used as a measure (Blaes. 2, H.). <PG?(S)►
⚫ETYM Formation like ȧyк-aλ-íc, quo-aλis, τpvq-aλís et al. (Chantraine 1933: 252),
but there is no root etymology. Connection with μáva уváo 'jaws' or
►μаσáoμа 'to chew' seems impossible. Fur.: 212 compares Lat. matula 'pot for
liquids' and ẞáτos, þádos, þádiov 'measure of liquids'.
µáðŋ •Var µáðŋois, µaðntýs, etc. →µav¤ávw.
µáðvɩaɩ [f.pl.] · yváðoɩ ‘jaws' (H.). →µaσáo̟µai.
µaĩa [f.] ‘mother', mostly used to address elderly women (Od.), 'nurse, midwife' (Att.),
'grandmother' (Dor.); name of a big crab (Arist.), cf. ypaña; of a plant, = λɛлídiov
(Orib.), cf. yépwv and synonyms in plant names in Strömberg 1940: 56 and 159'. As a
PN, mother of Hermes (h. Merc.). <GR
⚫DER μainïos and μαιáç = μαιεvτiкÓç, -кń (Nonn.), Matás = Maña (435).
Denominatives: 1. [v.] ‘to be midwife, deliver' (Att.) with paɛía [f.]
‘midwifery' (Pl.), µαíεv-µα ‘product of delivery', -σis 'delivery', -tɩkóç ‘pertaining to
delivery, able to deliver' (Pl.), µatɛútpɩa ‘midwife' (S.); 2. µaιóoµai [v.] ‘id.' (Hell.)
with µaíw-σɩç ‘delivery', -tɩkós (Plu.), µaíwτpa [pl.] ‘midwife's wages' (Luc.); µañoι
'adoptive parents' (Paros).
⚫ETYM Analogical enlargement of the nursery word µã with the suffix -α, based on
ypaña (related to ypaus, both 'old woman'). Borrowed as Lat. maia 'midwife'; the
ancient roman goddess Maia was later identified with Maña (WH).
µaɩµáw [v.] ‘to be eager, quiver with eagerness, rage' (Il.). <PG?>
•VAR зsg. μачáε, pl. μачówσɩ, etc., aor. μαчµñσaι (E 670); enlarged form μαчáσσw
(LXX, AP), also µµσσ (Nic.) and µaчµášƒ (Ph.).
•COMP Also with ảva-, лɛpɩ-, έлI-.
•DER µaîµaž• tapaxwdŋs ‘disturbing' (H.), µa¼µáktŋc, -ov [m.] “the boisterous one”,
of Zeus as god of the wind in Athens (Plu., Harp., H.), opposed to µɛλíxioç; also
Mαчμакτηр name of a month (Phocaia), with Maчµaктηpióv, -ŵvos [m.] ‘id.' (Att.),
probably from *Maчµaктýpiα [pl.] name of a festival; µaчµáõŋs. úßplotńs (Zonar.).
•ETYM The intensive reduplication can hardly be of IE origin; the aorist must be
secondary. The original quantity of the middle syllable cannot be ascertained.
Although productive, the suffix -aк- in µaîµaž, µaчµáкíηs, etc. points to Pre-Greek
origin. Late μaчuáσσw may just contain an enlargement -(a)σow, but it might also be
connected with the velar in µaµáк-τηs, etc. Additionally, á-µaчákɛtos may belong
here (cf. s.v.), but this is semantically unclear (assuming a pleonastic privative, like in
ȧẞελτεpoç, is unlikely).

=== page 472 ===

892
paivn
The connections with μaíoμa and μwμai are obsolete; see Tichy 1983: 331-334 for a
discussion of the meaning of μaquάw and an attempt to derive it from the perf. ptc.
HEHAWT-.
чaívn [f.] 'name of a small herring-like fish, Maena vulgaris' (AP 9, 412). <?>
•VAR Further forms чaivoμévη (sch. Luc.) with μaivoμéviov (Alex. Trall.), MoGr.
µaívovλa, µaváλɩ, etc.; details in Thompson 1947 s.v. Also µavíç, -ídos [f.] (com.,
Arist.) with μavídiov (com., Arist.).
•ETYM No etymology. The connection with fish names in other languages (e.g. Ru.
men' [m.] 'barbot', Lith. ménkė 'haddock', which derives from meñkas 'small', see
Fraenkel 1955 s.v., and Skt. mina- [m.]) is extremely doubtful. Strömberg 1943: 53ff.
hesitatingly attempts to connect μаívη with μaívoμat by interpreting it as "the
wildly raging fish". Borrowed as Lat. maena.
µaívoµaɩ [v.] ‘to rage, be furious, out of one's mind, excited' (II.); rarely active έк-
μaívw 'make furious' (E., Ar.), μaívw (Orph.), aor. µñvaι (S., E.), intr. med. μývaσða
(Z 160, Theoc.). <IE *men- 'think of, remember'>
●VAR Aor. µavñvai (IA), fut. µavéɛtaɩ (Hdt.), perf. (with present mg.) µéµŋva (A.,
S.).
•COMP Also with prefix, е.g. εк-, лερɩ-, úлo̟-, ¿v-.
•DER 1. From the present: μalvás, -ádos [f.] ‘the raging one, Bacchante' (II.);
µavóλŋs (Aeol., Dor. -λaç, fem. -λic) ‘raging, excited' (Sapph., A.). 2. From the root:
μavía, -in 'fury, madness' (IA); µаviкóç, µаviwdns 'furious, raging' (IA), fem. also
чaviáç 'id.' (after Aúσoa: Avoσáç, Schwyzer: 508). Verbal adj. εu-uavns ‘raging' (IA),
probably a hypostasis (to μavía) after έu-qavic, etc., as έµ-µαívoμα does not occur
before Act. Ap., J. On μávτiç, see s.v.
•ETYM Several languages have a zero-grade yod-present corresponding to µaívoµai <
IE *mn-ie/o-: Skt. mányate, Av. mainiieite 'to think'; OIr. muinithir ‘id.'; OCS monjo
'to think, consider', Lith. miniù 'to commemorate, remember'. The intr. aorist
μаvчvaι has counterparts in the Balto-Slavic infinitive, Lith. miněti, OCS mÚněti.
Secondary origin may be considered for μavñvat (which is post-Homeric) as well, cf.
paívoμai pavñvat. Formations that arose in Greek are дηvασðαι < PGr. *man-s-
and μéµηva (after takñvai : tétyka, etc.).
Related to the group of ►µévoç, ►µéµova, and probably ►µµvýokw. For more
cognates, see LIV² s.v. 1. *men-.
μaíoμαι [v.] 'to touch, investigate, search', present also 'to seek to attain' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Aeol. also μáoµαι (Sapph. 36?), fut. µáσσo̟μαɩ, aor. -µáσσaσðal.
●COMP Usually with έëɩ-, in the aor. also with ɛiσ-, ¿ê-, åµqi-, µeta- (Pi. N. 3, 81).
●DER Verbal adjectives ά-лpоτí-µαστoç ‘untouched' († 263), ¿˜í-µaðτoç epithet of
àλýtns (v 377), mg. unclear (cf. Bechtel Lex. s.v.).
Action nouns: μáσµα [n.] 'search, investigation' (Cratin. 424, Pl. Cra. 421b), µaσtúç,
-úoç [f.] 'id.' (Call. Fr. 277). Agent noun: μаστρ [m.] 'searcher' (trag.), also [f.],
Schwyzer: 530, also name of an Athenian officer (Hyp.); μáστεɩpα [f.] (A.),
µaotńpios ‘Epµñs 'Hermes, God of tracing' (A.); epic PN Máστwρ; μαστpóç [m.]
uákap
893
name of a financial officer (Pellene, Rhodos, Delphi), μaσtpikós (Delphi IIª), µα-
στp(ε)ía, El. μαστpáα = εüvvα (Messen. IP, H.).
Denominative μаστεúш [v.] 'to search, track down' (Pi., A.; Epid., X.), µáor-evois
(Epid. IV, Archim.), -EUτns (X.), -εía (VIP); cf. μаτεúw. Perhaps also related are PNs
like Evμaчoç, Oivóμaoç, Maíwv (epic).
•ETYM The sigmatic forms (e.g. aor. -µáσσασα and ȧ-лpoτí-µaστoç) suggest an
analysis чaíoμai < *mas-ie/o-, but they might also belong to μаτέw, µаτεúw as
secondary formations. Often, μaíoμai 'to touch' and μaíoμa ‘to strive for, try' (the
latter with genitive) are considered to be two different verbs, but the meaning 'try to
reach, strive for can be easily explained from the conative aspect of the present stem.
There are no clear cognates. In the sense 'to touch', μaíoμat has been compared with
words for 'beckon with the hand', etc., e.g. OCS namajati, 1sg. namają ‘to beckon',
Lith. móti, 1sg. móju ‘id.', mosúoti 'to turn, swing'; but these clearly continue a root
*meh, or *meh-, and thus are formally different from Greek. In the sense 'strive,
try', the verb was compared with μaччáw 'to be eager', μшμa 'to strive', but these
connections cannot be formally substantiated. LIV² s.v. *mes- reconstructs a present
*ms-io- > *ahio- >> PG *ma¹io-, but such analogical replacement is questionable.
► µáotiž, ►µáoÐ¾s, µaσtporós were compared in Frisk, but are unrelated. See
further ►µaσtóS.
μaчpa [f.] 'the Dog Star'. →μapμaípw.
μalowv, -wvos [m.] 'native cook' in Athens (Ath. 14, 659a); μаισшvукà σкбμματα
(ibd.). <?>
•ETYM No etymology. Acc. to Ar. Byz. (ibd.), it is originally the name of the comic
mask of a cook or servant, which was named after an actor. Unrelated to µãƒãσða
'chew', as per Chrysippus (ibd.).
μáкap [adj.] epithet of gods and men, ‘happy, blissful' (II.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Fem. also μáкap (E., Ar. [lyr.]), but more frequently µáкaιpa (h. Ap. 14), also
ntr. in the obl. cases (AP, Nonn.). Further also μáкãρ (Archil. Supp. 3, 5, Sol. 14,
Diph. 126, 6), μáкaps (Alcm. 10, 11).
⚫DER Superl. μaкáρτατоç (Оd., A., S.); μaкápios blessed, happy' (Pi.); often used as a
form of address (Pl., Ar.), cf. Saчuóviɛ; also µaкapióτηs 'blessedness' (Pl. Lg., Arist.);
µaкapía [f.] ‘id.' (Ar., Pl. Hp. Ma. 293a); µakapítŋs, Dor. -tāç, fem. -Tɩs “part of the
blessed", 'blessed one' (A., Ar., Men., Theoc.). Denominative µaкapíšw [v.] ‘to
praise, glorify' (Od.) with µakapiσtós (IA), also barytone µaкápiσtos; pakapioµós
[m.] ‘act of blessing' (Pl. Resp., Arist.), µakapiotýs [m.] (J.). Also µaкaptóç ‘blesseď
(AP 7, 740, 5; verse-final), as if from *µaкaípw. Obscure is μaкapívη. ávdpáxvn
'purslane, Portulaca' (H.).
⚫ETYM The idea of Brugmann IF 18 (1905-1906): 434 that μáкap is originally a neuter
*'blessedness', whence occasionally msc. µáкäp and fem. µáкaчpα, is not supported
by the texts. It is rather Pre-Greek, because its formation is isolated within Greek,
and because of the interchange -ap/-āp.

=== page 473 ===

894
hakedvóg
µakɛdvóç [adj.] ‘tall, slim', of trees, etc. (n) 106, Nic., Lyc.); also name of a people
related to the Dorians (Hdt.). <PG(S) ►
•DER Also EN Makɛdóvɛç [m.pl.] ‘Macedonians', -óv (IA) [sg.], whence Makɛdov-
ía, -íŋ, -ɩкóç ‘Macedonia, -nian' (IA), also ǹ Maкεdov-íç (scil. yñ) (Hdt.), -îτıç (Ael.),
-100a 'Macedonian woman' (Stratt.); µαкɛdovíčw [v.] 'to be pro-Macedonian' (Plb.,
Plu.). Long medial vowel in Maкη-Sŵv (Hes. Fr. 5, 2, Call.), -Sovía, -in (Hell. poet.).
ETYM The pair Maкɛ-Sóv-ɛç beside μакε-Sv-óc is thought to contain an old
ablauting suffix, which is also supposed in yoɛdvóc, etc., though a variant -Sóv- is
lacking there. A suffix -Sóv- is found in animal names, in other appellatives, as well
as in action nouns.
A by-form of the EN is Maкéτηs 'Macedonian' (Gell.), -τıç [f.] (Str., AP) and -τía,
-τŋ (AP), -τă (pap., see Mayser 1: 3, 24); cf. oiкétηs, etc. Fur. does not discuss these
forms. As an analysis µakɛ-dv-os is impossible for an IE word, the ethnonym is
probably of substrate origin (cf. Aaкɛdaíµwv; Fick 1905: 90); the form with -T-
(which could be a variant alternating with -8-) then points to Pre-Greek origin.
The meaning of the adjective strongly suggests that it is cognate with μaкpós (Frisk),
but this can hardly be accounted for in terms of IE morphology. On account of the
strange suffixation, I assume Pre-Greek origin for it, too.
μαкελη [f.] 'mattock' (Hes. Op. 470, Theoc., A. R.), also a destructive instrument of
Zeus (A., S., Ar.). <PG(V)>
•VAR µákeλλa [f.] (Ø 259, Luc. Hes. 7).
•ETYM The formation has been compared with ảyέλŋ, Oúελλa, etc. The similarity
with Síкea cannot be coincidental, but Frisk concludes that a convincing
explanation has not yet been found. A cross of Siкελλa and a form *ματéλη,
corresponding to Lat. mateola 'tool to stave in the earth', supposed by Güntert 1914:
122f., is not supported by any further evidence. Arm. market 'mattock' shows a
remarkable similarity; it might be a loan from a common source. Unrelated are Lith.
makāras 'big stave' and Arm. mač ‘plough-tail' (the latter is an Iranian loan).
The following glosses from H. may belong to µáкɛλλa, -éλŋ: µáokŋ. Síkeλλa, þáoka.
µaкέλŋ and µáккop (Lacon. for µáσкoç). έpуαλɛiov yɛwpyikóv, wç dikella
‘agricultural tool like a 8.'.
The variation -εa/-έn is best explained by a Pre-Greek ending *-ala. Therefore,
µáкɛλλa, µakéλŋ are Pre-Greek, as is Síкελλα, see Beekes 2008. On variation к/σk,
cf. Fur.: 295-301.
µáкɛλλov [n.] ‘fence' (inscr. Epid. IVª). ◄PG?(V), LW Sem.?>
•VAR -oç [m.] ‘id.' (sch. Ar. Es. 137); -os [m.] and -ov [n.] 'meat market, hall for
groceries' (Mantinea Iª, Sparta, 1 Ep. Cor. 10, 25, D. C.); µáкελ(\)α. páуμаτα,
Spúчaкtoι 'fence, railing; latticed partition'; µáкελoç. Spúðaкtos (H.).
•DER μaкελλwτai Oúpal latticed doors' (Delos IIª), borrowed as Lat. macellōtae 'id.'
(Varro); µакɛɛov. laniatorium 'butchery', μакελíτηs corporicida (cod.
corpodicina) (gloss.); details in Redard 1949: 117. Also µaкɛλãç [m.] as “keeper of
latticed doors" (AP 7, 709)? See O. Masson Arch. Orbis 18:4 (1950): 7ff.
:
μáλа
895
⚫ETYM Frisk considers this to be a borrowing from Semitic (Hebr. miklā 'enclosure'),
after Stowasser apud Lewy 1895: 111f. Borrowed from Greek was Lat. macellum
'market, etc.', whence macellarius > μакελλápiоç butcher' (gl. laniator), -tov [n.]
'food market' (pap. VIP). The form μaкελλwταí was not derived from Hebr. miklā'ōt
[pl.], but from µáкɛλλov, like e.g. Ovσavwtós from Oúσavoç. The TN Máкɛλλa [f.], a
town in western Sicily (Hell. and late), also belongs here. The primary meaning of
μάкεov is lattice, fence', and thence 'meat market', etc. The fence may have
consisted of pointed objects, which would support relationship with ►µaкέλŋ
‘mattock’. If this is correct, the word must be Pre-Greek.
μаккoάw [V.] 'be stupid or out of one's mind' (Ar. Eq. 62, 396, Com. Adesp. 1210, Luc.
Lex. 19); Makкw [f.] name of a stupid woman (Suid.). <?>
⚫ETYM Popular formation with expressive gemination; further details are unclear.
Lat. (Osc.) maccus 'person of the Atellana, fool, buffoon' also belongs here, of which
further details and various explanations are found in WH s.v.
.
μаккоúρα [f.] Xɛipì σidηpã, ñ xpŵvtai пpòç toùç ïллoυç 'an iron hand, which is used
with horses' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Improbable Semitic etymology by Lewy KZ 55 (1928): 24ff.
µaкpóç [adj.] ‘long, great, high' also ‘deep, tall, far, lengthy' (Il.). ◄IE *meh₂k- ‘long,
thin, tall'>
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. µaкpó-ßɩoç ‘having a long life' (Hdt., Hp.), ¿ñí-, úñó-,
лрó-чакρоç ‘oblong' (Hp.), see Strömberg 1946: 100.
DER Grades of comparison: μакрó-тεроç (е 20 = σ 195), -TαTоç (E 288 a. 373);
further primary forms µáσσwv, µýkiotos (see on µñkoç).
Nominal abstracts: µáкpos [n.] 'length' (Ar. Av. 1131), probably an accidental
formation, cf. Chantraine 1933: 417; µakpótŋs [f.] ‘id.' (Hell.).
Denominative μакρúvш [v.] 'to lengthen, remove' (LXX, Hero), whence μакpvσμóc
'long interval', μáкρчµµа [n.] ‘sth. thrown away' (LXX; v.l. µáкpuvois).
⚫ETYM Old adjective, which was also preserved in Latin and Germanic: Lat. macer
'meagre, thin', OHG magar, ON magr‘meagre' < IE *mh,kró-. A parallel l-formation
is found in Hitt. mak-l-ant- 'meagre'. μакεdvóç cannot be formally explained in IE
terms, however. In the sense of ‘long, high', μaкpóç ousted doλixóc, which was
inherited too. On the vocalisation of laryngeals in the position *RHC-, cf. Beekes IF
93 (1988): 25. Seе ►µñкоç.
µáкτpα [f.] ‘kneading trough, bathing tub', etc. →µáσow.
µáλa [adv.] ‘very, quite, by all means' (Il.). <IE *mel- ‘strong, better'>
●COMP Compar. µãλλov ‘more, rather³, superl. µáλiota 'most of all, especially' (II.).
•ETYM Formation like åµa, táxa, nápα, etc. (Schwyzer: 622). It is thought to contain
a zero grade stem, as opposed to the full grade seen in Lat. mel-ius 'better' beside
multus 'many' <ml-tó-; a zero grade also in Latv. milns 'very many'. The compar.
µãλov (with secondary length after ¤ãσσov) probably replaced the original full
grade *uéλov. The form μáλiov. µãλλov (H.), to be inserted in Tyrt. 12, 6 as well, is

=== page 474 ===

896
quadápaopov
an innovation; the same goes for µаλɩшτéра· лроσqλɛστépα 'more dear' (H.). See
▶ ua入epós, ▶ qué入w.
µaλáßaßpov [n.] name of an oriental spice, probably a kind of cinnamon (Peripl. M.
Rubr., Dsc., Gal., Plin.). <LW Ind.>
•DER -Ivoç 'prepared with µ.' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM From Skt. tamāla-pattra- [n.] ‘leaf of the Tamāla tree', which was borrowed as
τà μaλáẞapa, Lat. mālobat(h)rum (after mälum), -inus, -ātus.
μaλaкós [adj.] 'weak, soft, tender; effeminate, flabby' (II.), on the mg. cf. Treu 1955:
183, 187f. <IE? *mlh₂-k- 'weak'>
•COMP μαλакоуvóμwv 'of mild mood' (A.), μаλαкo-кpavɛúç "having a weak skull",
bird-name 'grey shrike' (Arist.).
•DER µaλaкía, -íŋ (IA), µalaкóτηs (Pl., Arist., Herod.) 'weakness, effeminacy'.
µαλaкíwv [m.] (form of address) 'sweetheart' (Ar. Ec. 1058), see Chantraine 1933: 165;
τà µaλákia ‘molluscs' (Arist.); μaλaкódŋs 'softish' (St. Byz.). Denominative verbs: 1.
μаláσσw, -ττw 'to soften, appease' (Pi., IA), μáλαyua [n.] 'emollient, padding' (Pl.,
Thphr., Ph. Bel., etc.), µαλαуμα-τwdŋs (medic.), -τí\w [v.] (Zos. Alch.); µáλažiç
'softening' (Thphr., Plu.); μаλак-τηp "weakener”, μаλакτǹp λépavτos ivory
worker' (Plu.); -TIкóç 'mitigating' (Hp., Plu.). 2. μaλaкíčoμaι [v.] 'to be soft' (Att.). 3.
μαλaкúvw [v.] 'to soften' (X., Hell.), with μaλáкuvσiç 'softening' (Alex. Aphr.).
•ETYM The nearest cognate of μaλaкós seems to be monosyllabic ẞláž, so we are
dealing with a primary к-derivative. The forms point to a split paradigm: *mlh₂-k- >
*µλāк- and *mlh₂-ek- > *µαλ-aк-. The comparison with the verb for 'rub, meaľ (in
►µúλn) is outdated. See ►ßláž, ► µaλðaкóç.
µalatñpes · vañται 'sailors' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
uaλáxn [f.] 'mallow' (Hes.). <PG(V)►
•Var Also µóη (Epich. and Antiph. apud Ath. 2, 58d, SIG 1172, 8, etc.), µoláõï
(Vase inscr. Naples). µáλẞaкα [acc.] (Orac. apud Luc. Alex. 25).
•DER μaλáxiov (Ar. Fr. 320, 10), μoλóxiov (Clem. Al.) ‘woman's ornament worn
around the neck', also μáλaкiov (Poll., H.), after μaλαкóç; µαλáxιoç. ¿xßñç лoιóç a
fish (H.), after the color (Strömberg 1943: 25); μoλoxítns (v.l. -tic) 'mallow-colored
stone' (Plin., Isid.); μolóxivoç 'made of mallow-fibre, mallow-colored' (Peripl. M.
Rubr.), Hoλóxiva [n.pl.] 'clothes made of mallow' (ibd.) > Lat. molochina [f.]. Cret.
TN μ Moλoxãνɩɩ (nom. *Moloxãç, see Schwyzer: 528).
⚫ETYM Along with Lat. malva (whence MoHG Malve, etc.), from a Mediterranean
language; traditionally compared with Hebr. malluaḥ, name of a lettuce-like plant;
does Georg. balba also belong here? The hapax µáλẞαкα [acc.] has a remarkable
similarity with malva and points to *μαλƑαк/x-. We may therefore assume a Pre-
Greek form *mal" ak-. This explains all Greek variants, including the different
vocalizations. Pre-Greek may have taken the word from Semitic, or the other way
around.
la入Oakóg
897
µáλdaкov [n.] = ε (Dsc. 1, 67, Plin. 12, 35) ‘aromatic gum obtained from
Balsomadendrum africanum'. <LW Near East>
•ETYM Fur.: 212 thinks it is a non-IE loan from the Near East, standing for
*μαбаλкov, and compares Hebr. bedōlaḥ, Akk. budulḥu, bidurḥu.
µaλɛpós [adj.] mg. uncertain, said of fire (Il., Hes. Sc. 18, A. Ch. 325), of lions (A. Ag.
141), of singers (Pi. O. 9, 22), also of лóðоç, "Аpηs; usually explained as 'violent,
strong' (or 'consuming'), acc. to Bechtel 1914 s.v. rather "zermalmend”, ‘crushing'.
<?>
•VAR μελεрóç. μараντιкóv. каvσTIкóv 'quenching, burning' (H.).
•ETYM Formation like aλɛpós, pavɛpós, etc. There is no etymology, because of the
uncertain meaning. Traditionally taken to be related to µála in the meaning
'violent', etc.; acc. to Bechtel, however, it belongs to µáλεvpov and ►µúλn.
µáλɛvpov [n.] ‘flour' (Alc. 70 LSJ, Achae. 51, Theoc. 15, 116). <IE *melh,- ‘meal, rub'>
⚫VAR Cret. PN Máλevpoç (SGDI 5028 n 4).
•DIAL Myc. me-re-u-ro/meleuron/.
•ETYM Either a reshaping of älεupov (s.v. ►ålέw) after μúλη, or an old word,
cognate with OHG melo < PGm. *melwa- 'meal', etc. The latter connection is
possible if we reconstruct PIE *melh,-uV-, in which case Myc. me-re-u-ro < *melh,-
ur-represents the old vocalism, cf. ǎpoupa ‘arable land' (Myc. a-ro-u-ra) which is an
extension of *h₂erh₂-uṛ. µáλɛvpov must then have taken its vo
or even continue an old ablauting variant *mlh,-eu- (assuming that the heteroclitic
inflection is secondary). The explanation of Myc. me-le-ti-ri-ja by vowel assimilation
from mela- (as per LIV² s.v. *melh2-) is unacceptable, as there was no regular vowel
assimilation in Greek (see Van Beek fthc.b).
µáλŋ [f.] ‘armpit', almost only in the expression úлò µáλŋs ‘under the armpit, secretly'
(Att.), after this also úïò (tǹv) µáλŋv (Plb., Luc.), лapà tǹv µ. (Hippiatr.). <?>
•DIAL Myc. ma-ra-pi /malāp¹i/?
•ETYM In the same meaning we find μaσxáλn, but it does not seem probable that
μáλη is a shortened form of μaσxáλn.
µaλðaкóç [adj.] ‘weak, tender, soft, mild' (P 588, also Hp., Pl.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Aeol. μóλеaкoç (Alc.).
•DER μaλеaкía 'softness' (Pl. R. 590 b); μаλеαкódŋs ‘emollient' (Hp., Gal.),
μаλеáкivoçμаλеαкóç (AP).
ia入Bákivog
Denominative verbs: 1. μaláσow
=
=
μaλáσow (Hp., trag.), with μaλеaк-τηpιov
-TIKÓÇ, Iç (medic.). 2. μαλеакíčoμat [v.] 'to be or become soft' (A., E., Pl., Gal.). 3.
μаλеакúνw = μаλaкúvw (sch.). 4. Also μaλáw (Aret.), -aívw (Stob.) = µàλ¤áσow,
Ha入OakÚvw
both probably through replacement of the suffix, rather than to µálŋ, µáλwv.
Unrelated is μáλÐŋ.
Without suffixal -αк-: μаλеóбηs = µаλαктιкòç ½ кηрwdns 'emollient or like wax'
µaλaktikòs
(Hp. apud Gal.); µáλwv [m.] 'sissy' (Socr. apud Stob.); Máλtov woman's name
(Paros); μalewow. μаλaкwow 'will soften' (H.). Here also εлíμаλеα. àуaеá,
лpoonví. ½ palaкá, ǹ àσОεvñ λíaν 'good, soft, or soft, or very weak' (H.).

=== page 475 ===

898
⚫ETYM Formation like μaλaкóç; the two synonymous adjectives may have influenced
each other. If μaλakós belongs with ßλáč, then µaλðaкós must have taken its ending
from μaλaкóç. Solmsen 1909: 55 recognizes μáλon as the feminine of an original
adj. *uaλóc 'weak', which also left traces in μáλ0wv, etc. (though a reconstruction
-n-ko- seems improbable for μaλеaкóç).
Outside Greek, the Germanic word for 'mild', e.g. OHG milti, Go. unmildjai
"ǎστop you', has been compared, which could belong to Skt. márdhati 'to neglect'
(maintained in LIV² s.v. 1.*meld"-).
However, the following considerations may show that the word is Pre-Greek: 1)
μαλе- cannot be explained from IE *mld"-, as this would give **ẞλa-; 2) µaλðakós
cannot be cognate with μaλaкóç, as the latter must go back to *mlh₂-ek-, and there is
no trace of the *h₂ in the former; 3) if μaλáw is old, it points to suffixal *-ay-,
which together with the (more common) variant seen in μαλеαкóç must derive from
the well-known PG suffix -ak-.
It is now clear that words in -aкo- cannot be derived from an IE derivational type
*-n-ko-, as most words of this kind (like öστpaкov) are of substrate origin.
►μáλŋ should be separated from μaλеaкós as a technical loanword. However,
µaλÐwv, *µaλðów, etc., which seem to be derivations of μáλon, are rather variants of
μαλеaкós without the suffix *-ak-. It is unclear whether aμalós 'weak' can be
connected; quaλdúvw differs too much phonetically as well as semantically.
See further uαλαкóç.
μáλon [f.] 'mix of wax and pitch', used to caulk ships, and on writing tablets (Cratin.
204); acc. to H. also = τpvqɛpń [adj.] 'delicate, tender'; is this correct? Also name of a
large aquatic animal (Ael., Opp.), perhaps after its tender or wax-like meat,
Strömberg 1943: 32. <PG(S)>
•VAR Also μáλеă (Ar. Fr. 157), µáλ0ŋc, -Oŋ (Hippon., S., D.); on the variation -ŋ: -ă
cf. Solmsen 1909: 265.
•ETYM This word probably has nothing to do with µaλðaкóç, as it is a technical
loanword. The word is Pre-Greek, as μaλ- cannot be explained from IE (*mld¹- >
Bλa-). This also explains the nom. in -ă (Pre-Greek: C 3,1). Borrowed as Lat.
malt(h)a.
µaλiáw [v.] ‘to suffer from glanders'. •DER µaλíaðɩç, the disease. →µñλov 1.
μάλкη [f.] 'numbness from cold' in hands and feet, plur. 'chilblain' (Nic.); µáλêηу· τÒ
кóлavov. Пáρtot 'chopping-block' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
●DER µáλкov [n.]: qápµaкov ảoƉevés te kai µάλкov a weak and benumbing
medicine' (Anon. apud Suid.), perhaps a compar. like píytov; superl. µaλkiotatov
uap (Call. Fr. anon. 45). Denominative чαλкíw [v.] 'to become numb with cold,
freeze' (A. Fr. 332 [652 Mette], X., D., Ael.), after idiw, often written μalakíw after
µaλaкóç; µaλкió-wVTI [ptc.dat.sg.] (Arat. 294, m.c.), μаλккñу. Úлò кρúοvç
KATEOKÀNKÉVAL Kai Svokívηtos elvai 'to be stiff and unable to move for cold' (Phot.).
Here also μaλкóv. μаλакóv (H.)?
•ETYM A convincing explanation is still lacking. There have been attempts connect
Lith. mulkis 'blockhead', OCS mlúčati ‘be silent, dumb', and other words of doubtful
›
quavdákns
899
appurtenance. The connection with μaλaкóç is semantically unconvincing. A form
μαλк- can hardly be explained in IE terms. The variant spelling μaλaкíw may
indicate that the word is Pre-Greek.
μaλλós [m.] 'flock of wool' (Hes. Op. 234, Milete VIª, A., S., Herod.). <PG?>
•COMP ëŋyɛσí-µaλλos 'thick-fleeceď (I 197).
●DER µɑλλwτós 'provided or lined with flocks of wool (Pl. Com., Str.) with
μаλλwτápiov 'sheepskin' (pap. V-VIP); µáλλwσç 'lining with wool' (sch.). Further
µáλλvkes. tpixes ‘hairs' (H.), after äµnukeç, káλukeç, etc.; with simplification of the
geminate: μáλov 'long hair, pigtail' (AP 11, 157, Herm. Trism.).
ETYM The connection with Lith. milas 'coarse homespun wool' has been
abandoned. Greppin Glotta 59 (1981): 70-75 suggests that Arm. mal ‘ram' is cognate
with the Greek word. The latter only denotes the 'flock of wool', and never the
animal, but this may be a later semantic development. An IE form *mh₂l- is rather
improbable, however. Greppin explains the form from *malyo-, but this is not
certain, as the -- may also be a geminate of Pre-Greek origin. Clackson 1994: 232
(fn. 250) suggests that “the word is better explained as a loan from Arabic māl
'possession' with its transferred meaning 'sheep' (thus Ačaryan 1977: 224)."
The word may well be Pre-Greek.
µāλós [adj.] epithet of τpάyos ‘goat' (Theoc. Ep. 1, 5), explained as 'white' by H. <?>
•ETYM May have been dissolved from μаλo-лápavos, properly ‘apple-cheeked❜
(Theoc. 26, 1), but taken by H. to mean λɛvкoлápεloç; cf. µálovpos (-pis)
Aɛúkoupos, Aɛukókɛpkoç (H.). See ► µñλov 1.
=
µáµata [n.pl.] · лoiýµata (v.l. лεµµаτа dressed food' Meineke), ẞpóμаτα ‘prepared
food (H.); μáшаτа· Вρóμаτа (sch. Pl. Alc. 1, 118e). <?>
•ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 21f. thinks it is dialectal (Doric-Macedonian) for
µáуµaτα (and related to µáσow ‘to knead').
µáµµŋ [f.] 'mother' (Pherecr., Men., Epicur., AP), 'mother's breast' (Arr.),
'grandmother' (LXX, pap. Iª, Ph., Plu.). <ONOM>
●COMP µaµµó-еpεлτos raised by grandmother' (Phryg., Poll.), also Mãáкvôos
[m.] 'blockhead' (Ar. Ra. 990), properly “who hides with his mother” (kɛúеw).
•DER Hypocoristic derivatives: μадíа (Аr.), -íov (Phryn.), -ídlov (Plu., Hdt.).
Adjective μauç, μкó (pp.). Сf. лаллíα, еtc. s.v. ►лάллα.
Denominative μшá [v.] 'to cry for the breast' [thus LSJ] (Ar. Nu. 383).
⚫ETYM A nursery word, from reduplicated µáшă [voc.] (Ar. Byz.). Several cognates,
e.g. Lat. mamma 'mother, nurse, grandmother, mother's breast', MoHG (Alem.)
mamme, Lith. mamà, Ru. máma. See also Chantraine REGr. 59-60 (1946-1947): 243
and Risch Mus. Helv. 1 (1944): 119. On the geminate, see Schwyzer: 315; on the a-
vowel, ibid. 339. See ►µã‚ ►µaĩa, ► µýtyp, ►µaotós.
μаvбáкηç [m.] 'dεσµòç xóρτov (band to tie trusses), sheaf, bundle'. <LW Thrac.?>>
●DER µavdákiov [n.] (pap.); µavdakηdóv ‘in the form of a band (Hippiatr.).

=== page 476 ===

900
μavva 1
901
⚫ETYM Formation like yauváкηs. Is it perhaps a loan from Old Iranian banda-ka-
'band, fetter' via Thracian, in view of the development b> m? See recently Brust
2005: 415ff. The formation can hardly be IE. See µávdpa.
μávбaλoç [m.] 'bolt of a door' (Med. apud Erot., Artem.). <?>
●DER µavdalwʊaç ‘bolting(?)' (H. s.v. τvlapwσaç), µavdaλwτós 'with the bolt shoť
(com., Phot.), also a lascivious kiss [LSJ].
•ETYM Technical word in -aλo- without etymology; cf. on µávôpa. The formation
can hardly be IE. Unrelated are aµávaλov = ȧqavés ‘invisible' (Alc. Z 81),
άµavdaloĩ. áqavíšɛ, ßλáлtɛɩ ‘renders invisible, damages' (H.), in view of the
divergent meanings.
µávôpa [f.] ‘fold, pound, stable' (S. Fr. 659, Call., Theoc., Peripl. M. Rubr., Plu.), also
‘cloister' in άpxɩ-μаvdpíτηç ‘chief of a cloister, abbot, archimandrite' (Just.). ◄PG?►
•VAR μάvбpaι ερкη, pαуµоí, αúλαi, oŋkoi ẞowv kai ïллшv 'enclosures for cows and
horses' (H.).
•DER Enlargement μávôрεvμа (D. H.), after the nouns in -ɛvμα.
•ETYM The word µávôpa has been compared with Skt. mandirá- [n.] ‘dwelling,
house', mandura [f.] ‘stable' since Fick, in which case we could be dealing with a loan
from a common source (Asia Minor). The unification of μávdpa, µávdaloç,
μavdáкηs under one root mand- 'to fence in' or 'pound made of twisted rods', is ill-
founded. Semitic etymology in Lewy KZ 58 (1931): 59 (to be rejected).
DELG mentions μavdpo- in names, on which see Nilsson 1941(1): 558³. Hardly an IE
formation, as a root *mh₂n(d)- is improbable.
μavdpayópaç [m.] ‘mandrake' (Att., Thphr.). <?>
•DER μavбpaуоpítηs olvos (Dsc.), -ĭtiç. Aqpodítη (H.); the plant was known as an
aphrodisiac; -кós 'made of µ.' (Alex. Trall.); -oµévη ‘drugged with µ.' (name of a
comedy of Alexis).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. E. Fraenkel Satura Berolinensis: 23f. suspects that the plant was
named after a person (a physician). Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 42 (following
Lagarde) hesitatingly refers to the Persian plant name merdum gijā "plant of
humans"; the Mandragora root is called åvеpшлóµоpoos by an unknown informant,
and is referred to by Columella as semihomo. It could be a folk-etymological
adaptation of a foreign word.
From μavбpayópaç, MoE mandrake, Arm. manragor, etc. have been borrowed.
чavdúa [f.] a woollen garment (A. Fr. 364 = 711 Mette, LXX). <?>
•VAR - [f.], -aç, -ns [m.].
⚫ETYM Unexplained foreign word: Persian acc. to Ael. Dion. Fr. 252 and H.; A. (l.c.)
and St. Byz. 415, 7 speak of AuẞupviкỲ чavdúŋ. Considerations in Brust 2005: 420ff.
µávòs [m.] 1. ‘slave', also a typical slave-name (com.); 2. 'kind of cup' (Nico 1, Delos
III, pap.); also the unlucky throw of the dice; also a bronze figure, used in the game
of кóτταẞоç (a cup, or a support?); see Ath. 487c d. <?>
•VAR μávητεç [nom.pl.], µávãç [acc.pl.].
⚫DER Diminutive μavíov.
⚫ETYM The slave name is from Phrygian (Opúč means 'slave', among other things;
see WH s.v. mānēs); the connection with кóτтαẞоç is secondary. Mazzarino Rend.
Acc. Linc. 6:15 (1939): 366ff. thinks the word is Sicilian in the latter meaning, and
connects it with Lat. mānāre ‘to flow'. We may be dealing with two different origins.
µavðávw [v.] ‘to learn, get to know, experience' (Pi.). On the meaning, see Snell 1924:
74f. and Dörrie 1956. <IE *mn(s)-d"h,- ➤
•VAR Аor. μαеɛĭv (Il.), fut. µαð½σoµαι (Thgn., Parm.), perf. µεµáðŋka (Anacr.,
Xenoph., Emp.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. кaτα-, έk-, épo-, µεta-.
•DER Action nouns: 1. µáðŋ [f.] ‘learning, insight' (Emp., H.). 2. µáðos [n.] ‘what has
been learnt, custom' (Alc., Hp., A.). 3. µáðŋoiç = µáðŋ (Alcm., IA). 4. µáðŋµа ‘what
has been learnt, knowledge', plur. (mathematical) sciences' (IA, Hell.), with
μаечματ-кóç 'fond of learning, scientific, mathematical' (Pl., Arist.), -ɩkɛúoµai [v.]
'to argue mathematically' (Dam.). 5. µáðηµoσúvý ‘learning' (Phr., imperial period).
Agent nouns: μα-τý ‘disciple' (IA), -τкóç ‘fond of learning; learnable' (Pl.,
Arist.), -tikɛúoµai (Dem.), -tɛúw [v.] 'to be a disciple, turn into a disciple' (NT, Plu.)
with -τɛía ‘education' (Timo, D. Chr.), -τiáw [v.] 'to be eager to learn' (Ar.); fem.
-τpíc (Ph.), -τpia (D. S., Act. Ap.); µαеετηç ‘id.' (Knossos IIa), after εúpεTηç?
⚫ETYM The Greek forms all go back to the zero grade aorist µaεiv; the full grade
could be represented either in μevðýpη ‘épovτíç, µερчµvа' (H., EM) or in лρoµηеs
'premeditative, careful'. The latter is isolated (cf. s.v.), but μεvе- corresponds to
OHG mendi 'gladness', menden 'to rejoice', beside a zero grade in e.g. Go. mundon
sis to look at, σкoëɛīv’, ON munda ‘to aim (with a weapon), head for a goal'.
A full grade in Lith. mañdras 'lively, cheerful', OCS modrá ópóvшoç, σoqóç'. A pre-
form *mns-deh,- (related to *mén-s-) is assumed for Skt. medhá 'wisdom, insight',
Av. mazdā 'remembrance'. See µεvðάpŋ.
µaviákns, -ov [m.] ‘golden collar, worn by the Persians and Gauls' (Plb., LXX, Pln.).
VAR Also - [f.].
•COMP μavvo-pópos (Theoc. 11, 41; v.l. for ȧuvo-).
⚫DER Diminutive -táktov (sch. Theoc. 11, 41), also μаváкɩv (pap.); μávvos, óvo
[m.] 'collar' (Poll.).
•ETYM Formation like ►µavdáкηs, ➤ yavváêns. Usually considered to be a Gaulish
word (cf. e.g. Olr. muin-torc 'collar', OW minci 'collar for horses', etc.) with cognates
in Lat. monile 'collar', OHG menni ‘neck ornament', etc.; see WH s.v. monile.
Relation with μóvαлоç 'aurochs' seems improbable.
It is now thought that the other IE languages must have acquired the word from the
same (or a related) source as Greek. R. Schmitt Sprache 13 (1967): 61-64 connects Av.
zarǝnu-maini- 'with golden collar'; see also Kronasser 1969: 61. Arm. maneak 'collar'
could be of Iranian origin in view of the suffix *-aka-. The variants μávvoç, μóvo
point to a non-IE origin for the Greek word: geminate -vv-, interchange a/o and
presence of a suffix -(1)aк-. Still, the origin remains unclear.
µavva 1 [f.] ‘frankincense powder' (Hp., Dsc.). <PG?►

=== page 477 ===

902
flavva 2
hápadov
903
•ETYM Probably a loan, possibly of Pre-Greek origin.
µavva 2 [n.] ‘manna' (LXX). <LW Sem.>
ETYM From Hebr. mān ‘manna'.
µāvós [adj.] ‘thin, loose, open in texture, rare' (IA, Emp. 75, 1). ◄PG?(V)►
•VAR μǎvóc (Telecl. 61); on Bavóv see below.
●COMP µǎvó-σtos with loose chain, thin, fine' (A. Fr. 297 = 688 Mette).
●DER µavóτŋs ‘thinness, rareness' (Pl., Arist., Thphr.), µavía ‘id.' (An. Ox.); µavwdns
'thin' (Arist.); чaváкiç 'rare' (Pl. Com., H.), to лоλλáкiç; μavów [v.] 'to loosen'
(Thphr.) with μávwotę (Arist.). Variant ßavóv· λεлτóv ‘thin, delicate' (H.).
⚫ETYM Ion. μãvóc and Att. μǎvóç derive from *μavƑóc; beside these, we find a u-stem
in µávv. þкpóv (cod. лкрóv). Аðаµãvεç ‘small' (H.). The u-stem is also seen in
Arm. manr, gen. manu ‘small, thin, fine', manu-k ‘child, boy, servant' (see Clackson
1994: 117). Unrelated is ►µávvča. Brugmann RhM N.F. 62 (1907): 634f. also adduces
μаvаúεται· ларéλкƐται (H.), properly ‘isolates himself, and, hesitatingly,
ßávavσoç. However, the -av- remains unexplained.
Skt. manák a little', Lith. meñkas 'short', Hitt. maninku- 'close, near', are all of
unclear formation, as well as OIr. menb < *menuo-. If Gr. μavv- is from *mnh₂-u- (cf.
µavádŋg, pav-áкic), it conflicts with the etymology of OIr. menb.
Perhaps, µóvos could be included here. For Pre-Greek origin, see Fur.: 221 with good
motivation. See ►µóvoç.
µavtía [f.] ‘raspberry' (Dsc. 4, 37). ◄PG(O)►
•ETYM Probably Pre-Greek. Cf. Alb. Gheg mand ‘mulberry(tree)'; see Fur.: 209, 272,
who compares Sardian and Basque forms and states that ẞáτos cannot be
separated from these words. He considers μavτía to be Dacian, but with no apparent
reason.
µávtis, -ews [m., f.] ‘seer, prophet' (Il.); also name of a plant (Nic.), of a grasshopper:
'praying mantis' (Theoc., Dsc.), a garden-frog (H.) as a predictor of the weather, cf.
Strömberg 1940: 79. ◄IE? *men-ti->
●var Ion. gen.sg. -10ç.
•COMP Often as a second member in trag., e.g. laτрó-μаντç 'soothsayer who is also a
physician' (A.), cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 272f. Rarely as a first member, e.g. þavti-ñódos
'predictive' (E. [anap.], Orac. apud Luc., Man.), which is formally like olwvо-лóλоç
'bird-watcher', etc. (Wackernagel KZ 29 (1888): 143).
●DER 1. µavtɛñoç, -ñïos 'concerning the soothsayer, prophetic' (P., trag.), after
ẞaσɩλɛioç, etc.; μavɩεov, -ñïov [n.] ‘oracle, oracle site' (μ 272). 2. µavtikóç ‘id.',
pavtiký (téxvn) ‘the art of seeing' (IA). 3. µavτãos ‘id.' (AP), after ǹpãoç, etc. 4.
μауτоσúvη 'faculty of prophecy' (Il., Pi., Emp.), after iлло-σúvη, etc.; -ouvos [adj.]
'belonging to the seer or oracle' (Corinna, E. [lyr.]). 5. μаντεúоμα (late also -ɛúw)
[v.] 'to predict, consult an oracle' (Il.), after Baσiɛɛv, etc.; with чavteia, -ein, ŋ-ïn
‘prophecy, prophetic faculty, oracle' (h. Merc.), µávτεч ‘oracle' (Pi., trag.),
µavtevtýs = µávtis (Hdt.), -ɛútpia (sch.). PN Mávτios (Od.).
!
•ETYM As an agent noun in -π-, µávτç stands isolated (most other ti-stems are
abstract nouns); µáρë brigand' (A. Supp. 826f.; broken context) and лópτç 'calf
are similar in formation. Benveniste 1935: 83 reconstructs an old neuter *τò µáväɩ
‘divination', but uаντ-лóλоç, adduced by Benveniste, can easily be explained in a
different way (see above). µávtiç seems to be derived from μaívoμal, µavñvai (cf.
úлò toũ Đɛoû µaívετaι, Hdt. 4, 79). It is natural to take it as an original feminine
abstract, like чáτıç, with an Aeolic reflex of the suffix. However, the vocalism μav-
would have to be an analogical zero grade (after which example?), which makes the
etymology a bit doubtful. See ▸µέµova, ►µévos.
µávvča [f.] · µovoкéqaλov σкópodov 'garlic' (H.). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM No doubt a Pre-Greek plant name; it has nothing to do with μavós 'thin,
loose'. For words in -a (with short -a, an ending characteristic for substrate words),
cf. kóvula.
μávo glossed as yaλλɛpíaç, óvíσкoç (diminutive of ovos '‘ass', but also a fish-
name) by Dorio apud Ath. 315f. µalós 2.
μɑлéɛv [v.aor.] 'to take hold, grasp' (Hes. Sc. 231, 304). ◄?►
•VAR Reduplicated µεµáлoεv [зpl.opt.aor.] (ibid. 252; v.l. µæµáproiεv).
•DER Further *μ-µañɛt̃v in ¿añéws 'immediately, quick'
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. In spite of its semantic agreement with μάрлτш
(µéµapлεv, -ŵç Hes. ibd. 245, Op. 204), μαлéεν can hardly be connected with it in
formal terms.
µápaydos →σµápaydoç.
µápayva [f.] 'whip' (A., E., Pl. Com., Poll.); H. also σµápayva (cf. on oµápaydos).
<LW Iran.➤
•ETYM The word corresponds to Syrian māraynā ‘flagelli genus'. Hübschmann KZ 36
(1900): 175f. already assumed that both were loans from OP *māra-gna- "killer of
snakes". On the formal difficulty that MoP mahr points to *marOra- (mārora-),
instead of *māra-, see now Brust 2005: 428ff., who assumes it is a loan from North-
West Iranian.
дápaðov [n.] 'fennel, Foeniculum vulgare' (Epich., D., Thphr.). <PG?>
•VAR Also -os [m., f.] (Hermipp.) and μápαеpov (Alex., Hell. pap., Dsc.).
•DIALMyc. ma-ra-tu-wo/marat¹won/.
•COMP Compounds εv-µápαoç 'rich in fennel (AP), iлño-µápα(p)ov 'Prangos
ferulacea' (Diocl. Med., Thphr., Dsc.), Sià τò μéуεños (Strömberg 1940: 30).
•DER µapaðíç, -ídos [f.] = iñño-µ. (Ps.-Dsc.), µαpa¤ãç [m.] ‘fennel-trader', μapaðín
olvos (Dsc., Gp.), TNs like Mapałáv, -wvos [m., f.] (11 80).
•ETYM For a plant name, foreign origin is suspected. A cunning attempt at an
explanation in IE terms was made by Hesselman 1932: 94ff., who compared MoSw.
mjärd(r)e, OSw. miærdher [m., n.] 'fish-trap' (or its funnel-like entrance), from
PGm. *merdra- < IE *merH-d³ro-; the plant would have been named after its funnel-

=== page 478 ===

i
904
papaivw
like flower. Apart from formal problems, the Mycenaean form eliminates the
proposed cognates. It is rather a Pre-Greek word.
μapaivw [v.] 'to quench, destroy', med.-pass. 'to die away, wither' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Aor. μapãvai (h. Merc.), aor. pass. µαpavėñvaɩ (Il.), perf. med. µεµáðɑ(σ)µαι
and fut. uapavu (late).
•COMP Also with άлo-, кατα-, пpo-, ¿к-.
•DER µápavoɩç [f.] 'fading away' (Arist.), papaoμós 'withering', µаpaσµádn
(medic.); µαрαντIкós 'withering' (Phryn., sch.).
further connections.
•ETYM As an example for the above system of forms, Frisk suggested кηpaívw 'to
damage, corrupt' with comparable meaning, or: laivw, aor. laval 'refresh', with
opposite meaning, which probably had an old primary nasal present (cf. s.v.). The
precursor of µapaívw may have been a nasal present as well; see µápvaµaɩ with
DELG thinks that the root may be related to Lat. morior, etc. This idea finds support
in the thesis of Meier-Brügger KZ 102 (1989): 62-67 that the verb meant 'to die out,
let die out, let waste away', from the root *mer- 'to die away'. However, his
reconstruction *mrn-ie/o-, with two consequent vocalic resonants, and hence the
explanation of μap-, is hardly possible and does not solve anything.
.
μapáσσaι [f.pl.] · кúvɛç, öρviðεç 'dogs, birds' (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also aμapáσai ai σüç. oi dè кúvaç 'swine, others: bitches' (H.), see Fur.: 372.
⚫ETYM The word is Pre-Greek in view of the prothetic vowel. It has been compared
with ►μapív.
чapavyέw [v.] 'to contract the pupils when exposed to light; to be blinded', of the
pupils of a cat (Plu.). <GR
⚫DER μapavyía 'flicker, be blinded' (Archyt. apud Stob. 3, 1), -yɛa also name of a fish
(Xenocr.), because of its gaze, acc. to Strömberg 1943: 42f.
•ETYM Compound with second member as in xpvo-, oki-, ßol-avyέw, and with an
adjectival or verbal first member. Thus, either related to μаpμápεos 'flashing'
(μаpμápɛa avyaí Ar. Nu. 187 [lyr.]), or to μаpμаípw, with compositional
formation like in e.g. εiλv-σлáoμai, ▶dvoraλíčw.
µapyapírns [m.] ‘pearl' (Thphr., Str., Ael., Arr., NT). <LW Iran.➤
●Der µapyapitis (\í¤oc) [f.] ‘id.' (Ath., Isid. Char.), diminutive -τáplov (PHolm.).
Besides, probably as a back-formation (cf. below), μápyapov 'id.' (Anacreont.,
PHolm.), -os [m., f.] ‘id.' (Tz.), also ‘Indian pearl mussel' (Ael.), -íç (λíoc) 'pearl'
(Philostr., Hld.), -ídɛç [pl.] name of a pearl-like kind of date palm (Plin.); -ídŋc [m.]
(Praxag.).
•ETYM An oriental loanword, mostly assumed to be from Iranian, MP marvārīt, MoP
marvā-rīd ‘pearľ (acc. to Schiffer RPh. 63 (1937): 45ff.), but critical discussion in
Brust 2005: 432ff. The older view derives it from Skt. mañjarī 'flowering bead' (epic
class.), 'pearl' (lex.), with -íτηs added in Greek, like in numerous other stone names.
The by-form mañjara- [n.] would agree well with μápуapov, but the late and rare
occurrence of both the Skt. and Greek form is no support for a direct identification.
μapiεús, -έws
905
Suggestion by Gershevitch 1989: from Iran. *mrga-ahri-ita- 'born from the shell of a
bird' = 'oyster'.
From μapуapíτηç, Lat. margarita, etc.; see WH s.v.
µápyos [adj.] ‘mad, furious, greedy' (Od.). <PG(V)►
VAR Also μópуoç. ǎлληστое 'greedy', μopyíaç уаστрчμаруíaç, кal ȧкpaoias
'gluttony, being out of control, incontinence' (H.). Moreover äμαруоç; μаριкãç
kivados 'catamite' (H.), but see under the names; äßαpкva. λчµós ‘hunger, famine'
(H.), which points to *äßapкoç. äßaptos. ärλŋotos, oi dè äµapyos (H.), àẞapτía.
άлλŋστíα (H.). PNs Bápyos, Bápyŋ, Bpóyyos, Bápyaσos, Mápyaσos. "Aẞаpτos
(Paus. 7, 3, 10).
•COMP As a first member in e.g. уaστpí-µapуos ‘gluttonous' (Pi., Arist., Ph.) with
yaστpɩ-µapy-ía (Hp., Pl.), -έw (Ph.); Blanc RPh. 65 (1991): 59-66 connects σtóµapyos
from *στоμá-μаpуoç.
•DER Mapуíτŋs [m.] name of the principal character of a satirical epic poem (Arist.,
Plb.), -ɩɩɛíα [f.] 'fury, madness' (Phld.); μapуóτŋs [f.] ‘madness, gluttony,
wantonness' (Pl., trag.), -oσúvη ‘id.' (Anacr., Thgn.); µapyŋévtwv. Avooúvtwv
'raving' (H.).
Verbs: 1. μapyaívw ‘to rage, be furious', only pres. (E 882, Democr.); 2. μapyάw, only
in pres. ptc. µapywv, -woa 'furious, wanton' (trag., Call.); 3. μapyóoμat, only in ptc.
ú, µαρушμévоç ‘id.' (Pi., A.). With an unclear e-vowel: µépyɩɛ. à¤pówç
Eσ0ε 'eat at once!' (H.).
ETYM The many variants (prothetic vowel, к/y, μ/ẞ, a/o, etc.) are typical for Pre-
Greek words. The -ɛ- in µépуɩɛ probably represents a Pre-Greek variation as well;
see Fur.: 21772.
µápdos [m.] ‘reed-pipe' (Hdn. 1, 142, LSJ Supp.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
uápn [f.] 'hand' (Pi. Fr. 310). <?>
•DER ► εvµapńs, whence εúµápεa; uncertain μápis, -ɛws [m.] name of a measure for
liquids, 6 кOτúla (Arist., Poll.), = 10 Xóɛs (Polyaen.), whence diminutive μápiov
(pap.).
=
•ETYM Forssman 1966: 135-140 doubts the authenticity of µápη ‘hand'. Blanc REGr.
105 (1992): 548-556 and Blanc RPh. 70 (1996): 118 and 126 supposes that the form was
coined to explain εvuapηs. Schrijver 1991: 458 rejects an r/n-stem, as this would
presuppose a root consisting of a single consonant m-, which is impossible in PIE.
Former comparisons with Germanic and Celtic words, to be found in Frisk, are now
obsolete.
µapiɛús, -έws [m.] 'stone that burns when in contact with water' (Arist. Mir. 833a 27;
v.l. uapıbáv [acc.]); in H. µapišɛús. Aíðos tis, ős énɩota(oµévov üdatos kaíɛtai ‘id.”,
also μapiony [nom.] without an indication of mg. (Hdn. 1, 16, 7). ◄?►
•ETYM The correct form is uncertain; connected with ►µapµaípw? In this case, it
would properly mean “gleaming, sparkling". See ▸ uapí入n.

=== page 479 ===

906
μapíλn
háprtw
907
μapíλn [f.] ‘glowing ashes', opposed to ǎve pa 'glowing coals' and σлodó, tá ‘ashes'
(IA). <PG(V)►
•VAR Arist. also has σμ-. Photius cites a form µɑpɛívη which he connects with
fiapaivw.
•COMP μаpiλo-кaúτηs 'charcoal-burner' (S.).
⚫DER Diminutive μapúλλα [pl.] (P.Leid. X. 56), after other diminutives in -útov;
papiλ-ɛúw [v.] ‘to change into glowing ashes; to burn coals', whence -εutýc (Poll.).
⚫ETYM Formation like µvotíλŋ, (wµídn, otpoßidn (-idos), etc. (Chantraine 1933: 249).
The form with ou- probably shows that the word is Pre-Greek, as initial IE *s- would
disappear in Greek. See μapiɛúç.
µapív [f.] · tǹv σñv. Kρñτεš 'swine (Cret.)' (H.). <PG?(V)►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 372 cites àμapáσaι ai σüç. oi dè кúvaç 'others say dogs' (H.) beside
þapáσσai kúveç, öpvɩðɛç ‘birds' (H.). Because of the prothetic vowel in the former,
μapív (if connected) is probably Pre-Greek.
µapîvos [m.] an unknown fish; perhaps a kind of barbel (Arist., H.), cf. Thompson
1947 s.v. H. glosses it кíapos 'chest', a kind of flatfish, ix0uç 0aλáσσioç 'seafish', кkai
övoμa kúpιov 'an ordinary name'. <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Formation like áτay-îvoç, etc. (see on ►åτταуãç). The suffix -ĭvoç is Pre-
Greek.
μápis [m.] a liquid measure (Arist., Poll.) = 6 kóτulai, or 10 xóɛs (Polyaen.). <LW
Iran.➤
•ETYM Schmitt 1989: 301-315 thinks it is a loan from OP *mari-.
μаρíσкoç [m.] 'bog-rush, Cladium mariscus' (Plin. HN 21, 112). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Formation like iẞíσкoç, áλ¤íoкoç, and other plant names (Chantraine 1933:
407); further opaque. The suffix -íoкos probably points to a Pre-Greek word.
μаpμaípw [v.] 'to flash, sparkle, gleam' (Il., late also prose). <PG(V)►
•VAR Only present. Rarely with ȧva-, napa-, nepi-, vito-.
●comp ïupi-, nεpɩ-µápµapos ‘sparkling (of fire)' (Man., Hymn. Is.).
•DER Besides μаpµápεos ‘gleaming, flashing, sparkling' (II.) with µapµapíšw
µapμaípw (Pi., D. S.); µapµapvyń [f.] ‘flashing, sparkling', of rapid movements, etc.
(IA since 0 265), cf. on ȧpyós 1 for the semantics; formed after aμapvyń. Thence
μаpμаpуód 'seeing sparks' (Нp.), μаρμарúσσw (cf. àµapúσow) hapiaipw
(Them., Jul.); apμáρvуμа (Cael. Aur.).
=
=
•ETYM Analyzed as a reduplicated intensive yod-present µаpμaípw < *µαp-µαp-ɩw,
standing beside uаpμápɛoç like Saudáλλw beside Saudáλɛoç. The discussion of the
semantics and parallels in other IE languages by Tichy 1983: 289-296 shows that the
word may well be an onomatopoeia in origin. This means that Pre-Greek origin is a
strong possibility, and in fact, it is almost ascertained by aμapúσσw, with a
prothetic vowel. The suffix -vy- also speaks for this.
An element μap- is found in Maïpa [f.] "the sparkling one", name of Sirius (Call.,
Eratosth.), also as a PN in Hom., and in μapavyέw. Cf. further perhaps the PN
Auoí-μapoç, son of Poseidon (Paus. 9, 29, 6), perhaps from *Auto-μápμapos?
The connection with µapíλŋ and ►µapiɛúç is quite possible in terms of Pre-Greek
origin. It was thought that Skt. márīci- [f., m.] 'beam of light, mirage in the air' was a
certain outer-Greek cognate. Although accepted by Mayrhofer KEWA 2: 589 and
Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 321, the connection must be rejected, since the Greek vocalism
μap- cannot be explained in this way (PIE has no phoneme *a). See µápμapoç.
·fiápriapos.
μápчapoç [m.] 'stone, (piece of) rock' (M 380, 1 499, probably also E. Ph. 663 [lyr.] and
Ar. Ach. 1172 [lyr.]), also an attribute of лετpоç (П 735, E. Ph. 1401); 'white stone,
marble' (Hp., Thphr., Theoc.); also μápμаpov [n.] ‘id.' (Call., late inscr.); also
'callosity on the foot of asses' (Hippiatr.). <PG?(0)►
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. μаpμapo-pεyyns 'gleaming like marble' (Tim. Pers.).
●DER μаρµáρ-ivos (Theoc., inscr.), -ɛoc (inscr., pap., AP) ‘of marble'; -óɛɩ 'gleaming
like marble' (S.), -wdŋs ‘marble-like' (Et. Gud.); uncertain μаpμαpiкóç, of äoßeotos
(PHolm. 25, 19); probably rather to Mapµapiкý. Further µapµapîtis (néɩpɑ) ‘marble-
like' (Ph. Byz.); also a plant name, 'peony, Fumaria' (Ps.-Dsc.), because of the blue-
gray color; Strömberg 1940: 26, also ‘peony' (Plin., who explains the plant's name
from its location). µαρμαρ-ápιoç 'marble worker' (inscr.; = Lat. marmorārius).
Denominative apμаpóμα, -ów [v.] 'to be changed into marble, to cover with
marble' (Lyc., Hero); µapµápwσis 'callosity' (Hippiatr.) is best taken directly from
µápµаpov, cf. on ɑétwoiç s.v. ►aiɛtós. µapµapwoσós 'with callosity' (Hippiatr.) is
from Lat. marmorōsus 'id.'.
•ETYM Because of its original sense of ‘stone, rock', Frisk connected it with μápvaμai,
assuming that the meaning ‘marble' resulted from folk-etymological connection with
μарμаíрw, μарμápɛoç. P. Mazon prefers a connection with μapuaípw; cf. LSJ's 'a
crystalline rock which sparkles'. Pre-Greek origin is probable.
The age of the veterinary meaning 'callosity' cannot be established; in any case, it
does not represent an independent development from a supposed mg. *hardening'
vel sim., but is rather a direct metaphor from 'stone' or 'marble'. The same
development is seen in Lat. marmor, which was borrowed from Greek. The forms
found in Western European languages are from Latin. See μápvaμai, ►µapμaípw.
µápvaµaɩ [v.] ‘to fight, battle' (II.). <IE? *merh₂- 'seize, grip'>
•VAR Only present; by dissimilation ßapváµεvos [ptc.].
•COMP Rarely with έлɩ, лερɩ-.
⚫ETYM The zero-grade nasal present μápvaчa has an exact formal pendant in Skt.
mṛṇīhí [ipv.], from which thematic mṛṇáti 'to crush', also 'to grab' was formed. If
this etymology is correct, μáрvαa may originally have meant 'to crush one
another', or alternatively, it may derive from the sphere of wrestling (from 'to grab').
Both Gr. and Skt. may derive from athematic *mr-n(e)h₂-. For possible further
cognates, most of which do not seem ascertained, see LIV² s.v. *merh₂-. See
▶ qiápriapos.
µápëτw [v.] ‘to catch, seize, lay hold off, overtake' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. µápчai (Il.), perf. µεµаpлεv, etc. (Hes., A. R.).
•COMP Also with кατα-, σuv-.

=== page 480 ===

908
hápornog
•DER µάρлç [m.] 'robber' (A. Supp. 826 [lyr.]; Schwyzer: 271, 504³); káµµapyiç.
μéτpov σitikóv, τò éµéðчov. Aioλɛiç 'a corn-measure (Aeol.)' (H.).
ETYM A system without outer-Greek cognates. Note the glosses (all H.) ẞpáчai-
ovλlaẞɛiv, ávaλwoai, kpúyai, Oŋpεñσa 'to gather, spend; consume, hide, hunt' and
ßpárteɩv. ¿oðiɛiv, kpústteiv, áqavíɛɩ to eat, hide, make disappear; remove', t
otóµati ɛ̃λkeiv, ǹ otεvášεiv ‘to suck into one's mouth, or to sigh, groan', with ßp- <
mr-.
With a different auslauting velar, we find ẞpaкɛiv ovviέvai 'to understand', i.e. 'to
grasp, and ẞpážať ovlλaßɛiv, dakɛiv, кaτaлɩɛiv ‘to gather, bite, drink'. The latter
have been compared with Skt. mṛśáti 'to touch take'. However, the variation ê : ë
cannot be explained in IE terms (improbable is assimilation μ
K > μ
л as pеr
Schwyzer: 302). Rather, the variants point to Pre-Greek *mr(a)k"-, which became
either ßpaл- or ẞpaк-, with a reflex different from that of the IE labiovelar, or µapë-.
See ẞpaкεĭv, µañéɛiv.
-
-
µápoɩñños [m.] ‘bag, pouch (for money), purse' (X., LXX, Hell. pap.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Codd. also -ɩñoç, -vä(Ã)oç.
•DER Diminutive μарσíллov, -íлov, -úл(л)ov (Нp., LXX, Hell. pap.).
•ETYM The word is most probably Pre-Greek because of its variants in л(л) and ɩ/v.
Borrowed into Lat. marsup(p)ium, -sip(p)-; see WH s.v.
paptixópaç [m.] according to Ctesias (apud Arist., Paus.), an Indian name for a
mythical animal, acc. to Paus. 9, 21, 4 (μаρτóрα) the tigre, = ȧvdpoqȧyoç. <LW
Iran.
ETYM From Iranian; related to OP martiya- [m.] 'man' and Av. x'ar- [v.] 'to
consume', MoP mardom-xar 'man-eater'. Cf. Brust 2005: 449ff.
µáptvç [m., f.] ‘witness' (II.) 'martyr, blood-witness' in christian litt. <PG(S)►
•VAR Aeol. (Hdn. Gr.) and Dor. μµáρτup, Cret. Epid. µaïτvç (-ps), -poç, also μµáρτv
[acc.] (Simon.), µáptvoi [dat.pl.] (-poɩ Hippon.?); thematicized in epic and NWGr.
háptUpos.
●COMP μаpо-éqµα [v.] 'to call to witness' (inscr., pap.), yɛvdó-µaptvç ‘false
witness' (Pl.), έní-µapτuç ‘witness' (Ar., Call., A. R.), probably back-formation from
л-μapúpoμai, -pεw; on alleged έлµápτvpos (for εл µápτpoç) see Leumann 1950:
71.
•DER μаρτupíα (λ 325; cf. below on μаpτpéw), µаpτúpiov (IA) ‘testimony, evidence'.
Denominatives: 1. μаρτúρoμα [v.] 'to call to witness' (IA), also with prefix, e.g. Sia-,
έnɩ-; 2. µaptvpéw [v.] 'to testify, bear witness' (Alc., Pi., IA), often with prefix, e.g.
ȧvɩɩ-, ¿к-, -, diα-, кατα-, σuv-; thence μаρτúpηµа (E.), (ȧvti-, katα-)-µaptúpnois
(Epicur., pap.) ‘testimony', also (dia-, ék-, έnɩ-, ovµ-)µapτvpía ‘id.'.
⚫ETYM The basis may be a verbal abstract *μáp-TV- 'testimony', seen in μáp-tus, -tuv,
-TUσt. The change from the abstract mg. 'testimony' to the appellative 'witness' is
frequently attested, e.g. MoFr. témoin < Lat. testimōnium, MoE witness originally
'testimony', then 'witness'. The suffix -po- gave rise to μáρτуpоç, probably of
adjectival origin. A compromise with μápтuç then perhaps led to the consonantal
stem μápτup-; note the gen.pl. μapτúpwv (εvavτíov µаpτúpwv, etc.), which can be
uáoe入ns
909
both from the o-stem and from the consonantal stem. Dissimilation occurred in
µaïtv(p)s < *µáptvp-ç; µáptvσi and μápτuç can be explained in the same way.
µápτʊç has been explained as a zero grade tu-derivation from the root *smer-
'remember', which is found in Skt. smárati and which may have other derivatives in
Greek, e.g. ►μépчuva 'care, concern'; the proper meaning of μápτus would then be
*remembrance'. However, a reconstruction *smr-tu- would rather give *ẞpaτv-;
therefore, I assume that it is rather a loan from Pre-Greek (see Fur.: 296). This is
confirmed by the suffixes -tu-r-, which are non-Indo-European.
μаσάo̟μα [v.] to chew, bite' (Hp., com., Arist.). <?, PG?(V)►
VAR Aor. μaonσaσbai.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. Siα-, кατα-.
⚫DER Derivatives: (diα-)µáσnua 'bite, morsel' (Hp., Antiph., Thphr.), (Sta-)µáonois
‘chewing' (Thphr., Dsc.), µaoŋtýp “chewer”, ‘muscle in the lower jaw' (Hp.), лapa-
μаσńτη “by-chewer", 'trencher-companion, parasite' (middle com.). Besides
лapaµaoúvíŋs ‘id.' (middle com.), µаðúváηs (H.), Maσuvτíaç PN (Ar.) from
*µaσúvw; cf. µoσðúvε· þáσãσð ẞpadéws 'to chew slowly' (H.); Chantraine
corrects to µãσ-, which may be right or wrong; the variation might point to Pre-
Greek origin.
⚫ETYM The meaning of μаσáoμα suggests that it is an iterative-intensive deverbative
formation to a primary yod-present (cf. qũpáw to qбpw < *ôňp-w). Next to it we
find an innovative *μaσúvw. The yod-present has been analyzed as PGr. *mnth-i̟e/o-
on account of the gloss µáðva уváðoι ‘jaws' (H.); a stem PGr. *mnth- can also been
recognized in μáota} << µáoto- < µað-t-.
As there is not enough evidence for a sound change *-tH- > Gr. -0-, I reject the
comparison with Skt. math- 'to stir' < IE *metH- (which is semantically not
compelling either). The synonym Lat. mandō, -ere 'to chew' is mostly derived from
*metH-, too, but in Latin, the development *mt-nH-> mand- is regular (cf. pandō <
*pt-nH-).
On the other hand, the Gm. group of OHG mindel, ON mél [n.] 'bit of the bridle' <
IE *ment-, Go. munþs ‘mouth' < IE *mnt- has been compared. Gr. µað- was analyzed
as the corresponding zero grade, but the aspiration cannot be explained. Moreover,
the Gm. group should rather be compared with MW mant ‘gums, mouth', Lat.
mentum ‘jaw' as *mn-to-.
In sum, everything remains uncertain, but note that the gloss μoσσúvæv could point
to Pre-Greek origin.
µáσŋ [m.] ‘leather', name of leather objects (cf. Suppoépα) like 'leather shoe, strap'
(Sapph., Hp., S.); also metaph. of a flexible and flattering man (Ar.). <PG?►
•VAR Aeol. μáσλns, -ntos (with loss of the 0); µáσðλŋ [f.] (S. Fr. 571, H.).
⚫DER μασtivos 'like leather' (Cratin., Eup.), μσ½µατα [n.pl.] 'leather ware'
(Ctes.).
•ETYM Formation like τáƒŋç, λéßiŋs, etc.; explanation uncertain. Traditionally
derived from quán (see ¼µác) with loss of the anlaut (for which µáστ is
compared, see Chantraine 1933: 375, Strömberg 1944: 44). However, such a loss is

=== page 481 ===

910
haodóc
highly improbable. Schwyzer: 533 and 7253 derives µáσλns from ►μάστ and
►μaíoμa; thence чuáσ0η with secondary adaptation to iµáç.
Extensively on μáσÐλη, Hamm Glotta 32 (1953): 43ff. Possibly Pre-Greek (see Fur.:
172118).
μασóç 'breast'. →μαστóç.
μаσкаvλnç [m.] 'basin for ablution'. <?>>
•ETYM Late transcription of Hebrew maskel (inscr. Philadelphia, Lydia IIIP). DELG
asks whether it is a notation of Baσкaúλnç.
µáσкη · díкɛλλα (H.). →µaкéλŋ.
µάoretov [n.] ‘leaf or stalk of silphion' (Antiph.). <PG?(S)►
•ETYM On the suffix -ετo-, see Fur.: 115ª.
µάoow [v.] ‘to knead (dough), press a workable material in a form; to strike, wipe off,
make a reproduction of sth.' (since τ 92). <IE? *menk-, or *mehģ- ‘knead'>
•VAR Att. μάττw, -qμα, aor. μážα, -σα, pass. μaña,
μéμαуμα, act. чéµaxа (Ar.).
⚫COMP Often with prefix, like ȧло-, έк-, ȧvα-.
vaɩ, perf. med.
●DER 1. ¿kµayɛt̃ov (μayɛñov Longin.) 'mass of which prints are made, offprint, mould;
towel, napkin' (IA). 2. µayiç, -ídos [f.] ‘kneaded mass, cake, kneading trough,
dresser' (Hp., Com, S.). 3. µáyµa [n.] ‘kneaded mass, thick salve, smear' (pap., Plin.),
čк-, áлó-µayµa ‘offprint, wiping cloth, wiped off dirt' (Hp., S., Thphr.), µayµóv. tò
kaðápotov ‘purifying means' (H.). 4. ěk-, ává-µaži ‘wiping off (Arist.). 5. µayɛúç
[m.] ‘kneader, baker, sbd. who wipes off (Poll., AP, H.), probably directly from the
verb. 6. µaкτηp. ǹ кáρdoлoç 'kneading trough', ǹ лvελíç 'socket, basin'. Kai dɩpеépa
'leather bag'. Kai ópxñσewç σxñµa 'scheme of a dance' (H.); (àло-, kata-)µáktns
'someone who kneads or wipes off (Com. Adesp., H.), fem. ȧлодáктρα (Рoll.). 7.
µáкτpa [f.] ‘baking trough' (com., X.), ‘trough, bathing tub, sarcophagus' (Hell.),
spelled µáкpα, see Schwyzer: 337; (ék-, áñó-)-µákτpov ‘offprint, towel, etc.' (E., Ar.).
8. LaKtńplov μάкτрα (Plu.). 9. μактρσμó name of a dance (Ath.), after
кopdaкiσµóç; cf. on μакτηp above; thence -íστpiα name of a dancing girl (ibid.). 10.
àлoµaydalıá (Ar., Plu., Gal.), µaydaλiá (Gal.), -éa (Hippiatr.) 'bread crumb for
handwashing; like άpaλá, quτaλiá, etc., but with unexplained 8 (perhaps after
*άлo̟µáубηv?). 11. With root-final к: μакapíа· ẞpшµα έк (wµov кai ȧλqíτwv 'dish
made of soup and barley groats' (H.).
=
⚫ETYM In Germanic and Balto-Slavic, comparanda are found that may be derived
from IE *meh₂ģ-, e.g. MoHG machen, OS makōn 'to make, erect, build, if from *to
knead, form' (but note Molc. maka ‘to smear'), OCS mazati, 1sg. mažą ‘to smear,
salve' (MBret. mezaff 'to knead' is unrelated, see Matasović 2009 s.v.); uncertain is
the comparison with Arm. macanim, macnum 'to stick, congeal'.
On the other hand, a root IE *menk- is found in Lith. minkyti, 1sg. minkau, also
mánkyti, 1sg. mánkau 'to knead a soft mass', OCS moka, Ru. muká ‘flour' and related
Balto-Slavic words. From Gm., one might adduce MoHG mengen, OE mengan, etc.,
µáotič, -¡yoç
911
if the original mg. is ‘knead together', and from Indo-Aryan Skt. macate ‘to crush,
etc.' (Dhātup.).
The etymology is connected with the question which velar was original in Greek, -k-
or -y-. The isolated µaкapía is the only one with a clear voiceless stop, for µáσow <
*μαк-w can be explained as analogical after the aorist. If related, μāča points to -y-,
but чaуñvai and most nominal forms -y- can be explained by analogy as well.
Therefore, both options remain open. A suppletive system *menk (whence μaкapía,
μáσow) beside meh₁g- (whence μауñval) is conceivable, too. I retain some doubts,
however, about the form -uaydaλiá. See μāča.
µáσowv ‘longer'. →µñkoç.
µáota [?] · ŋyɛµáv, ½ µɛyáλws (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
µáσtaž, -akoç [f.] 'mouth; mouthful, morsel' (I 324), also metaph. 'locust' (S. Fr. 716,
Nic.), Ambraciotic acc. to Clitarch. apud EM 216, 9, because of its voracity (cf.
Strömberg 1944: 17f.). <PG?▷
•DER µaστá¶w [v.] 'to chew' (Nic. Th. 918), also ouμ- (Hippiatr.), with expressive by-
forms: 1. μασταpúšw (v.l. -íľw) [v.] 'to chew fervently, without uttering a word', of an
old man (Ar. Ach. 689); cf. μаστаpíšɛiv. µãσtixão¤αɩ. кαì τρεμεу 'to tremble'. "
σpodpŵç ǹ kakŵç μаσãσðαι to chew violently and in a bad way' (H.), µaotηpúšεɩv.
tò kakŵç µaσão¤a (Phot.); formation like кɛλapúчw, þarτapíšw, etc. 2. µaotixáw,
only ptc. dat.sg. μаστɩуóшντ (Нes. Sc. 389, verse-final) 'chewing violently for anger'
= 'grinding the teeth, foaming' (of a boar), µãστɩxãσðaɩ in H. s.v. μаσταpíεv (see
above); back-formation μаστíη [f.] 'resin of the mastich-tree' (Com. Adesp.,
Thphr.), µaotíx-ivos (Dsc.), -ŋpá [f.] ‘plaster from mastich' (Aet.), after έλaŋpóç,
etc. (Chantraine 1933: 232f.).
•ETYM Both μáστaž and µαoτášw, which need not be directly related, go back to a
derivative чaσ-τ- (from *μα-τ-, cf. the gloss μávat. yváðo H.) which stands
beside the yod-present μаσáoμai (from *µα--). The function of the proposed
formation remains unclear, however. For the formation of µαστášw, cf. ßaorálw,
кλαστάw (beside кλáw), etc. (Schwyzer: 706); for µáστаž, see лóрτaž (: róptic),
µúλač (: µúloc). The gloss µéσταкa. tǹv µɛpaonµévηy tpoqýv ‘chewed food (H.),
with deviating vocalism, does not show an old full grade, but it was simply reshaped
folk-etymologically after μεστós 'mouthful'.
The group may be of Pre-Greek origin; see μаσáoμai for further details.
μаστεúш 'to search after'. μaíoµai, patɛúw.
μάστɩ, -¡yoç [f.] 'whip, scourge', metaph. 'plague' (Il.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Also dat. uάστĩ, acc. -ĭv (Y 500, o 182, AP).
•COMP μαστɩуo-pópos 'bearing the whip', also name of a policeman (Th., pap.).
⚫DER Diminutive μаστíуov (M. Ant.); μаστу-íαç [m.] 'rogue' (Att.), see Chantraine
1933: 93; -ía name of a magic plant (PMag. Par.).
Denominative verbs: 1. µaστíw ‘to whip, scourge, thrash' (Il.), present only, sporadic
in epic. 2. µaσtíšw (post-Hom.), -íodw (Theoc.), aor. µaστížaɩ (Il.; Hell.) ‘id.”, either

=== page 482 ===

912
HAOTIXáw
from µáσtiš or enlarged from µaotíw, beside µaotik-twp ‘scourger, chastiser' (A.
Eu. 159), Tp 'id.' (conj. A. Supp. 466). 3. μаστɩу-wσαι, -ów (-έw Hdt. 1, 114) ‘id.'
(IA), with μаστíуwσis 'whipping' (Ath.), -woчos 'worth a thrashing' (Luc.), after
λɛvõчos (Arbenz 1933: 99).
⚫ETYM The connection with μaíoμαɩ, as an enlargement in -y- of an old instrument
noun in -ti-, is doubtful; the word is rather Pre-Greek, on account of the suffix -iy-.
µaotixáw →μiáotač.
μαστóç [m.] 'nipple, motherbreast, breast', metaph. 'hill, height', also name of a cup
(Apollod. Cyren. apud Ath. 11, 487b, Oropos, Delos); cf. Jaeger RhM 102 (1959): 337ff.
(on the use in Clem. Al. and Ph.). <PG(V)►
VAR Post-Hom. μаστóç, epic ion. poet. μačóç, Dor. (Theoc.) μaσdóç, Hell. also
µaσðóç; on µaσtíxŋ see ►µáotaž.
•COMP qiλó-µɑστos loving the breast' (A.), yuvakó-µaσtos (-Ɖos) 'having female
breasts' (medic.), dɛкá-µašos ‘having ten breasts' (Epigr. Gr.); µaσtó-de-tov [n.]
'breast-band' (AP); cf. e.g. áкµó-0ɛtov.
•DER Diminutive μaστíov 'small cup' (Oropos), μaστápov ‘id.' (Delos), also 'small
breast' (Alciphr.).
•ETYM Attempts have been made to attribute μšós, μστós, μaσós to three
different pre-forms, *mad-do-, *mad-to-, *mad-do- (Schrader KZ 30 (1890): 476).
However, the existence of a nominal suffix *-dh-, and especially of *-d-, is doubtful.
Moreover, semantically, derivation from the root of μadáw is meaningless.
If the form is Pre-Greek, µačós [mazdos] and μaστóç differ in voice only (and
aspiration in Hell. μao0ós). Since voice and aspiration are not distinctive in Pre-
Greek, all forms may go back to the same Pre-Greek word. It is therefore not
preferable to explain μaσós (attested at a later date) as a reshaping after words with
comparable meaning, or by association with words like otñßoç, kúσßos, ßpóxBos.
µaσtporós [m., f.] 'procurer, procuress' (Ar., X., etc.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also μаστpоoós (H.); hypocoristic µáστpuç [f.] (Phot.).
⚫DER μαστρолкóç, -Олεúш, -олεíа (Att.).
•ETYM The usual connection with μaíoμα 'touch, investigate' is uncertain, as the
variant with -q- may point to a Pre-Greek word. Fur.: 160 compares µáτpvλλoç, -a
'procurer', ματpuλɛïov ‘brotheľ, μaστρvλλɛïov and µáστpus procurer, -ess'; note the
variation σ/ zero in these forms, on which see Fur.: 301ff.
µaσxáλŋ [f.] ‘armpiť' (h. Merc.), metaph. ‘axil, branch' (Thphr.), ‘bay' (Str.), etc.
<PG(S)►
●COMP E.g. àµôɩ-µáσxaλos 'with two arm-holes', of Xitwv (com.).
•DER µaoxaλíç [f.] ‘axil' (Thphr.), µaoxáλɩ(v)ov, -ɛov (-έov cod.) [f.] ‘basket made of
palm twigs' (H., sch.), -taños ‘belonging to the armpiť (inscr., medic.); µaσxaλiotýp
'girdle in the arm-pits' (Hdt., A.), like ẞpaxioviστηp, etc., see Chantraine 1933: 328;
formally, it is a euphemistic expression for 'mutilate' from the denominative
µɑoxaλíšoµaɩ, with probable original mg. “be girded in the armpits”: according to
ancient informants, all bodily extremities including nose and ears were cut off
μáτη
913
during mutilation, and were fastened to a string running through the armpits.
Thence μаoxаλoμós 'mutilation', µão×αλíσµατα [pl.] 'cut off extremities' (A., S.,
Lex.). The correctness of this old interpretation is doubted by Boehm in PW 14:
2060ff.
•ETYM The formation may be compared with that of άykáλŋ 'bent arm'; further
details are unclear. No doubt a Pre-Greek word. A very bold attempt was made by
Adams Glotta 62 (1984): 65f. See ► µáλn.
uátalog qiátn.
μаτεúw [v.] 'to search, seek, strive to' (E 110). <?>
•VAR µatéw in µáτηs (Theoc. 29, 15, from Aeol. *µátŋµ), µatɛt̃· Inteĩ; µatñoal.
paoteñoal, (ntñoaɩ ‘id.'; µáσoaɩ· Čŋtñoai (H.), µateĩoðaɩ• 【nteĩoðaɩ (Hp. apud Erot.).
•COMP Also with prefix: ¿σ-µaτéoµai, -µáσασðαι (Hp.), ¿µi-, kat-eµi-µatéw (Nic.) ‘to
put the finger (down the throat), to implant (a sting)'.
•DER µáτos [n.] ‘investigation' (Hp. apud Gal.), µατýρ· έлíσкoлoç 'supervisor',
εniηtwv, έpevvyτns 'searcher, inspector' with μаτηpεúεɩv• µa<σ>tεúεiv, Čŋteïv (H.).
⚫ETYM μаτεúw is probably secondary for μаτéw (cf. Schwyzer: 732). The latter
formally corresponds to Saτéoμα and лατéo̟μα, so we probably have to start from a
nominal t-stem.
The verbal nouns äðαστоç, ǎлαστоç are parallelled by άлроτíμαστos, while
-táo(ơ)aoĐai, pácoat conform to the aorists Sáo(a)aoĐai, ráo(a)aobat. Therefore,
the verbal forms with -σ- can be combined with µatéw, just like nominal
að þaðτúç, µãστýp, µáotiž, ►µáoµa, etc. The form μаστεúш (seе ►μαíoμα) may also
have received its -σ- from these sigmatic forms.
The pair μaτéw: μaíoμat may be compared with Saτéoμαι: Saíoμαi; but ascertained
outer-Greek comparanda are lacking for μaíoμa (unlike for daíoμai).
µatέw [v.] ‘to tread, in the ptc. µátɛioɑɩ [nom.f.pl.] (Aeol., Incerti auct. 16, 3 LP, from
*µáη-µ), μatε· лаτεï ‘id.' (H.). <IE? *men- 'tread'>
•ETYM Formed like ►µaτέw ‘to search', if not simply a rhyme with лaτέw. Connected
with a primary verb 'to tread' in Balto-Slavic, e.g. Lith. minti, isg. minù 'to tread
(down), break flax', OCS męti, 1sg. múno̟ ‘to press together', Ru. mjať', 1sg. mnu ‘to
knead, tread (loam), break (flax)'; nominal derivatives are found in Celtic, e.g. W
mathr 'trampling, mire' < *mn-tro-. Skt. carma-mná- [m.] ‘tanner' cannot be
included here; see Mayrhofer EW Aia s.v. Seе ►лаTÉW.
µátŋ [f.] ‘fault, folly' vel sim. (Stesich., A., S.). <?►
●var Also µatíŋ ‘id.' (k 79, A. R.), a metrically convenient transformation (Porzig
1942: 204 and 70); µátŋv [adv.] ‘idly, in vain, without reason' (h. Cer.).
•DER 1. µάταιoç ‘idly, empty, foolish, rash' (IA) with μаταιó-τηs (Hell.), -σúvn
(Polem. Phgn.) 'idleness, etc.' and denominatives: a) (άлo-)ματαï [v.] (Hdt., J.),
μаτάw [v.] (A., S.) 'to talk nonsense, act foolishly', also -auάw [v.] 'id.' (Hell.); b)
µataióoµiai, -ów [v.] ‘to bring to naught, act foolishly' (LXX, NT) with µаταíwµa
(Hermas). 2. ματáш, aoг. ματñσαι 'to do in vain, miss, be useless' (Il.).

=== page 483 ===

914
μáτov
⚫ETYM The difficulty in determining the original meaning of the verbal noun μáτη
(thus Fraenkel 1912: 115) and of its fossilized accusative µáτηy makes it very hard to
find a convincing etymology. The connection with the Slavic group of Pol. matać,
1sg. matam ‘to swindle, turn, lie, deceive', SCr. matati, 1sg. matam ‘to allure, attract',
clearly has little value.
Meier-Brügger Glotta 67 (1989): 42-44 connects the root *men- 'to have in minď,
with negative connotations. Fur.: 88 n. 476 notes that words for 'stupid, foolish' are
often of substrate origin (see also ibid. 242, 339; cf. µаττaßoç. ó µwρóç 'moron' H.).
See μvów, µαττaßoç.
μάτιov [n.] Eg. measure of capacity (pap. II-III³)<?>
•ETYM Unknown.
uatic [adj.] - Héya,. TIVÈ, Ėrì Toũ BaolÉus (H.). <?>
ETYM Tentatively compared with Celtic words for 'good', e.g. OIr. maith < PCI.
*mati-. It remains doubtful whether the gloss is from Greek or from another
language.
µaτpvλɛïov →µaσtporós.
µáttaßos [adj.] · ó μwpós 'someone stupid, moron' (H.). <PG? (SV)►
•VAR µattáßŋs. åлopŵv ‘without escape or means' (H.), µατtaßeĩ. nepißλénel,
άdŋµovɛi ‘gazes around, is troubled (H.), µαττaßo<ú>µevos. µéλλwv kaì áлokvŵv
'who is about to do something but hesitates' (H.).
•ETYM A popular word, acc. to Chantraine 1933: 261f. derived from µátŋ with the
degrading suffix -ß-, and containing expressive gemination. It may well be Pre-
Greek; see Fur.: 242, who connects it with μáτatoç 'idle'. See ►µátŋ.
µattúŋ [f.] name of a sweet dish, which is made of all kinds of ingredients, like minced
meet, poultry, aromatic spices; it is ascribed to the Thessalians and the Macedonians
(middle and new com.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also a [f.], -ŋs [m.].
-a
•COMP As a first member in μаτtvo-kórŋs [m.] (epithet, Amm. Marc.), perhaps also
in чаττvо-λoчxós (Ar. Nu. 451 and Hdn. Gr. 1, 231 according to Bentley; codd.
patio-).
•DER µattvá¢w [v.] 'to prepare a µ.' (Alex.).
•ETYM Formerly analyzed as derived from *µatτús (comparing ixеún: ixĐúc, deλqúa
: Sɛλqúc, etc.), representing *μaк-τús with a dialectal (Cretan or perhaps Thessalian)
assimilation. This would be a tv-derivative of μáσσw < *μαк-дw 'to knead'; see Kalén
1918: 91ff. following Ath. 14, 663b. Improbable. Fur.: 386 compares μaτúλλŋ ‘id.'
(Poll. 6, 70). The a-vocalism in the root and the alternation (t) point to Pre-Greek
origin. Borrowed as Lat. mattea; see WH s.v.
.
flails 1 µáõαɩpα. кαì ǹ µτò (Latte: μσív) лоoñσα large knife, also a
procuress' (H.). <LW Lyd.?>
•DER µavλíčw = µаστролεúш 'to pander' (H., sch.) with µavλiστns [m.] (Cat. Cod.
Astr., Phot., Suid.), µavlíσtpia [f.] (Suid., sch., EM); µavdiotýpiov. rap’‘Iññúvakti,
μáxλos
915
λúdiov vóµσµ¤ ‘a Lydian custom / currency in Hipponax' (λéµσµa cod.) λertóv ti
'something small or delicate' (H.); Latte gives Aúdióv ti Aertóv vóµσµa ‘a small
Lydian currency', fr. 126 Bergk.
•ETYM A chain of hypotheses is assumed by Jongkees Acta Orbis 16 (1938): 146ff.:
from Lyd. *mav-lis, an adj. built on *Mavs, the Lydian name of the mother goddess
Magna mater (seen in PNs from Asia Minor, e.g. Mava, Mav-ɛvva, Mav-oo-wλloc,
etc.). Thus, it would properly mean ‘belonging to Mavs”. Thence 1. = µáxaɩpa, as the
Magna mater was considered the patroness of metal weapons; 2. 'woman devoted to
the Magna mater', who makes her money as a prostitute; 3. 'coin of the Magna
mater' (with added suffix -τýpiov). Criticism of these hypotheses in O. Masson 1962:
178f.
µavlıç 2, -1doç, -105 [f.] ‘knife' (Call., Nic., AP, H., Suid., sch.). →µañλiç 1.
μаupоç ⚫VARμаvρóç. áμavpóç.
=
µaqóptns, -ov [m.] 'short cloak with a cap' for women and monks. <LW Sem.>
•VAR μaqóp(T)ιov [n.].
•COMP бελμаτɩко-μó - 'a μ. cut like a Dalmatian cloak', from dελ-,
Saλμaτiкń, Lat. Del-, Dalmatica (pap. imperial period).
•ETYM From Sem., cf. Hebr. ma'aforet, Aram. ma'aforā, -fortā ‘cloak with cap'. See
Lewy KZ 59 (1932): 192. Lat. probably borrowed mafortium, maforte from Greek, as
well as mafortis, -fors; see WH s.v. Greek borrowed σouẞριко-μаqóptiov (pap.
imperial period) from Latin.
µáxaɩpa [f.] ‘large knife, butchery knife' (II.); post-Hom. also 'short sword, dagger'.
<PG(V)►
•COMP μаxаιрo-ópos [adj.] 'sword-bearing', subst. msc. 'sword-bearer' (IA), à-
μáxaчpoç 'without a knife' (Pherecr.).
⚫DER Diminutive μaxaíp-tov (Hp., X., Arist.), -íç [f.] (com., Str.), -ídiov (Ph., Luc.);
further µaxaɩpãç [m.] 'sword-bearer' (pap., inscr.), µaxαɩpwτós ‘equipped with a
sword' (Gal., Paul. Aeg.); μaxaчpíwv, -iwvoç [m.] plantname = ipíov (Dsc. 4, 20, v.l.
-úviov), after the form of the leaves, acc. to Strömberg 1940: 44; also as a PN (Paus.);
Maxaipɛús [m.] (Str., sch. Pi.).
on
•ETYM Like yέpaιpa, xíµαιpα, лíεipа, etc., μáxαιpа looks like a derivative in *-α- built
an r-stem. Traditionally connected with μάoμα, but DELG finds this
implausible. Semitic etymology (with reservations) in Lewy 1895: 177 (comparing
Hebr. m²kērā 'sword', but acc. to Gordon Antiquityy 30 (1956): 22ff., this is rather
from Greek); cf. Kretschmer Glotta 19 (1931): 160. Borrowed as Lat. machaera.
I compare μáуɛɩpos 'cook', and on account of the interchange y/X, conclude that it is
a Pre-Greek word.
μáxλoç [adj.] lascivious' (of women), ‘luxuriant, wild' (Hes., A.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR µáxλnç åкpаτηç, лóрvoç 'out of control, sodomite' (H.); also μaxláç, -ádos
[f.] (Man., AP, Ph.), µaxλís. έtaípa, лópvη 'courtisane, prostitute' (H.).

=== page 484 ===

916
iáyouar
●DER µaxλo-σúvη ‘lasciviousness, voluptuousness' (№ 30, Hes., Hdt.), -tŋs ‘id.' (EM,
Sch.); µaxλɩкóç ‘like a lascivious woman' (Man.); µaxλɛúoµaɩ [v.] ‘to be lascivious' in
µεµaxλevµévov íτop (Man.), µaxλwvtes. nopveúovtεç ‘prostituting' (H.).
•ETYM The comparison with Skt. makhá-, an attribute of gods, is gratuitous and
should be discarded in view of the unknown meaning of the latter (see Mayrhofer
EWAia 2: 288). Fur.: 211 adduces Báкxos (with interchange ẞ/u), and compares (ibid.
fn. 48) Arm. mahaz ‘lascivious', suggesting that all these words are from Asia Minor.
Note that a word of this meaning with interchange ẞ/u may well be Pre-Greek.
чáxoμαι [v.] 'to fight, combat' (II.). <PG?>
•VAR Epic also μáðéðèãi (µáðεóµévos, þaðéðúµévov with metr. lengthening), aor.
μaxéσ(σ)ασðaι (Il.), µаñσãσðα (D. S., Paus.), µaxɛσðñvai (Plu., Paus.), fut.
µaxñσoµaɩ (epic Ion.), µаxéσ(σ)oµaɩ (Ion. and late), µаxέoµαι (B 366), µaxoñµai
(Att.), µaxɛītaι (Y 26), perf. µεµáõnµai (Att.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. Sta-, σʊv-, άлo-. As a second member in μovo-µáxos
'fighting on his own' (A., E.), msc. ‘gladiator' (Str.), whence μovoμаx-έw, -ía, etc.,
vav-μáx-os 'fighting at sea' (AP), but vaú-чaxos from µáxη, see below.
•DER μáxη 'battle' (II.); as a second member in ä-, лрó-, σúµ-, vαú-, i̟ллó-чaxoç, with
derivatives like лродаx-íш, σvдμαx-éш, vανμαx-έw, -ía.
Thence: 1. μаxn-τns [m.] 'warrior' (Hom., LXX), Dor. μаxατáç (Pi.), µаɣáταp.
ávτíлaλoç ‘adversary' (H.), Aeol. μaxaíτaç (Alc. 350), probably hyperaeolism (cf.
DELG). 2. µáõ-чoç ‘warlike, militant' (IA), after äλкчoç; also msc. ‘soldier of an
Egyptian tribe', with µaxчµкóç in the way of the pά×чµ³ (pаp.). 3. Maxáwv [m.] PN
(Aeol. epic), Ion. -έwv, with Dor. Maxav-ídaç.
From μáxoμat also µax-nµwv ‘warlike' (M 247, AP) and µax-ητós 'to be fought with'
(μ 119), à-, лεр-μáx-τ (Att.), μаx-ητɩкóç 'ready for battle' (Pl., Arist.). The
second member -µá×ãç, as in åлɛɩpo-µáxãç ‘unexperienced in battle' (Pi.), Aɛovτo-
µáxãç ‘fighting with a lion' (Theoc.), may be derived from noun or verb alike.
⚫ETYM Beside the thematic root present μáxoμai, the isolated by-form чaxεoμα is
modelled on μaxσoμal, rather than a denominative of µáxη. The pair µaxñσoµaɩ :
εµα×ó-µην has parallels like åл-ε×ðñσoµαi : åл-ε×ðóµηv, µáðñóðμа : µαov and
уεvýσoμα εуεvóμŋy. One has therefore been inclined to analyze εчaxóμηy as an
original aorist, from which чáxoμα was subsequently made. Further evidence for
this view is the remarkably low frequency of the aorist in Homer (Trümpy 1950:
260333). It is supposed that a new aorist μaxéσ(o) aσbat arose (after the model of
кoτéσσασðaι, etc.) after μáxεσa had been reinterpreted as a present. The new
future μaxoчμaι then arose from μaxéσ(σ)ασðαɩ in analogy with the type tɛλéo(0)αɩ :
fut. Tελw.
In the domain of fighting and battle, old inherited expressions can hardly be
expected. The connection with a supposed Iran. PN *ha-mazan- "warrior" in
►Аμаčúv, àµαČαкáрαν· лоλεµε˜v. IIέpoat, and áµɑčavídɛç. ai µηλéα (H.) is
ingenious, but highly uncertain. Within Greek, it is formally possible to connect
чáxoчαι with μáxaipa ‘(butchering) knife and with µñxað, µòxavý ‘ruse' (cf. Xεɩpo-
μáxα [f.], scil. εταipɛía, the name of the workers' party in Milete acc. to Plu. 2, 298c.),
917
a suggestion which DELG rightly calls improbable. As an isolated root, μax- may
well be Pre-Greek.
µáч [adv.] 'blindly, in vain' (Hom.). <PG?►
•COMP As a first member in µayı-λóyos ‘speaking in vain' (h. Merc.), after other first
members in -ɩ, see Zumbach 1955: 22; µay-vλákāç ‘barking in vain' (Pi., Sapph.), etc.
•DER μay-ídios idle, useless' (E., Theoc.), -18íws [adv.] (Hom.).
⚫ETYM Adverb in -, always occurring before vowel, of unexplained origin. Not
related to Lat. mox 'soon', etc. (see WH s.v.). It could well be Pre-Greek.
µɛyaipw [v.] 'to grudge, envy, refuse' (II.), mostly with negation. <IE *megh₂- 'great'>
•VAR Аor. μεуñpal.
•DIAL According to sch. N 563 and Eust., from Salamis (cf. Ruijgh 1957: 162).
•DER Privative verbal adj. ȧ-µéyap-τos 'not enviable, unpleasant, unhappy' (Il.).
Perhaps Méyaipa [f.] name of one of the Erinyes.
•ETYM Formation like έxaípw, yɛpaipw, etc., formally identical with Arm. mecarem
'to esteem highly' from mec 'great', except for the yod-derivation. As Clackson 1994:
149-150 remarks, the suffix -aípw became productive in Greek, e.g. ¿λɛaípw to ¿λéw
'to pity'. Thus, it is unnecessary that an r-stem *meg(h₂)-r- 'greatness' or *megh₂-ro-
'great' underlies both the Greek and Armenian verbs.
The Greek development of meaning is understood by Clackson from 'to regard as
great' > 'regard as too great' > 'grudge'. See ▸µέyaç.
µέyapa 1 [n.pl.] ‘pits into which living pigs were thrown during the Thesmophoria'
(Paus.). LW Sem.?>
VAR Also uáy- (Men.).
•ETYM Probably from Semitic, cf. Hebr. me'ārā ‘cavity'. See Lewy 1895: 94, although
he prefers identifying the word with μέyapov ‘hall'.
µέyapov 2 [n.] ‘hall, room, the inner space of a temple', plur. ‘house, palace' (epic Ion.,
Il.); on the mg. e.g. Wace JHS 71 (1951): 203f. <PG▷
•VAR Gen.pl. -έwv (Sophr.).
•ETYM Undoubtedly a technical loan from the substrate, perhaps adapted to µέya; cf.
the TN Méyapa.
µέyaç [adj.] ‘great, big, large' (Il.). <IE *meg-h₂- ‘much, many'▷
•Var µɛyáλŋ [f.], µέya [n.]; compar. µέwv, superl. µέyɩotos (Il.).
●DIAL Att. compar. µɛí(wv, lengthened after кpεítτwv, åµɛívwv, etc. (Schwyzer: 538),
Myc. compar. me-zo.
•COMP μεуá-еччos 'with great mind' (Hom.), µεуαλ-ητwρ 'magnanimous' (II.),
μεуaλó-oppwv 'magnanimous' (Att.), cf. Hom. µéуa opovéwν; µεуɩσtó-tɩμoç 'with
highest honour' (A.).
●DER 1. From μεyɑ-: µéуɛðoç [n.] ‘greatness, sublimity' (Il.), Hdt. v.l. µέyaðoç; cf.
лλñ-оç; -ε- by vowel assimilation according to Schwyzer: 255, but this is improbable
入门-dog;
as such assimilations were irregular; thence μεуεÐ-ɩкóç ‘quantitative' (comm. Arist.),
-úvw [v.] 'to magnify', pass. 'to get exalted' (late), after μεyaλúvw; -óoμα =
μεуаλúvoμаι (medic., S. E.); PN Méyns with patronymic Mɛyádŋs (II.).

=== page 485 ===

918
μεdéwv, -έovσa
2. From μεyaλo-: μεyaλ-ɛïoç ‘grand(iose)' (Pl., X., Plb.), enlarged after avspɛioç,
with -εóτns 'highness, majesty' (LXX); μεуáλ-wμα [n.] 'greatness, power' (LXX),
-woúvn 'id.' (LXX, Aristeas), -w- analogical; -wστí [adv.] ‘magnificently'.
3. From μéуiστos: µeyiotãves [m.pl.] (rarely -áv sg.) 'great lords, magnates' (Men.,
LXX, NT), after the PNs in -ãvɛç, Björck 1950: 55, 278ff.; PN Mɛyiot-w [f.] (Emp.,
pap.), -íaç, -ɛúç; µɛyɩotɛúw [v.] ‘to be(come) very great' (App.).
•ETYM A form corresponding to μέya, µέyaç is found in Arm. mec ‘great', meca-w
[instr.] (a-stem); Skt. máhi [n.] 'great' (with h from *-gh₂-) can also be subsumed
under IE *mégh₂-. We find PGm. *meku with secondary *-u after *felu > Go. filu
‘many', see ►лolúç: ON mjąk 'very'. Further, Hitt. mekk- ‘much, many' (Old Script)
was reshaped into an i-stem mekki-.
The final -a from -h, is the zero grade of -ā in Skt. mahā- 'great' (as a first member),
maha-nt- 'id.'; the effect of a laryngeal after g was aspiration in Skt., with *gh > h. The
masculine μéуaç, -av is immediately understandable as an innovation from μéya; the
other forms have an enlargement *-/-, the origin of which is unlear. This
enlargement is also found in Go. mikils ‘great' < PGm. *mekila- and in synonymous
Lith. didelis 'great' (from didis ‘id.'). See ȧya-, µɛyaipw.
µɛdéwv, -éovoa ‘ruler'. →µέdw.
µédчvoç [m.] corn measure (IA), a “bushel” = 48 XoívɩкEÇ, which was about 52 1/2
liters in Athens. <PG>
⚫VAR Older -íuvoc; with dissimilation Fedчuvos (Gortyn).
•COMP As a second member in ŋuédчvov [n.] 'half-bushel', also -os [m.]
(haplological for ηµ-µéðчvov, originally a substantivized adj.).
•Der µµv-αoç 'measuring one μ.' (Gortyn), -αïov. μéτpov μodíov (H.).
ETYM Formally, μédчvoç looks like дépчuvα 'care, anxiety', λuvn 'harbor' (cf.
λíny), στáµvos 'wine-jar', etc. If we assume an enlarged mn-stem to the root *med-
(seen in Greek μεdo̟μа to carе', μédw 'to rule, govern', µηdεα 'counsels, plans').
However, the -- remains problematic. It is tempting to compare Lat. modius
"bushel", derived from modus 'measure'. Because of the great number of loanwords
in uv, Chantraine 1933: 216 considers the word to be of Mediterranean origin. To
my mind, the word must be Pre-Greek, in view of the suffix -μv-. See Fur.: 246".
µédw [v.] ‘to rule, govern' (Emp., trag.). <IE *med- 'measure'>
•VAR Also -έw? Only present.
•DER µέdwv [ptc.] 'ruler' (Hom.), like äpxwv, fem. -ovoa “ruling”, name of one of the
Gorgons (Hes.), also µɛdéwv, -έovtos ‘id.' (Il., h. Merc.), fem. -έovoa (h. Hom., Hes.);
PN Médwv, Aаo-μεdwv, etc., TN Mɛdɛwv (Boeotia) in the sense "seat of
government"(?).
μεoμα [med.] 'to care for, think of, be prepared for' (II.), only pres. except
µedýσoµal (I 650). Hence µεdíµ· épwɩ 'hero' (H.), probably after кúdчyoç, dókiµoç,
etc.
•ETYM In the sense of ‘think of, be prepared for³, μεdoμai corresponds exactly to the
Lat. frequentative meditor, -ārī ‘to reflect, meditate', beside which we find the
primary verb medeor, -ērī ‘to heal and the primary noun modus 'measure', from
heiyvuil
919
which modius, modestus and moderor are derived. Celtic has several cognates, e.g.
OIr. mess 'iudicium' < *med-tu-, air-med 'measure'. The basic meaning 'measure' is
found in Germanic as well: Go. mitan (also miton 'to consider'), OE metan, MoHG
messen, etc. An old specialized meaning is found in Lat. medeor 'to heal' (originally
'to take measures' vel sim.?) and Av. vi-mad- 'healer, physician'.
See undoμaι, which has been considered to show a lengthened grade of the same
root, but may also be from a different root *meh,(d)-.
µéɛa [n.pl.] ‘male genitals'. →µndɛa.
μéðv [n.] ‘entoxicating drink, wine' (II.). <IE *med³u- n. 'honey, intoxicating drink'>
VAR Gen. -vos (Pl. Epigr., Nic.).
•COMP As a first member in µεðv-лλýš, -уoç ‘hit by wine, drunk' (Call., APl.), etc.
•DER Denominative verbs: µæðú-σkoµaɩ (IA) ‘to intoxicate oneself, be(come) drunk',
aor. µεðv‑σðñvaɩ (Alc., IA); act. µεðú-σкw ‘to intoxicate oneself (Pl., Hell.), aor.
µεðú(σ)-σαι, fut. μεð; þæðú- (only present-stem) = -úσкoμα, often metaph.
µεðóów; µεðú-w
(Od.).
Verbal nouns: 1. µéðŋ [f.] ‘drunkenness, intoxication' (IA), back-formation from
µɛðúw after лλŋðúw : лλýðŋ; 2. évσ intoxication' (Thgn.), after лóσç (Рorzig
1942: 190); 3. µέðvoμa 'intoxicating drink' (LXX, Ph.). 4. μévσos (-ơn) [m., f.]
'drunkard' (Hecat., Ar.), first of women; also μεúσns ‘id.' (Ath., Luc.); 5. µεðvotýs
‘id.' (Arr., AP), -úσtpia [f.] (Theopomp. Com.), -vσtás (Trag. Adesp.). 6. µæðvotikós
‘dipsomaniac, intoxicating' (Pl., Arist.); 7. µεúσ. εidos àµлéλov ‘kind of
grapevine' (H.); 8. µεðчшvαños epithet of Dionysus (Plu.); playful transformation of
Mnoччvatos (from Mývμva), according to H. an epithet of Dionysus (Wackernagel
1916: 1313).
PNs, e.g. Mé0wv, -vλλoç, -úσкoç. On ►åµéеvστoç, see s.v.
⚫ETYM Old word for 'honey, mead', which was retained in most languages: Skt.
mádhu- [n.] ‘honey', Av. madu- [n.] ‘currant wine', OCS medʊ 'honey', Lith. medus
‘id.', ON mjoðr, OHG metu [m.] ‘mead', OIr. mid ‘id.', ToB mit ‘honey'. The
meaning 'honey' was limited in Greek to μελɩ, which was inherited as well; the
archaic word μév, which (unlike its derivatives) was soon given up, referred to wine
only.
µɛíyvu̟ [v.] ‘to mix, bring together, connect', med. 'to intermingle, convene in battle'
(II.). <IE *meig/k- ‘mix'>
•VAR μεуv-úw (X., Arist.), µíoyw (Hom., IA, etc.), ovεμεíуvʊτо (Sapph.), aor. µɛīžaɩ,
med. дíкτo (epic), pass. дuуñvα with fut. -ñσoμαɩ, µεч×еñvαɩ with -σoμαι, fut.
µɛížw, -oµai, perf. med. µµ(ε)µ¤; act. µµα (Hell.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. σʊv-, εл-, кατα-, ȧva-. As a first member in
governing compounds µ(ε)₁(o)-, e.g. µuε-έ\\ŋvɛç [pl.] 'semi-Hellenes' (Hellanic.,
Hell.), µ(ε)ižó-еpoos 'mixing the crying, with mixed cries' (A.); also σy-, especially
in µʊy-áykɛa [f.] ‘place where valleys meet' (A 453), from ¼µσy-ayкýç. As a second
member in ŋaµ-, áva-, ovµ-µyńs̟, etc. (IA); thence µyńs (Nic.), άva-, énɩ-µíž [adv.]
'mixed' (II.).

=== page 486 ===

920
μεidiáw
•DER Few derivatives: 1. (σúµ-)μεï¾ɩ (also --) 'mixing, etc.' (IA); 2. µεу (-í-)
‘mixing' (Emp., Anaxag., Arist.), µɛ×µ[a] (Alc.); 3. ¿лųµ(ɛ)išíα, -íŋ ‘mixing,
intercourse' (IA); from έríµ(ε)ik-tos. 4. µyác, -ádos [m., f.] ‘mixed, together' (Att.).
5. Several adverbs: (oúµ-)µíya, µuyá-dŋv, -dis, µíy-da, -dny (epic poet.). 6. µyášoµai
[v.] 'to mix, unite' (О 271), to µíуα, дuyás (Schwyzer: 734).
•ETYM It is very doubtful whether píуvч, which is frequent in mss., is an original
zero grade. It is probable that μɛíуvч, built after µɛîžaɩ and µɛížw, was early. The
full grade is an alternative rendering for other forms, which in principle take zero
grade (as in μεïç for µíčiç; (oúµ)-µiktos, péµuyµai).
IE *m(e)ik- is reflected by Skt. miśrá- = Lith. mišras 'mixed'; Lith. miēšti, 1sg. miešių
'to mix', OCS měšiti, isg. měšo̟ [caus.] 'to mix'. A sk-present, like in μíoуw, is well-
represented in the Western languages too: Lat. misceō, OIr. mescaid 'mixes,
confuses', OHG miscan, MoHG mischen (if not a Lat. loanword). The vu-present is
probably an innovation, as it is limited to Greek. Indic has a reduplicated s-
formation in mí-mikṣ-ati ‘mix', probably an original desiderative, with perf. mimikṣé,
caus. mekṣayati.
All other languages have a voiceless root-final stop instead of the voiced one
represented by μíσyw and found in µуñvaɩ, µíуa. Since all Greek formations (except
the ske/o-present) are isolated (e.g. pass. µуñva), these are probably analogical after
forms with a following voiced consonant (or made to the aorist μεα). It is
unnecessary to assume a variant *meig-.
μεɩɩάw [v.] 'to smile' (Il.). <IE *smei- ‘smile'>
•VAR In Hom. only ptc. -tówv, -tówσa, later also inf. -tāv (Pl.) and indicative forms,
e.g. µɛdiḍ (Theoc.); aor. µɛid-tāσai (Sapph., Pl., Plb., Plu.), -ñσaɩ (Il.).
•COMP Also with prefixes like εл-, úñлo-. Compound piλo-(μ)μεidns 'with a friendly
smile', especially of Aphrodite (Il.), as if from µɛïdos. yéλws ‘laughter' (H.), but
perhaps directly from the verb, see below. On Hes. Th. 200 see Risch 1947: 76 and
Strunk Glotta 38 (1960): 70, but also Dornseiff Ant. class. 6 (1937): 247, and Heubeck
Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 16 (1965): 204-6; see DELG.
●DER µεíðηµɑ [n.] 'smiling' (Hes.), -íaμa ‘id.' (Luc., Plu.), (εл-)µεðíασıç (Plu.),
-íaσμа (H.), -ασμós (Poll., Sch.), tо μεðαστкóу 'cheerfulness' (sch.); µɛid-áµwv
'smiling' (Hymn. Is.).
⚫ETYM The relationship between the above forms is unclear. The present μεd-iάw,
with the aor. μɛdɩāσaɩ, is probably an epic transformation, and the pres. ptc. may
have served as a pivot form. The form oλo-(µ)μεd½s can be derived from a verb as
well, and μεidos then extracted from it.
All Greek forms have an element -8-, which appears to be lacking in most other
languages. Skt. smáyate, -ti 'smile', ToB smi-, ToA smi- 'id.', OCS smijati sę isg. smějo
sę ‘to laugh', Latv. smiêt, 1sg. smeju ‘to laugh (at)'. However, we also find the Balt.
iterative smaidit, and smaida laughing'. One view is that Baltic and Greek
independently added *-d- to the root. The opposite view is that Baltic and Greek
share an old *d-enlargement (DELG s.v. and LIV² s.v. *smei-). In view of the recent
insight that root-final *d and *h, interchange frequently, *smeid- may well be the
original form.
µεíчwv [compar.] ‘larger'. →µéyaç.
Heipa
µɛíλa [n.pl.] 'propitiations, atonement, penalty' (I 147 = 289, A. R., Call.).
•VAR Rarely sing. -tov.
⚫ETYM No good explaination exists. See ▸μεíλxoç.
µɛíλɩxoç [adj.] 'soft, mild, friendly' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Also μελíxtos ‘id.' (Il.); Mɛtλíxios epithet, especially of Zeus (IA).
921
•DIAL Att. also Maxixios (early itacism, Schwyzer: 193), Dor. Mηλ-, Arc. Mελ-, with
MEXεov 'temple of Zeus M.' (Halaesa); details in Nilsson 1941(1): 411ff.; Aeol.
LÉ入入IXOS.
•COMP μελλxó-qwvos (Sapph.), ȧ-uεíλxos 'unfriendly, irreconcilable' = åµieíλiktog
(II.).
•DER From μεíλxoç: 1. µædixín [f.] 'softness, mildness' (O 741, Hes., A. R.); 2.
µeiλixwdnç 'soft' (Cerc.); µæλíxŋ [f.] ‘boxing-glove' (Paus. 8, 40, 3), cf. лvppíxn; 4.
μεíσow [v.] 'to calm, appease' (II.), aor. -ía, also with έк-; μεí (μ
Milete VI³) [n.] 'expiational sacrifice' (к 217), (¿к-)µεí₁₁ 'expiation' (Anon. apud
Suid., Eust.), µɛtλɩk-týpios ‘expiating' (A. Pers. 610), -ɩɩkŵç [adv.] ‘id.' (sch.);
µɛíλiktpa [pl.] = µɛiλíyµata (A. R.).
:
●ETYM Popular formation with a suffix -X- like in vлíɑxoç, Dor. óσσíxoç, etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 403f.), related to μεía, but without any certain further
connection. The different dialectal forms μελ- μελλ- μnλ- have been explained
from μελ-v-; for comparison, Lat. mel 'honey', gen. mellis (if indeed from *mel-n-)
has been proposed, as well as Lith. malónė ‘mercy'. μεixos was undoubtedly
connected with μéλ by folk etymology.
μεчov [n.] 'small animals (sheep or lambs), which were sacrificed during the
Apatouria' (Att. inscr., Is., sch.). <GR>
•COMP As a first member in μεt-aywyós 'who puts the animals on the weighing-
machine' (Eup. 116) with μɛ-αywyéw (Ar. Ra. 798), -ɛlov, -ía (Suid.).
•ETYM Properly a neuter of the comparative μɛíwv with transition to an o-stem.
Unrelated to the IE word for 'ram, sheep' in Skt. meṣá- [m.] ‘ram, sheep, fell', OCS
měx leather sack', etc.
µɛĩpa} [f.] ‘girl' (com.), late also msc. 'boy' (Aret., Hld.). <IE *mer-io- ‘young (girl or
man)'>
•COMP qɩλo-µεîpa} [m., f.] ‘loving boys' (Ath., Paus.).
•DER Diminutives: 1. µεpáкov [n.] 'youth, younger man' (Hp., Att.) with μɛƖpaкɩ-
wons youthful' (Pl., Arist.), -óoμat [v.] 'to become adolescent' (X., Ph., Ael.), -εúoμα
[v.] ‘id., to behave as a youth' (Arr., Plu., Luc.), also µɛpaк-ɛúoµa (Alciphr. 2, 2). 2.
µɛɩpakiσkoç [m.] 'boy', also -1 [f.] ‘girl' (Att.). 3. µɛpaкúλλtov ‘id.' (com.).
•ETYM For the feminine gender, cf. déλoαε, лópτaž, oкúla. The diminutive
derivatives in Greek ousted the basic word.
We have to start from a noun, perhaps *µεĭpos (cf. \íða: λíos), which would agree
with Skt. márya- [m.] ‘youth, lover', Av. mairiia- (meaning unclear), and Skt. marya-

=== page 487 ===

922
μεíρоμαι
ká- 'small man' (with a thematic k-suffix independent of μεipaε). A fem. *μεīpα (like
στεĬĭpα) may be also considered.
As a remote cognate, Lith. mergà 'girl' has been adduced and, with different
vocalism, Lith. martì [f.] ‘bride, young woman' (cf. ►Bpitóµaptic); also, the unclear
Lat. maritus 'with wife, married' (see WH s.v.). Nowadays, Celtic words are also
connected: W morwyn, OCo. moroin ‘girl, maiden' < PCl. *moreinā-, MW merch
'daughter' <*mer-k-. The connection of Alb. shemërë is "hardly convincing"
(Demiraj 1997 s.v.). In view of all the different enlargements involved, all
comparisons beyond IIr. and Gr. *mer-io- (perhaps a common innovation?) remain
a bit weak.
µɛípoµaɩ [v.] ‘to receive as one's share' (I 616), ‘to divide' (Arat. 1054). <IE *smer-
'remember, care'>
•VAR εµµopε [зsg.perf.act.] 'shares in' (Il.), 3pl. ¿µµópavti. teteúxaot 'they have as a
share' (H.), later also εµµopεç, -ov (A. R., Nic.); µεµópηкa (Nic.); εчµaptaι (-τo)
[3sg.perf.(plpf.)med.] ‘it is (was) decided by fate' (II.), ptc. (especially fem.)
ɛiμapµévη 'fate' (IA); Aеol. ¿µµóрμεvov (Alc.), Dor. εµßpαται· εïµαptai, ¿µßpaµéva.
ɛiµapµévη (H.); also innovated ẞɛßpaµévwv. ɛiµapµévwv (H.), µεµóp-ital, -nµévos
(Man., AP).
•COMP Also with ȧлo- (Hes. Оp. 578), έл- (Vett. Val. 346, 6). As a second member in
► кáµµoρoç (< кá-σµоρоç), ►ňµоρо < ǎ-σµороç, etc.
•DER 1. ► µέpoç [n.] ‘share, etc.'. 2. µópos [m.] ‘fate, (fate of) death, violent death' (II.),
'share, share of ground', also as a measure of land (Mytilene, Western Locris).
Diminutive μópiov [n.] 'share, part, member of the body' (IA), mathem. 'fraction,
denominator', with µopiaσµós, -σtikóç, from *µopiášw (Ptol., sch.); further µópчµoç
[adj.] 'destined by fate' (Y 302, Pi., A.), µópios 'belonging to the fate (of death)' (AP),
probably also μopíaι, of ελañaɩ, µоpóεç 'deathly' (Nic.). 3. μópα [f.] name of a
Lacon. section of troops (X.). 4. µoîpa [f.] 'part, piece, piece of ground, share, degree,
fate, (evil or good) fate, death-fate', also personified goddess of fate' (II.); in
compounds, e.g. μopη-yεvns 'child of destiny' (T 182), -11 analogical metrical
lengthening; ε-μopoç ‘favoureď (B., Pl.). Hence μop-ádɩos 'destined by fate' (S.
OC 228 cod. Laur.), -ídios 'id.' (Pi., S.), -años 'belonging to fate' (Man.), -taïos
'measuring a degree' (Ptol., Procl.). µoip-iкóç, -ɩкws ‘according to degree' (Ptol.,
Vett. Val.); µoɩpíç [f.] ‘half (Nic.); μop-άoμαι, -αw [v.] 'to divide, be awarded one's
share, share' (A., A. R.), -ášw = -άw (Anon. in Rh.). 5. µoptý (Dor. -τá) 'share of the
farmer' (Poll., Eust., H.). 6. μópoчμoç 'destined by fate'.
•ETYM The perfect forms Aeol. εµµopε (later taken as a them. aor., whence ¼µµopes,
-ov) and Ion. ɛïµaptaɩ can be explained from *sé-smor-e and *sé-smr-toi, resp. The
full grade yod-present µɛípoµaι < *smér-io- joins this pattern, also seen in oɛipw:
Eq0opα qеαрuat. Initial *sm- shines through in derivatives too: e.g. ä-µµоpos,
Katà (u)uoipav.
Corresponding forms outside Greek are doubtful. Lat. mereō, -ēre, -eor, -ērī 'to earn,
acquire' (if properly *to get one's share') might be cognate, but its formation,
*(s)mer-eh,-, is different. Hitt. marrije/a-ta(ri) cannot be connected (as it rather means
'to dissolve by heating'; cf. Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). The connection with the group of
μελaç
923
μépчuva 'care, concern' is highly hypothetical. Of the nominal derivatives, only μoчpa
requires a special explanation: one may start either from an o-stem μópos or from an
older consonant-stem *µop-. The o-vowel could also be an Aeolic zero grade. See
LIV² s.v. 2. *smer-, to be separated from 1. *(s)mer- 'denken an, sich erinnern’.
μεíwv [compar.] 'smaller' (II., Hp., X., Dor., Arc.). <IE *meiH-u- 'less, small’▷
•VAR μεчov [n.], also μεóτεpоç (A. R., Arat.), superl. µɛĩστoç ‘'leasť' (Locr. V³, Hdn.,
H.).
•DIAL Myc. me-u-jo, me-wi-jo /meiw-ios/.
•COMP As a first member in μεtov-εкTέw [V.] 'to have too little, fall short', with -εčia
(X.), from µεiov xεv after éλɛov-éktŋs, -ektéw, -ežía.
•DER Derivatives, probably analogical after the o-stems: 1. µålótŋs [f.] ‘minority'
(A.D., Vett. Val.); 2. μεóоμα, -ów [v.] 'to decrease, be inferior, diminish' (Hp., X.,
Arist.) with μɛí-wois 'decrease' (Hp., Arist.), -wua 'reduction of wealth' = 'penalty'
(X. An. 5, 8, 1), -wτηs [m.] 'who diminishes' (Paul. Al.), -wτɩкóç 'diminishing,
decreasing' (Hell.).
⚫ETYM Considered to be a primary comparative from a verbal root 'to lessen' (LIV2
S.V. 1. *meiH-), seen in Skt. mináti ‘to lessen, damage', miyate ‘to become less,
wither', etc. Cf. the opposite лλεíwv, nλéwv, nλeïotos (see лolús). The presence of
the suffixal -u- in Myc. me-u-jo and me-wi-jo is unexpected from an IE point of view
(we expect it in the positive only), but it is not contradicted by the later evidence. It
might find support in ToB maiwe 'small, young' < *moHi-uo- (Adams 1999 s.v.,
which he connects with ON mjór 'small, thin'). See ►μvúеw.
µέλaßpov [n.] ‘vault of the roof, roof-beams, roof, also (often plur.) 'dwelling, house'
(Il., also inscr. Delos III, LXX, pap.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also μελápa [f.] (Delos IV³).
•COMP As a second member in úчɩ-μéλapos 'with high-roof-beams' (h. Merc.), etc.
•DER µελαерóo̟μα 'provide with roof-beams' (LXX).
▸
•ETYM Explained by the ancients as áïò toñ µελaíveσða úrò toũ karvoũ, ‘because
of sooting by smoke' (EM 576, 16). The comparison with Bλwepós 'high', proposed
by Frisk, fails because the latter would presuppose a root *mlh3- (if inherited at all),
which can never yield μéλa-.
Connection with кuéλɛ0pov 'beam' was tentatively considered by Güntert 1914:
144f. and Pisani KZ 71 (1954): 125f. because of the remarkable formal and semantic
similarity. In my view, this proves that the word is Pre-Greek, as ►кμéλεpov is a by-
form showing variation ɛ/α and in the initial.
µéλaç [adj.] ‘dark-colored, black' (II.). <IE *mel(h₂)-n- 'black'>>
•VAR Fem. -aiva, ntr. -av. Compar. µɛλáv-τεpoç (Il.), superl. -τatoç (IA), late
μελavóτɛpoç (Str.), µɛλaivotátη (Epigr. Gr., AP).
•DIAL Aeol. -ALS.
•COMP Very frequent as a first member, e.g. µελáy-xpoos (-es [pl.]), -xpolŃs, -XpŃs,
-xpwç, μελavó-xрoos, etc. 'with dark skin' (see Sommer 1948: 21ff.); µεay-x
‘dark, black' (A., E., X.), cf. Súσ-xчoç, Sommer 1948: 71ff.; µeλáv-detos probably
'dark-striped' or 'with dark bands' (O 713, A., E.); µɛλáv-Spv-os 'made of black wood

=== page 488 ===

924
qué入doual
(Sópv)' (A. Fr. 251), ntr. 'heartwood' (Thphr.), plur. 'piece of tunny', with μελáv-
Spus [m.] 'tunny' (Pamphil.); µελáµ-лupov [n.] (also -oç [m.]) ‘ball-mustard, Neslia
paniculata' (Thphr., Gal.); for the form cf. ►Sióσлupov, on the mg. Carnoy REGr. 71
(1958): 96; µɛλay-káλaµov [n.] (dvandva) ‘ink and pen' (pap. VP, see Maas Glotta 35
(1956): 299f.). Often in PNs (e.g. short names like Mɛλaivɛús, Mɛλavɛús, Mɛλavėɛús,
Mé入avdog).
•DER 1. µɛλaiv-áç [f.] name of a dark-colored fish (Cratin.), see Strömberg 1943: 22;
-ís [f.] name of a sea-shell (Sophr., Herod., Xenocr.), also name of Aphrodite in
Corinth (Ath.). 2. µɛλáv-tov [n.] ‘ink' (pap., Edict. Diocl.). 3. μελav-ía [f.] ‘blackness,
black shade or pigment' (X., Arist.), -óτηs [f.] 'blackness' (Arist.), opposed to
Aevkótŋs. 4. µeλavós = µédas (Sp.), -óv [n.] ‘black pigment' (Sammelb. IV³); after
keλalvós, ópqvós, etc.; µελaivaños ‘id.' (Orac. Sib.), after кvεqaños, etc.; µɛlavwdns
'blackish' (EM).
Denominative verbs: 1. μελαívoμα [v.] 'to become dark or black' (Il.), act. (trans.)
-w; hence µźλavoɩs [f.] ‘blackening' (Arist.), µéλaσ-µa [n.] ‘black spot, black paint'
(Hp.), -µóç [m.] ‘blackening, black spot (Hp., Plu.), µɛλavtnp-ía [f.] ‘black pigment,
blackness' (IG 22, 1672, Arist.), -1ov ‘stain' (sch.). 2. µɛλávw [v.] ‘to become (make?)
black' (H 64). 3. intr. µɛλavéw [v.] ‘id.' (Thphr., A. R., Call.).
•ETYM The formation µέλãç [m.] < *µéλav-s, µédaɩva [f.] < -av-ɩa, µέλav [n.] is
parallelled in the adjective τáλãç [m.] 'wretched', táλaιva [f.], τáλav [n.]. It must be
remarked, however, that τáλaç seems to be an original nt-stem. Traditionally,
μéλava is identified with Skt. malini [f.], from alleged IE *melh₂-n-ih2. The stem
uελav- [m.] would be an innovation for older thematic *uéλavo- = Skt. malina-
'dirty', but the direct comparison fails, for not only is malini exclusively known as a
gloss in the sense of 'menstruating woman', but the masculine malina- must be an
epic-classical derivative from Ved. mála- [n.] ‘dirt'. The latter may be from *molh₂-o-
or from *mel-o-, so we cannot decide on this basis whether the root of μελãç ended
in a laryngeal.
Of the many words cited under the root mel- denoting colors, a couple of Baltic
formations with a suffix -n- are interesting for Greek: Latv. melns 'black', OPr. melne
'blue spot', fem. milinan [acc.] 'spot'; beside these, there are formations with a suffix
-u(o), e.g. Lith. mulvas 'yellow, of clay'. See ▸μoλúvw.
µéλoµàι [v.] ‘to cause to melt' (363), intr. 'to melt' (Nic. Th. 108). <IE *smel-d-,
*h₂meld- (?) 'melt'>
•VAR μελw to cause to melt' (Call., Man.); άµéλdɛv. týkɛiv ‘to melť' (H.).
•ETYM In Greek, µéλdo̟µαɩ was superceded by inherited týêw. It is a full grade
thematic root present with an exact parallel in Gm.: OE meltan 'to melt, flow away',
caus. mieltan 'to dissolve, digest' < *maltjan = ON melta 'to digest, malt'; beside
=
these (with inital s-) OHG smelzan, MoHG schmelzen, etc. The Gm. verbs have
many derivatives, e.g. Go. ga-malteins 'analysis'.
The relation to Greek ȧuaλdúvw and aμéλdev is unclear. Rix KZ 104 (1991): 19438
reconstructs the root without initial laryngeal. On µελdóµevos (Þ 363) see Schmidt
Glotta 65 (1987): 65-9.
μÉλI, -ITOS
µéλɛ [voc.] in Att. & µέλɛ [voc.], ‘my best (friend)' vel sim. (com., Pl.). <GR➤
•ETYM Probably shortened from & µέλɛɛ; compare & tãv from & táλav.
925
µɛλɛaypis, -ídos [f.] ‘guiney-fowl, Numida ptilorhyncha, meleagris' (Soph. apud Plin.,
Arist.), also μɛλéaуpoç. ǹ кaτoiкídioç öρviç 'the domestic bird' (H.); extensively
Thompson 1895 s.v. <?>
⚫ETYM Probably a foreign word, adapted to Mɛλéaypos by folk etymology. Uncertain
hypothesis by Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 159': connection to an Iranian word for
'bird, fowl' seen in Av. mǝrǝya-, which does not match the African origin of the bird
at all.
чελɛdaívw, μελɛτáw, etc. μéλw.
µéλɛos [adj.] ‘idle, vain, futile; miserable' (Il.). <?>
•COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. µελεo-лaðý‹ ‹suffering misfortune' (A.).
⚫ETYM As for its accent, μéλɛoç agrees with secondary adjectives like Xpúσɛoç, AíɛOÇ,
Bóɛos (Chantraine 1933: 50f.), but conceptually it rather belongs to primary oxytones
like έtɛós, kevɛós, otɛpɛós; is it a case of Aeolic retraction? Like ¿teós from ¿tefóc,
µελɛos may derive from *µéλɛƑoç. Further details are unclear. See ▸ßλáoqnµos.
µέλɩ, -ɩtos [n.] ‘honey' (Il.). ◄IE *melit- ‘honey'▷
•DIAL Myc. me-ri.
COMP Very frequent as a first member, e.g. μελí-кpã-τov, Ion. -кpη-τоv "honey
mix", "sacrifice of milk and honey' (Od.), compounded with кɛpávvчu; also
μελτo-, е.g. μελɩto-лóλŋs [m.] 'honey trader' (Ar.); as a second member in olvó-
uελ 'drink from wine and honey' (Plb.), etc.; on άлóμελɩ, sее s.v.
•DER A. Adjectives: μελτóεç 'honey-sweet' (Pi.), fеm. μελτóεσσα (scil. μača), Att.
μελτойττа 'honey-cake' (Hdt., Aг.), μελτ-ηpós 'pertaining to honey, honey-like'
(Ar., Thphr.), -vos 'made from honey' (pap.), -wdŋs 'honey-like' (Thphr.). Probably
also μελ-xpós ‘honey-sweet' (Alc., Anacr., Hp., Telecl., Theoc.), cf. лεvõрóç,
BSEλuxpóc, Chantraine 1933: 225f. See Sommer 1948: 263, who assumes it is Aeol. for
μελí-xpws 'honey-colored'; acc. to Schwyzer: 450 it stands for -✗pooç.
B. Substantives: µελíτ(ε)ɩov [n.] ‘mead' (Plu.); µɛλitóv. knpíov, i tò ¿Q¤òv yλeñкOS
'honeycomb, or the boiled new wine' H.; µɛditítŋs (Xíŝoc) ‘topaz', (oĭvos) 'honey-
wine' (Dsc.); μɛλíτεα [f.] 'Melissa officinalis' (Thеoc.); μελτσμós [m.] 'treatment
with honey' (medic.) as if from *µελɩtíčεiv.
C. Verbs: µɛλitóoμaɩ ‘to mix with honey, be sweetened with honey' (Th., Plu.) with
μελíτwμα 'honey-cake' (com.), -wots 'sweetening' (gloss.).
=
Isolated stands uέλiooɑ, -ɩɩa [f.] ‘bee' (Il.), perhaps haplological for *µɛλí-λɩx-iα
"honey-licking"; compare Skt. madhu-lih- [m.] "honey-licker" 'bee'; but
alternatively derived from *μελ₁τ-1α. Thence several compounds and derivatives, e.g.
μεруós (-TT-) 'beekeeper' (Pl., Arist.) with -éw, -ía, -εov; μεσσεÚç 'id.'
(Arist., pap.), also (with different origin) as a PN; μελíσσov 'beehive' (pap. III"), -ía
'id.' (Gp.), -úv 'id.' (LXX), etc. Cf. further BλÍTTW.
i

=== page 489 ===

926
μελíα
⚫ETYM Old inherited neuter for 'honey', formally identical with Hitt. milit < melit.
The Greek verb Bλiττw and the Hitt. stem form malit(t)- show that the root
originally had ablaut, so a gen. *mlit-ós.
With thematic enlargement, it is found in Go. miliþ and Alb. mjaltë < PIE *meli-t-o-.
OIr. mil and Lat. mel may also go back to *meli-t-; it is improbable that the Lat. gen.
mellis is from *mel-n-. Arm. metr, gen. mełu was supposedly transferred to the u-
stems after synonymous *médhu (see ►µéðv).
The gloss μελíτioν· лóµα τɩ ΣкvðiкÒV µελTOS εovo σù dατɩ кαì лóα τɩví ‘a
Scythian drink made from honey, cooked with water and a kind of herb' (H.), stems
from an unknown source.
µɛλía [f.] ‘ash, lance made of ash-wood' (Il., also Thphr.). <PG? (S, V), IE? *smel- ‘ash,
grey'.➤
•VAR Epic -ín.
●COMP µɛλin-yɛvýs ‘born from an ash' (A. R.); ¿¨-µµeλíns [m.] ‘armed with a good
lance' (Hom.), after it qɛpε-µµελíŋs 'bearing a lance' (Mimn.).
●DER µέλ-ɩvos (p 339); with metrical lengthening μεíλ-vos (II.) 'made of ash-wood';
like in Spú-ïvoç, etc., and favoured by the metre; further µɛλí-ïvoç (Att. inscr.), µɛλé-
ïvos (Att. inscr., Thphr.): after лελε-ïvoç, etc., or dissimilated from -1-1-?
⚫ETYM Morphologically and etymologically isolated. The old comparison with Lith.
(dial.) smėlis 'sand-colored, ashy-grey' starts from the grey color of the wood.
Perhaps the word is Pre-Greek in view of the various forms in -ɩvoç. See Fur.: 223,
226, 317 on the consonantism (who compares лτελéα ‘elm³), and 354, 356 on the
vowel alternations.
μελivη [f.] 'millet', especially 'foxtail millet (Setaria italica)' (IA). <?>
•ETYM Lat. milium [n.] 'millet, proso millet' is usually compared, although it formally
deviates from uελívn. Uncertain is the appurtenance of Lith. málnos [f.pl.] 'swath,
foxtail millet'. The root is thought to be either that of Lat. molō ‘to meal', etc., in the
sense "product to be mealed"; or that of µéλas (cf. MoFr. millet noir, G Mohrenhirse,
denoting varieties of millet); Porzig 1954a: 178 assumed an opposition with äλqı,
supposed to be related to aλoós 'white'.
On the other hand, Fur.: 246 compares λuμos 'millet' and λiap. кéуxp öμolov
μελívη úло Аакóvwv (H.), which may continue Fελ-. This seems too far-fetched.
μéλкα [f.] 'a dish prepared from sour milk' (Gal., Alex. Trall., Gp.). <LW Lat.>
•VAR Or [n.pl.]? Also -ŋ.
•ETYM From Lat. melca ‘id.', which itself is considered to be a loan from Germanic;
see WH s.v. for this and other interpretations.
μελкιov [n.] · кρývý, výµqai, лaíyviov 'source, nymphs, playful' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Has been compared with a few Balto-Slavic words of various meanings, e.g.
Ru. moloko 'milk', Lith. malkas ‘'draught'. The second and third meanings are rather
unclear.
µéλλaž, -aкoç [m.] 'young boy' (inscr. Alexandria, PMag. Par.), µελaкεç vεwτεpol
'the younger ones' (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR See below on µiλač.
μελoç
●DER Diminutive µελλáкιov (Alexandria).
927
⚫ETYM Thought to be a hypocoristic short form (based on, e.g., μεīpaε) of µελλ-
éonẞos (Hell. inscr.), μελλ-εipηy (Sparta), vel sim.; cf. μελλóvчµqoç (S.), and see
Chantraine 1933: 379f. However, as the word is no doubt identical with μiλač 2, it is
rather Pre-Greek (note the variant with single -λ-). Therefore, etymological
connection with uɛλλ- is improbable.
uéλw [v.] 'to be destined, must, need, etc.', in various constructions; also 'to be about
to, commemorate, linger, hesitate' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Аor. µελλñσαι (Thgn., Att. prose), fut. μελλnow (D.).
•COMP Rarely with dɩα-, кaτα-, ávɩɩ-. As a first member in µελλó-yaµos = µéλλwv
yaµɛïv (S.), µɛll-εípηy 'who is about to be εipηv' (Lacon.).
•Der µéλλŋois ‘being about to do, (mere) intention, hesitation' (Th., Pl. Lg., Arist.),
μελλчμа 'postponement' (E., Aeschin., -ŋouа PMasp.), μελλw [f.] hesitation' (A. Ag.
1356), µεñoµós 'delay, indecision' (Epicur., D. H.), also 'approach', of a disease
(Aret.); μεnτns [m.] ‘laggard' (Th. 1, 70, Arist.), -τкóç hesitating' (Arist.),
µeλλntiãv. tò µéλλɛɩv (H.), like ßɩvηtɩāv etc., Schwyzer: 732.
•ETYM The full grade yod-present µéλλw, probably < *µɛλ-ɩw, is original; the non-
presentic forms and the nominal derivations were created at a later date.
Traditionally connected with Lat. prō-mellere 'litem promovere' (Paul. Fest.) and the
Celtic group of OIr. mall 'slow, tardy'. On this basis, a root *mel- 'to linger, hesitate,
be late' is sometimes reconstructed.
According to Gray Lang. 23 (1947): 247, however, дéλλw is a denominative from
*µéλos 'concern, interest', related ►µéλw, Lat. melior, etc. Alternatively, Szemerényi
AmJPh. 72 (1951): 346ff. suggested derivation from the root of μoλεïv 'to go', μελoç
'member', Lat. mōlior ‘set in motion by force', etc.
μελos [n.] 'member', in older literature only plur. 'limbs' (Il.); also '(articulated) tune,
song, melody' (h. Hom. 19, 16, Thgn., Pi., IA). <?►
•COMP Avσɩ-μελns 'relaxing the limbs' (Od.), also with allusion to the μελedýµata (v
57); µɛλo-ñoiós ‘poet of songs' with -έw, -ía (Att.), µɛlɛoí-ñtepos ‘with singing
wings', of a cicada (AP), after the typе ελкεσí-лεлdos.
•DER 1. Diminutive µελúpov ‘small song' (Ar., Theoc.), -ta [pl.] 'poor limbs' (M.
Ant.); µɛλíσk(1)ov ‘id.' (Alcm., Antiph.).
2. Adjective: µɛλikós ‘lyric' (D. H., Plu.).
3. Adverb: μελndóv 'part by part' (Poseidon.); on µελ(ε)ïστí see below.
4. Verbs μελíчw 1. 'to analyze' (Pherecyd. Hist., LXX), also with Siα-, έк-, ȧло-; 2. 'to
sing, sing of (Pi., A., Theoc.), also with diα-, åväɩ-. Further µɛdioµós (dɩa-) ‘analysis'
(Plu.), 'song' (Str.), µελiσμa 'song, melody' (Theoc., AP); µɛλкτáç (Theoc., Mosch.),
-ɩστηs (Anacreont.) ‘flute-player'; µελɩoτí ‘limb for limb' (J.), older form µελɛïσtí
(Hom.), probably from *µɛλεïw. Also µελεáš [v.] 'to execute a recitative' (Nicom.
Harm.).
•ETYM For the double meaning 'member' and 'tune, song', cf. Ir. alt 'member' and
'poem'. In the sense of 'member', μéλoç has been replaced by synonymous terms like

=== page 490 ===

928
μελлw, -oμai
кwλov, ǎpopov. To judge by its structure, µéλos must be old (cf. ¿dos, šitos, yévos
etc.), but it does not have a clear outer-Greek counterpart. Still, a comparison with a
Celtic word for 'knuckle' might be possible: Bret. mell, Co. mal, plur. mellow, also in
W cym-mal 'articulus, iunctura, commissura'. This may derive from PCl. *melsā, and
would relate to μéλoç like e.g. Skt. vats-á- 'yearling' to *Ƒέτoç ‘year'.
µέλлw, -oµai [v.] 'to celebrate with song and dance; to sing, dance' (Il.). < ?►
•VAR Post-Hom. (epic lyr.) aor. µéλwai, -αoðaɩ, fut. µéλyw, -oµai.
•COMP Also with άvα-, µετα-, ÈNI-.
•DER μελлηеpα [n.pl.] ‘plaything' (II.), µελлкτwр, -opoç [m.] 'singer'; µoλлý [ƒ.]
'(play with) song and dance' (II.), with µoλлaïoç epithet of ȧodn (Erinn.), µoλëŋdóv
‘like a μoλлη' (A. Pers. 389), µoλлãtıç [f.] (Dor.), apposition to кɛpкíç 'female singer'
(AP), µoλлášw [v.] 'to sing (of)' (Ar.), whence µoλлαστás [m.] (Dor.) 'singer,
dancer' (AP), μoλnáotpia = ovµñaíкépa (H.); µoλлoí [m.pl.] guild of singers in
Milete, with μоλлкoí ‘id.' (Vª).
⚫ETYM No etymology. If somehow related to μéλoç, we have to start from an original
meaning 'member', not from 'song'. Far-fetched speculations by Szemerényi Emerita
22 (1954): 169ff. Connection with the Celtic group of OIr. -molathar 'to praise', W
mawl 'praise' is dubious.
µέλw [v.] ‘to be concerned with, care for³ (IA). <?►
•VAR μελε μo [зsg.pres.], µéλquα, fut. µελñow, -σε, -σa (II.), aor. µελñσaɩ,
εμελŋσɛ (Att.), pass. µεληеñvαι (S.), perf. µéµŋλa, -ε (Il.), med. μεµßλetai, -to (II.),
with a new present μεµßoμa (A. R., Opp.), µεµéλnke (Att.), µeµéλŋµai (Theoc.,
Call.).
•COMP With prefix: ¿-µéλoµaɩ and -équaɩ ‘to care for³, µɛtα-µéλo̟μai, peta-pédɛi
µoɩ ‘repent' (IA).
•DER 1. µéλŋµa [n.] ‘anxiety, object of care, darling' (Sapph., Pi., A.), µελnoµós ‘care'
(EM). 2. μελéτwp, -opos [m.] 'who takes care of = 'avenger' (S. El. 846). 3. µελɛτάw
[v.] 'to care for, strive; to study, practise oratory' (Hes., h. Merc.) beside μελéτη 'care,
provision, practice, etc.' (Hes.); because of its accent (cf. yevetý, tedετη), the latter is
probably a back-formation, like ȧуáлη from άуaлáw; on deverbatives in - (ε) Táw see
Schwyzer: 705. Thence μελετη-pós 'who likes practicing' (X.). From µeλetáw: µeλét-
ŋua ‘practice' (Att.), -ŋσıç ‘id.' (AB), -ŋtiкós ‘caring' (LXX), -ntýs [m.] ‘trainer’
(Aristid.), -τýpov 'place for practice' (Plu.). 4. μεde-dŵveç [f.pl.] (late also sg.)
'cares, concerns' (v.l. τ 517, h. Hom., Hes., Thgn.), also µedŋ-dóveç, -dwv ‘id.'
(Simon., A. R.); -εdwv- and -ŋdov- are both metrically conditioned for -εdov-;
µɛλɛdŵvaɩ [pl.] ‘id.' (v.l. τ 517, Sapph., Theoc.), sing. -wvŋ (Hp.); µɛledwvós [m., f.]
'watcher' (Ion.), -wvɛúc 'id.' (Theoc.).
=
Denominative μελεdαívw [v.] 'to care for' (Ion., Archil.); besides, µελεtaívw (Argos
VI³) from μελετáw; µeλedýµaτa [pl.] µελε-dŵves (Y 62), after vonμata;
µελεdηµwv ‘caring' (Emp., AP), after vonµwv etc., see Chantraine 1933: 173; μελɛd-
ŋêµóç ‘practice' (Orac.); back-formation µɛλédŋ [f.] ‘care' (Hp.), after µedétŋ.
From έëɩ-µελo̟µai: 1. έnµελ-ýs ‘caring for, anxious; object of care' (IA); thence
μéλaα 'care, attention' (Att.); 2. ¿µελŋ-τýs [m.] 'who cares, governor', etc.;
Méiova
929
μεταμελɛa 'repentance, change of mind' (Att.) is analogical to μεtα-µéoμa; also
(back-formation) µetáµelos ‘id.' (Th. 7, 55).
⚫ETYM Beside the full-grade thematic root-present μéλw, the perfect µµηλa has a
remarkable lengthened grade. The middle μéußλετai, -to for *με-μλ-ε- takes the zero
grade and a thematic vowel. The 11-enlargement in μελ--σw gradually conquered
the whole verbal system: µελñ-σαi, -Oñvai, µeléλn-kɛ, -µai.
There is no convincing etymology. Most dictionaries defend the connection with
μελλw, which is semantically not evident.
µéµßpaž, -aкoç [m.] 'kind of cicada' (Ael.). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Formation like ȧσлáλaž, кópač, üpač, and other animal names (Chantraine
1933: 379). Probably related to ẞpáε 'drone' vel sim., as a sound-imitation. Other
such names of cicadas and locusts in Strömberg 1944: 18. According to Gil Emerita
25 (1957): 322f., the word is Pre-Greek, which must be correct in view of the suffix
and the meaning. See ▸μεußpáç.
µeµßpás, -ádos [f.] ‘kind of sprat' (com., Arist.). <PG(S)►
•Var µεµßpádiov (Alex. Trall.).
•COMP μεµßρ-αчúa [f.] ‘kind of anchovy' (com.), cf. the gloss áqúa. µɛµßpás (H.),
see ► ȧqúa.
⚫ETYM Perhaps dissimilated from ßɛußpás (Aristomen.). See Fur.: 217. See ▸ Bεμẞpáç.
µµvημɑ‘to be mindful of. →µvýokw.
µµvwv 1, -ovo [m.] name of a black bird (Ael., Q. S., Dionys. Av.). <?>
•Der µεµvovídes [f.pl.] ‘id.' (Paus. 10, 31, 6).
•ETYM The birds in question were connected with the tomb of Memnon in different
ways by ancient informants; see Thompson 1895 s.v. and Hitzig and Blümner 1896-
1910 on the attestation in Pausanias. See µɛvw, ►µéµvwv 2.
•
µéµvwv 2, -ovos [m.] · ó övos ‘donkey'; µεµvóv<ɛ>ta• τà övɛia кpéɑ ‘donkey meat'
(H.); acc. to Poll. 9, 84, also name of the relevant market. <GR>
▶
⚫ETYM In the meaning Övoc, we have an appellative use of the PN Méμvwv as "the
firm, steadfast one” (see μévw and Ayaµεμvwv for a different opinion), because
of the proverbial stubbornness of the donkey (cf. A 558ff.). See åλéкtwp ‘cock' (s.v.
►ȧλeкtpvwv), kaλλíaç ‘ape, monkey', and Káστwp 'beaver' as other animal names
that are based on appellatives. Further examples of this naming process in Schrader-
Nehring 1917(1): 231'.
µέµova [v.perf.] ‘to have in mind, strive' (Il.). <IE *men- 'think'>
●var ipl. µéµaµεv.
⚫ETYM Old stative perfect, identical with Lat. meminī ‘to remember', IE *mé-mon-h₂e.
Without reduplication, we find Go. man ‘to think, believe', ga-man ‘to remember'.
The ablaut, with a zero grade in the plur. µµµεv < *mé-mn-me, is old and matches
e.g. Go. 1pl. mun-um. Another exact correspondence exists between the imperatives
µɛµáτw and Lat. mementō < PIE *mé-mn-tōd. The zero grade in the ptc. μεμаúç,
plur. ε µεµãóτεç (with metrical lenthening) is analogical.

=== page 491 ===

930
μεμópo
A yod-present was formed to the root *men-, represented in Greek by µaívoµial
(with deviating meaning); from a root *mneh₂- (probably an extension) derives
µµvýσкw. An old verbal noun is ►µévoç; perhaps, the compound ►avtóµatos
also contains the zero grade.
On the supposed forms ¿µµãƒ (Hom.), ¿µµéµovev (S. Tr. 982 [lyr.]) see Leumann
1950:52.
μεдópov [n.] 'monument, mortuary monument' (inscr. imperial period). <LW Lat.>
•VAR Also μшóp
•ETYM All of the above are crosses of μημεão and Lat. memòria. From µɛµópɩov
comes Lat. memorium. See Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 97 and WH s.v. memor,
memoria.
µéµqoµai [v.] ‘to reproach, blame, be discontent, complain' (II.), 'to accuse' (Gortyn).
<IE? *me-mb- ‘reproach' (?) ►
•var Fut. µéµyoμɩ, aor. µµãσðaɩ, µɛµóðñvai.
COMP Also with prefix, especially εл-, кατα-. As the first member of a governing
compound: µɛµчí-µopoç ‘reproving fate' (Isoc., Arist.).
•DER 1. (εлí-, каτá-)μεµчç 'reproof, reproach, objection (Att. since A.). 2.
(εm-)µoµôý ‘id.' (poetic since Pi., Ep. Col. 3, 13), µóµôoç [m.] ‘id.' (E. Fr. 633,
Mantinea V₁); εлí-, кατá-дo̟μоç 'subject to reproach, reproachable, reproaching'
(A., E.), either hypostases from εлì, каτà μоμкñs, or bahuvrihis; also εлчuεμo-ńs
'reproachable' (Nic., AP), чεμ-ns 'subject to complaints' (Mantinea Va), derived
from έ-, ¿µµéμooμа; opposite ǎ-μoμоs (A.), à-µεшôη (Pi., A.) with ȧμεμo-íα
(A., S.). 3. µεµqɛɩpα [f.] μеμчлç (Telecl. Com. 62), probably personified after
npéoßeipa, kteátɛipa, etc. 4. µɛµqwλý = µéµysis (H., Suid.).
=
•ETYM The isolated Gothic verb bi-mampjan 'mock, insult' (Ev. Luc. 16, 14) shows a
remarkable similarity, although its -p- does not correspond to Gr. -q-. Celtic words
for 'disgrace', like OIr. mebul 'shame' et al. < PCelt. *mebla, lack the medial nasal.
This may point to a root *meb"-, which occurs as a reduplicated or a nasal present in
Greek (and perhaps Gothic). Most dictionaries doubt the connections mentioned
(not even mentioned in LIV²).
uév emphatic pcl. v 1.
µevɛaívw, pevováw →µévos.
µɛvðńpŋ [f.] explained as œpovtís, µépiµva ‘thought, care' (in Panyas. 12 [?], H., EM,
Suid.). <?>
•VAR Cf. μεvеηp. pow, Siaτážw 'to take care of, arrange' (H.), and à-
µεvðńpiσtos = ápóvtiσtos, àµépчuvos 'without consideration, careless' (Timo 59;
codd. ȧл-).
ETYM Origin uncertain. Perhaps derived from the root of uavávw with a suffix
-άpn (cf. µépµnpai, -pí(w). See µávðávw, ►µoñσà.
µévos [n.] ‘mind, courage, rage, strength, urge' (II.). ◄IE *men-s- ‘mind'>
!
}
μεvw
931
•COMP Svσ-μεvns 'evil-minded, hostile' (II.) with dvoμév-ɛα, -in, -aívw, etc.;
metrically enlarged dvoµɛvéwv, -έovtes (Od.); à-µevýs 'forceless' (E.); perhaps also
the PNs Auεvεaç, Aµɛvíσkoç and (with unexplained -vv-) Аµεvváµεvos (Bechtel
1917a: 6f.)? Cf. further aµεvηvós. In PNs, e.g. Kλɛo-µévŋç; as a first member in
µεvo-ɛɩкýç ‘suitable for the mind, delightful, plentiful (Hom.).
●DER 1. µɛvɛaívw (v.] 'to desire strongly, rage' (II.), aor. -ñvaɩ, with -aívw added to
*meneh-. 2. μεvováw (v.] 'to have in mind, aim at, wish, desire' (Il.), also -ww, aor.
-ñσat, of unclear origin (Mεvoiτηs, -oítios belongs to olτos 'fate'). Thence μεvový
[f.] 'intention, desire' (Call., A. R., AP; probably a back-formation).
•ETYM As an old verbal noun, μévos is identical with Skt. mánas- [n.], Av. manah-
[n.] 'spirit, thought, will', IE *men-s- [n.]. The adjective Suσ-μεvns matches with Av.
duš-manah- ‘evil-minded', Skt. dur-manas- 'sorrowful; and εv-μεvηs with Skt. su-
mánas- 'well-minded'. The root formed a perfect that is preserved in ►µéµova, cf.
yévos yέyova. The related present μaívoμa deviates in meaning. See further
►кw.
µévtoɩ [pcl.] postpositional pcl. 'however, meanwhile, yet' (IA). <GR➤
•ETYM From μév (►µýv 1) and the dative to 'tibi' (still distinct in Hom.). Hell.
μévτov ‘id.' modelled on vdot ►ěvdov. See Denniston 1954: 405, 409-10, 495.
µévw [v.] ‘to remain, stay, wait, expect, stand fast' (II.). ◄IE *men- ‘stay'➤
•VAR Also µµvw (II.), enlarged µµvášw (Il.), fut. µevéw (Ion.), Att. µεvw, aor. µɛīvai
(Il.), perf. µεµévòka (Att.).
•COMP Very frequent with prefix, e.g. ¿v-, έn- katα-, лαрα-, úñо-. Оften as a first
member in governing compounds, e.g. µεvε-xápμns 'steadfast in battle' (Il.), also -oç
(II.); PN Mɛvé-λaos, -λɛws (II.).
•DER µOVÝ (¿V-, έл-, кatα-, пapα-, úлo-, etc.) ‘stay, abode, etc.' (IA) with µóvos
(лαр(α)-) 'staying, steadfast, etc.' (Thgn., Pi., IA); µovíŋ ‘stability, permanence'
(Emp.), 'steadfastness' (Tyrt.), probably after кaµµovíŋ ‘endurance'; µovos (év-,
лap(á)-, ¿ñí-, etc.) ‘enduring' (Pi., Att.). µévηµa [n.] ‘place of detention' (pap. VI³).
µεvɛtós ‘inclined to wait' (Th., Ar.). Méµvwv (Hom.), a secondary appellative
(μéμvwv 2), interpreted as "who stands firm, who persists", but rather from *Méεd-
µwv, cf. on ►’Ayaµέµvwv. An iterative deverbative επ-µŋváw is retained in the perf.
Énipiefinvákavti (Del.³ 91, 11; Argos IIIa); cf. below.
⚫ETYM The thematic root-present μévw is the basis of the whole Greek system. Beside
this stands a reduplicated present µµvw. The perfect µµévηкa is an innovation.
Although a counterpart of these formations is not found outside Greek, we have
Arm. mnam 'to stay, expect', which agrees with the iterative ε-unváw; both derive
from *mēnā-, for which cf. Lat. cēlāre (to oc-culere), sēdāre (to sīdere; cf. ►ët̃o̟ai).
Other formations are found in Lat. manēre < *mn-eh,- and Av. mānaiieiti [caus.] ‘he
makes stay' <*mon-eie-. In Sanskrit, we find as primary formations the reduplicated
athematic ma-man-dhi (ipv.), ma-man-yāt (opt.), á-ma-man (ipf.) 'to wait, stand
still' (only RV 10, 27; 31; 32). Further represented in ToAB mäsk- 'to reside, be' <
*mn-sk-, and probably in the isolated verbal noun OIr. ainmne 'patience' < *an-men-
V-. The comparison with Hitt. mimma- 'to refuse, reject' as from *mi-mn-e/o-,

=== page 492 ===

932
Mépiva
matching uíuvw (Jasanoff 2003) is doubtful for semantic as well as formal reasons
(see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
µépчµva [f.] ‘care, concern, solicitude' (h. Merc., Hes., Sapph., Emp., Pi., trag., Ar.);
rare in prose, originally Ionic? <IE? *smer-, PG?>
●COMP à-µépчµvos 'without concern' (S., Hell.), auεpчv-ía 'carelessness' (Plu.), etc.
•DER µεpчváw [v.] 'to care (for), be anxious' (S., Ar., X., D.), whence με-α,
Dor. -άuaτα [pl.] 'cares' (Pi., S.); -ŋτý [m.] ‘caring for something' (E.), -ŋTIкóç
(Artem., sch.).
•ETYM The position generally taken is that µépчµva is a back-formation from
µεpчváw (cf. ¿pεvváw : έpɛvva, etc.), but this idea it not confirmed by the age of the
attestations, nor by their distribution. Formally closest is µéðчµvoç; a noun *µɛp-í-
µwv or *µép-ɩ-µа seems to have served as a basis. A primary verb *smer-
presupposed by this analysis exists in Skt. smárati, Av. maraiti, paiti-šmaraiti, hi-
šmar to remember, remind'. Cognate formations can perhaps be found in
► µépfiepos, fépuinpa, -í(w, where further connections are given. Alternatively, Fur.:
246 assumes Pre-Greek origin because of the suffix (-quv-).
µépµɛpos [adj.] conventional epithet of unclear mg. (acc. to H. µépµɛpa = xaλeñá,
dεvá, povτídos ǎ a difficult, awesome, worthy of thought'); apparently a
reduplicated intensive formation. If related to μépчvα, we may assume an original
mg. raising concern', whence 'distressful, dreadful' vel sim. (?), beside 'pondering,
caring', of persons. <PG(V)►
VAR Also attested as a PN (Apollod., Paus.). In Hom. (only Il.) always μεpμεpа
[n.pl.] as an epithet of Epya, also as object of péčεv, µτíσασða; post-Hom. of
кaкóv, ẞλáßŋ, etc. (E., Lyc., Nic.), also of persons and animals (Pl. Hp. Ma., Plu.,
Opp.); enlarged μεp-µépios (Them.).
•DER μεpunpai [f.pl.] 'cares, concerns' (Hes. Th. 55, Thgn. 1325, also IG 14, 1942 [late
verse]), µɛpunpílw [v.] ‘to care, meditate, invent, consider, linger' (Hom.), aor. -ížaɩ,
fut. -í\w (cf. Ruijgh 1957: 87); also µɛpµaípw [v.] (Suid., H., Phot. [codd. also -µέpw]);
on ɑro-µepµnpívat 'forget the cares' (Ar. V. 5, D. C.) see Ruijgh ibid.
⚫ETYM Under μuépчuva, the primary thematic root-verb Skt. smárati, Av. maraiti
'remember' (reduplicated hi-šmar-) was adduced. The length of the vowel in
μεpμpaι, as opposed to µépµɛpoç, was explained by Frisk from the verb μεpμηpíчw,
where he ascribed it to the meter. Yet, this is no sufficient explanation; the
interchange rather points to Pre-Greek origin (on ε/11, see Fur.: 2574²). Thus,
unrelated to ▸μάptvs or µεípojai.
ép, -00 [f.] 'band, string' (K 23, D. S. 3, 21). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Dat.pl. -0ais (Agatharch. 47); acc.sg. -0ov (H.), nom. -Oos (Zonar.).
⚫ETYM Formation like λuç 'intestinal worm' (μépдuvėα is a v.l. in D. S. l.c., cf.
Eλuvos), and like öpvɩç, yέλyıs ‘head of garlic', etc. Cognates have been supposed in
unpúw 'to wind up' as well as in ►ßpóxos and ►µápalov ‘fennel'. But of course, the
word must be Pre-Greek, because of the alternating suffix -10-/-1v0-. Fur.: 289
compares unpivos, ouńpivos 'string, thread', and further σuñpiу 'hair', σµpɩyyεç
лλεкταí, σεραí, ẞóστpuxo 'coils, strings; cords; curls of hair' (H.).
uéoapov
µépµvoç [m.] ‘kind of falcon' (Call., Ael.). <PG(V)>
●var µépµvns. tpíopxos (H.).
⚫DER PN Mépμvwv (Theoc. 3, 35).
933
•ETYM Origin unknown, but compare the Lydian dynasty of the Mεpμvádaɩ; see
Neumann 1961: 70. Fauth Herm. 96 (1968): 257 recalls the PNs Mápμaε (Paus.) and
Bápẞa (Bápẞaε), and ►µópovos (epithet of aiετós ‘eagle', meaning unclear). The
last connection could show that the word is Pre-Greek (alternation μ/q).
µépores, -wv, -eoσɩ [pl.] epithet of ävеpwлo (Hom.), ßpoτoí (B 285), after these of
Aaoí (A. Supp. 90 [lyr.]) and, as a substantive, = äveршлo (trag., Hell. and later
poets); also = oi äœpoveç üлò Еúßoéшv 'senseless (Eub.)' (Gloss. Oxy. 1802, 48).
Further as an EN (Pi.) and of a bird (Arist., Plu.); cf. below. ◄PG(S)►
⚫СомР μεроло-σлóроç 'procreating men' (Man.).
•DER μερолηïоç 'human' (Man., Opp.).
ETYM The original meaning is unknown, which has opened up the way for
speculations (see Frisk). Koller Glotta 46 (1968): 14-26 starts from h. Ap. 4 with the
formula лóλç μεрóлшv ȧvерáлшv, said of Cos, and states that it meant 'a city of
mortal men'. See further Ramat Acad. Toscana La Colombaria 1960: 131-157 and
Ramat Riv. fil. class. 90 (1962): 150.
The suffix -ow (-wy), probably non-IE, is found in various names of animals and
peoples, e.g. Spúoy, Apúoñeç, rápvoy, Аóλoлεs, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 259). Like the
word itself, it is probably Pre-Greek. See Beekes Glotta 73 (1995-1996): 21-27. The
relation between ȧépoy and Mέpoy is unclear (see Fur.: 246).
μépos [n.] 'part, share, section, row, rank' (h. Hom., Thgn., Pi., IA). <IE *smer- 'think
of, remember, care'>
•COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. µεp-ápxηs [m.] ‘distributing official' (Att.
inscr.), 'commander of a military division' (Hell.), very often as a second member,
е.g. лoλv-μεрýs 'consisting of many parts' (Ti. Locr., Arist.).
●DER µɛpíç, -ídoç [f.] 'part, distribution, contribution, plot of ground, district, class'
(Att., Hell.) with µɛpíd-tov (Arr.); as a first member it appears in in µɛpid-ápxns [m.]
'governor of a district' (pap., LXX), etc. Further μεpítŋs [m.] ‘participant' (D., Plb.)
with μɛρɩɩкóç belonging to the µɛpítηs' (Lyd.), (ovµ-)µεpitɛúw, -oµaɩ [v.] ‘to
distribute (among each other)' (LXX, pap.), with µεpɩτεía 'distribution of property'
(pap.); µɛpikós ‘concerning the part, individual, special' (Aristipp. apud D. L.), with
-KEÚw [V.] 'to consider as an individual' (Steph. in Rh., Eust.); μεpóεv. µɛpiσtiкóv 'fit
for dividing [LSJ]' (H.); µépɛa or -ɛía in έv tāɩ µɛpɛiãi (Tab. Heracl.).
Denominative (first from µépoç, but later from μɛpíç too): µɛpíšw (Dor. -íodw) [v.]
'to distribute', med. 'to distribute among each other, to drive apart' (IA, Theoc.,
Bion), also with prefix as έлɩ-, §ɩaα-, кατα-; thence (εñɩ-, katα-)µεpσμós 'distribution'
(Pl., Arist.), μépiσμа 'part' (Оrph.), кατα-, ȧva-μéplots 'distribution' (Epicur.),
μεpoτns 'distributor', ouμ- 'fellow-heir' (Ev. Luc., pap.), fem. -íotpia (sch.).
ETYM Verbal noun from μεíρoшa 'to take one's share', perf. εчμoрε 'to
participate'.
►
μéσαẞov [n.] 'strap', fixing the pole to the middle of the yoke. <PG>

=== page 493 ===

934
MÉaakdov
•VAR Hes. Op. 469 -wv, probably gen.pl.; µɛσσaßα [pl.] (Call.); µɛσáßolov, v.l. -ó-
(Poll. 1, 252).
●DER µɛσσaßów [v.] ‘to yoke (the horses)' (Lyc.).
•ETYM Analyzed as an hypostasis from (¿v) µέow Bowv 'between the oxen', with a
thematization like in έкατóμ-ßη (μεσáßolov based on évvɛáßotov, etc.). However,
the compositional vowel -a- instead of -o- is unexplained (assuming that µɛσɑ- was
influenced by µετα- does not help). In fact, the whole analysis is morphologically
unacceptable. If we take into consideration the forms µéσoy ‘strap' in µεσóлa
jµávta tòv repì tòv Švyòv kai tỏ äpotpov dedεµévov ‘a strap bound around the
yoke and the plough' (H.), pointing to interchange of labials, and also μɛσσаioν· TỎ
Úлò τоÙ τраoç úлоτеéμɛvov 'which is put around the neck' (H.), with
geminate -σσ-, μεσáτ (µ˜áτov I Reg 17, 7), Pre-Greek origin becomes evident.
See Fur.: 107 on α/o, 148f. on л/ß.
μéσαкλov [n.] 'weaver's beam' (LXX 1 Ci. 17, 7). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR v.ll. -kvov, -ávτov; -кμov (H.), -кvov (Suid.); μεσαкμоν· каvàν τo iστo 'rod
of the loom', oi de avτíov ‘others: (part of) the loom', oi dè tỏ µeoάktwv ǹ µeoάкpwv
(H.); µεσáτµu̟. ts̟ kavóvi, tậ µéσw kaλáµw toù iστou 'the middle rod of the loom'
(Suid.).
ETYM Almost certainly a technical loanword from Pre-Greek, because of the many
different variants.
µɛoŋµßpía [f.] ‘midday, noon', as a direction 'south' (Att. A.). ◄GR➤
VAR -ín (Archil., Hecat.), uɛσaußpín (Hdt.).
•Der µɛonµßpivós (Att.), Dor. (Theoc.) µεσ¤µßpivós ‘ptng. to the afternoon,
southern' (after the adj. of time in -ɩvós); µεσýµßpios ‘southern' (Ruf. apud Orib.),
µɛonµßpiác [f.] (Nonn.); also (after Dor. àµépα) τỏ µεσãµépɩov ‘at midday' (Theoc.).
Denominative verb µɛσŋµßp-iá‹ƒ (Pl.), -íw (Str.), with ptc. -táwv, -tówv (AP, A. R.)
'to pass the meridian, culminate', of sun and stars.
•ETYM An abstract formation in -ía from μéσov чµap, or derived from an old
adjective *µéσ-ãµ(ß)p-os, -tos of the middle of the day' from the zero grade of ǎuap
'day'. Thence μεσ-ǎµßp-ía, -íŋ with shortening by Osthoff, and μεσ-ŋußp-ía with
analogical η after ▶ñµap, µεpa.
n
µéσкoç [m.]? · kódov, dépμа. Níкavôpoç 'skin, fleece (Nic. = Fr. 119)' (H.). <LW
Orient.>
•ETYM An Oriental loanword acc. to Lewy 1895: 131, Justi IF Anz. 17: 125: cf. Aram.
meškā, Assyr. mašku, OP maškā, MP and Arm. mašk 'hide, skin, soft leather', etc.
Did лéσкoç arise from here by contamination with лéкоç (Güntert 1914: 145f.)?
Latte simply reads лéσкоç instead of μéσкoç.
µeoódµa • yvvý <ws Aákwves> (H. gl. 917). <?►
•VAR Also uɛσodóμа. уuvη. Аáкwvɛç (H. gl. 947).
⚫ETYM Unknown; -Sua reminds of Sáuap. Fur.: 227 derives a form μεσ(σ)oμа from
the glosses cited above, but this is unwarranted.
i
:
!
HÉOMdov
935
µɛσódµn [f.] ‘crossbeam', stretched from wall to wall in a building, or from side to side
on a ship, and in which the mast was stepped (Od., Hp., Q. S.), details in Bechtel 1914
S.V. GR➤
•VAR µεσóðµã (Delph. IVª), μεσóµvŋ (Att. inscr.), on the phonetics see Schwyzer:
208. Also peoóÔun Ęúłov, TỎ ảnÒ TỐC TPÓTEÇ %, Toũ iøToũ (H.) and peoóSuat kai
µɛõódµata. τà µεσóðτλα. τívεç dè τà τŵv doкŵν αστ½µατα (H., Latte:
“μεσódματα vix sanum").
⚫ETYM Properly "belonging to the middle of the house", a compound of μéσos and
the zero grade of the word for 'house' (dɛµ-, dµ-), seen in ►dɛoïótŋs and ▶dáñedov,
cf. on Sóμoç, enlarged with a suffix -ā-: µɛσó-dµ-ã like *εкατóµ-ẞF-ã. The term
was transferred from domestic architecture to the construction of ships. The second
member -Sun is often directly derived from déuw 'to build' as a zero grade root-noun
(cf. véo-dµã-tos, dé-dµŋ-µai < *-dmh2-), so "middle structure"?
μéσoç [adj.] ‘(in the) middle', of space, time, etc., τỏ μéσov 'centre' (II.). ◄IE *medio-
'middle'>
•VAR Compar. μεσαí-τεpoç, superl. -τατoç (IA), after лaλαíτεpoç, etc.; also
µέo(σ)atos (Il., Ar.), after σxατoç, etc.; µεðσótatoç (A. R., Man.).
•DIAL Aeol. μéσσoç, Cret. Boeot. µéttoç.
•COMP Very often as a first member, e.g. ►µεσódµ, µεoŋµßpía; µɛðaɩ-лóλɩoç ‘half-
grey, grizzled' (N 361; cf. e.g. μɛσó-λευкоç), likе чɛσαíτɛроç, was not built on a
locative but metrically conditioned (Schwyzer: 448).
•DER Adjectives: 1. µɛσýɛs = µέσoç (M 269, metrical enlargement in verse-final
position, perhaps after tiµýɛiç, tedńeis). 2. µeo(o)ńpns = µéoos (E., Eratosth.), after
лобкрη, еtc. 3. μσ = μéσ (Antiph.), cf. Tɛλευταïоç. 4. μεσádioç 'central'
(Aeol. acc. to sch. D. T.), after dixádios etc., cf. also µεσá‹ƒ. 5. µεσídios in the
middle, mediating' (Arist.); µεσídiov [n.] ‘property deposited with an intermediary',
whence -tów 'to make a deposite' (pap., inscr.). 6. µɛoítŋs [m.] ‘mediator, arbiter',
with -ITEúw [V.] 'to be a μ., to settle', also 'to pawn' (Plb., pap., NT), -Tεía 'mediation,
settlement, pawning' (J., pap.). 7. µéoŋs [m.] ‘wind between åлapêtias and kaikiaç'
(Arist.), also μɛσɛúç = kaikiaç (Steph. in Hp.). 8. µeoótns, -ntos [f.] 'middle, mean,
moderation' (Pl., Arist.). 9. μɛσαкóðεv [adv.] ‘amidst, between' (Arc. IVª), from
-αуóеεv after лаvτaɣóðεv.
µεσσáτ (Call.), μɛσάτov name of a strap (Poll.) are unrelated, see ►μéσaẞov
'leather strap'.
Denominative verbs: 1. μɛσów 'to constitute the middle, be in the middle' (IA); 2.
чεσεúш 'to keep the mean, be neutral' (Pl. Lg., X., Arist.); 3. μεσáw = μεσów (LXX,
D. S.).
ETYM Old local adjective, identical with Skt. mádhya-, Lat. medius, Go. midjis, OHG
mitti, all from IE *médio- ‘in the middle'. See further ►με(σ)σnyú(s).
μεσлλov [n.] 'medlar, tree, Mespilus germanica' (Archil., Hp., Amphis, Dsc.), also
'thorn, Crataegus (orientalis, oxyacantha', Thphr.). <PG?(S)►
•var -íλŋ [f.] (Thphr.).

=== page 494 ===

936
με
ETYM A foreign word of unknown origin. Probably Pre-Greek on account of the
suffix -- (Pre-Greek: suffixes). Borrowed as Lat. mespilum, -a, whence OHG
mespila, etc.
μεσлði éσa.
μéσσavoç (-ov) →µéτavλoç.
µε(σ)onyú(c) [adv.] ‘in the middle, between' (II., Hp., Eratosth.). <IE *med¹ieh,-g™u-
'going in the middle'>
•VAR μεσnyú (only Orph.).
ETYM On the facultative -c, see Schwyzer: 404 and 620. The similarity with έyyúç is
obvious, but it is unknown whether this is due to a common origin or to analogy. See
most recently De Lamberterie RPh. 72 (1998): 132, arguing that it contains an
instrumental μɛσσŋ, like in Skt. madhya 'in the middle' (Forssman IF 101 (1996):
305), and a root *g*eu- which stands beside *gem-, *geh₂-. See ▶лpéσßus, ► έyyús.
μεστóç [adj.] 'full, filled, satiated' (IA). <IE? *med- 'measure, be full'>
●COMP Also with ảva-, ¿v-, ¿ñɩ-, etc. in different mgs., first after άváлλɛoç, etc. Also
possible is a back-formation of avα-µεστoñóðàí (cf. Strömberg 1946: 91 and 117).
●Der µɛσtóoµai, -ów [v.] ‘to be filled, fill up' (com., S., Pl. Lg., Arist.), also with ava-,
Siα-, έv-, кατα-, whence late and rare μéστwσis 'filling, satiation', -wua 'filling'. Also
µéoµa• µéotwµa (H.), perhaps an old primary formation independent of μεστóç?
ETYM Unclear. Connection with μadáw is impossible from the laryngealist point of
view. A connection with *med- 'to measure' has also been proposed, defended by
Meier-Brügger KZ 105 (1992): 240-244, referring to de Saussure's translation ‘qui a sa
mesure'. LIV² connects μεστós with 2. *med- 'voll werden, satt werden', to be
separated from 1. *med- 'measure'.
μéσqa [adv., prep.] 'until' (508). ◄ GR►
•VAR Further µέoqi (Aret.); µéota (Cret. IIª, Cyren.), µɛtt' ¿ç (Gortyn), µéσtε (Arc.),
µεσлodɩ, µɛç (Thess.); cf. Ruijgh 1957: 137.
•ETYM The initial part is the same as in ►µéxpɩ (and perhaps ►µετá); thence the -ɩ in
μεσqɩ was taken. Final -pa is obscure. µéσtè corresponds to ►čσtɛ; µεorodɩ may
contain IE *pod-i 'foot' (see García Ramón in DELG Supp.); Thess. μεç (only in μèç
τãç лéµëτaç), might stand for μéστε, -τα with haplology. Many details remain
unclear, as is common with petrified expressions.
µéta, µetá [adv., prep.] ‘in the midst, afterwards; between, with, after' (Il.), with gen.,
dat. and acc. <IE *meth₂ ‘in the midst, between, after'>
●DIAL Myc. me-ta.
⚫ETYM The Germanic preposition Go. miþ, ON með, OHG mit(i) 'with, among' < IE
*met(i) or med¹i is very similar, and probably related to µéσoç; Gr. -a could be an
innovation after кaτá, ává, diá, etc. Cf. also Alb. mjet 'middle'. A remote cognate
may be contained in the first element of μεxpt, and possibly in μéσoç. Note tà
μéτα ε 'afterwards' (Hes. Op. 394 acc. to Hdn. and other sources [τà µεταžú codd.]),
with -ε like in Oúpače, etc. The form µɛtažú [adv.] 'in the midst, between' (Il.), late
μetaváσtns, -ov
937
also ‘afterwards', is common and old, and may derive from µɛta + §v(v). Beside µɛtá
or instead of it, some dialects (Aeol., Dor., Arc.) use ►лεdá.
µétɑ\\ov [n.] ‘mine, quarry' (Hdt., Th., X., Att. inscr.), late also ‘mineral, metaľ
(Nonn., AP), back-formation from µεta\\ɛúw. ◄PG(S) ►
●COMP As a first member in μεταλλ-oupyós 'miner', with -έw, -ɛiov (D. S., Dsc.).
•DER 1. μετаλλεīа [n.pl.] 'minerals, metals' (Pl. Lg. 678d), substantivized form of
*μετα\\ɛños ‘ptng. to to a mine'. 2. µεταλλiкós ‘ptng. to mines' (D., Arist.). 3.
μεταλλεúç [m.] 'miner' (Lys., Pl. Lg., Att. inscr.); thence, or from μéταλλov, 4.
µɛta\\ɛúw [v.] ‘to be miner, work in the mines, dig up from quarries' (Pl., Arist.,
LXX) with µɛtɑ\\-ɛía (Pl., Str.), -ɛvois (Ph. Bel.) ‘mining', -evtýs = µetaλλeús (Str.),
-εUτIкÓS ‘ptng. to mining' (Pl. Lg., Arist., pap.). 5. μεταλíšμа [v.] 'to be
condemned to be a miner' (Cod. Just.). 6. µεταλλīτç. уñ τıç 'some kind of earth' (H.).
On itself stands μεταλλáw [v.] 'to investigate, inquire, examine' (Il., late prose), cf.
below.
ETYM A technical term of mining, and therefore suspected of being a loan. The
attempt to explain μεταλλov as a back-formation from μεταλλáw does not help, as
no convincing etymology has been found for the verb either. The explanation from
μετ ǎλλα, properly “(inquire) for other things”, is hardly convincing. It is much
more probable that denominative µεταλλáw is originally a technical term, which was
used in a metaph. sense by epic poets, but fell out of use elsewhere. Borrowed as Lat.
metallum 'mining, metal', whence MoHG Metall, MOE metal, etc. On Pre-Greek
-aλλ-, see Beekes 2008.
μεταμvo [adj.] idle, vain, useless' (Hom., Pi., Theoc.), where always -a [n.pl.], later
'borne by the wind, raised on high' (Simon., Ar.), by association with ävεμoç. <GR>
ETYM The word is synonymous with àvɛuwλioc, and like the latter, it is modelled on
ǎvεчos 'wind'. It is a hypostasis of μετ' ȧvéμwv for *μετ-avεμ-úvios, with subsequent
haplology. The glosses μwvin. óλywpía and μwvióv. μáταιov, ȧxpεov (H.) probably
originated from a false analysis of this form. Not related to µáτηv.
LETaváOTNG,
εvá, -ov [m.] See below. <GR>
•DER In Hom. only in the expression àτíµηov µεaváσtηy (I 648 = P 59); post-
Hom. 'migrant, emigrant, fugitive' (Hdt. 7, 161 of the Athenians, Arat., Ph., pap.),
-σtɩç [f.] (Ph.) and -στpiα (AP), like ȧyúptηs : ȧyúptpia, etc.; µεtavάot-10s [adj.]
'migrating, wandering' (AP, Nonn.), μετаvαστ-εú, -εúo̟μα [v.] 'to drive out,
wander, flee' (LXX, Str., Ph.).
⚫ETYM Hdt. and his contemporaries already understood the word as 'wanderer', and
connected it (as μετ-αvá-στη-s) with μετ-аvα-στñ-vα 'to move, emigrate',
µɛtaváσtaσiç ‘removal, emigration' (Hdt., Th., Hp.). In this case, however, it would
stand for *μετavα-στά-τηs with metrically conditioned haplology (cf. έлɩ-, лapα-,
rpo-otá-tηc, etc.), as an old root noun -σtŋ-s < *steh₂- (like in Skt. ni-ṣṭhấ-s, prati-
ṣṭhá-s, etc.) has no counterpart in Greek.
Since this interpretation is in conflict with the Homeric use of μετά and ávíστασðal,
a better hypothesis may be the explanation already given in the TLG: µeta-váo-tis ~
*μετα-vaíw 'to live together with', like µεtavaiε-tηs (Hes.), -τáw (h. Cer.). As an old

=== page 495 ===

938
μετaεú
parallel formation to Att. μéτ-oкоç, Агg. лεdá-Ƒоlкоç and to μετоikétai• katà µéoov
oikoûvteç (H.), µετaváστηs would originally have meant 'who lives among others
(as a foreigner), resident' (and still does in Homer).
Because of the disappearance of verbal -vao- and the gradual advance of μετα-
'around' at the expense of μετα- 'with', μετáσ was associated with
µetavaotñvai, µeτaváστaσiç already in classical times. Leumann's view (Leumann
1950: 1833°) that μετα-váσ-τηs would properly mean ‘immigrant' (from µɛta-vaíw ‘to
move) has to meet the same objections as the connection with μετаvаστηvαι. See
► vaíw.
μεtažú →µéta.
µetápolos [adj.] ‘raised, high in the air' (Ion.), equivalent of Att. µɛtéwpos (Capelle
Phil. 71 (1912): 449ff.). <GR>
•VAR Doг. лεбápσios (A., Ar.).
●DER µetapoiów [v.] 'to raise on high' (Ion.).
ETYM Formation like ȧvápσios (to *ǎv-apτoc), àµßрóσios (to ǎµ-ßpoτos), etc. Acc.
to Wackernagel KZ 28 (1887): 131, it is a contracted form of *μετ-áεptos > *µét-āp-
Toç, from μεT-aɛípw, -aipw 'to lift up'. See μετéwpoç.
µétaooai [f.pl.] ‘lambs born later, i.e. of middle age', between the лрóуovoɩ and the
žpσai (1221); τà μéτασσα [n.pl.] 'later on' (h. Merc. 125). <IE *meth₂-tio- 'born later'>
⚫ETYM Derived from μéτα like εлσσа 'daughters born later' to εлɩ, so probably from
*µεta-tɩo-, -ɩɩă [f.], like Skt. ápa-tya- 'offspring'. The explanation as μéτ-ασσα =
µεt-oñσaɩ “being in between”, an archaic zero grade fem. ptc. of μετ-ɛĭvaɩ, meets the
problem that both τà µéτασσα (for τà µετóvτα) and лσσα have to be explained as
analogical formations. See лεpiooós.
μéτavλoç [adj.] attribute of Oúpa (Ar., Lys., Plu.), also substantivized [f.] 'the door that
opens from the (outside) court, or from the living of the men, towards the back
rooms' (opposite ǹ aλɛoç Oúpa 'the outside door'), in Vitr. (6, 7, 5) used of a
corresponding corridor. <GR>
•VAR μéσavλoç (E., Ph. [v. 1. -Atos, Vitr.), μéσσavλoç (-ov) 'the inner court where the
cattle were put for the night' (Hom., A. R. 3, 235); µɛðaúλŋ [f.] ‘court inside the
house' (pap. VIP; reading not quite certain).
•ETYM As a hypostasis, Att. μéτavλos either stands for ǹ µεť aúλýv (Оúpα), i.e. the
door behind the (outward) court, or for ý µɛť aúλñs (µet' aúλŵv Oûpa), i.e. the door
in the middle of the court (between both courts); the meaning, which changed with
the organisation of the house, cannot be settled without exact knowledge of the plan
of the house; cf. the explanations by Wistrand Eranos 37 (1939): 16ff. Therefore, the
etymological analysis is likewise uncertain. On μεσo- for older μετα-, see
Wackernagel 1920-1924(2): 242.
On the other hand, Hom. µéσσavλoç seems to stand for τò μéσov or (¿v) µέoσw
aúλñs, meaning "what belongs to the middle of the court" or "what is in the middle
of the court", i.e. 'middle of the court, interior of the court'; cf. Risch IF 59 (1949):
19f. It would then have to be separated from µéτavλoç. In A. R. 3, 235, epic
HÉtpov
939
μéσσavλoç may have been influenced by later μéσavλoç; late µεσaúλŋ conformed to
the simplex.
µεtéwpoç [adj.] 'raised on high, in suspense, above the earth, on high sea, superficial',
metaph. 'hesitating, uncertain, pending, excited' (II.). <GR
•VAR Epic μετηopos, Aeol. and Dor. лεdáoрos (Alc., A.).
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. µɛtɛwpo-λóyos 'who speaks about tà µɛtéwpa,
astronomer', with -éw, -ía (IA).
●Der µetewp-ótŋs [f.] 'sublimity' (Corn.), -ía ‘absence of mind (Suet., M. Ant.),
-oσúvη 'id.' (Man.); -ídiov mg. uncertain (pap. letters). Denominative µɛtɛwpíšw [v.]
'to raise high, encourage (with false hopes), etc.', med.-pass. also 'to become proud,
arrogant' (IA) with μετεwp-σμós (Hp., Arist.), -чoμа (Hell.), -totę (Plu., D.C.)
'exaltation, excitedness, etc.'; -toτns (H.) as an explanation of лεdαopioτns (beside
<a>уaτíaç), -ɩσtкóç 'exciting' (Vett. Val.). Also μɛtɛwpέw
=
µetewpíšoµai (Ph.).
•ETYM Derivation from *μετ-αεípw, μετ-αípw (Аeol. лεdaípw) 'to lift up', like
ouvάopos 'coupled together' from ovv-aɛípw (cf. \oxos to ¿½½xw, etc.). A hypostasis
of μετ' ȧépos located in the air', with analogical -o-, is unlikely. See ►µετápolog.
µεtóëŋ [f.] ‘metope', element between the triglyphs on the frieze of Dorian temples
(Vitr.), codd. methope, -a like triumphus, sephulcrum, etc. (cf. Leumann 1963-1979:
131). <GR➤
•VAR Accentuation not found in the mss. Also μεðóлα [n.pl.] (Delph. IV*, H.;
μ[...]oлα Att. inscr. IVª), cf. εóлtηs beside éƒórtηç. etc. (Schwуzer: 220).
⚫ETYM Given other technical terms like μετα-кióνovν, μετα-στúλу space between
the columns' (Att. and Hell. inscr.), μεópios, -ov 'what lies between boundaries,
borderland between two countries' (Th., X.), µετóлoу must indicate a space between
the oлa. Acc. to Vitr. 4, 2, 4, the ónaí were tignorum cubicula et asserum, i.e.
omissions or indentations in the beams, in which the heads of the crossbeams were
fitted in; these heads were covered with special planks, the so-called triglyphs.
According to another view, rejected by Vitr., the oлai were originally openings for
light, which certainly fits the meaning of óл½, 'hatch, opening for light', better.
Demangel BCH 55 (1931): 117ff. argues for the latter, seeing the triglyphs as a grid
which was put before the oлaí afterwards.
The form µετóлη is clearly secondary to µετóлоν, and adapted to the simplex,
perhaps because the metopes themselves seemed to be “openings in-between";
µɛtóëŋ ‘opening between (the triglyphs)' would be a compound of the type лɛpí-
кηлоç garden around (the house)' (Hell. and late pap.), cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 252, or
understood like чεσ-aúλŋ (seе ►μéτavλoç).
µétpov [n.] ‘measure, goal, length, size; metre' (Il.). <IE *meh,- ‘measure’▷
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. σýµµετ 'with the same measure, measured,
appropriate, symmetrical', oчμμετp-ía 'harmony, symmetry, etc.' (IA); лεpí-µετpoç
'exceeding (the measure)' (Od.); but Лεpí-µετpov (Hdt., Arist.), -oç [f.] (scil. ypaµµń)
'circumference', with verbal connotation after лεрíodoç etc. (cf. лερι-μετреw Luc.).

=== page 496 ===

!
940
HÉTWTOV
●DER Adjectives: 1. µέτpios ‘moderate, suitable' (Hes.) with µetpi-ótŋs 'moderation'
(IA), -oσúvη 'poverty' (pap. VIP), -aкóç 'moderate' (pap. VIP), -άw 'to be moderate'
(Att., Hell.) with -aσµóç (Suid.); µεpúε (H. s.v. λαуapíττεται). 2. µetpikós
'metrical, by measure' (Arist.). 3. µετηó [adv.] 'in metrical form' (Nonn.). 4.
Verb: µɛτpéw ‘to measure (out)', etc. (Hom.), very often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, Sia-,
Èл-, ¿к-, άлo-, σvv-; hence (often with prefix) µéτp-ŋσis ‘measurement' (IA), -ŋqua
‘measure' (E., Hell.), -ŋtýs [m.] “measurer”, name of a measure, ‘metretes' (Att.),
-ŋtís [f.] ‘id.' (Amorgos IV³), -ŋaños ‘sticking to a μ.' (Caryanda), -ŋtikós
‘regarding measurement' (Pl.). As a second member in several verbal compounds,
e.g. yɛw-µέtpηs [m.] ‘geometer' (Pl., X.) with yɛwµετp-ía, Ion. -ín (Hdt., Ar.), -tкóç
(Democr., Pl.), -έw (Att.), ßov-μετpηs “measurer of cows" = ó εлɩ Оvolv
tɛtayµévos rapà Aiτwλoïç 'who has been appointed at a sacrifice (Aetolian)' (H.).
Backformations, e.g. dɩáµετpoç (scil. ypaµµn) [f.] ‘diameter, diagonal, etc.' (Pl.,
Arist.), εлчμετрov 'excess, addition' (Hell.).
•ETYM Beside μέτpov, we find µτpα [f.] 'areal measure', etc. (Cilicia) with an
identical suffix, but a different root grade; corresponding exactly with Skt. mắtrā [f.]
'measure'. Also in έpeol-µýtpiv. τǹу yεwµετpíav (H.), see on ►pa.
It may go back to the root *meh,- seen in the athematic present Skt. má-ti 'measures'.
Greek shows a short vowel in μéτpov, as opposed to Skt. mátram [n.] 'id.'; this
derives from a vocalization of the zero grade *mh,-tro-> μετp- (rather than *mh,tr->
μητp-). The latter would be the expected vocalization, if we assume that *NHC-
develops like *-CNHC-> Gr. CN₁/a/wC. However, contra Beekes 1969: 183, it seems
that the *m- remained consonantal in initial position, see Beekes IF 93 (1988): 22-45.
A derivation IE *méd-tro- from *med- ‘measure' is impossible, as it would have given
*μεστρоv. Sее ►µñtiç.
µέtwñov [n.] ‘the space between the eyes, forehead, brow', metaph. 'front, front of an
army' (II.); also as a plant name = Xaλßávn (Dsc.). ◄GR➤
●COMP ɛúpv-µétwлoç ‘with a broad forehead (Hom.).
•DER μετάлоç 'on the forehead' (A 95, P 739), also substantival = 'forehead' (see
below), -tov [n.] 'front' (Priene IVª), ‘bandage on the forehead, etc.' (Gal.), name of a
salve prepared from the plant u., etc. (Dsc., Gal.); μετшл-ídios of the forehead' (Hp.,
АP), but лpo-µετwл-ídios ‘on the forehead' (Hdt., X.), лεpɩ- 'covering the forehead'
(Hp.), from the corresponding prepositional forms; -tałos ‘id.' (medic.); -ías [m.]
'with a typical forehead' (pap.); μεtwríç. ¡atpikòç èлídεσμoç 'medical bandage' (H.);
µɛtwä-ŋdóv (Hdt., Th.), -ădóv (Opp.) ‘forming a front'. On the PN Métwños
Sommer 1948: 8².
•ETYM Acc. to Arist. (HA, 491b 12), it originally means µetažù tŵv ỏµµáτwv, ‘space
between the eyes', a hypostasis from µɛtá and åë-ɑ ‘eye, face' with a thematic vowel.
The form μετбл-оv 'forehead, front' may be a parallel formation containing a suffix
-to-. The expression is understandable when one starts from an animal's head, which
has the eyes on the flanks (cf. Sommer op.cit. 115¹).
μεxpɩ [adv., prep.] ‘as far as, until' (Il.). <IE *me-g"s-r-i 'until'>
VAR Also uéxpis ( 128, X., Hell.).
i
i
941
•ETYM Identical with Arm. merj ‘near, by', whence merjenam ‘to approach' < *merji-
anam; from IE *mé-gs-r-i, containing the word for 'hand'. See ►äxpı.
un [pcl.] 'not, that not' (Il.). <IE *meh,>
•VAR Further undé, undeís, unkétɩ, µýte, etc.
⚫ETYM Old prohibitive negation, identical with Arm. mi, Skt. má, Av. mā, OP mā,
and TóAB mā; IE *meh,; also to be included here is Alb. mo ‘id.' < *meh, next to mos
<*meh, kwe. See ▸ov.
µŋdɛa 1 [n.pl.] ‘male genitals', of owτós (Od., Androm. apud Gal., Call., also Ant.
Lib.), µέčɛa (Hes. Op. 512, Lyc.); µεdɛa (Archil. 138); metaph. ‘urine' in Opp. (Cyn. 4,
441); μεoç aidotov 'private parts' (H.). <PG(V)►
•COMP As a second member in ɛvµélɛos (cod. -µážɛwç; leg. -µɛ(éoƒ?). ɛúquǹc (cod.
-ɛìç; leg. -oûç?) toiç aidoiois 'well-endowed qua private parts' (H.).
•ETYM The variation between µndɛa, µéšɛa and µédɛa clearly points to a Pre-Greek
word: interchange ε/n (cf. Fur.: 25842), S/C (Fur.: 253ff.). The form μýdɛɑ is not a
euphemistic replacement for µεšɛa, µédɛa (as per Wackernagel). WP compared MIr.
mess (< *med-tu-) ‘gland', assuming an original meaning 'swell, swollen in the form
of balls' (which does not make sense for this root).
undɛa 2 'counsels, cares'. →μηdopai.
µýdɩov [n.] plant name, 'Campanula lingulata' (Dsc.). <?>
●DER έлµýdiov name of an unknown plant (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Strömberg 1940: 122 supposes connection with µýdioç. µaλaкóç ‘soft, delicate'
(H.).
µýdoµai [v.] ‘to deliberate, estimate, contrive, decide' (Hom.). <IE *meh,-, *med-
'measure'>
•VAR Aor. µýσaσðaɩ (Hom.), µñσto· <έ>ßovλeúoato (H.), fut. µýσoµai.
•COMP Rarely with εлɩ- and dα-. As a second member e.g. in Opaσv-µýdns ‘with bold
plans' (Pi., B.), also as a PN (Il.). 2. µndoðúvò ‘prudence' (Hell.). 3. µýðτwp, -wpos,
-opos [m.] 'adviser' (Il., Hp.), also as a PN (II.); as a second member in e.g. Sopt-
чηστwρ [m.] 'adviser in war' (E.), often in PNs, е.g. ①εо-μηστwp (Hdt.), Kλvτal-
µýotpa, -ŋ (see on ► кλúw), etc.
•DER µýdɛa [n.pl.] 'counsels, plans' (II.).
•ETYM Primary thematic µýdoµaɩ, whence aor. µñσασðα beside older µñσto, and
µýσoµaɩ, is commonly identified with the near synonym µέdoµαι (see ►µέdw). The
lengthened grade -- is also seen in Dor., so it must be old. This is remarkable, as all
other presents with a long root vowel have an old full grade plus a laryngeal.
Therefore, one might consider influence of the root *meh,- 'measure' (discussed
under µñtıç and µετpov) on µεdoµat, so as to yield μndoμa. This cross would have
to be old, as the verbal noun μndɛa 'plans' has an immediate counterpart in Arm.
mit-k' [pl.] 'id.'. See Beekes IF 93 (1988): 30f., and also Clackson 1994: 147-149, who
denies that Arm. mit-k' and Greek µndɛa necessarily constitute a shared innovation
of these two languages.

=== page 497 ===

942
inkáofial
Hñ入ov 1
943
µŋkáoµai [v.] ‘to bleat', of sheep, also of a hare and of a horse; in the formular verse
kàď ď žлɛσ ¿v kovíɲσɩ µaкáv, of a horse, deer, boar, and also of a man (Phryn. PS,
Procop., sch., H.). <ONOM *měk- 'bleat'>>
•VAR µŋkášw (Nic.), perf. µεµηкα only in ind. plpf. ¿µéµŋkov (1 439) and ptc.
μεμηкŵç (K 362), fеm. μεμαкvīαι (A 435), aor. ptc. μакáv (P 469, к 163).
=
•DER After кεμάç and other animal names: µnкás [f.] ‘bleating', in Hom. only plur. of
alyɛç ‘goats', later (S., E.) also of ǎpveç 'sheep', and (substantivized) = a. Late
derivatives: unк-ασμóç (Plu., Poll.), -10µós (Opp.), -ń (Ael., sch.) [f.] ‘bleating',
-ŋtiкós [adj.] ‘bleating' (sch.).
:
ETYM The pair µé̟µŋкα: µакεv (ptc. µакóv) agrees with λéλŋкα λaкɛiv (with
comparable meaning 'to scream, screech'), кéкpaya: кpayɛīv 'to croak', etc. Several
types of present were created from the old intensive perfects and thematic aorists:
µnkáčw, -áoµai (cf. λáσкw, кpáčw, etc.). On µaкáv, see Leumann 1950: 235 n. 31. The
formation is onomatopoeic, starting from the sound-imitation μn (*mē), and with
many cognates, e.g. MHG meckatzen ‘bleat', mecke ‘he-goat', Lith. mekčióti, mekénti
‘id.', Lat. miccio ‘id.', Skt. (lex.) meka- [m.] 'he-goat', Arm. mak'i 'sheep'. The ablaut
μηк-/ μак- cannot be of IE date, so it must be analogical.
µñkoç [n.] ‘length' (Od.). ◄IE *meh¸k-os- 'length', *mh,k- 'long'>
●DIAL Dor. µãкoç (Archyt.).
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. лεpi-µýêñç, Dor. -µáкηs 'very long, very high'
(II.), with expressive enlargement лερчµηк-ετоç 'id.' (Hom., Arat.), after лáуετOÇ,
ápidεíкετoç, àµµákɛtog, etc.
•DER Superlative µýкστoš (Dor. µáкiστos) longest, highest, greatest' (II.), with
MηкιστεÚS PN (II.); compar. μáσσwv, ntr. µãσσov (0 203, etc.), after åσσov etc.,
derived from μaкpós after έλáσσwv, лáσσwv, þáσσwv; secondary μaкpó-tatos,
-Tεpoç.
Old denominative verb μηкúvw (Dor. µакúvw) 'to lengten, stretch out (Pi., IA),
rarely with prefix, е.g. άлo-, εл-. Hence the rare and late prosodic terms µýк-vvõiS
(sch.), -vouós (Eust.) 'lengthening', -Uvτкóç 'which can be lengthened' (A. D.).
Further derivations, also rare and late: µŋкɛdavóç 'long' (AP, Nonn.), for µaкɛdvóç
after ηлεdavóç, etc.; μηк-кóç 'regarding the length' (Procl.), -60 Ev 'from afar'
(Aesop., Paul. Aeg.), -ótηs [f.] 'length' (Gal.).
•ETYM A counterpart to µñкoç is Av. masah- [n.] ‘length, greatness', with a short
stem vowel. Likewise, Av. masišta- and OP maišta- are opposed to μýкστos in their
vocalism, which is not well understood. The full grade formation *meh₂k-os- in
μñкoç is typical for an old s-stem. On the short vowel in ►µαкpóç < *mh₂k-ro- see
further ►µétpov. The root is also seen in Lat. maciēs ‘leanness', maceō ‘to be lean’
and Hitt. mak-l-ant- ‘lean'.
µýкwv [f.] ‘poppy, Papaver somniferum, poppy-head' ( 306), meatph. of poppy-like
objects, e.g. 'ink-bag of the cuttle-fish' [m.] (Arist.). <IE *meh,k-n->
•VAR Dor. Arc. µákwv, -wvoç.
⚫COMP μηкwvo-qópos (scil. yñ) [f.] 'poppy-bearing country' (pap.).
j
•DER 1. name of poppy-like plants (Euphorbia, wild lettuce): µηкáv-τov (Нp.,
Thphr.); also = 'opium' (Phld.), -íç [f.] (Nic., inscr., pap.). -ītɩç (Gal.), also name of a
stone (Plin.), Redard 1949: 57. 2. µŋkáv-ɛoç [adj.] 'spiced with poppy' (Philostr.),
ntr. ‘opium' (S. E., sch.), -ís [f.] (Alcm.), -кós 'poppy-like' (Thphr.). 3. Diminutive
µŋкwvápiov (Androm. apud Gal.).
⚫ETYM Formation like Bλnxwv. It is clearly related to the Slavic and Germanic word
for 'poppy': CS makú, Ru. mak (o-stem), and OHG maho, MHG mahen, mān, and
(with the reflex of Verner's Law) OHG mago, OSw. val-mōghi (val- < *u̟alha-
'torpidity'), etc. The Verner variants and the short vowel (as opposed to Gr. -ā-) are
notable and point to old ablaut. Kroonen 2009 reconstructs an ablauting n-stem for
PGm., which is the same formation as Greek and points to an inherited lexical item.
As the poppy originates from the Mediterranean according to botanists, it is often
thought that we are dealing with a 'Wanderwort', which was borrowed into Indo-
European at PIE date. Fur.: 218 compares Bηкávov. εidos ßоτávηs and concludes to
a Pre-Greek form, but this is improbable.
unλn [f.] ‘chirurgical probe' (Hp., AP). ◄GR?▷
•COMP As a second member in лλατυ-µηλη 'broad probe' (medic.) and other
determinatives (Risch IF 59 (1949): 285), àµqí-µnov [n.] 'probe with two ends'
(medic.).
●DER µŋλów [v.] ‘to probe' (Hp., Ar.), also (med.) ‘to paint wool (Eust., H.), with
unλwσis 'probing', µnλw-tý, -tíc, -τpíç, -τpídiov ‘próbe' (medic.); µnλ-aqάw [v.] ‘to
probe' (Sophr., H., EM, Eust.), after yηλaqάw; µýλwepov 'painted wool' (Eust., H.).
⚫ETYM Prellwitz proposed a pre-form PGr. *mas-lā- derived from the root of μaíoμai,
aor. μáoσaoba 'to touch, examine'. Possible, but uncertain.
µŋλolóvðŋ [f.] ‘beetle, gold-beetle, dung-beetle' (Ar. Nu. 764, Arist.). <GR▷
•VAR Also µŋλoλáv¤n (Poll.), µnλávěŋ (Herod.).
•COMP Xpσo-μóvtov (Ar. V. 1341).
•DER μηóvеov (sch. Ar. V. 1332).
•ETYM From μñλov óλóvětov, properly “fig-sheep”; it consists of μñλov 'sheep' and
öλovos 'wild fig', because many beetles are parasitic of figs and other plants. The
formation is like iлло-лóταчоç (foг ïллоç лоτάшоc). It was reshaped to μηλoλávеn
by folk etymology, based on ävfoc; thence (after olväven blossom of the vine, etc.)
unλávon. Extensive treatment in Strömberg 1944: 5ff.
uñλov 1 [n.] 'apple' (II.), also of other stonefruits (Hp., Dsc.), '(seed-)capsule of a rose'
(Thpr.), metaph. plur. 'breasts, cheeks, tonsils, apple-like beaker' (Ar., Theoc.,
medic., pap., inscr.). <?>
VAR Dor. Aeol. µãλov.
•COMP As a first member in μñλ-ow 'apple-colored' = 'yellow' (1 104), µαλo-лáðavoç
'with apple-like cheeks' (Theoc.); µŋλ-áлov [n.] name of a fruit (medic., Plin.), etc.
As a second member in determinatives, e.g. yλvкú-µаλov, -µηλov “sweet-apple'
(Sapph. [but cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 10], Call.), µελí-μηλov 'summer apple, Pyrus
praecox' (Dsc.), also ‘apple mead' (medic.) for μnλó-µελɩ (Dsc.); cf. kokkú-µηλov; cf.
further ►чunis.

=== page 498 ===

944
Hñ入ov 2
=
•DER A. Substantives: 1. µndén, -a ‘apple-tree' (Od.); 2. µŋλíç, µaλíiç [f.] unλéa
(Ibyc., Theoc.), ‘yellow pigment' (Plu.), name of a distemper of asses, perhaps
'glanders' (Arist.); 3. µndítηs olvos ‘apple-, quince-wine' (Plu., Dsc.); 4. µηλíoкa
[n.pl.] name of cups shaped like apples (Delos IIIª); 5.Mn-tádec [f.pl.] 'fruit-tree
nymphs' (Poll.), like кpηv-tádɛç; 6. µýλwеpov [n.] = ǎµлελoç λεvкý (Thphr., Dsc.),
cf. чiwepov 'id.' from члλów, лúрwерov = лúрεерov.
B. Adjectives: 7. þýðivos, µáðivos 'made of apples, apple-colored' (Sapph., Thphr.);
8. μεo concerning the apple' (Nic., A. R.); 9. µnλwdns ‘apple-like' (Gal.).
C. Verb: 10. μnλw to resemble an apple (in color)' (medic.). Perhaps the island
name Mños; see Heubeck Glotta 25 (1936): 27.1.
•ETYM Mediterranean word. From Greek stems Lat. mālum, mēlum, with mālinus
‘apple-colored', mēlinus ‘of quince-apples'; see WH s.v. 1. mālus. The word was
formerly connected with Hitt. mahla-, but this appears to have a different meaning
'grape, vine, twig of a vine', see Cuny REA 20 (1918): 364f. It can hardly be related to
άuáчažuç, as per Fur.: 212.
μñλov 2 [n.] 'small cattle, sheep and goats' (II.). <IE? *meh,lo- 'small cattle'>
•VAR Mostly plur. -α. µηλáτwv (Lyc. 106) after лpоßáτwv.
DIAL Also Dor.
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. µnλo-ßótnc, Dor. -Taç 'shepherd' (Pi., E.), also
-ẞoτńp (Σ 529, h. Merc. 286) in verse-final -ẞoτñpαç, after the simplex; µŋλátav. tòv
noчéva. Bowtoi (H.), haplological for µnλ-ŋλáτav or for μηλóτav after ẞoŋλáτav
(Bechtel 1921, 1: 307); on ►µndolóvðŋ, see s.v. Rarely as a second member, only in a
few bahuvrihis, e.g. лoλú-µηλoç ‘with many sheep' (Il.); also in PNs, e.g. Boeot. Itoí-
μελoç.
•DER μηλяos pertaining to the small cattle' (Ion., E.), µŋλóτai noµéves (H.),
unλwτn [f.] 'sheepskin' (Philem. Com., Hell.), like кöpшτη etc., with Mλwoos
epithet of Zeus (Corc., Naxos), prop. "who is wrapped in a sheepskin” (Nilsson
1941(1): 395f.).
•ETYM An old word for 'small cattle', which is well-attested in Celtic, e.g. OIr. mil [n.]
‘small animal', and is sporadically found in WGm. too, e.g. in OLFr. māla ‘cow',
MoDu. maal 'young cow'. Opposed to these words, which may all go back on a pre-
form meh,lo-, stands Arm. mal 'sheep' with a-vocalism, as well as Ukr. mal' [f.]
'small cattle, young sheep', Ru. (Crimea) malíč ‘kind of Crimea-sheep'. It seems
obvious to connect these words with the Slavic adjective for 'small', e.g. OCS malo,
Ru. mályj. One step further is the Gm. word for 'small, narrow' in Go. smals, etc.,
which is often used of small cattle, e.g. ON smali [m.] 'small animal', OHG smalaz
fihu ‘small cattle'. If we posit IE *(s)meh,l-, (s)moh,l- (OCS mal, etc.), and (s)mh,l-
(Arm. mal, Go. smals, etc.), it seems possible to bring together all words mentioned.
For Arm. mal, Ačaŕyan 1977: 224 (approved in Clackson 1994: 232250) proposes a loan
from Arabic mal possession; sheep'.
µńv 1 [pcl.] confirming pcl., 'honestly, certainly; truly' (Il.). <IE *sme 'really, true'>
•VAR Dor. Aeol. µáv.
945
•ETYM Commonly compared with the asseverating pcl. Skt. sma, smā, but the exact
relation with this form and with uá remains unclear. The particle µév ‘really, true”,
which is functionally identical and related in meaning, can hardly be separated from
►μnv. Like ▶Sn beside ▸dé, µýv must have undergone vowel shortening as a result.
of a weakening of its function; this shortening then entered Attic and the other
dialectal areas from the epic and Ionic scientific language. See Leumann Mus. Helv. 6
(1949): 85ff.; extensively on μnv Schwyzer 1950: 569f. See ► μá.
unv 2 [m.] 'month' (Il.), also 'moon-sickle (Ion., Ar., Att. inscr., Thphr.). <IE *meh,nōt,
*meh,n-es-s 'moon, month'>
VAR Also Att. uɛíç, Dor. uns, El. μɛúc; gen. μnvóç, Aеol. µñvvoç.
●COMP µévo-εids 'formed like a moon-sickle' (IA), PN Mηvó-Swpoç, also µŋví-
apxos, -ápxns [m.] ‘monthly prefect' (pap. IVª). after τaží-apxoç etc.; ñλitó-µnvos
'missing the right month' (T 118; cf. s.v.), έë-µýv-ios lasting a month, monthly' (IA).
●DER µýv-ŋ ‘month' (Il.), like σɛλývŋ; -ás ‘id.' (E.); µŋv-íokos [m.] 'moonsickle',
especially of objects in the shape of a moon-sickle (Ar., Arist.); unv-tatos ‘a month
old, monthly' (Hp., LXX, pap.), -tɛoç 'monthly' (Hell. pap.), µηv-aïoç 'belonging to
the month' (Orac. apud Lyd. Mens.; probably from µývn); µòvaotɛía [f.] ‘monthly
achievement' (pap. IIIP), but cf. Mŋvασταí [m.pl.] 'adorers of Mýv' (Rhodos);
µývov [n.] (botanical) ‘peony' (Ps.-Dsc.), from its astrological use, see Strömberg
1940: 133.
•ETYM From the oblique cases (gen. µñvv-os < *mēnsos, etc.), an analogical nom.
*mēns arose, whence *mens by Osthoff's Law. By subsequent loss of the nasal and
compensatory lengthening, μɛís and uns developed. The new nom. μny arose by
analogy with gen. μnvóc, etc. (after simplification of the -vv-), and El. μɛúç is built on
the model of Zvós : ZɛÚç.
Originally, a disyllabic nom. *mēnōs- (with lengthened grade) or *mēnōt- (with
alternating --) existed beside the obl. stem *µŋvo- < IE *mēns-. Thence arose Lith.
menuo 'moon, month', Go. menops 'month', etc. The disyllabic form is also seen in
Lith. ménes-is 'month'. On monosyllabic *mēns- are based both Lat. mēns-is (gen.pl.
mēnsum) and Skt. mās- 'moon, month' < PIIr. *maHas- < *meh,ns-. The
development of the calendrical meaning 'month' was accompanied by the creation of
new expressions for 'moon' (σελкvη, lūna, etc.). Original derivation from *meh,-
‘measure' (see ►µñτɩc), from the role of the moon as a measure of time, is quite
possible.
µñvyž‚ -ɩyyo¢ [f.] ‘skin, cuticle', especially 'cerebral membrane' (Hp., Arist., Gal.), also
'cuticle in the eye' (Emp., Arist.),'drum of the ear' (Arist.). <PG(S)►
•COMP As a first member in unvɩyyo-qúλaž [m.], name of a chirurgical instrument
(medic.).
●DER Diminutive μvíуov (gloss.); MoGr. μηvyyɩɩɩ [f.] ‘inflammation of the
cerebral membrane', MoFr. méningite (Redard 1949: 103f.).
•ETYM The semantic parallel with words like Lat. membrana 'thin, soft skin' and
Slavic words for ‘inner part of the skin, etc.' (e.g. SCr. mézdra, Sln. mézdra, Ru.
mezdrá), all ultimately derived from the root of IE *mēms- ‘meat', is striking.

=== page 499 ===

946
However, µñíуš cannot be combined with them. The unexplained -v-, together with
the suffix -tyy-, clearly points to a Pre-Greek word.
µñviç [f.] ‘wrath', especially of gods, but also of Achilles (II.). <?>
•VAR Dor. µãvɩç, -los, -ɩdos.
•COMP As a second member in εµ-µavɩç ‘filled with wrath' (Cret.), on the formation
Sommer 1948: 113.
•DER unvíw, Dor. μavíw [v.] 'to rage' (Il., Hdt., Hell.), aor. -ioa, rarely with ȧлo-, επ-
(ávtɩ-, čк-); µývɩ-µa [n.] '(reason for) wrath' (Il.), -0µós ‘raging' (P 62, 202, 282); also
uŋváw 'id.' (LXX, D. H.), on the formation Schwyzer: 732, and µnvíaµa (LXX);
enlargements -tά(w (Et. Gud.), -í\w (An. Ox.), and -toμa (Iolkos IIIª). From µñâç
(μηvíw?) also μηvítns (-týc?) [m.] ‘a man filled with rage' (Arr. Epict.).
•ETYM Etymology unknown. The identification with Lat. mānēs ‘souls of the
departed' by Ehrlich KZ 41 (1907): 294f. is now abandoned. The explanation from
*μvã-vis (from the root of μεμvηua by Schwyzer RhM 80 (1931): 213ff. was later
doubted by Schwyzer himself (Schwyzer 1939: 495); instead, he proposes connection
with aquáw. The semantically obvious connection with μévos and cognates is
impossible because of the long ã in Doric (see Björck 1950: 177f.); on µŋvítng, see
also Radermacher RhM 63 (1908): 444ff.
µŋvów [v.] ‘to notify, betray, announce' (h. Merc.). < IE? *meh₂- 'notify'>
•VAR Dor. μavúw, aor. -ñσaɩ, etc.
•COMP Also with prefix: кατα-, έкK-.
•DER µývvµa [n.] ‘indication, information' (Th., Men.), (кατα -)µývvois ‘id.' (Att.);
µŋvvtýs [m.] ‘informer' (Att.), also -τýp ‘id.' (A. Eu. 245, Orph. H.), µavúτwp ‘id.'
(AP); µŋvutikós 'containing information; boastful (Ph., D. C.); µývvτpov, usualy
plur. -a 'reward for infomation' (h. Merc.) with µŋvvípíšoµai ‘to be denunciated (for
a reward)' (Hell. pap.; also H. as an explanation of uŋvúεσðaɩ).
•ETYM µŋvúw is either a primary thematic vu-present (with present suffix introduced
in the aorist) or a denominative from a pre-form *µñvuç or *µvбç. The word
remains without obvious cognates. LIV² takes up the connection with the BSl. group
of Lith. móti, OCS namajati 'to beckon (with the hand)' and reconstructs *meh₂- 'to
notify'.
µñov [n.] Name of an umbellate, ‘bald money, spignel, Meum athamanticum' (Dsc.,
Plin.). <PG?(V)►
●VAR µɛĩov (v.l.).
ETYM Carnoy REGr. 71 (1958): 96 connects mei- 'to be refreshing', which does not
convince. Fur: 23535 compares μañov 'Trifolium arvense', which would point to
substrate origin.
µñpɩyž [?] · ákavða yɩvojévŋ év toïç έpíois tŵv ëроßáτшν 'thorns which grow in the
fleece of cattle', i.e. 'bristles'? (H.). <PG(S,V)>
⚫var σµñpɩyž⋅ лóɑ, кai ɛidoç áкáveηs grass, also a kind of thorn'; quýpɩyyεs.
лλεкταí, σεipαí, ẞóστpuxoɩ 'braids, cords, curls of hair'. Kai τwv кuvwv v to unpois
inpukálw
947
kai toĩç aʊxéσv òpðaì τpíxɛç hairs which stand upright on the shank and neck of
dogs' (H.); a kind of hairdress (Lyc. 37, Poll. 2, 22).
•ETYM In the sense of 'braids, cords', σµñpɩy agrees with µúpivoç. The occasional
meaning 'rope, string' may have been caused by the similarity with µýpivôos, µnpúw.
The meaning 'v tois µnpois... tpíxεs' is clearly a folk-etymological attempt to
connect µñpɩy with µŋpós. Fur.: 28978 separates the gloss as äкavea from the other
words. All of them are clearly of Pre-Greek origin, of account of the suffix -tyy-, the
prothetic σ-, and the lack of possible cognates.
unpɩvoç [f.] 'cord, thread' (II.). PG(S)►
⚫VAR σµýpɩvoç [f.] (Pl. Lg. 644 e). Cf. unpivs Orph. A. 597, and further σµñpɩy,
-tyyos hair' (Lyc. Poll. 2,22, H.); σµýpiуyɛç· лλεktai, oɛipai, ßóoτру×α (H.), see
▶ ñplyE.
•ETYM Because of its suffix, unpivos is probably Pre-Greek. Adaptation to µépúομai
has also been assumed, a word that was probably inherited. However, there is little
reason for this: see μpúμal.
µŋpós [m.] ‘the upper meaty part of the shank, shank' (Il.). ◄IE? *mē(m)s-ro- ‘fleshy'>
•VAR Plur. both unpoí [m.] (O 146) and µñpa [n.].
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. unpo-τpaqńs 'with fleshy shanks' (Str., AP), σúµ-µŋpos
'with the thighs closed' (Hp.).
•DER µnpía [n.pl.] 'thigh-bones' (Il.), -íov [sg.] (Posidon.); unp-taños belonging to
the shanks' (X.), like vwτ-taloç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 49); µnpíšw [v.] 'to strike on
the thigh' (D. L.), after yaστpiw; diα-µŋpíšw [v.] 'to hold the thighs separated' with
-σμóc (Ar., Zeno), also кata- '‘id.' (Suid.).
⚫ETYM According to Vine 2002: 333, µñpa continues an old collective plural *mēms-
reh₂, although one would expect Greek to develop anaptyxis as in **µεµßp-. Via a
back-formation *mēms-ro-, this collective may have been the basis for the thematic
neuter for 'flesh': IE *mēms-(o-), seen in Skt. māṇsá- [n.], Go. mimz, Ru. mjáso, ToB
mīsa [pl.], all ‘meat'. We also find a form IE *mēs- (with unexplained lack of nasal) in
Skt. más [n.] 'id.'. Reflexes of *mēms-ro- can be found in Lat. membra [n.pl.] ‘limbs,
body parts', Olr. mír 'piece, bite', CS męzdra 'inner side of a rind'. To account for the
Greek forms unpóç and µñpα, it would be best to depart from the nasalless pre-form
*mēs-ro- seen in Skt. más-. Unrelated is ► µñvyč.
μпρvкáчw [v.] 'to ruminate' (Arist., Thphr.), -áouαι. <?>
VAR μap- (Ath. 9, 390f, Jul. Gal. 314d), -iw (Gal.).
•COMP Also with άvα-, àлo-, (LXX, Ph., Plu. et al.).
●DER µnpvkioµós [m.] (LXX), àva-µnpúknoiç [f.] (Aristeas) 'ruminating'; back-
formation μýpu [m.] name of a (supposedly) ruminating fish, ‘Scarus cretensis'
(Arist.), see Strömberg 1943: 53.
•ETYM The three verbs µŋpvк-άoμaɩ, -άšw, -í【w are derived either as denominatives
from a noun with a suffix -к-, or as enlargements of a primary *μηpúк-, which may
itself have an enlargement -к- (cf. pú-к-w, έpuк-ávw, -aváw to έpúoμαι or έpúw).
Frisk connects *μnpów, -voμαi 'to wrap, wind', referring to the turning movements
of the mouth and muscles of a ruminator; unconvincing.

=== page 500 ===

948
val
Hnxavń
949
µŋpúoµai [v.] ‘to draw up, furl, wind (up)' (u 170, Hes., Hp., X., Plb., Hero). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Dor. μap- (Theoc., cf. below), aor. µηpúσασðaɩ, perf. µεµýpʊкα (Hp.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ¿к-, πεpl-, ovv-.
•DER unpчua [n.] ‘knot, strand (Hero, Ph. Bel., Nic.), -μάτiov (Hero); ovμ-σ
[f.] 'winding together, connection' (M. Ant.). *µñpuç 'clew' is posited by Fur.: 218 on
account of ẞηpvσσεúε σεε (supposed to stand for σлεрãν), ελíσσεv ‘to wind
(H.); which he assumes to be a denominative of *ẞn puoσa = *µñpvç.
•ETYM The word is probably Pre-Greek, on account of the variant in B-. Fur.: 289
suggests that unpúoμat is a denominative of *µñpus. See ▸µivoç.
µýtηp [f.] ‘mother' (Il.). <IE *meh₂ter- 'mother'>
•VAR Dor. µáτηp; gen. µntpós, acc. µŋtépa, etc.
•DIAL Myc. ma-te.
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. µŋtpо-лάτшp 'mother's father, grandfather through
mother' (II.) and other kinship-names, µntpó-лolis [f.] 'mother-state' (Pi., Simon.,
IA), à-µýτwp ‘motherless' (Hdt.), poet. also ‘unmotherly' in µýτηp åµýtwp (S.);
probably in Anunτηp. On the compounds see Sommer 1948: 147, 176f., Risch IF 59
(1949): 17f., 59 and 261, Wackernagel Glotta 14 (1925): 38.
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: ματpúλ(λ)α [f.] 'brothel-hostess' (Phryn., Eust.) with ματpuλ-
Elov brothel (Din., Men.), see Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 224, Björck 1950: 67;
[µntpápiov = matercula (gloss.). 2. µýtpa, Ion. -1] [f.] ‘uterus, womb' (IA), metaph.
'hardwood, marrow' (Thphr.), see Strömberg 1937: 122ff., also ‘queen bee' (Arist.),
see Sommer 1948: 1474; µntpídios “having a womb”, ‘rich in seeds' (Ar. Lys. 549),
after кoupídioç, vvµqídioç? 3. µntpíç (scil. yñ) [f.] ‘land of the mother' (Pherecr.),
after лατрíç. 4. μŋtpiкóç ‘regarding the mother' (Arist., Hell. inscr., pap.). 5. µntpó-
Ev (Dor. μa-) 'from mother's side' (Pi.).
6. Denominative verbs: µŋτp-tá¶w 'to honour the (Great) Mother' (Poll.), after Ovot-
άw (cf. Schwyzer: 735), -iw 'to belong to the (Great) Mother' (Iamb.), -ά\w ‘to
resemble the mother' (gloss.). 7. PN Mŋtpɛis (Schulze 1933a: 419), Mãτpuç
(Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 220). 8. See also ► µкτpws and ► µntpvá.
•ETYM Old inherited word for 'mother'. It has been retained in all branches except in
Hitt. (which has anna-): Skt. mātár-, Lat. māter, Lith. mótė 'woman, wife', (dial.)
'mother', OHG muoter. The word does not go back to a nursery word *mā (see µã),
as it contained a laryngeal (*meh₂-ter-), as shown by the acute accent of Lithuanian.
µñtic, -los, -180s [f.] 'measure, skill, craft' (II.). On the concept of μñτç, see Detienne
and Vernant 1974. ◄IE *meh,- ‘measure’➤
COMP As a second member in лоλú-µητуç 'capable of many machinations,
inventive', of Odysseus, also of Hephaistos (Hom.), ȧукvλo-µýτηs 'having crooked
counsels, cunning', of Kronos, also of Prometheus (Hom.).
●DER 1. µntiέtă [nom.sg.m.] (originally vocative?), epithet of Zeus, 'who possesses
µñtɩç', metrically conditioned form at the end of verse for *µŋtīta, cf. veqeλnyep-éta
(Zɛúc); acc. µntiéτηy (metr. inscr. Tegea), nom.- éτys (Corn.). 2. µntióɛç ‘imbued
with μ.', of Zɛúc, чápµaкa, etc. (§ 227, h. Ap. 344, Hes.).
Denominative verb: aor. µητíσασðaι, fut. µητíσɛσα 'to ponder, design, devise'
(Hom., Emp., A. R.); pres. µntíoµaɩ (Pi. P. 2, 92); as a present, epic poetry uses
µntiáw, -áquai (µntiówv, µntiáaoðat, etc.) for metrical reasons (after the type in
-táw), also prefixed εлt-, σuv- (Hom., A. R.). Verbal noun µŋtíμata [pl.] (H. s.v.
µýtɛa, for µýdɛa?).
⚫ETYM An original verbal noun meaning *measuring', µñτiç is derived from the root
*meh,- found in Skt. mimāti 'measures', etc. The formation *meh,-ti- itself is found in
an isolated Germanic word, OE mad [f.] 'measure', and is presupposed by the
denominative Lat. mētior 'to measure'.
Another Greek formation is µýτpa ‘land-measure', ablauting with ►µéτpov, with the
instrument suffix *-tro-. Other languages also preserved isolated verbal nouns in
various meanings, e.g. in Germanic: Go. mel 'time', OHG māl ‘point of time, (time
for) meal'. The unassibilated -τɩ- (for -σt-) must be explained as an archaic element
of Aeolic (and perhaps Doric). See further µndoμai.
µýípa 1‘uterus'. ¬µýtnp.
unτpα 2 land-measure, кλñpoç'. →μετpov.
µǹτpwę [m.] ‘male relative of the mother, maternal uncle, grandfather' (Il.). <IE
*meh,ter 'mother', *meh,tr-ōu- 'relative of the mother'>
•VAR Dor. μάτpwc, -woc and -w (further forms in Schwyzer: 480 and in LSJ).
●DER µntpwïoc, -os (Dor. μα-) properly 'belonging to the μnτpwɛç, i.e. to the
mother's family' (τ 410), later referring to μnτηp directly: 'what belongs to the
mother, maternaľ (A.); tò Mòtpãov (scil. iɛpóv) ‘the temple of the Great Mother
Cybele', which was used as a state archive in Athens (Att.); τà Mηtpwa (scil. iɛpá)
'the temple-service of Cybele' (D. H.); with µητρwaкóç 'belonging to the service of
Cybele' and μntp\w to celebrate the Cybele-festivals' (late); µntpwïkós = µntpikós
(Delos II). By-form µnτpwv (Dor. µá-), -wvoç [m.] (inscr. Asia Minor; originating
from the acc. μýtpwv). µòtpviá (Dor. μa-, Ion. -in) [f.] ‘stepmother' (Il.) with
µntpvi-wdns ‘like a stepmother' (Plu.), -ά(w 'to act as stepmother' (gloss.); jocular
innovation µntpós [m.] ‘stepfather' (Theopomp. Com., Hyp.).
•ETYM If µŋtpviá is connected with µnτpws (following the communis opinio, but
there is in fact no decisive evidence for this), we must start from a long -ōu-> ō, of
which -v- in μητpɩά would be the zero grade (cf. Schwyzer: 479f.). Regular
correspondences with μητpá (probably for older *μnτpulă, gen. -vɩãç, see
Wackernagel KZ 33 (1895): 574', Schwyzer: 4698) are found in Arm. mawru, gen.
mawrui (< *mātruụi-) ‘stepmother, mother-in-law', and perhaps also (though
further off) in OE modrige 'sister's mother' < PGm. *mōdruuiōn-. The formation
would have to be of pre-Proto-Greek age. Cf. Kuiper 1942: 56ff. See ▸µýtnp.
µnxavý [f.] ‘expedient, contrivance, cunning; means, tool, machine, device' (IA, Dor.).
<PG(S,V)►
•VAR Dor. μaxavá.

=== page 501 ===

950
hía
•COMP μаvо-лоtóç 'machine-builder, engineer, machinist' (Att.), ȧ-µnxavoc (Dor.
-á-) 'without any means, helpless; unmanagable, irresistible, impossible' (II.), partly
associated with μnxavάoμai; thence άµnxav-ía, -ín (1 295), -έw (Ion.).
●DER 1. Uncertain Maxa-vɛús epithet of Zeus (Argos, Tanagra, Cos, since V³), also a
month name (Corcyra), Maxavɛãoç month name (Chalcedon); Maxav-íç epithet of
Athena (Cos), -îtɩç epithet of Aphrodite and Athena (Megalopolis). 2. μnxaviwtns
'deviser, machinator', of Hermes (h. Merc. 436; after ȧyyελɩ-wτns, etc.). 3.
unxavápioç 'engineer' (pap.). 4. μnxav-óεç 'inventive' (S.), -Iкóc ‘id., pertaining to
machines, mechanical', subst. 'engine builder' (X., Arist.). 5. μnxávшμа (Dor. μα-)
[n.] 'apparatus, crane' (Thphr., Delphi), enlarged from μnxavý (Chantraine 1933:
187). 6. Denominative verb μnxavάoμai (-áш) ‘to devise (with ruse), realize,
construct, manufacture artificially' (Il.), aor. µnxavýσaσðaι, etc., also with prefix, e.g.
¿ñɩ-, ávtɩ-, époσ-; hence µnxáv-nµa 'invention, apparatus, mechanical device' (Hp.,
D., trag.), -ŋσiç ‘id.' (Hp., Plb.), -ŋτýs [m.] 'deviser of war machines' (sch.), -ntikós
'inventive' (X.). Besides, we find µñxαp [n.] (indecl.) 'means, expedient' (A., Lyc.)
and µñxoç (Dor. µā-) [n.] ‘id.' (Il., Hdt.); unlike µnxavý, both words are dying and
remain without compounds and derivatives.
⚫ETYM Dor. μaxavá, IA µηxavý are not derived (as traditionally assumed) from a
heteroclitic *μaxap, *µáxavos. They have oxytone accentuation, like the verbal
nouns quλaкý, кoµdý. Beside the r/n-stem, we find an s-stem µños, according to a
regular pattern. The root is usually recognized in verbal forms with a short vowel in
Germanic and Slavic, e.g. Go. mag ‘can, is able', MHG mag; OCS mošti, isg. mogą,
Ru. moč, 1sg. mogú 'can, be able'. These verbs have accompanying nouns Go. mahts
'power, might', etc. = OCS moštv, Ru. moč³ ‘id.' < QIE *mag-ti-. Beside this ti-
derivation, we find an n-stem in OHG magan, megin, ON magn, megin 'power,
might'. It is doubtful if Lith. magëti, 1sg. magù ‘to please, be pleasant', mëgti, 1sg.
mėgstu ‘to love, like', etc. can be connected with μnxavý, already in view of the ablaut
*ē: Gr. ā.
Since PIE had no *a, the question is how we can derive the ablauting forms. In
Beekes MKNAW 61 (1998): 10f., I pointed out that a laryngeal cannot have been
vocalized to Slavic *o. This means that the Germanic and Slavic forms (which are
closely related, both semantically and formally) cannot derive from *mh2g"-. As a
consequence, the Greek word remains isolated.
The suffix -av- is typical for Pre-Greek words; note that Greek has no forms with
*μǎx- either that could point to a zero grade. In fact, the connection with
►µáyуavov (Van Beek p.c.) proves that unxavý is Pre-Greek.
Lat. māchina was borrowed from Dor. μaxavá; Pashto mēčan 'handmill' from
unxavý (Morgenstierne Acta or. 7 (1929): 200; Morgenstierne Acta Orbis 18: 143); for
the meaning, cf. VLat. māchina also 'millstone, handmill'.
дía [f.] ‘one'. →ɛis.
μaívw [v.] 'to stain, soil, defile' especially 'to defile through bloodcrime' (II.); in Hom.
also a technical term for coloring or dying (A 141-7), see Myc. below. <PG?, IE? *smei-
'smear'>
Hikpós
951
●VAR Aor. µãvaɩ, µñvai, pass. µavėñvai (Il.), fut. µavõ (Cyrene, Antipho), pass.
µavėjσoµai, perf.pass. µɛµíaoµai (Att.), act. µɛµíayka (Plu.), µã [3sg.subj.aor.pass.]
beside fut. μaσεi (Cyrene).
•DIAL Myc. mi-ja-ro, probably of colored fabrics.
•COMP Rarely with prefix as έк-, кατα- σvv-. Compounded μat-opóvoç 'committing a
defiling murder, defiled by murder', epithet of Ares (Il. E and Q, B., Hdt., E.), µŋ-
opóvos (Archil.), μα-povéw (Att.), -ía (D., D. S., Plu.). Isolated are µíαxoç. μíaσμα,
and μaxpóv. <o> кaðapóv (H.).
•DER μíaσμa [n.] 'defilement, abomination, horrible stain' (IA), on the formation see
Porzig 1942: 241; µãƒµóç [m.] ‘defilement' (LXX, Plu.), µíavois [f.] ‘id.' (LXX);
µáσtwp [m.] ‘defiler, avenger' (trag., late prose), -o- like in µíaσµa, cf. also ȧλáστwp;
дávτη [m.] 'id.' (EM), à-µíav-τos 'unstained' (Thgn., Pi.), of a stone = ǎσẞεστoç
(Arist., Plin., Dsc.). Further após (II.), µɛpós (Call.) 'defiled, soiled, polluted',
especially through bloodcrime, with tap-ía (Att.), -óτηs (An. Ox.).
⚫ETYM Although the interchange *r/n in µaívw: μapós looks Indo-European, clear
cognates are unknown. Improbable or uncertain hypotheses are listed in Frisk.
The first member in µtat-póvoç is probably verbal, like in taλaí-лwpoç, so properly
“ μaívwv qóvų”. Beside it, we find μ-póvos, probably secondary like Aλen-
beside Aλai-uévns.
Blanc BSL 96 (2001): 153-179 connects Go. bi-smeitan 'to besmear, strike', but there is
no evidence for sm- in Greek; moreover, the development of meaning within
Germanic is not evident.
If there is no etymology, μaívw is rather Pre-Greek. Did it have *m'a(n)-, with
palatal *m-? We know that an /a/ could be pronounced as [e] after a palatalized
consonant; this might be the origin of the ɛ/α-alternation in adjectives of the type
lapós/filepós.
þíópíuμ.
μчкρóç [adj.] 'small, short, little' (E 801, y 296, trag., Att.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Also σμiкpós (P 757, Hes. Op. 361, Ion., trag., Att.), μккóç (Dor. Boeot.), μкóç
(Att. inscr. IV, Trag. Adesp. 31, pap.).
•COMP Very frequent as a first member, especially in scientific and technical
language.
⚫DER Diminutives and hypocoristics: μкúλoç (Mosch. 1, 13); µкúеov· tò µikpóv kai
výšov ‘infanť (H.); *µiккixos (cf. óσσixos etc., Chantraine 1933: 404) in Lacon.
µikkixidɗóµevoç ‘under age' (inscr.), from *µккɩxíčoµα; cf. also the PN below.
Abstract: (σ)μкрóτηs [f.] 'trifle, insignificance' (Anaxag., Pl.). Denominative:
(σ)μкpúvw [v.] 'to diminish, reduce, belittle' (Demetr. Eloc., LXX), also with prefix,
especially кατα-; кατασµкρíčш ‘id.' (Arist., Phld.), σµкpíεσαι· Siαττãσαι 'to sift'
(H.); άлоσμкрów ‘id.' (Tim. Lex.). PNs, e.g. Σμкpívŋs [m.] “niggard" (Men.), like
Aiσxívηs, etc.; Míkwv, Mikiwv, Míкvеoç, -íwv, Σμкvеíwv (Leumann 1950: 155,
Schulze 1933a: 671).
•ETYM The group of words has a familiar and colloquial aspect, as is shwon by the
variants кóç and geminated μккóç. The initial interchange in μкpóç and (older)

=== page 502 ===

952
µíλα 1
oμкpós is unexplained and (also) points to Pre-Greek origin. The connection with
the comparative μεíwv, assuming that the к was taken from the opposite µaкpóç,
fails because oμкpóç is clearly older: the latter cannot be combined with μɛíwv
(which belongs to Skt. mináti 'reduce', etc., and has no s-mobile). Old alternation of
suffixes in μik-pó-ç: μк-v-0óç (Bloomfield Lang. 1 (1925): 94) is improbable.
α1 'taxus, bindweed'. •VAR µîλoç. →σµîλač.
.
µîλaž 2 [?] · ŋλiкía ‘age-group' · évɩoɩ dè µéλλaž. kaì nap³‘Epµíñлs̟ έv ☹ɛoïç (fr. 33)
άyvońσaç Apteµídwpoç. ¿kɛi yàp µíláž έotiv, dŋloĩ dè tòv Sŋµotikóv ‘some have
μελλa, among them Artemidorus on Hermippus's "Gods" (fr. 33), but wrongfully,
as μia is found there, and it means a kind person' (H.). DELG adds that the gloss
may be partly corrupt, referring to µέλλa in H., i.e. µéλ[\]akes. vewtɛpoɩ ‘the
younger ones' (corrected to μελλ- by Salm.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Identical with ►µĭλaž 1 as a metaphor? Baunack Phil. 70 (1911): 461 supposes a
cross of μεipa (pronounced μip-) and μελλač (?). The word is Pre-Greek on account
of the variant seen in ►μéλλa.
µuλ(\)ós [adj.] · ßpadúc, xañvoç 'slow, loose, spongy; frivolous' (H.), cf. ápyós. µλóc,
ẞpadúc and vwxελεa 'slowness' .... pó (-wτIC cod.) (H.), vwxελńs⋅ ó µiλóç,
(-wtię
ßpadúc, äxpŋotoç ‘useless; ineffective' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•DER PN Míλwv (inscr.).
•ETYM Unexplained; cf. Latte Glotta 34 (1955): 191f. DELG compares ►µîλaž 2. The
variation AAA points to a Pre-Greek word. Fur.: 226, 317 compares лτíλоç 'having an
eye-disease through which the eye-lashes fall out', but this is not very convincing.
µíλtos [f.] ‘ruddle, red earth, red color, cinnabar, vermillion, red lead' (Hdt., com.,
Att. inscr.), also 'rust' in plants = εpvoißη (Paus. Gr.), and a taboo for 'blood'
(PMag.). <PG>
DIAL Myc. mi-to-we-sa /miltowessa/.
•COMP μλτо-лáрηоç 'with red-painted cheeks', of ships (Hom.), žµ, µµ
‘painted red' (Dsc., Lebadea).
•Der µλtápiov = 'blood' (PMag.), µλtɛïov ‘vessel for storing µ.' (AP), µíλt-ɛios ‘of
µ.' (AP), -wdŋç 'u.-colored, rich in μ.' (Eub., com., Str.), -íτns [m.] name of a red
stone (Plin.), -ów 'to smear with μ.' (Hdt., Ar.). PN Miλτɛúç (Epid.VI³), or an
appellative; Mıλt-iádns (after Σtpeyi-ádnc), Miλtó [f.], etc.
•ETYM A technical foreign word. The connection with μéλaç 'black' is phonetically as
well as morphologically impossible, and semantically uncompelling. The word is
undoubtedly Pre-Greek.
µíλqoɩ [m.pl.] a disease, 'falling off of the eyelashes' (Dsc., Gal.). <PG?➤
•DER_µíλqwois [f.] 'the falling off of the eyelashes' (Gal.), cf. λkwolç, "wols,
кvidwσiç, etc.; back-formation μλôóç [m.] ‘sbd. who suffers from µíλqwσiç' (Vett.
Val.).
•ETYM Like so many nouns in -poç, µíλoo is etymologically unclear. Fur.: 225, 317
compares ►лíλoç ‘id.' and ►µλ(\)óc ‘slow' (but see s.v.).
953
µчaíкvλov [n.] 'fruit of the кóμapoç' (com., Thphr.), cf. Dawkins JHS 56 (1936): 1.
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also μεμαíкvλoç (Gal.), µµáкvλoç (H.).
⚫ETYM A foreign word, no doubt Pre-Greek (note the variations). For the ending, cf.
ǎкvλoç 'acorn' with comparable meaning.
дíμаркvç, -vos [f.] 'hare-soup, jugged hare', from the intestines with their blood
(com.). <PG
•ETYM The form µíμapкuç seems to display reduplication. A tempting similarity
exists with a synonymous Germanic word: OE mearh ‘sausage', MoNw. mor 'meat-
sausage from intestines', ON morr 'the fat inside a slaughtered animal, etc., PGm.
*márhu- < IE *márku- or *mórku-. If related, it would have to be a very old
anatomical expression of cattle-breeders, cf. évvστpov fourth stomach of a
ruminant', which is unlikely. Unrelated are Lat. murcus ‘maimed' or Hitt. mark- ‘to
cut apart' <*merg-.
Acc. to Neumann 1961: 85f., µíµαpкuç is a loan from Hitt. or another IE Anatolian
language. I agree with Fur.: 366% that the word cannot be IE. The reduplication is
clearly Pre-Greek.
výσкw [v.] to remind (oneself), remember, heed, care for, make mention' (II.). <IE
*mneh,- 'remind'>
•VAR Usually -oµaι (-ŋσкw, Schwyzer: 709f., Aeol. µµvαιoкw [gramm.], µvýokeTAI
Anacr.); fut. µvýow, -oµaɩ, aor. µvñoai (Dor. µvãoat), -aσēaɩ, perf. med. µéµvŋuai
(Dor. -μvā-, Aeol. -µvα-) with fut. µεµvýσoµai (all Il.), aor. pass. µvñσ¨¤ñvai (§ 418,
Aeol. uvaoñvat) with fut. μvησoa (IA).
Also pres. uvάou, pa povτо, μvшóдεvоç, etc. (Il.), 'to woo for one's bride,
court' (Od.) 'to solicit' (Hdt., Pi.), лρо-µváοµαι to court for' (S., Pl., X.); see below.
•COMP Often with prefix, especially úло-, àvα-; also л-, é¨-výokw, έл-,
ovv-,npo-availivńokw.
==
•DER 1. µvñµa, Dor. Aeol. µvāµa [n.] ‘memorial, monument, tomb' (Il.) with µvŋµ-
ɛiov, Ion. -ñïov, Dor. µvaµ- ‘id.' (Dor., IA), cf. σñµa : σŋµɛĩov, etc., rare and late
-átiov, -ádiov, -áciov, -óptov (see pó); nuatítng Xóyos 'funeral oration'
(Choerob., Eust.); vëóµvη-µa ‘remembrance, note' (Att.) with -µατikóç, -µatíšoµai.
2. µvýµη, Doг. µváua [f.] 'remembrance, mention' (Dor., IA), µvý-σ-µη (Lycaonia);
hence or from дña: -½ïoç 'as a remembrance' (Phryg.), -íσкoμаι
дvкo̟α (pp.). 3. µvɛía [f.] ‘remembrance, mention' (Att.), verbal noun <* µvā-
tа like лεv-íα etc. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 81). 4. µνñσtiç (µvão-) [f.] ‘remembrance,
thought, posthumous fame' (v 280) with -σ- like in µvnoðñval, µvnotúç, etc.; after
Añστç (see λavávw) rather than the other way round. 5. ȧvá-, úró-µvn-oiç
'remembrance, admonition' (Att.); also µvησt- as a verbal first member in µvŋot-
кaкέw [v.] 'to remember the (suffered) wrong', whence -ía, -os (IA). 6. µvnotúc,
-vos [f.] 'courting' (Od.), later replaced by μvηστ-εíα, -εчμа (еее μoteúw). 7.
µvnotýp (µvão-), -τñpos [m.] ‘wooer' (Od.), on μvηστúp beside µvŋotúç see
Fraenkel 1910: 32²; also month name µvαστúp (Messene); adjectival ‘remembering,
reminding' (Pi.), µvýσtɛpa [f.] ‘bride' (AP), 'reminding' (Pi.); µvñστpov 'betrothal,

=== page 503 ===

954
µµoç
marriage' (Cod. Just.); лρодηστр-α (лpo-μáoμα) [f.] 'matchmaker' (E., Ar., Pl.),
-íç ‘id.' (X.). 8. µvýστwp 'mindful (A.). 9. µvñσtý [f.] 'wooed and won, wedded'
(Hom., A. R.), also 'worth remembering' (Sammelb. 6138), лоλv-μση (-os) 'much
wooed' (Od.), also 'mindful; remaining in memory' (Emp., A.); but "A-µão
(Gortyn); hence μvnotɛúw (µvao-) [v.] 'to woo a wife' (Od.), also 'to apply for a job',
with µvýotevµa (E.), -ɛía (Hell.) 'wooing'. 10. µvýµwv (µvá-), -ovos [m., f.] ‘mindful’
(Od.), often as the title of an office 'notary, registrator' (Halic., Crete, Arist.), first
derived from μvñµa, but also directly associated with the verb. Thence µvòµo-oúvé
'remembrance' ( 181), also the name of one of the Muses (h. Merc., Hes.); -σuvov
[n.] ‘id.' (Hdt., Th., Ar.); probably poetical; -os 'for remembrance' (LXX); besides
Mvauóv-a (Ar. Lys. 1248), cf. on εpóò; Mvηµ-ó (Orph.) Mvnoσúv
Denominative μvдovεú [v.] 'to remember' (IA), with μvηµóvεv-σiç, -μα, etc.
Adjective μvημov-Iкóç 'for remembrance, with good memory' (Att.). 11. PNs like
Mvŋσɛús (Pl.), short name of Mvno-apxos (Boßhardt 1942: 130), Mvaoíλλɛ
(Boeot.); Mvaσέaç; probably a Hellenisation of Sem. M³našše = Mavaσon.
⚫ETYM The above paradigm (including all formations derived from μvā-) is a Greek
creation. A monosyllabic IE *mneh₂- is represented in classical Skt. a-mnāsiṣuḥ
[3pl.aor.] 'they mentioned' (which recalls μvñoα); further, in a-mna-ta- 'not
mentioned' and mnayante 'are mentioned'. It is probable that this is a root extension
of *men- 'to remember', but its function is unclear. Other cognate languages present
nothing that could be compared directly with the Greek forms.
=
It has been thought that μváoμal corresponds exactly to Skt. mnāyate, so from
*mneh₂-ie/o-, but it was rather analogically formed to (e.g.) the aorist µvýσασða;
шμvησкw may also have been secondarily created, like е.g. кIкλńσкw or ẞiẞpwoкw.
The meaning 'to woo a woman, court' developed from µváoμai 'to think of, be
mindful of as a courteous expression; see Benveniste 1954: 13ff. The connection with
yuvn *gn-h₂- should be discarded. See μaívoμa, ►µéµová, ►µévoç.
µчµoç [m., f.] name of an actor, 'mime' (A. Fr. 57, 9, E. Rh. [lyr.], D., Plu., pap.), kind of
scenic sketch, founded by the Syracusan Sophron, 'mimus' (Arist.). <PG?>
●COMP μччo-урácpos 'mime-writer' (Hell.), Aoyó-uчuoç [m.] 'actor or writer of
spoken mimes' (Hegesand. Hist.), àpxí-µµoç [m.] ‘chief comedian' (Plu.); as a
second member mostly verbal to μééé, е.g. уvaкó-µµoç ‘imitating women'
(trag.).
●DER µµáç, -áðos [f.] 'mimic player (female)' (Ael.), µµó [f.] ‘ape' (Suid. s.v.
níðŋkos), µ¼µ(ε)ía [f.] ‘farce' (Ph.), µµкóç ‘regarding the µчµoç, mimic' (Hell.).
Probably denominative μчéoμα, μuñσασðα 'to imitate, mimic, copy (in art)' (h.
Ap. 163), also with prefix, e.g. άло-, έк-, with derivatives: (avτt-, άлo-, εк-)µíµηgis
'imitation, artistic, especially dramatic presentation' (IA), (àлo-) µíμnμa 'imitation,
representation' (IA); (ovµ-)µluntýs [m.] ‘imitator, artisť (IA), µµýτwp, -opos [m.]
‘id.' (Man.); µµŋtiкós ‘able at imitation, imitating, mimetic' (Pl., Arist.); µµŋλós
‘id.', also ‘imitated' (Luc., Plu.), or ‘referring to µчµoç' (Chantraine 1933: 242), with
µµnλá¢w (-í¢w?) = µµéo̟µαí (Ph.).
⚫ETYM Compared with µµéo̟µ¤ι, µµoç is attested only rarely and at a late date; still, it
is most likely that μчµµα is a denominative built on the latter. The technical
955
meaning of μчμoç makes a loan probable. The connection with Skt. māyā [f.] ‘magic,
etc.' is dated: the translation found in Frisk (following Schulze) as 'Zauber(bild),
Truggestalt' is deceptive, as it focuses on the notion of 'image', which is not found in
the earliest attestations of maya. It rather means 'magical power, skill, etc.'.
μчμоç was borrowed as Lat. mīmus ‘id.'. There is no etymology, and Pre-Greek origin
is quite possible.
uv [encl.pron.] 'eum, eam, id; se', anaphoric or reflexive pron. 3sg. (II.), late also 3pl.
<IE *hi- 'he, who'>
•VAR Also anaph. vv ‘id.' (Dor., trag., cf. Björck 1950: 163).
DIAL Myc. -mi /min/.
•ETYM Compare especially Cypr. ►ïv ‘id.' < *hi-m (Lat. is, etc.). Not from a
reduplicated form *im-im (as per Rix 1976: 186), which looks rather strange for
indefinite pronouns. The initial nasal may have been taken from (the end of) the
preceding word, as happened in OP dim and OPr. dim (reanalysis of the neuter
ending *-od), e.g. in the 1sg. aorist *(h,e)deiksm Him > *(e)deiksam im >> *(e)deiksa
mim > ědá μv. Cf. Beekes KZ 96 (1982-1983): 229-32.
uívбaž [f.] 'a kind of Persian incense' (Amphis 27 Kock). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
µívdɩç [?] ‘association for the maintenance of tombs' (Tit. As. Min. II, 1, 62,
[Telmessos]). LW Lyc.?>
⚫DER μεvdīτai 'members of such a society'.
•ETYM A local word, perhaps from Lycian miñti. See Neumann 1961: 53f. and Laroche
BSL 58 (1963): 78¹.
µívðŋ [f.] ‘minť (IA, Thphr., Plu.); on the mg. Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 105ff.
<PG➤
•VAR Also μíveǎ (Thphr.), µívos.
.DIAL Myc. mi-ta.
•ETYM A foreign word, like Lat. menta. It is undoubtedly Pre-Greek, because of the
variant ending -ă. See ➤кaλaµívеŋ.
µívoç [m.] 'human ordure' (Mnesim. Com.). <PG?>
●DER µvð-ów [v.] 'to stain with μ.' (Ar.), metaph. 'to renounce utterly, abominate'
(Hell., com.).
⚫ETYM Formation like övеoç, σлελεеоç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 369); further unclear,
but perhaps Pre-Greek.
µvýðw [v.] ‘to lessen, fade away', also trans. 'to reduce' (Il.). <IE *mi-n(e)-u- 'lessen,
diminish'>
•VAR Also μvuvěávw (PMich.); ipf. -úðɛσкov (εµvúðε Hp.), fut. µvvеñow, aor.
-ñσαι, pеrf. μεшvúеηка (Нp.).
•COMP Rarely with ſɛpɩ-, σuv-, àño-..
•DER Medical terms: μivú0-ŋois [f.] 'waning', -nuaτα [pl.] 'what is lessening, dying
members', -wens 'weak, lessening' (Hp.), on the verbal derivation see Chantraine

=== page 504 ===

956
lvopic w
1933: 431, -kóç 'diminishing' (Cael. Aur.). Beside it μívuva [adv.] 'for a short time'
with uvuvádios 'lasting a short time' (Il.).
•ETYM Built after the synonym öðɩvýðw, either from a vu-present (corresponding to
Lat. minuō, cf. *q0ivƑ-w) or from an adjective *μvúç (cf. ẞαpúеw: Bapúc), which
seems to have been preserved as a first member in a few compounds, though late and
rarely attested: μuvú-wpos, -ópios ‘living a short time' (AP), µvúčnov. óλiyóßiov
'having a short life' (H.). The same adjective has been recognized in µívuvða, i.e. acc.
*μivúv +-0a e.g. after the opposite Sneά.
An IE adj. *minu- is also presupposed by Lat. minuō, and probably also by minus
(secondarily s-stem), and is assumed for Germanic (e.g. Go. minniza ‘smaller' <
*minuiza-) as well. If a suffix -nu- is separated, uɛíwv, etc. may be compared.
дuvvpíw [v.] 'to whimper, whine, complain (in a low tone)' (E 889, 8 719), 'to sing in a
low tone, wharble, hum' (Ar., Pl., Arist.). <PG?>
⚫VAR Luvupíσai [aor.] (Plu.).
●DER µuvúpioµa ‘twittering' (Theoc., S. E.), -toµós ‘id.' (sch.), -íoτpia [f.] ‘twittering’
(andwv, verse inscr.); unclear µvvpíyµata [pl.] (Philox. 2, 28). µvúpoµať [v.] ‘to sing
in a low tone, twitter' (A., S., Ar., Call.), µvupós ‘whimpering, whining' (A., Phryn.
Com.), 'twittering' (Theoc.).
⚫ETYM Expressive and onomatopoeic words, resembling кivupí(w : kɩvýpoµai :
Kivupóç, with which they were amalgamated in a way that can no longer be
established. There is no further evidence for a variation к/µ, as proposed by Fur.: 388.
Still, Pre-Greek origin is possible.
Acc. to Leumann 1950: 244, µivvpíšu) is the oldest form of the series. Lat. minurriō,
-īre 'twitter' (Suet.) shows a remarkable similarity: if it is not directly borrowed from
Greek, it was at least influenced by it. Similar reduplicated formations are µµµó
τoû ïллov qwvý ‘horse's voice' and µµážασ¤· õpεµετíσaσα, qwvýσãσa 'to neigh (of
horses), resound' (H.). See μúpoμα.
µipyáßwp · tò Avkóqws 'twilight' (H.). ◄GR?►
•Var µpywoai. nnλσa 'to cover with mud or clay' (H.).
ETYM A relationship with μíoyw (upуáßup as dialectal Laconian or Elean for Ion.
*μoy-nfwc, e.g. Brugmann-Thumb 1913: 150) has been assumed, the second element
being the word for 'dawn'. However, the gloss on upуwσa (if it belongs here at all)
cannot be correct. Connection of the first element with Lith. mirgěti 'flicker', ON
myrkr, acc. myrkvan 'dark' < PGm. *merku-, *merkuija- is improbable.
µíðуµa [n.] (?) ³έлì τoû кaкo…voñç кαì þuлaρoñ каi лovηpoυ 'filthy, dirty, bad' (H.).
<?7
•VAR µpµa ms. (DELG).
ETYM Unknown. Latte connects the glosses μpywσat and μруoбλov.
друoбλov [n.] μúσoç, µíaσµа 'defilement, stain' (H.). <?>
ETYM Unknown. See ▸μípуμa.
[upóv [?] ötav vvotáčŋ tis Aéyovσɩ Tapavtīvoɩ 'The Tarentians say this whenever
someone is sleepy' (H.). <?>
•DER Perhaps the PN Mípwv (see Latte)?
•ETYM Unknown.
=
µupúkɛov →µvpíkn.
μíσ уw
⚫ETYM Sее ►μεíуvчш; for μσу-áукεiα, see also ǎyкoç (►ảyk-).
дuσέw [v.] 'to hate, abhor' (Pi., IA). <PG>
957
●var Aor. µoñσaɩ (P 272), aor. pass. µʊñßñvai (Hdt.), fut. pass. μσσoµα (E.), also
-еσ (LXX), perf. μεдíση-кα, -μαι (Att.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. Sia-, άло-. Very often as a first member (opposed to
qλo-), е.g. μσó-0ɛos 'who hates the gods' (A., Luc.), cf. Schwyzer: 442.
•DER µíσŋµa [n.] 'what is hated' (trag.), µíoŋеpov (-τpov) 'charm producing hatreď
(Luc., pap.), after στεруηеpov, Benveniste 1935: 203; µontós hated, hateful' (A., X.),
-ŋTIкós prone to hatred' (Arr.), oε. μíσεɩ, σтúуε 'id.' (H.). шonτη [f.]
'lascivious woman, whore' (Archil. [?], Cratin.), accent according to Ammon. 94; cf.
Montóg. ǎлλŋστoç ‘greedy' (H.) with unclear change of mg., with µontia
‘lasciviousness, unsatiable desire' (Ar., Procop.). µĩσoç [n.] ‘hatred, enmity, grudge,
object of hatred (trag., Att.).
•ETYM The date and the spread of the respective attestations do not favor the
common assumption that μσέu) is a denominative to µãooc; if it were, we would
expect an aorist Hom. *uíoɛ(0)σev instead of μíoŋoεv (but perhaps it is analogical
after qiλnoεv?).
A suffix -σoç does not exist in inherited words. Therefore, Fur.: 254 assumes a Pre-
Greek word, with an assibilated dental *ty.
дσðóç [m.] ‘hire, pay, wages, reward, daily wages' (Il.). <IE *misdo- 'salary'>
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. μ000-dó-tη¢ [m.] 'who pays the wages', -τéw, -σía
(Att.), compounded forms of μσðòv Soñvɑɩ with a suffix -τη-; µσƉo-qopέw [v.] 'to
get paid' with -pópos 'who served for hire', -popá 'wages'; žμ-μσoç 'being paid'
(Att.).
•DER Diminutive μσápov (Hp., com., pap.); µíσ [adj.] 'hireď (Hell.);
µɩσðóoµai, -ów) [v.] 'to hire for oneself, act. ‘to hire' (IA) with several derivatives:
μíσÐшμа 'rent, lease' (Att.), -wμάτiov (Alciphr.), µíσwo 'hiring' (Att.), -wσчµoç
'which can be hired' (Lex. apud D.), -woчuaios (gloss.); μσешτóç (directly from
μσóc?) hired, hireling, mercenary' (IA), -wτns [m.] 'tenant' (Att.), -wτpia [f.]
(Phryn. Com.), -wτIкóç 'belonging to rent' (Pl., pap.), -wτnpiov 'meeting place of the
μσеwτо (Ephesus II³, H. s.v. öч' ñλðɛc).
•ETYM This old word for 'reward, recompense' vel sim. was also preserved in Indo-
Iranian, Germanic and Slavic: Skt. mīḍhá- [n.] 'prize in a contest, contest', Av.
mižda- [n.] ‘wages', Go. mizdo [f.] 'wages', MoHG Miete 'rent', OCS mozda, Ru.
mzdá [f.] 'wages, hire, reward', all from IE *misdó-. Because of the gender of the
Gm. and Slav. words, Meillet MSL 21 (1920): 111 considers *misdó- to be an old
feminine; but if so, the change of gender in μołóc would be remarkable. In the sense

=== page 505 ===

958
LOTÚ
of ‘wages', σðóc was replaced by oчávov in the Hell. period (Chantraine 1956a:
25f.).
Tú
•ETYM See μvoτíλŋ (also for µotvláoµai).
µotúλλw [v.] 'to cut up meat' (II.). ◄PG?►
●var Aor. þuotñλai, -aσðaɩ (Semon., Lyc., Nonn.); Sα-µotñλai (Hdt. 1, 132).
•DER Backformation μστλλov piece of meat' (Strato Com.).
•ETYM As a denominative, στú\\\\w seems to go back to * μστúlos ‘cut up,
consisting of pieces' (cf. σtwµúλλw : -úλoç, кαµ˜úλλw: -úλoc). As a further basis,
one might posit a noun *шστo-, which could stand for *miT-to-, and could be
connected with some Germanic words for 'hew, cut', e.g. Go. maitan 'to injure,
mutilate'. Skt. méthati 'to be inimical' is not related (cf. Mayrhofer EWAia). The
word may rather be Pre-Greek. See ►µíτvàoç.
µíov, -voc, -éws [n.] 1. 'copper ore' found in Cyprus (Hp.); 2. 'ruffle, Tuber aestivum',
growing near Cyrene (Thphr.), cf. André 1956 s.v. misy. <LW Anat.?>
•ETYM Perhaps an adjective 'brilliant' borrowed from an Anatolian language; cf. Hitt.
mišriuant brilliant', from the root *meis- (Skt. mişáti 'to open the eyes'). See
Neumann Kadmos 28 (1989): 94f.
µíσxoç [m.] 1. ‘stalk of a leaf, fruit or flower' (Thphr., Porph.); 2. name of a Thessalian
instrument for field work, iσxupótepov ěti tñç dikελλns 'even stronger than the 8.',
... ŏ μäλov ɛiç þáðoç кatiòv лλεíш уñу лεруτρεлεɩ кαì кατwτéрwеεv 'which,
reaching deeper, turns around more earth, and from a greater depth' (Thphr.). Acc.
to H.
= ó napà tậ qúλÀλw kóкkoç ‘the seed at the leaf, which can hardly be correct.
Also difficult to understand is poкoç = 'pod, shell' (Poll. 6, 94). Extensively on
μíσxoç Strömberg 1937: 115f. <1. PG(V); 2. PG?(V)►
●COMP ǎ-µσxoç 'without stalk' (Thphr.).
⚫ETYM Probably an agricultural term in origin, and transmitted to botany by the
botanist Theophrastus. No etymology. The connection with µíσкaιoç. кñлoç ‘garden'
(H.), which is also compared to Lith. miškas 'wood, forest', also 'wood for burning or
building', is semantically void, unless one accepts a basic meaning 'trunk, bar' for the
Lith. word.
Fur.: 133 connects μíσxoç with μíσкoç 'pod, shell', which means that the word is Pre-
Greek. However, he does not connect the stalk with the Thessalian tool. On the other
hand, he may be right in connecting the latter with μíoкatoç 'garden', where ox/oк
also points to Pre-Greek origin.
μíτоç [m.] mg. uncertain, 'thread of the warp, chain' vel sim., also 'thread' in general,
Lat. līcium (since Y 762), see Blümner 1875-1887: 141ff., where other interpretations
are discussed. Cf. кατà μíτov ‘uninterrupted' (Pherecr., Plb.). <?>
•COMP Often as a second member, е.g. λεлτó-шτоç 'with fine threads' (E.), лоλú-
дuτoç consisting of many threads, damask' (A., Cretin., Peripl. M. Rubr.).
959
uvá
●DER µutwdns ‘thread-like, made of threads' vel sim. (S. Ant. 1222), µíτɩvo ‘licinae'
(gloss.), pós, uτápiov (sch. E. Hec. 924), μuτóμα, -wσασðaι [v.] ‘to hitch up
threads' vel sim. (AP), µσασðα(?) ‘id.' (Pl. Com.), µíσaσa 'liciare' (gloss.).
ETYM Because of the uncertain meaning, all explanations are hypothetical.
µíτpα [f.] 'girdle bound with metal' (Il.), 'maiden's girdle' (Theoc., A. R., Call.), 'fillet,
diadem' (Alcm., Hdt., E., Ar., Call.), 'victor's chaplet, wreath' (Pi.). <?>
•VAR Ion. -pŋ [f.].
•COMP
-ópos (also -o-q-) ‘bearing a μ.' (Hdt., Plu.), aloλo-µítpηs 'with
glittering girdle' (E 707, Theoc.), on the ending -ŋs see Schwyzer: 451); ǎ-µτpoç
'without girdle' (Call.).
●DER µτpíov (gloss.), µuτpódŋs like a µ.' (An. Ox.), µτpaïov (cod. -έov)· лaкílov
'many-colored' (H.); µτóðµα, -ów [v.] 'to put on or wear a μ., to dress with a μ.'
(Str., Nonn.).
⚫ETYM For comparison, one has thought of Skt. mitrá- [n., m.] ‘frienď, properly
'friendship', Av. mira- [m.] 'treaty, friend', as a personification 'Mithra' = OP
Migra-, assuming an inherited word *mi-tro- with original meaning 'connection',
from IE *mei- 'to bind, attach' (Pok. 710). The combination remains quite
hypothetical, as long as a corresponding primary verb is not found (IIr. may- ‘to fix,
establish??). Extensive treatment of mitrá- in Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.
Given its technical meaning, þíτpα (which is isolated in Greek) could very well be a
loan, perhaps from an Indo-Iranian source. Or does the short -ă (in the acc. µíτpăv
[LSJ) point to a Pre-Greek word?
µítvλos [adj.] Adjunct of a (Theoc. 8, 86) of uncertain mg; acc. to H. μíтvlov.
čσxatov, výrov. Aaкɛdaíµovεç ‘utmost, childish; foolish'. <?►
•VAR μúτɩλov žσxατov, à' où кai τòν vεwτατоу utmost, whence (?) also the
youngest’. oi dè kai tò ảлoßaïvov kai ó výrɩoç kai ó véos ‘that which results, infant,
young one' (H.); see Leumann Glotta 32 (1953): 217.
•ETYM Explained as 'hornless' and connected with oτúλλw, in which case μúτλOS
must have arisen by means of metathesis. However, as DELG remarks, the
explanation may be due to a folk-etymology with Lat. mutilus by a later scholiast.
Dissimilation from an original *μúτlos could be imagined (similar cases in
Schwyzer: 258). The similarity with the PN MUTλývη (also M₁TUλ-) is probably
irrelevant (cf. WH s.v. mutulus).
µítvs, -vos [f.] name of a substance used by bees (Arist.). <PG?►
•ETYM Unexplained; it could very well be Pre-Greek.
µvã [f.] ‘mina', weight and a sum of money = 100 drachmae (IA). <LW Sem.>>
•VAR Gen. -ãç (Ion. -ñc), etc., Ion. µvéaɩ [pl.].
●DER Diminutive µvadápiov (Diph. Com.), probably for *μvad-ápiov from *µvά-
Stov, -μvα-dov (like (w-άptov (ά-dov); µvα-años, μvaños ‘weighing or worth a
mina' (com., X., Arist.), -ïaïoç ‘id.' (Arist., Hell.), -iεiov [n.] golden coin = 1 silver-
mina (pap.); on -laños, -tɛToç see Chantraine 1933: 49 and 53.

=== page 506 ===

{
960
•ETYM A Semitic loanword. Cf. Hebr. māne, Akk. manu name of a weight. Borrowed
from µvā was Lat. mina. Skt. manắ- [f.], name of a golden ornament, remains far;
but MoP man as a designation of a weight might belong here, too; see Mayrhofer
EWAia 2: 308. Fur.: 380 connects μváσios/v and assumes a cultural term from the
Near East.
μvάoμα 'to remember, think of, ponder', also 'to woo (a woman), court'. →µµvýσкw.
µvapóv [adj.] glossed as μaλakóv, ǹdú, þádiov ‘delicate, sweet, easy' (Phot.), or
Ovµñpes ‘delightful' (H.), respectively (Cratin. 431). <?►
•ETYM Probably for µvapóv (*µvapóv), cf. Schwyzer: 274. See ▸μvíov.
váσov [n.] name of an Egyptian waterplant, 'Cyperus esculentus' (Thphr.). ◄LW
Eg.➤
⚫VAR Also μvaúσIOV.
•ETYM From Eg. mnw; see Hemmerdinger Glotta 46 (1968): 245.
μvíov [n.] 'seaweed' (Lyc., Nic., Agatharch., Str.), also µvóç = áлaλóç 'soft' (Euph. 156
from EM and Hdn.). <?►
•DER μvi-óεiç (A. R.), -wdns (Nic.), após (Opp., AP) 'weak like moss'.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. See ►µvóoç.
µvóos, µvoñç [m.] ‘soft down' (on young birds) (Hp., Ar., AP). <?►
•ETYM Rhyming word with xvóos, xvoñç [m.] 'down, foam, crust. On the other
hand, cf. μvíov 'seaweed'. Is μvóoç a cross from these two? See µvíov.
uva [f.] name of the serf population of Crete. <?>
•VAR µvwïа, μvoïa.
•ETYM Polomé Latomus 13 (1954): 83 argues against the connection with Georg.
mona 'servant, slave' as a Caucasian-Pre-Greek correspondence (as per Hubschmid
1953b: 103, with Dumézil). See ► dµws.
µoyέw [v.] ‘to toil, be distressed, suffer' (II.). <PG➤
●Var µεµoyŋws [perf.ptc.] (Nic.).
•COMP Rarely with σuv-, év-. As a first member in μoуoσ-τóкoç epithet of Eileithyia
(II.) and Artemis (Theoc.), who where assist at child-birth; also of wdivɛç (Lyc.), of
the Trojan horse (Tryph. Ep.), of wpa (Nonn.). Compound mg. uncertain, but not
(as per Bechtel 1914) ‘causing pain', taking µoyoσ- as an acc. pl. < *µóyovç. In any
case, μоуо-τóкоç was metrically impossible (Chantraine 1942: 95).
•DER µóyoç [m.] ‘toil, trouble, distress' (A 27, rare). From µóyos probably µoyɛpós
'laborious, distressful' (trag.). Adverb póyıç 'with toil, barely' (Il.). Perhaps PN
Moyéã [m.] (Boeot.).
•ETYM µoyέw may be a denominative from µóyoç, but the scarcity of the substantive
makes it more probable that an old intensive verb μoуéw gave rise to µóyoç as a
back-formation.
There are no certain cognates. The Baltic adjective Lith. smagus 'heavy, strong,
powerful (of blows)', Latv. smag(r)s 'heavy' rather belongs to Lith. smōgti, 1sg.
smagiù 'to scourge, beat, throw (something heavy)'. Meier-Brügger Glotta 70 (1992):
!
MoLXÓC
961
134f. proposes that the word belongs to *megh₂- 'big', but this is semantically not
immediately convincing.
A by-form with initial oμ- is found in σµoyɛpóv. okλŋpóv, éríßovλov, xóv
‘harsh, treacherous, sorrowful' (H.), cf. also oµvyɛpós ‘painful, etc. Beside
σμоyɛpóv and σµvyɛpóç, Fur.: 140, 363 connects μóxеoç, μoxóc, and judges the
group (probably correctly so) to be Pre-Greek. See on μwloc. See μóx
▶ Hox入ós, ▶ uó入LS.
µóðoç [m.] ‘battle-din' (Il., Hes. Sc., Nic.). <PG?>
•COMP µоеoúpas. tàs laßàs tŵv кwлшv 'the grips of a handle' (H.), explained in
Solmsen 1909: 56².
⚫DER μóða, -αкos [m.] 'child of the Helotes or Perioikoi, who has received his
education together with a Spartan' (Phylarch. Hist. [IIIª], Plu., Ael.); µóеwv, -wvos
[m.] = µóðaž (sch., EM., H.), also ‘impudent man' vel sim. (Ar. Pl. 279), parodically
represented as a demon (beside Kóßaλot etc., Ar. Eq. 635); name of a vulgar dance,
practised by sailors (Ar., Poll.), also name of a melody on the flute that accompanies
the dance (Trypho apud Ath. 14, 618c). µoеwvкóç like the µówvɛç' (Ion apud Plu.
Per. 5), μowvía. àλačovɛía tiç tov owµatos kivistiкý ‘a boasting posture of the body
that sets in motion' (EM).
•ETYM The great stylistic difference between epic µóðos and Dor. µóðα and µóðwv
is remarkable, but it is clear that Homer preserves the oldest meaning 'turmoil'.
No cognates outside Greek. Has been compared with CS motati sę ‘agitari’, Ru.
motát' 'to throw to and fro, waste; to reel, wind up', or with Skt. mánthati, mathnáti
‘to stir, shake', but Gr. O as against Sl. t and Skt. th contradicts this (*-tH- does not
regularly yield Gr. -0-); moreover, regarding the latter equation, a vocalic nasal does
not vocalize to -o- in this position in any Greek dialect. Perhaps the word is Pre-
Greek.
Louiváw
•ETYM See μváw (s.v. ►µów) and ▸ μúλλov.
FLOLý入入W
ETYM See μúλλw s.v. ►μúλŋ.
frolog →oológ.
µoчpa [f.] ‘part, share, lot'. μεipoµai.
μочτos [m.] xáρıç, thanks, favour' (Sophr. 168). <LW Ital.?>
ETYM As the word is Sicilian, perhaps it is a borrowing from OLat. (or Italic?)
*moitos 'exchange' (seen in Lat. mūtāre 'to change, exchange'; cf. mutuus 'mutual',
etc.); see WH s.v. mūtō. At any rate, unrelated to the group ǎuoto, ▸μoчoç, and
►σμoló.
μoxós [m.] ‘adulterer' (IA), ‘idolatrous person' (Ep. Jac. 4, 4), cf. μоxaliç, µoxáw,
-ɛúw. <IE? *h,meig"- 'urinate'>>
•COMP Sometimes as a first member, e.g. µox-áуpia [n.pl.] 'fine imposed on one
taken in adultery' (0 332), after (wάypia, Chantraine 1956a: 51³ (cf. s.v.); also

=== page 507 ===

962
KATÁμLOLXOS =======
(pap.).
hókpwv
μaxós (Vett. Val.), probably back-formation from кαταμοɣεúw
•DER A. Several feminine formations, mostly late: чox-ás (Aeschin. Socr.), -aλís
(LXX, NT, Hld.), also ‘idolatrous woman' (NT), -ǹ, -íc (Ar. Byz.), -atva (Tz.); older
μоXεÚτρια (see below).
B. Adjectives: чox-ídios ‘begotten in adultery' (Hecat., Hdt., Hyp.), after koupídios,
see on ►кópη; -Iкóç (Luc., Plu.), -tos (AP), -wdns (Com. Adesp., Ptol.) 'adulterous'.
C. Abstract formation: µœxové = µaxɛía (Man.).
D. Denominatives: 1. µaxáw [v.] ‘to seduce into adultery, be adulterous' (originally
Doric: Gortyn -íw), of a man (the Lacedaimonian Callicratidas in X. HG 1, 6, 15),
-άoμa 'id.', of women and men (LXX, NT), 'to be idolatrous' (LXX), 'to bastardize'
(Ael.), after Lat. adulterāre; 2. μoixɛúw = -άw, also pass. 'to be seduced' (Xenoph.,
Att.), med. -ɛúoμai 'to be adulterous' (Att. only of women, LXX also of men); 'to
idolate' (LXX); оуεíα 'adultery' (Att.), μoxεv-τs = μoxóç (Man.), -τpia [f.] (Pl.,
Plu.); 3. μox-αívw (Vett. Val.); 4. -άw (Anon. apud Suid.) ‘id.'.
ETYM Often analyzed as an agent noun of ouɛíxw 'to urinate', as a vulgar
expression. Borrowed as Lat. moechus. The initial laryngeal (*h¸meig¹-) is usually
assumed not to have vocalized before a resonant and an o-grade root (the Saussure
Effect). Alternatively, it may be thought that the semantic connection of adultery
with urinating is not specific enough, and that the etymology must be abandoned.
µóкpwv [?] µóкpwvα. τòv óčúv. 'Epuеpañol 'sharp' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Latte Gnomon 31 (1959): 32 corrects it to μóкwvα, after the Acarnanian name
Móкwv; an adjective *дóкwv would explain μоккúvεiç лερióрovεiç 'very thoughtful;
arrogant' (ms. μokkwvwσis). Fur.: 341, 372 identifies µóкpwv with άuaкpãτɩç
ɑµñeλórpaσov ‘wild leek, Allium Ampeloprasum' (Ps-Dsc. 2, 150), but it remains
unclear on which grounds.
=
µolyós [m.] ‘bag made of cowhide' (Ar. Eq. 963, D. C.), Tarentinian acc. to Poll. 10,
187. LW Thrac.>
●DER µóλyıvoç ‘made of ox-hide' (Theodorid. apud Poll. 10, 187); µóðyns, -ntos [m.]
(like лévηç, лλávηs, etc.) = μoxеpós (Crates Gramm. apud sch. Ar. Eq. 959), in the
same mg. also μoλyós (Suid.).
⚫ETYM Differs from a Germanic word for ‘bag, pouch' only in the velar and accent:
OHG malaha, MHG malhe leather bag', ON malr 'bag' < IE *mólko-. It has
therefore been assumed that Gr. -y- is due to borrowing, perhaps from Thracian
(thus Pok. 747). Also, Go. balgs 'ballows, bag', Ir. bolg have been compared, in which
case μolyós must have been phonetically influenced by ɑµέλyw.
Fur: 126 assumes a pre-IE Wanderwort. Cf. Taillardat 1962: §§160 and 209,
commenting on the meaning ‘glutton, kívaɩdoç'; cf. also Taillardat REGr. 64 (1951):
10ff.
=
μоλεiv 'to go, come'. Bλwoкw.
1
{
963
μоλεúw [v.] 'to cut off and transplant the shoots of trees' (Lex. Att. apud Poll. 7, 146);
µodovɛiv. ¿ykórtɛiv tàs rapaqvádas ‘to engrave the offshoots' (H.). ◄IE? *melh¸-
'come, appear', PG?>
⚫ETYM Probably built on *μóλoç or *μoλɛúç 'runner', from the root of μоλεiv 'to go,
come'; see ẞλwoкw. The form μooúε is explained as modelled on koλoúεiv.
Perhaps, чóλopos [m.] 'kind of snake', μoλoupíç, -ídos [f.] 'locust' (Nic.) should
also be included here? It may be asked, however, whether the variation -ov-/-εv- is
not rather a Pre-Greek phenomenon. I do not believe in a variation μ/к as in
μоλεúw/кoλоúw (Fur.: 388). See μóλovρoç.
fló入ovpos.
µólıç [adv.] ‘hardly, barely' (trag., Att.). <?>
•VAR = μóуIÇ.
FLÓYLS.
•ETYM No etymology. Earlier proposals (see Solmsen 1909: 169ff.) are problematic:
connection with µwλos 'fight', if from earlier 'trouble', is formally doubtful because
of the root vocalism; that with μéλλw 'to be about to do, hesitate, etc.', semantically
uncompelling. See ▸μoуέw.
µoloßpós [m.] scornful or ignominious qualification, referring to Odysseus, who has
not yet been identified, by the goat-herd Melanthos and the beggar Iros (p 219, σ 26;
after this Lyc. 775); also of the head (кɛoαλń) of a plant in unknown mg. (Nic. Th.
662). <PG(V)►
•DIAL Myc. mo-ro-qo-ro /molog"ros/.
●DER μoλóẞp-lov [n.] 'the young of a swine' (Ael.), -íτηç ç ‘id.' (Hippon.). PN
Móλoßpos [m.] (Th. 4, 8, 9; Lacon.).
ETYM Numerous doubtful proposals have been advanced. In antiquity: ȧлò τo
µoλɛïv kaì napaуívɛσðaɩ пpòs ßopàv kai τpoo̟ýv ‘from going, and having recourse
to food' (sch. Lyc. 775), which is clearly folk-etymology; and also recently: Neumann
KZ 105 (1992): 75-80 derives it from *μoλos, related to Skt. mála- [n.] 'dirt', and the
root *grh3- ‘eat' in ßißpwoкw, assuming a meaning ‘Dreckfresser'. Although this is
clearly better than earlier proposals, it does not explain the second member -ẞpoç, as
*-gwrHo- would have given *-ẞapo- (I do not accept the loss of laryngeals in
compounds). Rather a Pre-Greek word; Fur.: 388 compares кoλóßpiov ‘young of a
swine' (Ar. Byz. apud Eust.).
μolópos evergreen plant, asphodill, Asphodelus ramosus' or = Ő入óaxolvos,
'Scirpus holeschoenus' (Euph. 133, Nic. Al. 147). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
µóλovpos [?] unidentified snake (Nic. Th. 491). <?>
•ETYM It has been assumed that a word for a locust is derived from this word:
μоλoupíç, -ídos (Nic. Th. 416). Gow and Scholfield think that it is the snake
µóλovpoç, but Gil Fernández 1959: 52 translates ‘locust'. Hesychius has µoλoñpɩç.
aidoĩov ‘private parts'. кoλoßǹ óyan blunt spear(head)³. ½ µóðɩç oúpŵv ‘urinating
with difficulty' (folk-etymology), and μolovpides. Batpaxides kai tŵv otaxúwv tà
уóvaτa little frogs, the knees of the offspring' (?); Suid. has μoλupíç, μovídεç
μоλvρídαç τàç ȧкpídaç 'locusts' qaoí. No etymology.

=== page 508 ===

964
дoλóxη [f.] 'mallow'. →μaλáxŋ.
µoλлó̟ [f.] ‘dance with song'. →μελлw.
lolóxn
µólσov [n.]? · σɛλívov kavλós kai ǎvos ‘stalk and flower of the celery' oi dè τǹv
úлoчváda (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
µóloos [m.] ó dŋµós. Aioλɛïç ‘fat (Aeol.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Compared with µέλdw. See Hoffmann 1893: 241, who reads dŋµós for dñµoç.
μóλußбoç [m.] 'lead' (IA). <LW IE Anat.>
•VAR µóλßo (A 237, also Hell. prose), also µóλvßos (LXX), µóλßoç (Plu.),
Bóλußdos (Att. defix.), ßóλчµos (Delph., Epid.), þóλíßos (Rhod. in ´ɛpi-ßolißãoɑi).
•DIAL Myc. mo-ri-wo-do.
•COMP μоλußбo-xoέw 'melt lead, solder with lead' (Ar., inscr.).
●DER A. Substantives: µoλúß-αɩva [f.] 'weight of lead, plummet, ball of lead' ( 80,
Hp., Arist.), 'a plant, Plumbago europaea' (Plin.), see Strömberg 1940: 26; like
äкaiva, etc. (Schwyzer: 475, Chantraine 1933: 109); -íç [f.] ‘id.' (Att., Hell.); -tov [n.]
'leaden weight' (Hp.), µoλíß-tov [n.] ‘leaden pipe' (Antyll. apud Orib.), -íðɩov (Hero);
µoλvßd-ītis [f.] ‘lead-sand' (Dsc., Plin.); -wμa ‘lead-work' (Moschio apud Ath.);
µoλvßãç, -ãtos [m.] ‘lead-worker' (pap.).
B. Adjectives: μoλúßd-ivoç (µoλíẞ-) ‘leaden' (IA, Paul. Aeg.), -oûç (µodiß-, µoλvß-)
‘id.' (Att., Hell.); -wdŋs ‘like lead' (Dsc., Gal.), -ɩкóç ‘leaden' (gloss.), µoλvßpóv. tò
µoλvßoɛɩdéç ‘like lead' (H.).
C. Verbs: µoλußdóoµai (µoλiß-) ‘to be furnished with leaden weights, etc.' (Arist.)
with wous (gloss.); лεpi-ßolißwσaɩ ‘frame with lead' (Rhod.); μoλußd-iáw [v.] ‘to
have the color of lead' of the face, as a symptom of disease (Com. Adesp.).
Here also μoλẞíç. στá¤µóν τɩ εлτаμvаoν (H.) with loss of internal or v (Solmsen
1909: 60²).
•ETYM Because of its variants, the word is commonly considered to be an Anatolian
loan. The form ẞoλчuos would be due to metathesis and Boλißos due to assimilation.
The forms μóλẞos and μóλuẞos are clearly the most archaic; apart from these,
there is also Myc. /moliwdos/; and μoßo is now also found in Olbia about 500ª.
The Mycenaean form could easily be the oldest, assuming that i changed to u before
w(d).
A connection with Lat. plumbum cannot be substantiated. The Latin word is rather
related to Celt. *pl(o)udo-, as I have shown in Beekes MSS 59 (1999): 7-14; the
Germanic word *laud- (E lead) was borrowed from Celtic. The Greek word cannot
have come from the West (cf. also Basque berún ‘lead'), as lead was much older in
Greece.
The Greek word has now been compared with Lyd. marivda-, of which we now
know that it meant ‘dark' (as in E murky); its Hitt. equivalent is ‘Markuu̟aia-
'chtonic deities'. marivda- would be an IE word from the root *merg"-, *morg"iio-
giving *marwida-, which may have become *marwda- with syncope, which in turn
μóvos
965
might have become *marwida- by anaptyxis. For the semantics connecting ‘lead and
'dark', cf. Lat. plumbum nigrum. See Melchert 2004.
µoλúvw [v.] ‘to defile, pollute, stain' (Att.). <IE? *mel(h₂)- ‘dirt'>
•VAR Mostly present stem; μоλvvã, μoλúvaι, -vvеñvat, etc. (Hell.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, ovv-.
•DER μóλ-vvσiç, -vouós 'defilement, pollution' (LXX, Str.), -voua 'stain' (late), -vµµα
'id.' (gloss.); μoluvíŋ. ǹ лuуń 'behind, rump' (H.), μóλυxνov· Svστaλéov (H.), leg.
avστaλéov 'dried up'?; Latte gives detaλéov ‘filthy' vel sim.
Perhaps also the Boeot. HN Moλóεç, if "the filthy one", from *μóλoç?
⚫ETYM Denominative in -úvw from an unattested base form. Schmidt KZ 32 (1893):
384 connects it with Lith. mulvė ‘mud, mire' and the factitive verb mulvinti 'to cover
with mire'. In order to combine the root vocalism with that of Lithuanian, he
assumes *µaλúvw (like Lith. -ul- from *-!-), and assimilation *a > o before v in the
following syllable, but there are too many counterexamples to such a rule.
Numerous words for 'dark, dirty color' and 'dirt, defilement' are assembled under a
root *mel(H)-, but only Skt. mála- [n.] ‘dirt, defilement' is of interest here, with a
derivative málavant- 'dirty', which formally matches the hydronym Moλóaç. Both
Greek μoλúvw and Moλóɛç may have been built on older *μóλoc, -ov 'dirt' (cf.
aioxúvw, okλŋpúvw, etc.), which corresponds with the Skt. word if we assume a pre-
form *molH-o-. Cf. Mayrhofer EWAia, s.v. mála-.
Alternatively, Fur.: 227 compares qoλóvei• µolúvei (H.), which could point to a Pre-
Greek word. See ► µέλaç.
µóvaños [m.] Paeonic word for ẞóvaσoç, þóλivƉoç, ‘aurochs' (Arist.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also μóvαños (Arist.), µóvwy, -wños (Ael.).
ETYM Fur.: 207, etc. adduces μóvaлоç (Arist. Id. Mir. 830a) and derives μóvшτOS
(Antig. Mir. 53 cod.) from *μovaƑtos < *µovaлoç; both µóvαɩлоç and *µovaлtoç
may continue a Pre-Greek pre-form *monap-. Other variants could be ẞóλivoç and
Bóvaσ(o)os, but details are unclear.
µovðvλɛúw [v.] 'to stuff, fill, etc.' <PG?(V)►
•ETYM If óvеvλɛúw stands for Fove-, it may show the characteristic Pre-Greek
variation Fu (Fur.: 246). See ►óvevλɛúw.
µóvчoç ‘lasting, steadfast'. →µέvw.
µóvos [adj.] ‘alone'. <IE? *men- ‘small', *mon-uo- ‘alone'>
•VAR µovos (epic Ion.), µwvos (Theoc.).
•COMP Frequent as a first member, e.g. µóv-apxos [m.] ‘monarch' (µoúv-), with -έw,
-ía, etc. (Thgn., Pi., IA).
●DER 1. µováç, µovváç, -ádoç as an adj. [f., m.] ‘lonely' (trag., AP), subst. [f.] ‘unity'
(Pl.) with µovad-taños ‘of uniform greatness' (Hero), -(кós 'consisting of unities,
uniform, individual' (Arist.), -tσtí [adv.] ‘in unities' (Nicom.), -toμós [m.] ‘formation
of unity' (Dam.). 2. µovax-ñ (Pl., X.), -ws (Arist.) ‘only in one way', -oû (Pl., Thphr.)
‘only in one place'; µovaxós [adj.] ‘single' (Arist., Epicur.), also [m.] 'hermit, monk'
(AP, Procop.), Lat. monachus, with μová✗-ovσa [f.] (Jerusalem VIP), -ɩкós [adj.]

=== page 509 ===

966
hópa
'hermit-like, monkish' (Just., pap. VIP); substantive μovaxioμós 'monastic life';
μovаx-ów 'to get lonely' (Aq.). 3. μovvá [adv.] ‘lonely, alone' (Od., Arat.), µovažía
'lonelyness' (sch., Eust.) from *µovažós like dižós, etc.; PN Movážios (Vº). 4. µoviós,
µoúvɩoç ‘living alone, wild' (Call., AP), µovías [m.] ‘lonely man' (Ael.). 5. µovía, -ín
'lonelyness, celibacy' (Max.), µovótŋs [f.] ‘unity' (Sm., Iamb.), ‘singularity' (Alex.
Aphr. in Metaph.). 6. µovvóðɛv (Hdt. 1, 116; v.l. -oðévta), µová-dŋv (A. D., EM),
µovva-dóv (Opp.) ‘lonely, alone'. 7. Verbs: µovóoμaí (µovv-) [v.] ‘to be left alone',
-ów 'to leave alone' (Il.), with μóv-wois 'lonelyness' (Pl., Ph.), -wτηs [m.] = µovíaç
(Arist.), -wτiкóç ‘(left) alone' (Ph.); µovášw [v.] 'to stay alone, separate oneself
(LXX, Christ. authors, gramm.) with μovaσµós ‘lonely situation' (Eust.),
μоvаστηрιov 'cell of a hermit, cloister' (Ph., pap), uováστpia [f.] 'nun' (Just.).
•ETYM PGr. *µóvƑos (whence Ion. µovoç, Att. μóvos) probably stands beside
*µavƑós in µāvós, ►µavós ‘thin, rare', albeit with a somewhat different meaning.
The latter agrees with Arm. manr, gen. manu 'small, thin'. An element -uo- also
appears in the synonym *olfoc (see oloc), and also in ►öloç < *sol-uo- 'whole'.
Otherwise, *uóvƑos is isolated. A different formation may be found in Skt. manák ‘a
little', Lith. meñkas 'scanty', ToB menki [n.] 'lack', etc., which contain a velar.
Unrelated is Hitt. maninku- 'short, near'.
rópa →ueipoual.
.
μоруáç [f.] yаστρчμаруíaç кai ȧкpατíaç ‘gluttony, being without command;
incontinence' (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM It has been suggested that this is the Aeolic equivalent of *uapyías. On the
other hand, we may also be dealing with the Pre-Greek variation a/o (Pre-Greek,
sections 6.1 and 6.3). See ►µápyos.
μópуoç [m.] 'twined basket of a chariot, in which straw and chaff was transported'
(Poll. 7, 116, H.); acc. to H. also σкútivov or ßóelov tεuxos ‘leather ware'. <PG?▷
•DER µopyɛúw [v.] ‘to transport in a µópyos' (Poll. l.c.). Unclear µópyɩov. µétpov yñs,
ő εστɩ лλεероν. кαi εldoç àµлéλov 'land measure, which equals a plethron; also a
kind of vine' (H.). Chantraine reads μóрτov and connects μоpτη, without
argumentation.
ETYM The connection with ò̟μóруvчμ or Aμopyós would presuppose the
operation of the Saussure's Law (loss of initial or root-final laryngeal in an o-grade
root). However, the connection is semantically uncompelling and speculative. As a
technical term, probably Pre-Greek. See ►µápyos.
µopiaɩ [f.pl.] of έλaĩaɩ, probably to be corrected in μopiaí (Scheller 1951: 128 and 1324),
name of holy olives in Athens (Ar., Lys., Arist.). Thence Aßŋvā Mopía and Zɛùç
Mópios as protectors of olive culivation (S.). Cf. Nilsson 1941(1): 442. <?>
•VAR Rarely sing.
ETYM Probably from μópoç, μópiov 'lot, share' (see μɛípoμat), as these trees
formed the share due to the goddess in every plantation (Latte in PW 16: 302f.).
Nilsson (l.c. fn. 4) refers to “den primitiven Rechtsbrauch, daß ein Baum dem
gehört, der ihn gepflanzt hat, auf welchem Boden er auch wächst". Different
i
{
|
Hopuw, -oic
967
explanation by Heubeck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 1 (1949): 281 (with Brandenstein): a
Pre-Greek word for ‘olive', whence several PNs in Asia Minor and Greece were
derived, e.g. Múpa (Lyc.), Múpai (Thess.).
μоρдúρоç [m.] name of a sea-fish of the family of the breams (Sparidae), 'Pagellus
mormyrus' (Arist., Archestr.); details in Thompson 1947 s.v. <PG?>
•VAR With dissimilation µopµúλos (Dorio apud Ath., Opp.); also µúðµη (Epich. 62).
ETYM According to Strömberg 1943: 76 "probably called after the sound, which
arises from its quick movement in the water”. The connection with µúρoµαι, μúðш
'to flow, trickle' (Strömberg l.c.) is not convincing. Connection with µopµúpw is
quite possible, if the fish meant here would properly be the 'bubble-blower'.
Borrowed as Lat. murmillō ‘gladiator with Gaulish helm, on top of which was a fish';
see WH s.v.
µopµúpw [v.] ‘to bubble up, foam', of water (Il., late prose). <ONOM➤
•VAR Present stem only; also μupμúрw (H.).
•COMP Also with άva-, έлɩ-.
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic verb with intensive reduplication (Schwyzer: 647 and 258,
Chantraine 1942: 376). Such formations are frequent: Lat. murmurō, -āre [v.] 'to
murmur', Skt. múrmura- [m.] 'crackling fire', -ā [f.] name of a river, marmara-
'roaring', Lith. murměti, murm(l)énti ‘to grumble, murmur', Arm. mřmř-am, -im <
*murmur-am, -im) ‘id.', etc. See µúpoµai.
μopμá, -oñç [f.] 'bogey, spectre', also personified and as an interjection (Erinn. [?],
Ar., X., Theoc., Luc.). <PG?▷
•VAR Also -óvos, -óva, etc. (Schwyzer: 479).
•DER μopμwτóç 'frightful' (Lyc.); µорμ-úσσoμα [v.] 'to frighten' (Call.), µopµúčav-
TEC (Phryg. IVP), also чopμúvε and μоpμúpεt. Sεivолочε 'scares' (H.). Further the
nouns μópμopos and μúpμos póẞo, чó xαÝ, εклАηкτк½ (H.). PN
Mópuveos (like Topyó Tópуuboç, Leumann 1950: 155129); also the PN Mupμdóvεç?
Enlarged verbal form μopμolúttoµai μордúσσода (Аr., Pl., X., Ph.),
µopµoľvžáµεvos (Gal.) with µopµoλúк-ŋ, Dor. -a [f.] (Sophr. 9, Str.), -ɛɩov (-εïov)
[n.] (Ar., Pl. u.a.) = μoρμά; also μоpµopúчw ‘id.' (Phot.).
=
•ETYM μоρμó has been compared with Lat. formidō ‘terror, fear, ghost' by assuming
a dissimilation analogous to that supposed for μúpµη beside Lat. formica. Further
connections are uncertain; it is probably a reduplicated formation like Topyó (see
yopyós), which was originally used as a terrorizing call, and perhaps cognate to
μopµúpw. The by-forms Moμßpó, Moµµw (H.) clearly show the popular character of
the word. Beside uopuw, we find both μopμúσσoμαι, -úvεɩ, -úpεɩ and µорμо-
Aúttopai, -Aúkn, -λúкɛov, for which roµôólvε, roµqolúžai (to roµôós) may be
compared, though dissimilation from *μopμopúττоμаι (Schwуzer: 258) is also
imaginable (the nouns μopμoľúкη, -εov are backfomations).
A connection with Lat. formīdō, etc. does not seem obvious. To my mind, it is likely
that the words are Pre-Greek, although there is no concrete proof of this. See Fur.:
364.

=== page 510 ===

968
μоρóεiç
969
μоpóɛiç [adj.] μoрóεντа epithet of εpμaτα 'ear-pendants' (E 183, σ 298). <GR▷
•VAR Only ntr.pl. -oɛvτa; a different word is µopóɛt derived from μópos ‘fate (of
death)', as in µopóɛv лotóv ‘fatal drink' (Nic.).
ETYM Acc. to H. and Eust. 976, 40 = µετà лоÀÀоû kaµátov ƒεjovημévα 'what has
roλλoû nenovnµéva
been accomplished with much pain' (from μópos 'share'; per H., also = лóvоç
‘labour, pain'); therefore in Q. S. 1, 152 also of tεúxŋ. Acc. to LSJ, it probably rather
derives from μópov 'mulberry', in the sense 'having the color or shape of mulberry'.
µópov [n.] ‘black mulberry, blackberry' (Epich., A., Hp.). <?►
•DER µopέa, -éŋ [f.] 'mulberry tree, Morus nigra' (Nic., Gal.); μópivoç 'mulberry-
colored (pap.); on ►µopóɛç s.v. Here also µœpides. µávtɛç ‘seers' (H.), where the
latter must be a mistake for μavτía vel sim., which Dsc. 4, 37 gives as the Dacian
name of the mulberry (see ẞáτOC).
⚫ETYM Gr. μópov matches with Arm. mor, instr. -iw 'blackberry', whence mor-i, mor-
eni 'berry-shrub'. Latin has mōrum 'mulberry', whence (as loans) Germanic words
like OHG mür-bere, mōr-bere, MHG mülber. In spite of its long vowel, Lat. mōrum
may be a loan from Greek; the same holds for Arm. mor. Thus, all forms mentioned
may go back to Gr. μópov. For the compounded form σuкóμopov, see ►σŨкov. Pok.
749 gives μpov (H.), but I can only find μpa. σvкáшva, which Latte corrects to
fiópa.
μópožoç [m.] 'kind of pipe-clay, used to bleach clothes' (Gal., Aët.). <PG(V)►
VAR Also μópox00c (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM The variation : X0 (like in 'Epɛɛúç: Epɛxσεc) is typical of Pre-Greek; see
Fur.: 263 Anm. 3. The interchange 0/σ may reflect a phoneme * (Pre-Greek: section
5.5).
µópottov [n.] έк qλoioù лλéyµa ti & étuïtov ảλλýλovs toĩs Anµŋtpíos ‘kind of
wickerwork made of bark, with which people used to beat each other during the
Demetria' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM See Nilsson 1906: 323³. Fur.: 341 connects Calabr. marrotta. A Pre-Greek word
is probable (cf. DELG).
µóppia [n.pl.] name of an oriental mineral (‘Derbyshire spať' or a kind of agate); also a
vessel made of it, “murra vessel” (Paus.). <LW Iran.➤
•VAR μoúppiva (Arr.); also µo(v)ppívŋ [f.sg.] (Peripl. M. Rubr.).
⚫ETYM Probably of Iranian origin; cf. MoP mori, muri ‘glass balls'; the Greek word
was borrowed as Lat. murra, vāsa murrina (whence perhaps чoúppiva, -ívn?). See
also Kretschmer Glotta 1 (1909): 337.
µópoчµos [adj.] ‘decided by fate, лεnpwµévos', of ñµap = ‘day of death', thence also of
man (X 13): 'destined to die, mortal' (Il., also Hdt.). <IE *smer- 'think of, remember,
care'>
⚫ETYM Related to μεípoμα, and traditionally derived from *μópots, supposed to be
Aeolic for *smr-ti- in the sense of μóрoç, μочpа. This analysis is doubted by DELG
s.v. μɛípoдa, which prefers a derviation in -σчoç. The connection with the word for
!
i
'death' (Lat. mors, IE *mr-ti-) or 'mortal' (μоρτóc, ẞpoτóc) is rightly rejected by
Frisk.
µoptós [adj.] = ävßpwéos, Ovntós (H., Call. Fr. 271), rather µópτos (Latte). ◄IE *mór-
to- 'mortal, man'>>
⚫COMP μорτоẞáτɩν· ȧvершлоßáτɩv vauv (H.), mg. unclear; cf. µоpτо-ßáτŋ ‘trodden
by the dead' (LSJ). As a second member in Ayé-, Kλɛó-, Xαpí-μорτоç (Lesbos, Syros,
Lato), Bechtel 1921, 1: 123; Masson RPh. 89 (1963): 218ff. (more names in DELG).
⚫ETYM DELG correctly remarks that there is no reason to take the gloss as Aeolic, in
view of the Doric names. Therefore, the vocalism points to original *mór-to-,
identical with Skt. márta- and Av. marəta- [m.] ‘mortal, man'. See ẞpoτós.
µóptos · µélas, paɩós ‘black, grey' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Uncertain. DELG compares μopúσσw and refers to Pok. 734.
µopúʊʊw [v.] Only perf. ptc. μεμоpuxµévos (v.l. -y-) ‘defiled, blackeneď (v 435, Nic.,
Q. S., Opp.), also 2sg. aor. opt. μopúšais 'one should besmear' (Nic. Al. 144). ◄?►
•DER Compar. μopуáτεpov (used as an adverb) ‘darker' (v.l. in Arist. Metaph. 987a
10), Mópuxos epithet of Dionysus in Sicily (Sophr. 94), as his face was besmeared
with yeast during the wine harvest; also name of a tragic poet (Ar.) with Mopuxía.
oikia (Pl. Phdr. 227b); see Praechter Herm. 42 (1907): 647.
•ETYM For Mópuxos, cf. ňovxos, ßóστpuxos, and other popular words in -xos (see
Chantraine 1933: 402ff.); a back-formation from μoрúσσw, with analogical -úσow, is
possible.
Possible Greek cognates are mentioned under μópovoç. Outside Greek, Slavic
words for 'smear', etc. have been considered, e.g. Ru. marátь, maráju 'to smear,
stain', etc. (but these have IE lengthened grade).
μopon [f.] 'shape, form, beauty, grace' (0 170 and λ 367), on the mg. cf. Treu 1955: 175f.
1?1
•COMP Very often as a second member, e.g. лoλú-μopqoç 'with many forms' (Hp.,
Аrist.) with лоλvµopq-ía (Longin., Him.).
•DER Three denominatives: 1. μopóa, -ów (v.] 'to assume a shape or form'
(Thphr., Arat., LXX, NT, Plu.), also with μετα-, Siα-, etc., whence (μετα-,
Sia-)μópowσis 'shaping, embodiment' (Thphr., Str., Ep. Rom.); µopq-wtpia [f.] ‘she
who shapes, represents' (E. Tr. 437), -wtiкóç ‘forming' (Gal., Procl.); also дópoшμα
‘form' (Epicur., Aq.), but in trag. (A., E.) as an enlargement of μopoń, cf. Chantraine
1933: 186f.
2. µopáčw [v.] ‘to make gestures, behave' (X.) with -aσuós name of a dance (Ath.,
Poll.), ‘to embellish' (Eust.); έ-µopoά(w 'to pretend, simulate' (Ph.).
3. μopqúvɛi kaλλwříčɛɩ, koσµɛî ‘to adorn' (H.), after кaλλúvw etc.; from ä-µoppos:
áμpúvεv. où dɛóvτwç ëρáttεiv 'not proceeding as one should' (H., Antim. 72).
Two names: Mopow [f.] epithet of Aphrodite in Sparta (Paus., Lyc.), Mopqɛúc [m.]
son of Sleep (Or. Met. 11, 635), after the dream-images created by him. Adjective
μoponεs with beautiful shape' (Pi.).

=== page 511 ===

970
hóppvos
HOTÓ
971
•etym àµepqés. alσxpóv (H.) points to a noun *µέpopos [n.] beside μopon. A verbal
root *mergh-vel sim. that could be the basis of the verbal nouns *μépчoç and μоpoń
is unknown. Lith. márgas 'many-colored, beautiful' and mirgëti 'to flicker' (with zero
grade), point to a root *merg (w)- (Winter's Law) and therefore cannot be related.
Van Beek (p.c.) suggests that Lith. mergà ‘girl' (which has no good etymology)
makes a nice formal match, if from 'beautiful appearance'; we would have to assume
a pre-form *merg™³-h₂- in which Gr. introduced an o-grade. Lat. fōrma (the long ō is
secondary, De Vaan 2008 s.v.) may be a loan from Greek via an intermediary (e.g.
Etruscan), but perhaps it could be related to μopon, assuming a relatively early
metathesis *mergwh_ >> *gwherm-> *gworm-> form-.
μópovoç [adj.] epithet of aiɛτós (316), also name of a kind of eagle (Hes. Sc. 134,
Arist., Lyc.), 'vulture' acc. to Suid.; cf. Thompson 1895 s.v. <?>
•VAR Accentuation after Hdn. Gr. 1, 173 (following Aristarchus); μopovós is cited as
well.
•ETYM Like the rhyming word opqvóc ‘dark', µópovos is usually explained from a
meaning 'dark-colored' vel sim. (thus already Hdn., Suid.). Similar words are
μóv. σкovóv, µέλav ‘dark, black' (H.), µоρúσσw, Mópuxoç, as well as ►μópov.
Connection with μopon cannot be proven.
Pisani RILomb. 73 (1939-40): 497ff. suggests an Aeolic form *μopẞo-qv-o-ç < IE
*mrgo-gwn-o-, with a first member related to Skt. mrgá- [m.] 'big bird', and
influenced by the eagle name vittoqóvos “killer of ducks" (Arist.); doubtful in view
of the haplology that has to be assumed. See μopqń.
µóʊʊvv, -ñvos [m.] ‘tower-like building of wood' (X., A. R., Call., D. H.), also of other
wooden constructions (Lyc.). ◄ LW?>
•VAR-VOS [dat.pl.].
⚫DER MOσƠÚV-Oɩкoɩ [m.pl.] ‘inhabitant of the µóσσvvɛç', name of a people south of
the Black Sea (Hecat., Hdt., X., Arist.); μоσσUVIкоÍ· žúλvоι лívαкεç μεуáλoɩ, wστε EV
avtois kaì äλqita µáσσɛv ‘large wooden planks, for pressing barley groats in' (H.);
also as an ethnicon in μоσσуукà μаСоvодεiа (Аг. Fr. 417), cf. H.
•ETYM Stated to be a loan from Iranian (comparing Oss. (Digoron) masug ‘turris').
However, acc. to Brust 2005: 464ff., this must be regarded as uncertain. Fur.: 340
follows a proposal by Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934): 112 that the word is a pre-IE
substrate word.
logoývely → iaodouar
µóðvλov [n.] kind of cinnamon (Dsc. 1, 14, cf. Gal. 14, 257). ◄?►
⚫DER μOσVλITIÇ a kind of cassia (ib.).
⚫ETYM Has been compared with the PN Móσulot. Cf. Redard 1949: 67, 74.
µóσxos 1 [m.] ‘offshoot of plants, slip' (A 105, Thphr.), 'stalk of a leaf (Dsc.); 'young
cow, heifer, calf (also fem.), also of other young animals and of young men (Hdt.,
com., E., pap.). <IE *mosgo- 'young of an animal', *mosg'o- 'young shoot'>>
i
•COMP As a first member almost only in the sense 'calf, e.g. μoσуо-τрópos raising
calves' (pap.), μooxó-tavpos [m.] ‘bull as old as a µóσxoç', i.e. ‘bull-calf (Al. Le. 4, 3);
as a second member only in μovó-μoσxos with one stalk' (Dsc.).
●DER 1. Diminutive µoσx-íðɩov ‘small shoot' (Ar., Ael.), -íov 'young calf (Ephipp.
Theoc.), -áptov 'id.' (LXX, pap.).
2. Substantives: μоσx-ác, -ádos [f.] 'shoot, slip' (Pamphylian), after quτác etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 353), also 'heifer' (gloss.); -íaç [m.] 'young of a animal' (Poll.), like
vɛavíaç etc.; -wv, -wvoc [m.] 'calf-stable' (pap.); -ñ [f.] 'hide of a calf (Anaxandr.).
3. Adjectives: μóσx-(ε)ɩos ‘of a calf (E., X., Plb., AP); -vos ‘of calf-leather' (pap.),
-íval. oi okiptηɩɩкoí ‘the jumping ones' (H.). 4. Adverb: μоσx-ŋdóv 'like calves'
(Nic.). 5. Verb: μoσxεú [v.] 'to plant a shoot' (D., Thphr., D. H.), also 'to raise a calf'
(Philostr.), with µoσx-ɛía [f.] ‘planting of shoots' (Ph. Byz.), -ɛvois [f.] ‘id.' (Gp.),
-Evμa [n.] 'shoot, offspring' (Thphr., pap.), -εvματкóç = malleolaris (gloss.).
Perhaps related is the EN Móσxo "youngsters", see Brandenstein 1954b: 82.
•ETYM The form μoσxíov seems to match Arm. mozi, gen. -voy 'calf exactly.
However, a number of objections may be raised against the reconstruction of a
Graeco-Armenian isogloss (see Clackson 1994: 152-154). First, the Armenian word
have a number of different origins; it is not excluded that it is a borrowing from
Greek, for example. Further, the meaning 'calf is comparatively recent in Greek
beside 'stalk, shoot of a plant', in which meaning µóσxos is traditionally compared
with Lith. mazgas 'bud of a tree'. Also, the semantic development 'heifer, young'
'shoot' seems strange (though not without parallels: DELG compares E to sucker).
Now, the Lithuanian word is mostly derived internally from mègsti 'to knit', so that a
couple of options remain:
may
1) μóσxoç calf and Arm. mozi are a Graeco-Armenian isogloss *mosgo-, and Lith. is
unrelated.
2) Greek and Lith. are related as * mosgo-, and Arm. is a loan from Greek.
3) two etyma *mosg½o- and *mosg"o- merged in Greek (improbable).
µóσxos 2 [m.] ‘musk' (Aët., Alex. Trall.). <LW Iran.➤
•DER µooxítηs = óσμúλos, name of a sea-octopus that emits a strong odor (sch. Opp.
H. 1, 307).
•
ETYM From MoP mušk 'id.', which is from Skt. muská- [m.] 'testicle', because of the
shape of the gland; cf. μúσxov. τò ȧvôpɛiov кai yuvаɩкεãoν дóрov 'the male and
female genitals' (H.). Late Lat. muscus ‘id.' with muscātus, -um also belong here,
possibly a borrowing from Greek. All other European forms came from Latin.
μóτа [n.pl.]. Σapdiãvai ßáλavot ‘acorns' (Dsc. 1, 106). <PG>
⚫ETYM Fur.: 304 compares µóστηvα kápva (a nut-bearing tree, Ath. 2, 52b); further,
ǎμτ = кαστávεtov 'chestnut' (Ageloch. apud Ath. 2, 54d). So an interchange
&LLWTOV
µo(σ)t- ~ å-µwt- remains, which points to Pre-Greek origin.
µotós [m.] ‘lint pledget, lint, compress, tampon' (Hp., Dsc.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR τà μóτα [pl.] (Call., H.), like µηpóç: μñра etc., gen. μоτáшv (Q. S. 4, 212; verse-
final); µotòs … koîλoç ‘drainage tube' (Hp.).

=== page 512 ===

972
hottia
μúαч, -ǎкоç
973
•COMP µoto-qúλaž [m.], -ákiov [n.] ‘bandage to retain a compress' (medic.), žµ-
μоτоs provided or treated with u.', also 'ulcerating' of wounds (medic. since Hp.),
also metaph. (A. Ch. 471), cf. Bechtel 1921(3): 294f.
⚫DER Diminutive μоτápov (Gal., EM), Lat. motarium; further μóτ-wμα [n.] ‘lint
dressing' (Hp., pap.), -ŋµα [n.] ‘linen, oakum' (pap.). Denominative μoτów [v.] 'to
stop up, pack', also with diα-, επɩ-, лɛpɩ-, whence (diα-, лεpɩ-)µóτw-σɩ ‘packing'
(medic., LXX), back-formation dɩáµoτov [n.] ‘lint, tent' (Paul.Aeg.); besides μ-
µoτéw ‘id.' (medic.).
•ETYM Technical medical expressions without etymology. Fur.: 182 compares μóða.
στрбμаτα anything soft for lying on: mattress, etc.'. If this is correct, the word is
Pre-Greek.
hottia →kióxdoc.
µoñσa [f.] ‘Muse', goddess of song and poetry (usually in plural), also metaph. ‘song,
music, poetry' (IA, Il.). <IE? *men(s)-dh,- whence *mond¹-ih₂, PG?>
•DIAL Aeol. μoчσa, Dor. μñoa, Lacon. µñá (Ar.).
=
■COMP Many compounds, е.g. μovσ-уéτηs, Aеol. μ-αуéτaç [m.] 'who leads (the)
Muses' Apollo (Pi., Att.), ǎ-μovoos 'without Muses, uneducated, etc.' (IA), àµovσ-
ía 'lack of education' (E., Pl.).
•DER A. Substantives: 1. μovo-εiov 'seat of the Muses, school for higher education,
Museum' (Att.), Lat. mūsēum, -ium, also 'varicolored sculpture of stones, mosaic';
thence late Gr. μovσãov ‘id.' (WH s.v.). 2. Movσα-ïστaí [m.pl.] ‘guild of worshippers
of the Muses' (Rhod.), like 'Epμaïστaí etc. 3. µovowveç oi kopvqaïai tŵv µayɛipwv,
кai oi tɛxvītaɩ ‘the top cooks, i.e. the specialists' (H.), with Movoóvɩoç, -ía (if not
Etruscan; Solmsen 1909: 49). 4. μovoάptov name of an eye-salve (Alex. Trall.).
B. Adjectives: 1. ovoкóç belonging to the Muses, musical, educated' with μovσкý
(τéxvη) 'music, poetry, mental education' (Pi., IA), -ɩкεúоμαι [v.] 'to be a musician'
(Duris, S. E., sch.). 2. µoo-años belonging to the Muses' (Pi.). 3. μoúσ-ɛtos ‘id.' (E.,
AP).
C. Verbs: 1. μovσóoμa 'to be led and educated by the Muses' (Ar., Phld., Plu.), -ów
'to endow with music' (Ph.), ¿к- (E. Ba. 825), кata- (Jul.), ‘to ornate with mosaics'
(Tralles), with чovσwτns ‘mosaic-worker' (Syria VIP); probably a back-formation to
μovσov (see above). 2. μovσ-íčoμαι (E.), -íσdw (Theoc.) 'to sing, play', with
fovoiktáç. yáλtηs, texvítηs harper, artist' (H.). 3. µovσ-tá¶w ‘id.' (Phld.).
⚫ETYM Although the precise original appellative meaning of μoñσα is unknown, it is
clear that the Muses are connected with poetry and singing. The word may analyzed
either as *μóvτ-да oг as *дóvе-α. It cannot be directly related to *men- (μévoç,
μεμovа, etc.). The explanation from *μóvτ-чα (as ‘mountain woman, nymph') is
impossible, as the root of Lat. mont- ‘mountain' is not found in Greek (and is
actually IE *men-, LIV² s.v. ?3. *men-). More plausible is the comparison of μoñσa <
*µóvе-α with ►µεvðýðη, ►µávðávw. In this context, it may be remarked that the
Muses are connected with memory and remembrance, which is indeed the meaning
of the root IE *men- (LIV² s.v. 1. *men-).
}
t
So far, all explanations have started from the assumption that the word is IE, while it
could also be of Pre-Greek origin (continuing *mont-a).
μóxos [m.] ‘exertion, difficulty, distress, misery' (Hes. Sc., Pi., trag., mostly poet.).
< PG➤
•COMP Often as a second member, е.g. лоλú-μоxeos of much labour' (trag., Arist.),
also as a technical expression (in construction) in лpóµoàðòɩ· ïà époßeßλŋµéva tŵv
Toixwv 'the projecting parts of the walls' (H., also Delos IIª).
•DER 1. μoxе-épós ‘laborious, miserable, worthless, bad with μox-íα 'bad
condition' (IA), -óoμа [v.] 'to be troublesome' (Aq.). 2. μox-εç (Nic.), -wdns
(Vett. Val.) 'id.'.
Verbs: 1. μox-έw 'to exert oneself, subsist with difficulty' (poet. since K 106), also
with έk-, etc., with µoxе½µατα [pl.] ‘exertions' (trag.); 2. µoxе-í¶w ‘id.' (poet. since B
273), a metrical variant of µoxέw, see Chantraine 1942: 95, Shipp 1967: 95; 3. µoxе-
ów 'to tire' (Aq.).
•ETYM For the sequence -X0-, we may compare äxßos, öx¤os, ßpóxos etc. When
compared with synonymous μóyos, ►µoyέw, the words show a variation y/X,
which must be Pre-Greek. It is improbable that μóxos contains an "expressive.
enlargement" -0- (Frisk).
Fur.: 319f., 388 connects µottíaç. & otpéqovoi tŵv putýpwv tòv äšova ‘by which one
turns the ǎwv of the reins' (H.) as Cretan for *μoкtias.
µoxλóç [m.] ‘handle, lever, long or strong rod, often used to bar doors, 'crossbeam,
-bar' (Od.). <PG(V)►
•VAR μокλóç (Anacr. 88).
●DER Diminutive μоxλ-íov (Com. Adesp., Luc.), -íσкoç (Hp., Ar.), µoxλ-ikós
'regarding the lever' (Hp., Ph. Bel.).
Verbs: 1. μoxλεúw 'to (re)move with a lever' (Ion. poet., also late prose), also with
άva-, έк-, whence μoxλ-ɛía 'removing with a lever, restoring with a lever' (Arist.,
medic.), -ɛvous 'id.' (Hp.), -εvτns (Ar.), -ɛvτiкóç 'pertaining to leverage' (medic.); 2.
μоxλéw 'id.' (M 259); 3. μoxλów 'to shut with a bar' (Ar.).
•ETYM A pre-form *μoy-σλo-s with the instrumental suffix has been assumed, as
seen in Lat. pālus ‘pole' < *pag-slo- from *peh₂g- ‘to fix'. The basis has been taken to
be the stem seen in μóðos and ►µoyέw. The variation к/X, and (if correct) the
comparison with µóxos and μoyέw, show that the word is Pre-Greek.
uu 1 [n.] the twelfth letter of the Greek alphabet (inscr. IV³). <LW Sem.>
•ETYM Transformation of a Semitic name based on vũ; cf. Hebr. mēm. Ion. has µã
instead (Democr., Delos IIIª; Schulze KZ 42 (1909): 113), like vw based on pw. Cf.
Schwyzer: 140.
µõ 2 [interj.] µ¼µu imitation of a complaint (Ar. Eq. 10). <ONOM▷
•ETYM Cf. Schwentner 1924: 29 and 50f., and Lat. mū facere. See ►µú‹w.
µúaž, -ǎkos [m.] ‘(sea) mussel or its shell (medic., Plin.); ‘spoon' (medic.), from
'shell'. <PG?(S), GR?►

=== page 513 ===

974
uváw
⚫ETYM Formation like àσлáλaž, µéµßpaž, üpaž, and other animal names (Chantraine
1933: 378f.). Probably derived from µūs (which may also mean 'mussel'), like μvïoкη,
-os ‘id.'; cf. also Lat. mūsculus 'mussel', and see Strömberg 1943: 109. Connection
with μúw 'to shut (oneself)' is not very probable. Although the suffix -aε is typically
Pre-Greek, it is quite possible that this suffix was added to the IE word *muHs
'mouse'.
μváw →µów.
µvyɛpós →µvkapis.
µždáw [v.] ‘to be humid, decay (due to moisture) (Ion. poet., Plb.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Аor. μvбñσaí (H.), perf. µεµúdŋka (Dsc.).
•COMP Also with лɛpɩ-, dɩa-.
•DER µúð-aλéoç ‘soaked, dripping' (since A 54), Sia- (A. [lyr.]), -aλóɛç ‘id.' (AP);
μúdos [m.] 'moisture, corruption' (Nic.) with µdóɛç = µvdaλéos (Nic.), µvdóv,
-wvos [m.] 'putrefaction of an ulcer' (Poll.). (dia-)µúdŋσ ‘moisture, corruption'
(medic.), µūdaívw [v.] ‘to moisten, make weť (A. R., Nic.), also with Sɩa-. For
►μúбpoç, which may be cognate, and μúčw 'suck', which was wrongly connected.
►µú¶w
⚫ETYM It is doubtful whether μúdos was the basis of the Greek group, as it is late and
rare (see below). A verb or a noun may have served as a basis for μudaλéos, which is
the earlier attestation (formation like iкµaλéoç, ášaλéos, etc.); beside this adjective
(probably with metrically lengthened u), the verb µudaívw may have its long vowel
by analogy (after avaλéos : avaívw, etc., see Schulze 1892: 169ff.). µvdáw is
ambiguous too: it can be denominative from μúdos, but it can also be understood as
a deverbative formation (cf. Schwyzer: 719, also 682 on μadáw), in which case μúdoç
would be a late back-formation.
Comparable words outside Greek do not clarify the situation: Lith. máudyti 'to
bathe' (full grade iterative), may have secondary d and is probably related to Latv.
maût 'to submerge, swim'; Lith. mudrus 'lively' cannot be from IE *mud-, as the
expected reflex of Winter's Law is missing (so it must derive from *mud¹-). Further
Skt. mudira- [m.] ‘cloud' (class.), also ‘frog' and 'lover' (lex.), where all meanings
probably derive from múd- [f.] 'lust, joy', módate 'to rejoice'. For the semantics, note
Skt. mádati ‘to rejoice', beside µadáw. Further, MoDu. mot 'fine rain' and other
Germanic words are compared.
Fur: 249f., 259 connects дúσоç and takes 8/σ to point to Pre-Greek origin. The
variation of vocalic length may also point in the same direction.
µúðɩov →µÿç.
µúdos [adj.] ǎqwvos (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR µúvdos (S. Fr. 1072, Lyc. 1375, Call. Fr. 260), in lower Italy 'with small ears'
(Rohlfs ByzZ 37 (1937): 58f.).
⚫ETYM The connection with μúvdos (see also on μuкós) immediately presents itself,
and it would point to a Pre-Greek word (prenasalization). Connection with Arm.
munj 'dumb' may seem obvious, but is unclear in the end (Clackson 1994: 45 lists.
})
{
MUC 2
975
munj < *mundio- as 'somewhat dubious'); it could well be a substrate word. Pok. 751
does not help.
μúdpoç [m.] 'metal or iron mass roasted in fire, glowing stones (of a volcano)', etc.
(Ion., A., S., Antiph., Arist.) on the mg. see Kagarow Eos 31 (1928): 195ff. <PG>
⚫VAR σμúбρoç. §άлpoç σídηpos 'red-hot iron' (H.).
•COMP As a first member in μudpoктʊлέw 'to forge glowing iron' (A.), -кTÚÑOS (E.).
•DER As a medical technical term, µvdpí-aσɩç (Ion. -ŋoic) [f.] 'broadening of the
pupils' (Cels., Gal., Cael. Aur.), as if from *μvdp-táw "to glow like metal"; naming
motive uncertain.
-
•ETYM If related to µvdáw, which is formally proximate (µúdpos: µvdaλɛóç; cf.
Debrunner IF 23 (1908-1909): 5 and 9), µúðpos originally denoted the molten,
flowing metal mass as opposed to the hard iron. However, the technical meaning.
rather suggests a Pre-Greek word. This is confirmed by the variant oμúdpoç.
μvελóç [m.] 'marrow' (Il.). <PG?>
•VAR Epic Ũ with metrical lengthening. Late Greek has μvalós, rejected by
Phrynichos.
⚫COMP Some compounds, e.g. à-μúελoç 'without marrow' (Arist.).
•DER µvελ-óεç 'full of marrow' (Od.), -wdŋs ‘like marrow' (Arist.), -vos 'soft as
marrow' (AP); μvελóμα [v.] 'to be changed into marrow, consist of marrow'
(LXX).
•ETYM For the formation, cf. àµɛλý ‘fat' with comparable meaning. Has been linked
with μvóv 'cluster of muscles' (see ►μüç). Marrow and muscles, both being soft,
stand in opposition to the bone. The old word for 'marrow', seen in Skt. majján-,
OHG mark, etc. was replaced in Greek by μvελóc, and in Latin by medulla.
The word has no further etymology. Chantraine 1933: 244 is probably right that the
word is Pre-Greek. Fur.: 350 adduces μvaλóç as a Pre-Greek variant, but this may be
recent and is unreliable.
uvÉw →[LÚw.
μúчw 1 [v.] 'to suck' (Hp., X.). <ONOM▷
•VAR Aor. µvšñσaɩ (▲ 218), pres. also µv(-άw, -έw (Hero, late).
•COMP Also with έк-, άлo-. As a first member in μúšovpis 'fellatrix' (Com. Adesp.).
•DER (¿к-)μúčno, ¿к-µÙ‹-еs sucking' (medic.), μητ [m.]
'caterpillar' (Sm.).
⚫ETYM Properly "to do μv", because of the position of the lips when sucking, and
basically identical with μúčw 2. The traditional connection with µvdáw is not
obvious semantically. See for further details Tichy 1983: 103f., 143f.
μúчw 2 [v.] 'to mutter, moan' (Hp., A., Ar., Arist.). <ONOM>
•VAR Aor. µúžαι (Men.), fut. µúžw (D. L.), perf. ptc. µεµvšóτε (Antim.), after Hom.
TEQUČÓTES.
•COMP Also with έлɩ- in éééµvεav ‍(▲ 20), ¿ñεµúžato. ¿ñeσtévažev, énɛyóyyvoev
'groaned, muttered' (H.).

=== page 514 ===

976
P
•DER μvучóç [m.] 'moan, sigh' (A., Arist.), also 'production of the sound u' (D. T.);
further μuxuós 'id.' (w 416).
•ETYM Properly “to say µữ”, an old onomatopoeic formation with several
correspondences, like Lat. mūgiō ‘to roar', Hitt. mūgae-zi ‘to evoke, invoke, entreať,
OHG muckazzen ‘to speak slowly', etc. See Tichy 1983: 150. A connection with
► μúσσo̟μαι may also be envisaged. See ▶µvкáoµaι, ► µúðoç.
µñðoç [m.] ‘word, discourse, conversation, deliberation, story, saga, tale, myth' (II.);
on mg. and use see Fournier 1946: 15f. <PG?►
•COMP µvßoλóyos [m.] ‘story-teller', whence -έw, -ía (Att.), -ɛúw ‘to tell' (Od.), metr.
for -έw; лоλú-uvos rich in words (stories)' (II., Arist.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: μv0-ápiov (Str.), -ídov (Luc.), -údptov (Tz.). 2. Adjectives: μve-
Iкós 'belonging to the µ.' (Pl., Arist.), -wdns 'fabulous' (Att.).
=
3. Verbs: a) μvеéo-μα 'to tell' (Il.) with µven-τýs story-teller' (Antig.), µvðŋtñpes.
στασιασταí leaders of a revolt' (H.), also µvеñτaɩ (like olкɩñ-tal, noλi-ñtai)
στασiαστaí (Anacr. 16; cf. Coll. Alex. 248f.); also sing. with unclear mg. (Phoen. 1, 7);
b) µvеɛúw ‘id.' (E., Arist.) with µúðεчµа ‘tale' (Arist., D. H.); c) µvеíw ‘id.' (Dor. in
Ar. Lys., Theocr., AP). On itself stands µúða. qwvý. Kúлpɩɩ 'voice (Cypr.)' (H.).
•ETYM Frisk thinks that μoç is originally a creation of popular and everyday
language, drawn from an onomatopoeic element μµū. DELG objects that there is no
trace of sound-imitation, not even in the earliest texts. There are no comparanda; the
word is quite possibly Pre-Greek.
μvĩa [f.] 'fly' (Il.). <IE *mus-ih2>
•VAR Also μúa.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. μv(1)0-σóßŋ [f.] ‘fan against flies, fly-flap' (Delos IIIª,
Men.), ►µúwy 1 [m.] 'horse-fly; goad, spur³, ► кuváµvia [f.] ‘dog-fly'.
●DER 1. µvītis, -ɩɗ0¢ [f.] = 0λáσ, 'Capsella bursa pastoris' (Ps.-Dsc.), also µvó-
лεрov (ibd.), as the partition of the fruit was compared to the wing of a fly
(Strömberg 1940: 55). 2. µvïïкóç ‘pertaining to the fly' (gloss.), µvódηs name of a god
in Elis, who was also called μví-aypos “fly-catcher” (Plin.). 3. µvïvda лaišɛɩv ‘play the
game μvĩа уαλкñ' (Poll., H.).
•ETYM Formation with the suffix -α-, like vñσσɑ, кíσσɑ, and other animal names
(Chantraine 1933: 98). An old word for 'fly, mosquito' is found in several languages,
but it was subject to all kinds of (tabooistic?) transformations. PGr. *mus-ia, whence
μvía, agrees best with Lith. musià, muse 'fly' and with the Slavic group of OCS
múšica ‘mosquito'. Lat. musca ‘fly' has a suffix -k-, and Arm. mun (gen. mn-oy)
'mosquito' a suffix -n-, if it derives from *mus-no-. A basis without -s- is possible too,
like in ON mý [n.] < PGm. *mü-ja-. Forms with (secondarily developed?) velar are
found as well: OHG mucka ‘id.', Slavic words (with ou-diphthong) like Ru. múxa 'fly'
< IE *mous-h2-, etc. Onomatopoeic origin (from the humming sound) is quite
possible; see WH.
μбкάoμαι [v.] 'to low, bellow' (of cattle), metaph. 'to roar, crack' (almost only poet.).
<IE *muH-'bellow'>
●var Aor. µňkɛĭv (Il.), µūkýσaσðaι (Ar.), perf. µéµūka (Il.).
uukns, -ntos
977
■COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧuqi-, лαрα- (к 413). As a second member in έpí-μūкoç
'lowing loudly' (Hom.).
•DER Action nouns: µūk-ŋßµós [m.] ‘the bellowing' (Il.), Chantraine 1933: 137; -ŋµua
‘id.' (E., Arist., Call.), -ŋ01 ‘id.' (Arist.); back-formation µvký ‘id.' (A. R.).
Agent nouns: μvê-ŋtýs, Dor. -aτás 'the bellowing' (Theoc.), -ǹtwp ‘id.' (Nonn.),
-ŋtíɑɩ σɛioµoí (Arist.), “σɛíovtɛç tǹv уñν µεtà ßpóµov” ‘shaking the earth with a
roar'; cf. on ẞpaoμаτíaç s.v. ► ßρáσσw; μυкáµwν 'bellowing' (Hymn. Is.).
Adjective μuкηtiкós 'bellowing' (Corn., S. E.). Adverb μυкηбóv 'with bellowing'
(unknown poet POxy. 864, 22).
•ETYM The pair μйкεīν: µεµÑкα agrees with кpǎуεiv: кéкpāya, λaкɛīv: λέλŋкa, etc.
The present μvкáoµaɩ, to which µvкýσασðaɩ is an innovation, was formed from this
pair after intensive verbs like ßßpūxa: ßpʊxáoµai (Fraenkel 1912: 95f.³); on the
middle diathesis, see Schwyzer 1950: 227.
The Greek verb has direct couterparts in Balto-Slavic and Germanic: Lith. mūkti, 1sg.
mūkiu 'to bellow', Ru. myčáť', Ukr. múkaty, etc., MHG mühen 'id.'. Lat. mūgio, etc.
have IE *g (see on μúw 2).
μνкαρíç [?] VUкTEρíç 'bat' (H.). <PG?>
ETYM The assumption of a taboo reshaping of VUкTɛρíç based on μуктηр, μúčα,
μÚкητεç, etc. is unconvincing. Latte thinks the gloss is corrupt (see DELG), but this
cannot be maintained as there is no argument. Fur.: 122 compares μvyɛpós
vuktikópað ‘long-eared owl' (Cyran. 29), so the word could be Pre-Greek.
µúkn [f.] · ǹ Oýkη ‘chest, box' (Suid.). <PG?, IE? *mu(H)k-n-➤
-
•VAR Cf. µúкwv. σwpós, Оŋµáv 'heap' (H.), and aµúkapis. éλñßos, äеpoiσµα 'mass,
aggregate' (H.).
⚫ETYM The identification is by Fur.: 372. If the third gloss is correctly compared, the
à- is evidence for a Pre-Greek word. Pok. 752 compares ON múgi ‘heap', OE mūga
'heap, mass', Bav. Mauche 'Auswuchs, Fussgeschwulst der Pferde'. See now Kroonen
2009: 116ff. on the possibility to reconstruct an IE n-stem for µúкwv beside a Proto-
Germanic paradigm nom. *mühō, gen. *mukkaz.
μúкηpoç [m.] ‘almond, kind of nuť (Ath. 2, 52c and 53b, H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Lacon. чoúêòpos, acc. to Seleuc. and Pamphil. apud Ath. 2, 52c and 53c
Laconian and Teian for åµvydáλŋ; another by-form is àшxеαλóεç; further forms
given are ǎμvкτov. уAUкú 'sweet'. oi dè äµкτov (H.), and àµvкλíç. yλuкúç, ñdúç ‘id.'
(H.), see Fur.: 140.
●COMP_µovкηpó-ßaτoç (Ath. 2, 53b), -ßas (H.) ‘kapvoкatáктηs, nutcracker',
probably for -ẞáyos = -Fáyos to (F) άyvчμ 'break'; cf. ßáyoç. кλáσμa ‘fragment,
morsel'... Aáкwvεç (H.); details in Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 95f.
•ETYM The variants (prothetic ȧ-, v/ɩ, kt/ yƐ/ xе, etc.) show that the word is Pre-
Greek.
µúkns, -ntos [m.] 'mushroom', also metaph., e.g. ‘mushroom-like protuberance, any
knob or rounded body, cab or cap at the end of a scabbard, snuff of a lamp-wick,
membrum virile' (IA). <PG>

=== page 515 ===

978
•VAR Gen. also -ov (Ion. -εw), plur. -αɩ.
⚫DER μUкτ-vos 'made of mushrooms' (Luc.), μνкóομаι 'to become like a
mushroom, become spongy' (medic.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally taken to be a formation in -1(t)- from a noun possibly found in
Lat. mucus 'snivel, mucus of the nose'; for the development of meaning, cf. Sln. glíva
‘agaric' beside Lith. gleivės 'slime'; for further details, see μúσσoμal. However, Fur.:
298 correctly remarks that the meanings of this word cannot all be explained by
derivation from µúσσoµαι to snuff, blow one's nose'. He assumes a basic meaning
'prominent, extremity', as μúкηç may also mean 'stump of a felled olive tree' (inscr.).
He connects the word with μúσкλoi oi ävßµéveç tŵv εŋpŵν σúкwv 'stalks of dried-
up fig trees' (H.), which implies that the word is Pre-Greek (interchange к/oк). On
the suffix -1, -10 in Pre-Greek, see Fur.: 172118.
чúкλoç [adj.] ‘lascivious, lewd' (Archil. 183 as a PN, Lyc. 771, H.), as epithet of the pack
mule (Lyc. 816), also name of the ass itself? (PTeb. 409, 7, IP; written μolк-, reading
very uncertain). Acc. to H., μúкλot or μúкλat are 'black stripes at the neck and feet of
the ass'; according to EM 594, 18 and sch. Lyc. 771, μúкλoç is 'a fold on the ass's neck'.
<PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. µúσкλo (below).
•DER μuxλós, a Phocaean name of a stallion ass according to H., but also = σkolóçs,
óxevtýs, Máyvns, µolxós, åkpatýs ‘twisted, someone lewd, lecherous, adulterer, not
in control'; cf. also чúσкλоι σкOλIOí (H.).
•ETYM µuxλós has been reduced to a pre-form *μvкoλós and identified with Lat.
mūlus 'mule', if from *mukslo-; a deviating formation is found in Alb. mushk 'mule'
well as in Slavic forms like ORu. mбskú ‘mule'.
as
As the breeding of mules originates from Pontic Asia Minor (cf. on ►övoc), Frisk
remarks that we are probably dealing with a Wanderwort. I do not agree with this:
the variants (notably к/X, σк) are typical for Pre-Greek words (Pre-Greek section 5.5),
and thus receive an easy explanation. Fur.: 29925 thinks that µúкloç is a separate
word.
µvкós [adj.] · äqwvos 'speechless' (H.), alphabetically in a wrong position. <PG?, ?>
•VAR With dental stop: μτós, μúηs, µúdos (H.), µúvdos (S. Fr. 1072, Lyc. 1375, Call.
Fr. 260), in lower Italy 'with small ears' (Rohlfs ByzZ 37 (1937): 58f.), μvvapós (H.)
'id.'.
On itself sands µúpкoç· ó кałóľov µǹ dvváµεvos λalɛīv. Eupakoúoloi, ¿veós,
ǎqwvos ‘who is unable to speak at all, dumb' (H.); µvpiêãs. äqwvos, ¿v ¿autŵ éxwv ô
µé\\ɛi épáttɛiv 'who keeps for himself what he is going to do' (H.), cf. von
Blumenthal 1930: 42.
⚫ETYM Skt. múka- 'dumb' has been compared. Perhaps from sound-imitating mū.
For the dental formations, cf. Lat. mūtus. Arm. munj ‘dumb' < *mun(d)io- (?) can be
connected with µúvdoç. Lat. murcus ‘mutilated' (he who cuts off his thumbs, so as to
avoid becoming a soldier) corresponds formally with µúpкoç; it is rather a loan from
Latin in Sicily than the other way around (see WH s.v.).
Hún
979
Does μupiкãç continue a Pre-Greek form *mur-k-? The other forms do not fit in
easily; it is very unclear whether the words with μu(v)8- belong here. The form
μúvdoç may be a prenasalized variant beside μúdos (and must therefore be retained
pace Latte, whose note is unclear to me). It seems that μuvapós is a misreading for
*uovópos.
µÚкwv [?] · σ'wpóc, Onµáv (H.). →µúkn.
µvλαɩкá [n.pl.] a kind of figs (Ath. 3, 78a). ◄GR➤
•ETYM Perhaps from a place called Muλai.
µvláσaσðaι [v.] • tò owµa ñ tǹv keqaλǹv σµýžaσðα. Kúлρio 'to wipe off the body or
the head (Cypr.)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Taken as a denominative from *µúλŋ or * μuλov, and connected with a Slavic
word for 'soap': Cz. mýdlo, Ru. mýlo, etc. These derive from a Slavic verb myti ‘to
wash' < *m(i)uH- with the instrument suffix *-dhlo-, which is the Slavic equivalent of
Gr. *-tro-. The connection is therefore highly improbable.
μúλŋ [f.] 'handmill, mill', '(the lower) millstone' (Od.), metaph. 'molar' (LXX), ‘knee-
cap, hard formation in a woman's womb' (Hp., Arist.). <IE *melh,- 'grind'>
•VAR Hell. and late also µúλoç [m.] (LXX, NT, Str.), cf. Fraenkel 1912: 58.
•COMP μvλo-εids like a millstone' (H 270), μλ½-аtos 'ground by a mill' (ẞ 355, A.
R., Lyc.); ✗ερо-µúŋ ‘quern' (X.), also -µulos (Edict. Diocl.), -µvlov (Cass. Fel.), cf.
on ẞoúτupov; diminutive -µútov (Dsc., pap.).
•DER A. Substantives: 1. µúλaž, -αкos [m.] ‘millstone, big rounded stone' (M161, AP,
Opp.), cf. Mía etc. (Chantraine 1933: 379). 2. Hence, with a suffix -p-, µúλaкpoç [m.]
'millstone' (Alcm.), plur. = youчioɩ ódóvtes ‘molars' (H.); -aкpíç, -ídos [f.] as an
attribute of λãas 'millstone' (Alex. Aet.), substantively ‘cockroach', also (influenced
by ȧкpíc) 'locust' (Ar. Fr. 583, Poll.); also -aßpís ‘id.' (Pl. Com., Poll.), perhaps after
ȧßpós, äßpa; -nepís 'id.' (Poll.). 3. µvλáv, -wvos [m.] 'millhouse, mill' (Att.) with
-wviкós 'miller' (pap.), diminutive -úviov (gloss.). 4. μvλwеpós [m.] 'miller' (Att.,
Arist.); cf. Chantraine 1933: 373 on the rather unclear formation; hence -wopic [f.]
'milleress' name of a comedy of Euboulos; -wеpiкós ‘belonging to a miller' (Plu.),
-wopέw 'to grind' (Men.); back-formation -wopov = µvλáv (Phot.)? Also -wopiato
epithet of кαλυëτñpεs (perhaps = 'roof-tiles', Delos IIª, reading uncertain); also
µvλwpós ‘miller' (Aesop., Poll.), after ävλwρóç, etc. 5. diminutive µvλápiov ‘small
handmill' (pap.). 6. µvλɛús [m.] epithet of Zeus as keeper of mills (Lyc.). 7. µvlíaç
[m.] (Míos) 'millstone, stone from which millstones were made' (Pl., Arist., Str.), see
Chantraine 1933: 96. 8. µvlíτηs [m.] (Xíos, ódoúc) 'millstone, molar' (Gal.). 9.
Mvlóɛis. rotaµòç Аpкadíaç ‘a river in Arcadia' (H.), but cf. the HN MolóɛƖç,
usually connected with Skt. mála- ‘dirt', s.v. ►µoλúvw.
B. Adjectives, all rare and late: 1. μúλ-10s 'belonging to a mill' (Procop.); 2. µvλ-iкóç
‘id.' (Ev. Luc., Gal.); 3. -vos 'consisting of millstones' (Smyrna); 4. -años 'working in
a mill' (AP), -aĩov [n.] 'handmill' (pap.); 5. -ɩaïoɩ ódóvtes ‘molars' (medic.); 6. -óɛıç
'consisting of a millstone, belonging to a mill' (Nic., Nonn.); 7. -ητɩкǹ žµrλaσtpos
'remedy for toothache' (Gal.).

=== page 516 ===

980
μÚλλov
C. Verbs, all rare: 1. µvλiάw only in µūλtówvtes [ptc.] 'gnashing with the teeth' (Hes.
Op. 530), on -táw Schwyzer: 732; 2. μvλóoμа 'to be hardened, cicatrized' (Hp.). On
itself stands μúλw = ẞivéw (Theoc. 4,58) with μvλ(\)ác [f.] 'whore' (Phot., Suid.),
μvλλóç [m.] 'cake in the form of the pudenda muliebria' (Ath. 14, 647a; Sicilian).
•ETYM The primary verbal noun µúλŋ, secondary µúλos (perhaps after λíos or Ŏvos
åλétŋs), and the primary yod-present μú\\\w are consistent in their u-vocalism,
which is now explained by Vine 1999b: 565 as a raising *olį > ulį, comparing qú\\ov
beside Lat. folium, and a few more examples. The u then spread from µúλλw to µúλŋ
before the former lost its agricultural meaning.
The yod-present is seen in OHG muljan, ON mylia 'to crush', from a zero grade
which also appears in W malu 'to grind' and Arm. malem 'to crush'. Further verbal
forms are OIr. melim [1sg.], OCS meljo [1sg.] from *melH-, Go. malan, Lith. malù
[1sg.] from an o-grade, like Hitt. malla-' / mall- < *molH-ei; Lat. molō is probably
from *melō like OIr. melim.
The technical meaning ‘grind' may have evolved as a specialization from 'rub' or
'crush'. As a verbal noun, μúλn looks archaic in Greek, while uúλλw, which
developed an obscene meaning, was replaced by ȧλéw, which was also inherited,
but limited to the eastern languages. μáλɛupov stands by itself. Remarkable is the e-
vowel of Myc. me-re-u-ro 'meal' and me-re-ti-ri-ja 'female grinders', which seems to
point to a root *melh,- instead of the usual reconstruction *melh₂-.
μúλov [n.] 'lip' (Poll. 2, 90). <ONOM?>
•DER Verbs μvλλ-aívw, -í\w (Phot., Suid.), vλλáw in µɛµúλλŋkɛ. diéotpantai,
σuvéστραлται 'distort the mouth, make mouths' (H.). With intensive reduplication
µoquúXλeiv. Oŋlášɛɩv, έσðíɛv ‘to suck, eať. kai tà xɛíλŋ] époσáñteiv å\\é\oç ‘attach
the lips to each other' (H., Hippon., Com. Adesp.), cf. μoµváw s.v. ► µúw.
Adjective, probably a back-formation: µv\\ós (cod. -ú-) KaunÚ入og,OKo入Lós,
kullós, otpeßlós ‘bent, curved, crippled, twisteď (H.), also Eust. 906, 54 'swivel-
eyed'.
=
•ETYM Frisk compares a Germanic group with a single consonant: OHG mūla [f.],
MHG mūl [n.] 'mouth, jaws', and further Skt. múla [n.] 'root', but acc. to Mayrhofer
KEWA s.v., Dravidian origin cannot be excluded for the latter. It does not seem that
µüßoç is connected, nor that the gemination is expressive. Perhaps an onomatopoeia.
µúλos [m.] name of a Pontic fish, also found in the Danube (Ar. Fr. 414, Ephipp.,
Gal., Ael.). <?>
•VAR μúλoç (Opp.).
ETYM As there is no further specification of the fish (see Thompson 1947 s.v.), all
explanations are up in the air. Therefore, the connection with the group of μέλaç,
under the assumption that we are dealing with the mullet (Strömberg 1943: 22; see
also WH s.v. mulleus), is a pure hypothesis. Borrowed as Lat. mullus.
quÚ入入w → uÚ入7.
µũµa [n.] ‘meat, cut up and mixed with blood, cheese, honey, vinegar and tasty herbs'
(Com. apud Ath. 14, 662 d). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained. See ▸µuttwτÓS.
Muap=duśuv.
uvvapós, uÚvdog → kóc.
µúvŋ [f.] ‘pretext, лpóçãσıç' (§ 111). <?►
μūρíos
981
●DER Aeol. μúvaμαι in µvváµεvos [ptc.] (Alc. Z 69), mg. uncertain: 'to pretend'?, 'to
divert'?
⚫ETYM The former connection with àµúvw, àµɛúσaσða is impossible because the
prothetic vowel developed from a laryngeal, provided that the latter words are IE.
μúvη might be a back-formation from µúvaμai (Hamm 1957: 14335²).
µvvvákia [n.pl.] 'kind of shoes' (Poll. 7, 89, Ath. 351a). ◄GR▷
ETYM Reported (by Poll.) to have been named after their inventor.
µúžα 1 [f.] 'slime'. →µúσσoμai.
μúžα 2 [f.] 'kind of plum-tree'. <PG>
•ETYM Fur.: 1295 (also 393) compares μvoкλov ‘id.' (Orib. Syn. 6, 43).
μúpaɩva [f.] 'kind of eel, moray' (Sophr., A., Ar.). <PG(S,V)►
•var Epich. -ñ-; oµúpaiva (Pl. Com., Mnesim., Arist.).
●DER µūpos (Dorio apud Ath. 7, 312f), σµūpos (Arist.) [m.] 'kind of sea-eel'; cf. e.g.
λúкαιva: λúкoç; extensive treatment in Thompson 1947 s.vv.
⚫ETYM Connected with oμúpis ‘emery powder, etc. by Wood AmJPh. 49 (1928): 172,
and with words for ‘grease, fat', e.g. OHG smero < IE *smer(u)- (Pok. 970f.), which
would fit the eel as a fat creature.
However, this does not explain the Greek û. Names of fishes are often Pre-Greek.
The suffix -aiva is well-known in such words (Fur.: 171"), as is the prothetic σ-.
Therefore, it is a clear Pre-Greek word.
μvρíкη [f.] ‘tamarisk' (Il.). <PG?(S)►
•VAR Originally ĭ; i from metrical lengthening, see Solmsen 1901: 14f.
●DER µupík-ɩvoç ‘of the tamarisk' (Z 39, pap.), -ívɛoç ‘id.' (AP), -wdŋc ‘tamarisk-like’
(Thphr.); Mupiкaños epithet of Apollo in Lesbos (sch. Nic. Th. 613).
⚫ETYM Ending in -íêŋ (like έλíkŋ, ádíên), µvpíêŋ is a loan of unclear origin, probably
Pre-Greek word. In favor of Semitic origin is Lewy 1895: 44: connection to Hebr.
mārar ‘to be bitter' because of the bitter bark (cf. μupíky. dvowdns H., related to
Aram. mōrīgā 'crocus'?); cf. also µúppa?
µūpíos [adj.] ‘countless, immense', usually plur. (Il., poet.). <?►
●var µúpioi [pl.] 'ten thousand' (Hes. Op. 252).
⚫COMP Often as a first member, е.g. μυριó-кαρлоç 'with countless fruits' (S.), -qópos
(vauc) 'freighter carrying 10,000 measures' (Th.); also μupióvτ-αpxos 'commander
of 10,000 men' (A., after έкatóvt-apxoc).
●DER µvpιáç, -ádos [f.] 'the number 10,000, myriaď (IA); µup-oσtós ‘ten
thousandth' (Att.), after έкατoστóç, ɛikoσtóc; -aσtós ‘id.' (Hell.), after µvpiáç;
-ootús [f.] = µvpiác (X.); µvpi-ákiç ‘ten thousand times' (Att.), also -ovtákıç ‘id.' (H.

=== page 517 ===

982
iópin², -nkos
as an explanation of μuρiáкiç; after έкατоνтάкiç); μριoуταб-кóç 'of the number ten
thousand' (Theo Sm.), from *μupioντάç after εкαTOVTάÇ.
ETYM No etymology.
µúpµnž, -ŋkos [m.] ‘ant', metaph. ‘submarine rock' (IA, Lyc.), also as a proper name
(Hdt.), also 'gauntlet with metal studs' (Poll.). For the mg. cf. μupμηкía 'ant-hill;
throng of people'. <IE *morui- 'ant'>
VAR Dor. (Theoс.) µúðµã‚ -äкoç. Also µúpµоç (Lyc.), ßúpµaž, ßópµač, öpшkaç
(H.).
•COMP Rare in compounds, e.g. µµηкo-λéwv (LXX) and λεovão-µúpµn§ (Hdn.
Gr.), name of a fabulous animal. Cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 256.
●DER 1. µvpµnk-iá [f.] ‘ant-hill' (Arist., Thphr.), 'crowd' (Com. Adesp., H.), 'triller,
arpeggio' (Pherecr.). 2. μρдηк-íα 'wart under the skin', or the irritation caused by it
(Hp., Ph.), with µvpµŋkiáw [v.] 'to be afflicted with warts' (LXX), whence -íaσiç
(medic.). 3. μupдηк-(ε) чov [n.] name of an ant-like spider (Nic., Plin.). 4. μυρμηкiaç
Aíos 'stone with ant- or wart-like lumps on it' (Plin.), ~xpuσós 'gold dug out by
µúpµnkes' (Hld.). 5. µvpµnkītis (Xíos) ‘id.' (Plin.). 6. µvpµnk-wdns ‘ant-like' (Plu.),
-weis 'full of warts' (Marc. Sid.), metrically lengthened from -óɛiç. 7. µµηкíčш as a
medical expression 'to feel as though ants were running under the finger' i.e. 'to be
quick and feeble' (of the pulse); 'to itch' (medic.). On itself stands µµdáv
Žvvoikía twv µvρμýкwv, a transformation of µúpµnž, and µvpµndóves. oi µúpunkeS
úлò Awρiéwv (H.), a derivation from μúpчoç (see above) after τεvеpηdóv and other
insect names; cf. also σoηкóv and other names of habitation in -óv.
⚫ETYM The suffix is found in σкwλη 'worm, maggot', σon 'wasp', etc. Parallel forms
with a velar suffix (probably genetically unrelated to μúpμηε) are Lat. formica 'ant'
and Skt. valmika- [m., n.] ‘ant-hill'. The basic form was probably *morui-. It is found
in various forms, most of which underwent some deformation, perhaps of tabooistic
origin. Influence of *u(o)rmo/i- 'worm' may also be assumed.
IE *morui- is directly continued in Av. maoiri-, OIr. moirb, ORu. morovij, etc.; IE
*mour-, *meur- in e.g. ON maurr- [n.] < PGm. *maura-, OSw. myra [f.] < PGM.
*meuriōn. Other forms are Skt. vamrá- [m.] (cf. also valmika- above) and ẞópμα,
Búpμaž, where ẞ- probably stands for F-; in öpμкαç, a F- may have been lost. In Lat.
formica, the f- may go back to m- by dissimilation (cf. on µopµá); it would then be
close to μúpμη.
µúpoµaɩ [v.] ‘to shed tears, bewail (Il.), later (Lyc., A. R.) also ‘to flow' (of a river) and
'to drip' (of blood). <ONOM▷
•VAR Only pres. and ipf. (3pl. ipf. µũpov Hes. Sc. 132), except for aor. µúpaσðai
(Mosch.).
•COMP Also with ëɛpɩ-, époσ-.
⚫ETYM If it originally refers to a murmuring sound, μúpoμα is onomatopoeic, and
related to μopμúpw. The connection with Lat. muria [f.] ‘pickle', Lith. mùrti, 1sg.
mùrstu 'to become wet', etc. is not preferable. Probably derived from the same root is
the seond member of ȧλɩ-µpηεs, µups, an epic epithet of лоτafós, rétpŋ, etc.,
although its proper meaning remains uncertain.
HÚptOS
983
μúpov [n.] 'sweet-smelling oil, salve, perfume' (Archil., Lesb. lyr., IA). <?>>
•COMP Often as a first member, е.g. µρo-лóληs 'seller of salves' (Att.). μup-εчó
[m.] 'preparer of unguents' (Critias, Arist.).
⚫DER 1. Substantives: diminutives µup-ídiov (Ar.), -áciov (Arr.); μupíç [f.] 'salve box'
(Poll.), cf. σ´vpíç, also = µuppíç (Thphr.), see ►µúppa; [iúpwµa [n.] = µúpov (Ar. Ec.
1117); µupívηs olvos (Hell., com., Ael.), beside µuppívηs (see μúppa and ►µúptoc).
2. Adjectives: µvp-pós ‘belonging to µúpov' (A., Ar.), like έλaŋpóç; -óɛɩs ‘full of
salves, smelling like salves' (AP, Man.), -wdŋs 'salve-like' (sch.). 3. Verbs: μupíчw
(IA), ouvpiw (Archil.) 'to salve, perfume'; μρóодa 'to be salved or perfumed' (Ar.
Ec. 1117 [v.l. μεчúpioµai]).
•ETYM Evidently a culture word, μúpov may be a loan (thus Chantraine 1933: 16).
Traditionally connected as IE (together with σµúpıç ‘emery') with a Germano-Celtic
etymon for 'smear, fat': OHG smero ‘smear', OIr. smi(u)r ‘marrow' (perhaps also in
Lat. medulla if < *(s)meru-lo-). However, this comparison does not explain the
Greek -u-. The isolated form σμupi w may rest on association with σuúpic, gμúpva,
but it may also be a variant.
μúpava is also a Pre-Greek word on account of the variants in σμ-, and probably
unrelated. See also σμúpic, σµúρva.
µúppa [f.] ‘myrrh, sweet-smelling wood of the myrrh-plant' (Sapph., Thphr.). ◄LW
Sem.➤
•DER µuppíç, -ídos [f.] 'sweet cicely, Myrrhis odorata' (Dsc. 4, 115) beside μupís
(Thphr. CP 6, 9, 3) from (or after?) μúpov (cf. below). µuppítns (-tis) [m., f.] name
of a stone (Plin., “myrrhae colorem habet”), and of a wine (Edict. Diocl.); also
дppívηs (scil. olvos; Hell. com.), if not from ►μúptos or ►µúpov.
⚫ETYM From Semitic, cf. Aram. mūrā, Hebr. mōr, Arab. murr 'myrrh' (Lewy 1895:
42ff.); should µupíкη also be included here? Borrowed as Lat. murra, murrina.
According to Ath. 15, 688c, μúppa stems from дúрov. дúppα was replaced by
unrelated ouúpvα, σдúpvη, which had the same meaning; this may in turn be a
back-formation from Σμvpvaía [adj.] (properly 'Smyrnaean'), which arose as an
epithet of μúppa. Further details in Heubeck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 1 (1949): 272f.
µúpʊos [adj.] · kóчivos τα xwv 'basket with ears', öç кai äppixos ‘a kind of wicker
basket' (H., Call. Fr. anon. 102). <PG? (V)►
⚫ETYM Grošelj Živa Ant. 5 (1955): 112 compares Etr. murs ‘urna'. Fur.: 65 accepts this,
and further compares (213) Buppós. кávěαpoç. Tuppηvoí ‘dung beetle'; metaph.
'drinking cup' (H.). Probably Pre-Greek.
μúpτoç [f.] 'myrtle, twig or spray of myrtle' (Pi., Simon.). <PG(V)►
•VAR μúрτov [n] = чupoívη (Archil. acc. to EM 324, 14), 'myrtleberry' (Att.),
'pudenda muliebria' (Ar.); on the difference in gender see Schwyzer 1950: 30.
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. µʊpto-лóλŋs [m.] ‘myrtle seller' (Sammelb. Iª), iɛpó-
µuptos [f.] = µvpoívn ȧypía (Ps.-Dsc.).
●DER 1. µúpσɩvos ‘of myrtle' (Eub., Thphr.), Att. µúppivoç, also µúptivos; µupoívn,
Att. -pp- [f.] 'myrtle, -twig, -crown' (IA), μupσɩvo-εids (h. Merc. 81), pov-ís
(olvos) 'myrtle wine' (Dsc.), 'kind of stone' (Plin.), probably after the color, ‘kind of

=== page 518 ===

984
uis, fuuós
Euphorbia' (Dsc.), after the form of the leaves, acc. to Strömberg 1940: 43; -ɩvoç ‘of
myrtle' (Dsc., Aët.), Muppiv-oûç, -oũvτos [m.], -oŨɩɩα [f.] names of Attic demes,
with ovσo [pl.] ‘inhabitants of M.'; µуρσшуãτov λatov 'myrtle oil' (medic.); also
µvρτívη [f.] 'kind of olive, kind of pear-tree' (Nic.). 2. µvpτíç, -ídoç [f.] 'myrtle-berry'
(Hell.), also μupτía. µvpoívη, kai µupτíç (H.), µvpτác, -ádoç [f.] ‘kind of pear-tree',
etc. (Nic., Gal.). 3. µupτíðavov [n.] ‘myrtle-like plant', etc. (Hp.), perhaps from
µvptís, cf. ¿pevßé-Savov ‘madder', Strömberg 1940: 147f. 4. µuptadís. ǹ óčvµuppívn,
ws Aάкwvɛç 'butcher's broom (Lacon.)' (H.), like ovк-alis etc. (Strömberg 1940: 78).
5. μρτ-íημupov-íτηs (Thphr., Nic.). 6. μρTεwv, -@voç [m.] 'murtetum'
(gloss.), also µvpσɛwv ‘id.' (gloss.). 7. µvptwtaí [f.pl.] 'vases decorated with myrtle-
twigs?' (vase-inscr., AmJArch 31, 349f.; like µǹλwτý etc.). 8. µúpτwv, -wvoç [m.]
'weakling, debauchee' vel sim. (Luc. Lex.). 9. μuptíλwy. Či̟óv tɩ ‘an animal' (H.);
formation like aiyiλwy etc. with a Pre-Greek suffix. TNs and PNs like MúpτOÇ,
Muρτoç, Múpσivos, Múpσoç, Mupτilos, Mupoílos, etc.; see Heubeck Beitr. z.
Namenforsch. 1 (1949): 271.
=
⚫ETYM Because of the phonetic similarity and their semantic proximity, μúρτoç,
µúppa, µvpíêŋ are usually considered to be mutually cognate Semitic loans without
further argumentation, as first stated by Lewy 1895: 42ff. (see especially Heubeck op.
cit. 282, with further hypotheses). However, the variation μρτ-/дурσ- points to Pre-
Greek origin (see Fur. 259) and should not be explained by assuming all sorts of
cross-influence. Semitic origin is also rejected by DELG. Heubeck (l.c.) takes the
group as coming from Asia Minor, which does not exclude that it is Pre-Greek.
Lat. murtus, -um, as well as Arm. murt, MoP mūrd, were borrowed from µúptos,
-OV.
μбç, μvóç [m.] 'mouse, rat' (IA, etc.), metaph. of sea-animals: 'mussel, kind of whale',
etc. (A. Fr. 34 [= 59 Mette]); details in Thompson 1947 s.v., on the naming motive see
Strömberg 1943: 109f.; also 'muscle' (Hp., Arist.); cf. below. <IE *muHs 'mouse'>
•VAR µñv [acc.sg.] analogical, see below.
•Comp µv-yaλñ (-éŋ) [f.] ‘shrew-mouse' (Hdt., com., Arist.), μvo-еnpas [m.] 'mouse-
catching snake' (Arist., sch.), ä-µvos 'without muscle' (Hp.), also μvo-kéλevdpa
[n.pl.] 'mouse dung' (Dsc., Moer., Poll., H.); for the second member cf. Lat. mūs-
cerda 'id.', but unclear in detail.
⚫DER 1. Diminutive μvïdov (Arr., M. Ant.), also μúdiov 'small boat' (D. S.), 'small
forceps' (medic.); µÏσкη, -oç 'small sea-mussel' (Hell.). 2. On ►μúα, -ǎkoç [n.] ‘sea
mussel', see s.v. 3. µvwv, -wvos [m.] ‘cluster of muscles, muscle' (P 315 and 324, A. R.,
Theoc.). 4. µvwvía (rather -tá) [f.] ‘vulva', properly ‘mouse hole', as a term of abuse
for a lewd woman (Epicr. 9, 4), directly from µõñç like iwvá from lov, etc.; more in
Scheller 1951: 45f., 70f. 5. Adjectives μvódŋs 'muscular' (D. S., Plu.), also 'mouse-like'
(Plu.); úяos of the mouse' (An. Ox.), μúïvoç 'with the color of a mouse' (EM,
Phot.). 6. μvw-τóc epithet of XITOV (Poll.), 'mouse-colored' or 'of mouse-skin'? also
name for an arrowhead (Paul. Aeg.), also 'having muscles' (Clearch.); thence
μvóομαι 'to be or become muscular' (medic.), trans. -ów.
Úagozial
985
•ETYM Old IE name of the mouse, retained in several language families: Lat. mūs,
mūr-is, OHG mūs, Skt. múṣ-, etc.; the acc. μv must therefore be secondary for *μña
by influence of uv to ñç, úóç, etc.
The vocalic length was caused by a laryngeal, for which there are two indications: the
accent of SCr. miš, and ToB maścitse 'mouse', with mas- < *mwas- <*muHs-. A
variant with short vowel has been wrongly supposed in Skt. muşká- [m.] 'testicle'; cf.
E pÓơXOS 2.
The metaphorical meaning 'muscle' (after the mouse-like movement of certain
muscles under the skin) can be observed in other languages too: beside Greek, also in
Germanic (OHG and OE 'muscle of the upper arm'), Lat. musculus 'small mouse,
muscle', Arm. mukn 'mouse, muscle'. Derivation from the verb for 'steal' in Skt.
muş- (pres. muṣṇāti, móṣati) is purely hypothetic. On several plant names containing
the word for 'mouse', see Amigues RPh. 74 (2000): 273f.
uúσos [n.] 'pollution, defilement, horrible sight' (Emp., trag., Hp.). <?►
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. Xεpouvons 'polluting the hands' (A. Ch. 73) with verbal
interpretation of the second member, μvσ-axons 'cumbered by μúσoç, horrible'
(Nic., AP).
•DER Adjectives: μvσapós 'polluted, defiled, horrible' (Hdt., E., Ar.), -ɛpós (Man.), cf.
papós/-ɛpós; cf. µvσapía (Sm.); also µvoά. ¡uapá, µɛjaoµéva, µvoapá ‘polluteď
(H.). Verbs: 1. μvσáttoµal, -axðñval, -ážaσðaι ‘to feel defiled, loathe, abhor' (Hp., E.,
X., Luc.), whence µµ = (A. Supp. 995) and expressive μvσάxvn [f.]
µúσoç
'prostitute' (Archil. 184), = üoŋtý, ȧкáðapтoç 'to be abhorred, unclean' (H.),
ó voμévov 'stained' (H.), cf. ßdɛλúττoμαi: ßбελvxpóç. 2. µvσášw =
µvoáttoµai (Aq.). 3. µvσiáw 'to abhor, loathe' (Corn.), after verbs of disease in -táw.
With velar enlargement (but perhaps a Pre-Greek variant) in µúσкoç. µíaoµa, kñdoç
'pollution, anxiety' (H.), cf. µíαxoç s.v. ► µaívw.
•ETYM μúσos recalls µãσoç, but remains without certain etymology. A couple of
isolated words meaning ‘unclean' from Celtic, Germanic and Slavic are compared in
Pok. 742: e.g., OIr. mosach < *mussāko-, LG mussig 'dirty', Ru. músliť' 'to suck,
beslaver'. The group has been compared with the root of μvdáw 'to be moist, decay'
as *mud-s-o-, but this remains hypothetical. The sparsely attested forms ► ȧuvσxpóç,
►ȧuvxpós could be related if μúσoç is Pre-Greek.
µúσσoµai [v.] ‘to blow one's nose, snort' (Hp., Epic. in Arch. Pap. 7, 5); also act. 'to
wipe off (Pl., E., Arr., AP), metaph. 'to deceive' (Men., H.). <IE? *mug-, *muk-
'slime, glide', PG?(V)►
VAR Fut. μúčoμα.
•COMP Usually with ảлo- ‘id.' (Ar., X., Arist.), also with лpo- 'to deceive sbd. for
money' (Hp.), 'to snuff a lamp' (Ar. V. 249 v.l. for лрóßυσov), 'to extort money'.
•DER 1. µUKTάp, -ñpoç [m.], often plur. 'nostril' (Ion., com., X.), also 'mocker' (Timo),
as a back-formation from µvктηpíšw, 'mockery' (Plu., Luc.); thence µкänpíšw (ȧño-
H.) 'to bleed at the nose' (Hp.), 'to be mocked' (Lys. Fr. 323, S., LXX), whence
-ŋploμós 'mockery', -ŋpíσμаτα [pl.] (H. as an explanation of ȧлоσкáаτα),
-ŋplots [m.] ‘mocker' (Ath.). 2. µúžα, -ŋs [f.] ‘slime, mucus', also 'nostril, snout,

=== page 519 ===

986
spout of a lamp' (Hes. Sc. 267, Ion., Arist.), with several derivatives: diminutive
µvčápiov (M. Ant.); µvšódŋs ‘slimy, full of slime' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.); µv\-wtñpes
[pl.] (Hdt., Hp.), -ŋτñpεç (Gal.) 'nostrils' (cf. τролшτýð, кшäητýð, etc.); µvčáčw,
-áw 'to be slimy' (sch.); fishnames: μúчwv, -wvoç [m.] 'kind of mullet' (Arist.), as a
back-formation μúžos ‘id.' (Ath.), cf. кóккwV: кÓккOÇ, etc. (but see below on the
derivation); µvšivos ‘id.' (Hices. apud Ath.), like кopaкīvoç, etc. 3. áлóµv‹-i
'snuffling' (Plu.), -ía 'mucus' (AB, H.). On ►µúкηs ‘mushroom', see s.v.
•ETYM µúσσo̟μat is a yod-present; Latin has a nasal present ē-mungō ‘to wipe the
nose' (cf. oxí【w beside Lat. scindō). Frisk explains µúža as follows: in the same way as
kviσŋ and кvīσɑ may go back to the s-stem supposed in Lat. nīdor, μúžα could go
back to an s-stem perhaps continued in Lat. mucor [m.] 'mold, moistness' (Solmsen
1909: 238f.). He then asserts that μúžшv, µúžoç can be derived directly from μúča. For
the sporadic forms with oμ- (quúσσɛtai and σµvкtýp H., oµúžwv Arist. beside
uúчwv), Frisk adduces a Celtic parallel in Gael. smuc, smug 'mucus'. Further
proposed cognates include MIr. mocht 'weak' < *muk-to- (problematic, see
Matasović 2008 s.v. *muxto-), the Germanic group of ON mjúkr, and Latv. mukls
'marshy'.
To my mind, the forms µúča, μµúчoç, µúžшv (the above derivation of which seems
doubtful) beside μUк-, as well as the existence of variants with initial σ-, could also
point to Pre-Greek origin. On µúσкоç· µíаσµа (H.), see μúσoç. See ►µúчw 2,
►xw.
µúστaž, -aкoç [m.] 'upper lip, moustache' (Stratt., Eub., Theoc., LXX), a Doric and
Laconian word (cf. Arist. Fr. 539). <PG(V)►
•VAR µÚTTAKES. µvкaí (cod. µúкα). Σikɛλoi. ”Iwves (leg. Аáк-) лóуwva ‘beard' (H.).
On Búστa see below.
•ETYM According to Ehrlich KZ 41 (1907): 288 and Güntert 1914: 128, a
transformation of µáστα ‘mouth' by influence of the rare ẞúστaž ‘moustache'
(Antiph.), which has itself been explained as an innovation. Frisk assumes a cross of
µáσťaž and µúλλov ‘lip', which seems impobable. Both the variation μ-/ẞ- and the
variant μúτταкεç point to Pre-Greek origin; see Fur.: 218, 304.
µvotńpiov⇒µúw.
μvστíλη [f.] 'piece of bread, scooped out as a spoon' (com. Ath., Aret., Poll.). <PG(S)►
•DER Diminutive µvστλápiov (Poll.), denominative μσáµ [v.] 'to gulp out
soup with a μvστíλŋ' (Ar.). Further дúστpov [n.] 'id.' (Nic. Fr. 68,8 = Ath. 3,126b),
also -os [m.] (Poll., Hero Mech.), also 'spoon, especially as a measure or dose'
(medic., pap.), μvotpo-¤ýky [f.] ‘spoon-case' (pap.); diminutive µvστpíov (medic.).
•ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word because of its suffix -iλ-, which is frequent in
these words. For the suffix of μvoτiλn, one may compare (wµin, orpoßin, papíŋ,
лédiλov, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 249). For an Indo-European etymology, one would
have to assume a nominal basis, e.g. *µúστov, -os, for which there is no further
connection. The notation µotúλ(\)ŋ, -άoµaɩ is due to confusion with ► µuotúλλw.
µúστž [adv.] · äµа τó̟ σкóτε ‘at the time of darkness' (H.). <GR>
⚫ETYM From μúw, with an adverbial suffix, see Janda Sprache 40 (1998): 21.
.
µuttós [?] ·• tò yuvaɩкɛiov 'female genitals' (H.). <PG(V)►
987
⚫ETYM Fur.: 218 compares ẞúττоç τò yuvaiкalov aidoiov ‘id.' (H.), which proves Pre-
Greek origin. See ►μUкóç.
µvttwtós [m.] ‘dish, kind of paste', made of cheese, honey, garlic, etc. (Hippon.,
Anan., Hp., com., Thphr.). <PG(V) ►
•VAR Also -σσ- (Hp. Loc. Hom. 47), -σ- (Call. fr. 282).
•DER µUTTWTεúw [v.] 'to change into a μ., to hash up' (Ar.), μvσσшτεúµata. áptúµata
'condiments' (H.).
•ETYM For the realia, cf. on µõµa. A formation in -wτós, probably denominal (cf.
Chantraine 1933: 305f., Schwyzer: 503). In view of the variation -TT-/-σ0-/-σ-, the
word is Pre-Greek.
чvxíw [v.] 'to blow the nose, sniff; to ridicule' (Theoc., Plb., AP). <PG?►
•VAR άvα-μvеíoμa 'to sniff, sigh loudly' (A. Pr. 743); in H. also лpoμε and
εлεμúуеσαν, the latter as an explanation of έлεµvžav.
•DER µxеσµós [m.] 'snorting, mocking' (Hp., E., Aq.); µvxеóðηs ‘snorting' (Hp.),
as if from *uúx0os (cf. below).
⚫ETYM An expressive present, related to μúσσoμα and ►μúчw 'to moan, sigh'. Frisk
suggests that the starting point for the present μxеw may have been the aorist
µúžaɩ, µúžaσðaɩ, perhaps via an intermediary *µúxos (see above), or alternatively
after ẞpóča: ßpóxos: ßpoxiw. The element μux- could be Pre-Greek (not in
Fur.).
uuxXóc =uÚklos.
μuxós [m.] 'the innermost place, interior, corner, hiding-place, storage room' (II.); on
the mg. in Homer see Wace JHS 71 (1951): 203ff. <PG?>
•VAR μvxá [pl.] (Call. Del. 142). On μoxo- see below.
•COMP εлtá-µvxos 'with seven hiding-places' (Call.).
●DER 1. µúxɩoç ‘innermost' (poet. since Hes. Op. 523, late prose); several superlatives,
all from µvxóç: µvxoítatos (§ 146), from the loc. -μvxoч in чoxoĩ. ¿vtós. IIápioi
‘inside' (H.); μvxaíτaτoç (Arist.); -Tεpoç (Hdn. Epim.), after µɛσaí-τατoç, -tɛpoç,
etc.; μúxατоç (A. R., Call.), after εσxατoç, etc.; μуεστατое (Phot.). 2. μúx-aλoç =
-ɑτoç (trag. anon. μúxαλa Tápτapa; also E. Hel. 189 [lyr.]?), cf. µvõáλµn. þvðòs
Baλáoons 'depth of the sea' (Phot.), cf. äλµŋ, and ßúσσaλo þóеpo 'holes' (H.). 3.
μvxwdηs full of corners' (E.). 4. μvxác [f.] = µvxóc (Lyr. Adesp. Oxy. 15 II 4). 5.
µòóõààí [v.] ‘to be hidden in a corner' (sch.).
▶
Оn µúσxov· τò àvdpɛĩov кai yuvaiкεчov μópov ‘male and female private parts' (H.),
connected by Fick KZ 43 (1909-1910): 149 assuming *μúX-σкov, see μóσx 2.
⚫ETYM As a fourth series of stops (*k", etc.) is not assumed anymore, the genetic
connection with Arm. mxem 'to immerse' (Frisk) is obsolete, but it was semantically
doubtful anyway. The Gm. group of ON smjúga 'to slip in', MHG smiegen 'to nestle'
may theoretically derive from IE *smeug"-, like Greek, but the Gm. words may also
go back to *smeuk, and correspond to OCS smykati sę ‘to drag on, cooper', Lith.

=== page 520 ===

988
hów
smukti 'to glide (away)', etc. Fur.: 364 thinks that μuxós is Pre-Greek, but without
further arguments (see ẞubós and Fur.: 254). One argument could be the gloss
Búσoaλo, if it really belongs here; another, the gloss μµoxoй· ¿vτóç with a vocalic
interchange.
µбw [v.] ‘to close, be shut', of the eyes: 'to shut the eyes, abate', especially with кata-
(S. Fr. 774, Call., Nic.). <IE? *meus-, *meuH- 'shut'>
•VAR Аor. μvσaι (637), late μσα (AP), fut. μvow (Lyc. 988), perf. μεμбкa (N 420).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially έлɩ-, кatα-, ovv-. As a first element in µú-wy,
thematically enlarged -wлóç “with closing eyes”, i.e. 'near-sighted' (cf. Sommer 1948:
92).
•DER 1. Adverb in -τí with privative a: aµvorí ‘without closing (the lips), at one
draught' (Hp., Pherecr.), whence ǎµvotis [f.] ‘drinking at one draught' (Anacr.,
Epich., E.), whence àµvoτí(w [v.] 'to empty the cup at one draught' (E., Plu.). 2.
(σúµ-, kaτá-)µúois [f.] 'closing' (Hp., Thphr., Plu.). 3. µúστηs [m.] ‘sbd. initiated (in
the Eleusinian mysteries)' (Heraclit., Ar., E.), probably from “who shuts his eyes”, in
opposition to the εлолτηs “the observer": he who has reached the highest degree;
µúσtɩç [f.] name of comedies of Antiph. and Philem., also in LXX; µvotikós
'belonging to the µúστa (mysteries), secret (IA), µvotýpiov, usually -a [pl.] ‘secret
service' (IA), μvotηp-iwdns, -iкóç, etc.
Beside μów stands μvéw (mostly pass. μvéo̟μα) 'to be initiated”, secondarily act. 'to
initiate' (IA), aor. µvηеñvaɩ, µvñσai, fut. µvýðýσoµai, perf. µµúŋμαɩ; rarely with έv-,
σuv-, лρo-. The mg. probably developed from 'to have one's eyes closed (cf. µúστηs).
Thence μúnσis [f.] 'initiation' (Hell., inscr., Ph.).
On itself stands µváw 'to shut the lips (the eyes?)' (only in Ar. Lys. 126 tí foi µvãte;
explained with oкapdaµúttete by H.), also μová (H., Phot.); perhaps constructed
from the passage in Ar.; but cf. the reduplication in μoúλws.v. ►µúλw.
•ETYM The present μúw can be explained either from *mus-ie/o-, or from *muH-
ie/o-. The short vowel in the aor. μσa, like that of obáσaι, etc., may perhaps be
explained from an older root aor. (Frisk suggests that μvoav 637 stands for older
*μбv); μбσαι can be secondary after μów. The fut. μow derives from the aorist. The
innovative presents μvéoμа and μvéw may have arisen from non-presentic forms
enlarged with ŋ, like µvηеñvaɩ, µɛµúŋµaɩ; cf. Schwyzer: 721. The perfect µéµüka
recalls other intransitive perfects, like čoτnka, ßéßèêα, etc., and could be a recent
formation.
From other languages, Oettinger 1979: 161ff. connected Hitt. munnae-zi 'to hide,
conceal', which is followed by Bernabé and Rodríguez Somolinos Glotta 71 (1993):
121-129. μúw cannot belong to aдúvw, however, which requires a root *h₂meu-. The
connection with Pal. muš- ‘to satiate oneself as IE *meus- 'to shut oneself by Janda
Sprache 40 (1998): 21 is semantically not very attractive. Finally, Fur.: 378 compares
► άuúw and considers the possibility of Pre-Greek origin.
So: either the root was *meus-, in which case the perfect was innovated, or it was
*meuH-, when the aorist and nominal forms like µúστηs are young.
μvwóc [m.] 'dormouse' (Opp. K. 2, 574). <PG?(S)►
989
•ETYM The proposal to derive μuwεós from a pre-form *μv-wк-дoç, a verbal
governing compound of μúw 'to shut' and the IE root *h3k"- 'eye, sight', with a suffix
-to- and compositional lengthening, is untenable: it would have resulted in -00-, not
in --. Unclear is μvwεía, glossed üßpiσtiкòs λóyos by H. and Suid.; according to
Suid., it also means 'mouse-hole', μvшлíα. If so, the first member may be μüç, but it
may also be folk etymology. The word is rather Pre-Greek, cf. µópošos for the
suffix.
µvwñía [f.] 1. ‘mouse hole' (Arist., Ael.); 2. 'shortsightedness' (Aët.). <GR>
⚫ETYM In the first meaning, a compound of μüç and óлη 'hole', with compositional
lengthening and suffixal -ía; cf. Scheller 1951: 45f. In the second meaning, the word is
derived from uúwy 2 'shortsighted'.
µúwy 1, -wños [m.] ‘goad, spur; gadfly', also ‘stimulus' (A., Pl., X., Arist.). ◄ PG?(S)►
•DER µvwñí¶w [v.] ‘to spurn' (X., Plb.); µvшžíšo̟μα [v.] 'to be stung by gadflies' (X.,
J.).
•ETYM Boisacq's proposal *µví-wy "with the aspect of a fly, fly-like" is called doubtful
by DELG. The suggestion of a special use of μúwy 2 (Gil Fernández 1959: 81-4) is not
convincing either. For the suffix -wy in insect names, cf. Kwvwy ‘gnat, crane fly' and
Sommer 1948: 92. Since кwvwy is probably a Pre-Greek word, the same may hold for
μúwy as well.
µúwy 2, -wños [adj.] 'shortsighted' (Arist.). <GR➤
⚫DER μvшлíα 'shortsightedness', -wлíαç [m.] 'shortsighted man' (Poll., Paul. Aeg.),
-wлíασ = -wлíα (Gal.), after the words for diseases in -íaσıç, as if from *-wлάw;
дvшлáш [v.] 'to be shortsighted' (2 Ep. Pet. 1, 9). Also thematic μwлóç ‘id.' (X.
Cyn.).
•ETYM Properly "with eyes getting shut”, from µúw and wy. See ►µúwip 1, ► µúw.
w [?] Name of a letter. ⇒µ 1.
µwкáoµai [v.] ‘to mock, ridicule, insulť (LXX, Epicur., Agatharch.). <PG(V)►
•COMP Sporadically with prefix, like dɩa-, kata-.
⚫DER μwкós [m.] ‘mocker, insulting' (Arist., LXX), μшкíα 'mockery', µшкoç [m.]
'insult' (Anon. apud Ath., Simp.), µwкášw (Suid.), -εúw (Zonar.) 'to insulť; µóкηua
(LXX), diα-, кατα-µóкησię (Plb., Ath.) 'mockery'.
•ETYM Formally (cf. ßpwµáoµai, лwïáoµaɩ, etc.), it is obvious to take µwkάo̟µai as an
intensive deverbative; the rare forms µwкóç and µãкoç must then be back-
formations. One might also compare intensives like μŋкάo̟μα and µvкáoµα, but
further details are obscure. According to an anonymous spokesman (Stud. itfilcl.
N.S. 1, 93), the word was originally used for a camel (кáµηλos μwкãτai), an
indication which could point to onomatopoeic origin. Fur.: 133 compares μúуεtai.
poveĭ (H.) with a different velar, and concludes to a Pre-Greek word. See ▸μμo.
µwλos [m.] ‘battle, turmoil of battle' (Il., σ 233, Hes. Sc. 257; after these Archil. 3). <IE?
*meh,- 'get tired'>

=== page 521 ===

990
μwλv
•COMP As a second member in ɛöµwλoç· àуaðòç лoεoτç, εoƒˆoç 'good fighter,
well-armed' (H.), Evчwλíwv (Sparta); further in the following words from Gortyn,
which semantically belong together: ȧvτiwλoç ‘åvτíðiкoç, opponent in court',
ávτчwλía. Síкŋ εiç ñv oi ávτíðɩкo лαрαуívovταɩ 'trial in which the adversaries are
present' (H. s.v. µwλɛï), àµíµwlos ‘about which a trial is held, disputable', άµwλɛí
'without trial', uncertain ȧyxεµw [\ía], perhaps = ȧyxiotɛía?
⚫DER Denominative verb дwλéw [v.] 'to go to court, litigate' (Gortyn), also with
άμ-, àло-, εл-; μwλεi· µáуεται 'battles', μwλησε· μaxσεα, лкрауеησεται 'will
be embittered' (H.). Here probably also Mwλɛia [n.pl.], name of an Arcadian festival
(sch. A. R. 1, 164).
•ETYM Connection with Lat. mōlēs ‘heavy mass, effort, etc.' (Frisk) is by no means
certain: the original meaning would then be ‘effort, labor' vel sim. (cf. µwλos”Apnoc),
whence 'fight' (cf. лóvоc), and thence, with transition to the juridical sphere,
'lawsuit' (cf. Siwкεν, Qεúуεɩv; see Trümpy 1950: 160ff., Ruijgh 1957: 95f.).
A better solution seems to separate a suffix -/-, and connect a group of Germanic and
Slavic words: OHG muoan 'to cumber, bother' (G müde), Ru. 1sg. máju 'to exhaust,
tease', Lith. pri-si-muol-ėti 'to get tired'. See LIV² s.v. *meh¸-. See μóλiç, ► µwλvç.
μwλv [n.] name of an unknown plant (к 305, Com. adesp. 641), identified in various
ways by later authors (Plin., Dsc., Ps.-Dsc., Poet. de herb.). According to Thphr. (HP
9, 15, 7) it is an Arcadian name for a kind of garlic ‘Allium nigrum'; also μwλvç þíα
(Lyc. 679). See Ferrari RILomb. 88 (1995): 12ff. ◄PG?(V)►
•ETYM A foreign word, which may be compared with ►µóλvčα. This has a non-
Greek suffix (cf. кóvuša, öpuča), which means that our word is probably Pre-Greek,
too. For the u-stem, cf. μíov, þрáðu, owpu, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 119). All proposed
IE etymologies (see Frisk) have to be rejected.
µáλvčα [f.] name of a kind of garlic (Hp.). <PG(S)►
•ETYM Related to μwl with the same ending as in кóvuča, öpuča, píča, etc. See also
André RPh. 84 (1958): 235. As the ending can hardly be explained in Indo-European
terms, it must be Pre-Greek. It could represent /-da/ or /-ta/.
µwλvç, -vos [adj.] '(mentally) enervated; dull, feeble, weak' (S. Fr. 963. Nic., Demetr.
Lac.). <?>
•VAR Also μшλv§. áлaídɛvτoç ‘lacking education, stupid' (H.), cod. -8-, cf. von
Blumenthal 1930: 42f.; µáλvкα⋅ τòv åлaídεvτov. Zaкúvеtoι (H.); μwλvρóv. vwерóv,
ẞpadú 'sluggish, slow' (H.).
•DER μwλów [v.] 'to boil imperfectly, scald, simmer', med. 'to become powerless, fade
away', especially of wounds: 'to fail to come to a heaď (Hp., Arist.), also -úvw,
-úvoμai; aor. pass. µw\v(v)Оñvať, perf. med. μεµáλvouat, rarely with ảлo-, кaτα-,
Sia; µwλúetai yŋpáσкɛ “becomes old, µµévŋ. лapɛiµévŋ ‘slack, weakened'
(H.). Verbal nouns μlvois (-vous) [f.] 'scalding, simmering' (Arist., Thphr.),
opposite of чnois; -vtǹs ¿néwv mg. uncertain (Timo).
⚫ETYM For μwλów (whence μwλúvw), compare кwλúw. The much rarer чwλuç could
be a back-formation. With velar: дwλvě like кópuε. vɛavíσкoç 'boy' (H.), see кópη;
!
991
μwλupóç like exυρóç, кαлуρóç, etc., if not dissimilated from -vλóç. Because of the
unclear meaning and formation, μwλuç is etymologically hard to assess.
Connection with μɛos does not explain the long vowel -w-. Comparison with
чwλos is mentioned by Pok. 746. Petersson 1923: 18 relates μwλúw to μoloúw (see
µoλɛúw), like kwλúw to koloúw. As Frisk remarks, everything remains hypothetical.
The suffix -vк- looks Pre-Greek.
µwλa [?] a Lydian name for wine (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 219 compares ẞwλnv = äμлελoç, a kind of vine in Bithynia (Gp. 5, 17, 5).
If correct, the word seems Pre-Greek in view of the interchange.
µwλw¥, -wños [m.] ‘stripe, wale, weal, bruise' (Hyp., Arist., LXX, medic.). ◄ PG(S)►
●DER µwλwñ-ikóç ‘stripy' (Gal.), -í\w [v.] ‘to make stripes, wallop, bash' (Aq., Plu.).
⚫ETYM The analysis as a compound containing -wy 'eye, sight, etc.' is wrong. Words
like these contain a suffix -wy (see e.g. кwvwy) and are certainly of Pre-Greek
origin. Any relation with *mel- 'black' (µéλαç, μoλúvw) is out of the question.
μμai [v.] 'to strive, try, desire' (poet.). <?>
•VAR 3sg. μwται (Epich.), зpl. μшvtai (Euph. [IIIª]), opt. µτo (Stob.); perhaps also
El. μaño, see Fraenkel 1910: 45, Bechtel 1921, 2: 854; inf. µwσa (Thgn.), ptc.
v (A., S.), aor. εατ εбpεv, ετεxváσατo, ¿½τŋσεv 'invented, contrived,
investigated (H.).
•DER µwoɩç [f.] ‘searching' (Corn.).
•ETYM It cannot be established whether the primary verb µãμaɩ is an athematic
formation or a yod-present (cf. Schwyzer: 6758). There is little support for the
supposition of Bechtel 1914 s.v. µaчáw, that µm̃µaɩ derives from a lost perfect. The
hapax μwσατo is an innovation from μшчa. Connection with the reduplicated verb
►μaчáw and the ambiguous μaíoμa is possible. Prellwitz BB 26 (1901): 309ff.
connected the Gm. group of Go. mops 'courage, fury', followed by Pok 704f.
µñµos [m.] ‘blame, reproach, blemish' (poet. ẞ 86, late prose), 'stain of a sacrificial
animal' (LXX). <?>
•Var µwµap [n.] (Lyc.).
•COMP ǎ-μшμоç 'without blame' (Ion. poet.), μ-σкóло who inspects the
sacrificial animal for a blemish', together with -σкoréoµai, -éw (Ph.).
●DER µµµ with blame' (Stoic.); cf. vóμoç, etc. Denominative verbs: 1.
µwµáoµa ‘to blame, abuse, defame' (Ion. poet. since Il.), Ion. -έoμat, rarely with έɩ-,
Siα-; thence дóμηua (LXX, v.l.), -ŋois (sch.) 'blame', -ŋtc [m.] 'censurer' (Hp.),
-ПTIкóç 'censorious' (Hell.), -nλós 'blameful' (Hld.). 2. µwµεúw [v.] ‘id.' (274, Hes.
Op. 756), in order to avoid contracted forms, cf. λwßάoμa next to Awẞɛúw (see
► λwßn). 3. µwµaívw [v.] ‘id.' (Hdn. Epim.).
•ETYM Beside µãµoç stand µµ¤· at̃oxos, qóßos, yóyos ‘shame, fear, blameʼ and
µvµapíšɛi. yɛλolášɛɩ ‘jests' (H.); the old connection with ảµúµwv ‘noble, royal, vel
sim.' as a privative formation from *µūµa is rather doubtful. Ablaut w (from *ōu) : v
is hardly possible, in spite of examples like (wµós : Túµŋ. The word remains isolated,
but cf. wкáoμα, μшкоç for the meaning.

=== page 522 ===

992
wvv, -vxo
µŵvvž, -vxos [adj.] 'with one hoof, mostly plur., of horses, as opposed to the split
hooves of cattle and sheep (Hom., Hdt., Arist.). <IE *sm-h₂nog™h->
•VAR On the stem formation, see Sommer 1948: 96ff.
•ETYM The ancients derived it from *μovƑ(o)-ovu, with syllable dissimilation and
compositional lengthening, an opinion defended in modern times by Runes Glotta.
19 (1930/1931): 286f. However, Saussure 1922: 266 derived it from *σμ-wvvε with an
old zero grade of IE *sem- (see εlç 'one'). Under this hypothesis, uшvvε must be an
extremely archaic form, which Frisk did not consider very likely. However, the
reconstructed form must be *sm-h¸nug¹- > µw-vvx-, as was shown by the present
author (Beekes Orbis 20 (1971): 138-142).
μwpóç 1 [adj.] 'stupid, obtuse, foolish' (IA). <?>
•VAR Att. μwpos (accent probably taken from the vocative; see Schwyzer: 380 and
383).
⚫COMP Compounds, mostly late: e.g. μwpo-λóyos 'who speaks stupidities', whence
μwpo-λoyía, -λoyέw, -λóуnua (Arist.), úлó-чwрoç 'a little stupid' (Luc.).
•DER μwpía [f.] ‘stupidity' (IA),, Ion. -íŋ; µwpíα· iллoɩ kai ßoñç úлò Аpкádwv
'horses and cows (Arc.)' (H.), дwpíaç [m.sg.], like e.g. έpv0píaç, and with a semantic
development like in MoGr. áλoyo = ллоç; Mwρíwv (Arc. Gramm.). Denominatives:
1. µwpaívw [v.] ‘to be stupid, foolish' (A., E., X., Arist.), 'to play the fool, make
foolish', pass. 'to become insipid' (LXX, NT), whence μáраv-σ = μwрía (sch.). 2.
μwρóoμα [v.] 'to become insipid' (Hp.). 3. μwpɛúw = µwpaívw (LXX). 4. μwpíw 'to
be stupid' (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Usually connected with Skt. mūrá- 'foolish', with ablaut ō(u) : ū,
but this ablaut is now not accepted anymore, cf. Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. With words
of this meaning, we must reckon with deviations and crosses, which makes
comparative work rather difficult. Lat. mōrus ‘mad, silly' was borrowed from Greek
(see WH s.v.).
μwpóç 2 [adj.] · ỏчú, µáταov, àµßλú ‘sharp, in vain, blunt; dull' (H.). <?>
ETYM On the gloss ocú, see Leumann 1950: 27218.
=>
iWXetal → wkáofial.
i
N
v- variant form of the privative prefix, in v-nλ(ε)ńs, v-ýveµos, v-wdós, etc. <IE *n-
'un-'>
⚫ETYM In Beekes 1969: 98-113, it was shown that forms in vη-, vα-, vw- arose from the
IE negating prefix *n- combined with a following sequence *HC- (for *H = *h₁, *h₂,
*h3, respectively). This vocalized as *n-HC-. See ȧ-.
váßλa [f.] name of a Phoenician lyre with 10 or 12 strings (Soph. Fr. 849 [uncertain
conj.], LXX). <LW Sem.>>
•VAR -aç [m.] (com., Str.), also vañλa [f.] (Aq., Sm.), -ov [n.] (H.).
•DER vaßλí¢w = \áλλw (gloss.) with vaßλiστns [m.] 'váßλa-player' (Euph.), also
vaẞoto-кTUлεÚç ‘id.' (Man. 4, 185) for *vaßλo-ктúлоç (through cross and with
formal enlargement -ɛvc), vaẞλíστpiα [f.] (Maced.).
•ETYM Like the instrument, the name was probably also Phoenician; cf. Hebr. nēbel
name of a harp. More in Lewy 1895: 161. Borrowed as Lat. nablium, nablum, see WH
S.V.
Originally, the word seems to have meant ‘vase'. See Masson 1967: 67-69 and
Heurgon 1966: 518-522. Etruscan has na plan, designating a cup.
váɛppa [f.] · déσñova ‘mistress' (H.). ◄ GR►
ETYM An Aeolic form, probably for va<éτ>εppa; cf. vaiτεɩpa (leg. vaέτ-?).
оiкоdéσлovα (H.), see Hoffmann 1893: 241.
vaí [pcl.] affirmative pcl. ‘really, yes' (Il.); vaì dń, vaì µýv, vai µả Sía, vǹ Aía, etc. <IE?
*(he)no- 'that one'>>
•VAR Also vý (esp. Att.), vɛí (Boeot., also Arc.).
●DER vaíxı (S., Pl.), with -xɩ like in ovxí, µnxí; vaɩdaµŵç (Com. Adesp.) after oúdaµŵç,
kindaqiws.
ETYM Greek v corresponds with Lat. në 'really'; vai could have a formal
counterpart in ToB nai ‘indeed, surely'. For vý: vεi: vai, cf. ǹ : εi: ai ‘if; daí is
analogical beside Sn. The word is usually connected with the demonstrative IE
*(h,e-)no- 'he there'; see ►¿кɛĭvos and WH s.v. enim.
vaïás [f.] 'Naiade' VAR vaiç, Ion. vniás, vηis. váw.
valкiσσopεvovτaç · énítŋdes diaoúpovtaç kaì έževτελí ovτaç 'they who willingly "tear
to pieces", that is to say, disparage' · τɩvèç dé ‹pασi vaikiσσńpɛiç λéуɛσðαι εлì τoŨ
εμчаívovτos óμoλоуεt̃ν каì µǹ óμоλоуобνтоç 'others say that v. is called he who
•

=== page 523 ===

994
vaiw
vaós
995
makes it appear that he agrees, even if he does not agree' (Pherecr. 222), εлì тwv
kateyevoµévwv ǹ is 'the way of speaking of those who speak falsely' (H.). Cf.
Photius s.v. <?>
⚫ETYM It has been attempted to recognize vaíxi (= vaí) in the beginning.
vaíw [v.] ‘to live, inhabit', occasionally 'to be situated (in this mg. also med. ε
valóμεvoc), aor. trans. 'to settle, give as a home', intr. 'to settle' (Il.). <IE? *nes-
'escape, return home', PG?>
•VAR Aor. váσσaι, -σaσðaι, -0ñvat, late forms vaiησavτo, perf. vévaσua, fut.
váooozial.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. кατα-, àño-, σʊv-, лɛpɩ-, napa-.
•DER Enlarged vaiɛτάw 'to live, inhabit', also with лεpɩ-, µεta-, лapa-; also ‘to be
situated', especially in ε vaiτáwv 'well situated, livable' (II.); cf. Chantraine 1942:
358. From the present stem (probably in part a back-formation from vaiɛtáw): repi-,
μετα-vaιéται [m.pl.] 'who live around, together with' ( 488, A. R. 4, 470, Hes. Th.
401), áλi-vaiétaι 'who live in the sea' (B. 16, 97); ¿v-vaέτa 'inhabitants' (Isyll., A. R.),
-έtıç [f.] (A. R.). Simplex vaέτηs, Dor. -τaç ‘inhabitant' (poet. since Simon.), vatéτiç
[f.] (Call.); secondary (¿v-)vaετýp [m.] ‘id.' (AP), ¿vvaέτɛƖpα [f.] (APl.). On
► µɛtaváotŋç, see s.v.
•ETYM The causative meaning of aor. váσσai probably arose from its opposition to
intr. vaσðñvaɩ. The meaning ‘to be situated', which is often found for vaiɛtáw
(especially in ε vaɩετáшv), but rarely with vaíw, has not yet received a convincing
explanation; perhaps we must start from the ptc. ε vaiɛtáwv, if properly 'where one
lives well', with the same shift as in ó éлßáλλwv, etc. (type café chantant).
The verbal stem vaσ- (vaíw < *váσ-чw) is isolated. Comparison with *nes- as in
►véoµaɩ, vóσtos is semantically attractive, but the a-vocalism poses a problem. A
solution could be that vaσ- arose by restoration of v- in the zero grade àσ- < *ns-;
thus e.g. LIV2 s.v. *nes-. Note, however, the original reflex of the zero grade in
▶ äguevog
Alternatively, vaσ- could be Pre-Greek. See further vaós.
váкη [f.] 'woollen skin, fleece', especially of sheep and goats (§ 530, Lyc., Paus.). ◄PG▷
•VAR More common is váкos [n.] (Pi., Hdt., Simon., inscr.).
•COMP As a first member in vaкo-déчns [m.] 'tanner' (Hp.), as a second member in
kaτw-vákŋ [f.] 'coarse cloth, worn by slaves working on the field, with a front of
sheepskin' (Ar.), which is properly a bahuvrihi; on ȧpvaкíç see ►ȧpýv.
⚫DER vakúpiov. Sépua 'skin, hide' (H.); formation unclear, perhaps to be changed
(following Schmidt) into vaкú<d>ptov (like µɛλ-údprov etc., Chantraine 1933: 72f.).
•ETYM For váкoç: váкŋ, cf. váлos: váлη and common pairs of abstracts, like ẞλáẞos
: Bλáẞn; the suffixation of váкoç is like ɛipos, qãpoç, etc., that of váкη like λóëŋ, etc.
(all names for 'wool' and 'cloth').
The reconstruction as IE *nak-s-ko- and comparison with OE næsc 'soft leather, e.g.
deer-skin' <PGm. *naska-, which is isolated in Germanic, cannot be upheld for
obvious reasons. Rather a Pre-Greek word; see Fur.: 294, 305. The suffixation of
vaкúptov points in the same direction. See váσow.
1
!
vaµapav [acc.sg.m.] ‘candelabrum?' (inscr. Delos 2240f.). ◄LW Sem.➤
ETYM Through metathesis from Syr. m²nārā 'id.'; see Grégoire Byzantion 13 (1938):
181f. Ronzevalle Mél. Univ. St. Joseph (Beirut) 22 (1939): 109-121 starts from Syr.
namara 'crown'.
vávvac, -a →vévvoç.
•
vavvápiov [n.] · oűτw кαλoúµevov eidós tɩ áσwτwv 'a sort of hopeless people'
ǎμε бè τòv τρучεрòν каi μаλакóv ȧкоúεv 'better: hearing softly and delicately'
(H.). <?>
•DER Also name of a courtesan (Theophil.11); cf. perhaps vávvav.
•ETYM Unknown.
.
vavvapíç [m.] kívaidoç 'someone lewd' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. See vavvápiov.
vävos [m.] 'dwarf (Ar. Fr. 427, Arist., Longin., H., POxy. 465, 225 [IIP]); also a cake
made of oil and cheese (Ath. 14, 646c). <ONOM➤
⚫VAR Often vávvos (mss.); on the notation vávvos (hypocoristic gemination) beside
vāvos cf. Schwyzer: 268.
•COMP As a first member in vavvo-quns 'of dwarfish stature' (Ar. Pax 790).
•DER vavwdns 'dwarflike' (Arist.), vavvoúdiov lapdog' (sch. Luc. Conv. 19).
ETYM An onomatopoeic word of unknown origin; cf. Schwyzer: 423 and Björck
1950: 67. Borrowed as Lat. nānus > MoFr. nain, etc.; see WH s.v.
važos [adj.] epithet of кoloσσós (Epigr. apud Phot.). <?>
ETYM According to Geffcken & Herbig Glotta 9 (1918): 97 ff., to be accented važóc =
'driven (with a hammer)', related to váσow. According to G. and H., the name of
the island Nátos should also be included here.
vaós [m.] ‘temple, house of a god, sanctuary' (Dor., Thess., late Att., Hell.). <GR? *nas-
PG?>
wo-,
•VAR vafós (Lacon.), vaños (Lesb.), vós (Hom., Hdt.), vɛws (Att.).
⚫COMP vao-kópos (Delph.), va-кópos (Dor.), vɛw-, vɛo-кópos (IA, Hell.) [m.]
'temple-warden' with derivatives (see кopéw); vα(o)-, vεw-лоóç, secondary
-ло(i)αç (Schwyzer 451), -ло(i)ηs name of an office in charge of the construction of a
temple, whence -лoiέw, -лolía, -rolet̃ov, -roïkóç, etc. (inscr. since V₁); as a second
member in лpó-vaos (A.), Att. -vɛwç, also -váïoç, Ion. -výïs (Aðŋvã Пpovaïa,
-vnia), 'in front of the temple', substantivized лрó-vαоç, Ion. -vηos [m.], -vaov,
-váïov, -výïov [n.] ‘front hall'.
●DER 1. Diminutives: vaïdtov (Plb., Str.), vaïoкos [m.] (Str., J.) with -íokiov, -lokápiov
(pap., sch.). 2. Adjective: vaïкós ‘belonging to a temple' (Dodona). 3. Denominatives:
vaɛúw [v.] 'to take sanctuary in a temple' (Gortyn); vaów ‘to lead into a temple'
(Crete); cf. vaúεу. ¡кετεÚεу, ларá τò εлÌ τηу εστíаν каταчεúуяν τоÙÇ iкÉτAÇ
'supplicate, after the fact that suppliants take refuge at the hearth' (H.).
•ETYM A pre-form *vaσƑos has to assumed for the different dialectal forms.
Therefore, the word is mostly analyzed as PGr. *nas-wo- and derived from váσσal,

=== page 524 ===

996
váin
►vaíw as 'habitation, house (of the god)', which is quite possible. However, Fur.:
338¹³ adduces the variants valós (Clinias apud sch. A. R. 2, 1085, H.) and vɛtós (inscr.
Samos IVª), variants which would point to substrate origin.
váлη [f.] 'wooded vale, chasm' (558 = P 300); váла· σúµчуτоç τóлоç 'оvergrown
váña. σúµqutos tóros
place' (H.). PG?>
•Var város [n.] (Pi., S., E., X.).
•DER vaл-aïoç like a wooded vale' (S., E.), -wdns 'id.' (Eust., St. Byz.).
ETYM Cf. the TN Náлоç (Lesbos); probably Pre-Greek. Sее ►лроушлŃs.
vãлv, -vos [n.] 'mustard'.
•VAR Also σívanɩ.
•DER Vάлεov (Nic. Al. 430), after уητεоν, кávεLOV. → σívαлɩ.
vápdos [f.] 'spikenard, Indian narde, Nardostachys Jatamansi' (Hell. and late). <LW
Sem.➤
•VAR vápdov [n.] (Thphr. Od. 12, Poll.).
=
vápdov otáxvs, vápdos
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. vapdó-σtaxus, -vos [m.]
(Dsc., Gal.).
•DER vápd-tvoç 'of nard' (Antiph., Men., Plb.), -íτηs olvos 'wine spiced with nard'
(Dsc. in tit.), -ĭüç ßotávŋ ‘nard-like plant' (Gal.) ; -í(w 'to resemble the narď (Dsc.).
ETYM From Phoenician, cf. Semitic forms like Hebr. nerd, Aram. nirda, and Babyl.
lardu. Further connection with Skt. naḍá- ‘reed, cane' (beside nadá- ‘id.') is quite
uncertain and should probably be abandoned; the Semitic words rather come from
Skt. nálada- [n.] 'Indian narde' (AV), on which see Mayrhofer KEWA: s.vv. nadáḥ
and náladam. Borrowed as Lat. nardus, -um; see WH. Beside vápdos, we have vápti
[f.], designating aromatic plants (Thphr. HP 9, 7, 3).
Fur.: 199 also compares vápen and suggests that we are dealing with a Middle
Eastern culture word.
vápn ǹ ǎopwv kai μwpá 'an insane and stupid woman' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
vápěŋž, -ŋkoç [m.] 'giant fennel, Ferula communis', also denoting its hollow stalk,
which was used as a thyrsos and splint, among other things (Hes.); also ‘capsule,
cupboard' (Str.). <PG(S,V)►
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. vapèкopópos ‘v.-bearer' (Pl., X.).
•DER vapеýкɩov ‘small splint' (medic.), -ía name of a v.-like plant (Thphr.), cf.
ẞaкτηp-ía, ápτηp-ía, etc.; vapеýк-ɩvos ‘made of v.' (Arist.), vapеŋk-í¢w [v.] ‘to
splint' (medic.), whence -чoµós, -toμa (Apollod. Poliorc., etc.); vap◊nkiŵvtes.
vápěnši rλýσoovτεs hitting with v.' (H.). TN Napеáкtov in Phthiotis, also a
mountain in Thessalia (X., Plu.).
ETYM The variant válpa vápen (H.) with metathesis, as well as the TN
Napеáкtov, point to original -āк-, which is a Pre-Greek suffix. See Fur.: 199, who
compares ►vápdoç.
váρкaqov [n.] 'a fragrant Indian bark' used as spice (Dsc. 1, 23). <PG?>
i
váoow
997
•VAR Also váσkaqеov (written vaóкapwov, which will be a simple mistake), but also
váкaqov. Also Aλáкaqov (Paul. Aeg. 7, 22)?
ETYM Fur.: 299 thinks it is a cultural term from the Middle East, in spite of the
suggested Indian origin. On a possible variation p/σ, see ibid. 299f.
vápêη [f.] ‘numbness, deadness, numbfish' (IA); on the fish see Strömberg 1943: 57.
<PG?>
VAR Secondary vápкă (Men.).
•COMP As a second member in Onpio-vápкη [f.] name of a plant that paralyzes a
snake (Plin.).
●DER vapкwdŋs ‘paralysed' (Hp.); vapkáw [v.] ‘to be paralyseď (①328), also with
άлo-, dɩα-, ¿к-, whence άлováρкη-σis (Plu.); vapków [v.] 'to paralyse, deaden' (Hp.)
with vápkw-ois, -tıkós (medic.).
•ETYM vápкη has been analyzed as a zero grade verbal noun with barytone accent
(Chantraine 1933: 22f.), belonging to a Germanic verb OHG sner(a)han, MHG
snerhen ‘to swing, knot, draw together', with deverbative ON snara ‘to turn, swing,
wind' < PGm. *snarhōn- and the verbal noun OHG snar(a)ha, ON snara [f.] 'swing'.
The supposed connection (thus still LIV² s.v. *snerk- ‘zusammenziehen, schlingen')
is semantically far from convincing; moreover, one would expect *nrk- to yield Gr.
*v (8) paк-. The structure of this word looks non-IE. Therefore, we should rather
assume a Pre-Greek word *nark-; the variant nom. in -ă also points to this.
vapкíov [n.] · ȧσкóv 'skin, hide, belly, bellows, etc.' (H.). <?>
.
⚫ETYM DELG considers connection with λápkoç, λapкíov, and perhaps vápvač, and
rejects the connection with vápкn.
vápkɩσσos [m.(f.)] 'narcissus' (h. Cer.). <PG>
⚫DER vapкíoσivos 'made from narcissus, narcissus-colored' (Hp., Dsc., pap.), -íτηs
name of a stone (D. P., Plin.), because of the color or the smell?
•ETYM The suffix clearly points to a Pre-Greek word; cf. Hester Lingua 13 (1965): 361,
with Heubeck Vox Romanica 19 (1960): 151f. The connection with vápкη is due to
folk-etymology.
vapós [adj.] 'flowing, liquid'. →váw.
vápon [f.]. σkεvaσtós äptos ó кai µaonτpís 'prepared bread/cake, which is also called
μ.' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
váσow [v.] 'to stamp down, squeeze close, press together, stuff (o 122). ◄PG?(V)►
•VAR Att. váττw, aor. vážai, fut. vážw (H.), perf. med. vévayµaɩ, vévaoμai.
•COMP Rarely with prefix, e.g. кατa-, ovv-.
•DER Verbal adjective vaστós ‘pressed together, stuffed (medic., J.), substantivized
(scil. лλaкoυç) [m.] name of a cake (com.) with vaστíσкoç [m.] (Pherecr.); also
vaкtóç ‘pressed together' (Plu.); vaкtά. ToÙÇ µíλovç kaì tà è̟µïíðɩa ‘things made of
felt and felt shoes' (H.). Verbal substantive váyua [n.] 'closely sqeezed stone-wall'
(J.).

=== page 525 ===

998
vavāyós
•ETYM It is unclear from the attestations whether the verbal stem originally ended in
a velar (vážaɩ o 122) or a dental (vaστós from *vαττóç?). Etymology unknown;
connection with váкos 'woollen skin' cannot be proven. Borrowed as Lat. naccae
'fullones', perhaps from *váкταi; see WH s.v. The verb is probably Pre-Greek.
vavāyós [m.] 'shipwrecked person' (Hdt.). <GR>
•VAR Ion. -nyós.
•DER vav-ayέw, -nyέw [v.] 'to be shipwrecked', -äyía, -nyía [f.] 'shipwreck', -áyia,
-nyia [n.pl.] (rarely -tov [sg.]) 'wreck (of a ship)' (IA).
ETYM Compounds of vauç and ǎуvчµ, àуñvαι 'break' with long compositional
vowel. This may be due either to compositional lengthening or analogy after other
such compounds (thus in Ion. -ny-), or to influence of кατáуvчш, žāуa, see Björck
1950: 42 and 147.
vaúкληŋpoç [m.] 'shipowner, captain', sbd. who lets his ship and the places on board to
other persons (IA), on the mg. against ччлороç and кáлηλoç see Finkelstein Class.
Phil. 30 (1935): 320ff.; metaph. 'owner of a rented house' (com.). <IE *krh₂s-ro-
'head'➤
DER vauкλnp-ía [f.] 'employment as a vaúкλη-poç, society of shipowners,
navigation' (Att.), perhaps from vauкλŋpéw (see below); -tov [n.] 'freighter' (D., E.);
vav-kλáp-10s epithet of Poseidon (Delos Iª), -кληpiкós belonging to the v.' (Pl. Lg.),
vauk\npu|LOL Ơ TŚyat• Tả HavÔokeĩa rooms, taverns’ (H.), after quantuos
Denominative vauкλŋp-éw [v.] 'to be vaúкληpoç' (Att.), metaph. 'to govern (a state)'
(trag.), with vauкληpηµατα [pl.] 'shipping' (Tz.). Further vaúкpapos (vaúкλapos H.)
[m.] name of the manager of a vauкpapía (Lex Solonis apud Arist. Ath. 8, 3, Hdt.)
with vauкpap-ía [f.] part of a phyle in Solonic Athens, for financial and
administrative purposes (Arist. Ath. 8, 3), -ta [n.pl.] 'registry of the vaúкpapoɩ'
(Ammon. gramm.), -ɩкóç ‘belonging to the vaúкpapoç or -ía' (Lex Solonis apud
Arist.).
ETYM The usual term vaúкλapos / vaúкληpos arose by dissimilation and folk-
etymological connection with кλñpoç from older vaúкpapos. The latter only
remained in a technical sense. The original mg. is "who stands at the head of a ship".
The zero grade in the second member of vaúкpäpoç (*-krh₂-C-) may be compared
with that in ópó-кpaιpα (see ►кpalpa). Here, кpāρ- may derive from *krāh-ro-,
which belongs to *krāhn- <*krh₂-s-n- seen in кpavíov, and inflected forms of
►Kápa. Other ablaut grades are continued in кápηvα < *krh₂-es-n-h₂ and Lat.
cerebrum <*kerh₂-s-ro- (see кáρηva, ►кépaç).
The same element appears in Boeot. PN (A)α-кpāpídaç < *Aá-кpāpoç (Solmsen
RhM 53 (1898): 151ff.). Borrowed as Lat. nauclērus, cf. Friedmann 1937: 26ff.
vauλov [n.] 'fare, freight, passage-money' (Att., Hell.). <GR>
•VAR -oç [m.], also -\- (inscr.), Schwyzer: 238.
●DER vavλów, -óoμαι [v.] ‘to let out a ship, freight a ship' (Plb., pap.), with vaúλ-wOLS
‘freighting', -woчoç ‘belonging to freighting' (also of ktývn, ővol), -wtikń [f.], scil.
σuvėýêη or σvyypacń ‘freighting agreement' (all pap.); cf. Kalbfleisch RhM 94
(1951): 94f.
i
vavoodov
999
⚫ETYM Probably from vauç, though further λo-derivatives of nouns and semantic
examples are missing. See Chantraine 1933: 241. Borrowed as Lat. naulum. See
▶vavo入ov.
vauç [f.] ‘ship' (Il.), details on the inflection in Schwyzer: 578. <IE *neh₂u- 'ship'>
•VAR Epic Ion. vnūs, gen. vews (vnós, veós, Dor. vaós), dat. vñï (vaï), acc. vañv (vña,
véa), plur. nom. vñεç (véεç, vãɛç), gen. vɛwv (vηwv, vawv), dat. vavoí (vŋvoí,
výεooi), acc. vañs (vñas, véas).
•COMP vaú-apxos 'commander of a ship' (IA), see also vεwpiov, vɛwλkéw; in
dat.pl. as a first member, e.g. vavoí-kλutos, -kλeito 'famous for his ship' (epic poet.
Оd.), vavσí-лорos (X., Arist.) = vaú-лороç (A., A. R.) 'sailed by ships'; as a second
member in Xiλió-vaus 'consisting of thousand ships' (E., Str.); amalgamation with a
suffix -ía- in e.g. (лεvτεкaι-)dɛкα-va-ïa [f.] 'fleet of fifteen/ten ships' (Plb. and D.).
Cf. further vaväyós, ► vaúkλnpos.
•DER A. výïoç, Dor. váïos (Il.), vòïtns (Th., A. R.) 'consisting of ships, belonging to
the ship', or võτηs? See Redard 1949: 12 and 43.
B. vaútηs, Dor. -τaç [m.] ‘sailer, ship-passenger' (II.), vaúotns (pap.) with analogical
-σ-. Thence several derivatives: 1. vαuτiç, -180ç [f.) epithet of yuvaiкɛç (Theopomp.
Com.), vaúτpia [f.] (Ar. Fr. 825); 2. vaut-ɛía [f.] ‘shipping' (Hell. inscr. and pap.),
after oτpatɛía (to oτpatɛúw), etc.; 3. vavτ-ía (Arist., Aret.), Ion. vavoín (Semon.),
'seasickness, disgust' (Scheller 1951: 41) with vauτɩ-woŋs 'prone to seasickness,
sickening' (medic., Plu.), vavt-táw [v.] 'to be seasick, be disgusted' (Att.), vavτía
partly a back-formation; -taσµós = vauτía (Hippiatr.); 4. vauτ-Iкós (consisting) of
seamen', also (referring to vauc) ‘nautical' (IA); 5. vaut-íλos [m.] or [adj.] ‘shipper,
seaman; nautical' (Hdt., trag.), also name of a mollusc, ‘paper nautilus, Argonauta
argo' (Arist.), see Thompson 1947 s.v.; on the formation Chantraine 1933: 248f.);
vauτλ-íα, -ín navigation, sea-journey' (0 253), also connected with vauτíλλoμa
(Scheller 1951: 35), vavτíλλoμαι [v.] 'to be sailor, sail' (Od.); 6. Navτεúç [m.] PN (0
112 beside лpчμvεúç; see Wackernagel KZ 24 (1879): 297).
C. See vaulλov and vañσλov.
=
⚫ETYM Old IE word *neh₂u- 'ship', which is also found in IIr., Arm., Lat., Celt., Gm.,
and Illyr. The inflections of Greek, Sanskrit (and also Latin) seem to correspond:
vaus Skt. náuṣ < IE *neh₂u-s; vñ(Ƒ)α = Skt. návam, Lat. nāvem (whence nom.
nāvis) < IE *neh₂u-m; vñ(Ƒ)εç = Skt. návas < IE *neh₂u-es, vñ(Ƒ)aç = Skt. náv-as < IE
*nehu-ns, etc. Other reconstructions (e.g. nom. *neh₂-eu-s, acc. *neh₂-eu-m, gen.
*neh₂-u-os << *nh₂-u-os, cf. Beekes 1985: 96) are also possible.
Examples from other languages: MoP nāv, Arm. naw (perhaps from Iranian), OIr.
nau, ON nór [m.], Illyr. TNs Nau-na, Nau-portus, etc.
Lat. nauta, nausea were borrowed from Greek.
vauσov [n.] Arg. for vauλov: 'fare, freight' (èpódiov кai vañσλov, IG 4, 823: 12 [IVª,
Troezen], H.). ◄ GR➤
⚫DER vavσλóо-μаι, -ów [v.] 'to be carried for fare, transport', (as a passenger)
'travel' (E., Ar., Lyc.).

=== page 526 ===

1000
vaÜggov
i
vespós
1001
•ETYM Built on vaus with a suffix -0λo- also seen in Oúσ-0λa, Оεμε-Oλa, etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 375); the -o- must be secondary (cf. vaúoτηs beside vaúτnç s.v.
►vauc). Unrelated is ▸ vauσσov.
vañσσov [n.] 'name of a tax' (Cyzicus VI, Cos Ia). <?>
•ETYM Because of the -σσ- (original sampi) a technical foreign word, perhaps from
Carian; see Wackernagel RhM 48 (1893): 299.
váqða [f., n.] ‘petroleum' (LXX, Str., Dsc.). <LW Iran.➤
•VAR -aç [m.].
⚫ETYM Cf. MoP naft 'petroleum', which is of uncertain origin. Acc. to Brandenstein
OLZ 43 (1940): 345ff., the Greek word is from Iran. *nafta- from *nab- 'be wet. On
the meaning and further forms see Brust 2005: 471ff. Borrowed as Lat. nap(h)tha.
vaqpóv [n.] Avov páчμа linen thread' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
våw [v.] 'to flow, stream', mainly of water (Il.). <?>
•VAR Only present stem except for diavañσai diaлλεчσαι 'to sail across' (H.) and the
ptc. aor. àµqɩ-vaέvtos (Emp. 84). A long vowel is found in ipf. vãε(v) (A. R., Call.),
valov (1 222); note vaúɛɩ· þéɛɩ, þλúčεt 'flows, gushes forth' (H.), interpreted as Aeol.
•COMP Rarely with àµœɩ-, diα-, лεpɩ.
●DER 1. vaέtwp. péwv, roλúppovs ‘streaming, having much current' (H.), vátwp (S.
Fr. 270); 2. vãpós ‘welding, streaming' (A. Fr. 347 = 764 Mette, S. Fr. 621); 3. vāµa
[n.] 'flowing water, source, stream' (trag., Pl., X., Arist.) with diminutive vaµá-tɩov
(Thphr.), Taios 'from sources, source-' (Aeschin.), -Toons 'rich in sources'
(Thphr.); 4. vaσμóc = vãµa (E.), -wdŋs (H.). Probably also 5. Naïáç, Ion. Nŋïác (Od.,
A. R., AP), Natç, Ion. Nŋïç [f.] (II.) 'Naiade', see below.
•ETYM It is usually assumed that all present stem forms go back to *váƑ-шw (Frisk,
DELG, LfgrE). This is only possible if one assumes that shortvocalic vắw (váɛl,
vάovσɩv 292, ℗ 197) stands for vaíw as a rhythmical variant (Chantraine 1942: 167).
Note, however, that vaíw is only attested in 1 222 (with a v.l. vãov). The ptc. àµqɩ-
vaévτoç (Emp. 84) was probably formed under the influence of pvévτoç. It seems
that a basic form *vαƑεµа or *váƑηua has to be assumed for vāμa (which is common
in Attic), although such a formation is unparallelled; if so, vãpós could also be from
*vafɛpós, vaoµós from *vaƑeoµós, and váτwp from *vaƑéτwp (cf. Bechtel 1914:
234f.).
The forms with long vowel va-ïáç, -ïç, vn-tác, -íc presuppose a noun *vãƑ-a (cf. e.g.
кpýv-ŋ : -τác); the proper meaning would then be "daughter of the source". As all
nymphs are considered to be daughters of Zeus, the Naiades are connected with the
Dodonaic Zevs Náïos. However, a source in Dodona is only mentioned in late Latin
writers, and Zeus is unknown as a god of sources (cf. Nilsson 1941(1): 426f.); so the
proper meaning of Náïoç remains unclear. If the Naiades have something to do at all
with Zɛùç Náïoç, their qualification as daughters of a source must be left open.
Correspondences to váw outside Greek are uncertain. One might compare the
athematic long grade present Skt. snauti 'to drip', with zero grade ptc. snuta- (cf.
i
LIV2 s.v. *sneu-), although the explanation of the Greek a-vocalism as an analogical
zero grade *snaw- beside *snew- remains dubious. See véw, výxw, ▶Nnpeús.
-vε [pcl.] in Thess. ö-ve, tó-ve, tá-ve = ő-de, tó-dɛ, τá-dɛ; beside it -vu in Arc. Cypr. ő-
vu, with deictic - Arc. gen.sg. tw-vi = τoñ-dε, tovdi, etc. ◄IE *eno- ‘this, that'➤
•ETYM Like vai and vý, -vε has also been connected with the demonstrative stem
*(e-)no-. On -vu, see on vù, vŏv, võv 'now'. See ➤ vaí.
vεāλns [adj.] ‘fresh, powerful, rested' (Ar. Fr. 361, Pl., X., D.). <GR➤
•VAR -ǎλns (Nic.).
•ETYM Originally ‘newly fed, newly grown (up)', from *vɛo-aλns, a compound of
véos and the root of an old verb 'to feed, nourish', preserved in ǎvaλτoç, and in
Lat. alō, etc. The compound underwent compositional lengthening and is formed
with the suffix -ns (cf. Schwyzer: 513).
vɛāvíās, -ov [m.] 'youth, young strong man', also as an adj. 'youthful, strong, wilful'
(Od.). <GR
•VAR Ion. vεŋvins, -ew; veãvis [f.] ‘young lady, girl' (Il., also LXX), Ion. vεñvis,
contracted vñviç, -, -LV.
DER 1. Hypocoristic: vɛavíσкoç, vɛŋv- [m.] 'id.' (IA) with vɛavioк-εúоμαι [v.] 'to be
in youth' (com., X.), -εúμаτα [pl.] = Lat. Iuvenalia (D. C.); vɛaviσк-ápiov (Arr.
-ɛúµatα
Epict.), -údpiov (Theognost.). 2. Adjective: vɛavкós 'youthful' (Att., Hp.) with
vɛavɩk-éw [v.] ‘to be youthful' (Eup.), -ótŋs ‘'youth' (Sext. Ps.). 3. Verbs: vɛavɩεvoμaɩ
[v.] 'to behave youthful or recklessly' (Att.), rarely with prefix as ¿èɩ-, „poʊ-; thence
vεavíεvμа [n.] 'youthful behaviour' (Pl.), vɛav(1) εía [f.] (Ph.); vɛavíčw (Plu., Poll.).
•ETYM A substantival derivation in -íãç from *vɛãvós vel sim., which must itself be
an enlargement of vέoç. A proposal for the origin of this suffix -an- was made by
Leukart 1980: 238ff.
véατos [adj.] 'lowest, utmost'. •VAR Epic also vɛíatoç. →vɛós, véoç.
vɛáw [v.] 'to plough up a fallow land. →vɛóç, véoç.
veß入āpar =лɛpaivɛv 'to finish, fulfill' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Cf. vεẞλápετα (?) in Phot. = Ar. Fr. 241.
veẞpós [m., f.] 'young of the deer, fawn' (II.). <?>
⚫COMP As a first member e.g. in veẞpо-τóкoç 'bringing forth fawns' (Nic.).
•DER Several derivatives, most poet. and late: 1. Substantive: vɛßpíç, -ídos [f.]
'fawnskin' (E.) with vɛßpíd-tov (Artem.) and vεßpiw [v.] 'to wear a fawnskin' (D. 18,
259, beside кpατŋpíчw 'drink a bowl, of the participants of a Dionysus-festival),
vɛßpɩoµós ‘wearing vɛßpíç' (gramm.); vɛßpñ [f.] ‘id.' (Orph.); vɛßpías [m.] of yadɛós,
name of a shark (Arist.), after its color, cf. Thompson 1947 s.v., λaqos veßpías ‘deer'
(H. s.v. λádac); véßpaкeç oi ǎppɛveç vɛottoì twv ȧλεкτρυóvwv 'the male chicks of
the rooster' (H.), cf. σкúλаž, лóрτα and Chantraine 1933: 379; vεßpiτηs Mitos
(Orph.), -τç (Plin.), after the color. 2. Adjectives: véßpivos (S.), véßpɛtos (Call.,
API.) 'of a fawn', véẞpεtov name of the Pastinaca sativa (Ps.-Dsc.), Strömberg 1944:

=== page 527 ===

1002
vénλus
50; vεßpwdŋs 'fawn-like' (AP). 3. Verb: vεßpóoμa 'to be changed into a fawn'
(Nonn.).
⚫ETYM An exact match to vɛßpós has been sought in Arm. nerk, -oy 'color', deriving
both from IE *(s)negro-. However, the meaning of the Armenian word has nothing
to do with ‘deer'. The correspondence is listed as 'doubtful' in Clackson 1994: 182.
Janda Sprache 38 (1996): 87-92 derives it from *neg"-ro- ‘naked' (= unarmed).
The deer and hind are often called after their variegated color, e.g. лpóč, пpoкás
'deer or roe-like animal' from лερкνóç 'spеcklеd', лрεкνóу· лоιкιλóуроov ελαчov
'varicolored deer' (H.).
vénλus 'newly arrived'.
λɛvooμai.
VEIкoç [n.] 'quarrel, strife, feud' (Il., Hdt.), on the mg. Trümpy 1950: 144f. <IE *neik-
‘attack, run at▷
●COMP As a second member in ſoλv-veikýs ‘much quarrelling', as a PN Пoλv-vεiêηs
(II.).
●DER vɛikέw [v.] 'to quarrel with words, blame, abuse' (II.), epic also -ɛíw < *-es-i̟e/o-,
aor. vɛiкéσ(σ)αɩ; thence vεɩкεσ-tip 'quarreler' (Hes. Op. 716; v.l. -ŋtýp); velkéσolos.
лоλéμоç 'hostile' (H.), after iкéolos etc.
•ETYM Related to the Baltic group of Lith. ap-nìkti, also su-nikti ‘to attack somebody',
Latv. nikns 'bad, grim, vehement', nàiks 'vehement, angry', and to Hitt. nini(n)k-zi 'to
set in motion, mobilize' (see LIV² s.v. *neik- 'sich erheben'). Greek only preserves
derivations from the s-stem, and perhaps also viкn.
Vεiós [f.] 'fallow field' (Hom., Hes., Call., Arist., Thphr.); on the mg. see below. <IE?
*ni- '(be)low'>
•VAR Also vɛós (X., Amorgos IVª), vɛtá (Amorgos IVª), vɛá or véa (Thphr., Att.
inscr.).
⚫DER With deviating semantics: vεt-60εv [adv.] 'from below' (K 10, Hell. poet.), vɛt-
60ɛ ‘id.' (poet. inscr. III³, Luc.), vɛɩ-óðɩ 'below' († 317, Hes. Th. 567, Hell. poet.).
Superl. vɛíaτoç 'lowermost, utmost' (mainly epic since Il.), also vέaτoç, Arc. výατo,
after σxατоç, лúµаτоç, сf. µεσоç: µéσatos; veátŋ [f.] (Cratin., Pl.), contracted výτη
(Arist., Ptol.), scil. Xopon 'the lowest string' (with the highest tone); vɛióτaτov.
kata̸tatov ‘lowermosť (H.); also výïotos in výïota⋅ čoɣata, кatóτaτɑ (H.),
probably also in N½ïσται (Boеot. -Ïттα) лúλαι a gate in Thebes (A. Th. 460, E. Ph.
1104). Fem. vɛíaчpa (véapa Simon.) 'the lowermost', as a substantive (scil. yaστnp)
'belly, abdomen' (Il., Hp., Hell.), cf. yépaipa, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 104, 234; cf. also
Benveniste 1935: 112); contracted vɛipa (A. Ag. 1479, E. Rh. 794 [readings not quite
certain], H.); vɛɩpós [m.] (Lyc., H.) with vɛƖpη кoiλŋ. кoiλía εoxáτη 'outermost
stomach' (H.), Schwyzer: 475. On the entire set of forms, cf. Schwyzer: 503.
Denominative vɛáw [v.] 'to plough a fallow land' (Hes. Op. 462, com., Thphr.),
connected with vέos 'new' at an early date, if not even derived from it, cf. on ►véoc;
vɛatós [m.] ‘working of fallow land' (X. Oik. 7, 20; like åλoaτós), véaois [f.] ‘id.'
(Thphr.) with vɛáσчµos (gloss.), see Arbenz 1933: 87.
⚫ETYM If vεióεv, vɛíατoç, vɛíαipa are cognate with vɛtós, vɛtós (scil. yñ, Xúpα), it
must have originally meant 'with a low location, low plain'; the meaning 'fallow
i
:
Vεкpós
1003
land', which is also possible for Homer, could rest on the folk-etymological
connection with véos 'new'; cf. Lat. novālis, -e 'fallow land'.
The comparison of vɛtós < *vɛifós with a Slavic word for 'field', e.g. Ru. níva [f.], is
doubtful (see Derksen 2008 s.v. with alternatives). For Greek, if we separate a suffix
*-uo-, it is possible to compare the IE adverb *ni 'low' seen in Skt. ní, with derivatives
in e.g. OHG nidar 'downward', OE neowol ‘steep' < *ni-uol-. However, the writing
vŋ- in výïotos, Arc. výjaτos has not been explained in a convincing way. Since an old
lengthened grade is highly improbable (especially in a superlative), the ŋ must be
secondary.
vɛíqɛi [v.] 'it snows' (Il.). <IE *sneigwh- 'snow'>
•VAR Aor. vɛival, vɛɩėñvaɩ, fut. vɛiyɛɩ. Cf. víqa [acc.sg.f.] '(falling) snow' (Hes. Op.
535).
•COMP Sometimes with prefix, e.g. кaτα-. Compounds, e.g. vip-ó-ẞolos ‘snow-
covered' (Ar., E.), ȧyá-vvio-os 'with much snow' (A 420, Σ 186, Epich.).
•DER 1. vɩ-ádɛç [f.pl.], also sing. vɩo-ás, -ádos ‘snow-flake, snowstorm' (Il., Pi.,
trag.), also [adj.] 'rich in snow' (S.); 2. vio-etós [m.] 'falling snow, snowstorm' (Il.,
Arist.) with vɩQεt-wdys 'connected with snow-fall' (Arist., Plb.); 3. vɩq-óɛis 'snowy,
rich in snow' (Il.).
•ETYM The full-grade thematic root present vɛiqɛ (vioέµɛv M 280 stands for vɛup-),
from which the other Greek verbal forms arose, neatly corresponds with Av. snaēža-
(e.g. subj. snaēžāt), OHG and OE snīwan, Lith. sniēgti, 3sg. sniēga, as well as perhaps
Lat. nivit ‘it snows' (Pac.), from thematic PIE *sneigh-e- 'it snows'. A zero grade
thematic present is found in OIr. snigid ‘it drops, rains', and a nasal present in Lat.
ninguit, Lith. sninga.
Deviating in meaning is the zero-grade yod-present Skt. sníhyati 'to get wet, sticky',
metaph. 'to find affection', with sneha- 'stickyness, affection, etc.', with a shift of
meaning that has been ascribed to the mild climate, like in the Celtic word (see
above). Comparable to this shift in Greek is e.g. Nonn. D. 22, 283 aïµatı vɛiqɛis of
sticky blood, Lyc. 876 oµßpía vás of a rain shower. It is also possible that 'to be
sticky' is the original root meaning, as advocated by LIV² s.v. *sneig¹h-.
The root noun acc. víopa (beside which as a nom. viqetós, viyás, Xiwv) is identical
with Lat. nix, nivis < IE *snigh- and is also continued in ȧyá-vviços < *-snig™h-. víßa.
Xtóva 'winter' (H.) could also be included here as Illyrian (Krahe IF 58 (1942): 133).
An o-stem *snoigo- is found in Gm. (e.g. Go. snaiws, MoHG Schnee) and in Slavic
(e.g. OCS sněgo).
Vεкpós [m.] 'corpse, dead' (II.), plur. 'the dead' = 'inhabitants of the Underworld'
(Od., Th., LXX, NT), also attributive and adjectival (-á, -óv) 'dead' (Hell.); vεкpòv
ллоν (Pi. Fr. 203) is probably predicative. ◄IE *nek-(u-) 'violent death, corpse'>
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. vεкpo-déyµwv 'receiving dead' (Aidns, A. Pr. 153
[lyr.]); rarely as a second member, e.g. μupió-vεкpoç 'with uncountable casualties'
(μáxn, Plu.).
•DER 1. Substantive: vɛkpwv, -wvos [m.] (Tegea IIª, AP), vɛкpia [f.] ‘place of the dead,
graveyard' (Hell. pap.), on the unknown accent see Scheller 1951: 46. 2. Adjective:

=== page 528 ===

}
1004
VEKTAĺpovσIV
Vεкp-чuaios 'belonging to a corpse', τò vεкρ-чμайоν 'corpse' (LXX), after Ovηoч-aïoç,
Chantraine 1933: 49; vɛkp-ikóç ‘regarding the dead', tà vɛkpiká ‘inheritance' (Luc.,
Vett. Val.); vɛкp-wdns 'like a corpse' (Luc., Gal.). 3. Verb: vɛкpóoμαι, -ów ‘to die, kill,
enervate (late) with véкpwotę 'being dead, killing' (late), -woчua [n.pl.] = vɛkúσia
(church-writers, gloss.), to váσчoç (Arbenz 1933: 93), -wµata [pl.] ‘dead bodies'
(comm. Arist.), -WTIкóç 'causing death' (Gal.).
R
In the same mg. vékũç (post-Hom. -ň-) [m.], also [adj.] 'dead' (epic poet Il., also Hdt.
and Gortyn), véкup. vekpós. Aákwvɛç (H.); some compounds, e.g. vɛкvo-µavtýïov,
-εiov 'oracle of the dead' (Hdt.), iσó-vɛкuç 'corpse-like' (E. Or. 200 [lyr.], after iσó-
ɛos, see on σoc). Thence: véкuɩa [f.] ‘offer to the dead, so as to summon them' (D.
S., Plu., Nic.), old abstract formation in -tă instead of later -íã (cf. àλýðɛα beside
-ɛía, etc., cf. Solmsen 1909: 248ff.); in the same mg. vɛкvïσµós (Man.); on formations
in touós see Chantraine 1933: 142ff.; veкúσia [n.pl.] 'feasts of the dead' (Hell. pap.),
cf. aλúσia, yɛvέota, whence Nɛkúσios [m.] Cretan month-name (II³); vɛкvïкóç
'belonging to the dead' (Cyran.); vɛкúα [f.] plantname = opλóμoç (Cyran.), because of
its use in the conjuration of the dead; after кapúa, σIкúa, etc.; on Vεкúdaλ(^)oç see
S.V.
Archaic is véкɛç vɛкpoí (H.), note also vɛk-áç, -ádos [f.] 'heap of dead' (E 886, AP),
like vɩpáç, etc. (Bechtel 1914 s.v., Chantraine 1933: 352).
Unrelated is ►vwkap, -apos [n.].
⚫ETYM The monosyllabic stem of véкɛç corresponds exactly to Lat. nex, necis [f.]
‘violent death, murder' and OAv. nas- [f.] ‘need, distress', from a root noun IE *nek-.
The u-stem in véкuç also appears in Iranian, in Av. nas, gen. nasāuuō [f., m.]
'corpse'; originally, the Gr. v was short, corresponding to Iranian ablaut u : āv < *u :
ou, as established in Beekes and Cuypers Mnem. 56 (2003): 485-491. Lat. nequālia
‘detrimenta' is sometimes adduced, but rejected by De Vaan 2008 s.v. nex. The ro-
formation in vεкpós has no parallel outside Greek.
The root was verbal in PIE, e.g. Skt. náśyati, ToA nakät [3sg.pret.] ‘to disappear,
perish'; see LIV² s.v. nek- for further forms.
Probably unrelated is ►véкτap.
.
vektaípovoɩv [v.] · koláčovσv ‘chastise'; vɛktápaç· µáσti ‘whip'; veкtápðn. ÉTŋµiáðŋ
'was punished' [corr. for vμweŋ] (all H.). <?>
•ETYM Not related to ▶véktap. Unknown.
véкταp, -apoç [n.] 'nectar, drink of the gods' (II.). <IE?, PG?>
•COMP As a first member in vεкταpo-στayns 'dripping nectar' (com.), etc.
•DER VEкTáp-ɛoç 'of nectar, smelling like nectar' (Il.), -wdns 'nectar-like' (Gp.);
Vεкτápιov [n.] plantname = ελéviov (Dsc.), also name of a medicine and several eye-
salves (Gal.), with vɛкτapítηs (olvos) 'wine spiced with vεкτápiov' (Dsc., Plin.).
⚫ETYM In contrast with außpooía, which is of related meaning (see ẞpotós), véкtap
does not have an ascertained etymology. Often considered to be a compound of the
root noun *nek- 'death', found in véкɛç (cf. ►vɛкpós), Lat. nex 'murder', and the
verbal root *terh₂- 'to cross, overcome', found in Skt. tárati, the zero grade of which
indeed occurs as a second member in Skt. ap-túr 'crossing the waters', viśva-túr
j
j
VÉμs, -w
1005
'overcoming everything', etc. (cf. on τépμa). There is no reflex of word-final *h₂,
which may be assumed to have been lost in the oblique cases, e.g. *nek-trh₂-os >
véкτapoç. However, it seems unlikely that the latter stem form was introduced into
the nom./acc., since these were much more frequent. We rather have to assume
analogical reshaping of the nominative; cf. the discussion in Beekes 1969: 161.
If the etymology is correct, véкτаp would be an element of IE poetic language (cf.
Schmitt KZ 77 (1961): 88, who refers to Skt. mṛtyúmáti tř ‘to overcome death'
odanéna 'by rice-milk' (AV 4, 35), as well as R. Schmitt 1967: 38f., 155ff.). Various
older speculations should definitely be rejected (e.g. véкτap would originally mean
'not being dead', belonging to the gloss кτεpεç vɛкpoí 'the dead' [H.]; cf. on
►кτέpaç); see Frisk for references.
Meanwhile, different explanations have been suggested assuming non-Indo-
European origin. Fur.: 320 compares viкápiov, an eye-salve. If this is correct, the
word may be Pre-Greek. He also points to other Pre-Greek words in -ap (op.cit.
13475), remarking that the traditional interpretation as a compound is too Indo-
Iranian in character for a Greek word.
Drew Griffith Glotta 72 (1994): 20-3 explains the word as a loan from Egyptian ntrh
‘divine', a sodium carbonate used in mummification; in T 37, véкtap is dripped into
the nostrils of Patroclus. The word is found as nit(i)ru in Akkadian, and as nitri in
Hittite. Since these forms have no velar, the difficulty of explaining the Greek cluster
-кT- remains. It is suggested that it went via a Semitic form *netkṛ, but such a form is
not attested. Drew Giffith further compares dáкTUλoç 'date' from Eg. dql, but this
form may have been influenced by the word for 'finger'. It cannot be assumed that
the velar was introduced from véкUÇ, so the explanation cannot be maintained. The
Egyptian word was later borrowed as víτpov. Finally, Levin SMEA 13 (1971) derived
the word from Semitic natr 'to burn incense'.
Vεкúdaλ(A)os [m.] 'the cocoon of the silkworm' (Arist., Ath., Clem. Alex.). On the mg.
Immisch Glotta 6 (1915): 203ff. ◄ PG(S)►
•ETYM Formation like kopú-d-aλ(\)os ‘crested lark' (see kópudos), “so probably
derived from vέкus in view of the apparent lifelessness of the larva” (Frisk).
According to Immisch Glotta 6 (1915): 203ff., the name is also connected with the
view of the Seelenschmetterling (butterfly of the soul) and its symbolic views.
Incorrectly, Güntert 1919: 220 f.: properly "deathworm”, from véкuç and del- ‘split' in
Saudáλw, etc. The interpretation in Frisk seems most improbable. The word is
clearly Pre-Greek (on -aλ(^)oc, see Beekes 2008).
VÉKUS →VEKPÓS.
véµeois, -ews [f.] 'righteous anger, retribution' (Il.), also personified (Hes.); on the mg.
below. <IE? *nem- 'attribute'>
•DER Nɛμéσα [n.pl.] 'festival of Nemesis' (D.), appellative vεμéσov [n.] as a
plantname wкчµεidéç 'catchfly' (Ps.-Dsc.); Nεμεσεчov (-tov) 'temple of Nemesis'
(Hell. inscr.); vεueoitηs líƉos [m.] name of a magic stone (Cyran.).
=
Denominative verbs: 1. vεμεσ(σ)άoμaι, -áw 'to become indignant, rage, get angry,
resent' (Il.), aor. vεµεσ(σ)-ηеñvai, -ñσaσðaɩ, -ñσaɩ, verbal adj. -ŋτóç; analogical after

=== page 529 ===

1006
véμos
other verbs in -άoµaɩ, -áw (cf. Chantraine 1942: 358, Schwyzer: 727), -σσ- beside -σ-
is also analogical / metrical, as in vɛµéσσɩ [dat.sg.] Z 335; veµeontikóç ‘prone to
perturbation' (Arist.), vεµεσnµwv 'unwilling, perturbed (Call., Nonn.). 2. vɛµɛσíčo-
μai (only pres. and ipf.) 'id.' (Hom.).
•ETYM Formation in -ɩs (cf. yévɛoiç, Aáxɛoiç; see on layxávw), often connected
with vέuw. The proper meaning would be * (just) assignment, attribution,
imputatio'; this perhaps still shines through in the usual epic expression oú véμεois
(Tɩví), originally 'one cannot attribute (to sbd.)', i.e. 'one cannot blame sbd. for sth.'
(cf. Bischoff Gnomon 15 (1939): 549¹).
véµos [n.] ‘grove, forest' (since A 480). <IE? *nem ‘attribute', *nem- 'bend'>
•DER Probably here Nɛuéa, epic -ɛín [f.] valley and place in Argolis with a forest
dedicated to Zevs Néμɛoç (since Hes.).
•ETYM Identical with Lat. nemus [n.] 'forest, (holy) wood'; also related is a Celtic
word for '(holy) wood, sanctuary', in Gaul. nemeton, OIr. nemed. For IE *nem-os-
beside *nemeto-, cf. Télos τελεTη. Further combinations are hypothetical:
connection with Skt. námati 'to bend' with námas- [n.] ‘bow, adoration'; with
▶véµw, -oµàɩ in the sense 'to pasture'.
véμw, -oμaι [v.] 'to allot, dispense, distribute, appropriate, possess; to inhabit, manage;
to pasture, graze, consume' (II.). <IE *nem- 'dispense, distribute; take'>
●VAR Aor. vɛчµai (Il.), -ασðaɩ, pass. vεµηеñvαɩ, fut. vɛµw, -oñµaɩ (Ion. -έoµaɩ, late
-ǹow, -ñσoµai), perf. vevéµnka,-nuµai (Att., etc.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, έ´-, katα-, époσ-.
•DER A. voµn [f.] ‘pasture', metaph. 'spread', e.g. of an ulcer, 'distribution' (IA),
'possession' (Hell.). Аlso εл-, лро-voμn, etc. from εл-, éρo-véµεv, -εσ0α, etc. Also
voμóc [m.] ‘pasture' (II.), 'seat, residence' (Pi., Hdt., S.), 'province' (Hdt., D. S., Str.).
From vou or voμóc (cannot always be determined with certainty): 1. voμác, -ádos
'roaming the pasture', substantivized plur. 'pastoral people, nomads' (IA), as an EN
'Numidians' (Plb.); thence voμad-кóç 'roaming, belonging to pastoral peoples,
Numidian' (Arist.), -íτηs ‘id.' (Suid.), -íat [f.pl.] ‘pastures' with -taños (Peripl. M.
Rubr.). 2. voµεúç [m.] ‘herdsman, shepherd' (II.), also ‘distributor' (Pl.), plur. 'ribs of
a ship' (Hdt.); from this (or from voµóç?) voµεúw [v.] ‘to pasture' (Il.) with vóµεv-µa
[n.] 'herd' (A.), -Tɩкóç 'belonging to pasturage' (Pl.); davoμ-εúç (to diavoµý),
лρоvo̟μ-εúш (to плрo-voµý), etc. 3. vóμos regarding the pasture', also as an epithet of
several gods (Pi., Ar., Call.); cf. on vóµoç; voμaños ‘id.' (Nic., Call.); voµwdns
'festering', of an ulcer (medic.). 4. voµášw, -oµai [v.] ‘to pasture' (Nic.).
B. vóµos [m.] ‘custom, usage, law; (musical) key, tone' (since Hes.), with several
compounds, e.g. "Evvoµoç PN (II.), ɛű-voµoç ‘equipped with good laws' (Pi.) with
ɛʊvoµ-íŋ, -ía ‘lawful order' (since p 487). From vóµoç: 1. adj. vóµµoç ‘customary,
lawful' (IA), with voµµóτηs [f.] (lamb.); voμшкóç 'regarding the laws, juridical,
jurisprudent' (Pl., Arist.); vóμatoç = vóµµoç (Ion. and late); vóμos 'id.' (Locris; cf.
on voµós). 2. Verb voμí(w 'to use customarily, be used to, observe (a custom),
believe' (IA, Dor.), sporadically with prefix, e.g. ouv-, кaτα-; thence vóμσiç [f.]
'belief (Th.), vóσμа [n.] 'custom, received or current institution, (valid) coin' (IA),
veoy入入ós, -入óc
1007
diminutive -άτov (Poll.); voμστóç 'received' with voμστεúоμа 'bе received' (Plb.),
also voμτεúομα ‘id.' (Hell. and late inscr.), cf. 0εui(o)teúw.
=
C. vεμετwp, -opos [m.] 'keeper (of justice), avenger' (A. Th. 485); véµnois [f.], also
άло-, dα-, εл-, etc., from àло-véµw, etc., 'distribution' (Is., Arist.); veµ-ntýs
vεμέtwp (Poll.) with -ǹτpiα [f.] (inscr. Rome, IVP); uncertain Nεμ½ïoç epithet of
Zeus (Archyt. apud Stob.); perhaps for Néµɛtos (from Neµća). On ► véµɛoiç, see s.v.
D. Deverbatives: vεµéðw, -oµaɩ [v.] ‘to pasture' (A 635, Nic.); vwµáw ‘to distribute,
maintain, observe' (Il., Hdt., Parm.), aor. -ñσat, also with έлɩ-, àµôɩ-, лρоσ-, whence
vwµ-nois (Pl. Cra. 411d), -ńτwp ‘distributor, etc.' (Man., Nonn.).
⚫ETYM The Greek system is built on the present véuw. The disyllabic forms vεμéτwp,
véµegiç, véµnoiç must somehow be analogical after yɛvéτwp, yévεσiç, etc., as vεμ-
had no final laryngeal. The ramification of the meanings found in véμw and its
derivations is problematic. Benveniste 1948: 79 stresses that the phenomenon of
lawful and regular distribution that characterizes the verb véuw. However, it may be
asked whether more than one root is at the basis of vεµw.
Of the words outside Greek that are interesting for the etymology, the Germanic
verb for 'take' agrees best with vέuw: Go. niman, etc.; further, Latv. ņemît, isg. ņemu
'to take'. A selection of nominal derivations: Av. nǝmah- [n.] ‘loan', Lat. numerus
'number, etc.', OIr. nem [f.] 'poison' (cf. Gr. Sóσiç, G Gift).
Connection with Skt. námati ‘bow, bend' and ToB näm- 'id.', which are formally
identical with véµw, can be neither proven nor disproven. LIV² makes a division in 1.
*nem- 'zuteilen' (Gr., Gm. and Latv.) and 2. *nem- ‘sich neigen' (IIr. and To.). See
► vεμos.
vɛvíŋlos [adj.] ‘unwise, blinded', acc. to H. = tvöλós, áñóñλnktos, ávóŋtos ‘blind,
senseless, stupid' (Call. Jov. 63). <PG?>
•DER Beside it έvíŋλos (very doubtful, probably <v>ε-)· ávóŋtoc; also vɛvós. εvýðns
'simple, silly' (H.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 392 compares vɛvós with ¿vɛós ‘stupid, dumb'; the v.l. <v>ε- might also
be an instance of this alternation.
vévvos [m.] ‘(maternal) uncle' (Thera, Poll., H., Eust.), ‘maternal grandfather' (Poll.;
v.l. vóvvoc); on the mg. cf. μnτpwc. <ONOM>
·DER vávvav. tv the ntpds in toù natpds áde入póv.oidè thy toÚtwv ade入priv.
vávvn. µntpòs ådeλoń (H.). Cf. also viv(v)ŋ [f.] ‘grandmother, mother-in-law' vel
sim.? (Thessalonica IIP).
•ETYM Reduplicated Lallwort like e.g. Skt. naná [f.] 'mother, mama', MoP nana ‘id.',
SCr. nana 'mother', Ru. njánja ‘nurse'; Lat. nonnus, -a ‘monk, nun', also ‘nurse-
maid' can probably also be adduced. On the Greek words, see Schwyzer: 315, 339, 423.
vɛoyiλλóç, -iλóç [adj.] ‘newly born, young, small' vel sim. (µ 86, Is. Fr. 12, Theoc., late
prose); cf. H. vɛoуíàñ (µ 86). vεoyvñs, vɛapãs, véas, vewotì yevvŋėɛions; acc. to sch.
ad loc. уáλaкɩɩ tpeqoµévns ‘fed by mother's breast'; besides perhaps vɛoyɩλns in
vɛoyŋλća, v.l. Anacr. 51 for vεoßŋ\ća. ◄IE? *ģeid- ‘suck'>
•VAR Perhaps found in Myc. ki-ra = /gillā/, Chantraine 1968: 574.

=== page 530 ===

1008
veoyvós
•ETYM The second member is also seen in the PN ríos, with Tiλís, -íwv. The
gemination, which is typical of pet names, does not necessarily belong to the
adjective. However, if it is original, -yiλλos may stand for *-yıd-λos and belong.
together with Lith. žįsti, 1sg. žindù 'to suck'; vɛoyiλλós may then originally mean
"who started sucking recently".
vɛoyvós [adj.] ‘newborn'. yiyvoμai.
veolaía [f.] 'group of young men, youth of a nation' (A. [lyr.], Ar. Fr. 67, Theoc., late
prose), also adj. (E. Alc. 103 [lyr.]; correct?). <GR>
ETYM Abstract compound from véos and λaós with a suffix -ía-: *vɛo-λãƑ-ía,
properly "composition of young people". Cf. Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 172f.
véoμaɩ [v.] ‘to reach some place, escape, return, get home' (II.). <IE *nes- ‘return,
heal'>
•VAR Contracted forms vɛuµaɩ, vɛĩaɩ, vεitat, etc., only present-stem. Further viooμai
(-00-), only present stem except for uncertain or late attestations of a supposed
aorist vío (o)aobat, often with prefix. е.g. μετα-, лоτ-, ȧло-, 'drive, go, come' (Il.).
•DIAL Myc. PN Ne-ti-ja-no /Nesti-anōr/, see Peters Sprache 32 (1986). It is compared
with Thess. Néoσavdpoç (SEG 34, 530).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially άño-.
●DER 1. vóσtoç [m.] 'return, homecoming, (felicitous) journey' (Il.), also income,
produce' (Trypho apud Ath. 14, 618d); ä-voστos 'without yield' (Thphr.); hence
vóστчμos 'belonging to the return' (Od.), also 'giving produce, fruitful, nutritious'
(Call., Thphr., Plu.).
Denominative verb voσtéw ‘to return, come home, travel (epic poet. since Il., also
Hdt.), also with prefix, e.g. åлo-, úло-, лεpɩ-; thence àлo-, dño-, лεpi-vóotnois [f.]
‘return, retreat, etc.' (late). 2. Néσtwp, -opos [m.] PN (Il.), whence Nɛσtópɛos (II.),
Aeol. for -10; -εtos (Pi., E.), vɛσtopic, -ídos [f.] name of a cup (Ath. 11, 487f.).
⚫ETYM The thematic root present véoμα < *nes-e/o- corresponds formally with the
Germanic group of Go. ganisan 'to recover, be saved', OE genesan 'to escape, be
saved, survive', MoHG genesen 'to mend, recover', with a perfective prefix *ga-. The
semantic connection between these verbs is quite straightforward. Skt. násate 'to
come near, approach, meet sbd., unite', which is semantically farther removed, is
nevertheless formally identical; if Násatyā [m.du.], indicating the Aśvins, properly
means "Healers, Saviors", it fits well with vέoμal, ga-nisan and the causatives Go.
nasjan 'to save' and OHG nerian 'to save, heal, feed'.
The forms viooμat (also written víσσoμα) are debated. Acc. to LIV², we may explain
them as *ni-ns-e-> vīσɛ- (instead of sound-regular **vive-) by assuming an
athematic 3sg. *ni-ns-toi with preservation of s before t, and only later thematization
(likewise, Pok. 766; differently, Peters Sprache 30 (1984): 86). The explanation as a
desiderative *ni-ns-s-e/o- is less likely in view of the formal match with Skt. nimsate
<*ni-ns-e/o-.
The comparison with ToA nasam, ToB nesau 'I am' < perf. *nos- is accepted by
some, doubted by others. See also on ►vaíw ‘to live' and on ►äoµevoç.
•
VεOσσÓC
vɛónτpai [f.] · viwv Ovуaτépɛç 'daughters of sons' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Hypotheses by Latte and Benveniste 1969:1: 234.
1009
véos [adj.] 'new, young, youthful, unusual, unheard' (II.). <IE *neuo- 'new'>
•VAR Grades of comparison vεwτερоç, -τατоç (since Il.), also vέatoç in the sense of
'the last one' (trag.), but perhaps contaminated with vɛíaτoç, see on ► vɛlós.
•DIAL Myc. ne-wo.
· •COMP Very often as a first member, cf. vɛo-yıλós, vɛo-yv-ós, vé-opτos (see
öðvæµ), vɛoxµóç, etc.
•DER 1. vɛapós 'young, youthful, tender, fresh' (B 289; on the formation below) with
vɛápwσis [f.] 'rejuvenation' (Poet. in Pland. 78, 13). 2. veótns, -istos (Dor. -τac) [f.]
‘age of youth, youthful spirit, band of young men' (Il.), -τñσios ‘youthfuľ (Ps.-
Phoc.). 3. vɛoin [f.] 'youthful thoughtlessness' (Y 604), véolai· ápoσúvať ‘id.' (H.);
after avoin, ǎvota. 4. véāε, -koç [m.] = vɛavías (Nicophon, Poll.); see Björck 1950:
264f. Adverbs: 5. vɛwotí ‘newly, fresh' (IA) from véws + tɩ (Schwyzer: 624). 6. vɛóðɛv
'lately' (S. OC 1447 [lyr.]). Denominative verbs: 7. vɛá(w 'to be or become young'
(trag., com., Hdt., Hell.), also with prefix, e.g. àva-, έк-, ¿v-, whence ¿кvɛaoµós
'innovation' (Simp.); on vɛaσµós ‘labouring of a fallow land' (Gp.), from vɛáw, see
below and on Vɛlóç. 8. vɛów 'to make new' (A.), also = vɛáw (LXX, Poll.) with
vεóματα [pl.] laboured fallow land' (LXX). 9. vɛáw [v.] 'to work fallow land' (Hes.
Op. 462), cf. Lat. novālis (ager, terra) 'fallow land'; besides, derivation from vɛLÓC
'fallow land' is conceivable. 10. vεwσow, -TTW [v.] 'to renew' (Hdn., H.). 11. Vεwτɛpitw
[v.] 'to renew, innovate (in political organization)' (Att.) with vεwτp-ó-,
-LOLS, -LOTŃS, -LKóç. On ►veāviāç, see s.v.
⚫ETYM The form véos < véƑoç (cf. Myc. ne-wo and Cypr. vεƑóστατos) is identical
with Hitt. neua-, Skt. náva-, Lat. novus, OCS novб, ToВ ñuwe, ToA ñu, all from IE
*neuo- 'new'. There is also a derivative in -io- in Skt. návya-, Go. niujis, Gaul. Novio-
dūnum, Lith. naujas. Theoretically, veños (only A.. R. 1, 125, verse-initially) could
agree with this, but it is rather due to metrical lengthening. An r-formation parallel
to vɛapós is found in Arm. nor 'new' < *neueró- vel sim.; cf. vòpós. The
denominative verb vɛáw agrees with Lat. novāre and Hitt. neuahh- 'to renew', but
they could be parallel innovations, like the correspondence of vɛóτηs with Lat.
novitās, and of véã with CS novako. It is probable that the adjective *neuo- derives
from *nu 'now'.
vɛoʊʊós [m.] ‘young bird, chick', also of other animals and of men (Il.), 'yolk of an
egg' (Arist.). <IE *neuo- +-tio- 'young'>
•VAR Also voσσós (Schwyzer: 253 with lit.), Att. vɛottóç.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. v(ε) 0000-tpoqéw (-tt-) [v.] 'to rear young birds'
(Ar.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: v(ε) oσσíov, -TT- 'chick', also metaph. 'yolk of an egg' (Ar.,
Arist., Thphr.); -oσís, -ttís [f.] ‘id.', also as a PN (com., Arist., AP), as a designation
of a shoe (Herod. 7, 57; probably from the PN). 2. collective v(ε)0ʊʊiń (Ion.), -ttá
(Att.), vooσá (Hell.) 'brood', also ‘den, lair' (Herod.), 'beehive' (LXX). 3.

=== page 531 ===

1010
vεÚw
1011
Denominative verb v(ε)000ɛúw, -TτεÚw 'to breed, nestle' (IA) with vɛoττεía,
-ttevoɩç ‘breeding' (Arist.). 4. PN Nóσσoç, Noσσw, Noσσiêãç (inscr.).
•ETYM Formed from véos, probably after the example of лεpiσσós, ériσσal, or
µétaσσaɩ. These contain the adjectival suffix *-tio- added to a preposition, as found
also in e.g. Hitt. appezziia- ‘backmost', Skt. ápatya- ‘offspring' < *Hop-e/o-ti-o- and,
within Greek, in the adverbs óлíσ(σ)w, лρóσ(o)w.
vɛoxµós [adj.] ‘new, unusual, strange', almost only of objects (Ion. poet., Alcm.).
<GR
•DER vεoxµíŋ· кívησ éρóðóɑos recent movement' (H.) and denominative
vεoxμów = vεwτεpí(w 'to innovate (in the political system), to revolt' (Hdt., Th. 1, 12,
Arist.) with vεóxμwσç [f.] 'innovation, unusual appearance' (Arist., Aret.); also
vεoxμ-έw (H., Suid.), -í\w (H.) ‘id.'.
⚫ETYM Derived from véos, but with an unclear formation. It has been compared with
óppoxµóv. žʊxatov, áкpov ‘topmost, highest' (H.), from öppos. Wackernagel KZ 33
(1895): 1f. analyzes -Xμ- as the zero grade of xwv, xquaí, so the compound would
originally mean 'new in (this) land'; however, this has not been universally accepted.
vénetos [?] = kalaµívėŋ (Gal.). <PG?►
'•Var Cf. vérɩta. ǹ kaλaµívðŋ (H.).
•ETYM According to André 1956 s.v., vérɩta was taken from Lat. nepeta. Fur.: 357 is
probably right in considering the origin of the Latin word to be a Greek pre-form
*Vεлετα. Such a form points to Pre-Greek origin.
vérodes [pl.] in véñodɛç kalñç Alooúdvns as a designation of the owкai ‘seals' (8
404); differently interpreted by later poets: as áлóуovoɩ 'descendants' (Theoc. 17, 25,
Call. Fr. 77; also Eust. 1502, 36); as vηžíлоdεç 'creatures with fins' (H.), referring to
fishes (Call. Fr. 260, Nic., AP), as äлodɛç 'feetless' (Apion apud Apollon. Lex.). <?>
⚫ETYM The exact meaning is uncertain, so the word remains etymologically unclear.
The fact that Greek has no word-negation *ve- 'not-, un-' is evidence against the
interpretation 'footless'. The interpretation as 'aлóуovo' identifies véлodɛs with Lat.
ne pōtes = Skt. nápātaḥ [pl.] ‘grandchild'; thus, the word would have been adapted in
its inflection to лоúç : лоdóç.
vép✪ɛ(v) [adv.] ‘(from) below'. •Var véptɛpos ‘lower'. ⇒ëvɛpƉɛv, ¿véptepos.
Véτшлov [n.] 'oil of bitter almonds' (Нp.), also vετóлov (H.) and by folk-etymology
μετшлоν (medic., H.); víшлov (Нp. apud Erot.). <PG?, LW Sem.?>
•ETYM Acc. to Lewy 1895: 39f., it is a Semitic loan; cf. Hebr. nāṭāp, Aram. nºṭāpā,
nāṭōpā ‘drip; dripping, odoriferous resin'. However, the variations dental/zero (Fur.:
391) and ε/t could also point to a Pre-Greek word.
vevpá [f.] ‘string of a bow, sinew' (Il., X., Arist.). ◄IE *sneh,-ur/n- ‘band, sinew'>
•VAR Ion. -n.
●COMP Many compounds, e.g. vɛupó-σлαστоç 'drawn by strings', substantivized
[n.pl.] ‘puppets' (Hdt., X.), with derivatives vɛupoσráσt-ns, -ikós, -ía, -έw (Arist.,
Hell.).
●DER Diminutive vɛupíov [n.] (AP). Lengthened form vɛupɛtý (Theoc. 25, 213; verse-
initial), cf. ¿yxɛíŋ : yxos, etc.; oxytone accent after veupý.
Also vɛupov [n.] ‘sinew, string (of a bow, of an instrument), cord, penis', in plur.
'strength, power' (II.).
Derivatives: 1. diminutive vɛupíov (Hp.). 2. Plant name vɛupás, -ádos [f.] =
лоτíррιоν (Dsc., Plin.), Sopúкvov (Plin.). 3. Adjective vεup-wdns 'sinewy' (IA), -voc
'made from sinews' (Pl., Arist.), -кóç 'suffering from contraction of the sinews,
concerning the sinews, etc.' (medic.). 4. Verb vɛupóομαι, -ów 'to be provided with
sinews' (Ar., Ph., Gal.), also with prefix ȧлo-, έк-, whencе άлоvɛúpwσis [f.] 'end of
the muscle, where it becomes tendinous' (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Greek vεupov and Lat. nervus 'sinew, muscle, nerve' < *(s) neuro- display a
thematic enlargement of the r-stem seen in Av. snauuarǝ [n.] ‘sinew', ToB Ṣñaura
'sinews, nerves', Arm. neard 'sinew, fiber' (with QIE *-t). An alternating n-stem is
found in Skt. snāvan- [n.] ‘band, sinew'. The Greek and Latin thematizations
probably originated in the collective (neuter plural).
We have to depart from IE *sneh,-ur/n-, a derivative in -uer/n- from a root *sneh,- 'to
twist together (threads)', found in véw 2 'to spin'. For the reconstruction, see
Schrijver 1991: 269. Hitt. išķunau̟ar [n.] 'sinew' is unrelated, but derives from
išķunaų- 'upper arm' (cf. Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
vɛúw [v.] 'to incline, nod, beckon, grant' (II.). <IE *neu(H)- 'nod, incline'>
•VAR Aor. vεñσal, fut. vɛúσw, -vεúσoµai (II.), perf. vévɛvka (E.) -vévεvšaι (Ph.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, έnɩ-, Kata-
●DER Vεñσiç [f.] 'nodding, inclination', also with к-, ává-, etc. (Pl., LXX), vɛñµa [n.]
'beck, nod' (A., Th., X.), also with εл-, έv-, σuv-; thence vεvμáτioν (Arr.); VEVσTIкÓç
'inclining' (Ph.). Enlargement vεvotά(w (rarely with εл-) [v.] 'to nod, beckon' (II.),
cf. ẞaoτáчw, þvoτálw, etc.
•ETYM Frisk argued that the retention of the diphthong in vɛúw as well as in
vεvστáчw pointed to a pre-form *neus-e/o- or *neus-ie/o-, comparing ▸ yεúoμαι and
►ɛüw. The late forms vévεUкα, -vévεчμαι are derived from vɛúw. However, the
obvious cognate Lat. abnuō ‘to refuse, deny', adnuō ‘to nod, permiť derives from
*-neue/o-, which is why a root without -s- would be preferable. The form vεчμa
agrees with Lat. nūmen < *neu(s)-mn, but both forms are easily understood as
independent innovations.
García Ramón MSS 54 (1993): 33-63 discusses the Aktionsart and aspect of *neu(H)-
'to make a sudden movement', and comes to the following conclusions: 1) Lat. nūtus
does not prove a laryngeal. 2) Skt. návate ‘to move' should not be included as
evidence. 3) The Greek present may continue *neu(H)-e/o-. 4) The verb is non-
momentative and non-durative. The original meaning is still preserved in Greek and
Latin.
Further cognates include Lith. niaūsti ‘to incline' and MIr. a:t-noí ‘to entrusť (LIV²
s.v. *neu-). The group of Ru. núrit', which is semantically close, is difficult to connect
because a ro-adjective is hard to imagine for this root. See vúσow, ▸vvστάw.

=== page 532 ===

1012
veqέλŋ [f.] 'cloud, mass of clouds' (epic poet. since Il., X., Arist.) also a cloud in urine
and in the eye (medic.), metaph. 'fine bird-net' (Ar., Call., AP). <IE *neb-1- 'cloud'>
•COMP vεqελ-ηуεpéτα 'cloud-gatherer', epithet of Zeus, with voc. for nom., ŠTTL-
véqελos 'clouded' (Hdt., Hp., Arist.).
●DER 1. Diminutive vɛqέλtov [n.] (Arist., Thphr., medic.). 2. Adjectives: vɛqel-wdns
'cloudy' (Arist.), -wτóç 'covered with clouds, consisting of clouds' (Luc.). 3. Verbs:
vɛɛλ-óoμai (Eust.), -íčoμai (sch.) 'to be(come) covered with clouds'.
⚫ETYM Both véqos and vɛqελŋ are old inherited words with exact counterparts in
several languages. The word vɛqέλn corresponds to Lat. nebula, MW nyfel 'cloud', IE
*neb-el-h2-. Germanic has the same element -!-, but the ending and the medial vowel
vary: e.g., ON njól [f.] ‘darkness' < PGm. *nebulā, OHG nebul [m.] 'mist' < PGM.
*neb(V)la-. Celtic forms like OIr. nél [m.] ‘cloud, mist', gen. nivil are ambiguous.
Beside this l-stem, we find a neuter s-stem *neb¹³-s- in ►véqos Skt. nábhas- [n.]
‘cloud, mist, haze', Hitt. nepiš, OCS nebo, gen. nebese ‘heaven'. The word ►öµßpoç is
unrelated.
véqoç [n.] ‘cloud, mass of clouds' (II.). <IE *neb¹-s- 'cloud'>
=
•COMP vεQo-εidns 'cloud-like' (Epicur.), ovv-vεons 'surrounded by clouds, dark' (E.,
Arist.), εm-vεons 'cloudy, bringing clouds' (Arist., Thphr.) with the verbal
formations (probably back-formations): σuv-véqε, -vévoqɛv (Ar., E., Arist.), εл-
véqɛt (Arist., Thphr.) 'is or makes cloudy', whence лívɛчɩç [f.] ‘cloudiness' (Arist.).
●DER 1. Diminutive vɛcúdpiov (Olymp. Phil.). 2. Adjective vɛowdŋs ‘cloudlike,
bringing clouds' (Arist., Str.). 3. Verb vɛcóoμai (also with έк-) 'become cloudy, be
changed in a cloud (Thphr., Ph.) with vέqwois [f.] ‘cloudiness' (Ph.).
•ETYM For cognates, see verέλŋ. LIV² s.v. 1. *nebh- takes the impersonal verbs
ouvvéqɛl, etc. as old.
vɛopoí [m.pl.] 'kidneys' (IA). <IE *negro- 'kidney'➤
•VAR Also vεqpw [du.] (Ar. Ra. 475), rarely sg. veœpós.
•COMP As a second member in лεpí-vεopos 'fat around the kidneys' (Arist.).
DER Vɛopía [n.pl.] 'id.' (pap. II-IIIP); vεop-iτηs σqóvdulos 'first vertebra of the
sacrum' (Poll.), -ĭτç (vóσos) [f.) 'disease of the kidneys' (Hp., Th.) with -τкÓS
'suffering of vεopīɩç, healing the v.' (medic.); vεop-wdns 'kidney-like' (Arist.), -tañoç
‘ptng. to the kidneys' (Dsc.); hypostasis vεp-ídios 'on the kidneys', of dŋµós fať
(①204).
•ETYM The word vɛopoí has a counterpart in the glosses given by Festus: nefrōnēs
(Praeneste), nebrundinēs (Lanuvium) 'kidneys'. The Germanic word for 'kidney',
OHG nioro, ME nēre (also kid-nēre > E kidney), OSw. niūre, etc., which requires a
pre-form *neuran-, points to IE *negro-. Both ȧdnv 'gland', inguen 'groin' and Lat.
rēnēs, Olr. áru 'kidney' must be kept separate.
véw 1 [v.] ‘to swim' (Il.). <◄IE *sneh₂- 'swim'>
•VAR Ipf. -vvεov (11), aor. vεñσal, perf. vévɛvкa (Att.), fut. vɛúσoμai (H.), -σoñµai
(v.l. X. An. 4, 3, 12).
COMP Often with prefix, e.g. Stα-, ¿к-, nɛpɩ-.
Vέw 2
1013
•DER VEŨσiç [f.] 'swimming' (Arist.), ȧvávɛv-σuç properly "swimming upward",
'revival' (LXX).
Beside véw stands výxw, usually -oµaι ‘to swim², Dor. (Ps.-Theoc.) váxw, -oµat, fut.
výšoμaι (epic poet. Od.), aor. výsaσðaι (Plb., Lyc., AP), perf. med. vεvñõĐai (Ath.),
very often with prefix (mostly med.), e.g. лαрα-, diα-, ¿к-, εлɩ-. Thence vñšiç [f.]
'swimming' (Batr., Plu., medic.), Stávně-tę 'swimming through' (Herm. apud Stob.),
vnxaλéos 'swimming' (Xenocr.), after µvdaλéoç, etc.
⚫ETYM The present vnxw, váxw, whence výžoμαι, etc., contains a velar enlargement
of IE *sneh, as seen in Skt. snáti 'to bathe', Lat. nāre 'to swim', OIr. snäim 'to swim,
float, etc.'. For the root-extension -X-, compare σμñv beside oµηxw 'to salve'.
Deviating from výxw in their vocalism, véw and vɛñσaɩ agree with лλéw : nλɛñoai
and could be rhyme-formations. Verbal nouns with o-ablaut are supposed in vóa.
лŋyń. Aákwveç 'source (Lacon.)' (H.; corrected to voá by Bechtel 1921, 2: 378) and in
Noûç лoτaµós (Arcadia, Asia Minor; cf. Schwyzer: 310); a zero grade aorist occurs in
EVVUBEV. ÉкÉXUVTO (H.) (correct?).
Beside vnxw and véw, there is váw 'to bubble up, stream'.
vέw 2 [v.] 'to spin'. <IE *sneh,- 'spin'>
•VAR Present 3sg. vñ (vñ, vεi; Hes. Op. 777), 3pl. vãoɩ (Ael., Poll.), ipf. vvn (Aeol.;
Hdn., EM), inf. vñv, ptc. võvτα (H.), váµεvos (Poll.); also view (Cratin., Pl., LXX);
aor. vñσaι, -ασða (since ŋ 198); vwσα (Eup. 319, ptc.f.pl.(?); Meineke vñσaɩ), pass.
vηeñvaι and fut. vnow (Att.), perf. med. vévηoμai (late).
•COMP Rarely with έл-, dα-, σvV-, KATA-.
•DER vñµa [n.] ‘thread, yarn' (Od.) with vŋµat-ikós ‘consisting of threads' (Ath.
Mech.), -wdns 'fibrous' (Plu.); vñoɩ [f.] ‘spinning' (Pl.); vñτpov [n.] ‘distaff (Suid.);
►výbovσa [f.] plant name.
⚫ETYM The dental enlargement in view may be compared with кvýеw: кvñν, лλńеw
: ëλñão (Schwyzer 703), and perhaps also кλwеw ‘to spin' (Frisk).
Aeolic Evvη and Homeric ε-vvητos 'well spun' point to original *sn-, which is
etymologically expected on account of OIr. sniid 'spins, stitches'. The root is also
found in Lat. nēre ‘to spin' < *(s)neh,-, and without s-mobile in Germanic, e.g. OHG
näen 'to sew'.
The question is what present formation PIE built on this root. The forms võσɩ,
vшvτα, vóμεvos are thematizations (from *vηovσi, *výovta, *vnóµεvos) of the old
athematic verb found in the ipf. vvn < *e-sneh,-t. However, there are also forms that
point to an i-enlargement: e.g., Ru. nit' 'thread', Lith. nýtis 'warp thread' < *(s)nh,i-
ti-. Lat. neō is ambiguous and could continue either a yod-present derived from this
i-present, or an old athematic formation. Celtic points to a yod-present *sniyo-. Latv.
snāju, snāt ‘to wind together loosely' is perhaps related, but its apparent o-vocalism
is unclear. The *o is also found in several nouns, e.g. OIr. snáth 'thread (probably <
*snoh,-to- rather than *snh,-tó-), OGutn. snōp 'cord' = OE snōd 'headband, snood',
Latv. snātene ‘linen shawl'.
An important derivative from *sneh,-, which became lexicalized already in PIE, is
*sneh,-ur/n- 'cord, sinew, etc.'; see on vεupov.

=== page 533 ===

1014
-Vεw 3
-vέw 3 [v.] ‘to amass, pile up, load with sth.'. <?>
●VAR Aor. vñoaɩ, -aσbat, perf. med. vévη(σ)µaɩ, also with έëɩ-, ëɛpɩ-, ovv-, etc. (IA),
aor. pass. vño¤ñvai (Arr.), fut. výow (Suid.), vŋoóµɛła. кopɛσðŋσóµɛða ‘will be
stuffed' (H.); ipf. also výεɩ, výɛov, aor. vηñσα (epic Il.), vanσaτo (B. 3, 33), besides
vývɛov (only v.l. ¥ 139), εл-, лap-εvývεov (Hom.).
⚫COMP Present stem only with εл-, лερ- (Hdt.).
•DER výnois [f.] 'heaping up' (sch. A. R. 1, 403).
•ETYM Hom. -εvývεov does not have intensive reduplication with lengthened grade
(such formations are not assumed anymore, since dŋdéxatai has been explained
differently). Most scholars assume that it is a mistake for -εvýεov, but an objection is
that is occurs several times (DELG). Therefore, the form remains unexplained.
The present vnέw, posited on the basis of viεɩ, výεov, may have been formed from a
non-presentic stem in -1, like aor. vηñoα. Likewise, -véw may have arisen from
vñσa (which may in turn be a contracted form of vηñσα). The gloss vævτoç.
σwpɛvovτoç heaping up' (Phot.) can also be explained in various ways. In its
entirety, then, the collection of forms remains unclear. There is no etymology.
vɛwλkéw [v.] ‘to haul the ship on land, bring the ship in dock' (Thphr., Plb., D. S.).
< GR➤
⚫DER Also VEWAкóç = ó vɛwλк@v (Arist., Cos Iª, Poll.), -ía [f.] 'docking' (Aen. Tact.,
Arist., Thphr.), -ta [n.pl.] 'docks' (App., H.).
•ETYM Synthetic compounds of vaûç and λкw. The forms vɛwλкós < *vijf-oλkós
and vɛwλк-íα, -α may be back-formations from vεwλкéw (cf. dεpoτoμεw,
лоλчоркέw, etc.; Schwyzer: 726), but they may also be the basis of the latter.
vɛwpia [n.pl.] 'dockyard, ship-arsenal' (Att.). <GR>
•VAR Also tov [sg.].
•DIAL Dor. vaúptov (Corc. IIª).
⚫DER Diminutive vɛwpídiov (Delos; IIª); vɛwpós vɛwpioqúla guard of the
dockyard' (H.), -oí [pl.] = ¿ñµɛλŋtal twv vewpíwv (IG 1², 74: 11 [Vª]).
•ETYM From *vòƑo-Ƒóp-ɩa (perhaps with haplology), originally ‘place where ships
are surveyed', a compound of ▶vaus and a verbal noun of ►ópáw, extended with the
suffix -10-. The rarer form vɛwpós may be a back-formation from this (like e.g.
Oupwpós; cf. Leumann 1950: 22320).
vɛws [m.] 'temple'. →vaós.
vέwτa [adv.] 'next year' (Semon. 1, 9). ◄GR?►
•VAR Elsewhere ɛiç (έç) véwτα (X., Thphr.), Delph. [έv v]ɛw [t]α (Del.³ 323 A 12 [V-
IV³]).
•DER In the same mg. έs véw (Cyrene; also as a weakly attested v.l. in Theoc. 15, 143);
unclear és véwv (BGU 958 c 13 [IIIP]), see Maas Riv. fil. class. 56 (1928): 413f.
•ETYM Without a convincing explaination. The word véwτa is traditionally analyzed
as a compound of véos and ěτos 'year', but none of the advanced reconstructions
(see Frisk) can explain the -w-. DELG accepts the solution by Szemerényi 1969b: 233,
who starts from the dative attestation in Semon. without the preposition εs,
VÝKOVOTOS
1015
assuming that vɛw was abstracted from vεw(1)ε Tεɩ, and that adverbial -τa (as in
εлεɩτα, etc.) was added later.
vŋ- privative prefix in vò-kɛpdýs ‘useless³, vη-лεvðýš ‘free of sorrows', etc. (Il.). ◄GR▷
•VAR Dor. vā-.
•ETYM Forms in vη-, va-, vw- arose from the IE negating prefix *n- combined with a
following sequence *HC- (*H = *h₁, *h₂, *h, respectively). After reanalysis of such
forms, vη- spread as a separate prefix to words without original initial laryngeal. See
Beekes 1969: 98-113, and cf. the privative prefixes ►ȧ- and ►v-, both from *n-.
vý [pcl.] assertory particle. →vaí.
vnás [f.] a gigantic animal, the remains of which were seen on Samos (Euph. apud Ael.
N.A. 17, 28). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
vnyátɛos [adj.] epithet of XiTv (B 43), кpýdeµvov (E 185), qāpos (h. Ap. 122), kaλúßai
(A. R. 1, 775). <?>
•ETYM The similarity with MoGr. Macedonian ávηуατoç 'not worn yet, new' cannot
be accidental. However, the etymology is unknown. Fur.: 374 does not help.
výypɛtos [adj.] 'which cannot (or hardly) be woken' (Od., Alex. poets). <IE *h,ger-
'awake'>
ETYM From *n- and *h,gr-eto- in уpετo. See yɛipw.
výdyµos [adj.] epithet of üлvos (Hom.), in late poets also of Mouσa, 'Opqɛúç, üdwp,
äveos (h. Pan., API., Nonn.). < GR>
•ETYM Reinterpretation of dμos 'sweet' (see ndús) by taking the preceding
ephelcystic v to the next word. This v had been introduced after the loss of the F in
order to remove the hiatus (e.g. "×εv édуµoç üлvos B 2). See Leumann 1950: 44f. and
Chantraine 1942: 14.
vηdúc, -úos [f.] 'abdominal cavity, abdomen' (II.). <?>
•VAR -Úç, secondarily -úc; see Schwyzer: 463f.
●DER With suffix -10-: výdvia [n.pl.] ‘intestines' (P 524, A. R., Nic.).
•ETYM Unexplained.
vnew 'to heap (up)'. →-vέw 3.
vý ovσa [f.] plant name (PMag. Par.). ◄PG▷
⚫ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word; see Fur.: 1975. Details in Strömberg 1940: 106.
výow 'spin'. →vέw 2.
vñïç, -180ç, -ɩdα [adj.] 'unknowing, nescius' (since H 198, 0 179). <?>
•VAR Secondarily acc. -tv.
⚫ETYM Perhaps contains the prefix vn, which arose by reanalysis of the original
privative prefix *n- (cf. vηкεpбnc) and a root noun *uid-.
výkovotos [adj.] 'who does not hear' (Emp.). ◄IE *h₂kou- 'hear'>

=== page 534 ===

1016
vma(e)ńs, -eés
•ETYM From *n- and *h₂kous-, as in ►άкoúw.
vnλ(e)ýs, -ɛés [adj.] 'without compassion, pitiless' (epic poet. since Il.), also
'unescapable, unavoidable', in vεè ñµα, etc. ◄IE *n-hleu-es- 'pitiless', *n-h₂leu-
'unescapable'>
•VAR Metrically lengthened vεns, -ɛés (Hes. Th. 770 and h. Ven. 245 [verse-
initial], A. R. 4, 476); see Chantraine 1942: 74 and 101.
•COMP As a first member in λεó-лovoç ‘punishing without mercy' (Hes.), etc.
ETYM In the sense 'without mercy', from the negation *n- and *hleu-o- (as in
►λɛoç, èλɛéw). In the sense ‘unescapable', from the root *h₂leu-, as in ȧλéoμa. The
PN Nηλεús (Hom.) could be related, but could also be Pre-Greek. See Beekes 1969:
109 and index.
vηλíлovç [adj.] 'without footgear, barefoot'. <GR>
•VAR Gen. -лоdos (S. OC 349), výjλлоç, -ov (A. R. 3, 646, Lyc. 635, Theoc. 4, 56,
where v.1. àvýλлo [-áλ-]).
•DER Cf. vòàíñεčoɩ ½ výλino· ávʊñóбετоι without shoes' (H.).
ETYM Acc. to sch. Theoc. 4, 56, it derives from an otherwise unknown and
unexplained λ (name of a Dorian shoe) and privative v(n)-. If this is true, the
oldest attestation vòλíños may stand for *ηλño-лovs with syllabic dissimilation
(cf. Schwyzer: 263), or be a reformation of výλoç after ñoñç.
vývɛµos [adj.] ‘without wind, calm' (Hom.). <IE *n-h₂nh₁-m->
•DER Vηvεµíη (Il.) ‘calm, lull', vηvεuεw [v.] 'to be still' (Hp.).
•ETYM From *n- and the root of ävεos in the zero grade.
vηvéw 'to heap (up)'. →-vέw 3.
vnvía [f.] public eulogy, sometimes accompanied by the flute (Cic. Leg. 2, 24, 62). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. It is supposed to be the origin of Lat. nēnia. The word vηvíaτov is
ascribed to Hipponax (fr. 163 Masson) by Poll. 4, 79. Cf. vηvíaτos (correction for
vivýatos). vóµos raidapiwdŋjs kaì ôpúyɩov µéλos ‘childish tune, Phrygian melody'
(H.).
vηлελέw 'to be powerless'. →уηneλéwv.
výлoç [adj.] 'under-aged, young, feeble, childish, foolish' (Il.). <?>
•COMP As a first member in vηлó-oppwv 'puerile, thoughtless' (Str.).
•DER vηéŋ [f.] 'puerility, childish behaviour' (Hom.) with Aeol. -én for -in,
probably after vopέŋ (Leumann 1950: 11072, Chantraine 1942: 83); hencе vηлíεоç
výnos (Opp.); viruótns [f.] ‘puerility' (Pl., Arist.); vòíášw [v.] ‘to be childish' (Hp.
Ep., Erinn., 1 Ep. Cor. 14, 20, etc.).
=
Enlargements: 1. vηлíαɣоç ‘id.' (Il.), whence -axɛúw [v.] 'to be childish, play
children's plays' (X 502, verse-final; metrically conditioned, Chantraine 1942: 95 and
368), -áxw ‘id.' (A. R., Mosch., Opp.), probably after στεváxw, láxw; see also
Schwyzer: 722f. 2. vòrútios ‘id.' (Il., Ar. Nu. 868, Orph.), with -íŋ (A. R.), -tɛvoµai
(AP).
Výpiτos
1017
•ETYM The most recent discussion by Kazansky 2005 is not convincing: he assumes a
root *h₂ep- strength' with an extension *h₂pel- in åvŋäɛλíŋ åσðévɛa 'weakness'
(H.), óλуηлελéwv, etc. Since the root *h₂ep- itself is not attested in the meaning
'strength', Van Beek (p.c.) suggests that it may be better to return to the proposal of
Lacroix 1937: 261ff., who proposed that výлоç consists of the negative prefix and
►ηлчoç. We may reconstruct *n-h₂p-iio-, with the root *h₂ep- 'join' as found in Hitt.
happ-zi 'to join', Lat. aptus 'fitting' and Gr. ǎлτw 'to attach, grasp'.
výpεtov [n.] the plant 'dolphin-flower' (Ps. Dsc. 3, 73). <?>
⚫DER Vηpεtádiov (ib.).
ETYM Neither výptov nor Nηpεúç offers an etymology.
Nŋpɛúc, -έws [m.] sea god, son of Pontos and Gaia (h. Ap. 319, Hes. Th. 233 and 240).
<PG?>
•VAR Epic Ion. gen. -ñoç.
•DER Nηpɛtos in Nηpεĩа τéкvα = 'fishes' (Euphro 8, 2) and Núpεtov, -ádiov =
Sɛλqívɩov, a plant name (Ps.-Dsc.) perhaps referring to vηpóv (fresh) water'?
Besides Nηpηç, -eïs [f.], -ídes [pl.] 'Nereids, seanymphs' (Il.).
ETYM As Nηpɛús has relevance only as the father of the Nereids (see von
Wilamowitz 1931: 219 and Nilsson 1941(1): 240; in Hom., he is probably mentioned as
äλos yépwv), we should consider whether the father was named after his daughters.
He may also be called Пpwτɛúç (West ad Hes. Th. 233). Not only Nŋpɛúç has been
considered as a base form of Nηpη(F) id-, but other stems as well; cf. Schwyzer: 465
and Chantraine 1933: 345f. The glosses vòpídaç. τàç кoíλaç ïéτpaç ‘hollow rocks' and
vòpóv. tò tanɛvóv ‘low-lying' (H.) are also worthy of consideration.
An IE etymology can hardly be expected. The word is probably Pre-Greek, as is
suggested by the ending -ɛúc. See ▸váw.
výptov [n.] name of a plant, 'Nerium Oleander, oleander' (Dsc. 4, 81, Plin.). <?>
•ETYM May belong to vpóv ((fresh) water' because of the characteristic property of
this plant to follow the course of brooks (Strömberg 1940: 113).
výpis 1 [?] plant name, mostly taken as 'savin, Juniperus Sabina' (Nic. Th. 531), but
sometimes identified with výpov. <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
vñpɩç 2 vηpídaç τàç кoiλaç лéτpaç 'hollow rocks' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. DELG connects the word with vηpóv, but this is not obvious.
vηpíτns [m.] several kinds of sea-snails (Arist.). <PG?>
•VAR Also written -ɛí-; besides we find ȧväpíτäç (Ibyc., Epich.), ávηpíτηs (Herod.).
⚫COMP vòpiτopóqos (A. Fr. 312), but see Leumann 1950: 245.
•ETYM The more usual orthography with -ɛí- may be based on association with
Núpεtos (from Népεús); the connection with vηpóv 'water' (already improbable in
itself) is refuted by the forms avap, avηp- with vocalic anlaut. Fur.: 372 takes this
initial variation as evidence for Pre-Greek origin. See Thompson 1947 S.V.
výpɩτos [adj.] 'uncountable' (Hes. Op. 511, A. R.). <IE *h₂ri- 'count'.>

=== page 535 ===

1018
vnpóv
•COMP As a first member in vηpiτóquλλov· ñoλúquλλov 'with many leaves' (H.), and
in vòpítóµvės (H.); cf. also vηpíτai· µεyáλoɩ (H.), to be changed into výpiτal.
heyá入al.
ETYM From *n-h₂ri-to-, a compound of privative *n- (see vn-) and a verb apt- 'to
count' (seen in apieµóc) with a suffix -to-. It also occurs in εlкoσv-piτoç
'twentyfold' (X 349, with compositional lengthening), Arc. 'Елápɩτо = εлÍÀεкTOL
ÉT[入EKTOL
'selected', etc. Hence, probably through reinterpretation, the mountain name
Núpiτov (B 632, Od.) and the PN Núpiτos (p 207); see Leumann 1950: 243ff., as well
as Ruijgh 1957: 161f.
vŋpóv [adj.] · tò τaлɛvóv 'low' (H.). ◄?►
•ETYM Unknown. The connection with vñpis 2 by DELG is not obvious.
vnpós [adj.] 'fresh', of fish, nuí-vηpos 'lightly salted'; also of water: Tò vòpó (ó vòós).
'(fresh) water' (Hell.), MoGr. vεpó. <GR>
•ETYM Contracted from vɛapós (Schwyzer: 250); see ▸véos and Kretschmer Glotta 15
(1927): 64.
•
vŋoiyda [?] · ¿v Nuкτí (= Philem. 52) áлodidóaσi µáonµá ti rolóv (H.), so a kind of
dish. <?>
•ETYM Unknown. The suffix -tyda points to Pre-Greek origin.
vñσoç [f.] ‘island' (Il.); also '(flooded) land near a river, alluvial land' (Tab. Heracl.,
pap.). <PG>
•VAR Dor. vãoos (Rhod. vãoσos SGDI 4123, 4 [Iª]).
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. vησo-qúλa ‘guardian of the island' (D. S.), vnoí-
apxos, -ápxns governor of the island' (Antiph. com., Hell. inscr., etc.), after τaží-,
лоλí-αрxоç, etc.; not from vηoís or vηoiov; xεpσó-vησos, Att. Xεppó-, Dor. -vaσos
[f.] 'peninsula'; лεрívησoу 'with a fringe', of quáτiov.
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: vŋoíç [f.] (Hdt., Th., Plb.), vηoídiov (Th., Arist., Str.), vnoíov
(Str.), vσúбpiov (X., Isoc.). 2. Other nouns: vηoiwτns, Dor. vaoɩwτaç (-tɩç [f.])
'islander', as an adjective 'insular' (Pi., Hdt., A.), after idɩwτηç, στpatiwtng, etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 311); thence vηoɩwτкós typical of an islander' (Hdt., Th., Ar., E.);
vnoítŋs [m.] ‘id.' (St. Byz.), fem. vaσîüç ‘forming an island (AP); vηoaños ‘insular'
(E., Arat.), after λчvaños, etc.; Nησádɛa [n.pl.] festival at Delos, -εov [sg.] name of
a fund (Delos IIIª), with -1- like in vnoí-apxos, etc. 3. Verbs: vnoíčw (Plb.), -tá¶w (Str.,
Ph.) 'to form an island'; vησεvoμat 'to form alluvial deposits' (EM 25, 48).
⚫ETYM The interpretations as "swimmer", derived from vnxw or the root *sneh₂- 'to
bathe' (recently, Meier-Brügger KZ 106 (1993): 302, who follows Rix in assuming.
PGr. *snāk-io-), should be abandoned. As words for 'island' differ from language to
language, vñσos is probably an Aegean loan (note that Lat. insula is also of unclear
origin). Fur.: 387, who points to the variation between single σ and geminate, also
assumes a Pre-Greek loan.
vñoσa [f.] ‘duck' (IA). <IE? *h₂enh₂t- ‘duck', GR?>
●DIAL Att. vñíτα, Boeot. (Ar. Ach. 875) vãoσa [f.].
vnqw
1019
•DER Diminutive visttápiov (Ar., Men.), vòτtíov (Nicostr. Com.), vãoσiov (pap. VI-
VIIP).
•ETYM A formation in -α like μvĩα, kíσσa, and other animal names (Chantraine 1933:
98). The first question is whether the word is related to other words for 'duck' that
go back to *h₂enh₂t- (vel sim.). These are the following: an i-stem in Skt. ātí- [f.] and
Balto-Slavic, e.g. Lith. ántis, Bel. úc [f.] < PSI. *o̟tú ‘duck'. In Slavic, there is also an û-
stem, e.g. ORu. uty, gen. utøve (PSl. *oty). The various extensions go back to a t-
stem, which was retained as such in Lat. anas, gen.sg. anatis, gen.pl. anat(i)um, and
in some Germanic languages, e.g. OHG anut (i-stem in plur. enti), ON endr [pl.].
However, the stem *h₂enH-t- suggested by Lithuaninan and Latin would yield *av-
in Greek, even in a zero grade root. No solution has been found for this problem. Rix
KZ 104 (1991): 186-192 suggested a dissimilation of *h₂ - h₂ to *s - h2, with adaptation
to the root of vnxw 'to swim'. One may also envisage derivation within Greek from
vnx- 'swim' (thus Ruijgh, apud Schrijver 1991: 95). For older literature, see Hamp
KZ92 (1978): 29-31.
vñotię, -los, -ɩdos [m., f.] 'not eating, fasting, jejune' (Il.); as a fem. subst. a part of the
small intestine, ‘intestinum ieiunum', as it was always found to be empty upon
section (Hp., Arist.), see Strömberg 1944: 63. <IE *n-h,d-ti- 'not eating, fasting,
sober'>
=
•VAR Dat. also -εt, nom.pl. also -εts. Secondary forms: výσtys [m.] (Semon., Arist.),
výστεpα [f.] (Nic. Al. 130), see Fraenkel 1910: 1262. With secondary ά-: ävŋotiç
ǎσɩτOS (A. Fr. 433 Mette, Cratin. 45).
●DER vŋotɛúw [v.] 'to fast, with vŋotɛía, -ŋ [f.] ‘fast' (IA) and the rare and late
adjectives výστ-чµos (pap.), -ɩкós (Aët.) ‘ptng. to fast.
⚫ETYM From the negation *n- and the verb for ‘eat', to which a suffix -ti- was added.
The origin of this element used to pose a problem, but it also appears in ǎypwotic,
which Meier-Brügger KZ 103 (1990): 33f. convincingly analyzed as *h₂eģr-o-h¸d-ti-
'field-fodder'. The synonym Arm. nawt'i ‘fasting' (which also translates Gr. vñotɩç in
the Gospels) may well be derived from the same pre-form *n-hd-ti- (see the
discussion in Clackson 1994: 154ff.), as proposed by Klingenschmitt, assuming a
development *-tt- > Arm. -wt'-. Meier-Brügger lc. also gives possible parallel
formations *-hd-ti- from Iranian and Luwian.
výτη [f.] 'the lowest (string)'. →vɛLÓS.
výow [v.] ‘to be sober', often metaphorical. <IE *h,eg™- ‘drink', *n(e)-h₁gh- 'sober'>
•VAR Dor. vάow. In the older language only present, mostly ptc. (IA, Thgn., Archil.);
aor. vñчšai (J., 1 Ep. Pet. 4, 7).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, ÈK-.
●DER 1. vnqwv, -ovos in výpovεs. výpovtes (H.), dat.pl. výpoσi (Thgn.); 2. vòœáλios
'without wine', of libations, etc. (A.), later also of persons 'sober' (Ph., J.), whence
vòqaλiɛúw [v.] 'to bring a libation without wine' (Poll.), vòqaλíšw in vòqadɩoµévov.
üdatɩ, oúk oïvæ voμεvov purified with water, not with wine' (H.); besides
vηoaεús epithet of Apollo (AP 9, 525, 14, where -έa is a metrical enlargement in
verse-final position, cf. Boßhardt 1942: 70); also vηoaλéos (Hdn. Gr., Ph.), after

=== page 536 ===

1020
VÍXUTOS
avaλéoç, etc., and vòqavtikós ‘sobering' (Pl. Phlb. 61, Porph.) as if from *vηqaívw;
cf. e.g. σnuaλéos : σnμavτiкóç. Verbal noun vñчлç [ƒ.] 'soberness' (Plb., Str.).
•ETYM Arm. nawt'i is probably unrelated (see on ►vñστç); see the discussion in
Clackson 1994: 154ff. In view of the predominance of nominal forms (including the
ptc. vowv) and of the meaning, it is conceivable that the relatively rare present
vnow (with secondary vña) is denominative. This was already suggested by Frisk,
and is elaborated by Weiss KZ 107 (1994): 91-98, who reconstructs *n-hig™h-on- >
vnopov-, from the root for 'drink' seen in Hitt. eku-zi and in Lat. ēbrius < *h,ēg™³_r-
(perhaps rather *h₁e-h₁gh-r-). Weiss also makes it clear (ibid. 97) that vάow is a
hyperdorism, which may have been created by an ancient commentator.
OHG nuoh-turn 'sober', earlier considered to testify for *nagh, is not related (it is
rather a loan from Lat. nocturnus).
vývτos [adj.] ‘streaming richly, overflowing', of dwp, äλµŋ, idpws, etc. (Hell.
poetry). <GR➤
•var Оn έživýxvtos ‘id.' (Supa, Orph. A. 39, 312) see below.
•ETYM Can hardly be separated from other frequent formations in -Xuτos (from
Xεw), like άupí-xvtoç, à-diá-xvtoç, oivó-xuτoç; in this case, vn- must be secondary.
However, since the compound лɩvýτoç clearly belongs to лvo̟μα, the
question arises whether vnxuτоs was not secondarily connected with vnxoμai. This
would agree better with the meaning. See ▸vn-.
výxw, výxoµai [v.] 'to swim'. vέw 1.
-VI-Vε.
viẞaτiσuós a Phrygian dance (Ath. 629d, H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Hypothesis by Haas 1966: 168; also, Haas Acta Ant. Acad. Hungar. 18 (1970):
57f.
viyλapos [m.] 'whistle' (Ar. Ach. 554), plur. ‘trills, quavers' (Pherecr. 145), but a small
flute acc. to Poll. 4, 82. <?>
•DER VIYλapɛúw [v.] 'to whistle' (Eup. 110); cf. vyλapεÚwv. Tεрετí(wv humming'
(H.).
•ETYM Unknown.
vídeç [?] · aidoĩa ǹ ópxídia лaidíwv 'private parts or testicles of children' (Phot.), who
cites the word as Sicilian. H. has vídɛs, which Latte corrects. <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
víčw, -oµai [v.] ‘to wash, bathe' (Il.). <IE *neig"- 'wash'>
•VAR Analogical viлτw (Men., NT), -oµα (v.l. σ 179, Hp.), aor. vivaɩ, -ασðαɩ (Il.),
pass. vɩôðñvaɩ (Hp.). fut. víчw, -oμαι (Od.), pass. viðσoµi (LXX), perf. med.
Vévɩлται (419), vévчдα (Aг.).
•COMP Also (in Att. prose always) with prefix, especially άлo- and к-.
⚫DER 1. víлτρov (àлó-) [n.] (mostly plur.) 'water for washing' (trag., Aг.), лобáνлτρα
[pl.] (-ov) by syllable-dissimilation from *лоб-αлóулτроν, sеcondaгу лобóулτрov,
'water for washing one's feet' (Od.); also лоðαvлηp [m.] (secondarily лodo-) ‘basin
{
vikn
1021
for washing one's feet' (Stesich., Hdt., inscr.), votτp [m.] 'washing basin' (Ev. Jo.); 2.
katavin-tŋs [m.] 'washer', who washes the peplos of Athene Polias (AB, EM). 3.
(ȧлó-, кατá-)víμua [n.] 'washing water'; 4. (àлó-, ék-)víys [f.] 'washing' (Plu.,
medic.). On ►xépvɩy, see s.v.
•ETYM The word ví(w goes back to a zero grade yod-present IE *nig"-ie/o-, which is
also retained in OIr. nigim 'to wash'. Skt. nenikté has intensive reduplication, but cf.
also impv. ninikta; further, a sigmatic aorist nikși [isg.inj.med.], anaikṣit [3sg.act.]
with regular lengthened grade, and a thematic aor. anijam, both perhaps going back
to a root aorist (see LIV²). Greek generalized the zero grade in víчw, víμμα, etc.
Formal correspondences are found in the privative verbal adj. ävлτоç beside Skt.
niktá- 'washed', OIr. necht 'pure'. An isolated verbal noun seems to have been
preserved in Gm., e.g. OHG nihhus, nichus 'river-monster, water-spirit', fem.
nihhussa, MoHG Nix, Nixe, PGm. *nik-wes-, *nik-us-. Lat. pollingō 'to wash corpses'
probably does not belong here; it is connected by LIV² with *uleik"- 'to make wet.
viên [f.] ‘victory, upper hand', in a battle, in a contest, before court, etc. (Il.), Níêη
'goddess of victory' (Hes.). <PG?➤
•VAR Dor. víka.
●COMP viêη-qópos (Dor. -ā-) 'carrying away victory' (Pi., A.), viкó-ẞovλos 'who
wins in the council' (Ar. Eq. 615; hidden PN, connected with viкáw), qiλó-vikos
'fond of triumph, emulating, pugnacious', whence -ía, -έw (Pi., Democr., Att.), often
written with -Et- and associated with vɛiкoç 'quarrel'; 'Оλчμло-víкηs, Dor. -aç [m.]
'victor in Olympia' (Pi., IA); many PNs, e.g. Niкó-бημoç, Tritó-vikoç.
•DER 1. From Níкŋ : vikás, -ádos [f.], vik-ádiov, -ídiov ((small) Nike-statue' (inscr.);
2. Adjective viкałoç 'ptng. to victory' (Call., J.), vкáяç 'rich in victories' (AP); on
VIкN-TηPIOS, -TIKÓç see below.
Probably denominative viкáw (v.] 'to vanquish, overcome, conquer', Ion. Viкέw,
Aeol. viêη, aor. viêñσaɩ, pass. viê-ŋеñvai, fut. -ŋow (all Il.), perf. vɛvíkηka (Att.),
rarely with prefixes, e.g. ¿к-, кατα-, лро-; on the epic use of víкη and viкάw see
Trümpy 1950: 192ff.
From vкáw: 1. VIкάτwp, -opos [m.] 'victor', epithet of the kings Seleucus and
Demetrius of Syria (Hell. inscr.) with vɩкaτópɛov ‘tomb of Niкáτwp' (App.), also
PN with the patronymic Niкαтopídas (Rhodos), cf. Fraenkel 1910: 163', vкŃτwp 'id.'
(D. C.). 2. viкατnр, -ñpoç [m.] 'victor' (Dreros III-IIª), viêηtýs [m.] ‘id.' (III-IV³). 3.
víкηдα (Dor. -ā-) [n.] 'prize of victory, victory' (Hell., Crete). 4. víкaеpov [n.]
'offering for victory' (Sparta), víkaστpov [n.] ‘prize of victory' (Phot., H.); on the
formation see Chantraine 1933: 373 and 333f. 5. vкητηpιoç, [n.] -ov 'ptng. to victory,
prize of victory' (Att.) and viкητкós 'conducing to victory' (X., Hell.), both also
connected with víêη.
An innovation for víêη is vīкoç [n.] (Hell.), after кpáτoç (Fraenkel Glotta 4 (1913):
39ff., Wackernagel 1916: 81f.). Unclear is viкápiov [n.] name of an eye-salve (Alex.
Trall.); cf. on véкτap.
ETYM There is no good etymology. Skt. nica- 'directed downwards', OCS nicь
'directed forward, on the face', Latv. nīcām 'down the stream', etc. are from *ni-
h3ko and are unrelated, as this would have to yield a labial stop in Greek.

=== page 537 ===

1022
víkdov
Connection with the root of vεiкos and Lith. ap-nikti 'to attack' is semantically
gratuitous. Klingenschmitt's analysis (Klingenschmitt 1975: 16222) as *ni-ih,k-eh₂-
"Niederwerfung” is pure speculation, as the prefix *ni- is not attested elsewhere in
Greek. The word could be Pre-Greek (not in Fur.).
VÍKλOV. TÒ AíкVov 'winnowing fan' (H.). •VAR Also -ɛi-. λкμáw, Aíкvov.
VIкÚAɛov [n.] 'a fig' in Crete (Hermonax apud Ath. 76e). <PG>
•ETYM See Neumann Glotta 36 (1957): 156 and Neumann Glotta 40 (1962): 51-4, as
well as Ruijgh 1967a: $10. The Mycenaean sign <ni> looks like a fig-tree.
Viкúρτaç [m.] · Sovλéкdovλoç ‘born slave' (H.); of. Hippon. fr. 28 M. <?>
•ETYM See O. Masson 1962: 120f., as well as Haas 1966: 168.
VIV = autóv, avτýν, etc. →μv.
vívvn [f.] 'grandmother, mother-in-law(?)'. →vévvos.
vívvov [n.] pupus (gloss.). <?>
.
•ETYM Unknown.
vívvov [?] · tòv † кαταßáλληу ïллov (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Perhaps a modification of "vvov (DELG).
víσqua 'to travel, go, come'. →véopai.
vítpov [n.] ‘sodium carbonate, soda, natron' (Sapph., Ion., Arist., Hell.). <LW Eg.➤
•VAR With dissimilation v - τ > λ - τ: λíτpov (Att., Hp.), cf. Solmsen 1909: 235.
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. óεú-vɩτpov 'mix of vinegar and natron' (Paul. Aeg.),
Аτρо-лwληs 'natron-seller' (inscr. IV³).
●DER 1. vitpwdns (also λ-) ‘natronlike, containing natron' (Pl., Arist.), with -wdía
(medic.); 2. víτpivos ‘of natron' (Delos IIª); 3. vɩɩpíα [f.] ‘natron-mine' (pap. IIIª,
Str.), cf. Scheller 1951: 46, with vɩτpióτηg voμóc name of an Egyptian province (Str.);
4. vitpiký [f.] and -ká [n.pl.] ‘natron-taxes' (Hell. pap. and ostr.); 5. vitpītis [f.], of
λµvŋ, ‘producing natron' (Str.); 6. vɩɩpóoµai [v.] ‘to be washed with natron” (Sor.),
with viτpwµα [n.] 'sodium carbonate' (PHolm., H.); also 7. víτpaσµa [n.] ‘soap' (Sor.)
as if from *viτpáчw.
•ETYM An Oriental loanword: Hebr. neter, Arab. naṭrūn > MoFr. natron, etc., and
probably also Hitt. nitri- [n.], all from Eg. ntr(j) ‘natron'. See Lewy 1895: 53, Laroche
BSL 51 (1955): xxxiif., Neumann 1961: 19, and WH s.v. nitrum (which is a Greek LW)
for further considerations.
voά [f.] · лnyń. Aάкwvɛç 'source, running water' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown; reminiscent of ▸váw. Cf. Perpillou BSL 67 (1972): 109ff.
vółos [m.] 'procreated out of wedlock by a known father, illegitimate, bastard (II.);
opposite yvýσioç. <PG?>
•COMP vola-yεvns 'baseborn' (E.), with analogical à (Dor.) for o (Schwyzer: 438).
•DER voεios 'ptng. to a vóðoc' (Lys., Ar.), denominative voɛúw [v.] 'to corrupt,
adulterate' (LXX, J., Plu., Luc.), also with úлo-, with voɛía [f.] 'birth out of wedlock'
VóσOS
1023
(Plu.), (лo-)voеεvτýs [m.] ‘adulterer' (Ptol.), (úлo-)vóðεvσiç [f.] ‘corruption,
adulteration' (inscr. Mylasa).
•ETYM Unexplained.
voдý, voдó, vóµos →véµw.
vóos [m.] 'mind, sense, intellect, reason; purpose, aim' (Il., epic Ion.). <?►
•VAR Contracted vous (Att., also к 240, etc.), perhaps Aeol. gen. vw (Alc.), acc. vwv
(Sappho)?
•COMP Very frequent as a second member, e.g. εu-voos, -vous 'well-minded', whence
εúvo-έw, -in, -tă, etc. (IA); as a first member, e.g. in the compounds vov-0εT-έw [v.]
'to put in mind, remind of (after voμoеετεw: vooétis: vórov еɛīvaɩ, etc.),
whence vovßć-trois, -tŋua, -oia, -tɛía, etc. (IA); voʊv-ex-ns ‘prudenť, vouvex-ws,
-óvτwę [adv.] (to vouv EXεɩ, Exwv).
•DER Nouns: 1. voɛpós intellectual' (Heraclit., Arist.); 2. vonpηs prudent, capable'
(Herod., H.); 3. voótis, nos [f.] 'intellectuality' (Procl.); 4. vóap [n.] ‘illusion,
phantom' (Theognost.), archaizing innovation.
Verbs: A. vow to meditate, observe, think, devise, have in mind' (II.), aor. voñσal
(contracted vwσat), etc., very frequent with prefix, e.g. dia-, ¿v-, ¿ñɩ-, éρo-, þεtα-,
ouv-; hence 1. vóŋμa [n.] 'thought, intelligence, decision' (Il.), -µáτov (Arr.),
-µatiкós (late). -μwv 'thoughtful, prudent' (Od., Hdt.); 2. vóŋ-σis (vwois) [f.]
observation, understanding, thinking', also Siavón-σç, etc. (IA); 3. лpo-voía [f.]
'provision', Sia-voía, -votă 'meditation, thought, aim', etc. (IA); 4. von-tiкóç (also
лро-, etc.) 'mental' (Pl.); 5. лρo-, §ia-, έí-, vro-vontýs [m.] 'director', etc. (late).
B. vooμa 'to be converted into vóoc' (Plot.).
⚫ETYM No doubt an old inherited verbal noun (cf. Móyos, (pópoc, etc.), though there
is no certain etymology. An old proposal compares the Germanic group of Go.
snutrs 'wise, prudent', which is possible, but not compelling. Heubeck Minos 20-22
(1987): 237 defended the connection with vɛúw (cf. LIV² s.v. *neu̟-). Formally,
connection with *nes- (mentioned by LIV²) is also possible, but the semantics seem
to be difficult.
vopßɛi [v.] ¿vtaµɛt̃taɩ ‘will engrave' (H.). <?►
•VAR vopẞá. кaλń (H.).
ETYM Pok. 977 connects Go. at-snarpjan 'to touch', ON snarpr 'sharp, hard,
uneven', snerpa 'to sharpen', MoDu. snerpen 'to bite (of wounds)', OHG snerfan
'draw together'. De Vries 1961 mentions Arm. snerb 'narrow'. The connections
remain uncertain.
vopúŋ [f.] a plant, = στpúxvov (name of various plants), τеúµαλλos 'spurge' (Thphr.
apud Phot.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
.
(
:
vopúny [ópúεɩv] εσTɩ dè εidos Óσлрíoυ a kind of leguminous plant' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
vóσoç [f.] ‘illness, disease; distress, need (Il.). <?►

=== page 538 ===

1024
VÓσTOS
VUKTÁλwy, -wñOS
1025
•VAR Epic Ion. voñσoç (see below).
•COMP VOσO-TOLέw [v.] 'to cause illness' (Hp.), εní-voσos 'prey to disease, unhealthy'
(Hp., Arist.), Strömberg 1946: 85.
•DER A. Adjective: 1. voσɛpós ‘ill, unhealthy' (Hp., E., Arist.); 2. vooŋpós ‘id.' (Hp.,
X.), cf. vyɩŋpós (Pi., Ion.); thence voor piov (H. s.v. кηpéσɩov), perhaps for
voσntηplov or vooŋpóv? 3. voσnλós 'ill, sickly' (Hp.), from voσéw, cf. Chantraine
1933: 241; thence voσnia [n.pl.] 'diet for ill persons' (Opp.), vooŋλɛúw [v.] ‘to care
for a patient', med. -oμai 'to be ill' (Isoc., J.), vooŋλɛía [f.] ‘nursing, morbidity' (S., J.,
Plu.); 4. voσaкɛpós ‘id.' (Arist.); 5. voowdŋs ‘ill, unhealthy' (Hp., Att.); 6. Nóσoç
epithet of Zɛúc (Milete VI-V³).
B. Verbs: 1. vooέw 'to be ill' (Att., also Ion.), whence vóσnua [n.] 'illness' (IA),
diminutive vooŋµátiov (Ar.), -tikós, -twdŋs ‘sickly' (Arist.); 2. voʊɛúqµai ‘to be
sickly', whence vóσɛvμa ‘illness' (Hp.); 3. voσá‹-oμαɩ 'to be ill', -w ‘to make ill',
vooi w 'to make ill' (Arist., Gal.).
C. Substantives: 1. vóσavσiç [f.] ‘getting ill' (Arist.), cf. vyíavoɩç; 2. unclear vooíµŋ
(leg. -nun?) = vóσnua (Theognost.).
⚫ETYM Since Herodotus has voñσos beside vooέw (which is predominant in Ionic
anyhow), it is thought that the former is a Homerism in Hdt. Mechanically, we have
to reconstruct a pre-form *vóσƑos on the basis of our material, but as Wackernagel
1916: 86 suggested, epic voñσoç could also be understood as a false rewriting of
NOO, which would represent *vóσσoç. The epic form must then have been taken
over by Hdt. and Hp.
There is no good etymology. Recently, an attempt was made by Willi JHS 128 (2008):
153-172, who reconstructs *n-h₂osu-o-, starting from the adjective *hosu- 'good, in
good condition'. This is taken to be a u-stem of the root *h,es- 'be', and is supposed
to be the same formation as found in Hitt. āššu- ‘good, favorable' (cf., however,
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). Willi then posits a "regular" development of *n-osuo- to
*noswo-, assuming that all instances of prevocalic av- (the normal reflex) are
analogical. In order to make this work, he assumes that intervocalic PIE -su-
regularly yielded Gr. *-σF- (which is against the communis opinio). However, since
this root (and all other roots which turn up with an initial vowel in Greek) started
with a laryngeal, the regular outcome of *n-h,osuo- (and of all similar cases) is
*anoswo-. This disproves the whole account.
vóσtos →vεoμai.
222),
vóðði(v) [adv., prep.] ‘aside, far (from), without' (epic and lyr. since Il.). <?►
●DER voσqídios situated aside, secretly' (Hes. Fr. 187), voσqidóv [adv.] 'secretly'
(Eust.); verb vooqíčoµα to turn away (intr.), remove (oneself), steal' (B 81 =
act. ‘turn away (trans.), remove', aor. voσcíσ(σ)ασðaɩ, pass. voσqiσðñvaɩ (Od.), fut.
voσчíσ(σ)oμaι (A. R.), also act. vooqiw (h. Cer., Pi.); sometimes with prefix,
especially άo-; thence vóσqioμa [n.] 'pilfering' (pap.).
⚫ETYM No etymology. Meier-Brügger MSS 48 (1987): 179-186 explains the form as
containing *nos 'us', as seen in ǎµµε < *дs-me, and assumes an original meaning
'away from us'; this is semantically doubtful. Heubeck KZ 98 (1985): 257-259 defends
Thieme's idea that the word is derived from the stem *nos- of the word for 'nose';
this is impossible, as the word for 'nose' was *neh₂-s-, *nh₂(e)-s- (see Beekes 1995:
180).
Nóτos [m.] South(west) wind', which brings mist and wetness (II.), ‘the South,
Southwest' (IA); on the mg. Nielsen Class. et Med. 7 (1945): 5ff. <PG?►
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. Eúpó-voτoç [m.] 'Wind between Eupoç and Nóτoç'
(Arist.).
=
DER A. Subst.: 1. voτía, -ín [f.] 'wetness' (307, Arist., Thphr.; it could also be an
abstract in -ía from vóτoç, see Scheller 1951: 54 f.); from it votiwdns (Gal.)
votwdns (see below) and voτiáш 'to be wet, drip', if not rather voτ-táw (see below).
2. votis, -idos [f.] ‘wetness' (E., Pl., Arist.).
B. Adjectives: 1. vótios ‘rainy, weť (epic, Hp.), 'southern' (IA); on the retention of
-TI- Schwyzer: 270; 2. votɛpós ‘id.' (IA); 3. vóτivoç ‘id.' (pap.); 4. voτwdŋs 'id.' (Hp.);
|-
5. Vot-latos 'south(west)ern' (Herm. apud Stob.).
C. Verbs: 1. voτíšoµαι, -í\w 'to become, be wet, make wet', also with prefix, e.g.
кατα-, vлo- (IA); hence votiσµós 'wetness' (Sor.). 2. votέw (Hell.), vot-táw (Arist.;
Schwyzer: 732; cf. above) 'to be wet, drip'.
⚫ETYM Connection of vótos with véw and vnxw 'to swim' leads nowhere, since these
continue a root *sneh₂-. A similar formation may be seen in Arm. nay 'wet, fluiď <
PArm. *nato- or *noto-. The form may instead be Pre-Greek.
vovеετέw 'to admonish, warn'. ⇒vóoç.
voñ¤oç [adj.] only as an epithet of douлoç (Hes. Fr. 48), 'dull' vel sim. <IE? *sneud-
'cloud, dark', PG?▷
•ETYM Solmsen Glotta 2 (1910): 75f. adduces vulóv. äqwvov, okoteɩvóv ‘mute, dark',
and vußwdɛç ʊkotɛvwdɛç (H.), comparing the IE word for 'cloud' in Av. snaoda-,
Lat. nūbēs, etc.; cf. on vστá(w. However, the two glosses adduced, together with
vouoç, may also form a Pre-Greek etymon (thus Fur.: 12029). One might also think
of comparing vwens 'indolent, etc.'.
vu [n.] name of a letter (Achae. Trag., Pl., inscr., pap.). <LW Sem.>>
•VAR Indeclinable.
ETYM From Semitic; cf. Hebr. nün. See Schwyzer: 140.
vu, võv [pcl.] enclitic particle 'now', rarely adverbial. <IE *nu, nuH 'now'>
•VAR vuv [adv.] 'now' (Il.); vūv-í (Att.), with deictic -ī like ód-í, etc.; on spread and
use Ruijgh 1957: 57ff., also Risch Gnomon 30 (1958): 92.
•ETYM Old inherited adverb, retained in most branches: Skt. nú, nú, nūn-ám, Lat.
nu-diūs tertius “now (is) the third day", num, nun-c, OHG nй, late MHG nйn, Lith.
nu, nú, nun-ai, Hitt. nu [pcl.], ki-nun 'now', etc. Gr. vuv may have either old *-m
(Lat. num) or *-n (Skt. nūn-ám).
vvēóv, vvwdɛç =voÛßoç.
VUKTάλw¥, -wños [m., f.] 'seeing in the night' = 'day-blind', as a msc. substantive 'day-
blindness', secondary 'night-blind, night-blindness' (Hp., Arist., Gal.); cf. Gal. 14,

=== page 539 ===

1026
viun
776: vvktáλwñas dè λéyovσiv, ötav ǹµépas µèv ßλéπwoiv åµavpótɛpov dvoµévov dè
ǹλíov λaµpótɛpov, vuktòs dè ěti µãλλov ‘night-blind is called this, when people see
less clearly at day, but more clearly when the sun sets, and even more clearly at
night'. ǹ úлεvavtíws, ǹµépas µèv ólíya, έσñépaç dè ǹ vuкtòs oỷď ölws ‘or the
opposite: at day they see only few things, while in the evening or at night they see
nothing at all'; opposite nuɛpáλwy (Gal. 14, 768e Dem. Ophth.). <PG>
⚫DER VUKταλwл-кά [n.pl.] 'attacks of night-blindness' (Hp.), -táw [v.] 'to suffer from
v.' (Gal.), with -íaσıç (Orib.).
•ETYM On the suffix -wл-, see άyxíλwy (with a variant aiyiλwy), which is Pre-
Greek. The connection with vú (for the formation, compare aiuáλwy to alμα, and
aiµaλéos and Ovµáλwy to Ovµ-iáw, Ovµós) must be folk-etymological.
výµœŋ [f.] ‘bride, young lady', also appellation of a goddess of lower rank, ‘nymph’
(Il.); also metaph., e.g. 'pupa' (Arist.), see Gil Fernández 1959: 208 ff. <PG>
•VAR Dor. -ā. Voc. -ă (T 130; AP 14, 43).
●COMP vʊµó-ŋτos seized by the nymphs, raptured, delirious' (Pl., Arist.), µελλó-
vuμqoç 'about to be wedded', 'betrothed' (S., Lyc., D. C.).
●DER A. Nouns: 1. výµqios ‘bridal' (Pi.), with different accentuation vuµqíos [m.]
'bridegroom' (II.); 2. vuμ-ídios 'bridal, wedding-' (E., Ar.), formation like koupídios,
see on ►кópη; 3. -кóç ‘id.' (trag., Pl. Lg.); 4. -ɛños, epic -ηïos 'bridal, belonging to the
bride' (Simon., Pi., S., Call.), like кoupýïoç, yuvaikeĩoç, -ñïoç, etc.; 5. -años belonging
or consacrated to the nymphs' (E., inscr.), -aía [f.] name of a water-lily (Thphr.); 6.
vuµqác, -ádos [f.] 'belonging to the nymphs' (лúλa; Paus.); 7. vvμoides. vñodýµata
yuvaikɛia vyµqiká ‘women's wedding-shoes' (H.); 8. vvµqáv, -ŵvos [m.] ‘bridal
chamber' (LXX, Ev. Matth.); 9. vvµqάoµata [n.pl.] 'ornaments of the bride' (Orac.),
after voάouατα; 10. Nчμaσía [f.] name of an Arcadian well.
B. Verbs 1. vчuqɛúw 'to give in marriage, to marry (of the groom)', pass. 'to marry
(of the bride)' (Pi., S., E.) with vʊuôεúµatα [n.pl.] ‘'marriage' (S., E.), sing. 'bride' (S.),
výµqevois [f.] ‘marriage' (LXX); vyµqev-týs [m.] ‘bridegroom' (E.) ‘groomsman'
(Poll.), -np 'bridegroom, husband' (Opp.), -τpiα [f.] ‘bridesmaid' (Ar., Plu.), -týpios
‘bridal', tà vyµqevtýpɩa ‘marriage' (E.). 2. vu̟µô-iáw 'to be in a frenzy', of a mare
(Arist.), after the verbs of disease in -tάw.
•ETYM Compared with Lat. nūbō 'to get married', OCS snubiti 'to love, court', from
IE *sneub. This is still followed by LIV² s.v. *sneub"-. However, the inner nasal in
vúμon remains unexplained this way. Therefore, výμon is rather a Pre-Greek word,
perhaps containing a prenasalized stop. The voc. in -a may be the old nominative
(cf. Pre-Greek endings). Note that Kretschmer Glotta 28 (1940): 273 also pleaded for
substrate origin, comparing the source name Nuμqaoía.
vúvaμaɩ [v.]
•VAR VUVατÓS.
⚫ETYM Cret. for dúvaчa, Suvaτóc.
•
vúvvov [n.] · εлì τoïç лaidíoιç кατаßаvкαλоúμεvóν paσi λéуɛσða óμoíwę kai tò
vúvvioç 'in the case of children, they say that they are lulled to sleep; likewise
vúvvios' (H.). <?>
1
VÚš, VUKTÓC
1027
⚫ETYM An onomatopoeic Lallwort; cf. MoGr. vavvapíšw, vavvoupí w 'I lull asleep'
and Oehl IF 57 (1940): 19.
vúž, vuкtóc [f.] ‘night' (Il.). ◄IE *nek"t-, nok"t- ‘night', *neg™- 'become dark'>
•COMP Often as a first member, е.g. vʊкто-μаx-íα, -in [f.] abstract formation as if
from *vʊкτo-μáxos; vuêto-µaxéw (Plu.), vvкtí-ëλayкãos ‘wandering at night' (A.),
with locatival first member, probably partly analogical; as a second member e.g. in
άwpó-vʊкtoç ‘at an untimely, nightly hour' (A. Ch. 34), µɛoo-vúktos ‘in the middle
of the night' (Pi., Hp.), to дéσaι vúкTεç; further -vux- in e.g. EV-VUXOS, EV-VÚXIOS
‘nightly, in the night' (Il.), vúxtos ‘nightly' (Hes.), vuxɛúw [v.] ‘to wake all night long'
(E., Nic.); cf. below.
●DER 1. VÚкTwp [adv.] ‘at night' (Hes., Archil.); 2. vúкτεpos ‘nightly' (trag.) with
vuktepis, -idos [f.] 'bat' (Od.), also as a fish-name (Opp.) and plant-name (Aët.), cf.
Strömberg 1943: 111, see also Strömberg 1940: 74; VUкtepītis, -idos [f.] ‘avayaλλìç ǹ
кvavñ (Ps.-Dsc.), VUкTɛρεúw [V.] 'to pass the night, pass a sleepless night' (X.), also
with Sia-, ¿v-, etc., whence vʊкTεp-ɛía [f.] ‘hunting by night' (Pl.), -ɛvµa [n.] ‘night-
quarters' (Plb.), -ɛvtńs [m.] ‘who hunts by night' (Pl.), -ɛvτкóç 'fit for hunting by
night' (X.); 3. VUкτépios 'nightly' (Aret., Luc.), τà vuкtépɛia = ǹs vʊktɛpɛía (Eun.); 4.
vuktepivós ‘id.' (IA) with vuкtɛpɩvía or -ɛía [f.] 'commander of the night watch’
(Ephesus IP), spelled -ŋa; 5. vʊкtepńσios ‘id.' (Luc., S. E.), perhaps for -íolos
(Fraenkel 1912: 151¹)? Rare vÚкTIOç 'nightly' (AP), vuкtḍov [n.] ‘temple of the night'
(Luc.), after unτp@ov, etc., Nuktɛúç [m.] PN (Apollod.).
Cf. also VUкTáλwч. For VUкτέλos epithet of Dionysus (AP, Plu., Paus.)
haplological for *VUкTI-TÉλIOS, which is a hypostasis of vúε and τéλos (Tελéw), cf.
VUKTEλEIV. ÉV VUкTÌ TEλɛiv (H.).
⚫ETYM Old inherited word for ‘night', retained in most IE languages: Lat. nox, gen.pl.
noctium, Go. nahts, Skt. nák, acc. náktam (adverbial), Lith. naktis, gen.pl. naktų,
OCS noštv, etc., all from IE *nokt-. The i-stem forms in Lat. noctium, Lith. naktis,
OCS noštь, etc. are innovations of the separate languages. The deviating v in vúε is
explained from *nok"t- by Cowgill's Law (extensive treatment in Vine 1999b).
The aspirated and t-less form in vúxα. vúктwρ (H.), EvvUX-oc, -toc, ɛivávʊxeç, vúxiOS,
etc., is attested only in Greek and in Anatolian (Hitt. neku-zi 'to become dark').
Schindler KZ 81 (1967): 290-303 reconstructed a static paradigm for a PIE root noun:
nom. nokt-s, gen. nek"t-s, because of Hitt. nekuz mehur ‘at night', which contains an
old genitive. However, acc. to Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. neku-zi, the consistent non-
geminate spelling in Hitt. neku-zi and the aspirate in Greek vux- both point to a root
*negh-, which was lost in PIE after Anatolian split off. Subsequently, *neg™ht- was
assimilated to PIE *nek"t- (cf. IIr. *nákt-). On -vvx- as a second member, see also
Sommer 1948: 64f.
The r-stem in vÚкτwp, etc. is also found in Lat. nocturnus < *nokterino-, although
this may also be an independent formation. Otherwise, the formation of the
adjectives is partly paralleled by derivatives of Huaρ, ►ǹµépа: a) vuktepivós :
ǹµɛpivós, b) vuкtépios: ǹµépios; c) VUкTερησLos polos; d) vʊкτερεúw :
nuεpεúw.

=== page 540 ===

1
1028
VUóc
vvóc [f.] 'daughter-in-law' (Hom.), secondary 'bride' (Theoc.). <IE *snuso- 'saughter-
in-law'>
*
•ETYM An old feminine o-stem, identical with Arm. nu, gen. nuoy ‘id.', from IE
*snuso- [f.]. Lat. nurus was transformed into a u-stem is (after socrus); Skt. snuṣā, to
an ā-stem, as was the Germanic group of OHG snur, MoHG Schnur, and the Slavic
one of CS snöxa. Alb. nuse 'bride' does not belong here. Connection to the of
vɛupá, vεupov is impossible, as this word was * sneh,-ur/n- and contained a
laryngeal.
vupičeɩ [v.] · vvooɛ, úɛ ‘to prick, pierce; scratch' (H.). <?►
•VAR Also vupwv. vúoowv, žúwv (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. Perhaps related to vévw and vúσow; cf. Pok. 767.
vúσa [f.]= SévSpov (Pherecyd. 178 J). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
võσos [adj.] = xwλóc, a Syracusan word (Nonn. D. 9, 22; EM 280). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
group
vúσσa [f.] ‘turning post in the race-course, starting point and goal of the contest' (II.).
<PG?>
ETYM Without a good explanation. Compared with vúσow as *vúк-α "the
thrusting one", which seems possible. Untenable Semitic etymology in Lewy KZ 55
(1928): 24ff.; acc. to Jüthner Die Antike 15 (1939): 251, the word is Aegean (i.e. Pre-
Greek).
vúσow [v.] 'to thrust, sting, pierce' (on the epic use Trümpy 1950: 96f., 100ff.). <?►
•VAR Att. výττw, aor. vúžaɩ (II.), fut. výžw, Hell. aor. pass. vvyñvaɩ, vuxеñvaɩ, perf.
vévuyuan.
●COMP Also with prefix, e.g. кαta-, úño-.
•DER 1. vúčiç [f.] 'thrust, sting' (Dsc., Plu.), кατávv-15 'stupefaction, bewilderment'
to kata-výσσoμai 'to be stinged in the heart, be stunned' (LXX, NT); 2. vúyμa (also
-Xμα) [n.] 'stab, prick' (Nic., Epicur., Gal.) with vʊyчα-τкóç 'fit for stabbing'
(medic.), -twdŋs 'punctuated' (Arist., medic.); 3. vvy-µóc [m.] (D. S., Plu.), -µý [f.]
(Plu.) 'id.'; 4. vúy-dηy ‘by pricking' (A. D.). Further vuкxáσaç = vúžas (H.),
expressive enlargement with geminate and aspiration.
•ETYM Without an exact correspondence outside Greek. A formal similarity exists
with some WGm. and Slav. expressions for ‘nod, etc.', e.g. MLG nucken 'to move the
head menacingly', nuck(e) 'sudden thrust forward and upward of the head when
frightened, etc.', OCS nukati, njukati 'to encourage', which are sometimes connected
with vɛúw, Lat. nuō (assuming a velar enlargement). Following Brugmann IF 13.
(1902-1903): 153ff., vúσow has been analyzed in the same way, which would, however,
imply a basic meaning 'to pull, thrust' for the root of vɛúw.
vvoτάw [v.] ‘to slumber, be sleepy' (Hp., Att.). <IE? *snud- 'sleepy, slumber'>>
•VAR Mostly present; aor. -áža (Thphr., LXX), -áσat (Dionys. Com., AP).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. úлo-, ÈNI-.
{
}
vweńs
1029
●DER_vvotayµós [m.] 'drowsiness' (Hp., LXX), vúʊτayµa [n.] ‘nap, short sleep'
(LXX), vúστažię (H.) as an explanation of vaкaρ; vʊσταктηç as an epithet of üлvоÇ
(Ar. V. 12, Alciphr.), -aкɩɩкŵç ‘in a sleepy way' (Gal.). Also vuστaλéos ‘sleepy' (Aret.,
H.), after úлvaλéoç, skipping the presential suffix (Debrunner IF 23 (1908-1909): 18),
vúσtalos (Com. Adesp.) with vuσtaλwriãv. vvotáčɛiv (H.).
ETYM Some Baltic expressions for 'slumber, sleepy' are strongly reminiscent of
vvστáчw, e.g. Lith. snústi, 1sg. snúdau 'to slumber away', with snudà, snúdis 'sleeper,
dreamer'; a different ablaut-grade appears in snáudžiu, snáusti ‘to slumber', and
(independent of Greek vuστaλéoc) forms with an l-suffix: Lith. snaudālius 'sleepy
man', Latv. snaudule 'sleepy-head'. Thus, -τáw would be just a formal enlargement,
as in кλαστάw (from кλαστ-, кλad-), Bαστá(w, etc. If this is correct, the old
connection with vɛúw 'nod' should be abandoned. It is doubtful that vulóv and
►vouoç also belong here.
vó [pron. nom./acc.du.] 'we two, both of us' (Att., also E 219 and o 475). <IE *neh, 'we
two'>
•VAR Att. gen. and dat. võv.
•DIAL Nom., acc. vwï, gen., dat. vwïv (Hom.); acc. vwe (Antim., Corinn.).
•DER Possessive vшïτεpos (О 39, µ 185).
⚫ETYM The old dual personal pronoun, identical with Av. nã, OCS na, from IE *neh3.
Further, with an old long diphthong, there is Skt. nau. Lat. nōs also belongs here.
The other case forms are Greek creations: või, perhaps from *vw-Fi (?); vwɛ, based
on σчε or лóбε (Schwyzer: 602f.).
vwyaλa [n.pl.] ‘dainties, candies' (com. IVª). <?►
•DER vwyaλéos = λαμлрóç (Zonar.) and vwyaλiew [v.] 'to chew candies' (com. IV³),
with vwyaliouaτα [pl] = voyaλa (Poll.); also -ɛúw ‘id.' (Suid.) with -εúμaτα [pl.]
‘id.' (com. V-IV³).
ETYM No good explanation. Grošelj Živa Ant. 1 (1951): 259 assumed dissimilation
from *λwyaλa, derived from λwyn.
vwdóc [adj.] 'toothless' (com., Arist., Theoc.). <GR>
•COMP Determinative compound vwdo-yέpwv 'toothless old man' (com.), see Risch
IF 59 (1949): 277.
•DER vwdótŋs [f.] 'toothlessness' (Porph.).
ETYM From *n-hd-, consisting of privative *n- (see ȧ-) and the root of odwv
(òdoúc) < *h3d-ont-. The o-stem perhaps replaces older *vwdwv after the pattern of
στрáßwν: στpaßós, etc. (see Solmsen 1909: 29ff.). For the reconstruction of *h3-, see
Beekes in Kortlandt 2003: 186.
væðuvos [adj.] ‘feeling no pain' (Pi.), ‘alleviating pain' (S.). <◄ GR▷
•DER vwSuvía 'painlessness' (Pi., Theoc.).
⚫ETYM From privative *n- and odúvη; see on vwdóc.
vwens [adj.] 'slow, indolent, stubborn' (A 559), see Bechtel 1921(3): 319 and Leumann
1950: 316. <?>
•DER Thence vw0ɛia [f.] 'indolence' (Pl., Luc.), vw0wdns 'lethargic' (Aret.).

=== page 541 ===

1030
vwkap, -apoç
More usual is vwłpós ‘id.' (IA), whence vwep-ía, -iŋ (Hp., Herod., pap.), -óτns [f.]
(Hp., Arist., LXX) 'slowness, indifference'; -wdns 'laming' (Hp.); fem. vw0pás, -ádos
botanical name = ẞαλλwτý, also vw0oupíc (Ps.-Dsc.). Denominatives: 1. vwеpɛúw,
-oμα [v.] ‘to be slow, slack, indifferent' (Hp., Hyp., pap.), with vwepɛía 'slowness'
(Erot.); 2. vw0p-táw ‘id.' (Dsc.).
•ETYM A number of etymologies has been proposed, none of which is really obvious:
1) from privative *n- and the root of öðμa, meaning "who cares for nothing", with
transformation of the second member after the s- and ro-stems; 2) from privative *n-
and the root of woέw, 'who does not let himself be pushed from his place'. 3) The
old connection with Skt. ädhrá- 'weak, poor', which presupposes PIE *nh3d-ro-, is
again hesitatingly mentioned in Mayrhofer EWAia, but the meaning of the Sanskrit
word, which is clearly derived from the root nādh- 'to be in need', is too remote.
Alternatively, Fur.: 390 connects vwoάλns and vwopúc, but a variation e/o is
otherwise unknown.
vwkap, -apoç [n.] lethargy, coma' (Nic., Hdn.); the latter explains it as σtépŋois TĤS
yuxñs ‘absence of the soul'; it is also translated as vúσtağı ‘slumbering”. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also [adj.].
•DER vwкapwdŋs 'slothful, sleepy' (Diph.).
⚫ETYM Frisk includes võкap under the derivatives of the root *nek- 'disappear' in
Greek, but a long vowel is entirely unmotivated in this formation. On the other
hand, Fur: 133 connects vwкap with vwxɛλns, which fits well semantically (the
translation 'Todesschlaf by Frisk is inspired by a wrong etymology), and he denies
that it has anything to do with vɛkpós, ►vékuç. For Pre-Greek words in -ap, see
Fur.: 13475.
vwlɛµés, -éws [adv.] 'without pause, unceasingly' (Il.), usually verse-final with aiɛí;
later 'firmly' (A. R.). <GR?>
•ETYM Probably a compound of privative *n- and a neuter *öλεoç, which is rather
hypothetically compared with a word for 'break, breakable' in Germanic, e.g. OHG
lam 'crippled', which may further belong to OCS lomiti 'to break', Lith. lémti 'to
ordain', isg. lemiù, and perhaps OIr. ro-laimethar 'to dare' (LIV2 s.v. *lemH-). The
comparison with the Greek form presupposes, however, that the root reconstruction
is *h₂lem(H)-.
vwμάw →vεµw.
vwлéoμaι [v.] 'to be downcast', = vowлɛiσðαι 'to shun, disapprove of (Ion. Hist.,
Phot.). <?>
•VAR Vεváηai. τεταлεívшται, кαταлéяληкταɩ ‘is humble, is struck with
amazement' (H., Phot.).
•ETYM Cf. Enpovartńs. Alternatively, does it derive from vú… do evns tôn Öst
'weak qua sight' (H.)?
vwpɛi [v.] . ¿vεpyɛi 'is effective, operates' (H.). <IE? *noHr->
⚫ETYM It has been compared with Lith. nóras 'will' and nóriu, norëti 'want'. This
would point to *noHr-, but a reconstruction that is only based on a gloss remains
i
vwxελńs
1031
doubtful. At any rate, it does not belong to *h₂ner-, which is impossible because of
the acute vowel in Lithuanian.
vwpow [adj.] mg. unknown. <PG?(S)►
•VAR Only in vúð-oлɩ, -oлα, as an epithet of xaλкŵ, -óv (Hom.); after this vápoл
πεлλ (Nonn.).
•ETYM Adjective of unknown meaning. Cf. vwpoy. λaµñpós, óžúqwvos, ěvnxos
'bright, shrill, resounding'. ǹ ötɩ tǹv öysv áoĐevý stoε ‘or that which weakens sight'
(H.), which would imply a meaning ‘blinding'. It has often been compared with
►àvnp, but this has an initial laryngeal. Comparison with vwpε• έvɛpyεî ‘is active'
(H.), Lith. norëti, 1sg. nóriu ‘want', etc., which have incorrectly been compared with
àvnp, is perhaps possible, but gratuitous.
The suffix -o- may point to a Pre-Greek word. Kuiper MKNAW 14: 5 (1951): 5
suggested that it was taken from αïеoл.
vwτov [n.] 'back' (Il.). <?➤
•VAR Secondary τòv võτov and oi võτo (Egli 1954: 84ff.).
•COMP VWTO-qópos 'carrying on the back', 'bearer' [m.], 'beast of burden' [n.] (X.,
Hell.) with -éw, -ía (D. S.); лоIкIAλó-vwτoç 'having a varicolored back' (Pi., E.).
•DER Adjectives: vwτ-laños (Hp., Pl., E.), see Chantraine 1933: 49, also -años (Nic.),
-10s (Ti. Locr.) 'belonging to the back', fem. -tás (Hp.).
Substantives: vwτidavós [m.] 'kind of shark' (Arist.), on the formation see Schwyzer:
530; also εлvæτidɛúç ‘id.' (Epaen. apud Ath. 7, 294d), explanation uncertain (see
Thompson 1947 s.v.; different Strömberg 1943: 49f.; cf. also Boßhardt 1942: 86);
vwτεÚç [m.] 'beast of burden' (Poll., H.), see Boßhardt 1942: 86.
Verb vwτíw to turn one's back, cover one's back, besmear, beat on the back' (trag.,
cf. Kretschmer Glotta 5 (1914): 287), also with prefix, e.g. àлo-, ε-; thence váτσµа
[n.] 'cover of the back' = 'wing' (Trag. Adesp.).
•ETYM There are no obvious cognates. If connected with the Lat. natis, natës, gen.pl.
-ium [f.] 'the buttock', we may either assume an old root noun *n(e)h¸t- (Schrijver
1991: 169) or a root *nh₂t- (De Vaan 2008 s.v. natis), which became thematicized in
Greek.
vwxeλns [adj.] 'slow, dull, sluggish' (Hp., S., E., Hell. epic). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also vwxaλns (cod. vwq-). vwėpós ‘id.' (H.), vwxαλíčε• ẞpadúvɛɩ 'to make
slow, delay' (H.). MoGr. has àvwxalos.
•DER vwxɛλíŋ, -ía [f.] 'slowness, laziness' (T 411), cf. Porzig 1942: 204 and Delebecque
1951: 156f., also -εta [f.] (Orib., H.); vwxελεúодα 'to be slow, indolent' (Aq.).
The plantname vwxɛlic, -ídos [f.] = ẞaλλwτń (Ps.-Dsc.; cf. Strömberg 1940: 158) has
a variant vwкɛλic, and is therefore rather of Pre-Greek origin; note also vwopÚS
(Fur.: 390).
•ETYM Fur.: 133 convincingly compares vwкap ‘lethargy', which points to Pre-
Greek origin. The variant forms in -xaλ-, -кελ-, and the alternation X/o lead to the
same conclusion (although there is no explanation for the latter).

=== page 542 ===

F
[I]
žaivw [v.] 'to card, comb wool, metaph. 'to scratch, mangle, lacerate' (§ 423, IA). <IE?
*ksn-ie/o->
•VAR Fut. Čavw, aor. Eñvai (late εãvai), pass. žavėñvaɩ, perf. med. εεασμai (Hell. also
Ealian).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially кατα- and Siα.
= εní-
•DER žávtŋs [m.] 'wool-carder' (Pl.) with čavíкń (scil. tέxvn) [f.] ‘the art of carding
wool' (Pl.), fem. εávτpiα (title of a drama by A.); §άoµa [n.] ‘carded wool' (S. Fr.
1073), also čáμμa (Н. s.v. лεкоç), άvažaσµóç [m.] laceration' (med.), žávois [f.]
'carding of wool' (gloss.), žávov [n.] 'comb for carding' (Poll., AB, H.), also
Eηvov (Poll.), probably after кτéviov; \aváw (Nic.) ‘to work hard (carding wool)',
-ñσai (S.Fr. 498), áлožavãv· кaкoлαеεv 'to suffer' (H.); cf. voaváw : vqaívw and
similar cases in Schwyzer: 700. Probably related is εлívov 'chopping-block', with
an unclear formation.
•ETYM Technical expression from the production of wool. Its formation may have
been influenced by úqaívw, which is semantically close. Probably somehow related
to ►žέw, ►łów, but the exact derivation is unknown. There are no correspondences
outside Greek.
žavós [adj.] 'yellow, golden yellow, reddish, brownish, blond', of hairs (Il.), also of
other things (post-Hom.); on the mg. Capelle RhM 101 (1958): 21f. ◄PG?►
•DIAL Myc. PN ka-sa-to, cf. Gallavotti Par. del pass. 12 (1957): 10f.
⚫COMP avеo-кóμns (also -os) 'blond-haired' (Hes., Pi.), εлí-αvos 'almost yellow,
yellowish' (X., Thphr.) beside εлɩ-žavėíšoµα [v.] ‘to become yellowish or brownish'
(Pherecr.).
●DER 1. Eávłoç [m.] name of a river, a town, a person, a horse (II.), with oppositive
accent; 2. áveŋ [f.] name of a yellow stone (Thphr.); 3. žávěrov [n.] name of a plant
used to bleach hairs (Dsc., Gal.); Strömberg 1940: 23; 4. aðó, éstos [f.]
'yellowness' (Str.); 5. Denominative verbs: a. žavėí(w 'to make or be ε.' (com., LXX)
with §ávě-10ɩç, -toμós 'yellow-colored (medic.), žavėíoµata (kóµns, xaiτns) ‘blond
curls' (E. Fr. 322, AP) ; b. žαvеóo̟μai 'to become ε.”, -ów 'to paint ε.' (Dsc.), whence
εávěwoiç (Ps.-Democr. Alch.); c. žavėúvoµα ‘id.' (Thphr.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. A remote connection with Lat. canus 'grey' has been supposed,
but this remains gratuitous. The comparison with Etr. zambic, supposedly 'of gold',
has little value (Heubeck Würzb. Jb. 4:2 (1949-1950): 202 compares Σкáμavбpoç as
well). The word may be Pre-Greek; cf. ►žovłóç.

=== page 543 ===

1034
Eei
žɛĩ [n.] Name of the letter (Callias apud Ath. 10, 453d). <LW Sem.➤
•VAR Indeclinable. Later §î (Luc.).
•ETYM Formed after лε = Sem. pē; see Schwyzer: 140.
évos [m.] 'foreigner, guest, host' (II.), 'mercenary, soldier' (§ 102, Att.); (έvn (scil.
yuvń, yñ) [f.] ‘foreign woman, foreign country' (trag., X.); as an adjective 'foreign'
(post-Hom.). <PG?>
•VAR Epic Ion. poet. žɛivoç, Dor. évƑos (in Cor. ЕεvƑокλñç, Corc., El. EεvƑápηs),
Čñvos (Cyr. Þióčηvoc), (hyper-)Aeol. čέvvos (Hdn.), cf. Schwyzer: 228.
•DIAL Myc.ke-se-nu-wo /ksenwos/, ke-se-nu-wi-ja /ksenwia/.
COMP Many compounds like (εvo-, žɛivo-dóкos [m.] 'receiving foreigners or guests;
hosť (II.), piλó-čε(1) vos loving guests, hospitable' (Od.), лрóžεvoç, Сorc. лpóčevfos
[m.] 'public guest, deputy' (post-Hom.), see Risch IF 59 (1949): 38f.; see Eεvoç
ITÓVTOS.
•DER A. Adjectives: 1. évɩoç, žɛívios 'regarding the foreigner', τà ε(í) via 'friendly
gifts' (II.), = Myc. ke-se-nu-wi-ja. 2. younger ε(1)vikós ‘id.' (IA); 3. žɛvýïos in tà
žεvýïa (or τò žεvýïov) = τà žɛívia (Hom.), after лрεσß³ñïa; 4. žɛvóɛç ‘full of
foreigners' (E. [lyr.]).
B. Substantives: 1. \ε(1)vín, -ia [f.] 'guest-friendship, guest-right' (since w); 2.
ɛvoʊúvη [f.] ‘hospitality' (Q 35); 3. čevwv, -wvos [m.] ‘guestroom, -house' (E., Pl.);
Eɛvwveç oi àvdpŵvεç úлò Þрvyŵv 'the men's apartments among the Phrygians'
(H.); 4. čɛvíc, -ídos [f.] 'road leading into foreign countries' (Delph. II³); 5. čεvídiov
[n.] 'small guesthouse' (pap. IIIP); 6. εv-údpiov (Men.), -útov (Plu.) depreciatory
diminutive of évoç (Chantraine 1933: 73f.).
C. Verbs. 1. čε(1) ví(w 'to entertain as a guest' (Il.), also 'to surprise' (Hell.), whence
Évois [f.] 'hospitality' (Th.), \εvoµós [m.] ‘id.' (Pl., inscr., Luc.), also 'strangeness,
innovation' (Plb., D. S., Dsc.); \εvotés [m.] ‘hosť (sch.). 2. §ε(1)vóoµα to enter into
a treaty of hospitality; entertain sbd. as a guest, to be entertained' (Pi., IA), also ‘to
live in (or: emigrate to) a foreign country' (S., E.), -ów 'to deprive of, embezzle'
(Hld.); έvwσiç [f.] 'stay abroad' (E. HF 965). 3. čεVIτεÚ-oμαι to serve abroad as a
soldier' (Isoc., Antiph.), -w 'to live abroad' (Timae. Hist., J.); after лоλtɛvoµai, -w to
лоλíτηе and лóλis (Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 173); \εvɩɩ-ɛíα [f.] 'being a mercenary,
life abroad' (Democr., LXX), -εuτns [m.] 'who lives abroad' (VIP).
•ETYM The semantic agreement with the old PIE word for 'foreigner, guest', seen in
Lat. hostis [m.] 'foreigner, enemy', Go. gasts ‘guest', OCS gostú ‘id.', IE *għosti-, has
led to attempts to connect these with έvoç, assuming a root etymology *ges-. The
word έvos could be Pre-Greek.
ɛpóv [n.] 'the dry (land)' only in лotì žɛpòv ǹƒεípolo (ε 402), лotì žɛpóv (A. R. 3, 322,
AP), εлì ɛpóv (Nic.). →čŋpós.
{ćotŋs [m.] measure for fluid and dried things, = Lat. sextarius (Oropos [around
200ª], J., AP), also ‘pot, bottle' (Ev. Marc. 7, 4, pap.). ◄LW Lat.➤
•DER {εσtíov [n.] ‘id.' (Ostr., Orib., Aet.); cf. aµvíov, Auxviov, etc.; εστ-ało
'measuring a ε.' (Gal.).
1
İnpós
1035
•ETYM Backformation from *εστápiov, which was borrowed from sextārius with
metathesis, under the assumption that this was a diminutive. The suffix is like in
кodpávτns (= Lat. quadrāns), etc. The word εéσtpič кpiðý. † ¿čáστixoç. Kvíðioι (H.)
is probably similar.
εσμ (IA), fut. έow (Paul.
Eew [v.] 'to shave, carve, smooth, polish' (Il.). <IE? *ks-es- ‘carve’>
•VAR Aor. Éσ(o)al (II.), pass. ɛσñα, perf. med.
Aeg.), perf. act. εεкα (Choerob.), verbal adj. ɛστóç (II.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àлo-, кατα-, лαрα-, лεрɩ-.
•DER 1. Éσç (άлó-) [f.] ‘planing' (Thphr., Delph. IV³); 2. čέσµατα [pl.] 'carving,
chips, carved objects' (M. Ant., AP); 3. §ɛσµoîç [dat.pl.] (H. as an explanation of
σлαрáуμασɩ 'pieces torn off); 4. Jóavov [n.] '(carved) image of a god' (S., E., X.), also
name of a musical instrument (S. Fr. 238); čoávwv. лρoеúрwν έεεσμεvwv 'carved
doorways' (H.); acc. to Latte Glotta 32 (1953): 35, who reads (oavwv лрoеúрwv.
Éεoμévwv, it is also an adjective; diminutive oάviov (Anaphe II³). 5. чoïç, -ídoç [f.]
'chisel' (Hell. inscr.) with oïdov (pap. III³) and oτηs [m.] name of a profession
(Isauria; Redard 1949: 36); probably directly from εέw after кoлíç, dopíç, etc.; čoós.
žvσμóç, óλкóç 'scratch, furrow' (H.). 6. Of the prefixed forms: Statóoç [m.] 'sculptor'
(Delph. 341ª), àµqôí-\ooç (-ovc) ‘smoothing all arounď (AP); έ´-, кατa-, napa-čoń,
-á ‘carving, planing, etc.' (inscr.). On ►\wστpa, see s.v.
⚫ETYM Probably related to úw and aívw, but without a close correspondence
outside Greek. The stem εσ- (reconstructed from žɛσtóç, aor. εéσ(o)al, etc.) is the
basis of all forms cited. It has traditionally (Pok. 585f.) been interpreted as *ks-es-, the
zero grade of the IE root *kes- 'to scratch, comb', with an enlargement -es- (cf. on
►τpέw). This root is seen in OCS česati 'to comb', Lith. kàsti 'to dig, scrape', etc.;
►Kɛάw and cognates could be related as well.
The form óavov follows the model of oxavov: εxw, лλókavov : ñλέкw, etc. See also
KÉOKEOV.
žŋvós [m.] • kopµós 'squared trunk, block' (Suid.). <?►
•ETYM Has been connected with εлívov 'chopping-block', but further details are
obscure.
Eŋpós [adj.] ‘dry, arid' (IA). <IE? *ksero- 'dry'▷
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. Emp-aλoɩέw [v.] 'to rub dry with oil' (Lex Solonis
apud Plu. Sol. 1), composed of Enpòv àλɛiqɛɩv (to *np-aλolyós); Enpóßně, -xoc [m.]
'dry cough' (medic.), opposed to vypó-ßη\ (Strömberg 1944: 100); katá-, έní-čŋpos
etc. (Hp., Arist.) beside кατα-, εл-čŋpaívw.
●DER 1. Enpótηg, -ŋtos [f.] ‘dryness' (Att., Arist.); 2. Empíov [n.], \ŋpáciov [n.]
'desiccative powder' (medic., pap.); 3. Empódŋs ‘dryish' (EM beside лvpódnŋc). 4.
Enpaívw [v.] 'to make dry', -oμai 'to dry up', fut. -αvā, -avoñµαι (IA), aor. Eŋpãval
(-ñvai), -avēñvat (Il.), perf. med. ¿½½paσµαι (IA), -αµµαι (Hell.); often with prefixes
like άva-, àлo-, εл-, кατα-. Thence (ava-) \n pavois [f.] (Thphr., Gal.), (àvα-, ¿ë-,
úлεр-)Enpaσía, -in [f.] (Hp., Arist., Thphr.), on the formation see Chantraine 1933:
85; (ȧva-)npaσμós [m.] (medic.) ‘getting dry'; (ava-)\npavtiкós ‘getting dry' (Hp.,
Thphr.).

=== page 544 ===

1036
číμẞ(p)α
•ETYM The word Empós can hardly be separated from ɛpóv. If these belong
together with Lat. serēnus 'bright, clear, dry' <*kseres-no-, serēsco 'to become dry',
OHG serawēn 'id.', etc. (cf. Pok. 625), Enpóç must contain a lengthened grade, which
is problematic. Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. kṣā rejects the old connection with Skt. kṣāra-
‘burning, biting, sharp' and kṣayati 'to burn'. Alternatively, for ɛpóv one might
assume metathesis of oxɛpóv 'id.', possibly influenced by Enpós. See Janko Glotta 57
(1979): 20-23 on this problem.
žíµß(p)α =σídn.
ipis [f.] 'Iris foetidissima' (Thphr.). <PG➤
•VAR Also čipíç (Dsc. 4, 22); σipiç or σipis (EM 209, 35); župíc (Dsc., Plin. Gal.); čɛɩpíç
(Ar., H.), all 'id.'.
•ETYM Frisk (s.v. \upóv, which is unrelated) asks whether the original form was ɩp-
or up-. Acc. to DELG, up- could be due to folk etymology (referring to Strömberg
1940: 44). Indeed, the form oчpic/oipiç suggests that up- is the oldest form. The
variants point to Pre-Greek origin.
tipos [n.] 'sword with a straight, double-edged blade' (Il.); see Trümpy 1950: 60ff.;
metaph. of the iqoç-like bone of the cuttle-fish (Arist.); as a plant name = ioiov
(Thphr.). PG(V)►
•VAR Also σkiQoç (sch., EM, H.).
•DIAL Myc. qi-si-pe-e /k"siphehe/ [du.].
•COMP As a first member in §ɩŋ-opópos 'sword-bearing' (A., E.) with analogical -ŋ-
(Schwyzer: 440). On σкɩóα-τóµos see below. As a second member in ǎ-\ıqoç
'swordless' (Lyc., A. D.), àčio-ɛí [adv.] (Hdn.).
⚫DER 1. diminutive opídiov (Ar., Th.), also plant name = σларуávov, 'swordgrass'
(Ps.-Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 44; 2. Čiqúdpiov (okɩ- Epich.) name of a crustacean
(medic., H.). 3. §ıqíaç (σkıq- Epich.) [m.] 'swordfish' (Arist.), also name of a comet
(Plin.); 4. čɩíov [n.] ‘cornflag, Gladiolus segetum' (Thphr., Dsc.); 5. Šɩopŋs ‘armed
with a sword' (E., late prose). 6. žɩýv. ó qέpwv čipos 'who bears a ε.' (Suid.). 7.
чívdα лαíεv=Qíεv (Theognost.). 8. iw (v.] 'to dance the sword-dance'
(Cratin.), άлočíšεɩv. óp×εïõðàí rov önov, okiqišel. čiqíčel. čσtɩ dè oxñµa
μаxαιρiкñç óρxnoεws (H.). Thence up-toμós (Ath., D. C.), -toua (Choerob., H.)
‘sword-dance', \ɩqiotúç. µaxaipoµaxía, µáxn èk xɛipwv ‘battle with daggers' (H.);
10-10τp [m.] (pap., Plu.); -στns (H.) 'sword-belt' rather directly from čípoç in view
of the mg.; cf. Kopучιστηр S.V. кopuoń. With prefix diα-žíšoµαι [v.] 'to fight with
the sword' (Ar.), diažiqiσ-µós [m.] ‘battle with swords' (Plu.). Two further glosses
from H.: šípaɩ. τà ¿v tais pukávais dpérava ǹ oidpia 'sickles or tools in planes' and
(with metathesis) σкɩívoν· лλéуµa έк qoívɩkoç ‘sth. plaited of date-palm' (after
кoqívov, etc.); perhaps also σкippa-tóμoç, a profession (Sparta Iª)? Cf. on ►кiqoç.
•ETYM Oriental origin (Aram. saj³fā, Arab. saifun, Eg. sēfet 'sword') has been
advocated by e.g. Lewy 1895: 176f.
Čop KZ74 (1956): 231f. compared Oss. æxsirf 'sickle', assuming IE *k" sibhró-. Such an
isolated comparison, however, is highly unlikely.
i
)
1
|
EÚ入OV
1037
The Myc. form clearly points to Pre-Greek origin because of the variation k™-/k-.
Perhaps the forms with σкıq- also point in this direction. It is unlikely that Myc. qi-
si-pe-e lost its labiovelar through dissimilation with the following op (as per Heubeck
Minos 6 (1958): 55ff.). Pre-Greek also had labiovelars, which did not always share the
fate of the inherited ones (see Pre-Greek).
žovėós [adj.] mg. uncertain, 'resounding, trilling, quick, agile, yellow'(?), said of the
wings of the Dioscuri (h. Hom. 33, 13), of an eagle (B.), a cicada (AP); of the
nightingale and its yévus (A., E., Ar., Theoc.), of the swallow and other singing birds
(Babr.), of bees (S. Fr. 398, 5, E.); also of the winds (Chaerem. Trag.), of ȧλкvóvɛç
(AP), of the iллαλɛképvóv (A., Ar.); further of µéλ, aíµa, λúкoç (Emp., Opp.), with
žavėóç as a v.l., probably referring to the color (cf. H. Šovðá• oỷ µóvov žavĐá, állá
кαì λεvкȧ кαì лuppá 'not only ε., but also white and tawny'). <?>
DIAL Myc. PN ko-so-u-to (Gallavotti Par. del pass. 12 (1957): 6f.).
•COMP As a first member in žovðó-лτεpoç, of µéλσσa (E., Lyr. Alex. Adesp.).
•ETYM On the meaning, see Leumann 1950: 215. The etymology is unknown. The
general similarity with aveóc has long been observed. Cf. Taillardat 1962: $266 and
Duerbeck MSS 24 (1968): 9-32.
žvλaµáw [v.] ‘to plant or sow green crops or fodder' (opposed to σлεíрw), usually with
dat. (Xópτw 'fodder'). <?►
•VAR Aor. -μñσal.
•DER žvλáµŋσiç [f.], also the back-formation Evλaun [f.] 'sowing green crops',
Evλaμητns (also -1στnc) [f.] 'sower of green crops' (Hell., pap.; Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3:
127, 66 and 79).
⚫ETYM Technical word without etymology. Neither úλov nor ȧµáw (àµáoμα) seems
to yield an acceptable connection.
žúlov [n.] 'wood, timber, firewood, tree, beam, stick; wooden block put around the
neck, gallows; bench, table' (II.); also as a measure of length: 'the side of the vaúẞiov'
(Hero Geom., pap.). <Non-IE substrate?
●COMP Very frequent in compounds, e.g. \v\oupyós (-opyós, -ɛpyóc) [m.]
‘carpenter', with -έw, -ía, -ikós (IA), cf. on Sημovpуóç; µovó-žvλoç ‘made from one
piece of wood', of лλoïov, etc. (IA). On ►úloxoc, see s.v.
●DER 1. Diminutives: \v\-άptov ‘small piece of wood' (LXX, pap., etc.), -ǹqov ‘piece
of wood' (Hp., Hell.), -áqtov 'id.' (Eust.); on -noiov, -áciov see Wackernagel Glotta
4 (1913): 243f.; čútov 'piece of wood' (pap. IVP).
Further substantives: 2. uλ-ɛúç [m.] 'woodcutter', name of a sacrificial attendant in
Olympia (inscr. Iª, Paus., H.), with -ɛúw, -ɛúoμα 'to fetch wood' (Hell. inscr., Men.,
H.), -ɛía [f.] 'fetching wood, stock of wood, timber' (Plb., Str., pap.). Švλítns. ix☺ñç
лotóç ‘kind of fish' (H.), explanation in Strömberg 1943: 25; žulītis (yñ, Xépooc) [f.]
'bush' (pap.); 4. \v\wv, -wvos [m.] 'place for wood' (Delos III-IIª).
Adjectives: 1. §úλ-vos ‘of wood, wooden' (Pi., B., IA), 2. -ɩкóç ‘id.' (Arist.) with
-Iкápios 'woodseller (?)' (Corycos), from Lat. -ārius, 3. -ŋpós ‘regarding wood'
(Delos III³), -npá [f.] 'woodmarket'? (pap. IP), 4. -ódŋs 'woodlike, -colored' (Hp.,
Arist., Thphr.).

=== page 545 ===

1038
Eúxoxos
Eúw
1039
Verbs: 1. žvλ-íšoμ to fetch wood' (X., Plu.) with -toμós 'fetching wood (Str., D.
H.), -10τns 'who fetches wood' (sch.); 2. \v\-óoµaɩ, -ów 'to turn into wood, make of
wood' (Thphr., LXX) with -wots [f.] 'woodwork' (Th., Hell. inscr.), -wμα, -wμáτv
'id.' (Delos IIIª, etc.); 3. vλ-ɛúw, see above on чuλεÚç.
●ETYM The word \úlov appears as σúlov, σúlivos on younger Att. vases (see
Schwyzer: 211). It seems to correspond with Lith. šùlas 'post, pole, stave' < IE *ksulo-,
Ru. šúlo [n.] 'garden-pole', SCr. šulj [m.] 'block' < IE *kseulo- (?). Germanic words
like OHG sul [f.] ‘style, pole', Go. sauls 'pillar' have a similar appearance. The
relation between the Slav., Balt., and Gm. words has been amply discussed, but
hardly explained. Was the word taken from a non-IE substrate language? See
Lehmann 1986 s.v. sauls. Original connection of úλov with úw is not probable,
but secondary influence (Chantraine 1933: 240) is conceivable.
žúλoxos [f.] Xóxun, lair', also ‘thicket, bush'? (Hom., AP, Anacreont., also late prose).
<GR?>
•DER \v\oxíšoµai (-íσd-) probably = žvλíšoμα (Theoc. 5,65; see žúλov).
ETYM Explained from *uló-oxos with haplology, but the exact semantic
interpretation remains uncertain; cf. Solmsen 1901: 97¹. Because of the fem. gender
(perhaps after λóxun?), Bechtel 1914 s.v. points to the possibility of adjectival origin:
"having dry wood as a bed", of εúvý?
úv [adj., prep.] 'with, together' (Il., especially OAtt.). <?>
VAR With dat.; since IIª sometimes with gen. after μετά. Younger form σúv (since
Il.); on the distribution of the forms see Schwyzer 1950 487². On the use in Plato see
Kerschensteiner MSS 1 (1952): 29ff.
•DIAL Myc. ku-su /ksun/.
ETYM No clear correspondences exist outside Greek. The appurtenance of BSI.
forms (Lith. sù 'with', OCS sú, Ru. s(o) ‘together with, down from, etc.') is doubtful.
Dunkel Glotta 60 (1982): 55-61 assumes that (uv arose from *som with *k- (seen in
*kom, Lat. cum) added before it (thus a contamination).
The word žúv is probably also contained in μεταžú (cf. on ►μετá). See ►žuvóc.
uvós [adj.] 'common, public, usual' (epic Ion., Il.), = KOLVÓç. <GR➤
•COMP Rarely in compounds, e.g. εлí-žνvoç = εлí-кolvos 'common' (M 422).
●DER 1. žuvάwv, -áv (Pi.), žuvέwv (Hes.), žuvwv (S.) [m.] = кováv, -óv 'comrade,
Čuváwv,
companion', whence (vvwvía (Archil.), žuvwvós (Theognost.); see on koιvwv, -vía,
-Vós (S.V. ► koLvóc). 2. Žuvŕia [n.pl.] 'common booty', i.e. not yet distributed (A 124,
Y 809), after лрeoßñïa, žeivýïa. 3. žvvóo̟μα [v.] ‘to have contact with' (Nearch.,
Man.), -ów 'to bring into contact with' (Nonn.).
•ETYM From *uv-tó-, derived from úv like кoшvós from *кoμ-los < *kóµ (*kóv) =
Lat. cum. On žuvóç: koɩvós and their derivatives, see Leumann 1950: 224³ and Björck
1950: 366f. See ►úv.
župóv [n.] razor' (K 173). ◄IE *ksuro- ‘razor'>
•VAR Also -ós [m.].
)
{
}
•COMP Rare as a first member, e.g. župo-dókŋ [f.] 'razor-case' (Ar.); as a second
member with metrically conditioned enlargement in úлo-šúpios (AP 6, 307; verse-
final), "what is under the ε.", whence 'on which the razor is whetted'. Backformation
in úлó-чupoç 'cut away as ifby a razor', of the nose of an eagle, etc. (Нp.), àлó-župоç
'cut off, steep', of a rock (Peripl. M. Rubr., Luc.), кaτá-župos epithet of Oupides
'loopholes' (Ph. Вel.), cf. úñо-, àло-, кαтα-žυрáш, -έw below.
•DER 1. Diminutives: \úp-tov (Hell.), -áqov (Gal., sch.). 2. Supíaç [m.] ‘with a
tonsure, clean-shaven man' (Poll., H.). 3. On župíc, -ídos [f.] see ►řipíç. 4.
Denominative verbs: a. Eupéw 'to shave clean' (Hdt., trag. and Att.), župάw, -άoμαι
(Hdt., Plu.), šúpw, -oμα, aor. Šūpαt, -ασða (Hp., Hell.), also with prefix, e.g. àño-,
Úло-, кατα-; thence žúpŋois [f.] 'shaving' (LXX), -noчos 'good for shaving' (Ael.
Dion.), župnσμós [m.] ‘id.' (Hdn.), župητý [m.] ‘barber' (pap.); b. žvpíšw = -έw
(sch.), whence úpσμa [n.] 'shaving' (Tz.).
•ETYM An inherited word, identical with Skt. kṣurá- [m.] ‘razor' < IE *ksuró-. For
further connections, see ►žúw.
.
žvσtádɛç [f.] ai лυкvαi ǎμлελо, äμεov dε τàç ɛikỹ kai µǹ katà otoixov requtev-
μεvaç άкoúεv vines planted closely togehter, but it is better to understand the plants
planted at random and not those planted in a row' (H.). ⇒ovotáç.
Evotis, -ídos [f.] 1. 'robe of rich and soft material, worn with festive clothes as a robe of
state' (com., Pl.), whence vστidшτóç (scil. XIτwv) ‘chiton like a robe of state' (Att.
inscr.); 2. 'shaver, drawknife; currycomb' (Epich., Diph.). <GR▷
•ETYM From žvσtós ‘shaven clean, planed', probably a comic name: a cloth sweeping
the ground (on the formation, see Chantraine 1933: 343f.), but also a "planing
instrument” (Chantraine 1933: 338). See ►žúw.
žvστóv 1 [n.] 'shaft of a spear', usually 'spear' (Il., Hdt., E., X.). ◄ GR>
•ETYM From ► žúw as "what has been smoothened; smoothened stick” (scil. Sópv).
žvotós 2 [m.] ‘walking place in a garden, a gymnasium, etc., covered colonnade where
athletes exercise in winter' (X., Hell., inscr., Vitr., Plu., Paus.). <<GR>
●VAR Also -óv [n.].
●COMP As a first member in žvot-ápxns [m.] 'director of a žvστós' with \voτapx-έw,
-ía (late inscr. and pap.).
•DER ŠVOTIKÓS 'belonging to a ε., who exercises in a §.' (late inscr. and pap., Gal.).
ETYM Originally an adjective, чuστóc meant 'smoothened', of the floor of a
promenade and a colonnade; thus still in vστòç Spóμos (Aristias 5, Va). Cf. also
Súεv 'to smoothen', of dáлɛdov (X 456). The word ►žvστádɛç (beside which ovσT-)
is unrelated.
ów [v.] 'to shave, smooth, scratch' (II.). <IE *kseu- 'shave, scratch'>
•VAR Aor. žūσαι, pass. \vσñvaι, perf. pass. \voµai.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, έñɩ-, katα-, nεpɩ-.
•DER Action nouns: 1. §ñσɩç (ȧлó-) [f.] ‘shaving, scratching, ulceration, erosion' (Hp.,
inscr.). 2. žσμα (åлó-) [n.] ‘filings, chip, lint, etc.' (Hp., Arist.) with \voµá-tov,
-τwdŋs (medic.); -λlov [n.] ‘erosive plaster' (Cyran.). 3. žvoµý [f.] ‘scratching'

=== page 546 ===

1040
EWutpa
(Sophr.), plur. ‘scribbles' (AP, D. T.). 4. \voµóc [m.] ‘itching, irritation' (Hp.). 5.
kata-žvý [f.] ‘smoothing' (Didyma IIª).
Agent and instrument nouns: 6. εvotýp, -ñpos (repi-) [m.] 'shaver, plane, rasp, file'
(Hp., Hell. inscr.), \voτ-ŋpídiov (Phryn.), -ńpios (Paul. Aeg.). 7. §úστpa [f.] ‘plane,
curry-comb' (Hp., Hell. inscr. and pap.). 8. στρ = -τp (Sparta IIP), also 'sickle,
\στpov
scythe on a wagon' (D. S.); thence voτpíov (pap. IIª Paul. Aeg.), žvotpíç (H. s.v.
στελyíç, = στλεyyíç), žvστршτóç 'fluted, chamfered' (LXX, Hero), žvστpóoµai [v.] ‘to
flute' (Mylasa). 9. лɛpi-žúσtŋc [m.] name of a chirurgical instrument (Hermes 38,
283). 10. žvýλŋ (-áλn) [f.] ‘planing iron' (X., H., Suid.). 11. \vστáλλov =
(Delos IIIª).
στpov
Adjective žvotɩkós ‘ptng. to shaving, etc' (medic., etc.). See also žvστíç, -óv, -óc and
►Supóv.
•ETYM There is no direct correspondence for the Greek system. An athematic
lengthened grade present is found in Skt. kṣṇáuti ‘to grind, whet, rub', zero grade
pres. ptc. kṣṇuvāná-. If this contained a nasal infix, it is archaic, as is clear from Lat.
novācula [f.] 'razor', a denominative or deverbative formation from *novāre <
*ksnovāre. The nasal was also introduced in non-presentic forms, e.g. ptc.perf.
kṣṇutá- (= Av. hu-xšnuta- 'well-sharpened'), verbal noun kṣṇótra- [n.] ‘whetstone'.
One may further compare Lith. skústi, 1sg. skutù 'to shave, plane, etc.', if somehow
transformed from *ksu-. See έw, ▸ Faívw.
.
шστρα [?] · чʊкtpíç, yúktpia (H.). <?>
•ETYM The gloss is probably corrupt, since чuкτp- is unknown. It has variously been
corrected to чηktpic, yńktpia, or the lemma changed to εúστpα. The word is usually
given under έw, but this need not be correct.
B
0
6- 1 copulative prefix. <IE *sem- ‘one'>
●VAR In ő-лaτpos ‘of the same paternal descent' (A 257, M 371), órátpios (Lyc.); in
ő-tpixeç ïññoɩ ‘horses with like manes' (B 765) and the glosses óуáστwp. dµoyáotwp,
öyεç. óμóvуɛç (H.); also in oléτɛaç.
•ETYM Probably, Aeolic for copulative ȧ- 1. Semantically, it often comes close to
►ó- 2. Seе ►ŏлα.
►ỏ-
6- 2 'close by, near, with' vel sim. <?>
⚫ETYM Assumed to be a fossilized prefix cognate with Av. and Skt. ā- 'towards, away
from' <*(H)o-, in order to explain ó- in ỏкéλλw 'to drive ashore' beside ►кέλλw, and
further oτpúvw, ►ökoç 1, ►öoxn, öчov; for further details, see the separate words.
In view of the paucity of the examples, this analysis is probably wrong. More forms
are mentioned in Pok. 280f., but almost all of these are now explained by an initial
laryngeal.
ò [pron., art.] demonstrative ‘this one, that one' (Il.), later article. <IE *so, to- 'this
one'>
•VAR Fem. ǹ, Dor. ȧ; the nom.pl. oi, fem. ai (epic, Att.) is analogical for toí, taí (epic,
Dor.).
•DER Also substantivized öç, in kai öç, ñ 8' öç ‘said he', etc. (Il.).
⚫ETYM An old demonstrative, originally only nom.sg.msc. and fem., retained in
several languages: e.g. Skt. sá(h), fem. sá, Go. sa, fem. so, ToB se, fem. sā, and OLat.
sa-psa ‘ipsa' with innovated forms sum, sam, sōs, sās ‘eum, eam, eos, eas'. All are
from IE *so(s), *seh₂.
óá [interj.] interjection of pain (A. Pers. 117 and 122 [lyr.]). <ONOM▷
•VAR Also óã.
•DER Besides ová, ovā interjection of admiration (Arr. Epict., D. C., Ev. Marc. 15, 29);
oval of pain, 'woe' (LXX, J., NT).
•ETYM Cf. Lat. vāh, interjection in various mgs., as well as vae utterance of pain, Go.
wai 'woe'; further forms in Pok. 1110f. On ó-, ov- as a rendering of a w-sound, see
Schwyzer: 313.
ỏa 1 [f.] ‘elderberry tree, mountain ash, Sorbus domestica' (Thphr.). <IE *Hoi-ueh₂-
'yew'>
●VAR Ion. őŋ, oïŋ; variant ova. The fruit is called öov or ovov [n.] ‘elderberry' (Pl.
Smp. 190d, Hp., Thphr., Dsc.).

=== page 547 ===

1042
ŏa 2
⚫ETYM Words reminiscent in form and meaning of ŏa are found in many languages:
Lat. uva [f.] 'grape', which may derive from IE *Hoiueh₂-, like ŏa; a derivation
*oiuii̟ā- is assumed in Arm. aigi ‘vine'. Further, Lith. (j)ievà, Latv. iēva [f.] ‘alder
buckthorn', the Slavic group of Ru. íva [f.] ‘willow', the Celto-Germanic word for
'yew', e.g. Olr. eó [m.], OHG iwa [f.], and OPr. iuwis 'yew'. It remains uncertain
whether these words have a common origin, and/or whether we must reckon with
old loans. Alb. vo-dhë, va-dhë 'rowan tree' were borrowed from Gr. őa, oïŋ.
öa 2 'hem, border'. →wa.
oap, öapos [f.] ‘wife', only in óápwv [gen.pl.] (I 327); wpɛσσiv [dat.pl.] (E 486); ỏapaç⋅
yáμovç. oi de yuvaiкaç 'wives, others: women" (H.). <PG?>
•DER Thence ỏapíšw [v.] ‘to have a private conversation, to consort with someone
intimately, to chat' (Il., h. Hom.), only pres. and ipf.; Ŏapos, usually plur. -o [m.]
'cosy intercourse or conversation', also 'ditty' (h. Hom., Hes., Pi., Call.), probably a
back-formation; also ỏapiστús [f.] (Hom.), later oαpiσμóç, usually plur. -oí [m.]
(Hes., Call., Q. S.), óαpíσμаτα [pl.] (Opp.) 'intimate, close or colloquial conversation,
billing and cooing'; ỏapiστns [m.] ‘close friend' (T 179, Timo); on mg. and use of the
verbal nouns see Benveniste 1948: 70, Porzig 1942: 181f.
•ETYM Looking at the denominative oapí(w, it is thought that őap originally meant
'confidential intercourse', whence 'confidential company, wife'. A good etymology
has not been found. Several proposals have been made (see Frisk) where the initial ó-
would be either the Aeolic variant of copulative à- ‘equal, together with', or ò- 2
'to, with'. Regarding the second member, these proposals do not convince, however.
Ruijgh 1967a: 386f. supposes that the Linear B ideogram for 'woman' (MULIER)
developed into the sign for wo, suggesting that there was a Pre-Greek word *woar
'woman' (cf. ►Sáμap).
ößбnv [adv.] in the face, overtly, public' (Call. Fr. 522, Lampsakos; A. D. Adv. 198,7
[where also öẞSηv]). <IE *h₂ek"- 'face'>>
•VAR Only in ɛiç (¿ç) ößdŋv.
•ETYM Adverb in -§ŋy from ò̟ë-, the root found in ò̟ëý, öчoµaɩ, etc., with ɛis like in
ès ăvta.
oßeλóc [m.] 'broach' (Il.), ‘obelisk, bar of metal used as a coin or weight, oboľ (= the
sixth part of a drachme), ‘obelus, horizontal line used as a diacritic'. <PG>
•VAR Att. óẞoλóç, Dor. Arc. ódɛλós (also Nic.), Thess. ¿ßɛλλóç.
●COMP ỏßolo-σtáτŋs [m.] “obol weigher”, i.e. ‘petty usurer' (com.), tpi-wßolov,
Dor. -wdɛlov [m.] (-w- by compositional lengthening) 'coin worth three obols,
amount of three obols = half a drachme' (Th., Ar.); also ódoλkaí· óßoλoí (H.) from
*68e入-o入kaí?
•DER 1. Diminutive òßɛλíσkoç [m.] ‘(little) spit, needle, obelisk, etc.' (Att., Hell.); 2.
ößeλías (ǎptos) ‘bread roasted on a spiť' (Hp., com.); 3. ößeλíτns = -ías (Poll.); 4.
ỏßɛλɛia ( = ia) [f.] name of an iron object (Att. inscr.), -ía [f.] ‘obol tax?” (Cos Iª); 5.
óßɛλ-añoç like a broach' (medic.), oßoliaños 'worth an obol, weighing an obol'
ößpula
1043
(Arist.); 6. oßeλiw [v.] ‘to mark with an obelus' (Cic., Hermog.) with ỏßeλioµóç [m.]
‘marking with an obelus' (sch.); but ỏßolioµós [m.] ‘carriage rate' vel sim. (pap. III³).
•ETYM The variation : ẞ in odɛlós : óßɛlós can seemingly be explained by
assuming an original labiovelar *g", but a number of problems remain in the
reconstruction of a pre-form: 1) non-Aeolic oẞελós instead of expected odελóc
cannot be easily explained by analogy, as e.g. Frisk s.v. states; 2) there is not enough
evidence for early vowel assimilations in Greek, for which oẞoλóç is taken to be one
of the main examples (see Van Beek fthc.b). Thus, it was assumed (Schmidt KZ 32
(1893): 321ff.) that unaccented *e regularly developed to o if accented *ó followed in
the next syllable, with at least one consonant separating the vowels. However, if
óẞoλós would reflect such an old assimilation & > o, then the vocalism of ỏß/dɛλós in
all other dialects would be hard to understand; 3) the geminate in Thess. óßελλóç is
unexplained; 4) the word was etymologically connected with ẞéλos 'missile’, but the
initial ỏ- cannot be accounted for (cf. ►ò- 2). Extensive discussion of the word (also
in compounds) in Tod Numismatic Chronicle 7 (1947): 1-27. The word is clearly Pre-
Greek (see Fur. 389).
ößpia [n.pl.] 'cubs of wild animals' (E. Fr. 616); cf. iẞpíкaλo⋅ xoчpoι 'young pigs' (H.).
<PG(V)►
●var óßpikáλoioi (A. Ag. 143 [lyr.]), ¿ßpíxoiσi (A. Fr. 474, 809 Mette).
•ETYM For oẞpixa (perhaps -o₁?), compare animal names and hypocoristic
formations like óptálixos, dooixos (Chantraine 1933: 403f.); óßpíkala (-01?) seems
to have a combination of suffixes -к- and -λ-; further unclear. Vendryes REGr. 32
(1932): 496 supposes Sicilian origin. Fur.: 1913, on the other hand, assumes Pre-
Greek origin with interchange ò-/ i-. Although this would be a rare interchange, the
variation in the suffixes -K- and -X- seems to confirm this.
ößpчuos [adj.] 'strong, mighty' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Ŏμẞpчos with prenasalization.
•COMP As a first member in oßpчo-лáïpŋ [f.], epithet of Athena and others, having
a mighty father'.
⚫ETYM The word ößpчoç is traditionally compared with words that have no initial ỏ-
and a long stem vowel: Вpчóç· µéyaç, xaλɛñós ‘huge, hard' (H.), ßpчáo̟µí
✗αλεлαívw, to be hard to deal with', Bpчw [f.] epithet of Hecate, Persephone, and
others (see ßpiŋ), all of which are probably related to ßpíw, ẞpiapóc. The short
in ößpчo may have been taken from äλкчoç and other near-synonyms, but the o-
yields serious problems: it is neither a prefix nor a prothetic vowel. The variation
oẞpi- Bp probably points to Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 246, etc.), as does the
prenasalization.
ößpv【a [f.] ‘assaying of gold' (Just. Edict. 11). <?►
•DER óẞpučiaкóç and oẞpulos ‘pure, i.e. having been assayed', of gold (pap. IV-VIP,
sch.).
ETYM A technical loanword, compared by Benveniste RPh. 79 (1953): 122ff. with
Hitt. huprušhi- name of a pot, as the word originally indicated the pot in which the

=== page 548 ===

1044
ǒ ydooc
gold was tested. Borrowed as Lat. obrussa (since Cic.), later obryza, -iacus (since
IVP).
öydoos [adj.] ‘eighth' (II.). ◄IE *h¸ekteh¸ ‘eighť, *h¸ekth¸-uo- (?) ‘eighth’▷
●VAR ỏydóatos (Il.); after τéτpaτoç, etc.
•COMP As a first member probably in ỏyðódiov. Ovσia лap³ Aðŋvaíois tedovµévi
Onoɛi 'sacrifice brought to Theseus by the Athenians' (H.), probably of a sacrifice
brought "on the eighth day"; cf. on ▸aúτódiov.
•DER òydoaños ‘appearing on the eighth day' (Plb., Plu.). On òydoác, -ńkovta, etc.
see ► OKTÓ.
⚫ETYM The Greek ordinal 'eighth' goes back to toydofos (cf. Old Corinth. [by] Sófa),
which is an enigmatic form beside the cardinal óкτw for at least two reasons: the
voiced cluster -yd- and the suffix -ow- that it seems to contain. It is possible that the
voiced cluster is analogical after ßdoµos from *septm-o-; Sommer 1950: 24f. even
considered the possibility that the cluster in a pre-form *oktų-o- developed an
anaptyctic -o-. However, nowadays one usually reconstructs *(h)ekt(e)h-uo- with a
suffix *-uo- added to the form, seen in the cardinal *hekteh. Rix 1976: 172
reconstructs *(h)ekthu-h₂o-, assuming voicing of the cluster by the *-h3-, which was
afterwards vocalized to yield -o-; this is an ad-hoc solution.
Another question is whether or not the -u- is part of the stem (cf. Skt. aṣṭáu). It is
found in Go. ahtuda ‘öydoos', OHG ahtowi [pl.] ‘eighth (as an office)', and in Lat.
octāvus (with -ā- perhaps by dissimilation *-eh¸uo- > *-eh₂uo-; Schrijver 1991: 300).
ỏyкáoµaɩ [v.] ‘to cry, roar', of the ass (Theopomp. Com., Arist., Luc.). <IE? *h,enk-
'groan'>
•COMP Also with лpo-, σuv-.
●DER Öykŋois [f.] (Corn., Ael.), -ŋ¤µós [m.] (Luc., Nonn.), -ŋµα [n.] (gloss.) 'roaring,
bellowing', also of oxen; -ŋotýs [m.] ‘crier' (AP), -nŋστɩкóç 'inclined to crying' (sch.);
óукwdns 'id.' (Ael.).
⚫ETYM An intensive formation, like Boáw, yoáш, μvкáομαι, etc. A direct formal
counterpart is Lat. uncare 'to drone', of a bear (Suet.). An e-grade (IE *henk-) is
found in Ru. jačáť, 1sg. jačú ‘to groan, call plaintively', Alb. nëkon, Gheg angój ‘to
groan, sigh, lament'. Celtic and Germanic have various forms in the same meaning
from IE *h,ong-, e.g. MIr. ong 'groan, sigh, lament', MLG anken 'to groan, sigh';
further, Lith. iñksti ‘to groan, sigh', ùngti ‘id.', etc.
The word may have been onomatopoeic in origin. However, De Lamberterie RPh. 73
(1999): 37f. now derives it from öyкoç 'swelling'. Borrowed as Lat. oncare 'to cry', of
an ass (Suet.). See also Ŏкvoç 2 'bitter'.
öукɩov [n.] 'name of a chest for iron and bronze ware' ( 61, Hermipp. 16). <?►
•VAR Also -íov.
⚫ETYM Details unknown; in Poll. 10, 165 σкεŨоç лλεктóν, a plaited tool. It is therefore
unclear whether it belongs to ŏyкoç 1 (as a chest with hooks or handles) or to
►ÖYкoç 2 (as a carrier).
byxvn
1045
öyкoç 1 [m.] ‘barbs of an arrow, chock' (II., Philostr. Im., Moschio apud Ath. 5, 208b).
<IE *h₂onk-o- 'curvature'>
⚫VAR Further öyкη⋅ уwvía 'corner, angle' (H.).
⚫ETYM Identical with Lat. uncus [m.] 'hook', as an adjective 'curved'; Gr. Öykɩvoç
'barbed hook' (Poll. 1, 137 v.l., sch.) comes from Lat. uncinus [m.] ‘id.' (Vitr.). For
further cognates (e.g. άykáλŋ, áyкúv), see on ►áykúλoç.
öykoç 2 [m.] 'mass, burden, weight; dignity, pride, show-off, also as a notion of style
(IA). <IE *h₂onk-o- 'curvature', ?*h,onk-o- 'burden">>
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. úлép-oукoç 'excessively large, exaggerated,
haughty' (Pl., X.), rarely as a first member, e.g. ỏykó-qwvos ‘with a hollow and
pompous tone' (of a trumpet; sch.).
•DER 1. Adjectives ỏyк-ŋpós ‘bulky, extensive', mostly metaph. 'pompous' (Hp., X.,
Arist.); wdns bulky, bombastic' (Pl., X., Arist.); óyкúλoν· σεμνóν, уабрov 'proud,
haughty' (H.), together with (S-)ỏykúλλoµaí, -vλóo̟µαi [v.] 'to be swollen, be puffed
up' (Hp., Ar.); compar. Ỏyкóτɛpoç 'bulky' (Arist.), superl. -τατos (AP). 2. Verb
ỏукóoμαι 'to be puffed up, swollen, elated', -ów ‘to raise, exalt, etc.' (IA), also with
prefix, e.g. Sɩa-, ¿ε-; thence (di-, ¿½-)öykwσiç ‘swelling' (Arist., medic.), (¿§-)öykwµa
'swelling' (Hp., E.). From H.: òykiai. Oŋµwveç, xwµατα 'heaps, piles'; öуêη. µéуæð
'magnitude' (cf. on ►öykoç 1).
ETYM In the sense "what is carried, load, burden", taken to be an o-grade verbal
noun to the root *h,enk- (seen in the reduplicated aorist vɛyкɛīv). A problem with
this analysis is the Schwebeablaut that has to be assumed, as the root is rather
*h,nek-. Jouanna CRAI (1985): 31-60 has claimed that the meaning 'burden' is not
attested, and that all attestations can be understood from a meaning 'swelling', which
may have developed from ‘curvature' (and, like ►öyкoç 1, be derived from *h₂onk-).
öyдoç [m.] 'furrow, swath, line of scythed grass or grain', also of the course of the
moon and the sun, etc., ‘strip of land, which is (or ought to be) scythed down or
cultivated in another way', also as a field-measure (Il., pap. imperial period). <IE
*h₂og-mo- 'trajectory'>
•DER έлóуuoç ‘presiding over the öyчos', epithet of Demeter (AP); óуµεúw [v.] 'to
form an o., to move in an ő.' (X. Cyr. 2, 4, 20 of the drivers; S. Ph. 163 of the wounded
Philoctetes), εл-oуµεúw (kúкλov) [v.] 'to move in circles' (Tryph. 354); perhaps also
"Oyчuos name of Heracles among the Celts (Luc. Herc. 1)?
ETYM A term of agriculture. As a verbal noun to ǎyw (öyчov ǎyɛɩv Theoc. 10, 2),
öyμos may be identical in origin with Skt. ájma- [m.] ‘trajectory, draught'. It is hard
to imagine parallel innovations, since the suffix -mo- was not productive in Greek.
This is one of the good examples showing that *h₂0 > Gr. o.
öyxvŋ [f.] ‘pear tree, Pirus communis', also ‘pear' (Od., Thphr.). <PG?➤
•VAR Also Ŏxv (Theoc., Call., Nic.), őууva· äлov 'pear (tree)' (H.).
•ETYM Hypothetically connected with yxos ‘lance', if this was originally a lance of
pearwood. Of course, this remains a wild guess. Cf. ►ȧxpás and ►äxɛpdos, both
'pear (tree)'. Fur.: 13159 connects кóуxva ai öуxvaι (H.), and thinks the word is Pre-
Greek, also on account of the by-form öxvn (ibid. 279).

=== page 549 ===

1046
ódá
0
ódá [adv.] 'with the teeth, clenching one's teeth' (ódà èv xɛíλɛσ Qúνтεç α 381 = σ 410
= 268; also com., e.g. Ar. V. 164 diατpážoμαι τoívvv ódáž τò díкTUOV); perhaps in
different mgs. at three places in the Il. (e.g. A 749 ódà λov odaç; cf. X 17, B 418).
< PG➤
•DER Three verbs: 1. óðaк-τá‹w (Call., A. R.), -τíšw (D. H.) 'to bite, gnaw' (cf.
λaktí¼w : λáč); áðaкτã• кvýеoµαι 'to itch' (H.). 2. ódáε-oμα, -w to scratch (oneself),
to itch, be scratchy, gnaw', also -άoμai (-éoμα), -άw; variant άdážo̟µαi, -áoµai; fut.
-σoμα, perf. ptc. wdayµévos (S.), aor. wdážaτo (AP); wбáyµηу• ¿êvnoáµnv (H.);
ódážεi toiç ódovσι Sáкvε 'bites with the teeth', folk-etymological explanation (H.);
ódayчóç (à-, S. Tr. 770), ódaž-ŋoµóc (Hp., Ph., Plu.) ‘itch', -ητкós (Poll.), -wdŋs
(Aret.) 'scratchy, causing itch'. 3. ádaxεi 'scratches, itches' (Ar. Fr. 410), ádaxã. kvα,
KVÝÐεɩ kɛQaλŃv, чunaqa 'scratches the head, touches' (H.).
•ETYM Both ỏбaк-τά¶w, -τí¶w and ódáɛ in H. have been derived from ódáε, which
traditionally translated as 'with the teeth'. However, it is hard to derive óðáž-oμaɩ,
-άoμat, which is attested better and earlier, as well as άdax-ɛĩ, -α, if we start from
such a meaning. For the oldest attestations of odά (II.), 'with the teeth' is not
directly evident, although it seems possible. Bechtel 1914 rendered odά in these
places with 'itching, scratching' (after ódážoμα). The later meaning 'with the teeth'
would have arisen from a folk-etymological connection with odwv and dáкvw.
The forms with á- have traditionally been explained by vowel assimilation (Schmidt
KZ 32 (1893): 391f.), but this has now become doubtful (see Van Beek fthc.b); they
rather point to Pre-Greek origin. It is also quite possible that the original reading was
áday-, and that this was replaced by 68- at some point by folk etymology, as áday-
was less well-known. The aspiration in άdax-a, -ɛi does not have to be explained as
analogical (Schmidt 1.c.), but may be a variant of a Pre-Greek phoneme as well. The
same holds for the interchange between -кT- and -- in the verbal forms. For all these
reasons, the former derivation from a zero grade *h3d-nt- must be dropped. See
►áðaуµóç.
ódaxāç [?] · kataлúушv. Tapаvτīvot ‘lecherous, lascivious (Tarentinian)' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
odun [f.] 'smell, scent'. öw.
ódóλvvot [m.]? · εpéẞivot 'chick-peas' (H.). <PG(S)►
.
⚫ETYM Clearly a Pre-Greek word; cf. öλuvoç.
ódós 1 [f.] ‘road, street, ride, journey, march' (Il.), metaph. 'way out, means' (Pi., IA).
<IE *sod- 'course'>>
•COMP Many compounds, like odo-лoiέw [v.] ‘to clear a path, pave the way' (Att.),
with -лoúa [f.] 'road construction' (X.), -лoιóç [m.] 'road worker' (X., Aeschin.,
Arist.); ódoι-лóрos [m.] 'traveller, wanderer' ( 375, trag., com.) with -лopía, -íŋ
'journey (on land)' (h. Merc. 85, Hp., Hdt., X.), -лopέw [v.] 'to cover a distance,
travel, cross' (Ion., trag.); ódoι-dóкoç [m.] ‘highwayman, robber' (Plb.); the first
member retained a locative ending in order to avoid a sequence of three shorts. As a
second member e.g. in ɛ-odos 'well-roaded' with εvod-ía, -έw, -ów (Att.), also in
ódúvŋ
1047
εïσ-, ë‹-, µéð-, σúv-odoç, etc. ‘entrance, etc.' (since к 90), used as verbal nouns of εio-
Léval.
•DER 1. ÖÔLoÇ (ẻv-, nap-, -, etc.) ptng. to the road’ (Il.); 2. Tả ỏÔaĩa [n.pl.] ‘goods
traded along the way' (0 163, 0 445; cf. ódáw below); 3. -oduкóç, in е.g. μɛеod-кÓÇ
'methodical, systematic' (Hell.); 4. odwτós ‘equipped with roads, practicable, doable'
(S. OC 495; cf. ódów); 5. ¿dítns (rap-, etc.) [m.] 'traveler, wanderer' (II.); 6. ödioµa
[n.] 'road construction' (A. Pers. 71 [lyr.]), cf. teixioµa.
Denominative verbs: 7. odɛúw 'to travel by road, wander' (since A 569), very often
with prefix, e.g. ₁-, -, -, лар-, συv- (partly from dí-odoc, etc.); thence
(-)ödevσis (IA), etc.; 8. ódów ‘to show the way, lead (Hdt., A., E.); 9. ódáw (¿‹-) ‘to
sell' (E. Cyc.); odεïу· лwλɛïν 'to sell' (H.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally, ódós is connected with a Slavic word for 'course', e.g. OCS xod
[m.] ‘ßádioµa, Spóµoç', Ru. xod 'course, progress', which (like ỏdós) frequently
occurs with a prefix, and may have its initial (x- instead of s-) from compounds with
prefix (pri-, u-, per-). However, the absence of traces of Winter's Law in the Slavic
word (lengthening of the preceding vowel by influence of the glottalic stop *d)
makes it probable that xod was borrowed from Iranian. A further connection has
been proposed with IIr. verbs like Skt. ā-sad- 'to tread on, go on', Av. apa-had- 'to go
away, become weak'.
The relation between all forms mentioned and the root *sed- 'sit' remains unclear.
Thus, the Greek noun ódós remains isolated.
ódós 2 [m.] 'threshold'. ovdóç.
ódoús [m.] 'tooth'. ⇒ódwv.
ódúvŋ [f.] ‘pain, torment, harm, sorrow' (II.). <IE *h3d-un- 'pain'>
•VAR Mostly plur. -ai.
•COMP As a second member in e.g. лεpi-údυvoç 'very sore, painful' (Hp., Att.), -w-
compositional lengthening; thence лɛpɩwdvv-ía [f.] (Hp., Pl.), verbs -έw (medic.),
-áw after ódvváw; rarely as a first member, e.g. in oduvý-qaτos (óduvηQατα
чápμaкα E 401 = 900, also of píčav A 847; after this Orph. L. 345, 753) 'soothing,
mitigating', an incidental poetical formation after ápηï-paτoç, etc., but with
remarkable active mg.
●DER óðuv-ŋpóç, Dor. -ãpós ‘dolorous, painful (Pi., Att.), -wdŵç [adv.] ‘painfully'
(Gal.), -aitɛpos 'more painful' (Hp.) as if from *òduvaños after oxodaítɛpoç, etc.
(Schwyzer: 534); ódvváw [v.] ‘to hurt, grieve', -άoμa 'to be hurt, suffer pain' (IA),
rarely with -, кαт-; thence oduvματα [pl.] 'pains' (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Beside IA odúvη stands Aeol. Súvaç [acc.pl.], cited in Greg. Cor. 597. On this
basis, it was assumed that the vocalic interchange is due to vowel assimilation ε > o
before v. However, this is improbable; as argued by Kortlandt 2003: 94 and 199, a
form attested only in Gregory of Corinth (XIIP) cannot be taken so seriously.
The form ódúvη was taken to be an enlargement in -ā- of a verbal noun in -ur, -uen-,
-un- from the root *hed- ‘eat'. Semantic parallels were adduced by Frisk (Hor. curae
edaces, Lith. ėdžiótis 'to trouble oneself beside ėdžióti 'to devour, bite', from ěsti 'to
eat'), and odúρoμα 'to wail' was compared as well. A further representative of

=== page 550 ===

1048
38úpolar
*hed-ur, -un- has been seen in Arm. erkn, gen. erkan 'birth-pain, heavy pain'. On the
further basis of OIr. idu ‘birthpangs', from which he derived from PCelt. *edwon-,
Schindler KZ 89 (1975): 53-65 reconstructed an original feminine paradigm
*h,éduō(n), gen. h,dun-és, nom.pl. *héduon-es.
However, the initial laryngeal was *h3-, like in ►ódúv; cf. Kortlandt 2003: 94 and 199,
where Schindler's analysis of the Irish and Greek words is criticized on good
grounds. The comparison with Armenian is doubtful, because acc. to Kortlandt, a
cluster *dw did not yield Arm. rk (ibid. 88ff.). He starts from a root *h¸ed- ‘to bite,
sting' also seen in Lith. úodas ‘gnat' < *h¸od-o-. Van Beek (p.c.) suggests that this root
is continued in the verbal roots meaning ‘stink, smell' (Gr. ►ö(w) and ‘hate' (Lat.
ōdī), on which see LIV² s.vv. 1. *hed- and 2. *h¸ed-, but that the original meaning was
'to sting'. Within Greek, wdís may also be related.
ódúpoµaι [v.] ‘to wail loudly, lament, grieve, mourn, bewail' (II.). <IE? *h¸d-ur, *h¸d-
un- 'pain'>
•VAR Non-presentic forms are rare: aor. ódúpaσ0α, pass. wdúpеŋy, fut. óðvρoñµai.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. åл-, KAT-.
•DER ỏdupµóç [m.] (trag., Pl.), öðupµa [n.] (trag.) ‘wail, lamentation', óðúp-tnc [m.]
'who breaks out in lamentations' (Arist.), -TIкóç 'inclined to lament or to wail'
(Arist., J. Plu.).
•ETYM Perhaps a denominative yod-present to the r-stem alternating with the n-stem
in ►ódúvŋ, so originally 'to feel pain'. As a rhyme of μúpoμaι, dúpoμai arose.
ódúσ(o)aσbai [v.aor.] 'to be angry, grumble' (II.). <IE? *h₂ed- 'hate'>
•VAR Perf. pass. ódŵdvσtai (ε 423), aor. pass. óðvσ¤ñvaɩ (H.).
•ETYM Beside the aor. ódúσ(σ)ασðai (ódúσavto Z 138, ódvoσáµievos τ 407), we find
ovбúεται épíε 'fights, quarrels' (H.), probably with metrical lengthening: a
formation like ►ηлúw, ¡§pów, µεÐów, etc. If not analogical after other verbs denoting
a state in -úw, ódúoμа may derive from a u-stem noun *odu- (óvσñvaι,
ódúvσται may have a secondary -σ-). This has been compared with a verb for 'hate'
seen in Lat. ōdī, odium, Arm. ateam, and with a Germanic adjective for 'dreadful':
OS atol, ON atall (Hitt. hatuki- 'terrible, frightful' is unrelated; see on ►άτúčoµaι to
be terrified' and Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. hatuk-zi).
'Odvoσɛúç [m.] son of Laertes and Anticleia, king of the island Ithaca (II.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Epic also Odvoɛús (metrical shortening? Cf. on Axiɛúc). Several by-forms
with λ (cf. Schwyzer: 209 and 333, Heubeck 1961: 24ff.): Olvσ(σ)εúç, 'Olut(t)eúc,
'Olioɛús, etc. (vase-inscr.), Ovλižεús (Hdn. Gr.), Lat. Ulixēs. The form with -8- is
only ascertained by epic literature.
•DER 'Odvoñïos (σ 353); 'Odúσσɛia [f.] 'the Odyssey' (Hdt., Pl.) with 'Odvσσɛlakós
'belonging to the Odyssey' (Hdn. Gr., sch.), τà 'Odúσσaα 'Odyssean games' (Magn.
Mae. III); Olio-σɛïdaɩ [m.pl.] name of a family (opáτpα) in Thebes and Argos
(inscr.).
•ETYM Connected by the epic poets (e.g. τ 407ff.) with ódúσσoµat, which is folk-
etymological (Linde Glotta 13 (1924): 223, Risch 1947: 82f., Stanford Class. Phil. 47
(1952): 209ff.). Modern interpreters sought the origin of the name in the Greek West
ódúv
1049
or on the continent on the one hand, and in Asia Minor on the other. Those who
argue for western, Illyrian-Epirotic origin are Helbig Herm. 11 (1876): 281 (doubts by
Kretschmer 1896: 280ff. with Ed. Meyer), Krahe IF 49 (1931): 143, and van Windekens
Herm. 86 (1958): 121 ff.; for continental origin, Boßhardt 1942: 138f. (also on the
phonetics); for origin in Asia Minor, Hrozný Arch. Orbis 1 (1929): 338, Gemser
Archiv für Orientforschung 3 (1926): 183 (from Babyl. Hitt. Ul(D)uš?; on this, see
Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1930): 215), and Kretschmer Glotta 28 (1940): 253 and 278
(Odysseus as an Anatolian hero, related to Hatt. Aúčŋs, Lyd. Aíos). Doubtful
attempts to connect the name 'Odvσσɛús with the name of his maternal grandfather
AUTÓλUKOÇ by Bolling AmJPh. 27 (1906): 65ff. and Bolling Lang. 29 (1953): 293f.
However, the name is typically Pre-Greek (see Fur. index) on account of the many
variants. Faure's connection with oλiyos (Faure 1980: 33) is therefore wrong.
odov [m.] 'tooth' (Ion.). <IE *h3d-(o)nt- 'tooth'>
•VAR odoúc (Arist., LXX); gen. ódóvτoç; Aeol. plur. dovτɛç (only Procl., Greg.
Cor.).
•COMP OSOVτ-áуpa [f.] 'forceps for drawing teeth' (Hp., Arist.), xavλt-ódwv (Hes. Sc.
387, ntr. -ódov and -ódovv Arist.) 'with protruding teeth'.
•DER 1. odovτápiov 'little cog' (Heliod. apud Orib.), ódovt-ís [f.] name of a fish (pap.
III), ãç [m.] dentatus', -íaç [m.] 'dentiosus' (gloss.); odontitis [f.] 'toothwort,
Dentaria' (Plin.). 2. Adjective oódovт-ɩкós ‘ptng. to the teeth' (medic.), -wτóç
'equipped with teeth' (Hero, Luc., Gal.), with odovτóoμαι [v.] 'to be equipped with
teeth' (Poll.). 3. Verbs: odovτ-táw 'to teethe' (Gal.) with -íaois [f.] 'teething' (Dsc.,
Gal.), -w 'to equip with teeth' (Orib.), 'to polish (with a tooth)' (pap.), together
with -toµós (Poll.), -toμa (Eust.) 'the grinding of teeth'.
•ETYM The younger nom. ódoús for ódúv is perhaps after didoúç. The form ódúv,
gen. ódóvτoç agrees with the old name of the tooth in Skt. dán [m.], Lith. dantis [m.,
f.], and OHG zan(d), all from IE *h3d-ont-. A zero grade *h3d-nt- is found in Go.
tunbus (unextended tund- still in Go. aihvatundjai 'horse's tooth'; cf. De Lamberterie
RPh. 74 (2000): 278), Lat. dēns, etc. The original ablaut is still alive in Skt.: gen.sg.
datás <*h dnt-ós beside acc. dántam; cf. also the Germanic forms. The zero grade is
assumed by some in Myc. o-da-ke-we-ta, -tu-we-ta, -twe-ta '(wheels) with teeth', but
this is uncertain; see Aura Jorro 1985-1993 2, 16.
Aeol. dovτεç (with secondary barytonesis) was taken to suggest that óóvτ- stands
for earlier *¿dóvɩ- with vowel assimilation. Therefore, one used to reconstruct *h,d-
ont- as 'the eating one'. However, there are a couple of problems with this view. First
of all, the attestation of the Aeolic form (twice in a late secondary source) is doubtful.
Further, the initial ó- is neatly matched by Arm. atamn (Kortlandt 2003: index),
which points to *h3-. It is further confirmed by vwdóc, which requires *n-h3d-o- and
can hardly be secondary. The root *h3d- means 'to bite' and is also seen in Lith.
úodas, Latv. uôds ‘gnat', both from *h¸od-o- with long vowel by Winter's Law, and
within Greek with ►ódúvη (see there for further suggestions). The Aeolic form can
easily have έd- after dw. See ▸vwdóc, ► aiµiwdéw.

=== page 551 ===

1050
ŏoç 1
öšos 1 [m.] ‘branch, twig, bough, offshoot' (II.), also knot or eye on a tree (Thphr.).
<IE *hesdo-, *Hosdo- 'branch'>
•VAR Aeol. vodos (Sapph.).
•COMP As a second member in e.g. лévɩ-ošos ‘with five knots', as a name of the hand
(Hes. Op. 742), лɛvtá-ošos ‘with five knots (Thphr.).
•DER ÓČ-wdŋs ‘branchy, having many knots' (Thphr., Dsc.), -wτós branchy', -aλéos
‘id.' (AP), after å aλéos; óšóoµai [v.] 'to put forth branches' (Hp., Thphr.).
•ETYM Old inherited word for 'branch', identical with Arm. ost, gen. -oy, Go. asts,
OHG ast, from IE *Hosdo-. Beside these, we find OS and MLG ōst ‘knot in wood,
knarl' with deviating length. Traditionally analyzed as *o-sd-o- 'sitting on (the stem)',
containing a prefix ►ỏ- 2 and the zero grade of *sed-; cf. on ï¼w (s.v. ►ëľoµai). It has
also been compared with Lat. nīdus 'nest' < *ni-sd-o-.
However, Lubotsky draws attention to the fact that there are various words with
similar formation and meaning: Skt. ádga- ‘knot, sprout (of bamboo)', MP 'zg 'twig',
and MoP azg 'twig' seem to reflect *Hodsg()o-, and OIr. odb 'knot', MW oddf 'knot'
go back to *osbo- < *Hosg"o-. Hitt. ḥašduer- can also be compared; see the discussion
in Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. Taken together with Gr. ölos, Arm. ost and Go. asts 'branch'
< *Hosdo-, we seem to be dealing with a preform *Hosdg"o- (that may have
undergone metathesis to *Hodsgo- in Indo-Iranian). Lubotsky therefore assumes
that the word was in fact an old compound with the first element *hest(H)- ‘bone'.
ocoç 2 in ocoç Apnos, a nickname of brave heroes (Il.). ǎocoç.
ŏw [v.] 'to smell, scent' (IA). <IE *h₂ed- 'smell'>
•VAR Also őσdw, -oμai (Theoc., Xenoph.); aor. óšñoaɩ, fut. òšñow (Att.), also òšéσal,
-έow (Hp. Superf., Hell.), plpf. odwdɛt (Od.), perf. ödwda (Hell.).
●COMP Also with prefixes like åл-, лроσ-. As a first member in the governing
compound òó-στоμоç 'with smelling breath' (AP, M. Ant.), as a second member in
plantnames like кuv-óČoλov (Ps.-Dsc.).
●DER 1. ódµý [f.] ‘odour, scent' (Il.), óσµý (Att., Hippon.); on σu from dμ see below;
as a second member e.g. in εű-odμoç, -oσμoç 'sweet-smelling, odorous' (Pi.), also in
övooµa [n.] plantname? (Dsc.); thence ódµ-aλéos (Hp.), -ńɛɩ (Nic.), -ŋvóc (H.; cod.
ö8-) 'strong-smelling'; boμ-wdns (Arist., Thphr.), -ŋpós, -pηs (Nic.) 'id.'; ooμúλ-11,
-os, -tov 'strong-smelling octopus' (Ar., Arist.), ooµ-ítŋs (gloss.), -ītɩç (Ps.-Dsc.)
plantname, -ác [f.] = Ŏvoσμа (Dsc.); ódμ-, óσμ-áομa [v.] 'to scent' (Ion., Arist.),
óðµ-áðµaí
with-nois (Aret.).
2. From the present: ő-aiva [f.] = óσµúλŋ (Call.), ‘stinking adenoid' (Gal.) with
-atvikós 'belonging to the oaiva' (Ps.-Dsc.); öolic [f.] = ỏσµóλŋ (Arist.); öčŋ [f.]
'malodorant breath' (Cels.), 'skin of the wild ass' (Suid.), because of the smell; ó\n\íç.
ǹ ßotávη (Theognost.); óládéç = ódµádŋs (EM, sch.); also 'Olóλai [m.pl.] name of a
Locrian people (Hdt., Str., Plu.)? Lengthened present oαívoμα = öw (Sophr.), after
ošaívoµai
ooopaivouai. 3. From the perfect: odwdń [f.] 'scent' (AP). 4. the suffix -wdns in εv-
wdns 'sweet-smelling, odorous' (Il.), etc.; it became a highly productive suffix, but
with a faded mg.
30óvn
1051
⚫ETYM Apart from the perfect ödwda, all verbal forms are clearly innovations based
on the present öw. The derivations are largely based on this present, as well. The
formation of odwdń (derived from the perfect?), as well as of odµý and -ŵdŋç, is
isolated within Greek. Both can be old: ódμn may match Alb. amë 'unpleasant smell'
< IE *hed-mh₂-, and -ódŋs may represent (with compositional lengthening) the s-
stem of Lat. odor, OLat. odōs, probably also seen in Arm. hot, gen. -oy 'smell, odor' <
IE *hed-os-. The form ỏσµý rather derives from *od-s-mā than phonetically from
óð-μý.
Both IE *hed-mh₂- and *hed-os- presuppose a primary root present, which is
continued in thematic form in Lat. olō, olĕre (with 1 for d); beside this, we find the
more common innovation oleō, -ēre (after the intransitive verbs). The yod-present
öw was first thought to differ in vocalic length from Baltic forms like Lith. úodžiu
'smell', but the formation is in fact identical, as it is now known that the Baltic
vocalism is due to Winter's Law: lengthening before a glottalic (i.e. voiced non-
aspirated) consonant. Arm. hotim 'to smell' is a denominative of hot (see above).
The present Arm. hototim (with intensive reduplication) may present a formal
parallel to the reduplicated perf. ödwda. See oσopaívoμai.
öðɩša · áñývn ýµoviкý ‘wagon drawn by mules' (H.). <PG?►
•ETYM Lagercrantz KZ 35 (1899): 273 and Frisk 1966: 283 adduce oμa. Possibly
Pre-Greek.
óðvɛños [adj.] ‘foreign, alien' (Democr., Att., Arist.), ‘irregular' (Gal., Aret.).
●COMP ỏеv(ε)ɩó-Əvμßos 'buried abroad' (Man.). → Ovos.
=>
öoμai [v.] 'to attend, turn to, take heed' vel sim., only with negation (Il., A. R.). <?>
•VAR Only presentstem, except öðεσαν· εлεστрáqŋσav ‘turned around, paid
attention to' (H.).
•DER From H.: 60έwv. opovτí(wv ‘heeding', öŋ. oppovtís, wpa, qóßos, Móyos
'thought, care, fear, mind (etc.)' and öɛσav (see above).
•ETYM Not well explained; the o-vocalism is remarkable in a present. Several
proposals have been made, but all at best hypothetical: a) connection to Go. ga-
widan, etc.; b) to óðɛúɛɩ· äyɛɩ, œpovτíšɛ (H.), Lith. vedù ‘to lead, bring', etc.; c) to
Dëluv, I củĐéc, „ ë0cpa (see Frisk s.v.). See » vuông
60óvn [f.] 'delicate cloth, linen, sheet, canvas' (Hom., Emp., Act. Ap., Luc., Gal., AP).
ALW Eg.➤
●Var Usually plur. Also óðóvov [n.], often plur. (Hp., Att., Hell.).
•COMP óеоνо-лwλŋs 'salesman of linen' (pap.).
•DER ỏеóvɩvoç 'made of o.' (Pl. Com., Luc.). From óóviov: 60ovɩ-aкós [m.] ‘id.'
(pap., inscr.), -npá [f.] '‘linen tax' (pap., Ostr.); diminutive o0ov-ídtov (pap.).
•ETYM A culture word of foreign origin. Acc. to Lewy 1895: 124f., it is from Hebr.
'ēṭūn of uncertain meaning; however, Spiegelberg KZ 41 (1907): 129f. has proposed
Egyptian origin for this word (Eg. idmj 'reddish linnen').

=== page 552 ===

1052
60óvva
óðóvva [f.] ‘greater celandine, Chelidonium maius', also of the sap of this and other
plants (Dsc., Plin.); name of an Egyptian stone (Paul. Aeg.); as a botanical name also
60óv<v>tov (Dsc.). <LW Eg.>
•ETYM Recalls óðóv-ŋ, -tov, and hardly accidentally. Acc. to Dsc. 2, 182, it originates
εу τч кατ' Айуʊлтоν Аpαßíα, and acc. to Plin. HN 27, 12, it is Syrian.
öpı [adj.] 'with the same hair' (Il.). ◄GR➤
⚫ETYM Composed of ò- 1 and Opíε.
ö¤poov [adj.] · óµóðwvos, σúµqwvos having the same voice' (H.). <GR➤
•ETYM Composed of ►ỏ- 1 and a verbal noun of ▸ ▶ Opéoual.
"Opus, -vos [f.] high chain of mountains in Thessaly (Hdt., Str.), also öеpuv. Kρñτεç
τò opoç 'mountain (Cret.)' (H.). <PG►
•DER From it ỏ0pvóεv. τpaxú, úλwdeç, daov, kpŋudes overgrown, forest-like,
rough, steep' (H.).
ETYM Acc. to Mahlow 1927: 497, it stands for oopus, with variation 0 : 4 (cf.
Schwyzer: 302f.). Fur.: 198 compares Myc. o-du-ru-we, -wo (cf. Ruijgh 1967a: 185439).
The name is no doubt Pre-Greek.
oi [pcl.] onomatopoeic, expressing pain or suffering (trag.). <ONOM>
=>
•VAR ỏí acc. to Ar. Pax 933. →óïšбç, oïµol.
o'ťaž, -ākos [m.] ‘handle of the rudder, rudder' (trag., Pl.), oŋkɛç [pl.] name of a
device on the yoke (a handle? rings? 2 269). <IE *h₂(o)iH-s- 'pole, shaft'>
•VAR Ion. -η\, -NKOS.
•COMP As a first member in olaкo-vóμoç [m.] 'helmsman' (A. [lyr.]), cf. Sommer
1948: 166; as a second member perhaps in кɛp-oíaкɛç (from кɛpα(1)-oíaкɛç) [pl.]
'ropes belonging to the yard-arm' (Luc. Nav. 4).
⚫DER Diminutive oláкlov (Eust.); olaк-ηdóv [adv.] 'in the manner of an oïa' (A. D.);
denominative olaк-iw (-n-) [v.] 'to pilot, steer' (IA), with -toua 'steering' (Trag.
Adesp.), -tστýc (Suid.); oiák-woiç ‘steering' (Aq.). Also oinïov [n.] 'rudder' (Hom.).
⚫ETYM An instrument name, oïaž is formed like лópлã ‘handle of a shielď, τpóη
'handle of an oar', and oi½ïov like λatoniov ‘a kind of shield', έpyaλ½ïov ‘tooľ, etc.
The base of the Greek words was an old s-stem PIE *h₂(o)iH-s-, reflected in
thematicized Skt. iṣá [f.] 'pole, shaft' and Hitt. hišša- ‘id.', which both point to a zero
grade. The origin of the Greek o-grade is unclear. The s-stem is also found in Slavic,
e.g. Sln. oję, ojęsa [n.] ‘thill'. The nautical usage is a Greek innovation; cf. on ► loτóç,
which came to mean 'mast'. The IE noun is also preserved in Fi. aisa 'bar of the
forked pole (thill)', probably from Baltic *aisō or *aisa-. According to H. Katz 2003:
252, the noun is preserved as an IIr. loan in other Uralic languages too.
oiẞos [m.] 'back of the neck of a cow' (Luc. Lex. 3). <?►
ETYM Does it occur in oxiẞos?
oуvчш [v.] 'to open' (Il.). <IE *h¸ueig- 'give way'>
•VAR Also otyw, Aeol. inf. oɛíуny (SGDI 214, 43), later also ȧv-otyvúw (Demetr.
Eloc.), ipf. wуvuvão (B 809, ℗ 58), ȧva-oíyɛσкov (N 455), -@yov, -έwyov, aor. oižai
!
oidéw
1053
(ε, witε Hom., ȧv-éčɛ Hom., Att.), pass. oixОñvai (Pi., Att.), fut. oïεw, perf. ȧv-
éaya (intr., Hp. and late), with -έwxα, *-έwyµαɩ (Att.), wïктαι (Herod.), ȧv-@ktal
(Theoc.).
●COMP Mostly with prefix, especially ȧv- (to which úπ-, лap-avoíуvýµu, vit-, ovv-
avoíyw, etc.), with the secondary past tenses "volуov, кvošα, ηvoíxēŋv, ǹvoiyny,
ηvéwa, etc. (X., LXX).
•DER Few derivatives: ǎvoiiç [f.] ‘opening' (Th., Thphr.), ǎvoɩy-µα [n.] ‘opening'
(LXX), -εúc [m.] ‘opener' (Dam. Pr.), έлavoiк-τwp (Man.), -τηs (Arg. Man.) [m.]
'who blows up'. As a second member in ле-oíу-ta [n.pl.] 'opening of a barrel,
opening of the Anthesteriae in Athens (Plu.).
•ETYM The judgment of these forms remains rather uncertain. The most recent
discussion is by Forssman 2005. He concludes that on the basis of the Greek
evidence, an ablauting root *òƑεɩy-/ *òƑɩy- can be reconstructed. Starting from
epigraphically attested ỏɛiyŋy < óƑεíуηy and the zero grade w(F)íyvuvão (cf. "yvuvão.
ŋvoiyovτo [H.]), ȧvaoíyɛσkov, ávéwyɛ, ȧvéwɛ in Homer can be replaced by earlier
*ȧv-ofɛíуɛσkov, *ȧv-ó(Ƒ)εɩуɛ, *ȧv-ó(F)εtε. There is no certain etymology. The form
OFLY-, OFεy- corresponds formally to Skt. vijáte, vejate 'to tremble; to shrink, start
back', Skt. véga- = Av. vaĕya- [m.] 'violent movement, pressure, clash, blow' < IE
*huóigo-, etc. See ►έnúxato.
olda [v.] ‘to know' (II.). <IE *ueid- 'see, look, know'>>
•VAR 2sg. oloa (Il.+), olobas (com., Att.), oldaç (Ion.); ipl. duεv, Att. ĭouεv after the
2pl. στε. The initial i- in the 3pl. Toãoɩ is measured both long and short in Homer;
this is explained by assuming a pre-form *uid-san, with different dialectal
developments, by Ringe (Jr.) MSS 50 (1989): 123-157. For the forms (e.g. subj.
εdoμεv, inf. ɛidévaɩ, "dµεvai, plpf. εη) see Chantraine 1961: 189f.
• ETYM An old perfect, identical with Skt. véda [1sg.], vidmá [1pl.], Go. wait [1sg.],
witum [1pl.] ‘know', from IE *uóid-h₂e [1sg.], *uid-mé [1pl.]. Other cognates are OCS
vědě ‘I know' with middle inflection, formally = Lat. vīdī. From the perfect arose the
present Arm. gitem 'to know'. Other correspondences are, among others, 2sg.ipv.
σ = Skt. viddhí, ptc. ɛidwç = Go. weitwops 'witness', fem. idvĩa = Skt. vidúṣī. In
Greek, idɛiv 'to note, observe' is used as an aorist; cf. also ► vñïs.
De Lamberterie (in DELG Supp. s.v. olda) wrongly assumes a root *huid- on
account of vñis (Call.), which is a late form and can easily be a secondary formation,
while there are no forms with ε(F) 18- or ε(F)ε18- (and cf. "Spic, idµoσúvη, Bivio). On
the basis of Celtic evidence, Schrijver KZ 112 (1999): 264-272 argues that the plpf. йεn
'he knew' continues a stative stem *ueid-eh,-.
oidéw [v.] 'to swell' (ε 455). <IE *h₂oid-eie- 'swell'>
•VAR Also oidáw (Plu., Luc.), oidaívw (Hell. poet.); oidάvoa, -w (I 646 and 554, Ar.,
A. R.), oidíσкoμα (medic.), act. -w 'to make swell', aor. oidñoa (IA), oiбñvai to
oidaivw (Q. S.), perf. wdŋкα (Hp., Theoc.).
•COMP With prefix, especially ȧv-oidéw, -oidiσkoµai, -oɩdaívw; also with dɩ-, ¿‹-.
•DER 1. oldµa [n.] 'flood of water' (Il.), after кūµα; cf. kvéw : kỹµa, dokéw : Sóyµa (or
from a lost primary verb); oidµatóɛiç 'flowing' (A. Fr. 69 = 103 Mette, Opp.). 2. oidos

=== page 553 ===

1054
Oisínovs
[n.] 'swelling' (Hp., Nic., Aret.); cf. кpatéw: kpátos. 3. oïd-ŋµa [n.] 'swelling' (Hp.,
D.) with -ηµáτov (Hp., Aët.), -ŋµatódŋs (medic.); (ȧv-, di-, -, etc.)-oídnois [f.]
‘bulge' (Pl., medic., Thphr.). 4. (¿л-, úvл-)oidaλéos ‘swollen' (Archil., Hp.), to oidaívw
like kɛpdaλéos : kepdaívw. 5. oïdā [m.] ‘unripe fig' (Poll., Choerob.), from oidos or
oidéw. 6. Backformations: üлodos 'somewhat swollen' (Gal.), to úit-oldźw; ¿voidýc
'swollen' (Nic.), to έv-oidέw. See also ▸Оidíñovç.
•ETYM Of the presentic forms, only oidέw could be old. The causative oidávw arose
by enlargement, together with the intr. oidávoμaɩ, and in the same way oidíσkoμai,
-w; oidaivw would be analogical after кuдαívw, ópyaívw, etc., or perhaps from
oidñσai after кɛρdñσαι : кɛpdaívw, etc. The late and rare form oldáw was formed to
oidñoal. Sometimes, oidéw is held to be an iterative-intensive formation, but a
corresponding primary verb is not attested. A certain cognate is Arm. aytnum 'to
swell' with the primary aor. ayteay and the noun ayt (i-stem) 'cheek' < IE *h₂oidi- or
*h₂eidi-; the nu-present is an Armenian innovation. Germanic presents a few isolated
nouns, like OHG eiz, MoHG (dial.) Eis 'abscess, ulcer', from PGm. *aita- < IE
*he/oid-o-, cf. formally close oidoç [n.]; a suffix -r- is found in e.g. OHG eittar [n.]
‘pus' < PGm. *aitra- [n.], and perhaps also in HNs like Eiter-bach. Lat. aemidus is
isolated as well (probably after synonymous tumidus), deviating from oidέw in
vocalism, but in this way it proves that the root was *h₂eid-, not *heid- (the other
non-Greek forms may continue both IE *h₂oi- and *h₂ei-). The Slavic group of OCS
jado 'poison' is open to more interpretations: they can also be derived from *h,ed-
'eat'.
Оiбíлovç [m.] king of Thebes, son of Laios, who unknowingly married his mother
Iocaste after he had killed his father. <GR➤
•VAR Also -лоç (AP), -лоυ, -лоυу (Hdt., trag.), -лodos (Apollod.), -лoðα (Plu.);
besides, after the patronymics, the following metrical variants of *Oidɩródāç, -ŋç:
gen. -лóбãо, -лóðã, aсc. -лóðãν (epic poet.), -лódεw (Hdt.), etc.; see Schwyzer: 582,
Fraenkel 1912: 163f., Sommer 1948: 38, Egli 1954: 14 and 17.
•Der Oidiñódɛia [f.] 'the saga of Oedipus' (Arist.; after ǹ Odúσσɛα), also τà
Оidɩлódɛα ‘id.' (Paus.) from Оiðɩñódɛtos [adj.] (Plu., Paus.).
⚫ETYM Properly "with a swollen foot", with regular change i ro in Oldı- and IE
*h₂oid-ro-, which is found in Gm., e.g. OHG eittar ‘pus'; see ▸oidéw. Improbably, on
the meaning of the first element, Schröder Gymnasium 63 (1956): 72 ff. (to ON eista
'testicle'); quite hypothetically, Kretschmer Glotta 12 (1923): 59f. (chthonic
interpretation).
oiétɛas [acc.pl.] ‘of the same year, of the same age' (B 765). ◄IE *sm- ‘same' + *uet-s-
'year'>
⚫ETYM For *ỏ-Éτɛαç (see ỏ- 1 and τoç 2) from *oƑéτηs, with ot as a reversed
notation for metrical lengthening. This notation can be understood in connection
with the antevocalic change of ot to o in Attic (e.g. εлóŋσɛ); it also occurred in Ionic.
öïçûç [f.] ‘bale, wailing, suffering' (Il.). <ONOM
•VAR oičúc (trag., Herod.), -úoç.
•COMP лάv-oιuç 'consisting of nothing but misery' (A. [lyr.]).
i
olkoç
1055
●DER ỏïšū-póç (also -pwτɛpoç, -póτatoç metrical lengthening, see Chantraine 1942:
102 and 258), secondarily ocupó 'woeful, miserable, poor' (epic Ion. since II., Ar.);
oïúw (Ď) [v.] 'to wail, suffer', aor. -ñσal.
⚫ETYM An expressive word, ultimately derived from the interjection of (Ion. o after
Ar. Pax 933), probably through a verb oïчw, oïw (only A. D. Adv 128, 7ff.). See
►oiμwчw, ▸oľкTOÇ.
o'n 1 [f.] ‘elderberry tree'. →őa.
oïŋ 2 [f.] ‘village' (Chios IVª, A. R., H., Theognost.); Att. deme name Oa (also Oia, "On,
Oin). <?>
•COMP Perhaps as a second member in Oivón.
●DER oiñtaɩ [m.pl.] ‘villagers' (S. Fr. 134), oiατãv• kwµŋtõv ‘villagers' (H.), Oiātai
[m.pl.] inhabitants of a deme in Tegea (Paus. 8, 45, 1; reading uncertain). Besides
wßá [f.] name of a Spartan tribe (IG 5(1), 26: 11 [II-Iª], Plu. Lyc. 6) with wßátaç. toùs
qvλétaç ‘tribal members' (H.), wßážaɩ to divide into wßaí (Plu. ibid.); also wyń (=
wfŋ)• kwµn ‘village' (H.), wás (was cod.). tàs kwµaç, ovaí· qvλaí ‘tribes' (H.). Details
in Baunack Phil. 70 (1911): 466f.
⚫ETYM The word on has been identified with wßá = *wƑá under a pre-form *wƑíā.
Formerly derived from *Ƒда and compared with Go. gawi 'xwpa, лεрíxwpоç,
district', which is interpreted as PGm. *ga-awja- [n.]. This is unlikely, however; see
Lehmann 1986 s.v. Further details are obscure.
ointov →oïa².
olкoç [m.] ‘house, dwelling of any kind, room, home, household, native land' (Il.). <IE
*ueik-, uoik- 'house'>>
•VAR Dial. FoчкOÇ.
•DIAL Myc. wo-i-ko-de/woikon-de/ ‘homeward'.
•COMP Very many compounds, e.g. oiкo-vóµos [m.] ‘housekeeper', with -voµéw,
-vouía (Att.), compound of olкov vélieiv, -eoðai; pét-oikos (IA), itedá-folkos (Arg.)
‘sbd. living among others, small farmer, tenant'; έлoíк-tov [n.] ‘outbuilding,
countryhouse, village' (Tab. Heracl., LXX, pap.), hypostasis of έπ oľкov.
●DER A. Substantives: 1. τà oiкía [pl.] (II.), sing. τò olкíov (since LXX) ‘residence,
palace, nest'. 2. oiкía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] (post-Hom.), Folкía (Cret., Locr.) 'house, building'
together with the diminutive oiкidov [n.] (Ar., Lys.), oiкin-τηs (Ion.), folkiá-taç
[m.] (Locr., Thess., Arc.) = oiкέτηs (see 5.), oiкiα-кóç 'belonging to the house,
oikέtŋs
housemate' (pap., Ev. Matt.). 3. Rare diminutives oiк-íoкoç [m.] 'little house, little
room, bird cage' (D., Ar., inscr.), -ápiov [n.] 'little house' (Lys.). 4. oikɛúç (II.),
Foɩkɛús (Gort.) [m.] ‘housemate, servant'; fem. Folkέa (Gort.). 5. oiké-tns (IA),
Boeot. Fuкé-τaç [m.] 'housemate, servant, domestic slave', fem. -üç (Hp., trag.),
together with -TIкóç (Pl., Arist., inscr.), -Tɛíα [f.] 'the whole of domestic servants,
attendants' (Str., Aristeas, J., inscr.); oiкɛTɛúw [v.] 'to be a housemate, occupy' (only
E. Alc. 437 [lyr.] and H.); compound лаvокɛσíα [adv.] 'with all oiкétaɩ, with the
whole of attendants' (Att.).

=== page 554 ===

1056
OIKTOS
B. Adjectives: 6. oikɛчoç (Att.), oiк½ïoç (Ion. since Hes. Op. 457) 'belonging to the
house, domestic, familiar' together with -εóτηs (-nïótns), -elów (-niów), whence
-ɛiwμa, -ɛiwσiç, -EIWTI-KÓÇ. 7. Oiкídios ‘id.' (Opp.); кατoιк-ídios (to кατ' oйкov)
'indoors' (Hp., Ph.).
C. Verbs. 8. oikɛw (Il.), foikéw (Locr.) 'to live, reside', also 'to be located, occupy,
manage', very often with prefix, e.g. ȧñ-, di-, ¿v-, ¿π-, kat-, µet-. Thence oïk-ŋois
(late also doiк-εois), -ñoipos, -ŋua, -nuatiov, -nuatikós, -ntýp, -ntńplov, -ńtwp,
-ntýs, -ntikós. 9. oiкí(w 'to found, settle' (since μ 135 άлкɩσε), often with άn-, di-,
кατ-, μεT-, σUV-, etc., whence oк-tolç, -loía, -loµós, -lotĤs, -LotŃp, -10TIKÓS.
Adverbs: 10. oкo-0εv (Il.), -0ɩ (epic), -σε (A. D.) beside the fossilized locative o❞k-ou
(Il.), -ε (Men.), a recent formation? 11. okα-de 'homeward' (Il.), Foíкade (Delph.),
probably from (Ƒ)oīкa [n.pl.] like kέλɛvða, kúkλa, etc.; oľкa-dıç (Meg.); further
oikóv-de (epic).
•ETYM Old name for ‘abode, house', identical with Lat. vīcus [m.] 'group of houses,
village, quarter', Skt. véśa- [m.] 'house', especially 'brotheľ'; IE *uóik-o- [m.].
Additionally, there is a zero grade root noun in IIr. and Slav.: Skt. viś- [f.], acc. viśam,
Av. vis- [f.], acc. visam, OP viðam 'abode, house, community', also 'house of kings' in
Iranian; OCS vбsь [f.] (secondary i-stem) 'village, field, piece of ground', Ru. ves'
'village', from IE *uik- [f.]. Next to these old root nouns, IIr. has a verb Skt. viśáti,
Av. visaiti, IE *uik-e/o- meaning 'to sit down, settle, enter'. IE *uóik-o- must be
derived from this verb, originally as an action noun, properly “settlement”. Gr. tà
oikia and Skt. veśyà- [n.] ‘house, village', though formally identical, are separate
innovations (Schindler BSL 67 (1972): 32). The word τpiɣáïкɛç is probably
unrelated.
oiкtos [m.] ‘lamentation, compassion, pity' (Od.). <ONOM▷
•COMP Rarely as a second member, e.g. π-oкτoç ‘pitiable' (A.), äv-oɩкτos 'pitiless'
(S., E.).
⚫DER Primary superlative oкtiστos (X 76), qiλ-oiktiστos loving pity the most' (S.)
from qiλ-OIкTOS (A. [lyr.]); thus the rare oiкTIкóç 'ptng. to lamentation, lamenting'
(An. Bachm.) and oiкtoσúvŋ [f.] = oľкτoç (Hdn. Epim.). Old is oiкτpós 'woeful,
wailing, deplorable' (Il.), as a first member e.g. in oiкτpó-уoos 'with woeful
lamentation' (Pl. Phdr. 267c); probably (in spite of the difference in gender) to
olкτos after aĭoxos: aioxpós, xos: ¿xós, etc., cf. also the pair oкɩɩστоs :
αioxiσtos.
Denominative verbs: 1. From oiкτрóç: oiкτĺpw 'to pity, commiserate, bewail' (II.),
Aeol. oiкτippw (Hdn. Gr.), aor. oiкτīpaι, fut. oiкτipш (Att. also -τɛpw after itacistic
-tɛīpaɩ, -tɛipw) late -τ(ε)ipnow (LXX, NT), also with кat-, etc.; thence oiкτip-µóç
[m.] 'compassion, pity' (Pi., LXX, NT), -μwv 'compassionate, pitiful' (Gorg., Theoc.,
LXX) with -μoσúvn (Tz.); *oiktíp-дw is supposed to continue *oiкτp-ɩw with an i-
colored schwa secundum. 2. From OÏKTOÇ: OiкTÍČw, -oμα ‘id.' (trag., Th., Arist.), also
with кat-, etc., whence oikt-toµós [m.] 'bewailing' (A., X.), -íoµata [n.pl.] ‘id.' (E.),
KATOÍкT-IσIÇ [f.] 'wailing, compassion' (X.).
⚫ETYM Like oÏÚç with comparable meaning, olкτoç probably also derives from the
interjection or via oï w; the close connection appears from the backformation
oĭμoç
1057
► Svooiw, from Súσ-oiкτoç. Comparable nouns from interjective verbs in -(w are
frequent, e.g. aïaуμа, аiaкτós (to aiáčw, aiai), ßáßaž, ßaßáкtηs (from ßaßáčw,
Baẞai), etc. Doubtful non-Greek combinations, such as Go. aihtron 'beg' and MIr.
éigid 'screams', are given in Pok. 298. See ►óïľúç, ►oiµw(w.
oiкvla [n.pl.] 'a kind of pulse' (Epic. in Arch. Pap. 7, 7). <?►
•VAR OÏкελOÇÓ лíσоç (Theognost Can. 20.); oiкuloç. τò óσлрíov (ibid. 21).
⚫ETYM Recalls Lat. vicia.
oчμa [n.] 'rush, attack, rage', of a lion and an eagle (Il.), of a snake (Q. S.). <IE? *h₂eis-
'move quickly'>
•DER Verbal forms: aor. oчµñσa 'to plunge, dash forth', said of birds of prey and of
people compared to birds of prey (X 140, 308, 311, w 538), fut. oiµñσovoi (Orac. apud
Hdt. 1, 62), of Oúvvoɩ, with oµµа· öpμŋµa ‘rush, incitement' (H.). A supposed but
unattested present *oiµáw seems, just like the o-vowel, to presuppose a noun *olµoç
or *oµn (beside an original ntr. *siµa).
⚫ETYM Probably from *oloua, related to Av. aēšma- [m.] 'anger', which is compared
with an IIr. verb 'to put in quick movement, urge forward' (e.g. Skt. pres. íşyati, Av.
išiieiti, perhaps related to laívw) as a primary noun. Lat. ira 'anger' belongs to this
group as well. See ►óïσtós, ▸olotpoç.
on [f.] 'song, chant, saga, tale' (Od., A. R., Call., etc.). <IE? *soh₂i-m- 'song, spell'>
•VAR In similar use also oчµoç άoɩdñç (h. Merc. 451), έлεwv olµov (Pi. O. 9, 47), Xúpηs
oчμovs (Call. Iov. 97).
•DER ǎoчov äppηtov ‘unsaid' (H.), substantivized hypostasis лpooíμov (Pi., Att.
prose), opoíμov [n.] (trag.), properly "what stands лρò oчµηs or éрò oччoυ (older
oïμov, see oчμoç)", start of the song, introductory chant, introduction, preamble',
borrowed as Lat. prooemium. Unclear is лαpoчµíα.
• ETYM Because of the occasional connection of msc. olμos with song and play, it has
been thought obvious to connect oчun with olμos 'path, way'. It is supposed, then,
that the word acquired a special meaning in the language of the aoidoi.
Alternatively, however, oчun and olμos 'song, chant' can be separated from olμoç
'path, way' and connected with ON seiðr [m.] ‘kind of sorcery', Skt. sắman- [n.]
'song', which would presuppose a root *seh₂-i- ‘bind (also found in Gr. ►¡µác), as
was proposed by Bader BSL 85 (1990): 36. In this case, the connection with olµos
'road' is folk etymology. The form oчμos cannot reflect *sh₂om-io- (cf. Hitt. išḥamāi-i
'to sing' <*sh₂m-oi-), as *-VmiV- should have yielded Gr. -VivV-.
oчo [excl.] exclamation of pain (Thgn., trag.). ⇒óïšúç, OIKTOS.
oчuos [m.] 'streak' (A 24 oľµoι кvάvolo, on a Owpη\), ‘path, road, track', also ‘strip,
tract of land' (Hes. Op. 290, Pi., trag., Pl., Call., Men.), also connected with song and
play (see ▸oïµn). <?>
•VAR Also [f.] after ödós, etc.; also aspirated oчμoç, see below.
•COMP Few compounds: Súσ-oчμoç (τúxa A. Ch. 945 [lyr.]); acc. to H. = εnì кakų
ňkovσα, dúσodos; äчç· äлоs 'without way' and лáроччoç. ó yɛíτwv 'neighbour'
(H.). See also лароччíа.

=== page 555 ===

1058
oiμww
•ETYM Perhaps related to olun. Since an aspirated form olμoç is ascertained, e.g. by
Hdn. Gr. 1, 546, and by oppoíμov (see on oµn) and ǎoчμoç, a pre-form IE *h,oi-mo-,
which is at the basis of Skt. é-man- [n.] ‘path, walk', cannot be considered. Sommer
1905: 29 therefore proposed a modified reconstruction *h,oi-s-mo-. Osthoff BB 24
(1899): 168ff. earlier proposed a pre-form *uoi-mo-, belonging to ïεμα 'to pursue,
hasten, desire'. Finally, Schulze 1933a: 665 connected oipwv 'εvvwpía'. A 24
requires initial F-, and ǎoчµoç· ǎropos (instead of **ävoчos) may also point to this,
but Hes. Op. 290 does not have F-.
oiμww [v.] 'to wail loudly, cry, lament' (Il.). <ONOM▷
•VAR Aor. oчµŵčaɩ (II.), fut. oiµáž-oµaí (Att.),¾w (Plu., AP).
•COMP Also with άv-, άл-, etc.
•DER oiµwy-ń [f.] (Il.), -µa [n.] (A., E), -µóc [m.] (S.); privative adjective ȧv-oíµwk-
Toç 'not wailed for', adverb ȧv-oчμwк-τí (-Tεí) 'without lamentation' = ‘unpunished'
(S.). An innovation is olµáττw ‘id.' (Lib.).
⚫ETYM Derived from the interjection oчμo (o μot) 'woe me'. See oïÇúc, ► OIKTOS.
o'vn [f.] 'the ace on a die' (Achae., Zen.). <IE *Hoi-no- 'one, only'.>
⚫VAR Also oivóc [m.] (Poll.).
●DER oivíšɛv. tò µovášɛv katà уlwσσav 'be alone regarding speech', oiv@vta.
μovηpη 'solitary' (H.).
⚫ETYM Old word for ‘one, only', found as a numeral in several languages: Lat. ūnus
(OLat. oino), OIr. óin, Go. ains, OPr. ains, IE *Hoino-. In Greek, ɛlç was used in
this meaning. The accentual variation ovη: oivós may be related to the substantival
use of the former. A parallel fomation is ►olos <*Hoi-uo-.
oivos [m.] ‘wine' (Il.). <IE *uoh,i-no- ‘wine', *ueh,-i- ‘turn, twist’▷
•VAR Dial. Foivos.
•COMP Very many compounds, e.g. oivo-xóos [m.] ‘cupbearer', together with -xoέw
[v.], aor. -xoñσa 'to be a cupbearer, pour wine' (II.), epic also -Xoɛúw (only present),
metrically conditioned (Chantraine 1942: 368); oiv-ávěŋ [f.] ‘fruit-bearing bud,
blossom of the vine', also metaph. of the grape (since Pi., Thphr.), also name of a
plant, 'meadowsweet, Spiraea flipendula', because of its smell (Cratin., Arist.), name
of an unknown bird (Arist.); ä-ovos 'without wine' (IA), -oɩvos ‘drunk' (Alex.,
Plb.), back-formation from ¿ε-oɩvóoµai 'to get drunk' (E.). On Oivón cf. ►oïŋ 2.
•DER A. Substantives: 1. Diminutives, mostly belittling: oiv-áptov (D., Hell.), not
from orvapov because of the mg. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 74); -íoкoç (Cratin., Eub.),
-ídiov (Apollod.). 2. o'vn [f.] 'vine' (Hes.), like éλaía: λatov, etc.; oivác [f.] ‘id.' (AP,
Nic.), also 'rock dove, Columba livia', after the color (Arist.); also adjectival
'belonging to the wine' (AP, API.). 3. oïv-apov [n.] 'vineleaf, grapevine' (X., Thphr.)
with -apíç, -apía, -ápɛos, -apíšw (Ibyc., Ar., Hp., Thphr.). 4. oivoûta [f.] ‘wine cake’
(Ar.), also name of a plant with intoxicating effect (Arist.). 5. oivwv, -wvoç [m.] ‘wine
cellar' (X., Hell.). 6. Fotvwa [f.] 'vineyard?' (Thespiaе), cf. лpоðuрóα etc. in Hdn. Gr.
1, 303. 7. Some glosses in H.: oïvwτpov. xápaкα, ñ τǹv äµлελov iστãσɩ ‘pole by which
the grapevine is held upright', yoívaкɛç (= F-). Bλaστoí 'sprouts', yoɩvéɛç кópaкɛç
'ravens', cf. oivάç.
1
oiouar
1059
B. Adjectives: 8. oiv-ŋpós 'containing wine, abundant in wine' (Pi., Ion., Arist.); 9.
-wdŋs ‘wine-like, redolent of wine' (Hp., Arist.); 10. -кós ‘ptng. to wine' (Hell., inscr.
and pap.).
C. Verbs: 11. oiv-ioμa 'to furnish oneself with wine' (Il., late prose), -i(w 'to
resemble wine' (Thphr., Dsc.); with oiv-ɩστýpiα [n.pl.] name of an Attic festival
(Eup., H., Phot.); cf. Avеεστpiα, xapiστηpiα, etc. 12. oiv-óoμal, -ów 'to intoxicate
(oneself)' (Ion., Od., trag.) with -woię [f.] 'intoxication' (Stoic., Plu.). On the PN
Oivɛús see Boẞhardt 1942: 106f.; on the HN Oivous [m.] (Laconia) and on Oivoñσσa
[f.pl.] (islands), see Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 2 (1950-1951): 233.
•ETYM Greek (F)oīvoç looks similar to other words for 'wine' in Soutern European
languages: Lat. vīnum < *uih,no-, U vinu, etc., Arm. gini <*uoin-iio-, Alb. Gheg vênë
<*uoinā-.
The IE word for 'wine' may be reconstructed from these forms; together with related
►"Tus 'willow', Lat. vītis ‘vine', and various other words, it may be derived from the
root *ueh,-i- 'turn, bend'. As the wild vine was indigenous in southern Russia and in
certain parts of central Europe, this assumption is acceptable from a historical point
of view. However, as the cultivation of the vine started in the Mediterranean region,
in the Pontus area and in the south of the Caucasus, most scholars are inclined to
look for the origin of the word in these countries. This would point to non-IE origin.
However, if we put the homeland of viticulture in the Pontus and the northern
Balkans, the word for 'wine' might come from there. In this case, not only would the
words mentioned from Greek, Lat., Arm., and Alb. derive from this IE source, but
also Hitt. uiian(a)-, HLuw. wiian(i)-, and the relevant Semitic words, like Arab.
wain, Hebr. jajin. In Beekes MSS 48 (1987): 21-26, it was pointed out that the Hitt.
form requires *uih,-on-o-; this is now accepted by Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. (with the
modification that the Hittite form is not thematic).
The Celtic and Germanic words were borrowed from Lat. vīnum, and from
Germanic or Latin again the Slavic and Baltic words for 'wine'. From Arm. gini
comes e.g. Georg. yvino.
oľoμα [v.] 'to suspect, expect, think, believe, deem' (Od.). <IE *huis- 'suppose,
assume', *huis- 'see clearly'>
•VAR New presents: úл-oíεσðα· úлovoεïv 'to distrust' (H.), úлεр-oɩáµα to be
arrogant, conceited' (Phot., Suid.; also H.?). By-forms ooμat (Hom.), oчual (trag.,
Att.), also active oïw, ow (Il.), oiw (Lac. in Ar., etc.), aor. otσ(σ)ασða, öïσñvai
(epic), oin-Оñvaι (IA), -σaσa (Arat.), fut. oin-σoμаι (Att.), -еñσoμαɩ (Gal.).
•COMP Sometimes with prefix, e.g. σuv-.
•DER on-σiç [f.] (IA), -µα [n.] (Plu., D. C.) 'conceit, smugness, belief, opinion' with
-ματíaç [m.] 'prig' (Ptol., H., Suid.), -τɩкóç ‘arrogant' (Ph.); àv-wïσ-toç ‘unimagined,
unthought of (epic since 39), -tí [adv.] (892).
ETYM We may consider ooμat (i) and oiw (both i and i) to be the original forms,
and thence oťouat, oïw. Furthermore, oчual arose in unstressed position, together
with the ipf. "µny (Ar.) beside woμny. The oldest forms point to a reconstruction
PGr. *owis-ie/o-, which is supported by öïσñvα and ȧv-wiστoç. Then, o(F)íoμat
developed into *ö(F)дoд> oμα.

=== page 556 ===

1060
oios
Etymological details are unclear. Beekes 1969: 58 assumes a root *huis-. The
comparison with Lat. ōmen 'portent' (OLat. osmen) from *ouis-men- is dubious (see
De Vaan 2008 s.v. for alternatives). It seems preferable to depart from an adverbial
pre-form *h₂ouis directly comparable to Skt. āvis 'evidently, before the eyes'. Then,
bíoμal must be formed with the denominative suffix -ie/o- from this adverb. The
root *heuis is also found in Gr. àíw 'to perceive' and with enlargement in
► aloeávoμai 'id.'.
otos [rel.pron.] ‘of which quality' (Il.).
•VAR Oťa, olov.
⚫ETYM From the relative pronoun ►öç; see also̟ ► tołoç.
ołos [adj.] ‘alone, only, single' (= class. ►µóvoc). <IE *Hoi-uo- 'one, only'>
●VAR Fem. -α (-1), ntr. -ov (Hom., Hes., Pi., A., S.); Cypr. olƑoç.
•DIAL Myc. o-wo-we /oiw-ōwes-/ ‘with a single ear'.
•COMP As a first member in oio-лóλos 'wandering solely, alone' (Hom., Pi.), together
with oiолоλ-éw (E. [lyr.], AP).
•DER oióɛv 'all alone' (H 39, 226); explanation in Leumann 1950: 258ff.;
denominative aor. oiwoñva 'to be left alone' (Il., Q. S.). Details on the use of oloç in
Ruijgh 1957: 127f.
•ETYM Identical with Old Iranian words for 'alone, one': Av. aēuua-, OP aiva- from
IE *Hoi-uo-. Fomation like *µóvƑos > ►µóvos), *öλƑoç > ►öλoç. Beside it stands IE
*Hoi-no-; see ► oïvn. Further connection with pronominal *h,ei- is probable.
oipwv, -wvos [m.] 'furrow of a plough, ǹ xápačiç tov ápótpov' (Eratosth., Hdn.),
‘straight line (in measuring fields), ǹ ¿k tñs kataµetpńoews tñs yñs ɛúðvwpía' (H.);
probably also in Cypr. i-to-i-ro-ni, i.e. iv (= εv) τ oipwvi 'in the region'. <IE? *soHi-
r- 'furrow, limit’>
•VAR Also oi-.
•ETYM Probably a derivative in -úv, which is often used to indicate places, from a
noun *oĭpoç vel sim. Compared with Skt. sītā- [f.] ‘furrow', sira- [n.] ‘plough', sīmā
[f.] 'frontier' by Schulze 1933a: 665, which is semantically and formally quite possible.
The relations between the Skt. words, however, are debated.
öüç [m., f.] 'sheep' (II.). <IE *h,eui- 'sheep'>
it
•VAR Hom. gen. öïoç, nom.pl. öïɛç, etc.; Att. olç, gen. oiós (also Hom.), nom.pl. olɛç;
Arg. ÖFIÇ. Details on the inflexion in Schwyzer: 573, Chantraine 1942: 219. In
prose,
was ousted bу лрóẞατоν.
•COMP Rare compounds and derivatives: oio-лóλos 'herding sheep' (h. Merc., Pi.),
-vóμoc id.' (Delphi IVª, AP, API.). Diminutive oïdov (Theognost.); oïεoç of sheep'
(Hdt., Cos), oéa. μηλwτη 'sheepskin'; olíaç (dialectal for -éαc). τшν лроßáτшν τà
okenaotýpia dépμaτa 'the covering skins of sheep' (H.); also oα. Sißépai, µnλwtai
'hides, sheepskins'; őa• µŋλwτý (H.). Perhaps with lengthened grade (?) wa [f.]
'fleece of sheep' (com., Att. inscr. IV³, Poll., H.). ►оiσлóτη and ►oiσúлŋ are
probably unrelated.
1
ỎI TÓC
1061
•ETYM Old name of the sheep, found in nearly all IE languages, e.g. Skt. ávi-, HLuw.
hawi-, Lat. ovis, Go. awistr 'sheepfold', Lith. avis, all from IE *h¸éui- [m., f.]. The
accusative öïv matches Skt. ávim, while the gen. öïoç equals Skt. ávyaḥ. Additionally,
Gr. olɛoç corresponds to Skt. ávy-aya- (usually -áya-), but perhaps only as a parallel
innovation (see recently Schmitt 1997).
We also find Lyc. Xawa-, with transition to the a-declension (Melchert 1993: 66).
This Lycian X- can point to *he-, contrary to what has often been assumed (see
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. hāui-). The reconstruction *h3e- is also backed by the absence of
ā in Skt. (no reflex of Brugmann's Law).
oloos [m.] kind of wicker, 'chasteberry' (Thphr., Ael. Dion.). <IE *uoh,i-tu- 'wind,
bend', or PG?(S)►
•VAR Also -ós.
•COMP oiσó-кαρлov [n.] 'fruit of the olσoc' (sch., Eust.), for the ntr. gender cf. on
►BOútupov.
=
•DER olσov = σxoivíov 'cord, thread' (H.); oloa, -aкoç [f.] kind of willow (Gp.); on
the formation see Strömberg 1940: 78. Further oloú-a, -n [f.] Aúyos, willow' (Poll.),
oiova ȧypía
Eλžívη (Ps.-Dsc.), with olovoupyóç [m.] ‘basket-maker' (Eup.), Tà
olova [n.pl.] 'basket market' (Lycurg.), oiσú-ivoc 'made of oiova' (ε 256, Th.).
ETYM The pre-forms *uoi-tu-o- and *uoi-tu-ā have been assumed, which would
both be enlargements of *uoHi-tu-, derived from the IE verbal root *uehi- 'to wind,
twist' with a suffix *-tu- and an old o-grade. See on ▶itéα, ▶"τuç. An enlargement is
found in OCS větví [f.] branch' < *uoHi-tu-i-. However, the form in -úa does not
look Indo-European; moreover, oloaε has a Pre-Greek suffix. Is the word Pre-Greek?
oiσoqάyos [m.] ‘esophagus, upper opening of the stomach' (medic., Arist., Thphr.).
<GR➤
ETYM A learned formation, created by a physician. There are hardly any good
attestations of this purely scentific expression. Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 174
explains it as 'the one that carries what is eaten', from oσε and the common
second member -qάyoç. The formally much easier explanation as “olooç-eater”
(Strömberg 1944: 61ff.) cannot be defended. A similar Semitic designation of the
esophagus is Akk. šērittu “that which carries down"; cf. Mayrhofer BiOrbis. 18: 274¹.
oioan →oioian.
оiσлwτη [f.] 'greasy dirt of unshorn sheep's wool, especially on the buttocks', also
'sheep droppings' (Cratin., Ar., D.C., Poll.). <PG(S) ►
•VAR -wτń (Hdn. Gr. 1, 343, H.), like µŋλ-, kŋp-wtý, etc. Also oσлη (v.l. Hdt. 4, 187
[cf. oiσúлη], Gal.), оiσлаι· лроßáτшν кóлроç, þúлоç 'sheep droppings, filth' (H.).
ETYM Analyzed as *oƑI-σлwτη, but with an unclear second member. Connection
with the stem syllable of σлατíλŋ ‘ordure, diarrhoea', etc. is uncertain, as the
semantic function of σлα(τ)- is in need of explanation. The word is rather Pre-
Greek; cf. the suffix -wτ- in àoкαλaẞóτηs (s.v. ►àoкáλaßoç). See Fur.: 188, 384, and
further on oiσún.
óïσtós [m., f.] ‘arrow' (Il.). <PG?>

=== page 557 ===

1062
•VAR OiσTÓC (Att.).
oťστpos
•COMP As a first member e.g. in oïσto-dέyµwv ‘holding arrows' (A. [lyr.]).
•DER OÏσTEÚW [v.] 'to shoot arrows' (Hom., Nonn., AP), also with St-, àл-; thence
OσTEV-TP (Nonn., AP), -τnc (Call.) 'archer', -μa [n.] 'shot of an arrow' (Plu.).
ETYM No convincing etymology. The traditional analysis (see Frisk) as a prefixed
verbal adjective ỏ-ïσ-tóç, related to Skt. iṣyati ‘to bring in quick movement' via a
proper meaning "rushing on, flying towards” (or “urged on, sent off"), is extremely
improbable. DELG correctly supposes this word to be of Pre-Greek origin (not in
Fur.).
oστpoç [m.] 'gadfly, Tabanus bovinus' (X 300, A., Arist.), also of a water-insect and a
bird (Arist., perhaps Sylvia trochilus), ‘sting' (S., E.), ‘rage, madness, fierce desire'
(Hdt., Pl., S., E.). <IE *h¸eis- ‘set in movement, irritate'>
•COMP oiσtpo-rλýš, -yos ‘stung by a gadfly, driven by rage' (trag., of Io, also of the
Bacchantes).
⚫DER Oiστp-wdns 'enraged' (Pl., Epicur.), -neis 'full of stings, stinging, stung' (Opp.,
Nonn.), -óv 'with rage' (Opp.); olστp-άw 'to rouse, rage, roar' (trag., Pl., Arist.),
also -έw (Theoc., Luc., Jul.), aor. -ñoa, also with ȧv-, -, nap-, di-. Thence oστp-
ŋua [n.] 'sting' (S., AP), (лαр-)оïσtp-ŋois [f.] ‘rage, passion' (Corp. Herm., PMag.
Par.); back-formation лápolστpoç ‘enraged, mad' (Simp.).
•ETYM Agreeing in its barytonesis with кéστpoç, xúτpos, etc., olσtpos must originally
be an instrument noun or an agent noun (which amounts to the same thing). If it is
cognate with olμa < *oloμa, and if (like the latter) it is derived from a verb 'to set in
vehement movement, urge, irritate', the word originally meant “urger, irritator". The
actual meanings ‘gadfly', 'sting', 'anger' can be explained from this starting point. An
identical formation, except for the gender, is Lith. aistrà [f.] 'vehement passion'; for
further cognates, see on olµa. See also Gil Fernández 1959: 157. Fick KZ 43 (1909-
1910): 136 compared loτvášɛ. ópуíšɛτα ‘rages' (H.) as a parallel zero grade tv-
derivation *His-tú-, but Latte judges the gloss to be corrupt.
oiʊúa, -n oloos.
oiσúлη [f.] 'the greasy extract of sheep's wool' (Hdt. 4, 187, Hp.); cf. Dsc. 2, 74 with an
extensive description of the preparation; acc. to H. it is ó τñç olòç þúлoç ‘sheep's
ordure'. <PG>
•VAR oσuлoç [m.] (Dsc. 2, 74, Plin., H.); ot̃σлαɩ· лpoßátwv kórpos, púños ‘sheep's
dung, ordure' (H.); oïσëŋ (v.l. Hdt. 4, 187, Gal., Suid.).
●DER oiovë-íç [f.] 'greasy flock of wooľ (Hp.), -ŋpós (Ar.), -óɛiç, -wdns (Hp.) ‘greasy'
(of wool); -ovλádavov (Plin.); oiσúлεov pov рулαрóν лроßáτшν 'greasy wool
of sheep' (H.).
⚫ETYM Explained as *óƑɩ-σúлη, like the synonym olσлшτη, with an unclear second
member. There is clear evidence for the variant oσлη, but it is difficult to decide
whether the form with u or the form without it is secondary; cf. Fur.: 18822 on
Baλ(v)л-. In any case, the word is most probably Pre-Greek (the meaning also speaks
for this). One might think of a labialized s, thus *ois"p-.
i
oïqw
oïow, -oµai [v.] ‘I will bear, bring' (II.). <IE *h¸eit-s- ‘fetch'➤
1063
●var Dor. oiow, -ɛītαι (Ar., Theoc., Archim.), pass. oσðñσoµαι (E., D., Arist.), aor.
inf. olσaɩ (Ph. 1, 116), άv-oīσaɩ (Hdt. 1, 157; -wσaɩ codd.). Subj. έë-oíσE (Arc.),
oσwµεv. кoµíσwμεv ‘transporť' (H.); verbal adj. oiσtós ‘bearable' (Th.), mostly with
prefix, e.g. Súσ-01σTOS 'hard to bear' (Hp., trag.), άv-úл-oιστоç 'unbearable' (Timae.,
D. H.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àν-, άл-, έл-, συv-. As a first element perhaps in
►oiσopάyos esophagus', perhaps also in Oloɛ-(ća (Lesbian fieldname), cf.
Schwyzer: 442 and 445.
•ETYM Except for a few isolated aorist forms (see above) and for olσtós, oïow is
limited to the future tense (on olσɛ, oiσέµεv(α), etc., see Schwyzer: 788 and
Chantraine 1942: 417f.). It stands in suppletion to the durative present pépɛɩv and to
the perfective aorist έvɛykɛiv. The Boeot. PN Avεμ-oíτaç, adduced by Bechtel 1917a:
8f., supposedly meaning 'who carries the wind'(?), cannot be taken as a proof for oi-,
nor can the other names in -oítηs, -oitos (Bechtel 1917b: 346).
Until Tichy Glotta 78 (2002), there was no etymology for olow. Tichy connects it
with Lat. ūtī 'to use' from PIt. *oit-, and argues that the meaning may have developed
from 'fetch (in one's own interest)' to 'use'. Greek olσ- < *oiss- is explained as an s-
present *oit-s-. Melchert 2007 proposes to compare CLuw. hizza(i)- ‘to fetch' <
*hzeit-s-e/o- as well, which was previously translated as 'to bring', but rather means
'to fetch'.
oitóv →ű8vov.
olτoç [m.] ‘fate of men, (unfortunate) destiny' (Il., trag. [lyr.]). <IE *h₂oi-to- ‘share'>
•COMP As a second member in μɛуáλ-αɩτoç ‘burdened with a heavy fate, unhappy'
(Theoc.) and in PNs like 'Ex-oiτηs (Athens; Bechtel 1917b: 345); as a first member in
Oiτó-λivos [m.] “linos of fate” (Sapph. 140b, from Pamphos).
⚫ETYM The derivation of olτos from the root of iéval 'to go' as *h,oi-to- is formally
possible. An identical formation is supposed in the Celto-Germanic word for 'oath',
OIr. óeth, Go. aips, OHG eid, if it originally denoted the walk to confirm an oath; cf.
MoSw. edgång. As an alternative, consider Av. aēta- [m.] ‘punishment, guilt, which
was identified with oĭtos by Bartholomae IF 12 (1901): 139 under an original meaning
'part, share'. It cannot be separated from alσa, aïtioç, etc., and may reflect an
ablaut *h₂ei / *h₂oi. Thus, oltoç may rather derive from *h₂oi-to-, originally 'what has
been granted'; this is semantically much more convincing.
oiqw [v.] 'futuo' (Thera, Gort., Plu. Pyrrh. 28). <IE *h¸ieb¹-, *h¸e-h¸ib¹- ‘enter,
copulate'>
•VAR Uncertain -éw (Mimn.).
•COMP As a second member in quλ-oíqãç [m.] (Theoc. 4, 62), Att. PN Kóp-oɩoç,
also Kóp-oẞoç, for which Kretschmer Glotta 14 (1925): 199 suggested Phrygian
origin.
•DER oiq-óλns [m.] 'fututor' (Naxos; H.), -óλic [f.] (H.).
⚫ETYM The synonym Skt. yábhati, OCS jebo̟, Ru. jebú, can hardly be separated from
o'iqw. Moreover, ToB yäp- ‘to enter' formally identical. It is supposed that Tocharian

=== page 558 ===

1064
oixuń
preserves the original meaning, and that the other languages initially started to use
the word as a euphemism, perhaps after the departure of the Tocharians. The
comparison with ►Čópos and ►Zéqupos is doubtful; see s.vv. LIV² reconstructs a
prefix ỏ- added to a root *ieb- to account for the Greek form, but it is better to
assume a reduplicated present *he-h¸ib"-, as suggested by Cheung 2007: 175, since
the prefix mentioned hardly occurs in Greek (see on ó- 2).
oixuń · doúλn, oï de oixµãv (H.). ◄?►
•ETYM Unknown.
oïxqµɑɩ [v.] ‘to go (away), leave, disappear, die' (Il.), mostly used in a situation with an
accompanying or preceding action, which is expressed by a pres. ptc.: 'to be gone
away, be vanished'. <?>>
•VAR Fut. oixnσouμat (Att.), perf. "xwka, oï- (K 252), õηкa (K 252 v.l., Hell.), med.
xnμα, o- (Ion.).
COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àπ-, εл-, лаρ-, di-, μετ-.
•DER oixvέw [v.] ‘to go, come, walk, approach', also with έε-, ɛio-, etc. (Hom., Pi.,
trag.), also = oxoµai (S.).
•ETYM The pair oxoμαi: oixvéw may be compared with úл-íσxo̟µaɩ : úr-loxvéolai.
The perfect oчxwka, which is attested early, probably arose by analogy with some
semantically close example (Frisk suggests µεµßλwкa).
The main problem with oxoμat is its curious meaning, which seems not to have
been proper to oixvέw, which is durative. It is suggested in LIV2 s.v. *heigh- that
oxoμaι continues an old perfect.
An acceptable connection is provided by the nasal present Arm. ijanem ‘to come
down' (beside Gr. oixvéw, although both may be innovations), 3sg. aor. ēƒ < *oigh-
(i)e-t. On the Armenian verb, see Klingenschmitt 1982: 208f. Furthermore, ToB yku
'gone' [ppp.] is considered to be related; see Adams 1999: 61. A few isolated nouns
are also adduced: OIr. óegi ‘guest' < *oigh-ēt-; Lith. eigà [f.] 'course', but the latter is
rather directly derived from *hei- 'go'. The analysis as an "extension" of the root
*hei- 'go' is gratuitous. See ĭxvoç.
▶
oiwvós [m.] ‘bird of prey, observed by the soothsayer' (II.), 'prognosticating bird,
omen' (Il., also in prose). <IE? *h₂eu-i- 'bird'>
•VAR Óïwvós (Trypho; also Alcm. 60 B 6?).
•COMP As a first member in oiwvo-лóλoç [m.] 'interpreter of birds' (Il., Pi., A. [lyr.]);
in D. H. = augur.
•DER olwvíčoμai [v.] 'to observe the prognosticating bird or the auspices, to deem an
omen, tell fortunes' (X, D., Hell.), rarely with prefixes like µετ-, εε-. Thence olwv-
στns [m.] 'interpreter of birds, augur' (Il., Hes. Sc., D. H.), -iotikós 'belonging to the
bird-interpreter or to soothsaying' (Pl., Arist.), -toµa [n.] ‘omen' (E., LXX), -toµós
[m.] 'id.' (LXX, Plu.), -tστnpiov [n.] ‘omen' (X. Ap. 12), probably after tɛkµýpiov;
'place for observing birds, augurale' (D. H.); olwvεvτns = olwviστńs (pap.).
⚫ETYM Explanation debated. Because of the comparable formation in viwvós (: viúç,
viós), it is probably best derived from a nominal basis. Therefore it is connected with
the IE word for 'bird' seen in Lat. avis, Skt. viḥ, etc. (also reflected in Gr.
alɛτóc).
Į
ÖKVOS 1
1065
The initial ó- has been explained as a case of vowel assimilation since Schmidt KZ 32
(1893): 374, but this is unnecessary: one may assume an o-grade, as does Beekes
Sprache 18 (1972): 21, who departs from a nominative *h₂ou-i-ōn that was
subsequently thematicized. By others, it has been combined with oчa, ▸olστpoç,
► ỏiστós and connected with the root *Heis- 'to put in vehement motion', but this is
doubtful. The connection with @óv ‘egg' by Schmeja IF 68 (1963): 35f. was defended
by Peters 1980a: 292-305.
Öka, ÖKKa →Öte.
ÓKÉλλw =KÉλw.
Óкíστiα [n.pl.] 'harrow' (SEG 13, 13, 120, Athens). <IE *h₂ok- 'sharp'>
ETYM Cf. Lat. occa and Gr. ►óžíva.
ökкaẞoç [?] 'braceleť', = кpíкoç (EM 383, 21), = yéλia (H.). <PG?►
•VAR Lat. inscr. occabus.
⚫ETYM Unknown. With a suffix -ß- (Chantraine 1933: 262); Pre-Greek?
ókųßáľw→okųẞós.
ỏkkūlai · tò ỏkláσai kaì ènì tŵv ittɛp<v>wv ka¤i¢σ to prostrate, sit down on
one's heels' (H.). →óкλáČw.
óкλáčw [v.] ‘to prostrate, crouch down, squat', metaph. 'to sink, abate', trans. 'to abate'
(N 281, Hld.). <?>
•VAR Aor. Ókλáσaι (S.).
■COMP Also with prefix, e.g. μετ-, Úл-.
•DER őkλa-σiç [f.] 'crouching' (Hp., Luc.), -oµa [n.] name of a Persian dance (Ar. Fr.
344b); also oкλa-días [m.] 'camp stool' (Att. inscr., Ar.), -Sía = ökλaσiç (Suid.), -Sóv
(A. R., Nonn.), -dis (Hdn. Gr.), -dioτí (Babr.) [adv.] 'crouchingly, squattingly,
prostratingly'; ókλáž [adv.] ‘id.' (Hp., Pherecr.), after yvúε, лúč, etc.; "Oklaσoç [m.]
PN (sch.), like Aάμaσoç, etc.
•ETYM A noun like *őkλoç, *ỏкλý, or *ỏkλác, but also a verb *ỏкλáw (cf. Saµáw :
Saμáw), may have served as a basis of oкλá(w. Etymology unknown. Note the
glosses кλwкvdá. τò кaðñσðaι εƒ áµotépois лoσív ‘sitting down on both feet',
Ỏккũλαι• tò ỏкλáσai kaì è̟nì tŵv лtεp<v>ŵv кaðíɛσðαι to prostrate, sit down on
one's heels' (H.).
Öкvoç 1 [m.] hesitation, doubt, shyness' (Il.). <?>
•COMP Also as a second member, e.g. ǎ-oкvos [adj.], -ws [adv.] 'without hesitation,
determined' (IA, Hes.), with ȧoкv-ía [f.] 'determination' (Hp.).
⚫DER Adjective oкv-ηpós 'hesitant, doubtful, arousing doubt' (Pi., IA), whence -npía
[f.] = Öкvoç (LXX, pap. VIP), -ŋpɛúw (v.] 'to inspire doubt' (LXX); in the same mg.
also óкv-ηλós (Theognost.), -údns (Dionys. Av.), -aλéos (Nonn.). Denominative
ÓK Vέw (-ɛíw E 255 is metrically conditioned) [v.] ‘to hesitate, tarry, scruple, recoil'
(Il.), also with ȧπ-, кατ-, di-; thencе (ȧл-)óкvησiç [f.] 'doubt, reluctance' (Th., Plu.).

=== page 559 ===

1066
ÖKVOS 2
1067
⚫ETYM Hackstein 2002: 232 suggests the possibility of dissimilation from *h₂onk-no-
(to öyкoç 'hook'), comparing Lat. cunctāri ‘to hang, tarry'.
Öкvoç 2 [m.] name of a big bird, family of the heron, perhaps 'bittern' (Arist., Paus.,
Ael.). <?>
⚫ETYM Identical with ►ökvos 1? The name clearly refers to the motionlessness of the
bird by day.
óropvóç →ákopvós.
ökpɩç [m.] ‘top, protruding point, corner' (Hp.). ◄IE *h₂ok-ri- 'top, protruding'>
•COMP As a first member in oкpí-ẞaç, -avtoç [m.], properly “walking on the top”,
'elevated place, stage, stand' (Pl.). Fur.: 217 takes this word as Pre-Greek, but
without sufficient reason.
•DER Óкpɩ-óɛıç 'sharp-edged, spiky' (Hom., A., Hell. poet.); óкpíç [f.] 'spiky', epithet
of qápayč (A. Pr. 1016); ỏkpi-áoµat [v.] in óкptówvão ‘they incited themselves, they
were fierce' (σ 33), wкpiwµέvos (Lyc. 545); ókpi-á¶w (v.] 'to be brusque, be bitter' (S.
Fr. 1075).
⚫ETYM Identical with Lat. ocris [m.] 'stony mountain', U ukar, gen. ocrer ‘arx, mons',
MIr. och(a)ir 'edge, border', Skt. áśri- [f.] ‘corner, sharp edge'; an o-grade with
suffixal -ri- from *hek- in ► áкpos, etc.
óкρvóɛɩç [adj.] 'morbid, spooky, ghastly' (Z 344, I 64, A. R., AP). <GR>
•ETYM Arose from кpóɛç by false separation in the genitives &ημíoo kpvóevtos
(I 64) and кαкоμηуávоo кρvоćσons (Z 344); see Leumann 1950: 49f. The
phonetically close oкpióεiç may have been an influence (Ruijgh 1957: 103).
óktádiov [n.] · kaλáðɩov пpós óðviðápia 'basket for small birds' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
Ökta入入og =ópdaduós.
ỏкtó [num.] ‘eight' (Hom.). <IE *h¸ekteh¸ ‘eight’▷
•VAR Boeot. Lesb. Óкτó like Súo, Heracl. hoкtó after ‹‹, έétá, El. óлτó after έntá.
COMP As a first element, we usually find Óктα- (after εлτα-, εεa-, etc.) in oкτα-
KóσLOL 'eighthundred' and in many bahuvrīhis like òкτá-μηvos 'eight months old,
eight monthly' (Hp., X., Arist.). Besides, there is oкTw- in ÓкTW-кaidɛкα, ÓкTW-
SáкTUλoç 'with a breadth of eight fingers' (Hp., Ar.), etc.
●DER Further oydoń-кovτa, which (like έẞdoµý-кovτα) may have started from the
basic word, see öydoos. A cross with oкτú gave rise to ỏydw-кovta (B 568 = 652).
After oydonкovτa the late bydoάs [f.] 'group of eight' (Plu.) for oóktás [f.] (Arist.).
Further derivatives: ỏktá-ki(5), -kiv ‘eight times' (Hdt.), òêta-σσóç ‘eightfold (pap.
IIIP), after dioσóc, etc., -xws 'in eight ways' (EM, comm. Arist.).
●etym Gr. Óktó, Lat. octō, Skt. aṣṭá(u), Go. ahtau, Lith. aštuoni, and other cognate
forms go back to IE *hekteh,(u). Arm. ut' was reshaped after the word for 'seven',
like El. ỏлτw. The IE word for 'eight' was clearly an old dual, but further analysis is
quite uncertain.
}
óкwxń [f.] ‘arrest, custody' (EM). <GR, IE *seg"- ‘hold">
●DER ÓкúX-чμoç ‘'answerable, liable' (Cyrene IVª; after ȧywyчµoç?), ókwxɛúɛiv. exeɩv,
σuvεxεv 'to hold (together)' (H., also S. Fr. 327). In literary sources (and perhaps
originally) only with ȧv-, di-, кατ-, etc. (from ȧv-έxw, etc.).
⚫ETYM Reduplicated formation from ►xw; see also ►ávoкwxń and ►ovvokwxótɛ.
óλayµɛúɛɩv, óλaчµ- ⇒ovλaí.
oλai [f.pl.] 'barley corn used at a sacrifice'. ovλaí.
oλαιτoí [m.pl.] ·σлεрμoλóуоɩ 'gossip'. кai oλaτoí (H.). <PG>
•VAR Also ŎλαITOS (Orus apud EM 622, 9).
•ETYM Clearly a Pre-Greek word on account of the variation at/ a. Fur.: 338 also
connects λɛtóv· ßλáσηµov slanderous' (H.), which is not immediately evident.
óλẞáxiov⇒ovλaí.
öẞoç [m.] 'prosperity, blessed state, wealth, happiness' (II.). <PG>
•COMP Óλẞo-dóτηs, Dor. -Sóτaç [m.], -dóτɛɩpa [f.] ‘giver of wealth' (E. [lyr.], Hell.)
äv-olẞoç 'without prosperity, unhappy' (Orac. apud Hdt. 1, 85, trag.).
●DER 1. Öλßioç ‘blessed, well-to-do, happy' (II.), voc. óλßɩó-αчov (г 182), superl.
ÖλẞiστOS (Hell.); 2. óλßɛç ‘id.' (Man.); 3. òλß-ía [f.] = öλßos (Phot.); 4. Óλßí¼w [v.]
'to bless (oneself)' (trag.), εл- (Nonn.), with oλßiστúp, -ñpos ‘blesser' (late).
•ETYM Various older hypotheses are found in Frisk s.v. Fur.: 155 connects öλлα-
Xóvdpov tiç ëynois. ëdeoµá tɩ ‘cooking of groats, kind of food'. † öλẞos (H.); if the
gloss is cognate, it must be Pre-Greek, which is certainly a good possibility.
öλεepos [m.] 'destruction'.
\\uµ.
óλéкpavov [n.] ‘point of the elbow'. →wλékpavov.
ỏλɩßpóv [adj.] · óλɩoðŋpóv, Aɛĩov, έmoчaλés ‘slippery, smooth, unstable' (H.), beside
wλíßpažav. wλiσov 'slipperiness' and, without p, ólíßážαɩ• ¿Àɩσ¤ɛïv ‘to slide' (H.).
IE? *hlib-ro- 'slippery, smooth'>
•ETYM May be cognate with OE slipor, OHG sleffar ‘slippery, smooth' (with MoNw.
slipra ‘glide'), from *(s)lib-ro-. Thence the primary verb OHG slifan, MLG slīpen 'to
slide', etc. Further cognates in Pok. 663 and 960. See also Xiußos and ►óλɩo¤ávw.
The problem of *s- beside prothetic vowel has not been solved; see Beekes 1969: 82-
87. Perhaps Germanic added the s- after the loss of the initial laryngeal.
óλɩyŋñɛλéwv [adj., ptc.] 'weak, powerless' (O 24 and 245, & 457), -έovoa (t 356). ◄IE?
*h₂pel- 'strength'>
•DER Metrically enlarged from oɩу-ŋлελýs̟ (AP, Opp.). Thence oɩуŋƒɛλ-íŋ [ƒ.]
'weakness, impotence' (ε 468); likewise εηлελ-ín [f.] 'strength, thriving' (Call.),
εúŋлελýs (H.), opposite кaкηäελ-ín, -έwv (Nic.); also άvηëελíŋ. àσðέvεla 'weakness'
(H.) and vηлελéw = ȧdvvaτéw (Hp.).
⚫ETYM The form (óλу)-ηлελýƒ is derived from a neuter *ǎлελoç 'strength' (with
compositional lengthening), and is compared with the Germanic group of ON afl,
OE afol [n.] 'strength'; the El. PN Tɛvτí-αлλoç (possibly Illyr.), Illyr. PN Mag-

=== page 560 ===

1068
ǒdiyyos
aplinus, etc. also belong here. However, since the Germanic words must be
connected with Lat. ops, opus, etc. < *hep-s-, the Gr. à- would be unclear in this
comparison. We have to reconstruct *h₂pеl- (уηлɛλ-έw < *ṇ-h₂pel-), and the
connection with Lat. ops may have to be abandoned. The denominative ȧv-aлɛλá【w
in ávaлɛλáσaç ȧvappwobɛíç 'recuperated' (H.) belongs here as well. Cf. also on
►VÝл.
öyyos [?] a kind of locust (Phot., Suid.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR ỏλíyɩoɩ. ɛidos åkpídwv ‘id.', tɩvés píšíov, öµolov Boλß ‘a small root, like a bulb'
(H.); thus Latte, but the ms. has (unaccented) oliyɩot. DELG thinks that the correct
form should be ŏλyyoɩ.
⚫ETYM Connection with Ayús does not help (Frisk, DELG). In view of the
prenasalization, the word may be Pre-Greek (not in Fur.). Cf. Gil Fernández 1959: 95.
See ►óλiyoç.
ólíyos [adj.] 'small, inferior' (Il.), ‘little, few' (post-Hom.). <IE? *h¸lig- ‘little'>
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. òλy-apx-ía [f.] 'rule of the few, oligarchy' (IA;
after μovapxía, see μóvoc) together with olyapx-έw, -Iкóç (Att.); -ns [m.] (D. H.)
On ►óλɩynnɛλéwv, see s.v., on oλiyo-Spavέwv see ▸Spáw, on ólíy-wpoç see ▸ wpa.
•DER Grades of comparison: oλíy-1otos (II.), óλíšwv (Il.), óλɛíľwv (Att. inscr.; after
µeíTwv); óliyótns, -ŋtos [f.] ‘small number' (Pl., Arist.), óλɩyóoµaɩ, -ów ‘to become
small or faint-hearted, to diminish' (LXX); óλty-άkıç ‘seldom' (Ion.), -axóðɛv ‘from
few places' (Hdt., Arist.), -axou 'in few places' (Pl., Arist.). Perhaps also oλíyɩɩ. εidoç
άкpídwv. tivéç píšíov, öµoιov ßoλß✪ (H.), see ►öλуoç.
⚫ETYM For ►öλyyos, connection with Atyús does not help - perhaps the word is Pre-
Greek? The adjective oλiyos may be identical with Arm. ałk'at 'poor' < *oliko- <
*h3ligo-. However, Alb. lig ‘angry, meager' could rather belong to λolyós 'ruin',
which should not be connected with oλiyos. Less clear are OIr. líach 'miserable,
unhappy' and OPr. licuts ‘small' (which fits well semantically), which both derive
from a root in *-k-.
.
öλɩvoɩ [m.] · kpiеñs deoµoí. kai λīvoç ëɑpå Kvëpíoç 'sheaves of barley, also λ. (Cypr.)'
(H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Fur.: 375 gives "Nivos (usually λívov)”.
o入LvÚw →è入Lvów.
öoẞos [m.] 'penis coriaceus', = 'of leather' (com., Herod.). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Obscene word with a suffix -ẞ-. Chantraine (DELG) and others suggested that
it was transformed from öλotos after other familiar and vulgar words. However, as
the suffix shows, the word is rather Pre-Greek.
óλ100ávw [v.] 'to slide, slip, glide' (Att.). <IE *h¸lid-, *h¸slid"- ‘glide'>
VAR -aívw (Arist., Hell.), aor. oλσ0-ɛïv (Il.), -ñoa (Hp., Hell.), -ñva (Nic.), 2sg.
woas (epigr. Iª-IP), fut. óλσеńσw (Hell.), perf. wλíσеŋкα (Hp.).
■COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àл-, di-, Èε-, KAT-, Úπ-.
Į
i
)
1069
•DER 1. Verbal nouns: ólíσ0-ŋµα [n.] ‘fall, sprain' (Hp., Pl.), -ŋois (also åл-, kat-,
„ɛpɩ-) [f.] ‘slipping, spraining' (medic., Plu.); back-formation öλiσos [m.] lubricity'
(Hp., Hell.), also the name of a slippery fish (Opp.). 2. Verbal adjectives: 100-ŋpós
'slippery' (Pi., IA), -εç ‘id.' (AP), -αvwτépα 'id.' [nom.sg.f.] (Gal.), from
*100avos, but which accentuation? Further oλ100óc 'id.' (Hdn. Gr. 1, 147),
probably from oλoos with shift of accent, -ŋtiкós ‘'making slippery' (Hp.). On its
own stands oσpá¶w = óσávw (Epich., Hp. apud Gal. 19, 126) as if from
*öλiσ¤poç, cf. óλiß(p)ážaɩ from ►ỏλißpós.
•ETYM All forms derive from the thematic root aorist ooεiv. A present in -ávw
(later -aívw) arose from this, which recalls -Sapεv: Sap¤ávw, aiσéσðaι :
alσávoμaι, and may (like these two) contain an enlarging element IE *-dh-, with Gr.
-00- coming from *-dh-dh-. An alternative is to assume metathesis *h¸slid"-> *h¸lisd¹-;
see Mayrhofer EWAia: II, 787. This pre-form may be compared with a verb for
'glide, slide' in Germanic and Baltic: e.g. OE slīdan (MoE slide), MHG sliten, Lith.
slýsti, 1sg.pret. slýdau (with secondary y beside slidùs ‘smooth, slippery'). There are
also some isolated nouns in Slavic and Celtic: OCS slěd, Ru. sled [m.] 'trace' < IE
*sloid¹-o-, MoIr. slaod ‘gliding mass'. Skt. srédhati ‘to stumble, make a mistake' vel
sim. may also belong here. See also Aoiσ00s 1.
ỏλкn [f.] ‘dragging, drawing, towing, inhalation, draught, drink, attraction, drawing
down of the scales = weight' (IA). <IE *selk- ‘draw'>
•VAR Óλкós [m.] “drawer”, ‘machine for hauling ships on land, strap' (Hdt., Th., S.,
E.), also 'track, furrow, ditch; orbit, coil' (E., Ar., Hell.), also the name of a spider
(Dsc.); adjective oλкós 'drawing to oneself, attracting' (Pl., Arist.), 'dragging on,
leaning, tarrying' (Ph., Hld.).
•DER From óλкý: 1. óλкás, -ádos [f.] 'towed ship, trading vessel' (Pi., IA) with
óλкadı-кóç (Arist.); 2. oλкɛov (-íov) [n.] ‘large bowl or basin, out of which water is
drawn' (com. and inscr. since IV³), after ȧyyɛãov, with óλкíðɩov (pap. III³); 3. óλkɛïç.
oi τȧ àµíẞλŋστрα εлσлшτα 'who draw the fishing nets towards themselves' (H.);
4. óλкaños ptng. to drawing, making a twist' (Nic., Lyc.), -alov [n.] 'stern(post)' (A.
R.), -aía, -aín [f.] 'tail' (Nic., A. R.); 5. öλк-чμoç 'drawable, flexible, viscous' (medic.,
Plu.), 'useful for drawing' (Paul. Aeg.), perhaps after στáσчoç; 6. -nεç 'weighty'
(Nic.); 7. -áw to draw' (pap., H.).
•ETYM Verbal nouns from λkw, built according to regular patterns. Lat. sulcus [m.]
'furrow' may be an old formal correspondence to óλкóç, but it may also be a zero
grade; cf. OE sulh [f.] ‘plough, furrow' < IE *slk-. Further details s.v. ►ëλkw.
öλλ1}, -ɩkoç [f.] ‘wooden cup for drinking' (Pamph. apud Ath. 11, 494f.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
ölλvµ, -µai [v.] 'to ruin, destroy, lose', intr. med. 'to be ruined, be losť (Il.). ◄IE
*h3elh,- 'destroy'➤
•VAR Also -úw, -úoμai (Archil.), óλéкw, -oµαɩ (Il.); aor. óléσaɩ, òλéσðaɩ (II.), pass.
óλɛσ¤ñvai (LXX), fut. óléσ(σ)w (epic), óléw (Ion.), óλw (Att.), óλéoµai, óλoñµai
(Il.), perf. óλwλɛкa (Att.), intr. öλwλa (Il.).

=== page 561 ===

1070
ö
•COMP Very often with prefix, especially an- (thus exclusively in Att. prose), with
εεαл-, σναл-, лρσαл-, etc.; also with St-, -, etc. As a simplex only epic.
•DER 1. öλɛ0poç [m.] 'destruction, ruin, loss, death' (Il.) with oλép-toç 'disastrous'
(Il.), -táw ‘to be on the verge of death' (Archig.), after other verbs of disease in -táw;
(-)óλεеp-ɛúw, assimilated (ε(-) \op-εúw 'to destroy' (LXX), together with -ɛvʊɩç,
-ɛvµɑ, -ɛía (beside -ía), -evτýc; MoGr. \oλoßpɛúw. 2. åлóλe-σis [f.] ‘loss' (Hippod.
apud Stob.); as a first member e.g. in óleo-vwp 'destroying men' (Thgn. [?],
Nonn.), wλɛoí-kαρлоç 'losing its fruit' (к 510, etc.; w- metri causa). 3. Óλε-τúp, -ñpos
[m.] 'destroyer, murderer' (Σ 114, etc.), -τɛipα [f.] (Batr.), ȧvdp-oλéτɛpα (Hes., A.),
ỏλé-tηs [m.] (Epigr. Gr.), àvdp-oλéτns (poet. inscr.), öλɛtç [f.] (AP), raid-oλétwp,
-opos [m., f.] 'child-killer' (A. [lyr.]). On the PNOɛtãs (Halicarn., etc.; Carian?) see
O. Masson Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 10 (1975): 163f.
•ETYM The disyllabic forms öλεpos, óλéσαι, etc. at first sight point to a root *h¸elh₁-
(the commonly accepted reconstruction). The present ou derives from *őλvчµ;
for the pattern, compare στopéσαɩ: στópvчµ. However, in view of the metathesis
which regularly occurs in this type, we may also consider a root *h,elh₁-, and in this
case, the Greek present is certainly recent. If athematic, oλéσa also reflects the
root-final laryngeal, while oλóμny, etc. are thematicized forms. For the enlargement
in óλέкw, cf. ¿púкw, etc. Within Greek, óloós ‘pernicious, fatal' is related as well.
An obvious cognate of öλλμ is Lat. -oleō (LIV² s.v. *h3elh,-) as found in dēleō and
ab-oleō, which represents an iterative formation *-h3olh,-eie/o-. Since Puhvel HED,
hallanna- 'to trample down, flatten (fields and plants)' is also compared, which may
in principle derive from older *h2/3elH- (Kloekhorst 2008: 271), and would be in
agreement with the reconstruction *h,elh,- assumed for Greek and Latin. Hackstein
1995: 248ff. adduces ToB alāṣṣäm 'is exhausted'. See recently Neri 2007 on the thesis
that the root *helh,- is also contained in verbs for 'fall', like Lith. pùlti, 3pres. púola,
and OHG fallan and cognates. We may note that the reconstruction *helh¸-,
tentatively suggested above for the Greek forms, is possible for Latin (if we assume
that the verbal suffix *-eie/o- was restored), but not for Hittite. See oloós.
öλµoç [m.] ‘mortar', metaph. of mortar-like, i.e. hollowed objects, e.g. 'mouthpiece of
a flute, drinking cup, tripod of the Pythia' (A 147). <IE *uel- 'turn'>
•VAR Psilotic oµoç.
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. óλµo-лolóç [m.] ‘manufacturer of mortars' (Arist.), vq-
óλμ-tov [n.] 'stand of an öλμos' (com., Poll.).
●DER Diminutive oλuíov [n.] (pap.), also óλµíσкos [m.] 'socket of a door hinge, of a
tooth' (pap., S. E., Ruf., Poll.); óλμɛtóc [m.] öλμos (sch. Ar. V. 238), after
σTελε(1)ós, etc.
=
•ETYM From *uol-mo-, originally 'roll, cylinder', after the cylinder-like form of the
mortar made of a hollowed tree (cf. Palmer Eranos 44 (1946): 54f.). Further related to
►ɛiλéw ‘to roll, turn'.
ÓóкAηpoç 'entire'. →кλñpoç.
ÓλOкÓTTIVOS [m.] name of a gold coin, Lat. solidus (pap. IV-VIP). <LW Lat.>>
VAR Also -ov [n.]. and óλокóTIOV (BGU 1082).
doóg
1071
⚫ETYM From ►öλos and Lat. (aurum) coctum = óló-xpuσos 'consisting entirely of
pure gold' (with ct borrowed as TT); see Frisk.
óloλúčw [v.] ‘to cry out loudly; to call, shout with joy, moan (to the gods)', especially
of women (mostly poet.). <ONOM▷
•VAR-ÚTTW (Men.), aor. óλoλ-úžaɩ (Od.), fut. -úžoµai (E.), -úžw (LXX).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially ȧv-, εл-.
•DER ỏλoλvy-ń [f.] (Z 301) with -aía [f.] epithet of the vuкtɛpís (epitaph), -µós [m.]
(A.), ua (E.) 'loud outcry', mostly of women invoking a god; -wv, -óvos [f.]
‘quacking of a frog, etc.' (Arist., Ael., Plu.), also name of an unknown animal (bird),
Lat. acredula (Eub., Theoc., Arat.), see also Thompson 1895 s.v.; óλoλúk-tpia [f.]
'professional wailing woman' (Pergam. IIª), -tóλns [m.] 'crier' (An. Ox.), cf. e.g.
okwrtóλŋç,
σкwлTÓŋs, vaкτéw. Backformations öλoot [m.pl.] = dɛiσi-daíµoves (Theopomp.
Com., Men.), öλoλuç [m.] (acc. to Phot. = ó yuvaikwdŋg kai katáеɛoç кai ßáкηλos
kaì þáknlos
'woman-like, superstitious and womanish'; Anaxandr., Men.).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic reduplicated formation with the same ending as in iúčw,
Baüчw, etc. Similar formations, genetically cognate or of identical structure, are Lat.
ululāre 'to howl, ulula [f.] ‘owl', Skt. ululí- 'crying loudly', úlūka- [m.] ‘owľ, Lith.
ulula (bañgos) '(the waves) howl', all with u. Beside these stands oλoλúчw, with
dissimilation o-v or perhaps ablauting to λελɛu; cf. Pok. 306 and 1105. See
öλovos [m.] 'wild fig'. öλuvos.
oooíτpoxos [m.] 'round piece of rock, boulder, large stone' (N 137, Democr. 162,
Orac. apud Hdt. 5, 92 ẞ). <IE *uel- ‘turn', *dªreg¹- ‘run'▷
•VAR Accent uncertain. Also oλoíτpoxos (Hdt. 8, 52, Theoc. 22, 49), óloíτpoxos (X.
An. 4, 2, 3).
⚫ETYM Probably properly 'circle-runner', a technical term for a round stone, which
rolls downhill or is taken forth by a vehement stream. The first element belongs to
► ɛiλéw 'to roll, turn' and looks like a locative; acc. to Bechtel 1914 s.v., it derives from
a noun *Foλofo- 'whirl, rotation', closely connected with eiɛóç; this is rejected by
Shipp 1967: 49f. (who follows the ancients in connecting óloós ‘pernicious',
assuming that -o- is metri causa).
oloós [adj.] 'destructive, sinister, ominous' (II.). <IE *h₂olh,-uo- 'destructive' >>
•VAR Also oλotós (A 342, X 5, h. Ven. 224), óλwoç (Hes. Th. 591, Nonn.), ovλoós (A.
R.), vocative oλé (Alcm. 55), ólóɛts (S. Tr. 521 [lyr.]).
•COMP As a first member in oλoó-oppwv 'with destructive intent', of üdpoç, λéwv, σûç
кάлρoç (Il.), also 'crafty', of "Atlas, Aińtns, Mívws (Od.); also oλo-epyós, -epyńs
'having a destructive effect' (Nic., Man.) with loss of o (cf. Schwyzer: 252f.).
ETYM Derived from the root of óléσa, öεpos, etc. (see ouμ), and
traditionally explained as *oλo-Fóç < *òλɛ-Ƒóç with vowel assimilation (Schmidt KZ
32 (1893): 332f., 337). All formal variations are secondary: oλotós with ou spelling
lengthened o (Chantraine 1942: 168; cf. on oiéτɛac); obloós with metrical
lengthening and/or after ovλos; oλwïos after óλoqwïos acc. to Frisk, but corrected to

=== page 562 ===

1072
O入ÓRTW
"
1073
óλoos by Nauck; óλóɛs with poetical enlargement (Schwyzer: 528 with lit.); voc.
ỏλé from *oloé (or *ỏλε[Ƒ]έ?) with loss of vowel by hyphaeresis(?); cf. w µéλɛ.
Suggestions on the formation in Ruijgh Minos 20-22 (1987): 537 and García Ramón
2000: 69-71.
óλóлtw [v.] · λɛníŢɛiv, tíλλɛiv, kоλάлτεν 'to peel, pluck, peck' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. óλóчa (Call., Euph., Nic.) 'to strip off, tear off, pluck'.
•ETYM Can hardly be related to λé˜w, ►λoñós, etc., but rather a Pre-Greek variant
of ▸òλoúqw.
ölos [adj.] 'complete, whole' (p 343 and w 118, Att., Hdt.), olε [voc.] 'salve' (w 402).
<IE *sol(H)-uo- ‘whole'>
VAR OUλoç (epic Ion.).
•COMP Often as a first member, almost only Hell. and late (instead of лav-, see
Leumann 1950: 105), е.g. óλó-кληpos (see ►кλños), ólo-σxεpńs (see ►лoxεpw),
►ÓλOKÓTTIVOÇ.
•Der óló-tijs, -istos [f.] ‘wholeness' (Arist.), ólóoμa [v.] 'to be constituted as a
whole' together with öλwσiç [f.] (Dam.), ovλéw in oúλɛíoɛv. ¿v vyɛíą quλáσσoiɛv
'may they keep watch in health' (H.). Besides óloós = öpóvµos kai ayaƉós ‘clever
and able' (Suid., H.) with óλoɛîταɩ. vyɩaívɛɩ ‘is healthy' (H.). Uncertain OÜλoç, Ionic
epithet of Apollo, acc. to Str. 14, 635 and Suid. as a healing god; cf. ►ovλos 3.
⚫ETYMIdentical with Skt. sárva-, Av. hauruua- 'whole', from IE *sol(H)-uo-. For oλó-
τηs, compare Av. hauruua-tāt- and Skt. sarvá-tāt(-i)- [f.] 'wholeness, etc.', which are
probably independent innovations. Beside the Indo-Iranian forms, we find Lat.
salvus ‘sound, safe' (on the a-vocalism, see Schrijver 1991: 294-297 and Nussbaum
1997: 186ff.) and, with disyllabic stem, Osc. σaλafs 'id.', Pael. Salavatur 'Salvator",
which points to an older ablauting u-stem *slh₂-eu-. Perhaps the Greek and Indo-
Iranian forms derive from a thematization of a neuter *solh₂-u?
Other cognates are ToA salu 'complete', ToB solme 'id.' (with a different suffix), and
Alb. i gjallë ‘alive, lively'. A different suffix is found in Olr. slán 'healthy' < *slh₂-no-,
perhaps Lat. sollus < *sol(H)-no- and possibly in Hitt. šalli- / šallai- ‘big, main, chief,
etc.' < *solh₂-i- (Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). On the question whether the Saussure effect
operated in this word (as advocated by Nussbaum 1997), see Pronk 2009.
ólós [m.] name for a bleary liquid, from the juice of squids (Hp., Phryn. PS, Phot.), for
blood (AP 15, 25, 1. Óλòç λißpòç ipŵv). ◄PG?►
•ETYM Unclear. A cross between Ooλós and ópós, as assumed by Frisk, is improbable.
A Pre-Greek word is possible.
óloσxɛpńs [adj.] 'complete, whole, general' (Hell.).
=>
•DER Óλoσxépεia [f.] (Phld. Rh., Str.). →лoxεpά.
ólovpídaç [?] · ɛldos кóуxηs kind of mussel' (H.). <?►
•VAR Oλoupotσtv. ävw tñs Oúpaç σtрópiууεs 'pivot above the door' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown.
óloúqw [v.] = oλóлτш (Рhot.), óλovqɛiv (óloúqɛtv Schmidt). Tíλλav 'to pluck hair',
Soovɛïv (-peiv Schm.). Siατíλλεiv i daoiλλaívɛiv to mock' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•ETYM The present etymon is evidently a variant of ▶óλóлτw, with variations of ou
and / л that point to a Pre-Greek word. The IE etymology proposed by Grošelj
Živa Ant. 4 (1954): 173, which connected it with the IE word for 'bark, etc.' in Lat.
liber [m.] bark, book' < *luber, Ru. lub 'bark', can therefore be forgotten.
ỏλoqλuktíç [f.] ‘bladder, pustule with blood and water' (Hp.). <GR➤
•VAR Also -Quкtís (H.); óλoquydwv (Theoc. 9, 30) or -qúyywv (H.).
⚫ETYM From oλóç and qλUкτíç; see ►Qλúкταivα.
óλoqúpoμai [v.] ‘to wail, lament, bewail, bemoan' (Il.). <IE? *Holb'- 'cry, lament'>
•VAR Aeol. -úppw (Hdn. Gr.), aor. óλoqúpaσa, ptc. pass. bloqupėɛíç (Th. 6, 78),
fut. oλoquρouvτai (Lys. 29, 4 codd.).
•COMP Often (especially in prose) with prefix, e.g. àv-, άí-, кat-.
•DER Oλoqup-μós [m.] (Ar., Th., Pl.), -σiç [f.] (Th., J.) ‘lamentation, wail; -tiкóç
'prone to wail' (Arist., J.). Further ólóquç. olktoç, ëλεos, Оpñvos ‘lamentation' (H.,
Sapph. 21, 3), Aeolic for *oloquç acc. to Schulze KZ 52 (1924): 311, óλoquvós
'lamenting, wailing' (Hom., AP).
•ETYM The ending is also seen in synonymous ódýρo̟µáι, µúðομаí, kɩvýpoμaι,
µɩvúpoµai; óλoqúpoµaɩ may have been formed after them, and it is unnecessary to
suppose a prior adjective *oloqupóç. The form oλoqudvós may be an innovation as
well, e.g. after àλαлаdvóç, σμεpdvóc, etc. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 194) and yoɛdvóc
(Frisk). Likewise, was *oλoqús formed after öïúç?
In view of Arm. ołb, gen. -oy ‘lament', Lith. ulbúoti‘to call, sing', one might asssume
a pre-form *öλpos (= Arm. ołb) or *ỏλqúc, which would have received an anaptyctic
-o- from synonymous ►óλoλúw.
oloquios [adj.] mg. uncertain. Hom. only oλoqwïa [n.pl.], substantivized or as an
epithet of Svea ‘plans' (Od.); Hell. in sing. of λúкwv έpvos (Theoc. 25, 185), and of
iós 'poison' (Nic. Th. 327). <?►
•ETYM Formation like µŋtpwïos, ǹpwïos, Aɛxwïos (Hell.), etc., so perhaps derived
from a substantive in -ws or -w. By the ancients it was associated with öλλμ and
interpreted as pernicious' (H. oλoqwïa óλéеpia, olov óλoлoá, dεvà ẞovλεúµaτα);
it was connected with έλɛqaípoμat in Hom. in the sense of 'deceitful'.
öλлη [f.] oil flask². →λлoç.
”Оlчµão [m.] name of several mountain ranges in Greece and the Near East,
especially at the borders of Thessaly and Macedonia; seat of Zeus and of the gods
(II.). <PG➤
•VAR With metrical lengthening OÜλ-. Ruijgh 1967a: 173 points to a variant Ovλчμ-,
Myc. u-ru-p-.
•DER 'Оλúµл ‘Olympic' (II.), 'Оλчµíα [f.] region in Elis Pisatis with a famous
temple of Zeus (Pi., IA; cf. von Wilamowitz 1931: 224).
•ETYM Probably originally an appellative 'mountain', and without a doubt Pre-
Greek. Report of the discussion in van Windekens 1952: 66ff. (see also van

=== page 563 ===

1074
öλuvеos
Windekens BNF 6 (1955): 117). Cf. also Nilsson 1941(1): 353f. Perhaps Myc. u-ru-pi-ja-
(jo-) points to an original PG *u-, which is one of the phonemes that could be
reflected as Gr. o (though the interpretation of the Myc. word is debated). Was the
original word *Ulump(-)?
öλuvos [m.] 'wild, unripe fig' (Hes. Fr. 160, 1, Hdt. 1, 193, Hp., Thphr., LXX).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also öλovos.
•COMP As a first member in oλuvo-opópos 'bearing öλ.' (also oλovo-, pap.), with
-έw (Thphr.).
•DER ỏλúv¤-ŋ [f.] 'wild fig-tree, ¿pivɛóç' (Paus.); -άw [v.] 'to caprificate, έpiválw'
(Thphr.).
•ETYM A technical Pre-Greek word with a suffix -v0-. Note bolunda öλuvéos (Corp.
Gloss Lat. 2, 517, 40), which points to original *F-, and cf. unλoλóveŋ, ►óðóλuvðoç.
As -ove is very rare, the second -o- in öλovocould be due to assimilation from
*-v-. Fur.: 358 further compares'Оλоμлоç.
.
öluvos [?] τò àñóτρe̟µµα кaì ảлокáОαρμа 'what is rubbed or cleansed off (H.).
<PG?>
•ETYM Unknown. Is the word Pre-Greek?
ölupa [f.pl.] kind of grain like (ɛtaí, usually translated as '(corn) of spelt', also as
'durra' (Egypt) (Il., Hdt., D., Thphr.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Rarely sg.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in oλupo-kóitos [m.] ‘öλupai-beater, -baker' (pap. IIIª).
•DER Oλúp-ivos 'containing öλupat, made of oupar' (pap. IIIª Gal.), -ítŋs (äptos)
[m.] 'bread made of öλupar' (LXX).
•ETYM An isolated cultural term. By-forms like žλvµos 2, ►öλuvos, and ovλaí
suggest that it is Pre-Greek. Cf. ǎxupa for the suffix.
öµados [m.] ‘clamorous crowd, melee, turmoil, clash' (Il.). <?►
•Der dµadéw, -ñoaɩ [v.] ‘to clamor, speak or shout all at once' (Od., A. R.).
•ETYM For the formation, see perhaps кéλados, xpóµados, etc. Usually connected
with Skt. samád- [f.] 'battle' and connected with oµós = Skt. samá-, but this is rather
improbable: samád- should be interpreted differently as sam-ad- (Mayrhofer EW Aia
2: 703f.), and ouados could belong to ouάw (although DELG rejects this
comparison because of the semantics).
óµáчw [v.] 'to growl, grumble', said of bears and panthers (Zenod.). <ONOM➤
⚫ETYM Probably onomatopoeic. Here also öμadoç. See ►óµóc.
òµaλós [adj.] ‘equal, level, smooth' (1 327). <IE *semh₂-l- 'level, smooth'>>
•VAR Innovation óuaλns 'id.' (Pl., X., Arist.).
•COMP As a second member e.g. in άv-wuaλoç ‘unequal' (IA), with compositional
lengthening.
●der óµaλ-ótŋs, -ŋtos [f.] ‘equality, even surface' (Pl., Arist.), -ɛúç [m.] 'leveller'
(who levels the soil, pap. IIIª). Denominative verbs: 1. óµaλ-íw 'to level, make even'
òueipoia
1075
(X., Arist.), also with di-, -, etc. Thence óμaλ-toμós [m.] ‘leveling' (LXX, S. E.), -ığıç
[f.] ‘leveling' (Delph., Didyma), -totñpes [m.pl.] ‘instruments for leveling' (gloss.),
-чστpov (H.); hardly to Niστpov. 2. óµaλ-úvw [v.] ‘to make equal, make even' (Hp.,
Pl., Arist.), also with dɩ-, лpo-, σuv-; -uvtɩkóç ‘emollient' (Gal.). 3. *άv-oµaλ-ów in
ávoµáλw-σiç [f.] ‘equalization' (Arist.).
•ETYM The formation is like that of Lat. similis 'like', OIr. samail <*semh₂-l-. The o-
grade of ouaλóc is often thought to have been imported from ►óµóc. Cf. also the 1-
stem in Lat. semel ‘once' < *s(e)mli-, Go. simle 'one time' = 'once'. Arm. amol
'harnessed pair of cows' is probably unrelated.
ỏµaptέw [v.] ‘to meet, join' (Hom.). <IE *sm- 'together' + *h₂er- ‘join'>
●DER óµapτã ‘together', see aμаptý.
•ETYM The identification of the frozen instrumental aµapτý (óµ-) with Skt. (Ved.)
sám-ṛtā ‘at the meeting, in battle' (e.g. Schwyzer: 433) is wrong, as the latter is the
locative of sám-ṛti- ‘coming together, battle'. The form with aµ(a)- must go back to
*sm-h₂er- containing the root *h₂er- 'to join', while the probably more recent
formation with oμ- derives from óµóç, óµoû. See ►öμmpos.
öµẞpos [m.] ‘rain, shower, thunderstorm', also 'rainwater', metaph. ‘water' (Il.).
<PG?
●COMP As a first member e.g. in oußpo-pópos bringing rain' (A., Ar.); often as a
second member, e.g. in čл-, кát-oμßpos 'rainy, wet with rain' (Hp., Arist.).
⚫DER Adjectives: ŏußp-tos 'ptng. to rain, like rain' (Pi., Ion.), -ŋpós 'wet' (Hes.), -nλós
‘id.' (Theognost.), cf. údpηlóc; -wdŋs ‘abundant in rain' (Thphr.), -kóç ‘id.' (Vett.
Val.), -чµoç = ‘ptng. to rain, rainy' (Nic. Th. 388, v.l., PMag. Lond.); also àvoµßpεis
‘abundant in rain' (Nic. Al. 288, of 'Oчμлo), from ȧv-oµßpέw, cf. below.
Substantive ouẞpía [f.] 'rain' (sch.); cf. ȧvτλía, vετía.
Verbs: 1. ouẞpéw 'to (make) rain, moisten' (Hes., LXX, A. R.), aor. -ñσat, also with
ȧv-, -, etc. Thence (επ-)óμßous [f.] 'raining, etc.' (Suid., sch.), öµßµα [n.]
'rainwater' (LXX); 2. oµßpíw = -έw (Eust.); 3. oμẞpoυτa imbricitur (gloss.).
ETYM Often compared with Lat. imber, -ris [n.] 'rain(shower)', with the same
meaning, and with Skt. abhrá- [n.] 'cloud', with slightly deviating meaning (e.g. Pok.
315f.). An old r-stem was assumed for these words, beside which stood the s-stem in
Skt. ámbhas- [n.] ‘water, rainwater'. However, the assumption that Gr. -ẞ- could
represent an IE aspirate in the position after nasal is wrong (pace Schwyzer: 333).
In an recent and yet unpublished talk, Kroonen started from the old paradigm *nebh-
s-, gen. *nbh-es-s for Lat. imber and Skt. abhrá-, so from the root seen in Gr. ► vέqoç,
►Vɛqέλn, etc. The locative *nbh-es-i gave rise to Lat. imber-i and (with revocalization
and thematicization) to Skt. ámbhas-.
In view of the *-bh-, öµẞpos cannot belong to this group. For the same reason, Arm.
amb, amp, gen. -oy 'cloud' must be kept separate from the Greek word. Thus,
ouẞpos has no good etymology. Szemerényi 1964: 241f., 249 assumes a loanword, so
it is possibly a Pre-Greek word.
óμεípoμaι [v.] 'to desire' (LXX, NT; inscr. Phrygia JHS 38 (1918) 157). <?>
●var óµεipovtal. σ they desire' (H.).

=== page 564 ===

1076
óμεíxw
ŏдμα, -ατ
1077
•ETYM Unknown.
ouεíxw [v.] 'urinate' (Hes. Op. 727; codd. óµixɛiv, see below.). <IE *h,meig"- 'urinate'>
•VAR Aor. oμεižai (Hippon. 55 A; codd. -- or -11-); àµížαι oúρñσαι to urinate' (H.).
•DER Óμεíxμаτα = oúpηµατα (A. Fr. 435 = 487 Mette; codd. -í-).
•ETYM The persistant itacistic notation is probably due to the popular character of
the word. The old thematic root present ouɛixw, which was ousted by the more
decent verb oupέw (after which oµɩxέw arose), corresponds exactly to Skt. méhati,
Av. maēzaiti and ON míga 'to urinate', while sigmatic ouεiai recalls Lat. mixi, perf.
of meio 'to urinate' < *h¸meigh-ie/o-. Other present formations: Lat. mingō
(innovation?), OLith. minžu, Arm. mizem (a denominative from mēz 'urine', where
a reflex of the initial laryngeal is lacking, but see Martirosyan 2008: 542f.;
alternatively, we are dealing with an Iranian loan), etc. Connection with μotxóc can
be debated; the gloss with au- is unexplained.
ouŋyɛpns [adj.] 'assembled' (Il., Pi.; v.l. -ups). <GR>
•VAR Dor. ouãу-.
•ETYM From óµoυ and άyεípεv with formation of the second member after the
adjectives in -ns. Thus also oμnyupis [f.] 'meeting' (Y 142, Dor. oµáy-) after the
simplex ǎyupis (see ►ảyɛípw) with contraction or compositional lengthening.
óµñ [adj.] ‘of the same age'. λLĘ.
dunpέw [v.] only in wunpηoɛ 'met' (л 468) and in the ptc. óµŋpεñσaɩ [f.pl.] (= -oñσai)
'meeting, agreeing' (Hes. Th. 39). <GR>
•ETYM From ►öµnpos; cf. dµýpng ‘united, (being) together' (Nic. Al. 70), after the s-
stems.
öunpos [m.] 'pledge, hostage, bail, warrant' (IA). <GR>
•VAR Plur. also -a.
•DER óµòpɛúw [v.] ‘to serve as a hostage, guarantee, take as a pledge, take hostage'
(Att. Rhet., E. Rh. 434, Antiph.), also with έ-, ovv-; thence oµŋp-ɛía [f.] (Pl., Th.,
Plb.), -ɛvµɑ [n.] (Plu.) ‘pledge, hostage', έžoµýpevoiç [f.] ‘taking of hostages' (Plu.).
•ETYM Probably a compound of oμou and ȧp- in apapɛiv, etc.: properly “joined
together, sbd. who is forced to accompany", with a development of meaning similar
to that in Lat. obsēs (: obsideo) 'hostage, bail'. The original meaning is still found in
►óμmpέw and oσу 'who have the same
powýpals,
vote/opinion' (H.); cf. also ►óµaptéw and ►äµaptý. The word öµŋpos = d tuylós
(Lyc., H.) is probably an appellative use of the poet's name. On attempts to connect
the name Oµmpos (Cret. "Quapos) with the appellative, see the litt. in Frisk.
ouiλos [m.] 'throng, band of warriors, crowd, turmoil of battle' (Il.). <PG(S) >
•VAR Aeol. ŏμλos (EM) could be hyperdialectal.
•COMP As a second member in έ-óµλos 'standing beside the crowd, strange,
uncommon' (S. [lyr.]), etc.
•DER Denominative outλéw (Aeol. pres. ouía Alc.) [v.] 'to be together, associate
with (friendly or adversely), keep company, converse' (II.), also with prefixes like
кað-, époσ-, έ‹-; thence óµλ-ía, -íŋ [f.] ‘company, intercourse, association, speech,
sermon' (IA), formally from ŏμλoç; -ŋua [n.] 'association' (Pl., E.), -ŋtýs (ovv-)
[m.] 'companion, adherent, student' (X., Luc.), fem. -τpia (Philostr. VA), -ntikós
‘sociable, affable, talkative' (Isoc., Plu.). óµíλăðóv [adv.] ‘in bands' (Il.), -ŋdóv Hes.
Sc.), 'together with' (A. R., Opp.).
⚫ETYM Frisk argues for an analysis öμ-iλo-ç (related to oμóc, etc.) with the rare suffix
-io- (as in στpóßiλоç, лéðiλov, etc.), taking outλλoç, óμíλλɛ to be hyper-Aeolisms.
However, it rather seems that the word is Pre-Greek. Suffixes with VC were frequent
in Pre-Greek; the interchange -tλ-o-/ -1λλ-o- may represent a suffix -il-o-. The form
öµīλos recalls ►äµλλa (which seems to be Pre-Greek, as well).
@quxÉw →óueixw.
duixλn [f.] ‘fog' (Il., A., Ar., X.). ◄IE *h¸migħ-lh₂- ‘fog’▷
VAR Att. ó- (secondary aspiration).
•COMP ȧv-óμxλos 'without fog' (Arist.).
•DER óµxλ-wdŋs ‘hazy' (Hell.), -ŋɛç ‘id.' (Nonn.). Verbs -óoμa (Hell.), -aívw (Lyd.)
'to vaporize'.
●ETYM Identical with a Balto-Slavic word for ‘fog', e.g. Lith. miglà, OCS mögla [f.],
from IE *h migh-lh₂- (suffixed like vɛopέλn). Beside this old l-formation, to which
MoDu. (dial.) miggelen ‘to mizzle' also belongs, stands a zero grade root noun in Skt.
mih- [f.] 'fog' on the one hand, and a full grade o-stem on the other, e.g. Skt. meghá-
[m.] 'cloud' <*h₂moigh-o-.
It is sometimes assumed that oμεíxw 'to urinate' and cognates (IE *h,meig"-) are
related, but this would mean that we have to reconstruct an original palatal for the
current entry as well, which was then depalatalized before *1 (cf. Lith. klausýti ~ Ru.
slúšať' 'to listen' < *klouH-s- < *klouH-s-, the s- in the latter going back on restored
*k). This is a problematic assumption, however, since IIr. *Hmaigh- seems to exclude
a palatal.
Also probably related is Arm. mēg ‘mist, fog' < *h₂meigh-0/h₂-, which acc. to
Martirosyan 2008 shows regular loss of the reflex of initial laryngeal before m (cf.
Arm. magil 'claw' with secondary m next to Gr. övvε 'nail'). Armenian dialectal
material points to a verb *mglim 'to cloud', which parallels the formation of Gr.
óµíxλŋ. On ► áµÐаλóɛσσα, sеe s.v. and also Ruijgh 1957: 145.
öшa, -aτoç [n.] ‘eye; look, sight, face', metaph. 'sun, light' (Il.). <IE *h¸ek"- 'see'>
•COMP As a first member e.g. in óµµаτo-στεpηç 'depriving sbd. of eyesight' (A.
[lyr.]), 'deprived of eyesight, blind' (S., E. [lyr.]); often as a second member, e.g.
µελɑv-óµµɑτoç ‘with black eyes' (Pl., Arist.).
⚫DER Diminutive óµµáτov [n.] (Arist., AP), = MoGr. μáτ; further óμµáτεoç
'belonging to the eyes' (S. Fr. 801), óµµaτów [v.] ‘to provide with eyes, enlighten' (A.,
D. S.), - 'to deprive someone of his eyes' (E. Fr. 541), 'to open sbd.'s eyes,
illuminate' (A., S., Ph., etc.), ¿v- 'to provide with eyes' (Ph.).
⚫ETYM The usual form is ouμa, but there are also the rare forms Ŏллατα (Sapph.) and
ößµατα (Call., Nic., Hymn. Is.), which may, like ŏµµα, have arisen from *öлμα by

=== page 565 ===

1078
öµvvä, -pai
progressive assimilation and by differentiation (Frisk), respectively. Or is öðµata
rather an artificial reshaping with -Qua (Chantraine 1933: 175)?
If oμua is a verbal noun in -μa from the root óл- ‘see³ (►öπwña, öчo̟μα), it must
originally have meant 'look, glance', but it may also be an enlargement of the root
noun seen in the dual őσσɛ < *hek"-ih₁. The form óóðaλµós is unrelated. See
further öσσε.
öµvæ, -µai [v.] 'to swear, affirm with an oath, take a vow' (Il.). <IE *hemh,- 'insist,
urge'>
•VAR Also -úw, -úoµaɩ, aor. ¿µó-σ(σ)al, -σ(σ)ασðaɩ, fut. ò̟µoñµα (II.), perf. óµáµo-
кα, -(σ)μa, aor. pass. óμo(σ)еñval (Att.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. àл-, εε-, επ-, σuv-, Úл-.
•DER άváμоτо 'unsworn', together with -tí [adv.], further ovvwµó-tηs [m.]
'confederate' together with -oía, etc. (IA); for óркшμóτη sее öρкoç.
⚫ETYM The aorist oμóσal points to a root *hemh3- (cf. apóσa 'to plough' < *h₂erh¸-);
the future oμεiτal was created analogically for older *oμotal. The present formation.
övчu is reminiscent of öλλvµɩ, etc., and confirms that the root-final laryngeal was
*h3. The perfect is a clear innovation.
Traditionally, öµµ, µóσ are connected with the disyllabic athematic root-
present Skt. ámi-ti 'to take hold of, swear'. Currently, Lat. amāre 'to love' is
compared as well, and on this basis the root *h₂emh,- has been reconstructed (see
LIV2 s.v.). A huge problem with this view is that one has to assume vowel
assimilation oμo- < *àµo- for Greek, which is certainly not regular (see Van Beek
fthc.b). It is therefore best to assume a root PIE *h3mh3- reflected as PIt. *ama- in
front of a vowel; cf. Schrijver 1991: 318. See oμofïoç, ►óμокλý.
óóуvos of the same ancestry'. ⇒yɩyvoµaɩ.
óuotos [adj.] epithet of лóλεμоç, vɛīkoç, Đávatoç, уñpaç (Hom.), traditionally (e.g. by
H.) identified or connected with quoчoc, and explained as 'common to all,
equalizing, impartial', which is supported by synonymous žuvòç 'Evváλios (Σ 309).
<?>
•VAR On -oïïoç for -oïos cf. yɛλoïïoç (s.v. ►yɛláw).
•ETYM Acc. to an alternative interpretation by Anon. apud Apollon. Lex., however, it
means kakóç, for which an etymological argument has been raised: ỏµoíïos (with
lenis) < *μoчios from *μot-fα, or rather for * μo-Flos from *ỏμo-Ƒā
corresponding to Skt. ámīvā [f.] ‘misery, vexation, suffering', ámīti ‘urge, press' (cf.
on öμvчд). Uncertain.
ooo
=
oo⇒óµóç.
óµoкλý [f.] ‘threatening cry, reprimand, command (Hom., Hes. Sc.; also Emp. [-έwv],
Pi. [-aïç], A. Fr. 57, 5 = 71, 5 [áv]); 'attack, onset' (Hell.), perhaps falsely deduced
from II 147? <IE? *h¸emh3- ‘seize' + *kleh,- ‘call'➤
•VAR Also ó-? See below.
•DER Further (probably as a denominative) the more usual óµoкλ-άw, -έw (also ỏ-)
'to cry threateningly, call, urge', in 3sg.ipf. óµóкλa (Σ 156, 248), 3pl. óµóкλ-ɛov, ipl.
ǒurvn
1079
-εo̟μεv (О 658, etc., w 173), aor. óµoкλñσαι (Hom., S. El. 712), iterative ipf.
Óμокλησασкε (B 199). Thence oμoк\n-túp, -ñpos [m.] 'shouter, warner' (M 273, Y
452), fem. -Tεipa (Lyc. 1337).
⚫ETYM Since the elision in úл' óμокλñс (e.g. Hes. Sc. 341), кéкλεt' óμoкλńσaç (v.l. Y
365) points to original lenis, the connection with ouóc, etc. was already doubted in
antiquity. A counterpart for oμo- could be found in Skt. áma- [m.] 'violence,
pressure, turbulence', Av. ama- [m.] 'attacking power, strength'; thus, ỏµo-кλý
would originally be a determinative compound meaning “attacking cry”.
The second member must belong to ►кaλéw < *klh₂-eie/o- and may be a root-noun
*kleh,-, but it can also be explained as an abstract *omo-klā- related to *omo-klo- (cf.
on ►µeσódµn), with loss of laryngeal like in vɛoyvós. The former interpretation
seems to be excluded by óμoкλáv (A.), but an artificial Dorism cannot be excluded.
On the variation -άw: -éw in the verb, see Chantraine 1942: 361.
óóðyvää, -μai [v.] 'to wipe (oneself), dry (oneself)', med. with - also 'to give sbd. a
beating; to imprint'. <IE *h,merg- 'wipe off>
•VAR Aor. ỏµópžαɩ, -ασðαɩ (Il.), fut. óµópέw, -o̟µα, pass. aor. ¿µopуñvaɩ, perf.
шμоρудaι (Аtt., Arist.).
•COMP In prose only with prefix, especially άл-, ¿§-.
•DER_¿¿óµopši¢ [f.] ‘stamp, imprint, impression' (Pl.), åлóµopyµɑ [n.] ‘which is
wiped off (Eust.).
ETYM The Greek aor. oμópa is probably secondary (with vocalism from the
present oчóруvч) for őµαpšov· àлóμаžov 'wiped off (H.), which can be equated
with the zero grade aor. Skt. amrkṣat. Further connection within Greek with
►ȧuépyw is conceivable (for the semantics, cf. Lat. verrō 'to sweep' next to Hitt. uarš-
'to reap, harvest, wipe"), but the variation in the initial vowel is unexplained (there
is no sufficient reason to assume vowel assimilation). The initial vowel is absent in
the late forms μópε-avto, -áµεvot (Q. S.), probably via reanalysis as ɑño-µ-.
óμóc [adj.] 'common, one and the same, equal, similar, level (II.). <IE *som-h2-0-
'same, equal'>
●COMP Very often as a first member, e.g. dµó-oppwv ‘of similar character, like-
minded' (X 263).
•DER oμ-óσε 'to one and the same place', -ou 'at the same place, together' (II.), -ó0εv
'from the same place' (ε 477); óμwç 'equally, likewise' (II.), ŏμws 'nevertheless, all the
same' since M 393; óчoτoç (II.), öμotos (young Att.) 'like, similar, the same' (II.), after
лoчoç, τoчoç, etc., with óµα-óτŋs, -ŋtos [f.] ‘similarity' (IA), verb -wеñvai (Il.),
-óoµai (IA), -ów (Th., E.) ‘to equalize, unite, make the same'; further óµoí-wµa,
-wσiç, etc. See also ►óµaλós and perhaps ►öµiλoç.
•ETYM Old word for ‘one and the same, equal', identical with Skt. samá-, OP hama-,
and Gm. words like ON samr, sami, Go. (sa) sama (secondary n-stem), etc., from IE
*somh₂-ó- with root-final *h₂, because there is no reflex of Brugmann's Law in Skt.
Other cognate formations are εiç, ▸ëtɛpos, ►ǎµia, and ►ά- 1.
öµлvη [f.] ‘food, corn', plur. ‘cake of flour and honey, honeycombs' (Call., Nic., H.,
EM). <PG(V)►

=== page 566 ===

1080
ǒuwpos
1081
•VAR Also ŏμлη.
•DER Ŏμлν(ε)чо ‘ptng. to corn, nutritious, fruitful' (S. Fr. 246, Hell. poet.), fem.
”Оμлvа epithet of Demeter (Call., Nonn.; after лótvia); ò̟µnveióxεip. „ovσóðæð,
лλоúσчoç 'with rich hand, rich' (H.); óµлvaкóç ‘id.' (AP); ò̟µ˜vòpòv üdwp. tpócyov
'nutritious' (H.).
ETYM Traditionally connected with Skt. ápnas- [n.] 'produce, property, possession',
ON efni [n.] < PGm. *afniia- 'material, goods' (also ON efna, OE æfnan ‘to carry out,
work'), Hitt. happin-ant- 'rich'. The inner nasal in Greek was explained by
anticipation of the suffix, and ŏuлn by dissimilation from this form. These
assumptions are ad hoc and therefore doubtful.
Frisk further states that oµúvεv. ažεv, σæµvúvelv, évtiµótepov лoɛïv ‘to
strengthen, respect, honor' (H.) is unclear. However, acc. to Fur.: 161, it shows that
we have a by-form oμquv-, and a Pre-Greek word. The word äpɛvos is unrelated.
ỏµqaλós [m.] ‘navel, navel string' (Il.), very often metaph. of navel-shaped elevations:
'knob of the shield or yoke' (II.), 'centre' (a 50). <IE *h¸enb¹-, *h¸mb¹-, *h¸neb¹-
'navel'>
•COMP Compounds like ỏµqaλŋ-τóµoç [f.] 'cutter of the navel string, midwife'
(Hippon., Hp.; on -11- see Schwyzer: 438f.), μεσ-óμчаλoç “in the middle of the
navel", 'in the centre', especially of Delphi and its oracle (trag.), also 'having a navel
(an elevation) in the center' (trag., com.); also with enlargement of the second
member, e.g. εл-oμpáλ-toc situated on the navel (the shield knob)' (H 267, Parth.),
also equipped with a navel (AP 6, 22).
•DER 1. Diminutive oµcáλtov [n.] (Arat., Nic.); 2. óµqaλíç [f.] ‘navel string' (Sor.); 3.
óµçaλ-óɛç ‘equipped with an ò.' (Il.), -wτós ‘id.' (Pherecr., Plb.), -wdns ‘ỏ.-like’
(Arist.), toc 'belonging to the o.' (AP), -кóç ‘id.' (Phan. Hist.); 4. óµ‹αλσ¨τкp, -ñpos
[m.] ‘knife used for cutting the navel string' (Poll., H.; cf. on ẞpaxioviotńp).
=
•ETYM The old word for 'navel' closely corresponds to Lat. umbilicus (probably from
*umbilus oupaλóc), OIr. imbliu < PCI. *imbilon- < IE *h¸mb"-l-. This originally
athematic l-stem (perhaps retained in the Epirotic tribal name "Oupaλ-os [gen. sg.],
-ɛç [nom. pl.]; see Schwyzer: 484) alternates with an n-stem in Lat. umbō, -ōnis [m.]
'boss of a shield', probably also in a WGm. word for 'belly, abdomen': OHG amban
(secondary a-stem), -on [m.], OS ambon [acc.pl.m.], PGm. *amban- < QIE
*Hombon- (cf. on ŏμcpaε). The variation 1: n recalls ȧyкáλŋ: ȧукáv.
In the eastern languages, we find forms with a different ablaut grade, like Skt. nábhi-
[f.] 'navel, nave', OPr. nabis '‘id.', Latv. naba 'navel', but also Gm. forms like OHG
naba [f.] ‘nave of a wheel', nabalo [m.] ‘navel (suffix like in oupaλós, etc.), all from
IE *h3neb¹. The Schwebeablaut *Homb¹- / Hnobh is probably due to the
development of the zero grade *h3nbh- in the western languages, so the original root
shape was *hneb-, with oμpaλos continuing the zero grade *h3nbh-l- (with
vocalization of the laryngeal according to the so-called Lex Rix).
öµqaɩ [pl.] barbaric word for the best quality of nard (Gal. 14, 74). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
öµчaž, -ǎкoç [f.] 'unripe grape' (11 125), also of olives (Poll.); metaph. of a young girl,
an undeveloped nipple, etc. (poet.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Late also [m.].
●DER 1. ỏµáкɩov [n.] 'juice of unripe grapes or olives' (Hp., pap.); 2. óµpaкiç, -ídos
[f.] 'cup of a certain kind of oak' (Paul. Aeg.), because of the astringent taste; 3.
ò̟µqak-íaç (olvoc) [m.] ‘wine of sour grapes' (Gal.), metaph. 'sour, unripe' (Ar.,
Luc.); -íτns (olvos) [m.] ‘id.', also name of a stone (Gal.; codd. -τítns), -ītis [f.] of
Eλaín (Hp.), 'kind of oakapple' (Dsc., Gal.); 4. óμ‹pakwdns ‘ö.-like' (Hp., Arist.), -vos
'made of o.' (Hp., pap.), -ŋpà (ȧyyɛĩa) [n.pl.] 'vessels for ő.' (medic., pap.); 5.
óµpakí¶w [v.] ‘to be sour, unripe', also of other fruits (LXX, Dsc.), -ía 'to pick
sour grapes' (Epich.).
•ETYM By itself, oµqa could derive from an unattested pre-form *ỏµcpwv (= Lat.
umbō, etc.; see on oupaλóc), but the semantic explanation as a navel-like knob is
hardly convincing. Fur.: 341 connects qucpíaç 'a bad Sicilian wine' and ȧups. oïvov
ǎvos 'wine blossom'. oi dè μéλava olvov 'red wine' (H.). The variation would point
to Pre-Greek origin; note that the suffix -α is also typically Pre-Greek.
ỏµqń 1 [f.] ‘divine voice or revelation, oracle, emblem' (Il.), 'voice, speech' in general
(Pi., trag.). <IE *sengwh_ 'sing'>
•COMP 'Qµqpo-kλέƑηs [m.] a Cyprian in Abydos, ε-oµðα óvóμаτα ‘auspicious
names' (H.); enlarged in лav-oµpaños 'sending all omens, witness of everything',
epithet of Zeus (℗ 250, Simon., Orph.), also of 'Héλios (Q. S.) and “Hpa (EM),
transformed into лav-oµôýs (övεpot, Orac. apud Porph.).
•DER óμp-aïoç, -nε 'predicting' (Nonn.), 'Oμpain [f.] name of a goddess (Emp.),
óµqtý, -ñpos [m.] 'prognosticator' (Tryph.), after viкη-τηp: viкáw, etc. Cf. Ruijgh
1957: 134.
ETYM An archaic inherited word, which is isolated in Greek and has cognates only
in Germanic. Beside oµcon < IE *song wh-eh₂- stands e.g. Go. saggws [m.] 'song, music,
lecture' < IE * song wh-o-. The basic primary verb is retained only in Germanic, e.g. Go.
siggwan 'to sing, lecture' < IE *sengwh-e/o-.
óµqń 2 [f.] • лvoń ‘breath' (H.). <?>
•Var Also ò̟µqά. ỏoµý. Aákwveç ‘scent (Laconian)' (H.).
•COMP As a second member in εü-oµos = εoðèós (Arcad. acc. to Timachidas apud
Ath.; codd. -palov).
⚫DER Verb лOT-óµεi· лpoσóčε to smell, stink' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown. It cannot be related to the group of ▶vé‹pos, ►vecéλŋ (thus Frisk,
on which see the litt. s.v.), since that word had no initial laryngeal.
•
öµqopa [n.pl.] · öσα áлó τшν iεpŵν έкôέρεσða ó vóμoç кwλúε 'what the law forbids
to carry away from shrines' (H.). <GR
ETYM Latte notes: ȧvácpopa reportanda ad aram; thus it would have dialectal ov- for
áva.
öμwpos [?] 'a Sicilian bread' (Epich. 52, Sophr. 27). <?>

=== page 567 ===

1082
óvada
Ovívne
1083
•VAR Cf. öμovpa⋅ σεµíðaλiç ¿¿ðý, µéλi ëxovoa kai oησáµηv 'cooked flour containing
honey and sesame' (H.); also oμopíτaç (Redard 1949: 90).
•ETYM Unknown.
ovala [f.]=áváλwua, 'expenditure, cost' (Thess. III). <GR?>
⚫ETYM Backformation from avaλów, perhaps influenced by Saлávé : dañaváw (cf.
also Saлav-oúμεva, -woɛi after avaλ-oúµεvα, -wσεi). See Fraenkel 1912: 88.
övap [n.] ‘dream', especially ‘fortune-telling dream, vision' (II.), as an adverb ‘in a
dream' (trag., Att.). <IE *hen-r 'dream', *h¸ner-io->
•VAR Only nom. and acc.; further övɛlpos [m.] 'god of dreams, dream' (II.), -ov [n.];
other case forms are ovɛip-aτoç, -ατɩ, -ατα, etc., 'vision, phantom' (Od.); thence the
back-formation övɛtap [n.] (Call., AP). Note Aeol. Ŏvoipos [m.] (Sapph.); Cret.
ăvaipov. Yvelpov, ăvap. övap (H.).
●COMP E.g. óvεipo-лóλoç [m.] ‘interpreter of dreams' (Il.), εv-óvɛƖpos having good
dreams' (Str., Plu.).
●DER 1. Diminutive ovɛƖp-átov (sch.). 2. Adjectives óvεip-εios (8 809, Babr.), -ŋɛɩç
(Orph.), -ατIкóç (comm. Arist.) 'concerning dreams, pertaining to dreams', -wdŋs
'dream-like' (Philostr.). 3. Verbs: óveip-woow, -wttw (‹‹-) ‘to dream, have a seminal
discharge while sleeping' (Hp., Pl., Arist.), with (-)ovɛip-wĔiç [f.] (Pl., medic.),
-wyµóç [m.] (Arist.), -wкtiкóç (Arist., Thphr.); -ovɛɩpów ‘id.' (Hp.); *¿žovεip-1ά¶w
in έžovɛpiaσµós [m.] (Diocl. Med.).
●ETYM Ŏvap < *h¸en-r and Lesb. Övoipos, Cret. ävaчpov < *h¸n-r-io- show gradation
with övɛɩpoç < *h¸n-er-io- (with full grade of the suffix; for the addition of *-io-, see
►λoc). The case forms ovɛip-atoç, -αtɩ, etc. probably arose by a cross of *övaτoç,
etc. with övɛɩpoç; from ovɛipat- in turn arose the late and rare form övεlap for Ŏvap.
The neuter gender of övεipov (for övɛɩpos) was influenced by εidwλov, έVÚлVIOV.
The word is limited to Greek and two neighbouring languages, in both of which it
only occurs with a suffix -io-: Arm. anurj < *onōr-i̟o- (cf. tékµwp beside tékµap;
Arm. a- < o- is a regular development in a pretonic open syllable, like in anun to
ővoμa, etc.), and Alb. âdërrë (Gheg), ëndërrë (Tosk), the details of which are
debated. Note also Cret. ävaipos, of which the a- is unexplained (cf. Beekes Sprache
18 (1972):126).
Through the rise of Ŏvap and cognates, the meaning of old üлap shifted (s.v.).
övɛlap, -atos [n.] ‘utility, value, help, refreshment'; plur. -aτa 'refreshments, foods,
valuables, gifts' (Il.). <IE *h¸neh₂- ‘help, be useful">
⚫ETYM False writing for ovη(F)ap < *övä-Fap, a verbal noun of oóvívnu; perhaps
influenced by àλɛíaτα (s.v. ►àλéw), ɛldap (s.v. ►ědw), etc.
Övεidos [n.] 'reproach, rebuke, abuse, disgrace' (II.). <IE *hneid- 'revile'>
●DER Thence ovɛidɛíŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Nic.), cf. on ¿λɛyxεíŋ s.v. ►έλéyxw, óvɛidɛtos ‘baling,
scolding' (Hom., AP), óvɛidɛíw [v.] 'to blame' (Thebaïs Fr. 3) < *-es-ie/o-; mostly
Ovɛidiw 'to make reproaches, abuse, scold', also with prefixes like ε-, лроσ-, with
several derivatives: ovɛíd-toua [n.] 'reproach, abuse' (Hdt.), -σµóc (-) [m.] ‘id.' (D.
H., J.), στnр (E.), also кατ- (Man.), -чστηs (Arist.) 'who reproaches',
(-)ovεidiotikós ‘abusive' (Hell.); on itself stands εл-ovεid-1στoç ‘deserving a
reproach, worthy of blame' (Att.), probably for *εл-ovεds after other verbal
adjectives in -IσTOÇ.
●ETYM övɛƖdoç is an old verbal noun, isolated in Greek. The basic primary verb,
which was replaced by the denominative ovεidíw in Greek, is retained in other
languages: Skt. athem. nid-āná- ‘reproved' [aor.ptc.], beside which stand the passive
formation nidyá-māna- ‘id.' and the nasal present níndati 'to reproach', Av. nāis-mi
< *nāid-s-mi 'I reproach', as well as Baltic forms like Lith. níedėti 'to despise', Latv.
nîdêt, 1sg. nîdu ‘to squint at, exclude, hate', which derive from a stative *h¸neid-eh₁-.
Germanic has a secondary formation in Go. ga-naitjan 'to revile', etc. Especially
interesting for Greek, because of its prothetic vowel, is Arm. anicanem, aor. anici <
*hneid-s-(for Arm. a- < o- in pretonic open syllable, cf. on ►ővap).
ovos [m.] 'droppings, excrement of animals' (4 775, 777, A. Fr. 275 [= 478 Mette]).
1?7
VAR Late also fem. after кóлроç.
•COMP Oveo-qópos 'dungbearer' (pap. IV³).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. For older lit., see Frisk s.v.
ovovλɛúw [v.] 'to stuff, pad, fill up with stuffing', of food (com. IV-IIIª). <PG?(V) ►
⚫DER OVOVAεÚσεiç [pl.] 'stuffed foods' (com. IV-III); further μovеvλεúw (rejected by
Phryn. 334, sch.), µovеvàεúσε (Poll. 6, 60) ‘id.'.
⚫ETYM Expression of culinary art without etymology. We may start from a noun
*óvúλŋ, -oç like кopdúλŋ, кavеúλŋ, кpwẞúλoç, etc. Frisk suggests that the initial μ-
in µovėvλɛúw was perhaps taken from ►µattúŋ (with related meaning) or from
дoλуóç 'bag' (less probable). Fur.: 246 explains the variation μ/zero from initial F-.
Probably a Pre-Greek word.
övɩylɩv [?] · ɛidos otvou 'kind of wine' (H.). <PG?(V) ►
•VAR"Ovoyλiv (Alcm. 117 apud Ath. 1, 31d).
•ETYM Unknown.
óvívŋµɩ [v.] ‘to be of use, help, avail' (Il.). <IE *h¸neh₂- ‘help, be useful' >>
●VAR Aor. óvñσai, fut. óvýow (Il.), Dor. óvaσɛi (Theoc.), med. óvívaµai (Att.), aor.
óvýσaσðaι (late), wvýµηv, opt. óvaíµŋv, epic åл-ovýµnv, -óvistw (Il.), wváµŋv, inf.
övaσbai (E., Pl.), fut. óvσoμai (Il.).
●DIAL Myc. o-na-to /onaton/, o-na-te /onatēr/.
⚫COMP Often with άлo- 'to benifit, gain, enjoy, relish'.
●DER 1. Övŋap (written övεtap, s.v.); 2. övnois [f.] ( 402), övaσis (Dor., etc.)
'benefit, advantage, gain, enjoyment' with óvoчos ‘useful, beneficial' (h. Merc.); 3.
'Оvýτwp, -opoç [m.] PN (II 604, etc.), Dor. óváτwp (conj. Pi. O. 10, 9) 'helper',
Ovijtwp name of a plaster (medic.); 4. 'Ovýtηs [m.] PN (Eretria IV³); for the PNs in
Ovno-, etc. see Bechtel 1917b: 348ff.; 5. óvnjuwv = óvησчoç (СCat. Cod. Astr.). 6.
Primary compar. forms: superl. óvηjïσ-τoç 'most useful' (Ion., etc.), compar. ntr.
ovnov (Nic.), Dor. óváïov (Dodona IIIª); reinterpreted as a positive, details in
Leumann Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 7ff.

=== page 568 ===

1084
ÖVLVVOS
⚫ETYM The full-grade medial aorist forms ȧл-ovýµní, -óvýto, -ovýμεvoç, etc. are
noteworthy. They may have their vocalism from the s-aorist óvñσaɩ, as Kümmel
remarks in LIV². In Euripides, wvá‍τo, övaσat may have the old vocalism from
*h3nh₂-, or have their -ǎ- from the present óvívaμα, with productive short vowel (cf.
στ: σμ). The late present óvíoкw (Ath. 2, 35c) was formed from óvnow after
εúpηow: εúpíσкw, etc.
There are no obvious cognates. Skt. näthá- [n.] 'refuge, help' was compared by
Wackernagel 1955(2): 946, and looks like a primary noun from a root *nā-, but is
further isolated (cf. Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 33f.). LIV2 s.v. *h3neh₁- compares ON
unnum [ipl.] 'to love, grant' if from *h3n-nh₂-mé, but remarks that the -ns- in related
forms like Go. ansts 'favor' is difficult to explain with this reconstruction. Moreover,
additional assumptions are needed to arrive from the assumed nasal present
formation at Greek óvívaμal.
2
övɩvvos [m.] name of a parasite in seaweed, ‘kind of centipede' (Thphr. HP 4, 6, 8).
<PG?>
ETYM To be analyzed as öv-tvvoç, acc. to Strömberg 1944: 11f., thus a compound
from ►övoc and "vvos 2; however, this is most improbable. Probably a Pre-Greek
word (not in Fur.).
"Ovoydiv
ETYM See ►öviуλiv.
òvóyupos →àváyupos.
Óvoкívdios [m.] 'donkey-driver'. →кívdač.
övoja, -atos [n.] ‘name' (Il.), gramm. 'word' (Att.), as a part of speech
(Arist.). <IE *h3neh¸-mn, *h¸nh¸-men- ‘name'>
= nomen
VAR Epic (also Hdt.) oйvoда (metrical lengthening), Aeol. Dor. Övчдa; Dor. also
*ěvuчa if found in 'Evчμα-кρατíбaç, 'Evvμavτiáðaç (Lacon.), but the interpretation of
these PNs is doubtful.
■COMP óvoдá-кAUTOÇ 'with a famous name' (X 51), ovoμакλýбηу; óvo̟ματto-
лoчéw [v.] 'to give a name, name' (Arist.), after other compounds with -лoɩźw
(ovato- Ath., Zos. Alch., -лoúa Str.); vévvμ(v)os ‘nameless' (epic); more
recent is ȧv-úvдos (552).
DER A. Nouns: 1. Diminutive ovоμáτioν (Arr., Longin.); 2. Adjectives óvoμаτ-ódnic
'having the nature of a name, concerning the name' (Arist.), -ıкóç ‘ptng. to the
ővoμа' (D. H.).
B. Verbs: 1. óvo̟μaívw 'to call, proclaim', almost only aor. óvoμñvαɩ, also with -
(mostly epic Il.), fut. o(ú)voµavéw (Hdt.), pres. (Dor.) óvчµαívw (Gortyn, Ti. Locr.).
2. óvoμáчw 'to call (by the name), name, enunciate', aor. óvoμáσαι (Dor. Aeol.
óvvµá¶w, aor. óvvμážα) often with prefixes like ¿‹-, έπ-, kα‍t-, nap-, μεt-. Thence
óvo̟µaσía [f.] ‘name, expression' (Hippias Soph., Pl., Arist.), óvoµaσtýs [m.] = Lat.
nominator (pap. III³), óvoµ-aσ‍tí (-ɛí) ‘by name' (IA), -aσtiкóç ‘ptng. to naming'
(Pl.), óvoμаστIкỲ (лTшσιÇ) 'casus nominativus' (Str., gramm.). 3. óvoμаτíčw [v.] 'to
dispute about names' (Gal.), -tσµós [m.] ‘list of names' (inscr. Thess.).
ǒvocal
1085
•ETYM Old word for 'name', directly comparable with Arm. anun < *onomn- <
*anomn- (with o > u before m and a > o in pretonic open syllable); Arm. anun may
represent both the zero grade *hnh¸-mn- (originally found in the oblique cases) and
the full grade *hneh¸-mn from the nominative, but the Greek word must have the
old zero grade. Further, OPhr. onoman, NPhr. ovoμav also have their initial o- from
*h (Kortlandt SCauc. 7 (1987): 63).
The e in other languages has a different origin: Alb. emër (Gheg), êmën (Tosk) may
be a loan from Latin nōmen, while in OPr. emmens [gen.sg.m.] < *h¸ṇh3-men-s, the
initial e- is the reflex of a vocalic nasal (cf. also the group of OCS ime). Celtic (e.g.
OIr. ainm) is derived from *anmen- < *h3h3-men-), and ToB ñеm, ToA ňom points
to *nēm, which perhaps derives from a preform *h¸neh,-m- by dissimilation of the
second h3. If the e- found in Laconian Evчµαкpατdaç belongs here at all, it is not
well explained, but it need not be due to (incidental) vowel assimilation; it may also
be due to dissimilation of the first laryngeal against the second (cf. on Tocharian).
The Greek u-vocalism in ovuμa, vávчдvoç, etc. is due to Cowgill's Law (see Vine
1999b).
All languages have generalized one of the two ablaut grades: Lat. nōmen = Skt. náma
<IE *hneh₂mn. In Germanic, Go. namo [n.], etc. < IE *h¸nh3mōn goes back on a zero
grade, while OFr. nōmia, MHG be-nuomen, MoDu. noemen have the old full grade
*h3neh-; see Beekes Sprache 33 (1987): 1ff. (against this, Stüber Die Sprache 39/1
(1997): 74-88, but unconvincing).
The Anatolian evidence is highly complicated (see Kloekhorst 2008): Hitt. laman-
[n.] < *h¸neh¸-mn- (like Latin), with regular loss of the *h3- and then *n- > 1- by
dissimilation; lamnija- [v.] 'name' from *h3nh₁-mn-; but HLuw. a-ta4/5-ma-za
(interpreted as /?lāman=ta/ in Kloekhorst KZ 117 (2004)) preserves the reflex of
initial *h¸-.
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. hanna¹- has also made it clear that the root of the word is
*h3neh, as still preserved in the Hittite verb hanna'- 'to sue, judge' and in Greek
►ŏvoμat. A denominative yod-present like óvoμaívw is found in other branches, too:
Go. namnjan 'to name', Hitt. lamnija-. The original n-stem is still clearly seen in
vávчдv-oç <*д-h¸nh3-mn-; ȧvóvчμoç is younger.
övoчa [v.] 'to scold, blame, insult' (Hom., also Hdt.). <IE *h¸neh- 'name'>>
•VAR Aor. óvóσ(σ)ασa (vaτo P 25; cf. below), fut. óvóσσo̟μα, with кατα- in кαt-
ÚVOντо, -ovoσеñs (Hdt. 2, 172 and 136).
•DER Verbal adjective óvorós (Pi., Call., A. R.), óvoσtós (I 164, Lyc.) with analogical
-σ-; dental formation in ovorτάw = övoчa (h. Merc., Hes., A.); óvytá• µeµrtá
‘reproached' (H.), probably after the oppositum ảyŋtá ‘admireď; övoσts [f.] ‘blame’
(Eust.).
ETYM All forms except ovato (which is rather aor. then ipf.), övαται· áτчáčεtai
‘dishonors' (H.), and the debated form oűvɛσßε (§ 241) are based on a root óvo-;
thus, óva- is not an old ablauting variant but a secondary deviation. The comparison
with the Celtic group of MIr. on 'shame', anim 'blemish, fault' remains highly
hypothetical, while that with the unreliable ptc. (hapax) OAv. nadant- ‘slandering,
reviling' and with Skt. níndati 'to blame, revile' (as ní-nd-ati; but rather ní-n-d-ati,

=== page 569 ===

1086
Ŏvoc
for which see ►övεtdoc) is based on the wrong assumption that óvóσσ-aσðal, -oµai,
and óvoστós go back to *ỏvod-, instead of being analogical.
Kloekhorst 2008 has recently convincingly argued for connection with Hitt. hanna-'
'to sue, judge' (3sg. ḥannāi, 3pl. ḥannanzi), which he retraces to *he-h¸nóh¸-ei, *h₂e-
h3nh,-énti by regular sound laws. For the semantics of the Greek word, starting from
the meaning 'to call, name', one may compare the English expression 'to call names'.
övos [m., f.] ‘ass, female ass' (A 558), often metaph., e.g. ‘windlass, winch, the upper
millstone' (ovos àλéτηc), as a fishname (after the grey color, or after the large head
as a sign of stupidity?), see Strömberg 1943: 100. <PG?>
•VAR Myc. o-no /onos/.
•COMP Very often as a first member, e.g. in plantnames like óvo-¤ńpa, -kápdɩov,
-лodov, ővoσµа (see Strömberg 1940: 138 and 61); on ►övivvoç, see s.v., on övaypos
= övos äyptos ‘wild ass' see Risch IF 59 (1949): 286f.; as a second member in ñµí-ovos
[f., m.] 'mule' (Il.), cf. Risch l.c. 22f.
⚫DER 1. Several diminutives, partly in metaph. mg.: óv-íσkoç [m.] (Hp., Ph. Bel.), -tov
(-íov?) [n.] (pap.), -ídiov (Ar.), -áptov (Diphil. Com.), -apídiov (pap.), -údiv (?; pap.
IVP). 2. Other substantives: óvís [f.] ‘donkey droppings' (IA); óvītɩ [f.] ‘kind of
marjoram, Origanum heracleoticum' (Nic., Dsc., Gal.); óvíaç [m.] 'kind of σkápoç'
(Ath.); ỏvɛĩov [n.] ‘donkey stable' (Suid.). 3. Adjectives: öv-ɛtoç ‘of a donkey' (Ar.,
Arist.), -кóç ‘belonging to a donkey' (NT, pap., inscr.), -wdŋs ‘donkey-like' (Arist.).
4. óvɛúw [v.] 'to draw with a windlass, draw up' (Th., Stratt.). On ►övwviç, see s.v.
•ETYM Doubtfully explained by Brugmann IF 22 (1907-1908): 197ff. from *osonos
(which via *ohonos > *hoonos would have been reinterpreted as ó Ŏvoc), which
together with Lat. asinus is supposed to be a loan from a South Pontic language.
Arm. ēš, gen. iš-oy is rather from *h,ekuo-. Sum. anšu ‘ass' was also compared (see
Neumann IF 69 (1964): 61).
Not related to Lat. onus 'burden' (Grégoire Byzantion 13 (1938): 287ff.), nor to Hebr.
'ātōn 'female ass'. Probably a Pre-Greek word.
övv₹ 1, -vxos [m.] ‘nail, claw, hoof, often metaph. in several mgs. (Il.). <IE *h¸nogh-
'nail'>
•DIAL Myc. o-nu-ka/onuka/ or /onuks/, cf. Guilleux RPh. 75 (2001): 149.
●COMP óvuxo-ypaqέoμai [v.] 'to be carved by a nail (Hp.), yaµy-wvv and -wvvxos
'with curved claws' (Il., also Arist.); on μwvvč, see s.v.
⚫DER Diminutive ovúxtov [n.] (Arist., pap.); ovuxiστηp, -ñpos [m.] 'hoof (LXX), cf.
on ẞpaxioviστηp and ovvxíčoμai below; óvux-чμaños of the size of nail-parings, tiny'
(Com. Adesp.), -taños ‘as broad as a nail (Eust.); óvux-íšoµα [v.] 'to cut one's nails'
(Cratin., LXX) with -ɩσµóc [m.] (Str.), -tστýptov [n.] 'nail scissors' (Posidipp. Com.);
-í\w [v.] ‘to test with one's nails' (Artem.); -ów [v.] ‘to equip with claws, bend in a
claw-like fashion' (Orib., sch.).
•ETYM Old name of the nail and the hoof, retained in most branches in various
formations. Disyllabic ovuε (ovux-) obtained its v-vocalism from *h3nogh- by
Cowgill's Law, which would require a neighboring Proto-Greek labiovelar (see Vine
bos
1087
1999b). Therefore, we may propose a u-stem *h3nogh-u- (for which OCS nogбtб
'hoof <*Hnogu-ti- has been compared), or reconstruct *hnogh-.
The Greek form agrees with Arm. etungn ‘nail', which is a secondary n-stem like ot-n
'foot' < acc. *pod-m (see ►лoúc). Kortlandt assumes that *h3nogh- / *h¸ng"- yielded
PArm. *onog / *ong, which were contaminated in *onong; this became *enong by
dissimilation, which gave elungn, on which see Kortlandt 2003: 76. The other
languages have a monosyllabic stem: either *h3ng"- (Lat. unguis, OIr. ingen [f.]) or
*h3nog"- (OHG nagal [m.] ‘nail', BSI., e.g. Lith. nāgas [m.] ‘nail, claw'). IIr. has a
voiceless aspirate, e.g. Skt. nakhá- [m., n.] ‘id.'.
övu₹ 2, -vxos [m.] name of a precious stone, ‘onyx' (Ctes., LXX). ◄?►
•COMP σapd-óvvε 'sardonyx' (Philem. Com., J.); cf. σápdiov.
●DER OvÚXIov [n.] 'kind of onyx' (Thphr., LXX), -tos [adj.] (Suid.),-ítŋs [m.], -ītɩç
(Aitoc) [f.] 'onyx-like stone' (Str., Dsc.), -tvoc 'made of onyx, onyx-colored' (Hell.).
•ETYM Perhaps identical with övvε ‘nail' because of its white glaze, like that of a
fingernail; alternatively, is it just a foreign word reshaped by folk etymology?
Untenable Semitic etymologies in Lewy 1895: 58.
óvvpíletai [v.] · ódúpɛται ‘laments' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 35658 mentions this form after ivúpετO μÚрεTO (H.).
övwviç [f.] plantname, 'restharrow, Ononis antiquorum' (Thphr.); cf. Strömberg 1940:
61, 155. <PG(V)>
•VAR Also -íç.
●DER OvWVITIS [f.] 'id.' (Ps.-Dsc.).
●ETYM Fur.: 340f. compares àvwvíc (Dsc.), with variation a/ o, thus it is probably a
Pre-Greek word.
čadic →àvačupic.
ožɛpíaç [m.] name of a Sicilian cheese (Com. Adesp. 880 from Poll. 6, 48), acc. to H. =
τupòç άxpɛños ‘useless cheese'. <?>
ETYM Formation like óлíaç (from óлóç) 'kind of cheese', oßeλías (from óẞελóc)
‘kind of bread, and other names of victuals; thus perhaps from *òžɛpós (from óčúc)
like yλuкɛpós (from yλuкúç; Scheller MSS 6 (1955): 87). Acc. to Bolling Lang. 12
(1936): 220, it is incorrect for ó ɛpías (from žɛpóc, šŋpós) vel sim.; however, the
article to be assumed creates difficulties.
ỏžíva [f.] · ¿pyadɛióv tɩ yewpyikóv, oɩdnpoûç yóµqovs éxov, éλkóµevov dïò ßowv ‘an
agricultural tool having iron teeth, drawn by cows' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Probably connected with the IE word for harrow' seen in Lat. occa, W oged,
OHG egida, Lith. akėčios (also ek-), from IE *h₂ok-et-h₂-, although the Latin word is
unclear (see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). The Greek word was perhaps reshaped after oчúç
and has an ending like ȧžívη 'axe', but the latter has a long t, while here the length is
unknown. Note that Pre-Greek has a suffix -tv-.
öos [n.] 'wine vinegar' (IA). <PG?>

=== page 570 ===

1088
óúα, -n
●COMP òšo-лwλŋs [m.] ‘vendor of wine vinegar' (Lib., Poll.), ó§-áλµŋ [f.] ‘broth
made of oчos and ǎλµŋ' (com.), кát-oos 'drenched with wine vinegar' (Posidipp.
Com.).
⚫DER 1. Substantives: diminutive oídov [n.] (pap.); óžíc, -ídos [f.] 'vinegar flask’
(com., pap.); óžívηs (olvoc) [m.] 'sour wine', also metaph. and as an epithet of men:
'sour, ill-tempered' (Hp., Ar., Thphr.), cf. e.g. кɛyxpívns, έdaqívns; ỏčaλíc, -ídos [f.]
'sorrel, Rumex' (Nic., Ps.-Dsc.) with óáλ-ɛoç ‘tartish' (Apollod. Car.), to *očaλoç;
onís [f.] plant name (Theognost.).
2. Adjectives: o-pós relating to wine vinegar, acetic' (S., Ar., medic.), -wτóç ‘in salť
(Ar. Fr. 130), -wdns like wine vinegar, sour' (Gal.), -ĭtiç [f.] ‘tasting like wine vinegar'
(PHolm.). 3. òšíčw [v.] 'to taste or smell like wine vinegar' (medic.).
⚫ETYM From ►òžúc, like ñdoç to dúç, εúpoç to εúpúç, etc.
ỏžúa, -ŋ [f.] ‘beech, Fagus silvatica' (Xanth., Thphr.), 'spear shaft (made of beech
wood), spear' (Archil., E.). <?>
•VAR Secondarily oεéa, -ɛĩa (but cf. below).
●DER òğv-óɛıç ‘made of beechwood, of έyxos, Sópu (Il.); hardly enlarged from óčúc,
as per Bechtel 1914: 55; ošú-ïvoç (-Éέïvoc) ‘id.' (Thphr., Delos III³).
⚫ETYM On the variation ošúa, -ŋ, see Schwyzer: 189; late ošća after itéa, µŋλéa, etc.;
ožɛia after the adjective.
Probably identical with the old IE word for ‘ash', which got the meaning ‘beech' in
Albanian as well (cf. on уós). The Albanian, Armenian, and Germanic forms.
come closest to Greek: Alb. ah (from *ask- or *osk-), Arm. haci (from *askiio-?), ON
askr, OHG asc (PGm. *aska-, *aski-). The suggestion that ocún was reshaped after
očúc is not strong, and the assumption of an old metathesis like in žúv, etc. is
untenable (Sánchez Ruipérez Emerita 15 (1947): 67).
The other languages have a deviating stem formation: e.g., Lith. úosis, Ru. jásen' <
PIE *Heh3s- (see Derksen 2008 s.v. *àsenь). Other European forms have a short
initial vowel, e.g. Lat. ornus [f.] 'mountain-ash' (if from *os-Vn-o-), OIr. uinnius [m.]
'ash-tree' <*osno-, and also the Gm., Arm., and Alb. forms mentioned above. This
may be taken to point to ablaut *Heh¸-s- / *Hh3-es-.
The IE character of these words is far from sure, despite the tradition to compare
them. The forms are unclear. The vocalic variation in Greek, which is not sufficiently
explained by assuming the intervention of an adjective, may in principle also point
to a Pre-Greek word. The word άxɛpwïç is unrelated. Witczak Linguistica Baltica 1
(1992): 201-211 connects Arm. hac'i ‘ash' with ảкτéα, while he connects ►óžúa with
Arm. uši and hoši.
óúyyɩov [n.] 'lard' (Dsc., Orib.). <LW Lat.?➤
•VAR Also ȧžovyyía = Lat. axungia, àžoúyyiov, Lat. oxingion (gloss.).
•ETYM Borrowed from Lat. axungia. Fur.: 341 thinks that it is rather a loan, not a
native Latin word.
oupεyuía [f.] 'sour eructation of the stomach'. <<GR>
•VAR Also -ín.
•COMP oчupεyu-wdŋc, -áw (medic.), кpo̟-ožεуúa (Ar. Pax 529).
1089
•ETYM A compound of ošús and puучós with a suffix -ía-, so from *óžv-ɛpvyµ-ía
with dissimilatory interchange of the vowels; cf. Strömberg 1944: 99.
óžúc [adj.] ‘sharp, stinging'; 'sour, tartish' (of taste), 'shrill, loud' (of the voice), 'fierce,
acute, rapid', of emotion and movement (Il.). <?►
•COMP Very often as a first member, also with prefix, e.g. äл-oğuç ‘pointeď (Hp.,
Dsc., Gal.), with back-formation from ȧл-očúvw.
•DER ►öчoç [n.] ‘wine vinegar'; ošútnc, -ntos [f.] 'sharpness, sourness, acuteness',
gramm. high-tonedness' (IA); ošúç, -údoç [f.] 'dock, Rumex' (Plin., Gal.), cf. èuÚç,
KpokÚç.
Denominative verbs: 1. ošúvw 'to sharpen, whet, sour, heat' (IA), also with prefix
(especially лαр-), whence őžuvτpa [n.pl.] 'wages for sharpening tools' (Hell. inscr.),
óžúσµаτα [n.pl.] ‘whetting, sharpening' (Delos IIIª), лapošvσµós [m.] ‘irritation,
embitterment' (Hp., D.), -vüкóç ‘enlivening, irritating, embittering' (IA), -vτaí [pl.]
(H.; očúvτηs Hdn. 1, 77, 25). 2. čoεέw 'to sharpen' (inscr. Delos), cf. Hellmann 1992:
67.
⚫ETYM Without correspondences outside Greek. It has been compared with Öкpıç,
which is an o-grade of the root of aкpoç, but there are no further examples for u-
stem adjectives with o-vocalism. Alternatively, Narten 1986 reconstructs a root *h3ks-
on the strength of the comparison with Skt. akṣṇoti ‘to mark the ear, but this is
doubtful. See ► òžíva.
óлáw [v.] 'to chase, oppress; to make follow, give as a companion, provide with,
grant', med. 'to take as a companion' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Аor. óлáσ(σ)ai, -ασðaι, fut. óñáσ(σ)w.
•COMP Rarely with katα-, „ɛpɩ-, Éπ-.
⚫ETYM From ►εлоμα (with epic Ionic psilosis), best taken as an iterative-intensive or
causative with secondary dental inflection (*óлáw: óлá(w). Derivation from a noun
(*óлóç, *óлý) is possible as well; see on ►óлáwv, and cf. also óлndós.
óлáλλioç 'opal' = Lat. opalus (late).
ETYM See E-M.
öлατpoç [adj.] Probably ‘of the same paternal descent' (A 257, M 371). <GR➤
ETYM From copulative 1 and лάτрη paternal descent' (sее ►лατкр).
Wackernagel 1955(1): 491ff., however, thinks it is Аеolic for ó-лάτрιоç (Lyc. 452)
'having the same father', which is certainly possible.
óráwv, -ovoç [m.] 'fellow, companion' (II.). <GR, IE *sek"- 'follow'>
•VAR onέwv, -wvos (Hdt.).
•DIAL Myc. PN o-qa-wo-ni /"ok"āwōni/ (Lejeune 1964: 87, Ruijgh 1967a: 256¹¹³).
⚫ETYM The form *òлά-Ƒшv 'belonging to the retinue' is derived from *ỏлά [f.]
'followers, retinue', a verbal noun from ►εлoμaɩ. The psilosis is also found in
►óлáчw. Cf. synonymous кolvov, -áv < -áwv. See Ruijgh Minos 9 (1968): 109-155.
öлɛaç [n.] ‘awľ (Poll. 10, 141). ◄GR, IE *h¸ek™- ‘see’>>

=== page 571 ===

1090
1091
•VAR Also v.l. -εap; dat.sg. úлéατɩ (Нdt. 4, 70); úлéατa• ónýτia (H., üлɛa. tà óñíoða
cod.).
•DER Diminutives óлýτ-ov [n.] (Hp., LXX; vл- in gloss.), -ídlov [n.] (Poll. 7, 83);
unclear Nicoch. 9.
⚫ETYM Vine Glotta 72 (1994): 31-40 rejects Schwyzer's interpretation and assumes a
stem in -ur/n-, also from *opā- 'hole'; this gives a substantive *opā-uṛ / *opā-unt-.
The word would properly mean 'hole-making thing' = 'awl', rather than 'provided
with an eye. The nominative would then yield öлεaр, and was replaced by öлɛaç.
The form *oлηατ- > *óлεãτ- gives óлητ- by contraction. Vine adds a discussion of
Myc. o-pa-wo-ta, ultimately rejecting the derivation from óлn.
The form with úл- remains difficult; folk etymology was assumed, e.g. by Frisk, and
dialectal origin (cf. Аeol. úлíσσw = óлíσσw) may also be considered.
óлn [f.] 'light opening, hatch, hole, hollow' (Ar., Arist.), 'sight' (Cerc. 4, 23; beside
ȧková). <IE *hek"- 'see'>>
•VAR Dor. -a.
•COMP As a second member in σtε(1) v-wñós ‘with a narrow opening, narrow' (II.),
лoλv-wèóç ‘having many holes, mesh' (X 386, etc.), w analogical or metrical; also in
►εvóлaι, ►μετóлη, etc.; further also in ►ávóлaια?
●DER ỏлaîoç ‘having an opening', of a tile (Diph. Com., Poll.), óлaïov [n.] ‘skylight,
chimney-flue' (Att. inscr., Plu.), cf. Bérard REGr.67 (1954): 4; óлnεç 'having a hole',
of Sippos (Hp.).
•ETYM If it is a verbal abstract from óл- ‘seе³, óлý must originally have meant 'sight'
(thus as an incidental poetic formation in Cerc.; see above), whence 'that through
which one sees'. It can, however, also be an extension from a root noun, thus an
agent or instrument noun in origin. See ŏμμa.
órŋdós [m.] ‘attendant, companion' (h. Merc. 450, late prose). <GR➤
•VAR Dor. (also trag., etc.) òëādóc.
●DER órŋdéw, óñadéw [v.] ‘to attend, accompany' (Il.), -ɛúw (A. R.) with órádŋσi
[f.] 'attendance' (Criton apud Stob.), óлηητкp. σúvodoç, áкóλovoç 'fellow,
companion' (H.).
•ETYM Оn óлάwv, óлadóç in tragedy, see Björck 1950: 109f. Since óлηdóç can hardly
be separated from synonymous óлάwv, an analysis órŋ-dós (óë-ŋdóç?) has been
considered. Such a formation is unknown, however, especially for an agent noun
(but several in -óv do exist). Meier-Brügger Glotta 69 (1991): 171f. therefore
derives the word from an adverb *óлηdóv 'in company'; the substantive would have
been derived from the verb óлηdεw.
The connection with Hitt. hapati- ‘servant, etc.' must be abandoned (see Tischler
1983ff.: 163f.).
óлīлɛúw [v.] 'to look after something, stare or peek at someone' (Il.). ◄IE *opi-h¸k™-
'look at❜>
•VAR Аor. óëɩлɛñσɑ; the pres. óлɩɩεúш arose after óлτεúw.
•COMP As a second member лαреεv-oллα [vоc.] 'one who stares at maidens' (A
385), after which raid-oñîña [pl.] (Ath.), etc.
i
•DER óëɩлεvτýр, -ñpos [m.] ‘sbd. who stares' (Man., Nonn.), óninã. è̟šanatã
'deceives' (H.).
•ETYM Because of the strong productivity of the verbs in -ɛúw, several nominal stems
can be considered as a basis. A verbal noun *óлɩлý, like óлwë½ and ► έviлý, is most
likely; thence the denominative олɩлα and the second member -Оллα in
compounds. The stem consists of a preverb óл- (sее öлσеεν) and the zero grade
of *hek"-, giving *opi-h¸k"- > ónīπ-.
örıç [f.] ‘revenge, punishment, retribution of the gods' (Hom., Hes.), 'help, assistance
from the gods' (Pi. P. 8, 71); 'awe, obedience, solicitude' (Hdt., Pi., Mosch.). <IE
*hzek"- 'see'>
•VAR Acc. -tv, -18a; dat. -1.
⚫DER ỏлíoμαι 'to awe, fear, shy' (II.), also with εл-, post-Hom. 'to worry about', e.g.
óлíðdoµαι (Lacon. epigram), late aor. áлíσατо (Q. S.); óñɩðvóç [adj.] ‘awesome' (A.
R. 2, 292), rather verbal than nominal, cf. Chantraine 1933: 193 and 195. PN Aŋï-
oritys, 'Oritns [m.] (A 420 and 301).
ETYM The connection with oл- in öчoμat, etc. can hardly be rejected. This implies
an older meaning 'sight, look, glance', whence 'animadversion, punishment' on the
one hand, 'consideration, respect, reverence' on the other. The development of
meaning of the noun was partly influenced by óлíšoμaɩ. Cf. on ►έVLAŃ.
öƒʊðɛv [adv., prep.] ‘(from) behind, at the back, after(wards)' (II.). ◄IE *h,epi, *h,opi
'close upon, at, behind'>>
•VAR Also -ε (Ion. poet.); öðε(v) (Il.).
●COMP Many compounds like óлσðó-doµoç [m.] ‘backmost hall of the temple of
Athena' (Att.); on óлɩσðέvap see Oέvap. As a second member in µεt-óriσðε(v)
'behind, after' (Il.), etc.
•DER Óлíσð-10 (IA), -ídios (Sophr., Call., AP) ‘situated in the back'; grades of
comparison óлíσtatos (℗ 342, A 178), instead of *óлíσð-ατоç(?), and thence -τɛpoç
(Arat., Nonn.) beside óлσó-τεрos (Arat.). Further óлíσ(σ) w (Il.), Аeol. úлíσσw
(Sapph.) 'backwards, afterwards' with óлσó-τατоç (Hell.); ε-олíσw 'id.' (Il.), etc.
ETYM The old adverb/preposition öлɩ (Myc. o-pt) is retained in öлɩ-0εv. Later,
öлσε was formed from this after лpóσ-Оεv and óлíσ(σ)w. The latter stands for
*opi-tio-; cf. on εľσw s.v. ►ɛiç for the suffix. For connections outside Greek, see on
► εлɩ; the o-grade is also found in Lat. ob, etc.
óлτíшv [m.] a plant with a bulb, perhaps ‘Bunium ferulaceum' (Thphr.). <PG(V)>
•ETYM Fur.: 240 compares oτov 'an Egyptian truffle'; oτoν τò Úл' ¿víwν oltóv
(H.) beside "tov a Thracian mushroom (Ath. 2, 62a v.l. oltóv; iton Plin.), which he
analyses as pointing to (6) Fɩτov. He further connects "Svov, oldva. The variations
point to a Pre-Greek word.
óлλn [f.] 'the unsplit hoof of a horse' (A 536 = Y 501), 'the split hoof of oxen, cattle' (h.
Merc., Hes., Pi., IA). <?>
•DER Óлλn-εiç 'with hooves' (Poeta apud D. Chr. 32, 85).

=== page 572 ===

1092
óлλíaç
1093
•ETYM Unexplained. The formally obvious connection with öлλov is semantically
hard to explain. Connection with ȧлλý 'simple', with *sη- > ó-, could be envisaged,
although the conditions of this development would remain unclear.
óñλíaç [?] · Aokpoi toùs tórovs év ois ouveλaúvovtes ápiðµoñoi tả лpóßata kaì tà
Boσкnματα 'the Locrians thus call the places where they drive together their catlle
and count it' (H.). <?>
•ETYM The thesaurus suggests that in these places many traces of hoofs were seen;
hardly the correct solution.
öлλov [n.] 'implement, tool, instrument, marine instruments', notably 'tackle, (heavy)
weapons' (II.). <IE *sep- 'care, prepare', *sop-lo 'instrument'>>
•VAR Mostly öлλα [pl.].
•COMP блλо-μάx-os 'who fights with heavy weapons', -éw, -ía (Аtt.). v-oлλоç
'under arms, armed' (Tyrt., S., E.), enlarged εv-óлλoç 'id.', also substantivized (scil.
pueµóc) as the name of a military rhythm (Pi.); on ►úлépoлλoç, see s.v.
●DER 1. Diminutive óлλápov (Hell.). 2. “Ordŋ-tes [pl.], gen. ‘Оëλýðwv name of one
of the four oldest Ionian phylai (Hdt., Milete); -0- after ëàñеoç, or by transfer of
aspiration? 3. óлλí-tŋs Dor. -taç [m.] 'heavily armed (warrior)' i.e. 'hoplite' (Pi., IA),
fem. -τıç (Poll.), together with -Tikós, -teúw, -tɛía (Att.). 4. óлλ-ikóç ‘pertaining to
arms' (Vett. Val.). 5. Олλɛúç [m.] PN (Hes. Sc.). 6. Orλó-σµioç [m.] epithet of Zeus
in Arcadia (Arist., inscr. IIIª), -σuía [f.] epithet of Hera in Elis, etc. (Lyc.), -duía [f.]
name of a phyle in Mantinea (IV₁); formation unclear. 7. ►óлλíaç: Aoкpoi τoùÇ
TÓTOUS, ĖV OỄ, GuvelaŮvovte, áp Quoơi tả apóßata kai tả Booknata (H.) is
unclear. 8. ►óëλóτεpoç. 9. Denominative verbs: a) óñλéw = óñλíšw only in wлλεov (
73; b) óñàíšw, -oμa 'to prepare', of food and drinks, etc. (Hom.), 'to arm, equip
(oneself)' (II.), aor. óлλíσ(σ)αι, -ασðaι, -σ0ñvai, late perf. шлλiкα, often with prefix,
e.g. ¿§-, ¿q-, кað-. Thence öлλ-чσis [f.], -ioµós [m.] ‘arming, armament, equipment,
equipage' (Att.), -ɩσµa [n.] ‘arm(s)' (E., Pl.), ¿‹oëλɩo-ía [f.] ‘equipment, position,
muster, (military) review' (X., Ain. Tact., etc.), also έoëλaσía [f.] ‘id.' (Arist., inscr.),
probably after Sokɩaσía, yu̟µvaσía, etc.; órdiotýs, Dor. -táç [m.] ‘armed warrior',
also attributive (Vett. Val., AP). c) ŏƒλɛ-σðaɩ ‘to prepare', of dɛïëvov (T 172, Y 159),
formation after the thematic root-presents (Schwyzer: 722f.), if not simply a mistake
of the tradition for óлλɛãσðαɩ, as per Solmsen 1901: 90. On the use of öлλov and
derivatives in Hom. see Trümpy 1950: 81ff.
⚫ETYM Greek formation with suffix -λ- and o-grade (Chantraine 1933: 240), from the
inherited root of ëлw 'to care for, perpetrate'.
óлλótɛpoç, -tatos [adj.] 'junior, youngest' always of persons, also applied to women
(II.). <GR>
⚫ETYM Oppositional formation in -τɛpoç, like кoυρóτɛроç, áуpóτεpoç, and
ópéστεpoç. According to a remarkable interpretation from antiquity, it properly
means able to wear arms, sturdy', as opposed to the yέpovτεç. Extensive
argumentation in Bechtel 1914 s.v.; cf. also Barone Boll. fil. class. 13 (1906-1907): 283.
ònokápragoy Kapagov.
!
1
óлóç [m.] 'plant juice', especially ‘juice of the fig-tree used to curdle milk, fig curd' (E
902). IE *soko- ‘juice, resin'>>
•COMP Some compounds like лoλú-oлoç ‘juicу', óño-ßáλσaµov [n.] ‘the juice of a
balm' (Thphr.) for óлòs ßalσáчos (alternative explanation by Risch IF 59 (1949):
287), likewise óлo-кápлaеov (Plin.), -кáλлασov (Gal.), see Thiselton-Dyer Journal of
Phil. 34 (1915): 305ff.
●DER 1. öлov [n.] 'poppy juice, opium' (Diocl. Fr. 94), with óлɩкóç 'made of opium'
(pap. II-III³); 2. óñíaç (tupóç) [m.] 'cheese made of milk, curdled with fig juice' (E.,
Ar.); 3. óлwdŋs (Hp., Arist.), óлóε (Nic.) ‘juicy'; 4. as a TN 'Олoûç (< -óεɩç),
-oñvτoç [m.] capital of the eastern Locrians (Il., inscr.) with 'Оño(ú)vtioi [m.pl.],
hoлovτíwv [gen.] (Th., inscr.); on the phonetics see Schwyzer: 253; also a HN, see
Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 2 (1950-1951): 233; 5. óлí(w 'to press out the juice, curdle
with óлóç' (Arist., Thphr.), also with ε(-; thence óлσµós [m.] 'pressing out of juice'
(Thphr., Hell. paаp.), öлσμα [n.] 'pressed-out juice' (Dsc.).
•ETYM The form óлóç, with Ionic psilosis for *óлóç (cf. hoлovτíwv), matches with a
Balto-Slavic word for 'plant juice, etc.', e.g. OCS sokú ‘juice', Lith. sakai [pl.] 'resin' <
IE *soko-. A by-form with initial *sų- is Lith. svekas, Latv. svakas, svęki ‘resin,
rubber'. Perhaps Alb. gjak 'blood' is also related (Demiraj 1997 s.v.). Lat. sūcus,
probably from *souko- or *seuko-, is clearly deviant.
órtáčoµiai, óntávoliai, órtós =öлwлα, öσσε.
óлτáш [v.] 'to fry, roast, bake' (Od.). ◄PG?(V)►
●var órteúµevos (Theoc.), aor. óëñoai (Il.), óëtηßñvai (Od.), perf. äätyka, -nuai
(Euphro or Ar.), fut. òrtýσoµai (Luc.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ¿л-, ¿§-, kat-, nap-.
•Der örtŋois [f.] ‘frying' (Milete Vª, Hp., Arist.), with óëτýσчo 'fit for frying'
(Eub.), óët-ýtɛipɑ [f.] epithet of кáµvoç (Call.), -ŋtúpia (H. as an explanation of
wyά, alphabetically wrong, so very doubtful); also òƒtevtýp [m.] ‘smith', of
Hephaistos (Coluth. 54 V-VIP) as if from *óлτεúш; cf. кαчuvεvτηp, etc. As a second
member in yaσtp-órtŋç, fem. -óлτç 'sausage fryer' (Delos IV-IIIª). Backformation.
-олτо 'well-done' (Hp.), from εε-олτáш (IA). Further óлτóç 'fried, roasted,
bakeď (Od.); with óëτ-aλéoç ‘fried, roasted' (Hom., Ath.), enlarged from óëtóç after
avaλéoç, etc.; óлτаvóç 'fried, fit for frying' (com., Arist.), formed like έyavóc with
related mg. From óлτavóç further oлτáv-чov 'kitchen' (com., inscr.), -tkóç 'fit for
frying' (pap. III³), -ɛús [m.] ‘kitchen master' (pap.) with -ɛĩov (-ñïov) ‘kitchen' (Plu.,
Luc., Hdn. Gr.); óлταváριoç⋅ assator, coctarius (gloss.). Formally isolated is oлτaσía
[f.] 'roasting, kiln' vel sim. (PHolm. 9, 39 dòç ɛiç öëtaσíav óëtão¤α), probably to
Óлτáш after еεрuaσía vel sim.
⚫ETYM As to its formation, óлτáw is a verb in -táw like ápτáw, poiτáw, ovτáw, etc. It
is commonly assumed that the verbal adjective óлtós (or rather tå óлá) forms its
basis. Etymology unclear. Fur.: 263 compares ŏyov ‘any cooked dish' as a variant,
which seems a good possibility; the variation is Pre-Greek.
=
ónti入(入)og →óp0a入1ós.

=== page 573 ===

1094
ópáw
1095
'to
óлvíw [v.] 'to marry, take as a wife', late also 'to have sexual intercourse with', pass.
get married', of women (Il., also Cret. and late prose). On the mg. see Ruijgh 1957:
107f. (against Leumann 1950: 284). <PG?►
•VAR Also óлúw (Arist., Cerc., Moer.), fut. óлúσw (Ar. Ach. 255).
•DER óлvσtúç [f.] 'marriage' (Cret.), with analogical -σ-; from the present stem
onvintaí [pl.] 'spouses' (Herod.). óлvóλαɩ· уɛyaµŋкóτεs 'married women' (H.); aor.
subj. pass. óлvασðáµɛÐα (Lyr. Alex. Adesp. 1, 52) as if from *òлváčoμal.
•ETYM Hitt. ha puš- ‘penis' is not related: it was cited in this form and compared with
Óvíw by Watkins 1982, but actually has a quite different form ḥāpūša(šš)-, and also a
different meaning, viz. 'shaft, shin-bone'; see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. for details. The old
comparison with Etr. puia ‘wife' (Hammarström Glotta 11 (1921): 212) is tempting; if
correct, it is probably a Pre-Greek Mediterranean word.
öлwña [v.perf.] ‘to watch, observe, view, contemplate' (Il.). <IE *h¸ek™ - 'see'>
•VAR Innovated ipf. óлшлεоν (Оrph.) and aor. óñwï½σασðα (Euph.). Further fut.
öчoчa (Il.), which like the following forms often occurs with prefixes like ȧл-,
έit(i)-, kat-, ïpo-, úƒ-, úñɛp-: aor. pass. óóðñvαι (IA) with fut. óðñσoµaɩ, perf. med.
wμμa (Att.). As a suppletive present to öлwлα, ▸óрáw is used.
•DER ỏnwit-ń [f.] ‘observation, view, eyeball', plur. ‘eyes' (Od., A. R.), -ŋtýp [m.]
'scout' (h. Merc. 15), -ta [n.pl.] (scil. òστéα) 'the bones of the eyes' (Hp.). Derivatives:
1. verbal adjective óлτós (Luc. Lex. 9, Ath.), earlier and more common as a
derivation from prefixed verbs, e.g. ün-, än-, kát-, npó-ortos (npo³ïíôç); thence
Ùл-, ÅÑ-, KAT-Oŋtt-ɛúw, úñoy-ía, etc.; 2. agent and instrument nouns: a) έë-, kaɩ- (h.
Merc. 372), úñɛp-, di-órtŋs, etc., also έi-, kat-, viɛp-, di-ont-eúw (K 451), dioлtýp
(K 562); thence the simplex óлτεÚш (Ar. Av. 1061); b) oлτηр [m.] 'scout' (Od.), also
with dɩ-, ¿è-, kaτ-; thence óлτýp-ta [n.pl.] ‘gifts upon seeing a person' (E., Call.); c)
dí-, ɛïo-, čv-, kát-oлtpov [n.] (Alc., Pi., A.) with derivatives; 3. Adjectives: ort-ikóÇ
'ptng. to sight', -кń [f.] ‘optics' (Arist.), older (Pl.) ovv-, έn-, viεp-ontiкóç. 4. Action
noun: oy [f.], gen. óлós ‘eye, face, look' (Emp. 88, Antim. 65), more frequent as a
second member, e.g. olv-oч 'wine-colored' (Hom.); ŏчç (εл-, лрóσ-, σúv-) [f.]
'sight, vision, view, appearance' (Il.); ŏчavov [n.] 'appearance' (A. Ch. 534). 5. For
óлτíos [m.], see on oo0aλμóç. 6. Verbs: óлτ-ávo̟μа (LXX, Hell.), -áčoμα
(LXX) 'to appear, become visible', probably after aiσávoμa and avуáčoд;
óлταívш (Eust.), like лaлταívш, etc.
•ETYM The verbal root is also found in YAv. aiẞii-āxšaiia- ‘to watch over' < *h¸ek™-s-
(other interpretations in LIV² s.v. *h3ek"-) and in Skt. ikṣate 'to perceive' < *h¸i-h¸k™-
s-, which (like the Greek future) are originally desideratives. The root is also
contained in öлiç, öðσε, öµα, and ►шч.
óлúpа [f.] 'end of the summer, beginning of autumn' (Il.), 'harvest, fruit' (post-
Hom.), cf. on 0εpos s.v. Оépoμal. <IE *h,opi 'at, on' + *h,os-r/n- 'harvest-time,
summer'>
•VAR Ion. -11. Also oлúpa; Lac. (Alcm.) óлáрα (see below).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in óлwpo-qúλa} [m.] ‘fruit watcher, garden watcher'
(Arist.).
1
i
●DER 1. Ónwp-ɩvós 'belonging to oл.' (Il.); 2. ïà ónwp-taĩa [n.pl.] ‘fruits' (Thphr.); 3.
-чμos 'fructiferous' (Anon. apud Suid.), after кάpëшios; 4. -чµɛños ‘of fruit, belonging
to fruit' (PLond.; uncertain); 5. -Iкóç ‘belonging to on.', also name of a medicine
against dysentery (Plin., Gp.); 6. 'Олwрεúç [m.] epithet of Zeus in Akraiphia (inscr.);
hoлopic [f.] PN (Lacon. or Mess. inscr.), Hopora [f.] PN (Lat. inscr.). 7. oлwρápov =
pomarium (gloss.). 8. Denominative verb óлwp-iw 'to reap (fruit), harvest in
autumn' (IA) with -toµós [m.] 'vintage' (Aq.). Hypostasis μετ-ówрov (µεÐ-) 'what
comes after ónópɑ”, öðɩv-ó¨wpov ‘when the oл. ends', ‘(late) autumn' (IA), a verbal
governing compound with them. enlargement. Thence µεt-, ɩ-oлwp-ɩvós (IA),
etc.
•ETYM The aspiration is not original and must have been taken from a word with
closely related meaning, e.g. wpa. The form is a contraction from *op-ohara, yielding
Lacon. ónápa; it consists of the preposition oл- (see on ►εлɩ and ►öлσеεv) and a
heteroclitic neuter *ohar < *h,os-r. The Greek word properly means 'the time
following summer'. The oblique form *hos-n- is continued in Balto-Slavic and
Germanic as an n-stem, e.g. CS jesenú, Ru. ósen' [f.] ‘autumn', Go. asans [f.] ‘harvest,
summer', OHG aran, MoHG Ernte 'harvest'.
ópavyέoµai [v.] 'to inspect closely' (Aesar. apud Stob. 1, 49, 27). ◄GR➤
⚫ETYM Verbal dvandva-compound from ópáw and avуéoдa; cf. Wahrmann Glotta
19 (1931): 178. On the topic in general, see Schwyzer: 645.
ópáw [v.] ‘to look, perceive, contemplate, see' (Il.). ◄IE *uer- ‘observe, note'>
●VAR Ion. also ópέw (Hdt.), also öpŋai (§ 343), ópŋão (A 56 and 198 acc. to
Zenodotus, uncertain accent), ópñs, -ñ‚ -ñv (Hp., Democr., Herod.), Aeol. öpηu
(Sapph.), öpn (Theoc.); ipf. έwpwv (Att.), epic 3sg. öpa, Ion. wpa (Hdt.), etc.; present
also Ŏpovτaι (104) with -VTO (Y 471), öpε quλάσσɛ guards, watches' (H.);
innovated perf. act. έópaкa (Att., also έwp-), Ion. oрáρηкα and шрηкα (Herod.),
Dor. ptc. wpaкvĩa (Epid.), med. έúpaμa (late Att.), aor. pass. ópα¤ñval (Arist., D.
S.), plpf. also opwpɛɩ (Y 112).
●COMP Highly frequent with prefix, e.g. ¿q- (¿л-), кαð- (kat-), ´ɑð-, пpo-, ovv-,
Úлεp-.
•DER Almost all derivatives are Hell. and late, as opposed to the older ones which
derive from primary óл- (see ►öлwлα) and from idɛīv: 1. ópāτóç ‘visible' (Hp., Pl.),
лpo-opaτós 'which can be foreseen' (X. Cyr. 1, 6, 23) as against лрó-Олτо
(лройлτос) 'foreseen, apparent' (IA); 2. öpaµa [n.] 'sight, spectacle, appearance' (X.,
Arist., LXX), also лαр- (Hell. and late), with opаμаτíčoμа (Аq.) against ŏμα,
►ɛidos; 3. öpaσıç [f.], also with лpo-, ´ap-, úñεp-, etc., ‘sight, face, look, apparition',
plur. also ‘eyes' (Demad., Arist., Men.) as opposed to öyɩç; úôópaσıç ‘suspicion’
(Plb.) for older úñoчsía; 4. ópaτýs [m.] ‘viewer' (LXX, Plu.) against óлτηp 'scout';
ópaτp (H. as an explanation of ortýp); 5. ópatikóç ‘able to see, provided with sight'
(Arist., Ph.), with eq- 'fit for oversight' (X.), as against έлoëtкóç belonging to the
εлóлη² (Pl.). 6. ópaτílw [v.] 'to catch sight of, aim for' (medic. IVP). 7. See ▸oupos
[m.] 'watcher' and ►έлíoupoç.

=== page 574 ===

1096
ópyά w
•ETYM The ipf. έápwv < *ñ-Ƒópwv, with aspiration after opw, and the perf. έópaкa <
*Fε-Fópaka, also έwp- after the ipf., seem to point to an original F-, which has left a
trace neither in Homer nor epigraphically, and is also absent in Myc. o-ro-me-no. It
remains uncertain whether the rough breathing is connected with the older F-.
The presentic forms, from which all non-presentic forms are derived, including the
verbal nouns, seem to require three different stems: 1. Fopã- in ópá-w, whence
perhaps regularly Ion. ópέw; 2. Ƒopη- in Aeol. öpŋµɩ, öpŋ, epic öpŋal, etc. (see
above); 3. Fop- in Ŏpovται, -vτo, öpεɩ.
Original *worā-ie/o- can be either an iterative-intensive deverbative of the type
лоτάoμαι, which fits the meaning well, or be explained as a denominative from a
feminine *worā, as found in oppovpά < *лрo³hopά < *лрo-Ƒoрá, and in Germanic,
e.g. OHG wara [f.] 'attentiveness', wara neman 'observe', ToA war, ToB were
'flavor. The Germanic and Tocharian words are usually reconstructed as verbal
nouns *uor-eh₂-, *uor-o-, respectively, but Hackstein 2002: 123-131 reconstructs the
root as *suerh3, and connects it with ►ëpuμai.
More difficult to judge, however, are Aeolic (F) ópηui and other seemingly athematic
verbal forms. The forms ópñç, -, -ñv may have been transformed from this by
thematization. One may compare Lat. verēri 'to venerate', though it has an ablauting
stem vowel.
The primary thematic formation "povταɩ, -vão, to which perhaps also belongs öpεt
(H.), is built on the root. It is attested in the formulaic expression εлì 8' ȧvépεç
σoì öpovται (-vτo), and modified in the plpf. εлì d' ávǹρ έσðλòç ópúpɛɩ. The o-
vocalism is remarkable, though analogous cases can be found, e.g. öoμat, oïxoμai.
From the primary verb are derived both *лpо-Ƒоp-á in oppoupá (see above) and
*-Ƒopós ‘guardian', a form which occurs only as a second member in compounds,
e.g. Avp-, tɩµ-wpós, êŋäovpós from ðʊpα-, τα-, кηão-Ƒop-óç. Formally, we may
compare Germanic adjectives like OS war attentive, cautious, aware', OHG giwar
'id.'.
Further instances of a root *uer- include Latv. veruôs, vērtiês ‘to inspect, observe',
ToA wär, ToB wär-sk- 'to smell'.
See ▸oupoç 2, wpa.
opyálw [v.] 'to soften, mold, tan'. ⇒έópyŋ.
opyavov [n.] implement, tool, instrument, sense organ, organ' (Hp., Ctes., Att.,
Arist.). <IE *uerg- ‘work'>
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. ópуavo-лotóç [m.] ‘instrument maker' (D. S.).
●DER Diminutive ópyáv-tov (AP, M. Ant.), -tкóç ‘instrumental, operative, practical'
(Arist.), -íτns [m.] ‘engineer' (pap. IV³), -tστńc [m.] ‘engineer of waterworks' (pap.
IIP), unattested *opyavílw, but di-, кατ-opуaví(w (AP, Alchem.); ỏpyavápioç =
fistularius (gloss.); ópуav-óoμαι 'to be organized, be provided with organs' (S. E.,
Iamb.), also with St-, whence (St-)opyάv-wσiç [f.] ‘organisation' (Iamb.). 'Opyávò [f.]
epithet of Athena (Thasos Vª, Athens), cf. 'Epyávŋ; as an adjective opyáva ‘operative,
formative', of xεip (E. Andr. 1014, not quite certain).
j
}
ǒpyra
1097
ETYM Formation like Eóavov (from εéw, -ooc), ŏxavov (from exw, Ŏxoc, -oxoc),
лλóкavov (from µλéкw, µλókos), ópkávŋ (from öpkoç, ěpkoç), etc. (Chantraine 1933:
198, Schwyzer: 489f.); similarly, öpyavov stands beside -opyós, öpyla, čopya, pyov.
It is unclear whether it was derived directly from the verb or from -opyós or ěpyov.
See pyov and ▸ pow.
ópyás, -ádoc [f.]→òpyn, opyáw.
ópyɛwv, -wvos [m.]⇒öpyia.
opyń 1 [f.] 'psychical drive, propensity, character, (strong) emotion, passion, wrath' (h.
Cer. 205, Hes. Op. 304); on the mg. see Marg 1938: 13f., cf. Diller Gnomon 15 (1939):
597. <IE *uerg- 'swell of juice, strength, anger'>
•COMP As a second member in äv-, dúo-, εv-opyos (Cratin., S.), analogically
enlarged in ȧv-, Svo-, ev-ópyntos (Hp., Gorg., Th., cf. ǎvoos: ávóŋtos, etc.), with
-noia [f.] (Hp., E.); transformed into an s-stem, e.g. лεpi-opyńs (Th.).
•DER ópy-íoç irascible' (Hp., X., D., Arist.) with -óτns [f.] (Arist., Plu.).
The verb ópyáw 'to bristle, swell with nourishing liquids and juice' (of the earth and
of fruits), 'to bristle with, be full of lust and desire' (of men), 'to desire strongly' (IA),
rarely with -, etc., is probably a denominative, and mostly presentic. Thence: 1.
back-formation vé-opyos 'freshened', of yñ (Thphr.); 2. ¿šópyŋois [f.] 'stong desire'
(Herm. in Phdr.); 3. ópyntús. ópyń (H.); 4. ópуaσµóç [f.] ‘orgasm' (sch. Hp.), after
σлασμóç, etc.
From ópyn in the sense 'wrath': 1. ópуíšoµαι [v.] 'to be angry', also -í(w 'to make
angry', also with prefix, e.g. ouv-, di-, έ‹-, nap-, nεpɩ-, (Att.), with ларopy-loµós [m.],
-toμa [n.] 'provocation, wrath' (LXX, Ep. Eph.); 2. ópyaívw [v.] ‘to make wrathful, be
wrathful' (S., E.).
From ópyáw (if not from ópyń or an older root-noun, see below) also ópyás, -ádos
[f.] 'luxuriously fertile', of earth, marshes (Att.).
ETYM ópyn has a direct correspondence in Skt. ūrjá [f.] 'nourishment, strength', but
the latter is an enlargement of older úrj- 'id.', and the formal identity of opyń and
ūrjá is secondary. At first sight, the Skt. form seems to require *urHg-, but the same
problem occurs in Skt. ūrdhvá- beside opłóc, and there is yet no definite solution for
this.
Semantically, úrj(á) fits much better with ópyáw, which preserved the original
concrete meaning. The transference to the psychological sphere in ópyn is found in
OIr. ferc [f.] 'rage' < IE *uerģ-h₂-.
For semantic influence of "pyov on ópyń (S. Ant. 355) and ópyás, etc., see Tovar
Emerita 10 (1942): 228ff.
opyń 2 [f.] a difficult word in Herond. IV 46; perhaps an adjective opposed to
Béẞnλoç. Cf. V. Schmidt 1968: 109-114, who thinks that the underlying substantive is
yuvń rather than yñ; it could mean 'initiated' and belong to opyta. <?>
•ETYM Uncertain.
opyia [n.pl.] 'secret religious customs, sacred secret service' (IA). <?>
•VAR Rarely-lov [sg.].

=== page 575 ===

1098
ǒpyvia
•DER ópyιáç, -ádos [f.] 'belonging to o., orgiastic' (Man.), opytálw 'to celebrate ŏ., to
initiate into the ő.' (E., Pl., Ph.), also with ε-, ouv-, etc., with opуiaσ-μóç [m.]
‘celebration of the ő.', -τýs [m.] ‘participant in the ő.' (Str., Plu.); -tiкóç ‘orgiastic,
passionate' (Arist.).
ópyɛwv, also -(ɛ)ɩwv, -wvos [m.] 'member of a religious brotherhood (h. Ap. 389,
Att.), with opyɛwvikós (inscr.), from öp yɩa with suppression of -ta after other nouns
in -ɛwv (see on this topic Chantraine 1933: 163f., Schwyzer: 521); positing a pre-form
*öpyoç is unnecessary.
⚫ETYM Traditionally interpreted as a derivative from the root of pyov, pdw, with o-
vocalism like in Ŏpyavov, etc. Alternatively, is it related to opуn and ópyάw?
Chantraine 1933: 55 considers foreign origin because of the meaning. On history and
meaning of opyta, see van den Burg 1939.
öpyvia [f.] 'fathom' (Y327). <PG>
•VAR Att. inscr. -va, also ópóyva (Pi.), gen. -ãç, -ñç, plur. aí (cf. below).
●COMP As a second member, beside regular and usual -ópyɩos (λ 312), also dɛk-
wpuyos 'ten fathoms long', etc. (X. Cyn. 2, 5) with compositional lengthening and
remarkable u-vocalism, which can hardly be explained by Cowgill's Law.
•DER ópyvi-aĭoç (AP), -óɛƖ (Nic.), 'a fathom long or wide', opyu-óoµαɩ in (dɩ-,
лερι-)wρуvɩwμέvos 'outstretched (a fathom wide)' (Ctes., Hipparch., Lyc.).
•ETYM Traditionally explained as a substantivized perf. ptc. fem. from ópéyw 'to
stretch (the arms)' without reduplication, reminiscent of ǎyuta, ǎрлuα, etc.; see
Beekes 1969: 27f. This explanation meets with semantic and formal difficulties: why
use a feminine form to express this notion, and why a perfect? The supposed archaic
ablaut öpyvɩa: ópóyuia is problematic as well; one rather expects that the o was
anaptyctic, as suggested by DELG s.v. Anaptyxis could also explain the variant
*-opuy-, seen in compounded -wpvy-.
Most problems have been solved by De Lamberterie Die Sprache 35 (1991-1993): 128-
130, who assumes that the word originally occurred in a syntagm öpyvɩa xɛíp, which
was used in the dual; this presupposes an adjective *opyús. Further traces of a u-stem
of the root *h3reg- are found in Skt. rjú-, Av. ǝrǝzu-, and especially in Ved. rju-hásta-
'with outstrechted hands'. See òpέyw.
öpdɛilov →tópdüλov.
öpd<n>µa [n.] · ǹ toλúrη tŵv έpíwv 'ball of wool, öρdiкov. τòV XiTwvíσкov. IάpioL
'short frock' (H.). <?►
•VAR Or <1>, <w>?
•ETYM Isolated in Greek. Taken as a verbal noun of Lat. ōrdior ‘to begin a web, start',
e.g. by Pok. 60, which seems doubtful. The form pdvλevσáµηv. ¿µóxеŋσα ‘was
weary, etc.' (H.) also belongs here, which is from opdvλɛúw, deriving from *öpdvλoç,
-úλŋ with a formation like in кóvduλos, kopdúλŋ, etc.; cf. toλvлɛúɛv, which also
means μoxεīv.
ópeãves = ävdpɛs in the language of the Pythia (Plu. Mor. 406e). →òpε(1)ãveç.
į
!
}
i
}
ópeoxác, -ádoc
1099
ópéyw, -oμai [v.] 'to reach out (one's hand), hand over, stretch oneself, to stretch out
for'. <IE *h3reģ- 'stretch, direct'>
•VAR Aor. ópέžaɩ, -ασðaɩ, fut. ópέέw, -oµai (Il.), perf. and plpf. med. зpl. opwpéxαταl,
-TO (II.), pεудai (Hp.), aor. pass. ópεxОñvα (E., X., Hp. Ep.). Other presentic forms:
1. ptc. opɛy-vúc (A 351, X 37), -výμεvoç (AP, Mosch.); 2. opty-váoμai (Hes. Sc. 190,
Herod., Theoc.), together with the innovated aor. wpłyv-Ŕеŋv (Antipho Soph., Isoc.),
fut. -ησoμа (D. C.); for I as a secondary prop vowel, cf. кípvη (s.v. ► kɛpávvyu).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially έë-.
•DER 1. OPEKTÓç 'stretched out' (B 543, Str.), see Ammann 1956: 20, 'desired, longed
for (Arist.) with ópɛкτɛïv. ¿лðμε 'to desire', ópɛкɩɩŵv. ¿ëðvµãν (H.); άv-
ópεкτo without desire for, undesired' (Arist.), with ȧvop-ɛкtéw, -ɛžía (late). 2.
öpɛyua [n.] 'stretching (e.g. of the hand, also of the foot), step', also as a measure of
length (A., E., Arist., Tab. Heracl.). 3. öpɛčıç [f.] ‘desire, appetite' (Democr., Arist.)
with opεкTɩкóç 'inclined to desire, pursuing' (Arist., Arr.), 'arousing appetite' (Dsc.).
4. opéуdny by stretching out' (sch., H.). On ►öpyvia, see s.v.
•ETYM As a thematic root present, ópέyw agrees with Lat. regō ‘to direct, lead,
govern' and OIr. rigim 'to stretch out'; other Graeco-Latin correspondences are
~ rēxi and ópεкTÓç ~ rēctus (Lat. long ē is due to Lachmann's Law). Gm.
words like Go. raihts 'straight, right' and Av. răšta- 'directed, arranged, straight' also
belong here. Independent formations are öpεyμα, Av. rasman- [m., n.] 'line of
battle', and Lat. regimen [n.] 'leadership'. It is uncertain whether there is an old
connection between the isolated ptc. opɛy-vúc, -vúμɛvos and the Av. adjective raš-
nu- 'straight'; the present optуvάoμat, with suffixed nasal, is probably independent
from Skt. rñjáti 'stretches itself, runs' with nasal infix.
opɛktóS
opε(1)ãveç [m.pl.] acc. to Plu. 2, 406e = ävôpɛç in the language of the oracle of the
Pythian Apollo; cf. opɛíovɛç. ävdpεç (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Formation like Aкapvãvεç, etc.; further unclear. Acc. to Güntert 1921: 122f., it
belongs to ǎpony, etc.
ópεµrótŋs name or epithet of rivers in the language of the Pythia (Plu. Mor. 406e).
⇒'Оpoµáτaç.
Ópέovτo [v.] 'they stirred, hurried' (B 398, Y212). <?>
⚫ETYM If not poetic licence for öpovτo, it is best taken (with Bechtel 1914 s.v.) as an
intensive of pετо- wpμηoη 'was stirred' and the aor. εpon. ópμnon 'will move' (H.),
from a root *her- ‘move'; see on ►έpέ¤w and ►öpvyli.
ópɛʊkoç [adj.] ‘living in the mountains' (A 268, 1155, Hes. Fr. 79, 5). ◄IE *kei- ‘lie’▷
•VAR ÓρεσкÓOS (A., E.).
⚫ETYM Compound of ▸öpos and кɛчµαɩ with o-grade (cf. e.g. Sopu-σσóoç to σɛíw);
the irregular length (cf. Skt. -śay-á- lying') is probably metrically conditioned, and
the -- is analogical after кoчτoç, etc. Acc. to Bechtel 1914 S.V., we should write -ot- for
-æ-. An innovation (after the adjectives in -1oc) is ópέσkɩoç epithet of Dionysus (AP);
the same holds for opɛσкɛúw 'to live in the mountains' (Nic.).
ópeσxác, -ádos [f.] ‘vine with grapes', = öoxŋ, -os (Harp., H.). ◄PG(V)►

=== page 576 ===

1100
ópεús
⚫ETYM The word is evidently related to ►ápaσxádɛç, and as variants, both are of Pre-
Greek origin (Fur.: 348).
òpɛús [m., f.] ‘mule', replacing original Att. ǹuíovos (Il., Ar., Arist.). <IE *h,er- ‘go',
*her- 'raise'>
⚫VAR Ion. ovpɛÚç.
•COMP As a first member in opɛw-кóµoç [m.] 'mule driver' (Att.), etc. (perhaps for
opɛo- with influence of the gen. opέws?).
•DER opiкós 'belonging to a mule' (Is., Aeschin.).
•ETYM Derived from öpos, Ion. oupos 'frontier', which originally means 'furrow'.
Thus, opɛús would properly mean 'furrow-drawer'. The lack of aspiration in ópɛús
may be explained through secondary association with opos; on the psilosis, see
Chantraine 1942: 185.
ópɛxłέw [v.] expressive epic poetic verb of unclear mg., in Hom. of þóɛes oqašóµevol
(Y30, traditionally explained as 'to rattle'), in Theoc. of the sea (0áλaoσav
opεxеεiv 11, 43) 'to roar, surge', but in Ar. (Nu. 1368), A. R. (1, 275), Opp. (H. 2, 583)
of the heart (kapdía, кéap), also of Ovμós (A. R. 2, 49); after this in Nic. (Al. 340) of
the кúστç and in the tragedian Aristias (6; V₁) of лédov, which is rather obscure.
<?>
•ETYM The acoustic notion, which is undeniable in Theoc. and obvious in Homer,
cannot possibly be assumed for the other attestations. Etymologically unclear. The
ancient connection with poxeέw ‘to rustle, roar' is formally difficult, and does not
explain all attestations; that with opέyw (assuming an enlargement -0-; cf. Schwyzer:
703) is gratuitous as long as the meaning is unclear. See DELG s.v. for interpretations
from antiquity.
ópa yopiσкoç [m.] 'sucking-pig' (Ath., H.), also as a fish-name (Plin.), after its
grunting sound, acc. to Strömberg 1943: 69. <GR>
·DER Further Boplayopiokia. Xoipea kpéa.kai uikpoi Xoipoi Boplayopioro (-OákEOL
cod.). Aάкwveç 'pig meat; also, small pigs are called ẞ. (Laconian)' (H.).
ETYM Acc. to several sources in Ath. 4, 140b, it stands for *oppaуopíσкoç, “¿лεi
npòs tòv öpßpov répáσkovtai”, “because they are sold at day-break'. Thus it would
literally mean 'who has its market at day-break', a qualification which Bechtel 1921, 2:
328 rightly finds remarkable. Still, he considers it to be beyond doubt, and the name
would then be a word of pleasantry. Acc. to Pisani Paideia 13 (1958): 143, it was
created by the Lacedaemonians with unfriendly reference to 'Oplayópaç, the first
tyrant of Sicyon, whence opp- by folk etymology. The meaning was much
discussed.
(F)opBaía [f.] epithet of Artemis (Lacon. and Arc. inscr. since VIª, X., Plu.). <IE?
*uerd"- 'grow'>
•VAR Also Fwp-, -0ɛiα, -0ɛα, -ɩα.
•⚫DER Fopeaσia (Lacon. and Arc. inscr. since Va), opewoía (Pi., Hdt., Meg. inscr.);
doubtful explanation by Kretschmer Glotta 30 (1943): 155f., see Risch Mus. Helv. 11
(1954): 2941.
}
ǒpdpos
1101
⚫ETYM Traditionally connected with opłóc, but this is doubtful, since the latter has
no initial F-, and the semantic connection with Artemis is not clear either. Ruijgh
1967a: $130³¹ has suggested that the epithet denotes Artemis as a goddess of growth
and fertility; he derives (F)opeaía from the IE root *uerdh-, Skt. várdh- 'to grow'.
opłóc [adj.] 'upright, straight, right, true' (Il.). <IE *h¸rd"uo- ‘high, upright">
•DIAL Myc. o-to-wo-, o-tu-wo- and o-two-wo-point to /orthwo-/.
●COMP As a first member in several compounds, e.g. ópó-кpaιpa (see ►кpaĭpa),
óреó-μаντç, -лоλç (Pi.), ópео-στáτηs [m.] ‘column standing upright, etc.' (Att.
inscr., E.); rarely as a second member, e.g. -opos 'upright' (Ath.), a back-
formation from ε-opłów (Pl.).
●DER 1. Öp-105 (-10- formal enlargement) 'upright, steep, going up, shrill, loud,
arranged in columns' (A 11), on the difference of mg. against opłóc, see Chantraine
1933: 37; thence op¤-ía¢ [m.] (-íaç H.) 'the lower part of the mast' (Epich.), -tá【w [v.]
‘to cry loudly' (A.), -táoµata [pl.] ‘high pitch' (Ar.), also ‘to raise' (API.), -iaois [f.]
‘erection' (medic.); -táw = -ów (gloss., sch.). 2. op0-ηλós 'tall, straight' (Hell. inscr.),
after vyŋλóç; also -ŋpós ‘id.' (pap. Iª). 3. óp¤éσɩov. öpðɩov, þaкpóv, òžú, µéya ‘tall,
sharp, large' (H.), cf. Оεσлéσoç. 4. 'Opеávvns (Pl. Com., inscr.), also single -v- (Phot.,
H.) [m.] name of a Priapus-like demon (-vv- hypocoristic gemination; cf. 'Epyávη,
etc.). 5. ópóτηs [f.] 'uprightness, straight position; correctness' (IA); -oσúvη [f.]
‘uprightness' (Democr.). 6. Denominative verbs: a) opłów 'to raise, straighten,
improve, succeed' (Il.), aor. -woat, often with prefix, especially St-, кαt-, άv-. Thence
(dɩ-, кατ-, ȧv-)ópłwσis [f.] ‘raising, etc.' (Hp., Arist.), Sɩ-, кατ-, áë-ópеwµα [n.]
((implement for) raising, right act, etc.' (Hp., Arist.), St-, кατ-opłwτŃs [m.]
'improver, etc.' (LXX), ópеwτp [m.] 'raiser, upholder' (Pi.), St-, кat-opłwtikóç
'improving, successful' (Arist.); b) (di-)opłɛúw = (di-)opłów (E.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally, opłós is identified with Skt. urdhvá- 'raised, high' and derived
from *uord-uo-; for the initial F-, the gloss Bopσóv. στauрóv. Hλεioɩ 'pole, stake
(Elean)' (H.) is compared. The words are thought to derive from the verbal root
*uerd-, preserved in Skt. várdhati ‘to raise, grow (trans.)' and in Av. varəd- ‘id.'.
However, it is highly awkward to disassociate opłós and ūrdhvá- from the group of
Lat. arduus 'steep, lofty', OIr. ard 'high, great', and especially Av. ǝrǝduua- 'high', etc.
We have to leave the reflex of the initial in Skt. ūrdhvá- as an inner-Sanskrit
problem. Note that a similar problem occurs in the correspondence between ópyń
'impulse, drive' and Skt. ürj- 'refreshment, strength'.
There is no evidence for initial w- in Mycenaean. This has been explained in a
number of different ways, in order to maintain the connection with Skt. várdhati,
e.g. the assumption that PGr. *wo- > *o- at an early date. See ►öppos and
► (F)opeaía.
ópłóкpaipα →кpaipa.
öpopos [m.] 'time before daybreak, time of the cock-crow, first dawn', later 'morning'
(h. Merc. 98, Hes. Op. 577). <IE? *h3r-dro- 'sunrise'>>
•COMP oppo-Bóas [m.] name of the cock (AP), cf. ►ŋïkavóç; tò itɛpí-op pov 'dawn'
(Th., Hdn.).

=== page 577 ===

1102
ópiyavov
•DER 1. Adjectives öpp-tos 'belonging to dawn, happening at dawn' (h. Merc. 143),
'Opepía [f.] name of a goddess (Schwenn RhM 86 (1937): 298); -ɩvós ‘id.' (Arat., LXX,
AP), cf. Eweɩvós, etc.; -ídios ‘id.' (AP), cf. åïdioç, etc.; grades of comparison ópėpiať-
tɛpoç, -tatos (Hdn.), adverbial also oppi-τεpov (pap.) after лрwï-, òyí-tepov.
2. Verbs: a) opеp-εúw, -oμai 'to be sleepless or awake in the early morning' (E.,
Theoc.), back-formation "Oppos [m.] name of a mythical dog (Hes. Th. 309), see
Kretschmer Glotta 13 (1924): 270, with έл- also 'to be out of bed early' (D. Chr., Luc.);
b) -íw 'id.' (LXX, Ev. Luc.) with (εл-)opßpiσµós [m.] (Aq, Plu.).
•ETYM The best etymology proposes *h3r-dro-, from the root *h 3er- 'to rise' also
found in Lat. ortus 'rise of a star', oriens 'sunrise'. Acc. to Frisk, the meaning ‘time
before daybreak, first light of the morning' would seem to contradict this etymology,
but it is unclear why. Frisk further adduced opaуoрíσкoç as proof for *Fopp-,
but the relevance of this word for the present entry is doubtfyl. At any rate, a direct
comparison between oppos and OCS гan öpеpios', Ru. ráno ‘early' as *urōd"-no-
is useless, in view of the unmotivated lengthened grade in the reconstruction.
opiyavov [n.] name of a sharp or bitter tasting herb, 'marjoram, organy, origanum'
(Epich., Hp., Ar., Arist.). <?>
•VAR Also -os [f.]; also written opɛí-; variant έpɩy- (pap. IIª).
•COMP With determining first member: ȧypt-opiyavov (Dsc.), cf. Risch IF 59 (1949):
257, τpay-opiyavov (Nic., Dsc.).
●DER òpiyav-ís (-1s) [f.] = µãpov, a kind of salve (Ps.-Dsc.), -ítns (olvos) 'wine spiced
with o.' (Dsc.), -óεts belonging to ò.' (Nic.); -íwv [m.] name of a frog (Batr.), -í\w 'to
be like ò.' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained word of foreign origin. Marjoram originates from Northern
Africa. Was it folk-etymologically adapted to opos and yávos? Incorrectly, Carnoy
REGr. 71 (1958): 97f.
ópívdns (ǎpτoc) [m.] 'bread made of rice flour' (S. Fr. 609 from Ath. 3, 110e, Poll. 6,
73). <LW Iran.>
■DER ópívбov σлéрμа (Poll.); óрívda. ηv оi лоλλоì öрυ(αν кαλouσ 'what most
people call rice' (Phryn. PS 93).
ETYM Acc. to Ath. and Poll. l.c., ópívdŋs would be Ethiopian, but in fact it is an
Iranian loan; cf. MoP birinj and Arm. brinj (from Iranian), and see the discussion in
Brust 2005: 488ff. See ►öpuča.
ópívw, -oµai [v.] ‘to excite, stir' (II.). <IE *h¸r-i- ‘set in movement'>
•VAR Lesb. ópívvw (only Hdn., -v- Alc.; see Hamm 1957: 36 and 131), aor. ópīvaɩ,
-ασai, pass. opivеñvai.
•COMP Also with σuv-, -, ȧv-.
•DER ópívτns [m.] 'exciter' (Theognost.). Uncertain is the appurtenance of the
Corinthian horsename 'Opifwv (Fraenkel Gnomon 22 (1950): 238).
⚫ETYM The present opivw, whence the other forms derive, may either be from *opi-v-
w (a yod-present built on a nasal present, like кλívw) or from *opi-vF-w (a
thematicized vv-present).
ǒpkos
1103
Disyllabic *ori- is found also in Arm. ari [ipv.] 'stand up', aor. y-are-ay (< *-ari-) ‘I
stood up', as well as in Lat. orior. These derive from an earlier i-present which is
found in Anatolian: Hitt. arai-*/ ari- 'to arise, raise' < *h¸r-oi-, *hr-i-; cf. Kloekhorst
2008 s.v. This is an extension of the root *her- 'rise' seen in ►öpvvµt.
.
óρкáðovç • ¿q' wv τà σõкa чúxovotv ‘on which figs are dried (H.). <PG?(S)►
⚫ETYM Unknown. Probably Pre-Greek.
ópkávn →ëprocç.
öρкoç [m.] ‘oath' (II.), ‘object to swear by,, originally of the water of the Styx (B 755,
Hes., h. Cer. 259). <?>
•COMP ópк-wμóτŋs [m.] ‘who takes an oath' (Arc., Locr. inscr. VI-V³) with
ópkwµot-éw [v.] ‘to take an oath' (trag., etc.), a compound of öpkov ò̟µóσɑɩ with a
suffix -Tη-; εÜ-opкoç 'faithful to one's oath' (Hes.) with ɛvopк-éw; v-opкos ‘bound
by oath' (Att.) with έvopк-íčoµaι [v.] 'to bind by oath'; but opкoç 'sworn' (Pi.) is a
back-formation from ε-opкów, -opкí(w; on εлíоρкоç, see s.v.; лεуторк-íα [f.]
"taking of five oaths", "oath by five gods' (Locr. V₁), with a suffix -ía-.
●DER 1. öpkiα [pl.], rarely -ov [n.] ‘objects to swear by, oath pledge, animals
sacrificed for an oath, oath, solemn treaty' (II.), öpкios belonging to an oath, sworn
by' (Att., Leg. Gort.). 2. ópkikóç ‘belonging to an oath' (Stoic.). 3. ópków [v.] ‘to make
one swear, put under oath' (IA), aor. -woat, often with εε-, whence ópкúματα [pl.]
‘oath' (A.), óρкwτηç [m.] 'who makes swear, who puts one under oath' (Att.),
ópкw-σiç [f.] 'swearing, adjuration' (Hdt., J.). 4. opкíčw [v.] 'to make one swear,
adjure, administer an oath' (Ion., X., D., Hell., also Dor.), aor. -íoat, Dor. fut. ópкičEW
(Delph.), also with di-, -. Thence ópкíσµaτα [pl.] 'adjurations' (Megara I-II³), (St-,
-)ópкiσµóç [m.] 'swearing, adjuration' (LXX, Plb.), opкiσ-τ [m.] 'exorcist'
(Act. Ap.). 5. ópкíλλoµα [v.] 'to swear in vain' (Phot.), as if from a pejorative
diminutive *opкíλoç. 6. -opкέw only in derivatives from compounds, with analogical
formations: εvopк-éw (with ɛvopк-ía) from ɛű-opkoç (see above), wɛvdopk-éw from
wεúd-opкos (Risch IF 59 (1949): 258), with εμлεd-, àλŋе-, dvσ-, плар-оркέw, etc.; for
εлпоρкέw see on ►έлíoρкoç.
Isolated, with a different mg., ópкávŋ [f.] 'enclosure' (A., E.) beside late έpkávη, like
Opyávŋ : 'Epyávŋ (see on Ŏpyavov and pyov); cf. also PN "Оpкατоç (Calymna
II³).
▶
•ETYM Formally, öpкos seems to be connected with εpкos 'fence' (thus already Eust.
and EM), in which case it would properly denote the oath as the bounds that one
assumes, a restriction, tie, or obligation. A meaning ‘tie, bond' is indeed found in
öpкoɩ dɛσμoì σopayidos 'bonds of a seal (H.), perhaps to be corrected to
*σqpayidɛç; cf. also ópкávη. Discussion in Luther 1935: 90ff. and Luther 1954: 86ff.,
who assumes that öpкoç is originally a magical power that fences in the swearer.
Bollack REGr.71 (1958): iff. and Hiersche REGr. 71 (1958): 35ff. identify öpкos with
the Στú, by which the gods swear, and take it as the world-embracing fence (µéyaç
ǒpkos).
Criticism of these views by Benveniste 1969:2: 165ff., who thinks of öpкoç as a
sacralizing object, and refuses to give an etymology. Similarly, Leumann 1950: 91f.

=== page 578 ===

1104
ÓρкÚлTЄIV
proposed that öpkoç = Lat. *sorcus or *surcus in surculus 'twig', in which case it
could denote a staff which is raised when swearing; öµvvµ 'to swear' would then
properly mean 'to grasp', and öpкov ò̟µóðaɩ ‘to grasp the staff (cf. on ►öµvч). See
Bắpkos.
OPKÚTTELV. TÒ ÚTEPKÚTTELV <TPÒ, Tò> i8sĩV TL TÒ ĖKTÍVELV ÉQUTÒV Kai ẻ ỎVÚXV
Tστασ a 'to raise one's head in order to see sth.; overstretch oneself and to stand on
one's toe-nails' (H.). Cf. шркʊлτεv· Ùƒεpékuétev έлaɩpóµεvoç (Suid.), i.e. ‘to stand
on the tips of one's toes, in order to see over the heads of others'.
⚫ETYM Contains кÚлтш; aсc. to DELG, the first part is suggestive of opvuμal or
ópós, but the spiritus is unexplained.
öpкüç, -ūvoç [m.] ‘tuna' (middle com., Arist.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Later öpкuvoç (Dorio and Hikes. [Iª] in Ath.).
⚫DER ópкuvɛiov [n.] mg. uncertain (Halicarn. Va). On the stem-formation see
Schwyzer: 458 and 488. Also ópкúaλoç 'id.' (v.l. Xenocr. apud Orib.), like qúoaλoç,
etc. (Strömberg 1943: 127f.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained loanword; cf. Thompson 1947 s.v. Probably Pre-Greek; note the
suffix and the meaning.
öpμεvos [m.] 'shoot, stalk, stick, especially of cabbage and asparagus' (Diph. Siph. and
Posidipp. [IIIª] in Ath.). <?>
•VAR Plur. also -a; also öp-.
●DER ópµεvóεiç having a (long) stalk' (Nic.); έ\-opµεví(w ‘õpµeva ¿кßáλλɛiv, to put
forth shoots' (S. Ichn. 275 [uncertain], Nicostr. Com., Phryn., Poll.).
•ETYM Formally identical with the aor. ptc. of opvчμt, which is semantically quite
plausible. Cf. ►pvoç.
ópµý [f.] ‘onset, assault, onrush, outset, effort' (Il.). ◄IE *sor-meh₂- ‘flow, stream' or
*h3(o)r-sm- 'uprising'>
•COMP As a second member in èpopun 'onset, assault' (X 130, Th.), ȧcopun 'starting
point, resource, etc.' (IA), but these are back-formations from έq-, ȧq-opµáw (cf.
Chantraine 1933: 149).
•DER Denominatives: 1. ópµaívw [v.]to (re)consider, ponder³ (II.), aor. -ñvaɩ (rarely
with έq-, úлερ-); on the mg. as opposed to μεpμηpíw, etc. see Voigt 1934, later 'to
put in violent motion, be eager' (A., Pi., B.); perhaps ópµavóv. áveotηkós, xaλenóv
'stirred up, troublesome' (H.); analogical ópµáστεpα [f.] 'she who urges on' (Orph.
H.) like Оεpμáάστрα, etc. beside Оεpµαívw. 2. ópµáw [v.] 'to incite, excite', intr. (also
midd.) 'to rise quickly, charge, begin' (Il.), aor. -ñσaɩ, often with prefix, especially
ȧq-, -, лα-, -. Thence ópµµaτα [pl.] 'onrush' (B 356 = 590), (лap-)ópµηµa [n.]
'onset, incitement' (LXX, Epicur.), (лap-, -, εε-)ópµŋσ [f.] ‘incitement, onset,
assault, eagerness' (X., Plb.); ópμ-s̟tó̟piov, Dor. -ātηpiov [n.] '(operation) base' (Att.,
Cret. III-IIª), -ntýs [m.] ‘he who urges on' (Philostr. Iun.), -ŋtíaç [m.] ‘id.' (Eust.),
(¿q-, àq-, ñap-, ¿ε-)opµntikós ‘offensive, desiring, eager, etc.' (Ti. Locr., Arist.);
back-formation ǎpopμos 'setting off, leaving' (S.).
öpμo 2
1105
⚫ETYM Traditionally compared with Skt. sárma- [m.] 'flowing, streaming' (only RV 1,
80, 5), from a verbal root seen in Skt. sí-sar-ti, sár-ati ‘to flow, stream', also 'to hurry,
drive, etc.', which is formally excellent and semantically possible. However, within
Greek one might also compare opvчu 'stir' and propose a pre-form *or-smä- (a
similar formation is perhaps continued in ǎpua). The form εpuý. εodoç 'way out'
(H.), with a variant épíµŋ ‘id.', is difficult to assess.
ölukas →µýµnš.
öpµīvov [n.] ‘sage, Salvia Horminum' (Thphr.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Also -os [m.]; also -μĭv-.
⚫ETYM Formation like σέλīvov, kúµĭvov, kapdaµívn, þoλßivη, etc. (Chantraine 1933:
204, Schwyzer: 491). Frisk mentions three options: a loan (like the first two words), a
derivative from öpμoç (though the semantics would need further argumentation), or
one from opμn 'assault, onrush' (Strömberg 1940: 93), as the plant was used as an
aphrodisiac. However, the word is no doubt Pre-Greek, just like the other words
with a suffix -iv- (not in Fur.).
öpμoç 1 [m.] 'chain, necklace, lace' (Σ 401); name of a dance in a ring (Luc.). <IE *sor-
mo- 'string'>
●DER 1. Diminutive ópμ-íσкoç [m.] 'small necklace' (Att. inscr., LXX), 'signet-cord'
(LXX, J.) together with -íoкtov name of a precious stone (Plin.); 2. -tá [f.] ‘fishing-
line' (Pl. Com., Antiph., Arist.), ópµa-tóvoç [m.] ‘angler' (E. Hel. 1615); 3. ópμ-αðóç
[m.] 'string, chain' (w 8, Ar., Pl.), on the formation see Chantraine 1933: 367,
although -a0oç seems to be Pre-Greek, cf. yvá0oc), with -átov (Gal.), -a¤í(w [v.]
'to string' (H., Suid.). 4. vo-ópчuov [n.] acc. to Ael. Dion. Fr. 417 лαρà τoîç лaλaioïç
XρvσoÛν τɩ кoσµápiov 'among the ancients, a little golden ornament'.
•ETYM Old thematic derivative with a suffix -mo-, from the root seen in εpw 1
'string'. Martirosyan 2010 s.v. connects it with Arm. orm 'wall', which is formally
impeccable.
öpμos 2 [m.] ‘anchorage, road(stead), harbour', also metaph. (II.). ◄IE? *sor-mo-
'string'>
•COMP ópμo-qúλa harbour-master' (pap.); often as a second member, e.g. лáv-
opμos offering anchorage to all (ships)' (λquéves, v 195), often as a PN (Sicily, etc.),
Súσ-opμoç ‘with a bad harbour, inhospitable' (A., X.); often with preposition, partly
as back-formations from the relevant verbs: -opμoç 'sailing out' (E.), to ε-opμéw,
üo-opμoç 'at anchor, fit for anchoring' (Ph., Str.), also [m.] ‘anchorage' (Arist., Str.),
to vq-opμέw, лpóσ-opµos [m.] ‘id.' (Str.), to лрóσ-opμέw, -opµí¶w.
•DER Two denominatives: 1. ópuéw 'to be at anchor (in the harbour)' (IA), also with
¿q-, έ-, úq-, etc., with ¿qópµŋois [f.] and (as a back-formation) εpopμos [m.] 'being
at anchor, blockade' (Th.). 2. ópµíšw 'to bring to an anchorage or harbour', -oµai ‘to
anchor, moor' (Il.), aor. -íoat, -íσaσat, often with prefix, e.g. ¿v-, лpoσ-, кað-, µεð-.
Thencе (лроσ-, etc.) ópμσiç [f.] ‘anchoring' (Th.), (èv-)ópµµα [n.] ‘anchorage,
anchoring' (App.), époσoðµσµós [m.] ‘anchoring' (sch.), лроσоршστýpιov (H. as an

=== page 579 ===

1106
ǒpveov
explanation of εлívεov [cod. ¿ëývov]), ¿pшoτŋpíɑ [f.] 'rope for anchoring,
attaching' (Ph., D. S.), òpµíotpia [f.] “the anchoress” epithet of Isis (pap. II³).
•ETYM No certain etymology. Often connected with ►ópuŋ ‘impulse', but with
various ways of argumentation for the semantics (details in Frisk). Connection with
►εipw 'to string' is more promising, starting from an original meaning 'attachment'
and identity with öpμos 'chain'. Comparison with pua, in plur. 'supporting
stones', has also been proposed (unclear).
öpvɛov [n.] 'bird' (N 64). <IE *h₁er-n- 'bird'>
▶
•VAR Also Ŏpviç, -īƉoc [m., f.] ‘(augural) bird (Il.), in later Att. especially ‘hen, cock',
acc.sg. also -tv, plur. also -ɛıç, -iç (trag., D.), Dor. -ixos, etc. (Pi., Alcm., B., Theoc.,
Cyrene), dat.pl. -íxɛσoɩ and -ɩɩ, whence nom.sg. -1ε, gen.pl. -íкwv (Hell. pap.).
COMP A few late compounds, e.g. opvɛo-OpευTIкÝ (f.) 'the art of bird-catching'
(Ath.). Often as a first member, e.g. opvɩ00-0ńpas [m.] ‘bird-catcher' (Ar., Arist.),
ópvxo-λóxos [m.] ‘id.' (Pi.). Also as a second member, e.g. Súσ-opvɩs 'with bad
auspices' (A., E., Plu.), лоλυ-óрvеos 'rich of birds' (E.).
•DER A: From öpvεov: opvε-wбns 'bird-like' (Plu.), -wτns [m.] 'bird-catcher' (Poll.),
-akóç ‘avian' (Tz.), -ášoμaι to twitter' (Aq.), 'to hold one's head up high” (“watching
the birds", Com. Adesp.).
B: From öpviç: 1. diminutives opvie-tov (IA), -ápiov (com., Arist.), also opv-úqLOV
(Thphr., Dsc.), rather from öpvɛov. Substantives: 2. opvie-ãç, -ã [m.] 'poulterer'
(pap. II-VIP); 3. -íaɩ [m.pl.] “bird-winds”, which bring migratory birds (Ion., Arist.),
Xɛчɩwv öpvɩðíaç (Ar.); cf. ¿τŋoíaɩ, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 95); -íaç [m.] ‘bird-fancier'
(Lib.); -íwv [m.] PN (Att.); 4. opvɩð-wv, -wvos [m.] 'henhouse' (inscr., pap.); 5.
opvibía [f.] 'poisoning by bird dung' (Hippiatr.). Adjectives: 6. opví0-εo of a bird,
of a chicken' (Att.); 7. -кóç 'belonging to birds, hens' (Luc.); 8. τà ópviеiαкá name of
a work on birds by D. P. (on the formation Schwyzer: 497 with lit.); 9. -wong 'bird-
like' (Arist.). Verbs: 10. opvie-ɛúw 'to catch birds' (X.), -εúоμα 'to watch the birds,
auspicari' (D. H.) together with -ɛía [f.] ‘auspicium' (Plb.), -evtýs [m.] ‘bird-catcher'
(Att.), -ɛvtikń [f.] 'the art of bird-catching' (Pl.); 11. öpvɩð-óoμαι to be changed into
a bird' (Philoch.); 12. óp við-tá(w 'to speak the language of birds' (sch. Ar. Av.).
Further opvios = opví0-εios (AP), opví(w 'to twitter' (Aq.), uncertain; cf. opvɛάoμαι
above. On itself stands ópуαлéτоν [n.] (Boеot., Ar. Ach. 913), hypocoristic and
contempting, with unclear a; cf. further кɩvóлεtov, έpëεtóv, etc., also Bechtel 1921, 1:
308. On the various formations see F. Robert 1944: 67ff.
•ETYM Both opv-ɛov and öpv-i-s derive from an n-stem *her-n-, which in öpvɛov
was enlarged with a suffix -ε(1)o-, probably marking gender (Chantraine 1933: 62).
The more common form öpviç is originally a feminine derivative in *-ih₂, to which
the suffixes -0-, Dor. -X- were later added.
The n-stem that must be assumed for Greek is also found in the Germanic and
Anatolian words for ‘eagle': Go. ara, gen. *arins, ON ari, and orn< *arn-u-, OE earn,
etc., Hitt. ḥāran-. Balto-Slavic has an l-stem, e.g. Lith. erēlis from older arėlis, OCS
orúlб, Ru. orël ‘eagle'.
öpoẞos
1107
öpvvµaɩ [v.] ‘to stir, rise, rush away, hurry' especially ‘to excite, incite, revive' (II.). <IE
*her- '(a)rise'>
•VAR Aor. wpóμŋv, -εto, often older athem. pτo, ptc. öpµεvos, etc., fut. ópoñμαi,
opεital, perf. Ŏpwpα; act. öpνvш, also -úw, aor. poa, redupl. 3sg. "popɛ, fut. öpow,
aor. pass. 3pl. peev (Corinn.).
Further ópoúw 'to rise quickly, rush away' (II.), fut. ópoúow, in Hom. only aor.
ópouσal, often with prefix (e.g. ¿л, àv-, ¿v-, ¿‹-).
•COMP Also with prefixes like έл-, úл-, àv-. As a first member in governing
compounds, e.g. ópσo-τpíαɩva [m.] 'wielder of the trident' (Pi.), ópoí-aλos ‘stirring
the sea' (B.), PNs like Opoέ-λaos (Boeot.), 'Opoí-λoxos (II.) beside Opti-λoxos
(Dor.); see Schwyzer: 442, Bechtel 1917b: 353f., Wackernagel 1916: 236¹. As a second
member in the compound кov-opτóç (see ►кóviç), in verbal adjectives like 0έ-optos
'sprung from the gods' (Pi., A.), vé-opτos 'newly arisen' (S.).
●DER Perhaps ►ôpµý. Further only öpovσis [f.] ‘rise, öpµŋσi, ópμý (Stoic.),
¿poúµata. ¿pµýµata, rndýµata leaps' (H.); remarkable ópoótŋs, -ntos [f.] = ¿pµý
(Critias), ópσíτηs [m.] name of a Cretan dance (Ath.).
•ETYM The pervasive o-vocalism points to a reconstruction *h3er-. Traces of an e-
grade have been supposed in εpετo. wpµŋŋ 'was excited' (H.), etc. (see ►έpέw), as
well as in Aα-épτηs (related to λaós), but such forms can never derive directly
from *her-. It is best to derive these forms from the root *her-, or to assume
secondary ablaut in Greek.
Kümmel 2000a: 253-266 has found a distinction in Indo-Aryan between the roots
¹ar- 'sich in Bewegung setzen' < *her-, aor. árta (= @pτo), pres. irte, and ²ar- 'treffen,
stoßen auf, wohin gelangen' < *her-, pres. ṛcchati (cf. ►ëpxoµat). This gives a solid
foundation to the formal distinction between PIE roots *her- and *her- on the basis
of the root vocalism.
The presents öpvvш, Skt. ṛṇóti, and Hitt. arnu-i 'to deport, etc.' may be old parallel
formations (though Hitt. may rather derive from *h,r-nu- as a productive causative
formation).
An original form *чovчд (I was assumed to be a schwa secundum like in кipvηu; see
on ►кɛρávvu̟µ) was formerly found in the epithet 'Елpуúτoç. Zεùs έv Kpýtη (H.),
but the connection is arbitrary, and formally impossible in laryngealist terms (*h¸r-
always gives Gr. op-). Under an analysis *h3r-n-eu-, we may compare the aorist
ópoσal, whence later the rare present ópoúw, as an o-colored full grade (cf. kpoúw,
Koλoúw) from an extended root *h3r-u-; compare Lat. ruō 'to rush, collapse'. See
▶ópívw, ▶ăpos, ▶ oöpoc 1.
öpoßos [m.] 'chickpea, Vicia Ervilia', plur. ‘chickpea seeds' (Hp., D., Arist., Thphr.).
<PG(V)
•COMP opoẞ-áуxn [f.] name of a weed, "smotherer of the opoẞos", 'Cuscuta' (Thphr.,
Dsc., Gp.); nevt-ópoßos (also -wp- with compositional lengthening) [m.] properly
"with five op.", name of the yλuкvoidŋ, usually metaph. of an architectural ornament
(Hell. inscr., Dsc., Plin.).
=
•DER 1. Diminutives: ópóß-tov [n.], also ‘flour made of op.' (Hp., Ph., Dsc.),
Xpvσoкóns εidos ‘kind of dish of linseed and honey' (H.); -ádiov [n.] = ópóẞač

=== page 580 ===

1108
òρóðaμvos
(Ps.-Dsc.). 2. -ías [m.] name of a kind of έpέßivos and a kind of Miẞavos (Thphr.,
Dsc.). 3. -íτns [m.] (\íos), name of an öpoßos-like stone (D. S.), -îtıç [f.] ‘prepared
Xpuσóкoλλa' (Plin.). 4. -až [f.] = yλvкvoidŋ (Ps.-Dsc.), -aкxoç σídŋs [pl.] 'fruit of the
pomegranate (Nic.), -áкxη· þoτávy tis. oi dè tñs polās toùs kaproúç ‘a plant;
others: the fruit of the pomegranate tree' (H.). 5. -10pov [n.] plant name = úлoкɩσðíç
(Ps.-Dsc.), cf. Ooрúß-, кóл-ηерov, etc., Chantraine 1933: 373f. 6. -ɩvos äλεupov ‘meal
of ő.' (Ph., Dsc.). 7. -taños ‘of the size of a op.' (Dsc.). 8. wpoßioµévoi kexoptagliévoi
åлò τŵv ßoŵv (leg. ópóßwv?) ‘fed, fattened, of cows' (H.).
⚫ETYM Like έpéẞivoç, Lat. ervum, etc., an old substrate word, probably from the
eastern Mediterranean area. In any case, opoẞos need not have undergone
assimilation from **poẞoç, as per Schmidt KZ 32 (1893): 325. For further details, see
►épéẞiveoç.
ópóбauvos [m.] 'branch, twig' (Thphr., Call., Nic., AP). <PG(V)>
•DER Diminutive ópodaµvís [f.] (Theoc.).
•ETYM Probably for Aeol. Fρódaшvos = ►þáðaшvoc, with ỏ- as a graphic indication
for Ƒ (cf. ►ópívɗns). The form öpaμvos ‘id.' (Nic., AP) is unclear; it is probably not a
F
cross with öpμεvos.
opołúvw [v.] 'to excite, incite, revive' (Il., also A. Pr. 202). <GR?>
•VAR Aor. ópo0val.
COMP Also with ε-, ȧμ-.
•ETYM Acc. to Frisk, a secondary formation from ►¿pέ0w, replacing earlier *opołέw
(after apoúvw, óτpúvw, etc.), or directly from a lost noun *öpołoç. Not assimilated
from *po0úvw; see Van Beek fthc.b.
öpoμaι [v.] •VAR Only Ŏpovτal, -vτo (epic). →ópáw.
öpov [?] • okeñóç tɩ yewpyɩkòv ws 'Ioaïos (fr. 5) ‘an agricultural tool acc. to I.' ...
µýrote µévta τò őpov лapá tε Аiσxúλw кαi лapà Mɛvávɗpu̟ oŋpaivɛi & tǹv
ɲɛñatiµévny otaqúλijv riéšovoɩ (Harp. 139) so the piece of wood with which
bunches of grapes are crushed; also for olives (Poll. 7, 150); cf. SEG 11, 244. <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
ópóvτov [n.] 'cuckoo-pint', name of a plant used as a remedy against jaundice
(Archig. apud Gal.). <PG>
⚫ETYM Acc. to Strömberg 1944: 51, from the PN Opóvτηs; naming motive unknown.
Fur: 345 refers to Gams in DKP 1: 602f., who connects it with äpov 'Natterwurz', a
kind of shore-weed.
ópós [m.] 'the watery part of curdled milk, whey', also metaph. of other liquids (Od.,
Hp., Pl., Arist.). <IE *ser- 'flow', *sor-o->
•COMP ỏρо-лоτέw [v.] 'to drink whey', with -ín [f.] (Hp.).
•DER òpwdns 'whey-like' (Thphr.); έop-íw [v.] 'to press out the whey' (EM, H.).
⚫ETYM An oxytonized agent noun (like τpooóc, etc.; see Chantraine 1933: 9f.) with
Ionian psilosis, beside the action noun in Lat. serum [n.] ‘id.', Skt. sará- 'flowing,
öpos
1109
liquid', from the verbal root *ser- 'run, flow' retained in Skt. sísarti, sárati, aor.
ásarat.
öpos [m.] 'border, boundary mark (pole, column, stone), term, limit, mark,
appointment, definition' (Att.). <IE? *ueru- 'draw', *uoru-o->
•VAR Oupos (II.).
DIAL Myc. wo-wo /worwos/, Corc. opfos, Cret., Arg. poc, Heracl. öpoç. Brixhe
REGr. 109 (1996): 640 adds öppos (Heracl. Pont.) < *hópfoç, also oppos (Chalcid.,
Megar.), cf. RPh. 71 (1997) 170.
•COMP As a first member, e.g. opo-0ɛσía [f.] 'the fixing of boundaries' (Hell. inscr.,
Act. Ap., pap.), like voμo-Оɛσía, etc., formally from ópo-0έtηs (gloss.), a composition
of ŏpov Oεival with a suffix -τη-; often as a second member, e.g. Sí-wpos ‘with two
boundary stones' (Arc. IV), ȧup-oúptov [n.] 'toll paid by the seller to the owner of
the neighbouring estate as a fixation of the sale' (pap. IIIª, Rhod. inscr. II),
ávó [m.] (*àµpovpι-á(w); on ɛv0vwpía, see s.v.
•DER 1. öpía [n.pl.] (rarely sg.) 'borderline, border areas, etc.' (Hp., Att., Arc.); 2. ópía
[f.] 'border' (Att. inscr.); 3. öptos belonging to the border' (Zeùç öp., Pl., D.) = Lat.
Terminus (D. H., Plu.); 4. óptкós 'ptng. to definition' (Arist.); 5. op-aíα TEкTOVIкŃ =
gruma, -años Aios (gloss.); 6. ópíkw (Ion. ovp-) [v.] 'to border, demarcate, separate,
determine, define' (IA), aor. -íoat, often with prefix, e.g. di- (εл-di-, etc.), àq-, лερɩ-,
лроσ-, with (àч-, лερ-, di-)öрσμа (also oйp-) 'delimitation, border' (Hdt., E.), (ȧq-,
rεpɩ-, etc.)ópiqµós ‘delimitation, determination, etc.' (Att.), (di-)öpiσıç (Pl., Arist.),
ópio-τnc [m.] land surveyor' (Att., Tab. Heracl.), -TIкós 'ptng. to delimitation or
determination, limiting, defining' (Arist.). 7. On ►ópɛúç, see s.v.
•ETYM In view of Mycenaean, all Greek forms must go back to FópƑoç. This can be
connected wih Lat. urvāre (amb-) ‘to mark out a boundary with a furrow' (Enn.
apud Fest., Dig.); the basic noun is urvum 'curved part of a plough' (Varro) <
*u(o)ru-o-, which may in principle continue the same formation as *Fópfos.
Within Greek, further connection wih έpúw 'to draw' is probable. See ▸oupoí,
►oupov 2.
opos [n.] 'mountain, height'; also (in Egypt) 'desert' in contrast to the cultivated plain
(Il.). IE *her- 'rise', *her-s->
•VAR With metrical lengthening oüp-ɛoç, -ɛa, etc. (epic), also wp-ɛoc, -ɛα (Theoc.).
DIAL Myc. o-re-a₂ /oreha/.
•COMP As a first member: 1. with unenlarged stem i.a. in ►ópɛokwoç; 2. thematically
enlarged in opɛo-σέ\ɩvov [n.] 'mountain-parsley' (Thphr.); 3. often in loc.sg., e.g.
ópεɩ-Spóμoç going through the mountains' (Pi., E., Nonn.); thence i.a. ópɛí-xαλкoç
[m.] 'mountain ore, brass' (h. Hom. 6, 9, Hes. Sc. 122), borrowed as Lat. orichalcum,
folk-etymological auri-; also wpó-xaλкos (Peripl. M. Rubr., PGiss. 47, 6), perhaps w-
= Lat. au-; 4. in loc.pl., e.g. ópɛσí-τpoqos 'grown up in the mountains' (Hom.).
•DER 1. Ópέσ-Tεpoç living in the mountains, consisting of mountains' (X 93); 2.
öpεtos (epic lyr. oüp-) 'mountainous' (h. Merc. 244) <*ores-io-, fem. -ɛtác (AP), as a
substantive 'mountain-nymph' (Bion, Nonn.); 3. ópɛɩvós < *ores-no- ‘id.' (IA); 4.
Opéσ-tηs [m.] PN (Il.), with 'Opeot-ádns, ópéot(ε)ɩov [n.] = ελévov (Dsc., Plin.);

=== page 581 ===

1110
ópoúw
’Opέo-taɩ [m.pl.] “highlanders”, name of an Epeirotic people (Th.); òpeσt-iádec
výµчai (Z 420, h. Hom. 19, 19), metrical for *opεστ-ád- (Schwyzer: 508); ópeσt-íaç
[m.] 'mountain wind' (Call.), like 'Оλчμлíαç, etc.; 5. opwdns 'mountainous' (EM).
⚫ETYM The original meaning is "elevation", a verbal noun *h₂er-s- related to the root
of ►öpvvμα to rise, etc.'. A further derivative of this s-stem may be found in Skt.
ṛṣvá- ‘rising up, high'. See ►öppos, ► ópσoðúpŋ.
ópoúw →öpvvμai.
ópoqń, -qos →¿pέqw.
öρлα [?] еpαoùç ävεμоç 'rough wind' (H.). <PG?>
.
•ETYM Fur.: 327f. compares "Оpëα· 'Epivúç (H.) and "Opiα. 'Epivúç (H.) with
anaptyctic vowel, as well as ►ápлášw. Probably Pre-Greek. Perhaps “Аpëvɑ (Fur.:
327, 347) also belongs here?
öpras [?] · tñç ákpídos ó yóvos, évéεv уápov лooσ ‘offspring of the locust, from
which sauce is made' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
öpëŋ [f.] · σidŋpos év & tòv ¿λéqavta túrtovσi ‘metal in which ivory is beaten' (H.).
<PG?>
⚫ETYM DELG compares ►ǎpëη ‘elephant-goad'.
öpäηž [m.] ‘sprig, twig, (shaft of a) spear' (Ø 38, Hes. Op. 468). <PG(S) ►
•VAR Also ő-; Dor. Aeol. -ā, -koç.
•COMP ε-óрлη 'with fair twigs' (Nonn.).
ETYM Formation like σкwληĚ, кáxληě, vápеně, etc. without a clear etymology. The
comparison with Lith. várpa 'ear' is not very illuminating; derivation from the root
of Lat. sarpo 'to trim the vines', sarmentum 'osiers', äρлη 'sickle' is unlikely, as an
o-grade of this root is not attested elsewhere. Frisk connects εpлw in the sense of a
slow movement over the ground: "crawler, sneaker".
It is rather a Pre-Greek word, given the suffix -ak-.
öppos [m.] ‘rump, arse' (Ar.), 'end of the os sacrum' (Gal.). <IE *hers-, *hors-
'bottom, arse'>
•COMP As a first member in oppo-лúу-чov, Ion. ópσo-, see лʊуη. As a second
member in лαλív-opσos 'moving back' (F 33, Emp.); -pp- (Ar. Ach. 1179); not in
►äчoppoç.
•DER oppwdns 'belonging to the rump' (Hp., Gal.), óppoxµóv. εσ×ατov, ǎкpov
'utmost, extremity' (H.), perhaps after ▸ vεoxμóç.
⚫ETYM Old inherited expression for 'bottom, ass', avoided by the epic because of its
vulgar status, and identical with the Germanic group of OHG ars, MoE arse, Arm.
oř, plur. oř-k' (i-stem), and Hitt. arra- ‘id.', all pointing to IE *Hors-o-, *Hors-i-.
Regarding the color of the laryngeal, OIr. err ‘tail' seems to point to original *h₁ers-
h₂- but, alternatively, the Celt. e-vocalism is a secondary development. In the latter
case, the word could be understood as enlargement of an s-stem *her-(0)s-
'elevation', and would thus be closely related to opos 'mountain'.
óprodupn
1111
The intervocalic sequence *-rs- was probably retained in Greek when preceded by
the accent (it subsequently became -pp- in Attic), but *s dropped with compensatory
lengthening if the accent followed (cf. on ►oúpá). See ► òpσoðúpn.
oppwdźw [v.] 'to shudder, fear, dread' (Att.). <GR?>
•VAR Ion. ȧppwdéw (Hp., Hdt.).
COMP Also with prefix, especially кat-.
•DER oppwdía, ȧppwdin [f.] 'fear, dread' (Hdt., Th., E.).
⚫ETYM Not definitively explained. The proposal by Bréal MSL 8 (1894): 309 is
semantically attractive: oppwdéw comes from oppos 'ass' through *oppwdns 'afraid,
anxious', like in MoFr. couard, Ital. codardo from Lat. coda. However, this would
amount to assuming that the Att. form with -pp- came into Ionic with substitution
of app- for opp- (perhaps after appwστέw, -ía?), which is hard to believe. Acc. to
Schmidt KZ 25 (1881): 112, Att. opp- developed from older ȧpp- by assimilation to the
folowing w; a better option seems folk-etymological influence of oppos on original
ȧpp-.
Taillardat RPh. 71 (1997): 170 (also DELG Supp.) defends the old interpretation as
τòv öppov ispov ‘to shit in the pants' vel sim. The ȧ- would be due to Ionic
dissimilation of ỏ - w.
Fur.: 342 considers the word to be Pre-Greek, which would make the variation ȧ-/ ỏ-
understandable.
ópσodákvŋ [f.] name of an insect which eats the buds of plants (Arist. HA 552a).
< GR➤
⚫ETYM See Gil Fernández 1959: 140. The word probably contains Ŏppos (-pσ-) and
·8ákvw.
ópσoðúpŋ [f.] especially a side-door or side-opening at the back, leading from the
men's hall in the λaúpη to the rooms upstairs (X 126, 132, 333); see Wace JHS 71 (1951):
203ff., Bérard REGr.67 (1954): 18ff.; also sens. obsc. (Semon. 17). <IE *Hors-o- 'back' +
*dhuer- 'door'>
•DER With opσo-, we also find: oрσоλóлоç еpithet of Ares, who cuts the enemy into
pieces (Anacr. 70 = 393 P), opσoλолεúш (metrical for -έw) [v.] 'to attack, revile' (h.
Merc. 308, Max. 102), -έoμa 'to be teased or disquieted' (A. Pers. 10); ópσoλóлoç
‘attacker' vel sim., properly = ó λεлwν τòv öрpov 'who thrashes the back', scil. Tou
qvyóvtos rodeµíov ‘of the fleeing enemy', cf. Lasso de la Vega Emerita 23 (1955): 114f.
Further ►ópσodάкvη [f.] name of an insect that eats buds (Arist.); naming motive
unknown.
•ETYM It is clear that the first element should be identified with oppos, öpσoç 'back,
ass', for which we may compare лαλív-oрσoç in Homer (but not aчoppos). The
word means 'back door', which is a very natural interpretation.
Following sources from antiquity, others explained it as a high door, connecting
either Skt. ṛṣvá- 'high' or varṣ- in várṣ-man- [n.] culmen'; cf. also ɛipεðúpŋ (H.) and
Epupis (EM). See Risch IF 59 (1944): 20. In the same sphere belongs oppóẞnlo
ódós (cod. ód-).'Itaλɩwτai ‘threshold' (H.).

=== page 582 ===

1112
ópool
However, there is no indication in our texts that the door is located above the
ground, and the obscene use in Semon. (though in an unclear context) proves the
connection with oppos.
•
pσal, with different vocalism and with different
ópσoí [m.] · τwv ȧpvwv oi εσ×ατoi yεvóµεvoi (H.). <?>
•ETYM The word resembles
inflexion.
opτaλíç [f.] 'hen' (Nic. Al. 294). <?>
●Der óptáλixos [m.] ‘young bird' (A. Ag. 54, Ar. Ach. 871, AP, Opp.), ‘young animaľ
(S. Fr. 793), 'chick' (Theoc.), -txɛúc [m.] id.' (Nic. Al. 228: accus. -ñα, metrical
enlargement in verse-final position). Denominative àv-optaλí\w [v.] 'to prance, clap
the wings like a hen (cock)' vel sim. (Ar. Eq. 1344).
•ETYM Popular formations in -ís and -ixos (cf. áŋdovís, kóчixos, etc.; see Chantraine
1933: 344 and 403), or perhaps rather with -aλiç like in ouк-aλíç, Sopк-aλíç (to бopк-
ás), etc. It is assumed to be derived from a noun *òpτoç of unknown meaning. The
obvious connection with opvuдa 'rise, come into movement' (cf. кovi-opτóç, Oέ-
opτoc) does not mean much semantically.
öpτv [m.] ‘quail, Coturnix vulgaris' (Epich., IA); also as a plant-name = σteλéqovpos,
'Plantago Lagopus' (Thphr.), cf. Strömberg 1937: 50. <IE? *uort- 'quail'; PG?▷
•VAR Fem. in Lyc. 401; уópτuε (i.e. Ƒópτuč), -Ŭyoç (H.), -UKOÇ (Philem. 245).
•COMP As a first member in opτvyo-µýtpa [f.] “quail-mother", 'corncrake, Rallux
crex' (Cratin., Arist., LXX), acc. to Н. = öρτε úлεμεуεns; as a second member in
Qıλ-ópτu quail-loving' (Pl. Ly. 212d).
•DER Diminutive opτúytov [n.] (com.); ’Optvyía, -íŋ [f.] old name of the island Delos
and other islands (Od., Str.), see Tréheux BCH 70 (1946): 560ff., thence epithet of
Artemis (S.); patronymic 'Optuуíwv (Euboea).
⚫ETYM Formed like the rare bird names ißuε, þaïßvž; cf. also kókкūž, лtépvč, etc.
(Chantraine 1933: 397, Schwyzer: 498). Except for the ending, Fópτuε corresponds to
Skt. (Ved.) vártikā [f.] ‘quail', later attested as vartaka- [m.], with the highly
productive suffixes -ikä- and -aka-. Note also MoP vardij- 'id.'. The original form of
the word cannot be reconstructed. Fur.: 122 points out that both the suffix and the
variation к/y point to a loan.
ópúa 1 [f.] 'intestine' (Epich.). <PG? (V)►
•VAR In H. also -oúa.
•ETYM Not certainly explained. The connection with Lat. arvīna [f.] ‘grease, fat, lard,
especially around the intestines' is doubtful (see Pok. 782 and WH s.v.); E-M points
out that the ending -īna recalls the Etr. ending -ēna, -in(n)a. The variation -va/ -ova
might point to a Pre-Greek word.
opva 2 [f.] name of an instrument used in a quarry (PCair. Zen. 759 [IIIª]).
•ETYM See ►ópÚTTW.
öpvчa [f.] ‘rice' (Aristobul. Hist., Megasth., Str.). <LW Eastern Iran.>>
•VAR Ŏpučov [n.] (Thphr.).
óppavós
•COMP ópulo-τpoqέw [v.] 'to grow rice' (Str.).
1113
•DER Diminutive opú-tov [n.] (sch.), -íτηçлλαкоüç 'rice-cake' (Chrysipp. Tyan.).
•ETYM Eastern Iranian loan; cf. Afghan. vrižē [f.pl.] ‘rice', as well as Skt. vrīhí- [m.]
‘id.'; earlier history unknown. See Brust 2005: 494ff., as well as on ►ópívdns.
ópvμaydós [m.] ‘noise, din' (II.). <?►
•VAR Ópuуuáбeç. Oópuẞot 'noise' (H.).
•ETYM Expressive word with the same ending as кélados, xpóµados, poïßdos, etc.,
and with a comparable meaning. Cf. wpúoµa and wρuyµóç, as well as έpuyɛiv,
εpúуŋos (Kretschmer KZ 38 (1905): 135); further details are unclear.
öpvµos · ßwµós. oi dé öpvµßoç ‘altar; others: ő.' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Clearly a Pre-Greek word, due to the variations.
ópúʊʊw [v.] ‘to dig (up, in, out), scrape, bury' (Hom.). <IE? *h¸reu-k- ‘dig up, grub'>
•VAR Att. -ɩɩw, late -xw (Arat.), ipv. öpvyɛ (Seriphos); aor. ópúžaɩ, fut. ópúčw
(Hom.), pass. aor. ópvxеñvaɩ, fut. ópv×¤ýσoµα, perf. ópa̸pvyµaɩ (IA), prefixed кat-
wpvyμaι, act. ópúpuxa (Att.), them. aor. ópuyɛiv, pass. ópvуñvaι (late).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. кat-, di-, àv-, nɛpi-.
⚫DER 1. back-formation öpvε, -vyoç [m.] ‘pickaxe' (AP), usually name of an Egyptian
and Libyan (also Indian) gazelle or antelope (Arist., LXX), seemingly after the
pointed horns, but rather a folk-etymologically transformed loan; also name of a
large fish (Str.). Prefixed compounds, e.g. кατ-wpvε, -vxos buried, dug in,
underground' (w by compositional lengthening), as a fem. noun ‘grave, crypt (trag.);
dat.pl. kaτwpvxéɛooi (Xáɛooi, Xíðoɩσi ( 267, 1 185), probably metrical enlargement; St-
wpu, vxoc (late mostly -vyoc) [f.] 'ditch, channel, mine' (Ion., Th., Tab. Heracl.,
pap.). 2. (§ɩ-, úл-)ópu̟уша [n.] 'hole, grave' (IA); 3. ópuуµóç [m.] ‘id.' (Priene). 4.
(di-)opvxń [f.] (-wp-) 'digging' (D., Delos), also -yn (LXX). 5. (кat-, εл-, úл-)ópvžiç
[f.] ‘id.' (Arist.). 6. ópʊкτý [f.] = öpυyчa (Ph.). 7. ópuк-τp [m.] 'miner' (Zeno
Stoic.), -tŋg [m.] 'digger, tool for digging' (Aesop., Str.); (di-)opvкtpíç [f.] epithet of
Xελúvη 'mine protection roof (Poliorc.). 8. ópuyɛús· fossorium (gloss.).
⚫ETYM The basis of all verbal forms and derived nouns seems to be a stem opux-; the
voiced stop in ópuy- and the present ópúxw are secondary.
Thus, we can explain the primary yod-present opúσow from *h3rug"-ie/o-. However,
cognate forms appear to continue a root *h₂ruk-, e.g. the secondary nasal present Lat.
runcō, -āre 'to weed out, root up', runcō, -ōnis [m.] 'weeding hook', Latv. rūkēt ‘to
dig, scrape', Skt. luñcati 'pluck off (with l- for IE *r).
Further cognates include Ir. rucht < *ruk-tu- 'swine', Alb. rrah 'excavation, reclaimed
lanď < *rouk-so- (Restelli RILomb. 91 (1957): 475). Therefore, we have to assume that
the aspirated stop, which is seen only in Greek, is analogical.
It is possible that the root-final *k is a root extension; a root *h3reu- is perhaps found
in ovpoí [m.pl.] 'trench'. Connection with ►öpoç 'boundary' is impossible because
of Myc. wo-wo, etc.
opqavós [m.] ‘orphaned, orphan', metaph. 'bereft, abandoned (v 68). ◄IE *h¸orb¹-o-
'orphaned, bereft'>

=== page 583 ===

1114
ǒppvn
•COMP As a first member in oppavo-diкaσ τaí [m.pl.] “orphan-judge” (Leg. Gort.).
●DER 1. Adj. opoαv-iкós 'belonging to opqa voi (Il., Pl., Arist.), -10s 'abandoned,
lonely' (AP). 2. Substantive oppav-ía [f.] ‘orphanhood, bereavement' (Pi., Att.),
-óτns [f.] ‘id.' (Cappadocia). 3. Verbs. a) oppav-í(w (also ȧл-) ‘to make an orphan,
bereave of (Pi.); thence formally -ɩστns [m.], but in the sense of 'guardian' (S. Ai.
512), also name of an official (Selymbria); b) -ɛúw 'to bring up orphans', med. 'to be
orphaned' (E.) with -ɛuua [n.] 'orphanhood (E.), -ɛía [f.] (if not itacistic for -ía) ‘id.'
(pap.); c) -óoμα 'to be bereft' (AP, sch.).
•ETYM The glosses ópqoßóτai· ¿ñítponoɩ ópqavŵv ‘guards of orphans', óppoßotía.
εлτролη guardianship', and "powσεv. wpávσεv (H.) point to the previous
existence of a noun *opqoç. From this noun, oppavós (with the same meaning)
seems to be a purely formal enlargement after other adjectives in -avóç.
This pre-form *opooc agrees exactly with Arm. orb, -oy 'orphan', and Lat. orbus
‘orphaned, bereft' < IE *Horbo-. A io-derivative is supposed in the Celtic and the
Germanic word (perhaps a Celtic loan?) for 'heritage', e.g. OIr. orb(b)e, orpe [n.], Go.
arbi, OHG arbi, erbi [n.]; thence 'heir', e.g. OIr. orb(b)e [m.], Go. arbja, OHG arpeo,
erbo [m.].
Melchert fthc., for which see Kloekhorst 2008, argues that Hitt. harp_tta (ri), harp_zi ‘to
separate oneself and reassociate, change allegiance, join with' (from an original
middle herb-to) preserves the original verbal root, with a derivative *h₂orbh-o-
which developed a specialized meaning 'bereft, orphan' in some languages (Gr., Lat.)
but a meaning 'inheritance, heir' in other (Celt., Gm.).
Compare loanwords into Uralic languages, e.g. Fi. orbo, orvo ‘orphan'.
öpovn [f.] 'dark(ness), murk, night' (Thgn., Pi.). <?>
•VAR Dor. -ā.
•DER oppv-aios 'dark, murky' (II.), -wdns ‘id.' (Hp.) and several expressions for 'dark
color, dark red': öpqv-ivos (Pl., X.), -tos ‘'id.' (Arist., Plu.), -ŋɛç (Q. S., Man.), -óç
(Nic.); unclear opqv-ítaç [m.] (Dor.), epithet of τáλapos (AP).
•ETYM The similarity with pεẞos has often been observed. If related to opovn, we
would have to posit a basis *h₂rg"-sno- (with the same suffix as in the opposite
Aúxvos < *luk-sno-) > PGr. *erk™³no-, from which a feminine org™³nā- was created,
with secondary o-grade (Schwebeablaut with *h,org"-sno- is unattractive).
Also compared with a Germanic adjective for dark shades of color, e.g. OHG erpf
'fuscus', OE eorp, earp 'dark-colored, blackish', from PGm. *erpa-; to this also belong
names of the partridge (with different ablaut), e.g. OHG repa-huon, and Slavic words
with nasal, e.g. Ru. rjab 'motley', CS jerębь partridge'.
Comparison with Arm. arjn 'dark brown' < QIE *argwhen-, *orgwhen- has been
proposed as well (Scheftelowitz BB 29 (1905): 17). ToB erkent-, ToA arkant- 'black'
are unclear, as are ToB orkamo 'dark', ToA orkäm ‘darkness'. All in all, neither
comparison is convincing.
opqws name of a large seafish of the genus of the perches, 'Serranus gigas' or
'Polyprion cermum' (com., Arist.). <?►
ópxεoμai
1115
•VAR Also -wç, -w, -wv; secondary oppós or oppos (Arist.); acc. to Hdn. Gr. 1, 224,
öppoç кoLvwç, ópqŵç dè AttɩKŴÇ.
•DER opo-íσkoç [m.] = кíxλŋ as a fish name (Pancrat. Ep. apud Ath.), -aкívns [m.]
'young opowç' (Dorio apud Ath.), derived from *öpqaž (cf. déλqa, etc.) with a
suffix -v- like in dɛλqaк-ívŋ, ελaq-ívηs, etc.; ópч-ɛú¢ [m.] = ópqwc (Marc. Sid.,
Alex.), with allusion to the PN. Details in Thompson 1947 s.v. and Strömberg 1943:
21f.
•ETYM Formation like the fish names λaywc, -ós (originally a compound?), áxapvwç,
etc. Often compared to opovη, with reference to the color (see Strömberg 1943: 21f.),
but unclear in detail. Connected with opoóc in oppo-ẞóτal (see oppavóc) by
Bechtel 1917a: 32, but without semantic argumentation; perhaps because of its
solitary way of life (described by Arist. as μovýpηns)? Borrowed as Lat. orphus,
MOHG Orf.
öpxquos [m.] only in the Homeric formulae öpxão àvdpwv, öpуaμε λawv, later
öα σU (A. Pers. 129 [lyr.]), etc. <PG?>
⚫ETYM Etymology and meaning debated. Traditionally derived from ǎpxw with a
superlative suffix -μo-, and interpreted as 'leader'. If inherited, the o-vocalism must
be due to ablaut (cf. ðyuos : &y). Fur: 342 thinks that ả-/ ỏ (in ảpx/ 3pxauoc)
points to a Pre-Greek word. However, Bechtel 1914 S.V. and others proposed to
compare opуatos ‘ordered plantation' and cognates (see on ►öpxos) in the sense
'protecting wall (of the men)', like pкoç Axawv; Wright Class. Rev. 29 (1915): 111f.
compared öpxos 'row of trees'.
opxác 1 [f.] 'kind of olive' (Nic.). ⇒ÕPXLS.
•
ópxáç 2 · лεpißolos, aiμaσiá 'enclosure, wall' (H.). •VAR öpуaτos. ⇒öpxos.
ópxéoμaι [v.] 'to dance', act. 'to make dance' (Il., Ion., trag.). <IE? *h,ergh- ‘mount(?)'>
•VAR Aor. opxnσaσðaɩ (Od.).
•COMP Also with prefixes like ȧл-, KAT-, È‹-.
pxou
•DER 1. Action noun ópx-10µós [m.] ‘dance' (Hom., h. Ap.), -ŋσµós [m.] ‘id.' (A.),
-ŋotús [f.] ‘id.' (Hom., E. Cyc. 171), like kɩðapiσtúç; younger -ŋois [f.] ‘id.' (post-
Нom.), -μα (бл-) [n.] ‘id.' (Simon., S., Pl.). 2. Agent noun ópx-noτp (II.), -notńs,
Dor. -ŋσtás (II., Thera, OAtt.) [m.] ‘dancer' with fem. -ŋστpíç (com., Pl.), -ńσ tpia
(Moer.). 3. the nomen loci opx-nστpα [f.] ‘dancing-room, orchestra' (Pl., Arist.). 4.
adjective -ŋotikós ‘ptng. to dance(r)s, fit for dancing' (Pl., Arist.).
ETYM Taken by Frisk as an iterative-intensive formation from primary
(but DELG finds this unconvincing, both formally and semantically). Skt. ṛghāyáti
'to tremble, scream, rage', which is traditionally compared (see Mayrhofer EWAia 1:
249), is indirectly connected at best. In inscriptions, opxéoµal is often found in the
meaning 'to mount' (Watkins BSL 70 (1975): 11-26, especially 18-19, and LIV2 s.v.
*h,ergh; the latter remarks that the semantic developments are unclear in detail).
However, in view of the reconstruction given under öpxic, Watkins's connection.
with the word for 'testicle' is dubious.

=== page 584 ===

1116
ópxiaos
ópxílos [m.] name of a small bird, probably 'wren' (Ar., Arist., Thphr.); details in
Thompson 1895 s.v. <?>
•VAR On the accent Schwyzer: 485; also tλoç (mss.).
⚫ETYM Formation like кopе-, τрox-íλoç, etc., perhaps from opxéoμа because of the
liveliness of the bird. Unclear.
öpxis, -ɛws [m.] 'testicles' (IA); also the plant name ‘orchid' (Thphr., Dsc.), after the
shape of the root, and a kind of olive (Colum.), after the shape of the fruit (see
Strömberg 1940: 37 and 55). <IE *h3(e/o)rg"-i- ‘testicle'>
•VAR Ion. gen. -tos, plur. mostly -ɛis, -iɛç.
•COMP óρxí-лεða [n.pl.] 'scrota, testicles' (Ar.), whence ópxɩ-лεdíšw (Ar., H.); v-
opxis 'provided with testicles, uncastrated' (Hdt., Luc.), also ěv-opxos (¥ 147, Hp.),
Ev-ópxns also 'buck' (Ar., Arist., Theoc.), with substantivizing -ns (see Schwyzer:
451), -nc (Milete VI₁), with shift to an s-stem (see Schwyzer: 513).
⚫DER Diminutives ópxídia [pl.n.] (Dsc.) and opxác, -ádos [f.] 'kind of olive' (Nic.,
Verg.).
⚫ETYM An old inherited word, retained in several languages. Ignoring enlargements,
opxis agrees with Arm. orjik' [pl.] ‘testicles', gen. -wocʻ < IE *h¸(0)rghi-io-, and with
Alb. herdhë [f.] 'id.' < QIE *h¸erg"-ih, [du.], MIr. uirgge [f.] ‘id.' < *Horģijā-.
Av. ǝrǝzi [m.du.] ‘id.' points to a zero grade IE *Hrgh-i-h₁. Beside the inherited i-stem
in Hitt. arki- [c.] ‘testicle' < *h¸rg³-i-, Hittite also has a verbal root ark-ª(rı), ārk-³ / ark-
'to mount, cover, copulate' < *h3rgh-, *h,orgh, with loss of initial *h, in front of *r and
of *o (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
A derivative in -l- is found in Baltic, e.g. Lith. eřžilas, dial. ařž- [m.] 'stallion', where
the vocalism of the former can be explained to be secondary by Rozwadowski's
change (a recent overview of this effect is found in Derksen Baltu Filologija 11 (2002):
5-12).
The material shows that we may safely reconstruct initial *h3- for PIE, which is also
what the o-vocalism in most languages points to. In our reconstruction *h¸(0)rgª-i-, it
is unknown what the exact original ablaut pattern looked like: Greek and Hittite may
continue a zero grade, Avestan certainly attests to it, and Armenian may do so as
well, if *he-yields Arm. ho- as opposed to *h30- > 0-, as per Kortlandt 2003: 42.
opxos [m.] 'row of vines or fruit trees' (ŋ 127, w 341, Hes. Sc. 296, B., Ar., X., Thphr.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR ỏpxós [m.] 'border of the eyelid, τapσós' (Poll. 2, 69); opxác. repißolos,
aiμaσiá 'enclosure, wall' (H.), opxádos otéyns (S. Fr. 812); ópxηdóv (Hdt. 7, 144) is
explained by H. as nẞηdóv 'from youth upwards', but usually as 'in a row, general'.
•DER öpɣatoç [m.] ‘ordered plantation, garden' (1) 112, w 222, AP), plur. 'rows of
garden plants, fruit trees or vines' (E 123, E. Fr. 896, 2, Moschio Trag. 6, 12), metaph.
ódóvtwv, kióvwv öρxατos (AP, Ach. Tat.).
With a suffix -µ-: Òpxµaí. ¿payµoí, kalaµwveç, qápayyeç, oññλvyš 'fences, reed-
beds, chasms, caves' (H.); ópxµoúç. Aoxµwdeç kai öpεov xwpíov ovк έлεpуašóµεvov
'bushy and mountaineous area, uncultivated land' (Lex.); in the same mg. ópáμ
(Poll. 7, 147).
ÖGLOS
1117
•ETYM If the hapax ópηdóv is correctly understood as 'following the row', the
meaning 'row' has to be accepted for opxoç, as well. The word öpxατos was probably
a collective abstract meaning 'order of rows (of plants)'. Thus, it seems hardly
possible to combine the above words under a notion 'fence, enclosure', which hardly
fits opxoç. Thus, the traditional connection with IE *uerg- 'to turn, wind together,
fence in' in Lith. veržiù 'to fence in, string', ON virgill 'snare', MoHG er-würgen, etc.
becomes unlikely for semantic reasons; the same holds for the comparison with Lith.
sérgmi ‘to preserve, watch over' (Fraenkel KZ 72 (1955): 193ff.).
The connection of the TNs Opxqμεvós (older 'Epx-; cf. Schwyzer: 255) and Illyrian
Oρyouεvaí (Krahe ZNF 7 (1931): 254 and Krahe ZNF 11: 81) is commonly accepted.
As there is no IE etymology, it seems more probable that the word is Pre-Greek
(note the agricultural meanings, and the name of the town with its variants). See
►ɛpуw, ►ëpxaτoç, and ▶öpxaµoç.
öç 1 [pron.rel.] 'who, which' (II.). <IE *hi-o- 'which'>
•VAR ň, Ö.
•DER ÖTεpos ‘who, which of the two' (Cret.), also öσ-tis, ő-te, oios, öσoç, etc.
•ETYM Inherited and identical with Skt. yás, yá, yád, Av. yō, yā, yaṭ, OPhr. ios, NPhr.
ɩoç, from IE *Hi-o-s, Hi-eh₂, Hi-o-d. Old too is őtεpos = Skt. yatará-, Av. yatāra- ‘id.'.
The original function was not relative, but rather demonstrative (the pronominal
stem *hi-); see Gonda Lingua 4 (1954-1955): iff., Gonda 1956: 96f., 126, and Monteil
1963: 1-17. Thus, in the framework of the development of initial *i- versus *Hi-, öç
testifies to PIE *Hị- > PGr. j-, PIE *į- > Gr. ‹-.
ös 2 [pron.demonstr.] •VAR in kaì öç, etc. ⇒ó.
ös 3 [pron.poss.] ‘suus'. →.
öσɩoç [adj.] ‘sanctioned or permitted', by the gods or by nature, 'pleasing to the gods,
just (= Lat. fas), devout, ritually pure' (Thgn., IA), cf. óoin below. On the mg. of
öσtoç, -íŋ, see on iɛpós and also Terstegen 1941, Jeanmaire REGr. 58 (1945): 66ff.,
van der Valk REGr. 64 (1951): 417ff. <?>
•VAR Substantivized τò öσtov, tà öσia.
•COMP As a second member in ȧv-óσtos (IA), probably a bahuvrihi 'who is without
tò öσlov, ñ óσía' (Frisk 1941: 10f.), àð-óσios = àv-óσios (Eg. inscr. Iª), see Strömberg
1946: 41.
•DER dσía, Ion. -ín [f.] ‘divine or natural law, law, holy custom, holy service' (Od.),
probably for óσtía (Frisk); óσtó-tŋs [f.] 'divine obedience, piety' (Pl., X.).
Denominative dσtó-oµα, -w ‘to purify (oneself), hallow' (IA), especially with ảq-,
also with кa- and -. Thence (àq-, кα-)oσíwσis [f.] 'purification, hallowing' (D.
H., Plu.), ápoσкáματа· кαеáρμаτα, каеáрσιа 'purifications' (H.), ỏσɩwτp [m.]
"purificator", name of a sacrificial animal in Delphi (Plu.).
⚫ETYM There is no convincing etymology. Often explained as a derivative in -10-
from a participial form *s-o-to- beşide alleged *seto- in έτá· áληеñ (see ►¿τáľw).
However, the root for 'to be' is now established as *hes-, and the type of formation
assumed is untenable. The older connection with Skt. satyá- 'true' < IE *h,s-nt-io-

=== page 585 ===

1118
ỏoμŃ
fails because there is no reflex of the laryngeal, and because of the vocalization *n >
o, which is not found in this environment in any dialect.
The derivation from *soto- (from a different root *set-, seen in ►έrá¼w and ► ¿tɛóc)
is defended by Pinault 1996: 43f.: *sotiio- 'conforme à l'ordre établi, pieux'. Cf.
Benveniste 1969:2: 198-202. A recent attempt by Willi JHS (2008): 153-172 is
unconvincing (see on ► vóσoc).
ogun = •Sun. = a.
ŏoos [pron.rel.] ‘how great' (II.). <IE *h,i-o- ‘who'>
⚫VAR Epic öσσos, -n, -ov.
⚫ETYM Derived from the relative ►ŏç; see s.v. and on τóσOS.
öσëpiov [n.]. ‘pulse, legumen' (IA). <?►
•VAR Mostly plur.; late also -ɛov.
●COMP òσëpio-ñóλŋs [m.] ‘pulse trader' (Att. inscr.), óσëp-ŋyós < *bonpe-nyós
(Schulze 1933a: 4304) 'transporter of ő.' (Abydos V-VI³).
●der dorpi-wdŋs like a pulse' (Aq., Orib.), -yíτŋs [m.] (-y- spirantic indicator of
hiatus) 'pulse trader, pulse planter' (pap. VI³); ỏσлр-εúш [v.] 'to sow with ő.' (Att.
inscr.).
⚫ETYM No etymology; probably a loan (Chantraine 1933: 55). IE hypotheses (see Frisk
s.v.): connection with σлεчроv 'cover' or with σлεiрw 'to sow', but these are
impossible, since ó- is not a prothetic vowel.
öσσa [f.] (prognostic) voice, rumour' (B 93). <IE *uok"-ih, 'voice'>
•VAR Att. ÖTTA.
●Der óttevoµai [v.] 'to wait for omens, interpret, predict' (Ar., Plb., D. H., Plu.),
óττɛía [f.] ‘prediction' (D. H.); probably after µavτεúoµal.
⚫ETYM Formation like yλwσσa (to yλwxec), derived with a suffix -α from öπ- 'voice',
as seen in accus. öлa, etc. (see ►*öy, 1).
öσσε [n.du.] 'both eyes' (Il.). <IE *h3ek"- 'see, face'>
•COMP As a second member in pɩ-ott-ís [f.] ‘pendant provided with three eyes (eye-
like ornaments)' (cf. τpíyλŋµa ëpµατα) with the diminutive suffix -tov (Hdn. Gr.,
Eust.); also -ns [m.] (Phot., EM).
•ETYM An inherited dual, from PGr. *okie < *h3ek"ih,, identical with OCS oči both
eyes', Arm. ač'k' [pl.] 'eyes'. See Forssman MSS 25 (1969): 39f. Seе öµµα, öлшлα,
and ►ŏσσoμα.
öσσoμα [v.] 'to look, forebode, presage' (II.). <IE *h,ek"- 'see'.>
•COMP Also with пpotɩ-, έлɩ-, кAT-.
⚫ETYM An old yod-present from PIE *h,k"-ie/o-, from the root *hek"- 'see, face'. The
present oσσoμai had a semantic development different from the non-presentic forms
Ŏлшла, öчоμαι, etc.; cf. Treu 1955: 62f. Att. ÓTTεÚoμat is rather derived from ŏσσα.
Аее ►öлшлα, öµα, and öσσε.
dotakóg →àoTakóg.
dotapis →àotapis.
1119
ỏσtέov [n.] ‘bone' (II.), also 'stone of a fruit' (pap. IIIª), see below. <IE *h¸esth₁-i-
'bone'>
•VAR Att. ÓƠ ToÛv, Aeol. plur. -ta, Dor. (Theoc.) -ía.
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. òστ(ε)О-кóлоç [m.] name of a bone-disease (Hp.,
Thphr., Gal.), óλ-óσTEOV [n.] Plantago Bellardi', a substativized bahuvrīhi
"consisting only of bones", because of its healing power; cf. ÓστƐO-KÓλλo [f.] and
Strömberg 1940: 88f. and 32.
•DER Diminutives: óστ-áptov [n.] (medic.), -apídiov [n.] (Pall.); adjectives -έïvoç
(IA), -tvos (Ar. Ach. 863 [Boeot.], Arist.), -óïvos (Aq.) 'made of bone', -wdŋs (X.,
Arist.), -ɛwdŋs (Plu.) ‘bony'; -íτŋs [m.] ‘ptng. to the bones' (Ruf.).
•ETYM The PIE word for 'bone' was originally a neuter root noun, as evidenced by
Av. ast- (e.g. gen. astō, acc. asča < *ast-ča) and by Lat. os < oss < *ost, ossis.
gen.
It was transformed in various ways in other languages, e.g. Skt. ásth-i [nom.acc.],
asth-n-ás [gen.] with interchange of i and n, and Hitt. ḥaštai / ḥašti- with ablaut *ōi :
i. The root shape must have been *HestH- (as shown by Skt. -th-). The initial
laryngeal is shown to be *h3- by Lat. os (root nouns generally have e-vocalism), while
Greek ooτéov shows that root-finally we have *-h,-. The Greek ending -ɛov <*-ei-o-
is probably a thematization of the full grade of the IE suffix *-i-, which also seems to
be found in Skt. hŕd-aya- [n.] 'heart' beside hárd-i 'id.' (cf. ►кapdía).
The words ŏστрαкоν, åστрáуaλoç, άσταкóç, ỏστрúα, and ►ỏσqúç are
unrelated.
bot\ɩy}, -ɩyyos [f.] lock of hair, tendril, vine, curling flames, tentacle of an octopus'
(Thphr., Call., A. R., Nic., Hdn. Gr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also ǎσTλ- (Hdn. Gr. 1,44).
ETYM Formation like ɛly, στpóðiуž, ¤µуž, лúλɩууɛç, etc., with comparable
meanings (Chantraine 1933: 399f., Schwyzer: 498); otherwise obscure. The word is
Pre-Greek, as is shown by the varying anlaut and the suffix -tyy-. Fur.: 276 also refers
to *őσtpvyž in ỏσtpúyylov ǹ ¿miqvλliç ‘racemus', 'stalk of a bunch of berries' (gloss.;
not in LSJ). H. has ǎστλiyyaç. αúyáç † äotpɩyyaç; EM 159, 38 has äσtpiyaç.
öσtpakov [n.] ‘hard shell of snails, mussels, turtles, etc.' (h. Merc., A., Hp., Arist.),
‘earthen potsherd (for writing on, e.g. at a vote), earthen vessel' (Hp., Att.). <PG(V)►
●COMP Few, e.g. ỏʊtpakó-depµoç ‘having a shell for skin, with a hard skin' (Batr.,
Arist.), μaλaк-óστракоç 'with a soft shell' (Arist.).
•DER A. Substantives: 1. Diminutive ỏστpáк-tov [n.] (Arist., Str.); 2. -íç, -ídos [f.]
'pine-cone' (Mnesith. apud Ath.); 3. -ɛúç [m.] 'potter' (API.). 4. -aç [m.] ‘id.' (inscr.
Corycos, Hdn. Gr.); 5. -íτηs [m.] name of a stone (Dsc., Plin.), of a kitchen (Ath.),
fem. -ɩɩç ‘calamine' (Dsc., Plin.); 6. -ías [m.] name of a stone (Plin.).
B. Adjectives: 7. -voc, 8. -ε(1)oc, 9. -óɛç (AP), -ous (Gal.) 'earthen'; 10. -w8ns 'shell-
or sherd-like, full of sherds' (Arist., LXX, pap.). 11. -ŋpá [n.pl.] 'crustaceans' (Arist.).
C. Adverb: 12. -ívda 'played with potsherds' (Ar.), see Taillardat REA 58 (1956): 189ff.
D. Verbs: 13. -íw 'to write sbd.'s name on a potsherd and thus vote for his exile; to
exile' (At., Arist.) with touós [m.] 'ostracism' (Arist.); 14. -óoμa 'to crack into

=== page 586 ===

1120
ŎστρεLOV, -εOV
pieces' (A.), 'to become covered with a shell' (Lyc., Gal.), -ów 'to turn into a shell,
harden' (Arist.), 'to cover with sherds' (Att. inscr. IV³).
⚫ETYM Traditionally (Schwyzer: 497, Chantraine 1933: 384), it was assumed to be a
formation in -aкo- derived from an r-stem oστ-p-, seen also in ►öσtpɛov. This r-
stem was assumed to interchange with the i/n-stem in Skt. ásthi, gen. asthnás (see
► ỏστέov). However, there is no alternation between *r/n and *i in IE, nor a suffix
*-nko- (as per DELG) leading to Gr. -aкo-. Therefore, the word must be Pre-Greek
(not in Fur.).
The suffix -ako- is also seen in ►άoτaкóç ‘smooth lobster; hollow of the ear', which
may be related as a Pre-Greek word, displaying typical variations. The same holds
for ►ȧστpáуaλoç.
öστpεlov, -εov [n.] ‘oyster, mussel, sea-snail; purple dye' (A., Epich., Att.). <PG(S)►
●COMP ỏσtpεɩo-ypacńs ‘painted with purple' (Eleg. apud Plu.), Aµv-óotpea [pl.]
'pond oysters' (Arist.).
●DER ỏστp-éïvos 'mussel-like, provided with a shell(?)' (Pl.), -īvos ‘purple' (POxy.
109, 5; III--IV³), probably from Lat. ostrīnus ‘id.' (since Varro), cf. below; -ε(1)wdns
‘oyster-like' (Arist., Str.), -ɛaкóç ‘belonging to oysters' (Zonar.), -íτηs [m.] kind of
stone (Orph. L.).
•ETYM The old etymology, which analyzes őστpε(1) ov as a suffix -ε(1)o- added to a
stem oστp 'bone', which is also assumed for öστракov, is wrong, as there is no
evidence for an Indo-European pre-form *ostr- meaning 'bone' (see on Ŏστрαкov).
Therefore, the word must be Pre-Greek. I assume that -ε(1)- continues a Pre-Greek
suffix -ay- (Pre-Greek: Suffixes s.v. -at-/-ε(1)-). For a word with this meaning,
substrate origin is most likely in any case.
It was borrowed as Lat. ostreum [n.], ostre- [f.] (from öστpɛα [n.pl.]), together with
ostr-inus (whence Gr. oστpivoç; see above), -eātus, -eārius, etc.; thence MoHG
Auster, etc.
öʊtpääov [n.] ‘stable, fold' (Antim., H.), "Oστpчɑ [pl.] name of a mountain (Lyc.).
<PG?>
⚫ETYM Improbable hypothesis by Bezzenberger BB 27 (1902): 174, who reconstructs
*h,od-tro-, comparing the Germanic group of OS edor 'fence' < *h,edro- and the
Slavic group of OCS odrǝ bed' <*h,od"ro-: both the Greek suffixation and the
formation in *-tro- remain unexplained. Acc. to Frisk, öστpчov belongs to
► ŏotpakov, ▶ŏotpɛov, assuming a prior meaning *protecting roof, for which he
gives a parallel in Lat. lestūdō ‘tortoise', also 'protecting roof.
Since there is no IE etymology, the word may be Pre-Greek, although there appears
no further indication for this.
ỏotpúa, -ún [f.] name of a tree with hard, white wood, 'hop hornbeam, Ostrya
carpinifolia' (Thphr., Plin.). ◄PG►
•VAR Also oσTρÚç, -úoç (or -vc, -voc?), and oστpυiç, -ídoç.
⚫ETYM Frisk compares ►öστpɛov, but the semantics are weak. The assumption of
syllable dissimilation from *oστpo-Spuç is extremely doubtful. Heubeck 1961: 37 and
oσQuç, -úoç
1121
Neumann Glotta 37 (1958): 106-112 consider öστрυç to be Pre-Greek. Indeed, the
enlargements -úç, -úa, -víç are typical for an adapted foreign word. Not in Fur.
òσpaívoμaι [v.] 'to catch scent of, smell' (IA). <IE *h¸ed- ‘smell' + *greh,->
•VAR Aor. oσop-éσðaι (Att.); wσôpavão (Hdt. 1, 80), fut. ỏσæp-ñσoµaí (Att.), also
óσopav-0ñvai (Hp., Arist.), -Oǹooµαι (LXX), younger present oσôp-ãται (Paus.,
Luc.), aor. woop-ýσavto, -ýðŋ (Arat., Ael.). Rare and late causative ỏσqpaívw 'to
give to smell, make smell' (Gal., Gp.), also with ảл-, σvv-, ſap-, etc.
•COMP Rarely with лɛρɩ-, úπ-, кαт-. Compound каa¨v-oσöρávτηç [m.] 'who smells
smoke' (Com. Adesp., Alciphr.).
•DER 1. öσop-nois [f.] 'olfactory sense or organ' (Pl., Arist.), 2. -aσía [f.] ‘smell,
smelling' (LXX, Arr.), 3. -avoiç [f.] 'olfactory sense' (Clearch.). 4. back-formation
öσopa [f.pl.] 'flavours, smell' (Ach. Tat.) with ooopádiov [n.] 'bunch of flowers'
(Eust.). 5. ỏσop-avtúpios ‘smelling, sniffing' (Ar.), 6. -avɩɩkós ‘smelling, able to
smell (Arist.), -ŋtikós ‘id. (Gal., D. L.); 7. -avτós (Arist.), -ŋtós (S. E., Gal.)
'smellable'.
•ETYM The triad oσopéσða óσývoµa: ¿æητós corresponds to aiσéσa:
aiσeńσoμa aiσnós, which is semantically related and much more frequent;
óσopαívoμα may have been built after this on the basis of examples like ȧλτéσαι :
áλitaívoµial, ßýooμai : þaívw, лɛo̟é̟σɛtai : qaívw, etc.; óσópavеñva possibly after
εvчpavеñvaι, and wσopavτo (Hdt.) probably after ηvεíкavτo, etc.
It is widely agreed that the initial syllable contains a zero grade s-stem from the root
*hed- seen in ►öľw, ► ódµý, ► ỏoμý. This s-stem also occurs in the suffix -wdns (s.v.
►ő(w). Against further identification of oσ-opaívoaɩ with ȧ-, εv-opaívw (which
belong to oppv) speak the non-presentic forms oo-opéσ0ai, -opnσaσbai, for which
no parallels exist in ȧ-, εv-oppaívw.
Brugmann's old connection (e.g. Brugmann IF 6 (1896): 100ff.) with Skt. jíghrati,
ghrāti 'to smell', ghrāṇa- [n.] 'scent, nose' is now followed by LIV² s.v. *greh,-. The
verbal compound in Gr. 6o-opη- < *heds-greh,- was compared with *mens-deh,-
in IIr. *manz-d³ā- by Schindler 1975: 266. Thus, all Greek forms derive from the
future.
Seebold 1980: 482 also connected OE bræð 'smell, breath', etc.
óσquç, -úos [f.] ‘hips, loin(s)' (IA). <PG(V)►
•VAR Accented thus in Hdn. Gr.; the codd. often have -úç.
●COMP As a first element e.g. in óσqv-aλyńs (A. Fr. 361 = 111 M., Hp.) ‘suffering from
a hip-disease (lumbago)', with -έw, -ía (Hp.).
⚫DER Diminutive oσqúdiov [n.] (Theognost.).
⚫ETYM For the formation, cf. ¡čúc, vndúç, etc. Often connected (but without serious
argumentation) with oστ-έov, assuming different second members, e.g. Qu- as in
Equv, or σqu- as in σqudŵv. lσxupós ... 'strong' (H.). Fur.: 375 adduces qúç = óσqúç
(AB 1096), with Doric loss of initial σ- before Q, pointing to a Pre-Greek prothetic
vowel. He also accepts (op.cit. 393) the connection with чúa ‘loin-muscles' and
► чóa, which was suggested already by Prellwitz and is too obvious to be discarded.
Thus the word is clearly Pre-Greek.

=== page 587 ===

1122
Box 1 [f.] 'scrotum' (Hp.). <PG?>
ǒoX71
•VAR In the same mg. also oσx-έa [f.], -ɛos [m.] (Arist.), -ɛov [n.] (Poll., H.). Also
öσxɛα- ẞαλλávτa, µаpσúñía ½ tò tŵv didúµwv άyyɛãov ‘bags, purses or a sack of
twins (sens. obsc.)' (H.).
•COMPȧv-oσxv. ävavdpoc ‘unmanly' (H.).
•ETYM Explained by Frisk as a metaphorical use of ŏoxη 2. DELG considers this
possible, but uncertain. Improbable is derivation from a prefix ò- (see ►ỏ- 2) and
oxεiv (suggestion by DELG). The word may well be Pre-Greek.
öσxŋ 2 [f.] in öʊxai. kλýµata ßotpúwv yέµovτa ‘branches full of bunches of grapes'
(H., similar Harp.; unclear Nic. Al. 109). <PG(V)>
•VAR Also wσxη• kλŋuatís ‘vine-branch' (EM, Suid., H.); msc. plur. wʊxoi. tà véa
kλýµata oùv avtoïç toïç þótpuoi ‘young branches, with the bunches themselves'
(H.); likewise, among others, EM 619, 32 with oi-, perhaps after olvos; sg. in
Aristodem. apud Ath. 11, 495f.
•COMP Frequently in woxo-opópia [n.pl.] name of an Athenian festive day, together
with -opópoɩ [m.pl.], -qopíkóç (since IV³); on the mg. see Rutgers van der Loeff
Mnem. 43 (1915): 404ff.; codd. also ó- (cf. öσxos Ar. Ach. 997 as a conjecture).
Hypostasis εл-óσxiov [n.] 'offshoot of a vine' (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Scheftelowitz IF 33 (1913/1914): 141, 144f. hypothetically compares MP azg
'branch', MoP azay 'twig, bud', but this word is further isolated. Previously
connected with oxɛĩv ‘to hold with prefixed w-, o- (see Frisk for lit.), but this prefix
does not exist in Greek (see ►ò- 2). The variation of the initial vowel rather shows
that the word is Pre-Greek (not in Fur.).
ötε [conj.] 'when, as', mostly temporal (IA, Arc., Cypr.). <IE *h,i-o- 'if, when’➤
•DIAL Myc. o-te, Aeol. öτa, Dor. öka.
⚫ETYM Usually explained from the relative ő- < IE *hi-o- and the particle -Tε, -τα,
-кα (cf. on ►εlτα, ηvíкα and Schwyzer: 629).
ötλoç [m.] ‘burden, load, suffering' (A. Th. 18, S. Tr. 7 sch.). <PG?►
•DER ÓTλ-έw (Call., A. R., Lyc.), -ɛúw (A. R., Babr.) [v.] 'to bear, undergo', -ŋµa [n.]
'distress' (H., Theognost.).
•ETYM Taken as a verbal noun to τλñva 'to bear, suffer', under the dubious
assumption that the prothetic vowel ỏ- was rhythmically conditioned, or a prefix.
However, this is no explanation, and moreover *tlh₂-0- would give Gr. *τaλo-, so the
etymology is wrong. The word is probably Pre-Greek.
öτoßos [m.] 'noise, sharp sound' (Hes., A., S., Antim.). <ONOM, PG?>
•DER OTOẞ-éw 'to produce noise' (A.).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic with a suffix -ẞo- like in Oópuẞoç, кóvaßoç, etc. Besides, there
ótotoĭ,
is the reduplicated interjection oτotoĩ ‘ah!, woe!' (trag.), with óτоτÚČw to cry oτOTOч,
lament' (A., Ar.); see Schwyzer: 716.
ÓτóστVÀλov [n.] name of an unknown plant (Epich. 161 cited in Ath. 70f). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
1
1
i
1
oùyyia, oùykia
1123
òτpalέws [adv.] ‘swift, quick' (Ã 260, T 317, τ 100, Hes. Sc. 410, Sapph. 44, 11, A. R. 1,
1210). <?>
•VAR Also -λéos [adj.] ‘id.' (Opp., Q. S.). Cf. ótpηpós ‘id.' (Hom., Ar.).
●DER ỏτpúvw [v.] ‘to encourage, urge, incite, stir up' (Il.), aor. óτpũvaɩ, fut. ỏtpvvã,
also with prefix (always in prose), especially εл-. Hence oτpuv-τúç, -úv [f.]
'incitement' (T 234f., Antim. 91), -TIкóç 'inciting' (Eust.), -τɛúç [m.] name of a
Lydian, together with -τɛídŋs (Y 383f., 389); έpуótρvs. katáσкoroç ερуwv labour
inspector' (H.), a back-formation.
⚫ETYM Like Kλivw < *кλi-v-чw, óτρбvw < *ỏτpv-v-дw is an older nasal formation to
which a presential yod-suffix was added. óτpηpóç is undoubtedly a recent formation
in -pós (on which, see Chantraine 1933: 231ff.); perhaps óτpaλéos was formed to
oτpúvw after the model apoaλéos : Japoúvw.
The variation in óτpúνw: óτpaλéws recalls that in τpňáλεiα : τpáñεČa < *(k")tur-.
The form oτpúvw has therefore been analyzed as *ò-τp-v-w, consisting of a prefix
ỏ- and a zero grade IE *tur- which metathesized to τpυ- (cf. on τpvôáλɛia). In this
way, connection with Skt. tvárate 'to hurry' and with the Germanic group of OHG
dweran 'to turn round quickly' < IE *tuer- became possible. This analysis seems
quite uncertain, however, since a prefix ó- probably did not exist in Greek; cf. ► ỏ- 2.
See ▶topúvn 1.
ótpúyn, -qáyos →tpúyn.
ótpÚvw → tpa入Éws.
óttεvoμai ⇒öoσa.
ov [pcl.] 'not' (Il.). ◄IE? *h₂eiu- ‘lifetime, long period❜>>
•VAR Antevocalically ovк, ovX (II.), ovкí (epic), ovxí (trag., also Hom. and Att.
prose).
•DIAL Myc. o-u-qe ‘and not'.
⚫ETYM Pre-Greek origin has been considered for a long time, until Cowgill Lang. 36
(1960): 347ff. connected the element with alov and cognates, assuming a basic
expression *ne hoiu kid, where *ne is the sentence negative; it lost its meaning to
the second element, a development which occurs more often. The syntagm would
also explain Arm. oč' and Alb. as (cf. Kortlandt 2003: index).
The other Greek forms are easily explained in this way: Hom. ov-kí contains the IE
indefinite pronoun *kid and is the oldest form; thence ouк by elision and ox with
aspiration, if the latter was not elided from ov-XI, containing the stressing particle IE
*ghi (Pok. 417f.), like vaí-XI, ñ-XI, etc. = Skt. hí (in na-hí 'since not', etc.), Av. zi.
From oúdè ɛiç arose ovdɛíç, younger Att. and Koine oveɛís 'nobody'; in the same
way, oúd-aµoñ, -aµoĩ, -aµɩŵç, -aµóç, and -áшvoç arose from ►*åµo-, äµa.
ovaí [excl.] 'alas!' (LXX). <LW Sem.>>
•ETYM A loan from Semitic; see Lowe Hermathena 105 (1967): 34-9.
ovyyía, ovукía [f.] = Lat. uncia.
VAR Also oyкía (Epich. 203).

=== page 588 ===

1124
ovdaç, -εo
OÚλŃ
1125
•ETYM A loan from Latin by the Greeks of Sicily.
ovdaç, -ɛoç [n.] 'ground, soil' (Il.). <PG?, ?>
•VAR Dat. -ɛt. On the inflexion see Chantraine 1942: 210f.
•DER ovdaños ‘on or under the ground' (Lyc., Orph., AP) and several hypostases:
кat-ovdałoç ‘subterranean' (Hes. Fr. 60, h. Merc., Сall.), úл-ovdaños ‘id.' (Plu.,
Оpp.), έлovdaчo εлó 'who dwell on the earth' (H.); лpoσ-ovd-í\w, -íoaɩ [v.]
'to throw on the ground' (Hdt., Plu., D. C.), έлoτoúdiže. katéßaλev έ´ì yñv ‘threw to
the ground' (H.), containing the prefix лoτ-.
⚫ETYM There is no good etymology. Semantically attractive but phonetically difficult
is the connection with Arm. getin 'bottom of the earth' <*ueden-o-, Hitt. utnē 'land'
<*ud-n-i-, but then ob- remains unexplained; see oúdós ‘threshold' for details. See
Peters 1980a: 57f. for a discussion of all possible reconstructions. One also compared.
►εdapos ‘ground, bottom'.
ovdós [m.] 'threshold' (II.). <PG?, ?>
•VAR ódós (Att.), wdós (Cyrene, H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. A basis *ödƑós enables connection with oʊdaç, but only if one
accepts that this is a generalized Ionic form (Att. *ödas would be expected). The
further connection of Arm. getin and Hitt. utne with oʊdas and oúdós used to be
justified by the assumption of a form *ỏ-Fod- besides ódóc from *Ƒod-óç, but a
prothetic vowel cannot be assumed anymore in an inherited word. In any case,
*huC- did not give ouC- (as per Peters 1980a: 72f.). In principle, oúdóç and ovбaç
could be variants of the same Pre-Greek word. See ▸ovdaç.
ovdwv, -wvos [m.] 'kind of felt-shoe made of goat hair' (Poll. 10, 50). <LW Asia
Minor➤
⚫DER Diminutive -úviov (Edict. Diocl. [Asine]), -wváptov (Charis., gloss.).
⚫ETYM Borrowed as Lat. ūdō, -ōnis [m.], also odō. Acc. to Martialis 14, 140, the word
is Cilician, thus a foreign word from Asia Minor; cf. WH s.v. and Neumann 1961: 33.
ovеap, -ατoç [n.] ‘udder', also metaph. (II.). <IE *h,e/ou(H)dh-r/n- 'udder'>
●DER oúðátios (AP), -óɛƖ (Nic., Opp., Orph.) ‘belonging to udders, fertile’.
•ETYM Old inherited word for ‘udder', preserved in several languages. The original
r/n-stem is also seen in Skt. údhar, gen. údhnas. In Lat. über, -eris [n.] (secondarily
with adjectival mg. ‘rich, fertile'), the r-stem was generalized, like in Germanic, e.g.
MHG üter, ON júgr <*jūdr with deviating initial, and in Lith. ūdr-óti, 1sg. -ó ju 'to be
pregnant', pa-ūdróti 'to get an ever larger udder', of pregnant swines and dogs. If the
Germanic forms with initial *e- are not secondary, the root starts with *h- and
shows ablaut e/o / zero. Slavic rebuilt the word after the neuters in -men, e.g. SCr.
vime, Ru. výmja [n.].
The variations in anlaut seem to point to an old ablaut *HeuHd-, HouHd³-, HuHd-.
Acc. to Schindler BSL 70 (1975): 7f., this reflects a PIE static heteroclitic formation.
To explain the Greek form, the Saussure Effect is assumed: loss of the laryngeal after
a root with o-grade and a resonant or semivowel. However, if the length in Skt. could
1
1
be explained in a different way, there is no need to reconstruct the internal laryngeal
at all, since in Balto-Slavic, initial *HuC- merges with *uHC- (see Pronk fthc.c).
ovλaí [f.pl.] ‘(unground) barley corns, roasted and sprinkled between the horns of the
sacrificial animal' (Ion. since y 441); Lat. mola salsa. <PG(V)►
•VAR Óλaí (Att.), oλoaí (Arc. IIª). Cf. öλлα. уóvεpoυ tiç ëynoiç. ědeoµá tɩ ‘cooking
of groats, a dish'. * öλßos 'wealth, blessed state' (H.).
●COMP As a first member in ovλo-xúτaç [acc.pl.f.] ‘id.' (Hom.); ovλóxvta. τà
кaτápуµaτa ‘first offerings' (H.); compounds of ovλaí and xéw with a suffix -τo-
(cf. е.g. ȧкµó-еετov); oúλo-xúτaç took the gender of oblat (but acc. to Schwyzer:
439, it stands for *oúλàç xuτás); thence ovλoxuτ-έoµaɩ [v.] ‘to besprinkle with ou.'
(Thphr. apud Porph.). Also ovλo-xóïov (-xoεiov?). ȧyyɛiov, εiç ö ai ỏλai
εµßáλλovτaι лрòç ȧлaрxàç τwν Ovotov 'vessel in which the ò. are thrown at the
beginning of sacrifices' (H.); as if from *ovλo-xóoç, -xoέw.
●DER Also (with òλß- = òλƑ-) òλß-á×vov [n.] basket for the oλaí (EM 257, 53
[Syracuse]), óλẞáxiov. kavoñv. Aɛivóλoxos (H.); óλßaкýïa ‘id.' (Dor., acc. to H. s.v.
εÚлλoυτOV кαvoñv); óλayµεúεɩv· óλàç þáλλɛv 'to throw ỏ.' (Phot.) with óλaчµɛúç. ó
(cod. Tò) tà, ỏds Bá)luv he who throws the ỏ. (H.).
•ETYM The second o in Arc. oλoaí may stand for F (cf. Soáv = dƑáv, see ▸dnv), from
which we obtain a basic form oλFaí. The comparison with öλupal and λvμоç
'barley' is hypothetical. In view of the gloss öλлα (H.), which Fur.: 155 and 240
connects with ►öλẞoç under an original meaning 'Nährung, Getreide', it is probably
Pre-Greek.
ovλaµós [m.] ‘throng, crowd (Il.: oỷλaµós ávdpwv); metaph. of bees (Nic.); technical
usage 'troop of cavalry' (Plb., Plu.). <IE? *uel- 'press together'>
•COMP As a first member in ovλaun-ópoç, oùλaμ-ávuμos (Lyc.); details in Trümpy
1950: 159.
•ETYM From yólaµos (=fóλ-). Sɩwyµós 'pursuit' (H.), a pre-form (F)oλaµós with
metrical lengthening is deduced (cf. Chantraine 1942: 124f.). This is derived from
►εiλéw 1 'to press together', with an o-grade root and suffixal -au-, like лоτаµóç,
入óKalog.
•
ovlaqoç [m.] Vεкρóç 'corpse' (H.). <PG(S)►
•DER Also in ovλaon-pópos 'bearer of corpses' (Call. Iamb. 1, 234).
•ETYM Often connected with oλoç 3 as containing a suffix -po- (cf. Chantraine
1933: 263). However, it rather seems to be an independent Pre-Greek word.
ouλe 'salve' (w 402). →öλoç.
ovλn [f.] 'scarred wound, scar' (Od.). <IE *uel- 'draw, tear’▷
•COMP oλо-лрóσшлoç ‘with scarred countenance' (Cat. Cod. Astr.).
●DER oùλóoµaɩ, -ów [v.] ‘to scar, cause scars' (Arist.), with -woię (Gal.), -wµa (Suid.)
'scarring'.
ETYM From a pre-form *wolna-, but without a direct counterpart outside Greek.
Closest is Lat. volnus [n.] 'wound' < PIt. *welanos- < QIE *uelh3-nos-. Celtic words

=== page 589 ===

1126
OUλLOS
like MW gweli [m.] 'wound', also ‘blood' < *ueliso- (vel sim.), Olr. fuil [f.] ‘blood' <
*uolH-i- are root-related.
As a common basis for these nouns, the root *uelh¸- ‘to strike' must be assumed, as
represented by Hitt. u̟alḥ-²i ‘to hiť, Lat. vellō ‘to pull out' and, within Greek (with
change of meaning), ►áλíσкoμαι 'to be caught'. The loss of laryngeal in *uolH-neh₂-
> PGr. wolnā can be attributed to the Saussure Effect; for an alternative, see Van
Beek 2009.
oulos 'baneful'. ⇒oλoç 3.
oblov [n.] 'gums' (Hp., A., Pl., Arist.). <?>
VAR Mostly plur. -a.
•ETYM The basic form is uncertain: *(F)ólσov, *(F) óλvov, or even (if an Ion. loan
into Att.) *(F)óλFov? It is etymologically uncertain as well: both the connection with
Eiλéw, eλoua 'press together' (referring to the compact, massive structure of the
gums) and that with ɛiλéw 'to turn, wind', ɛiλúw 'to envelop' (properly *"tumor,
envelopment"; Pok. 1141, WH s.v. gingiva) seem conceivable.
oλos 1 ‘whole, entire'. öλoç.
oλoç 2 [adj.] A. ‘frizzy, shaggy, woolly, crinkly', of kóµn, λáxvn, xλaïva, tárŋtes, etc.
(II.), as a first member in ovλó-pi, -kápivos, -koµos, etc. (Od., Hdt., Alex., Arist.);
also of plants like čλı, σέλɩvov (Simon., Hdt.); B. Later, of úlov, Sévdpov, etc.
(Thphr.), also of the voice (Plu., AP), of movements (Call.) 'compact, dense, thick,
лкVÓç, σvεστраµµέvoç. ◄ IE? *uol(H)-no- 'wool'>
●VAR Myc. wo-ro-ne-ja was interpreted as /wloneja/ with metathesis for /wolneja/ by
Ventris and Chadwick 1973: 322; uncertain.
•DER From A. ovlás [f.], of xaítŋ (Nic.); from B. oŰλoç [adj.], of xλaµúç; oúλáç also
as a substantive = лкрα, еúλакоç (Call., AP, H.).
•ETYM In the meaning 'frizzy', ovλos can be connected with ɛidéw 2 ‘to roll, turn,
wind (Bechtel 1914). The later-attested meaning 'compact, thick, etc.' agrees better
with εiλéw 1 'to press together', but we may also be dealing with a semantic shift.
'twisted' > 'compact' (cf. ►ovστpέqɛɩv), and it is often difficult to separate the two
verbs.
However, the morphology is difficult: a base form like *Fóλvos fits better with a
substantive. A reduplicated *Fó-Fλ-os is improbable. If Myc. wo-ro-ne-ja stands for
/wolneja/, we may reconstruct *uol(H)-no- 'wool', either from *uel- 'to twist' or
*uelH- 'to pluck' (Lat. vellō). See ►ľovλoç.
oλoç 3 [adj.] 'baneful', epithet of Ares and Achilles, also of "Ovεpos (II.); of Eros (A.
R.), also of Xεчμa (Bion), of στóμov (Nic.); probably also in ouλov kekλŃyovtes (P
756, 759; acc. to the sch. and McKenzie Class. Quart. 21 (1927): 206 ‘thick, loud,
violenť, to ► ožλoç 2). ◄IE *h¸lh‚-u- ‘destructive'>
•DER With a suffix -10- and in the same mg.: oλtoc, said of dστip (A 62), of Ares,
etc. (Hes. Sc., Pi., S.); also of Apollo and Artemis (Delos, Milete), probably originally
as bringers of pest and death ( = λoμos), later connected with Apollo as a healing
1
oùpá
1127
god and connected with oλoç (whencе Ал. "Оλios in Lindos; cf. on öλoc). On
►Ouλaqoç, see s.v.
⚫ETYM Derived from the root *helh₁- of ►öλλvµ, but the details of the derivation are
disputed. It seems best to assume an original u-stem *helh₁-u-, *h3lh,-eu-, which is
probably continued in oλoós, as well.
As an epithet of "Ovɛipoç, ovλoç was interpreted by Bechtel 1914: 259f. as 'deceiving'
and connected with Lith. vilti 'to deceive', which Frisk calls "verlockend aber
überflüssig".
ovos 4 [m.] 'sheaf of corn', secondarily 'song to worship Demeter' (Ath. 14, 618d);
oбλo. Spáуματα 'sheaves' (H.). <?>
●DER Ovλw [f.] epithet of Demeter (Semus 19). Egetmeyer Kadmos 32 (1993): 35f.
compares the Cyprian epithet of a goddess wo-lo-we-a-i/wolweai/ [dat.sg.f.].
•ETYM Unknown. Hardly the same word as louλoç, as assumed e.g. by Frisk.
oʊv [adv.pcl.] ‘well, so', also (originally?) affirmative: 'in fact, indeed, certainly' (Hom.,
Att.).<?>
•VAR Post-Hom. Ion. wv (also attested as ov), Lesb. Boeot. Dor. &v, Thess. oʊv (<
wv?).
ETYM The relation between ovv and dov is unclear. Unconvincing explanations in
Brugmann-Thumb 1913: 633 and in Schwyzer 1950: 586f. On ov in Homer, cf.
Reynen Glotta 36 (1957): 1ff. and Reynen Glotta 37 (1958): 67ff.
oűveka,
-êɛv [rel. adv., conj.] 'wherefore, because of which, for the reason thať (Il.), as
a preposition 'because of = Evεкα (mostly Att. poetry, Herod.). <GR>
ETYM As a relative, compounded from ou EVEкα; as a preposition, arisen from
ÉKεívov ĚVEKα > έкεIVOúvεкα (vel sim.) by false division.
oovov
•VAR OŰVEI.
ETYM Acc. to Mayer Acme 14 (1961): 233ff., it was borrowed from Eg. wny (cf. Copt.
ov(ε)ɩvi) ‘to run'. See ▶ ¿pioúvis.
ovpá [f.] 'tail' (Il.), later often metaph. ‘rear (guard)' (X., Plb.). <IE *h,ers- 'tail', PG?➤
•VAR Ion. -ń.
•COMP Ovp-ãyós [m.] 'leader of the rear guard', with -έw, -ía (X., Plb., LXX); on кóλ-
oupoç see ►кóλoç; see also ►кóðovpoç, ►лáуovpoç.
●DER 1. Diminutive oúpádov (Gp.); 2. Adjectives oúp-años belonging to the tail' (Y
520, Hp.) with -aía [f.] (like кɛpaía, etc.) 'tail' (Aret.), -añov [n.] ‘id.' (E.). 3. oúp-axós
[m.] ‘foetal organ, point, outer end', e.g. of the heart, of the eyebrows, of a stalk
(medic., Ael.), -íaxos [m.] 'lower end of a spear' (Il., A. R., AP; metrically
conditioned?); cf. кúµß-аxоç, στóµ-axoç, etc. 4. oúpádns belonging to the tail' (Hp.
v.l.). See also oỷpač.
•ETYM The alternation between oúpá and öppoç, -opσoç mirrors that between koupá
and kóppŋ, kópʊn. The cause for this alternation may have been the accent: *opσá
gave oúpá, while -po- remained when the accent preceded: öpσos (> Att. öppos).
Note OIr. err [f.] 'tail' < IE *h,ers-h₂-.

=== page 590 ===

1128
oùpavós
The form oúpaxós is remarkable, with a suffix that is probably Pre-Greek; here again
there are the parallels with -ax-, -X-, -UX- (cf. Chantraine 1933: 403). Even stranger is
the form oúpíaxos, which has been considered to be a metrical licence (there is no
other word in taxos). One might suppose, therefore, that the preceding consonant
was palatalized, i.e. -rs-; cf. Beekes 2008. This might lead to the conclusion that the
word for 'tail' is Pre-Greek (unless one concludes that oup(1) axós is not cognate with
the tail-word). See ►öppos.
ovpavós [m.] 'heaven, sky' (II.), also personified (Hes.). <PG?, IE? *uors-o- 'rain'>
•VAR Dor. Boeot. wpavós, Aeol. wpavos, öpavos (both probably for opp-, see below).
●COMP Often as a first member, e.g. oúpavozµýкηs sky-high' (ε 239); in hypostases
like έл-oupávɩoç ‘in the sky' (II.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutive oúpavíoкoç [m.] ‘tent-roof, palate' (Hell.), also name of a
constellation (sch.); 2. oúpáv-tos 'heavenly' (Pi., IA), -ís [f.] (AP); -ía [f.] name of one
of the Muses (Hes.); 3. Oúpav-iwvɛs (0ɛoí) [m.pl.] 'the heavenly (gods)' (Hom.,
Hes.), also 'the Titans' (E 898; from Oúpavós); -ídns, Dor. -ídas 'son of Ouranos',
plur. 'the Titans', also 'the heavenly' (Hes., Pi.); 4.Oúpav-tác [f.] ‘game to worship
Ourania' (Sparta); 5. oúpav-íšw or -íoμa 'to go up high' (A. Fr. 766 M.), -¹ášw ‘to
toss up high' (H. s.v. oúpavíav), -oυσða 'to become deified' with -wous (Eust.).
•ETYM As the Aeolic variation wp-, op- probably stands for geminated opp-, the basis
is likely to have been *(F) opσavós, accented like op pavós and perhaps an
enlargement of a noun *uorsó- = Skt. varṣá- [n., m.] ‘rain'.
Alternatively, like e.g. öxavov: xw, žóavov: éw, it has been supposed that oúpavós,
as an agent noun, derives from a verbal root *uers- as seen in Skt. várṣati ‘to rain';
alternatively, that it derives from the iterative oúpέw, in the way that Indo-Iranian
nouns in -ana- are connected with verbs in -ayati (= Gr. -έw); it would then mean
"rainmaker" or "moistener, impregnator". However, the identity of the suffixes Gr.
-avo- and IIr. -ana- can only be accepted under the doubtful assumption of PIE *a.
Specht KZ 66 (1939): 199ff., Fraenkel 1955 s.v. viršus and others interpreted it as "der
zur Höhe in Beziehung stehende", from the root of Skt. varṣman- [m., n.] 'height',
Lith. viršus upper, highest seat', to which "Eppos ó Zɛúc (H.) has also been
connected, so from IE *uers-; however, this is not to be preferred, neither
semantically nor formally.
The old identification with the theonym Skt. Váruṇa- is certainly wrong; see
Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.
It has also been suggested that the word is of foreign, i.e. Pre-Greek, origin (DELG);
note that -av- is difficult to account for if the word represents an old IE formation.
ovpaž, -ayos [f.] Att. name of the bird τéτpı (Arist.). <PG▷
•ETYM The suffix occurs in Pre-Greek, and it has parallels with three Pre-Greek
vowels: -vy--iy- (with long vowel, as appears often in Pre-Greek); see Chantraine
1933: 397, and cf. ►λáτaž. This means that the word is Pre-Greek and probably has
nothing to do with the word for 'tail'. Cf. ►ovpá.
ovpέw [v.] 'to urinate' (Hes., IA). <IE *uers- ‘urinate'>
•VAR Ipf. έoúpovv, aor. oúpñσaɩ, fut. -ǹow, -ŋσoµai, perf. ¿oúpŋka.
}
|
oupos 2
•COMP Also with prefixes like ¿v-, ¿§-, époσ-, kat-.
1129
•DER (¿‹-, åл-)opŋσis [f.] ‘micturition', -ŋτýp [m.], -½еpa, Ion. -ŋ ‘urethra', -ŋua
[n.] ‘urine', -ŋτкós ‘urinating frequently, promoting urine' (Hp., Arist.); also as
back-formation oúpov [n.] 'urine' (Hdt., Hp., Thphr.), together with Svσoupέw [v.]
'to have difficulties with micturition', -ía [f.] 'difficult micturition' (medic.) as if
from *Súσ-oupoç. From oupov or ovpέw: oúpávŋ [f.] 'chamber-pot' (A. Fr., S. Fr.) =
Ovρητúp (Poll.).
•ETYM Iterative formation *uors-eie/o- from the primary root present seen in Skt.
várṣati ‘to rain' < IE *uérs-e/o- and YAv. aiẞi.varǝšta- ‘rained upon'. It is a
euphemistic expression for oµεíxw; cf. ► oúpavós and poŋ. The cluster -rs- lost
its s with compensatory lengthening when followed by the accent.
Lat. ūrīna goes back to *uh,-r- (Skt. vár- [n.] 'water', ON úr [n.] 'drizzle'), and
therefore cannot be connected. See CEG 1 (RPh. 70, 1996): 117f.
ovpía [f.] name of a duck-like waterbird (Alex. Mynd. apud Ath. 9, 395e). ◄?►
•ETYM Unclear. It cannot be combined with the word for 'water' in Lat. ūrīna, etc.;
see on ▸oupέw.
ovpoí [m.pl.] 'trench or keel-furrow, through which ships are pulled into the sea' (only
B 153). <IE *uoru-o- 'drawer', *uerH-u- 'draw'>
ETYM Formerly, words mentioned s.v. öpos 'frontier, etc.' were connected, but
also ►ópúσow 'to dig'. Recently, however, García Ramón 2004 (see also DELG
Supp.) has analyzed oúpoí as an agent noun *uoru-ó- built on the same root as ¿púw
'to drag', illustrating the etymology with examples from Homeric phraseology.
oupov 1 [n.] 'urine'. →oupéw.
opov 2 [n.] in oðpov (-a) ñµóvoäv (-vwv) († 124, K 351) and Síoкov oỷpa (Y 431,
Síoкoupa Y523) as a measure of length. <?>
•VAR Later only oupa (A. R. 2, 795).
•ETYM Because the concrete meaning is unknown, the word has no certain
explanation. Wackernagel 1955(2): 1082 supposed that oupa was originally a
collective plural of oupos 'frontier, furrow' (or to oúpoí?, Frisk adds), from which the
singular oupov was an innovation. Details in Bechtel 1914: 261f.
oupoç 1 [m.] 'fair wind' (Il.). <IE *her- 'arise'>
⚫DER o pios 'with a fair wind, favourable', also as an epithet of Zeus, ǹ oúpía (sc.
évoý) = oùpos (IA); ovpíw ‘to carry with a fair wind (trag.), oùptow ‘id.' (AP); often
in hypostases like έлoup-íw ‘id.', also intrans. 'to blow fairly, etc.' (Att.); cf. εл-oυpos
'blowing fairly' (S.).
⚫ETYM May be derived from the root *her-, extended *her-u-, in ►öpvμα, ►ópow
starting from a pre-form *orwo-. Att. opios must then be a Homerism or Ionism.
opos 2 [m.] ‘watcher, guard(ian)' (Il.); in Hom. almost only in opos Axaiwv, epithet
of Nestor. <IE *uer- ‘observe'>
•VAR Myc. wo-wo/worwos/.

=== page 591 ===

1130
oŮpos3
•COMP Cret. ovpɛúw [v.] 'to watch, guard' with ovpɛĩa [n.pl.] 'fortress' (III³), wpεia
(Iª); òpɛúεiv. qvláσσɛv ‘id.' (H.).
•ETYM Can hardly be separated from ópáw, and probably derives from *ƑópƑoç,
which is attested in Mycenaean wo-wo. On the Cretan forms, see Bechtel 1921, 2: 691
and 791, as well as Thumb-Kieckers 1932: 153. See ► έniovpoç.
oupos 3 [m.] 'border'. →öpoç.
opos 4 [n.] 'mountain'. →öpoç.
ous [n.] 'ear', metaph. ‘'handle' (Il., IA). ◄IE *h₂eus-, *h₂e/ous-n- ‘ear'>
•VAR ŵs (Theoc., Hell.); gen. wτós (IA, with nom. acc. plur. τα, etc.), also oατoç,
-ατα, etc. (Simon., with nom. acc. sing. ovac); also the gloss aτa (cod. ätα). ñía.
Tapavτīvoɩ (H.); probably also sing. aûç (Paul. Fest. 100, 4; see Wackernagel 1955(2):
1252ff.).
•DIAL Myc. a-no-wo-to /an-ōwotos/ 'without handles'; also a-no-we lanōwes-/ like
ȧup-wns 'with two ears or handles' (Theoc.), beside äµô-wτoç (Od.).
⚫COMP WT-akovσTέw [v.] 'to eavesdrop, listen, pay attention' (Hdt., X., D., Plb.), a
compound built on wτì áкovστóv (opposite àν-ηкOVστÉш оÚк άкOUσTÓV), with
wtakovotńs [m.] 'eavesdropper, listener' (Arist.); ȧv-oúατoç 'without ears, without
handles (Theoc.), ǎ-wτoç ‘id.' (Philet., Plu.); µvóσ-wτov (µú-wtov) [n.], µvoʊwtiç
[f.] “mouse-ear”, i.e. the plant ‘madwort, Asperugo', from µvòs åτα ‘id.' (Dsc.), see
Strömberg 1940: 42. On λaywc, see s.v.
•DER wt-íov [n.] ‘handle, ear' (Theopomp. Com., LXX, NT), -áptov [n.] ‘id.' (com.
IV³); ovατ-óεiç 'with ears, handles' (Simon., Call.), which can also be reconstructed
in Hom. and Hes. for wτwɛiç, acc. to Wackernagel 1916: 168f.; wτ-кóç ‘belonging to
the ear' (Gal., Dsc.). Also wτíç, -ídos [f.] 'bustard' (X., Arist.), perhaps after the
cheek-plumes or the tuft, Thompson 1895 s.v.; besides wτoç [m.] ‘eared owl' (Arist.),
after the ear-plumes. See also on ►έvádiov, ► έvútiov.
•ETYM The nominatives oʊç, wç (cf. Boûç, ßñç) can be derived from IE *Hōus. The
color of the initial laryngeal is determined by Lat. auris, aus-cultō, etc., which must
continue an e-grade *h₂eus-. This e-grade may also be found in the gloss aτa, if from
*avσ-aτa; see perhaps also on ȧávða; it is certainly found in лαpεαí 'cheeks' <
*par-aus-(i)ai. It has been supposed that the o-vocalism in ouйç was taken from the
word for 'eye'.
OAtt. OΣ is noteworthy; it cannot contain an inherited diphthong *ou- and thus
seems to point to a contraction from *ōwo-. An s-stem *h₂ous-os was reconstructed
on this basis, for which support was found in OCS ucho [n.] ‘ear³, gen. ušese < *h₂eus-
os, gen. *heus-es-es. However, it is also possible to interpret the OAtt. form as wç,
analogical after wτóc, etc. This would eliminate the problem that Homeric ouç at Y
473 (there are also problems with A 109) contains a contraction which cannot be
resolved. Cf. Fischer MSS 56 (1996): 42 and the discussion in Haug 2002: 85ff.
The other case forms can be derived from pre-forms *h₂ous-nt- (see Kiparsky Lang.
43 (1967): 619-635), so it is no longer necessary to assume a lengthened root grade
*h₂ōus-nt-, as per Frisk. This gives Hom. (Aeol.) oaτoç, with a geminate as a reflex
of the cluster *-Rh-, and IA *owatos with compensatory lengthening, contracting to
}
OŮtáw
1131
¿τóç. The n-stem continued by these forms is also found in Arm. un-kn (with -kn
after akn 'eye'; cf. on the Greek vocalism above) and in Gm., e.g. Go. auso, ausins.
However, n-stems were highly productive in Germanic, which excludes them as
evidence for the original flexion.
To summarize, the Homeric instances may show a trace of an original root noun
*h₂ous (represented in Lith. gen.pl. ausų), while the rest of the Greek forms
(including OAtt. OΣ) may have been built on the n-stem *h₂ous-n-, which need not
be inherited (though note the Armenian parallel). Other notable forms are the old
duals Av. uši <IE *hus-ih, with zero grade, OCS uš-ī < IE *h₂eus-ih,.
On the reconstruction of the initial laryngeal, see Beekes Sprache 18 (1972): 123f.;
extensive treatment of ouç and derivative compounds in Szemerényi SMEA 3 (1967):
47-88. Perhaps related are ►áкoúw, ► άкpoάoμai.
ovoía [f.] 'property, homestead; being, presence, existence, reality, substance' (Att.).
<IE *h,s-ont- ‘being'>
•VAR Ion. -in, Dor. woía.
•COMP Often with prefix (from ǎл-ɛчµɩ, etc.), e.g. àл-, ‹‹-, µεт-, лаp-, σvv-ovσía, -ín
(mostly Att.). Compounds -oúσios 'bereft of property' (Ph.), úлεр-оúσιoç above
being', μετ-оúσчoç 'below being' (Them., comm. Arist., etc.).
⚫DER Ovσ-idiov [n.] 'small property', -tóτηs [f.] 'nature'; -wons 'substantial, real'
(Epicur.), -taкóç ‘belonging to property'; verbs ouv-ovolášw [v.] ‘to be together³, ¿‹-
ovolášw ‘to have power' (since IVª; ovσtáčw only PMag. Lond.), whence σuvovσt-
aʊtýs [m.] (Pl., X.), -aσtiкóç (Ar.) etc.; ovσi-ów, -óoμa 'to provide (be provided)
with substance', ouv- 'to be connected to something' with (ouv-)ovoiwois (late).
ETYM Abstract formation in -ía from the ptc. v, ovσa, öv (cf. the pair yɛpovoía :
yέpwv). On this was modeled Dor. woía, but also έσσía on Dor. Aeol. čσσa [f.], évtεS
[pl.] (Pl. Cra. 401c); see also σtó s.v. ►ɛiµí. Suppositions on the formation in
Collinge Glotta 49 (1971).
ovσov [n.] 'ship's tackle, ropes' (Lyc. 20, Antim. 57 Wyss, H.), mostly plur. <?>
•ETYM von Wilamowitz Herm. 59 (1924): 273 compares σoûσov (?).
ovτáw [v.] 'to harm, wound' (Il., also trag.). <PG?>
•VAR Present only ipv. oταε (X 356); 3sg. ovτḍ (A. Ch. 640 [lyr.] conj. Hermann);
more frequent is the present ovτά(w; aor. ovτ-áσaɩ, -ñσaɩ, -ŋðñvaι, fut. -άow, -ñow,
pret. 3sg. oτa, inf. ovτ-áµεv(αɩ), ptc. -áµɛvoç, perf. pass. oταστal.
•DER ǎ-OUTOS, ȧv-оúτατoç ‘unwounded', vε-oúτατоç 'newly wounded' (II.), later also
-ŋo (Nic., Nonn.). àv-outηtí [adv.] ‘without wounding, without wounds' (X 371,
Q. S.).
•ETYM Athematic oʊτ-α, -áµεv(αι), -áµɛvoç, which certainly function as aorists,
should probably be considered to be the common basis of the above forms. Thence
OÜτaɛ and (if correctly restored) ovτα, together with oúτ-ñσαɩ, -ŋеñvaɩ, -now on the
one hand, and the s-aorist oτ-άσαɩ, whence in turn -άow, -ά(w, -αστal. See
Chantraine 1942: 356, 380, 410f.; on the use in Hom., see Trümpy 1950: 92ff.
Morphologically and etymologically unclear. Often connected with wτɛń
(ovtaµévny wteiλýν E 518, P 86) and with ȧáw. Already Meister 1921: 229 had

=== page 592 ===

1132
OÚTιSAVÓS
thought of Pre-Greek origin, which seems to be the best solution, by the
interpretation of wτελn as a variant. A root of the shape *h3u(a) th₂- (e.g. Peters
1980a: 60ff.) is impossible for PIE.
ovτɩdavós [adj.] 'worthless, insignificant' (II., also A. Th. 361). <GR➤
⚫ETYM Derivation from ovτɩ like ǹлεðаνóç, лενкεdavóc, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 362),
although the 8 could also belong to original *o-tɩd < *h₂oiu k™id; see on ➤ov. See
► ȧλλodαлóç, ►ŋµɛdaлóç.
ovτos [pron.dem.] 'this, this one, that one, iste' (II.). <IE *so- + *h₂u-to- 'that one'>
•VAR αÜTη [f.], τOÛTO [n.].
⚫ETYM The form oτOÇ < *so/to- + h₂u-to- (Beekes 1995: 202), a univerbation of the
*so/to- pronoun with the stem that also figures in aúτóç. For the element *hu
‘away, again' (Skt. ava ‘away', Gr. a) used in proniminal stems, cf. OCS ovʊ ... ovʊ
the other'. This element is also found in Skt. só < *sá u < *so h₂u, and
perhaps also лávʊ (see on ►лãç)
'the one
...
òqɛíλw [v.] ‘to owe, be obliged, be due' (IA, also Il.). <IE *h¸bel- ‘owe, be obliged'>
•VAR ÓQέλλw (Aeol., Arc., also Hom.), oonλw (Cret., Arc., Arg.), sigm. aor. opetλ-
ñσaɩ, pass. -ŋ¤ñvaɩ, fut. -ŋow (Hell. also -έow), perf. ¿qɛíλŋкa (Att.), them. aor.
woɛλov, öqελov (Il., Att.).
Further opλσкávw 'to be guilty, incur punishment, be sentenced', fut. ooλ-now, s-
aor. -ñσaɩ, perf. wîλŋka (Att.), ptc. Foqλŋkóσi [dat.pl.], 3pl. [Ƒo] qλéaσɩ (Arc.), them.
aor. òqλɛiv (IA), also with εл-, лроσ-.
•DIAL Myc. o-pe-ro 'deficit', etc.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. лpo-, époσ-.
•DER A. From the present ooɛíλw: òqeiλ-étŋs [m.], -étɩç [f.] ‘debtor' (S., Pl.) with
-Éσov [n.] small debt' (Eust.), -nuα [n.] (Th., Pl., Arist.); oonλwμa (Cret.) after
áváλwµa; óqɛíλ-nois [f.] (pap. IIIª) ‘debt, indebted sum'; -n [f.] ‘debt, leasing' (pap.,
NT).
B. From the aorist óqλɛïv: öqλ-ŋua [n.] (D., Arist., pap.), -ŋois [f.] (LXX) 'penalty,
fìne'; -ŋτýs [m.] 'debtor' (gloss.), òqλoí. òqeiλétai, òqɛiλaí (H.).
●ETYM The system óqλɛïv : òqλioкávw : óólńow : wλŋкa neatly corresponds to
ɛúpɛīv : ɛúpíσkw, ɛúpǹow, eűpŋka, except for the presentic enlargement -ávw (see
Schwyzer: 700). The aorist óoλñσαι (Lys. and late) was built on the future. Arc.
[Fo]qλé-aσ also has the same enlarged zero grade without secondary -к-. This
system was built on the zero grade thematic aorist; beside it stands another system,
based on the full grade aorist weλov, whence the nasal present *ooέλvw was
derived (like τεµoν τεµνw), giving the various dialectal forms oóqɛíλw, òqέλλw,
oonλw. As the formation of the present oqɛíλw became opaque by its phonetic
development, it was able to become the basis of another system. The form ooɛíλw ~
Öpελov was also separated from opλεiv semantically.
An old problem is Fo-, which only appears in an Arcadian inscription. It cannot be a
prefix, but it may be that Fo- is a notation of (earlier) o-. On the forms, see Hamp
ó-.
Glotta 60 (1982): 227f.
For references to attempts to connect opɛw with opέλλw 2 'to augment', see s.v.
óqέλw 1 'to owe'. →òqɛíλw.
óðaλµós
1133
óqέ\\w 2 [v.] 'to increase, enlarge, augment, advance' (epic, Pi., A., Theoc.). <IE
*hbhel- 'increase, augment'>
VAR Aor. opt. òpε\\εv (II 651, ẞ 334), beside which the ambivalent forms.
óqέλλwoiv (A 510), öœεÀÀɛ(v) (B 420, Theoc. 25, 120), wœɛλλe (π 174).
•DIAL Myc. no-pe-re-a2 /nōp¹ele¹a/ ‘useless' [nom.pl.n.] < *ṇ-h¸b″el-es-h₂.
•COMP Also with έ- (0 18).
•DER Ŏqελ-µα [n.] (S. Fr. 1079), -µóç [m.] (inscr. Lydia) 'increase, advantage”, -σчoç
'advantageous, useful' (Call., Orph., Opp.), after xpn-, óvý-σчoç; also óελλчµoç ‘ïd.'
(Max.) with direct connection to òqέλλw.
öqελos [n.] 'promotion, use, advantage, gain' (II.); as a second member in e.g. àv-
wopeλns 'useless' (IA), replacing *vwopeλns seen in Myc. (see above); secondary
simplex opeλns (pap. II³); 'Oqeλéo-tŋs [m.] PN (II.); 'Opéλ-avdpos [m.] (VIª)
perhaps after Aλé-avdpoç (Sommer 1948: 198).
Denominative (with w- from the compounds) woɛλéw [v.] 'to be of use, help,
support' (IA), whence -in, -ía, secondary -ɛa [f.] 'use, help' (IA), -ŋua [n.] (trag.),
-ŋoç [f.] (S.) ‘benefit, use', -noчoç [adj.] ‘useful' (S., Ar.); much more common is
wo̟éλчµoç ‘id.' (Att.), probably from woɛλéw, -ía. More details in Leumann 1950:
120ff. with an attempt to explain the lengthening of the initial vowel. Hamp Glotta
60 (1982): 229f. thinks that woɛλéw was extracted from the negative compound Myc.
no-pe-re-a₂/nophele¹a/.
⚫ETYM The old verbal noun öqɛλos is widespread in Greek. Beside it stands a yod-
present ỏœέ\\w < *òqɛλ-iw, and an s-aorist oɛɛ with Aeolic development of
*òpe入-o-.
The form öqελos can be directly identified with Arm. *awel in awel-i 'more' and the
denominative y-awel-um 'to add to', in ar-awel 'more' and ar-awel-um 'to increase':
all are from an IE root *h3b¹el-. It is mostly agreed that ooέλλw 3 contains the same
root as the present lemma, since Armenian also has this meaning; various scholars
also believe that ooɛíλw derives from the same root as well (see e.g. De Lamberterie
1992, of which a summary is found in DELG Supp.). However, opinions differ on the
semantic scenario to be proposed for Greek (is 'increase' or 'sweep' primary?); see
the discussion in Clackson 1994: 156-158.
óqέw 3 [v.] 'to sweep, broom' (Hippon. 51). <IE *h¸bel- 'sweep'>
●DER Ŏqελua [n.] 'broom' (ibid., Eust.), óελμаσ σаpóμаσv 'sweepings' (H.),
Öчελτpov. кάλλuvτpov 'broom' (H.), whence opελτpεúw (Lyc. 1165).
•ETYM Identical with Arm. awelum 'to sweep', awel 'broom', except for the
formations. Doubts on the identity of the Greek and Armenian etyma were
expressed by Jahukyan and Arutjunjan (see Clackson 1994: 158 with fn. 232), who
assume borrowings from Near Eastern words. See ▶oqÉλλw 2.
óóðaλµós [m.] ‘eye' (II.). ◄PG(V) ►
•VAR Boeot. Öкταλλoç, Epid. Lacon. óлτíλ(λ)oç.

=== page 593 ===

1134
ŏcopic
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. μov-óðaμs (μovv-) 'with a single eye, one-
eyeď (Hdt., Plb., Str.), étɛp-óóðàλμos bereft of one eye' (D., Arist.); also as a first
member, e.g. ópeеaλµ-wpúxoç 'digging out the eyes' (A.).
●DER 1. Diminutive óóðaλµ-íðɩov [n.] (Ar.); 2. -ía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] ‘eye-disease' together
with -táw 'to suffer from an eye-disease' (IA), whence -íaσiç [f.] (Plu., H.); 3. -íaç
[m.] name of a kind of eagle (Lyc.), also of a fish (Plaut.); because of the fixing
glance, Strömberg 1943: 42; 4. -ɩkós ‘ptng. to the eyes', msc. 'eye-doctor' (Gal., Dsc.);
5. -ndóv 'like eyes' (gloss.).
6. Verbs óαλµíšoμa 'to be inoculated' (Thphr.), 'to suffer from opaλµía' (Plu.);
with preposition ¿v-óðaλµ-íw 'to inoculate' (Thphr.), -í\oµα pass. (Delos) with
-toµós (Thphr.); also -ɩášoμα (Plu.); -o¤¤µµá¶w to disregard, disparage' (pap.
IV³); έл-oqðaλµ-íw (Pherecyd., Plu.), -táw (Plu., pap. III³), -έw (pap. IV³) ‘to ogle,
peep at'.
⚫ETYM Understandably, attempts have been made to derive the word from the root.
ол- 'to see'. However, there are variants in Boeot. Öктαλλos, Epid. Lacon.
Óлτíλ(^)oç. This interchange кT: πT: 0 was interpreted by Frisk as follows: -KT- is
old, л is analogical and of is expressive. This кɩ / л was then compared with group
kṣ in Skt. ákṣi ‘eye', and a correspondence between the suppletive n-stem in Skt. gen.
akṣṇás and a putative 1-stem in oo0-αλ-μóç was assumed by Specht.
However, since an IE labiovelar became a labial before a consonant, the explanation
that takes -кT- as a regular reflex is just plain wrong. Also, expressive aspiration is a
meaningless explanation for -40-. Moreover, the repeated attempts to explain
óðaµó as a compound are all wrong (e.g., from Оáλaμos 'bedroom' and áλλw
'to flower'; for literature see Frisk s.v. óеαλμóç).
Finally, not only the variation cannot be explained from Indo-European; the rise of a
suffix -aλ(^)- would be incomprehensible as well. In Beekes 2008, it is shown that
Öкτaλλoç has a Pre-Greek suffix (thus already Beekes 1969: 193); it continues a
palatalized *, which was represented as a geminate. This leads to a PGr.
reconstruction *ok"t-al-(m). Here the labiovelar could become a labial, but the
labial element could also be ignored, which yielded OкT-. Aspiration was not
phonemic in Pre-Greek, hence the variant ope- is unproblematic on this account. In
óлτíλ(\)oç, *a apparently became i by influence of the following palatalized
consonant. The fact that PGr. *ok"t- strongly resembles IE *h3ek"- is a mere
coincidence, and such accidents may be expected to occur every now and then.
By way of contrast, the gloss őkкov· óóðaλµóv (H.) may well be of IE origin (related
to Arm. akn?). For words derived from the inherited root óл- 'see', see ►öµµα,
·öσσε, þöлwлα.
öqıç [m.] 'snake' (M 208). <IE *heghi- 'snake'>>
•VAR Gen. -to, EOS, -EWS.
•COMP As a first member in the constellation name oqi-oxoç [m.] 'snake-holder',
Lat. Angui-tenens (Eudox., Arat.), see Scherer 1953: 184f.
●DER Diminutive oq-ídiov (1 and i) [n.] (Att. inscr., Arist.); -íaσıç [f.] (to *ỏqiáw)
"snake-disease", name of a disease of the skin (Gal.); -twdns 'rich of snakes, snaky'
(Pi., Arist.); -tóɛtç 'rich of snakes' (Antim.), HN Oqtoñç [m.], 'Oqioñσσa [f.] name of
óppic-Úog
1135
several islands (Antim., Arist.), of a plant (Plin.); -takós ‘belonging to snakes, tà
ópiaкá title of a work (sch. Nic.); -ióvɛos 'snaky' (Opp.), perhaps from *-1-ívɛoç
(Schwyzer: 491'); -íτns (λíños) [m.], -iñtic nétpn [f.] 'serpentine' (Orph. L.), after the
color, Redard 1949: 59, 'erysipelas' (Gal.); Redard 1949: 104.
⚫ETYM Probably identical with Skt. áhi-, Av. aži- [m.] 'snake' from IE *h¸égwhi- (the
absence of reflexes of Brugmann's Law points to IE e-vocalism). The traditional
connection with Arm. iž, instr. -iw ‘id.' is problematic, since it presupposes a pre-
form *Hegwhi- (with unexplainable lengthened grade). The appurtenance of the first
member of the Germanic word for 'lizard' (OHG egi-dehsa, etc.) is unclear, since one
expects *heghi- to yield PGm. *awi-. The lengthening of the o- in M 208 (after
which Hippon. 49, 6, etc.) is metrically conditioned; see O. Masson 1962: l.c. See on
►xis and (unrelated) ► ëyxɛλuç.
óp入lokávw →Õpei入w.
}
òqvíc [?] · üvviç, ǎpoτpov ‘ploughshare, plough' (H.). ◄IE *uogwh-n-i- (?) 'coulter,
ploughshare'>
•ETYM Can be identified with OPr. wagnis ‘coulter' < IE *uog™³ni-. Beside this stands
Lat. vōmis (-er), -eris [m.] 'ploughshare', from an unclear base form; see De Vaan
2008 s.v. It is probablye that öчata. deσµoì ápóτpшv 'ties of the plough'. Aкapvāves
(H.) also belongs here; see Bechtel 1921, 2: 76. See ►ÜVɩç.
ooppa [adv., conj.] 'so long as, until; in order that'; in correlation τóopa 'so long as,
meanwhile' (II.); on the use in Hom. see Bolling Lang. 25 (1949): 379ff. <IE *-b³r->
⚫ETYM From relative ó- and demonstrative τo-, perhaps comparable to Arm. erb
'when?' (IE *he-b¹r-), ToA ku-pre 'when', tä-prem 'so much', etc. Ehrenfellner KZ
107 (1994): 101-104 explains the second member as the zero grade of *ber- 'to bear'
as 'auf welches hinzielend'.
óøpûç, -úoç [f.] ‘eyebrow', mostly plur.; metaph. 'elevated edge, brow of a hill' (Il.). <IE
*h3bhreuH- 'eyebrow'>
•VAR Details on the inflexion in Schwyzer: 571.
•COMP As a second member in σúv-oopus 'with meeting eyebrows' (Arist.).
•DER Diminutive oopú-diov [n.] (H. s.v. έлσкúvov, Theognost.), MoGr. (ó)øpúði;
oopún, -a 'elevation' (Hdt., Argos) like ixú-n, -a, etc.; -óɛç situated on an edge,
terraced' (X 411), -wdns 'protrusive' (Gal.).
Denominative verbs: 1. ópv-óoμai [v.] 'to be haughty' (Timo, Luc.) with -woɩs [f.]
'elevation, edge' (Paul. Aeg.), older ovv-oopvooμat [v.] 'to knit one's brows' (S., E.);
with кaɩ- in katwôpvwµévos ‘to be provided with brows' (Philestr. VA, Luc.); 2.
oppv-ά w 'to beckon with the eyebrows', also as an expression of pride (Amips.
Com. V-IV); 3. -áw 'to be hilly' (Str.); 4. oopuyva. óµoíws (i.e. = -áčε). BowToi
(H.); unclear, perhaps after optyvá
⚫ETYM Oopuç continues an old root noun *h,bruH-, identical with Skt. bhrú- [f.],
acc. bhrúvam, and with forms from Celtic and Gm.: Olr. for-bru [acc.pl.], OS brū.
The root noun is also visible in Balto-Slavic: OCS brov-, Lith. brùvė, dial. -is. The IE
paradigm was nom. *h3b³rēuH-s, gen. *h¸bruH-os, which explains the Gm. forms

=== page 594 ===

1136
ǒxa
OHG brāwa [f.] 'eyebrow', wint-prawa 'eyelash', which belong with OS brāha 'id.' to
OE braw [m.] 'eyebrow', ON brá [f.] ‘eyelash'.
The root noun was extended as an n-stem in ON brún, while ToB pärwāne [du.] may
contain the regular dual ending in this language. An extension with dental is found
in Av. bruuat-biiqm [dat.pl.f.], MIr. brúad [gen.du.], and in åßpoñτεç. òópûç.
Makɛdóvɛç (H.).
oxa [adv.] 'by far', before ǎpiστos (Hom.). <GR>
⚫ETYM Backformation from oxa ‘id.' (εoxoc, ¿¿éxw); see Leumann 1950: 133ff.
oxávŋ •VAR öxavov, óxý, etc. →ëxw.
oxen [f.] 'cave, grotto' (Arat., Nic., Orph.). <GR
ETYM Hellenistic for Xεin after oкpóεiç for кpυóɛç; perhaps through cross with
sematically related òxεtóç.
ÓXεtós →ÓXεw.
óxɛúw [v.] ‘to cover, mount', med. 'to copulate' (IA). <GR>
•VAR Aor. -εÑσαɩ.
•COMP Also with έл-, кaɩ-, лαρ-, etc.
•DER OX-εños serving as a cover' (Din.), -ɛiov [n.] 'covering place, stallion' (Lycurg.,
Arist.); -ɛía [f.] (X., Arist., pap.), oxń [f.] (Arat.), -Evσiç [f.] (J.) 'covering,
impregnation', -εvµα [n.] 'product of the body' (Arist.); -evτýs [m.] ‘stallion' (pap.
IIIª), -εvτɩкóç ‘ruttish' (Arist., Thphr.); -ɛúτplav (H. s.v. wóav). Also óxwv.
óxevtikŵç ëxwv (H.), óxéwvtai (Arat. 1070 verse-final) = óxɛúwvtaɩ.
•ETYM Etymology debated. Acc. to older interpretations, it is related to oxεqua 'to
drive, ride', in which case the ending -ɛúw and the active diathesis would be
remarkable in oxɛúw. Others connected exw in the sense 'to overpower'. More
attractive is the hypothesis by Boßhardt 1942: 30, who takes oxεúw as a denominative
from oxɛúc 'door-bolt, etc.' (which also derives from Exw): this was originally a
wooden pin which was fitted in a hole in the wall to block the door. The hapaxes
óxшv, óxέwvτaɩ are secondary innovations.
óxέw, -éoµaɩ [v.] 'to carry, bear, endure, sustain', 'to let mount or ride', 'to anchor'
(Od., E. Hel. 277); more frequent in med. 'to drive, ride, swim, be at anchor' (II.).
<GR➤
•VAR Aor. and fut. (not in Att. prose) act. óxñ-σαι (Call.), -σw (A., E.), med. -σaσðaɩ,
-σoμai (Hom.), pass. -Оñvαι (Hp.).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially έë-oxέoµaɩ.
●DER 1. ỎX-ɛtós [m.] (from őxos?) ‘canal, furrow' (Pi., IA) together with -ɛɛúw ‘to
conduct by a canal', whence -ετɛíа, -έτεчµα, etc.; óxετ-ηуós 'drawing a canal (
257); 2. Ŏxετλa óx½µατα (H.); 3. Ŏx-µα [n.] 'vehicle', also metaph. (Pi., IA) with
-ŋpatikóę; 4. -nous [f.] ‘driving, riding' (Hp., Pl.).
•ETYM The middle is an iterative of exw 2 'to carry, offer' (Schwyzer: 717); the
meaning 'to drive, ride, transport' is old; cf. especially Lat. vehō, etc. The rarer active
forms can also be understood from this meaning, but in some instances, the
oxlos
1137
meaning of the active has shifted by influence of ►xw 1 ‘to hold, possess, etc.': note
óxéovtas óïšúv (ŋ] 211) beside лóvov t' ¿xéµev kai óïľúv (N 2, 0 529). See ►öxoç,
►ŏxλoç.
óxέw [v.] ‘to cherish resentment, get angry or wrathful. <GR➤
•VAR Only aor. ptc. oxenσas and 3pl. Xov (Hom.), fut. oxe now (Q. S.), óxĐɛi.
otével, otevášɛi ‘to wail, sigh, groan' (H.); cf. óx¤ãƒÐà· àëò τoû öx¤ŋ. oi yàp
OTÉVOVTES ÉⱭUTOÙÇ µετεwρíčovσiv 'from oxen; for the wailing elevated themselves'
(H.); enlarged ox¤-íw (Оpp. H.), лpoσ-oxÐ-í¢w, -íσaɩ, -tw, -wxеiкa (LXX).
•DER ÖÐŋσ Оópuẞoç, τápaxos 'noise, agitation' (H.), лpoσó×¤σ-µɑ [n.]
‘displeasement, object of indignation' (LXX), лó лрóσкpovσç,
SεɩvОлάеεα 'offence, exaggerated complaint' (H.), etc.
•ETYM Probably a causative or iterative-intensive of exo, xew (see ►xoc), like
popéw : pé邙oual, oopéw:邰ouar, Opotw : Opéoual; notáoual : nétoual, etc.
Connection with ǎxos, -oμat is phonetically less convincing.
oxen [f.] 'high and rocky edge by the water, bank, shore' (Il.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Usually plur. -al.
•DER Ŏxoç [m.] 'height, hill' (Ion. since h. Ap. 17), 'hunch, outgrowth, tubercle'
(medic.) with ox0-pós ‘hilly' (Hell.), -wdns 'full of outgrowth, tuberculous' (D. H.,
medic.).
•ETYM Seems to display a suffix like in μóxoc, ßpóxos, etc., but the connection
with exw 'to hold' is semantically unconvincing. Cf. further εvox0oç, -έw. Fur.: 110,
etc. compare ȧкTτý “promontory, edge', which would point to a Pre-Greek word with
obvious variations.
öxoißoç [m.] ‘purple stripe or edge of a chiton' (Ar., Pherecr.); 'tuft neckband' (Att.
inscr.); cf. Kretschmer Glotta 16 (1928): 169. ◄PG➤
•ETYM Technical word with a suffix -- like in ►кóσvµßoç, ►кóλλaßoç, etc.
Connection with oxen 'high edge' seems possible. Cf. also olẞoç (Luc. Lex. 3)?; acc. to
Poll. τoŨ τpanλou toũ ßoòs tò káλλɩστov 'the best part of the neck of a bovine". No
doubt a Pre-Greek word; cf. Fur.: 321.
óxλɛús •VAR -έw, -í¢w. ¬öxλoç.
öxlos [m.] 1. ‘(orderless) crowd, multitude, throng', plur. 'crowd, people'; 2.
‘disturbance, perturbation, annoyance' (Pi., IA). <IE *uog¹-(s)lo-, *uegh- ‘drive, ride,
transport'>
●COMP óxλo-кpatía [f.] 'mob-rule' (Plb., Plu.), ǎ-oxλos 'without disturbances, not
disturbing' (Hp.).
•DER Adjectives 1. oxλ-npós bothersome, annoying' (IA) with -npía [f.] (LXX); 2.
-Ikóç 'belonging to the crowd, mobbish' (Hell.); 3. -wdns ‘annoying' (IA), 'popular,
common' (Plu.).
Substantives 4. oxλæúç. µoxλóç, σtpóqiyž, deσµóç ‘bolt, pivot, tie' ... (H.); έло×λεÚç
[m.] 'brake shoe on a cart' (Ath.), probably for *¿лoxεúç; έñox\íšoµai 'to be bolted'
(Apollon. Lex.).

=== page 595 ===

1138
öxua
Denominative verbs 5. oxλéw 'to put in (rolling) motion, roll away' (261), 'to
disturb, perturb, bother' (Ion., Hell.; with prefix, especially έv-, also Att.); ȧv-oxλéw
= ȧv-oxλíw (S. E.). Thence öxλ-nous (èv-) [f.] ‘bothering, interference, perturbation'
(Democr., Hell.), (¿v-)őxλ-ŋµa ‘id.' (Epicur., medic.), oxλnti-kós = òxλikós (Procl.);
6. óxλeúovtai = óxλeñvtai· kvλivdoñvtai ‘roll' (H.); 7. óxλ-íw ‘to pull up or out of
place' (Il.), also with µɛt-, àv-, etc.; 8. óxλ-ά(w ‘to be disturbed or confused' (LXX).
•ETYM The original meaning of the verbal noun öxλos, which was concretized in the
sense 'crowd', cannot be established with certainty; in the sense of ‘perturbation,
etc.', it may have been influenced by oxλéw.
Starting from *uog"-(s)lo- (on the lack of a F- in Homer, see Chantraine 1942: 125),
öxλos corresponds with the well-known verb 'drive, carry' seen in Féxw (see ►xw
2), óxéoμa, Lat. vehō, etc. Several possibilities exist for the semantic development:
e.g. an agent noun *driving, carrying, moving', or an instrument noun *driver,
carrier, mover'. ON vagl [m.] ‘tiebeam, roost' (properly *bearing-bar, carrier') is
formally identical. The primary nouns Lat. vectis and ON vog < IE *uog"-h₂- ‘lever'
agree semantically with the denominatives oxλ-íw 'to raise', oxλ-éw 'to roll away'
(both by using a lever), and with oxλ-ɛúç 'bolt, etc.'. An original meaning 'drive'
could easily develop into both 'stirred mass, mob' and 'spiritual excitement, unrest';
the same holds for the denominative oxλéw (cf. Lat. turba, -āre).
Ŏxuа VAR oxuάw, öxшoç. →Xw 1.
•
öxos [m.] ‘cart, carriage, vehicle'. ◄IE *uog"-o-, *ueg¹- ‘carry, drive'>
•VAR Gender: msc. (Pi. O. 6, 24 [őkxoç, see below], Hdt., A., etc.), often plur. -o
(since h. Cer.); also ntr. plur. öxɛa, -ɛσqɩ (Hom., Pi.).
•ETYM Old verbal noun from Ƒέxw 'to carry' (see εxw 2), óxεo̟μα 'to drive', thus
from *Fóxos (on the loss of the F- in Hom., see Chantraine 1942: 125), and identical
with Slav. words like OCS voz [m.] 'wagon', IE *uógo-. The e-vocalism expected in
an s-stem is preserved in exεσot. ǎpμaσt 'with carts' (H.); öxɛa is modeled on öxoç,
óxéoual.
The forms *Fóxos and [Ƒ]óxɛa correspond to Skt. váhas- [n.] ‘vesseľ (metaph. for the
song of praise), vāhá- [m.] ‘draught animal', as well as 'vessel', Av. vāza- [m.]
'draught animal' (would be Gr. öxos). A derivation in -n- with the same meaning
was formed in the Western languages: OIr. fén 'kind of wagon' < IE *ueg"-no-, OHG
wagan 'wagon' < IE *uog"-no-; a suffix *-tlo- is used in Lat. vehiculum [n.] 'vessel',
Skt. vahi-tra- [n.] 'ship', and appears also in öxετλα. oxηματα (H.). The geminate in
ŎKXoç, Óкxéw (Pi.) is unexplained. Cf. ►óxέw, ►Ŏxλoç, and ▸ yaɩáoxoç.
bxvn=bYxvn.
óxupós →èxupós.
* 1 [f.] 'voice, sound, word' (Il.). <IE *uek"- ‘speak'.>
•VAR Оnly in öña, -óç, -í.
•COMP On εúpúола, sеe s.v.
•DER On ►őσσa [f.], see s.v.
ǒuov
1139
•ETYM A root noun from IE *uok"-s. Lat. võx has a long vowel, which must stem
from the nom.sg. Skt. has vák, acc. vácam pointing to a paradigm *uōk”s, *uok”-m.
Besides these, there is an s-stem in ►εлoç. Cf. ►έvoлý.
oч 2, óлós [f.] 'еуe, facе'. öлшлα.
oyé [adv.] 'afterwards, after a long time, late (in the evening), too late' (Il.). <IE
*h,e/op- 'on'>
●VAR öч (Aeol., Lyr. Adesp. 57).
■COMP Often oч- as a first member (after ȧyxt-, ǹpt-, etc.), e.g. oчí-yovoç 'late
arrival, younger' (Il., Hdt., Arist.); also ỏy-, e.g. òy-apó-tys [m.] 'who ploughs late'
(Hes. Op. 490). As a second member in ȧл-oчé (A. D.), кατ-oчé (Alex. Trall.) 'late
(at night)', cf. кαt-óлɩv, àño-пpó, etc.
●DER 1. Ỏyi-aítɛpoç, -αíτaτoç (Att.), after лaλaíτεpos, etc. 2. öy-10s ‘late' (Pi., Arist.)
with ỏyɩó-τns [f.] (Thphr.), like лрóï-o; -чos ‘id.' (X., Hell.), likе лрóï-μos
(perhaps by reinterpretation of öчµos ‘visible' B 325); -ɩvóc ‘id.' (imperial period),
after Éc-vóc, etc. 3. ỏ íxa ỏ é. Buţávnto (H.), diminutive like óng-ixos, etc. 4. ỏ -
ía [f.] ‘evening' (IA). 5. òy-í¶w ‘to be late, be overdue' (Lys., X.) with -toµós [m.]
'delay' (D. H.).
ETYM The final accented -é in oué is unexplained. The form öч recalls ч 'in a
high place', but it must in fact have spread from compounds with *ỏч-. We can
therefore assume a basic form *öy, which recalls ►äy and is identical with Lat. ops-
'towards' (beside op, ob), e.g. in o(b)s-tendō.
oyavós [m.] of Xíos, a black stone (Peripl. M. Rubr. 5, Plin. HN 36, 196 ntr.pl.
obsiana). <LW Lat.>
•ETYM Acc. to Pliny, it is named after a person called Obsius, who discovered it.
ỏyɛiovtes [m.pl.] ‘wishing to see' (E 37), desiderative ptc. to őлwлα, etc. <IE?>
⚫ETYM Hypothesis by Wackernagel KZ 28 (1887): 141ff.: from öyɛi ióvτεs, whence the
Hom. ind. oчɛíw and the other post-Hom. desideratives in -σɛíw; hardly probable,
acc. to DELG. See Schwyzer: 789 and Chantraine 1942: 453; see also Lindeman BSL
60 (1965): 46f.
öyüç •Var öчoμai. ⇒örwra.
öov [n.] 'side-dish, especially meat'; in Athens and other places especially 'fish' (II.).
<GR, IE *h,op-s>
•COMP о-лóc [m.] 'cook' (IA), ε-oчos 'rich of side-food, especially fish'
(middle com.). oy-aptv-týc [m.] ‘cook' with -τɩкóç, -σía (com.), back-formation
óчapτúw (Hell.).
⚫DER Diminutive oчápiov [n.] (com., pap.), MoGr. wápi 'fish'; óy-wv-ŋs [m.] ‘buyer
or trader of side-dishes' (Ar. Fr. 503) together with -ía, -έw (Critias, Ar.), -tov [n.]
“meant for buying öчov", ‘cash salary, wages' (Hell.) together with -tá¶w, etc.;
borrowed as Lat. opsōnium [m.] ‘side-food', opsōnāre (to ỏywvéw) together with
-ator, re-borrowed as oч/wváτwp, cf. WH s.v.

=== page 596 ===

1140
ǒyov
•ETYM Convincing analysis by Taillardat in DELG Supp.: thematicized from the
adverb *öy, reconstructed for oyέ ‘late' and őч, and seen in Lat. obs-. The oчov was
a supplementary dish, which was always eaten on top of e.g. grain or bread. This
suggests the comparison with Myc. o-pi. Taillardat adduces other parallels from
Greek for the use of a prefix εлɩ- with verbs for eating, expressing the same sense of a
supplementary meal.
II
лáyaσa [f.] · Oúpa. кai лayaσaí ‘door' (H.). <PG➤
•ETYM Fur.: 1575 identifies the word with the town Ilayaσaí in Thessaly. Other place
names in -aσa, such as Iɛpуaσa, are mentioned by Fur.: 64268. The word is Pre-
Greek.
лáyŋ [f.] ‘snare, trap' (IA). <IE *peh₁g- ‘make fast, stiff >
●COMP ¿ñíñaуos [m.] 'hardened frozen crust' (Plu., medic.; back-formation to
¿ðñýуvvµɩ, -µα).
•DER лαуíç, -ídos [f.] 'id.' (Ar. Fr. 666, Hell.), derivatives -18ɛúw, -ídɛvµa (LXX).
лáуoç [m.] 1. 'pinnacle, cliff, hill' (epic Ionic since ε 405, 411); 2. 'ice, hoarfrost, frost'
(A., S., Pl., Arist.), late also ntr. after piyoç, кpúoç. Thence (or from лауñval,
лýуví) 1. лaуɛtóç [m.] = ˜áуoç (Pi., IA), лауετwns 'ice-like, icecold' (Hp., S.,
Arist.); 2. лayɛpós 'freezing, icecold' (D. Chr., Arist.; after кpuɛpós); 3. naywdns
nayɛtwdns (Thphr.).
=
⚫ETYM Verbal nouns in *ph₁g-h₁/o/i- of лηуvoμi 'to fasten, attach'. See лáč,
►лáσσαλоç, and ►лáxνη.
лáуovpoç [m.] ‘(edible) crab, Cancer pagurus' (Ar., Arist.). <PG>
•ETYM Usually interpreted as “whose tail (oúpá) consists of лáyoç”, due to the hard
short back of the body (as opposed to the softer tail of other species). However, this
traditional etymology is unconvincing; see oкíoυpoç for a similar case. More
probably, лáуoupos is a Pre-Greek word. Fur.: 165 and 331 connects oáypos,
oáywpoç 'kind of fish' (H.); with secondary r, we find qaypópios. The word was
borrowed into Latin as pagurus, whence Middle French, MoFr. pag(r)ure 'Cancer
pagurus'.
лáуxv [adv.] 'altogether' (Il., Sappho, Hdt.). <GR>
⚫ETYM Derived from *лavτ- 'all' (ntr. лãv), but -xv is unclear. Most often considered
to be a transformation of *лáу-xɩ (like ñ-x₁) et al. on the model of лávʊ ‘altogether'.
Others have suggested haplology from *лàv áуxú (related to Skt. amhú- 'narrow'; see
►ǎyxw and ►ǎyx₁), or a dissimilation from *лáуõvʊ after лpóxvu (see Frisk s.v.).
Meier-Brügger KZ 107 (1994): 87f. assumes a compound 'completely poured', with a
second member *-khu-t- from xéw ‘to pour'.
лáðvŋ [f.] ‘crib'. ⇒qátvn.

=== page 597 ===

1142
Málog
лáеoç [n.] 'incident, experience, misfortune; emotion, passion; state, condition'.
→лáσxw.
лaιáv, -āvoç [m.] 'choral song, hymn', especially for Apollo, 'paean'; also personified
as 'divine physician' (Hom.); epithet of Apollo, 'physician, savior'; also name of a
foot (Arist., Heph.). <PG?>
●VAR raińwv, -ovoç (Il.), naiwv, -ŵvos (IA), лáwv, -ovoç (Aeol.); лaιáv, -ãvoç (Dor.,
trag., Hell.).
•DIAL Myc. pa-ja-wo-ne /Paiāwonei/ [dat.].
●DER 1. лaiwv-ios ‘belonging to a paean, healing, saving' (A., S., Ar.), fem. -tác (AP),
-íç (S. E.); also -ía [f.] epithet of Athena (Paus), as a plant name ‘peony' (Thphr., Ps.-
Dsc.); лaιavídɛs [pl.] epithet of ảoɩdaí (Pi.); IIaíŋóvios = Haiwvios (API.); raiavías
[m.] 'paean-singer' (Sparta). 2. лaιшνɩкóç = лαιóνoç (Plu., Gal.), лαιανкóç 'paеan-
like' (Ath.). 3. raiŋooúvŋ. ¡atpɛía ‘medical treatmenť (H.). 4. лaiwvíšw (IA), -avišw
(Dor.) 'to strike up a paean, to worship with a paean', naiwvioµós [m.] (Th., Str., D.
H.), -σται [m.pl.] ‘guild of the paean-singers' (Rome, Piraeus, II-IIIP).
•ETYM Probably taken from the exclamation iǹ лaiηwv, iw лaιáv (as the begining of a
song). The basis is *лαιá-(F) wv like Iά(F)ovεç, KOIVά(F) wv (see "Iwvɛs and
►koɩvóc), but is otherwise unclear. Perhaps 'who heals illnesses through magic
(Apollo)', from *лаîƑα, *лаƑíã 'blow', related to лaíw 'beat'; otherwise, related to
лаúw? In origin, the word may well be Pre-Greek.
лaiлáλŋ [f.] 1. ‘fìne flour, flour dust' (Ar. Nu. 262, Apollon. Med.), 2. 'shrewd person,
crafty person' (Ar. Nu. 260). <?>
●COMP 1. dvσ-лaíлaλoç, epithet of a valley (Archil.), the waves (B.), Mount Othrus
(Nic.), etc.; 2. Svσ-odo-лαíлαλα [n.pl.] 'difficult and rugged' (A. Eu. 387, reading
uncertain); 3. лoλv-лαíлɑλoç, of the Phoenicians (0 419), of the air (Call. Fr. anon.
225).
•DER Several formally close, but semantically doubtful fomations: 1. лαɩлαλ-óεS
[adj.] 'rugged', of islands, mountains, roads (Il., epic); 2. -чµos [adj.] ‘artful, shrewd'
(Theognost., sch.); 3. -wdns ‘id.' (EM, Suid.); 4. -ɛos (meaning unknown) of ллó
'woodpecker' (Antim.). Verbs: 1. лαлаλãу· лεршσколεν, εрεʊvãv 'to look around,
inquire' (H.), лαлáληµα [n.] (Аr., Aeschin.) = лалáλη, probably enlargement; 2.
лαιлάλλεу. σεíεv 'to shake' (H.); 3. лaiлaλwoσw. tò naíšw kaì tò nаpoɩvã 'to dance
and act like a drunk' (Theognost.). лαíлɑlá τε кpηµvoús τε (Call. Dian. 194) is
probably a back-formation.
•ETYM The adjective лɑɑλóɛç, used by the epic poets as an epitheton ornans, is
most often interpreted as 'raw, steep' or 'twisted'; hence dvσ-лaíñaλoç ‘rough and
steep'. In view of the glosses лαлάλε· σεíεу 'to shake' (H.) and лαлαλáσσw
(Theognost.), лα-лαλ- could be an intensive reduplication of the root *лαλ- of
►лáλλw 'to swing, rock', thus 'be agitated' vel sim. Acc. to Tichy 1983: 306ff.,
meaning 1. is a ghost word.
лαiç, лadóç [m., f.] 'child, boy, son, slave, servant', more rarely ‘girl, daughter' (Il.).
<IE *peh₂-u- 'few, little'>>
•VAR Also лáïç (epic Lesb., Boeot.).
Talpáoow
1143
•COMP лαιб-αуwyós [m.] 'children's attendant, schoolteacher', ä-лαiç 'childless'
(IA), etc.
•DER A. Nouns. Several hypocoristic diminutives, partly replacing raïç: 1. raid-íov
[n.] (IA), -tótns [f.] ‘childhood' (Aq.), -twdns ‘childish' (D. H.). 2. diminutive raɩd-
íσкoç [m.], more usually -íokŋ [f.] (Att.), -ioki-wpóc [m.] (Sparta) ‘guard of girls'?,
-tσкápiov (Hell.), -tokɛïos (IVª), -tokɛtov 'brotheľ (Ath.). 3. лaid-ápιov (Att.) ‘little
boy', -apíσkoç (Hld.), -apídiov (gloss.), -αpíýµατα· лaιdápiα 'little boys' (H.), -apíwv
(H.), -apiwdns ‘childish' (Pl., Arist.), -apıкóç ‘belonging to slaves' (pap. VIP),
-apiɛvoµai [v.] ‘to behave childishly' (Aristox.). 4. лáïλλoç ‘male child (Tanagra). 5.
лaid-ía 'childhood' (Hp.), -tá 'child's play, pleasantry, pastime' (Att.); -twdns
'playful' (Ion Hist., Arist.). 6. лaíуviov [adj.] 'playful”, -ín [f.] ‘play'.
B. Adjectives: 1. лaɩd-vóç ‘in infancy, childish' (Od., epic). 2. лaíd-elos, -eïos, -ŋïos
'childlike' (Pi., trag., Pl.); τà -ñïα name of a festival (Delph. V--IV). 3. raid-ikóç
'concerning the child, childlike'; τå лaidiкá ‘dear' (B., Att.). 4. лaidoûç, -oñσσa
'having many children, pregnant' (Call., Hp.).
C. Verbs: 1. лaí¶w [v.] ‘to behave like a child, play' (Od.), also with έv-, e.g. ¿µnaík-
-- --μový (LXX, NT), кατα-, ovv-, etc., aoг. лañσαι, analogically also
лαчžα (Crates Com., Сtes., Hell.), лañу-µα ‘play' (E.), qiλo-лaíуμwv 'fond of playing'
(¥ 134), -μoσúvα [pl.] ‘id.' (Stesich.); лαιу-víŋ 'play' (Hdt.), -vɩýµwv ‘playfuľ (Hdt.),
-vɩov (Att.), -x-vov (Erinna, Theoc. in pap. Antin., Call.) ‘play, jesť’. Probably, лaɩу-
v- for *лaɩdv- because of an early connection with лaíšw. (ovµ-)raík-tns ‘player,
team-mate' (AP), -τpia [f.] (Ant. Lib.), (ovµ-)ñaío-tys [m.] (Pl. Min., pap.), -tɩkós
‘jocular' (Clearch.), -τpŋ [f.] ‘playground' (Herod.); ovµñaík-twp, -лaío-τwp (X.,
AP). 2. лaid-ɛúw (v.] 'to raise, breed, educate' (also with έк-, σuv-, etc.) (IA), with
лaɩd-ɛía [f.] ‘upbringing, education, breeding' (A., Democr., Att.), also 'childhood,
youth'; -ɛvoɩç [f.] ‘upbringing, education' (Pi., trag., Pl.), -εvµa 'subject, outcome of
the upbringing, pupil' (Att.), -ɛvτns 'instructor, teacher' (Pl.), -EUTIкóç 'belonging to
the upbringing' (Pl., etc.), -evtýpiov ‘school' (D. S., Str.). 3. *raɩd-ów in raid-woiç
[f.] 'adoption' (Elis).
•ETYM Disyllabic лáïç points to original *лαƑ-1-8-. The unenlarged stem is still seen
in Аtt. лаüç (vase inscr.) and in the Cypr. gen. Þɩλó-лαƑ-oç; uncertain is Cypr.
Sɩлαç, = dí-лαιç? A parallel enlargement occurs in ►лañρoç < *peh₂u-ro-, cf. Lat.
parvus 'small'. Other cognates are Lat. paucus 'few' < *peh₂u-ko-, pau-per, if from
*peh¸u-(0-)p(0)rh¸-0- 'providing little' (see de Vaan 2008 s.v.), and Go. fawai [pl.]
'few'. The appurtenance of Lat. puer <*phu-ero- 'smaller' is not certain.
лaɩoá [n.pl.]? · лλakoúvтia лapá Kwotę ‘(flat) cakes (Cos)' (Iatrocl. apud Ath. 646f.).
<?>
•ETYM Unknown.
лaιáσow [v.] mg. uncertain: 'to twitch, sway, move vehemently?'; лUкvå åл ǎλλov
È訊’ä入入ov ópuāv, ÈvlovgiaoTiKWg ĚXelv, oneÚdeav, Oopußeiv, andāv ‘to move often to
another and from another, be inspired, hasten, make noise, leap' (H.), 'to flash,
flicker?' (B 450, E 803, A. R., Q. S., Opp.); cf. ларaιчáσσε· τiváσσεɩ, ëηdã, napakɩVET

=== page 598 ===

1144
丌aiw
'shakes, leaps, stirs up', diaqáσσεv. Siapaivɛiv 'to show through', лaiлáσσovσα.
ravtì palvoµévn (B 450) ‘completely clear' (H.). <?>
•VAR Only present stem.
•COMP Rarely with έê-, nɛpɩ-.
•ETYM Probably a reduplicated intensive present, but the uncertain meaning does
not allow us to establish an etymology. See Tichy 1983: 309ff. for further suggestions.
лaíw [v.] ‘to strike, hew, thrust, hit, bump' (IA, Cret.; relatively rare in Attic prose).
<IE *ph₂u-ie/o->
•VAR Вoеot. лηw (Нdn.), aor. лаt̃σαɩ, pass. лаioðñvaι, fut. лaíʊw, -ŋow, perf.
лелАιкα, -σμα.
■COMP Often with prefix, e.g. лαрα-, àντɩ-, εv-, ouv-, úлεp-.
•DER_лaîµa [n.] 'impression' (Crete), ларалаíσµаτα [pl.] 'attacks of madness'
(Оеnom.), лараíлачµа· лαракол½ 'frenzy' (H.); άváлα-στоç struck back', [m.]
‘anapest' (com., Arist.); εµлα-στOS 'embossed, coined', -oµa [n.] 'embossment'
(Delos IIª). -στɩкǹ τέvη ‘the art of embossing' (Ath.); back-formations ¼µα-oç,
пpóσrai-os (to ¿µ-, époʊ-лaíw) ‘bursting in, suddenly' (A.).
⚫ETYM All Greek forms are based on the present лαíw. Cognate forms: Lat. paviō, -īre
'to thump, pound, strike' (<*phu-ie/o-), Lith. pjauti 'to cut' (3s. pjáuna), Latv. pļaût
'to mow, harvest' < *peh,u- (or *pieh₂-u-). LIV² follows Hackstein 1992: 161 and
reconstructs a pres. *pi(e)h₂-u-ie/o-, which would have lost the first *į due to
dissimilation (LIV²) or simple phonetic loss (Hackstein). The development may have
been *pihu-i̟- > *phu-i-, the absence of laryngeal metathesis being due to the
following *į instead of a stop. Perhaps connected with the group of ToB pyakar [3pl.]
'they struck down', Gr. ►лταíш 'to hit', TOAB putk- ‘to divide', Lat. putāre ‘to prune
(trees)'.
лaλáðŋ [f.] ‘cake made of preserved fruits' (Hdt. 4, 23, Thphr., LXX). ◄PG(V)►
⚫DER Diminutive лaλað-íç [f.] (Ph. Bel., Str.), -tov [n.] (Polem. Hist.), лαλáσ-iov (Ar.
Pax 574; v.l. -Otov); adj. -wdns (Dsc.).
•ETYM Has often been connected with ►Äλáσow ‘to kneaď' < *лλαð-, but the latter
requires a preform in *pld, whereas лαλá-Оŋ would have to reflect word-initial
*plh₂-e-. If this line is followed, it can be compared with лаλá-µη, лаλα-στý, ‘flat of
the hand, etc.'; the word лéλα-voç 'dough, pulp' could show the full grade of the root
in *pelh₂-n-, and the PIE root would be *plh₂- 'to hit', whence the roots *plh2g/k- in
LIV² may derive. However, the semantics of this etymology are not compelling, of
course. Alternatively, лаλáеη could reflect a loanword. Fur.: 259 cites raláσia · tả
ovykɛkoµµéva oñka. kaì diả toñ е лαλáðɩα ‘harvested figs, also лαλáðα with -0-’
(H.); the variation 0/ σ could point to a Pre-Greek word.
лáλai [adv.] ‘of old, formerly, long ago, bygone, earlier' (Il.). ◄IE *plh₂- ‘?’►
●DIAL Myc.pa-ra-jo /palaios/.
.
•COMP лαλαι-уεvýs ‘born long ago, of high age' (Il.), έк-лαλαι ‘long since, long ago'
(Hell.).
•DER лαλαóç 'old, ancient, former' (Il.), лαλαι-óτηs ‘age, antiquity' (Att.), -óoμaι,
-ów [v.] 'to grow old, make old, declare archaic' (Hp., Pl., Arist.); hence лαλaí-wσiç
ra入áoow
1145
[f.] ‘aging' (Hp., LXX, Str.), -wµata [pl.] ‘antiquity' (LXX). Compar. лaλaí-tɛpoç,
-τατоç (Рi.), also лaλαió-τɛpoç († 788), -τατоç (Pl.).
⚫ETYM Formation like xaμαí, лаpαí, except for the accent. A frozen case-form,
perhaps originally a dative. The Mycenaean form precludes a labio-velar, and points
to *plh₂-ei; see Chadwick Glotta 54 (1976): 68-70. Thus, the earlier connection with
►THE 'far away, far' <*k"- must be abandoned.
naλaíw [v.] ‘to wrestle, survive a wrestling match' (Il.). ◄?►
⚫VAR Aeol. -aчui, Boeot. -w (Hdn. Gr.); aor. -añoa, -aɩσðñvaι, fut. -aíσw.
•COMP Аlso лрoσ-, kata-, σvv-.
•DER 1. IIaλaiµwv, -ovoç [m.] ‘wrestler, only as the name of a sea-god and an epithet
of Heracles (E., Call., Lyc., inscr.); from 'wrestler' were derived лααчov-é [v.]
‘wrestle' (Pi.) and лɑλɑï(σ)µo-σúvò ‘art of wrestling' (Hom., Simon.). 2. лálai-oµa
'wrestling, bout in wrestling, trick' (IA), 3. -σiç [f.] 'prize fight' (Ptol.); 4. -στńs
'wrestler', fighter' (0 246), -σTIкÓç belonging to wrestling, to the wrestler' (Arist.); 5.
-στpā [f.] 'wrestling school, gymnasium, arena' (IA) with -στрídiov, -otpitηs,
-σtpikós, -σtpiałoç. The noun лáλη [f.] 'wrestling, wrestling match' (Il.) is a back-
formation, hence ȧvτí-лαλoç [m.] 'rival, opponent' (Pi., IA), Svσ-лαλns 'hard to
beat' (Pi.; with transition to the s-stems) et al. Similarly, diañáλ-ŋ [f.] (Pln.) from
Siα-лaλaíw (Ar., Ph.).
•ETYM One could derive 'wrestle' from 'rock, sway', and connect лaλaíw with
►лáλλw, for which a root *plh,- has been suggested. Gr. лaλaíw may be a recent
enlargement of a stem *лaλα- (cf. kɛpaíw: kɛpá-σai), but there is no way to arrive at
a sequence лаλα- from a preform *plh,-. Alternatively, one could connect лíλvaα
'to approach' < *plh₂- (semantics: 'to make close contact' > 'wrestle'), and posit a
zero-grade verbal formation *plh₂-e-> лαλα-. However, since no synchronic traces.
of such a verbal stem remain, this remains hypothetical.
лaλáµŋ [f.] ‘(flat) hand, device, means, function' (II.). <IE *plh₂-(e)m- 'hand'>
•COMP Svσ-лáλapos 'mischievous, helpless' (A. [lyr.]).
•DER лάλαчuç (cod. -íç). τɛxvíτηç лapà τoïç Σaλauviois 'craftsman (Salam.)' (H.),
лaλaµç [f.] ‘mole' (Alex. Trall.). Denominative лaλαµ-áοµαι, -ýσãσðaɩ ‘to handle,
perform, plan' (Alc., E., Ar., X.) also лαλaμñσas. τexváσas, έpyάσas having
wrought, produceď (H.), -ŋua [n.] 'performance, plan' (Com. Adesp., Ael.).
Furthermore άлáλαμvоç (also à-лáλаµоç) 'without hand', 'unadept, helpless,
indeliberate, inconsiderate' (E 597); лаλauvaiоç 'who does sth. with his own hand',
euphemistically 'murderous, murderer' (trag.); both from *лáλαµα [n.].
⚫ETYM Related to Lat. palma [f.] 'flat hand', OHG folma, OIr. lám ‘hand', all with an
old zero grade m-derivation (*plh2-m-) of a lost verb for 'spread out'. Greek requires
*plh2-em-; cf. Beekes 1975: 10ff. Other derivations of the same verb have been
suspected in ►´alaσtý and ►лéλayoç; see also' ►лελavos, ▶лλáσow, and ►ëλaváw,
as well as ►εлɩлoλñç.
лаλáσσoμаι [v.] 'to draw lots'. →лáλλw.
naláσow [v.] ‘to besprinkle, stain, tainť (Il.). ◄?►

=== page 599 ===

1146
•VAR Fut. inf. лaλažéµɛv, perf. ptc. лεлαλαуµévоç, plpf. лɛлáλaкτo.
•COMP εμ-лαλáσσoμа 'to be tampered, be entangled' (Hdt., Th.), žuлαλážai.
εμлλεαι 'to entwine' (H.), with µлαλáуµατα [pl.] ‘entanglements, embracements'
(A. Supp. 296).
•Der ráλažiç [f.] ‘sprinkling' = ‘priming' (Epid. IIIª).
ETYM Possibly connected with лáλλw 'to swing', though this verb itself has no
certain etymology. One would have to posit a Proto-Greek root *pal- with the suffix
-áσow, also found e.g. in στaλáσow, aiµáσow, et al.
лaλaotý [f.] ‘surface of the hand, breadth of four fingers' (IA). <PG(V)►
•VAR -áσta (Aeol.), -αɩστń (Hp., Arist., pap., perhaps secondary after лaλaiw?), also
-alστnc [m.] (LXX, Hero); after μετρητηs, etc.
•COMP τρι-лάλα(1) σTOS 'measuring three handbreadths' (IA, Hell.).
•DER лαλα(1)στ-laïoç 'measuring a handbreadth' (IA, Hell.).
⚫ETYM Frisk derives this noun from the same verb for 'spread out' as ➤лaλáµŋ, with
a suffix -st-. However, the word rather seems Pre-Greek, as is confirmed by the
variation σ/ 10 (which probably points to a palatal *s³); cf. Fur.: 296.
лаλɛúш [v.] 'to act as a decoy, lure into, tempt' (Ar. Av., Ph., Plu.). <PG?>
•DER лαλεvταí. oi τà λíva iστ@vτεç, oiç τà Оŋрíα лаλεúεται 'those setting up the nets
by which animals are trapped (H.), -ɛutiкóv (cod. лat-). Oŋpevtikóv ‘related to
hunting' (H.), -εvtá. tà Xíva oỉs tà Oŋpía áλioketal ‘nets by which wild animals are
caught' (Phot.), -εúτpiα [f.] 'decoy bird' (Eub., Arist.), -ɛvτpíç [f.] (Phot.), -εvμa 'bait,
lure' (anon. apud Greg. Cor., p. 1017 Schaefer).
⚫ETYM A technical word, probably Pre-Greek.
лaλέw [v.]<PG?>
•VAR Only in the aor.opt. лαλýσɛɛ, said of a fleet which cannot fight (Hdt. 8,21), ind.
лáŋσε. ápη 'to destroy' and perf. лεлαληкévαɩ· έклεσεt̃у 'to fall out',
nenadŋuévai. ßɛßλашévα 'who are disabled or hindered' (H.); furthermore (as if
from лáλλw) лεñadµévos. ßεßλɑµµévos, αppos yɛyovás 'disabled; who has got
dislocated joints' (H.), лεлaλкévai λéyetai tò èknínteiv tà rλoĩa ‘suffer shipwreck'
(Phot.).
--
•DER έклαλýs ‘dislocated' (Hp., H.), ¿клαλéw (v.] 'to dislocate, disjoint' (Hp.),
έknáλŋoiç, -ɛia [f.] 'dislocation' (medic.).
•ETYM If Frisk's proposal is correct viz. that the rare simplex could be a
backformation from έклαλéw, a denominative of εклαληç ‘jumped out', which in
turn was from from έк-лάλλоμαi 'to jut out' (see лáλλw 'to sway, rock') -- then this
entire lemma is secondary. Only the forms лεлαλµévoç and лεлαλкévαɩ must be
older. Fur.: 149 connects these words with glosses in Baλ-, and with the root Blaß-,
which could show that the word is Pre-Greek.
лáλŋ 1 [f.] 'wrestling match'. →лaλaíw.
лáλη 2 [f.] 'fine flour, fine dust' (Hp., medic., Pherecr.). <?>
•DER лάλŋuα [n.] ‘id.' (Nic.), -ŋµáτioν (Ar.Fr. 682). Reduplicated лαɩлáλŋ; perhaps
tо лаλáσσш and лαλúvw.
Ta入入Lxiap
=
1147
•ETYM Has been derived from лáλλw 'to swing, rock' 'to sieve flour', which is
conceivable but not compelling. Alternatively, one could connect лáλŋ with Lat.
pollen 'flour, powder' < *pol(H)-, Gr. ►ñóλíoç, Lat. puls, -ltis ‘kind of porridge' <
*polt-.
лάλɩv [adv.] ‘backwards, reverse; again; anew' (II.). <IE *k"lH-i- ‘turn'>
•VAR Also лáλɩ (Hell. poet.).
•COMP As a second member in originally prepositional expressions like žμ-лαλv
'reversely, on the contrary', ȧvá-лαλiv 'backwards, aback' with άvaлαλεúw [v.] 'to
take back, cancel (pap.). Very often as a first member, e.g. лaλív-opσos (see
►öppos), naλíwžiç [f.] ‘pursuit, counterattack' (Il., App.) < *лaλi-fiwğıç, where radɩ-
was formed after other first members in -t.
•ETYM Frozen accus. of a noun *лáλiç ‘turning, turn' (from лελoμai; see also
►лáλαɩ), which may first have been used as an accus. of content in cases like лáλɩv
lévai, Baívɛiv, didóval. See Dihle Glotta 83 (1985): 7-14 on the mg. of лaλíwĘıç: it may
be a technical term used in chariot fighting during the second millennium, from
Tá入LV FlÓKELv.
лаλíovρoç [m.] plant name, 'Christ's thorn, Paliurus australis' (Thphr., Theocr.).
<PG?>
ETYM A connection with oúpá ‘tail' makes little sense, nor it is to be taken with
opov ‘urine' (thus DELG). The word is most probably Pre-Greek (cf. Dihle Glotta
51 (1973): 270f.); see ► лáуovpoç.
лaλλaкý [ƒ.] ‘concubine' (IA, Hell.). <PG?►
•VAR лаλλaкíç (Hom., X., Hell.).
•DER лαλλaк-íðɩov (Plu.), -ĭvos [m.] 'son of a concubine' (Sophr.), -ía (also -ɛía to
-εúw) 'concubinage' (Is., Str.); -εúоμα, -εúw [v.] 'to take as a concubine, be a
concubine' (Hdt., Str., Plu.). A probable back-formation is лáλλα [f.], also [m.]
'youth' (gramm.), -áкlov = μεрáкioν boy' (Pl. Com., Ael. Dion.), лаλλaкóç
εpúμεvos (εppшμévos cod.) 'eromenos' (H.), Phot.; лάλλη [m.] (Samos III--IIª, Ar.
Вуz.), лαλληкáριov (pap., written. --), MоGг. лαλλnкápt. A different suffix is found.
in лáλλãç, -ɑvτoç [m.] 'youth' (Philistid.; after yiyaç). Athena's epithet Пaλλáç,
-ádoc [f.] (Il.) is isolated; among the Greeks in Thebes (Egypt), it functions as a
sacral term for ‘girl'; -ádiov 'statue of Pallas', originally 'doll, female idol' (Hdt., Ar.,
inscr.).
ETYM The word may well be Pre-Greek, with a suffix -ak-. Similarly, Levin General
Linguistics 23 (1983): 191-197 regards Latin paelex 'mistress' as a loanword from a
Mediterranean language, maybe a Semitic one, in view of Hebr. plgš /pi(y)leyeš/
'concubine'. The remaining connections that have been proposed, particularly those
with Ir. airech, gen. airige [f.] 'concubine', Avestan pairikā [f.] 'witch', MP parik,
MoP pari < PIr. *parīkā, should all be dismissed for formal or semantic reasons.
лaλλávtɩov [n.] kind of grass (Hippiatr. 66). <?>
ETYM Fur.: 344 comparеs áлоλávτIov 'id.', but the analysis of the latter is unknown.
ña\\ɩxíap [n.] · ñreµµátióv ti rapà Aάкwσɩ ‘small cake (Lacon.)' (H.). <PG?►

=== page 600 ===

1148
ra入入Ú tas
⚫ETYM DELG suggests a compound of лāv and λɛíxw (after Bourguet 1927: 148¹), but
it may rather be a Pre-Greek word.
лallútaç [?] öpyavov Baσavioτý piov instrument of torture' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM From лãν and ►λúw?
лάλλw [v.] ‘to sway, rock, draw lots', med. 'to vault', also ‘to jump, hop'. <?►
•var Aor. ëñλaɩ (Il.), med. лýλaσðaɩ (Call.), лáλão (áv-, кat-éñaλto), reduplicated
аμ-лεлαλóу (Нom.; see below on лεлáλ-εσеε, -éσðαt, if for -aσ0ɛ, -áσðaι or -axε,
-áx¤ai), aor. pass. àvα-лaλɛíç (Str.), perf. med. ïéñaλµai (A.).
■COMP Also ava- (aμ-). As a second member in έууεσ-, σαкéσ-лαλoç 'swaying the
spear, shield' (II.).
●DER 1. лáλoç [m.] ‘(shaken) lot' (Sapph., Hdt., trag.), äµñaλos [m.] 'fresh casting'
(of the lot, Pi.); avaлáðŋ [f.] name of a dance (Ath.); 2. лaλtóv [n.] ‘javelin' (A., X.),
¿лáλtaža ‘threw the javelin' (H.), лaλtós [adj.] (S.); 3. ñaλµós [m.] ‘vibration,
pulsation' (Hp., Arist., Epicur.), -wdns ‘full of vibrations' (Hp.); лadµatías oɛioµós
'heavy earthquake' (Arist.); 4. лáλσis (ává-, àлó-) [f.] 'pulsation, etc.' (Arist.,
Epicur.). Intensive verb лα-лáλλаv 'to shake' (H.). A velar enlargement seems to be
present in *лaλáσooµai, renálaxße, -áxðaι (H 171, 1 331); these difficult perfects
must perhaps be read as reduplicated aor. -ɛσ0ε, -éσbai.
⚫ETYM The forms лάλτо and back-formed лáλλoμαi arose through metanalysis of
the compounds кat-εл-αλão, àv-εл-aλτo, which belong to äλoµai ‘to jump', as
containing augmented έ-лαλão. The remaining forms show a common basis лaλ-
(pres., reduplicated aor., etc.). In LIV², Gr. лαλ- 'to swing' is connected with Slavic
material such as Sln. pláti, 1sg. póljem 'to surge, let seethe', as well as Gr. ►лɛɛµí™w
and ►лóλɛµoç. The root would be PIE *pelh,-, whence a nasal present *pl-n-h,-e/o- >
Gr. лá-ε/o- (with similar phonetics as in þáλλw), and a reduplicated aorist *pe-
plh-e/o-> лεлαλ-ε/o-. This analysis is possible in theory, but note that there is no
independent evidence for лáλλw continuing a nasal present. Thus, everything
remains uncertain. Alternatively, we could be dealing with a different, Proto-Greek
stem *pal-, to which лaλúvw and лаλáσσw could belong as well. The appurtenance
of лóλɛμoç is semantically uncompelling. The noun лáλoç is probably deverbal, as
the meaning suggests. See лαλaiw.
náλµvs, -vdos, -vv [m.] ‘king' (Hippon., A. Fr. 437 = 623 M., Lyc., AP 15, 25), also PN
of a Trojan (N792). <LW Lyd.>
•ETYM Originally a Lydian word (Lyd. qaλmλus).
лáλoç [m.] 'lot'. →лáλλw.
лãλoç [m.] 'gladiator'. <LW Lat.>>
•ETYM From Lat. pālus ‘stake', a gladiator's rank.
лαλúvш [v.] 'to sprinkle flour; to besprinkle with flour, dust, snow, etc.' (II.). <GR>
•VAR Аoг. лaλñvai.
•COMP Rarely with aчo-, diα-, блερ-.
návenp,npos
1149
⚫ETYM Either a direct derivative of лáλŋ 2 'fine flour' or from an unattested u-stem
*pal-u- 'flour'.
ñaµлýdŋv [adv.] ‘wholly, throughouť³, = лáµëav (Thgn., A., S.). ◄GR▷
•VAR -ŋdóv, -ŋdovic (Theognost.).
•ETYM Transformation of лáμлav after the adverbs in -dηy, -ηdóv. See ▶έµäns.
naµqaívw [v.] ‘to shine brightly, radiate' (Il., epic). ◄ GR➤
●VAR Only present; iterative лaшqaívɛoke (Eratosth.).
●DER лaµqavówv, -ówσa, -ówvτa [ptc.], as if from *raµqaváw.
•ETYM Reduplicated intensive of qaívw.
raµqaláw [v.] 'to gaze around in astonishment' (Hippon., Anacr., Herod.),
έnaµpáλnoev. ¿ðaúµiaoe, nepießléyaτo 'wondered, gazed around' (H.). <PG?(V)►
•ETYM Reduplicated intensive in -áw. Frisk assumes that it represents a dissimilation
of *paλ-pal-áw, probably from qaλós 'white' (H.; see palaкpós), with the same
semantic development as assumed for λɛUкós 'white' > Aɛúσow 'to look'. Fur. 161
equatеs лаuqаλáw with лалταλáoμa 'to look around' (Lyc.), assuming Pre-Greek
origin.
náµqi [adv.] navτáлaσι ‘altogether' (H.). <GR➤
•ETYM An instrumental in -qt, derived from лãv [n.] ‘all’?
Пáv [m.] pastoral god from Arcadia (h. Hom., Pi., Hdt.). <IE? *peh₂us->
⚫VAR Case forms Пa-vóc, -ví; Пáovi (Arc. VIª); plur. Пāvɛç (Ar.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutive Ilavíσкos (Cic.); 2. Пávios 'belonging to Pan' (A. Fr. 98 = 143
M.), tov [n.] 'sanctuary of Pan' (Epid. III), -ɛtov [n.] ‘id.' (Str.), τå Ilávɛiα 'festival
of Pan' (Delos IIIª), fem. IIaviás (Nonn.); 3. Пavкóç ‘id.' (Hell.); 4. Ilavaστai
[m.pl.] ‘worshippers of Pan' (Rhod., Perg.; like Алoλλwvaσtaí etc.; IIavotaí conj.
in Men. Dysc. 230); 5. лavɛúw ‘to treat in the manner of Pan' (Heracl. Paradox.).
•ETYM Often identified with Skt. Pūṣán- [m.] ‘god who protects and augments the
herds', assuming an IE ablauting paradigm *pehus- (> PGr. *pauh-on-> IIáv) /
*phus (> Skt. Pūs-án-), derived from PIE root *peh₂- 'to protect'. Doubts by
Mayrhofer EWAia 2 s.v.
лavdoúpa, -doñpa [f.] three-stringed lute (Euph. apud Ath. 183f., Poll.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR лávdovpos (Euph. l.c., inscr. Seleucia ad Calycadnum), qávdoupos (Nicon.
Harm. 4).
⚫DER -Soúpiov, -Soupis (H.), -Soupíšw, -dovpiστns.
•ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word. Hübschmann 1897: 395 compares Arm. p'andir,
Oss. fændur, and Georg. panțuri.
лávеηρ, -ηpos [m.] 'panther' (Hdt., X., Arist.). <LW Orient.>>
•COMP AUкO-лάvenpos [m.] 'wolf-panther' (Hdn. Epim.).
⚫DER Diminutive -ηpioкos (Hero).
⚫ETYM Foreign word of Oriental origin. Compare Skt. (lex.) puṇḍarika- [m.] ‘tiger'; if
connected with лápalıç, one might consider original *лápoŋp, which was

=== page 601 ===

1150
nāvós
changed to лávеηp by folk-etymological association with лāv 'all' and Oŋpáw 'to
hunt'. See Fur.: 19033.
лavós [m.] 'torch' (A. Ag. 284 [codd. pav-], S. Fr. 184, E. Ion 195 and 1294 [codd.
лταν-], Men.). <PG?(V)►
•ETYM_Unexplained. Fur.: 318 thinks the word may be Pre-Greek because of the
variant with ëɩ-.
лаvσždí (-εí) [adv.] 'rushing in collectively or jointly, with the entire army' (Th.,
Pherecr., X.). GR>
•VAR Also лⱭσσ-.
•DER -Sín (II., A. R.), -Sía (E., X.) ‘id.', also in a great hurry', -Síny (EM, H.); -Sóv
'together' (Nonn.); denominativе лασ<σ>vdiá¢w [v.] 'to assemble' (Cyme; imperial
period).
•ETYM Compound of лáv and ►σεúoμai (aor.3sg. σúτo), with the adverbial suffix -Sí,
etc.
ñávv→ñãç.
лáž [adv.] ‘enough, well' (Men., Diph., Herod.). <GR➤
⚫ETYM Probably from ►лýуvvµ, лaуñvaɩ, with adverbial -s like in ► ära§.
лažaµāç [m.] ‘biscuit'. <?>
•DER našaµítŋs, nažaµídov (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Allegedly from the name of a baker, Пážaμoç (Gal., Suid.).
лαлαч [adv.] exclamation of pain and astonishment (IA). <ONOM>
•VAR On the accent see Hdn. Gr. 2, 933.
•DER лaлaιáž (Ar., E., Luc.); redupl. лñañañañaï (Ar. Th. 1191).
ETYM Nursery word.
лάллǎ [m.voc.] ‘papa!' (( 57, etc.) <ONOM>
•VAR Accus. -ǎv.
•СомР лро-лаллое 'great-grandfather, proavus' (Att.), εлí-лαллоç 'great-
grandfather, abavus, forebear in general' (Jul., Lib., Poll.).
•DER лάллоç 'grandfather, ancestor' (IA), 'down (on seeds, on the chin)', name of an
unknown bird; лαлл-доç ‘ancestral' (Ar.), -Iкóç ‘id.' (pap. IIP), -wdns 'fluffy'
(Thphr.). Denominativеs лαлл-áСw (E 408, Q. S.), -iw (Ar.) [v.] 'to say papa, call
papa', -aσµós [m.] ‘calling out “papa” (Suid.); hypocoristic лaлë-íã, -ídıov (Ar.).
Fully inflected: лáлαç, -αv, -α (Hell.).
⚫ETYM Reduplicated nursery word
лáлpaž, -akos [m., f.] name of a fish in the Thracian lake Prasias (Hdt. 5, 16).
<PG?(S)►
•ETYM Has been connected with лépêŋ ‘perch³, лɛpêvós ‘spotted', or explained as
onomatopoeic after the supposed sound of the fish; cf. ßaßpáčεiv 'to chirp'. The
word may be Pre-Greek (suffix -ak-).
лantaívw [v.] ‘to look around, glance at sth.' (II.). <PG?►
5
nápavta, -Tá
•VAR Аoг. лαлτñvαɩ, also -āvαι (Pi.), fut. -avέw.
•COMP Rarely with ȧло-, dα-, лερɩ-.
1151
•DER лεлτĤναç· лεpißλɛчáµεvos looking around' (Н.); лалταλáμεvoç (Lyc.).
•ETYM Intensive reduplicated formation лα-лɩ-αívw. Could be connected with
лéτo̟μαι to fly, assuming the image of a restless gaze, but this is hardly compelling.
No good IE etymology. Other forms which have been connected: some Cypriot
glosses from H., such as члáτov. µßov. Пáqo looked at (Paph.)',
¡νкαлάταоу. укаτáßλɛчov 'id.', etc. (see Frisk s.v.).
лáñūpos [m., f.] 'papyrus shrub, linen, paper' (Thphr., Dsc., pap.). <LW➤
•DER Diminutive лaлúp-ιov [n.] (Dsc.), -(ε)óv [m.] ‘bed of papyrus' (Aq., inscr.);
-voc [adj.] 'made of papyrus' (Delos IIª, Plu., pap.), -кóç ‘'id.' (pap.), -wdns (Gal.,
sch.).
⚫ETYM Loanword of unknown origin. Note that Pre-Greek has a suffix -up-.
лápα [adv., prep.] 'besides, by; from, next to, alongside, against' (Il.). <IE *prh₂,
*preh₂- 'beside, by'>
•VAR With gen., dat., acc. Also ларá, epic also лаpαí (Пapαι-ßáτāç in dial. inscr.),
non-IA mostly ráp.
•DIAL Myc.pa-ro.
•ETYM Discussion by García Ramón 1997: 47-62. For Indo-European, he
distinguishes *prh₂- ‘at the front, beside', with a loc. *preh₂-i, also *pr- ‘id.' and *pres-
in лρéσẞuç. Beside these, there is also a gen.-abl. *prh2-es > лápоç, and finally, *pro
and pro-h, 'to the front'.
The words лαpаí, лар, and лαрá are synonymous; ларαí maу derive from *preh₂-i
with analogical *pr-. The word лαрá lost the meaning 'forward' to лpó. See ▸лápoç,
›ñépa, ▶ñépi, ►ñρív, ►лpó, and ►лρóç.
ларαуaúdηç [m.] 'garment with purple border' (Lyd. Mag. 1, 17; 2, 4). <LW OP>
•VAR лapaya̸das (cod. лapaya̸yas) ‘a Parthian garment' (H.).
•DER лαрαуaúdov (POxy. 1026, 12; VP; Ed. Diocl.).
•ETYM A loanword from Old Persian; see R. Schmitt Glotta 49 (1971): 107-110.
лаpádɛiσoç [m.] 'enclosed park with animals' (X.), 'garden' (LXX, Hell., pap., inscr.),
'garden of Eden' (LXX), 'abode of the blessed, paradise' (NT). <LW Pers.>>
⚫ETYM Loanword from Av. pairi-daēza- [m.] 'enclosure', MIran. *pardēz, MoP pālēz
'garden'. Iranian *daiźa- is cognate with Gr. ►τɛixoç, from the IE root *d¹eigh-.
ларакλavσíðupov 'lover's complaint sung at his mistresses's door, serenade' (Plu.).
<GR➤
•ETYM Univerbation of лapα-, кλañσɩç, and ¤úpα (Leroy 1969: 223-237).
лараσáууηç [m.] Persian length measure (Hdt., X.). <LW OP>
ETYM From OP; cf. MP frasang, MoP farsang. The view that ларασάyyn was used
in the meaning 'äyyɛλoç' is probably due to a misunderstanding (Pearson on S. fr.
520).
лápavta, -tá [adv.] ‘immediately' (Aesch., D).

=== page 602 ===

1152
rapavidázw
nápvoy
1153
•ETYM From лαð² αʊτà τà лрáуµaτa.
rapayıdášw [v.] 'to spatter' (Hippon. 92 M.).
⚫ETYM Masson cites Coppola, who adduced чídɛç. чrádɛç, yakádɛç ‘drops, drops of
rain' (H.). See víčoµai.
➤
лapdakós [adj.] ‘wet, damp' (Archil., Semon., Ar. Pax 1148); лápτačov (-ľov cod.).
Üypavov. Aάкwvɛç 'wetting' (?) (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR V.ll. лop-, -dokóç.
•ETYM The variations a/o and S/T show that the word is Pre-Greek. Fur. 241 further
adduces apdw 'to irrigate' < *å-Fápdw (Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 29f,
Neumann 1961: 91); he also compares Basque forms.
ñápdalıç, -10g, -ɛws [f.] ‘panther, leopard' (Il.); also name of a fish of prey (Ael.,
Opp.), of a bird, perhaps 'red-backed shrike, Lanius' (Arist. [-λoc], H.). <LW?>
•VAR Also лóρб-.
•COMP лapdaλń-popos borne by a panther' (S. Fr. 11), kaµñλo-лápdaλıç [f.] ‘giraffe'
(Agatharch., LXX).
•DER лapdal-éŋ, -έa, -ñ [f.] ‘pelt of a panther' (II.), -ta [n.pl.] ‘panthers' (Arist.),
-ɩdɛú ‘young panther' (Eust.), -ε(1) 0$ 'belonging to the panther, panther-like'
(Arist.), -wŋs (Ath.), -wτóç ‘spotted like a panther' (Luc.); лápdos [m.] ‘panther'
(Ael. NA 1,31 [v.l. лápdaλoç]); as a second member in ►λɛóлapdoç.
•ETYM Loanword from an unknown Oriental source; compare several Iranian words
for 'panther, leopard', e.g. Sogd. pwrônk, Pashto präng, MoP palang, and Skt.
pŕdāku panther'. Gr. лáрdoç might be a back-formation from Lat. pardus (Lucan).
H.'s statement that лóрбαλiç is male, лáрбaλıç female probably represents a
secondary distinction. For the suffix, compare dάualis and, more remotely,
кvádaλov, ěτalov, aλoç, et al. Seе ►лávеŋp.
лаpɛiαí [f.pl.] 'cheeks' (II.). <IE *heus- 'ear'>
•VAR Rarely sing. -tá (trag.), for -ɩă (cf. ȧyvɩaí to sing. -tă)? Aeol. лapañaɩ [pl.]
(Theoc. 30, 4 [cod. -aúlais], Hdn.). Furthermore лαр½ïov [n.] (also plur. -a)
'cheek(s), bridle' (Hom.; Ceos Va?).
•DIAL Myc. pa-ra-wa-jo [du.] ‘bridle'?
•COMP кαλλɩ-лápɲos (-10s, -elos) ‘having fair cheeks' (Il.), µαλo-лápavos (Aeol.) =
λɛvкo-лápɛios (Theoc., H.; literally 'having apple-colored cheeks'), εv-ñápaoç = εv-
лáрεɩos (Pi.).
●DER 1. лapŋïç, -ídos (-ýs, -ñdoc) [f.] ‘cheek' (trag., AP); 2. napɛiás (-ŋïác), -ádos [f.]
‘cheek, cheek band' (Hell. epic, medic.); 3. лapɛías (öqıç) [m.] ‘kind of snake' (after
the light spots on both sides of the neck; Att.); also лapoúaç (Apollod. apud Ael.;
after ovç).
ETYM From PGr. *par-aws-a, *par-aws-iio- 'that which is next to the ears', a
compound of лapá and the (original) e-grade of ous, either with or without a suffix
-10-. The Greek words present some phonetic problems; cf. the discussion in DELG,
Forssman 1966: 153, Ruijgh 1967a: $32, and especially Peters 1980a: 295ff. on the
question whether a separate form *par-aws-ijā should be assumed.
:
лapńopos [m.] ‘(horse) in the same harness' (II.), metaph. 'walking beside the track,
irrational', also ‘outstretched, sprawling' (through false interpretation of II 471?). ◄IE
*huer- 'bind, connect, hang'>
•VAR Also -áάopos (A. Pr. 363; v.l. -ń-), -apoc (Theoc. 15, 8), -wpos (Tryph., AP).
•DER A rhythmic byform is лapŋópios ‘driven out of course', of a ship (A. R.),
'irrational' (AP). Thencе лаpηopíaι [f.pl.] 'side-traces' (Il.), metaphorically 'outlying
reaches of a river' (Arat. 600); лαрηpía (for -ŋopía?). µwpía ‘folly' (H.).
•ETYM Verbal noun of лap-aɛipw; see ▸ȧɛípw 2.
лapłέvoç [f.] ‘virgin, girl, young woman' (Il.). <IE? *psteno- 'breast'>
•VAR Also лаpσέvos (Ar.).
•СOMP лαρеεv-oлĩлa (А 385), see ►óðɩлeúw; kaλλɩ-nápеɛvoç ‘having fair virgins, of
a beautiful virgin' (E.).
●DER A. Nominal: 1. Diminutive лаpеεv-íσкη, -tσкápιov (Hdn. Gr., gloss.); 2.
лαреévioç (analogical -ɛoç, -ñïoç) 'vestal' (II.); 3. -tкń [f.] 'maiden' (II.), -tкóç 'vestaľ'
(LXX, D. S.); 4. -tov, -ɩkóv, -íç names of several plants, ‘artemisia' et al. (Hp., Dsc.); 5.
-wdns 'vestal' (St. Byz.); 6. -tavós 'born under the sign of Virgo' (Astr.); 7. -íaç [m.]
'son of a maiden' (Arist., Str.); 8. -óv (-ɛwv AP, etc.), -wvos [m.] 'bower', usually the
name of the temple of Athene лареévoç (Аtt.). 9. лapеɛvía (-ɛía), -in 'virginity'
(Sapph., Pi.).
=
B. Verbs: 1. лapеεvεúoµai, -w (also with àño-, dɩα-, ¿ê-) [v.] ‘to be a maiden, treat as
a maiden' (Ion., A., E.), -ɛvµa [n.] ‘maiden's work, son of a maiden' (E.), -evois [f.]
-ía (Luc.), -ɛía 'id.' (E.). 2. ȧло-лаpеεvów [v.] 'to deflower' (LXX).
⚫ETYM Klingenschmitt 1974 proposed a reconstruction *pr-steno- 'having protruding
breasts', with a development of *-rst- to -p0-. The -σ- in Ar. is the Laconian
development of 0. Though one might expect *pro- or *pra-, the development to PGr.
*parsteno- is considered acceptable. For *steno-, cf. Skt. stána-, Arm. stin; however,
note that the original form was probably *psteno-, as proven by YAv. fštāna- ‘breast,
ǝrǝduua-fšni- 'having firm breasts' <*-pstn-ih,-.
Пapvão(σ)ós [m.] mountain chain in Phocis (Pi., Od., Hdt.). ◄ PG(S,V)►
•VAR Epic Ion. -ŋσ(0)ós.
•ETYM Acc. to ancient sources (St. Byz., EM. sch. A. R.), the older name of the
mountain was Aapvaσσóç. It clearly contains a Pre-Greek suffix; note the
interchange σo/σ. Beekes JIES 37 (2009): 191-197 explains the phoneme σσ/ττ from
Pre-Greek *k”.
лáрvoч [m.] 'grasshopper' (Ar.). ◄ PG(V)►
•VAR Aeol. Boeot. (Str. 13, 1, 64) лópvoy, also kópvoy (Str. l.c.), gen. -oлoç. We also
find the variants лpavú. àкpídoç εɛldoç ‘kind of grasshopper', and кápvoç. µεуáλŋ
ȧkpíç 'big grasshopper' (both H., see Fur.: 344, 388).
•DER Паруóлоç (-лíwv) Алóλλwv (Paus., Str.), who protects against grasshoppers;
Koрvoлíwv, gen. -wvos, epithet of Heracles in Oitaia (Str.); thence the Aeolic month
name Пoрvóлoç, -лíwv (Cyme, Str:). Also коруóлideç. kwvwreç ‘gnats, mosquitos'
(H.).

=== page 603 ===

1154
napolia
ETYM The formation is reminiscent of Spúoy, σкáλow, and other animal names;
-ол- is a Pre-Greek suffix. Given the vacillation in the form of the word, it is unlikely
that л- and к- are due to a simple dissimilation. Probably the word had an initial
labiovelar stop in Pre-Greek, the labial element of which could have been lost before
o. The o itself may reflect a after a labiovelar.
лapoчua [f.] 'proverb, saying' (Att., etc.), also 'incidental remark' (Herod. 2, 61),
'comparison' (Ev. Jo.). <GR>
•Der napoiµiwdns ‘proverbial' (Plu.), -takóç ‘id.”, also name of a meter (Plu., Heph.);
-iá Goquan, -w [v.] 'to speak in proverbs' (Pl., Arist.).
•ETYM An abstract from лáp-oчµos 'by the road, neighbor' or лаð² oi̟µov, oľµŋv;
semantically unclear. Traditionally derived from olμos 'course, way', e.g. by H.:
'proverb which is spoken along the road (cf. лápoчoç ‘neighbor', лαpoiµwoavtes
'turned aside from the road'). Alternatively, one could derive it from ►➤oчµŋ ‘song,
tale'; see Frisk s.v.
лáрoç [adv., prep.] 'before, sooner, previously'; prep. (+ gen.) 'before' (II.). <IE *prh₂-
os 'before, earlier'>
•DER лάpoι-0ε(v) 'in front of, beforehand' (Il.), -τεpos 'former, earlier' (Il.), -τατoç
(A. R.).
•ETYM An adverb that can be traced back to PIE, probably deriving from an earlier
gen.sg. in *-os. Cognates: Skt. purás ‘in front of, before' (beside purá ‘earlier'), Av.
parō ‘in front, earlier'. The forms in лαpoɩ- have a locatival origin. See ► лápa, ► ñépɩ,
►лрó, ▶лрóç, etc.
лapwaɩ [f.pl.] ‘sorrel' (Phot., Arist.). <GR?, ?>
•Var лapóɑv, лapoúav, лapaúɑv [acc.sg.].
•СOMP μаλо-лаpoúav [adj.] 'white and sorrel-colored'.
•DER лαрwαiоç [adj.] (Call. Artemis 91, if correct).
•ETYM It is assumed that the word is an Aeolism, and was derived from the snake
name лapɛíαç (s.v. ларεiαí); see Hoffmann & Debrunner 1954(2): $76. However,
the variation of the vowels remains unexplained.
лápwv, -wvoç [m.] ‘light ship' (Plb.). <?>
•VAR -úv LSJ.
ETYM No etymology.
лãç [adj.] ‘whole, all, every' (Il.). <IE *ph₂-ent- 'all'>
•VAR fem. лãσα (Сret. Thess. Arc. лávσɑ, Aeol. лaïσα), ntr. лãv (Dor. Aeol. лắv),
beside лǎv-, ä-лãν, etc.
•DIAL Myc. pa-te /pantes/ [nom.pl.], pa-to /pantos/ [gen.sg.], pa-sa/pansa/
[nom.sg.f.], pa-si /pansi/ [dat.pl.]; ku-su-pa /ksumpans/, to-so-pa /tosospans/.
•COMP Very often as a first member лăv-, e.g. ñav-ñµap ‘all day' (v 31); more rarely
лаντо-, е.g. лаνтo-μσns 'all-hateful' (A.), лαντо-кpáτwp, -opoç [m.] 'the Almighty'
(LXX; older лαу-кρаτηç, see on ►кρáτоç).
⚫DER лavτ-oчoç [adj.] 'various, manifold' (Il.), -oðαлóç ‘id.' (since h. Cer.); -oσε 'in all
directions' (II.), -OTε 'always' (Arist., Hell.), -axñ, -αxoυ, -αxóеɛv, -axóσɛ, etc.
TáoOW
1155
'(from) everywhere, every way' (IA). ►лáуõv, ñáv-v ‘altogether, very' (Att., also
Ion.).
•ETYM Gr. лãç < *лаvτ-ç, with analogical лãν << лắν (< *лávτ). Furthermore, we
find ǎ-лãç ‘the whole' < *sm-pant-. The Myc. forms prove initial *p- (rather than
*k"-), and enable connection with ToA puk, pont-, ToB po, pont- 'all' (Adams 1999:
402). The -v in лáучυ and лávʊ is unexplained.
лάσασðαɩ [v.aor.] 'to acquire'. •VAR лáσo̟µαι [fut.]. →ñéлaµai.
лaoñáλŋ [f.] ‘fine flour, etc.² = лαiñáλŋ, nálŋ (Ar. V. 91 [metaphor for a very small
measure], H., Phot., Suid.). <?>
•COMP лασлαλη-qáуos ‘eating лaσлáλŋ' (Hippon.).
•Der лáσëɑλoç ‘milleť³, лaσñalétŋs ‘grinding millet' (Gal.); PN Пασлalãç.
⚫ETYM Formation and origin unknown. It seems obvious to connect лaiлáλŋ, but the
relation is unclear.
лáσσaλoç [m.] ‘plug, pin, peg' (Il.). ◄PG➤
•VAR Att. лáτταlos.
⚫DER Diminutive лασσαλ-íσкоç (Hp.) and tov (H.); -ɛúw (often with лрoσ-, also
with dɩα-, кaτα-) [v.] ‘to pin, hang up' (Hdt., Att.); instrument noun -ɛĩov (Plb.,
EM); -óoµai [v.] 'to be provided with a peg' (sch.), лроσ-лаσσαλów [v.] 'to pin'
(Thphr.). Gr. лáσσāž, -ākoç [m.] ‘лáσσaλoç' (Megar., Ar. Ach. 763), with derivatives
-άkiov, -aкíšw (H.); лaσσápioç. σtavpós ‘stake, pole' (H.).
•ETYM This word is usually derived from PIE *ph₂k- ‘stiff, hard', but this is
improbable: a pin has not become stiff (like a peg of ice); it has been fastened or fixed
to a wall or a pillar. The suffix -aλ- is Pre-Greek and cannot be IE; the same goes for
the suffix -ãк-; cf. лópëã§, кvódã, etc. Hence, лáσσɑλoç is probably Pre-Greek
(*paky-al-).
лáσow [v.] 'to strew, sprinkle' (Il.), also ‘to weave' images ‘into' a piece of cloth. <?>
•var Att. лáïíw (Ar.), aor. лáσ-al, -ασðaɩ, лaσðñvai (Att.), perf. med. лέлaσµai
(LXX, A. R.).
•COMP Frequently with prefix, e.g. кατα-, ε- (лρо-εлɩ-, лap-εñɩ-, éрoo-en-), ¿v-
(ouv-εv-, лap-εv-, époʊ-ev-).
●DER_лaσ-τóç [adj.] ‘strewn, sprinkleď (Hp.), Xpvσó-лαστoç ‘gold-stitched' (A.),
кατά-лαστоç 'bestrewn, decorated (with figures)' (Aг.); лαστóç [m.] 'knitted curtain,
blanket, bridal bed', also 'bridal chamber' (Hell.); лаστów 'to build a bridal chamber'
(Aq.); (katá-, ¿ní-, diá-, oúµ-)ñáσµа [n.] ‘(medicinal) powder' (Thphr., medic.);
лάστpɩα [f.] ‘embroiderer' (sch.).
•ETYM With a similar form and meaning, we find ëñ- in ëñ кai ëñv έëì toû
katáraʊʊe kai kaτaлáσσяν (H.); note especially έлñу ôάрµαкov (inscг. Epid.)
beside ... páрμака лáσσεу (Е 900).
Under a reconstruction *kh₂t- (ignoring the *ē to which the Epidauric form points),
it would be possible to connect Lat. quatio 'to shake' and PCl. *kāti- ‘chaff, husks',
which is almost identical with the glosses лкτεα· лíτуpα husks of corn', лητîτal.

=== page 604 ===

1156
naotás, -ádog
ritúpivoi äptai. Aάкwvɛç ‘bran-like breads (Lacon.)' (H.). Perhaps related is Lat.
quālus 'wicker basket', if from 'sieve'.
Semantically good, but phonetically very uncertain is the comparison with TOAB
kätä 'to strew' (which points to a root *KeT- and is usually connected with
► σkidvnu).
лaστáç, -ádoç [f.], often [pl.] 'annex, porch, atrium', also 'inner room, bridal chamber'
(through association with лαστós 'bridal chamber'; Ion., Delph.). <GR▷
•ETYM From *лαp-στáç = лapα-otás, pl. -ádes [f.] 'door-post, pillar, atrium, etc.',
from лαpα + *sth₂- ‘stand. With a different dissimilation, we find raptádes (-ádai
cod.). ǎuлελo 'grape-vine' (H.). A parallel development is shown by Lat. postis
'(door)-post' <*pr-sth₂-i- 'standing forth' or *po-sth₂-i- 'standing upright'.
naotóg →náoow.
лάσxш [v.] 'to experience, undergo, suffer' (Il.). <IE *b"end"- "bind'>>
●Var fut. лɛíσoµaɩ, aor. лaðɛïv, perf. лéñovðα (лéñoσɣa Stesich., Epich., pap. IIIª).
•COMP Also with άvτɩ-, σʊу-, лëρo-, etc.
•DER 1. лévƉoç [n.] ‘sorrow, grief (II.), whence лεvðέw [v.] ‘to grieve, sorrow' (II.),
лévе-ŋμα, -μшv, -ŋtńp, fem. -ńτpia, etc.; révð-iµos [adj.] 'belonging to grief (poet.;
perhaps after Gaváσчµoç), -iкóç ‘id.' (X., LXX), -ŋpós ‘id.' (Anaxil.); PN ПεveεÚç,
reshaping of Tevðεúç. 2. лáðoç [n.] 'experience, passion, suffering' (IA); лáð-ŋ [f.],
-ŋua [n.] ‘id.', -nois, -ntikós, -ikóç, etc.; avtɩ-, σvμ-лαðηs 'feeling repulsion' or
‘sympathy', with derivatives -ɛa [f.], -έw [v.] (Ar., Hell.), to the verb àvtɩ-, ovµ-
лαеɛчv. Denominative лα-αívoμα, -αívw 'to be filled with лáðoç; to arouse лáðoç'
(Hell.). 3. лaox-ntɩáw ‘to feel an (unnatural) lusť”, -ŋtiaoµós (Luc.).
•ETYM On the semantic development of лaðεïv, see Dörrie 1956, and Boreham Glotta
49 (1971): 231-244. Old ablaut: zero grade in лáσ×ш (<*лáð-σк-w) and лαеɛïv < PGr.
*p() nth-, e-grade in лεíσo̟µαι < *лévе-σ-oμα) and лévеоç, о-grade in лε-лovе-α. The
further etymology is uncertain. LIV2 supports the old connection with Lith. kenčiù
'to suffer, endure', OIr. céss(a)im ‘id.', but a root *k"end"- would violate the PIE root
structure contraints. Alternatively, the Greek forms could belong to the root *bhend¹-
'bind' (seе ►лεvеεpós), with a semantic shift in intransitive usage from 'be bound' to
'suffer'; thus Janda 2000: 128f. after E. Leumann ZII 6 (1928): 10 and Pedersen REIE 1
(1938): 192 ff. Seе ►лччα.
лátayoç [m.] ‘clatter, crash, rattle' (Il.). <PG?►
•DER 1. лαταу-έw (also ȧvɩɩ-, úлo-, etc.) [v.] ‘to make noise, splash, roar' (Alc.
[ratάyeoke]), -ý [f.] (D. P., Longos), -ŋµa [n.] (Men.) = лáταyoç. 2. лatáσσw (aor.
лατážαι, also έк-, σUV-, etc.) [v.] 'to knock, beat, hurt' (Il.; Att. mostly as an aor. and
fut.act. to the present τúлтш). 3. лaτáž [interj.] (Ar. Av. 1258). 4. kanatḍ.
kaτakóчЯç. Пáqiot 'you break down (Paph.)' (H.).
•ETYM Possibly an onomatopoeic verb. On the derivation of лátay-έw, compare
Tucker 1990: 106. The suffix in -y- is found in semantically close forms, such as
lalayń, oµapayέw (Σµápayos), olµwyń, etc. Fur.: 279 compares σnatayyiğɛɩv.
ταрáσσяv 'to agitate, disturb' (H.); the word may be Pre-Greek.
лatávŋ [f.] ‘(flat) dish' (Sophr. 13, Poll.). ◄PG?▷
•VAR Dor. -ā, ntr. -ov 'id.' (Poll. v.l., H.).
●COMP As a first member in лατáv-εчiç, name of a (boiled) eel (Epich. 211).
●DER Diminutive -tov [n.], -íwv [m.], name of a cock (com. IVª).
1157
•ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word, as per Fur.: 149, who connects лétaɣvov/лát-
'broad flat cup'; also compare the suffix of λɛкávŋ 'dish, pot', oúpávŋ ‘chamber-pot',
etc.
лátɛλλa [f.] ‘large cup' (Poll). <LW Lat.➤
•VAR ẞáτελλa.
•ETYM A loanword from Lat. patella (see E-M s.v. patera).
лaτέoµaɩ [v.] ‘to dine, enjoy, eat and drink' (Hdt.). <IE *ph₂t- ‘graze, feed'>
•VAR Аor. лáσ(σ)aσðaɩ and perf. med. ïéñaσ-µaɩ (II.), fut. лáσoµai (A.).
•DER ǎ-лασ-τoç ‘uneaten, sober' (II.). Backformation лátos = τpoôý (sch.).
•ETYM Present stem with enlargement *-t- from the PIE root *peh₂- ‘to protect,
graze'. In Germanic, we find Go. fodjan 'to feed' < *peh₂-t-, a short vowel only in
OHG ka-vat-ōt 'pastus'. See лoчuýу and лшµа 1 for further derivatives of the root
*peh₂-.
==
лаτéш [v.] 'to step, tread, enter, tread underfoot', 'to despise' (poet. since Pi.), 'to tread
grapes, grain' 'to press, thresh' (LXX, pap.). <?>
•VAR Аoг. лατñoai, etc.
•COMP With prefix, especially лεpɩ-, kata-, ɑro-.
•DER From the verb: лаτ-ησμós [m.] 'treading' (A.), 'threshing' (pap.); -ŋois [f.]
'treading (of grapes)' (Corn.); -ŋua 'refuse, sweepings, waste' (LXX); -ŋtýc [m.]
‘grape-treader' (pap.), -ητýpov ‘treading place' (Mуlasa); лατηуóv. лenatnµévov,
Kolvóv 'trodden, common' (H.). From лερɩ-лατéш: лɛpiлátŋσiç ‘walk-around' (late),
-ŋτкóç name of a school of philosophers (Hell.). From кατα-лατέw: katarátŋois
‘treading' (LXX), 'tour, inspection' (pap.), -ŋua 'that which is trodden underfoot'
(LXX). From ȧло-лаτéш 'to retire' = 'to do one's needs' (IA): ȧлoлáµα, -ŋσ
άлолátnua, -nois
(com., Gal.), also -oç [m.] 'excrement, dung' (Hp., Ar.). From л½λoлatέw [v.] ‘to
tread in the muď (pap., sch.): лηλoñat-ídɛç [f.pl.] “mud-treaders” = kind of shoes
(Hp.). лáτoç [m.] 1. ‘road, path' (Hom., A. R.), ¿клάτɩoç ‘astray, extraordinary' (A.);
2. ‘treading, place where one treads, floor'; ‘trampling, trampled matter, threshing,
dust, dirt' (Hell.); лɛρíñaτoç [m.] 'walk-around, place for walking, discussion', name
of a philosophers' school (Att., etc.).
ETYM The meaning 2. of лáτоç shows that it is a back-formation from лаτéw. In the
meaning 'way, path', however, Frisk regards лάτоç as a possible old variant of
лÓντОç; лατεш could then be its denominative. Yet it is not evident that 'way, path'
would yield 'to tread', an action which focuses on the individual movement of the
legs. DELG doubts the connection with лóvτoç. If the latter is rejected, лaτéw has
no etymology.
лаτηp [m.] 'father' (Il.). <IE *ph₂tēr ‘father'>
•VAR Gen. лατρóç, acc. лaτépα (Il.).

=== page 605 ===

1158
•DIAL Myc. pa-te.
MátOS 1
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. лατpо-ôóvoç ‘parricidal, parricide' (trag., Pl.), acc.
-ña (Od.); -póvtŋs [m., f.] ‘id.², à-ñáτwp ‘fatherless' (trag., Pl.).
●DER 1. Diminutive лaτp-íðɩov (com.), also лaτép-tov (Luc.), -íwv [m.] (late; from
voc. лátεp). 2. лáτpa, Ion. -ŋ [f.] ‘paternal ancestry, tribe; native city, country,
homeland' (Il.). 3. лatpiá, Ion. -ý [f.] ‘paternal ancestry, lineage, family' (Hdt., El.,
Delph., LXX, NT), -чwτηs, Dor. -ɩóταç, [f.] -ɩwτiç 'from the same lineage, native,
fellow-countryman' (Att., Troezen, Delphi Va), -wτIкóç 'belonging to fellow-
countrymen, homeland' (Delphi IV, Arist.). 4. лάτрιоç 'paternal, hereditary,
customary' (Pi., IA), fem. лατp-ís ‘paternal, homeland' (Il.); younger лατр-ɩкóç
'paternal' (Democr., Att., Hell.). 5. лaτρóðɛv *from one's father' (II.). 6. εv-natpídnç,
Dor. -ídaç, fem. -15 ‘of a noble father, noble', usually as a name of the Old Attic
aristocrats (trag., Att.), antonym кaкo-лaτp-íðaç, fem. - (Alc., Thgn.). 7. ïáτpwç,
gen. -woç and -w [m.] ‘male relative; father's brother, uncle' (Pi., Cret., IA); hence
лτрó-ïç, лατρos 'belonging to the paternal clan, paternal' = лάτpwç, лatpiкóç
nátpws, natpikÓS
(Il.). 8. лατршóçs 'stepfather' (Hell.; formation unclear), also лατpulóç. 9. Verbs:
лατερíчw (Aг. V. 652) 'to call father' (from the voc.), -εúw 'to hold the office of лατǹp
лóλεwç (лατερ-íα)' (Milete VIP); лаτрów to take after one's father' (Philostr.,
Alciphr.), -táčw ‘id.' (Poll.).
•ETYM Inherited word for 'father' (as the head of the family), preserved in most IE
languages, e.g. Skt. pitár-, Lat. pater, Go. fadar. Skt. pítriya and Lat. patrius agree
with лάτрoç. Possible cognates of лáτpшç, with formation like µýtpws, include
Lat. patruus and Skt. pitrvyà- 'id.'.
лάτoç 1 [m.] ‘road, path². →лατέw.
лάτоç 2 'nourishment, τpoo̟é̟'. →ratéqiai.
лáτоç 3 [n.] vôvµα τñç “Нpaç ‘garment of Hera' (Call. Fr. 495, H.). <IE? *(s)pen-
'spin'>
•ETYM Has been connected with PIE *(s)pen- 'to spin' (see on ►лévoμai), or
explained as a back-formation of лаτéw as 'what is tread' = ‘long garment reaching
to the feet, train'. Neither is convincing.
лαчvɩ [?] mg. uncertain (Hipp. 79 M.). <?>
•VAR лañν• µкpóv. oi dè µéya. ½ άyaóv ‘small', others say 'big' or ‘good; лañâç·
άлoɣpέwç ‘sufficient'; лañvov· µέya (all H.).
•ETYM If the explanation as 'small' is correct, one might connect it with лañpoç.
лañpos [adj.] ‘small, little', plur. ‘few' (Il.). <IE? *peh₂u-ro->
•Var Fem. лavpác (Nic.).
•Der Adv. лavpákıç⋅ óλiyákıç ‘seldom² (H.); лavpakis. tǹv néµëtŋv Σaµoēpḍkes
Kaλoчσiv 'the pinky finger (Samothr.)' (H.); diminutive лаupídios (Нes. Оp. 133).
•ETYM Cognate with Lat. parvus 'small'. With different suffixes, Lat. pau-cus 'few',
paul(l)us 'small, few' (basic form unclear). Without a suffix, we find Аtt. лα-ç =
►лαiç.
!
1
TaxÚs
1159
naúw, -oµai [v.] ‘to withhold, hold back, arrest, stop (trans.)', med. 'to cease, stop, run
out' (II.). <?>
•VAR Аoг. лаÑσαɩ, -ασðaι, etc.
•COMP Often with prefix, especially άvα-, кατα-.
●DER 1. ȧvá-, кatá-, diá-ravµa [n.] 'rest, ease, placation' (Il., Hes.), áváлavμα also
'fallow land', adj. -ματкóç (pap.). 2. ȧvá-, кατá-, diá-лavoiç [f.] 'rest, ease,
relaxation' (Pi., IA), rare лañσɩç (Нp., LXX). 3. лavσ-wλń (µeta-) [f.] ‘id.' (B 386, T
201), probably derived from the aor. лañσaɩ. 4. лañλa (ảvá-) [f.] ‘id.' (Hp., Att.). 5.
ravotó̟p, -ñpos (S.), лaúστwp, -opos (Isyll.) 'stopper, terminator', adj. ravotńpios
‘ending' (S.), with ȧva- 'fit for resting' (Hdt., X.). 6. ȧvα-, кατα-лаvσtiкóç ‘giving
rest, relaxing' (Phld., Ptol.). 7. лavoɩ- in governing compounds, e.g. navoí-novos
‘ending pain' (E., Aг.), лavσ-ávεµoç 'calming the winď (A.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The form would allow for a PIE reconstruction *peh₂-u-, as per
LIV² s.v., but there are no certain cognates outside Greek.
лaqláчw [v.] 'to bubble, boil' (N 798). <ONOM
•VAR Aeol. -άodw (Alc.).
•COMP Rarely with έк-, εлɩ-, etc.
•DER лαλáσματа [n.pl.] 'bubbles, bombastic words' (Aг.), έклαolaσμós [m.]
'boiling over' (Arist.).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic reduplicated formation like кaxλášw, ßaßpáľw, etc. With
reduplication, we find the aor. pladɛiv 'to crush, tear up (intr.)' (A. Ch. 28 [lyr.]);
with ε-vocalism, qλɛdwv, -óvos [f.] ‘babble' (Plu.), qλédwv, -ovos ‘babbler' (A.,
Timo); with long vowel, ôλŋdãvτa· Aŋpoñvía ‘talking nonsense' (H.). A similar
onomatopoeia is Lat. blatio, -ire 'to babble, prate'. See oλéw and oλúw.
лáxνη [f.] 'hoar-frost, rime', also metaphorically, e.g. of clotted blood (§ 476). <IE
*peh₂k/g- 'make compact, congeal'>
●DER лaxv-ǹεɩs (Nonn.), -wdŋs (Gp., Hymn. Is.) 'frosty'; -óoµai (also with лɛpɩ-) [v.]
'to become covered with rime', -ów 'to cover, (make) cloť (P 112).
•ETYM From earlier *лáк-ov-ã or *лáу-ov-ã, related to the root of ►лýуvö. A
similar semantic development is shown by лáуos 'hill; ice, hoar-frost' (see лáуn).
Compare vúε ….. лηуʊlíç ‘icy-cold' beside лávé (§ 475f.).
лaxúç [adj.] 'thick, fat, well-fed, dense, stout' (Il.). <IE *bng"-u- 'dense, thick'>>
•COMP лаxу-μεрηs 'consisting of thick parts, gross, massive' (Ti. Locr., Arist.); úлép-
лаxuç 'too fat' (Hp.).
●DER 1. Compar. лáσσwv, only acc. -ova (Od.), superl. лá×-στoç (Il., Call.), -íwv
(Arat.), -útɛpoç, -útatos (IA). 2. ñáõεtoç (rather -ɛtós [mss.]) = лaxúc († 187, ↳ 191,
Hp.); also as a ntr. noun (Nic., Opp.); 3. ñáxntes. rλoúoioi, raxɛïç ‘wealthy, thick'
(H., after ïévòtes); PN Máxns, -ŋtos [m.] (Th.). 4. лaxvλŵç ‘in large draughts'
(Arist.). 5. лáxoç [n.] 'thickness, strength, force' (since 1 324). 6. лaxútns (-vtýs?)
'thickness'. 7. Denominative лаxúvw (sporadicaly with έлɩ-, ¿к-, σʊv-, únεp-) [v.] ‘to
fatten, batten' (IA), лάxuvσç [f.] 'thickening', -TIкóç 'fattening' (medic.), -voµóc [m.]
(Hp.), -vσµa [n.] (Aët.). 8. лaxãσai [aor.] 'to fatten' (medic., Herm. 33, 343).

=== page 606 ===

1160
•ETYM An old u-stem adjective, cognate with Skt. bahú- ‘many, much, numerous',
OAv. bǝzuuaitē [dat.sg.m.] 'dense', Arm. bazum [adj.] ‘much', Hitt. panku- [adj.]
'total'.
лéαρ [n.] . Пλavкíαç λɩлαрóv ‘radiant' (H.). <GR>
•ETYM A contamination of лĩɑp and στέap 'fat', or the result of a phonetic
development ia > ea in some dialect.
лεdá [prev.] 'after, with, amidst', = μµετá (Aeol., Dor., Arc.). <IE *ped- 'foot'>
•COMP Пεda-yεíτvios [m.], a month name (Rhodes, etc.) = Att. MεtαyεITVIÚV.
⚫ETYM Probably from *ped- ‘foot, trace', as attested in лoúç, ►éédov; thus literally ‘on
the floor, in the tracks, vel sim.". Compare Arm. y-et, z-het 'after' from het 'trace' (=
лéбov). The rare form лετá is probably a contamination with μɛτá. For the ending
-α, compare μετá, ává, diá, etc.
лédŋ [f.] ‘shackle, fetter' (Il.). <IE *ped- 'foot'>
●VAR Dor. -a, mostly plur. -al.
•COMP Often as a second member, especially in poetry and in late prose, e.g. ioto-
лédŋ (see on ▶iotós).
●DER_Diminutive лεdíσкη [f.] (Thebes IIIª), -tov (EM); лεdýtηs [m.] ‘fettered,
prisoner' (com., Herod., LXX), лédшv, -wvoç [m.] 'id.' (Ar. Fr. 837); denominative
лεбáw (rarely with кατα-, ȧuqi-, σuv-) [v.] 'to fetter, bind, shackle' (especially poet.
since Il.), to which reda-tás [m.] (Dor.) ‘fetterer' (AP).
•ETYM Derivative of PIE *ped- 'foot'; cf. ►лédov and лε(α. The same semantics are
found in Lat. ped-ica ‘shackle', im-ped-iō ‘to hinder', ON fjoturr [m.] ‘shackle' (<
PGm. *fetura-).
лédiλov [n.] 'sole under the foot, sandal', secondarily also of other footwear (Il.; also
Hdt. and Plu.). <IE? *ped- 'foot'>
•VAR Mostly plur. -a.
•DIAL Myc. pe-di-ro.
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. Xpvσo-лεðiλos 'with golden sandals' (Od.).
⚫ETYM Derived from *ped- 'foot' with a suffix -iλo-. The suffix might be Pre-Greek.
лéбov [n.] 'soil, earth, ground' (Il.). <IE *ped-o- [n.] ‘trace, footstep'>
•VAR лεdov-бε (N 796).
•COMP As a second member in dá-лɛdov, кρáσ-лεdov, etc.; ¼µ-лεdoç ‘standing on
the ground, firm' (epic poet., late prose), whence ¿µлεdów [v.] ‘to confìrm, consider
inviolable' (Att., etc.); äлɛdoç ‘flať (Hdt., Th., X.) (< *sm-pedo- ‘having one surface');
as a first member e.g. in лɛdo-ßáµwv ‘earth-walking' (A.). Adverbs med-óσɛ, -óðɛv,
-oɩ (epic poet.).
•DER лεSíov [n.] ‘surface, plain, field' (Il.); Cypr. лεdíja 'plain', fem. after xúpa, yñ?
Thence: 1. лεdɩáάç, -ádoç [f.] ‘flat, level, on the plain' (Pi., IA); 2. лεdiεivóç (also
лεбεɩvóç, -ïvóç) 'flat, level' (IA); 3. лεdiакóç 'belonging to the plain', plur.
‘inhabitants of the plain of Attica' (Lys. Fr. 238 S., Arist., pap.); 4. ñedɩeïç [m.pl.] ‘id.’
(Plu., D. L.); 5. лɛðiáσчoç 'on the plain' (Str., Dsc.); 6. лεdασчµαïç = campester
(gloss.); 7. лεdiwdns ‘flať (sch.); 8. IIɛdió [f.] ‘goddess of the plain' (Hera; Sicily).
}
meidouar
1161
•ETYM Derived from *ped- 'foot'. Cognate forms from PIE *pedo-: Hitt. peda- [n.]
'place', Skt. padá- [n.] 'footstep, piece of ground', OAv. pada-, YAv. pada- [n.]
'footstep', Lat. oppidum 'fort', U peřum 'ground, place', Arm. het 'footprint', OPr.
pedan 'ploughshare', Lith. pėdà, (dial.) pédas 'footprint', Latv. pêda 'foot-sole,
footstep' <*ped-o-; ON fet 'step'.
лέ¼α [f.] ‘instep', usually metaphorically 'foot-end, lower edge, border of a garment,
coast, net, mountain range, etc.' ( 272, medic., Hell.). <IE *ped- 'foot'>
●DER Independently of the simplex: άpyʊpó-лɛ(α [adj.f.] 'with silver feet', said of
Thetis, etc. (II.), msc. -лεČоS (AP). лɛčíç, -ídoç [f.] 'seam' (Ar., Att. inscr.).
•ETYM Derived from *ped- 'foot' with a suffix -α. A comparable form is found in
PGm. *fet-i [f.] > ON fit, gen. fit-jar ‘web', and perhaps also in OHG fizza, MoHG
Fitze 'winding, thread'. See τρáлeľa.
néšɩç [m.] ‘puffball, lycoperdacea' (Thphr. HP 1, 6, 5). ◄IE *pesd- ‘break wind'>
•ETYM From *pesd-, the root of Lat. pēdō, Gr. ßdéw; see Forssman MSS 29 (1971): 47-
70.
лɛšós [adj.] ‘going on foot, living on the land, said of men and animals, 'walker,
footsoldier', as a collective 'infantry, land-force' (II.); metaphorically ‘common,
prosaic' (Hell. and late). <IE *ped- 'foot'>
•COMP Frequently, e.g. nɛšo-µáxaç, -os ‘fighting as a footsoldier' (Pi., IA).
•DER лεČɩкóç ‘of a лεóç' (Att., etc.), -ítns [m.] = nɛčóç (Suid.: óñàíτηc), -ótnc, -ntos
[f.] ‘being лɛóç' (comm. Arist.); лε(εúw [v.] 'to go on foot, be a pedestrian' (Att.,
Arist.), -EUTIкóç 'going on foot' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM Except for the accent, the word is formally identical to Skt. pád-ya- 'regarding
the foot' < PIE *ped-io-. See лоÚÇ.
лε [n.] name of the letter. <LW Sem.>
•VAR Later лĩ.
•ETYM Indeclinable; equal to Semitic pē.
лεíðоμα [v.] 'to trust, rely, obey, be persuaded' (II.). <IE *b"id"- 'convince, trust'>
•VAR fut. лεíσoμα, аoг. леéσеα, лεлеéσðα, pеrf. лéлоðα (all Il.), aor. pass.
лεσеñvαι, fut. -Оñσoμα, perf. лéлεiσ-µαι (Att.), med. лɛíσασðαι (Hell.), aor. ptc.
лiðñoas (II.), fut. лðñow (§ 369); act. nɛíðw, nɛiow, лɛлðɛïv with fut. лeлiðñow,
nɛĩʊai (all Il.), rɩðɛïv (Pi., A.), nénɛiкα (young Att.) 'to convince, persuade'.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àva-, εлɩ-, пapa-, ovv-. As a first member in governing
compounds, e.g. лεíðαрxoç 'obedient to the authorities' (A.), PN Пεσíστpατoç; as a
second member in ȧ-, εv-л(ε) 1Оns (Thgn., A., Att.), aor. ȧлíеŋσε (Il.), fut. ȧлеnow
(K 129, 300); thencе леñσαç and леńσw.
•DER A. From the root aorist: 1. лστóç 'faithful, reliable, credible' (II.), лστó-τis
'faith' (IA), лστεúw (diα-, кατα-, etc.) [v.] 'to rely, trust, believe, confide' (IA),
whence -ɛvµɑ, -evolç, -evtikóç; rotóquai (kata-, σʊv-, лpo-), -ów [v.] ‘to trust
entirely, warrant, assure; to make reliable' (II.), whence -wμa, -wolę, -WTŃs, -wtikÓS.
2. лíστç [f.] 'faith, trust, authentication, assurance' (IA), whencе лστкóç 'faithful'
(Plu., Vett. Val.; if not for лεστкÓç; see below). 3. леavós ‘trustworthy, reliable,

=== page 607 ===

1163
1162
лεívη
believable, obedient' (IA), лðav-ótŋs, -ów (Pl., Arist.). 4. лíovvoç ‘relying on
somebody or something' (mostly epic poet. Il.), probably after 0ápouvoç.
B. From the present: 1. IIɛw [f.] ‘(goddess of) persuasion, conviction, obedience'
(Hes.), thence Boeot. aor. έniwoɛ, -σav (IIIª)?; 2. лɛðóç ‘pesuading (easily),
persuasive' (Ep. Сor.). 3. лεеημшv 'obedient, persuasive' (late epic).
C. From the present or s-aor. (more recently): 1. лɛñσɑ [f.] ‘obedience', 2. -itɛlotoç as
a second member in ɛ-, Svσavá-, åµetá-reiotos etc. (Att.), as opposed to older
ärlotoç. 3. Nelotiкóç ‘fit for persuasion, convincing' (Pl., Arist.), -ńpios ‘id.' (E.). 4.
лɛt̃oµa [n.] ‘conviction, confidence' (Plu., Arr., S. E.), -µový [f.] ‘id.' (Ep. Gal., pap.).
5. nɛïoiç (rapá-, кaτá-) [f.] ‘conviction, etc.' (Plot., Hdn., sch.). 6. éɛotýp ‘who
obeys' (Suid.) 7. Iεíη epithet of Aphrodite (Delos).
D. From the perfect: лeñoíð-ŋois [f.] ‘trust' (LXX, Phld.), -íav ‘hope, expectation'.
•ETYM Present лεíðo̟µαι < PIE pres. or aor. subj. *bheid¹-e/o-, aor. лɩð- < PIE aor.
*bheidh /*bhidh. Cognate with Lat. fidō, -ere < IE *b¹eid"-e/o-, fidus 'faithful, reliable',
fidēs, -ēī ‘trust, guarantee', foedus, -eris [n.] ‘treaty, agreement'; Alb. bē [f.] ‘oath’, besë
[f.] ‘faith', bindem ‘to be convinced, believe'; OCS běda “distress, necessity' < *bhoid¹-
eh2, běditi 'to force, persuade', isg. běždo̟ < *b¹oid-eie-. Probably also related to Go.
beidan ‘to wait', baidjan 'to force', OE badan, OHG beitten ‘to demand.
nɛivŋ [f.] ‘hunger, famine' (o 407, Pl.). <?►
•VAR More recent лεĭva (Pl. Resp. 437d, Arist.).
●COMP уɛw-лεivηs hungry for land, without land' (Hdt.); with transition to the o-
stems, oεú-εvos 'very hungry' (Аrist.), лрóσ-лεvoç 'hungry' (medic., Act. Ap. 10,
10).
⚫DER лεv-αλéoç 'hungry' (com., Plu., AP; after diyaλéos et al.), -wdns ‘id.' (Gal.).
Verbal forms: ptc. nɛváwv (II.), inf. лεvýµεvať (v 137), itɛlv-ñv, -ñs, -ñ (Ar., Pl.), fut.
-ŋow, aor. -ñσaɩ, perf. nɛ-nɛívŋka (Hdt., Att.) [v.] ‘to hunger, be hungry'; later
nteɩvãv, -ặ, -ắow, -ãσaɩ (LXX); rarely with dɩa-, úno-, únɛp-, àva-. Gr. nɛivè could be
a back-formation to лεɩvñν, like díva to dɩñv.
•ETYM Fur.: 339, 378 compares ǹ-лav-α, -ɛî 'flows off, which is rather doubtful.
According to De Lamberterie RPh. 74 (2000): 280, лεivα may be the older form; in
that case, short -a may be the Pre-Greek ending.
лɛîpa [f.] ‘test, research, experience' (Alcm., Thgn., Pi., IA). <IE *per- ‘cross, pass’▷
•COMP чμ-лεро 'experienced'; iлno-лεipηs [m.] 'horse specialist' (Anacr. 75, 6),
μоvо-лεраι (λúкot) hunting alone' (Arist., Men.); àлɛipwv 'unexperienced' (S.).
Backformations such as ává-, àлó-, diá-лεiрa (Pi., IA) from ȧvα-лεрáоμαι, etc.;
τаλалɛípios 'who has suffered much'.
•DER Three denominatives: 1. лεpάoµai (more rarely -άw, often with prefix like ȧva-,
dia-, ảno-, ¿k-) [v.] 'to tempt, put to the test, try' (Il.). Thence ſteɩpätýs [m.] ‘pirate’
(Hell.), -τɩкóç ‘belonging to pirates' (Str., Ph.), -τɛúw [v.] ‘to act like a pirate' (LXX);
itɛipatńpiov (Ion. -ŋt-) [n.] ‘(juridical) triaľ (Hp., E.). ‘gang of pirates, pirates' nesť
(LXX, Str.), лεрητpios 'exploring, trying' (Hp.); лɛípaσiç [f.] 'temptation, assault'
(Th., D. C.; may also belong to 2.). 2. nɛpáčw, aor. -áσαɩ, -ασðñvαι (also with кατα-,
Eк-, άлo-, etc.) [v.] 'to tempt, put to the test, assault' (Od., Arist., Hell.), fut. лεрážw
(Сret.), кατα-лɛpάow (Lys.). Thencе лεp-ασµós [m.] ‘temptation' (LXX, NT),
-aστýs [m.] ‘tempter' (Ammon. Gramm.), -αστкóç 'belonging to, fit for tempting,
trying' (Arist.), åлεíрαστоç 'unexperienced, untempted' (Hell.). 3. лεpηtíšw (only
present) [v.] 'to tempt, explore, assault' (Il.).
•ETYM From PGr. *per-ia (Aeol. лéрра acc. to Choerob. An. Ox. 2, 252), from the
root *per- 'to cross, pass'. See further лɛiрw and ►лɛpáw.
лɛipap, -aτoç [n.] ‘end, boundary, outcome, goal, decision' (II.); epic also 'rope, cable'.
◄IE *per-ur / *per-u(e)n- 'ford, crossing'>
●VAR mostly plur. -ατα (лεp(p)áτwv Alc.), younger nɛĩpas (Pi.), népas (Att.).
•COMP As a second member in ȧ-лεipwv (Il.), remade into an o-stem ǎ-ſɛpos (Pi.,
Ion., trag., Pl., Arist.) ‘endless, unlimited', also ȧ-лε(í) pατoç ‘id.' (Pi., Ph.); here also
anteipéolos, àreipitos; àñépova. népaç µǹ éxovτa ‘without boundary' (H.); noλv-
лɛípwv ‘with many (wide) boundaries' (h. Cer. 296, Orph.).
•DER 1. лεрαívw (Hom.), лɛpaívw (Аtt.), aoг. лερñvaɩ, лɛpāvαɩ (also with Sia-, ouv-,
etc.) [v.] 'to bring to an end, finish, conclude', à-лépavtos (-ɛí-) ‘unlimiteď (Pi.,
Att.), лεраντкóç 'conclusive' (Ar., Arist.), oчμлéраσμа [n.] 'end, conclusion'
(Arist.), -µatkóç (Arist.). 2. лɛpatóqμαɩ, -ów (also with ảлo-, σvv-) [v.] ‘to end,
bring to an end, limit' (Arist.), àñonɛpát-wois (medic.). 3. άлo-лεрaτíчw 'to enď
(sch.). 4. nɛpateúɛɩ· ópíšɛ ‘delimits' (H.). Also лεpáτη [f.] ‘extremity of the heavens’
(243, Arat., Call.), after the superlatives; лεpáτ-η0ɛv 'from the boundary, from
beyond' (A. R.).
ETYM From a basic form *лépFap with PIE r/n-inflexion, from the root *per- 'to
cross, pass through'. From the n-stem, Greek derived ȧ-лεíршν; лεчραç, лéрαç are
remakes as well. Compare Skt. párur [nom.acc.sg.n.], párvaṇas [gen.abl.] ‘knot, joint,
section'. The mg. ‘rope, cable' may derive from the use of ropes for measuring or
delimiting a space. See further лεipw and ► лépā.
лɛípɩvða [acc.sg.f.] ‘basket on a cart (0 131, § 190). <PG(S)►
•VAR Gen.sg. -tvēos (A. R. 3, 873), nom.sg. лɛipivs (gramm.).
⚫ETYM Like many words in -v0-, this word is probably Pre-Greek. Several TNs have
been connected with it: IIɛpηv, Пεipaεúc, etc.
лɛípw [v.] ‘to perforate, pierce, pervade' (Il.); as a simplex epic poet., with prefix also
in (late) prose. ◄IE *per- 'cross, pass'>
•VAR Аor. лɛpaɩ, perf. midd. лεлαpμα, aor. pass. „τapñvai (Hdt.).
■COMP Often with prefix, e.g. Sia-, àvα-, кατα-, лεpɩ-.
•DER A. With e-grade: 1. Sɩaµлɛp-és [adv.] 'right through, continuously' (II.). 2. nɛp-
óvŋ [f.] 'brooch, buckle' (II.), also -ovíc, -óviov, -ovídiov, -ováw, -óvηka, -ovytýp,
-ovnτpíç.
B. With o-grade: 1a. nópoç [m.] 'passage, ford, narrowing, journey, road, way; means,
way out', plur. 'earnings' (II.), whencе лор-εúç, -µg; b. „opεúoµαι, -ɛúw [v.] 'to
carry, provide' (IA), whence -ɛía, -ɛñov, -evµa, -evolg, -evtikós; c. 1topíšw, -íšoµai ‘to
bring about, provide oneself (IA), whence toμós, -loµa, -loths, -LσTIкÓÇ. As a
second member in ǎ-лopoç 'without escape, impassable, destitute' (Pi., IA), whence

=== page 608 ===

1164
Пεчoμа
άлорέw, -íα. 2. лоρеμóç [m.] 'ferry, strait, sound, etc.' (IA), whence -еµíç, -еμoç,
-μкó, -μεú, -0µεúw, -0µεíα, -0μεчov, -еµεчμα et al.
•ETYM Gr. лɛíрw < *per-ie/o-, лóроç < *рor-o-, лоp-еµóç < *por-d³mo-. The old
meaning ‘to carry over, ferry over' is still found in Greek in лópoç, nopłµóc.
Cognates are Skt. píparti [3sg.act.pres.], aor. párṣ- 'to bring across', Av. (fra)frā
[1sg.subj.aor.act.] 'to cross', YAv. pāraiia- ‘to bring, lead'; Go. faran ‘to wander',
farjan 'to ferry over'; Lat. portāre ‘to carry, transport' (denominative). See also
►лорεчν and ►лépvηµɩ.
лɛñoµɑ [n.] ‘rope, cable' (II.). <IE *bhend"- 'bind'>>
●Der rɛioµát-iov ‘navel-string' (sch.), -10s concerning cables' (Orph.); also -ɩkóç
‘cable-like' = 'persistent, unaccommodating' (pap., Eust.)?
•ETYM From *лέve-oμa, derived from the PIE verb 'to bind', which Greek may have
retained in ►лάσxw, albeit in a totally different meaning. An isolated derivative is
►лεvеερóç; ► чáτvη is unrelated. The zero grade *bhnd-sm- might be preserved in
ráoµa. & ovvýptytai rpòs tò qutòv tò qúllov ‘by which the leaf is joined to the
plant' (H.); a mixed form is ééσµ¤· ǹ nɛt̃oµa, ǹ µíoxos 'stalk, husk, shell'. čστɩ dè ¿
où tò qúλlov éptηaι ‘by means of which the leaf is attacheď (H.).
лÉкw [V.]. 'to comb (oneself), card, shear' (II.). <IE *pek- ‘pluck, card’>
●VAR itɛike tɛ (0 316) and лɛikɛv (Hes. Op. 775) are metri causa; aor. néžai, -aσðaɩ.
•DIAL Myc. po-ka /pokā/ 'shorn wool'.
•COMP Also with ảлo-. Furthermore ñóð-vôoç [m.] 'wool weaver' (pap. IIª); ɛipo-
лÓкos 'wool-fleeced', εű-локоç 'with fair wool (A.); vεóлокоç 'newly shorn'
(μaλóc, S.).
●DER 1. лóкoç [m.] 'sheep's wool, fleece' (M 451, Hell.), лок-áριov (Sammelb. III--
IV³), -ádɛç [f.pl.] 'lock or tuft of wool or hair' (Ar.), IIókɩoç [m.] “shearing month",
Locr. month name (inscr.); verbs: локíчoμαι 'to shear wool' (Theoc.), whence -toμóc,
-ɩσtí (pap.); -ά\w ‘id.' (sch., Suid.); -óoµα ‘to be covered, as if with a fleece' (AP). 2.
лÓкToç [m.] = лóкoç (Lyr. Adesp. 73, Hdn.). 3. лéкoç [n.] ‘id.' (An. Ox. 3, 358), nɛîkoç.
εpιov, čáµµα ‘(carded) wool (H.). 4. лεкτýр (Suid.), лoкtýp (pap. II³; after лóкoç)
[m.] 'shearer'. Enlarged verb лεк-τéw 'to shear wool' (Ar.).
•ETYM Gr. лέкw < PIE *pek-e/o-; cf. Lith. pešù, pèšti ‘to pluck, pull out'; for nɛkt-éw <
*pek-t-, cf. Lat. pecto 'to comb, card', OHG fehtan 'to battle' (if originally 'to pluck
each other'). Gr. „éкos phonetically agrees with Lat. pecus [n.] ‘(small) cattle, sheep'
< PIE *pek-e/os- [n.]; лókoç is probably an innovation. Latin has a present *pekte/o-
and a noun pecten, with unknown quantity of the final vowel in the nom.sg.
(Sommer in De Vaan 2008). Traditionally, a present with a suffix *-t-e/o- is
reconstructed on the basis of Lat. pectō and Gr. лεкτέw, but this formation is very
rare in IE. The alternative reconstruction proposed by Pinault MSS 62 (2006) is
therefore quite attractive: reduplicated *pe-pk- with dissimilation to *petk-, whence
the n-stem *petk-n-, *ptk-én- 'comb'. A reduplicated present fits the repetitive
meaning of 'to comb, pluck' very well. See also ►кTEÍÇ.
лéλayoç [n.] ‘high seas, sea' (II.). ◄PG?>
1165
•COMP Late: лελαyo-Spóµoç 'sailing on, flying over the sea' (Orph., PMag. Par.), ɛv-
лɛλayńc ‘lying by a fair sea' (Orph.).
•Der ñɛλáy-ios ‘belonging to the sea' (trag., Th., X., Arist.; after äλ-10s, Baláσ0-10s),
-Iкóç ‘id.' (Plu.), -τç [f.] 'id.' (AP); -años epithet of Poseidon (Paus.). Verbs:
лελαуiw (also with v-) [v.] 'to form a sea, be flooded, be out in the open sea, sail
the sea' (Hdt., X., Str.), -toµoí [pl.] 'experiences at sea' vel sim. (Alciphr.); -óoua 'to
form a sea, overflow' (Ach. Tat.).
•ETYM Frisk connects лελαуoç with ►лλáž, -aкóç [f.] ‘plain, plain of the sea, etc.',
лλáу-ɩoç ‘athwart, transverse, sloping, curved, and ►лέλavoç. However, nothing
confirms a connection of лéλayos with the root *pelh₂- 'to spread out', and the
connection with лλαу/к- is phonetically impossible. Thus, the word rather seems to
be Pre-Greek.
лéλavos [m.] ‘liquid flour dough, flour pulp, honey and oil', often presented as a
sacrifice, 'sacificial cake' (A., E., Pl., Att. inscr., Herod.); name of a weight or coin
(Delph., Arg. V--IIIª), = oßolós (Nic. Al. 488). <PG?>
•VAR Also -ós (Hdn. Gr. 1, 178).
•DER Сf. лéλavор· τò τετрáуαλкov 'а coin³, лéλαɩνа· лóлаvα, μελíуμаτа 'round
cakes, propitiations' (H.). On лελáуvɩv· τpúßλov έклεταλoν 'outspread cup or bowl'
(H.) see лεταуvov (s.v. ►retávvvµi).
•ETYM The original meaning and etymology are uncertain. If the original mg. was
'flat cake, flat dough', which the coin name лέλavoç in particular seems to evidence,
„éλavos could be derived from PIE *pelh₂- ‘to be flat, level as *pelh₂-no-. Fur.: 338
compares лέλaɩva, and concludes that it is a Pre-Greek word. The argument is
uncertain, but the conclusion may well be correct.
лελãруóç [m.] 'stork' (Ar., Pl. Alc. 1, 135d, Arist.); also = äyуoç τɩ kɛpáμɛov ‘kind of
earthen vessel' (H.), after the form? <?>
•VAR The length of the a is mentioned by Phrynichos 88.
•DER лελαρу-1бεúç [m.] 'young stork' (Ar., Plu.), -tкóc ‘of a stork' (H., Suid.), -wdns
'stork-like' (Str.), -īüç [f.] ‘kind of avayaλλíç ‘pimpernel' and yɛpávov ‘crane' (Ps.-
Dsc.). Denominative άντɩ-лελαрy-éw 'to show love in return (like storks do)'
(Aristaenet., Iamb.); ávɩɩлɛλápу-wois, -ŋois, -ia (Com. Adesp. 939, 1570). On
IIɛλapуɩкóv (τɛïxos), see ▸IIɛλaoyoí.
•ETYM Uncertain. EM 659, 7 already connected the name with the black and white
feathers of a stork; Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912): 294f. therefore analyses the word
as *лελαƑ-αруóç, from ȧpyós 'white' and *лελαƑóç 'blackish' (connected to Lith.
palvas 'sallow', лελóç, etc.). This seems improbable.
ñéλaç [adv.] ‘near, nearby' (Od.). <IE *pelh₂- 'approach'>
•VAR ó néλaç 'next, nearest, neighbour' (IA).
●DER 1. лελá-τηç, Dor. -τaç [m.] 'one who comes near, serf, jobber' (trag., Pl.), [f.]
-Tɩç (Plu.), with -tikós (D. H.); ¿µneλáteipa [f.] = neλátis (Call., Euph.); 2. néλaσiç
[f.] (¿µ-, лpoσ-) ‘approach' (S. E., Procl.); 3. ä-äλŋtos (epic), ä-nλātoç (Dor., trag.)
‘unapproachable, appalling'; 4. ëλātis, -ɩdos [f.] ‘wife' (Ar., Lyc.); 5. tɛixeoi-itλñta
[voc.] epithet of Ares (E 31, 455); 6. лlýtns. rλnoiaotýs ‘neighbour' (H.).

=== page 609 ===

1166
Médedog
Adverb лλησíov (Il.), Аeol. лλá-σov, Dor. лλãτíov 'near', adjective ëλŋσíos
'standing nearby, neighbouring' (Il., epic Ion.); лλησó-pos 'neighbouring' (IA),
rλŋoi-ótŋs [f.] ‘neighbourhood' (A. D.); ñàŋoσi-ášw (Dor. лλãτɩ-) 'to approach,
accompany, associate with' (Att.), whence -ασμóç, -aσua, -aσıç (Arist.).
•ETYM Clearly related to the verbs meaning 'to approach' (see below), but the
morphological analysis is unclear. Gr. лéλaç has been explained as an old nom.sg.
'who is near'; the forms in лλη-, лλã- reflect the zero grade *plh₂-. See Sαonλñtic,
►лíλvaµiai, ► лλá¤w, ▶лλýv, and ►лλńσow.
лéλɛеoç [m.] 'ordure'. σлéλεoç.
nÉ入edpov [n.]→入ÉOpov.
лéλɛɩa [f.] ‘wild pigeon' (Il.). ◄IE *pel- ‘gray'➤
•VAR лελɛáç, gen. -ádos, mostly plur. -ádɛs [f.].
●COMP As a first member in лεε-éµ 'feeding pigeons' (A.); also
metaphorically as a name of the priestesses of the sanctuary at Dodona (Hdt., S.,
Paus.).
•DER лελεíoυç. Kшoι кαi оi'Нлεрãται τoùç yέpovтaç kaì tàs npeoßúτɩdaç 'old men
and women in Cos and Epirus' (H.).
•ETYM The msc. лελεíoυç is a secondary innovation. The bird was clearly named
after its color, like e.g. Lat. palumbēs ‘dove', palleō ‘to be pale'. It could reflect a u-
stem *лελúç 'grey', cognate with лedióç, nodióç, neλɩτνóç. The priestesses in Dodona
(like the aged people in Cos and Epirus) were called “doves" because of the color of
their hair. Cf. ➤meλidvós.
neλekáv, -ãvos [m.] ‘pelican' (Anaxandr. Com., Arist.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Сf. лελɛкavós 'fulica' (gloss.).
•Der reλekãç, -ãvtos [m.] ‘green woodpecker' (Ar. Av.); nɛλɛkīvos [m.] ‘pelican'
(Ar. Av., Dionys. Av.); more usually as the name of several plants, "axeweed",
especially 'Securigera Coronilla' (Hp., Thphr., Dsc.), and in the architectural
technical expression 'dovetail' (Ph. Bel., Hero Bel.).
⚫ETYM Derived from лελɛкυç ‘axe' because of the functional and/or formal similarity
with an axe. For лελɛкáv, compare especially the ethnonyms in -áv (Aкapváv, etc.).
Fur. 320 compares oñéλektos. nedɛkáv (H.).
лελεкUÇ [m.] 'axe, double axe, hatchet' (II.). <PG(S,V) ►
VAR Gen. -ɛws, Ion. -ɛoç; also ẞÉλεккOÇ, see below.
•DIAL Myc. pe-re-ku-wa-na-ka (?, Puhvel KZ 73, 221f.).
•COMP εчα-лελεкUÇ = Lat. sexfascalis (Plb.), σqуро-лελεкUÇ ‘hammer-axe' (Att.
inscr.); nu-лελεкkov [n.] “half-axe", 'axe with one edge' (Y 851) (< adj. *ñµ-лéλεкf-
os 'consisting of half an axe').
⚫DER Diminutivе лελéк-оν (Att. inscг.), лελεккOV (-os) 'axe-handle' (N 612, Poll.,
H.; from -кF-ov), лελεкv-váρov ‘id.' (Theo Sm.); лɛλɛкãç, -ãτoç ‘axe-smith' (Ostr.
Ia). Denominatives: 1. лελεк-άw (-ɛккáw ɛ 244 < *-εкF-άw; rarely with ȧvα-, άло-,
K-, кατα-) 'to cut with an axe' (ε 244), whence -ηua, -noic, -ntýs, -ńtwp, -ntpię,
-ntós (Hell.); 2. neλekí¼w (ảño- AB) ‘to chop off with an axe', especially ‘to behead
É入入a1
1167
(Plb., Str.), whence -чouós (D. S.). The gloss лéλεкpα. ážívη ‘axe' is obscure and may
be late. Gr. лéλvε ‘id.' (LXX, pap.) on the model of instrument names in -vε, whence
TελÚк-10V (Peripl. M. Rubr., pap.).
•ETYM Compare Skt. paraśú- [m.] ‘axe, battle-axe', Oss. færæt ‘axe' (from Iranian
into Tocharian: ToA porat, ToB peret 'axe') < QPIE *peleku-. These words have long
been identified with Akk. pilakku, which however never means 'axe', but rather
'spindle'. Thus, this comparison must be given up. Fur.: 150f. points to þéλɛkkoç
öσpió tɩ µεpèç λαúp μεуεoç εpεßívov Xov 'pulse resembling a λ. with the
size of a chick-pea' (H.). Further, compare his notes 39 and 40. He also assumes that
the -кк- represents Pre-Greek gemination. лελεкpɑ, too, may be a Pre-Greek
formation, like лελvε.
nɛλɛµíšw [v.] ‘to vibrate, shake', pass. 'to tremble' (Il.). <PG?►
●VAR Aor. -íčat, -ɩXĒñval.
⚫ETYM Denominative formation in -í(w, from an unknown noun, *лέλɛµa vel sim.
Possible cognates are identified in Germanic, e.g. in the compounds Go. us-film-a
'frightened, appalled' (usfilmei 'fright, horror'), ON felms-fullr 'full of frightening',
which would presuppose a noun PGm. *felma- 'fright'. If the suffix was *-mo-, one
could connect it to лáλλw 'to sway, rock'. Another cognate may be лóλεµoç. Fur.:
151 calls лελεμ- “entschieden ungriechisch"; the suffix -εμ- would be Pre-Greek.
лελбvóç [adj.] 'blue, dark color, pale, bloodshot' (Hp., Arist., Nic.; also Th. and
com.?) <IE? *peli- ‘pale, grey'➤
•VAR лελτvóç (Att. according to gramm.; perhaps to be restored in Th. 2, 49, Alex.
110, 17 et al.).
•Der neλidv-ýeis (Marc. Sid.), -años (Nonn.), whence -óτηs [f.] ‘blue stain' (Aret.,
Gal.), -óoµaɩ [v.] ‘to turn blue, etc.' (Hp., Arist.), whence -wμα, -wotę (medic.). Also
лɛλiós ‘blue, dark' (Hp., D., Thphr., Nic., etc.), лελɩ-wdns (sch.), -ótŋc [f.] (medic.),
-óoμa (Hellanic., Hp., LXX), whence wσic, -wμa (medic., sch.), -aívoμaι (Hp.);
лελλóç (лéλλoç?) ‘dark-colored' (S. Fr.?, Arist., Theoc.), -aç [m.] 'old person, very
old man' (Hdn., H.). With y-enlargement: лελуóvεs [m.pl.] = yépovντεs (Lac.,
Massal.), = oi ¿v tαîç (Macedonian acc. to Str. 7 Fr. 2); neλɩyãveç. oi évdošoɩ. rapà
Sè Zúpois oi Bovλεvτaí ‘esteemed ones, in Syrian councillors' (H.).
•ETYM Traditionally explained as an enlargement of лεdióç, or a transformation of
older лɛλɩ-tv-óç, which would have the same combination of suffixes as Skt. páliknī
[f] < *pali-t-n-i 'grey' beside msc. pali-t-á- (would be Gr. *лελɩτóç; thence perhaps
лελT-VÓç after the fem.?). An i-stem has been assumed as the basic form, which may
be retained in лελiós (probably for *лελ-Ƒó-c), and perhaps also in лελλóç (if from
*лελчó). Seе on лéλεα for a different formation. See also лоió.
лελα 1 [f.] 'milk pail', also 'drinking bowl, goblet' (II 642, Hippon., Theoc., Nic.).
APG? (S, V)►
•VAR Also - acc. to Arc. 108, 1.
•Der reddiç, -ídos [f.] ‘id.' (Hippon., Hell. poetry); nédiš, -ikos [f.] = KÚλ or
лроxodov (Cratin.); -íкn, Aeol. -íka [f.] = xoñç, λɛkávη ‘a liquid measure = 12
кoτúλaɩ; dish, pot or pan' (Poll.); nedλíxvn [f.] = лéλλa (Alcm., Hell. poetry; after

=== page 610 ===

1168
Té入入a 2
kúλ-1§, -íxvη; cf. further έλíк-ŋ from šλiε). ñe\\ŋtýp, -ñpos [m.] ‘milk pail, drinking
bowl (Hell. authors in Ath. 11, 495e), лεllavτñpa. àµoλyéa ‘milk paiľ' (H.) (to
*лε\\αívw).
⚫ETYM The comparison with Lat. pēluis [f.] ‘bowl, dish' or Skt. pālavī [f.] ‘kind of
barrel, vessel', pārī [f.] ‘milk-pail' is unconvincing, and does not lead to a PIE
reconstruction. Fur.: 134 posits a Pre-Greek word because of the vacillation -IK-, -UK-
(and -λ-, -λλ-).
лéλλа 2 [f.] λíos 'stone' (H.). <PG(V)>
.
•VAR Cf. QEλλɛúç below.
•ETYM Assuming PGг. *лελσã, it has been connected with OHG felis 'rock', MIr. all
'crag' (< PCl. *palso-), Skt. pāṣāṇá- [m.] ‘stone, rock', Psht. parsa ‘id.' (< IIr. *pars-,
IE *pels-); however, the variation *pelso- / peliso- does not seem IE (cf. Fur.: 1627).
The noun could be identical to the Macedonian town IIέ\\a. Fur.: 161f. further
compares qɛɛúç ‘stony ground', which shows a different anlauting consonant, and
therefore points to Pre-Greek origin.
лελλopáqoç [comp.] an artisan who sews together hides (gloss.). <LW Lat.➤
•ETYM Hybrid form containing Lat. pellis ‘hide'and pártw.
лéλλñτpa [n.pl.] 'foot-wrapper, foot bandage' (A. Fr. 259 = 435 M., S. Fr. 1080; H., who
also gives the suspicious forms ´εllaotaí, nεllúta and relλúteµa). ◄IE? *ped-
'foot'>
⚫ETYM Analyzed as *лεб-Ƒλυ-τрα, a compound of лεε- 'foot (see ►лоús) and the root
Eiλúw 'to wrap', with a suffix -τpo-. Nevertheless, monosyllabic Fλv- and its length.
are surprising.
лελμα [n.] 'sole of the foot or shoe' (Hippon., Hp., LXX, Hell.). <IE? *pel- 'hide'>
•COMP As a second member in ẞaðú-, dí-, µovó-лελµos (AP, Edict. Diocl.).
●DER kata-лελµaτóoμaι 'to be soleď (LXX), лɛλµaτí¶w ‘to sole' (pap. VIº), ‘to sleek
the soles' (Anon. on EM 659, 43).
•ETYM For the formation PIE *pel-mn ‘skin, hide', compare OS filmen, OFris.
filmene, OS æger-felma 'pellicle of an egg'. With n-suffix: Lat. pellis <*pel-n-i- ‘skin,
hide', Lith. plėnė ‘membrane', OPr. pleynis 'cerebral membrane', Ru. plená
‘membrane' < *pl-ēn-(i)ā-; OCS pelena 'band for swathing children', Ru. pelená
'shroud, (dial.) nappy', Sln. pléna 'bandage' < *pel-en-h2-, OHG fel, -lles, OE fell, ON
fjall [n.] 'hide' < PGm. *fel-n-. Perhaps εpvσíлελαç [n.] name of a skin-disease
belongs here as well. There is no corresponding primary verb. See also лελTN,
►εлíлλоov, and ►σлоλáç.
▶
лéλoµaι [v.] ‘to stir' (in compounds), ‘to become, take place, be' (Il.). ◄IE *k"lh,- ‘go
round'>
•VAR More rarely лελw, aor.med. 2sg. εлλεo, зsg. -τo, act. εлλε (M 11; v.l. ñεv).
•COMP Also with prefix (especially in aor.ptc. лεpɩ-, έm-nλóµevos).
●DER 1. лóλoç [m.] ‘axis, world axis, pole, vault of heaven, disc of the sundial, etc.'
(IA); denominative ptc. ó лоlɛúwv (Cod. Astr., PMag. et al.). 2. -лóloç in
compounds like αi-лóλoç, diкασлólóç, i̟éлo̟лóλоç ‘horse-breeding' (Il.),
лελwp
1169
vuêtɩëóλoç ‘travelling by night' (E. [lyr.]); τpíñolos ‘ploughed thrice' (Hom., Hes.);
from the prefixed verbs are derived aµíлolos (see s.v.), лεрíлоλoç, etc. 3.
deverbatives: a. лоλéw, -éoμαι (often with prefix, e.g. àµopi-, àvα-, лεру-, лроσ-) [v.]
'to go about, wander around, take care of, etc.' (Pi., Att., etc.); also with nominal first
member, е.g. лчρ-лоλέw 'to watch a fire' (Od., X.), 'to ravage with fire, destroy' (IA);
here belong, partly as back-formations: лεрí-, лрóσ-лоλоç, луρ-лóλоç, лúρ-лооç,
etc.; trans. 'to turn (said of the earth), root up, plough' (Hes. Op. 462, Nik. Al. 245). b.
лoλɛúw (X 223, trans. S. [lyr.]) ‘id.', from àµœɩ-лoλɛúw (epic Od., Hdt.), metri causa
for -έw; c. лwλéoµαɩ (also with έлɩ-) [v.] 'to come or go frequently' (Il.) έninwlŋois
[f.] 'muster, review of the army' (name of Il. 4, 25off. in gramm., Str., Plu.).
•ETYM Greek has a thematic present лελoµα, -w < PIE *k"elh,-e/o-, like Lat. colō, -ere
(< *kwel-e/o-) 'to build upon, inhabit, attend, honor', Skt. cárati 'to move around,
wander, drive (on the meadow), graze', Alb. siell 'to turn around, turn, bring'. The
zero grade them. aor. -лλ-ετo has no counterpart. Because of π- before ε, лελoµαi
must be an Aeolic form; the expected - of Ionic-Attic is seen in τéλoμαι,
▶ téλloµai, telé¤w, ►τέλoç. The PIE connotation of cattle-breeding and agriculture
is preserved in compounds such as aiлóλoç, ẞouкóλoç, τpí-лoλoç. The formal
similarity of лwλéoμa and the Skt. causative caráyati is secondary. Whereas лóλoç
may be a productive o-derivative from the verb, àµœíñoλoç (= Lat. anculus) and
several words for 'car, wagon' (see кÚкλoc) may be inherited nominals. Note also
лεрíлоλоç patrolling guardian' (Epich., Att.) = Skt. (Ved.) paricará- [m.] ‘servant'.
Sее ►лáλv, ►τηλε, ▸εµлoλý, and ►εлɩлλα.
лéλtŋ [f.] ‘small light shield without an edge, mostly made of wattle-work, with a
cover of leather' (Hdt., Tab. Heracl., Att.). <LW? Thrac.>>
•DIAL Dor. -ā.
●COMP As a first member in лελτo-pópos (X., Plb.), Boeot. -ópaç, also -a-qópaç =
TE入taotńg.
•DER Diminutive лελτ-íov (Men.), -ídiov (sch.), -áptov (Callix., Luc.). Denominative
лɛλτá【w [v.] ‘to bear a shield' (X., App.), лeλt-aσtýs ‘shield-bearer, peltast, lightly-
armed man' (Att.), -αστIкóç 'of a peltast' (Att.). A probable back-formation is кατα-
лελτάw 'to overpower with peltasts' (Ar. Ach. 160).
ETYM Acc. to Hdt. 7, 75 and other sources, the “έλτη was carried by the Thracians;
thus perhaps it is a loanword. Usually connected with ►лéλµɑ, Lat. pellis, etc. as a
derivation in -t-. Semantically, this is quite possible, but there are no good cognates
with a t-suffix.
ï¿λtŋs [m.] ‘the pickled Nile fish kopaкīvoç' (Diph. Siph apud Ath. 121b, H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. See Strömberg 1943: 131 and Thompson 1947 s.v.
лελτоν [n.] 'base of an altar, tomb' (inscr. Lycaonia). <LW Asia Minor▷
ETYM LW from Asia Minor, belonging to Hitt. palzahḥa- 'pedestal, base' (Haas
Jahrbuch für kleinasiatische Forschung 3 (1953): 132); accepted by Neumann 1961: 99f.
ПÉλvĘ →˜ÉÀɛкuç and лελλα 1.
лéλwρ [n.] 'monster, monstrosity' (Hom., Hes., h. Ap., Nonn.). <?►

=== page 611 ===

1170
•Var Plur. лéλwpa beside sing. лελwpov [n.].
•DER Adj. лελwp-os (certainly first in Hes.), older and more usual -чoç (Il.),
'monstrous, enormous'. Diminutive лɛλwp-ís (Xenocr. Med.), -ás (Hell. and late
poetry) [f.] 'kind of shell.
⚫ETYM Old formation in -wp (to which perhaps the PN лελáрηs [Stуra] belongs).
Hesychius gives the variants Téλwp. лελápov, μакрóν, µéуа long, big' and
τɛλwpios péуaç, лελópios 'big, monstrous' (H., also grave inscr. Memphis Iª). This
suggests an original *k"-, and Aeolic origin for лéλwp. Frisk compares τépaç 'marvel,
monster' and suggests that лελwp arose from dissimilation of *kwerōr; however, the
latter would not easily explain τépaç (from *kerh₂-s?), so this word is better left
aside. Thus, лελwp remains without etymology.
лéµлελoç [adj.] ‘old, old man' (Lyc. 682, 826). Glossed by Gal. 6, 380 as лapà τò
¿knéµneoðai eis “Аdov лoшý ‘after the sending of a procession to Hades', ‘id.' in
Suid.; H. gives στwµúlov, λálov, oi dè λíav yŋpaλéov 'wordy, loquacious; very old'.
<?7
*.
•ETYM Galen's explanation is a folk etymology based on the similarity with лéμлw.
Blanc RPh. 72 (1998): 134 proposes reduplicated *лελ-лɛλ- > néµñedoç, from the root
for 'grey' seen in лελðνóç, лελiós (see also Blanc KZ 110 (1997): 233f.).
лεμлш [v.] 'to send, dispatch, guide, accompany', med. (mostly with prefix) also 'to
send for someone, fetch'. <?>
•VAR Аoг. лéμai, fut. лéµw (Hom.), aor. pass. лεµеñα (Р.), perf. лéлo̟µôа
(IA), mеd. лелεα (Att.).
•COMP Very often with different prefixes, е.g. ȧло-, έк-, έл-, µετα-, пpo-.
•DER 1. лoµëý (áva-, àïo-, ¿ê-, „po-, etc.) [f.] 'conduct, escort, procession, pompa'
(Il.). 2. noµñós [m.], also [f.] ‘escort, messenger' (Il.), also adj. ‘guiding, bringing a
message' (A., Ael.); prefixed compounds, е.g. лроño̟μл-ós ‘escort, escortess, guide
(m./f.), guiding, escorting' (A., X.); as a second member in compounds, e.g. yuxo-
лo̟µ-ó ‘guide of souls' (E.). From 1. or 2. (not always discernable): a. ñoµ-añoç
'guiding, leading' (Pi., trag.), àлo- (LXX, Ph.); b. -чuos ‘'id.' (Pi., trag.), 'sent off (S.),
also ava-, dia-, etc. (D. S., Luc.); c. -ɩkóç ‘belonging to the procession' (X., Hell. and
late); d. to 'leď (Plot.); e. -ílos [m.] name of a fish that accompanies ships,
'Naucrates ductor' (Erinna, A. R.); f. лoµñεúw (rpo-, ovµ-, έëɩ-, dɩα-) [v.] ‘to escort,
guide, partake in a procession' (Il.); thencе лóμлev-ois, -týs, -týplos, -tikóç; -εła
[pl.], -ɛía [f.]; probably also, as back-formation, лоμлεú ‘еscort, partaker of a
procession' (Od., Att.). 3. лéµчí (mostly with ảñó-, ék-, ¿n-, µɛτá-, etc.) [f.]
'sending' (IA). 4. лεµлð ‘escort' (S. Fr. 142 II 10 [lyг.]); ëρoëεµëτýp-10s 'escorting'
(Philostr. VA), ȧло-, éро-лεμл-тɩкóç (Men. Rh.); 5. ►εúñéµñελoç.
•ETYM All forms belong to productive derivational patterns. The verb has no IE
etymology, nor does it show characteristics of loanwords or Pre-Greek vocabulary.
лɛµôŋpíç [f.] a small fish mentioned by Numen. apud Ath. 309f. <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown. Cf. Thompson s.v.
teveepós
1171
*néµqiž, -iyos [f.] poetic word of unstable mg., partly due to the artificialities of Hell.
poets: 'bubble of air or water' (secondarily of the soul), 'blister on the skin, drop (of
water or blood), drizzle, spraying spark, also said of the sunlight' (Ibyc., trag., Hell.
poetry). <PG?>
•Der neµqiyódns 'full of vesications' (Hp.). лâçíç, only attested in the gen.pl. -ídwv
(Lyc. 686; v.l. -íywv). With o-grade: éoµôós [m.] ‘blister on the skin' (Hp.); more
often with X-suffix in лoµôpoλúw (-úσow?), only aor. зpl. лoµôóλvžav ‘sprang up'
(of tears; Pi.), and roµôóλvž, -ùyoç [f.], also [m.], ‘bubble' (Hp., Pl., Arist., Thphr.),
metaphorically of a female hair ornament (Ar., Att. inscr.), of an architectural
ornament (Att. inscr.), of shield-knobs (H.), of a zinc oxyde (medic.). As a first
member in лоμчoλvуo-лaqλáσμаτα [pl.] jocular formation (Ar. Ra. 249). Thence
roµpodvy-wtós ‘provided with bosses' (Ph. Bel.), -wdŋs ‘like bubbles', -ŋpóv [n.]
'plaster with zinc oxyde' (medic.), -ów [v.] ‘to make bubbles' (Arist.), -óoµoɩ, -í¶w ‘to
bubble' (medic.).
ETYM Possibly Pre-Greek words. They might be onomatopoeic in origin; compare
similar expressions for 'swelling, etc.' in Baltic: Lith. pampti 'to swell', pempùs 'fat-
bodied', pumpulis ‘roundish, thick-bellied thing', also bumbalas ‘knob, bladder’. Cf.
► ßéµßiε and ► ßóµßos.
лεµöpηdwv, -óvos [f.] 'kind of wasp, tree wasp' (Nic.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM The suffix is the same as in the synonyms Tεvеpηdáv, ►áv¤pηóv. The base
was probably onomatopoeic, and possibly Pre-Greek: compare words for 'humming,
buzzing', such as SCr. bümbar bumble-bee', Skt. (lex.) bambhara- [m.] 'bee', Arm.
-oy 'bumble-bee, hornet'; also, Skt. bhramará- 'bee', OHG breman 'to hum',
Latin fremō ‘to roar' < *bhrm-, etc. Cf. Kuiper 1956: 222 and Fur.: 222.
bor,
лεvéστaɩ [m.pl.] name of the serf population of Thessalia; as an appellative 'slaves,
servants, poor farm laborers' (Att., Arist.). <LW? Illyr.>
•VAR Rarely sing.
●DER ɲɛveot-ɩkós ‘belonging to the penestať (Pl.), -ɛía [f.] 'the class of penestai
(Arist.).
•ETYM Possibly identical with the Illyrian PN Penestae (cf. also the Apenestae in
Apulia). The ancients connected лεvéστα with лévès 'poor', лévoшa 'to toil', which
in itself is possible (from *pen-e/os- [n.]).
лévηs, -ητos [adj.] 'poor'; as a msc. subst. 'poor man'.
•DER лεvía 'poverty'. →лévoμai.
=
лevðɛpós [m.] ‘father-in-law = father of the wife' (cf. έkupóç), also 'brother-in-law,
son-in-law' (Il.). <IE *bhend"- 'bind'>
•DER лεvðɛpá, Ion. -ý [f.] ‘mother-in-law' (D., Call.), -ɩdɛúç ‘son-in-law' (inscr. Asia
Minor, imper. time.), -ídns ‘id.' (pap. VIP; Schwyzer 510); -10s (Arat.), -Iкóç (Man.)
'belonging to the лεvеερóç'.
•ETYM Inherited kinship term *bhend"-er-o-, formally almost completely agreeing
with Lith. beñdras 'participant, sharer'; compare Skt. bándh-u- [m.] 'relative'.

=== page 612 ===

1172
Mévlog
Derived from 'to bind', hence literally “ally". The oxytone accentuation of лevðɛpós
is after ►ěkupóç. See ▸лεчσμа.
meioua.
лévеoç [n.] sorrow'. →лáσxw.
névoµai [v.] ‘to exert oneself, toil, work, prepare, provide' (Il.), 'to exert onself, (have
to) do hard labor, be poor, lack sth.' (Sol., trag., Pl.). <IE *(s)penh,-►
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.
•COMP Often with aμot-, also ouv-.
●DER 1. лεvía, Ion. -ín [f.] 'poverty, lack' (§ 157); 2. лεvõp-ós ‘poor, devoid of sth.' (y
348; cf. µɛλixpóç s.v. ►µéλi), -ótns [f.] (S. E.), -aλéos ‘id.' (AP). 3. névns, -ntos [m.]
(fem. лévŋoσɑ• лτw×ń ‘beggarу' [H.]) 'who has to live from the labor of his hands,
needy, poor³, лεvéo-tepos, -tatos (X., D.); thence лεvòɩ-ɛúw 'to be poor' (Emp.),
-vλídas [m.] "son of poverty" (Cerc.), which presupposes a hypocoristic *Iεvnt-
úloç. 4. nóvos [m.] ‘(hard) labor, effort, struggle, sorrow, pain' (Il.); also as a second
member, e.g. лavσí-лovоç 'ending pain' (E., Ar. [lyr.]); but ματαio-лóvoç et al. to
лоуεoμα. Thenсе лоу-ηрóç 'toilsome, useless, bad, evil' (IA), whence -npía,
-εvai, -εvа; лоvóεç ‘id.' (Man.). 5. Iterative deverbative лоvéоμαι (also with
åµôɩ-, diα-, etc.) [v.] 'to exert oneself, provide, suffer' (Il., mostly in the older
language), and active novéw (also with diα-, έк-, кατα-, etc.) also trans. 'to cause
pain' (post-Hom.). As a second member in µαταιo-лovéw [v.] 'to labor in vain'
(Democr.), whence -лovía (Str.), -ëóvèµɑ (Iamb.), -лóvoç (Plu., Gal.). Deverbal
лóv-ŋµa (diα-) [n.] ‘labor, work' (Pl., E.), -ŋois (diα-, кατα-) ‘labor, effort' (Plu., D.
L.); as a back-formation e.g. diáлov-oç 'working hard, weary' (Plu.) from diα-лovéw.
6. лováw only in εлováеη (Pi.) and έлóvασav (Theoc.).
⚫ETYM A primary formation is the present лévoμα; iterative лovéoμaɩ, -έw and the
noun лóvоç may be productive derivatives. The only viable cognates are words for
'to stretch, twist, weave' in PIE *(s)penh,-, e.g. Lith. pinti ‘twist', OCS pęti ‘stretch',
Arm. hanum and henum 'weave', Go. spinnan, etc. Greek would then have
undergone a semantic shift from ‘to stretch' > ‘tense, strain' > ‘exert oneself.
лévtɛ [num.] ‘five' (Il.). <IE *penk"e 'five'>
•VAR Аeol. лεµлε, Pamph. „é(v)dɛ.
•COMP As a first member, beside лεvtε- and ɲɛµƒɛ-, we mostly find лεvta- (Il.), after
έnta-, deka-, tɛtpa-, etc.
⚫DER Ordinal лεμлτоç 'fìfth', Агс. лεμлоτоç (aftеr Séкoτоc), Gortуn лéутоç, whence
nɛµëtało ‘belonging to the fifth (day), happening on the fifth (day)' (§ 257);
nɛvtákiç [adv.] (Рi.) beside лεулάкi (Sparta), лεµлτáкɩç (D. S.) ‘five times'; collective
лɛµïás [f.] ‘quintet' (Pl., X.) besides “εµлtás (Pl. Phd. 104a), éɛvtáç (Arist.).,
whence rɛvtád-ov [n.] ‘quintet' (pap. II-III³), лεµлɑd-ɩкóç ‘fivefold' (Dam.).
Adverb лévτα-ɣα (M 87), -ỵoŨ, -Xñ, -×шç; adjective éɛvtažós ‘fivefold (Arist.); noun
nevtáxa. ǹ xɛip ‘the hand' (H.), cf. MoGr. Lac. лεvτóxtŋ ‘hanď (Kovkovlés Apx. 27,
61 ff.). A denominative verb, probably from лɛµлáç, is nɛµrášoµai, -w [v.] ‘to count
(by the five, with the five fingers)' (8 412, A.), with ava- 'to estimate, calculate, think
over' (Pl., Plu.) with лεµлаστáç [m.] (Dor.) 'the counting one' (A. [lyr.]). From
πεvτηкovτa 'fifty': nevtηkoo-tús [f.] 'body of fifty', part of a Spartan λóxos (Th., X.),
лεлερι
1173
revtikootýp, sec. -кovτýp [m.] 'commander of a лεvtηkootús' (Cos, Th., X., Att.
inscr.).
•ETYM Non-Aeolic лévτɛ, whence Pamph. лέ(v)dɛ, Аeol. лεµéɛ and the other IE
words for 'five', e.g. Skt. páñca, Lat. quinque, Lith. penki, Go. fimf, all go back to IE
*pénkwe. Similarly, Gr. néµïtos < *penk"-to-, like Lat. quintus, Lith. peñktas, Go.
fimfta. The lengthening in лεvτη-кovta (PGr. *ē) not only appears in Skt. pañcā-śát-
[f.], but also in Arm. yi-sun (i <*ē); the lengthening was caused by the glottal feature
which resulted from the loss of *d in *dkomt (see έкατov; Kortlandt MSS 42.
(1983): 97-104). A parallel development is found in Lat. quinquã-gintā 'fifty' (after
quadra-gintā 'forty'?).
лéоç [n.] 'penis' (Ar. Ach.). <IE *pes-os- n. 'penis'>
•DER лεoids 'with a swollen member' (Com. Adesp.), also лɛwdę ‘id.' (Luc. Lex.).
•ETYM Identical with Skt. pásas- [n.] ‘id.', cognate with Hitt. *pešan- / pešn- / pišen-
‘man, male' [c.] < *pés-ōn, *pes-(e)n-, Lat. pēnis ‘tail, penis' <*pes-n-is. See ▶róoðŋ.
nérāļiai [v.] ‘to possess, acquire' (Argos Vª). <IE *kueh₂- (?)►
•VAR Аor. лắσασðαι, fut. лắσo̟μaι (Dor., Arc., poet. since Pi., Sol.); pres. ¿µ-
ллáσкo̟µαι to acquire'.
•DER_1. лãµa [n.] (Arc., Arg., Сret.), εллаµа (< έµ-л-; Вoеot.) ‘possession'.
Derivations: noλυ-лáμшv 'wealthy' (A 433), èxé-лãµov (уévoç) 'having possessions,
inheritor (Locr.), žк-лaµov· áкλýрwτov 'without lot' (H.); with transition to the o-
stems: μ-náμw (сod. ¿µлαуµш)· лаτршxu̟ 'heiress'; εnɩ-<ña>µat-ída⋅ tǹv έríkλŋpov
'heiress' (H.); лaµŵxoç. ó кúpios ‘lord' (H.), whencе лаμшуέw 'to possess' (Tab.
Heracl.). 2. šµñãσɩç (Corc., Meg.), švéāois (Arc.), čññāσis (Boeot.) [f.] ‘acquisition',
лǎσiç kτñσiç ‘possession' (H.). 3. лªµ-ëησíɑ [ƒ.] 'full possession' (A., E., Ar.). 4.
nátopes. ktńtopes 'possessors' (Phot.), лāτýp ‘possessor' (Critias). 5. With
analogical -σ-: лáσταç [m.] ‘possessor, lord' (Gort.); also PN E-лαστoç (Argiv.),
гvо-, Оó-ллαστоç (Boeot.), probably also лεлαστai (Thgn. 663).
⚫ETYM The forms τа ллáµаτа (Воеot.), гυvó-ллаστоç, etc., with geminatе лл, show
a trace of the original cluster *kų (cf. Úллоç). Thus, лé-лä-µai, лá-σaσðαi, ná-σoµai
continue a monosyllabic full grade. A connection with PIE 'to swell' *kueh,- is
impossible because of the different laryngeal. There is no exact correspondence
outside Greek. The zero grade *kuh₂-, which correponds with IE *kueh₂-, is found in
ä-KŨ-P-OS, ▶KÚPIOs lord, possessor'.
лεлαрεчν [v.aoг.inf.] 'to demonstrate, show', acc. to H. = ¿vdɛïžaɩ, σŋµñvai (Pi. P. 2, 57;
v.l. лɛñopɛïv). ◄IE *prh3- ‘give, provide'>
•VAR nεлapεúσov. ɛépaστov, σaqés ‘easy to make intelligible, wise' (H.).
•ETYM Floyd AmJPh. 92 (1971): 676-9 demonstrated that the word contains the root
*prh¸- of лopɛîv, with -лаp- < *-prh3-V-; for the development, we may compare
άλíʊkoµaɩ with Ƒaλ- < *u̟lh¸-V- (see Beekes, in: Bammesberger 1988: 75). Cf.
►лорεiv.
лéñɛpɩ [n.] ‘pepper' (Eub., Antiph., Arist.). <LW Orient.>>
•VAR Gen. -10, -ɛwç; also -1, -180ç [m.]. Rarely лí-.

=== page 613 ===

1174
1175
•СOMР лɩлεрó-уapov [n.] 'peppered fish broth', µαкρo-лεлερɩ [n.] 'long pepper'
(medic.).
●DER -15, -180¢ [f.] ‘pepper tree' (Philostr. VA). Thence лɩëεpîtɩç [f.] plant name
'siliquastrum' (Plin., etc.); лɛлɛpíšw [v.] ‘to taste like pepper' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Oriental LW, first from MInd. pipparī (Skt. [epic cl.] -lī), further of unknown
origin.
лелλоç [m.] 'woven cloth, blanket' (Hom., trag.), usually 'female or male garment,
women's skirt' (Il.). ◄IE? *pel- ‘fold'>
•COMP е.g. εŰ-лεëλos (¿ü- epic) ‘having a beautiful garment' (Il.).
•Der лéлλwµa [n.] ‘robe, garment' (trag.).
•ETYM In theory, it could be a reduplicated formation ïé-ëλ-oç of the root PIE
*pl(H) 'to fold', found e.g. in Gr. ȧ-лλ-óç, àлλóoç 'single, simple', dutλóoç,
Sɩлλoчç 'double, twofold', OIr. diabul 'double'. Alternatively, the root might be *pl-
'skin, hide'; see лελµα. Neither solution is compelling.
néñvũµai [v.perf.] 'to be prudent, clever, clear-minded', very often in ptc. лεëvũµévos
'to be prudent, clever, clear-minded' (Il., also late prose); also aor. pass. opt. 2sg.
лубеεiηs (Nic.). <IE? *pneuH->
•Comp äµ-лvñτo ‘regained consciousness'.
•ETYM The verb is generally derived from the root *pneu- of лvεw 'to blow³, but
LIV² posits a separate root *pneuH- to explain the length of лvv-. The appurtenance
of Hitt. punušzi, punuššanzi 'to ask' < *pnuH-s-, however, is difficult for reasons of
both phonetics and semantics (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
лεлpwτaɩ ‘it is destined by fate'. →лopɛîv.
neлpilos →ñépdoµai.
лεлрwiшv [gen.pl.] perhaps the name of a phratry or deme (Erythrae, IVª). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
néлwv, -ovos [adj.] ‘ripe', metaphorically 'soft, mild' (IA). <IE *pek"- 'cook'>
•VAR Hom. only voc. лéлov. лéлwv is used for msc. and fem., but fem. also лέëɛɩpa
(Anacr., Hp., S., Ar.), new msc. лéлɛɩpoç (Hp., Thphr., LXX); compaг. лεлαí-τεроç,
superl. -τατoç (after лεлαívw?), also rɛñɛpó-tɛpos, -tatos.
•DER лεлαíуw (aoг. лεлāv-αɩ, -Оñval with -Onσoμaɩ, perf. inf. лεлával (Arist.), also
with έk-, kata-, úлεp-) [v.] ‘to make ripe, ripen', metaphorically 'to mollify, mellow,
soothe' (IA), whence лέлav-oɩç [f.] ‘ripening' (Arist.), -ɩɩкóç ‘making ripe' (Hp.,
Dsc.); back-formation лέлav-oç (-óc) ‘ripe' (Paus., Artem.); лεлavas. лλakoúvtia
'flat cakes' (H.) (= лóлɑvα, see ►лñéσow).
•ETYM A derivative PIE *pek"-on- from the root *pek"- ‘to cook, ripen'. The verb
лεлαíνw <*ре-рan-ie/o- continues *pek"-n-ie/o- with the zero grade of the suffix.
лερ [pcl.] enclitic pcl. of emphasis (Il.). <IE *per 'going through?'>
•ETYM Identical in form and function with Lat. -per in nu-per, parum-per, etc.; see
лépã [adv.], also [prep.] + gen. '‘beyond, further, longer, more, past' (Att.). <IE *per
'beyond, across'>>
•COMP compaг. лεpαi-τépw (Att.), -τɛpov; adj. -τɛpoç (Pi.).
also
•Der лέpāv, Ion. -ŋv [adv., prep.] + gen. 'over, across, beyond, opposite to' (Il.). adj.
лεрαчoç 'ulterior³, especially ǹ лεpaía (Xúpα, yñ) 'the country on the other side',
PN (Hdt., A. R., Plb., Str.). Thence 1. Пɛpaïτηs [m.] 'inhabitant of the IIɛpaía' (J.); 2.
лεрαιóеεv 'from the other side' (A. R., Arat.); 3. лɛpaɩóoµαɩ, -ów (also with dia-, etc.)
'to cross over, bring over' (since w 437), 'to accomplish' (Gort.), 'to end' (medic.),
ɲɛpaiwoiç [f.] ‘crossing' (Str., Plu.). Denominative verb лɛpáw (aor. -āσaɩ, Ion.
-ñσaɩ, also with prefix, especially dɩa- and έk-) [v.] ‘to pass through, go beyond,
reach the end' (Il.), (diα-)лép-aµα [n.] 'crossing' (Str.), εклéраμα 'coming out' (A.),
лéρ-ασιç [f.] 'stepping through' (S.), -áσчμoç 'crossable, passable' (E., Str.); -ατóç,
Ion. τós 'id.' (Pi., Hdt.); -ατns 'ferryman' (Suid., Procl.), also 'stranger, emigrant'
(LXX; probably from лépā); nepā-tɩkóç ‘foreign', and -τóc ‘id.' (pap. IIIª). Often with
intensifying åväɩ-: ȧvtiлépaia [n.pl.] ‘the stretches of coast on the opposite side' (B
635), -aia [f.sg.] (A. R., Nonn.); àvɩɩлέpaç ‘opposite' (Th., X.), -лέpav, -ŋv (Hell.),
-лéрã (Ev. Luc.) ‘id.²; -лépηеε(v) ‘from the opposite coast' (A. R., AP).
•ETYM Gr. лεpã and лέpāv are petrified case forms of a noun ‘other side': the latter
continues the acc.sg. of a noun *per-h₂- [f.], while the former allows for several
interpretations (instr.sg.fem. or nom.pl.ntr.?). See ➤лépɩ and ► лápos.
répas, -atos [n.] ‘end, boundary'. →nɛipap.
лépуovlos →σ´opyíloç.
répdiž, -škoç [m., f.] 'partridge' (Archil., Epich., S., Ar., X.). ◄PG▷
•VAR Сrеt. лηρ (H.), with -np- < -ɛpd-.
лкpι
●COMP e.g. лεpdɩko-¤ńpaç [m.] “partridge-hunter”, kind of hawk, ovpo-répdiž
Σúpоç лéрdiε (Аel.).
=
●DER Diminutive лɛpdík-tov (com.), -ɩdɛú¢ [m.] ‘young partridge' (Eust.), adjective
-ε10 of the partridge' (Poll.), -tác, -tádos [f.] (Gal.), -íτŋs [m.] name of a stone
(Alex. Trall.).
•ETYM Frisk explains the word as a derivative in -к- from ►лépdoμa 'to fart', due to
the droning sound when partridges take the air.
лéρбoμαι [v.] 'to fart' (Ar.). <IE *perd- 'fart'>
•VAR Perf. лεлоρda (with resultative mg.), aor. -лαpdɛïv, fut. -лapdǹgoµai.
•COMP Also with άлo-, кατα-, лpoσ-, úлo-.
•DER 1. лopdý [f.] 'fart' (Ar.), whencе лóрdшv, -шvоs [m.] nickname of the cynics
(Arr.); 2. лpádŋows [f.] ‘farting' (Hp.); 3. лpadíλŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Theognost.); reduplicated
лεлpadîλaɩ [pl.] ‘id.', also name of a fish (H., Phot.), equally лεлрílos. ¿xßñç rolós
'kind of fish' (H., after the sound it produces). 4. with additional suffix лúpačov.
ápódɛvσov 'they shitteď (H.), Cret. for *лέpdαžov as if from *лεpd-ášoµai;
furthermore ȧлолapdaкã (-ka?)· τoñto έpηtai napá τò àлoлapdɛïv (H.).

=== page 614 ===

1176
лερеw
•ETYM A thematic present *perd-e/o- from the root *perd- ‘to fart of Skt. pardate,
OHG ferzan, Lith. pérsti, 1sg. pérdžiu, Ru. perdéť, Alb. pjerdh. See ouλŋropdέw and
▶ TépòLE.
лεpеw [v.] 'to destroy, devastate' (Il.). <IE? *bherd¹->
•VAR Aor. лépσaɩ, лpaðɛïv, fut. лépʊw (Il.). Inf. pass. лépеα (ПI 708; aor. *лερð-σ-,
or with haplology from *лépеεσðαɩ); unclear is лépеετo (M 15, etc.), semantically
aoristic.
COMP Also with Sia-, èк-, ovv-. As a first member in governing compounds лεрoσé-
л(T)oλç 'destroying cities' (A. [lyr.]); second member in лτоλí-лореos ‘id.' (II.), also
-Log (1504), -nc (A. [lyr.]). лépois [f.] 'destruction', title of several poems (Arist.,
Paus.).
•DER Deverbativе лореéш (аoг. лореñσα, also diα-, έк-, etc.) [v.] 'to destroy,
devastate, pillage' (II.), whence (έk-)-rópłnois (D.), -ŋµa (Pl.), (¿k-)-ńtwp (A., E.),
-τs (E.), *-τpios (Tz.), -ηtiкÓS (H.).
ETYM Without a convincing etymology. Janda 2000: 240-242 and LIV² propose a
PIE root *bherd- <*bher- + *d"h,- "Beute machen" = 'capture'.
лépɩ [adv.] ‘around, round; excessively, quite; by, at, concerning' (II.). <IE *per- 'cross,
pass'>
•VAR Prep. лεpí (dial. also лép), + gen., dat., acc.
•DIAL Myc. pe-ri-, as a first element in compounds.
•DER Adv. лépi (suffix -k-), also prep. 'around, round' (mostly Ion. poet.), + *-10- in
MEPL-0σÓS, -TTÓS ‘excessive, extraordinary, superfluous', whence -σσεúw, -ɩɩɛúw, etc.
(Hes.).
•ETYM From a PIE loc.sg. *per-i 'in crossing, in passing' > Skt. pári, Av. pairi ‘around,
about, among, etc.'; Lat. per 'through, across', per- 'very', -per 'through, during', Ven.
per ‘for' < *peri, Lith. per [prep.] ‘over, around, through', OCS prě-, Ru. pére- ‘over,
through, very, exceedingly' < *per; OCS prědo 'in front', Ru. péred(o) 'before, in front
of [prep.] <*per-dhh,-om; Go. fairra 'far'. See ▸лεp.
repiáyvvtai [v.] Meaning uncertain. Used of öy ‘voice' (П 78), thence of ηxó ‘echo’
(Hes. Sc. 279). GR>
•ETYM The allegedly late occurrence in II 78 is about a voice which is broken. Thus is
it derived from ǎyvчu 'to break' as "is broken on all sides"? Or is it cognate with Skt.
vagnú- [m.] 'sound, call, invocation', Lat. vāgiō ‘to lament'?
nepißāpides [f.pl.] 'kind of women's shoes' (com.). <?>
•VAR Also лεpíẞapa [n.pl.] ‘id.' (Poll., H., Phot.).
⚫ETYM Formation like лερισкελídɛç 'foot-clasps, -rings', but further unclear. Jocular
derivation of ẞapıç, Egyptian name of a ship?
nepiŋuektéw [v.] 'to be very reluctant, be upset' (Hdt.). <?>
•VAR Thence ηuεкτεi· Svσqоpεi 'is angry' (H.).
⚫ETYM The formation is reminiscent of synonymous ►άyavaкτéw and of úλaкtéw,
but the origin is unclear. Frisk hesitatingly suggests *лεpι-εμéw 'to vomit', with
compositional lengthening as in εv-quétns.
лεpiwσlov, -α
1177
лεрívalo (-εo) [m.] 'perinaeum, the space between the anus and the scrotum'
(medic., Arist.), plur. 'male genitals' (Arist.). <?>
VAR Also -ov [n.]. Doubtful by-forms are: лεpivo. лεpivéw Gal.; лεрíva (for
лрivα?). лεpívalov. τò aidoiov 'pudenda' and лεрívoç. τò aidoiov ... † τò τŵv
Sɩεúμwv бépμα, ňуovv ó τaчpoç 'pudenda; the skin of the testicles or male pudenda'
(H.).
•ETYM Body part derived from лεpí and iváw, -έw ‘to empty', with a suffix -10- (-ɛ0-),
thus literally "empty region”. See ➤лýpα.
nepívɛws, -w [adj.] “exceeding the ship (the equipment of the ship, its crew)", so
'surplus'; as a msc. subst. 'fellow passenger, passenger' (Att. inscr., Th.). ◄GR▷
•ETYM A hypostasis from лεpì *vāƑós, with лεpí ‘over, in excess'.
repippndńs [adj.] Uncertain. Usually explained as 'falling over, tumbling away' (X 84,
A. R. 1, 431), ‘bent, misplaced' (Hp. Art. 16, Mul. 2, 158). ◄?►
●DER лεpippýdηv (A. R. 4, 1581).
•ETYM Formation likе лεр-кαλλns 'very beautiful', thus probably from a noun
*¿ñdoç. The root etymology is unknown. It has been connected with ►padɩvós
'flexible', ▸pádaμvoç 'branch'; hence, *ureh₂d- has been proposed.
nepiokeλńs 1 [adj.] 'very rough, very hard, inflexible' (S., Hp., Thphr.). <GR➤
●der rɛpiokéλ-ɛia, -ía [f.] ‘harshness, roughness' (Arist., Porph.), -aoía ‘id.' (Orib.);
same extension as in Оɛpμaσía, pλεyμaσía, etc.
•ETYM Probably literally 'completely dried (cf. σкληpós; from *σкέλoç
'barrenness') > 'dry all around'. The same is also supposed for άσкɛλŃç. See
▶ OKÉ入入W.
лεpɩokελns 2 [adj.] 1. 'going around the legs', in τà лερiσкελñ ‘trousers', sing. Tò -ÉC
(LXX). 2. 'with the legs around', i.e. 'with the legs put apart' (sch.). <GR>
⚫DER From 1. is derived лεрισкελíç [f.] 'leg-band, -ring' (Hell.), with -ídiov (Delos
II³).
⚫ETYM From σKÉλoç 'leg'.
лEPLσσÓS, -TTÓS →πépi.
nepɩotepá [f.] ‘pigeon' (IA). <?>
•VAR Secondary -óc [m.] 'cock pigeon' (com.).
⚫COMPлεριστεро-лwληç 'pigeon-vendor' (Hell. pap.).
●Der Diminutive rɛpiotɛp-íç [f.] and -tov [n.] (also used as decoration of women),
-ídlov (com., pap.), -18ɛús (Hell. pap.); -(ε)wv [m.] ‘pigeonry' (Pl., pap.). Gr.
teplotep-lov, -ewv also occur as a plant-name for 'Verbena officinalis, supina' (Dsc,
Ps.-Dsc.), which are visited by pigeons.
•ETYM Not certainly explained. Perhaps from лελós ‘dark, blue', лέλɛɑ ‘wild
pigeon', by a wrong restitution of earlier *лελστεрá (cf. MoGг. лελotépi).
nepiwoiov, -ia [adv.] ‘excessive, immoderate', also + gen. (Il., Pi.). <GR➤
•DER Adj. -toç ‘id.', also ‘extraordinary' (Sol. and Emp.); лεpóσov· µéуa ‘big' (H.).

=== page 615 ===

1178
TEPK VóG
⚫ETYM From лέpɩ, with the same suffix as έtwσios ‘fruitless', perhaps created after the
latter. An intermediate form *лεpt-o- can hardly be justified. Hence лεpóσoç 'id.'
(EM 665, 29).
лɛpêvós [adj.] ‘spotted, having dark spots', also the name of a kind of eagle (§ 316,
Hp., Arist.). <IE *perk- ‘variegated, motley'>
•DER έлÍ-лερкvoç 'somewhat spotted' (X.). лépкоç [m.] 'kind of eagle' (Arist.), лéρкη
[f.] 'redfin perch, Perca fluviatilis' (Emp., com., Arist.), -íc, -íov, -ídiov (com., pap.,
Dsc.); лερкáç [adj. f.], attribute of кíxλη, probably as a fish name (Eratosth.).
Denominatives: a. лɛρкá¶w, -oµαι (also with úло-, έπ-, έv-) [v.] 'to get dark spots,
start ripening”, act. also ‘to darken' (ŋ 126, Thphr., LXX); b. лɛpкaívw, -oµai (¿µ-) [v.]
‘id.' (E., H.); c. àño-nepkóoµai [v.] ‘to become dark', of ripening grapes (S. Fr. 255, 6).
Неге лεркбμаτα· τà έлÌ τоỹ проσáлоу локíλματα spots on the face' (H.).
Furthermore: 1. with zero grade: лpaкvóv. µéλava ‘black' (H.); 2. with different full
grade, probably secondary: лрεкVÓν· лошкιλóxрооov λapov 'deer with various colors'
(H.), to which belongs 3. with o-ablaut ►лpóč, -кóç [f.] and лpoкáç [f.] 'deer- or roe-
like animal', Пpóкvη PN ‘Nightingale' or 'Swallow'; 4. with lengthened grade ►лpóε,
-Kóç [f.] 'dewdrop'.
⚫ETYM An adj. *лερкóç lies at the basis of the nouns лépкoç, лɛpкáç, the adj. лɛpк-
vós, and the verbs лɛpк-ášw, -aívw, -óoμat. Compare MIr. erc (W erch) ‘spotted,
dark-red', 'salmon, trout', also 'cow, lizard'. The form лрaкvóv is from a zero grade
*prk-n-; cf. Skt. pŕśni- ‘spotted, variegated', OHG forhana ‘trout', OE forn(e) [f.];
further cognate forms are MoSw. färna fish name < *perk-n-; OHG faro, farawa
'variegated' <IE *pork-uó-. Perhaps Lat. pulc(h)er 'beautiful' <*pelk-ro- for *perk-ro-
belongs here too?
népvā, -ŋs [f.] ‘ham' (Str., pap. II³, Ath.). <LW Lat.➤
VAR By epic influence, or as an error of transmission, also лтéруα (Вatr., Poll. 2,
193).
⚫ETYM Loanword from Lat. perna 'id.'. See also ►лτέρуη.
=>
mépva² →OpidaE.
лépvŋµ [v.] ‘to sell' (II.). <IE *perh₂- 'sell'>
●Var лépvaµai (Il.), aor. лɛpãσ(σ)at (Il., also Aeol. and Ion. inscr.), fut. inf. лɛpáɑv
(Ø 454), pass. лрã¤ñvαɩ, Ion. лрηе-, with fut. -ŋσoμaɩ, perf. med. réлpāµiai, -ŋua
(IA), fut. лεлрáσoμα (Ar., X.); recent Att. innovations are act. лεлρãкα and pres.
„mpáσkoµai, later -w (Thphr. [?], Luc., Plu.), -ńokw (Call.). Further forms: εëpŋσa
(Samos VIª; to ¿½½), лépуσ л 'sell!' (H., from the present);
tetepnuévos (Þ 58; for лεлpηµévoç after лɛpáσα).
•COMP Also with άлo-, лαрα-, ouv-, etc.
●DER 1. лpāσɩç, Ion. пpñois (diá-, ȧлó, etc.) ‘sale' (IA), ëρáσшoç 'for sale' (Pl., X.). 2.
åñónpaµa [n.] ‘subletting' (Hell. pap.). 3. лpaτýp, Ion. лpη- ‘salesman' (IA), -ńptov
[n.] ‘selling point, market' (Hdt.; Hell.); also лрáτwp, -opos 'salesman' (Hell. inscr.
and pap.; also with лpo-, Din. and Is. in Poll.), лрατоpεúw [v.] 'to act as a salesman'
(Tenos III). 4. лрáτηs, -oυ 'salesman' (also ouμ-, лpо-; Att. orators in Poll., pap.); in
Пεpσεqóvη
1179
late papyri, often in compounds like ελato-, olvo-лрá-τηç. 5. adj. лpαtɩkóç in -ń
'sales tax', -óv 'sale on commission' (pap.).
⚫ETYM The system „ɛpåσα, „éлpāµαɩ, лpāеñvαɩ points to a root *prh₂-, with a root
aorist and a nasal present *pr-n(e)-h₂- (cf. LIV²). The forms лépуηji, rɛpvaµai must
have analogical ε for the original zero grade, which is preserved in лopváµεv• лwλεīv
'to sell', лopváμεval. лwλoúµεvai “selling' (H.), which are probably Aeolic. There are
no certain cognates of *perh₂- outside Greek, since OIr. renaid, -ren 'to sell' may
belong to a root *h₂reiH- 'to count' (Schumacher 2004: 551f.). See ► лópvn.
лεpóvη →εipw.
лερлεpoç [m.] 'dandy, boaster'; as an adj. 'vain, boastful' (Plb., Arr., S. E.). <LW Lat.>>
•Der nεprep-ótŋs [f.] ‘boasting' (Chrysost.), -εúoμa [v.] 'to be a windbag, boast' (1
Ep. Cor. 13, 4, M. Ant.); also μ- (Arr.); -ɛía [f.] (Clem. Аl.); ршло-лεрлερ-ńерα [ƒ.]
‘empty boasting' (Com. Adesp.).
•ETYM A loanword from Lat. per perus 'perverse, wrong-headed', attested since
Hellenistic times.
nepoća (-aia, -ia, -ɛiŋ) [f.] name of an Egyptian tree, ‘Cordia myxa', which originated
from Persia (Hp., Hell.). <GR>
●DER лɛpoέïvos “belonging to the persea tree' (pap.), лépσ(ε)ɩov [n.] ‘its fruiť
(Thphr.); diminutive -ídiov (pap.).
⚫ETYM Named after its Persian origin; suffix like in unλéa, etc.
лερσεúç [m.] name of an unknown fish from the Red Sea (Ael. NA 3, 28). <?>
•VAR Also лépσoç 'id.' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown.
Пɛpσɛqóvŋ [f.] spouse of Hades (Pluto), queen of the underworld; as a daughter of
Demeter, identified as Kópŋ (Ion. since h. Cer. and Hes.) <IE *perso-g™³n-t-ih₂
'threshing>
•VAR Also Пεpσɛ-óvɛα (Il., Od.). Several by-forms are found: Dɛpσɛ-qóva
(Simon., Pi., Thess.), -póveta (H.), Пŋpióva (Locr.), IIŋpɛóóveia (Lac. acc. to H.);
with a different ending: Пɛpσé-qaσσa (A.), Þɛpoé-qaσσa (S., E.), Deppé-qatta (Pl.,
Ar., Att. inscr.) etc., лɛpoó-qaïta (Att. inscr.), name of the sanctuary Þep(p)eqátt-
tov [n.] (D., AB).
•DER Plant name Пεpσεóviov, Dep- (Ps.-Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 100.
•ETYM It was long thought that the original form of the first member was Dɛpoε-,
whence the various other forms would have arisen by dissimilation of aspiration,
compositional lengthening, etc. The name was always considered obscure until
Wachter Kratylos 51 (2006): 139-144: the original form is лεpσóчаττα, as found in
eight attestations, seven of which are on 5th c. BC Attic vases (by seven different
painters). Note that the form лεрσóðɑɑ was not even mentioned by Frisk. It
should be analyzed as containing a first member *perso-, cognate with Skt. parṣá-
[m.] 'sheaf of corn' (following a suggestion by Weiss, Wachter l.c. also mentions the
possibility that Lat. porrum 'leek' and лрáσov ‘id.' are related, perhaps implying a
meaning ‘ear of corn' for IIɛpoo- and Skt. parṣá-). The second member is derived

=== page 616 ===

1180
mépUOL(v)
from *-g"n-t-ih₂ (to *gen- ‘to hit, strike'). Thus, the name refers to a female thresher
of corn.
The forms in -óvɛa beside -óvη (cf. IIŋvελóлεɑ beside -ŋ) may be folk-
etymological; IIɛpσε-, etc. too, after лερеw.
лépvσɩ(v) [adv.] 'last year' (IA). <IE *per, *uet- 'year'>>
•VAR Doг. лÉρUTI(C).
●DIAL Myc. pe-ru-si-nu-wo.
•DER лερvσɩvós 'from last year' (Att.).
•ETYM PIE adverb of time *per-ut-i, literally ‘on the other side of a year', a loc.sg. of a
compound of *per and *uet- ‘year'. Cognate forms: Arm. heru, ON í fjørð, MHG vert
'id.', OIr. ónn-urid ‘ab anno priore' < *peruti. Without final *-i in Skt. parút last
year'. See TOÇ.
лéσкoç [n.] ‘skin, rind' (Nic. Th. 549); лεσкéwν· Sεpµáτwv 'hides' (H.); ȧ-лεσкýs
'without a cover' (of τóča; S. Fr. 626; not quite certain). <?>
•ETYM The word rhymes with μέσкoç ‘skin, fleece'. Perhaps from *лέk-σк-o-, from
‘pek- ‘to comb² (cf. ñókoç ‘fleece³)? Rejected by Frisk.
*
лεσσóç [m.] 'the oval stone in board games', mostly plur. ‘gaming piece, board game,
checkers', often metaphorically in several mgs. (a 107). <PG?►
•VAR Att. лεττÓS.
•COMP As a first member in лɛσσо-voμέw 'to arrange the gaming pieces', also
metaphorically (A., com.).
•DER лεσσáрov [n.] 'pessary' (medic.); лɛσσ-iкóç, -TT- 'belonging to board games'
(Apion); -ɛúw (rarely with diα-, µετα-) [v.] ‘to play on a board with pieces' (IA),
whence -ɛía, -εvτTŃS, -EVTIKÓS, -EUTάpiov (Pl., pap.).
•ETYM Loanword of unknown origin. A Semitic etymology (belonging to Aramaic
pis(s)ä 'stone, small table') has been proposed. Fur: 270 cites Hitt. piššu [n.] 'rock,
block of stone' (without conclusion). The word may well be Pre-Greek (perhaps
*pek-).
лéʊʊw [v.] ‘to ripen, bake, cook, digest' (Il.). <IE *pek"- ‘cook'>
•VAR Att. лέɩɩw, aor. лévai (II.), fut. лéww (Ar.), pass. perf. néñeµ-µai, aor. лɛóðñvai
with лɛеñσoµα (Hp., Att.). The prеs. лεлτш (Аrist.) is an innovation.
COMP Also with катα-, лεрι-, σuv-. Nominal: ȧрτо-кóлоç (Нdt.), Myc. a-to-po-qo
/artopok "os/ 'baker', §ρv-лεл-ηç 'ripening on the tree' (com., AP).
●DER 1. лέµµa [n.] ‘pastry, cake' (IA), whence -átiov (Ath.); 2. réų [f.] ‘digestion,
cooking, ripening' (Hp., Arist.). 3. лentós (E. Fr. 467, 4, pap., Plu.), more usually in
compounds, e.g. ä-, dúσ-лεлtoç ‘indigested, hard to digest' (Hp., Arist.), whence ȧ-,
Svo-ney-ía [f.] (Arist., Hell.); 4. ɲɛnt-ikós ‘'fit for digestion' (Arist.), -úpɩoç ‘id.'
(Aret.). 5. ñéñtpiα [f.] ‘bakeress' (H.). With o-grade: 6. лóлavov [n.] ‘pastry' (Att.,
Hell.), whence -wdŋs ‘like pastry' (H.), -ɛvµa [n.] ‘id.' -ɛãov. panificium (gloss.). 7.
лолáç, -áðoç [f.] 'id.' (AP).
⚫ETYM Gr. лεσσw is from PIE *pek"-io/e-, like Skt. pácyate [3sg.med.] 'ripens'. Other
cognate forms: thematic root present *pek"-o/e-> Skt. pácati, Lat. coquo, W pob-,
MÉTOLal
1181
OCS peko, Lith. kepù (with metathesis), Alb. pjek ‘to cook, bake'. Nominal
formations: лéμμа < *pek"-mn, àρτо-кóлоç < *-pok"-o- with metathesis; лεлτρια
presupposes a msc. *pek"-tr- 'baker³. See ▸лέлwv.
nɛtávvyu, -úw [v.] 'to spread out, unfold, open' (Att.). <IE *peth,- 'spread out'>
•var rítvŋui, -άw (Il.; čлτvov Hes. Sc. 291), лετ-áľw (LXX), -áw (Luc.), aor. лɛtá-
σ(σ)ai. Pass. -σеñvaɩ, perf. med. лéntaµai (all Il.), лɛлétaσšai (Orac. apud Hdt., D.
S.), aсt. лεлεταкα (D. S.), fut. лετ-áσw (E. [lyr.]), -áσow (Nonn.), -w (Men.).
•COMP Often with prefix, especially έк-, ávα-, кατa-.
●DER 1. лétaλov [n.] ‘leaf (Il.), ‘metal or gold plating' (Att. inscr.); also -ŋ\ɑ [pl.]
(Hes. Sc.; metri causa); лετάλ-оv, -la, -íç, -elov, -ītis, -wdns, -ów, -wois, -i(w, -ioµós;
hypostasis εμлεтταλ-íç· εdεσµα diȧ тvρой σкεvаСóuεvov 'a dish prepared from cheese'
(H.). 2. лéτασоç [m., f.] 'broad-brimmed hat', also metaphorically (Hell.), whence
retáσ-lov, -wdŋç, -wv, -îtiç. 3. réτασµа (also with каτα-, ларα-, úлo-, etc.) [n.]
‘blanket, curtain, etc.' (IA). 4. ¿клétaσɩ [f.] ‘spreading out' (Plu.). 5. лεtaoµós [m.]
‘id.' (LXX). 6. лétaɣvov [n.] ‘drinking bowl' (Alex.), -akvov (H.). 7. nétŋlos (-lós)
‘grown onto' (µóσxos, ßoûç; Ath., Н.), “àvaлεлταµéva tả képata ɛ̃xwv”, having the
horns spread out'. 8. ȧvαлετ-ηs 'spread out', whence -εα [f.] 'spreading out'
(medic.). 9. ¿êèéta-λos ‘open, flať (Mosch., ȧyyɛĩov). With unclear semantics:
лετýλaç. τoùç µкρоùç кαì еаµvádɛiç qoívɩкaç 'small and shrubby date-palms';
retŋàíç. áкpíç ‘top, peak' (H.); лετηλíaç kapкivos (Ael.).
ETYM The forms лετά-σαι, лÍτ-vη-µ, лé-лτă-чaι point to a root *p(e) th₂-; the
present лετá-νvoдu was formed analogically after the aoг. лετá-σaι, etc. The old
nasal present лívηµí has a secondary -1- introduced in earlier zero grade *pt-neh₂-.
Cognate verbal forms are found in Lat. patēre ‘to be open' < *pt-ē-, with patulus
'spread out broadly', and the nasal present Lat. pandō 'spread out', Osc. patensíns
[3pl.ipf.subj.] 'to open' < *patn- < *pt-n-h₂-. With an l-suffix like лέτaλov, we find
OHG fedel-gold [n.] ‘leaf-gold'.
лετɛυpov [n.] 'hen-roost, acrobat's bar or framework, high platform, public
noticeboard' (Ar. Fr. 839, inscr. IV, Hell.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Also -aupоν, лéντευроν, see below
•DER лετεÚρ-lov [n.] 'small noticeboard' (Erythrae IV³), -íoμα [v.] 'to act as an
acrobat' (Phld.), whence -toμóc, -1σtńs, -10τńp (Plu., Man.).
•ETYM Technical expression with vacillation between ɛu and av, and between лετ-
and лεvτ-. No good IE etymology is available. Thus, it is probably a Pre-Greek word;
cf. Fur.: 291, 353.
nétoliai [v.] ‘to fly' (Il.). <IE *pet- 'fall'>
●var Aor. étáσðaɩ, ëɩéσðαɩ (all II.), with pres. лéταµαι (poet. since Sapph., Arist.),
aor. лɛtaσðñvai (Arist., LXX), ëτaµαι (late; s.v.); aor. act. лτñvai, ptc. ñíáç, etc.
(poet. Hes., also Hell. prose); fut. лτýooµai (IA), netýooµai (Ar.), perf. кat-éntŋjka
(Men.).
·COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. àva-, àno, Sia-, eio-, èk-, Kata-,Ôtep-.
Compounds: a. -лéτŋç, Dor. -лétaç [m.], e.g. vyɩ-néτηç, -aç ‘flying high' (Hom., Pi.),
enlarged -ŋɛç (Hom.); b. -лetýc, e.g. úñɛpëεtýƒ ‘flying over' (Hell.); c. ¿knet-Ĥolios

=== page 617 ===

1182
métpā,一门
'ready to fly' (Ar.); d. άɛpσi-лótηg and -лótŋ-tog 'flying high' (Hes., AP, Norm.),
from лоτάoμα.
●DER 1. лotý [f.] ‘flying, flight' (ε 337, h. Merc. 544 [v.l. лtepúyeσoi]); 2. rtñois [f.] ‘id.'
(A., Arist.), whence лtýσчµoƒ (Jul.); ëτñµa [n.] ‘id.' (Suid.). 3. Adj. in -no-: a. лτηvóç,
Doг. лävóç 'winged' (Pi., trag., Pl.); b. лετεуóç, -ŋvóc ‘id.' (Thgn.; IIετývη Att.
ship's name [inscr.]; from лéτo̟µα); c. nete-nvós, -elvós ‘id.' (Il.), with diectasis; d.
лotāvós ‘id.' (Pi., Epich., trag. [lyr.]; -ŋvós epic poetry in Pl. Phdr. 252b), probably
modelled on лoτáoμal. 4. Deverbative: лoτάo̟µα, -éo̟µa (also with ảµôɩ-, πepi-, Èk-,
etc.) 'to fly, flap' (Il.); лwτάo̟µαi (also with έк-, έлɩ-, úñεp-) ‘id.' (M 287, h. Ap. 442,
etc.); thencе лwτ½ɛ 'flapping' (Nonn.), also лшτ½µατα [pl.] 'flight' (A. Eu. 250;
usually corrected to ïot-).
LÚ
⚫ETYM The Greek root aorist лτά-σðαι, ë-лτα-τº, лτá-μεvoç, with full grade in ëτñ-
vai, έ-πtā-v, ätý -σoμa, seems to require a root *peth₂-, whereas most of the
cognates in the other IE languages (Lat. petō ‘to make for, reach', MW ehedec 'to fly'
< PCl. *-fet-e/o-, OIr. én, W edn 'birď < *fetno- [m.]; Hitt. pattai¹- / patti- ‘to run, fly,
flee', pattejant- 'fugitive', Skt. pátati 'to fly, fall', Av. auuapasti- 'falling', pata- 'to
fly', ham.pata- 'to fall down', OP ud-pata- 'to fall down, become unfaithful") can or
should be explained on the basis of *pet-. Hackstein 2002b: 140-143 argues that the
root was originally *pet- in Greek as well. The pres. лετα-μαι may be analogical to
лtá-oðaɩ, after лtéoðaɩ next to rétoµai. Gr. notéojai and Skt. patáyati ‘fly, hurry'
agree in their formation, but лwτáoµat is independent. See ➤лτɛpóv and ► ·πTÉpvč.
лéτpā, -ŋ [f.] ‘rock, rocky mountain range, cliff, ridge; rock cavern, cave' (Il.),
'boulder, stone' (Hell.). <PG
•COMP_лetp-ŋpeons ‘covered with rocks' (A., E.), éɛtpo-ßólos ‘throwing rocks',
whence -ía (X., Plb.); úñó-éετpos ‘rocky' (Hdt., Thphr.).
•Der ñétpos [m., f.] 'boulder, stone' (Il.). Several adjectives in the meaning 'rocky,
stony': лετp-años (poet. since µ 231), also as an epithet of Poseidon (Pi.), -ńɛɩs (II.),
-voc (Ion. poet.), -wons (IA), -ńpηs (S.), -wεis (Marc. Sid.). Diminutive -ídiov
(Arist.); adverb -ŋdóv (Luc.). лετрáv, -ŵvos [m.] 'rocky place' (Priene IIª).
Denominative лετрóоμα, -ów (also with кατα-, úло-) [v.] 'to be stoned to death,
turn be turned into stone' (E., X., Lуc.), лέτρшµa [n.] 'stoning' (E.), also 'heap of
stones' (Paus.). Several plant names: ïɛtp-ívŋ, -ɑía, -aĩov, -wvov, -ís, ¿ní-netpov,
etc.
•ETYM We find лετpos 'stone' and its collective, лé¨τpα. There is no etymology. The
suggestion by Meier-Brügger KZ 94 (1980): 122ff. that лετpoç derives from *per-tro-
'Instrument zum Hindurchkommen' is improbable. The word is probably Pre-
Greek; see Fur.: 272 etc.
=
neýdoual → mvvdávozial.
лɛúkŋ [f.] ‘pine', especially 'Pinus Laricio' (II.), metaphorically ‘torch' (trag.). <IE
*peuk-'sting'>
•DER лεvк-εɩç, Dor. -άɛç 'made of pine, belonging to the torch, stinging, sharp'
(trag. [lyr.], D. P., Opp.); -tvoç 'made of pine' (S., E., Plb.); -úv, -wvoç [m.] 'pine
forest' (Hdn. Gr.); -ía [f.] 'taste of pitch' (Tz.). лεvкáλчμoç, epithet of oppéves (Il.),
{
{
1
f
πnyń
1183
also of лрαлídεç, µndɛa (Orac. apud D. L., inscr.); лευкεбανóç, еpithet of лóλεμоç (K
8), of ẞéλεчvα, ȧσлíç (Оrph.), of ¤áλασσα (Opp.); with oppositional accent, we find
лεUкέбavov, the name of a bitter umbelliferous plant, 'sulphur weed' (Thphr.).
•ETYM Similar names of pine and fir-trees are found in Baltic, Germanic, and Celtic:
OPr. peuse [f.] (< PIE *peuk-), Lith. pušis (< *puk-), OHG fiuhta, MIr. ochtach [f.] (<
*peuk-t-, *puk-t-). A by-form is found in ►лʊуµý. If лεúêη has the same origin as the
second member of ¿xε-лεvкýs, nεpɩ-лevкýs ‘stinging, sharp', it can be derived from
an adj. *лɛvкóç 'sharp, stinging'. Gr. ¿xe-nevкýs may contain an s-stem *лεñкoç [n.]
'stinging, point'. From the same basis, we find the adjectives лεvкáλчo and
Пεкεdavóç, for which a meaning 'sharp, intrusive, stinging, bitter' must be posited.
The A-suffix also occurs in лευкαλéov. Eŋpóv 'dгу', лευкαλεt̃ται. Enpаívɛται 'dries up'
(H.). For Indo-Iranian cognates, see Morgenstierne NTS 13 (1942): 229 and Turner
1966 No. 8407 *pōśi.
neoveiv →Acívw.
лǹyavov [n.] ‘rue, Ruta graveolens' (Diocl. Gr., com., Thphr.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Qαíкavov. лηуavov ‘id.' (H.).
•COMP ȧуριо-лηуаvov 'Syrian ruе' (H., Аët.), лηуav-éλatov 'rue oil' (medic.).
•DER лηуáν-ov [n.] 'rue' (Thphr., Nic.); adj. -vos, -εtos (Gal.), -óɛç (Nic.)
'belonging to the rue', -wdns 'rue-like' (Thphr.); -íτns olvos (Gp.), -ītis xodń
(Sopat.); -ŋpá [f.], -ŋpóv [n.] ‘rue plaster' (medic.); -íw [v.] 'to be like a rue' (Dsc.,
Gal.).
•ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word; note the formal variation in paíкavov (Fur.: 162).
The suffix recalls other plant names, such as λáxavov, þáкavov, éλátavoç, and
pápavoc.
Пnyaσos [m.] name of the mythical horse, that Poseidon conceived with Medusa
(Hes.). <LW Anat.>>
•VAR Dor. Ilάy-.
•DER IIŋyáσ-εoç, fem. -ís 'belonging to Pegasus' (Ar., Mosch., AP).
•ETYM It is now agreed upon that Pegasus derives from the first element of
piḥaššašši-, an epithet of the Hittite and Luwian Storm-God (Starke 1990: 103-6). The
adjective piḥaššašši- is to be regarded as a Luwian genitival adjective of a stem
*piḥašš-, which is attested in HLuw. pihas-. Acc. to Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. piha-, the
meaning of this onomastic element in Anatolian is 'strong' vel sim., and not
‘lightning'. Based on the latter translation, which has been current for some time,
scholars have proposed a formation *b¹ēh₂-o- to *beh₂- ‘shine', but Kloekhorst
argues that this unappealing reconstruction (unmotivated lengthened grade) should
be abandoned.
лŋyń [f.] ‘well, hot spring', also plur. ‘waters, stream' (Il.). <GR?, PG?►
•VAR Doг. лαуá.
⚫DER Diminutive лηу-íov (pap. IIª), -ídlov (Suid.); adj. -años 'belonging to a well'
(IA), -чµaños ‘id.' (Hdn. Epim.); -álw (also with ȧvα-, кατα-) [v.] ‘to spring up' (Ph.,
AP), лayáσɑσðαɩ [aor.inf.] 'to bathe in a well' (Dodona; late.).

=== page 618 ===

1184
•ETYM Since 'wells' are often denominated as being 'cold' (e.g. ОCS studenьcь :
studeno, Lith. šaltinis: šáltas, Gr. víßa [= víða]· xióva, kaλeitai dè oʊtwę kai kpývŋ
Év Opάкn 'snow, also the word for “source” in Thracia' [Phot.]), a derivation from
the root of лηуvчμа 'to get stiff has been proposed; cf. лηуvλíç 'ice-cold',
лауετúdŋç ice-cold', лауετóç 'icе'. While theoretically possible, we have no further
evidence for this suggestion. Alternatively, we could be dealing with a Pre-Greek
word.
лýуvvµ [v.] ‘to fix, stick, join, congeal or coagulate' (Il.). <IE *peh₂ģ- ‘coagulate, fix'▷
•VAR Dor. Aeol. лáу-, also -úw (X., Arist.), лñσσw, -ɩɩw (Hell.), aor. лñšαi (šлnêto A
378), pass. ñaуñvai, ròx³ñ-vai, fut. nýžw, perƒ. act. intr. ´éëŋya (all Il.), trans. plpf.
εлεлη×εσαν (D. C.), med. лéïηуµai (D. H., Arr.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ¿v-, ouv-, kata-, лɑpɑ-. Compounds: лηуɛσi-µallos
'having dense wooľ (г 197); -πη, e.g. in ȧvtí-ï½§, -yos [f.] 'kind of chest' (E.); vav-
лnу-ós [m.] 'shipbuilder' (Att., etc.); -лηу- and -лαy-ńc, e.g. εúñnyńs, evлayńs
'well built' ( 334, Pl.), лɛpiäηyńs ‘frozen around' (Nic.); σчµлaуns 'put together'
(Pl.).
•DER A. From the full grade: 1. лηуós solid, dense, strong', originally ‘attaching’; in
late poetry 'white', also ‘black'. 2. лŋyás, -ádos [f.] ‘hoar-frost, rime' (Hes.); 3.
лηуvàíç [f.] 'frosty, icecold' (§ 476, A. R.), 'hoar-frost, rime' (AP et al.). 3. лñуµα
(diá-, napá-, oúµ-, лpóσ-, etc.) [n.] ‘joint together, stage, scaffold, etc.' (Hp., Hell.;
conjecture apud A. Ag. 1198), -µáτov (Ph., Procl.); 4. ññšis (σúµ-, ěk-, čµ-, etc.)
'fixing, fastening, coagulation' (Hp., Arist.); лηуvvσiç ‘id.' (Ps.-Thales). 5. лηкτóç,
Dor. лāк- (кατá-, σúμ-, -, etc.) 'solid, etc.' (in Att.); лηкτý [f.] 'net, framework'
(Ar., Arist.), лαкτá [f.] 'fresh cheese' (Theoc.); µкηs [m.] 'who posts up' (Arist.);
лηкτíç (Dor. Aeol. лaк-), -ídos [f.] name of a Lydian harp (IA); mnktikós (¿k-)
'coagulating' (Thphr., Dsc.). 6. лηуɛtós [m.] = ray- (D. P.).
B. From the zero grade: лáуoç, -ɛetóc, -epós, ►ñáyŋ, ►˜áž, ►ñáxvη; also ñáyɩos
'stout, solid' (Pl., Arist.), лayɛús [m.] ‘pedestal' (Hero). Further also nåk-tóç in
кaτañaк-τóç, (Hdt.) and лaкτó-w (¿лɩ-, ¿µ-) ‘to fix' (IA; лакτóç for traditional
лηкτóе in Hom.?).
⚫ETYM From PIE *pehg- 'to coagulate, become fixed' > лηу-, zero grade *ph₂g->
лау-. Cognate verbal forms in other IE languages: Lat. pangō, -ere 'to insert firmly,
fix' <*ph₂-n-g-, Skt. pajrá- 'solid, firm' with loss of the laryngeal by Lubotsky's Law
(Lubotsky MSS 40 (1981): 133-138), pājas- [n.] ‘side, surface?”, Khot. pāysa- ‘surface',
Lat. compāgēs joint' (etc.), pāgus 'district', pāgina 'column'.
˜ŋdáw [v.] ‘to leap, jump; to beat' (of the heart or pulse) (Il.). <IE *ped- 'foot'>
•VAR Hyperdoric лað-; aor. ï½§ñoai.
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. άva-, kata-, έk-, άлo-.
•DER (åva-, ¿к-)лýd-ŋµa [n.] ‘leap' (trag.), -ŋois (åva-, έê-, áño-, etc.) ‘jumping,
leaping' (IA), -1¤µós [m.] ‘pulse beať (Hp.), -ŋτýs (èл-ɛσ-) [m.] ‘leaper' (Ptol.,
gloss.), -tiкós (èк-) 'fit for jumping' (Arist.). Backformation τpí-лηdoç or -ov
"three-jump", 'trot' (Hippiatr.).
1185
•ETYM Deverbative or denominative formation on the basis of a form *pēd-, which
could be the lengthened grade of the root *ped- 'to tread, fall', whence *ped- 'foot'
and several verbal forms derive, such as Skt. pád-ya-te 'falls, treads', OE fetan 'to fall'.
The Greek verbal stem suggests a denominal formation, thus from a noun *pēd-o-;
see лndóv 'blade of an oar'.
лηбóv [n.] 'blade of an oar' (Od., Hell. epic). <IE *ped- 'foot'>
•DERлηdáλov [n.] 'rudder, fin-rudder' (Оd.), лηбαλ-wdns 'like a fin-rudder', -wτóç
‘equipped with a rudder' (Arist.), -óoµai [v.] ‘to be equipped with a rudder' (Simp.).
•ETYM From a preform *pēd-o- 'sole' or 'footstep'. Often compared with Lith. pėdà,
dial. also pëdas, 'sole of the foot', but these have acute long ė from *e before *d,
according to Winter's Law. Thus, the long vowel in Greek was taken from the root
noun *ped-, *pēd-. Semantically, the use of 'foot' for 'rudder' can be explained by the
flat form and low position of a ship's rudder. The verb лηdáw must have been
formed before *pēd-o- 'sole' or 'footstep' acquired its nautical meaning.
лηdóç [m.] name of an unknown tree (Thphr. HP 5, 7, 6, EM 669, 40). <?►
•VAR Also лñdos.
●DER лηdɩvoç, old v.l. for onуivos (E 838, acc. to Eust., EM, H.); perhaps also
лηбηɛσσα (v.l. A 183 for лið-); лádоç tree name (Thphr. HP 4, 1, 3).
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. Pliny HN 3, 16 mentions padus as a Gaulish word for
'pine'.
лησкоç [m.] 'offspring, son' (Crete V₁). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
лnktis →nýyvvu.
лnlaµús, -údos [f.] ‘(young) tuna' (S. Fr. 503, Phryn. Com., Arist.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also лaλaµíç (Cyran.).
•DER-vdɛía [f.] ‘catching tuna', -vdεĩov [n.] ‘site for catching tuna' (Str.).
ETYM Strömberg 1943: 79ff. (also 128ff.) extensively argues for derivation from
лηλóç 'mud', after the habitat of the fish. Nevertheless, this is improbable; the word
is no doubt Pre-Greek.
лýληž, -ŋкoç [f.] 'helmet' (Il.). <PG(S)►
•ETYM Like so many other expressions for weapons and armor, it is probably a
loanword or a Pre-Greek word; note the suffix -1} < -āž, which often occurs in Pre-
Greek words.
´ηλíкos [pron.adj.] 'how big?, how old?' (IA). <IE *k"o- 'how'>
•ETYM An interrogative adjective *keh₂-l-i-, derived from the interrogative pronoun
*kwo- 'which'. Compare demonstrative τηλíкoç (Dor. Taλ-) 'this big, this old', and
relative ǹlikoç 'how great, how old'. An identical formation (without a suffix *-ko-)
is found in Lat. quālis 'what kind of, tālis 'such' and, with short initial vowel, OCS
koliko 'how much'. The element *keh₂- 'to what extent' may continue the PIE
nom.acc.pl.ntr. of the pronoun. Seе ►лóеεv.

=== page 619 ===

1186
ηlós
1187
ëŋlós [m.] ‘loam, clay, mud, dung, bog' (IA). <PG?►
•VAR Dor. лāλós (Sophr., inscr.).
●COMP e.g. ëŋλo-qopέw [v.] ‘to carry clay' (Ar.), áкpó-лηλoç 'with mud on top'
(Plb.).
DER лλ-voç 'made of clay' (D., Arist.), -años 'made of clay; living in mud' (Man.,
Paus.), wons loamy, muddy' (IA), -wεiç 'id.' (Opp.); -óoμal, -ów (rarely with лερɩ-,
etc.) [v.] 'to be covered with loam, burden with clay' (late), -wois [f.] ‘besmearing',
-wμa [n.] 'mud' (Charis.). Denominative лpo-лηλaкíšw [v.], literally “to tread in the
mud in front of oneself' = 'to taunt, insult' (Att.), probably formed directly from
лηλóç after other verbs in -aк-íw; thence -toµós [m.] ‘dishonor, reproach' (IA), -101
[f.] ‘insulting' (Po.).
⚫ETYM Without a convincing etymology. Pre-Greek?
лñλvž [?] · payáç ‘fissure in the soil, crevice' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•ЕTYM Sее ►σлηλalov.
лчuα [n.] 'disaster, sorrow, distress' (Il.). <IE? *peh,->
COMP Often as a second member, е.g. ȧ-лημшv 'without disaster, undamaged' (II.);
thencе лημшv 'baleful' (Orph.). Denominative лηµαívw [v.] 'to do harm, damage'
(II.).
•DER лηµov-ń [f.] 'id.' (trag., treaty in Th. 5, 18), лηµ-σúvη [ƒ.] ‘id.' (A., E., Orph.),
άлŋµo-σúvŋ [f.] 'freedom from worries' (Thgn.) = àëŋµov-íŋ [f.] (Call.).
⚫ETYM Primary verbal noun in *pē-, as suggested by the vocalism of лñµα in Pi. and
S. [lyr.]. Within Greek, it could be related to ► taλaíлwpos ‘enduring hardship'; see
s.v. In Indo-Iranian, Av. pāman- [n.] name of a skin disease, Skt. pāmán- [m.] ‘kind
of skin disease, scratch' could reflect *peh,-mn-. Formally, these forms could be
connected with the root *peh,-i- 'to taunt', as reconstructed by LIV2 for Skt. piyati 'to
taunt, scold'.
´ñ, лñv ‘to sprinkle'. →лáσσw.
лηvéλoч, -oл [m.] 'duck or wild goose with colored neck' (Alc., Ibyc., Ar., Arist.).
<PG(S)►
•VAR Aeol., Dor. „āv-.
⚫ETYM Formation like other animal names in -oy, such as Spúoy, képкoy, nápvow et
al. The bird may have served as the base for the PN Пηvελóлεα. The stem is also
found in IIŋvéλ-εws [m.], name of a Boeotian leader (II.). Because of its suffix, the
word may be Pre-Greek in origin.
лvη [f.] 'the thread of the woof, wound around the bobbin; woof (E., AP). <?>
•Var itñvos. üqaσμa 'woven robe, web' (H.).
•DER лηvíoν, Doг. лāv- [n.] 'spool with thread' (Y 762, Thphr., AP), also
metaphorically of a kind of puppet (Ar. Fr. 377, Arist.); Öŋvīts (Iāv-), -ítidoç [f.]
"weaveress", epithet of Athena (Ael., AP), Пavíτηs [m.], PN of a Messenian (Hdt.).
„ŋvíčoµai (Dor. „аví-σdoμal (Theoc.); also with άvα-, άлo-, έк-) [v.] ‘to reel (off)'
(com., Arist., Thphr.), whence лηvoμa [n.] 'reeled wool' (Ar. Ra. 1315 [parody of A.],
AP).
1
!
i
⚫ETYM Has been connected with the verb лévo̟μα 'to spin', but this is impossible
because of Doric -ā-. Lat. pannus 'piece of cloth, rag', Go. fana [m.] ‘cloth, towel',
OHG fano 'cloth', MoHG Fahne, OE fana ‘banner' < *fan-ōn have a different
meaning and short *-a- (and no PIE etymology).
лηvýкη [f.] 'false hair, wig' (Luc. Dial. Mer. 5, 3, etc., Phot., Poll.). <GR>
•DER лηvηкíčɛɩv· άлατãν 'deceive' (H., Cratin. 319), also with Sia- (Cratin. 282);
rnsvikiopátwv. qεvaкɩσµáτwv ‘cheatings' (H.).
•ETYM As a wig may seem a bobbin of threads, the word has probably been derived
from лývη on the model of oεváкŋ ‘wig’.
лηvíкα [adv.] 'when?' (Att.). <IE *k"o- 'who?'>
•ETYM Formed from the interrogative pronoun, on the model of ηvíka ‘when’.
лηóç [m.] 'kinsman by alliance' (II.). <?>
•VAR Dor. Aeol. „āós.
•DER лaшτaι· σvyyevɛiç, oikɛtol. Aάкwvɛç ‘kinsmen, relatives (Lac.)' (H.), perhaps
after лατρiшτα. Also in the patronym Пoλv-лαïns (Thgn.). Denominative лaóoμa
[v.] 'to become a kinsman' in лαшes (Alc.). Abstract éŋoσúvŋ [f.] (A. R.).
•ETYM Kinship term without certain connection. As PGr. *pāso- it has often been
connected with Lat. pār, paris ‘equal, matching' (perhaps from *parVs, *pās-i-), but
this is formally not compelling; also, the etymology of the Latin word is disputed.
Unrelated to лηiσкоç 'son, offspring'.
лηpα [f.] 'leather bag, knapsack' (Od., Ar.). <PG?>
•VAR Ion.-1].
•COMPлηрó-dεoc (iµác) 'binding a knapsack' or 'bound around the knapsack' (AP).
⚫DER Diminutive лηрídov [n.] (Ar., Men.); лmp-iç or -ív, gen. -ĭvoç [f.] 'scrotum'
(Nic.); enlarged -íva [f.] (Gal.) = „tepi-valov.
⚫ETYM Unexplained; cf. on Oúλakos and σάkkoç. Fur.: 152 compares ßŋpídɛç.
vrodýµata, à ýµeïs éµßádes Aéyouεv 'sandals, which we call έµßádɛç' (H.) and ëɛpɩ-
ẞāpides 'womens shoes'; he further mentions Lat. però 'soldiers shoes' and pre-
Romance *barr- 'small vase'.
□ŋpia [f.] · A<0>itévdioi tǹv xwpav τou άypoυ 'region of the field (Aspendos)' (H.).
<?>
•ETYM The connection with Go. fera, OHG fiara [f.] 'side, region' is very doubtful. It
is unknown whether the Thess. PN Пmpɛin (B 766) belongs here.
лηрós [adj.] ‘infirm, invalid', of the eyes 'blind', of the limbs ‘lame', etc. (B 599,
Semon., Hp., Luc.). <?►
•VAR Аtt. лñроs acc. to Hdn. Gr. 1, 190.
•COMP лηрo-µελs 'crippled' (AP), ǎ-лηpoç ‘unmaimed' (Hdt.), чμ-лηpoç 'maimed,
crippled' (Hdt., Нp.), ч¼µлαрoç. εµлληктоç 'stunned' (H.); s-stem àлηpýs̟ (A. R.),
ȧnapés. úyiés, ánǹpwτov ‘healthy, unimpaired' (H.).
●DER лηpódŋs (H. s.v. yuós), beside voowdŋs. Denominative лηpóoμal, -ów (Dor.
лāp-) [v.] ‘to be maimed, maim² (IA, Gortyn), whence ï½p-woɩç [f.] ‘maiming' (IA),

=== page 620 ===

1188
лñXVS
-wμa [n.] ‘id.', also ‘maimed animal' (Arist., Gal.). Backformation лãpoç [n.]
'infirmity' (Alc.; uncertain).
•ETYM Isolated. Cannot be connected with лñµα 'sorrow' because of the *ā, as shown
by Doric лãρ-.
лñxчç [m.] 'forearm, arm', as a measure 'cubit', and other metaphorical mgs. (II.). <IE
*behg-u- lower arm, elbow'>
•VAR Dor. Aeol. ïãxuç, gen. -ɛos, -EWS.
•COMP dí-¯ŋx³ç 'two cubits long' (IA).
●DER 1. diminutive ëŋxíσkoç [m.] (Anon. apud Suid.); 2. adjectives лxv-aïos (IA,
лα×ν- Еpich.), -tos (Mimn., A. R.) 'one cubitlon g'; 3. verbs: лηxí\w [v.] 'to measure
by the cubit' (LXX), whence ïñx-ɩoµós [m.] ‘fneasuring by the cubiť (LXX, pap.),
-toµa [n.] ‘cubit-measure' (Sm.); лηxúvw (лɛpi-) [v.] 'to embrace' (Hell. and late
epic).
⚫ETYM PIE word for ‘arm'. Cognates: Skt. bāhú-, Av. bāzu- [m.] 'lower arm, arm,
foreleg of an animal', ON bógr, OHG buog [m.] 'the upper part of the foreleg, bow',
ToA poke, ToB pokai [obl.] ‘arm'.
лαp [n.] 'fat, tallow' (epic Ion. Il). <IE *piH-uer- 'fat'>
•DIAL Myc. PN pi-we-ri-di, -si (?)
●DER Adjective лíwv [m.], ñïov [n.], лíɛɩpα [f.] ‘fat, fertile, rich' (II.), whence лεpóç,
лαрóç ‘id.' (Нp., Arist.); grades of comparison лó-τα, -τεроs (Hom.), new
positive лos (Epich., Nic.); лóτηs [f.] 'fatness' (Hp., Arist.). Poetic лnɛiç ‘id.' (AP).
Denominative verb лαívш (aoг. лāvα, also with diα-, кατα-, etc.) 'to make fat,
fatten, enrich' (Pi., IA), лíα-σμа [n.] 'fattening food' (A.), лолɩ-лíaµµa [n.]
'remaining fat (on the altar)' (Cyrene), -oµóc [m.] ‘fattening' (Ael.); -vτpios (Hp.),
-vtikós (Apoll. Lex.) ‘making fat, fattening'. With λ-suffix: лaλéoç ‘fať (Ion. poet.),
rarely лíαλoç 'id.' (probably reshaped after σiaλos [Hp.]).
Isolated: лµɛλ-ń [f.] ‘fat, larď (IA), whence -wds 'fatty' (Hp., Arist.), -ńs ‘id.' (Aq.,
Luc.).
•ETYM Gr. лαр derives from PIE *piH-ur [n.] 'fať'; the adjective лiwv, лiɛɩpa
presupposes *лíƑwν, *леƑεр-дα from PIE *piH-uön, fem. -uer-ih, 'fat', which
corresponds precisely to Skt. pivan-, fem. pivarī- ‘fat, swelling'. Further cognate
forms: Skt. pivas-, Av. piuuah- [n.] 'fat'. Gr. лчµɛλý presupposes an earlier m(o)-stem
*piH-m(o)- ‘fať; a cognate formation may be Av. paĕman- ‘mother's milk' [n.] <
*pe/oiH-mn-.
лíуyaλoç [adj.] · σаúρoç ó кαλоúμεvos Xaλкiç horse-mackerel (H.). <?►
•
•ETYM Has been compared with Skt. piñgalá- ‘reddish, brown-yellow', with a variant
piñjára-. Also in the gloss лууavεóσσɩov. Aµɛpíaç yλauкóv (which one corrects into
лíууav. vɛóðσɩov)? Uncompelling.
лīdaž, -ākoç [m.] ‘eruption, geyser' (epic Ion. poet. II 825). <PG?>
•COMP лoλv-ñïdaε having many springs' (II.).
●der rɩdak-îtɩç [f.] ‘belonging to a spring' (Hp. Ep.), -óɛç 'rich in springs' (E.),
-wdŋs ‘id.' (Plu.). Also лidñeσσa [f.] ‘id.' (of ”Idŋ, A 183); лðvàíç (cod. rŋd-). ïétpa;
[
1
tidog
1189.
è ñç üdwp péɛɩ 'a rock from which water flows' (H.). Verbs: лðáw (also with Sia-)
[v.] 'to spring, spout up' (Arist.); лdúw (also with ȧvα-, àлo-, dα-) ‘id.' (Hp., Arist.,
Thphr.); лidvoç [f.] 'trickling through' (Hp.).
•ETYM For лīdaž, лidáw, and -ǹɛσσσα, one might assume a noun *лíd-ā-, but лid-úw
and -vλíc point to an v-stem *лíðuç. No certain cognates outside Greek. The word
could well be Pre-Greek (Fur.: 259). See лíσɛα and ► ´ítvç.
лεw [v.] ‘to press, push, beset' (Il.). ◄?►
●VAR -έw (v.l. in Hom.; Hp., Herod., Plb.), aor. лɩéðαi (IA), pass. лεσðñvai (8 336),
also лɩ-éžαɩ, -ε×³ñvaɩ (Hp., Epidaur.); fut. лέow, perf. med. лɛñíɛσµai (Arist.; -íɛyµaɩ
Нp.), act. лεлiɛкα; also лášw (Alcm., Alc., Hell.), лɩáðαι (-ážαι Theoc.), лaσðñvaɩ,
лεлíaσμα (Hell.).
•COMP Often with σuv-, ¿к-, άлo-, etc.
●DER 1. лie-oɩç (ovv-, άлo-; also (-)ñía-) [f.] ‘pressing, pressure' (Pl., Arist.); 2. -σµós
(έk-, ovv-, etc.) [m.] ‘id.' (Hp., Arist.); 3. -σµa (àлo-, ¿к-, etc.) [n.] ‘pressure,
compressed mass' (Hp., Eub.); 4. -σtýp [m.] ‘presser, press' (Att. inscr., medic.),
whence -σtηpios ‘pressing', ntr. ‘press' (Dsc.); 5. -σtpov [n.] ‘id.' (Hp., Gal.).
•ETYM The variant лáш is an innovation after the verbs in -álw, or by phonetic
development from лεw. The etymology is uncertain. Skt. pīḍáyati ‘to squeeze,
press, hurt' < *pisd- is very similar both in phonetics and semantics. If from *pisd-,
лεw might be connected with Gг. лτíσσш 'to bruise, to husk', Latin pinsō 'to crush',
Skt. pinásti ‘id.' < PIE *pis-. However, *pis-d- would be a unique kind of enlargement
in PIE. Also, the passage of alleged *лí¼w to лé‹w would remain unexplained. Katz
Glotta 72 (1994): 151-168 assumes a compound *h,pi-sd- with loss of the laryngeal in
composition, which is an improbable rule.
лíðŋkoç [m.] ‘monkey' (IA since Archil.). <PG?►
•VAR Dor. -āкoç (Ar. Ach., Eg. inscr.).
●comp rɩðŋko-qayέw [v.] ‘to eat monkey(-meat)' (Hdt.), xoipo-ñí³½koç [m.] “pig-
monkey”, 'monkey with a pig's nose' (Arist.).
●DER 1. Diminutives: лðýк-1ov [n.] (Plaut.), also as a plant name (Ps.-Apul.), and as a
designation of a weight hung between two warships (Ath. Mech.); -ɩdɛús [m.] (Ael.).
2. Adjectives: -wdns 'monkey-like' (Arist., Ael.), -εos 'belonging to monkeys,
monkey-' (Gal.); -óɛɩç, fem. -óɛσσα in 【ɩеŋкoñσσαɩ vñσaɩ [f.pl.] 'the Monkey
Islands', off the coast of Campania (Arist., Str.). 3. Verb -íw (also with úão-, dɩα-) ‘to
play the ape', whence -toµós [m.] ‘monkey-trick' (Ar.). Metaphorically лðýkη [f.] =
yúλλa, ‘flea' (Ael.); consonant stem víð½\, -ŋkos (Aesop.). Isolated is лíðшv, -wvoç
[m.] 'small monkey' (Pi., Babr.), probably a hypocoristic.
•ETYM The same suffix can be found e.g. in iέpā, µúpµn, thematicized also in
чITταкóç. A loanword from an unknown language.
лíðoç [m.] ‘large, mostly earthen vessel for storing wine, which is open at the top' (Il.).
< PG(V)►
DIAL Myc. qe-to.
•COMP àð-oíу-iα [n.] 'ceremony for the opening of vessels' (Plu.).

=== page 621 ===

1190
TTLKÉPLOV
•Der лðáкvò (Thasos Va), also in Att. mss., beside ôɩdákvη (A., D., Thphr., Moer.),
Dor. лσáкva [f.] (H.); лðáкvov [n.] (Eub., Hyp., Luc.), -víç [f.], qɩd- (Poll.). Other
derivations: 1. diminutives ле-íσkoç [m.] (Plu. Cam. 20), -áptov [n.] (H., EM); 2.
πɩð-(e)áv, -ŵvos [m.] 'cellar' (com., inscr. IV--IIIª); 3. -íaç [m.] ‘jar-shaped comet'
(Seneca); 4. -τç, -ɩdoç [f.] 'kind of poppy' (Dsc.); 5. -wdns 'like a jar' (Arist.).
•ETYM The word displays vowel variation e: i (see the Myc. form), and consonant
variation in ле- vs. oid-. Thus, probably Pre-Greek.
лкÉριov [n.] ẞoúτupov 'butter' (Hp.). <?>
=
•ETYM Phrygian, according to Erotian. 73,13.
лкpóç [adj.] ‘sharp, pointed, piercing, bitter, painful (Il.), on the meaning see Treu
1955: 78 and 273. <IE *pik-ro- 'motley, painted'>
•COMP лкρó-xоos 'full of bitter gall' (Нp.), уλuкú-лкроç 'bittersweet' (Sapph.), see
Risch IF 59 (1949): 32.
•DER 1. Abstract: лкρ-óτη [f.] 'sharpness, bitterness, etc.' (IA), -ía [f.] ‘id.' (D.,
Arist., Hell.). 2. plant name: лкρ-áç, -íç, -íðɩov (Arist., Thphr., Ps.-Dsc.), see
Strömberg 1940: 63; -ás [f.] also of the soil ‘acid' (pap. IIIª); -ídɩos as an adjective
'somewhat bitter' (Ath.). 3. Verbs: лкρ-αívoμαι 'to become bitter, embitter', -aívw
'to make bitter' (IA), also with έк-, εv-, лαрα-, etc.; thence -aσµós (лapa-) [m.]
'embitterment' (LXX, Ep. Hebr.), -αvɩɩкŵç [adv.] ‘in an embittering way' (S. E.);
лкp-óoµa ‘id.' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.), almost only with έk-, with -woɩç [f.] (Gal.);
back-formation жклкρоç 'verу bitter' (Arist.), see Strömberg 1946: 73; cf. лкр-
áčoμα, -άw ‘id.' (S. E.), also with έк-. 4. Substantivization лíкpα [f.] name of an
antidote (Alex. Trall.). 5. PN Пpíkwv [m.] (Eretria, Tanagra) with metathesis as in
MoGr. лρкóç (Kretschmer Glotta 6 (1915): 304).
•ETYM Formally identical to a Slavic word for 'motley', e.g. CS pústrú < IE *pikro-,
derived from a verb 'to sting, cut, embroider, paint'; cf. Skt. pimśáti 'to carve, cut to
measure, ornament', OCS posati 'to write'; further cognates under ►локíλoç. The
adjective лкpóç has also been compared to Skt. silpá- ‘motley' (if metathesized from
*piślá-).
ñíλa [f.] ‘mortar' (POxy. 1890, 12). ◄LW Lat.➤
•DER лλάpov (medic.) 'eye-salve'.
⚫ETYM Loanword from Lat. pila.
лíλvaµai →лéλaç.
лíλoç [m.] · кoɣiós ‘screw' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
лîλoç [m.] ‘felt, felt hat', also 'felt shoe, felt blanket, etc.' (K 265); as a plant name
'touchwood, Polyporus igniarius', also ‘lotus bud' (Thphr.). <?>
•COMP кραταí-лλoç ‘with hard felt (A. Fr. 430 = 624 M.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: лλ-íov (Arist., Hell.), -ídiov (Att.), -áptov (medic.), -íoкOS
(Dsc.). 2. Adj. -vos 'made of felt' (Andania Iª, Poll.) -wτóç ‘id.' (Str.), -wdns 'felt-like,
pressed together' (Ptol.). 3. Verbs: лλéw 'to felt, press together, make dense, knead'
riµñλnui, -apai
1191
(Att., Hell.), also with prefix, especially σvv-; thence ntíλ-ŋois [f.] ‘felting, densening,
concentration by cold' (Pl., Thphr.), -ŋµa [n.] ‘felting, felted fabric' (Arist.), -ŋtiкóç,
-ń (τéxvη) 'belonging to felting, the art of felting' (Pl., Arist.); лλ-óμα to
concentrate, contract (oneself)' (Thphr.), trans. -ów, also with oυv-, лрoσ-; thence
-wσis (v.l. of -ŋois, Thphr.).
⚫ETYM Formally similar words for 'felt' are found in Latin, Germanic and Slavic: Lat.
pilleus, -eum ‘feltcap', OHG filz [m.], OE felt [m., n.], ORu. púlstó [f.] ‘feltcover', Ru.
polsť [f.] ‘cover, carpet, felt'. The Germanic words go back to a PGm. s-stem *filtiz-,
*feltaz-, ostensibly from IE *peld-os- / *pildos- [n.]. If, however, the Germanic words
were derived from OHG and MoHG falzen [v.] ‘to connect, put on, in' (etc.), they
can be dismissed. The Slavic words are ambiguous because the -ti- suffix may have
been preceded by either d or s. Lat. pilleus, too, is ambiguous: it can be linked with
Gr. лλoç on the one hand, or with Lat. pilus ‘hair' on the other. Schmidt KZ 32
(1893): 387f. reconstructed *pil-s-, which could be a zero grade of the IE s-stem *pilos-
[n.] beside *pilo- [m.] ‘hair'. This solution seems no longer convincing. More
probably, we here have an old culture word of unknown origin (cf. Ernout BSL 30
(1930): 115). On the phonetic developments, see Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 243.
mulle入ń→riap.
ñíµñλŋu, -aµai [v.] 'to fill, make full', intr. 'to fill oneself, become or be full' (II.). <IE
*pleh,- 'fill'>
-vto
•VAR -ávetai [3sg.] (I 679), rare -άw, -έw (Hp.), also лλ½еw (intr., late also tr.; Il.,
epic poet.). Aor. лλñ-σαι, -σασðαɩ, -σðñvaɩ, (Il.), intr. лλñ-τо, -vτо (еpic), εv-énλnto,
etc. (Att.), fut. лλý-σw, -σo̟µαι (Оd.), -σðýσo̟µαι (Att.), perf. med. nénλŋoµai (IA),
act. лéлληкα (Att.), intr. лéлληеα (poet.).
■COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àva- (ouv-avα-, лроo-ava-, etc.), èv- (ȧvτ-εv-, лαр-
Ev-, etc.). As a first member in some governing compounds, е.g. лλησíσtos 'filling
the sail' (Od., E.), 'with full sails' (Ph., Plu.).
●DER 1. “λέwç, Ion. лλéОç, еpic лλεños (for *ëàños), ntr. »λéov 'full' (II.), also with
¿v-, ávα-, ¿к-, etc. from the compounded verbs. For the comparison of ►µλɛíwv with
the superl. ëλɛîʊtoç. 2. nλý-µn [f.] ‘high tide, flood' (Plb., Str.), -σµŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Hes. Fr.
217), лλñµα. лλкpwμa 'complement' (H.), -oμa [n.] 'fertilization' (Arist.); -σµos
'saturating, causing tedium' (Epicur., medic.); -oμový [f.] 'fullness, congestion,
(over)saturation' (IA), see Chantraine 1933: 207, with -σμovádŋs (Hp., Gal.),
-σμovкóç (Pythag. Ep.) ‘(over)saturating'. On ►лλ½µvý, see s.v. 3. ñλý-pŋs ‘full'
(IA); as a first member in е.g. лληpo-qopέw [v.] 'to fulfill' (Ctes., LXX, NT, pap.);
nλŋpó-tns [f.] ‘fullness' (Plu.), ëλŋp-ów ‘to make full, (ful)fill, finish, pay entirely'
(IA), often with prefix, e.g. ávα-, έê-, ảño-, σvv-; thence -wµa (áva-, ovv-, etc.) [n.]
'filling, filling piece, full number, full payment, (full) crew' (IA), also -wois (áva-, ¿k-
etc.) [f.] 'accomplishment, complement, satisfaction' (IA), -wτns (έк-, áлo-) [m.]
'finisher, executor, collector' (Att.), -wτIкóç (ávα-, σuv-, etc.) 'fulfilling, completing'
(Epicur., medic. et al.). 4. πλñ-Оos [n.] 'fullness, mass (of people), herd' (Il., Dor.,
Arc.); often as a second member, e.g. naµ-ñλñ¤ýs ‘consisting of a whole mass, very
numerous' (Att.); -¤ã [f.] ‘id.' (Locr., Boeot.); -Oúç, -¤úoç [f.] ‘id.' (Ion., Cret., Locr.,

=== page 622 ===

1192
niµëpŋui
Hell.); see Ruijgh 1957: 110; thenсе лλη-Оów [v.] 'to be full, become full, increase',
-Oúvoμαι, -0úvw 'to belong to the mass, agree with it, augment oneself; to make full,
augment' (A., Arist., LXX, NT); hence -Ovσμós [m.] 'increase' (Procl., Simp.),
-Ouvτɩкós 'plural' (gramm.); 5. лλŋе-wpa, Ion. -ŋ [f.] 'fullness', medic. ‘plethora, full-
blooded (Ion. Hell.); on the secondary barytonesis see Wackernagel and Debrunner
Phil. 95 (1942): 181f. Thence лληе-wptáw [v.] 'to suffer from л.², -wpiкóç ‘plethoric'
(Gal.), -wpέw 'to be full' (Suid.).
=
•ETYM The conjugation has parallels in e.g. Indo-Iranian, viz. 3sg. aor. έ-ëλŋσ-ε
Skt. á-prās <*é-pleh,-s-t; 3sg.pres. лíμ-лλη-σ = Аv. ham-pā-frāi-ti ‘fills up' < *pe/i-
níµ-rλn-oi
pleh,-ti, but the zero grade ipl.prеs. лíµ-лλα-µεv cannot regularly be from IE *pi-plh,-
mé, because this should have become **лíµÃ¼µε (the ablaut was restored). Some
nominal suffixations can be dated back to the parent language: e.g. лλý-pηç, Arm. lir
‘fullness', Lat. plērus 'for the greater part’, plērï-que ‘mosť < *pleh,-r-; ïλñµa < *pleh,-
mn is echoed by the Lat. gloss plēminābantur. replebantur. The theta as a suffix
occurs in a number of presumably young formations, viz. éλñ-Ɖoç, ëλý-0-w, né-ñλŋ-
Ba (cf. Bpi-Oos ẞpí-0w: ẞé-ßpi-0α), but лληебç is comparable with Lat. plēbēs <
*pleh,-duh, (on the original inflection, see Pok. 799f., Schrijver 1991: 380f.,
Kortlandt 1997b: 160, and De Vaan 2008: 471). Seе ►лоλÚç.
ñíµëpŋui [v.] ‘to blow (up), fan, kindle, burn up' (Il.). <IE *prh,- ‘blow, blaze’▷
•VAR Inf. -áva (IA), also -άw (X., Plb.), ipf. ¿v-éлpηðov (1 589), fut. лpǹow, aor.
лpñσαɩ (Il.), pass. aor. épηo¤ñvai, perf. ñéñpŋoµai, -ŋµaɩ (IA, also Epid.), perf. act.
лεлpòкa (Hp.).
•COMP Often with prefix, especially έv-.
●DER 1. épŋotó̟p, -ñpos [m.] 'heavy gale, hurricane accompanied by a stroke of
lightning' (Hes.), also ‘bellows, jugular' and name of a snake that causes
inflammation (Arist., Ds.), with лрnotηpiá¶w [v.] ‘to ignite as if by lightning' (Hdn.
Epim.); ¿µлpηστns [m.] 'incendiary' (Aq., Ptol.). 2. лрñочç (mostly чu-) [f.] 'blowing
up, ignition, inflammation' (IA, Аret.); 3. εµлρησμós [m.] ‘ignition, inflammation'
(Нell.); 4. лρñσµa [n.], -µový [f.] ‘id.' (Gal., Hippiatr.); лαрαлрǹ(σ)µata [n.pl.]
‘inflammations on the legs of horses' (pap.). 5. лpηotikós ‘blowing up' (Hp. apud
Gal.). Also 6. лpηdáv, -óvos [f.] ‘inflammatory swelling' (Nic., Aret.) and, with a
suffix -µ-, лpηµaívw [v.] 'to blow intensively' (Ar. Nu. 336 [lyr.], Herod.), épŋµováw
'to snore, roar' vel sim. (Herod.), as if from *лpñµα, *лpηчový. As a second member
in ẞоú-лρηστç, gen. -dos or -εws [f.] “inflammatress of cows", name of a poisonous
insect (Hp.); for the formation cf. on ẞoú-ßpwσtiç.
•ETYM The verb ïíµëpŋµi, ñ¡µépával, пpýow, пpñσai, épηoðñval, also лpýеw forms
a sub-class with ►ñíµrλŋu, ñuñλával, etc. It seems to have been heavily influenced
by it. Directly related is Hitt. parai-' 'to blow, inflate, ignite' < *prh,-(o)i- (Kloekhorst
2008: 631), but it is hardly related to Skt. próthati ‘to cough, sneeze', pruṣṇóti ‘to
sprinkle', ON frúsa, frýsa, etc. (see Pok. 809).
лívaž, -akos [m.] 'wooden plank, dish, writing table, public statement, chart, painting'
(II.). <PG(S)►
!
!
)
TTLVUTÓG
1193
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. лvako-¤ýky [f.] ‘collection of paintings' (Str.), λɛxo-
лívač [m.] 'dish-licker' as a jocular name (Batr.).
⚫DER Diminutives: лváк-lov (Att.), -íc (com.), -ídiov (Hp., Arist.), -íσkoç (com.),
-íoкtov (Antiph.). Other derivatives: лvαк--кóç 'belonging to the board' (Vett.
Val.), -taños as thick (large) as a лívač (Hippiatr.), -woɩs [f.] ‘timber-, tablework'
(Plu.); -18-ãç [m.] ‘salesman of лɩvakidɛç' (Hdn. Gr.); -ŋdóv ‘like planks' (Ar.).
•ETYM The word belongs in technical contexts, like other formations with the
productive -aк- suffix; cf. káµaž, kliµaž, otúpač, núvda (Chantraine 1933: 377f.). It
may perhaps be akin to the Slavic group of CS pьnú, Ru. pen' [m.] ‘tree-stump,
bobbin, stem' (but doubts in Derksen 2008: 427). The parallel suffixation of Skt.
pínāka- [n.] ‘staff, stick' is coincidental in any case. The word is probably Pre-Greek,
in view of the suffix.
лívò [f.] ‘pen shell', late also ‘pearl shell, pearl' (com., Arist., pap.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Younger лivа (codd. predominantly have -vv- instead of -v- in pap. and inscr.).
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. лvo-týpŋs [m.] “pen shell guard", name of a kind of
crayfish (S., Ar., Аrist.), àληеɩvó-лvоç 'consisting of real pearls' (pap. IIP).
•DER лv-άpov 'pearl shell, pearl' (pap.), -кóv ‘pearl' with -íкios ‘of pearls' (Peripl.
M. Rubr.), vos belonging to the лívη' with λíos = 'pearlshell' (LXX), -ÚTOV
‘earring made of pearls' (pap. III³); probably haplological for *лv-[εv]wtiov.
•ETYM Perhaps from Hebr. pěnin ‘coral' (Lewy KZ 55 (1928): 28), but in view of the
variation v/vv, it is more probably Pre-Greek (not in Fur.).
лivov [n.] 'beer' (Arist.). <PG?>
•ETYM Probably a foreign word, perhaps adapted to лívw. (cf. Schwyzer: 693³).
лívoç [m.] ‘dirt', on clothes, on the body, in the hair, 'grease in wool' (trag., Paul.
Aeg.), ‘coating, patina on bronze or metals', metaph. of archaic style (D. H., Plu.).
<IE? *kwin- 'dirt', PG?>
•COMP As a second member (with transition to the s-stems) in ά-лvηç 'without dirt,
clean' (Ath.), Suσ-, кαко-лvýу 'badly begrimed' (S., Ar.); opposite ε-лvηs 'neat,
beautiful, plain' (Cratin., E., Cic.).
•DER лvapós ‘dirty' (com., E., inscr. Delos), лivap-ótŋs [f.] (Eust.), -óoµaɩ in
ɲɛnɩvapwµéva (Suid.); лv-ŋpós (Hp. apud Erot.), -óɛis (Hp., A. R., AP), -wdns (Hp.,
E., Lyc.) with -wdía· áкaðapoía ‘uncleanness' (H.). Denominative: лɩv-óoµαɩ in
ɲɛлvw-µévos ‘dirty, etc.' (Hell. poet., D. H., Cic., Plu.), à‹лo>лIVOÛTAL·
άлopuлoûtaɩ ‘is cleaned' (H.); -άw in лvõv (Ar. Lys. 279), after þvíŵv.
⚫ETYM The connection with Lat. caenum 'mud' is phonetically impossible (De Vaan
2008: 81), but the linkage with Lat. inquināre 'to soil' and Latv. svinît ‘id.' < *k*ein-
(?) seems tenable. Further, hardly related to MoSw. dial. hven [f.] 'swamp' <
*hwainō- (cf. Nw. dial. kvein 'blade of grass').
ÄIVÚOKW, AIVUTη →rivutós.
лvutós [adj.] ‘intelligent, sensible, reasonable, prudent, rational' (Od.). ◄PG(V)►

=== page 623 ===

1194
rivw
•VAR Variant forms are лvʊτóç. čµôpwv, σwôpwv 'sensible, reasonable' (H.),
frequent in Cypr. PN, e.g. IIvuτ-ayópaç (O. Masson Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 7 (1956):
238ff.).
■DER лV-Úσσw (late epic) from *pinut-y-, aor. ind. εлívσσεу (E 249), ptc. pass.
лvvoðɛíç (Pythag.) ‘to make deliberate, warn to be clear-minded' with лvv-tý [f.]
'prudence' (H 289, v 71 and 228, Hp. Ep.), -tótns [f.] (Eust.); further -τás, -tãtos [f.]
(Dor., AP), after taxv-tǹs etc. (Schwyzer: 529¹); ïívvoiç. oúveσiç ‘comprehension',
лvvµévijv. ovvetηу 'wise' (H.). Also ȧлvúσσw 'to be thoughtless, rash' (O 10, ε 342 =
258), = άлvτéw (Apollon. Lex.), from *å-лívυτоç; adverb ȧлvúτшç (H.), see
►άлvúσσwv. Also prеs. лvúσкш, -oμaι (Simon., A., Call., Orph.); probably from
*VUT-σK-.
E
⚫ETYM The relation between the relevant forms has not been satisfactorily explained
thus far. Older explanations take лvʊτóç to have somehow developed out of a full
grade form *penu- with & raised to 1 (Schulze 1892: 323³, Frisk Eranos 43 (1945): 215ff.,
Nehring Class. Phil. 42 (1947): 108ff.), so as to connect the word with Lat. putāre ‘to
prune, estimate, consider', OCS pytati ‘to examine, scrutinize' < *p(e)ut-. These
attempts must be rejected for a number of reasons. First, a form penu- is not attested.
Secondly, the change & to t is not systematic. Third, the alternation лVUTÓS ~ ÄVUTÓS
is unexpected. The last variation is, however, known from Pre-Greek, and must
reflect the varying rendering of a palatalized cluster, viz. *p'nut- (cf. Beekes 2008: 51).
The etymon has nothing to do with лvέw.
лívw [v.] 'to drink' (Il.). <IE *peh¸¯, ph¸-i- ‘drink'>
VAR Pres. Aeol. and Dor. (Call. Cer. 95) лwvw, fut. лíoμαι, aoг. εлoν, лεïу (all
Hom.; later éɛv), ipv. лîðɩ (com. et al.), Aeol. лõðɩ, pass. ¿лóðŋy with fut.
лoðýσoµaɩ, perf. act. лéлwêα (all Att.), med. лéлoµαι (Оd.); also causat. лɩñiokw, fut.
лíσw, aor. лt̃σɑɩ, лoðñvaɩ, also with лpo-, ¿v-, σuv- et al. ‘to give to drink, water' (Pi.,
Hp., Nic.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. kατα-, έк-, éρo-, úÃO-, ¿V-.
•DER A. From the zero grade ло-, mostly with suffix -t-: 1. лotóv [n.] 'beverage' (II.),
лоτóç 'drinkable' (trag., Th.), žµлotoç ‘id.' (Aret.), лótoç [m.] ‘drinking, beverage'
(Att., Theoc.); from this лóτ-чμоç 'drinkable, fresh, pleasant' (IA), -ɩкóç 'inclined
towards drinking, etc.' (Alc. com., Plu.), most with ouμ- 'belonging to the
bacchanalia, pot companion' (Att.), see on ►ovµrótng, -olov; rot-í\w, Dor. -íodw 'to
make drink, drench' (IA, Theoc.), also with лро- et al., with -чσµós, -loµa, -lotés,
-lotńplov, -lotpięç, -ioτpa.
2. лoτý [f.] ‘drink, draught' (pap.), gen. and acc. -ñτoç, -ñτα (Hom.), metrically
enlarged, originally at verse end (Schwyzer: 529), not haplological from *лoto-tη]-
toç, -τη-ta (as per Fraenkel Gnomon 21 (1949): 40 еt al.); лоτ-qua [n.] '(medical)
drink' (medic.), on the enlargement see Chantraine 1933: 178. 3. лóσɩç [f.] (also with
лро-, каτα- еtc. in different senses) 'drinking, drink, bacchanalia' (Il.), лóσчoç
‘drinkable' (pap. IVP, Ps.-Callisth.), cf. лóτчµoç above; on лóµа see s.v. 4. лotýp
[m.] 'drinking cup' (E.), -nptov [n.] ‘id.' (Aeol., IA); лóτη [m.] ‘drinker' (only in
лоτη λúvоç Аr. Nu. 57), fem. лótɩç (com.); did both arise by decomposition from
frequent compounds like σчµлóτns (Pi.), oivorótηs, -tɩç (Anacr., etc.), as supposed
ПÍπTW
1195
by Leumann Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 12? Superl. лоτíστаτоç (Ar. et al.); to this
derivatives like σчμлóσ-чоу 'bаcchanalia' (Pi., Alc.), кαталóт-1ov 'pill' (medic.),
каταлоτηе 'throat' (H., Suid.); olvолоτ-áчw 'to drink wine' (Hom.). 5. кαταлó-еpa
[f.] (region of the) throat' (Paul. Aeg.).
B. From the full grade: лõµɑ [n.] ‘draught, drink, beverage' (Att.), ɛ̃êлw-µa [n.]
‘drinking ware' (IA), beside лóµa (also лpó-, кaτá-, čк-) [n.] ‘id.' (Pi., Ion. Hell.);
ĚKTWTLS
клwɩɩç = ǎµлwis (Cat. Cod. Astr.); εűлwvoç öµßρoç. εлоτоç easy to drink' (H.),
уакov-лwуη бuлóτηs 'fond of drinking' (H.).
C. From the zero grade л-: 1. лíστpa [f.], rïotpa [n.pl.] ‘drinks' (E. Cyc., Str.), also
roµóç, rot, rστурoу (H.); the -σ- is analogical, like in 2. лστós ‘drinkable,
fluid' (A.), after xpiστós acc. to Leumann Mus. Helv.14 (1957): 79, and in лστKÓS
‘id.' (Ev. Marc., Ev. Io.); 3. Boeot. лɩtɛúw [v.] ‘to drench, give water' with à-ïítɛvtos
'unwatered' (Thespiae III³), from a noun *лiτ(o)-; cf. below. Cf. Benveniste BSL 51
(1955): 29f. with litt.
•ETYM The n-presents лívw and лóvw have no counterparts in other IE languages,
and therefore seem to be innovations within Greek. An archaic formation is the
reduplicated present *pi-ph¸-eti; cf. Skt. pibáti, Lat. bibō, OIr. ibid (with the change of
initial *b- to *p- or medial *-ph- to *-b-), but it is absent from Greek. The root also
had an aorist; cf. Skt. 1sg. á-pā-m < *h,e-peh¸-m, and especially the imperative ëш-е₁
(beside л-0; see below) = Skt. pa-hí < *peh-dhi. This aorist may have served as a
basis for the n-present лóvw. The perf. act. лε-лw-кa corresponds to Skt. pa-páu <
*pe-poh,-, but may also have been created within Greek on the basis of лów (if not
the other way around).
In addition, the widespread variation between *p(e)h3- and *p(e)h¸i- presupposes the
existence of an old i-present *ph3-(e)i-; cf. OCS piti < *ph-i-, Skt. pītá- 'drunk' <
*ph3i-to-, and further the Skt. causative payáyati < *poh¸i-éie/o-. In Greek, this
secondary root gave rise to the n-present ïívw (< *ph3i-n-(i)e/o-), the factitive ǎ-лɩ-
σa 'I gave to drink' (modeled after ë-otŋ-v : ½-otη-oa, ë-qûv : ë-qñ-σa, etc.) and the
reduplicated present л-лí-σкw, while the primary *p(e)h¸- is still found in лóvw and
in nominal formations such as лоtós ‘drinkable”, „шµα ‘drink', etc. (cf. Skt. pā-tár
‘drinker' < *peh¸-ter-, pá-na- [n.] ‘drink' < *peh¸-no-, Lat. pōculum ‘cup' < *peh¸-tlo-,
etc.). It is mostly assumed that Hitt. pāš-³ / paš- ‘to swallow' derives from *poh¸-s-ei
[3sg.]; see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. Seе ►ǎμлшτç and ►лvov.
nɩñalis [f.] · ǹ rapá tiσi xalkiç, лap' ¿víoιç dè σaupa ‘a migratory fish, horse-
mackerel' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
ññ(n)íšw [v.] ‘to beep' (Ar. Av. 306). ◄ONOM▷
⚫ETYM An onomatopoeia, like MoЕ bеep. Seе ►лɩлó.
mлpάokoμai, -w →ñépvijµi.
лiлτW [v.] 'to fall (off), drop down, fall out' (II.). <IE *petH- 'fly, fall'>

=== page 624 ===

1196
лАлú, -оÙÇ
•VAR Fut. лεσέo̟μα (epic Ion.), -oûμαι (Att.), aor. лεtεïv, čƒεtov (Dor. Aеol.), лεoεïv,
εлɛσov (IA), perf. ptc. acc. лεлɩ-εŵɩ', -ɛwτaç (epic), nom. -ŋws (Ion.), which may
also be from лτησσw, лεлτ-ós (trag.); ind. лéлτшкα, ptc. -wкóç (Att.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. εiσ-, ¿к-, εµ-, εл-, кατα-, μετα-, лεpɩ-, éрo-, ovμ-,
ÚNO.
•DER 1. лóτ-µoç [m.] ‘fate, destiny, (fate of death' (Il., epic poet.). 2. πτw-µα [n.],
often prefixed (oúµ-, etc.) in different senses, ‘fall, which has fallen, corpse' (Att. A.,
Hell.), whence diminutive -µátov (inscr. Asia Minor), -µατíç [f.] ‘tumbling cup’
(Mosch. apud Ath.), -µατiкóç ‘inclined towards falling, etc.' (Hell.), -µατíw to bring
down' (Hell.) with -ματiσμóç [m.] 'falling sickness' (Ptol.). 3. πτw-σç (σúµ-, etc.) [f.]
'fall' (Hp., Att.), i.a. 'throw of the die', whence as a grammatical term '(in)flectional
form, case form' (Arist.), with -oчuoç 'brought down' (A.), perhaps after áλwoчuoc;
-tikós (µeta-, etc.) ‘inflectable' (gramm.). 4. лéσ-oç [n.] ‘corpse' (E. [lyr.]), -ŋµa [n.]
'fall, which has fallen down, corpse' (trag.), see Chantraine 1933: 184; -wμa [n.]
'plunge' (vase inscr.), after лτшµa. 5. -ñetńs i.a. in лεpɩ-лεtýs 'falling down,
blundering into something', лро-лετηç 'ready, rash', with лεрɩ-, лρо-лετ-εα [f.]
(IA); also in compounds like ε-лετηs 'turning out well, convenient, fortunate', with
-ɛα [f.] (IA); ►§u-лεtĤç s.v. 6. -лτŵç in ά-лτŵç, -ŵτos 'not falling' (Pi., Pl.); also
-лτηç in åƒτηs (inscr. Olympia)? Оn лоταμóç, see s.v.
⚫ETYM The derivational history of the different formations poses many problems.
The formation лíлτш represents PIE *pi-pt-e/o- or *pi-pth,-e/o- (latter form in LIV²
s.v. *peth,-), but the origin of the vowel length (noted by Hdn. Gr. 2, 377) is unclear.
Influence from piлτw is usually assumed. The Schwebeablaut of лετ- with the roots
µɩw-, ëτη- in лε-лτш-кα, лτã-µɑ, -oiç, ñε-ñòη-ŵs (*peth,- : *pte/oh₁-?) is
problematic, but does not have to be old; it may be a secondary innovation within
Greek. The same is probably true for the n-present лíτ-vw (also -vw), which has an
anaptyctic, like other n-presents (e.g. ►лíτvηu). The -σ- in the IA aorist and future.
is unexpected, and its origin is unclear.
The whole system seems to be a specific Greek development of the old IE verb also
found in лéτoμα 'to fly', Skt. pátati 'to fly, fall'. Further details s.v. ►лéτoμα; cf. also
►лτǹσow and ▸лíτλoç (the latter hardly belongs here).
лiлú, -oñç [f.] 'woodpecker, Picus maior and minor' (Arist. [v.ll. лíñoç, ñíñρα, etc.],
Lyc.). <PG?
•ETYM Formation like aŋdw, TUTά, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 115f.), probably
onomatopoeic like ►ллñí¶w, Skt. pippakā [f.] name of a bird. A similar bird name
лíññoç or ñîëоç is supposed by Ath. 9, 368f. for iллoυç. The name may well be Pre-
Greek; cf. ►лíqɩyč.
лσάкiov [n.] · лεp₁στóμov 'mouth of a vessel' (H.). <?>
•ETYM See Schmidt's edition of Hesychius.
nɩoyis, -idos [f.] ¨ = rúžɩç ‘box, of box-wood' (IG 11(2), 287: B 50; 54 [Delos IIIª]). <?>
•ETYM The word is phonetically incompatible with лúšɩç within the Indo-European
framework. The variation of *pisg- with *puks- (*pugs-?) could point to a Pre-Greek
substrate word.
!
лíσɛα [n.pl.] 'humid prairies' (Il.). <?>
niouyyos
⚫DER лσεÚç 'inhabitant of low terrains' (Theocr. 25, 201).
1197
⚫ETYM Has been compared with Steph. Byz. Пoa. лóλiç kai кpývy tñc Dλvµñíaç.
Chadwick Minos 9 (1968): 64 reconstructs *Ilofa on the basis of Mycenaean facts.
лíσоç [m.] 'pea, Pisum arvense' (com., Thphr.). <LW?>
•VAR Also -ov [n.].
•DER лíσvoç 'made out of peas' (Ar.).
•ETYM LW from an unknown source. Lat. pisum is identical, probably as a loan from
Greek (cf. WH s.v.).
лσоç [n.] 'meadows, pastures' (Y 9 = 124, Call. Fr. anon. 57, A. R. 1, 1266). <PG?>
•VAR Only pluг. ►лíσɛα.
•ETYM No certain etymology. Traditionally analyzed as *лd-σoç, related to ►лîdaž,
►лdów, etc.; this is rejected by Fur.: 26048 and 254², who takes the alternation 8/σ to
point to Pre-Greek origin.
лíσσα [f.] ‘pitch' (Il.). <IE? *pik- ‘pitch, resin'>
•VAR Att. лítta.
●COMP Е.g. лσσo-, éɩɩɩo-кoлéw 'to besmear, depilate with pitch' (Att. inscr., com.,
Thphr.), îòpó-лσσoç [f.] ‘mix of wax and pitch' (Hp.).
●DER 1. Diminutive лσσápov [n.] (medic.); 2. Several adj. (Att. forms are not
separately indicated): лσσ-ηрóç (Hp.), -ńpns (A.), -ivos (Att.), -nε (Nic.) 'pitchy';
-wdns 'pitch-like' (Arist., Thphr.); -íτηs (olvoc) 'tasting like pitch' (Str.); 3. Verbs
лσσ-ÓW, MITT-ÓW, -óoμa 'to besmear, depilate (oneself) with pitch' (since IV³),
whence -wσiç, -wτńç, -wτóç (Hell.); also -iw [v.] 'to taste like pitch' (sch.); *-άw in
ñíσσãoɩç [f.] ‘a pitching over' (Epid. IVª).
⚫ETYM Old designation of pitch and resin, an inherited word also retained in Lat. and
in Slav. The oldest form is Lat. pix, pic-is [f.] < IE *pik-; thence, Greek derived лíσoa
with a suffix a, like in vñσσa, µvĩa, etc. Slavic shows a suffix -l-, e.g. CS рúkúlб, OCS
рбcыlб [m.]. As a loan, the word has spread further: from Lat. pix to Germanic, e.g.
OHG peh, from Gm. to Lith. pikis, Ru. pek, etc. (Pok. 794). Another option is to
connect ►лíτυs.
лotákŋ [f.] ‘pistachio tree' (Alciphr.). <LW Iran.>>
⚫DERлστάкιov (also ßiot-, yitt-, qɩɩɩ-) [n.] 'pistachio' (Nic., Posidon., Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Foreign word of Oriental origin; cf. MoP pista 'pistachio (nut)'. On the suffix
-(a)k-, see Chantraine 1933: 376.
NÍOTIS, ALOTÓS →лeißoriai.
лovyyoç [m.] ‘shoemaker' (Sapph., Alex. Aet., Herod., com. apud Poll.). ◄PG(S)►
•VAR Also -σ0-. See below on лεσσ-/ɩɩ-.
•DER -úyytov [n.] ‘shoemaking' (com. apud Poll., Hdn. Gr.). Besides лéσövéτov.
σKUTETOV 'shoemaker's workshoр' and лεσσúлτη· σкυτεÚ<T>ρια 'female shoemaker'
(H.). Cf. лεττúкia [n. pl.] ‘small pieces of leather' (Moer.).
⚫ETYM A Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 357), as revealed by the suffix -vyy-.

=== page 625 ===

1198
лÍσUVOÇ
入ayycov
1199
niavvog → neidoual.
mioupes →téooapec.
лɩɩɛów ‘to drench, give water'. →nívw.
лttákɩov [n.] 'writing table, leaflet, note, letter, label, etc.', also ‘list of members,
society' (Dinol., Plb., Hell., pap. and inscr.). <LW Thrac.?>
•COMP лɩɩɩakɩ-ápxns [m.] ‘chairman of the society'.
•DER Diminutive -ídiov [n.] and -í\w ‘to labeľ (pap.).
•ETYM Origin unknown; Friedmann 1937: 51ff. assumes that the word came from
Thracia via Lesbos (cf. Пíτтакоç). Both лσσɑ (Bq) and лɛttúкia (s.v. ) are
unrelated. Borrowed as Lat. pittacium.
лÍτλоç [m.] 'stroke of an oar', metaph. 'rhythmical, heavy beat, attack, etc.' (trag.).
1?7
•DER TVλεÚW [v.] 'to make a stroke with an oar', also metaph. (Ar. V. 678, Com.
Adesp. 3 D.), -iw 'id.' (Gal.).
•ETYM No etymology. The connection with лíлτw, лéτoμαι (favored by DELG) does
not convince. Cf. on ►лíτūpα.
ñíτõpa [n.pl.] ‘husks of corn, bran', also metaph. = 'bran-like rash, sediment' (Hp., D.,
Thphr.). <PG? (S, V)►
•VAR Rarely-ov [sg.].
•Der étũp-íç (also -1c) [f.] 'bran-colored olive' (Call.), -íaç [m.] ‘bread baked of bran’
(Gal., Poll.), -íτŋs (äpτos) ‘id.' (Philem. gloss. apud Ath., Gal.), -wdŋs ‘bran-like’
(Hp., Thphr.), -óoμal [v.] 'to suffer from pituriasis' (Hp.), -iw [v.] 'to have bran on
oneself (pap.), with -toμa [n.] 'scab' (Hdn. Gr.); -íaois [f.] 'bran, scab' (medic.), from
*-law, cf. ywpiaσiç etc. On the PN ПTupεúç see Boẞhardt 1942: 119.
⚫ETYM Formation like λéлupov, but without a certain explanation. Dissimilation
from *лúτpov has been assumed (cf. Schwyzer: 258, Specht KZ 61 (1934): 277 ff.),
with a root etymology connecting Lat. putus 'clean', putare 'to purify, etc.', Skt.
pávate 'to purify', of grain and other things, pávana- [n.] 'winnow, sieve'; this is
highly unlikely. In favor of connection with лáτvλoç, Thumb KZ 36 (1900): 180
adduced semantic parallels. Note the synonymous glossеs лητεɑ· лíτуρα, лητɔ̃τal.
túpi<v>oi ǎpto (H.), which are connected with лñν, ►лáσow. Because of its --,
лíτupa cannot be combined with these, unless we assume substrate origin. The same
is suggested by the suffix-up- (Fur.: 262). Cf. ►лтúоOV.
лíτç, -voç [f.] 'pine, fir, spruce' (Hom., Hdt., Thphr.). <PG?>
VAR Epic dat.pl. -vooiv.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. лtvo-кáµëŋ [f.] ‘pine caterpillar' (Dsc.), xaµaí-ritvç
[f.] plant name (Nic., Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 61f., 109.
●DER Diminutive лtú-dɩov [n.] (Plin., Theognost.), лtv-íç, -ídoç [f.] ‘pine seeď
(Dsc.), -vos 'made of pinewood' (Hp. Thphr.), -wdŋs ‘rich in pines' (Alcm., Str.);
-ovσa (v.l. -oñσσa) [f.] 'kind of milkweed, Euphorbia' (Dsc.), on the formation see
Strömberg 1940: 43; -oñσσai [f.pl.] name of a group of islands on the Spanish coast;
-oñç, -oñvtos [m.] name of a town on the Black Sea (Str.), -ɛa [f.] town in Mysia (B
829), -aσσos [f.] town in Pisidia (Str.); cf. von Blumenthal ZONF 13 (1937): 155 and
158.
•ЕTYM лíτuç resembles Lat. pīnus [f.] 'fir, pine' and Alb. pishë ‘fir, pine', both with an
unclear basis and, on the other hand, Skt. pítudāru-, pūtúdru- [m.] tree name
(extensive treatment in Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 137f.). Benveniste BSL 51 (1955): 29ff.
argued against the procedure of collecting all kinds of phonetically similar forms that
should be kept separate semantically (e.g. ►лíwv, ►лívw, ►ñítvç, etc.). Fur.: 260
compares the toponyms Пoúη = Пτúŋ (St. Byz.) and concludes that the word is
Pre-Greek; not very certain.
Tipavokw →páos.
лíqчу [?] name of an unknown bird (Arist., Ant. Lib., EM), acc. to H. = кopvdaλλóç
'lark'; also paλλic (after кopv-Sa\\íc?) (H.). <PG(S,V) >>
•VAR Also -QI, -q.
•ETYM Probably an onomatopoeia, and as such comparable to лn(n)íčw, ►ññw;
the suffixation is reminiscent of instances such as σáλлуž, пépdíč, etc., and the
morphological variation between -1 and -ty strongly points to Pre-Greek origin.
For further details, cf. Chantraine 1933: 397ff., 382 and Thompson 1895 s.v.
►í.
ríœpŋµu [v.] ‘to let in, bring in, out, or through', intr. ‘to intrude, come in, etc.' (com.,
E., also Th., D., Arist., Plb.). <GR➤
•VAR Only inf. ¿σ-лôрávαι (Аrist.), beside -oppéw in ɛio-éqpovv (D.), -εpoúµ
(E.). Otherwise only future and aorist forms, always with prefix, especially εiσ- (εл-
ELσ-, etc.) and έк-, but also Siα- and ȧлo-: εiσ-, έк-, Siα-oppηow; àло-, εiσ-, έ½-
épηoa, έк-pηoеñvα; also (εл-)εɩσ-, ¿½-éépηкα with subj. εл-εσ-qpw, ptc. ε-εσ-
opɛíç, inf. ɛio-opñvaɩ (for -ôpɛïva? H.), ipv. čê-œpɛç (Ar. V. 162 with Buttmann;
codd. кqɛpɛ); to this ipf. -εopíoµεv (Ar. V. 125), for -ɛqpiɛµεv?
•ETYM The verb primarily occurs in the future and aorist, presentic formations being
scant and secondary. Thus, εiσ-έœpovv, -εépoúμny is modeled after the type
épíλouv, the hapax έσ-лɩôpávaɩ after iστávα, л(µ)лλávαι, etc. This infinitive, then,
can hardly be based on a conjectured ¹pl. *лí-oрα-дεу corresponding to Skt.
bibhṛmás (pace e.g. Pok. 128). Most probably, the verb is to be analyzed as from
*лpo-u, the aspiration being taken on by the initial π after the loss of o (cf. on
► œpoñpoc). This process probably took place in the aorist forms: -opńow, -é-qpnka
continuing -лp(0)-ñow, -ñp(0)-ñкa. Hence, the reduplicated present developed.
лíwν •VAR Fem. лíɛɩpα. →лĩªp.
=
лλáууoç [m.] name of a kind of eagle (Arist.; v.l. лλávos), plancus (Plin.). ◄PG?►
•ETYM Frisk assumes derivation from лλášoμαι to wander about', which is not
evident. The word may well be Pre-Greek (Fur.: 122).
лλαууóv [f.] 'wax figure, wax doll' (Call. Cer. 91). <?>

=== page 626 ===

1200
•DER Tλayyóvɩov [n.] 'kind of ointment' (Polem. Hist. apud Ath. 15, 690e, Sosib.,
Poll.).
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown. According to Polem., πλаууóvoν was named after the
discoverer Пayyóv; Frisk wonders whether the noun λayуóv has the same origin,
but on the whole, the semantic gap between 'wax figure' and 'salve' is hardly big
enough to justify etymological separation of the two words.
лλáуɩoç [adj.] ‘oblique, athwart, sloping; crooked', τà лλáуiα 'the sides, flanks' (Pi.,
IA). The sense 'horizontal', misleadingly given as the first mg. by Frisk, must derive
from 'transverse'. <PG?>
●COMP E.g. лλayıó-kavλoç 'with side stalks (Thphr.), see Strömberg 1937: 108f.,
лapa-лλáyıoç ‘sideways, oblique' (Thphr.).
•Der лλayı-á¶w [v.] 'to turn amiss, sideward; to lead astray' (LXX, Ph., Plu.) with
-aσμóç [m.] 'lateral direction, aberrance' (Epicur.); -ów ‘id.' (X.), with -wσic (H.) as
an explanation of λótwois; further also λάyoç [n.] 'side' (Tab. Heracl.).
ETYM Ostensibly from QIE *plg-iHo-, but the non-laryngeal root of this
reconstruction is incompatible with supposed cognates like лéλayos ‘sea' < *pelhɩg-
o- (should this word be related). In view of Gm. correspondences such as OHG flah
‘flať’, OS flaka [f.] ‘sole of the foot' (further cf. ON flóki [m]., OE flōc [n.] ‘flounder'),
presupposing *plog- or *plag-, it may be proposed to reconstruct лλáуoç as *plag-.
Since PIE did not have a phoneme *a, the word may be from a European substrate.
The variant лλáч, -αкóç [f.], too, can be understood from this perspective.
However, unlike for ►лλáž, the semantic side of this connection is not evident.
As Van Beek suggests (p.c.), a semantically better connection would be that with
►лλáчw 'to lead astray' and perhaps àµлλαкíσкw 'id.', in which case the group may
be from Pre-Greek *(a)"pla"k-. Cf. on лλnσσw and ►лλáčw.
лλaðapós [adj.] ‘damp, watery, spongy, soft, flaccid, tasteless' (Hp., A. R., Dsc.).
<PG?➤
•DER éλadap-ótŋs [f.] ‘flaccidity' (Epicur.), -óoµat [v.] 'to become soft' (Aq.), -wois
[f.] (medic.), -wµa [n.] (Suid.). Further éλadáw [v.] ‘to be watery, soft' (Hp., Arist.,
Ph.) with ŋoɩ [f.] (Sor.); also -wois [f.] (Aët.), as if from *-ów; лλádoç [m.]
'dampness, sponginess' with -wdns (Hp.), -óɛis (sch.); πládŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Emp.),
perhaps a back-formation from лλαdάw.
⚫ETYM Unclear word, found especially in medical literature; an apparent derivational
pattern emerges from лλαб-αрós: -áw: -os and the semantically close rhyming
words kλad-após : -áw : -oç, µad-após : -áw : -oç; also pu̟л-αρóç : -άw : -os (see
Chantraine 1933: 227). Clearly, several words that were originally more dissimilar
influenced each other formally, semantically, or both. As a result, it is risky to
reconstruct the original form of πλαd-αpóç. Lith. pelděti ‘to swim' (cf. Fraenkel 1955:
565) < IE *peld- comes into consideration, but hardly Lith. pilti ‘to pour' < *plh‚¯‚
► лλέw, or even лoλúç. Alternatively, we may consider a Pre-Greek origin for the
word.
лλaddiáw [v.] ‘to babble' vel sim. (Lacon.); cf. πλad<d>iñ• µataït̃eɩ, σoßapevɛtai to
speak folly, act pompous' (H.). <?>
[入aváouals-áw
●var Only inf. „λaddɩñv and ipv. лλaddiŋ (Ar. Lys. 171 and 990).
1201
•ETYM Perhaps modeled after verbs in -táw designating diseases (Schwyzer: 732), but
at any rate onomatopoeic; cf. MLG pladderen 'to babble'.
лλá¶w, -oµai [v.] 'to make devious, repel, dissuade from the right path, bewilder',
med.pass. 'to become devious, go astray, wander about (Il.). <PG?►
•Var Aor. лλáyžaɩ, pass. πλayxеñvaɩ, fut. лλáyžoµai.
•COMP Also with ларα-, áло-, etc.
•Der éλayкtóç ‘devious, mad, bewildered' ( 363, epic poet.), Пaукτaí [f.pl.] (scil.
лετрα) (μ 61, etc.), meaning not quite clear; лλαукTO-σúvn [f.] 'wandering about' (o
343, Nonn.); λayk-túç, -úoç [f.] ‘id.' (Call.); -τp [m.] epithet of Dionysus (AP),
'confuser' or 'wanderer'?, -Tεpa áτралτóç 'zodiac' (Hymn. Is.). Appurtenance of
►лλáууoç is uncertain.
•ETYM Usually connected as *plang-ie/o- with Lat. plangō ‘to hit', Go. faiflokun
‘¿кóлtovτo' (cf. Pok. 832-833) < IE *pleh₂g-. The shortness of the a is unexpected,
however, as *plh₂g- should have given **лλŋy-; in principle, it is conceivable that it
spread from forms with a nasal infix by Osthoff's law, i.e. *лλãуу- > *лλǎуу-. Frisk
points at the formal agreement between лλáуžαɩ, лλαукτóç, and Lat. plānxi,
plānctus.
However, the semantics of the Latin verb are different, ‘to beat (the breast)' > 'to
bewail', and it is probably rather related to лλnσow. It is not evident at all that the
meaning ‘to drive off course' derives from ‘to beat'; rather, лλýσσw and лλáľw
influenced each other both semantically and formally. Van Beek (p.c.) suggests that
лλάw is related to åµлλαкíσкw as a Pre-Greek word *(a)"pla³k-, to which “λáуoç
may perhaps also be connected.
лλáðavov [n.] 'cake mold or form' (Theoc., Nic.). <PG>
•COMP Synthetic compounds like кopo-лλáðоç [m.] one who forms feminine
figures, doll modeller' (Pl., Isoc.).
•DER лλαðavíτaç ǎuvλos 'cake baked in a mold' (Philox. 3, 17; not quite certain);
лaеá [f.] 'image, εiкóv' (Dor. in Plu.).
•ETYM Seе ►лλáσow.
лλáеw 'to approach' (Dor.).
•ETYM See ►лέλas.
лλɑíðɩov [n.] ‘long quadrangle, rectangle, rectangular frame' (Att.). ◄LW Lyd.>
●Der лλaiσióoµai [v.] 'to be put into a πλαíσov' (Delos).
•ETYM No relation with the synonymous éλv-¤íov (pace Frisk), but a direct loan
from Lyd. blaso /pl/as/o/ 'socle'. This word is related to Hitt. palzaḥ(h)a-, palzašḥa-
'pedestal, a flat base for statues', which Kloekhorst 2008: 623 reconstructs as *plth₂-
sh₂o- (cf. Gr. лλατúc). Fur.: 260 also appropriately adduces лλάταç 'basis of a tomb'
(inscr. Patara), which is very likely to be of Anatolian origin.
rλaváojai, -áw [v.] ‘to go astray, wander, go about, sway'; 'to lead astray, lead around,
deceive' (321). <?>
•VAR Fut. лλavýσoµαι, -ηеýσoµαι, aor. -ηеñvαɩ, perf. nenλáviµiai.

=== page 627 ===

1202
•COMP Also with лερɩ-, ало-, etc.
лλáč, -aкóç
•DER 1. лλáv-ηµa [n.] ‘straying, going astray' (A., S.), -ŋσis [f.] ‘leading astray,
suggesting' (Th.), åлo- ‘wandering' (Pl., LXX); a very common back-formation is 2.
ëλávŋ [f.] ‘extravagating, (pointless) wandering about, odyssey, mistake' (IA); 3.
rλávns, -ŋtos [m.] 'who wanders around, wanderer', also 'wandering star, planet'
(Scherer 1953: 40f.), medic. 'unstable temperature', [adj.] 'wandering' (IA); thence
enlarged лλav-tŋs, Dor. -átaç [m.] ‘id.' (trag., etc.), -ñτíç [f.] (Lyc.) with -ηTIкóç
'infiltrating, misleading' (Str., sch.), -ŋTɛów [v.] 'to wander about' (AB).
From лλaváw probably also the back-formation 4. лλávоç [m.] =
лλávη, also
'tramp, vagabond, deceiver', as an adjective errant, misleading' (trag., Pl.), with
Tλav-wdns inconstant, irregular, sliding away' (medic.), -tos 'wandering about'
(AP); also åлóëλav-os, -íaç; nɛpiñλáv-ɩoç, -íŋ (AP et al.).
5. Opaque formation лλα-výττш 'to wander about' (Ar. Av. 3); 6. As a second
member very often -лλαvηs and -лλανоç, -лλávоç, e.g. à-лλavýç (ảστnp) 'fixed star'
(Pl., Arist.), áλí-лλαvoç 'wandering the sea' (Opp.), λαo-лλávoç 'leading the people
astray' (J.).
•ETYM Uncertain etymology. Perhaps a thematization of a nasal present *pl-néh₂-ti,
*pl-nh₂-énti > **лλαvãσ, **лλαvavo, corresponding to the IE root *pleh₂- 'broad,
flať (cf. Lat. plānus), but the semantics are highly problematic. Borrowed as Lat.
planus [m.] ‘tramp', planētae [f.pl.] ‘planets, etc.', implanō, -āre ‘to seduce' (=
лλαváw). The meaning strongly recalls лλάw, but it is hard to think of a formal
connection.
лλáž, -aкós [f.] ‘plane, plain, surface of a sea, a mountain' (Pi., trag.), 'flat stone,
board, table' (Hell.). <?>
•COMP As a second member probably in ►Sírλač (see s.v. and Fraenkel 1910: 374),
and τρí-лλα.
⚫DER 1. Diminutive лλaк-íov [n.] (Troezen IV), -ís. кλvídiov 'small couch' (H.). 2.
-ác [f.] ‘floor of a wine cellar' (pap. II³). 3. -ítas äptos ‘flat cake' (Sophr.), -îtɩç [f.]
'kind of calamine or alum' (Gal.). 4. Adjective -ɛpós ‘flat' (Theoc.), -óɛç ‘id.' (D. P.),
-ɩvos 'made of marble slabs' (inscr.), -wdns 'overdrawn with panes, a crust' (Arist.).
5. лλak-oñç, -oûvtos (from -óɛic) [m.] ‘(flat) cake' (com., etc.), with -oúvt-lov, -ikós.
-ɩvoç, -ãç, etc. 6. лλaк-ów [v.] ‘to cover with slabs of marble' (Syria), with -wots [f.]
(Asia Minor), -wτń [f.] ‘kind of calamine' (Dsc.). 7. TN: IIλáкoç [m.] part of Mount
Ida (II.), with úлолλάк-10 (Z 397), -os (Str.); IIλaкíŋ [f.] name of a Pelasgian colony
on the Propontis (Hdt.), with лλакiαvóv [n.] a kind of eyesalve (Aët.).
ETYM Apparently from a root noun *plk-s; cf. (with different vocalism) Latv. plakt
'to become flat', plaka [f.] 'low lying place, plain', ON flaga [f.] 'thin layer, flatness' <
*plok-eh₂-; possibly directly related to a Germanic root noun with lengthened grade:
ON fló, pl. floer [f.] ‘layer, stratum’< *plōk-s, *plōk-es; perhaps also OHG fluoh,
MoHG Flüche, Swi. Fluh [f.] 'rockwall'. From лλакоÛç, -oŨνтоç сame Lat. placenta ‘a
kind of flat cake' (phonetic details unclear). Beside *plk-, we also find *plg- in
►лλáуɩoç, *pld"- in ►лλáσσw, and *plh₂- in лaλáµŋ. It is uncertain whether any of
these is related. The connection with лέλαуoç is doubtful.
nλáotiyš, -lyyos
=
1203
-лλáσtoç •VAR in §ɩ-, tpɩ-, ïoλλa-rλάσos etc., late Att. Hell. -лλaσíwv. ⇒dirλáoios.
лλáσσw [v.] ‘to knead, form, mold, shape (a soft mass); to think up, imagine, pretend'
(Hes.). <PG?>
•Var Att. -ɩɩw, fut. „λáσw, aor. лλáσ(σ)αi (Hes.), pass. лλaσðñvaɩ, perf. nénλaoµai
(IA), act. лεлλαкa (Hell.).
•COMP Very often with prefix in different senses, e.g. кατα-лλáσσw 'to spread,
besmear', èμ-лλáσσw 'to smear, stop up' (cf. below).
⚫DER Action nouns: 1. лλáσµα [n.] ‘forming, formation, fiction' (IA) with -µατíaç
[m.] 'fictional', -µατódηç ‘id.' (Arist.), -µατкóç 'id.' (S. E.); žµ-, ¿лí-, кατá-лλασμα
[n.] ‘plaster' (medic.). 2. лλáσ (ává-, кaτá-, etc.) [f.] ‘forming, formation,
figuration' (Hp., Arist.). 3. ávα-лλαoµós [m.] ‘figuration' (Plu.), µετα-лλao-µós [m.]
'transformation' (gramm.), etc. 4. kata-лλaσtús [f.] 'besmearing' (Hdt. 4, 175).
Agent and instrument nouns: 5. „λáσtŋs [m.] ‘former, molder, maker' (Pl.), often in
synthetic compounds, е.g. кηро-лλáστη [m.] 'modeller in wax' (Pl.), with -éw
(Hp.), etc.; λáσ-tis (Ael.), -teipa (Orph., API.), -τpia (Theol.Ar.). 6. лλáστpov [n.]
‘earring' (Att. inscr., etc.), ¼µëλασ-tpov [n.], -tpos [f.] ‘ointment' or 'plaster' (Dsc.,
Gal., pap.).
Adjectives: 7. лλaστós ‘formed, shaped, thought up' (Нes.), εµлλασ-τov [n.], -tos [f.]
‘ointment, plaster' (Hp.); лλαστý [f.] ‘clay wall' (pap.) with ñɛpɩ-, σvµ-nλaoteúw [v.]
'to surround, construct with T.', éλaσtevtýs [m.] 'builder of a л.' (pap.). 8.
лλaσtiкós (époσ-, &v-, ȧva-) ‘suitable for forming, plastic' (Pl.).
Directly from the verbal root 9. πλáО-avov [n.] 'cake mold or form' (Theoc., Nic.),
лλáðavíταç ǎμvλlos 'cake baked in a mold' (Philox. 3, 17; not quite certain); лλαеá
[f.] 'image, ɛiкúv' (Dor. in Plu.); synthetic compounds like кopо-лλáðoç [m.] ‘one
who forms feminine figures, doll modeller' (Pl., Isoc.).
•ETYM From *лλα0-₁w < QIE *plď¹-ie/o-. The stem *pld- cannot be Indo-European,
however, because roots with both plain stops and voiced aspirates were not allowed.
It has been considered an inner-Greek innovation, comparable to formations such as
лλń-Оw, ßpí-0w, etc. (Schwyzer: 703). However, since the verb shows no traces of a
laryngeal, it cannot be (directly) related to the group of *pelh₂- 'broad', e.g. лaλáµŋ,
OHG folma 'palm of the hand' <*pélh₂-m, *plh₂-m-ós, *plh₂-ém-m, Lat. plānus 'flat' <
*plh₂-no-, etc. (pace e.g. Pok. 805ff.). Perhaps, however, this root became conflated.
with that of Gг. лλатúç, Skt. prthú- 'flat' < *plth₂-u-. From чμлλαστроу was
borrowed Lat. emplastrum, whence MoFr. emplâtre, etc.; also, MLat. plastrum
'plaster', MoFr. plâtre, OHG pflastar, etc.
The word may well be Pre-Greek, both due to the lack of etymology and in view of
the anomalous root structure.
rλáotɩyž, -yyos [f.] ‘scales' (Att.), also ‘disk of the kottabos-standarď (Critias,
Hermipp.), metaph. ‘oyster shell' (Opp.), 'horse-collar', which hangs from the wood
of the yoke, like the scales from the weigh-bridge (E. Rh. 303), also (plur.) ‘surgical
splints' (Hippiatr.). <PG(S)►
•VAR лλńστууεç [pl.] 'id.' (Hp. apud Gal. 19, 131).

=== page 628 ===

1204
丌入atayéw,一ñoal
•ETYM From a stem лλaστ- (the hapax лλǹσtɩу-yes points to a root variant *лλãσt-
with a long vowel, but the evidentiality of this form is limited) plus the suffix -tyy-
(Chantraine 1933: 398ff., Schwyzer: 498). The etymological base of the word is not
clear. Formally there is no reason to disconnect the word from лλáσσw ‘to knead,
mold' < *pld-ie/o-, but this linkage is not evident on the semantic side. The same
holds true for the connection with IE *plth₂- as in лλατúç ‘flať. In view of the suffix
-tyy, it therefore seems better to assume a Pre-Greek origin (not in Furnée).
лλatayéw, -ñoaɩ [v.] 'to rattle, crash, clap (one's hands)' (¥ 102 σчμrλatáyŋoev [v.l.
-лατ-], Нell. poet.). <PG?>
•COMP Also with σuv-, úло-, etc.
•DER лλaτáу-ŋµα [n.] 'bang' (Theoc.). Also лλαταу-ń [f.] 'rattle, steed' (Hellanic.,
Pherecyd., Arist., A. R.), -óv 'id.' (sch. Theoc.), -úviov [n.] 'broad petal of the poppy
or anemone (Theoc.), -wvíσaç· åлoλŋkvšíσaç kaì yoonσas 'having declaimed in a
hollow voice, made a noise' (H.). Cf. лλατáσσw = -ayέw (Suid.).
●ETYM It has been suggested that the verb (onomatopoeia?) is a conflation of
►лαταуέw and лλ½σσw (Güntert 1914: 120f.), but this is questionable. The word may
well be Pre-Greek (not in Fur.). Sее ►лλαтvуíw.
лλáτavos [f.] ‘plane tree' (Ar., Pl., Thphr.). <PG?>
•VAR Lat. platanista [m.] name of a great dolphin in the Ganges (Plin.); cf.
Thompson 1947 s.v. rλataviotĤs.
•DER лλαταν-úv, -wvoc [m.] 'plane grove' (Dsc.), -tov [n.] 'kind of apple, like the
plane's fruit' (Diph. Siph.). Also еarly лλατáиστoç [f.] ‘id.' (B 307 and 310, Hdt.,
Theoc.) with -σtoÛÇ, -oñvtoç [m.] ‘plane grove' (Thgn.), Lacon. -lotás (-lotãç?),
dat. -ɩσtą ‘id.' (Paus.), -íσtɩvoç attribute of an apple (Gal.).
•ETYM The word has been derived from лλατúç (etc.), under the assumption that
the tree was named after its broad leaves or flat patches of bark (Strömberg 1940: 39,
Chantraine 1933: 199f.). This etymology must be rejected in view of the opaque
derivation of the oldest attested form лλaτáviσtoç. Instead, we may assume that the
name of this Asiatic and South-East European tree was borrowed from Pre-Greek,
and only secondarily became associated with лλατúç.
лλáτaž, -aкoç [m.] Alexandrian name of the fish кopaкivoç, 'Sciaena nigra, brown
meagre (Ath. 7, 309a). <PG➤
•DER лλατάкIOV [n.] 'id.' (pap. II-IIIP).
•ETYM Frisk refers to Athenaeus's comment that the fish was named after its
considerable size, i.е. “åлò τоũ лερiεуОντоç”, and therefore connects it to ▸лλaτúç.
Since, however, -aк- is one of the most common Pre-Greek suffixes, the word is
probably Pre-Greek as well. Furthermore, there is лλατíσταкoç (-кóç) [m.],
according to Dorio apud Ath. 3, 118c the greatest kind of the fish called µúλλoç;
however, according to Parmeno ibd. 7: 308f., it is synonymous with σaлépôŋs and
kopaкivos; metaph. = τò уʊvaɩкɛãov aidoiov (H., Phot.).
rλātis, -idos [f.] ‘wife' (Ar., Lyc.). →ñéλaç, neλášw.
入ÉOpov
1205
лλaτvyí¼w [v.] ‘to slosh the water with one's wings; to splash', also metaphorically of
idle noise (A., Eub.). ◄PG➤
⚫ETYM Distortion of лλаταуéw (*-yi(w) under the influence of лλатúç or otherwise
лλɑτús 1 [adj.] ‘wide, broad, flat, level (II.). ◄IE *pleth₂- ‘broad'>
COMP Often as a first member, e.g. лλατú-quλλоç 'broad-leaved' (Arist., Thphr.).
•Der ñλatútŋs [f.] ‘width, breadth² (Hp., X.); лλaτúvw [v.] ‘to widen, make broad
(X., Arist.), also with Sia-, &v- etc., with лλáτ-võμα (-vêα) [n.] 'dish, brick, etc.'
(Herod., Hero, pap.), -voµós [m.] ‘broadening' (Arist., LXX). Also ëλatɛïov [n.]
'board, table' (Plb.), after the instrument nouns in -ɛãov; from ëλateĩa (xɛip, qwvý
etc.): лλατяáш [v.] 'to blow with the flat of the hand' (Pherecr.), 'to pronounce
broadly' (Theoc.).
Several additional formations: ëλátos [n.] ‘width, breadth, size' (Simon., Emp., Hdt.,
Ar.) with ả-ëλaτǹs ‘without breadth² (Arist.); лλατ-kós (v.l. -vкós) ‘concerning the
width, breadth, exhaustive, extensive' (Vett. Val., comm. Arist.); cf. yɛv-ɩкóç to
yévoc.
лλaτaµáv, -ŵvos [m.] 'flat stone, ledge of rock, flat beach, etc.' (h. Merc. 128, Hell.),
with -aµwdŋs ‘flať (Arist.). ëλáτη [f.] ‘blade of an oar, oar', metonymic 'ship', also
'shoulder blade' (trag., Arist.), usually wµo-лλáτη (Hp.); ëλátŋs, Dor. -āç [m.]
'pedestal of a gravestone' (inscr. Asia Minor, cf. yúng, nópkns); rλátiуĘ. TĤç kŵÀηs
τò ǎкpov ‘the end of a handle' (H.). TN Iλάáταια (B 504 et al.), usually plur. -aí [f.]
(IA) town in Boeotia, with -auís, -aɩɛïç, etc.; change of accent like in ► ǎyua : -aí.
•ETYM Identical to Skt. pṛthú-, Av. pərəðu- ‘wide, broad' < PIE *plth²-u- (for ëλáτoç,
cf. Bápos vs. Bарúc); лλατаμáv corresponds to Skt. prathi-mán- [m.] 'extension,
breadth' <*pl(e)th₂-mon-; notably, the TN IIάτala matches Skt. prthiví- [f.] ‘earth',
W Llydau 'Brittany' < *plth₂u-ih. Other relevant formations outside Greek are Arm.
lain, OIr. lethan, MW llydan 'broad' < *plth₂-no-, and the verb Skt. práthati ‘to
extend' <*pléth₂-eti.
ñλatús 2 [adj.] ‘salty' (Hdt. 2, 108 [лóµατα], Arist. Mete. 358f. [üdwp, üdata]). ◄GR►
ETYM No doubt due to erroneous interpretation of лλаτòç 'Еλλкσлоντоç (Нom.; cf.
A. Pers. 875) the 'broad Hellespont' as the 'salty Hellespont', because the epithet
'broad' was perceived as inapproprate. In Hdt. 7, 35, the Hellespont is characterized
as folɛpós te kaì áλµvρòç лoτ¤µós 'muddy and salty river' (Heubeck Glotta 37
(1958): 258ff.).
лλεеpov [n.] measure of length of 100 feet, square measure of 10000 square feet (IA);
later (Plu.) Lat. iugerum; also 'race-track' (Syrac.). <PG>
=
•VAR лελεерov (Hom., also Delph. and Corc.).
COMP As a second member in е.g. à-лελεероç 'immeasurable' (Hom., Nonn.), Sí-
лλεеpoç 'measuring two ëλ.', -ov [n.] ‘length or area of a лλ.' (Hell.). -ía [f.] ‘id.'
(Corc.).
•DER лλεер-laiоç 'measuring one лλ.' (X., Pl.). -tov [n.] designation of part of the
Gymnasia in Olympia (Paus., Luc.), -í\w [v.] ‘to measure, spread oneself over sth.'
vel sim. (Thphr. Char. 23, 2), also έк- (Gal.), with -toμα = Spóµµα (H., Phot.).

=== page 629 ===

1206
лλεíwv
•ETYM Etymology unclear, in spite of attempts to derive the word from niµëλŋµi ‘to
fill' or лελoμα to turn'. On the variation лελε pov: πλéеpov, cf. Schwyzer: 259 and
Szemerényi 1964: 214f., who takes лλεеpov as a Greek syncope of лελɛеpov. Fur.: 152
adduces Bλépov (inscr. Thespiae, LSJ 1414), a form that further complicates the
issue. In all likelihood, a foreign word (Hermann IF 34: 340).
ñλɛíwv [adj.] compar. 'more, longer, larger' (Hom.). <IE *pleh,- 'full'>
•VAR Also лλεwv, ntг. лλεïov, лλéov (II.), epic. Aeol. plur. also πλεεç, Сrеt. лλíεç, etc.
(additional forms in Seiler 1950: 113, Schwyzer: 5376; cf. also below); superl. ëλɛïotoç
(II.) 'most, the longest, the greatest'.
•COMP As a first member in e.g. the compounds лλεov-ɛε-íα [f.] 'greed, benefit',
πλεov-εкTέw, with -éktŋµa, -éktŋs, -εкtiкós (IA), from лλéov EXεv, cf. εvεčíα etc.
(►εxw 1); nλεστó-μẞpoτos 'very rich in people' (Pi.).
•DER From лλε(i)wv, ndéov: nλeiótŋs [f.] ‘plurality' (Theol. Ar.), лλɛovótns [f.] ‘the
superior length of the chord' (Nicom. Harm.); лλεov-άkıç ‘more often' (IA), -axóc,
-axwç 'multiple, in multiple ways' (Arist.), -axñ ‘in more respects' (Pl.); -ášw [v.] ‘to
have an abundance, be excessive, grow in number, increase' (IA), with -aoμóç,
-aσμa, -aσıç (Arist., Hell.).
From лλɛotos: πλεlot-áкis 'most often, very often' (IA), -axóεv 'from the most
(or: very many) places' (Ar.), -ýpηs ‘the most (Xpóvos), the longest' (A. Eu. 763),
-ŋpíšoµaɩ [v.] ‘to appoint someone as the highest authority', vel sim. (A. Ch. 1029),
-ŋpiášw [v.] ‘to bid the highest price (in auctions), outbid (Lys., Pl. Com., Them.),
with -ŋpiασμóç. úлεеεµãƒµó ˆoverbidding' (H.).
•ETYM The comparative ſλéwv and superlative лλεĩστoç are to be reconstructed as
PGr. *pleihōn, *pleisto- from PIE *pleh,-is-on-, * pleh,-is-to-; cf. ON fleiri 'more', fleistr
'most', Av. fraěštam 'mostly' (also Skt. prāyaḥ, Av. fräiiah- 'more, much, many <
*pleh,-io-); πλɛíwv is analogical to ëλɛĩσtos (cf. also µɛíwv).
The seemingly archaic forms »λéɛs, nλiɛs (see Schwyzer: 5376) are best taken as
innovations from »λéov, plur. »λéa (see Leumann Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 1f.). Att. ïλɛīv
= πλéov and Arc. лλоç (πλwç?) 'more' is unclear; see Schwyzer: 537 and Leumann l.c.
The sporadic attestations with 11, е.g. лλñov (Milete, etc.), IIλñστ-apxos (Tegea) can
hardly be interpreted as testimonies of an older situation (see Seiler 1950: 113).
From the same root as лoλúç <*polh,-u- and лíμµлλŋµ <*pi-pleh‚-mi.
лλɛɩwv, -ñvos [m.] used by hellenistic poets in the sense of 'year' (cf. H.: лλεóv. ó
¿viautós. ɑntò toũ rávtas toùs kaproùs tñs yñs ovµëàñpoñσða 'year, from its
getting full with all the fruits of the earth'); the meaning in Hes. is unclear, cf.
Troxler 1964: 186f. (Hes. Op. 617, Call. Jov. 89, Lyc. 201, AP 6, 93, IG 9(1), 880: 16
verse inscr.). <<GR>
⚫ETYM Most probably with an original meaning “full period", thence to be connected
with πλéwç, epic »λɛĩos 'full'. The suffix -óv- is reminiscent of the formation aiwv
(cf. Schwyzer: 488).
лλεкw [V.] 'to braid, knit, wind, twine' (II.). <IE *plek- 'twine'>
•VAR pres.ptc. лλεуvýµεvos (Оpp.), aor. лλéαɩ (Il.), pass. лλexеñvaɩ (Od.),
„λaкñvaɩ (IA), innovation ”λεкñvaι (Tim. Pers.), fut. nλé‹w, pass. лλε×¤ñσoµα,
лλεúµwv, -ovos
1207
лλαкησoμαι, perf. nénλoxa (Hp., Att.), also nεлλεɣα (Hp.), -ɛкα (Call.), med.-pass.
лεлλεуμαι (IA).
•COMP Often with prefix, especially rɛpi-, ¿v(1)-, ovv-.
●DER A. With e-grade: 1. nλɛktós (σúµ-, εű-, etc.) ‘braided, kniť (Il.). 2. nλektý [f.]
'winding, knitwear, rope, fish trap' (A., E., Pl.). 3. nλektávŋ [f.] ‘wattling, sling,
winding (IA); enlargement of лλεкτη after Spεлávη, etc., like Boτávη to Bоτóv
(Schwyzer: 490), with -ávov (Eub.), denominative verbs -avάoμаi (A.), -аvóομ
(Hp.) 'to be twined around'. 4. πλéyµa (éµ-, σýµ-, etc.) [n.] ‘plait, wattling, etc.' (IA)
with -µáτov (Arist.), -ματεúεσðα· έµ»λéкεσðα (H.). 5. πλéкos [n.] 'wattling,
basketwork' (Ar.). 6. nλéšis (nepí-, εµ-, σúµ-) [f.] ‘braiding, twining around, etc.' (Pl.,
Arist.) with -ɛídɩov (Suid.), (ëɛpɩ-, ovµ-)äλektikós belonging to braiding, etc.' (Pl.).
7. nλéktpa [n.pl.] ‘wattling' (Samos IVª). 8. πλéкwµα = Spáyµa (sch.). 9. ¿µntλék-tijs,
[f.] -τpɩα ‘braider [m./f.] of hair' (gloss., EM). 10. (лɛpɩ-, ¿µ-)лλéydŋy ‘entwined,
interwoven' (Hell.). 11. àµôi-, éɛpi-, ovµ-rλek-ýs ‘id.' (Nonn., Orph.), a verbal adj.
after the s-stems, with nɛpëλék-ɛɑ [f.] (Jamb.). 12. Desiderative лλɛčɛíw (Hdn.
Epim.).
=
B. With o-grade: 1. лλóкoç [m.] ‘twine, lock, wreath, collar' (Pi., trag.); adjectives
Stá-, oúμ- (AP, Nonn.) from Sia-, σчμ-лλéкw; лλóкIov [n.] 'necklace' (Hell. inscr. et
al.), μ- ‘hair-slide, etc.' (Hell.), also plur. Ɛopτǹ лapà Avaíos 'festival
(Athenian)' (H.); ëλóê-чµoç ‘suited for braiding' (Thphr.), see Strömberg 1937: 171,
Saлλóк-ɩvoç ‘braided' (Str.), лεpitλok-ádŋy ‘in a close embrace' (AP); ëλoк-íšoµαi
[v.] ‘to let one's hair be braided' (Hp.). 2. лλoкý [f.] (Epich., Arist.) ‘plait, fabric,
intertwining, complication, etc.', very frequently from prefixed compounds (лεpɩ-,
¿µ-, kata-, ovµ-, etc.) in different senses (IA). From лλoкý or лλókos : rλokás [f.]
'hair plait, lock' (Pherecr.), after yɛvɛáç, etc.; éλoкɛúç [m.] ‘hair braider' (Epich.,
Нp.). 3. лλóкaµos [m.] ‘lock of hair' (epic poet. since E176) with -íç, -ïdos [f.] ‘id.'
(Hell.), perhaps by decomposition from ¿vëλokáµdes Axataí (Od.) after έvêvýµides
Axato beside кvηµíç (Leumann 1950: 122f.); πλókaµa. τà лεpióστεa vɛupa 'the
sinews around the bones' (H.), -wdɛa. tòv ovλov þóσtpvxov 'the curling lock of hair'
(H.). 4. лλóкаvov [n.] 'braiding, knitwear, etc.' (Pl., X.); after óavov, Ŏpyavov, etc.
5. лλоxμóç, mostly plur. -oí [m.] 'locks of hair' (P 52, A. R., AP), with a suffix -smo-
(Schwyzer: 493).
•ETYM The thematic root present лλέкw < *plek-e/o- has no parallels in other IE
languages, where we usually find the extended root *plek-t-; cf. Lat. plectō = OHG
flehtan 'to braid', OCS plesti 'ouррáлτεу', Ru. plestí 'to twine'. The original root is
still found in isolated formations, e.g. Skt. praśna- [m.] 'turban, headband < *plok-
no-, OHG flahs, OE fleax [n.] 'flax' < *plok-so- (parallelism with the rare s-stem
лλéкоç is probably coincidental).
лλɛovektéw, nλɛovεčíα, etc. →лλɛiwv.
лλɛúµwv, -ovos [m.] ‘lung(s)' (II.), metaph. ‘jellyfish' (Pl., Arist.). <IE *pleu-mon-
'lung'>
•VAR Mostly plur. Secondarily лvεúµwν after лvεw, rveñµa.

=== page 630 ===

1208
T入eupá
•COMP Isolated compounds, e.g. лλεvμo-pρwуns 'with a rupture in the lung' (Hp.),
ȧλɩ-ñλɛúµwv [m.] ‘jellyfish' (Marcell. Sid.).
•Der éλevµov-wdŋs (also лv-) ‘lung-like' (Arist.), -ía [f.] ‘inflammation of the lungs,
pneumonia (Com. Adesp., medic.), much more common is the hypostasis ëɛpɩ-
ñλevµov-ía, -íŋ ‘id.' (IA), ëλevµov-ís [f.] ‘id.' (Hp.). Professional short-form ëλɛûµoç
[m.] 'lung-sickness', with лλεvµμ-άw, v.l. -ów 'to suffer from lung-sickness' (Hp.,
Gal.).
•ETYM Gг. лλεúμwv is closely related to Skt. klomán- [m., n.] 'the right lung', [pl.]
'the lungs' <*kw)leu-mon-, Lat. pulmō ‘lung' < *pul-mon- (with metathesis), but the
correspondences all contain minor irregularities. The root *pleu- must be the
starting point, as it reappears in OCS pljušta, Lith. plaūčiai [pl.] ‘lungs' < *pleu-t-ieh₂,
and seems to be old. Perhaps related to ▸лλέw.
лλɛvpá [f.] 'rib(s), side of the body', metaph. 'side of an area, of a geometrical figure,
flank of an army' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Usually plur. -aí; also -óv [n.], usually plur. -ά.
•COMP Very often as a second member, e.g. лεрí-лλεvpoç ‘going around the ribs,
covering the sides' (E. [lyr.]).
⚫DER Diminutive лλεvρ-íα [pl.] (Нp., Delph. inscr.), -tác [f.] 'side of an area' (Tab.
Heracl.), after лεðɩ-áç, etc.; cf. Chantraine 1933: 354; -taños situated at the sides'
(Boeot. inscr.), -ikós 'belonging to the ribs' (sch.); -íτns [m.] 'connected to the ribs,
designation of a bone of the spine (Poll.), -îñç (vóσoc) [f.] 'pleurisy' (Hp., Ar.), also
as a plant name = σкóрdov (Ps.-Dsc.), because of its effects, cf. Redard 1949: 75;
-óµata [n.pl.] = лλɛvрá (A.), a poetic enlargement, see Chantraine 1933: 186; -loµós
[m.] meaning unclear, ‘dam'? (pap.); лλɛvp-wv, -@voc [m.] Aetol. TN (B.639, etc.),
see Krahe ZNF 8 (1932): 159. Hypostasis лαрα-лλɛvp-ídia [n.pl.] ‘side armors' (X.,
Arr.).
•ETYM No clear etymology. Hardly related to лλáž < *plk- (pace Benveniste 1935:
112f.) or лaλáµŋ < *plh₂-em-eh₂- via *лλñ-Ƒαp (pace Frisk 2, 559).
лλέw [v.] ‘to travel by sea, sail, navigate', with prefix also 'to swim, flow' (Il.). ◄IE
*pleu- 'sail, flow'>
•VAR Аoг. лλεσαai (Att.), fut. лλεú-σоμаι (II.), -σобμа (Att.), -σw (Hell.), perf.
néñλevka (S.), pass. лéлλεvõµai (later Att.), лλεv-σðñvai, -σðýσoµai (Arr.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, kata-, έñɩ-.
•DER лλóoç, contracted лλoñç (ává-, έní-, nɛpí-, etc.) [m.] ‘navigation, seafaring',
also 'traveling time, traveling wind' (IA); compounds, e.g. εű-лλoоç 'good for sailing,
having a fair voyage' (Erinn., Theoc.) with -ín, -ta [f.] (Il., epic poet.), лεрí-лλovç
[adj.] 'possible to sail around' (Th.), 'sailing around' (AP), also 'encasing' (Hp.; cf.
xindoov)
From лλóоç: 1. the old inherited i̟o-derivative лλotov [n.] 'craft, ship' (IA), with лλα-
ápiov (Ar., X.), -apídiov (pap.); 2. лλóïµoç 'navigable' (Att.), often written лλóïμoç
after лλów, etc. (cf. Arbenz 48f.); 3. лλoa̸dès ‘swimming, flowing', i.e. 'not fixed,
mobile' (Hp.), see Strömberg 1944: 25. 4. лλoïкóç ‘id.' (Suid.); but 5. лλoï¼w [v.] ‘to
commit navigation' (Hell.) rather for older deverbative лλwïш (see лλów).
入ńpns
1209
From лλέw stems the rare form лλɛñσɩç (simplex only in H. s.v. vɛñσç), i.a. in
εлíлλεvσiç [f.] 'attack at sea' (Th. 7, 36 beside ȧváкpovσiç; otherwisе εлíлλoυç). Оn►
►лАOÛτоÇ S.V.
ETYM The primary thematic root present лλε(F)w is a PIE formation; cf. Skt. plávate
'to swim, flow', OCS pluti 'to flow, sail', Lat. pluit ‘it rains', etc. < *pleu-e/o-. The
future лλɛúσo̟μɑt also has parallels outside Greek, such as Skt. ploṣyati and OIr. luïd,
-lú ‘to drink' < *pleu-s-; further, лàoĩov (< *rλófiov) matches ON fley [n.] ‘ship' <
*flauja- < *plou-io-, and éλóoç, лλoÛç corresponds to Ru. plov ‘ship, barge', ToB
plewe [m.] 'ship' <*plouo-. See also ▸лλúνw.
лλźwу 'more'. →лλɛíwv.
nλéws ‘full’. •var ëλñ³oç ‘multitude'. →ñíµñλŋµu.
入nyń →丌入ńoow.
лλŋµµeλýs [adj.] ‘out of tune, faulty' (Democr., Att.). <GR➤
•Der ƒλŋµµελ-έw [v.] 'to fail, commit an offense', -ɛta [f.] 'fault, offense, mistake'
(Att.).
•ETYM Compound of лλýv ‘withouť and µέλoç ‘tune', the opposite of ελ. Cf.
►лλу and ►μéλoç.
´λýµvò [f.] ‘nave, drum' (Il., Hes. Sc., Hp., A. R.). <GR?>
•COMP лАηшνó-Sετov [n.] 'hoop with which the spokes are attached to the nave'
(Poll.).
ETYM Traditionally associated with лíμлληш (cf. H. “алò τоб лληробσðαι úлò τOU
ǎžovos"), but this is popular etymology. Preferably derived from *k"lh₂-mneh₂ 'part
that turns about the axle' (Waanders 1992: 594), i.e. from the root of ▸лελоμα.
rλnuòpic, -idos [f.] 'rise of the sea, flood' (1 486, Ion. poet., Hell.). <PG? (S, V)►
VAR Acc. also -v (cf. below); -μμ- (mss.).
=
•Der ñλŋµúp-w [v.] ‘to overflow, make flow' (Archil., B., Call.) with лλýµñpa [f.]
лλŋuvpíç (Hell.); byform éλŋµñp-έw ‘id.' (Hp., Plu.), like кúp-w beside -έw, etc.
(Schwyzer: 721); thence -iŋ, -ía [f.] (Aret., sch.).
•etym ПÀŋµ-ŭpíç may have been derived from ëλ½µm 'flood-tide', like ȧλµ-špíç from
äλµŋ, whence the yod-present éληµýpw with additional derivatives; the vowel length
of this verb could have spread back to the primary noun ëλŋµūpíç. Note, however,
that the forms with double -μ- are problematic. This, in combination with
occurrence of the suffix -up-, may point to Pre-Greek origin.
лλýv [prep.] with gen. ‘except', adv. and conj. ‘except, aside from, save that, however'
(207). <IE *pelh₂- 'near'>>
•VAR Dor. Aeol. лλáv.
•ETYM Like the antonym ▸ Sýv, the frozen accus. from a root noun *ëλýs < *plh₂-s,
*plh₂-m, related to лελαç and cognates. Probably originally ‘close, near', then ‘aside,
except' (see Schwyzer 1950: 542f.).
rλýpns ‘fulľ’. →ñíµñλnu.

=== page 631 ===

1210
入noiov
ПλоŪTOS
1211
лληoíov 'near'. →лéλαç.
лλnσow [v.] 'to strike, slap, thrust, hit', pass. 'to be beaten, thrust, hit, struck' (Eк- 'to
startle', έn- usually ‘to criticize, scold', napα- in pass. 'to become crazy', etc.). <IE
* pleh₂k/g- 'beat'>
•VAR In the older language, the pres. is always prefixed. Att. -ττw (¿k-ntλýyvvµai
Th.), aor. лλñšαɩ (Il.), Dor. лλāžαɩ, redupl. (¿-)„éπλnov (Hom.), pass. „λñуñvai
(II.), Dor. Aeol. лλãуñvαɩ, with prefix -лλǎуñva (IA), лληуеñvαɩ (Е., late), fut.
лλńчw (II.), pass. лλ½уýσo̟µα, -лλǎуýσoµαι (Att.), perf. лéлλŋya (Il.: лɛñλŋуóç),
лéлλŋɣα (Hell.), pass. „éлληуα (IA).
•COMP Often prefixed in various senses, e.g. with έк-, έn-, katα-, napα-. As a first
member in governing compounds, e.g. лλý‹-íííos ‘flogging horses' (Il., epic poet.).
•DER Action nouns: 1. πληуń, Dor. πλayá [f.] 'hit, wound, etc.' (II.). 2. πλńуavov.
ẞакτηpíα 'staff, лληуáç· Spéлavov 'curved sword' (H.). 3. éλñу-µα [n.] = πλŋyń (S.,
E., Arist.), -µóç [m.] ‘id.' (medic.), кaτá- (LXX). 4. ảitó-, ék-, čµ-, ¿ní-, katá-nλnšiS
[f.] 'apoplexy, concussion, etc.' (IA); „λñšiç, Dor. „λāšɩ [f.] ‘striking' (Ti. Locr.).
Agent and instrument nouns: 5. лλñкτрov, Doг. лλãкτpov [n.] ‘instrument for
striking, mallet' (h. Hom., Pi.). 6. ñλŋkτýp [m.] ‘id.' (Hdn. Gr.); nλaktýp. tò toũ
áλektpvóvos nλñкτpov 'cock's spur³ (H.); лλáкτwp [m.] (Dor.) ‘striker' (AP),
nλýktys [m.] ‘id.' (Hp., Arist.), έ- ‘blamer, castigator' (gloss.), -лλýktɛipa [f.] ‘id.'
(AP).
Adjectives, mostly as a second member: 7. -πλη}, e.g. лapañλý, -yos ‘stricken
sideways' (ε 418), 'crazy' (IA), 'paralyzed' (Hp.) with -nyíα, -ŋуiкós (Hp.), olστpo-
лλ stung by a gadfly' (trag.); лλ½ε as a simplex only as a designation of a bandage
(Sor.); 8. -ïÀŋktos, e.g. åñónÀŋktos ‘stirred by strikes' with -ŋšíŋ, -ía (IA); 9. ¿k-,
кατα-лλαуns startled' (Plb., Luc.). 10. лληкτiкóç ‘striking, hitting' (Pl.), ¿кëλŋкɩɩ-
кós (Th.), etc.
Verb: 11. лληкτíšoμα 'to fight' (Ø 499 et al.), mostly 'to dally' (Ar., Herod.), with
-toµós [m.] (AP), probably an enlargement of the primary verb (cf. λaкtíšw and
Schwyzer: 706) rather than from a nominal t-derivative.
⚫ETYM The verb лλnσow ostensibly continues *plāk-ie/o-, but the kappa probably
arose secondarily in the verb; cf. лληуn. Therefore rather PIE *plhg-ie/o- than
*plh₂k-ie/o-, although both variants have correspondences in other Indo-European
languages; cf. *pleh₂k-ie/o- in OCS plačo 'to lament' (if from "to beat one's chest"),
with which agrees Lith. plókis [m.] ‘blow, stroke', as opposed to *pleh₂g- in Lat.
plangō 'to beat, bewail' < *pl(e)h₂ng- with a nasal infix, and the Gm. group of Go. fai-
flokun ‘¿кóſtovto', OE flōcan ‘to slap'. Lith. plàkti ‘to beat, chastise' (would be IE
*plok-) can only be indirectly related, via secondary ablaut.
As Van Beek suggests (p.c.), it is doubtful that лλάw is related. Semantically, it
may have influenced лλησσw, but the formal connection is problematic, and лλάw
seems to be semantically closer to åµлλaкíσкw, etc.
лλíкov [n.] 'kind of tart, pie' (Chrysipp. Tyan. apud Ath. 647e). <PG?>
⚫ETYM No etymology; maybe Pre-Greek.
лλívеos [f.] 'brick, air-brick', metaph. 'square building-stone, metal ingot, abacus'
(IA). <PG>
•COMP Е.g. лλv0o-pópos 'bearing bricks, brick-bearer' (Ar.), nμ-лλív-ov [n.]
'ingot in the shape of a half-brick' (Hdt., Att. inscr.).
•DER 1. Diminutive: лλivе-íov (Att.), -ís [f.] (Hell.), both predominantly in metaph.
use; -ápiov (LXX), -ídiov (lamb.). 2. Adjectives: πλive-ivoç 'made of bricks, of brick'
(IA), -ɩкóç ‘id.' (pap.), -taкós ‘busy with bricks' (D. L.), after ßißλ-akós, Oŋpi-akós,
etc.; -wτós ‘brick-shaped (Paul. Aeg.). 3. Substantive: µàɩvė-īτɩç [ƒ.] ‘kind of
στулτηрíα' (Gal.). 4. Adverb: -ŋdóv ‘shaped like a roofing tile' (Hdt.). 5. Verbs:
λive-ɛúw [v.] 'to cut out bricks, make bricks' (IA) with -ɛía, -ɛiov, -ɛvσiç, -εvμa,
-εvτýs (Hell.); -óoμat 'to cover with bricks' (AP).
•ETYM The semantic field (architecture), as well as the presence of the notoriously
foreign element -ɩv0-, suggest that the word is a loan from Pre-Greek; see Chantraine
1933:371.
лλíσσoµai [v.] ‘to cross the legs' (< 318). <?►
•VAR Аor. άлεлλíατo 'trotted off (Ar.), лλížavτα· diavαßávτα (H.), perf. Siα-
nɛnλɩyµévos ‘with legs spread out' (Archil.), ɛpɩ- ‘with legs laid around (Stratt.),
nepinenλíxðai• din\λaxévai tà okéλŋ άoxnµóvwç “interchange the legs indecorously'
(H.), act. Sα-лεлliós (στóµα) ‘standing open' (Hp.), fut. pass. кατanλıyŋoɛı (Ar.
Fr. 198, 3), according to H. = кαταкpatηśńσŋ.
katakpatnonon-
●COMP έк-ëλíσσoμa 'to gapе', of a wound, etc. (Hp.), åµ-\iσow (Poll.),
Sianλioσovτes (v.l. Y 120).
•DER лλíž = ßñµа (sch.; Dor.), лλx-áç, -áðoç [f.] 'perineum, inside of the thighs'
(medic.), πλíуµa [n.] 'sprawling, perineum' (Hp., H., EM); àµôɩ-πλí} [adv.] ‘with
sprawled legs' (S. Fr. 596), лepi-nλíž. nepiɛi\nows holding embraced' (H.),
nepintλíydnv. stepɩßáðŋv ‘astride' (H.).
•ETYM Uncertain etymology. Perhaps related to OIr. sliassait [f.] ‘shank' < *spleigh-s-
ont-ih, or (without s) Skt. plehate 'to go' < *pleigh-e/o- (Pok. 1000). Not related to
OCS plęsati, Ru. pljasát' 'to dance' < (?)*plenk-e/o- (pace Pisani 1938: 181ff.).
totov, 入óog, roug →入éw.
лλóкашos →лλÉкw.
лλочτоç [m.] 'riches, wealth' (Il.), also personified (Hes.), cf. Пoúτwv below. <IE
*pleu- 'run, flow, swim'>
VAR Late also [n.], see Schwyzer 512.
•DIAL Myc. po-ro-u-te-u/Plouteus/.
•COMP E.g. лλoυτо-dóτηs [m.] 'who spends riches' (Hes.), kaλλí-πλouτoç 'with
beautiful riches' (Pi.).
⚫DER 1. πλoÚσ-10s, Laс. лλоúτIоs (EM) 'rich' (Hes., h. Merc.), with -taкós 'belonging
to the rich' (Alex. Com.), -táw = лλOUτéw (Alex. Aphr.). 2. лλoυT-ŋpós 'bringing
riches' (X.); -ā, -āкoç [m.] 'a rich fool' (com.). 3. лλoυτ-ívôηy [adv.] 'acc. to
nλout-ívdŋy
property' (Arist.). 4. nλovt-έw [v.] 'to be rich' (Hes.); -í(w 'to make rich, enrich'
(trag., X.; with каτα- Hdt.), with -10τs, -10τĤpios, toμós (late). 5. MoÚτwv, -wvoc

=== page 632 ===

1212
JT入Ú VW
[m.] god of riches, i.e. of the corn provisions buried in the earth (trag.); on the
motive of designation see Nilsson 1941(1): 471ff.; according to H. εüлλovtov kavov.
лλoũτov yàp λeyov tǹv έk tŵv кpiðŵv kai tŵv nupwv nepovoíav, 'nλ. was called
the surplus of barley and wheat'. 6. ПouTεúç 'id.' (Mosch., AP).
•ETYM Derivative from »λéw, i.e. *plou-to- 'flow, multitude', with the suffix -to- as in
e.g. ẞíoτos, vóσtos, etc.
лλúvw [v.] 'to wash, clean' (cf. ►λoúw, víľw). <IE *pleu- 'flow, swim'>
•VAR Iter. πλúvεσкOV (X 155), aoг. лλūvα (Оd.), fut. πλov-éw (epic Ion.), -w (Att.),
pass. perf. лénλvμα (IA), aoг. πλveñvai (Hell.), fut. -Onσoμaι (Com. Adesp.).
•COMP Also with ảлo-, έк-, кατα-, etc.
■DER Adjectives: 1. vεó-, Ễк-лλυ-Tos 'newly washed, washed out' ( 64, A., Pl.),
“λvτós ‘washeď (Hp.); 2. ¿ü-nλuv-ýs ‘washed well' (Od.); 3. itλuv-tikós ‘belonging to
washing' (Pl., Arist.), πλv-tiкóç ‘id.' (Alex. Aphr.).
Substantives: 4. „λuvoí [m. pl.] ‘washing pits, troughs or sites' (Hom., Hell.), with the
diminutive лλúvov [n.] (inscr. Sicily); with barytonesis 5. éλúvoç [m.] ‘laundry’
(pap., ostr.), see Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3, 3; unclear in Ar. Pl. 1061; with лλuvεúç [m.]
'washer' (Att. inscr., Poll.).
Action nouns: 6. nλúois (nepi-, katá-, ȧnó-) [f.] ‘washing' (IA), late anónλuv-σiS
(Sophon.); лλúσчos belonging to laundry' (pap. IIIª); 7. nλúµɑ (ɑnó-, nepí-; also
лλúσμа Phot., also mss.) [n.] 'washing water, swilling water, swill' (Hp., Pl. Com.,
Arist., pap.); 8. λvoµós. nλvtýp ‘(washing) trough' (H.).
Agent and instrument nouns: 9. πλúv-τpia [f.] 'washer' (Att. inscr., Poll.), -τpíç [f.]
'id.' (Ar.), also 'fuller's earth' (botanics in Thphr., see Capelle RhM 104 (1961): 58),
msc. лλúν-τη (Poll.), лλú-τηs (EM, Choerob.); also лλτηр (H.; see above) and
*nλUv-τp in Пuv-τp-tα [n.pl.] name of a purification festival (Att. inscr., X.) with
-twv, -twvos [m.] month name (Thasos), if not rather analogical after other nouns in
-týpia, -týpiov (see Chantraine 1933: 63f.); likewise kata-¨λvvtηp-í\w ‘to shower
with abusive words', properly perhaps 'to immerse in swilling water, to drench with
swilling water'? 10. ïλúv-tpov [n.] = „λúµa (Arist.) [pl.] ‘payment for washing' (pap.
III³, Poll.).
⚫ETYM The vowel length of лλбvw points to a thematicized nasal present *лλú-v-w
(cf. кpivw from *кpí-v-w). The formation must be an inner-Greek creation from the
IE root plu- (which gave λéw < *pleu-e/o-), but a nasal present with the same
meaning is also found in Armenian, viz. lua-na-m 'to wash, bathe'. See лλéw and
▶T入WW.
лλбσσεɩν [v.] 0εipɛσa 'to be destroyed' (H.). <?>
•
⚫ETYM DELG suggests a connection with λów, but the gloss may be corrupt.
лλww [v.] 'to swim' (Il., epic Ion.), aor. also 'to sail, go by sea', beside ſλέw as a pres.;
on лλww beside πλéw see Bechtel 1921(3): 196ff., 208. IE *pleu- or *pleh3->
•VAR Aor. λw-vai (εл-έлλwv, etc., Hom., Hes.), лλwσai (П 47 ptc. εn-nλwoaç; Hdt.,
Arr.), fut. лλóσ-qµαι (Hdt.), -w (Lyc.), perf. лéлλwкa (Hdt., Lyc.; also E. Hel. 532 and
Ar. Th. 878 [parody]).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ¿n-, έk-, kata-, napa-.
πvέw
1213
•DER Probably, all derivatives are Ionic (cf. Fraenkel 1912: 3f.).
Adjectives: 1. лλш-τóç (лрóσ-, čк-) 'swimming, navigable' (K 3, Hp., Hdt., Arist.)
with Tís [f.] 'raft' vel sim. (Demetr. Astrol.), -τεúоμаι [v.] 'to be navigated, cruised'
(Plb.); 2. λw-TIKÓS 'seafaring' (Hell.); 3. -σчμoç navigable, seaworthy' (S.,
Diogenian.), rather from πλwσat than from *лλшσç; likewise лλwïuoç alongside
入óipos.
Substantives: 4. каτáлλwσiç [f.] 'home-coming by sea' (Herod.); 5. πλwτnp [m.]
'sailor' (rare in E., Ar., Pl., often in Arist., etc.), 'swimmer' (Opp., Nonn.); 6. лλw-
áde, -iádɛç (Thphr.), -ídɛç (A. R.) [f.pl.] 'swimming, flowing'; also 7. πλwc, pl.
лλшτεç name of a fish, = кεστрεÚÇ (but cf. Thompson 1947 s.v. πλwτα); but
Saкpunλwεv (T 122) is not a denominative from *Sакрυ-лλwç, but modeled after
Sáкpu Xεwv, Xεovσa and built as a univerbation; cf. Leumann 1950: 36.
Verb: 8. nλw-ï¼w (-w(w) ‘to go by sea' (Hes., Th.), with -ïσɩç [f.] ‘seafaring' (Just.).
•ETYM Within Greek, the derivation of πλów, with its -w-, is not clear, but
etymological separation from tλέw < *pleu-e/o- seems unattractive. The formation
has a close parallel in Germanic, e.g. ON flóa, OE flōwan 'to flow' < PGm. *flōan- <
PIE *plōu- (with *-ōu- > *-ō- like in Go. sauil [sɔ̃il] ‘sun' < *seh₂u-el-), whence Go.
flodus [m.] 'river' (etc.). The apparent lengthened grade is also found in Slavic, e.g.
OCS plavati, Ru. plávať 'to swim (to and fro)'. See лλéw and лλúvw.
лvɛúµwv ‘lung'. ⇒nλeúµwv.
лvéш [v.] 'to blow, breathe, respire, smell' (Il.). <IE? *pneu- 'breathe, cough, smell'>
•VAR Epic лvɛíw, aor. лvɛñσɑi (Il.), ipv. ǎµvvɛ, med. -úto, -ú(v)ðŋ (Hom.), fut.
лvεú-σoµαι (IA), -σoчμαι (Ar., Arist.), -ow (Hell.), perf. лεлvευкa (Att.), pass.
луεvσ-еñvαι (Thphr.), -Onσoμal (Aret.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, àño-, ɛio-, Èk-, ¿v-, ¿iu-, itpoσ-.
⚫DER 1. πvon, Doг. лvо(1)ά, ерiс von [f.] 'wind, breeze, breath' (Il.), also ȧva-, Sia-,
έê-~, etc., etc. Epic -ot- metrically conditioned after vεíw, see Wyatt 1969: 166-168.
Very often as a second member, e.g. ǹðú- (áðú-)ƒvooç, -лvoυç 'with a pleasant wind,
breath' (Pi., S., E.), έлí-лνооç, -πvous 'inspired' with èлíлvolα [f.] 'inspiration' (A.,
Pl.); -лvoια also beside -πvoý in ȧvá-, åлó-, dɩá- etc.; also άvαлvóïкoç “concerning
breathing' (Ptol.).
2. iveūµa (äµ-, npóʊ-) [n.] ‘wind, breeze, breath, ghost' (Pi., IA) with ëvɛvµá-tIOV
(Hell.), TIкóç 'concerning the wind, etc.' (Arist.), -чoç 'bringing wind' (Arat.),
-τwdŋs ‘like wind or breath, windy' (Hp., Arist.), -τíaç [m.] ‘asthmatic' (Hp.) with
-tiάw [v.] 'to gasp' (sch.); “vεvµα-tów, -tóoµai [v.] 'to blow up, (cause to) vaporize'
(Anaxipp., Arist.) with -τwσis, -τwtikós; itvevļa-τí\w (àлo-) [v.] ‘to fan by blowing'
(Antig., H.) with -tɩoµós.
3. лνεÑσç [f.] 'blowing', more usual in compounds, e.g. àváлуευ-σç 'inhalation,
respite' (I.). 4. With secondary -σ-, and a suffix -ɩ- like in ǎ-лvevo-tos, -tí, -tía:
лVεVσ-TIкÓç 'belonging to breathing' (Gal.), more generally àva- (Arist.) etc.; -τiάw
'to gasp' (Hp., Arist.). 5. εiσxv-nλos, -nλas loving, lover' (Call., Theoc., EM), from
εio-vέw 'to inspire (love)', with analogical -λos; cf. Chantraine 1933: 242.

=== page 633 ===

1214
aviyw
•ETYM The verb and its derivatives appear to have been regularized to a large extent.
The only isolated forms are epic äµлvvɛ, etc. ‘take breath' = 'recover from'. The
appurtenance of the perfect лéлvчµaɩ, -µévos ‘to be mentally active, animated, be
sedate' is doubtful, and лvʊτóc and cognates are certainly unrelated. Schulze 1892:
322ff. also separated äµüvvɛ and néлvyα from évέw.
From other languages, only some Germanic formations can be compared: ON fnýsa
'to sniff, OE fneosan 'to sneeze', which may go back on IE *-eu-; however, beside
them stand several variants, e.g. ON fnasa, OHG fnehan, and the whole group may
be onomatopoeic in origin.
Cf. also лолvów and ► лvíyw.
лviуw [v.] ‘to limit one's breath, asphyxiate by squeezing, water or vapor, to choke,
drown, be drowned', also 'to muffle, smother' (Epich., Sophr., IA); on the meaning
'to drown, be drowned' see Schulze Berl.Ak.Sb. 1918: 320ff. <PG?>
●VAR Aor. „vîčaɩ, intr. and pass. лvšу-ñvaɩ with fut. -ησoμαι, late лvɩ×еñvaɩ, perf.
med. лεлvуμα.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially ȧло- and кατα-.
•DER Action nouns: 1. лvīуoç [n.] ‘stifling heat' (IA), opposite piyoc; 2. лvīу-µα [n.]
'suffocating' (Hp.), -µóç [m.] ‘id.' (Hp., X., Arist.) with -дwdηc 'suffocating' (Hp.),
-µový [f.] ‘id.' (Hdn. Epim.), cf. qλeyµový, inµový; 3. πvišis (katá-) [f.] ‘choking,
asphyxiation' (Arist., Thphr.), 'drowning' (PMag.Par.); 4. nvíč, -yós [f.] ‘choking,
asphyxiation' (Hp., Dsc.), like opíš (Chantraine 1933: 2f.); 5. πviyɛtós [m.] = πvɩyos
(Ptol.; H. s.v. ȧyxóvŋ), like župɛtós, nayetós; 6. nepɩлáуń [f.] ‘suffocation' (Vett.
Val.).
Agent nouns: 6. лvĭyɛúç [m.] “suffocator", "cover for extinguishing coals' (Ar.,
Arist.), 'air chamber' (Hero, Ph. Bel.), 'muzzle' (com.), probably by analogy of лvíуw,
лvĭуñvaɩ with τpíßw, tpiß-ñval, -, -ɛúc, etc. (Boßhardt 1942: 48); 7. πVкτηp [m.]
'choker, choking' (Nonn.). 8. évɩy-ɩɩɩç (scil. yñ) ‘kind of clay' (Dsc., Plin.); 9. -aλíwv,
-wvoc [m.] 'nightmare, incubus' (medic.), like aibaλ-íwv beside ai0-áλn, αï¤w; 10.
лvɩ-yŋpóç ‘choking', especially ‘stifling hot' (Hp., Att.), from лviуoç or лvíów; 11.
лvĭyóɛç ‘id.' (Nic., AP), ĭ metrically conditioned; 12. nepi-, ovµ-πviy-ýs ‘suffocated
(Nic., J., D. S., after лvĭу-ñvaɩ); 13. ликтóç steamed, smothered' (com.), ‘airtight'
(Hero), 'suffocated, choked' (Act. Ap.); 14. enlarged лvɩу-íw [v.] 'to choke, strangle'
(AP), influenced by лу-íчw.
⚫ETYM No clear etymology. Earlier attempts to analyze the formation as a conflation.
of several different verbs are unconvincing. Rather onomatopoeic or, given its onset
in лv-, sound-symbolic. A Pre-Greek origin cannot be excluded.
ñóɑ [f.] ‘grass, herb, grass plot', late also ‘(time of the) hay harvest, summer' (Il., Att.).
<IE *poiH-ueh, 'grass, meadow'>
VAR Epic Ion. лoíŋ (II.), Dor. (Pi.) лoíα.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. лoo-vóμos 'feeding on grass', лoló-voµos ‘having
grassy pastures' (A. [lyr.]), λexε-ñoins (see ►λéxoc).
•DER 1. Diminutive лo-άpov (лo-) [n.] (Thphr.); 2. noi-ǹeiç, Dor. -áɛɩç ‘rich in grass'
(Hom., Pi., S. [lyr.]); -ŋpós ‘id.' (E. [lyr.]); 3. ло-á¶w [v.] 'to be rich in grass, bear
1
1
1215
grass' (Str.); 4. -aσµóç [m.] 'weeding, clearing of weeds' (Thphr.), -áστpiα [f.]
'weeder (fem.)' (Archipp.), -áστplov [n.] 'weeding tool' (Poll.), from лоá‹w = 'to
weed, clear of weeds' (only as a conj. in Philem. Com. 116, 4). On supposed Boeot.
*лúaç 'meadow', see Finley Glotta 33 (1954): 311.
•ETYM PGr. *poiwā- is formally identical to Lith. pieva [f.] ‘meadow' < *poiH-ueh₂- or
*poHi-ueh₂-. Connection with the root of лoчýу cannot be shown. The deviating.
noɩvá. noía. Aákwvɛç (H.) may be due to conflation with кotvá· Xóptos (H.).
лodaлós [adj.] ‘native of where?, whence?' (Hdt., Att.); also ‘of what sort?' (D.); in this
meaning Hell. лotaлós (with τ from itótepog, nótɛ, etc.). ◄IE *k”o- 'who?'>
•ETYM Formation like ►ȧλλodaлóç, etc. The first member is from IE *kwod
quod (see on лóеεν and τíc), if not analogical after ηuεd-αлóç, etc. (Schwуzer:
604'). The form (ó) лоðαлóç in Hdt. as opposed to (ó) кóτɛρоç is unclear; cf.
Wackernagel 1916: 35².
= Lat.
лodápêηs [adj.] epithet of Achilles, in лodápêηç dãos Axiλλɛúç (II.), also of Hermes
(B.), of Spóµoɩ and ǹµépa (Pi.); also epithet of a remedy against gout (Gal.). ◄ GR▷
•ETYM A compound from лoúç and ȧpkéw 'to keep off, aid, suffice'; cf. лodóкηs
'quick-footed', also ‘helping the feeť (Gal.). On „odáρêηs beside лodákŋs and ródaç
WкÚç, see Treu 1955: 6.
лodηvεкýs stretching to the feet' (Il., epic, Hdt.). ..
ETYM Compound from лоúç and Evɛукɛiv; see Siηvεкns and evɛyкɛiv with
references.
лобокáккη [f.] 'foot block'. káкaλa.
лóеεv [interr.adv.] 'whence, from where?' (Il.). <IE *k"o- 'who?'>
•DER Indefinite лoеév 'from somewhere' (Il.), Ion. кóеev (Hdt.). Also лóеɩ, лOеÍ
'where?', 'somewhere' (Il., epic); лoυ, лov (Аtt.), Ion. кoŨ, кov ‘id.'; лoĩ, пol
'whither?', 'to somewhere' (Att.), лóσε 'whither?' (Hom.).
ETYM Formations from the pronominal stem ло-, Ion. ко-, from IE *k"o- with
representatives in most IE languages, e.g. Skt. kás 'who?', Go. has 'id.', Lat. quod
'what?'. Cf. лoÏoç, ▶лóσoç, ▶лоτε, and лоτεpoç; see also τíc. On the adverbial
endings -0ɛv, -0ɩ, -σɛ, see Schwyzer: 628f.; on the petrified case forms лoυ (gen.) and
лоч (loc.), op.cit. 621f.
лоеέw [v.] 'to desire, long for, miss' (Il.). ◄IE *ghed½- ‘long for, desire, pray’➤
•VAR Inf. -ŋµεvat (Od.), ind. -ǹw (Sapph.), aor. 100-éσai (II.), -ñσai (IA), fut. -έσoµai
(Att.), -ńow (IA), perf. neñóð-nka, -ŋµai (late).
•COMP Rarely with prefix, especially έлɩ-.
•DER (¿ñɩ-)ñóð-ŋoic, -nua (Aq., Ep. Сor., et al.), έлɩлое-íα (Еp. Rom.) 'longing'; also
лое-ητúç [f.] 'id.' (Opp.), -nτwp [m.] 'desirous person' (Man.).
Furthermore лóеoç [m.] 'desire, longing, love' (II.), also a plant name (Thphr.), cf.
Strömberg 1940: 107, 110еń [f.] ‘id.' (Hom., late prose), лoеɛvós longed for' (Lyr.,
trag., also Att. prose), after ȧλyelvóç etc.; 100vóc ‘id.' (AP).

=== page 634 ===

1216
TOL
TOLVń
1217
⚫ETYM Formally, лоеéw directly corresponds to OIr. guidid 'to pray'= PIE *g*hodh
éie-, which is an iterative formation. Additionally, Balto-Slavic has a nasal present in
Lith. pa-si-gendù, -gèsti ‘to long for, miss', OCS žędati ‘to desire, long for³ < *gwhend"-.
The related aorist Оéσσaσaι can be compared to the OIr. s-subj. 1pl. -gessam <
*ghed-s-. In Indo-Iranian, the root is found in YAv. jaidiiemi ‘to ask for’. The
development *gh -> b-, needed to account for the Gm. group of Go. bidjan 'to pray',
is controversial. On the concept of лóðоç, sеe now Weiss HSPh. 98 (1998): 31-61.
лoɩ [prep.]
DIAL Arg., Phoc., Locr.
•ETYM See лotí.
лoɩέw [v.] ‘to do, make, produce (also of poetry), act', med. also ‘to choose, deem,
appraise' (Il.). <IE *ki-eu-, *k"ei-u- 'gather, deem'>
⚫VAR Аoг. лoñσα, fut. лoñσw, perf. med. лεлоíŋµα (all Il.), act. лεлоíηкα, aor. pass.
лоеñva (IA), fut. лoеýσoµαι (D.), лεñoñσoµaι (Hp.).
■COMP Often prefixed in different senses, e.g. with ȧvτɩ-, &к-, έv-, лεру-, лроσ-. Аs a
second member -лоóç in productive compounds, e.g. λоуoлоóç [m.] ‘historian,
fabulist, newsmonger' (IA) with Aoyoroi-éw, -ía, -ikós, -ŋua.
●DER 1. лоíŋµα (лpoσ-, лεpɩ-) [n.] 'production, work, poem' (IA) with -ηµáτov
(Plu.), -ŋµatikós ‘poetic' (Plu.); 2. лoiŋoïç (лpoσ'-, лεpɩ-, ¿к- etc.) [f.] ‘creation,
production, poetry' (IA); on the meaning of лoí-ŋµα, -ŋou see Ardizzoni Riv. fil.
class. 90 (1962): 225ff., Chantraine 1933: 287. 3. лointós (˜poo-, ¿k-, etc.) ‘made,
produced' (Il.), also 'made artificially, not by nature' = 'adopted' (Pl., Arist.). 4.
nointýs [m.] (IA), fem. -ǹtpia (Hell.) 'creator, producer, poet', especially of Homer,
with -ŋτкós 'creating, poetic', ǹ -ntiký (téxvn) 'the art of poetry' (Pl., Arist.),
-ŋtɩkɛvoµai ‘to speak poetically, etc.' (Eust., sch.). 5. desiderative лoшσɛíw 'to wish to
do' (Hdn.).
•ETYM The verbal root must have contained a Ƒ; cf. Arg. лƒãƒƒç, εƒâƑchε,
εлoƑεО, Boeot. εлоƑεσε, pres. opt. El. [лo]ɩƑéoɩ (beside repeated лoέoɩ), which
derive from *лoчƑεjш. Usually derived from a stem *k"ei-u-, akin to Skt. cinóti 'to
pile, arrange, erect', Av. cinuuaiti ‘to select' < *ki-n(e)u-ti (Pok. 637-638), but the
exact derivation is unclear. It has often been argued that the verb is derived from a
noun *лоƑos (Schwyzer: 450, 7267), but this only occurs in compounds from the Vth
c. onwards. The alternative view that it continues a root *keiu-, abstracted from the
nu-present *k*ineuti > Skt. cinóti (Frisk, DELG), is rejected by LIV². On the meaning
of лoέw and other verba faciendi, see Braun Stud. ital. fil. class.N. S. 15 (1938): 243ff.;
also, Valesio Quaderni dell'Istituto di Glottologia (Bologna) 5 (1960): 97ff.
лoкíλoç [adj.] 'varicolored, wrought in many colors (stitched, knitted, woven),
manifold, versatile, cunning' (Il.). ◄IE *peik- ‘stitch, paint'>
•DIAL Myc. po-ki-ro-nu-ka /poikil-ōnuk¹a/ [n.pl.].
•COMP E.g. лоIкλó-Opovos (see Opóva and Bolling AmJPh. 79 (1958): 275ff.), noλv-
лоÍкIλоç 'much variegated' (E.).
⚫DER 1. лOIкIλ-íα [f.] 'variegation, diversity, embroidering' (IA); 2. -íaç [m.] fish name
(Paus.), see Strömberg 1943: 25, Thompson 1947 s.v., -is [f.] name of a bird that eats
the lark's eggs (Arist.), Thompson 1895 s.v.; 3. -ɛú¢ [m.] 'embroiderer, stitcher' (Alex.
Com.).
4. Denominative verb лок-íλλw 'to make varicolored, work artfully, etc.', also with
Siα-, кατα- etc., whence -λµa [n.] 'varicolored work, stitching, etc.' (II.), -tλµóc [m.]
‘elaboration, decoration' (Epicur., Plu.), -os [f.] ‘id.' (Pl.); -ɩλτýs [m.]
‘embroiderer, stitcher' (Aeschin., Arist.), fem. -íλτpɩα (Str.), -ɩλtiкóç ‘belonging to
stitching' (LXX, etc.); лoк-λów [v.] 'to stitch' (A. Fr. 304 = 609 Mette); -λɛúoμal
[v.] 'to be artful, versatile' (Vett. Val.).
⚫ETYM The suffixation -λos (cf. кóïλoç, vauτíλoç, ópyíλos, etc.) implies a root
*лок-, which is directly comparable to Skt. péśa- [m.] 'ornament', Av. paēsa- [m.]
'leprosy', Lith. paišas [m.] 'smut, dust-spot' < PIE *poik-o-; the same formation (also
as an adjective) occurs in Skt. puru-péśa-, Av. paēsa- 'leprous', Go. filu-faihs
These derive from the verbal root *pik-, seen in OCS púsati ‘to write', n-present Skt.
pimśáti 'to carve, cut, ornament', Lat. pingō 'to stitch with a needle, paint' (through
nasalized coda *pi"g"- from *pik-n-). Cf. ►лкрóç ‘cutting in, stitching'. The forms
лεкÓV. лкρÓν, лευкεdavóν (H.) and лíууaλoç are uncertain.
лoquýv, -évos [m.] 'herdsman, shepherd', metaph. 'guardian, leader, master' (II.). <IE
*peh₂-(i-) ‘protect’▷
DIAL Myc. po-me /poimēn/.
•COMP Some compounds, е.g. ло-ávæρ = лoǹív ȧvdpшv with лчαvóp-ov [n.]
àvdpŵv roчµavóp-ɩov
‘herd, troop of men' (A. Pers. 241 and 74); qitv-roíµŋy ‘guardian of plants' (A. Eu.
911).
●der roµév-ios (AP, API.), earlier and more often attested is -кós (Pl., Hell. poet.)
'belonging to herdsmen'; -100α [f.] 'shepherdess' (pap. IIIª); ñoíµv-ŋ [f.] 'herd, flock
of sheep' (1122) with -tov [n.] 'id.' (IA); -éviov (Opp.), -tos belonging to herds' (E.),
-nos (B 470, Hes.), -кóç (pap. III³), -ítηs (E., Poll.), -wτηs (sch.) ‘id.'; -10εv [adv.]
'of the herd' (A. R.).
-1
=
Denominative verb лoчaívó 'to be a herdsman, to herd, pasture', med. ‘to graze', of
the herd (II.), rarely with dia-, ovv-; thence лoчav-týp = roµýv (S.), -tikós
ñoµevikós (Gal., H.), лoчaσía [f.] ‘the grazing' (Ph.). Also ññv, -ɛoç [n.] ‘flock of
sheep' (epic, Il.).
ETYM Formally, лочу has an exact correspondence with Lith. piemuō, gen.
piemens 'herdsman' = PIE *poh₂i-mōn, *poh₂i-mén-s; the neuter лшv < *poh₂i-u,
*poh₂i-eu-(o)s is formally close to Skt. payú-, Av. paiiu- [m.] 'herdsman, protector' <
nom. *poh₂i-u-s, gen. *poh₂i-u-os; all are from the primary verb *peh₂-ti > Skt. páti ‘to
keep, protect', whence also go-pá- [m.] 'cowherd'. The frequent i-extension seems to
imply the pre-existence of an i-present, 3sg. *ph2-éi-ti, 3pl. *ph₂-i-énti; from this verb
probably derives Skt. nṛ-páy-(i)ya- ‘protecting men', nŕ-pi-ti- [f.] ‘protection of men'.
Сf. ►лшμа 1.
лoɩvý [f.] ‘ransom, fine, penalty, vengeance' (Il., epic poet.). <IE koi-neh,
'punishment, vengeance'>

=== page 635 ===

1218
лоτое
лÓλÇ
1219
•COMP Е.g. лоу-ŋλaτέw 'to pursue with vengeance' (see ►έλaúvw), vý-rolvos
‘unpunished, unavenged (Od.); on ►ǎrova s.v.
●DER 1. лoɩ[v]íov [n.] = лový (Delph. IVª), like лñεd-íov, xwp-íov, etc.; 2. adjectives
лoív-чoç ‘avenging' (S.), -años ‘punishing, avenging' (late); 3. verbs лov-άoµaι ‘to
avenge oneself (E.) with -áτwp (A., E.), -nτwp (Nonn.), -τp (Opp.) ‘avenger'; fem.
-τiç 'avengeress' (AP); -íoμat in aor. -íaσa 'to exact a penalty' (Arc. VIª). 4.
лováματα. τчwρημаτα 'vengeances' (H.), after μíσðшµα, кεo̟áλwμа, μηxávwμα, etc.
(cf. Chantraine 1933: 187).
⚫ETYM Identical with Av. kaēnā- [f.] ‘punishment, vengeance', Lith. káina [f.] ‘price,
utility', OCS cěna [f.] ‘tiµý', Ru. cená [f.] ‘price, value' < *koi-neh₂-, from the verbal
root *kwei- seen in Skt. cáyate 'to avenge, punish' (cf. ànótiois, tíois beside ápa-citi-
[f.] ‘revenge'), Av. kaii- ‘to atone, make pay'. Within Greek, this root is continued in
► Tívw, etc. Borrowed as Lat. poena >> MoE pain.
лoчoç [interrog. pron.] ‘of what kind?' (Il.). <IE *kwo- ‘who?'▷
•VAR Ion. Koĭoç.
⚫ETYM From interrogative *ko- 'who?' (seе ►лóеev) with suffixal -oĭoç; see ▸ ToToç.
лoɩлvúш [v.] 'to snort, pant, bustle about panting, be bustling' (epic since II.). <GR>
•VAR Thence aor. лолуñσal.
•Der Dat.pl. [ë]ovʊtp[0]σɩ (Antim. in PMilan. 17, 43 in unknown meaning, cf. ed.
ad loc.); explained by H. as σлоυdaíois 'earnest'. In лoлvvós. Оɛpáлwv 'attendant'
(H.), the ending is corrupt.
•ETYM Reduplicated intensive formation ло-луów (Schwyzer: 647) from ►лvéw,
► лéñvvµai. Cf. ► ·molpÚdow.
roɩqúσow [v.] ‘to snort, hiss, puff, blow' (Hell. poet., title in Sophr.), лoúčαL.
Éкooẞñσαι 'to alarm' (H.). <GR>
VAR Dor. fut. -qvw.
•Der лoíqvyµa [n.] ‘the blowing' (A. Th. 280), лoiúydŋy [adv.] ‘hissing' (Nic.); the
sch. on Nic. has a pres. лoóúšεiv.
⚫ETYM Reduplicated intensive formation of onomatopoeic character; see on Quσa.
NóKOG → HÉKW.
лóλɛµoç [m.] ‘battle, war' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Epic also лtóλɛµoç.
•DIAL Myc. e-u-ru-po-to-re-mo-jo /Euru-ptolemoio/.
•COMP Е.g. лоλέµ-apxos [m.] “warlord”, name of an official (IA, Dor.), quo-
´(t)óλɛµoç ‘friend of battles, warlike' (Il.).
•DER A. Adjectives: 1. лoλéµ-toç ‘militant, hostile', as a substantive ‘enemy' (Pi., IA);
2. -ŋïos ‘belonging to battle, war' (Il., epic); metrically conditioned, probably after
Apnios (Trümpy 1950: 134); 3. -Iкós 'belonging to war, militant, hostile' (Hdt. 3, 4 as a
v.l., Att.); 4. -wons 'id.' (Olymp. in Grg.).
B. Verbs: 1. лоλεμ-éw 'to battle, fight a war' (IA), often with prefix, e.g. Siα-, кατα-,
έк-; thence -ǹτwp (Antioch. Astr.), -ŋtýs (Gytheion III³) [m.] ‘warrior', -ŋtýptov [n.]
'military base, operation base, headquarters' (Plb.); Siañoλéµnois [f.] ‘ending of the
}
war' (Th.). 2. лоλεµí‹ƒ (also лτoλ-) 'to fight' (Il., epic), metrical for -έw, see
Chantraine 1942: 95; thence -toτýs [m.] ‘fighter, warrior' (Il., epic), fem. -íστpia
(Heraclit. Ep.), -10τpię (Tz.), -1στpios 'belonging to warriors' (IA). 3. лoλεµ-óðµai
'to become enemies' (Hdt., Th., X.), also with έк-, etc., whencе έклоλéµ-wois [f.]
'becoming of enemies' (Plu.). 4. Desiderative лоλεμησɛíw 'to wish for war' (Th., D.
C.).
PNs, e.g. Ioλéμwv, whence the plantnamе лоλεµávov (Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940:
135; IIτoλεμaños.
•ETYM The alternation between initial л- and ´- (see Schwyzer: 325 with literature,
as well as Trumpy 1950: 131 ff., Ruijgh 1957: 75f., and Merlingen 1956: 55f.), although
echoed by лóλıç < PIE *tpolh,-i-, must have been adopted from Pre-Greek (Fur.:
317). Formally, the word has been linked with лελεμíчw 'to shake, tremble', and more
distantly to лáλλw, but this is semantically unattractive.
лoλóç [adj.] 'whitish-grey', especially of hair, also of foaming seas (Il., epic, also
Hell.). <IE? *pol-io- 'grey' >>
•COMP Е.g. лоλo-кpóτaqoç ‘with grey temples' (℗ 518 et al.), úлo-, ¿ñi-ñódios
‘grizzled, mixed with grey' (Anacr., D.), probably back-formations (cf. έriñoλióoµai
below), see Strömberg 1946: 101ff.; on µɛðai-róλioç see ►µéσoç.
•DER 1. Fem. лоliás (Luc. Lex.); 2. лóλov [n.] 'Teucrium polium or creticum'
(Thphr., Nic., Dsc.), named after the color of the flower (Dsc. 3, 110); 3. rodiótns [f.]
‘greyness' (Arist.), лoλá (from лoλɩ-tá) [f.] ‘id.', also as a disease (Arist.); 4.
denominative лоλ-αívoμаt 'to become whitish', of the sea (A. Pers. 109 [lyr.]);
-óoμa 'to become grey', -ów 'to make grey' (Arist.), also with έлɩ-, лpo-, whence
-wσis [f.] 'becoming grey' (Arist.), -wμa [n.] 'greyness' (Eust.); -ά(w 'to become grey'
(sch.).
⚫ETYM The formation лоλóç has been reconstructed as from *лоλifo- on the basis of
Myc. po-ri-wa and the link with Skt. palitá- ‘grey', but the appurtenance of the Myc.
word is quite uncertain, and the Sanskrit word may contain a suffix -ita-. Since,
furthermore, the reconstruction *pol-i-uo- with its double suffixation is a priori
improbable, the original form must rather be set to *pol-io-; cf. Arm. alikʻ [pl.]
'wave's crests, white tuft, beard' < *pl-io-es. With the suffix -uo- for color
designations, we find the related formations Lith. palvas 'light yellow, straw-colored',
OCS plavo 'white', ON folr ‘pale' <*pol-uo-. Cf. ►лellós.
лóλɩç [f.] ‘citadel, fort, city, city community, state' (II.), on the meaning in Hom.
Hoffmann 1956: 153ff. <IE *tpelH- 'fortification' from *pelH- 'pout'?>
●VAR Ion. -ɩos, -ŋoç, also rtóλiç, -ɛws (epic, Cypr., Thess., Arc.).
•DIAL Myc. po-to-ri-jo has been interpreted as *ПToλiwv.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in ëtoλí-ropðos (-лópеios, -лópеŋs) ‘sacking cities,
destroyer of cities' (Il., epic); enlarged in IA лоλoυxos (from -to-oux.); Doг. лoλ-á-
оxoç, -taxoç, ерiс лоλ-n-oxoç 'ruling a city, city protector'; unexplained is лоλσσ-
in лоσσоç, лоλσσo-voμéw (A.). Very frequent as a second member, e.g. ȧкpo-
rodiç = ródiç äkρη 'upper town, citadel' (Od.); on this and related compounds, see
Risch IF 59 (1949): 261ff.

=== page 636 ===

1220
•DER 1. With a secondary suffix »τoλí-εеpov [n.] (epic II.); cf. µελaßpov, ОéµɛÐλa,
*εov (Schwyzer: 533). 2. Diminutive лoλíxvη [f.], often as a TN (IA), with -íxviov
(Att.); noλídiov (í) [n.] (Str.). 3. Пoλeús (-ŋúc) [m.] ‘city guardian' (Thera before Vª,
Arist., Hell.); fem. Пoiás (IA, Arg.). 4. лоλíτηs (epic, Sapph., Att.) 'citizen,
townsman', лoλ-á-tas, -ý-tns [m.] (Dor. Aeol., B 806, Ion.), after oiкiá-TAS, -IŃ-TNS,
etc., fem. -ĭç (S., E., Pl.); hencе лоλт-кóç 'civic, political' (Hdt. 7, 103, Att.);
-ɛúoµai, -ɛúw [v.] ‘to be a citizen, take part in state affairs' (Att., etc.), noλiatɛúw
(Gortyn), whence -ɛía, Ion. -ŋiŋ, -ɛvµα (Hdt., Att.); also лoλtσµós ‘administration'
(D. L.), see Chantraine 1933: 143. 5. Denominative лоλíw 'to found (a city), cultivate
a place by founding a city' (epic Ion., X.), aor. -ío(σ)at, also prefixed (rare and late)
with v-, ouv-, etc. Thence лóλ-toua 'foundation (of a city)' (Ion. poet., Th.),
-loµátiov (Hell.), -tσµós ‘foundation of a city' (D. H., Lyd.), -1σtńs ‘founder of a city'
(rejected in Poll. 9, 6).
•ETYM Together with the variant éτódıç (= Arc. Пóλiç, name of the castle in
Mantinea; Thess. oi τolíapa with assimilation) from PIE *tpolH-, to which
correspond the zero-grades Skt. púr, gen. puraḥ [f.], Lith. pilìs [f.] < *plH-. The two
forms suggest that PIE had an ablauting root noun (cf. Pok. 798-801). Original
meaning 'hill top'; cf. the s-stem *pélH-s, *plH-és-os supported by Olr. all [n.] 'cliff,
ON fjall [n.] 'mountain'.
лóλoç [m.]⇒лéλoμai.
лóλtoç [m.] ‘flour porridge' (Alcm., Epich., Plu.). <?>
●COMP NOλTO-NOɩέw ‘to make into ë.² (Orib.).
●DER Diminutive лoλtápiov [n.] (Dsc.), adjective лoλτóðŋs ‘porridge-like' (Erot.).
•ETYM The form *pol-to- is reminiscent of лáλŋ 'fine flour' < *plH-eh₂- and
►лελavoç 'liquid substance (of flour)' < *pelh₂-no-. Outside Greek, it has been
compared with Lat. puls, -tis [f.], which is reconstructed as *pol(H)-t- with the
Saussure Effect, and sometimes with pollen [n.] 'flour, powder' < *polH-n- (cf. De
Vaan 2008: 474). The Saussure Effect would need to be invoked in order to connect
the Greek as *pol(h₂)-to-. The situation is obscured, however, because the nominal
formations may have been derived relatively recently from the verb лaλλw. A final
alternative would be that лóλτоÇ is a substrate word, related to e.g. лaλáеŋ 'cake of
conserved fruits' and лλáðαvov ‘cake mold' (suggested by Van Beek 2009).
лolús [adj.] ‘much, many, often' (Il.). <IE *p(e)lh,-u- ‘many'▷
⚫VAR NOλλŃ, noλú, Ion. poet. alo лoÀÀóç, 10ÀÀóv.
•COMP Highly productive as a first member, e.g. лоλú-τρолоç 'much-wandering,
much-turned, wily', of Odysseus, Hermes and others (Od., h. Merc.), 'many-shaped'
(Th.). On the Homeric compounds in лoλ- see Stanford Class. Phil. 45 (1950): 108ff.
Beside this, we rarely find лoλλα-, е.g. лоλλα-лλáσɩoç, -лλñσoç ‘manifold' (IA), like
dɛka-rλáσioç, noλλá-кiç etc.; see also dɩ-лλáσoç. Compar. and superl. πλεíwv,
nλéwv, nλɛiotos (from *pleh,-is-to-), s.v.; innovation лóλστos (Tab. Heracl.), see
Seiler 1950: 61.
1
}
NONÚ【W
1221
•DER лоλóτηs [f.] 'plurality' (Damasc.), лоλλ-оστós "the manieth”, 'one of many,
small' (Att.), after εiкoστóç etc.; -áкıç ‘often' (II.), epic and lyr. also -KI; after Sεкá-KIÇ
etc.; explanation uncertain.
•ETYM The o-grade in лoλúç, -ú < *polh,-u- is flanked by a zero grade in Skt. purú-
'many' < IE *pļh,-u- and an e-grade in e.g. OIr. il, Go. filu ‘many' < *pelh,-u-. The
geminated stem лoλλo- is not certainly explained; it is mostly assumed that it
contains the same suffix as in µɛyaλ-. The adjective is an old derivative of the verbal
root 'to fill' as in ►лíµлλŋµɩ.
лоλqoí [m.pl.] farinaceous food, 'wire noodles' (com.). <?>
•VAR Also sg. -óç.
⚫COMP лоλо-чáкn [f.] 'dish of wire noodles and lentils' (Poll. 6, 61).
⚫ETYM Of unknown origin. Perhaps somehow connected with лλεçíç. onoaµíc (H.).
TOTý →TÉLTW.
roµqóλvž, roµqós →néµqič.
novéoµai, nóvos→révojai.
лóντoç [m.] 'sea' (Il., epic), often in names, e.g. ó Eűžяvoç nóvτoç ‘the Black Sea', for
which also (ó) Пóvτos (IA), also as a name of the southern coast of the Black Sea
and a state in that area (App. et al.). <IE *pont-eh,-, *pṇt-h,- ‘path’➤
●COMP E.g. лоvτo-лópos 'crossing the sea' (Il., epic), with лovτолop-έw, -ɛúw [v.] 'to
cross the sea' (Od.), on the formation see Chantraine 1942: 62, 95 and 368); on
►EŃσлovτos see s.v.
●DER 1. nóvt-10s ‘belonging to the sea' (h. Hom., Pi.), fem. -tás (Pi.); 2. -ɩкóę ‘from
Pontos' (IA); 3. -íλoç [m.] name of a mollusc (Arist.), cf. vaut-iλoc; 4. -ɛúc [m.] name
of a Phaeacian (0 113); 5. novτ-íw [v.] (A., S.), elsewhere with кατα- (Att., NT) 'to
sink into the sea', whence лovτíσμаτα [n.pl.] ‘oblations sunk into the sea' (E.),
кataлovt-lσµóç [m.] 'the drowning' (Isoc., LXX), -1στns [m.] 'one who throws into
the sea, who lets drown' (Att.); 6. kata-лovɩ-ów ‘id.' (IA); лovt-óðµa 'to form a sea'
(Q. S.), -ów = -íw (Nic. Dam.), with -woɩs [f.] (Tz.).
•ETYM Together with ►˜áτoç, лóvτoç represents an old IE *h,-stem with ablaut of
the root, viz. *pont-éh,-s, gen. *pnt-h,-ós; cf. Skt. pánthāḥ, gen. pathaḥ, Av. pantå,
gen. pabō, Lat. pōns, gen. pontis [m.] 'bridge, passage', Arm. hun 'ford', OCS potь
[m.] 'road', OPr. pintis ‘id.', etc. In Germanic, the root is mainly verbal; cf. Go.
finþan ‘to find, etc. < *pent-e/o-. See ▶natéw.
nónavov →丌ÉOOw.
лóлoɩ interjection of surprise, disagreement, etc. (Il., epic). <PG>
•VAR Epic w лóлo. Also лóñаž (A. Eu. 143).
•ETYM Creation like ►лaлαî, ßaßaí, -áž. On the reinterpretation of w лóлo (also
w) as 'oh gods!' in Lycophr. and Euph., see Leumann 1950: 33 and Ruijgh 1957: 101.
лолúш [v.] 'to click with the tongue', as a calling signal, etc. (com., Thphr., Theoc.).
<PG➤

=== page 637 ===

1222
лоρεiv
stoppúpa
1223
•VAR Dor. -úσdw.
●DER ñoñë-voµós [m.] (X., Plu.), -vσµa [n.], (Dexipp. in Cat., Juv.) ‘the clicking';
enlarged in лоллу-λάσеw 'id.' (Theoc.), cf. Boμßuλiášw (see ßóµßoc).
•ETYM Onomatopoeia with reduplication.
лоρεv [aor.] 'to provide, donate, offer, grant' (Il., epic). <IE *perh,- 'give'>
●var ré¨pwtai [perf.] 'it is given or decided (by fate)', ptc. лɛлpwµέvos (Il., epic);
рtc. лрwτóç (Нdn. Gr.).
⚫ETYM Morphologically similar to e.g. µoλεïv : µεµßλwкα < *melh¸-. The verb is
derived from the root *perh¸-, which is also found in Skt. pūr-dhi [ipv.] ‘give!' <
*prh3-dhi. Because of the color of the laryngeal, the verb cannot be related to лεpáw,
лεíрw 'to penetrate' <*perh₂-(1)e/o-, nor to лépη to sell' <*pr-neh₂-mi.
topdéw →丌épdw.
ropouóg → neipw.
rópis, -10s [f.] ‘calf, heifer', metaph. 'young girl' (epic since к 410); also лópτa§ [f.] ‘id.'
(P4) modeled after déλoaž, σкúλaž, etc. <?>
•VAR More common is róptɩç, -tos (epic since E 162).
•DIAL Myc. po-ti-pi/portip¹i/ [instr.pl.].
●der_ropti-tpóqos ‘feeding calves' (h. Ap., B.); glosses лоpτáкivov (or -ɩov?).
μoσõíov ‘young calf, лoptášɛi (or -akíšeı?). SafiaλíTetaɩ ‘is subdueď (H.).
•ETYM Presupposes IE *por-i-, an i-stem beside e.g. ON farri, OHG far(ro) ‘bull' <
*por-só(n)- / *por-nó(n)-, MHG verse, MoHG Färse [f.] 'young cow' < *por-s-ih₂-.
Perhaps from a verb *prH-e/o- as in Lat. pariō ‘to mate' (Lith. perěti ‘to brood, sit on
eggs', however, has no laryngeal in the root, and therefore cannot be related).
лóρкη [m.] ‘ring around the shaft of a spear, holding the metal spearhead' (Z 320 =
495).<?>
•DER 7оρкwбng 'like a л.' (Eust.).
•ETYM Suffixation like in yúŋs, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 30, Schwyzer: 461), but no
further etymology. Cf. ►лóркоç and ►лóряη.
лóρкоç [m.] 'kind of fishing-net' (Pl., com.) <?>
•DER лоρкεúç [m.] 'net-fisher' (Lyc.).
•ETYM Etymology uncertain: if connected with Arm. ors ‘hunting, hunting-booty', it
derives from PIE *pork-o- (Patrubány KZ 37 (1904): 428). Doubts on the meaning of
the Arm. word in Clackson 1994: 164. Cf. ►лóрkns.
·лópvŋ [f.] ‘prostitute, whore' (IA). <IE *perh₂- 'sell'>
•COMP Е.g. лорvo-ßoσкós [m.] ‘procurer', with -έw, -ía, -ɛĩov (Herod., Att.); лopvo-
λútaç [m.] (inscr. Tarentum), see Parlangèli Glotta 40 (1962): 50.
●DER 1. Diminutive лopу-ídiov [n.] (com.); 2. -ɩкós ‘belonging to harlots' (Aesch.,
LXX); 3. -ɛov [n.] 'brothel' (Ar., Antipho), 4. -oσúvŋ [f.] 'prostitution' (Man.); 5.
-εúa, -εú [v.] 'to live like a harlot; to prostitute', also metaph. 'to practise
idolatry' (NT), with -ɛía, -ɛvoiç, -εvµα, -εúτρια (IA). From лópуη also лópvoç [m.]
'lover-boy, lover' (Att., LXX, NT).
!
⚫ETYM Linked to лéруηш 'to sell', and hence derived from *porh₂-neh₂-. The loss of
laryngeal is mostly ascribed to Saussure's Law (loss of laryngeal after o-grade); for a
different interpretation (loss between liquid and nasal), see Van Beek 2009.
лópos [m.]⇒ñɛíρw.
лоρлη [f.] 'clasр' (II.). <PG(V)►
•DER лоρлíоν, -άw, -a, -óμα, -wμa; with a suffix -āк-: лópлāž, -āкoç [m.] 'ring
or loop on the inner (bulging) side of a shield' (B., S., E. Ar.), 'part of the headgear of
a horse' (E. Rh. 385) with -āкioua (Ar.); originally a Doric expression, see
Chantraine 1933: 381, Björck 1950: 296f.
•ETYM Neither a reduplicated formation from лεípw, nor a creation *pork-ueh₂- from
лóρкè makes sense (pace e.g. WP 2, 39). Fur.: 163 connects лopóíts̟. repóvn
‘buckle' (H.), and concludes that the word is Pre-Greek on account of the variation
л/Q.
лópσw [adv.] 'forward, beyond, far away from something, away' (Pi., trag. [lyr.]). <IE
*per, or *preti, proti 'forward'>
•VAR лóррw (Att.). Compar. and superl. лóрσ-tov, -1στα (Pi.), see Seiler 1950: 106f.;
roppw-tépw, -táτw (Att.). Adverb лópʊw-ðɛv (Archyt.), ´óppw-0εv (Att.) ‘from far'.
⚫DER Denominatives 1. лорσ-úvw (v.] 'to accomplish, provide' (epic Ion., also X.),
also with л-, ouv-, originally 'to bring forth' (cf. Lat. producere, MoHG
hervorbringen); 2. лоpσαívw ‘id.' (Hom. v.l., h. Cer., Pi.), rejected by Forbes Glotta 36
(1958): 261.
•ETYM May be identical to Lat. porrō, Praen. porod 'forward' if < *p(o)rsō(d), with an
ending like in ävw, káτw, etc. DELG, however, prefers to derive лópʊw from лpóσw
(< *лpoτ + -w) with metathesis (comparing ►лpótɩ beside лóptɩ), because both
words share the same sense. Seе ►лрóσш.
лopo̟úpa [f.] ‘purple dye, purple snail, purple clothes' (Sapph., Hdt., A.). <PG?▷
•VAR Ion. -pn.
•COMP E.g. лорqupó-Cwvoc 'with a purple girdle' (В.), лаμ-лóрóурos 'consisting
only of purple, all-purple' (Pi.), ¿ñɩ-, vño-ñópqupos ‘something purple' (Thphr.,
Arist.), see Strömberg 1946: 104f., 138; also ȧλ-лóрqupos 'of sea purple, dyed with
real purple, purple-red' (Od.); different Marzullo Maia 3 (1950): 132ff., Marzullo
1970: 255.
●DER 1. лopóúp-ɛos (Att. -oûç, Aeol. -tos) 'purple, purple dye', of cloth(e)s, also of
blood, etc. (II.), cf. on лopoúpw. 2. лоpoуp-εúç [m.] 'purple snail fisher' (Hdt.,
Arist.), with -EUTIкóç 'belonging to the лорoupɛúç (-ɛutńc?)' (E., Poll.), probably
after ȧλiev-TIкóç, cf. Fraenkel 1912: 63', Chantraine 1956a: 119; лoрqup-ɛúw [v.] 'to
fish for purple snails' (Philostr.), -evτýs [m.] = -ɛú¢ (Poll.). 3. лoрoup-íç [f.] 'purple
garment' (X.), also name of a bird (Ibyc.), see Thompson 1895 s.v. 4. diminutive
лopôúp-ɩov [n.] (Arist.), also ‘purpur cloth' (pap.). 5. -ɛĩov [n.] ‘purple dye house'
(Str.). 6. -iτns (litos), fem. -ītis 'like porphyry, containing porphyry' (Plin., inscr.,
ostr.), -ɩɩкóç ‘containing porphyry' (pap.). 7. ñopqup-íwv [m.] ‘purple coot, Fulica
porphyrion' (Ar., Arist.), see Thompson 1895 s.v., Chantraine 1933: 165. 8. -ɩкń [f.]

=== page 638 ===

1224
toppúpw
1225
'purple taxes (pap. IIª). 9. ñopqvpwµata. tŵv taïs Oɛaïs tv0évtwv Xoipwv tà kpέa
'the meat of pigs offered to the gods' (H.). 10. лoрqup-iw 'to make purple' (Arist.,
Thphr.), also with έлɩ-, úлo-. 11. TNs like Пopqup- íç, -ɛwv.
•ETYM There are no Indo-European connections; probably a loanword from a
Mediterranean language. Оn лорqúpa, -úpɛos, -úpw, see Vieillefond REGr. 51 (1938):
403ff.; further, Castrignanò Maia 5 (1952): 18ff., Gipper Glotta 42 (1964): 39ff., and
Tichy 1983: 280ff. Borrowed as Lat. purpura, whence MOE purple, etc.
ropo̟úpw [v.] 1. ‘to surge, boil', of the sea (E 16, Arat., A. R.), metaph. of the heart
(Od., A. R., Q. S.); 2. 'to dye purple, redden' (Hell.), 'to paint red' (Nonn.). <?>
VAR Only pres. and ipf.
•COMP With лεрɩ- (Man.).
•DER лopóúpεos (Aeol. -tos) 'boiling, whirly', of the sea (Hom., Alc.); to be kept
apart from лоpúpɛos ‘purple'.
•ETYM Reduplicated formation like μopμúpw (s.v. with lit.); for лоpóúpɛoç, cf.
µapµápɛos from μapμaípw. Traditionally compared to Skt. jár-bhurīti ‘to have
convulsions, sprawľ from the primary verb bhuráti ‘id.' (see further on oúpw). In
the sense to dye purplе', лоpoúpw was adapted to лopoúpa. Discussion in Tichy
1983: 280ff.
лóç [prep.] = ►лotí, ►лpóç. <IE *pos 'near, after', *poti➤
•VAR Before vowel also ло- (Arc. Cypr., Phr., Pisid.).
•ETYM Traditionally thought to be identical in origin with Lith. pàs 'by, near', OCS
po 'behind, after' < *pos, which would also be present in Lat. post < *posti, Alb. pas
‘behind, after', etc. However, DELG is quite explicit in its rejection of this
comparison, arguing that all Greek variants лó-, лóç, ло- must be expained from
*poti > Myc. po-si.
лóσðŋ [f.] ‘penis' (Ar. Nu. 1014), also ‘foreskin' (medic.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. ȧкpoẞvoτía below.
⚫DER Diminutive лóσеov [n.] (Нp., Ar.); -ía [f.] 'foreskin' (Ph.), metaph. 'stye on the
eyelid (medic.); perhaps shortened from áкpо-лоσ0-ía (Scheller 1951: 43²); -wv,
-wvos [m.] 'provided with a л.², vulgar designation of a boy (Ar. Pax 1300; meaning
unclear in Luc. Lex. 12); also PNs like -íwv, -úλoc; perhaps also Bóσ0wv (Halicarn.),
O. Masson Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 10 (1975): 162.
Furthermore лоσ0-aλíwv (Dor. inscr. around 200ª), with a familiar enlargement -λ-;
see Taillardat RPh. 87 (1961): 249f.; -aλíoкoç = -wv (Ar. Th. 291; conj. Dindorf,
accepted by Taillardat l.c.).
Сompound άкpо-лoσð-íα [f.] (Hp., Arist.) -tov [n.] (Poll., Ruf.) ‘foreskin'; for this
άкpoẞvστía [f.] ‘id.', coll. ‘the uncircumcized people' = 'heathendom' (LXX, NT),
formerly assumed to contain a folk-etymological euphemism after ßúw (EM 53, 47,
Blass & Debrunner 1959 $120, 4).
•ETYM Traditionally connected with лéoç < *peso-, but the required derivation
*pos-dhh,-o- is rather articifial. If άкpo-ẞvστía is not analogical, the word must be
Pre-Greek in view of the variation. This explanation is increasingly attractive in view
of the semantic field. Note that the derivation from *gosd-eh₂- (Szemerényi Archiv.
1
Linguist. 5 (1953): 13ff.) is wrong, because root was * gosd-; cf. OSw. kvaster [m.]
'twig, brush', OIr. bot [m.] ‘tail, penis' < *g*osd-o-.
лóσɩç 1, -105 [m.] 'husband, spouse, consort' (Il., epic poet.), cf. Chantraine REGr. 59-
60 (1946-1947): 219ff.). <IE *poti- ‘lord (of the house), husband'>
•ETYM Old and widespread designation of the lord of the house and the husband:
Skt. páti-, Av. paiti- ‘lord, ruler, husband', Lith. pàts 'husband' (for older patis), ToA
pats, ToB petso [obl.] ‘husband', Lat. potis 'capable, powerful', all from IE *póti-. The
word is often used as a second member of a compound or with a gen., e.g.
▶dɛoñótŋs, Skt. viś-páti- ‘lord of the house', Lith. vieš-pats 'Lord-(god)' (cf. on
►olкoç), Lat. hos-pes ‘guest, host', Ru. gos-póď' 'Lord, god', Go. bruþ-faps
'bridegroom'.
The meaning 'lord, husband' is usually explained (see Benveniste Word 10 (1954):
256, following Pedersen) from an older meaning 'self in Lith. pàts (and in Av. *x'aē-
paiti-) and in the particle Lith. pàt 'self, even', Hitt. =pat 'the same, also, even, etc.';
however, the Hittite particle probably derives from *-bhod (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.).
This interpretation is extensively criticized and rejected by Szemerényi 1964: 337ff.
Sее лоτуα and Пoσεidwv.
лóσıç 2‘drink, beverage'. →лívw.
лóσoç [interr. pron.] ‘how great?, how much?, how many?' (Att.). <IE *koti- ‘how
much'>
•VAR Ion. (Hdt.) кóσoç.
•COMP Еpic лоσσ-ñµαp ‘in how many days?” (§ 657).
)-
•Der ñoσó-tŋs [f.] ‘quantity' (Arist.), ïoσ-wdŋs ‘quantitative' (comm. Arist.), -ívda
[adv.] (X.), see Schwyzer: 627, -áкi(c) 'how often?' (Pl., Call.), -ów [v.] 'to calculate
the quantity, to count up' (Thphr.); also лóστоç “the how-manieth?" (w 288, Att.),
dissimilated from *лoσ(σ)o-στós, and accented after лóσоç; hence лoσt-aïoç ‘on
what day?' (X.), after devτɛp-añoç, etc. Indefinite лоσóç (Аtt., Hell.), лoστóç (late).
⚫ETYM From *лóτд-ос, an adjective formed from IE *k"óti, found in Skt. káti, Lat.
quot 'how many?'. See further on лóеεу and ►τóσoç.
лotaívos [adj.] 'new, fresh, unexpected, unheard of (Pi., B., trag., also Hp.), acc. to
Eust. and Phot., Doric for лрóσατoç. <GR>
•VAR лоταιуí = лроσчάτшç (Zonar.).
•ETYM Can hardly be separated from лpoταívov· épò µкoũ, лaλαóv (H.) and
►épotaɩví ‘in front' (E. Rh. 523), Boеot. лpoτηví ‘earlier'. As this stands for ëpò taɩví
(scil. ǹµépai), notαiví, -vioç must go back to an adverbial *лoûì taɩɩ with haplology.
лоτаμóç [m.] 'river' (Il.). <?>
•COMP Е.g. лоταµo-qúλaž [m.] 'river-guard' (pap.), кαλλ-ñóτaµoç 'with fair rivers'
(E. [lyr.]).
●DER 1. Diminutives лоτάμ-чov [n.] (com., Str.), -íoкos [m.] (Str.). Further
substantives: 2. лoα-εú [m.] designation of the east wind in Tripolis (Arist.), 3.
-íτŋs [m.] 'river-worker' (pap.). Adjectives: 4. -tos belonging to the river' (Pi., Hdt.,
trag., etc.), -ɩaños ‘id.' (Arist. [v.l. -tos], Ruf.); -ñïos (Nonn.), fem. -ŋïs (A. R., Nic.)

=== page 639 ===

1226
notavóc, notάopai, rotéopai
‘id.', both metrically conditioned. 5 -ódŋs ‘river-like' (Eun.); 6. -ŋvý [f.] epithet of
Mτmp, the river goddess (inscr. Pisidia), cf. Schwyzer: 490. 7. Adverb -ŋdóv like a
river, in streams' (Luc., Aret.); 8. Verb -óoμa 'to form a river' (Aq.). 9. nickname
Пoτáµλa [m.] (Sophr.), see Schwyzer: 561.
•ETYM Formation like oúλaµóç, лλóкаµoç, etc. Combined with лíлtw, ɛ̃netov ‘to fall'
in previous centuries, thus originally "waterfall" vel sim., referring to a river
sweeping away things in a mountainous area. Etymological comparison with the
epithet duлetýs (II 174, § 477) is difficult. The analysis faces the problem that the
root-final laryngeal was *h₁, and thus cannot explain the suffix vocalism -aµ-.
Others have connected лoτaµóç to лɛτávyμɩ in the sense of "extension", and
supposed identity with the Germanic group of OS fathmos, OE fæðm ‘extension (of
the arms), embrace, fathom' (OE flôdes fæðm). A final option, formally more
attractive and semantically possible, is a relation with *peth₂- 'to fly', as evidenced by
Gг. εлτατо. Connection with Lith. tekù 'run', assuming metathesis from *toraµós
(Pisani RILomb. 73 (1939-40): 502f.), should be rejected.
In sum, the etymology remains uncertain. In principle, the word could be Pre-Greek.
notavós, notάoriai, rotéoliai ⇒rétopai.
лóτε [interr. adv.] 'when ?', indefinite лotε, лoté ‘at some time' (Il., Att., Arc., Cypr.).
<IE *kwo- 'which?'>
•VAR Ion. кótɛ, Aeol. лóta, Dor. лóкa.
⚫ETYM From the pronominal stem ло- with various particles added; see лóеεν and
►ÖTε. Formerly, ▸ tíлtɛ was also assumed to contain лóτε, but this is now unlikely.
лоτεроç [pron. adj.] 'who or which of either?' (Il.). <IE *kwo- 'which?'>
•VAR Ion. кóτεpos.
•ETYM Old pronoun, identical with Skt. katará-, Go. hvaþar, Lith. katràs, etc., IE
*ko-tero- (cf. on ►лóðεv); on the varying accentuation, see Schwyzer: 381.
лotí [prev., prep.] ‘towards, by' (Il., epic poet., Dor.). <IE *poti ‘against’>>
•VAR лOT' before vowel.
•DIAL Myc. po-si-.
•ETYM Identical with Av. paiti, OP patiy ‘against, by'. Beside it stand ➤rpóti, ▶rpós,
and ►лóç.
nóτμos →nintw.
лóτvia [f.] ‘lady, mistress', especially of goddesses (Il., epic poet.). <IE *pot-n-ih₂
'lady'➤
•VAR On disyllabic лóτvα for older лóτуα (Оd. et al.), originally only in the voc.
лóτvα еɛά, which may have been an Aeolic syntagm, see Peters 1980a: 213ff.
●DIAL Myc. po-ti-ni-ja. On the Myc. adjective po-ti-ni-ja-we-jo see Lejeune Par. del
pass. 17 (1962): 401ff.
⚫DER лоτvádεç [pl.] ‘'id.' (E.), after μalvádɛç etc., see Chantraine 1933: 355 and 357;
лoτ-άoμαι [v.] 'to beseech (a goddess); to wail, lament', especially of women (late
prose), on the mg. see Mras Glotta 12 (1923): 67f. Thence -aσuoí [pl.] (Str.), -aσıç [f.]
}
!
TOÚG, Modóg
1227
(Poll.) wail', -aστns [m.] 'lamenter' (Phld.); also -άчoμа in лоτуáčov. εüxоv,
лapaкáλɛi ‘pray, call' (H.). TN IПoτvai [f.pl.] Boeotian town name (Paus.), called
after the IIóτvial (Demeter and Kore); hence the adjective Пoτv-tác (A. et al.) and
the PN -cúc (Paus.).
•ETYM Identical with Skt. pátni [f.] 'mistress, goddess', Av. panī- [f.] ‘mistress',
OLith. vieš-patni [f.] ‘lady, mistress': IE *pótnih₂. This is the old feminine of IE *póti-
‘lord, husband' in ñóðɩç ‘husband'; лóτvα ‘mistress, goddess' became isolated from
it.
toÙ →nódev.
лovкpíç [f.] ‘river perch, Perca fluviatilis' (inscr. Acraiphia before 224-210 BC). <IE
* perk-'motley'➤
•ETYM Acc. to Taillardat (see DELG Supp.), the same word as лɛpкíç [f.] ‘small perch’
(Dsc.). The word would be a metathesized form of *лρvк-íð- < *pṛk-, with pu from r,
written лouкpid- in Boeotian. It would then be cognate with лрαкуóν, épɛкvóç, etc.;
see on лpóч and ►лερкνóç.
лоблоç [m.] 'hoopoe' (Cyran. 20). <ONOM▷
⚫ETYM The word is onomatopoeic; cf. ► čлoч ‘id.'.
лoúpɩov [n.] ‘kind of tart' (Chrysipp. Tyan. apud Ath. 14, 647d). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
roupog → twpos.
лоÚç, лоdóç [m.] 'foot', also metaph. in several mgs. (II.). <IE *pod- 'foot'>
•VAR Doг. лάç, лóç; see below.
●DIAL Myc. po-da-ko /podargos/ [n.] name of an ox (Chantraine RPh. 89 (1963): 13),
ti-ri-po /tripod-/, etc.
•COMP Very frequent in compounds, e.g. IIód-apyos [m.] name of a horse (Il.), also
as an appellative 'swift- or white-footed' (Lyc.), cf. ápуí-лovç s.v. ►ápyóc; tpí-rovç
(-лоç) 'three-footed', msc. ‘tripod (Il.), cf. Myc. ti-ri-po. Extensive discussion on
лоε- as a second member in Sommer 1948: 28ff. Hypostases with a suffix -to-, e.g. ¿µ-
лóð-ɩoç ‘at one's feet, in the way, obstuctive' (IA), úлo-лóð-ov [n.] ‘'footstool' (LXX,
Hell. inscr. and pap.).
●DER 1. Diminutives лód-tov [n.] (Epich., Hp.), -áptov [n.] (com.), -íσkoç [m.]
(Herod.), cf. Myc. ti-ri-po-di-ko.
Further substantives: 2. лod-ɛĩα [n.pl.] designation of a foot covering, ‘leggings' vel
sim. (Critias, com.); 3. -ɛwv, -ɛwvos [m.] 'foot-end of an animal skin, strip or sheet'
(Ion., Theoc.); 4. -ía [f.] ‘sail sheet' (gloss., Serv. ad Verg.); 5. -ídɛç [f.pl.] designation
of a foot covering (Poll.); 6. -óτns [f.] 'the property of being provided with feet'
(Arist.); 7. -wua [n.] 'floor, base' (pap.).
Adjectives: 8. лоd-taiоç 'measuring one foot' (IA); -кóç 'concerning a metrical foot'
(Aristid. Quint.).
Verbs 9. лоε-íчouai 'to be bound by the feet' (S., X.), also (metrical) 'to divide in feet,
scan' (Eust.), with -ɩσµós [m.] ‘measuring by feet' (late), -íστpa [f.] ‘foot-trap' (AP);

=== page 640 ===

1228
also with prefix, е.g. εµ-лоd-íчw 'to bind the feet' (Hdt., A.), but usually 'to hinder,
obstruct' (Att.), from ► ¿µ˜odáv, ¼µródios (see above); ávα-лod-í\w 'to make to step
back, to call back, go back' (IA); 10. лоd-ów, -óoμa 'to tighten the sail sheet, be
provided with feet' (Lyc. et al.), whence -wtóç.
⚫ETYM The old word for 'foot' was a consonant stem *pod-. In most languages, it was
either preserved as such, or enlarged: e.g. Arm. ot-k² [pl.] = ñóðɛç, otn [nom.acc.sg.]
= acc. лóða < IE*pód-m. The o-grade appears also in Hitt. pāt- / pat-, CLuw. pāta/i-
'foot'. A lengthened grade is found in Gm., e.g. ON fótr, OE fēt [pl.] < PGm. *fōt-iz <
IE *pód-es. An innovation after the u-stems is Go. fotus, acc. fotu < IE *pód-m. An e-
grade is attested in Lat. pēs, ped-is, while the original color of Skt. pắt, acc. pád-am,
gen. pad-ás cannot be deduced.
ToA pe, ToB paiyye 'foot' contain an enlargement, but are difficult to analyze
precisely (see Adams 1999 s.v. paiyye). The appurtenance of Lith. pādas ‘sole of the
foot, threshing-floor, etc.', Ru. pod 'bottom, ground, plank-bed' is hardly possible in
view of Winter's Law (see Derksen 2008 s.v. podб).
All this seems to point to old static ablaut IE *ped- pod-. In Greek, the e-grade is
retained in a series of derivations: ► лédŋ, ►ñéša, ► nεšóc, ► лédov, ►лédiλov, ►лedá;
further, an old zero grade is found in ►ë¬ßda.
The originally lengthened grade of the nom.sg. is found in Greek only in лóç (Dor.
apud H.). It was replaced by Dor. ñóç, Hom. τpí-ños after the oblique forms; Att.
лоÚç recalls doúc, etc., but has no certain explanation.
лpayopitŋs [m.] ‘kind of wine' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
лpáµoç [adj.] = лpóµoç (Ar. Th. 50). ◄?►
⚫ETYM If the tradition is correct, it could contain a zero grade form of ▸лpóµoç, but a
form *pr- beside лpo is improbable. The form is most often corrected to лρóμµоç.
лpáµvɛioç [adj.] ‘qualification of wine' (Hom.). <?>
•VAR-LOS (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Cf. the note of J. André ad Plin. 14, §54. H. has лpáµvη. Síкɛλλa äµлελoç; also,
Poll. 7, 150 лρáμvηuα = vine branch of Pramnos.
пpavýs→□pηvýs.
.
лpαvó [?] · åкpídos εldoç kind of locust' (H.). <PG>>
⚫ETYM Gil Fernández 1959 adduces лápvo¼. This means that the word is Pre-Greek;
see Fur.: 344, 392.
лρãoç, -ov [adj.] 'soft, gentle, mild' (Pi., Att.). <?>
•Var épɑüç, épηüç (epic Ion., lyr., Hell.). Grades of comp. лpaó-tepoç (also лpaü-,
лρη-), лрαó-τατoç (лрáüστoç Phrygia); adverb лрáшç, rarely -έwç; also лρα-óvwç
(Ar., Lys.), acc. to Frisk after εúdaчµóvwç, but acc. to DELG adverb to a compar.
лрάwν.
•DIAL Att. fem. -ɛĩa, plur. -έwv, -έσɩ.
!
}
mpáoow
1229
•COMP Also as a first member (mostly late), e.g. лрαü-µŋtɩç ‘mild-tempered' (Pi.); on
►лрεуμε sее s.v.
●der épα-ótŋs (Att.), -útηs (LXX) [f.] ‘mild temper'; épa¨vw, Ion. épηüvw‘to make
mild, soothe' (Hes., h. Merc. 417), also with кατα- (rarely άло-, dia-, etc.); thence
лpá-vvσiç [f.] (˜pý-), ˜pa-voµós [m.] 'the soothing', -uvτкós ‘soothing' (Arist.,
medic.), -uvτns [m.] (EM).
•ETYM The o-stem лрãоç may have developed from the older v-stеm лрαüç, probably
through the adv. лрáшç, which was contracted from лрαέwç, belonging to лрαüç;
extensive treatment in Egli 1954: 100ff. The subscript in лρãоç is secondary,
probably from pάwv. The form épaüç is regularly derived form *pr(e)h₂-i-u- by
Hamp MSS 43 (1984): 52f.; see Pok. 844.
пpañídɛç [f.pl.] ‘midriff, mostly as a seat of intelligence and of emotions, 'sense, mind'
(Il., epic poet.). ◄IE? *prep- ‘appear', *k*rp- ‘body, shape'>
•VAR Rarely sg. -ís.
•COMP No compounds or derivatives.
•ETYM Formation in -íç (like лapŋïs, oavis, ¿λnis, opovτíc), probably from the root
*k*rp- which may also be seen in лρεлw 'to be conspicuous' (but see the comments
there). From this root derive words for 'body, shape', like OHG (h)rëf, OE hrif 'body,
abdomen, belly', Lat. corpus, Skt. kṛp-á [instr.] ‘shape, beauty'. In the OE compound.
mid-hrif 'midriff, the meaning (which agrees with лрαлídεç) may depend on the
first member mid-.
лрáσov [n.] ‘leek, Allium porrum', also of a kind of seaweed, like leek (com., Thphr.).
◄PG?, IE? *prs-o- ‘leek'>
●COMP Е.g. лрασo-ɛɩdýs ‘leek-like', from the color (Hp., Arist.), alaσσó-лpaσov
[n.] of a seaweed (Ath. Mech.).
●DER 1. лpáσ-10 (Pl.), -ɩvos (Arist., LXX), -tavós (M. Ant.), -wdŋs (Thphr.) ‘leek-
color, blue-green'; 2. -îç [f.] name of a stone, after the color (Thphr.); 3. -tov [n.]
plant name 'horehound, Marrubium, etc.' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.); 4. лpaσiá, Ion. -ɩý
[f.] 'garden-bed' (Od., Hell.), mostly plur. -taí, also Att. deme name and a town in
Laconia (Th.). Thеncе лрασ-áчoμαι, -чóоμаι 'to be divided into beds' (Aq.); see
Scheller 1951: 67; 5. лpaσíčw [v.] 'to be leek-colored' (Dsc.); 6. IIpaσσaïoç [m.]
nickname of a frog (Batr.).
•ETYM The traditional identification with Lat. porrum leads to a reconstruction IE
*prso-. The maintenance of -σ- between resonant and vowel recalls Saσús beside
Lat. densus <*dns-u-. It could be argued that the meaning points to substrate origin
for this word. If the word is Pre-Greek, this would explain the -σ-.
лpãσow [v.] ‘to pass through, travel' (only epic), 'to finish, accomplish, do, exact, intr.
'to come to an end, succeed, act' (IA, etc.). <IE *per(h₂)- 'go through, cross'>
•VAR Att. -ɩɩw, Cret. -SSw; epic Ion. лрησσw, fut. лpážw, Ion. -ýžw, aor. лpāžαı,
-ña (all since Il.), pass. лрαуеñvai (S., Th.), perf. лéлpãуa, -ŋуa (Pi., Hdt.), -āxa,
-xa (Att., Hdt.), pass. лεлpαуµαɩ (A:).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. Sɩa-, ɛiσ-, kata-, ovv-. Compounds: e.g. εv-лpäy-ia [f.]
'prosperity, success', кαко-лрãу-íα 'accident, misfortune' (Pi., Att.), whence εv-,

=== page 641 ===

1230
лρατηvov
apÉOBUG
1231
како-лрãу-έw (Att.); analogical Suσ-, кαко-лрãуns (Vett. Val., H.), not from
лрãуoç; also ε-лpaž-ía, Ion. -пpηž-ín [f.], after пpāžiç, лpāžai.
•DER Action nouns: 1. лρāšɩç, éρñɩ (also with diα-, кατα-, etc.) [f.] 'realization,
accomplishment, advancement, act, exaction' (II.), with лpa§-ɛídɩov [n.] diminutive
(EM), -чuos 'realizable' (Cyprus II-IIIP), 'recoverable' (Delos I-IIP), also лρáкτчoç
(from Dor. *лρãкɩɩç or after лραкTI-кóç?) 'liable to a monetary penalty' (Delphi IIª).
Further compounds лpo-лpαε-íα [f.] 'precedence in negotiation' (Acarnan. inscr. V-
IV³), úлερ-лρά-ov [n.] 'over-exaction, blackmailing' (Mylasa VP), cf. also 10. below.
2. лрãуμа (post-Hom.), Ion. лρñжµa (< -кσµ-; inscr.), лpñуµα (Нdt.) [n.] 'performed
act, fact, business', plur. ‘facts, affairs of state, etc.'; as a second member in ȧ-, лоλv-
лрáучwν, etc.; hence лрαуµá-τov, -tikós, -tíầc, -tãs, -twdŋs, -tɛúoµał, with -tɛvµa,
-teía, -telwdns, -TEVTŃS, -TEV-TIKÓS.
3. лрãуoç [n.] poetic replacement for the worn-out word лрãуμa (Pi., trag.). 4.
лрαкτúç (Doг.) = лрāžɩç (EM).
Agent nouns: 5. лракткр, лрηкτкр, -ñроç [m.] 'executor, tradesman' (Hom.),
'exactor' (Hell.) with -τpios effective, decisive' (A.). 6. лрάктшр, -opos [m.]
'executor, avenger' (A., S., Antiph.), 'exactor, tax official' (Att., pap.) with -τop-ɩкóç,
-Ɛɩoç, -ɛúw with -ɛiov, -ɛía (-ía?). 7. ɛiσ-, ¿к-лpáкτηs [m.] 'collector, tax official'
(Aq.). 8. ñpnšŵv = άyopañoç, i.e. 'notary' (Sicil.; Theognost.); probably from лpñšiç
(Schwyzer: 517). 9. Adjectivе лрαкткóç 'concerning action, skilled, practical' (Att.).
•ETYM All forms go back to a common stem лрãк- oг лрãу-, which is a к-
enlargement of a zero grade лpα- (DELG compares pú-k-w). Frisk connected this
with the root *perh₂- 'to sell' in лéлрāµα, ллрắσкo̟μι (sее лεруηш), but
semantically, connection with ►лéрã, ►лɛipw (root *per-) is much more likely, given
the oldest meaning 'to travel, fare', etc. Further details are obscure.
For the function of the velar, лλýoow : rλŋyń, tµńyw : τéµvw, etc. have been
adduced. It is designated as terminative by Schwyzer: 702³.
лpatýviov [n.] designation of goats of a certain age (Ar. Byz., H., Phot.). <?>
•VAR Аlso лро-, and épητýν, ¿¨˜pytýv -ñvos [in.].
⚫ETYM Unknown. Anatolian, acc. to Solmsen 1909: 140f.
лpέµvov [n.] ‘tree-stump, trunk, stub', also ‘bole', metaph. of a column, etc. (h. Merc.).
On the mg. see Strömberg 1937: 98f. <PG?(V)>
•VAR Also -os [m.].
•COMP As a second member i.a. in aútó-épɛµvos ‘together with the trunk, root and
branch, entirely' (A., S.).
•Der épéµva• tà лáxos éxovta \úla 'wood having thickness' (H.); épεµv-údŋs
'stump-like' (Thphr.), -iw [v.] 'to pull up, remove the stump' (Test. apud D. et al.),
¿к- (D. et al.), -ɩáσai· έkpišãσai ‘to root out' (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Fur.: 65 assumes that it is a variant of ▸лpчµvóç, and considers
the words to be Pre-Greek.
лρέлw [v.] 'to draw attention, be comspicuous, distinguish oneself, excel', also (mostly
impersonal épέлε) ‘it is fitting, appropriate' (Il.+). <IE *prep- ‘be conspicuous,
appear' or *k*rep->
j
•VAR Rare fut. andaoг. лрéч-w, -at (A., Pl.).
■COMP Often with prefix, e.g. Siα-, μετα-, εv-, εM-.
•Der épεñ-wdŋs (Att.), -óvτws (Pi., Att.) ‘fitting, appropriate', épen-tós (also eʊ-)
'drawing attention' (A. et al.); often from the prefixed compounds, е.g. μετα-, diα-,
¿к-пpen-ýç, also ev-, åpɩ-лpεл-ýs ‘striking, excelling, pre-eminent, etc.' (II.), whence
εлρéл-εɩα (Att.), -έw, -íľw (Aq.), etc. Further лрεñwv, -ovτos [m.] name of a fish
(Opp., Ael.), properly “fit (for eating)" (Strömberg 1943: 33)? On 0εолрóñоç, sее
S.V.
⚫ETYM Identical with Arm. erewim become visible, appear', traditionally
reconstructed as *prep-. An old independent formation is Arm. eres, plur. eres-k
'face, appearance' <IE *prep-s-. Celtic too seems to have maintained a derivation
from this verb in Olr. richt 'form, shape', W rhith 'species' <IE *prp-tu-. The
connection of OHG furben 'to purify, clean' is quite uncertain.
For Armenian erewim etc., a reconstruction *krep- is just as possible as *prep-
(Clackson 1994: 165f.), and it has been argued that there was in fact one root *k"rep-,
not two roots *krp- and *prep- (cf. Schindler BSL 67 (1972): 67, DELG Supp.). This
would mean that the group of Skt. kṛpá [ins.] 'beauty', Lat. corpus 'body', etc. is
related to Gr. лρεлw.
лpéσẞuç [m.] 'old man, elder' (poet. Pi., trag.), 'president' (Sparta); plur. лpéσßɛç
mostly 'ambassador, messenger' (Att., Dor. inscr.); further лрεσß-ñεç (Hes. Sc. 245),
-εov (Lyc.), dual -ñ (Att.); cf. below on лрεσßεúw. <IE *pres-geu-, *preis-g"eu-
'who goes in front'>>
•VAR Gen. (rare) -ɛws, -ɛoç, acc. -UV, VOC. -v.
•DIAL Myc. pe-re-ku-ta (PY An 172.2) /presgu-/ or /prei(s)gu-/, pe-re-ku-wa-na-ka
(PY Va 15.2)/preigu-wanaks/ (cf. Hackstein 2002: 109).
•COMP As a first member in лpεσßv-yεvýs 'first-born' (Il.), etc.
⚫DER 1. Grades of comparison: лрεσßú-τɛpoç ‘old, venerable', -τατoç 'the oldest, most
venerable' (II.), also -τépiov 'council of elders' (NT); also лрεσß³iστoç 'most
venerable' (h. Hom., A., S., etc.) after кpátiσtoç, kúdiστOÇ, with a cross лρεσẞíστ-
aτos (Nic.). 2. Feminines: лрéσßα (Oɛá) 'the venerable', of Hera and others (Il., epic),
reminding of лótva (Оɛá); пpéoßεɑ µýτηp (poetic inscr. Caria II-Iª³), metrically
conditioned; лpέoßɛɩpa, of ɛwv, etc. (h. Ven., etc.), after лíɛɩpɑ, -ávɛɩpa, etc.;
τpeoßŋïç, of tyµń (h. Hom.), after ßaσiλŋïç, etc., cf. лрεσßñεç above.
3. лрεσß-ñïov [n.] 'gift of honor' (289), -ɛtov 'privilege (of age)' (Att., Hell.). 4. -ɛía
[f.] 'right, privilege (of age)' (A., Pl.), usually ‘embassy' (Att.), to лрεσßεúw. 5.
épɛoßótηs [m.] ‘the old, aged one' (IA), enlargement of лрεσßуç after лoλítηç, etc.,
with fem. -ŪTIÇ, -vɩɩкóç [adj.] ‘senile' (Att., etc.). 6. лpeoßútns, -ntos [f.], Dor. -τaç.
-τατoç ‘(higher) age' (inscr. Messene Iª, etc.), after vɛótns. 7. πpéoßis [f.] ‘age, rank’,
only in кatà épéσßɩv (h. Meṛc., Pl., etc.); after katà táživ, etc. 8. épέoßos [n.]
'(object of) veneration', after кūdoš, кρáτoç, etc. 9. лpɛσß-ɛúw [v.] ‘to be the eldest,
have precedence, be ambassador', trans. 'to attend, venerate like a épέσßuç', med. ‘to
send ambassadors', also with ларα-, συv-, άло-, etc. Thence -εuτns [m.]
'ambassador, messenger' (Att.), singulative to лрεσßεу. Аlso лpεoß-evtikóç,
-ɛútɛipa, -ɛutɛúw, -εvμα, -εvσiç; partly also лрεσßεíα (see 4. above) and, as a back-

=== page 642 ===

1232
1233
formation, лpɛσßɛñoɩv [dat.pl.] (Lyc.). 10. Shortened names like Пpéσßwv (to
лрεσẞεɩpα, perhaps after лéлεрα : лεлwν), Пρéσßоç, etc., see Bechtel 1917b: 385. On
the different spellings and formations see Lejeune 1955-1996: 239ff.
•ETYM Beside the above forms, Doric (especially Cretan) and NWGr. have several
by-forms with y instead of ẞ and with a different initial syllable: Cret. лpɛуʊç,
лpɛíуɩotos with compar. лpɛíуwv, also лрεу-ɛúw, whence -ɛvτáç, -ñïa, -ɛía; also,
Locг. лрεíуa [f.] 'council of elders'; лрεσуευτáç, лрεуу-; later лрууɩστos with
-Lστεúw (Cos); лрεσуéα = лpεσßεía (Argos); лplσуε(1)εC (Boeot.) is perhaps itacistic
for лрεɩσ-; also σñépyʊç. épéσßuç and лépуouv· лрεσßε (H.). See García Ramón
Emerita 53 (1985): 51-80 for a discussion of all dialectal forms.
The common basis is probably лpεσу- (with voiced σ; cf. Delph. лрε‹ßɛvtáç); thence
the other forms arose, but the phonetic developments are uncertain in detail. The
interchange ẞ y may point to an original IE labiovelar *g". The preceding syllable,
which should probably be taken as the first member of a compound, is generally
assumed to contain a frozen adverb лpέç ‘in front' (see ►лрóc). The origin of the
final syllable is debated. It has been compared with Skt. puro-gavá- leader', of which
the second member is derived from a root *g"eu- 'go' (a variant of *g"em-), so it
originally means "who goes in front". Some recognize this root variant in Lith.
žmogus 'man' < “going on the earth" (Fraenkel). The connection with the Arm. u-
stem erēc“, gen. eric‘-u ‘elder, priest' is tempting. It may derive from *preisg™u-, and is
usually connected with Lat. priscus ‘ancient, of old'. It may also be assumed that
лpεɩσ- is an old element, identical in origin with Lat. *prīs, in prīmus < *pris-mo- and
in pris-tinus.
De Lamberterie 1990: 909ff. comments extensively on the formation, meaning, and
use of the Greek term. Clackson 1994: 165 is critical about the formal side of the
Greco-Armenian comparison (claiming that *-sg"- would have to give Arm. -c-
instead of -c-). See ►µɛσ(o)nyú(s).
лpεvµεvýc [adj.] 'gentle, merciful, pleasing, welcome' (A., E.). <GR>
•DER лρεvμεvεiα [f.] 'gentleness' (A., E.).
•ETYM Probably from *лpηü-µεvýs, with diphthongization and shortening of the
long diphthong. Thus, it would be an Ionism in the language of the tragedians. On
this ground, DELG criticizes the etymology, and instead posits *лpo-evµεvýc; this
poses other formal problems, however. The form époεvµεvýc (SEG 18, 592, Soloi
[Cyprus]) may support the latter view, but may also be a reinterpretation of the
ораque word лρεудεууç, асc. to Brixhe and Hodot 1988: 147f.
лpŋyopɛwv, -wvos [m.] 'crop of a bird' (Ar., H., Poll.). <GR>
•ETYM Originally means “body part where the food is collected”, vеα лpoa◊poí¶etai
n τpoon (Poll.), is a formation in -ɛwv like ȧveɛpɛúv, кɛvɛwv, and other designations
of places and parts of the body (Chantrainė 1933: 164f., Schwyzer: 488): thus from
*лpo-áуopos (on the compositional vowel, see Schwyzer: 398 and 402), or directly
from лpо-αуεipεiv.
пρηdáν •VAR пρýðw (¿v-éñpηðov), épηotýp etc. →nífiπpnju.
лpñ¤µα [n.] · ñoλúrodos kepadǹ švioi nλektávy ‘tentacled head of an octopus' (H.).
<?>
•ETYM Unknown.
лpημαdíŋ [f.] name of a kind of olive (Nic. Al. 87). <?>
⚫ETYM Formation in -ádɩoç, as if from *ëpηµác (cf. ¿pivás, kotiváç, iσxáç, etc.). For
further connection with *лρñµα, лpnuaívw, nifiñpnju, there is no indication. Cf. also
▶tpnziás.
rpnµác, rpnµvác [f.] name of a (young) tunny-fish (Pl. Com., Nicoch., Opp.). <PG?>
•VAR Also лρчµádɛç, -ádɩať (Arist.), лpñµvα (H.) [pl.].
⚫ETYM Strömberg 1943: 126ff. discusses the many names for 'tunny'; see also
Thompson 1947 s.v. Fur.: 245 considers the variation v/zero to be a Pre-Greek
phenomenon.
лpηvýs̟ [adj.] ‘leaning forward, headlong, inclined, steep' (Il., epic Ion. poet., Arist.).
<IE? *h,en-os- 'face'>
•VAR лρävηs (X. et al.).
•COMP Also кατa-, ñpo-, ¿ñɩ- (cf. Leumann 1950: 77ff.).
•DER лρηv-íw 'to throw head over heels, throw down, destroy' (Hell.), aor. -ížai, also
with ảлo-, кατα-; rarely лpηv-ów ‘id.' (AP, H.), also with кατα-; to this belongs
(back-formation?) лрανóу· τо кατwo̟ɛpés, лpavés ‘leaning down, face-down or
head-first' (H.).
⚫ETYM Cannot be seprated from ȧл-, лρоσ-ηуýs, so it may contain a substantive
*ēnos- or *ānos- [n.] 'face'; see άлηуηç for the etymology, which is rather doubtful.
xpηtýv →пpatývlov.
лρηwν →лрóv.
лρíασðαι [v.] 'to buy' (Od.). <IE *k"reih₂- 'buy'>
⚫VAR Рtc. лριáμεvoç, finite forms εлpiáµŋv, пpíwµai, épiαíµηv, ipv. épíãσo (-íw, -íà).
•COMP Rarely with prefix, e.g. ¿к-, OVV-.
•DER Negative verbal adj. ά-лрíα-τoç in άлpiáτηу [acc.sg.f.] 'unbought, without
ransom' (A 99, h. Cer.132), as an adv. ‘gratuitous' (§ 317, Agath. 4, 22), plur. ảлpiátaç
(Pi. Fr. 169, 8); PN Алрiáτη; cf. Leumann 1950: 167f.
•ETYM An old aorist, exclusively attested in Greek. A comparable formation is OIr.
ni-cria [subj.] ‘emat' < PIE *k"rieh2-t. Greek does not have the nasal present that is
found in Sanskrit, Celtic, and Slavic, viz. Skt. krīṇāti (for older *kriņāti), Olr. ni
[subj.], ORu. krúnuti 'to buy'. It is possible that the expected Greek reflex *лpívηu
had become awkward because of its resemblance to the antonym лépуη, Аeol.
лopváµεv ‘to sell' (Meillet BSL 26 (1925): 14). The verbal adj. ά-лpíαtos is close to
Skt. krītá- 'bought' < *krih₂-to-, but Greek may also continue *n-krih₂-eto-.
Numerous post-Indo-European formations are found in the various branches, e.g.
Skt. krayá [m.] 'purchase (price)' <*k"roih2-0-, OIr. críth 'payment, purchase',
OLith. krienas 'price', ToB karyor, ToA kuryar 'purchase, trade'.
´pív [adv., conj.] ‘before, previously' (II.). <IE *prei ‘earlier, before'>

=== page 643 ===

1234
•VAR Rarely as a prep. with gen.; Hom. also лрív, Gort. лpε (once beside frequent
лpɩv), Locr. œpɩv.
ETYM With final -v like in vuv, vůν, лáλv, etc. Clearly related to лрó < *pr-o-, with
I as in Lat. prior, priscus, etc. The base form may have been the old locative *pr-i. The
e-vocalism in Creеt. лрεу and perhaps in Hom. лрív (if itacistic) could be mirrored
by Lith. prie <*prei.
лрчvоç [f., m.] 'holm-oak, kermes oak, Quercus ilex, coccifera' (Hes.). <EUR?>
•VAR лрívη [f.] 'id.' (Eup.).
⚫DER Diminutivе лρiv-ídov [n.] (Ar., Ael.), -ɛúç [m.] ‘oak grove' (Erythrae IV³),
-ɩvoç ‘made of л., hard, tough' (Hes.), -óðηs ‘л.-like, hard' (Ar.); IIpɩvóɛσσɑ [f.]
name of an island (Epirus).
ETYM No Indo-European etymology. The Carian TN IIpivaσσós points to an
Anatolian origin (Carnoy Beitr. z. Namenforsch. N.F. 10 (1975): 222). Machek Ling.
Posn. 2 (1950): 155 compares Slav. brinʊ ‘larch', assuming a loan from a common
source. Fur.: 165 assumes a Pre-Roman(ce) *brin ‘Pinus mugus' (Machek), which
would make the Greek dendronym a European loanword.
лpiw [v.] ‘to saw', medic. 'to trephine', ódóvtaç épíε 'to gnash one's teeth', (ódàε)
лpíɛv ‘to bite (with one's teeth), grasp', pass. metaph. 'to experience a biting pain’
(IA). <?>
•VAR Rare and late -í\w, aor. лpĩσαɩ, pass. лpiσðñval, perf. med. ïéñpioµɑi (all IA),
act. лεлρкα (D. S.).
•DIAL Perhaps Myc. pi-ri-(je-)te-(re), see Aura Jorro 2, 124.
•COMP Also with diα-, εv-, άлo-, etc.
●DER 1. лpíwv, -ovos [m.] ‘saw' (IA) with лpιóv-tov [n.] (Ph. Bel.), -īùç [f.] plant
name (Aret. et al.), Redard 1949: 76; -wτós (Ar., Arist.), -wdns (Thphr.) 'saw-shaped,
jaggeď. 2. пpĩoµa (лapá-, čк-) [n.] ‘anything sawn, sawdusť' (Hp., Thphr.), ‘trilateral
column, prism' (Euc.), with -µáτiov (Procl.); épiσpois. taïç Biaiois katoxaïç ‘in
forced detention' (H.). 3. лрiσιç (άvá-, ěк-, àлó-) [f.] 'the sawing' (Hp., Arist.). 4.
лрíστη [m.] 'sawer, saw' (Att. and Hell. inscr. and pap., Poll.), with fem. лpĩστɩç
'sawfish' (Epich., Arist.), see Strömberg 1943: 44; also an instrument (Att. and Epid.
inscr.), etc. 5. лрlστp [m.] 'saw, sawer' (LXX). 6. лрστóç 'sawn' (Od.), Ammann
1956: 16; εű-, dúσ-лpiσtos (Thphr.). 7. épiσtikós ‘belonging to sawing' (Hero).
Some forms were enlarged with w: лε-лрɩw-µεvoç, à-, diα-лpíш-τоç (Нp.),
(dia-)ñpiw-ois [f.] (Delph., Epid.), лpióµãσι épíσµãoɩ ‘sawdusť (H.), with fut.
лpɩwσɛî and subj. pres. лpió̟ (Tab. Heracl.).
⚫ETYM лρíw seems to point to a stem *pris-, perhaps older *pri-. It may correlate with
лεíрw 'to pierce' <*per-ie/o-, for which Frisk compared *trī- in Lat. trīvī, trītum, and
perhaps τpißw to rub (down)' < *trh,-i- beside Lat. terō and tɛipw ‘to rub (open)' <
*terh,-ie/o-, as well as *ski- in Lat. scīvī, scītum 'to decide' beside secō ‘to cut'. The
value of this comparison is yet unclear.
Further etymological comparison has proven fruitless; the link with Alb. prish 'to
spoil, break, destroy' (Meyer 1891: 353) is uncertain. WP 2, 89 assumes that лpíw is
apóBata
1235
onomatopoeic. The w-forms are probably due to contamination, perhaps by
tetpwµévos, ätpwtos, tpww, tpŵμα.
лpó [adv., prefix, prep.] 'forth, forward, before, for' (Il.). <IE *pro 'forward'>>
•VAR With gen.
●DIAL Myc. po-ro-.
⚫ETYM Allative formation in *-0, with ending like άлó, úлó. A common IE adverb; cf.
Hitt. parā 'forward', Skt. prá, Av. and OP fra-, Lat. pro-, OIr. ro-, Go. fra-, Lith. pra-,
OCS pro-, Ru. pro, from IE *pro. A lengthened grade *prō is found in лpwï, etc. Cf.
also ▶лpóкa, ▶лpóµoç, and ►épótɛpos. Other old case forms of the same element
*pr are found in épív and ëрóç < *proti. More remotely related are лápa, ▶rápoç,
► лépā(v), ► ñépɩ, etc. On Gr. лpó beside лapá and related forms in Latin, see García
Ramón 1997.
лpoɑλnç [adj.] of a terrain (X@poc), over which the water flows down quickly,
'sloping, sudden' vel sim. (262), of water (üdwp) itself, ‘breaking forth, streaming
down' vel sim. (A. R. 3, 73); metaph. 'rash, heedless' (LXX, Str., A. D.);
лpoɑλɛστátηy. лƒ˜áу xoá 'most hasty, most ready or
accessible' (H.). <GR➤
•ETYM From лpo-áλλoμaɩ, with a formation like лpo-netĤs.
лрóαрov [n.] 'large wooden mixing bowl' (Pamphil. apud Ath. 11, 495a). <?>
⚫ETYM Usually explained as a compound of лрó and ȧpúɛv 'to draw water'. This is
not especially illuminating for a vessel from which wine was poured into the
drinking cups. See ►ápúw.
лрóẞаτα [n. pl.] ‘cattle, herd, flock' (Il.), 'small cattle'; -ov [sg.] mostly 'sheep' (Att.,
Gort., etc.); also name of an unknown fish (Opp., Ael.), because of the similarity of
the head, acc. to Strömberg 1943: 102. <IE *pro-geh₂- 'go'>
●COMP лρоßаão-уváµwv [m.] ‘knower of herds' (A.), лoλv-лpóßaτoç ‘rich of cattle,
sheep' (Hdt., X.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutive лpoßáτ-ov [n.] (Att.). 2. Adj. лpоßáτ-ɛоç (Аrist.), -1кóç (LXX,
N.T.) 'belonging to sheep (small cattle)', -wdns 'sheep-like' (late). 3. -óv (-ɛwv Hdn.),
-wvos [m.] ‘sheepfold' (Hell. inscr. and pap.). 4. -ǹµατα· лpóßατα ‘cattle' (H.) (after
кtýµata, ßooký-µατα, etc.; Chantraine 1933: 178). 5. -ɛú¢ [m.] ‘shepherd' (title of a
com. of Antiph.). 6. -ɛúw [v.] 'to keep, tend cattle or sheep' (D. H., App.) with
-Evtikós, -ɛúσiµos, -evtýs, -ɛia. 7. Plant names: -ɛlov, -ɛloç, -aía (Ps.-Dsc.), cf.
Strömberg 1940: 137. Оn лрóßεоç, a rhythmical shortening of лpoßátɛios (An. Ox.,
et al.) see Palmer Class. Quart. 33 (1939): 31ff.
•ETYM The verbal abstract лpóßασis is found once in the same sense as лрóßατα, in ẞ
75 кεчµýλá τε лрóßασíу τε, where it designates movable cattle as opposed to
immovable property. For the semantic development, cf. ON ganganda fé “going
cattle" = 'living stock' beside liggjanda fé 'кɛчµýλiα', or Hitt. iiant- "the going",
‘sheep' ptc. of ii̟a- 'to go'. It is plausible, therefore, that лpóßατα was derived from
лроßаívεv. Cf. Benveniste BSL 45 (1949): 91 ff. with extensive treatment and

=== page 644 ===

1236
npoßookiç, -ídoç
criticism of diverging views. In the secondary sense of 'sheep', éрóßατov has
replaced older ŏiç.
In view of the dat.pl. лpóßασɩ (Hdn.) instead of лρоßατоç (Нes.), the plural
лрóẞατα is considered to be old (Risch 1937: 196, Benveniste BSL 45 (1949): 91ff., Egli
1954: 41ff.); Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 178ff. opposes this idea, and remarks that
participles in -To- do not necessarily have a passive sense in Greek (σtatós, rλwtós).
Note, however, that the attestation of лpóßaσ is very weak.
лpoßoσkiç, -ídos [f.] ‘elephant's trunk' (Arist., Hell.), also metaph. of the proboscis of
an insect and of the two tentacles of the ten-armed squid (Arist.). ◄GR▷
•ETYM Formation like åукaλíç, εлуovvíç, кoïíç, and other names of body parts and
instruments, probably directly from þóσкw rather than from the rare form BooкóS
(cf. Chantraine 1933: 338). For the use of the prefix, compare лpó-doµoç ‘front room',
etc. With a different accentuation, there is also лpoßoσкós (-os) [m.] ‘assistant
herdsman' (Hdt. 1, 113); cf. лрóðovλoç. Borrowed as Lat. proboscis, promuscis.
лрóðavɩç [adv.] лрóτεроν 'before' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
лpoηpóσɩos [adj.] name of a festival before ploughing (Att.). <GR➤
•VAR IN IIponpoσía (scil. έopτý, Ovoía) [f.], -ta (iɛpá) [n.pl.].
•DIAL Epid. IIpaрáτios (inscr.), also -τpιoç.
•DER лpoηpóσɩoi Đeoí, -ía Anµýtnp (Plu.).
⚫ETYM Hypostatic formation from лpò ápóτov (with compositional lengthening).
With crasis and dissimilation: лληрoσíа [f.] (Att. inscr.); see Schwyzer: 258 and 402,
Lejeune 1972: 323².
лpoïкtηs →лpoíč.
лpoíž, лpoikós [f.] ‘gift, present' (v 15, p 413, both gen., on which see below), 'dowry'
(Att.), see Sommer 1948: 94; also late pap. as an archaizing term in juridical jargon.
<IE *seiHk-stretch forth the hand'>
•VAR Used adverbially: acc. лроiкa gratuitous, for free' (Att.), probably also gen.
itpolkós (V 15).
●COMP ä-ipoikos ‘without dowry' (Att.); see Sommer l.c.
•DER Diminutive лpoê-íðɩov [n.] (Plu.); adj. -ídios ‘forming a gift' (Ph.), -чµaños ‘id.'
(pap. VIP), ‘gratuitous' (D. C.), -tos ‘gratuitous' (AP); verb -í(w 'to provide with a
dowry' (D. S., Ph. et al.). Also лpo-ïêtηs [m.] ‘beggar' (p 352 and 449), -ïσσoµαι ‘to
ask, beg for a gift' (Archil. 130). Cf. also the fut. кατα-лρoïžoμαι in o кατaлρoïεαι
'he will not get away unpunished', etc. (IA com.).
•ETYM An archaic word that became extinct, but was later revived. Formation like
rpóσ-qvž, so ipó-ï½ (лpóïкa with dieresis is Ion., acc. to EM 495, 33), from a prefixed
verb which is also the basis of лpoïкτηç. The yod-present лpo-ïσσoµâɩ can be either
primary or denominative from лpoíč.
Original mg.: “reaching out (of the hand), presentation”, related to Lith. síekti, 1sg.
siekiu 'to reach out, etc.²; „poïk-tηs originally means 'who reaches out his hand'; cf.
1237
лpoτɛivw xɛpa кαi лроσσоμαι (Archil. 130). See further "kw and LIV2 s.v. *seik- for
further cognates from Baltic, Tocharian, and Umbrian.
лpóкa [adv.] ‘instantly, suddenly' (Hp., A. R.). ◄IE *pro-k- ‘in front’▷
•Var лpótε (Hdt., Call.).
⚫ETYM Temporal formation like aỷtíka, tŋvíka, tókα; clearly derived from ►лpó
‘(be)fore, forward'. The velar suffix has correspondences in OCS prokú ‘remaining',
Lat. reci-procus 'returning on the same road' from *directed backward and
forward'), proc-erēs ‘chiefs, nobles', procul 'far away'. The final -a is ambiguous:
perhaps after äµɑ, τáxα, etc. or the ntr.pl. ending? The suffixation with -τɛ is
parallelled by εлεite, aʊte, etc.
лpoкávia [n.pl.] with or without äλqɩta, flour of barley (Hp., Att. inscr.); see the
TLG.<?>
•ETYM Unknown.
лpoµálɑyyɛç [m. pl.] a group of flatterers and spies on Cyprus (Clearch. fr. 19
Wehrli). <?>
•ETYM Indigenous term without etymology. The association with paλáσσw points to
folk etymology (DELG).
лpoµŋðýs [adj.] ‘forethinking, cautious' (IA). ◄IE? *men(s)-d½h,- ‘direct the mind to’▷
●DER 1. лpoµýð-εα (Att.), also -ía (trag.), Ion. -íŋ, Dor. -µáðɛα [f.] ‘caution,
foresight'; 2. IIpoµη0-εúç, Dor. -µã¤-, [m.] “the forethinking one”, ‘Prometheus'
(Hes., Pi.), secondary appellative (A.); to this as an opposite’Eлчµŋßɛúç (cf. Boßhardt
1942: 95f.); with -εos 'belonging to Pr.' (Nic., AP), τà IIрoμη0-εtα festival of Pr.'
(Att.), -кwç 'in a way worthy of Pr.' (Ar.), at the same time connected with
époµ¿ðýc; 3. époμ-éμα to be forethinking, cautious' (IA), also -εúoμa ‘'id.'
(Alex. Aphr.) with -ɛvtkós = époµŋßýs (Eust.); on époµýðɛσαɩ (ipv. aor.?, Archil.?)
see Maas KZ 60 (1932): 286.
•ETYM From pó and *µñ¤oç, *µãos, which may be semantically associated with
μаεv. Since the latter is compared with μεvη and Go. mundon sis, etc.,
analogical ablaut must be assumed for лpoμηеns, perhaps after μndoμai or µñtiç.
This remains a bit doubtful.
лpoдvotvoι [adj.] 'one by one, one after another' (230), -al (233). <GR▷
ETYM Formation like ȧyxiστ-ivos (from ǎyxiστα), žvdiva (from vdov); see Meid IF
62 (1956): 2743. From a noun likе *лрóμуηστç 'wooing' (from лpо-μváομα 'woo for
sbd.'), thus the original meaning is 'belonging to wooing', after the ancient custom to
present several women one after another. See Hoffmann RhM 56 (1901): 474f. The
hypothesis of Forssman KZ 79 (1965): 26ff. is to be rejected (cf. on ►ëpuµvóc).
лpóµoç [m.] ‘protagonist' (Hom.), 'leader, commander' (trag.). <IE *promo- 'first'>
⚫ETYM Usually connected with U promom 'primum', Go. and ON fram ‘forward',
and identified as an old superlative of IE *pro in лрó, etc. The hapаx ►лpáμoç, if not
corrupt, has been compared to Go. fruma 'first'. Since the word only means.
'champion' in Hom., we have to consider the possibility that “póµo was shortened

=== page 645 ===

1238
from лpóµαxoç (already suggested by Aristarchus); the meaning ‘leader' would be
due to a misunderstanding of the epic word. The hapax àуoì лpóµvoi (A. Supp. 904
[lyr.]) presents metrical difficulties, but may be due to an error in the tradition;
differently, Forssman KZ 79 (1965): 11ff. (see on лρчдνóç).
лроνшлηs [adj.] 'inclined, stooping, downcast, weak' (A., E.), on the mg. Muller
Mnem. 55 (1927): 101ff. <?>
⚫DER лроушлоç 'outside, in front of the house', τà лроуáлα, τò лроуáлоу 'front,
facade of a house' (E.), "pwεç лроушлоι 'Lares compitales' (D. H.); see on
► уwлέo̟μαɩ with vɛváëŋtai.
ETYM Formally, vшлéoμα is comparable to deverbatives such as лwλéoμαι, wеéw. It
may have given rise to лроушлηs, лроуóлоç, but лроуóлα is also reminiscent of
the synonym έváлa; therefore, it has been suggested (Eust., Bechtel 1914 s.v. váлη)
that лроváлα is from *лро-εуóлα. At any ratе, лроνшлηs and vшлéoμaι cannot be
connected with váлη 'woodland, glen' (Bechtel 1.c.) with ablaut as in кóлη: кάлτw,
as suggested by Frisk.
лрóž, лρoкóç [f.] 'roe- or deer-like animal' (p 295, Archil., Arist. et al.). <IE *perk-
'spotted, motley'>
•VAR Also лρокás, -ádos [f.] (h. Ven. 71), like Sopкás, keµás.
•ETYM Animal names of the same type as yλauε, уúч, α, etc.; see лepкvós.
rpoolov →oijun.
лpóç [adv., prep.] 'furthermore, thereto; from, by, at, to, towards, in face of (epic IA,
Aeol.). <IE *proti ‘against’▷
•VAR With gen. (abl.), dat. (loc.), acc. Epic also лрótɩ, лpoτí, with metathesis лoptí
(Cret.), with e-vocalism лερτ' (Раmph.), лрéç (Аeol. acc. to gramm.), see also on
•ETYM The form лpóτɩ is identical to Skt. práti ‘to, against', except for the missing
effect of Brugmann's Law. This points to *preti, which is perhaps found in Pamph.
лερτ'. See also Lat. pretium 'price, worth' <*préti-o-, "the opposite equivalent", OCS
protivo against' < IE *proti-.
The usual forms лpóç (and лρéç) have arisen by assibilation of *-ti- in antevocalic
position; note that final -os is also found in лápos and лóç. An older form pres is
found in Messap. prespolis (Pisani Sprache 7 (1961): 103; meaning unknown; acc. to
Pisani ‘lord of the house, (house) priest'). Beside лроτí/ лрóç, Greek has ➤лoτí,
►лóç. Further connection with лрó is conceivable; cf. on ►лpóσw.
лpoσávτns [adj.] ‘ascending steeply, inclined, craggy, rough, adverse, hostile' (Pi., IA).
<GR➤
•ETYM Adjectival hypostasis of the adverb лрóσ-αvτa (Dicaearch.) 'upwards, up the
mountain'; like v-avra from a noun ‘front', which is also seen in the frozen case
forms ►ǎvτα, ►άvτí, ►ǎvτηv. Likewise in ǎv-avtα 'up a mountain', with ȧváv™ηs
'uphill', and кáτаvτα 'downwards, downhill', with кατávτηs 'going down'.
Tpóow
лpoonvýc [adj.] 'favorable, gentile, sweet' (Emp., Anacr.). <IE? *h₂en-os- 'face'>
⚫DIAL Doг. лρоσāvis.
•DER лроσnvεα (Нp.), лроσууεúоμα = σaívw 'to flatter' (H.).
1239
⚫ETYM Like ȧлηуý and лρηуns, derived from a word for 'face', which itself is of
uncertain etymology.
лpóσðɛ(v) [adv., prep.] ‘ahead, before, formerly, yore; in front of (Il., IA) <IE, GR➤
•VAR With gen.; also лрóσðα (Dor. Aeol.), which gave лрóееα (Сret.); лpóστɑ
(Delph.).
●COMP Also combined with other adverbs or prepositions, e.g. ¤µ-лpoσðε(v) ‘in front
(of), before' (IA), -a (Dor., Aeol.), with έµлрóσ0-105 'in the front', especially of
body parts (Hdt., Att., Arist.), -ídıoç ‘id.' (A. D., pap.), εлí-лрoσðεv ‘close before,
near' Att., Hell.) with έлɩлρoσе-έw [v.] 'to be in the way, in front of it, to hinder, to
cover' (Hp., Hell.), лó-лроσеε 'just before' (Нp.) with ȧлαлpoσð-íðɩoç ‘older
inhabitant' (Locr.).
●DER лрóσð-ɩoç ‘in the front', especially of body parts (Hdt. v.l., trag., Arist.; cf.
¿µлpóσðɩoç époσt-íšLOS
εμлрóσеоç above), -ídios ‘id.' (Nonn.), лроστ-ílios = лpoσð-ídios 'earlier, the
former' (El.).
●ETYM Formation in -0ε(v), -0α, which in view of the meaning and spread can hardly
be derived from лрóç (Kretschmer Glotta 1 (1909): 55), but rather from лpó with
analogical -σ- (лрó-Оεv, however, only in Greg. Cor.). The example cannot have
bеen öлσεv, as this stands for earlier öðεv itself, and probably took -σ- from
лрóσеεν. Therefore, more probably after ктOσ-0ε(V), VτOσ-0ε(v), or from
лрóσ(σ)w? Extensive discussion in Lejeune 1939: 333ff.
apoon&ńg →kñdog.
лpóσqaτoç [adj.] ‘undecomposed', of a corpse (№ 757 έpońɛis kaì ñ., Hdt.), ‘fresh', of
plants, victuals, water etc. (Hp., Arist., Hell.), metaph. 'fresh' = 'which happened
lately, recently; following immediately', of actions, emotions, etc. (A. [lyr.], Lys., D.,
Arist.). <GR>
•ETYM Acc. to Phot., it means vεwστì ápηµévos recently deceased', an
interpretation which seems to give the best solution: the second member belongs to
neqveïv, póvos, ► Oɛívw ‘to hit, kill', with the same second member as in Apŋï-, ápɛí-
pаτoç, μvλn-paτoç, ódvvý-qατoç. DELG observes that it may have been a hunting,
or fishing term, as it is used for flesh in Hp. Acut. 49 and in Men. 397. The
development of meaning to 'recent' became possible after the second member had
become opaque (cf. àpɛípaτoc, which also means 'martial' in trag.). The first element
cannot be a verbal prefix (as if from *лpoσ-Оεívw), and has not received a good
explanation yet (Frisk's suggestion 'close to' does not really make sense).
лрóσw [adv.] 'forward, onward, further', etc (II.). <IE *pro-ti-o- ‘against'>
•VAR Epic also лрóσσш. Compaг. лpoσw-τέpw, -τά¨τw, adv. лpóσw-0εv 'from far
away' (Ion. poеt.), лрóσσоеεν († 533.), after other adverbs in -o0ev (epic Ion. poet.).
⚫ETYM Contains the same formation as oлíσ(σ)w, derived from *pro with a suffix
*-tio-, or perhaps a thematic entension of *proti > лpótɩ. See also ▶лópow, ▶ñóppw.

=== page 646 ===

1240
лрóσшлоν
лpóσwлov [n.] ‘face, countenance, mask, role, person' (II.). <IE *proti ‘against' +
*h₂ek"- 'see'>
•VAR Epic pl. also -лατα, dat. -ασɩ, which can easily be explained as an enlargement
favoured by the metre (Schwyzer: 515³).
•COMP Rarely as a first member, е.g. лроσшло-λýƒ™ŋs [m.] ‘who respects persons,
who is partial' with -Aŋtéw, -Aŋyía (NT). Very often as a second member, mostly
late., е.g. μкро-лрóσшлоç 'small-faced' (Arist.).
⚫DER Diminutives лроσшл-íðɩov (Ar.), -ɛov (-tov) [n.] ‘mask' (Thphr., LXX), the
plant name -tov, -íç, -iáç, -îtɩç (Dsc. et al.; probably after the form of the flower;
Strömberg 1940: 47), -oñïta [f.] ‘face-shaped vessel', “face-urn” (Polem. Hist., Poll.).
⚫ETYM Similar to ►µέτwïov ‘forehead', лрóσшлov is also a hypostatic form, i.e. from
*лpotɩ-wë-ov “what is opposite to the eyes (of the other), the sight (of the other)”.
By connection with ерic лроτ-óσσоμα, лроσ-óчoμа 'to look аť', öлшлα, еtc.,
лρóσшлоν may have been (re)interpreted as verbal noun (cf. G Angesicht).
Formally, лрóσшлоv neatly corresponds with ToA pratsak, ToB pratsāko 'breast'
(containing ToA ak, B ek 'eye') and with Skt. prátika- [n.] 'face, appearance' from
práti = лpóτɩ and a zero grade *-h3k"-, so *proti-h3k™- (cf. ►óлīлεúw < *opi-h³k™-).
The Greek form may continue this old compound, assuming that *Cih,C developed
to PGr. *CiŌC (which is doubtful), or it may have been recreated within Greek from
лpóτɩ and őч.
On the IE expressions for 'face', see Malten 1961: 1ff.
лpotaɩví [adv.] ‘ahead, in front of (E. Rh. 523). <GR➤
•VAR Boeot. inscr. лpotηví ‘earlier'; лpotaíviov. pò µкpoñ and лaλαóv ‘for a small
[time]; old' (H.; text uncertain)
•ETYM Acc. to Bechtel 1921, 1: 309f., it derives from лρò τα-vì (locatival; scil. ηµépα),
with a suffix -vɩ added to the pronoun; cf. also лоταívov (Schwyzer: 612). See
▶ rotaíviog.
лpóτɛpoç [pron. adj.] 'front, former', usually of time ‘earlier' (Il.). <IE *pro-tero-
'further'>
•VAR Adv. лρóτεpov 'earlier' (post-Нom.), лроτέрш 'further (forward), sooner' (epic
since Il.), -woɛ 'forward' (h. Hom., A. R.), -weε(v) 'from before, from earlier on'
(Theognost., EM); лpotεpη-уεvés born earlier, elder' (Antim.), after ȧpxn-yεvýc
etc.
●Der ǹ лpotɛp-aía (scil. ŋµέpa) ‘the preceding day' (IA), cf. voτɛpaía, etc., also -ɛía
[f.] ‘id.' (Tab. Heracl.), -ɩкóv [n.] ‘priority' (pap.); лpoτεp-έw ‘to be ahead, have the
advantage, prevent' (IA), also with кatα-, σuv-. Thence -ŋqua [n.] (Hell.), -ŋois [f.]
(Hld.) 'advantage, lead'.
⚫ETYM Opposite of üστεрoç, from лpó, identical with Av. and OP fratara- 'the one
more in front, earlier', Skt. pratará- 'further, farther, future'.
npóti, npoti →丌pós.
1241
лpótunσiç [f.] ‘(region of the) navel (A 424, Q. S., Sinope IIIª, H., Poll.); in H. also
npotuiñtis. ó nepì τòv óµчαλòv кατά τòν λαуóvа τóлоç 'area surrounding the navel,
waisť' and лроτuntóv. tòv dµqaλóv. <GR>
⚫ETYM Verbal noun from лроτεμуw 'to cut off in front', originally of the severing of
the umbilical cord, then of the navel itself and the area surrounding it (Porzig 1942:
337). Often analyzed as “incision of the body", whence ‘waisť' (e.g. LSJ, Benveniste
1948: 78), which should be rejected. The form épotµñtɩç in H. (also v.l. sch. A 424;
accent uncertain) must be explained, if the accent in H. is reliable, as a fem. of
*лроτ (likе лроßλnc); cf. e.g. daσлλñτç and ëρoßλñτiç, à§µñτiç (but these forms
are rare and late). A proparoxytone лpótµηtis would be strange, and can hardly be
an archaism (Wackernagel 1916: 236).
лpoúµvò [f.] ‘plum tree, Prunus' (Thphr.). <PG?, LW Anat.?>
•DER лpoñµvov [n.] ‘plum' (Gal. et al.).
•ETYM Probably of Anatolian origin, like the tree itself; cf. the Phryg. TN
Пρччvησσó and Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 181f. Borrowed as Lat. prūnus, -um,
perhaps from an intermediate *лpoυ(Ƒ)vov (Fur: 243)?
TPOÚVEIKOS (-IKoç) [m.] ‘one who bears cargo out of the market, hired porter' (Com.
Adesp., Hdn. Gr., Ael. Dion., H., Eust.), also a designation of a loafer or a person
from the lower classes (Herod., H.); also adj. (AP 12, 209)? <GR?>
•DERлρоυνкíα (H.), see on σкÍTαλo.
•ETYM A colloquial word without a certain etymology. Hardly derived from лpo-
ɛvεĭkaɩ, as suggested already by Eust. and others, nor related to vεĩкos (AB, EM); cf.
also Bopuẞwdεiç кαi лроυvεíкоυç in D. L. 4, 6.
лрovσελέw [v.] 'to ridicule, outrage, maltreat' (A. Pr. 438, Ar. Ra. 730). <?►
•ETYM Without etymology. One doubtful hypothesis derives it from *лpo-εσ-ελεw
(from λoc) “to dump in the swamp” (Schwyzer: 724), for the semantics of which
лρолηλαкíεv (H., Suid.) ‘id.' has been compared.
лpóœpwv [adj.] ‘kind, willing' (epic poet. since Il.). <GR▷
•VAR Fеm. лрópaσσa (Il., Od.).
•ETYM Bahuvrīhi compound, literally meaning “forward-minded" (cf. Sommer 1948:
110³). The form лрóчрασσα is after synonymous έкασσα (Wackernagel Gött. Nachr.
1914: 41f.); cf. on ►έкúv and ▸ opŃv.
лpoxávò [f.] ‘pretext' (Call. Cer. 73, fr. 26). ◄ GR▷
•VAR Dor. -ā.
•ETYM Archaic or dialectal formation with unclear history. Acc. to Eust. 1109, 39,
derived from a verb лроxαívw, which is further unattested and translated as
rpoqaσíšoµaɩ ‘to give a pretext'; unconvincing. More probably, it is derived from
лро-έxоμαι 'to pretend', thus from *лрo-oxάvη with elision.
лpóxɛɩpos [adj.] ‘at hand, ready, easy, usuaľ (IA). <GR➤

=== page 647 ===

1242
TTPÓXVU
●DER лpoxεip-iov (-ov) [n.] ‘handbag' (pap.), -óτns [f.] ‘readiness' (Hell.), époxɛɩp-
íšoµaɩ, -í\w [v.] 'to provide (oneself) with, put at disposal, choose' (Att., Hell.),
whence -1015 [f.] 'provision, accomplishment', -touós [m.] 'provision, choice' (Hell.).
•ETYM Hypostasis from лpò xεɩpŵv, possibly also a bahuvrīhi “with a forward hand"
(Sommer 1948: 108, 112, 141, Schwyzer 1950: 508).
лpóxvʊ [adv.] ‘kneeling, on the knees' (I 570, with кaßεoµévη); 'fully, thoroughly,
entirely' vel sim. (460, 69 with (ȧл-)oλéσеα; A. R. 1, 1118; 2, 249), mg. uncertain
(Antim. Col. 2 P.). <IE *gon-u 'knee'>
•ETYM In the meaning ‘kneeling', лpóvʊ clearly contains the zero grade of yóvu, as
in yvú. The proper meaning is therefore "with the knees forward", a frozen
ntr.acc. which stands for *лpó-уvu = Skt. (gramm.) pra-jñú-, of which the meaning
is not quite certain (Wackernagel 1916: 74). The origin of the aspiration is uncertain
(cf. Schwyzer: 328). The meaning ‘fully', if at all from ‘kneeling, probably came
about by reinterpretation of an epic expression. For a different etymology, cf.
Brugmann-Thumb 1913: 127¹, who derived лpóxvv ‘fully' from xvaúw ‘to plane, gnaw
off; the originally independent *лpó-уvʊ ‘kneeling' would then have coalesced with
it (an idea accepted by Wackernagel 1916: 74).
лpox@vai [f.pl.] 'buttocks, coccyx' (Archipp. 41). <GR>
•ETYM Perhaps a nonce form or comic contamination of кoxóvη and лрwкTÓS
(Güntert 1914: 122); otherwise, with лpó.
лpulées, -éwv [m.pl.] ‘heavily armed foot-soldiers' (Il., Hes. Sc. 193, Gortyn), metaph.
of birds (Оpp.); пpovλéσi• nešoïç óñλítaïç ‘hoplites on foot (H.). <PG(V)►
●der Also лpúλis [f.] ‘(Cretan) weapon-dance' (Call.; acc. to Arist. fr. 519 Cypr. or
Cret.); лpvλɛúσɛis. ènì tñs ¿kyopās tŵv teleutnoávtwv rapà tậ) iepɛĩ (H.). From
лрúλç сomеs *лруλεúw 'to perform a л.', whencе лpvλɛúσɛç [f.pl.] (H.).
⚫ETYM It is not entirely clear how лpуλéεç (sg. -λúc [Hdn.] or -λúc [Schwyzer: 572])
and лρúλç are related. According to Leumann 1950: 286f., Сrеt. лрúλç would have
arisen through false interpretation of epic лpuλéεç; Ruijgh 1957: 96f. opposes this.
In view of the formal variant лpoυuléσt, the word is probably of Pre-Greek origin.
Unrelated to лpútavıç (Misteli KZ 17 (1868): 174; cf. Bechtel 1914 s.v. diαлpúdios).
лpчvóç [adj.] ‘utmost, hindmost, undermost', of the body part that is closest to the
torso, vel sim.; also of the undermost part of a tree, a rock, etc. (epic poet. Il.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR With shift of accent лpúµvη, secondarily -vă [f.] ‘hindmost part of a ship, stern'
(IA, Il.), in Hom. mostly attributive лpúµvn viñç.
•COMP As a first member in e.g. лpvµv-wpɛia [f.] 'lower part, foot of a mountain (E
307), from *лрчμv-wpηs (Solmsen 1909: 249, Risch Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 18). From
лúдé е.g. éдv-oбxos 'holding the stern' (E., AP), vчí-лрчμvos 'with high stern'
(Str.).
●DER 1. épu̟µv-óðɛv ‘from the lower end, from the bottom' (A.), also (Hell. poet.) =
пpúµv-ηеɛv, Dor. -äev 'from the stern' (II.); 2. -τns [m.] ‘steersman', as an adj.
'standing on the stern' (A., E.) with -ŋtкós (Callix., pap.), -ñσtos (E.) ‘id.', tà -ŋoia
1243
[n. pl.] ‘stern cables' (Hom., AP); probably analogically built to лpúµvò (Chantraine
1933: 42, Schwyzer: 466); 3. -aïoç ‘id.' (A. R.); 4. -ɛú¢ [m.] PN (0 112, Nonn.).
•ETYM Often connected with лрó, assuming u for o by Cowgill's Law (e.g. Forssman
KZ 79 (1965): 11ff.), but this is semantically unconvincing, because лpu̟μvós indicates
not the most foward, but the hindmost part. For the suffix -uv-, one compares Skt.
ni-mná- [n.] 'depression, depth', adj. ‘lying deep'.
The connection with OCS króma 'back part of a ship' is wrong; cf. Vasmer 1953 s.v.
kormá. Cf. also éрóµvos and ▶époµvnotïvoɩ, connected with épvµvós by Forssman
KZ 79 (1965): 11ff.; sее ►лрóμоç.
The most promising etymology consists of the connection with лрεμvov, the non-
Indo-European interchange ε/v pointing to a Pre-Greek origin (cf. Fur.: 6527°).
лpútavɩç, -ɛws [m.] title of a leading official, in Athens member of the governing
committee of the council, 'foreman, chief of affairs, prytan' (Dor. IA); also name of a
Lycian (E 678). <PG(V)►
•VAR Aеol. лρó-.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. vav-лpútavis = vaúapxos (Pi.).
●DER 1. Adjecitves épʊτav-ɩкóç (IA inscr.), -&os (Aristid.) 'belonging to the л.²; 2.
substantives -εiov, Ion. -ñïov [n.] ‘residence of the л., city hall' (IA), in Athens also
name of a court of law; τà лpʊτavɛĩa ‘'legal costs' (Att.); here Iputav-ītıç (Herm.
Hist.), -ɛía (Syros) [f.] epithet of 'Eστía as a protectress of the Prytaneion; 3. verb
лруταν-εúш 'to be л., lead something' (h. Ap. 68) with -ɛía, Ion. -ŋŋ [f.] ‘(term of
the) office of a л.' (IA, Rhodes, etc.), -εvμα = Lat. principatus (epigr. Iª), -ɛú¢ [m.] =
лрúτανç (Rhodos), back-formation acc. to Boßhardt 1942: 77.
•ETYM In view of the close resemblance to Etruscan purdne, eproni ‘title of an
officiaľ, лpútavis probably belongs to the Anatolian-Aegaean stratum of social
designations (cf. Baoilɛúç, ávač, τúpavvoç, and Schwyzer: 62 and 462). The
variation of Aeol. лрóτаviç (Аtt. inscr. incidentally have лроταν-εúw, -ɛía) and
Phoc. and Cret. ẞpuτavεúw, -εiov is suggestive of borrowing from a Pre-Greek
source; cf. Heubeck 1961: 67f.; Linderski Glotta 40 (1962): 157ff. also connects Hatt.
puri 'lord'. The association with лpó 'in front' is secondary and folk-etymological;
лру- is not an old by-form of лpо, as has been claimed on the basis of diaлpúσoç,
npuµvós, apvλées.
лpóŋv [adv.] ‘lately, the day before yesterday' (II.). ◄IE *proH ‘early, in the morning'>
•Var épóŋv (II.), лpŵv (Call. fr., Herod.), Dor. лрwav, épóɑv, épāv (Theoc.); on the
phonetics Schwyzer: 250.
•COMP As a first member in лpηpótns [m.] ‘early plougher' (Hes.), like ỏy-apótns
(see oчé); often in Thphr., e.g. лршï-кαрлоç 'with early fruit', compar.
лршïкαρлóτεроs (see Strömberg 1937: 162f.).
●DER Also лpwi (Il.), Att. ñpó̟ (ëpu̟), épŵï) ‘early, in the morning'. Compar. forms:
лрwï- (лрú)-)τερoç, -tatoç, usually -aítɛpos, -aíτatos (IA), after лaλαíτɛpos etc.
Other derivatives: лрóïоç, лрãоç at an early time' (О 470), лрwïα [f.] ‘early time,
morning' (Aristeas, NT), after óvía; in Attic replaced by лpó-ïµos (X., Arist., pap.
and inscr.), to őччos (Arbenz 1933: 76); also лрó-üç after лpó; Hell. -ïvós

=== page 648 ===

1244
TTPWKTÓG
(Chantraine 1933: 200f.); лpwïšá [adv.] ‘the day before yesterday' (B 303), to лpúηv
after Xoá, 'very early' (Theoc. 18, 9), to лрwï; лршïеev 'from early in the morning'
(LXX).
=
⚫ETYM Both лрбηу and лрwï presuppose an adverb *лрó, which is confirmed by
OHG fruo ‘early', Lat. prō ‘for, before', Av. frā ‘forward, in front', and less directly by
Skt. prātár ‘early, in the morning' beside Av. fra ►лрó. It is perhaps an old
instrumental *pro-h..
The form лрóηy, -āv may have been influenced by petrified accusatives, like dńv,
Sắv, nλýv, nλáv, ảкµýv. Similarly, лpw-ï seems to have been modelled after locatives
like ñpɩ, лépvσɩ, ávτí. This лpwï served as the basis for the adjective лpáï-oç (= OHG
fruoji 'early'), which, interpreted as лρó-ïoç, gave rise to лpó-ïµoç, -ɩvós (see above).
лpwêtóç [m.] ‘rump, anus' (Hippon., Ar.). <IE *pre/oh₂kt- ‘buttock'>
•DER лрwкτĺw ‘paedico' (Ar.).
•ETYM Closely related to Arm. erastan-k‘[pl.] ‘buttock', an action noun in -an-, from
IE *preh₂kt-. This means that Greek derives from *proh₂kt- (Beekes in Kortlandt
2003: 191). The earlier reconstruction as *p(e)rh3kt- (see the discussion in Clackson
1994: 166f.) does not abide by the rules for IE root structure. Skt. pṛṣṭhá- 'back' and
related forms are more easily derived from *pr-sth₂-0-, and are therefore unrelated.
лрóv [m.] 'protruding rocks, mountain top' (II.). <?>
•VAR лρшνоç oг лpwvóç, plur. лρшvεç, also лрwovεs (epic poet. since Il.), also лpηóv
(Hes. Sc. 437, Hell.), лрεóν (AP), -@voç, -óvoç.
⚫ETYM Starting from the later attestation лрηóv (whencе лрεúv, лрáv), the plur.
лрwovεç, -αç could be explained as a diectasis of лршvεç; this would point to original
*лpηƑŵv or *ëpãƑóv (Schwyzer: 377). On the other hand, if we assume a pre-form
*лpúƑwv, épŵoves becomes regular, but лpηóv must then either be due to false
analysis, or an old ablaut variant of лpóν. A reconstruction *лpóƑwv is strongly
supported by лp@pα 'prow, bow of a ship', which can hardly be dealt with
separately. This goes back to *prh-ur-ih2, beside *prh-uon- giving лрóν; the
adjective is probably derived from the forebear of Skt. púrva- 'frontmost, earlier'.
Fur: 331 wonders whether лроúvoç. Bouvoúç is a variant, or a contamination of
лрóν and ẞovvóc.
лpáž, пpwкóç [f.] 'dewdrop' (Theoc., Call.). <IE *prōk- 'drop, sprinkle'>
•VAR Only plur. лpãкɛç.
⚫ETYM Formation like кλóч, ршлεç, τрáž, etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 2, Schwyzer:
424); thus, originally an agent noun “dripper, sprinkler” from a lost verb for
'sprinkle', which left traces in several derived adjectives, e.g. ►лɛpêvóç. For a parallel
of 'sprinkle' beside 'drop', cf. especially Skt. pŕsan- ‘spotted, speckleď, pṛṣatá- [m.]
'spotted gazelle' (Ved.), 'drop of water' (epic class.).
лpŵpa [f.] ‘forepart of a ship, prow, bow' (μ 230: gen. лpópηs, attributive to vηós). <IE
*prh3-u(e)r-ih₂ 'forepart of a ship'>
•VAR Ion. лpúρη, secondary after ïpúµvò.
ㄫTaiw
1245
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. кuαvó-лршроs 'dark-bowed' (Hom., B.),
-лppε (у 299, verse-final enlargement), -лрóïpa [f.] (Simon. 241), explanation
uncertain.
•Der лpάp-ã¤ε(v), -ŋ0ɛ(v) ‘from the bow, at the bow' (Pi., Th.); -ɛús [m.] ‘officer in
command at the bow' (X., D., Arist.), also PN (0 113); -átŋs [m.] ‘id.' (S., X.), to
épvµvýtηs, kʊßεvýτηs (Fraenkel 1912: 206) with -ατɩкóç 'concerning the prow'
(pap., Poll.), -αTɛúw (v.] 'to be in command at the bow' (Att., Hell.); -noia [n.pl.]
'uppermost points on starboard' (EM: лрчμvýσiα); ptc. aor. лрwрáσαντεç
kpotǹoavteç. ǹ dè µɛtaqopà àñò tŵv veŵv kai tñç ɛipɛσíaç 'making rattle, striking;
a metaphor from [the terminology of] ships and rowers' (H.), cf. Men. Sicyon. 421
Kassel.
•ETYM Apparently contracted from *лpáƑαp-ɩα or *лpáƒɛp-ια. The expected msc.
*лpáƑwv (cf. ñíwν: лíɛpα) is attested as лpóv. Discussion in Peters 1980a: 190f.,
who argues that a suffix -ɛipa is expected on the basis of лíεрα, лεлεрα, and that it
would yield the main attestation лр@рα. Actually, *лрóƑεр-дα would have to result
in лpшpα instead (which is also attested, but only as a weaker variant in the mss. and
pap.). However, in this case, лρшpa can hardly be explained, as there is no basis for a
pre-form in *-apia. Therefore, Peters argues that -- was introduced, like in the
presents in -noкW, -WoKW.
It is improbable that кvavo-лрóïpav (Simon. 241) preserves an old uncontracted
form *лрwεipαv (Hdn. 2, 410); see Peters l.c.
Apart from the suffix -n-, related *лрw-Ƒwv is formally comparable to Skt. púrva-
'foremost, earlier', ToB parwe 'first', OCS provò 'first' <*prh¸-uo-.
Borrowed as Lat. prōra, prōreta (from Ion. *лpwpητηs); see WH s.v.
лpŵtos [adj.] ‘foremost, first' (Il.). <IE *prh¸-to- (?) ‘first'>
•VAR Dor., Boeot. лpãτoç.
■COMP Very productive in compounding, е.g. лршτó-уovoç 'first-born' (epic poet.
Il.).
•DER 1. Superlativе лрóτ-σтα [adv.] 'first of all', -10τos (epic poet. Il.), Dor. (Thera)
лрάτστоç 'the very first' (Seiler 1950: 105). 2. лршτ-εov [n.] 'first prize, first rank'
(Att.); Eos of the first rank'. 3. -ɛúw 'to be first' (Att.) with the back-formation
лpwïɛúç epithet to λaós (Tim. Pers. 248). Several short names, e.g. IIpwt-ɛú¢ [m.]
Seagod (Od., etc.), -Tτéaç, -τíwv, Пpar-ívaç, -úλos, etc. (Bechtel 1917b: 387). On
Пpwtɛσí-λaos, -λɛws (II., etc.), see Risch 1937: $71a.
•ETYM Related to Skt. púr-va-, Av. paur-uua- <*prh¸-uo-, and Lith. pìr-mas < *prh3-
mo-, but with a suffix -to- as in tpítos, tétaptoç, etc. Dor. лρãτos is problematic,
because it seems to continue *prh₂-to- with a different laryngeal; in spite of DELG,
the two forms cannot be unified under *prH-. The postulated reconstruction *лрó-
aτos, which similarly could explain лршτоç, but not лраτоç, cannot have developed
out of *prH- in a regular way. Cf. Beekes 1969: 214f.
лταíш [v.] 'to nudge, crash into, stumble, err, have bad luck' (IA); rarely trans. 'to
knock over' (Pi. fr. 205, LXX). ◄PG?, IE? *pi(e)h₂-u-ie/o- ‘strike’▷

=== page 649 ===

1246
丌TáKa
•VAR Аor. лασαι, fut. лταíσw, also perf. (later Att., Hell.) лταιкα, pass. (late)
ntangdjval, ënTalgial.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially époσ-.
•DЕR лταчσμа (лрóσ-) [n.] 'push, fault, misfortune, defeat' (IA, Thgn.), лрóσлταιOLS
[f.] 'push, stumble, collision' (D. H.).
•ETYM Rhyming formations like лaíw, þaíw, and also -кvaíw may have influenced
лταíw (and vice versa); for the onset, cf. ►лτíσow, лτησow. The word may well be
Pre-Greek. Alternatively, Hackstein Glotta 70 (1992): 154-167 (see also on лτησσw)
reconstructs a present *pi(e)h₂-u-ie/o- on the basis of лταíw, Lith. pjauti 'to cut', and
Lat. paviō 'to pound, strike'.
лτάкα [acc.sg.f.] ‘hare' (A. Ag. 137 [lyr.]). <PG?, IE? *pieh2-k- ‘duck away, shy'▷
•VAR The nom. is unattested.
●Der éták-iç, -ido¢ [f.] ‘id.' (Com. Adesp. 1127), -tσµós [m.] ‘shyness' (ibd. 1128:
*лtaкíšw), -ádɩç [adv.] 'shy' (Theognost.); лтaкwpeïv. rtýσoeiv, dedoikévai ‘be
scared, fear' (H.), after oλywpɛiv, tiµiwpɛiv etc.
⚫ETYM Considered to be a root noun of the aorist лτǎкεïv (see лτñσσw), from a
paradigm nom. ►лτŵ§ < *pioh₂k-s, analogical gen. лτaк-óç. It seems, however, that
the whole complеx of лτάε, лтάкα, and лтшxóc is Pre-Greek in view of the
alternating root-final stops к/ X-
K/
лταкávα ‘boat mať used in boats called кávva (Poll. 10, 166). <PG?>
⚫DIAL LSJ gives лταкáλα oг лτανáka.
⚫ETYM No etymology; possibly Pre-Greek.
лτáρνvμαι [v.] 'to sneeze' (Hp., X.). <ONOM>
•VAR Rare and latе лτάруεται, лταípw, лτɛipw, лτépoμαi; them. aoг. лταρεv (since p
541), ptc. also лτарεíç (Нp., Arist.), лτáраντεç (Аrist.; uncertain).
•DER лταp-µóç [m.] 'the sneezing' (IA) with -μкóç 'causing to sneeze', -μкý [f.]
'sneezewort' (Dsc., Gal.), see Strömberg 1940: 85; лóроç ‘id.' (Hdn. Gr. 1, 191).
•ETYM Onomatopoeic word, probably related to Lat. sternuō ‘id.', OIr. sreod
'sneezing'; however, the reconstruction of a root *pster- remains hypothetical. Arm.
p'ŕngam, p'ŕnčem ‘to sneeze' is probably onomatopoeic; see Clackson 1994: 99. An
aspirate is found in the gloss åлoô¤ªрážασðαι· τò toiç µuktñpolv εiç τò εεw nov
лроéσеαι, άлоλáσai, poyxáσai. Kpñteç kaì Σáµuo (H.), with the same meaning as
Lat. stertō 'to snore'.
Strunk MSS 46 (1986): 221-242 assumes an ablauting n-present with the full grade
shifting between the root (Lat. sternuō) and the ending (hence лτáρучαι with a
zero-grade root).
лtéλaç [m.] ‘wild boar' (Lyc. 833, verse-final). <PG?>
•VAR Also лτελέa. σûç úïò Аaкwvwv 'boar (Lac.)' (H.).
•ETYM The ending is the same as in έλέcaç. A possible cognate would be ➤лτελεŋ
‘elm', but this leaves much unexplained. The connection with Lith. kiaūlė ‘swine',
kuilys 'breeding-swine', and with Skt. kirí- [m.] ‘boar', suggested by Merlingen 1956:
58, should also be rejected. Holthausen's connection with лελitvós, rεliós, etc.
i
!
t
atépvn
1247
(Holthausen IF 62 (1956): 152) is arbitrary. The word may well be Pre-Greek (note
initial л-).
лtɛλéa [f.] ‘elm tree' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Ion. -én, Epid. лελéα.
DIAL Myc. pte-re-wa.
⚫DER лTελε-IVOÇ ‘of an elm' (Att. and Del. inscr., Thphr.), -wv, -wvoç [m.] 'elm grove'
(gloss.). Пτɛɛós [m.] town in Thessaly, etc. (B 697 et al.).
•ETYM The suffix -έa is frequent in tree-names (cf. µŋλéa, itéa). The word ééλaç
'boar' is formally close, but the semantics are far off (Strömberg 1940: 140 adduces
MoHG Eberesche to prove that boars may live in elm-woods). Lat. pōpulus 'poplar'
cannot be related, since it deviates strongly in form and meaning; phonetically closer
is Lat. tilia ‘lime-tree'. For the variation л-: л-, cf. ñóλɛµos and ñóðɩç. Arm. t'ełi
‘elm' may have been borrowed from лελéα (Solta Sprache 3 (1956): 227" argued for
old etymological relationship), or both may have been borrowed from a common
source, like Lat. tilia (which was borrowed into Greek in λía. αïyɛɩpoɩ 'black
poplars' [H.]); see Clackson 1994: 169. Fur.: 226 assumes that it is a variant of µɛλíŋ
'ash'; he concludes that the word is Pre-Greek.
ntépis, -ews [f.] ‘fern, bracken' (Hell.). <GR➤
•VAR Also -íç, -ídos.
•COMP As a second member in Spu(0)-ëtɛpíç [f.] ‘oak fern' (Dsc., H.), Oŋλv-ntepís
[f.] 'female fern' (Thphr., Dsc.). With the same meaning лτέрov (also with Onλu-)
[n.] (Ps.-Dsc., Alex. Trall.); see Strömberg 1940: 40f.
⚫ETYM The original meaning must have been "feather plant", as it is related to
►лτεрóν; it was named after the form of the leaves (cf. MoHG Federkraut 'water
milfoil'). Likewise, MoHG Farn (OHG far(a)n, etc.) 'fern' can be equated with Skt.
parṇá-, Av. parɔna- [n.] ‘wing, feather, leaf. Alb. fier ‘fern' may be related as well,
possibly as a loanword, acc. to Mann Lang. 28 (1952): 40.
ntépvŋ [f.] ‘heeľ', also metaphorically of the lower part of several objects, etc. (epic
Ion. poet., Arist., Hell.). <IE *tpersneh, 'heel'>
•VAR Secondarily -vă (LXX).
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. ëεpvo-кoïíç [f.] ‘heel-pusher', nickname (middle and
new com.; see Wackernagel 1916: 196); *úлó-лtɛpvoç ‘under the heel' in ú´oëtεpv-íç,
-ídos [f.] ‘base, underlay' (Ph., Hero Bel.).
•DER лτερv-íç, -ídos [f.] 'foot of a bowl' (middle com.), -iw [v.] 'to hit with the heel,
trip one up, supplant someone out of his position, provide a shoe with a new heel'
(LXX, Com. Adesp.), to which -totńs [m.] (Ph.), -toµóç [m.] (LXX). Isolated and
semantically unclear is étépvíš, -ĭkoç [m.] ‘main stalk of a cactus' (Arist.); next to it
we find ►τépvaka. TĤS KÁKTOV TOû qutoũ kavλóv 'stalk of the cactus' (H.), s.v.
•ETYM Old designation of the heel: Lat. perna 'calf of the leg', Gm. (e.g. Go. fairzna
'heel'), possibly Hitt. paršina- 'buttock (?)' (= paršna-; with paršnāi- ‘to squat
down'), from IE *tpersneh₂. Beside these, we find Indo-Iranian forms with secondary
vowel length: Skt. párṣṇi- [f.], Av. pāšnā- [n.] ‘heeľ. The initial л- must reflect an

=== page 650 ===

1248
TEPÓv
original cluster, probably *tp-, i.e. *tpersn- (see Lubotsky 2006). Оn late лτέрvα
'ham', seе ►лéрva.
πεpva.
лτɛpóv [n.] ‘feather, wing, pinion', also metaphorically of feather- and wing-like
objects (Il.). IE *pet- 'fly'>
•COMP лτεро-чópos 'feathered, winged (A., E.), véó-лtɛpos ‘(swift-winged' (Pi.,
IA); on ►úлoëεtpídios s.v.
●DER 1. étɛpó-ɛis 'provided with feathers or wings' (epic poet. Il.); antonym ǎ-ëτεpo
(Od.), of μoç (as an opposite of εñεa étɛpóεvta); 2. лtepw-tós ‘id.' (IA), -tikós
'belonging to plumage' (VP); 3. -µα [n.] 'plumage' (A. fr., Pl. Phdr., etc.), rather
enlarged from лτεрóν than from лεрóðµà 4. πtepó-tns [f.] ‘winged condition'
(Arist.); 5. лτép-wv [m., n.] of an unknown bird (Com. Adesp.), -vis [m., n.] of a kind
of hawk (Arist.); 6. лτεp-óоμα (also with έк-σUV-) [v.] ‘to get wings, become
fledged', -ów 'to feather, wing' (IA), whence -wots [f.] ‘feathering, plumage' (Ar.,
Arist.). Next to it лτέpvě, -ňуoç [f.] ‘wing' (II.), often metaphorically like ëεpóv.
Often as a second member, е.g. τανú-лτερυε (Il.), also -лτέpvy-os (Simon.)
'spreading the wings'. From лτερуε are derived: 1. diminutive лτεрúу-ov [n.],
designation of several wing-like objects (Hp., Arist.); 2. -wбns 'wing-like' (Hp.,
Thphr.); 3. -wτós ‘provided with wings' (Arist.); 4. -wµa [n.] 'poultry, etc.' (late); 5.
лtɛpvy-í¶w (also with ava-, etc.) [v.] 'to move the wings' (Ar.); also -óoμαɩ, -ów
meaning unclear (Lesb. lyr., medic.), with aлo- 'to lose the wings' (Vett. Val.); ëεp-
úσow (also with Sia-, etc.) [v.] 'to flap with the wings' (Archil.[?], Hell.), perhaps
from лτεрóv.
⚫ETYM The word for 'feather' or 'wing' is derived from the verb for 'fly', represented
in Greek by ►лéτoμai, лτéσðαi. A good formal correspondence to лtɛp-óv <*pt-er-
is not found in the other languages: Skt. pátr-a- [n.] 'wing, feather', Lat. acci-piter,
-tris 'hawk', OHG fedara, ON fjoðr [f.] 'feather', etc. all go back to IE *petr- (which in
Greek is represented in úлoëεt̃pidíwv óvɛípwv 'winged dreams', Alcm. 23, 49). Some
connect Arm. t'er 'side' as if from *pter- (comparing t'ir 'flight' < *ptēr- and t'ř-čim
[v.] ‘to fly', aor. t'r-eay), but this is semantically dubious. A heteroclitic stem is found
in Hitt. pattar (also pittar) [n.], gen.pl. -an-aš. An n-stem is seen in Lat. penna [f.]
'feather, wing' <*pet-n-h₂ et al.
As for лτépvε, no convincing parallel for the suffix -vy- can be found in Greek
(öpτu and other bird names are too far off); connection with various words in other
IE languages has been suggested (see Frisk), but these are all unconvincing. The old
connection betwееn лтεрóν and Ru. peró [n.] 'feather', etc. cannot be substantiated;
the Slavic words have cognates in Skt. parná- [n.] 'wing, feather, leaf, etc., Lith.
sparnas [m] ‘wing, paddle(?), leaf, ToB paruwa [pl.] 'feathers', and others, from a
root *(s)per-.
ëτñµ¤ •VAR ëτηvós, atñolç. →nétopai.
лτńσow [v.] 'to duck (for fright)' (IA); sigm. aor. rarely trans. 'to frighten, drive away'
(E 40, Thgn.). <PG?, IE? *pieh₂-k- ‘duck (away), shy'➤
•VAR Also лτwσσw (Il., epic poet.), Aeol. (Alc.?) лτášw, fut. лτýžw (Att.), aor. étñžαɩ
(Il.), Doг. лτãžαι (Pi.), also them. aor. ptс. кατα-лтǎкáv (A. Eu. 252), perf. ëëtηxa
心
лTÍσOW
1249
(Att.), ëëτηka (LXX with v.l. -xa, late); also epic forms ptc. perf. лεлtnws (B 312, §
354, etc.), 3du.aor. кαtα-лτýtηv (© 136).
•COMP Also with prefix, especially кατα- and úло-.
•DER лτñžiç [f.] 'fright' (LXX), enlargement лτwσкáчw 'to duck, have fear' (A 372)
after similar ȧλvoká¼w (to ảλúσkw, ȧλúσow), ǹλaσкá(w; perhaps from *лτóσкw; the
v.l. лτwкášw must be after лτóε. Cf. Schwyzer: 708, Chantraine RPh. 57 (1931): 125,
Chantraine 1942: 338.
ETYM The epic forms лεлτηóç, кαταлτýτηу show that there was a root variant
without velar. A further cognate is лτоέw. The comparison with Arm. t'ak-čim,
aor. t'ak‘-eay ‘to hide oneself (Pedersen KZ 39 (1906): 342f.) is discussed by Clackson
1994: 169f. Photius gives лтεкáç. ntáž.
The root is extensively discussed by Hackstein Glotta 70 (1992): 136-165. According
to him, ToB pyāk-tsi 'to strike down' is related, which requires a reconstruction of
the root as *pieh₂(k)- (he thus rejects a root *pteh₂-k-). Greek has both *ptā- and
*ptāk- in ƒɛëtηŵç and лτñžαι, respectively (from the latter, лτησσш was derived;
another present is лτwσσw). Also cognate are лоãν <*pioh₂-eie/o- and лταíw ‘to hiť
<*pi̟eh₂-u- and, from other IE languages, Lith. piáuti ‘to cut, mow, harvest, torment'
and perhaps Lat. paviō from *pieh₂-u- (with loss of *i after initial p- or by
dissimilation against the second -į-).
There are two problems with this reconstruction: first, the semantic connection
between Tocharian 'to strike down' and Greek 'to frighten' is not evident, and
second, it neglects the evidence of лτшуóç 'beggar', which is clearly related and
shows a substrate alternation.
лtíλov [n.] ‘fluff, down, insect wing', metaphorically ‘leaf, etc.' (IA). <PG(V)►
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. лλó-vwτoç ‘with a fluffy back' (AP), tetpá-rtidos
'with four fluffy feathers' (Ar.).
⚫DER 1. πTIλ-WTÓç 'provided with лτíλα' (Arist., Att. inscr.); 2. -óoμaɩ, -ów [v.] 'to be
equipped with ëɩ.; to equip with ëɩ.' (late), whence -wots [f.] 'emergence of fluff
(Ael.), also of a disease of the eyelid and eyelashes (Gal.); лτíλoç 'disease of the
eyelids' (LXX, Gal.) is a back-formation on these words, whereas лíλλoç = lippus
(gloss.) has expressive gemination; 3. -woow [V.] 'to have a disease of the eyelids
(lashes) (Archyt.).
⚫ETYM The word лτíλоу was connected with лτéσða by Frisk, with a "hypocoristic"
suffix -o- (Chantraine 1933: 248f.). On Dor. чíλov (Paus. 3, 19, 6), see Bechtel 1921,
2: 319f. Fur.: 263 takes the alternation лτíλоv / чiλov as evidence for a Pre-Greek
word, and he further compares Lat. pilus. In support of this, one may note that an IE
pre-form *pth₂-ilo- does not look convincing.
лτíσow [v.] ‘to shell, grind grains by stamping' (IA). <IE *(t)pis- ‘stamp, smash'▷
•VAR Att. also лτÍттш; аог. лτíσαι, раss. лτσеñуα, perf. mid. εлτσal.
•COMP Rarely with prefix, like лεpɩ- and кatα-.
●DER étiσ-ávŋ [f.] (-avov [n.] Nic.) ‘peeled barley, barley groats' (Hp., com., pap.);
-µós [m.] ‘winnowing' (com.), -µα [n.] ‘peeled barley' (Str.; nɛpiñ[t]íoµata [pl.] sch.;
Jacobsohn KZ 42 (1909): 276), -15 [f.] ‘skin' (Gal.), -tɩkóç 'fit for shelling' (com.).

=== page 651 ===

1250
JITOEW
ntigow,oual
1251
•ETYM The word лíσσw is an old agricultural term, retained in several languages,
though exact matches of the Greek forms in л- are not found. Note the
correspondences ǎ-лτσ-τо 'unstamped' (Hp.) with Skt. piș-țá-, Lat. pis-tus
'smashed'. All other nominal and verbal forms are based on лτσ- as well, except for
the present лτíσσw, which was formed analogically after лλáσσш, лάσσш, etc. Nasal
presents are found in Skt. pi-ná-șți ‘to crush' (perf. pipéșa, pipișe), Lat. pī-n-sō ‘to
pound' (with secondary perf. pïns(u)i, next to pis-tor 'pounder, miller', etc.); Balt.
and Slav. have secondary formations, e.g. Lith. paisau, -ýti 'chop off ears of corn'
(beside primary pisù, -ti ‘to copulate'), Ru. pixáť ‘to thrust, stamp' (next to primary
pšeno 'millet' from *púšеn [ptc.] 'stamped'). On Greek лτ- against p- elsewhere, cf.
лτoέw [v.] ‘to frighten, scare', pass. 'to become shy, scared, passionately excited'
(Thgn.). <?>
•VAR epic étaέw (лτoiñµai Thgn. 1018), fut. лańow (AP), aor. лτo(1)ñoai (σ 340);
лτóαισ' (Sapph. 22, 14), έлτóaσεv (31, 6 codd., cf. Hamm 1957: $49b3), mostly pass.
лτо(1)ηеñαι (X 298); έлτoáðηs (E. IA 586 [lyr.]), perf. εлτо(í)ηµαι (Нes. Op. 447).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. Sɩa-, Èk-.
●DER 1. лto(í)ŋ-σis [f.] ‘excitement, passion' (Pl., Ph., NT); 2. лоía (epic -n, rarely
лτóŋ, -α) [f.] ‘fright, passion' (Hell.), лτα-ádηs (Hp.), -aλéos (Opp.) ‘scared,
frightened'.
•ETYM The verb лτoέw is a secondary formation, probably an iterative-intensive of
the primary verb retained in кataлtýtyv, nentyús (see on ëτñσσw). It goes back to
older *лτw-έw (cf. лτŵε); лτоιéш and other forms are derived from it by metrical
lengthening (cf. e.g. oλotós and лvoin).
Next to лτоεш, we find the rare лтоáш (see above), like for example лоváш next to
лоvέw (sее лεvo̟μat). The old combination with Lat. paveō 'to tremble' (Froehde KZ
22 (1874): 259ff.) is accepted by Merlingen 1956: 56, starting from IE *tpou-.
However, see Hackstein Glotta 70 (1992): 154-167, who reconstructs *ptoh₂-eie/o-; see
also on ►лτησσw.
todieopov
⚫ETYM Seе ►лÓλis, and further Ruijgh 1957: 77f.
лτópłoç [m.] 'sprout, shoot, young twig, branch' ((128). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Also лóρеoç· ëτóµ³oç (H.).
•COMP Rare and late as a second element, e.g. qλó-лopos loving offshoots'
(Nonn.). The assumption that лτóрðоs would have an older abstract meaning
'sprouting' in Hes. Op. 421 (e.g. Porzig 1942: 50) is unnecessary.
●DER лτopе-ɛïov [n.] ‘id.' (Nic.), -tos [m.] epithet of Poseidon (as promotor of
vegetation, quτáλoç, Chalkis Va).
=
•ETYM There is a variant лópеoç, and Arm. ort' ‘vine' may somehow be related, as
well. Fur: 317 attributes these matches rather to independent borrowing from a
common origin.
лτúоv [n.] 'winnowing shovel' (N 588, A., S. in Fr., Theoc.). <PG?(V)►
1
}
!
•VAR Аtt. лτέov, acc. to Ael. Dion. et al.
⚫DER Diminutive лτváрov [n.] (Hdn., EM) and díлτνоу· Kúлριоι μµétpov, oi dè tò
ημччédчvov measure (Cypr.), half a µέdɩµvoç² (H.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally (e.g. Curtius 1858: 498) compared with Skt. pávate, punáti ‘to
purify', e.g. of corn, and also with OHG fowen < PGm. *fawjan- 'to sieve, purify
corn' (Pok. 827), which supposes a secondary л-. If an old full grade is accepted for
лτεоν (only mentioned by grammarians, who label it Аttic), лтúоу could be
secondary after лтúш. However, the variation v/ɛ seems rather to point to Pre-Greek
origin (Fur.: 314).
лτúpoμaι [v.] 'to get scared, become shy' (Hp., D. S., Ep. Phil., Plu.); ȧло-лτúрш 'to
scare' (gloss.). <?>
•VAR Аoг. лτуρñvai (late).
•COMP Also with кατα-.
•Der лtuptiкóç ‘fearful, scared' (Arist., Str.), лτурµós as an explanation of лτоíα (H.,
Phot.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The initial agrees with лтησσw, лτoηеñvα, which is also close
in meaning (this connection is mentioned in Persson 1912(1): 429' and Merlingen.
1956: 56), while the ending recalls the semantic group ódúpoμαι, μúроμαι, etc.
However, лτúρоμual can hardly be a contamination of the two, contrary to what Frisk
proposed.
лtúoow, -oµai [v.] ‘to plead, fold (up)', med. ‘to fold around oneself (II.). <PG?>
•VAR Fut. лτúžш, -oμαι, aoг. лτúžαɩ, -ασðαι, pass. лτууеñуαι, лтvуñvaɩ, perf.
néntvyµai, ëntvykai.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àvα-, лερɩ-, лρоσ-.
●DER 1. étuкtós ‘folded' (Z 169 etc.), évêtý [f.] (Cod. Inst.), évêt-ís [f.] (AP, Gal.),
-íov [n.] (sch., Suid.) ‘tablet' (dissimilated from л-, see Schwyzer: 260); 2. лtúyµa
(ëρóʊ-, лɛpí-, etc.) [n.] 'fold, loop of a garment, compress' (E 315, E., Arist., medic.),
with (лроσ-)лτυyµáτ-tov [n.] 'compress' (medic.); 3. лτúčiç (also ȧvá-, diá-, etc.) [f.]
'folding, fold' (Hp., Arist.).
Further лúу-ε [pl.], acc. -aç, dat.sg. -í (Hom.), acc. -a (E. [lyr.]) [f.]; with
enlargement ëτvX-ǹ, mostly plur. -aí [f.] (post-Hom. poet.) 'fold, ply, layer', metaph.
'gorge, valley'; it also functions as verbal noun to лтúσσш, especially to the prefixed
compounds (e.g. ávaлtuxý to ávα-лτúσσш); as a second member in §í-, τpí-, ñoλú-
лτо (Il.), see Sommer 1948: 65f.), with transfer to the s-stems in nepɩ-rtuxýs
'folding around' (S.), §ɩ-лτvxýs (Arist.), etc.
From лτжη are derived: 1. лTUα-íç, -ídoç (úño-) [f.] 'layer, joint' (Plu.); 2. -tov [n.]
'folded table, etc.' (Hdn. Gr., pap.), -los = étuкtós (EM); 3. -wdns 'fold-like, ply-like'
(Arist.); 4. ПTvx-ía [f.] name of an island near Corcyra (Th.).
⚫ETYM Beside лúσσw, there are also relatively rare forms with -tt- (dia-ntúttw Pl.
Lg. 858е, poσ-ava- Arist.). Therefore, the -σσ- is perhaps rather a Ionism than a
strategy to avoid the co-occurrence of τ and ɩɩ in ëτútτw (Schwyzer: 319¹; cf. 755²).
As an old yod-present, лτúσσш goes back to *лтÚX-дw. It can be considered a
denominative from ïtúx-es.
T

=== page 652 ===

1252
πTŴW
The etymology is unclear: the connection with Skt. pyúkṣṇa- (only in the compound
pyúkṣṇa-veṣṭita-), which stems from Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 1: 277, is highly
questionable (see Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 173). Fur.: 318 considers the word Pre-Greek,
which may well be correct, although his connection with лʊкvós, etc. is not
convincing.
лτбw [v.] ‘to spew, spit' (Hom.). <IE *tspi(e)uH- 'spew, spit'>
●var Aor. étú-σaαɩ (Hom.), pass. лtv-σðñval, -ñvai (Нp.), fut. лτúσ-w, -oµαι (IA),
реrf. εлτυкα (late).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àño-, έK-, ¿V-.
•DER 1. áлó-, кaτά-лτστо 'worth spitting upon, abominable' (Anacr., trag., also
Аtt. prose); 2. лτúσis (also čк-, éµ-, ảvá-) [f.] ‘spewing' (Hp., Arist.); 3. лtvoµós [m.]
‘id.' (Hp.); 4. ëτúoµa (ěµ-, áñó-, kaτá-) [n.] ‘spittle' (Hp., Plb., LXX); 5. άño-лtvotýp
[m.] ‘spitter' (Opp.); 6. лτváç, -áðos [f.] designation of a venomous snake (Gal. et
al.); 7. лτú-aλov, -ɛλov [n.] (-os [m.]) ‘spittle' (Hp., Arist.); from there -aλwns
'spittle-like', -aλí(w, -ɛλíw 'to secrete spittle' with -aλioµós (-ελ-) [m.] (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Beside the present лтб-ш with long vowel (Schwyzer: 686, Chantraine 1942:
373), we find the aorist лτбσα with short vowel, just as in έpúσai, ápúσaɩ etc. This
stem is further found in лτÚσιç and, with analogical σ, in лтúσ-μα, -μóç, etc.
Since the onset has several variants in Indo-European cognates, it was often
concluded that no preform can be reconstructed, which was attributed to the
onomatopoeic origin of the word (e.g. E-M s.v. spuō). The sequence sp- is found in
Lat. spuō, Germanic (e.g. Go. speiwan), Lith. spiáuti, 1sg. spiáuju (from *spieuH-?),
and perhaps in Skt. (niḥ-)ṣṭhívati, if tv is dissimilated from p. v. No s- is shown by CS
pļúvati, ısg. pljujo̟, Arm. t'uk' ‘spittle' with t'k'-anem ‘to spew, spiť'; a different order
of sounds is attested in Alb. pshtyn (Mann Lang. 26 (1950): 387).
P
Greek ëɩ- could agree with Arm. t'; if for older л-, ОCS pljujo̟ and Lith. spiáuti can
be compared. Others prefer to derive the deviating forms from one preform. It seems
that a heavy cluster such as *tsp-accounts best for the forms attested.
Even within Greek, several variants are attested: άño-, ¿k-ññ-tí¶w (Hp., com., Arist.;
the simplex vτí(w is found only in EM), probably extended expressively, and
subsequently dissimilated (borrowed into Lat. as pytissāre; cf. Leumann 1959: 159¹);
Dor. л-qеúσdw = εллτów (Thеoc.); чúττя· лτúɛɩ and σíaι· лτúðaɩ, Пáqɩɩ (H.),
with oíaλov.
лτãµα •VAR „TwσIÇ. →ninτw.
лτáž, -кóç [m.] ‘hare' (P 676, Thphr., Theoc.), attributive to λaywós (X 310, Babr.), of
Orestes seeking refuge (A. Eu. 326), of a coward (Lyc. 944). ◄PG?, IE? *pteh₂-k- ‘duck
away, shy'>
•COMP As a second member in лoλv-лτáž ‘with many hares', ά-лτάε 'without hares'
(Call., Hdn. Gr.).
•DER лтwкάç, -άdos [f.] epithet of aïvia (Hom. Epigr.), of кúлɛpoç (Simm.), as a
substantive referring to birds (S. Ph. 1093).
⚫ETYM The original meaning must have been "who ducks away, the shy one", an
agent noun besidе лτóσσш, лτуσσш; this meaning still filters through in лτwкάç and
}
1
miyń
1253
is also possible for лτóε in certain attestations (e.g. X 310). A broader use of лτáε is
also suggested by the various explanations in H.: лtŵkes. deiλoi, λaywoí, dopкádɛç,
λaqoɩ, vɛßpoí. The alternation к/ X evidenced by лτшõós ‘beggar' points to
substrate origin; cf. also on лτάкα and лτησσш (where an alternative is
mentioned).
лτWoow⇒лτĤoow.
лtwxós [m., f.] ‘beggar', also [adj.] 'begging, poor' (Od.). <PG?(V), IE? *pteh₂-(k-) ‘duck
away, shy'▸
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. лτшуo-лоós 'drawing beggarly characters' (Ar.),
‘making beggars' (Plu.), úñép-лtwxos 'very poor' (Arist.), see Sommer 1948: 170³.
•DER лтWX-коç 'beggarly' (Att.), -εiov [n.] 'almshouse' (Cod. Iust.), -εúw [v.] 'to beg'
(Od.) with -ɛía, Ion. -nin [f.] 'beggary' (IA), -iw 'to make a beggar' (LXX).
•ETYM ëɩwɣóç is a formation in a velar like ˜τŵĚ, ►лτŵσσW (see s.v. and on
►лτоέw). It seems that its aspiration cannot be explained in an IE framework (there
is no direct connection with the much later perfect εлηα). Since it is highly
probable that лτó§, лτwкós hare' is related, we are dealing with a typical Pre-Greek
alternation к/ X.
nýavoç →kÚazios.
лúαρ →лóç.
лʊуń [f.] 'behind, rump' (Archil.). <PG?>
•COMP Several compounds, е.g. лυуо-στóλоç 'decorating the rump' (Hes.), see
Martinazzoli Par. del pass. 15 (1960): 209ff., кατá-лʊуoç (H., Phot.) with -луóτερoç,
-лuуóτατоs (Sophr., Epigr. Gr.), and -лúушv, -wvos [m.] 'voluptuous, lewd' (Arist.);
[f.] кατα-лúуαιvα (Att. amphora), see Fraenkel Glotta 34 (1955): 42ff. with literature);
on the insect name лʊуo-λªµïíç (Аrist.), see Strömberg 1944: 13f.
⚫DER 1. Diminutives лʊу-íov [n.] (Tab. Defix.), -ídiov [n.] (Ar.); 2. substantive лʊу-
alov [n.] 'buttocks' (Hp., Arist.), -ɛwv, -ñvos [m.] ‘buttocks, arse' (Hippon. 92), after
кɛvɛwv, cf. Masson ad loc.; 3. adverb -ŋdóv 'with the tail foremost, rump to rump'
(Arist.), 1σTí '?' (Hippon. 92), cf. Masson ad loc.; 4. -iw [v.] 'to inculate, sodomize'
(Ar.) with -чoµa (Theoc.). Hypostasis ¿µ-лúy-α [n.pl.] 'buttocks, region of the
buttocks' (pap. Iª).
•ETYM A slang word, completely avoided in epic poetry and higher literature
(Wackernagel 1916: 225f.). It has no convincing etymology. Connection with Skt.
pūga- ‘multitude, mass', etc. is phonetically fine, but the semantics are not
compelling (see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. and below on лúvvoç). Holthausen IF 20
(1906-1907): 329 connects лúε, лучý, like MoHG Steiß 'rump' beside stoßen 'to
bump', which in turn is formally difficult because of the long vowel of лüуŃ.
Differently, Bezzenberger BB 27 (1902): 176f. (to ►лúμаτоç, etc.; s.v.). Connections
with Germanic by Holthausen KZ 74 (1956): 244 are to be rejected. The word лuуń
could well be Pre-Greek, due to the variation ū / ŭ, but it is not mentioned by Fur.

=== page 653 ===

1254
ÚBoual
1255
=
лvyµý [f.] ‘fist, fist-fight' (Il.); as measure of length, 'the distance from the elbow to the
knuckles', equivalent to 18 Sáкτulo (Thphr., Poll.). <IE? *puk-, pug- ‘sting'>
•DER лvуματоç 'as large as a л., dwarf-like' (Hdt., Arist.), nom.pl. "the fistlings",
name of legendary people of dwarves (I 6, Hecat., etc.); лvуμ-кóç 'belonging to a
fist-fight' (An. Ox.); name Пvyµãç [m.] (Chantraine 1956a: 18). On Пvyчaλíwv,
probably a popular adaptation of a foreign word, see Ruijgh 1957: 136.
лυуúv, -óvoç [m.] measure of length, 'the distance from the elbow to the first finger-
joint', equivalent to 20 Sáкtvλo (Hdt., X.); from this уoúσoç ‘one л. long' (к 517 =
A 25, Arat.), probably analogical (Risch 1937: 125), since *лuуovт- (cf. Schwyzer: 526)
is not probable; regular лuуov-taños ‘id.' (Hp., Thphr.); ïúêtηs [m.] ‘'fist-fighter'
(Xenoph., Pi., Att.) with лʊкт-ɩкóç ‘belonging to fist-fight(ers), brave in fist-fighting'
(Att.), -oσúvŋ [f.] 'skillfulness in fist-fighting' (Xenoph.), see Wyss 1954: 31; -ɛúw [v.]
'to be a fist-fighter, have a fist-fight' (Att., Boeot.) with -ɛvσiç, -evτns (gloss.), -εtov
(Suid.); also with analogical A-extension -aλɛúw [v.] (Sophr.), -aλiw (Anacr.) 'id.'.
лú [adv.] ‘with the fist, in a fist-fight' (especially epic poetry, Il.); derived from it
лvy-µáxos [m.] ‘fist-fighter', -µaxέw, -µaxia, -íŋ (Hom., epic poet.), a univerbation
from ïò‹ µá××σðat; cf. Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 180.
⚫ETYM The above words are all built on a root лу-, which was probably both verbal
and nominal. As parallels for лvу-un, primary formations like ►лaλáµn, otiyµý, and
Spaxun could be adduced. The form лу-óv recalls ȧyкóv and layov, the first
perhaps being verbal, the last probably nominal (see on λayaíw). The form лúк-
τηs, too, can be either primary or secondary, whereas for лúε a nominal origin seems
most probable (see Schwyzer: 620); cf. still „úž· лvуµń (H.).
A corresponding 1-derivative is seen in Lat. pug-il [m.] 'fist-fighter', an n-formation
in pug-nus [m.] ‘fisť (pugnāre, pugna are secondary derivations). Thus we arrive at
an isogloss pug- ‘fist' between Latin and Greek. This etymon has been further
connected with Lat. pungō, pupugi ‘to sting' (see WH s.v. pugil), for which we would
have to assume a specialisation 'to sting' > 'to sting with clenched fist and knuckles
stretched out forward', i.e. 'to box'. The word pug- 'fist' could be a suffixless agent
noun, originally * "the stinger, the boxer". The meaning 'to sting' can still be seen in
Lat. pūgio ‘dagger'. The same meaning is found in ►лεúкη, but this word is probably
not related, since it has a voiceless stop к.
лvбapíw [v.] 'to fling with the foot, hoof (App. Prov.), acc. to EM = λaкτíčɛɩv, acc. to
H. = tò µǹ ávéxɛoðaí tivos, áλλ' ánoëndãv, xadenaivɛv 'to leap off, be angry'; with
àло- (Ar. Eq. 697), Sia- (Com. Adesp.), both with ō (metrically conditioned?). <?>
•VAR -aλíw (Suid.).
●der лvdapioµós = dvoxépeia (Zon.).
•ETYM A popular expressive formation in -apíšw (-aλí(w), further isolated. Grošelj
Živa Ant. 3 (1953): 205 compared Lat. pudet (if from 'strikes down, is struck down'),
Gr. ►σnɛúdw, and Lith. spáudžiu, spáusti 'to press'. Cf. WH under tripudium, with
further literature.
лúɛλoç [f.] ‘water-trough' (with soaked corn? See τ 553, where grain is washed), 'bath-
tub' (Hp., com., pap.), ‘coffin' (Hell.), cf. Schulze 1892: 515 and Schulze 1933a: 380¹.
<PG?>
•VAR Hell. and latе лúαλоç.
•DER лVÉλ-lov [n.] 'coffin' (Crete, Diogenian.), -ís (-aλíc), -ídoc [f.] ‘id.'; also 'setting
of a jewel, eye-socket, etc.' (Att., Hell.); -ódns 'trough-like, hollow' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM Sometimes thought to be related to лλúvw through dissimilation from *лλv-
Eλos (cf. Kretschmer Glotta 6 (1915): 308; Renehan Class. Rev. N.S. 18 (1968): 133).
However, although the suffixal variation -ɛλos/ -aλos could perhaps be explained,
the etymology with лλúvw is almost certainly wrong: it is very likely that лúɛλoç is a
Pre-Greek word.
лvετíα →лÓç.
лvðµýv, -évos [m.] 'bottom of a vessel, the sea, etc.', 'ground, base, underlay, foot (e.g.
of a cup), plant, i.e. root-end, stick, stem' (epic since II., also Hell. and late prose),
‘the lowest number (base) of an arithmetic series' (Pl., etc.). <IE *b¹ud¹-m(e)n-
'bottom'>
•COMP Infrequently as a second member, e.g. à-лúðμεv-os bottomless, footless'
(Thphr.), see Sommer 1948: 99; also (gramm.) à-лúеµηу ‘id.' (Theognost.), etc.
without the thematic vowel.
⚫DER Diminutive леµév-чov [n.] (pap.), -кóç 'belonging to the base', -έw [v.] 'to
form a base' (late).
•ETYM The formation of лvеµýν is identical to λчýv and ñoчýv (it is not productive
in Greek, see Chantraine 1933: 174). The form ле-μηу agrees with Skt. budh-ná-
[m.] 'bottom, ground, foot, root', from IE *bud"-. The suffixes match, if one derives
budh-na- from *bhudh-mn-o- (where the m was lost at an early stage). In Germanic,
*bhudh became PGm. *bud- (seen in OE bodan, MLG bödem(e), etc.); then, after mn
>n, *bud-n- became *butt-> bot(t)- according to Kluge's Law (seen in OE botem >
MoE bottom), ON botn; we also find evidence for PGm. *bub- (OHG bodam, OS
bothme, ME bothme). The developments in Germanic, including the forms with þ,
have now been explained in detail by Kroonen ABäG 61 (2006): 17-25. Metathesis
occurred in Lat. fundus 'bottom, etc.', MIr. bond, bonn 'sole, basis' <*bund"o- < PIE
*bud"nó-. On лúvdač, see s.v.
лúðo̟µα [v.] to putrify, decay' (II.). <IE *puH- ‘rot’>>
•VAR Only pres. stem except кατanénuða. kateppúŋka has flown down' (H.);
further causative лúеw, fut. πúσw, aoг. лÑσα (лúσαt Call.) 'to cause to rot', both also
with кατα- (II.); on the date of the attestations see Wackernagel 1916: 133.
•DER We further find лúоν, лúоs [n.] 'purulence' (Hp., Arist.); as a second member
in σαρкó-лvov [n.] 'the festering of flesh' with -лvóðηs (Нp.); adjectives, e.g. µ-
лоç 'festering, full of festering ulcers' (Hp., Att.) with έµлvóοµα [v.] 'to fester'
(Нp.); лvеεdóvεç [f.pl.] 'festering ulcers' (Hell.), after σηлεdóv, etc.
Denominatives with prefix: ¿к-, ¿µ-, ảлo-, dia-лvéw (-éqµαi), -íʊkoµai (late -íʊkw)
'to fester', with -nú-nois, -qua, -nuatikós, -ntikós, -кós (Hp., medic.); late simplicia:
nú-nois, -ntikós (Aret., Gal.).

=== page 654 ===

1256
TÚKa
•ETYM Beside the 0-enlargement in лб-еоµα, -еw (cf. ßpí-еw, πλ½-Оw, etc.;
Schwyzer: 703), which can also underlie лúσw and лõσαɩ, Sankrit has a yod-present
puyati 'to rot' with a back-formation púya- [m., n.] ‘festering, pus' (thus púya- is not
identical with лúov). Baltic has a nasal present Lith. pūnù and pūvù (i.e. pu̟vù) ‘id.';
in Germanic, we find an isolated ptc. ON fúinn 'rotten'. The nouns лúoν and лúOÇ
go back to an unextended primary verb; they have their closest agreements in Arm.
hu, gen. huoy (o-stem) ‘festering blood', and in Lat. pūs [n.] (from *puH-os). Further
related are e.g. Lat. pūteō ‘to roť, pŭter, -tris, -tre 'rotten', Go. fuls 'rotten'. Here also
belongs ►лóç 2 'beestings', s.v.
лúкα [adv.] 'dense, solid', metaph. ‘careful, sensible' (Hom.). <?>
•DER We further find лкá(w, Dor. -άodw (Theoc.), aor. лuкáσ(σ)αɩ, pass. -σēñval,
perf. med. лεлúкaσµɑɩ, quite rarely with лεpɩ-, etc., 'to tighten, enclose tightly,
encase compactly, cover' (epic poet., late prose); thence лúкãσµа [n.] 'encased,
covered object' (Sm.); adjective лкνóç, еpic and lyr. also лUкɩvóc, 'dense, solid,
compact, numerous, strong, brave, clever' (Il.). This often occurs as a first member,
е.g. πкvó-σαρкoç 'with solid flesh' (Hp., Arist.).
From лкvóç are derived лυкV-óτηs [f.] 'density, closeness, etc.' (IA), -áкiç =
„oλλákıç (Arist.), -ów [v.] 'to make dense, tighten, etc.' (IA) with -wμa, -wois,
-wtikós; -ášw [v.] 'to be numerous' (EM, gloss.). As a first member ſtukɩ- in äukɩ-
µndýs (-µýdns) = µýdea лvкvá (г 202, 208) Exwv, 'with a dense mind, considerate,
sensible' (a 438, h. Cer., Q. S.), see Bechtel 1914 s.v. Оn ►ǎµлε, see s.v.
⚫ETYM The forms лúкα : „ʊкvóç : лvкi-µŋdýs form a system; лúкα : ſtuкvós can be
especially compared with Oauá : ►áµvoc, which are also semantically close. The
form лUкɩvóç may, acc. to Schwyzer: 490, have been formed analogically to лúкα and
лкνóç, after еαμvóç, áðɩvóç, etc. Szemerényi's theory (Szemerényi 1964: 82ff., 87ff.)
that лuкvós and άuvos are syncopated from лUкivós and *¤áµuvos should be
rejected.
Further analysis remains hypothetical. The connection of ǎµлvε with Av. pus-ā-
'diadem' is highly doubtful; the same holds for a primary verb IE *puk- ‘to fasten,
etc.' (Pok. 849), from which лúкα was considered to be a denominative (Schwyzer:
734). Greek only has a secondary verb лкáčш. Alb. puth 'kiss' and puthtohem 'to
clothe tightly, string oneself, embrace' are unrelated.
In sum, the evidence for IE *puk- (Pok. 849) remains meager. Fur.: 317 assumes that
лкVÓç, etc. are Pre-Greek, but this assumption, too, is based on scanty evidence.
лUкτη •VAR Also, -τíov, -τíç. →лτúσσw.
лvλɛwv, -ɛñvoç [m.] 'wreath' (Alcm., Call. fr., Pamphil. apud Ath.). <PG?(S)►
•VARлUλóv (H.), also лúλууεç· αi év tŋ ëdpa tpíxɛç. kaì ïovλoɩ, þóσtpvxol, kikivvol
'the hair/wool in the seat (?); down, locks of hair, ringlets' (H.).
⚫ETYM The formation of лυλεóv and лúλууεç has been compared with that of лod-
ɛwv, Avxv-ɛwv and wµ-ɩyyɛç, λá-tyyɛs respectively. On this basis, a pre-form
*лúλoç has been assumed. This *лúλoç is then connected with Skt. pulaka- [m.pl.]
‘erection or bristling of the hairs of the body', pula- ‘id.' (Lex.), and pulastí(n)-
'wearing the hair straight', which point to <*pula-. From Iranian, Kurd. pūr 'hair of
Пúνdаž, -αкоç
1257
the head' is adduced, and from Celtic MIr. ulcha 'beard', ul-fota 'with long beard.
However, Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 151 doubts the connection between the Greek and the
Sanskrit words, and the whole remains rather uncertain. In fact, the suffix -ɩyyɛç
may even point to a Pre-Greek origin for this etymon.
лúλŋ [f.] ‘wing of a door, gate', mostly plur. 'door, gate', especially of town gates, gates
of a camp and the like (II.); 'entrance, access, bottleneck, etc.', also as a TN (Pi.,
Emp., IA). <PG?>
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. лvλ-ápτηs [m.] 'gate-closer', epithet of Hades, also
as a PN (Hom.), where the second member is related to ap- in ȧpapíσкw, with a
univerbating suffix -τ- (Bechtel 1914 s.v., Fraenkel 1910: 31); лUλ-wpóc 'gate-keeper,
guard' (II.), epic лvλă-wрóç, Hdt. Tuλ-oupóç, also H. лuλ-aυpós (Dor.), -ɛupós
(Ion.); on the compositional vowel and the second member see on ►ópáш; εлτά-
лλоç 'with seven gates' (Il., epic, lyr.); TN εpμo-лúλαɩ [pl.] (Simon., Hdt., etc.),
called IIúλai by Attic orators and others, cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 267.
⚫DER 1. Diminutive лvλ-íç, -ídoç [f.] (IA); 2. -óµaτα [n.pl.] 'gate' (A, E.), an extension
(Chantraine 1933: 186f.); 3. -ɛwv (late), -óv (Arist., Hell.). -(e)wvoc [m.] 'gate-space,
gateway, gate-building'; 4. IIvλ-ätɩç, -180c [f.] 'belonging to Пúλať (S. [lyr.]), -aïtıç,
-dos [f.] 'belonging to a gate' (Lyc. 356), perhaps for IIvλãτç; cf. Redard 1949: 10
and 212; 5. évλaños belonging to a gate' (late), 'belonging to Пúla (Demeter; Call.);
PN Пúλatos (B 842); Пvλaía, -í½ [f.] epithet of the amphictyonian meeting in IIúλat
(IA); derived from Пvλaía: Пvλataσtaí [m.pl.] originally *"members of the Пvlaía"
(on the formation Fraenkel 1910: 175ff.; hardly correct Bechtel 1921, 2: 655),
metaphorically 'mountebank, liar' (Phot., Suid.; Rhod. acc. to H.); probably also
Tлλαчкóç like a conjurer' (late); 6. Denominative verb лvλ-óоμat 'to be provided
with gates' (Ar., X.).
ETYM As opposed to inherited Оúрα, лúλη is without etymology. It is probably a
technical loanword, like many other architectural terms (e.g. µέyapov); possibly of
Pre-Greek origin.
лúµɑtos [adj.] ‘utmost, last' (Il.). <?►
ETYM A frozen superlative without correspondences outside Greek. A remote
connection with Skt. púnar 'back, again, further' has been proposed, but this is
unlikely. It has been argued that the preposition άлo has a variant *pu, but the
intermediate form άл, which is attested in Arc.-Cypr., Lesb., and Thess., may have
arisen phonetically from άло. See also лúvvoç and ►лρчµvóç.
лúvdaž, -akoç [m.] 'bottom of a vessel' (Pherecr., Arist. et al.), metaph. ‘hilt of a
sword' (S. Fr. 311). <?>
⚫VAR ȧлvdáкwτоç· àлúеµεvoç 'without bottom' (H.).
ETYM The word лúvdaε is formed like кáµαč, лívαč, στúpаž, etc.; it further recalls
Lat. fundus with the same meaning, and so it is close to лvеµýv. However, the medial
-v8- for expected -v- is highly problematic: it cannot be explained as a regular
development (pace Schwyzer: 333); cf. on -uß- in ►őµßpos. Likewise, initial π- for
expected q- is puzzling (since it was no longer followed by 0), and most explanations
offered (reshaping after лvßµýv; a borrowing from a Germano-Macedonian loan

=== page 655 ===

1258
moveávoual
word [Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934): 115ff.; cf. on лúруoç), or a borrowing from
Macedonian [Pisani Rev. Int. ét. balk. 3 (1937): 18ff.]) are not convincing. The suffix
-aк- is typical for Pre-Greek words; of course, the suffix may have been taken over
from Pre-Greek words, but this seems to have occurred only rarely (the word is not
discussed by Fur.). If an inherited Indo-European form was adapted to Pre-Greek,
this could explain л- and -v8-, and the connection with Lat. fundus, etc. could be
upheld.
лvvðávoµai [v.] 'to find out, learn, ask, inquire, investigate' (Il.); act. лεúðш, лɛñσaɩ to
announce, cite' (Crete). <IE *bheud" - "become awake or attentive' >>
•VAR Epic also лεúеоμаι (which was metrically easier, see Chantraine 1942: 111, 282,
308), fut. лεúσo̟µα, them. aor. лvеéσðαι, redupl. opt. лεлúðОτо, perf. лέñvoµai.
COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àvα-, εк-, лро-.
⚫DER With zero grade: 1. лúστç [f.] 'questioning, inquiry, tidings' (Att., A.) with
nvotɩ-áoµai [v.] ‘to interrogate' (Plu., Phot., H.); 2. лúσµa [n.] 'question,
interrogation' with -μаτкóç 'interrogative, asking' (late); 3. лσ¨τоÇ (EM, Eust.),
always as a second member, or in prefixed compounds, е.g. ǎ-лσ¨τоç, àνá-лvσTOS
(Od.).
With full grade: 4. лɛvðó [f.] ‘tidings' (A. Th. 370); 5. лeñσiç (àvá-) [f.] 'information'
(Ph., Plu.), older ëúσtɩç, cf. Fraenkel Glotta 32 (1953): 27 with literature; 6. лεvðŃv,
-ñvos [m.] 'spy' (Luc., Arr.), see Solmsen 1909: 143;
7. Adjective ëɛvotкóç ‘interrogating' (A. D., Ph.); 8. As a second member -лεvеŃs,
after the stems in -ɛç (Schwyzer: 513), е.g. ȧ-лεvе-ns 'uninvestigated, unaware' (Od.);
9. qiλó-ñevo-tos (Phot., Suid.), -τηs (Ptol.) 'who loves questioning' with -лεvoτέw,
-лεVστíα (Hell.).
•ETYM The full grade thematic present лεúеoμαι has exact morphological matches in
several languages: Skt. bódhati, med. -te 'to watch, perceive, understand, Av.
baodaiti, -te 'id.', also 'to smell', the Germanic group of Go. ana-biudan 'to order,
arrange', faur-biudan 'to forbid', ON bjóða 'to offer, present, make known', and in
Slavic, e.g. OCS bljusti, 1sg. bljudo 'to preserve, guard, observe', Ru. bljustí, isg.
bljudú 'to observe, perceive'; all go back to a thematic present PIE *bheud-e/o- 'to
observe, be awake'. The deviating meaning of the Germanic verbs agrees with the
(probably secondary) active Cret. лεúеw, and it is related to an old opposition of
diatheses; a corresponding meaning is shown e.g. by the Skt. causative bodháyati 'to
wake up, instruct, inform'. The meaning 'to find out, ask' is a Greek innovation. An
exact agreement is found between (ε-) лúеovτo and Skt. budhánta, and these are in
origin identical; a complete formal match is also found between (ǎ-) лστoç, Skt.
buddhá-, and Av. hupo.bus-ta- 'well scented'; likewise, between лÚστ and Skt.
buddhi [f.] insight, intelligence, spirit', and between (ȧ-)лεvеns and Av. baodah-
[n.] 'observation'. However, in all these cases we have to reckon with independent
innovations. A nasalized present like лvеávoμat is also found in Lith. bundù, inf.
bústi 'to wake up' (suffixed caus. búd-inu, -inti) and in Celtic, e.g. OIr. ad-bond- 'to
give notice, announce'. Here, too, original identity is made doubtful by the strong
productivity of these formations.
:
:
1
MÜóg 2
лúvvoç [m.] · ó лρwкτóç ‘anus' (H.). <PG?►
:
1259
⚫VAR Besides лouviášelv. saidikoïç xρñσðαι. лоúvov yàp ó Saктúλoç (= anus) (H.).
⚫ETYM The remote similarity with ►лvуý, Skt. putau 'the two hindmost parts' (only
Lex.), Latv. pun(i)s ‘lump, bump', Lith. putà [f.] 'foam-bubble' has attracted
attention, but see Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. putau. In view of its semantics and lack of
certain cognates, the word may rather be Pre-Greek.
лúžoç [f.] ‘box tree, box wood' (Arist., Hell.). <LW Italy>
•DIAL Myc. pu-ko-so (cf. Scardigli Minos 6:2 (1960): 1f.)
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. лapá-užoç ‘inlaid with л.' (Cratin.).
●DER 1. лuž-íov [n.] 'writing-table (made of л.)' (com.); 2. -íç [f.] 'box (made of π.)'
(Hell.); 3. -ídtov [n.] diminutive of лužíov and лužíç (Ar., pap.); 4. лúž-ɩvoç [adj.]
'made of 11., 1.-colored' ( 269, Att.); 5. -ívɛoç [adj.] ‘id.' (AP); 6. -wdns [adj.] ‘1.-
like', of the color (Dsc.); 7. -(ε)wv, -(ε)wvos 'box tree grove' (gramm.); 8. -í\w [v.] ‘to
bе л.-colored' (medic.); 9. IIužoÛç, -oûvτoç [m.] river and town in Lucania, in Latin
Buxentum (Krahe Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 2 (1950-1951): 233 with literature); perhaps
also 10. IIvčíτng [m.] river near Trapezus in Asia Minor (Arr., etc.), see Redard 1949:
175.
⚫ETYM Unconvincing attempts by Scardigli Sprache 6 (1959): 220ff. (extensive
treatment with literature), who derives it from Asia Minor (but ultimately from IE
*bhHu- 'grow'; cf. qúw and Arm. boys 'plant'), and by Carnoy Ant. class. 24 (1955):
22 and Carnoy REGr. 69 (1956): 284 (who connects IE *bheugh- 'bend'). A further
counterargument against an origin in Asia Minor is adduced by Fur.: 157, who
stresses that the tree is at home in Italy, not in Asia Minor or Greece (Schrader-
Nehring 1917 under Buxus). Therefore, we are rather dealing with a loanword from
Italy.
The forms „úžos, -ís, and -ɩvov were the source of Lat. buxus (or both are
independent borrowings; see Fur. 157), Lat. pyxis, and Lat. pyxinum (see WH s.vv.
with further literature); the modern European forms (MoFr. buis, MOHG Büchse, E
box, etc.) were in turn borrowed from Latin.
лúоν1 'pus'. VAR Also лúоç. ú.
лóç 2 [m.] ‘animal milk, first milk after birth' (com.). <IE? *puH- rot, pus'>
•VAR Also лúov (Emp.), лúaр (Ael. Dion.), лúαç (H.) ‘id.'.
•DER Besides we find лuɛτíα, with contraction лuτíɑ, and with vowel metathesis
лτúα [f.] 'clotted milk, rennet' (Arist., Hell.), from *лυετóç, which relates to лÓç
like nayɛtós to náуoç, etc. (thus Schwyzer: 501; differently Scheller 1951: 52).
•ETYM Connection with Skt. púṣyati ‘to thrive' < *pu-s- ‘swell' is improbable.
Probably originally identical with лúov, лúоç ‘pus' (s.v. ►лúðоμαι), but with gender
and accent after òpós or tupós, which belong to the same semantic field. The by-
forms лúαр and лúαç (if their tradition is correct) may have been formed after cap,
лαρ, and äλαç, кpέaç respectively. Both the substance and its properties (smell,
fermentation, etc.) may have caused the transference of meaning from 'pus' to 'milk':

=== page 656 ===

1260
MÚnnaE
expressions for 'congeal, getting sour, ferment', and also for 'rotting', affect each
other now and then: Skt. śara- [m.] 'sour cream', also śáras- [n.] ‘skin on cooked
milk', from the verb 'to break' in Skt. śṛṇáti, ►кɛpaïw, with a ptc. śīrṇá- ‘rotten,
spoiled'. However, the other example given by Frisk, Lat. caries 'decay', Lat. colostra
'beesting', probably does not belong to that root (cf. De Vaan 2008 s.v.).
лúллaž [excl.] exclamation of admiration (Pl., Com. Adesp.). <ONOM▷
•DЕRлαллάw (Cratin. 52).
⚫ETYM The word лúллαε is an exclamation of onomatopoeic character; ultimately, it
could be Pre-Greek.
лũρ, лépóç [n.] 'fire' (Il.). <IE *peh₂-ur, ph₂-uen-s 'fire'>
DIAL Myc. pu-ka-wo /pur-kawoi/?
•COMP Many compounds, е.g. лup-kaïά, Ion. -ïǹ [f.] 'fireplace, pyre' (II.), from *лup-
kaf-tá, a compound of лup and кαíw (aor. кañσαι) with a suffix -tä-, the accent
being the same as in σлodiá, ávеpaкiá, etc. (cf. Scheller 1951: 93 with a different
interpretation), see also Myc. pu-ka-wo above; лup-pópos 'fire- or torch-bearing,
-bearer' (Pi.), later also лupo-opópos (cf. Schwyzer: 440); лupɩ-yɛvýç 'born, worked in
fire' (E., etc.); ä-лup-oç ‘untouched by fire, without fire' (II.); on лʊρ-лoλέw see
►лελоμα; oп луρ-αúστηç, еetc. sеee αw 2; on лpiŃкηç s.v.
●DER A. nouns: 1. лépá [n.pl.] ‘watch-fires' (II.), dat. лupoîç (X.), originally the plur.
of лp, with transition to the o-stems and shift of accent (cf. Egli 1954: 18 and 22f.); 2.
лup-á, Ion. -ý [f.] ‘fireplace, pyre' (Il.); 3. ►лupσós (see also s.v.) [m.], plur. also -σá
[n.] ‘firebrand, fire-signal (with remarkable oxytonesis), -σwdns 'firebrand-like' (E.
[lyr.]), -σɛúw [v.] ‘to ignite, give a fire-signal (E.; X.), -oeia, -oevtýp, oevtýs (Hell.),
-σíτηs 'fire-color' (Philostr.); 4. лup-ɛtós [m.] ‘burning heat, fever' (X 31), perhaps
after vioετós (Porzig 1942: 245); thence лup-έσσw, Attέττw, aor. -έža; adjectives
-ƐKTIKÓç; -ɛtiάw, -εταívw, -ετwdηS, -ÉTIOV, -εTIкÓ; 5. лup-εĩα, Ion. -ñïa [n.pl.]
'lighter, firesticks' (h. Merc.), not from лupη 'pуrе' as per Zumbach 1955: 14; 6. лρ-
ía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] ‘vapor bath, steam bath, etc.' (Ion., Arist.), 'fishing by torchlight'
(Arist.), -táw ‘to prepare a vapor bath, foment, warm' (Hp.), whence -íaμa, -íaσiç,
-laτηp, -ατpiov (Scheller 1951: 55); also -ɩáτη [f.] 'warmed animal milk' (com.); 7.
лup-ídov [n.] 'spark' (Thphr.); 8. лup-íτŋs [m.] 'copper ore, ore' (Dsc., pap.),
"fireman", epithet of Hephaistos (Luc.), see Redard 1949: 36, 60, 245; 9. лúр-εерov,
-oc, -wepov 'pellitory, Anthemis pyrethrum' (because of its warming effect, see
Strömberg 1940: 82 and 146f.); 10. лupαλλíç; 11. Пup-wvía epithet of Artemis
(Paus.).
B. Adjectives: 1. лup-ódŋs ‘fire-like, fiery' (IA); 2. -ɩvos 'fiery' (Arist., Plb.); 3. -óɛɩç
‘id.' (Hell.), also a name of the planet Mars (Arist., Hell.); 4. on ►лuppós.
С. verbs: 1. лup-óoμα [v.] 'to catch fire', -ów 'to set on fire' (Pi., IA), also with έк-,
etc.; see Wackernagel 1916: 124, whence лúp-wσɩ (also έk-, dia-, etc.) [f.], -wµa,
-WTŃS, -WTIKÓę; 2. лʊρ-ɛúш [v.] 'to make fire, kindle' (Pl.); ¿µлρ-εúw, -íw from μ-
лρоç; thence -εÚS, -eutŃs, -evtikós (more in Boßhardt 1942: 83); 3. лvp-á‹w (EM) as
an explanation of 4. ►лupaкtéw.
}
лüραчíç, -ídoç
1261
⚫ETYM The word лõр, лŏр-óç was originally a heteroclitic r/n-stem, still inflected this
way in Hitt. paḥhur, gen. pahhuenaš < PIE *peh2-ur, gen. ph₂-uen-s. Traces of this
formation can still be seen in Germanic: Go. fon, gen. fun-ins and ON funi are built
on *ph₂uen-s, while OHG fuir, fiur, MoHG Feuer, and ON fúrr, fýrr are from PGm.
*fūr(-i)- < *pHur. Armenian preserves hur, gen. hr-oy 'fire' < *pHur-o- with
secondary thematization, beside hn-oc' 'fireplace, furnace' <*pHun-.
In Tocharian, we find ToA por and ToB puwăr, pwār. Italic has U pir [nom.acc.] <
*pur, abl. pure < *pur-ed, and perhaps Lat. pūrigō 'to clear, clean' if <*pūr-ago-. Lat.
pūrus may or may not be related.
The ablaut was eliminated in Greek; the change in the quantity of v is secondary.
луραкτéш [v.] 'to harden in fire, burn to coal' (1 328, Nic. Th. 688). <GR>
•VAR Later лραкτóoμαɩ, -ów 'be singed, carbonized' (D. S., Str., Plu.).
⚫ETYM Although лурактéw is traditionally taken as a compound of лup and ǎуεv
with the meaning 'to rotate in fire' (e.g. Bechtel 1914 s.v.), this is both semantically
and morphologically unsatisfactory, since ǎyɛv cannot mean 'to rotate', and an
intermediate form *лúpαкτoç 'rotating in fire' (thus Bechtel) is without parallel.
The form лupαкTέw is without a doubt an expressive extension in -(a)кτέw, derived
from лup-áчw (EM 697, 16; Stolz Wien. Stud. 25 (1903): 234), or from *лup-áσσw vel
sim., like vλaкτέw from vláw 'to bark' (beside úλayµós, etc.), or åλuкτέw from
áλúw, ȧlúoow; for the last examples, cf. Frisk Eranos 50 (1952): 8ff. The word
лupaкtóoµai is formed after the numerous intransitives in -óoчa with a factitive
-ów.
лuрαλλíç [f.] name of an unknown bird, probably a kind of dove (Arist., Call., Ael.); a
kind of olive (medic.); name of an insect that supposedly lives in the fire (Plin.).
< GR➤
•VAR v.l. -aλíç, H. лuppaλíç.
•ETYM Diminutive formation in -aλ(\)ís (Chantraine 1933: 251f., Niedermann Glotta
19 (1931): 9f.), probably from лup after the reddish color; it is also associated with
лuррóç (лuppαλíc). However, according to Niedermann (l.c.) it derives from лupóç
'wheat' after its nutrition; cf. ovкaλλíç, from ►σŪKOV.
rūpaµís, -idos [f.] 1. ‘pyramid (Hdt. et al.); 2. ‘kind of cake of roasted wheat-grains
preserved in honey' (Ephipp.), mostlу лúραчoñç, -oÜVτoç [m.] (Ar., Ephipp., Call. et
al.), also лuрαμоí [m.pl.] (Artem.); acc. to H. лúрaчoç also = Xóρτоç 'food'. <GR>
⚫DER Besides, we find лupáµŋ [f.] 'sickle' (sch.), a back-formation from лpāµηó
[m.] 'wheat-harvest' (Arist. et al.); лvpαudo-εdýs ‘pyramidal' (Epicur.), usually
haplologically лupaµo-έdýs ‘id.' (Thphr. et al.), -íðiкóç ‘id.' (Iamb.).
•ETYM In the sense of ‘cake', лõрaµís is derived from лupós 'wheat', after oŋoaµíç,
-ouç. According to Diels KZ 47 (1916): 193ff. (with literature), the Egyptian pyramids
were named after the form of the cake; it must be noted, however, that the form of
the cake is actually unknown (Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 243).

=== page 657 ===

1262
HÚpyos
лúpуos [m.] ‘tower, wall-tower', also the fortification wall itself (Il.), metaph. ‘closed
division of warriors, column' (Il.), 'siege tower' (X.), 'farm-building' (LXX, pap.,
NT). <PG(V)►
•COMP Е.g. луруo-Sáïкτоç 'destroying towers' (A. Pers. 105 [lyr.]; originally 'with
destroyed towers?? See Fraenkel 1910: 82; Williger 1928: 45'), εÜ-лuруoç 'with fair
towers, well-towered' (H 71, etc.).
•DER 1. Diminutives éʊpу-íov, -ídiov, -iç, -iokoç, -iokiov, -lokápiov (mostly Hell. and
late); 2. лúpу-wµɑ, mostly plur. -óμaτα [n.] 'tower structures' (Orac. apud Hdt., A.,
E.); 3. ïupуɩɩpov [n.] form and meaning unclear (pap. VI³); 4. лupy-íïns [n.] ‘kind of
sparrow' (Gal., etc.), see Redard 1949: 84, also on σлopуíλoç; -îñç. ẞoτávŋ 'pasture'
(H.); 5. adjective лúру-vоç 'consisting of towers' (A. [lyr.]), -εo 'tower-like' (Ion.,
trag.), -wdns ‘id.' (S.), -@τç 'towered' (A. [lyr.]; feminine built on *-wτŋs, Redard
1949: 8); pу-ρns 'provided with towers, enclosed within towers or walls' (Orac.
apud Paus.), with -ŋpéoµα [v.] 'to be enclosed within towers or walls, be besieged'
(A., E.); 6. adverb -ŋdóv 'columnwise' (Il.), 'towerwise' (Aret.); 7. verb лру-шσα,
-ów 'to fence with towers, pile up' (λ 264), with -wτós ‘piled up' (Str., etc.); 8. Пupy-
aλídaɩ [m.pl.] name of a guild in Kameiros (inscr.); after Tavtaλidai?
•ETYM The word лúpуoç is a technical term of construction (architecture). It has
been wrongfully taken as a Germanic loan word by Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934):
100ff., because of the striking similarity with MoHG Burg, Go. baurgs 'town, tower'.
The Germanic word is from the root *berg"- 'high' found in MoHG Berg, Hitt.
parku- 'high', etc.
Likewise, Пépyaμos (-ov, -a) ‘the citadel (of Troy)', also as a TN, is considered a
loan word related to this root (see Heubeck 1961: 63ff., Pok. 140f.).
Others have taken it as a loan from Pre-Greek. The glosses opúpкoç. τεixos ‘wall' and
Q<o>úpкop. oxúpwμa 'stronghold' (H.) attest a variant form with different stops; the
same variation is found in the TNs IIúpyos (Elis, in Hdt. 4, 148 and Str.) and Dúpкoç
(Th. 5,49). Urart. burgana 'palace' may point to an origin in Asia Minor. Although
the exact morphology of Пεpуauov remains unclear, the suffix -auo- is otherwise
attested as Pre-Greek (cf. кápdaμov).
That лúpуoç was not inherited from Proto-Indo-European is further confirmed by
the place names Пεруaσа, Паpуaσa, and Bapyaσa (cf. Fur.: 64268 on лáyɑσɑ). In
conclusion, the word is clearly Pre-Greek.
avpńv →丌upóç.
лvpińkŋs [adj.] 'with a fiery point', i.e. 'provided with a glowing top' (лupiηкea
чóv 387). ◄ GR▷
•VAR Also -nç.
•ETYM After àµô-ýkns, tavv-ýkis, etc. (see ►ǹký); župɩ- is analogical after äuêɩ-,
λaɩ-, etc. To be rejected, Bechtel 1914 s.v.: ˜upi-(ńkns) like nuki-(µndýc), as a
“replacement” of rúpivo-.
лúρνoç [m.] · чwµós 'morsel' (H.); meaning debated already in antiquity; cf. e.g. H.:
núpvoɩ· Čɛiai kai σɩɩwdε(?) 'one-seeded wheat, cereal'. ½ ó кaτεpуagµévos ditos
πūpóc
1263
'cultivated grain'. ǎλλo xóρτoç, äλλo μayida 'food; cakе'; лúpvα. Spúôη, kλáoµata,
σɩɩía ‘was torn; morsel; grain'. <PG?➤
•VAR лúpvov [acc.sg.] (0 312, p 12: coordinated with kotúÀŋv; Lyc. 639), лúpva (oïta :
σĭτoç) [acc.pl.] (p 362), qnyívwv núpvwv [gen.pl.] (Lyc. 482).
•COMP As a first member in лuρvo-τóкoç ǎpoupa (Hymn. Is.).
•DER лúρуηται. έσ0íŋτa 'will be devoured' (H.).
⚫ETYM The word лúрvoç is obsolete and without etymology. It was compared with
лорúvaν. μαуída and τоpúvη. σɩτŵdéç τɩ (H.) by Fick BB 16 (1892): 284, adducing
Skt. cárvati 'to grind, masticate' and cūrṇa- [n.] 'powder, flour', as well. This would
lead to the reconstruction PIE *kweru- (Pok. 642), which requires a pre-form *τεpúva
for τopúvŋ. However, this leaves the u-vowel in "úpvos unexplained (Bechtel 1914
S.V.).
According to Szemerényi 1964: 29ff., лúpvoç is syncopated from лúpɩvoç (and
derived from лpós ‘wheat'), but this is contestable for several reasons.
Fur.: 370 connects the word with Basque ap(h)ur 'crumb', Béarnais (Pyrenees) purre
'small bread of maize'. This etymology seems unreliable, but in any case, the word
may
well be Pre-Greek.
лüρóç [m.] '(grain of) wheat' (II.). <IE *pHu-ro- 'corn, wheat'>
VAR Mostly plur. лpoí (Chantraine 1953: 30), Dor. (Cos, Thera, Syracuse, etc.)
atupós.
•COMP Е.g. лuрo-qópos ‘wheat-bearing' (Il.), Stóσ-лupov [n.] 'the cherry-like fruit of
Celtis australis (Thphr.), -´upoç [m.] = \ɩðóóëɛpµov (Dsc.) (Strömberg 1940: 128
and 138); on the gender cf. Boútupov, -oç.
⚫DER Diminutive лupídiα [n.pl.] (Ar., pap.); adjectives лúp-vos (E., X., Hell.), -кóç
(pap.), wdns (Str.), -áшvoç (Hes. fr. 117, etc.), after кváµ-, σŋσáμ-vos (Forbes
Mnem. 4:11 (1958): 157) 'of wheat'; on лupaμíç, -aμoüç sеe s.v.; лup-íτηç äpτos
'wheat-bread' (Aët.), αúτо-лурíτηs (Phryn. Com., Hp.) = αúτó-лupоç, etc. (Redard
1949: 90). Also лupýv, -ñvos [m.] ‘pip, pit, stone of fruit' (Ion., Arist., Hell.), see
Solmsen 1909: 125f., with à-´úpòv-oç ‘pitless' (Ar. Fr. 118, Thphr., etc.), etc.; ïupηv-íç
(Tanagra IIIª; written лoupεɩɩç), -tov (Thphr.), -ídiov (Delos IIIª, pap.) ‘kernel,
knag, knob'; also íupŋv-ádec [f.pl.] name of a guild in Ephesus (inscr.); -wdns ‘pit-
like' (Thphr.).
•ETYM An old term *puH-ro- 'wheat' is also retained in Balto-Slavic, e.g. Lith. pūrai
[pl.] 'winter corn', pūras [m.sg.] 'single winter corn', SCr. pir [m.] 'spelt', CS pyro
‘öλupa, kéуxpoç', Ru. pyréj ‘dog-grass, Triticum repens'; OE fyrs 'dog-grass' (with a
deviating suffix) also belongs here.
The initial σ- in σлρóç may have been taken over from σчτоç or σлóроç, σлερμа
(Fraenkel Phil. 97 (1948): 169f., Fraenkel IF 59 (1949): 304f.). In spite of the
connections with Balto-Slavic and Germanic, лõpós may be an old 'Wanderwort'
(Schwyzer: 583). According to Nieminen KZ 74 (1956): 170f., however, it can be
connected to Lith. pūrai 'to cut, mow' and Lat. pavio 'to strike' as "what is beaten,
threshed". Janda 2000: 39-43 accepts the derivation from *peh₂-u- 'to strike' in Lat.
paviō, but assumes a semantic development from 'striking' to 'cleansing': wheat was

=== page 658 ===

1264
Tuppó s
called pure because the grains could easily be separated from the husks. This is
possible, but not compelling.
лuppóç [adj.] 'blazing red, tawny', especially of hair (of the head) (IA, poet.). <?>
•VAR лupσóç (E., Mosch.).
●DIAL Myc. pu-wo, -wa, -wi-no Gallavotti Par. del pass. 12 (1957): 11.
•COMP Е.g. лuррó-еpíš (also лupσó-) ‘red-haired (E. [lyr.], Arist., Poll.), ¿ití-ituppos
'reddish' (Arist., Thphr.), see Strömberg 1946: 106.
•DER 1. uppíaç [m.] 'red-haired man', especially of slaves (Ar.), IIupfías PN
(Corinth VI³), see Latte Glotta 35 (1956): 296f., IIupfaλíwv PN (Argos), see Schulze
1933a: 115; лppάкηs 'with reddish hair-color; redskin' (LXX, Hell. pap.), лupрíxos
'red', of a bull (Theoc.), also as a PN; hence perhaps uppíxη [f.] name of a war dance
(Att.) with -íxıoç, -ixíšw, etc. 2. лúpp-a [f.] name of a bird (Ael.), -aía [f.] 'red robe?
(Halic. IIIª); 3. лuppó-tŋs [f.] ‘red hair-color' (Arist.); 4. verbs: „upσ-aívw 'to color
reď (E. [lyr.]), ´upp-í\w (LXX), -ášw (Ev. Matt.) ‘to be reď, of heaven, -ɩáw ‘to
redden, blush' (late).
ETYM The relation of the Corinthian horsename IIupfos (cf. perhaps Myc. pu-wo,
etc.) and Пupf-íaç, -aλíwv (see above) to IA лuppós is not quite clear: PGr. *purwo-
should have given IA *лŏрóç oг лūрóç. Therefore, PGr. *purswó- is usually posited
(after Hoffmann 1898: 589). Frisk asks if uppós could derive from *лйpóç by
expressive gemination, which seems ad hoc. On the suffix -Fo- in color adjectives,
see Chantraine 1933: 123 and Schwyzer: 472; on the phonetics, see Lejeune 1972: 1385
and Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 262f. See further ►лup and ►лupσóç.
Schulze 1933a: 115f. connected Lith. purvas 'dirt, muck'; on this, see Fraenkel 1955 S.V.
with further literature.
On derivatives from лuрρóç in Latin and Romance, cf. Kahane Glotta 39 (1960-1961):
133ff.
луρσóç [adj.] 'firebrand, torch'. <EUR?>
⚫ETYM Fur.: 157 derives лuppós from this form, adducing the personal names
Пúppwv and Пúpowv of Epeirotic kings as cognates. In Latin, we find burrus and
birrus, and in Romance, būrius (REW 1410); Lat. būricus 'small horse' is probably
named after the color, as is Romance *burricus beside *burriccus 'hinny' (REW 1413).
Fur.: suggests that it is an old Pre-European word for the color of a horse, which was
only later associated with лup 'fire'.
πVTÍ¶W →πTÚW.
avtivn = Butívn.
лw [pcl.] 'ever, still' (Il.), enclitic, almost always after negation: оüлw, μηлw, ou
лолоτε, Doг. (Еpich.) où лúлокα, post-Hom. also in negating questions τí πw, etc.
<IE *k"oh, 'ever, still'>
•VAR Ion. Kw; further Dor. η in äλλŋ лη 'anywhere else' (Cyrene), лηлoкα 'ever'
(Sparta Va, Theoc., etc.).
πwλźw
1265
ETYM A fixed instrumental, identical to OP kā (confirming pcl.); cf. also Go. Ive
'anyhow', from a PIE instrumental *k"o-h₁, ke-h,, formed from the pronominal stem
*ko-; see лółεv.
лúуwv, -wvoç [m.] 'whisker, chin-beard' (IA). <PG?>
•COMP Often as a second member, е.g. τрαуо-лóуwv [m.] 'with a goat's beard'
(Cratin.), also as a plant name 'goat's beard, Tragopogon' (Thphr., Dsc.), see
Strömberg 1940: 56.
●DER Diminutive лwуáv-ɩov [n.] (Luc., etc.), -ías [m.] ‘the bearded one' (Cratin.,
etc.), also [n.] of a comet (Arist.; Scherer 1953: 107), -ítns, -lýtng [m.] ‘id.' (Hdn.,
Suid., etc.), -ɩкóç, -tałos ‘bearded' (gloss.).
⚫ETYM The origin of лóуwv is unexplained. A connection with лηуνч, лηуóç fails
on semantic grounds (w vs. n). Adams Glotta 64 (1986): 16f. explains the word from
*лодα-у-ov <*рoum-g-on-, derived from his reconstruction for Skt. púmāms- 'male';
this, too, remains quite dubious.
лwλéoµaι [v.] 'to go to and fro, go somewhere frequently'. →éλoμaɩ.
лwλéw [v.] 'to offer for sale, sell' (IA). <IE? *pel- 'sell'➤
•VAR Fut. лwλ-now, aor. -ñσaɩ, pass. -ηеñval.
COMP Often with prefix (especially Hell. and late inscr. and pap.), е.g. лро-, Sα-,
áva-,ávTL-
•DER 1. Action nouns: ñóλ-ŋoiç [f.] ‘sale' (X., etc.), -ŋµa [n.] 'sale, sold merchandise’
(inscr. Tauromenion, etc.); back-formation -ǹ, Dor. -á [f.] ‘sale' (Sophr., Hyp. fr.).
2. Agent nouns: лwλ-ŋtýs [m.] ‘seller', designation of a financial official (Att., etc.),
also -τp [m.] ‘id.' (Delph. IVª, etc.), fem. -nτpiα 'seller' (Poll.), as a second member
with Aaxavo- (Ar.), etc.; -лóλŋç [m.] and -πwλiç [f.] enjoy unlimited productivity in
compounds, e.g. ȧλλαντо-лóληs 'sausage-seller' with ȧλλavτo-wλ-éw, etc., ȧpτó-
лwλis 'bread-seller, baker' (Ar., etc.), cf. Fraenkel 1912: 26 and 109, Schwyzer: 451; the
simplex wλns was extracted from this compound (Ar.);
3. wλ-ητpiov 'shop' (X., etc.); 4. adjectives -ητкós belonging to sale' (Pl.), see
Chantraine 1956a: 134; -чos 'for sale' (Hell. pap.).
•ETYM In view of its formation, лwλéw must be an iterative-intensive deverbative,
although neither in Greek nor in related languages is a corresponding primary verb
attested with certainty. Skt. páṇate 'purchase, buy' may represent an old nasal
present in MInd. shape (reflecting older PIAr. *pṛṇāti), but this is considered
unlikely by Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 69. An -n- is further found in a Balto-Slavic noun:
Lith. pelnas 'gain, profit, merit', OCS plěno Náqupov', Ru. polón 'captivity, booty' <
PIE *pel-no-. Germanic provides two isolated adjectives: ON falr 'for sale' < IE
*polo-, OHG fāli ‘id.' < IE *pēlio-, next to OHG feili, MoHG feil with unexplained
vocalism. Semantically, лwλéw is close to εμлoλn 'trade(ware), purchase, gain',
which is usually connected with лέλoµα, originally *to turn' (for the connection of
лwλéw to лéλoμa, see Schwyzer: 720). If лwλéw is indeed related to εμлoλn, the
derivation from IE *pel- of the words mentioned above should be abandoned. Cf.
also the literature on лéруημ.

=== page 659 ===

1266
MOVE
1267
лŵλoç [m., f.] ‘young horse, foal, filly' (II.), secondarily also of other young animals
(Arist., etc.), poetically also 'horse' in general, metaph. 'young girl, youth, etc.'
(Anacr., A., E.). ◄IE *pōlH-, plH- 'foal'>
•VAR Myc. po-ro.
●COMP Compound лwλo-dáµvòs [m.] 'foal-tamer; horsebreaker' (X.) with
лwλodaµvéw (S., E., X.), etc.; λευкó-лwλos 'with white foals' (Pi., trag.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives лwλ-íov [n.] (Att., Arist., etc.), -áptov (Pl. apud D. L., etc.); 2.
adjectives -ɩкóç ‘belonging to, concerning foals' (S., E., Arc., etc., inscr.), ‘virginaľ (A.
[lyr.]), see Chantraine 1956a: 116ff.; -ɛtoç 'id.' (Suid.); 3. Пwλw [f.] epithet of Artemis
in Thasos (Nilsson 1941(1): 483³); 4. Denominative лwλ-ɛúw [v.] 'to break in a young
horse' (X.), with -ɛía, -evoiç, -evµa, -evtýc, -evtikós (X., Max. Tyr., etc.).
•ETYM Semantically, лwλoç corresponds exactly with MoHG Fohlen, Füllen, and
cognates, e.g. Go. fula, ON foli, OHG folo < PGm. *fulan-, with the diminutive ON
fyl [n.] < PGm. *ful-ja-, OHG fulīn [n.] < PGm. *ful-ina-. Contrary to лŵλoç < IE
pōlH-, PGm. *fulan represents the zero grade *plH-. Alb. pelë 'mare', must be related
as well, reflecting *pōl-n-. Certainly unrelated (contra Frisk) are лαîç, Lat. puer, etc.
The appurtenance of Arm. ul 'small goat', connected by Meillet REArm. 10 (1930):
184f. and others (including Arm. amul ‘infertile' < IE *ṇ-pōlo-), is rather doubtful
because of the deviating meaning (cf. Lidén 1906: 25, with older literature). Thieme's
theory (Lidén 1897: 48²) that лwλos, etc. are related to PIE *kel- (see ►лέλoµα), via
an original meaning 'meadow-animal', should be rejected.
лáλvños (-úños) [m.] ‘sea polyp, cuttlefish', metaphorically 'nose polyp' (Hp., Thphr.,
etc.); also substantivized adjective τà éoλúлoða ‘many-footed', of insects (Arist.).
<PG(S)►
•VAR Plur. -o (Semon., Epich., Hp. [v.l.]), also лшλуч, -vлоç (Diph. Siphn., Dsc.,
Рoll.), лоλуч, -υлоç (Рaul. Aеg.); more usual is лovλúлoυç, -лоdoç (ε 432), acc.
-лovv (Ion. Trag.), also gen. -лoυ, etc. (Thgn., etc.), лoλúñoυç, -лodoç (Arist.).
●DIAL Myc. po-ru-po-de.
⚫DER Diminutive лшλúлov [n.] (Нp.).
•ETYM The word лóλулоç is a Mediterranean word of unknown origin. The form
with w, confirmed by the borrowing Lat. pōlypus, -i (since Plaut.), is clearly the
oldest; it is the basis for the folk-etymological formations лoυλυ- and лоλυ- after
лоλúç and лоúç (Fraenkel 1912: 164', with older literature; Specht KZ 59 (1932): 129).
Note, however, that the inflexion with лod- is already attested in Mycenaean and in
Homer. The word is not treated by Fur.
лm̃µa 1 [n.] ‘lid, cover' of a chest, pot, tube, etc. (Il., epic Ion., Arist., Hell.). ◄IE *peh₂-
'guard, protect'>
●DER лwµ-átɩov [n.], diminutive (Sor.); -ατíaç [m.] ‘kind of snail' (Dsc.), and two
denominatives: 1. лwµáčш [v.] 'to cover, close with a lid' (Arist., Hero, etc.), also with
εл-, лεрι-, еtc., with εллшμασμós (Eust.) and the back-formation εлíлwμα 'lid'
(Gal.), έnnwµatikós (sch.); 2. nwµatíw ‘id.' (Arist., Thphr., etc.), mostly έ-, лɛpɩ-,
άлo-, with έллwµátiσis (VIP); the seemingly primary έƒлwµávvvµai 'to be covered'
(Hero) is derived from the latter.
•ЕTYM лшµα is an old verbal noun from IE *poh₂-mn beside *poh₂-tro-m [n.],
reflected in Skt. pátram ‘case, barrel (if related, this word was certainly influenced by
*peh, 'to drink'), and in the Germanic group of Go. fodr 'sheath, cover', MoHG
Futter 'lining' (of cloth). The primary verb is retained in Skt. pắti ‘to guard, protect'
< IE *peh₂-; see also ►šoчµýv.
лwµɑ 2 ‘drink'. ⇒лívw.
лшμápov [n.] 'orchard' (pap. [IIIP]). <LW Lat.>
•DER лwμαрíτηç 'merchant of fruits' (pap. [VIP]); -T10σa (VIP).
⚫ETYM Borrowed from Lat. pōmārium.
лwpέw •VAR лwpytúç. →rŵpos, taλainwpoç.
лŵpoç [m.] ‘tuff (Arist., Thphr., Hell. inscr., etc.), in Anatolia 'stone- or chalk-
formation, concretion, stone in the bladder, kidney, etc.' (Hp., Arist., etc.). ◄PG?(V)►
●var Also ñoñpos (inscr. Delphi), éópos (Thphr. Lap. 7, Gal. 6, 57).
•COMP As a first member in e.g. лwp-óµðaλov [n.] ‘concretion in the navel (Gal.).
●DER 1. Diminutive лwp-íov, -íðɩov [n.] ‘callosity' (medic.); 2. adjectives лóp-ɩvoç ‘of
tuff (Hdt., Ar., Hell. inscr., etc.), -ɛía λíƉoç ‘tuff (Str.), -óðŋs ‘л.-like' (Gal.); 3. verb
лшp-óομαι, -ów 'to petrify, harden, grow together in a concretion, grow hard' (Hp.,
Arist., Thphr., NT), also with dɩα-, έл-, σvv-, with (ε-)лwр-wμα, -wois
'petrification, concretion' (Hp., Gal., NT); 4. лwp-íaσiç [f.] 'callus on the eyelid'
(Gal.), as if from *лwp-tãv (Schwyzer: 732).
•ETYM Originally, лшpos and derivatives indicated a kind of stone, and it was used as
a construction term; later, however, it was used especially as a medical term. It has
no etymology. According to Haupt 1912: 84f., it was borrowed from Assyr. pûlu
'shell-lime'. However, no connection seems possible with лwpeĩv. kŋdeveɩv, „εVÕεTV
'to worry, mourn', лшρñσαι· λνлñσαч 'to be grieved' (H.), and лшpŋτúç [f.] ‘pain'
(Antim.). Cf. also ταλαíлwроç. Fur.: 328 connects *ч/wpoc in ywpírηs λíos, a kind
of marble (Cyran 46) and Hitt. purut- loam, chalk, mortar'. This may point to Pre-
Greek origin.
лwpós →taλainwpoç.
лõç [interr. adv.] ‘how?”, лws [indef.] ‘somehow' (Il.). ◄IE *k"o- ‘which?’>>
•VAR Ion. Kwç, kwç (Hdt., etc.).
•ETYM The form ƒŵç is a frozen ablative from the pronominal stem лo-, Ion. кo-
from IE *ko-; see лóеεу and ► ŵç 1.
TWTGOial → Étoual.
лшv [f.] name of an unknown bird, cf. nŵvž. лoiòç öpviç. ó Apiσtotéλnc év tŵ nepì
wwv (H.); attempts at an identification in Thompson 1895 s.v. qwvč. ◄PG(S,V)►
VAR Qwv (Arist.), лшvуč, plur. -vyyɛs (Ant. Lib., EM).

=== page 660 ===

1268
лŵvε
•ETYM In spite of the fact that the meaning is unknown, the word must be Pre-Greek;
o
cf. especially the variation ~ л in the initial, the variation y ~ yy in the suffix, and
the suffix -vyy- itself.
pa VAR Before vowel p'. apa.
P
pã [adv.] easily' (Alcm., S. Fr. 1086, Ion. Trag.). <?>
•VAR Epic pña (written pɛĩa), péa (monosyllabic reading necessary or possible; does
it stand for Aeol. på?), Ion. péã (Simon.), Aeol. ßpā (= Fpã, gramm.); pña (Alc.)
must be a Homerism or a mistake.
•COMP As a first member in þá-Ovµos light-hearted, carefree' (Att.) from *þaï-
Ouμoç, if not secondary for well-attested pá-Ovµoç (Wackernagel 1907: 26).
●DER Comparative: epic p½ïtɛpov, Ion. þýτεpov (Thgn.), Dor. þátɛpov (Pi.), also Ion.
piov, Att. pãov; pãσσov (gramm. in EM) analogical for ãσσov; superlative epic
pητατα, Ion. p½ïστα, Dor. þáïoτа (Theoc.), Att. pãoτa. The adverb served as a basis
for the adjectival forms pηïrepos, píïotos, páwv, pãσtoc; from pña, på, the positive
pn-ïdiwc, Att. padiwc, Aeol. ẞpa-ïSíwc (Alc.) was derived, and from there in turn the
adjective pηdios, pádios (like μay-dís, -ídio, etc.); hence paiεστεpoç, etc.
Denominal from p½ïov, pãov are: pŋï¼w, þaïïw [v.] ‘to recover' (IA), aor. -íσaɩ; þaïav.
vyɛíav health' (H.). From þýïotos, pãotos are derived: proτúvn, paotóvn [f.]
'recovery, leisure' (IA).
•ETYM Starting from epic pña and Aeol. ẞpă, we may reconstruct PGr. *wrāha or
*wrāja. The word is no doubt old and inherited, but a good etymology is lacking. A
connection with the root *ureh2- that has to be assumed for äлηupα has been
suggested, but this cannot be proven. Specht KZ 59 (1932): 93ff. unconvincingly
connected ȧpalóc 'thin'.
pã a plant name. ⇒¿ñov.
paßátteiv [v.] · ävw kai káτw ßadíšɛiv. τɩvés dè túntɛv kai чsópov лoiɛïv [kaì
qpáσeɩv] tois roσí, кaì þáσσɛv ‘to walk upwards and downwards; to beat and make
noise with [and to be about to indicate with] the feet, and to strike' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR In Photius 479, 18: σoßɛiv кai τρέуяv кai σuvtóvwç rodoktuлɛiv ‘to drive
away, run, strike the earth vigorously with the feet'.
⚫ETYM Has been compared with ȧppáßaka. ópxnστýv. àëò τoñ áppaßáooɛiv ő έoti
ópxɛïσðaɩ. oi dè τòv ßλáσŋµov ‘dancer, after å., which means to dance; others:
slanderer' (H.). Fur.: 142 connects ǎpaßos and ápoлñoai. лatñoal. Kpñtεç, and
concludes that the word is Pre-Greek.
þáßdos [f.] ‘twig, rod, staff, magic wand; line, stripe, groove' (Il.). <PG(V) ►

=== page 661 ===

1270
payn
•COMP Compounds like paẞd-ouxos [m.] 'staff-bearer', name of an official (Ar., Th.,
Hell.), лoλú-рpaßdos having many stripes' (Arist.).
●DER 1. Diminutive paßd-íov [n.] (Arist., Thphr.); 2. þaßd-wτós having rods, streaks,
grooves' (X., Arist.), -wμa (H.) as an explanation of okvtáλia; -woię [f.] ‘cannelure'
(Att. inscr. late Va); 3. Denominatives: a) paßd-íw [v.] 'to beat with a rod, thresh'
(com., Thphr.), to which -toµós [m.] ‘treshing, -tστp [m.] 'thresher' (pap.); b)
-εúo̟μα [v.] 'to fish with a rod' (Arist.); c) -óoμai [v.] 'to have stripes' (Lyd.).
⚫ETYM A suffixal element -So- is only found in a few nouns indicating sounds (e.g.
Kéλados) and in isolated, etymologically unclear words (cf. ►кλádoc, which is close
in meaning). Analyzed as páß-doc, it has been compared with Lith. viřbas 'twig, rod'
and Ru. vérba (OCS vrúba) 'willow' (zero grade IE *urb-), and Lat. verbera [pl.]
(rods for) punishment, verbēnae [pl.] 'twigs of the laurel, etc.', with full grade.
However, in view of the variants pάuvos and paлíç, we can be certain that the
word is Pre-Greek (the word is not treated by Fur.).
payń [f.] 'tore, chink, gap, cleft' (Hp.). ◄PG?►
•VAR Also with Sia-; more usual pay-ác, -ádoc [f.] ‘id.' (Hell.).
•DER Diminutive pay-áðɩov [n.] (Celsus); further pάy-dηy ‘torrential, fierce,
vehement' [adv.] (Plu.), payd-años ‘id.' (com., Arist.), -αtóτηs [f.] (Poll.); for the
meaning cf. payá (þáya cod.). áкµý, ßía, ópµý ‘point or prime, force, impulse' (H.)
(see also Erot. on payń).
ETYM The words payń, etc. are sometimes seen as derivatives of pрауñvaι, þýуvч,
but payñvaɩ is analogical. The word may instead be Pre-Greek. Note also pay-aιos
with the problematic cluster -yd-, which can hardly be taken from þáydŋv.
pádaµvoç [m.] ‘branch, twig, shoot' (LXX, Suid., H.). ◄PG(S,V)►
●var Also pódaµvos (H.) and þádaµov. kavlóv, ßλaστóv ‘stalk, shooť (conj. Nic.
Al. 92), padaµɛĩ. ßλaστávεi ‘sprouts' (H.).
●DER padaµvwdns (sch.).
⚫ETYM The ending of pádaµvos can be compared with άuvos and pάuvos, as well as
oqévdaµvoc, otáμvoç, etc. The Aeol. form ►ópódauvos points to a pre-form Fρód-.
In view of all alternations, the word is no doubt Pre-Greek.
þaðɩváкη Persian name for a foul-smelling oil found in Arderikka, east of Susa (Hdt.
6, 119). LW Iran.>
ETYM Probably a pre-Iranian loanword.
padɩvóc [adj.] ‘taper, bendable, slender' (epic since ¥ 583). <PG(V)►
•VAR ßpádɩvos (Sapph.); podavós epithet of Sovaкɛús (Σ 576; v.ll. þadɩvós, padalós);
podáv-n [f.] 'weft thread' (Batr.), to which -iw [v.] (sch.), -tστptov (gloss.); also
padavóc, -1, -íľw (Il.), -ãταi· лλavãτaι 'wanders, strays' (H.), padavičɛi. pističel,
Tɩváσσεɩ 'bursts, shakes' (H.).
ETYM The formation is like in лʊкɩvóç, but the basis is unknown. Some connect
padɩvós with the semantically unclear лεpуppηdns or with pádaμvos; Lobeck
1837: 156 also connects padéç. τò àµqotépws ¿ykekλчµévov 'bent to both sides' (H.).
Further connected is perhaps also the Arc. PN Ƒpádwv, but padavwpoɩ oi twv
páduuos
1271
λаɣávwv кηлovρpoí 'watchers of vegetable gardens' (H.) remains unclear (rejected by
Bechtel 1921, 2: 420).
Other forms that have been hesitantly adduced are Skt. ávradanta [3pl.ipf.]
'loosened, became mellow' (hap. leg. RV 2, 24, 3; see LIV² s.v. *ured-), Go. wraton
‘лopeveσbai, diodɛúɛv', ON rata ‘id.'; also, Lith. randù, ràsti ‘find (see Fraenkel 1955
s.v.). However, all these proposals remain hypothetical (details in Bechtel 1914 s.v.
лεруррηбns). The variation *urad-/ urod-shows that padɩvóc is a Pre-Greek word.
pádiž, -îkoç [m.] ‘branch, twig' (Nic.), ‘palm leaf (D. S.). ◄PG(V)►
ETYM A formal match is found between pádi and Lat. rādīx 'root', if they reflect
*wrād-. Lat. rāmus 'branch, twig', which may go back to *wrād-mo- or *wrã-mo-, is
semantically closer. Go. waurts, etc. can probably be compared as well. Cf. also on
►pádaчvos, where the short a certainly does not reflect a PIE *urh₂d-, since this
would have yielded long ā instead. The pre-form *wrad- / wrād-, suggested by these
forms, is probably non-Indo-European. Cf. also píša.
=>
pádios = pā.
páčw [v.] ‘to growl, grouch', originally of a dog; secondarily also of men (Cratin. 25).
<ONOM➤
•ETYM Perhaps of onomatopoeic origin; cf. ► ȧpáčw and ►þúčw. See also ▸ pwxw.
pálayos = padamuyitw.
þaðáµɩyž, -ɩyyos [f.], mostly [pl.] ‘drop' (A 536 = Y 501, Hes., Pi.); also ‘dust particle'
(kovins þ. Y 502), ‘spot' (Opp.). <PG(S)►
•DER þaðaµí¼w [v.] ‘to besprinkle' (Opp., Nonn.; like σáλлуš to -ñí¶w). Variants are
þaðµíšɛoðaɩ. þaívɛσa 'to be besprinkleď (H.); paðαívɛtaι· þaívεtal, ßpéxetal ‘is
besprinkled, gets wet' (H.); þaðaσσóμevol. palvójievoɩ (H., Phot.).
•ETYM þaðάµuyž has the same suffix -ty as λáïyyɛç, σtpopáliyč, ►rúλууεç, etc. (see
Chantraine 1933: 398ff.), but it cannot be analyzed any further. We find a variant
*þaðµóç in þa¤µíɛσa (probably by syncope of a, as is often found in Pre-Greek
words). Frisk suggests an analogical proportion *pa¤µós : ►þaívw to ßałµós : ßaívw,
which leads him to assume that contaminations or extensions led to the creation of
pałaívw (to paívw) and þaðáσσw (to στaláσσw). This is far-fetched. Although the
word is not treated by Fur., þaðάшy is clearly Pre-Greek, if only because of the
suffix.
paеaлvуiw [v.] 'to kick someone's buttocks' (Ar. Eq. 796). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also pоеoлvyí¶w, to which -toµóc (Suid., Thom. Mag.).
•ETYM Possibly based on лvуń ‘'bottom', apparently with an onomatopoeic first
element that is also seen in pábayoç. τápaxos 'agitation' (H., sch.). Yet the precise
morphological relation with луη remains to be clarified. Haplology from
*þaða[yo]-ñvyí¶w (Ehrlich 1910: 7) has been assumed, but this seems unlikely. The
o-vocalism in pоео-лυуíчw can hardly be secondary after półos 'roar'; it is much
more likely that the variation a o is caused by the Pre-Greek origin of the word.
páovios →pā.
~

=== page 662 ===

1272
pauBias
PAKTÓS
1273
paɩßías [?] · àšýµoç dñµoš ‘deme that has impunity' (H.). <?►
●var þaµßáç. ó duos public executioner' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown.
paußós [adj.] 'crooked, bent inward', especially of legs (Arist., Nic.). <PG(V)►
•COMP As a first member in paiẞo-εdns of crooked shape' (Hp.).
•DER þaɩß-ŋdóv ‘in bendings' (Euph.), -ów [v.] ‘to bend' (Lyc., Gal.), -óτŋs [f.]
'bendedness' (Eust.).
•ETYM The words in -ßós often designate a physical defect, e.g. Koloßós, klaµßós,
σkaµßóç, úßóç. The best comparison until now was with the Germanic group of Go.
wraiqs 'σкoλióç', which led to IE *uroigo- or *uroig-uo-. However, the Greek a-
vocalism remains difficult, and neither кλaußós, etc. above, nor λatós, ►σкαLÓS
(with old uo-suffix) offer a solution for it. Since the vocalism can only be explained if
we assume *ureh₂ig-u-, whereas the Germanic suggests *uroig-u-, the word is
probably non-Indo-European. It is probably Pre-Greek; see on þáµqoç. Cf. also
►poiкóç and ▸ pußóc.
paiva [v.] 'to besprinkle, spray, strew' (Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. pñvaι (Hp.), pãvai (Att., Hell.), pass. pavēñvai (Pi., etc.), ipv.2pl. páσσatɛ
(v 150), ptc. лερι-paσáµεvoi (Pergamon IIª) after кedáσσaɩ, kɛpáσ(o)aɩ, etc.(?), perf.
act. Si-éppaуka (LXX), med.3pl. έppádaτai (v 354), plpf. -daτ(0) (M 431), with
analogical -8- acc. to Schwyzer: 672, but see below; εppαшα (Hell. and late), -aσμai
(sch.).
•COMP Often with prefix, especially rɛpɩ-.
●DER 1. pavíç, -ídos [f.] ‘drop' (trag., Ar., Arist.) with paví(w = paívw (Poll.); 2.
pavτóç besprinkled, spotted' (Hp.) with pavτíšw (also with лεpɩ-, etc.) = paívw
(LXX, Ep. Hebr., etc.); (ñɛpi-)þavt-toµós [m.] (LXX, NT), -toµa [n.] (Vett. Val.); 3.
pavtńp, -ñpos [m.] ‘sprinkler' (Nic.), to which (лεpt-, áño-)þavtýpiov [n.] ‘vessel
with sprinkling water³ (IA); 4. (лɛpɩ-)þávtŋs [m.] ‘sprinkler' (pap.); 5. (лɛpí-)pavois
[f.] 'sprinkling' (Pl., pap.); 6. åлó-p(p)avеpov = ȧлорраvτηpiov (Anaphe, Priene); 7.
páσua [n.] 'sprinkling, spray' (Hell.).
-
•ETYM The stem pattern of paívw is based on a stem pav- which, if inherited,
represents the zero grade of IE *uren- or *sren-. Previous etymological attempts have
been: Solmsen KZ 37 (1904): 590ff. (connecting a Slavic verb ‘to let fall, shed', in Ru.
ronít, Cz. roniti, Pol. ronić, etc., which may - but need not go back to *uron-);
Szemerényi KZ 73 (1956): 74 (connecting Hitt. hurnäi- ‘to besprinkle', but this has to
be read as harnai-; see Kloekhorst 2008); connection with paláшyž (improbable).
None of these etymological attempts accounts for the variation v and 8 (in the
perfect), which is a well-known Pre-Greek phenomenon (Kuiper 1956: 216). This
proves that the verb is Pre-Greek.
paíw [v.] 'to smash, break to pieces, shatter' (Il., epic). <?>
•VAR Aor. paioaɩ, pass. paισñvai, fut. paíow.
•DIAL Myc. o-pi-ra3-te-re /opi-raistēres/ (?), see Baumbach Minos 11 (1970): 388-90.
•COMP Also with dɩα-, άлo-.
•DER paιστηp, -ñpos 'hammer', both [f.] (Σ 477; after σoupa?) and [m.] (AP 6, 117).
Elsewhere the gender is unknown (A. Pr. 56, Call. Dian. 59, etc.); paιστpios
'shattering, destroying' (A. R., Opp.); þaíoτwp. кpavτýp ‘boar's tusk' (H.). Several
compounds in -τnc, e.g. Ovµo-ppaío-tŋs ‘life-destroying' (II.), kuvo-ppaío-tηs 'dog
louse' (p 300, Arist.).
•ETYM The form paíw rhymes with лaíw, ëτaíw (which are semantically close) and
with кvaiw, yaíw. The -σ- in paɩσñvaɩ, etc. can be analogical. The etymology is
unknown; it can hardly be a contamination of pnуvчμ and лαíw.
þákos [n.] ‘rag, shred, wrinkles, remnants' (Od.). <?>
•VAR Often plur. pákɛa, -ŋ.
•COMP As a first member in þakó-dutos, originally ‘clothed in rags', ‘shabby' (E.
[lyr.]).
●DER Diminutive páktov, plur. -ta [n.] (Ar., etc.); 2. pakwµata [pl.] = pákŋ (Ar.); 3.
ȧл<p>aкíσματа (H.) to þáкη (: *ȧño-ppaкíšεv); 3. adjective páк-ɩvoç (Hell.
inscr.), -óɛɩ (AP), -wdns (D. C., AP) ‘tattered, wrinkled'; 4. uncertain (corrupt
according to Debrunner IF 23 (1908-1909): 14) þakwλéov. pákoç ‘rag' (H.), cf.
pwyaλέoç, etc.; 5. denominative paк-óo̟µα [v.] ‘to become ragged, wrinkleď (Hp.,
Plu.), to which -wotę [f.] 'wrinkling, wrinkledness' (Sor.).
pákɛa, -n corresponds to Aeol. ẞpáк-ɛα (Sapph. 57), -ŋ (Theoc. 28, 11), but in the
sense of (long) ladies' garments', cf. also páкoç. кáλaµoç, įµáτov лoτεéç
'expensive garment' (H.). Other formations are: ẞрáкaλov. рóлаλov 'staff, roď',
ẞpáкetov. Spéлavov, кλadevτηpιov ‘sickle, pruning knife' (H.), dissimilated from
*-τpov; without dissimilation páкετpov ‘chopping-knife (Poll.), v.l. páx- (after
páxɩc), with -ɛτpíšw [v.] 'to split, cut through' (Pl. Com.).
⚫ETYM The deviating meaning ‘ladies' garments' casts doubt on the appurtenance of
ẞpáкɛα, -oç. The other words can easily be connected with pákos (i.e. from
*Fpákoc), with ẞpáкaλov formed after þóлaλov, σкútaλov; ßpáкet(p)ov seems to be
a primary instrument noun which, just like páкoç, presupposes a primary verb (for
instance *pakεiv).
Evident morphological cognates lack outside Greek. The traditional comparison
with Skt. vṛścáti ‘to hew, fell (trees), split', with yūpa-vrask-á- ‘post-cutter' and the
ptc. vṛk-ṇá- ‘hewn, felled' fails to give one too, since it is probably related to Skt. varj-
'to turn around, avert' <*huerg-.
IE *uresk-, *urosk-, which we may reconstruct, has a variant in the Slavic word for
'rumple' (cf. páкoç, also 'rumple'), e.g. CS vraska < *uorsk-a. ToA wraske 'disease' is
phonologically and semantically far-fetched. For this IE *uresk-, uersk-, one could
reconstruct an older *urek-sk- or *uerk-sk-, which enables us to establish connections
with u̟rk-, the pre-form of páкoç. A pre-form IE *urk- may also be found in the
Indo-Iranian word for 'tree' (originally ‘felled tree'), Skt. vṛkṣá-, Av. varǝša- [m.], IE
*urk-s-o-, beside *urk-os- in páкoç (see Lidén in WP. 1, 286). Everything remains
highly uncertain. The word could well be Pre-Greek.
þaktýpios •Var þáktpia. →þáoσw.
partós →pńyvour.

=== page 663 ===

1274
paupás
pántw
1275
paupás →papias.
páuvos [f.] 'briar, rhamnus' (Eup., Hell. and late). <PG?>
•Der ‘Paµvoñç, -oûvtoç [m.] name of an Att. deme, with -oúσtos [adj.] (Att.).
•ETYM The form pάuvos may have developed from *páßvoc, and thus belong with
►páẞdos and cognates; see s.v. with literature. It is quite possibly a Pre-Greek word.
The nasal suffix may be the same as in ¤áμvos (or taken over from it). Cf. also
►padivóc and ►рεμẞoμα.
páupos [n.] (hooked) bird beak' (com., Call., Plu.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Further paµyóv. kaµлúλov, Blaóv 'crooked or bent, distorted; þaµà
yóvata. ßλaɩσà yóvata, tò dè aửtò кal paißá curved knees' (H.).
•COMP λεлó-pαµqoç ‘having a thin beak' (Paul. Aeg.).
•DER þaµoń [f.] ‘crooked knife' (Plb., H.). From páμoos are derived þáµô-tov [n.]
diminutive (sch.), -ic, -ídos [f.] 'crooked clasp' (Hero), also = vɛws εldoç kind of
ship' (H.) (cf. кopwvíc), -10 = лελεкаvós (Cyran.), -wdns 'beak-like' (Philostr.),
-notaí. ix Oñç moloí ‘kinds of fish' (H.) (Strömberg 1943: 43), -ášoµaι ‘to poke with the
beak' (H., Phot.).
•ETYM Next to páµqos, paµqń (cf. e.g. ypάoos: ypacń), we find þéµyos. tó otója, ½
píç 'mouth or nose' (H.); this cannot be interpreted as a regular full grade, but is a
variant (see below). Initial paµq- has been compared with кαµл-, уvaµñ-, kpaµß-,
etc. The words þéµ³µα to turn round, roam' and þóµßos ‘(magic) wheel are
phonetically comparable and semantically similar. Cf. further ►páßdoc, ► þéµißoµai,
and also poμpaía.
Germanic words have been further compared: MLG wrimpen 'to turn up one's nose',
wramp-achtich 'curled, crooked' (i.e. IE *uremb(")-; however, these comparisons are
based on virtually nothing. The variation between 3 and 4 rather points to Pre-
Greek origin, as does the a-vocalism. Moreover, paußóc is also clearly a variant (see
Fur. 286, 335, 338). This means that þáµôoç has prenasalization, beside paußós with
the frequent variation a/at, where t is from a following palatalized consonant.
pavíc ⚫VAR pavτýp. →paívw.
páž, pãyós [f.] ‘winegrape, -berry', secondarily also 'berry' in general, metaph. ‘kind of
spider', plur. 'fingertips' (Att., Hell. and late). <PG(V)►
•VAR LXX also [m.]. þŵł, pwyós (Archil., LXX, Nic.).
•COMP As a first member in payo-ɛɩdýs ‘grape-like' (medic.).
•DER pay-íov [n.] diminutive (Philum., etc.), -ɩкós 'belonging to the grape', -wdŋs
‘grape-like' (Thphr.), -í(w ‘to pick grapes' (Theoc.).
ETYM The form páč is reminiscent of páμaτα (this may come from *páyμ-).
Booτpúxia, σtaquliç. Makedóveç ‘bunch of grapes (Maced.)' (H.), as well as of Lat.
racēmus 'stalk of a cluster of grapes, grapes'. The word is further isolated; it is
probably a Mediterranean word (cf. Schwyzer: 425 with literature, also 310). The IE
etymologies that have been proposed should all be rejected (WH s.v.; also
incorrectly, Carnoy REGr. 69 (1956): 286 and Carnoy Ant. class. 27 (1958): 326). It is
most probable that páč is of Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 126); pw would then be a Pre-
Greek variant. Demiraj 1997: 196 adduces Alb. rrush ‘resin', which is identical to
Rrush, the old name of Ragusa; if related, this would rather suggest a substrate origin
of the word.
paníšw, -oµai [v.] 'to beat with a stick, a rod, by hand', pass. 'to be beaten' (IA). <PG?►
•VAR Aor. pass. paлɩσðñvαɩ, act. рañíσaɩ, perf. ptc. pass. pɛpañoµéva.
•COMP Rarely with prefix, e.g. εлɩ- (also 'to reproach').
•DER рáл-σμα [n.] 'stroke, slap in the face, box on the ears' (Antiph., NT, Luc.),
-toμós [m.] ‘id.' (Corn., Sor.); εñɩppáл-ɩɩç [f.] ‘reproach' (Ion. Hist.), -toµós ‘id.'
(Plb.). Besides, as a second member, -paлç in xpvσó-pрaлç, voc. -ɩ 'with a golden
rod', epithet of Hermes (Od., h. Merc., Pi.), έü-ppαлç (Еpµñç) ‘with a beautiful rod'
(Nonn.); paлíç as simplex = páẞdos only H., Phot.
⚫ETYM As the simplex paлíç may have been extracted from xpuσó-pрañɩç, where -ɩç
can be explained as a compound suffix (cf. ǎv-αλк-ɩç, Ïлл-oup-c), the direct basis of
paлíчw is uncertain. It may have been formed from a noun (*páy, *рaл-η, vel sim.),
but it can also be a transformation of a primary verb (cf. the examples in Schwyzer:
735f.). Formally, рaлíчw could be a zero grade formation of þéлw, pórtaλov; it would
have indicated, if deverbative, a sweeping movement (of a rod, the hand, etc.). See
further ►þéлw; cf. ►pwy 1, ► þáßdoç, ▸þáµvoç, and also ►þáлτw. Alternatively, a
Pre-Greek origin is a serious option for this etymon, as well.
paлíç kind of shoe. <PG(V)►
•ETYM The variation with ápлíç (Fur. 392) points to Pre-Greek origin. See ► ápïíç.
þáлτw [v.] 'to sew (together), stitch, instigate' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Aor. þáwaɩ (II.), them. aor. Eppaqov (Nonn.), pass. þaôñvaɩ, fut. þáww, perf.
pass. ëppaµµaɩ (IA), plpf. act. ¿ppaqŋkɛɩ (X. Eph.).
na
●DIAL Myc. ra-pte(-re) may stand for *þaïτýp [m.] (see Morpurgo Davies 1963 s.v.
with literature; differently Heubeck IF 64 (1958-1959): 119ff.); also Myc. e-ra-pe-me-
e-rapmena/ 'stitched'. Myc. wa-ra-pi-si-ro, which was thought to stand for
Fpáчiλoç, can no longer be connected, since erapemena shows that the verb had no
initial F-.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ouv-, kata-, Èv-.
•DER 1. Action nouns: pacń (also σuv-, кατα-, etc.) [f.] ‘hem, seam' (X 186), here and
below, -q- is analogical; þáα [n.] ‘id.' (Pi., IA); 2. Agent nouns: paqɛús [m.] ‘sewer,
stitcher, instigator' (A., Poll.), acc. to Boßhardt 1942: 40 from payý; þáñtns [m.]
‘stitcher' with -τɩкóç (late), fem. þáжрα (Eust.), with лεpɩ- [m.] of a priestess in
Piraeus (inscr.); paлτúp ‘id.', see above on Myc.; Siкo-ppáq-oç [m.] ‘hack lawyer' (D.
Chr. et al.), with -ppaqέw [v.] 'to instigate a lawsuit' (Ar.), -ppaqía (Man.); 3.
instrument nouns paciç, -ídoç [f.] 'sewing needle' (Hp., Archipp., Hell.), paqid-εúc
[m.], -ɛα [f.] 'stitcher', -evτýs [m.] ‘id.', -ɛvtóc (LXX), -ã¢ [m.] ‘id.' (pap. IV³); cf.
Boßhardt 1942: 40; paqis also fish name = ελóvŋ (Arist., Opp.), see Strömberg 1943:
37; beside it þaŋíç as a fish name (Epich 51 v.l.), = êpηëíç (H., EM), see on ►ápëíç; 4.
verbal adj. þarɩɩóç ‘stitched, sewn together' (w 228f.); 5. ‘Payó [f.] name of a goddess
or nymph (Phaleron IVª). On pawwdóc, see s.v.

=== page 664 ===

1276
þáлuç
páxis, -Los
1277
•ETYM Since Myc. e-ra-pe-me-na shows that þáлτw does not go back to a form with
initial F-, the older etymology with Baltic (Lith. veřpti, 1sg. verpiù 'to spin', Lith.
veřpti (virpti), virpěti 'to tremble, shudder, vibrate', Latv. virpêt 'to spin with a
spindle; shudder', verpt 'to spin, turn round about') must be abandoned. Cf. further
▶ pétwéiouai.
páлuç ⚫VAR páquç. →páqavoç.
pãσow [v.] ‘to beat, smash, thrust, stamp' (also of dancers), intr. 'to strike, dash’
(Hell.). <?>
•VAR Att. þáττw, Ion. pnσow (epic since Σ 571), with έл- (454, 456, h.Ap. 516, also
LXX, NT), fut. páčw, aor. pāžai (Att., Hell.), paxОñvai (LXX).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. εлI-, OVV-, KATA-.
•DER 1. σúρ-, лрóσ-pažiç [f.] ‘crash, impact' (Arist., pap.), àлó- name of a ball game
(Poll., Eust.); 2. кata-ppáкtηs [adj.] 'rushing down, precipitous' (S., Str.), [m.]
'waterfall' (D. S., Str.), ‘portcullis, boarding bridge' (LXX, App., etc.), name of a bird
that sweeps down (Ar., Arist.); Kaτα-ppýкτηs [m.], name of a river in Phrygia
(Hdt.); кατα-рракτηp 'rushing down' (Lyc.), of a bird; 3. þaкτýplov. öpxnois tis
‘kind of dance', -τýpiα· τúµлava ‘kettledrums' (H.), þaкτýpios ‘suitable for beating'
vel sim., also 'clamorous'? (S. Fr. 802 and 699); þáк¨τpiα [f.pl.] (-ta [n.pl.]?) poles for
beating olive trees' (Poll., H., Phot.). On páy-dηv, -daños, see payń; on ▸ paxía s.v.
⚫ETYM The form páσow was rare, and in Koine it became confused with pŕyvoμ; it
has no certain etymology. Since a consonant must have been lost before the p-, a pre-
form PGr. *Fpάx-w (cf. pax-ía) can perhaps be identified with a Slavic verb for 'beat'
(also with loss of *u-), i.e. Ru. razíť', Cz. raziti, with Cz. ráz 'stroke, stamp', Ru. raz
‘turn' < *ureh₂g". The Slav. words, however, have also been connected with Ru.
rézať ‘to cut, slaughter', OCS rězati ‘kóŋtɛɩv', etc., which are related to i̟é̟yvчµɩ (see
Vasmer 1953 s.v. raz II and Fraenkel 1955 s.v. rézti 1). The semantically attractive
connection with apáσow (Bechtel 1914 s.v. pnσow) would require PGr. *warakh-
je/o- (with different development of *CRHC, perhaps conditioned by the accent?),
but for ►ápáσow, there is no indication for F-. Cf. ► þáxis.
paotwvn →pā.
*paτávη [f.] 'stirring spoon, scoop', only in (Dor.) paτávav. τоpúvny 'stirrer, ladle'
and ẞpaτávav. τорúvηv. 'Hλεio (H.). <PG?, IE? *uert- 'turn'>
•ETYM Instrument name in -ávη like лaτ-, Spεñ-, oúρ-ávη, etc., either from a zero
grade verb (e.g. aor. *Ƒpατ-εiv) or from a noun (e.g. *Ƒpaτ-n). An extended verb
form is perhaps found in ẞpατávɛi. þaïè̟ɛi áñó vóσov. 'Hλɛio 'to recover (El.)' (H.),
originally ‘gets well again'; cf. e.g. ßλaστávw from ßλaστ-ɛïv, aioðávoµaɩ from
aio éσa. The word ►äppaτoç is formed from a noun, like äµaxos from µáõŋ, etc.
Traditionally, this etymon was connected to Skt. vártate, Lat. vertō ‘to turn (intr.)',
etc. (cf. Pok. 1156ff.), and poτapía (-ápia?). Topúviov (H.) was explained as having
Aeol. po for pa (Bechtel 1921, 2: 864). However, the variants ẞpaτ- ~ ßpor- and the
suffix -av- may also point to Pre-Greek origin.
páqavoc [f.] 'cabbage, Brassica cretica' (Att., etc.), 'radish, Raphanus sativus' (Arist.,
pap.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also -ávη (Batr. v.l.), etc. Cf. þáquc, páñus [f.] ‘turnip', péqavos (Hp. Mul. 2,
115).
●DER 1. paqavíç, -îdos [f.] ‘radish' (com., etc.) with -ídɩov [n.] ‘id.' (Pl. Com.), -1dwdns
like a radish' (Thphr.), -ɩdóoµaɩ [v.] ‘to be treated with radish' (Ar.); 2. paqáv-tov
[n.] ‘radish' (pap.), also þaлávov; 3. -ɩvos ‘of radish' (pap., Dsc., etc.), -īùs [f.] ‘kind
of iris' (Plin.), see Redard 1949: 76; 4. -ŋdóv [adv.] 'in a radish-like way' (medic.).
Besides, páquç, þáлuç [f.] 'turnip' (Ath. 9, 369b, 371 c). Uncertain is the
appurtenance of páqas ([acc.pl.] acc. to H. s.v. paqavíc, with Tryphon Dor.),
probably miswritten for paqávous or paq<áv>aç; cf. Phot. pápavov. tǹv paqavīda.
'Eñixapµoç (Fr. 204; improbable).
•ETYM With páqavoç, compare лúаvoç, λáxаvov, лŔуavov and other plant names;
þáquç and þáñuç are reminiscent of σíкuç, кáxpuç, otáxus, etc.
Since the word is widespread only in Europe, and since it has variant forms, it
cannot be an inherited word from PIE, but must have been borrowed instead, or
otherwise belong to a substrate: cf. Lat. rāpum [n.], -a [f.], OHG ruoba [f.], Lith. rópė
[f.], which all point to a pre-form *rāp-; beside these, we find OHG raba, CS rěpa,
Ru. répa [f.], which point to *rēp- (cf. Machek Ling. Posn. 2 (1950): 158ff.). The Greek
words, in turn, require *rap-, or raph-, respectively: páñus, páquç, páqavos. The
transformation of the old word for 'turnip' to black radish and cabbage would be due
to the decline of the cultivation of the turnip in Greece; for ‘turnip', a new word
yoyyuλiç then came into use.
Since the variation л
~
op and the suffix -av- are evidently Pre-Greek features, the
word may originally be of Pre-Greek stock; thence teh European cognates cited
above were borrowed.
páqoɩ [m.] · öpvɛtç tɩvéç ‘'birds' (H.). <PG?►
⚫ETYM The etymology is unknown. Probably Pre-Greek.
paxía [f.] ‘breakers of the sea, high tide, spot in the surf, rocky beach' (IA); Hell. also
'bustle, clamor of a mob'. <GR>
•VAR Ion. pnxín.
•DER paxi-wdns 'full of breakers' (Str.).
•ETYM Related to ►þáσow, þáττw, and pσow 'to beat, bump, etc.' (s.v. with further
literature), i.e. either as an action noun directly from the verb (with -ía from the
yod-present *Fpάx-w? See Scheller 1951: 39f.), or as an original abstract or a
collective formation (oik-ía, ávτλ-ía, etc.) from *pãxoç ‘stroke, bump'.
páxis, -10s [f., m.] ‘spine, back', often metaphorically ‘ridge, etc.' (I 208). ◄PG►
•VAR Att. -ɛws.
•DER 1. þax-íτηs [m.] ‘belonging to the spine' (Arist., medic.), èñppax-ítɩdes
ápτmpiai (Hippiatr.), Redard 1949: 101f.; 2. paxi-años ‘id.' (medic.); 3. pax-íľw [v.] ‘to
crack, chop up (the spine)' (trag.), also 'to show off, boast' (Din., H.), also with Sta-,
кατα-; thence -ɩστns [m.] 'splitter' (pap.), 'showoff, boaster' (Theopomp. Com.),
-lotýp· weúotns, áλačúv liar or cheat, vagrant' (H.).

=== page 665 ===

1278
paywdóc
With transformation of the stem: 4. pάx-ετрov = páxis (H.), also designation of a
certain part of it (Poll., Phot.), perhaps after äукɩστpov, déptpov, ñtpov (cf. Fraenkel
Glotta 4 (1913): 43, Schwyzer: 532), -ɛτpíľw = paxíčw (Poll.); besides, we find þáк-
ετpov, etc. (see ►þáкos?); 5. paxás. xwpiov oúvdevdpov kaì µetέwpov 'thickly-
wooded place on high ground (H., Phot.), after dɛpáç, oñλáç, etc., with paxádŋv.
¿ñì tñs páxεws ‘on the spine' (H.); 6. gen.sg. τoû paxa, from paxaç ‘id.?' (Halaesa;
Roman times).
Besides, paxós (also pāxos; codd. also páxos, probably after páx₁s), Ion. pnxós [f.]
'briar, thorn hedge, (thorny) sprig' (Hdt., S., X., Thphr.), εü-ppnxos, prxwdns
'thorny' (Nic.); denominative paxwoai [v.] 'to cover with sprigs' (Att. [307-6ª]). For
the meaning 'briar, spine, back', cf. e.g. ǎkavða, Lat. spina, etc. Unclear is páxvos [n.]
(pap. IV-VIP), 'cloak' vel sim.?
•ETYM The word páxis was compared with Lith. ražis ‘stubble' (beside more usual
rāžas ‘stubble, [fork] tooth, barren twig'), from a preform *urag"-i-; the initial ụ- is
confirmed in Greek by opηxov (where ó- stands for Ƒ-)· tñs a¡µaσɩāç ‘wall' (H.). A
full or lengthened grade *urāgh- was seen in pãxóç, pnxós (e.g. Pok. 1180). However,
since FpǎX-/Fpãx- cannot be derived from an IE form (the ablaut in the above
reconstructions being impossible), it may instead be Pre-Greek.
paчwdóc [m.] ‘rhapsodist, performer of epic (Homeric) poems' (Hdt., S., Pl.). ◄GR▷
•DER paчwd-iкóç 'belonging to the rhapsodisť, -éw [v.] 'to recite epic poems', -ía [f.]
'reciting epic poems, epic poems' (Att., etc.).
⚫ETYM The word paywбóc is a verbal governing compound of pawai ódýν (ȧoidŕv),
thus originally 'who sews a poem together', referring to the uninterrupted sequence
of epic verses as opposed to the strophic compositions of lyrics; cf. Hes. Fr. 265
þáyavtes áoɩdýv, Pi. N. 2, 2 'Oµŋpídai partŵv ¿néwv... άoidoí (see Patzer Herm. 80
(1952): 314ff.; Sealey REGr. 70 (1957): 312ff.).
þéукw [v.] 'to snore, snort' (A., E., com., Arist. v.l.). ◄PG?►
•VAR þέyxw (Hp., Arist., Herod., Hell. and late); note the variants pεyx-, poxμ-, and
pwxμ-.
•COMP Rarely with àлo-, úло-, лapα-.
======
•DER péyk-oç (also -✗-) [n.] 'snore' with -wdns 'snore-like', péyчis [f.] ‘id.' (Hp.);
poykɩñv. péykɛɩv. 'Eлíxapµoç (H.) (after the verbs of disease in -táw); poyxáčev (H.)
as an explanation of pyxiάšav, whence poyx-aoµós = péyxos (Gal.), -aσtńs
nasator (gloss.); poyx-aλí(w 'to snore' (gloss.), after yapyaλí(w, etc.; also póyxos
(Cael. Aur.), pwxµós péyxos (Erot.); pós poxós, poчuós 'to hiss' (late
medic.); pwxw 'to hiss, chatter one's teeth' (Sor., H.).
=
ETYM The etymon is clearly onomatopoeic; cf. púyxos. Although the variation is
certainly due in part to the onomatopoeic character of the word, many of the
alternations would also fit a Pre-Greek origin. The Celtic forms compared in Frisk
(OIr. srennim 'to snort', MIr. sréimm ‘snoring') may derive from *sreg"-n-.
pέw 1 [v.] ‘to act, perform', especially of a sacrifice, 'to sacrifice' (Il., epic). ◄IE *uerg-
'work'>
•VAR Fut. péεw, aor. péčαɩ, pass. pεxеñvaɩ.
1
pεeos
•DIAL Myc. wo-ze [3sg.pres.] /worzei/, seeAura Jorro 1985-1993(2): 451.
•COMP Rarely with έëɩ-, kata-, etc.
1279
⚫DER Verbal adjective ǎ-pεк-τos 'undone' (T 150, Simon.), agent noun pεкtýρ, -ñpos
[m.] 'doer' (Hes., Man.), -τpios 'effective' (Ion Hist.), [f.] -Tεpa (Man.); þéкτηç
[m.] 'id.' (Plu., Aret.), -TIкóç 'capable of sth.' (Porph.), also ρéкταç 'sacrificer'
(Tauromenion; Rom. times); лappéktηs. лávta éρáττwν έлì kako ‘doing all for
mischief (H.); cf. Fraenkel 1910: 150 and 175; on pέw with derivatives, see
Kretschmer Glotta 18 (1929): 85f.
⚫ETYM Next to (F)épyov with full grade, IE had a zero grade yod-present *urg-ie-ti
(Av. vǝrǝziiāmahi, etc.), of which the Greek representative *Fpάw (= Myc. wo-ze)
was replaced by the full grade εpdw < *Ƒεpу-дw (after Fέpyov). This form was
substituted by the secondary full grade Fpεy-, with a different position of the liquid,
at first in the aor. and fut. péčαɩ, péεw, then also in the pres. pé(w, the verbal adj. ǎ-
p(p)εкτoç, etc. (cf. Schwyzer: 7162 with literature). On traces of the same full grade in
Albanian and Celtic, cf. Pok. 1168 with literature (cf. also Bader 1965: iff.; on pdw
and pέw, Hamp MSS 45 (1985): 106-109). See further ►εpdw and ►pyov.
péчw 2 [v.] ‘to color, þáлτεν' (Еpich. 107, Phot., EM). ◄IE *sreg- ‘paint'.>
•VAR Aor. péčαı.
•DER pέyoç (ȧλлóрouрov, Anacг.), more usual óñуoç [n.] 'blanket, carpet' (Hom.) =
tò þaлτòv σtpŵµa (Et. Orion.), τó nopôvpoûv nepiẞóλatov (EM); péyµata (ñoкíla,
Ibyc.); Xpuoopayés. xpvσoßaqés 'gold-embroidered' (H.); agent noun = Baqεús,
colorer': pɛyɛús (EM v.l. beside pay-, pny-), pŋyɛús (sch., H.), poyɛúç (inscr. Sparta,
H.); see Boßhardt 1942: 83.
⚫ETYM This etymon can hardly be separated from Skt. rájyati 'to paint oneself, get
red, get exciteď, rāga- [m.] ‘painting, paint, excitement'. In view of the lack of an
initial vowel in Greek, we have to consider a reconstruction *sreg-. The stem form
pny is problematic, however.
péƉoç [n.] ‘face, countenance' (S. Ant. 529, E. HF 1205 [both anap.], Theoc. 29, 16, Lyc.
1137), 'body' (Lyc. 173), meaning uncertain (Sapph. 22, 3); plur. 'faces' (A. R. 2, 68),
'limb' (Theoc. 23, 39); older meaning unclear (έк þɛ¤έwv II 856 = X 362, X 68); cf.
pε εwv. σлλáуxvwv, μελwv, σwμáτwv 'innards, limbs, bodies' (H.); the sch. on X 68
proposes 'face, mouth', also 'nostrils', the last of which is preferred by Leumann 1950:
218ff. (with older literature) because of the plur. Cf. Snell 1948: 24-6, who
demonstrates the transition from the literal meaning, namely a body part, to the
more general mg. 'body'. <?>
●COMP As a first member in Aeol. þɛðo-µaλíðaç, literally with face-apples', acc. to
sch. X 68 = εлpoσáлovç.
•ETYM Since the meaning ‘face, countenance', given as Aeolic by grammarians, is
certain, we have to depart from this when explaining the word. Both an older epic
meaning 'mouth' and 'figure, body' seem possible (cf. e.g. Lat. ōs 'mouth, face', facies
'figure, face'); the pl. could have been formed after µéλɛa, σtýßɛa, oτépvα, vwτα, etc.
On the meaning in Hom., cf. Vivante Arch. glott. ital. 40 (1955): 41f. An original
meaning 'nostril(s)' fits well, and the transition to ‘face' or 'body' is unproblematic.

=== page 666 ===

1280
peia, péa
The form pélos has no convincing etymology. The lack of the F- (ẞ-) in Aeol. péoç
makes a connection with Skt. várdhati ‘to grow' difficult. Fraenkel's suggestion to
connect ►píç and péw (Frisk Glotta 32 (1975): 31ff.; also, Treu 1955: 1904) is neither
morphologically nor semantically convincing.
->
peia, péa → pā.
pɛɩtos [m.?] an unidentified object from Delos (BCH 54, 1930, 121). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
pελaτwpía 'receipt' (POxy. 3125). ◄LW Lat.➤
⚫ETYM Formed from a borrowing from Lat. rēlātor ‘registrator'.
þéµßoµaι [v.] ‘to go about, wander, roam around, act at random' (Hell. and late).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Only pres. except þεµôеñvai· þéµßɛoðai (H.).
•COMP Rarely with άo-, etc.
=
●der pɛµßwdŋs ‘walking about, aimless, idle' (Plb., Plu.), with the back-formation
¿éµßos [m.] ‘wandering about' (Plu., Aret.), adj. pɛµßós (late), fem. -áç (LXX v.l.).
Extensions: pεuß-εúw (also кαтα-) þéμßoμ, -ασμós [m.] 'roaming' (LXX;
*-álouai).
With ablaut póµẞoç [m.] ‘circular movement, top, hummingtop, magic wheel,
tambourine' (Pi., Critias, E.), geom. 'rhombus' (Arist., Euc., etc.), also name of a flat-
fish, 'turbot' vel sim. (Ath., etc.), see Strömberg 1943: 38, Thompson 1947 s.v.; also
púμßos (Att. according to grammarians); poμßo-dns ‘rhombus-like, rhomboidic'
(Hp., Euc., etc.); þvµß-íov [n.] 'little top' (sch.); pouß-wτós 'having the form of a
rhombus' (Hell. and late); -ŋdóv 'in the way of a p.' (Man.); pouẞ-éw (also pv-) [v.]
'to go in circles' (Pl., etc.) with -ŋτý [m.] 'top' (Оrph.), εл- 'to whirl like a
humming-top' (Sapph.); poμßóoμat 'to be turned into a p.' (Hero); þvµß-óvεç [f.pl.]
'wrigglings' of a snake (A. R.), cf. άyк-óvɛç, etc.; -ováw (also pεµß-) 'to sway, hurl
away' (Phld., Ael.), after σqɛvdováw.
•ETYM The word póµßos is attested already in Pi., and it proves that the primary
form ¿éµßoµaɩ, which is attested much later, must have existed at an earlier stage,
too. The by-form púµßos recalls cases like pooέw: puoéw (cf. Schwyzer 351f.); note
also pu̟ẞóv. εлкαµлéç (EM, Hdn. Gr.). The form péμßоμαι was compared with MLG
wrimpen 'to contract (one's face)' (Persson 1912(1): 498), but an IE pre-form *uremb-
is highly doubtful. At least as uncertain is the comparison with Lith. rengtis 'to bow',
etc. (de Saussure MSL 8 (1894): 443; Lidén 1899: 14f.).
It is difficult to combine péµßoμaɩ with þáµqoç, ¿éµqoç, þáµvoc, þáßdoc, and ò̟é̟лw
in traditional Indo-European terms, in view of the various different labials (ẞ, Q, π).
Because the meanings deviate, an etymological analysis remains hazardous.
However, the forms with puμß-, puß- seem to point to a Pre-Greek word, as does the
interchange π/ ẞ/ Q.
þεлw [v.] 'to decline, descend', especially of the balance, 'to sway down, turn out, gain
the upper hand', with prefix also trans. 'to lower, let tilt' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Rare fut. péчw and aor. péyai (IA).
péw
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. επ-, àvti-, kata-.
1281
●DER 1. poný [f.] 'lowering, tilting (of the scales), swing' (Alc., IA), to which (among
others) ȧvτí-рpoлos ‘equipoising, counterweighing' (Att.), with ȧvτɩppor-ín (v.l. -ý)
[f.] 'counterweight' (Hp.); 2. лɛpí-ppɛyɩç [f.] ‘tilting' (Hp.); 3. рónalov [n.]
'bludgeon, mace' (Il.), with poлáλ-tov [n.] (Hell. inscr. and pap.), -wτós ‘equipped
with a club-like rounding' (D. C.), -wdns (pulsing) like a club', of the pulse, -wσiç
[f.] designation of a hair disease (medic.), -кóç ‘club-like', as a designation of a verse
(gramm.), -íε στpéqɛi, kivɛi wę pónаλov 'turns, moves like a club' (H.) with -10μoí
[pl.] (Ar. Lys.); 4. þóлτpov [n.] ‘the wood in a trap, knocker, ring at the door,
tambourine' (Archil., Att.); dissimilated to рóлτоν of unclear meaning (Epid. IV),
-τíov. кλɛdíov ‘little key' (H.); 5. nɛpi-, έni-, kata-ppenýƒ ‘tilting, etc.' (IA), étɛpo-
ppεлns, originally 'tilting to (one or) the other side', hence 'indecisive, unbiased' (A.
[lyr.], Hp.); 6. рεπτкóç 'tilting' (Stoic.).
⚫ETYM Attempts have been made to connect pεлw with þáлτw, paní(w, and even
►pwч, but see s.v.v. The alleged common semantic denominator 'to twist (together),
wind, bend' was sought in pónaλov, þóлτроν, but these words are perhaps not
related (see Chantraine 1933: 246), and the supposed meaning 'throwing stick', which
was needed for that connection, is unwarranted. Cf. ► ò̟é̟µßoµaɩ with references. The
word may instead be Pre-Greek. The word кaλaupoч (compared by DELG), which
is certainly Pre-Greek, is unrelated.
pέw [v.] ‘to flow, stream', also metaphorically, 'to stream off, fall off, of hair, ripe
fruits, etc. (Il.). <IE *sreu- 'flow, stream'>
•VAR Aor. puñvai (y 455), Dor. έppúã, fut. ¿vñooµai, perf. ¿ppúŋka (Att.); fut.
pεúσoμa (Thgn., com., Hp.), pεvσoчμa (Arist.), pɛúow (AP), aor. pɛñσal (Ar.,
[anap.], Hp., Hell.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. àño-, dia-, ¿к-, katα-, nepi-, vito-.
•DER Many derivatives, also from prefixed compounds:
A. with full grade 1. pέɛðpov (Il., epic Ion.), pɛï¤pov (Att.) [n.] 'stream, river, water';
2. ‘Pɛīτoç [m.] name of a stream or brook (Eleusis Vª, Th., Paus.), see Krahe Beitr. z.
Namenforsch. 5 (1954): 89; 3. þεñµa [n.] ‘current, stream' (IA), cf. Porzig 1942: 267f.,
‘stream, rheumatism' (medic.), with ¯µáτov, -μаτáðη, -µкó, -µíopai,
-patioµós; 4. þéos [n.] ‘stream' (A.), cf. on έv-ppens below; 5. pɛñois [f.] (Hell. for
púσis); 6. pεvστós 'streaming, fluid' (Emp., Arist., etc.), -στкóç (Plu.), -σταλéoç
(Orac. apud Eus.); 7. -ppɛí-tŋs (from -ppefé-tns) in compounds, e.g. ¿ü-ppɛitng
'streaming beautifully' (Hom., etc.), ►ákaλappɛítηç; 8. -ppens only in gen. ¿ü-ppɛłos
= ¿ü-ppeféos (II.) from ¿ü-ppeńs ‘id.'; rather to pέw than to pέos (Schwyzer: 513).
B. With o-grade: 1. þóoç (кaτá-, etc.), Att. pouc, Cypr. póƑoç [m.] 'stream, flow'; 2.
poń (έк-, etc.), Dor. -á, Corc. phoƑaчσ [f.] 'flowing, stream, outflow' (II.); poïσкoÇ
[m.] ‘brookleť (Halaesa), powdns (pot- Gal.) 'flowing, suffering of flux, having
strong currents, watery, falling off (Hp., Th., Arist., etc.), poïкóç 'fluid' (Hp., Dsc.),
pot w 'to drench', of horses (Hippiatr.) with poïoµóç (H.); 3. þoĩaɩ [f.pl.] ‘floods'
(Hp.); 4. -ppola [f.] in prefixed compounds, e.g. Stáppola (to dia-ppέw) 'flowing
through, diarrhoea' (IA); on the formation Schwyzer: 469.

=== page 667 ===

1282
C. With zero grade: 1. putós ‘streaming, pouring out, flowing strongly' (trag., etc.;
with àµôí-, nɛpí- since Od.); puτóv [n.] ‘drinking horn' (Att., Hell.); 2. þÚOIs (ěk-,
etc.) [f.] 'flowing, flow' (IA); 3. ► þúµα = þɛñµa (late) s.v.; 4. púāš, -āкoç [m.] 'strong
current, rushing stream, stream of lava' (Th., Pl., Arist., etc.), probably Sicil. (Björck
1950: 61 and 285); cf. púay (cod. poí-). pápayε 'cleft, chasm' (H.); 5. puάxetos [m.]
'multitude of people' (Lac.; Ar. Lys. 170), expressive enlargement of púaž after
óxεtós, ouppetóç? 6. þvác [f.] (also [m., n.]) ‘fluid, falling off (Arist., Thphr., etc.),
also an epithet of ¿èðñç or a designation of certain fishes that live in swarms and
follow the currents (Arist., etc.), see Strömberg 1943: 50f., Thompson 1947 s.v., also
'flow', with puadiкóç, ‘suffering flux, etc.' (medic.); 7. þvdóv (0 426), þúdny (Crates,
etc.) 'flooding, abounding'.
On pueμóc, see s.v.; on þúτpoç, þóa (potá), poñç as plant names see póa.
ETYM The thematic present pέw (< *þéƑw; cf. póƑoc, etc. above) agrees with Skt.
srávati ‘flow' < IE *sréu-e-ti. There are other exact morphological matches as well,
but their age is uncertain because of the strong productivity of the relevant
categories. Examples are: póos = Skt. srava- [m.] 'flowing' (cf. OCS o-strovú, Ru.
óstrov 'island', from *surrounded by stream[s]'); pon = Lith. sravà [f.] ‘flowing, flow
of blood, menstruation' (cf. Skt. giri-sravā- [f.] ‘mountain brook'); þúσiç = Skt. srutí-
[f.] ‘way, street'; þvτós = Skt. srutá- 'flowing' (cf. Lith. srutos [f.pl.] (dial. -tà [sg.])
'liquid manure, [animal] urine'); (εü)-ppɛńc, related to Skt. (madhu)-sravas- [m.]
'dripping of honey', plant name (lex.). The neuter pεчµа (IE *sreu-mn) is mirrored
by a corresponding masculine in Balto-Slavic, e.g. Lith. sraumuō, gen. -meñs 'rapid'
(IE *srou-mon-). An m-suffix is also found in Germanic, e.g. ON straumr 'stream'
(IE *srou-mo-), in Celtic, e.g. OIr. sruaim ‘stream', and in Alb. rrymë ‘stream' (Mann
Lang. 28 (1952): 37).
Genetic connection between the Dor. aor. έ-ppúã and the Lith. pret. pa-srùvo
'flowed' <*-āt (Schwyzer: 743) seems unlikely. Also formally identical are the futures
рεúσoμα (-σw) and Skt. sroşyati. Apart from that, the Greek and Sanskrit, as well as
the Baltic verbal systems go different ways. Cf. pwoμα.
i̟é̟yvvµ [v.] ‘to tear (up), break (to pieces), burst' (Il.). ◄IE *ureh,ģ- ‘break'>
•VAR Fut. pŕžw, aor. þñžαɩ (all Il.), perf. med. εppηy-чa (137), act. (intr.) Eppwya
(Archil., Hp., trag.), ptc. έppηyεĩa (Tab. Heracl.), trans. Eppηxa (Hell.), aor. pass.
payñvaɩ (Il.), with fut. payńσoµaɩ (A., etc.), ¿òx¤ñvai (late); new pres. pńoow, pńttw
(Hp., Hell.; to pñšai, pŕšw).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, dia-, ¿к-, kaτα-, лεpɩ-. As a first member in
verbal governing compounds p½§(1)-, e.g. pηĚ-ńvwp epithet of Achilles, breaking the
(rows of) men' (Hom.) with -ηvopín (217), cf. Sommer 1948: 180; Jernstedt Idg. Jb.
14: 151 connects poow 'to throw (down)'.
DER A. With e-grade: 1. ρñуµα (čк-, σúv-) [n.] 'tore, cleft, breach' (IA) with
pating, wdns (Hp.); 2. pηучós ‘id.' (pap. III³); 3. pηyuív (-µíç), -μīvoç [f.]
'breaking down of a cart, breaking of the sea' (Il., epic), a derivation in -īv-, cf.
Chantraine 1933: 168, Schwyzer: 465; Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 40 assumed
influence of Oíç; 4. ¿ñšíç (also кατá-, лεpí-, etc.), Aеol. Ƒpñ¹ç [f.] ‘breaking
through, breach' (Alc., Hp., E., Arist.) with pηкtiкóç (кatα-) ‘fragile, brittle' (Hp.,
1
pñov
1283
Aët.); 5. þýкτns [m.] “the disruptor", designation of a certain form of earthquake
(Arist., Lyd.); 6. Foηyaλéov (cod. τp-). Sieppwyóτa 'broken through' (H.); cf. below
B 4; 7. αρηкτоç = ǎ-Ƒρηкτoç 'unbroken' (Hdn. Gr.).
B. With o-grade: 1. pwέ [f.] only pŵyaç [acc.pl.] (X 143) ‘tore' = 'narrow passage' (cf.
Wace JHS 71 (1951): 203ff.), further in prefixed compounds, e.g. åлoppwε ‘torn off,
fem. ‘torn-off piece, outflow' (Il., epic poet.); 2. Stappwyń [f.] ‘gap, interspace' (Hp.);
pwyaí· pýšɛis (H.); 3. pwyás, -ádos 'torn up, cleft' (Hell. poetry.); 4. pwyaλέoç ‘torn
up, full of holes' (Hom.); 5. pwyµý [f.] ‘breach, tore' (Hp., Arist.) with pwyµatíns
(Hp. apud Gal.; cf. A 1); pwxµóc [m.] 'tore, cleft, gap' (Y 420, Hell.), containing a
suffix -σuo- (Schwyzer: 493), -μaí [pl.] ‘id.' (Marc. Sid.).
C. With zero grade: 1. payń (dia-), payác, páydny, paydałos (s.v. ►payń); 2. þáyos
[n.] ‘rag, shred' (pap. II³), payóɛis (Nic.) after ► þáкoç, -óɛiç; 3. rɛpippayns 'broken
all around' (AP), from лɛpɩ-ppαyñval.
•ETYM The form ¿½µ < *Ƒpηуvµ (cf. Ƒpñší, paléo) corresponds
semantically and phonologically with the primary stem in Arm. ergic-anem, aor.
ergic-i with the usual caus. ergic-uc'anem 'to tear apart, break'. Phonetically adequate,
but semantically less convincing, is the comparison (since Meillet MSL 9 (1896): 142)
with a Balto-Slavic verb for 'to beat, etc.' in Lith. rėžti ‘to cut, incise, beat', OCS rězati
'кóлτεν', Ru. rézať' 'to cut, slaughter', etc. It seems impossible to connect ▸ páσow in
view of the different laryngeal. Forms with pay- must contain a secondary zero
grade, since *urh,g- would give ƑρηY-.
piyos →pétw 2.
ρñµα •VAR ρñσιç, þýτpa, etc. →εïpw 2, þýτwp.
*pńv [m.] ‘sheep, lamb' (A. R.). <GR▷
•VAR ρñva [acc.] (Nic.), pývɛσσɩ [dat.pl.] (A. R.).
•COMP As a second member, e.g. in лоλú-рpηv-ε [nom.pl.] (I 154 = 296), thematic
extension in лоλú-ppηv-o-ç [nom.sg.] ( 257) 'rich in sheep'; úлó-рpηv-o-v [acc.sg.]
(K 216) 'having a lamb underneath, suckling a lamb'. As a first member in pηvo-
popɛúc [m.] 'bearer of sheep fleece' (AP), see Boßhardt 1942: 29; extracted from there
pηviкós 'from the sheep', þñvε, -кos [f.] 'sheep fleece' (Hp.).
•DER Several glosses in H.: pηvεa· лрóßατα ‘cattlе' (cf. kτývεa); pãva. äpva ‘lambs,
sheep' (Elean?), þúɛɩva. äpvɑ. Kúñлpɩɩ (does it stand for Ƒpηv-?); probably also
τpavóv (if for *FP-). εεauηvañoν лрóßатоν 'six-month-old cattle' (but then the a
remains unexplained). The island name 'Pηveta (near Delos) may be related, too.
⚫ETYM The above forms differ only in ablaut from ►ȧpýv < fapńv; as a basis, one
would best assume a formation *urh,-en > ȧpv, zero grade *urh,-n-> (-p)pnv-. Lat.
rēnō (mentioned by Frisk) should remain separate.
The forms pývεoσɩ and þñva (Hell. epic) may well have been built after лoλú-ppη
and other compounds, but this explanation does not seem to fit Hippocratic pηúkós
and pηvič, nor the glosses in Hesychius (cf. Sommer 1948: 66ff.; Ruijgh 1957: 161;
Schwyzer: 568).
pñov [n.] ‘rhubarb' (Gal.).

=== page 668 ===

1284
•VAR Also pã (Dsc.).
proós
•ETYM The word would come from the river called Rha (i.e. the Wolga; Amm.
Marcell. 22, 8, 28). Cf. André 1956 s.v. rhā and reum.
pŋσós = ȧpxós? (Epich. 205, cited by Phot., Suid.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
pńoow →ò̟é̟yvvµi.
pŋtívn [f.] ‘resin, fir resin' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.), on the neuter gender cf. ßoútupov.
<PG➤
●COMP þitɩvó-knpov [n.] 'wax dissolved in resin' (medic.).
•DER pηtiv-wdns 'resinous', -íτηs olvos 'resinous wine' (Dsc.), denominative verbs
-iw 'be resinous' (Dsc.), -óoμa 'to be made resinous' (Hp., Dsc.).
⚫ETYM The suffixes -īvos and -ïvŋ are found both with inherited and with Pre-Greek
words (Chantraine 1933: 204f., Schwyzer: 491). Since there are no good cognates,
however, the word is probably Pre-Greek. The comparison with Lat. rasis [f.], a kind
of raw pitch pulverized to dust that was mixed with wine (WH s.v., as a supposed
loan word from *páσiç), is uncertain. Lat. rēsīna gives proof of a dialectal Greek by-
form *pnoiva (Leumann 1963-1979: 141); the variation attested by this form shows.
that it is a Pre-Greek word (cf. Fur.: 261).
þýτwp, -opoç [m.] 'speaker, annunciator' (S., E.), especially 'orator in public, public
speaker' (Att.), 'master speaker, discourse artist' (late). <IE *uerh,- 'speak'>
•COMP Some rare and late compounds, e.g. qiλo-pητwp 'who loves orators' (Phld.).
●DER pηtop-íσkoç denigratory diminutive (pap. IIP), -кóç ‘oratorical, silver-tongued,
rhetorical', pηTop-εúw [v.] 'to act as an orator, practice the art of oratory', rarely with
кatα-, έí-, etc.; thence -ɛía [f.] ‘oratory, artful discourse' (Att.). pŋtop-í\w ‘id.'
(Hell.). Further pŋtýp, -ñpos [m.] 'speaker' (I 443), 'orator' (AP 7, 579, metrical
inscr.), so metrically conditioned?
⚫ETYM As a term for a profession, pητwp was created in the Attic official language
(Fraenkel 1912: 9); the original function as an agent noun from εipw 'speak' can still
be seen in E. Hec. 124 (anap.) μúеwv pητopεs, which mirrors Hom. μúðшv þητñpa (I
443); a doubtful attempt to find a semantic differentiation can be found in
Benveniste 1948: 52ff.). See ɛipw 2.
þýτavov [n.] name of a plant (Gp. 12, 1, 1). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
piyoç [n.] 'frost, cold, shivering fit' (ε 472). <IE *sriHg-os 'cold'>
.COMP Some compounds, e.g. piyо-лúρετoç [m.] (-ov [n.]) 'tertian fever, ague' (Gal.,
Ptol., etc.) for older "upɛtòs kai pîyos (Hp.), see Strömberg 1944: 85; ȧ-pplyŃs (-yéws
[adv.]) 'not sensitive to cold' (Hp.); also ä-p(p)tyos ‘id.; not shivering' (Arist., Aret.);
Súσ-piyos 'to tolerate cold badly' (Hdt., Arist., Thphr.); both connected with piyέw
like e.g. Súo-popos with popέw, qέpw.
⚫DER Denominative plyww, -wσat [v.] 'to freeze' (481), rarely with εл-, έv-, etc.,
formed after the antonym iSpów (not from *plywσ- as per e.g. Schwyzer: 724).
1
Pikvós
1285
Further the perfect Eppiya 'freeze, congeal, shudder', aor. þɩуñσaɩ (Il., epic), fut.
płynow (E 351), pres. piyέw (Pi.); rarely with ȧлo-, εлɩ-, KATA-.
Primary comparative píytov 'colder, ghastlier, more terrible' (Hom., Hes., Semon.),
superlative píуiσta (E 873), -oç, -ov (A. R., Nic.).
Further adjectives: 1. pɩyɛdavós ‘ghastly, terrible' (T 325, A. R., Opp.), to pɩyos after
an unknown example, or from *þɩyɛdwv (Chantraine 1933: 362)? 2. piyaλéos ‘id.'
(Emp.); to pĭyoç like åpyaλéos to ǎlyos; 3. piyndós (katα-) ‘id.' (§ 226, Hes. Sc., Nic.,
Nonn. Ap), from έpiya, pɩyέw; 4. pływdns 'causing a shivering fit' (Hp., Gal.), from
pīyoç; 5. ‘Pīуµoç [m.] name of a Thracian (Y 485); to piyoç like ɛpµóç to Oépoc?
⚫ETYM The proportion pptya: piyoç is matched by уéуηеα уñеoç, λéλŋеa: Dor.
Aãos, or (ablauting) yέyova: yévos, etc. The pair píyiov: piyoç has a parallel in
ǎλytov: ǎλyoç, кéρdiov: кéρdoç (Schwyzer: 539).
The form piyos corresponds exactly to Lat. frīgus [n.] ‘cold, frost, shivering', from IE
*sriHg-os [n.]. The form pĩyéw in turn is identical to Lat. frīgeō, but this identity may
be due to parallel innovations.
píša [f.] 'root', also metaphorically ‘origin, stem, base' (Il.). ◄?►
•VAR Aeol. ẞpíča, ßpioda.
•DIAL Myc. wi-ri-za /wriza/.
•COMP Several compounds, e.g. pišo-tóµoç [m.] ‘root-cutter, -gatherer, herbalist',
„oλú-ppios ‘having many roots, rich in roots' (Hp., Thphr.).
•DER 1. pičíov [n.] 'little root' (Ar., Thphr.), plur. -éa (Nic., -εia Al. 265), probably
after oστéa beside (Dor.) oστía; 2. pičíαç (ónóc) [m.] 'root juice' (Thphr.), opposed
to kavλíaç; 3. adjectives pí-wdns 'root-like' (Thphr., Hero), -кóç ‘belonging to
roots' (Plu.), -ɩvos 'made of roots' (PHolm.), -añoç ‘serving as a base' (Sardes); 4.
adverbs píš-ɲɛv (A. R.), -ółɛv (Nic., Luc.) ‘out of the root'; -ŋdóv ‘in a root-like
way' (Hld.); 5. verb píšóoµai (¿ppíšwtai), -ów (-woα) 'to strike root, root, provide
with roots, affirm, consolidate' (Od.), also with v-, έк-, кατα-, etc., whence píč-wµa
[n.] 'original soil, origin, roots' (A., Emp., Thphr.), -wois [f.] 'striking root' (Philol.,
Thphr., etc.). On píča, compounds and derivatives, cf. Strömberg 1937: 5, 8ff.
•ETYM Aeol. ẞpíša requires a pre-form PGr. *Fpíd-α, which differs in vocalism from
Lat. rādīx; in both cases we have a derivative in *-ih₂- of a noun that is also found in
Germanic and Celtic: ON rót [f.] 'root' from PGm. *wrōt- < PIE *ureh₂d-. An i-stem
is found in Go. waurts, OE wyrt, OHG and MHG wurz 'herb, root' < PGm. *wurt-i-
< *urd(-i)-, with zero grade, and in Celtic, e.g. W gwraidd [coll.] 'roots' < *wradi-
(see Matasović 2009 s.v. *wrida-). Since the vocalisms are not reconcilable, we have
to reckon with borrowings in case most of these words are considered related. The
attempt at a regular solution (schwa secundum) by Vine 1999a: 5-30 does not solve
all problems. ToB witsako 'root' is difficult to explain (Adams 1999 s.v.). See
►pádaμvoc and ► þáðiě.
piкvós [adj.] 'bent, crooked, shrivelled (of age, dryness, cold), stiff (epic poet. since
h.Ap.); pikvoquɛïç. tàs otpeßlàs kaì лɛɛσµévaç ‘which are crooked and pressed'
(H.). <IE *uroik- 'turn, envelop, make crooked'>
●COMP έлí-ppiкvoç ‘somewhat benť (X., Poll.).

=== page 669 ===

1286
píμẞai
•DER þɩkv-ŋɛiç ‘id.', enlarged form (Nic.); -óτŋs = кαµлvλóτηs ‘crookedness' (H.);
-wdns 'shrivelled' (Hp., AP); þiкvóoμat [v.] 'to shrivel, contract, contort' (S., Arist.,
Opp.), rarely with кατα-, diα-, whence píкvwotę [f.] 'shrivelling, wrinkledness' (Hp.).
Further poikós 'crooked, bow-legged' (Archil., Hp., Arist.) and piкáČεται (H.) as an
explanation (beside στpoßεt̃τα) of pižikáčetal.
⚫ETYM The pair þik-vóç : þolk-óç can be compared with е.g. лк-рóç: лOк-íλoç. The
form poiкóç matches Lith. ráišas (also raišas) ‘limping, lame' (for the semantic
difference, cf. кulλós ‘crooked, crippled'), Germanic words like ME wrāh 'wrong,
stubborn', NDu. wreeg ‘stiff, and (as far as the form is concerned) also Av. uruuaēsa-
[m.] ‘vortex, etc.'; all these words reflect IE *uroiko- [m.] ‘turn, curvature' vel sim.,
[adj.] 'twisted, crooked'. An e-grade variant *ureiko- is attested in MLG wrich
'forbidden, distorted, fixed, stiff, etc.'.
Corresponding primary verbs are the zero grade yod-present in Av. uruuisiia- 'to
turn (around)'; a full grade root-present in OE wrēon < PGm. *wrihan < IE *ureik-
with pret. wrāh < PGm. *wraih < IE *uroik- 'to envelop' (for the meaning, cf. ► ɛiλúw
and ►ɛiλéw 2), and a zero grade root present in Lith. rìšti, 1sg. rišù ‘to bind'. Within
Greek, the hapax legomenon þiкášɛtaɩ (H.) is a denominative or deverbative; the
form pičikáčetat, if transmitted correctly, must be an expressive enlargement (cf.
Baunack Phil. 70 (1911): 370).
piußai →oidŋ.
þíµqa [adv.] ‘rapid, agile, nimble' (Il., epic). <?►
●COMP þчµô-ápµατos 'with a quick cart' (Pi., S. [lyr.]).
•Der piµq-aλéos (EM, Suid., Hdn. Gr.), cf. óτpaλéos.
•ETYM The word píuqa is formed like táxa, wкa, etc., but the root is unclear. Since a
sequence -Q- cannot have been inherited, the t has been analyzed as from ε before
nasal (see Schwyzer: 275). PGr. *wrenka (vel sim.) has been connected with Lith.
rangus 'dexterous, flexible', rangiúos, rángtis 'to hasten', rengiúos, rengtis 'to prepare
oneself, be prepared', under a reconstruction PIE *ureng -. It must be said that the
connection between Baltic and the Germanic group of OE wringan 'to wind, wring',
OHG ringan 'to make an effort, fight' (thus e.g. LIV2 s.v. *ureng"-) is much more.
attractive. In sum, although there are parallels for ε > 1, the proposal is quite shaky.
piveotýp [m.] probably 'halter' (P. Tebt. 886, 68 [IIª]). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
pívŋ [f.] ‘file, rasp' (X., Arist., Delos IIIª), acc. to Hdn. Gr. in the same meaning pɩvý,
also 'shark', the rough skin of which was used to polish wood and marble (Hp.,
Epich., com., Arist.). <?>
•VAR Hell. piva Moer.
•COMP As a first member in pivó-ßatos, -ßátŋs [m.] designation of a kind of ray,
which stands between pivn and ßáτos (Arist.), see Strömberg 1943: 123 with
references, Thompson 1947 s.v.
⚫DER 1. Diminutive piv-íov (Gal.), -ápiov (Aët.) 'little file'; 2. denominatives: a) piváw
[v.] ‘to file' (Ar., Arist., Ph. Bel.), also with кατα-, dia-, etc., whence (áлo-)þívηµa
1
Pintw
1287
[n.] 'filing, swarf (Hp., Herod.), (dia-)þívnois [f.] ‘filing' (Gal.); b) pivíw [v.] ‘id.'
(pap. IIIP), whence pívioµa [n.] 'swarf (Ctes., medic.).
⚫ETYM The meaning 'file' is original, and 'shark' is derived from it (see above);
Strömberg 1943: 86. pivós ‘skin' especially denotes a fine, soft cowhide.
Frisk saw a primary formation with a suffix -v- in pívη from a verb that is not
directly attested in Greek, but only in the derived Germanic verb evidenced by OS
wrītan ‘to tear apart, scratch, write', OE wrītan ‘to dig in, scratch, write'. This root
etymology must be rejected, since the Greek form requires *uriH-, whereas for the
Germanic words, *urei- without laryngeal must be reconstructed (see on ►pivóc).
pɩvós [f.] ‘skin of man and animal, hide; (esp.) cow skin, cow hide; shield made of cow
hide' (epic Il.; cf. Leumann 1950: 314f.). <PG?>
•VAR Rarely [m.] (Nic., Opp.) and -óv [n.] (after dépµα, σкñτоç). The feminine
gender is analogical after Boén, alyén, etc. The gloss ypīvoç. бépμa (H.) attests a F-.
•DIAL Myc. wi-ri-no /wrīnos/, adj. wi-ri-ne-jo.
●COMP E.g. pivo-τópos 'shield-piercing', epithet of Ares (Þ 392, etc.), of the Oúpoos
(Nonn.); ταλaúpivos (= taλá-fpivoc) ‘shield-bearing' (possibly 'shield-enduring',
referring to the weight, as argued by Richardson Hermathena 55 (1940): 87ff.);
usually an attribute of лoεµστs, epithet of Ares (Il.); on this expression see
Leumann 1950: 196 ff.; Trümpy 1950: 38 with Nachträge.
•DER Ypívτns (= Ƒpívτns). Bupσεúç ‘tanner' (H.), formation probably after primary
Šávtns, úpávtng, etc.
ETYM The Aeol. gloss ypīvos. Sépμa (ypɩvós Hdn. Gr.) confirms the initial F-, which
is also evidenced by τaλαúpivoç, so we can safely posit *Ƒpĭvóç. Frisk connected the
same Germanic verb as he did for pivn, but the Germanic -ī- must derive from PIE
*-ei- in view of Go. writs with a short i; this is impossible for the Greek form.
Moreover, the parallel that he adduces for the difference in meaning, dépµa ~ Sépw,
is imperfect, since the latter means 'to flay', whereas *urei-(d-) rather means 'to
scratch'. Therefore, his etymology must be rejected. Instead, the word could be Pre-
Greek.
píov [n.] 'mountain peak, foothills' (Hom.); also as a TN in Achaia and other regions
(Th.). <PG?>
DIAL Myc. ri-jo TN.
ETYM The form píov is isolated within Greek, and has no certain etymology. If it
originally had an initial F-, it would recall Thrac. ßpía ‘лódiç, tɛïɣoç', and perhaps
also ToA ri, ToB riye 'town' (see the literature on ẞpía). The connections with
Germanic are no better, e.g. OS wrisil ‘giant' (WP 1, 267), nor those with Skt.
várṣman- [n.] 'height', Lat. verruca, ОCS vrúб, Ru. verx, etc., or with Hitt. šēr
'above' (Heubeck Orbis 13 (1964): 266f.; Risch Mus. Helv. 22 (1965): 1944). As an
alternative to all these problematic suggestions, we should consider the possibility
that the word is of Pre-Greek origin.
piлos 'wickerwork'. →pių.
þíлτw [v.] 'to throw, hurl, thrust, bolť (Pi., IA). <PG?▷

=== page 670 ===

1288
pic, pivós
•VAR Also piлτέw (IA since v 78), iterative pret. þíntaσkov (Hom., Hes. Sc., -ɛσкov
Nic. Fr.), fut. píyw, aor. piyaɩ (Il.), pass. þóеñvai, þìóñvai (Att.) with fut. pip-
еýσoμaι (S.), -σoμαι (LXX), perf. med. εppчµµαι (Orac. apud Hdt., E., Ar.), pɛpîôеal
(Pi.), see Schwyzer: 649; act. *ppiqa (Lys.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. áлo-, ávα-, έv-, dia-. As a first member e.g. in piy-
ɑσлɩç, -ɩɗoç ‘throwing the shield away, coward' (Ar., Pl.), -άoñdoç ‘id.' (Eup.); cf.
Sommer 1948: 93.
•DER 1. piлń [f.] 'throw, thrust, gust of wind, sway, press, heavy movement' (epic II.)
with piñí¼w (dia-, έk-, etc.) [v.] ‘to cause a gust of wind, kindle, fan' (Hp., Ar., Arist.),
‘to hurl' (Hld.); þín-lois, -ioµós, -loua ‘fanning' (late); back-formed from piñý; piñís,
-ídos [f.] 'fanner' (com., AP); on εü-ρīлоç s.v.;
2. þiчiç (diá-, áñó-, etc.) [f.] 'throwing, hurling' (Hp., Att., Arist.) with (ȧлo-)ρíчoç
'to be thrown away' (late); also Fρyídac (Mantinea), cf. Kretschmer Glotta 5 (1914):
265; 3. (diα-)piчτα [n.pl.] heavy movements, bolts' (Arion, X.); 4. þióń (dɩα-,
άлo-) [f.] ‘cast, throwing back and forth' (Pratin. Lyr., Lyc.; after piqñval); 5. pintós
'cast, thrown' (S. Tr.), µntpó-ppiñtóç (Dosiad.); 6. þɩɩкóç ‘capable of throwing'
(comm. Arist.); 7. frequentative pɩätášw, -áσαɩ [v.] ‘to thrust back and forth' (epic E
257), with -aσµós (Hp., Plu.), -aσtikós (M. Ant.).
⚫ETYM The regular character of the morphological system, which is completely built
on an element Ƒρiл- (secondarily shortened to Ƒρiл-), shows that it is a (relatively)
late creation. The root has no convincing etymology. Although MLG wriven 'to rub,
wipe, scour, draw', MHG riben 'to turn rubbing' matches formally (Pok. 1159), the
semantic gap is considerable; moreover, the IE preform *ur-iH-p- then needed is
highly implausible. Instead, we could consider Pre-Greek origin for this etymon. See
also ▸píy.
píç, pivós [f.] 'nose', of man and animal, plur. pīvɛç 'nostrils, nose' (Il.). <PG?>
•VAR Late also pív.
●COMP pɩv-ŋλatέw ‘to seek out with the nose, trace' (A.), cf. on ►έλaúvw; ɛű-pis,
-pɩvos having a good nose, examining keenly' (A., S.), also ɛű-pivoç ‘id.' (late); the
second member is extensively dealt with in Sommer 1948: 87ff.
•DER pivía [pl.] 'nostrils' (Arist.), piváw [v.] 'to lead by the nose' (com.).
⚫ETYM The word pís replaced the old IE designation of the nose (e.g. Lat. nārēs,
nāsus, Skt. nas-). It is formed like "s and is (cf. Schwyzer: 570²), but has no certain
etymology. The proposal by Meier-Brügger MSS 51 (1990): 125-128 to reconstruct *sr-
ih₂-n-, a derivative of the root for 'top, point' seen in Hitt. šer ‘above', is interesting,
but not compelling either. The word may well be Pre-Greek.
píσkoç [m.] 'chest, box' to preserve adornment and money (Antiph., Hell.). <PG?>
•COMP pioko-qúλaž, -áktov ‘treasurer; treasure room' (Hell.).
•ETYM Probably a loan word, like MoE chest, coffer and other synonyms. According
to Donatus (on Ter. Eun. 754), it is of Phrygian origin, a path followed by Thumb
1901, who considers Celtic to be the ultimate source (cf. OIr. rúsc '[basket made of]
bark'); the word would have reached Greek from Galatian through Phrygian because
pódov
1289
of the change u > i. The word was borrowed as Lat. riscus (note the synonymous
rhyming word fiscus, of debated origin).
píu̟, pīñós [f.] ‘willow rod, wickerwork, wattled mat, wattle' (Od., Hdt., Ar.). <◄?►
VAR Later also [m.], also piлoç [f.] (v.l. Hdt. 2, 96, Cyrene IV), [m.] (Hell.).
•ETYM No agreement outside Greek. It was connected with píëτw long ago (Persson
1891: 165), assuming a basic meaning 'turn, wind' for both. However, this connection.
fails due to the weak semantics; cf. also ►þíлτw.
póa [f.] ‘pomegranate', tree and fruit (Od.). <PG?>
•VAR Accented poá by Hdn. Gr.; epic Ion. poun; also potá (Ar., Arist., etc.).
●DER poïdɩov [n.] ‘little pomegranate' (Men., pap. IIP), poïdia (cod. pudía). þoà ǹ poiá
(H.); potás, -ádoc [f.] 'poppy' (Dsc.), after the flowers, see Strömberg 1940: 52; poúv,
-wvoc [m.] 'pomegranate plantation' (LXX).
⚫ETYM The series potý potá: póa can be compared with Xpoin: -otá : -óa. If not a
loan word (Schwyzer: 348 and 469), it is perhaps related to pέw (Strömberg 1940: 52)
because of the richness of the juice. The original form may have been *pof-tá, i.e. a
tă-derivation from poûç ‘stream²; cf. okor-lá (: okoлós), έoxat-iá (: čoxatos), etc. Cf.
further the plant names ►poñç [m.] ‘sumach' and ►þúτpoç; they are certainly not
related to péw (Strömberg l.c.). Apart from a connection with pέw, a Pre-Greek
origin remains a serious option for póa.
póßillos [?] · Baσiliokos öpvis (H.). ◄PG?►
•ETYM According to Specht KZ 68 (1943): 35 and Specht 1944: 146, related to Pol.
wróbel ‘sparrow'. On -\(\)os in bird names, cf. Chantraine 1933: 249; cf. also
Thompson 1895 s.v. Is the word instead Pre-Greek?
poyós [m.] = aɩtoßóliov, i.e. ‘depot of cereals' (Tab. Heracl. 1, 102, Epich.). <?>
⚫ETYM Attributed to the Sicilians by Poll. 9, 45. Etymology unknown.
podávn, podavóc →padivós.
þódov [n.] ‘rose' (h. Cer.). <LW Iran.?>
•VAR Aeol. ẞpódov.
•DIAL Myc. wo-do-we /wordo-wen/, epithet of oil (Chadwick and Baumbach Glotta
41 (1963): 243; Lejeune 1958-1963: 26).
•COMP E.g. podo-dáкtvλoç ‘rosy-fingered, epithet of’Hús (Hom.), ẞpodo-dáкτvλoç
of the moon (Sapph.), cf. Leumann 1950: 18%; kuvó-ppodov [n.] 'dog rose, Rosa
canina' (Thphr.), see Strömberg 1940: 30 and 98.
●DER 1. pod-ća, -έŋ, -ñ [f.] ‘rose tree' (Archil.); 2. -(ε)wv, -(e)wvos [m.] ‘bed of roses'
(AP, pap.) with -wvá [f.] 'bed of roses, rose garden, rose tree' (Hecat.); 3. -in [f.] ‘bed
of roses' (Mycale IVª); 4. -óɛıç ‘of roses' (Y 186, B., E. [lyr.]), -ɛoç ‘id, roselike' (poet.
h. Cer.), -vos of roses' (Anacr.); on the adjectives see S. Schmid 1950: 47', Zumbach
1955: 14, and Forderer Gnomon 30 (1958): 96; 5. -áptov [n.] 'rose ornament' (pap.),
-ís, -ídos [f.] 'rose pastille' (Dsc.); 6. -ítŋs [m.] ‘rose wine' (Dsc.), -ĭɩç [f.] name of a
stone, because of the color (Plin.); 7. -ouvτía [f.] ‘dish flavoured with roses' (Ath.), as
if from *podovç; 8. -íw [v.] 'to cover with roses', of a tomb, with -toμóc, -íσia [pl.] =

=== page 671 ===

1290
półos
Lat. Rosalia (Asia Minor), also 'to make smell like roses' (Thphr., Alex. Aphr.), intr.
'to resemble a rose' (Dsc.); 9. Perhaps also the name of the island ‘Pódoç (Georgacas
Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 6 (1955): 155)?
•ETYM On the basis of Aeol. ẞpódov, we can reconstruct PGr. Fpódov. The word is
certainly borrowed from the East, probably like Arm. vard 'rose' from Olran. *urda-
(cf. MoP gul 'id.'; Schwyzer: 344%; on Aram. warda and Arab. ward ‘id.', Arab.
warada 'bloom', waruda 'be red', cf. Mayrhofer Arch. Orbis 18 (1950): 74; Mayrhofer
Sprache 7 (1961): 185). Lat. rosa was probably borrowed from Greek, but the details
are unlear (see WH s.v.).
półos [m.] ‘roar (of waves, of oars)', metaphorically ‘noise' in general (Hes., A. Opp.);
'path, trail' (Nic.; Boeot. acc. to Plu. in Hes. 13). <PG(V)►
•VAR See below.
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. ȧλí-ppoos 'roared around by the sea' (trag.,
Mosch.), τaxú-ppoot Móyou quickly rushing words' (A.); лαλɩ-ppółɩo rushing
back' (Od., Hell. epic). On εлipроеоç, sеe s.v.
•DER półɩoç, [f.] -tác 'roaring, clamorous' (epic ε 412, also late prose), mostly -tov
[n.sg.] and -ta [n.pl.] 'roaring wave(s), breaking(s), high-tide; loud stroke of the oar',
metaphorically 'noise, bluster, rush' (poet. Pi., trag. [mostly lyr.], also late prose).
From półos are derived (probably denominative, cf. Schwyzer: 726) połέw [v.] ‘to
roar, clamour' (A., S.), also with έл-, diα-; óµo-, kako-ppoßέw = ¿µo-, kako-λoyέw
(Hp., S., E., Ar.); from półtov: połɩ-á¢w [v.] ‘to make a rushing sound (with the oar)'
(com.).
⚫ETYM This etymon has no convincing etymology. Segmentation as *sr-ed- (to ser-
'stream') makes little sense. In view of the variation attested in the gloss páðayoç =
półos (sch. Nic. Th. 194, H.) and þaðα- = роеo-лuуíчw, we have to assume that
półoç is a Pre-Greek word. On pábayos, see pabaлvуí¶w.
poîẞdoç [m.] 'buzzing, whistling, hissing noise', of arrows, winds (S., Ar.). <PG>
⚫DER Besides poiẞdéw [v.] 'to buzz (etc.); make buzz' (A., Q. S., AP), also with άлo-,
επ-; prefixed also of birds, 'to squawk, caw' (S., Thphr., Nonn.); poíßdŋµa [n.] =
poïßdoc (S.), -nois [f.] ‘whistling' (E. [lyr.]); -ŋdóv ‘with a hissing noise' (Q. S.), also
connected with poïßdos; ¿лppoíßdηy < -ßd-dŋy ‘in a rushing attack' (E. [troch.]).
⚫ETYM The word poîßdos, a poetic onomatopoeia, has the same suffix as kéλadoç,
äpados, and other words for sounds; for the -ß-, one may compare oploĩσßoç,
öτоẞoç, etc. (on the root, cf. Haas 1956: 132 f.). Since the word strongly recalls
► poïšos and ► þvßdéw and, moreover, the -ẞd- in the suffix is certainly not of Indo-
European origin, the word is probably Pre-Greek.
poïoç [m.] ‘buzzing, rushing, humming', of arrows, wings, water, etc. (epic П 361,
Hell.). <PG>
•VAR [f.] in 1315; cf. Schwyzer 1950: 34'.
•COMP As a second member in áλí-ppoos 'roared around by the sea' (Nonn.).
•DER 1. Adjective poù-wds (medic.), -ŋɛ (Hell. inscr., Nonn.), -años (Orac. Chald.)
'buzzing, rushing, humming, etc.'; 2. adverb -ηdóv (Nic., Lyc., 2. Ep. Pet.), -ηdá
(Nic.) 'with rushing, with humming'; 3. poišέw [v.] ‘to buzz, hum, hiss, rush; make
:1
popéw
1291
buzz, etc.' (epic K 502, Hell.), also with εл-, άvα-, etc.; thence poi-nµa [n.] (Ar.),
-nous [f.] (Aq.) 'buzz, buzzing', -nτwp [m.] 'noisemaker' (Orph.).
ETYM An onomatopoeic word, similar to poiẞdoc, and likewise without
etymology. If related to poißdos, poisoç is certainly of Pre-Greek origin, but even if
unrelated, such an origin may still be considered.
porkóc →pikvóç.
póupoc →péquoial.
póµos [?] · okwλně év žúλoiç (Arc. apud H.). <?>
•VAR Cod. -oĔ, which probably intruded from the following entry.
•ETYM Frisk tried to connect the Indo-European word for worm; cf. Lat. vermis, Go.
waurms 'worm', ORu. vermie 'locust, worms' (all < PIE *urm-), Lith. varmas ‘gnat' <
PIE *uorm- (Pok. 1152). However, this is based on difficult assumptions: either póuoš
is a dialectal form for *páµoc, which would reflect PGr. *wrmo- (allegedly seen in the
Boeot. PN Fápдuxos), or a non-dialectal form *Ƒpóµos has a wrong o-grade for IE
*uorm-.
þóµíža [?] · ɛidos ákovtíov (H.). ◄PG?►
•ETYM The ending -α is compared with σópviča by Fur.: 360; the word may be Pre-
Greek.
poµqaía [f.] a large broad sword, used by the Thracians acc. to Phylarch. and Plu.
Aem. 18 (LXX, NT, J., etc.); also = ‘vuкtɛpíç, bat' (Cyran.). <?>
⚫ETYM The origin is unclear; as so many weapon terms, it was perhaps borrowed
from Thracian. However, the formation may be Greek, as -aía is also found in
кɛpaía, кauvaía, avλaía, and other instrument names and concrete objects. The
word poµqɛiç. qµávtes, ois pántetai tà úrodýµаτα straps by which shoes are
stitched' (H.) is formally closer.
Boẞhardt 1942: $228 posits a noun *poµon [f.] 'curving, curvation, hook', from a
verb *pεuqw 'curve', as the basis for both poμpets and poµqaía. Cf. péµoos and
► þáμpoç,; see also WH on rumpus.
poupsic →poupaia.
=
þóralov, þorý, þórtpov →þé˜w.
poñç [m., f.] ‘sumach, Rhus coriatia' (Dsc.). <?►
•ETYM Etymology unknown; the connection with pέw is wrong (André Latomus 15
(1956): 304ff.).
povo(σ)ɛos, povσtos [adj.] ‘reddish', especially as a designation of the red faction in
the Circus (Lyd., late inscr.); also oi povσσătoi (Lyd.). ◄LW Lat.➤
•DER povoi w [v.] 'to be reddish' (Gp.).
⚫ETYM Borrowed from Lat. russeus, russātus.
pooέw [v.] 'to slurp, gulp', also nasalized pчµávw (Hp.), see Bechtel 1921(3): 198. <IE
*s(e)rbh- 'slurp'.➤

=== page 672 ===

1292
poxdéw
•VAR Fut. pooσoμαɩ, -w, aor. poñσa (Ar., X., Arist.; also Hp.), Ion. (Hippon., Hp.)
pvoέw, -ñσaɩ, also puμávw (Jouanna RPh. 55 (1981): 205-13); rarely -άw (late).
•COMP Also with έк-, άvα-, кατα-, etc.
•Der þóq-ŋua (þúq-) [n.] ‘thick broth, soup' (Hp., Arist.), originally a 'slurped meal',
with -ŋµátov (A. D.), -ŋµaτwdns 'soup-like' (medic.); -ŋous (avα-, кata-) [f.]
'slurping' (Arist., medic.), -ŋós ‘apt for slurping' (Str., medic.), -ŋtikós ‘slurping'
(Str.); also póчuα = póqnua, portós = poyntós (Hp. apud Gal.), as if from póqw
(EM); þóqɩσµa [n.] (Cyran.).
•ETYM The word pooέw is an iterative-intensive formation. Most cognates represent
a zero grade IE *srbh: Arm. arbi [aor.] 'I drank', Lith. suřbti, 1sg. surbiù 'to suck',
OCS srobati, Ru. serbát' 'to slurp', Lat. sorbeo ‘id.'. However, instead of being a zero
grade form, puppέw is rather an (onomatopoeic) by-form (see Tichy 1983: 84, pace
Schwyzer: 351f.). A primary full grade present is retained in Lith. srebiù, srēbti 'to eat
(liquid food) with a spoon' < IE *sreb-, another full grade IE *sorbh- is found in Alb.
gjerp 'slurp' (probably < *sorb¹-eie/o-, Huld 1984: 143). The forms þóµµa and þortós
seem to go back to a primary verb with remarkable o-vocalism, probably after
popéw.
Perhaps the root is also found in Iranian (Psht. rawdǝl 'suck', etc.; Morgenstierne
1927 s.v.). Cf. ►pvßdéw.
poxέw [v.] ‘to rush, roar', especially of sea-waves (Od., A. R., Opp.), also ava-
(Orph.). <ONOM➤
•DER póx¤os [m.] 'rushing, roaring' (Lyc., Nic.), probably a back-formation
(Schwyzer: 726³).
⚫ETYM Sound words without etymology. Note the formal similarity with semantically
close półoç, pošos, poîẞdos; the medial -X0- may be compared with μóxеoç,
ẞpóxos, óxεw, etc. Cf. on ►ópεxеéw.
púaž, þváxetos ⇒péw.
pvẞdéw [v.] 'to slurp in, up'; кαταруßdкσαç· кαταлóv, poońσaç having swallowed,
having gulped down' (H.). <GR?>
•VAR Aor. þvßdñσaɩ (µ 106), the simplex only here.
•COMP With ȧva- (u 104f., 236), έк- (Mnesim. 4, 17).
•ETYM The variant with u, more frequently written or in the manuscripts (after
poɩßdéw), is confirmed by the word-play with Xápuẞdis (Bechtel 1914 s.v. poißdéw,
Wackernagel 1916: 83). The word is without doubt related to puoέw (see ►poqέw);
the cluster ẞd may be analogical after poiẞdéw. An adverb þúßdηy (written ot)
Saчws is cited by Phot. (accordingly, Bergk corrects Hippon. 35 púdny to þúßdŋy,
which is hardly correct; see Masson ad loc.).
pußóv [n.] = tò έnikaµinès napà toîç Aioλɛñσv (Hdn. Gr., EM). <PG?>
•VAR 'Puẞãs (II), see Bechtel 1917a: 43.
=
•ETYM The form þußóv might have been adapted analogically from paißós after a
word that is semantically close, perhaps úẞós or уρʊлós (Bechtel 1921, 1: 125).
Alternatively, it may be a Pre-Greek word.
pokávn
1293
púyxos [n.] 'snout of a pig, snout, beak' (Stesich., com., Arist., Theoc.). <ONOM, IE
* srung"- 'snore'>
COMP Often as a second member (with transition to the o-stems), e.g. oεú-ppuyxos
'with a pointed beak' (Epich.), name of an Egyptian fish (Str., etc.), see Strömberg
1943:43.
●DER puyx-íov [n.], diminutive (Ar.), -aiva = nasuta (gloss.), -á¶w = μкτηpíw
(Phot.), -táv. Saστpéqɛiv, poуxάav 'twist about' (H.).
⚫ETYM The word púyxos can hardly be separated from Arm. ŕng-un-k' [pl.] 'nostrils,
nose' which, if inherited, must go back to IE *srung"- or *sring"- (with secondary
nasalization). Hübschmann 1897: 486f. assumed borrowing from púyxos. A
connection with pέykw, péyxw ‘to snore' has been considered.
þúša · ßía. ǹ toñ tóžov tážiç ‘strength, force; the arrangement of a bow' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown.
púw [v.] 'to growl, grumble', of a dog (Hermipp., Poll.), also 'to screak', of a falcon
(Poll.). <ONOM▷
•VAR Or -έw.
⚫ETYM A sound word, like páčw; for the u-vocalism, cf. ¡úľw, ypú¶w, µúľw, etc.
¿vėµós [m.] ‘regular movement, beat, rhythm, measure, consistence, proportion,
form' (IA, Archil., Thgn., A.), defined as ǹ tñs kɩvñoews tážis by Pl. Lg. 665a. ◄IE
*sreu- 'stream', *sru-d³mo->
•VAR Ion. puσuós.
●COMP Often as a second member, e.g. ε-pv¤µos 'with a beautifully regular
movement, rhythmical, well-proportioned', with -ía [f.] (Att.).
•DER þvеμ-кós [adj.] 'rhythmic' (Pl.), see Chantraine 1956a: 135; -10s 'id.' (Hdn. Gr.);
-íw [v.] 'to make regular, organize, set up, instruct, form' (IA), also with prefix, esp.
μετα-; -έw 'to organize, determine' (Athens Va), -óoμα 'to develop' (Democr. 197 [-
ou-]; -ów uncertain ibd. 33).
•ETYM The short ň (e.g. A. Ch. 797) forbids connection with épvµαɩi, púoµai ‘to avert,
protect and þõτηp 'protector, guardian', with or έpúw 'to draw' and þɔ̃τýp ‘rein'.
Instead, the connection with pέw 'flow, stream' must be correct, ‘streaming' typically
being a quiet and steady movement. For the meaning of pu¤µóç, cf. Wolf 1947,
Leemans Ant.class. 17 (1948): 403ff., and Waltz RELat. 26 (1948): 109ff.; cf. also
Sandoz 1971: 58-77.
pukávη [f.] 'plane' (AP 6, 204). <PG?>
●DER pukáv-nois [f.] ‘planing' (Bito III-IIª, pux-), from *puкav-áw; þvкav-íw [v.] 'to
plane' (gloss.).
ETYM The word poкávη has the same formation as σкαлávη, Spεлávη, and other
instrument names, but the root is unknown. Wackernagel's suggestion
(Wackernagel KZ 67 (1942): 176) to connect Skt. srúc- ‘offering spoon' fails to
account for the meaning. Lat. runcina 'plane' (with -n- after runcare ‘to weed', or
perhaps with distant assimilation) is certainly borrowed from Greek: since puкávn

=== page 673 ===

1294
pòua1
has no initial vowel, a genetic relation with the Lat. word can be excluded. A Pre-
Greek origin is certainly a possibility for this word.
pчµa 1 [n.] ‘tow, towing rope' (Plb., D. H.).
●DER þúµŋ ‘pull, press', puμós 'tension wood, pole of a chariot', þúσtov 'spoils',
pvστάw 'to drag to and fro', puτηp ‘rein', etc. έpúw.
põµa 2 [n.] ‘protection'.
=>
●DER þúσtos ‘freeing, saving', þvσí-лoλis 'protecting the city', puτηp 'protector', etc.
⇒ εpviai.
=>
þúµßoc¬¿éµßoµμαι.
púun [f.] 'street, alley' (since IVa).
⚫ETYM From púμη 'tow, press' (s.v. ►puμa 1), with a semantic development to a more
concrete meaning, i.e. 'where the crowd presses'. See ►έpúw.
pvμovλkéw [v.] ‘'to pull the towing rope, tow, take in tow' (Hell.). <GR➤
•ETYM A technical term of the nautical language, pu̟μovλкéw may derive from *puμ-
Ouλкóç 'who draws by a line; who tows a boat', or directly from púµati ëλkeiv ‘draw
the tow-line' after other verbs in -oλкéw, e.g. vɛwλkéw (to vɛwλкóç, vaūv ελкεv),
лλVеovλкéw (to лλvеoυλкóç); cf. Schwyzer: 726. The first member is põμa 'tow-
line', rather than puμós 'pole (of a chariot)', as argued by Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958):
180f. Borrowed into Latin as remulcum [n.] 'tow-rope' (since Caes.), -āre ‘to take in
tow' (Non.).
pvoquar →ëpvzial.
þúлоç [m.] 'filth, uncleanliness (e.g. in the ear)' (Semon., Att.), metaphorically 'sealing
wax' (Ar. Lys. 1198). <?>
•Var þúлa [n.pl.] 'filthy clothes, laundry' (( 93); þúños [n.] ‘whey' (Hp. Mul. 1, 64),
after λíлoç, etc.
•COMP þuлo-кóvulos 'having filthy knuckles' (com.), ηµí-ppuños 'half dirty' (Hp.).
●DER 1. Adjectives: pʊл-óɛç 'dirty' (Nic., AP), -wdns ‘id.' (Dsc., Vett. Val.); on
pu̟лapós see below.
2. Verbs: a) þvл-άw (epic lengthening to -ów, -ówvτα) 'to be dirty' (Od., Ar., etc.;
because of the meaning hardly with Chantraine 1942: 357 from þúлa, rather from
þúлos with analogical -άw); b) pu̟л-óðµai (þépvлwµévos (59), also with кaτα-, 'to be
smudged' (Hp., Hell. inscr.), -ów 'to smudge' (late); c) þúлτ-oµαι, -w, also with άo-,
etc., 'to clean (oneself), wash (oneself)' (Ar., Antiph., Arist.) with þuët-ɩкóç ‘apt for
washing' (Pl. Ti., Arist., etc.), -ńplov каеаρτηplov (Suid.), þúчí (àñó-) [f.]
‘cleaning, washing' (Pl. Ti.). Besides, puñapós ‘dirty' (IA) with -ía [f.] ‘filth, dirty
convictions' (Critias, late), -óτŋs [f.] ‘id.' (Ath.); þvлaívw, also with кατa-, etc., ‘to
besmudge, dishonor' (Att.) with þúлaσµа [n.] 'filth' (Apollon. Lex.) as µíaσµa:
fuaívw.
=
PŨTÓS
1295
ETYM No convincing etymology. The word puлapós may have been formed from
рулαívw after the synonymous pair uapóçuaívw, but it remains uncertain.
whether it was an old r/n-stem (Benveniste 1935: 19), or built analogically from
þúлоç. The seemingly primarу þúлτoμач, -w can be secondary to þúлoç after τúлτw:
púntojai,
τÚлоç, etc. (possibly also influenced by synonymous vírtoµai, -w).
The connection with the Slav. word for 'scab, itch, crust of a wound, e.g. OCS
strup, Ru. strup < IE *sroupo- or *sreupo-.
þvллaлaï [interj.] 'cry of Athenian rowers' (Ar.). <ONOM➤
•VAR Аlso рулαлaî (AB).
ETYM An onomatopoeia.
pianov →Ěpvqian.
þúois →péw.
põσós [adj.] ‘shrivelled, shrunk, wrinkleď (I 503). ◄?>
•VAR In the manuscripts, variants with -00- are attested. On půτíç, -ídos, see below.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. v-puσos 'somewhat wrinkled' (Dsc.), see Strömberg
1946:128.
•DER 1. puσ-aλéoç ‘id.' (Nic.), see avaλéoç, etc.; 2. -wdns 'with a wrinkled appearance'
(AP, etc.); 3. -óτηs [f.] 'wrinkledness' (Plu.); 4. puoiλλaç τàç puτídaç 'wrinkles' (H.),
cf. Chantraine 1933: 252, Schwyzer: 485; 5. puo-óoμα, -ów 'to shrivel, wrinkle
(oneself)' (Arist.), with -wotę [f.] (Gal.); 6. -αívoµαɩ ‘id.' (Nic., AP).
Further: þůtíç, -ídos [f.] ‘wrinkle, fold' (Ar., Pl.), Aeol. ßpútides (EM); þvtid-wdns =
pvowdns, þvtid-óoμai, -ów = þvσóoµαɩ, -ów (Hp., Arist.), puτíd-wσiç [f.] 'wrinkling'
(medic.), -wμa [n.] ‘wrinkle' (sch.). Probably related too are puτíσμata [pl.] (Men.),
acc. to Phot. = τwv dieppvnkótwv ¡µatíwv tà áлoëληpóµаτα ‘patch, piece of cloth'.
•ETYM The word puσós can be compared with λošós, koµчóç, yavσóç, and other
expressive adjectives in -σóc (Chantraine 1933: 434, Chantraine 1956a: 17). For puτíç,
DELG and Frisk adduce éηêtíç, žvotíç, dokiç, etc., assuming derivation from *pv-τý,
-τóv vel sim. with a diminutive suffix -íd-.
Solmsen's comparison (IF 31, 463) with έpúw 'draw, pull, snatch' < *ueru- is
formally possible, but this does not furnish an IE etymology. The (imperfect)
similarity with Lat. rūga 'wrinkle, fold' and Lith. raūkas ‘id.' is accidental.
þɔ̃τý [f.] ‘rue, Ruta graveolens' (Nic., Ps.-Dsc.); acc. to sch. Nic. Th. 523, Peloponnesian
for лηуavov; cf. þu̟τá. ... лηуаvov AɛUкóv 'white rue' (H.). <PG?>
ETYM The etymology is unexplained; Osthoff MU 5 (1890): 76ff. connected Lat.
rūmex 'sorrel' (cf. WH s.v.). Lat. rūta is probably borrowed from Greek (Krogmann
WUS 19 (1938): 133 considers both to be independent loans from a Mediterranean
language); English rue is borrowed from French rue, which continues the same Latin
word.
pūτóç [adj.] only in puτoĩσv λáɛσσ (267, 10), for which the sense 'dragged stones'
does not make really good sense. <PG?>

=== page 674 ===

1296
•ETYM The connection with έpúw 'to draw' is formally possible, but not
semantically evident; Schulze's suggestion (Q. 318) to connect Lat. rūta (caesa) 'dug
out (and felled)' must be dismissed because the latter derives from ruō ‘to dig'
*HreuH- (cf. De Vaan 2008 s.v.). According to Deroy REGr. 67 (1954): iff., it is of
Pre-Greek origin and cognate with Lat. rūdera (which would be Etruscan; cf.
Chamoux REGr. 65 (1952): 284).
þúτpos [n.] 'plant with pricking extremities, Echinops Viscosus' (Thphr.). <?>
⚫ETYM Strömberg 1940: 52 derived the word from pέw, which is a mere guess.
pw [n.] name of the letter p (Ar., Pl., etc.). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Indeclinable.
驚
•DER pwtaкíčεiv = t✪ þ otaxɛiw ovvexŵç xpñoðaɩ (Suid.) after *iwτα-kíčɛv in
iwταкiσμóç (see on iwτa); pwßiкóç [adj.] ‘unable to pronounce the p' (D. L.), after
ovλλaẞiкós, τpiẞIкóç, etc.
ETYM Borrowed from Sem. rōš (beside rēš); see Schwyzer: 140.
pwßídac [m.] name of seven-year-old Spartans (Aέšɛiç'Hpodótov). <?>
•ETYM The formation is the same as that of the patronyms in -ídac (Schwyzer: 509),
but the root is unexplained.
pwdɩyyes [?] • nλŋyai vaiµoi diakɛkoµµévai. oi dè µwλwiεs 'spots bloodshot by
hitting; bruises' (H.). <PG(S,V)>
•VAR PÚTIYYES.
⚫ETYM Frisk's suggestions that the variant púτiyyɛs (H.) is secondary for pwdiyyɛç,
or that the latter is analogical after oμwdiyyɛç, can be dismissed. Instead, the
variation 8/τ and the suffix -tyy- point to Pre-Greek origin.
półwveç [m.pl.] 'nostrils' (Nic., D. H., Str., etc.), rarely -wv [sg.] (Heracl. apud Gal.,
etc.); púυvεç μUктñрεç 'nostrils' (H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM The formation is the same as in лóушv, yvá0wv, etc., but the root is
unknown. Usually, półos 'roaring' is connected, which presupposes an original
meaning 'snorer, rattler' (Pok. 1002); Fraenkel Glotta 32 (1953): 31ff. recalls péłoç.
Alternatively, one could consider a Pre-Greek origin for this word.
.
рбкo̟дαι [v.] óруíčоμαι, Аvлочμa 'to be distressed' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Perhaps related to pwxw, s.v.
þávvvu [v.] ‘to strengthen, invigorate'; med. ‘to be(come) strong; insist on sth., be
determined' (Pherecyd., Hp.). <?>
•VAR Also pres. -úw (Ti. Locr., etc.), aor. pwσai (Hdt., Att.), pass. ¿wołñval, fut.
pwow (Att.), very often perf. med. with pres. meaning έppwµaι (Att.).
•COMP Also with έɩ-, áva.
•DER pw-un [f.] 'strength, vigour, power' with -uaλéos 'strong' (IA), -σus (è̟ní-, ává-)
[f.] 'strengthening', -στкóç 'strengthening, strong' (late), -στкроу· лapopääpov
'stimulation' (Phot.), -στα [m.] ‘hold, support, bearer' (Tz.), ǎ-ppшoτоç 'weak,
indisposed', with ảppwot-ía, -éw, -ŋµα, etc. (IA); pwpós. σqodpós ‘vehement' (H.).
pwy 2
1297
•ETYM The regular stem formation with generalized pw(σ)- cannot be old; in any
case, the present is an innovation (literature in Schwyzer: 697). The form
pwσкoμέvwç 'with power' (Hp.) indicates a newly built present *pwoкo̟μal. A
connection with pwoμat seems possible. Alternatively, Rikov Glotta 66 (1988): 124f.
has proposed a connection with Skt. sara-: póμŋ, pwσis would continue *srh,-,
whereas the Skt. could derive from a secondary aniț root.
pw1 'tore'. pńyvvµ.
þú₹ 2 ‘grape'. →páč.
pwo̟дaι [v.] 'to move intensively or with effort, brisk about; dance' (II.). <IE *srh3-ie/o-
‘move violently' vel sim.▷
•VAR Almost exclusively 3pl.ipf. and aor.: pwovτo, έppшovto, έppáσavão (II., epic);
further, also epic (late and rare) pweto (Nic.), pwovð (= -ταɩ, D. P.), pwoovtai
(Сall.), έлippwσai (AP).
•COMP Often with εл- (rare and late ȧva-, ouv-).
•ETYM The words pwσaɩ, έppwμaɩ, and póvvyµ can perhaps be connected; pέw, on
the other hand, is rather not related (Schwyzer: 349 and 722); on pwσкoμέvwç, see
►púvvvчu. Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. šarḥije/a-zi follows a proposal of Cop (1955a: 398) to
connect pwoμai to the Hittite word, the meaning of which is not completely certain,
but must be something like ‘to attack'. The Hittite and the Greek suggest a preform
*srh3-ie/o-.
þŵлoç [m.] ‘odds and ends, tinsel, trumpery' (A., D., Arist.). <?►
•COMP As a first member in þшло-лóλŋs [m.] 'seller of petty wares' (LXX, H.).
•DER ¿wñ-iкóç‘belonging to tinsel, false, worthless' (Plb., Plu., AP), -ɛúɛɩv•
ршлолwλεïv 'to deal in petty wares' (H.); also -íw (Ion Trag; meaning unclear)?
⚫ETYM No etymology; perhaps related to ▸ pwy.
pwxfós →pńyvvµ.
pwxw [v.] ‘to hiss, rattle' (Sor.). <?>
•VAR þwxεv. ßpúxeiv toïç ¿doñoɩ ‘to bite with or grind the teeth' (H.); pwxµóc [m.]
(v.ll. pwy-, pox-, poy-) 'hissing' (medic.).
•ETYM These are all sound-imitating words; cf. ►páľw.
pwy 1 [f.] · ßotávη áлaλý ‘a delicate grass' (H.). <PG?>
●var Plur. pwnɛç [f.] 'brushwood, low shrub wood, shrubbery, bush' (Od., Lib.).
•DER рwл-ñïα [pl.] (Il.), -íov [n.] (D. C.), -ás [f.] (Opp.), -a [m.] (Suid.) ‘id.'; -ǹɛɩç
'overgrown with bush' (Q. S.).
⚫ETYM The word pwy may be related to paлí(w, xpσó-ррaлç (with ►þáßdoc,
►páμvoc), and also to pεnw, péµßoμat, but connections outside Greek are not
found. The word may be of Pre-Greek origin.
pwy 2 [?] Egyptian word for 'ship'; сf. лλочоу лалúρɩvov, ô кαλɛt̃тai Alyvrtioti pwy
(UPZ 81: II 7 [Ptol.]); also pшμσç ‘id.' (pap.); miswritten in póvičiç. rotaµías vews
εidos 'kind of river ship' (H.), see Lidén Glotta 42, 149 with literature. <LW Eg.>

=== page 675 ===

1298
Pŵy 2
•ETYM Borrowed from Eg. rms 'ship' (see also Schwyzer: 277).
M
σá [interr. pron.] = tíva, in σá µáv = tí µýv how so?' (Megar. in Ar. Ach. 757, 784).
<IE *kwi- 'who?'>
•ETYM Like Boeot. τά (Pi. O. 1, 82), σá reflects *к-α, ntr.plur. of τíç 'who?'. It is
formally identical to OLat. quia-nam ‘why?', going back to IE *ki-h₂. It is also found
in Ion. ä-σσa, Att. ä-Tτα (see Schwyzer: 616, 319); cf. on ► τíç.
σaßakós [adj.] ‘damaged, rotten', of inner organs (Hp.), ‘effeminate, womanish' (AP),
ó σapóç. Xioɩ 'unsound (Chios)' (H.); on the meaning Luck Phil. 100 (1956): 275f.
<PG(V)►
=
•DER Besides, σaßážas. dia-okedάoas, diaoaλɛvoas 'scattering through, shaking
through' (H.); σaßáкtŋs [m.] ‘the shatterer', a house-goblin (Hom. Epigr. 14, 9), fem.
oaßaktídes. dotрáкɩvα (‹ýðiα ‘earthen figures' (H.); σaßαкñç. avotnpŵs, Enpws,
τpaxέws harshly, dry, roughly' (H.).
•ETYM The formation can be compared with μaλakóç, τpißaкóç, etc., but the
etymology is unknown. Fur.: 241 connects σaukóv · Eŋpóv. Zupaкóσtoɩ 'dry; lean'
(H.), which very strongly suggests Pre-Greek origin for this word.
σáßavov [n.] ‘large linen cloth' (pap., Alex. Trall.). <LW Sem.➤
•DER Diminutive -tov [n.].
•ETYM The word σáẞavov is a loan from Semitic, cf. Arab. sabanijjat 'cloth produced
in Saban (near Baghdad)' (see Lewy 1895: 127; cf. Schwyzer: 308). Borrowed as Lat.
sabanum (see WH s.v.); from Latin, or from Greek, were borrowed Go. and OHG
saban 'oɩvdwv, pall, linen cloth', Ru. sávan 'pall', etc.
σaßapíxıç [f.] ‘vagina' (Telecl.). <PG?>
•VAR Also -íxη (H., Phot.), σaµapíxn (Theognost.); also σápaßos (H., Phot.; with
metathesis?).
•ETYM A diminutive formation in -1X-, characteristic of lower registers. Wrong
etymologies by Grošelj Živa Ant. 2 (1952): 215 and Brugmann IF 39 (1917-1921): 114ff.
If the variation ẞ/µ is old, the word is Pre-Greek; cf. Fur.: 221.
σaßßáτwσiç [f.] referring to a groin disease in Alexandria (Apion, J.). <LW Sem.>>
•VAR Shortened form σaßßó [f.].
ETYM The word is derived from σáßαττα 'sabbath', as it originally denoted a
‘sabbath-disease' (on the meaning, see Scheller Glotta 34 (1955): 298ff.). Ultimately of
Aramaic origin.

=== page 676 ===

1300
OáBUTOS
σaipw 1
1301
oáßvttos [m.] · eïdos župńσews eiç kadλwroµóv
...
TɩVèç dè τò yuvaɩкɛov 'kind of
shaving for ornamentation; female genitals' (H.). ◄PG?(S)►
•VAR Also -TTηS (Phot.), -ɩɩa [f.] (Com. Adesp.).
•ETYM Although there is a certain similarity with ẞúttos • yuvaikòç aidoĩov ‘female
genitals' (H.), that connection remains uncertain. Cf. also σaßapíxis and σákav- tò
τñç yuvaiкóç (H.); compare further the literature on σaßapíxic, and see Kretschmer
Glotta 13 (1924): 271, Sommer 1948: 192, and s.v. ►σaivw. For σáßuttoç, Pre-Greek
origin is certainly worth considering.
σáyapış, -10, -ɛws [f.] 'axe, battle axe', used by Scythians, Persians and other peoples
(Hdt., X., etc.); acc. to H. = лελéк þóσov 'little one-edged axe'; called
áðs by AP 6, 94. ◄?►
•ETYM A foreign word without etymology. Alessio Studi etruschi 18 (1945): 142
compared Lat. sagitta ‘arrow', Berb. zaġāja ‘javelin', but one would rather of course
expect Iranian origin.
σayń [f.] σáτTW.
σaynvη [f.] 'large fishing net, trawl' (LXX, NT, Babr., Plu., etc.). <PG>
•VAR Cypr. ȧyáva (H.), see Bechtel 1921, 1: 412.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in σayŋvo-ßólos [m.] 'who casts a net' (AP).
●DER σayŋvaños [adj.] 'belonging to the net' (AP); σaynv-εúw [v.] 'to catch with the
net', mostly metaphorically, e.g. of soldiers that catch everything alive as they form a
line and sweep over a country (Hdt., Pl., Str., Luc., etc.), with -ɛús [m.] 'net fisher'
(D. S., Plu., AP, etc.), back-formation (Boßhardt 1942: 76), -εvτns (Plu., AP), -εvτp
(AP) 'id.'; -ɛía [f.] 'catch by net' (Plu., Him.).
⚫ETYM The ending of σayηvn recalls åлývη, εipýуò, etc. The connection with σάɩɩw
(Pok. 1098) is semantically insufficiently founded. Because of the Cypr. by-form and
the attractive connection with σáyoupov with a different suffix, the etymon is
without a doubt Pre-Greek (foreign origin was suggested already by Schwyzer: 490,
322, Lamer IF 48 (1930): 231, and Chantraine 1956a: 10). The word was borrowed into
Latin as sagēna.
oáyos [m.] 'woollen cloak, soldier's cloak', e.g. used by Gauls, Hispanics (Plb., D. S.,
App., etc.). LW Celt.>>
•ETYM The word σάyos was borrowed from Lat. sagus, -um ‘id.', in turn a loan word
from Celtic (see WH s.v.).
.
σáyoupov [n.] · yupуátov ‘neť (H.); LSJ gives ‘net for suspending substances in
fluids', but see also their Supp. <?>
⚫ETYM Because of the probable etymological connection with σayńvn, σáуoupov is
likely to be of Pre-Greek origin.
σaðépɩov [n.] a marine quadruped, not further defined (Arist. HA 594b). ◄PG►
•VAR σa píov (v.l.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 190 supposes that the word denotes a beaver, and compares σaτúpiov,
probably 'sorex moschatus' (Arist. l.c., 32); according to H., (@ov τετрáлov ½
Auuvatov 'four-footed water-animal'. He further adduces Basquesatero 'field-mouse'
and sator 'mole'. It is possible that σápač. ɛíp 'louse; a sea-fish' (H.) is somehow
related as well.
σáðŋ [f.] ‘penis' (Ar. Lys. 1119, probably also Archil. 67). ◄?►
•COMP ȧvdpo-σáðwv, -σáðŋs [m.] name of Priapus (AB, H., etc.).
•DER σáðwv, -wvoç [m.] = ñóσ¤wv ‘penis; foreskin' (Telecl. etc.).
•ETYM The formation can be compared with лóσðŋ, etc. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 367).
Perhaps related to σaívw, if from 'tail' (compare MoHG Schwanz ‘tail; penis').
σaðpóc [adj.] ‘unsound, broken, broke; unhealthy, weak' (IA). ◄PG(V)►
•DER σaðp-óτηs [f.] 'unsoundness' (late), -óoµaɩ, -ów [v.] 'to be unsound; make
unsound' (LXX, pap. VIP), with -wσic, -wμα (pap. VIP, H.).
•ETYM The etymology is unexplained: Chantraine 1933: 224 and 373 thinks of onеw
(rejected by Benveniste 1935: 202); perhaps a contamination of σaлрós with an
unknown word? Fur.: 196 connects yapós 'brittle' and чaidpá. àpaɩóτpixa 'with
thin hair' (H.), and concludes that the word is Pre-Greek.
σaiva [v.] 'to wag with the tail, waggle', metaphorically 'to blandish, flatter' (Od.,
Hes.).<?>
•VAR Rare aor. coŋva (e.g. p 302), čσāva (Pi. O. 4, 6, P. 1, 52).
•COMP Also with лερɩ-, лроσ-, etc.; as a first member in σaívoupoɩ kai gaivovpideç
oi tàs oủpàs ovvEXÑS KIVOÛVTEÇ ÏÃ´oɩ kaì kúvɛç ‘horses and dogs shaking their tails
continuously' (H.).
•DER oávvlov. tÒ aidolov àvti toÙ Képiov. tò yàp aidolov tod' őte oŮpàv Ě入eyov, wc
Еüлоλç (H.), so originally 'tail' (the -vv- is hypocorrect gemination); also σav-víwv
Eűлoàıç
(Arr.), σávvac (Cratin.), σávvopos (Rhinth.) [m.] 'fool', σavvádaç τàç ȧypíaç alyaç
'wild goats' (H.).
⚫ETYM The etymology is unexplained. We must reject the suggestion of Solmsen IF
30 (1912): 38 ff., who reconstructs a word for 'penis' and connects Lith. tvinstu, tvinti
'to swell out (of a river)', etc., which seems to go back to *tunH-, and connects other
words in σa- as well, e.g. ►σátupos.
σaipw 1 [v.] ‘to sweep (out)' (S., E.), metaphorically ‘to clear away' (BCH 29, 204;
Crete). <?>
•VAR Aor. σñpaι, Cret. σāpat, fut. σapw (H.).
•COMP As a first member perhaps in σαрáлoυç (Gal.), acc. σapрáлoda, σáрaлov
(Alc.); acc. to D. L. 1, 81: dɩà tò éλª¨τúлovv ɛt̃vaɩ кaì έлσúpɛiv τà ñóðε (cf. Bechtel
1921, 1: 125, Sommer 1948: 264 and 188); acc. to Gal., however, to σέonpa (►*σaipw 2);
the word σαрαлod- is unexplained.
•DER 1. σápov [n.] 'brushings' (Sophr., Ion Trag., Call.), 'broom' (Epid. IV, etc.) with
σap-óoμaι, -ów ‘to be swept out; sweep out, sweep clean' (Lyc., NT, pap., etc.), -wσiç
[f.] 'sweep out' (pap.), -wµa [n.] ‘brushings' (AB et al.), -wται [m.pl.] 'sweeper'
(Phanagoria), -wτpov [n.] ‘broom' (Suid.); 2. σápµατα [n.pl.] ‘brushings' (Rhinth.),
oapμós owpòs yñs, kaì кáλλvoµa ... 'heap of earth; sweeping' (H.).

=== page 677 ===

1302
*oaipw 2
ETYM The word σaipw is commonly connected with oúpw 'draw, drag (along)'. The
initial was always thought to have been *tur-, with σap- and oup- (with analogical
σ-) as different vocalizations of a PIE zero grade *tur- (σaipw <*tur-ie/o-, like e.g.
► σáp₹ ‘flesh' < *turk-).
A full grade thematic present *tuer-e/o- is found in Germanic, e.g. OHG dweran
'turn around quickly, stir', OE þweran ‘id.', and in Indic: Ved. (KS) tvárate ‘to hurry'.
Connection within Greek with ỏτpúvw ‘to encourage' (see ►óτpaλéws) is highly
improbable, as the existence of a prefix ó- is doubtful.
Perhaps nominal derivations like zero grade Lat. turma 'troop, squadron', turba, and
► oúpßn, ►túpßn belong here, as well. The word τopúvη is not related.
*σaipw 2 'to show one's teeth'. →σέonpa.
σάkkoç [m.] ‘bag (made of goat hair); sieve; burlap, a large cloak made of the same',
e.g. used as a wedding dress (Hdt., Hippon., Ar., LXX, NT, inscr. and pap.). <LW
Sem.➤
•VAR Also σáкos (Att.?).
•COMP As a first member e.g. σaкko-qópos [m.] ‘bag bearer' (pap., etc.).
●DER 1. Diminutive σaк(k)-íov (Hp., Ar., X., Men., etc.), -ídiov (pap.), -áλtov (gloss.);
2. -oúdia [n.pl.] meaning unclear (pap.), after λvoúdiov, see Xívov; 3. -ã¢ [m.] ‘sack
bearer' (inscr. Corycos, pap.); 4. -ías olvos ‘sieved wine' (Poll.); 5. -ɩvos 'made of
burlap' (sch.); 6. Denominative σaк(K)-éw 'to sieve' (Hdt. 4, 23), -ɛúw acc. to Ael.
Dion. et al., -w ‘id.' (Thphr., etc.). Also σaктóç 'sieved' (Eup. 439), seemingly a
primary ptc.
ETYM The word σáккoç is a loan from Semitic; cf. Hebr. (Phoen.) saq 'cloth of hair,
bag, mourning-dress' (Lewy 1895: 87; Bertoldi ZRPh. 68 (1952): 73ff. calls it
Mediterranean). Lat. saccus (cf. also MoE sack), etc. are borrowed from Greek.
σαкvós [m.] 'broken, leaky' (лíеo). σαxvóç.
σάkoç [n.] ‘shield (made of leather); long shield, tower shield (Hom., also A., etc.), cf.
on ►άσлíç. ◄LW Sem.>
•COMP Some compounds: e.g. σaкéσ-лαλoç ‘shield-swaying' (E 126, Call., Nonn.),
σakéσ-qópos ‘shield-bearing' (B., S., E.), qɛpɛ-σσaкýs ‘id.' (Hes. Sc., Nonn.), cf.
Trümpy 1950: 20ff., and extensively Ruijgh 1957: 94f.
•ETYM Usually argued to be of Indo-European origin, and connected with Skt. tvác-
[f.] 'skin, hide' and Hitt. tuekka- 'body'. However, it might instead be borrowed from
Semitic, since e.g. Akk. saqqu and Hebr. saq are formally and semantically very close
(E. Masson 1967: 24).
oáktag →OátTW.
σáкxap, -apoç [n.] 'sugar' (Gal.). <LW Ind.>
•VAR σáкxapɩ [n.] (Peripl. M. Rubr., Orib.), after μέλɩ, etc.; also -ɩs [f.], -ov [n.]
(Dsc.).
•ETYM Borrowed from MInd. (Pāli) sakkharā- ‘sugar' (itself going back to Skt.
śárkarā- [f.] ‘grit, granulated sugar'; cf. ►кpóкη 2). MoP šakar was also borrowed
oádog
1303
from Indic and, through Arab. sukkar, it also reached e.g. MoE and Du.: sugar and
suiker, respectively. Lat. saccharum was borrowed from Greek σáкxapov.
σalayéw, σaλáкwv, etc. σáλoç.
=
oaλaïev [v.] Opηvɛïv (Anacr. 167), = колτεσеαι (H.); oaλaïo-<uÓÇ>. KWкUTÓS
‘wailing' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Etymology unclear; cf. also ► vaλáµßn.
σaλaµávdpa [f.] 'salamander, kind of newt' (Arist., Thphr., etc.). <?>
⚫DER σαλαμávбpɛtos in the way of a salamander' (Nic.).
•ETYM Given its non-Indo-European structure, σaλaµávdpa may be Pre-Greek. Cf.
also on σaúpa, which is probably Pre-Greek, as well.
oaλáµßŋ [f.] ‘light opening, vent-hole' (S. Fr. 1093, Lyc., H.). <PG?(V)►
VAR Also σaλáßn (H., Phot.), -Bos (H.).
•ETYM Semitic origin has been proposed for this word; cf. Syr. ṣelpā ‘rima portae',
slaf'split, tear apart' (Lewy 1895: 96). Further, similarity with Σaλaµßw. ǹ Appodíτn
лαрà Baẞuluviois (H.), Σalaµßás. ... öτɩ лερiéрxεται Орηуоñσα τòу "Аdwviv (EM,
referring to ▶oaλaïɛv [s.v.]), and Σaλaßaкxó (Ar.) has been observed by Lewy l.c.
and Solmsen IF 30 (1912): 42. However, the alternation ẞ/uß would receive a good
explanation under the assumption of Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 203, 286).
σaλaµívðŋ [f.] ‘spider' (Byzant.). <◄PG(S)►
⚫ETYM The suffix -iven is clearly Pre-Greek, but further connections are unknown.
σáλoç [m.] ‘turbulent movement of the sea, flushing of the waves; anchorage, roads
(as opposed to a protected harbor)' (S., E., Lys., Hell.), metaphorically of an
earthquake (E. IT 46), 'turbulent emotion' (LXX, Gal., Max. Tyr.), cf. ȧoaλńc, oáλŋ
below. PG(S,V)►
•COMP Some late compounds, e.g. εлí-σaλoç 'exposed to the σáλoc' (Seqund., Peripl.
M. Rubr., etc.); probably also in epic кoví-σaλos 'cloud of dust' (see кóviç). With
transfer to the s-stems: ȧ-oaλns 'unshaken, unconcerned' (A. Fr. 319 = 634 M.) with
ȧoáλ-ɛiα [f.] ápчvía, áoστía (Sophr. 113), άσaλɛīv· ápoνtiσtñσai ‘to be
heedless' (H.); σáλŋ, oáλã [f.] = qpovτís (Et. Gen., H.) is probably a back-formation
to the latter.
=
•DER Denomininatives: 1. σaλɛúw, originally of the ship, 'to roll (on the waves)', then
'to throw oneself about, oscillate'; trans. 'to make oscillate, shock' (Att. since A., also
Hp., Hell.), also with prefix, e.g. άлo-, έл-, dia-; thence σálɛvois (dia-) [f.]
'oscillation' (Arist., etc.), σáλεчμα [n.] ‘id.' (D. Chr.); 2. σaλóoμa 'to go with a
rocking motion' (EM, explaining σalákwv).
With a velar suffix: 1. σáλač, -aкos [m.] ‘large sieve of mineworkers' (Arist. or
Thphr. apud Poll.), also an Att. name of a potter (Σáλaxç; Krahe IF 57 (1940): 113),
-ayž. µetaλλikòv okɛñoç ‘metallic vessel or implement' (H.); σaλáкwv, -wvos [m.]
'boaster, swaggerer, dandy' (Arist.), with σaλakwv-ía (-ɛía) [f.] (Arist., Alciphr.),
-íšw (dia- Ar.), -íčoµαɩ, -ɛúo̟µαι (H., Phot., Suid.); denominative σaláσow (¿K-) [V.]
'to shake' (Nic., AP), probably directly from σáλoç after tɩváσσw, tapáσow, etc.; 2.

=== page 678 ===

1304
cadovalov
oaλayέw = oaλáσow, σaλɛúw (Opp., Orac. apud Luc.), oaλayn. ẞon 'shouť' (H.); cf.
TATAYÉw, Matáoow.
ETYM Originally, σáλos was a technical nautical term. Fur.: 256 connects Oáλaσoa
/*σáλaσσa and Jáλŋ, Čálos ‘tornado, whirlpool', and concludes that the word is
Pre-Greek. Already the velar suffixes, and especially the variation they display, prove
Pre-Greek origin for this word: -ay-, -αк-, -αук-; cf. onλayyɛúç. Lat. salus, salum
were possibly borrowed from Greek.
σaloúðɩov [n.] ‘pot, measure' (POxy. 3060) cf. Mayser-Schmoll 1970 I, 1: 79. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also -wσiov, -wtiov, -wdLov.
⚫ETYM In view of the suffix variants, the word is probably Pre-Greek.
σalós [adj.] 'foolish' (H. s.v. voλóc, sch. Ar. Nu. 397). <PG➤
•VAR Also Saλós (Cyr.) and *Čaλóc; the latter is seen in the derivative Čaλaívw (H.,
EM 406, 43), see Fur.: 255.
•ETYM Cf. Lat. dalīvus, from *Sáλatos. The variation in the initial (σ-/-/-) proves
Pre-Greek origin; the root can be reconstructed as *tal-.
σάλлη [f.] sea fish, 'Box salpa' (Epich., Arist., etc.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also -ŋ [m.] (Archipp.), -os (Arist. v.l.), σápëŋ [f.] (Arist.); also σáλлуš
(Arist.), folk-etymological transformation.
⚫ETYM The variation p/λ is typical for Pre-Greek (Fur.: 387; see also Neumann 1961:
42). Cf. also Lat. salpa (Plin., Ov.), Ital. salpa, sarpa, Fr., MoE saupe (cf. Hubschmid
1963: 13f.; Thompson 1947 s.v.).
σáλmyš, -ɩyyos [m.] ‘trumpet' (Σ 219). ◄PG(S)►
•DER σαλлíw [v.] 'to blow the trumpet, trumpet' (IA), dialectical innovations -íσow,
-íɩɩw, -íddw, aor. σαλл-íуšαı (Þ 388), -íσai (LXX etc.), fut. -íow (NT), -tw (LXX),
perf. med. σɛσáλл(у)ктαι, -1σται (late), rarely with εл- etc.; σaλлукτýs̟ (Th., X. et
al.), -iкτýs (Att. etc., inscr.), -totńs (Hell. and late) [m.] ‘trumpet player', -toµós [m.]
-ɩoµa [n.] (Thd., Poll.) ‘trumpet call”, -totiкóç ‘belonging to the trumpeť (Poll.).
Further derivatives: σαλлíуу-tov [n.] ‘pipe' (Gal.), -wτóç ‘trumpet-shaped' (Teos).
ETYM For the formation, σuply and pópμy can be compared (cf. also λúpa,
kɩðápa, σaµßúkŋ, etc.). On the onomatopoeic Lith. švilpti ‘to pipe' etc., see Fraenkel
1955 s.v. (with references); cf. further Hester Lingua 13 (1965): 364. As a word of
Mediterranean culture, σáλлуε remains without IE connection; the suffix is Pre-
Greek (not in Fur.).
σáµaž, -ǎkoç [m.] 'bulrush, mat of bulrush' (com. Va). <PG(S)►
●DER -άktov [n.], a female ornament (Com. Adesp.).
•ETYM Formation like oloa, etc. (see on oloos), but further unexplained. Belardi
Doxa 3 (1950): 219 rightly rejects a connection with pre-IE *sam- 'water, sea, swamp'
(?) by Alessio Studi etruschi 19 (1946-1947): 152. The suffix is Pre-Greek (not in Fur.).
σaµßúêŋ [f.] ‘triangular instrument with four strings' (Arist., etc.), metaph. ‘scaling
ladder' (Plb., etc.), on the semantic motivation, see Ath. 14, 634a. <LW Sem.?>
•VAR Also - (H.).
oavdapákn
1305
•DER σαµßvк-ɩσtýs, fem. -íoτpiα 'sambuca-player' (Hell. poet., Plu.), after
kidaplotńs,-iotpia.
•ETYM An Oriental loan word of unknown source; see E. Masson 1967: 91ff. (with
extensive treatment and criticism of earlier views, for example on Hebr. šebākā
'lattice'). On the secondary nasalization, see Schwyzer: 231f. with litt. Borrowed into
Lat. as sambuca (WH s.v.).
σáµos [f.] 'hill' (Str. 8, 3, 19; 10, 2, 17); also the island names Σáµoç, Σáµn. <pg>
⚫ETYM Without a doubt Pre-Greek, as argued by Fick 1905: 54 and 112. Likewise, but
with a different interpretation (connected to áσáчuvos), Alessio Stud. ital. fil. class.
N. S. 20 (1956): 121ff. The IE etymology by Persson 1912(1): 471 can be rejected.
σaμчnpa [f.] an oriental sword (J. A.J. 20, 2, 3). <LW Iran.>
•VAR σªµчñpaι· σñлáðαι þαрßαpiкαí 'broad blades of the barbarians' (Suid.).
⚫ETYM An Oriental loanword; cf. MoP šamšīr.
σáч(o)vxov [n.] 'marjoram' (Nic., Dsc., Paus. et al.), on the meaning see Andrews
Class. Phil. 56 (1961): 78. <?>
●DER σaµ(0)úx-ɩvoc 'made of σ.' (Dsc., Gal. et al.), -í(w 'to be like σ., season with σ.'
(Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Foreign word of unknown origin (the plant was especially at home in North
Africa). Borrowed into Lat. as sampsūc(h)um, -us (WH s.v. sambūcus; see Hester
Lingua 13 (1965): 364).
σáv the Doric variant of the Ion. letter oiyua (Hdt. 1, 139). <LW Sem.>
●COMP σaµ-qópaç, -ov [m.] ‘horse in which a σáv was branded' (Ar.), see Fraenkel
1912: 143.
⚫ETYM Borrowed from Semitic (e.g. Hebr. šin). On the sign σαµл (= 900), from Byz.
σàv (= wç ǎv 'like') and л, cf. Schwyzer: 149.
σávdalov [n.] ‘sandal(s)' (h. Merc.); name of a flat fish (Matro), see Strömberg 1943:
37. <PG➤
•VAR Also σáuẞaλov (Eumel., Sapph., AP).
•COMP σavdaλoß½кη ‘sandal case' (Men., Delos IIª); σaµßaλ-oúxn, -ovxíç [f.] ‘sandal
chest' (Herod.), -íoкα [n.pl.] (Hippon. 18 = 32 Masson; see below).
DER σavdáλ-tov (IA), -íoкov (Ar.); also -íc, -ídos [f.], a kind of date (Plin.), -wdns
'sandal-like' (sch.).
•ETYM For the alternation v8 ~ μẞ, compare кopíaµßλov ~ кopíavdpov, which may
also be the result of different adaptations of a foreign word (already Schwyzer: 303;
see also Kronasser 1962-1987: I 91). Compare further σayyápios (H.; s.v. ►okutEÚS)
and τayyápios (τσ-) [m.] ‘manufacturer of Parthian τáyyaɩ' (pap. VI³). Lat.
sandalium, MoFr. sandale, MoP sandal, etc. were borrowed from Greek. Fur.: 153,
389 also mentions σέµ˜ada. úлodýµata (H.), perhaps to be read *σέµrada?
σavdapákŋ [f.] ‘sandarac, red arsenic sulphide, realgar, red orpiment' (Hp., Arist.,
Thphr. etc.), 'bee-bread' (Arist.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also -άxn.

=== page 679 ===

1306
σávdvě 1, -UKOÇ
gapárong,rodog
1307
•COMP σavбapak-oúpylov [n.] 'sandarac pit' (Str.).
⚫DER σavdapáкivoç 'sandarac-colored, bright red' (Hdt. etc.), oavdapaкíw 'to be
sandarac-colored' (Dsc.).
●ETYM Long taken to be an Oriental loanword from an unknown source. Uhlenbeck
PBBeitr. 19 (1894): 327ff. implausibly derived it from OInd. *candra-rāga- 'moon-
colored' (Cuendet adapted this to *candana-rāga- ‘sand-colored', which is likewise
hypothetical; see Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. candanaḥ). LSJ mentions Assyr. šindu arķu
'green paint', 'yellow sulphide of arsenic'. The variation к/X could also point to Pre-
Greek origin. Cf. on σávduž.
σávdvě 1, -vkoç [f.] designation of a bright red colorant, a bright red mineral color, a
red transparent fabric, etc. (Str. 11, 14, 9 [conj.], Dsc., Gal. etc.); also a women's cloth.
For an extensive discussion of the meaning, see Flobert RPh. 90 (1964): 228ff.
<PG?(S)►
⚫DER σavбúk-lov [n.], meaning uncertain, -ivos 'sandyx-colored' (pap.); σavdwv,
-óvoç [m.] designation of a transparent fabric (Lyd. Mag.), formed after σtv-Swv?
•ETYM The formation can be compared with ßóµẞvě etc.; σavdapákŋ seems to be
related in some fashion (but cf. also Skt. sindūra- 'red-lead, cinnabar', Assyr. sâmtu,
sându‘red stone'?). Borrowed into Lat. as sandyx (Prop., Verg., Plin.). As far as the
formation is concerned, Pre-Greek origin is certainly a possibility (cf. ► σávdvě 2).
σávdvě 2 [?] · Kißшτóç 'box, chesť (H.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Also σεVSOúкη; diminutive σεvdoúкiov (sch. Ar. Pl. 711 and 809).
•ETYM The formation of the word is Pre-Greek.
σavís, -ídos [f.] 'board, plank, wooden scaffold, etc.', plur. also ‘tablets used for
writing, writing boards' (Att.), ‘planks of a gate, wing of a door' (epic). <?►
DER 1. diminutives σavid-tov [n.] (Att., etc.), oav-íσкη [f.] 'painting' (Herod.); 2.
σavid-wua [n.] 'planking' (LXX, Thphr., Plb., etc.), see Chantraine 1933: 187; 3. -wdns
'plank-like' (late); 4. -ów 'to provide with planks', -wτóç (Hell. and late).
⚫ETYM The formation is like σελíc, Soкíc, and other technical terms (Chantraine 1933:
337), but the etymology is further unexplained. The connection with ►σaívw by
Solmsen IF 30 (1912): 46f. should be rejected for semantic reasons.
σavváкιov [n.] 'a kind of cup' (Philem. 87). <?>
•VAR Also -aкpov.
•ETYM Unknown.
σavvās [m.] epithet and personal name, 'μwpós, stupid person' (Cratin., cf. Clark
Class. Rev. 69 (1955): 245f.; Colophon). <GR?>
•VAR σavvíwv 'id.' (Arr.), σávvopos = μwpós (Rhinth.), probably for -upos (Kaibel
ad loc.); cf. Zavvupíwv. As a PN also Σávv-os (Hippon.), -años, -чos, -vpíwv, fem. -w
(V-IV³); Σavvidapos nickname of Avτídwpos (Epicur.).
oav<v>lór\nktos.
•DER Besides σavvíov = aidoiov 'private parts' (Eup.), σаv<v>ɩóлληкtos.
aidoιóлληкτоç 'struck with shame'(?) (H.); σavvádaç. τàç ȧypías alyas 'wild goats'
(H.) (formally patronymicon of *σávvos vel sim.); probably also εσavúpičev.
Пкαλλεv 'was flattering' (H.) for έσav(v)-.
•ETYM The names are based, at least in part, on the meaning 'shame'. Frisk and
DELG derive it from σaívw; cf. also extensively O. Masson 1962: 165f. Borrowed as
Lat. sanna grimace', sanniō 'buffoon' (WH s.v.).
σavtoviкóv [n.] ‘a variety of wormwood from the Santones in Gaul'. <GR▷
•ETYM The word is clearly derived from the name of the people.
σάos →σwc.
oañépdŋs -ov [m.] name of a fish that is identified with the кopakīvos and the
„λatíotakos, which is thought to originate from the Nile and the Black Sea, but also
from other waters (Hp., com., etc.). <PG(V)►
•Der σanɛpd-ís (Arist.), -tov (Apollod. apud Ath.).
ETYM Certainly a borrowing. Thompson 1947 s.v. (with extensive treatment)
plausibly points to Arab. sabar, Copt. šabouri, name of a well-known fish of the Nile,
Tilapia nilotica (there is no indication that the Lyd. PN Sa-par-da-a-a has anything.
to do with this fish, pace Grošelj Živa Ant. 7 (1957): 43). Fur.: 153 adduces σáẞɛipoç.
кópa ‘tub-fish' as a variant. Lat. saperda, a fish, is probably borrowed from the
Greek.
carpós ońroia.
.
σaлúɛv [v.] · σaivetv. 'Pivewv (Fr. 24) 'to fawn (Rhinthon)' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Of unclear etymology (connection with oaívw can be discarded).
oánqɛipos [f.] ‘lazurite; sapphire' (Thphr., LXX, etc.). <LW Sem.?►
•DER σaлqɛip-10v (-лл-) [n.] 'coloring made of σ.' (pap.), -tvos 'made of σ.' (pap.,
Philostr., etc.).
•ETYM Certainly somehow related to a similar Semitic word; cf. Hebr. sappir. Since
the Semitic word is probably borrowed itself (E. Masson 1967: 662), we might also
consider Pre-Greek origin, in view of the elements -л- and -ɛɩp-oç. Through Lat.
sapphirus the word reached the European languages, e.g. as MoE sapphire, MoDu.
saffier, etc.
σáлwv, -wvoç [m.] 'soap'. <LW Celt.?>
•DER With -úviov [n.] 'id.', -wvapiкós 'soap-like, belonging to soap' (late medic.
etc.).
ETYM The word σáлwν is usually seen as a borrowing from Lat. sāpō 'id.' (since
Plin.), ultimately from Gm. (OHG seifa, OE sāpe, etc.; see WH s.v.). Also worth
considering is the alternative proposal by André Ét. celt. 7 (1955-1956): 348ff., who
argues that it was borrowed from Asia Minor Celtic instead.
σapaßāpa [n.pl.] 'a pantalon worn by the Scythians' (Antiph. 201). ◄LW Iran.▷
⚫ETYM Certainly borrowed from Iranian; cf. MP šalwār 'trousers' (Knauer Glotta 33
(1954):100-118).
oápapos →oápwv.
σapánovs, -nodos [m., f.] 'splayfooted'. <PG?>

=== page 680 ===

1308
oapyávn
•ETYM If the first element σapa- is not in some way formed from σaípw 1, we might
also consider Pre-Greek origin (final -πous could have been adapted secondarily).
σapyávn [f.] 'plaited basket' (since IV³). <PG(V)►
•DER σapyav-iç [f.] (conj. in Cratin.), -tov, -ídov [n.] (pap.) 'id.'. Besides, tapyával.
nλokai, ovvdégeiç, „édaɩ ‘twinings, bindings, shackles' (H.) with τετаруаvwµévη =
ovunendeyuévn, ovvɛλŋµµévŋ ‘plaited, gathered together' (H. EM).
⚫ETYM Instrument term without etymology (cf. Chantraine 1928: 23f.), the formation.
of which can be compared with лλektávŋ, ópkávŋ, etc. (the traditional connection
with σopós leaves the -y- unexplained; cf. also on τáρяη). The variation σ-/- is
Pre-Greek (see Fur.: 124; the suggestion of a hyperatticism by Schwyzer: 319 can be
discarded) and points to a pre-form *t'arg-an-.
σapyós [m.] name of a fish, 'Sargus Rondeletii' (com., Arist. etc.). <PG?>
•DER -íov [n.] ‘id.' (Gp.), -īvos [m.] name of a sea fish that appears in schools,
perhaps 'garfish' (Epich., Dorio, Arist.); cf. кεστρ īvoç, σapбīvoç, etc.
⚫ETYM Word of unknown, perhaps Pre-Greek origin (on the realia, cf. Thompson
1947 S.V.).
σápda [f.] 'salted and corned fish' (Diphil. Siph. apud Ath. 3, 120f., Xenocr., Gal.).
<PG➤
⚫DER σapdivoç, -ívn 'pilchard, sardelle' (Arist. Fr. 329, Epainet., Gal.), Lat. sarda,
sardīna.
ETYM Probably originally 'the Sardian fish', derived from Sardus 'Sardian,
Sardinian', Σapdw = Sardinia, named after the place of origin (Strömberg 1943: 86;
on the realia, Thompson 1947 s.v.).
σapďávov [n.] of µɛidiãv, yɛλāv ‘to laugh', σapdávɩoç yέλwç ‘sneering laughter' (v
292, Pl., Plh., etc.); as a v.l. and late also -óvov, -óvios (also -w-) after ZapdóvioS
'Sardinian'; σapdášwv. µetà riкpíaç yɛλwv ‘laughing with bitterness' (Phot., Suid.).
<?>
•ETYM The origin of this etymon is debated. In antiquity, it was sometimes.
connected with σéoŋpa, sometimes with a plant from Sardinia (σápdiov, -ávη,
-óvlov) that caused spasmodic laughing. The alternative suggestion by Kretschmer
Glotta 34 (1955): iff. to connect the name of the Sardana people (neighbours of
Egypt), referring to σapdavápaλλoç уɛλwтолоíoç (H.), remains unclear in its
details.
σápdɩov [n.] name of a gem, 'carnelian, sardine' (Pl., Thphr., etc.), also = 'seal' (inscr.).
<?>
●VAR σapdá, -oñç [f.]; Xíðos σápdios, σápdivos or σapdóvov ‘id.' (rare and late).
•COMP As a first member in σapd-óvuč, -vxos [m.] ‘sardonyx' (Hell. and late).
⚫ETYM Probably originally 'stone from Sardes', named after the place of origin (the
Semitic etymology by Lewy 1895: 57f. is doubtful). In Latin, we find several
loanwords: sarda, -ius, -inus lapis, sardonyx. See, however, Hester Lingua 13 (1965):
375.
oápE, aapkóg
1309
oapdóves, -óvwv [f.pl.] 'the rope sustaining the upper edge of a standing hunting net'
(Poll., H.). <?>
•VAR σapdóvia [n.pl.] (X. Cyn. 6, 9: gen. σapdovíwv wrong for -óvwv?).
ETYM A technical term without etymology.
oápr →dioapov.
σápioa [f.] ‘Macedonian lance' (Thphr., Plb.); Lat. sarīs(s)a. ◄PG?▷
•ETYM Etymology unknown (the hypothesis by von Blumenthal 1930: 21 is
insufficiently founded). Perhaps Pre-Greek (Fur.: 387).
σapкášw [v.] a rare verb of controversial meaning: related to dogs that are stubborn
and bite ravenously (y\iσxpóτata σapkáčovtes Ar. Pax 482), to grazing horses (Hp.
Art. 8); to biting the lips angrily (Gal. 19, 136), with which seems to agree the
meaning given in lexica 'to mock bitterly, grimly' (εл-, Ph.), e.g. H.: σаpкáčεl.
μεidiα, εipwvεúεtai, katayɛλḍ, àлò τo σεσηpéval 'smiles, feigns ignorance, derides';
oapkáoas. µetà mikpías ǹ ǹpéµa tàs twv xɛidéwv σápkaç diavoíğaç, yɛláσaç
'revealing the flesh of the lips gently or with bitterness; laughing'. <GR?>
●DER σapkaσµóç [m.] ‘grim scorn' (Hdn., Phryn.); unclear is the com. formation
σаρкασμo-vokáµntai [pl.] (Ar. Ra. 966).
•ETYM No completely convincing argumentation for the most obvious connection
with σáp has been given yet. In Ar. Pax 482, a meaning 'to remove the flesh, gnaw
the flesh from the bones' (cf. σapкí(w) is quite possible; the word would then have
been transferred to grazing horses (Hp.). In its further semantic development, it may
have been influenced by σέonpa (see H. above σαркáčwv ... кai σɛσŋpwc Ph. 2,
597). The form oúpkiše. σápkaše (H.) can either be Aeolic (σúpкεç = σápkeç), or it
may show influence from ►σúpw.
σápua [n.] 'chasm, abyss' <PG?>
•DER Perhaps σápaßoç. τò yuvaiкɛiov aidoĭov 'female private parts' (H.) and σápwv.
Xáyvos. tɩvès dè tò yvvaɩkɛĩov ‘lustful; the female pudenda' (H.). See on ➤➤oñpay.
⚫ETYM Sometimes connected with the verb ► oέoŋpa 'to show one's teeth, to grin' via
a meaning "yawning chasm", but if the connection with σápaßos ‘female private
parts' is correct, the interchange between ẞ and μ, as well as the extra a in the latter
form, could rather point to a Pre-Greek origin (not mentioned in Fur.).
σapµɛów [v.] ‘to raise a heap (of earth, of sand)' (Tab. Heracl. 1, 136 oùdè yaɩ@vaç
Angsi... oudéoaprevuei). <?p
⚫ETYM From σapµós. σwpòs yñç kaì кáλλvoµa. äλ чáшшov, äλλoι Xóρτov (H.,
Hippon. 165a); see σaipw 1 (O. Masson 1962: 180).
σápž, σapkós [f.] ‘flesh, piece(s) of meat' (Il.). ◄IE *turk- ‘cut’▷
•VAR Often plur., in Hom. almost exclusively (see Schwyzer 1950: 43, Chantraine
1953: 30). Aeol. oúpкɛç [pl.] (H., EM).
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. σaρкo-qάyoç ‘eating flesh' (Arist.), Míoç
σаρкopáуoç, a stone quarried at Assos (Troas), which was used for funeral
monuments and said to have eaten the corpse (Poll. 10, 150, Plin., etc.); from there

=== page 681 ===

1310
oápwv
'coffin' (inscr.), Lat. LW sarcophagus, OHG sarch, etc.; ǎ-σαpкoç 'without flesh, thin'
(IA); on -páyoç, see Sommer 1948: 94f.
●DER 1. σapk-íov (Hp., Arist. et al.), -ídov (Arist., etc.) [n.] 'piece of flesh', -ís [f.]
'meat, food' (late pap.); -ĭτıç [f.] name of a stone (Plin.); 2. σápк-tvoç (Att., etc.),
-ɩkós (Hell. and late), -ɛos (late) 'fleshy, made of flesh'; -wdns 'flesh-like' (Hp., X.,
etc.), -pηs 'consisting of flesh' (Trag. Adesp.); 3. σapк-í(w ‘to scrape clean of flesh'
(Hdt.), on the privative meaning see Hudson-Williams Class. Rev. 26 (1912): 122f.),
also лεpɩ- (medic.), with toμóc, and έк- (LXX); 4. -ów (лεpɩ-, εк- etc.) 'to make
fleshy, change into flesh', with -wua, -wσiç, -wtiкóç (medic. etc.); 5. -á(w s.v.
⚫ETYM Generally connected with Av. 9ẞaras-, pres. 9ẞərəsaiti, properly 'to cut' (upa-,
us- etc.), as a simplex 'to shape, create, destine, etc., from IE turk-. Lubotsky Sprache
36 (1994): 94-102 has shown that Skt. tváṣṭar- contains a zero grade (with a <r), like
Av. 9ẞōrǝštar (from *9ẞǝrǝštar-); for OIr. torc 'boar' of the same origin, he
reconstructs *turkos. Discussing the rise of -ap-, -up- as well, Lubotsky rejects a
reconstruction *tuork-. Different views in Vine 1999b. Alb. shark 'flesh of a fruit'
(Jokl IF 44 (1927): 13 ff.) is borrowed from Greek.
σápwv [adj.] λáyvos. tɩvès dè yuvaɩкɛtov ‘feminine (parts)' (H.). <?►
•VAR Cf. σápaẞoç. tò yuvaikɛĩov aidoĭov 'the female pudenda' (H.).
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown.
oapwvis, -idos [f.] 'old hollow oak' (Call. Jov. 22 etc., H.), also with -o-: σopwvís. ¿látn
лαλαá 'old silver fir' (H.); cf. Spuµòç Σópwv (Paus. 8, 23, 8). ◄PG(V)►
ETYM Acc. to Strömberg 1944: 29, from σapwvɛç tà tŵv Oŋpatŵv Xiva 'the net of
hunters' (H.), which remains unconvincing in spite of the parallels adduced. Since
the variation between a and o cannot be explained as e.g. vowel harmony, we have to
assume Pre-Greek origin for this word.
σatívaɩ [f.pl.] ‘coach, carriage for women, equipage' (h. Ven., Sapph., Anacr., E. [lyr.]);
for the plural, cf. e.g. öxεa; for the meaning, see Leumann Herm. 68 (1933): 359f.
<PG?>
•DER σάτλλα. л[η]λeiàs tò äotpov (H.), the 'cart'; see Scherer 1953: 145.
ETYM There is a certain similarity between σátτλλα and Arm. sayl 'car' (also as a
constellation, from *satilia). This should perhaps be explained as borrowing through
e.g. Phrygian. Schmitt Glotta 44 (1966): 148ff. rather argues for a Thracian origin of
σάτlla, whereas remote resemblance of Arm. sayl with Georg. etli 'car,
constellation' is pointed out by Adontz 1937: 5ff. Whatever the precise origin of the
words, σatíva and σáτλλα are certainly related, but defy derivation from Proto-
Indo-European.
oatpárŋs, -ov [m.] 'satrap', governor of the Persian king (since X.). <LW Iran.>
•DER σατрαл-кóç belonging to the satrap' (Arist., etc.), [f.] -ís (Philostr.), -ɛúw [v.]
'to be a satrap, rule as a satrap' (X., etc.) with -ɛía, Ion. -ŋŋ [f.] 'the office or province
of a satrap, satrapy' (since Hdt.); -ɛĩa [n.pl.] 'the palace of a satrap' (Hld.).
⚫ETYM From Olran. *xšaðra-pā- ‘protecting the empire' (OP xšaça-pāvan-), from
xšaðra- (see ►кτάoµα) and päiti (see лчuny). The frequent variants in
1
aátupos
1311
inscriptions ατp-, εεα(1)τp-, εεαιеp- (also σadp-) represent the OP initial xš- (and
partly also the internal dental) in a more exact way, but they are also partly due to
folk etymology: ατp- must have its initial &- from ε- (Schwyzer: 206 and 329);
conversely, the explanation of the at-diphthong by Kretschmer Sprache 2 (1950-
1952): 70 is hardly convincing. Cf. also Skt. kṣatrapa-, etc. (Schmitt ZDMG 117 (1967):
131).
σάττw [v.] ‘to stuff, compress, pack, load, equip' (IA, Cret.). <IE *tuenk- 'press
together'>
•VAR Ion. σáσσw (Hp.), Cret. (Gortyn) ovvɛσσá§§η, aor. σážaɩ, pass. σa×¤ñvaɩ, perf.
med. σéσayμa.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. ¿ïɩ-.
●DER 1. σayń or σáyŋ [f.] (acc. after Hdn. 1, 309) ‘pack, equipment' (since A.), also
'packsaddle' (pap., Babr. etc.); 2. σáyµa (¿ñí-) [n.] ‘coat, cloak' (E., Ar.), 'packsaddle'
(LXX, Str., pap., etc.), diminutive -átov [n.] (Arr.); -aτãç [m.] ‘saddler' (pap.); 3.
σáktas [m.] ‘bag, pouch' (Ar. Pl. 681, Poll.), probably from ‘stuffer' (Björck 1950: 68),
also = iaτpós (Boeot., Stratt.), probably as a nickname (Bechtel 1921, 1: 310); 4.
σакτηρ = Оúλαкoç 'sack' (H.); 5. σάкτwp, -opos [m.] 'crammer' (A. Pers. 924
oaktńp
[anap.]), 6. σáкtpa [f.] = qopµós (Phot.); 7. σášis (¿ñí-) [f.] ‘cramming' (Arist.,
Thphr.); 8. σaкτóç ‘crammed' (Antiph., pap.).
•ETYM The forms σáttw, σážaɩ, and σέσɑyμαɩ form a regular morphological system,
which includes the nominal derivations. Of the latter, σayn and σάyua have
analogical -y- (Bechtel 1921, 2: 745 implausibly argues for the converse, claiming that
y is original as in Cret. σádon, whereas σάттш would be analogical after σáča). The
root *tuenk- is found in Germanic (OHG dwingan 'to compress, coerce') and in Lith.
tveñkti, 1sg. tvenkiù 'to dam up, etc.'; see LIV² s.v. The connection with ToAB twānk-
, however, which is maintained by Adams 1999 s.v., is difficult, both because of the
difference in the preforms needed (IE *tue-n-k- for Tocharian, the vocalism being
arrived at through an intermediate noun) and because of the uncertain meaning
(traditionally 'to force in') of the poorly-attested Tocharian verb. Skt. tvanakti (lex.)
'to draw together' is unreliable; see Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. Cf. also oŋkós and
► σwкóç; also ► σuxvós.
σáτupos [m.] 'Satyr', mostly plur. as a designation of mythical beings, which belong to
the company of Dionysus and are often represented as (male) goats (since Hes. Fr.
198, 2); metaphorically of apes with a tail (Paus., Ael.). <PG(S)►
●DER 1. Diminutive σatup-íʊkoç [m.] (Theoc. et al.), also as a plant name (Ps.-Dsc.),
-íðɩov [n.] (Stratt.); 2. -ɩkóç ‘satyr-like, belonging to the satyr play' (Pl., X., Arist.,
etc.), -10 ‘id.' (pap.), -wdŋs ‘satyr-like' (Luc. et al.); 3. -tov [n.] name of several
plants, which were used for means of sexual arousal (Dsc., Plu., Gal. etc.), see
Strömberg 1940: 93 and 100, also name of an aquatic animal (Arist.); 4. -στns [m.]
'actor in a satyr play' (D. H.), after кiðαpiστηç, etc.; 5. -táw 'to suffer from satyriasis'
(Arist., medic.) with -íaoç, Ion. -inois, also -ɩ(α)σµóç [m.] (medic.); also -taкóç
‘causing satyriasis' (Ruf.), -taký [f.] ‘remedy against satyriasis' (medic.).

=== page 682 ===

1312
gavãdal
•ETYM The etymology of σárupos is unknown. A number of hypotheses have been
proposed, but none of them makes sense: from a word *ony ‘penis' and a second
member 'swell' (see σaivw), by Solmsen IF 30 (1912): 36ff.; a strengthening prefix
σa- and the same element 'swell' (Brugmann IF 39 (1917-1921): 114ff.); from чny with
a suffix -tv-po-ç (Grošelj Živa Ant. 2 (1952): 215ff.); borrowed from Illyrian, going
back to *seh, 'sow' and cognate with Lat. sator (Krahe 1955: 37ff.); borrowed from
Illyrian, but ultimately from *seh₂- 'satiate', identical with Lat. satur (Kerényi Studi e
materiali di storia delle religioni 9 (1933): 151 ff., Kerényi Rev. Int. ét. balk. 2 (1934-
1936): 21).
Yet for such a mythical word, Pre-Greek origin seems likely in the first place, and
this idea is even corroborated by the suffix -up-. Cf. ►Σλŋvós and ▸títupoç.
σavãdai · σañdoi. Aµεpías toùs oɛilɛivoùs oütw kadɛioðai qŋoɩv úлò Makεdóvwv
(H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. See Kalléris 1954: 259f.
σavкóv [adj.] · žŋpóv. Σvpaкoúσiot ‘dry (Syracusian)' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
⚫ETYM A number of wrong etymologies have been proposed, e.g. borrowing from an
originally Italic word related to avoç; other hypotheses can be found in Pisani
RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 25, Bechtel 1921, 2: 287, and Carnoy Ant. class. 24 (1955): 23.
Conversely, Fur.: 110, 134, 229, 241 convincingly compares σauxдóv. σаxvóv, xañvov.
σa póv, àσ0ɛvéç (H.), ►σaßaкóç 'weak, moldered, smashed' (H.), and σaẞaкwç
avotηpwc, Enpws, τpαxέws (H.) with σaßážaç diασкɛdáσaç, diασαλɛúσaç (H.). It
follows that the word is Pre-Greek.
.
σavкpóv [adj.] áẞpóv, λaqpóv, äкpov 'delicate, light, highest'; σаυкрóлобεç.
áẞpóлodɛç 'delicate-footed' (H.). On the combination of suffixes -кp-, see
Chantraine 1933: 225, Schwyzer: 496. <PG(V)►
●DER In H. also σauxшóv. σаxvóv, xañvov, σaеpóv, àσðɛvés ‘tender, porous,
unsound, feeble'; with ч-: чauкpóç kalλwinotńs, taxúc, ¿λaqpós, ápalóc ‘dandy,
swift, light, thin'; yavкpòv yóvʊ· кoñqov ‘light', yavкpóлoda. kovôóлoda ‘light-
footed' (folk-etymologically connected by H. with ǎкpos and yaúɛiv).
ETYM The combination of σauкpóç with чauкpóç (and σauxμóç; s.v. ►σauкóv)
shows that the word is Pre-Greek.
σañλos [adj.] Poetical adjective of unclear and varying meaning, referring to walking
and movement (Treu 1955: 253 and 295): σaula ẞaívɛv h. Merc. 28 (of a tortoise),
Anacr. 168 (Bacchantes), Semon. 18 (horse), oaula Baσoapídɛç (Anacr. 55),
explained by H. with кoñqa, ňovxa, τpvôɛpá ‘light, quiet, dainty' and with ȧßpóv,
koñqov, ǎkpov, tpvqɛpóv ‘delicate, light, highest, dainty'; acc. to sch. Ar. V. 1169 =
tò qañλov kai diɛppuŋkóç, so ‘light, dainty, delicate, prancing' vel sim.? <PG>
•COMP As a first member in σavλo-лpwktiáw (Ar. V. 1173).
•DER σavλóoμα (E. Сyc. 40: кшμo... ȧodais ẞapßíτwv σavλoúµεvot), acc. to H.
τручãν, ерúлτεσ0αι, évαßpúvεσat 'delicacy, to be broken small, to be effeminate',
Sia-σavλóoμai (Ar. Fr. 624), diaσаvλoúμεvov. diαкivoúμevov kai έvaßpvvóµεvov, ½
dɩaσεóµεvov (H.), with σaúλwμa. Oрúшча 'piеcе' (H.).
4
σavoa
1313
•ETYM The word σauλos rhymes with paulos; the words have possibly influenced
each other (other barytone adjectives in -λos are µáxλoç, ktíλoç, ëwλos). Moreover,
we find σavvá (σañva?). áлaλá 'weak' (H.) with a suffix -v-. It is difficult to offer an
etymological explanation (cf. on σaúpa), first and foremost because of the unclear
meaning. The word σauλoç presumably belongs to a group of Pre-Greek words (see
▶oavkós).
σavviov [n.] designation of a javelin used by foreign peoples (Men., Str., D. S.), ‘penis'
(Cratin. 443). <?>
•VAR Also σaúviov.
•DER σavviά w 'to throw a σ.' (D. S.), with -αστáç (Dor.) [m.] (Lyr. Alex. Adesp.).
⚫ETYM The etymology of this word is unexplained; cf. on ►σaúpa.
oaúpa [f.] 'lizard' (A. Fr. 92 M., Hdt., Arist., Theoc.), also = σaλauávdpa (Thphr.),
metaphorically as a plant name = кáρdaµov (Nic.), ‘penis of a boy' (AP), 'plaited
case made of palm bark, used in setting dislocated fingers' (medic.). Also σaupoç
[m.] ‘id.' (Hdt. [v.l.], Hp., Epich., Arist., Nic.); metaphorically as a fish name =
τpáxovpos (Alex., Arist., Gal.), after the color (cf. Strömberg 1943: 121). <PG➤
•VAR Ion. -pη.
•COMP As a first member in σaupo-кτóvoç [m.] killer of lizards' (Plin.); on σaupo-
Bpiés, see below.
=
●DER 1. plant names σaup-ídiov [n.] (Hp., Gal.), -íyyn [f.] (H.), cf. e.g. quoiyyn
qñσɩy to qũσa, also -ītɩç [f.] (Ps.-Dsc.), cf. Strömberg 1940: 130. 2. fish name -íç [f.]
(Suid.). 3. -īta εldóç tɩ öqɛwv ‘a kind of serpent' (H.). 4. -íyyn also = τò (wov n
σaúpa (H.), saurītis also a precious stone that was allegedly found inside a lizard
(Plin.). 5. -τns [m.] 'keeper of crocodiles' (pap.). 6. σavpwτý. лoкíλŋ ‘dappleď,
-wτoiç dópaσi toiç σavρwτñpaç ëxovoi katà tñs έлdopaτídos (H.). 7. σavрwτp,
-ñpos [m.] (K 153, Hdt. 7, 41, Plb.) 'lance shoe, bottom end of a lance that could be
stuck into the ground, vel sim.'; cf. instrument names like τролшτηр, σqupwτp, to
this σaupwτóç and σaúpa = 'case' (see above); in the same meaning also σaupoç in
oavpo-ßpidès ¿yxos (Trag. Adesp. 264); the lance-shaft was probably compared with
the long tail of a lizard (cf. oúpíaxos). 8. PN Σavpíaç, Σaúpwv etc. (IA, etc.).
•ETYM Without etymology, like many other words for ‘lizard'. The words σaúpa,
σaupoç, etc. are often connected with a group of other words starting with σav-:
σauλoç, σauvóc, and σauvíov, as well as σauкpóç (see Frisk), but there seems no
reason for this. As the animal was not a part of the PIE world, the word must be of
local, i.e. of Pre-Greek origin; it is not mentioned by Fur. The word dinosaur was
coined in 1841 by the English paleontologist R. Owen, with dino- from Sɛvóc
'terrible'.
σaúσaž [acc.pl.] a leguminous plant (Com. Adesp.). <PG(V)►
·VAR JaÚgakaç· tupoic áradoic eitpópouc. kai Sokovo è oúto appon rosiv
лрòç σuvovσíαv 'soft, nourishing cheeses' (H.).
⚫ETYM Older etymologies involve connections with σavкpóv, σauxµóv, etc. (see
Solmsen 1909: 133, who is hesitant about this), and with σavσapóv. чɩеpóv
'whispering, slanderous' (H.; Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 25'), interpreted as 'dry'

=== page 683 ===

1314
and connected with
gavaapóv
σauкóv. The word oavσapóv is clearly onomatopoeic,
however, in view of the meaning.
Fur.: 30132 is without a doubt correct in connecting owoɩkeç. oi έqłoí кúαμoι 'cooked
beans' (H.), which shows that the word is Pre-Greek (interchange w/av).
σavσapóv · чɩðvpóv 'whispering, slanderous' (H.). <?►
•DER -toμós 'paralysis of the tongue' (Arist. Probl. 647b).
ETYM See Pisani RILomb. 73 (1939-40): 509.
oάqa [adv.] 'surely, certainly, definitely', especially with olda, but also with other verbs
of knowing and saying (Il.). <?>
•DER σaqńs [adj.] 'sure, definite, apparent, clear, evident' (Pi., A.), on σaqés (h.
Merc.) see below; adverb σapéws, σaqws 'id.' (h. Cer.). An extension is found in
σaq-ŋvýc, Dor. -āvýc (Pi., trag.), adverb -ŋvéwę (also Hdt.), after åл-, лρσ-ηvý
etc., with σaqnv-εα [f.] 'clarity, clearness' (Att. since A., Alcmaion), opposed to
àσáqɛa from ȧ-σaqńc, oaqŋv-í¢w to make clear, explain' (IA) with -toμós, -totiкós
(late). Doubtful is σaðýτwp. µávás álŋðýs, µnvvtýs, épµinvevtýs ‘genuine seer,
informer, interpreter' (H.), as if from *σaqéw (diaσaqέw exists since E.); probably
arisen from a v.l. at I 404 (for ȧońtwp).
⚫ETYM Of the above words, the adverb σápa has the earliest attestations and seems to
be oldest (Leumann 1950: 1127); σaqέws is derived from there (after τáxα : τaxέwc),
as is the ntr. σaqés (σaqès d' oÚк olda h.Merc. 208) and σaqέστεpov. The form
σaqns would be the latest.
The etymology is unexplained. The form σaqńs was often analyzed as having a
second member related to oάos, paívw, the first member being a “strengthening"
element σa-, but such an element does not exist. Luther 1935: 61ff. has an extensive
treatment of σáða. Fur.: 344 etc. (see index) suggests several connections (e.g. with
σópos, on the basis of which he concludes that the word is Pre-Greek), but none of
them is really evident.
oaxvós [adj.] 'tender, mellow', of кpέa (Gal.). <PG(V)►
•VAR σaxvóv· áƒ¤εvéç, xañvov ‘feele, porous' (II.). Also σaкvós, MGr. and MoGr.
vaxvós 'thin', σaxpóç.
⚫ETYM Derivation from σwxw, ywxw 'to rub down' has been assumed, but the details
remain unclear. The variations σ-/- and -к-/-x- point to Pre-Greek origin; also note
σavõµóv· σaxvóv (H.).
oáw onew.
oßévvvu [v.] ‘to quench, extinguish', pass. 'to be extinguished, become extinct (IA).
<IE *(s)ges- 'extinguish'>
•VAR σẞevvów (Pi., Hp.), aor. σẞéσ(σ)α (II.), pass. σßɛσ¤ñvαι (IA), fut. oßέow (A.,
E.); med. σßévvμa (Hes.), aor. σßñvaι (II.), fut. σßησoμαι (Pl.), perf. čσßηкa (A.),
*σßεσμαι (Parm.). Deviating aor. кaτα-σßãσaɩ (Herod.).
•COMP Also with prefixes, especially άло- and кατα-.
•Der oßéσis (åñó-, кatá-) [f.] ‘extinction, putting out' (Arist., etc.), oßeo-tŃp, -tñpos
[m.] 'extinguisher' (Plu.), -τýpios [adj.] 'useful for extinguishing' (Th., etc.), -τɩкóç
σéẞoμal
1315
[adj.] ‘id.' (Arist., etc.); ä-σßεστos [adj.] ‘unextinguishable' (Hom. et al.), σßɛστós
(Nonn.), fem. 'unslaked lime' (scil. τítavos) (Dsc., Plu.), also ȧσßεστpiot and -wois
in H. as explanations of кovaτaí and кovíaσɩç ‘plastering'.
Glosses in H.: Čεívαμεv· σßévvчμεv 'quench', εlívα. εлεσßévvεv (for -ɛív-?),
άлočívvται (written --, for -(ɛív-)· ȧлоσßévvʊται 'is extinguished'; (óaσov. σẞéσov;
Coάo<εiç> σ[ɛ]ẞéσεlç.
⚫ETYM The root of all these forms is σẞεσ-, as found in oẞéσ-σat and ǎ-σẞεσ-τoç. On
the basis of the aorist oẞéσ(σ)at, the other forms were created: oẞévvuμu < *oßéo-vv-
[u, oßέow, oßɛo¤ñvai, čoßeoµiai. Later on, the secondary aorist coßŋv, oßñvaɩ was
created after στŋv, έkány, έáynv, etc., and then oßǹooµai, čσßηкa were formed after
this. The form кατα-σßãσαɩ falls outside this system. It could be interpreted as an
iterative (*σẞoñσat), for which we could compare (óασov, Čoάσɛç as attested in H.
The glosses with (- may indicate that oẞéo- < PIE *sges- developed into σdɛσ-
dialectally. If correct, this *sges- may be compared with e.g. Skt. jásate 'is
extinguished', jāsa yati 'to exhaust', Lith. gèsti 'to be extinguished, go out', caus. gesýti
‘to extinguish, put out', OCS u-gasiti, 1sg. u-gašo̟ ‘to extinguish' < PIE *g"ōs-, Go. qist
'destruction', ToAB käs- ‘to extinguish'. However, Hitt. kišt-ari ‘to be extinguished,
perish' is incompatable with the labiovelar in oẞέvvy. If we posit a pure velar
which is possible for all other languages, σßέvvvμα and Go. qist must be separated.
The initial σ- in Greek is aberrant; cf. e.g. Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 1: 590 and
Schmidt Sprache 22 (1976): 40-49, who assumes that oẞ- is metathesized from *ẞo-,
the regular outcome of an aorist *g*se-. This seems unneccesarily complicated.
oßév(v)ɩov [n.] ‘fibrous spathe of a male date-palm' (pap.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
oéßɩç [?] = nvšíç 'box (of box-wood)' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
g,
σéßoµaɩ [v.] ‘to shy, feel ashamed' (A 242), post-Hom. 'to be in awe, honor, worship',
especially with regard to the gods. <IE *tieg"- 'leave alone, give up'>
•VAR Also σéßw (Pi., trag.), rarely in prose (cf. Schwyzer 1950: 234). Non-presentic
forms are quite rare: aor. pass. σεеñvαι (S. Fr. 164, Pl. Phdr. 254b), fut. σεßησoal
(pap. IIP).
•COMP Rarely with лρoσ-, ȧvτ-.
=
•DER σέßaç [n.] ‘awe, amazement, worship, object of awe, object of worship' (epic
poet. Il.), only nom. and acc.; plur. σέßη at A. Supp. 755; as a second member of
compounds -σεẞns (but possibly derived directly from σέßoμa), e.g. εú-σεßñç ‘god-
fearing, pious' (Thgn., Pi.), ɛvoéß-ɛɩa, -éw, -ŋµa (from this form and from ảσέßŋµa,
also a simplex σεßηa [n.] 'worship' (Orph.) is formed). σέßaç served as a basis for
the aor. σɛßáσσaτo (II.), whence pres. σεßáčoμαι, aor. pass. σεßασеñvaι (late)
σéẞoμa and derivatives σɛßáσεç [pl.] 'deferences' (Epicur.), -oua [n.] ‘object of
worship, shrine' (D. H., NT), -σμóc [m.] 'worship' (Hell. and late), with -σuoc,
-oļuótŋc, -otós ‘venerable, reverend, elevated', = Lat. Augustus (D. H., Str.), with
-OTIOS, -OTIKÓS, -otɛúw, -otɛïov, and a pres. σɛßíšoµai, -í(w = σéßo-µaɩ (Pi., trag. et
al.), which could also be an enlargement of σέßoμaɩ, with -toµa [n.] (sch.). Verbal

=== page 684 ===

1316
σεiv
adjective σεлτóç ‘venerable' (A. Pr. 812, late prose), mostly in compounds, ä-, лερí-,
еεó-σεлτоç, etc. (trag.); σεлτ-ɩкóç, -ɛúw (H.). Agent noun 0ɛo-σεлtwp [m.]
'worshipper of gods' (E. Hipp. 1364 [anap.]). σéßɛpoç. εvσeßýç, díkaιoç (H.). See also
►σεμvó and ➤σoßέw.
•ETYM Traditionally compared with Skt. tyajati 'to desert, leave alone, abandon' <
*tieg"-e/o-. Although this seems semantically remote at first sight, the fact that the
causative σoẞew < *tiog"-eie- means 'to scare away, chase away' indicates that
σéẞoua originally may have meant to run away, flee' vel sim. Formal Greco-Aryan
matches like σεлτóç ~ tуaktá-, Оεо-σεлτwρ ~ tyaktar-, σéßaç~ tyajas- are rather due
to parallel development than to common inheritance. The origin of the -a- in the s-
stem σéẞaç is unclear, but perhaps analogical after yέpas (cf. Chantraine 1933: 422).
σεiv [v.] 'to let children urinate' (Ar. fr. 850). <ONOM>
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic.
σɛɩpá [f.] ‘cord, rope, snare, lasso' (II.). <IE *tuerH- ‘grasp, seize, fence in'>
VAR Ion. -pn (Dor. σnpá gramm.).
⚫COMP σεɩpa-pópos [m.], Ion. -pn-, of ллоç a horse which draws by the trace only,
trace-horse' (Hdt., A., Ar.), ларá-σεpos tied or fastened alongside; a horse
harnessed alongside the regular pair; (metaph.) companion' (E. [lyr.], X., Poll.).
•DER σɛƖpaños ‘equipped with a rope, walking by the rope' (= σɛpaqópoc; S., E., D.
H.); σɛpáw [v.] 'to tie or to pull with a rope' (Phot.); ȧvα-σɛpáw 'to pull backwards
(with a rope)' (E., A. R.); σɛip-wτós 'girded with a cord' (Sm., Thd.), -ów 'to gird,
hem' (Dosith.), -wots (Phot.). Diminutive σɛƖpíç [f.] (X.); σɛpideç. σɛipaí ‘ropes',
oɛpí<ç>. (wotńp ‘girdle' (H.), with -ɛ- for -εɩ-?; σεpádɩov [n.] (Eust.).
⚫ETYM Usually connected with Lith. tvérti, 1sg. tveriù 'to grasp, fence in' and
reconstructed as *tuer-ieh₂-, lit. 'seizing' (cf. also σopóc). Note that the acute
accentuation in Lithuanian points to the presence of a laryngeal, *tuerH-, which
means that σεpá should reflect *tuerH-ieh2- (with loss of laryngeal before *į
according to Pinault's Law; Pinault 1982). Connection with ɛ"pw ‘to put in order,
connect', Lat. serō 'to link, connect' would be better semantically, but would leave
the Gr. σ- unexplained. Hitt. tūrije/a-zi 'to harness' is unrelated (thus e.g. Risch apud
Mayrhofer Sprache 10 (1964): 197 and Mayrhofer IF 70 (1965-1966): 253), and rather
belongs to Skt. dhur- 'yoke, pole of a carriage' and Gr. ►ðapós (cf. Kloekhorst 2008:
900).
0-
Σɛɩpńv -ñvoc [f.] ‘Siren(s)', mythical destructive bird-like creatures (woman-birds),
who in the Odyssey attract sailors on passing ships with their beautiful chant, and
then kill them (Od.); also a designation of various seductive women and creatures
(Alcm., E., Aeschin., etc.); a designation of a wild kind of bees (Arist. et al.); see Gil
Fernández 1959: 214f. <?>
VAR Zip (Att. vase-inscr.); see Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 61f. Often pl. -ñvɛç,
gen. du. -vouv (Od.). By-forms Σapηv-ídɛç (Dor. Σŋpηv-) [pl.] (Alcm. et al.), -áwv
[gen.pl.] (Epich. 123, verse-final).
σɛiw
1317
•COMP Has been assumed as a first member in Myc. se-re-mo-ka-ra-o-re, -a-pi
(Mühlestein Glotta 36 (1958):152ff.); but well-founded doubts by Risch SMEA 1
(1966): 53 ff. See Aura Jorro 1985-1993: 255.
•DER ΣeipĤv(e)10s like a siren' (LXX, Hld.).
•ETYM Formally, it is possible to compare σɛpá as “the ensnaring one” or Σɛípioç, as
a personification of the mid-day blaze and mid-day magic; see Solmsen 1909: 126ff.
In favor of Pre-Greek / Mediterranean origin is e.g. Chantraine 1933: 167; further
hypotheses in Brandenstein 1954a: 56f. Fur.: 172 takes the name of the wild bees as
Pre-Greek.
Σɛípios [m.] Sirius, the dog star' (Hes.), also appositive or attributive Σɛípios ȧσtýp
(Hes. Op. 417), as an epithet of stars (Ibyc. et al.) and of the sun (Archil. et al.),
'glowing, burning, desiccating'; also an epithet of the vãɛç (Tim. Pers. 192), probably
reinterpreted as 'devastating, destroying' (cf. von Wilamowitz ad loc.). <IE? *tuis-ro-
'sparkling', PG?>
●Der σɛipióɛiç ‘scorching, glowing' (ñ\ios, átµós, Opp., Nonn.); σɛipi-áw [v.] ‘to
glow, scorch' (ořéɑ σɛipiáɛɩ, of Σɛípios, Arat. 331), also 'to get a heat stroke
(σɛɩpíaσıç)' (medic.); further σɛɩp-aívw [v.] ‘to scorch, parch' (Oros apud EM), -ów
(άлo-), also -έw (-ɛów) 'to desiccate, drain, filtrate' (medic., pap.; cf. Lagercrantz
1913: ad loc.), whence wμa, -wois (late); σɛip-άw 'to strike', of lightning (Ael.
Dion.).
Further some designations for a thin, transparent (summer) garment: σɛpóv,
σɛipiov, σɛipɩva, σɛɩpýv (Harp., Phot., Hes.); cf. Solmsen 1909: 128. Artificial back-
formation σɛip, σɛipóç. ó ñλios kai Σɛípios (Suid.).
•ETYM Assuming an original meaning 'sparkling, flickering', Σɛípios has been
connected with σɛíw, which is compared to a verb 'to be excited, sparkle, gleam' in
Skt. tvis-, whence tvís- 'excitement, gleam', tveṣá- 'tempestuous, sparkling', and
especially Av. 9ßẞisra- 'glitter'. The basis for the Greek form would then be *tueis-ro-
or, if σɛ-stands for σi- (Götze KZ 51 (1923): 151f.) *tuis-ro- (like the Avestan word).
Fur: 262 compares típios. Oέpovç. Kpñtéç ‘summer (Cretan)' (H.); if correct, the
word could be Pre-Greek.
=>
σεipów →Σɛípios.
σɛíw [v.] ‘to shake, agitate, sway', med. and pass. also 'to quake, shiver'. <IE *tuei(s)-
'excite, sparkle'>
•VAR Epic εл-σσɛíw (see below), aor. σɛσaɩ (II.), them. aor. ptc. acc. σtóvta
(Anacr.), pass. σɛioðñval, fut. σɛíów (IA), perf. med. σéσɛɩσµaɩ (Pi., etc.), act. σéσɛкa
(Hell. and late).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àvα-, кatα-, άлo-, dɩa-, ¿v-, έñɩ-. Seldomly found in
compounds, e.g. σεσ-áƒ¤ɛα [f.] i.e. 'the casting off of burdens, i.e. of debts',
designation of a law of Solon (Arist., Plu.); on Sopu-σσóoç, see ▶Sópu and Schwyzer:
4504.
•DER σεi-σç (ȧлó-, кaτá-, etc.) [f.] 'shaking' (medic.), -σμós (àva-, dia-, etc.) [m.]
‘shock, earthquake, extortion' (IA), whence -σµódŋs like an earthquake' (late), -σµa
(ларá-, dá-, etc.) [f.] 'shaking' (LXX), 'extortion' (pap.), whence -σμaτíaç [m.]
r

=== page 685 ===

1318
ge入ayéouar, -Éw
'concerning an earthquake' (D. L., Plu.); -στpov [n.] 'rattle' (taken over in Latin as
sistrum), -στpoç [m.] plant name 'Rhinanthus maior' (Arist., Plu.), -σwv, -σwvoç
[m.] a kind of vase, “shaker" (middle com.), formation like in кaúowv, cf. kaiw;
-σtŋs [m.] a kind of earthquake (Lyd.), -στóç ‘shaken' (Ar.), 'rattling', used of ear-
pendants (Delos III-IIª).
•ETYM Because of its aberrant vocalization, the zero grade ptc. σtóvτa must be
interpreted as an aorist. Except for this form and nominal -(σ)σóos, all forms show
the stem σɛ(σ). The geminate -σ0- in epic ¿ïɩ-σσɛíw, έ-σσɛiovto must go back to an
original consonant group, which means that σɛíw can be connected with Skt. tvéṣati
'to excite; (med.) to be excited, inflame, sparkle' (cf. Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 686),
which points to a reconstruction *tueis-e/o In Avestan, besides 9ẞaēšā ‘fears' <
*tueis- we also find forms without -s-, viz. 9ẞaiiah- [n.], 9ßiiā [f.] ‘fright, danger' <
*tuei-os-, *tui-eh₂-. Also possibly related is ►Σɛípioç.
σɛλayέoµiai, -έw ⇒oέλaç.
σéλaç, -aos [n.] 'light, glow, beam' (II., epic poet., Arist., etc.); on the use in Hom. see
Graz 1965: 310ff. <?>
•COMP σελaσ-pópos ‘bringing light' (A.), with analogical -ŋ-: σɛλan-pópos (Man.),
-yevétns (AP).
•DER σɛλá-w 'to shine, glow' (Nic. Th. 691), whence -σµа, -σµóç 'glow' (Man.);
-yέoµaɩ (E., Ar.), -yέw (Opp.) ‘to glow, radiate', whence -yŋois [f.] ‘glow' (Zonar.)
and by back-formation -yos [n.] ‘beam' (Hymn. Is.); enlarged -yí\w ‘id.' (Nonn. et
al.), whence yoμa [n.] '‘lightning, flash' (Man.); -σooμa 'to shine, glow' (Nic. Th.
46), -oкw 'to glow' (Theognost.). See also σελývη, ► oéλaxos.
•ETYM Etymology unclear. Frisk s.v. states that a connection with Av. x'arǝnah-
'glory of fame' is semantically attractive, but the interpretation of the latter word is
debated (see Lubotsky 1998b for discussion). Moreover, the initial σ- of σέλaç is
incompatible with Av. x'-. A different but unlikely etymological proposal can be
found in Pisani Rend. Acc. Linc. 6:7 (1931): 75.
oelátŋs [?] = kox\ías 'snail with a spiral shell' (H.); the form has been corrected to
*σiaλíτnç, see Redard 1949: 86.
oéλaxos [n.] 'cartilaginous fish' (Hp., Arist.). <PG?>
•VAR Mostly plur. -άxn.
•DER Diminutive σɛλáx-ov [n.], also a designation for small crustaceans (com.), -10c
'cartilaginous', of fishes (late), -wdns 'belonging to the cartilaginous fishes' (Arist.).
•ETYM The formation resembles téµaxos, tápixos, otέlexos. Connected with oέλas
'light, glow, beam' already by Galen, because of the phosphorescent light of certain
cartilaginous fishes (Strömberg 1943: 55); yet the suffix -ax- may also point to Pre-
Geek origin (cf. кúµẞaxos). The old connection with OHG selah 'seal', etc. is
untenable; cf. Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 24f.
σɛλývŋ [f.] ‘moon' (Il.). ◄GR➤
•VAR Dor. -áva, Aeol. -ávva.
⚫COMP Often as a second member, e.g. ȧ-σεληvoç 'moonless' (Th. et al.).
σελiç, -idoç
1319
DER σɛλnv-ain, Dor. σɛλavaía [f.] = σελvη (Il., epic poet.), like Aηvaín (cf.
Schwyzer: 469); -tov [n.] 'phase of the moon, contour of the moon, etc.' (Arist.,
Thphr.), plant name -ĭτɩç; -ápiov [n.] designation of moon-shaped ornaments, -íç [f.]
'id.', -íoкoç [m.] ‘id.' (late), -íτηs (Aiboc) [m.] "moonstone", "selenite' (Dsc. et al.),
also fem. -ītis (Redard 1949: 60), 'moon dweller, etc.' (Luc., Ath. et al.), -1ɛĩa [n. pl.]
'moon festival' (pap. IIª; Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 95), -ałoç 'moonlit, concerning the
moon' (Orac. apud Hdt., A. R.), -taкós 'belonging to the moon' (Plu. et al.), after
-αкóç; -ιáčoμai (Ev. Matt., Vett. Val.), also -(1)álw, -táw (Man.), 'to be
moonstruck, i.e. to be epileptic', whence -taoµós [m.] ‘epilepsy' (Vett. Val.).
•ETYM This etymon derives from *σɛλaσ-vā, a derivative in -vā from ►σέλaç ‘light,
glow, beam'. The formation may be compared with the PIE word for ‘moon',
*1(o)uksneh₂, as attested in e.g. Lat. lūna 'moon' (compare ►λúxvoc).
oέλīvov [n.] ‘celery, Apium graveolens' (II.), also metaph. ‘vagina' (Phot.); on the
meaning, cf. Andrews Class. Phil. 44 (1949): 91ff. ◄PG?(V)►
VAR Aeol. -vv- (gramm.).
•DIAL Myc. se-ri-no.
⚫COMP Often as a second member, е.g. лετро-σέλvov [n.] 'rock celery' (Dsc.), taken
over in Latin as petro-selinum, MLat. petrosilium > MoHG Petersilie; see Strömberg
1940:33.
•DER σEλív-ivoç ‘of celery' (late, rare), -íτηs olvoç, -ãτov [n.] = Lat. apiātum,
Σɛλivoñç, -oũvtoç [m., f.] HN and TN, -oÚvτios ‘of S.' (Megar., Th., Str.), -oúσLOS
(Thphr.) 'id.' (on the formation see Schwyzer: 528 and 466), -ovoía. kpáµßns eidos
'kind of cabbage' (H., Eudem. apud Ath.).
•ETYM Probably a foreign word like кúµvov, ► þηtívη. Strömberg 1940: 37
proposed a connection with σéλµa 'deckplank', σελis 'crossbeam', after the coarse,
hollow stalk. Note that Fur.: 351 suggests a connection with Myc. sa-ri-nu-wo-te,
which would point to a form *σáλivov, indicating Pre-Greek origin.
σεliç, -ídos [f.] 'crossbeam of a building or ship, cross-piece, transverse wall,
transverse row of benches or seats in a theatre, cross stripe or column in a papyrus
roll' (Att. inscr., Hell. and late inscr. and pap., LXX, Plb., AP). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Frequently plur. -ídɛç.
⚫DER Diminutive σελíd-tov [n.] 'papyrus column' (Ptol., Vett. Val.), -wμa [n.] 'broad
plank' (sch.); σέλµa, often plur. -ατα [n.] 'deck-plank, rowing plank, rowing bench,
deck, scaffolds' (h. Bacch., Archil., trag., Str.), metaph. of the seat of the gods (A. Ag.
183 [lyr.]). As a second member (with transfer to the o-stems) -(σ)σελµç (ε-)
'with beautiful oέλµατα' (epic poet. Il.).
Glosses σɛλuíç... кαì τà ľкpiaα '... and the half-deck' (H.), σελµwv. σavidwv ‘planks,
boards' (H.).
•ETYM This word could be denominative as well as deverbal (formation like ►σavíç,
► Sokiç, etc.), whereas σέλµa is a verbal noun in -μa (dépµa, ßñµa, etc.). Hesychius's
gloss σελuís seems to be a cross of the two, whereas σελµv seems to belong under
an o-stem *σɛλµós.
r

=== page 686 ===

1320
σε\\íčoμai
Schmidt 1875: 78 compared these words with OHG swelli [n.], MoHG Schwelle 'till,
threshold' < PGm. *swalja-, and ON súl, OHG sül, etc. ‘pillar' < PGm. *suljō-, but
phonetically this etymology is unconvincing, since *su- does not yield Gk. σ-. Frisk
(s.v.) instead connects σéλua with OE selma, sealma, OS selmo [m.] 'basis of a bed',
but this too is phonetically impossible. If the gloss λματа· ... σανdóματα ‘planking'
(H.) is cognate, the alternation between σέλµa and λµa may point to Pre-Greek
origin.
σε\\í【oµai [v.] = чƒɛ\\íčɛσðαɩ• tɩvèç dè σελλíŢε· ȧλačovɛɛɩ 'make false pretentions'
(H.). In Phryn. Com. 10 'to imitate Aeschines, son of Sellos', on which see DELG.
<?>
•ETYM Unclear.
į
oépipos →oéppos.
σɛpóç [adv.] · X¤éç. 'Hɛão 'yesterday (Elean)' (H.). ◄IE *dgies ‘yesterday'>
1321
•ETYM Perhaps from *₁εσ-óc, related to Skt. hyás ‘yesterday' < PIE *d½ghies, with
Elean rhotacism and -ós after vuкTÓÇ, etc. Cf. ►XOÉS.
σépqoç [m.] 'small winged insect, gnat, winged ant' (Ar. et al.). <PG(V)►
=
σéμɛlos [m.] Lacon. for кoxλías ‘snail with a spiral shell' (Apollas apud Ath. 2, 63d).
<?>
•DER σεμελoчpídat oi ävεv кελúчouç oüç vioι íчaкaç 'those without shell, which
some call λ.' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unknown. See ►σéσiλoç.
oeµidāλıç, -10s [f.] ‘finest wheat flour, fine flour' (Hp., com., etc.). <LW Sem.➤
•VAR Gen. also -ɛws, -1805.
•DER σεµáλ-ov (also -tv) [n.] ‘id.', -íτηs äptos (Hp., pap., etc.), see Redard 1949:
90f.
⚫ETYM Loanword from Semitic; cf. Syr. s'mīdā and Assyr. samīdu 'fine flour' (Lewy
KZ 58 (1931): 28f.), whence also Lat. simila 'id.', etc. are derived. The Greek word was
the source for Georg. semi(n)dali 'wheat'.
σεμvóc [adj.] 'venerable, honored, holy, noble', also 'haughty, proud' (h. Cer.). <IE
*tieg™-no->
●COMP Many compounds, e.g. σεµvó-µavti [m.] ‘venerable seer' (S.), ä-σεµvoç
'unworthy, ignoble' (Arist., etc.).
•Der oɛµv-ótŋs [f.] 'dignity, nobility, pride' (Att.), -ɛov [n.] ‘holy building' (Ph.),
after ȧpxεiov etc.; -úvoµaι, -úvw [v.] 'to exalt oneself, be proud; to make venerable,
exalt, praise' (Hdt., Att.), also with άло-, εл-, úлερ-, etc.; formation after
еpaσúvoμaι, -úvw, aloxúvoμal, etc.; back-formations úлéр-, εлí-σεµvoç (late), cf.
Strömberg 1946: 98; -ów = -úvw (Hdt.), with derivative -wua [n.] 'dignity, majesty'
(Epicur.).
⚫ETYM This word reflects *σεẞvóç < *tieg”-no-, an original verbal adjective from
► σέẞoμai 'to shy, feel ashamed; to be in awe, honor'.
σεpyoi = λaчot 'deer' (H.). <?>
ETYM Unknown; cf. Hester Lingua 13 (1965): 376 and Fur.: 247.
oépis, -idos, -ews [f.] ‘endive, chicory' (Epich., Dsc., AP et al.). <?>
•COMP vó-σɛpıç (Plin.), with pejorative vo-, see Strömberg 1940: 31.
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
•VAR Also σúppos. Anpídiov µikpóv, droĩov ¿µníç ‘small animal, a kind of gnat' (H.),
oépiqos [m.], -íqŋ [f.] ‘a kind of locust' (Zen., Suid.), -qov [n.] aívetov
Baλáσotov 'maritime wormwood' (Dsc., Gal.).
•ETYM For the formation, compare other animal names in -pos, 40s (lapos,
Epiqoç, etc.), and cf. Chantraine 1933: 263. According to Fur.: 384, the variation in
forms points to a Pre-Greek origin. The forms σépqoç/σépiqos could reflect a form
*ser'p-o- or even *sar'p-o-, but the -v- in σúpooç is then hard to explain. Do we have
to assume two separate words?
σéσɛɩ [n.] ‘small hartwort, Tordylium officinale' (Hp., Arist., Thphr., Dsc. et al.) <LW
Eg.➤
•VAR -ɩç [f.], also σíλɩ [n.] (Plin.); cf. also σλλкúлрov [n.], an Egyptian tree (Hdt. 2,
94), see Strömberg 1940: 127.
•ETYM A foreign word like лéëɛpɩ, kivváßapı, etc. According to Ps.-Dsc., an Egyptian
name for кavкαλíç. Taken over in Latin as seselis, sil.
σεσεpĭvoç [?] a fish. <?>
•ETYM See Thompson 1947 s.v.
σéonpa [v.] 'to show one's teeth, to grin' (IA), also 'to gape', of a wound (Hp.), an
isolated perf. with pres. meaning.
•Var Ptc. σɛonpwŵç, Dor. σɛσāpŵç, epic σɛσăpvĩa [f.] (Hes. Sc. 268).
•DER See on ➤σñpay\.
•ETYM As an old perfect, the verb looks inherited, but no cognates in the other IE
languages are known. Sometimes σápµa ‘chasm, abyss' is regarded as cognate.
σćσĩλos [m.] ‘land slug' (Ath. 2, 63c, Dsc. 2, 9, H. [cod. -on\-]). <?>
●var Also σɛσέλɩtα [acc.[ (Dsc. 1.c.); compare ►σέµɛlos ‘id.' (Ath. 2, 63d [Lacon.],
H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
σɛvoµɑɩ [v.] ‘to charge in, huddle, hurry, hasten, chase', act. 'to chase (away), rush,
incite' (Il., epic poet., also Hp., Aret. [as ovðñ, ¿σúðŋ]). <IE *kieu- ‘start to move'>
•VAR Also (B., Hell. epic) act. σɛúw; aor. έoσúµŋv, čoovto, oúto; ¿o(0)úðŋv, gúðŋv,
σúɩ; also σεúατo, εσσεúаντо, act. čσσεva, σɛña, perf. čσσчμαι, ptc. εσσúµεvos (cf.
Chantraine 1942: 190 on the accentuation), 3pl. σɛσúɑvται (H.), verbal adj. εní-
σσutoç; also σoñµal, σoñvtal, ipv. σoñ, inf. σoñσðαi (trag.), Dor. σowµny, owµai, etc.
(H.), perf. ptc. έσσonμévov (H.), act. 3sg. σóɛ (B.), a deverbative derived from
σofoûµai < *σof-εoμat, cf. Wackernagel KZ 25 (1881): 277; with lengthened grade
σwovτo, σwoμεvovs (A. R.); σɛûtai (S. Tr. 645 [lyr.]).
•COMP With prefixes, especially έru-.

=== page 687 ===

1322
σεÛTλOV
•DER As a second member in compounds: autó-σσUTоç 'self-sped' (A., S.), often
-σ(0)óoc in e.g. Aao-σσóoç 'inciting the men' (Hom. et al.); σoûç (from *σófoc) [m.]
'(fast, upward) movement' (Democr., Lacon. acc. to Pl. Cra. 412b, H.); úлоσεvαντηρ
[m.] 'expeller (of the plague)', epithet of Apollo (metr. inscr. Callipolis), derived
from úлo-σɛúw in analogy after e.g. λчµav-τýp from λчµαívo̟μai; σwɩpov in
►έníσowτpov; ►лavovdí; ► έnaσoútɛpoç. Cf. also tεvµáqµai and ▶tevtáčw.
•ETYM This verb is directly cognate with Skt. cyávate 'to move, stir, undertake', Av.
siiauuaite 'to enact, commit' < PIE *kiéu-e-to, with correspondences -σσυτоç ~ Skt.
cyutá 'moved', Av. mainiiu.šūta- 'driven by mind' < *kiu-tó- and σочμα <
*σoƑέo̟μαι ~ Skt. causative cyāváyate < *kiou-éie/o-. Another cognate is Arm. aor.
čʻogay (pres. ertʻam) ‘I went', from an o-grade *kiou-. In spite of the clear cognates,
the exact prehistory of the Greek forms is unclear. A preform *kiéu-e-to should have
regularly given **σεετal. The preservation of -εv- in σεvoμa must therefore be
analogical. LIV² (s.v. kwieų-) assumes that it was rebuilt on the s-aorist σσɛva. Yet
this form is difficult to explain as well, since a preform *kiéu-s-m should regularly
have yielded *(-σ)σña. Harðarson 1993a: 190 assumes that σɛvoμa reflects *kieu-
ie/o-, a recently formed present on the basis of the original s-aorist, but this is
phonetically unlikely: *kieu-ie/o- should have given *σɛíoμal. Perhaps we should
assume that an original athematic middle *kiéu-to(i) (perhaps preserved as such in
the rare form σɛtal) was the basis on which the -v- was preserved and generalized
in the other forms. On the aorists σσεva and xXεva, see Hettrich MSS 35 (1976): 47-
61; see also Peters Sprache 21 (1975). See ▶kivέw, ▶kiw.
σεÛTλov →Tεūtλov.
σnow [v.] 'to sieve, sift' (Hp., Dsc., Hell. and late pap.). <IE *kieh₂- 'sieve'>
●var Aor. oñoal, oŋoðñvai, perf. oćoŋoµaɩ, verbal adj. oŋotós.
•COMP Also with Stα-, кατα-, etc.
●Der σñσıç (Suid.), σãσɩ (Delph.) [f.] ‘sieving', oñoτpa. kóσkıva ‘sieve' (H.), whence
oŋotpídiov [n.] (pap. II³).
ETYM This verb seems to be a 0-present (compaге лλ½еw, and especially the
synonym noεw) to a root σn- <σã-, which is attested as such in 3pl. pres. σwσi (Hdt.
1, 200), aor. σñσαɩ, etc., and (with analogical -σ-) σησеñval, which all point to a verb
*σáw (cf. EM ow). This is related to Att. Siα-ɩɩáw (EM τŵ), from *kieh₂-. See
► Siαττάw for further discussion.
oŋkós [m.] ‘enclosure, fence, pen, stable, enclosed sacred space' (II.). <PG?>
VAR Dor. (Epid.) σaкóç.
●COMP σŋko-kópos [m.] 'stableman' (p 224, etc.).
●DER oŋk-ís (Ar.), -úλŋ, -vλλa (Ael. Dion., H., Phot.) [f.] 'house-slave', -íτns (Dor.
σaк-) [m.] (ȧpńv, pippoc) ‘fed in the stable, weaned' (Theoc., Long.), σñкa. oűτwç
¿nɩqłέyyovtaɩ oi roquéves eis tò ovyklɛiσai tà nоíμvα 'thus the herdsmen call out
in order to enclose the flocks' (H.), -ά(w 'to drive into the pen, confine' (☹ 131 etc.),
onków (with ȧvɩɩ-, ȧvα-) 'to weigh against, balance, equalize, compensate' (Hp.,
trag., Arist.), whence onк-wμα (Dor. σáк-) [n.] 'enclosed sacred space' (E., inscr.),
usually 'weight, counterweight, calibrated weight or measure' (E., Hyp., Plb., Hell.
!
}
1
antia
1323
and late pap. and inscr.); -wτp [m.] 'balance beam' (H.); ȧvtońk-wois [f.]
'counterweight, equalization' (Hdt., Plot.), with backformation ȧvτí-σηкoç
‘equalizing' (Eust.); σákwoɛ. katékλεσev ‘enclosed' (H.), áлoσŋêwσaç. wc év onkŵ
кαταкλɛíσaç like "having enclosed in a pen" (H.).
⚫ETYM Since Bezzenberger BB 12 (1887): 240, commonly connected with ►σάττw ‘to
stuff through a preform *tuākó-, which in laryngeal terms would be *tueh₂k-os. Yet
σάɩɩw would then reflect *tuak-i̟ō, which cannot be explained in laryngeal terms
(*tuh₂k should have yielded *TÜк-). Perhaps the alternation rather points to Pre-
Greek origin.
onlayyɛúc, -źwc [m.] 'gold refiner, gold washer' (Agatharch.). <PG>
ETYM For *oaλayyɛús (from σálay; see σáλoc), with -n- after ►σñpay?
oñua [n.] ‘sign, symbol, trait, omen, mark, character, feature, gravestone' (Il.). <?►
•VAR Dor. σãμα.
COMP E.g. σnμаτ-oυpуóç [m.] 'mark maker' (A.); often as a second member with
regular transition into the o-stems, e.g. ǎ-σnuoc, Dor. ǎ-σäµoç 'without signs,
unimpressed, unintelligible' (IA, Dor.), taken over as MP asēm ‘(uncoined) silver',
MoP sim (silver) thread', cf. Bailey TPS 1933: 50), isolated ȧ-σ½µwv ‘id.' (S.), έní-
σŋµos (Dor. -ā-) ‘provided with a mark' (IA, Dor.), ntr. -ov ‘mark, weapon' (Ion.
Hell. and late), also -a (Simon., A.); after σñµa.
•Der oŋµa-λéos ‘sending signs', epithet of Zeus (Paus.), -τóε 'full of gravestones'
(AP); denominative σnuaívw (v.] 'to give a sign, show, order' (Il.), Dor. (Pamphyl.)
σau-, often with prefix, e.g. εл-, бло-, аα-, ȧло-. Hencе σημáv-τwp, -τopos [m.]
'commander, ruler, guide' (epic Il.), a military official (Hdt. 7, 81), ‘annunciator,
announcing' (late poet.), -τúp, -τýplov, -tpov, -tpię, -tpia, -tikós, -σiç, also oŋuaoía
[f.] 'announcement, etc.' (Arist., Hell. and late), onμatíšoµai = onμaívoμa (sch.),
diminutive σnuáτov [n.] (Eust.), σnμ-εlov, Ion. -½ïov, Dor. σāμ- [n.] ‘sign, mark,
standard, signal, signet' (IA, Dor.), formation like μvημ-εïov beside дvñμ-α, with.
-Elwdns 'noteworthy' (Arist., Hell. and late), onuló -εów 'to note, notice; to
provide with a seal' (Hp., Thphr., Hell. and late), also with εл-, etc.; thence -ɛíwois,
-ɛiwµa, -ɛiwtikóç. oŋµ-ɛía (-éα, -aía) [f.] 'standard, banner' (Hell. and late),
formation like Baoiλ-ɛía, etc. PN Σauxoc [m.] (Boeot. inscr.), etc.
⚫ETYM Although the word looks inherited, no good etymology exists. Brugmann (e.g.
Brugmann 1886-1900 II: 348) equated it with Skt. dhyāman- [n.] ‘thoughť, but
semantically, this is not compelling. If correct, however, σñμа would reflect *diéh₂-
mn-.
σnµεpov →τημερov.
onuúda [f.] 'Judas-tree, Cercis siliquastrum' (Thph.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
σŋría [f.] 'squid' (Hippon., Epich., Ar., Arist.). <PG?>
•VAR Ion. -ín.
⚫DER Diminutives σηл-iðɩov (Нp., com., Arist.), -idápiov [n.] (Philyll.), -tác [f.]
'squid' (Nic.), -íov or -εov [n.] 'Os sepiae, bone of the cuttlefish, pounce' (Arist.).

=== page 688 ===

1324
σýroμai
⚫ETYM The formation of this word is unclear. Normally, words in -ía are abstracts,
which does not match this word's meaning. A connection with σηлoµaɩ to roť is
semantically possible (perhaps referring to the ink that smells as if it is rotten), but
formally problematic, as oŋría occurs in Epich. (61 and 84) with -ŋ]-, whereas
σηлoμα has Doric forms with -ā-. If the forms of Epich. are corrupt or Ionicisms,
the connection would be possible. However, it may be more likely that σηлíα is a
Pre-Greek word (not mentioned in Fur.). The word was taken over in Latin as sēpia.
oýroµai [v.] ‘to rot, become rotten', act. 'to make rot' (Il.). ◄IE? *Kieh₂p- (vel sim.)
'rot', PG?>
•Var Perf. σέoŋлα, aor. σaлñvaɩ (Il.), fut. σaдησoµαι (Hp., Pl.), also act. σ½µw (ÏA),
non-present forms are rare: fut. σnyw (A. Fr. 275 = 478 M.), aor. σñчαɩ (Ael.).
•COMP Also with prefixes, especially ȧло-, кατα-, dia-.
•DER σηлεdúv, -dóvos [f.] 'decomposition', plur. 'rotting juices' (Hp., Antipho Soph.,
Pl.), formation like τηкεdóv, etc.; also a designation of snakes, since their bites cause
putrescence (Nic., Ael.), like τεpηdwv, etc. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 360f.); thence
derivatives -Sovodŋs, -dovikós (medic.); σñóɩç (áñó-, σúv-, etc.), Dor. (Ti. Locr.)
σãч [f.] 'decomposition, fermentation' (Emp., Hp., Arist.), ońy, oŋrós [f.]
'festering sore' (Hp., Dsc.), [m.] ‘snake (also lizard), the bite of which causes intense
thirst' (Arist., Nic.), σηлη [f.] 'decomposition' (Aq.), σηão-nolóç = oŋätikóç (Alex.
Aphr.), oŋretov. oŋлedóvoç ‘decay' (H.), σŋë-ïós ‘rotten' (Arist.), 'causing rot' (Dsc.
et al.), earlier and more frequent ä-σŋл-τoç 'not rotting' (Hp., X., Arist., Thphr.),
-TIKÓç 'causing rot' (Hp., Arist.), -τpios ‘id.' (Hp.), σηл-εów = σýлw (Man.) (rather
enlarged from σηлw than derived from σé̟лη).
With a different ablaut grade: σɑлpós ‘rotting, rotten, rancid', 'matured' of wine
(IA), also σαлрías olvos (Hermipp.); σa˜p-óτŋs [f.] 'decomposition' (Pl., Arist.,
etc.), oμai (Hp.), -úvoμat (Nic.), -óoμat (sch.) 'to rot', -iw 'to make rot' (LXX).
⚫ETYM The alternation σηл-/σαл- has been taken to point to IE origin (so *tueh₂p-,
*tieh₂p-, or *kieh2p-; the last is chosen in LIV2 s.v. *Kieh₂p-), but no cognates are
known. However, *Kih₂p-ro- does not yield σaлрóç, so we either have to assume a
secondary zero grade (which is unlikely), or we have to accept that the verb is of Pre-
Greek origin. Older connections with Skt. kyāku- [n.] 'mushroom' and Lith. šiùpti
'to putrefy' must be rejected. See on ► oŋía.
oñpayš, -yyos [f., m.] 'cave hollowed out by water, hollow rock' (S., Pl., Arist.), also
used of cavities and pores of the body (medic.), metaph. = εлvμía 'desire' (H.).
<PG(S)►
•VAR Also σnpayyos.
●DER oŋpáyy-ɩov [n.] washing place in Piraeus (Att.), -wdŋs ‘full of σ.' (medic.,
Paus.), -óoμai, -ów 'to be hollow, make porous' (late).
ETYM Formally similar to synonymous opάpay; cf. also páλay, etc. (Chantraine
1933: 399f.). Sometimes connected with oέonpa 'to grin', but this is semantically
unlikely. It is rather a Pre-Greek word, in view of the suffix (not mentioned in Fur.).
onpauẞos [?] • εidoç кavеápov 'a kind of beetle' (H.). <PG(V)►
σеévoc
1325
⚫ETYM Strömberg 1944: 23 considered this to be Laconian for On paqoç ‘spider'. Fur.:
171 compares the word to σípaшpos. tò þúyxos 'snout', assuming that σpaẞoç
denotes a 'snout beetle'. This is semantically unlikely, but in view of the connection
with Onpapos (the suffix -auß- seems to be Pre-Greek; cf. кɛpáµßvε ‘longicorn
beetle'), the word could be of Pre-Greek origin.
σns [m.] ‘moth, mite' (Pi.). <?>
•VAR Gen.sg. σɛós (gramm.), nom.pl. σéɛç, acc.pl. oćas (Luc. Ind. 1), gen.pl. oέwv
(Ar. Lys. 730, etc.); later ontóç, oñteç, oŋtŵv (Arist., etc.).
•COMP σητó-ẞρwτoç 'eaten away by moths' (LXX, NT).
•DER σntάw 'to eat away, gnaw', in σnτúμεva. ßißpwσкóμεva 'being eaten' (Suid.).
⚫ETYM The older inflected forms, gen.pl. σéwv (after which arose σéac, σéɛç), follow
the type σaos, -έwv. The accentuation of gen.sg. σɛós follows the pattern of
monosyllables. The younger forms oŋtós, etc. are rebuilt after Ons, Ontós, etc.
The etymology is unclear. The comparisons with why ‘date wasp', σívoμaι 'to rob,
damage', and Lat. tinea 'tinea' are semantically and/or formally weak. It is rather a
loanword from Semitic; cf. Hebr. sās ‘moth', Akk. sāsu, etc. (Lewy 1895: 16f.,
Scheftelowitz BB 28 (1904): 289), and Arm. c'ec'mite'.
σŋσaμov [n.] 'seed and fruit of the sesame plant', also referring to the plant itself (IA).
<LW Sem.>
VAR Also -oç [m.], -ŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Gp.). Dor. σáσaμov, Lac. σάaμov.
•DIAL Myc. sa-sa-ma [pl.].
•COMP As a first element e.g. oŋσaµo-лóλŋs [m.] ‘sesame merchant' (Att. inscr.).
•der onoaµ-íç, -ídos [f.] ‘dish made of roasted sesame seeds and honey' (Stesich.,
com.), -ñ (-έa Hdn.) [f.] ‘id.' (com.), -tov [n.] ‘id.' (Hdn.), -ítŋs [m.] ‘sesame cake'
(Poll., Ath.), -îτıç (уñ) [f.] ‘planted with σ.' (Hell. pap.), see Redard 1949: 91 and 109;
-óɛɩç, -oûç [adj.] ‘made of σ.', msc. ‘sesame cake' (Hp., Ar.), -tvos 'made of σ.' (X.,
Hell. pap., Str., etc.), -años 'id.' (Luc.), -Iкóc 'concerning σ.' (pap.), -wong sesame-
like' (Thphr.), -оúvτoç 'made of σ.' (sch.), -ɛúw 'to sow σ.', whence -ɛia [f.] (Hell.
pap.).
⚫ETYM Loanword from Semitic; cf. Akk. šammaššamu ‘sesame', Aram. šūmšemā, etc.
(Lewy 1895: 28f.), with a formation like кápdaμov, þáλσaµov, etc. Taken over in
Latin as sēsamum, sēsuma.
ontávos, oñtes →TĪTES.
σ0évoç [n.] 'strength, power, ability, might' (almost only epic poet. Il.). <?>
•COMP Very frequent as a second member, e.g. à-σ0εvns 'without strength,
strengthless' (Pi., IA), whence ȧo0év-εα, -éw, -ŋµα, -ów, -wσiç, -ɩкóç (Arist.) and the
secondary simplex σłɛvýs· iσxupóç, kaptɛpós ‘powerful, strong' (H.); also as a first
member, e.g. σ0εvo-ẞλaßηs 'damaging the strength' (Opp.), after opεvo-ßλaẞnç; PN
Σ0εvé-λaos (after Mɛvéλaos), Σ0éveλos (Il.).
•DER σ0εv-após 'powerful' (epic poet. I 505, also Hp.), formed like ẞpiapós,
στiẞapóc, etc.; Σ0év-tos [m.], -tác [f.] epithet of Zeus and of Athena in Argolis
(Paus.), -α [n.pl.] name of an Agon in Argos (Plu.), also fem.sg. epithet of Athena

=== page 689 ===

1326
olāyov
(Lyc. 1164), formed after women's names in -ɛɩa; σ0έv-w (with έлɩ- Q. S.) 'to be
strong, be able' (back-formation, only pres. and ipf.; trag., also late epic and prose; cf.
Schwyzer: 723), -ów 'to strengthen' (1. Ep. Pet. 5, 10).
ETYM No clear etymology. The suffix of σ0évoç has been analyzed as *-(e)nos- and
compared with ǎoεvoç, ктñνоç, etc., but the existence of an old IE suffix of this
shape is unlikely. The initial σ0- is taken as the root by Bolling AmJPh. 21 (1900): 316
and compared with Skt. saghnóti ‘to be a match for, be equal to (a task)', Av. a-zg-
ata- 'irresistible (?)', which would point to PIE *sgh-énos.
σãyóv [f.] 'jawbone, jaw, cheek' (Hp., Att., Arist., LXX, NT). <PG>>
VAR Ion. σin (σɛα-, ova- late pap., etc.), -óvoc.
⚫DER σlay-óvɩov [n.] 'region of the jaw, cheek piece' (Hp., LXX, Ath. Mech.), -ovíτns
µñç ‘jaw muscle' (Alex. Trall.); Redard 1949: 101.
⚫ETYM Synonym for yváðos (which is the more usual word). Connection with чioμa
'to chew' is semantically attractive, but the formation is quite unclear. The latter part,
-wv, may be compared to the -wv in layov, keveúv, лvyúv, áyкóv, and other words
for body parts, but the former part is obscure. Since IE origin is formally hardly
possible, the word could well be of Pre-Greek origin, possibly reflecting *s'āg- (cf.
Beekes 2008: 52).
σɩaλɛvdpíç [?] a bird (Call. fr. 419, acc. to H.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Origin unclear. Perhaps reflecting Pre-Greek *s’al-.
σialov [n., m.] ‘spittle, slobber', metaph. ‘'joint fluid, synovitis' (Hp., Pherecr., X.,
Arist., Hell. and late). <?►
•VAR σíɛλov (-os).
•DER σiaλíç. Bλévvoç 'slime' (H.), σtaλwons like saliva' (Hp.), otaλ-í(w (σiɛλ-) [v.] 'to
form spittle, slobber, foam' (Hp., Archig.), -toμuós [m.] 'water-brash' (medic.),
-ɩστplov [n.] 'bridle-bit' (Gp.), σíαɩ· лτúðaι· Пláqo 'to spit (Paph.)' (H.), cod.
лτñσαι, cf. Schwyzer: 752.
•ETYM Probably an onomatopoeic word. A connection with Skt. kṣivati ‘to spiť is
formally difficult. Note that the verb σкxαívw, -oμa 'to feel disgust, detest' shows
the rare and late forms σtaívoμat, aor. σtávony to meet antipathy, disgusť (pap. VI-
VIIP, H., Suid., gloss.), and σtaívw 'to cause antipathy' (sch.), which seem to be
transformations on the basis of σiaλov.
oíaλos [m.] fat pig, porker', also appositive to σuç ‘id.' (Hom., Q. S., Thphr apud
Porph.); metaph. 'fat, grease' (Hp. Acut. [Sp.] 37). <PG>
•DIAL Myc. si-a₂-ro.
•DER σiaλ-wdns 'porker-like, fat' (Hp.), -oûται· τρéqετal ‘is fattened' (H.).
•ETYM The one attestation that means 'fat, grease' (Hp. Acut. [Sp.] 37) may have
arisen out of 'fat pig' by ellipsis, and cannot be used as an argument in favor of the
view that the original meaning of oíaλos is 'grease, fat'. Therefore, the connection
with oíaλov 'spittle, slobber', which otherwise would be semantically attractive,
becomes doubtful. Other etymological proposals are unconvincing. The connection
with OE pwinan 'to become weak, to die away' is semantically weak; the connection
σiyaλóεiç
1327
with RuCS tyti 'to become fat' (Bechtel 1914 s.v.) is formally difficult, as the latter
reflects *teuh2 (Skt. tav²- 'to be strong', Gr. τaüç ‘great, many', ▸ows 'safe and
sound'). The word is probably of Pre-Greek origin.
σɩẞúvŋ [f.] 'hunting spear, javelin' (Alex., D. S., AP). <LW▷
•VAR Also -ŋs [m.]; ovßívn (pap. IIIª); also Čißúvη (LXX, Ph. Bel.).
⚫DER Diminutive σißúviov [n.] (Plb.), - (H.).
•ETYM Clearly a word of foreign origin; cf. MoP zōpīn, Arm. səvin, and Syr. swbyn
'javelin'. According to Fur.: 247, these words show that the original form was ovẞívn,
which was possibly metathesized to σißúvη on the basis of other words for
instruments in -úvη, like кopúvη, τopúvη. Compare also σtyv(v) ηs ‘hunting
spear', which however cannot be related. Taken over into Latin as sibyna (sub-, syb-).
oîya [adv.] ‘silently, in silence', also interj. ‘be quiet!' (trag.). ◄?►
●DER σtyáw (Hom. only ipv. σíya; ind. since h. Merc.), fut. σɩyńσoµai (S., E., Ar.),
-now (AP, D. Chr.), perf. σɛσíуηкα (Aeschin.), pass. σɩy-άoµαι (S.), aor. -еñvaι (Hdt.,
E.), -ãñvai (Theoc.), fut. -ηeñσoμai (E.), perf. σɛσíу-ŋµαɩ, Dor. -ãµaɩ (Pi., E.) ‘to be
quiet, keep secret', pass. 'to be kept secret', sometimes with кaτα-, etc., whence σty-
ŋóc, Dor. (Pi.) -āλóc 'silent' (Hp., S., Arist.), -ŋpós ‘id.' (Men., LXX), -nτns [m.]
'silent person' (Latium IIP), -ŋτɩкóç ‘silent' (Hp.), -ŋµovặc σiyās ‘keep silent' (H.),
σɩyń, Dor. -á (Pi.) [f.] 'silence, secrecy' (Il.; Hom. only σɩуn; cf. below); σĩyos [n.] ‘id.'
(late innovation, An. Ox.), whence σty-aλéoç 'silent' (AP, Orph.), -áчw (Pi., X.,
D.C.), кaτα- (Arist. et al.) 'to make silent', кataσɩyaivε, gloss of лрαüvɛi (H.), σɩy-
ápvns [m.] ‘?' (Call. Epigr. 45, 6), cf. Schwyzer RhM 75 (1926): 447 and 77, 105.
⚫ETYM It is probable that the interjective adverb oiya formed the basis for all these
words. First, the ipv. oίya and instrumental dat. σɩуñ were formed, on the basis of
which the verbal and nominal paradigms were built (Schwyzer: 722, 726, Schwyzer
1950: 257', Chantraine 1942: 357). The origin of oчya is unclear, however. The
Hesychius gloss píуa. σɩóлα 'keep silent!' (H.) has been analyzed as Fíya and taken
to point to a pre-form *σFly-. Frisk s.v. suggests a connection with OHG swīgën ‘to
be silent', but this is formally impossible: the latter would reflect *sueigh-, which
would regularly yield Gk. **ɛix-. Therefore, it is probably of onomatopoeic origin.
Cf. also σɩwлάш, -ń.
σîyaλóɛıç [adj.] epic epithet of rvía, xiτóv, εïµaτa, Opóvos, etc., brilliant, gleaming'
vel sim. (Hom.), later of ȧµúydaλa, uvía (Hermipp., Numen. apud Ath.). <?>
●DER vɛo-σiyaλos 'with a new brilliance', of τpóños (Pi.), after the pattern ααλóεç
: лоλν-лαíлαλоç, etc. (Leumann 1950: 214³); σiyaλów [v.] 'to smoothen, polish'
(Apollon. Lex. s.v. σɩуaλóɛvτα, sch. Pi.), σɩyáλwµa [n.] 'polishing tools of a cobbler'
(Apollon. ibd., H. s.v. σiyaλóɛv), also 'border, edging of a pelt' (H. τà nɛpiantóµεva
tais wais), oiáλwμa ‘iron mountings of a Roman longshield' (Plb. 6, 23, 4; H.), with
loss of the y, cf. Schwyzer: 209.
⚫ETYM Formation like αiðaλóɛç, óµчaλóɛç, etc., which are also epic epithets. The
technical noun oɩyáλwμa belongs to a different style category and cannot be derived
from σɩyaλóɛç directly, but may be formed on the basis of σiyaλów (if this verb is
not a construct of grammarians), or forms an enlargement of an unattested noun

=== page 690 ===

1328
olya入poi
*oiyalos (like eе.g. ȧετшμα to άετóc). Etymology unclear. Older, unconvincing
attempts in Frisk s.v.
.
σyaλpoí [m.] oi ǎqwvoi kai oi ǎypɩɩ tétɩɩyɛç 'wild cicadas that do not make any
sound' (H.). <PG?>
•VAR Cf. σiyiov. ɛldoç téttɩyoç ‘a kind of cicada' (sch. Ar. Av. 1095).
•ETYM The reading of this word is not fully certain; some scholars prefer a reading in
-aλoí (cf. Frisk s.v.). Because of the muteness of this type of cicada, this word was
connected already in classical times (Plin. HN 11, 92) with σtyń 'silence' (see σiya),
which could make sense. Strömberg 1944: 18 rather connects the word with σi w 'to
hiss'. Fur.: 369 compares the words ȧdiyóp. τpw\a\\íç. úлò Σkvēŵv 'grasshopper
(Skythian)' (with prothetic vowel?) and εуápŋ. ó téttiž napà Σɩdτaç ‘id.
(Sidetian)' (H.), which would point to a Pre-Greek origin. This would be supported
if the word should indeed be read σiyaλ(^)oí, as Furnée cites it, since words in
-aλo- are Pre-Greek (Beekes 2008).
σiyɩστpov [n.] 'chest' (Eust. 956, 6; 1604, 10). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
oíylos [m.] weight and coin (in X. = 7.5 Att. obols), 'shekel' (Att. inscr. end IVª, X.),
also used as an ear-pendant (e.g. in σtylo-pópos Com. Adesp. 792); in this meaning
also oiyλai [f.pl.] (PMasp. VIP, Poll.). <LW Sem.>
VAR OIKλoç (LXX, J.).
⚫ETYM Loanword from Semitic; cf. Hebr. šekel, etc. Taken over in Latin as siclus.
oiyua [n.] indecl. name of the letter (Pl., Arist., etc.). <?►
•VAR Also -ĭ-.
•DER σɩyμ(ατ)o-εids ‘sigma-shaped' (late), σуµãτíš ‘to write with a sigma' (Eust.).
•ETYM The name of this letter is without an evident Semitic precursor (Hebr. sāmekh
is formally remote). Therefore, it is more probably a verbal noun from the verb oilw
'to hiss' (Schwyzer KZ 58 (1931): 186ff.).
.
σiypai • τwv ȧypiwv ovŵv oi ßpaxɛïç kaì oчoí ‘small and snub-noised wild swine' (H.).
<PG(V)►
•ETYM Pre-Greek, in view of the gloss σíka. бç. Aáкwvɛç 'swine (Laconian)' (H.).
σɩyбv(v)ŋs [m.] ‘hunting spear, javelin' (Hdt. 5, 9, Opp.). <PG(V)►
•VAR -oç [m.] (A. R., AP), -ov [n.] (Arist. Po. 1457b 6, AP), -чµvov (Lyc.).
•ETYM According to Herodotus and Aristotle (l.c.), the word is Cyprian, whereas a
sch. on A. R. 4, 320 states it is Scythian. The word resembles the ethnonym Σtyúvval,
-ol, vvot (Hdt., A. R., Str.), a people on the other side of the middle Danube, which
must have been Iranian (Scythian). According to Herodotus, retail dealers (кáлηλo)
were called σtyúvval by the Ligyes in the neighborhood of Massilia, clearly after the
people (cf. Dunăreanu-Vulpe in Bonfante BSL 37 (1936): 78 and Kretschmer Glotta
27 (1939): 245). Fur.: 247 assumes that σɩyõv- reflects *oɩyuƑv-, which is a variant of
σɩyчμv-, with the typical Pre-Greek alternation -μ/Ƒ-. Cf. ►σißúvη, which however
cannot be cognate.
1329
oilw
oidn [f.] 'pomegranate (tree)' (Emp., Hp., Thphr.; Nic. also i by metrical lengthening);
also the name of a Boeotian water-plant = vчuqaía (Thphr., Nic.). <PG(V)►
•VAR žíµßα þotaí. Aiolɛiç ‘pomegranates (Aeolian)' (H.). Also -a (Boeot.),
Schwyzer: 30; -έaɩ [pl.] (Halaesa), perhaps after ovкéaɩ; σíßdŋ (Call., H.), oíλẞia.
oídia 'pomegranate peels' (H.).
•DER oid-lov [n.] 'pomegranate peel' (Hp., Ar., Thphr.), oiλẞia. oídia (H.) with -10-
εdns oídov-like' (Hp.), -twτóv [n.] 'medicine produced with σ.' (Paul. Aeg.), -óɛç
(Nic.), -ɛos (Hdn. Gr.) 'from the pomegranate peeľ'; Σĭd-oûç, -oñvtos (X.), -óels,
-óεvτos (Euph.) [m.] TN near Corinth.
•ETYM Cf. PNs like Σídŋ, Σídvµa, and also Alb. shegë ‘pomegranate', etc. See also on
►σídŋpos. On the by-forms σißdŋ and α, see also Brandenstein 1958: 80ff. with
references. Fur. (index) accepts all forms as real, including чußpa (286). Analyzing
σißdŋ as < *σɩƑS-, he argues that the group is Pre-Greek. The gloss piußa polaì
µεуáλα. ǎµεvov dè dià τov · žíµßat (H.) is unclear.
oidŋpos [m.] ‘iron, steel', also ‘iron tool, sword, iron weapon, etc.', metaph. ‘(iron)
toughness' (II.). <UNKNOWN>
•VAR Fem. in Nic. Th. 923; Dor. -āpoç.
●COMP E.g. σdηpó-qpwv ‘iron-minded' (A., E.), oidŋpo-kóvtpa [f.] 'hunting spear'
(Gortyn, Sagalassos), ¿lo-σídŋpoç ‘made completely of iron' (Attica, Delos, etc.).
•DER Doric forms are not indicated separately: odηp-tov [n.] ‘iron tooľ (IA, Cret.),
-íσкoç [m.] a medical instrument (Crete V-IV₁), formation like oẞɛλíσkoç, etc., cf.
Chantraine 1933: 408; -ɛĩa, -ɛĭov [n.] ‘iron mine' (Arist., Delos, etc.), -ɛúc [m.] 'iron
smith' (X. et al.), -ítns [m.], -ītis [f.] 'made of iron, iron' (Pi., Eup. et al.), also name
of a stone (Plin., Orph.) and several plants, “vervain” (J., Dsc.), because they are
supposed to heal stab wounds, cf. Strömberg 1940: 89; -ε(1)oc, -oç, -10¢ [adj.] ‘iron'
(II.), nec id.' (Nic.), -óɛƖç (EM), -ɛóɛç (Ep. Alex. Adesp.), -wdns 'id.' (sch.), -óoμα,
-ów 'to be provided with iron' (Th., inscr., etc.), whence -wots [f.] ‘ironwork' (Att.
inscr., etc.), -óµaτα [n.pl.] ‘iron mountings' (pap. VP), -wτós ‘studded with iron'
(Edict. Diocl.)), -ɛúw [v.] ‘to work with iron, forge' (Poll.), whence -ɛía [f.] ‘ironwork'
(X.); -w [v.] 'to resemble iron, contain iron' (medic.).
•ETYM Origin unclear. The Greeks got to know iron from Asia Minor, the Pontus
and Caucasus, and it is likely that they took over the word for it from these areas as
well. In that sense, the resemblance with the Caucasian word (Udian) zido 'iron' may
be relevant (cf. also Fur.: 105). Some scholars assume that σidŋpoç originally referred
to meteoric iron, and is derived from Lat. sīdus ‘constellation' (cf. Kretschmer Glotta
26 (1938): 64). Others assume that the word refers to the redness of the metal, and
assume a connection with oidn ‘pomegranate' (Deroy Ant. class. 31 (1962): 98ff.,
Crepajac KZ 80 (1966): 249ff.). Still others assume a connection with words for
'silver', like e.g. Lith. sidabras 'silver' (because both metals have a white color); cf. e.g.
Mallory & Adams 1997: 313-4.
oiw [v.] 'to hiss' (1394, com., Arist.). <ONOM
•VAR Only the pres. stem is securely attested; aor. oíža (Theoc. 6, 29) is a conjecture,
further only лoížŋ (Ar. V. 704 v.l.) besides -σín.

=== page 691 ===

1330
σíka
σíλoupos
1331
•COMP Rarely with εл-, Stα-.
●DER σɩyµós [m.] (Arist., Phld., Plu.), σioµós [m.] (Suid.), oížıç [f.] (Arist.) ‘hissing';
also ▸σiyua?
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic, just like Lat. sibilō, etc. Cf. Schwyzer KZ 58 (1931): 186ff.
σíкα vç. Aάкwvɛs (H.). σus and oίypal.
•
σíkɛpa [n.] a kind of fermented drink (LXX). <LW Sem.>
⚫ETYM Loanword from Semitic; cf. Hebr. šekar.
σÍKɩV(V)16, -180¢ [f.] ‘dance of the satyrs' (S. fr. 772, E. Cycl. 37, D. H.). →knkiç, knkiw.
Oɩкúα [f.] 'bottle-gourd, Lagenaria vulgaris? (Hp., Arist., Thphr., etc.), metaph.
‘bleeding cup' (Hp., com., Pl., etc.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Ion. -ún (σεкоúа H.).
⚫COMP OIKU-nλatov [n.] 'patch of gourds, cucumbers' (Hp.), -npατov (pap.).
⚫DER σÍKVOÇ (σIкvóc) [m.] 'cucumber or melon, Cueumis (sativus)' (Hp., com.,
Arist., etc.), oíкuç [f.] ‘id.' (Alc., Dsc., Gal.). Diminutive σIкú-Siov [n.] (Phryn. Com.,
pap. II-III³), -wdŋs ‘cucumber-like, etc.' (Hp., Thphr.), -ŋdóv ‘like a cucumber’
(medic.), -óv [m.] 'cucumber patch', -óvŋ [f.] = σíkvos ǎyptos 'wild bottle-gourd',
also 'bleeding cup' (Hdt.), formation like кpoτóvŋ, etc.; -wvía [f.] = KOλOкÚvеn
'round gourd' (Hp., Plu.). Also Σкváv (Σεкv-), -wvoç [m., f.] “cucumber city", city
not far from Corinth (II.) with -wVIOS, -WVIKÓS.
From the second meaning: -vá(w 'to cup' (Arr.), with -úaσiç, -vaσ-μóç (late).
•ETYM For other plant names in -uç, compare e.g. þáquç, káxpus; for plant names in
-úa, compare oiσúa, óστpúa, etc. The Hesychius gloss σɛкoúα. σIкúa, as well as the
toponym Σкvwv/Σɛкuwv, shows an alternation σIк-/σEк-, which cannot be
explained from an IE point of view. Together with the forms ouкúa = σiкúa (Edict.
Diocl., cf. Fur.: 367), KÚKUOV· Tòv σɩкvóv (H.), and кuкúïšα. уλukɛĩa koλókuvta
'sweet round gourd' (H.), as well as Lat. cucumis ‘cucumber' and ORu. tyky
'pumpkin', we seem to be dealing with a Wanderwort that might also have Semitic
cognates, e.g. Hebr. qiššu'a 'cucumber'. Exact origin and preform unclear.
σɩкxóç [adj.] 'disgusted, picky, especially concerning food' (Arist., Plu., Ath.). <?►
•COMP ǎ-σiкxoç 'not picky concerning food, not easily causing satiety (of food)'
(Plu.), see Frisk 1941: 16.
•DER σíкX-OS [n.] ‘disgust, tedium' (Sm.), formed like e.g. µáкpos [n.] from µaкpÓS,
cf. Schwyzer: 512; -óτŋs [f.] ‘id.' (Eust.), -aívw, -aívoμa [v.] 'to feel disgust or tedium,
to detest' (Call., Plb., Arr.), whence -avτóç 'provoking disgust' (M. Ant.), -aoía,
-aσµóç (gloss.), σɩkxašóµievos. okwítóµεvos being mockeď (H.).
•ETYM The cluster -кX- makes an IE origin unlikely. Further unclear.
oíλßŋ [f.] · ɛïdos néµµatos <¿k> kpišñs, onoáµns kai µηкwvoç ‘a kind of cake made of
barley, sesame and poppy' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Neumann 1961: 98 compares this word to Hitt. šiluḥa- ‘a kind of cake', which
may have variants in šiluųa- and šiliųa-. If cognate, it is clearly a loanword or a Pre-
Greek word. Yet the -ẞ- of oiλẞn is difficult to reconcile with the Hittite forms.
oɩ\ŋropdéw [v.] ‘to behave with vulgar arrogance' (Sophr. 164, Posidon. 36 J., H.,
Phot.). <?>
•VAR Dor. σtλā-, aor. -ñoaɩ.
•DER σɩλŋopбía [f.] (Luc. Lex. 21).
•ETYM The element -лoрdéw is clearly cognate with лépбoμαι 'to fart'; compare
also MoGr. τσɩληлoурdã 'to spring, leap, kick with the heel (of young horses); to
fart' and τσɩληлоúрdiσμа 'farting (of horses)'. The first element, on-, is of unclear
origin. On the basis of the toponym IIopdooλývη (an island), it has been suggested
that oiλn- must belong with Σηvós.
σíɩyvov [n.] 'winter wheat', Lat. silīgō (pap. II-VIP). <LW Lat.>
•VAR Also σEλ-, -10v.
●Der σ\ɩyv(1)-ápios [m.] 'baker or seller of σ.', also σyıvápios = Lat. silīginārius
(ibid.); σíλıyıs (σέλ-) [f.] ‘flour made of σ.' (Chrysipp. Tyan., Gal., etc.), -íτns
(ǎpτos) 'bread made of σ.' (Gal., inscr. Ephesus I-II³), -íaç [m.] ‘id.' (Eust.).
•ETYM Loanword from Lat. silīgō, -inis [f.] with transformation to the o-, 10-, and 1-
stems.
oilos [m.] 'satire, satirical poem' (Str., Ael., D. L. et al.). <?>
•COMP σiλλo-ypáqos [m.] ‘poet of σ.' (Ath., Jul.).
•DER σiλλ-aívw (rarely with Sia-, кατα-, εл-) 'to mock, ridicule' (Hp., Herod., Ael.,
Luc.), -ów (Sia-) 'id.' (Com. Adesp., Gal., D. C.), PNs e.g. Σíλλoç, -až, -ɛúç.
ETYM Unclear origin. According to Solmsen IF 30 (1912), it is derived by
hypocoristic gemination from a preform *oiλós (= Lat. silus 'pug-nosed'), besides σi-
μóç 'snub-nosed', through the meaning 'with a turned-up nose > mocker' (Σiλ-ŋvóc
would belong here as well, then). Kretschmer Glotta 4 (1913): 351ff. rather derives
oiλos from Σλŋvós, referring to άváσ\\os having erect hair, with which Satyrs are
often depicted' (compare also oλéα· τpíxшµα 'hair growth' H.). Both etymologies
are formally unattractive. The interpretation of the hapax oiλos 'squinting' in Luc.
Lex. 3 is unclear: the word is preceded by ös, and may therefore be a corrupt spelling
for λóc squinting', but compare also oλów, which according to Phot. (from
Archipp. 52) = τoùs óóðààµoù épéµa лapaqépɛiv ‘to gently turn away the eyes'.
oiλAuẞov [n.] an edible thistle (Dsc., Ruf. apud Orib., H.). <?>
DER σíλAuẞa [pl.] 'fringes, tassels' (Poll., H.), oíλλußos 'strip of parchment or paper
attached to scrolls' (Cic. Att.), σiλlußiãv (cod. σiкu\\ɩāv). τò τOÙÇ кρоσσоÙÇ
άлоσεíεσα 'to shake the tassels, fringes' (H.).
⚫ETYM Origin unclear. For the formation, compare plant names like opoẞoç,
σкóλuẞoç, öxеoß, кóσvμẞos, etc., which usually have no etymology (cf.
Chantraine 1933: 261 f.). Fur.: 67 compares Lat. titulus, originally an appendix to the
scroll, and reconstructs *tit(o)l-ob¹- > sisl-ub-.
σíλovpos [m.] a big river fish, probably 'catfish' or 'sturgeon', Lat. silūrus (mid. com.,
Hell. pap., Str., etc.). <PG(S)►
•DER σiλopioµós [m.] 'serving a σ.' (Diph.).

=== page 692 ===

1332
oilon
•ETYM In the older literature, it is derived from oúpá 'tail' and an unclear first
element (compare µɛλáv-oupos for the formation), the first element being connected
by Solmsen IF 30 (1912): 9ff. with *otos, as in σíos and Σŋvós. However, the
word is rather formed with the Pre-Greek suffix -oupoç.
oíλqŋ [f.] an insect, ‘cockroach, carrion beetle' (Arist., Gal., Ael., AP). ◄PG(V)►
●VAR tíλoŋ (Luc.).
•ETYM Etymology unclear. The variant tíλoŋ in Luc. could be an artificial Atticism
(cf. Schwyzer: 319) or show a Pre-Greek alternation T-/σ-. The form formally and
semantically resembles σépooç, a small winged insect, ‘gnat, winged ant'. Fur.: 167,
etc. connects Lat. delpa (an insect) as well, all of which would point to Pre-Greek
origin.
σíλqiov [n.] a plant known especially from Cyrene, 'silphium'. <PG(V) ►
•VAR σελлоv. σiλqov (H.).
⚫DER σiλqiwτós (Ar.), σɛσiλqiwμévos (Philox., not certain) 'prepared with σ.',
σλqióɛiç 'made of σ.' (Nic.).
•ETYM The variants σíλqov, σελлov, together with Lat. sirpe ‘id.'", point to a
loanword of unknown origin. Fur.: 163, etc. also mentions Berb. aselbu ‘iuncus
maritimus'.
σíµẞλoç [m.] ‘beehive' (Hes., Ar., Arist., Theoc., A. R.). <PG?>
•VAR -α (H.), plur. also -a (Opp.).
●DER σчµµßλ-ñïoç, [f.] -ŋïç ‘belonging to the beehive' (A. R., AP), -tos ‘id.' (Dsc., Ruf.
apud Orib.; uncertain), -ɛúw [v.] 'to seek shelter in a beehive' (AP), -wσiç [f.] an eye-
disease (Hippiatr.).
⚫ETYM Origin unclear. Older proposals (cf. Frisk s.v.) are all uncompelling. Fur.: 286
compares words like σлúη box for keeping flour and bread', oioviç 'id.', σißaía
'wallet' and Lat. simpulum 'a small ladle', simpuvium 'vessel for offering liquids, a
sacrificial bowl'. Also uncertain.
σчíkov [n.] musical instrument with five strings (Poll. 4, 59). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
σчµóç [adj.] ‘having an impressed, pouting nose, snub- or flat-nosed' (opposite of
урυлós), 'bent upward, rising, concave, hollow' (opposite of кupτós), metaph.
'impudent, mischievous' (IA). <PG? >
•COMP Also with modifying or further characterising prefixes like ȧvα-, έv-, úло-.
●DER σчµ-ótŋs [f.] 'snub-nosedness, upward bending' (Pl., X.), σч-óo̟μaï, -ów ‘to
become snub-nosed, bend upward, bend off (Hp., Th., X., Arist., etc.), also with
ảño-, ¿ñɩ-, vño-; thence -wσis [f.] 'snub-nosedness' (Gal.), ȧлo- ‘bending off course
of a ship' (App.), -wμa [n.] 'curved upward prow of a ship' (Plu.)), -aívw [v.] 'to
bend the nose upward' (Call. Iamb.), oчuov. aiyaλós 'sea-shore, beach' (H.), PN
Σĩµ-oç, -úλoç, -ixos, etc., also -íac, whence the appellative *σчúaç [m.] probably “flat-
nose", 'monkey' (taken over in Latin as simia 'monkey'), HN Σчó - (Il.,
etc.), appurtenance uncertain.
alvdwv, -óvog
1333
•ETYM Oxytone adjectives in -μós are rare (Chantraine 1933: 151), but note that e.g.
еεpμóç and doxμóç are both of IE origin. The word oчós may theoretically be Indo-
European, and Janda 2005 derives it from *tih₂-mó- literally “struck” > ‘flattened
(nose)', from the root *tieh₂- ‘to strike', which he also assumes for oñµa ‘sign, mark'
< *tiéh₂-mn “what is carved", owμa 'corpse' < *tióh₂-mn “the killed one” and σîtos
‘grain, food' <*tih₂-tó- “threshed”, and which is attested as such in Hitt. zāḥ-' / zahḥ-
'to hit, beat' <*tioh₂- (cf. Kloekhorst 2008: 1019). This construction seems highly
improbable in view of the wide range of attested meanings, and the fact that a
meaning 'strike' is not attested in Greek. Moreover, neuters in *-mn do not regularly
take the o-grade, so σwµa must be left out in any case.
Older connections with Germanic words like OHG swinan, ON svína ‘to disappear,
decrease' or MHG swimen 'to stagger, be suspended', ON svima 'to float, stagger,
swoon' (Pok. 1041) are formally impossible (*su- does not yield Gr. σ-) and
semantically remote. In conclusion, σчuós is most likely Pre-Greek, although there
are no further indications for this. It was taken over in Latin as sīmus ‘id.'.
σчoç [m.] a fish (Opp., Ath.).
⚫DER Diminutive σч-άptov (pap. VI-VII³).
⚫ETYM Sometimes connected with oчuós 'snub-nosed, bent upward', with which it is
formally identical, apart from the opposite accentuation. Nevertheless, semantically
such a connection cannot be proven.
σívāлɩ [n.] 'mustard, mustard plaster'. <PG>
●var σivηäɩ, -aïv, -ɑñıç, -ŋëvç (Hell and late). A variant is ►vãnu.
•COMP *σɩvαло-лηкτη may be found in Lat. senpecta (late).
⚫DER σɩvάлov (EM, gloss.), -ídiov (Alex. Trall.), -tvoç 'of mustard' (Dsc., Gal.), -ŋpós
'spiced with mustard' (pap.). -í(w 'to apply a mustard plaster', whence -toμós
(medic.).
•ETYM Σívāлɩ(§) / σívāлv(s) cannot be separated from väлu 'mustard'. An
alternation σt-/zero is also found in loans from Egypt (σí: σéσελ, σάpi: σíσapov),
on the basis of which Egyptian origin for this word has been suggested (Hehn-
Schrader 1911: 211, André Latomus 15 (1956): 296ff; rejected by Mayrhofer Sprache 7
(1961): 185ff.). Instead, the words can be better explained from a Pre-Greek form
*s'nāpi. Pre-consonantal palatalized consonants yielded both Cɩ and C (e.g. kva̸y :
kivánetov < *k³n-, λaσitós : λáσtai < *las³t-); cf. Beekes 2008. In this case, *s³nāpV
yielded both σívä”- and *ovär-. In initial position, *ov- regularly yielded Gr. v- (cf.
e.g. PIE *sneh,ur- > Gr. vɛūpov ‘sinew³). Gr. vāлu is taken over in Latin as nāpus
‘turnip' (Plin.) and σívaл(s) as sinapi(s) ‘mustard', from which Go. sina(s), OHG
senf mustard', etc., have been borrowed.
σɩvdwv, -óvos [f.] 'fine woven cloth, fine linen, garment; blanket, etc. made thereof
(Hdt., Th., trag., Hell. and late). ◄LW Sem. (Anat.?)►
●COMP σivdovo-qópos [m.] 'wearer of a σ.' (Delos, Tegea).
⚫DER σvбóv-lov [n.] 'garment, etc. made of σ.' (Hell. and late), -íσкoç [m.]
diminutive (Samos IV³), -íτηc, Dor. -ítaç [m.] 'wearer of an σ.' (Str.), 'garment made

=== page 693 ===

1334
avíov
of σ.' (Hell. and late), also attributive (τελaµáv, Xɩτóv (Poll., Phot.), -tá(w ‘to cover
in σ.' (pap.).
•ETYM Possibly a loanword from Semitic, e.g. Hebr. sādīn ‘linen undercloth, kind of
shirt' (Lewy 1895: 84f., E. Masson 1967: 25f.), although the formal connection is
rather weak. Taken over in Latin as sindon ‘id.'.
σɩvíov [n.] · кóσкivov 'sieve' (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR =
σɛvvíov (PRyl. 139, 9 [I³])? σeivios tóлoç ‘sieving, winnowing area' (pap. IV³).
•DER Aor. σlviáσa 'to sift, sieve' (Ev. Luc. 22, 31, H., Phot., EM, Suid., gloss.), whence
σɩví-aσµα [n.] ‘recrement, detrimentum', = pu̟лapíα τoυ σíτoυ 'waste product of
þvrapia tov oito
grain' (gloss.), -ατηрlov. кóσкIVOV 'sieve' (H.)?
•ETYM A connection with on Ow, σáw, ▶diatτáw ‘to sieve' < PIE *kieh₂- seems
phonetically impossible. Instead, the alternation oɩv- : σɛvv- : σɛɩv- rather points to a
Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 357).
σívoчa [v.] 'to rob, pillage, destroy, damage' (Od., epic, Sapph., Ion., X., Hell. and
late, also Argos, Crete, Herakleia; Hdt., Hp. also -έoμat; not in Att.). <?►
•VAR Very rarely attested in aorist: έoívavto (Hdt.), έлɛoívato (Nic.), époʊívavtes.
ßλáyavtɛç ‘disabling, hindering' (H.).
•DIAL Rarely with έëɩ-, kata-, épо-.
●COMP σɩv-ódwv, -ódovs, -ovtos [m.] a fish (Arist., Dorio), folk-etymological for
σuv-ódwv (see Strömberg 1943: 45). Unclear however is otváчwpoç 'harmful, baneful,
wicked, mischievous, sweet-toothed, lustful' vel sim., with -ía, -éw, -ɛvua (Ion., com.,
Arist. et al.); because of its short t, it is not derived from the verb, but from the noun
divog.
●DER σívos [n.] ‘damage, harm, disaster' (Ion., A., Arist.), whence ά-oɩvýs
'unharmed, harmless' (λ 110, Sapph., Ion., A., Pl., X., Hell. and late), with opposite
εлɩ-σɩvý (Thphr.), σivτns [m.] 'destroyer, robber', mostly of beasts of prey, 'thief'
(Il., Hell. and late epic), σívτwp [m.] ‘id.' (Crete IVª, AP), Σívtɛç [m.pl.] EN of the
old population of Lemnos (Hom. et al.) (appurtenance uncertain, according to
Kretschmer Glotta 30 (1943): 117 lit. "the robbers" and to be distinguished from the
Thracian Σivo), Σíviç, -180¢ [m.] PN of a mythical robber (B., E., X.), also
appellative 'robber, destroyer' (A. Ag. 217, Call., Lyc.), oɩvapós ‘damaged (Hp.),
formation like puñapós, etc.; oivótŋs [f.] ‘damage, flaw³ (gloss.), έлσívios. ¿rißovlos
'treacherous' (H.), σɩvów (лpo-) = σívoμα (Man., Vett. Val.), whence σɩvwτIкÓS
‘harmful' (late), oívdpwv = rovòpós 'toilsome' (Phot.), also 'slave born of a slave'
(Seleucus apud Ath.), also PN, odpŵν· лové, þλαлτкшv 'toilsome, hurtful,
mischievous' (H.).
⚫ETYM Because of its long -1-, the present σívoμat is best regarded as a yod-formation
*σív-чoμαι (the present oɩvéoμat must be secondary, for which cf. Schwyzer: 721; on
the unclear form σívovτai Sapph. 26, 4, see Hamm 1957: $217a). If it is of IE origin,
σivoμa must contain a presential -v-, just as кλívw and кpívw, which spread not only
to the aorist forms (quite possible in view of their rarity), but also to nominal
derivatives like oivos, oívtns, etc. (which is more problematic). Assuming a preform
*tƑɩ-v-ε/o-, the verb has been connected with OE þwinan, etc. 'to become weak,
σíσapov
1335
disappear' (Wood Mod. Phil. 5 (1907): 268), but these should rather be derived from
the root dghei-, together with dwīnan ‘id.', Gr. ►ívw 'to decline, decay'. Further
etymology unclear.
oivwv, -wvos [m.] 'stone parsley, Sisum amomum' (Dsc., Plin.), σívwv äypɩos
лεUкÉSαvov 'sulphurwort' (Ps.-Dsc.). <?►
•VAR V.l. oíowv.
=
⚫ETYM According to Dsc. 3, 55, this plant is at home in Syria (cf. André 1956 s.v.
sinōn). Origin unexplained.
σíov [n.] name of several marsh- or meadow-plants, ‘Sium' (Speus. apud Ath., Theoc.,
Dsc.), also identified with otσúußpiov and ävησσov (Dsc., Ps.-Dsc.). <?>
•DIAL Myc. TN si-jo-wo-te /sijo-wontei/.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. See CEG 3 = RPh. 72 (1998): 138.
σalós →σós.
σinnovσTVÄÄεÏOV.
oɩлtaxópaç [m.] ‘lac-tree, Schleichera trijuga' (Ctes.). <LW Orient.>>
⚫ETYM Oriental loanword.
σɩлúŋ (-úa) [f.] 'box for keeping flour and bread' (com., AP, Poll.). <PG(V) ►
•VAR ovлúŋ (pap. IIIª), σɩvïç [f.] (Hp.), iлúa (H.), oíлvdvoç (Orac. apud Luc. Alex.,
cf. Fur. 177); note hоμоσεлvо (inscr. Selinous, RPh. 69: 128, l. 3).
•ETYM Taken to be a loanword from Semitic by E. Masson 1967: 44f., based on
comparison with Hebr. sap, etc. This may explain variants like σiqvɩç ‘id.' (Poll., H.)
and oɩßaíɑ = лǹpα ‘wallet'. Perhaps Lat. simpulum, simpuvium belong here as well.
The variation may also be explained by Pre-Greek origin.
oipatov [n.] 'boiled wine' (Antiph., Alex. Nic.); also as adjective: oípalos olvos. <?>
•ETYM Perhaps derived from σɛpów (see ►Σɛipios). Fur.: 255 considers, this word to
be Pre-Greek because of the element -atov.
σɩpóç [m.] ‘pit for keeping corn, silo' (Att. inscr. Vª, S. Fr., E. Fr., D., Hell. and late),
also (metaph.) 'pitfall' (Longus) and = dɛσµwτýpiov ‘prison' (H.). <PG▷
•VAR The quantity of -- is unstable: usually short, later also σɛpóç.
●COMP σipo-μáðτŋs [m.] lit. “seeker of pits", "probe, gauge' (Ph. Bel., LXX).
•ETYM Technical word without etymology. The variation between σip-, σip-, σɛp- is
hard to explain from an IE point of view. Connection with oчuós 'stub-nosed, bent
upwards' through a meaning 'bending in, falling in' (thus Solmsen IF 30 (1912): 11 et
al.) is improbable.
oiσapov [n.] 'Pastinaca sativa' (Epich., Diocl. Fr., Dsc.). <?>
•VAR -чov [n.] piece of jewelry (com. after Poll. 5, 101, H., Phot.).
ETYM The word recalls äσapov 'hazelwort', ndúσapov 'axe-weed'. Strömberg 1940:
157f. interprets σíσapov as a reduplication of σápov as attested in Call. Del. 225, but
this is semantically improbable (cf. Frisk s.v.). WH s.v. siser compares σápi [n.]
(Thphr.), a kind of rush. Unclear.

=== page 694 ===

1336
globuprov
σσúμßpov [n.] 'bergamot mint, Mentha aquatica' (com., Arist., Thphr., Dsc.),
'watercress, Nasturtium officinale' (Dsc., Plin.), (metaph.) a piece of jewelry (com.
after Poll.). <PG?>
●DER σíσvμßp-ov [n.] ‘id.' (Nic., AP, back-formation), -tvos 'made of σ.' (Antiph.,
Thphr.).
•ETYM Etymology unclear. Strömberg 1940: 158¹ regards the word as a reduplicated
formation from Оúμßpα, a sweet-scented plant, with dialectal development of 0> σ.
Sometimes seen as a variant of σoupiyxiov [n.] barbary nut, Iris sisyrinchium'.
Probably a Pre-Greek word.
σlσúpa [f.] 'thick, villous cloak (made of goat fur), fleece cloak' (Ar.). <PG(S)►
•VAR σíoupva (also -vn, cf. Solmsen 1909: 259), -vos [m.] (H.), also -os and σíσuç
(H.).
COMP E.g. σloupvo-pópos 'wearer of a σ.' (Hdt.), of the Iranian ПIάкτvɛç.
⚫DER σIσup-wτós 'made into a σ.' (Athen IV³), -vwdns 'like a σ.' (S. Fr. 413).
•ETYM Unclear etymology; according to Fur.: 215, it is of Pre-Greek origin.
σtoupíуxiov [n.] 'barbary nut, Iris sisyrinchium' (Thphr.). <PG?>
⚫ETYM Etymology unclear. Strömberg 1940: 158¹ regards the word as a reduplicated
formation from ►σûpty\ ‘quill, flute, syrinx' with a X-suffix. Sometimes connected
with ►σɩσúµßpɩov ‘bergamot mint, watercress'. Probably a Pre-Greek word.
oiowy →oivwv.
σíτλa [f.] ‘pail' (Ulp., Alex. Trall.). <LW Lat.➤
⚫ETYM Borrowed from Lat. situla.
σitos [m.] 'corn (especially wheat), bread, food' (II.), see Moritz Class. Quart. 49
(1955): 135ff. for the semantics. <?>
•VAR Plur. σita [n.].
•DIAL Myc. si-to.
•COMP Numerous compounds, e.g. σɩɩ-aywyós 'conveying corn' (Hdt., Th.), olt-
ŋpεσɩov [n.] 'provision of grain, (money for) victualling, pay' (X., D., Hell. and late),
σúσ-oɩtoç [m.] ‘table companion, messmate' (Thgn., etc.), whence ovooit-ia [pl.],
-ía, -ɩкóç, -έw, -noiç.
•DER σLTía [n.pl.], rare -íov [sg.] 'bread, fare, provision', also 'corn' (IA prose, com.),
diminutive σɩt-ápiov [n.] ‘corn, bread (Hp., pap.), -avíɑç (лupóç) [m.] ‘kind of
wheat' (Thphr.), formation like кpiеavíaç; -wμаτα [pl.] 'provision' (pap. IIP, cf.
Chantraine 1933: 186f.), -wv, -wvoç [m.] ‘granary, cornfield (Plu. et al.), -w [f.]
epithet of Demeter (Hell. and late), σIT-ηpós (Hp., Arist., etc.), -tкóç (Hell. and late),
-ɩvos (late) 'concerning the corn³, -aĩa [n.pl.] ‘corn-rents' (Olymos), -wdŋs 'cornlike',
σɩɩwdŋ [n.pl.] ‘corn' (Thphr., etc.), σɩɩ-éoµai [v.] ‘'to feed' (w 209 [σitéσkovto]), also
with кaτα-, etc.; thence -ŋois [f.] ‘(public) maintenance' (IA); also -εúw, -ɛúoμαι [v.]
'to feed, supply' (Hdt., Hell. and late), whence -ɛutós (X., etc.), -evois, -evolios,
-εvτns, -ɛía (Hell. and late); -í(w, -íšoμa ‘id.', often with εлɩ-, whence έƒ-σlt-iσµlós
'victualling' (X., D., etc.).
σiqapos (σεí-)
1337
•ETYM Often explained as a loanword from other IE languages, e.g. from Ru. žíto
'corn', OPr. geits 'bread' (Wiedemann BB 27 (1902): 213) or from Go. hvaiteis 'wheat',
etc. (Meyer 1892: 51²), or as a substrate word (taken with e.g. Basque zitu 'corn,
harvest' or Sum. zid 'flour').
Nevertheless, the word looks IE, and Janda 2005 has suggested to reconstruct it as a
substantivization of an adjective *σitó- 'threshed' derived from *tih₂-tó-, literally
“struck”, a *-to-ptc. from a PIE verbal root *tieh₂- 'to strike, hit' as attested in Hitt.
zah-'/zahḥ- 'to hit, beat' < *tioh₂- (cf. Kloekhorst 2008: 1019). This root *tieh₂- would
also be visible in ►σñµa ‘sign, mark' < *tiéh₂-mn “what is carved", σшμa 'corpse' <
*tióh₂-mn "the killed one", and σчµóç 'snub-nosed' < *tih₂-mó- "flattened". As
explained under σчµóç, this etymology is of doubtful value.
σíττα [interj.] cry of herdsmen (Theoc.). <PG>
•VAR Also чítta (sch.); similar чúττα (E. Cyc. 49, Luc., AP); qɩɩɩa (Poll. 9, 122 and
127) cf. Fur.: 329.
•ETYM Elementary interjection; see Schwyzer KZ 58 (1931): 170ff. and Kretschmer
Glotta 21 (1933): 172.
oíttŋ [f.] ‘kind of woodpecker or nuthatch' (Arist., Call.). ◄PG?▷
•VAR Dial. also Ïтτα, Ïлτα (H.).
•ETYM Clearly onomatopoeic; cf. Thompson 1895 s.v. with important details. Fur.:
325 also connects ßíttakoç, yittakoç ‘parroť.
oittúßai [f.] depµáτivai στolaí, τà дшкρà i̟µаντápiα leather garments, the small
halyards' (H.). Further σíττußα [n.pl.] · xitàv ¿к depµáτwv 'frock made of hide
(Poll. 7, 70), σíttußov. tò µukpòv dépµa 'small hide' (Hdn. Gr. 1, 378) and oíttußol·
kpoσσoí, ¡µávteç, Oúσavo 'tassels, leather straps, fringes' (Phot., Eust.). ◄PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Cf. Grošelj Živa Ant. 5 (1955): 230.
oíttvßos [m.] a káккaßoç-like cauldron (Antiph. 182, 7). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR σíttußov, -a, -a ‘skin, leather, leather strap, leather jacket' (H., Poll., Phot.,
Hdn. Gr.), oíovẞoi = кρoσσoí, чµáντεç, Оúσavoι 'tassels, leather straps, fringes'
(Phot., Eust.).
⚫DER Besides σítτυßov, -a, -αι as expressions for 'skin, leather, leather strap, leather
jacket' (H., Poll., Phot., Hdn. Gr.). Also σíσvßot = кpoσσoí, įµávtɛç, Oúσavoι (Phot.,
Eust.); in the same mg. also ▸oiußa, probably through contamination.
•ETYM If we assume that the original meaning of this word was ‘leather bag', which
developed into 'kettle, pan', then the appurtenance of σíττußov ‘skin, leather' and
oiouẞo leather straps' makes sense. See Frisk s.v. for improbable attempts at
etymologizing. This word is clearly Pre-Greek instead, reflecting *situb-.
oiqapos (oɛi-) [m.] ‘topsail, topgallant sail' (Arr.), ‘curtain in the theatre' (Ephesus).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also σiлapos (v.l. Arr. Epict. 3, 2, 18).
⚫ETYM Technical word without etymology. The variations σ- : σɛ- : oiл- clearly
point to a non-IE origin (cf. Fur.: 163). Perhaps connected with Sem. šaperir, Assyr.
šuparraru 'to spread out' (Frisk s.v.). Taken over in Latin as sip(h)arum, -rium.

=== page 695 ===

1338
σLλós
σɩqlós [adj.] describing physical and psychological defects, 'crippled, lame' vel sim.
(лóða σlós A. R.), 'blinded, foolish (Tλañкoç, Eleg. Alex. Adesp. 1, 2; of fishes
Opp.); also 'porous, hollow' (vápen, Eust.). <PG(V)►
•VAR σɩлaλóç, σuvóc, see below.
•DER σɩq\woɛɩev [aor.opt.], verb used in a curse (E 142), σiqlos [m.] 'infirmity'
(Lyc.), -wua [n.] 'porosity, hollowness' (Eust.).
•ETYM For the formation, compare tuôlós, xwlós, etc. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 238).
Besides σuplós and derivatives, we also find σuvóç kɛvós ‘empty, void, bereft' (H.),
σɩvýɛɩ kɛvoî ‘empties' (H.), σvɛús [m.] ‘mole' (Lyc.), although these words with
v-suffix could be derived from oiqwv 'tube'. More importantly, we find σɩaλóç
'blinded(?), maimed(?)' (Call. Fr. anon. 106, H., Eust.). Because of the variants σλ-
/ σɩν- / σɩлαλ-, the word is probably of Pre-Greek origin. The late meaning 'hollow'
may have been based on the formal similarity with oíqwv [m.] 'tube, etc.'.
Giovεús [m.] 'mole'. →σoλóc and σiqwv.
oiqwv, -wvos [m.] 'tube (especially for draining water), fire-engine, fountain, wine
siphon, siphon, etc.' (Hippon., E., Hell. and late); also plant name = aiyiλwy 'oat-
grass' (Ps.-Dsc.). <?>
•COMP σiQwvo-λoyía 'weeding of σ.' (pap.).
⚫DER σiQwv-tov [n.] = oiqwv (H.), -iw 'to draw off wine with a siphon' (Ar.),
σɩovɛúç [m.] 'mole' (appurtenance uncertain, perhaps through “digger of tubes"?),
σɩQvóç. Kɛvóç 'empty, void, bereft' (H.) (appurtenance uncertain).
ETYM Technical term, formation like äußwv, Sóλwv, etc. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 162).
Etymology unclear; possibly onomatopoeic?
ownáw [v.] 'to be silent, keep secret', also 'to silence' (Hom.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. -ñσai (Il.), fut. -ǹσoμαι (Att.), -now (Aeschin., Hell. and late), perf.
σεσɩŵлηкα, pass. σɩлηñval, -ηеσoμα (Att.); also σwлáw in dɩãσwлáσqμai,
σεσшлαµévov (Рi.), ɛvowñía. ñovxía ‘rest, quiet' (H.).
•COMP Also with кατα-, Siα-,
лαрα-,
etc.
•DER σɩwл-ŋ [f.] 'silence' (Pi., Att.), often attested in dat.sg. -ñ ‘in silence, silently'
(also Hom.); -nós (E., Arist., Call., etc.), -npós (X., AP) 'silent', -ŋσiç [f.] (also àло-,
лapα-, úño-) ‘taciturnity' (Rhet. et al.).
•ETYM Although superficially resembling σtyáw, σɩyń, oĩya, a connection is
unlikely. Because of the alternation σɩшл- / σшл-, an IE origin is improbable
(connections with e.g. Go. sweiban 'to stop, suspend' (see references in Frisk s.v.) <
*suiop- are unconvincing. It is rather of Pre-Greek origin, reflecting *s'ōp- or *s'up-
(cf. Beekes 2008).
σкáчw [v.] ‘to limp' (Il., epic poet., also Hdt., LXX). <IE *sken(g)- ‘limp, be slanting' or
IE *skend- 'jump'➤
•COMP Also with εлɩ-, úло- (only pres. and ipf.).
•DER σкασμóç [m.] 'limping' (Aq.).
•ETYM The noun σкασμóç is attested very late (IIP), and can easily be a back-
formation on the basis of σкá (w. The verb itself can go back to earlier *σкáy-дw or
σkαλaеúpw
1339
*σкáб-w. Usually reconstructed as *skng-ie/o- and connected with Skt. khañjati ‘to
limp', OHG hinkan 'to limp' < *(s)keng-e-, ON skakkr ‘limping' (thus Frisk s.v.,
LIV² s.v. *(s)ken(g)-). Alternatively, one could assume a connection with Skt. skándati
'to jump', Lat. scandō 'to ascend', OIr. sceinnid 'to jump' < *skend- 'to jump', which
would mean that σká(w reflects *skṇd-i̟e/o-.
okaɩóç 1 [adj.] ‘left, western' (especially epic poet., rarely attested in this meaning since
Il.), 'unfavorable, left-handed, inapt' (IA). <IE *skeh₂-i-uo->
•DER σkai-ovpyέw 'to do wrong' (Ar.), okató-tηs [f.] 'improper behavior, inapt' (IA),
-σúva [f.] ‘id.' (S. [lyr.]).
•ETYM Formally and semantically identical with Lat. scaevus ‘left, inauspicious', on
the basis of which we can reconstruct *skeh₂iuo-. According to Steinbauer 1996
(unpublished presentation, cited in Janda 2000: 118 and Stüber IJDLLR 3 (2006): 61-
72: 68), this word could be identical to σкatós 'shady', derived from PIE *sk(e)h₂-ieh₂-
'shade' as attested in Gr. σká [f.] 'shadow', Skt. chayá- 'shadow, reflection', YAv. a-
saiia- [adj.] ‘that does not cast a shadow', etc. The semantic development may have
been 'shaded' > 'western', and when referring to hands, ‘shaded hand' > ‘improper
hand left hand'. Cf. also the rhyming word ►λatós ‘left”.
=
σкαιóç 2 'shady'. →okiá.
σkaipw [v.] 'to hop, jump, dance' (epic Il.), only pres. and ipf. <IE? *sker- 'jump'>
•VAR kap◊µoí• kɩvýσɛç 'motion, dance, movement' (H.).
•COMP Also with ava-, Sta-, úло-, etc.
●DER σkap-¤µós [m.] 'jump' (Hell. epic), also in compounds, e.g. ¿ú-, лoλú-σкapеµos
'with fair, many jumps' (Il.); σkápos [n.] ‘id.' (EM), whence ȧ-σkapés. ȧkívŋtov
‘unmoved, motionless' (H.), oкapíα· лaɩɩá ‘childish play, amusement, fun' (H.),
diminutive -tov [n.] (pap.). σкap-íw [v.] 'to hop, tap, flounce' (Gp.), whence -чoμóc
[m.] (Eust., H.), ảσкapíšw (Hp., Cratin.). Perhaps also σкápoç [m.] 'Scarus cretensis,
parrot-fish' (Epich., Arist., pap., etc.), if named after its lively movements, cf.
Strömberg 1943: 52; σкapīτiç [f.] a stone (Plin.), if named after its color, cf. Redard
1949: 61. See ►ȧσкapíç and ▸σкipτάw, and cf. also okapdaµvoow.
⚫ETYM Etymology unclear. LIV² (s.v. 1. *(s) (ker-) connects W cerddaf 'to walk', and
reconstructs σkaipw as *sr-ie/o-. Although the latter reconstruction would indeed
regularly yield the Greek verb, the interpretation of W cerddaf as reflecting *ker-ie/o-
is not ascertained. Moreover, the semantic connection is quite weak. Other
connections, e.g. as mentioned in Frisk s.v., do not make more sense. The alternation
σkapi w / àσkapi w is unexplained.
okaλaðúpw [v.] Cf. σкaλaеúpwv. ȧкoλασταívwv, ó okaλɛúwv ‘licentious, stirring,
poking' (H.). GR▷
•DER σкαλαеvρμáτα [n.pl.] 'petty quibbles' (Ar. Nu. 630).
ETYM The verb is used as a euphemism for 'to copulate' in Ar. Ec. 611, and is
possibly built on a combination of øкáλλw, okaλɛúw 'to stir, hoe, poke' and à¤úpw
'to play' (cf. Schwyzer: 645 on the type of compound). See ►σкáλλw.

=== page 696 ===

1340
okadanářer
okalanáčeɩ [v.] þéµißetai ‘roams, rolls abouť (H.), σkaλnáčeiv. þeµßwdŵs ßadišɛiv ‘to
wander about roamingly' (H.). <PG>
•ETYM The alternation σкαλaл-/ σкαλл- is suspicious, and if the noun ►кáλëŋ ‘troť
is cognate (thus Fur.: 379), we probably are dealing with a Pre-Greek word.
oka入qvóg →oká入入w.
σкaλíaç [m.] 'fruit shell of the кáктоç' (Thphr.). <PG>
•ETYM Frisk s.v. connects OHG scala 'shell, pod', but Fur.: 373 rather adduces
άσкaλía, áσкáλŋpov 'fruit of the artichoke', which would point to a Pre-Greek
origin.
σkaλídpιç [f.] a speckled water-bird, probably 'redshank, Scolopax calidris' (Arist. HA
593b). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kaλídpıç (v.l.).
•ETYM The variation σк-/ к- may point to a Pre-Greek origin.
σкαλíov [n.] a small cup (Philet. apud Ath., H.). <?>
•ETYM According to Bechtel 1921, 1: 125 possibly connected with ON skalli [m.]
'brain-pan, skull'. Quite uncertain, however.
σкáλw [v.] 'to stir up, hoe' (Hdt., Arist., Thphr., LXX). <IE *skelh2/3- ‘split, tear'>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf. (aor. ipv. лεрíσкaλov Gp.).
•COMP Rarely with dɩa-, etc.
•DER σkaλ-íç, -ídos [f.] ‘hoe' (Att. inscr. IVª, Str., J.), whence -ɛúw 'to hoe' (gloss.),
-σɩ [f.] ‘hoeing' (Thphr.), -µóc [m.] ‘id.' (pap. III³), -µós [m.] ‘thole' (h. Hom., A., E.,
Arist., Plb.), -uídiov [n.] ‘id.' (Com. Adesp.), -µn [f.] 'short sword, knife' (S. Fr. 620),
= μáxαipa Opaкía “Thracian knife' (H.), -ŋvóc (-ŋvýc) 'craggy, rough, uneven', (of
numbers) ‘odd', (of triangles) ‘scalene', (of cones) 'slant' (Democr. apud Thphr., Hp.,
Pl., Arist., etc.); thence -ηvía, -ŋvóoµai (Plu.); ä-σkaλos ‘unhoed' (Theoc.), probably
metrical for åσкáλɛvτoç; verb σкαλ-ɛúw 'to hoe, scrape, stir up' (Hp., Ar., Arist.),
aor. σкαλɛñσaɩ, also with ȧva-, έк-, úлo-, etc. Thence oкaλ-ɛús [m.] ‘hoe' (X., Poll.),
-ɛvoiç [f.] ‘scraping' (Aq.), -ɛvµa [n.] 'scrapings' (sch., H.), -ɛv@pov [n.] ‘poker'
(Poll.), -ɛía [f.] ‘hoeing' (Gp. tit.). Also σkaλ-í(w (ả-) [v.] ‘id.' (Phryn.), whence
-touós [m.] hoeing' (pap., Eun.), -tot-plov [n.] 'hoe' (sch.).
•ETYM This verb has generally been connected with Lith. skeliù, skélti ‘to split; strike
fire', Arm. c'elum 'to split, tear' and Hitt. iškalla-/ iškall- 'to slit, split, tear'. The
acute intonation of the Lithuanian verb points to the presence of a laryngeal, *skelH-,
and Kloekhorst 2008: 399f. argues that on the basis of Hittite the laryngeal cannot be
*h₁, which means that the root must have been *skelh2/3-. The geminate -\\- of
σкáλw seems to go back to either *σкáλ-дw (with a yod-present as in Lith. skiliù'to
strike fire') or *σкáλ-vw (with a nasal present like in Lith. skilù 'to split off, separate
oneself). In the first case, we could assume loss of *H before *i (Pinault's Law), thus
*sklh₂-ie/o-> *skl-ie/o-> *σкáλ-tw. In the latter case, we could assume that an
original *skl-ne-h2/3 first yielded *σкaλvā-/*σкaλvw-, on the basis of which a
thematicized *σкáλv-ε/o- was formed (similarly in ẞáλλw; note, however, that the
latter derives from a root in *-h₁, and that a nasal present from a root *skelh,- would
!
okávdadov
1341
be easier for σкáλλw). It is unnecessary to assume that σкáλλw reflects a laryngeal-
less root *skel-, pace LIV². The derivatives of σkáλλw all show a stem okaλ- with
single -\-, but this need not reflect an old situation; compare σpaλ- from σqά\\w
and aλ- from ¤áλλw, etc. See on ►σkaλaðúpw; appurtenance of okwλos and
►σкóλow is uncertain.
σкáλoy →σкóλoy.
σкauẞóç [adj.] 'crooked, bandy-legged' (LXX, Hell. pap., Gal.). <PG(S)►
⚫DER σкαμẞó-лovç 'with crooked feet' (Ps.-Archyt.), σкаµßóоμаι 'to curve' (Aq.),
okáµßvkeç. okóλores, xápakes ‘pointed object, stake' (H.), σkaµßáλvě. okaµßóc,
στpɛßλós ‘crooked, twisted' (H.), okaµßηpíšovtes. ỏiσðαívovτεç ‘slipping and
falling' (H.).
⚫ETYM This word cannot be separated from σкчµßóç ‘lame', and the variation.
σкαμẞ-/ σкчμẞ- as well as the derivatives with the non-IE suffixes -UK- and -aλ- point
to a Pre-Greek origin of this word (unless OIr. camm 'crooked' <*kamb- points to
an European substrate word). Etymological proposals as mentioned in Frisk s.v. are
unconvincing.
okaµµádes [f.?]'лóрva 'prostitutes' (H.). <PG?►
ETYM No etymology. Given the meaning, it is probably a Pre-Greek word.
σkaµ(µ)wvía [f.] kind of scammony, ‘Convulvulus scammonia' (Eub., Arist.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also ȧσкаμшvíα (Gp.).
DER -úvtov (Nic. Al. 565) 'juice of the σ.', -vitηs olvos (Dsc., Plin.), also кáuwv (Nic.
Al. 484).
ETYM On the formation, cf. Chantraine 1933: 208. The variants σкaμ-/ σкаμμ-/
άσкaμ- point to a Pre-Greek origin for this word. Not related to ► кúµĭvov.
σкávбaλov [n.] 'trap', usually (Semitism) 'temptation, scandal' (LXX, NT; PCair. Zen.
608, 7; IIIª [-άvwv gen. pl.]). <PG?, LW IE? ▷
•DER σKavdaλ-iw 'to tempt, be offensive, annoy', -ioμa 'to be tempted to sin, to be
offended' (LXX, NT), whence -ɩoτýs [m.] an acrobat, e.g. ‘trapeze artisť (SIG 847, 5
[II³]), -ów ‘id.' (Aq.), okavdáλ-ŋ [f.] ‘stick of a trap' (Alciphr. 3, 21, 1: kpeάdlov tñs
okavdálŋs áлapτ½σaç; reading not quite certain), oкávdalos. ¿µrodioµós
'hindering' (H.), σкavбáληеpov [n.] (Ar. Ach. 687: σкavбáληep' iστàç εлwv,
according to sch. ad loc. τò έv taïç nayioɩ èrikaµлèç žúλov ‘the crooked stick in a
trap'; accoding to Poll. 7, 114: τò τñ oëaptívy époonpäŋµévov ‘that which is bound
with the cord', in Poll. 10, 156 σкаvбáληepov is identified with лαττάλov.
•ETYM Since this noun, on the one hand, means 'trap', but on the other hand also has
a derivative oкavdaλiστýs ‘acrobat', it is likely that oкávdalov is originally a
technical term, possibly referring to a construction with a piece of wood hanging on
ropes, which could be used as a trap as well as as an acrobat bar. Often interpreted as
an IE word and connected with Lat. scandō ‘to ascend', Skt. skándati ‘to jump, hop,
hurry' (cf. Frisk s.v.). Apart from the semantic arbitrariness of this connection, it is
formally problematic as well: Gr. -a- would remain unexplained. Therefore, and

=== page 697 ===

1342
OKάVSIĘ, -ĪKOÇ
since we are dealing with a technical term, it is not unlikely that it is of Pre-Greek
origin, or alternatively a loan from another Indo-European language.
okávdiž, -ĩkos [f.] 'wild chervil, Scandix pecten Veneris' (Ar., And., Thphr., Dsc.).
<PG(S)►
⚫VAR Also σkávově (v.l. Dsc. 2, 138).
●DER σkavd-ikwdŋs ‘like σ.' (Thphr.), okavdiкo-лwλŋs [n.] ‘chervil-seller', nickname
of Euripides (Ar.[?] in H.).
⚫ETYM The formation of the noun resembles þáðiž, лépdíž and other plant names (cf.
Chantraine 1933: 382). Clearly of Pre-Greek origin, cf. kaoкávdiž, a kind of onion,
which could well be a variant of it.
okavdapilery →giveapifev.
σкαлépdα [f.] a game at the Dionysia, during which two young men sitting with their
backs to each other try to lift up the other using a cord running through a pole (Poll.
9, 116, H.). PG(V)►
•VAR σкαлаρбεñσal see below, also кαлαрб-, σкαρлad-.
=
⚫DER σкαлερбεñσa (Hippon. 3, 3), acc. to H. = λodopñσa 'to rebuke', acc. to Tz. An.
Оx. 3, 351аñσа to help, assist', кαларбευσ μдаτεú¯¯α 'to draw
divinations' (H.), σкαрлаdɛñσαι· кpīvaɩ 'to separate, decide' (H.), σкáлapdoç. ó
τapaɣádηs кai áváywyos 'disturbing and ill-breď (H.), laккoσkáлepdov.
Ааккóлршкτоν loose-breeched' (H.). Also: кaì лãv tò dvoxepès okanépda λéyetai
кaì ó ráσɣwv oкaлéρdŋç, ‘all that is hard to manage is called σ., and he who suffers it
is called σ.'.
⚫ETYM It is not clear exactly what the term σкαлéрda refers to (perhaps to the cord;
сf σкалéρбaν ελкε 'to draw the σ.' in Poll.). If the mentioned derivatives are
cognate, the terms must be Pre-Greek in view of the variants σкαлɛpd-/oкaлapd-
/кαлαрб- (cf. Fur.: 351, 393).
σкánɛtoç [m.] 'digging' (Megara). <PG>
•VAR Also кάлετоç 'id. (Il., Hp.).
⚫ETYM Most probably Pre-Greek; see the discussion under σкáлtw.
σкáлτw [v.] ‘to dig, dig out, work the earth', with кatα- ‘to inter, bury', usually 'to
demolish, raze to the ground, destroy' (h. Merc., Pi.). ◄EUR➤
●VAR Aor. σkáчai (IA), fut. okáчw, perf. čσкaqa, med. žσкαµαι (Att.), aor. pass.
σкαч-ñvaι (E., Hell.), fut. -ñσoμaι (J. et al.).
•COMP Often with prefixes, especially кατα-.
•DER okáqŋ [f.] 'winnow, bowl, trough, dish', also ‘ship' (IA), σкáqos [n.] ‘hull of a
ship', poet. also 'ship' (IA), rarely action noun 'digging' (Hes. Op. 572, Gp.),
diminutive σkaq-ís, -ídos [f.] 'cup' (1 223, Hp., Ar. et al.), also 'barge' and 'spade'
(Hell. and late), -íov [n.] ‘bowl, cup' (com., Hell. and late), also as a designation of a
hairdress (Ar.), ‘barge' (Str., Hld.), -ídtov [n.] ‘winnow, ship' (Hell. and late), okaq-
íτη [m.] 'boatman' vel sim. (Anon. apud Demetr., Str.), σкaqń [f.] 'digging' (Hell.
pap., etc., Hdn. Gr. 1, 345), also ‘grave' (Bithynia), or oкáqŋ?; кata-okaq-ń [f.]
‘tomb, demolition, destruction' (trag., also Att. prose), often plur. -αí; кaTA-OKAQ-ŃS
1343
‘burieď (S.), σkaq-tá [f.] 'ditch, grave' (Halaesa Iª), oкaq-ɛúç [m.] ‘digger' (E.,
Archipp., Hell. and late), also 'dish, σкaqηóópoç' (Com. Adesp.), σкaq-ɛúw [v.] 'to
empty in a trough' (Ctes., Plu.), whence -εvous (Eun.); further -εvoic, -ɛía [f.] 'the
digging' (Suid.), -ɛiov [n.] 'shovel', also ‘bowl, cup' (= -íov; late Att. Hell.), -ɛídiov
(Hdn. Epim.), -evtńs = fossor (gloss.), okaq-ŋtós [m.] ‘the digging' (Thphr., Hell.
and late inscr.), -ŋtpoɩ [pl.] ‘id.' (pap. I³); NWGr. (Delphi, Troezen, etc.) okárɛtos
[m.] ‘grave, tomb', Megara σкáлεdoç after dáлεdov, лédov (Solmsen 1909:196); also
kánɛtos ‘id.' (Il., Hp.), also ‘spade' (Gortyn)?, uncertain σкaлéτwois 'the digging'
(Troezen). 8. okαqαλoç· ávτλητip 'one who draws water' (H.), likе лáσσαλоç etc.;
an A-suffix also in σkaqλɛúç = σkaqɛús (Athens IV)? 9. σкαл-ávη [f.] 'shovel, spade'
(Theoc., AP), also 'excavation' (Thphr.), with -αvýτηs [m.] ‘digger' (Zonar.), -avɛúç
[m.] 'id.' (Lyc., Phld., Str.), -avɛów [v.] 'to dig up' (inscr. Magnesia, Phld. Rh.). 10.
σкáччa [n.] 'the digging, ditch, place dug up' (Pl. Lg., Hell. and late). 11. лɛpioкayɲs
[f.] ‘the digging up' (pap. VIP, Gp.). 12. σкañtýp, -ñpos [m.] ‘digger' (Margites, X.
apud Poll.), see Fraenkel 1910: 107; 2, 55, Benveniste 1948: 39; fem. -Tεɩpa (AP). 13. TN
Σkantǹ üλŋ (Thrace; Hdt. et al.) with Σkɑëtŋovlikós (Att. inscr.), -ítŋs [m.] (St.
Byz.); on the formation see Schwyzer: 452.
ETYM The basis of the above forms is either σкал- (with σкaq- analogically after
еáлτw: τáчоç, τаñvα) or σкα- (with σкαл- before voiceless consonant, and
analogically before vowel). In the case of σкαл-, the relic Lat. scapulae, U scapla
[acc.sg.] 'shoulder-blade' has been compared, assuming that it originally meant
'shovel' as a primary agent noun (cf. σкápaλos above). In the case of σкaq-, σкáлτw
could formally correspond to a verb for 'plane, scratch, etc.' in Lat. scabō, OHG
scaban, Lith. skabiù (beside skobiù, skōbti) 'to scoop out with a chisel, vel sim.', to
which the Slavic group of Ru. skóbeľ ‘plane-iron', etc. is connected. Semantically,
okáqŋ, σkápos, etc. fit better with 'to plane, scoop out' than with 'to dig' (extensive
treatment in Solmsen 1909: 196ff.), but such words may of course easily change their
meaning.
~
Frisk's discussion of σкáлτw, referring to Pok. 930ff., is highly dated. We now know,
for example, that PIE did not have an ablaut e a, so the words with -e- (e.g.
► кÓлτw, ▸ σкεлαpvoç) must be omitted. Connection with σкó̟лτw and ►σкíлwv is
formally and semantically unfeasible. The same holds for that with Lith. skōbti, 1sg.
skobiù, as Greek has no form with long à (in other words, there is no trace of ablaut).
It seems that the forms кáлετoç and oкáлɛtos may be Pre-Greek, and well as other
forms with σкαл-, like σкáqаλoç and the strange σкaqλɛúç. The other forms seem to
be based on *skab¹-, as in Lat. scabō and OHG scaban. I suggest that this root is a
loan from a European substrate language.
*okapapaios →kápapos.
okapdaµvoow [v.] ‘to blink, twinkle' (Hp., E., X., Arist.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Att. -TTW; Kαpdaµúσσw, -ττw (H., EM).
⚫DER σкapdaμúк-τŋs [m.] ‘blinker', -τкóç ‘blinking' (Arist.), -τéw 'to blink' (Luc.,
Porph.); σkapбaµvy-µós [m.] ‘blinking' (Antyll. apud Orib.), ȧ-σкapdáµivk-toç (also

=== page 698 ===

1344
σkapīqάoμaι
-τí [adv.]) 'not blinking, without blinking' (Ar., X, Luc.), á-σкapdaµúk-tŋs ‘one who
does not blink' (Hp.), -τéw (sch.).
•ETYM The stem of all these words is (σ)кapdaµvк-. The formation looks non-IE,
and the variation between forms with and without σ- may well point to Pre-Greek
origin.
okapîqάoµai [v.] 'to tear up the surface of a body, scratch, make an outline' (H., sch.
on Ar. Ra. 1497). ◄ EUR ➤
⚫DER σkapīq-ŋσμoí [m.pl.] 'scribblings, quibbles' vel sim. (Ar. Ra. 1497), -ŋµατa
[n.pl.] 'id.' (sch. Ar. Nu. 630, Phot.), verb -ɛúw with -ɛúματа 'id.' (sch., Suid.),
σкápiqoç (-ov) [m., n.] ‘outline, sketch, slate pencil' (H., sch., EM), acc. to sch. also
= кápóoç, ¿púyavov 'dry stalk or stick', probably a back-formation to the verb.
•ETYM These words, which show a stem oкapio- < *skarīb¹-, cannot be separated
from Lat. scrībō 'to write' < *skrīb¹-, Latv. skrīpât ‘to scratch, scribble, write down' <
*skrip-, ON hrífa ‘scratch, tear' < *krīp-, and MIr. scrip(a)id 'scratches' < *skrīp-,
although these forms cannot be satisfactorily combined under one PIE etymon (the
alternation *b/p, the long *i, the absence vs. presence of *-a- are all inexplicable).
We are, therefore, rather dealing with an European substrate word.
σкápoç [m.] a fish. →σкaípw.
okáqŋ, okáqoç, etc. →σкáлτw.
σкaqúpŋ [f.] 'fox' (Ael., H.). <?>
•VAR кapópη (Suid.) can be haplological for τñç [σ] кaqwpns.
喜
•ETYM The interpretation as “Grubenwächterin” (thus Frisk s.v.) and connection
with σкáoŋ ‘grave' is semantically unattractive. Further unclear.
"
okeďávvvu [v.] ‘to scatter, spring, drive apart', med. ‘to disperse, burst, go apart,
spread' (later Att.). <IE *(s)kd-n-eh₂- 'split, strew out'>
•Var okídvaµal, -vηµɩ (Il., epic poet.), σкɛdáw? (see below), fut. σкɛdάow (Thgn.),
σкɛdw (Att.), aor. σкεdáσαι, -σ¤ñvaι (II.), perf. pass. έσкédασμαι (IA); also without
σ- keďáσσaι, -σ¤ñval (poet. II.), see Chantraine 1942: 110; late pres. forms кεdávvvμ
(AP), Kɛdówνται (A. R.), ptc. кɛdáwv (Nic. Al. 283, better than σкɛdáwv), kɛdaíoµai,
-aíw (Hell. epic).
COMP Also with prefix, especially άло-, Siα-, кατα-.
⚫DER σkéd-aσiç [f.] 'the scattering' (a 116 = v 225, Hp. et al.), -aoµóç [m.] (Hell. and
late), (dia-)σked-aστýs [m.] ‘destroyer' (Ph.), (dia-)oked-aσtikós ‘scattering' (Dsc.,
Lyd.), okɛd-aσtós ‘dissolvable' (Pl., Plu.).
•ETYM The present σкεdávvvμt is a recent formation from the aorist σкɛdáσat. The
closest cognate is Av. scindaiieiti ‘'breaks, destroys' with nasal infix. Without
anlauting s-, we find the nasal present in ToAB kätä- 'to strew (out)', pres. ToB
katnam. Lith. kedinti, 1sg. kedinù 'to tug, pluck', keděti 'to burst' are unrelated in
view of the failing reflex of Winter's Law (the semantics are also weak). The
appurtenance of Alb. çanj, çaj 'to split, tear up, plough', perhaps < *sked-ņ-ie/o, is
unclear. Several verbal nouns are found in various languages, especially with a suffix
-r-, and verbs built from these: Arm. šert ‘chip, piece of wood', if from *sked-ri-
3
oké入入oual
1345
(anlaut uncertain), Lith. kedinti [f.] ‘splinter', Latv. skadrs ‘easy to spliť, ME scateren,
MoE scatter, MIr. scaindrim 'to split in two'. Cf. ►oxílw, ► kédµata.
σкɛеpóç [adj.] ‘exact, careful' (Hp., Gal., Lyc.). <GR►
•VAR -ŵç (A. Pr., E. Fr. 87).
•ETYM According to Frisk s.v., this word is a formation in -Opo- from a stem σxε- as
found in oxɛiv 'to hold' (cf. ►xw), showing the reflex of Grassmann's Law. Since the
suffix -Opo- is rather rare, the assumption that this word is a -po-derivation from the
verb oxέow to hold back' might have more merit (contra Chantraine 1933: 225,
Schwyzer: 481). We must then assume, however, that in oxέew the effect of
Grassmann's Law was analogically eliminated, while it was retained in σкε0 póc.
Semantically, we might think of a development 'holding back' > 'reserved, exercising
restraint' > 'careful'.
σкεληлερov [n.] výлov ‘infant, child' (Archil. 582 West). <?>
•ETYM Unclear.
σкέλλoµai [v.] ‘to dry up, wither, languish, grow tired, harden', act. 'to dry, parch'
(Epich., Hp., Choeril., Hell. and late). <IE *skelh,- 'dry up, wither'>
•VAR KATEσKÉλλovto (A. Pr. 481), σкελλóμεvа· σкελετεvóμεvа (H.), fut. 3pl.
σкελOÜνται σкελετσеησovται (H.), perf. čσкληкα, aoг. кατα-, ȧло-σкλñvα, зsg. ȧn-
Éσкλŋ (Ar., Men., Alciphr.), opt. ȧло-σкλαíη (Moеr., H., Suid.); fut. 2sg. ȧло-σкλση
(AP). Only few active forms: aor. opt. σкýɛɛ (Y 191), subj. ¿v-σkýλŋ (Nic. Th. 694),
ind. σкɛλa (Zonar).
•COMP Most frequent with кatα-, àño-, ¿v- etc.
•DER 1. okɛλɛtó¢ [m.] ‘dried up body, mummy, skeleton' (Phryn. Com., Pl. Com.,
Phld., Str., etc.), 'dried up' (Nic. Th. 696), whence σкελɛτ-ódŋs 'like a mummy'
(Luc., Erot.), -ɛúw (кατα-) [v.] 'to mummify, dry up, parch' (Teles, Dsc. et al.), med.
-εúоμαι (кατα-) to dry up, languish' (Ar. Fr. 851, Isoc., Gal.); thence -ɛía (-in) [f.]
'drying up, withering' (Gal., Aret.), -ɛvμa [n.] 'that which has withered (sch.);
-íšoµai = -ɛúoµai (H., Zonar.). 2. σкελopós 'dried up, meagre, slender* (Hp., Erot.
[v.l. -ɛœpóc]). 3. σkλŋpós ‘hard, brittle, harsh, severe' (Hes., also Dor.), whence
okλnp-ótns, -úvw, -voµa, -voµós, -óoµaι, etc. 4. okλŋopós ‘slender, weak, small,
thin' (Pl., Theopomp. Com., Arist.). 5. -σкελnç in лερɩ-σкελç 'very hard, brittle,
inflexible' (Hp., S., Hell. and late), whence лεрισкéλяα (-ía) [f.] 'hardness,
inflexibility' (Arist., medic., Porph.); kataokeλýs (to kata-σkéλλoµai) ‘meagre' (of
style), 'powerless, brittle' (D. H., Prol.), ȧ-σкɛλńs (Hom., Nic.) ‘powerless(?),
incessantly(?)' (interpretation not fully clear).
•ETYM The aorist forms oкýletɛ and έvɩ-σkýλŋ must stand for økɛiλ- < *okɛλ-o'-,
perhaps with old analogy to σonλɛɛ (Schwyzer: 756). Forms like έoklŋŵtes (A. R.)
are built on the basis of τεvηwτεç, έotŋwtɛç (cf. Kretschmer Glotta 3 (1910-1912):
311f.), ȧло-σкλain on the basis of TεОvaiŋ, στaíŋ, etc. Because of Dor. σкλŋpós and of
σкελεTÓC, the forms in σкλat- cannot be old.
The system with perf. čσкληкα, aor. σкλñva beside a present σкéλλoμa (probably <
*σкελ-ε/o-, but possibly from a nasal present with analogical root vocalism)
resembles e.g. tétλŋka, tλñvai beside ȧva-τéλλw. Although the perfect stem

=== page 699 ===

1346
OKÉ入OG
čokλŋka is widely attested, the other stems were ousted by forms of the verbs
Enpaívw and avaívw ‘id.'. Although the verb looks Indo-European and could be
projected back to a pre-form *skelh,-, good verbal comparanda are lacking. Nominal
cognates may be MoHG schal 'faint, vapid', LG ‘dry, barren', ME schalowe 'faint,
tired, shallow' (E shallow) < PGm. *skala- and, without initial *s-, LG hal(l)- ‘dry,
meager', MoHG hellig 'tired, exhausted (by thirst)', and possibly Latv. kálss 'meager',
kàlst, 1sg. kàlstu 'to dry up'. The adjective σкλnoppós 'slender, weak, small, thin' (Pl.,
Theopomp. Com.; also Arist.) has been influenced in form and meaning by έλappóc.
σкéλoç [n.] ‘thigh, leg' (II 314). <IE *skel- 'bend, curve'>
•DIAL Myc. ke-re-a2 /skeleha/ [pl.].
•COMP Often as a second member, е.g. τετрα-σкελns 'four-legged' (trag. etc.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives σкɛλ-íσкoç [m.] (Ar.), -údpiov (Herod., Arr.). 2. σkɛλéαι [f.pl.]
'breeches' (Critias, Antiph.). 3. σкɛλíšw (Plu., S. E.), usually with úлo- (Pl., D., etc.)
'to trip up one's heels, upset, outsmart', with (úлo-)σkɛ\-toµós [m.] ‘tripping up,
supplanting, toμa [n.] 'accident' (LXX); also σkéλ[\]ioµa. Spóµŋµa ‘running,
course' (H.). 4. okελλós bandy-legged, diɛσtpaµµévos, paißós' (sch., H., EM), cf.
στρεẞλóç etc.; see also кUλλóç.
With o-grade: okoλió 'crooked, bent, twisted, unjust' (II 387), perhaps from
*σкóλoç [m.] after oкalóc etc.; cf. σкoλoïç. Spεлávoɩç 'pruning-knives' (H.); σкoλ-
ótŋs [f.] ‘curve, injustice' (Hp., LXX, Str.), -óoμαι 'to be bent, curve' (Hp., Thphr.),
with-woc, -wμa (late), -αívoдa 'to curve' (Hp.), -á(w 'to be bent' (LXX); TÒ σKÓNOV
'drinking-song' (Pi.); explanation debated: because the songs were presented in an
irregular order? Perhaps σкwλn contains a lengthened grade. On σкαλŋvós, see
► σкáλλw; on σкελíç, see σXελIS.
⚫ETYM Formally comparable to Lat. scelus [n.] 'malice, badness, crime' < *skel-o-,
which points to an original meaning *curvation, deflection', which in Greek is best
witnessed by e.g. σкoλóç 'crooked, unjust'. Other formations are *skel-ko-, attested
in OHG scelah, OE sceolh ‘oblique, curved, squinting', MoHG scheel, ON skjalgr
‘oblique, squinting', and *skel-no-, attested in Alb. çalë ‘lame'. Within Greek,
► кvλλóç and ► кwλov are sometimes adduced as s-less variants, but this is unlikely.
σкéлαvoç [m.] a kind of fish, possibly a kind of tunny (Opp.). See Thompson 1947 s.v.,
Strömberg 1943: 128. <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
σкéлаρvoç [m.] 'axe for working wood, chip-axe' (Od., S. Fr. 797, Hell. and late),
'surgical bandage (metaph.)' (Hp.). ◄PG(S)►
•VAR -ov [n.]
•COMP As a second member in е.g. ¿µɩ-σкéларvoç 'smoothed on both sides'
(Milete, Didyma).
•DER σкεлάрv-ιov [n.] 'pillar' (Didyma IIª), -ŋdóv [adv.] 'like a kind of σ.-bandage”
(Hp.), -iw 'to work with a σ.' (Hero), with (ȧло-)-toµóc [m.] (medic.).
⚫ETYM Althoug IE comparanda have been suggested (Ru. ščepáť' 'to split, crumble,
diminish', Latv. šķēpele 'split off piece, sherd'), the presence of the suffix -apvo- is
awkward from an IE point of view. Attempts to eliminate this suffix by proposing
OKÉNTOUAI
1347
metathesis from *σкέρл-avoç, connected with MoHG Scherbe, schürfen, etc. <*sker-
p- (thus Niedermann IF 37 (1916/1917): 149f.), are unconvincing as well. Both
formally and semantically (instrument names), the word is much more likely to be of
Pre-Greek origin.
okéлaç [n.] ‘shelter, protection, cover' (Od., E., Lyc, AP et al.). <?►
•VAR okénǎ [acc.pl.] (Hes. Op. 532), see Sommer 1957: 147; okény [f.] 'cover, screen,
protection' (IA).
•COMP As a second member -σкεлÝ (окεлое only EM), e.g. avεμo-oкenýc
'screening from wind' (II 224).
•DER σкέлw, only pres. and ipf. (Hp., Plb., mostly late); Oкεлáw, only in 3pl.
σкεлówσi (v 99; σкɛлáovσi v.l. Theoc. 16, 81) 'to cover, screen, protect (from)' (IA,
Hell. and late), also σкεл-ά(w, aor. -άoat; all also with кατα-, лεpɩ-, ¿ñɩ- etc.
Derivatives from σкέлw: 1. σкεл-avós 'screening, protecting' (Opp., AP), -avov [n.],
-avos [m.] ‘cover, protection' (AP); also (from oкéлaç, -n?) -elvós (-n-, -1-) ‘id.', also
'protected' (Scymn., LXX, medic. etc.), on the basis of aiлεɩvóc, etc. See also
► σкέлαvоç, a kind of fish. 2. лεрíσкεл-τоç = лεрισкεлηу 'protected all around':
ɲɛpioкéntu̟ ¿vì xwpw (Od.) or 'visible all around', perhaps to oσкέлτoμaι; 3.
governing compound σкεл-ávov [n.]. 'storehouse' (pap. III³).
Derivatives from σkerášw: okén-aoµa [n.] 'cover' (Pl., Arist., etc.), -aσıç [f.] (LXX),
-aσµós [m.] (EM) 'cover'; -αστýs [m.] 'screener, protector' (LXX), -aʊtıkós (Arist.,
etc.), -aστpios (D. S., D. H., etc.) 'covering, protecting', -αστpov [n.] 'cover, veil'
(Sm.), (лαрα-)σкεл-áστpa [f.] ‘bandage' (Gal.).
⚫ETYM Although σкεлw seems primary at first sight, it is attested only late, which
may indicate that it should rather be interpreted as a back-formation from the
denominative verb σкεлáчw (Schwyzer: 684) or from σкéлη, σкέлaç (cf. the
semantically close στéуw beside σtéέyn). Only the epic verbal adj. лεрíσkɛntos would
contradict this hypothesis, but this form is used only in a standing expression in the
Odyssey and may be better connected with the verb σкεлτo̟μα, as are later
attestations (Arat., Call. etc.).
Although the stem looks IE and could be projected back to a pre-form *skep-, no
good cognates are known. Only some Balto-Slavic forms like Lith. kepure, Ru. čepéc
'cap, hood' may be connected, although these reflect an s-less stem *kep-.
okértoµai [v.] ‘to look around, look back, spy, contemplate, consider, survey' (Il.);
Att. has σколéw, -éoμat instead (see below). <IE *spek- see sharply, spy'>
•VAR Aor. σkéчaσðαi (Od.), fut. σкέyo̟µa, perf. čσкεдчα (IA), aoг. pass. σкεеñvai
(Нp.), σкεл-Пvα with fut. -nσoμαι (LXX).
•COMP Often with έèɩ-, кaτα-, лρо-, diα- etc.
•DER A. With e-grade: 1. σкéчç (εлí-, кατá-, etc.) 'contemplation, deliberation,
examination' (IA). 2. okέµ-µa (rarely with dia- etc.) ‘examination, problem' (Hp.,
Pl.). 3. okent-ooúvn [f.] = okéysis (Timo, Cerc.). 4. -ǹpiov [n.] ‘tesť (Man.). 5. -ɩkóç
(εл-, Siα-) 'cogitating, revising', oi σкεлτɩкоí name of a philosophical sect (Hell. and
late). B. With o-grade: 1. σкoлóç [m., f.] 'spy, guard, scout; goal, purpose' (II.),
hypostasis εлí-σколоç 'hitting the goal' (Hdt., trag., late), adv. -α; άлó-σколоç

=== page 700 ===

1348
oképapos
'missing the goaľ (Emp.); σкóл-чo “purposive, appropriate' (late); as a second
member, e.g. oiwvo-σкóлoç [m.] ‘bird-watcher' with -éw, -ía, -ɩkóç, -ɛĩov (E., Hell.
and late). 2. prefix compounds: έлí-, кατά-, лрó-σколоç [m.] 'spy, supervisor,
foresighted, etc.' (Hom., Pi., IA). 3. σколý (кατα-, εл- еtc.) [f.] 'spying, watch-tower'
(Att., etc.) with σколáw (Ar. Fr. 854). 4. σкoлá, Ion. -in [f.] 'watch-place (on a
mountain, on a fortress), mountain summit, watch-tower' (epic Ion. poet., Il., also
Hell. and late prose), with oкoë-ɩýtys [m.] ‘summit dweller' = Пáv (Paus.), -tá¶w
(алo-) to spy, look out' (epic II.), -άoμa 'to perceive' (Il.; only with dɩa-). 5.
σкonέw, -έo̟µaɩ iterative-intensive to σкέлτo̟µα (Pi., IA), non-presentic forms σкoë-
ñoai, -ñoaołaɩ, -ŋow, -ýσoµai, έoкóлηµα (late). 6. σколεúw (кατα-, άão-, έñɩ-),
probably secondary for σкoлéw (X., LXX, pap., etc.), with σкóл-ɛvσɩç, -evtýs (Aq.),
-ɛia [n.pl.] (Procl.). See also σкórɛλoç and ►σkwy.
•ETYM The old yod-present σкεлτоμal must derive from *σлέк-дoμαι with metathesis
and be identical to Lat. speciō, Av. spasiieiti, and (apart from initial s-) Skt. páśyati 'to
see'. The aor. σкέyaσðaɩ can in the same way be identified with Lat. spexi and Skt.
áspaṣṭa. The old root noun as found in Skt. spaś-, Av. spas- 'spy', Lat. haru-spex, etc.
<*spek- is not attested as such in Greek, and seems to have been replaced by σкoлóç;
cf. the cognate formulae Skt. súryam... spáśam and Hom. 'Héλtov ... Oколóν ‘Sun,
the spy'. The noun σкoлý <<*spok-éh, agrees, except for the accent, with ON spá [f.]
'prophesy' <PGm. *spahō < IE *spók-eh₂.
okέpaqos →okepßóλλw.
OKεpẞów [v.] 'to vilify, slander' (Ar. Eq. 821, H.; ipv.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR σкεpẞoλε (leg. cum M. -ó\\ɛi?). áлατã ‘cheat' (H.); σképßolos 'vilifying,
slandering' (Call. Fr. 281, H.); also кɛpẞóλovoa (cod. -olvσσa). λoidoрoñoα,
Вλασημобσα, áлаτшσα 'abusing, speaking profanely, deceiving' (H.).
•DER σкέpaços (oxép-). odopía, Blaσoηuía ‘abusing, speaking profanely';
кépaчoç. Xλεvaσμóç, какoλoуía 'mockery, abuse' (H.).
•ETYM Sometimes ►σkipaços is interpreted as cognate as well. The variants oкεp-,
σXεp-, Kεp-, and possibly σкip- point to Pre-Greek origin.
σkεpóç [?] aidooλɛíкτηç 'cunnilingus' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
σкɛÑOÇ [n.] 'vessel, device', mostly plur. 'house or ship equipment, weapon, armor,
luggage' (IA). <IE?>
●COMP Frequent as a first member, e.g. okɛvo-qópos ‘carrying luggage, luggage-
carrier' (IA), oкev-wpóç 'luggage-watcher' (Cratin.) with -wpέoμa, -wpέw, -wpía,
-úpηua 'to look after or through the luggage, to instigate (slyly)' (D., Arist., etc.),
later also σkaιwpέoμα, etc. (after σкalóc); as a second member in å-σkevńs ‘without
equipment' (Hdt.).
•DER σkɛvý [f.] ‘armor, clothing, wear' (IA); as a second member e.g. óµó-σkɛvoç
'with equal armor' (Th.); frequently prefixed лаpα-, кatα-, έлɩ-σкεvý etc., as back-
formations to ларα-σкεválш, etc. Diminutives: σкεv-ápiov [n.] 'small device' (Ar.
etc.), 'simple wear' (Pl. Alc. 1, 113e), -úqtov [n.] 'small device' (Lyd.).
OKNVÁTTW
1349
Secondary verbal formation oкɛv-άw, -áčoμat expressing different nuances, e.g. 'to
equip, arm, dress, prepare, etc.' (IA since h. Merc.), with aor. Oкεv-áσαι, -áσασðal,
very frequent with prefix, лаpα-, кατα-, εлɩ-, etc. Derived from these, mostly with
prefixes: σkεú-ασiç, -áσчoç, -aσía, -aσμа, -αστóç, -aσtĤç, -aσtɩ-кóç; also лapaσкεv-
n, etc. Denominative verbs εл-, кατα-σкεv-ów (cf. εл-, кατα-σкεvý) = -ȧ(w (Argos,
Crete, Delphi etc.), σкεvoσα = ετoчµáεσα to prepare for oneself (H.).
●ETYM The preservation of the ɛv-diphthong before a vowel is hard to explain in an
Ionic-Attic word. No good cognates are known. Connection with Lith. šáuti, 1sg.
šáuju 'to shoot, shove', Ru. sováť' 'to shove, sting, push', etc. < *keuH- is semantically
unlikely.
σêŋvý [f.] ‘(roof of a) tent, booth, banquet; stage (building), scene' (IA, Dor.). <?►
•VAR Dor. σкāvā.
●COMP E.g. σкηvo-ëŋy-ía [f.] ‘tent-building' (Arist.), 'the feast of tabernacles' (LXX,
NT etc.), σú-σкηvoç, Dor. σúv-σкavos [m.] 'tent mate, housemate, table mate' (Att.,
Tenedos, etc.) with -ía (X. etc.); with a suffix -10- е.g. ларα-σкηу-tov, -α [n.]
'room(s) next to the σкηуη' (D., Delos etc.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives: σкηv-íç, -ídos [f.] (Plu.), -ídiov [n.] (Th.), -údptov (Plu.). 2. -íτns
[m.] 'tent-dweller, chandler, nomad, etc.' (Isoc., Str., inscr.); also -evtýc [m.] (EM,
AB). 3. -ɛĩov [n.] 'tent-pole, -rod' (pap. III³). 4. -ɩкós ‘belonging to the stage, actor'
(Hell. inscr., Plu. etc.), -чкεúоμа [v.] 'to perform as an actor' (Memn.).
Denominative verbs: 5. σкηv-άoμαι 'to pitch a tent, camp' (Att.), also with кaτα- etc.;
σкηv-áw [v.] 'to feast' (X.). 6. σкηv-έw 'to be in a tent, to camp' (Att., especially X.),
not easily distinguished from -áw in non-presentic forms; also with Sɩα-, σvv-, άло-
etc.; thence -ŋua (Dor. σкávaμα) [n.] 'tent, camp' (A., X., Epid. III³), also 'body'
(Macedonian inscr.; cf. σкñvoç). 7. σкηv-ów 'to pitch a tent, to camp' (Pl., X., etc.),
often with кατα-, лαpα-, σʊv-, εлɩ-, άлo- etc.; thence -wμa [n.], mostly pl., ‘camp,
dwelling', also 'body' (E., LXX etc.), with кaτα- 'cover, curtain' (A. Cho. 985), also
-woię (kata-) [f.] (Agatharch., LXX etc.); -wτaí· σvoкηvovτɛç ‘living in the same
tent' (H.).
Also σкñvoç, Dor. (Ti. Locr.) oкāvos [n.] 'body' (= tent of the soul), 'corpse' (Hp.,
Democr., Ion. inscr., Nic., Ep. Cor.), see Leumann 1950: 308f.); gender after owμa, cf.
also ►кτηvoç, ►σμñvoç etc. Unclear is σкñv. Ő tɩveç µèv чuxĤv, tɩvès dè qáλaivav
(H.), i.e. butterfly, moth' (cf. oкývwµa. papilio gloss.).
•ETYM According to DELG s.v., σкηvý originally denoted any light construction of
cloth hung between tree branches in order to provide shadow, under which one
could shelter, sleep, celebrate festivities, etc. Formation with a suffix -vý (cf. лový,
έúvý, qɛpvý, etc.; see Chantraine 1933: 191f. and Schwyzer: 489), derived from the
root σkη-/σkā- < *skeh₂-, which is found in σкtá 'shade' as well. See there for
further etymology. Borrowed as Lat. scaena (only in the sense of 'stage').
σêŋvíлtw [v.] only έokýviye. diéqεipe, diɛokédaσev 'destroyed utterly, shattered' and
Saσкηvia Saoρñσαι, diασлεt̃рaɩ 'to disperse, scatter about'. Sieokŋvíóðŋ dè
Siɛowµaτíσðŋ (H.); to this yain ... Sɩεσкývшe 'shattered to the floor' (Nic. Th. 193).
1?7
1

=== page 701 ===

1350
oki入入a
1351
ETYM Popular expressive contamination of oкηлтш and the words discussed s.v.
► кvíч, especially kunɛïv. σɛiɛv ‘to shake' and okvirtev. vúooɛiv ‘to prick' (H.).
DELG objects that the words quoted do not fit the meaning. Cf. ►σкηрíлτopiai.
okýrtolai [v.] ‘to support oneself, lean, pretend something, use as a pretention', act.
'to throw down, sling', intr. 'to throw oneself down, fall down' (IA), ¿ñɩ-okýrtw also
'to impose, command', med. (Att. juridical language) ‘to object, prosecute, raise a
complaint'. <EUR?►
•VAR Аct. σкηлτш, fut. σкηуw, аor. σкñчαι, pass. σкηoеñvαι, perгf. εл-éσкηøα, pass.
л-éσêηai. Fut. σкýчoμα, aor. σkýчaσðaɩ.
•COMP Frequent with prefix (almost only act.): кατα-, εл-, ảлo-, ¿v-.
●DER_σкñчƒç [ƒ.] ‘excuse, pretention, pretext' (IA), εлíσкηчs [f.] ‘objection,
complaint' (Att.); áñóokŋµµa. àñépeioµa ‘prop' (H.) (A. Fr. 18 = 265 M.), έñíoкnua
= εлíσкηчç (Lex. Rhet. Cant.).
Beside this, several expressions for ‘stick, etc.': 1. σкāros. kládos, kai äveµos rolós
‘branch, a certain wind' (H.); for the latter meaning, cf. σкηäτóç below. 2. okηä-ávn
[f.] (AB) with -ávov [n.] 'stick, scepter' (N 59, Σ 247, Call. Fr. anon. 48, AP),
okanáviov. þaktηpia, äλλoi okiлwva 'staff, crutch' (H.). 3. okäлtov [n.] (Dor.) ‘id.'
(Рi.), IA σкñлτov in σêηät-oðɣoç 'stick-, scepter-bearer' = 'ruler' (Hom. etc.), with
σêñëtov
the Persians and other Asiatic peoples who have a high office at the court (Semon.,
X., etc.), with -ía [f.] (A. etc.). 4. σêñëτpov [n.] ‘id.' (Il., epic poet.); like ẞáкτpov, etc.
Semantically more remote: 5. Oêŋätós [m.] ‘thunderbolt, lightning, suddenly
breaking storm' (trag., X., D., Arist. etc.); cf. opuкτóç, OTPENTÓS.
•ETYM The root of all these words is σкãл-, with the system oкýäτw < *skāp-ie/o-,
okñysal, okānos comparable to e.g. kórtw, kóysaɩ, кóлoç and túƒtw, túyal, túñoç.
The noun σкãлоç can be equated with Lat. scapus 'shaft, stalk' and Alb. shkop 'stick,
scepter', pointing to *skeh₂p-o-. Zero-grade forms may be attested in the Germanic
words for 'shaft, spear, lance', OHG skaft [m.], ON skapt [n.], etc. < *skh₂p-.
Although formally the words could certainly be of IE origin, the distribution of
forms and the semantics rather point to a European substrate origin.
oknpírtoµai [v.] 'to support oneself, uphold oneself (Od., Nic., Ph.), act. (secondary,
Wackernagel 1916: 131) σкηpíлτw 'to support, uphold (A. R.). ◄?►
•VAR Only pres.
COMP Also with Siα- (AP), εл- (Н. s.v. εлσкулτw).
•ETYM Expressive cross of σкýлτo̟µα and σηpíαoðaι, έσtýpiktai (pres. στηpíšoμai,
-w first in tragedy). Cf. ►σкηvíлtw.
σkɩá [f.] ‘shade' (Od.), also ‘variegated hem or edging of a dress' (Hell. inscr. and pap.,
Men.), see Wilhelm Glotta 14 (1925): 82f. <IE *skeh₂-ih₂, gen. skh₂-ieh₂-s 'shadow'>
•VAR Ion. -in.
•COMP E.g. σkiα-τpoqέw, -éoµiai (Ion. σкin-), Att., etc. also -τpaqέw, -έoμαι (to σкia-
τpaqns like εvτpańs̟ etc.; to τpaчñval) 'to live (raise) in the shadow or indoors, to
grow up pampered' (IA), after Bov-кoλéw etc., see Schwyzer: 726; Baú-σкios 'with
deep shadow, deeply shaded' (h. Merc. etc.), кατá-, εлí-σкιоç etc. beside кατα-, επ-
σкiá¶w; on doλixó-σkioç, see dolixós (acc. to a different interpretation, it means
'with long ash', see Treu 1955: 119f.).
●DER 1. okɩáç, -ádos [f.] ‘shade roof, tent-roof, pavilion', also name of a tóλos in
Athens, etc. (Eup., Theoc., Att. inscr.). 2. σklád-tov [n.] 'sunscreen' (com., Thphr.). 3.
-íσкŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Anacr.). 4. σkí-alva [f.] (Arist.), -aɩvíç [f.] (Gal.; v.l. okɩvíc), -adɛús
[m.] (Hell. and late) fish name (after the dark color, Strömberg 1943: 27, see also
σkiaiva, Thompson 1947); to this σкtabíç 'id.' (Epich.), perhaps from the island name
Σkiabos (Strömberg 1.c.). 5. σкɩ-óεç 'rich in shadows, casting shade, shaded' (Il., epic
poet.); -áɛç (Hdn.; also Pi. Pae. 6, 17?). 6. σki-ɛpóc, also após ‘id.' (especially epic
poet. since A 480, see Schwyzer: 482, Chantraine 1933: 230). 7. Okɩ-wdŋs ‘shadowy,
dark' (Hp., E., Arist.). 8. σкI-αкóç 'provided with shade' (wpolóytov Pergam. IIª;
Hdn.). 9. σki-wtós ‘provided with a hem (oкiá)' (Peripl. M. Rubr., pap.).
Denominative verb σкiáw (Od., Hell. and late epic), σкiálw (IA) 'to shade,
overshadow, shroud in darkness', forms: σкiáσa († 232; after λáσal etc., see
Chantraine 1942: 410), fut. Att. σkiw, late σкiάow, perf. pass. έσкíασμα (Semon., S.),
aor. σкιασ0ñvα (E., Pl., Arist.), also with εл-, кατα-, συv-, лερɩ-, άло-; thencе (úлo-,
ov-)okiaois, (ènɩ-, etc.)σкiaσµóç, (εл-, etc.)σкiaoµa, okiao-týs̟, -τɩкós (almost
always late); the bahuvrīhis кατα-, έñí-σkios etc. function as back-formations. On
σkɩá and derivations in Homer and in Aeolic lyric, see Treu 1955: 115ff., 213ff.
•ETYM Skt. chāyá [f.] ‘shadow', also ‘image, reflex, resemblance', Av. a-saiia- ‘who
casts no shadow' (cf. Gr ä-σкios), MoP saya 'shadow', and Latv. seja 'face' must
reflect *skeHieh₂-. On the other hand, Gr. σкiá, together with ToB skiyo and Alb. hie
'shadow', must be interpreted as reflecting *skiHeh₂-, from older *skHieh₂- with
laryngeal metathesis. On the basis of σкηvý, Dor. σkāvá ‘tenť < ‘cloth to provide
shadow', the root can be identified as *skeh₂-, which means that we are dealing with
an original ablauting proterodynamic *ih2-stem *skéh₂-ih₂, *skh₂-iéh₂-s. In Indo-
Iranian and Baltic, the full-grade stem was generalized, whereas in the other
branches the zero-grade stem spread throughout the paradigm. The Slavic forms,
OCS sěnь and Ru. sen' [f.] 'shadow', reflect *skeh₂-i-n-, with an extra suffix -n-. The
hapax σкatóç 'shadowy' reflects *skeh₂-i-uo-, and perhaps σкotós (in H.: σkotá
OKOTELVά, σKOLÓv. ... σúσкιov) can be regarded as an o-grade variant *skoh₂-i-uo-.
The relation with σкóτoç 'darkness' is unclear.
σkíуyoç [m.] a lizard found in Asia Minor that is used as medicine (Dsc. 2, 66 Welm.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also σKíуKoç and кíкɛpoç = кpoкódɛiλoç xɛpσaños 'a land lizard' (H.); Fur.: 277.
⚫ETYM The variantions point to a Pre-Greek origin.
σkɩdapóv [adj.] •åpatóv 'thin' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 368 connects ά-kidvóc, which has ȧ- instead of σ-. This looks like a Pre-
Greek variation.
okidápn, okivdapog →kidapoc.
okídvηu →okedávvyµu.
σкía [f.] 'squill' (Thgn., Hippon., Arist., etc.). <PG?>

=== page 702 ===

1352
Okuā入izw
•DER OKɩλλ-ítηs, of olvos (Ps.-Afric., Colum.), see Redard 1949: 99; -itikós, of őžos
(Dsc. et al.), -ɩvoç 'made of σ.' (Dsc. et al.), -wdns 'σ.-like' (Thphr. etc.).
•ETYM Unexplained foreign word, probably Pre-Greek (*skila?). Borrowed as Lat.
scilla.
okųµäλí¼w [v.] ‘to jeer, flout' (Ar. Ach. 444, Pax 549, D. L. 7, 17); acc. to gramm.
(Moer., Phryn., H.) = кatadaкtvλíšw; acc. to sch. Ar. Pax ad loc. 'to hold up the
middle finger' (sens. obsc.). <PG(S)►
•DER σкíµαλλoç (PLond. = Aegyptus 6, 194), probably designation of a finger.
⚫ETYM The verb oкчµãλíw seems to be derived from a noun *σкчµãλos, which may
be attested as oкíµaλλoç (with geminate -M-). The formation resembles those of
Kóẞaλoç, σкíτaλoc, and other comedic words (cf. Björck 1950: 46f., 259f.). Since all
words in aλl-(oc) seem to be of Pre-Greek origin (Beekes 2008), these words are
likely to be Pre-Greek, too.
σкчẞóç [adj.] = xwλóç, σкaµßóç ‘lame, crooked' (H., sch. Ar. Nu. 254). <PG(V)►
•DER okɩɩßáčeɩ• Xwλɛɛɩ ‘is or becomes lame' (Ar. Fr. 853, H.), to which σкчßaσµóç.
cpiλýµatos eldos ‘kind of kiss' (H.). Semantically unclear is σкäßádɛç. ülŋ eüßetos
eiç toíxwv έníƉeolv, okérns xápiv (H.). Seemingly primary is σkiyať ókláσai. Axaioí
'to squat (Achaean)' (H.). Without σ-: кчßášε· otpɑyyɛvɛtai (oτpατ- cod.) 'to
loiter' (H.); ỏкчµ-ßáčɛɩv (ỏ- hardly from óкλáčεv?). diatpíßɛiv kai otpayyɛúɛσðaɩ
(στрατ-cod.) 'to wear away, loiter' (H., Phot.).
⚫ETYM Although an IE origin has been suggested (connections with e.g. ON skeifr
'slanting', Latv. šķībs ‘id.' in Pok. 922), the alternation between σкųµiß-, okiß-, kiµiß-,
and oкuß-, as well as σкauß-, in σкaμßóç 'crooked, bandy-legged' clearly points to
a Pre-Greek origin (cf. Fur.: 154, 286).
okiμiñovę, -лodoç [m.] 'low bed(stead)' (Ar., Pl., X., Gal.). <?>
■DER -71ódov [n.] (middle com., Luc.).
ETYM Interpreted as *σкчμлé-лous *supporting the foot' and connected with
►σкíµµa. A connection with σкчßós ‘lame, crooked' (thus Schwyzer: 263) is
semantically unlikely.
okiintoμai [v.] 'to throw, sling, throw oneself down, fall down, uphold (oneself)'
(Call. POxy. 2080, 49 [σ]кчµл[τóµεvo]v H., also act. σкiµлτε); kiµyavtes.
¿peioavtes, otnpičavτes 'who leaned, propped' (H.). Details in Solmsen 1909: 206f.;
see also Bechtel 1921(3): 331. <?>
⚫VAR Aor. σkiμyaσða (Pi.), pass. σкчµ¤ñvαι (Нp.), perf. pass. àл-ɛσкíµóðaɩ (Pi.),
mostly with ev(t)- : έv(1)-σkíµyai (P 437, Pi., A. R., Nic.), -σкчóðñvai (ПI 612 = P
528).
⚫ETYM Epic and poetic verb, on the one hand reminiscent of σк½лw (-oμα), on the
other of píµлw (-oµaɩ; cf. Nic. Th. 336 ¿vɩ-σkíµyŋ with v.ll. -xpíµyŋ and -oknyŋ),
perhaps arisen from a cross of both (cf. Güntert 1914: 29). Usually connected with
▶ Okitwv.
okívaž, -čkos [m.] designation or epithet of the hare, λaywós (Nic.). <PG>
akivdayós
1353
⚫ETYM Often compared with кívda, although this is semantically rather gratuitious
(the meaning of σкívaε is unclear). If connected, the variation between σKIV- / KIVS-,
as well as the presence of the suffix-aк-, points to a Pre-Greek origin.
σкívap [n.] 'body' (Nic. Th. 694). <PG?►
•ETYM Often connected with σкñvos 'corpse' (see ►σкηvý) which, if correct, could
point to a Pre-Greek origin (variation n/t, cf. Fur.: 171174).
σкɩvdaкiσaι [v.] = τò výкτwp έлаvαστñvαí τɩɩ ȧσɛλywç 'sexual arousal at night'
(Phot.) and σкívdaрov. лρоσкívηµа· каì τò vÚктшρ έлαναστñvaι ȧкoλáστwę
σkivdaкíσaι 'movement towards (i.e. a woman); sexual arousal at night'. In H. 1.
okivdapeveola: kakogyo入eveodal, Saktudileodal, okylalileodal ‘to play
mischievous tricks; to be pointed at with the finger; to hold up the middle finger'; 2.
okivdapiσai. tà aỷτá ‘id.'; 3. σkivdáp(e)ios. öpxnois oütw kalovµέvò ‘a dance'; 4.
okivdapol. tà npookvvýµata (leg. лpoσкɩ-, cf. Photius s.v. σкívdapov); 5. σkívdapoç.
ǹ ÉNAVÁσTAOIS VUкtòs ȧqpodioiwv žvɛкa ‘arousal at night for sex'. <PG➤
•ETYM The verb is a demominative of *σкívdač, a doublet of кívdač. Cf. Taillardat
REA 58 (1956): 191ff. See ►кívdaž for an etymology.
okivdaλµóç, okɩvðáλaµoç [m.] 'splinter, hair-splitting, etc.' (Dsc., Alciphr.), also
σкivбáλaμoç (Ar., Luc. et al.), also σxivdaλµóç, oxidaλaμóç etc. (v.l. Hp. Mul. 2, 133).
<PG(S,V)►
•DER σkɩvúλiov [n.] 'shingle' (Delph. IIª), àva-oxivduλɛúw [v.] 'to pierce' (Pl.),
-σkivdvλeúw, -okivdaλɛúw (H., EM, Phryn.), after okulɛúw, σкaλɛúw etc.;
oxivdúλnois [f.] ‘split' (Hp. apud Gal.). 2. See ►σкiðapóv · àpatóv ‘thin' (H.). 3. See
▶okodog.
⚫ETYM Frisk groups all these words with oxi w 'to split', but this is incorrect: oxitw
never shows σк- nor -v8-. The root variations, σкivd-/σkid-/σxivd-/oxid-, as well as
the presence of the suffixes -aλμ- (cf. ►óóðαλµóç; Beekes 1969: 193f., Beekes 2008)
and -v- rather point to a Pre-Greek origin. The second a in σкivdáλaµoç is a
secondary prop vowel, which is frequent in Pre-Greek (Fur.: 378-385). See σxíčw.
σкɩvdápiov [n.] name of an unknown fish (Anaxandr. 27, 4). <PG?>
ETYM Since the meaning is unknown, etymologizing is useless. Nevertheless,
formally the word seems Pre-Greek.
σkívбapoç [m.] 'an obscene gesture' (H., Phot.). <PG(V)►
•DER σKIV api w 'make obscene gestures' (H.). Σкɩτäλo 'demons of lewdness' (Ar.,
H.).
⚫ETYM The variation is typical of Pre-Greek. Cf. s.v. ►σkivdaкíσal.
σkivdaqoç→kidaqoç.
okɩvdayós [m.] name of a four-stringed musical instrument with thorn-like
appendices (middle com. etc.), also designation for a senseless word (Artem., S. E.
etc.); name of an ivy-like plant (Clitarch.; cf. Dawkins JHS 56 (1936): 9f.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Without initial σ-: кIvdawós (Timo, H.).
⚫DER σkivdaчɩóμεvos (σquyµós) ‘vibrating like a σ.' (Gal.).

=== page 703 ===

1354
okiveapil w
⚫ETYM A foreign word like кɩápa, ßápßiτoç, and many other instrument names. It is
of Pre-Greek origin, in view of the interchange σ-/zero.
okɩvðapí¶w →σkivdapoç.
σкívoç [m.] 'jumper, swimmer' (Thphr H. P. 4, 6, 9); translated as naufragus by
Pliny. <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
σkíovpoç [m.] 'squirrel' (Opp., Plin.). <PG?>
•ETYM The interpretation of this word as a bahuvrīhi compound of σkiá and oỷpá,
"who generates shade with his tail" (thus eg. Frisk), looks like a folk etymology
rather than a serious explanation. The suffix -oupos could point to Pre-Greek origin
(from -ar-o-?). Borrowed as MLat. *scuriolus, which is the source of MoFr. écureuil,
MoE squirl, etc.
oкiлwv, -wvoç [m.] ‘staff, stick', also ‘crutch' (Hdt. 4, 172, Cratin. [lyr.], Ar. [anap.], E.
[anap.], Call., AP, Hp., Epid. IVª). <?►
•VAR v.ll. σкýлwv (after σêñïτpov?), σкíµлwv (after okiµëtoµai?).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in å-oкíлwv ‘staffless' (AP).
⚫ETYM Ionic poetic word, built like кúqwv, Sóλwv, and other tool names (Chantraine
1933: 161f.), and almost identical with Lat. scipio, -ōnis [m.] 'staff (as a sign of power
and dignity, like σкñлτрov). The further similarity with σкηäávov, σкñƒτpov, and
cognates (see σкó̟яτοµα) has been observed for a long time; however, the forms
cannot be combined under one pre-form.
It is unlikely that ▶σkíµëtoµa is a denominative nasal present (like σêýëtoµaɩ from
σкãлoç); for a different explanation, see s.v. Further, connection is considered with
the semantically unclear σкоiлoç. ǹ έt̃oxǹ twv \úλwv, q' wv εiσ oi кépaµoɩ (H.),
probably of the supporting beams on which the tiles rest. Connection with
σкñлτроν, etc. seems impossible (DELG refers to Benveniste 1935: 167 and to
Szemerényi 1980: 133). It is unclear how to assess the similarity of the Latin form.
σkipaqoç [m.] meaning uncertain; in Hippon. 86 = 129a [pl.] explained as 'treachery'
by Masson; after Hdn. 1, 225, 13 = ȧkóλaσtoç kai кußɛvτηç ‘undisciplined, gambler'
(2, 581, 27 ả. K. kvßioτýs), acc. to EM 717, 28 = öpуavov кußεvτɩкóv 'tool used in
gambling' (alternative supposition). <?►
●DER σkɩpaq-ɛãov (-tov) [n.] ‘gambling-house' (Isoc., Theopomp. Hist.), -εvτýç [m.]
'dice-player' (Amphis 25), -wdns ‘treacherous' (AB).
•ETYM Because of the unclear meaning, without etymology. According to Hdn.
(l.cc.), ȧлò τwν év Σkipw (suburb of Athens; see on σкípov, known as a home of
prostitutes and gamblers) diατpiẞóvτwv. Or is it a variant of кipacqoc = àλóñη? Cf.
ȧλwлεкíεv. ȧлατãν 'to deceive' (H.).
σкípov [n.] a white parasol or canopy, which was carried at processions from the
Acropolis to a place called Σkipov (Σkipov) (later a suburb of Athens) on the holy
road to Eleusis in honor of Athena Skiras and other deities (Lysimachid., sch. Ar. Ec.
OKVITÓC, OKVÍŲ
1355
18); plur. Ekipa name of a women's festival in honor of Demeter, Kore and Athena
Polias (Ar., inscr. et al.). <?>
●COMP As a first member in Σkɩpo-qópia [n.pl.] ‘id.' (H., Phot., Suid.); hence
Σkipopopiwv, -wvos [m.] Att. month name, = June-July (Antipho, inscr., etc.).
• ETYM Etymology not fully certain. Comparison with oкiá 'shade' is semantically
attractive, but formally somewhat difficult: σká reflects *skh₂-ieh₂-, the *-i- of which
belongs to the suffix and cannot therefore be equated with the -i- in σкípov, which
would have to be from *skh₂-i-ro- (vel sim.).
Often equated with Alb. hir grace of God' (Jokl 1923: 67, following Bugge) through a
semantic development comparable to the one in the Germanic adj. for 'clear,
gleaming, bright', e.g. Go. skeirs, ON skírr, MoHG schier, which would have a basic
meaning ‘(subdued) shine, reflex' (Pok. 917f.). Deubner 1932: 40ff. argues that the
interpretation of okipov as 'parasol' is a late learned construction, and interprets
σкípov as a designation of several ritual items.
σkîpoç [m.] ‘induration, callus, hard tumor' (medic.), ‘hard, scrubby ground, scrub’
(Tab. Heracl.). <PG(V)►
VAR Also -pp-, σкбρ-; σкiρоç [m.], -ov [n.] 'crust, rind, cheese-rind, hardened
grease' (com.); also ‘hard, white matter, gypsum' (sch. Ar. V. 921, Suid.), in this
meaning also σkíppa (Suid.), yñ σкippáç (sch. Ar. V. 921); yñ λevký worɛp yúyos
'white earth, like gypsum' (Su.).
●DER_okippítŋs [m.] ‘gypsum-worker' (Zonar.). Abstract formation σkɩpp-íŋ [f.]
'induration' (Aret.), àкpoσкip-ía [f.pl.] high scrubby lands' (Tab. Heracl.); adj.
σKIρ(p)-óc 'hard' (Plu., Them.), -w8ns 'callous' (Gall., Poll.); verb -óoμat 'to harden,
take root' (Sophr., medic.), also with éл- etc., whence -wua [n.] 'induration' (Dsc.);
-wois [f.] 'id.' (Sor., Gal.).
•ETYM Fur.: 387 suggests that the word is Pre-Greek, comparing σкūpos (cf. op.cit.
366). This seems quite probable.
σкipτáw [v.] 'to jump, hop' (especially epic poet. Y 226, 228, also late prose), -źw
(Opp.). <?>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.
•COMP Also with prefix (mostly late), e.g. ȧvα-, εMI-, KATA-.
●DER okipt-ŋqµa [n.] ‘jump' (A., E. et al.), -ŋois [f.] ‘the jumping' (Plu.), -ŋ¤µós [m.]
‘id.', -ŋtńs [m.] ‘jumper, dancer' (Mosch., Orph. etc.), -ŋtikós (Plu., Corn.); ΣкípτoS
[m.] name of a satyr (backfomation; AP, Nonn. etc.), -twv, -twvos [m.] 'one who is
exalted' (Eun.).
•ETYM Iterative-intensive formation in -τáw from σkaipw < *skṛ-ie/o-. The -t- is
thought to be a secondary prop vowel, but this makes the etymology formally less
certain.
ok入npós, ok入nppós →oké入入ozial.
OKVлÓS, OKVÍч →kviųs.

=== page 704 ===

1356
σKOTSOC
σkoïdoç [m.] = oiкovóμoç, τaµíαç, etc., designation of a Macedonian official (Hdn.
Gr., Poll., H.), epithet of Dionysus (Men.); σкodíą [f.dat.] 'educatress, housekeeper'
(Naxos I-IIP). <?>
⚫ETYM According to Frisk s.v., related to oxicw, as if from an IE root *skid-, which
cannot be correct; see on σkivdaλμóç. Otherwise unexplained.
OKOÍKIOV →KÓLĘ.
σKOĨлOÇ ⇒σкĺлwv.
σKOMLÓS →σKÉλoç.
σKÓMUS, -vos [m.] 'fringe of hair, a haircut in which a tuft of hair was left on the head'
(Pamphil. apud Ath. 11, 494f., Dsc., H., Poll. etc.). <PG?>
•ETYM Perhaps connected with σкoλúлtεv, although a Pre-Greek origin seems
more likely.
σкoλóлaž, -aкoç [m.] name of a bird, usually identified with ảσкaλóлaç (-лãç?) [m.]
(Arist.) and explained as 'woodcock, Scolopax rusticola'; cf. Thompson 1895 s.vv.
<PG?
•ETYM On the basis of the equation with ảσкαλóлaç (-лãç?), it is considered to be a
Pre-Greek word by Fur.: 344. The resemblance with oкóλoч ‘pole' (referring to the
long beak of the snipe?) might be due to folk-etymological adaptation.
okolóлevdpa [f.] 'millipede, sowbug'; also name of an animal of the sea (Arist., etc.).
< PG➤
•DER σкоλóлεvбp-ov (Thphr.), -tov (Dsc.) [n.] plant name, after the form of the
leaves acc. to Strömberg 1940: 42; -wdns 'resembling a σ.' (Str.).
•ETYM The etymological proposal by Guasparri Glotta 76 (1998): 199-201, who
suggests a derivation from σкоλол- 'biting' and Evτεpov, also 'earth worm', is
formally untenable and therefore unconvincing. Rather a Pre-Greek word.
σкóλоч, -оло [m.] 'pointed pole, palisade, prickle' (epic ion. poet. Il., Hell. and late
prose), for Att. Xápač, στavpóç, -wμα. <PG(V)>
•VAR Also σkóλoppov. Opavíov 'bench' (H.), perhaps after Sippoc; cf. σкóλvеpov.
•DER Diminutive σкoλóл-ov [n.] (Antyll. apud Orib.), -ŋìs µoïpa ‘the destiny of
being impaleď (Man.), after ßaoil-ŋïç etc.; -i\w ‘to provide with a σ.' (Stad.) with
-toμós [m.] 'the impaling, the spearing' (Vett. Val.); often åvα-σкoλoлí(w 'to stick on
a pole, impale' (Hdt., etc.) with -ɩɩ [f.] (sch., Eust.), àлo- ‘to remove the poles'
(Aq.).
⚫ETYM Often derived from σкáλλw 'to stir, hoe', but the formation is peculiar. The
interpretation of σкóλол- as a disyllabic stem cognate with e.g. Lat. scalpō 'to scratch,
cut with a sharp instrument, etc.', OHG scelifa 'membranous shell', Lith. sklempti,
sklembti 'to plane, etc.' (Pok. 926) is formally even more unlikely. The variant
σkóλoppov with -op- rather points to a Pre-Greek origin; cf. Fur.: 107.
σKOλúpιov [n.] 'footstool' (Pl. Euthd. 278b, Poll.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR KÓλvepov (Telecl.).
1357
•DER σKÓλvеpos 'low' (H., Phot., Suid.), σкoλúерwv. ταлεvõν. άлò σкoλúеpwv
Siqpwv (H.).
⚫ETYM Diminutive of an unattested word *σкóλupov, which seems to be a variant of
Kóλupov. This could point to Pre-Greek origin. A connection with σкоλúлтELV
(thus Frisk s.v.) is formally and semantically unlikely.
σкóλчμоç [m.] name of a kind of thistle with an edible flower base, 'Scolymus
hispanicus, artichoke, Cynara scolymus' (Hes., Alc., Arist., etc.); on the mg., see
Dawkins JHS 56 (1936): 6. <PG(V)►
•VAR σкóλчμov (Zonar.). On σкóλuẞoç, see below.
⚫DER σкOλvμ-wns like σ.' (Thphr.).
⚫ETYM A variant of this word can be found in σкóλuẞoç. ó éσ¤óµεvos Boλẞóç ‘edible
onion' (H.). The variation ß/µ is a well-known Pre-Greek phenomenon.
σкoλúлtεv [v.] ·έкτíλλεv, кoλoúɛv 'to pluck out, cut short'; σкoλúчai. kolovσal,
Koλoẞwσa 'to cut short, shorten'; ávασкoλúчaç yʊuvwσaç 'having stripped' (H.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Beside okoλúßpa· σкvеpwrý ‘sad' (H.) we find σкoλúópα. σкvеpwrý, okλŋpá,
Épуwdns, Svσxεpns 'sad, hard, difficult, intractable'.
•COMP Often with ảлo- 'to skin, strip off, circumcise' (Archil. 124, S. Fr. 423, Ael.
Dion. etc.).
⚫ETYM The variation between σкоλυл- and коλоẞ- in кoλoẞóç 'curtailed, cut short'
points to a Pre-Greek origin. A connection with σкáλλw 'to stir, hoe' (thus e.g.
Frisk) is therefore unlikely. Also, the variation between -ßp- and -opp- in σкoλúẞpa
and oкolúopa (whether or not they are really connected with σkoλúrtɛv; the
semantics are quite far) points to a Pre-Greek origin of these words (Fur.: 171).
σкóµẞpoç [m.] 'mackerel' (Epich., Ar., Arist. etc.). <PG?►
●DER Diminutive σкoµßpídεç. ¿xúc 'fishes' (H.); also Arist. HA 543b 5 (v.l.
σкоρлídɛç). Additionally, the apparently denominative σкoμßpíσaι yoyyúσaɩ. kai
лαιбãç àσελуouç εldoç 'to murmur, grumble; kind of wanton sport'; also
σкоμẞрíčяv as an explanation of paеaлvуíчav 'to slap the buttocks' (H.).
⚫ETYM Origin unclear. The word may well be of Pre-Greek origin; cf. Fur.: 124. The
word was borrowed as Lat. scomber.
okóvula →kóvula.
σêóлɛλoç [m.] ‘cliff, rock, mountain peak' (mostly epic poet. B 396), 'watch-tower'
(pap.), -ov [n.] ‘earthen wall, hill' (LXX). <?►
•DER σкoлελ-í¢w [v.] 'to set up a watch-tower', with -toµós [m.] (Ulp. in Dig.).
•ETYM Although within Greek the meaning 'watch-tower' seems to be a later
development out of original 'cliff, rock, mountain peak', an etymological connection.
with oкoëý ‘watch-tower', σкoлá ‘watch-tower, cliff, etc. (see σкéлτoµα) might
suggest that a meaning 'watch-tower' was the starting-point of this word after all.
Older etymological connections (e.g. in Frisk s.v.) involving an alleged PIE root
*skep- 'to cut' (thought to be attested in σкéлαpvos) are outdated, as such a root
does not seem to have existed. Borrowed as Lat. scopulus.

=== page 705 ===

1358
OKONÉw, OKOLá, OKONóg
OKONÉw, OKOLá, oKonÓg →OKÉNTOLial.
σkopaki w →kópač.
σkopdivάoµaɩ [v.] 'to stretch (drowsily), yawn' (Hp., Ar., Poll.). <?>
●var Ion. -ćoµiai.
•DER σkopdív-ŋμa [n.] (кopб- v.l. Erot.), -ŋoµós [m.] (Hp., Gal.).
⚫ETYM Presumably from a non-attested noun *σкóрdivov, -oç. A more primary form
is probably represented by σкopбá¢εiv· σлãσðαι (H.). Hardly related to ►кópdač,
►кpadáw; no further etymology.
σkopóẞvlos [m.] káv¤apos ‘dung-beetle' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•ETYM Clearly connected with кápaẞoç. The word therefore seems to continue
*σkap(a)ẞ-vλ-, with o from a before v in the next syllable.
σкóρodov [n.] ‘garlic, Allium sativum' (Milete VIª, Ion., com., Thphr. et al.). <PG?>
•VAR Hell. and late also σкópdov (see Schwyzer: 259); there is also σкopadov (inscr.
Cyrene), which may be secondary.
•COMP A number of compounds, e.g. okopod-áλµŋ [f.] 'salty garlic-broth' (com.), cf.
Risch IF 59 (1949): 58; ócio-σkóp(0) Sov [n.] kind of wild garlic (Gal., Ps.-Dsc.); cf.
Strömberg 1940: 33.
●DER σkopód-tov [n.], -í\w [v.] ‘to feed or to spice with garlic' (com.), σкopodoûv·
σuvovσιáεv 'to have intercourse with' (H.); on the mg., see Specht KZ 62 (1935): 215.
•ETYM Related to Alb. hurdhë [f.] ‘garlic' and Arm. xstor, dial. sxtor ‘id.'. The
Albanian form can be reconstructed as *skord-, the Armenian word as *skodor-,
which was metathesized from *skorod-, but the details regarding the developments
of initial cluster are obscure (Ačařyan in Martirosyan 2010). Given the alternation
*skord- ~ *skorod-, the word must be non-Indo-European, i.e. Pre-Greek or adopted
from a local language in the Pontic area. For other names for onion and garlic, cf.
›кρó̟µµvov and ▶лрáσov; see also ►ßoλßós.
σкopлíoç [m.] 'scorpion' (A. Fr. 169 = 368M.); often metaph. as epithet of a fish (com.,
Arist. et al.), after the poisonous stings, see Strömberg 1943: 124f., Thompson 1947
s.v.; also σкópл-αɩvα, -ís, on which see below; of a plant (Thphr.), see Strömberg
1937: 50f.; of a constellation (Cleostrat., Hell.), see Scherer 1953: 170; a war machine
for firing arrows (Hero et al.), whence σкоρлíш (see below); of a stone (Orph.), also
σкoρлīτiç, -íτηç. <PG(V)►
•COMP As a first member e.g. in oкоρлí-оυроç (-ov) plant name (Dsc.).
•DER 1. Substantives: σкоρл-íоv [n.] plant name (Dsc.), -ídlov [n.] 'small slinging-
machine' (Plb., LXX), -íç [f.] (Arist.), -alva [f.] (Ath.) fish name (see above); -ĭτç [f.],
-íτns [m.] name of a stone (Plin., late pap.), after the color and shape, Redard 1949:
61); -twv, -twvos [m.] month name in Alexandria (Ptol.). 2. Adjectives: σкopr-iwdŋs
‘resembling the σ.' (Arist., Ph. et al.), -ñïoç, -ɛoç ‘belonging to the σ.' (Orph., Man.),
-tóɛɩç ‘id.' (Nic.), -takóç ‘id.' (medic.), -tavós ‘born under the sign σ.' (Astr.). 3.
Verbs: σкоρл-íчw 'to scatter' (Hecat.[?], Hell. and late), also with Siα- etc., -αívoμa
σKÓTOC
1359
'to be enraged' (Рrоcop.), σкорлоτaι· áуpiαívετaι, pεíετα ‘gets angry, is
provoked' (H.).
•ETYM The scorpion is widely distributed in the southern parts of Europe, but there
are isolated populations as far north as the Isle of Sheppy in Great Britain. The Indo-
Europeans, whose homeland was probably located to the North of the Black Sea, did
not have a word for the scorpion, and the Greeks must therefore have adopted it
from a different language when they arrived in the Mediterranean. Acc. to Fur. (see
his index), ►кápaßoç, kapáµßios, *σkapaßaïoç, ▶kepáµßvě, kepáµßηλov, knpaqiç,
and ypapatos all continue the same Pre-Greek word, which seems possible. It is to
be noted that most forms can easily be reduced to a structure *karamp-, except for
ypaчaños and σкорлíоç. The word does not derive from PIE *skerp- 'to scratch', seen
in OE sceorfan ‘to scratch' and Latv. šķērpêt ‘to cut grass'. The Greek word was
borrowed as Lat. scorpius, -iō.
σкóτoç [m.] 'darkness, dark', also of the dark before the eyes = 'swindle' (Il.). ◄IE
*sk(e)h3t- or *skoto- 'shadow, dark'>
•VAR Also [n.] (since V₁), after e.g. qwc, see Egli 1954: 64f.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. σкoτо-µηv-чos “having the moon in the dark”,
'moonless', epithet of vú (457), univerbation of σкótos and µýv(n); besides the
abstract σкоτо-μηv-ía [f.] 'moonlessness, moonless night' (Hell.), also σкоτо-дýуη
'id.' (Democr.[?], LXX) and (after the nouns in -aιvα) σкоτó-μαivα [f.] ‘id.' (AP et
al.). Further σкoτo-div-ía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] ‘swindle' (Hp., Pl.), with -Sɩviáw [v.] (Ar., Pl.);
also -Sɩvoç [m.] ‘id.' (Hp.), after Sĭvoç.
•DER A. Adjectives: 1. σkótoç ‘dark, secretly, illegitimate', in Crete also = ävηẞos 'not
grown-up' (especially epic poet. since Z 24), cf. Ruijgh 1957: 108 against Leumann
1950: 284; σkoτíaç. Spaлéτηs 'runaway' (H.). 2. σкOT-años 'in the dark, dark' (IA),
after kvεqałoç etc. (Schwyzer: 467). 3. -ɛtvóc 'darkness' (A.), after qaɛvóc etc., with
-ɛɩvótŋs [f.] (Pl.), -εvwdɛç (H.), see vuеwdɛç. 4. -óɛɩç ‘id.' (Hp., Emp., Hell. epic);
ΣкOTOÑσ(σ)α (-óɛσσα) [f.] town in Thessaly (Hell.). 5. -woŋs 'dark, dizzy' (IA) with
-wdía [f.] (late). 6. -ɛpós 'dark' (Hell. poet.).
B. Substantives: 1. σkotía [f.] = σkótos (Ar., LXX, NT et al.); cf. Scheller 1951: 38. 2.
σкoτapia. Čóqoç. Axatoí ‘darkness (Achaean)' (H.). 3. Σkotitaç [m.] epithet of Zeus
(Paus. 3, 10, 6); explanation debated; cf. Redard 1949: 212. 4. Σкoτíα (-tá) [f.] epithet
of Aphrodite (H., EM), see Scheller 1951: 129.
C. Verbs: 1. σкOτóоμа it becomes dark before my eyes, I'm passing out', -ów 'to
make pass out, to darken' (Att., etc.), also with ảлo-, σuv-; on the mg., see
Chantraine Sprache 1 (1949): 147f.; thence σкóτ-wμα, -wσis (Hell. and late). 2. εлɩ-
σкOT-έw [v.] 'to shroud in darkness, darken' (Hp., Att.), like εл-Оvµi-έw, -Xεip-éw
etc.), with -ŋoɩs [f.] (Plu. et al.), -oç adj. (Pi. Pae. 9, 5 v.l.). 3. okotáw in 3pl. okotówoi
'their sight becomes darkened' (Nic.). 4. σкoτ-áСw 'to become dark, darken' (Att.,
etc.; in the older language only impersonal), mostly with ouv-, whence -ασμós [m.]
(late). 5. -w 'to darken' (Hell. and late), also with έлɩ-, ɑño-, katα-, whence -toµós,
-Lois (late). 6. σкоTεÚεɩ· Spαлεтεúεɩ 'runs away' (H.), cf. σкoτíaç above sub A. 1.
•ETYM The word σкóτoç has a close cognate in a Germanic word for 'shadow': Go.
skadus, OE sceadu (also 'darkness'), OHG scato, -(a)wes, from PGm. *skaðu- (after

=== page 706 ===

1360
OKPIẞλiτns
the opposite *haiðu-, originally 'appearance in the light' in Go. haidus 'art, manner”,
etc). Beside these, we find Celtic forms with an apparent lengthened grade, e.g. OIr.
scáth [n.] 'shadow'. We may reconstruct either IE *skoto-, -tu (Greek and Germanic)
beside *skōto- (Celtic), or an ablauting root noun *sk(e)h3t- (Matasović 2008 s.v.
*skāto-). Cf. also on ► σkiá.
okpißλitng [m.] 'cheesecake' (Chrysipp. Tyan. apud Ath. 14, 647d). <LW Lat.➤
•ETYM From Lat. scriblīta [m.] ‘id.', which itself seems to have been taken from Greek
(*Oτpeßitηs: otрεßλóç?); see WH s.v. and Redard 1949: 91.
okúßaλov [n.] ‘waste, offal, refuse, muck' (Hell and late). <PG(V) ►
VAR Also *σкúẞλov as in σкuẞλiw?
W
●der okvßal-wdns ‘muck-like' (late), -ɩкóç ‘dirty' (Timocr.?), -í\w [v.] ‘to treat like
or regard as waste' (LXX, D. H. et al.), also with ȧva-, àло-; to this -чσµóc [m.] (Plb.),
-чoμa [n.] (Ps.-Phoc.), -tous [f.] (sch.); -εúoμat ‘id.' (sch.).
⚫ETYM Neumann 1961: 90f. and 107 compared Hitt. išhuuai- 'to throw (away), shake
(away)'. Fur.: 148 compares кúлελla. tà tñs µášŋg kaì tŵy äptwv ènì tñs tpanéšns
kataλɛiµµata ‘whatever dough and bread is left over on the table' (Philet. apud Ath.
11, 483a); if correct, then the word is Pre-Greek. See DELG Supp.
okvdµaívw [v.] ‘to rage, grumble' (Σ 592). <?►
•VAR Backformation σкúdµaivoç. σкvеpwлóç ‘sad- or angry-looking' (H.).
•COMP With ȧлo- (Σ 65).
●DER σkúšoμaι ‘id.' (Hom.), also with εлɩ-, aor. opt. έлσкúσσατo (ŋ 306), ind.
εлσкúσαι (EM) ‘id.'; act. σкúčovσiv. ñσvõñ úлoеεууoντα, шσлεр кúvεç 'speak
quietly in an undertone, like dogs' (H.); σкvčáw ‘id.' (Poll.). Perhaps also PN
Σкúбpoç (Delos IV₁); cf. Bechtel 1917b: 501. With a suffix -0 po- or -po-: σкuеpós
‘grumpy, murky, gloomy' (Men., Arat.), whence okvēp-ášw [v.] ‘to be grumpy,
murky' (E. El. 830), -íwv [m.] PN (Tanagra IVª); on σkúеpač. µɛīpač, éqηßos ‘young
boy, adolescent' (H.), see σкupáλios. Especially in σкvеp-wлóç 'with a gloomy look'
(Hp., Att.; cf. Sommer 1948: 7 and 9), whence -wrótŋs [f.] (Hp.), -wñá¼w [v.] 'to
look gloomy, etc.', -wraσµós [f.] (Plu.).
⚫ETYM Like in Epidμaívw beside píšw, σкvdµαívw beside σкúšoμα has its -- from
лμαívw, εpμαívw, etc. For σкUе póc, there is no reason to assume a pre-form
*σkud-Opos (whence *σкuσ-0pós and, with dissimilation, σкvеpóc).
There is no certain etymology. Lith. (pra-)skùsti, 1sg. -skundù, pret. -skudaй 'to
become nervous, tired, begin to feel pain', Latv. skundêt 'to grumble, commiserate,
blame, grudge', etc. (Pok. 955) cannot be related, as the accentuation points to *-ďh-.
σкúčα [f.] ‘lust, heat' (Philet. 27 [?; see Powell ad loc.], SEG 4, 47 (Messana IIP[?];
personified as a woman). <PG?>
•DER OKUČάw (ȧva-, έк-) [v.] 'to be in heat', of dogs, horses et al. (Cratin., Arist. et al.)
with -nous [f.] (Ar. Byz.).
●ETYM Unexplained. The word could be Pre-Greek (note the meaning), from a pre-
form PG *skut❞a.
okúšoµai →σkvdµaívw.
σkvėpós →σкvdμaívw.
OKÚ入入W
1361
okúλaž, -ǎkoç [f., m.] ‘doggy, puppy' (Od.), also 'whelp, cub' in general (E. [lyr.], Nic.,
Luc. et al.); metaph. 'collar, neckband' (Pl. Com., Plb.). <PG?➤
•COMP Also as a first member e.g. in σkvλako-τpóqos 'breeding dogs', with -ía, -ɩкóç
(late).
•DER 1. Diminutive okuláк-tov [n.] (IA). 2. Fem. -aiva (AP), -1 (Orph.). 3.
Substantive -ɩɩɩ [f.] 'protectress of cubs', epithet of Artemis (Orph.), see Redard
1949: 212; -ɛÚç [m.] = σкúlaž (Opp.), rather metrical enlargement than back-
formation from -ɛúw (cf. Boßhardt 1942: 71 and Kretschmer Glotta 11 (1921): 228). 4.
Adjective -εtos of puppies' (Hp., S. E.); -wdns (X.), -ɛutiкós ‘belonging to a puppy'
(Ph.), analogical enlargement. 5. Verb -ɛúw act. 'to mate, copulate', of dogs (X., Arr.),
pass. 'to be raised' (Str., Max. Tyr.), with -ɛía [f.] 'dog-breeding' (Plu., Poll.), -ɛvμa
[n.] ‘offspring' (Epigr. apud Plu., AP), -evtǹs [m.] ‘dog-breeder' (Him.).
•ETYM Words for young animals often end in -a (cf. µɛipač, déλqaž, róptaž; see
Chantraine 1933: 377ff.). Therefore, oкúλač could be related to σkúλov [n.] name of
a shark (Arist.) and to σкúλλa fish name (Nic. Fr. 137 Schn.); see Solmsen 1909: 20';
forms with a geminate are σкúλ(A)oç = σкúλaž, кúwv (EM, H.), σкvλλíç. kλŋµatíç
(H., Strömberg 1940: 31), and кúλλa. σкúla (кúlλaç кúλa cod.). 'Hλɛчo (H.).
Σkúλλŋ, Att. Σkúλλa (“the bitch"), name of the well-known sea-monster (Od.), is
perhaps related.
There are no certain cognates outside Greek. Arm. c'ul, gen. c'l-u 'young bull', from
IE *skul- or *skōl-, was compared by Meillet BSL 26 (1925): 20f. Comparison with
Lith. skalikas ‘barking dog' (from skalyti 'to bark hunting') and kale ‘'bitch' go back
to *(s)kol. Schwyzer KZ 37 (1904): 150 pointed at σкúčovσv (H.) and σкvdμaívw
(does this contain a root *sku-? Cf. ►σкúµvoç). In view of the lack of an etymology,
the word could well be Pre-Greek.
σKÚλw [V.] 'to lacerate, tear up, flay', mostly metaph. 'to pester, tire, bother, trouble,
vex', med.-pass. ‘to strain', aor. act. ‘to infest, plunder' (pap., inscr., NT, late prose;
rarely poet.: A., Nic., AP). <?>
•VAR Aor. σкûλ-αɩ, pass. -ñvaɩ (-ħеñvai Eust.); fut. -ǹσoµαɩ, perf. med. čokvλµai.
With metathesis úλλɛσα if ‘σкúÀÀɛσðαí (SIG 56, 3; Argos Va; cf. Schwyzer: 329).
•COMP Rarely with άлo-, έлɩ-, лpo-, ovv-.
●DER okvλ-µóç [m.] ‘bothering, tribulation' (Hell. and late), 'rending, mangling'
(sch.), -μwdns 'troublesome' (Vett. Val.); -μa (twice with кóдns) [n.] 'hair plucked
out' (AP), cf. čσкvλται (кóμη) is tousled (AP); σкúlσiç. Ovµóç, σáλoç, tapaxń
'spirit, a tossing motion, disorder' (H.), -TIкós 'vexatious' (Vett. Val.). Further
σкúλoç [n.] (pl. σkúla in Nic. Th. 422) ‘stripped hide, skin' (Call., Theoc., AP; cf.
Sépµa to dépw), 'nutshell' (Nic.); as a first member in okůλo-déyŋs [m.] ‘tanner'
(Ar.), -óc ‘id.' (D.). Also σкulos [n.] (Herod. 3, 68 with u after σкūτoç, if not a
misspelling). See ▸кoσкvλµáτια 'cuttings of leather'.
•ETYM Together with its derivations, oкúlλw is especially known from the later
colloquial language and in the metaphorical meaning 'to pester, etc.'. Through
adaptation to σкula, the aor. σkula may have obtained the meaning ‘harass,

=== page 707 ===

1362
okÙ入a
plunder' (but see s.v.). Only pres. σкúλλovτα 'they are stripped of their flesh', of
warriors drowned by fish (A. Pers. 577 [lyr.]), and σкůλo-déηç (Ar.) are attested
early.
Traditionally connected with the group of ►σкáλλw (see s.v. and Pok. 923f.), where v
in σкú\\w was supposed to be a reduced vowel (Schwyzer: 351). This scenario is
impossible, but Vine 1999b: 565ff. regards σкúλλw as an o-grade formation *skol-
ie/o-.
σкula [n.pl.] ‘war-booty, especially weapons', also -ov 'spoil, booty' (S., E., Th. et al.).
<PG?>
•DER *σkvaĭoç in σкvλaíaç. τà σкüλа кai ¼áqupa. oi εè τàç лαvoлλíαç ‘arms and
(other) booty from an enemy; a hoplite's full armor' (H.). Denominative verb σкUλ-
ɛúw 'to rob a slain enemy of his weapons' (Hes. Sc. 468, IA); σкvλεúματa [n.pl.] =
σкʊλa (E., Th.), -ɛía [f.] 'plundering' (LXX), -ɛvoi [f.] (Cilicia), -ɛvµóc [m.] (Eust.)
‘spoils', -evtýc [m.] ‘one who strips a slain enemy' (Aq.), -evtikós ‘plundering' (Tz.).
Also σкvλ-áw, -ñσaɩ (UPZ 6, 15; 21, AP 3, 6[?], Eust.) ‘id.', -nτpiα [f.] 'she who strips a
slain enemy' (Lyc., Eust.).
⚫ETYM The root specifically refers to the stripping of a slain enemy of his weapons
and armor. Probably a derivative of the root of σкúλλw 'to lacerate, tear up, flay',
even though the meaning of σкula may have influenced the aorist okula 'to
plunder'. Other etymologies, such as comparison with σкбτоç 'prepared skin,
leather' and εoкúvɩov ‘skin of the brows' (Pok. 951 ff.), σкúλoç, are less attractive. It
is noteworthy that σulov (see on ovláw) has a similar meaning; does this point to
a Pre-Greek interchange σ-/oк-? Fur.: 393 connects εúλλoμai, but see ▸σкúλλw.
σкúµvoç [m., f.] ‘cub, whelp', especially 'young lion' (epic Ion. poet. Σ 319, also Arist.
etc.). <PG?(S)►
•DER Diminutive σkчµv-íov [n.] (Arist.), -ɛúw [v.] 'to breed' (Philostr.), -ε10 ‘of a
whelp' (Suid.).
•ETYM The word has been connected with oкúλa 'puppy', but the variation of the
suffix remains unclear on this account. The suffix -μv- could point to Pre-Greek
origin.
.
σkupðáλɩoç [m.] · vɛavíσкos 'youth' (H.). Also σкvpеáλia (-ɩãç cod.). εópαστo
TOÙÇ ÈQŃẞous OÜτw qησì кαλɛioa, Alovúσios dè τоùç µεíραкaç 'adolescents are
called this way acc. to Theophrastus, and young boys acc. to Dionysius' (H.).
<PG?(V)►
•VAR σкupеáviα. τoùç έońẞovç oi Aάкwvɛç 'adolescents (Laconian)' (Phot.). With
metathesis oкúpaε· µɛīpa§, éqŋßos 'young girl or boy, adolescent' (H.). Without σ-
(and Lac. -σ- from -0-) in кupσíoν· μεрáкιov 'boy' (H.), Lac. кupσávios ‘id.” (Ar.
Lys.).
⚫ETYM Formation like vno-áλios, etc. Has been compared with Skt. kṛdhú-
‘shortened, mutilated', á-skṛdho-yu- 'not shortened, not needy', which is further
connected with the Lithuanian group of skurstù, skurdau skuřsti ‘to lack, lag in
growth, languish', nu-skuřdęs 'impoverished, neglected'. These words derive from a
root *sker-d. Since σкup- is semantically remote and cannot reflect a zero grade,
OKÚpos
1363
nor an o-grade, the etymology is incorrect. There is no better etymology, but Pre-
Greek origin is probable (note the variant without σ-).
σkúpov [adj.]=ǎσкupov 'St. John's wort' (Nic. Th. 74). <PG>
⚫ETYM See ►ǎσкupov.
σkupoç [m.] ‘stone-chippings, rubble' (Epid. IVª, H., Poll., sch. Pi.). <PG(V)►
•DER σkupwτà ódós 'road paved with σ.' (Pi. P. 5, 93), tà σkvpw[tá] [n.pl.] (Delos
III³), σкuρwwσ Awwσiv 'petrify' (H., from Hp.?), σкvpádηç 'consisting of σ.'
(Eust.).
⚫ETYM Perhaps the island name Σкupoç is related (after the marble quarries?). Fur.:
366 takes the word to be a variant of oкipos and concludes that it is Pre-Greek.
σkǎτáλŋ [f.] 'stick, club, spar, drum' (Archil., Pi.), especially a staff used as a cypher to
read dispatches, more generally also ‘(Spartan) dispatch'. Metaph. a snake (Nic. et
al.), or a fish (Opp.), see Strömberg 1943: 36. <?>
•VAR OKÚτaλov [n.] 'stick, club' (Pi., Hdt., Ar., X.).
•DER Diminutive σкutáλ-tov [n.] (Ar., Hell. and late), -ís [f.] ‘stick' (Hdt., Hell. and
late); further -íaç [m.] a type of long cucumber (Thphr.; Strömberg 1937: 91); -wτóç
'provided with a σ.' (Hero, EM); -toµós [m.] ‘club-law' in Argos (D. S., Plu.); -óoμa
[v.] 'to be clubbed' (EM, H.), hence wots (Troezen).
•ETYM No etymology. Borrowed as Lat. scutula.
okútŋ [f.] · keqaλý 'head'; σкúτα. τòv tpáxη\ov. Σikɛλoí 'neck, throat (Sicilian)' (H.),
see further LSJ s.v. about the attestations. ◄PG>
⚫ETYM Fur.: 359, 362 compares кot(t)íç, (лpo)-kóττα 'head' and assumes Pre-Greek
origin.
σкŨτoç [n.] 'prepared skin, leather, leather thong' (§ 34). ◄IE *(s)kehu-t-➤
•COMP σкUτо-τóµoç [m.] ‘leather-worker, cobbler' (H 221); as a second member in
Swdeкá-σкUTOÇ 'consisting of twelve leather strips' (Pl.).
•DER Diminutive oкut-ápiov [n.], -íç [f.] (Hell. and late); adj. -vos leather' (IA),
-Iкóç 'pertaining to leather(-work) or cobbling' (Pl., Arist. et al.), -wdns 'leather-like'
(Arist.); -ɛúc [m.] 'cobbler' (Att.), -ɛiov, -ɛúw, -ɛía, -ɛvoiç (Hp., Att., etc.).
Denominative σкut-óoµai in έσkutwμέvoç 'coated with leather' (Att. inscr., Plb. et
al.).
⚫ETYM Probably related to the PIE word for 'skin' *keh,u-ti-: with a zero grade, OHG
hūt, Lat. cutis, and ToA kāc; with a full grade, OPr. keuto and Lith. kiáutas 'case,
envelop, shell' (see, e.g., De Vaan 2008 s.v. cutis). The initial *s- of Greek may be
shared by MW eskit, Co. eskit, esgis ‘shoe' < *ped-skuHt-. The root *(s)keh,u- may
also have been preserved in ►έmoкývɩov ‘skin of the brows' and ►кúτoç 'hollow (of
a shield), vessel'.
σкúчoç [m., n.] 'cup, mug' (§ 112, rare in Arist., Hell. inscr., etc.). <PG? (V) ►
●DER Diminutive σкuq-íov [n.], also ‘skull' (Paul. Aeg.), -ídiov (EM?), -áptov (gloss.);
adj. -(e)ɩoç ‘σ.-like' (Stesich.); oкúq-wµa [n.] = σкúqoç (A. Fr. 184 = 308 M.; on the
:

=== page 708 ===

1364
OKWANE 1, -NKOÇ
σμápaydoc
1365
suffix, see Chantraine 1933: 186), -wv, -wvoç [m.], meaning unclear (Gal.). okužiqóv.
σкúчov (H.) is doubtful.
⚫ETYM No etymology. The form σкúчoç is similar to σкápoç, -ŋ (see ►σкáлτw), but
the vocalism is unexplained. Fur.: 176 compares кúẞoç. ... Пápioi dè tò tpúßλiov ‘a
drinking vessel (H.), etc., which could be a Pre-Greek variant.
σkwλŋž 1, -ŋkoç [m.] 'worm, larva' (N 564). <?►
COMP As a first member e.g. in σкwλŋкó-Bрwτоç 'eaten away by worms' (Thphr.,
etc.).
⚫DER Diminutive σкwλnк-1ov [n.] (Arist., etc.); -íτns [m.] (кnpós or στúpač) 'wax or
resin in the shape of a worm' (Dsc.); -wông worm-like' (Arist.); -óoμα [v.] 'to be
eaten away by worms', -wotę [f.] (Thphr.); -táw [v.] 'to suffer from worms' (Orib. et
al.), -íaσıç [f.] (Sm., Thd.); -í\w [v.] 'to have an irregular pulse' (Gal.), cf. µvpµnкíšw
'id.', σкwλnкíčovτal кivovτaι wę oi σкwλŋkɛç 'move or stir like worms' (H.).
•ETYM Usually regarded as derived from a lengthened grade formation to the root of
►OKÉλoç 'thigh, leg' (see there for PIE etymology) and σкoλiós 'bent, twisted'. The
suffix -nk- is also found in σoń, µúðµη, etc.; the thematic formation is perhaps
found in σкóλoσ Speлávoiç, Sià τηу σкомÓτητα 'scythe, after its curvedness' (H.;
if this is not rather related to σкwλoç 'pole'), σкwλúлτоμαι 'to curve, wind' (Nic. Th.
229), and MoGr. (Pontic) σкoбλos 'upper shank' < *σкwλoç or *σкóλoç. In view of
the lengthened grade and the non-IE suffix, this analysis is dubious.
okwÀŋ§ 2. [?] • tò kvλóµevov kỹµa 'wave rolling along' (H., Pl. com., Phryn.). кai áлò
tñs äλw tò divŋßèv kaì ovvax¤èv eis Aikµntóv ‘from the threshing-floor, what is
whirled and put together into winnowing' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM A metaphorical use of σкwλn} 'worm', after the way of movement (Phryn.).
σкwλoç [m.] 'pointed pole' (N 564), 'thorn, prickle' (Ar. et al.). <IE?>
•VAR Also oкwλov, pl. -a ‘id.' (EM, H.), metaph. ‘stumbling block', whence -óoµaɩ
[v.] 'to be offended' (LXX; Aq., Al.).
•COMP σкwλo-ẞatíw [v.] ‘to walk on stilts' (Epich.), -ßáτŋs ‘(kind of) weevil' (H.).
•ETYM The word resembles oкóλow 'pointed pole' and, outside Greek, Alb. hell
'spit, icicle' < *skōl-o-; without *s-, Lith. kuōlas 'pole' < *kōl-o- and OCS kol 'pole' <
*kol-o-. These words probably all derive from PIE *kelH- 'to hew'; see Pok. 545-547
and s.v. ► kλáw. Another possible cognate is oкáλλw 'to split'.
σкблτw [V.] 'to mock, jest, flout, taunt' (h.Cer. 203). <?>
•VAR σkwa (IA), fut. σкáoμai (Ar.), pass. aor. σкwoеñvaι (X.), perf. čσкшμμαi
(Luc.).
COMP Also with άло-, εл-, кατα- etc. As a second member in qλо-σкóддwv, -ovoc
[m.] 'fond of mocking' (Hdt., Plu., Luc. et al.), -ooúvη (Poll.).
•Der okŵµia (έní-, áñó-) [n.] ‘mockery, jest' (Att.), -átov [n.] (Ar.); okŵyıs (èní-)
[f.] ‘id.' (Alex., Plu.); okártŋs [m.] ‘mocker' (Archig. et al.), qiλo-oкáëτηç 'fond of
mocking' (Arist. et al.), -έw (Ath.); fem. σкáëτpia (Procop.); σкшëtɩkóç ‘id.' (Plu.,
Luc., Рoll.); σкшлαλéоç, meaning unclear (Hdn. Gr.); deverbal oкwèɩ-óλŋç [m.]
‘mocker' (Ar. et al.), -ŋλós 'mocking' (Zonar.). On okŵrevja, okwñíaç, names of
dances, see ►σкWY.
⚫ETYM An unexplained formation that must be recent in the prehistory of Greek. The
root may be that of σкéлτoµαι 'to look about' or σкáлτw 'to dig', but neither is
immediately obvious. Perhaps the verb is related to oкóy little horned owl'.
σkup [n.] 'muck, excrement' (Epich., Ar., Stratt.). <IE *sk-ōr ‘excrement'▷
•VAR Or σkúp, cf. Schwyzer: 377 and 384; gen. σкατóç (Poll.).
•COMP As a first member e.g. in okаτо-oáуoç 'muck-eater', with -éw (com.).
•DER Oкwp-ía [f.] ‘metal slags' (Arist. et al.), see further Scheller 1951: 49; diminutive
-ídiov, -táw (late) 'to turn into σкwpía', -aµíç [f.] 'stool' (Ar.), after άuíç 'chamber
pot'.
ETYM From the PIE heteroclitic *sok-r/n-, found in Hitt. šakkar, gen. šaknaš
'excrement', Lat. mūscerda 'mouse droppings', and ON skarn 'muck' (cf. Schindler
BSL 70 (1975): 1-10 and Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. šakkar). The form oк@p reflects a
collective *sk-ōr, while σкatós reflects quasi-PIE *sk-n-to-s. An IE word with similar
formation is reflected by кóлроç 'excrement'.
σkwpvvqiav [f.] = tò okávdaλov <"Exapµoç>, év Mŋoív. év dè Tpιakásiv tà doiwdŋ
Xpéa 'trap, stumbling-block; bony meat (if to be read as τà óστúdŋ кpća)' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Meaning uncertain; etymology unknown.
OKWY, OKWAÓS [m.] ‘little horned owl' (ɛ 66, Epich., Arist., Theoc. et al.); metaph. as a
fish name (Nic. Fr. 18), probably after the colors (Strömberg 1943: 114); name of a
dance (Ael., Poll.), with in the same mg. also σкóлεчμа (A. Fr. 70 = 20 M.) and
σкwñíaç (Poll.); as a name of a dance also connected with σкonɛɩv (Ath., H.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also Kúų.
●COMP As a second member in ȧɛí-σкwy a kind of owl (Arist.), which acc. to Arist.
was not a migratory bird.
•ETYM Formation as лτáž, кλwч, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 2), but unexplained.
Connected with σкóлτш by Ath. and Ael., which is probably folk etymology. The
same holds for the modern comparison with σкéлτоμαι, after the sharp view and the
protruding circle around the eyes. A by-form кów is often mentioned (see
Thompson 1895 S.V. σкwч); also, уŵлaç. кoloɩoúç. Makɛdóvɛç ‘jackdaw (Maced.)'
(H.). Given these variations, the word is probably Pre-Greek. Other words for 'owl'
are ►yλavž, ► otúε and wτos (s.v. ► oÚc).
σµápaydoç [f., m.] ‘emerald' (Hdt., Pl., etc.). <LW Orient.>>
•VAR Also μápaydos (Men., Hell. inscr.), also (µápaydos, -tov (inscr., pap.).
•COMP σμapaуdo-xairns 'with emerald-green hair' (Tim. Pers.).
•Der σµapáyd-ɩov [n.] (M. Ant.), -ítnc [m.] (\í¤oc; Hell., Plin.); -ɩvos ‘of emerald,
emerald-green' (pap. et al.), -ɛoç ‘id.' (Hld.), -wdŋs (sch.); -í\w [v.] ‘to be emerald-
green' (D. S., Dsc.).
⚫ETYM To be compared with Skt. marakata- (also marakta-) [n.] and Akk. barraqtu,
Hebr. bäræqæt ‘id.', whose original source may be Semitic (cf. brq 'gleam, flicker').

=== page 709 ===

1366
σμapayεw
For the Greek reflex oµ-, cf. Σµépdıç beside OP Bardiya, etc. (Schwyzer: 311); we also
have to reckon with influence of ouаpayéw. The form μápaydoç, which is attested
only later, may have been borrowed from Indic. From Greek, in turn, were borrowed
Lat. smaragdus and Pers. and Arab. zumurrud, whence Osman. zümrüd was taken,
which was again borrowed as Ru. izumrúd. Cf. Mayrhofer EW Aia s.v.
ouapayέw [v.] ‘to drone, roar, thunder', of the sea, thunder, etc. (epic II., also Hp. Mul.
2, 154). <PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. -ñσal.
•COMP As a second member (directly referring to the verb) in έpɩ-σµápayos ‘droning
loudly', of Zɛúc (Hes.), later also of Báλaσoa, etc.; also лоλu-, ẞapu-, ȧλ-σμápaуos
etc. (Opp., Nonn.). oµapayíšw [v.] ‘id.' (Hes. Th. 693), σµаpáσσw (EM), µapáσσw
(Erot.).
•DER σuapay-n [f.] 'the droning' (Opp.), -oc [m.] name of a chthonic god (Hom.
Epigr.).
•ETYM The word σμapayéw is an onomatopoeic formation like λaλayέw, natayéw,
σapaуéoдaι, pabayέw, etc., beside which we find λaλayη, лáταуoç, σчáрayos,
pábayos, etc.; σμαрáσow is formed like e.g. лаτáσσш and paláσow. Fur.: 227
considers ooápayoç to be a variant (with interchange / μ), and takes the two words
to be Pre-Greek. In any case, it is unrelated to σpapaуέo̟μa (pace Güntert 1914: 159).
.
σµápdiкov [n.] · στpověíov ‘sparrow; lewd person'; σμapdiкoлwlai oi τoùç
στpovoùç „wλovτεs 'those who sell sparrows' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
⚫ETYM As per Grošelj Živa Ant. 7 (1957): 228, σµáрdiкov is related to ►σμopбov:
σvvovolášɛv ‘to keep company, have intercourse with' (H.). Fur.: 226 instead
compares σлαрáσov = öрvεov εµεè στ 'bird resembling a sparrow' (H.),
¿µqεpès στpovė
which would give us a typically Pre-Greek variation between л and μ. If σuopбov is
indeed related, the interchange a/ o would also point to Pre-Greek origin.
oµapiç, -ido¢ [f.] name of a small fish resembling the μavíc, 'Sparus smaris' (Epich.,
Arist., Opp., Marc. Sid. etc.), see Thompson 1947 S.V. <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 226 convincingly compares σлápos 'a small sea-fish, a kind of bream',
which proves Pre-Greek origin for this word in view of the variation μ/ л. A
connection with ouŋpíčav 'to plane' (Hero) is implausible (pace Strömberg 1943: 87),
because oμapis generally has short å (long ã only Marc. Sid.).
oµáw, oµáoµai [v.] ‘to rub (off), wipe off, med. also ‘to rub oneself with ointment'.
<IE? *smeh,- 'rub’➤
●VAR σµḍ, σµãτai (Hdt. and late); σµñ, σµñτai (Att. com.); σµñv (Luc.), aor. σµñσal,
-σaσa (mostly Ion. Hell. and late), Dor. ptc. oµаσ¤µévα (Call.), perf. med. ptc.
mpo-ešµnoµévos (pap. II³),
•COMP Also (especially act.) with ảлo-, έê-, etc.
•DER σuñua, Dor. (Theoc.) σμãμa [n.] 'cleanser, soap, ointment' (Ar. Fr. 17, Hell. and
late). With a velar enlargement (Schwyzer: 702, Chantraine 1942: 330): A. σµńxw,
-oμa ‘id.' (since (226), aor. σµñžαɩ, -ασðαɩ (Hp., Hell. and late), pass. oµñx¤ñvai
(Ar.), perf. med. ptc. εσµηуµεvo (Dsc.), also with ȧло-, diα- etc. Hence 1. vεó-σμŋк-
σμños
1367
TOÇ 'newly polished' (N 342 et al.). 2. oµñyµa = oµñµα, with -µατóðŋs (Hp., late). 3.
oµñžis (ànó-) [f.] 'the rubbing off, cleaning' (Str., Dsc. et al.). 4. σμýk-tns [m.] ‘one
who rubs off (gloss.); -τpíç [f.] 'kind of fuller's earth' (Hp., com.), -τɩкóç ‘cleaning'
(medic.). B. σuwxw 'to bray, grind' (Ar., Nic.), aor. σµžaɩ, perhaps after owxw,
vwXw.
•ETYM Etymology uncertain. Possibly related to Lat. macula [f.] ‘stain, bloť (from
*smH-tlā; see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). In any event, it is unrelated to Go. bi-, ga-smeitan,
OHG smizan, etc. Although one would first think of reconstructing a root *smeh₂-,
LIV² s.v. *smeh,- follows DELG in taking the a-forms as secondary, and deriving the
verb from *smeh,- instead. The preservation of initial *sm- in some Greek words is
problematic. See also on σμwd and ▸σμµávη.
σµɛpdaλéos [adj.] 'terrible, frightening, fearsome', of appearance, cry and shouting
(epic II.). <?>
•VAR σμεpôvoç 'id.' (Il., h. Hom., A. Pr. 355, Nic.).
•ETYM σμεpdaλéos can be compared with λɛvyaλéos, ápyaλéos etc.; qµεpdvós is
formed like e.g. Sɛvóc. The pair ouεpdaλéos : σµεpdvóc shows an interchange of
suffixes like in loxaλéos : loxvós, etc.; see Benveniste 1935: 45f. A corresponding s-
stem (like in apσaléos : Bápσos) is found in oµépd[v]os. Añµa, pwµn, dúvalus,
öpμŋua ‘will, vigor, power, impulse' and εvσμεpεns. εűpwστos 'robust, strong' (H.),
for the meaning of which cf. Savóτηs, also 'power, force, dexterity'.
The word ouɛpdaλéos is traditionally connected with OHG smerzan, OE smeortan
'to hurt' and OE smeart 'painful', MoE smart 'biting, stinging, sharp, witty, elegant'.
However, the Germanic word may rather be related to Lat. mordeō 'to bite', and
within Greek auέpdw 'to deprive of (thus LIV² s.v. *h₂merd-). In this case, quεpd-
has no etymology, unless we assume that PIE *h₂merd- interchanged with *smerd-
(on the problem, see Beekes 1969: 84). Cf. also σµopdoûv.
σμépdoc [?] ixúoç εldoç kind of fish' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Etymology unknown.
σuñvos [n.] 'beehive, skep' (Hes. Th. 594, IG 12, 326: 15, Pl. Resp. 552c, Arist.), 'swarm of
bees (wasps), swarm in general' (A. Pers. 128 [lyr.], S. Fr. 897, com., Pl., Arist., etc.),
<PG?>
•VAR Dor. (Theoc.) σµāvos; plur. σµñvα (Orac. apud Plu. 2, 96b), σµñvai (leg. -n?).
τv μεσσwv oi kypodóxoɩ, étoi ai Oñкat 'the wax containers of bees, the cells' (H.);
improbable conjecture by Feyel Rev. arch. (1946): 5ff. to read Σµñvaι for σɛµvaí in h.
Merc. 552.
●COMP σηv-oupyós [m.] 'beekeeper' (Ael., Poll.), quó-gyvos (µédiosa) loving
swarms, appearing in swarms' (Nonn.).
●DER Diminutive σµŋv-íov [n.] ‘beehive' (Dsc.), = лpóлodi ‘bee-glue' (H.); -wv,
-wvos [m.] 'station (stand) of beehives' (Olymos Iª; Čµ-), -twv ‘id.' (Apollon. Mir.),
-ŋSóv 'in swarms' (Hdn. Epim.).
⚫ETYM The formation can be compared with Оvoç, кtñvos, épvos, téµevos etc.; the
original meaning was probably 'swarm (of bees)' rather than 'beehive'. The
etymology of oµñvoç is unknown. Fur.: 376 compares loμñvat еñкαι, ȧкóλovoL

=== page 710 ===

1368
ouñply E
'cases, followers' (H., see Latte); although this does not yet prove that the word is of
Pre-Greek origin, it is nevertheless is a good possibility (pace DELG, which assumes
IE origin without argumentation).
oµñpɩy →µñpɩyč.
ounpi w [v.] 'to abrade, smooth, polish' (Hero). <?>
●DER Diminutive -µáτov [n.] (Hero Spir.); σµýpoμa [n.] ‘airtight ingrained tube'.
ETYM Although a connection with σuñpуε is formally attractive, the semantics are
not clear (originally *to depilate'?). Alternatively, we might consider the possibility
that it is an extended variant of σuáάw, perhaps after otŋpičw.
ouńpivdoc →linpýofial.
oµńw →oμáw.
allkpockpós.
oµīλaž [f., m.] ‘Taxus baccata, common yew tree', also the name of an ivy-like weed
and a leguminous plant (Att., Hell.), in Arcadia the name of an oak, ‘Quercus ilex'
(Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•VAR OAtt. µîλaž, -αкoç; also µïλos (Cratin., Thphr.), σλos (Call., Nic., Dsc.) [m.]
'taxus'.
DIAL Myc. mi-ra₂ has been intepreted as /(s) milia/, denoting the material a table is
made of.
●DER σµiλák-ivos (Poll.), -ɛtos (Theognost.) 'made of yew'.
•ETYM For the relationship between (σ)µïλaž and (σ)µîλos, one may compare olσač :
oloos or opóẞač: öpoẞoç. Because of the OAtt. variants uiλaε and µiλoç, oµíλač
cannot be related to σuíλŋ: the variants prove Pre-Greek origin for this word (Fur.:
390).
oμiλŋ [f.] 'knife, wood-carving knife, scalpel, chisel', instrument for artisans,
physicians, sculptors, etc. (IA). <?, PG?►
•VAR -ǎ (AP), -n (Hdn. Gr.).
•COMP As a first element in ouλi-yλúqoi (téxvai) 'working with chisels, sculptural'
(Epigr. Galatia), which does not contain a Caland t, see DELG s.v. against Schwyzer:
448.
⚫DER 1. Diminutive ouλ-íov [n.] with -wτóc, -áptov [n.] (late medic.); 2. -tvoç 'acting
as a knife' (late medic.); 3. áлo-, diα-σµλɛúw [v.] 'to smooth with a chisel, plane'
(late) with quiλ-εvμa [n.] 'chipping' (Ar.), -ɛvτós (AP), -evois, -ɛia [f.] (Hdn. Epim.).
•ETYM Doubtful analysis of quiλŋ as an instrument noun in -λŋ (like µýλŋ, xnλý,
τpwуλη, etc.) in Chantraine 1933: 240. On the assumption that the long i of quiλn
was introduced secondarily on the model of the nouns in -iŋ, -io-, the word has
been connected with the Germanic word for 'carpenter, smith', ON smið, OE smip
(> MoE smith), OHG smid, from PGm. *smiþu-, *smiðu- < IE *smi-tu. However, this
etymology is shaky; cf. the initial reflex of *sm-. Alternatively, Pre-Greek origin
might be considered. Cf. ►σµvúŋ, ► σµívðos, and ► µĩкpóç.
quilos →oµiλaš.
allopdoiv
oµɩvdvpídia [n.pl.] a kind of women's shoes (Poll. 7, 89). <GR>
•ETYM Named after Σuvdupídns of Sybaris; cf. Hdt. 6, 127.
quívoc [m.] 'mouse' (A. Fr. 227 = 380 M., Lyc., Str., AP); σдívеα. ǹ кατокídios
'domestic mouse' (H.). <PG(S)►
1369
•DER Σuve-εÚç (A 39, Str.), -tos (Ael.) [m.], epithet of Apollo (honored in the Troad
and on the islands as a protector against destructive field-mice); Σuívoc as a month
name on Rhodes; và Σµívēta name of a festival (Troad, Lindos).
•ETYM A Mysian word, according to sch. A 39, but in any case Pre-Greek or
Anatolian (cf. Chantraine 1933: 371 and Schwyzer: 510). It may be somehow
connected with Etr. ismindians, an epithet of Mars (Kretschmer Glotta 20 (1932): 221,
Kretschmer Glotta 30 (1943): 133). The form σuíç. Üç (H.) was probably invented on
the basis of actually attested ouбç (a cross with μбc), to follow the alphabetical order.
ouɩvúŋ [f.] 'two-pronged mattock' (Att. inscr., com., Pl.). <?, PG?>
•VAR Gen. (o-stem) σvoto (Nic. Th. 386); acc.pl. σvúdas (Ar. Fr. 402b; probably
for σuvúaç).
⚫DER σμivúdiov (Poll. 7, 148 ex Ar.).
•ETYM An instrument name, comparable in its formation to σrún, dotpún, óypúŋ,
etc., σµĭvúŋ is generally considered to be a verbal abstract in -vu(a) from a root
*smei- 'cut', which was thought to be attested in ouiλn. However, the etymology of
quíλn is uncertain, and it is perhaps Pre-Greek. Accordingly, we should be careful in
deriving quĭvún from such a root, and consider Pre-Greek origin for this word as
well.
oμotós [adj.] meaning doubtful; see below (Hdn. Gr., H., Theognost.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR σμoios (LSJ; -óc DELG). Also σμvóc, μoóc (H.) = xaλɛлóç, poßɛpós, σtuyvóc,
σкUерwлóç 'difficult, fearful, hated, sad- or angry-looking'.
•DER PN Σuoios (Ar. Ec. 846)
•ETYM The form σµotós is probably related to aµoos, which adds yet another
variant for the initial: σμ-/ ǎμ-/ -. This variation points to Pre-Greek origin. The
word μotoç is unrelated.
arokop
atopdoiv.
σμoρdovv [v.] σuvovσάav 'to keep company, have intercourse with'; σuópdwvεç
(cod. -ovεúç)· úлoкоρστɩкŵç åлò τwν μорíwν, wç лóσешvεç 'hypocoristic for
"members", as in "having a large penis" (H.). <?, PG?>
⚫ETYM Bechtel Herm. 55 (1920): 99f. also adduced oμoкodov. τò σµíεσai àç
yuvaiкaç 'to assume the posture of a woman' and σμoкópdovç. toùs tàs òópûç
έykoíλovç ëxovtaç 'who have sunken or concave eyebrows' (H.).
Both glosses derive from a noun *σµópdos of unknown meaning, identified by
Specht KZ 62 (1935): 215 with Lith. smárdas, Ru. smórod, etc. 'bad smell, stench',
from IE *smordo-, Lith. smirděti 'to stink' with zero grade. von Blumenthal 1930: 45
compared ouεpdaλéoç, assuming IE *smerd- 'rub'.

=== page 711 ===

1370
μyεpó
σoẞéw
1371
However, cf. oμápбкov, which could point to a Pre-Greek word if we understand
it as 'lewd person'.
σµvyɛpós [adj.] 'painful, toilsome, miserable' vel sim. (A. R.; perhaps S. Ph. 166 for
σTUYɛpóc). ◄PG?(V) ►
⚫DER εл-σμúуεpoç, adv. -ws 'id.' (Od., Hes. Sc. 264, A. R.), perhaps with έл- after
èti-novoc.
•ETYM It is meaningless to assume an expressive contamination, e.g. from μoyεpós
and otvyɛpóç. Attempt at a morphological explanation by Strömberg 1946: 90.
Fur.: 363 compares μóуos and σчoyερóv· σкλŋpóν, εлíßovλov, μoxηpóv (H.), as
well as ofuuyepóv. èninovov, oiktpóv, Loxinpóv, rovnpóv, ènißoudov,àviapóv,
Xaλɛлóv (H.). This would show that the word is Pre-Greek.
quún [f.] name of a fish (Alex. Trall., Gp.). <?>
•ETYM Can hardly be separated from ouúλλa. oαúpа τpáxoυpoc, a fish' (H.); see
Strömberg 1943: 121. No etymology.
.
ouvlixn [f.] · tov (vyoũ tò tpñµa èv ✪ ó iotoßoeùs kaе½µоσται 'the hole in the yoke
in which the carriage pole is fixed' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
qúpic, -idos, -ews [f.] ‘emery-powder for abrading and polishing' (Dsc., late medic.).
<PG(V)►
VAR Also ouípic.
•DER σupíτηs λíos [m.] (LXX), σµɩpiɛĩa [n.pl.] (spelled (uppeα) ‘emery-powder'
(Imbros IIa).
•ETYM Compared with µúpov and with a Germano-Celtic word for 'grease, fat' in
OHG smero, OIr. smi(u)r, etc.; this is semantically not very convincing, as the Greek
word denotes a highly specific substance. Moreover, the frequent variant with
remains hard to understand (it is not due to vowel assimilation). Acc. to von
Blumenthal 1930: 45, it belongs to σµáw, σµñν, and Frisk asks if ouúpis could be due
to the influence of μúpov. Fur.: 366 takes the variation u/t as proof of Pre-Greek
origin, which is the most likely option.
σμúpvη [f.] 'myrrh' (Hdt., Arist.). <GR>
•VAR σμúpvǎ (Hp., Arist., Thphr., etc.; cf. Solmsen 1909: 254), also чμúpva (Hyp.,
inscr., pap.), gen. σμúpvηs (S., E. et al.).
●COMP Šµvpvó-µελav (-avov, -ávɩov), -avos [n.] 'mixture of myrrh and ink' (PMag.),
ȧλvкó-σµvpva [f.] ‘kind of myrrh' (Hippiatr.).
●DER σµúpvivos (LXX, pap.), -aïos (AP) ‘made of myrrh²; -í\w [v.] ‘to treat or season
with myrrh, to resemble myrrh' (Ev. Marc., Dsc.) with -ɩɩ [f.] (Aët.), -tášw (?, Alex.
Trall.); -ov (Nic.), -tov (Dsc., Gal.) [n.] plant name (after the scent of the seeds acc.
to Strömberg 1940: 62).
⚫ETYM Probably a back-formation from Σupvaía (μúppa) "the Smyrnaean"; cf.
Heubeck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 1 (1949): 272f. with criticism of the interpretation
that œµúpva is a by-form of μúppa.
aflipos fiÚpaiva.
σµбxw [v.] 'to cause to carbonize, be slowly consumed in a fire, smolder away', med.
'to carbonize, smolder'; on the use in Homer, see Graz 1965: 250ff. <IE? *smeug(h)_
'Smoke'>
•VAR Aor. σuuat (epic since Il., late prose), pass. σдxеñvat (Theoc.), quite
uncertain άлoσμvyévtes (Luc. D Mort. 6, 3; see Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 31ff.),
perf. katɛoµvyµévn (Hld.).
•COMP Also with кατα-, úлo- et al.
⚫ETYM Formation like τpúxw, wúxw; the late form ȧлoσμууévτεç, if it belongs here at
all (see above), is an analogical formation (cf. Schwyzer: 760).
Beside the primary verb quúxw, we find a noun in Arm. mux, gen. mxoy 'smoke'. In
Celtic, OIr. múch, MW mwg ‘'fire' may go back to IE *muk-. In Germanic, there is a
primary verb with a diphthong and a root-final IE voiced stop, e.g. OE smēocan 'to
smoke, fumigate' < IE *smeug-, beside the zero grade smoca [m.] 'smoke' < IE *smug-
on-, smocian 'to smoke'. An Indo-European reconstruction for all these forms is
difficult, as a voiceless aspirate *k (PIE *(s)mūko-; Meillet MSL 8 (1894): 294,
followed by Frisk) is not reconstructed anymore for PIE.
Lith. smáugti, 1sg. smáugiu ‘to strangle, string together, plague' should probably be
explained differently (Fraenkel 1955 s.v.), while for Ru. smúglyj ‘dark, brown' etc.,
other interpretations are possible (Vasmer 1953 s.v.).
σµwdɩ [f.] ‘bloodshot bruise, bloody weal' (B 267, Y 716, Opp. H. 2, 428). ◄PG(V)►
●var Plur. -tyyɛç. Also µwdič. pléy, qλuktíç ‘blood vessel, boil' (H.).
●DER oµwdikà cápµaka (Gal.).
•ETYM The derivation from a noun *σμwd(o)-, and further connection with σµñv,
σµáчw ‘to rub', still maintained by Frisk, is formally and semantically unconvincing.
It is rather a Pre-Greek word; note the suffix -tyy- and initial σ-/ zero (Fur.: 279f.).
oµwvŋ [f.] ‘gust of wind (Hdn. Gr., H. [cod. σµwoń, alphabetically misplaced], EM).
<?>
⚫ETYM Connection with σuwxw (see σμáw) is semanticaly improbable.
quwxw →oμáw.
σoßέw [v.] ‘to scare away, chase away', intr. 'to walk in a pompous way, strut' (Att.
Hell. and late), pass. ‘to be agitated' (late). <?>
•VAR Aor. σoßñσaɩ, fut. σoßñow, perf. σɛσóßηкα, pass. σɛσóßηµai.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially άлo-.
•DER_σóß-ŋois [f.] 'violent movement' (Plu.), -ŋpov [n.] ‘fly whisk' (Ph. v.l.),
ȧлoσóß-ημα, -ŋolę, -ntýc, -ntýpios, -ηTIкóç (sch. et al.). Backformation σóßŋ [f.]
'horse's or bull's tail' (Hippiatr., sch., Suid.), more usual дv(1) 0-σóẞn 'fly whisk'
(Delos since IIIª, Men. et al.).
ooẞapós blowing along violently' (of the wind etc.), usually 'haughty, proud' (Att.),
probably from σoßéw after the numerous adj. in -após, with fem. σoßáç, -ádos
'insolent, capricious' (Eup., Ph.), 'kind of dance' (Ath.); also Σóßot = Σátvpoi (Ulp.).
•ETYM An old causative or iterative-intensive from the root of σέßoμai.

=== page 712 ===

1372
óykos, oóyxog
1373
σóуkoç, σóyxos [m.] 'sow thistle, Sonchus aspera' (Antiph., Thphr., etc.). <PG>
⚫DER σoyкwdns like a σ.' (Thphr.), σoуxíτηs [m.] 'hawkweed, iɛpáкiov tò µέya' (Ps.-
Dsc.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Considering the variation, clearly a Pre-Greek word. Fur.: 134f.
compares Basque tšokoŕo 'silver thistle'.
σoέw →σεúw.
σÓккOÇ [m.] lasso' (in Malalas, about the Huns). <?>
⚫DER OOKKEÚW [v.] 'to catch by the lasso'.
•ETYM Unknown.
σólov [n.] 'sandal' (pap IIP); also 'seat'. <LW Lat. >>
⚫ETYM From Lat. solea, solium.
σolaikišw [v.] ‘to speak (write, think) with flaws, unskillfully' (Hdt., D., Arist., etc.),
'to behave in an uneducated, awkward manner' (Zeno, Plu. et al.). <GR➤
⚫DER σoλolk-loμós [m.] 'flawed manner of expression' (Arist., Phld.), -1στns [m.] title
of a dialog by Luc.; back-formation σóλoкoç ‘speaking with flaws' (Anacr., Hippon.,
et al.), 'behaving in an uneducated, awkward manner' (Hp., X., etc.).
•ETYM Formed like åττiкíšw, etc. after the Cilician town Σólot, whose inhabitants
spoke a bad form of Greek (Str. 14, 2, 28; D. L. 1, 51). It has also been supposed that
Σóλoкoç was derived from Σóλot, as in MoooÚVOLкOL. Borrowed as Lat. soloecismus,
soloecus, -ista.
σolatúros µvdpoktúroç [sic] kaì xaλkós tis év Kúлpu̟ 'forging red-hot iron, copper
(Cypr.)' (H.). <GR➤
•DER σoλovл[íŋ] Call. fr. 85, 11, cf. Pfeiffer ad loc.
ETYM The gloss explains that the first element is the loc. of σóλos, or of Soloi in
Cyprus, where bronze was worked.
σólos [m.] iron mass, used as a discus' (Y 823, 839, 844; Hell. and late epic). <?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained foreign word (cf. Schwyzer: 62). The word has been compared
with Hitt. šuliia- 'lead'; see Gusmani 1969: 509.
σoµôós [adj.] ‘spongy, loose, porous', also metaphorically of sounds (Hp., Alex.,
Arist., etc.). <?>
COMP Also Ev-, úлó-, Xαuvó-.
●der σoµq-wdŋs ‘id.' (Thphr. et al.), -ótŋs [f.] 'porosity' (Arist.), -óoµaι [v.] 'to
become spongy' (Aët.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally connected with the Germanic word for 'fungus' in OHG swamp,
-bes, swam, -mes, OSw. svamper, ON svo̟ppr, Go. swamm [acc.], OE swamm [m.].
However, the development of initial *su- to σ- cannot be assumed for Greek, in spite
of ►σέλaç. DELG thinks that a 'Wanderwort' is improbable. See ▸σлóyyos.
oopéλAŋ [f.] okŵµµá ti èrixwpiášov ɛiç toùç yέpovtaç, áñò tñç σopoû ‘customary jest
about the elderly, called after the urn' (H. = Ar. Fr. 198). ◄GR►
i
•ETYM From σopóç, like σopo-daíµwv with similar meaning (Com. Adesp. 1151), but
with an unclear ending -\\- (a diminutive? Cf. Schwyzer: 485 and Chantraine 1933:
252).
σópviža [?] ɛử\wμov 'rocket, Eruca sativa' (H.). ◄PG➤
⚫ETYM Pre-Greek (Fur.: 360), like póμča.
σopóa [f.] raλioúpov ɛldos ‘kind of Christ's thorn, Paliurus australis' (H.). ◄PG?►
⚫ETYM Fur.: 230 reads the second o as F, and compares Lat. sorbus 'sorb-apple'.
Probably a Pre-Greek word.
σopóç [f.] 'burial urn, coffin' (since Y 91), also degrading for an old woman (com.).
<IE *tuer H- 'fence (in)', *tuorH-0-➤
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 34².
●COMP σорo-луós [m.] 'coffin maker' (Ar., AP), εúpú-σopos 'having a broad coffin'
(AP).
•DER σóp-(E) 10v (-ɛov) [n.] ‘id.' (inscr.), -ídiov [n.] (late), -wïov [n.] 'mummifying
linen' (pap. IIIª), perhaps after μvóïov, Eg. name of a container?
•ETYM Probably from *tuóro-, an old agent noun belonging to a verbal root 'to seize,
enclose, etc.' in Lith. tvérti, 1sg. tveriù 'to enclose, fence in, grasp', also 'to form,
build'. The word σópos is formally identical with Ru. tvor 'creature, form, shape' (to
tvorítь to create, do, build'); cf. also Lith. aptvaras 'fence' (to ap-tvérti). See ►σɛɩpá.
σós [pron.] ‘tuus', possessive pronoun 2sg. •VAR Dor. etc. tɛóç. →σú.
σ00σov 1 [n.] 'lily, lotus (ornament)' (Ath. 12, 513f.; uncertain Arist. Mir. 838a 23; see
Dugas BCH 34 (1910): 116ff.). <LW Orient.>
•DER σOÚσIVOS 'made of σ., like σ.' (Hp., Thphr., Dsc. et al.).
⚫ETYM An Oriental loanword; cf. Hebr. šūšan lily, lotus', from Eg. sśśn > śśn‘id.'; see
Masson 1967: 58f.
σouσov 2 [n.] 'cable (of a ship)'. <?>
•VAR As a v.l. beside ovσov ( 390 [for őлλov] and Antim. Fr. 57, 2 W. = Coll. Alex.
p. 250); ovσov [n.] ‘id.' (Lyc., Alex. Aet., H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. It is assumed that the initial variation σ-/ zero goes back to a
scriptio continua in q 390.
σoúxivov [n.] ‘amber' (Aet.). <LW Lat.➤
•DER σOÚKIVOS (made of) amber' (Artem.).
⚫ETYM The words go back to Lat. sucinum.
σoqós [adj.] ‘clever, skillful, able, shrewd, wise' (Hes. Fr. 193). <PG?▷
●COMP As a first member e.g. in Σoчo-кλñç; very often as a second member, e.g.
qiλó-ooqos 'friend of a σopóv, who loves τò σoчóv, τǹу σoqiav, eager for
knowledge, friend of the sciences, philosopher' (Heracleit., Att.) with qiλo0o0q-ía [f.]
'(scientific) study, education, philosophy' (Att.), -éw [v.] 'to be eager for knowledge,
study' (IA); ¿ní-σooqos name of an annually changing official (Thera), on which see
► vεqεɩ.

=== page 713 ===

1374
onáiE, onádiov, onádwv, oradov, onátog, etc.
●DER σoq-ía, Ion. -ín [f.] 'skillfulness, virtuosity, knowledge, cleverness, shrewdness,
wisdom' (since O 412). Denominative verbs: 1. σopíšoμa 'to practice a form of art,
think up, concoct' (since Hes. Op. 649), also with prefix, especially кατα-; act. -í(w
‘to instruct' (LXX, christ. lit.), whence σóq-ioµa [n.] ‘clever trick, piece of cunning'
(Pi., IA), whencе -чσμάτov, -чσawns, -μatiкóç; -ɩσiç [f.] (sch.); -στns [m.]
‘artist, learned man, teacher, sophist' (Pi., IA), with -íστpiα, -1σTIKÓS, -LσTÝLOV,
-IOTEÚW, -IOTEÍα. 2. σopów = σoqiw (LXX).
●ETYM Unexplained. If ►Σíovqoç, ►σáqa, and ▶yéqɛɩ are related, this would point
to a substrate word.
orádiž, orádiov, σñádwv, σñadóv, σлáτoç, etc. →σлáw.
σлáðŋ [f.] designation of several flat and oblong oblects, e.g. ‘tool of a weaver for
striking home the threads of the woof, blade (of a sword), blade of an oar, spatula,
flat rib (shoulder blade?), spathe, especially of the palm, stalk of the palm leaf (Alc.,
IA). <IE? *sph₂-d" (h,)- 'blade, spade'
2
1.
> ⚫DER 1. σлαе-íç, -ídos [f.] 'spatula, garment of closely-woven cloth' (com., inscr.).
2. -íaç kɩɛíç ‘flat rib' (Opp.). 3. -íτŋs [m.] ‘palm wine' (Alex. Trall.). 4. -ɩva [pl.]
‘garments' (Aq.), -ívŋs [m.] ‘young deer', after the shape of the horns (H., Eust.,
sch.), cf. ¿λaqivns etc. 5. -ápios [m.] ‘guard (equipped with a σ.)' (Lyd., Cappadoc.
inscr.), -apía [f.] 'fighting contest' (EM), -αpiкóv [n.] 'thin upper garment' (Sm.). 6.
σлα-áw to strike with a σ., seal up, hatch, dissipate, waste' (Ar., D., Hell. and late),
rarely with dɩa-, έv-, кατα-, whence -ŋua, -ŋois, -ŋtós. 7. -íšw ‘to stir up with a
spatula' (Opp.), also with лεpi- etc., whencе σлаеíσµaτа· σлadovíσµata (H.).
⚫ETYM Related to PGm. *spað-an, -ōn- ‘spade': OS spado [m.], OE spade, spadu [f.],
MoHG Spaten [m.], and perhaps also Skt. sphyá- [m.] 'shoulder-blade', Khot. phvai
'spade, shovel'. The IE root must have been *sph₂-, with a suffix *-d½(h,)- in Greek
and Germanic. The root is perhaps also found in σлáw. Borrowed as Lat. spada,
spatha, spatula.
%
σлaípw [v.] ‘to sprawl, flounder' of living creatures, etc. (rare examples in Arist., A. R.,
Plb., D. H., AP). <IE *TsperH-‘kick with the heel'>
•VAR Only present.
•DER σлαрíw (Eust.).
⚫ETYM Formal cognates are Lith. spiriù, spirti 'to push with the foot, kick backwards,
etc.', Skt. sphuráti 'to push with the foot, jump up', with nasal Lat. spernō 'to reject,
spurn', OHG spurnan 'to kick out with the foot or the heel', and probably also Arm.
sparnam 'to threaten', Hitt. išparra-³ / išparr- ‘to trample'; see LIV² s.v. *spherH-.
Because of the late and rare ocurrence of σлaíрw, Güntert 1914: 146 explains it as a
contamination of earlier and commoner άσлαíрw with σкaípw. Cf. ►σqupóv and
►σлεiрw, as well as ►σлuρеí‹w. Lubotsky 2006 discusses the irregular
correspondences in the anlaut of the IE verbs, and reconstructs *TsperH- 'to kick
with the heel'; this may be an original compound of *pd- 'foot' and *per(H)- 'to beat,
kick'.
σлálaеpov [n.] (Poll.) = σкáλεvеpov 'oven rake' (Poll.). ◄PG(V)►
}
Onapáoow
•VAR σлáλavеpov (Phot., also H. [cod. σлαúλαеpov alphabetically misplaced]).
DIAL Myc. qa-ra-to-ro /skwalat ron/.
⚫DER σлαλúσσεTαι· σларáσσεται, Tɩváσσετα 'is torn, is shaken' (H.).
ETYM Perhaps from σлáλαε; see ▸σкáλλw.
1375
onáλaž, -akoç [f., m.] 'mole' (Arist. etc.), also as a plant name 'meadow saffron,
Colchicum parnassicum' (Thphr.). <PG(V)►
●VAR σqάλaž ‘id.' (Paus. 7, 24, 11) for άoqάλað (Babr. etc.), folketymologically after
σqά\\w because of the undermining activity of the mole?
•DER σлαλaкíα. vóσоç ǹ лεрì τоúç óóðààµúç, лкршσç 'disease of the eyes,
blindness' (H.); also σлαλaкóç as a color term (pap.). See ► άσлáλaž.
•ETYM The variation betrays a Pre-Greek word; see Fur.: 159.
σлáviç, -ɛws [f.] 'rarity, scarcity' (IA). <PG(V)►
•VAR Ion. dat. -1.
●DER 1. σлávɩoç 'rare, scarce' (IA), but σлavo- in composition, e.g. σñavoσitía [f.]
'lack of grain or provisions' (X., Arist., inscr. etc.), σñaν- (Delos IIIª), σлavoñóуwv,
-wvos 'with scant beard growth' (Ion. Hist., pap.), shortened σлavóç ‘id.', also
‘eunuch' (Ptol. etc., Bуz.); σлаvɩ-áкıç 'infrequent' (Luc. etc.), -óτηs [f.] = oñávis
(Isoc., Ph.), also σлаvíα 'id.' (E. Rh. 245 [lyr.]; from σлáviоç or enlarged from
oñáviç). 2. oñavíšw, -oμα ‘to lack, be sparse, be missing' (Pi., IA), also with лo-;
hence σлavσtós ‘meager, sparse' (S. etc.), -iσtiкós ‘id.' (Vett. Val.); σлaví(w also
factitive 'to exhaust, spend, dispense' (LXX, pap., Ph. Byz.); back-formation to the
verb is σлavóv. τíuov, roλλoû äžióv έστv 'valued, costly' (H.).
⚫ETYM Etymology disputed. Frisk suggests a derivative in -v- to σлáш 'to draw'. Fur.:
378, however, may be right in connecting ǹлavɑ, -vei· ànopei, onavíčɛɩ, àµŋxavɛi ‘is
without resource' (H.); he assumes a prothetic σ- and a prothetic a-, which was
lengthened to -. If so, the word is Pre-Greek.
σлavós [adj.] ‘grey' (pap.) ◄PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 339 etc. connects σñáviç.
oñañɩpwtaç [m.] probably name of a priest (Pamphylia, Schwyzer: 686, 17 and 24,
Sillyon); cf. Bechtel 1921, 2: 823. <?>
ETYM Unknown.
σлɑpáσov [n.] pε pès tập στpovėụ ‘bird resembling a sparrow' (H.).
<PG(V)►
⚫ETYM σлαр-áσιov is a diminutive, like кopáσtov from кópη. The forms with -y- (see
on σлоруíλoç) have a counterpart in a Germanic and Baltic word for 'sparrow':
MHG sperke, OPr. spurglis, also spergle-wanag<is> 'sparrow-hawk' ("sparrow-
vulture"?). If from *σлαрƑ-áσιov, σларáσiоν may be compared with a widespread
Germanic name of the sparrow, e.g. Go. sparwa, OHG sparo, ON spo̟rr < PGm.
*sparua(n)-. Fur.: 226 compares oµápdikov. στpov¤íov (H.).
σлapáσow [v.] 'to rip, tear, shred, attack' (IA). <?>
VAR Att. -άTTW, aor. -ážai, fut. -ážw, -ážoμαι, perf. med. έσлáрαуμαɩ.

=== page 714 ===

1376
•COMP Also with Siα-, кατα-, etc.
Orapyáw
•DER σлápaучa [n.] 'torn or ripped piece, scrap' (trag., Arist. etc.), -ayчóç [m.]
‘ripping, tearing, convulsion' (trag. etc.), -αyµwdηs 'convulsive' (Hp., Plu.), -ağıç [f.]
'convulsion' (medic.), -αкτóv [n.] 'crumbled rock, rubble' (Hero), Sɩασларакτóç
'torn' (E., Ael.).
⚫ETYM Expressive formation in -áσσw like τapáσσw, tɩváσσw, лaτáσow, and others,
without a certain etymology. If -áσow is only an enlargement, the word could be
connected with σлaiрw, etc. Others have regarded the velar as part of the root (-σow
is analogical for -(w, according to Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 224), connecting
σлapáσσw with Lat. spargō, ON spark [n.] 'kick', and Gr. σлapуáw, oqapayέoµai,
inter alia. Yet this would not explain the second α of σларáσσw. Persson 1912(1): 418
has compared Arm. p'ert' 'torn off piece' (-rt' < -rkt-), ON spjo̟rr [f.] ‘strip of cloth' <
PGm. *sperrō. Yet another conjecture was put forward by Thierfelder (apud Frisk):
derivation from σлáш on the model of τapáσσw, ápáσσw, xαpáσσw, etc.
a
σrapyάw [v.] ‘to be bursting, swell (of milk, etc.), be full of desire and lust, desire
intensely' (IA). <IE? *sperg- 'strew, spout'>
•VAR Only pres., -yɛñσa [ptc.f.] (Q. S. 14, 283).
•Der oлápy-nois [f.] 'swelling' (Dsc., Sor.), also -wots [f.] ‘id.' (Dsc.), as if from
σлapуów; cf. MoGг. σларуóvw. Also (back-formation?) σлαруaí ópyai, ópµai
'impulses', with -o- (Аеolic?) σлоруaí· épεðσμоì εiç tò tɛkɛiv ‘impulse to breed'
(H.); hence Σлαрyɛúç [m.] name of a centaur (Nonn.).
•ETYM Several IE forms have a similar form and meaning, and could go back to a
preform *sp(e/o)rg-; yet a definite etymology cannot be established. Compare Lat.
spargō 'to strew (around), sprinkle', Av. sparǝga- [m.] 'barbed hook', frasparǝga- [m.]
'sprout, twig', ON spark [n.] ‘'kick', sparkr ‘vivid, stirring', Lith. spùrgas ‘knar, tassel,
etc.', sprógti ‘to advise, place'. See oчapaуεoμaɩ, as well as ▸σлaрáσσw.
*σлápów [v.] 'to swaddle (a child)' (h. Ap. 121). ◄?►
•VAR Only 3pl. aor. σлáρžav.
•DER σлáруavα [n.pl.], rarely sg. -ov 'nappy' (poet. since h. Merc., Pi.),
σлapуavɩɩη [m.] 'child in swaddling clothes' (h. Merc.), -tov [n.] plant name
'Sparganium ramosum, branched bur-reed' (Dsc., Plin.), -ów 'to swaddle' (Hp., E.,
Arist., etc.), also with v-, кατα-, àло-, whencе -wμa, -wσis (late); also -áw (Pl. Lg.
789e), -iw (Hes. Th. 485: aor.ptc. -íoaσa).
⚫ETYM Primary verb *spr-g- from the root *sper- of σлáрτov, σлεчрα, with an
enlargement -y- of unknown origin; perhaps by contamination with a verb of similar
meaning, e.g. ε"pyw (Frisk)?
σлapvóc [adj.] ‘sparsely sown, scarce' (A., Pl. Com., Call.). <GR
•COMP σлαрvoлóλios. óðɩyoróλios ‘with a sprinkling of grey hairs' (H.) (cf. σñapto-
лóλɩoç, sеe ▶σлɛipw).
•ETYM Poetic and rare verbal adj. from ►σлεipw; antonyms äuкvóç, ovxvós.
σñápoç [m.] ‘lesser sea bream, Sargus annularis' (Epich., Matro, Arist.). ◄PG(V)►
!
1377
•ETYM Origin unknown. Has been connected with Lat. sparus, -um ‘short spear',
OHG sper 'spear', and σлaipw. Not very convincing. Fur.: 226 compares σµapiç ‘a
small worthless seafish' (and rejects Lat. sparus). Borrowed as Lat. sparus, -ulus.
oñáptov [n.] ‘rope, cable, cord, string', also 'plumb line' (B 135); σлáptos [m., f.] (rare
σлάрτη, -τоν) also name of a shrub used for snares 'Spartium junceum, kind of
broom' (Pl., X., etc.). <?>
•Var oñáptŋ [f.] (Ar. Av. 815 [wordplay with the TN Σлápτη], unclear Cratin. 110),
σлápτoç [f.] (Hero).
•COMP σлaptódɛtoç 'bound with σ.' (Оpp.), λɩvóσлαрtov [n.] plant name =
(Thphr.).
⚫DER Diminutivе σларτíov [n.], also as a plant name (Att., Hell.), -ivos 'made of σ.'
(Cratin., Poll.), -ívn [f.] 'rope, cable' (Ael.).
•ETYM Appears to be a verbal noun in -to- with a zero grade root. Although a basic
verb derived from *sper- / *spr- is not attested in Greek, it has been supposed on
account of the y-enlargement in *σлáруw, σлáρžα 'to envelop', and also of σлεipα,
σлuрíç. Comparison with Arm. p'arem, p'arim 'to enclose, embrace' poses phonetic
difficulties (p' cannot come from PIE *sp-). Borrowed as Lat. spartum ‘Spanish
broom'.
σлτáуy, -ov [m.] 'kind of sea urchin' (Sophr. 102, Ar. Fr. 409, Arist.). <PG(V)►
•VAR лátαɣyaç [acc.pl.] ‘id.' (Poll.). Note also paτáyyns ‘pangolin' (Ael.) (Fur.: 1115,
164, 281; not in LSJ).
•DER σлαταɣɣíɛɩv. tapάσσɛv ‘to agitate' (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Hardly related to σлáw 'to suck' (cf. on σлаτáλη). The variation
shows that the word is Pre-Greek.
σлăτáλŋ [f.] ‘lavish, lascivious way of life, debauchery, luxury', also of luxurious
objects, 'adornment, bracelet, anklet' (LXX, Hell. inscr., AP, etc.). <PG(V)►
•DER Diminutive Lat. spatalium [n.] 'bracelet' (Juba apud Plin., inscr.).
Denominative verb σлаταλáш (кαTα-) 'to live lavishly, lasciviously' (Plb., LXX, NT
etc.), aor. -ñσaɩ; thence -ŋua [n.] (AP). Backformation σлατalós (-aλoc) ‘lavish,
lascivious' (AP etc.).
•ETYM If originally an abstract, σлɑτáλŋ may semantically be compared with
kpaináλn, daitaλɛúç; further connections are uncertain. Perhaps from σлáw 'to
draw in, suck', of wine, etc.; e.g. ‰σлaσεv äµvotiv έλkúσas (E. Cyc. 417); cf. also
oлáðɛ nívɛɩv (Arist.). On the --, cf. oñatíšɛi. ….. ελкɛ (H.). To be rejected is the
explanation by Neumann 1961: 88f., viz. that σлαταλóç is a loanword from Hitt.
*išpatalla- 'who gladly and often eats to the full'. Fur: 154, 179 convincingly connects
Báτaλoç lascivious man', so the word is Pre-Greek.
σлατiλŋ [f.] 1. 'thin excrement' (Hp., Ar. Pax 48, D.C.); σлατíλovpo oi τηv oúpàv εiç
τηу σлаτíληy EкTIОÉVTES 'secreting urine into ordure' (H.); unclear
(Sophr.) (PSI 11, 1214 d 4). 2. 'leather waste' (sch. Ar. 1.c.). <PG?>
к
•VAR Аlso лατíλŋ (An. Ox.).

=== page 715 ===

1378
•DER Also лaστílŋ = ǹ televtaía ýµépa tov ¿vavτou 'the last day of the year' (Hdn.
Gr. 1, 322, 19).
⚫ETYM In the second meaning, it belongs to σлάτоç. The meaning 'thin excrement'
may also be combined with ‘leather waste' as a euphemistic metaphor (to which the
phonetic similarity with Tiλoç, Tλáw may have contributed). However, since Meillet
MSL 13 (1905-1906): 291f., the word has usually been connected with oiσnwtŋ.
σлáτоç [n.] 'hide, leather' (Hdn Gr. 1, 322). <?>
•ETYM The word is supposed to be Boeotian. No etymology. See σлáw.
onáw, oráoµai [v.] ‘to draw', e.g. a sword, ‘to pull out, tear, drag, suck in, slurp down'
(S., Ar. etc.) <IE *(s)peh₂- ‘draw'>
•VAR Аor. σлáσαl, σлáσ(σ)ασðaɩ, pass. σлασðñvαι (II.), fut. σлáσw, -oμαι, perf. med.
зσлασμαι (IA), act. εσлαкα (Аг., Arist. etc.).
•COMP Very often with prefix in different shades of meaning, e.g. άvα-, áлo-, diα-,
εлɩ-, кατα-, лεpi-.
●DER A. From the unenlarged root: 1. σлáðɩç, mostly to prefixed verbs, e.g.
áváσлασç (to àνα-σлáσαι, -σлäv) 'pulling in', etc. (Hp., Arist., etc.). 2. σлаσμós
(εлσлασμó, etc.) [m.] 'wincing, spasm, violent movement' (IA), whence
oraoµwdnç, kataσлaσuкóç. 3. oлáðµА (áлóσлασµа, etc.) [n.] 'spasm, sprain, shred,
scrap' (IA); 4. -σñaσtos in έríoraσtoç ‘brought upon oneself, incurred (Od. etc.);
oлaσTIKÓS (kata-, ëɛpɩ-) ‘pulling in, slurping in' (Arist.). 5. -σлaστép, -ñpos [m.] in
έлioлaστýp (Hdt., AP; -σлɑτéð inscr.), ñoñσлãστǹp (Epid. IV-IIIª) “attractor”,
'thong which draws the door, bird string, net'; εлiσлaστpov [n.] ‘id.' (LXX, D. S.
etc.).
i
B. With S-enlargement: 1. лαрασлáç, -ádoç [f.] 'shoot torn off and planted' (Thphr.),
άлo- 'twig torn off (AP, Nonn.). 2. σлáðič, -iкoç [m.] (torn off) twig, especially a
palm twig' (Nic., Plu., etc.). 2. σлádiov [n.] 'race-track' (Argos, H; "the lenghty one";
cf. στádiov). 3. σлadóv, -óvoç [f.] 'spasm, convulsion' (Hp., Nic.), whence -ovi(w,
-ovioµióc. 4. orádwv, -wvoc [m.] ‘eunuch' (LXX, Plb. etc.), also σлáðоç (Eust.).
C. With t-enlargement: σлáτoç [n.] ‘(removed) skin' (H., sch. Ar. Pax 48 [Boeot.]),
σлáτɛo in σлаτεíwv. dεpμaτivwv 'leathern' (H.), as a first member in
Σ<ra>to\ŋaotaí [m.pl.] guild of fullers in Argos (Roman era).
D. Derived verbs: oлášɛi okušα. Axatoí (H.); σлadíğaç aor.ptc. of σnadíļw ‘to
remove' (Hdt. 5, 25); σлατíčя· τŵv <σ>лaτéwv ëλкεɩ, twv depµáτwv, twv tɩτеv
(H.).
⚫ETYM Klingenschmitt 1982: 132 has connected Greek σлáw with Arm. hanem 'to pull
out', if from a pres. *pā-n-, built secondarily from the aorist. García-Ramón fthc.
now suggests that it is cognate with Ved. pā-, ud-pipīte ‘rises against' and Hitt. pippa-
| pipp-, and reconstructs *(s) peh₂- 'to draw, set in motion (violently)'. The Greek
verb may have been derived from the aor. σлασ(σ)α- or from *sph₂-eie/o-. Thence,
the whole tense system developed within Greek. Adams 1999: 368 still considers
plausible the suggestion by van Windekens that ToB pāss- 'to rip off (the skin)'
continues *peh₂-s-. Seе ►σлáеη.
oneipw
1379
oлɛīpa [f.] ‘twist, coil', for instance of a snake; 'network, spiral'; designation of several
round or circular objects, e.g. 'rope, belt, bead, round base of a pillar' (Ion. poet., also
Hell. and late prose; v.l. (269); also as a military term = Lat. manipulus (Hell.), see
Debrunner IF 48 (1930): 244; later = cohors (inscr. and pap., Act. Ap. et al.). <IE?
*sper- 'turn, wind'>
•COMP Some compounds, е.g. σлερo-кéαλov [n.] 'base and capital of a column,
Úлó-σлεɩρov [n.] "what lies under the round base", 'square slab, лλívoc' (inscr.).
●DER σлɛɩp-íov [n.] ‘little column base' (Hero); -ɩkóç ‘belonging to a σ.' (Hero); -ítŋc
(scil. Míos) 'stone for a column base' (inscr. Didyma), other interpretation in
Redard 1949: 64²; -aía [f.] ‘priveť (Thphr.); -ŋdóv ‘in convolutions, in a circle'
(Opp., AP).
Denominative verb σлερ-áоμαι 'to convolve' (Hell. and late), also with лɛpɩ-, etc.;
older σv-σлεράoμa 'to wind, pull together' (Pl., X., Arist., etc.), also act. σv-, лεpɩ-
σлɛpάw ‘to wind, pull together' (Hell. pap., D. S. et al.); hence σлεip-āµa, Ion. -ŋua
[n.] 'twist, coil, for instance of a snake, band, etc.' (A., Arist., Nic., etc.), see further
Chantraine 1933: 184). Also (ov-)σлεрóðμα 'to wind (together)' (Hp., Thphr.), act.
aor. σлεpwσaɩ 'to swathe' (Call.), from σлεчpov?
•ETYM From quasi-IE *sper-ieh₂. It is uncertain whether the root was originally verbal
or nominal (cf. Schwyzer: 474 and Chantraine 1933: 98f.). Related formations are
found in σлáρτоv, σлεчроv, and perhaps in σлáруavov.
σлεчρov [n.] 'cloth, burial shroud, sailcloth, shroud' (Od., Euph.). <IE? *sper- 'turn,
wind'>
•DER σлερo-póρoç [m.] 'bearer of a σ.' (Ephesus); heteroclitic plur. σлεip-εα (Nic.
Th. 882), after pηуεα, etc.; a metaphor for the onion skin, cf. -ódηs 'rich in layers'
(Nic.). Uncertain is the appurtenance of σëɛpíɑ [n.pl.] ‘garments' (X. HG 4, 5, 4;
rather σɛipia with Dindorf). Denominative aor. σлεршσα = σларуavшσα 'to
swathe' (Call.), if not from ►σлɛĭpa.
•ETYM From *sper-io-, from the same verbal or nominal basis as σлεчpa, originally
'winding'. A similar formation is found in Alb. fier, thier 'fern', acc. to Bonnet RPh.
2000: 283.
σлɛipw [v.] 'to sow, seed', also (especially with prefix) 'to spread, scatter, distribute'
(IA). <IE *sper-strew'>>
•VAR Аor. σлεчpaɩ, fut. σлɛpã, aor. pass. σлаp-ñvai, fut. -ñσoµai, perf. med.
зσлардαι (IA), act. σлαρкα (late.).
•DIAL Myc. pe-mo, pe-ma.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. Sia-, кATα-.
•DER The following derivatives have a full grade of the root: σñépµa [n.] ‘seed,
sowing, stem, sprout' (ε 490); as an o-stem in e.g. σлεpµo-λóyoç ‘rook' < *‘picking
corn' (Ar., Arist.), ‘chatterbox' (D., etc.).
Hence the diminutive σлεp-µátov [n.] (Thphr., etc.), -µаτíaç (σкvóc) [m.] ‘seed
bearer' (Cratin.), -µatítns, -µatīts ‘bearing, bringing forth seed' (late), -µatiкóç
'seminal' (Arist., etc.), -μаτódηs 'seed-like' (late); σлερμαívш [v.] 'to sow, bring
forth' (Hes., Call., Plu. et al.), σлεр-µατí\w [v.] 'to sow, bear seed', -μatíšoµai [v.] ‘to

=== page 716 ===

1380
σлεÚSw
1381
be sown, pregnant' with -µατoµós [m.] ‘production of seed' (LXX, Thphr.),
-μаτóоμα to come to seed' (Thphr.), with -μáτwois 'seeding' (Phan. Hist.).
oñépados [n.] = σлεpμa (Nic.), like Xεpadoç.
With an o-grade of the root we find the following derivatives: σлópos [m.] ‘seed,
sowing' (Att.), -чµoç 'fit for sowing', τà -a ‘sowing fields' (X., Thphr., LXX et al.).
σлopá [f.] ‘sowing, seed, procreation, descent' (trag., Pl., Thphr. et al.), -ałoç ‘sown’
(Babr.); often with prefix, e.g. Siασлорá [f.] 'dispersal, exile' (LXX, Ph., Plu. et al.).
From σлóроç or σлорá: ¿µó-σлороs of the same seed, kindred' (poet. h. Cer.);
σлоρ-εúç (кατα-, dia-) [m.] 'sower, begetter' (X., pap. et al.). σлорητóc [m.] 'sowing,
seed' (A., X., Thphr.), after åλoŋτós, äµntos, etc.; orорáç, -áðoç ‘dispersed (IA), ai
Σлорádεç group of islands, with -ádŋv 'dispersed (Att., etc.), -adikóç ‘id.' (Arist.),
-áσa [aor.] 'to disperse' (inscr.). ¿σлop-íŋ [f.] 'second sowing' (Hes.), ¿ñíσropos
(A.); лεрισлóр-ta [n.pl.] 'suburbs' (LXX).
The zero grade of the root is found in the following derivatives: σлαр-τóç 'sown' (A.
et al.); oi Σлaptoí [m.pl.] lit. 'the sown ones', of the dragon seed of Cadmos (Pi. et
al.); see also σñapvós.
⚫ETYM Cognate with Hitt. išpār-' 'to spread out, strew' < *spor-ei. On the details of
the Hittite reconstruction, see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. No further cognates are known;
Arm. sp'ir 'strews', sp'řem 'spread out', p'arat 'spread out, separated', is unrelated, as
it cannot be connected on formal grounds. See further LIV² s.v. 3. *sper-, and cf. also
the litt. on σлaipw.
σлéλɛƉoç [m.] 'dung' (Ar. Ec. 595). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR ÉÉλɛƉoç (Ach. 1170, S. Ichn. 414).
..
•COMP Ú-σлελεƉos ‘pig's dung' (D.C. 46, 5, Poll. 5, 91), лɛλɛƉo-ßáy [m., f.] ‘who
washes away ordure' (Hdn. Gr. 1, 246, 12; H.).
•Der onéÀÀŋži• oñελéðοiç, лελλíα· σлéλɛðoɩ (H.).
•ETYM For the final syllable, cf. σлúðaðoç, övеoç; on the anlaut, see Schwyzer: 334.
Connection with PIE *spelH- 'to split' (cf. LIV2 s.v.) in σлoλáç, (à)σлáλaž, etc. is
semantically possible; cf. e.g. MoHG scheißen < *to separate', related to oxí\w ‘spliť.
The second -- would then reflect *h,. Alternatively, the geminate -\\- in the variants
may point to Pre-Greek origin, in which case the root could reflect *(s)pal-.
σлέvdw [v.] 'to offer a libation, pour, bestow' (II.); 'to agree on a ceasefire (while
performing a libation)'; also 'to reassure, promise; to secure sth.' (Gortyn), see
Willetts Glotta 43 (1965): 251ff. <IE *spend- ‘libate'>
•VAR Аor. σлεt̃σaɩ (Il.), fut. σлɛíów (Hdt., etc.), perf. čσлɛкα (Plu.); med. oñévdoµaɩ,
aneidaoda, aneiaozial onenoian (IA).
●COMP Also with prefix, e.g. кαTA-, ÈMI-.
•DER σлovdń [f.] ‘libation, offering of wine' (B 341 = A 159), plur. usually 'ceasefire
agreement, truce, peace treaty, pax dei' (IA, etc.). σлovdo-pópos [m.] 'herald of the
truce, the pax dei' (Pi.); úлó-σлovôoç 'under a ceasefire agreement, under safe-
conduct' (IA).
σлovd-εчoç 'belonging to the offering', also metrically 'spondeus' (D. H. et al.), -ɛĩov
[n.] ‘libation vessel' (Hell.); also -ɛlakós, -ɛlášw, -ɛɩaσµós (late); -ɩкóç belonging to
the offering' (pap.); -noчa [n.pl.] ‘id.' (Philem.), after óvn-σчμoç, etc.; cf. also
napaσróvdŋoiç (Рlb.) from ларασлovd-έw to лapá-σлovdoç; σлovd-itis (otaywv)
‘id.' (AP); σлóvεikes. oi tàs σñovdàç xéovτeç ‘those who libate' (H.). See especially
Citron 1965.
ETYM Cognates: Hitt. išpānt- / išpant-, 3sg. šipanti, išpanti 'to libate' (Kloekhorst
2008 s.v.); Lat. spondeō ‘to pledge, promise', ToB spänt- ‘to trust', all reflecting a PIE
root *spend-.
σлéоç [n.] 'cavern, cave' (epic II., also Cypr. inscr.). <PG>
•VAR Also σлεоç; gen. σлεioυç, dat. σлñi, plur. σлéσσɩ, σл½εσσɩ, etc. (details in
Chantraine 1942: 7, 11, 101, Schwyzer: 102, Ruijgh 1957: 126f.).
•ETYM Cf. ►σлηλatov. The word is no doubt Pre-Greek (Fur.: 123).
σrépyovlos →σñopyíloç.
oñépxoµai [v.] ‘to come rushing in, huddle, be upset, be impassioned'; act. σлéρxw
with л-, кατα- 'to press, incite, spur', also trans. (mostly epic poet., Il.). <IE *spergh-
'hurry'➤
•VAR Only in present stem, except aor. pass. ptc. σлεpуеεíç (Pi., Hdt.) and fut.
oлépšojai. ópyɩoðσqua 'will be provoked', aor. ¿onepřáµinv. ǹñeiλŋoɑ, wpуioðŋv
'promised or threatened, was provokeď (H.).
•COMP Mostly with έ-, кatα-, лεpɩ-.
●Der In nepi-, έiu-σлepxýs ‘hurried' (S., X. et al.) to nepɩ-, èï-oñépxw; but ȧ-σлεxεç
'vigorous, intense' (Hom.) from *σлéруоç [n.], beside which σлεрX-vóç 'swift, hasty,
violent' (Hes. Sc., Hp., A. et al.) like in e.g. εpεẞos 'darkness' to έpεµvós ‘dark'.
σлéру éppшévwç 'vigorously' and кατασлερуádny 'urgently' (cod. -áτηv) (H.)
(see Latte ad loc.); σлερуvλλáðηv кéкpayaç 'shouting vehemently' (Com. Adesp. 30).
Also in PNs like Σлεру-úλoç, -wv, -t and the HN Σлεру-εó (like Alpɛós,
IInveós).
•ETYM The form σлéρxoμα reflects a full grade *sperg"-, while the zero grade of this
root is attested in Av. a-spǝrǝzatā [ipf.] 'he was diligently exerting himself, Skt.
sprhayati 'to be zealous, zealously desire'. OHG springan 'jump', OCS -pręže 'tighten'
< PIE *spr-en-g"- probably does not reflect a nasal present of this root, in view of the
non-palatal velar of Slavic and the remote semantics; see further LIV² s.vv. *spergh-
and *(s)preng"-.
σлɛúdw [v.] ‘to hurry, hasten, strive, exert oneself, trans. 'to drive, quicken, ply, aspire
after'. <IE *speud- 'press, drive, hurry’▷
•VAR Аor. σлεчσaɩ, fut. σëεúσqµαɩ (II.), σлεúσw (E. et al.), σлεvσiw (Cret.), perf.
зσлɛvкα (Hell.), rare med. σлεú-doµai (A.), pass. šσлevõµai (late).
COMP Also with prefix, e.g. επ-, кαтα-, συ-. Further in кɛvó-σлоуб-оç 'seriously
prosecuting frivolities', also -έw, -ía (Hell.). кaτάσлεv-σɩç (to kata-σлɛúdw) [f.]
'hurry' (Thd.; σлεÑσç gloss.), σлεуσ-τóç (Рhryn.), -τкóç (εл-) 'hurried' (Arist.,
Eust.).
•DER σлovd-ý [f.] 'haste, zeal, labor, seriousness, good will' (II.), hence -aïoç 'zealous,
striving, serious, good' (IA), -αιóτns [f.] (Pl. Def., LXX et al.), σлоúð-āž· ȧλετpíẞavoç

=== page 717 ===

1382
Ondalov
'pestle' (H.) (cf. below); σлov§-ášw [v.] ‘to be quick, carry on seriously, etc.' (IA),
also with εлɩ-, кατα-, σv-, etc.; thence -aoua, -ασμáτov, -ασμós, -aστýs, -Ɑστóc,
-AσTIKÓÇ.
•ETYM The only certain cognate is Lith. spáusti < *spau?d-ti ‘to press, squeeze', also
'to push, drive on', intr. 'to hurry' (see LIV² s.v. *speud-). A trace of the meaning
'push' has also been sugested for σñoúdaž = åλetpißavos 'pestle of a mortar'. The
word σлod has a formal cognate in Lith. spaudà [f.] 'pressure, literature'. There is
also, with zero grade and a long vowel as a result of Winter's Law, spūdà [f.] ‘throng,
urgency, pressure' and spūděti 'to be oppressed, thrust down, pain oneself, meddle'.
Perhaps Alb. punë 'work, business' is also related, if from *spud-nā.
orýλaɩov [n.] ‘cave, cavern' (Pl., LXX, NT et al.). <PG(V)►
•DER σëηλaións ‘cave-like', -aïτŋs [m.] ‘god of caves' (Paus.), -ádiov [n.]
(Theopomp. Com.), after the diminutives in -ádiov; not -άdiov; cf. Hdn. Gr. 2, 488,
12. Also σëñλvуž, -vyyos [f.] ‘id.' (Arist., Theoc., A. R. et al.) with onŋlvyy-wdns
(EM), oεSnc (sch.).
•ETYM Both σлηλáíov and σëñλvy are enlargements of a root σлηλ-: for σ˜ñλvу},
cf. the semantically close oñpay\ 'hollow rock', pápay\ 'cleft', and also opάpvyš
‘throat', \ápuy ‘larynx'; σлýλαov may be formed after úлó-уaɩov 'underground
chamber'. Borrowed as Lat. spēlaeum and spēlunca (see WH s.v.), and as Alb. shpellë
'rock, cave'. Fur.: 123 reconstructs a Gr. form *σлñλvž, -ñкoç, from Lat. *spēlūca. He
further adduces лñλ = рауáç 'fissure' (H., Phot.) and refers to Etr. spel(a) 'cave,
tomb'. The word is no doubt Pre-Greek (note the prenasalization and the suffix
-vyy-).
oriduye-vyyos onńdaiov.
===
oлídios [adj.] ‘extensive, wide' (σrídiov µiñkoç ódou length of a roaď A. Fr. 378 = 733
M.), σлбóеεу = μαкрóеεv from afar' (Antim. 77); σлðνóν· лʊкvóv, σuvεxÉç,
лεлηуóе 'closе or compact, holding together, fixed'; σлdóεv. μελαν, лλατú,
σкOTεLVÓν, лкVÓV, μéya 'black, wide or broad, dark, close or compact, great' (H.).
1?1
•DER Cf. further σлidéoç [gen.sg.] (A 753) beside v.l. άσлdéç; if correct, probably
from *σлбúç; see also ελεσлíðaç and άσлíç 1. Verbal derivative σлí(w = έкTEÍVW
'stretch out' (sch. Ar. V. 18, Eust.).
•ETYM An obsolete group of words, which seems to have lived on only in the learned
and poetic language. The authors were obviously no longer certain about the
meaning (cf. H.'s explanation of σлdóεv). The root σлð- can be compared to Lat.
spissus laborious, slow, dense' (< *spid-tos or *spit-tos; see De Vaan 2008 s.v.). Lith.
spìsti, 1sg.pres. spintù ‘to begin to swarm (of bees), to gather' < *spit- is probably not
related, in view of the different dental. The word σлáw is not related.
σлiчw [v.] 'to squeak, chirp', of birds (Arat., Thphr.). <EUR
•VAR Also σлívos [m.] 'finch' (com., Thphr., Arat.) with σлv-íov, -ídiov (com.);
byforms: σлívα ó σлívoç 'siskin', σлvеíα. εldoç opvapíwv 'kind of bird', σлívol
σлɩvēĤp, -ñpos
1383
'siskins'; σлíууov· σлívov ‘id.'; also лíууаν· vεóσσov. Aμεpíaç 'young bird', σлúуyaç
öpviç 'bird' (H.).
•DER σлíα [f.] 'common chaffinch' (S. Fr. 431, Arist., Timo), σлčíα. τà öpvɛa
ǎлavτα all birds' (H.); σлɩ-íaç [m.] 'sparrow hawk' (Arist.), = ɛldoç iέpakoç ‘kind of
hawk or falcon' (H.), -íτns [m.] (Arist.), = ɛidoç aiyáλov ópvéov 'kind of titmouse'
(H.); ópó-σлɩšos [m.] 'brambling' (Arist.).
⚫ETYM Cf. similar τpíw 'to buzz, gnash, squeak'. The other forms, including σлíчw,
σлíčα, but with the exception of лууav, can be derived from *σлуу- and connected
to OHG fincho, OE finc ‘finch' < PGm. *fink(i)an-, *finki-, which lacks the initial *s-.
Within Greek, this etymon resembles σлуvóv· µкрóv, þраxú, and σлíкavov
σлávov. The connection with Germanic may point to a European 'Wanderwort'.
σлðaµý [ƒ.] ‘span, the range between the stretched thumbs and the little finger' (IA).
<PG?>
•COMP τρι-σлíðaμoç 'measuring three spans' (Hes. Op. 426 et al.), cf. den Boer
Mnem. 4:9 (1956): 3.
⚫DER σлеαμ-αoç 'one span wide' (Hp., Arist. et al.).
•ETYM For the formation, cf. лaλáµη ‘palm of the hand', Sóxµn ‘a hand's
breadth³, ➤лvуµý 'distance from the elbow to the knuckles'; for the suffix -0-, cf. also
σлiðíal. σavidɛç vɛws ‘planks of a ship' (H.). No known cognates; probably Pre-
Greek.
σлλáç [f.] ‘storm, squall' (Plu., Hld. 5, 31, AP 7, 382). ◄PG(V)►
•Der kata-σлɩλá(w [v.] 'to storm'.
•ETYM Fur: 373 connects ǎσлλos. xɛíµappos úïò Maкɛdóvwv ‘torrent (Maced.)'
(H.); the word is Pre-Greek in view of the variation.
σñíλoç 1 [f.] ‘rock, reef (Ion. Trag., Arist., Lyc., Peripl. M. Rubr. et al.). <PG?>
•VAR Additionally (favored by the meter in the oblique cases) σлλác, -ádoc [f.],
mostly plur. -ádɛç ‘id.' (Od.); also of лέτpα (A. R.); -adwdns 'rocky' (Str.). PN Σлλα-
Síaç (Eretria IIIª; see under σлλáç, Bechtel 1914).
•COMP Siά-σлλs (Peripl. M. Rubr.).
•DER σлλóðŋs (Arist., Plb.) 'rocky'.
•ETYM No cognates outside Greek; probably Pre-Greek.
σлíλоç 2 [m.] 'spot, stain, blemish'. <?>
•VAR -ī- (Hdn. Gr.). Also σлλáç, -áðos [f.] ‘id.' (Ep. Jud.[?], Orph.).
•COMP ǎ-σлλоç 'spotless, without blemish' (Hell.).
●der σriλóoμiai, -ów ‘to become stained, make stains, stain, besmirch' (Hell.), kata-
σлɩλášw ‘to stain, conceal (H., EM).
ETYM No etymology.
σлɩvēñp, -ñpoç [m.] 'spark' (A 77, Ar., Arist., Plb., etc.). <PG?>
•DER σлɩvə-ŋpí¶w 'to sparkle, cause sparks' (Thphr., Plu.), àño- ‘id.' (Arist.), -toµoí
(H. and Suid.). Also σrivðapides [pl:] (h. Ap.), -ápvyɛç [pl.] (A. R.), oñívėpač, -ǎkoç
[m.] (Sext. Ca.) 'id.'.
On the bird names σлivðαpíç = Lat. spin-turnix see Thompson 1895 and WH s.v.

=== page 718 ===

1384
OTTLVÓG
⚫ETYM For σлvеnp, cf. ȧστηp 'star', aionp ‘ether'; σлívеpač, like ǎve pa 'charcoal';
σлveαp-idεç, like coxáp-a 'fireplacе'; σлvеáрvу-εç, like μаρμаpvу-αí 'sparklings'.
Reminiscent of Lith. spindžiù, spindėti, Latv. spîdêt, spīdêt ‘to gleam, beam' < *spņd-,
Latv. spuôdrs 'white, gleaming' < *spond-ro-, but formally impossible to connect. The
Baltic words reflect a root *spend-, without *-i- and with root-final *-d- because of
the acute accentuation. On the attempt by Niedermann IF 26 (1909): 58f. to connect
Lat. scintilla with σлvеp from a Mediterranean form *stinth-, see further Pariente
Emerita 20 (1952): 394ff.
σлɩvós [adj.] 'meager' (Procl.). <?>
•DER σлvádŋs (Ptol.).
⚫ETYM Formation as in loxvóc 'withered'. Though the attestation is late, probably an
old word, and connected with σлídioç. Hardly related to OIr. séim 'meager' <
quasi-IE *speimi-; see Matasović 2008 s.v. *sfēmi-.
σлivoç 'finch'. ⇒σñí¶w.
oлláуxva →σлλýv.
σлλεкÓW [v.] 'to copulate'. <?>
•VAR σлλεкoŪV (Ar. Lys. 152 Dindorf ex H. et Poll.; codd. лλɛкoñv), diεσnλε-кwµévη
(Ar. Pl. 1082), кataσлλɛкŵσαι (cod. -áσaι)· кatɛλáσa 'to drive or push down' (H.).
•COMP Also with Stα- and кatα-.
•Deronλékwµa [n.] (sch. Ar. Pl. 1082).
•ETYM The well-attested form лλεкоuv may have lost its σ- secondarily (cf. Schwyzer:
334); no further etymology.
orλŋdós [f.]? ‘ash' (Lyc. 483, Nic. Th. 763). <?►
•Var onλŋdó• oñodòs λentý, kóvis 'fine ashes, dusť (H.).
•ETYM Perhaps a contamination of σлоdóç and another, semantically close word
(Xλñdoc?). No cognates outside Greek.
onλýv, onlŋvós [m.] ‘spleen' (IA), metaphorically 'compress' (Hp.), cf. -íov; aiyòs
σnλv a plant name 'mallow, cheeseweed' (Ps.-Dsc.). <IE *spl(e)g"-n- spleen'>
•COMP ǎ-σлληv-ov [n.], -os [m.] 'miltwaste' (Dsc. et al.), supposed to cure the
spleen. See Strömberg 1940: 86, where ȧ- is wrongly interpreted as prothetic; cf. Vitr.
I 4, 10.
•DER σлληv-íov [n.], -íσkov [n.], -íoкoç [m.], -áptov [n.] 'compress' (Hp., Dsc.,
Samos IV³); -íov also as a name of several plants (Dsc.; cf. äoïàévov). σndqv-ítns,
fem. -ɩɩç ‘belonging to the spleen, disease of the spleen' (medic.); σëλŋv-íkós
'belonging to the spleen, splenetic' (Hp., Hell. com., etc.), -wdŋs ‘id.' (Hp.). σnλŋv-
táw 'to be splenetic' (Arist. et al.). Furthermore σлλáуxva [n.pl.] 'interior organs
(heart, liver, lungs, kidneys), intestines' (II.), sing. rarely also secondarily as
designations of individual organs (A., Pl., Arist.), metaphorically (plur. and sing.)
'heart' = 'mental state' (trag.), 'compassion, commiseration, charity' (LXX, NT).
In compounds, e.g. σлλαууvo-qayos ‘eating intestines' (LXX), εű-σñλayõvoç
'having healthy intestines' (Hp.), 'compassionate' (LXX, NT), σлλαyxv-ídia [n.pl.]
σлodóc
1385
diminutive (Diph.), -ídŋs (UPZ 89, 3 and 13; form and mg. doubtful, cf. Wilcken ad
loc.), -кóç belonging to σ.' (Dsc., pap.); -íšoµα 'to commiserate' (LXX, NT); -í\w,
-ɛúw 'to consume intestines' (Cos IVª, LXX, Ar. et al.), -toµós [m.] (LXX); -ɛúw,
-εúоμа to predict from intestines' (Str.).
⚫ETYM An n-stem is found in other names of body parts, like opηv, ȧdýv, avxýv, etc.,
but these all inflect with root ablaut. Several IE subfamilies show similar words for
'spleen', but the differences between them are too substantial to be able to
reconstruct a single IE word for 'spleen'. We find Lat. lien 'spleen' (< *lihēn <
*(sp)lihēn) < *(s)ligh-ēn-; CS slězena ‘spleen' < *s(p)lēģ³-n- or *s(p)leh,g-n-; MBret.
felch 'spleen' < *spelgh-; Skt. plīhán-, Av. spǝrǝzan- < *(s)plhg-n-. It is probable that
Arm. p'aycałn is somehow related, as well.
The exact reconstruction of the Greek forms is unclear. We should start from
*σnληx-, *σñλax- (= Av. spǝrǝz-an-), an n-stem like Lat. lien, etc. Anticipation of the
nasal gives σnλayxv-. The form σлλу may have arisen haplologically for *σлληx-nv
(after monosyllabic oppv), or is it from *splēngh? On σnλny and σnλáуxva, see
further Egli 1954: 44ff. and Schwyzer: 489'. Borrowed as Lat. splen (>> MoE spleen,
etc.).
σлóууoç [m.] 'sponge (for wiping off)', metaphorically also of sponge-like objects, e.g.
'gland' (II.). EUR?>
•VAR Also σopóyyos (certain in Hell. and late inscr.), see Hiersche 1964: 207f.
●COMP σñoуyo-еńpas [m.] ‘sponge hunter or gatherer' (Plu.).
=
●DER Diminutive σñoуy-íov [n.] (Ar., Dsc.), -áptov [n.] (M. Ant. et al.); -ɩá [f.]
σлóууos (Ar., Aeschin., Arist., Aret. et al.), on the accent see Scheller 1951: 73; -ías
[m.] ‘id.' (Ar. Fr. 856); -ɛú¢ [m.] (-tεúc) ‘sponge gatherer' (Arist., Thphr.); -wdns
'spongy, porous' (Hp., Arist., Dsc.); -чτç ‘id.' (Plin., Aët.); -iw 'to wipe off (Hp.,
Att., etc.), also with ȧлo-, έк-, etc.; -totikń (téxvn) ‘wiping' (Pl.).
⚫ETYM An old Wanderwort, identical to Arm. sunk, sung 'mushroom, cork-tree' and
Lat. fungus 'mushroom, sea-, tree-mushroom, mushroom-like ulcer'. Borrowed as
Lat. spongia (from σ”oyɣá), with spongiōsus, etc.
σлоdóç [f.] 'ash, ember, metal ashes, dust' (Ion. 1 375, trag., etc.). <PG(V)►
•COMP σлоdo-εdns 'ash-colored' (Hp., Arist. et al.), v-σлodoç ‘id.' (Dsc.), see
Strömberg 1946: 128 and 130.
●DER σñod-tá, Ion. -in [f.] 'heap of ashes, ash' (ε 488, Hp., E. Cyc. 615 [lyr.], Pl. Com.,
LXX, AP et al.), see Scheller 1951: 67; thence -twdns ‘ash-colored' (Erot.), -taños ‘id.,
gilvus' (gloss.), -tác [f.] ‘wild plum, Prunus insititia (?)' (Thphr.).
Further tov [n.] 'metal ash' (Poseidon., Dsc.), with -taкóç 'made of σ.' (late medic.);
-(ε) Los ‘of ash(es)' (Semon. et al.); -wdns ‘ashlike', of color and taste (App., Gal.);
-íτηç ǎpτoç 'bread baked in ashes' (Hp., Diph.); also σлоdɛúç 'id.' (see s.v. on
►σnolás).
Denominative verbs: σлоd-óоμal 'to be burnt to ashes' (Hp., Lyc., AP),
ovveσnodwµévov. σкεкovov (concise' (H.); -wσaσa 'to bestrew with ashes'
(LXX); -iw 'to roast in the ashes' (Pl., Ar.), intr. 'to be ash-colored' (Dsc.), also with
úno-; σnodéw to crunch, smash, grind', also sensu obsc.; of food 'to consume,

=== page 719 ===

1386
oro入ás, -ádog
swallow' (often in Ar., com., A., E.), also with кατα-, áño-, diα-; cf. kata-σnodéw ‘to
stretch down in the dust' (A., Ar.); here also σлod-ópxns [m.] ‘eunuch' (Eust.), see
Maaß RhM N. F. 74 (1925): 432ff.
•ETYM Fur.: 154 convincingly connects ǎoßolos ‘soot, dust of coals' and *σñoλós in
σлoλɛúç (according to Frisk s.v. σoλáç, wrong for *σлodɛúç). The word would then
be Pre-Greek.
σлolás, -ádoç [f.] 'leather harness, jerkin' (S. Fr. 11, Ar., X.). <PG(V) ►
•ETYM A formation in -ás from a verbal noun *σлóloç or *σлoλn. Related to
► άσлáλaž? Perhaps from a verb for 'split, tear off (IE *spel-), in which case it may
be related to σлóλа· τà лapατλλóμεva έpídia àñò τŵv σкελŵν τwν пρоßáτwv 'wool
plucked off the legs of sheep', äσлaλov. σкūtos ‘skin, hide' (H.), but hardly to Thess.
σлóλоç 'polе' (IG 9(2), p. XI [II]), if = 'split wood'. The word σлoλɛúç ‘kind of
bread' (Philet. apud Ath. 3, 114e) may belong here, or be mistaken for σлodɛúç (see
►σлodóç).
From other languages: Lat. spolium ‘skin, hide; arms, spoils' (= σлóλia), Lith. spālis
'beard (= part of the stalk of flax)', pl. spāliai ‘parts of the stalk', OCS polб 'sex, half,
MoHG spalten 'to cleave', Go. spilda ‘writing tablet', all reflecting a root *spel(H)-
'what is split, stripped off (see also LIV² s.v., but Skt. phalati ‘to burst' is probably
unrelated). Cf. further σTέλλw and valiç. If Lat. spolium can be a loan from
Greek, the Greek forms may also reflect the Pre-Greek root that is also seen in
ǎσлαλov 'mole'.
σлovúη, σлóvvlos #oqovdúln, opóvdňλos.
σлopyíλoç [m.] a bird, probably ‘sparrow' (Ar. Av. 300 with allusion to a PN). <?►
•DER σлεруovλos (also π-). ópviάptov äyptov 'small wild bird' and σлapáσrov.
öpveov ¿µqepès σtpovēų ‘bird resembling a sparrow' (H.). Also σtpovðòs nupyítns
'house-sparrow' (Gal.).
⚫ETYM The word σлору-íλoç is formed like opxiλoç, τpoxiλoç, and other bird names;
σnéрyouλoç is dialectal for *σлεpу-úλoç, like кηpúλoç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 249 and
251). The forms with -y- have a counterpart in Germanic and Baltic: MHG sperke,
OPr. spurglis, spergle- ‘sparrow-', which may point to a European substrate word or a
Wanderwort. See also Thompson 1895 s.v. Cf. also áp and ►σnapáσov.
σлóððvyyɛç →orúpaðol.
σлúрαеoɩ [pl.] 'droppings of goats and sheep' (Hp., Dsc.). <PG? < EUR
VAR 1úpało (Nic.).
=
•DER Diminutive σлupáðα [pl.] (Dsc.); collective σqupaðía [f.] (Poll.; cf. кoëpía
'dunghill'); adj. σлурαеwηç 'like sheep's droppings' (Hp.). Further σnvpádes [f.pl.]
'pills' (Hp.), oqvpádes [f.pl.] σлúрało (Ar., Arist.). Also σлópеvyyɛç. ɑi
ovvεotpaliµévai µetà þúrov tpíxes ‘hair matted with filth' and σлореúууia. τpíẞoλa
'water-chestnut'. τà diаxwpη<µа>τа τшν αiушv, ä τɩvεç σлурáðαç кαλобσιv
'excrement of goats' (H.). Note also σлúρdapa 'dung' (Poll. 5, 91).
⚫ETYM For the formation of σлúрało, cf. (σ)лελεoç 'dung', öv0oç ‘id.', чáчaðo
grains of sand'; σлуρádɛç is like λádɛç 'stones', loxádɛç 'dried figs', etc.
!
σtádios
1387
Similar words are found in Lith. spiros [f.pl.] 'droppings of goats, hares, and other
small animals' < *sprH-, Molc. sparð [n.] 'droppings', sperðill [m.] ‘kind of sausage' <
*sporH-to-, but they can only be related if Greek σлup-/ σoup- reflects earlier
*sporh₂-. The Greek alternations in (σ)π/qup-α0/8- could very well point to Pre-
Greek origin.
σлρíчw [v.] 'to kick, lash out (of a donkey)' (Ar. Fr. 857). <?►
•VAR σTUρеíεv· σлãσðαɩ кαì áуavaкtɛïv. „udapíšɛiv кai σqúčɛv ‘to be drawn, be
irritated; to dance, throb or beat violently' (H.).
⚫ETYM If σлup- reflects *spor-, it derives from the same root as σnaipw. Cognates
with the same suffix *-dh- may be seen in Skt. spárdhate 'to compete, dispute', sprdh-
[f.] 'competition, dispute', Go. spaurds [f.], OE spyrd [m.] ‘running-match, course'.
σлvρiç [f.] 'basket' (IA, etc.). <PG(V)►
•VAR σqupíç (Hp. v.l., Hell. and late), -ídoç.
•COMPσлuρido-qoópos 'basket-carrying' (pap. IIª).
•DER Diminutives σлup-íðɩov (com. et al.; σq- Hell. pap.), -íxvov (Poll.; like кuλixvn
et al.); also -18w8ns 'basket-like', -18óv [adv.] 'shaped like a basket' (sch.).
ETYM The word σлup-íç is formed like σкaqis bowl', etc., either from a noun
(*σлupóç vel sim.) or directly from a verb. It is hardly related to oлáptov ‘rope,
cable' via a meaning *twine, as the variation σл-/σ- shows that the word is Pre-
Greek. Fur.: 241 further compares σúpixos (Alex.), σúpiσσos (Poll.), σúplokos (H.),
úpixós (Ar.), üpioxos (Phryn.), úpíσkoç (H.), úpíσσos (H.), all 'twined basket', if from
*σFúρixos.
OtayWv #otáČw.
otáiny otádiog.
στádiov [n.] 'racecourse, stadium', secondarily also a measure of varying length, in
Hdt. 2, 149 = 100 ópуvai or 6 лλépa (Thgn., Pi., IA). <?>
•VAR Plur. -ta and -tot (scil. Spóμoi).
●COMP σtadio-Spóµos [m.] 'racer' (Simon., Att.), later σtadia- ‘id.' (Hell. and late
inscr.), a hypercorrect formation after the plur. στádia; often as a second member,
especially after numerals, e.g. Óкa-σtádios (also óкτw-) ‘measuring eight σ.' (Plb.,
Str.).
•DER otadɩ-ɛú¢ [m.] ‘racer' (Plb. et al.), -ɛúw ‘to run for the wager' (Arist. et al.),
-aioç 'measuring one σ.' (Plb., D. H. et al.), -aσµóç [m.] 'measuring by stadia' (Str. et
al.).
⚫ETYM Perhaps an original folk-etymological transformation of σлádiov (Argiv.; see
►σлáw), after στádios? Bechtel 1921, 2: 473 assumes that στádiov is original and that
σлádiov arose through dissimilation. Borrowed as Lat. stadium 'race-course'.
σtádioç [adj.] ‘upright, standing still, firm, immobile, lying on the balance = weighed,
etc.' (Il., Pi., Hell. and late epic, D..C.), in the Il. only dat. στadíŋ as an attribute of
voµívη ‘fighť or, on its own, 'in close combat'; έv avto-σtadiŋ (N 325) ‘id.'; cf.
Trümpy 1950: 112f. and Krarup Class. et Med. 10 (1949): 7. ◄GR▷

=== page 720 ===

1388
•VAR σTadía. Avxvía 'lamp' (H.).
OTά(w
•COMP ópеo-στádiov [n.] ‘chiton running straight downwards' (Ar. et al.), also
στádio, σTATÓS XITWV.
•DER σtadaños ‘id.' (A., Ti. Locr. et al.), also Th. 4, 38 v.l. of σtadía.
⚫ETYM Adjectival derivative from the adverb στá-dηv ‘in standing posture' with the
suffixes -10- and -αto-, like кτád-toç from έкτá-dηv (from ¿к-Tεívw); see Chantraine
1933: 39 and Schwyzer: 467 and 626. See "στηu.
στáчw [v.] 'to let drip (in), shed', intr. 'to drip' (post-Hom.). <?>
•VAR Aor. στážai (Il.), fut. στážw (Pi., etc.), aor. pass. σταxОñvai (Нp.), σταуñvai
(Dsc.), perf. pass. žσταкtαι (Od.).
•COMP Also with άло-, кατα-, έv-, έñɩ.-, etc.
By
●DER σtay-wv, -óvos [f.] ‘drop' (trag., Hp., middle com., Hell. and late), hence
-ovias, -ovītis, -oviaños (late); also στáy-ɛç [pl.] (A. R. 4, 626), which is probably a
back-formation, cf. below.
σταу-ετóç [m.] 'id.' (Aq.), like vεTÓç, etc.; σταу-μα (εлí-) [n.] 'the dripping, drop,
aromatic oil' (A., Gal., pap. et al.), εл-, кατα-σταуuós [m.] 'dripping of the nose,
sniffing' (late medic.). στážɩç (ȧлó-кατá-) [f.] 'the dripping', especially of blood from
the nose (Hp., Gal.). σταкτóç ‘dripping' (IA), -τý [f.] 'myrrh oil' (Antiph., Plb. et al.),
-tá [n.pl.] ‘resins' (medic.); votaкtov [n.] 'the dripping in' (Gal.); σta<k>tikóv.
rεµµátiov rλakovvtoɛidéç. äλλoi dè ȧyyɛĩa dɩvλíšovta Nɛiλwov üdwp ‘small cake;
vessels filtering water from the Nile (H.). ¿ëɩ-otákτηs [m.] ‘woolen thread for oil-
dripping' (late medic.); σταктεpíα (for -τnpía) [f.] 'bottle for myrrh oil' (pap. VI-
VIIP). στáy-Sny 'drop by drop' (Hp., Aret.). Στáčovoa [f.] source in Sicyon (Krahe
Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 2 (1950-1951): 230).
ETYM The present στá(w reflects *στaу-дw and forms the basis of the other forms.
The form στáyɛç is probably a backformation from σταyóvɛç (Schwyzer: 424). Often
connected to Lat. stāgnum ‘standing water, pool' and OBret. staer ‘river, brook' <
*stag-rā. The semantics of this etymology are not obvious, but the connection
remains possible.
otaðɛpós ⇒otáðµn.
σtałɛúw [v.] ‘to scorch, roast, fry' (Ar., Arist., Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•DER -EUTÓS 'Scorched' (A. Pr. 22), -εvois (v.l. σtat-) [f.] 'scorching' (Arist.).
•ETYM Perhaps the word contains the synonymous εűw, but the rest is unclear. Fur.:
191, on the other hand, compares σtátɛvois (Arist., Alex. Aphr. in Mete. 186) =
otáłɛvoɩç, which would indicate Pre-Greek origin.
-
στá un [f.] 'directive, carpenter's line, finish line, plumb line, rule, norm' (since O
410). <GR➤
•COMP úлoσtá¤µŋ (to vão- otñvat) [f.] ‘sediment, lees, foundation' (Pl., Hp. et al.).
σtaðµ-oñxos [m.] 'owner of goods, etc.' (A. Fr. 226 = 376 M., Antiph., pap. et al.),
εлí-σταеµoç [m.] 'quartermaster' (Isoc.), 'military quartered on another' (pap.;
Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 175); vaú-σtaðµov [n.] (Th.), secondary -os [m.] (Plb., D. S.,
Ota入áoow
1389
Plu.) ‘anchorage, fleet station, fleet'; originally a substantivized adjective like Boú-
OtaOfLov.
•DER σταеμ-άo̟μα (Ion. -έoμα) 'to measure (by the directive), estimate, gauge,
weigh' (Pi., IA), also with diα-, εл-, ȧvτ-; thence -ηua, -noiç, -ntikós (late). σtaðµ-
iw ‘id.' (Aq., Sm.), also with Sta-. στa¤µóç [m.] 'location, stable, farmstead, night
lodgings, travel stage, day's march; pillar, post, jamb; balance, weight, heaviness' (II.);
plur. also -µá [n.] (after táλavta, (uyά), to which sing. -óv 'weight, balance' (IA),
poet. also 'homestead, farmstead; jamb, etc.' (trag. et al.). στaðμ-íov [n.] 'balance,
weight' (Hell. and late); -ɩкóç ‘of weighing' (Gal.); -wdns ‘rich in sediment' (Hp.), cf.
úrootáµn; otaеµ-íчw 'to weigh', also with Sia-, ovv-, etc.; hence -ɩ015 [f.] ‘the
weighing', -ɩστns [m.] ‘weigher', -totí [adv.] ‘by weight', -чσTIкóç 'for weighing' (late);
σταеμ-ɛúw to take up or have quarters, etc.', also with кατα-, εл-; also -ɛíα [f.]
(late).
⚫ETYM Formation like Baμóç, μó, éμó, etc. A derivative of the root of
►στημ, PIE *steh₂-, with the suffixes -0- and -μo-. The suffix -0- also appears in εv-
στans 'standing firm, quiet' (Ion. Hell. and late since Il.), which was probably built
on the aor. στáðŋy (Risch 1937: 82). The synonymous and later attested form
otałɛpós (A. Fr. 276 = 479 M., etc.) may have been built from pavɛpós (or a similar
example) under the influence of à-qavńs.
otais, otaltós [n.] 'wheat flour turned to dough with water' (Ion., Eup., Arist.,
Thphr., etc.). <IE➤
•VAR σTaís.
•COMP σtaιt-oupyós (written στεT-) [m.] 'mixer of σ.' (Ostr.).
⚫DER Diminutive στaiτ-íov [n.] (PMag. Par.); -vos 'made of σ.' (Hdt.), -íτaç [m.]
‘bread of σ.' (Epich., Sophr.), -wdns ‘σ.-like' (Poll.), -ñïa. réµquatos ɛldoç ‘kind of
small cake', στα<i>τíaç· ǎptov ɛldoç 'kind of bread' (H.).
⚫ETYM The connection with the IE word for 'dough' in SCr. tijesto 'dough', OIr. táis
‘id.' < *theis-to-, OHG theismo 'leaven' is semantically appealing. If related, the
anlaut must have been influenced by στéap 'fat' (Pedersen 1909: 56). See also τýкw.
σταλáσσw [v.] 'to drip, shed drops, drop' (Sapph., E. et al.). <?>
•VAR Also -άw (Hell. and late epic, AP, Luc.), -ášw (Aq., Plu., Luc.), -áττw (Porph.),
aor. -ážai (Ar., Lyc., LXX).
•COMP Also with άлo-, ¿v-, etc.
●DER σtaλay-µós [m.] ‘dripping, drop' (trag., Ar., Hp.), hence -μaños 'calculated by
the drop (of the water-clock)' (Vett. Val., etc.), -μíτηs plant name (Hippiatr.); also
-μa [n.] 'drop' (A., S., Scymn.). Lat. LW stalagmia [n.pl.] 'ear-drops', stalagmiās [m.]
'kind of copper-vitriol' (Plin. HN).
⚫ETYM Formation like лаλáσσш, þaðáσow, ai̟µáσow; the form σtaláw is metrically
conditioned (after xaλáw, etc.), to which belongs στaλεŋdóvεç. στaλayµoí (H.),
perhaps metrical for στaλεd- or σta-λnd-?
The form στaláσow is an enlargement of στá(w. Usually derived from a root
*(s)tel(h₂)- 'to drip' (see LIV² s.v. *stelh₂k-), whence also τελμa 'puddle' and MoE
stale 'urine' are derived. This seems possible, but is not very convincing in view of

=== page 721 ===

1390
σTάλIĘ, -ĭKOÇ
the limited distribution, the vague semantics, and the s-mobile. See further on
▶ávaota入Úw.
otáλiž, -ĭkoç [f.] 'plug or post for fastening a hunting-net' (Theoc., Plu., Opp., Poll.).
<?>
•Der otáλıdaç (-ídaç?). toùs káµaкaç ǹ xápaкaç ‘vine-props or -poles, pointed
stakes' (H.), στaλidwv (X. Cyn. 2, 8 codd.; oxaλídwv Steph.).
•ETYM The suffix alternation recalls kλäïk-, from kλŋīd- ‘bolt, key' (cf. s.v. ►kλɛiç);
see Schwyzer: 496. Further analysis uncertain; the root could be that of either
►σTÉλλw or στηu (with a suffix -λ-).
otaµīveç [m.pl.] 'vertical side-beams of a ship*(Poll. 1, 92, H., EM). <PG?➤
•VAR Acc. -ĭvas (Moschio apud Ath.), dat. -ívɛσσɩ (ε 252, Nonn. D. 40, 446).
•ETYM Perhaps from ►ïσtŋ, with a formation like έpµīv-, pŋyµĩv-, voµĩv-, and like
these words a derivation in -iv- from a stem in -μ- or -µ(ε)v-. Cf. also ►σtáµvoç. The
short ĭ in στaμivεσσt may be due to the meter; see Debrunner REIE 1 (1938): 1ff.
otáµvos [m., f.] 'big jar, especially a wine-jar' (IA). <IE *sth₂-mn-o- ‘standing'>
•DER Several diminutives: στaμv-íov, -ápiov [n.], -íʊkoç [m.] (com., Hell. and late).
PN Στauvíaç [m.] (Ar.). Denominative verb: στauv-íw, only with кατα- and σuv-,
'to pour into a jar, transfuse' (Thphr., Nic. et al.).
⚫ETYM Formation like έpvµvóc (from žρvµα), λíµvη (from λчunv), etc. (see Schwyzer:
524 and Chantraine 1933: 215). Probably from a noun *σtāµa, *σtaµv or the like,
'stand, standing place'; the jar would thus be a large, standing one. Probably related
to σtátos [m.] (substantivized from στatóç) ‘big jug' (Hell. inscr., H.), OHG stanta
'jug to be put somewhere', Lith. statinė 'barrel, cask'. A zero grade u-derivation is
also supposed in ►σtaµîvɛç; comparable formations in other languages are ToB
stām, A Ṣtām 'tree' (cf. stäm- 'to stand'), OHG stam, gen. stammes 'stem', which may
reflect PGm. *stamna- (IE *sth₂-mn-o-). Cf. also στnμwv. Borrowed as Alb.
shtambë, shtëmbë [f.] 'bottle' (Mann Lang. 17 (1941): 23). Fur.: 227, 245 compares
στáqoç 'trough' with variation µ/q; uncertain.
στασávη [f.] żyуúη, úлое½кη 'surety, mortgage' (H.). <?►
ETYM No etymology.
στáσiç [f.] 'standing, standing still, stand, location, position, political opinion, party,
division' also 'placement, weighing, defrayal' (Alc., Thgn., Pi., IA), on the mg. see
Bolling AmJPh. 82 (1961): 162f. <IE *steh₂- 'stand', *sth₂-ti->
•COMP στaσí-apxos [m.] 'party leader' (A. et al.), žɛvó-στaσiç ‘inn for strangers' (S.).
Often with prefix as a derivation of prefixed verbs, e.g. ảváσta-σiç (to ảv-íotapai,
-íστŋµ) ‘standing up, removal, making to stand up, expulsion' (IA).
●DER στáσ-чoç 'standing (firm or still), quiet, weighable' (IA), ‘stilling, blocking'
(Hp.). Also wons 'partial, rebellious' (X., Arist. et al.), -twτηs [m.] 'party member'
(IA), hence -WTIкÓç, -IWτяíα (after лatpiótηç, σtpaτióτηs, etc.); στασ-iáчw 'to form
parties, divide, quarrel' (IA), also with prefix, e.g. ȧvτI-, diα-; στασ-í(w 'id.' (Crete
III³).
oτaquλń
1391
⚫ETYM Old verbal noun *sth₂-ti- of στηu 'to stand', identical with Skt. sthíti- [f.]
'stand, standstill', Lat. statiō 'standing place', frozen accus. statim 'fixed, on the spot',
Go. staps [m.] 'position, place', OHG stat [f.] ‘id.'. From the full grade *steh₂-ti-: Av.
stāiti- ‘standing, stand, position', Latv. stātis [pl.] ‘turning point (of the sun)', and
Ru. stat' 'build of the body'.
otatńp, -ñpos [m.] designation of a weight and of a coin, ‘stater' (IA). <IE *steh₂-
'stand'>
=
●VAR σtatñpeç is also the opposite of åлodoτñpεç 'returners' (Epich. 116), acc. to Et.
Gen. = Xpεwστa 'debtors', cf. oßolo-στατηp (Hdn. Gr.) oßolo-στáτηs obol
weigher, usurer' (Ar. et al.).
COMP Thematicized in bahuvrīhi compounds: бɛкα-στáτηр-os 'concerning ten σ.'
(Arr.), -ov [n.] 'sum or weight of ten σ.' (Att. and Cret. inscr.).
•DER σtatηp-iokos (-iσµós?) type of tax (pap.), -talos 'worth or weighing one σ.'
(Theopomp. Com., Hell. and late).
•ETYM Derived from στηu in the sense 'to put on the balance, weigh off. See also
Benveniste 1948: 50. Similar, but independent, formations are found in Lat. Stator,
-ōris epithet of Jupiter, Skt. sthátar- [m.] 'driver of a car' < *steh₂-ter-. Borrowed as
Lat. stater. See στηu.
σtatióν [f., m.] 'station'. <LW Lat.>>
•DER -ápios (inscr.).
•ETYM From Lat. statiō; see Drew-Bear Glotta 50 (1972): 93.
O
σtatós
στατó [adj.] 'standing (still)', of a horse (Z 506 = 0 263), of water (S. Ph. 716 [lyr.]);
Hell. of jars 'made or fit for standing' (Delos, pap.); subst. στáτoç [m.] ‘vessel'
(Delos, Oropos, H.), with στάTIOν [n.] ‘id.' (Delos IIª). <IE *steh₂- 'stand'>
●DER otat-ıkós ‘belonging to weighing' (Pl.), on the mg. cf. ►στáσiç; ‘standing still'
(Arist.), 'stilling' (Hell. and late); στατ-íчш, -íčоµαι 'to stand, set, establish' (S., E. et
al.).
⚫ETYM Old verbal adjective of loŋμ 'to stand'.
otavpóç [m.] ‘pole' (§ 453), 'cross' (D. S., NT et al.). ◄IE *steh₂-u- 'pole'>
•DER σtaup-íov [n.] (Theognost.), -ɩкós ‘belonging to the cross' (Tz.); στavp-ów 'to
provide with poles' (Hdt., Th., etc.), 'to crucify' (Plb., NT et al.), also with ȧva-, etc.;
thence -wµa [n.] 'fraise, palisade' (Th., X. et al.), -wois [f.] ‘impalement, crucifixion'
(Th. et al.), -woчuos 'belonging to the crucifixion' (Christ. lit.).
•ETYM Identical to ON staurr [m.] ‘pole' < *steh₂u-ro-, which is probably also the
basis of Lat. instaurare 'to renew, restore' (whence restaurare ‘id.'). See further on
►σtoá, ► otñlos, ►στúpač, and ► oτúw.
otapiç →àotapic.
στaquλn [f.] 'grape' (II.), metaphorically 'swollen uvula, uvula inflammation' (Hp.,
Arist., etc.), also στaúlŋ (accent after кoτúλŋ, кavúλn?) ‘lead in the balance,
plummet of a leveľ (B 765). ◄PG(V) ►

=== page 722 ===

1392
στaxávn
•COMP E.g. στaqvλo-τоμεw 'to cut off grapes; to perform surgery on the uvula' (late),
¿pɩ-στáquλos ‘with big grapes' (Od., epic).
●DER Diminutive otaquλ-ís, -ídos [f.] (Theoc., Hp.), -tov [n.] (M. Ant., pap.); -īvos
[m.] 'carrot' (Hp., Dsc.), metaphorically as the name of an insect (Arist.), see
Strömberg 1937: 52; -ítηs [m.] epithet of Dionysus (Ael.); -wμα [n.] name of an eye-
disease (medic.), after yλaúкwμα, etc. From στaqúλŋ: σταquλíčεɩv• tò ovvɩ<o>á¢εɩv
τàç was to iμatíov 'to?? the fringes of the mantle' (H.). PN Στáquloç [m.].
ETYM Probably the zero grade form of στεuquλa. The similarity with άoτaqiç
'dried grapes' is probably not accidental, but the exact relation of the words is
unknown. The group of words is Pre-Greek (cf. Chantraine 1933: 251, Schwyzer: 485,
and Fur.: 342, 373). It has been argued that σtaquλivos 'carrot' is not related to
στaquλn (Greppin Glotta 64 (1986): 248-252, Hansen KZ 102 (1989): 211). The latter
argues that the meaning 'carrot' comes from Sanskrit sta(m)bh- with stambha- ‘post,
pillar, column', so that it was 'the pillar plant', or 'the plant with the pillar root'.
otaxávŋ [f.] only in the expression Sikaiótepos otaxávns (Zen., Lib. et al.), where it is
understood as 'balance'. <PG?>
•ETYM Formation like τputávŋ and other instument nouns. Perhaps as a technical
expression from ►στáxuç ‘ear', due to some specification of the meaning, but more
likely a Pre-Greek substrate word.
otáxvs, -vos [m.] ‘ear (of corn)' (Y 598), metaphorically 'offshoot' (poet.), as a plant
name (Dsc. et al.), 'surgical bandage' (medic.). <PG(V) ►
•VAR -ÛÇ (E. HF 5), -ův (Call., A. R.).
•COMP σTaxvo-ẞoλéw 'to put forth ears' (Thphr.), лоλú-σTaxus 'rich in ears' (Theoc.,
Str.).
•DER σtaxv-ŋpós ‘bearing ears' (Thphr.), -wdns ‘ear-like, full of ears' (Thphr.,
Nonn.), -ĭvoç ‘of ears' (Olympia), -ītis [f.] (also -ítns [m.]) plant name (Ps.-Dsc.),
-óoμa 'to develop into an ear' (Dsc.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally connected with ON stinga, OE stingan 'to sting', nominal OHG
stanga [f.] 'stick, pole, bar', MHG stunge ‘prickle', Lith. stangús ‘stiff, fixed', stangà
[f.] ‘effort', sténgti 'to be able', stingti 'to harden', Latv. stiñgt ‘id.'. The Germanic
words reflect *steng"-u-, of which στáxus would be a zero grade *stng"-u-. The
appurtenance of the Baltic forms is doubtful, since their accentuation seems to
require a reconstruction *steng-, in which case they cannot be related. However, the
variant ǎσtaxus (see s.v. and Kretschmer Glotta 21 (1933): 89) rather suggests that
the Greek word is of substrate origin (see also Fur.: 373). Cf. ►στóvuž and ►otóxos.
otéap, otéatos [n.] ‘(standing) fat, tallow' (the opposite of лεn), also 'dough'
στaïç (Od., Hp., X., Arist., etc.). <IE *steh₂-ur➤
•VAR σTέāp (com., see LSJ Supp.), otñp, otñtos (Hell. pap. et al.).
==
⚫DER Diminutive στεάτ-ov [n.] (Alex., Paul. Aeg.), -wdns 'tallowy' (Hp., Arist. et al.),
-vos of tallow, of dough' (Aesop.), -wμa [n.] 'tallow formation, fat tumor', hence
-wµátiov [n.] (medic.), -ɩɩaɩ лλaкoûvτƐç ‘flat cakes' (H.) as a gloss to ñíoves; otɛat-
óoμa [v.] 'to be tallowed' (LXX), 'to suffer from a fat tumor' (Hippiatr.); also σTε-
άw 'to tallow' (Al.).
otεißw
1393
⚫ETYM The word σtέāp < *στñ-Ƒαp < PGr. *stā-ur. A heteroclitic noun like лаρ,
oap, etc. (Schwyzer: 518, Benveniste 1935: 19, 27 and 169), from *steh₂- 'to stand;
see ïotηµ. No exact correspondences outside Greek. The words σtaïç ‘dough’
and άyxiσtīvos (s.v. ►äyxt) are unrelated.
στέуw [v.] 'to cover, defend, avert, keep closed, bear, sustain' (post-Hom.). <IE *(s)teg-
'cover, roof▸
•VAR Also aor. σTτεεαι (Plb. et al.), στε×¤ñvαι (VI³).
•COMP Also with ȧлo-, etc. Further in στέy-apxos [m.] 'housemaster' (Hdt. et al.);
often as a second element, e.g. in úлó-στεуоç 'under a roof, covered' (Emp., Pl., S. et
al.).
●DER otɛy-vós ‘covered, waterproof, clogged' (Ion., E., X., etc.), hence -vótŋs [f.]
'thickness, stoppage' (Hp.), -vów (aлo-, etc.) 'to thicken, stop', -vwoię [f.], -vwtikós
(Hell. and lat). Substantivized στέyvη, Dor. Aeol. -a [f.] ‘roof, cope, covered place,
house, room' (Alc., Gortyn, IA). Also στεу-avós 'covering, watertight' (Att.),
-avóτηs [f.] (Eust.), -avów 'to cover' (Hell. and late), -αváµατα· τà έv toiç toixols, oi
εyóεvo úμo 'things in the walls of a house, the so-called bonds' (H.); -ávn
[f.] 'cover' (AP); -avíoat (cod. -ñ-)· σtéyò úлodex¤ñva 'be received in a room' (H.).
Furthermore στɛкɩɩкós 'for keeping the water out' (Pl., etc.), στέywois [f.] (to an
unattested *σtɛyów) ‘the roofing' (pap. III³), cf. σtéy-vwolç, -ao(o)iç.
στέyos [n.] ‘roof, house' (trag., also Hell. and late prose); in compounds adapted to
στéуw (cf. Schwyzer 513): oúpavo-στεуns 'bearing the sky' (A. Fr. 312 619 M.).
Derivations from σtéyn (otéyos): otey-ú\\iov [n.] ‘huť = 'workshop' (Herod.); -îtıç
[f.] = лópvη (Poll., H.); στɛу-áчw, -áσa 'to cover, roof (IA), also with ȧло-, кατα-,
etc.; thence ao(σ)₁ç, -αžɩç (ȧлo-) [f.] 'covering' (Epid., Delos IV-IIª, etc.), see
Schwyzer: 271, Chantraine 1933: 281), -ασμα (ȧло-, кατα-, лpо-) [n.] 'cover, cope'
(Pl., X., etc.), -aστýp [m.] ‘coverer, tile' (Poll., H. as a gloss on σwλýv), -aotpis [f.]
'covering, cope' (Hdt. et al.), -αστpov [n.] 'covering, cope, container' (A., Antiph.,
etc.).
=
Also tέyos [n] = σtέyos (Od.; not in trag.), hence τέy-ɛo (Оálaµoi Z 248, dóµo
Emp. 142) mg. not quite clear: 'under a roof (= 'upstairs'), 'roofed'; cf. S. Schmid
1950: 39; Tεy-ídiov [n.] designation of a garment for women (Tanagra and pap. IIIª);
also tέyn [f.] = τéуoç (Vett. Val., H.).
•ETYM The form σtέyw is a primary thematic present; non-present forms are late
and rare. It derives from PIE *(s)teg- with s-mobile (see LIV² s.v.), attested in the
Latin thematic present tegō 'to cover', perf. tēxī, and in OIr. teg, gen.sg. tige 'house' <
*tegos- [n.], OHG dah, ON þak [n.] ‘roof < *togo-, OPr. stogis, Lith. stógas [m.] <
*stogo- with Winter's Law. Skt. sthagati (Dhatup.), sthagayati 'to cover, conceal' are
unrelated (Kuiper 1954: 249). Borrowed as Lat. stega 'cover' (from στέyn), segestre,
-rum, tegestrum 'cover made of skin' (from στéуaστpov).
στɛißw [v.] ‘to tread (on something), densify by treading, trod, trample' (A 534, Y 499,
epic poet.). <IE *steib-‘get stiff, fix'>

=== page 723 ===

1394
OTEIλεIŃ
•VAR Only pres. except aor. кat-έotɛiyaç (S. OC 467; not quite certain), verbal adj.
otɩrtós (v.l. -ɛɩ-) ‘trodden solid, solid, hard' (S., Ar.), ǎ-στлτoç ‘untrodden' (S.; also
OGI 606?).
•COMP Rarely with prefix, е.g. εл-, KATA-.
•DER σTOιẞn [f.] 'stuffing, cushion, bulge, etc.'; often as a plant name 'Poterium
spinosum', the leaves of which were used for stuffing (Hp., Ar., Arist., Epid. [IV],
etc.), στoß-íov 'id.' (Dawkins JHS 56 (1936): 10), -ác = στßáç, -ŋdóv 'crammed'
(comm. Arist.), σtoiß-álw ‘to fìll, stuff (Hdt., LXX et al.), rarely with Sia-, whence
-aotós, -aotýs, -aσiç, -áσ¹µoç, -aσía (Hell. and late).
Zero grade of the root in: σtíßoç [m.] ‘(trodden) road, path, footstep, trail' (epic Ion.
poet. since h. Merc.), fuller's workshop' (pap. IIIª), whence otßác, -ádos [f.] ‘bed of
straw, reed or leaves, mattress, bed, grave' (IA), -άádiov [n.] ‘id'. (Hell. and late),
-adɛúw 'to use like straw' (Dsc.). Further σüßɛúç [m.] ‘hound' (Opp.), 'fuller' (pap.),
= ódevtýc (H.), -ɛúw 'to track' (D. S., Plu., H.), = лopɛúεσðαι (H.) with -ɛía [f.]
‘tracking, etc.' (D. S. et al.), -ɛĩov [n.] 'fuller's workshop' (pap.), -evtýs [m.] ‘hounď
(Sostrat. apud Stob.); also -in -ɛía (Opp.; metrically conditioned). σtißiký [f.]
'fuller's tax' (pap. IIIª); στßášw ‘to enter, track, etc.', -aσıç [f.] (late); έotißŋtai
[perf.pass.] 'has been trackeď (S. Aj. 874; to στißéw or -άw); ä-στɩß-os ‘unentered'
(AP), often -ńc ‘id.' (A., S., also X. et al.), -ŋtos ‘id.' (Lyc. et al.; cf. ¿σtíßntai); Σtißwv
name of a dog (X. Cyn.).
=
στẞapós 'solid, compact, massive, strong' (II., epic poet., also Hell. and late prose);
like ẞpiapóc, etc.; -apηdóv [adv.] 'compact' (late).
With a long vowel we find oτißŋ [f.] ‘ripe' (Od., Call.), -ŋɛɩs (Call.); on the mg.,
ñáyos, máxvò to ►лýyvvµi.
cf.
•ETYM Related to Arm. step, gen. -oy 'frequent, incessant, permanent' (adj. and adv.),
with stip-em 'to press, urge', -aw, -ov ‘quick, diligent(ly)' < PIE *stoibo- or *steibo-.
Perhaps also related to Lith. stiebas ‘mast(tree), pillar, stalk', stáibis 'lower shank,
supporting post', if the accent, which points to root-final *-b-, is old. Similar words
with root-final *-p- in other Indo-European languages resemble the Greek root: Lat.
stipāre 'to compress, surround' (sometimes connected to the Corinth. PN Στíлwv, IG
4, 319); Lith. stipti, 1sg. stimpù 'to stiffen, grow rigid', stiprùs 'strong', stiēpti ‘to
stretch'; OE stif, MHG stīf ‘stiff, erect' < *steifa-, MLG stivele 'support', ON stífla 'to
dam'. With *-bh-, we find CS stúblo ‘stem, stalk', Latv. stiba ‘staff, roď and, within
Greek, σtipos, with a mg. that resembles that of σtεißw. The exact relation between
the roots *steib-/*steibh-/*steip- is uncertain.
oteileiń →oteleά.
σtɛĭpa 1 [adj.] ‘infertile', of cows, goats, women, also metaph. (Od., Hp., Hell. and
late), 'virginal' (Lyc., Luc.). <IE *ster-ih, 'infertile'>
•VAR Secondary σtɛipos (E. Andr. 711 as v.l. to σtεppós), εúvoúxous σtεipovs (Man.),
katáotɛipos (Vett. Val.), cf. кáτ-1σoxvoç, etc.
•DER otɛip-wdns ‘(looking) infertile' (Hp.), στεp-óoμαɩ, [v.] 'to become infertile'
(LXX, Phld., Ph. et al.), with -wois, -wtikóç; -ɛúw [v.] 'to be infertile' (Gal.).
1395
•ETYM Formation like лíɛƖpα, xíµaιpa, µoîpa, etc. (Schwyzer: 494, Chantraine 1933:
98). An old term for an infertile animal, also used for infertile women. Similar
formations are reflected in Arm. ster] 'infertile' < *ster-i- (cf. anurj beside övɛpoc)
and Skt. stari- infertile cow'< *ster-ih₂. Further cognates are Lat. sterilis 'infertile',
with -ilis from gracilis, fertilis, etc. (Leumann Glotta 42 (1964): 118), Go. stairo [f.]
'infertile woman', Alb. shtjerrë 'young cow, lamb'. See ▶otɛpɛóc, ▸otépiqos.
otɛĭpa ß
σtεipa 2 [f.] 'foremost part of the keel, stem' (A 482 = ẞ 428), = tò è̟žéxov tñç пpúpas
žúλov katà tǹv τрóлу 'wood of the prow projecting towards the keeľ (H.). <GR>
•VAR Enlarged στεipwµα = τpóñiç ‘keeľ (H.).
•DER ȧvá-σTεipos 'with the prow pointing up, with a high stem' (Plb.).
•ETYM An old feminine formation (cf. especially semantically close лрâpα), beside
►σtɛpɛós ‘stiff, hard'; thus perhaps originally denoting the “hard, solid part” vel
sim.? The word may be identical to στɛipa 1 ‘infertile'.
στɛixw [v.] 'to march (in), rise, draw, go' (Il., epic Ion. poet., also Aeol. prose). <IE
*steigh- 'stride'>
•VAR στíxw (Hdt. 3, 14; conjecture in S. Ant. 1129 ex H.), them. aor. στxεïv (sigm.
aor. лɛpí-σtɛižaç d 277).
•COMP With prefix, e.g., ȧло-, dα-, εл-, лроσ-. As a second element e.g. in μovó-
σxos consisting of one verse' (Plu.), as -σtoɩxoç in e.g. tpí-σtoixos ‘consisting of
three rows' (μ 91), -ɛí [adv.] 'in three rows' (K 473), µɛta-otoɩxɛí mg. unclear (Y 358
and 757); σú-στoxos belonging to the same row, coordinated, corresponding'
(Arist., etc.).
●DER From this, probably deverbative, comes στɣáoμaɩ ‘id.' in зpl.ipf. ¿otixówvto
(Il., Theoc., Nonn.), also with лεpɩ-, σuv-; pres. στɣówτai (Orph.), act. otɩxówσɩ,
ptc. ntr.pl. -ówvía (Hell. and late epic); dµootɩɣáε [3sg.pres.] ‘escorted (O 635),
from *óμó-στixos or for oμou σt.?
Nominal derivations: A. στíxɛs [f.pl.], ouxós [gen.sg.] ‘rank(s), file(s)', especially of
soldiers, 'battle array, line of battle' (epic poet. since Il.).
B. στixos [m.] ‘file, rank', of soldiers, trees, etc., often of words, 'line' in verse and
prose (Att., etc.). στx-áç [f.] ‘id.' only in dat.pl. στɣádɛσσ (Epigr.). Diminutive
-ídiov (Plu.); -áptov 'coat, tightly fitting garment' (pap.). Adjectives in -ɩvoç, -ɩкóç,
-úpηs and -ŋpós, adv. -ŋdóv (late). Hence στX-í\w [v.] 'to arrange in rows' (LXX; v.l.
x), oµós (Tz.); лεpiστxíw 'to surround' (A.), also лεрστоí(w ‘to
fence in all around with nets (net-poles), to ensnare' (D., Plb., etc.).
C. στoчxoç [m.] 'file or column of soldiers, choir members, ships, etc., layer of
building stones, row of trees, poles, etc.' (IA), hence σtoix-ás [f.] ‘arranged in rows',
of λãa (Sol. apud Poll. et al.), -ádes (vñooɩ) name of a group of islands near
Massilia (A. R., etc.); here also the plant name σtoɣás (Orph., Dsc.) and -adítŋs
olvos 'wine spiced with σ.' (Dsc.). Cult names of Zeus and Athena: -años (Thera),
-adɛús (Sikyon), -ɛía (Epid.), referring to the arrangement in phylai. Further
adjectives in -taños 'measuring one row' (Att. inscr.), -Iкós (late); adverb -ηdóv
(Arist., etc.), -ndís (Theognost.) 'line by line'. Verbal derivations: σTOIX-έw 'to form a
row, to stand in file and rank, to match, agree, be content, follow' (X., Att. inscr.,

=== page 724 ===

1396
σTEλεá
Arist. Hell. and late), also with лεpɩ-, σvv- etc., hardly deverbative in view of the mg.;
-σtoɩxoúvτwç ‘matching, consequent' (Galatia, Aug. time). στoɩx-í(w ‘to arrange in a
line, order' (A. Pr. 484 and 232, X. et al.), often with лεpɩ-, also dia- and кaτα-;
thence -toµós (Poll.).
D. σTOIXεiov, often plur. -ɛia [n.] 'letters in free-standing, alphabetical form' (of
уpáμματα: 'character, script'), also 'principles; component, element' (Pl., Arist., etc.),
'heavenly bodies, elementary spirits, natural demons, magic means' (late and Byz.);
also 'shadow-line' as a measure of time (Att. com.), cf. σкià àvτíστoxos (E. Andr.
745); the original meaning is 'object in a row' vel sim. (on the formation cf. σnuεiov,
µvŋueĩov, ¿λeyɛĩov, etc.); on the development of the mg., which is in many ways
unclear, see Burkert Phil. 103 (1959): 167ff. with references. σox-wds belonging
to the σtoɩxɛia, elementary' (Arist., etc.), of barley ‘in several rows' as opposed to ǎ-
σ рó (Thphr.), so either the same as στox-wdns or a misspelling of it.
σε-ów [V] 'to introduce to the principles' (Chrysipp. et al.), 'to equip with.
magical powers, charm' (Byz.), also -woię, -wµa, -włńs, -wtikós (Epicur., Phld. et
al.), -wµatikós (Ps.-Ptol.), see Mugler 1958-1959: 380f.
•ETYM The full grade thematic present στɛíxw agrees exactly with Go. steigan ‘to go
up', OIr. tiagu ‘to stride, go' < IE *stéigh-. A nasal present is reflected in Lith. stìgti ‘to
lack, be absent', 3pres. stiñga < *stigh-, OCS 1sg. po-stigno ‘to get in, reach, hiť <
*steigh, and a yod-present in Lith. steīgti, 3pres. steigia ‘to organize, (dial.) want,
hurry'. Further, OHG steg [m.] 'small bridge', ON stig [n.] ‘step' < PGm. *stigaz <
PIE *stig"-0- (= στíxoc), OE stige [m. i] ‘going up, down', ON stigr [m.] 'path'. Also,
Alb. shteg 'footpath', Go. staiga, OHG steiga [f.] 'mountain-path, road', Latv. staiga
[f.] 'course' <*stoigh-o-.
στɛɛá [f.] 'shaft of an axe, hack, hammer, etc.' (Hom.), 'cavity for the shaft' in -εɩn (
422) and -ɛá (Aen. Tact.), acc. to Bérard REGr. 68 (1955): 8f. and Pocock AmJPh. 82
(1961): 346ff. with Eust., H. and EM. <IE *stel- 'stalk, shaft'>
VAR -EŃ (A. R.), στελεń (422; v.l. Nic. Th. 387); -ɛóv (Aen. Tact., Babr.), σTEλяóv
(ɛ 236) [n.]; -ɛós and -ɛtós [m.] (Att. inscr.); -εós or -ɛóv (Hell. and late); στɛɛÓS
(Hp. with v.ll.), στɛidɛiós (Aesop.), gen. -εo (Nic. Th. 387 as a v.l.).
●DER σtɛɩλɛi-ápiov (Eust.) and the denominative ptc. ¿oteλewµévos ‘provided with a
shaft' (AP).
Further σTÉλexos [n., m.] 'the end of the stem at the root of a tree, stump, log, stem,
branch' (Pi., IA); on the mg. see Strömberg 1937: 95ff. Also in ло-στελεx-
(Thphr.), -os (AP) 'with many stems' (cf. Strömberg 1940: 103f.). From this στελéxiα-
лρεμ<v>ια 'stumps' (H.), -wdns 'stem-like' (Thphr., Dsc.), -taños 'serving as a stem'
(Gal.), -ndóv ‘according to the kind of stem' (A. R. 1, 1004 as a v.l. for σtolxndóv).
στóλoç [m.] ‘rostrum' (Pi., trag.), ‘outgrowth, stump, appendage' (Arist.), if not
related to στóλoc equipment', see s.v. ► σTέ\\w.
⚫ETYM For the formation of σTελɛá, cf. Swpɛá, yɛvɛá, and for -ɛóc, -ɛóv, cf. кoλ-ɛóc,
-ɛóv; σtεɩλ-ɛn is like ȧp-ɛn, vɛup-εń (στελ- may be due to metrical lengthening;
see Schwyzer: 469³, Risch 1937: 131, and Chantraine 1933: 51 and 91). For σTÉλεxoç,
which may also be a metrical variant, cf. τéµaxoc, etc. (Schwyzer: 496, Chantraine
1933: 403).
otέ\w, -oµal
1397
Both oteλeá, -ɛóc, -ɛóv, and otéλɛxos are based on an unknown, probably nominal
basis, perhaps an s-stem *στéλoç (Schulze 1892: 175), which may be related to Arm.
stełn, pl. stełun-k‘stem, shaft, stalk, twig' and to OE stela [m.] 'stalk of a plant', ON
stjo̟l ‘stalk' < *stel-; see further s.v. ►στέ\\w and ► otýlŋ.
otέ\\w, -oµai [v.] 'to put in order, make ready; to equip or dress with weapons,
clothes, etc.; to prepare (for a journey), dispatch'; also 'to furl, take in the sails, tie up,
constrain'; med. especially 'to summon, fetch, prepare (for a journey), set off (also
act. intr.), also 'to put on (clothes)' (Il.). <IE *stel- 'put in order'; also *spel- ‘split'?>
•VAR Aor. σTεiλat, -aσat (Il.), Aeol. ȧло-, εл-στελλαɩ, fut. στελ-éw (ẞ 287 et al.), -w,
-oчμaι (Att.); aor. pass. σταλ-ñvαι (Pi., IA), -Оñvaι (Hell.), perf. pass. žσtaλµaι (IA),
act. žσταλкα (Att.), žστoλa (gramm.).
•COMP With the prefixes àлo-, diα-, έm-, кatα-, éεɛpɩ-, ovv-, úñо-. As a second
member e.g. in idɩó-στoλos having one's own equipment, equipped at one's own
expense, making one's own journey' (Plu. et al.), лʊуo-στóλoç epithet of yuvn (Hes.
Op. 373); on the mg. see Martinazzoli Par. del pass. 15 (1960): 203ff.; vau-στol-έw [v.]
'to send on a ship; to navigate, steer (a ship)' (Pi., S., E., late prose), vaú-στoλoç only
A. Th. 858 (lyr.); cf. vav-µaxέw, olvo-xoέw etc. in Schwyzer: 726); ȧkpo-σtóλ-1ov [n.]
'decorated end of the rostrum' (Callix., Str., D. S., etc.); àлóστoλ-oç (to àño-στέ\\w)
[m.] 'envoys, fleet expedition' (IA), ‘apostle' (LXX, NT). As a second member e.g. in
μελavó-στоλоç 'with a black garment' (Plu.).
•DER σTÓλOÇ [m.] ‘equipment (of a campaign), campaign by water and by land, fleet,
army, troop, legion, march' (Pi., IA). σtoλń [f.] ‘armor', usually ‘dress, garment'
(IA), 'obstruction, pressure, constraint' (Epicur., medic.), on Аеol. σлóλа cf. below;
also àлo-, dɩα- έn-σtoλý etc. (to àлo-στέ\\w) 'sending, extension, mission, letter'
(IA, etc.), with ȧлoστoλ-ɛú¢ [m.] 'official for equipping and dispatching the fleet'
(Att.), etc., see Boßhardt 1942: 53f.
From σtoλn derive the diminutive σtóλ-tov [n.] (Delos IIª, AP et al.), σtoλ-ás [f.]
‘jacket' (Ael.); στoλ-íç [f.] ‘dress', plur. 'folds' (E., Arist., etc.), further -ídiov, -idwdns,
-ɩdóοµaι, -ídwµα, -idwtós.
From στon and σtóλoç: σtoλ-í\w [v.] ‘to put in order, equip, dress' (Hes. Op. 628,
E., Hell. and late), also with кατα-, συv-, úло-; thence loc, -toμa, lorós, lots,
-lotηplov, -lotɛía; στoλ-áľoµαι [v.] 'to dress' in στoλáðavτо (metrical inscr.
Marathon IIP; cf. Schwyzer: 672). otoλµós [m.] ‘equipment, clothing' (A., E.).
otéλµa. otéqos, στέµµα ‘crown, wreath, garland (H.); στελµovíaɩ. (wμaτa ‘loin-
cloths' (H.) (= X. Cyr. 6, 1); cf. àpµovía, etc. ¿лí-, diá-, áñó-σταλµa [n.] ‘public
mission, etc.' (Thphr., pap.). Sɩασtaλ-µós [m.] ‘assessment' (pap. VI³). otáλ-ois [f.]
'obstruction' (Gal.), Siá-στáλ-σis 'destination, treaty' (LXX). àvα-, diα-, лεрɩ-, etc.
-σταλτIкóç (late).
•ETYM A few attestations, at least some of which appear to be Aeolic, show initial σл-
: σлε\\áµεvα· στελáµεvαi; σлоλεiσа· σταλεĩσα; εйσлоλоv. εvεíµovα, εvσταλéα;
кaσnέλλɛɩ (cod. -έλŋ). σtopvúɛi (all H.); σлóλα = στoλń (Sapph.); кaσñoλéw (-oñeλ-
?)· úлoστopéσw (Sapph., H.). This has been taken to indicate that IA σTελ-, Aeol.
σлελ- reflects PIE skel-. Bechtel 1921, 1: 125f. (cf. Hamm 1957: 15³) proposes that the
PIE roots *stel- 'send' and *skel- ‘equip' merged in IA, but the evidence for a root

=== page 725 ===

1398
*skel- is very meager. The forms σлóλα and εüσлоλоç may instead reflect PIE *spel-
'split' (see ►σлolás).
A PIE root *stel- is attested in Arm. stełc-anem, aor. stełc-i [v.] 'to prepare, create'
(with unexplained c), Alb. shtiell [v.] ‘to wind up, reel up, collect' < PIE *stel-n-, OCS
po-stыlati, sg. po-steljo 'to spread', OPr. stallīt 'to stand'; see LIV2 s.v. *stel- and
Derksen 2008 s.v. *stúlati. Perhaps PGm. staljan- 'to put, etc.' (in G stellen and
cognates) is related as well, but it may also be a denominative from PGm. *stalla-
'place, etc.', which could derive from *sth₂-dlo- instead.
στελúлηv [f.] àσqodeλóv 'asphodel' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown. The gloss is doubted by DELG. The suffix -uл- may indicate Pre-
Greek origin (cf. Pre-Greek, suffixes).
otéµßw [v.] = kɩvā ovvɛxwç (EM), 'to shake ceaselessly' (A. Fr. 440 = 635 M., also EM
et al. as an explanation of ảσtεµôηc), ‘to abuse, vilify' (Eust.). ◄PG?(V) ►
=
•VAR Enlarged σtεµßášεiv. Xodopɛïv, xλεváεɩv 'to revile, jeer at' (H.), -ážαι· úßpíσal
'run riot' (EM), -άσεç. λodipial 'railers' (H.); àστéµßактоν (Kλéoç, Euph.)
ákívntov ǹ þéßalov i tetiµnµévov 'motionless or immovable, firm, honoreď (Et.
Gud.); unclear άστеμßакта τчpovμévη (Lyc. 1117); also àστεµ³Ý· à¤¤µẞŃ,
άτápaxos 'fearless, calm' (H.).
•DER σTÓẞos odopía, övɛdos ‘jeering, reproach' (Lyc., H.), στoßášeɩv. kakoλoyɛiv
‘to slander', -aσμátwv. λoidopiŵv ‘jeering' (H.), (èñɩ-)σtoßέw 'to mock, taunt (A. R.,
Epic. anon., EM).
With aspirate: ȧotâµ = áfietakívntos (H.), ‘unshakable, firm' (epic Il.). On
►στέμλα [n.pl.] 'squeezed olives or grapes, mass of olives or grapes' (IA), see s.v.
σtópos [m.] ‘bombastic, high-flown speech' (Longin.), -āž, -ākos [m.] 'bombastic
speaker, loud-mouth' (Ar. Nu. 1367; from Aesch.), -á(w [v.] 'to speak bombastically,
talk big' (Ar. et al.), also -ασμós, -aσtkós (Eust.); στoµ-ów ‘id.' (Phld.), -wdns, -ós
(sch.). στóµßos = Bapúnxos, ßapúqoyyos 'deep-voiced' (Hp. apud Gal.).
•ETYM The word στεußw preserves the meaning 'to push violently, shake ceaselessly'.
This yielded 'to maltreat, revile, ridicule' in στéµßw, -ášw, σtóßos, and -έw. Hence
the meaning of στóµоç, -α, etc.
Possibly related to the Germanic deverbatives OHG stampfōn, MLD stampen, OSw.
stampa, etc. 'to smash' < PGm. *stamp- < PIE *stomb-. The Greek forms without a
nasal may point to a nasal present. For the forms with an aspirate, influence of
►στέow 'to honor' has been assumed. More plausibly, the variants with and without
a nasal and the variants with an aspirate could be interpreted as evidence for Pre-
Greek origin. See ➤ȧoteµqńs.
στéµqulov [n.] mass of olives from which the oil has been pressed (Ar.). <PG?(V)►
•Var otέµqðla [n.pl.] (rarely sg.) ‘squeezed olives or grapes, mass of olives or
grapes' (IA), with σtεµqvλ-ítɩdes τpúyes ‘mass of grapes for wine' (Hp.), -ís ‘id.'
(Ath.), -ías oivos (pap. IIIª).
⚫ETYM A full grade variant of σtaquλń 'grapе'. No further etymology; perhaps Pre-
Greek, if the -- is interpreted as prenasalization.
OTÉVW
στεvós [adj.] 'narrow, close, small, tight, slim' (IA). <?>
•VAR Ion. σtɛɩvós, Aeol. (gramm.) σtévvoç.
COMP Often as a first member, e.g. στεушлóç, sеe ►óлη.
1399
●Der otevó-tŋs (Ion. -ɛɩ-) [f.] ‘narrowness, tightness' (IA); back-formation otɛivoç
(epic II.) for στévos (A. Eu. 521 [lyr.]) [n.] 'narrowness, narrow room, throng,
distress'.
Denominative verbs: στεívoμa 'to be narrowed, crowd, be crowded' (epic II.), rarely
with έv-, àµɩ, лεрɩ-, a back-formation with only present and ipf. forms. Act. στɛívw
'to narrow, crowd (Nonn., Orph.) is rare and late. στεvóομα (-εɩ-), 'to become
narrow' (Hell. and late), also -ów ‘to make narrow', often with άлo-; thence -wσɩç,
-wµɑ, -wtikós (late.). στɛvvypós 'narrow' (Ion.) with στεvуpãσα [aor.] 'to
contract (Hp. apud Gal.); TN Σtevú-kλŋpos ‘narrow piece of land' (Hdt. 9, 64).
Probably also σtável. <o>teivetai, ovµßéßvotai 'to become narrow, cram' (H.), with
unclear root vocalism.
•ETYM The alternation στɛvós σtεlvós : σtévvos (and also Att. σtεv(Ƒ)ó-tεpos,
-τατoç instead of -w-) points to PGr. *στεvƑóc, a thematic enlargement of the u-stem.
σTEVU- continued in στεv-уpós and Σtεvú-кληpos (Chantraine 1933: 122).
No cognates outside Greek are known. Cf. Chantraine 1933: 226, Fur.: 226 ("nicht
sicher erklärt"), and DELG ("L'étymologie de ce groupe de mots reste obscure.").
The form σTεvvypós may have a Pre-Greek suffix (see Pre-Greek, Suffixes under yp:
tavaypic, Bá入aypos, yńdiypos).
otέvw [v.] ‘to moan, drone, groan, lament', also trans. ‘to mourn, bewail' (Il., epic
poet., also late prose). <IE *(s)ten- 'groan'>
•VAR Rarely med. -oμat, only pres. and ipf.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àvα-, εл-, μετα-, úло-. Compounds e.g. áуá-στovos
'moaning loudly, roaring' (Od. et al.).
•DER A number of root enlargements is found, part of which is metrically
conditioned (Schwyzer: 105, 736; Chantraine 1942: 112): σTEV-ά(w, aor. -ážaɩ, fut.
-á≥w, also with ảva-, έ-, etc. (poet., also Hdt., D., LXX, Plu.); otɛv-áxw, -áxoµai,
-axéw, -axñoaɩ, -αxíšw, -αxíšoµαɩ, also with ava-, έл-, лερɩ-, etc. (mostly epic Il.), all
meaning 'to sigh, groan'; on these formations see Schwyzer: 702, Chantraine 1942:
330.
The following words derive from σtévw: Στév-twp [m.] PN (E 785; Benveniste 1948:
54). σtóvos [m.] ‘moaning, etc.' (Il., epic poet.); στovó-eis (otovófeσav [f.sg.] Corc.
VI³) 'full of moaning, causing moaning, woeful' (Il., epic poet.).
From otevášw: otɛvay-µós [m.] ‘the moaning, sighing (Pi., trag., Pl.), -µwdŋs (Paul.
Aeg.); -µa [n.] ‘id.' (S., E., Ar.), -µαtwdns (Gal.).
From στεváуw: σtovaxý [f.] ‘id.' (epic poet. Il.), verb στovaxέw, -axñσαɩ, -αxí¶w, also
with έлɩ-, лapα-, etc. (epic poet. Il.), further, often as a v.l., otɛvaxέw, -axilw.
⚫ETYM The full-grade thematic στévw agrees exactly with Skt. stanati 'to drone,
thunder', Lith. 1sg. stenù, OE stenan 'to moan, groan' < PIE *sten-. A yod-present is
reflected in OCS stenjo, and with zero grade in OE stunian, ON stynja 'id.'. Further,
Skt. stan reflects an athem. ipf. < PIE *sten-t.

=== page 726 ===

1400
Perhaps related s-less forms are attested in Aeol. τévvel otével, ßpúxεταɩ ‘groans,
roars' (H.), possibly < *ten(h2)-ie/o- (as per Pinault 1982: 267), Skt. tanyati 'to sound
loudly, thunder' < *t(e)n-ie/o-, OE þunian 'to sound, resound' < *tn-ie/o-, OE þunor
'thunder', Lat. tonere 'to thunder'.
otepyávos [m.] · кóлpшv 'place for dung' (H.), at an alphabetically incorrect position.
<?7
ETYM No etymology; not related to Lat. stercus [n.] 'excrements', W trwnk ‘urine',
etc. On the accent, see Schwyzer: 520.
στέpyw [v.] ‘to show affection, cherish sympathy, love tenderly', of family members, of
subordinates towards superiors and vice versa, etc. (rarely of physical love); 'to be
content, content oneself (Thgn. IA). <IE *sterg- love, tend'>>
•VAR Aor. στépεαi, fut. στépěw (IA), perf. στopуа (Hdt.), pass. Eστεручaι (Emp.,
AP), aor. στεрXеñvat (Lyc., Plu. et al.).
●comp àлo-σtέpуw 'to cease to love, abhor' (Terp., A., Theoc., LXX et al.). As a
second member, e.g. in qλó-στopyos ‘cherishing sympathy, loving tenderly', with
-éw, -ía (Att., Hell. and late).
•DER σTÉPу-nеpov [n.] 'love potion, love herb' as a plant name (Dsc.), see Strömberg
1940: 92 and 147, ‘love' (A., E.); -ŋua [n.] 'love charm' (S.); στopyń [f.] ‘affection,
love' (Emp., Antipho, rarely Hell. and late).
ETYM Possibly related to OCS strěšti, strěgo 'to guard, tend', but the *-t- of the Slavic
forms may be secondary in view of Lith. sérgėti 'to watch over, guard', in which case
the Greek form cannot be related. Sometimes also connected to OIr. serc, MW serch
'love', MBret. serch 'concubine' < PIE *sterk-eh₂, but the different velar poses a
problem.
and
otɛpɛós [adj.] ‘stiff, hard, firm, tenacious, steady, solid, normal', also of money
measures (Il.), 'cubic' (see Mugler 1958-1959: 378f.), rarely ‘infertile' (E., Arist.). <IE?
*ster- 'stiff, fixed'>
VAR Att. also σteppós.
COMP As a first member in στεрε-μετр-íα [f.] 'the measuring of cubic bodies,
stereometry' (Pl. Epin., Arist. et al.).
●der otepe-ótŋs (-pp-) [f.] ‘hardness, firmness', also ‘infertility' (Pl., Arist., etc.);
otepe-óoµai (-pp-), -ów [v.] 'to become, make firm, hard, to harden' (Hp., X., Arist.),
also with άлo-, кατα-; thence στεpέ-wµa [n.] ‘firmness, solid component, firmament'
(Hp., Arist., etc.), -wotę [f.] 'to harden' (LXX, Str. et al.), -wματíčw, -WTIKÓS, -WTHS.
Enlarged στεpé-ïvos 'hard' (pap. I³), after ëέtpivoç, žúɩvoç, etc.; σtépiqoç ‘hard,
firm, infertile' (Att., Arist., etc.), hence σtεpio-ótηs (sch.), -óoµaɩ [v.] 'to solidify'
(Ph.), -wuaτa [n.pl.] 'solid foundation', -εvoµévè· rapßevevoµévy ‘brought up as a
maiden' (H.), στεpéµvos ‘hard, firm, solid' (Pl. Epin., Epicur., Phld. et al.), -iwdŋs
(Porph.), -tóoμai (Zeno).
ETYM The word στεpɛóc, whence Att. στεppós (Scheller 1951: 114; differently Forbes
Glotta 36 (1958): 269f.), probably reflects *σTεpεƑóç, a formation which agrees with
ÉTE(F)ós, keve(F)ós, etc. Leumann Glotta 42 (1964): 118 derives σtepɩqos ‘unfertile'
1401
from the root of στεipa, enlarged with the suffix -po- that designates animal names
(cf. Epiqoç, λapos, etc.), with a semantic change from 'infertile' to 'hard'.
The formations above are based on the IE root *ster-, attested in e.g. OHG stara-blint
‘blind', OHG starën ‘to stare', MoHG starr 'rigid'; ToB ścire 'harsh' < *ster- and ToA
ștare ‘effort' < *storo-. The words στɛipa 1 ‘infertile' and στɛĭpa 2 ‘stem' also
belong here. Numerous further words may belong to the same family, with various
formations and different enlargements: Oσép, σηý, στóреy,
► oτnpíšw, ▸otpiqvós.
otέpvov [n.] ‘breast, chest', in Hom. always of the chest, also as a seat of emotions,
'heart' (Il., poet, also medic.). <IE *sterh3- 'spread out', *ster(h)-no->
•VAR Often plur. -a.
•COMP εúpú-στεpvoç 'with a wide chest' (Hes. et al.), στεpvo-τuлýs ‘beating the
chest' (E. [lyr.]), épó-σtepvos ‘in front of the chest' (A.), to which лpoσtepv-ídiov
[n.] 'harness (of horses)' (X. et al.), also σtɛpvídov ‘id.' (late).
•DER Verbal derivations from hypostases or univerbations, e.g., úлoστεpv-íšoµai ‘to
fix under the chest' (Plu.); úлóστεруоу· úлоуάστрioν 'paunch' (H.). Further
derivations are rare: στεруíτdεç· лλεчpаí 'sides (of a person, animal) (Poll.),
σTÉρVI. ÉVτεpιúvn 'inmost part' (H.), like μóλíž, óñvič, etc.; unclear is στépvɩov
'meat that is difficult to digest', cf. LSJ s.v.
⚫ETYM Related to OHG stirna [f.] 'forehead' < *ster(h₂)-n-ieh, and Ru. storoná
‘region, side' < PIE *stor(h3)-n-eh2. The root is probably that of στópvчµ, i.e.
*sterh3. One might, however, also consider a reconstruction *ster-no- from the root
*ster- ‘lay down' without a laryngeal, reflected in Skt. stṛṇóti ‘lay down, destroy'; see
Narten MSS 22 (1967): 57-66, LIV² s.v. *ster- and s.v. στpaτóç. The latter
reconstruction has the advantage that it would account for the absence of a reflex of
a laryngeal in στépνov. However, the semantics seem to favor the former
reconstruction, even if the exact semantic development remains uncertain. The loss
of the laryngeal would be regular in this position, acc. to Van Beek 2009.
σtépoμai [v.] ‘to be robbed, lack, lose' (Hes., IA). <IE? *ster- 'steal, rob’>>
•VAR Ipv. σtapέστw (Delph. IV³)? Full grade with n-enlargement in ptc. στɛpɛís (E.),
σtɛp-ŋеñvaɩ (Pi, IA), fut. -ñσoµai, -ŋ0ýσoµai (Att.; otεpoñµaɩ And.), perf. ¿otépŋuai
(IA); act. 'to rob, snatch from': aor. σtep-ñoai (otepéoaɩ v 262, pap. et al.), fut. -ǹow
(στεpŵ A. Pr. 862, -έow pap.), perf. ¿στέpηкα (Att.); pass. στɛpéw, simplex only ipv.
σtɛpɛíτw (Pl.), otherwise with άлo-, hence med. στεpέoµaι (Hell. and late); also
otɛpiokw, -oµai (Hdt., Att.), åño- (S.), aor. στɛpíσɑɩ (metrical inscription Eretria IV-
IIIª, AP; cf. ȧлоστεрíчw Hp.).
•DER (ȧло-)στέpŋσiç [f.] ‘robbery, confiscation' (Hp., Att., etc.), also -ɛσç (pap.),
after aïpεσiç, εüpɛσɩç etc., with στep-ñoiµos, -éoiµos 'which can be confiscated' (pap.
inscr. II-III³), -ŋua [n.] ‘id.' (Ps.-Callisth.), (àлo-)στεpytikós ‘robbing, removing,
negative, privative' (Ar, Arist., Hell. and late), στεpητýs [m.] who snatches or
withholds sth. from sbd., deceiver' (Pl., Arist., et al.), fem. -ηtpís (Ar. Nu. 730;
parody).

=== page 727 ===

1402
1403
ETYM The above forms probably all go back to the them. present στépoμal. The
isolated ipv. Delph. στapéστw, which Bechtel 1921, 2: 231 regards as a zero grade root
aorist, is better explained as regular from στɛpéσðw (with ɛ > a before p in this
dialect). First, the then-intransitive aorist στερ-ñvαι, -ησoμаι was formed from
στέpoμαι (if it were old, we would expect zero grade σtap-), and then -ηñval,
-ŋonσoμai; later also the active otep-ñoal (otepéσaɩ after óléσal, etc.), -now, etc.,
and finally στεp-έw, -íokw (cf. e.g. εúp-ǹow, εúp-íoкw). There are no certain
cognates. A possible connection is with MIr. serb 'theft', which can reflect *ster-uā.
σtεporn [f.] ‘lightning, gleam, shine' (epic II.).
•var Σtepórŋs [m.] name of a Cyclops (Hes., Call.); σtέpoy, ‘glittering, lighting' (S.
[lyr.]) is a back-formation after alloy.
●Comp otεpor-¡\yɛpéta, epithet of Zeus (H 298, Q. S., Nonn.), after vɛqɛλŋyɛpéta
(cf. Risch 1954: 394).
⚫ETYM See ►ȧστερолŃ.
otέpqos [n.] ‘skin, fur, hull' (A. R., Lyc., AP). <IE *sterb"- "become solid, get fixed;
.skin'>
•VAR Also tépoos (Nic.); also σtpéqos. otpéµµa, dépμа, ßúpσα. Awpiɛis 'band, skin,
hide (Doric)' (H.) and popoç.
•COMP σtεpóó-лεлλoç ‘with a лéлλoç made of skin' (Lyc.); uncertain µɛλá<v>-
στεpqoç 'with a black skin' (A. Fr. 370 = 721 M.).
●DER otɛpqíva. depµatívn. oi dè dépματα övεa ... 'leathern; the skin of an ass' (H.);
cf. otέpqviov. okλŋpóv, otepɛóv ‘hard, firm' (H.). Denominative verb: σtɛpq-ów (to
dress with skins' (sch.), hence -wτñpα [acc.] 'dressed in skins' (Ibyc.); also otpéqwois
(for στépq-?). кáλvyiç àyyɛíwv dépµati yɩvoµévi ‘covering of vessels made of skin'
(H.).
...
⚫ETYM For the alternation between anlauting σt- and t-, cf. on (σ)τέyoç, etc.; for the
formation, cf. ɛlpos, dépos, лéкоç, etc. Usually connected with the group of
► στɛpɛós ‘hard, firm'; cf. Boέns otepeñoi (II.), otepeà dépµata (Pl.). Cognates
outside Greek are Ru. stérbnut' [v.] 'to become solid or hard; to die' < *strb¹-, OCS
(u)strabiti 'to get better, recover' <*storb¹-, ON stjarfi [m.] 'lockjaw, tetanus', stirfinn
'stubborn', OHG sterban 'to die' (< *to become stiff) <*sterb"-, MIr. ussarb 'death'
<*ud-sterb-eh₂, srebann [m.] ‘skin'.
otɛūtai [3sg.pres.] usually translated 'to announce formally, declare oneself ready,
promise, threaten, affirm', but cf. Meier-Brügger in DELG Supp. s.v., who pleads for
a translation 'to be manifest'; see below. <IE *steu- ‘be manifest'>
•VAR Ipf. σTεUTO (Hom., A. R., A. Pers. 49 [anap.]), зpl. στεÜVτα (Maiist.), isg.
στεчμαι (conj. Orph.).
•DER Myc. te-u-to [m.] PN = *Σtɛvτwp (Meier-Brügger Glotta 70 (1992): 1)?
•ETYM An archaic epic word, corresponding to Skt. stáuti 'to praise, declare', stative
stáve ‘is praised', sigm. aor. astoșța. Greek replaced the old stative ending *-o(i) with
middle *-to(i) in σtɛūtaɩ. The original meaning is found in Hitt. ištuųāri [3sg.pres.]
'to be manifest; be announced < *stu-ó-ri (Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). On the formation,
see Narten 1968: 9-19.
otέqw, -oµai [v.] 'to surround closely, enclose tightly, encase, wreathe, honor (with
libations)', in prose often στεpavów. ◄IE *stegh- 'crown'>
●VAR Aor. σtéyat, -aσða (II.), pass. στɛôēñvaɩ, fut. στέчw, -oµαɩ, perf. čσtεµµaɩ
(IA), έσtɛ¤µévos (Milete VIª); cf. στéðµata below.
●COMP Also with лɛpɩ-, ¿ë-, кaτα-, etc. As a second member in Xpvσo-oteqĤs
'consisting of a golden garland' (S.), but mostly verbal, e.g. кαταστεQ-ns 'wreathed'
(to каτα-στέw, S., A. R.).
•DER σtéqoç [n.] 'wreath, garland' (Emp., trag., late prose), metaph. 'honoring.
libation' (A. Ch. 95); στéµµa, mostly plur. -ata [n.] ‘band, wreath' (Il.), also as an
ornament of Roman statues of ancestors, 'family tree' (Plu., Sen., Plin.), 'guild' (late
inscr.), with -μaτíaç epithet of Apollo (Paus.), -µaτañov mg. uncertain (H., AB),
-ματów 'to wreathe' (E.); on the byform στé¤µατα· τà στéµµατα ‘wreathes' (H.), see
Schwyzer: 317. σtéчç [f.] 'wreathing' (pap. IIIº); στɛлtiкóv [n.] ‘wreath-money, -toll'
(раp. III³). στεлτýρια· στéµµατα, ä oi oiкéτaι έк τŵV кλáбwv εεηлтоν 'wreaths which
the slaves fastened from the branches' (H.); Στεлτуριoν [n.] name of a Delphic.
festival (Plu.). σTɛqάv [m.] ‘summit' (Ephesus IIIª), = úчηλóç, àëóкpŋµvos ‘high,
sheer' (H.); after кoλoqúv, etc.; στεávŋ [f.] 'fillet, edge of a helmet' also 'helmet'
(Trümpy 1950: 43 and Hainsworth JHS 78 (1958): 52), ‘edge of a rock, pinnacle of a
wall' (Il., epic poet., also Hell. and late prose). στéqavos [m.] 'wreath, frame, wreath
of victory or honor, honor' (since N 736) with several derivations: -tɩov, -íʊkoç, -íç,
-ikós, -lałos, -ítns, -itikós, -išw, -ía; especially στéqav-óoµaι, -ów 'to form a
wreath, wreathe, crown, decorate, honor' (Il.), also with лεpɩ-, etc.; thence -wμa,
-wμatiкóç, -wσiç, -wτηs, -wτíç and -wτpíç, -wτIKÓÇ.
⚫ETYM Not related to Skt. stabhnáti 'to prop up', as is traditionally thought, since the
Sanskrit word reflects *stmb-, it is neither related to OHG stabēn 'to be fixed or
stiff, ON stafr 'staff, and cognates, since the mg. is hardly compatible. Lidén 1924:
224ff. connected MoP taj corona, diadema regium', Arm. t'ag ‘id.' < PIE *(s) togh-o-,
which is followed by LIV² s.v.
σtñ¤oç [n.] ‘breast, chest', also as the seat of emotions, ‘heart' (Il.), metaph. 'ball of the
hand, foot' (medic.), 'sandbank' (Plb., etc.). <?►
VAR Frequently plur. -ɛa, -11.
•COMP στηó-бεσμoç, -íç, -ía, -ŋ 'breast-band' (Poll., LXX, Hell. pap.), µεуαλó-,
μкρó-στηoç 'with wide or narrow chest' (Mnesith. apud Orib.).
•DER Diminutive στη0-íov (Alex., Arist., etc.), -ídiov (Phryn.), -úviov (middle com.,
LXX); cf. Xελúviov 'lip, jawbone, etc.'. στη0-αñov 'breastwork' (sch.); perhaps
otŋðías. öpvis roóç ‘some bird' (H.); otηł-ikós (Arist.), -taños (inscr. IV³, sch.)
'belonging to the breast'; -1στýp [m.] 'breast-plate of a horse's harness' (gloss.), cf.
ẞpaxioviστnp armlet', etc.
•ETYM AS στños is also Dor. and Aeol. (Sicyonic στãos may have ã < ŋ; see
Thumb-Kieckers 1932: 129), the connection with σηµ (Chantraine 1933: 421,
Benveniste 1935: 200) must be given up. The similarity to στývoν· στñßoç (H.), Arm.
stin, Skt. stána- [m.] 'female breast', etc. is hardly coincidental. If cognate, the
relation between στývov and στños would be like that of Lat. plēnus 'full' to
лλñеoç 'multitude'.

=== page 728 ===

1404
σTH
στnλn [f.] 'column', e.g. for fixing a peace treaty, hence 'law, treaty'; also 'buttress' (IA
since Il.). <IE *sth₂-sleh₂->
•VAR Dor. στáλα, Aeol. στáλλα.
•COMPστηλo-уpaqέw 'to write on a column' (Hell. and late).
⚫DER Diminutives στηλ-íov, -ídiov, -íç, -ïdoç, -údptov (Hell. and late). στηλ-íτηs, fem.
-ĭτɩç 'whose name is written on a column as a denouncement, publicly dishonored'
(Att.), 'column-shaped, belonging to columns' (Luc., AP), also -τεúw, -íτɛvµa (late).
στλ-ów, -óμa 'to erect (a column), designate by columns, demarcate, write on a
column', also with ảva-, кaτα-, ¿v-, лεpɩ-; thence -wσç, -wµa (Hell. and late).
•ETYM Traditionally reconstructed as PGr. *oráλ-vā < PIE *stl-n- (on the treatment
of the group -λv-, see Schwyzer: 283f.), from σTÉλλw with a zero grade like in έлí-
στα-μа (see also σTάλ). The same formation is found in OHG stollo [m. n]
'scafold, upport, post'. Risch 1937: 110 gives an alternative and more plausible
reconstruction *στα-σλã from the root of στημɩ, with the same suffix as e.g. Lat.
scālae < *skand-slai. Borrowed into Lyc. as sttala (Kretschmer Glotta 28 (1940): 103).
otñµa⇒otýµwv.
otýµwv, -ovos [m.] 'the warp in the upright loom, thread', also of a single thread
(Hes.). <IE *steh₂- ‘stand', *steh₂-mon->
VAR Dor. -á- (AP).
⚫COMP σovo-vòtiêǹ téxvò ‘the art of spinning' (Pl.), Xpνσo-στηµwv 'with golden.
threads, gold-stitched' (Lyd.); an o-stem is found in στημo-ppayέw 'to be unraveled
into threads' (A.) and μаvó-στημoç 'with thin warp' (A.).
•DER σtñµa [n.] shaft or bearing in which the axle of a slip-hook works (Hero), 'the
exterior part of the membrum virile' (Ruf., Poll.). Diminutives σtηµóv-tov (Arist.),
-íaç kíkɩvvoç ‘thread-like curl' (Cratin.), -tкóc ‘belonging to the warp' (pap. III³),
-wdŋs ‘warp-like' (Plu.), -íšoµαɩ ‘to lay down the spokes of a web' (Arist.). Besides
στηv-íov 'yarn, (weaving-) thread' (Delos IIIª, Hell. pap.), cf. Aquév-tov to λíuvη
(Schwyzer: 524); with loss of the v: στηµ-íov (late pap.).
⚫ETYM From PIE *steh₂-mn-, related to Lat. stamen [n.] 'thread, loom, warp', Skt.
stháman- [n.] 'standing-place', Go. stomin [dat.] = Grг. úлóστασιç, ОSw. stomme [m.]
'scaffolding, frame' < *stām-, and Lith. stomuō 'body shape, stature'. Cf. the o-grade
in στáµuž. dokìç žulivη 'wooden plank' (H.); with a zero grade, στáµvos and
►σtaµivɛç. See ▶ïotnju.
στýva [n.pl.] ‘festival in Athens before the Thesmophoria, where women uttered
curses and insults' (Ar., H., Phot.). <?>
•DER στηviwσai Baσηñoa, λoιSopñσa 'to slander' (H.).
⚫ETYM No etymology; the relation to στηvov is unclear.
σtývov [n.] · σtños 'breasť' (H.). <IE *psten-o- 'breast'>
•ETYM The word has been connected to Arm. stin < *pste/ēn- and Skt. stána- 'breast',
Av.fstāna-; probably related to otñšos.
στpiw, -o [v.] 'to support, establish, attach; to found, stand up, lean on'
(Democr., E. et al.) ◄?►
1405
oTilw
•VAR Aor. -ížaɩ, -íaσa (II.), also -íσal, -íσaσða (Hell. and late), pass. -ɩ×¤ñvai
(Tyrt., etc.), fut. -ížw, -ížoµai, -iow, -ɩw, pass. -¹×¤ñσoµai, perf. med. έotńpiyµai, plpf.
έotýpikto (Il.), inf. ¿στηpíσðαι (LXX), act. στnpixa (pap.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧvTI-, άÑO-, ÈV-, ÈÑI-.
•DER σtñplyš, -ɩyyos [f.] 'support' (Lys., X., D. S. et al.), a back-formation like
σáλлɩуč (:-í【w), στрóðiуž, лλáστуε, etc. (àνπ-, ȧло-, εл-, úло-)στýpiуμα [n.]
'support' (Hp., E., etc.), -iyµós (åvɩɩ-) [m.] ‘support; standing firm, still' (Arist., D.
H., D. S. et al.). -₁₁ç (άло-) 'establishment, support' (Hp.). -кτηc [m.] 'support'
(sch.). -IкTIкóç 'standing firm, still' (Procl.).
•ETYM As στñpɩy is clearly a back-formation, the original formation may be
preserved in στñрα· τà λíðɩvα лрóеυрα 'stone doorways' (H.), but the mg. of the
gloss is rather specific. Cf. also the PN Στñpíç (Milete, Bechtel KZ 46 (1914): 375).
Probably related to στɛpɛós and cognates, but the details remain unclear. Cf. also
►σкηρíлτоμαι, which has a similar formation.
στýτα [f.] = yʊvý 'woman' (Theoc. Syrinx 14, Dosiad. Ara 1). <GR➤
•ETYM Jocular formation, created by scholars from A 6 diaσtýτηy (Leumann 1950:
112, Ruijgh 1957: 100f.).
στía [f.] 'small stone, pebble' (A. R. 2, 1172). <?>
•VAR OTĭov [n.] (Hp. apud Gal. 19, 140).
•COMP лоÚ-στos 'rich in pebbles' (Call., Nic.).
●DER σtɩwdŋs ‘like a pebble, stone-hard (Gal.), στášei· \íðois þáλλɛi ‘throws with
stones' (H.).
•ETYM This item formally agrees with Skt. stiyāḥ [pl.] 'standing waters', but the
semantics are quite different. An intermediate meaning could be sought in Skt.
styāna- 'curdled, stiff. Other possible cognates are Go. stains [m.] ‘stone' < PGm.
*staina- < *steh₂i-no-, OCS stěna, Ru. stená [f.] ‘wall' < *steh¸i-neh₂.
otißapós, otißn, σrißos, etc. →oteißw.
otißi―otiµl.
στíчw [v.] 'to stitch, tattoo, brand' (IA). <IE *(s)teig- ‘sting'>
⚫VAR Aor. σTížai, pass. στуеñvai, fut. στížw, perf. pass. στɩуμα.
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. кατα-, лεрt-, diα-. Also in лɛpiσtɩуnç ‘variegated' (Nic.).
■DER στíу-μa [n.] 'stitch, mark, brand' (Hes. Sc. 166, IA), also = Siyaшα (F) as sign
for the number 6 (attempt at an explanation by Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 53)
with -µατíaç [m.] ‘branded one' (IA). (¿ni-, dia-)otiy-µý [f.] ‘mar, spot, point, tittle’
(IA) with чuaños ‘including just one point, without extension' (Hell. and late); -µóç
[m.] 'stitch, brand' (A. [lyr.]). otížíc (diá-) [f.] ‘stitching' (late). στу-ɛúç [m.]
‘stitcher, brander' (Hdt.), 'brandiron' (Suid.), probably directly from the verb;
likewise -wv, -wvos [m.] 'branded one' (Ar. Fr. 97). στiyoç [m.], -ov [n.] 'point'
(Archim.). σtíк-τηs [m.] ‘stitcher, brander' (Herod.); -τós (кατá-) 'spotted,
variegated' (trag., Arist., etc.).
⚫ETYM From PIE *(s)teig- 'to prick, sting' (see LIV² s.v.): Go. stiks, OHG stih < PGm.
*stiki- [m.] ‘stitch', MoHG stechen ‘to sting', Distel ‘thistle' (< PGm. *þīhstila-);

=== page 729 ===

1406
denominative Lat. instigare 'to incite, provoke' < *steig-, stinguō 'to extinguish' <
*steng- + -u-; Skt. áti stig- ‘to penetrate', stegá- [m.] 'which stings', YAv. stija [ins.sg.]
'with the tip (of the tusk)', Skt. tejate ‘to sharpen' < *teig-e-to-, tīkṣṇá- [adj.] ‘sharp,
keen-eyed', téjas- [n.] 'sharp edge (of knife), sharpness', YAv. bi-taēya- 'having two
sharp edges', tiyra- 'cutting, pointed, sharp'.
στíλßw [v.] ‘to shine, gleam, shimmer' (Il., epic poet., late prose). <PG?►
•VAR Rare and late aor. σtiλyai.
•COMP Also with άлo-, etc.
•DER σTiλẞ-ŋ [f.] 'lamp' (com.), Аττкоì бε εσолτроν 'mirror (Att.)' (H.); -ŋdwv,
-óvos [f.] ‘brilliance, shimmer' (Thphr., Phld. et al.), cf. λªµëηdáv; otíλyıç [f.]
‘sparkling' (Tz.); otɩλß-áç (yñ) ‘shimmering' (late), -años = coloratus (gloss.), -ŋdóv
[adv.] ‘gleaming, sparkling' (Suid.). σtíλß-wv, -ovtos, -wvos [m.] name of the planet
Mercury (Arist. et al.), see Scherer 1953: 89f.
Further σußós ‘gleaming' (Gal.), hence -ótŋs [f.] (v.l. for σtλävótŋs Plu.); -ów ‘to
make shine' (LXX, Dsc.), hence -wσiç, -wµα, -wеpov, -wτns (LXX, Dsc. et al.). With
-л- also στλлvóç 'shining, sparkling' (E 351, Arist. et al.), hence -óτηs (Gal., Plu. et
al.), -ów 'to polish' (Arr., Gal.), -wτns (Lyd.); for the suffix cf. еαλлvóç ‘warming',
τερлνóç 'delightful', etc.; PN Στíλлwv.
ETYM A connection to PCl. *stil-n- (MIr. sellaid, -sella 'looks', OIr. sell 'eye, iris'; W
syllu 'stare, gaze') seems far-fetched; no further cognates are known. If the root
variant στλл- is not secondary from σtíλy-, the variation between -л- and -ẞ- may
point to Pre-Greek origin.
otiλŋ [f.] 'drop' (Ar. V. 213), metaphorically 'small thing, moment'. <?>
ETYM Hardly related to Lat. stilla 'drop' (see De Vaan 2008 s.v.); no other
etymology.
OTL入丌vóg →oti入Bw.
στчu [n.] 'powdered antimony, kohl, black make-up' (Ion trag., Antiph., LXX, Dsc.,
pap. et al.). <LW Eg.➤
•VAR Also -µµ-, -ɩs [f.], also σtīßiɩ [n.].
●DER σtųµ(µ)-í¢w, -íšoµiai, otißíšoµat 'to make oneself up with kohľ' (LXX, Str. et al.),
-loμa [n.].
⚫ETYM Borrowed from Eg. ştim, Copt. σе½µ, στημ (Lewу 1895: 217). Borrowed from
Greek as Lat. stimi, stibi(um).
στiqoç [n.] 'crowd packed closely together, troop of warriors, ships, etc.' (Hdt., A., Ar.,
Th., X. et al.). <PG▷
●DER σtɩôpós ‘packed closely together, tight, compact' (Ar., X., Arist., Hell. and late)
with -ótŋc [f.] ‘compactness' (middle com.), -áw ‘to harden' (Ath., Eust.).
⚫ETYM For the alternation στqoç: σtoрós, compare e.g. alσxoç: alσxpóç, kūdoç :
kuspóç. The long root vowel may be secondary, like in σtißη 'hoarfrost'. Sometimes
compared to *stibh- in CS stablo 'stem, stalk', Latv. stiba 'staff, rod', and perhaps also
Skt. stibhi- [m.] 'bunch of flowers, bundle'. The semantics are, however, hardly
compelling. Semantically close to σTεíßw, but the different root-final poses a
!
1407
problem and is perhaps best understood in terms of substrate origin; see further the
discussion s.v. σTεißw. Cf. also ►στpiovóc.
OTIXOS →σTEIXW.
στλɛyyiç, -idoç [f.] 'scraper for scraping off oil and dust, curry-comb' (Hp., Att.), often
metaphorically of a splendid head ornament, a kind of tiara (X., Plb., Hell. inscr. et
al.). <PG?
•VAR Also σteyyis, otely(y)ic, oteleyyic, otdıyyiç, otpeyyic, otepyíc; cf. Kretschmer
KZ 33 (1895): 472f., Brugmann IF 30 (1912): 375. Also σthayyis (Nic. apud sch. Pl.
Chrm. 161e).
•DER OTλEYY-ídiov (Hell.), -íov (sch.), -íoμa 'to scrape off (Suid.), hence -ɩoµa [n.]
'scraped-off dirt' (Arist., Lyc.), -tστpov [n.] = σtλeyyis (EM).
•ETYM A loanword from an unknown source, Neumann 1961: 94f. points to Hitt.
ištalk-i 'to level, smoothen'. The variant with a may also point to substrate origin.
σtλɛyyúç [?] ‘kind of corn' (Thphr. H.P. 8, 4, 3).
⚫ETYM No etymology. The lemma is often deleted, see e.g. Amigues RPh. 75 (2001):
156 and DELG Supp. s.v. σTλεyyiç.
στoά [f.] 'colonnade, portico, storage room', also as a name of the Stoic school, σtoà
лoкíλŋ (Att.). ◄IE *steh₂-u- ‘stand', *stoh₂-u-ih₂
•VAR Also στotá (Ar. [anap.], inscr.), στoń (Erythrai, Hdt.), σtwïá (Cnossos,
Mytilene).
•COMP лρо-στov 'portico located in front (of the rooms), porch' (Att.), hypostasis.
●DER Diminutive σtwïdiov, στoïdiov [n.] (Delos, Str. et al.), adjective στw-ïkóç
'belonging to the Stoic school, Stoic' (Hell. and late), hence -ɩкɛúoμαɩ to act like a
Stoic' (late); disparagingly Σtóak (Στwa?) 'miserable Stoic' (Herm. Iamb. 1; Björck
1950: 48 and 263).
l
⚫ETYM From *σTWF-tá, a collective formation in -tá (with shortening of the win
σtolά, and subsequent loss of the in σtoά; see Schwyzer: 244, 349, 469; on the
phonetic development, see also Adrados Emerita 18 (1950): 408ff.). The Indo-
European proto-form would be *stoh₂-u-ih₂. An e-grade is found in ►σtaupóç, and a
zero grade in ➤στüλoç. Further related to Lith. stovėti ‘stanď, stovà [f.] ‘stand,
position', OCS staviti ‘to place, put', OE stōwian 'to keep from' (see Kortlandt
Baltistica 25:2 (1989): 104-112). The root is *steh₂- 'to stand'. See ïotnfi.
otóßos →otéµßw.
otoißń →oteiẞw.
otaɩxelov, otoixos =σteixw.
στOŃ, στóλ
=σTÉλλw.
στóλoкpoç [adj.] 'with horns not yet fully grown' (H. s.v. Kóλov); 'with shortened hair'
(H.); Tò στóλoкpov = кopdúλn 'club, cudgel' (Phot.). <GR?>

=== page 730 ===

1408
στóμа
ETYM Recalls paλaкpós 'bald-headed'. The first part may be στóloç (see
► στέ\\w), although the semantics are difficult. The second part -кp-os may be from
Képaç; cf. ► Síкpoc, and see also Nussbaum 1986: 73.
στóµa [n.] ‘mouth, muzzle, front, peak, edge' (Il.). ◄IE *steh₂-mn- ‘mouth'>
VAR Aeol. σTúuа (Theoc.), -aτoç.
•DIAL Myc. To-ma-ko, Tu-ma-ko /στóµapyoç/ (Mühlestein SMEA 2 (1967): 43ff.;
Killen Minos 27-8, 1992-1993 [95]: 101-7).
•COMP στóμ-apуos 'chattering' (trag.), to apyós (Willis AmJPh. 63 (1942): 87ff.:
‘shining' > ‘bright' > ‘loud??), if not after yλwoo-apyos, which could stand for
y\woσ-alyos (see yλwσσa with references); Blanc RPh. 65 (1991): 59-66 analyses
the word as στóµа + µápуoç ‘furious', see also Blanc BAGB 1 (1996): 8-9; cf. also
Пóð-apyos (s.v. ►лoúç); εű-σtoµos 'with a beautiful mouth, speaking nicely', also
'silent' (Hdt., X., etc.); further rare στоμат-oυруóç 'word-making, grandiloquent'
(Aг.). кαко-στóμatos (AP) for кaкó-σtoµoç (E. et al.).
•DER στóμ-ov [n.] 'mouth, opening, denture, bit, bridle' (IA), rarely 'mouth' (Nic.),
with -íç [f.] ‘halter' (Poll.); εл-στoµ-íw [v.] 'bridle, curb' (Att.), also 'to shut up.
one's mouth' (late). στóµ-ç [m.] 'hard-mouthed horse' (A. Fr. 442 = 649 M.; cf.
Schwyzer: 462³), also -íaç ‘id.' (Afric., Suid.), στoµ-wdŋs ‘speaking nicely' (S.),
‘savory' (Sor.); στóμ-íoμαι to take into the mouth' (Aq.), with prefix, e.g. àлo-
στo̟µíчw to remove the edge' (Philostr.). στoµ-ów (ava-, etc.) 'to stop the mouth,
provide with an opening, edge, to harden' (IA), -wµa [n.] 'mouth' (A.), 'hardening,
which is hardened, steel' (Cratin., Arist., Hell. and late), -wµáτov (gloss.), -wσis [f.]
'hardening' (S., Hell. and late), -wτns = indurator (gloss). Further σtoµát-lov [n.]
diminutive (Sor.), -кós 'belonging to the mouth' (medic., etc.), àло-στoµat-í‹w ‘to
repeat, interrogate' (Pl., Arist., etc.). See also στóµ¤×oç, ‣otwµúloç.
•ETYM The PIE men-stem *steh3-mn- was either originally neuter or later
reinterpreted as a verbal noun in -μa (Schwyzer: 5245); cf. the abundant occurrence
of the short stem form στoμ- in compounds and derivatives (cf. Georgacas Glotta 6
(1958): 163). Cognates are found in Av. staman- [m.] 'mouth (of a dog)' (on the short
a, see Lubotsky Kratylos 42 (1997): 56f.), W safn ‘jaw-bone', and Hitt. (UZU)ištāman- /
ištamin- ‘ear' (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. for details). Greek generalized the zero grade
*sth3-mn-, like in ovoμa < *h3nh3-mn-. Go. stibna, OHG stimna, stimma 'voice' are
unrelated.
στóμaxoç [m.] 'throat' (II.), 'gullet' (Hp., Arist. et al.), 'mouth (of the bladder, uterus)*
(Hp.), (upper orifice of the) stomach' (late), ‘anger' (Vett. Val., pap. II-III³). <GR>
⚫COMP Compounds εv-, кαко-στóμaxos 'beneficial, harmful', of food (medic.).
●Der σtoµax-ikós ‘of the stomach', -кεúoμαι 'disorder in the stomach' (late medic.);
-éw = stomachor (Dosith.).
⚫ETYM From στóμа, with the same suffix as in oúpaxóc, oúpíaxos (see ►oupá),
кúμẞaxoç, etc. (Schwyzer: 498, Chantraine 1933: 403). There is a Lat. LW stomachus
'gullet, stomach' with stomachor, -āri 'to be indignant', whence by semantic back-
formation stomachus 'annoyance'; στóμaxos 'annoyance' is probably a loan from
Latin.
otóµqos→otéµẞw.
Otovaxń →OTévw.
1409
σtóvvž, -vxos [m.] 'peak of a rock, of a fang, of a claw, etc.' (E. Cycl. 401, codd. y'övvč,
A. R., Opp., AP), σtóvvxaç. tà ɛiç óžù λýyovta kaì tà äкpa twv óvúxwv ‘which ends
in a sharp point, and the tips of claws³, στóvuši. кépaσɩ ‘horns' (H.). ◄PG(S)►
•ETYM Assumed to be a cross of ovuε and ►σtóxos, ►σtáxus or ►σtópłvyž (see
Güntert 1914: 139); uncertain. Rather Pre-Greek, in view of the suffix.
otopévvvul, otopeús →otópvyµi.
otópłvyš, -vyyos [m., f.] 'cusp, tine (of an antler), fang, cape, etc.' (S., Com. Adesp.,
Lyc., AP et al.). <PG(S)►
•VAR σtópðŋ tò óžù toñ dópatos, kai έridopatíç ‘the sharp [point] of a spear, tip of
a lance or spear' (H.).
ETYM Like its synonym στóvυĚ, στópеу is built like oáρvуž, σлñλvуž,
σлóððvууɛç, etc. These words have been connected with στɛpɛós 'stiff, hard' and,
outside Greek, with ON stirðr 'stiff, unbending', storð [f.] 'grass, green stalk' and ON
stertr [m.] 'bird's tail', OHG sterz. None of the Germanic formations exactly
corresponds to the Greek one, and the semantics of the etymology are vague, so the
connection is at best a possibility. We should better accept that the word is non-
Indo-European (thus Pre-Greek) on account of its suffix.
στópvчш [v.] 'to stretch out, spread out, make one's bed; to level, pave, strew, sprinkle'
(p 32 and later). <IE *sterh3- 'spread out'>>
•VAR στpávvvµ (A. Ag. 909 [στopvúva Elmsley], Hell. and late), στopέvvvµ (late),
all root variants also with -úw, aor. σtopéσai (Il.), στpшσα (IA), pass. στоpεσñvαι
(Hp. et al.), στpw¤ñvαι (D. S., etc.), perf.pass. στpшµαι (K 155, etc.), έσtópotal or
-nta (Aeol. gramm.), έστópɛσμαι (late), act. στршкa (Hell. and late), fut. στopw
(Ar.), στpwow (E., etc.), Dor. στорεσε (Theоc.), στpwvvýσw (Ps.-Luc.), pass.
στpwłńσoµai (LXX), verbal adj. σtpwtós (Hes.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. úло-, кατα-, εN-.
●DER σtpŵµa (katá-, úлó-, etc.) [n.] 'which is spread out, carpet, bedding, layer'
(IA), -áτov [n.] (Hell. and late), -aτɛúç [m.] ‘bed-sack' (Thphr. et al.), ‘variegated
patchwork' (Gell.), name of a fish (Philo apud Ath.), after its golden stripes, see
Boẞhardt 1942: 62, Strömberg 1943: 28), -ατíτηs pavos picnic with one's own.
equipment' (Cratin.), -aτíw [v.] 'to provide with carpet, plaster' (Hell. inscr., Poll.,
H.).
σtpwµvý, Dor. -ά, Aeol. -ā [f.] ‘carpet, mattress, beď (Sapph., Pi., Att., etc.), with
-áoµai in έotpwµvηµévos (Phot.); cf. Xíµvn, roíµvn.
otpŵois (úró-, etc.) [f.] 'the spreading, plastering' (Hell. and late). στpwτýp [m.]
'cross-beam, roof lath' (Ar. Fr. 72, Hell. and late), with -nptov, -ηpídiov‘id.' (EM, H.,
Suid.); σtpótŋs [m.] ‘one that prepares the beds and dinner couches' (middle com.,
Plu.). Furthermore, the isolated σtopɛús [m.] 'the lower, flat part of a device for
making fire' (H., sch.). = уаληvолоóç (H.), which is probably derived from *στópoç
or -á? With o-grade also στópvn [f.] = (úvŋ (Call., Lyc.). The appurtenance of Myc.

=== page 731 ===

1410
1411
a-pi to-ni-jo (of uncertain mg.) is unclear (see Taillardat REGr. 73 (1960): 5ff.). Also
here σTopVuτÉα. кaταστpwτéα, лɛploiкodoµηtéa (H.).
ETYM The three root forms in στóp-vyµ: σtopé-σai : otpw-tóç, ëέ-σtpw-µaɩ are
partially leveled: σtpávvyu and oτpŵσɑɩ after στpwtós, kotpwµai; otopέvvyµi after
στopéσαι. We find the same metathesis of the expected full grade σTεpo- < *sterh₂- to
σtopɛ-, like in ►kopévvuju, Đópvyµai (s.v. ►Opwoкw), etc. Cognates with a nasal
present outside Greek are Skt. stṛṇati 'to spread out, extend, strew', Lat. sternō 'to
spread out', OIr. sernim 'id.', Alb. shtrin 'id.'. The zero grade στрwτóç corresponds to
Lat. strātus, Lith. stirta [f.] 'haystack'; cf. also Skt.stirṇá- 'spread out' < *strh₂-no-. Gr.
στρшμа corresponds to Lat. strāmentum 'straw', while στópvη corresponds to Ru.
storoná 'region, side', but both formations are probably independent innovations. Cf.
further στέpvov and ►στpatóç.
στopúvη [f.] designation of a surgical instrument, lancet, кατιádiov' (Aret.). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained; for the formation, cf. ►τopúvn.
otopxáčev [v.] · ɛiç <σŋ>koùç kataкλεíεν τà ẞoσкýµаτа 'to shut the cattle into the
pen', στоpуáσw ovукλɛíow 'shut', εστópуαčov. кλεov 'was/were shutting' (H.).
1?1
•ETYM Denominative derivative from an unattested form *στópxos, -ǹ without
etymology. Cf. tapxúw.
στÓXоç [m.] erected pillar, post, mark, fixed target' (E., X., Poll., Att. inscr.), also
‘suspicion' (A., after στo×ášoµα)? A very rare word; part of the attestations is
blurred. <IE? *stegh - 'sting, bar'>
●COMP ǎ-στoxos ‘missing the target, ε-στoxoç ‘aiming well, hitting well' (Att., Hell.
and late), hence ȧ-, εv-στOX-íα, -έw.
●DER σtox-ác, -ádos [f.] ‘raising for the poles of fixing-nets' (Poll.); also adjective,
mg. unclear (E. Hel. 1480 [lyr.], probably wrong v.l. for στoládɛç); -avdóv [adv.] 'by
conjecture' (Theognost.). Denominative στоxáčoμa 'to target, shoot, seek to
achieve, guess, conjecture, explore' (Hp., Att., Hell. and late), also with кατα-, etc.;
(kata-) otoxaoµós, -aois, -aotýs, -aσtikóç; also σtóxασµа [n.] ‘javelin' (E. Ba. 1205;
cf. Chantraine 1933: 145).
•ETYM No certain cognates outside Greek. Since the original meaning seems to have
been erected pillar, post', we can compare Ru. stog [m.] 'heap, heap of hay' < *stog"-;
Bulg. stéžer 'post to bind horses to', Lith. stāgaras ‘long, thin stalk of a plant', Latv.
stęga 'long bar'. Not related (pace Frisk) is OE staca 'stake', which belongs to MoHG
stechen < *stig-; cf. s.v. στí(w. The following forms from Germanic do belong here,
however: ODan. stag 'point, germ'; OHG stanga, ON stong [f.] 'stick, pole', ON
stinga, OE stingan 'to sting', etc. (on the relation with στάxuç, see s.v.).
otpapóc →otpe入ós.
▶
otpáy}, -yyós [f.] 'squeezed out drop' (Arist., Thphr., Men., AP et al.). <PG➤
•COMP στрауу-oup-ía, Ion. -in [f.] = ǹ кατà στрáyya oüpŋσiç 'urination in trickles'
(Gal.), 'strangury' (Hp., Att., Hell. and late), -ɩкóç, -tiwdns, -iáw, -éw; otpayy-í\w [v.]
'to squeeze out drop by drop' (LXX, Dsc. et al.), also with кατα-, έк-, άño-; σtpayу-
εúo̟μα (also -y-) ‘to hesitate, linger, dawdle' (Ar., Pl. Hell. and late), with -ɛíɑ [f.]
'hesitation' (M. Ant.).
•DER στpayу-óc (also -y-) 'flowing drop by drop', also 'tied together, entangled, by
shocks, irregular' (medic., etc.), -ɛiov [n.] 'drop-bottle' (medic.). στpayу-íaç (лuρós)
'kind of wheat' (Thphr.), cf. Strömberg 1937: 91.
With a suffix -λ-: στpayуáλŋ [f.] 'cord, rope, noose' (J., Plu., S. E.), -aλíç [f.]
‘entangled knot, induration' (com. Vª, Arist. et al.), -aλiá [f.] ‘id.' (LXX, etc.), see
Scheller 1951: 88, -aλiwdŋs 'knotty, entangled (LXX, Com. Adesp.), -aλáw [v.] ‘to
choke, strangle' (Men., LXX), -aλíšw ‘id.' (D. S., Str. et al.), also with άño-; -aλioµós
(gloss.), -aλóoμat 'to become entangled, ensnared (Ph. Bel. et al.).
ETYM For the formation of στpáу}, cf. στpíуž, λúуĚ, кλayy-í, etc.; for that of
στрαуу-áλŋ, cf. σкUτ-áλη, etc. Cognates are often assumed in Lat. stringō to string,
tie together, if from *strengō with analogical i (see s.v. in De Vaan 2008); Latv.
stringt<*strng" 'to become stiff, wither'; MIr. srengim 'to draw, drag'; ON strangr
'hard, rigid', OHG strengi ‘stretched, stiff, MoE string. The PIE root *strengh-
probably meant to twist, string', which would have developed into 'to wrench'. If
related, στpaуy must be a contamination of *στpαу- < *strng"- and *στpεyу- <
*streng", with *g for *gh from the nom.sg. στpáуε. In view of the fact that an Indo-
European derivation requires several analogies and is not evident semantically, it is
not improbable that the word is Pre-Greek. Note the variant forms without nasal,
which may point to prenasalization.
στpatós [m.] ‘troop, department of the people' (Pi., trag., Crete), 'troop of warriors,
army, navy' (II.), also ‘(military) camp' (Il.); otápto. ai tážeis tov nλýðovs ‘(battle)
arrays of a multitude (of men)' (H.). <IE *ster- 'camp, spread out'>
•VAR Aеol. στрóτos (Sapph.), Cret. στapτos (inscr.).
•COMP στраτ-ηуós (IA), -ãyós (Dor. Arc.) [m.] 'army commander' (cf. Chantraine
1956a: 90), στρατó-лεdov [n.] ‘army camp, army, fleet' (IA), see Risch IF 59 (1949):
15; also as a second member, e.g. in dɛží-στpatoç ‘receiving a host' (B.); in addition,
numerous PNs.
=
•DER Collective formation στpaτ-íá, -iý [f.] ‘troop, host, army', also ‘campaign'
στрaτɛía (Pi., IA), see Scheller 1951: 84f., with -tóτŋs [m.] 'warrior, soldier' (IA),
-iwtikós (Att.), -ɩwτápiov [n.] mg. uncertain, perhaps ‘soldier's sack' (pap. III³).
otpát-105, fem. -ía 'warlike', also as an epithet of Zeus, Ares, and Athena (Alc., Hdt.
et al.); also -ɛɩoç, -ɛía ‘id.' (Mylasa IIª). στpατúλλα [m.] disparaging diminutive of
στраτηуós (Cic. Att.; cf. Delph. Στpατvλλiç). Denominative στpατ-άoµαι (-óoµαι?)
'to troop together', only in epic ipf. έστpατówντo (Il., A. R., Nonn.), also with ȧuqi-,
έnɩ-, ovv-; cf. Leumann 1950: 185, Chantraine 1942: 80, 359, 364; στpat-óqµaɩ in the
ptc. στpaτwłév (στóμov) ‘consisting of an army' (A. Ag. 133 [lyr.]; Wackernagel
1916: 125). Further στрατ-εúw, -εúоμαι 'to wage war, serve in the army' (IA), also
with έк-, -, σuv-, etc.; -ɛía, Ion. -ŋïŋ [f.] (¿к-, έπ-, σuv-) 'campaign, war-service'
(IA), Evμa [n.] 'campaign, army' (IA), -evois (èñɩ-) [f.] ‘campaign' (Hdt., D. H. et
al.), -εúσчμoç, -εVTIKÓS.

=== page 732 ===

1412
otpeB入óg
⚫ETYM Probably originally 'camping army', reflecting *str-to-, the to-ptc. of the root
*ster- 'to spread (out)' reflected in Skt. strnóti 'to lay down, destroy' (see Narten MSS
22 (1967): 57-66, LIV2 s.v. *ster-); cf. further s.v. σTέpvov 'breast, chest'.
Corresponds exactly to Skt. strta- 'thrown down, sprinkled', á-stṛta- 'unconquered,
unconquerable', Av. stǝrǝta- 'spread out', OIr. sreth 'strewn'. The relation between
the two roots *ster- and *sterh3- is yet to be clarified.
otpeßλós [adj.] ‘turned, twisted, crooked, cunning' (IA). ◄PG(V)►
⚫DER στpεẞλ-óτηs [f.] 'crook, perversity' (Plu. et al.); στpεßλ-ów 'to twist, dislocate,
torture, torment' (IA), also with Siα-, кατα-; hence -wσic, -wμα, -wτńрioç; also -εvia
[n.] 'perversion' (Sm.). otpέßλŋ [f.] ‘winch, roll, screw', also as an instrument of
torture (A., Arist., Plb., etc.); formation like oµíλŋ, among others.
With o-grade we find: στpóßoç [m.] 'whirl' (A. Ag. 657, H.); hence σtpóẞ-iλos [m.]
'top, whirlwind, whirlpool, fir-cone' (Att., Hell. and late), -ílov, -tλitns, -idéa, -idās,
-tλɛwv, -ílivos, -1λwdŋs, -1λíšw, -1λów (all late). στpoß-íŋ [f.] 'cone made of lint'
(Hp.). στpoß-ɛús [m.] a fuller's instrument (sch.). στpoß-ɛía [f.] 'fullery(?)' (Delos
III). στpoßɛλós σoßapós, τpuqɛpós 'rushing, delicate'; -ελóv. σкoλióν, кαшлúλov
'curved, bent' (H.). στpoßаvíoкоç τрíлoυç 'three-footed' (H.). στpoẞálwv. ouvexwç
otpɛqóµevoç ‘turning around continuously' (H.). Denominative στpoßέw [v.] ‘to
turn around in circles, move violently, distract' (A., Ar., Hell. and late), also with
Sia-, etc. With nasal infix στpóµßos [m.] 'top' (E 413), 'whirlwind (A. Pr. 1084),
'snail-shell, snail, etc.' (Arist., Hell. poet.) with στроµßо-εid, -wons (Arist. et al.),
-εiov, -iλoç, -ηdóv, -έw, -ów (late).
With zero grade: στpaßóç 'squinting' (medic.), with -wv 'id.' (Com. Adesp.), also as a
PN; στpáß-α PN, -óτŋs [f.] ‘squint' (Orib. et al.), -(w 'to squint' (H., EM) with
-toµós (Gal. et al.). The original mg. is still present in στpaßo-лódŋs ‘with twisted
feet' (Hdn.). Further στpáßηλoç [m., f.] 'wild olive-tree' (Pherecr. [lyr.]), name of a
snail (S. Fr. 324, Arist. et al.); στpaßalós. ó otpoyyvlias kai tetpáywvos ävēpwitos.
Axaoí 'the well-rounded and square (i.e., perfect) man (Achaean)' (H.); στpaßɛúç.
кшлεÚç 'oar-spar' (H.) (Chantraine 1928: 17). Further, a number of forms with a root
στpoß- appear to be related: στpoïßoç. dīvoç 'whirl, rotation' (H.) (cod. στpoißóç.
Selvóc); Att. PN Στpoïßоç; στpoißäv. ȧvτστрéqεv 'to turn to the opposite side',
στроíßηλoç ëлaðµа лληуñç év кεqαλñ 'a swelling in the head caused by a blow'
(H.); лоλú-στроßos 'whirly' (Nic.), after лоλú-plotoẞoc; hence the simplex
στpoîẞoç, etc.? Perhaps also with -ε- in Thess. Στpεßovvɛio (see Bechtel 1921, 1:
210)? Borrowed as Lat. strabus, strabō, strambus.
⚫ETYM Reminiscent of στpέow ‘to twist, turn', in spite of the different labial. The
variant with prenasalization and the frequent occurence wih the non-Indo-European
suffix -- point to Pre-Greek origin. The root variant with -ot-, if not secondary (see
above), is unexplained. Often taken together with ảστpaßńs, which is doubtful.
στpɛúyoμai [v.] 'to be exhausted, troubled' (epic O 512, µ 351). <?►
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.
⚫DER OTPεvyεdwv [f.] 'exhaustion, trouble' (Nic.), like tŋkɛ-, σŋëε-dúv, etc.
otpépw-ofial
1413
•ETYM Traditionally connected with ON strjúka 'to smoothen', OE stroccian ‘id.',
OCS strogati, Ru. strogáť' 'to plane', strug ‘plane'. However, this etymology is
semantically unlikely and formally impossible: both the Germanic (an original
geminate *-kk- < *-g"n-; see Kroonen 2009) and the Slavic forms (with no trace of
Winter's Law) point to *streugh. van Windekens Orbis 11 (1962): 343 compares ToB
sruk- 'to die' (ToA sruk- 'to kill'), but the initial cluster is incompatible. No further
etymology.
otpéqw, -quai [v.] ‘to twist, turn', intr. and med. also ‘to run' (Il.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Dor. στpáqw? (Nisyros IIIª; quite doubtful), Aeol. στpów (EM), aor. στpéyal,
-ασðaɩ (Il.), Dor. άño-στpáчaɩ (Delph.), pass. στpεó¤ñvai (Hom. [intr.], rarely Att.),
Dor. στpaôеñvaɩ (Sophr., Theoc.), στpaqñvai (Hdt., Sol., Att.), àv-ɛσtpéqŋoav (late
Lac., etc., Thumb-Scherer 1959: 42), fut. otpέyw (E., etc.), perf. med. čσtpaqiai (h.
Merc.), Hell. also έotpɛévos (Mayser 1906-1938, I: 2: 196), act. σtpoqa (Hell.),
also στpaqa (Plb.).
●COMP Very frequent with prefixes: àvα-, àлo-, έŋ, kata-, µɛτα-, úлo-. The
derivative στpópos 'band, cord, cable' (see also below) occurs in έü-σtpoqoç = ¿ü-
στpεons 'well-twisted, easy to twist or bend' (N599 = 711, E., Pl., etc.), -qpía [f.]
'flexibility' (Hell. and late); àvτíστpoq-oç 'turned face to face, according' (Att., etc.),
to ȧvτ-στрέqw. Furthermore, in olaкoστроq-έw 'to turn the rudder' (A.) from
olaкo-στpópos (Pi., A.). στpopo-divovτa 'to wheel around eddying' (A. Ag. 51
[anap.]), replacing otpeqe-dívŋßev [3pl.aor.pass.] 'they turned around, swindled' (H
792; act. in Q. S. 13, 7), probably a combination of στpεoμα and dɩvéoμai
(Schwyzer: 645); στрεчo-diкéw 'to pervert the right' (Ar.), στрεчí-μaλλoç 'with
frizzly wool' (Ar.); cf. Schwyzer: 442.
•DER With e-grade of the root: στрεπ-τóç [adj.] 'twisted, flexible' (Il.), [m.] 'necklace,
curl, etc.' (IA), -áptov (Paul Aeg.). -tikóç (εni-, µeτα-, etc.) 'serving to twist' (Pl. et
al.). otpeñ-týp [m.] ‘door hinge' (AP). otpéµµa (repi-, Sɩá-, etc.) [n.] ‘twist, strain’
(D., medic., etc.), σú-στpεµµɑ ‘ball, swelling, round drop, heap, congregation' (Hp.,
Arist., Hell. and late). otpéy-is (èñɩ-) [f.] ‘turning, turn' (Hp., Arist.), -aĩoç, PN
-iádns; otpert-ívða [adv.] kind of play (Poll.). ¿ñotpeq-ǹs ‘turning to (something),
attentive' (IA) with -ɛα [f.] (pap. III³).
With o-grade: στpópos [m.] 'band, cord, cable' (Od.), 'gripes' (Ar., medic.); hence
στpóp-ov [n.] 'breast-band, headband' (com., inscr. et al.), -íç (лεpɩ-, etc.) [f.] ‘id.'
(E. et al.), -íoλos [m.] ‘edge, border' (Hero), -wdŋs 'causing gripes' (Hp. et al.), -wtóç
'provided with pivots' (LXX), -wμa [n.] 'pivot, door hinge' with -wµáτov (Hell.),
-wτp [m.] 'oar' (gloss.), -óoμa 'to have gripes' (medic. et al.), ¿кστpowσaɩ (H. s.v.
¿žaykupwoai tǹv Đúpav), -έw ‘to cause gripes' (Ar.); otpoqń (¿ïɩ-, кατα-, etc.) [f.]
'twisting, turning around, etc.' (IA), -años epithet of Hermes (Ar. Pl. 1153). From
σp or σpóos: στpóq-15 [m.] 'clever person' (Ar., Poll.), -ɛov [m.] 'winch,
cable, etc.' (Hell. and late), -ás [f.] ‘turning' (S. [lyr.], Arat. et al.), -ádɛç vñσoɩ (Str. et
al.), -στpopádηy (only with επ-, лεpt-, etc.) 'turning around' (epic Ion.). Further
otpoq-ɛús [m.] ‘door hinge, cervical vertebra' (Ar., Thphr. et al.), -ty\ [m., f.] ‘pivot,
door hinge' (E., com., etc.).

=== page 733 ===

1414
otpηvés
With A-enlargement: στpó-aλos [m.] 'top' (V-VIP); -άλyε [f.] 'vertebra, curve, etc.'
(Il., epic), -aλiw (v.] 'to turn, spin' (o 315, AP).
With lengthened grade: iter.-intens. στpwó-áw, -άo̟μai (εñ-, µεta-, etc.) 'to turn to
and fro, linger' (Il., epic Ion. poet.), -έoμα ‘to turn' (Aret.).
With zero grade: ¿riotpaq-ýs = ¿лotpεq-ǹs (see above; late). PN Σtpays-µévns
(Dor.).
•ETYM The root has no Indo-European cognates. Still, LIV² s.v. *streb"- lists the root
as Indo-European. However, as Van Beek suggests (p.c.), a comparison with
►στpεẞλóc and cognates strongly favors the conclusion that we are dealing with a
Pre-Greek root (with variation ẞ/Q).
στpηvéç [adv.] ‘loudly, shrilly', especially of sounds (A. R., AP). <IE?>
•VAR Also adj. στpηvóç 'loud, shrill' (Nicostr. Com.).
●COMP σtpηvó-qwvos (Call. Com.).
●DER σtpηv-ú【w [v.] 'to trumpet', of an elephant (Juba 37; cod. στpuv-), after oλoλ-
úw, etc. Also nominal στpηvoç [n.] 'recklessness' (LXX, Apoc., AP), [m.] 'strong
desire' (Lyc.), hence otpηv-táw [v.] ‘to revel, live unrestrained' (med. com., Apoc.,
pap. III³, etc.; Schwyzer: 732). From H.: σtpηvýεtať. otpηviã; ảotpivés. Súofetov,
σkαɩóv, óžú ‘in bad case, mischievous, sharp'.
•ETYM The exact semantic relation between στpŋvés and στpñvos is unclear.
Traditionally compared to Lat. strenuus 'active, vigorous'. This connection may be
correct, although it is not evident semantically (see De Vaan 2008 for an alternative
etymology of the Latin word). The Greek words may also reflect a lengthened grade
derivation of the root of σTεpεós, but this remains speculative.
otpißɩɩkíy} [?] 'little drop' (Ar. Ach. 1035). <ONOM▷
⚫ETYM Sound-imitating formation; for the suffix, cf. qñoɩyž, kúσtɩy, etc., as well as
Aíkiyέ = ǹ ¿λaxiotŋ ßoǹ twv ópvéwv and otpißoç. λentǹ kaì ôžeĩa qwvý (see sch. ad
loc.). See also σTpí(Y)§ 1.
στpí(y) 1 [f.] 'owl' (Carm. Pop., Theognost.); cf. otрíуλoç. ... oi dε VUKTOKópaka
dè vuktokópaka
'night-raven (vel sim.)' (H.). ◄PG(V) ►
•VAR Also στλíž, acc. στpíуya.
•ETYM Formation like yλauε, σкŵy, λúуĚ, etc., and reminiscent of Lat. strix, -gis
'screech-owl', which lacks the nasal. Either may be a loan of the other; the Greek
word is often assumed to be influenced by or derived from ►τpíšw 'to buzz, squeak',
but its facultative nasal may point to substrate origin.
-σTPIĘ 2
⚫ETYM In ►éσTPIĘ?
otpɩqvóc [adj.] ‘dense, solid, hard' (Ion. Hell. and late). <?►
•DER -ótŋs [f.] 'density' (D. H.); also στpíovos [m.] 'food that is difficult to chew'
(στpíqvos áµáontos ákatáлotos LXX).
⚫ETYM Reminiscent of στoppós (see σtiqoç), σtépɩqoç, and σtpuqvóc, possibly a
contamination. Cf. also στpíqoç = λíσлоç (Suid.). Possibly related to MLG and
MOLG strif, stref stiff, severe, solid', MHG and MoHG streben 'to strive'.
oτpóßos →σtpeßẞlós.
OTPUPVós
1415
στpoẞúloç some bird, cf. André 1956 s.v. strophilus.
•ETYM No etymology.
στpoуyúλoç [adj.] 'round, spherical, compact' (IA). <PG(S)>
●COMP E.g. στpoууvλo-ëрóσwñoç 'round-faced' (Arist., pap.), úло-σрóууo
'somewhat rounded' (Thphr. et al.).
●Der otpoyyvλ-ótŋs [f.] 'roundness' (Pl., Arist.). στpoyyúλ-tov [n.] 'round bottle'
(pap. VI³). στpoуyúλλw [v.] 'to round (off)', with -µa [n.] (late). 4. στpoyyvλ-í\w ‘id.'
(D. H.) with -toμa [n.] 'terse expression' (Anon. Fig.). 5. στpoyyuλ-óμa [v.] 'to
be(come) circular' (Plu. et al.), -woiç [f.] (Hp., LXX et al.), -wµa [n.] (Al.). otpoyyvl-
aívw [v.] 'to make round' (Hippiatr.), -εúματα (H. s.v. уoууʊλεúματα).
⚫ETYM Formation like yoyy-úλoç, кªµл-úλoç, àуê-úλoç, etc. Connected to ▸στpáу
by Frisk, but the meanings of the two words are not obviously connected. If the
etymology is correct, στроyуúλoç was either derived from a form with o-grade in the
root, or it was influenced by yoyy-úλos (Güntert 1914: 146f.). However, the whole
complex (with or without στpáуε) may instead be Pre-Greek, in view of the suffix -
0入-
otpoißos, otpóµßos=otpeßlós.
otpoñłos, otpovłóc [m., f.] 'sparrow, (generally) small bird' (B 311, etc.), also ‘ostrich'
(= σ. katάyaloç, σ. ǹ µɛyáλŋ, etc.; IA); name of a flatfish (Ael.), see Strömberg 1943:
117; σtpoÛç. ó σtpovėòç kaì öσrpiov 'sparrow, pulse' (H.). <PG? (V) ►
•COMP στpovеo-káµŋ\os [m.] ‘ostrich' (D. S., Str. et al.), see Risch IF 59 (1949): 57
and 268.
•DER Diminutive στpovð-íov, -íç, -áptov (Arist., Hell. and late). Further στpovð-íaç
[m.] 'lecher' (Com. Adesp.), -iwv [m.] = -ós (late, see Chantraine 1933: 165). σtpoñ¤-
Eto 'belonging to the ostrich' (pap.), -(ε)чov (µñλov) 'kind of quince' (Thphr., Nic. et
al.), also name of a plant ‘Saponaria, soapwort' (Hp., Thphr., etc.), which is also
called otpovłóç, otpovło-káµnλos; -ɩvos 'made of soapwort' (Ath.), -wdŋs ‘ostrich-
like' (sch.). στpov-wτós ‘painted, decorated with σ.' (Sophr.). στpov¤-í\w [v.] ‘to
twitter' (com., etc.), also 'to clean with soapwort', -toµós [m.] (pap.); -taoµós [m.]
'scab' (gloss.). Here also Tpoños PN (Bechtel 1923: 151f.)?
⚫ETYM Fur.: 182 deduces a variant form *τpovos from the PN cited above, and from
óεiòv τpoú<iv> for òv στpоúе(E)Lov (Sammelb. 7243, 21 [IVP]), as well as a form
*Spoveos from the PN Apovou [gen.] (Telos II³). The variations would point to a
Pre-Greek word, but since the evidence is built mainly on names, this conclusion
remains highly uncertain.
otpopá入LYE, Otpdry otpépw.
otpúµaž [?] žúlov punxavnpévov ¿v taïç Àŋvoïç ñpòs tǹv tŵv otaqvλwv škėλıyɲv
'wood built into a winevat for the pressing of grapes' (H.). <PG?►
⚫ETYM No etymology, but the semantic field and suffix-aк- suggest substrate origin.
σtpvqvós [adj.] ‘bitter (of taste), sour, astringent, severe' (Pl., Ar., Arist., etc.). ◄GR?▷

=== page 734 ===

1416
OTPÚXVOv
●DER -ótŋs [f.] ‘bitterness, severity' (Arist., Plu. et al.), -ów 'to astringe' (Plu. v.l.,
Eust.).
ETYM No convincing etymology. Clearly reminiscent of σTúow 'to astringe'.
Perhaps it derives from the same root, with secondary στp- (from ►στpúvós or
►στpηvc)? The comparison with the Germanic group of OS strüf 'upright, stiff,
raw', OHG strūbēn 'to be stiff, and with Balto-Slavic words like Lith. strubas 'cut
short, curtailed' or OCS strбpбtб rawness, harshness', Ru. strúp 'scab, crust of a
wound etc., is not semantically compelling and formally awkward (root-final *-p/-
b½), and therefore uncertain.
στрúvov [n.] name of several plants, e.g. 'nightshade, Withania somnifera' (Thphr.,
Dsc. et al.). PG(V) >
•VAR Also -os [m.], also τpúxvov [n.] (Nic. Th. v.l.), -os [f.] (Theoc., Com. Adesp.,
Phot., EM).
•ETYM This word gave rise to the name strichnine. MHG strūch, MoHG Strauch
(pace Petersson 1923: 18ff.) are unrelated, as they reflect a PGm. long *ū. Fur.: 135
compares Sopúкvov (Dsc., Plu.), a plant which may be similar to the στpúxvov.
See s.v. for further comments.
otpwvvvµi→otópvuµi.
otpwpáw #otpépw.
otvyέw [v.] ‘to hate, detest, abhor, hold back' (Il., epic poet., Hdt. and late prose). ◄IE?
*steug-➤
•VAR Aor. σtvyɛĭv (Hom., Call., Nic. et al.), στúžα (λ 502 (causative), A. R., Opp.,
AP), στvу-ñσαɩ, pass. -ηеñvαι, fut. -σoμai (trag.), perf. ¿στúу-ŋкα (Hdt. et al.), -ŋuai
(Lyc.), -μαi (H.).
COMP Also with ȧло-, кατα-, further σtvy-ávwp 'hating men' (A. Pr.), yevσí-σTUĘ
'hating lies' (AP).
•DER σTuy-ŋτós ‘hated, detestable' (A. Pr., late prose), -ŋua [n.] ‘object of hate or
repugnance' (E. et al.), áло-στúу-ŋous [f.] ‘abhorrence' (sch.). Furthermore, the
adjectives σtvy-ɛpós ‘hated, full of hate, detestable' (Il., epic poet.), -vóc ‘id.”, also
‘gruesome, sad, etc.' (Archil., Hp., trag., etc.), hence -vótŋs [f.] (Hell. and late), -vía
[f.] (sch.), σTuy-vóoμa 'to be somber' (AP, H.), also with кατα-; στúуνwσov.
Xúpiσov (H.), OTUу-válw [v.] 'to be, become overcast' (NT et al.), also with Sia-,
кaτα-, σuv-; thence -vaσiç [f.] (late). στúуios 'hated, detestable' (E., Plu.); στúyoç [n.]
'hate, object of hate' (A. et al.). Στúč, -yóç [f.] river in the Underworld (Hom., etc.),
adj. Σrúyios (trag., etc.), name of an Arcadian mountain brook with ice-cold water
(Hdt., Str., Paus.); also as a noun, 'hate, detestation' (Alciphr.), plur. ‘ice-cold'
(Thphr.); also σкwy (Ant. Lib. et al.).
=
•ETYM The name Στúε is an archaic formation; it cannot be decided whether the
pres. στvyέw or the aor. čστuyov is old, since the latter can be metrically
conditioned; cf. e.g. έktuñov s.v. ►ктúлоç (see also Schwyzer: 721 and Chantraine
1942: 347).
!
1417
There is no ascertained etymology. The root σtuy- has been compared to Ru.
stýgnut' 'to cool down, get cold, freeze', but the latter is a variant of older *stydnoti
with *-dn-> *-gn-; cf. Cz. stydnouti 'to cool down', SCr. stûd [f.] 'cold' < *stud-
*stoud. Hardly more convincing is the comparison with ToB ścono, śconiye
'enmity' (van Windekens Orbis 13 (1964): 224 f.), which rather belongs with the
Slavic words above, if from *steud-n- (see Adams 1999 s.v.). LIV2 s.v. *(s)teug-
follows a connection with Skt. toj- 'to drive, push', but this may also be related to
*h₂teug- in Gr. áτúšoμαι to be terrified'.
σTUλOS [m.] 'column, pillar, support' (Dor. Ion., trag., Hell. and late), also = Lat. stilus
‘pointed piece of metal' (late), cf. Sempoux Rev. belge de phil. 39 (1961): 736ff. ◄IE
*sth₂-u-lo- 'post'>
●COMP otvλo-ßátŋs, Dor. -tās [m.] 'foot of a doric column' < σtõλoç + ßñ-vaɩ, with
suffix -tä (Dor. inscr., Pl. Com. et al.), see Fraenkel 1910: 34 and 200f.; tɛτpá-
σtulos consisting of four columns', -ov [n.] 'colonnade of four columns' (inscr. and
pap. imperial period, etc.).
•DER Diminutives: στvλ-íç [f.] (Att. inscr., etc.), -íσкoç [m.] (Hp., Hell. and late),
-ídiov [n.] (Str.), -ápiov [n.] (pap. III³). σtvλ-ítŋs [m.] 'standing on one column,
stylite' (Suid.), fem. -íτooα (inscr. Amasia), like Doivooa, Baoiλiooa, etc.
Denominative verbs: σtul-ów [v.] 'to support with columns' (Hell. and late), also
úло-, dɩα-, άло-; thence (úño-)στúλ-wμα, -wσis (Hell. and late); στul-í\w mg.
uncertain (Ostr.), with úлоσтuλ-10μóc 'support' (pap. IIP).
⚫ETYM These words are comparable to Av. stūna-, stuna- [m.], stunā [f.], Skt. sthú-
ṇā [f.] (with secondary -n-) 'pillar' < *sth₂-u-no-, with a different secondary suffix
(on the interchange of -- and -n-, see Benveniste 1935: 43). The root *sth₂u- is an
enlargement of *steh₂- 'to stand'; see στŋµ. It is also found in oτúw, ▸στavpós,
and σToά. Not related to ▸στÚлоç.
σtúroç [n.] ‘stick, shaft, stalk' (A. R., Nic., Plb.); cf. H.: otúños. otéλexos, koppós
'stump, trunk'. kаì τоυ óчеаλµоυ τò σшµа, кai τò кúτоç (cod. кñτоç) 'the whole of
the eye, vessel or jar'. kaì ó yóqoç tñs ßρovτñs 'the sound of thunder'. <PG(V)►
•COMP Note στʊлoyλúqoç. Čuloyλúpos. otúños yàp ó otélexos "yovv tò épéµvov
'stump or trunk'.
•DER στvлáčεi. ẞpovτã, yoqɛi, wяi 'thunders, sounds, thrusts' (H.), ȧлоστvлá¶w to
drive away with a stick' (Archil.).
•ETYM Traditionally connected with ON stúfr [m.] ‘tree-stump', MLG stūve [m.] ‘id.',
Latv. stups 'old broom', Ru. stópka 'wooden nail in the wall' < *stop-ka, also spíca
'needle' (see Vasmer 1953 s.vv.), but this seems unlikely in view of the semantics.
Perhaps somehow connected with the root of тÚлτw. The by-form στúμoç
otéλexos, kopµós (H.) shows variation л/μ, which could indicate Pre-Greek origin;
see Fur.: 222-227. Not related to σTúw 'to be erect', ►στüλoç ‘pillar', etc.
στуллεчоν [n.] ‘oakum, tow, coarse fiber of flax or hemp' (Hdt., X., D., Hell. and late).
<PG?>
•VAR Also -íov, σɩɩлávov.
•COMP σÃεО-лóλŋs [m.] ‘oakum-dealer' (Ar., Critias, inscr.).

=== page 735 ===

1418
•DER στлл-εïvoç (-vos, στл(л)úïvoc) 'made of oakum' (Com. Adesp., Hell. and
late). Rare στÚлл-ŋ [ƒ.] ‘oakum, coarse flax' (J. apud Suid. s.v.), στúллaž [m.] jocular
short variant foг στуллεо-лóλns (Ar. Fr. 696); also στúлоç = στú¨ëŋ (кáλα àŋÒ
στÚлOU [Gal.]).
•ETYM No known cognates, Fur.: 259f. compares toƒɛãov ‘cord, rope' without further
comment. The word is most likely to be of substrate origin. Borrowed as Latin
stuppa, stūpa from στúлëŋ, from a Doric dialect in Southern Italy.
otvätηpía →otúqw.
στúpaž 1, -ǎkoç [m., f.] 'resin, gummy', also the shrub or tree producing it, 'Styrax
officinalis' (Hdt., Arist., Thphr., Str. et al.). <EW Sem.▷
●DER σtupák-tov [n.] diminutive (pap.), -vos 'made of the storax-tree or of storax'
(LXX, Str., Dsc. et al.), -í(w (v.] 'to smell or taste like storax' (Dsc.).
•ETYM For the formation, cf. őµqaž, Sóvač, ǎ vôpaž, etc. According to Hdt. 3, 107, it
was introduced in Greece by the Phoenicians, which points to Semitic origin.
Lagarde and Lewy 1895: 41f. compare Hebr. şŏri 'the resin of the Mastix tree and the
terebinth'; doubts in Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 501. Perhaps related to στúpač 2; cf.
στupákiva ákovτíσματα ‘javelins made of σ.' in Str. 12, 7, 3. Borrowed as Lat. styrax,
storax.
σtúpa₹ 2, -ǎkos [m.] '(lower end of a) spear-shaft' (X., Pl. et al.). <PG?>
⚫DER Diminutive στupáк-tov [n.] (Th., Aen. Tact.); -íεɩv· кεvτpíšεɩv 'to goad, spur
on' (H., EM).
⚫ETYM Formation like xápač, кáμaž, etc., hardly related to στaupóç. It is either
identical to the tree name ►στúpa§ 1, or Pre-Greek.
σTUρiów [V.] mg. uncertain, 'to guarantee' (pap.)? <?>
•DER OTUρiwoię (pap.).
⚫ETYM Unknown.
στчãν [v.] ẞpovτäv 'to thunder' (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM A by-form of στυлáчw; see ► σTÚÑOç.
otvqe\i\w [v.] ‘to strike hard, dash, beat, drive away, maltreat' (Il., epic and lyr.).
<GR?>
•VAR Aor. -λížai.
•COMP Also with àлo-, ávα-, μieta-, nepi-.
•DER στvôελуµоí (v.l. -σµоí) [m.pl.] 'maltreatment' (A. Eq. 537 [anap.]).
Furthermore, σtuqɛlós ‘hard, raw, stony, severe' (A. [lyr.], A. R., Opp., AP; also
Arcad. Cyren. acc. to sch. A. R. 2, 1005; cf. Leumann 1950: 269f.), secondarily
‘astringent, bitter' (AP; after στúow); kata-σtvqeλóc 'raw, stony' (h. Merc., Hes.), ȧ-
σTUQEλós 'not hard, friendly, smooth' (Thgn., AP); enlarged στvoελwdŋs 'hard' (Q.
S.); also στúpλoç 'raw, stony' (trag., Lyc.); кατá- (H.), -áptos (Boeotia III³; PN?).
ETYM At first sight, epic σtuQEλí(w seems to be a derivation of the later attested
σTUQEλóc, but it is rather the other way around in view of the chronology and the
semantics. The barytone accent of σtúλos is remarkable. It is perhaps a derivative
1
oú
1419
of στúow 'to astringe' (through 'contract > 'become solid??). On στvqελíw, cf.
further Ruijgh 1957: 84ff.
στúów [v.] ‘to astringe, have an astringent effect', especially of taste; 'to thicken,
obstruct, treat with a corrosive' (Hp., Arist., Hell. and late). <?>
•VAR Aor. σtūчai (ávaσtūyai S. Fr. 421), pass. σtvôðñvaɩ, perf. med. čotyäiai.
•COMP Also with άлo-, εлɩ-, συV-, Úло-, etc.
•DER σTŪчIÇ (εní-, úлó-) [f.] ‘astringence, thickening, corrosion' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.,
etc.). στūµµa (σtúµµα?) [n.] ‘astringent' (medic.). Oτvääηpía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] designation
of contracting minerals, 'alum, vitriol' (Hdt., Hp., Arist., etc.), also ‘alum monopoly'
(pap.), -npios 'treated with alum' (PHolm.), -ŋpiwdŋs 'containing alum' (Hp., Arist.
et al.), -ŋpiakòv dépµa ‘piece of soft leather' (gloss), -ŋpíšovσa 'water in which alum
is washed' (gloss); also -ŋpá ‘id.' (PHolm.), probably after the adjectives in -ŋpós, e.g.
tapiɣŋpós (see Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 96). σtuntiкóç ‘astringent' (Diocl. Fr., Hp.,
Thphr. et al.). στuôós ‘id.' (Vett. Val., Gp.), -óτŋs [f.] 'density' (Plu.), -wdns
‘astringent, bitter' (Cat. Cod. Astr.). Possibly also στúplos (see σtvqeλí(w) and
σó (to σúα; cf. εуμó) epithet of στлτηрíα (PHolm.) = σкληpóç,
ok入npós,
avστηpós 'hard, harsh' (Hdn. Gr., H.).
⚫ETYM Formally similar to σTúw, which may be related (cf. Oúw beside τúow). Cf.
also ▸στpuqvós. An ingenious (but unlikely) hypothesis is advanced by Ruijgh 1967a
$92, who argues that Myc. tu-ru-pte-ri-ja (scil. yñ) stands for στрулτηpíα, the older
form of στулτηрía, which underwent dissimilation; he concludes that στúow may
have replaced older *στpúow.
otów, -oµai [v.] ‘to have an erection' (Ar., Diog. Ep., Luc., AP). <?>
•VAR Aor. σTuσaαι, pass. στvеñvαɩ, perf. čστūka.
●DER σtõµa [n.] ‘erection' (Pl. Com.), σtutiкóç ‘causing an erection' (Phylarch.; v.l.
σTUлT-). On στúμоç, see on σTÚÑOÇ.
•ETYM Originally ‘to be stiff, erect' < *sth₂-u-. From the same stem derive ►στüλoç,
► σταupóç, and ►στoá. Possibly related to στúow and ►σtúpač 2.
otwµúlos [adj.] ‘talkative, conversational, chatty' (Ar., Demetr., Theoc., Luc. et al.).
<?>
•COMP στwμvλ0-σv\\ɛкτádŋs [m.] 'talk-collector' (Ar. Ra. 841), see Fraenkel 1912:
20.
●DER otwµvλ-ía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] ‘talkativeness' (Stesimbr., Ar., Plb., AP et al.), -nеpa [f.]
'id.' also personified as an epithet of daiτaλɛïç 'banqueters' (Com. Adesp., Numen.
apud Eus., Phryn.); after nouns in -ηерα likе ршло-лεp-¯εp-ǹеpα ‘empty braggard's
talk'; adjective -nepos (Aristaenet.).
Denominative verbs: στшμúλλoμa 'to be talkative, chat, babble' (Ar.), rarely -úλλw,
also with кaτα-; hence -úλματα [n.pl.] 'chatter' (Ar.); -vλεúoμα 'id.' (Alciphr. Phot.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally compared with στóµɑ, with full grade of the root (*steh3-m-)
and a suffix*-ul-.
oú [pron.] 'you (sg.)' (Il.). ◄IE *tuH ‘you'➤

=== page 736 ===

1420
ovaypic
•VAR Dor. (also Aeol. in gramm.) tú, Hom. also túvŋ, Lac. toúvŋ. Obl. cases: acc. σέ,
Dor. (also Aeol. in gramm.) té, Dor. also τú, Cret. τƑέ (only in H. τpέ. σέ, interpreted
as τFÉ. DELG thinks this is suspect, as *tw- always gives σ- in all dialects). Dat. ooí,
encl. to (Il., Att. = 'indeed'), Dor. Toí, also tív, Hom. Tεïv. Gen. Hom. σɛão, Hom.
Ion. σéo, σεŨ, Att. σoû, Dor. téo, téos, tɛñç, etc. Enclitic σε, σOI, GOV.
•DER Hence the poss. pron. σós 'your' (Il.), Dor. Aeol. (also Hom.) tɛóc, Boeot. tiós.
•ETYM From PIE *tuH: Lat. tū, MoHG du, Lith. tù, etc., Dor. tú. Initial σ- in IA, etc.
was introduced after σέ < *tue. τúvŋ is like έyóvŋ, with an added particle (see s.v.
►żyw). Dor. gen. téo is like guéo (see s.v. ►èµé): PIE had *teue; cf. Skt. táva; on Dor.
TÉOÇ, Hom. σÉεv, etc., see s.v. ►εué. The poss. pron. tɛós < *tefós and σós < *τƑós
derive from PIE *t(e)uo-; cf. Lat. tuus < *teuos.
ovaypíç [f.] ‘a fish with teeth(?)' (Epich. 69, Arist., H.). <PG>
•VAR Also ovvaypíç (Arist.), -ídoç.
•DER Cf. σuvodovtíç as a fish name (Strömberg 1943: 45) and кpɛαуpíç, лavaypíç,
governing compound with ȧypeúw, ǎypa.
⚫ETYM Fur.: 123f. starts from ovač, -koç, ovákiov [n.] (Su.); σváкiv (gloss.) 'kind of
flatfish'. He takes σuvaypís (Arist.) to be folk-etymological for the form without a
nasal. No further etymology.
σúaž, -akoç →σvaypíç.
σúẞaka. σvwdŋ 'swinish'; oúßaç Máyvos ‘lecherous', also name of a satyr (vase-inscr.);
ovßáλλaç. ó kataqepǹs npòs tà áopodioia 'prone to sexual pleasures'; also úẞáλλns.
кατaqɛρnç, λáуvos 'inclined, lecherous' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Connection with Lat. subāre 'to be in heat', of female animals, has no
plausibility; Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 25f. supposes a Mediterranean origin.
The gloss ovwdŋ appears to be based on folk etymology. Several glosses can be
compared to σúẞaкa, e.g. σú[µ]ßpoç· кáлpoç ‘swine' (H.), but also oußplakóv. tò
noluteλés, ovßpiášev. σoßapeúetaɩ, τpuôã and ovßpiaσµós. ¿ ¿v εvwxíą ¤ópuẞóç
(H.); cf. also σúẞpa and σußpoí, with unclear glosses. All are assumed by Frisk to be
connected with Σúẞapıç, or influenced by it (or by üßpic). For oußáλlac, úßáλλnc,
cf. also Baλlíov. The alternation between initial σ- and aspiration, the -ß-, and the
suffix-ak- make Indo-European origin unlikely, thus it is probably Pre-Greek.
ovßývn [f.] ‘quiver' (Att. inscr., Ar. Th. 1197, 1215, H.), 'flute case' (Poll., EM, H.).
<PG?>
⚫ETYM Formation like σaynvn (s.v. with literature). No etymology.
ovyxic →oukxis.
σvкáuivov [n.] 'fruit of the mulberry tree, mulberry' (Amphis, Arist.). <LW Sem.>
●DER σvkáµĭvos [f., m.] ‘mulberry fig-tree' (Arist., Thphr., middle com., etc.), -ĭvivos
‘of the mulberry fig-tree' (Sotad. Com., Hell. pap.), on the formation cf. Schulze KZ
43 (1910): 189; tvwdns 'mulberry-like' (Thphr.). Also -ivéa [f.] = -ivos (after σuкÉα
ovкέa
'fig-tree', etc.; Aesop., Dsc. et al.). -ivewv = moretum (gloss.).
OUкXÍç, idos
1421
•ETYM A Semitic loanword; cf. Aramaic šiqʻmīn [pl.] ‘mulberry trees', Hebr. šiqmā
[sg.] 'id.' (Lewy 1895: 23, Strömberg 1940: 36, Ross KZ 77 (1961): 273).
σũkov [n.] ‘fig', also metaphorically 'wart, swelling, vagina² (11 121). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Boeot. (Stratt.) tõkov.
•DIAL Myc. su-za = ovкía [f.] ‘fig tree'.
•COMP σuкó-μopov [n.] 'fruit of the mulberry tree' (Str., Dsc. et al.), -os [f.]
'mulberry tree, sycamore' (Cels.), -éέa [f.] ‘id.' (Ev. Luc. et al.); cf. ►ovkáµīvov and
►μóρov.
⚫DER Dimininutives: σUк-ídiov, -ápiov [n.] (com.).
Further nominal derivatives: σUK-íç, -áç [f.] ‘cutting from a fig-tree' (Ar., Poll.). OUK-
éa 'fig-tree' (Od.), Dor. Aeol. also -ía, IA -έŋ, -ñ; ovк-íov [n.] 'fig-juice' (Hp.). OUк-
(ε)wv, -(e)wvos [m.] ‘fig plantation' (LXX, pap.). ovк-ítns [m.] (olvoc) ‘of a fìg-tree,
fig wine' (Dsc.), Spartan epithet of Dionysus (Sosib.); -ĭüç [f.] name of a precious
stone, probably after the color (Plin.). σuк-aλ(\)íc, -ídos [f.] ‘fig throstle' (Epich.,
Arist. et al.), see Niedermann Glotta 19 (1931): 9f. Adjectival derivations: σúk-ɩvoç ‘of
a fig-tree', metaphorically 'useless' (IA), ovк-wdŋs ‘fig-like, full of warts' (Arist.,
medic.), -áσtoç epithet of Zeus = кaápoчoç, since figs were used for purification
(Eust., H.).
Verbal derivations: OUк-álw 'to gather figs' (Att.), also 'to investigate' (Aristaenet.,
H.), also with ȧлo-; hencе -αστηç, -áστpia = σvкo-pávtηs, -pávtpia (EM, H.). Ovк-
-άotpia
íčoμa 'to be foddered with figs' (AP), -óoµaɩ ‘id.' (AP), whence -wτós 'foddered with
figs' (Aët.), ñлap ouкwτós liver fatted with figs' (Gal., Orib.), -woɩç [f.], -wµa [n.]
'formation of warts', -wτiкóç 'related to warts' (medic.).
•ETYM Like Lat. ficus and Arm. t'uz ‘fig', a loanword from a Mediterranean or
Anatolian source. This source may well have been Pre-Greek: the variation in initial
consonantism (Boeot. τŨкov) probably reflects an original *Puk-, with a palatalized
/ty.
ovkopávtŋs [m.] 'false accuser, denunciator', later also 'trickster, cadger' (Ar.). <GR>
•VAR Also ovкoqáσeis [pl.] = ovкoqavτíaι (AP), after àлoðáσɛç, etc.
=
•DER σUKOQpaVT-έw 'to act as a denunciator, accuse falsely, blackmail', -ía [f.] 'false
accusation', -íaç [m.] (ǎvɛµoç) “wind of accusations" (Ar.), -qua [n.] 'false
accusation'. ovкoqavt-ikós, -wdŋç ‘slanderous' (Att., etc.). Fem. σukopávtpia (Ar.),
Fraenkel 1912: 25.
•ETYM Expression of popular language, originally probably "fig-indicator”, which
already in antiquity was explained differently. Acc. to Cook Class. Rev.21 (1907):
133ff., the expression refers to an apotropaeic gesture, like Ital. far le fiche, MoFr. faire
la figue à qn.
ovkxíç, ídoç [f.] ‘kind of shoe' (AP, Suid.). <LW? Caucasus▷
VAR Also Yx; ovкx-áç, -ádoç (Poll., H.); σúкуoι· úлodýµаτа Þpúyia 'Phrygian
sandles' (H.).
⚫ETYM Knobloch Sprache 4 (1958): 198ff. supposes a loan from the Caucasus, which
may also be found in Av. haxa- [n.] 'sole of the foot' (see also Fur.: 361). Borrowed as
Lat. soccus.

=== page 737 ===

1422
ovλáw
ovláw [v.] ‘to strip off (the armor), take away, rob, plunder, seize' (Hom., IA). <?►
•VAR El. opt. ovλain; aor. ovλñσai (Il.), epic pres. also -ɛúw (cf. Chantraine 1942: 368;
not from ouλɛúc), -έw (Delph., Theoc. et al.; also Pi.? See Forssman 1966: 157f.).
•DIAL On the debated forms Myc. su-ra-se, su-ra-te, see Morpurgo Davies 1963 s.vv.
•COMP Also with άло-, etc. Compounds ɛo-σúλns [m.] = 0ɛwv σvλýτwp (Alc. et al.),
see Peek Phil. 100 (1956): 23, iɛpó-ovλoç [m.] 'temple-robber', with -έw, -ía (Att.).
Further ovλ-aywyέw 'to carry away as booty' (Ep. Col., etc.), ä-oulos ‘one who
cannot be distrained, invulnerable, safe', τò äσvlov ‘fenced territory, refuge', with
άovλ-ía [f.] ‘safety from distraint, invulnerability' (Parm., A., E., Pl., inscr., etc.).
•DER σvλ-nτwp [m.] 'plunderer' (A., Nonn.), fem. -ǹtɛɩpa (E. [lyr.]; Fraenkel 1912:
22f.), -ŋois [f.] ‘plunder' (S., Pl. et al.), -ηtiкós related to plunder' (Hell. inscr.),
-nτns (gloss).
Further oula [n.], ouλaɩ [pl.], rarely -ov [n.], -ŋ [f.] 'captured shipload, booty'
(Samos VI, Locr. V₁, Str.), in Att. 'right of seizure of a ship or its cargo, right of
distraint' (D., Arist.). From oula or ovláw (-έw, -ɛúw): ovleús [m.] ‘plunderer'
(SGDI 2516, Delph. IIIª), also as a mythical PN (Boßhardt 1942: 123). On Σvλo- and
-σulos in PNs, see also O. Masson Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 16 (1981): 166ff.
●ETYM It is formally attractive to assume that ovláw is derived from σñλa, etc., but
notice that the nominal forms are rare and have been attested later than the verb. In
any case, the Att. mg. 'right of seizure' must be secondary and cannot be separated
from ǎovλoç. The form ǎovλoç itself may derive from ovláw as 'who may not be
taken away or be robbed'. There is no certain etymology. The forms are similar to
►σкula 'booty', but their relation is unclear (see Schwyzer: 329 and Sánchez
Ruipérez Emerita 15 (1947): 67f.); do they point to a Pre-Greek interchange σ-/ok-?
Pisani Sprache 5 (1959): 143ff. explains σkulov as secondary after σkŨτos, which
seems doubtful. He thinks that ouλa comes from Lydian, together with Lat. spolia
'booty'. The gloss έooúlla. ás̟ýpei kɩλ. (H.) is in the wrong place alphabetically, so
it cannot be trusted. The word vλātai· έotepý¤ŋ, áлéОavεv 'was robbed, died' (H.) is
unrelated (Pisani l.c.).
oýv→ EÚv.
ouvaypic →oÚaypic.
ovvɛoxµós [m.] ‘juncture, joint', only in έv ovvεoxµ (E 465, verse-final). ◄GR➤
⚫ETYM For *ouvoxμóc for metrical reasons, after word-pairs like čolka: olкα, εopτŃ:
ópτý (Frisk Eranos 38 (1940): 41f.).
ovvέotaɩ [m.pl.] designation of the members of an association, probably participants
of a dinner society (IG 92(1), 434 [Acarnania IIª]). <GR>
⚫ETYM Without a doubt derived from ouv-ɛσ0íw 'to dine together' (cf. σúσ-σITOL,
лαpá-σɩɩɩ); see Chantraine RPh. 86 (1960): 177ff.
σvvoкwxótɛ [perf.ptc.nom.du.] 'grown together, bent together' (B 218). <GR>
•VAR The reading σvvoxwкóτε is predominant in the paradosis. Also σUVOXwкóτoç
[gen.sg.] 'collapsed' (Q. S. 7, 502).
σūpɩyš, -ɩyyos
1423
⚫ETYM From ►σuvέxw, but further unexplained. Probably an artificial formation (on
the mg., see Hartmann 1956: 250). Several attempts at an explanation have been
undertaken: 1. Brugmann IF 13 (1902-1903): 280: reduplicated formation like ouv-
Okwxń, ►ȧvoкwxŃ, etc. 2. Wackernagel Gött. Nachr. 1902: 738f. assumes a
denominative *ouvoxów (from σúvoxoc), since the reading ovvoxwкóτε seems to be
the more reliable one. This was recently defended by Hackstein 2002: 164ff. 3.
Schwyzer: 7666 considers ouvoxwкóτε to be an enlargement of *ouvoxótε (from
*hɛhoxa). Cf. further Chantraine 1942: 424³.
ovvwxadóv [adv.] 'continuously' (Hes. Th. 390, Q. S.). <GR>
⚫ETYM From Exw, with a suffix -adóv and compositional lengthening to -w-.
ovpn túpn.
=
σúpyaστpos [adj.] mg. unclear (Alciphr.; v.l. dat. sg. -opt), epithet of snakes (AP 15, 26
Dosiad. Ara), understood as τǹ уaστέpa σúpwv 'sweeping with its belly'.
Explained by EM, Phot. and H. (who has σupyάστwp) as 'swineherd', EM and Phot.
= εpуáτηç 'farmer'; described by H. as ŏvoμa ẞapẞapıкóv 'word of foreign origin'.
<?>
•ETYM Radermacher Festschr. Kretschmer: 160ff. refers to Zɛùç Eupуáστη in
Bithynia and assumes an originally foreign slave name.
ovpía [f.] kind of garment (pap.), called aútóлokov i̟µátov 'woolen cloak or mantle’
by Poll. 7, 61. <GR>
•COMP σuρóлolos 'made in Syria'.
⚫ETYM H. states: ŏτɩ έν Kαллαdoкią yívɛtai, oʊtoι dè Σúpot because it originates
from Cappadocia, the people of which are called Σúpol.
σūpɩyš, -ɩyyos [f.] ‘quill, flute, syrinx' (Il.); also of pipe-like objects, e.g. 'windpipe,
blood-vessel, fistula' (medic., etc.), 'spear case' (T 387), ‘hole in the nave of a wheel'
(trag., etc.), 'subterranean passage' (Plb., etc.). ◄PG(S)►
●COMP лεvɩε-σúpɩyyos 'with five pipes' (Ar. et al.).
•DER Diminutive σupíyy-tov [n.] (Hp., Plu. et al.), -ídiov [n.] (Hero). Other nominal
derivations: ovptyy-ís [f.] 'kind of ►кaσía' (medic.). σuptyy-íaç [m.] designation of a
tube (Thphr., Dsc.), cf. Strömberg 1937: 91. ouplyy-ítns [m.], -īti¢ [f.] name of a
precious stone (Ps.-Dsc., Plin.). ovplyy-wdns 'hollow, fistular' (Hp.). σuplуy-taкós
'meant for fistulae' (medic.; after кapdiaкóç, etc.).
Denominative verbs: σupíšw (Ion. poet. h. Merc.), Att. -íττw (Pl., D., Arist. et al.),
Dor. -íodw (Theoc.), aor. -ía (Ar.), -íoat (Babr., Luc.), fut. -ížoµαι (Luc.), -íσw
(Hero et al.), -tw (LXX) 'to blow the syrinx, whistle, hiss', also with úão-, ¿ê, ảño-,
etc. Hence σúp-tyμа [n.] 'tone of a pipe' (-toμa H.) with -уμаτódηs 'pipe-like,
hissing' (medic.), -tyчós (X., Arist., etc.), -toμós (LXX, etc.) [m.] 'the whistling,
whirr', -tys [f.] 'flute-playing' (sch.), -iкτηs, -ɩστηs (Arist., Corn.), -Iкτáç (Theoc.,
AP), -1στnp (AP) with -tσηpídiov mg. unclear (pap. I³), -tyкτns (Phot.) [m.] ‘flutist',
also ‘whistling'; oupiotiký (téxvn) ‘the art of flute-playing' (sch.). σupɩyy-óoµai [v.]
'to become hollow, get a fistula', -ów 'to make into a pipe, etc.' (Hp. et al.), also with

=== page 738 ===

1424
oupitng
¿ê-, лpo-, åño-; thence -wois [f.] ‘formation of a fistula' (medic.), -wµa [n.] ‘fistula'
(Vett. Val.). ouplyy-tάw [v.] 'to suffer from a fistula' (Hippiatr.).
ETYM A substrate word; cf. especially the non-Indo-European suffix -tyy. The
explanation by Solmsen 1909: 129ff. is to be rejected: a derivative in -tyy- from a
noun *σūpos vel sim., related to Skt. tūṇa- [m.] 'quiver', túṇava- [m.] 'flute'. Neither
can we follow Greppin KZ 103 (1990): 35-37, who assumes PIE origin.
Arm. sring 'flute, pipe' was probably taken from the same source. Borrowed as Skt.
surungā [f.] ‘subterranean passage' (on the etymology and history of the meaning,
see Stein ZII 3 (1925): 280ff.).
σvpíτns [m.] 'stone found in a wolf's bladder' (Plin. 11, 208). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
σúpixos [m.] 'basket' (Alex.). Also oupíσкoç. άууεïóν τɩ лλεкtóv, eiç ö oñka
εµßάλλovσɩ ‘a woven basket into which figs were thrown'. ɩvès dè úpíokov (H.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Here also "pixos (corr. Porson for cod. -tσós in Ar. Fr. 569, 5), "piσxos and
ẞpioxos (Phryn. PS), σúpiσσos (Poll.), úpíσσos (H.), -ós (Theognost.); also uppíç.
σлuрíç 'basket' (Zonar.); cf. úpíσida (for úpíç, -ída?). σлvpídiov, σлvpíç ‘id.' (H.);
úppáda (cod. üpp-). σлvρíðíov ‘id.' (Theognost.), üppaxa. лpíσxn (H.) (cf. ßpíσxos in
Phryn.). With other anlaut: ►äppixos and ápíokos. kóðɩvoç ‘big baskeť (H.).
•ETYM There are many alternating forms, and no clear Indo-European etymology, so
Pre-Greek origin is very likely (Fur.: 135, 241, 392, 300).
σúpw [v.] ‘to draw, trail, drag, pull, ravish, sweep' (IA). <IE *tuer- ‘stir, etc.'>
•VAR Aor. σūpaι, pass. σúpñvαι (late), fut. ovpw (LXX), perf. oέoupμaɩ, -ka (Hell.
and late).
•COMP Sta- 'to hackle, mock', επ- 'to be neglectful, treat neglectfully', kata-, napa-.
•DER With suffixes with -μ-: σúpµa (ȧñó-, ¿ñí-, napá-, ñɛpí-) [n.] ‘train-dress,
sweepings, dragging movement' (Ion., X., Hell. and late), hence σupμatītis kórpoç
'swept-together heap of manure' (Thphr.), σupματкỲ Qwvη 'drawn-out accent'
(VII³), ovpµaτìs otpatiá. ǹ tả ovµýýýaτa kaì ôpúyava σúpovσα kai ovλλέyovσa
'woman sweeping and collecting what has been raked together and firewood' (H.),
ovpµós (¿ñi-, repɩ-, úлo-) [m.] ‘grinding, dragging, pulling movement' (Arist.),
'vomiting' (Nic.); Sta- 'pulling apart, mocking' (Hell. and late); from this σvp-μádεç
[f.pl.] 'snow-drifts' (late), -uaía, Ion. -uaín [f.] 'vomitive, radish' (Ion., Ar., etc.), also
name of a Laconian priest rank (inscr., H.), -µaïw 'to take a vomitive', -μaïoμóç [m.]
(Hdt., medic.), uµíoν· λáxαvóν τɩ σɛλívy čoɩкóç ‘greens like celery' (H.), -µστp.
Evλoлwλns 'wood seller' (H.), oupun [f.] 'trailing tail of a snake' (sch.).
Further σúp-ths [m.] 'towing-rope' (Man., H.), -τwv [gen.pl.] (nom.sg. -Tηc or -τóc)
name of a dance (Akraiphia IP), Staσúp-tηs [m.] 'slanderer' (Ptol.), Sta-, ¿k-ovptikós
(Hell. and late). ávaσupt-óλis [f.] ‘lewd woman' (Hippon.), from ȧva-σúptŋg ‘who
draws up (the clothes)', cf. oipólis 'who copulates' and Chantraine 1933: 237f.
Probably also related Σúpτç [f.] name of a gulf on the north coast of Africa with
sandy shores and dangerous breakers (Hdt., etc.), known as "the pulling one" (cf. v.
Wilamowitz on Tim. Pers. 99); metaphorically 'destruction' (Tim. Pers. 99, H.).
oipap
1425
σúpoiç [f.] (also dɩá-) 'the drawing of a plough' (late). With enlargement -- (from
kápoŋ hay??): σúpon. púyava 'firewood' (H.), oupo-εtóc [m.] ‘sweepings, filth’
(Hes., Call., Plu. et al.), 'rabble' (Pl. et al.), also -ετwdns 'vulgar' (Plb., Luc. et al.), see
Chantraine 1933: 300, Schwyzer: 501; -ā} [m.] ‘rabble' (Ar. V. 673 [anap.], Luc.). On
σúppos 'some insect' see s.v. ►σέppos. Possibly also here: άoups lewd'.
•ETYM Probably related to σaipw 'sweep', if both reflect a root *tuer- 'to sweep'. In
this case, σúpw reflects *tur-e/o-, with analogical *σ- (rather than *tuor-e/o- with
Cowgill's Law, as per Vine 1999b: 569ff., with morphologically awkward o-grade).
The form σaipw would reflect *tur-ie/o-, with regular vocalization of the *r (cf. e.g.
►σápέ ‘flesh' < *turk-). For possible connections outside Greek, see s.v. ►σaípw.
Since σúpo-n, -εtτóç, -α probably derive from σúpw within Greek, a connection with.
OHG swerban 'to drive quickly to and fro, whirl, wipe off and W chwerfu 'to whirl,
turn around' (Pok. 1050f.) is improbable. See σúpyaotpoç.
oūç, ovóc [m., f.] 'swine, sow, boar' (Hom., Pi., rarely Hdt., Att. et al.). <IE *suH-s
'swine'>
•VAR Also Uç.
•DIAL Myc. su-qo-ta/sugotās/ or /-ō-/; see further s.v. ► ẞóσкw.
●COMP σň-ßá-tns [m.] ‘swineherd' (Od., Hdt., Pl.), fem. -τpiα (Pl. Com.), adj. -tikóç
(Pl. Com., Plu.), also -ßó-τηs ‘id.' (Arist.) with -ßóota [n.pl.] 'herds of swine' (A 679
= § 101, Plb., Lib.); σú-aypos back-formation = σus äyptos (Antiph., Dionys. Trag. et
al.), see Risch IF 59 (1949): 286f. Also (mostly Hell. and late) ovo-, e.g. -qopẞós [m.]
'swineherd' (Plb. et al.), -pópẞtov (Arist.; σu-qopẞós Hom. et al.), metrically
conditioned oun-ẞólos (Opp.) = ovо-кτóvоç (Call., Nonn.).
●DER σú-aɩva [f.] (Opp.), -ač, -ákιov (gloss., Suid.) a fish-name (Strömberg 1943:
101); -άdeç. ai üɛs, éoxnuatioµévws 'wild swine' (H.). Further σú-aos (X. et al.), -ɩvos
(v.l. in X.) ‘of a swine', -wdŋs 'swinish, gluttonous, beastly' (Plu., Philostr. et al.). ov-
óoμai 'to become a swine' (VIP). Unclear σuñλαι· τóлоι ßорßорódεç 'miry places'
(H.); on ovqɛós 'pig-sty' s.v.
•ETYM The inherited form is ⇓ç (= Lat. sūs) < PIE *suHs. The initial σ- of σuç is
somehow secondary, perhaps after σíados ‘'fatting pig'; alternatively, it is a LW
from another IE language, or derives from an otherwise unattested cognate of Lith.
kiaūlė ‘swine' (it is senseless to adduce σwλoús. ₺ç [H.], as von Blumenthal 1930: 45f.
does). Not an onomatopoeia, as per West Glotta 76 (1998): 232f.
σvστádɛç 'vines planted densely' (Arist., inscr. IV³); also a 'water container'. <GR>
•VAR Also U-, see s.v.
•ETYM From σuvíσταµaι; cf. лαστáç from лapíστapai.
σúчαкα уλɛÜкoç 'new wine' (H.). <?>
⚫DER ovqaкÍČEɩv. óлwpílav 'gather fruit' (H.).
•ETYM Unknown.
σuqap [n. indecl.] 'wrinkled skin' (Sophr., Call., Luc. et al.), also personified 'wrinkled,
decrepit person' (Lyc.), 'skin of a snake' (Luc.), ‘skin on milk' (sch. Nic. Al. 91, H.)
<PG?>

=== page 739 ===

1426
aipeóc
•ETYM Traditionally compared with Lat. süber ‘cork-oak, cork', in spite of the
semantic difficulties. If correct, we are dealing with borrowings from a common
source. Acc. to Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 27, it is related to "oɛap 'mistletoe',
but semantically this is hardly probable.
ovqɛós [m.] ‘pigsty' (Od., Parth., Gp.). <?►
•VAR Also -εLOU к 389 with metrical lengthening at verse end; cf. Chantraine 1942:
104. Also σupós (Lyc., Poll.), -ɛwv [m.] ‘id.' (Agath., Gp.), after ȧvdp(ε)wv, etc.
•ETYM For the ending, cf. owλɛós ‘lair', etc. Probably derived from σuç, but the
details are unclear. See ►σûç.
σvxvós [adj.] 'numerous, many, much, wide, lồng' (IA). <?►
●DER σuxv-άkıç [adv.] 'frequently, often' (Luc.), -ɛwv, -ɛwvos [m.] ‘thickeť (Aq.),
-á¼w = ¤¤µí¶w (EM) with -aσua [n.] (Poll.).
ETYM No etymology.
σqάyvos [m.] name of a bush, = èλɛλíσqaкov, àσлáλaеoç (Diocl. Fr., Dsc.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 124 compares σoáкoç 'sage-apple, salvia; tree-moss' and oάyvos 'salvia'
(gloss.) and páσкov ‘kind of moss (Thphr., oáσкoç H.). Given these variants, the
word is Pre-Greek.
σqadá¶w [v.] ‘to flounce, rear (of horses), be uneasy, twitch' (Hp., trag., X., Plb., Plu. et
al.); àvaσqadáčяv. ȧvαлηdãν, ȧváλλoμαι, λакτíяv 'to leap or spring up, kick with
the heel' (H.). <?>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.
•DER σqad-aσμós [m.] 'flouncing, twisting' (Pl.), -αστк@ç 'flouncing' (Eust.).
ETYM Hdn. Gr. 2, 929 recommends a form σpadá¶w (-άw), like даτάw, which
may be hypercorrect. An expressive word without a convincing explanation. For
comparison, σpodpós, ▸σqɛdavós, σqevdóvη, and σpóvdulos have been
adduced, but σлáш, σлαбóν maу also be considered; cf. σqadaσμóç· σñaσµóç, kai τà
öμola (H.). In the latter case, the variation points to substrate origin.
σqάw [v.] ‘to slaughter (by cutting the throat), kill, sacrifice' (Il.). <PG?>
•VAR -átτw (Boeot.; late Att. also -áddw, see Schwyzer: 715), aor. σqážai (Il.), pass.
σôayñvaɩ (IA, etc.), -õеñvaɩ (Pi., Hdt., E. [lyr.] etc.), fut. σážw (E. et al.), pass.
-yŋooµai (Att.), perf. med. žσqayµaɩ (Od.), act. σpaka (late).
•COMP Often with prefix, especially ȧло-, εл-, кατα-.
•DER σqay-n (diα-, кατα-) [f.] 'slaughter, killing; throat' (trag., Att. prose, etc.), -ītis
'of the throat' (medic., Arist.), -ɛúc [m.] 'slaughterer; sacrificial knife' (S., E., And., D.
etc.).
ooáy-tos belonging to the slaughter, killing' (Hp., S. [lyr.] etc.); σœáу-ɩov (лpo-),
mostly pl. -α [n.] 'victim, oblation, especially before a battle' (IA) with -ɩášoµaι,
-táw ‘to slaughter, sacrifice' (IA), -taσµós [m.] (E. [lyr.], Plu. et al.).
σqay-iç [f.] 'slaughter knife, sacrificial knife' (E. et al.), also referring to σqayn;
-ídiov (Suid.); but εл-σqay-íç 'nape of the neck, where the axe strikes' and лapα-
σqay-iç 'part next to the throat' (Poll.). σpay-ɛĩov [n.] 'sacrificial bowl' (A., E., Ar.,
inscr.), derived form σpay-n or -ɛúc, also σpay-1στplov (sch.). σqáyµa [n.] 'the
opáke入og 1
1427
killing' (sch.), also with prefix in e.g. лрóσαу-μα (A., E. et al.). Late σqák-tŋs [m.]
'murderer', in compounds, e.g. with кaλaμo- 'one who kills with a pin' (Ph.), with
-τɩкǹ μáxαιpα (Zonar.); σoαк-τýp [m.] 'murderer', only with Sta- and Xчtapo- (AP);
-ɩpɩα [f.] ‘sacrificial priestess' (Ael.). σøák-τpov [n.] ‘sacrificial tax' (Palmyra II³,
Poll.).
As a second element -σqáž, e.g. in dia-σôáž, -άyoç [f.] 'rip, split, chasm' (Hdt. et al.),
also -σqay-ía [f.], e.g. ßoo- 'the killing of oxen' (API.).
•ETYM The attested formations are productive, so they can all be derived from either
the verb σqάw, σôážaɩ or from a nominal root σpay-. No cognates outside Greek;
Fur.: 300 connects páσyavov as paσy-/opay-, which remains uncertain.
σqaîpa [f.] 'sphere, ball, balls in a boxing-glove, globe' (Od.). <?>
•COMP E.g. σpaipo-εds 'spherical' (IA), èлí-σqaipα [n. pl.] 'leather coating (mostly
of boxing balls), boxing-gloves' (Plb., Plu.).
•DER σqaip-ndóv 'like a ball, sphere' (N 204 et al.). Diminutive -íov (Pl. Ep., Hell. and
late). σqaip-ɛúc [m.] the young men of Sparta, named after their boxing-gloves
(Paus., inscr.). σpaip-iкós (Archyt., Arist., etc.), -εto (comm. Arist.) [adj.]
‘spherical'; -чç ‘cypress' (< *conical'?) (Gal.). σqaɩp-wv, -wvos [m.] 'round fishing-
net' (Opp.), -íw (åvti-, dia-, ovv-) 'to play ball' (Att.); qaipíddɛiv. σqaɩpíšɛv ‘id.'
(H.), hence -10s (Arist.), -чσµós (Artem.), -toμa (Eust.) 'ball-game', -ɩoτýs ‘ball-
player”, -ɩσtıkóç ‘belonging to a ball-game', -tστηpiov ‘ball court, ball house', -íστpa
'id.' (Hell. and late). σaip-óoμat, -ów 'to be round, round off, to provide with a
round edge' (X., Arist., Hell. and late), also with ȧло-, Siα-, εv-; hence -wμa 'rounded
body' (Arist. et al.), -wois 'a spherical shape' (late), -wτńp, -ñpos [m.] ‘knob, bulb vel
sim.' (Tab. Heracl., Hell. pap.); see Solmsen IF 31 (1912/13): 492ff. Lat. spaerita [m.]
kind of cake (Cato; Leumann Sprache 1 (1949): 206) probably derives from an
unattested *σqaip-itns.
•ETYM The formation is like that of лεipα, σлεt̃pа, μoîрa, etc. No cognates
outside Greek. Sometimes connected to σлaíрw 'to flaunce', but the semantics are
hardly convincing, and the initial cluster remains unexplained. The word opaipa
was borrowed into Syr. êspērō, Ethiop. spir (Schwyzer: 159 and 161), and Arm. spˇeř
(>> Georg. spero; Bailey TPS 1945: 28).
σqάкɛλoç 1 [m.] 'caries, gangrene, necrosis' (Hp., Gal.), also 'twitching pain, cramp'
(A. Pr. 878, 1045, E. Hipp. 1352). <?>
•DER σqakeλ-wdŋs ‘gangrenous' (medic.), σqakeλíšw (εлɩ-, àлo-) 'to suffer from
caries or gangrene' (Hdt. Hp., etc.), rarely 'to suffer from a twitching pain, cramp'
(Cratin., Pherecr., Plu.), with -toµós [m.] ‘caries, gangrene' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.), cf.
Strömberg 1937: 191, 'heavy pain' (Stoic.), ‘epilepsy' (Hippiatr.); ¿ru-, àño-oqakéλioiç
[f.] ‘gangrene' (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Formation like σкóлελoç, лúελoç, etc. from an unknown root. The word was
originally a medical expression, acc. to Chantraine 1933: 244. Starting from a
meaning 'convulsions (of pain)', Persson seeks to connect MHG spachen 'to split',
LG spaken 'burst, putrefy', etc., which can hardly be correct. Cf. opákos, ►opýž,
and ▸ páкελoç.

=== page 740 ===

1428
OnáKE入og 2
σлάкελоç 2 [m.] 'middle finger' (sch. Pl. Ti. 84 ẞ, Phot.). <PG(V)>>
•VAR Also σQaкŋλoç or q-.
⚫ETYM Pre-Greek in view of the variation.
σqάkoç [m.] ‘sage' (com., Thphr.). ◄ PG(V)►
•DIAL Myc. pa-ko-we, on which see Morpurgo Davies 1963 s.v.
⚫COMP σqaкwdns 'rich in sage' (H.). On ►¿λɛlíσçaкoç, see s.v.
•ETYM Of unclear origin. Solmsen 1909 connects σчáкɛλos, which is possible. Cf.
further ►qάokoç. According to Fur.: 124, it is related to σoáyvoç, payvos, etc., which
would point to Pre-Greek origin.
oqά\\w, -oµai [v.] ‘to bring down, ruin, mišlead, med. 'to go down, be ruined, be
mistaken' (IA). <IE *(s)g™hh₂el-➤
●VAR Aor. σôñλai (Il.), Dor. σçãλaɩ (Pi.), pass. σpāλ-ñvai (-Оñvaɩ Gal.), intr. -at
(LXX; Schwyzer: 756), fut. -w, pass. -σoμαι, perf. med. čσo̟αλ-μαι (IA), act. -кα
(Plb.).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àлo-, napa-.
●DER oqaλ-ɛpós ‘slippery, treacherous, staggering' (IA), -µɑ [n.] ‘fall, accident,
misstep, mistake' (IA), -µóc [m.] ‘id.' (Aq.), hence -µñσai (ȧño-) ‘to stumble' (Plb.)
and oqaλ-µã. okiptặ, oqá\\etai ‘springs, is tripped up' (H.). σøáλ-σis (ȧvá-, nepí-,
àµí-) [f.] ‘fall, accident' (Hp., Vett. Val.), σøáλ-tŋs [m.] epithet of Dionysus “he
who ruins" (Lyc.). à-oqaλ-nc (also εлɩ-, лεpɩ-, àρi-σqaλns etc.), ntr. -és, adv. -(έ)ws
'not falling, not staggering, firm, safe, reliable' (II.), -ɛa [f.] (Att.), -íčoµα, -iw (Hell.
and late), all deverbal. The hapax σqáλoç [n.] (trag. POxy. 676, 16) is uncertain. See
also on ǎσpaλTOS, which may have been folk-etymologically adapted.
•ETYM The derivational patterns are the same as those of e.g. ►лáλλw and ► okáλλw.
Traditionally connected to Skt. skhálate, -ti ‘sumble, stagger, err', Arm. sxalem, -im
'id.'. Rix 1976: 31 (also LIV² s.v. *(s)g™³/h₂el-) reconstructs *sgh₂el- with Siebs' Law,
which seems a good possibility. Attempts to connect the root to that of ► σлoláç and
► ȧσлάλaž are unfruitful, because the initial clusters do not match.
σqalós [m.] 'foot block' (Epich., Poll., H.), 'disc' (Poll., H.). <PG?>
•DER σqaλíw to fetter' in cooáλ(ev (Phot.), -ɩžev (H.).
⚫ETYM A technical expression; hardly identical with Latv. spals 'grip, handle' and
PGm. *spal- 'cross-beam, rundle (of a ladder etc.)' (ON spolr [m.], MHG, ME spale),
which reflect *spol-. Fur.: 351 connects σpéλaç, and considers the words to be Pre-
Greek, which is possible.
σapaуéoμaɩ [v.] 'to crackle, sizzle' (1390), 'to teem, be full to bursting' (1 440). <IE
*sb"rh₂(e)g- 'burst, crackle'>
•VAR Only ipf. oqapayɛυvτo; also σqapayíčw in żσqapáуičov 'excited (with noise)'
(Hes. Th. 706), -íčɛi. ßpovtā, tapátteɛɩ, yoqɛi 'thunders, disturbs, sounds' (H.).
•DER σqάpayoç = \óqoç ‘sound (H.); furthermore only as a second member, e.g.
¿pɩ-σqápayos ‘with loud noise' (h. Merc. et al.), ẞapv-σqápayos ‘with dull noise'
(Pi.).
σεvaμvos
1429
•ETYM Perhaps of Indo-European origin (for the formation, cf. quapayέw), with
cognates in Skt. sphúrjati, -áyati 'to crackle, drone', OE sprecan, OHG sprehhan 'to
speak', etc.; Skt. sphúrjati 'break up', Lith. sprógti 'to burst, explode' are probably also
related (see s.v. ►σларуáw). These have been taken to reflect *sprh₁g-, but the
aspirate in Greek and Sanskrit rather points to *sb³rh₁ģ-. Cf. ► σppayis.
.
σqápay[y]os [m.] · ßpóyxos, tpáxnlos, loqµós, yópos ‘throat, neck, plague, sound
(H.), qápvy 'throat' (Apion apud Phot.).
=
ETYM See s.v. ►àσpápayoç 1.
σqɛdavós [adj.] 'violent, vehement' (Il. [-óv adv.], Xenoph., Hell. epic, AP). <?>
•DER Next to σpodpós, adv. -pa, -pws ‘id.' (µ 124) with σpodp-óτns [f.] 'violence,
vehemence' (Pl., X. et al.), -úvoμat, -úvw 'to become, make violent, vehement' (A. Pr.
1011, Ph., Plu. et al.), also with ¿ïɩ-, after the opposite лpavoµα, see Fraenkel 1906:
37; σodp-óoμα ‘id.' (Ph. v.l., Gal.).
⚫ETYM The formation of σqɛdavós is similar to that of έdavós, σtɛyavóS, OKEITA VÓS,
idavóc, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 196f., Schwyzer: 489f.). Together with ooodpóc,
σqɛdavóc may reflect a heteroclitic r/n-stem (Benveniste 1935: 20), but this is
uncertain. Possible Greek cognates are σqadáčw and ▸oqevdóvŋ.
σqɛis [pron.] 'they, them(selves)' <IE *se- ‘oneself>
•VAR anaphoric and reflexive 3 pl. Forms: ntr. σoća, acc. Att. σçãç, Ion. Hom. σoćac,
Aeol. Hom. Dor. σqɛ, Cret. Syrac. wε, gen. oqwv, Ion. Hom. σoέwv, Hom. also
opɛiwv, dat. opioi(v), Aeol. Ion. Hom. Dor. σ(v), Cret. Syrac. чtv, Lac., etc. qiv,
(σqi(v), σqe also 3sg.); epic 3du. σowɛ, -ïv, 2du. σqwï, -ïv, Att. σqw, σqwv.
•DER Hence the possessive pron. oqétepos, oqwïtɛpos (Il.), epic also σqóç ‘their’
(rarely reflexive), with σqɛtɛpíšoµaɩ, -í\w ‘to make one's own' (Att. Hell. and late),
-toµós, -totýc (Arist.).
⚫ETYM The oldest forms were probably *σ-qɛɩ and σ-q₁(v), with σ- a zero grade of IE
*se- (Lat. si-bi, Osc. sí-feí, OCS se-bě). The forms σqe, oqɛiç, opāç, oqwv, etc. were
created in analogy to ǎµ(v), äµµɛ, ŋµɛîç, etc.; qɩv and чiv developed irregularly
from oqiv with loss of σ- and metathesis, respectively. See further Schwyzer: 600ff.
and Chantraine 1942: 266ff., 273.
σQεкlapās glass-maker of special glass (L. Robert 1969: 93-932).<LW Lat.>
⚫ETYM Derived from σлéкλоv 'speculum', which itself is a borrowing from Lat.
speculum.
oqέlaç [n.] ‘footstool (p 231, σ 394, A. R. 1159), 'socle' (Delos VIª), ‘log?' (Nic. Th.
644). <PG?
⚫DER Diminutive σqɛλíσкov [n.] 'stool'(?) (Samos IV³). Hypostasis -σε-ín ó
Opaviτns 'the top-rower (i.e., in a trireme)' (H.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 351 concludes from the possible connection with opaλós that the word
is Pre-Greek.
oqévdaµvos [f.] 'maple, Acer monspessulanum' (Thphr., Dicaiarch.). <PG➤
•VAR Note σлévбaμvov. žúλov 'wood' (H.).

=== page 741 ===

1430
•DER -Vos of maple' (Cratin., Ar.).
oqevdóvn
⚫ETYM Formation like díкτaµvov, þádaµvoç, etc. Often connected to opevdóvŋ ‘sling
etc.', either through a meaning 'trembling' or after the form of the seeds (Carnoy
Ant. class. 27 (1958): 318 and Carnoy REGr. 71 (1958): 99). Fur.: 164 compares
σлévdaµvov úlov (beside äкασtos. σqévdaµvoç and кáστov. žúlov [H.]). The
word is probably Pre-Greek (Schwyzer: 524, Alessio Studi etruschi 15 (1941): 177). See
also Amigues RPh. 73 (1999): 102f.
oqɛvdóvŋ [f.] ‘sling', from wool, hair, animal sinews, etc., often metaph. of sling-like
objects, e.g. 'bandage, headband, case on a ring, white of the eye' (Il.); also 'throw,
missile' (Ar., X.), referring to σpevdováw. ◄PG>
•COMP Rarely as a second member, e.g. Bɛλo-opεvdóvŋ ‘arrow-sling, fire-missile'
(Plu.).
●DER oqevdov-ýtŋs, Boeot. -átaç [m.] ‘slinger' (Hdt., Th. et al.), -ŋtiký (téxvn) ‘the
art of slinging' (Pl.), -ŋdóv 'like a sling' (sch., EM); -aíav oqevdóvny, is tǹv
oopayida 'sling, signet' (H.). Denominative verb σqɛvdov-áw 'to sling' (IA), also
with άлo-, Sα-, к-; thence -ŋois [f.] (Hp., Pl. et al.). Similarly opɛvdov-iw ‘id.' (Ps.-
Callisth.), -10τns [m.] (Them.).
•ETYM Formation like åуõóvŋ, лɛpóvŋ, ßɛlóvŋ. No convincing etymology; most
often connected within Greek to σqɛdavóc, oyodpóc, opadá¼w, and to Skt. spandate
'to pull, beat out' (Pok. 989). Further often compared with Lat. funda 'leather strap,
sling', which would point to a common loan from a Mediterranean or Anatolian
source (E-M s.v. funda). This source is likely to have been Pre-Greek.
oqúv, oqnvóc [m.] ‘wedge' (A. Pr. 64, Ar., Arist., Hell. pap.). <?►
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. opηvó-rovs, -лodos 'with wedge-shaped feet', of
кλívη (Ceos V³), εлí-σøηvoç 'wedge-shaped' (Lebadeia), see Strömberg 1946: 100;
ȧvti-σonv 'counter-wedge' (Ph. Bel.).
⚫DER Diminutives σoŋv-íσкoç [m.] (Hp. et al.), -ápiov [n.] (late medic.), uncertain
-íç, -ídov (Hero). Further σpavíov. кλɩvídiov 'small couch' and ev oqavių. έv
Kλɩvapių ‘in bedsteads' (H.); but лapα-σo̟é̟v-iov [n.] 'side-block for wedging' (Hell.
inscr. and pap.). σðŋv-óoµaï, -ów 'to be wedged, to wedge (in)' (Arist., medic., Hell.
and late), often with, e.g. ȧлo-, dα-, napa-; oqǹvwois (àño-, dia-, ¿m-) [f.] ‘wedging
in' (medic. et al.), àлoσηv-wμα [n.] 'wedge-shaped block' (pap. IIP).
⚫ETYM The form σov reflects *σáv, *σqavσ-, or *σqa-ŋv (cf. σqavíov and Cean.
σqŋvónovs < *σqāv-). The traditional identification with a PGm. *spēn-u- 'chip'
(OHG span, OE spōn, ON spánn, spónn) must be given up because the labials do not
match. The same goes for the connection with Skt. sphyá- [m.] 'shoulder-blade',
Khot. phvai 'spade, shovel', which are rather related to σлáðŋ (see s.v.). The word
σonv therefore remains without an etymology.
oqýž, -ŋkós [m.] ‘wasp' (Il.). <PG?(V)►
VAR Dor. (Theoc.) -āкóç [m.].
●DER oqŋk-iá [f.] 'wasp-nest' (S., E., Ar., LXX et al.), see Scheller 1951: 68, -íov [n.]
'comb in a wasp-nest' (Arist., Thphr. et al.), cf. also έл-σo̟é̟к-ov [n.] of unknown
meaning (Delos IIIª). σqŋk-íσkos [m.] 'pointed wood, rafter, etc.' (Ar., Arist., inscr.
opiyyw
1431
et al.), -íaç [m.] ‘id.' (Pherecr.), also name of a verse (Ps.-Plu.), cf. oqŋkikós,
oqnkwdnc. opńk-ɛov [n.] 'wasp-like insect' (Nic.), -εta [f.] old name of the island.
Cyprus (Lyc., H.).
Further in the adjectives σoηк-кóç 'wasp-like', name of a verse (Eust.) and -wdns
‘id.' (Ar. et al.), also name of a verse (sch.). We further find a denominative verb
oqŋk-óoµai ‘to be contracted, bound in the middle', -ów ‘to contract, binď (P 52,
Ar., Hell. and late epic, late prose), often with prefix, e.g. àño-, dɩα-, έл-; thence
-wμa [n.] 'point of a helmet' (S., Ar.), 'cord, cable' (pap. IIIª, etc.). Rarer derivatives
are opηкioμós εidos aúλnσews, εеρηµévoν åлò τñу έµôɛpɛíaç τŵν ßоµ<ß>wv 'an
imitation of the buzzing of a wasp on the flute' (H.), -iwσiç. кŋpía σqηкwv
'honeycombs of wasps' (H.), the unclear σoηкóç = oynkwdnc (S. Fr. 29), σöηкóç
λópov. tò ǎkpov toû λóqov кtλ. ‘the summit of a hill, etc.' (H.) and σońkŋ [n.pl.] of
unknown meaning (pap. IIIª).
•ETYM For the formation, cf. ►μúpµŋ} and ►okáλn. A comparison with σov
'wedge' seems attractive, but is morphologically impossible. Persson 1912(1): 396
hesitantly compares σoáкɛλoç, referring to the constricted body of the wasp; one
may also think of the sting of a bee, but again the formal side of the derivation
remains unclear. The word has also been connected to v 'gall-insect' (see Fur.:
393). This comparison points to Pre-Greek origin (y-/oq-), which seems most
attractive. Connection with чñv 'to rub' cannot be proven.
σqiyyw [v.] 'to bind, embrace, jam in' (since Emp., A. Pr. 58). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. σqiyžaɩ, oqiyõ§ñvaɩ, fut. σqiy\w, perf. med. σqɩyµαɩ; non-pres. forms
almost only Hell. and late.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ŋɛpl-, ovv-, &iul-.
=
•DER Verbal adjective σqiуктóç 'bound' (AP, Opp. et al.). σqiук-τhp [m.] 'that which
binds' (AP, Nonn.), ‘contractile muscle closing an aperture' (medic. et al.), also
XIτwv. Tapavτivoɩ 'tunic (Tarantinian)' (H.); -Twp of reins (AP); -tns = kivaldoc
(Cratin., H.).
opíyžic (ànó-, diá-, nepí-), also àлó-σqɩɩç [f.] ‘the binding' (medic. et al.). σœíya
(Úлó-) [n.] 'obstruction' (Hero, medic.).
•ETYM The pres. σqiyyw has been taken to be the oldest form, and the nasal-less
forms čσqiyaɩ, σqiyµa and àлóσqɩɩç to be secondary. It is possible, however, that
the variation is due to Pre-Greek prenasalization. Borrowed as Lat. spinter 'bracelet',
spintria 'male prostitute' (because of the contractile muscle of the anus).
Σqiy, -tyyós [f.] 'sphinx' (Hdt., A., E., etc.), also name of a monkey (Agatharch. et
al.). <PG(S, V)►
•VAR Further acc. Diкa [f.] (Hes. Th. 326, v.ll. Σqiкa, Diyya, Σqiyya), Σqi, -кóc
(Choerob.; also Thess. inscr. VII?); Biкaç Σqiyyas (H.).
●COMP ávɗpó-σqiy} [m.] 'male sphinx' (Hdt.), σууó-лous 'with sphinx-feet'
(Hell.).
■DER σqiyy-iov [n.] 'kind of monkey' (Plin., inscr. Praeneste), meaning unclear (Luc.
Apol. 1); -ídiov [n.] ‘little sphinx' (inscr.).

=== page 742 ===

1432
opídec
•ETYM The by-forms Þika, Σçîka as well as qiyyα = σqiyya (Pl. Cra. 414d) point to
substrate origin. Cf. also the TN Díкiov öpoç north of Thebes (von Wilamowitz 1931:
269). The word may have been connected with σqiyyw 'to bind' by popular
etymology. On the possibility of an Egyptian loan, see Mac Creedy Glotta 46 (1968):
250.
ovides [?] Xopdaì μαуɛɩρiкαí 'tripe fit for cookery' (H.). <PG>
⚫ETYM Reminiscent of Lat. fides 'cords of a lyre'; cf. E-M s.v. They were probably
borrowed from the same Mediterranean language.
apóyyos →otóyyos.
σyódpa, -ós →σqɛdavós.
σqovdúλŋ [f.] ‘kind of beetle which lives on the roots of plants and emits a strong
smell when attackeď (Ar., Arist. [v.l. σлovd-], Thphr.). ◄PG(S) ►
•var σrovdúλŋ ǹ yaλñ nap' 'Attɩкoïç ‘weasel (Attic)' (H.).
ETYM For the formation, cf. kopεúλŋ, σxεvdúλŋ etc. Formally close to σpóvλoç
'vertebra', but no semantic connection can be established. Borrowed as Lat.
sphondyle, -lum, -lium. The word contains the Pre-Greek suffix -vλ-.
σqóvôňλoç [m.] '(cervical) vertebra', metaph. ‘a tambour in a column, spindle-whorl'
(Ar., Pl., Arist., inscr., etc.). <PG(S, V)►
VAR Also (non-Att.) σлóvбuλoç, often as a v.l. beside σo- (Pherecr., Hp., Arist. et
al.; details in Hiersche 1964: 204).
•COMP σqovduλo-dívητoç ‘spun with the spindle-whorľ' (AP), лoλv-opóvdvλos
'with many whorls' (Luc.).
●DER σqovdúλ-10v [n.] ‘cervical vertebra' (Y 483, Antim.), plant name ‘common
medicinal herb, Heracleum sphondylium' (Dsc. et al.). σqovduλ-íç [f.] ‘id.' (Ps.-
Dsc.), -óɛç 'consisting of whorls' (Man.), -wdŋs ‘whorl-like' (sch.). ¿к-σqovɗvλíļw
'to break a vertebra' (LXX, EM).
ETYM Formation like кóvduλoç, SáкTUλoç, probably first from a noun *σpóvdoç.
Sometimes connected with words like ►σqevdóvŋ, ▸σqɛdavós, and opadáčw,
supposedly containing a verbal root 'to jerk vel sim.', but this is mere speculation.
The variation σл/σ- points to Pre-Greek origin.
oqpāyis, oqpnyís, -īdos [f.] ‘seal, seal of a state, impression of a seal, signet, seal-ring,
cut stone' (IA), 'sealed field-plot' (pap.). For extensive discussion on the mg. of
oppayís, see Diehl 1938 (with lit.); also Kenna JHS 81 (1961): 99ff., Kranz RhM 104
(1961): 3ff., 97f. ◄PG(S)►
●DER Diminutive σøpayídɩov [n.] (Ar., Thphr., inscr.). Denominative verbs σopay-
íšw, -íšoμaɩ ‘to provide with a seal, seal, signet, stamp, confirm' (IA), often with
prefix, e.g. εл-, кατα-, σuv-; thencе -чσμа (àντ-, àло-, εк-) [n.] 'impression of a seal,
sealed document' (E., X., Hell., late); -чoµóç (εл-, ларα-, лερ-) [m.] 'sealing,
confirmation' (Hell. and late); èv-, εл-σópáу-1σiç [m.] 'sealing' (late); -torplov [n.]
‘seal, stamp' (pap.); -lotýs (¿n-, à´o-) [m.] ‘sealer, witness' (Plu., Luc., pap. et al.).
opipa
1433
Σopayidov, the name of a cave (ävτpov) of prophesying nymphs on the Cithairon
(Paus. 9, 3, 5), where the vúµqai Σopaуíτɩdɛç live (Plu. Arist. 11).
•ETYM Formation like kλŋïç, kvηuís, etc., which points to a secondary derivative. The
Σqpayítides výµqat were connected to σpapayεoμat by Lobeck 1837: 51º. Prellwitz
1892 s.v. suggested connection with Lith. spróga 'crevice', sprógti 'to explode, burst'.
Though formally possible, these etymologies are rightly called "semantically
enigmatic" by DELG. Fur.: 324' takes the word to be Pre-Greek because of the suffix
-īd-. This is possible; DELG remarks that the use of the saw in the Aegean is pre-
Hellenic.
σopiyaw [v.] 'to be full to bursting' especially of women's breasts, metaph. 'to be
swollen with passion or pride', more generally 'to brim with vitality' (Hp., A. Pr. 382,
E., Pl.). <PG?>
•VAR Only pres. stem, especially ptc.
•DER Backformation σopiyos [n.] 'power, strength' (Hermipp.), -wdŋs 'teeming'
(Orib.), -avós teeming, swelling' (Theoc. 11, 21 v. l., Hp. apud Tim. Lex., Poll., sch.).
⚫ETYM Intensive formation in -áw (Schwyzer: 719). Hardly related to MoNw. dial.
sprikja, MoSw. dial. sprika ‘to unyoke, spread out, split apart, etc.'. The word σopiai.
ȧлɛai, ópуai 'boasts, anger' (H.) must also belong here, with irregular loss of -y-.
Fur.: 175 compares Celtic *brīgos 'power, courage, liveliness'; beside σopiaí, he
adduces (168) ẞpi, ßpiáw, (247) ßpчµáw, (375) ößpчos, and ßpчµós, which would
suggest substrate origin.
*σqudów [v.] only in έσqudwµévos (Timocl. 29) ‘stuffed with food'. <?>
●DER σqvdwv. iσxvpós, eűpwotos, σkλŋpós ‘strong, stout, hard' and Sɩa-σqvdwσai.
aúñσaι to increase' (H.).
•ETYM A rare word of which the meaning is only roughly known; no etymology.
σqúчw [v.] ‘to beat violently', of the pulse, ‘to twitch, rush to something' (Hp., Pl.,
Arist., Thphr. et al.). <?>
•VAR Dor. (Theoc.) σqúσdw, only pres. and ipf.
•DER σqvу-µóç [m.] 'pulse, heartbeat, twitch' (Hp., Arist., Plu. et al.), with -μóðηs
and -ματwŋs (as if from *σqúyμa) 'twitching like a pulse' (Arist., medic. et al.).
σqvу-дuкós 'of the pulse' (medic.); σqúžiç [f.] ‘id.' (Arist., Gal.). ä-σqUK-TOÇ 'without
pulse-beat, easy', hence ȧ-σQUк-Tέw 'to have no pulse', àσquž-ía 'stopping of the
pulse'; also à-σqvyµ-ía [f.] ‘id.' (medic.). Newly-formed present oôúɩɩw ‘to strive
eagerly' (D. Chr.).
•ETYM In form and meaning, σoúčw resembles σpadá¼w and σлεúðw. No etymology.
σqupa [f.] 'hammer, beetle' (y 434, Hes. Op. 425, Hdt., A., com., Arist.), metaph. 'ridge
between two furrows' (Poll. 7, 145), as a measure (Daulis II³), = tñç σropílov yñc tò
µétpov, óµó-oqvpos óµóxwpoç ‘neighboring' (H.); name of a fish (H.), cf.
σqúpaiva below. <?>
=
•COMP E.g. σoup-ǹλaros ‘wrought with the hammer, thorough' (Hdt., Pi., A., Pl.,
etc.), with -éw (Ph.).

=== page 743 ===

1434
σoppupalía, etc.
=
⚫DER Diminutive σoup-íov [n.] (Hell.), σøúp-aɩva [f.] name of a fish, bicuda (Stratt.,
Arist., etc.), after its shape (Strömberg 1943: 35); -ndóv ‘hammer-like' (Philostr.);
-woɩ [f.] ‘the hammering, forging' (Didyma IIª), Siápoσis (H.), -ýµata. τà
oidýpia, öti ov xeitaɩ ‘grappling-iron, because it does not melt' (H.).
•ETYM Frisk s.v. connects this etymon to σqaipa 'ball etc.', in which case the latter
would reflect QIE *sgur-ih, vs. σôñpa < *sg™ ur-V-. This seems far-fetched,
especially since the semantic connection is not evident. The etymology of σqupa
thus remains unclear.
oppupalía, etc. →σлúрαo.
oqupis →orupic.
oqupóv [n.] 'ankle, foot-joint' (II.), metaph. 'the lower part of a mountain' (Pi., Theoc.
et al.). <?>
•COMP τavú-σqupos 'with slender ankles' (h. Cer., Hes.), έлɩ-σðúp-iα [n.pl.] ‘ankle-
buckles' (II.).
•DER σquρóoμαι (v.] 'to tie one's ankle-buckles, put on one's laced boots' (Carm.
Pop. 7), -wτnp, -ñpos [m.] 'shoe-strap' (LXX), see Solmsen IF 31 (1912/13): 492ff.
⚫ETYM The traditional etymology connecting this word with Skt. sphuráti 'to push
away with the foot', etc. cannot be maintained, because the labials are incompatible.
The variant σquspá [pl.] (Act. Ap. 3, 7, pap. IIIº, H., gloss.) is unexplained (hardly
after σpodpós 'violent, vehement', pace Frisk s.v.).
oqw, oqwï¬σqeis.
oxadwv, -óvos [f.] ‘hatch or honey-cell', plur. 'honeycomb' (com., Arist., Theoc., pap.
III), larva (of bees or wasps)' (Arist.), = кUẞEUTIкÒÇ ßóλoç 'throw of a dice' (H.).
1?1
•VAR Also accented oxádwv, gen. also -wvoc, -ovτoç (Arist.).
⚫ETYM Perhaps from oxálw 'to make an incision, let flow', as is traditionally
assumed, but the semantics of this etymology are vague.
oxάw [v.] 'to make an incision, tear open, open a vein, let (the blood) flow, let
something take its course, release, drop, abandon' (Hp., X., Arist., etc.). <IE? *skeh₂-
'split'?>
•VAR Also σxáw (Hp., com., Arist. et al.), mostly aor. σxáσaɩ (Pi., B., Hp., E., com.,
X., Arist., Hell. and late) with pass. σxãσð-ñvαɩ, fut. pass. -ñσoµai, act. oxάow, perf.
mid. žσxaσuaɩ (in εσxασμévη as a plant name; see Strömberg 1940: 43).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. àлo-, kata-.
•DER 1. σxáσç (ȧлó-, кaτá-) [f.] ‘the tearing, bloodletting, release' (medic., Ph. Bel.).
2. oxáoµa (katá-) [n.] ‘incision, release' (Hp., Dsc., Ph. Bel.). 3. кaτα-σxaoµós [m.]
'draft' (medic.). 4. σxaστnp = Lat. tendicula (gloss.); кaταḍ[x] αστnp mg. unknown
(IG 11(2), 165: 11 [Delos IIIª]). 5. σxαστηp-íα [f.] 'trigger, release in mechanisms, etc.'
(Arist., Ph. Bel., Hero, Plb., etc.); -tov [n.] 'lancet' (Hippiatr.).
•ETYM Usually an original meaning ‘make an incision, tear open' is assumed, whence
‘open, let loose, etc.'; the word would be characteristic for the language of physicians.
oxedia
1435
A basic meaning 'let loose' vel sim. seems possible as well, in which case the common
professional expression oλéßa oxáσaɩ would have a direct correspondence in MLG
(also MoDu.) āderläten ‘let blood', lit. 'let the vein'. As the whole formal system is
clearly built on the aor. oxáσat, from which oxálw, oxáw and all other verbal and
nominal forms are derived, this form should be the starting point for the etymology.
Certain correspondences outside Greek have not yet been found. The word oxáw is
generally compared with Skt. chyati (anu-, ava-, vi-, etc.), ptc. cha-ta-, chi-tá-, caus.
chay-áyati (IE *skeh₂-, *skh₂-i-) 'to split, hurt', especially of the skin (on the meaning,
see Hoffmann MSS 19 (1964): 61ff.; on the phonetics, Hiersche 1964: 103f., 214f.).
Although the connection is semantically unobjectionable, it should be remarked that
of the Skt. verb forms, the non-presentic finite forms (e.g. the full grade s-aorist a-
chā-s-it) occur only in grammarians. Further combinations, e.g. that with Lat. sciō,
remain hypothetical. The form oxáσat is a Greek innovation (perhaps a cross of
oxíσal and εáσat, xaλáσat vel sim.)? Note that ox- cannot be directly explained from
the assumed IE form.
oxalic [f.] 'fork used as a support for erected hunting-nets' (X., Poll.). <PG?>
⚫VAR Gen. -ídoç.
•DER σxaλíd-wμa ‘id.' (Poll.).
ETYM Technical word in -íç like σavís (further references s.v.), Soкíç, etc.; base
form unknown. One might connect σkaliç ‘mattock' (see ►σкá\\w); cf. the gloss
oxaλideç di' wv σxášovσi τà díктvα òp¤à éστãτα 'by which fishing nets standing
upright are torn open' (H.). Alternatively, was it influenced by oxɛiv 'to hold'? Cf.
the synonym στáλ₁. The explanations do not convince; the technical word may
instead be of Pre-Greek origin.
oxalioai [v.] Oŋláσai, kai ávíσxaλov tò äτokov kaì áе½λαστov 'to suckle; a childless
or barren [animal] is also called ȧvíoxaλov, i.e. without milk' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
oxɛdápiov •var oxédiov. →oxíšw.
oxέdnv [adv.] 'slowly, easily' (X., Plu.). <GR>
•ETYM Taken with oxɛīv as “holding back"; opposite ȧvédŋv. Cf. ► oxedóv.
oxɛdía [f.] 1. ‘raft' (Od., Att., Hell. pap.), ‘pontoon bridge' (Hdt., A. [lyr.]), ‘frame'
(Ath. Mech.). 2. 'clamp, clip' (Ph. Byz.). <?>
•VAR Ion. -ín.
•COMP As a first member in oxɛdɩ-ovpyós [m.] ‘raft-builder' (Them.).
•ETYM Acc. to Bq s.v., a substantivization of an adjective oxεdía (vaus, yέqupa), the
feminine of oxédios (see σxεdóv). Alternatively, a collective abstract formation in
-ía from oxɛdóv (cf. кoía, oiкía, εστía) with original mg. “unprepared formation,
improvization". However, the semantics are unconvincing. Not from oxεdn, which is
a loan from Lat. scheda (if authentic at all; see oxi (w). The semantic development
to ‘clamp, clasp' in Ph. Byz. can be understood if one assumes influence of σxɛîv
'hold'.

=== page 744 ===

1436
σXεSóv
oxɛdóv [adv.] ‘near', of place and time (epic lyr. Il.), 'nearly, almost, about' (post-
Hom. IA). <IE *seg"- 'hold'>
•VAR Also -60ɛv 'from nearby' (Hom., A. R.).
⚫COMP Compound aúτo-σxεdóv (-dá P 319) 'really close' (Hom., Arat.), 'at once' (A.
R.) with avtoσxed-in, which only occurs in the oblique cases: dat. -in (µáxn, voµívn;
cf. Trümpy 1950: 113), acc. -íny 'in close combat, man to man' (Hom.), έç ~ 'in close
combat (Tyrt.), -ins 'inconsiderate, offhand' (h. Merc.); adj. -tos 'unprepared,
improvised' (Arist., Hell. and late).
●DER σxέd-10ç ‘nearby, belonging to close combat' (A. [lyr.]), ‘adjacent, concerning
the immediate present, instantly, unprepared, improvised' (Hell. and late); adv. -íŋv
'in close combat' (E 830), 'soon' (Nic.). Hence the verbs: 1. σxεdi-άw (also with ȧno-,
etc.) 'to improvise, do or make offhand, act thoughtlessly' (Hell. and late), with
-ασμα, -ασμóç, -αστɩкшç (Hell. and late; on the mg. Koller Glotta 40 (1961-1962):
183ff.). 2. aúτoσxεdi-á¶w ‘'id.' (Att.) with -αστns (X.), -ασμа, -ασμóç, -αστóç,
-αστɩкós (Pl. Com., Arist.).
⚫ETYM From oxεïv, σxéσðaι (see ►xw) with a suffix -dov (Schwyzer: 626); properly
'holding to, connecting'. Borrowed as Lat. schedius, -ium. See ➤oxέdŋv.
oxédůvoç [adj.] 'tenacious'. <IE *seg"- 'hold'>
•VAR Only in σxedúvn qilótys (Emp. 19).
⚫ETYM Formation from oxɛîv like лíouvoç, Đápovvoç, with d after oxεdóv.
oxελís [f.] mg. instable, 'rib of beef, thigh-bone, side of bacon' vel sim. Acc. to H. = Tò
àñò tñç páxɛwç ëwç τoñ úлoyaστрíoυ 'the part from the spine down to the lower
belly', also = кpέa éniµýky tetunµéva longish or oblong cut of meat'. ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Mostly plur. -ídɛç (A. Fr. 443 = 724 M. (?), com., Luc., Poll.); also σkɛλíç, plur.
-ídɛs (pap. IIIª, D. Chr., Poll.).
•ETYM Generally taken as from oкέλos 'thigh, leg', which is not impossible
semantically, but certainly incorrect given the variant form, which points to Pre-
Greek origin (not in Fur.).
oxɛvdúλŋ [f.] name of an instrument of the xaλкɛïç, probably ‘pair of tongs' (Eleusis
IV, H.). PG(V)►
•VAR <σ>Kévбūλlă (AP; preceded by -oic; on the secondary -ă, see Solmsen 1909: 260
and 262).
•DER σKevбúlia [n.pl.] '(small) pincers, nippers' (Hero), also кεvбula (trad. AP 11.
203). In H. also σxεvdvλó-ληлτоɩ 'caught between tongs' and the perf.ptc.
έoxevdvλñoðaɩ, from *oxevdvláw 'to pinch with tongs'.
⚫ETYM Suffix like in kavðúλŋ, kopdúλŋ. The variation shows that word is Pre-Greek.
oxepós [?] · áкtý, alуiaλóç 'cape, shore' (H., Theognost. Can.). <?>
•ETYM Hiersche Zeitschr. f. Phon. 17 (1964): 515ff. assumed a pre-form *ʊkɛpóç,
related to OE score, MLG schore (rocky) coast, shore' (IE *sker-; see ►кɛipw),
whence ►ɛpós would have arisen by metathesis. This is improbable. Acc. to Hennig
RhM 75 (1926): 266ff., Σxɛpía is from Phoen. Schchr = Sxr'trading post'.
See further εлoxεрó and Janko Glotta 57 (1979): 20-23.
oxitw
1437
σxéτos [adj.] expressing strong emotion, usually used in a denigrating sense
'audacious, heinous, cruel, miserable' (II.), seldom in positive sense 'obstinate,
tireless' (Hom.). Details on the mg. in Brunius-Nilsson 1955: 46ff., 75ff. <?>
•Der oxetλi-ášw, quite rarely with кatα-, àño-, è̟ëɩ-, 'to experience something as
cruel, to rise against, to complain' (Att.) with -aoμós (Th., Arist. et al.), -αστiкóç
(late).
•ETYM Frisk assumes dissimilation from *σxé-ios, a by-form of *σxε-ló-s
(comparing μεix-os: -10, foux-oç: -10s and the antonym έo-0λó-c). The original
meaning would be 'persevering'. This proposal is not supported by any evidence,
however.
oxña =xw.
oxí¶w [v.] ‘to split, cut, separate' (Pi., Hdt., Att.). ◄IE *skid- ‘cut, split, separate'>
•VAR Aor. oxio(σ)ai (Od.), pass. σxiσð-ñvai (P 316), fut. -ñσoµaɩ, act. oxiow, perf.
med. σxioμai (Hell.).
•COMP Frequently with prefix, e.g. àлo-, dα-, àvα-, лɛpi-.
•DER A. With unchanged root auslaut: 1. oxíða. oxidos oɩvdóvos, þñуµа cutting of
fine cloth; breakage' (cod. л-) (H.) like кλád-a [acc.sg.], if not a Doric or Hell. nom.
(Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 170); as a second member in άлo-, diα-, napa-oxides
[f.pl.] (rarely sing. -σxis) secessions, branchings, etc.' (medic.). 2. oxíð-až, -ǎkoç [m.]
'split wood, piece of wood, splinter' (LXX, D. S.), with -aкηdóv (úño-), -aкódŋs
(medic.); cf. Xápaž, káµaž, etc. 3. oxídos. tǹv áñóσxiotv ‘division' (H.), also -σxidńs
e.g. with ȧ-, ȧkpo-, vɛo- (Hell.), directly from the verb. 4. σxíd-tα. wμóλɩvα ‘[pl.] raw
flaw; items of raw flax' (H.), whence Lat. schidia [f.sg.] 'chip of wood' (Vitr.). 5.
σxɩdavós (like лðavóç), in σxíðavó-лoυç (Arist.) = σx₁ó-лovç ‘with split feet or
toes' (Arist.).
B. With altered root auslaut: 1. σxíša [f.] 'split wood, piece of wood, etc.' (Hom., Ar.,
pap.), ‘shaft, javelin' (LXX,AP); diminutive -íov [n.] (Poll., Alciphr.); -íaç [m.] ‘lath,
like a lath' (Cratin., Dicaearch., Hell. pap.). 2. σxiστós (also ǎ-) ‘spliť' (Hp., Att.). 3.
oxíois (ánó-, diá-, etc.) [f.] 'split, carving' (Pl., Arist.). 4. oxio-µós (dia-, nɛpi-, vño-,
ev-) [m.] 'id.' (A. Ag. 1149, Delph. inscr., pap.); -μα (also with ảлó-, diá-, etc.) [n.]
‘split, tear' (Arist., Thphr.); -µń [f.] ‘id.' (LXX, H.).
ETYM A number of identical formations are found in other IE languages, which may
be archaic: 1. άлo-σxíd-ɛç = Skt. apa-chid- [f.] 'section, clipping', 2. σxiστóc = Lat.
scissus < *skid-to-, Av. a-sista- (but note Skt. chinná- < *chid-ná-), 3. the aor. oxíσaɩ,
-aσea to Skt. aor.med. chit-s-i, 4. traces of an old nasal present in Lat. sci-n-dō, Skt.
chi-ná-d-mi, 3pl. chi-n-d-ánti ‘to cut off, split' (not in ►σkivdáλaµoç, etc. [s.v.]). The
yod-present oxi w is a Greek innovation (Wackernagel 1916: 133 pleaded against
identification of oxíετa and the Skt. pass. chid-yá-te). A full grade appears in Lith.
skiedžiu ‘separate, divide'. Skt. ví-chitti- ‘interruption' is independent of oxiσiç
(which was innovated; cf. лíστç).
Further cognates, e.g. Arm. c'tim (from *c'it-im) ‘tear, scratch', can be found in LIV².
The reconstruction of the root as PIE *skheid- given there is not endorsed here. There
is no explanation for the aspirate -X--

=== page 745 ===

1438
σxivdaλµós
Lat. scheda [f.] 'stroke of papyrus' is a loan from *oxidŋ (or oxida; see A. 1 above),
also 'concept', via influence of schedium [n.] 'unprepared speech, draft, sketch' (=
late and MoGr. oxεdiov ‘id.'; on the meaning, see oxédios, from oxɛdóv), oxedápiov;
on the history of these words, including Ital. schizzo, MoFr. esquisse, MoHG Skizze,
see Kretschmer Glotta 10 (1920): 168 ff.
Other words mentioned by Frisk s.v. are not cognate with σxi(w: ►okivdaλµós,
OKIVSÚÀLOV, ► σKidapóv, okoid-.
oxivdalµós →okivdaλµós.
oxīvos [m.] 'mastich tree, Pistacia Lentiscus.' (Hdt., Thphr., Theoc., LXX), 'squill,
Oкíλa' (Epich., Hp., com.). <PG?>
诉
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. σxivo-кέqaλos 'with a squill-like head' (Cratin.).
DER σXIV-íc [f.] 'mastich-berry' (Thphr.), -tvos 'of mastich' (medic.), -10c 'id.'
(Theognost.), -iw, -íšoμα 'to clean one's teeth with mastich' (Jamb., EM, Phot.),
also a name of certain dance movements (Ath.).
ETYM Without a doubt, this word, denoting a tree and a marine organism, is Pre-
Greek.
oxoivos [m., f.] ‘rush, reed, rope plaited of rush' (ε 463), also as an (Egyptian) land
measure (Hdt. 2, 6, Hero, pap.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Myc. ko-(i-)no (?).
⚫COMP OXOLVO-Tεvns 'in a straight line' (Hdt.), 'stretched, plaited from rushes' (late).
DER 1. σxotv-íov [n.] 'rope, cord' (Hdt., com.), 'measuring cord, linear measure'
(Arist., Hell.). 2. oxoiv-ís, -idos [f.] 'rope, cord' (Theoc., Hell. inscr.), also -íç, ïoç
[adj.] 'plaited from rushes' (Nic.). 3. -tá [f.] 'bunch of rushes, cluster, enclosure'
(Thphr., Str.), -taía [f.] 'enclosure' (Olbia, Odessus IIIª). 4. -íλos (v.l. -íkλos) [m.]
name of a bird, perhaps 'wagtail' (Arist., see Thompson s.v.), -íwv [m.] 'id.' (Arist.),
also 'effeminate flute melody' (Plu., Poll.). 5. -ɛús [m.] name of a bird (Ant. Lib.), also
PN, eponym of the town Σxoivos in Boeotia (Paus., St. Byz.; cf. Σxoɩvous below); -ńs,
-ñdos (-nïc, -nïdoc) [f.] epithet of Aphrodite (Lyc. 832; acc. to sch. ad loc. because of
the sexual effect of the rush). 6. -áτaç [m.] epithet of Asclepius έv τữ “Eλɛ (Sparta
IIIP). 7. -aç [m.] 'rope-maker' (pap. IVP). 8. -ĬTIÇ (кaλúẞη) 'made of rushes' (AP). 9.
-vos [adj.] (com., E.), -ɩкóç (Hell. pap., Gp.), -tos (pap. IIIª) ‘(plaited) from rushes';
-wdns 'full of rushes, rushy' (Nic., Dsc.); -oÜç, -OUVτOÇ 'rich in rushes' (Str.),
Exoɩvous HN and TN (Boeotia, Arcadia; Str., Paus.; cf. -ɛúc above). 10. Verbs: àло-,
лαрα-, лερι-σxоví(w 'to rope off, enclose' (D., D. H., Plu.), with (лεp-)
(Delph., pap.), (ларα-, лερι-)σxоíviσμа (LXX, Plu.).
•ETYM Fur.: 391 compares кoíva. ✗ópτoç 'fence' (H.); because of the variations к/X
and o/zero, the word is Pre-Greek.
oxon [f.] 'rest, leisure' (Pi., IA), ‘(learned) conversation, lecture' (Pl., Arist.), 'place of
lecture, auditorium, school' (Arist.). <GR
•COMP As a second member in ä-oxoλos 'without leisure, busy', with ảσxoλ-ía [f.]
'business' (Pi., IA), -έw, -έoμa (Arist.), -ŋua (Str.), -ηματкóç (Vett. Val.).
1439
●DER 1. σxoλ-añoç ‘leisurely, slow' (IA), with -aιótŋs [f.] (Th.). 2. -ɩкóç ‘reserved for a
lecture, belonging to school' (D. H., D. Chr.). 3. -ɛpós ‘leisurely' (late). 4. -ɩov [n.]
'explanation, comment, scholion' (Hell.), with -údpiov, -lášw, -laστńs (Tz., Eust.). 5.
-εov [n.] 'school' (Arr.), also 'place of rest' = 'grave'? (Anatol. inscr.). 6. -άw (also
with άло-, σuv-, etc.) 'to have leisure' (Att.), 'to be busy with something' (X., D.,
etc.), 'to give a lecture' (Hell.), with -αστýs [m.] ‘living leisurely' (Com. Adesp., LXX,
Plu.), with ou- 'fellow-student' (Hell.), -αστкóç ‘leisurely' (Arist.), 'dedicated to
study, scholar', especially ‘armchair scholar' (Hell.), ‘public adviser' (late pap.).
ETYM Properly “holding back", derived from the aor. stem ox- (see ►xw) with a
suffix -\-, with a thematic vowel -o- after verbal nouns like Bolń, σtolń, yový, etc.
Cf. perhaps ȧoxaλáw.
σŵкoç [adj.] epithet of Hermes (Y 72). ◄?►
•VAR Σwкoç [m.] PN (A 427ff.).
⚫DER Further owкέw 'to be strong, have power' (A. Eu. 36, S. El. 119 [anap.]); so
σwкOÇ would mean 'strong, powerful'.
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Bechtel 1914 s.v. assumed *Σáoкoç as a short form of *Σao-
kpáτns (> Σw-kpáτηs; cf. Cypr. ΣaƑo-кλεƑηs), in which case the appellative would
have derived from the PN. Various hypotheses have been put forward for the
etymology, e.g. relation to σŋkós (Pok. 1098), or kinship with σow from IE *tuoH-
ko- (Fraenkel Lexis 3:1 (1952): 66ff.), who compares the suffix -k- in Lith. tùkti
'become fat', taukai [pl.] 'fat, grease, marrow'.
owlńv, -ñvos [m.] ‘pipe, channel (Ion., Archil., Hell.), 'grooved tile' (Hell. inscr.);
name of a crustacean, ‘razor-fish' (Dor. and Att. com., Arist.); see Thompson 1947
S.V. <PG?(S)►
•COMP As a first member in σwληvo-εids 'pipe-shaped' (Aen. Tact.); on σwληvo-
еńpaç, -кévτηs, see Fraenkel 1912: 93 and 108f.
⚫DER Diminutive owλnv-tov, -ídiov, -ápiov, -íoкoç (Hell.); also wτós 'pipe-shaped'
(Lyd.) and the verbs -i(w 'to hollow out with -σµós (Ruf. apud Orib.), -óoµaɩ ‘to
serve as a pipe' (v.l. Paul. Aeg.). -εúoµai = ovµñεpiqépoµai (EM, H.); to this -ɩστns
[m.] 'one who fishes for the owλnv' (Phaenias apud Ath.).
•ETYM Formation like кwλýv, лupηv, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 166f.), so probably first
derived from a noun *owlos (-ov). Etymology unclear; Solmsen 1909: 129ff. (who
deals extensively with meaning and attestations) proposes a reconstruction IE *tuō-l-
for σupty and σaupwτnp (see s.v. σaúpa), but these are Pre-Greek. Fur.: 172118
suggests that the word is Pre-Greek (giving other such words in -nv).
σwμa [n.] 'living or dead body' (Il.; in Hom. it is necessary or possible to translate it as
‘corpse'), 'person' (Att.), 'slave' (Hell.); metaph. ‘totality' (A., Pl., Arist.), 'text of a
document' (pap.). On the development and spread of the mg., see Kretschmer Glotta
18 (1929): 80f.). <?>
●COMP E.g. σwμato-qúλaž ‘bodyguard' (Hell.); univerbation σwμ-ασк-ía [f.] ‘bodily
exercise' (Pl., X.) from σшμα άσкέw; in addition to this, as a back-formation,
σwμaσк-έw to do bodily exercise' (X., Plb., etc.); τp₁-σáµατo 'with three bodies'
(A., E.), late τpí-σwµoç ‘id.' (An. Ox.).

=== page 746 ===

1440
owofial
⚫DER 1. Diminutive σwµáτ-ov [n.] (Pl. Com., Arist.; mostly depreciatory). 2. -ídiov
[n.] 'text of a document' (pap.). 3. -ɛiov [n.] 'corporate body, college' (Cod. Just.). 4.
-ɩкóç 'bodily' (Arist.), -ɩvos ‘id.' (gloss.), -wdns 'bodily' (Arist.). 5. -óoµai, -ów (¿v-,
Úло-) 'to be embodied, embody' (Arist., Thphr.), with -wotę [f.] (Thphr.). 6. -iw
(dia-, έv-) [v.] 'to edit a text', with -toµós [m.] (pap.).
•ETYM Among several IE expressions for 'body', only *krp- (Lat. corpus, Skt. kṛp-,
and other cognates) has a large distribution. For the Greek word for 'body', σwµa,
there is no convincing etymology. Formally, it could be compared with ow-pós
'heap', assuming a pre-form *tu̟oН-mn for σшμa, with a basic meaning
'compactness, swelling' (?). Other proposals are doubtful or uncertain (see Frisk);
relatively most promising seems an analysis as *(s)tioH-mn "what has stiffened",
related to Skt. styā- 'to flow, get stiff (mentioned by LIV² s.v. *stieH-). See ►σwpóç.
σwoμai [v.] VAR σwoντо, σwoμεvovs (A. R.). σεvoμai.
Ownáw →OLWTáW.
σwpi [n.] name of an ore, perhaps 'ferrous sulfate, melanterite' (Dsc.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Gen. -ɛws (Dsc., Hippiatr.), Lat. -eos (Cels., Plin.), σõpu (Gal., Orib.).
•ETYM A foreign word of unknown origin. The formation recalls otĭµi, σápɩ, or µíov,
μwλv, et al., respectively. The variation / v (Fur.: 367) points to a Pre-Greek word.
σwpós [m.] 'heap (of corn)' (Hes., Hdt., X., Ar., Arist.). <<?>
•COMP A few late compounds, e.g. лoλú-σwpoç ‘of many corn-heaps', epithet of
Demeter (AP; cf. σwpiτiç below).
⚫DER 1. σwp-aкoç [m.] 'box, basket' (Ar. Fr. 248, inscr. and pap., after Оúλaкoç?),
with aкiç [f.], designation of an instrument to clean horses (pap. IIIª, Poll.). 2. -ítηs
[m.] (scil. Aóyoç, ov\loуioµóc) "conclusion of heaping" (name of a sophism,
Chrysipp., Cic., S. E.), with -ɩɩкóç (S. E.); -ĩπç [f.] epithet of Demeter (Orph.). 3.
-ɛóc = σwpós (EM, sch.). 4. -ŋdóv 'by heaps' (Plb., LXX, AP). 5. -ɛúw (also with έк-,
έлɩ-, ovv- et al.) [v.] 'to heap up, pile up' (E., Arist., Hell.), with -ɛvoɩs (èñɩ-, пpoσ-,
úло-) [f.] 'heaping up, piling up' (Arist.), -ɛvµα (εέɩ-) [n.] ‘that which is heaped up,
heap' (X., Eub.), -ɛíα (¿ïɩ-) [f.] ‘heaping', also as a mathematical term ‘summation,
series' (Nicom., Plu.), -evtýs [m.] ‘heaper' (Phld.), with -ɛvüкóç (sch.). Unclear is
σwpóτɛpoç, which is explained as 'big cup' in a Greek-Coptic glossary; see Aegyptus
6, 215.
•ETYM There are no known cognates outside Greek. Within Greek, some connect
owμa (comparing уvш-µа уvá-p-чµоs and кλñ-μα : кλñ-poç, etc.). Starting from
*tuō-ro- (so IE *tuoh₂-ro-), Solmsen IF 26 (1909): 213ff. seeks connection with ▸ows,
σάos and cognates, also pleading against connection with σopóç. For the root, see
LIV² s.v. *teuh₂- 'schwellen, stark werden'.
σws [adj.] ‘safe, healthy, intact' (Att.; also Hom., Hdt.). <IE? *teuh₂- be strong'>
•VAR σάos (epic poet., Il. [σawτεpos], also Cypr., Arc., Lac., etc.), σwos (Hdt., Hp.,
X., Hell.), σóos (epic, also Hdt.); compar. σawtɛpos (A 32, X., Theoc., AP).
owxw
1441
•COMP As a first member in ΣaƑo-kλéfns (Cypr.), σaó-opwv (epic poet.), ow-qpwv
(Att.), Σav-кpáτηs (Boeot.), Σá-daµoç (Arc.) et al.; as a second member in vno-,
Tɛkvo-σσóoç (poet.), but cf. on σεvoμai.
•DER Epic aor. σaŵ-σαɩ, pass. σaw¤ñvat, to which fut. σawow, pres. σaów; contracted
IA σwσaɩ, σwеñvaɩ, σwow (inscr. σww), σw(w (ε 490, Hes. Op. 376; from *ow-ï(w); to
this perf. med. σέowσµαi (trag.), σéσшµαι (Pl.), act. σέowкα (Hell.) 'to keep alive,
save', med.-pass. intr. 'to stay alive, save oneself. All these forms often occur
prefixed, e.g. with ȧvα-, àлo-, Siα-, έк-. As a first member in σwσi-лoλiç 'saving the
city' (Ar., Str.) et al. Deverbative formations: 1. σwτηp, -ñpos [m.] 'saviour' (h. Hom.,
Pi., IA), with owtŋp-ía, -ín [f.] ‘rescue', -10¢ ‘'bringing rescue, saving' (IA), -ɩwdŋs
‘wholesome' (Gal.), -taσtaí [m.pl.] ‘worshippers' (of the Oεoì σwτñpεç, or of "Apteµis
Σúτɛipα; Rhod., Att.). Archaizing byforms: σawτýp (Call.), σawτwp (Maiist. IIIª),
Σawτns epithet of Dionysus (AP, Paus.); hypocoristic enlargement Σwτnpixos PN
(Plu., Luc.); 2. σwtɛɩpa [f.] ‘id.' (Pi., IA); 3. σwστpa [n.pl.] (-σ- like in σέσwoμal, etc.)
'reward for saving, thankful offering for saving lives' (Hdt., X.), with зsg. σαoστpεi
(probably for σaw-, Cephallenia). 4. owotikós (dia-) ‘saving, preserving' (Arist.); 5.
Sia-owστns [m.] 'policeman' (Just.); 6. ȧva-σwσμós (Aq.), -σwσμа (Tz.) 'rescue'. On
the frequent PNs in Σw(1-), Σwo(1)-, Σwτ(0)-, etc. see Bechtel 1917b: 413ff.
⚫ETYM The above forms may all go back to PGr. σáfos (cf. Cypr. ΣaƑo-кλεƑηs). It is
unnecessary to posit alternative basic forms like *σwƑoç. The form ows arose from
σá(F)os by contracted, and owos in turn by thematization (perhaps the ntr.sg. σwov
via plur. owa); epic σóos may stand for σáoç after owç, or arose by metrical
lengthening. PGr. σáƑos is probably a thematization of *oavs < *tueh₂-u-s.
Connection with σwpóç, σwµa (as *tuoH-ro-, *tuoH-mn) is quite uncertain: the
original meaning would be something like 'to be strong', which fits poorly for a
corpse; moreover, a reconstruction *tuoh₂-mn (with o-grade) is improbable. See
► σwpós and ▸ TAÜÇ.
owalkeg →gaioa².
owxw →чwxw.

=== page 747 ===

τáßɛλλa [f.] ‘tablet' (IP to VIP). ◄LW Lat.>
T
●DER -ápios (from Lat. tabellarius), -íwv (from tabellio).
•ETYM From Lat. tabella.
Táẞλa [f.] 'dice-table' (IP). <LW Lat.>
•VAR Also -n.
•DER taßλ-í\w [v.] 'to play dice', -tórŋ ‘game of dice', formed after Kaλλióëη (AP 11,
373), Taẞλápios from Lat. tabellarius (pap., inscr.).
ETYM From Lat. tabula.
τayyń [f.] 'rancid smell' (Alex. Aphr.), 'kind of tumour' (Hp.). <PG?▷
●DER tayy-íĞw [v.] ‘to emit a rancid smell' (medic., Gp.), -íaσɩ [f.] ‘kind of swelling’
(gloss.), -óc rancid' (Gp.; perhaps back-formed).
•ETYM An isolated word. The comparison with WGm. words like MoHG stinken,
OHG stanc 'stench' on the one hand, and with ON stækr 'stinking' on the other
(PGm. *stēkja-), meets with serious phonological problems (like the a-vocalism in
Greek). The word could be Pre-Greek.
táyŋvov [n.] ‘frying pan' (com., Luc.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Tуavov (com., LXX; both forms Gal.), -ávη [f.] (gloss.); also nуavov (Ath. ex
Anacr.), with ǹyávea• néµµata tà áлò τηуávov ‘what has been fried in the ɩ.' (H.),
perhaps from τ'ηyavov (see Schwyzer: 413).
•COMP ταуηo-σtpópiov [n.] 'frying-spit' (Poll.), ταуηvo-кσo-еǹpas [m.] 'frying
pan-sniffer (Eup.), tŋyavó-σtpoqov (H. s.v. Xíστpov); \ηpo-τηуavov (Hegesand.;
Syracus.), Xαλкo-žηpo-τηуavov = scutra (gloss.).
●DER τayŋv-íaç [m.] 'pancake' (com.), -íτηs ‘id.' (Gal., Ath.), -w (also with aлo-)
[v.] ‘to fry in a pan' (com., Ph., Gal.), with -ɩɩ [f.] (Gal., Alex. Aphr.), -tσtóc (Alex.,
Gal.), oτai [m.pl.] title of a comedy by Ar. From τηуavov: τηуav-íτns (Hippon.,
gloss.), -í\w (com., Hell., also with ảлo-, ¿ɩ-), with -loµós [m.], -lotós (Hell.); -ŋtóv
= frictum, frixum (gloss.).
ETYM Of the two different forms, τάуηvov is probably original; tǹyavov (Hell.-
Asiat., acc. to Gal. 6, 490) then underwent metathesis after the frequent instrument
names in avov.
A technical word without etymology. Bezzenberger & Fick BB 6 (1881): 237f.
compared OE peccan 'to burn', OHG dahhazzen 'lodern', which are further isolated.

=== page 748 ===

1444
Tāyós
Fur.: 391 thinks that the form in ǹyav- proves Pre-Greek origin, which is quite
possible.
Tāуós [m.] 'chief, commander' (trag.), especially a title of Thessalian officials and of
the chief of the Thessalian league (Thess. inscr., X.), 'president of a phratry' (Delph.
inscr.); on the mg. see Bowra JHS 54 (1934): 56. <?, IE? *teh₂g- ‘order, fit'>
•DER à-tay-ía [f.] ‘'lack of a tayós' (Thess.), tay-ɛúw (also with ovv-) ‘to be tayós'
(Thess., Delph., X.), med. 'to summon to the chief (A. Th. 58), -έw) ‘to be
commander' (A. Pers. 764). Uncertain täyά [f.] ‘leadership' (A. Ag. 110 [lyr.]); cf.
TayŃ S.V. ►τáσσw. On apparent τǎуoí (Y 160) see Wackernagel 1916: 222.
•ETYM A Thessalian title, which was used to create a foreign 'couleur locale' by the
tragedians; cf. Björck 1950: 153. Traditionally connected with Táσow, in which case
the long vowel in τayóç must be very old. ToB tāś 'commander' is probably related,
for which Adams 1999 s.v. reconstructs a pre-form *tāgyu-. Lith. pa-togùs
'convenient, pliable, pleasant', su-tógti ‘to rely on, be wedded, commit oneself has
been further compared, which would presuppose a root *teh₂g-.
táyŭpɩ [n.] ‘small thing' (Eup. 3, Theognost. Can.). <PG(V)►
•DER τayúpia (leg. -1?). τà ¿λáxiσta, tà tuxóvta (H.).
•ETYM Fur. 261 compares σayúptov· äptov кλáσµa ‘piece of bread' (H.), and thinks
the word is Pre-Greek.
tάyxovpos [m.] 'gold' (sch. Theoc.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Also ǎyxoupos (Besant.), tάyxapas (Cosmas ad OGI, 199).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 391 concludes from the variation that the word is Pre-Greek.
τapíσιov [n.] a fish. <?►
•VAR Also -105 (PLond. ined. 2143).
•ETYM Unknown.
τaɩvíɑ [f.] ‘band, binding, headband, spit of land, sandbank' (IA, Emp., Epid.),
'tapeworm' (Gal.); name of a band-like fish (Epich., Arist.; Strömberg 1943: 37f.), also
name of a region near the Sea Mareotis (Ath.). <?►
•COMP Compounds taivió-лwλiç [f.] ‘band-seller' (Eup., D.), úлo-τaívɩos ‘forming a
spit or sandbank' (Ph.).
⚫DER Diminutive Talv-íov (Priene, EM), -ídiov (medic., Delos); adjective -wdns
'band-shaped' (Thphr.), -wτIкóç (olvos) 'wine from Tainia' (Ath.), ~ papyrus
(Plin.); verb -tów 'to adorn with bands' (Att., etc.).
•ETYM Formation comparable to кɛƖpía ‘band, tapeworm, etc.'; cf. also koɩlía,
ávτλía, and other secondary formations in -ía. Probably ultimately related to Tɛívw,
but the details are rather unclear. The missing link may be a noun like *τaïva or
*Taivá; cf. σqaipa.
takepós •Var tákwves. →týkoµal.
τaλα- 'bearing, enduring, etc.' <IE *telh₂- ‘bear, endure'>
COMP As a first member in verbal governing compounds (epic poet.): Taλa-
(F)εpyós 'enduring labor' (Hom., Hes., Theoc.), taλα-лεvе½s ‘enduring harm' (ε 222,
Táλapoç
1445
B.), ταλα-лεíр-оs 'who has overcome many tests' (Od., etc.). Besides, with the
second member as a subject, taλá-oppwv ‘of enduring mind' (N 300, Opp.; also
τaλaσi-, taλai-). After this taλα-kápdios 'with tolerant heart, suffering' (Hes. Sc., S.
[lyr.]).
⚫ETYM From Taλáσσa. Further also taλai-; see taλαíлwроç. Cf. also taλaúpivoç
(to pivóc) and ►åτaλóç; ►τaλaóc, ▶táλaç, ▶táλavta, ‣ táλapoç.
taλaínwpos [adj.] ‘enduring hardship or distress, pestered, unhappy' (A. Pr., S., Ar.,
Pl., D.). <?>
•VAR Substantivized: τò ταλαíлшрov 'endurance, effort' (Hp., Ar., D. H., App.).
⚫COMP Bahuvrihi ȧ-ταλαíлwроç 'without endurance' (Hp., Th., Ar.).
•DER ταλαιлwρ-Iкóç 'persistent, hardened' (Gal.); -ía (Ion. -ín, often plur.) [f.] 'effort,
labor, évépyɛia' (Hp.), ‘effort, hardship, suffering' (Hdt., Att.); -έw, -έoµai [v.] ‘to
make effort, toil, suffer' (IA), the active sometimes also trans. 'to pester, agonize'
(Isoc., D. C.), with -ŋoç, -ŋµa (late); also -í\w = -έw (Phld., Sm.), with -toµós (Phld.).
⚫ETYM The first member τaλai- equals Taλa- (s.v.). For the second member, some
words that are almost only transmitted by lexicographers (H., Suid.) have been
compared, and connected with éñµ¤, ëòpós by WP 2, 8: лwрεчv• kŋdeúelv, nevðεiv
'to mourn, suffer' (Elean, acc. to Suid.), лwρñσαι· λлñσα 'to be grieveď³, лwpητúç.
taλairwpia, névŝos 'suffering' (also Antim.), also лŵpoç. ó τalaíлwpоç; however,
nwpós. tvplós, rŵpwois. túpλwots (Suid.) derive from лшpos 'stone', лwрów 'to
harden, strike with blindness'. Others compare the Gm. word for ‘danger', *fēr-
(older litt. in Frisk).
táλavta [n.pl.] ‘scales, balance' (epic poet. Il.), also a designation of a unit of weight
and currency, 'talent' (since Il.). <IE *telh₂- 'bear, endure'>
•VAR Secondary sing. τáλavtov 'balance' (Thgn., B., A., Ar.), ‘talent' (since 0 393).
•COMP As a second member in nμ-τáλavtov [n.] ‘half a talent' (since 751 and 796),
properly a substantivized adjective, 'consisting of half a talent' (Risch IF 59 (1949):
51); ȧ-táλavτoç 'having the same weight, equal' (Il., Hell. epic).
•DER taλavɩ-iaños 'worth one talent' (Att.), -tɛoç ‘id.' (pap. IIIª); -ɛúw (also with
àµqi-, àvti-) [v.] 'to weigh, balance, sway to and fro', pass. 'to swing' (Arist., D. S.),
with -ɛía [f.] (conj. Pl. Cra. 395e); -óoµaí (dɩa-) [v.] 'to swing to and fro' (Pl., Ach.
Tat.), with к- 'to be robbed of one's talents' (Sopat. Com.); Taλávτ-wσiç [f.]
'weighing, swinging to and fro' (Antipho Soph., Arist.); -άw = -ɛúw (EM).
•ETYM Properly “bearing”, a participial formation *tlh₂-ent- fromo the root *telh₂- in
►Taláσσal, etc. (see Beekes 1975: 51). Borrowed as Lat. talentum, -a. On Aτaλávtη,
see s.v. See τálās.
taλaós [adj.] ‘enduring, tolerant, unhappy' (Ar. Av. 687 [anap.], Q. S.). <GR➤
⚫ETYM Formation like τavaós, but perhaps just a shortening of taλα-кápdios vel sim.
Táλapos [m.] 'basket' (Hom., Hes. Sc., Ar., Mosch., Paus.). <IE *telh₂- 'bear'>
●DER Diminutives taλap-íʊkoç [m.] (Arist., Theoc., AP), -10v [n.] (pap. III³, Poll.).

=== page 749 ===

1446
⚫ETYM Properly "bearer", a substantivization from an adjective *τaλa-póc, built from
the root *telh2-, with regular shift of accent. For the formation, cf. λaya-póc, xaλa-
pós, etc. See taláσσai.
τάλāç [adj.] ‘wretched, unhappy', expression of compassion (epic poet. Od.). ◄IE
*telh₂- ‘bear, endure'>
•VAR táλaiva [f.], táλăv [n.], gen. táλavoç, -aívηs, -avoc, dat. also -avτi (Hippon.),
VOC. Táλav.
•ETYM Originally, a formation in -vɩ- from
into an n-stem after the example of µέλas,
(Solmsen IF 31 (1912/13): 499ff.). See ▶tāv.
taláσσaɩ (like táλavtα), which turned
-avos because of the frequent vocative
☑
Talaσía [f.] 'wool-labor, wool-spinning' (Pl. Lg., X., Ph., Plu.). ◄GR➤
●DIAL Myc. ta-ra-si-ja ‘quantity of bronze or wool weighed for working'.
●COMP As a first member in taλaσɩ-oupy-ós [f.] 'wool-spinner' (Pl. Ion, Trypho
apud Ath.), with -ɩкós (Pl. Plt., X.), -ía [f.] (Pl. Plt.), -έw [v.] (X., D. S., Luc.) after
dnilovpy-ós, -kóg, zia, -Éw.
•DER Tαλάo-tos (in -a pya) 'concerning wool-spinning' (X.), -ŋïa pya (A. R.,
Nonn.; after лоλe-µýïa épya); talλáσia. τá ëpia ‘wool' (H.).
ETYM The word έpyaoía probably served as an example for the formation of
Taλaoía (cf. Pl. Ion 540c: ȧλλ' ola уuvaiкì лрéлoνtá έσtiv ɛiлεïv taλσoу лεì
¿piwv έpyaoíaç, ‘but as far as it befits a wool-working woman to say things about
wool-working'). The form τaλaσía was created from taláσ(σ)ai after the examples
of Èpyáoaolan :èpyaoia, yuuvágaolai : yuzivaoia, 8okuáoal:dokuavia, etc.
(Schwyzer: 469).
It is best to assume 'to weigh' (like in tάλavτα) as another meaning of taláσ(σ)aι 'to
endure (although further unattested). Thus, taλaoía would properly mean
*weighing (for sbd.)', like Lat. pēnsum (weighed off) wool, wool-labor, day-work for
a woman'. Differently, Solmsen IF 31 (1912/13): 503ff., who assumed an intermediate
form *ταλáτηs, properly meaning 'who has to endure laborious work', comparing
Ru. stradát' to suffer', dial. 'to harvest', with stradá 'heavy labor, harvest work'.
Taláσσai [v.aor.] 'to endure, tolerate' (Il.). <IE *telh₂- 'bear, endure'>
•VAR Med. -ασai (Opp.), fut. taláσow (Lyc.); teláσσai• toλµñoai ‘to dare', tλñvai
(H.). Further tλñvai (Dor. tλāvat), also with ava-, etc., fut. τλñσoμai (Dor. Aeol.
τλáσ-), perf. τéτλŋka, plur. tétλăµev, ptc. tetλŋwç.
•COMP As a first member in tλn-Ouμoç (Dor. τλá-) 'of patient mind, patient' (Pi.,
AP), Tàŋ-róλɛµoç PN (Il.), also tŋoi-kápdios (A. [lyr.]); besides taλα-(F)εpуóç,
►ταλαíлwρoç, ταλaoí-qpwv. As a second member in лoλú-τλãç 'much-enduring,
persisting', of Odysseus (Hom.), probably from a stem *-tleh₂-t-, so Aeolic. Not here.
▶AT入as.
•DER 1. ►τaλaós. 2. tλntós, Dor. τλāτós ‘able to tolerate, bearable' ( 49, trag.),
more usual ä-τλntos, ä-t\ātos ‘unbearable' (epic poet. Il.), лoλú-t\ŋtos ‘much-
enduring, much-testeď (λ 38). 3. τλ½µwv, Dor. τλắµwv 'persevering, steadfast,
tolerant, troublesome, unhappy', also ‘enterprising, bold, brutal (epic poet. Il.), with
τλŋчoσúvη [f.] 'steadfastness, patience, patient acceptance' (Archil., h. Ap.).
τaμía
1447
•ETYM The aorist taláσσat has a secondary disyllabic zero grade (cf. daµáo(0)al,
Xaλáσa), but we also find tɛλáσσaɩ (H.), which probably represents the old full
grade *telh₂-, like in έλáσaι, кɛpáσ(σ)aι, кpεµáσaɩ, etc. In the other tenses (except for
the present), Tλ- was generalized. The short vowel in τéτλǎμεv is secondary after
*σταμεv. The form τλñvaι may be a replacement of Tελáσσαι after στñvaι et al. The
present έ\\w in ávaτéλ\w 'go up, rise, lift up', etc. is isolated formally and
semantically.
For cognate verbal forms, see LIV² s.v. *telh₂-, and for the history of the Greek
formations, Harðarson 1993b. Latin has a perfect te-tul-i continuing *te-tolh₂-h₂ei
(ToA ca-cäl he raised' [caus.pret.] is a regular formation). The to-ptc. in tλŋ-tóc,
Tλā-τóç neatly corresponds to Italo-Celtic forms: Lat. lātus from *tlā-tos < *tlh₂-to-,
MW tlawdd 'poor' (with the same meaning as in táλaç). A zero grade of the root is
found in Skt. tulá [f.] ‘balance' < IE *tlh₂-eh₂- and in Germanic, e.g. Go. þulan, OHG
dolën 'tolerate' from a stative *tlh₂-eh₁-.
In Greek, the meaning has been narrowed to 'tolerate, endure' in the verbal forms,
while aɛípw is used in the sense of 'support'.
See ▶TÉλλw 2, teλafiwv, tólµn, ▶Távtalos, ‣táλavτα, etc.
τaλaúpɩvos ‘shield-bearing'. → pivós.
=>
taláwp, -wpos [m.] ‘bow' (Euph. 9, 12; of the bow of Artemis, Choerob. in Theod.).
1?1
•DER taλawpea• tožεúµaτa ‘bows' (H.).
•ETYM Unexplained.
tālis, -idos [f.] ‘young, nubile girl, bride' (S. Ant. 629 [anap.], Call. Ait. 3, 1, 3). ◄?►
•ETYM Perhaps an Aeolic form of ► tñdic (s.v.).
Tauía [f.] 'housekeeper, conductress' (Hom., Alcm., X., Hell. inscr.). <GR>
•VAR Ion. -ín. More usual τauíaç (Ion. -inc) [m.] 'housekeeper, conductor, manager,
treasurer' (II.), also used for Lat. quaestor (Hell.).
•DIAL Myc. PN Ta-mi-je-u.
COMP As a second member in Eλληvo-τauía [pl.m.], designation of Athenian
officials that administered the funds of the league at Delos (Att.).
•DER τau-ɛúw [v.] (sometimes with dia-, etc.) 'to manage, economize', med. 'to
manage, save up, take in' (IA), with -ɛov [n.] 'storehouse, treasury, fiscus' (IA),
diminutive -ɛídiov (Suid., perhaps Men. Sam. 402 [=233] Jacques), -ɛia [f.]
'management, administration' (Pl. Lg., X., Hp., Arist.), -ɛvoɩç [f.] ‘id.' (Ael.), -ɛúµata
[pl.n.] 'economy measures' (X.), 'provisions' (D. S.), -evtýs [m.] ‘administrator'
(Poll. v.l.), -ɛvtikóç ‘economic' (pap., Poll.), tò τaqɛvtiкóv ‘economy' (M. Ant.),
-εúτwp [m.] 'id.' (Man.), -ɛú¢ [m.] (St. Byz.; back-formation), -εuτpio = Tafusiov
(sch.). Further taµi-ikós, -lakós ‘of the taµíaç or taµ(1)ɛïov' (Hell. and late inscr. and
pap.).
•ETYM Connected with τauɛïv 'to cut (up), divide', but the details of the formation.
are not quite clear. Since examples of primary derivatives in -íaç do not exist, an
intermediate nominal form is needed. Generally, τauías is considered to be a

=== page 750 ===

1448
TálOOS
masculine innovation of the feminine taµía ‘(female) housekeeper', which is more
common in Homer, but much rarer elsewhere. However, this is contradicted by the
fact that comparable primary formations in -íα (лεvía, μavía, Baλía) are abstracts.
Schwyzer: 470 and 4733 assumes that τauía is based on τáμ-tă (Pi., doubtful), from
which tauíaç was then secondarily created. Conversely, one might think that *τauía
[f.] 'cutting up, division' led to τauíaç [m.], from which τauía 'housekeeper' was
formed based on ảyyɛλíŋ from ảyyɛλins ‘messenger' (cf. on ►äyyɛλos).
τáμσoç [f.] 'rennet' (Hp., Theoc., Nic.). <PG(S)►
●Der taluo-ívns tupós ‘cheese made with rennet' (Diocl. Fr.; like òšívηs, etc.), -ɩov
[n.] 'coagulum' (gloss.).
•ETYM Has been compared with tauɛïv, with the suffix found in µáðiσoç, kútiσos (cf.
Chantraine 1933: 435). DELG and Frisk justify the development of meaning by
pointing to oxiε τò уáλa 'to curdle milk' (Dsc.) and to yaλaτμóv = λáxаvov
入áyavov
ǎyptov 'wild herb' H., if this contains the root *temH- 'to cut'. However, this
etymology for yaλaчuóv may well be wrong. Rather, τáquσoç is Pre-Greek because of
the suffix -10-.
tãv only in & tãv (☎ táv), a popular form of address (Att.). <GR➤
•VAR Also τáv.
⚫ETYM Acc. to Kretschmer Glotta 1 (1909): 58, it may have developed from τáλav.
Doubts by Björck 1950: 275ff., who deals extensively with meaning and attestations.
τavaós [adj.] ‘thin, narrow, outstretched, expanding widely, long, high' (epic poet.
since P 589). “IE *tnh,-eu- ‘thin’>
•VAR Myc. ta-na-wa (of wheels).
•COMP As a first member in tavaó-dɛɩpos 'with a narrow or outstretched neck', of
oiwvoí (Ar.), often with elision of the -o-, e.g. tava-ýêηs with a long point, edge”, of
weapons (Hom.), ‘lofty', of rushes, mountains (Opp., Orph.; cf. on ǹк½), also τavaú-
лоба epithet of μñλa 'thin-legged, with stretched feet' (1 464, h. Ap., h. Merc.). With
-α- (after ταλα-, лaλai-, etc.): tavaí-μūкoç 'far-bellowing', of ẞous (AP).
⚫ETYM Christophe KZ 114 (2001): 90-116 recently argued that the root *ten- had no
laryngeal. However, the laryngeal is necessary for almost all branches: Celtic forms
like OIr. tanae 'thin' < PCl. *tanauio- << *tnh₂-eu-o-, Lith. tévas 'thin, slender, high
(of voices)', Latv. tiêvs 'thin, slender' < *tenh₂-u-ó-, OCS tбnбko, Ru. tónkij, Sln.
tänak 'delicate, fine' < *tnHu-k-, and probably also Lat. tenuis < *ten(a)ui- < Plt.
*tṇ(a)ui- < IE *tnh₂-eu-. The Germanic evidence is ambiguous regarding the
laryngeal, e.g. OHG dunni < PGm. *þunw-. The Greek form presupposes *tnh₂-eu-o-;
cf. Beekes MSS 34 (1976): 9-12. Within Greek, comparanda are Tavu- and
►τávuτal. Christophe's assumption that *tnu- gave τavv- in Greek is unnecessary,
and his assumption of another prop vowel in tºn°-wo-, giving tavaóc, is improbable.
tavɛĩaɩ [f.pl.] ‘beam' (Thphr. HP 4, 1, 2). ◄IE *tenh₂-u- ‘thin'>
⚫ETYM Formally, this seems to be the feminine of an adjective *τavúç (see ►τavv-);
semantically, this is quite possible.
Tavu-
1449
tavnleyńs [adj.] ‘reckless, heedless, inconsiderate', only in τavηεyéos Bavátolo
(Hom., Tyrt.). <IE *h₂leg- 'care for'>
•VAR Also -έws (metr. inscr. Phrygia).
•DER Similarly Svo-ŋλεyns (also of Оávaτos X 325), also of лóλεμоç, etc. (epic), ȧл-
neyέws (epic since Il.), άv-ŋλεуns (róleµoc), -éwc (Q. S.), vnλeyńc, -έwc (H.).
•ETYM The second member belongs to aλéyw 'to care for'; vnεyns < *n-h₂leg-
contains the negative prefix. In view of the meaning, Leumann 1950: 45 (following
Blass and Bechtel 1914 s.v.) reads ' avηλεyns, which would fit the semantics
excellently. Szemerényi 1964: 154, 159 defends the connection with Tavv-.
Tavapúw [v.] 'to quiver'. <PG(V)►
•VAR Only in кtav¤apú<(>w• tρεµw H.; also τavðαλúšɛi• τpéµiɛl. Awpiɛiç. oi dè
σлaipɛ trembles (Dor.), others: quivers' (H., cod. τavɩ-, but at an alphabetically
wrong position); influenced by τavalí (see Távτalos). With o-vocalism
Toι opúσσεv. σεíɛv 'to shake', toißopúкtpia. ǹ toÙç σelσμové rolouσa 'who causes.
shaking' (H.). Also έtav¤ópišov. ětpεµov (H., leg. ¿tav¤ápušov?). Further details in
Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 266.
•DER Also Tavapuστoí [pl.] “the quivering ones", epithet of opμo 'necklaces'
(Theopomp. Com. 95).
•ETYM Popular words with intensive reduplication; as to be expected, without clear
genealogy. Frisk cites an old proposal to connect some Balto-Slavic words for 'to
tremble, etc.', e.g. Ru. drógnut' 'tremble', dróž' [f.] ‘shiver', Lith. drugŷs [m.] '(cold)
fever, butterfly'. Discussion in Tichy 1983: 212f. The word tov opúšw may be
identical, with a > o before v. If so, the variation points to Pre-Greek origin.
Távτaλoç [m.] father of Pelops, grandfather of Atreus, mythical king of Sipylos in
Asia Minor, famous for his riches and punished in the underworld for his faults
(Od.). <?>
•DER Tavτaλ-ídat [m.pl.] 'offspring of T.' (A. [lyr.]), -ic [f.] 'daughter of T., i.e.
Niobe (API.), -εos belonging to T.' (E., etc.), also -ɛos (AP) and -ɩkós (Man.); -îĪTIS
[f.] name of a plant = Topуóvεtov, λеóσлεрμov (Рs.-Dsc.) referring to the rock that
threatened to crush T. (Redard 1949: 77, Strömberg 1940: 101).
Verbs: 1. τavτaλ-i\w 'to hover' (Anacr.), med. 'to weigh?' (proverb in Zen.),
tavtaλišetai. oaλεúετα ‘is rockeď, étavtáλišev. ětpεμεν 'trembleď, έtavtaλíxəŋ.
εσεíσon 'was shaken' (H.). 2. -óoμal in τavταλwεíç (S. Ant. 134 [lyr.]), acc. to sch. ad
loc. = diaτivaxɛiç ävw0ev kátw, diaσɛɩσðɛíç ‘shaken from top to bottom, shaken all
over'.
⚫ETYM Connection with the root taλa- is impossible, as this contained a laryngeal. It
is unclear how the verbs τavτaλ-íw, -óoμaι relate to Távτaλoç. They were probably
influenced semantically by τáλavτa; cf. Pl. Cra. 396d, where Távtaλoç is interpreted
as talávtatos “who has to bear much” (from ►táλac). On tavðaλúšε (cod. tavt-),
see s.v. ►τavеapúšw. An IE interpretation is most improbable.
τavʊ- 'thin, narrow, slim'. <IE *tenh₂-u- 'thin'>
•COMP As a first member in several compounds, and originally adjectival, e.g. tavú-
photos with thin bark' (P 767, etc.), -qullos 'with narrow leaves' (Od.), τavú-

=== page 751 ===

1450
TáVUTAL
Tappéw
1451
oqupos (beside τaví-σqupoç, after кaλλí-oqupoç or dissimilated from v ....
v?) 'with
slim ankles' (Hes., h. Cer., Ibyc., B.), τavv-ǹкηs ‘with a thin point' (Il.; also τava-
ńкηç, see ►τavaóc). Tavv- disappeared as an independent adjective at an early date.
In some cases, it may have been semantically influenced by ►τávʊtai, tavúw, which
seems clear in tаνÚ-лτεроç (Неs., h. Cer. et al.), Tαvʊ-лτéрυε (Il.), also τavvσí-
лτερoç (Оd.) ‘with spread wings' or 'speading the wings' (less clear are cases like
τavú-nεñλoç, -ɣlwσσos, -еpiε. Sommer 1948: 127f., tries to show that τavu- was
originally a verbal member (to be rejected).
•ETYM An adjective *τavús, which apparently disappeared in Greek, has exact
correspondences in several languages: Skt. tanú- 'thin, sweet, unimportant', Lat.
tenuis 'thin, etc.' (regularly reflected as an i-stem), ON þunnr < *þunwa- (i-stem in
OHG dunni 'thin'), OCS tбnúkб, Ru. tónkij 'thin, fine, slender' (for the suffix, cf. Skt.
tánuka-), all ultimately reflecting IE *tηh₂ú-. An old feminine form of *τavúç seems
to have been preserved in tavɛial.
távʊtai [v.3sg.pres.med.] 'to stretch, tense, extend, expand' (P 393, epic lyr., Ion.
prose). <IE *tenh₂- 'stretch'>
•VAR TavÚ-w, -OUσI, -OVτo, etc. (Hom., Hdt.), aor. τavúσ(σ)-al, -ασðaι, -Оñval, perf.
med. tɛtávvoµai (Il.), fut. τavú-w (Od.), pass. -σσoμαɩ (Archil.), -σ(σ)w (AP, Orph.).
•COMP Also with έv-, ¿ïɩ-, etc.
•DER Very few derivatives: 1. Tavvσts [f.] ‘stretching', of a bow (o 112) (for the
formation cf. áкovtiσtúç et al.); 2. távvoiç = táσiç ‘tension, extension', of an organ
(Hp., Aret.); 3. évταvvσμóç as an explanation of tаvvστÚç, sch. to Q 112.
ETYM A formation parallel to tάvʊτα is found in Skt. tanuté 'stretches, expands'.
The thematic present τavúw, etc. is an innovation, probably starting from the 3pl.
tavúovoɩ, -ovto. All other forms, like τavúσ(σ)aɩ, etc., developed from the present,
probably after έpúw, έpúσ(σ)ai. A new present tɛivw was created at a later date. See
► Tavu-.
ταлεvóç [adj.] 'low-lying, inferior in rank, vile, insignificant, meek' (Pi., IA). <PG?>
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. τaлεɩvó-opwv ‘of humble mind, meek', with -oppovéw,
-oppoσúvη (LXX, NT, Plu.).
•Der taneiv-ótŋs [f.] ‘humility, pettiness, lowliness' (IA); -óoµaɩ, -ów [v.] (also with
EK-, ovv-) 'to humble oneself, act. 'to humiliate, disparage, etc.' (IA), with -wσiç [f.]
'humiliation' (Pl. Lg., Hell.), -wua [n.] 'dejection of a planet' (Plu., S. E.).
⚫ETYM Formation like aiлεvóç, opɛivós, but further analysis is unclear. Frisk and
Pok. mention the old comparison with ON þefja [v.] ‘to stamp', þōf [n.] ‘crowd,
assuming a root *tap-, but this does not convince. Fur.: 158 considers substrate
origin.
tánns, -ntos [f.] 'carpet, rug' (Hom., Herod., Ar., inscr. Cos IV-III³). <PG(V)►
•var Also tárıç, -ɩdos (X., Delos IV-IIIª), ► Sáïç ‘id.', τáßŋs (Edict. Diocl. 7, 62).
•COMP Few compounds: τaлd-vôávíŋs [m.] ‘carpet-weaver' (Hell. pap.), àµôɩ-
táлŋs [m.] (middle com.), àµí-τañıç [f.] (late), àµqi-taños [m.] (Hell. pap., LXX)
'rug that is woolly on both sides' (also -dáqoç POxy., Fur. 178).
•DER Diminutive ταл½τ-чov (late), τaлíd-ɩov (Hell. and late pap.); τaлητ-ápiOS,
tañit-ápioç, -āç [m.] 'manufacturer of carpets' (late pap.).
•ETYM Formation like λéßηs, кάλлç and technical words of debated origin
(Chantraine 1933: 267 and 335f.). Traditionally taken to be an Oriental loan: Iranian,
from MoP tab-ad, inf. tāftan, tābīdan 'turn, spin' (Schrader KZ 30 (1890): 484). The
form άuoí-ταлоç shows a form without suffix. There are several variant forms (Fur.
passim), which proves Pre-Greek origin. Borrowed as Lat. tapēt-e, -um, whence Ital.
tappeto, OHG teppid, teppih, MoHG Tapete, etc.
Tap [pcl.]<GR
⚫ETYM Seems to be attested in the Venetus A of the Iliad. See TƐ.
τápavɗoç [m.] designation of a horned animal in northern regions, probably
'reindeer' (Schrader-Nehring 1917(1): 503), acc. to H. (@ov έλáqov лaparλýolov, oð
tàç dopàç ɛiç xitŵvaç xpwvtai Σkúеa 'animal reminiscent of the deer, the hides of
which are used for coats by the Scythians'. <LW? Orient., PG?(V)►
•VAR Also -Spos.
⚫ETYM Fur.: 389 cites Lat. parandrum (Sol.) as a variant with p-, which might point to
a Pre-Greek word. Isebaert Glotta 60 (1982): 62-65, reconstructs Old Ossetic *Baran-
tara- from *k(e)ren-tero-, properly "the horned animal par excellence".
τapáσow [v.] ‘to stir, agitate, confuse, arouse, startle' (Pi., IA). <IE *d³reh₂g"-
'confuse❜>
•VAR Att. -άτTw; aor. τap-ážαi (Il.), pass. -axеñvaι, fut. -ážw, pass. -ážoµaɩ, perf.pass.
τɛτápaуµaι (IA), act. -axa (late).
•COMP Often with prefix, especially ovv-.
●DER tap-ayµós [m.] 'confusion' (trag.), -ayµa [n.] ‘confused state' (E., D. H.); on
the difference in mg. between -μóç and -μα Chantraine 1933: 146; -ağıç (also with ¿к-,
εл-, σvv-) 'confusion, etc.'; -áктwp [m.] ‘trouble-maker' (A.), -áktŋg [m.] ‘id.'
(Lyc.), -aktikóç ‘fit for confusion, disturbing' (late), -aкäpov [n.] “spatula” as a term
of abuse, 'trouble-maker' (Ar.), -aкtýpiov [n.] ‘id.' (sch.).
τapax-n [f.] 'confusion, trouble, uproar' (Pi., IA), with -wdns (IA); as a second
member in ȧ-tápaxos 'without trouble, calm' (Arist., Hell.), also ȧ-τápaкτoç, with
áτapač-ía, -íŋ (Hp., Hell.); rare τápaxos [m.] = tapaxń (X., Hell.).
•ETYM Greek formed two presents from the root *d½reh₂g³-: Opáσow (with aor.
еpāžα) and tapáσow (with aor. τapážaɩ, perf. intr. téτpŋxɑ, etc.); the latter could
also be a denominative from τapaxý. For further connections, see ▶Opãσow. Since a
formation *drh2-egh- is rather doubtful, τapax seems to require a special
development of the zero grade *drh₁g"-, perhaps conditioned by the accent (as
defended by Rix).
τapßέw [v.] ‘to be startled, shy, shun' (epic poet. since Il.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. τapẞñoai, perf. tetápßŋka (E.).
DIAL Boeot. Tápßɛчu (Hdn. Gr.).
•COMP Rarely with лρо-, úло-, ÈK-.

=== page 752 ===

1452
tápyavov
•DER tápẞoç [n.] 'fright, shyness' (152 = 181, trag.; Tapßo-σúvη [f.] (σ 342), with
-ouvos 'frightening' (A. Th. 240 [lyr.]), after yno-σúvn, -ouvos; ά-tapß-ńs [adj.]
'fearless' (N 299, Pi.), from tapßéw or tápßoç; verbal adjective ȧ-tápß-ŋtoc ‘id.' (T
63), also ȧτápẞакτоç. Further τapẞaλéos [adj.] 'terrible, fearsome' (epic poet., h.
Merc.; after ouɛpdaλéoç, Bapσaλléoç), τapßñεiç 'fearsome' (Nonn.), like кoτηεç;
Tappá入vE,
τapßáλvě, -vyoç = ó tapaktikós (Hdn. Gr. 2, 743). Further details, especially on the
use in Hom., in Ruijgh 1957: 163.
ETYM The date of the attestations and their frequency suggest that tápßoç was
secondarily created from τapßέw, so denominative origin is improbable for the verb.
The word τápẞoç is often compared with Skt. tarjati (epic, class.) 'threaten, revile',
Lat. torvus grim, fierce', MW tarfu 'disturb, trouble, scare', Hitt. tarkuuant- looking
angrily, for the reconstruction of a root *terg"-. However, there are problems in the
reconstruction of the Welsh word (see Matasović 2009 s.v. *targ"-o-), and the
semantic development of 'angry, fierce' to 'shy' in Greek is not clear.
Fur.: 219 compares τapμúσσw. Moreover, it is difficult to explain the element τapẞ-
from the proposed IE forms, as a zero grade would give *τpaß-. On the Skt. forms,
see Kuiper 1956: 21518. ToA trak 'blind', ToB tärrek ‘id.' are certainly unrelated, since
they are compounds with ek 'eye' (A ak) as a second member.
Tápуavov [n.] 'sick wine, vinegar' (Phoen. [IIIª]). <PG(V)►
•VAR Acc. to EM 753, 54, the Attic form is σapyávη (see s.v.).
⚫DER Further olvoç tɛtapyavwµévoç 'sour wine' (Pl. Com.), τapуaívεv. τapáσσεv
'agitate' (H.).
⚫ETYM Not well explained. Traditionally compared with στɛpуávos and ►τpúč. The
difference in final velar makes comparison with the group of *terk-, trek- ‘turn' (Lat.
torqueō 'to turn, wind', Skt. tarkú- 'spindle', etc.; see Pok. 1077) impossible.
Expressions for 'turn' are often applied to drinks that have “turned” sour, bitter, or
the like, viz. o ovos τpérɛtaɩ, with τpолíαç 'spoiled wine, τápyavov', Ital. il vino dà
la volta 'id.', MoFr. le lait tourne 'the milk becomes sour', and many more examples.
Semantically, one may compare MoDu. wrang 'herb, bitter, sour' to Go. wruggo
'snare'. The variation τ-/σ- shows that the word is Pre-Greek. However, the
appurtenance of the following glosses, adduced by Frisk, is uncertain: tapyával.
лλокαí, σuvбéσεç, лéðα ‘twinings, links, shackles' and τεtapyavwµévη.
ovεлуévé, ovvɛiλŋµµévη 'plaited together, taken together' (H.); they barely
attest a meaning ‘turning, winding', etc.
tάpīxos [m.] and [n.] 'fish or meat conserved by salting, smoking or drying' (IA, etc.),
also 'mummy' (Hdt. 9, 120, S. Fr. 646) ◄PG>
•VAR Also -ov [n.] (Hell.); back-formed as an adjective ‘pickled' (Ael.); rare.
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. tapixo-лóλŋs [m.] ‘dealer in t.', with -лóliov and
-лwλέw [v.] (PL., Hell.); wµo-τápixos [m.] = σàpě Оúvvov τετapixεvμévov 'dried
tunny meat' (middle com., Dsc.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutive τapíx-tov [n.] (Ar.), 2. -npós [adj.] 'ptng. to pickling, pickled',
also msc. 'pickler, embalmer of bodies' (Arist., pap.), like λα-, oε-11pós; 3. -ã¢ [m.]
'dealer in t.' (pap. IIP); 4. -ɛúw (also with лpo-, ¿v-) [v.] 'to pickle, smoke, dry', also
Tapoós
1453
'to embalm', med. also 'to wither' (IA, pap.), with -ɛía (Ion. -ŋín) [f.] ‘pickling,
embalming' (Hdt., Arist.), -ɛvois [f.] ‘id.' (Hdt.), -ɛĩov [n.] ‘pickle factory' (pap. III³),
-ɛvtńs [m.] ‘embalmer, pickler' (Hdt., Hell. pap.), -ɛvtýp [m.] ‘id.' (Man.), -evtikós
= -npós (Dsc.). Of uncertain mg. τapɩxóτηç, perhaps = tapixevτýs (Tab. Defix.); cf.
τpixãoαi árai 'bury' (H.).
•ETYM The word is probably Pre-Greek, in view of the meaning of -α-. The
formation is isolated (on the long i, cf. Schwyzer: 644; ►äppixos 'basket' has ĭ); the
gender may have been adapted to ixuç 'fish' or кpέaç 'meat' (cf. Egli 1954: 73ff.).
From Greek came Arm. tarex 'herring', Syr. ṭārīxā ‘salted fish'. See tapxúw.
τаρμúσσw [v.] 'to startle' (Lyc. 1177). <PG?>
•VAR Aor. τapµúžaσðaɩ· çoßηßñval ‘get scared' (H.); áτáðµvêτos ‘undaunteď
(Euph., Nic., H., EM).
•ETYM Formation like aiðúσow, кivúσσoµai, σкapdaµúσow, which may be either
denominative or deverbative. Connection with τpέµw seems attractive, but the zero
grade τapμ- as opposed to τpаμ- (in τé-τρаμ-оç, τε-τρaμ-αívw) raises some doubts.
Debrunner IF 21 (1907): 243 posited *τapμós 'distress', from Tɛipw. Fur.: 219
compares τapẞéw, which is possible but remains uncertain; if correct, the word
would be Pre-Greek.
τáρлη [f.] 'big basket' (Att. inscr. IV, Poll., EM, H.). <PG>
•VAR Also ταρлóç [f.] ‘id.' (Poll.).
•DER Further τεpлóvŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Peripl. M. Rubr. 65), teεpлoç of uncertain mg. (pap.
III³).
•ETYM Frisk compares τapуávαι· лλокαí ... (see on ►τápуavov), σáprovs. kißwtoús.
Bɩvvoì Sé žulívous oikias (H.), σapyávŋ, and even τapσóç. Of these, the
comparison with σ/tapyáv- is useless; it is unclear whether σáρлoç is cognate or
not. Fur.: 183, etc. compares dáрлη. σaðуávŋ, kó¶pivos (H.), which would point to a
Pre-Greek word.
tapoós [m.] 1. ‘(plaited) device for dehydrating and drying cheese, etc.' (1 219, Theoc.),
'plaited tube, mat of rushes, kind of flat basket' (Hdt., Th., Ar.), ‘entangled roots
forming a network' (Thphr.). 2. designation of all kinds of flat objects, like 'sole of
the foot' (L 377, 388, Hdt., Hp.), also ‘palm of the hand' (late medic.), 'blade, rudder,
row of oars' (Hdt., Th., E., Plb.), 'flat of the outstretched wing, etc.' (Mosch., D. H.,
AP, Ael.). <IE? *ters- 'dry'➤
•VAR Att. τappós.
●COMP Rarely as a second member, e.g. σúvτappos 'with a network of roots'
(Thphr.), of Sévdpov, back-formation from ovv-tappóoμai.
•DER 1. τpaσiá (Eup., Ar., S.), τapσin (Semon.), τɛpσiá (Jul.; -ε- after tépσoµai) [f.]
'hurdle for drying figs, etc., dried figs, place for drying cereals, etc.'. 2. tapowdŋs
(-pp-) like a hurdle or mat, plaited (Thphr.). 3. τapoñtal. ȧyyɛĩa, ¿v olç oi tupoì
чúxovtaι 'vessel for keeping cheese cool' (H.); 4. Tapʊ-óoµaɩ [v.] (rarely with ouv-,
¿к-) ‘to form a network', of veins and roots (Hp., Thphr.), -ów ‘to equip with rudders
or wings' (Polyaen., Lyd.), with -wµa [n.] 'row of oars' (Poll.).

=== page 753 ===

1454
táppea
ETYM Words in Armenian and Germanic have been compared: Arm. t'ar 'bar for
drying grapes, etc.' < IE *trs-, OHG darra [f.] 'apparatus for drying fruits, etc.',
MoSw. and MoNw. tarre [m.] 'frame for drying malts, etc.', from PGm. *þarzó [f.],
secondary *þarzán- [m.], IE *torsá (would be Gr. *topoń). Both Frisk and DELG
assume that the remarkable shift of meaning to 'blade of the foot, etc.' started from
the flat form of the relevant objects. There are also phonological problems with this
explanation: it is improbable that *trs- would give tapo- in Greek, and the co-
ocurrence of pa and ap is also problematic in itself. (The maintained intervocalic -σ-
may be explained by the chronology of sound changes, however: cf. Manolessou and
Pantelidis 2008.) Chantraine 1933: 82 points to the a-vocalism. Was it a loan from an
intermediate language? See ▸tépσoliai.
τápqɛa [n.pl.] 'thicket, shrubbery' (A. R. 4, 1238). <?►
•VAR Dat. -εσ (E 555, O 606).
•DIAL Perhaps Myc. ta-pa-e-o-te, see Aura Jorro s.v.
•DER Tappús 'dense' (epic poet. Il.), -éɛs [m.pl.], -εtai [f.pl.] (perhaps after лuкivaí,
Baμɛai; cf. Chantraine 1942: 191), ntr.pl. -éa as an adverb 'frequently, often' (cf.
Leumann 1950: 166).
⚫ETYM Derived by Frisk from tρέow 'to feed' as a zero grade (tápoɛa would be
analogical after τapoúc, acc. to Porzig 1942: 246). However, the development to
Tapq- from a zero grade is irregular, and the semantics are not compelling.
Tapxúw [v.] 'to inter' (A. R. 3, 208). <PG(V)►
•VAR Fut. -úσw (H 456 = 674), aor. -ũσai (H 85, Q. S.), med. -úσaσða (A. R., Nonn.),
pass. -vēñvai (Lyc., AP), perf. pass. tετάчμ (late verse-inscr.).
●COMP à-tápxvtos ‘uninterred' (Ps.-Phocyl., Lyc.).
=
•DER Several glosses in H.: τapxávov. évτáðɩov ‘ptng. to burial; εníτapãov.
έritáqiov, ¿vtápiov; tépxavov. névðoç, êñdoç ‘grief, sorrow'; τépxvεa. ...ÉVtápia;
σtépɣava. nɛpidɛvov. 'Hλɛt̃oɩ 'funeral feast (Elean)'. Also τápxεa and τapуóµατα:
tà voloµéva toiç vɛкpoчç 'what is to be done with corpses' (sch. A and B to H 85).
⚫ETYM Has been compared with tάpixos, -ɛúw ‘to pickle, embalm', but this obviously
leads to formal and semantic problems. Fur.: 351 takes the forms with (σ)τɛpx- as
variants, and concludes that the word is Pre-Greek.
τáσσw [v.] 'to post, align in ranks, establish; to put in order, arrange' (post-Hom.).
<?>
•VAR Att. -Tτw; aor. τážαɩ, pass. τа×Оñvαι, later tταуñvαɩ, fut. τážш, perf. pass.
tétaypai, 3pl. tetάxatαi (Th., X.), act. (young Att.) tétaxa.
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. Аα-, εлɩ-, ларα-, лрo-, σvv-.
●DER 1. tayń (dia-, έñɩ-, σvv-, úño-, etc.) [f.] 'array, order, supply, etc.' (Ar. Lys. 105
[Dor.], Hell.); 2. τáyµa (diá-, έní-, oúv-, лpóσ-, etc.) [n.] ‘array, order, line-up, etc.'
(IA); 3. táčic (diá-, лaрá-, σúν-, úлó-, etc.) [f.] 'array, line-up, etc.' (IA); σuvτáž-чov
[n.] mg. unclear, perhaps name of a tax, 'census-list' (?) (pap. I³); 4. taktós (èní-,
Úлó-, άлó-, etc.) 'established, measured out, ordered' (IA); 5. тактIкÓç 'concerning
the line-up of an army, tactical' (X. et al.), frequently with εл-, лроσ-, σuv-, úло- to
prefixed л-τάττш, etc. (Pl., Arist., Hell.); 6. àva-, diα-, έлɩ-, úлo-τάкtŋs (from àva-
Taupoç
1455
τáσσw, etc.) [m.] names of various officials (Hell.); λлоτáкτηе [m.] 'deserter' (D.
Н.), to λлоτаžíov (ypaqń, Att.), compounded from tážɩv Àɩлɛïv; 7. έ-taktηp [m.]
'commander' (X.), ȧло-ταкτкр hermit' (pap. V³: άлоτáσσоμа 'to take leave'), ouv-
taktýp ‘arranger', with -ńpios (EM); 8. ¿v-táy-tov [n.] 'order', diminutive έtay-
ídɩov [n.] (late pap.); ¿v-tay-ńs ‘ordered' (late pap.), also with nominal first member,
e.g. óµo-tay-ns ‘equal in status, etc.' (Euc., Hero, etc.); 9. εлτáε [adv.] 'in a row, etc.'
(Hell.). See täyóç.
ETYM The -y- in τayń and τāyós (as to whether the latter is connected, see s.v.)
shows that táσow, -Tτw is analogical for *τáw. In other languages, it has been
compared with the Parthian title tgmdr, which Bailey 1985: 98 takes to be tagma-
dāra 'giver of order', OP ham-ataxšata 'they have put in order', ToB tāś
'commander', and (less certain) Lith. patogùs 'convenient', sutógti 'to be wedded; to
commit oneself, etc.'. If the OP form lost its laryngeal as a result of Lubotsky's Law
(loss of laryngeal before two or more consonants, of which the first one is
glottalized), we may reconstruct a root *teh₁g- (instead of the awkward *tag-
suggested by LIV²).
τατã [voc.] 'daddy' (AP 11, 67). <IE *tata 'father' ONOM
•DER Tāti [voc.] 'mummy' (Herod. 5, 69); τāτaλí\w [v.] 'to address with τāτα, flatter'
(Herod.); for the enlargement in -λ- сf. лктαλíчw (to лúкtηc).
⚫ETYM Familiar address like Lat. tata, Ru. táta, Skt. tatá-, Luw. tati(ia)- 'father', etc.
Also τéττα voc. ‘id.' (A 412) with e-vocalism, like Lith. têtis, -te ‘id.', tetà ‘aunt', Cz.
teta ‘id.'. See ►ǎττα and ➤лáñña.
tatúpos →tétapos.
τañ [n.indecl.] name of a letter (Hp., Pl., Att. inscr. IV³). <LW Sem.>>
⚫ETYM From Hebr. taw. Cf. Schwyzer: 140.
τaūpoç [m.] ‘bull' (Il.). <IE? *teh₂u-ro- 'bull' (cf. *steuro-).►
●COMP Very frequent as a first member, e.g. taupo-кtóvoç ‘bull-slaying' (S. [lyr.]);
also as a second member, e.g. 0ɛó-τaupos 'god-bull', of Zeus (Mosch.).
●DER 1. Diminutive τaup-ídiov [n.] (Suid.). 2. -ɛoç [adj.] ‘of bull, of beef, also epithet
of Poseidon (Il. [only fem.], trag., Ar., pap.), -ɛía, -éα [f.] ‘hide of a bull or ox, a whip
made of it' (Artem.), with -iw = Tɛívw 'stretch' (An. Ox.). 3. -ɛoc [adj.] 'id.' (Hes. Sc.
140, Att. inscr. IV³, Lyr. Adesp. Alex., pap.). 4. -ɩкòv (ɛñyoç 'span of oxen' (Hell.
pap.), tò t. ‘id.' (late pap.). 5. -wdŋs like a bull' (Nic.). 6. -ɛ(1)wv, -ɛ(1)wvos [m.]
name of a month in Asia Minor (inscr., Herod.), -óv [m.] ‘id.' in Alexandria (Ptol.).
7. -ívn [f.] from Lat. taurïna [f.] 'shoe made of bovine leather' (Edict. Diocl.). 8.
-ɛaστai [m.pl.] 'worshipper of Apollo Taureios in Ephesus' (inscr. Iª). 9. -118óv [adv.]
'bullishly' (Ar., Pl.). 10. τaupívda. qaλlikǹ raidià лapà Tapavτívois (H.). 11. -óoμa
(also with ảлo-) [v.] 'to behave like a bull (A., E.); taúpwσov. tañpov лoiŋσov ‘make
a bull' (H.); cf. tav-pívda; τañpoç also = aidotov, кoxóvη (Poll., Gal., Phot., Suid.).
12. -(1)áw 'to long for a bull', of cows (Arist.).
•ETYM Identical with Lat. taurus, Osc. τavpoµ (acc. sg.), U turuf, toru [acc.pl.], Lith.
taūras 'aurochs', OPr. tauris 'bison', OCS turo, Ru. tur 'buffalo'. Metathesis occurred

=== page 754 ===

1456
TaÜç
in Celtic words like OIr. tarb 'bull', MW tarw ‘id.'. The fact that Lat. taurus did not
undergo metathesis like parvus and nervus suggests that it is a LW (De Vaan 2008
s.v.). –Gm. words with initial st- are probably not cognate, `e.g. Go. stiur, OHG stior
'bull', because these point to older *eu (without initial s-, ON þjórr). Av. staora- [m.]
'big cattle' deviates slightly in meaning. Comparable forms are found in Semitic:
Akk. šūru, Aram. tōr, Hebr. šōr. If the similarity is not accidental, there must have
been a loan, either from IE into Semitic or vice versa, or from a third common
source. If the word is IE, Taupoç is traditionally connected with the group of ▸τaüç.
•
ταÜç [adj.] μéyаç, лоλúç (Н.). <IE?>
•DER tavσaç. þɛyaλúvaç, лlɛováσaç ‘haying furthered, having enlarged' (H.)
(presupposes *τaü¶w).
•ETYM Formation like лaxúç, τaxús, etc. Indo-Iranian has an s-stem in Av. tauuah-
[n.] 'might, power', Skt. tavás- 'strong, powerful, active', and a primary verb Skt.
tavīti ‘to be strong, have power' (from *teuh₂-). Greek cognates of this root are ►σwç
and (possibly) owpóc. Perhaps Taupos was derived from this root as well, with a
suffix *-ro-, but see s.v. According to Lubotsky 1988: 123, τaüç and σws (< σáƑoc)
point to an alternating paradigm of a u-stem adjective: nom.sg. *tueh₂-u-s (ablaut
like in Lat. brevis, gravis) > Gr. *oaus (with subsequent thematicization), gen.sg.
*tuh₂-u-os, etc., from where initial - was introduced into τaüç (the disyllabic
pronunciation of which is far from certain anyhow).
tavtótns →aútós.
=>
taqń [f.] ‘interment'. •VAR tάqoç [m.], táopoc [f.] ‘grave'. →Оáлτw.
Táqos [n.] astonishment'. áμẞoç.
τaxúc [adj.] 'swift, fast' (Il.). <?, IE? *d½ng"-u- (?) ‘swift'>
●COMP Often as a first member, е.g. ταуú-лwλoç 'with swift steeds' (Il., Theoc.).
Adverb τáx-a 'fast, easily', grammaticalized 'perhaps' (II.), also -έwç ‘fasť (¥ 365,
Hes. Th. et al.), with -ɛwoτí ‘id.' (Pherecr.) like vɛwotí. Compar. ¤ãσowv (Att. -ɩɩ-),
adverbial ãσσov, superl. τáxiστoç, adv. -α (all Il.). Also τaxú-τεpos (Ion., Arist.),
-τατоç, -τατα (Рi. et al.), -íwv, -tov (Hp. Mul., Hell. and late prose).
●DER 1. táxos [n.] 'swiftness, speed' (for *τños?), often adverbial (Il.). 2. taxvtńs
(Dor. -τác) [f.] 'id.' (Y 740); attempt at a semantic differentiation between τάxos and
τаxuτns by Chantraine 1933: 418. 3. τaxivós = τaxúc (Hell. and late), after padɩvóc,
Оaшvóç, etc., with taxívns (Dor. -vac) [m.] ‘hare' (Lacon. acc. to Ael.), acc. to H. also
‘čλaqoç'. 4. taxúvw (also with έлɩ-, σvv-, etc.) [v.] ‘to accelerate, hurry' (IA). 5. kata-
taxέw [v.] ‘to hurry, arrive first, prevent (Plb., pap.), hypostasis of katà táxos.
⚫ETYM All the above forms are based on τaxúc, except for the comparative ¤ãσowv
with long vowel, the judgement of which remains difficult as long as the etymology
is unknown. Acc. to Bechtel 1917b: 426 and Bechtel 1921(3): 126, the PN Tηуɩллоу
(Eretria) would contain an old noun *τñXоç Tάxoç. Seiler 1950: 40 explains
еáσσwv, еãσσov as an adaptation of *Onσowy to the timber of taxúc, τáxiστоç. More
likely is secondary lengthening of an older short vowel in Oáσσov, as argued by
Wackernagel Gött. Nachr. 1914: 124f. For extensive discussion on the comparison, see
=
Tεívw
1457
Seiler 1950: 37ff. The etymology remains unclear. Against the old connection with
Lith. déngti ‘run, hurry', etc., see Fraenkel 1955 s.v. deñgti. The word taxús ousted the
old PIE word wкúc, which remained alive only in poetry.
τawę [m.] 'peacock' (Att. com., Antiph., Arist., Hell.); also a fish name (Philostr.),
because of its color, acc. to Strömberg 119. <LW Orient.>>
•VAR Att. τaws (acc. to Trypho apud Ath. 9, 397e; on the inner aspiration see
Schwyzer: 219), also τaúv, gen. Taú (taw), taŵvoç, etc.
•DER Tawv-(E)Loç ‘of a peacock' (Luc.), -кóç 'peacock-colored' (Alex. Aphr.), τaïtηs
[m.] name of a stone = лáурoυs (Cyran.).
•ETYM Borrowed from an unknown Oriental source (Frisk compares Tamil toghai).
On the history of the peacock, see Schrader-Nehring 1917(2): 163f.; on the name, WH
s.v. The Lat. word was borrowed as OHG pfawo, also found in other European
languages. On Oriental continuants of τawç, see Spies IF 62 (1955/56): 202 with litt.
Tε [pcl.] 'and' (Hom.), enclitic. <IE *-kwe ‘and’▷
•VAR Myc. qe.
•ETYM Identical with Lat. -que, NPhr. -кε, Skt. -ca, Go. -h in ni-h ‘neque', etc., from
IE *ke. Also in adverbs: -τε (IA, Arc. Cypr.), -τα (Lesb.), -кa (Dor.), e.g. tótɛ, nótƐ,
öte; tóta, nóta, őta; tóka, róka, őka, etc. See also on ►öTE.
téyyupos [?] · öpvεov лoóv ‘kind of bird (H.). <?>
⚫ETYM Unknown.
τέyyw [v.] ‘to wet, moisten, pour out, soften' (Pi., B., IA; mostly poetic). <IE *teng-
'wet, moisten'>
•VAR Aor. τéуžαɩ, pass. τεу×¤ñvαɩ, fut. téyžw.
•COMP Rarely with έɩ-.
•DER TÉуğıç (¿ñí-) [f.] ‘moistening' (medic.), Tɛyêτós (¿лí-) ‘softenable by
moistening' (Arist., medic.).
•ETYM A primary verb identical with Lat. tingō [v.] ‘to wet, immerse, dip, paint'
(from *tengō; tinguō after unguo). A secondary zero grade formation in OHG
thunkōn, dunkōn [v.] 'to immerse' (MoHG Tunke [f.] 'sauce'), full grade in Swiss
tink 'moist'.
TÉYOS →σTÉYW.
TÉOnna →0áipos.
Tɛívw [v.] 'to stretch, pull tight, expand', intr. 'to extend, range'. <IE *ten(h₂)- 'draw,
stretch'>
●var Aor. tɛĭvaɩ, pass. τaðñvaɩ, perf. med. tétaµaɩ (Il.), fut. tɛvõ (Att.), perf. act.
τétaкa (Pl., D. H.). Reduplicated ταívш (rarely with ava-, etc., Il. and epic, also
medic.), with the aorist forms ττηvas (N 534), tityváµεvos (Orph.).
•COMP Very often with prefix: ȧva- (ovv-ava-), diα- (εл-diα-), έк- (dɩ-εк-), εV- (επ-
εv-), ларα- (ȧvτɩ-лαрα-), úлεр-, etc., etc.

=== page 755 ===

1458
Tεípɛa
●DER 1. tóvos [m.] ‘tension, cord, string, sinew', in the sense of ‘tension of the voice'
also 'tone, accent, sound; effort, strength' (IA), as a second member in лαλív-τovos
‘with backward tension, rushing backwards, elastic' (Hom., S. [lyr.], also Hdt., Ph.
Bel., Hero Bel.), лрóτоvо [m.pl.] 'front ropes' (Hom., etc.), with -iw [v.] 'to pull up
bу л.'; from the prefixed verbs e.g. diáτov-oç 'stretched, strained' (Thphr.), with
-Ikóç "diatonic" (of music), -alov [n.] 'crossbar, etc.' (pap.). From TÓVOÇ: TOV-IKÓÇ
'stretchable; related to tone' (Arist., Hell.), -años 'stretched' (Alex.), -talos 'consisting
of a tone, measuring one tone' (Arist.), -wdŋs ‘tension-like' (medic.), -í\w [v.] ‘to
provide with a tone' (gramm.), med. ‘to be provided with a tone' (Eust.); xɛipo-tov-
έw [v.] ‘to stretch out one's hand, vote, elect', with -ía (Att.), as if from xɛipo-tóvos
(A. [lyr.]), originally a compound of xεïpa tɛ̃íveiv; tov-ów (εл-, σvv-) [v.] 'to stretch,
strengthen, provide with a tone' (Ti. Locr., Hell.), with -wσiç, -WTIкóç (medic.). 2.
Tový [f.] 'duration of a tone' (music). 3. τáσiç [f.] 'tension, stretch, etc.', mostly from
the prefixed verbs, e.g. évtaois : ¿v-tɛívw (IA), tatós (Arist.), ¿vtatós (Pl.), etc.
'stretchable', Tat-ıкóç ‘giving a tension' (Orib.), almost only with prefix, e.g. diaτat-
ikós (Hell.). 4. tévwv, -ovtos [m.] ‘sinew, neck-muscle, tendon of Achilles' (Il., epic
Ion. poet., Arist.). 5. With reduplication tɛtavós ‘stretched, tense, tight, lank' (Hp.,
Thphr.), 'tight, lank-haired (Hell. pap.) = tetavó-Opi§ (Pl.). tétavos [m.] 'catalepsy,
tetanus' (Hp., Pl., Arist., etc.), with TεTαV-Iкóç 'suffering from catalepsy', -wdns
'cataleptic' (medic.), -ów [v.] 'to stretch out, make lank, smoothen' (Dsc.), -w0 pov
[n.] 'skin-smoothening agent' (Dsc.), -wμa [n.] ‘id.' (medic.). 6. τεɩvεσµóç [m.]
'constipation' (medic., Nic.), with -wdns (medic.), after лεσµóç (the variant with
τηv- (Bechtel 1921(3): 333f.) remains to be explained. 7. *tévoç [n.] in ►átevýc; from
the verb e.g. Sɩatɛv-ns ‘stretching out' (Thphr.), often with nominal first member,
e.g. ȧλi-Tevns 'stretching out unto the sea', also 'shallow' (Hell.); on εiλɩtevĤs s.v.
•ETYM The system of Greek tɛivw derives from the root *ten- 'to stretch', found in
most branches of IE (forms in LIV²). Skt. preserved an old athematic aorist á-tan
'stretched', from IE *He-ten-t. In Greek, the full grade of the verbal root is preserved
in the primary derivative τév-wv, -ovτoç (see Strunk 1967: 107), and in the s-stem
adjective à-tεvýs, where *tέvos is formally identical with Lat. tenus, -oris [n.] 'string
with a noose' and Skt. tánas- [n.] ‘'posterity' (only RV 5, 70, 4) from IE *ten-s-.
Beside this root-aorist, Skt. had an s-aorist atāṇsīt, med. atasi (zero grade), which
corresponds to Greek -Tεv-α from IE *Hé-tens-m. Instead of the old vu-present in
▶távutai, tavúw, Greek innovated a yod-present tɛívw, which agrees with Alb. nden
'to stretch', if from *en-ten-io. Among the nominal formations, we find Greek τóvos
beside Lith. tānas [m.] 'ulcer', Skt. tāna- [m.] 'thread, tone' (with remarkable identity
of meaning), tána- [n.] ‘posterity'.
Tεípɛα •VAR TEɛɩpɛσíaç. →τépaç.
Tɛipw [V.] 'to exhaust, wear out, distress, trouble' (Il., epic poet.). <IE *ter(H)- ‘rub’➤
•VAR Only pres. and ipf. (Aeol. inf. perf. téτopеai Hdn. Gr.).
•ETYM Full grade yod-present of the root *terh₁/3 which is also found in ►tépŋv,
►τέpuç, ►τετpaivw, titpwokw, ► τpów, ▸τpißw.
tɛîxos [n.] ‘wall, city wall, fortification' (Il.). ◄IE *d½eigh- ‘knead, form, fashion'>
●Var Also toîxos [m.] ‘wall' (Il.).
Tékiap
•DIAL Myc. to-ko-do-mo /toiko-domos/.
1459
•COMP To toixos: tolx-wpúx-os [m.] 'butlar, house-breaker', with -ía [f.], -έw [v.]
(Att.); ȧpyupó-Toxos 'with silver walls' (A. [lyr.]), ¿v-τoix-10s 'on the wall' (D. H.,
Ruf. apud Orib.; uncertain X. An. 7, 8, 1). Compounds, е.g. τεуεσɩ-лλñτα (s. néλac);
with transition to the o-stems e.g. TεXO-μаX-έw 'to fight at the walls', -ía f. (IA), -āç
m. (Ar. [lyr.]), -os m. (App.); ev-teins with fair walls, well walled in' (Pi., E.), also
ɛv-tɛix-ɛos (Il.; metr. condit., Sommer 1948: 19), -ŋstos (h. Ven. 112: teixéw).
●der To toîxoç: toɩx-ídiov [n.] (late), -10 ‘belonging to a wall' (Lebadeia), -í\w ‘to
list, heel over', of a ship (Ach. Tat., Eust.). To tɛîxoç: 1. Diminutive tɛɩx-údpiov [n.]
(X.), -ápiov [n.] (pap. I³; belittling), -ídiov [n.] (Zonar.). 2. -íov [n.] ‘wall (of a house)'
(Od., Ar., Th., X.). 3. -шμα = øpαуμós (AB; enlargement), -wτóç = Lat. vallaris (Rom.
time). 4. -tóɛç 'walled in' (B 559 = 646), -100σσα [f.] island near Milete (Th.); also
-tóɛσσα (Archestr.). 5. TεX-Iкóç = Lat. vallaris (στέqavos
tɛix-ikós
= corōna vall.; Rom.
~
time). 6. tɛɩx-í\w [v.] ‘to build a wall, fortify with a wall' (IA since H 449, also Dor.),
often with prefix, e.g. nɛpi-, àño-, ¿-, with -ɩɩç, -ɩσµа, -чσµós (also with лɛpɩ-, etc.)
'wall-building, fortification' (Att.); -1σtýs [m.] ‘mason, builder' (LXX, Lib.). 7. -έw
-iw (Hdt.), with -ŋtós ‘fortified' (Att. IVª).
=
⚫ETYM Greek toixos corresponds exactly to Skt. deha- [m.] (also [n.]) 'body', with
dehi [f.] 'wall, damm, hill', Av. pairi-daēza- [m.] 'surrounding wall' (see
►лapádɛɩσoç), and Gm. words like Go. daigs [m.] ‘dough', all from IE *d'oigno- [m.].
ToB -tsaika 'shaper', from tsik- 'to form, build', and Arm. dēz 'heap' are both
probably innovations (cf. Arm. dizanem, aor. dizi ‘to heap up'). The formation of
tɛïxos < IE *dhéigh-s- [n.] is isolated, but the e-vocalism is also found in Osc. feíhúss
[acc.pl.] 'walls', o-stem. The basic verb is preserved in Skt. deh- 'to spread, lute' as an
athematic formation déhmi; Latin has a nasal present in fingō 'to spread out on,
knead, build'. Greek Otyyávw is unrelated.
tékµap [n.] ‘sign, emblem', rarely ‘goal, end' (Hes., Pi., A., E., A. R.), also ‘symptom’
(Hp., Aret.). <IE *kwek- ‘see, appear'>
•VAR Indeclinable. Also τéкµwp [n.] ‘goal, end', sometimes ‘sign, proof (Hom.).
•DER τεкμαíρоμαi (also with ovv-, diα-, etc.) [v.] 'to determine, appoint' (Hom.), 'to
detect, conclude, deduce from signs' (post-Hom.), aor. τεкµýpασðαι (Il.), fut.
tekµapoñµai (X.), aor. pass. ptc. ¿ktekµapėɛis (Orac. apud Euseb.); act. tɛkµaipw,
τεкµñpaι 'to indicate, testify' (Pi., A. Pr. [lyr.], Nic., Arat.). tékµap-ois [f.]
'conclusion from signs, deduction' (Hp., Th., etc.), -τós 'deducible' (Cratin.), -τɩкóç
'fit to conclude' (Poll.).
From tékµwp: teεkµop-ɛúw [v.] ‘to testify one's loyalty to the emperor', with -ɛĭo
žévoɩ (inscr.). From tɛкµýpaσðaɩ: tekµýpiov [n.] ‘sign, feature, emblem, proof,
evidence, symptom' (IA) with -todŋs 'evidential, giving evidence' (Arist.), -tów [v.]
'to provide a testimony, proof (Th.), -tóoμai [v.] 'to detect, conclude from signs'
(Hell.), with -iwotę [f.] 'testimony, proof (Arr.).
•ETYM Etymologically, tέкμap is connected with the Indo-Iranian group of Skt. cáṣṭe,
cákṣate 'to see' < *ke-k"k-toi, -e-toi, also cákṣus- [n.] 'eye', Av. cašman- [n.] ‘id.',
where the latter also displays a suffix starting with -m-.

=== page 756 ===

1460
TÉKVOV
téêvov [n.] ‘child, young animal, shoot' (II.). ◄IE *tek- ‘beget, bear’➤
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. TεкVO-лoιóç 'begetting children', with -éw, -ía (IA),
E-TEкVOÇ 'with good or many children', also (Arist.) ‘good to the young', with -ía,
-έw (trag., Arist.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutive TεкV-íov (late), -ídiov (Ar.); 2. -ouσσa 'rich in children' (S. Tr.
308; cf. Kamerbeek ad loc.); 3. -ów (rarely with έлɩ-, ovv-, etc.) [v.] ‘to beget
children', usually of the man, -óoμαι [v.] ‘to bear children', usually of the woman
(Hes. Fr. 138, Pi., trag., Arist.), with -woɩ [f.] ‘production of children' (Th., Arist.),
‘'adoption' (D. S.), -wμa [n.] 'production, child' (A. Fr. 315 = 625 M.).
ETYM Usually connected with a Germanic word for (free) follower, servant,
warrior, hero', also 'boy, youngling': ON þegn, OE þeg(e)n, OS thegan, OHG degan
[m.], from PGm. *þegna-. This identification is not without problems, however, as IE
*tek-nó- would have yielded PGm. þekka-. Skt. ták-man- [n.] 'descendant' is only
attested in lexicographers and is better left aside. The word has several cognates in
Greek; see ➤TÍKTW.
TÉкTWV, OVOS [m., f.] 'carpenter, craftsman, artist, initiator' (Il.). <IE *te-tk-n-
'carpenter'>
•DIAL Myc. te-ka-ta-si /tektasi/ shows the regular reflex of the zero grade of the
suffix, see Guilleux BSL 92 (1997): 207-9.
•COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. TεкTÓν-aрxoç epithet of μoñσa (S. Fr. 159); very
often as a second member, e.g. àpXI-TÉкTwv [m.] 'builder, contractor, architect' (IA).
⚫DER 1. TéкTaiva [f.] 'craftswoman, initiator' (Hes. Th. apud Chrysipp. Stoic., Call. Fr.
anon.). 2. tekto-oúvŋ [f.] 'art of building' (ɛ 250, E. [lyr.], AP), also with àpxı- ‘id.'
(Pisidia). 3. TEкTov-ídŋę [m.] patronymic (0 114). 4. tɛktov-iкóç ‘belonging to a
carpenter, skilled in building', also with àpxı- ‘belonging to the architect or to the art
of building' (Pl., Arist.). 5. -ɛñov [n.] ‘carpenter's workshop' (Aeschin., Delos). 6.
TEKTOV-ɛúw [v.] ‘to carpenter' (Hero), also with àpxi- 'to plan, construct, with -ɛvµa
[n.] 'construction' (Bito). 7. TEкTOV-έw [v.] 'to carpenter, be a carpenter' (Ph.), with
-ía [f.] (Thphr. [?], AP); also with àpxı- 'to be a builder, construct' (Ar., Hell.), with
-ía, nua [n.] (Hell.).
Older denominative τεкταívoμαι [v.] 'to carpenter, manufacture, invent, machinate'
(II.), aor. tɛkt-ývaσðaι, fut. -avoñµaɩ, Hell. and late also -aívw (also with prefix, e.g.
napa-, ovv-, ¿ñɩ-); ¿nitektavtñpes (-tɛkv- cod.). oi rapασкɛvασταí ‘providers' (H.).
See ▸TÉXVI.
⚫ETYM Old expression of carpenting and building, identical with Skt. tákṣan- [m.]
'carpenter' and Av. tašan- [m.] 'builder, creator', going back to an n-stem built on
the reduplicated root *tetk-. On the feminine type τéкταivα versus Skt. takṣṇí-, see
Peters 1980a: 158f. Several languages preserve the basic reduplicated verbal formation
*te-tk-: Skt. tákṣati 3pl., OAv. tāšt 'to timber, create', Latv. tešu, test 'hew', iterative
Lith. tašau, -ýti, OCS tešą, tesati ‘id.'. Hitt. takš-zi ‘to devise, produce, etc.' is probably
an s-present, while Lat. texō 'weave, twine', also 'build, timber', is ambiguous
between *teks- and *tetk-; see De Vaan 2008 s.v. Greek replaced the verb with the
denominative Tεкταívoμai.
TÉ入入oual 1
1461
telaµwv, -ŵvos [m.] ‘carrying-strap, belt, strap, binding, bandage' (Il., epic Ion.), as
an expression of architecture 'column' (Hell., late Pontic inscr.), also 'base of a
column' (Argos Va)? Plur. telamones 'male figures used as supporting pillars,
ǎτλavτεç' (Vitr.). Also as a mythical PN (perhaps originally the bearer of the vault of
heaven). IE telh₂- 'bear, endure'>>
•DER tɛλaµwv-ídiov [n.] 'small bandage' (late medic.), -íчoµa [v.] ‘to be bound'
(Hell.). Patronymic Tɛλaµávos (Aïaç; Il., etc.).
•ETYM The original meaning is “bearer” and, like tλ½µwv, tɛλaµóv is an agent noun
to the verb for ‘bear' seen in tλñval, ‣ taláσoat, with a full grade root like in
teláσoai. tolµñoaɩ, tλñvai (H.). It has been compared with a Celtic word for 'sling,
trap', e.g. Olr. teilm (tailm DIL), MW telm, for which a reconstruction PCI. *telmi-is
possible.
TE入É0W
•var teλetý. →téλopiai.
tελɛvτý [f.] ‘end, end of life, fulfillment, closure, termination' (Il.). <?>
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. à-téλεutos ‘endless' (A. [lyr.]); also npo-televtý [f.]
'early death' (Vett. Val.), back-formation from лро-τελεvtάw.
•Der tɛλɛvt-aïoç located at the end, outmost, last' (IA, also completed in Pi.); -άw
[v.] (also with ȧло-, έк-, лρо-, etc.) 'to end (life), fulfill, conclude', with ȧлOTελεÚT-
nois [f.] 'conclusion, result' (Pl.).
•ETYM An isolated verbal noun, which seems to presuppose a verb *τɛɛúw (like
KEλɛúw); the pair Tελɛvτη: τέλoç recalls кpatεvτaí: кpáτoç. A remarkable similarity
is found in ToB klutk- ‘turn', etc., which can be derived from a Pre-Tocharian root
*k"louT- vel sim., to which a suffix -sk- was added. However, genetic relation to
Greek τɛɛvτý is highly unlikely. See tέλoµai, ▸télos.
TÉλoç [n.] ‘payment, tribute, debť (Call.). ◄GR?►
•VAR Also TÉλos Xpéos 'obligation, debt' (H.).
ETYM A transformation of téλoç 2 after äxboç, ßρiеоç, лλñеоç.
Tελívη [f.] name of a testacean, "ioúdpiov' (Hp., Dsc.). <PG(S)>
•VAR Also TÉλλiv [acc.] (Epich. 43; uncertain 114).
•ETYM Clearly a Pre-Greek formation, with palatal & and the suffix -tv-.
Tελλoμα 1 [v.] with лερ- 'to turn around in circles' (II.). <IE *k"el- 'turn'>>
•VAR In absolute participial constructions, e.g. nepitɛ\\oµévwv ¿vɩautŵv ‘in the
cycle of years', -évou étɛos, -évaus pais (epic poet.); the finite forms are said of
constellations, with adaptation to τέλλw 2, -oμaι in àvα-τéλλw, etc. (Alc., Arat.).
Also аct. лεрITÉλλn (Arat.), of the sun.
•DER As a simplex in tɛλλoµévov Tɛos (A. R.). Also finite forms in the sense of 'to
change, originate, become', like έs Xápiv téλλetai (Pi.); perhaps this is the same word
as (àva-)τéλλw, -oμa 'to rise, spring up': yévos ... QUTEUОè... TέλλεTO (Pi.); see
▶ TÉ入入W 2.

=== page 757 ===

1462
TÉ入入W 2
⚫ETYM The corresponding expression лεрулλоμévшv Evavτ@v [ptc.aor.] (Hom.,
Hes.) shows that tε\\oμα is a Ionic yod-present beside the Aeolic root present in
►лέλo̟µaɩ, from IE *kwel-. See τéλoµai and ‣ té\\λw 3.
Téλw 2 [v.] 'to make rise or spring, produce', intr. 'to rise, spring, originate, of
constellations, plants, waters, etc. (II., epic Ion. poet.), rarely med. 'to shoot up high'
(Pi.). IE telh₂- 'bear, endure'>>
•VAR Aor. tɛīλaɩ, -aσeat, perf. med. tétaλµai, act. tétaλka (Arist.).
•COMP Almost only with prefix: A. ȧva-τéλλw (also ¿ε-, έл-, пpo-, σvv-avatéλλw,
etc.), úлεр-τελλw, -oμa 'to rise up' (Hdt., E.), úло-τελλoμa 'to rise, originate' (Arat.,
A. R.); B. ¿ñ-tέ\\w, -oµα 'to assign, impose, order' (epic poet. Il., late prose), intr.
'to rise' of constellations, etc. (epic Ion., Arist., Plb.); έv-τéλλoμa (also with лроσ-
εv-), rarely -τéλλw 'to assign, order' (IA). Rarely as a simplex: ǹíov téλlovtos (S.),
ĭpɩ téλλɛ ‘springs, emerges' (Nic. Fr. 74, 32; cf. ►έ\\µα 1), also med. ñoñç
telloµévns (A. R.), téλλɛtaɩ of rising stars (Arat.).
●DER 1. άva-toλ-ń (also with εл-, ovv-) [f.] ‘(sun)rise, east' (μ 4 [ávτolaí plur.]);
¿ètol-ý [f.] ‘rise of a constellation' (Hp., Th., E., Arist., etc.); ¿vtol-ń [f.]
'assignment, order' (Pi., Hdt., Decr. apud D.), with -ídlov, -10, -KÓç, -ikápɩoç,
-чaños, -εúç (late). 2. vταλ-μα [n] = έvτoλń (LXX, NT). 3. See ▶TÉλoç.
⚫ETYM The forms tɛiλai, tétaλµiai, τéτaλкa were innovated from the present Tέ\\w
after the pattern of στéλλw and other verbs. As a yod-present, *Téλ-Iw 'to raise, rise'
and 'to assign' belongs to τaláσσat, etc., thus originally *telh₂-ie/o- (with loss of the
laryngeal in accordance with Pinault's Law)? Or is it rather the same verb as
► tε\\oμai 1?
Téλλw 3 [v.] ‘to achieve, perform', = tɛλéw. ◄IE *k"el- ‘turn’▷
•VAR Inf. tɛλλɛv (Gortyn), aor. tεɩlav (ódóv) ‘they completed (the road, journey)
back' (Pi.).
•COMP σUV-TEAλw = ovv-Tɛλéw in [ouv] Tε\\ovτα (Argos V₁; not quite certain).
OUV-TÉ入入W
ETYM Factitive of τέλλoμa 1, with the same development of meaning as found in
► TÉλoç 1 *turning', 'end, completion'.
téλµa [n.] ‘puddle, swamp, marsh, mire, mortar, dung' (IA). ◄?►
•DER tελµat-wỒηs 'swampy' (Arist., D. S.), -talos 'forming a swamp, living in a
swamp' (Arist.), -óoμai [v.] 'to become swampy' (Str.); also τελµíç, -ivoç [m.] ‘mire,
dung' (EM, H.); cf. ¿ηyµís (to ¿ñyµa), also ► ðíç.
⚫ETYM Unexplained; cf. on στaláσow. Arm. tełm, tiłm 'mire, dung' is a loan from
Greek (Pedersen KZ 39 (1906): 374).
τéλoμaι [v.] = ëσoμal, σται (Crete). <IE *k"el- 'turn'>
•VAR 3Sg. TÉλεTαι, also with σuv-. Tévτaι 'id.' (Cyrene), from *τéλ-taɩ.
•DER Extension in -0-: τɛλé¤w [(v.] 'to come up, appear, become, be' (Il., epic poet.,
also Ion. and Dor. prose); on the terminative meaning see Chantraine 1942: 327. Old
primary formations ▸téλoç 1 and teλetý [f.] ‘ceremonial rite, consecration' (Pi., IA),
with TελεT-άpxns [m.] 'head of the τελετaí (late), TελetĤs = teleotńs 'who performs
a consecration' (Hell.; cf. on Euphron. 1 [Coll. Alex. 177]); cf. Lat. cultus to colō, Skt.
TéλOC
cáraṇa- [n.] also ‘(liturgical) action, religious ceremony' (to cárati, -te =
τéλɛtαɩ); see also ► tέ\\w 3 and tɛλéw (to ►téλos 1).
1463
colit,
•ETYM Identical with Aeol. ►лéλoat, so originally ‘I become' with future meaning.
The form *τέλ-taɩ is an old athematic formation acc. to Meillet BSL 32 (1932): 198
(comparing στα), but this is improbable. It was rather formed from τελoμα after
the synonymous pair σoμα: σται (Fraenkel Glotta 20 (1932): 89ff.). Syncope from
TÉλεταɩ, as assumed by Szemerényi 1964: 165ff., is also improbable. The pair τéλoç:
TελεTη recalls yέvoç: уɛvετń (where the latter may have a reflex of the laryngeal from
*genh,-).
τéλoç [n.] 1. ‘end, limit, goal, fulfillment, accomplishment, determination; executive
function, office; initiation, etc.' (II.). 2. 'duty, tax, toll, expense, cost' (IA). 3. 'division
of an army, troops, military unit, squadron of ships' (Il., IA). <IE *telh₂- ‘lift, carry'▷
•DIAL Myc. te-re-ta (Morpurgo Davies 1963 s.v.).
●COMP As a first member in tɛɛσ-qópos ‘bringing τέλoc', epithet of vauτós
(Hom.), of Zɛús (h. Hom.), of àpaí, ɛvxaí, etc. (trag.), of xwpaɩ (Thphr.), etc., with
-pop-ía, -éw, -nois (Hell.); tελ-wvns [m.] 'tax-collector' (Att., Herod., Hell.), with
-wv-iov, -ía, -ikós, -eĩov, -éw, -nous (most Hell. and late). Very frequent as a second
member, partly in back-formations of tελεïv, e.g. à-tελńs 1. ‘endless, unfulfilled,
incomplete' (since p 546), opposite Ev-τελns 'entire, complete' (Att., A.); 2. 'without
duty, tax-free' (IA), with ȧτéλ-ɛtα, -ɛin [f.] 'incomplete state' (Arist.), 'exemption
from taxes' (IA); лоλυ-τεληs of many expenses, thriftless, costly' (IA); εv-τελńc
(referring to tελεɛïv) ‘easy to pay, cheap, small, economicaľ (IA); έкteλńs ‘complete,
ripe' (Hes., A., E.) from ¿к-tɛλéw (Il.). With a suffix -to-: à-téλɛσ-tos (may also
belong to Tελεiv) ‘endless, incomplete' (Hom.), 'without initiation, uninitiated (E.,
Pl.).
•DER 1. TÉλELOS (Il.), -ɛos (post-Hom.), -noc (Crete), -ɛws (Cos) 'concerning the end
or goal, etc., fulfilled, full-grown, etc.'; the formation could be *Tελeσ-los, *teλeσ-
Ƒоç, or τελε-чoc, and is much-discussed; hence tελε(1)-óτns [f.] 'completeness'
(Democr., Arist.), teλe(i)-ów [v.] ‘to complete, finish', med. and pass. 'to be fulfilled,
reach maturity' (IA), also with ảлo-, έK-, etc.; thence -wois, -wµa, -wτńs. 2. telńeic,
epithet of έkatoµẞaí (Hom.), also of oiwvoi (h. Merc.), of έnɛa (Tyrt.), of Nkɛavós
(Hes. Th). 3. tɛliкós belonging to the end' (Hell.), ovv- ‘forming a community
(ouvτéλεα)' (Plb.), 'payed jointly' (late); лεp-σuv-TελIкÓS (XPÓVOC) 'pluperfect'
(gramm.). 4. Tɛɛσta [m.] 'official' (Elis VIª); to TελeotŃc s.v.
5. Denominative verb Tɛλéw 'to finish, complete, initiate; to discharge, pay, spend'
(II.), epic also -ɛíw, aor. teléσ(σ)aɩ, pass. tελεσ¤ñvaɩ, fut. τɛλéσ(0)w, epic also -έw,
Att. -w, perf.pass. tetéλeoµai (II.), to which act. tɛtélɛka (Att.), also -ŋka (Hell.
pap.), ua (Cret.); very often with prefix, e.g. ȧло-, dα-, ¿к-, έлɩ-, σʊv-. From
Teλéw: téλe-oiç (ȧño-, ovv-, etc.) [f.] 'completion, conclusion' (Arist., Hell.); τéλεσμa
[n.] 'payment, tax' (D. S., pap., inscr.), also to prefixed verbs (e.g. with àño-)
'completion, goal, result' (Arist.); tɛλɛσ-týc [m.] ‘initiating priest' (late), 'Opoɛo-
TελεστŃ (Thphr.); with ouv- (to ouv-τελéw) 'member of a union of tax-payers'
(Cod. Just., etc.); -Tкóç 'concerning the initiating priest or the initiation' (Pl.), 'fit to
perform' (Arist.), also with ảло-, εл-, σν-; τελεσ-τhp [m.] 'initiating priest'

=== page 758 ===

1464
TÉλσOV
(Troezen IIª), Twp epithet of Apollo (AP), also as a PN; -rúpia [n.pl.] 'sacrifice for
succeeded undertakings' (X., Ael.), -t piov 'place of initiation' (Plu.); -τpα [n.pl.]
‘costs of initiation' (Hell. inscr.); -τpia [f.] ‘priestess of initiation' (Suid.). Lengthened
present τελíσкw (ovv-) = tɛléw (Hell.). In compounds, τɛλéw occurs as a first
member, e.g. tɛλɛσɩ-oupyós 'completing the work', with -ía, -έw, -ŋua (Pl., Arist.).
•ETYM Two etymologically different words seem to have merged in tέλoç: in the
sense of 'end, goal', Tέλoç can be derived from téλoµai, ‣réλoμa as *turning
point (of the race-course, the field)'; beside it stands лóλoç ‘hinge, etc.', like yévoç:
yóvoç. Given the broad root meaning of *kwel- (cf. Lat. colō, Skt. cárati which also
occur as ‘to commit, complete, etc.'), a different original meaning may also be
envisaged. In the sense of 'delivery, tax', Téλoc fits excellently with Tέλλw 2,
▶ telaµwv, ▶taláσσαι, τλñvαι 'to lift, carry, yield', like cópos ‘tax' with qέpw. For
réλoç as ‘division of an army', connection with Skt. kúla- [n.] ‘generation, family,
crowď, Ru. čéljad ‘crew' has been suggested, but this is neither formally nor
semantically convincing. Frisk compares the German military expression Aushebung
levy, conscription', in order to argue for derivation from the group of taláσσai. In
view of the striking similarity of the expressions rεívεv Téλoç and τɩταívεɩv τάλavτa
(Y 101 εi dε Đεó лεр lσov τεivεiεу лоλεμоυ τελоç, Неs. Th. 638 loov dè TÉλoç TÉTατo
лoλέµoo, and X 209 кaì τóτε dǹ xpúσɛa ñaτǹp έtítaive táλavta), Holwerda
Mnem. 4:16 (1963): 337ff. connects both τéλos and гáλavra with the balance and
explains them as 'tongue of a balance', librae iugum. This seems very convincing.
However, in the meaning 'tongue of a balance', Tέλoç must not be taken with
téλoµai, réλo̟µai as "quod verti potest" (with H.), but with τáλavτa as 'levy'.
TÉλσov [n.] 'end of the field', where the plough is turned (apoúpng N 707, Σ 544, VεLOчo
Σ547). <IE *kwels- 'carve, draw'>
•DER TÉλσaç στpooác, téλŋ, répata 'turnings, ends' (H.).
⚫ETYM Probably corresponds to Hitt. gulš-zi 'to carve, engrave, inscribe', Skt. karş- 'to
pull, drag, plow', and Av. karš- ‘id.'; the retention of -λσ- is regular if the accent was
on the preceding syllable. Forbes Glotta 36 (1958): 260f. does not accept this
phonological rule, and therefore reconstructs *Tελ-π-o- from the root of réλoç,
which is highly unsatisfactory and unnecessary.
Téλqovσa [f.] name of a source in several places in Greece. <IE *dhelb"- 'dig'>
•ETYM Neumann explains the form as a ptc. of the root *dhelbh- 'to dig', as in OHG
bi-telpan, MoE delve, MoDu. delven 'id.'.
téµaxos →téµvw.
τéμɛvoç [n.] 'separated piece of land, precinct, holy area' (Il., epic Ion.). <IE *temh,-
'cut, separate'>
•VAR Myc. te-me-no.
●COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. tɛµɛv-ovpós [m.] ‘guard of a t.' (Cnidos).
●DER 1. tɛµév-ɩos ‘belonging to the г.' (S., Chios IVª), -ía [f.] epithet of ‘Eσtía
(Erythrae IIIª); έvtεµév-101 0ɛoí (Milete, Priene). 2. -tкós ‘id.' (Anaxandr.[?], St. Byz.,
EM). 3. -ítŋs [m.] epithets of various gods, e.g. Алóλλwv, Zɛús (Th., inscr.), fem.
TÉμVW
1465
-ĭτɩç name of a height near Syracuse (Th.). 4. -iw (also with v-, Poll.) [v.] ‘to
establish or initiate a г.² (Pl., D. H.), with -ɩσµɑ [n.] (D. C.); „po-tεµévoµa ‘outer
court of a temple' (Th. 1, 134, Hld.).
⚫ETYM Traditionally connected with réuvw (e.g. Z 194 τéµεvoç τáµov, and cf. лãç ó
pepɛpioµévos tómos tivi ɛis tµýv кTλ. H.), which seems both formally and
semantically satisfactory: a suffix -voç (like in кτñ-vos, έp-voç, etc.) was added to the
disyllabic root *temh,-. Manessy-Guitton IF 71 (1955): 14ff. (with extensive treatment
and bibliography) does not accept a suffix -nos-, and considers Oriental origin: Akk.
temennu 'foundation charter', Sum. temen ‘id.'. The old connection with τéμvw
would then be folk-etymological. This is not very probable.
téµvovta [ptc.acc.sg.m.] · àµéλyovra 'sucking up' (H.). ◄IE *k″em- ‘gulp'>
•VAR Also Tεμεу· йчελуεν (H.), гεμε (N 707).
⚫ETYM Connected to an IE word for 'gulp, swallow' in Skt. ā-cámati 'to gulp', etc.,
Molc. hvóma 'id.' (most recently by Strunk Glotta 68 (1990): 49-61).
τÉμνw [V.] 'to cut, cut up, split, destroy' (Hom.). <IE *temh,- 'cut'>>
VAR Epic Ion., Dor. ráμvc (on τéμε N 707 see on τéµvovτα), aor. τεμεïv, еpic
Ion., Dor. τauɛiv, fut. τɛµw, Ion. tɛµéw; τµŋ- (Archim. ruȧ-) in the aor. pass. Tμn-
Oñvai, perf.pass. tétµŋ-µai (Od., Pi.) and act. -ka (Att.), verbal adj. tµŋtós (Att., A.,
S. [lyr.]), ü-Tunτoç (Hom.).
COMP Very frequent with prefix, е.g. ȧло-, εк-, εv-, кαтα-, лεрι-, OUV-.
•DER A. With o-grade 1. Toμn (Dor. -á) [f.] 'cutting, cut, cut off part, stump' (Il.), also
with άvα-, άло-, έк-, лεpt-, etc. (from àva-réuvw, etc.). 2. Tóμoç [m.] 'section, piece,
part of a literary work, scroll of papyrus, volume' (com., inscr., pap.); often to the
prefixed verbs with adjectival function, e.g. áлóτoμ-os 'cut off, steep, craggy' (IA),
with fem. -ás (D. S., J.), -ía [f.] ‘cragginess' (Hell.). Adjective toµós ‘incisive, sharp'
(S., Pl.), often as a second member in univerbations, e.g. Spv-róµoç 'cutting wood'
(Il.). 3. τoμ-εúç (εк-, лερι-, úло-, άло-) [m.] 'cutter, blade, knife', mathematical
'sector' (Trag. Adesp., Pl. Alc., X., Arist., Hell.); on toµeús, toµý, tóµos and tµñµa as
mathematical (geometrical) terms see Mugler 1958-1959: s.vv. 4. τoμ-íaç (usually
with έk-) [m.] 'who has been cut' (IA), with -taños (PMag. Par., gloss.). 5. Toμ-áç [f.]
'excavation, clearance' (Arc. IVª). 6. -íç [f.] ‘knife' (LXX). 7. τóµ-чov, plur. tà tóµ-ia
'cut victim, cut out parts of a victim, cut' (Att., etc.), τóµ-ios = -ías (pap.). 8. τoµ-
años ‘provided with a cut, cut off (A., E.). 9. -ɩkóç, only with àva- (to àvaroµ-ý)
belonging to the anatomy' (Gal.); also with nominal first member, e.g. Aaroμ-Iкóç
(to λaτoμ-ía, λaτóμ-os) 'belonging to a quarry, quarry-worker' (D. S.). 10. -ápiov
[n.] 'small volume' (Stob., Eust., EM). 11. Denominative verbs: -άw (only ptc.
τoµñvtɩ [dat.], of л½µατ) ‘needing cutting' (S. Aj. 582); έk-, σuv-toµíšw = ¿k-, ovv-
τéµvw (PMag. Par., Suid.); ¿êτoµ-ά(w ‘to castrate' (gloss.).
B. With zero grade < *tmh,-: 1. τµñ-µa (also with àлo-, лεpɩ-, etc.) [n.] 'section, part'
(Hp., Pl., Att. inscr., etc.), -µáñov (Eust.), -µατódŋs (Hp. Loc. Hom.). 2. -σıç (also
with άло-, úло-, etc.) [f.] 'cutting, destroying' (Pl., Arist.). 3. -τhp [m.] 'cutter'
(Nonn.); -τns as an explanation of έktoµeús (H.); -tɩkós (ava-) ‘cutting, stabbing'
(Pl., Arist.). 4. -Sŋy ‘incising' (H 262).

=== page 759 ===

1466
Tévayos
C. With full grade: téµaxos [n.] ‘piece, especially of salted fish', diminutive -tov [n.]
(IA), with formation like oέλaxos, otέlexos, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 403 and 421).
Hence tεµax-ítηs (ìx¤ñ¢) [m.] ‘sliced and salted fish' (com., pap.), -í\w (ảño-) [v.] ‘to
slice for salting, pickle', with -touós, -iotós (late).
D. From the aorist taµɛīv: taµeoí-xpws 'cutting the skin' (Il.).
Cf. also ►τéμεvoç, τaµía, τaµíaç, ► tálilooç.
ETYM The nasal present τáμvw << PGr. *tamnēmi < PIE *tm-neh,-mi is original, as
is a root aorist 3sg. *etemet < *h,e-temh,-t, which was replaced by a thematic aorist
Tεμov (Harðarson 1993b: 157-8, 160-1, 166). This situation was levelled in various
ways in the dialects: Att. innovated with the present τéμvw, while epic Ion. and Dor.
secondarily created the aorist &τaμov. Extensive treatment by Forssman Glotta 44
(1966): 5ff. The monosyllabic té-tµn-tai, tun-Оñval, etc. agree with ßßλntal,
ẞλŋеñvaι et al. A pre-form чuā- seems to be confirmed by the forms in Archim. and
by τμāžαι (see τunуw); on the other hand, τéτμηуταч is unambiguous in Pi. I. 6, 22,
and is also to be found in the lyrical parts of the tragedians (Forssman 1966: 158ff.).
This means that the root was *temh,- (thus also LIV² s.v.).
Celtic has the original athematic nasal present in OIr. tamnaid ‘to cut off < *tm-n-
(e)h-; in Latin, this was also thematicized to (con-)temnō ‘despise', perhaps via ‘cut
up, mutilate’. A nasal present is also found in Balto-Slavic, e.g. ORu. tjati, ısg. túnu
'to beat', Lith. tinti, 1sg. tinu'to sharpen'. See also τévdw and ▸τµńуw.
tévayoç [n.] ‘shallow water, shallow spot, shoal' (Pi., Hdt., Th., Arist.). ◄IE *tenh₂g-
'shallow water'>
●DER tevay-wdns 'full of shoals, shallow' (Hell.), -îtɩç [f.] ‘id.' (AP), -i\w (Str., Plu.),
-óoμai (Xenocr. apud Orib.) [v.] ‘to form a t., be shallow'.
⚫ETYM Formation like the oppositе лéλαуоç, and perhaps influenced by it.
Bezzenberger BB 18 (1892): 267 compared Latv. tigas < *th₂g- 'deep spot between
two shallow places', but in view of the root structure, this seems highly unlikely.
Tévow [V.] 'to gnaw at' (Hes. Op. 524; v.l. τévow [see tévОns]; conj. AP 9, 438, 1). ◄IE
*tend- 'split, cut off >>
ETYM An old primary thematic present; Latin has an iterative tondeō 'shave'. Celtic
has several cognates, e.g. MIr. ro-s-teind 'he split it (the nut)', pres. teinnid, tennaid
‘splits, breaks', tonn (< *tond-ā) ‘skin'. Traditionally connected with tέµvw as IE
*tem-d- (where one could assume that root-final *d became *h₁), but this leaves the
-m- unexplained. Fur. connects τévêŋs and thinks the verb is rather Pre-Greek.
Tévens [m.] 'glutton, gourmand' (com.). <PG>
•COMP As a second member in Axvo-tévðŋs lickerish glutton' (Poll.).
•DER Primary verb tévéεɩ [3sg.pres.] (v.l. Hes. Op. 524 acc. to sch. Ar. Pax 1009, Suid.
s.v. tévðaiç); tevő-ɛúw [v.] 'to be a glutton' (Poll.), -ɛía [f.] ‘gluttony' (Ar., Alciphr.);
лpotévð-aɩ [m.pl.] 'participant of the celebration of ▴орría' (at the first day of the
Apaturiae), also 'forestaller' (com.), sing. ‘greedy' [adj.] (Ael.), with -ɛúw [v.] ‘to
forestall, anticipate' (Ar.), -evoμat 'id.' (Eust.).
ETYM Acc. to Bechtel 1921, 1: 310, τóðƒν· ларà Koрívvη, εлì vшταíoυ (cod.
votißiov) kpéws tò övoµa ‘spinal meat' (H.) also belongs here, which Frisk analyzes
τépaç
1467
as belonging to *τóvoç, like ypóvewv ypóv0oç. Instead, we should envisage to
connect téveŋs with ►τévdw, in which case the variation 8/ 0 points to Pre-Greek
origin (Fur.: 196, 88). The words have nothing to do with the IE root *tem(h,)-.
Tεvívoι [n.] Aíеоι лλατεïç 'flat stones' (H.). <?>
.
•ETYM Doubtful hypothesis by Mayrhofer Wien. Stud. 67 (1954): 162: it would
originally mean *hewed' > 'smooth', and belong to Skt. gandhá- [m.] ‘smell'
(originally *to stab, blow, cut'). No etymology.
tevðpηdwv, -óvos [f.] 'wasp, forest-bee' (Arist., Dsc.). <PG(V)►
•DER Also Tεvepývn [f.] ‘id.' (Nic.), -nvov [n.] 'nest of a T.' (Arist.), -ŋv(t) wdns like a
honeycomb, perforated' (Hp., Plu., Democr. apud Ael.).
•ETYM See ►ávеpηdáv, àvеpývŋ, as well as лεopηdwv, and perhaps also ▸Оpñvoç.
The variant forms clearly show the Pre-Greek character of the word. Fur.: 196
suggests to connect ► tévēns.
tévwv⇒tɛivw.
τépaμva [n.pl.] 'house, residence' (E., almost only lyr., also Artem.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also τépεμva; sing. -áµvu̟ [dat.] (Maiist. 12). Here also τépα σεуavoì,
σкιαí, σкηváματа 'covered, shadowy place, tents' and τépαμvoç. кvyέλŋ 'vessel,
chest, box' (H.).
•ETYM Previously connected with an IE word for ‘beam, building, habitation' found
in several European languages, e.g. U tremnu ‘tabernaculo', Lat. trabs ‘beam' (with
taberna 'shed, habitation' from older *trab-), OW treb 'living', Lith. trobà 'house,
building', to which probably also belong Gm. words like OS thorp, OHG dorf
'village'. However, these words cannot be related to τépaµva, which would
presuppose a pre-form *terh₂b-no-, while the other languages point to a root *treb-
(thus De Vaan 2008 and Matasović 2009). The form τépεµvα, often explained by
progressive vowel assimilation, rather points to substrate origin. We should
definitely compare Оεpáлvη, which occurs both in the meaning 'servant, maid and
as 'house, residence' (see Оεрáлшv). Because of the alternations a/ɛ and 0/T, ẞ/л,
the word is Pre-Greek (likewise Fur.: 351).
tepáµwv, -ovos [adj.] 'soft by boiling', of pulse, etc. (Thphr., Phot.). <?>
•Der tepaµó-tns [f.] 'softness' (Thphr.).
•ETYM For τεpaµótns, cf. peilótηs to μεiwv. The word is probably secondary to
άτεράμwv 'hard, tough', like лηµшν to ȧлýµwν (see лñµα), or like τépaμvov.
ȧлαλóv, εчavóv 'weak, boiled' (Phot., Suid.) to ȧτépaµvoç. See ȧτépaμvoç and
► Tεpηv.
τépaç [n.] ‘sign, emblem; wonder, monster' (Il., epic poet., IA prose). <IE? *ker-
'magical sign, omen'>>
•VAR Gen. -aos and -ɛoç (Hdt.), plur. -aa (-ā, -α), -ɛa (metrically lengthened
Tεipɛa), Hell. -αtos, -aτα, etc.

=== page 760 ===

1468
TεPÉẞIVOS
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. τεраτо-λóуоç 'telling wonders, wonderful' (Pl.,
Philostr.), with -ía (Isoc., etc.), also -έw [v.] (Arist.), -ŋµa (late); tɛpa[σ]-σkóros
(Tεpατo-) [m.] 'interpreter of signs' (Pi., trag.).
•DER 1. Tepat-wdɛç 'miraculous, meaningful' (Att.), 2. -íaç [m.] 'performer of
miracles' (D. S.), 3. -Iкwç 'wonderful' (Epicur.). 4. τεpáσ-τɩoç 'bringing omens, of
bad omens, remarkable' (Hell.; like Σɛßáστios to σɛßãσ-τóç, also Tɛpáσtios). 5.
tέpaoµa [n.] ‘miracle' (Plu.), cf. чávτaσµα, etc. 6. Denominative verbs: a. tɛpat-
εúoμα (also with έл-, àлo-, etc.) ‘to talk marvels' (Att. Hell.), with -ɛía [f.] (Att.
Hell.), -ɛvµa [n.] (Ar., D. H.); b) -óoµαɩ [v.] ‘to stare at as a wonder' (Timo); c)
τɛpάчw (-άw Hdn. Gr.) [v.] 'to interpret signs' (A. Ag. 125 [lyr.]); 7. τεpaτ-ισμоí
[m.pl.] 'wonders' (Lyd.). 8. Tɛpɛσíaç [m.] PN, taken to stand for *Tεpεt-íaç with
metrical lengthening.
⚫ETYM Archaic word in -aç (cf. кτépaç, ßpétaç, oéλaç, etc.). Connected with ▸ лελwp
(and Téλwp) 'monster' (if this is from *ker-ōr by dissimilation; s.v.). Perhaps these
words can be connected in turn with Lith. kēras ‘magic, sorcery', Ru. čáry ‘magic',
Skt. kr- 'to make, perform', etc. (see LIV² s.v. *kwer- ‘(ab)schneiden, schnitzen'); note
that this presupposes that -aç was secondarily added within Greek, since the root is
anit.
tepéßivðos →tépµivðos.
tepɛitŋs [m.] a musical instrument in Egypt (BGU 1125, 4). ◄LW Eg.?>
•ETYM May be a loan from Egyptian.
Tεpετíчw [V.] 'to twitter, chirp, hum' (Phryn. Com., Arist., Thphr.). <ONOM>
•COMP Rarely with σuv-, úлo-.
●DER tepέt-ioµa [n.] (Arist., Hell.), -tσµóç [m.] (late) ‘twittering, etc.'.
•ETYM It is generally assumed that this word is onomatopoeic.
τépετpov [n.] 'auger, borer' (Od., Att. inscr., LXX, Plu.). <IE *terh,- 'bore'>
●DER Diminutive -τpov (Thphr.). With a suffix -ŋdov-: tepndwv, -dóvos [f.] ‘borer,
caries' (Hp., Ar., Arist.), with -Sovíčoμaι [v.] 'be consumed by caries', -Sovioµós [m.]
(Dsc.); cf. τεvеpηdwv, àλyndŵv, and see Gil Fernández 1959: 115.
•ETYM A primary instrument noun formed with the suffix -τpo- from the disyllabic
root *terh, seen in tέpɛσσɛv. ëτpwσεv, έτópvwσɛ 'pierced' (H.), τɛpέow (Eust.), zero
grade τpñσaɩ. In the same meaning, we find OIr. tarathar < *-tro-, Lat. tere-bra <
*-sr-. See τετрaivw and τɛipw.
τépηy [adj.] 'tender' (Il., epic poet.). <IE *ter-n- 'tender, soft'>>
•VAR Fem. -ɛɩva, ntr. -ɛv.
COMP As a first member in tɛpɛvó-xpwç 'with tender skin' (Anaxandr., Opp.).
Comparative tɛpév-tɛpos (Antun.), tepevw-tɛpos (Lyr. Adesp.), fem. tepɛivo-tεpŋ
(AP).
⚫ETYM An adjectival n-stem like pony, ǎpony, identical with Sabin. terenum 'soft'
(ascribed to Favorinus by Macrobius [late 4th c. AD]) save for the thematic vowel.
Lat. tener, -era, -erum ‘tender' also belongs here, if transformed from *terenos after
tenuis (see De Vaan 2008). See τépvç and ►τɛpáµwv.
TépμLVеoç
tɛpėpɛvoµai [v.] ‘to speak subtly' (D., Arist., Plu.). <?►
1469
•DER tɛpеp-ɛía [f.] 'sophistic reasoning, hairsplitting' (Isoc., Phld., D. H.), also as
military expression = ǹ otpatɛía ǹ év toĩs pépeσiv кaλovµέvη (Phot., Suid.; similarly
EM 753, 5), -ɛúµaσi pλvapíαiç 'nonsense' (H.), -ɛú¢ [m.] as a PN (Hermipp.).
•ETYM Can hardly be separated from τépеpov ‘topmost end, point, though a
convincing argumentation for the semantic development is lacking. Prellwitz points
to μετεwρolóуoç; one could also compare MoHG spitzfindig, MoFr. pointiller 'to
cavil'. One may also think of Tov¤opúчw 'mumble, speak inarticulately'.
tépėpov [n.] ‘top end (e.g. of the sail-yard), summit, highest point' (h. Merc. 322,
Emp., Hp., E. Fr. 371, Poll.). <?>
•DER Tépеpioι (кáλot) [m.pl.] 'ropes at the end of the sail-yard' (Ar. Eq. 440, Erot.,
Gal.), Tεpеpíα voń (S. Fr. 333) = óлσðíα лvoη. Glosses tεpеpwτηp. öo ó p
лрooрã τà èу τη αλáσση 'place whence the prow officer keeps watch of what
happens at sea' (H.) and τεеpηdáv• лpwpɛús ‘prow officer' (H.).
⚫ETYM A suffix -0 po- with the root tεp- 'reach the other side' has been assumed, but
this root ended in *-h₂, thus the connection is impossible (see tépµa).
tépµa [n.] ‘finish (of a race-course), end, highest point, supreme power' (Il., mostly
epic poet.). <IE *terh₂- 'cross'>
●COMP As a first member in τεpµo-Spoµέw ‘to run to the finish' (Man.), τεpµat-
oxoç H. as an explanation of ßaß₁doñoç. Often as a second member, e.g. à-
τépμwv 'without an end, boundless' (A., E., Arist.), derived from τépµwv.
⚫DER 1. Tépμ-10ç 'at the end, final' (S.); cf. στóµоç from σtóµa; 2. -ɩɛúç [m.] epithet of
Zeus (Lyc.), after Holi-ɛúç; 3. -ɩóɛç epithet of àσïíç (H 804), of xitŵv (t 242, Hes.
Op. 537), mg. unclear (лodηvεкýs stretching to the feet', acc. to the ancients);
formation like tɛixióɛis; hence tépµiç. ñoús ‘fooť H.; on Myc. te-mi-dwe-te, -ta see
Auro Jorro s.v.; 4. -ά\w [v.] ‘to limit' (Tab. Heracl., Thermon IIIª), with -αστñpεs
[m.pl.] 'boundary officials' (Epid. IIIª); 5. -ατíšw (seldom prefixed with άлo-, επ-)
'id.' (Str., S. E., Vett. Val.).
Besides τépμwv, -ovos [m.] 'end, boundary, edge' (A., E., Hell. and late prose); cf.
µvñµa to µvýµwv, etc., with tɛpµ-óvɩoç ‘at the end (A. Pr. 117 [lyr.]), -ovíľw [v.] ‘to
delimit', -ovσµóçs ‘delimitation' (Epid. IIIª); τεpµo-σúvă [f.] (Trag. Adesp. 509 [lyr.]),
nonce formation.
•ETYM The n-stem in tέpµa and τéέpμwv corresponds to that of Lat. termen, -inis [n.],
also ter-mō, -ōnis [m.] ‘frontier stone, marking stone, frontier' (see De Vaan 2008 for
further forms), as well as that of Skt. (RV) su-tárman- 'carrying over, saving' (of a
ship); Lat. terminus and U termnom-e 'ad terminum' show thematic enlargements.
The basic verb is preserved in Skt. tárati, tiráti (*terh₂-) 'to carry across, transfer'. See
on tépopov, which is probably unconnected. On Hitt. tarma- 'nail, peg', see
►τópμoç.
τépμvoç [f.] 'turpentine tree, Pistacia Terebinthus' (Hp., Arist., Thphr., LXX).
<PG(S,V)►
•VAR Secondarily tɛpéßɩvłoç, metathesized τpéµ¤oç (Nic. Th. 844).

=== page 761 ===

1470
TεPμLÓε
⚫DER Tεpμívе-IVOS (TEPεß-) 'belonging to the turpentine tree' (X., Diocl. Fr., Thphr.)
fem. -ís, haplological for -tvís (Nic. Al. 300); Tεpεßive-wdns 'rich in turpentine trees'
(AP), -í\w [v.] ‘to be like turpentine' (Dsc.). Tεpμvėɛús (Lyc.), Tɛpß- (Milete IIª)
epithet of Apollo as a god of medicine, Tpɛµ¤oûç TN (Cyrus; Ptol., St. Byz.).
⚫ETYM The younger form τɛpéßɩvos was perhaps influenced by έpéẞivos (Güntert
1914: 138), rather than dissimilated from µ v. Fur.: 219 assumes variation ẞ/ μ. The
word is Pre-Greek; this is confirmed by the suffix -ɩvoç.
tepuióeis •var tépµwv. →tépµa.
...
tépvaka [?] · tñç KάKTOV TOŨ QUTOŨ кavλóv 'stalk of the cactus plant' (H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Formation like dóvač, etc., explained by Frisk from earlier *τépvov, -os,
which would have an e-grade compared to the zero grade in Skt. tṛṇa- [n.] ‘(blade) of
grass, straw, herb', Go. þaurnus 'thorn', MoHG Dorn [m.], OCS tronε “акava'
(from IE *tɣn-o-, -u-). A problem with the etymology of these words is that the root
*terh₁/3 'to pierce' is set. Etymologies between Greek and Sanskrit plant names are
often wrong, and the word could be Pre-Greek.
téprouai [v.] ‘to satiate, refresh, delight' (II.). <IE *ter p- 'satiate'>
•VAR Аoг. τарíñval, τapóеñvaɩ, τɛpôеñvaɩ, еpic also ταрлóµεðα [¹pl.subj.],
reduplicated τετάpreto, tépyaσðai, fut. τépчoμai. Also active τéрлw, τépyai, tépyw.
•COMP Also with εл-, кατα- et al. Compounds: ȧ-τεрл-ǹç ‘unpleasing' (II.), opposite
εлɩτερл-Ń (h.Аp.); uncertain άτéρлov óúоç (Z 285); ǎ-τεрло “äурu̟лоç'
(Stesich., Ibyc.). As a first member probably in tɛpäɩ-kέpavvos epithet of Zeus, 'who
delights in thunder and lightning' (Hom., Hes.); τɛpyí-µßpotos ‘rejoicing people'
(Od., h.Ap., etc.).
●DER 1. τɛρл-vós ‘delightful, joyfuľ (0 45 [v. 1.]), with -vóτŋs [f.] (LXX); recent
superlative τερл-viσtos (Call.). 2. τépчƒç [f.] ‘delight, enjoyment' (Hes., mostly
poet.). 3. τɛpë-wλń [f.] ‘id.' (σ 37, Archil., Thgn., late prose). 4. τéрëɛɑ or -ŋ (dat.
-ɛσ1) [n.pl.] 'id.' (epigr. Itanos Iª-IP). Proper names, е.g. Тéрл-αvбpos, with short
forms Тépлηs (AP), Тéρлwv, name of satyrs (vase inscr.). Hoλú-τεрлоç (Corinth
VIª; Threatte Glotta 45 (1967): 186ff.), patronymic Tɛpë-iádŋs (X 330); Eú-τépëη,
Tεpчл-xópη (Hes.).
•ETYM Skt. present tarpati ‘to be satisfied' is an innovation (ep.) for earlier tŕpyati,
trpnóti, trmpati (see Mayrhofer EWAia 1: 634f.); the Greek root present τépлoμai
may
also be an innovation for an earlier yod-present. The intransitive aorist tapë-
ñvaɩ probably replaces earlier *τpaл-ñvαɩ (which fell together with the same
formation from ►τрέлw ‘to turn³). LIV² s.v. 1. *terp- ‘sättigen' compares the thematic
root aor. Skt. á-trp-at with Hom. τарлóμεеа. Оther cognates are Lith. tařpti, 1sg.
tarpstù 'to prosper', and probably also the Gm. group of Go. þaurban, OHG durfan
'to need', which is semantically more problematic, but possible acc. to Seebold and
Kümmel apud LIV².
τépσoμα [v.] 'to dry', both trans. and intr. (Hom., Hp.). <IE *ters- 'dry'>>
⚫VAR Aor. τεpσчvai (P 519), -ηµεvai (98), act. τépσal (Theoc., Nic.), τépoαio (Nic.)
[2sg.opt.med.], pres. tɛpσaívw, -oµaɩ (Hell. epic), with 3sg.aor. tépoŋve (P 529).
Téσσapεç, -a
1471
•ETYM Traditionally, τépσoμα is identified with Go. *ga-pairsan, but only
gabaúrsana [pret.ptc. acc.sg.f.] (of handu = ¿εŋpaµµévây xεĭpa) is attested, which
may also belong to ga-þaúrsnan Empaivεoal'. On the retention of -po- <
intervocalic *-rs-, see Manolessou and Pantelidis 2008. A zero grade yod-present is
found in Skt. tŕsyati, Go. þaursjan 'to thirst', and a causative *tors-eie- in Skt.
tarşáyati, Lat. torreō, OHG derran 'to scorch'. Greek has several nominal formations,
e.g. ►τapσós with τpaσiá. In Greek, τépσoμaι was replaced by the denominatives
avaívoµaɩ, -w (from aʊos), \ŋpaívoµai, -w.
τépus [adj.] ‘soft, weak' only in τépv. àσεvés, λεлτóv ‘weak, small' (H.), τépvas
ллoç Üτw λéуovtai öσoi àddŋqάyoɩ ɛiσí. žvioi toÙÇ ȧσεvεiç 'T. horse are called
those which are greedy; some: the weak ones' (H.). <IE *ter-u- 'tender, weak'>
•DER Besides tεpúvns. tetpiuuévos övos, kai yέpwv ½ Svoaváλŋätos yέpwv ‘beaten
off donkey, also an old man, who is in a bad shape for recovery'; tɛpúoketai. vooeĭ,
qoível 'is ill, declines'; τεpúσкεto έTεipετo 'was tired off (H.).
•ETYM The gloss τερúvηs may be compared with Skt. táruṇa-, Av. tauruna- 'young,
tender', from IE *teru-no-. Beside disyllabic τɛpu-, we find τpυ- in τpúw; cf. also
►ɩɩɩpwσkw. An s-stem is seen in кukλo-τepńs ‘roundeď (cf. ►кúкloc), for the
meaning of which cf. Hdt. 4, 36: tǹv yñv έoñσav kuklotɛpéa ŵs àëò tópvov ‘the
earth being round, as if from a τ.'.
Tépчos →στépqoç.
τépxvos [n.] 'sprout, twig' (Max., AP, H.); ◄PG(V)►
⚫VAR Also TρÉXvoç. Cypr. te-re-ki-ni-ja 'fruit', if this stands for τépx via.
⚫ETYM Formation like εpvoç, кτñvoç, etc. Niedermann IF 26 (1909): 46f. pleaded for
connection with τрéxw 'to run'. In τépуvɛα = εvτáqia 'ptng. to burial' (H.), we may
be dealing with a specialization of the meaning 'fruits'; cf. кαρлоí, кáρлшμα, -woiç,
which also denote fruits as offerings, кápлwσiç. Ovoía Apppodiτn εv Аµαеovτ
'sacrifice for Aphrodite in Amathous' (H.). Fur.: 351 compares τapxáviov. ¿vtáciov,
and therefore suggests a Pre-Greek word.
téσoapes, -a [num.] ‘four' (Hom.). <IE *kwetuer- ‘four'>
•VAR Att. τéɩɩapɛç, Ion. Arc. Hell. téσσɛpɛç, Dor. NWGr. τέτopɛç, Aeol. (Hom.)
niovpɛç, Lesb. néσ(σ)upɛç, Boeot. néttapes.
•DIAL Myc. qe-to-ro-we /kwetr-ōwes/ 'with four ears'.
•COMP As a first member in Hom. τεσσαрá-кovτα, Att. τεττарá-кova, Ion. Hell.
τεσσɛpá-кovτα, Doг. τετрú-коVτa 'forty'; also in τɛσσαрá-ßotoç 'worth four oxen'
(705), etc. Very frequent τετpα-, e.g. tetpá-kuklos 'four-wheeled' (Hom., etc.),
Tετρα-кóσιOι, Dor. -кάTIOι 'four hundred'.
●DER Hence the ordinal tétaptoç, epic also τéτpatos, Boeot. лéïpatos ‘fourth' with
τετapτ-años (Theoc. τετópτ-αιoç) ‘arriving at the fourth day' (IA), as a kind of fever
(msc., scil. лuρετós) ‘Quartana'. Collectives: τετpás (Boeot. лeτpác) [f.] 'period of
four days, quaternary', usually ‘fourth day of the month' (h. Merc., Hes.); tɛtpaktúç,
-úoç [f.] 'quaternary' (Pythag.). Numeral adverb tɛtpákiç (ɛ 306; Вoеot. л-), post-

=== page 762 ===

1472
TεTAYŃV
Hom. also kɩ 'four times'. Further adverbs: τéτpaα-xα, -×ñ, -Xóеɩ, -xws, etc. (IA); also
-xoá (Hom.); adjective τετpažóç (Arist.), -aσσóç (late pap.), like dióc, diooóc, etc.
•ETYM The inflection of the IE numeral for 'four' can be reconstructed on the basis of
the forms found in the separate languages. Among the Greek forms, the following
are important for the reconstruction: nom.pl. *kwetuor-es in tétopes (with τ instead
of σσ/ττ after τέτpασɩ); identical with this are Arm. č'ork', ToA śtwar, ToB śtwer, Skt.
catvárah (with ã < o by Brugmann's Law); Lat. quattuor has a secondary a in the
initial syllable. Then, the acc.pl. *kwetur-ns in лéσчраç, corresponding to Skt.
catúraḥ, Lith. keturi, Go. fidur- in fidur-dogs 'τετаpτałoç, of four days'; from this
stem form, a new nom. réσupɛç was created (it has been assumed that ñíʊvpɛç is a
variant of this form with reduced vowel). The loc.pl. *kwetur-su (Skt. catúrṣu) is
continued in the dat. τετрáσ. The ordinal *ketur-to- in Tеτрατоç, τéταрτo
corresponds to Lith. ketvirtas, ToA stärt, ToB starte beside Skt. caturtháḥ. The e-
grade of τéσσɛpɛs may be compared with that in the Balto-Slavic collective, Lith.
ketveri, OCS četverò, < IE *kwetueres; its origin is unknown (τéσσɛpɛç did not arise
from τéσσapɛç by vowel assimilation). For τετрúкovτα, Kortlandt MSS 42 (1983):
100 assumes that the laryngeal feature that arose from the initial *d- of the second
member was colored to *h3, because of the preceding *u in *kweturdkomt. Lillo MSS
49 (1988): 71-73 assumes that in Doric, the τ of the accus. was extended to the nom.,
giving τéτopεç. See τρáлε(α and ►τpvqáλɛia.
T
tɛtayŵv [v.] ‘seizing, grasping' (A 591, O 23). ◄IE *teh₂g- 'touch'>
•ETYM A reduplicated aor. ptc., like åµ-лɛлaλóv (see ►лálλw). Cognate with Lat.
tangō ‘touch', perf. tetigi, OLat. subj. tagam. For further combinations, see LIV² s.v.
TETⱭVÓS VAR TÉTavoç. →Tɛivw.
τÉταpoç [m.] 'pheasant' (Ptol. Euerg. 2 J). <LW Orient.>
•VAR Taτúpaç. ó qaσiavòç öpvɩç 'id.' (H.; also in Pamphil. apud Ath. 9, 387a).
•ETYM LSJ remarks that the word is a loan from the Orient, referring to MP tedzrev
'pheasant'. They further compare Lith. tetervà 'black grouse'; cf. on τéτpač. Ath. 14,
654c states that τέταpoç was imported from Media.
tεtiŋuai [v.] 'to be sad' (Il.). <?>
•VAR Perfect denoting the result of an event, in 2du. tetiŋoðov (©℗ 447), further only
the pt. τετημévos (Hom., Hes. Th. 163), also act. τετɩŋóç, dat. -ótɩ plur. -ótɛç (II.).
•ETYM Isolated within Greek, but possibly related to the root *kwei- 'to perceive, care'.
LIV² s.v. assumes that the Greek perfect, with original meaning *am aware', was
built on the basis of an unattested aorist *&-Tiny 'noticed'. For the meaning, cf. from
the same root Lat. cūra 'anxiety, care' < *kois-h2-. Within Greek, cf. ► ™ηpéw.
tetµɛîv [v.] ‘to find, reach, obtain' (Il., epic). <?>
●var Ind. tétµev, étetµev, tétfov, subj. tétµŋ, etc.
•DER Here perhaps the unclear form τεчε (N 707), cf. Chantraine 1942: 309.
⚫ETYM A reduplicated aorist likе лε-v-ɛïv, among others. Without a convincing
etymology. There is no convincing semantic argumentation for the formally obvious
connection with τεµvw ‘cut'. ToAB täm- 'to be born', caus. 'to generate', which was
TÉTTa
1473
first compared by Van Windekens Phil. Stud. 11: 175f., deviates strongly in meaning
as well. For argumentation in favor of this connection, see LIV² s.v. tem- 'erreichen'.
tɛtpaívw [v.] ‘to pierce, perforate' (A. [lyr.], Hdt.). ◄IE *terh,- ‘rub’▷
•VAR AOг. τετρчvαɩ (Hom.), τετpãvaɩ (Att. inscr.), med. τετρηvασai (Ar., Gal.),
pass. τετpavēñvai (Lyc., AP), fut. τετраvéw (Hdt.), -vw (IV); further aor. τpñσα
(Hp., Pl., Hell. and late), med. -σaσαɩ (Gal.), pass. -Оñvai (Trypho apud Ath., Gp.),
fut. τpησw (Lyc.), perf. med. τéτpηa (IA), with secondary pres. Tɩτрáw, titpyµi,
τɩτpaívw (Hell. and late), to which aor. tɩpãvaɩ (Thphr.).
•COMP Mostly with prefix, especially dɩa-, ovv-.
●DER 1. tpŋ-tós ‘pierced' (II.), ä-τpŋ]-tos (Pl., Arist.), from the prefixed compounds
e.g. лapáτpηtos (medic.). 2. τρñµα (diá-, лaрá-, čк-) [n.] 'hole, opening, eye of a
needle, dot on a die' (IA), with -áτov (Hero), -ατwdηs 'perforated', -aτóεıç 'id.'
(AP), -ατíšw [v.] 'to dice', -aτíктαç (Dor.), -ατt̃ταɩ [pl.] 'dice-player' (Sophr., Poll.,
H.). 3. τpñσiç (diá-, oúv-, etc.) [f.] 'perforation, opening, hole' (IA).
⚫ETYM The verbal forms tétpqual, tpytóc, tpñµa correspond with ẞéßλŋμα, Bλntóc,
Bλñua; tétuŋual, tuntós, tuñua, etc. The disyllabic root is preserved in tépɛ-τpov,
like in ẞéλɛ-µva. The root present of this root is preserved in Lat. terō ‘rub’. The
presents τετpαívw, tɛτpavéw, as well as the aorist τετpãvaɩ, must be innovations,
apparently after the verbs in -aívw. The comparison with Lith. trinù 'rub' is not
reliable, given the strong productiviy of nasal presents in Lithuanian. Also,
remarkable in τετρаívш, etc. is the ε-vocalism of the reduplication syllable, which
seems to have been taken from the perfect and fits better for an aorist than for a
present; cf. the incidental aorists τétopev, tetopýσas (see Topɛiv). Cf. ► Tɛipw.
τετpaμo •VAR τετpαμαívw. →τpéfiw.
tétpa₹ [m.] name of ‘a bird, after Thompson 1895 s.v. ‘black-cock' or ‘guinea-fowľ,
after Benton JHS 81 (1961): 48 ff. (w. extensive treatment) ‘large bustard' (Epich., Ar.,
Hell. a. late). <IE? *tetr- ‘hen-like bird'>>
•VAR Also -aкoç, -ayoç.
•DER τƐτpά\w [v.] ‘to cackle' (Alex. Mynd.). Also τéτpi, -ɩyoç [f.] (Arist.),
identification uncertain (Thompson s.v.). Further glosses: τετpáшv. öpviç rológ
‘kind of bird' (Lat. tetrāō Plin.), teτpádwv. öpveóv tɩ. Aλкañoç ‘id. (Alc.)', tetpaïov.
ópviðápióv tɩ. Aáкwvɛç ‘small bird [Lac.]'; τατúpaç· ó aσavòs öpvis 'pheasant', etc.
(see ▸ Téτapoç).
⚫ETYM For the suffix of τéτpα, -1, cf. the bird names ►кópαž, ►лéрεiε, et al. Similar
birdnames are Lith. tetervà 'blackcock, gray hen', tētervinas 'blackcock, bustard', Ru.
téterev 'blackcock', ON þiðurr 'capercailzie', Skt. tittirá- ‘partridge'. Originally
onomatopoeic.
tetpakivŋ [f.] ‘Opída' (Hippon. fr. 168 M). <LW Phr.?>
•ETYM Cleitarchus identified the word as Phrygian. Complicated explanation by
Haas Ling. Balkan. 2 (1960): 57f.
TÉTTA ⇒TATã.

=== page 763 ===

1474
TÉTTIĘ, -¡YOS
TÉTTI, -ĭyoç [m.] 'tree-cricket, cicada' (II.); metaph. a hair-pin with the shape of a
cicada (Att.). ONOM➤
•VAR Gen. also -iкoç (Hdn. Gr.).
•COMP As a first member in τɛɩɩyo-µýτpɑ [f.] 'subterranean larva of the cicada'
(Arist.).
⚫DER TETTÍYLOV (H. s.v. кερкóлη), also name of a coin (Delos IIIª); TεTTLу-ÓVOV [n.]
designation of a small mute cicala (Arist., Plin.), with suffix after ȧnd-, Xελid-óviov;
-óτns [f.] 'state of a cicada' (comm. Arist.), -wdns 'like a cicada' (Luc.).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic; cf. Tτíчw S.V. TITIуóvιov and Gil Fernández 1959: 130f., 190.
TEVOíç [f.] 'kind of cuttlefish' (Semon., Ar., Thphr.). <PG?(V)
•VAR Gen. -ídoç, -īdoç. Variant Oετv [acc.] (Hippon. ex H.). Also TεUеoç [m.] a
bigger kind of cuttlefish (Arist.); Tεvětás [f.] (Philox.).
•DER tev¤íð-10v [n.] (com.), -wdns ‘like a τ.' (Ath.); details in Thompson 1947 s.v.
The TN Tɛveis (Arcadia, -έa Achaia) has also been compared.
⚫ETYM Several attempts have been made to explain the word in IE terms, but none of
them convinces: Pok. 264f. posited IE *dheu-d"-, comparing Skt. dódhat- shatter,
turbulent, raging', etc., and assumed a meaning “making the water muddy,
entangling" for Greek, which hardly makes sense. Schindler KZ 81 (1967): 71, with
some reservations, gives the same reconstruction and assumes an original color
term, like in the plant name τɛúерιov = лóλov, έpv0pódavov. Semitic etymologies
have been proposed by Lewy 1895: 18, Lewy RhM 80 (1931): 108, and Grimme Glotta
14 (1925): 17.
The word could be Pre-Greek, in view of the variant and the meaning. Tovar MSS 10
(1957): 71-83 convincingly argued that Myc. te-u-ta-ra-ko-ro should be interpreted as
Tεvеp-aуópos 'collector of orchils', a plant from which colors were produced,
Roccella tinctoria. See tεñtλov.
τεúpɩov [n.] plant name, ‘tree-germander' (Dsc.). <?>
⚫ETYM See ➤TEVÕÍS.
tevµáqµai [v.] ‘to erect, build' (Antim.; on Call. Fr.567 cf. Pfeiffer). <IE *kieu- ‘set in
movement'>
●var Only tevµýoato; tevµãtai. texválɛ ‘builds' (H.).
●DER Further tɛvíάšш (also med.), perf. tetɛútaka [v.] 'to be regularly occupied with
sth.' (com., Pl.), also -άoow (Orac. in Ath. Mitt. 25, 399); thence τɛvτaσμóç
στpayyɛía 'hesitation, loitering' (H.).
⚫ETYM From *Tεúµа (or *τεчµα?), which might be identical with Av. šiiao-man- [n.]
‘deed, work’, IE *kieu-mn-. The primary verb is seen in σɛúoµaɩ. The form tɛvtášw
was probably extended from a verb in -τw, -τáw, which ultimately belongs to
►σεúομαι as well.
tɛûtλov [n.] ‘beet, Beta maritima' (Hp., com., Thphr., pap.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Ion. Hell. σεÛTλov.
•COMP As a first member in tεvτλo-qaкñ [f.] 'mix of beet and lentils' (medic.).
Téчpa
1475
•DER TEUTA-íov (Ar., Diocl. Fr., Thphr., pap.; also with initial σ-); -ís (Thphr., Diph.);
Tɛvtloñσσa [f.] “beet-island”, island on the coast of Caria (Th.).
⚫ETYM The proposal by Tovar MSS 10 (1957): 77ff. to derive it from IE *dheu- 'walk,
run' and assume an original meaning 'juicy' (cf. s.v. Tεvíc) should be rejected.
Acc. to Frisk, the interchange τ-/σ- may represent an artificial Atticism or Ionicism.
However, it may instead be a Pre-Greek variation, representing a palatalized dental
*ty.
TεÚXw [V.] 'to manufacture, accomplish, produce', of manual labor, building and
cutting; 'to prepare', often of food and drinks; 'to arrange, cause' (II., epic poet.). <IE
*dheugh- 'hit the mark, meet'>
●VAR Aor. tεūžαt, -αobat, reduplicated tɛtukɛïv, -έoa (with analogical -к-), aor.
pass. τv×³ñvaɩ, fut. τɛúžw, -oµαɩ, pass. tɛtεúžoµai, perf.ptc. tɛtɛvxws (µ 423, with
passive mg.), ind. tétɛvɣa (late), tɛtɛúxatai (N 22), tétuktai, plpf. (¿)teteúxato,
()tetúµnv.
•DIAL Myc. perf.ptc. te-tu-ko-wo-a /thethuk-wo¹a/.
COMP Also prefixed with quot-, εл-, кατα-, etc. Compounds, е.g. τευXεσ-óрoc
'wearing armor' (A., E.), τɛυкo-лλáσtɩç [f.] ‘manufacturing vessels' (Lyc.); ȧ-tεvxńs
'without armor' (E., AP); referring to the verb: vɛo-TεVXĤS = VEÓ-TEUKTOÇ (E 194).
•DER 1. Verbal adjective τUктóç 'wrought, accomplished' (Hom., Theoc.), EU-TUкTOÇ
'well-formed' (Hom., B.); tɛuktóç ‘id.' (Antiph., H., Suid.). vɛó-tɛvкtoç ‘newly
wrought ( 592). 2. tɛûxoç [n.] (mostly plur. -ɛα, -1) ‘device, weapon, equipment'
(epic), sing. 'tool, vesseľ (trag., X., Arist.), 'papyrus case' (pap.), also of the human
body (Hp., Arist.). Thence tεvx-noτýs (ávýp) ‘armed warrior' (A., Call., A. R.),
-ŋotńp ‘id.' (A.), -nε 'armed' (Opp.), -pηs ‘id.' (Orph.), -ïç [f.] plantname,
oxoτvoç Apaßiкń (Dsc.), -ītēs (Plin.). 3. tεúxŋµa [n.] (A. Fr. 375 = 6 M.), either from
Tεuxos or from tɛUXέw, which is found in τετεуñσa 'to be armed' (X 104) for
expected *TεTεvxéσ-(0) aɩ, like tevxno-týs, -tp (which replace TεXεσ- after
wunotýc, ópxnotńs, etc.); à-teúx-nos ‘without armor² = ȧtevxýs (AP, Hell. epic). 4.
tɛúk-twp, -opos [m.] ‘manufacturer, creator' (Man.), -týp [m.] ‘id.' (H., Phot.,
Suid.). 5. tɛñyµa [n.] ‘work' (Dosiad. Ara), teñšıç. kataokevý, roiŋoiç ‘manufacture,
production' (H.), also τúžiɛç [pl.] ‘arts' (Athens IIP), túživ. tɛúživ, лapaσkεvýv
‘equipment' (H.). 6. Tuxios [m.] PN, who fashioned the shield of Aias (H 220: Tuxíoç
KáuE TEÚXWV).
⚫ETYM Beside the thematic root present τɛúxw (aor. τεuчαι) 'manufacture', Greek has
the nasal present tvyxávw (with them. aor. tuxɛĩv) in the more original meaning ‘hit
the mark, meet'. Both verbs are derived from the root *dheugh- 'hit', to which belong
the Skt. stative duhé ‘gives milk', Go. daug ‘is fit' (see LIV² s.v. for further cognates).
See ▸ Tvyxávw.
téqpa [f.] ‘ash' (Il.). <IE *dhegh - ‘burn', *dªeg™³-r-h₂►
•VAR Epic Ion. -pn.
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. v-τεopos 'ash-color' (Dsc., Ath.).
⚫DER Many adjectives, mostly indicating colors: téqp-ɩvoc (Hp.), -aĭoç (Ael.), -aкóç
(beside σлоdαкóç), τà τɛôрaкá ‘ash-colored ointments' (Aet.), -óc (Arist., Herod.),

=== page 764 ===

1476
TÉXVN
TO Tεopóν 'ash-colored ointment' (late medic.), -ác [f.] 'kind of cicada' (Ael.; after
the color, Gil Fernández 1959: 100), -ŋɛ (Nonn.), -wdŋs ‘ash-like' (Thphr., Str.).
Verbs: τεop-óoμaɩ, -ów (also with кaτα-, ảлo-, ¿к-) ‘to be incinerated; incinerate’
(Hell.), with wσis [f.] (Dsc., sch.); -((w [v.] 'to be ash-colored (Dsc., Aret.),
εtéqpiσev. évéлpησεv 'incinerated' (H.).
⚫ETYM Formation like лéτpα, εdpα, xúpa, λaúpa, etc., derived from a root for 'burn'
seen in Skt. dáhati, Lith. degù, TOAB tsäk-, etc., IE *dhegh. This is confirmed by the
gloss Оéлταvoç. άлτóµεvоç kindleď (H.). Like τéopa, Lat. febris 'fever'
presupposes an r-stem.
τéxvη [f.] 'craftsmanship, handicraft, business, art; artifice, trick' (II.). <IE *tek-
'produce', *te-tk- 'build, timber'>
●COMP As a first member e.g. τεxvo-ypάqos [m.] 'performer of rhetoric' (Arist., D.
H.); often as a second member, e.g. ǎ-texvos ‘artless, inapt (IA), also -téxvnc, e.g.
toλv-téxvŋs ‘skilled in many arts' (Sol.).
•DER 1. Diminutives: Tεxv-íov [n.] (Pl., middle com.), -údprov [n.] ‘id.' (Pl. Resp.
475e), úqov [n.] 'workshop' (Suet. Aug. 72). 2. -íτns [m.] 'craftsman, artist' (IA),
with fem. -īti, -iti-kóç, -itɛúw, -iτεíα, -íτεvµα. 3. Adjectives: -кóç 'experienced in
art, practical, artistic, technical (Epich., Pl.), -ŋɛɩ ‘cunningly wrought, artificial'
(Od., Q. S.), -uwv ‘id.' (Opp., AP), -ŋτóc ‘artificial' (Hp., Plu.; from τεxvάoμαi?),
-ŋtɩkós ‘id.' (Plb.). 4. -oσúvŋ [f.] = téxvn (AP). 5. Verbs: a. -άoµai (often with prefix,
e.g. έñ-, ¿к-, пpo-) 'to manufacture by art, contrive or execute cunningly' (II.), with
-ŋqua, -nois, -ńtwp, (-ntóc?); b) -á¢w (often med., also with έπ-, etc.) ‘id.' (IA), with
-aσµa, -aσµóç; c) -ów (лpo-) [v.] 'to initiate into an art' (Gal.), with -wois.
⚫ETYM Derived from *tek-sneh₂- (for the suffix, see ►лáxvη, ►λáxvη, ►λúxvoc).
Sometimes, a basic form *TεкT-σvā is suggested (Skt. tákṣati, etc.), from the
reduplicated IE root *te-tk- 'to build', whence TEкTwv is derived.
Téwę [conj.] 'this long' (Il.). <IE *to- demonstrative pronoun; *teh₂-u-o->
•VAR Epic τños (written τɛíwę, τéwc, tɛłoc).
•DER Tάwç tέwç. Kpñtéç (H.), for *tãç from earlier *tãoç, after téwç; cf. ás = ëwc.
⚫ETYM From PGr. *τãƑoç, identical with the Skt. demonstrative tavat (stem tā-vant-)
'that far', except for the unclear final consonant (see ► čwc).
τ [interj.] always with the ipv.: 'there! here! take this!' (Hom.). <IE *to- demonstrative
pronoun➤
•ETYM The old instrumental of the demonstrative pronoun *to- (see ►τo-), identical
with Lith. tè ‘id.' < IE *teh,. The plur. τñte (Sophr.) was made after reanalysis of tñ as
an imperative. See ► tñvoç.
týßevva, -os [f.] designation of a garment of a distinguished person, Lat. toga (Hell.
and late). <PG(V)►
●Var Also tŋµevis.
•COMP τηẞεvvo-popέw [v.] ‘to wear a t.' (Larissa IIª).
•DER Tηẞevv-íç (Poll., cod. τŋµɛvíc), -Iкóç 'consisting of a t.' (Str.), -εoç 'belonging
to a T.' (Suid.).
Tñlε
1477
•ETYM In antiquity, the word was derived from the Arcadian PN Tηµεvos, Týßevvos.
Fur.: 220, 387 showed that the word is Pre-Greek (variation ẞ/µ and v/vv).
týyavov →táynvov.
τýðɛa [n.pl.] designation of a sea-animal, probably a 'sea-squirt, ascidia' (P 747).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also -ŋ (Nic., Poll.), sing. -oç (Arist. Fr. 309), also týеvov (v.l. -ɛov; Arist.).
⚫DER Diminutive τηеuváкiα [pl.] (Epich. 42). Frisk comments that the form is
doubted by the editors, but that the form, if correct, can be derived from *τηúvη (cf.
Xελúvη) after ỏστрáкiα et al. With some reserve, one may connect the sea-goddess
Tηeús.
⚫ETYM Extensive treatment by Kalén 1918: 20ff., 98ff.: starting from the form τýеvov,
he assumes earlier *On-Ovov and connects the word with Оñσða ‘to suck' and *0úov
'bag' (whence Oúλaкoç). This explanation is nonsensical and typical of older Greek
etymologies. Probably a Pre-Greek word, with variation v/ɛ. On the facts, see
Thompson 1947 S.V. ► τŔеvov.
τýðŋ [f.] ‘grandmother' (Att.). <IE *d"ēdē ‘grandmother'>
•VAR Also -n.
•DER tŋšíç, -ídos [f.] 'father's or mother's sister, aunt' (Is., D., Hell.), τηеíα 'old
woman' (Eust.); лpo-τýð½ [f.] ‘great-grandmother' (D. C., Poll.), ¿л-týðŋ [f.] ‘id.'
(Theopomp. Com., Poll.).
ETYM One may compare Illyr. deda 'nurse' (Krahe IF 55 (1937): 121f.), Slavic words
like OCS dědɩ [m.] 'лpóуovoç', Ru. ded ‘grandfather', Lith. dễ dė, dėdě, dēdis ‘uncle'.
τŃкw [V.] 'to melt, dissolve, consume' (Il.). ◄IE *teh₂- 'melt, decay'>
●VAR Dor. τάкw; aor. tñžαɩ, -ασðaɩ, fut. týžw; often intr. týkoµať ‘to melt down,
dissolve, decay', whence aor. ταкñvaɩ, also τηxеñval, fut. takýσoµaι, also týžoµai,
perf. tétηka (Dor. tétāka), late tétŋypai
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ouv-, KATA-, ÈV-, ÈK-.
•DER 1. THIS (σÚv-, ȧлó-, čк-, etc.) 'melting' (Hp., Arist., Hell.). 2. σúν-, лεрí-τηуμа
[n.] 'that which is melted together, fading away' (Arist.), 'dross' (Chrysipp.). 3.
tŋkɛdwv, -óvos [f.] ‘emaciation, decay, melting' (λ 201, Hp., Pl.). 4. tŋk-tós
'meltable, liquid' (Pl., E., Arist.), -tiкóç (σuv-) ‘dissolving' (Arist., Dsc.).
With zero grade: 5. τaк-ɛpós ‘melting, liquid, soft, tender' (Hp., com.; cf. pavɛpós,
σôɑλɛpóç, etc.), with -έpwσiç [f.] (medic.); also -ŋpós ‘id.' (Dsc.). 6. Uncertain tάkwv
(-ǎ-), -wvoc [m.] name of spiced food, 'sausage, lump of meat'? (Poll. 6, 53 from
Crates Com.).
⚫ETYM The forms τéτηкα (τéτāкα) and τǎкñvαι point to a root *teh₂k- (cf. LIV2 s.v.).
Leaving aside the root-final -к- of Greek, we may compare verbs in other languages:
OCS tajo, tajati ‘to melt', with talɩ ‘melting, fluid, taкɛpóç'; further, Arm. t'a-nam,
aor. t'a-c'i 'to moisten', -c'ay 'to get wet'; OIr. tám ‘death, pest'. Latin has a root
enlargement in *-bh-: tābēs [f.] ‘corruption, putrefaction', tābēsco ‘to melt, decay', etc.
τñλɛ [adv., prep.] ‘in the distance, far away' (Il., epic). ◄IE *k"el- ‘far’▷

=== page 765 ===

1478
T㎝入edácw
•COMP Very often as a first member, е.g. τηλε-кλετóç 'far-famed' (epic Il.), PN
Tηλé-µaxoç, originally “fighting from afar” (opposite άyxé-µaxoç; also Arc. Tηλí-
μаxoç
after άyxí-µaxos).
•DER Adverbs τη\-oũ, -óðɩ ‘id.', -60ε(v) ‘from, in the distance', -óσɛ ‘in the distance,
far away'; also τηλε-daлóç from a far country, far off, distant' after лod-ɑñóç,
άλλобαлóç, etc. (all II., epic); unclear is τηλεμoç (Theognost. Can.), perhaps after
τчμоç, чµоç? Comparative forms τηλо-τάτш (Оd.), -τépw (Hp., Arat.), -Tεpoç (AP),
Tλστα (Orph.; nonce formation after äуxioτα). Further Aеol. π½λu (-01) [loc.] =
tñλe, tηλoũ, with Boeot. Пελε-σtpotídas PN.
•ETYM Harðarson KZ 108 (1995): 205f. proposed that it is a locative *k"ēlh,- from the
root of ►лέλoµat. It is doubtful, however, that the word contained a laryngeal. For
the semantics, cf. Tέλos ‘end, goal, etc.' from the same root.
Tņ入£Oáw →Oá入入w.
τŋλía [f.] ‘table or board with an elevated edge', of the table of a baker, the stage on
which game-cocks fight, a gaming table (com., Aeschin., Arist., pap.), also of a sieve
(Ar. Pl. 1037, sch. onλía); unclear Ar. V. 147 (of a flue?). Uncertain oaλ[ía] 'sieve'
(Suppl. Epigr. 1, 414, Crete V-IVª). On the mg. Chantre RPh. 68 (1994): 77-86.
<PG(V)►
•ETYM A technical expression in -ía, like σxɛdía, kλioia, έotia, etc. In the sense of
'hoop of a sieve', tηλía and oŋλía are often connected with σnow, dia-ττáw 'sieve',
but the derivation is unclear. In the meaning ‘table, board', the connection with
words for 'plane, surface, etc.' (Skt. tala- [n.] ‘plane', Lat. tellūs ‘ground') is still given
by Pok. 1061, but this cannot be upheld as Greek would have a lengthened grade
formation. Also, as Scheller 1951: 62ff. remarks, the special character of the table is
not sufficiently accounted for in this way. Therefore, Scheller considers the meaning
'hoop of a sieve' or 'sieve' as original, and assumes a development to 'table (for
gaming, baking, etc.)'. For such a technical word, substrate origin is likely, and since
the variation τ/σ is typical for Pre-Greek words, we must assume such an origin.
τηlíкos [adj.] ‘of such an age, this old, this young, this large' (Il., epic). ◄IE *to-
demonstrative pronoun>
•VAR Dor. Tα-.
●DER tŋλikóʊde, tŋλikoûtos (after öde via tŋdikóv-dε, etc., oτoç) ‘id.' (Att.).
•ETYM Derived, via a suffix -к-, from IE *tehli- in Lat. tālis (beside OCS tolu 'so
much', pointing to *toli-), which is the demonstrative *tā ‘thus' (see To-) with a
suffix -li-. The form seems to correspond with MInd. tārisa- ‘such a one, of that
kind', but this is derived from Skt. tādŕśa- (Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. tādŕś-). Cf.
►´ηλíкoç and ►ñλíkos.
tñlis, -ews, -10s [f.] ‘fenugreek, Trigonella' (Hp., Thphr., pap.). <?►
•DER THλ-vos of fenugreek', -ov (uúpov) [n.] (Hell.); -ívη = кúτɩσoç (Ps.-Dsc.;
týλ-ɩvos
KÚTIσOS
Strömberg 1940: 43f.), -ítns oĭvos (Gp.); on ►¿π-tηλís s.v.; cf. also on ➤ tāλiç.
•ETYM This plant name has no certain explanation. The older dictionaries compare
Skt. tāla- [m.] 'wine-palm', Lat. tālea ‘stave, cutting', OLith. talokas ‘adult daughter,
tývε\\a
1479
younger girl, but such wild guesses have been abandoned in more recent days (cf.
Mayrhofer EWAia and De Vaan 2008).
tŋlúyɛtos [adj.] epithet of children of unknown mg. and origin (Il., epic). <GR➤
•ETYM The ancients connected both τéλoç 'end' ('latecomer', sch. T on I 482) and
τηλε (born far away', E. IT 829 [lyr.], Simm., H. in tŋ\vyétwv åroikiwv. tŵv µakpáv
dneXovov; but in Úyetos • Inłoũ tis n\ukias toi, yoveÜƠL Yeyovs, Ėrì yńpa naïs
μovoyεvns). For the formation, cf. ►άτpúуετoç and Taüyɛtoç. Janda Glotta 66
(1988): 20-25 connects the second member with λú(w hiccup, swallow' as 'in der
Ferne schluchzend'; not very convincing. Vine 1998: 64-66 connects Avypós 'painful'
and analyzes the word as *τηλε-λúyετos having mysery/pain at a distance'.
τŋμελéw [v.] 'to take care, watch, look after' (E., Pl. Lg. 953a, D. H., Plu.). <?>
•VAR Aor. -ñσai
•Der tŋµéλɛia [f.] ‘care, attendance' (Hp. Ep.), -ía [f.] (sch.), tqueλntýs. ¿nueλntýs
'manager' (H.). With privative prefix à-τηµελητoç, -τws 'careless, uncared for,
neglected' (A. Ag. 891, X.), ȧ-τηµελńc, -έwc, -ws ‘id.' (E. Fr. 184, A. R., Plu.), with
átŋµéλ-ɛia (Plu.), -íŋ (A. R.). Backformation τηµελńc, -έs (H., Phot., Suid.), -έwç,
-ŵs (Aglaias, Max. Tyr.).
•ETYM Without a certain explanation. The semantic and formal similarity with
µελoμa gave rise to several unsuccessful attempts to connect τηuɛλéw
etymologically. Not related to Lith. tēmyti(s) ‘note, imprint in the memory' (a Slav.
LW), Ru. tjámit' 'understand'. Pisani RILomb. 77 (1943-44): 564ff. suggested that
τημéɛα (whence τηuελέw) arose from *τη\ε-µελɛta by syllabic dissimilation, orig.
"to care from afar", which is semantically unconvincing.
τnμεpov [adv.] 'today' (Il., Att). <IE *ki- this'>
VAR Epic Ion., Hell. σnuɛpov; Dor. σáμɛpov.
●Der oŋuepivós ‘present' (Call.).
⚫ETYM From *kɩ-áµɛpov (cf. ► aʊpiov), a univerbation of pronominal к*- 'here, this'
(see ►¿кɛî) and ŋµépa, àµépa ‘day', perhaps via an adjective *kɩ-áµɛpoç ‘belonging to
this day'.
τñµos [adv.] ‘there, then, at that time' (Il., epic poet.), secondarily 'today' (A. R.), after
ñµap, ηµέpα. ◄IE *teh₂-mo- 'at the time, then'>
●var Dor. tãµos.
•DER Nominalized τò tãµov (scil. чápioμa) 'the present decree' (Thess.); extended
τημочτоç (Нes., Call., Nic.), τηµóσde (Theoc., Call.) ‘id.'.
•ETYM Like tέws < PGr. *tā-fosc, from the pronoun to-, tā-, with a suffix -µ- also
found in OCS tamo ‘there', and which may be somehow related to Skt. and Hitt.
-mant- (-μoç to Skt. -mat, like *τã-Fos to Skt. tá-vat). Beside τñµоç, τãµоç stands the
relative ñµoç, âµoç ‘as, while' (Il., epic poet., rare in Hp. and Hdt.).
*.
Tývελλα a ritual exclamation, taken from the cult of Demeter in Paros by Archilochos,
acc. to sch. Ar. Av. 1764, and used in a poem (τηvελλа кαλλíviкɛ Xaip' ǎvaž
‘Hpákλɛɛç [Fr. 119]). ◄?►

=== page 766 ===

1480
Thvíka
•DER Thence τηvελλα кαλλívɩкoç 'hurray! hail!' to a victor (Ar.), and τývελλoç 'to
whom one says Tηvελλa' (Ar. Eq. 276).
⚫ETYM Origin unknown.
τηvíкα [adv.] 'then, at that time' (S., A. R., Theoc.). <IE *to- 'there'>>
VAR Dor. (Theoc.) Tavíкa.
•DER TηVIк-auτα (IA), -ádɛ (Pl., Plb., Ph.) 'id.' (after ève-auτα, -ádε).
•ETYM From the demonstrative pronoun τo-, with the same unclear formation as
►ηvíka.
τvos [pron.demonstr.] Doric for έкɛīvos (Epich., Sophr., Theoc., inscr.). <IE *to-
'that'>
•DER TŋV-ɛĩ = ¿Kɛi (Epich., Theoc., Delph., etc.). -óɩ ‘then' (Theoc.), -w (Theoc.) and
-wɛ(v) (A. R., Theoc., AP) = εкεï¤εv; to tηv-ɛï (old loc.), -w (abl.) Schwyzer: 549f.
•ETYM Formation like кεĭVOÇ, so from *τέ-εvos or τ½-εvos, from the
demonstrative ▸ to- (cf. tñ).
τŋpέw [v.] 'to observe, guard, watch, keep an eye on, provide' (h. Cer., Thgn., Alcm.,
Pi., Att.). <?, IE? *keh,(-i)- ‘observe'>
⚫VAR Boeot. Siα-Tapέw [IIª] is hypercorrect; see Thumb-Scherer 17.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. лapα-, -, diα-, ovv-.
●DER 1. týpŋ-σiç (лαpα-, εлɩ-, dia-, ovv-) [f.] ‘observing, guarding, custody' (Att.,
Hell.), with ларατ½½-σч (H. on áлoчpáðaç). 2. -µα (лаpα-) [n.] 'observation'
(D. H., A. D.). 3. -týs (rapa-, έiil-, toño-, kviʊo-) [m.] ‘guardian, watcher' (Hell.),
-σía (only kaιpo-, τоло-) [f.] 'the observation of the right time or place' (Aristeas,
late). 4. -τpiov = Lat. servatorium (gloss.). 5. -τpa [n.pl.] 'custodial costs' (pap. III³).
6. -tiкóç (лapα-, επ-, diα-, σuv-) ‘observing, keeping' (late). Also 7. εηp-íα [f.]
'attention, care' (Pamphyl.; from έutnp-éw). 8. tnpós [m.] ‘guardian' (A. Supp. 248;
probably back-formation).
ETYM Since the hapax τpós is most probably a back-formation, the prehistory of
τpέw remains obscure. Relationship with Skt. cáyati [v.] 'to observe, feel shame or
anxiety' and OCS čajo̟, -ati ‘¿λµ¼w, époodéxoµai, époσdokŵ' < IE *k”ēi- has been
assumed, but this is unsatisfactory, as Greek shows no trace of the root-final *-i-. On
Skt. cara- 'messenger, watcher', which was earlier wrongly identified with tηpóc, see
Mayrhofer KEWA s.v. (it belongs to car- 'be around = réλoµai).
tŋtáoµai [v.] ‘to lack, be in want, be robbed (Hes. Op. 408, S., E., Pl., Arist.). <IE
*teh₂-(i)- steal, rob'>
●var Dor. tat- (Pi.). Only present, especially tŋtúµevos [ptc.].
•DIAL Myc. ta-ti-qo-we-u, see Plath 1999: 511-519.
⚫DER Beside τητη· åлopía, ëvdεa, oτépησiç 'difficulty, lack, loss'; τýτε· σлávε lack'
(H.) (like XnTεt).
ETYM From the root *teh₂- 'to steal'. As ττη (which is only attested lexically) may
be a back-formation, tηtάoµai is probably a verb in -τáw. However, either way we
have to reckon with a nominal dental stem, as seen in OCS tatɩ [m.] ‘thieve', etc. (IE
*teh₂-t-i-); see ►tnjüoloç.
TYPIS, -LOS, -180s
1481
tñtɛç [adv.] ‘this year' (Att. com.). <IE *ki- + *uet-es- ‘year'>
•VAR Ion. σñτεç (EM), Dor. Hell. σãτɛç (Gela PCair. Zen. IIIª; cf. Mayser 1906-1938,
I: 3: 126), also τãtes, tñdes, tñta (sch., Eust., Suid.).
•DIAL Myc. za-we-te /zawetes/.
•DER TηT-Ivós (Luc. Lex., Hdn. Gr., Phryn., Poll.), σaτ-ɩvós (PCair. Zen., EM) 'of this
year, this year's'; also oŋt-áv(ε)ɩos (Ion., Hell.), σat- (sch.), tòt- (Poll. v.l.) ‘id.' (of
produce of the fields; for the suffix cf. ¿rnet-avós, kpið-, σɩɩ-avíaç); to this σnt-av-
wdŋs ‘id.' (Hp. apud Gal.), ontɛíovs. vέous 'young, recent' (H.).
⚫ETYM The petrified ntr. accus. of an adjective (cf. Tρí-ετεC), built on Féτos and the
demonstrative *ki- (see кɛī). The expected form *KI-(F)εTεÇ seems to have been
replaced at an early (pre-Mycenaean) date by *kiawetes, after the precursor of
semantically related σnµεpov, τημ-, σáμ-, giving Myc. za-we-te, Class. σñtεç, tñtES,
TÃTES.
τηüσɩoç [adj.] 'idle, vain' (y 316 = 0 13, h. Ap., Alcm., B., A. R., Theoc.). <IE *teh₂-(iu-)
'thief'>
•VAR Dor. Tavσɩoç; also τaúσчov. μάταov ‘idle' (H.) (for -σtov?).
•ETYM An isolated poetic adjective. If it originally meant ‘deceptive', it belongs to a
word for 'thief in Skt. täyú-, Av. täiiu-, which are derived from a primary verb
preserved in Hitt. tāie/a-zi ‘to steal', OCS tajiti, 1sg. tajo ‘to hide, conceal'. Neumann
1961: 65 connected the gloss τεyoûv. Avdoì τòv λŋoτýv (H.) with this root, but it is
now supposed that *i would give Lyd. d, not y, in this position. The suffix -σtos may
have been added directly to a noun *τãüç after the pattern of Sημóσoç from dñµoç
(cf. also synonymous έτw-σ10s), so an intermediate form *Tα-τã(c) seems
unnecessary. See ▸τητάoμα.
·tistáopai.
Tɩắpα [f.] designation of a Persian headdress, ‘tiara, turban' (Hdt., A., X.). <LW
Orient.➤
•VAR Also tɩắpaç, Ion. tińpns [m.], tiápis (H.).
•COMP tɩapo-εidns 'like a tiara' (X.), лεpi-τiápα, -ptov 'round headgear' (Tz. with
sch.), etc.
•ETYM Oriental foreign word of unknown origin. Rejected explanations from IE are
given by Bq. Lat. LW tiāra, tiārās.
tißýv, -ñvos [m.] ‘'tripod' (Lyc., EM), tíßnvoc. deßnc, tpíñovs ‘id.' (H.). ◄PG? (S, V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 189 connects ïßiç, íẞwvos ‘basket', which he derives from a Hebrew or
Egyptian word. He remarks that the suffix -ny points to Anatolian origin, which may
perhaps indicate that the word is Pre-Greek.
tɩyyáßapı →kivváßapi.
tiypiç, -104, -180¢ [f.] ‘tiger' (Arist., Thphr., middle com.). <LW Orient.➤
•COMP iллó-τɩуρç ‘'kind of large tiger' (D. C.), Typo-εɩdns 'tiger-colored' (D. C.).
•DER Also the HN Tíypŋs, -ŋtos [m.] (Hdt., X., Arr., etc.), also Tiypls, -los, -ews,
-dos (Arist., Plb., Str., Plu.).
•ETYM Oriental LW, first from Iranian. Acc. to Varro (L. L. 5, 100), the word is
Armenian, while acc. to D. P., Eust., and others, it is Median, with the original mg.
:

=== page 767 ===

1482
TIBAIẞWOOW
‘arrow'. This means that it can be equated with Av. tigri- [m.] ‘arrow', as well as
tiyra-, OP tigra- ‘pointed' (cf. Skt. tigmá- ‘id.'), etc. (from the root of Greek ►σtí(w).
On the hydronym, which is OP tigrā, we may compare Varro ("vehementissimum
flumen") and D. P. (“лоταμòç кiστоÇ ȧлάντшν” 'the fastest river of all'). We have
to reckon with folk-etymological adaptation of a foreign word to Iranian (cf. MP,
Akk. Diqlat 'Tigris'). From Greek came Lat. tigris, etc.
tɩðaɩßwσow [v.] epic word of agriculture, originally popular: of bees (v 106 ‘to collect
honey?), of hens (Nic. Th. 199 'to brood, feed, tend'?), watering the field (Lyc. 622 'to
make fertile, nourish'?), of a quiver (Antim. in PMilan. 17, 37 'to stuff, store up'?).
<?7
•ETYM Formation in -woow, perhaps reduplicated. Fur.: 209 compares Lyc. tideimi-
'son, child', CLuw. titaimma/i- ‘id.', and assumes a Pre-Greek word. This conclusion
is mistaken, as the Anatolian words have a secure IE etymology: the root is *deh,- 'to
suck'.
tɩðaoós [adj.] ‘tamed, domestic, cultivated, mild (A. Eu. 356 [lyr.], S. Fr. 866, Pl.,
Arist.). <PG(S)►
●DER Tɩðασ-ɛúw (also with έê-, лpo-) [v.] ‘to tame, cultivate' (Pl., D., X., Arist.), with
-ɛía [f.] ‘taming' (Pl.), -ɛvoi [f.] ‘id.' (Plu.), -ɛúµata [n.pl.] ‘arrangements for
taming' (Porph.), -ɛvτń [m.] (Ar.), -ɛúτwp [m.] (Opp.) 'tamer, domesticator',
-ɛvtikós [adj.] ‘fit for taming, easy to tame' (Arist.); ȧ-τiðáσευτoç ‘untamed, wild
(Hell.), also ȧ-tíðaσos 'id.' (Ph.). Backformation τiðαì öpviɛç (Arat. 960), Tiêàç
öpvɩs (AP 9, 95).
•ETYM The word τiðaσós differs from other words in -aσos in its oxytone accent and
in its adjectival function (these are probably interconnected). The traditional
connection of τiðaσós with Оñσai ‘suck”, τɩðývη ‘nurse', etc. must be rejected, not
only because of the weak semantics, but also because words in -ασos generally have
Pre-Greek origin.
τíðŋµ [v.] ‘to put (away), lay (down), fix, make; to place, set up, establish, create'
(Hom.). <IE *dheh,- 'put, lay down, create'>
•VAR Aor. čеŋкα, Boeot. ȧv-éε (doubted by Forssman MSS 23 (1968): 7ff. but now
found in two Phocian dedications, see Jacquemin, BCH Supp. IX (1984) 764 [p. 150]
and 769 [p. 152]); plur. Оɛµεv, fut. Onow (all Il.), aor. pass. τéеηv (Att.), perf.
téðŋka, -ɛika, med. -ɛɩµαɩ (IA, Hell.).
•COMP Frequently with one or two prefixes in different mgs., e.g. εëɩ-, kata-, ovv-,
лро-, лρоσ-,бло-.
•DER Many derivatives are treated under separate entries: Ooiç, ► Oɛofiós, ► Oéµis,
▶OéµɛOλa, ▶Oɛµépŋ, ► Ońkn, ▶Owń, ▶Owµós. Further derivatives are: 1. Oñµa [n.],
almost only from prefixed verbs, e.g. ȧváðη-µα [n.] ‘sth. positioned, votive offering'
(Od.), with -ματɩкóç (Plb.). 2. Оéµa (with zero grade) [n.] 'proposition, input, theme,
etc.' (Arist., Hell.), with еεμ-áτov, -atikós, -atítηs, -atíčw, -atioµóç; ȧvá-, éлí-Оεµα,
etc. from ȧvα-, εл-τíеη, etc. 3. Oŋµáv, -@vos [m.] 'pile' (ε 368, Arist., Opp.),
Oŋµwv-tá [f.] ‘id.' (LXX et al.). 4. Oέ-tŋs [m.], as a simplex only in Is. 10, 24 'who
pawns' and Pl. Cra. 389d (nonce formation), especially frequent in univerbations,
|
Tiеúμa\\os
1483
e.g. ảywvo-0é-tnc (: ȧywvɑ Đɛïvaɩ) ‘arbiter at a contesť (IA), with -Оétis, -Oetikós,
-Oetéw, -Oɛoía. 5. Oetýp. todµntýs, épáкtηs ‘who wages' (H.), Sɩaßε-τp 'arranger'
(Pl. Lg., Them.); dɩaðé-tηs Hdt. et al., ȧywvo-0ε-τýp = -τns (verse-inscr. Catana). 6.
еετóç ‘adopteď (Pi., IA); often of the prefixed verbs, e.g. εлíðε-τoç ‘added, artificial'
(Att.); Onτóv. ẞwμóv 'step, base, altar' (H.). 7. еɛTIкóç (to Béσiç) belonging to a 0έσIC,
i.e. concerning adoption, disputation, etc.' (Arist., Hell.); σuvеE-TIKÓS (to σúvėεσIC),
etc. 8. -0ɛ-σía, -ía in σvv-, εк-, εлɩ-Оεoía (1) 'agreement, assignment, etc.' (II.).
•ETYM This important inherited verb was inherited from the PIE root *dheh,-, which
assumes a wide range of meanings: 'put, lay down, make, create, etc.'. The following
survey is limited to forms and words that are directly relevant for Greek. The active
root aorist in Boeot. ȧv-éε corresponds to Skt. ádhāt, OP adā, Arm. ed, IE *h,e-
dheh,-t. The K-aorist Оñкε (Hom.) is also found in OLat. fēced, perhaps already Myc.
te-ke (meaning uncertain), from IE *deh,-k-et. The middle root aorist εTo is
matched by Skt. adhita, from IE *h,e-dhh,-to. The reduplicated athematic present
Tíеnu is found in Skt. dádhāmi, Av. dadami < IE *dí-deh,-mi, etc., where the Greek
reduplication vocalism is probably older (IIr. may have taken its dá- from the 3pl.).
The verbal adj. Oετós is formally identical with Skt. hitá- (for *dhitá-) ‘put,
designated, fit, etc.', as well as with Lat. feced from IE *(-)dh,-tó-; the gloss Oŋtóv
[acc.sg.] is formally identical with Av. OP dāta- [n.] ‘law', Lith. dëtas 'put'. Greek
Oñμa formally corresponds to Skt. dháman- [n.] ‘seat, place, statute, law, etc.', Av.
daman [n.] 'place, creation', IE *deh,-mn; 0ετηp, to Skt. dhātár-, Av. datar- [m.]
'contriver, creator', Lat. con-ditor 'contriver, founder'. The perfect τéОη-к-α is a
Greek innovation (like čστηкα), in opposition to Av. dada, Skt. dadháu. The forms
téðɛika, téðɛifiai were created analogically after ɛika, ɛчμaɩ. Details on the Greek
morphology and inflection are found in Schwyzer: 686ff., 741, 761f., 774f., and 782.
Cf. further forms with comments in LIV² s.v. *dheh,- ‘stellen, legen, setzen; herstellen,
machen'.
tɩðnvŋ [f.] ‘wet nurse' (Il., Pi., S. [lyr.], also Pl., Arist.). <IE *deh,- ‘suck'>
•VAR Dor. (Pi.) -ā.
⚫DER TIеnv-εoμat (sometimes with ȧva-, έк-, σuv-εк-, rarely -έw) [v.med.] 'to be wet
nurse, suckle; to raise, foster' (h. Cer., Thgn., S. [lyr.], also Hp., X., LXX), also -εúoμat
(H.), with -, -nµa, -ntýp, -itýpios (Pl., E., Thphr., AP), -íaɩ, -ɛĩaɩ [f.pl.] (LXX,
Opp.), -εvτñрεç (conj. orac. Sibyll.). Innovated aorist έτОvaτo (Luc. Trag. 94), as if
from *τ0αívoμα. τеŋvós [m.] 'foster father' (LXX, Nic., Plu.), also adj. 'fostering,
feeding' (E., Lyc.). Short forms with expressive gemination: τíτОη [f.] ‘wet nurse'
(Ar., Pl., Thphr.), also 'mother's breast' (Arist.), with tɩtłɛúw (¿k-) [v.] ‘to suckle,
give the breast' (D., Arist.), -ɛía [f.] (D., Sor.); TITеós [m.] 'mother's breast', also of
the breast of the man (Hp., Att.), with -íov, -ístov (com.), -íčoμai (Aq.).
⚫ETYM Reduplicated formation of children's language, derived from the middle aorist
еñσa 'to suck'. For the suffix -v-, cf. yaλaηvós (see ► yáλa).
tɩðúµaλλoç [m.] 'milkweed, Euphorbia Peplus' (com., Thphr., Dsc.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Plur. also -a (AP).
DER -íc [f.] designation of several plants (Dsc., Ps.-Dsc.); see Strömberg 1940: 19.

=== page 768 ===

1484
Tiewvóg
•ETYM Probably a reduplicated fomation; cf. Ovµɛλaía. As all words in -aλλoç are
Pre-Greek (see Beekes 2008: 49ff.), the same holds for this one.
Tiewvós [m.] Son of Laomedon, abducted by Eos (II., Hes., et al.). <PG(V) ►
•ETYM Fur.: 191 compares ɩɩ = ηµépa (sch. Lyc. 941), also = ǹúc, ½ aúpiov (H.);
because of the variation τ/ 0, the word is Pre-Greek.
tíktw [v.] ‘to beget; to produce, generate, cause' (Hom.). <IE *tek- ‘produce’>>
●var Aor. tekɛïv, tekéoðaɩ, fut. téžw, often (and more original) -oμat [med.] (all
Hom.), inf. τɛкɛчoðaɩ (h. Ven. 127, verse-final), perf. tέtoka (Hes.), intr. έvtεtokuĩa
(Ar.), pass. aor. τε×еñvαɩ (Hp., LXX), perf. tétɛyµaɩ (late).
•COMP Also with άлo-, εк-, έv-, etc.
●DER 1. tékoç [n.] ‘child, cub' (Il., epic poet.). 2. tókoç [m.] ‘bearing, birth, offspring'
(II.), 'interest' (Pi., Sophr., Att.), with several derivatives: 3. Toкáç [f.] 'female giving
birth', mostly of animals (since § 16). 4. tokíç [f.] ‘id.' (Hell. pap.). 5. tokadɛia [f.]
'poultry farming', to *τокαdɛúw (pap.). 6. Toкapídiov. usurula (gloss.). 7. Lat. toculliō
'usurer' from Hell. *TOкUλλíwv or *τà τoкúλλia (Leumann Sprache 1 (1949): 207). 8.
τoкηεσσα [f.] 'woman giving birth, fertile' (Hp.). 9. τoкɛĩov [n.] 'hatchery' (Hell.
pap.). 10. tok-ɛïç (epic -ñɛc) [m.pl.] ‘parents' (II.), sing. -ɛúç ‘begetter, father' (Hes.,
A.). 11. tokɛŵveç [pl.] ‘id.' (Heraclit. 74), cf. West Class. Rev. 81 (1967): 127f.). 12.
toketóc [m.] = tÓкоç (Hp., Arist.), cf. лαуετóç to лáуoç et al. 13. TOKI W (also with
Eк-, etc.) [v.] 'to lend with interest, practise usury' (Att., Hell.), with -loµóc, -lotĤc,
-íotpia. 14. tokáw [v.] 'to be close to delivery' (Cratin.). 15. From the present stem
Tiktikóv (pápμaкov) [n.] 'drug for women giving birth' (Ar. Fr. 872). 16. ►¿níteš [f.]
'before delivery, near delivery'; after it кaλλí-τε = кαλλí-τɛкvoç (Hp. Epin.). --17. As
a second member in several univerbations, e.g. μovo-tóкoç ‘giving birth to one cub'
beside E-TOKOÇ 'having an easy birth, giving birth easily' (Arist.) wiht μovo-, εv-
TOкέw, -ía, etc. On ►τéкvov, see s.v.
•ETYM Belongs to the old root *tek- 'to produce', which appears in reduplicated form
in *te-tk- (Skt. 3sg. tāṣṭi ‘fashions', 3pl. takṣati, etc.). Apparently, Greek is the only
language that kept the root in its simple form.
Tíλλw [V.] 'to pluck, tear, pick' (Il.; rare in Att. prose). <?>
VAR Aor. Tiλat, -aσ0at, fut. Tλw, -oчμat (com., etc.), aor. pass. τλеñvα (Аr.),
τɩλñvaɩ (LXX, pap.), perf. med. tétɩλµaɩ, especially the ptc. τɛτλµévos (Ar., LXX),
act. Téτλкα (Hell.).
•COMP Also with ларα-, áño-, лερt-, etc. As a second member in váкo-tɩλτos 'whose
fleece has been plucked, from whom the wool has been plucked off, also -τíλτnç,
-τɩλτέw (com.); to this, as back-formations, the verbs Opvo-τí\\w 'to pluck bulrush',
óλo-τíλλw ‘to pluck entirely' (only ptc. pres., account PLond. Iº).
•DER 1. τλµóç (άлo-, лαрα-) [m.] ‘plucking' (A. [lyr.], Hp., Men., pap.). 2. τíλµa
(àлó-, diá-) [n.] 'something plucked, something torn, sprains' (medic., Herod.,
Theoc.), with -μátov (medic.). 3. tíλoɩç [f.] ‘plucking' (Arist., pap.). 4. tíλtpov [n.]
'plucking fee' (late pap.). 5. лαрατíλ-τpiα [f.] 'plucker', designation of a female slave
(Cratin., Philostr.). Backformations τíλo [m.pl.] 'the fine hairs of the eyebrows'
(Poll.), tλλá· лtepá ‘wings' (H.) (leg. лtíλa?).
Tiμwpós
1485
•ETYM A verb tíλλw (from *τλ-₁w) cannot be an old primary formation. If not a
loan, it must be a denominative from *τíλoç, *tíλov, vel sim. There are no cognates
outside Greek. Frisk suggests a pre-form *лτíλλw, which would belong to лτíλov, via
dissimilation in the compounded forms лapα-, лɛpɩ-, àño-(ñ)tí\\w.
Tilos [m.] 'thin stool, diarrhoea' (Sophr., Poll.). <?>
•COMP iллó-τλos 'horse diarrhoea' (Hippiatr.).
⚫DER TIλάw (often with prefix, e.g. кatα-, ¿v-, пρoσ-, àлo-) [v.] 'to have a thin stool,
to have diarrhoea' (Ar., Hippon., Hippiatr.), with tíλŋµa [n.] (EM). Here probably
also tíλwv, -wvos [m.] name of a fish in the Thracian Sea Prasias (Hdt., Arist.), see
Strömberg 1943: 61f.; cf. also ómσðv-τíλη, Boеot. óлɩto-tíλa [f.] ‘squid' (Stratt., H.),
perhaps after σnatiλn.
⚫ETYM No etymology. The comparisons with Arm. t'rik ‘mist, dung', if from *tiHr-,
OE pinan 'be(come) wet, moist', OCS tina, Ru. tína ‘mud, dirt' < *tiHn-, etc. remain
speculative, since there is no evidence for a root *tiH- or *tH-i- in this meaning. The
same holds for the connection within Greek with tooç. The word τηкw is not
related, either.
tidon →o[入on.
τĩµý [f.] ‘estimate, price, value, honor, honorary office' (II.) 'compensation, penalty,
retribution' (Hom.). <IE *k"ei->
•VAR Dor. -á.
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. ►τчµwpós, ä-tiµos ‘honorless, rightless, despised' (II.),
seldom 'without compensation' (л 431), ‘unpunished, unavenged' (A., Pl.), with ảɩɩµ-
ía, -ín [f.] 'dishonor, defilement' (since v 142), -áw [v.] ‘to dishonor, disdain' (Il., epic
poet., also epic prose), -άw (Il.), -wñvaɩ, -wσaɩ, -óoµαɩ, -ów [v.] 'to dishonor,
ostracize' (IA), to which ȧτíμ-ηtos, átiµ-aσtýp, -wσic, etc.
•DER 1. Tíμ-10c [adj.] 'appreciated, honored, valuable, precious' (since к 38), with
-lótic, -lóoµai; as a first member in ɩɩɩ-ópa [f.] 'expensive time, high prices' (Hell.
and late inscr. and pap.). 2. -nεç (epic -ñc, Dor. -áεç, Pamph. -áƒɛσα [f.]) [adj.]
‘appreciated, honored (Hom., Pi.). 3. -aĩoç ‘highly appreciateď (Diocl. Com.), PN
Tíμatos. 4. -ílos 'honorable' (Cypr.). 5. -ídaı [m.pl.] 'judges of the games' (Arc.-
Cypr.). 6. Denominative verb τчµáw (often with έлɩ-, épo-, ȧño-, ¿v-, έk-, etc.) [v.] ‘to
estimate, appreciate, honor, appraise' (Il.), with tíµ-ŋua, -ŋoiç, Dor. -aσıç, Arc. -aoía
(Chantraine 1933: 84), -ητηs, Boeot. -аτáç, -ητηp, -istýplos, -istikós, -ŋsteúw, -ŋteía;
from the prefixed verbs е.g. εлτíμ-ŋσiç [f.] ‘blame, reproach', -ŋuα -ητńc, etc. From
τчμάw (and from Tíμios?) the back-formation Tчµoç [m.] 'value, price' (Archil.,
Herod., A., Com. Adesp., late prose), with τчμоç (< -óɛç) in τчoç. τív
Övτaç 'ones who are valueď (H.), τчµоúστεроç (Olbia IIIª); τετíµövτal (Elis) from
Tчμów, which may be explained as a denominative from tччoç, but also as analogous
to άτчów. Further many PNs, e.g. Tɩµa-, Tчµŋ-, Tiµo-, Tiµnoi-kpátnc, 'Epyó-tiµos,
Tíμaios, Tíuwv, etc.
•ETYM See ▶tíw.
tɩµwpós [adj.] ‘protecting, protector, avenging, avenger' (Hdt., Att.). < GR▷

=== page 769 ===

1486
TLVáOOW
TITAĺVW
1487
⚫VAR Dor. Tчμάopos (Pi., trag.), Hell. epic τчuñopos (A. R.).
•DER τɩμwp-ía, -ín, -éw, -éofiai, -nois, -nua, -ntýs, -ntýp, -ntikóc, -íšoµai.
⚫ETYM Originally “preserving or guarding tчun", from *τчμα-Ƒop-oç, a univerbation
of Tчun and ►ópáw.
tɩvάoow [v.] ‘to sway, shake, quake' (Il., epic Ion. and Aeol. poet.). <?►
•VAR Aor. tiv-ážai, -ax¤ñvai, fut. -ážw, perf. med. tɛtí-vayuai.
•COMP Also with έê-, ¿v-, àño-, dia-, etc.
●der tɩvay-µós (¿k-, ¿v-, ȧva-) [m.] ‘shaking, quaking' (LXX, Hell. and late pap.),
also -µa (ȧño-, ¿v-) [n.] ‘shake' (LXX, AP), tivák-twp [m.] ‘shaker', of Poseidon (S.
[lyr.], Nonn.), Tɛpα [f.] of the trident of Poseidon (A. Pr. 924); έкtɩvayµóç also
'(suddenly) departing, sale of a producť (pap.); cf. ¿кtivážal. áлokivñoai ‘drive away'
(H.) and ȧлокɩvεν· τò åлéρуεσðαɩ кaì åлоτрέуяν 'run away' Suid. Also -aкτpov [n.]
'winnowing fan' (pap. III³), -ašıç [f.] 'pushing away' (Heph. Astr., EM).
⚫ETYM Without a certain explanation. Acc. to an old hypothesis by Fick, Tivážal, -w
may have been dissimilated from *кivážaι, -w (from kivéw, kivuμα), from which
τɩváσσw (after лаτáσσш, ȧрáσσш, etc.) was later created.
tɩvðaλéoç [adj.] ‘boiling hot' (Nic., Nonn.). <PG?(V)►
•COMP Siα-Tiveaλéos 'id.' (Ar. V. 329; cf. Stá-0εμ).
⚫ETYM Formation from τIvós after avaλéos, etc. The meaning of Tivеóç is
unclear: perhaps 'hot steam', of a kettle (Lyc. 36)? It has been compared with TIVTÓV.
έqłóv “boileď (H., but alphabetically incorrect). The variation 7/0 in the gloss (if it is
reliable) points to a Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 191).
tɩvðupíšw [v.] ‘to twitter' (Call.). <PG?(S)►
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic; cf. τIτí(w (s.v. ► titiyóviov) and
vpíw. The prenasalized
consonant and perhaps the suffix -up- may point to a Pre-Greek word.
tívw [v.] act. ‘to pay, settle, atone', med. 'to make (oneself) pay or atone, punish,
avenge'. ◄IE *kwei- ‘punish, avenge'>
●VAR Ion. i, Att. ĭ; also tɛívvaɩ (Hom., Hes., Hdt.), Cret. ipv. åлo-tɛɩvútw (Vª), Hell.
and late (άло-)τeívuµi, -tívvyµ, -tɩvvúw, Arc. åлv-tɛiétw; aor. tetoaɩ (Aeol. rɛt̃oaɩ),
-aσbai, fut. Tɛlow (Суpг. лɛíσε), -oμai (Hom.), aor. pass. τεσеñvα, perf. tétεσai
(Att.), act. TéτεIкa (Hell.).
•DIAL Myc. ptc. med. qe-ja-me-no /kei¹ameno-/ (interpreted as a sigmatic aorist by
LIV², as opposed to Lejeune 1958-1963: 305-6, 300% and DELG s.v.).
.COMP Also with prefix, especially άло- and έк- (also лроσ-αло-, лроσ-εк-, etc.).
•DER Tíσiç [f.] 'payment, compensation, penitence, punishment, revenge' (Il., epic
Ion. poet.); from έKTÍVw: EKTIσIÇ (also -ɛ- after τɛiσal, τɛíσw), Arc. čστεσç [f.]
'payment, atonement' (Att. Hell. and late), εкτεoµa [n.] ‘id.' (Pl., Hell.); from
ånotívw: ànótiois [f.] ‘repayment' (Ath.), ảлótéσµa [n.] ‘id.' (Amorgos). Also tituç
in TITUƑOÇ [gen.] ‘amends' (Gortyn); τíταç [m.] ‘avenger, avenging' (A. Ch. 67 [lyr.]),
Dor. for *τí-τnç; also designation of an official (Gortyуn), τíται· εüлороι, ½ katŕyopol
Twν ȧpxóvτwv 'resourceful; accusers/prosecutors of rulers' (H.); also à-τíταç 'non-
payer' (A. Eu. 256 [lyr.]).
•ETYM The difference between the Ion. and Att. presents shows that τivw goes back
to a thematicized nasal present *TɩVFW. Dialectally and in Homer, Greek preserves
the athematic formation τɛívuμαι (mostly written tiv(v)-; see Wackernagel 1916: 77ff.
with important details), which has a secondary full grade replacing *τĭvvμαι (perhaps
after aor. Tɛíσaσðaι, fut. τεíσoμα); Arc. ȧлv-τεléтw was also built on the latter forms.
Later attestations are tɛɩσðñvaɩ, tételofial, téteika (all innovations). Regarding
cognates of the Greek verb, it is now customary to distinguish three roots *kwei-: 1.
'to observe' (whence probably Gr. ►τíw), 2. ‘to gather, pile up' (whence perhaps Gr.
►лoчέw), and 3. 'to punish, avenge' (see LIV²). The original Greek nu-present
*τívʊται has a formal counterpart in Av. cinuuant- [ptc.pres.act.] 'penitent (?)' <
*kwi-nu-ent-. Others connect *k"ei- 1. and 3., assuming a semantic development 'to
observe, animadvertere' > 'to avenge, punish'. This allows comparison of Skt.
thematic cáyate ‘avenge, punish' (which would be Gr. *tɛiɛtaɩ = IE *k"ei-e-toi; cf.
Arc. άл-τεετw [act.]), to which the act. Av. ci-kaiiat 'should pay/mend,
άлotɛvútw³ (with reduplication; cf. Skt. cikéti ‘observes') is related. In Anatolian, we
may now compare Lyc. A ttiti, B kikiti ‘to fine'. More cognate Avestan forms are
given by LIV² s.v. The ti-stem in tíσɩç is compared with Skt. ápa-citi- [f.] ‘requittal,
IE (-)kwi-ti-. Within Greek, the o-grade h₂-stem лоvý 'penalty' is related,
corresponding to Lith. káina 'price', and found in Av. kaēnā- 'punishment', IE *k"oi-
nh,-.
τíлτε [adv.] 'why then?' (Hom., A. Ag. 975 [lyr.]). <GR➤
•ETYM Various explanations have been given throughout time. Szemerényi assumed
syncope from TÍ лоτε (Szemеrényi 1964: 218f.); Kretschmer compared τíлτε with Lat.
mihi-pte, suā-pte, etc.; others equated *τɩɩ-лε and Lat. quippe (e.g. Schwyzer: 266).
Recently, Lillo Glotta 70 (1992): 15-19 brilliantly solved the problem by arguing that
the word represents *kid-kwe (thus an older variant of tí tɛ), giving *kitk″e >
*kwik"te > τíNTE.
τis [pron.] 'who, which, what?'. <IE *k"i- interrogative and indefinite pronoun>
●VAR Ntr. tí, gen. téo (Ion.), toũ (Att.), younger tívoç; dat. téwɩ, tŵi, tívɩ; acc. tíva,
etc.
●DIAL Thess. KƖÇ, Arc. and Cypr. σıç, El. and later Lac. τp. Myc. displays the old
labiovelar in jo-qi = later öτ(T)ɩ.
•DER Enclitic tɩç, tɩ, etc.: indefinite pronoun 'some(one), whoever, etc.'.
⚫ETYM Identical with Lat. quis, quid, Hitt. kuiš, kuit, etc., from IE *ki-s, ntr. kwi-d.
The gen. Téo corresponds to OCS česo, Go. huis 'whose', from IE *kwe-so. Av. cahiiā
received the nominal ending *-sio. In Greek, the dat. Téwɩ, Twi was formed after τéo,
TOŨ. The accus. τíva added the ending -a to older *tív (= Hitt. kuin, Av. cim, etc.),
just like čv-a, Zñva, etc. From this point, the forms τív-oç, τív-ɩ, etc. with stem-final
-v- spread (already Hom.). The old ntr.plur. *kih, is found in ä-σσa, ä-tta (= ä-
τɩvα), and in ǎσσɑ, äττα. It arose by reanalysis of ò̟ëлoîá σσα as óñoť äσσα, etc. As
an independent element, it was preserved in Boeot. ►τá, Megar. σá 'why, how?'.
titaivw →tɛivw.

=== page 770 ===

1488
titavog
Tion
1489
títavos [f.] ‘chalk, plaster, crayon, marble-scrapings' (Hes. Sc. 141, Arist., Str., medic.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR In H.: tíτavos and tétavoç. kovía, õpioµa, äσßeστos ‘dust, plaster, unslaked
lime'.
•DER_tíτavıç [f.] (medic.); τävääǹ póα. чwτǹ ½ λεvкóxpooç ‘of pale
complexion', Tɩτévaç yεwμévaç 'rubbed with chalk' (H.).
•ETYM Like most expressions for ‘chalk', the word must be a loan. A different
hypothesis is offered by Reichelt IF 40 (1922): 47, who connects Skt. śvitná- 'whitish',
as well as the TN Tɩτávη, Aeol. Lac. IIɩtávŋ, and (with different anlaut) кíττavoç. ǹ
коνιαкǹ τíτаvоçc (H.) (assuming a cross with кóvic?). However, given the variation
ɛ/ɩ, the word is probably Pre-Greek.
títüŋ •VAR TIT¤ós. →tiðývn.
tɩtɩyóvov [n.] name of an insect, like the tétt§ (Epil. Com., Paus. Gr., EM, Eust.).
<?7
•DER Backformation tɩtíç, -ídoç [f.] name of a small bird, also ‘vagina' (Phot.).
Besides the birdnames títupos, titúpas (H.).
•ETYM Presupposes *τɩɩуáv (cf. τpvywv, xελidwv, ảŋdóv, which all have by-forms
in -óvlov). Zenodotus read τƐτριуŵταç (B 314) as τīτíšovταç, assuming an
onomatopoeic verb tītí\w ‘chirp’.
τíτλoç [m.] ‘title, inscription' (NT, Lyd.), ‘tattoo' (sch. Hermog.). <LW Lat.▷
•VAR Also [f.].
•ETYM A loan from Lat. titulus.
Tɩτρwσкw [V.] 'to wound, harm, damage' (IA). <PG(V)►
VAR Also τpww ( 293); aor. τpwσal, fut. τpwow (Il.), pass. aor. τpшеñvat, perf.
tétpwµaɩ (Pi., IA), act. téτpwka (late).
•COMP Also with prefix, e.g. kaτa-, έê-, the last in the sense of 'to have a miscarriage',
with the athematic root aorist εέtpw). ¿¿eßλáßŋ, ¿¿ekórn ǹ kúŋois ‘the conception is
terminated' (EM), subj. ¿êtp✪.
●DER 1. tpw-ois [f.] 'wound' (Hp., Arist., Thphr., Plu.). 2. -σµós [m.] ‘miscarriage'
(Hp., Dsc.). 3. -μa (Ion., Dor. [Theoc. 21, 50]), Att. τpañµa [n.] ‘wound, damage, leak
(on ships), setback, defeat', with diminutive -µáτiov, -µatías, -ins [m.] ‘wounded,
injureď (Pi., IA), -µatikóç ‘belonging to injuries' (Dsc.), -µατiαãoç 'wounded (pap.),
-ματíчw ‘to wounď (IA), -µatiσµóc [m.] (Ruf.). 4. -tóç ‘vulnerable' (Ø 568). To this,
semantically independent, εкτpw-µa, -ois, -σµós ‘miscarriage' (Hp., Arist.), with
-WτIкÓç (Plu.), -μatiкóç, -µατiaïoç, -µατσµóç (gloss.).
•ETYM Because of the -v- in Att. τρаñµα, τpa̸- used to be explained as from a long
diphthong τpwv-, and connected with répuç. Alternatively, Att. τрачµа has been
considered an innovation after Opañμa, Opaúw. In this case, Tτршσкw should be
derived from a root *terh¸- (cf. LIV² s.v.). It rather seems, however, that influence of
Opaчua is most improbable. Moreover, introduction of vocalism -av- in a root τpw-
would be incomprehensible. We have to start from a root τpw-/ τpav-, which cannot
be explained in IE terms. In Pre-Greek, however, a variation av/ w is found: see Fur.:
237, 242, 301³², 387 (kaσaúpa, -áç / кaσwpíç; σañσaž / σwoikes; tpaúžava / τpwžavov,
as well as añµα/ ¤ãµα). This means that the word is Pre-Greek; the connection
with Skt. turá- ‘wound, ill' should then be discarded, and connection with *teru-
(TÉpuc) 'soft, weak' is semantically unconvincing. Peters 1980b: 328ff. tries to revive
Martinet's theory of labialized *h, but this theory is now generally rejected. The root
*terh in LIV should therefore be deleted. For *terh,- 'to pierce', see τɛipw,
►τετpαívш, ►τɛεрáµшν, τéРετpov, etc.
tit(t)vßíšw [v.] ‘to twitter', said of swallows and other birds (Ar., Babr.), ‘to cluck',
said of partridges (Thphr. Fr. 181). <ONOM
•COMP Also with ảµqɩ-.
ETYM An onomatopoeic word, like Skt. tittirá- 'partridge', tit(t)ibha- bird name
'Parra jacana', Lith. titilvis 'sanderling', tilvikas 'snipe, sanderling, (German)
Brachhuhn'. These words are similar, but independent formations.
TÍTUρos [m.] 'he-goat' (sch. Theoc. 3, 2; -íç Phot.), 'bell-wether' (Dor.; Serv. ad Verg. E.
Prooem.), = Σáτvpos (Ael.), but Títupoɩ are distinguished from Σáτupoɩ and Σvo
(Str. 10, 3, 15); also designation of a short-tailed ape (Thphr.; cf. oάτupoç); name of
a shepherd (Theoc., Verg.), father of the poet 'Eлixapµos (Suid.), Tɩtupɛía yuvá
(Larissa IIIa). Also glossed as кáλauos 'reed, etc.' (H.). ◄PG?(V)►
•VAR Also τi- (metrical lengthening?).
•DER TITÚρ-ivos (avλóc) 'shepherd's whistle' (Ath., H.); -tστńc [m.] 'whistler' (App.),
after кiapiστns, etc. On títupos = opviç 'bird' see titɩyóviov.
ETYM Fur.: 184 compares S10úp-auẞos, which would contain a variant of tɩτup- with
a Pre-Greek suffix -außoç. Previous proposals include connection with ►σáτupoç,
from IE *tu- 'swell' (LIV² s.v. *teuh2-), by Solmsen IF 30 (1912): 32ff. This is rejected
by Nehring Glotta 14 (1925): 158ff., who considers both words to be loans from Asia
Minor. Deroy Par. del pass. 17 (1962): 421ff. connects -τupos with Taupoç 'bull'
(which would also stem from Asia Minor). See Si0úpaμẞoç.
titúokoliai [v.] 1. 'to aim' with weapons, etc.; also mentally ‘to aim at, strive for
(Hom., Theoc., AP); 2. ‘to make ready, prepare, harness' (Il.), in this mg. post-Hom.
-úσкw) (B., Arat., Lyc., etc.). <IE *dheugh- 'hit the mark, meet’▷
•VAR Only present and imperfect.
⚫DER ALSO TETÚσketo. kateokeváčɛto ‘prepareď, tεtúσkwv. ¿µqaví¶wv 'manifesting'
(H.) (cf. also τεTukeĩv, -éoðaɩ s.v. ► tɛúxw).
•ETYM Reduplicated oк-present from ► tɛúxw, ‣tvyxáva), from *tɩ-tux-okoµai (or
TI-TUK-?). On the use in Hom., see Trümpy 1950: 110f.
titw =Titavec.
Tion [f.] 1. 'close-grained wheat, einkorn, Triticum monococcum' (Arist., Thphr., etc.).
2. name of an insect = σíλon, tíλon (Poll., Phryn., Ael.). 3. mg. unclear in Ar. (Ach.
920, 925), acc. to sch. Rav. ad loc. and Suid. s.v. Opvaλλíc = σion. <1. ? 2. PG? 3. ?>
•Der tíqivos [adj.] 'belonging to the eirikorn' (Gal., Orib.).
•ETYM 1. and 3. unknown. On 2., see Fur.: 167, 249, 261: Pre-Greek assibilation, thus
from *. Further related to Lat. delpa.

=== page 771 ===

1490
TiQOÇ
tĩqoç [n.] ‘soggy place, marsh, pond' (Theoc., A. R., Lyc.). <?>
●DER tiqwdnç ‘soggy' (Str.), tíqia öpvea• tà ¿v toiç ëλeσɩ yɩvóµɛvɑ ‘which are born in
the marsh-meadows' (H.).
•ETYM Frisk and others analyze it as τi-qoç (gender like in λoç, tévayos), and
connect ti-λoç, t½-кw with a labial suffix, comparing Lat. tābēs. This is phonetically
impossible, and the etymology simply remains unknown. See tiλoç.
Tíquov [n.] 'Scilla autumnalis, squill' (Thphr.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM The variation in τíquov / ►quov points to Pre-Greek origin (Fur.: 391).
Tíw [v.] 'to honor, estimate, appreciate' (Il., epic poet.). <IE *k" eh,-i- 'observe, hold
诉
back, honor'>
•VAR The epic interchange i/ ĭ is metrically conditioned; later only tiw. Aor. tiσaɩ,
fut. Tíow, perf. ptc. pass. τετчμέvoç.
•COMP
Rarely with лро-, εpɩ-.
лоλú-τi-τоç 'highly honored' (Orac. apud Hdt. 5, 92), à-τí-ετOÇ 'unhonored' (A.
[lyr.]), 'not honoring' (E. [lyr.]), also à-tíɛɩ (Thgn. 621), perhaps nonce formation
opposed to preceding tiɛɩ; after this àτíovσ (Orph. L. 52). On ►àtíšεɩ, see s.v.
●DER On ➤ tiµń, see s.v.
ETYM The connection with τívw 'to punish' depends on the reconstruction of the
root of tíw. On the basis of Slavic material cognate with Tiw (OCS čajati 'to expect,
hope for’, SCr. čäjati ‘to wait'), Derksen 2008 opts for a reconstruction *kweh,i-, with
internal laryngeal. The same would work well for OCS kajati sę 'to repent', in spite of
semantic doubts by Derksen 2008 s.v. The Skt. verb 3pl. act. cáyanti, ptc. med.
cayamāna- (RV) ‘to observe, honor', cãyú- [adj.] ‘showing reverence', etc. are also
easily explained from a root *k"ehi-, whereas a reconstruction without laryngeal
would force one to assume a so-called Narten present for PIE, a type for which most
evidence has now disappeared. If we look at Greek, the alternation between i and ĭ in
Homer could also be explained by an alternation *keh,ie/o- / *khie/o- (note that
-τTOÇ is long as well, which could be from a metathesized *khi-to-), where the
latter form would give tiε/o-, while in the former, *tēje/o- may have been replaced by
τiε/o-. Moreover, tiµý is best explained as from a root with laryngeal, instead of
assuming a suffix *-smeh₂-. The root formed an i-present *kweh,-i-, and a vestige of
the old root *kweh,- may be found in Gr. ► τòpέw.
For the shift meaning in Greek, Lat. observāre 'to observe, honor, etc.' has been
compared.
Tλnμwv •VAR Tλñvai.
Taλáσσal.
τµńyw [v.] ‘to cut, cleave, divide' (Il., epic). < GR➤
⚫VAR Аor. τμñžαι, -ασ0αι; Aеol. τµāžai (Pi., Balb.), fut. τunsw, them. aor. Siéτμǎуov
[1sg.] (ŋ 276), pass. (die)tµáyev [3pl.] (Hom.), Hell. and late tµŋyñval.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially ȧлo-, Sα-.
TÓKOS
1491
•DER ȧлo-tµýš, -ñyoç [adj.] 'cut off, steep' (σколк, A. R. 2, 581; cf. άлoppó); also
-tµnšis [f.] ‘cutting off (late), чµñyos. ….. Boútuŋua 'furrow'; also tµŋyas. yatóµos,
àpoτnp 'cleaving the ground, plougher' (H.).
⚫ETYM Enlargement of tμŋ- in tμŋ-tóç, -Оñvaι, etc. (from τéµvw), after several
models. The short vowel in τµáyɛv (to έτµáyηv) recalls έppáyŋy, έáyŋv. Perhaps this
was the origin of the hapax diéτµayov. Further, tµñžai, tµýžw were built on ρñžai,
pŕšw, etc.; see Chantraine 1942: 392 and 400. Güntert 1914: 132 supposes a cross with
Onyw (еáyw) ‘'to whet'; Chantraine 1942: 330 attempts to find a semantic
differentiation from τéµvw. The Doric forms with τµã must be secondary; see the
discussion in DELG s.v.
TO- [pron.] 'this, that; the' (Hom., epic poet., Dor.). <IE *to-, teh₂- 'the, that'>
•VAR In acc. tóv, fem. týỷ (Dor. táv), ntr. nom.acc. tó, plur. nom. toí, fem. taí, ntr.
nom.acc. τá, etc.
⚫ETYM Inherited demonstrative pronoun, used in post-Homeric Greek as the article,
and in Homer as a demonstrative and anaphoric pronoun. Ionic-Attic replaced the
old nom. τoí, tai with oi, ai, after the nom.sg. ó, å. The formation is identical with
Skt. acc.sg. tám, tắm, tád, nom.pl.m. té, etc., and with Gm. forms like Go. acc. msc.
þan-a, fem. þo, ntr. þat-a, plur. þai. A new nom.sg. was created in Lith. tàs, tà, OCS
to, ta, to, etc. See ▶ó, ǹ.
toɩ [encl.pron.] ‘to you', dat.sg. corresponding to IA σoí (epic Ion., Dor. Aeol.), from
► σú. <IE *tu- 'you'>
•VAR Dor. also accented Toí.
⚫DER Hence Att. Tot as an enclitic pcl. 'indeed, truly, etc.'. Also at the beginning of a
sentence and with orthotonic accent, τoi yáp, Tolyáp (epic poet.).
⚫ETYM The atonic particle corresponds to Skt. te. For the stressed sentence-initial
particle, connection with the demonstrative to- has been proposed; see Schwyzer
1950: 580ff., who also discuss strengthened toιуápτoι, Toɩуapov, as well as toívov,
μévtoɩ, etc.
toltopiaow →tavdapúlw.
Toчos [demonstr. pron.] 'such, such as' (especially poetic, Il.+). <GR>
•VAR fem. Toía (Ion. -ŋ), ntr. toĩov.
⚫DER TOLOŬTOC, Totóσde 'id.' (esp. IA prose) built on ouτoç, ödɛ.
⚫ETYM Greek formation built on the pronominal stem τo-. The origin is disputed:
*tosio- (< gen.sg. *tosio) or *toiso-? The second option is chosen by W. Petersen
TAPA 46 (1915): 59ff., who starts from the gen.pl. toíwv = Skt. téṣām, ON þeira, from
PIE *toisom to *to-, Gr. ►τo-. Thence, the other case forms, e.g. τołoɩ, toĩoç, etc. In
the same way, лоïoç, oíoç could have been derived from noiwv, oïwv (= Skt. kéṣām,
yéṣām); after this also arose the other words in -oчoç.
TOTXOS →TEIXOS.
TÓKOS →TÍKTW.

=== page 772 ===

1492
tóλμn
Tóλμŋ [f.] 'boldness, courage, daredevilry, dauntlessness, brashness' <IE *telh₂- 'raise,
weigh, bear'>
VAR -un is rare; usually róλuă (IA), cf. below on τоλμηεiç, -μáш; Dor. Tóλua (Pi.).
COMP ǎτoλμoç 'without daring, daring nothing' (Pi., IA), лάντоλμоç 'daring
everything' (A., E.); ȧлóτоλμоç 'dauntless, courageous' (late) from ȧлоτоλμáш.
●DER 1. todµýɛis, Dor. -άɛç 'courageous, dauntless, enduring' (Hom., Pi.). 2. -ŋpós
'id.' (Att.), pía [f.] (Hell. pap.). 3. Denominative -áw (v.] 'to show courage, bring
oneself to courage; to act in spite of oneself, endure' (Il.), Hdt. -έw, aor. -ñσaɩ, etc.,
also with ảлo-, εл-, кατα-, etc. Thence -ŋua [n.] ‘venture, risk' (Att.), -ŋoɩç [f.]
'reckless deed' (Pl. Def.), -nτns [m.] 'daredevil' (Th., Ph.), more popular -ŋtíaç ‘id.'
(Com. Adesp.), -nτiкós = -ŋpós (late). 4. hypocoristic τóλuλλoç [m.] 'daredevil'
(Theognost. Can.).
ETYM PIE *tolh₂-m(e)h₂-> PGr. *tolmǎ-. The root-final *h₂ of the PIE pre-form was
lost before it could vocalize to *a. Traditionally, this loss is ascribed to the influence
of the *o in the root, a change known as “De Saussure's Law"; cf. Beekes 1969: 238-
242. Van Beek 2009 now disconnects the laryngeal loss from the presence or absence
of the o-grade, and ascribes it to the environment *-VLHNV-. The usual form τóλμα
arose as a back-formation from toλµáw. See taláσσai.
τоλúлη [f.] a clew of wool or yarn', also metaphorically of onion bulbs, pumpkins,
ball-shaped cakes (Ar. Lys. 586, Eub., S. Fr.1102, LXX, AP, etc.). <PG>>
•DER TOλvлεÚw 'to wind wool or yarn into a clew' (Ar. Lys. 587 [anap.], ambiguous t
137), mostly metaph. 'to instigate, accomplish with difficulty, undergo' (epic poet.
Il.), also with к-; hence toλvëεvµα [n.] = toλúñŋ, -evtikós (Phot., Suid., H.).
•ETYM Maurice RPh. 65 (1991) connects Tuluávτηs 'cushion-cover-weaver', which
he relates to Myc. tu-ru-pte-ri-ja, assuming influence of кopúvη or τopúvη to
account for the vocalism. Fur.: 340 compares Luw. taluppi 'clump of dough' (and
MoFr. talouppe); the word may have o < a before v. A recent attempt at an analysis
has been made by Melchert Orpheus 8 (1998): 47-51: there is a Hitt. verb tarupp-" 'to
gather, collect', with the rare variant talupp- (2x); cf. Kloekhorst 2008: 850. The o
may come from a before u, like in Pre-Greek. The word must belong to the Pre-
Greek substrate, (a language cognate to) which must have spoken in large parts of
Anatolia as well. This may explain why a similar word is found in Anatolian.
τóμovpoι (-oñpot) [m.pl.] designation of the priests of Zeus in Dodona by Strabo
7.7.11, who cites it as a v.l. in л 403; voc.sg. τóµoupe. µávti (Lyc. 223). Acc. to H. =
rpoqñtai, iepɛīs, oiwvoʊkóroi, diákovo ‘interpreters (of the oracle), priests, augurs,
officials (of a temple)'. <PG?>
⚫ETYM Unexplained. Strabo (l.c.) interprets the word as *τoμáp-oυpot = p-
Qúλaкɛç 'guardians of the mountain Tóuapos (Tuápoc)' near Dodona. Possibly a
Pre-Greek term.
Tov opúw [v.] 'to murmur, speak inarticulately, gurgle' (A. Fr. 298 = 630 M., Ar.,
Herod., Luc., Opp.). <PG>
•VAR Aor. -úσat, fut. -ú\w; pres. also τovéopíšw and tovėpúšw.
•COMP Rarely with úлo-, diα-.
TÓZOV
1493
•DER τovе(o)puσμós [m.] 'murmuring' (Phryn.), tovepστns = yoууvσtńc (Aq.);
tovėpuotńs
backformation τovеpúç. qwvý 'voice' (H.).
▸
▶
⚫ETYM Expressive reduplicated formation in -Oop-, with dissimilation to τ- in the
initial syllable. It belongs to Oópuẞoc, Opvλéw, Opέquat, whereas the suffix is the
▸
same as in yoyyúčw, ypúšw, óloλú(w, etc. Gr. Tove oluyέw 'to gargle, cluck'
(Pherecr.) has a similar meaning. On toðopúðσæv, see under tavapúчw. = The
formation, with prenasalization, is clearly Pre-Greek (Fur.: 382).
•
τóv¤wν [?] · лαрȧ Koрívvη εлì væτiaiov (votißiov codd.) кpéwç övoμa 'name of the
flesh on the spinal vertebrae (Corinna)' (H.) = fr. 685 P. <?>
•ETYM Bechtel 1921, 1: 310 supposes that it denotes a special delicacy, connecting
Tévew 'to be a glutton' (see Tévens).
TÓVOS →TEívw.
τóžov [n.] 'bow', plur. 'shooting device(s), (bows and) arrows' (II.). On the plur. see
Schwyzer 1950: 43 and 51, Chantraine 1953: 31f. <PG>>
DIAL Myc. to-ko-so-ta = τоčóτaç, to-ko-so-wo-ko.
●COMP tošocópos [m., f.] ‘bearing the bow, bowbearer', epithet of Apollo, Artemis
and others (epic poet. 483, also Hdt.), tožókλutos ‘famous for the bow' (Pi., B.),
also kλutótožoç having a famous bow', epithet of Apollo (Hom., B.), ảyкvÀótočOS
'having a crooked bow' (Il., Pi.).
=
●DER 1. toč-ótηç, Dor. -óτaç [m.] ‘archer' (II.), -óτɩç [f.] (Call. et al.), meaning
unclear in Plb. 8, 7, 3 (not with LSJ 'loophole for shooting arrows'); also plant name
ȧpτεμσía (Poet. de herb.). 2. -ĭτıç [f.] (vɛupá) ‘bowstring' (Hero, Ph. Bel.), epithet
of Artemis (Cos); uncertain -ɩɩŋoía = àpteµoía (Ps.-Dsc. 3, 113; read -îtıç?). 3. -íaç in
Tošiov ẞovvós. toũ Аƒóλλwvoç toû ¿v Σiêuŵvi ‘of Apollo in Sicyon' (H.). 4. -ía [f.]
name of a goddess (mentioned beside "Aptεuç; Gortyn). 5. -oσúvŋ [f.] ‘archery,
bowmanship' (N 314, E. [lyr.]). 6. -tavoí [pl.] 'people born under the sign of točótns
(Sagittarius)' (Cat. Cod. Astr.). 7. -ɛú¢ [m.] myth. PN (Hes. Fr. 110, 4), hypocoristic
like Tótos (Corinth. vase). 8. Diminutive -áptov [n.] (Luc. et al.). 9. -tкóç 'belonging
to the bow, the archer', -tкn (Tεxvn) [f.] (Att.), -tкóv (páρμакov) [n.] ‘arrow poison'
(Arist., Str. et al.); also for *τоεоTIKÓÇ. 10 -WTÓÇ = arcuatus (gloss.). 11. Denominative
verb τo-ɛúw 'to shoot with bow and arrows' (Il.), also кατα-, άлo-, ¿ê-, etc. Thence
-ɛvua [n.] ‘projectile, arrow' (IA), -εvous [f.] 'shooting with bow and arrows' (Lib.),
-ɛía [f.] ‘id.' (Hell. and late); -ɛvτńs [m.] ‘archer' (Y 850 et al.), also -ɛvτýp [m.]
(Arat., Nonn.); mostly referring to the constellation (metri causa for -óτns, -evtc),
[f.] -ɛúτεɩpα (Opp.), -ɛvtiкý [f.] ‘archery' (Gal.). 12. Toε-ášoμа to shoot at someone
with bow and arrow' (Hom., Opp.), -á(w ‘'id.' (Heracleit. All.), also with εл-; derived
from plur. τóža?
•ETYM Gr. tóžov replaces inherited ẞtóc: in Homer, τóžov is already the more usual
word for 'bow'. As the Iranians, and especially the Scythians, were famous archers,
one might suspect τóчov to be a loan from an Iranian language; compare MoP taxš
'bow, arrow' and Scythian PN Tóžapıç, Tážaкıç. However, the Mycenaean
attestations disprove this possibility. Thus, τóšov could be of Pre-Greek origin. Latin
taxus 'yew-tree' could also be related, but it cannot be a borrowing from Greek.

=== page 773 ===

1494
TOMá GLOV
toráčiov [n.] ‘topaz”, probably also of chrysolite and of other stones (LXX, Str., D. S.,
Apoc.). <PG(V)>
●VAR Also -a¢oç [m.] (AP, J., Orph. et al.), -ačov [n.] (Eust.).
⚫ETYM A loanword which (according to Iuba in Plin. HN 37, 108) was taken from the
language of the Trogodytes, and named after an island of the same name in the Red
Sea (likewise HN 6, 169). The form taßáσios, -is (PHolm.) presents another variant.
Fur.: 155, 344 assumes that the variation τaßáσ- / τoлá‹- points to a Pre-Greek word.
tóños [m.] ‘place, region, space; subject of a speech, etc.' (IA since A.). <IE *top-o-➤
●COMP toлápxès [m.] head of a district, esp. in Egypt; thence -έw [v.] -ía [f.] (LXX,
раp., etc.); ǎτолоç 'not at its place, out of place, unusual', évτóлоç 'situated in the
region, indigenous' (Pl., etc.).
●DER 1. Toлкóç 'local' (Arist., pap., medic. et al.). 2. tov [n.] 'place (of burial)'
(PLond., inscr. Asia Minor). 3. -íτns [m.] 'inhabitant of a place' (St. Byz.). 4. -ɛĭov
(-½ïov) [n.] ‘cord, rope' (com., Call., Hell. inscr.). Denominative verbs: 5. τoлá¶w ‘to
aim at a place or a point, suspect, guess' (Att.), also with no-; thenсе τолаστкÓS
'inventive, sharp-witted' (Men.), úлоτолασдóе [m.] 'suspicion' (J.). 6. τолíчw 'to
localize', oμós [m.] 'localization' (comm. Arist.), εктолí(w 'to remove', thence
-Loµós, -lotikós (Arist., Hell. and late). 7. úлotorέoµai, -éw (-ɛúw) ‘to suspect,
surmise' (Ion., Th., Ar.).
•ETYM The broad semantic range renders etymologizing difficult. The noun can go
back to PIE *top-o- or *tok"-o-. A connection with PIE *tek"- 'to run, flow' is
semantically difficult. The root *tep- 'to hit, stick, smear' (whence OCS teti, 1sg. tepo
'to beat', Lith. tèpti 'to smear, grease') could yield a noun *top-o- 'stain, spot', which
then developed to 'spot, place'; compare the similar semantic change which took
place in MoE spot or MoHG Flecken (a suggestion by M. de Vaan; p.c.).
Alternatively, Meier-Brügger Glotta 74 (1997/8): 99f. has derived tóños from *tep- ‘to
be hot', supposing an original meaning 'hot place, hearth' > ‘any place'.
Topáλov [n.] 'bed-cover' (Dura-Europos) <LW Lat.>>
•VAR with metathesis toλápiov.
ETYM Possibly borrowed from Lat. toral(i), according to LSJ.
tópßnlos [adj.] ·µµµopos ‘criticizing, querulous' (H.). <?►
•
•ETYM Specht KZ 59 (1932): 34' explains it by dissimilation from *τóλßηos, which
could belong to the isolated form τéλßεσαι· μкαλяīν 'to grumble,
complain' (H.). These forms could go back to a root *telg"-, but no cognate forms are
known.
Tópуos [m.] 'vulture' (Call. Fr. 204, Lyc.), τópyos vypócoitos ‘swan' (Lyc.). <?►
•ETYM Word belonging to learned Alexandrian poetry, without a convincing
etymology. A connection with Germanic 'stork' (ON storkr, MoHG Storch) seems
gratuitous. Thompson 1895 s.v. compares Coptic t(o)re, Ore 'kite'.
τópбüλov [n.] name of an umbelliferous plant, 'hartwort, Tordylium officinale (Ruf.
apud Orib., Gal., Plin.). <PG(V)►
•VAR -Úλtov (Dsc.), -ilov (Nic. [-εt-], Dsc.), -ítov (Dsc. v.l.).
tópvos
1495
⚫ETYM Unknown etymology. Fur.: 367 compares öpdaλov (Nic. Th. 841), which is
perhaps a mistake for t-. It cannot be explained as an old variant without τ- pointing
to Pre-Greek origin, pace Fur.: 391.
Topɛiv [v.aor.] 'to pierce' <IE *terh,13- 'rub, bore, pierce'>
•VAR τopε A 236, topeïv. topñoal, tpñoal, telɛïv (H.). Reduplicated in tέtopɛv.
Eτpwσɛv 'to damage', τɛτópη τpwoŋ 'wounding' (H.); thence ptc. τetopńoas (h.
Merc. 119; verse-final), fut. τetopǹow 'to pierce with tones, proclaim with shrill tones'
(Ar. Pax 381, parodizing, see Schwyzer: 783), perf. ptc. tetopnµévos (Nonn.). Also s-
aor. τoρñσα =τopεvσαι 'to stitch, chase, form' (Arat., AP, Sardis), also with ȧvτ- 'to
pierce, pervade, penetrate' (E 337, K 267), fut.ptc. ȧvτtopýσwv (h. Merc. 178), pres.
ptc. ȧvúτopova (ibid. 283); aor. pass. diατopηеñvαι (Anon. apud Suid.). Verbal
adj. Topητós 'vulnerable' (Lyc.).
•DER TOPεÚw, -εŪσa 'to carve, emboss, form' (S. Fr. 315, Hell. and late.), also with
dia-; wdǹv topɛúɛɩv (Ar. Th. 986 [lyr.]) 'to carve a song' (?). Hence τopɛv-τós
‘chased, engraveď, -tńs [m.] ‘chaser, engraver³, -tiký (téxvò) ‘the art of engraving',
ua [n.] 'chased or engraved work', -σts = caelatura (gloss.), -ɛía [f.] 'engraving',
-ɛov [n.] ‘chased work' (all Hell. or late). topɛús [m.] ‘borer' (Philyll. apud Phot.,
AP), probably a backformation from topɛúw, not from τópos 'id.' (Att. inscr. IV³, H.,
Eust.). Both tópos and diáτopos ‘piercing, pervading, loud; pierced' (A., S., Plu.,
Luc.: Siα-τετpaívw) could be derived from topɛiv. Read Siaτopía in Thphr. HP 11, 4.
•ETYM The meaning of the verb fits perfectly with that of the PIE root *terh,- 'to
drill', but the o-grade in aor. is problematic. It has been proposed that it developed
through metathesis of a sequence *-ero- > -ore- (similarly for лopɛïv, ▶µodɛïv,
►¤opɛĩv). This would mean that there was a root aorist *tero- < *terh¸- (cf.
TITрwσкw), but this remains speculative. Alternatively, we could be dealing with
real o-grade verbal formations. Epic ȧvτ-τорñσα, -τоpησwν, -τорovτa are
innovations. DELG adduces Skt. tará- ‘piercing, which resonates' and perhaps OIr.
tairm 'sound'. See further Topóç, τετpαívw, τɛipw, and ►τépus.
▶
Tópμos [m.] 'socket, nave, peg' (Hdt., Ph. Bel., Hero Bel., Hell. inscr.). <IE *torh₁/3-mo-
'piercing, boring'>
=
•DER Topμ-íov [n.] 'small peg' (Ph. Bel.), -iкá [n.pl.] 'mortises' (Hero Bel.); tópµn [f.]
nλýµvη, kaurý, kaµrtýp, vúσoa, vorλn\, Spóµoç (Ael. Dion., H., Suid.); the
meaning of the variant τópµă (Lyc. 262) is unclear: лλŔµvη or vúσoa? (sch. = TÒ
ɣápayµa tò áлò τоυ τроoũ ‘trace of a wheel'). Glosses: έк Topµãν. áлò τo
кашлτños к τоб σúµлаντо εрóμov 'from the turning point, or the whole course',
Éktopµeĭv. ¿ktetpáqðai tov Spóµov 'to be turned off the road (H.).
⚫ETYM A derivative of the root *terh₁3-; cf. ►τopɛïv. Cognates: Hitt. tarma- ‘nail, peg',
CLuw. tarma/i- [c.] ‘nail, peg' < *tor(h₁)-mo-; the appurtenance of ON þarmr [m.],
MoHG Darm < PGm. *þarma- is less certain. For the non-vocalization of the
laryngeal in PIE *torh₁/3-mo-, see on ▶tóλun.
τópvoç [m.] 'carving knife, lathe, turning-lathe, pair of compasses, circle' (Thgn., IA).
<IE *torh,-no- 'turner, borer'>

=== page 774 ===

1496
Topós
•COMP vτорvos 'processed with a turning-lathe, turned, revolveď (Pl., Arist.,
inscr.), whence έvτopvía [f.], -εúw [v.] (Hero).
⚫DER 1. Topv-íσKoç [m.] 'turning-lathe' (Ph. Bel., Delos). 2. Topv-ía στaquλń (Poll.)
kind of grape. 3. τopν-óoμαι, -ów 'to draw a circle, measure precisely' (Y 255, ε 249,
D. P., Tryph., H.), -wτós 'revolved, turned' (Hdn. Gr.), àлotopvwσiç [f.] ‘rounding
off (Heliod. apud Orib.). 4. topv-εúw [v.] 'to spin round, turn' (E. [lyr.], Ar., Pl.),
also with άло-, кaτα-, лɛpɩ-, etc. Thence -εuμα [n.] 'turning motion' (E. HF 978),
plur. 'turner's chips' (Hp., Hell. inscr.), -ɛía [f.] 'curved timber for shipbuilding'
(Thphr.), -ɛvτóç ‘turned, fit for turning' (Hell.), -ɛvtýs [m.] ‘turner' (Att. inscr.),
-ɛvtηpiov [n.] ‘turning-lathe' (Thphr.). With a prop vowel -o-: τópovos (cod. -óvoc).
τópvoç. Tapavτīvot (H.); τоpovευτós = τετopуεvµεvoc (Lacon. in Edict. Diocl.).
topovevtós tetopvevµévos
•ETYM An instrument noun with PIE suffix *-no- from the root of τɛipw, τετpaivw,
Topɛiv, etc. For the semantics, compare кUкλo-τερns 'turned around, round as a
circle, kúkλov tópvoç (X.), kukλotepès topveúoaoða (Pl.), and also Lat. teres, -etis
‘rounded off, smooth' to terō ‘to rub'. For the non-vocalization of the laryngeal in
PIE *torh₁/3-no-, see on ▸τóλμn.
topós [adj.] ‘loud, shrill, perceptible, clear', of the voice; also 'fast, agile' (A., E., Ar.,
Emp., Pl., X.). ◄IE *torh₁/3-0- ‘piercing'>
•ETYM Adjectival o-derivative of the root PIE *terh₁/3- 'to pierce, bore'. The semantic
change of 'piercing' to 'loud, shrill' is also found in the aor. and fut. stem tεtopǹo-;
see topɛiv. Connection with Lith. tarýti ‘to say, speak', Hittite ter-zi / tar- ‘to speak,
state <PIE *ter-/tr- is therefore unwarranted. Cognates: Skt. tārá- piercing'
(Mayrhofer Sprache 10 (1964): 193f.).
topúvŋ 1 [f.] ‘stirring spoon, stirring ladle' (Sophr., Ar., Pl.). <PG?(S)►
•VAR Dor. -a (ū Ar., ň AP 6, 305).
●DER τopuváw [v.] 'to stir' (medic., Eub.), also σuv-; τopúvw (Ar. Eq. 1172) is
probably a backformation to the noun (different Schwyzer: 491: τopúvη a
backformation from τopúvw).
•ETYM The origin of the suffix -úvŋ is unclear; compare kopúvŋ ‘club³, oißúvn ‘spear³,
Xελúvŋ ‘lip, jaw', etc. Semantically, one could connect the Germanic verb *þuer- ‘to
stir', e.g. OE þweran, OHG dweran, OE þwiril, OHG dwiril ‘stirrer' < PGm. *þwer-
ila-. Yet formally this etymology is implausible, since it would require a zero grade
*Tup-úvη, whence τopúvη with dissimilation. Derivation from the root of tɛípw is
semantically difficult. Lat. trua 'stirring spoon' has the same meaning, but the form
cannot be reconciled with that of topúvη. Since there is a PG suffix -ūv-, topúvη
could be Pre-Greek. Its o could continue original *a before a following *u.
topúvn 2 [f.] · σitŵdéç τɩ 'cereals' (H.). <?►
•ETYM No etymology. See ➤лúpvoç.
Tóσoç [demonstr. pron.] 'as large, as much' (II., epic poet.). <IE *to-ti>
•VAR Epic also τóσσoç; in prose only subst. τóσov [n.].
•DIAL Myc. to-so.
1497
⚫DER TOσ(σ)OUTOç, τoσ(σ)óσdε ‘id.' (Il.), τoσσ-ñvoços ‘id.' (Theoc.), after τñvoç;
-átɩos ‘id.' (A. R., AP), -ákɩ (Hom., Simon.), toσákıç (Polyaen.) 'so many times',
-auτáкıç (And., Pl., Arist.).
⚫ETYM From PIE *toti-o-, built on the PIE adverb *toti 'so many' (in Skt. táti, Lat. tot,
toti-dem 'so many'). The Greek formation probably first arose as a plural tóσ(σ)o 'as
many', whence the sing. Tóσ(σ)oç 'as large'.
τóσσαɩ [v.inf.] ‘to meet, get into, happen to' (Pi., Fr. 22). <?>
•DER Aeol. ptc. τóσσαiç for *τóσσaç (Рi. P. 3, 27), έ-τóσσαç; 3sg. ind. ¿лétoσσɛ =
¿èétuxe (Pi. P. 10, 33; 4, 25).
•ETYM No certain etymology. Because of the semantic agreement with τuxɛïv, Pisani
RILomb. 77 (1943-44): 565 regards tóσσα as a false Ionisation of Boeot. *τó ai for
*túžai = tvxeïv. Cf. Schwyzer: 755².
τótɛ [adv.] ‘at that time, then' (IA Arc.). <IE *so / *to- ‘this, that'>
●var Aeol. tóta, Dor. tóкa ‘then'; totè (µèv ….. totè dè) ‘sometimes'.
•ETYM Demonstrative (TÓTε) and indefinite (TOTέ) adverbs, derived from
demonstrative τo- with different particles. See ➤ötɛ and ►éótɛ.
toúpлaɩva [f.] the fish ‘torpedo' (Al. Trall., Paul. Aegin.). <LW Lat.➤
•ETYM A loanword from Lat. torpēdō ‘torpedo, crampfish, electric ray'.
TOŪTIS [?] · Ó KÓGσvqoç 'blackbird' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
τóoppa [demonstr. adv.] 'up to, during, so long, meanwhile' (epic poet. Il.+). <IE *to-
demonstr. pron.>
•ETYM From demonstrative τo- with an unclear extension; see ►öoppa with
references.
tpάyos [m.] ‘he-goat, buck', also metaphorically ‘smell of a he-goat' (epic Ion. poet. 1
239+, Hell. and late prose), often 'puberty', 'lechery' (Luc.); name of a fish = male
μavíc (Arist. etc.); several plant-names, e.g. = εpivɛóc in Messenia (Paus.), 'spelt'
(Dsc. and others), name of a constellation of the Dodekaoros (Cat. Cod. Astr.),
comet's name (Lyd. Ost.). <GR
•COMP τрαуолбywv [m.] plant name 'goatsbeard, salsify'; Boúτpayoç [m.] 'ox-goat',
a fabulous creature (Philostr.), εлíτpayoɩ [m.pl.] 'lush but infertile shoots of the vine'
(D. H., Poll., EM), εлɩɩpαуíαç [m.] an unfertile and very fat kind of carp (Arist.; see
below on τpayáw for the semantics); 'Елτpαуía [f.] epithet of Aphrodite (Plu. Thes.
18, Att. inscr. from Imperial times).
•DER 1. τpay-íσkoç [m.] ‘small he-goat' (Theoc., AP), fish name 'kipper' (Marc. Sid.),
also a kind of ornament (Delos IIª). 2. -aɩva [f.] ‘hermaphrodite' (Arist.). 3. -ɩkóç
'goat-like' (Plu., Luc.), short for τpaуwdiкóç 'belonging to the tragedy, tragic' (IA;
like кwμкóç = кwμwбiкóc), thence -кwбηs μüßоç (Рalaeph.); -кεúоμαι 'to speak as
in a tragedy' (sch.). 4. -ε(1)os ‘of a.he-goat' (late), -ɛiŋ (Theoc.), -ća (Thphr.), -ñ
(Poll., Eust.) [f.] (sc. Sopá) ‘goatskin'. 5. -ɩvoç = -ɛos (AP). 6. Tpáyɩos [m.] month
name in Thessaly (inscr.); -lov [n.] plant name (Dsc.). 7. -avós (H.) as an

=== page 775 ===

1498
Tpaywdóc
explanation of Xóvôpoç. Denominative verbs: 8. τpαуí(w (úлεp-) 'to break one's
voice, speak roughly' (Hp., Arist.), 'to smell like a goat' (Gal., Dsc.). 9. τpayáw 'to
break one's voice' (Gal. etc.) 'to grow over-luxuriant, to grow only leaves and shoots
without yielding fruit', of vines (Arist., Thphr.).
ETYM Literally 'gnawer, eater of sweets', agent noun of τpayɛiv; see τpwyw. There,
it is concluded that the group of τpwyw is of Pre-Greek origin, but the formation of
τpαуɛчv may be an inner-Greek creation. See αï}, ► ápvelós, ►káлpoç, ►кpióç, and
▶tpaypaós.
τpayḍdós [m.] ‘singer and dancer in the tragic choir, tragic actor' (Att. Hell. and late),
very rarely and mostly uncertain ‘poet of tragedies'; oi τpaydoí also ‘rendering of a
tragedy'. < GR▷
•VAR Boeot. τpayaƑudos (Orchom. Iª, archaizing).
●DER 1. τpaywd-έw 'to act as a τpaywdós, treat in a tragedy, to display or relate with
tragic pathos', whence late -ŋua, -ntýs, -ŋtós. 2. -ía [f.] ‘tragedy', also ‘elevated
poetry, grand display' (Pl., Hell. and late). 3. -ɩkós ‘like a tragic actor' (Ar.). 4. -áptoV
[n.] diminutive of -ía (D. H.). 5. -ɛúç = -ós (sch.).
●ETYM Probably formed after the pattern of ► þawwdóc; further etymology uncertain.
Traditionally derived from τpáуos 'buck', which would have been given as a prize to
the winner in the oldest dramatic Agon; thus also Else Herm. 85 (1957): 17ff. with ref.
tpákta [n.pl.] ‘layers of a cake, кaлúpia' (Ath.); tpáкτov [sg.] ‘white, bleached wax'
(EM) = ´tpakɩòs kŋpós (late med.) ◄LW Lat.➤
●DER tpákt-wµa [n.] ‘plaster of white wax' (Hippiatr.), -αï\w ‘to bleach or whiten like
wax' (EM); τрαкτεúш 'to manage', whence -εuτns, -EUTIкós (Cod. Iust., Lyd. Mag. et
al.), τραкταw [v.] 'id.' (Men. Prot.).
•ETYM A loanword from Lat. tractum 'piece of dough for making cake', tractāre 'to
handle'.
τpáμç [f.] 'the narrow space between the legs between the anus and the genitals: the
perineum' (Archil., Hippon., Ar., Ruf., Luc.), acc. to H. = τò τрñµα τñç ëарαç, ó
tñua ESpas,
öppos. tɩvès évtepov, oi dè ioxiov 'the hole of the seat, the rump; the innards, the
hip-joint (or the flesh around it)' <PG?>>
●Der diáτpaµiç = λσñóлvyoç (Stratt.).
•ETYM Frisk explains it as a zero grade verbal noun in *-mi-, from the same root as
τópμoç 'socket, peg' (from Tɛipw, τετрaívw.). This is formally difficult, because
that root probably had a final laryngeal. It could well be a Pre-Greek word.
tpálims, -180s, -ɩ0s [f.] according to sch. Lyc. 'ẞαрßαρiкòv лλoчov' (Lyc., Nic. [v.l.
-ßic]). <PG▷
•VAR V.l. τpáµẞɩs.
ETYM Probably a loanword. Fur.: 165 thinks it is a variant of τtpácně, tpóyně,
¨τpáï½§, τpóñη§ ‘bar, beam, board, handle'. In that case, τpáµïç could be a Pre-
Greek word.
tpāvýs [adj.] ‘clear, distinct, definite, sure' (trag., D. H., Ph., Plu.). <IE *terh₂- ‘pass
through, cross'>
TpanÉw
•VAR Late also -ós, often adv. -ŵs, -óv.
•COMPлεрíτрαvos 'very clear' (Hell. and late).
1499
●Der tpav-ótŋs [f.] ‘clarity' (Ph., Plu., etc.), -ów [v.] ‘to make clear, attract attention',
also with dɩα-, ¿к-; thence -wµata (yλwoons) [pl.] ‘perceptions' (Emp. 4, 11), -WTIKÓS
'serving for brightening' (Theol. Ar.).
⚫ETYM From PIE *trh₂-n-, from the root *terh₂- 'to pass, cross' (cf. E seeing through).
Alternatively, it could have secondary long -ā- for *ē, in which case it derives from
the root *terh, 'to pierce' (cf. E sharp sight). The s-stem adj. recalls σaqηvns, etc. (see
▶oapńs).
τpáñɛè̟α [f.] ‘table, plate, meal, dish, money changer's counter, bank' (Il.). <IE
*kwetuer- 'four', *ped- 'foot', *ktur-ped-ih₂- ➤
⚫VAR Doг. τрáлεσðа (Alcm.), Boeot. τрéлεddа (Оrchom. IIIª).
•DIAL Myc. to-pe-za /torpeza/.
•COMP τрaлεоôópos [m.] 'table-bearer' (Ar.Fr. 124), designation of a priestess of
Athena (Lycurg. etc.), τò τралεocópov [n.] 'serving table, sideboard' (Cic., Poll.,
etc.), óµotpáñεšos ‘eating at the same table' (Hdt., Pl., etc.).
●DER 1. Diminutive ɩpañέš-tov [n.] (Late Attic), geometric ‘trapezium' (Arist.+). 2.
-ɛúç in кúvɛç τpαлεчñεç table dogs' (Hom.), 'parasites' (Plu.). 3. -íτηç, Dor. -íτaç,
Вoеot. τрεлεε(§)í-τaç [m.] 'money changer, banker' (Late Att., Hell. and late);
thence -ITIKÓS, -Itɛúw, -itɛía, [f.] -ītis (pap. VI³), -ɛĩÏTAI KÚVEÇ = -ÑES к. (Hdn. Gr.; -ɛt-
probably itacistic), -íτηv Пápɩv. τòv лapαßávτα τǹу τρáлε(αv ‘who stood beside the
table' (Trag. Adesp. 270), ¿vτрαлεšítηç = napáσiτOÇ (Suid., Zonar.). 4. -ía [f.]
¿vτpañεČitns
‘carpentry' (Thphr.). 5. -ótŋs [f.] ‘tableness, the idea of a table' (Pl. apud D. L.). 6.
-ŋaç ‘belonging to the table' (Nic., Opp.). 7. -wdns ‘trapezoidal' (Str. etc.). 8. -ŵ(v).
iépeiá tis Ałývno a priestess at Athens' (H.) (= τpañɛšocópos above). 9. -óoμαι,
-ów 'to be dished up, dish up' (S. Fr. 611, Hell. and late inscr.); thence -óμaτa [pl.]
'offerings' (Pergamon IIª), -wots [f.] 'serving' (Plu.). 10. ТрaлεСoñç, -ovτos [f.] town
in Arcadia and on the south coast of the Black Sea; xwрα ТралεСovvτía (Paus.+).
•ETYM PIE *k"tur-ped-ih₂- ‘having four feet' > PGr. *t(w)r-ped-ja-. Compound of a
zero grade of PIE ‘four' (*ktur) with the word for 'foot', plus a derivational suffix
*-ih₂-. Myc. to-pe-za /torpeza/ shows the vocalization with o instead of a that is
regular in that dialect. Folk-etymological connection with ‘three' yielded τpíñɛšav.
tǹv tpárečav. Boiroi (H.), whence Boeot. τpéлε♪♪α. A different reflex *k"tru- >
tpu- is found in τpuqάλɛta, which agrees with Av. cabru-, OW petru-, Lat. quadru-
'four-'. See ►τέooapes.
τpaлέw [v.] 'to press (grapes)' (11 125, Hes. Sc. 301, Anan.), τрαлñν· λŋvoлatɛiv ‘to treat
the wine-press', τрαлέoντo (also [Аеol.?] τролéоνão)· έлατоντо (εлάτoν) 'were
treading' (H.): <IE *trep- 'tread'>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.
●DIAL Myc. jo-te-re-pa-to = ¿ç τpéлavão athem. aor. (Taillardat REGr. 97 (1984): 365-
373).
●DER τpaлŋτóç· ó olvos ‘wine'; oi τpaлηταí ‘wine-pressers' as an explanation of
лaτητɑí (H.). With o-grade τpoл½ïov [n.] ‘(wine-)press' (Hippon.), éрóτpoлoç

=== page 776 ===

1500
tpāxús
1501
(oivos) 'wine before the pressing' (medic. etc.), Oivo-tpóñoɩ [f.pl.], epithet of the
three daughters of Anios (Lyc. 580). See on ȧpañóç.
⚫ETYM Literally 'to tread (out)', a zero-grade iterative present *trp-eie/o- of a PIE root
*trep- 'to tread'; cf. LIV² s.v. With an e-grade, we find e.g. Lith. trepsëti ‘to scratch
(with the feet), trample'; with o-grade, Lith. trapinëti ‘to push with the feet, Ru.
tropáť ‘to stamp, trample, knock', formally identical with the Gm. group of OS
thrabōn, MHG traben, etc. Cf. ►τρέлw.
tpárn} →tpávně.
tpaoiá→tapoós.
τpavlós [adj.] 'suffering from a speech disorder, with deficient speech', for instance
'lisping, stammering', metaphorically of swallows ‘chirping' (Hdt., Hp., Call. com.,
Arist., AP, etc.). <PG?>
•COMP τpavλówvos 'with lisping speech' (H. s.v. Bátτoç, beside iσxvóqwvoc; from
Hdt. 4, 155), úñóτpavλoç ‘lisping something' (Hp.), лoiкiλóτpavλa (Theoc., of the
μελŋ of the кóσσvôoi); PN Tρaúλŋ (Lucr.).
•Der tpavλ-ótŋs [f.] ‘speech disorder' (Arist., Plu.), -íšw (vão-) ‘to speak deficiently,
etc.' (Ar., Arist., Luc.), whence -σμóç (Plu.); also wσiç [f.] (Gal.).
⚫ETYM The suffix -λoç is also found in other expressions for physical and psychical
defects, such as tuplós, xwlós, ouλós. Unclear etymology. Wackernagel 1897: 16f.
connects it as *trs-u- = Go. þaursus Enpós', to which ►áτεɩpηs from *ȧ-tepo-ńs
could belong as well. Yet the loss of σ in τpavλóc and in áτɛƖpηs is improbable beside
τpασiά and τépσoμat. Alternatively, does it belong to τpаữµа (see on ➤ titpwókw)?
The word might well be Pre-Greek.
tpañµa →titpwoкw.
τpaúžava [n.pl.] ‘dry wood, brushwood' (Pherer.). <PG>
•VAR Also τpαúσavov· žŋpòv лãν ½ opúyavov 'all dry items or firewood' (H.) (on σ
for see Schwyzer: 211).
•ETYM Acc. to Frisk, it may replace τpážava (see ►τpúуw) after Opaúw. However,
the variation av: w betrays a Pre-Greek word (Fur.: 286). It is improbable that the
-av- was taken from Opaúw; cf. on tpañµia s.v. titpwoкw. The meaning of τpaúžava
does not warrant a derivation from τpwyw.
tpáqn§, -nkos [m.] meaning uncertain. According to H. (similar EM, sch. Lyc. etc.), it
means xάpaž, σкóloy. žvioi tò dópu, älλoi tò tñs vewç xɛidos; acc. to EM also = τò
žúλov vðα τɩеéασɩ τòv äpτov. Rare in literary language: Bito ('beam, pole’?),
Lycophr. 641 ('beam, plank' ?), 1001 ('spear'?), Att. inscr. IVª ('board of a ship'?).
< PG➤
•VAR In H. also: tpárŋki. dópatɩ (from Lyc. 1001?); also with o-vocalism: τpóη
(cod. -qñc). Xápaž, oкóλow (cod. okwλŋž), tpórŋkos. µepis tñs kwaŋç ó tpórηž, où
έnλaµißávovtai oi épéσoovtes. wote ảnò µépovs tǹv kónŋv.
⚫ETYM Instrument name in -√ (cf. oťaž, лýλη§, etc.). In theory, one might connect
Lat. trabs 'beam', but this cannot be substantiated. It is a loanword, according to
Porzig ZII 5 (1927): 269, especially in view of the suffix. The variation a/o and ë/ô is
frequent in Pre-Greek words. Fur.: 165 also compares tpáµñç, tpáµißis 'foreign ship',
in which case we have prenasalized variants as well. Thus, it is clearly a Pre-Greek
word; the o cannot be explained from the noun τρолý, as Frisk surmised.
tpáxŋ\os [m.] ‘neck, throat', sometimes including the head, also metaphorically (IA).
<PG?>
•VAR Dor. (Epid.) -aλoç.
•COMP τрαηλoкoлέw 'to cut the throat' (Plu., Arr., etc.; like SɛƖpoτoμεw);
лεριτрáуηλоç 'running around the neck' (äλvots, pap. IIP), whenсе лεруτрауηλ-OV,
-ídiov [n.] 'necklace' (Hell. and late).
●DER 1. paxĤλ-ia [n.pl.] 'meat scraps, originally of the neck' (Hp., com.). 2. -tov [n.]
"neck piece", 'the lower end of a spear' (EM, Harp.). 3. -ís. collare (gloss.). 4. -talos 'of
the neck' (Hippiatr., H., Eust.). 5. -чaños ‘id.' (Str.). 6. -ɩwdŋs ‘stubborn' (EM), -údŋs
‘neck-like' (sch.). 7. -í‹w (ảлo-, лpoσ-) 'to bend back, lay bare, turn the neck',
metaphorically of a ship 'to turn towards the wind', also 'to lay bare, expose;
overpower' (Hell. and late); thence -loµós, -lotýp (late). Further έкtpaxŋλíšw (of a
horse) 'to throw the rider over its head', metaphorically 'to precipitate into ruin'
(Ar., X., D., etc.), whence -toµós (gloss.); лaλiτpaxηλíw 'to be stubborn' (pap. IIIª).
8. τpaxηλiáw 'to arch the neck proudly, accompany proudly' (LXX+).
•ETYM Probably a Greek innovation, as opposed to inherited aúxiv and dépŋ ‘neck’.
Formally, one would like to connect τpέxw 'to run', époxós, but the ‘neck' is usually
denominated as "turner, turn(ing)"; compare OCS vrate to vratiti 'to turn', probably
also Lith. kāklas, rather than 'runner'. Guilleux RPh. 73 (1999): 104 (see also DELG
Supp.) follows an article by Létoublon-De Lamberterie RPh. 54 (1980): 305-326,
which point to traces of an older meaning 'turn' for τpéxw. However, the word
may also be Pre-Greek, as Fur.: 1155 believes (the suffix -nλo- is frequent in Pre-
Greek).
1
τpāxús [adj.] ‘rough, uneven, stony, bumpy', metaphorically 'severe, harsh' (II.). ◄IE
*d³rh₂-g"-u- ‘rough’▶
•VAR Epic Ion. tpnxús.
•DIAL Myc. PN ta-ra-ke-wi-[ja]? (Lejeune REGr. 75 (1962): 342).
•COMP τpaxúqwvos (-ŋ-) 'with a coarse voice' (Hp., D. S. et al.), úñótpaxvs (-ŋ-)
'somewhat rough' (Hp. et al.).
•DER 1. τраxúτηs (-ŋ-), Att. τраυτη [f.] 'coarseness, unevenness, severity'
(Democr., Pl., X., Arist., etc.). 2. τpax-úvw [v.] 'to make rough, angry', sometimes 'to
be rough', pass. 'to be harsh, angry' (A., Pl., Arist., etc.), also with άлo-, ¿ê-, etc.
Thence -UVτкÓç ‘making rough' (Arist., Dsc.), -voµa [n.] ‘roughness, hardness',
-voµós [m.] ‘making rough' (medic. et al.). 3. τpãxoç. duretum (gloss.). 4. τpax-
áṛata [n.pl.] ‘hardenings in the eye, trachoma' (Dsc., Gal., pap. IIIP; after yλaúkwµa
etc.), -wματкóç (Gal.). 5. -úv, -wvoç [m.] 'rough, stony area' (Str., D. H., pap. II³),
Tpáxwv, -wvos, name of a Syrian province and mountain (J., Str.); thence -wvītis
(Xwpa Ev. Luc.), -wvītai [m.pl.] (J., Ptol., etc.). 6. Tpaxis (-iv), Tpnxis, -ïvos [f.], town
in Thessaly (B 682+), whence -ívios, -ɩvíc (IA).

=== page 777 ===

1502
TPε
⚫ETYM PIE adj. *drh₂g-u-? See Opáσow for reconstruction and cognates. Compare
also tάpxŋ tápačıç, äτap[a]xov. å×εíµαστov (H.); cf. Schwyzer: 362.
tpɛïç [numeral] ‘three' (IA). <IE *trei-es 'three'>
•VAR Aeol. (gramm.) τpñç, Dor. tpñs (Thera), tpées (Gortyn), ntr. τpía, gen. tpiŵv,
dat. τpiσí, Aeol. τpíσσɩ, Ion. also τpioĩσ (Hippon.), acc. τpɛïç (IA), Old Attic τpĩç,
Dor. τpuvę (Gortyn).
DIAL On Myc. ti-ri-se-ro-e, see Morpurgo Davies 1963.
•COMP As a first member τpl-, e.g. τpiýpŋs ‘a.trireme'; tplákovta, Ion. tpiṁ- ‘thirty';
-Kóσιol, Arc. -кáσtol, Dor. -кáτIO 'three hundred', -кác, -кádoç [f.] 'the number
thirty, a gathering of 30 persons, the thirtieth day of the month' (IA).
●DER 1. τpíç [adv.] 'thrice' (Il.), also τpiákis (Ar.+). 2. τpítos [adj.] ‘third (Il.), Aeol.
Téρτoç, enlarged τpíτaτoç (epic poet. Il.+), Aeol. τéρτατоç (Pi.; codd. τετр-); τρit-
años arriving at the third day, of three days, etc.' (IA), -ɛúc [m.] 'the third of a
µédɩµvoç', also -ɛúw, -evµa, -evtýs, -ɛía (Hell. and late inscr.); -ɛĩa [n.pl.] ‘the third
prize' (Pl. etc.). 3. Distributive adverbs τpí-xα, -xñ‚ -Xóðεv, -xoŨ, -Xŵç, -x¤á ‘triple, in
three pieces, at three places, etc.'; τρiσσóç, τριττóç, Ion. also τpiεóç 'threefold'. 4
tpiác, -ádoc [f.] ‘triaď' (Pl., Arist., etc.), whence -adikóç, -adí¢w (late). 5. τpíτpα
[n.pl.] 'threefold payment' (Gortyn).
•ETYM The nominative forms τpeïs, tpñs, tpées go back to PIE *treies, whence also
Skt. tráyaḥ, Lat. trēs, etc. Acc. *trins > Go. þrins, Gortyn. τpuvę (disyllabic after
τpiwv, -σí), contracted τpic. Ionic-Attic τpεiç was based on the nominative. Neuter
τpía < PIE *trih; cf. Skt. tri(-ni), Lat. tri-ginta (tria- innovation). The adverb τpís
agrees with Skt. tríḥ, Lat. ter (Plaut. terr < *ters < *tris). The ordinal τpíτoç is also
inherited; compare ToB trite, ToA trit. For the first member of compounds τpt- as in
τpí-лovç, compare Skt. tri-pád-, Lat. tri-pēs ‘three-footed'. Cf. ►τpittús, ▶tpíaiva,
and ► τpiάw.
τpɛóç [adj.] in MoGr. 'mad' (only in PNs, L. Robert 1963: 261f. <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
τpεµw [v.] 'to tremble (of fear), shiver' (II.). <IE *trem- 'tremble'>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf. (but Dor. τετρέµηкα EM).
COMP Also with úло-, лεрɩ-, àµq-.
●DER tpóµos [m.] ‘trembling, shivering, fear, fright (Il.), τpoµós [adj.] ‘trembling' (E.
Fr. 876), also -ɛpós (Sapph., E., A. R. etc.), -wdns (Hp., Str., Plu.), -aλéos (Eust.),
-IKÓS (gloss., Suid.) ‘id.'. Verb τpoµέw (II.) = tpέµw, deverbative or denominative;
also with úло-, лεpɩ-, àµôɩ-, etc.; originally only pres. and ipf., the aor. τpoµñσat is
late (LXX [v.l. τpóµɑσav as if from τpoµášw], lit. pap. III³). PN Tpóµŋns, -ntos [m.]
created for Atрóμητое (Dem.), etc. Further τéτраµоç [m.] 'trembling', with
reduplication and zero grade of the root; also tέτpoµos after τpóµos (Hp.+). Thence
τετраμаívш [v.] 'to tremble', v.l. τετρεµ- after τρέµw (Hp., Ar., Gal., etc.). Adv.
άτpéµă, -ǎç ‘without trembling, immovable, quiet' (Il.), of uncertain origin, cf.
1503
ǹpéµa(c), ñкa; also åτpɛµ(ε)í (Ar.). Adj. ȧtpeµ-ýs with -ía, -έw, -í【w (especially Ion.
poet. since Hes., Thgn.), -años (Hp., E. [lyr.], Call. etc.).
ETYM A primary present, identical with Lat. tremō 'to tremble', Alb. trem 'to
frighten', ToA tärm- (e.g. 3. pl. tärmiñc) 'to be angry, be excited, tremble'; further,
ToB tremi [pl.] ‘trembling' = Gr. τpóµoɩ. Lith. tremti, 1sg. tremiù 'to smite down',
trimstu, trimti 'to tremble, etc.'. Cf. ►τаρµúσσw, τpέw.
τρεлw [v.] 'to turn, revolve, put to flight; to turn oneself, change, take flight, etc.'. <IE
*trep- 'turn'>
•VAR Dor. Ion. also τрáлw, -oμaɩ, s-aor. tpέyaɩ, -aσbat, them. aor. τpaïɛïv, -έoσðaɩ,
fut. τpέyw (¿ñɩ-τpayw Crete), tpέwoμai, pass. (intr.) aor. τpαôеñvαι, perf. téτpaµµai
(all Hom.), also τpaлñvαι (A., etc.), τpεôеñvaι (E.), ptc. ¿v-τpεñévtes (pap. IIª), perf.
act. τéτpopα, later τéτpaqα (Att.).
•COMP Very often with prefix: ȧva-, ȧло-, έк-, εν-, εлɩ-, μετα-, лαрα-, лερɩ-, etc. with
different shades of meaning
•DER A. With -o-: 1. τрóлоç [m.] 'turn; way, custom, attitude, character' (Pi., IA),
'beam' (Moschio apud Ath. 5, 208c; also MoGr., = Sokòç tetpaµµévoç). Compounds,
е.g. лоλú-τролоç 'much-wandering' (etc.; see лoλúc), whence -ta (Hdt., Hp., etc.);
often from prefixed compounds, е.g. ¿лíτроло [m.] 'supervisor, steward,
administrator (IA). Thencе τрол-ɩкós belonging to the turn' (Arist., etc.), εлɩɩpoл-
ɩkóç, -ɛúw, -ɛia, -evoiç, -evolµoç, -evtikóç. Denominative tpoë-óoµat, -ów, also with
каτα- etc., 'to put to flight' (LXX, D. H. et al.). 2. τpoлóç [m.] “turner", 'straps, by
means of which the rudder turned around the кλŋüç while rowing' (Od., Opp.),
τрол-óоμαι 'to be provided with a τpoлóç' (A., Ar., Poll.), -wτńp [m.] = τpoлóç (Аr.,
Th. et al.). 3. τpoл½ [f.] ‘turn (of the sun, of the enemy, etc.), change' (0 404+);
compounds, e.g. àлoτpoë-ý [ƒ.] ‘avoidance, etc.' (Att.), whence -a, -, -ía,
-ιášw, -íαoµα, -laσµós, -ιαστýs. Thencе τpол-αños 'causing the turning (of the
enemy), granting victory'; τò τpола‰ov, -αtov 'victory monument' (Att.), scil.
oŋuɛiov vel sim. 4. -τρoлíα [f.] frequent in derivations, e.g. vτрол-íη = εvτpoл-ý
'consideration, attention' (Hp.), -ía [pl.] '(cunning) twists, intrigues' (h. Merc.),
µεtatpor-íaɩ [pl.] vicissitudes of fatе' (Pi.); лαλɩvτрoл-íαι [pl.] 'changes of mind' (A.
R.), to лαλív-τроños. 5. -τpóñiov [n.] in derivatives, e.g. έкτрóлov name of an eye-
disease, 'everted eyelid (medic.), oτpórov plant name 'heliotrope' (Thphr. et al.),
'sun-dial' (Delos IIIª et al.). 6. τроñíaç olvos (also έv-, έк-) ‘turned, sour wine' (Ar. et
al). 7. tpóriç, -10s (-180c, -ewc) [f.] ‘'ground beams of a ship, ship's keeľ (epic Ion.
since Od., Arist., etc.), properly “turner”? Thence poridɛĩa (also -ia) [pl.] ‘id.' (Pl.
Lg. 803a, Pell., Phot.); vаñç τετролévé (: époлí‹ƒ) 'provided with a keel' (Hp.);
hypostasis úлоτрóлоç located under the keel (Opp., Orph.). 8. àvaτpoлεúç [m.]
'overturner, destroyer' (to avατρoл-ǹ, àvα-τрέлw; Antipho, Plu., D. Chr.). 9. Adv.
-τролádην, Doг. -Säv, only from prefixed compounds, е.g. лроτролáбηу 'directed
forward, with headlong speed' (P 304, Pi., Pl., etc.); τpóлα лαíčɛν name of a game
(Cratin., Poll.). 10. τpoлéw = τрέлw (Σ 224; Myc. to-ro-qe-jo-me-no?), iterative or
denominative; also with лаpα-, лερɩ- (Нom.+), and nominal first member, e.g.
kakotporέw ‘to act badly'. 11. -τpoлášoµɑt only in úлεtpoлáσðŋy ‘turned back, had
a relapse' (to úлóτpoл-Оç, úло-τрέлоμαч; pаp. IIIª); also -τρолáСw, with úлo- 'to

=== page 778 ===

1504
τpέQW
have a relapse', -aσµós (Hp.); with ảлo- 'to avert', -taσµóç etc. (LXX, pap. et al.). 12.
With A-enlargement: τpoñaλíšεɩ· σtpέqɛɩ ‘turns', whence -μós μετaßolý 'change'
(H.); ptc. εvτроñaλɩšóµεvoç ‘turning round, turning back' (Il., Q. S.), ipf.
μεtaτporalíčεo 'you turned around' (Y 190). 13. τpoлāλíç (v.l. -a\\ís). -ídos [f.]
'bunch' of onions (Ar. Ach. 813), τpóññàíç (Hdn. Gr.), tpi(t)oëŋàíç (H.), formation
unclear.
B. With -ε-: 1. άлó-τρεчɩç ‘aversion', к- 'distortion', ȧvá- 'turn' (to ȧлo-τρέлw etc.;
Hp., Arist. etc.). 2. tpeπtikós ‘causing a change or a turn' (late), mostly from prefixed
verbs, e.g. épotpεr-tɩêós ‘challenging' (Att.).
C. With a 1. τрα¨-εµлαλɩv [adv.] 'turned backward' (: εμлaλɩv τpañέσðαɩ,
Pherecr.). 2. -τрαлελoç only with prefix, e.g.*ɛúτpáñɛlos (: ev τpañέσðaɩ) ‘turning
easily, mobile, adroit, witty' (Pi., Att.), whence εúɩpañɛλ-ía, -íšoµai, -ɛvoµai;
similarly with Suσ-, έк-, EV-, etc.; τралεóμεvos exw avaσpóεvo
'continuously upset' (H.).
D. With lengthened grade: τpшлáw, -άoµai [v.] ‘to turn, change', iterative verb, only
in pres. and ipf.; also with άло-, лapa-, έïɩ-, µεta-.
•ETYM From PIE *trep-, *trp- 'to turn', caus. pres. *trop-éie/o-. Cognate forms: Lat.
trepit 'vertit' (found only in Paul. Fest. p. 367, and perhaps a construction of
grammarians), Skt. (ep.) trapate 'feels ashamed, becomes timid', Hitt. terepp-zi 'to
plough'; cf. LIV² s.v. *trep-. Semantically, ¿vípéлoµai ‘to care about sth.', also ‘to be
ashamed for sbd.' may be connected. The connection of Myc. to-ro-qe-jo-me-no
(meaning unknown; with q) and of Lat. torqueō is untenable. The verb τрαлéw 'to
tread (out), press (grapes)' should probably be separated from τpέлw ‘to turn'. See
Mayrhofer EWAia s.v. trap.
τpéqw [v.] 'to make fat, feed, bring up, care for', also 'to cause to curdle', of yála
'milk' (1246) and of Tupós 'cheese' (Theoc. 25, 106, cf. tpoqaλiç below). <PG>
•VAR Dor. τpáqw, -oμα, s-aor. Opéчai, -ασеαi, čеpaya (epigr. Crete II-III³), them.
aor. τpaqɛïv (mostly intr.), pass. (intr.) τpαôñvαɩ (all Il.), еpɛóеñvaɩ (rarely since
Hes.), ¿еpápеŋ (Eretria VIª), fut. Opέyw, -oµai (h. Ven., etc.), perf. tétpoqa (¥ 237
etc., intr., also trans.), midd. τé pадμα (IA), whence τετpaqα (Plb.), also τéτpɛqaç
(pap. III³, after τpέqw).
COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, Èк-, σUV-.
•DER A. With -0-: 1. tpoqń [f.] 'nurture, nourishment, care, race' (Pi., IA), also ȧva-,
Èk-, dia-, etc. 2. tpoqós [f.], secondarily [m.] 'wet nurse, nourisher, caregiver' (Od.+);
replaced by τpoow [f.] ‘id.' (late, Rhodos). 3. -τpoos with prefixed verbs, e.g.
σúvtpoqos ‘fed or brought up together, familiar' (IA); with nominal first member,
e.g. vɛóτpoqos 'recently fed, newborn' (A. [lyr.], Cratin.), кoupoτpópos ‘bringing up
boys, nurse of the youth'; often as epithet of different goddesses (1 27+). From τpooń
(and τpoчós, partly also directly from τpέow) are derived: 4. τpoqɛús (ava-, oiwvo-)
[m.] 'feeder, caregiver' (Att.). 5. tpoqíaç [m.] ‘brought up in the house, stall-fed'
(Arist., inscr. etc.; antonym qopßác). 6. tpoqītis [f.] (ovyypaqń, also yuvń, yñ)
'concerning nourishment, taking care of feeding' (pap.). 7. τpóqtov [n.] 'food,
sustenance, diet' (medic. etc.). Adj.: 8. τpóq-is ‘plump, fat, large' (A 307 [kỹµa], Hdt.,
Lyc.); thence τpoqioûtai· raxúvetαɩ ‘grows fať (H.). 9. -óevta kúµata ‘id.' (O 621, y
Tpεqw
1505
290), metrical enlargement; cf. tpoqćovto below. 10. -qoç ‘feeding, fed, brought up’,
[m.] ‘foster-father, ward, alumnus' (IA), [f.] -qµŋ ‘housewife' (Poll.), -qµótns [f.]
(Eust.). 11. -ɩкóç ‘concerning nourishment' (Gal., Poll.), iëлotpoqikós (pap. Il.ª). 12.
-wdns 'serving as nourishment, nourishing' (Arist. et al.). -twdns 'coagulated, thick'
(Hp.; in H.). 13. -ŋtiкós 'belonging to sustenance' (pap. IIIP). Verbs: 14. -εúw 'to
suckle, still' (LXX, pap.), -ɛía [f.] 'serving as a wet nurse' (pap. Iª), -ɛĩa [n.pl.] ‘pay for
serving as a wet nurse and bringing up, sustenance' (Att.), 'boarding wages' (pap.).
15. -έw ‘id.' (pap., also Gal.?), -ηµατa [pl.] (medic.; uncertain); but iëëоtpoqέw (Att.)
from -oç. Iterative poôέovão ‘to swell' acc. to Aristarch. y 290 for τpoqóɛvta. 16.
-τpopía [f.] abstract to -τpoqoç, e.g. ouvτpoqía ‘joint upbringing' (Hell. and late),
iллоτрочíα 'the keeping of horses, stud farming' (Simon., Pi., Att.). 17. With λ-
enlargement τpoqaλic, -ídos [f.] 'fresh cheese' (com., Arist.), also -áλtov [n.] (com.),
τpvqaλíç (LXX, Luc., Hdn. Gr., H.; folk-etymologically after τpon), τpápaloc (see
below), -ic (H.). B. With -ε-: 1. Opέµα (ává-) [n.] ‘one brought up, alumnus, spawn'
(IA), -άtiov, -atikós. 2. Opéyis (ảvá-, čê-) [f.] ‘breeding' (medic., S. E. etc.). 3.
Opentikós (åva-) ‘nourishing (Pl., Arist., etc.). 4. Оpéл-τpa [n.pl.] ‘fostering wages'
(Il., Q. S.), -τýpia [n.pl.] ‘id.' (Hes., h. Cer.), 'nourishment, food' (S.), -τýplos
‘nourishing' (A.), -τýp [m.] ‘foster-father' (inscr., AP), -τɛɩpα [f.] ‘nurse' (E., Opp.,
AP), -τpā [f.] ‘id.' (inscr.), -τýτwp = -τńp (pap. VI³). 5. Оper-tάápio = Apµµátov
(late inscr. and pap.). 6. tpéqos [n.] = еpéµµα (S. Fr. 154; v.l. ßpéqoç). 7. -tpeqńs, e.g.
Aloτpεons 'fed by Zeus' (Il., Hes.). 8. PN Tpɛqpéλews (Paros). C. With a 1.
τpaqɛpós epithet of yñ (Hom., h. Cer.), of ǎpoupα, кέλɛvoç etc. (Hell. and late
epic), antonym vypós, so 'dry, solid'; also of fishes 'plump' (Theoc.). 2. -tpaqńs, e.g.
ɛvtpaqńs ‘well-fed, fat, plump' (Hp., trag., Arist., etc.). 3. ►τápoɛa, -úç. See also on
▶ póripos.
ETYM Formally closest to τpéqw are two Lithuanian verbs: the full-grade yod-
present drēbti, 1sg. drebiù (= Latv. drēbt 'to rain wet snowdrift') 'to throw a thick
fluid', and the zero-grade nasal present drimbù (inf. drìbti) 'to fall down in flakes, to
plump down, etc.'. The semantics are not convincing, to say the least. Further, the
Greek words are close to some expressions for 'dregs' in Germanic, Slavic, and
Celtic: e.g. MLG draf, OHG trebir [pl.] 'dregs', MoE draff 'dregs', Ru. drobá (also
drob, drebá) ‘dregs' (loan from German?), MIr. drab ‘dregs' (all from IE *dªrob¹-).
The correspondence of ON drafli [m.] ‘curdled milk' with τpopalís is certainly
accidental.
The meaning of τрέow was given by Benveniste as favoriser (par des soins
appropriés) le développement de ce qui est soumis à croissance'. This renders the
actual use of the Greek verb quite well, but it does not do justice to the original
concrete meaning, which can still be seen in τpéqɛv yáλa (according to Benveniste,
'favoriser la croissance naturelle du lait, le laisser atteindre l'état où il tend'), τpéqεLV
tupóv (also tpoqaλíc), as well as in tpéqeɩv áλoɩýv (v 410), tpéqeiv äλµnv (¥ 237).
On the nasalized forms, see Opóµẞos.
The cheese name τpácaλλoç must be Pre-Greek: in FS Kortlandt I demonstrated,
following Kuiper, that all words in -aλλ-(oc) are Pre-Greek (cf. ►Ŏкταλλoç). The
root has no IE cognates (see еpóдßoc). A connection with Opóuẞos is quite

=== page 779 ===

1506
TPεXW
possible, if we assume that τpέow as a whole is Pre-Greek. Prenasalization is well-
known in Pre-Greek; the ẞ is not problematic, as Pre-Greek did not distinguish
between aspirated, voiced and unvoiced stops. Thus, Opóµßos proves that the verb is
of Pre-Greek origin.
τpέxw [v.] 'to run, hurry' (II.). <IE *d" reg"- 'run'>
...
•VAR Dor. (Pi.) τрáxw, mostly pres. and ipf.; aor. Opέα (N 409 et al.), iter.
еpεчασкov (≥599, 602), fut. (ȧño-, etc.)-еpέo̟μα (Ar.), simplex Opέ\w (Lyc. 108),
uncertain Opažεĭtal· лopεúσετaι 'will be conveyeď (H.) (see Latte ad loc.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. àva-, ¿v-, ¿ñɩ-, napa-, itɛpi-, ovv-, úño-. As a first
member in τpɛɣédɛvos ‘running to the feast? (Plu., Ath.), as a PN (Alciphr.); as a
second member in [ɛv¤]vτpexýs ‘running straight' (Att. inscr. 307-62), whence
έvtpex-ns ‘skilled, able' (Pl., late) with -ɛta (late). See on ►ólooíτpoxOS.
•DER 1. τpoxóc [m.] 'wheel, wheel of torture, circlet, (potter's) wheel, round cake, etc.'
(II.), лрóτроуоç front wheel' (Ath. Mech.), úлóτрoxos "with wheels underneath",
i.e. 'provided with wheels' (Hell.), diminutives τpóx-lov, -íσkoç, -íσkɩOV, -lokάplov. 2.
τpóxoç [m.] ‘(circular) course' (Hp., S., E.); τpoxós [adj.] ‘running, hurrying' (Pi.),
'circular' (Lyd.; uncertain); often from prefixed verbs, е.g. лεpíτpoxos ‘running in a
circle, circular' (¥ 455, A. R., Call. etc.), -tov [n.] 'rim of a wheel (Papp. Mathem.). 3.
τpoxη [f.] 'course' (Trag. Adesp.). 4. tpóxis [m.] 'runner, messenger' (A. Pr. 941, S.
Inach.). With --: Opɛкt-ɩкóç ‘able to run' (after Moiris Att. for τρоxαστɩкóç),
-IKWTATOS. ÓČÚTAτoç 'most sharp' (H.).
Further derivatives: A. Adjectives: 1. tpox-años (roúc) [m.] ‘trochee' (Pl., Arist., etc.),
-aïkóç 'trochaic', -aĩa (лavía ‘spooľ') ‘running' (AP). 2. -taños (σov) ‘belonging to a
wheel of torture' (LXX). 3. -чoç 'hurrying' (S. Fr. 219 beside ßáoчos). 4. -ɛpós
(pvēμóc) ‘running' (Arist.). 5. -óɛtç, -ɛós, -tós ‘wheel-shaped, circular' (Hell. poet.).
6. -кóç (xαλкóç) 'granulated' (pap.). 7. -wdns 'wheel-like' (Apollon. Lex.). 8. -aλóç
'running in a circle, circular' (poet. since Hes. Op. 518), -aλεov [n.] 'globe, sphere'
(Arat.), -aλioɛiç díσkoç 'rolled' (Pherecyd.); εúτрóxalos = ɛűtpoxos 'running well,
quickly' (Hes., Hell. epic.).
B. Nouns: 1. τpox-tá [f.] 'size of the wheel, track' (Hell. and late). 2. -íλos [m.] 'stint,
wren' (IA); technical ‘sheave in a block and tackle' (Pl. R. 397a [v.l.], Att. inscr. 329-
8ª, Hero), -tλía (-éa, -ɛia), -ɩλɛĩov, -tλídiov; architectural 'hollow on the base of a
column' (Vitr.). 3. tpoxiaç. ñop<e>íaç ‘gaits' (H.); also as epithet of Xαλкós (Poll.; cf.
-ɩкóç; antonym τuлíαç). 4 τpoxiτηs olvos (Dsc.; uncertain). 5. τpoxάdeç. oavdália
áñò aiyɛíov dépµaτoç 'sandals of goat hide' (H.), pox-ádɩα (Edict. Diocl.), -adápios
[m.] 'shoemaker' (Attica, Imperial times); diατpoɣádeç. eidos nalýµatos, wç iotopɛł
Пpažɩávŋs kind of poetic work, as Praxiphanes informs' (H.). 6. τpox-avtýp [m.]
'round projection of the hip bone' (Gal., H.); -avtñpes. épòs tà rŋdália. kadɛĭtai
tñs itpúµvns μépos 'towards the rudders; part of the stern' (H.), as if from *τpoxαívw.
7. τpóx-µaλos (pl. -a, -α) 'round stone that has been ground smooth by water'
(Thphr., Nic., Lyc.), from *τpоx-μós or a contamination of τpoxaλós and óµalós
with oppositive accent? 8. -wotę [f.] 'circular motion' (Lyc.), as if from *τpoxóμα;
can also be enlarged from τpoxóc.
*.
τpέW
1507
C. Adverbs: τpox-ádŋy ‘running' (Epigr., A. D.), έëɩ- ‘running rapidly, fluent' (Hom.
et al.).
D. Verbs: 1. iterative τpox-áw 'to run', -ówvτα (o 451), also with εл-, лεрɩ-, σuv-,
úлo- (Hell. and late poetry). 2. τpox-á\w ‘id.' (Hdt., X, E., Arist., Hell. and late), aor.
-áσal, often with prefix, e.g. Sia-, εv-, εл-, ларα-, лроσ-, σuv-, bу-form in -άw,
whence -αστns, -aσtikós, -aoµóc, -aσμa. 3. τpox-í¶w 'to break on the wheel, furnish
with wheels' (Antipho, Arist., Bito, D. S., etc.), -íoμa 'to run (round)' (Arist.; v.l.
-áčoμai), quite rarely with кατα- etc.; εpi-τpoxiσμóç 'running round' (Antyll. apud
Orib.). 4. -táčw. roto, rotor (gloss.), -íaσμa [n.] 'wheelwork' (Bito). 5. -εvoµα = rotor
(Dosith.). 6. With lengthened grade: iterative (μετα-, nεpɩ-)τpwxάw (X 163, 318, A.
R., Q. S. etc.).
•ETYM Like the synonymous verb Оέw, τpέxw was originally limited to the present
stem (the aorist being provided by Spaµɛiv, as well as by ảлo-Spãval). The verb
τpéxw is isolated within IE, but τpoxós 'wheel' agrees completely with OIr. droch
'wheel' (IE *drogo-). A form with lengthened grade (like τpwx-áw) is probably seen
in Arm. durgn, gen. drgan 'potter's wheel' (originally a root noun); on the phonetics,
see Clackson 1994: 20963. The Germanic verb for 'walk' in Go. þragjan, etc., had
initial t-, just like the Celtic group of MW and Co. tro‘change, time', OIr. traig 'foot'.
See also ▶TÉρXvoç.
The basic meaning of the verb is 'to run, hurry'. This is confirmed by the aor.
Spauɛiv, and by several derivations and compounds: τpoxiç 'runner, messenger';
τpoxiλoç birds that run'; τpεxεdεtvos 'who hurries to the feast'. The verb does not
mean 'turn', a notion that is difficult to combine with ‘run, hurry'. As for the notion
'wheel', DELG notes that one generally thinks that a 'wheel 'runs' (Frisk explains
'Läufer'). (In Dutch, one says "the wheel runs well" ["het wiel loopt goed"], not "the
wheel turns well ["het wiel draait goed"].) We must reject Chantraine's suggestion
that the verb may have meant ‘courir en rond. Therefore, τpáxηlos cannot be
derived from τpέxw.
τpéw [V.] 'to flee full of fear, be afraid' (especially epic poet., Il.+), 'to live in exile' =
qɛúyw (Argos VI-Vª); ò τpéσaç ‘deserter' (Sparta), to which τpɛσãç, -ã ‘id.' (com.).
Verbal adj. ǎτpεστoç ‘dauntless' (trag.). <IE *tres- ‘tremble'>
•VAR Aor. τpέσ(σ)αɩ, whence ỏ τpέσaç ‘deserter' (Sparta), to which τpɛσãç, -ã ‘id.'
(com.). Verbal adj. äτpɛστoç 'dauntless' (trag.).
•COMP Also with Sα-, лαрα-, лepi-, úño-.
•DER Tεpoεv. έqóßŋσɛv 'he put to flight' (H.). On the meaning, cf. Trümpy 1950:
222ff.
•ETYM As an inherited verb, τpέw derives from *tres-e/o-; cf. Skt. trásati ‘to be afraid,
tremble', and PIE *trs-(s)ke/o- in Av. fra-tərəsaiti, OP tarsatiy ‘to be afraid, fear',
causative Skt. trāsayati ‘to frighten, make tremble', Av. Oråŋhaiiete 'to frighten' <
*tros-eie-. A different position of the liquid is found in Italic: U tursitu 'terreto,
fugato' <*tors-, an unexplained e-vowel in Lat. terreō 'to frighten'. Further, äτρεστOS
matches Skt. (sam-ut-)trasta- 'frightened, trembling' < *tres-to- << PIE *tṛsto- (full
grade innovated after τpéw, trásati), Av. taršta- ‘fearful' < *trsto-. Next to *tres- in

=== page 780 ===

1508
tpñµa, tpñois, tpntós
τpέw, we find *trem- in τpέµw, and trep- in Lat. trepidus (cf. ►τpañéw). Cf.
▶ tphpwv.
tpñµa, tpñσiç, tpijtós →tetpaívw.
τpńpwv, -wvoc [f.] epithet of лéλεaα, -εtás 'dove' (Hom., h. Ap., A. R.), also of кéлpoç
‘a water bird' (Ar. Pax 1067); also = лɛpiστɛpá, metaphorically for 'woman' (Lyc.).
<IE *tres- 'tremble'>>
•COMP лoλvτрńрwv ‘abundant in pigeons' (B 502, 582), whence ετpηpwv 'id.'
(Nonn.).
•ETYM Individualizing substantivization of τpηpós in τpŋ[1]póv. ¿λaqpóv, deiλóv,
taxú, rλotov µkpóv ‘light, wretched, quick, small ship' (H.). Because of the Doric
forms τpapóv. τ[p]axú (H.), and τapóv. τaxú with dissimilation, we must start from
*τpaσ-póv < *trs-ró- with a zero grade from the root of τpέw. In the sense of
έλaqpóv, taxú, tpηрóv is usually (cf. Pok. 1095, 1100) connected with ►óτpηpós,
►óτpaλéoç, but this is improbable.
τpɩάw [v.] in the language of sports 'to throw down thrice and thereby to win
definitively', said of fist-fighters (Poll., EM, Zonar., H. et al.), <GR>
•VAR -άσσw, -άτтw, aor. -ážαι, pass. -αxеñvai (ȧño-).
⚫DER TρiαкTηp [m.] 'winner (in fist-fighting)', àτрíαктоç 'undefeated' (A. Ag. 171
resp. Ch. 339, both lyr.); nevtetpiášoµaɩ ‘to be defeated five times' (AP). Aor. tpiáσai
in mathematics 'to multiply by three' (Theo Sm., Iamb.), àτpiασtos ‘not admitting
triplicity' (Dam.); tpiayµós, -oí (Harp. et al.), -αoµoí (Suid.) ‘triad(s)', name of a
philosophical work of Ion of Chios.
⚫ETYM Denominative of τpεñç, tpia.
τpíauva [f.] 'trident', weapon of Poseidon (epic poet. Il.+); in medicine, designation of
a cautery (Paul. Aeg.). <IE? *trei-es 'three', PG?>
●COMP tplaɩvoñxos [m.] 'wielder of the τpíαiva' (comm. Pl.).
⚫DER Denominative τpiαivów 'to shake (with the trident)' (E., com.), also ouv-, etc.;
thence probably τpiaivatñpes. ávtì toñ ápotpioñvtos (H.) (probably for *τpiαɩvw-).
⚫ETYM From τpεчç, τpíα after the instrument names in -atva, e.g. ǎкαɩvα, ȧpúταivα.
Chantraine 1933: 109 considers a folk-etymological transformation after the numeral.
Fur.: 189 compares τpívaε, and asks whether the word for trident could be a
transformation of a Pre-Greek loan for an agricultural tool.
τpíßw, -oµai [v.] ‘to rub, grind, wear down, exhaust, consume, wear off; med. 'to
occupy oneself with'. <IE *terh,- 'rub'>>
●var Aor. tpîyaɩ, -ασðαi (Il.), fut. τpí¼w, -oµaɩ (Od.), pass. aor. tpĭßñval, tpiqēñval,
perf. τéτρчµαι (IA), зpl. Ion. τɛτpiqataɩ, act. tétpiqa (Hell. and late).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. ȧлo-, diα-, ¿к-, ε…-, кαTα-, σUV-.
•DER 1. tpĭßń [f.] ‘grinding, wear, practice, occupation, pastime, delay' (IA), also dɩa-
, άло-, etc. Thence several derived formations: 2. τpißwv, -wvos [m., f.]: a. '(outworn)
simple cloak' (Att.), diminutives -úviov (Att.), -wvápiov (Hell. and late); -wvɩкŵÇ
'like an outworn cloak' (Ar. V. 1132 with allusion to meaning b); b. ‘shrewd (person),
versed, skillful' (Hdt., E., com. etc.), verb τpißшvεúðμat, meaning unclear (Antipho).
=
τpídaкvov
1509
3. tpißác [f.] ‘lecherous woman' (late). 4. tpißɛúç [m.] ‘rubber, massager, pestle, etc.’
(Hell. and late). 5. τpißaкós ‘rubbed, devious, experienced' (Hell. and late; probably
to τpißwv). 6. τpíßaž [m., f.] 'shrewd person' (late). 7. τpißiкóç 'based on practice'
(late). 8. τpißídı(o)v (H.) as an explanation of 8<o>idv¥. 9. τpißαía [f.] 'mortar'
(Suid., Zonar.). 10. τpíßavov [n.] designation of a measure of content (Gal., pap.), =
AŃKudos (H.). Further derivatives: 11. τpíßoç [f., m.] 'worn road, path' (Hdt., E., X.,
etc.), also τpiẞn 'practice, wear, etc.' (h. Merc., A. [lyr.]), 'friction, friction surface'
(Hp.). 12. τpчµµα (secondarily -í-) [n.] ‘which is rubbed, snippet, scrap' (Hp., inscr.,
Gal.), 'drink made of ground spices' (com., pap. etc.), 'shrewd person' (Ar.);
diminutive -μάτov (com., medic.); often from prefixed verbs, e.g. лɛpíτpääa
'cunning person' (Ar., D.), ‘ointment' (medic.), εлíτρчµµα 'plaster, make-up' (Joh.
Chrys.); τpчччós [m.] 'worn road' (X. etc.), εл-, σvv-τpчµµóç ‘grinding' (LXX). 13.
tpĩyis (àvá-, ěv-, σúv-, etc.) [f.] 'rubbing, wear, massage' (IA). As a second member:
14. -tpiy, e.g. åµqítpш ‘crafty, misestimateď (Archil.), oikótpi ‘house-slave' (Ar. et
al.), rather = ỏ očkov τpíßwv as ò ¿v oľku̟ tpißóµevoç, so transitive like лopvótpш,
okevótply, nedóτpå etc.; but note aiyótpißes åtpaлoí ‘paths worn out by goats' (D.
H.). With transfer to the s-stems: 15. -tpĭßýs, e.g. ¿vtpɩßýs ‘skillful, experienced,
ȧτpiẞns 'not rubbed, not traversed, inexperienced, undamaged' (Att.); ȧτpíẞαστоs of
a horse 'not trained' (X. Eq. Mag. 8, 3: antonym oi toùç лóðaç éкëεлovημέvo), as if
from *τpiẞácw, if not analogical after the numerous privatives in -αστoç. 16. After
the a-stems: -τpißηs, e.g. лaidoτpíßŋs, -ov [m.] = ò лaïdαç τpíẞwv 'gymnastic
master' with -ía, -íŋ, -éw, -ikós (IA). See ►ȧλετpíẞavoç.
•ETYM The whole Greek system of forms is built on the present τpißw with long
vowel, whence analogically with a short vowel aor. τpĭßñvai (after þióñvai, tvлñval,
etc.), τpíßoç, -ń (after σtißos, σtixoç, etc.), etc. No exact agreement exists outside
Greek. Closest are Latin forms like perf. trīvī with trītus, dētrimentum, etc. ToAB
triw 'to mix' (not 'to shatter') is far off in meaning. Does the Greek derive from
*trh,-i-g"-? See also on ► tɛipw, ▶tetpaívw, ▸ titpŵokw, and ►τpúw.
管
τpíуŋ [f.] 'trigla, gurnard', a fish (Epich., Sophr., Att. com., Arist., Hell. pap., etc.);
<GR?, PG?>
•VAR Dor. -ā, second. -ǎ (-i- and -í-).
•COMP τpιуópos 'catching gurnards' (AP), -ßóloç ‘id.' (Plu.).
•DER Diminutives τpłyλ-íç [f.] (Antiph., Arist.), -íov [n.] (Hell. pap., Gp.); thence
-ɩɩɩ [f.] ‘kind of acúŋ' (Dorio apud Ath.). Also τpiyóλaç [m.] name of a fish
(Sophr.).
⚫ETYM From ►τpí(w, referring to the grunting sound from the friction of the gill
cover bones when the fish is taken out of the water. Cf. τριуλíčяу кατà µíµnoiv ènì
Twv yeλwvTwv (H.). The by-form τpiуóλaç joined the nouns in -ólaç, -óλnc, eg.
falvóðaç, -ódŋs (Bechtel 1921, 2: 245). Extensively on τpíyλŋ Thompson 1947 s.v.
τρíðaкvov [n.] 'large oysters of the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean' (Plin. 32, 63). <LW
Orient.>
⚫ETYM Explained by Pliny as 'eaten in three bites', but this is probably a folk-
etymological interpretation of a loanword; see Thompson 1947 s.v.

=== page 781 ===

1510
Tpilw
τpí\w [v.] ‘to buzz, gnash, squeak' (w 5, 7, Hp., Arist., etc.). ◄ONOM➤
•VAR More usually perf. (with present meaning) tétpîya (II.), late fut. tpiʊw (Sm.),
τpičnow (Aq.).
•COMP Also with ava-, dia-, úлo-, etc.
●Der tpiyµós, tpiσµós [m.] ‘buzzing, gnashing, etc.', of animals (partridge, mouse,
fish), also of teeth and saws (Hp., Arist., Thphr., Plu.); see τpiyλn. Compare
τpičέaç = gryllus (gloss.), and τptуóvia v.l. for tεɩɩɩуóvа (Arist.) in Gil Fernández
1959: 124f.
•ETYM Onomatopoeia like στpí(y)\, Lat. strīdeō ‘to sizzle, drone, creak', and
probably also ToA trisk- 'to drone'. Cf. ► τpúšw.
tpińpns →¿pétns.
tpɩópxns [m.] kind of hawk, perhaps ‘buzzard, Buteo vulgaris' (Semon., Ar., Arist.,
Thphr., etc.). <?>
•VAR Also -os.
•ETYM Probably a loanword, adapted to úpɩ- and opxis; cf. *v-opxos and ¿v-ópxns
(see öpxis). This would be an allusion to the folk-etymological meaning 'three-
testicled' 'very lascivious' in Timae. 145 (Plb. 12, 15, 2). Details in Thompson 1895
S.V.
=>
=
Tplottic → ǒode.
τpíñλa → Sínλaž.
tpic, tpitos → tpeic.
τpɩɩɩúç [f.] 1. 'third of a phyle' (Att.); τpiττú-αpxоs [m.] 'principal of a t.', whence
-apxéw (Pl., inscr., Poll. et al.), also τρiктvapуéw (Delos III and IIª). 2. 'sacrifice of
three animals' (Call., sch.). 3. ‘triad', of a threefold victory (Philostr.); τpιús. tpiás
'number three, triad (H.). <PG➤
•VAR τpítús (Ceos), tpiktúç (Delos, see below), -Úos.
•DER τpittúa [f.] 'sacrifice of three animals' (Ister, Porph.; doubtful Epich. 187, rather
to be read -кTúα); also τριττо(1)α (Athens Vª), τρiкTOι<a> (Sophr. 3; uncertain) 'id.';
unclear: τpiкTεvaаv кηvаv (Delph. IV³), see on кηva. Further τрíкτɛɩpα (-ɛīpα cod.)
Ovoía 'Evvalía. Oúetai dè návta τpíα кai žvopxα ‘sacrifice to Enyalius, all three are
offered uncastrateď (H.); τpɩɩɩα (IG 1², 76), accent unknown, probably after
tpittóç; thence -oa (IG 1², 5: 5 [Eleusis V₁]) with loss of the t.
•ETYM The form τpik-túç supposes a velar enlargement, as seen also in τpɩσσÓS,
tpittós, tpišós (from *tpɩx-ɩóc); an original voiceless -к- is also conceivable, given
Skt. triká- 'threefold'. This form would have been replaced by τpɩɩtús on the model
of τpiττóç. The third variant τpшττúç might have been introduced after τpí-ïtvxoç
'threefold'. The variation more probably points to a Pre-Greek word (not in Fur.).
tpɩqo\īvos [adj.] of oĭvoç, from Trifolium in Campania (Ath. 26 e). ◄LW Lat.➤
VAR Hellenized in τpioúλλivos (Gal. 14, 19).
•ETYM From the toponym.
tpǔyáw
tpixáïkes (i) [m.pl.] epithet of the Dorians (T 177, Hes. Fr. 191). <GR>
1511
•ETYM Probably ‘hair-shaking', from Opíč, gen. τpixós ‘hair', like кopvе-áï‹ (X 132)
‘helmet-shaking': see for instance Leumann 1950: 65, in antiquity already Apollon.
apud sch. T 177, EM. Since early times, the word was taken to refer to the three tribes
of the Dorians (thus already Hes. l.c.). Differently, Pisani Arch. glott. ital. 50 (1965):
iff.
Tpoín [f.] 'the land of Troy'; in the Iliad already used for the town, Ilios. <LW Anat.>
ETYM The word is no doubt derived from Towes 'Trojans'. It has often been
remarked that Troia was the land, not just the city (e.g. Page 1959: 294). It is
explicitly stated by Del Valle Muñoyerro Glotta 75 (1999): 68-81 that it did not
indicate the town, but this is clearly wrong (cf. the name-epithet formulae εvτɛíxεoç,
εÜπupуoç, εúpvάyva, è̟žaλanážai) and unnecessary; the meaning gradually shifted
to the town (going to Troy always included fighting for Ilios).
The annals of Tudhaliya IV, from around the end of the 15th c., mention Wi-lu-ša
Ilios) and Ta-ru-(ú-)i-ša at the end of an expedition to the north. This must be
understood as "[the city of] Wilusa and [the land of] Troy.” Ta-ru-(ú-)i-ša must be
read /Trūisa/. Thus the original form had Trū-, which surfaced in Greek as Tpw-.
tporaliç, tpóriç, tpóños, etc. →tpέntw.
=
tpoqalis, tpoqń, tpóqis, etc. →τpέqw.
tpoxós, tpóxos →tpéxw.
τpúßov [n.] kind of drinking vessel of unknown shape and varying size (Ar., LXX,
Ev. Matt.), also a measure of capacity (medic. etc.). <PG▷
•ETYM Usually explained as ‘bowl, dish' or 'bottle, jug'. No etymology. Fur.: 367
compares τpíẞavov and considers the word to be Pre-Greek.
τpůуáw [v.] 'to gather (especially of grapes), reap' (II.). <?►
•VAR Aor. τpuуñoaɩ, fut. tpvyñow.
•COMP Rarely with ảлo-, ¿к-, πрo-, etc.; τpuуηópos 'bearing corn or grapes' (h.
Ap.).
•DER τpúyŋ [f.] ‘vintage, harvest' (h. Ap. 55, pap. IIP, Ath., AP et al.), 'drought,
dryness' (Nic. Th. 368), probably a backformation to the verb. Further derivatives: 1.
tpúy-ŋtos [m.] ‘vintage, harvest' Th., Thphr., LXX, pap., etc.), -ŋtikóç belonging to
the vintage' (late pap.). 2. -ŋois [f.] ‘vintage' (pap. IIIª, Plu.), -ñoчos ‘ripe for harvest,
vindemialis' (EM, H., gloss.). 3. -ŋuα [n.] ‘harvest' (of honey; Atticista ined.). 4. -ŋtýp
[m.] (Hes. Sc.), -ntńs [m.] (LXX, pap. et al.) 'winegrower, harvester', fem. -ýtpia (D.,
Poll.), -ŋτpiov [n.] 'wine-press' (gloss.); "potpuуntúpρ, -τns name of a star which
rises shortly before the vintage (since end Vª). 5. tpúyos [n., m.] = τpúyŋ (Et. Gud.,
H.). 6. PN Tpvy-años (Ar.), -ía name of a Bacchante (Nonn.). 7. Sɩatpúyios, of öpxoS
(w 342), perhaps 'ripening at different times'; but acc. to Schwyzer 1950: 449
‘interspersed with fruit trees or vines'; Пpoτpúуaɩos epithet of Dionysus (Ach. Tat.,
Ael.), Oɛoì II. (Poll.); „potpúyala. εopτǹ Alovúσou кai Ioσɛdŵvoç (H.). Also τpúyɛɩ,
tpvyɛĩ, tpvokɛi = Eŋpaível, -etai ‘[trans.] dries up, [intrans.] becomes dry' (Zonar.,

=== page 782 ===

1512
TPÚyoltog
Theognost., H.), εtpʊyev. εεηpávoŋ, εлì λíµvηs 'was dried' (about a pool of water)
(H.); for the meaning, compare τрúуη and τрυyaẞóλia. ɛiç ä кaproùç ₹ŋpoùç
άлετíеεντо 'in which dried fruits are stored' (H.).
ETYM No etymology, unlesss related to τpúε. The words oτpúуŋ (-xn cod.,
alphabetically misplaced). Xóptoç, кaλáµŋ ‘pen, fodder, stalk or straw' (H., also
medic. apud Gal.?), and òtpvynάyos epithet of an ass (Archil. 97; in H. also ȧ-) are
unrelated: the traditional explanation from τpuyŋ-qάyos with prothetic ó- must be
rejected. It rather means åкav0o-qάyos; compare OE risci bita 'panicle-, bulrush-
biter' = 'horse'.
tpúyoɩros [m.] ‘must strainer' (Ar., Phryn., Poll.). <?>
•DER τpúуoɩлέw [v.] (Suid.).
⚫ETYM From ►τpúε 'musť' and a second member from a verb meaning 'to sieve'.
Frisk connects -oɩos with Germanic *seip- 'to trickle', but this is connected by LIV₂
with siẞw 'to let flow'. Alternatively, one may derive -oɩлoç from PIE *seik"- 'to pour'
as reconstructed by LIV², whence, among others, OHG sihan 'to sieve' is derived. Yet
see iкuáç 'moisture', where the root is reconstruced as *seik-.
τpúчw [v.] 'to coo, murmur' (I 311, Hp., Hell. and late epic). <ONOM>
•VAR στpúčw (Erot.); rare aor. τpúžai.
•COMP Also with έлɩ-, etc.
●DER tpvywv, -óvos [f.] ‘turtle-dove' (Ar., Hell. and late epic), also as a fish name,
'stingray' (Epich., Arist.+); the naming motive is unclear: a euphemism? Diminutive
tpvyóviov [n.] (AP, Them.), also ‘pigeonry' (Ps.-Dsc.), -10¢ [adj.] (Opp.); tpvoµós
[m.] 'cooing, etc.' (Hp., Gal., H.). Furthermore, τpuλ(\)iw (ev-) 'to chuckle, babble'
(Ar. Th. 341, Hp., Poll.), whence toμóc (Hp.); for the suffix, cf. Opvλí(w (see
▶Opudos).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeia in -ú(w, like ypúчw, lúčw, etc.; cf. ►τpíšw.
tpvý\n(s), -is [f.] ‘ladle' (Luc. Lex., H.). <LW Lat.>
ETYM From Lat. truella 'dipper, scoop', after τрúш and the instrument names in
-nλn, e.g. unλn. Was Gг. τрулηλα. τoрúvη (H.) modelled on τpunάw?
τpúµŋ [f.] ‘(grated) hole' (sch.), metaph. 'shrewd, cunning fellow' (Ar. Nu. 448). ◄ GR➤
•VAR Also τpчµα (sch.), -áτiov (EM); τpúµa (ň) = лóvos (Theognost. Can.)
•DER τpvµaλ-iá [f.] ‘hole' (LXX, Ev. Marc., etc.), also with obscene meaning (Sotad.),
-ītis. Aqpodity (H.).
⚫ETYM Verbal noun from ►τpúw.
τpú, -уóc [f.] 'young unfermented wine with yeast, must' (Ion. since Archil., com.,
Theoc., Thphr., etc.). <PG?>
•COMP See τpúуoñoç; also úлó-τpuуos 'yeasty' (Hp.).
•DER 1. τpuy-ía [f.] 'yeast (of wine), young wine' (Ph. Bel., medic., pap. I³), -íaç
(olvoc) 'id.' (LXX, pap. IIIP e.g.). 2. τpúyɩoç. τpvyía oïvou η ελaíov 'sediment of wine
or olive oil (H.). 3. τpúу-tvov [n.] 'pigment made of yeast' (auct. apud Plin.). 4.
-wdns 'yeast-like, yeasty' (Arist., medic. et al.). 5. -ɛpós 'id.' (Polyzel. Com. V-IV).
Xw
1513
•ETYM Without certain etymology. The traditional connection with τápуavov
‘spoiled wine, wine-vinegar' is neither phonetically nor semantically convincing. The
formal identity with τpyάw is remarkable, especially since both words refer to
viniculture and wine production. Possibly, τpuуáw originally referred both to the
harvesting and the first pressing of grapes, but was ousted from the second meaning
by τpaлéw. Porzig ZII 5 (1927): 271f. pleads for Pre-Greek origin of both τápyavov
and τpú, as well as that of related τpúyŋ.
τрблáш [v.] 'to bore (through)' (1384+) <IE *truH-p-?>
•VAR Аoг. τрυлñσαι, etc.
•COMP Also with έк-, diα-, etc.; ¿к-τρʊлáш also intr. 'to slip out through a hole'
(εкτετρúлηкεv Ar. Ec. 337; from τpúлη?).
●DER 1. tpúit-nqua, -ŋµátov [n.] 'bore-hole, hole' (com., Arist., Hero), with έê- also
‘chippings made by boring' (Thphr.). 2. -ŋois (¿k-, nɛpɩ-) [f.] ‘boring (through)’
(Hp., Arist., Thphr.+). 3. -ŋtýs [m.] ‘borer' (Pl. Cra.), -ŋtýp [m.] ‘pierced vesseľ (Ph.
Bel.). Further τрúлavov [n.] 'borer, push drill, trepan, strands of wood for making
fire' (since 1 385), whence -ávov, -avwdns, -avikós, -avíčw, -avoµós (rare and late);
also -ávŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Hdn. Gr., H.), -avía [f.] 'thong of a push drill' (Poll.). A back-
formation is τрúñŋ, épüлa [f.] ‘hole' (Hdn. Epim., AP, H., Eust.). As a first member
in τpvл-αλóлη a fox which slips in through a hole', designation of a cunning
person (Com. Adesp.).
•ETYM Probably related to τpów, whence also τpúxw; further afield are τpíßw,
► τɛípw, and ►τετpαivш. Because of the late and rare attestation of τрúлη, the verb
can hardly be denominative. It is more likely to be an old iterative formation. BSI.
*trup-, *troup- has been compared, as in ORu. trup ‘trunk, (field of) corpses', Ru.
trup 'corpse', OPr. trupis 'log'; however, the circumflex vowel of BSl. (from PIE
*treup-; see LIV²) does not match Greek -ō-, which is also found in τpúxш. A better
candidate is PSlav. *tryti ‘to rub' < *truH-; see LIV² s.v. *treuH-. In that case, τpūnάw
would have a root enlargement *-p-.
tpūtávŋ [f.] ‘tongue of a balance' (IA). <GR>
●DER tpvtavɛúw [v.] ‘to weigh' (gloss.).
⚫ETYM Noun in -τávη from the verb τpúw; it probably refers to the opening in which
the tongue moves, “foramen, intra quod linum vel lingua, de quo examinatio est”
(sch. on Pers. 1, 7 as an explanation of the borrowing Lat. trutina).
τpvqάλɛɩɑ [f.] name of a helmet (Il., X 183), literally 'provided with four qáλor', =
kópus tetpácaλoç. <IE *kwetuer- ‘four'>
•ETYM Compound of τpu- 'four' (from the original zero grade of téσσapes, *k™tur-
> *k"tru-; see also ►τpáñɛ(α) and qάλos, with a suffix -εta-; originally an epithet of
kópus.
=>
tpvqń, tpúqos → Opúrtw.
τpбxw [v.] 'to wear out, exhaust, afflict', med. 'to wear down, pine' (mostly epic Ion.,
poet. since Il.). <GR
•VAR Almost only pres. and ipf. (fut. ptc. τpúžovτα p 387).

=== page 783 ===

1514
tpÚw
TUYXávw
1515
•COMP Also with кατα-, etc.
•DER τpuxoç [n.] 'rag, scrap, tattered garment' (S., E., Ar., Arist., Thphr.), diminutive
τpux-íov [n.] (Hp., Aret.), adj. -ŋpós ‘ragged, worn' (E.), ‘stringing, afflicting' (Vett.
Val.), after λvëηpós etc.; -ivos ‘raggeď (J., Gal. et al.). Denominative verb tpvxóoµai,
-ów (εк-) = τpúxoµaɩ, -w in tɛtpvxwμévos (Hp., Th., etc.), τpυx-wеñvaι (Hp.), -wσαι,
-wσɛv (Th.), -oυτaι (Mimn.), -ów (Gal., Hdn.); thence wσɛs [f.pl.] 'afflictions'
(Max. Tyr.).
•ETYM Formation like oµńxw, výxw, чwxw, etc. (Schwyzer: 702 and 685, Chantraine
1942: 330); see τpúw. See Mumm and Richter IJDLLR 5 (2008): 33-108 on the
enlargement -X--
τpúw [v.] 'to wear down, exhaust' (IA). <IE *truH- 'rub'>
•var Aor. tpñσai, fut. τpúσw, mostly perf. pass. téτpũµaɩ with ptc. tetpvµévos.
•COMP rarely with àão-, кaτα-, etc. As a first member in tpvσávwp 'wearing down
men' (S.), τpvσißios wearing down life' (Ar.), τpvσiлov [n.] ‘mark, branded on a
disused horse' (Eup., Poll., EM), back-formation τpúσitros [m.], name of such horse
(Theognost. Can.).
●DER TρŨσiç. Vóσoç, róvoç ‘illness, labor'; τpuσ[o]óv. voσɛpóv, λentóv, doßevés ‘of
illness, weak, feeble or sickly' (H.); τpúos [n.] = лóvоç (Сall. apud Et. Gen.). Also
tpúokel. tpúxel, Šnpaivɛɩ wears out, dries' (H.).
•ETYM The same zero grade as in tpūµa, -µŋ, tpūлáw, τpúxw. The Balto-Slavic
cognates (OCS tryjo̟, tryti ‘to rub', Lith. trūněti, 1sg. trūniù ‘to spoil, putrefy, decay')
point to a root *treuH-; cf. LIV. This obviates the need to explain Gr. -ū- as taken
from the pf.pass. τéτрüµαι. Cf. Tεipw, τετрaivw with further litt.
τpwуw [v.] 'to gnaw, browse, eat, mostly of raw fruits (IA since (90), later ‘to eat' in
general. <PG>
•VAR Aor. τpayɛïv (mostly with prefix, especially έv-), younger кata-ɩpŵžaɩ, fut.
τрwчoμαι, perf. pass. τéτpшуμαι.
COMP Often with prefix, especially in aor., e.g. кατα-, ȧло-, ларα-, èv-.
•DER A. With full grade: 1. tpŵyɛç [m.pl.] = Oŋpía tà èv toiç dorpioiç (Stratt.);
'weevil' (LSJ s.v.; like ерíч, лτáε, etc.); as a second member e.g. in кvαμоτpáž bean
eater' (Ar.); cf. τpŵyaç (nr. 3. below). 2. tpwk-tys [m.] ‘gnawer, nibbler, beguiler,
knave' (§ 289, 0 416, etc.); also name of a fish (Ael.), perhaps borrowed as Lat. tructa
(WH s.v.); as a second member e.g. in ittepvo-tpwktns (Batr.); -tís [f.] (Tz.), -tikós
'greedy' (Ph., Tz.). 3. tpwy-\ŋ [f.] ‘hollow, hole' (Hp., Herod., Arist., LXX, Batr.),
diminutive -λúptov (Hdn. Gr.), -λíτŋ [m.] name of a bird (Hdn. Epim., Eust.),
-λτç [f.] epithet of several plants = τpwуλ)o-dúτię, -dvtiký (Edict. Diocl. etc.; see
below). As a first member in τpwyλo-dúτηs [m.] “hole-crawler”, said of several
animals, e.g. foxes, snakes, also wren, whence -Sutέw, -Sutikós (Arist. et al.); -Súvwv
[m.] mocking epithet of a mouse (Batr.). Further Tpwyo-Sútai [m.pl.] name of an
Ethiopian people (Hdt. 4, 183 codd. ABC, pap.; in Str. et al. also written Tpwyλo-),
whence -Sútiç, -Sutikós (D. S., Plu. et al.); cf. τp@yas. tpŵylas (H.). 4. tpwy-áλia
[n.pl.] (rarely sg.) ‘sweets' (Pi., Fr. 124, Ar., Arist., Hell. inscr.). 5. -ava [n.pl.] ‘id.'
(Sparta IP). 6. -ματa [pl.] ‘id.' (Philox.). 7. tpŵ§-iç (àñó-) [f.] ‘gnawing' (Hp., Arist.+),
whence -quos ‘edible, in raw state' (Theoc.), -чua [n.pl.] ‘edible fruits' (Hp., pap.). 8.
-ava [n.pl.] 'dry wood' (Thphr.) (cf. ►τpαúčava). 9. On τpw\a\\íc, -ídos [f.]
'locust', see s.v.
B. With zero grade (from the aorist τpayɛiv): 1. τpay-avós 'edible' (Hdn. Gr., EM),
like έdavóç. 2. -aλíčw = τpwyw (Ar. V. 674), after лктαλíčш etc.; -áλa = tpwyáλia
(Theognost.). 3.-nýµata [n.pl.] (rarely sg.) 'sweets, dessert' (com., X., Arist., etc.),
whence -ŋµátia, -ŋuatwdng, -ŋuatíšw, -qua-tioµós. On ►τpáyoç, see s.v.
ETYM The vocalic alternation in τpwy- τpay- is explained by LIV² s.v. *treh¸(g)- as a
secondary zero grade τpay- for original *τpwy-. LIV² also connects ToAB träsk-,
ToB treṣṣäm 'to chew', from a PTo. root *tǝrsk-; see also Adams 1999: 319 S.V. tresk.
Yet the IE connection is very doubtful, and had better be abandoned (the secondary
zero grade is doubtful, and there is no root *treg-). In view of the vocalic vacillation
in tpwžava, tpaúžava, and τpw\a\\ís, these are Pre-Greek words. As there is no IE
etymology for τрwyw, this word could also be Pre-Greek (though τpážava,
τpaúšava, and τpw\a\\íç are probably not derived from it).
τpw\a\\íç [f.] locust' (Alex., Dsc., Plin. et al.) <PG(S)►
•VAR Also τpo\a\\íç and τpišε\\aç.
⚫ETYM = In Beekes 2008, I demonstrated that all words in -aλλ- are of Pre-Greek
origin (with A from palatalized 1, i.e. 1); thus the word is Pre-Greek. There is no
reason to derive the word from tрwуw (note the difference in meaning!).
τρшлάw →τρεлw.
=>
τpwxάw →τpεxw.
tpww →titpwokw.
Túẞapıç [f.] designation of a Dorian salad = “εv öεεɩ σελɩvα", i.e. 'celery pickled in
wine vinegar' (Poll. 6, 71). <?►
•VAR Acc. -LV.
ETYM Unexplained. Neumann 1961: 86f. argues against a connection with the
toponym Σúẞapıs (thus Fick BB 22 (1897): 50) and instead, hesitantly, proposes to
connect Túẞapıç with HLuw. tuwarsa- 'wine, vine' (whence also Oúpoos). Fur.: 262 is
sceptical.
τvyxávw [v.] ‘to achieve an aim or goal, to meet, come across, encounter accidentally',
intr. 'to meet, get or acquire incidentally'. <IE *d"eugh- 'hit the mark, meet'>
●var Aor. tuxɛîv, epic also tvxñoaɩ, redupl. subj. tetúxnoi, opt. tetúxoqui (late and
artificial), fut. tɛúžoµaɩ (all Il.), perf. τɛtúуöкa (since к 88), ptc. -ηкws or -ŋws (P
748), tétɛvxa (later Att., etc.), ¿τeteúxɛɛ (Hdt.), téτuɣα (Aristeas etc.), med. aor.
Tɛúšaσðaɩ (LXX), pass. ¿v-eteúx¤nv, perf. ¿iu-tétevyµai (Plb.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. εv-, εл-, άло-, ouv-. In compounds, as a second
member τuxns, referring to τúxη and τuxεïv, e.g. εÚTUXs lucky, SvotuxŃS
‘unlucky', whence -ía, -έw, -ŋua, -ŋoɩs (Pi., IA); very often to prefixed verbs, e.g.
έmtvx-ns (to ¿mtʊɣεïv) 'successful', whence -ía, -in 'success, luck' (IA). Also -TUXOC

=== page 784 ===

1516
TUI
(quite rare), e.g. Óчíτuxoç 'who attains (luck) late' (late). As a first member in PNs,
e.g. Tvx-ápɛtoç, Túx-avdpoç.
●DER 1. Túxŋ [f.] ‘coincidence, incident, luck, fate, destiny', also personified like Lat.
Fatum (since h. Cer. 420, Hes. Th. 360; appellative since Archil. and Pi.); τʊxèpós
'coincidentally, fortunately' (A. [lyr.], Ar., Arist., etc.), -aчoç ‘coincidentally' (Plu., J.,
AP), Tò Tuxaiov 'templum Fortunae' (D. C., inscr.), ǹ Tuxaía = Túxn (inscr.
Palestine); τà Tuxɛia 'festival in honor of Túxn' (Lampsakos); -1кóç 'coincidentally'
(Plb., Phld., etc.), -ádiov [n.] diminutive (Eust.); -áɛσðaι· στoxášεσða 'to aim (at)'
(H.) (τuxασáµεvov Erot. = στоxασáµɛvov Hp.); ¿vτUXAλÓS. ¿VTEVKTIкń 'affable' (H.).
Túxwv, wvos [m.] epithet of Hermes (Magnesia IIIª, Str., AP). 2. Tɛūčiç [f.]
‘attainment' (Plu., Arr., S. E.), earlier and more often to prefixed verbs, e.g. ¿ñí-
‘attainment, obtainment' (Arist. etc.), ev- 'meeting, visit, request' (Pl., Arist., etc.),
άлo- 'failing, vain request' (Hell. and late), whence εлɩ-, ¿v-, άлo-tεuktikós, etc. 3. To
άло-τуávш, etc.: άлó-τεvуμαa 'failed enterprise' (Arist., etc.), v-Tεvyμa 'encounter'
(D. S.), ¿ñí-tevyµa 'success, luck' (Hell. and late); but tɛñyµa to ▶ tɛúxw.
•ETYM The nasal present tyxávw (*dhu-n-gh-), them, aor. τuxɛiv (*dug"-e/o-), and
their derivatives preserve the more original meaning 'hit the mark, meet', as opposed
to the thematic root present τεúxw ‘to manufacture'. They are derived from the root
*d½eug¹- ‘to hit, to which belong the Skt. stative duhé ‘gives milk', Go. daug ‘is fiť
(see LIV2 s.v. for further cognates).
tvɩ [adv.] · wdɛ. Kpñτɛç ‘thus (Cretan)', iv tʊïv. ¿v toútu̟ ‘by this' (H.). To this Aeol.
Tvide 'here' (Sapph.). <IE *kwo- ‘somebody'>
⚫ETYM Formation after *лvï seen in Arg. Cret. ó-лvɩ, loc. of ïv- = Skt. kú 'where?',
kú-tra 'where(to)?', Osc. puf 'where', etc. These derive from IE *ku- which stands
beside kwo- as in лóеεv, etc. Further, лç (Sophr.) and Rhod. öлʊç arose from a
change of vi to v (Schwyzer: 199), and added -ç.
TÚкOÇ [m.] 'tool for processing stones, blacksmith's hammer, pickaxe', also 'battle axe'
(Hdt. 7, 89: codd. к and x; Poll. 7, 118 and 125). ◄PG➤
•VAR TÚXOS (Hell. inscr., H.; in E. HF 945 τúxaiç cod. for túxoɩs or túkols).
●COMP εÜTUKOÇ (-x-) 'willing, ready' (B., A., Theoc., Call., etc.), whence εÚTUк-áčov
(cod. -ačov). εűtuk[t]ov čxe, étoчov ‘it stays ready, prepared (H.) (hence to be
restored in A. Th. 150 [lyr.]), εÚTUкíšw (EM), ɛÚTUкŵç. pądíwç kaì tà õμoia ‘easy or
ready vel sim.' (H.).
●DER tuк-í\w‘to work stone' (Ar. Av. 1138, Poll.), -íõµata (tvx-) [n.pl.] ‘stone
buildings, walls' (E.), also άло-τυxí¶w = ȧñoлελɛкáw (Paus. Gr., H.), also with έк-,
áлo-tvxíšw
¿ê-,
лроσ- (Att. inscr. IV³); TUк-íov = TÚкOÇ (Eust.), TUк-ávη [f.] ‘thrashing equipment,
túkoç
flail (Theognost., Eust., gloss.), -ávov [n.] ‘id.' (pap., gloss.). Also τutávŋ. öpyavóv
ti, & xpwvtai ɛiç tòv åλontòv toũ σíτou 'tool which is used for threshing grain' (H.),
tpvyávη. ǹ tòv σitov ȧλowσa 'she who is threshing grain' (gloss.), after τpvyáw?
•ETYM Traditionally, túкoç is derived from a PIE root *teuk-, as in OCS tákno̟ti, Ru.
tknut' 'to thrust' and, with a different ablaut, CS is-tukati 'to cut from metal, pour,
found', OCS tykati, Ru. týkať' 'to thrust', Latv. tūkât ‘knead, press'; cf. LIV² s.v.
*teuk-. The aspirated forms τúxoc, -iw are supposed to be due to the influence of
TÚABOS1
1517
TεúXw. Yet the consonant variation rather seems to demonstrate that the word is
Pre-Greek; influence of tɛúxw is improbable, as its meaning is not specific enough.
túλŋ [f.] ‘bulge, callosity, pad, cushion' (Sapph., com., pap., AP, etc.). <PG?►
•VAR Also -Ū- (AP); túλos [m.] ‘bulge, callosity, hunch, nail, peg' (X., Ar., Nic., Hero,
Str., etc.).
•COMP tvλ(0)-vôávτŋs [m.] ‘cushion weaver' (Hyp., pap. VI-VII³), -ɛdýs ‘bulge-,
callosity-like' (medic.), ëɛpítvλoç ‘surrounded by túλot' (Delos), ‘callous' (Sor.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutives Tuλ-íov [n.] 'small nail' (Hero et al.), -ápiov [n.] to τúλŋ or
Túλoç (pap. and inscr. III-VIP), -aívov [n.] ‘small callosity' (Aret.), from *túλaɩva
after pλúкταiva? 2. -ɛov [n.] ‘paď (S. Fr. 468, Hell. pap.). 3. túλapoç. µávdalos,
τvλapúσaç μavбaλwoas (H.). 4. Túλ-wv, -wvoç [m.] 'provided with a callous skin'
(gloss.). 5. -óε 'callous' (Nic.), -wdŋs ‘id.' (Plu., medic.). 6. Tvλóµαι 'to get
callosities', -ów 'to make callous' (X., Theoc., medic. etc.), also with ảлo-, ¿к-, лɛpɩ-
etc. Thence τvλwtós, tetvλwµévos knobbed' (Hdt.); thence (¿к-, лεpi-)túλwois
(medic. etc.), adj. -wτIкóç; -wμα [n.] (Poll., H.). 7. Tvλ-íσow, -iτTW 'to make into a
bulge, twine into a ball, swathe (up)' (com., Hp., Ev. Matt., Luc., Gal., etc.), almost
only prefixed, especially with v-; τúλ-уμа (H.) as an explanation of λ, TUλуμó
[m.] 'swathing' (sch.). Backformation έvτúλŋ [f.] 'swaddling cloth' (pap. IIª). Unclear
is Túλos [m.] 'box, chest' vel sim. (D. C. 79, 20).
⚫ETYM Because of its vacillating meaning and its short form, túλŋ, -os can easily be
provided with an etymology. Various cognates have been proposed: the Balto-Slavic
group of OPr. tulan [adv.] 'many', Lith. túlas 'several, rather many', tulis ‘nail on a
car, plug, nail of an axle, etc.", OCS tylo, Ru. tyl 'neck', but these presuppose *tuH-;
Germanic ON þollr 'tree, peg', OE þoll, MLG dolle, MOHG Dolle 'thole', MLG
(Westfäl.) dülle 'booty', all seemingly < PIE *tul-no-; also, Lat. tullius 'gush', W twl
'round elevation', Alb. tul 'piece of meat without bone, roe', Skt. túlam [n.] ‘plume,
fan, bundle, etc.'. Greek σálos ‘unquiet movement of the sea, gulf of waves' (cf. Lat.
tullius) has also been connected as *tul(H)o-. Yet none of these IE words is a close
match for túλŋ in form and meaning, so the word may rather be Pre-Greek.
Túμẞoç 1 [m.] 'mound, burial mound, grave' (Il.). <PG>
•COMP tuµßoxóos ‘raising a grave' (A.), tvµßoxo-éw ‘to raise a burial mounď (Hdt.,
v.l. 323), -ŋ [f.] 'raising a burial mound (v.l. 323), óеνóτчμẞoç 'interred in a
foreign country' (Man.).
●der 1. Adj. túµß-(ε) tos belonging to the burial mound' (Lyc., inscr.), -ídıoç ‘id.'
(Orph.). 2. -íτns Aãas 'gravestone' (AP). 3. -íov [n.] diminutive (sch.). 4. τчµßàç
yʊvý tvµßádaç ëλɛyov τàç qapµaкídaç, àñò toũ nepì toùç túµßovç diaτpißɛiv kai
TOÙÇ VEKPOÙÇ ÅKPwtηpiášɛiv (H.). 5. -oσúvη name of a wall in Constantinople, which
was made of tombstones (VIP). 6. τvµßɛúw [v.] 'to bury', intr. 'to rest in the grave'
(S., E., Ar., etc.), ¿v-tvµßεúoµai ‘to rest in the grave' (Ph.), whence -ɛía [f.] ‘buriaľ’
(Suid.), -ɛvµa [n.] ‘grave' (S.), ‘corpse' (E.). Several hypostases, e.g. ¿étúµß-10s (A.,
S., Plu., AP etc.), -ídios (A. [lyr.] etc.) ‘at or on the grave, belonging to the grave'.
⚫ETYM Beside Túμẞos, we find Corcyr. τūμoç (VIª; the length is metrically ensured)
with the same meaning. The variation shows that the word is Pre-Greek (not

=== page 785 ===

1518
TÚHBOS 2
recognized by Fur.). Lat. tumulus 'earth-hill' and Arm. t'umb 'landfill, earthen wall'
may contain the same Pre-Greek/Mediterranean word. It is possible that Celtic
forms such as MIr. tomm [m.] 'small hill', MW tom [m., f.] 'dung, mound' belong
here, as well.
...
Túμẞoç 2 [m.] in & τúµßɛ, referring to an old man (Ar. Lys. 372), yépovta túµßov (E.
Med. 1209), yέpovtos τúμẞov (Heracl. 167); τʊµßoуépwv. έσxaτoyńpwę kai
napnyµévos tý diavoíą (H., Ar. Fr. 35, Com. Adesp. 1172 et al.); naptetúµßɛi.
rapaqpovɛ̃i, ñµáptnkev (H.); tetvµßwµévos = decrepitus (gloss.). ◄GR➤
•ETYM Clearly a metaphorical use of túµßoç 1.
túµлavov [n.] ‘kettledrum, hand drum' (IA h. Hom. 14, 3), also metaphorically as a
technical expression, ‘instrument of torture' (Ar. etc.), 'water wheel (Plb., pap.),
‘drum in a machine' (Hero; also -os [m.]), etc. <PG(V) ►
•VAR Also TÚITAVOV.
•COMP τчμлаОτεрлηе 'delighting in drums' (Orph.,) oрεаτоτúлаvov [n.] 'water
wheel' (Plb.).
⚫DER 1. TUμлάν-чov [n.] 'machine drum' (Hero), designation of a hair style (Str.), etc.
2. -ɛús [m.] 'cylinder' (Hero). 3. -άptos [m.] ‘drummer' (pap. VIP). 4. -ías, Ion. -ins
(üбpwy) [m.] 'kind of dropsy (by which the stomach is stretched like a drum)', or
'who is afflicted by dropsy' (medic.). 5. -íτns [m.] ‘kind of dropsy' (medic.). 6. -ɩкÓS
'afflicted by dropsy' (Alex. Trall.). 7. -óɛiç üdpwy (Nic.). 8. -wdns kettledrum-like'
(Sor.). 9. τυμлаví(w 'to beat the kettledrum, to drum' (com., LXX, Str. etc.), also =
άло- (Ep. Hebr., Luc.); thence τʊμrav-toµós [m.] ‘drumming' (Ar. etc.), -ɩoτńs [m.]
'drummer' (Str., pap.), plur. name of a play by Soph., -íστpiα [f.] (D., Luc.);
алоτуμлαν-íш 'to stretch on the wheel, to torture, beat' (Lys., D., Arist., pap., etc.),
-ɩσµós (Cat. Cod. Astr.). 10. τчμлаvóομа to be stretched like a drum' (Hippiatr.).
•ETYM Formation like öpyavov, etc. Traditionally (e.g. EM 771) connected with
τúлτш (whence the spelling τúлavov), with a nasal of PIE or secondary origin.
Others have regarded it as a Semitic loanword (cf. Aram. tuppa, Hebr. top, etc. 'to
beat the drum'), with folk-etymological adaptation to тúлτш and the instrument
names in -avov. Fur.: 287 suggests that the instrument, used in the cult of the Magna
Mater and Dionysus, rather comes from Asia Minor. The variant may also point to
Pre-Greek origin (prenasalization).
tuvvós [adj.] 'small, inferior' (Call., Theoc. et al.). <?►
•DER TUVVOÛTOÇ, í 'this small' (Ar.), after τηλк-OÛTOÇ.
•ETYM The geminate -vv- is possibly hypocoristic; cf. ► tutłóç.
túvτlos [m.] ‘faeces, mud' (Men., sch. Ar. Pax 1148). <?>
•DER Tuvτλ-wdns 'muddy, turbid', of speech (Com. Adesp.), -áčw (Ar.) of vines,
which is explained in various ways: ï½λoñatéw, ¿ñippaivɛɩv ëηλw, etc. (see LSJ).
•ETYM Unexplained; a contamination of τúpßŋ and ävτλoç seems improbable.
τÚлτш [v.] 'to poke, stab, beat with a weapon or a stick'. On the suppletive system
TÚNTW : έNÁTAŽA: лεлληуα, see Kölligan 2007: 303ff. <IE *steup- 'push, beat'>
Túpavvoc
1519
•VAR Aor. Túyaɩ, also tuñɛïv (E. [lyr.]), tvítñoa (late), pass. tväñvaɩ, also tvö¤ñvai
and tvätηеñvaɩ (late), perf. pass. tétya (all Il.), fut. ïvätýow (Att.), túyw (late),
perf. act. tɛtúrtöкa (Philostr., Poll.), tétvqa (Theodos.), ptc. tetúrovtɛç? (Call.).
•COMP Also with лρо-, кατα-, etc.
•DER A. τÚлоç [m.] 'blow, beat; impression, embossed work, relief, outline, form;
image, example, type' (post-Hom.). Often as a second member, e.g. ávτíτuлoç
'causing a counter-blow, striking back, echoing, obstinate, harsh; containing or
matching an image', as a subst. [n., m.] ‘image' (IA); thence àvtitur-ía, -έw, -ńs,
-ŋoç. From τúлos are derived: 1. diminutive τʊл-íov, -íðɩov [n.] ‘small example'
(Hell. inscr.), -áptov [n.] 'small figure' (Tz.). 2. -íç [f.] ‘club, hammer' (A. R., Call.
etc.), -ác [f.] ‘id.' (S. Fr. 844, H.). 3. -ɛtós [m.] = koneτós (D. H.), -ŋτóç ‘id.' (epigr.).
4. túrns. nλýktns (H. Theognost.; probably for -τηs). 5. -íaç xaλкóç hammered
copper' (Poll.; antonym τpoxías). 6. -ɩkós (adv. -ɩкws) ‘figurative, exemplary' (Plu.,
Gal., Ep. Cor. etc.), -wdns 'comprising the main features, in outline' (Arist., Str., etc.).
Verbs: 7. τʊл-óоμal, -ów, very often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, ȧvti-, ¿к-, έv-, úлo-, 'to
receive an impression, be formed; to form, mould, modeľ (IA), whence -woiç, -wµa,
-WTŃs, -WTÓS, -Wtikós (ava-, etc.). 8. τʊл-ášoµαι = -óoμαι (Оpp.); τʊnášelv. kórtelv,
TUлAOTĤplov. Tò tŵv ȧλiéwv otvµvíov (H.).
B. ɩɩëη [f.] 'blow, thrust' (E 887, A. R., Nic.); τúµµа [n.] 'blow, stab, wound (Hp., A,
Arist., etc.); túyɩ [m.] 'striking, wound' (J., Nic.), with лó- technical expression of
unclear meaning (Delos IIª). C. Also έvтuлàç кεкαλчччеνоç 'еmerge in outline', i.e.
'enshrouded tightly, closely' ( 163; similarly A. R., Q. S.; = wσtε TÒV TÚлOV TOÙ
owµatos qaíveoðaɩ H.), and ¿vɩuradía. ötav tŵ i̟uatíw tǹv xɛïpa épòs пpóσwëɑ
kateiλnµµévos otñoŋ (H.), but cf. Latte ad loc.; cf. v-τuлos 'embossed, coined'
(apyúptov Poll.), ‘able to be impressed' (Phot.), ¿vτυлóoμa 'to be imprinted', -ów 'to
imprint' (Arist., Hell. and late), εуτετúлασται he is enshrouded' (Pisidia). With
verbal reference лроτулηs 'pressing forward' (Plot.; H. R.); óроτúлоç beating the
mountain' (üdwp; A. Th. 85 [lyr.]), öpεt- (ópεo-, ópoɩ-)τúлoι [pl.] 'mountain worker',
and -ía, -ín (Hp., Thphr., Nic. et al.). Blanc RPh. 70 (1996): 199-210 thinks that the
first element comes from ópɛuç ‘mule', which were lashed on to make them advance.
Оn túµлavov, see s.v.
•ETYM Built on PIE *(s)teup- ‘to push, beat', as attested in Lat. stupeō ‘to be(come)
numb, amazed', stuprum 'dishonor', Albanian shtyp 'to crush', etc.; probably also
►στÚлоç. See LIV² s.v. *(s)teup-.
túpavvos [m.] ‘absolute ruler, monarch, tyrant', rarely fem. ‘lady, princess', also adj.
'dictatorial, imperious, ruling' (h. Mart., Pi., IA, etc.). ◄PG▷
•COMP μσоτúраvvos hating tyrants' (IA), Tupavvoкtóvos [m., f.] 'killing tyrants'
(late).
•DER 1. Tupavv-íc (scil. ȧpx?) [f.] 'autocracy, despotism, tyranny' (Pi., IA since.
Archil.). 2. -ía [f.] 'id.' (Xenoph., late pap.). 3. -ɛiov, often plur. -ɛĩa ‘residence of an
autocrat' (Str., D. S., J., Plu., etc.). 4. -ɩkóc ‘of an autocrat, violent, tyrannical' (since
A.). Verbs: 5. -ɛúw (after Baσiɛúw), -έw (rarely with ouv- etc.) 'to be an autocrat, to
rule (absolutively)' (IA). 6. desiderative -ŋoɛíw ‘to strive after tyranny' (Sol. apud D.

=== page 786 ===

1520
tÚpn
L.). 7. -táw 'to be greedy for power, pursue tyranny' (J., D. L. et al.). 8. -íw 'to take
the part of tyrants' (D.).
•ETYM A Pre-Greek word. None of the alternative hypotheses is plausible.
τúpẞη [f.] *confusion, noise, tumult' (Hp., Isoc., X., Plb. etc.); <PG>
•VAR σúpẞn (Suid., Eust.)
•DER Adv. Túpẞă (σúpẞa H.) 'pell-mell' (A. Fr. 311, 3 = M. 61 8, 3; acc.sg.?). Hence
τupßáľw (áva-) ‘to stir up, confuse, reveľ (Ar. et al.), -aσía [f.] (Poll., H.), -aσµa
(uncertain; late). Unclear τúpẞησiç. ýλißaròv àépa and Tupßηvóç. εлíðετOV TO
Алóλλwvoç (H.). Also ovpßáßuτtα (?) ‘higgledy-piggledy' (Ar. Fr. 866); oupßηveús
= avλntýs (σúpß³n yàp ý aúλoßýên) ǹ τapaxwdns (H. = Cratin. 84), σupßηvéwv
Xopós (Ath., Suid.).
•ETYM The variation τúpßη - σúpßη points to a palatal /t/ and therefore to a Pre-
Greek word (not in Fur.). A connection with Lat. turba 'confusion, noise, crowd,
troop' and turma 'troop, squadron, crowd' is difficult. Latin turba might be a
loanword from Greek, cf. E-M.
Tüpós [m.] 'cheese' (II.). <IE *teuH- 'swell'>
●COMP tupókvŋots [f.] 'cheese-grater, cheese-knife' (Ar., Delos IIIª etc.) (see on
-кvaíw); лoλútupos 'rich in cheese' (Pherecr.). See also Boúτupov (-os).
•DER 1. Diminutive τup-íov [n.] (com., pap. etc.), -íσkoç (late), -áσιov [n.] (pap. IIIª;
or 'tool for preparing cheese'?). 2. -aкívās [m.] (Dor.) 'kind of cheese-cake' (Philox.
V-IV), presupposes earlier *-άкivoç, after ouάк-ivoç, etc. 3. -íτηе (лλакоÛÇ)
'cheese-cake' = Lat. scriblīta (gloss.). 4. -óεç, -oŨç, Dor. -wc, fem. -oñσσα, -wσσα
(scil. ǎρτоç, лλαкoÛç) 'cheese-like, made of cheese' (Sophr., Theoc. et al.), -wônç 'id.'
(Hp., Cos IV-IIIª, Plu.). Verbs: 5. Tup-ɛúw 'to make cheese', metaphorically 'to
concoct' (Com. Adesp., D., Arist. etc.), also with ¿v-; -ɛúµata [n.pl.] 'curdled food,
cheese' (E.), ‘intrigue' (Com. Adesp.), -ɛía [f.] ‘id.', also ‘making cheese, cheese-press'
(Tab. Heracl., Mycale IVª, Arist. etc.), -ɛvσɩç [f.] ‘making cheese' (Arist.), -ɛvτýp [m.]
'maker of cheese' (oƒ˜Еpµñç, AP). 6. -έw ‘to make cheese' in aor. ¿τúpŋσas (Alcm.). 7.
-óoμaι, -ów ‘to become cheese', also with ảлo-, εлɩ-, ovv- (Ar., LXX, Dsc., etc.),
whence -wróc, -woię (late).
⚫ETYM Cognate with Av. tüiri- [n.] ‘cheeselike milk, whey', tuiriia- 'curdled, of milk';
perhaps also with MInd. (Apabhr.) tūra- 'cheese'. Further connections are disputed.
Phonologically, τüpóç can be derived neither from PIE tuer- 'to stir' (see ►óτpúvw,
►topúvn, ► túpßn), nor from PIE *tuerH- ‘to hold, fence in' (whence Lith. tvérti
‘seize, fence in' etc.). Phonologically unproblematic, and semantically possible, is a
derivation as *tuH-ró- to PIE *teuH- 'to be strong, swell' whence, for instance, RuCS
tyti 'to become fat'.
túpolę, -los, -ɩ80s [f.] ‘tower, keep, turret; palace, castle, fortified town' (Pi., Hp., X.,
Hell. poet. etc.); in H. also τúppɩç· ñúpyoç, éñaλšis, лpoµ¤×óν and τúpoos. tò Év üyel
oikodóµŋµa. ◄PG➤
•VAR Plur. -εS.
⚫DER Diminutive τuppídiov [n.] (Sicily).
TÚPOL
1521
⚫ETYM A loanword from a Mediterranean language (Kretschmer Glotta 22 (1934):
110ff. with many details), borrowed into Latin as turris. On the several attempts to
derive τúpσiç, turris as a borrowing from an IE language (e.g. Illyr. TN -dorgis like
Illyr. Bov-Sopyiç etc., Lyd. TN Túppa, Túpσa with Tuponvoi and *Turs-ci > Tusci
beside Etrusci), see Heubeck 1961: 65f.
TUT¤óç [adj.] 'small, tender, young', е.g. τuτеá кɛáσa 'to chop into small pieces'; adv.
tuτðóv, -á ‘a little, a bit, hardly, just barely' (epic poet. since II.). <ONOM➤
•ETYM A nursery word with hypocoristic gemination and aspiration. With a similar
form and meaning, compare MoSw. tutta ‘little girl', with a different meaning OHG
tut(t)a 'nipple' etc. Cf. ► τuvvóç.
tvtó [f.] · ń yλañ 'the little owl' (H.). <ONOM>
•ETYM Onomatopoeic, rendering the cry of the owl; cf. Plaut. Men. 653 noctuam,
quae 'tu, tu' usque dicat, also Lat. tutubāre 'to cry, of an owl', Lith. tūtúoti, tutútis
'first flute, pipe', name of a bird, 'crow, hoopoe' vel sim., MoHG tuten etc. Similarly
in Greek ToŪTIç ó kóσovqoç, taútaσoç öρviç лolóç (H.).
túqŋ (?) [f.] name of a plant used for padding cushions and beds, 'Typha angustata'
(Thphr., Str., Dsc.), designation of a head-covering (Tz.; cf. Lat. tūfa). <IE *tuH-bh-
'hump, bump'?>
•DER -npns [adj.] 'made of t.' (AP).
•ETYM Gr. túôŋ is often regarded as cognate with Lat. tūber, -eris [n.] ‘hump, bump,
tumour', and Gm. words such as ON þúfa [f.] hill in grassland', OE þūƒ [m.] ‘tuft,
bundle of feathers'; they may or may not be derived from PIE *teuH- 'to be strong,
swell'. Yet the meaning of the Greek word is sufficiently different to render its
connection with the other words purely hypothetical. Also, the length of the -ú- is
uncertain.
tvqλós [adj.] ‘blind, dark, blocked, clogged' (since Z 139). <IE *dheub¹- ‘foggy'➤
●COMP tuôλóσtoµos 'with blind mouth' (Str.), úлóτvôλos half-blind, weak-sighted'
(Plu. etc.).
⚫DER 1. many animal names, such as snakes: Tuoλ-íaç, -wy, -ivos, -ívns (MoGr. dial.
-íτns), and fish: -īvos, -v, -tvídiov. 2. -óτns [f.] 'blindness, obstruction' (Democr.,
Pl., Gal., Plu.). 3. -wdns (H.) as an explanation of ẞλávoç. 4. τvqλ-óoμa 'to go blind',
-ów 'to blind, obstruct' (Pi., IA), also with àло-, èк-, etc.; -wσiç (ало-, &к-) [f.] 'loss of
sighť (IA). 5. tvôλ-átτw ‘to go blind, be blind' (Hell. and late).
•ETYM τupλós belongs to the numerous adjectives in -λós that indicate physical or
psychical defects, e.g. σilós, xwlós, τpavlós, daλós (Chantraine 1933: 238). No
exact correspondence exists outside Greek. The root could be the same as in OIr.
dub 'black' < *dhub"-u-, and Go. daufs, ON daufr, OHG toub 'deaf < PIE *dhoub"-o-.
The original meaning seems to have been ‘obstructed, clogged, dark'. Due to the
short u in Celtic, the adjective cannot be derived from the verbal root PIE *dhuh₂- (cf.
► τúчoμαι 'to smoke').
túqoɩ [m.] • σqñvεç ‘wedges' (H.). <IE? *deub"- 'peg, wedge'>

=== page 787 ===

1522
túqoμai, -w
•ETYM In theory, one might connect Germanic words such as MLG dövel, MHG
tübel, MoHG Döbel, Dübel [m.] (with LG initial), MoE dowel 'spool, peg, tap, nail' <
PGm. *dub-ila-; with gemination MoSw. dubb, MoNw. dobb 'iron bolt', and verbal
forms: ON dubba 'to equip; to dub someone knight', OE dubbian 'to dub someone
knight'. Thus, one might reconstruct PIE *dhubh- 'to hit'. Yet the isolated position of
the Greek gloss calls for caution: the technical meaning 'wedge' may have arisen in
various ways.
τúqqai, -w [v.] 'to smoke, smoulder, glow', act. 'to make smoke, fume, singe, burn
slowly' (IA). <IE *d"uH- 'smoke, steam'>
•VAR Aor. τŎччvαι (Aг. etc.), ебчαι (Plb., H., Suid.), fut. τvôησoµаi (Men.), perf.
téðvµµai, tetúqðaɩ (Pl., Poll.), plpf. únεtéðvïto (Apolloph. Com. Va),
•COMP Also with έлɩ-, úло-, etc.
●DER 1. tñqoç [m.] ‘kind of fever' (Hp.), 'conceit, stupidity, fallacy, folly' (Hell. and
late); as a first member in τuqoyέpwv ‘feeble-minded old man' (Ar.). Thence τuo-
wdns 'feverish' (Hp.), 'befogged, bloated' (Vett.Val.); -óoμa (mostly perf.
tεtúqwμai), -ów 'to be befogged, foolish, bloated', act. 'to befog, delude' (Att., Hell.
and late), rarely with ¿ê-, ¿ño-, ¿ñɩ-; -wσiç [f.] ‘befoggedness' (Tz.); backformation
Úлóτç 'bloated' (Ion Chius). 2. tuyɛdwv, -óvoc [f.] 'stupidity' (Call. et al.),
-ɛdavós 'stupid' (Ar. V. 1364). 3. úñóðvчƒç [f.] ‘spurring on, incitement' (Plb.), Oчiç
'fuming, singing' (Suid.). 4. Tvo-áwv, -áovos (h. Ap., Hes. etc.), -wv, -wvoç (Pi. et
al.); wc, gen. acc. - (Pi., A., Ar., Hdt.) [m.] ‘whirlwind', personified ‘Typhon,
Typhos'; also -wɛúc, -wéos [m.] 'Typhoeus' (B 782f., Hes. Th. 821, h. Hom., A. R. etc.);
hence adj. -αóvios, -αoviç, -úvioç, -wviкóç (late).
•ETYM All verbal forms seem to be based on the present. There are no exact
correspondences of τúq- outside Greek. It is thought to be derived from the PIE root
*dueh₂- / *duh₂- 'to smoke' (see Oúw, also Ovμóç and еúµoc) by means of an
► · Ovµós
enlargement *-bh-. See LIV² s.v. *dhu̟eh₂-. ► τvoλóç is probably unrelated, but see s.v.
túxn=tvyxávw.
τwĐá¼w [v.] ‘to mock, sneer, jeer' (IA); also Owtálɛ. ¿µnaíšɛɩ, xλeváčɛɩ,
ÉлOWTάČOVTEÇ Èлλεvášovτεç (H.). <?►
•VAR Aor. Tweάσal, fut. -áσoμα.
•COMP Also with έл- etc.
●DER tw0-aoµós (εлɩ-) [m.] ‘sneering, mockery, banter' (Arist., Plb., D. H. etc.),
-áσµaτa [pl.] ‘id.' (Suid.), -αστns [m.] 'scorner' (Poll., H.), -αστíɩкós 'mocking,
sneering' (D. H., D. L., Poll.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
r
v [prep., pref.]<IE *ud ‘up'>
•VAR Cypr. in ủ rúxa εлɩ túη (also i(v) τúαι), also -ηpos [f.] ‘handsel',
corresponding to Att. τà έлíɣεɩpα.
=
•ETYM Traditionally, is identified with Skt. ut-, ud- 'upwards, up', Go. ut
'out(wards)', MoHG aus, etc. < PIE *ud. The analysis of "xηpos seems certain, but
for Ủ τúxα, other analyses are possible (Cypr. v = óv ‘ává³, Risch Kratylos 10 (1965):
92; or from earlier σùv τúxα, Thumb-Scherer 1959: 172).
The same preposition has also been claimed to be present in the expression ufαiç Çav
u-wa-i-se za-ne ‘Sià ßíov (?)' (ICS 217, 10), but this is rather doubtful; see for instance
the analysis of Weiss MSS 55 (1994): 151f., positing *h₂iu(u)-h₂ei-s- ‘bis in [alle]
Ewigkeit for u-wa-i-se. See further vonλn(y)}, ► ˝otpič, ► votepoç.
vaɩva [f.] ‘hyena' (Hdt., Arist. et al.), also the name of a sea-fish 'Charax puntazzo'
(Numen. apud Ath., Ael.); with the same meaning also vaɩvíc [f.] (Epich.); see
Thompson 1947 s.v. and Strömberg 1943: 100f. ◄ GR?>
●DER vaív-(ε)ɩoç ‘of the hyena' (Plin., Cyran.), -íτ [m.] designation of a stone
(probably after the color).
•ETYM Derived from us ‘swine' on the model of Aέaiva, Aúкaiva, etc. DELG thinks
that the animal resembled a swine by its airs and its bristly hair. Yet the hyena is a
species of its own and looks more like a dog than a sow; could it be that vaiva
replaces a loanword or a Pre-Greek word?
váкɩvoç [m., f.] 'hyacinth' (E 348, Sapph., Thphr., Theoc., Paus. et al.); designation of
a blue cloth or a blue color (LXX, Ph., J., pap.); also of a precious stone (late). <PG>
⚫DER vaкive-ivos of the hyacinth, hyacinth-colored' (Od., E., X., Samos IV³, etc.),
-wons 'hyacinth-like' (Dsc.), -íw [v.] 'to resemble a hyacinth' (Plin.). Also the name
of a Laconian youth, who according to legend was killed by Apollo with an
unfortunate throw of the discus. He probably was a Pre-Greek god who was
superseded by Apollo, and sank to be a mere hero; but he also merged with this god
to become Алóλλwv Yáкivoç (-os). Thence τà Yaкívеia (Cret. Faк-), name of a
Doric festival (Hdt., Th., X.), 'Yaкívēlos (Cret. Baк-) [m.] Doric month-name
(Sparta, Rhodos, Thera, Crete, etc.). On the Ionic sound substitution in Yákıvłoç for
original Fákɩvos, see Schwyzer: 224.
•ETYM A clear Pre-Greek word, cf. Fur.: 242, 377 (but not with a prothetic u-!). It is
disputed whether váкɩvoç is related to Lat. vaccinium ‘blueberry, whortleberry';
Deroy Glotta 35 (1956): 185ff. and Meillet MSL 15 (1908-1909): 162 consider both

=== page 788 ===

1524
üaλoç
:
vypós
1525
words to be independent loans from a Mediterranean language, to be connected with
Lat. baca 'berry' and Gr. Báкxos.
vaλos [f., m.] 'transparent stone, e.g. alabaster, crystal, amber' (IA), 'glass' (Pl., Arist.
etc.; in Hdt. Xvτη λíеoc). <PG>
•VAR Also űɛλoç.
•COMP vaλoupy-ós (vɛλ-) [m.] ‘glass-maker' (Str., pap.), whence -ɩкóç, -ɛĩov (late).
Also váλn 'id.' (H., Phot., Suid.)
●DER 1. úάλ-ɩvoç (véλ-) ‘glassy' (Corinn., Hp., Ar., inscr., etc.), -ɛoç, -oûç ‘id.,
transparent like glass' (Str., pap., AP etc.), -ɩкóç ‘serving for glass-making' (J.), -îüç
(ǎµµoç, уñ) ‘ïd.' (Thphr., Str.), -óɛıç ‘glass-color' (AP), -wdns ‘glass-like' (medic.). 2.
vaλ-ãç [m.] ‘glass-maker' (late inscr.); -wµa [n.] name of an eye-disease of horses
(Hippiatr.; cf. уλaúкwμa); diminutive véλov [n.] 'mirror' (Suid.); hence (or from
veλoç?) v(e)\ɩ-áptoç [m.] (Asia Minor). 3. vaλ-í【w (vɛλ-) [v.] ‘to have glass-color'
(Dsc., Ph. Byz. et al.).
•ETYM A Pre-Greek word, cf. Fur.: 351; it may have had palatal P, cf. the variant
ɛλλoç. This may also explain the coloring of the preceding a to e. The ancient
grammarians, such as Phryn., call "aλos Attic, and "ɛλos Hellenistic. There is a
remarkable similarity with the first member of the North-European name for amber,
suali-ternicum (called "Scythian" by Plin. HN 37,33). A similar identity of the words
for 'glass' and 'amber' is found in OGm. glēsum [Plin., Tac.] ‘amber' and OHG glas.
vẞóc [adj.] 'hunchbacked' (Hp., Theoc.). <PG?>
•VAR codd. üẞos (for v-?) [m.] ‘hunchback, hump', of a camel, a Cyprian ox (Arist.),
ẞε [voc.] (Theoc. 5,43), perhaps metrically conditioned.
•DER úẞóoμaι 'to become hunchbacked' (Gal.), üß-wµα [n.] 'hump' (or enlarged
from üßoç?), -wois [f.] 'hunchbackedness' (Hp., Gal.).
•ETYM The element -ẞ- in úẞóc is reminiscent of words like στpaẞóç, кλaμẞóç, and
other words for corporeal defects (Chantraine 1933: 261); úẞóc may have been
influenced by these. A convincing etymology has not been found. Petersson 1918: 74
compares Lith. subině ‘hindmost, back, bottom', which would have been derived
from *subas vẞoç. The word may well be Pre-Greek.
=
Üẞpiç, -10, -80, -ɛws [f.] 'arrogance, haughtiness, exorbitance, violence, offence,
abuse' (II.). <PG?>
●COMP úßpiyɛλws [m.] 'arrogant laughter' (Man.), μíoßpis having arrogance"
(LXX).
•DER úẞpíw, Dor. (Theoc.) -íodw, aor. úẞp-íσai, pass. -100ηval, etc. 'to be arrogant or
unbounded, to exert violence, offend, abuse' (II.), often with prefix, e.g. άq-, έv-, -,
Eq-, ka-. Derivatives: 1. üßp-toμa (εv-) [n.] 'arrogant action, etc.', also object of it
(Hdt., E., D., Plu. etc.). 2. -toµóç [m.] ‘id.' (A. Fr. 179 = 485 M.). 3. -10ɩs (only with
àv0-) [f.] ‘counter-abuse' (comm. Arist.). 4. -totńs (¿q-) [m.] ‘violator, offender' (N
633 [cf. -ɩotńp], Od., etc.), fem. -ɩσtię (EM); -lotýp [m.] ‘id.' (v.l. N 633, Opp., Nonn.,
AP), fem. -íστpia (LXX). 5. -1σtos ‘arrogant, scoffing' (Pherecr., Pl. Com.), grades of
comparison -ɩσTótεpos, lotóτatos (Hdt. 3, 81 [v.l. -σTIкWτερov], Att.). 6. -LσTIKÓS
‘id.' (Att., Arist., etc.). 7. ¿qúßpioτoç 'contumelious, disgraceful' (LXX, Plu., Man.,
Vett. Val. etc.). Also úẞpic, -ídos [f.] name of a nocturnal bird of prey, perhaps
‘eagle-owl, Strix bubo' (Arist., H.).
⚫ETYM No certain explanation. The -ẞ- and initial ú- hardly look IE, so the word
could well be Pre-Greek. Frisk is sympathetic to the connection with the prefix /
preposition ►ú-, but this means nothing. Nikolaev Glotta 80 (2002): 211-230 assumes
that ßpɩ contains the root of ßη and, with many additional assumptions,
reconstructs *ioHgri-. But as the Wetter-rule that he assumes is probably wrong, we
would expect *wẞpt-, and the construction must be rejected. Note that ẞη is always.
a positive notion, whereas üßpis certainly is not.
vyyεos → yévto.
vyɩns [adj.] 'healthy, unharmed, beneficial' (since ℗ 524). <IE *h¸iu- ‘span of time' and
*gwih¸- ‘live’▷
●COMP Úуio-rolέw 'to heal' (D. S.).
⚫DER 1. Adjectives: vyi-pós ‘healthy, beneficial' (Pi., IA), -ŋpéστɛpoç (Hdt.) (after
vyɩéσtεpoc); vyí-ɛuç ‘id.' (Pi.); Üy(ε)tos ‘id.' (pap. II-III³, gloss.); úуi-óτεpos (Sophr.).
2. Abstract vyiɛía, -ɛɩă, Ion. -ɛiŋ [f.] 'health', also personified (Simon., Pi., IA), -ɛɩvóç
'benificial to the health, belonging to health, beneficial' (IA), Hell. vyɛĩa, -ía, PN
(Hell. and late) Yy(ε)ios = Lat. Hyginus; quite rarely -ótŋs [f.] ‘health' in logic (S. E.).
3. Further nouns: Yytáτŋs [m.], epithet of Dionysus (Ath., Eust.); vyɛídɩov [n.] name
of several unguents (Gal.). 4. Verbs: a. vyɩ-aívw ‘to be healthy, be in good health'
(IA), also St-, -, ovv-; -avois [f.] 'healing' (Arist. etc.). b. -ά(w 'to heaľ, -áčoμai
(aq-, &-) 'to be cured' (Hp., Arist., Hell. and late), -άoµata [n.pl.] = ȧkéoµata (AB),
-αστηpiov [n.] 'hospital' (pap. IIP, gloss.), -αστóç 'curable' (Arist.), -αστɩкóç serving
for healing' (Arist., Str., Gal. etc.); ȧqvyɩ-aσµós [m.] ‘healing' (Iamb.). c. vyɩ-wσai 'to
heal' (Hp.), perhaps false for yvɩwσai?
•ETYM Traditionally explained as a compound of PIE *h,su- 'well, good' (see ►έúc)
and 'to live' (see ►(ww and ▸ßíos), with s-stem inflexion: IE *h,su-gih¸-es-. Initial v-
instead of εv- would be due to laryngeal loss in the compound. A close
correspondence seems to be found in Av. hu-jiiäiti- [f.] 'a good life'. However, Weiss
MSS 55 (1994): 151f. much more convincingly assumes that it derives from *h₂iu-
gih,-es- 'having eternal life'; he compares Lat. iugis 'constant' and Av. yauuaë-ji-
'living forever'.
vypós [adj.] ‘wet, moist, watery, fluid; weak, soft, flexible' (Il.). ◄IE *ug"-ro- ‘moist'▷
•COMP Úуpoμελs 'with flexible limbs' (X., Poll.), kávypoç 'soaked' (Hp., Thphr.
etc.).
⚫DER 1. Subst. vуpóτηs, Dor. -óτaç [f.] 'moisture, weakness, etc.' (IA, Ti. Locr.);
-ŋdwv, -ndóvos [f.] ‘id.' (Hp.); -íŋy. tò oðpov. Alovúσios (H.). 2. Verbs: a. vyp-aívw
‘to wet, water' (IA), very often with кað-, di-, -, etc.; -avoɩ [f.] 'wetting' (Gal. etc.),
-avɩɩкóç ‘wetting' (Diph. Siph. apud Ath. etc.); кaðvypaσµós [ƒ.] ‘wetting' (late
medic.). b. -άw 'to be, become wet or moist' (Hp.), -aσía [f.] ‘moisture' (Arist.,
Thphr. etc.), -aoua [n.] 'id.' (Hp.); may also be connected with -aívw. c. -woow 'to be
wet, moist' (A. Ag. 1329).

=== page 789 ===

1526
idepos
⚫ETYM Possible cognates include ON vokr, acc. vokvan 'moist, wet' < PGm. *uakua-
< PIE *чog-uo- or *uog-o-; and Lat. ūvidus, ūdus ‘id.', which can go back to PIE
*ug-, *ue/og- or *uh,-, see de Vaan 2008. Thus, all forms may go back to a root
*u(e/o)g"-.
üdɛpos [m.] 'dropsy' (Hp., Arist.). <IE? *udero- 'belly'>
•VAR Also ödɛpoç. уαστnр (H.), with dialectal ó- for -? Differently Güntert IF 27
(1910): 48: rather for üdɛpoç, because of the spiritus asper. Also üdepos eis àµída
'diabetes' (Gal.).
●der Adj. údɛp-ikós, -wdns, -iwdns 'dropsical'; verbs -aívw, -táw (with -íaσıç), -áw
'to suffer from dropsy' (all medic.).
•ETYM Cognate with Skt. udára- [n.], Av. udara- ‘abdomen, belly', Lat. uterus 'belly,
womb' (tr <*dr in oblique cases), OPr. weders 'belly, stomach', Lith. vědaras
‘sausage, intestines' (with long vowel from Winter's Law). Gr. üdɛpos must separated
from "Swp 'water', since a full grade üdɛp- is further unknown in Greek. The
semantic shift from 'belly' to 'dropsy' is unproblematic: Skt. udára- is also used in
the sense of 'pathologically swollen belly'.
vdéw [v.] 'to sing, glorify' (Hell. epic, conj. in E. Hyps. 3, 15). <IE *h₂ued- 'speak'>
•VAR -ɛíw metrically conditioned; also üdw, üdɛtv (Suid. etc.).
•DER üdŋ µn, won (Theognost. Can. 19), üdŋç. ovvεtós, i rointŃs (H.).
•ETYM Without ascertained etymology. It would be attractive to assume that úd- is
cognate with aúdn 'voice', and with Skt. vádati ‘to speak', ppp. uditá. Yet there is
no good explanation for the different reflexes in Gr. /hud-/ vs. /aud-/.
Svov [n.] name of a mushroom, ‘truffle' (Hell. and late). ◄PG▷
•COMP úvóquλλov. ǹ éñì toĩç üdvolç qvoµévy rón (H.) (Pamphil. apud Ath. 2, 62d).
•ETYM The word has hesitantly been connected to "dwp as ‘juicy' (Pok. 79), to vεɩ
'rains' as 'rain-plant', and to us 'swine' as 'sow-bread'. Under ►ïtov, I have argued
that we must assume a Pre-Greek word, in view of the variants üτvov, oldvov,
oiτvov, adduced by Fur.: 110, 184.
üdpa [f.] ‘water-snake', especially ǹ Aɛpvaía "dpa (Hes., Herod., S., E., Pl.); üdpoç [m.]
'id., Coluber nutrix' (B 723, Hdt., Arist., Call. etc.); üdpa / üdpoç (Hell. and late since
Eudox. apud Hipparch.) 'the constellation Hydra'. <IE *ud-ró- 'of the water'>
•VAR Ion. -n.
⚫ETYM PIE name for a water-animal, especially 'otter': Skt. udrá- [m.], Av. udra- [m.]
'otter', OHG ottar ‘id.', Lith. údra [f.], Ru. výdra [f.] ‘id.' (with *ū from Winter's
Law); Lat. lutra [f.] ‘id.' with additional l- by folk etymology. Cf. ►üdwp, ěvudpiç.
üбwp, -ατoç [n.] 'water' (Il.). <IE *uod-r, *ud-n-, coll. *ud-ōr 'water'>>
•DIAL Myc. u-do-ro /udros/ or /udron/ designation of a bucket-shaped pot.
●COMP ÚSpoqópos [m., f.] ‘water-bearer', ävudpos 'without water' (IA); údatotpeqńs
'fed by water' (p 208), ávúdaτoç ‘without water' (Man.), etc.; rarely daoi-<o>teyńs
'protecting from water, waterproof (AP 6, 90). Hypostases: žvudpię (-íc) [f.] ‘otter'
(Hdt., Ar., Arist.), Mɛðúdp-tov [n.] town in Arcadia, “between the rivers” (Th.), -tɛús
[m.] ‘inhabitant of M.', gen.pl. Mετvdpi½wv (Orchom.).
30入og
1527
•DER A. Stem údp-: Nouns 1. údpía [f.] 'water-bucket, urn' (Att., Locr. Va),
diminutive -íσкη, -íov, -ídɩov (Hell. and late). 2. -ɩvɛĩov [m.] ‘id.' (pap. II-IIIP), to
*üdpĭvoç or *údpīvoç). 3. -ótŋç [f.] ‘moisture' (Procl.). 4. -wµα [n.] = -εvµa (Eg.
inscr.), enlarged or from *-óoμai. 5. vSpavac [acc.pl.] 'vessel for lustration water'
(Andania Iª), rather from údpávŋ than from údpáv (cf. H.: údpávŋ. tò ảkpaiqvès kaì
Kadapóv; idpáv. eig Ovaiav ákpalpvéç. ‘Piv0wv; idpavós:ó áyviotńg t@v
'Eλɛvoɩvíwv). 6. ‘Ydp-oñç, -oñvtoç [m.] town on the Ionic Sea in Calabria. 7. -ŵv,
-wvos [m.] month-name (Ptol.).
Adjectives: 1. údp-nλós 'watery, wet' (epic poet. since t 113, also Hp.). 2. -ŋpós ‘id.'
(Sophr., Trag. Adesp., etc.). 3. -wdns ‘id.' (Thphr.). 4. -años ‘belonging to water'
(Olymp. in Phd.); oúdpaιa. údpía, µétpov ti, Attikov µetpytoñ ñµov (H.), Lacon. or
Boeot.? 5. -tos of water' (Hero). 6. Unclear údpaλńs· µetáßolos, also öqıç üdatos
(H.).
Verbs: 1. Sp-aívoμaɩ, -aívw (àq-) [v.] ‘to bathe, water, wet (Od., E. [almost only
lyr.]), -avtikós (pap. IIIª). 2. -ɛúoµaɩ, -ɛúw [v.] 'to scoop, fetch water' (Od.), quite
rarely with έQ-, лроσ-; thencе -εчov (-ŋïov), -ɛía, -εvra, -evolç, -εúç, -EUTŃC, -EUTIKÓÇ.
B. Stem údaτ- (on the whole younger than údp-): Nouns 1. údátiov [n.] 'little water,
little rain, rivulet' (Pl., Arist., Thphr., etc.). 2. -íç [f.] ‘blain' (medic.).
Adjectives: 1. -wdns 'watery, dropsical' (Hp., Arist., Thphr. etc.). 2. -ɩvos belonging
to water, watery, water-clear, flexible' (Hell. and late). 3. -ɩкóç ‘of water, watery'
(Thphr., pap. IIº). 4. -óɛƖç ‘watery, transparent like water' (AP, Nonn.). 5. -ɛɩvós ‘wet,
moist' (Hp.). 6. -npós 'containing water' (A. Fr. 96 = 44 M.).
Verbs. 1. údaτóoµaι (¿½-) [v.] ‘to be / become watery, dropsical', vdatów [v.] ‘to
turn into water, dilute with water' (Hp., Thphr. etc.), -wotę [f.] (medic.). 2. -íw only
in di-údaτíw 'to give to drink' (sch.), udατiσОév. wç üdwρ (H.), údατɩσµóç
[m.] 'murmur of water' (medic.).
C. Other formations: 1. üdoç [n.] (Call. Fr. 475), dat. -ɛɩ (Hes. Op. 61) ‘water'. 2. úd-
aλéos 'dropsical' (Hp.), -aλíç. údρwлiŵv (H.). 3. -apńs 'watery, diluted', especially of
wine (IA); τò údapóv (H.) as an explanation of üdapéç; ¿‹-vdapóoμai, ``ów [v.] ‘to
become water, make into water' (Arist., late). See also ►üdpa, ►üdpoç and ►üdɛpoç.
•ETYM A PIE r/n-stem for ‘water'. In Greek, the n-stem was enlarged with a *t, hence
*ud-n-t-> gen. üdατ-oç, etc. The denominative Spaívoμaι might continue older
*Salvw = Skt. udanyáti 'to water'.
Cognates: U utur [n.] (< *ud-ōr), abl. une (<*ud-n-), Latin unda wave, sea, river' <
*ud-n-; Alb. ujë ‘water'; Hitt. uätar / uitēn- [n.] ‘id.' (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.); Skt.
gen. udnás, loc. udán(i), adj. anudrás 'without water'; Go. wato, gen. watins, ON
vatn, OS watar, MoHG Wasser; OCS voda, Lith. vanduo ‘water'. The rare s-stem in
üdoç, dat. üdɛɩ is also found in the zero grade in Skt. útsa- [m.] 'source, spring' < *ud-
S-O-.
ben, vetóg →iw.
vfais Čav •VAR Cypr., written u-wa-i-se za-ne (ICS 217, 10). →.
Üλos [m.] idle talk, prank' (Pl., D., Porph., Jul.). <?>
•COMP Úеλoppημwv ‘talking idly' (Tz.).

=== page 790 ===

1528
ÚLŃv
•DER VOλéw [v.] 'to prate' (Ar., Ephipp., Phld., Luc.), also with έε-, ovv-. Cf. vσlós.
σalós, plúapos 'silly talk, nonsense' and úλλɛī· Opvλλɛĩ, λέyɛɩ, also vλáɛ• Opvλλɛi,
úλaкτɛi, λéуεɩ, Opηvɛi 'babbles, barks, says, laments' (H.).
ETYM No etymology. The word may contain the suffix -0λo- (as in ǎɛλoç etc.), but
there is no good explanation for initial v-.
dúv [?] · tǹv äµnɛλov ‘vine' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
viós [m.] 'son' (II.). <IE *suH-i(e)u- 'son'>
•VAR Also vós (Att.); older viús (Lac., Gort., etc., Old Att. also úúç, üç); obl. forms:
gen. viou (Corc. VIª [epigr.], X 238, etc.), vićoš (Il.), viños (Hell. and late epic), vłos
(Hom., Thess.), acc. v(1)óv, viúv, vića, vĩa, nom.pl. v(1)oí, viées, vieïs, viñes, vies, etc.
•DIAL Myc. i-jo /ios/, perhaps i-ju (i-*65) /¹³ïus/, dat. i-je-we /¹iewei/, i-we /³ïwei/.
Most recently -u-jo (TH Fq 229: ra-ke-da-mo-ni-jo-u-jo) /¹ūjōi/.
•COMP vioɛσía [f.] ‘adoption' (Hell. and late); univerbation of viòv Oεσðaɩ.
•DER 1. Derived fem. vin 'daughter' (Sammelb. IP), also va (Mytilene IP[?]). 2.
Diminutive vidɩov [n.] (Ar.), viáqtov [n.] (gloss.). 3. Denominative viów, -óoµaɩ [v.]
'to adopt as a son', -wois [f.] 'adoption' (late). 4. As 'grandson': a. viwvós (Hom.,
Theoc., Plu., late inscr. and pap.), plur. viwvɛis. viwv vićɛs (H.), after viɛīç; fem.
viwvý granddaughter' (J., gramm.). b. (1) 18oüç (Pl., X., D., Arist. etc.), (1) 18ɛÚç
(Isoc., H.); fem. vïdñ (pap. Iª, Poll., H.).
⚫ETYM The o-stem in viós is secondary against the v-stem in viúç; perhaps it arose by
dissimilation. The (proterodynamic) inflexion of viús shows the full grade *-eu- of
the suffix in viéoç, viét and viɛī, viéɛç and viɛiç, du. viéɛ, viɛī, and the zero grade *-u-
(which would point to hysterodynamic inflection) in vĭos, vẫɩ (with Aeolic retraction
of accent?), viés, viɛ. The generalized zero grade is limited to the epic, with the
exception of Thess. gen. hutoç. The acc. viéa, viéaç as well as viúv, viúvę (Gort., etc.)
must be innovations.
The same preform PIE *suH-iu- yielded ToB soy, ToA se, gen. seyo 'son'. Most other
languages have a different suffix in *suH-nu-: Skt. sünú- 'son', Av. hunu- 'offspring',
Lith. sünùs, OCS synь, Go. sunus, OHG sunu 'son'. These nouns are probably
derived from PIE *suH- 'to bring forth' as in Skt. súte 'to give birth', sūta- 'son'; Olr.
suth 'fruit' *su(H)-tu- 'birth, fruit'. Thus, PIE *suH-iu-, suH-nu- must be
interpreted as 'produce of the body'.
The absence of the suffix *-ter- in 'son', as opposed to the words for 'father, mother,
daughter, brother', is striking; perhaps PIE *suH-n/iu- replaced a different word for
'son', e.g. the one continued in Skt. putrá-, Av. pudra-.
Üкηs [m.] name of an unknown fish (Antim., Philet., Call.), acc. to Zenod. Cyrenaean
for έpvepivoc; acc. to Hermipp. = lovλíc (see Ath. 7, 304e, 320d, 327b and c). <?>
•VAR Üкaç ȧyελnïdas [acc.pl.] (Numen.); also üкoç (H.).
ETYM No etymology.
vλakóµwpoɩ [adj.] epithet of кúvεs (§ 29, π 4), thence μóðos v., also of dogs (Nonn. D.
36, 197). <GR➤
ű入n
1529
ETYM The initial - is due to metrical lengthening. Formed in emulation of
►уxεσíμwpoι, ióμwpot, so probably "famous for barking". The first element.
probably represents a noun úλaкý, which Porzig 1942: 239 explains as an artificial
formation for metrically impossible *úλaкτo-. See ► úλáw.
vláw [v.] ‘to bark', of dogs (Od., Theoc.), metaphorically of Cassandra (Tryph.), of a
man (S. Fr. 61 conj. for úλaкtw). ◄IE *ul-, ONOM, PG?>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.; med. ipf. úλáoντo (л 162, verse-final). Usually with
enlargement -KT- in úλaкτéw ‘id.', only pres. and ipf. except aor. úλáкτŋσa (Luc.
Nec. 10), also with prefix, e.g. ε-, лερɩ-, лρоσ- (since Σ 586; mostly late).
•DER ÚλaкτIкóç 'prone to barking' (Arist., Luc., Ph.), лроσуláкτησ [f.] 'the
reviling' (Simp. in Ph.); epic ptc. úλαктIÓшVTƐÇ (Q. S.), as if from *úλaкT-Iάw
(metrically conditioned). Furthermore váσкw ‘id.' (A. Supp. 877 [lyr.], uncertain),
aor. vλážai (D. C.), pres. vláσow (Chariton, Eust.).
Nouns with velar suffix: 1. ¿λaký [f.] 'the barking' (poetic in Pl. Lg. 967d, A. R., AP,
Plu., Luc.), μaчvláкāç [m.] 'who barks or cries in vain' (Sapph., Pi.), úλaк-óɛS
'barking' (Opp.), -ówντɛç ‘'id.' (Opp.), patronymic Yaк-ídŋs (§ 204), as if from
*Yλač (= Hylax ... latrat, Verg. Buc. 8, 106); on ►úlaкóμwpot, see s.v. 2. úλ-ayµóç
[m.] 'the barking' (575, X., Arist. etc.), Kuv- (Stesich.); üλ-ayua [n.] ‘id.' (A., E.),
from *vλάw? Also üλaσµa [n.] (Cyran.). On the hero"Yaç, see Kretschmer Glotta
14 (1925): 33ff.
⚫ETYM Probably an onomatopoeic word for 'howling, barking', compare Lat. ululāre
'to howl', ulula ‘owl', Skt. ululí- 'crying loudly', úlūka- [m.] ‘owl', Lith. ulúoti 'to
howl', etc., and in Greek oλoλú(w. For -áw, one may compare the semantically
close verbs Boáw, yoάw, etc. The suffix -(a)кt- is regarded as expressive by Frisk (see
►лρакτέw), but it may have been a Pre-Greek suffix; in fact, the word as a whole
may have been Pre-Greek.
üλŋ [f.] 'forest, wood, timber, firewood, shrubbery' (II.), 'stuff, matter' (Arist., Plb.,
medic., etc.); also = τò кαеíčov τOÙ oïvov † τоυ üdατoç (Phot.), 'sediment, mud,
slime, bodily secretion' (Ar. Fr. 879, UPZ 70, 9 [IIª], Hell. and late medic.); cf. ►λiç.
<IE? *suol-h2- or *h,eus-l-h₂ 'firewood'>>
•COMP Úλоτóμoç [adj.] 'felling wood', [m.] 'woodcutter' (II.), úλãτóµoç ‘id.' (Theoc.),
úλŋkoitηg [m.] ‘having his camp in the woods' (Hes.), úλŋwpós [m.] 'forester' (A. R.,
A.P), úλwpós ‘id.' (Arist.), -wpέw [v.] (Thess.Vª); thence vλŋwpɛas ɛúvás [acc.pl.]
(Nic. Th. 55), vλnpeús. voµeùs év úλŋ qvλáttwv H.; vλoµýtpa. eidos okwAnkos (H.).
As a second member in "vulos provided with matter, material' (Arist., late).
●DER 1. Adj.: vλýɛç, Dor. -áɛç ‘rich of wood, woody' (epic poet. Il.), -wdns ‘id.' (Th.,
S., X. etc.), 'muddy' (Dsc., Plu. et al.), -чuos belonging to the wood' (E.), -Iкóç
'bodily, material' (Arist. etc.), -años 'woody, wooded, in the forest, material' (Hell.
and late), Yaíŋ [f.] name of a wooded region on the Borysthenes (Hdt.), -@oc
'belonging to matter' (Orph. Fr. 353); -ɛɩwta [voc.] epithet of IIáv (AP 6, 106; after
Hàv ópɛiwtas AP 9,824). 2. PNYɛús name of a dog (X.). 3. Üλŋua [n.], mostly pl.
‘bushes', -ŋµatiкós [adj.] (Thphr.). 4. Verbs: a. úλášoµαι, aor. -άσaσða 'to fetch
wood' (Att. inscr., Poll., H.), -aoía [f.] 'the fetching of wood' (Att. inscr.), -áσtpia [f.]

=== page 791 ===

1530
iduyyes
‘wood-fetcher' (Phot.). b. úλíšw, -íσaɩ, ptc.pf. -ɩσµέvos ‘to clean, clear, filter' (Cratin.
354, Pl. Ti. 69 a, Archyt., LXX, Dsc., pap., etc.), also with prefix, esp. di-; -lotýp (di-)
[m.] 'filtering-cloth, sieve' (medic., pap.), -1στńpiov (di-) [n.] (pap., sch., H.),
Stúλoμa [n.] 'clarified fluid' (Gal.), -tous [f.] ‘clearing filtering' (Suid.), -toµós [m.]
'clearing, cleaning' (Clem. Al.), àqúλiouа уáλактоç as an explanation of opòç
уáλaктоç H., - xáν, лар- Tεváyous 'removing the mud, cleaning'
(pap.).
~
●ETYM The meaning ‘mud' can easily be explained by a recent development from
'matter' to 'solid matter, dregs, secretion' as against clear wine and pure water, as
appears already from the explanation by Phot. as tò кaðíčov toÛ oïvov ǹ toñ üdatos.
The earlier etymologies connecting "λn with Lat. silva or with úλov must be
rejected. If the original meaning was 'firewood', one may follow Vine 1999b: 573 in
deriving on with Cowgill's Law (*o > Gr. v in certain environments) from PIE
*suol-h2-, to the root *suel- 'to smoulder'; see LIV2 s.v. *suel-. Alternatively, starting
from the same meaning, connection with ON usli [m.] 'glowing ashes', from *h,eus-l-
h2 to the root of εüw, Lat. ürere 'to burn', etc., may be envisaged (Wackernagel 1916:
185).
Üɩyyɛç [?] · λóуxal 'troops of spearmen, vel sim.' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unknown.
vlíµn [f.] · µáxn tis (H.). <?►
•ETYM Kronasser Sprache 6 (1960): 178 compares Hitt. šulli- 'fight, quarrel', šulliazi
'to fight, quarrel; if a derivative *šullima- 'fight' existed in Hittite, this could have
been the source of the Greek word.
λıç [f.] ‘mud' (pap. IV-IIIª, LXX, EM). <?►
•VAR Also ÜλIÇ.
•ETYM Frisk suggests that is might have arisen from iλús 'mud, slime' by way
contamination with vλíw, üλŋ ‘mud' (cf. IG 1², 94: 20; 23 beside 2², 2498: 9). This
solution does not inspire much confidence.
of
Mos [m.] 'the Egyptian ichneumon (glossed by LSJ as 'tracker'), Pharao's rat' (Tim.
Gaz.); name of a fish (Cyran.). <LW Egypt.?>
⚫ETYM The meaning suggests a loanword. The hypothetical connection with dwp
‘water' as *üd-λoçs, which is found in older literature, must be given up as it finds no
support whatever.
чμεiç [pron.pers.] 'you (pl.)' (Il.). <IE nom. *iuH, acc. *usmé, loc. *usmi ‘you (pl.)';
gen./acc. *uos, *uõs▸
•VAR Acc. vµãç, Ion. úµéaç; Dor. úµés, acc. úµé; Aeol. űµfieç, acc. "µqie.
•DER Possessive adjective úµéτεpoç, Dor. also úµóç, Aeol. űµµoç 'your'.
•ETYM The acc. чµé, чµµε go back to *usme, and the nom. úµéç, öµε arose by
analogy with the nominal inflexion; later also vμɛïç < *-éɛç, and a new acc. úμεaç,
úμãs were created. Furthermore, the gen. úµшv, úµéшv, úшчéшv, and dat. úµ˜v, úµív,
üμμ(v) were formed.
1531
Cognate forms: Skt. nom. yūyám, acc. yuṣmán, vas, OCS nom. vy, acc. vasú, Hitt.
nom. sumēs, acc. sumās, etc. The PIE basis *us-(s)me contains the zero grade of the
full grade seen in Lat. võs, Skt. vas (encl.), etc. < PIE obl. *uðs.
dµýv 1, -évoç [m.] 'thin or weak skin, film, membrane, sinew' (Hp., Arist., Thphr., A.
R., etc.). IE *siuH-mn- 'thread, sinew'>>
●COMP dµεvoεidýs ‘membrane-like' (Hp., Arist., etc.).
•DER Diminutive úµév-tov [n.] (Arist. etc.), -wdns 'provided with a film, membrane-
like' (Hp., Arist.), -tvos 'consisting of a film' (Clearch.), -óoµα [v.] 'to turn into a
film' (Hp., Gal.), -ów 'to cover with a film' (comm. Hp. VIIP); vµεv-íw [v.] 'to
remove a film', -tστnp [m.] 'knife for flaying' (medic.).
⚫ETYM Except for the quantity of the v-, the Greek word is formally matched by Skt.
syuman- [n.] 'band, throng, bridle'. For the verbal root, compare Lat. suere, sūtum 'to
sew', Go. siujan, Lith. siúti 'id.'< PIE *siuH-C- from earlier *siH-u-C-, cf. Skt. sivyatu
'to sew'. Formerly, Hitt. šumanza- 'rope, snare' used to be compared too, but
Melchert 2003 has shown that the word means '(bul)rush' and must be posited as
šumanzan-(cf. Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.); it is therefore unrelated to dµýv.
vµýv 2, -évos [m.] 'wedding-cry', secondarily ‘god of wedding', 'hymen' (trag., Ar.,
Theoc., Opp., Ovid., etc.), usually in connection with úµévatos ‘id.', also 'wedding' (Σ
493, Hes. Sc., Pi., trag., Ar., Catull. etc.), Aeol. vµývǎos (Sapph., Cyrene), úµývaιos
(Call.), e.g. Yµǹv &Yµévai ǎva§ (E. Tr. 314). ◄PG?►
•VAR Also - metrically lengthened; voc. úчév Call. Fr. 473 Pf.
•DER vµεv-nïoç epithet of Dionysus (AP), -αïкòv µετpov (Serv.); úµεv-aιów [v.] 'to
strike up the vévaloç' (A. Pr. 557 [lyr.], S. Fr. 725, Plu.), 'to marry' (Ar. Pax 1076),
also with av-, σUV-.
⚫ETYM Frisk insists on the identity of the wedding-cry with vμnv 1 in the sense of
‘membrana virginalis'. A different, non-IE (Pre-Greek) origin of the wedding-cry is
assumed by Muth Wien.Stud. 67 (1954): 5ff. Similarly Fur.: 383, but without further
argumentation.
µvos [m.] ‘song, chant, hymn, elegy' († 429). ◄PG?►
●COMP ùµvwd-ós [m.] 'hymn-singer', whence -ía, -έw (A., E., Pl., etc.), лoλúðµvos
'with many songs, much sung of (h. Hom. 26, 7, Anacr., E. etc.).
●DER 1. diminutive dµv-ápiov [n.] (Lyd. Mens.), adjective -wdns ‘full of lauds,
praising' (Philostr.), -кóç 'consisting of hymns' (Didyma II-III³). 2. ¿qúµvov [n.]
'refrain' (A. R., Call. etc.), -táčw [v.] (Eratosth.). 3. úµvéw [v.] 'to sing (a song), praise,
glorify in a chant' (Hes., h. Hom., Alc., Sapph., IA, etc.), often with prefix, e.g. ¿q-,
áv-, кað-, è̟‹-; úµvηts [m.] ‘glorifier' (Pl., Att. inscr.), -tηp ‘id.' (AP, Opp.), fem.
-τpɩα (Attica, Pergam.), -στpia (Pergam.), -τpíç (Poll. v.l.), -σıç [f.] ‘the praising'
(LXX, D. S.), -τikós ‘praising' (Str.).
•ETYM No certain etymology. It could be derived from vµýv < *siuH-mn ‘tie, seam' as
*siuH-mn-o- 'construction of song(s)' (compare formally Aquý λíuvη, etc.,
semantically MoHG Liedgefüge). This explanation can be supported by an antique
conception (e.g. vpávaç üμvov in B.), but a derivation of "uvos from the root of up-
ń, vq-aívw is phonetically difficult (only PGr. *bn, gwn > µv, not e.g. PGr. *p³n).

=== page 792 ===

1532
ÜVIS, -EWS, LOS
Alternatively, üμvos could be connected with vμny 'wedding-cry', cf. Maas Phil. 66
(1907): 590ff. The word was also considered to be a Mediterranean loanword, for
instance by Autran 1938: 33, and by Fur.: 383. The latter regards μvoç as Pre-Greek
without further comment; Pre-Greek origin may be suggested by the sequence -μv-.
Yet, another solution would be to connect μvoc with Skt. sáman- 'song of praise' (<
*sh₂omen-) and Hitt. išḥamai- ‘song, hymn' to PIE *sh₂- 'to bind'; üµvos would then
require a preform *sh₂omn-os, Mallory & Adams 1997: 520a.
Vine 1999b: 576 reconstructs *suon(H)-mo- with development *suon-> *suun-,
analogous to that of *TuoR-. This seems phonetically preferable to *sh₂omn-o-, on
account of the conditioning of the change of *o to Gr. v, on which see Vine op.cit.
ÜVIS, -EWS, -10 [f.] 'ploughshare' (Hell. and late pap., Corn., Babr., Plu., AP, etc.)
< PG(V)►
•VAR Rare variants üvviç (sch. Hes. Op. 425, H.), üvvŋ (H.), acc.pl. Üvvas (Aesop.);
úvvчuáxos 'fighting with a ploughshare' (Max. Tyr.).
⚫DER Diminutive "vtov (pap. IVP).
ETYM Already in antiquity (Plu. 2, 670a), üviç was connected with us 'swine'. The
ploughshare would have been compared to a swine browsing the earth. A parallel
case is provided by W swch 'swine-snout' and 'plough-share'. Brugmann IF 28 (1911):
366ff. unconvincingly explains "viç as a compound of us and a word for 'snout' (to
MHG snouwen ‘to snuffle'), with the ending after òqvíc, so from IE *su-sn-i-; then
the geminate would have to be old.
Fur.: 387 regards the word as Pre-Greek on account of the incidental gemination.
üлap [n.] ‘vision', as opposed to Ŏvap ‘deceiving dream' (τ 547, v 90), 'true and visible
appearance, reality, being awake', often as an adverb 'while being awake, in reality,
really' (Pi., IA, Epid., etc.). <IE *suep-ōr ‘sleep'>
•VAR Indeclinable.
ETYM Originally 'sleep, dream'; the opposition to övap 'deceiving dream' > 'dream',
led to the meaning 'true dream', whence 'reality' (Frisk Eranos 48 (1950): 131ff.).
Cognate with Üлvoç, which points to a PIE r/n-stem. The r-stem further appears in
the denominative Hitt. šuppariia- ‘to sleep' < *sup-r-ie/o-, and in Lat. sopor < *suep-
ōs or *sue/op-r. Gr. üлap may regularly go back to *sup-r for an earlier nom.acc.
*suep-r.
üлατoç [adj.] 'the uppermost, highest' (Il., epic Ion. poet.). Also as a msc. noun = Lat.
consul. <IE *up- '(from) below, up, above'>>
•VAR With metrical enlargement úлaτñïoç ‘id.' (Nonn.).
•COMP ȧvеúлατos = proconsul, etc. (Plb., D. H. etc.).
•DER (ȧvе-)úлαт-ikóç, -ɛúw, -ɛia (Str., D. S., D. H., etc.), åνðυNAT-LAVÓS
proconsularis (Iust.).
=
⚫ETYM Superlative to üлo. Instead of the original suffix -mo-, as found e.g. in Skt.
upamá-, Lat. summus < *sup-mo-, we find -To- after čσxατoç, бéкατоç, µéσσατoç,
dékatos, µéooⱭTOS,
etc. Cf. ►ü, üчsoç.
▶
Úлεμνημvкε (X 491) →µúw.
Úлεppiaλos
1533
üлɛp [adv., prep.] as an adverb 'over, above measure' (very rare); preposition with acc.
and gen. (Arc. also dative [Tegea IIIª]): 'over, beyond' (local and temporal), ‘above,
protecting from or against, because of (Il.). <IE *uper(i) adv. 'over, above', *upero-
adj. 'upper'>
•VAR vлép (metrical lengthening vлɛíp). Dialectal forms: Lesb. Ïëɛp (gramm.),
Pamph. úлap (-ap for -εp phonetic, or after лáp), Arc. óлéρ, Boeot. oùnép.
⚫DER 1. Üлεpov [n.] (-os [m.]) 'pestle' (Hes. Op. 423), úñépa, plur. -αɩ [f.] ‘upper ropes
on the sails, steering-ropes' (ε 260 etc.). 2. comparative forms: úлéptεpos ‘located
above, upper, higher', -τaτoç ‘upper, highest' (Il., epic poet., also late prose); -wτatoš
'id.' (Pi.), from the adj. *üлεpos (cf. below).
•ETYM Cognate forms are Skt. upári, Av. upairi 'above, over', OP upariy 'over,. on',
Arm. i ver 'up, above', Go. ufar, OHG-ubir 'over'; also Lat. super 'above, over'. The
adjective üлεpoç is matched by Av. upara- 'upper', Skt. úpara- 'below, under, later”,
Lat. superus, Osc. supro- 'upper'. ►űлo.
vлεpdεns [adj.] only in úлεрбéα бñµov xovταç (P 330), with hyphaeresis for -dɛéa.
Meaning uncertain. <GR>
•ETYM Perhaps ‘highly inadequate' to déo̟чa 'to lack' (Apollon. Lex., H.), inflected
after the s-stems. Yet, Eust. ad loc. connected it to Séos 'fear'. Cf. Chantraine 1942: 74
and Sommer 1948: 108.
vлεpvwp [adj.] 'arrogant' (Hes., E.). <GR>
•DER Úлεpηvopéŋ (A. R.).
•ETYM A compound in -vwp, see ► ȧvýp.
inɛpǹqavos [adj.] 'overbearing, haughty, arrogant', rarely positive 'outstanding'
(Hes., Pi., B., A. Pr. 405 [lyr.], Att. prose, etc.). <?>
●VAR Dor. (Pi., B.) -ápavos, -nyávws [adv.].
●Der úñɛpŋqav-ía, -íŋ (kað-) [f.] ‘haughtiness, pride' (Sol., Att. prose, etc.). Enlarged
úлερηavéovτεç [m.pl.] 'wanton' (A 694), after úлεpηvoрéovτεç etc. Denominative
verb úлεpηavéw (also -ɛúw) 'to be haughty, treat haughtily' (Hell. and late), rarely
with Ka0-, ȧvē-.
•ETYM Origin unknown. The compositional vowel -ŋ- may have been taken from
Úлεрηvwp etc.; the ending -avos can be suffixal. All of the solutions proposed (see
Frisk s.v.) involve difficult ad hoc-hypotheses.
vлépɩvos →iváw.
inepkýdag #kidoc.
úñéporλos [adj.] ‘presumptuous, arrogant, excessive, immense' (II., epic poet.). <GR➤
●var Superl. vëɛporλŋéotatos (A. R. 2, 4), as if from an enlarged *úñepoñλýeis.
●Der úrɛporiλ-ía, -íŋ [f.] ‘presumptuousness, arrogance' (A 205, Rhian., Theoc.),
-oμa (only in aor. opt. -íσσαito p 268) 'to treat presumptuously or arrogantly; to
despise' (acc. to Apollon. Lex.).
⚫ETYM Literally *whose öлλa are superior' = 'superior (in battle), presumptuous'.
vñɛpqíaλos [adj.] 'superior, arrogant, excessive' (Il., epic poet.). <GR➤

=== page 793 ===

1534
inóppUxa
1535
•VAR Adv. -ws.
ETYM Probably contains a suffix -aλos, but the further analysis is unclear. The old
onnection to otáλn 'dish' is semantically uncompelling. The adjective is usually
connected with úлεрquηs 'extraordinary' and Lat. superbus, compounds with a
second member in PIE *-b"(h₂)u- 'being, arising'. With a dissimilation of v - v tov -
ɩ, vлɛpqíaλoç could stem from *ƒεpóúaλoç (Mastrelli Stud. ital. fil. class. 32 (1960):
109, De Lamberterie 1994), compare dëɛpqvýs ‘enormous' and vлépqεv ‘excessively'.
úлɛρwα [f.] ‘palate' (X 495, Hp., Arist., Plu.). <GR▷
•VAR Ion. -n.
⚫DER Beside it úлεрáïov, -@ov [n.] 'upper story, upper chamber, attic, garret' (Hom.,
Ar., inscr., pap., LXX, Act. Ap. etc.). Adjective úñɛpwïoç, -ños ‘belonging to the
Úлεрov, situated upstairs, living upstairs' (LXX, Hell. and late inscr., D. H., Plu.
etc.).
•ETYM From ►ȧлεp; but the formation not explained. It would be easiest to start
from an adverb *úлépw (cf. úñεpáτατos Pi.), formed like ävw, кáτw.
úлývη [f.] 'moustache', secondarily 'beard' (A. Fr. 27 = 58 M., com., Arist. etc.).
<PG?(S)►
•COMP úñŋvóßios ‘living off his moustache', i.e. ‘acting arrogantly' (Pl. Com.),
ávúлηvos 'without a moustache' (Eust., H.).
=к
•DER ÚлηVÝτηS [m.] 'the beardy one' ( 348 = к 279, AP, late prose).
ÚÄŋVÝTŋS
•ETYM For 'beard', Greek has an innovation formed on the basis of PIE 'chin' in
yévɛtov; further it has μúστаε. Вoth лóушv 'beard' and úлývη are without
etymology. The older connection with a word *āno/a- 'face' (to Skt. äná- 'face,
mouth, nose' to the root *h₂nh,- 'to breathe') is revived by Adams Glotta 64 (1986):
16f., who posits *upo-ano/eh,-. Yet, this etymology is semantically unsatisfactory and
formally difficult; see ▸άïòvýs and лpηуs for the formal problems.
Alternatively, the word has often (and understandably) been considered to be Pre-
Greek (with folketymological conection with úлó). Pre-Greek indeed has a suffix
-vn.
úлŋpétηs [m.] ‘servant, helper, mate, aide' (Att., Hdt., etc.). <GR>
•VAR Dor. (since IVª) -τaç.
●COMP àpx(1)véηpέτŋs [m.] ‘chief minister' (late inscr. and pap.).
•DER 1. Ùƒηp-Étɩç [f.] 'servant (fem.)' (E., Pl., et al.). 2. -ɛtiкós 'belonging to the
servant, serving, assistant, subordinate'; -óv (scil. éλoïov), -òs kéλŋs ‘little boat,
express boat' (Att., etc.). 3. väηp-ɛσía, often plur. -ɛσíaɩ [f.] ‘crew, staff, service' (Att.,
Hell. and late). 4. úлηp-éσov [n.] = -ετкòν лλочov (Eratosth. apud Str.). 5. vлp-
εTÉW [v.] 'to be a úлηрéτηs, to serve, aid, obey' (IA), also with σuv-, εε- etc.; úлηp-
éτŋµa [n.] ‘attendance' (Att.), -étŋois (èε-) [f.] ‘service' (Arist., pap. etc.). 6. úñŋp-
ɛτɛúw [v.] ‘id.' (Messen., Cos), -εTɛía [f.] (App. Anth.).
•ETYM A compound of π- and ►¿pέτŋs ‘rower', originally a sailors' expression. The
literal meaning cannot have been ‘under-rower'; rather, bл- is a hypercharacterising
prefix stressing the opposition to the higher кελεvστnc; cf. úño-dµáç = duwç. On the
meaning and spread of úлηpéτη and its cognates, compare Kretschmer Glotta 18
(1929): 77f. and Fraenkel 1910: 190 (different on details). Gr. úлηpéσov is an
independent formation meaning 'cushion for rowers', metaphorically 'riding
cushion' (Att. Hell. and late); it is probably a hypostasis (“lying under the έpétns”).
únɩoxvéoµai [v.] ‘to promise' (Att., Hdt.). <GR➤
•VAR Older лíσуoμаɩ (еpic Ion., Delph. etc.), aor. Úлоσ×éoα (Il.), fut.
úлoσxýσoµai, perf. vñéoxŋµai (Att., etc.).
•ETYM In Attic and Hdt., the v-formation úлσvéoµαɩ replaced úлíσxoµaɩ due to the
antonym ȧpvέoμaɩ, acc. to Wackernagel 1916: 217f. See ►xw 1.
Üлvov [n.] 'a kind of lichen' (Aet.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
üлvoç [m.] 'sleep' (Il.). <IE *su(e/o)p-no- "sleep'>
●COMP úrvo-dótŋs, fem. -dótɛipa 'giver of sleep' (A. and E. [lyr.]); ävлvoç 'sleepless'
(Il.), whence àʊлv-ía, -έw, -ooúvŋ. Hypostasis έvúлvos (to έv üлvæ) ‘occurring in
one's sleep' (A., etc.), -tov [n.] 'dream' (since B 56 = § 495; cf. below).
•DER 1. Adjectives: ȧлv-кóç ‘somniferous' (Hp., Aret. etc.); -wdns ‘sleepy, sleeping,
somniferous' (E., Pl., Arist., etc.), -wdia [f.] (Iamb.); -npós 'sleepy' (Hp.), -nós
‘sleepy, somniforous' (Nic., late prose), -aλéos ‘id.' (Pi. Pae. 8, 34 [?], Nic. etc.). 2.
Verbs: a. Úлv-ów (кa- etc.) 'to lull to sleep, fall asleep' (Ion. Hell. and late), -wτɩкóç
'sleepy, lulling' (Hp., Arist., Plu., etc.), кaðúлvwσiç [f.] ‘falling asleep' (Arist.); b. ú´v-
wσow, Att. -WTτw (àq-, ¿q-) [v.] 'to be sleepy' (IA); c. vnv-íw [v.] 'to fall asleep'
(Phryn.); but лvío̟µα, -í¶w 'to wake up' from εευлvoç; 4. ú˜v-éw = -ów (Anon.,
Fig.). 5. úлv-ów, almost only ptc. -wovτaç, -wovσa, etc. (Il., epic), ipf. -wɛoke (Q. S.)
'to sleep'.
⚫ETYM Gr. Ünvos goes back to PIE *sup-no-, as do Alb. gjumë and OCS súnú, Ru. son
'sleep'. With a different root ablaut, we find PIE *suop-no- in Arm. k'un, Celtic (OIr.
súan, MW hun) and Baltic (Lith. sāpnas), and *suepno- in Germanic (ON svefn) and
Tocharian (ToA späm, ToB spane). Indo-Iranian (Skt. svápna-) and Lat. somnus
could reflect either *suepno- or *suopno-. The presence of three different ablaut
grades may point to an older athematic n-stem. For a complementary r-stem, which
points to an older PIE r/n-stem, see üлap. The nouns were probably formed on the
basis of the corresponding verbal root *suep-/ *sup- 'to fall asleep', cf. LIV² s.v.
*suep-.
бло, úло [adv., prep.] ‘under, underneath; (from) under, below, down (to), by,
because of (II.). <IE *upo 'below, under'>
•VAR With gen., dat., acc. Epic poet. also úлaí, Aeol. etc. Úлα, Ion. also hʊʊ (Cumaе
V³), Arc. oлv.
DIAL Myc. u-po.
⚫ETYM Cognate forms: Skt. úpa, Av. upa 'towards, near, to, etc.', Go. uf 'on, under',
Olr. fo 'under', all < PIE *upo. With additional *s-, Lat. sub (as in super: úлép).
Greek лαí after лapai, kaτai, and úña after кatá, µεetá etc.
úñóßpvxa ⇒ßpúxios.

=== page 794 ===

1536
Úлóуu(1)oç
Yakdog, Yodoc
1537
úñóyv(1)os =¿yyúŋ.
inodeZin déxoal.
=>
úródpa (idwv) [adv.] 'glancing from below, with a glance from below' (Hom., Hes.).
<IE *derk- 'see'>
•VAR Úлodpáε 'id.' (Call., Nic.), after ódáž, ávaµíž, etc.
⚫ETYM From *лó-♪paк < *upo-dɣk- having a glance from below', formally identical
to Skt. upa-dŕś- [f.] 'sight, look'; for the verb, cf. úлоdéркоμαι. Greek úлóбpα
represents the original neuter of the compound, used as an adverb.
ino入aic →入āas.
únonetpídios [adj.] ‘winged'. ◄GR➤
•VAR In блолετρ₁díшv óvεípwv 'winged dreams' (Alcm.); variant droëtɛpídios
(Dionys. apud EM 783, 20f.).
⚫ETYM Derived from úлóлτεроç 'winged' (Pi., Ion. Att.), see лτεрóν, the IE
cognates of which go back to PIE *petr-. Therefore, the Alcman variant vŋoëεtp-
ídios could in theory preserve the PIE sequence *petr-. Yet, since this would require
separating лолετpídios from all other Greek attestations of лτéрov and its
derivatives, the Alcman form may be due to an idiosyncratic development of
*άлолτερ-.
öлɩɩoç [adj.] lying on one's back, bent backwards, reverse, downside up' (II.), 'flat'
(Hdt., etc.), metaph. ‘inoperative, supine' (late), ‘passive', of verbs (as opposed to
ávúлτо) 'not passive' (D. L.), ларúлτоç as a geometrical term beside üлτiоç
(Раpp.); τà üлτɩα also 'belly', i.e. the upper side when lying üлτоç. <IE *upo 'below'>
•DER Ûëti-ótŋs [f.] 'reverse position, flat shape, slackness' (Thphr., Str. etc.). Verbs: 1.
Úлτι-άw 'to bend (oneself) back, stalk along, be slack' (Att. Hell. and late), also with
έ-, etc.; -aσµa [n.] ‘bending back, bent back figure' (A.), -aoµós [m.] ‘bending back,
aversion' (Hp., late prose). 2. ùätɩ-óoµaɩ [v.] ‘to turn back, be upset, supine, slow'
(A., late prose), -wσis [f.] 'slowness, aversion' (late medic.). 3. úлτɩ-άw (ptc. -ówσa,
subj. 3sg. -áno) 'to bend oneself back' (Arat.).
•ETYM Derived from *upo ‘below' with the suffix PIE *-tio-, which was productive in
Greek as -To- (cf. aïtios, ǎptioç, okÓTIOS, VÚKTIOS). Compare Lat. supīnus 'lying face
downwards' < *sup-īno-, subtus ‘underneath, below' (on the model of intus).
"paž, -aкoç [m.] 'shrew-mouse' (Nic. Al. 37). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM The word is close in form to Lat. sōrex, -icis [m.] 'id.', and is probably related
to it. The suffix -a is Pre-Greek, like (probably) the word itself; the Latin word may
come from the same source. On Lat. o beside Gr. v, cf. Fur.: 361. The older
connection with Latin susurrus 'humming, whisper, etc.', Gr. üpov. σµñvoç. Kρñτeç
‘beehive, swarm of bees (Cret.)' (H.), and the PIE root *suer- 'to resound' is
semantically unconvincing, as is the supposed ablaut Gr. *sur- : Lat. su̟ōr-. Still, the
IE etymology is defended by Vine 1999b: 572f., arguing for the possibility of an o-
grade *suor- in Greek.
úpáž [adv.] · µíyðŋv, ávaµíž ‘promiscuously' (H.), see also on Oλúpa.
!
1
•VAR Also uppá or üppaε, if the word is Aeolic (Theognost. Can. 23).
•ETYM Perhaps a variant of εúpáε (DELG)? There is no connection with ▸
Úpixós →oÚpixos.
►üpač.
Úρτnρ [?] лλvvεús 'cleaner of clothes' (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
üpxn [f.] ‘earthen vessel used for salting fish, etc.' (Ar., Hell. pap., Poll., sch.). ◄PG➤
⚫ETYM A technical word, Aeolic acc. to Poll. and others. Lat. orca 'large-bellied vessel,
tun', whence urceus 'pot, pitcher', may have been borrowed from Greek, as may Lat.
urna 'water-, ash-pot'. Alternatively, both languages may have independently
borrowed them from a Mediterranean language (thus also Fur.: 361, etc.).
ús, vóc [m., f.] ‘swine, sow, boar' (Il.); ₺ç (Оaλáτɩos) name of a fish (Epich.,
Archestr.). <IE *suH- 'swine'>
•COMP úœopßós [m.] 'swineherd' (Od., etc.), popßέw [v.] (Chios V-IV³); also
voqopẞóc, whence -ía, -tov (Hell. and late); vσïéλɛðos [m.] 'swine excrement (D.
C., Poll.), vσлoλɛïv. ovßwtɛïv (H.), “Yσлopoç [m.] name of a river (Nonn.), perhaps
folk-etymology after Вóσлороç, cf. Maas KZ 52 (1924): 305.
cry
⚫DER 1. Diminutive vïdiov (üd-) [n.] (X. etc.). 2. adj. εoç ‘of the swine' (IA), úiкóç
'id.' (X., Hell. and late); pejorative úŋvós 'hoggish, piggish', vía [f.] ‘piggish, loutish
creature', véw [v.] 'to be piggish, dumb', vɛúç [m.] ‘piggish, base person' (Att.);
vwdns 'swinish' (Plu.), fem. -wdía (Ath.). 3. vov [m.] 'pigsty' (Hell. pap.). 4. víčw ‘to
like a pig', whence -toµós (Poll.). 5. Yotńpia [n.pl.] name of an Aphrodite festival
in Argos (Zenod. apud Ath. 3, 96a). See further Yádɛç, ►űaiva, ► Üknç, ► Üviç.
⚫ETYM A PIE word *suH-s for the swine and wild boar. Cognate forms: Lat. sūs, U si-
< *sū-, OE sū, OHG sū, Av. hu-. With additional suffixes Skt. sūkará- [m.] ‘wild
boar', OHG swin = MoHG Schwein, OCS svinʊ [adj.] ‘pig-', svinija ‘'pig, swine', ToB
suwo, etc. Cf. ► oûç, ► Xoĩpos and ▸ xλoúvns.
voyŋ [f.] name of a shrub, probably ‘kermes oak, Quercus coccifera' (Suid., also Paus.
10, 36, 1 [conj.]). <PG(V)►
•VAR Variant loyévn (Edict. Dioclet. 24, 9-12), ioyívn (ibid. 19, 8).
•COMP vσyɩvoẞaqns 'colored with voyŋ' (X., Clearch., et al.); voyɩvóɛis ‘voyn-
colored' (Nic.), with metrical shortening?
•DER voyɩvov [n.] name of a red pigment taken from the "oyn, also 'red cloak' (Nic.,
AP [both with due to metrical lengthening], pap., Plin., Dig. etc.).
•ETYM Pausanias (l.c., where the codices have US [before уívɛτaɩ; probably
haplography]) calls the word Galatian (Celtic?), identical to кóккoç ‘kermes oak'.
Fur.: 367 regards the word as Pre-Greek, because of the variants in loy-.
Üσkloç, üσxloç [m.] ‘a device (ȧyкúλŋ, ßpóxos) on sandals used to fasten the straps'
(Phryn. PS, Poll., H., Theognost.). <PG(V)►
⚫VAR ÉvvývoкλO· úлое½µατа Аакшviкwv έońẞwv 'sandals of Laconian ephebes'
(H.), ëлτvσxλoɩ• ȧvdpeĩov úródŋµa (H. = Hermipp. 67).
⚫ETYM In view of the variants, the word is clearly Pre-Greek.

=== page 795 ===

1538
vokvdá
ÜσTρIĘ, -IXOS
1539
.
Úσкvá [?] · úòç àqódεvµа (H.). <?>
•ETYM Unknown.
voµívn [f.] 'battle, fight' (Il., epic, lyr.). <IE? *Hiud -(s)mo-, PG?(S) ►
VAR Dat. also -ïv (μáxɛσ0α [verse-final] B 863, 56).
●DER voµvataí [m.pl.] name of a phyle (Epid.).
•ETYM If the word was inherited from PIE, we have to posit a basis *voμós (with
analogical -σμo- for *-μo-?) which can be compared with Skt. yudh-má- [m.]
'warrior', to IIr. *Hiudh- ‘to battle' from PIE *Hieud¹- 'to move'. Gr. voµívŋ can be
explained as a derivative in *-in- (cf. pŋyµīv-, oτaμiv-), remade into an ā-stem.
Another derivative of *vouós might be the PN"Youwv (Elis). Alternatively, voμívn
could equally well be a loanword from Pre-Greek, given its suffixation.
voлλnž, -ŋyoç [f., m.] 'triggering device for releasing footracers, for catching birds and
animals, etc.' (Att. inscr. [end Vª], Pl. Phdr. 254e, Hell. and late). It is unknown what
the device actually looked like (a snare, small stick, or rope?). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Dor. (Epid.) -āкoç; also (rarely) y yo, Dor. (Theoc.) -āyš.
•ETYM Traditionally analysed as a compound of лλñσʊw and vσ- in ►üσtɛpoç, but
the use of suffixless vo- would be unique, and the semantics are hardly convincing. If
this is indeed a compound with лλñσow, the first part may reflect ʊç ‘swine' (as
already suggested by Eustathius Episcopus Thessalonicensis in a comm. to Dionysius
Periegeta). In that case, the animal trap would reflect the oldest meaning. In view of
the variant with prenasalization, however, Pre-Greek origin seems the most likely
option (see also Jüthner Die Antike 15 (1939): 251).
ʊʊʊakoç [m.] only dσσáкovç. лaσσálovs (EM 785, 7, Phot.); gen.pl. -áкwv ‘cunnus’
(Ar. Lys. 1001); also üσσaкoç vστакóç (H.), = лáσσαλoç (Theognost. Can. 24),
votakós
űσtaž. лáσσaλoç кɛρáτɩvoç 'penis made of horn' (H.). ◄PG(V)►
VAR Also -a? (cf. s.v. üσσač).
7
•ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word, given the suffix -aкóç or -ač. In the sense of
лáσσɑλoç, it can hardly be separated from doσós ‘javelin'; as a vulgar expression in
Ar., üσσaкoç perhaps alludes to us as a substitute for xoчpos, which is often used for
'cunnus' in comedy.
vσσa [?] 'sex of the woman' (Ar. Lys. 1001, gen.pl. vσσáкwv).
•ETYM Ernout BSL 41 (1940-1941): 121' derives it from us, with the suffix -ak-; but this
etymology is obviously wrong, as it would have given *üaε. The word is no doubt a
variant of vσσαкoç.
vσσós [m.] ‘javelin', Lat. pīlum (Plb., D. H., Str., Plu.). <?>
•ETYM Technical word of uncertain origin; no IE etymology is available. Bechtel BB
30 (1906): 271f. derives it from Carian, comparing PNs like Yoolois, Yoowlos,
Maúσowλoç. Lewy KZ 55 (1928): 30f. compares Assyr. ussu, Hebr. hēs ‘arrow'. The
word could well be Pre-Greek.
üσσшлоç [f.] 'hyssop, Origanum hirtum' (inscr. Ceos Va, Hell. and late). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Also vσ-. Also -ov [n.].
•DER downíç. ǹ oáµyvxos (H.); do(0)writns (olvos) 'wine prepared with hyssop'
(Dsc., Plin., Colum., Gp.).
ETYM A loanword from Semitic, compare Hebr. ezōb (Lewy 1895: 38 with
references).
=
vorakós, iotaž →ÿooakog.
úστáç · ñ[\]αστàç àµлελшv 'гow of vines'; vστáda. ǹ daσɛĩa äµлελoç 'dense(ly
planted) vine' (H.). Сf. лαστáбεç.... τwν àµлελшv oi σvστádɛç 'vines standing close
tŵv åµnéλwv
together' (H.). GR>
•ETYM Probably a dialectical (Cypr.) form of ovʊtás, plur. ovotádes [f.] ‘vines
planted closely together (but not in rows)' (Arist. etc.), metaphorically of water
cisterns (Str.), which derives from oυvíστ¤µαι, as лασtáç from лapíστauai.
votέpa [f.] ‘womb, uterus', also 'ovary' (Ion., Pl. Ti. 91c, Arist., etc.). <IE *ud-tero->
•VAR Ion. -pn.
●DER votepikóç ‘concerning the womb, suffering from one's womb, hysteric' (Hp.,
Arist., Gal. etc.); compare MoGr. votɛpītɩç ‘hysteria'.
ETYM Feminine (scil. μnτpα 'womb??) of the comparative Üστεpoç 'outer'. The
semantics can be explained from a shift *outer, protruding' > 'belly'. A close cognate
is üστρoç. уαστηp (H.) < *ud-tro-. With a suffix PIE *-ero- instead of *tero-, we find
the same meaning 'belly' in Skt. udára- [n.] 'belly', Gr. ►üdɛpoç, Lat. uterus < PIE
*ud-ero-.
üσtɛpoç [adj.] ‘ulterior, posterior', superl. üστατoç ‘latest, last' (Il.). <IE *ud-tero-
'higher, outer'>
•VAR Adv. ÜσTεpov, -a, üσtatov, -a (Il.), -épws, -áτwę (late and rare).
•COMP Úστεрóлoɩvoç ‘bringing later punishment, punishing later' (A. [lyr.]).
•DER 1. ǹ votɛpaía (ǹµépa) ‘the next day' (IA). 2. vστɛp-εw [v.] 'to be late, miss the
right time, be inferior or in want' (IA), often with кað-, also ȧq-, έq-; thence votεp-
ŋua, -ŋoiç ‘lack, want' (LXX, NT), -ŋoµós ‘arrear, debt' (pap.), -ητiкóç happening
later', of fever (Gal.). b. votɛpíšw [v.] 'to be late, lag behind' (also έq-, кað-).
⚫ETYM Identical with Skt. úttara- 'upper, higher', also 'behind, later', derived from
PIE *ud 'on high, up, out'.
vσταкóv [n.] 'drinking cup' (Rhinth. 3 = Ath. 500f.). <PG(V)►
•
⚫VAR Úσtiaкkóç ·лоτуроу лоióу. 'Iταλшται (H.); voτíç (ms. vεTíç). údpíç.
Tapavτivol (H.).
ETYM In view of the variant in -кк-, the word may be Pre-Greek (Fur.: 150).
votpi§, -ixos [m., f.] ‘porcupine, hedgehog' (Hdt., Arist., Ael.), plur. metaphorically
'swine-breasts' (Pl. Com.). <PG(V) ►
•VAR Gen.pl. vστp-íуушv (Opp.), as if from üσtpıy§.
•DER VOTPIXÍç, -ídos [f.] ‘cat-o'-nine-tails', for punishing slaves (Ar., etc.).
•ETYM Uncertain etymology. Often analysed as üσ-tpič, from Opíž, tpɩxós ‘hair' and
vσ- like in ►üστεpoç, so 'with rising hairs'. The ancients (e.g. Pl. Com.) connected it

=== page 796 ===

1540
vvlw
with us 'swine'. To my mind, however, the nasalization proves Pre-Greek origin.
úúчw [v.] 'to make the sound u-u', of owls (Poll.). <ONOM>
•ETYM An onomatopoea. Varia lectio for iú(w, according to LSJ.
úpaívw [v.] 'to weave, warp, devise, produce' (Il.). <IE *(h,)ueb"- 'weave'>
•VAR Aor. úôñvai (Od.), vôãvai (B. [Dor.], Hell. and late after τετpãvaɩ etc.), pass.
úôavēñvaɩ (IA), fut. voavw (Att.), perf. pass. üqaσμa (IA), act. ovv-, rap-, ¿§-
úqayкa (D. H. etc.),
DIAL Myc. e-we-pe-se-so-me-na /ewepsēsomena/ 'which are to be woven', see Beekes
1969: 67.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. èv-, -, ouv-. As a second member: 1. adjectives in
-vos, e.g. ouvons 'woven together' (to ouvuqń, ovvvqaivw, Arist.), fem.pl.
σuvúqɛia 'cells of a honeycomb' (Arist.; uncertain reading), лαрvo-nc 'equipped
with an edging (лapvoń)' (Ar. Fr. 320, 7, Poll., Phot.), fem. -ís ‘garment equipped
with an edging' (Men., Poll.); nuvos half-woven' (Att. inscr. IVª). 2. nominal
-upos, e.g. Aivuopos (Alvó-) [m.] 'cloth-weaver' (pap., inscr.).
•DER 1. Úчavτós (τpt-, ȧv-, έv-, etc.) 'woven' (Od.). 2. úœáv-τηs (ovv-, ταлd-, etc.)
[m.] 'weaver' (Att., Arist., pap., inscr.), -τplα [f.] (late; -τpα [f.]), whence -τɩкóç, ǹ
úqavtikǹ (téxvn) ‘belonging to the weaver, weaving' (Att., etc.). 3. vqav-tápios ‘id.'
(Cyzicus). 4. üчaoua [n.] 'weaving, fabric' (y 274), also έε-, ¿v-, etc.; hence -μάτιov
(H.); ôαµα (Att. inscr. IVª). 5. üqavois (ovv-) [f.] ‘weaving' (Pl., Gal., Poll.). 6.
üчav-τpov [n.] 'weaver's wage' (pap.). 7. úœav-tɛïov [n.] 'weaving mill' (pap. IIIª);
-τúv (?) ‘id.' (pap. II³). Epic byforms: vôáw in voówσɩ (ŋ 105), voaváw in
úчavówντaç (Man. 6, 433).
Further nouns, probably back-formations: 1. vôń (лap-, ovv-, ¿q-, yuvaɩko-) [f.]
'fabric' (trag., Pl., Arist., Hell. and late). 2. üqoç [n.] ‘id.' (Pherecr., Eub., Hell. and
late).
ETYM The Myc. form may prove that the root was *h,uebh. The chronology of the
attestations suggests that voaívw is not a denominative from voń, üqoç, but was
transformed from an older primary present, a nasal present (cf. the Skt. forms) or
from a nominal form in *ub"-n- (thus LIV). Gr. von, üços may be explained as PIE
derivatives, or as back-formations within Greek. The hapax legomena upówσɩ,
úчavówvτεç are incidental formations of the epic language.
Cognate forms: Skt. pres. ubhnáti, inj. sám unap, pres. umbháti 'to bind, fetter',
úrṇā-vabhi- 'spider' [m.], YAv. ubdaēna- [adj.] 'consisting of woven texture'; Alb.
ven 'weave' (also from a nasal present?); OHG weban 'to weave, twist, spin'; ToA
wäp-, ToB wāp- ‘to weave'.
üqɛap, -ɛapos [n.] Arcad. name of the mistletoe, 'Viscum album' (Thphr., H. who has
Úpaíap). <?>
•ETYM Traditionally derived from Cypr. ►v- and *qéƑap, which would be a verbal
noun to "quv ‘grew', following the explanation in H.: tò έлqvóµevov Taïç MEúkalç
кai έλáτaιç ‘what grows on firs'. This is quite doubtful, as a full grade Qev- from this
root has further not been demonstrated in Greek with certainty (cf. on ovqɛós).
ÜW
1541
Perpillou therefore assumed that the word underwent dissimilation from *u-phuwar
(doubtful); the note by Nikolaev Glotta 80 (2002): 221-230 is hardly acceptable.
Connection with ouqap ‘wrinkled skin' (Pisani RILomb. 73:2 (1939-40): 27) is
implausible, too.
чɩ [adv.] ‘up, above; aloft, upwards; high' (Hom., Hes.). <IE *up-s- ‘above' >
●COMP E.g. in чßpeµétŋs ‘high-thundering', of Zeus (Hom., Hes.), úðaúxŋy ‘with
the neck high, proud' (E., Pl. Phdr. 253d, AP, late prose), whence dчavxev-éw, -ilw
'to bear the neck high, to strut' (Hell. and late).
⚫DER 1. adverbs ú½-où, -óðɩ, -óσε, -60ε(v) ‘above', 'upwards, from above' (II., epic
poet.). 2. superl. üyʊtoç (Pi., trag., A. R. etc., also late prose), compar. -íwv (Pi. Fr.
213), íτɛpos (Theoc. 8, 46); also superl. -oτáτw [adv.] (B. Fr. 16, 6). 3. Üчoç [n.]
'height' (Hdt., Emp., Att. since A., Hell. and late), -ñɛç 'high' (Nic., AP), after
aiyλńɛıç, etc.; vy-ów ‘to raise, elevate' (Hell. and late), ptc. vyɛýµɛvos (Hp.), also
with ảv-, -, etc.; hence -wμα, -wfatikós, -woię, -WTŃs, -WTIKÓS. 4. vyŋlós 'high'
(Il.). 5. short names: Yyɛúc [m.] (Pi.),Y¥w [f.] =Y¥núλŋ (Ar. Fr. 225, EM, Suid.).
•ETYM Old locative in *-i, as in ñpi, äpti, ävti, etc., derived from the adverb *up(-) as
seen in ►üлατoç, üлɛρ, ►üño. The enlarging -o- has a parallel in Aeol. öчɩ, Hom.,
etc. oчé 'late', in ǎy beside ǎл-o, etc. In Latin, too, it was productive: ab(s)-, ec/ex-,
sub(s). An additional *s to PIE *up- is also found in Celtic, e.g. OIr. ós 'above, over'
< *oupso-, OIr. úasal 'high', W uchel, Gaul. Uxello- 'high' < *oupselo- 'higher',
perhaps with the same l-suffix as in Gr. výηlós < *up-s-ēl-? Also in Slavic, e.g. Ru.
výše ‘higher³ <*Húps- (see Derksen 2008: 535), OCS vysokú ‘high'.
vw [v.] 'to rain', mostly impersonal ‘it is raining', also 'to cause to rain, send rain';
passive vóµɛvoç (§ 131), vetal, voðñvai (Hdt. etc.), ¿qvoµévos (X.) ‘to be affected by
rain, get rain'. <IE *suh₂-ie/o- ‘rain'➤
•VAR Only 3sg. pres. ipf. üɛɩ, vɛ (Il.), 3pl. vovoɩ, of vɛqéλai (Luc.), aor. Bσaɩ (Pi., Hdt.,
etc.), ipv. voov (& Zɛu, prayer by M. Ant.), fut. üσɛɩ (Cratin.), ipl. σouεv, of the
clouds (Ar.).
•DER ÚɛTÓç [m.] 'rain' (M 133), vét-toç ‘rainy, bringing rain' (Ion., Arist., Hell. and
late; Hdt. 2, 25 codd. vετóτατоι), -wdns ‘id.' (J.), -ía [f.] 'rainy weather' (Hell. and
late), vɛτ-í\w [v.] 'to send rain, rain upon' (LXX, pap.).
•ETYM Present in *-ie/o- to the PIE root *suh₂- 'to pour, scatter'. Cognate forms: Hitt.
šuhha- / šuhh- 'to scatter', išḥuuai-i / išḥui- 'to throw, scatter, pour' (Kloekhorst
2008: 396, 773), ToA 3pl. swiñc, ToB 3sg. and pl. suwam ‘it rains', ToA swase, ToB
swese 'rain'; Alb. shi ‘rain' < *sū-, OPr. suge (= suje) ‘id.'. Compare LIV² s.v. *sh,eu-.
For other IE expressions for 'rain', see on oúpavós, ►ëpσŋ and ►лλεw.

=== page 797 ===

qayɛiv [v.aor.] 'to eat, consume, swallow' (Il.), late and MoGr. also metaphorically 'to
swallow, endure'. <IE *b(e)hg- 'distribute'>
•VAR Fut. qάyoμai (Hell. and late).
•COMP Also with кατα-, v- etc. In compounds wμooáyos 'eating raw flesh', of
animals, also of wild peoples (Il.), wµopayéw [v.], -íα, -чov; лalatoqayɛt̃otal
[inf.med.] 'to be affected by confiscation' (Locr.), from *лaµατo-ôáуos. Hence by
reanalysis oάyos [m.] 'devourer, glutton' (Ev. Matt., Ev. Luc.). Rarely as a first
member: qayavерóлwv. ȧкαеáρтwν (H.), reversal of ȧvерwлоáуwv;
payoloídopos 'bearing insults' (gloss.), payé-owpos 'gluttonous', whence -σwpiτiç
yaoτnp (Com. Adesp.). Hypostasis лроσáуiov [n.] 'side dish, cheese'.
•DER 1. qpay-aç [m.] 'devourer' (Cratin.), кατα- ‘'id.' (A. Fr. 428 = 709 M.), кατw-
(nick) name of a bird (Ar. Av. 288). 2. qay-édaiva [f.] 'cancerous ulcer' (Hp., trag.,
D., etc.), 'gluttony' (Gal.), whence -εdaiviкós 'cancerous', -εdaivóoμα, -ów 'to suffer
from cancer', -wμa (medic., Plu., Poll. etc.); to *payɛdwv. 3. Also qáyaiva. ǹ µetà
tàç vóσovç noluqayía (Ammon. Diff.), acc. to H. also = payédaiva. Further qáywv,
-wvos [m.] glutton' (Varro, Vopisc.); also payóveç olayóveç, yváðoɩ ‘jaws' (H.). 4.
qάy-ŋua [n.] 'food, dish' (late), лpoσ- 'side dish' (Aesop.). 5. -nota (scil. iɛpá) [n.pl.]
‘eating festival', -ŋσóσα ‘eating and drinking festival' (Clearch.). 8. qάyulou
μαστоí, μáрσлло (Н.), чауúλov· μароíллоν (Рhot.). On ►qayıλoç, see s.v.
•ETYM Gr. qayɛîv funtions as an aorist to έσíw. Cognate forms: Skt. bhájati pres. ‘to
distribute, assign', med. -te ‘obtain, participate in, enjoy'; bhaktá- [n.] ‘portion, meal,
food', bhakṣá- [m.] 'food, drink, delight'. PIE *beh₂go- [m.] > Skt. bhága- [m.]
'prosperity, well-being, happiness', Av. baga-, baya- [n.] ‘share, (favourable) lot', OP
baga- 'god'. The short vowel of IIr. *bhaga- is expained by Lubotsky's Law (Lubotsky
MSS (1981)) from the loss of the laryngeal in front of a voiced stop plus another
consonant; this condition would have been given, for instance, in athematic verb
forms, and in bhakṣ-, Av. baxš-. ToB pāke, ToA pāk ‘part, piece' might reflect a
borrowing from Middle Iranian (Adams 1999: 363), and the Slavic cognates (e.g.
OCS bogato, Ru. bogátyj ‘rich', OCS bogʊ, Ru. bog ‘god') must also be loanwords
from Iranian, since they do not show reflexes of Winter's Law. See ►ẞayaîoç.
qayıλos [m] =ȧuvós 'lamb' (Arist. Fr. 507). <GR▷
•ETYM Derived from payɛiv and referring to the age of the lamb, scil. when
becomes edible.
payvos 'salvia' (gloss.), cited by Fur.: 124.

=== page 798 ===

1544
ETYM Cf. ►σqάyvoç.
páypos 1
qáypos 1 [m.] Cretan word for åкóvη 'whetstone', acc. to Simias (fr. 27) apud Ath. 6,
327e.<?>
⚫ETYM Might be formally and semantically identical with Arm. bark ‘bitter, sharp of
taste, vehement, angry', if from PIE *b"h₁g-ro- 'sharpening'; but see ▸ počóc.
qάypos 2 [m.] name of a fish, perhaps ‘sea bream, Pagrus vulgaris' (Hp., com., Arist.,
etc.). <PG>
•VAR Variants лáуpoç (Hdn. Gr. 1, 203); qάywpos. ¿xßñç rolós (H.), qaypa̸pios
(Str.), dissimilated from *oáyp-? Also лáyovpoç?
•ETYM Probably identical with paypos 1, because of the pointed shape of the body,
or the sharp teeth. Acc. to Isidorus, the Greeks called this fish fagrus "quod duros
dentes habeat, ita ut ostreis in mari alatur”. The variants π-/q- and -poç/-wpoc show
that the word is Pre-Greek (Fur.: 165). Differently Taillardat in DELG Supp.
qadáoai [v.] · yvάyaɩ to card (H.). <GR►
•ETYM Read pad<t>áσat, derived from pád
= trāma, кpóкnη, лηуíoν 'woof, weft',
whence the denominative verb qadɩášɛɩv; pádɩ is the popular form of vpádiov (see
► vчaívw).
páɛ, qaź¤wv, etc. ⇒qάos.
qalálŋ [f.] · ráðos owµatikóv, ö yívetai toĩç έpv¤pàv Đáλaσσav лλéovo (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
páčava [f.] a disease of horses (Hippiatr.). <PG(S)►
⚫ETYM Clearly a Pre-Greek word in -aiva (Fur.: 172").
qaídчuoç [adj.] 'shining, noble', often as an epithet of "EкTwp, Axiλλɛúc, and others
(Il., epic poet.), also as a PN; metrically enlarged -чµóɛ (N 686). <IE *gh(e)h₂id-
'bright, clear'>
•DER Qaidpós bright, clear, cheerful, joyous' (Pi., Sol., A., etc.; Þaidpη λ 321); in
compounds e.g. in qaɩdpóvous ‘with a joyous mind' (A.), qadрwлóç ‘with a bright
look' (A., E.). Hence 1. qaidp-ótηs [f.] ‘brightness, cheerfulness' (inscr., Plu. etc.). 2.
-óoμa 'to be cheerful' (X.). 3. -úvw 'to make clear, clean, wash; to cheer up, refresh'
(mostly poet. since Hes. Op. 753), rarely with έк-, έ…ɩ-, άлo-; thence -vvtýs [m.], lit.
‘purifier', of the statue of Zeus in Olympia (Paus., Poll.), but usually qaidvvtýs, -tai
(El. and Att. inscr.; cf. below); fem. Qaidpúvτpia (A. Ch. 759). Isolated is paidɛ öε
(H.), probably from *paidos [n.].
ETYM We find a stem paid- with various suffixes: paid-póc, paid-чμoç, *païd-oç; for
a similar system, compare e.g. kvdpós : kúdiµoç : кūdoç, etc. Another derivative must
have been *paid-úvw (compare aloxpós: aloxos: aloxúvw), which has left a trace in
paɩduvτns, and may have been replaced in the transmission by paidpúvw. However,
formations such as paidρúvτpiα and paidpóvous (for *paidí-vous) in A. testify to the
productivity of the adjective opaidpóc. Cognate forms are Lith. gaidrùs 'bright, clear',
gaidrà 'cloudless heaven, clear weather', also giedras, -rus 'id.' < PIE *g*heh₂id-.
paívw, -oμai
qaíкavov [n.] = л½уavov 'rue, Ruta graveolens' (H.). <PG>
1545
•ETYM Probably foreign, acc. to Schwyzer: 490. The word is probably Pre-Greek;
compare paiкÓÇ.
qaɩкós [adj.] synonym of λaµлрós (S. fr. 1107 P., H.).
•DER qaɩкŵç• λªµлpŵç (H.); qaiкáç, -áðoç, also paiкáσtov (Eratosth.) 'white shoes',
also shoes of farmers (H.), borrowed into Latin as phaecasia. Here probably PN
Daikiac, Daikivaç, Þaiкúλoç, Daíкwv (Bechtel 1917b: 495).
•ETYM A variant of qatós? Fur.: 32824 separates the two, in view of the difference in
meaning.
pardóvns #paivódns.
pavóns [m.] 'thick upper garment, cloak' (pap. since IP, Arr., Ath.). <GR?>
•VAR Dor. Qaɩvóλa (Rhinth.); also paívovλa, naívovλα, лévovλa (Edict. Diocl.).
⚫DER Diminutive paɩvóλov [n.] (pap. IIP). With metathesis qpaiλóvηs, qɛλ- (2 Ep. Ti.
4, 13), and the more usual paiλóvov (pap.), probably after the instrument nouns in
-óvη, -óvɩov; MoGr. qaiλóvi (qeλ-).
⚫ETYM Formation like μavóλns 'raving', σкшäτóλŋs 'mocker', etc. (Chantraine 1933:
237f.), but since it refers to an instrument, the semantics are deviant. An old
feminine formation (like µaívódıç etc.) is found in pavóλis, an epithet of ŋwç, aʊwc
(h. Cer., Sapph.), in the sense of ‘bright, illuminating' clearly belonging to qaívw. It is
unclear why the cloak was referred to as “the illuminating / shining one”. Borrowed
as Lat. paenula.
qaívw, -oµai [v.] 'to show, make visible, bring to light, make known', med. and act.
intr. 'to become visible, come to light, appear' (II.). <IE *beh₂- 'light, shine'>
•VAR Reduplicated лаμ-pаívw, ptc. -pavówσa, -qavó-wvτα (Il., epic poet.),
лaµчavá. λáµžεɩ (H.), aor. O̟ñvat (Dor. qāvaɩ), intr. qavñvaɩ (all Il.), fut. qavéw,
-ŵ (since T 104), -έoμa (since µ 230), -ýσoµаι (Hdt. et al.), Dor. -ŋoέw (Archim.),
neqńoetal (P 155), perf. med. лéçaoµal, 3sg. лéqavtaɩ (II.), act. intr. лéîèva (IA),
Dor. лéāva (Sophr.), trans. лéqayka (later Att.), aor. med. trans. ovασðaɩ (IA),
intr. and pass. pavēñvai (Att.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. άлo-, ¿к-, ¿V-, έπ-, кατα-, лро-, úло-.
Compounds: as a first member e.g. in qaivoµŋpídɛs (Ibyc.), sing. pavóµnpis (Poll.)
[f.] 'showing the thigh, with visible thighs'; PNs, e.g. Daivéλaoç, Davуóеεμç,
Davóτчμоç. As a second member, adapting to the s-stems, e.g. λεavns 'far-seen,
conspicuous' (poet. since w 83); innumerable PNs, e.g. Apiστo-opávηs; very often
from prefixed compounds, e.g. εµqavns ‘visible, apparent, evident' (IA) (to
µqaívw), whence -ɛα, -ía, -í(w, -lois, -íolpos, -loµós, -lotŃs, -lotikÓÇ.
●DER 1. qav-ɛpós ‘visible, apparent, clear' (Pi., IA), whence -ɛp-ótŋs (late), -óoµai
(Hdt.), -ów (late), -wσis. On qavɛpós meaning ‘quidam' in Byzantine Greek, see
Tabachovitz Eranos 30 (1932): 97ff. 2. Þávns, -ntos [m.] name of an Orphian god
(Orph.). 3a. qá-σɩç [f.] ‘announcement' (Att.), 'appearing, appearance' (Ti. Locr.,
Arist., Hell.+); frequently from prefixed compounds, е.g. лрóчãσıç [f.] 'alleged
motive, pretence' (Thgn., IA), whence -σí oμal (Thgn., IA), -σlotikós (LXX, Ph.);

=== page 799 ===

1546
paívw, -oμai
župα-σiç [f.] 'appearance, reflection, clarification, emphasis' (Arist., Hell.+), -tiкóç
‘emphatic' (Demetr. Eloc., etc.). b. qávois [f.] ‘appearance' (very rare and late),
àñóðav-σis [f.] 'declaration, statement' (Arist., Hell.+; beside åлópaσɩç), whence
-τIкóç (Arist. etc.), áváqavois [f.] ‘appearance' (late), äµqav-σiç ‘adoption' (Leg.
Gort.), τós 'adopted' (ibid.). 4. åµчavτúç [f.] ‘id.' (Leg. Gort.). 5. qάoµa [n.]
‘appearance, omen' (Ion. poet., Arist., etc.). 6. Verbal adj.: a. -qavtoç, often in
compounds: ǎqavtos ‘invisible' (Il., epic poet., late prose), vuкtíqavτoç ‘appearing
in the night' (A., E.); лрóаντоç 'announced, revealed' (Pi., Hdt., S. etc.), to лро-
paívw; secondarily pavτós as a simplex ‘visible' (Orph.). Also b. -patos in
άлαрéµ (to лаp-εµ-αívw), scil. čукɩɩç, lit. "not showing anything
alongside", as a grammatical term = Lat. modus infinitivus (D. H., etc.), opposed to
лapɛµqatiкóç, also άv-, kaк-éµqaños, etc. (late), also лpó-, úлép-qatos (Pi.).
7. -qávtŋs [m.] in univerbations, e.g. iɛpooáv-τŋs (ipo-) “who explains holy
practices”, “senior priest' (IA), whence -τɩç, -Tεw, -tía, -tikós. 8. -qa(v)tikós to
prefixed compounds, e.g. εµØα(v)TIкóç 'expressive, demonstrative' (Hell.+). 9.
pávτwp [m.] 'one who displays' (Att. epigr. IIP), кqάv-τwp, -τopía, -topikóç (late);
also in univerbations, e.g. iɛpo-qávτwp (Suid.), -qávτpia [f.] (Rom. inscr. IVP). 10.
Denominative (to derivations in -T-): qavtášoµai [v.] 'to become visible, appear❜
(IA), occasionally with έк-, ¿v-, кatα- etc., act. -á¶w ‘to make visible, present' (late),
whence pávτασ-μa [n.] ‘appearance' (trag., Pl., etc.), -µáτov (Рlu.), -µóç ‘id.'
(Epicur.), -15 (¿µ-) [f.] ‘sight, appearance' (Pl., etc.), -ía [f.] ‘sight, imagination,
fantasy' (Pl., Arist., etc.), whence -ɩwdŋç, -táčoµai, -tóoµai, -lów, -laʊtikóç; qavtaσ-
Tóc (Arist. et al.), -τIкós (Pl., Arist., etc.) 'able to produce the appearance'. 11.
Adverbs: -qadóv in άupadóv ‘publicly, openly' (Hom.), adj. -Sóc (τ 391, A. R.), - Stoc
(288), adv. -Síny (H 196, Thgn., et al.); -qavdóv in (¿‹-)ávaqavdóv ‘id.' (Hom.);
Sɩα-, àµádŋv, Dor. -dāv ‘id.' (Archil., Sol., Alcm.), ¿кôáôηу ‘id.' (Philostr.);
ávaqavdá (Od., A. R.).
Hence, from the present stem, the jocular adverb qaivívda лaíɛv 'to play ball'
(Antiph. Com. etc.). On qavý [f.] 'torch', see on pavós (s.v. ► cáoc).
⚫ETYM Derived from the PIE root *b"h₂- 'to shine, appear, seem'. A primary verb is
found in Skt. bhá-ti 'to light, shine', noun bhānú-, Av. bānu- [m.] 'splendour'; a
nominal n-suffix is also found in OIr. bán 'white', ToА pañi, ToB peñiyo [m.]
'splendour', and in Germanic: OE bōnian, LG bohnen 'to polish, scrub'.
Most of the Greek forms are formed on a verbal stem opav-, whence paívw < *phan-
ie/o-. Acc. to LIV, this goes back to a PIE nasal present *bh-n-(e)h₂-, whence with
thematization Proto-Greek *pave/o-. Cognate nasal presents are (continued in)
Arm. banam 'to open, reveal', nasalless aor. bacʻi, Alb. Gheg bâj, Tosk bënj ‘to make,
do' *ban. A verbal form without stem-final nasal is the hapax legomenon
лεчησεταч; it is also found in zero grade páσiç, -ατos, -aτiкóç and qάoua. Some
of these may also have been formed analogically: for qάoua, compare чaσμа to
vqaívw, for qáoıç, -qatos, compare ßáõis, -Baños to ßaívw; and лeqñoɛtai could
have been supported by ßησετα to ẞaívw. Alternatively, páσıç, -paτoç reflect
nasalless forms in *b¹h₂-, and лεóǹoetai < PIE *b¹eh2-. The H.-glosses répŋ. ¿pávi ǹ
лɛqúkaσɩ and qávta· λáµïovta are not very reliable. See ▸ páoç, ►qnuí.
pakós
1547
qaɩós [adj.] ‘grey, dark grey, blackish', also of dark colors in general (Pl., Arist.,
Hell.+), metaphorically of the voice (Arist.). <?►
●COMP qaιoxitwveç [f.pl.] ‘having dark chitons' (A.), Aɛvкópatos ‘whitish grey' (pap.,
Ath., Poll.).
•DER qaiótŋs [f.] 'dark grey color', úлoqaiów (to vñóðaɩoç) [v.] 'to color grey' (late).
The ethnonym Daíaкɛç, Daiŋkɛç has also been compared to this adjective (cf. Björck
1950: 260f.). Furthermore paiкóç = λªµлрóç (S. Fr. 1107, H.), paiкwç. λaµëpŵç ...
(H.), influenced in form and meaning by AɛUкóç. Hence paiк-áσtov [n.] (Hell.+), -ás
[f.] (AP) designation of a white (?) shoe? Here also pawτós (of xlaĭva Delph. IV³),
or to qάos?
•ETYM Qaιós has been compared with Lith. gaīsas ‘beam of light, redness in the sky',
and reconstructed as PIE *gh aiso- or *ghǝiso- (compare paidpós : Lith. gaidrùs);
neither is possible in the current reconstruction of PIE (at the most, *geh₂i-so-).
Other reconstructions which have been proposed are *paiƑóc and *paiσfóç. Lith.
gaisas has also been derived from *gaid-sas (cf. gaidrus), but apparently without any
support. In short, the etymology of paiós is unknown.
qaipíddw [v.] = oqaɩpí¢w (H.). <GR>
•ETYM For the form, see Schwyzer: 1, 334. It must be a dialectal form of σqaɩp-.
Datoτós [?] town in Crete, in the Peloponnese, in Thessaly (Plu.). <PG▷
•VAR DaiσToç is a PN, a Trojan (E 43ff.).
•DIAL Myc. pa-i-to.
●DER Paíσtɩos inhabitant of Phaistos.
•ETYM A Pre-Greek name (DELG); strangely enough the name is not mentioned in
Fick 1905, except on p. 15, where no interpretation is given.
páкɛλoç [m.] 'bundle' (Hdt., Th., E. Cyc. 242, Arist., Hell.+). <PG(V) ►
•VAR Also paкελλoç (Arist.).
•COMP òλoqákɛ[\os] [adj.] ‘forming a whole (unbroken) bundle' (pap. II³).
•ETYM The suffix is reminiscent of rúɛdoç, okóreλos etc. (Chantraine 1933: 244), but
the variant in -λλ- proves that this word is Pre-Greek. Fur.: 173 further compares
qάoкwλos and ßáσкioι, þaσкɛvταí. Qaσкídɛç. Solmsen 1909: 72 hesitatingly
compared σqákɛλos 'gangrene, spasm' (which is quite possible if the word is Pre-
Greek); the common meaning would be "drawn together, tied together".
qaкiálov [n.] 'face-cloth, headscarf, towel' (late pap. etc.). <LW Lat.>
•VAR Also -táptov, -tóλov, лакiálov.
⚫ETYM Loanword from Lat. faciale; details in Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 187.
çakós [m.] ‘lentil', often metaphorically of lentil-like objects, e.g. hot-water bottle,
birthmark, freckle' (IA). <PG?>
⚫COMP Qaкoεiбns 'lentiform' (Arist., Str. etc.).
●DER 1. Qpák-tov [n.] 'decoction of lentils' (Hp.). 2. -ɩvos ‘prepared with lentils', -tvãs
[m.] 'seller of lentil-products', qaкɩvo-лáλiov [n.] ‘shop with lentil-products' (pap.
etc.). 3. qak-wdns ‘lentil-like, full of lentil-like spots' (Hp. etc.). -wτós ‘lentiform’
(medic.), -woɛs [f.pl.] ‘formations of freckles' (Heph. Astr.). Also 4. qaкća (Epich.),

=== page 800 ===

1548
* páktal
çaкñ (Ar., Hell.+) [f.] 'dish made of lentils, lentil soup'; qaкɛyós, qaknyós [m.]
'cooker of lentil (soup)' (Hell. and late pap.). 5. nickname Daкãç [m.] (Suid. s.v.
Aloσкopídns). On ►ȧчáкη, see s.v.
⚫ETYM Possibly Pre-Greek, if ȧqάкŋ, äqakoç ‘vetch' can be connected. Phonetically,
Qaкós agrees well with Albanian bathë ‘broad bean' < earlier *b (h) a/ok-. For the
ending, cf. ǎpakoç. The initial syllable pa- also occurs in Lat. faba < *b¹ab¹ã, Ru. bob,
OPr. babo 'bean', and Gr. ► áσŋloç.
*páktal →páKTOV.
paktwvápios [m.] "head of a compamy of charioteers with the colors of his faction of
the circus'. <LW Lat.>
•VAR Also QaкTováρioç.
ETYM From Lat. factiōnārius.
QάкτOV 1 [n.] 'act, action, fact' (Leo Mag., Priscian.). <LW Lat.>>
ETYM From Lat. factum, which entered Greek after the VP.
qάкtov 2 [n.] ‘a recipient and a measure'. See Naoumides Gr. Rom. Byz. St. 9 (1968):
280, who cites from Cyr. (cod. Matritensis) pákov· µετроν ларå Аpкáσiv, kotúλαι
ATTIкαÌ τρεiç. Compare H. [on o 74] Qάктɛɩ [leg. чáкτα]. Aŋvоí, σɩлúαι, лúελol.
<PG?>
•DIAL Perhaps Myc. pa-ko-to, see Lejeune 1958: 34129.
•ETYM An Arcadian measure. Meier-Brügger KZ 107 (1994): 90f. follows Neumann,
who derives the word from the root of payɛiv 'eat' (originally 'distribute'), *b"h₂g-,
with substantivizing accent. DELG suggests a connection with лаxúc, which seems
highly improbable to me. Fur.: 171 compares *ẞáкavov, and ßaßáкivov <kai
ẞαẞáкɩvov> xúτpaç ɛidoç (H.), and ẞαкáïov. μéτрov τɩ (H.); there also extensively
on MLat. baccinus.
qalá [?] · µukpả кápa (H., Fur.: reads oáλa). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also páλai· öpoɩ, σкoriaí (H.).
⚫ETYM Fur.: 172 connects Baλóv. oúpavóv (H.), and further ▸ páλoç.
qáλay, -ayyoç [f.] 'round and longish piece of wood, log, roller, beam' (Hdt., Delos
IIIª, A. R., Orph.), ‘balance beam' (Arist.), 'joint of the fingers' (Arist., medic.), ‘row
of eyelashes' (Paul. Aeg.), 'spider' (com., X.), after the long joints of its legs;
traditionally a technical term in the military: '(close or dense) battle-array, line of
battle' (Il.), in later times of the so-called Dorian and especially of the Macedonian
phalanx, with heavy-armed infantry (X., Plb. etc.). <PG(S)►
•COMP paλayуoμax-έw [v.] 'to fight in or against a line of battle (on foot)' (X., D. S.),
opposed to iëño-, лupyo-µaxéw; qaλayyoµáx-ã¢ [m.] 'fighting in a line of battle’
(AP).
●DER 1. Qaλáyy-tov [n.] 'kind of poisonous spider' (Att., etc.), “spider herb”, used
against spider-bites (Dsc.), 'roller' (H., Eust., EM). 2. -ís [m.] 'soldier of a phalanx'
(Plb. etc.), "spider herb" (Gal.), -īπç [f.] ‘id.' (Dsc.). 3. -ITIкóç 'consisting of soldiers
of a phalanx' (Plb.). 4. -ŋdóv ‘in battle-array' (O 360, Plb. etc.). 5. qaλayy-ów [v.] ‘to
pá入入aiva
1549
furnish with rollers' (Ph. Bel., etc.), -wµa [n.] 'roller' (Phryn. PS), also = noµrý tis ¿v
TOIS ALOvvoÍOLS (H.), -wotę [f.] name for a disease of the eyelashes (medic.). 6.
paλayкτnpiα [n.pl.] 'round logs' (Milete V₁).
⚫ETYM Formation like o̟ápay, σñpaуž, pápuу etc. The prenasalized form proves
Pre-Greek origin (not in Fur.!). The nasal and the consistent vocalization as aλa-
render the earlier comparison with Germanic ‘beam' (ON bjalki [m.] < *belkan-,
OHG balko [m.] < *balkan-) and Balto-Slavic words (Lith. balžíena(s) 'flexible
crossbeam on a sledge, stick', Ru. (dial.) bólozno ‘thick plank', etc.) obsolete. Latin
sufflamen [n.] 'clog, break' (if < *flãg-(s)men- or *flag-smen-) is also problematic.
The Greek noun was borrowed into Latin as phalanga, whence late Latin / Romance
planca, MoHG Planke, etc.
qaλaкpós <PG>
•VAR Also páλavoc, qáλãpoç, qáλŋpos, qaλiós, etc.
ETYM The group of páλaveos and paλaкpóç is no doubt of Pre-Greek origin; see on
▸ palós.
qáλapa [pl.] qáλoç.
qalilei [v.] · Oźλɛɩ (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
qaλikpóv [adj.] · ǎкpatov ‘unmixed, pure' (H.). <PG>
•ETYM Fur.: 389 compares ▸xáλiç.
qalis [?] · kávvaßıç (H.). ◄GR►
ETYM To palóc = λɛUкóç; cf. SCr. bjelojka, Sln. belica 'white hemp', MoHG.
Wiẞhampf.
qάλкηç [m.] part of a ship, acc. to Poll. 1, 85f. = τò tỷ oneipą npoonλoúµevov, áð² où ǹ
devtépa tpóriç, usually interpreted as 'beam, board, rib of a ship'. <PG?>
•ETYM The uncertainty about the exact meaning renders etymologizing difficult. The
word has been connected with oáλay and with Lat. falx, flectō (see Frisk s.v.). The
Latin noun might be related to Gr. ¿µqaλkwµévoiç. nepinendeyuévois (Suid.).
Another unclear word is o̟áλкη. ód tñs kóµns avxµós, ǹ vuêtepíç (H.). In the first
meaning, perhaps related to лáλкоç (sее лηλóc)? On the different names of the bat,
see Schwentner KZ 71 (1954): 95f. The word may well be Pre-Greek.
qά\\aɩva [f.] ‘whale' (A. Fr. 464 M., Arist., Str., Nonn., etc.), of a monster (Ar. V. 35,
39, Lyc. 841); also 'moth' (Nic. Th. 760; Rhodian acc. to sch.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Codd. often oáλaiva, but the length of the syllable is metrically ascertained.
•DER Shorter form qάλλŋ [f.] ‘whale' (Lyc. 84, 394), = ǹ netoµévn yuxń (H.);
qáλ<λ>ai• qáλ<λ>aivai (H.).
•ETYM Formed with the feminine suffix -aɩva to a stem *páλλwv or pallos; see
► qaλλóç. Borrowed as Lat. ballaena; Latin b- instead of p(h)- shows that it entered
Latin through a third language. The word will be of Pre-Greek origin (note the
variation between single and geminate λ); see Fur.: 171¹77 on words in -aɩva.

=== page 801 ===

1550
páλlaiva 2 [f.] 'night-moth'. <?>
pá入入aiva 2
⚫ETYM DELG discusses the possible relation between this word and páλλaiva 1. Cf.
Keller 1913: 437ff.; Gil Fernández 1959: 204-207.
opέw, cópia [n.pl.] (Plu.),
palóc [m.] 'membrum virile' (Hdt., Ar., Att. inscr. etc.). <PG(V)►
•COMP pallopópos, -popέw (late), also
iOúpaλλos (Cratin., D. [from youth slang] etc.).
=
●Der qaλλıkóç belonging to the q.' (Ar., Arist.); Þaλλýv, -ñvos [m.] epithet of
Dionysus (Paus. 10, 19, 3; codd. Kɛqaλñvα); qalλiwv palopópos (Suid.);
ñεpɩqaλλía. лoµñǹ Aovýow tɛlovµévò twv qallŵv (H.). Also páλns, -ntos (-ñs,
-ñtoc) [m.] = qaλlós, also personified (Sophr., S. Ichn., Ar., Theoc., H.); Ion. gen.
páλɛw (Hippon. 14b).
•ETYM The meaning 'membrum virile' probably developed from another, more
concrete meaning. In meaning, the word Baλλía 'private parts' (Herod.) is closest;
some have connected the ethnonym Tp₁ßαλλoí (= *Tpipaλλoí). Other look-alikes in
form and meaning are MoHG (dial.) bille ‘penis' and OIr. ball 'member, body-part',
which have often been compared with various words (especially from Germanic) for
'ball, bullet, sack, drinking vessel, testis, bull', from a hypothetical PIE root *bhel-
'blow (up), swell. Because of its body shape, the whale opáλlaiva might also be
cognate with paλλós. The connection with 'pyralis, night-moth' remains unclear
(Immisch Glotta 6 (1915): 194ff.; cf. also Güntert 1919: 219f.).
The forms with ẞ (Baλλíov Herod. 6, 69) and the variation ^/^^ clearly point to Pre-
Greek origin, see Fur.: 172.
páλos [m.] helmet ornament or part of the helmet, 'grainy top'?, 'band of the helmet??
(II.). <PG?(V)►
•COMP ǎqaλoç 'without a q.' (K 258), τετрáqαλos 'with four qáλot' (M 384, X 315),
àµqiqaλos 'with a páλos on both sides, surrounded by œáλoɩ (E 743 = A 41, Q. S. 3,
334). On ►tpvqáλɛa, see s.v.
•DER qáλăpa [n.pl.] part of a helmet, ‘decorations'?, ‘jaw piece' ? (II 106), ‘jaw piece
of horses' (Hdt., E., X. etc.), ‘jaw dressings' (late medic.), metaphorically
'decorations' (Plu., D. Chr.), -ăpov [sg.] ‘ornament of the τápa' (A. Pers. 663 [lyr.]);
acc. to H. = ȧστpayaλíokos ó è̟nì tñç nepikeqaλaíaç, кai лapaуvaðídɛç, xaλivoì ñ
уллокóσшα. Нence Dalapius [f.] epithet of Athena (Call. Fr. 503). Also
tɛtpaqáλŋpos, epithet of кuvéŋ (beside au pípaλos; E 743 = A 41).
•ETYM As the form and function of the opáλo and opáλapa remain unknown, any
attempt at an etymology remains hypothetic. Borrowed as Lat. phalerae. Fur.: 231
adduces Baλóv. oúpavóv 'sky'; see also op.cit. 25736 on the suffix -apa. So the word
may be of Pre-Greek origin, provided that the identification is correct.
qalós [adj.] · Aɛukós (H.). ◄PG(V)►
•Der qaλúvɛi• λaµépúvei; qaλiooɛtai. Aevkaívetai, άopíše, probably also qaλíëtɛ.
μwpaívɛ and paλw◊ɛíç· лapɑτрaлɛíç (all H.); cf. λɛvkaì opéves. µаívóµɛvať (H.),
from Pi. P. 4, 194, and oaλóç also = μwρóç, εччavns (H.) (not to onlóc, pace e.g.
Pok. 489f.).
páos
1551
Furthermore: 1. qaλiós bright, white-spotted' (Call., Hell. pap., Procop.), after
лоλóç; чαλóлoυу· Аευкóлoυу (H.). 2. qáλŋpos (Nic.), Dor. -āpos (Theoc.), 'white-
spotted', also as an animal name (Theoc.), denominative ptc. qaλnpiówvτa 'frothing
up white' (kúματа N 799). Hence qaλnpic, -āpic [f.] ‘Eurasian coot, Fulica atra' (Ar.,
Arist., etc.), also 'canary grass, Phalaris nodosa' (Dsc.), -nptov [n.] ‘id.' (Ps.-Dsc.). TN
Þáλŋpov [n.] a harbour of Athens. 3. Qaλaкpós (also άva-, ñµ-, etc.) ‘bald-headed,
round and bald' (IA), -ótns [f.] (Hp., Arist.), -óoμat 'to become bald-headed', -ów 'to
make bald' (Hdt., Arist., LXX), ȧло- (Phryn. PS), -wμα, -wσis (LXX, Plu., etc.); -táw
‘id.' (Suid. s.v. àwpóλɛios); fem. qaλáкpa 'bare hill' (St. Byz.); TN Paláкpa(1),
-áкpiov etc.; also Báλaypoç, -áypat. As Frisk 1934: 62-64 showed, -aкpo- is suffixal
and has nothing to do with the word for 'top'. 4. páλavos baldheaded, bald' (AP,
D. L., pap., etc.), also as a PN and TN; -avtíaç [m.] ‘bald head' (Luc.), -ávtwµa [n.]
'bare spot' (v.l. LXX), often åvaóáλavtos (-avoc) ‘id.' (pap., LXX), and -avτíaç
(-avеíaç), -avτaños, -avtiaσiç, -ávτwµa (Arist., LXX, Luc. etc.); probably after the
verbal adjectives in -avτoç (cf. e.g. àОéрµαντоç = ǎεpμoç, etc.), then sporadically
adapted to ävßoç. See also лαµqaλáw and ‣ qaλis.
•ETYM All Greek forms may be derived from the adj. qaλóc, which was compared
with Lith. bālas 'white', as a plant-name 'snowdrop, etc.' (beside more usual báltas
'white'), and with Alb. balë 'horse with a white spot on its forehead'. A lengthened
grade to this root is found in Latv. bâls 'pale', and OCS bělo, Ru. bélyj 'white' <
*bhēlH-o-.
Among numerous other formations, the Lat. and Germanic designations of the coot
(= qaλŋpíc) has also been compared: Lat. fulica (probably < *bhol-ik-), OHG belihha,
MoHG Belche. It was further supposed that Baλiós was related as a word from the
Balkans, with Baλíos (name of a horse of Achilles), see Brandenstein Sprache 2
(1950-1952): 76 with further combinations.
However, the whole group, with interchanges o/ẞ, T/е, к/y, is clearly of Pre-Greek
origin, see Fur.: 192.
qávdovpos →лávdovpoç.
pavóc →páog.
qάos [n.] ‘light, daylight', also metaphorically (II., epic poet.). <IE *beh₂- ‘shine’►
VAR opów (epic), ows (Att.), also qáßos = qáƑos (Pamphyl.), gen. páɛoç, Att.
qάous and owτós, nom.acc.pl. qάɛa, páŋ, qwta, etc.
•COMP qaɛσôópos (Call.), paoσpópos (Lyr. Adesp.), qwopópos (Att.) 'bringing light,
bearing a torch'; pavoqópor Aloλɛïç. iépɛtaɩ (H.). Frequent as a second member, e.g.
Aɛukopans 'with white light, white-gleaming', лαμoans 'all-shining, wholly radiant'
(trag.), avioans 'increasing light' (Man., Cat. Cod. Astr.), Eúpuoáɛσσa [f.] mother
of Helios (h. Hom. 31; analogical formation metri causa); furthermore owτ(o-)
(Hell.+) in e.g. qwtoɛidýs ‘luminous, full of light', qwτaywyós 'bringing light, fem.
‘opening for light, window', whence -aywyέw, -ía; aúžíówτoç ‘increasing light,
whence -qwτέw, -ía.
•DER 1. From páos: qaɛivós < *paƑɛo-vós (Il., epic poet.), páɛvvos (Aeol.), PN
Danvos (Dor.), Danva (Arc.), qāvós (Att.) ‘shining, bright, pure'; thence avótηs

=== page 802 ===

1552
páos
[f.] 'brightness'; as a noun qāvós [m.] ‘torch' (com., X., etc.), also qăvý [f.] (Hes. Fr.
47, E.), perhaps after qăvñvai, -qăvýc? Þăvaios epithet of Zeus (E. Rh. 355 [lyr.]), of
Apollo (Achae.). From qaɛivóç: qaɛívw (àµqi-) [v.] 'to come to light, shine, glow'
(Od., epic), also trans. 'to bring to light' (Nic.), pass. 'to appear' (Call., A. R.); aor.
pass. qaávðŋv (Il., µ 441), probably for *pavēŋy after qávěŋy (Chantraine 1942: 81;
cf. Schwyzer: 723), whence paávτατоç 'most radiant' (v 93), compar. Qaάvτɛpoç
(AP).
2. From quç: Qwτ-avós 'glowing, light, bright' (X., Hell.+), qwτ-í(w [v.] 'to
(en)lighten, brighten, reveal, instruct', also of baptism (Hell.+), also with dɩa-, ¿ñɩ-,
кata- etc.; thence -ioµós (kata-, έñɩ-, nɛpi-) [m.], -ɩɩ (dɩα-) [f.] ‘enlightenment'
(Hell.+), -1σTIкóç ‘enlightening' (late), -1στηpiöv [n.] 'baptistery' (Epigr. VIP), plur.
luminaria (gloss.), -toμa [n.] 'lunar phase' (comm. Arist.). On owστnp, qwσкw, see
чavoτp, чaúσкw below.
=
Them. aor. qáɛ 'lighted up, appeared (Hwc, § 502), subj. лpoóáησɩ (Max. 280), ptc.
qάovσa (or rather qaoñσaɩ, Arat. 607 of the constellation Xηλaí), also ovτa.
λáµлovτα (H.). Thence two presents: 1. With an enlargement -0- only ptc. qaέwv
'shining, radiating, of the sun (Il., epic poet.), also as a PN Daéwv (Od., etc.), and
-ovτíç, -ovτáç (AP, Opp.); as a first member qaɛσчußpoτos 'bringing light to
mortals', of 'Hwç, 'Héλios, etc. (epic poet. since N 785, K 138), qavoí- (Pi.), note
qaćσaσbai. idɛīv, μαеεīv 'see learn' (H.). 2. With a suffix -σk- and reduplication: л-
qaúσкw [v.] (only pres. and ipf.) 'to reveal, show, announce' (Il., epic, lyr.); prefixed
without reduplication: diα-, εл-, úло-чaúσкw, rarely aor. -pañσai, fut. -qavow 'to
shine, rise of stars, 'to dawn' of daylight (Arist., Hell.+), also (after qŵc) -qwokw
(Hdt., late); simplex qwokɛt diaqavɛɩ (H.).
To the primary verb belong several nouns: ǎ-qavστos 'unilluminable,
unannouncable' (Plot.), ǹuí- (Poll.); qañois (diá-) [f.] ‘enlightenment, illumination'
(LXX, Plu.), úлó- '(narrow) opening, opening for light' (Hdt. 7, 36, LXX, Ph.);
Sɩáчavμα [n.] 'dawn' (pap. VIP); qavoτýp [m.] ‘lamp, torch' (Epid. IIIª), whence
qavotńpios epithet of Dionysus (Lyc.); also owστηp [m.] 'light, radiance', plur.
'lights of heaven' = 'stars, sun and moon' (LXX, NT, Vett. Val. etc.) = Ovpíc (H.).
Several PNs: Daúdajios, Þwkpitos, Nikoчáŋç, Eúpvoάwv, Aŋµopówv, Avtiqŵv, etc.
⚫ETYM All the above forms can be derived from a thematic aorist qafɛīv (Schwyzer:
747), which is seen only in the hapax legomena páε, лрóáσv, qάovσα (*qaoûσa),
from PIE *bhh₂-u-V-, and perhaps in qaúw (EM, etc.). The derived noun qάos yields
qws with contraction (whence pówę by diectasis, Chantraine 1942: 81); thence the
gen. owτós after xpшτóç, pшτоç, йлατоç еtc.; and the derivatives qwστηp, qwσкw. It
is superfluous to assume a special by-form qws < *bhoh₂-s- (= Skt. bhás- [n.]; cf.
below).
The PIE root is *beh₂- 'to shine' as seen in Skt. bháti. The forms with -u- are not
found outside Greek. A cognate with long vowel is generally seen in Skt. vi-
bháva(n)- ‘shining, lighhting', but this belongs to bháti ‘to lighten, shine' and thus
allows for an analysis as vi-bhá-va(n)-. A form without -u- is seen in ƒɛñoɛtai (see
►qaívw).
papkic, -idoc
1553
qápay\, -ayyos [f.] 'gully, chasm, deep trench, abyss' (Alcm., trag., Th., X., etc.).
<PG(S)►
•VAR Also σpápayyes (H. sine expl.); ǎσqapayos (Il., Plu., Q. S.).
●DER qapayy-wdns 'full of gullies' (Arist., D. S., etc.), - íτŋs [m.] epithet of the wind
Iapyx (Arist.), qapayyat̃ov. τñs capéτpas τò кάλчα 'quivеr-case' (H.),
qapayyóqµaɩ in yñ (ǎpovpα) лεapayywµévŋ 'craggy field (caused by the Nile)'
(Hell. pap.).
•ETYM Connection with a verb 'to cut, split, bore' (Frisk) is a chimaera. Like
► σñpay, ► áλay, pápay is of Pre-Greek origin (note the prenasalization). Fur.:
227 compares μápaуo oi àлóкρηдvo τóлo overhanging places' (H.) and Spanish
(Pre-Roman) barranca (cf. Alessio REIE 2 (1939): 153).
qápai · vqaíveɩv, лλéкɛv 'to weave, plaiť (H.).
⚫ETYM The gloss is suspect, see DELG.
papéτpa [f.] 'quiver' (II.). <GR?>
•VAR Ion. -τpη. Also qapaτpíτaç (Boeot.).
•COMP qapετpocópos 'bearing a quiver' (AP).
⚫DER Diminutive papéτp-tov [n.] (Mosch.), -ɛwv, -ɛwvos [m.] 'quiver' (Hdt.), after
the local nouns in -(e)óv; -íτaç [m.] 'archer'.
•ETYM Instrument noun and local noun in -τpā, for which derivation from qέpw
with a reduced grade has been assumed (cf. Schwyzer: 358), beside a full grade in
qεpɛτpov; one compares pápa pov: ẞépεpov, xapádpa : Xépados, etc. However,
because a reduced grade is not accepted anymore since the laryngeal theory, a
loanword should be considered, e.g. from Iranian, with folk-etymological adaptation
(see Chantraine 1933: 333 and especially Hubschmid 1953a with more examples of
loanwords for 'quiver').
papia unknown (pap. II³).
•VAR Xauapάptov (pap. IIIP).
opāpɩкóv [n.] a fish (Nic. Al. 398, Dsc.); also papiaкòv pápμaкov (Phylarch. apud
Athen. 81e).
•ETYM Unclear, see DELG.
qapkáčeɩ [v.] · kλéлτå ‘steals' (H.).
•ETYM Unclear, see DELG.
.
Qápкεç [pl.] • vεoσσoí 'young birds' (H.).
•ETYM The gloss does not appear in the correct alphabetical place; does it contain an
error? Speculations in DELG.
qapkiç, -idoç [f.] 'wrinkle' (S.Fr. 1108, Erot.). <PG?>
•VAR Also ▸ popкóv· Aevkóv, soλióv, pvσóv ‘white, gray, wrinkled (H.), s.v.
•DER qapkidwdŋs 'wrinkly' (Hp. apud Erot.), -doúµevoľ otvyvášovtεç (H.), of a
gloomy look, literally 'wrinkling'.
⚫ETYM Gr. Qapкíç has been compared with Lat. fricăre 'to rub off, Lith. brūkis
'stroke, line' and braukti 'to strike, rub', but this is formally hardly possible; so Pre-

=== page 803 ===

1554
pápiakov
Greek? The connection with popкóv is quite uncertain. In the meaning 'white, grey',
popкós may belong to a verb for ‘gleam', to which e.g. Go. bairhts, MoE bright; this
would presuppose a secondary shift from ‘grey' to 'wrinkling' (pvoóc).
pápμакov [n.] ‘healing or harmful medicine, healing or poisonous herb, drug,
poisonous potion, magic (potion), dye, raw material for physical or chemical
processing' (II.). <PG(V)►
•VAR pápμaкoç (accent following Hdn. Gr. 1, 150) [m.] 'poisoner, enchanter' (LXX,
Apoc.).
DIAL Myc. pa-ma-ko.
•COMP αрдаколwληs [m.] 'medicine seller, pharmacist' (Att.), лoλvápμaкóç
‘having many q., skilled in many q.' (Hom., Sol., A. R., Thphr.).
●DER A. 1. qapμáк-tov [n.] 'healing or harmful medicine' (Pl., Hell. pap., Plu. etc.). 2.
papμaк-ía, Ion. -ín [f.] ‘remedy' (Hp., LXX etc.). 3. papµaк-ɛúç [m.] 'who prepares
Q., poisoner, enchanter' (S., Pl. etc.), probably backformed from -εúw. 4. чаρμак-
ítns [m.], -ītis [f.] 'containing Q., concerning o.' (Hp., Eup., etc.). 5. papμaк-íwv [m.]
epithet of a physician (Gal.). 6. papμaк-íç (Ar., D., Arist. etc.), -ɛa (Arist.), -εúτpiα
(Theoc. in tit., Eust.), -toσat [pl.] (H., see ẞаμßакεÚτρiαι) [f.] 'enchantress'. 7.
чapμaк-wv, -ŵvos [m.] 'dye works' (S. Fr. 1109).
B. Adjectives 1. qapμaк-wdŋs ‘medicinal, poisonous, rich in o.' (Arist., Hell.+). 2.
papμaк-óɛç ‘id.' (Hell. and late poetry). 3. Qаpμак-ηpós 'treated with qp., imbued,
impregnateď (pap. II³). 4. -ɩкóç 'concerning the q.' (Tz.; usually -ɛutikós for
euphonic reasons).
,
C. Denominative verbs: 1. Qаpμак-εúw 'to prepare or use o., to heal, poison, enchant'
(IA), also with кατα-, diα-; hence -εvτ = -εúç (late), -εUTIкóç 'concerning the use of
q., belonging to q.' (Pl., Gal. etc.), -ɛía [f.] ‘preparation or use of Q., healing,
poisoning, enchantment (Hp., Att., Hell.+), -ɛvois [f.] ‘id.' (Hp., Pl.), -ɛútpia (see A
6); also as a back-formation -ɛúc (see A 3). 2. qapμaк-áw 'to feel the effect of a œ., to
long for o.' (D., Thphr., Plu. etc.). 3. чapμaк-óo̟μaι to be poisoned, enchanteď (Plu.,
pap.), aor. act. -wσat 'to provide with o.' (Pi.). 4. qapµáσσw, Att. -ττw 'to treat with
Q., to heal, poison, enchant' (1 393), rarely with кατα-, εv-, εлɩ-; hence pápµažiç [f.]
'medical treatment, enchantment, metalworking' (Pl., Plu., etc.), -αкτηρ, -áкτng [m.]
= чаρμакεúç (Оpp.), -αкτηpιos 'healing' (Lyc.). Also back-formation papμµǎкóç [m.]
'lustration, scapegoat', also as a term of abuse (Hippon., Ar., Lys., D., Call.); perhaps,
the long a was introduced after pejorative words in -ã (the length is certain in
Hippon. and Call., but shortvowel in Ar. Eq. 1045, both are possible in Ar. Ra. 733).
•ETYM The original meaning of oάpμaкov cannot be established with certainty. The
word is clearly Pre-Greek. Fur.: 220 compares póрßαvτα. iατριкà чáρμакα (H.),
pópẞia pápμaкa, oi de cópẞa (H.). Note the variations a/o and μ/ß, well-known
from Pre-Greek. Foreign origin is already pleaded for by Chantraine 1933: 384 and
Schwyzer: 497.
qápos [n.] ‘plough?' (Alcm., Antim. Eleg.; both very doubtful), 'ploughing' (H., EM),
also pápuy (Lyc.)?<?>
=
pápoos
=
1555
●DER qapoūv· ápotpiãv; qapŵσaɩ· ȧpóσat ... (H.); 3pl. papówσɩ 'to plough' (Call. Fr.
183 = EM 788, 24), perhaps after apówσt? äчapos, ȧápшτos ávńpotos,
ȧvapoτpíaστoç? (Call. Fr. 183, 82 c = 555 Pf.; very uncertain, cf. Pf. ad loc.), Boúqapov
(-ny cod., -ñ Latte). τǹу εváрoτ[p]ov уñv. pápos yàp ǹ ǎpoσis (H.). Further aor.
qάpoaɩ = oxiσai (EM). Compare pápa yč.
•ETYM The relation between the words cited is unknown, because of their meagre
attestation. The present papówσt seems an intensive deverbative (*papáw);
imitation of apówσt is quite improbable. The sequence oap- could be interpreted as
the original zero grade of a verbal stem PIE *berH- 'to pierce, bore', continued e.g.
in OHG borōn 'to bore', bora [f.] ‘borer', Alb. birë, brimë [f.] ‘hole'; with o-grade Lat.
forāre 'to bore (through)'; with e-grade MIr. bern(a) [f.] ‘cleft, split', Arm. beran
'mouth'; with e- or ō-grade Arm. brem 'to dig up, bore up', < *birem < PIE *bher-, or
*burem < PIE *bhōr-. Words for 'to beat, hew', such as Lat. ferire, ON berja, OCS
borjo, brati 'to fight' have been kept separate by E-M for their deviating meaning.
pápos [m.] 'lighthouse' (AP). <?>
•ETYM Origin unknown. Borrowed into Late Latin, French, etc. Hence derives the
name of the island in Alexandria, famous for its lighthouse (§ 355).
qpapos [n.] 'cloth, linen, garment, cloak, costume' (Il., epic poet.). <PG?>>
•VAR Later also qápoç (qǎpéɛσσɩ Hes. Op. 198 codd.).
•DIAL Myc. pa-we-a [pl.].
•COMP µελaµãpns having a black garment' (B.).
•DER qpápai vaivɛɩv, nλékɛɩv ‘weave, plait' (H.); also qopµóç?
•ETYM An isolated word, which could well be Pre-Greek. On the erroneous
connection with Lith. burė ‘sail, barva, bùrva 'color' see Fraenkel 1955 s.vv. with
Nieminen KZ 72 (1955): 129ff. and 147ff. Acc. to Solmsen 1909: 246, it belongs to
► cápσoç, ‣ pápvyč, etc.
qapσáyyɩov = ►ñapaσáyyns.
qápoos [n.] 'quarter, part of a city (Hdt. 1, 180f., 186 said of Babylon, which is divided
into two parts by the Euphrates), of a house (Poll.); of a felt hat and of a bunch of
grapes (AP); of a root (Nic.); of a gown (J.), 'cloth, covering, banner' (J.). <IE? *bhrs-
'break', PG?>
•COMP papσopópos = signifer (gloss.); Siacáp(σ)ous XITŵvaç (EM 175, 37).
•DER qάpowμa [n.] 'frame of a ship' velsim. (Demetr. in Cat. Cod. Astr.).
ETYM An Ionic word according to Solmsen 1909: 6f. Connection with pápos
'plough' makes little sense. Previously, it was assumed that the -o- was suffixal, and
äчoç, µúσoç etc. were compared (Schwyzer: 513). Fur.: 254 suggests a Pre-Greek
word, because of the suffix -σOS.
The most promising etymology, however, is a connection with Hitt. parši-a(ri), parš-
a(ri) 'to break', par ša- 'morsel, fragment', if we assume that in a zero grade *bhrs-o-, the
-s- was preserved between vocalic resonant and vowel. The Hitt. word is compared
with the Gm. group of ON bresta, OHG brestan, OE berstan 'to burst'. Within
Greek, we find a verbal form pápσai = oxioai (EM).

=== page 804 ===

1556
pápuyE
qápvyž [f.m.] ‘throat, gorge, larynx, windpipe' (Od.), also 'throat disease' (Hp.).
<PG(S)►
•VAR Also -v, gen. -vyos, -vyyos, acc. -vyya.
•COMP аpu̟ууоτo̟μía [f.] laryngotomy' (late medic.), uaкpoóápυ(y) ‘long-necked'
(AP).
•DER pap-úy(y)ε0 pov (medic., Poll.), -úyapov (H.) 'id.', on the model of the
synonyms ẞépεpov, ßápaеpov [?]; qap-vy(y)ívdηy ‘like a gullet' (Com. Adesp.,
Lex.); qapvyyí¶w = λapvyyíšw (Poll.). Cf. koλoí-opuğ, also opάpay and λápvyč.
•ETYM Frisk interprets this as an inherited Indo-European word for 'throat, gorge',
identical with Lat. frümen ‘id.' < *frŭgsmen, Arm. erbuc, gen. -oy (o-stem) ‘chest,
breast-piece of sacrificial animals'; it would be further connected with ►qάpoç. Yet,
this analysis is completely wrong: the prenasalized suffix -v(y)y- shows that the word
is of Pre-Greek origin.
qάoyavov [n.] 'sword' (II., epic poet., Cyprian acc. to AB 1095), 'sword lily, gladiolus,
iris' (Thphr., Dsc. etc.), 'sword of the swordfish' (Opp.). <PG(S)►
DIAL Myc. pa-ka-na.
•COMP qaσyav-oupyós 'sword-forger' (A. [lyr.]), xpuoσoчáoуavoc = xpvoάwp (sch.).
•DER Diminutive paσyav-ís, ídos [f.] 'razor blade' (AP 6, 307), -tov [n.] 'sword lily'
(Dsc., Gal. etc.); verbs paoyάvεται· žíεɩ ávaιpɛται (H.), qaoyaváw in
qaoyavɩwoav. ¿žiqiojiévny, qaoyavióv<twv>• ¿řipioµiévwv (H.).
•ETYM Formation like Spέлavov, кóлаvov and other instrument names. The
traditional connection with oqáčw, σqayń through *σqaу-σк-avov (Prellwitz) is
unconvincing phonetically and morphologically. The connection with Skt. khaḍgá-
'sword' (Specht KZ 66 (1939): 220) is refuted by Mayrhofer KEWA s.v.
The word is no doubt Pre-Greek (cf. the a-vocalism, suffix -av-). Fur.: 300 takes up
the traditional connection with σqay- (s.v. oqáľw) and interprets it in Pre-Greek
terms. Isebaert Glotta 63 (1985): 150f. connects Skt. bhájate, but he does not explain
the Greek -α-, nor the meaning.
qάonos [m.] 'an edible bean' (Epich., Ar., pap. IIIª, etc.). <LW?>
●DER qaσńλiov [n.] ‘id.' (Dsc., pap. IV-V³).
•ETYM Identical with Lat. phasēlus [m., f.] ‘kind of beans, husk-like bread (Cat., Cic.,
Aug. poetry, Colum., etc.), which probably was a loanword from Greek. The inverse
direction was assumed by Pisani Rend. Acc. Linc. 6:6 (1930): 184ff.: qáoŋλos would
be an Italic loanword into Greek, cognate with opaкós ‘lentil'. Because of Alb. bathë
'tick-bean' (see paкóc), Kretschmer Glotta 21 (1933): 181f. considered Illyrian
intervenience. Further details are found in WH s.v., where Mediterranean origin is
assumed. From the Lat. diminutive phaseolus (Colum., etc.), Greek took paσíoλoç,
-íwλos, raσíolos (Gal., Poll., Edict. Diocl.). Fur. 175 follows Alessio in comparing
Lat. basēlus light vessel', which would point to substrate origin, either
Mediterranean or Pre-Greek.
qάois 1 [f.] 'notification'. •VAR Also qágua. paívw.
qάois 2 [f.] 'declaration'. •VAR Also qáτiç, qáσкw. →qŋuí.
paokaívw → Baokaivw.
=>
paokás → Baokãç.
páooa
qaokia, -180ç [f.] 'bandage, strip' (Sor., Poll.). <LW Lat.>>
ETYM From Lat. fascia.
1557
qaʊkiç in 1. ẞaʊkevtai• qaokides, άykáλai (H.). 2. Siáquσoç. qaσкiç. <?>
•ETYM 1. Could be a loan from Lat. fascis, or a Greek word, cf. þáσkoi dɛoµaì
opuyávwv. 2. Possibly to be read as σкaçíç 'cup'.
qáσkoç [m.] 'tufts of moss drooping from oak trees' (Thphr., H.). <PG?>
•ETYM Starting from original *papσкoç, Solmsen 1909: 5ff. proposes three
possibilities: 1. related to the group of LG barsch 'sharp, rough, stern' < PGm. *bars-
ka-, OIr. barr 'point, top, etc.' < PCl. *barso-, OHG burst 'bristle', Lat. fastīgium
'point, ridge, etc.';
2. related to pápσos 'piece, part';
3. from earlier *qаρк-σкоç to qоρкóv· λɛvкóv, лоλóv, þvσóv.
Differently Mann Lang. 17 (1941): 12: to Alb. bashkë ‘pellicle'. On paσкás, -ádos ‘kind
of duck', see
ẞaσкāç.
Fur.: 124 compares σqάкoç 'kind of moss', σpayvos, páσкov (Thphr.) 'kind of moss'.
Op.cit.: 300 he adduces páσкwλos and ẞáσкiot, etc. It is impossible to make a
definite choice. A Pre-Greek word seems quite possible.
qáσкoç [n.] bundle of wood' (Edict. Diocl.). <LW Lat.➤
•ETYM Adaptation of Lat. fascis.
qáσкwλoç [m.] ‘leather bag, bag for clothing, for metal objects, etc.' (Ar. Fr. 319, Lys.
and Is. apud Harp., Att. inscr.). <PG➤
•VAR -ov [n.].
•DER Diminutive -wλtov [n.] (Hell.+).
⚫ETYM It seems formally evident to connect ►páσкos (cf. áσкúλiα : ȧσкóç), in which
case the bag would have been denominated after a skin from which the hairs have
not been removed (Solmsen 1909: 7). Pok. 111 connects þáσкio dεσµì pуávwv
'bundles of dry wood' (H.) as Macedonian. Borrowed as Lat. pasceolus (since Plaut.),
phascolum (Paul. Fest.). Pre-Greek origin seems probable (Fur.: passim).
qáoσa [f.] 'wood-pigeon, ringdove' (Ar., Pl., Arist., etc.). <PG?>
•VAR Att. -ɩɩα.
⚫DER Qaσσodóvoç [m.] 'killing pigeons, pigeon killer' (ipη O 236), 'kind of hawk'
(Arist., Gal. etc.), -qóvtŋs [m.] ‘id.' (Ael.); qáy, -ẞós [f.] a wilde dove (A. Fr. 210, 257
= 3, 403 M.; Arist., Lyc.), difficult to distinguish from qáσσa; qaßo-túлoç [m.] ‘kind
of hawk' (Arist.), qaßoktóvos. iɛpakoktóvos (H.).
⚫ETYM As qáoσa may have been reshaped after vñσσα, кíσσα etc., we cannot draw
any conclusions from the opposition qáoσa: qáy for the origin of -oo- and -ẞ-. For

=== page 805 ===

1558
pátvn
pάy, compare monosyllables such as yúy, oka̸y, yλaû etc. The hypothesis by Hamp
2005: 102-5, seems too complicated. The word is probably Pre-Greek.
qátvη [f.] 'crib, manger' (Il.), 'depression, coffer in a coffered ceiling, coffer' (Hell.
inscr.), 'tooth socket' (Poll.), name of a star in the constellation Cancer, beside the
"Ovo (Thphr.). <PG>
•VAR Late also лáðvŋ.
=
●DER 1. Diminutive qaτvíov [n.] ‘tooth socket, gums' (late medic., Ph.), name of a
star páτvn (Hephaest.). 2. Verbs: a. qaτv-ɛúw [v.] 'to feed at the manger' (late),
-íčoμαι (ек-) to be fed at the manger' (Hld., Nic. Dam.), -ášo̟µα ‘ïd.' (Aq.); b. patv-
ów [v.] 'to deepen a ceiling, furnish with panelwork; to coffer' (LXX), -wμa [n.]
'coffering, coffered ceiling, coffer, embrasure on a ship' (A. Fr. 78 = 114 M., Plb. etc.),
'tooth socket' (Gal.), -wµatiкóç ‘panelled' (Plu., Anatol. inscr.), -wτós ‘id.' (H.,
Phot.), -wσis [f.] ‘coffering' (LXX). 3. as a hypostasis from *¿к qátvŋç: ¿kqatv-íšoµiai
'to be cast out (of the manger)' (Posidon., Eust.), -toμa [n.] 'litter, scrap' (Philostr.
VA, etc.). 4. Þários, epithet of Zeus in Phrygia (Laodicea Combusta; imperial
period).
⚫ETYM The byform лáðvη, attested by Moeris 212, 9 as Hellenistic, lives on in MoGr.
and could come from Ionic (Schwyzer: 121; Wackernagel 1916: 23 with ref.). It is
widely assumed (Frisk, DELG) that лáðvη is the oldest form, whence by shift of
aspiration qάτvη. Inverted writing yielded another variant лáðµŋ (LXX; Schwyzer:
216). Yet, Beekes 2003: 109-112 stresses that átvη is the oldest form (Hom.),
whereas лάеvη is only Hellenistic. There are parallels for a progressive shift of
aspiration (pidákvη > лðákvη).
Frisk follows the traditional etymology of opáτvη as a derivative *b"nd"-n-h₂- to PIE
*bhend 'to bind' as in Skt. badhnáti, perf. babándha, Go. bindan. The same n-suffix
is recognized in some Celtic forms with full grade: Gaul.-Lat. benna 'two-wheeled
chariot with a plaited basket', W benn ‘carriage', and, as a loanword, MoHG dial.
benne 'waggon box'.
It has been assumed, on the basis of the Celtic word, that páτvŋ originally denoted a
'wicker basket'. However, the crib to which horses were tied is a solid construction
(εvчéστη) and cannot have been of wicker-work. As páτvη cannot be derived from
*bhend, the word is most probably Pre-Greek.
чаττáуη [m.] 'scaly ant-eater' (Ael.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also σлατáууηs (Sophг.), лаτáууηs (Рoll.).
⚫ETYM The variants show that the word is Pre-Greek (Fur: 164, 281).
pablenv →pavoryE.
qañλos [adj.] ‘bad, unfit, ill, mean, poor, etc.' (IA). <PG➤
•COMP qavλóßios ‘leading a bad life' (sch.), úлópavλos 'somewhat bad, etc.' (Hp.).
●DER qaúλoç (of fruits) ‘coarse, etc.' (Thphr. etc.). qavλ-óτŋs [f.] ‘bad character, etc.'
(Att.), -íw [v.] ‘to regard as bad, despise' (Pl., X., LXX, late), also with Sia-, ¿k-, etc.,
whence -σμós (¿к-) [m.] (LXX, J.), -toµa [n.] 'contempt', -íστpia [f.] 'despiser'
(LXX).
péyyos
1559
⚫ETYM Pejorative adjective with a suffix -λo- and barytone accent, like μáxλoç,
στúpλoç, etc. May have been dissimilated from *pλauλoç; compare the synonym
pλaupos. The form is also reminiscent of acpaupós ‘weak, powerless', and is no
doubt a Pre-Greek word.
qañoɩy} [f.] ‘blister from burns, blister' (Ar. Fr. 883, Hp. apud Gal. 19, 150, Poll. 7, 110,
EM 789, 52, H.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Also Qaбστуž, plur. -ɩууεç.
•COMP No compounds or derivatives.
ETYM Formation likе дñууε, στрópiу, etc. that has been compared with paúčε-
oppúyet 'roasts, dries' (H.). The prenasalized suffix and the variation σ/σr show that
the word is Pre-Greek; note the intervocalic -σ-.
páy → páooa.
péẞoμaι [v.] 'to flee, take flight' (Hom., A. R.). <IE *bheg"- 'run away, flee'>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.
•DER Causative-iterative poßéw 'to put to flight, frighten', -έoμa 'to flee, take flight,
be put to flight' (Hom.), also 'to frighten' and 'to be frightened' (post-Hom.), also
with к-, кατα-, лερ-, лρо-, etc.; later, the verb was interpreted as a denominative.
Hence opóẞ-nuα (èk-) [n.] 'fear' (S. [lyr.], sch.), ¿к-qóß-ŋow [f.] ‘fright' (Hdn., Sch.,
H.), qoß-ntikós (εк-, лрo-) 'fearful, daunting' (Arist. etc.), -ητpov (εk-) [n.] 'terror,
scarecrow, terrible event' (Hp., LXX, Ev. Luc., AP). As a first member in
Þoßeolotpátŋ, epithet of Athena (Ar. Eq. 1177), on the model of έλkeol-, àλpeoi-,
ταμɛσ etc.), also Poßéστpatos ‘id.' (Hes. Th. apud Chrysipp. Stoic., EM 797, 54;
after Apxε- etc.). Verbal noun póẞos [m.] 'flight' (Il., epic poet.), 'fright' (post-
Hom.), probably also A 544 etc.; often as a second member, e.g. лεpí-, čк-, čµ-,
úлépqoẞos, partly back-formations from έкpoßέw, -έoµaɩ, etc. Hence poßɛpós
'dreadful, fearful' (IA), poßɛp-óτηs [f.] 'terribleness', -i(w 'to terrify', -tσµóc [m.]
(LXX). póẞos 'fright' replaced the noun déos (to dɛídw). On ▸► póßŋ, see s.v.
•ETYM Beside thematic oέßoμat with *e, we find Balto-Slavic cognates with -ē- from
Winter's Law: Lith. bëgti, 1sg. bëgu ‘to walk, run', Latv. bêgt, 1sg. bêgu 'to walk',
bêgtiês 'to flee' (bēga ‘flight', bêglis ‘fugitive'), OCS běžati, 1sg. běžo̟ ‘pɛúyɛiv', Ru.
bežátb, 1sg. begú 'to walk, flee'. Van Windekens 1941: 96 suggested connecting ToA
pkänt 'apart', pukäl 'year', ToB pikul 'year'; considered conceivable by Adams 1999
s.v. pikul.
qeyyos [n.] 'light, splendour, lustre' (mostly poet., h. Cer. 278, also Att., Hell.+). <?>
●COMP E.g. Xpuσoqɛyyns 'with golden radiance, gold-radiant' (A. Ag. 288);
qɛyyoẞoλéw 'to cast light' (Man.).
=
•DER Qeyyiτns [m.] name of a stone = σɛλŋvítŋs (Plin., etc.); ßpaxvoɛyyítns
ẞpaxuqeyys (λúxvoc) ‘casting a sparse light' (AP 6, 251; metrically enlarged). As a
back-formation: qέyyw [v.] ‘to glow, shine, enlighten' (Ar. Ra. 344 [lyr.], A. R., late),
only pres. and ipf., also with лεpt-, occasionally кατa-, áva-.
•ETYM No etymology. Has often been connected with Lith. spingiù (spingu), spingéti
'to give a weak light, glitter' and with OE spincan 'to spark', OHG funko, MoHG

=== page 806 ===

1560
pei
Funke 'spark', but this suggestion is impossible in view of the initial stops. Nor is a
contamination of *σлéууoç and opάoc probable.
qεi [n.] name of a letter.
•VAR Indeclinable.
ETYM After лɛĩ, s.v.
qɛídoμa [v.] 'to spare, save, refrain from' (II.). <IE? *bheid- 'split' (?)►
•VAR Sigm. aor. qɛíσaσbai (№ 236, etc.), redupl. them. aor. лεqбéσðaɩ, opt. -oíµŋv
(Y 464, 101, 1277); on the differentiation in meaning against qɛíoaoa, see
Chantraine 1942: 415; fut. qɛíσoμai (Att.), дidε (О 215, № 158 = 187),
qεɩσÐ½σoµαι (pap. IIP), perf. med. ptc. лεεiσμévos (Luc., D. C.), repidŋpévos
(Nonn.), ipv. лεчídŋσo (late epigr.).
•COMP Rarely with úлo-, лερɩ- (X., A. R. etc.). As a first member in the univerbation
qeidaλqit-ñoai (aor.) 'to handle the barley thriftily' (Com. Adesp.), -ws (Phryn. PS).
Numerous PNs, е.g. Þεídɩллоç with εdллídηs, Aɛwqɛidns, Þεd-úλoç, -íaç, -wv,
etc., a king in Argos (Hdt.), whence -wvɛtos, -wvídns.
•Der qɛɩd-w [f.] (Hom., Hes., Democr., Th., LXX etc.), -wλń [f.] (X 244, Sol.) 'saving,
thrift, sparing', -wλós 'thrifty' (Hes. Op. 720), whence -wλía [f.] (Ar., Pl. etc.), qɛidws
· parsimonia (gloss.). Backformed adjective oɛdós 'thrifty' (Com. Adesp., Democr.,
Call. Fr. 460), whence qɛídwv, -wvos [m.] ‘oil-can with a narrow neck' (Poll.),
frequent as a PN (see below).
⚫ETYM Gr. Qεídoμat must be inherited, and agrees phonetically PIE *bheid- 'to split,
etc., as attested in Go. beitan, E bite, Skt. bhinádmi, Lat. findō 'to split', root aorist
Skt. ábhedam, ábhet. A convinding semantic motivation has not been found:
originally 'to cut off niggling, nip off or 'to cut away from sth. = to withdraw??
qɛλyúvɛɩ [v.] · ȧovvetɛi, Aŋpei ‘is stupid, talks nonsense' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Has often been connected with Skt. phalgú- 'futile, weak, useless, etc., Lith.
spilgti 'to languish from lack of light, die off (of plants), get a bad appearance (of
men)' and others, but this comparison is doubtful in all respects.
Qɛɛú¢ [m.] uneven, stony ground', also the name of a mountainous region in Attica
(Cratin., Ar., Pl. etc.). <?>
•DER DEλEITηs [m.] ‘inhabitant of the D.' (St. Byz.). Also peλλía [n.pl.] (X. Cyn. 5,
18), qɛλλíç (yñ, Poll: 1, 227), Qɛλλɛwv, -wvos [m.] (Arr. Cyn.17) ‘id.'; Þɛ\\ɛïç [f.]
region in Attica (IV³).
•ETYM The word has been connected with лέλλα. λíеoç ‘stone' (H.) in different ways;
Fur.: 161 suggests that it shows Pre-Greek interchange л/q; uncertain. Alternative: to
Qɛλλóc, referring to the uneven, porous structure of corc?
qɛ\\óç [m.] ‘cork, cork-oak' (Pi. P. 2, 80, A. Ch. 506, Thphr., Hero, pap. III³). <?>
•COMP Qɛλλópuç [f.] 'cork-oak' (Thphr.), perhaps from Arcadian (cf. Ruijgh 1957:
90).
•DER QÉλλ-ivos 'made of cork' (Luc.), -wdns 'id.' (Poll.), qɛλλívaç· кoūчoç, àлò τOÙ
Qελλov; qɛɛñoν· έллλéоν (H.); probably also qελλ-ivaɩ [pl.] name of a fast water
péppw-ofial
1561
bird (Dionys. Av.), qɛλλívio ópoẞáкxai (H.). Also Dεw [f.] the land of the
DEAλóлodes (Luc. VH2, 4).
•ETYM One may compare políc and a Slavic word of comparable meaning, e.g. Ru.
boloná 'outgrowth on trees', bólonь sap-wood, weak bark'. If correct, than pελlós
could derive from *qɛλ-vós - but given the limited distribution of the words, this is
highly improbable. Fur.: 164 compares άкρó-σлελλos and σɩτó-σлελλoç, on which I
have no opinion.
qéλλovpa [f.] ‘giant fennel, Ferula communis' (sch. Hes. Op. 52a). See André 1958: 60.
<LW Lat.
⚫ETYM As DELG remarks, probably metathesized from *oépovla vel sim., which
itself must be a borrowing from Lat. ferula, the Greek word for fennel being vápně.
Given the productivity of the suffix -oup- in plant names, folk etymology has
certainly been at work.
qévāž, -ākoç [m.] 'impostor, trickster' (Ar., rare and late). <PG>
•var Cf. ïisvýkò ‘wig' (Luc.); see below.
●DER qevakí¶w (àлo- Men. Prot.) [v.] ‘to deceive, trick', -toµós [m.] ‘deceit, trickery'
(com., Att. orators), -íoματα [pl.] (H.) as an explanation of лηуηкíσµata; qɛvak-
ɩσtýs [m.] ‘deceiver' (Phld., sch.), -ɩσtɩкós ‘deceitfuľ (Poll.), -ɩkŵç ‘id.' (EM). Also
qévayua [n.] (Phot.), to *peváσow; qɛváкη [f.] 'false hair, wig' (Luc.).
ETYM Probably a Pre-Greek word (compare the variant лηуηкη) with a
characteristic suffix -ā.
Qεvvñσɩç [m.] 'priest of Isis' (Wilsken, Griech. Ostraka 413, 417, 420 [IP]). <LW Eg.>
⚫ETYM An Egyptian word; see Masson Revue d'Égyptologie 29 (1977): 58.
qevvíov [?] · Mŋdikǹ ódós. Haµqúλtot (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
qɛvviç, -ida [f.] ‘ball game' (H., Phot., Suid.). <?>
•ETYM The same game as opaivívda (лαív); the word was made from qɛvívda (Et.
Gen.), with expessive gemination.
qépßw, -oµai [v.] 'to pasture, tend, feed, nourish', med. 'to feed upon, consume, enjoy'
(Ion. poet., Hes. Op. 377, h. Hom. 30). <?>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf., except plpf. έлεópßεi (h. Merc. 105).
•DIAL Myc. po-qa /phorga-/, also i-po-po-qo-i /ippo-porgoi¹i/ = iллочоpẞois with
dissimilation *k" -p - kw >p-p-k", also po-qe-wi-ja-i /p³org"ēwiã³i/ = popẞεiaïç
(see 4. below).
•COMP ñoλúqopßos ‘rich in pastures, feeding many' (Il., Hes.), ɛqopßos 'well-fed'
(Orph.), Evqopẞía [f.] 'good food' (S. Fr. 848), -tov [n.] name of a tree, ‘Euphorbia
resinifera', and its juice (Dsc., Gal., S. E. etc.). Also έµópßiov. teλávnµa (H.),
whence Arc. ivpopßíεv (= *εµqopẞíεv) 'to raise pasture taxes', ivopopßioµós (Tegea
IV). As a second member e.g. in ov(o)-qopßóc [m.] 'swine-herd' (Hom., etc.).
•DER pépẞovoa [f.] plant name (Ps.-Dsc.), εßηas voμεïç 'herdsmen' (H.). With
o-grade: copßń, Dor. -á [f.] 'pasture, food, nourishment' (Ion. poet. since Il.).

=== page 807 ===

1562
Thence: 1. popẞác, -ádos [m., f.] ‘feeding, grazing, nurturing' (Pi., S., E., etc.; mostly
poetic), whence -adiкóç (Plu.). 2. popẞ-áμwv id.' (Hymn. Is.). 3. popẞ-años
'belonging to the pasture' (Call.). 4. popß-εá, -ɛá [f.] 'halter', metaphorically
'mouthband of a piper' (Ar., S. Fr. 768, X., Arist., etc.), perf. ptc. εμлεqоßεɩwμεvos
‘equipped with a mouthband' (Ar.); 5. qopß-aía [f.] ‘id.' (LXX). 6. popß-aσía [f.] ‘id.'
(Suid.). 7. qópß-tov [n.] plant-name (Gal.). On cópßia. qápµaka ‘drugs' (H.) see
► чápμaкov. Note qopẞá [n.pl.] = qopẞń (Orph.).
ETYM Agricultural term without etymology.
qepéoßios →qépw.
pepeooarńg →ákog.
qépɩotos [adj.] almost only in voc. œέpiʊte as a courteous address (Il., epic poet.). <◄IE
*bher-ist(H)o->
⚫ETYM Identical with Av. bairišta [voc.] 'helping best', so probably inherited from
PIE. Superlative of the PIE root *ber- 'to carry, etc.' attested in Gr. opέpw, etc. The
original meaning is disputed: 'most serviceable, most helpful, useful??, 'strongest in
carrying?? The co-occurring variants opέpτɛpos 'stronger, braver, better' and
qpépτατoç 'strongest, bravest, best' (Il., epic poet.) are innovations after лép-τεpoç,
-τατoç; compare also piλ-τεpoç, -τατoç etc. Differently on opépiστoc, etc. Seiler 1950:
94ff. On the meaning, see also DELG s.v. QÉpτεpos.
qepvń [f.] ‘dowry' (IA) ◄IE *bher-n->
VAR Aeol. (Hdn. Gr., EM) qépεvă, Dor. qɛpvá [f.] 'god's share at the sacrifice'
(Epid. V-IV³).
•COMP ávτíqɛpvos ‘instead of the dowry' (A. Ag. 406 [lyr.]), τà àvtíqɛpva ‘return
лapápɛpva
present of the groom for the bride' (Cod. Just.); τà ларáqɛρvα 'what the bride brings
beside the dowry' (pap. I-II³, Just. Nov.); ä-, лoλú-ερvos (H.); έmoέpva [n.pl.]
'dowry' (sch. I 147, Eust.).
●DER_ Diminutive qɛpvάptov [n.] (pap. Aug. times), opɛpv-í(w 'to furnish with a
dowry' (LXX, Hell. and late pap.).
•ETYM Verbal noun of oέpw, originally meaning 'load'. The nasal suffix is also seen
in Arm. beřn, gen. beřin 'burden, load', Lith. bérnas 'boy, (farmer's) servant', Latv.
berns 'child, baby'; with o-grade Go. and ON barn [n.] ‘child' < “what was borne",
Alb. barrë 'load'. The disyllabic root-shape in Aeol. pépevă agrees with that of
чεpετpov, чóρετроv%; on the secondary -ǎ, see Solmsen 1909: 259. See also
►ẞɛрváμεÐα (H.).
qpépviov [n.] 'fish-basket' (Men., Com. Adesp., Ael.). <GR>
ETYM Like Qɛpvý, but with agentive meaning ("carrier").
qéptepos →qέpLOTOS.
qέpw, -oµai [v.] ‘to bear, endure, carry off, bring away, provide, reach, move along,
etc.' (Il.). ◄IE *bªer- 'bear, carry'>
•VAR Only pres. and ipf.
•DIAL Myc. pe-re = qέpɛɩ.
pépw,ofian
1563
•COMP Verbs frequently with one or two prefixes (in various meanings), e.g. åva-
(ouv-ava-, etc.), ȧло-(лρо-αло-), diα-, εiσ-(εл-εɩσ-), etc., etc. Nominal compounds,
e.g.: qɛpé-oɩkoç ‘carrying one's house' (Hdt.), “house-carrier” > ‘snail' (Hes. Op. 571),
ov öμov yaλñ (Cratin. 94, EM, H.); also qɛpéσßios ‘bringing sustenance,
nourishing' (h. Hom., Hes. etc.); qεрεσσíлovos ‘enduring, suffering' = qɛpéñovos
(epigr.). On -pepńs see A 6, on -pópos and -copos B 3.
=
•DER A. With e-grade (rare): 1. oέpua [n.] 'fruit of the womb, of the earth' (A. [lyr.]).
2. Qépτpov (Σ 236, Ael.), opéрετpov (Plb.) [n.] 'biеr', Qεрετрεúоμаt 'to be carried on a
bier' (Plu.). 3. pépτpuç. åλoç. Ooúpiot (H.); hardly correct, perhaps for *qɛptúç? 4.
opɛpτóc, only in oỷ τλaτãç oỷ qɛpτās (E. Hec. 158 [lyr.]), aqεpτos (A. [lyr.]),
ovµqɛptós ‘united (N 237, Nonn.); cf. below. 5. pépiσtos and -tεpos, -tatos. 6.
-pepŃs in derivatives from prefixed verbs, e.g. лpоøεpŕs (to лpo-qεpw) ‘outstanding,
excellent' (II., epic poet.), лεpiεpýs (to rεpióépoµat) 'running around, revolving,
circular', whence -εɩα, -ɛiŋ [f.] 'convolution, circumference' (IA); hence rarely in
compounds, e.g. oivo-qεpns (H.), see ►oivóqλuε.
B. With o-grade: 1. oopá, Ion. -ǹ [f.] ‘bearing, burden, fee, product, motion, course'
(IA); frequently from prefixed verbs, e.g. σчµôopá, -ý ‘event, coincidence, accident,
etc.' (IA), -á\w ‘to lament, beweep' (Hell.+), -aívw (Ps.-Hdt. Vit. Hom.); similarly
áva-, dia-, έnɩ-, лpoσ-opά, etc. 2. cópos [m.] ‘earnings, (collected) tribute,
payment' (IA). 3. popós ‘bearing, conducive, pregnant, advantageous' (Hp., Arist.,
Hell.+). Independently in compounds, e.g. τococópos 'bearing a bow, archer' (
483); in derivatives from prefixed verbs, e.g. σúµopos (to σvµôέpw) 'conducive,
suitable, advantageous' (since Hes.), Stáppopos 'various' (IA), whence -ótŋs [f.]
'difference' (Pl., late).
To popȧ or pópoç: 4. popɛús [m.] 'bearer' (Σ 566, A. R., Plu.), ȧuoi-, àva-, etc. 5.
popás, -ádos [f.], -ádiov [n.] ‘brood-mare' (late pap.), also 'productive' (Thphr.). 6.
popɛiov [n.] 'litter, sedan chair' (Din., Hell.+), 'porter's wages' (Poll.). 7. qópeτpov
[n.] ‘porter's wages, expenses of transport' (pap.), -τpíšw 'to load, transport' (pap.). 8.
opópчµos 'fertile' (Hell.+, AP, et al.), лоτ- 'conducive, useful (Epich.). Adverbs 9.
popádny 'borne along, quickly' (S., E., D. etc.), -ádāv (Epid.); -ŋdóv 'by bundles'
(Luc.). 10. póp-τos [m.] ‘load, freight' (Od.), whence -tíç (vañç) [f.] 'freightship'
(Od., late prose), -tíov [n.] 'load, batch, freight, cargo', plur. 'goods' (Aeol. poetry,
Att.), -τaž, -Taкoç [m.] 'carrier, barge' (Com. Adesp., pap. I³), -TIкóç 'bearing a
burden, burdensome, coarse, crude' (Att., etc.), -Tiкóτηs [f.] (Arist.), -τɩкεúоμαι
(sch.), tuos bearing a burden' (sch.), -τíw, -τíčoμαi 'to load up' (since Hes.), also
with ảvtɩ-, ¿ê-, ¿ïɩ-, åño-, etc., whence -tioµós (¿mi-, ¿k-, àño-) [m.] ‘loading' (late),
-τów ‘to load (late). 11. Iterative-intensive verb popέw 'to bear, etc., aor. Qopñσal
(Il.), late -έσal, very frequent with prefix, e.g. àva-, εл-, σuv-; thence -ŋµα (‹ƒɩ-, diα-,
ouv- etc.) [n.] 'garb, load, dress, bier' (IA), -ɛµa (Phot., Suid.), -ŋous (dia-, ¿v-, ovv-
etc.) [f.] 'bearing' (Hell.+), -εσts (Suid., sch.); -ŋós (àло- etc.) 'bearable, endurable'
(Pi. Fr. 88, 1, A. Pr. 979, E., late prose), -ŋτкóç (áva-, dia-, лεpɩ-) in different
meanings (late). With apparent nominal first member, e.g. кapëo-qopέw (X., Arist.,
etc.), denominative from кαρло-qópos (Pi., Hdt., E., Ar., X., etc.).
-

=== page 808 ===

1564
QεÛ
C. With lengthened grade: ►qwp (not ►qwpiaμós). See further qapétpa, ► qepvý,
►ȧupopεúc, ‣ dippoc; ►qopµóc (unrelated is pápμaкov).
•ETYM A PIE present *ber-(e/o)- 'to bear, etc.'; cognate forms are e.g. Lat. ferō ‘id.”,
Go. bairan also 'to give birth', Arm. berem, Skt. bhárati, OCS bero 'to collect', Ru.
berú to take'. Beside the thematic forms, Greek has a unique form without a
thematic vowel, the ipv. pl. oépτɛε (verse-initial in I 172), which agrees exactly with
Lat. ferte and also with fer, fertis, fers, fert, as well as with Skt. 3sg. bhárti (RV, bis).
These may well be old athematic forms.
PIE *bher was originally limited to the present stem (fut. olow, aor. évεykεiv, έveikai,
also tλñvai, taláσσaɩ, Lat. perf. tuli). Non-presentic forms are found in Greek only
occasionally: the late aor. ηoεpα (IG 3, 1379 = MoGr., after vεyкα), the isolated gloss
ëqepoev. ¿kúŋoev (H.), the incidental poetic formations qeptóc, äqeptos, ovliyeptós
with a remarkable full grade (as against the zero grade in Skt. bhṛtá-).
=
Cognate forms of the nominal derivatives (often independent innovations): cópos
Skt. bhára- [m.] 'taking away, profit, booty' (bhārá- [m.] 'burden, load'), OCS sʊ-
bor [m.] 'congregation', Ru. sbor 'collecting'; -qópos = Arm. -vor, e.g. lus-a-vor
'bringing light' (from loys 'light'; cf. Lat. Lūci-fer), Skt. -bhará-, e.g. vājam-bhará-
'bringing the prize of a contest'; opέpμa formally = Skt. bhárman- [n.] 'maintenance,
nurture, care', to which OCS brěmę, Ru. berémja ‘load, burden' with acute intonation
(cf. Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 247, 249); qέp(ε)τpov is formally comparable to OE beorðor
[n.] 'birth'. However, the existence of a root variant *berh₁- (for qépetpov, Skt.
bhariman-, Ru. berémja) seems doubtful.
qɛu [interj.] ‘alas, woe, ah!' (trag., etc.). <ONOM>
•DER Aor. qɛûšaɩ 'to cry qɛu' (A. Ag. 1308); also ou ‘'faugh' (Ar. Lys.).
⚫ETYM Onomatopoeic form, like Lat. fü, MoFr. fi, MoE phew.
qɛúyw [v.] 'to flee, escape, be on the run, go into exile; to be prosecuted' (Il.). <IE
*bheug- 'flee'>
•VAR Also pres. quyyávw (IA); aor. Quyɛïv, fut. qɛúžoµai (II.), qεvšoñµai (Att.), ¿ê-
Qevчw (pap. II etc.), perf.ptc.mеd. лεqуудévоç (Нom. etc.), act. лεчεvуóτεç (α 12),
лεчучÓτеç (II.), sg. -ws (Nic.), after qúča; ind. лéчεууа (IA), орt. лεчεúуoɩ († 609),
Èkneqevyoiŋv (S. OT 840).
•COMP Frequently with prefix, е.g. áлo-, dɩα-, έк-, кατα-. Nominal: e.g. quyo-
лóλɛµo ‘who shuns battle' (§ 213, Q. S.); rarely qu¥(1)-, e.g. quε-avopía or -ávopa
[acc.] 'fleeing from men' (A. Supp. 8 [anap.]), also qɛúyudpos 'shunning water' (late
medic.), Qɛvčíкτερоç, a plant name (Ps.-Dsc.).
•DER Root noun quy- in qúya-dɛ (Il.), -á-dis (Theognost. Can., EM) 'to flight', qúy-
Sa (A. Eu. 256 [lyr.]), -dnv (Nic. Th 21) 'on the run’.
Hence: 1. with suffix -α-: qúča [f.] ‘(wild) flight, panic' (Il., § 269 = p 439), -akɩvóc
'fugitive, shy' (N 102), as if from *qúšač; -aλéoç ‘id.' (AP), qušnλós. deilós, quyás
(H.); also isolated verbal forms: aor.ptc. Quéτεs (Nic. Th. 825), to *quчáoμα; inf.
qušávaɩ quyɛiv, dɛiliáσai (H.), for -ăval, or an artificial athem. formation? Cf.
лεqušótɛç above.
onyós
1565
2. With suffix -ã-: qvyń [f.] ‘flight, exile' (Od.); frequently from prefixed verbs, e.g.
άvα-, άло-, бɩα-, кατα-. 3. Adjectives лpó-, éрóσ-quε 'fleeing, searching for cover'
(late), лрóσquуos 'id.' (Aesop.), ȧquyns 'who cannot flee' (Timo); кaτaqúуlov [n.]
'refuge' (Democr.), лpoσ-, σvµúуov ‘id.' (late). 4. From quy- or quyń: quyác, -ádoc
[m., f.] 'refugee' (IA), whence -adɛúw [v.] (Att.), -adɛíw (El.) 'to expel, banish';
-adɛov [n.] 'place of exile' (LXX), -adɛía [f.] 'banishment' (Plb., Vett. Val.),
-adɛvtɩкóç ‘banishing' (Hld.); qúyчov [n.] 'place of refuge' (Andania Iª).
From quyɛiv and qɛúyɛɩv: 5. qúžɩç [f.] 'flight, rescue' (K 311 = 398, 447, Nic.), younger
qɛūšɩç [f.] ‘id.' (S. Ant. 362 [lyr.]); from the prefixed verbs: ȧvá-, áñó-, diá-, katá-
qužic, -qevšiç (Ar., Th., Pl., etc.), often mixed up in the transmission; hence úžчo
(Hell.+ also qɛúžчuoç, Delph. [IIIª] чúкτчoç) 'granting refuge, rescue' (ε 359, Plb.,
Plu.), 'capable of fleeing' (S. Ant. 788 [lyr.]), 'escapable, avoidable' (Hp., Max.), кατα-
(Plu.). From qúšiç also: qúžios belonging to the flight' (A. R.), as epithet of Zeus,
also of Apollo, ‘'granting refuge' (Apollod., Lyc., Paus., inscr. etc.); -ŋus 'fugitive,
faint-hearted' (P 143, Nic., Lyc.), formation unclear. 6. Verbal adjective QuкTóc
'avoidable, escapable' (Hom.), only with negation = ǎquкτoç (Pi., Simon., Att.);
younger QεUкτóç ‘id.' (S. Aj. 224 [lyr.]), with negation = ǎqɛuкτoç (late); qɛvкtało.
άлoτpóñɑɑ (H.), qɛukt-ikós ‘fit or prone for escaping' (X., Arist., Str.), also with
άvα-, άло-, dɩα-, έK-; QEVкT-lάw [v.] 'to want to escape' (Arist. Fr. 130). 7.
Desiderative qɛvěɛíw (E. HF 628; cod. -tw).
•ETYM Gr. Qɛúyw is built on a PIE aor. continued in quyɛiv, cf. LIV² s.v. 1. *b¹eug-.
The nasal pres. qvyyάvw was built on the aorist on the model of tuxeĩv : tvyxávw.
The Greek and Lat. nouns often agree with each other, e.g. Quyń = fuga. Cognate
forms are Lat. fugio, perf. fūgi 'to flee', Lith. búgstu, búgti 'to be frightened' (with long
vowel from Winter's Law), baugus 'fearful, afraid'. Less certain (because alternatively
derived to *bheug- 'to be useful') is the appurtenance of YAv. būjaiiamna- 'setting
himself free', YAv. būjaṭ 'sets free'.
qévaλos [m.] 'spark of fire' (Ar., Arist.). <PG?>
•VAR qeyάλvž, -uyos (Archil., Ar., Plb.).
●Der qeyaλóoµaɩ in ¿qeyaλwłŋ ‘he was covered in sparks of fire' (A. Pr. 364).
⚫ETYM Unclear. Usually interpretated as a reduplicated form to yóλoç, but since
-aλo- is a suffix, the words can at best be remotely cognate (cf. ►yáµµos, ►yñv).
péyaλos rather seems Pre-Greek.
oń [conj.] ‘like, as' (B 144, E 499 acc. to Zenodotus, h. Herm., Call.). <IE *b½e/o->
•VAR Also opñ.
•ETYM Not certainly explained. Probably cognate with Av. bā ‘indeed', bōit ‘even',
Lith. bà 'really', OCS and Ru. bo 'for', Go. -ba- ‘even', etc. < PIE *b^e/o-. Gr. qń could
reflect PIE *beh₂ [n.pl.] (cf. Frisk), *beh, [ins.sg.] (cf. DELG) or a lengthened grade
*bhe (cf. De Vaan 2009: 53). Differently Fraenkel Gnomon 28 (1956): 238 (with
semantic parallels from Slavic) and Ruijgh Lingua 58 (1982): 205 (on the oxytone
accent): œ as a suffixless ipv. of qηuí ‘say'.
onyós [f.] ‘oak, Quercus Aegilops' (II.). <IE *beh₂g- ‘beech'>
VAR Dor. (Theoc.) qayós.

=== page 809 ===

1566
⚫DER Onyivos (E 838, Call., Dsc.), with extended suffix -ívɛoç (AP, Orph.) 'of the oak,
oaken' (borrowed as Lat. faginus, -ineus), PN Dnyɛús (E 11 etc).
•ETYM Inherited word, identical with Lat. fagus [f.] 'beech', Gaulish *bāgos 'beech' (in
French place names), and with Gm. forms, e.g. ON bók, OHG buohha [f.] 'beech',
Go. boka [f.] letter'. The absence of the beech in Greece proper caused the change of
meaning of oηyós to ‘oak'. The name of the beech tree played an important role in
the discussion on the 'Urheimat' of the Indo-Europeans. An important question was
whether Eastern tree-names, like Kurd. būz ‘kind of elm', Ru. boz ‘elder' and
corresponding Slavic words had to be derived from *beh,g, too. This was dismissed
by Eilers and Mayrhofer 1962: 61ff.
onλn, -nкos [m.] 'wild fig' (S. Fr. 781[?], Ar. Pax 1165). <PG(S)►
•COMP &ηλŋkóеpεлtov· úïò óλúvðov (cod. őλovšov) tñs ovkñs te◊paµµévov (H.).
⚫ETYM An evident Pre-Greek word in -11 (cf. Fur.: 2457). It might have been folk-
etymologically adapted to onλóc, cf. Chantraine 1933: 381, Nehring Glotta 14 (1925):
181.
onλós [adj.] 'deceitful, deceptive' (EM, sch. Ar. Pax 1165, H., Suid.). <PG?>
•VAR Accent following Hdn. Gr. 1, 155, 20.
•COMP ẞpoτóηoç. ávßpórovç qilŵv, toutéσtiv åñaτŵv (H.).
⚫DER Denominative opów [v.] 'to deceive' (few attestations in A., E., A. R., etc.),
whence onλwμa [n.] (Antipho Soph.), -wotę [f.] (EM) 'deception'. ηc (accent
following EM 794, 1) [m.] ‘deceiver' (Hes. Op. 375 (?), h. Merc., trag. etc.), often
written as qıλ-, and at a very early date; hence -ηtɛúw 'to deceive' (h. Merc.), -ŋoiais.
кλεлτоσúvαιç (H.), -ατíα [f.], -ατíaç [nom.sg.m.] = -τηs? (Delphi IIIª). For the
origin of the spelling ouλ-, cf. Bechtel 1921(3): 336, Luther 1935: 167f.
=====
⚫ETYM Has been connected with Lat. fallō 'deceive', and with άлowλoç. On qaλós
μó, α with qαλíлτεɩ, paλwoɛiç see paλóç λɛuкóç. DELG thinks that
the writing quλ- is not original, but to my mind, the argumentation is wrong. The
word may well be Pre-Greek.
qŋuí [v.] ‘to say, explain, argue', perfective (Il.), as against imperfective λέyw, ȧyopɛúw
etc. 'to speak, talk'. Hence, the old ipf. qηy got aoristic function. Pres. med. ¿ôáµŋv,
EQατо, etc. <IE *beh₂- 'say'>
•VAR Dor. Qauí, Aeol. qãµ, also qáσkw, inf. qával (Att.), qάµev (Hom.), ipf. éqŋv,
έqãv, epic also έqáµŋv, inf. qáoðaɩ, fut. qǹow (℗ 148, 153), Dor. qaow (Ar. Ach. 739,
et al.), ôáσo̟µαɩ (Pi.), aor. qñσα (Hdt., Att.), perf. med. лéqaτaɩ (A. R.), ipv.
лεqáσеw (Pl. Ti. 72d).
•DIAL Myc. 3sg. pa-si /p¹āsi/.
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. àvɩɩ-, àño-, napα-, époσ-, σvv-.
•DER A. With full grade: 1. qµŋ, Dor. Aeol. qάua [f.] 'quotation, enunciation,
rumour, reputation, speech' (Od.); as a second member e.g. in εűqnfos, -qafios
'bringing a good message, containing no evil omen = mute, boding well' (Il.; PN B
846), whence -έw, -ía, -íšoµai, -ɩofóc; rolúpnuos, -qaμos 'speaking much, much
spoken of, famous' (Il.; PN A 264, Od. [PN], Pi., Parm. etc.), whence -ía. From ouŋ
is derived the PN Þ½µos [m.] name of a singer (Od.), epithet of Zeus (Erythrae IIIª),
=
privn
1567
-ía epithet of Athena (ibd.). Denominative onμí w [v.] 'to announce, spread by
rumour' (Hes.), also with έлɩ-, diα-, кatα- etc.; hence èriqýµoµa [n.] 'acclamation
of ill or good omen' (Th., J.), -toµós [m.] 'benediction' (Str.). From H.: áчnµovɛç·
äppnto, oik óvozialózevol; donoŮvtac. àypoíkous; donzliotong áypokias (read
-кovç?); ȧqauwται· оiкéται ȧуpoiкoɩ, лεpíoкoι (Сret.). 2. ñшç, -10¢ [f.] 'speech,
talk' (epic poet. since K 207), probably a contamination of ouŋ and qátiç. 3.
qŋpara. pýµata, qáσµaτа (H.). 4. Pääoðúvò [f.] ‘oracle?' (Crete II-Iª). 5. -qýtns
[m.] in vлoτηs ‘interpreter, expositor' (P 235, Hell. epic), -ôñïíç [f.] (AP etc.),
-qātıs (Pi.), -qntɛúw, -ɛía (late); époôýtηs (IA), Dor. Boeot. -qáτas (Pi., B.,
Corinn.) 'announcer, seer, prophet', -oñτiç [f.] (E., Pl., LXX, etc.), -oητɛúw, -ɛía, also
-qniw (Hp.), -ητáčw (Man.), -oητɩкóç (late); PN Ev-, Пɛpiqýtns (II.). 6. -qńrwp
-oуτηç in бло-, лрочητшр (Нell. and late poetry), σvµôýτwp. µávtis, µaptvç (H.).
B. With zero grade: 1. qάïç [f.] ‘quotation, rumour, enunciation' (epic poet. since
Od., Hdt.), qaτíšw (kaτa-) [v.] ‘to state, confirm, betroth' (epic poet. since Parm.,
Hdt., et al.). 2. páσıç ‘id.' (Hdt., Pl., Arist., etc.), often to the prefixed verbs ȧvtí-,
άлó-, ék-, katá-, whence (ávɩɩ-, åлo-)ατкóç (Arist. etc.); párηs yeúotns (H.). 3.
paτós, as a simplex only in opposition to ǎpatos ‘unmentioned, unknown' (Hes.
Op. 3) and with negation = äqaroç 'ineffable, unspeakable' (Hes. Sc. 230, Parm., Pi.,
etc.); as a second member (in original univerbations), e.g. лaλaí-qaτoç 'spoken of
long ago, ancient (Od., epic poet.). 4. qatɛóç, only with ov: ‘unutterable' (Hes.,
verse-final); probably metrical (or σtixos µɛíovpos) for -τέoç, if not = Skt. -tavyà-.
•ETYM PIE root present *beh₂- / *bh₂- 'to say'. Cognate verbs are Arm. bam 'say' <
*beh₂-mi, bay <*beh₂-ti ‘says' introducing direct speech (see Schwyzer KZ 57 (1930):
242ff. on Lesb. Qat 'you say'), Latin med. fatur (cf. qάτo), Ru. bájati, 1sg. báju ‘to talk,
speak', possibly OE bō(i)an 'to brag'. A derived nasal present may be Skt. bhánati
'speak, sound'. Gr. qάuç corresponds to Arm. bay 'word, speeh', and onµŋ to Lat.
fāma 'rumour, fame'. Gr. ǎpaτoç corresponds to Latin infitias īre 'to deny' from *in-
fato 'not said'; *fato- is also the basis for fateor 'to admit'. Furher nominal
derivations are Lat. fās, fātum, fābula, fācundus; Armenian ban, gen. ban-i, instr.
ban-iw 'word, speech, matter' with a suffix *-ni-, ON bøn, OE bẽn ‘request, prayer' <
PIE *be/oh-ni- (cf. qwvń).
-
The PIE root *beh₂- 'speak' may be identical in origin with *beh₂- 'to shine' in Skt.
bhá-ti 'to light, shine', see paívw. They are formally the same, and the semantic
derivation is common: 'say' < 'explain, make clear', etc., cf. Lat. dēclārō, arguō, etc.
See ▸owvń.
qvn [f.] large bird of prey, perhaps ‘bearded vulture' (Od., Ar., Arist., Opp., etc.).
<PG?(V)►
•VAR Also qívic (v.l. Dsc. 2, 53); see Fur.: 171114.
●DER Þŋveús [m.] (Apollod.), Þŋvó [f.] (Paus.).
⚫ETYM Without convincing etymology. The variant qivis may point to a Pre-Greek
word, which is most probable anyway. Osthoff 1901: 246 compared Skt. bhāsa- [m.]
bird a prey, in which case Greek would continue *b¹ēs-nā or *b¹ās-nā. Risch 1937: 98
supposes an original color designation, perhaps "bright”, like лɛpêvóç, kɛλaɩvóç etc.;
cf. the bird names μópovos and ► kúкvoç.

=== page 810 ===

1568
onp, -pós
qńp, -pós [m.] 'wild beast, predator', also of Centaurs (A 268, B 743) and satyrs
(Telest., Gal.).
•DER Øŋpeús [m.] a satyr (Nonn.); also qǹpea (-ɛia?) [n.pl.] 'swollen tonsils', because
of the similarity with budding satyr-horns (Hp.); adv. oŋpɛatikŵs (Gal.).
ETYM Aeolic for ▶Onp.
qñpov [n.] = ßpŵµ¤ ¤ɛŵv (Hdn. Gr. 1, 385) ‘food of the gods'; qñpos. † tŵv àpxaíwv
Đɛŵv tpoqń (H.). <?►
•ETYM We find related forms in Germanic (Go. barizeins 'from barley', ON barr
grain', OE bere 'barley' < *bar(e/a)z-), Celtic (OIr. bairgen, MW bara 'bread' < PC1.
*barag(en)o/ā, Matasović 2009: 56), and Balto-Slavic (OCS brašno 'food'), pointing
to a root *bhar(s), probably of non-IE origin (de Vaan 2008: 202).
q¤ávw [v.] ‘to anticipate, be ahead', absolute and with acc., often with ptc. <IE
*dgh₂- 'come near, nearly reach, pass'>
●VAR Pres. Hom. ã, Att. ǎ; aor. ëôеŋv (Il.), inf. ¿ðñvai (IA), ptc. oеás (Hom., Hdt.),
med. öðáµɛvos (epic), áσa (IA), Dor. еaσσα (Theoc.), fut. qñσoµai (11.),
qеáow (X.), perf. "ôðaкa (Philipp. apud D., Hell.+), лέóðaкa (late), pass. ¿łávoµai
(Arist. etc.), oеασ¤ñvai (D. H., etc.).
●COMP Also with prefix, e.g. лpo-, úло-, лαрα-.
•DER лpоóðaσíα [f.] (or -a [n.]?) “the anticipation”, name of a festival in
Clazomenae (D. S. 15, 18), лараoеабóv [adv.] 'in anticipation' (Opp.), ptc.
kataqðatovµévŋ = кατáóðãτov лoovμévη 'to take in possession beforehand (yñv
A. Eu. 398), qеaτñoŋ. oеáσŋ (H.), cf. Schwyzer: 705.
⚫ETYM Without any doubt an inherited word. Connected with Skt. dhag-nu-, by
Hoffmann apud Eichner MSS 31 (1973): 67, 9453; the laryngeal was reconstructed by
K.T. Schmidt 1988: 475f.
The root aorist qy follows the model of ëστηv, ëßηv, ëïtnv, ëqnv etc., with a zero
grade qеáдevoç. The 3pl. paσav for oеav (páv A 51) gave rise to the sigmatic
aorist paσa; to these aorists were joined the futures onσoμai (from full grade
*dhowh
hgwheh₂-) and płάow, and subsequently the perfects oеaкa, лéóðaкa. The present
q¤ávw < *q¤á-VF-w probably continues *dgh-nu-V-, with the suffix *-neu-/-nu-
replacing *-neh₂-/-nh₂- (LIV²: 135").
wh
On the glosses чаτǎσðαι· лρокαταλαμßávεv 'to anticipate'; чατñσaɩ· époεɩлεt̃v 'to
warn'; yaέvaɩ. qеáσα (H.), which have y-instead of 40-, see Schwyzer: 32.
qέyyoдa [v.] 'to utter a sound, sound, raise one's voice, call, talk' (Hom.). <?>
•VAR Aor. qеéyžaσðαɩ, fut. qеéуšoµαɩ (Il.), perf. еεуµɩ, 2g. εуαɩ, etc. (Pl.,
Arist. etc.).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. époσ-, áño-, ¿ñɩ-, ÚÑO-.
•DER 1. qеεуμα (лрóσ-, åлó-, etc.) [n.] 'sound, voice, cry, quotation' (Pi., Att.),
-µatiкóç (ȧño-, εл-) 'sounding, etc.' (Hell.+). 2. qеéуšiç (ȧvá-, εñí-, лpó-) [f.]
‘utterance, talk' (Hp., late). 3. ɛyk-τóç ‘effable' (Plu.), often and earlier in
compounds, e.g. ǎoеεукτоç 'ineffable, unpronounced, soundless' (B., A., etc.); -τIкóç
'sounding' (Max. Tyг.); лpoσ-еεукτηpιoç ‘adressing, greeting' (Poll.). 4. qłóyyos
[m.] (Il.), also qƉoyyń [f.] (Il., epic poet.) 'sound, voice'; in compounds yoyos
płεipw, -oμaι
1569
'clear-voiced' (Il., epic poet.), σúμ-o0oуyos 'with one voice' (A.), ȧvtí-Qðoyyos
‘resounding' (Pi.), to ¯µ¿½уyoμal, etc.; hence qoyy-áptov [n.] 'sound-pipe',
-á‰oμα = εyoµaɩ (Pi. etc.).
•ETYM Could be a stem oɛy- with regular ablaut and with nasalization (as in
кλayyń, кλáуžαι etc.), but it has no certain etymology. None of the existing
connections with semantically comparable words (e.g. with OCS zvęgo̟ ‘adɛiv', Ru.
zvjágat, 1sg. zvjagú ‘to bark, yap', Lith. žvéngti, 1sg. žvéngiu 'to neigh', or with Lith.
speñgti, of the ears, 'to resound, bite, hum, drone' (cf. Frisk) is phonetically
convincing.
qłɛíp, -póc [m., f.] 'louse' (IA); also a fish that lives on dolphins, 'Naucrates ductor'
(Arist. etc.); metaphorically of the seed of the spruce-fir (Phot.), of the middle part of
the rudder (Poll.). <?>
•COMP Qеεpoкτóvov [n.] plant-name (Ps.-Dsc.).
•DER Qеɛip-íov [n.] plant-name (Ps.-Dsc.), -wdns ‘lousy' (Arist.), -áptos ‘id.' (gloss.).
Verbs: 1. q0ɛip-táw 'to suffer from lice or phthiriasis', -íaσç [f.] 'phthiriasis' (Com.
Adesp., Str., medic. etc.); 2. qɛp-íšoµα, -í\w 'to delouse oneself (Arist., Thphr.,
LXX etc.), -σTIкÓç 'delousing, searching for lice' (Pl.), -tσµós [m.] 'delousing'
(gloss.).
⚫ETYM The word was already derived from oɛipw, qɛipa by Galen, i.e. as a back-
formation with retained -εt-. Doubt about this is voiced by Schwyzer: 326 and
Chantraine 1933: 3, the latter of whom considers folk-etymological adaptation of the
original word to qɛipw. DELG mentions the fact that the Greeks thought that lice
grew from rotten flesh, and then defends the connection with oɛípw, which is
doubtful.
qłɛipw, -oµaɩ [v.] 'to ruin, destroy, destruct', intr. (pass.) 'to be ruined, perish, suffer
shipwreck, fall out of course, be ruined, destroyed (Il.). <IE *d³gher- 'flow away,
disappear'>
•VAR Aeol. qέppw (Hdn. Gr.), Arc. qеńpw (Tegea IVª), Dor. qłaípw (Eust., EM),
aor. qƉɛīpaɩ (IA), ôеépσαɩ (Lyc.), fut. ô¤ɛpŵ, -oñµai (A., etc.), Ion. -έw, -έoµaɩ Hdt.),
epic 3sg. Sɩaqέpoɛɩ (N 325), perf. pass. αpμα (IA), act. еapka (Att.); intr.
(pass.) еapñvαι (Pi., IA), fut. -ǹooμa (IA; whence Ion. also -έw), perf. Sɩ-έqopa
(O 128, Hp., late prose), also trans. (trag. and com.).
●COMP Mostly with dia- (including σʊv-, лро-, кατα-, έлɩ-diαqеɛípw, etc.), also with
άло-, σuv-, кατα-, etc.
kata-
•DER 1. qеεpσíẞpoτoç (Epigr. apud Paus. 3, 8, 9) = εß. 2. With o-grade:
qp0opá, Ion. - (diα-, кατα- etc.) [f.] 'deterioriation, destruction, ruin, plague,
seduction, abortion, miscarriage' (IA), 0ópos [m.] 'deterioriation, destruction'
(Thgn., Att.), mostly in sayings. From qłopá (q¤ópos) the nouns: 3. (diα-)opεús
[m.] 'destructor, seducer' (E., Pl. etc.); q0opía [f.] 'destruction, mischief (Hp. Iusi.),
often from compounds, e.g. oiкoqłopía (Pl., Plu.), to oikołóp-os, -έw; qłop-ɛïov
(-εtov) [n.] 'drug for producing abortion' (Hell. and late inscr.). 4. adjectives ołóp-
tos 'producing abortion' (medic.), 'concerning seduction' (pap. VP), Sia- 'decayed'
(Gal.); quoc 'destructive, perishable' (Man., Herm. apud Stob.); -tкóc 'destructible'

=== page 811 ===

1570
pdívw
:
Qiáλn
1571
(late), õpηµãτo- ‘wasting money' (Pl.); -wdŋs ‘depraved, harmful (Hdn., Lyd.). With
zero grade: 5. pápµa [n.] 'corruption, throw-off' (LXX, J.), áñó- ‘miscarriage' (Hp.).
6. σúµαpois [f.] 'simultaneous destruction' (late). 7. apτós 'destructable,
perishable' (Arist. etc.), often äqapτos 'imperishable' (Arist., Hell.+), ȧqapoía [f.]
'imperishability' (Epicur., LXX, NT etc.), whence papoía (Thales apud Fulg.). 8.
ołapτiкóç 'destructive, harmful' (Arist., medic., etc.).
⚫ETYM Greek Q0ɛipw < *dhgher-ie/o- corresponds to an intransitive present in Indo-
Iranian: Skt. kṣárati, Av. yžaraiti ‘to flow, stream', Skt. also 'to flow away, diverge,
disappear'. An PIE s-aorist (εpa < ¿qɛp-σ-) is retained in 3sg. ákṣār (RV) <*a-
kṣār-ṣ-t; the other verbal formations of Greek and IIr. (e.g. caus. Skt. kṣārayati = Av.
yžāraiieiti 'to let flow', ptc. kṣarita, etc.) are innovations. The morphological identity
of qópos and Skt. kṣara- [n.] 'water' (Lex.) is due to independent development, as is
the comparison between äcßopos 'unspoiled, pure' (late) and akṣára- 'not flowing.
away, imperishable' (RV). LIV² follows the reconstruction *gger-.
poívw [v.] intr. 'to decline, decay, perish', (exceptionally) trans. or caus. 'to cause to
decline, consume, destroy' (Il.). <IE *dgwei- 'disappear'>
•VAR Qеɩvúеw intr. and trans. (epic poet. Il.). Further intr. forms: athem. aor. ¿qoí-
v, -, -ατo, еíσal, qеíµεvoç, etc. (Il., epic poet.), 3pl. 010εv (Od.), for -íaτo;
act. them. subj. qíns (ß 368), fut. ɛíσoµαι (Hom.), aor. íσaσai (-ɛɩ-; Q. S.),
perf. qеɩτaι (v 340), -ivtaι (A. Pers. 679 [lyr.]). Built on the present: qɩv-ñσaι (Hp.
Epid.), -ńow, ¿q¤ívηka (late); trans.-caus.: epic aor. oɛĩσai (-i-), Att. ðíʊaɩ, them.
3sg. еiεv (Σ 446), epic fut. qɛiow (-i-), Att. q¤iow (-ĭ-), perf. ¿qеɩкa (Them.).
•DIAL Myc. e-qi-ti-wo-e /ekwhthiwo"e/.
●COMP Also with prefix, especially άло-, кατα-. Compounds: e.g. qɩvóкαρлоç
'whose fruit has decayed, without fruit' (Pi.), öðɩvóлwрov, sеe óлúpα; µ³
(pioí-) 'destroying people', oεtσnvwp 'ruining men' (epic), etc.
•DER 1. From the present: otváç, -ádos declining, decaying, consumption', as a fem.
subst. 'consumption' (Hp., S., E., etc.); q¤ívvλλa [f.] taunting address of an elderly
woman (A. Eq. 935; after the PN); cf. œ¤ãƒα. ǹ λεëτǹ åïò q¤íoews (H.); öðɩváðµatα
(λíov) [n.pl.] 'setting (of the sun)', poet. formation (A. Pers. 232). 2. From the verbal
stem: qíois [f.] 'declining, waning, consumption' (Pi., IA), -tкóç 'consumptive'
(Arist., Epid. IV, Hell.+), -кεúoμai (Androm. apud Gal.), -táw (Hp., Arist.) 'to be
consumptive'; qɩtoí [pl.], rarely -ós [sg.], 'the deceased' (trag., late prose), äpitos
'imperishable' (Il., epic poet.). 3. With o-grade: ołó-ŋ [f.] 'consumption' (Att., also
Hp.; Ion. Hell. use is instead), -wdŋs 'consumptive' (Paus.). On ►¿łóïç, -ïç, see
s.v. Also in [f.] (Il., etc.) land of the iɛs (St. Byz.), perhaps originally 'land of the
dead' (= qеíµɛvot), a mythical place?
•ETYM PIE had a verbal root *dh ghei-, whence (acc. to LIV² s.v.) a nasal present
*dhgwh-n(é)-i-, which was remade into *dgwhi-n(é)u- in Greek (whence peɩvú-0w and
*qüívƑ-w > qüivw, with Ion. ĭ, Att. 1), and into *ď³gwhi-n(é)H- in Indo-Iranian
(whence Skt. kṣinṇati, Av. jināiti 'to destroy'). PIE also had an athem. aor. *dgh (é)i-
> Gr. qеíto, qðíµεvoç, etc. García Ramón MSS 51 (1990): 7-20, following Ruijgh,
explains the Mycenaean form as meaning 'dead', an act. ptc. nom.pl. in -uos-, with
medial-intransitive meaning, and perfect reduplication *e-; the form was later
replaced by poiµɛvoç. In Greek, the original diphthong & in the s-aorist and s-future
was replaced by i at an early date, at least in writing and perhaps also in reality, first
after pivw (with i). In Attic, shortening was introduced in oiσal, peiow after the
short vowel in olivw and on the model of oxiσat and denominatives in -íoat (-í(w).
Gr. qеíois Skt. kṣíti- [f.] ‘languishing, destruction', probably also Lat. sitis [f.]
'thirst' < *'disappearing, languish(ing)'. As a formula, Gr. кλéoç äqiτov (Hom.) =
Skt. śrávaḥ... ákṣitam (RV beside ákṣiti śrávaḥ). The initial *d" is retained in OAv.
dājiṭ.arǝta- /djit-arta-/ 'destroying Arta-'. See also vivopai.
=
qpłóïç, -10¢ [f.] ‘kind of cake' (Erythrae IV³, Cos IV-IIIª, Ar. etc.), 'pastille used for
fumigation' (Hp.), 'bar of metal' (Att. inscr.), perhaps 'kind of cup' (Eup. 373 acc. to
Ath. 11, 502b; very uncertain). <?>
•VAR Also qoç, -ídoç.
•DER Diminutive oеoïσкoç (Hp.).
•ETYM The strongly deviating meanings provide a problem that is still unsolved; we
can only speculate about the etymology. Formally, one might connect ołóŋ
'consumption' (to qivw 'to decline, consume'); the meaning 'decline' might be
recognized in the explanations by H. s.v. qłóïç (except for 'лλαкoñç³): τà éρòç
λentòv áλŋleoµéva kai tò åñoppέov yñyµa tou ✗pvσíov. See DELG, where the
possibility of a loan is kept open.
40óvos [m.] 'envy, jealousy' (Pi., IA). <IE? *dgwhen- (?) ►
■COMP ǎovos 'without envy, unenvied', usually 'bounteous, plentiful' (h. Ap.,
Hes.), ȧq0ovía [f.] 'abundance' (Pi., IA).
●DER QƉovɛpós ‘envious, jealous' (Thgn., Pi., IA), -ɛpía [f.] ‘envy' (Arist. etc.). Verb:
povéw [v.] 'to envy, begrudge, refuse' (II.) also with έлɩ-, úлo- etc.; thence -ŋois [f.]
‘envying, jealousy' (S. Tr. 1212), -ηtiкós ‘envious' (late).
•ETYM Probably to be analyzed as ołóv-o-, to a root *0v- (to which povέw is a
causative or iterative?). De Vaan (p.c.) tentatively suggests connection with qávw
'to anticipate, be ahead of, which could imply that it is related to Av.
ayžō.nuuamnǝm <*a-gžanųamna- 'which cannot be missed' (De Vaan 203: 441f.).
qiáλŋ [f.] ‘flat vessel, dish, flat bowl for drinking or sacrificing, etc.' (post-Hom.), also
for cooking and to preserve ashes (Y). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also quéλn (Hell. acc. to Moer.).
•DIAL Myc. pi-a₂-ra /p³i¹alā-/, also pi-je-ra, /p¹ielai/.
•COMP Qiaλnqópos [f.] 'bearer (fem.) of a q.', title of a Locrian priestess (Plb.).
•DER Diminutives: qtáλ-tov [n.] (Eub., Arist., Hell.), -ídiov [n.] (Hero), -íoкa [f.]
(Gortyn V-IV), -íσkoç(?) [m.] (Maced.), -ís [f.] (Luc.). Further: qualiai ȧpiμoi
[pl.] a game (Procl., etc.), -wdŋs ‘dish-like' (Ath., sch.), -wτóç ‘id.' (Delos IIIª, Gp.),
-ów (Bóepov) 'to hollow (the bottom) out into a flat shape' (Gp.).
ETYM A loanword of unknown origin, formally fitting the instrument names in
-aλn, -aλo- (σкvtáλŋ, yúaλov, -n). Etymologies to be rejected: *л-σɑλã from л- =
εлɩ- and ελεiv 'grasp'; also *л-Ƒhaλā < *pi-su̟alā to λŋ 'heat of the sun' < PIE *su̟el-
'to burn'. Cf. also vлεpoiaλoç. The word is probably Pre-Greek on account of the
interchange of suffixes that is already attested in Mycenaean (Fur.: 346).

=== page 812 ===

1572
prapós
piapós [adj.] 'gleaming, shining, oily, bright' (Alexandr. poetry). <PG?>
•VAR Qιapúvei. λaµñpúvɛi (H.).
⚫ETYM No etymology, but reminiscent of лαрóç and paidpós. It has been assumed to
be a contamination of those two adjectives, but this is unwarranted and therefore
better rejected. Fur.: 165 compares лaλóç. лɑрáλɛvкos and assumes Pre-Greek
origin.
qɩßáλews [f.] ‘a fig suitable for curing', also metaphorically of thin people (com.); acc.
to sch. Ar. Ach. 802, a place in Megaris or Attica. ◄PG▷
•VAR Plur. nom. -εw, acc. -εWS.
ETYM Without any doubt a Pre-Greek word (not in Fur.). Formation like kopáv-
ɛws [f.] 'tree with raven-black figs', µελívεws. εidoç åμлέλov kind of vine' (H.),
kavеápɛws [m.] a vine. As the basis of the TN, the sch. gives oißaλis = yévos oukñs
'kind of fig', with the plur. Qißáλais = oi ioxvoì tŵv ávеpóлwv; in EM 793, 26 (acc. to
Apolloph.) qiẞáλɛa = tà oʊka, -λéaɩ = ioxádes.
qɩdáкvη] [f.] 'wine-jar (A., D., Thphr.). <PG(S,V)>
•VAR Latе леάкvη (Thasos Va, Moer., Phot.); Dor. лσάкvα (H.).
•ETYM Since (pɩбáкvη is the old form, the word has nothing to do with лíеoç. Frisk
assumed (s.v. лíos) that the word had the diminutive suffix -xvn, which became
-αкvη, but this is impossible. The group of suffixes -aк-v- is typical for Pre-Greek.
For the shift of aspiration, compare (páτvη. See Fur.: 197, 393.
qidítia [n.pl.] the collective meal of the Spartans; also the place where this meal was
consumed (X., Arist., Plu., etc.). <PG?>
•VAR Rarely sing. (often (piλ-, also written qɛɩd-).
⚫DER (pidíτηs, Dor. -tas (qɛid-) [m.] 'participant of a qɩdítia' (Sphaer. Stoic., Ath.).
⚫ETYM Plu. Lyc. 12 explains the word from qiλía, with 8 for λ, which is clearly a folk
etymology. A connection with (padó 'saving, thrift' is at least formally possible. Fur.:
23845 thinks that the interchange S/A shows that the word is Pre-Greek; this is
uncertain.
Qíkıç [?] ‘anus' (Hdn. 1, 88, 35), see DELG Supp. <IE?>
•DER QIKIŴ; (PISIкíšeiv· ènì toũ naidɛpαστɛïv (Suid. q 992, X 42 Adler).
⚫ETYM Hardly from Lat. fica. Taillardat thinks of *p()uk-, Pok. 847, whence *puк-18-,
which became (QIк-18-. Katz 2004: 277-284 compares Skt. sphij- ‘hip, buttock', and
reconstructs PIE *(s)phiK-(i-). Rather uncertain.
qiλntys [m.] 'impostor, thief. <PG? >
•ETYM A common, and perhaps correct, writing for qýtng; see on ► oŋlós. The t-
form stands etymologically isolated and may be Pre-Greek.
qiλounov [n.] 'name of a plant, celandine, Chelidonium maius' (Ps.-Dsc. 2, 180).
<GR➤
•ETYM Literally 'herb of Philomela' (who was changed into a swallow). See André
1958: 60f.
Qiλos
1573
qíλoç [subst., adj.] 'friend, friendly, dear' (Il.), 'related, own', also reflexive possessive
'suus (tuus, meus)', of relatives, body-parts, clothing, etc., plur. 'kinsmen, relatives'
(Il., epic poet.). <?>
VAR Grades of comparison: a. piλiwv (T 351 = W 268), LOTOS (S. Aj. 842
[interpolated?], ascertained as a PN); b. qíλτɛpos (epic poet., late prose), -τατos (also
Att. prose; Dor. Qivτ-) ; c. qilaíτεpos, -τατOS (X., Call., Theoc., etc.) after
malaitɛpos, -tatos etc.; d. qiλwtɛpos (X., Call.); e. µāλlov qílos (A., S., Thphr.),
μάλστα Q. (X.).
DIAL Myc. pi-ra-me-no /philamenos/?
•COMP As a first member e.g. qıλóqpwv 'well-disposed, friendly-minded' (Pi., IA),
qɩλoµµɛdýs ‘with a friendly smile' (epic I 324+); early on in epic tradition, it was
reinterpreted as a verbal element, e.g. (póεvos (or -εvoc) 'to whom the guest is
dear'>'loving the guest, hospitable' (since Od.); in univerbations, e.g. Qiλoúτng
[m.] (to quɛi úεv) loving the sacrifice, friend of the sacrifice' (Ar. etc.). As a
second member, е.g. лоλúλoç 'with many friends' (Pi., Lys., Arist.), often
considered verbal, with transition to the s-stems, e.g. Ons loved by the gods,
dear to the gods' (IA); лpoσqɩýs ‘friendly, beloved, affectionate' (IA).
●DER 1. qiλótns, -ŋtos [f.] ‘friendship, hospitality, love' (II., epic poet.), -otýσios,
Dor. -otáσios ‘belonging to pótηs' (epic poet. since λ 246); also -oτtápiov address
to a girl (Ar. Ec. 891), perhaps the hypocoristic gemination after vητtápiov? 2. qiλía,
Ion. -ín [f.] 'friendship, affection, love' (Thgn., Emp., IA); independent of opíλoç.
Adjectives: 3. qíλ-tos 'friendly' (Pi., IA), -(1)wtikós (Theol. Ar.). 4. -tɩkós ‘id.' (Pl., X.,
Arist., etc.). 5. -takóç ‘id.' (Plot.), -taкóv [n.] name of an association (inscr. Corycos).
Verbs: 6. qiλéw (Il.) 'to be a friend, treat friendly or affectionately, to love, entertain,
care', post-Hom. also ‘to kiss' (especially with кατaα-), with inf. 'to like to do, use to
do', sometimes with prefix, especially кata-. Forms: Aeol. qíλ-nuu (Sapph.), -nµεvai
(X 265), aor. -ñσa (II.), erroneous -ãσai (Theoc.), pass. -ηy (B 668 [3pl. -ŋ0ɛv],
Att.), med.ipv. qiλaɩ, (è̟)qílato, qiλwvτaι etc. (epic since Il.), fut. -ńow, -ǹooµai
(Оd.), perf. лεqiλŋµa, -ŋka (Pi., etc.).
7. From qilia (qílios): qiλiášw [v.] 'to become friends' (LXX, Hell. pap. etc.),
whence aστns (H.); -tóoµα, -tów 'to make friends' (late), -iwotę (sch.), -ɩwτns =
Sɩαλλaкτńs̟ (Suid.); -αívoμat ‘id.' (late). From qiλéw: qinτwp [f.] 'lover' (A. Ag.
1446), ‘loving, with love' (Nonn.); -ŋtýs [m.] ‘lover' (AP), -ŋstiкós ‘inclined to love or
kiss' (Arist., etc.), -nua (Hyperdorism -aua Mosch.) [n.] 'kiss' (A. Fr. 135 = 228 M.,
E., X., etc.), -nuáτiov PN (Luc.), ȧvtiqíŋσıç [f.] ‘returning love' (Arist.), qiλnµooúvn
[f.] 'friendliness' (Thgn.), to qμwv (EM, further only PN).
Also (píλτpov [n.] love potion' (poet. since Pi., also late prose), -τpìç λíos love-
bringing stone' (Dam.); qiλŋtpα [n.pl.] (AP 11, 218; text and meaning uncertain);
qɛiλos (for -ī-) [n] = quλía (epigr. Caria, ca. IP). Numerous PNs, among others with
*QIλTO-, e.g. Diλtó-ževos, Þiλt-ádŋs. Literature: Landfester 1966. Kakridis 1963.
•ETYM For the epic aorist forms (¿-) qilaτo, etc., analogical origin to quέw is well
possible (cf. Sokéw beside έdoša); there is no need to assume a present *qíλλw. The
element quλτo-, which occurs only in PNs, may have arisen analogically to quo-:
DATÓ-Evoc to Piλó-ɛvoç like e.g. Davτ-aуópaç beside Dav-ayópaç, Davτ-íaç

=== page 813 ===

1574
Qiλúkn
beside Dav-íaç. Qiλτpov seems to have joined the numerous instrument nouns in
-τpov; the causative meaning 'stimulating love' is clear.
The original meaning of oiλos was 'own, accompanying' rather than 'beloved'. The
etymology is unknown; the connection with a Celto-Germanic adjective for 'fitting,
good, etc.' (Ir. bil, W Bil- in PNS, OHG bil-lih, etc.) must be abandoned. Lyd. bilis
'his, her' looks formally similar, but must be explained within Anatolian (from the
pronoun bi- ‘he'). Some have argued that oídos represents an l-derivative of reflexive
σqi, Lac. qiv (see Landfester op. cit.: 34ff. with a review of all earlier etymologies); in
that case, the original meaning would be ‘one's own'.
qɩλúкŋ [f.] name of a shrub 'Rhamnus Alaternus, evergreen buckthorn' (Thphr.).
<PG?➤
•ETYM Unexplained, perhaps as a substrate word related to ▸ qıλúpa?
qiλúpa [f.] (bast of the) lime tree' (Hdt., Thphr., Gal., etc.). <PG?>
•VAR Ion. -pη.
•DER qıλup-ća [f.] ‘mock privet, Phillyrea media' (Thphr.), after лεléa etc., qiλúp-
tov [n.] 'tablet of lime wood' (Ael.), -ɩvos 'made of lime wood' (Hp., Ar., D. C., etc.).
⚫ETYM Strömberg 1940: 119 surmises a compound of oiλoc and "pov 'swarm of bees'
(see ►üpa), because the lime attracts bees; compare Lat. apium celery/ivy' (to apis),
MOHG Bienenbaum 'Acer campestre'. The European lime tree is not found in
Greece; only in the North of the Balkans; the silver lime which is described by
Thphr. HP 3, 10 is found especially on the Macedonian mountains. Probably a
substrate word.
qiuós [m.] 'muzzle, gag' (A. Th. 463, Fr. 326 = 647 M., LXX, Dsc., Luc., etc.),
metaphorically of a dice cup, or of its cover (Aeschin., Poll. etc.)? <?>
•VAR Plur. also -á (AP 6, 312).
•COMP ɛôчoç ‘astringent, styptic' (µúpτoç, Nic.), 'well-bridled' (Hdn. Epim.),
ɛvôɩɩía (EM as an explanation of ɛvkaµía, see knµóc; cod. -qnu-).
•der qɩɩ-wdns = εqчos (µúpta, Nic.), qч-ów [v.] 'to seal with a muzzle, gag, fix,
put to silence', pass. 'to fall silent' (Ar., LXX, NT, J., Luc. etc.), rarely with ëɛpɩ-, etc.
Thence wσiç (лɛpɩ-) [f.] ‘sealing, plugging' (medic., Vett. Val.), -wτкóç 'putting to
silence' (P.Mag. Lond., Tab. Defix. And.), -wτpov [n.] 'instrument for plugging'
(Suid.); лɛpɩqu̟úí¶w [v.] ‘to fix, tie up' (Tab. Defix.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The identity of the suffix with the synonym кημóç is
remarkable. Contamination with qɩτpós seems improbable.
qɩɩpóç [m.] ‘trunk, block, log' (II.,
Cyprus. <?, PG?>
epic); acc. to sch. and Eust., from Amathus on
•ETYM Traditionally (Frisk, Pok.) explained as an instrument noun in *-tro- to the
PIE root *bhiH- 'to strike, hew, cut' seen e.g. in OCS biti, OIr. benaid, Lat. perfines
'perfringas'.
pitta →[tta.
Qittaкides →ITTÁKN.
qlέyw
1575
QiTV [n.] 'seed, sprout' (S. Fr. 889, old com.). <?>
•COMP ɩлony [m.] 'gardener' (A. Eu. 911).
●DER qɩtów [v.] ‘to sow, plant, bring forth' (trag., Pl.), aor. -ñσat, med. úσaσðaι, fut.
-úσoμa 'to bear' (Hes., A. R., Opp., Mosch.), -vμa [n.] 'produce, sprout, son' (A. Ag.
1281, Plu.); back-formation qituç [m.] 'begetter' (Lyc.).
⚫ETYM Probably a noun suffixed in -Tu-. Previously, often compared with the verbs
Lat. fiō, fit ‘to become, originate', OIr. biid, -bí ‘is', but these probably represent PIE
*b¹Hu-i̟e/o-, cf. ► qúw. Still, one could assume that qītu is dissimilated from *qõtu,
but this remains uncertain.
pladɛiv [aor.] only in λaкídes oλadov 'they tore the rags' (A. Ch. 28 [lyr.]). <?>
ETYM Unknown. Older, rejected etymologies of oλadɛiv are found in WP 2, 210. See
►лaplášw, ► pláw.
plāvvσσɛɩ · pλvapɛĩ, Aŋpɛĩ ‘talks nonsense' (H.). →olŋvaqáw.
qλaupos [adj.] 'bad, petty, poor, useless' (Pi., Sol., IA). <PG?>
•COMP Qλaupoupyós 'working badly, fumbler' (S.).
•DER qλaup-ótŋs [f.] 'poorness' (Plu., Poll.), oλavp-íšw (Plu.), kata- (Pi., Hdt.) ‘to
slight, humiliate'.
•ETYM No clear etymology, perhaps a Pre-Greek word? The adjective does look
similar to synonymous paulos; both could have dissimilated from an original
form *pλavλoç. Similar form and meaning are shown by some Gm. adjectives, e.g.
ON blauor 'fearful, timid', blautr 'weak, fearful, humid'. Others have compared Latv.
blaūrs 'very angry, grim, bad' and Lith. biaurus 'filthy, appalling, ugly'.
pláw [v.] 'to crush, bruise' (Pi., Hp., Ar., Theoc. etc.). <?>
•VAR Aor. qλáσaɩ, pass. pλασеñvai, fut. qλáow, perf. med. лéqλασμαl.
●COMP Also with άvα-, кατα-, ɛio- etc.
•DER qλá-σiç (εio-) [f.] 'bruise' (Hp.), -σµа (àµí-) [n.] 'bruise, contusion' (Hp.),
ávaqλaσµós [m.] (Eup.) to ȧvaqλáw 'to masturbate' (Ar., Luc.); a back-formation is
MoGr. ȧváqλa. Unclear: plaσµós. τños ‘fever', plaσμévos. τetvqwµévos
'smoking, gleaming' (H.).
⚫ETYM An expressive word rhyming with Oλáw and кλáw; cf. qλíßw beside Oλíßw.
On the anlaut variation 0-/ Q-, see Schwyzer: 302f. With an enlargement -8-, we find
►qλadɛiv, cf. кλádoç beside кλáw.
qλéyw [v.] trans. ‘to ignite, burn, light'; intr. ‘to burn, flame, blaze, shine' (Il.). ◄IE
*bleg- 'burn, shine'>>
•VAR Fut. qλέw (Il.), aor. qλéžai (Hes. Sc., A. Pr. 582 [lyr.]), pass. qλε×¤ñvaɩ (Hom.
Epigr., Th.) with fut. -σoμaι (Ach. Tat.), secondary oλɛуñvaι (Luc., AP) with fut.
-nσoμa (J.), perf.pass. лéqλεуμαι (Lyc.).
Enlarged: pλɛyéw, only pres. and ipf. = qλέyw (Il., epic, lyr.), mostly intr., also with
εл-; hence Пupiqλɛyé¤wv, -ovtos [m.] river of the Underworld (к 513, Pl. Phd. 114a);
qlɛyiáw = qléyw (Hdn. Gr.).
■COMP Often with prefix, e.g. εл-, кατα-, ȧvα-, лερi-.
:

=== page 814 ===

1576
plέyw
●DER A. With e-grade: 1. qλέy-µα (èлí-) [n.] ‘flame, blaze' (Ø 337), ‘inflammation’
(Hp., etc.), 'phlegm, slime' (Hp., Pl., Arist., etc.), -µáτov [n.] 'slime' (Sotad. apud
Stob.), -μaτíaç, Ion. -ins [m.] 'suffering from phlegm, full of slime' (Hp.), -µaτódŋs
‘igniting, full of slime, slimy, phlegmatic' (Hp., Pl., Arist., etc.), -µatiкóç ‘id.' (Gal., et
al.), qλɛyµatóɛv škpnyla. tñs ployós, pleyuatis. ǹ pléyµata ëxovoa (H.). The
semantic development here is unexplained.
Derived verbs: a. λεyµαívw [v.] 'to be inflamed, be heavily excited', often with
prefix, e.g. ¿к-, àvα-, σuv-, επ-; hence -μavσis or -μavτús [f.] ‘inflammation' (Hp.),
-µaσía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] ‘id.' (Hp., Arist.); b. qλεу-μаτóоμa (εк-) 'to become slime' (Hp.,
Gal.); c. úло-qλεуματíСw 'to become slimy' (Alex. Trall.), oλεуuatiσµós (gloss.).
2. qλɛyµový [f.] ‘inflammation, inflammatory swelling, heavy excitement' (medic.,
Hell.+), -µovкóç ‘inflammatory', -µovádŋs ‘tumorous' (Gal.), -μovάoµɑi ‘to be
inflameď (Alex. Trall.). 3. qλéšıç ardor, flammatus (gloss.); further only to the
prefixed verbs: ȧvá-, ¿ñí-, katá-, nɛpí-qλɛğıç [f.] ‘kindlng, etc.' (late); isolated is the
birdname is (dat. -18 Ar. Av. 884). 4. plεy-µóc [m.] in Bpoμíov q. (Thespis),
uncertain; perhaps = τò as̟µα (H.), -µwdns = -µatwdns (Gal.). 5. qléyos. tò pléyua
(H.). 6. pley-úas [m.] ‘eagle' (Hes. Sc. 134; after the color, H., EM); -upós 'burning'
(Ar. and Cratin. [lyr.], Hp. apud Gal.), dissimilated from -vλóc?; -váw = vẞpílw
(Ephor.), cf. H.: Þλɛyúaɩ. ¿Ovos úßpiotikòv kai àoɛßés. 7. Pléypa, Ion. -pŋ [f.] old
name of the Macedonian peninsula Pallene (Hdt., Str.), also λéураç лεdíov (Pi.,
Ar.), Þλɛypaía лλáš (A.); τà Þλɛypaĩa (лedía) plain in Campania (Plb.), after its
volcanic nature. 8. -λɛyńs̟ in έ-, лεpɩ-λɛync 'fiery' (Arist., Plu.), also e.g. in лupɩ-
pλɛyns 'ablaze, fierce' (Hp., Plu.).
B. With o-grade: qλó\, -oyós [f.] ‘flame, burning fire' (Il.), also as a plant-name
(Thphr.), after the color. In compounds e.g. ploу-wy and -wлóç 'flame-like, fiery'
(A. Pr.), кaλλíqλo 'with fair flames' (E. [lyr.]).
From pλó, partly also directly from qλéyw: 1. Diminutive oλóy-tov [n.] (Longin.).
2. -ídɛç [f.pl.] ‘roasted pieces of meat' (Archipp. and Stratt. [lyr.]), acc. to H. dià τò
ployiɛoα (so perhaps backfomation); ployídia. ai кɛyжpídɛs di' έlaíov
okɛvašóµeva (H.). 3. qλoy-ɛtós [m.] ‘burning, heat' (gloss.), after лupεtós. 4. Qloy-
íτŋs [m.] name of a precious stone, which looks like carbuncle (Solin.); -ītıç [f.] ‘id.'
(Plin.), also kind of anemone (PMag. Leid.). 5. qλoy-iń (-ín?) [f.] ‘flame' (Nic.). 6.
Adjective pλóy-ɛoç ‘flaming, sparkling' (II., E. and Ar. [lyr.]), póy-tos (?) ‘id.' (Hp.,
Orph.), -ɛpóc 'id.' (E. [lyr., anap.], A. R., AP etc.), -tvoç 'id.', also of colors (LXX, D.
S., pap., etc.), qλóy-ɩvov [n.] 'wallflower' (Thphr.), -wdŋs ‘flame-like, blazing red,
inflamed' (Hp., Arist., etc.).
7. verbs: a. qλoy-ílw = qλéyw (S. [lyr., anap.], Arist., LXX, AP etc.), also with ɑva-,
кata-, ovv- etc. Thence -íσµаτα (επ-) [n.pl.] ‘fire-damage, external inflammation'
(Hp., H. s.v. ov♂ äλa), napa-ployíσµãτa 'roasted food' (Achae.), -ɩσµós (repi-) [m.]
'the scorching' (Sm., Thd., H. s.v. qλoyµós), -íστpα [f.] = εvστpα (sch., Eust.). b.
-íotpa
ploy-óoμa, -ów (εк-, ȧло-) 'to inflame' (Arist., Thphr. etc.), -wolę (έk-) [f.]
‘ignition, inflammation' (Th., Thphr., D. S., et al.), Сoуóµаτα. τŵv äpτwν τà
έnкɛkavµéva (H.). c. pλoy-táw 'to become inflamed' (Hp.).
plεv-C-
1577
C. With o-grade: qλoy-μóc [m.] 'flame, glow, inflammation, heat of the sun or of
fever' (A. and E. [lyr.], Hp., Arist., etc.), -μów 'to burn' (PMag. Berol.).
•ETYM Inherited from PIE *bleg- 'to burn, shine' (LIV² *b¹le(-), nominal also
*blog. Nearest cognates are Latin fulgō (secondarily fulgeō), perf. fulsi 'to lighten,
glitter, shine' < *b¹lg-, flagrō, -āre ‘to burn, flame, glow', built on nominal *flag-ro-,
and flamma 'flame', probably < *flag-mā. Also ToAB pälk- ‘to shine, burn', also 'to
see blg-; OHG blecchan 'to make or become visible' < PGm. *blakjan, MLG,
MoDu. blaken 'to flame, glow, smoke'.
qλédwv, -ovoc [m., f.] 'babbler' (A. Ag. 1195, Timo). ◄PG(V)►
•var qλɛdóves [f.pl.] ‘babble' (Plu., Anon. apud Gal.).
•DER qλedov-wdns 'loquacious' (Hp. [codd. pλɛßo(do)vádŋs], Erot.), qλɛdovɛi.
ávaioðŋtet, q\vapεi (H.), -εúoµαɩ, -ɛúw ‘id.' (H., EM), whence -ɛía (EM).
•ETYM The variation qλed-/λnd- (in qλndwvta. AŋpoÛντα H.) has been interpreted
as ablaut, and the word thus connected with oλéw, by Frisk (assuming a suffix
-Sov-). However, we find -a- in лαλá‹ƒ and лαλáσματа stilted words', and
qλŋv- in ►qλŋvaqάw ‘to babble'. The variation oλεd-/\- shows nasalization (i.e.
replacement of a consonant by the nasal of its series), which points to Pre-Greek
origin; see already Kuiper 1956: 216.
The inner-Greek variation renders the connection with the proposed non-Greek
evidence doubtful: e.g. oλnd@vτa to OE blætan, OHG blazan 'to bleat' (suggested by
Holthausen KZ 47 (1916): 310). The connections with ToB plāce, ToA plāc 'speech,
talk, word' < IE *bhlōd-en- (Van Windekens, criticized in Adams 1999 s.v. plāce) and
that with OCS blęsti, isg. blędo 'to err, brag' is from *blend"- (see Derksen 2008 s.v.
*blęsti) are formally doubtful anyway.
qλéµɩva [n.pl.] ‘a disease of the knees of horses' (Hippiatr. 1, 227, 18 [ed. Oder-
Hoppe]). LW Lat.>>
⚫ETYM Transcription of Lat. flëmina (Pl.), itself borrowed from Gr. pλεyчový
‘inflammation'. Cf. DELG s.V.
olev-C- [v.] 'to burn' (trans.). <IE? *bleu- 'flow', PG?>
VAR We find qλev- only before consonant: in εл-éqλɛvσε τǹу xɛipa (IG 4, 955
[Epidauros II³]). Non-presentic forms: perf. ptc. pass. ¿k tɛixéwv nɛpineqλevoµévwv
лuρí 'from the walls encompassed by fire' (Hdt. 5, 77); cf. with the same metaphor
ȧoßéotŋ kéxuto qλó (II 123) and Lat. flamma circumfusus, divino circumfuso igni.
Further aor. ¿ëɩ-, nεpi-qλeñσai: pλò àvadpαµoñσa ¿néqlevoe tǹv xɛīpa (Epid. II³),
уaλñ кaτoкídɩoç лεрióλεvσεσα (Dsc.), in both places of encompassing flames and
singeing fire; to this belongs лεрoλεvσμós (Aq. De.).
•DER лερι-qλεvσμós 'burn' (Aq.).
⚫ETYM DELG suggests that лερioλów 'to burn superficially' (Ar. Nu. 396) stands for
*-qλɛúw, but I see no reason for this. In the antevocalic forms, *bleu- lost its -u-,
giving pλéw. As DELG also remarks, the comparison of fire with a liquid is
frequent in Greek.

=== page 815 ===

1578
pléy, -eßós
qléy, -ɛßós [f.] ‘vein' (N 546), also metaphorically 'metal-vein, spring (of water)' (X.,
Arist., Plb. etc.), 'vein of a plant' (Hp., Thphr.). <PG?>
•COMP Qλεẞоτоμéw (to qλéßa τéµvw) 'to bleed', -τoµía, Ion. -íŋ [f.] 'bloodletting'
(Hp., etc.), -tóµŋoiç, -toµiký (late medic.), -τóµov [n.] 'device for bloodletting' (late
medic., Luc.); εлioλεßo having the veins on top, with prominent veins' (Hp.,
Arist.), also eλavóqλɛßeç [pl.] 'with black veins' (Aret.).
•DER qλÉß-10v [n.] ‘small blood-vesseľ (Hp., Pl. Ti., Arist., Str.), -wdŋs ‘full of veins,
like veins' (Hp., Arist., Thphr., etc.), -ɩкóç belonging to the veins' (Arist.), -áčovtɛç·
ẞpúovτεs (EM, Phot.).
•ETYM As the IE designations of the veins vary strongly, and oλéy stands isolated, it
could well be a Greek innovation. In former dictionaries, connected with a large
group of words in oλ- (pladɛiv, pλéw, qλów, plúкταiva, etc.). It has been supposed
to be an enlargement in -g"- of *bhel- 'to blow, swell' (see paλlós), but such an
“enlargement" would not solve anything. Thus, it seems obvious to assume a Pre-
Greek loan, although I see no concrete formal indications.
qλew [v.] 'to overflow, flood, teem with' (A.). <IE? *bleu- 'flow', PG?>
•VAR Only gen.abs. qλɛóvτwv Swµáτwv úлépôεv (A. Ag. 377 [lyr.]), µýλwv qλeóvtwv
(ibd. 1416); qλéovtaç. qıλoûvtaç (leg. plúovraç?) i pλvapoñvtaç (H.).
•DER Epithet of Dionysus, with various forms: Dɛús (Chios acc. to EM), Pλέws
(inscr. Ephesus), Þλɛwv (Ael.), Þλoños (Plu.) and Plotά [f.] epithet of Kore (Lac.
apud H.), Dow [f.] name of a Bacchante (Nonn.). PN Þλéaç, -avτoç [m.] (Priene
II³). On the appellatives oλotós, plóoc, plouç, see plotóc, and plźwç. See also
►qλvač, ▸ qλvapéw, qλúктaiva. On dia-qλúžiɛç, see ►qλúw.
•ETYM The series pléw, qλɛñoai, néλεvσμα agrees with ´λéw, лλɛñσai, nénλevofiai.
Beside oλ(F)w, we find a zero grade in oλów (perhaps, quov was originally an
aorist, cf. кλvov). On the semantic relation between qλéw and qλɛñσaɩ, see ►qlɛv-
C-; it is unnecessary to posit a separate verb *pλɛúw 'to burn'.
The closest comparandum to qλέw is Lat. fluō 'to flow, stream', of which the non-
presentic forms like fluxi, fluctus may well be analogical (therefore, the velar in
oλúča, etc. need not be old). This points to a reconstruction *bleuH- (LIV² s.v. 1.
*bleuH-). Connection with Lith. bliáuti 'to roar', OCS bljuvati 'to vomit' is
semantically uncompelling. Alternatively, if oλéw, oλúw belong together with Bλúw,
BAúw, this could suggest that all these words are Pre-Greek.
qλéws [m.] ‘rush, Erianthus Ravennae' (Ar., Thphr.). <PG?>
•DER Qλóïvoç 'made of rush' (Hdt.). One assumes that the TN DλεiƑovт-ãεv (SEG
11, 1212, Olympia [Va]) is related.
•ETYM For qλéwę, DELG assumes *pλn-o-, beside *pλwF-o- for *olóoc, ploûç
'rind, skin'. Often derived from the verb oλéw, but Chantraine adds the word may
just as well be a loan; this would agree with my suggestion of substrate origin for
pλéw. So probably Pre-Greek. Cf. also ▸ płotóç.
*ôλñvaɩ [v.] Only in EM 796, 12, which is not well understood. See DELG. <?>
•ETYM Unknown. Connection with oλnvapos has been suggested.
qλidάw
qλnvaqáw [v.] ‘to babble' (Ar., Alex., et al.). <PG(V)►
•VAR qλŋv-aчáoµai (Phld.), -açñσaɩ (Jo. Dam.).
1579
•DER ληvaµaτα [n.pl.] ‘'babble' (E. Ep., Ar., Alex. etc.). Probably a back-
formation is pλvaq-oc [m.] ‘babble' (Men., Phld., Luc. etc.), also 'babbler' (Men.,
Poll.), whence -wdns 'babbly' (Hp. apud Gal.), -ía [f.] 'babble' (Phld., Suid.).
⚫ETYM Under ►qλedov, I have argued that the variation λεd-/- is a typical case
of Pre-Greek nasalization. Without -aq-, we find oλnvúw 'to brag' (Hp. apud Gal.),
plavúσσεi qλvapɛī, λŋpɛi 'talks nonsense' (H.), έкoλñvaι 'to bubble up' (E. fr. 470);
cf. also qλndŵvta. Anpoñvta (H.), ¢àñços (leg. olñvos or plývaqos?). qlúapos
(H.), qλɛdáv; also oλúw and oλvapéw. The ending is reminiscent of yŋλaqáw.
quá [f.] 'door-pillar, doorpost', also 'door-frame, lintel' (p 221, Hell.+); ‘jamb', e.g. of a
windlass (Hp., Ruf. apud Orib.). <PG?>
•VAR Both i and ĭ; Ion. -in, mostly plur. -taí; also -ɛtoi [m.pl.]. Later qλɛtá.
●DIAL Myc. pi-ri-ja-o [gen.pl.]?
•Der repiqλ[íwµa] [n.] 'framework' (Aphrodisias IIP), ȧvooλov ‘lintel (of a door)',
кατwoλov 'threshold'.
ETYM A technical word without etymology, so possibly Pre-Greek.
qλíßw, -oµai [v.] ‘to press, bruise' (p 221 [beside oλɩñoɩ, most codd. have 0λ-], Hp.
Loc. Hom., Theoc.). <IE *bhlig(")->
•VAR Fut. qλiyetal.
•COMP Also with έк-.
•DER qλîyɩç• Oλï¼µç (H.).
⚫ETYM Rare by-form of much more usual Oλißw, like oλáw beside Oλáw. Generally
compared with several words from Celtic, Latin and Balto-Slavic which all have *b¹l-,
e.g. W blif [m.] 'catapult, ballista', Lat. fligō 'to strike (down)', Latv. blaîzît 'to bruise,
press together, beat', Ru. blizná ‘scar, wound, break of a thread in a tissue', bliz, blizu
'near' <PIE *bl(e/o)i-g- or *bliH-g-. See LIV² s.v. *bleig-, where it is assumed that
qλiẞw represents earlier *pλet-. Root-final -ẞ- could be due to contamination.
qlıdάw [v.] 'to drip with fat (aλon), to disintegrate out of rottenness (σηлεdóσ1)'
(Nic.), 'to decay, burst', of clothes (Plu.); glosses from H.: plɩdãv. σýrɛσðaɩ ‘to roť;
Ěp入idev. Siéppeev, èppńyvvev flow apart, broke'; p入idáver. Sianintel, Slapper to
collapse'; pidiówνão diεσлwνto, ετεµvovτo 'drew apart, cut'; oλidóveç. tà ¿v toiç
įµatiois oñáoµata kai puτídɛç ‘shreds and wrinkles in clothes', Tɩvés dè oqvyµoí
'throbbing of inflamed parts, beating of the heart'. <IE? *bhlid- 'drip, flow, swell'▸
•VAR лερι- (v.l. Nic. Al. 62), cf. below.
=
•DER With full grade: λoɩɩãv· лεлpñóðàí (H.); qλoidoúµevos (Lyc. 35, after sch.
poуóμεvoc) and, also from H., the primary perf. forms лεpλodévai.
quкtαιvoñσðaι (cod. pleкtεvεioðα); лɛpladŵç. τòv plo̟òν áлoßaλúv (cf. on
pλoióç); diaлéqλoidev. diaкéxvτai; hencе úлεрoλooμoì vypoí as an explanation of
Siapλúžiεç. See also on áoσµós [m.] 'foam, slobber' (with copulative ȧ-, or from
áppós).
•ETYM Part of the above verb forms is primary: oλidávei, éqlidev, néqλoɩdɛv with
the noun oɩdóvɛs, and part is clearly secondary: pλid-άw, ploidúµevos (from

=== page 816 ===

1580
-έo̟μαɩ or -óo̟μα), and opλoid-táw (also qλid-). LIV² reconstructs a PIE root ?*b^leid-,
but there are no certain correspondences outside Greek; alternatively, these words
may well be Pre-Greek. Formally, MoE bloat might be connected, if from PGm.
*blaitōn.
A form лεрιλíoντos without dental in Nic. Al. 62 is given by the best tradition (v.l.
nepiqλɩdówvtos); it was probably influenced by лεpioλúw. There are more aspects in
which these two groups are close: beside pridáw, we have with a similar meaning
qλvdáw and qλvdapós 'weak, with meshes' (Hp.), perhaps already in Myc. pu₂-ru-
da-ro? Formally, it belongs to opλúw (see also pλéw), but semantically it is closer
to pλidáw. A nasalized derivative of oλudáw is έкoλuvdávw 'to burst open' (of
ulcers) (Hp.). Phonetically, oλudáw can be compared with ON blautr 'wet, weak'.
DELG assumes a separate verb opλiw, which LIV²: 88 does not follow. Cf. also
►ploiσẞos.
quéα [n.pl.] 'blood-swellings on horse feet' (Hippiatr. 51). ◄LW? Lat.>>
•ETYM From Lat. flēmina [n.pl.] (< qλɛyµový? See olέyw) 'cramped veins,
inflamed ulcers round the knuckles', either through textual corruption or by folk
etymology (see WH s.v.). Cf. also pλéµva.
plotós [m.] 'bark (of a tree), rind, skin of fruit, pellicle of a leaf or egg', also
metaphorically 'exterior hull' (since A 237). <?>
●COMP oplooppayńs ‘with cracked rind' (Thphr., Dsc.); frequent as a second
member, e.g. τavúphotos with thin rind' (II 767 etc.).
●DER_qλoɩ-wdŋs ʻrind-like, superficial' (Arist., Thphr.), -ŵτıç [f.] ‘made of rinď
(Lуc.); qλoïw (лɛpɩ-, έk-) [v.] ‘to peel off the rind, to rind' (Thphr., Dsc., pap.), qλo-
¨ïoµós (repɩ-) [m.] ‘decortication' (Thphr.), -1otiký (téxvη) ‘art of decortication' (Pl.,
Poll.); qλowσat ‘id.' (Nonn., AP), áлoλoιáw ‘id.' (Aët.). Note also εoç. τòv
ploiòv ánoßaλáv (H.), formally to pλidáw, etc. Also pλóos (acc. phóa Nic. after
Xpóa), qλoñç [m.] 'rind' (pap., AP), 'skin' of a man or a snake (Nic.; unclear mg. in
Arat. 335); also qλéwę (Hdt. 3, 98), with pλóïvoç 'made of ree' (ibd., E. Fr. 284,
Poll.). Furthermore, ▸ plźws (-ɛwc) [m.] ‘reed, rush'. On the PN DλóƑač, see
► Qλúa.
=
•ETYM Formally, oλóos and lolós < *pλóf-os, *pλof-tós belong to opλέ(F)w, like
the epithet of Dionysus Połoç, etc.; thus pλéws, -ɛwç after кopwvɛws, έpɩvɛws etc.
Semantically, the connection with oλéw is clear in úлépôλoα (µñλα) 'super-juicy', of
apples (verse-final in Emp. 80), perhaps instead of -pλoa, and similarly in oλoiε!v
(pλoiɛiv?) = ǎyav åkµášɛv (Antim.), if not for oλúɛɩv. In the sense of ‘rush', qλέwę
and qλouç refer to the luxuriant growth of the plant (cf. ßpúov to ßpów); Frisk thinks
that the rind (pλotós, qλóos) may have received its name from its being rich in flesh
and juice, as opposed to the wood underneath. But see ▸ oλźwç.
ploĩoßos [m.] 'the roaring, heaving' (A., S., Lyc. etc.), metaphorically 'battle-noise,
bustle' (Il., Euph.). ◄?►
●COMP лoλúλooẞos, epithet of áλaσσa 'roaring much or loudly' (Hom., Hes.
etc.), late also ä-, ẞapú-qλoiσßos (Nonn., Procl.).
∮入Úktalva
1581
•ETYM The ending is reminiscent of Jópuẞos, кóvaẞoç, etc.; further analysis
unknown. Relation with pλdáw, népλoidev is semantically not quite obvious.
plóuos [m.] 'mullein, Verbascum sinuatum' (Cratin. [lyr.], Eup. [anap.], Thphr.,
Dsc.). <PG(V)>
•VAR Also pλóvoç (Ps.-Dsc.), perhaps dissimilation & - µ > ¢ - v? àλóµoç (Arist.).
•COMP улло-чλoμos 'belladonna, Atropa belladonna' (Plin.), with augmentative
io-.
•Der qλoµíç [f.] ‘Phlomis samia' (Dsc.), qλovinç [f.] = övoσµa, óvitç (Dsc., Ps.-
Dsc.), qλoµádŋg лóα (H.) as an explanation of αioníç; nλoµíïw [v.] 'to poison with
лλ.' (Arist.).
•ETYM The variation (-/π- shows that the word is Pre-Greek.
qλúāž, -ākos [m.] ‘buffoonery' (AP), 'buffoon' (Poll., St. Byz., Eust.). <PG▷
父
•COMP olvaкoypáqos [m.] ‘author of plúaкes' (Ath.), -ypaqíá [f.] (Suid. s.v.
livewv).
•ETYM A Doric word, name of a genre devised by the Tarentine Rhinthon; originally
the name of a demon (Björck 1950: 61). Possibly built on oλúos [n.] ‘bragging', or
maybe a direct derivative of oλúw; cf. the rhyming form púa. Furthermore the PN
ÞóƑa (Tanagra V₁) from oλó(F)os (see ►plotós). See also pλúw, pλéw.
pλvapέw [v.] 'to babble idly, maunder, make jokes' (Hdt., Att.). <?>
•VAR Ion. qλunpέw.
•COMP Rarely with кατα-, σuv-, etc.
•DER Qλvap-ía [f.] 'silly prattle, idle babble, maundering' (Att.), -ŋµατα [pl.]
'maunderings, absurdities' (D. H., Ph., J.). oλúap-os [m.] 'babble, etc.' (Ar. Nu. 365
[anap.], Stratt., Men. etc.), ‘babbler, babbly' (LXX, Str., D. H., etc.), pλvapoλoyía
oλvapía ([Pl.] Ax.) etc., -wdns 'absurd' (Plu., Porph.).
7
====
•ETYM Enlargement of oλúw, but unclear in detail. A dissimilation from *pλvāλ-
may also be considered. On Ion. pλun- against Att. oλvā-, which may originally be
Doric (cf. qúaε), see Björck 1950: 45. The accent shows that opλúapos, as an
adjective and agent noun, must be a back-formation from oλvapέw. It cannot be
decided whether oλvapéw or the much rarer oλúapos (in the mg. 'babble') was
primary.
qλvdáw [v.] 'to be soft, weak'; the original meaning seems to be moist': pλuda.
vypaivɛτai (Gal.), qλvdãv. daxɛioðaɩ (H.).
=>
•DER With nasal éк-qλvvdávw (H.). → qλidάw.
qλvčákɩov →qλúktaiva.
qλúktaɩva [f.] ‘blister, pustule' (Hp., Th., Ar., Arist., etc.). <PG(V)►
•DER Diminutive qλvktaivis [f.], -idtov [n.] (Hp., Diocl. Fr.), -wdŋs ‘blister-like' (late
medic.), -óoμaɩ [v.] 'to get blisters' (Hp., Dsc.), -wσiç [f.] 'blistering' (Hp.), also -w
(-ów ?) ‘to cause blisters' (Dsc.). Also qλuktis, -ídos [f.] ‘id.' (Thphr., LXX), acc.pl.
QλÚкTEIÇ (DSc.). Furthermore oλvčáкtov [n.] ‘id.' (Hp., Cels.).

=== page 817 ===

1582
4入Úw 1
•ETYM Formation like in -atva from a stem oλuкT-, whence also oλuкtíç. The group
velar + t is typical for Pre-Greek, see Fur.: 319ff. See on oλoλuкtíç. For qλvčákov,
compare чvdpákov, ávеpáкtov; a basis *œλúčα < *qλúу-₁ǎ may belong to oivó-qλvě
(see qúyɛov), Siaqλúžiɛç, and further to pλúžaɩ, qλÚTw; see ► œλúw 1.
qλów 1 [v.] A. 'to be full of juice, thrive', of plants, fruits (Plu., Ael.), see ► pλέw.
B. ‘to well up' (Ø 361+), ‘to boil (Hp. apud Gal.), fut. qλúσɛi. (éσɛi (H.), ávaqλúw
(H., pap), diaqλów (Hp. apud Gal.), ¿кôλúw 'to boil over³ (Gal.), έôλúw ‘to sputter
at' (A. R.). Also said of a singeing lightning (Ar. Nu. 396).
C. 'to babble' (A., H.). <IE? *bleu- 'flow', PG?(V)►
•VAR Many derivatives in oλuy- (whence pλúšw), or ølv-k- (giving qλúʊʊw); aor.
plúoa (Archil. [codd. pλóoat], A., AP).
Also pλúčw, of speech (Nic.), oλúčav· άvačɛīv (H.), aor. έкoλúčαι уóov (A. R.), subj.
ȧлоλúчwσiv üẞpiv (A. R.). On oλvбáw, έкqλvvdávw, see pλidáw.
•COMP Also with àvα-, лεpɩ-, diα-, etc.
●DER 1. qλúoç [n.] ‘'babble' (Archil.), whence plovášɛ• pλvapɛi, Aŋpɛĩ ‘speaks
nonsense' (H.), perhaps Lac.; also pλváσoɛ• pλvapɛi, qλúя (H.), cf. qλúač. 2. plúois
[f.] = έávðŋois 'coming up', of a skin-eruption (Hp. apud Gal.), Sapλúžiɛç
Úлερẞλúσεç (Gal.).
=
⚫ETYM Many derivatives in -y-: opλv¢w, qλvyéw, qúyɛеpov, or -к-: qλvča, oivóqλvč.
Under pλéw, I explain that the verb could be Pre-Greek. The variation between the
enlargments -y- and -к- points to substrate origin (the substrate had no distinction
between voiced and unvoiced obstruents). See also on oluктαiva, which has a
variant stem opλuкt-. The form Staplúžies (s.v. ►pλéw) may be another stem-form
(with interchange кt/ε). See ►λev-C-.
qλúw 2 [v.] 'to vomit'. <IE *bleu- 'vomit'>>
...
•VAR In fut. qúoei. àñoßaλeĩ, ¿µéoei (H.), aor. åл-évoa (Archil.). DELG has
this word s.v. pλúw C.
•ETYM Usually connected with OCS bljúvati, ısg. bljujo ‘to vomit'; the corresponding
Baltic verb Lith. bliáuti, 1sg. bliáuju, also bliúti, 1sg. bliųvù is supposed to have
developed into 'bleat' or 'start roaring', which seems an uncertain change of
meaning.
póẞŋ [f.] 'wavy, long hair, mane', metaphorically ‘foliage, bunch of flowers' (Sapph.,
Pi., trag.; also Thphr.). <?>
⚫ETYM Verbal noun from péẞoμat referring to hair blown by the wind; cf. on
*Oɛɩpα, also σóẞn (see ►σoßεw).
qóßos →qéßoµai.
poîẞos [adj.] epithet of üdwp (Hes. Fr. 274, similarly Lyc.), of atyλa (B.), of qλóč (A.
Pr. 22); explained as 'pure, clear, bright'. <?>
•VAR Boîẞos epithet and name of Apollo (II.).
•COMP оẞó-Аηлτоç, Iоп. -λαμлтоç 'inspired, possessed by Q.' (Hdt., Lyc., Plu. etc.).
QOчVIŠ 1, -ĪKOS
1583
•DER 1. qpoiẞáç, -ádos [f.] 'priestess of Phoibos, seer' (E., Tim.). 2. Poiẞn [f.] daughter
of Ouranos and Gaia (Hes., A.). 3. Þoíßɛios, Ion. -ïoç 'belonging to Poiẞoç' (Hdt.,
E. [lyr.]), fem. -ŋïç (AP).
Denominative verbs: 4. poißášw [v.] ‘to prophesy, inspire' (S., Plb., Lyc., Str., etc.),
also 'to purify' (Lyc.), also with Sia-, ȧлo-, àvα-; poißαστns = vaticinator (gloss.),
poißaotýs
-áστpiα [f.] 'prophetess' (Lyc.), -αστiкós ‘prophesying, inspiring' (Plu., Longin.,
Ptol.). 5. poißáw [v.] 'to purify' (Hell. poetry), aor. -ñσaɩ, Dor. -ãσai; άñoqoißáoµai
[v.] ‘to speak ardently' (PMag. Par.), лpo- 'to prophesy' (Cat. Cod. Astr.); hence
qoíẞŋσiç [f.] ‘inspiration' (Vett. Val.), -ŋτns (Man., et al.), -ŋτúp (PMag. Lond.) [m.]
‘prophet', -ńτwp [m.] ‘id.' (Orph.), -ýtpia. kαðáptpiα (H.), also name of a goddess,
perhaps Isis? (Ethiopia), -ŋtós ‘inspired', qoßŋtevεɩv• Xpŋoµwdɛïv (H.). 6. qoɩẞãvai
λaµépûvai, µavtεúσaoðaɩ, koσµñoaɩ, ka¤āpaɩ, àyvíσa (H.), 'to purify' (anon. apud
EM), à-poíẞavτos 'not purified, impure' (A.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Some connect the glosses άoiкτóv (leg. äqiktov?). áкáðaptov,
µoŋtóv and ȧqiktpós (leg. äqiktρoç?)· áкáðαpτos, µapós (H.). Þoîẞos has nothing
to do with Dóẞoç. The word has also been connected with the town Boíßη in
Thessalia (St. Byz. s.v. Doiẞn).
Þoívīkɛç [m.pl.] people on the west coast of Syria, also the inhabitants of Carthage as
Phoenician colonists. <PG>
•VAR DOĭvě, -īkoç [sg.], Þoíviσσa [f.] ‘Phoenician' (II.); also the son of Agenor, as an
eponym of the people, also son of Amyntor, ruler of the Dolopians (Il.), and a river
near Thermopylae (Hdt.).
•DER 1. Polv-íkn [f.] 'land of the Ph.' (since Od.), also of Carthage (E.); older name of
Caria (Ath.), also place in Epirus (Plb., Str. et al.). 2. Adjective -к½ïoç (Hdt. et al.),
-IKIKÓS (Epich., Hdt., Th., etc.; see Chantraine 1956a: 120, 122, 124), -íkios (S. Fr., D.
S.), íкivos (Gal.). 3. -кíαç ävεμoç 'south-east wind' (Arist. et al.). 4. -tkídiov [n.]
'small Phoenician' (D. L.). 5. -iktσtí ‘in Phoenician (Punic) speach' (Plb.). 6. -IKÍčW
'to live like the Ph.' (Luc.).
ETYM On the formation cf. Aï¤īкεç, Téµµīкeç, Opýïkes (-ĭ-) etc.; cf. polLVÓS.
Borrowed as Lat. Poenus, Punicus, see WH s.v. The suffix -iк- is non-IE, and
probably Pre-Greek. See Beekes Kadmos 43 (2004): 167-184, especially 181ff.
QOτvɩž 1, -ĪKoç [m., f.] ‘palm-tree', especially ‘date-palm', also 'date' (since (163), also
other plants (Thphr., Dsc.). <GR>
•VAR Accentuation following Hdn. Gr.
•COMP qoivikoẞáλlavos [f.] 'date' (Hell.+).
●DER 1. Qoɩv-íσкη (for -ɩкíoкη) [f.] 'small palm-tree' (pap. IIP). 2. qoɩv-ikiç [f.],
-кídlov [n.] 'palm-ornament' (Delos III-IIª). 3. Adjectives poɩv-к½ïoç (Hdt.), -íkioç
(Gortyn V-IV³), -íkɛloç (D. S.), -íkɩvoç (com. IV³, pap. etc.), -кiкóç (Ph. Bel., pap.),
-ɩкηpóv?, of µέτpov (pap. IIP). 4. -кíτηs, of oivos (Dsc.). 5. Qolv-iкáv, -wvoç [m.]
'palm-grove' (Hell.+).
⚫ETYM Literally "the Phoenician", referring to the eastern origin of the palm and the
date trade of the Phoenicians.

=== page 818 ===

1584
QOTVIĘ 2, -ÏKOÇ
qoчvɩ 2, -īкoç [m.] name of a stringed instrument (Hdt. 4, 192, Hell. historians).
< GR➤
•⚫ETYM Related to ►qoĭvi 1 according to Semus, because it was made of palm-wood.
DELG calls this absurd, citing Herodotus, who states that it could be made of animal
horns. Rather, it was a Phoenician invention.
qoîvi₹ 3, -īkoç [m.] name of a mythical bird, worshipped in Egypt (Hes. Fr. 171, 4, Hdt.
2, 73, etc.), whose native land was claimed to have been Arabia or India. <LW? Eg.>
•ETYM To Eg. bjn; further history unknown.
qoìvi₹ 4, -īkos [m.] '(the color) purple' (Hom. etc.); as an appellative or adjective
(fem. also toσa) ‘sorrel' or 'red-colored', of a horse (Y 454), 'purple, dark-red,
tawny', of cattle, fire, clothes, etc. (Pi., Simon., E., Theoc.). <PG>
•DIAL Myc. po-ni-ki-jo.
⚫COMP QоIVIко-лáрдоç 'purple-cheeked, with red-colored sides', of a ship (Od.).
•DER 1. QOIV-IKIÇ, -Iкídos [f.] 'purple cloth or blanket, red-colored cloth' (Ar., X.,
Aeschin. etc.), 'red banner' (Lys., Plb.), with -кɩστns [m.] 'who wears purple', name
of a Persian court-official (X.). 2. Adjectives pov-ɩкóεs (Hom., Hes.), -íкƐoç, -ƖкOÛÇ
(Ion., Pi., X., Arist., etc.); -íкtoç (Epich., Arist. etc.); -IкIOÑç (Ar., Arist. etc.) 'purple,
crimson'. 3. Verbs: poiv-íσow, aor. -ía 'to make purple, red', also intr. 'to be made
reď (mostly poet. [orac. apud Hdt., B., trag. etc.], also Arist., Thphr.), also with έлɩ-
etc.; hence -tyµós [m.], -išis [f.] ‘red skin' (late medic.), -tyμa [n.] 'which is reddened'
(Lib.). potv-kiw (εл-) 'to be purple' (Arist., Gp.).
⚫ETYM Related to the people's name Doíviкɛç; see also on ▸ polvóc.
Þoîvɩ₹ 5, -īkos ‘Phoenician'. Þoívɩkeç.
qoɩvós [adj.] 'red' (of blood, aïµaτɩ ПI 159), epithet of Ouµós in unclear meaning,
'blood-red? murderous?' (h. Ap. 362), 'deadly' (Nic.), of alµa (Mosch.) probably
referring to the color (σ 97, A., S.), of a cobra, άσлíç (Nic.); of кαρлòs σídŋs (Nic.);
often with strengthening ►Sa-: Sapoɩvós ‘dark, tawny', especially of beasts of prey,
also 'murderous, bringing death?? (Il., epic poet.); enlarged -ɛóc (Σ 538, Hes. Sc. 159),
-nεic (Nonn.). <?>
•DER More usual poívios 'bloody, blood-stained, murderous, deadly' (Pi., trag.). fem.
qoivás = ¿pvoißη (Theognost. Can.); enlarged -ǹɛis of Spákwv (M 202, 220), -wdis
'bright red'.
•ETYM Without convincing etymology. Connected with póvos 'murder' already in
antiquity, but this is unconvincing semantically and morphologically (suffix -io-).
The word was associated with póvos early on, so that it came to be interpreted as a
variant of it. Perhaps, the EN Doíviкɛç is related to potvóc; similarly, Daíaкɛç to
► Qatóç. Traditionally, it was assumed that 'purple' got its name from the Doívɩкɛç,
as the "Phoenician color”; yet, various scholars have claimed the reverse, viz. that
qoîvɩ ‘purple, red color' was primary, whence Doɩviêη ‘the red (land), the land of
purple'. Others have assumed that Þoivikɛç was an (oriental) loanword. If one does
not want to separate qoîvɩ and Þoívikes from qoivós, the only remaining possibility
QÓλVEÇ KÚVES
1585
is to interpret poetic polvós (with Sapoivós and poívios) as a back-formation, which
is difficult, but not impossible.
Qoτáw [V.] 'to go to and fro, go repeatedly, walk about, frequent someone, go to
school, come to the market', of a commodity (Il.). <PG?►
•VAR QOITñσaɩ, Ñeqoitnka (èneqoitɛɛ Nonn.).
•COMP Often prefixed, e.g. with έлɩ-, diα-, σvv-, ȧло-. Compounds: nεpopoчtiç
epithet of 'Epivuç 'walking in the fog' (I 571, T 87), 'walking in the sky', of the moon
(Orph.), whence ǹɛpopoítŋs, άɛpopoíτas (Ion Chius, Orph., Nonn.), ŋɛpó-
(àεpó-)poiτos, of stars, birds, etc. (A. fr. 282 = 198 M., late poetry); opɛiqoiτns,
-qoɩɩos ‘walking in the mountains', whence -poitéw (Hell.+). Hence the simplex
poíτns. ò кýpu (H.).
•DER 1. Qoit-ác [f., m.] 'erring, swarming, raging', of Cassandra, Bacchantes, etc.
(trag., etc.), qoîτoç [m.] ‘the erring, aberrance' (opεvwv A. Th. 661). 2. poiτ-aλéos
‘id.', also 'roaming, driving mad (A. and E. [lyr.], Mosch., AP, etc.); enlarged -aλiɛúç
(Opp.), -aλiwtns (AP 9, 524, 22 verse-final) of Dionysus. 3. poít-ŋois (¿ñɩ-, ovv- etc.)
[f.] ‘frequentation, especially of school (Att., etc.). 4. Qoit-ntýs (ovv-) [m.] ‘pupil'
(Att., etc.), -nτp [m.] 'id.' (Nonn.), also = -aλéos (epic poetry V-VI³); -ŋtós (Com.
Adesp.), -istikós (sch.). 5. verbs: qoɩt-í(w = -άw (h. Hom. 26, 8, Call., A. R.), probably
after aui w; poit-άw 'id.' (Hellad. apud Phot.).
⚫ETYM All the above forms, including portáç, poitαλéoç and poчτoç, are built on the
present poiτáw. No etymology. One might think of a Pre-Greek loan.
polis, -idos [f.] 'scale of a reptile' (Arist., A. R., D. S., Opp., etc.), metaphorically of the
spots on an animal-skin (Hld.), of the mosaic of a cover (D. S.). <PG?>
•DER Qoλidwτós 'provided with scales' (Arist., Thphr., Hell. inscr., etc.), -wdns 'scale-
like' (Hp. v.l.), -óoμa 'to be covered with scales' (Philum.).
•ETYM Formation with o-grade, like λoлíç (to λoлós), λɛñís (to λéñoç, see ►λέлw).
Frisk supports the usual connection with pελós 'cork', but I see no reason for this.
As a technical term, it is probably Pre-Greek.
qolкóç [adj.] Epithet of Thersites (B 217) of unknown meaning. <PG?(V)►
•ETYM Traditionally interpreted as 'bandy-legged' and supposed to be related to
qάλos, designation of a helm-ornament or helmet-piece and connected with Skt.
hvárate 'to go crooked', etc.; see opáλoç. Fur.: 173 assumes that poλкós is identical
with *Boλкóc in Bóλкwv, the name of a Syracusan in D. S. 11, 91; in that case, the
variation Q-/ ẞ- would point to Pre-Greek origin.
qó [f.] ‘scab, leprous sore' (Erot. 384). Erot. l.c. explains poλλiкwdŋ. tà éqŋλwdn
кai λɛлpódŋ. oi yàp лαλαιoì póλλкaç έкάλovv τàç ¥npwdeis tpaxútntaç; but Galen
(19, 153) gives τà olov Ovλαкáбɛα кaì σoµá. <?>
•ETYM Perhaps, a variant of polis. De Vaan (p.c.) suggests that it could be a loan
from Lat. folliculus 'bag; husk, pod, skin, follicle, bladder, etc.'.
qpóλveç kúveç [?] · oï лuppoì övtes µéλava otóµaτα εixov 'red ones, having a black
mouth' (H.). PG(V)►

=== page 819 ===

1586
póvos
•ETYM Gennadius JHS 46 (1926): 42f. connects the word with políc and proposes to
read στíудατα for στóμаτα: "dogs of a yellow-red coat spotted with black". A direct
derivation is impossible for morphological reasons. Fur.: 228 connects polúvel·
μoλúvε 'stains, defiles', which would mean that the word is Pre-Greek.
opóvos [m.] 'manslaughter, murder', poet. 'bloodshed' (Il.); also in the poetic
expression épɛvyóµɛvo óvov a¼µatoç (П 162) for alμa qóvov or qóviov. <IE
*gwhen- 'slay, kill'>
•COMP povoliẞns ‘dripping with murder or blooď (A. [lyr.]), àñópovos póvos
'unnatural murder' (E. Or. 163 [lyr.]), áñópovov ai̟µa (ibd. 192). Highly productive
as an agent noun in univerbations, e.g. ávdpooóvoc killing men' (Il.), -ía [f.] (Arist.,
etc.), éw (Str.); enlargements -ɛúc ‘id.' (Man.), -τηs (A. Th. 572); see also on
► ȧvdpɛïqóvτη (Il.); also Bouqóvoc, -έw [v.] (H 466).
•DER 1. Adjectives: póv-10s 'murderous, murder-, blood-stained, deadly' (Pi., trag.);
-ɩкós 'belonging to murder, bloodthirsty' (Hdt., Th., etc.); -wdns 'deadly' (Hp.),
'reminding of blood, murder' (Thphr.), 'murderous, bloodthirsty' (LXX etc.). 2.
pov-ɛús [m.] 'murderer' (Il.), -ɛúw [v.] ‘to murder, kill' (Pi., IA), also with katα-, έn-
etc., whence -ɛvτýs [m.] ‘murderer' (LXX), fem. -ɛútpia (sch.), -evtikós ‘deadly’
(sch.), ɛvoчuos 'mortal' (sch.). 3. qóv-a [m.] name of a dog (X. Cyn.). 4. Pres.
-óoμai in rɛpovwμévos [ptc.perf.med.] 'blood-stained' (Opp.).
Beside copóvoc, we find qovaí [f.pl.] 'manslaughters, massacre, murder, blood' (Il.,
epic poet., also Hdt. and late prose), cováw [v.] 'to be eager for murder, blood' (S.
[lyr.], late prose).
•ETYM A verbal noun to Oɛívw, from PIE *gón-o- [m.]. Cognate forms: SCr. gön
(to gnàti 'to drive, hunt') 'distance over which a horse can be driven in one time', Cz.
hon 'hunt'; as an agent noun (cf. -póvoc) Skt. ghaná- ‘striking down, killing', msc.
'cudgel, club', Lith. gānas, Latv. gans herdsman' ("the driver"). All of these may be
independent formations.
qožós [adj.] ‘sharp, pointed' (B 219 of the head of Thersites, Arist., AP etc.). ◄PG(V)►
•COMP qožíxɛɩλoç, of кúλič, ‘with pointed edge', i.e. 'narrowing towards the top'
(Semon.), with post- after verbal --.
•Der qožótŋs [f.] 'pointed shape' (Gal.), -ivoc [m.] an unknown fish (Arist., also
Mnesim., written quε-, probably after qúčic, quyɛīv).
⚫ETYM No convincing etymology. Lidén 1906: 59f. connects oáypos 'whetstone'. Fur.:
345 also compares oáypos, but assuming a Pre-Greek word; op.cit. 393, he connects
qoñokoç. óžukéqaλos (H.).
4op斤 →péppw.
popivn [f.] 'hard and rough skin', especially 'swine's hide' (Hp., Antipho Soph.,
Aristom. Com., etc.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Variant popívη. ǹ лap' èvíos лuρívη (H.).
•ETYM Without cognates, neither in Greek nor in other languages. A remote
similarity is shown by a Germanic word for 'raw, outward rind', e.g. ON bọrkr, LG
popúvoual
1587
(> MoHG) Borke; ON bára [f.] ‘crest of a wave, hard strip on the surface, cheese-
rinď. Yet, the variant лupívη shows that the word is Pre-Greek.
qópkes [?] · xápaкɛç ‘pales' (H.). ◄LW Lat.▷
•ETYM LSJ explains it as a loan from Lat. furcae, which seems possible.
popкóv [adj.] · λevkóv, rodióv, þvσóv ‘white, gray, wrinkleď (H.). <PG(V)►
•DER Perhaps, here also belong the PNs Þópкos (Pi. P. 12, 13, S. Fr. 861, Lyc. 477,
Phanocl. 1, 20) = Þópkus, -ù(v)os [m.] (Od., Hes., etc.), in the sense äλɩos yέpwv ‘old
man of the sea'?
•ETYM A supposition is found s.v. ► qapкíç. Fur.: 157 connects Þópkus with Þópkos
and Пópкoç, and/or papкíç. Definitely Pre-Greek.
ópy, -tyyos [f.] 'cither', especially as an instrument of Apollo (Il.). <PG(S,V)►
•COMP qiλoqópµy loving the cither' (A. [lyr.]).
•DER popμíw (only pres.) 'to play the cither' (Hom., Hermesian.), -Iкτáç Dor. (Pi.,
Ar. [lyr.], AP), -ɩкτηp (Nonn.) [m.] 'cither-player', -Iкτóç 'accompanied by the
cither' (S. Fr. 16).
•ETYM A loan word, similar in form and meaning to σáλлуž, σñpiy§. Clearly a Pre-
Greek word, on account of the suffix. Fur.: 173, 342 adds ßápμos (Phyllis apud Ath.
14, 636c), ßápwμos (Euph. Fr. Hist. 8, Ath. 4, 182f), þáµµτos (EM 188, 21), and
Bápßiτos (Pi., Anacr.).
qopµós [m.] ‘basket', also as a corn-measure (IA since Hes.), also of other twined
objects: 'mat' (Hdt., Ar., Thphr.), ‘large seamen's cloak' (Theoc., Paus.), 'sieve'
(Dsc.). <?>
•COMP popμocópos [m.] ‘basket-bearer' (Epicur.), -έw [v.] (D. C.).
⚫DER Diminutives popuís [f.] (com., Arist.), -íoкoç [m.] (Pl., EM), -íσкiov [n.] (Poll.)
'basket', -íov [n.] 'id.' (Hippon.), 'faggot' (D. L.).
•ETYM The formally obvious connection with opέpw as “bearer” seems difficult to
combine with the varying meanings, which are all connected with the notion of
'twining'. Schulze 1892: 110ff. therefore connected pápai úôaívɛɩv, nλékɛv ‘to weave,
plait' (H.) and ►ãpos ‘cloth, linen'. Still, a development from 'basket' < ‘bearer' to
'twined basket', with subsequent transition to other twined materials, is conceivable.
Go. barms ‘кóλлоç' agrees phonetically with popμóc, but is also interpreted
differently. Not related to pwpiquós.
=
pópos → pépw.
popúvoμaɩ [v.] ‘to be mingled, stained, blemished' (X 21, Q. S. 2, 356; 3, 654), qopúvel·
qupą, polúvei, ovyxεi 'soils, defiles, mingles' (H.). <?►
•Var qopúσσoμaι (Opp.), aor. Qopúžaɩ, also with ȧva- (σ 336, Hp.), -úžaσðaι (Nic.),
nɛqopuyévos (Nic., Q. S., Opp.) ‘id.”, qopvoσéµevať µoλúvɛiv (H.).
•COMP aiμo-pópuкtoç ‘blemished with blood' (v 348), ȧ-qópuktos (AP), qopuktós
(Lyc.).
•DER Also popuτóç [m.] 'mixture, miscellany, waste, refuse, chaff (Democr., Ar.,
Arist., Thphr., etc.); cópuç. daктúλios ó katà tǹv εdpαv (H.), cf. µoλvvíŋ. ǹ évуý

=== page 820 ===

1588
ppayé入入iov
(H.), also as a PN (nickname); Popvotaç (Tanagra). Unclear papvµóc. todµnpós,
Opaoús 'daring, bold' (H.).
⚫ETYM Compare μоλúvw, лαλúvw. The formation of ôоpúžαɩ, лεчopuyuέvoç is like
popúžai, µµóðvуuévos (also -X-); popúσow is like åλúσow, aibúσow, aiµáσow, etc.;
while popuτóc is like σupoɛtóç, VIOεTóc, etc. The common element popu- cannot be
analyzed; if it belongs to oúpw, perhaps dissimilated from *qupu-.
opayéλov [n.] 'whip' (NT); 'a weight' (inscr. Lycia). <LW Lat.>
ETYM From Lat. flagellum.
páčo̟µai [v.] to consider, think (up), perceive, decide, discern', act. 'to signalize,
indicate, show, inform' (Il.). <?►
•VAR opάw (post-Hom.), aor. opáσ(σ)ασðα (Il., epic poet.), opaσñvaɩ (Od., epic
poet., Hdt.), act. páσa (\ 22), reduplicated лéœpadɛ, -έµɛv, etc. (Il., epic), fut.
qpáσ(σ)oµai (Il.), opάow (post-Hom.), perf.ptc. лpoñεópadµévos (Hes. Op. 655),
ind. „έôpaσµaɩ (A.), act. лéôpåкa (Isoc., etc.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. εl-, ovv-, nεpi-.
•DER 1. opadń [f.] 'consideration, insight, indication, hint' (Pi., Alc., A., E., etc.),
oppad-áw [v] =ẞovλεvoμaι (Hdn. Gr.), opadáov. έpµŋvεñov (H.), -āτýp [m.] an
official (Sicily III-IIª: ypaµµatεùç кai opp.), -ãσɛ ‘indicated' (Pi. N. 3, 26), -ŋtóc (sch.);
opadɛvovσi. Aéyovσɩv (H.). 2. opádµwv (Att. opáσμшv), -μovoç (also ȧ-, лоλ-, etc.)
'wise, mindful' (Il., epic poet.), -μooúvη [f.] 'wisdom, cleverness' (h.Ap., Hes. etc.),
-σµooúva (epigr.). 3. Opáois (µetá-, napá-, čк-, etc.) [f.] ‘(way of) expression' (Ar.
Ra. 1122, Arist., D. H., Str., etc.). 4. Opaotús. okéyſis, évvola, Boulý, opάois (H.);
ȧpaστúɛs [pl.] (Call. Fr. anon. 9; Suid.) from apaστos. 5. paστp [m.]
'enunciator, guide' (X., Ph., Plu.), -Twp [m.] 'guide' (A. Supp. 492); лαpapσ¨ç
'rewriter', µετapaσtýs ‘translator' (late); opáσrns = eloquens (gloss.). 6. opaotikós
(ларα-, лεрι-, μετα-, άντɩ-, έк-) 'expressive, explicit' (late).
As a second member: 7. -oppadńs (Il., epic poet.), e.g. ȧopads ‘inconsiderate,
unwise', -in 'stupidity', -έw [v.] 'to act inconsiderately, be unwise'; by decomposition
œpadéos (gen. N 354). 8. -œpaσtoç, e.g. äœpaσtos ‘incomprehensible, imperceptible,
unspeakable' (h. Merc., epic poet., Hdt.), -τúç (see 4. above).
•ETYM All the above forms go back to an element oppad-, which is seen clearly e.g. in
the archaic reduplicated aorist. It has the character of a zero grade root, but it stands
isolated. If one separates the dental as a root extension, connection with opŃ
might be tried. Cf. also ȧлоoрác.
opáσow [v.] 'to fence in, enclose, barricade, equip (a horse) with scale-armour, block'
<?, PG?
•VAR Att. -Tτw, also opάyvvμ, fut. opάw (all post-Hom.), aor. opážal, -aoðai
(épápчavτo Hdn. Gr.), ôpaxеñvai (Il.+), opaуñvai (Hell.+), with oppaуnσoμaι beside
paxеñσoµai (late), perf. med. лéopaуaɩ (E. etc.), лɛqapyµévos (Hdn. Gr.), plpf.
εлεчрαкτо (Hdt.), act. лéopaкα (Ph.), лέôрaya (sch.).
•COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧvàɩ-, àлo-, έv-, пεpi-, ovv-.
•DER 1. opάyμa [n.] 'enclosure, protection, defence' (IA), qápxµa [n.] ‘id.' (Epid. IVª;
< -кσµ-), also dɩá-, лɛpɩ-, ½µ-, etc. with different shades of meaning; αpαуμáτ
ppátnp,-epos
1589
[n.] ‘small partition-wall' (Delos IIIª). 2. œpay-µós (¿µ-) [m.] ‘enclosing, fencing in,
fence' (IA), -µítηs epithet of ¤áµvos, кáλaµoç ‘growing in hedges'. 3. Opáči ‘fencing
in, etc.' (IA), mostly with ȧлo-, diα-, ȧvti-, ¿v-, ovv-, etc. 4. кατα-, лερl-qpáktŋs [m.]
'who fences in, etc.' (late), opáкτηs 'floodgate' (Procop.). 5. opαкτóç 'fenced in,
protected' (Opp.), opaктεúw [v.] 'to surround' (pap. IIIª); чаρкτóç ‘id.' (EM),
чapкτóoμai in opáρкτov· quλαкǹу σкεúačε 'prepare the watch' (H.); also pápкτεσαι
(for ovσai?). Tò øрáττεσðαι (H.).
Old and common in compounds, e.g. äрαктoç (ǎoаpкτoc) 'unfenced, unfortified,
not decked, without armour' (Att.), vaúwpaktos (-qapktтos) 'protected by ships', of
στpaτós, etc. (A. [lyr.], E., Ar., Att. inscr.); opαкτikós („apa-, ¿k-, εµ-) ‘blocking,
etc.' (medic., etc.). On ►SpúðaкtOÇ, SEE S.V.
•ETYM As a common basis of the attested forms, opaк- beside papк- can be posited
(the late attestations oppαуñval and oppάyvчu are analogical). It is unclear which of
the two is older, or even if they both derive from a zero grade. Since their
distribution is unclear, we may envisage the possibility that they are due to substrate
origin. This is confirmed by the fact that there is no convincing correspondence
outside Greek. The traditional connection with Lat. farciō ‘to stuff, cram, fatten' and
frequens 'crowded, frequent' is quite uncertain. On qúpkos. tɛixos ‘wall' (H.) see
▶ túpyos.
opátηp, -εpos [m.] ‘member of a phratria' (Att.). <IE *brehter- 'brother'>
•VAR Younger opáτwp, -opoç, Ion. opτwp (IG 14, 759 [Naples II³]), opτηp.
ådeλpós (H.), Dor. opατp (Hdn. Gr.).
•COMP opατpiaрxos [m.] 'head of a phratry' (D., Att. inscr.), coppτapxoc, -apxέw [v.]
(Naples).
•DER œpάtpŋ [f.] (B 362f.), œpátτpɑ (D. H.= Lat. curia), with dissimilation oáτpa
(Tenos IIIa, Arcad.IIª); Att. etc. opaτpía, dissimilated paτpía (Chios IV, Tenos IIIª,
often in codd.), (p)½τpía (Naples) [f.] ‘kinsmanship', 'subdivision of a phyle' (= 30
yévn), 'phratria'.
=
Hence 1. qaτpíτas [m.] 'member of a phratry' (Arc.). 2. Opátpios, Ion. opýtpios
epithet of Zeus, of Athena and other gods as protectors of the opñτpαι and oppατpíai
(IA, Delph.). tov designation of the corresponding sanctuary (Poll., St. Byz.). 3.
opaτpiáw (v.ll. paτpi-, opατɩ-) [v.] 'to belong to the same phratry' (D.). 'to join an
alliance, conspire' (sch.), -aσµóç [m.] ‘alliance, conspiracy' (Eust.). 4. qpatpíšw [v.]
'id.' (Crateros, inscr.). 5. Oppαтopiкòv (opατεp-?) уpаμчаτε‰ov (D.). In later literature
(D. H., Plu.), œpáτpα and oppατpia are often used to translate Lat. curia; similarly, the
derivatives oppατpɩ-ɛúç, -αστýç = curialis, -aкǹ чopia
-aotýs
ynqoqopia comitia curiata, -kǹ
έккλŋσía ‘id.', -ατɩкòç vóμoç = lex curiata.
¿kkλŋoía -atikòs vóµos
•ETYM PIE word for 'brother'. Cognate forms: Skt. bhrátar-, Lat. frāter, Go. broþar,
OCS brat(r), etc. In Greek, it was replaced in its original meaning by ȧdɛλ(ɛ)óc. In
the context of the extended family, 'brother' was probably also used for 'half-brother'
and for other male cognates of the same generation, such as cousins. In several
languages, this led to the creation of new words for 'brother' = 'male descendant of
the same mother' (see ȧdeλopóc). The administrative meaning of the Greek word
was first established in the collective formations opáτpa, -ía. Beside opáτpa, we find

=== page 821 ===

1590
чpéāp, -āτoç
Skt. bhrātrá- [n.] 'fraternal relation, brotherhood'; with opаτрíα agrees OCS
brat(r)ija 'brotherhood', Ru. bráť'ja 'brothers' as a plur. of brat, epic Skt. bhrātrya-
[n.] ‘id.'.
oppéāp, -āτoç [n.] 'well' (197). <IE *breh,-ur 'source, well'>
•VAR Plur. Att. -āτα, *ôpηåτa († 197), written opεíaτa; hence sing. oppɛĩap (Nic. Th.
486), contracted opηtós (Egypt I³, Hdn. Gr.), -τí (Call. Cer. 15), plur. -ɩa (pap. IIIª).
•COMP öpɛatotýµлavov [n.] ‘water-wheel (Plb.), opɛwpvxéw ‘to dig a well' (Ar.,
Str., Plu.), -wpúxos ‘digging wells, well-digger' (Plu., Them.), -ía [f.] (J.).
●DER 1. œpɛát-lov [n.] (Hell. pap.), formally a diminutive, pl. opýta (Sicily) ‘id.' 2.
oppɛaτ-ía [f.] 'water-container, cistern' (X., P.lb.), ‘opening' (Apollod. Poliorc.),
qpntia. otóµa qpέatos (H.). 3. opεaτ-ɩaños ‘of a well', -tañov üdwp 'spring-water'
(Hermipp. Com., Arist., etc.), opηtaños (pap. IIIª), -tos ‘id.' (late). 4. -wdns 'well-like'
(sch.). 5. -toµós [m.] meaning uncertain; perhaps ‘the falling into a well' (Notium I³).
•ETYM PIA *p¹rēwar yielded Att. opέãp with quantitative metathesis. It derives from
PIE *brehur and is originally identical with Arm. ałbiwr, ałbewr 'well'. The
remaining case-forms have an n-suffix, e.g. gen. *opńƑα-τoç < *b³reh,-un-, but Arm.
has a gen. alber with a generalized r-stem. A zero grade byform, IE *brHun-, is
preserved in the Germanic word for 'source', e.g. ON brunnr, Go. brunna < PGm.
*brunna(n). The geminate is traditionally explained from the zero grade of an
enlarging en-suffix (*brun-n- beside *brun-en-).
This word for 'well' might in origin be a verbal noun to a verb for ‘to bubble up,
move heavily', of water, etc., as attested in Lat. fervō, -eō ‘to seethe, boil', dē-fru-tum
'boiled down must, must-sap' < *bher-u-, *b³r-u-. Some have also seen the element
*-u- in popúvoμal. Other Greek words for 'well' may be inherited too: кpouvós
and ►кpývη. An innovation is лŋуý, -αí ‘fountain-head, water(s)'.
opńv, -evóc [f.] ‘midriff', also as the seat of mental activity, ‘sense, soul, spirit, mind,
heart' vel sim. (II.). <IE? *brēn, *bhren->
•VAR Plur. oppέveç, -ɛvwv, dat. also -aσí (OAtt. epigr. VIª, Pi.).
•COMP pεvoßλαẞns ‘mentally injured, insane' (Hdt., Eup. etc.), opεvýpηs ‘sound of
mind' (Hdt., etc.), µετáôpevov [n.] ‘which is behind the midriff, the upper part of
the back, the back' (mostly epic since Il.). Ablauting -oppwv enjoyed extreme
productivity, e.g. äppwv 'out of one's mind, foolish' (II.) whence aopaívw, ȧqpovéw,
ȧppoσúvη etc., εüqpwv, epic εüqpwv 'with a cheerful mind, happy, pleasing, friendly'
(Il.), whence ɛvopaívoµaɩ, -aívw, έüqpovéwv (ptc.), ɛúópoσúvŋ, etc.; on ►ɛópóvŋ
‘night', see s.v.; лрóжpшv ‘of one's own accord, inclined, benevolent' (Il., epic poet.),
fem. лpóópɑσσɑ after έkaσσa (Hom.); on σwopwv see ▶owç.
●DER 1. Õpεv-ĬTɩç (scil. vóσos) [f.] 'mental disease, insanity, encephalitis”, -ɩɩkóç
(medic., Hp., etc.). -iτiάw, -iτíaσiç, -itíłw, -itioµós (late). 2. opɛv-ów. [v.] 'to bring to
sense, instruct, inform' (trag., etc.), whence wσε voυеετησεɩ and -wτηрιov.
лapaívɛσis (H.).
3. oppovέw 'to be minded, think, be wise' (Il.), also with кατα-, ларα-, ouv- etc. It was
reanalyzed from denominatives like άopovéw, óµoppovéw, etc. (to ä-, òµóðpwv).
ppiiáogoua
1591
Thence oppóvημα (кατα- etc.), -ŋµατíaç, -ŋuatwdns, -nuatíšoµai, -ŋµatioµóc; -noiç
(кατα-, лapα- etc.), -ŋtikós. Backformation: 4. opóvɩç [f.] ‘insight, skill' (y 244, § 258,
Lyc., Opp.), beside more usual oppóvчμoç 'sensible, wise' (IA); PN Opovíun mother of
Battos, the founder of Cyrene (Hdt. 4, 154), -qµóτns, -чµwds, -чµεúðµai, -íµɛvµa,
-íμεvois (late).
With a suffix -T-: 5. PN Þpóvùs, -ɩv, -ıdı [m., f.] (y 282, P 40). 6. opovτíšw [v.] 'to
consider, reflect, worry, be concerned' (Thgn., Sapph.), also with έк-, σuv-, etc.;
possibly to opovéw on the model of εpaτí(w to paμαι, oаvτáčoμαι to qаívoμаι, etc.
If this analysis is correct, a back-formation to oppovτí(w is: 7. oppovτic, -ídos [f.]
'reflection, worry, concern' (Simon., Pi., A., etc.). Derivatives: oppóvtiora, -tiois,
-τɩστŃ, -τíστpiа, -τιστурιоν, -TIσTIкÓÇ. Isolated is oppavícεiv. σwopovičev (H.);
perhaps an old zero grade, like in ȧopaívw?
•ETYM For the n-stem, we may compare other body-parts like aúxηv, -έvos and
►ádýv, -évoc, and without ablaut σлλýу, -ŋvós. A remnant of the zero grade is
retained in the dat.pl. opaoi and in the yod-presents of the type άopaivw.
Semantically attractive is the connection with oppáσow ‘fence, block', but this would
presuppose that oppaк- (opay-) in oppáσow represents the zero grade of a nasalized.
*рɛук- (< IE *brenk-), and that a lengthened grade nom.sg. *bhrēnk was
incorporated into the n-stems after the loss of the final velar. A similar problem is
presented by ►σ´λýv versus σлλáyxva.
Connection of opηv 'mind' (vel sim.) with oppá oμa 'to think, consider', with the
act. (causative) aor. лέopadε, is semantically straightforward. A zero grade oppad-
with enlargement -S- has several parallels (see oppάoμα), so this etymology is
formally quite feasible. On opévɛç in Homer, see Ireland and Hull Glotta 53: 183-195.
On oppéves and oppóvηous, see Snell Glotta 55 (1977): 34-64.
opikes [?] · Xápaкɛç ‘pales' (H.). <PG?(V)►
•VAR Rather -ĭ-.
ETYM Acc. to Frisk, to opíσow (see oppi) in the sense “die starr Emporragenden".
Besides, cf. pópкɛç· Xápaкɛç (H.). Fur.: 173 follows Grošelj Živa Ant. 4 (1954): 166f. in
comparing ẞpíкɛλoɩ = iσtóлodes, i.e. the beams of a standing loom. This would
mean that the word is Pre-Greek.
qpĭµáσσoμaɩ [v.] 'to snort with lust for life, behave unruly', of horses, goats etc. (Hdt.,
Theoc., AP, Ael., Poll.). <PG(V)►
●var Att. -ttoµaɩ, aor. -žaσðαɩ.
•DER &pɩµayµós [m.] ‘snorting' (Lyc., D. H., Poll.).
•ETYM Expressive enlargement (after oppváσσoµ?) of opĭµáw ‘id.' (Opp.), further
unclear. The earlier connections with ON brími [m.] 'fire' and Skt. jarbhurīti ‘to
move heavily, stretch, sprawl' cannot be maintained. Similar words in similar
meanings, apart from oppváσσoμα, are ẞpчµáoµαι and σopĭyáw. Fur.: 173,
following Kuiper 1956: 215, assumes that ẞpчµáoμai (etc.) is a Pre-Greek variant.
This seems evident, cf. Fur.: 247: σöpiαí· ȧлελαí, ópyai from *σqpıƑaí, with variation
μ/F.

=== page 822 ===

1592
opíž, -ikós
opíž, -ikós [f.] ‘shiver, the shivering or ruffling of the sea-surface, the ruffle of hair’
(Il., epic poet., also Hp.). <PG?>>
•VAR Enlarged opíên [f.] ‘id.', also ‘frost-shiver, frost, shudder of fear' (IA).
⚫COMP ρколоóc 'causing shiver', úлóчрiкоç 'with a light shiver' (Hell.).
•DER oppiкía [f.] ‘fever-shiver' (Dsc.), -íaç [m.] name of a horse, referring to the
manes (Pi.), -aléos (Hp., AP, etc.). -wdns (Hp., Att. Hell.+), whence -wdía (late),
-wets (Hell. lyr.) ‘shivering, horrible, etc.'; also opрiкvóv. opiкαλéov, Sɛivóv, poßɛpóv
‘awesome, fearsome' (H.), cf. piкvós; qpižós ‘bristling', of hairs (Arist.), perhaps by
reanalysis of the first member in verbal governing compounds, such as opišokóµns,
opiaúxnv. Likewise probably in the PN Op₁oc, also as a personification of shivering
(AP).
Verbs: 1. opiσow 'to bristle up', of ears (of corn), hairs, etc., 'to shiver (of cold),
shudder (of fear)' (Il.), aor. opičα, perf. лéqрiкα, also with εл-, άνα-, μεтα-, еtc.
Thence opiкτóç (àлó-, éлí-) 'shuddering, causing shiver' (Hell.+). Backformation:
εлpí. ǹ èлavάστασiç τŵν кчμάτwν (EM). 2. Other sparse formations with the
same meaning: opiкá(w (Poet. de herb.; also Hp.?), -aσµóç [m.] (LXX), -táw (late
medic.) with -íaσɩç (sch.), -óoμal,-ów 'horrescō, horrificō' (gloss.), also oppí(w
(PMag. Osl.). See also ▸opíкɛç.
⚫ETYM Without certain agreement outside Greek. The word may well be Pre-Greek.
poov on.
opovτi w →opýv.
opoñdos [adj.] 'gone away, disappeared, vanished, lost', only predicatively (Antipho 5,
29, trag., Ar., late prose). <GR>
ETYM Throug shift of aspiration from *лрó-hodos, a hypostasis from лрò ódov
'further on the road', thus A 382: лрò ódou έуévovto 'they came further on the road';
compare Go. fram-wigis 'continuous'.
opoupá [f.] 'watch, custody, guard, garrison, guarded place, prison' (IA). <GR>
•VAR Ion. -ń.
•COMP oppoúpapxos [m.] 'commander of a q.' (Att., etc.), -ápxns (Them.), whence
-apxía, -apxéw (X., Hell.+). Frequently as a second member, e.g. the hypostasis
Euopoupos 'on guard, belonging to the watch, in custody, occupied, captive' (X.,
Decr. apud D., Plb., etc.), -opovpέw ‘to be on guard, keep watch' (Th., D. C.), 'to be
captive' (late). Besides also oppoupós [m.] 'watcher, warden', plur. ‘garrison' (Att.,
Epid.); “povpós name of an official (Ion., Thess. IIIª), PN IIpwpos (Cyren.; Paus., D.
S., etc.).
●DER 1. poup-ís (vaus) ‘look-out ship' (Att. inscr., Th., X.). 2. opoúp-tov [n.]
'fortress, garrison' (Att.), 'prison' (Pl. Ax. 366a), Cret. (IIª) opwpιov. 3. -IKÓS
'belonging to watch, garrison' (Hell. inscr., D. C.). 4. -útŋs [m.] a military function
(pap. IVP). 5. poup-έw [v.] 'to be on guard, keep watch, guard, keep' (IA), also with
лара- еtc.; cf. on uppoupos above; thence -nuα (trag.), -nois, -ηtós, -ntikós, -ntip,
-nτwp (late).
pptiyw
1593
⚫ETYM Through shift of aspiration from *лpo-hoрá and *лрo-hopóc, compounds of
old verbal nouns meaning 'to see'; see opáw with further details on the
morphology.
qpváσσoµai [v.] 'to whinny for lust for life, sniff, behave impatiently', of horses, 'to be
wanton', of men (Hell.+). <PG?>
•VAR -άσow LXX, Att. -áτтоμαι (кατα-).
•DER ôpúayµa [n.] ‘the whinnying, sniffing' (A., S., X.), also of a wild boar (Opp.),
'wanton behaviour' (late prose), -aуµατíaç 'wanton' (Plu.), лоç ~ as an explanation
of лεdaopiστýs (H.); -ayµós ‘id.' (D. S.), œpvαуãoσέµvako (tpóño) of Bdelycleon
(Ar. V. 135), -áktŋs ïñños (D. L.).
•ETYM Expressive formation, like the synonym pчµáσσoµαι. Frisk suggests that
there were possibly old contaminations, and adduces Güntert 1914: 160, who suggests
a transfomation of opчµáσσoμαι after púaž (instead of *pváσσoμai). Yet, I am very
reluctant to assume such contaminations. The word may well be Pre-Greek.
opчyíλos [m.] name of an unknown bird (Ar. Av. 763 and 875), maybe 'chaffinch' =
Lat. fringilla, or a kind of heron, 'cattle egret'. <?>
ETYM The uncertain identification renders etymologizing difficult. Some similarity
in form is found in Lat. fringilla 'finch' or 'sparrow', and in Slavic, Ru. bergléz
'goldfinch'; but it remains uncertain whether they are cognate, and they may as well
be onomatopoeic formations. Benton JHS 81 (1961): 44ff., referring to the association
with Opú and the Phrygian god Sabazios in Ar., quite differently explains oppuyíλos
as "the small Phrygian", i.e. 'the small foreign slave'.
opúyw [v.] 'to roast, dry, fry' (IA). <?>
•VAR Late also oppúσσw, -Tτw; aor. pūžai, pass. opу×¤ñαι, óñуñvαι, fut. opúчw,
perf. med. εopvyμai.
•COMP Also with кaτα-, лɛρɩ- etc.
DER 1. púyavov, mostly pl. -ava [n.] 'small dry pieces of wood, dry twigs,
brushwood, fuel (IA), diminutives -ávov (Dsc.) and -avíc (Euşt.); -avíτηs
(кáλaµoç) 'fit for fuel (pap. IIIª), -avīτıç (üλŋ) ‘id.' (Hld.); -αvɩкós ‘of a dry
brushwood' (Thphr. etc.), -avwdns 'of/like brushwood' (Thphr., Dsc.); -avíčw [v.] 'to
gather (p.' (Poll.), -avσµós [m.] ‘the gathering of ‹p.' (Th.), -añσǹs [m.] (late),
-avíστpia [f.] (Ar.) 'brushwood-gatherer'. 2. Opúу-ετpov [n.] 'vessel or implement
for roasting' (Lex Solon. apud Poll., H.). 3. -ɛús [m.] ‘id.', also 'roaster' (Theopomp.
Com., Poll.); hence -ɛúw = opúyw (Poll.). 4. opvyía. ǹ opúyovσa, opúyios. Enpós
'dry' (H.), opúytov [n.] 'brushwood, firewood' (LXX), 'place for roasting' (EM). 5.
úvóv. кañol ‘burning' (H.). 6. œpvyívda лaíεɩ 'to play with roasted beans'
(Poll., H.). 7. épû\ɩç [f.] 'the roasting, parchedness' (late). 8. opuкtós ‘roasteď (Sor.),
as a msc. noun 'fire, torch, fire-signal' (A., Th. etc.), opʊкtwpós [m.] 'watcher of fire-
signals', whence -wpia, -wpέw (A., Th., E., Ar. etc.), -wptov [n.] 'post of a fire-
watcher, signal-station' (Arist., Plu., Hdn.); opυктóç (scil. кúаuoc) [m.] 'roasted
beans used as lots' (Plu.), used for voting (instead of a чños) (Poll., EM, Suid.);
opuкtoí [m.pl.] ‘small fish for frying' (com. IVª), opuкtά. Eŋpà ix¤údia εútελñ
'cheap dry fish' (H.); opposite εчητoí 'fish for cooking'.

=== page 823 ===

1594
puvn
⚫ETYM Without exact agreement outside Greek. A different vocalism is found in Lat.
frīgō, -ere 'to roast', but it cannot be reconciled with opúyw in a regular way. Unless
the Latin word was borrowed from Greek via an intermediate language (where
unrounding must have taken place), both languages could have borrowed the word
from a third party.
œpúvŋ [f.] ‘toad, frog' (Arist., Timae., Nic., Babr., etc.). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR opūvos [m., f.], also opoūvos (PMag. Osl.).
●COMP &puvoλóyos (-λóxos) [m.] ‘kind of consacration' (Arist.), -´oëεĩov [n.] ‘toad-
shaped fire-bowl' (Boeot.), -εids 'toad-like' (Arist.).
=
⚫DER Oppuvikós 'toad-like' (late medic.); plant-naine opúvov [n.] = лоτíрpιov (Dsc.),
ẞaτpáxιov (Ps.-Dsc.); œpuvítηs name of a precious stone (late). PN Ôpúv-1X0s,
-ikidŋs, -iwv, -wvdas etc.; PN Øpuvý (of a hetaere).
•ETYM If referring to the color, opúvη, œpuvos might be identical in origin with
Germanic 'brown', as in OHG brūn, etc. < PIE *bruH-n-o-. With reduplication,
compare Skt. babhrú- 'red-brown, brown', also designation of a big kind of
ichneumon, which agrees with the wide-spread name of the beaver: Av. baßra-,
baẞri-, Lat. fiber, OHG bibar, Lith. bēbras, bebrus, etc. < PIE *bhebhru-, *bhebhro-. On
the many vacillating names for the toad and the frog, see ẞáτpaxos. However, the
variation between oppuv- and oppouv- rather points to a Pre-Greek word.
Qúyɛov [n.] 'tumour of the glands, especially in the groin and armpit' (Gal.). <?>
•VAR -Opov (Ruf. apud Orib., Cels.).
⚫ETYM Possibly from *λúy-ελov, with dissimilation and change of suffix to -q\v\
in oivóqλuč, -qλuyos [m., f.] 'winedrunk, winedrinker', prop. 'gushing or bubbling
with wine' (Hp., X., Arist. etc.), whence -oλuyía 'drunkenness' (X. etc.), -pλvyέw 'to
be drunk' (LXX); cf. ►λúктαiva, oλúw 'to be full of juice'.
quyn, qua = qúy.
QŨкoç [n.] 'seaweed' (I 7, Alcm., Thphr., etc.), 'red make-up', prepared from seaweed
(Ar. fr. 320, 5, Theoc., etc.). <LW Sem.>>
•COMP Quкoyɛíτwv 'neighbour of the seaweed', epithet of Priapos (AP); äquкa.
ȧкαλλúmστα 'without cosmetics' (H.).
●DER 1. quкíov [n.] ‘alga, seaweed' (Pl., Arist., Delos IVa etc.), mostly plur. -ía, also
fish-name (AP, Orib.), cf. qúкns; ‘make-up, make-up-box' (Luc., Them., Delos IIIª),
QUкIOQάyou 'seawead-eater', of fishes (Arist.); Quкiwdns = quкwdns (sch.). 2. QUк-
ápɩov = qñкoç (H.), see äquкa, whence -api\w 'to make-up' (sch.). 3. qúk-ns [m.], -ís
[f.] (Arist., com. IVª etc.), also -ýv (-ns LSJ) [m.] (Diph. Siph. apud Ath.) name of a
fish, probably 'wrasse, Labrus', after its habitat and its food, -ídiov [n.] (AP, pap.
IIIª). 4. quk-ítns (late), fem. -ītis (Plin.) name of a stone, after the color. 5. Quк-wdns
'full of seaweed, seaweed-like' (Arist., Thphr., Dsc.), -tóɛts 'full of seaweed' (Y 693,
Theoc.), rather with metrically conditioned -tóεç than from Quкíov. 6. OÚKLOS
epithet of Poseidon (Myconos II³). 7. Quкóодαι [v.] 'to be stuffed with seaweed' (D.
S.), 'to make oneself up' (Plu.).
1595
⚫ETYM Loanword from Semitic; cf. Hebr. pük 'eye-rouge'. The meaning 'make-up' is
therefore primary for quкoç, too; hence 'seaweed'. Borrowed as Lat. fūcus 'rouge,
purple, make-up'.
qúlaž, -akos [m., f.] 'watcher, guardian, protector' (Il.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Also secondarily quλaкós (accent of the agent nouns) [m.] ‘id.' ( 566, Ion.
poet.), PN Dúλaкoç (Hom.).
•COMP oiкoqúλa& 'house-guard' (A., etc.), back-formation to quλáσow; also with
avv-, úno- etc. (to ouv-, ino-pu入áoow).
•DER 1. Fem. quλak-íç, -ídos (лpo-) ‘female guard' (Pl.), ~ vaûç ‘guardship' (Th., D.
S.), -100a [f.] (LXX). 2. quλaкý [f.] 'watch, custody, vigilance, guard-post, garrison'
(Il.), probably back-formation to quλáσow; with άντ-, лро-, ларα- from ávɩɩ-
quλáσow, etc.
=
In part referring to quλaкý: 3. qvλak-ía [f.] Quλaкń (pap. III-IVP), beside
compounds like άpxi-, owµato-qvlakía (inscr., D. S.). 4. qvlák-tov [n.] ‘watch-
house, -tower' (pap. etc.), often in compounds, e.g. óлλoquλáкiov ‘arsenal' (Str.) to
óñλoqúλa§. 5. -ɛov [n.] ‘id.', also ‘guard-post, watch' (Plb.); also σɩoqv\aketov [n.]
'granary' (Suid.), to oitoqúlakeç. 6. -ɛía [f.] 'protection, amulet' (Poet. de herb.,
gloss.), as if from *-ɛúw, if not for -ía; thus certainly in dɛoµoqvλakɛía [f.] ‘service as
a jailer' (pap.), to бɛσμочúλаž, -αкéw. 7. qvλαк-ñɛç [m.pl.] 'watchmen' (Opp.),
verse-final metrical enlargement. 8. -íτns [m.] 'police-officer, gendarme' (Hell. pap.
and inscr.), -ITEúw 'to serve as a q.', -ITкóv 'police-tax' (Hell. pap.), also with лapα-,
ouv-, åpxı- (Hell.+); fem. -ĭτıç Pythagoraic designation of the number seven
(Nicom.). 9. -tστns in Lat. phylacista [m.] 'dungeon-master' (Plaut., metr. uncertain).
10. -кós prudent, careful' (Pl.), with xpɛo- (inscr.), etc.
Denominative verb: 11. Quláσow, Att. -ττw 'to watch, keep, protect', med. 'to beware'
(II.), also with Siα-, ларα-, лро- еtc. Several derivatives: quλaкτñpεç [pl.] 'watchmen'
(II.), τnpios 'protecting' (Pl.), -τnрioν (лpo-) [n.] 'watch-house, -tower, means of
protection, amulet' (IA), quλαктηрíα. лаvvʊxíç (H.), quλaкτηpiášoµai to be
provided with an amulet' PMag. Par., qvlak-twp [m.] 'watcher' (Eg, epigr. Iª-I³,
Nonn.), -τpov [n.] ‘police-tax' (pap. IIP), -taɩ [m.pl.] official in Cumae (Plu.), -TIкÓS
(лρо-, §α-, лαрα-) ‘guarding, prudent, careful' (X., Arist., Plb. etc.), -ğıç [f.] ‘custody,
security' (S.Fr. 432, E. etc.), -уµа (лpo-) [n.] ‘commandment, protection' (LXX etc.).
12. quλaкíšw ‘to take in custody, throw into prison' (LXX, Act. Ap.). 13. -qvλakéw,
productive to compounds in -qúλaž, e.g. tɛɩxoquλaкéw 'to guard the wall' (D. H.,
Plu. etc.) from tяxoчúλα (Hdt., Plu. etc.).
⚫ETYM Without a convincing etymology. As the suffix -a indicates, the word may
well be Pre-Greek.
Quλn [f.] as an administrative notion ‘tribe, group of tribes, community', thence also
'army-unit furnished by a group of tribes or community' (IA). <IE *b¹h₂u- ‘arise,
be', *bhu-(s)l-►
•VAR QUλov [n.] 'tribe, family, generation, kind' (Il.).
•COMP quloẞaoεús 'principal of a phyle' (Arist., inscr. etc.), quloкpivέw [v.] 'to
make tribal distinctions, select by phyle' (Th., Arist. etc.), as if from *quλokpĭvýs.

=== page 824 ===

1596
pidia
Often as a second member, е.g. лáμλoç 'consisting of all races' (Pl., Ar., etc.),
whence ITauquλía [f.] land on the coast of Asia Minor (Hellenized foreign word?),
Пάuovo [m.pl.] name of one of the Dorian phylae (Hdt., Cos, Epid., Argos);
τpípulos 'consisting of three phyles, amounting to three phyles' (Hdt., D. H.),
Tpiquía [f.] coastal land of Elis.
●DER 1. QUλÉTŋS [m.] 'member of (one and the same) phyle, fellow-tribesman' (Att.),
σuμ- 'id.' (Methymna, 1 Ep. Thess.), from quλov, but referring to quλn; thence quλ-
ɛtɩkós [adj.] ‘belonging to a phyle-member, consisting of phyle-members' (Pl., Arist.,
etc.), -εTεúw [V.] 'to make quλéτηç, to adopt into the phyle' (Arist.); -ÉTIÇ έkkÀŋoia =
Lat. comitia tributa (App.). 2. qúlio Bɛoí 'the gods of the phyle' (Poll.). 3. -wdns
'consisting of several quλa' (D. S.). Also PNs, e.g. qvλodáµaç, Þúλaç, Þvλɛúç.
⚫ETYM Old derivative from quvat, with a suffix -(s)l-. For further etymology, see
▶ púouan.
Quλía [f.] name of a tree, probably a kind of wild olive (ε 477 = Nonn. 5, 474 beside
λain, Paus. 2, 32, 10 beside кóτɩvоç and λatoç; Philostr. beside кóпvоç, Ammon.
Diff.); beside εldoç ȧypiɛλaíaç, H. also mentions the meaning (εldoç) ouкñs and
eidos dévdpov öµolov rpívw. <?▷
•VAR Ion. -ín.
●Der Þvλiadwv, -dóvoç name of a town in Phthiotis (IG 9(2), 205: 13).
⚫ETYM Without etymology. Fur.: 367 compares quλúкη, also quλíкη (v.l. Thphr. HP
1, 9, 3).
qúľov [n.] ‘leaf (II.), also as a designation of plants with conspicuous leaves, and of
leaflike parts of plants (Hp., Thphr., Dsc., pap.). <IE *bhel-, blh₂- (?) ‘leaf, blossom'>
•COMP qu\\ocópos ‘bearing leaves' (Pi., etc.), τpíqulov [n.] 'trefoil, clover' (IA),
substantivized from τpíquλλoç 'three-leaved' (Dsc., H.).
●DER 1. Diminutive qú\\-tov [n.] (Pl. Com. etc.), -ápiov [n.] (Dsc. etc.), also leaf-
ornament' (Delos IIª). 2. quλλ-áç, -ádos [f.] heap of leaves, foliage, leafy grove'
(Hdt., trag., D. S., Str. etc.), adjective ‘leafy' (Nonn.), also name of the island Samos.
3. qvλλ-íç, -ído¢ [f.] 'foliage' (Gp.), also = -īτıç (Ps.-Dsc.). 4. quλλiác. έк λaxávwv
drótpiµµá ti okevašóµevov. ¿kaλeĭto dè Opĩa (H.). 5. qv\\-ɛĩa [n.pl.] ‘herbs' (Ar.). 6.
-ítns (åywv) = -ívns (sch.), -ītis [f.] plant-name 'hart's tongue' (Dsc.). 7. -ɩvos ‘made
of leaves' (Theoc., Luc.), -ívηs (ȧyúv) [m.] 'contest where the prize consists of a
wreath' (Poll., H.), also -tvaños ȧyóv (EM). 8. quλλ-кóç belonging to a leaf, leaf-
like' (Thphr.). 9. -wdns ‘id.' (Thphr.). 10. month name -ɩкós (Thessal.), -twv (Iasos).
Verbs: 11. qu\\-óoμal [v.] 'to be dressed with leaves' (Hp.), -óµaτα [n.pl.] ‘foliage'
(D. S.). 12. qvλλ-íw [v.] 'to defoliate' (Gp.), with ảлo- ‘id.' (Thphr. etc.), with μ- 'to
engraft', -ɩσµós (Gp.), with έлɩ- 'to glean in a vineyard', metaphorically of a petty job
(LXX), -íç gleaned grape' (LXX, AP), metaphorically of the verses of epigones (Ar.).
13. qvλλá¶w. frondesco (gloss.). 14. qvλλ-táw in -tówσa [ptc.pl.f.] 'to run to leaf
(without fruit)' (Arat.). 15. quλλɛiv. ȧdoλɛσxɛïv (H.), of useless bragging, cf. 14.
⚫ETYM Possibly connected to Lat. folium 'leaf as PIE *bol-io-, though the vowels do
not seem to match. Vine 1999b: 564ff. explains this by assuming *o > u (Cowgill's
Law) in the specific environment *-oli- > *-uli̟-. Quite a different formation with
púouar
1597
suffix -t- is found in Germanic, Tocharian and Celtic: OHG blat, MoHG Blatt, etc.,
ToA pält, ToB pilta ‘leaf, all with zero-grade, and Celt., e.g. MIr. bláth 'blossom,
flower' < *b¹lō-tu-, OHG bluot 'flowering, blossom', etc. with full grade. See Beekes
1990: 375-381. A laryngeal may have been lost before yod in PIE *bol(H)-io-, which
would enable comparison with the root *blh₂-.
qúloлiç, -ɩɗoç [f.] 'battle' (Il., epic; thence also in S., Ar., Theoc.). <PG>
•VAR Acc. -18a, but also -tv.
•ETYM Epic word only, without etymology. In antiquity, it was interpreted as a
compound from qulov and Ŏлα (öσσα) 'voice', which convinces neither
semantically nor formally (one would have expected *quλwлç). For understandable
reasons, modern scholars compare quλov too, with different interpretations of the
second member: to op- in Lat. ops, opus; to öлɩç 'bad look', i.e. 'enmity'; from *quλo-
λолç to Аéлw 'thrash' (see Frisk); all are quite hypothetic. The length of the ō can be
metrically conditioned. No doubt a Pre-Greek word (but the comparisons in Fur.:
163 are not convincing).
pvEndic → peÚyw.
qúoдa [v.] intr. med. 'to grow, arise, spring up, become', perf. (and aor.) 'to exist or
be endowed by nature, be there', trans. act. (factitive) ‘to make grow, beget, bring
forth' (Il.). IE beh₂u- 'grow, arise, be'>
•VAR qúw (εuqúvw Hdn. Gr.), aor.intr. Quvai, late quñval, trans. Quoat (Il.), fut.
qúσoμai, late quησoμa, qúow, perf. intr. лéqŨкα, epic also зpl. лεчúασɩ, рtc.
лεчwταç, etc.
DIAL Myc. pu-te, pu-te-re /puter-es/, pu-ta-ri-ja (interpretation not certain).
•COMP Very often with prefix, e.g. ÈK-, ÈK-, ÈTɩ-, ŋñεpɩ-, époσ-, ovv-. As a first member
in ►quoi oos.
•DER 1. Quń, Dor. -á [f.] 'growth, stature, nature, being' (Il., epic poet., also late
prose); also from the prefixed verbs, e.g. Siaquý ‘joint, space between, layer, etc.' (Pl.,
X., Thphr., etc.); as a second member -qués, e.g. μεуaλo-qns of a great, noble
nature' (Hell.+), -quia [f.] (lamb. etc.); also е.g. лроσчуns 'grown, attached, fitting'
(Od.); as a noun fem. -qvác, e.g. áлoqváç, -ádos ‘outgrowth, appendage' (Hp.,
Arist., Thphr.); hence the simplex qúoç. qútevµa, yévvnµa (H.).
2. qчµa [n.] 'growth, tumour, swelling' (IA, etc.), also čк-, лapá-, лpóσ-, from
έкôuvaɩ, etc. Thence -µáτov, -μаtías, -µaτwdns, -μаτóðμαι (Нp.). 3. qútλŋ, Dor -a
[f.] ‘lineage, race' (Pi., AP, Orph.), -tλov [n.] ‘plant' (epigr. Nicomedia); probably for
-0λn, -0λov; furthermore qúτpa- qúoiç, oi dè quτńpiα (H.). 4. qúσiç [f.] ‘growth,
character, descent, nature, being, etc.' (K 303), also άлó-, εк-, σúμ-, etc. from
άлoчõvαɩ, etc.; as a first member e.g. in quoioλóуos [m.] 'naturalist, natural
philosopher', -λoyía, -Aoyέw, -Aoyıkóç (Arist., etc.). Hence quσ-iкóç belonging to
nature, naturalist, physical, physician' (X. Mem. 3, 9, 1, Arist., etc.), quos 'fit for
growing, breeding' (Thphr.), -tóoµaɩ [v.] in reqvoɩwµévos rooted' (Arist.), -íwμa,
-iwois 'natural tendency, habitude' (Hell.+); also έµqvotów [v.] ‘to implant, infuse,
inspire' (Hp., X., LXX etc.) (see ►qũσa)? 5. qùτós 'grown by nature' (Pi.), 'planted'
(LXX), in compounds, e.g. vɛóquτos 'newly planted' (Ar. Fr. 828, LXX, Hell.+); also

=== page 825 ===

1598
Qúρkoç
act. in λató-quτos etc. (A. etc.); from the prefixed verbs, e.g. oúμτoç 'grown
together with, grown on, overgrown, innate' (Pi., IA).
6. qutóv [n.] ‘growth, plant' (II.). Hence several derivatives: qut-ás [f.] = -óv (Plu.),
diminutive -áptov [n.] (Ar. Byz., Ath. etc.), -tos 'begetting' (late), -кóç 'belonging to
plants' (Arist. etc.), -talo opxo (inscr. IVª), -wdns ‘plant-like' (Erot.), -wv, -wvos
[m.] 'plantation' (Hdn.), -ɛúw ‘to plant, plan' (Od.), also diα-, έлɩ-, кatα-, лɑpɑ-, etc.
Thence -ɛía, - - - - -εUTÝ, ετкpov, -EUTIкÓç. With
enlargement : quτaλ-tá, Ion. -in [f.] 'plantation, orchard, vineyard' (Il., Hell.),
'time of plantation' (Hp., Gal.), Duráλios epithet of Poseidon, of Zeus, etc. (Corn.,
Orph., Poll.), Qutaλída [m.pl.] Attic lineage with the eponym Øútaλoç. With a
combination of suffixes quτáλuoç, epithet of parents, of Poseidon, of Zeus, etc.
begetting, feeding, by birth' (trag., Hell.+); formation unclear. 7. See ►quλń, -ov,
and 8. ►QĭTV.
⚫ETYM The whole verbal system is built on the primary intransitive aorist opuvat,
quv. As an innovation, the factitive sigmatic aorist qñσaɩ, qñσa arose, after σtηv :
čotnoa, ëßny : ëßŋσα, dvv: εdvσa, etc. Then, the presentic and future forms qúoμal,
qúw, qúσoμα, qúow followed.
The transitive/factitive forms have always been much less prominent than the old
intransitive ones. The perfect, though in principle old, was influenced by the aorist,
too. Several of the nouns may have PIE roots, too. Cognates of the aorist &qu: Skt.
ábhūt 'he became' < PIE *h,é-b¹uh₂-t with metathesis of *bhu- to *buh₂-, OCS aor.
23sg. by, OLith. bu, Lat. fui (OLat. fui), etc. The perfect лévêα, лɛúaσɩ agrees with
Skt. babhuva, but in both cases we have probably innovations against older Av.
buuāuua < PIIr. *bhubhaHua. Cognate forms or parallel formations of the nouns:
quμa = Skt. bhúman- [n.] 'earth, world, being', Alb. bimë 'plant'; quτóv = Olr. both
'cabin', all with a short й from *bhu-to-, as against the long vowel in Skt. bhūtá- [n.]
‘being, creature, past time' (after metathesis), Ru. byt ‘being, way of life'. Further,
qúois (with --) stands beside Skt. bhūtí-, bhúti- 'prosperity, power, riches'.
Kortlandt demonstrated that the root had the form *beh₂u-, Kortlandt 1975: 3;
Kortlandt Ériu 37 (1986): 90f.; a summary in Lubotsky 1995: 224ff.
pÚprog → tÚpyos.
pupw [v.] 'to mingle, confuse, mix up, wet, besmear' (Hom.). <PG?>
•VAR Ipf. qupov (Il.), aor.subj. qúpow (σ 21), inf. qúpσal (A. R.), ptc.med.
qupσáµevos (Nic.), pass. ¿úðηv (A. [lyr.], LXX), late έqúpηy (J., Luc.), ind. 3sg.
qûpɛ (AP), ptc. qúpas (Luc.), fut. qúpow (Pi.), perf. med. ïéqvpµaɩ, especially ptc.
nequpµévos (Od.), with fut. лɛœúpoɛσðaɩ (Pi.).
•COMP Also with ovv-, àva-, έv-, etc.
⚫DER Deverbative qupáw 'to mix (up), knead, stir in' (IA), aor. qupãσal, Ion. -ñσaɩ,
-áσaσðaι, -ñσaσðaɩ, -aðñvai, -ŋ³ñvaɩ, fut. -άow, -ñow, perf. med. лɛqúpāµai, -ŋµai;
act.inf. -aкéval (Cic.); also with σuv-, àva-, épo- etc.
From qúpw: 1. qúpdŋy [adv.] ‘mingled, mixed up' (A., S., X. Plb., etc.), Dor. -Sāv (S.
[lyr.]). 2. qúpµa [n.] ‘slime, filth, dung' (Nic.). 3. -µós [m.] 'mixture, confusion,
disorder' (D. S., M. Ant. etc.); hencе чурμãται· лτáруʊται (H.)? 4. qúρ-σiç [f.] 'the
Quσa
1599
mixing (up)' (sch.), -σчos ‘mixed up'?, ‘kneadable'? (Nic.). 5. qupτós as a simplex in
quoσ. ... лεчpμεvo (H.), in compounds, e.g. aчóуpτos (Plb., Posid.),
aiµatóquptos (AP) 'besmeared with blood'; hence quptítnc (-ýtnc cod.). olvos (H.),
qvptíšeσðal. tò raíšeiv ovveotpaµ<µ>évols qupoïs toĩs iµatíois (H.). 6. In qupó-
Xpwμos 'mixed color, dirt-color' vel sim., of a cow (pap. IIP), shortened qupá, of Bouc
(pap. IVP); also qu̟poï· μoλúvε, þu̟лоï'soils, defiles' (H.).
From qupáw: 1. чúραµа (лρo-, εu-) [n.] 'mix, dough' (com. IVª, Arist., Hell.+),
-aμatiкá = kovaτɩкá 'plastering-work' (late). 2. -aσıç, -ŋσiç [f.] ‘mixture' (LXX, late
medic.), -ατýs [m.] “mixer”, metaphorically ‘untidy accountant' (Cic., gloss.),
meaning doubtful (inscr. Ephesus), -atóç ‘kneadeď (Sor.).
⚫ETYM Frisk still assumes a yod-present *pup-iw as a derivative of a noun qv-p-, or a
zero grade verbal stem œép- beside a hypothetical full grade *qɛp-. Yet, such ablaut is
now generally abandoned for Greek. An IE etymology seems impossible, so it is
more probably a Pre-Greek word (note the semantic sphere). Formally, qúpw might
be connected with лоpoúpw 'to well up, heave', which could be reduplicated, but
the semantics would be unclear; semantically, it could be connected with
►popúvoμal, which would also point to irregular ablaut.
qũʊa [f.] ‘breath', bellows' (mostly pl.), 'bladder, flatulence' (II.), also metaphorically
of a fire gushing forth (h. Merc. 114), 'crater of a volcano' (Str.); name of a fish in the
Nile (Str., Ath.), cf. below on qúoaλoç. <PG?>
•VAR Acc. -v (Suid.).
●COMP quσoeidŃs ‘bladder-like' (sch.), äquoos 'without flatulence' (medic.).
●DER 1. Diminutive quo-ápiov [n.] ‘small bladder' (late medic.). 2. adjectives -wdŋs
‘flatulent, windy' (Hp., Pl., Arist. etc.), -aλéos ‘windy' (Cerc., Nonn.). 3. -aλoç [m.]
'kind of toad' (Luc.), 'Tetrodon' (Ael.), 'kind of whale' (Opp., Ael.). 4. -aλλiç, -ídoç
[f.] 'bladder, water-bubble' (Luc.), 'kind of pipe' (Ar.), 'pill' (late), also name of a
plant (Ps.-Dsc. etc.), after the blather-like fruit-cover. 5. qñσty, -tyyos [f.] 'stalk of a
garlic, garlic (Hp., Thphr. etc.), also 'bladder' (Poll.); quoiyуióμαι [v.] in
reqvoiyyɩwµévos ‘heated by garlic' (Ar.). 6. qúʊêŋ [f.] ‘intestine, sausage' (com.),
diminutive tov (gloss.), Þúσкwv [m.] “fat-belly”, nickname (Alc. etc.); -a [f.]
'bladder, weal on the hand' (sch.). 7. qvotǹ µãša ‘inflated cake, buffer' (Ar., AP etc.),
also as a noun; accent after Hdn. Gr. 8. Þňσádɛta [f.] name of a source in Argos
(Call.), -tóεv 'from '. (Antim.). 9. denominative verbs: a. quoάw 'to blow, inflate,
sniff (II.), aor. quoñσal, etc., often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, diα-, εк-, έv-. Thence -ŋua
(åva-, ¿к-, ¿v-) [n.] ‘blowing, breath, wind, windiness' (IA), -ŋµátiov (Arr.), ¿µ-
qvo-nµatwdns (Gal.), -ŋois (åva-, etc.) [f.] 'the blowing, etc.' (Hell.+), -ŋtýp [m.]
'blowpipe, bellows' (Hdt., Arist. etc.), -ŋtýpiov (-āt-) [n.] ‘pipe' (Ar. etc.), -ntýs (¿v-,
λолαбo-) [m.] 'blower' (Man., Dsc. etc.), -ŋtopes àσkoí ‘bellows' (Nonn.), -östikós
(εv-) 'inflating' (Hp., Arist. etc.). b. qvσtáw ‘id.' (epic poet. Il.), also with ảva-, ¿ê-,
ptc. quσiówv etc., a metrical transformation of quoάw. Thence -íaµa [n.] ‘breathing,
snorting' (A.). c. quσióoμal, -ów 'to inflate' (Ep. Cor. etc.), quoiwois inflation' (Ep.
Cor., medic.); also εu-quotów? (see under qúoμa). Verbal nouns quσaoμó
(opposite àaouós), -чaσµós [m.] 'the blowing' (Arist.), -αкτηp. äptos rolós tis
лoлavádŋs (H.). As a first member in the governing compounds QvoiyvaƉoç “puff-

=== page 826 ===

1600
pirados, polyE
cheek", joking name of a frog (Batr.),-yvaléw (Tz.). See also on the intensive
►лoɩqúσσw (after the verbs in -úσow).
•ETYM Noun in -σă, but the exact root cannot be determined. As a pre-form, one
might assume qu-, quo-, qut- or Quк-, but none of these can be shown to have
existed in Greek. Comparisons are made with e.g. Arm. p'uk' 'breath, wind, fart',
plur. 'bellows' (but quσa cannot derive from *Quк-α), Skt. phūtkaroti “to make a
sound phut", 'to breathe, blow, etc.' (so quσa < *чυT-α). Further Skt. phuphusa- [n.]
'lung'. One may connect Lat. pustula 'bladder', OCS puxati 'blow', Ru. pyxáť' 'to
breathe heavily, cough' < *pous-, *pūs-, etc.
Although we may clearly start from IE material, the word may well have a Pre-Greek
origin; note e.g. the suffix of quσɩy, and quotý, “qúoki] (Þvoάdɛa is unclear). There
is hardly any evidence for PIE *bhus- (not in mentioned in Pok.); on *phus- (with a
phoneme ph- that is now abandoned), see Pok. 878.
qúσaloç, qñoɩy} →qñσa.
qvoiToos →Tɛlai.
piw=pÚouan.
qwyw [v.] 'to roast, fry' (Epich.). <IE *bheHg- ‘bake'>
•VAR qów (Stratt., Hp.), qwyvúw (Suid.), codd. -yúvw; qwyvúvať (Eust., EM),
Qúуvuται (Dsc.), aor. Eowka (Hp., Nic.), εowσa (Hp.), pass. έowxеηv, also with лpo-
(Dsc., Aret.), perf. med. (úло-)лεчшyμévos (Pherecr., Dsc.), лéqшσμαι (Hp.), verbal
adj. qwêτóc (Nic., Dsc.).
•DER qwyavov [n.] 'vessel for roasting barley' = opúyεtpov (Poll.), qw\is [f.] ‘the
roasting' (Gal.), qшкται [pl.] 'roasted barley-grains' (Luc.).
•ETYM May be compared with a Germanic verb for 'bake, roast' in ON baka, OHG
bahhan, pret. buoh, MoHG backen under an IE ablaut *bhoHg- : b¹Hg-. LIV²
reconstructs the root as *behg-.
Doubtful combinations with OHG baen, MoHG bähen 'to warm with covers' < IE
*bheh,-, MoE bath, MoHG Bad [n.] < PGm. *baþa- < IE bhh,-to- in Pok. 113.
qwïdes, qoïdes, qŵdes [f.pl.] ‘blister from burns' (Hippon., Hp., Ar., Diocl. Fr.).
<PG?>
⚫ETYM The basis seems to have been retained in póa. έžavеýµατa έv té̟ σáµatɩ (H.).
It recalls pavoιу, quσa; but the connection with a IE root *bu-, *b(h)eu- 'to
blow (up), swell' in Pok. 98ff. does not help for the Greek forms. Cf. also púкn.
Since IE origin is quite doubtful, is it perhaps Pre-Greek?
qwкη [f.] 'seal' (Od., Hdt., Ar.). <PG?►
•DER Qúкaiva [f.] a dolphin-like sea-animal, 'bottle nose dolphin?' (Arist.), after
páλλaiva; qwkoç kñtos Baλáσolov öμov ελivɩ 'sea-monster like a dolphin' (H.);
qwкic [f.] name of a fish (Gal.); also 'kind of pear' (Thphr., Ath.), after its shape?
⚫ETYM Isolated. The connection with quσa, mentioned by Frisk, makes little sense.
The word, designating a sea-animal, may well be Pre-Greek.
qwλɛós [m.] ‘lair, hole of wild animals' (Arist., Hell.+). ◄PG(S)►
!
pwvń
1601
•VAR Epic gen. -εto, dat.pl. -εtoïç (metrical lengthening), plur. also -ɛá (Nic.). Also
-ɛá [f.] (Arist.).
•DER 1. Diminutive (w)-ov [n.] (Poll.). 2. -ás, -áÔos lying in a lair” (Theoc., AP),
'consisting of a hole, full of holes' (Babr., Nonn.), also name of a mussel (Ath.). 3.
qwλ-íc, -ídos [f.] a fish, “hole-fish” (Arist.). 4. qwlaïdes. ỏotpákivá tiva ßpwµwdŋ
(H.). 5. -ɛwdns(?) ‘hole-like' (Plu.).
Verbs: 6. qwλɛúw [v.] ‘to live in a hole, hibernate' (Arist., Thphr., Theoc., Ph., Plu.,
etc.), also with v-, úлo-; owλ-ɛíα [f.] 'dwelling in a hole, hibernation', -ɛvσiç [f.] ‘id.'
(Ael.). 7. qwλ-έw ‘id.' (Arist.), qwλŋtýp. ¿ ¿v tậ aỷtậ kaƉešóµevos àɛí sitting at the
same place all the time' (H.), -ŋτηpiov [n.] 'place for secret assemblies' (Poll., H.). 8.
qwλášei. ¿µiqwlevɛi (H.).
•ETYM Formation like the synonymous ywλɛóç, ɛilɛós, beside owλɛά like otɛɛós to
-ɛá. Like ywλɛós, it is only attested in the post-classical period. Frisk mentions ON
ból < PGm. *bōla- [n.] ‘layer, nest of animals', OSw. böle [n.] < *bōlia- '‘beaverhut',
which he considers as a lengthened grade of ouλ-, but such ablaut schemes are now
rejected. The ending -ɛoç looks Pre-Greek; see Pre-Greek, suffixes 6. -αι/ɛ(1)-.
qpwvn [f.] 'sound of humans and animals, tone, voice, pronunciation, discourse,
speech, uttering' (II.). <IE *bhoh₂-neh, 'say, voice, sound'>>
•VAR Dor. -ά.
•COMP qwvaσkéw [v.] 'to train one's voice, i.e. to sound loudly, make much noise as
a speaker' (Pl., D., Arist., etc.), -aσkía [f.] (D., Thphr.), -aσкóç [m.] ‘master of speech
or songs' (late).
As a second member: óµóqwvos 'having the same voice or speech, homophonous'
(IA), -qwvéw [v.] (Hdt., Arist., etc.), -qwvía [f.] (Arist., etc.); σúµ-qwvoç ‘resounding
simultaneously, harmonious' (h. Merc.), whence -pwvéw, -qwvía (Att., etc.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutive owv-ápiov [n.] (com. IVª etc.), -íov [n.] (Arist.), -íç [f.] (Hdn.
Gr.). 2. adjectives -εç, Dor. -αɛç 'gifted with voice, sounding' = Lat. vocalis (Hes.,
Рi.), лоτɩшνεç 'capable of addressing' (1456), as if from *лoτɩ-qwvéw; -ikós (ovµ-)
=-TIкós (Hell.+).
3. Denominative verb *owváw, aor. Qwvãσa (Pi., also Sapph.), also in IA qwvñσaɩ
(II.), in Hom. лроσʊ-, µɛteqúvɛov, if need be also in -ɛɛ; but further owvέw ‘to sound,
raise one's voice, speak' (Dor., IA), very often with prefix, е.g. лроσ-, -, àνt-,
áva-, Sta-. The transition to the έw-class may have been favoured by the sound verbs
in -έw as well as the numerous denominatives (decompounds) of the type oμoqwvéw
(from óμóqwvoc).
From pwvéw (лpoσ-, εлɩ-, etc.): úvηµα (лроσ-, ávα-, εл-) [n.] ‘uttering, discourse'
(S., Hell.+), -nois (époʊ-, àvti-, ¿k-, etc.) [f.] ‘the sounding, speaking' (Hell.+), -itýc
(ảva-, àvti-, ¿ñ-) [m.] 'speaker, etc.' (late), -ŋτúpos 'belonging to discourse' (Str.
etc.), -istikós (rpoσ-, ávα-, εлɩ-) ‘belonging to voice, gifted with voice' (Hell.+).
•ETYM From the root of qui with o-grade; compare ON bøn, OE bēn < PGm.
*bōni 'question', Arm. ban 'word, speech'. Because the meaning of oqwvý ‘sound,
voice' is not identical to 'saying', Frisk prefers the connection with OCS zvone, Ru.
zvon 'sound', and the corresponding Alb. zë, Gheg zâ 'voice', from PIE *guono-
[m.]. Yet, this would require PIE *guōneh₂ for qwvý, a vocalism which the other

=== page 827 ===

1602
púp,-pós
languages do not show. Therefore, we may (with DELG) retain the connection with
onμí.
qwp, -pós [m.] 'thief (Hdt., Att.). <IE *bher- 'bear'>
●COMP άуaλματo-qwpāv [acc.] 'thief of statues, temple-robber' (Elis IV₁), on the
formation see Schwyzer: 451 and 563, also Sommer 1948: 68¹). Uncertain are
ȧлoчwpaç кλεлτaç and ïσqwpɛç· λŋotaí, kλéntai. Aáкwvɛç 'robbers, thieves' (H.).
■DER qwpá, Ion. -n [f.] 'theft' (h. Merc. 136, 385, Nic., Bion, Hell. inscr. and pap.);
qwpaw 'to search for a thief, catch a thief, metaph. 'to discover' (Att., Hell.+), aor.
-ãσai, fut. -άow, late perf. лɛóúpaкa, also with кατα-; back-formation qúpa [f.]
‘searching, tracking-down' (Phld., D. L., Aen. Tact.), or -ά, accent uncertain, see H.
qwpά• kλorý ….. qwpŋv dé tǹv épɛvvav. Also owpiãv = qwpāv (H.).
Especially as a juridical expression εл' avτоqúpu̟ = ¿ñ³ aúτñ îñ qwpα, originally
aúтoqwpw
'right at the theft', i.e. 'in the very act, overtly' (Att.); adjective avτóчwpoç 'self-
caught, self-disclosed' (S. Ant. 51, D. S., App.), to pwpáw; thus also kατάqwpoç
'disclosed, public' (late), to кaτaqwpáw; hencе лεрiqwpoc (εv-) '(easily) discovered'
(Plu.).
Further derivatives (from oop or qwpá): qwpios 'thievish, stolen', τà qúpia 'stolen
things', 'stealthy, secret' (Hell.+), τò cqwpiov also 'catch, discovery' (late), -εlov [n.]
'theft-penalty' (lit. pap.), -ídios ‘stolen' (AP, Max.); superl. opτatos (Sophr. 1, cod.
pwpó-).
⚫ETYM Old lengthened grade agent noun *b"ōr, lit. 'the bearer', to the IE verb 'to bear'
in qέpw, etc., identical with Lat. fūr, -ris [m.] ‘thief, and formally also with Arm.
burn 'hand, fist, force' (the n-stem is secondary like in otn 'foot', see ►лоúç).
Inherited oop was pushed back and replaced by the innovations кλwy and
(especially) kλéƒ™ŋs (already Il.); only the derivative qwpáw remained in use. An
other old word for 'thief is petrified in the poetic adj. ► τηüσɩoç.
qwpiaµóç [f.] ‘chest, trunk', e.g. for keeping clothes and laundry ( 228, 0 104, A. R. 3,
802), the gender is only visible in the latter attestation. ◄PG(V)►
•ETYM Isolated poetic word, connected by Eratosth. 4 with owplos (see ►qwp), and
in modern times derived from a verbal adj. *owpios ‘bearable' which could be
identical with Skt. bhāryá- ‘to be born'. The fomation, however, still remains to be
explained. Is it a folk-etymological adaptation of a loan word, such as kißwτóç, Lat.
cista, etc. (cf. Chantraine 1933: 133)? Fur.: 389 compares xwpiaµóç· кíστη (H.), which
seems to prove Pre-Greek origin.
qws, qwtós [m.] ‘man', in trag. also of heroes (Il., epic poet.). <IE? *beh₂- ‘shine', ?➤
ETYM Connected with Skt. bhás- [n.] light, splendour, power' by Brugmann-
Delbrück 1897-1916 2:1, 536, either as an original s-stem *beh₂-os (cf. on ►qάoc), or
from a t-stem IE *boh₂-t-. The idea is taken up by Peters 1993b: 101ff., but it is
semantically implausible.
quç 'light'. •DER qwteivós, qwti¶w, etc. → qáoç.
qwʊʊwv [m.] a coarse linen garment used in Egypt (Cratin.). <LW Eg.➤
•ETYM Maybe an Egyptian loanword.
1
Qwy
1603
qwtɩy}, -ɩyyos [f., m.] Alexandrian designation of a kind of flute, the 'German' flute
(Plu., Juba apud Ath., Ath.). <PG(S) ►
●DER Qwτ-iyylov [n.] (Posidon., Ael.).
•ETYM Formation like σupty, σáλлу etc., further unclear. A connection with
► Quσa, etc. seems impossible. The suffix is Pre-Greek.
qwv →лwv.
qwy [?] · qάos 'light' (H.). ◄GR➤
•ETYM Probably a transformtion of cows after another word (wy and compounds?).
Traditionally connected with diapáσow (see ►лaláσow, and Schwyzer: 302).
5

=== page 828 ===

X
:
!
xaẞíτɩα [n.pl.] name of unknown vessels (pap. IIIª). <?►
•VAR Also -óτia (?).
⚫ETYM Unexplained foreign word.
xáßos [adj.] · knµós ‘muzzle' (sch. Ar. Eq. 1147). <PG(V)►
•VAR Cf. Xaμóv below.
•DER Besides xaẞóv. kaµnúλov, otevóv, also xaµóv· кaþrúλov (H.).
⚫ETYM If the variation ẞ/μ is reliable, the word is Pre-Greek. Traditionally compared
with Lat. hāmus 'hook, fish-hook'. If this connection is correct, the Latin word could
perhaps stem from a language cognate to Pre-Greek.
xάчoµaι [v.] ‘to retreat, draw back' (epic poet. Il., also X.). <IE *geh,- ‘abandon, go
forth'>
•VAR Aor. Xáo(o)ασðα, fut. xáσ(σ)oμα, pass. àлоуασеñ· àлoеávη (H.). Very rarely
act. (almost only in H.): xáČev. ávaxwpeiv, pu入áoveolal; rpoyáČong. apopaivors,
άvaлodíčoɩç; aor. σvyxáσal. σvyxwρñσαι, ipv. áлóxασov· áлоxáρησov; páx
ávaxwpnσov, épóуασoν· лрóελеε; also άvaɣášovτεç (X. An. 4, 1,16 beside
έridiúkovtes), always intr. like xáčoμa; the only exception is ávéxaσσav (Pi. N. 10,
69 [codd. ȧvéxaσav or ávéσxaσav]), which seems to mean 'caused to retreat'.
•COMP Often with ảva-, rarely with ảño- (λ 95, API.), úño-, µɛta- (A. R.), Sɩα- (X.),
ларα- (H.).
•ETYM It is unnecessary to posit a root xad- with -8-, since the facultative epic
gemination in xáσσασеαι, xáσσoμat may be analogical, and the rare present xácou
can be explained as an innovation to the aorist. An exact agreement outside Greek is
unknown. Beside the medial aor. Xáσao0a with short vowel, Old Indic has active
forms with long vowel in ahās [3sg.], ahāsma [1pl.] 'to abandon, epudiate'. Ruijgh
and Van Krimpen Mnem. 22 (1969): 113-115 assumed derivation from the root *gheh,-.
The -a- remains unexplained under this account, however.
Xaivw →Xáokw.
xaños 1 [m., n.] ‘shepherd's crook' (A. R. 4, 972, Call. Fr. 125). ◄IE? *gªeh¸i-so- (?)►
•VAR Or -ov.
•ETYM The similarity with a Celto-Germanic word for ‘javelin, spear' in OIr. gae,
OHG gēr, etc., which is found as a loan both in Lat. gaesum and in Greek ► yañooç,
-ov, is perhaps no coincidence. We may tentatively reconstruct *geh¸i-so-. However,

=== page 829 ===

3
1606
yáios
further connection with Skt. héṣas- [n.] ‘missile' and Skt. hinóti ‘to urge on, hurl' is
both formally and semantically unconvincing.
Xâïoç [adj.] ‘of good descent, noble, good' vel sim. (Ar. Lys. 91), a Laconian form. <?>
•COMP Compar. Xaïwτɛpoç (ibd. 1157); also xãóç ‘id.' (Theoc. 7, 5); ßaðv-xáïoç mg.
unknown (A. Supp. 858 [lyr.], text uncertain).
.
⚫ETYM Probably belongs to xáσtos · áуaðós, xpηστós (H.), with Laconian loss of
the -σ-. Further isolated. Comparison with Gm. ‘good', e.g. Go. goþs, and with Alb.
zot 'firm' is improbable. Unclear is Pok. 423.
Xaípw [v.] 'to rejoice' (Il.). <IE *gher (H)- 'desire, enjoy'>
●VAR Aor. Xapñvaɩ (Il.), redupl. кexápovto, -oľτo (Hom.), sigmat. Xépato (≥ 270),
¿xaípŋoa (Plu.), xaipŋoáµevos (pap. II³), fut. xaipǹow (Y 363), xapńooµaɩ (Hell. and
late), Dor. -ŋooõµaɩ (Pythag.), ỵapoñµαι (LXX), redupl. kexapŋσéµev (0 98), -ñσetai
(266), perf. ptc. kɛxapŋóťɑ, -óτaç (H 312, Hes. Fr. 77) with present mg., ind.
кεxáρηкα (Hdt., Att.), кεxáρηµαι (h. Bacch.), plpf. кexάρηão, -vão (Hes. Sc., h. Cer.),
кεxаρμévоç (E.).
•COMP Also with έл-, σuv-, etc.
•DER A. From the verbal stem: 1. Xapá [f.] ‘joy' (Sapph., Att.). 2. xápµŋ [f.] ‘joy of
battle, bellicosity' (Hom.), also 'battle' (Hom., Pi., Lyc.), 'joy' (Ps.-Phoc.); xapμó-
oppwv 'belligerent, combative' (h. Merc.), µεve-xápµns, -os 'persevering in battle' (II.),
iллo-ɣápµηs 'fighting from horseback, charioteer' (Нom.); iлло- for iллo- is
metrical. 3. Xápµa (¿m-, kata-) [n.] ‘joy, delight, object of joy' (Il., epic poet., also late
prose), opposed to лñµα. 4. ✗аpμový [f.] 'joy, pleasure, delight' (S., E., Pl., X.),
probably after ηdový, see Wyss 1954: 39'), with -кóç (Procl.). 5. xapµo-σúvη [f.] ‘id.'
(LXX), -ouvos [adj.] ‘filled with joy', -ouva [n.pl.] ‘festivity' (Hdt. 3, 27). 6. Xap-tóc
‘joyous, delectable' (Archil., Att.), with έлí- ‘id.', also ‘gloating' (Att.), -xáptns ‘id.'
(com. V₁); on -xαptos in PNs (e.g. Aaµó-xapτoç) see Bechtel 1917a: 17f. 7. -xapńs
derived from the prefixed verbs (after xapñvai): έπ-, лεpɩ-, пpo-, úñεp-xapńs
'delighting, filled with joy, raptured, etc.' (IA); as a second member extremely
productive in late Greek, especially in poetry, e.g. óлλo-, μovσo-xapńc; likewise in
PNs like Ovμo-xápnc, Xápnc, -ntos.
B. From the present stem: 1. Xaip-ŋdwv, -óvos [f.] = xapá (Ar. Ach. 4), like åλyŋdóv.
2. Xaipo-σúvŋ [f.] = xapá (epigr. Marathon IIP, H.). 3. Xαчητкóç 'happy, cheerful'
(Vett. Val.). 4. Xαɩpετí\w 'to say ✗αipετε, to greeť, with -τɩσµós [m.] ‘greeting,
attendance' (Plb., LXX); cf. aipɛtíšw. 5. As a first member in PNs, e.g. Xαɩpo-kλñç,
Xaɩpε-кpáτη, to which short names like Xaipúλoç. 6. Xaipe-kakéw, -kakia, -kakoç
are rare and late for έmɣaɩpe-kaкéw (etc.) ‘to be gloating' (Arist., com. IVª), cf.
εлíxαρτоç above.
Independent of the verb is the old substantive xápıç, gen. -ɩτoç, acc. -ɩv [f.] ‘grace,
beauty, delight, boon, gratefulness, thanks', also personified plur. 'the Graces' (II.).
Compounds, e.g. Xapi-dwτns (Dor. [Cyrene] -ac) [m.] epithet of Hermes, Dionysus,
Zeus (h. Hom.), PNs like Xapt-yévηjs, xapito-ßλéqapos 'with gracious eyes (eyelids)'
(Eub., Att. epigr.); ǎ-xapıç 'without grace, unpleasant, disagreeable' (Thgn., Sapph.,
Hdt., trag.), also à-ɣápɩ-τoç ‘id.' (Hdt., E.); in the same mg. (from xapíšoµai) à-
Xaiτn
1607
Xápiotos (₺ 236), compar. ȧxapíστεpos (v 392) for åxapɩσtótɛpos), with -éw, -ía
(Att.); opposite εű-xapıç, -toç, -otos with -éw, -ía; èлí-✗apıç ‘attractive, charming'
(Att. since A.).
From xápıç: 1. Xapí-ɛç ‘attractive, charming' (II.), xapɩtó-ɛɩ ‘id.' (Anacr.), also xápɩ-
TOC = Lat. gratus (?) (Nysa Iª, letter of a proconsul). 2. Xap-fotos 'accompanied by
Xápis, filled with Xápıç' (Arist., Call. Fr. 193, late), also a cake (com.), after
appodíσios, etc. 3. Xapit-ýσiov [n.] ‘thank-offering' (late), 'spell of love' (PMag.),
-ǹota [n.pl.] ‘festival honouring the Charites' (Boeot.), after poτoios, etc., also
-wσtos (Ibyc., Rhegin.) like ávaк-wσios etc., see Chantraine 1933: 42. 4. Xapit-ía [f.]
'delightful jest, joke' (X. Cyr. 2, 2, 13), enlargement in -ía (see Scheller 1951: 38).
Denominative verbs: 5. Xαpíšoμai (-í(w) 'to be attentive to sbd., bestow a favour or
service on sbd., to give (cheerfully), etc.' (Il.), also with άvtɩ-, έmi-, kata-, ipoσ-, etc.,
with xápioua (ευ-, άлo-) [n.] 'grace, favour' (late), -toµóc [m.] ‘id.' (late and rare),
-1σTEчov [n.] 'thank-offering' (Thera, Cnidos), -tστpov [n.] ‘id.', with -στηpoç
'belonging to the thank-offering' (X., Hell and late), -чστкóç ‘generous' (Democr.,
Aristeas). 6. Xapiτ-óoμaι 'to be favoured, blessed', -ów 'to favour, bless' (LXX, NT).
Xαpoлós epithet of animals of prey, of people, of the sea, etc., esp. referring to the
eyes and the cool blue-gray eye-color, 'fierce, wild, cold' vel sim. (since λ 611), with
入
-óτns [f.] (Hell. and late); also (επ-)Xápoч 'id.' (Opp., pap. II³).
Extensive discussion of xaípw and derivatives, xápɩs and xaporós in Homer in
Latacz 1966: 20ff.
ETYM Xápiç is a zero grade 1-stem, a type found in páxiç and in the adverbs äλiç and
лáλv. A yod-present like in xaípw is found in Skt. háryati 'to find pleasure, enjoy,
like' < full grade *gher-ie-, and in Italic, e.g. U heries [2sg.fut.] 'volēs', OLat. horitur 'to
urge, exhort' (Enn.). In other languages, we find several isolated nouns that belong
here too: in Germanic, e.g. OHG ger 'desiring, longing' with gerōn 'to desire' and the
widespread n-derivative in OHG gern 'desirous, eager', Go. faihu-gairns
'qiλápyupoç', etc., adverb OHG gerno 'gladly', etc. Lubotsky IIJ 32 (1989): 107 thinks
the root was set because of Skt. harayanta (RV 4, 37, 2) < *għorH-eie-. This nicely
explains the Greek a-vocalism.
A lengthened grade *g"ēr-i- is continued in Arm. jir ‘gift, mercy, favour', adverb jri
'for free' (see Clackson 1994: 180f.), a full grade in Av. zara- [m.] ‘ambition, goal'.
The connection of ToB kartse, acc. krent 'good' must be left aside, as the
interpretation of the the To. word is ambiguous (cf. Adams 1999: 146f. Within Greek,
εv-, ► dvoxepńs is related.
xαíτŋ [f.] ‘curly hair, loose flowing hair, horse's mane' (Il., epic poet.), also 'lion's
mane' (E., Arist.), metaph. 'leaves, foliage' (Theoc., Call., Str.), 'crest' (Plu.). <IE
*gheh₂it- (?) 'curly hair'>
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. кvavo-Xαíτηs 'with dark hair', especially of
Poseidon, 'black-maned' (Il., epic); on the voc. кuavo-xaïta in nominatival function
see Risch 1954: 389ff.
•DER Xαiτneis (shortened -éεc), Dor. -άaç 'with long hair, with a long mane' (Pi.,
Semon., A. R.), also of plants 'rich in leaves' (Nic.); xait-wµa [n.] 'crest' (A. Th. 385),
poetical enlargement, see Chantraine 1933: 186. Hypostasis ávaxα-í\w [v.] ‘to cast

=== page 830 ===

1608
Xadádprov
(the horseman) over the mane, to throw the mane back, overthrow, revolt, rebel,
block' (S. Fr. 179, E., D., Hell. and late), with -, -чouα, -toμós 'barricade,
obstruction' (late).
•ETYM Old word for ‘hair, mane' with close cognates in Iranian and Celtic: Av. gaēsa-
[m.] 'curly hair', gaēsu- ‘curly haired, MoP gēs ‘hair that hangs down, curls', MIr.
gaiset [f.] 'bristly hair'. Both groups continue an s-stem. Normal laryngealistic
reconstruction requires a full grade *geh₂it-, which is a rather awkward vocalization
of the root. This is all the more problematic, as the word definitely seems IE. Or do
we have to assume *gth₂eit-?
xaλádprov [n.] low bed, mattress' (pap. IIP). <PG(V)►
•VAR Xɛλ- (pap. III³), -τptov (pap. VI³); kexaλaipɩwμµέvov (лλoĩov) furnished with
X. (pap. IIIP). As a variant, xáλavdpov· кpáßßατov (H.) also belongs here: the -v- is
the typical Pre-Greek prenasalization; it is no doubt authentic. Also XελádpioV
(POxy. III³).
ETYM The gloss of Hesychius shows that this is a Pre-Greek word, and that it has
nothing to do with the verb xaλáw; see Fur.: 185, 290, 352.
XálavÔpov →xa入ádpiov.
Xάλača [f.] ‘hail' (Il.); also ‘pimple, tubercle, grain, knot, knob' (Arist., Thphr., Gal.,
etc.). <IE?glh₂-d- 'hail, hoarfrost'>
•COMP As a first member in xαλα-εл 'whose words fall like hail' (AP, of
Hipponax).
•DER 1. Diminutive xaλá-tov [n.] granule, etc.' (medic.). 2. xαλač-ǹεç (Dor. -áɛç)
‘hail-like' (Pi., AP, Nonn.), also of σкоpлíоç (Nic.), xaλάios epithet of Zeus, of
Apollo (Cyzicus), 'full of knots' (comm. Hp. VIIP), name of a hail-like stone (Orph.);
Xaλašías (Plin.), -íτŋs (late), see Redard 1949: 63, xaλaš-añoç ‘hail-like, mixed with
hail', of vioɛtós (Nonn.), 'full of knots, knobs', of ηyós (Opp.), -wdns ‘hail-like, full
of hail, full of pimples, granular' (Hp., Arist., etc.). 3. xaλač-áw [v.] ‘to hail (Com.
Adesp., Luc.), 'to suffer from pimples' (Ar. Eq. 381, Arist.), also with εл-, кατα-; -táw
'id.' (late medic.); -wotę [f.] 'formation of pimples or granules' (Gal.).
•ETYM Formed with the feminine suffix -α- from a stem ending in dental, found in
Slavic: Polab. zlåd ‘hail', Pol. żłód ‘glaze', etc. < PSl. *želd-; often found with a velar
extension, e.g. OCS žlědica ‘glazed frost', Ru. oželédica ‘id., fringe of ice on the snow'.
In order to combine the Greek word, we have to posit a root *g/lh₂-d- and assume
that the Greek form continues the full grade of the suffix, so *għlh₂-ed-, where Slavic
points to *gelH-d-. The latter form is also found in Iranian: MoP žāla ‘hail,
hoarfrost' < PIr. *žarda- < IE *għelh₂d-.
Xaλáw [v.] 'to slacken' trans. and intr., 'to lower, let down, relax, loosen; to open, be
open' (Att.). <?>
●VAR Ptc. Xaλaívovtεs (Hes. Sc. 308), Aeol. 3pl. xóλaɩot (Alc.), see Hamm 1957: 57a 3,
228a), aor. Xaλáo(σ)αι, -áσaσðaι (h. Ap.), -ážai (Pi.), pass. -ασеñvai (A. Pr. 991, Pl.),
fut. -άow (Hp.), perf. кɛxáλασμ
!
1.
Xa入uiás, -ádog
1609
•COMP Also with dɩα-, εлɩ-, лαрα-, ȧva-, etc. As a first member in xaλí-qpwv 'with a
feeble mind, thoughtless' (Od., AP), whence -opovéw (¼ 13), -œpooúvn (1 310), like
Sat-oppwv, etc.; xaλaí-лous epithet of "Hoaστos (Nic. Th. 458), like лaλα- in
compounds, uai-póvoc, etc.; xaλa-Tovéw [v.] 'to slacken, become loose' (late), like
Taλa-; on the form of the first member see Schwyzer: 448.
●DER 1. Xáλaσıç (dia-, úño-) [f.] ‘slackening, relaxing' (Hp., Pl.). 2. Xáλaoµa (dia-)
[n.] 'slackened condition, relaxation, gap in the line of battle, etc.' (Hell. and late),
'border of a field' (Hell. pap.), -σµátov (лapα-) [n.] ‘slight slackening (in a rope)’
(Hero). 3. xαλaoµós (áva-) [m.] Xáλaσç (late medic.). 4. Xáλαoστýpia (scil.
σxavía) [n.pl.] ‘rope for lowering a portcullis' (App.). 5. Xalaστóv [n.] ‘festoon,
chain' (LXX, pap.). 6. xalaσtikós (áva-) ‘slackening, relaxing, loosening, removing'
(late). 7. See xaλádpiov.
=
On itself stands xaλapós (¿ñɩ-, úño-) ‘slackened, flaccid, loose, lax' (Hp., Att.), with
-αрóτηs (X, Gall.), -apóoμa (Erot.). Here probably also belongs the PN Xaλaкiaç
(Thess. [I]); cf. Dor. xaλážai (Pi.) and Bechtel 1917a: 46f.
•ETYM The pair xaλáo(σ)αι : xaλapós goes like taláσσai : τáλapoç, λayáσ(0)ai :
λayapóc, iλáo(o)aσai: iλapóç, etc.
Etymology unknown. It seems that the aorist xaλáo(σ) at (innovated presents xaλáw,
-aívw) is a primary formation. The connection with Arm. xał ‘game', xałam 'to play'
by Meillet 1936: 36 would require IE *k"-, and should therefore be abandoned.
Xaλßávŋ [f.] ‘resin of the all-heal', obtained out of the root of some oriental (Persian,
Syrian) umbelliferous plant of the genus Ferula; also a designation of the plant itself
(Thphr., etc.). LW Sem.>
•DER Xaλẞav-iç, -ídos and -óɛσσa 'belonging to the ferula' (Nic.), of píša.
•ETYM From Hebr. helbana ‘id.'; more details in E. Masson 1967: 60. Borrowed as
Lat. galbanum (WH s.v.). Cf. Fur.: 139.
xaλɛnós [adj.] ‘heavy, difficult, harsh, severe, troublesome, dangerous' (Il.). <PG?>
•COMP лαу-xαλεлóç 'very heavy, angry, etc.' (Att.).
•Der_xaλen-ótŋs [f.] 'difficulty, hardness, severity, etc.' (Att.); -ńpns' = xadenós
(Mimn.); xaλenaívw 'to be evil or mischievous, to be harsh, etc., to rage' (II.), rarely
with ȧvτI-, σuv- etc.; ✗αλεлτw 'to treat harshly, enrage', also 'to rage' (8 423, Hes. Op.
5, etc.), med. -ëtoµal, -yaσðaɩ ‘to rage' (Hell. and late epic, also late prose), -ôðñvai
‘id.' (Thgn. 155 [v.l.], S. Ichn. 328 [lyr.], Com. Adesp.), with ɣaλenτús. xaλɛnótŋs (H.),
after other nouns in -túç (cf. Benveniste 1948: 73).
•ETYM Unexplained. Is the word Pre-Greek?
xalía [f.] · ñovxía (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
xaλíðɩov [adj.] · лváktov (H.). ◄?►
•ETYM Unknown.
xaλчáç, -áðoç [f.] 'wild, lecherous woman', also an epithet of the Báкxαi (A. Fr. 448 =
719f. M. [vv.ll. xaλquíaç, xaλídas], H., Suid. [codd. -íµa], EM, Eust.). <PG?>

=== page 831 ===

|
1610
Xaλivós
•DER Xαλчµáčεv (v.l. -ɩкáčεɩv) = tò ip' hdovis àvieolar rpds ovvovoiav Kai
ÚлоστÉλλεу (EM, Et. Gen., perhaps Epich. 200 [see Kaibel ad loc.]).
•ETYM Formation like μatváç, λaikáç, λwyáç, etc. (Chantraine 1933: 352). The
lexicographers connected it with xaλáw, which is probably a folk etymology. Fur.:
138 connects yaλiáw άкolaσtaívw (Com. Adesp. 967) and on account of this
variant thinks the word is Pre-Greek. As xaλ- is hard to explain from IE, and given
the semantic sphere, this is quite likely.
=
xaλīvós [m.] ‘bridle, rein, bit' (Il.), also metaph. ‘marine ropes' (Pi., E.). ◄PG(S)►
•VAR Aeol. Xáλvvoç (Hamm 1957: 36º), plur. also -a.
●COMP E.g. Xaλv-aywyós leading by the reins, holding by the bridle' (Vett. Val.),
-aywyέw (Ep. Jac., Luc., Vett. Val. et al.), -aywyia (Simp. VIP), Xpvσo-xáλvoç 'with
golden reins' (IA).
•DER Diminutive xaλiv-ápiov [n.] (late), -îùç [f.] epithet of Athena in Corinth
(Paus.), as she bridled Pegasus for Bellerophon; xaλiv-óoµα [v.] 'to be furnished
with reins, rein in' (IA), also with έv-, àлo-, etc.; thence -woɩs [f.] ‘reining in' (X.),
-wtǹpia [n.pl.] metaph. ‘ropes used for mooring' (E., Opp., Nonn.).
ETYM Borrowed into Skt. as khalina-, khalina- 'bit of a bridle'. Foreign, i.e. Pre-
Greek origin is probable, as it is difficult to explain xaλ- from IE (*g"h₂l-, *għlH-V-
are unmotivated) and as a suffix -iv- is frequent in Pre-Greek (kúµvov, šutivη,
pηtívn). εüλnpa is often taken to be an inherited word for 'bridle', but this is
probably Pre-Greek, too.
Xάλ, -кoç [m., f.] 'small stone, gravel, rubble used for filling up, mortar for stone
building' (Th., Ar., Att. inscr., Arist., Hell. inscr. and pap., Str.). <?>
•VAR For the gender cf. ►λi0oç.
•DER xaλık-wdŋs ‘like rubble' (Thphr.), -wµatα [n.pl.] 'rubble and mortar, stone-
mortar' = Lat. caementa (gloss.).
•ETYM There is no convincing etymology: the general similarity with Lat. silex
‘gravel', MIr. scellec 'rock', OCS skolúka 'shell' is not enough for an IE etymology to
be credible. The formation is like kúλič, äλíž, þñvi§, etc. (see Chantraine 1933: 382). It
is probably a loan, see Fur.: 137, 384, who connects both Lat. calx 'stone (of a board
game), limestone' (whence OHG kalch, etc.) and Sum. kalga ‘limestone', Babyl.
kalakku. It can also be assumed that the Latin word was borrowed from Greek; note
that the appurtenance of the eastern words is doubted by DELG. In this case, Pre-
Greek origin is thinkable.
Xáλç, -v [m.] 'unblended wine' (Hippon. 73 = 67 Masson, epigr. Cyrene IP). <PG(V)►
●COMP As a first member in xaλí-kкpηtos ‘blended with X.' (Archil., A. R., AP, cf. also
A. Fr. 719c M.), also xαλíкpaιos and compar. Xaλikpótɛpos (Nic. Al.) ‘id.'. As a
second member in άкpo-xáλ slightly drunk' (A. R. 4, 432, D. P.), with - perhaps
after synonymous oivó-qλvč.
•DER Perhaps derived is aλчáç, epithet of the Báкxaɩ (but also connected with
►xaλáw).
|
}
Xaλkós
1611
ETYM Fur.: 389 compares paλiкρóv. ǎкрατov (H.). The gloss also shows a form in
-кpoç, like in xαλкpóτεpoç, which therefore cannot be explained as due to haplology
(Frisk); cf. paλaкpóç: it is a typical Pre-Greek form.
Xaliqpwv⇒xaλáw.
Xaλкóç [m.] ‘ore, copper, bronze', poet. metaph. of bronze objects (II.). <?►
•VAR Cret. кauxós.
•DIAL Myc. ka-ko, see below.
=
•COMP Many compounds, e.g. xaλкo-ëápηos (Hom.), -лápαoç (Pi.), see Forssman
1966: 152f.; xaλк-ýpηs ‘furnished with brass, fitted with brass, brazen' (Hom.+),
Myc. ka-ka-re-a2 /khalkāreha/, also xαλкo-ápaç ‘id.' (Pi.), see Forssman op. cit. 84f.;
Xαλкó-бετoç (trag.), Myc. ka-ko-de-ta [n.pl.] 'fitted with brass'; on Xαλкo-кépаuvoç
etc. see Wærn Eranos 50 (1952): 20f.; έлí-xαλкoç ‘coated with brass' (Hdt., Ar.), with
ĖTuXa\KĪTCU ÓT\itat and Ėxa\kíÔa Thy tò Kavovv épouzav sĩ, tà, Ouoias
еεрáлaivav (H.); also Sí-, τpí-ααλкov [n.] 'coins of two, three Xαλкoй', etc. (Hell. and
late), on the formation see Debrunner IF 60 (1952): 38f.
Here also Xaλкí-oιкoç [f.] epithet of Athena in Sparta 'having a brazen house, living
in a brazen house' (E. and Ar. [lyr.], Th., Paus.), in H. as an explanation of
Xaλкívaoç; transformed to an t-stem, probably after Io-oxos (cf. Paus. 3, 17, 2:
Aеŋvās... Пoλoúxov kaλovµévns kai Xaλkioíkov TĤS AÚTĤS).
=
●DER A. Substantives: 1. Xαλк-ɛúç [m.] ‘metal worker, coppersmith, blacksmith' (II.),
Myc. ka-ke-u; also as a name of a fish (Opp.), cf. Xaλкíç below. From this xαλкnïoç,
-ɛos 'belonging to the smith' (Od., Hes.), -½ ïov, -ɛĩov [n.] ‘forge, brazen tool,
especially kettle' (IA), -ɛĩa [n.] name of an Attic festival (IV³, Poll.); xalkɛwv (-wv
Hdn. Gr.), -εwvos [m.] 'forge' (0 273, A. R. 3, 41). 2. Xαλк-íov (-ɛĭov) [n.] ‘cupreous,
brazen tableware' (Att., Hell. pap.), also 'copper coins' (com.), with -íðɩov [n.] ‘small
cupreous tableware' (com. Vª). 3. Xaλk-údpia [n.pl.] ‘small change' (pap. Iª), -údpiov
= -óc (disparaging, Zos. Alch., Theognost. Can.). 4. xαλк-íç, -ídoç [f.] name of a bird
(E 291, Arist.) кúμvdic; referring to the color, also name of a plant (Ps.-Dsc.),
name of several fishes, probably ‘sardine' (Epich., Arist.), perhaps also after the
sounds it produced (Strömberg 1943: 74f.), name of a poisonous lizard (Arist., Plin.);
as a TN town on Euboea (after the copper-mines), whence -ɩdikóç, -ɩdɩký; finally also
-íç as a fish- and lizard-name, probably with allusion to the TN (Strömberg op. cit.
86). 5. Xalk-áş, -áÔos [f.] = xa\kávêquov (Ps.- Dsc.). 6. xa\k-itns [f.] -ius (líłos)
'copper ore' (Arist., Plu.), name of a mineral 'rock-alum' (medic., pap.), also =
Xαλкáç (Ps.-Dsc.); -ɛítns = -ɛús (Pisidia), itacistic or to ✗αλкɛúç? Cf. Redard 1949: 36.
B. Adjectives: 1. Xáλк-яоç (еpic, also Hell. and late prose), epic Ion. -ɛoc (cf. S.
Schmid 1950: 6ff.), Aeol. Dor. -10s (Myc. ka-ki-jo [du.], ka-ke-ja-pi [ins.f.]), Att. -oûç
'brazen, cupreous', also designation of a coin (Att., Hell. pap.), whence -talos 'worth
a чαλкoñç' (pap. IIIª, after Spaxµaños, ¿µwßoliaños), fem. -ɩaíα and -ɛía
designations of taxes (Hell. pap.); ×αλк-ɩdĩτç [f.] 'low-priced prostitute' (Com.
Adesp.). 2. xaλêñ (ɛiкáv) [f.] ‘bronze statue' (Antig. Mir., D. L.). 3. xáλkɩvoç 'made of
ore, concerning copper coins' (Hell. and late pap.). 4. xαλкɩкóç ‘consisting of copper
coins' (pap. IIIa). 5. Xaλк-wdŋs ‘bronze-like' (Thphr.).
=

=== page 832 ===

1612
Xaμaí
C. Verbs: 1. Xαλк-ɛúw ‘to forge' (Σ 400), also intr. 'to be a blacksmith' (Att.), formally
from xaλкɛúç, but also referring to xaλкóç, rarely prefixed, e.g. with кata-, ¿ñɩ-,
лро-, άло-. Thеnce -ɛía [f.] 'the art of forging' (Hp., Pl.), 'forge' (Hero), -εvμα [n.]
'what is forged, forged tool' (A.), -εvtýs = -eús (AP), -ɛutɩкós 'belonging to the art of
forging, versed in the art of forging' (Hp., X., Arist.), -εvτpov = -εov (gloss.). 2.
Xаλк-óoμαι [v.] 'to be coated with bronze' (Pi., Hdt., LXX, D. S.), 'to turn into ore'
(AP), rarely with кaτα-, лɛpɩ- (to кatá-, nɛpí-xaλkoç); thence -wµa [n.] designation
of several copper instruments (Att.), with -wμáτov [n.] (Delos IIª), -wµatãç [m.]
'copper smith' (pap. III³). 3. Xαλk-í\w to play coin-spinning with copper coins'
(Alex., Herod., Poll.), with -ɩσµós [m.] ‘gamẹ of coin-spinning' (Poll., Eust.), ‘to
glisten or sound like copper' (late); prefixed epi-xαλкíšo̟μαι (to лεрí-xαλкoç) 'to
become coated with bronze' (LXX), àло-уαλкíчw 'to take away the bronze' (AP 11,
283; word-play with Xαλкíç), úло-уαλкíw 'to look somewhat bronze-colored' (EM),
úñeɣáλkiσa. пpòs xaλkoû úñeðéµnv (H.).
D. Adverb xaλкívda (scil. лaíšeɩv). tò eis xaλkòv kußeúɛɩv (H.).
•ETYM An old IE word for 'ore, copper, bronze' is still retained in Skt. áyaḥ, Lat. aes,
Gm., e.g. Go. aiz [n.]. The prehistory of Greek xaλкós is obscure. An IE term is
improbable, as a word with an aspirate and a voiceless stop is not tolerated. The
similarity with the word for 'purple', кáλxη, also xáλкη and xáλxŋ, is hardly
accidental. It would point to an original meaning 'red metal' for xaλкÓS (XαλкÒÇ
¿pvėpós I 365), which is conceivable. Connection with the Balto-Slavic word for
'iron' (Lith. geležis, OPr. gelso, Ru. želézo) is phonetically unfeasible, but we could
have to do with independent loans from a common eastern source. In such a
framework, the connection with кáλxη could be maintained too.
It is also tempting to connect the Hitt. (Hattic-Hurritic) word for ‘iron', hapalki- (or
apalki-); the imperfect phonetic agreement would be due to incorrect rendering of a
foreign word (Pisani AION 7 (1966): 46f.).
xauai [adv.] 'to the earth, on the earth' (Il.). <IE *d½ghem- ‘earth'>
•COMP Extremely productive as a first member, e.g. xaµaɩ-лetýƒ ‘falling, fallen to the
ground, lying on the ground, futile' (Pi., trag., also Pl., Plb.), univerbation of xquai
лεσɛïv; xaµaí-\nλos originally "striving to the earth", low, base, small', also (scil.
Sippos) 'footstool (Hp., Pl., Arist.), xaµα-εúvηs, plur. -ɛñvai ‘having its lair on the
earth' (P 235, Emp.), fem. -ɛuvádɛç (Od.), with elision xau-ɛúvn (Poll., H., AP), xáμ-
ɛvvă [f.] ‘lair on the earth' (Att. inscr., A.), see Solmsen 1909: 256f.
On xaчat in plant- and animal-names Strömberg 1940: 109ff.; on xaµai-λéwv
(perhaps a calque from Semitic), see Lewy KZ 58 (1931): 33; on this also Dawkins JHS
56 (1936): 5ff.
•DER xaµ-ã¢ε ‘to the ground' (Hom., also trag. and late prose), after Anvaε, etc.
(accentuation acc. to Hdn. Gr. 2, 951 and others); after this xaμ-ãεv 'from the earth,
from the ground' (Hdt., Att. com.), also -aiev (A.D., Plu.), Aeol. -ádiç 'to the
ground' (Hom., A. [lyr.]), like äλλvdıç etc., Dor. -ávdɩç (Theognost.).
From xaμaí: xaμ-ŋλós ‘low' (Pi., X., Nic., Str.), after vyndós; xaµ-ītis (äµnedos) 'low'
(Gp., Suid., Eust.).
E
xávva
1613
ETYM A frozen case-form of the word for 'earth', usually explained as a dative; cf.
►лáλαι, ►лapαí. We can compare it with Lat. humi 'on the ground' < QIE *d¹għom-
ei, but the stem vowel is different. With e-vocalism we find OPr. semmai 'down'.
Probably, all are independent formations. Further see X0wv. See Hajnal 1992: 207-
220.
xaµóv · kaµñúλov (H.). →xaßós.
Xauúvn [f.] epithet of the Elean Demeter. <GR>
ETYM Acc. to Vegas Sansalvador Glotta 70 (1992): 166-180, this epithet means 'who
has the earth as a bed', with the zero grade of εúvý, *-h,uneh₂. A more clear form is
xaµai-ɛúvès (Hom.); we also find xaµ-ɛúvns (H.).
Xáμчaι [pl.] Egyptian name of crocodiles (Hdt. 2, 69). <LW Eg.>>
•ETYM From the Eg. name msḥ, but difficult in detail; cf. Černy Ann. Serv. Ant.
Égypte 42 (1943): 346-348.
Xavdávw [v.] 'to hold, include, contain' (Hom.). <IE *ged- 'grasp, seize'>
•VAR Aor. xadɛîv (epic Il., also Hp. and Ar. Ra. 260 [lyr.]), fut. xɛíσoµai (σ 17), perf.
(with present mg.) ptc.acc.sg. кεxavdóτa († 268, § 96), ind. кéxavdɛ. xwpɛi (H.),
plpf. kɛxávdɛɩ, with v.l. kɛxóvdɛɩ (N 192).
•COMP Never with prefix; as a second member in ɛv-xavdńs ‘ample' (Nic., Man.),
ɛúpv-xadńs (AP, Luc.), -xavdńs (Eust.) ‘id.'.
•ETYM A regular formal system, with a zero grade nasal present, zero grade thematic
aorist, and a full grade medial future. Only the perfect forms with -av- are divergent;
if not innovated after the present, they must have pushed original кéxovda out of the
system (retained in the v.l. кɛxóvdε1).
Beside this archaic verb, continued only in the epic tradition, Latin has a formation
with fixed prefix and generalised e-vocalism: prae-hendō, -hendī, -hēnsum ‘to grasp,
seize', the stemvowel of which may represent both IE *gend- and *gnd-. Zero grade
forms are found also in Celtic, e.g. OIr. ro-geinn he finds place in' (IE *g"d-n-). A full
grade root is found in Alb., e.g. gjëndem I am found'. These nasalized forms
probably go back on a nasal present; beside them stand several forms without nasal,
like Lat. praeda 'booty' < *prai-hed-ā, and the Germanic verb ON geta ‘to reach,
produce (> MoE get), Go. bi-gitan ‘ɛúpíoкɛiv', OHG pi-gezzan 'reach', fir-gezzan
'forget', etc.
Meier-Brügger MSS 50 (1989): 87-90 adduces the adverb xovdiv ‘in capacity' (SEG 21
(1965): 644, 19) and suggests a form ȧxovdñs for AXONAEΣ in SEG 13 (1956): 13, 251.
Xávva [f.] 'kind of sea bass, Serranus (cabrilla)' (Epich., Arist., Numen. apud Ath., pap.
IP, etc.). <PG(V)>>
VAR Also xávvoc [m.].
⚫ETYM In view of the characterization by Epich. as μεуаλoxáσμwv, connection with
Xavɛiv 'to yawn' (see Xάoкw) with expressive gemination has been proposed
(Strömberg 1943: 53). Extensive treatment in Thompson 1947 s.v., where foreign
origin (Eg. chna name of an unknown fish) is considered. Fur.: 351 compares XévvIOV
(H.), which makes Pre-Greek origin probable (a/ɛ).

=== page 833 ===

1614
xáos, -Eos, -ous
xáos, -ɛos, -ovs [n.] 'chaos', used as a designation for what was first by Hes. Th. 116,
usually (e.g. Arist.) taken as ‘(unlimited) empty space' (Ibyc., B., Ar.), later ‘wide
chasm, abyss' (Hell.). <?>
•DER Xaów 'to devour', aor. -woai (Tab. Defix., Simp. and Olymp. VIP).
Besides xauvos slack, porous, loose, bloated, puffed up, vain, frivolous' (Pi., IA).
Some compounds, e.g. ✗avvo-лoλītaɩ [m.pl.] “vain citizens” (Ar. Ach. 635 [anap.]),
Xavνó-лрwктоs having slack or bloated bottoms' (ibid. 104), úлó-✗avvoç 'somewhat
xavvó-rpwêtos
slack, vain' (late). Abstract xavvóτηs [f.] ‘slackness, vanity' (Pl., Arist., Plu.); xañvač
in xavváкwv. Xavvoroiŵv, oi dè xavvoλóywv (H.); xavv-óoµaι [v.] 'to become slack
or vain, etc.' (Alc., IA), also with έK-, etc. Thence -wois [f.] 'relaxation, puffing up'
(Ar., Hell. and late), -wµa [n.] 'dispersed earth', -wτкóç 'making loose' (Plu.);
Xavviάče. лλava (H.).
Also xavλi-ódwv (see ►ódwv) with a suffix -λ-?
•ETYM Against the idea that xάos would be 'the empty space', first expressed by
Aristotle and followed by most scholars, others interpreted it as a ‘chasm' or an
'abyss'. Morphologically, a connection with xauvos (with remarkable barytone
accent) may be supposed: Xάos < *xáƑos beside xañvoç, like pɛßoç to ¿peµvós <
*épeẞvóc. As a basic meaning 'loose, with holes' is quite possible for Xauvoç, an
original meaning ‘hole, empty space, yawning opening' is quite thinkable for xáoç.
Therefore xáos and Xauvos were since long connected with Xáσкw, xáoµa, xavɛt̃v,
►xnµη, etc.
Formally close are some Germanic and Baltic words for ‘palate': OHG guomo, ON
gómr [m.], etc. < IE *geh₂-mn- beside OHG goumo [m.] < PGm. *gauma(n)-, Lith.
gomurys, etc.
See ▸Xáσкw and ►xúpa.
Xapá →yaipw.
xapáòpa = xépados.
Xapáσow [v.] 'to make pointed, sharpen; to carve, engrave, strike, stamp' (Hes.).
<PG(S)►
•VAR Att. -TTW; aor. -αi, pass. -✗еñvaɩ, perf. med. кɛxάpayμaɩ.
•COMP Also with έv-, Siα-, επ-, etc. As a first member in the governing compound
xapaší-лovtos ‘splitting the sea', of an oar (Simon.).
●DER 1. Xάpауμа (лεpɩ-, пpo-, έƒ-) [n.] ‘engraving, engraved mark, impression,
minted coins' (S., Hell.); xapayuós [m.] ‘incision, stamp, stamped document'
(Thphr., pap. IP); xapayµń [f.] ‘loaf of bread' (pap. V-VI³). 2. xápažis (¿v-, áño-,
πлεpι, etc.) [f.] engraving, incising, incision' (Democг., late), лαрα-ɣápačıç 'false
coining, forgery', -чμos 'forged' (late). 3. Xαрαкτós 'made pointed, sharpened,
toothed' (Hp., Nic.); лεpι-XαрактIкóç 'cutting around' (Dsc.). 4. Xapaкτnp [m.]
‘engraver, one who mints coins' (Euryph. Pythag., Olbia IIIª), 'tool for engraving,
stamp, seal (Arist., Hell. and late inscr. and pap., etc.), 'impression, character', also
of facial expressions or language: 'physical and linguistic idiosyncrasy'; 'carved letter,
etc.' (IA, Hell. and late), 'individual feature, style, character' (Hell. and late); “ɛpɩ-
xapaкtýp [m.] ‘knife for cutting of the gums around the teeth' (late medic.). From
1
Xаракτηp: xαpaktnpikós
===
xáptns
1615
Xapaktηplotikós (Phld., etc.), xapaкτηp-iw (dia-,
µεta-) [v.] ‘to form, stamp, designate, characterize' (Hell. and late), whence -σμós,
-ioµia, -iotikós (late); xαpaкτηpiά(w [v.] 'to coin, mint' (Samos IP). 5. Xápaktns [m.]
'coiner, minter' (Man.), лapα- 'forger' (Vett. Val.).
=
Besides Xápač, -aкoç [m., f.] 'pointed stake, vine-prop, fortifying pale, stockade,
palisade' (Att. Hell. and late), also as a fish name (Diph. Siph., Opp.); see Strömberg
1943: 36, Thompson 1947 s.v.; xapaкo-ßolía [f.] ‘raising of a palisade' (LXX), wµo-
Xápa 'prop for the forks of vines' (Gp.). Thence: 1. Xapak-íaç [m.] (káλaµoç) ‘fit as a
stake or palisade' (Thphr.), also as a plant name, ‘kind of euphorbia' (Dsc.), see
Strömberg 1937: 91 and Strömberg 1940: 107; as a fish name (Gp., see xápač). 2.
xapaкíτηs [m.] ‘kind of euphorbia' (late), also = 'living behind a fence (B₁ẞλLAKÓS =
conventual), 'cut off from the world' (Timo). 3. Xapáкia· úšoστηpíyµata (H.). 4.
Xapaкów (лεpɩ-, άло-) [v.] 'to furnish with stakes, build a palisade' (Aesch., Arist.,
Hell. and late), whence -шµα (лεpt-) ‘site secured with palisades' (X., Arist., Hell. and
late), wotę palisading, propping up of vines' (Lycurg., Hell. and late), -óv 'vineyard
with propped up vines' (pap. II-III³). 5. xapakišw [v.], originally 'to furnish with
stakes', only metaph. of flies, ‘to rub the front legs for cleaning' (Arist.), with -ɩσµós
[m.] ‘palisading' (Pherecr., Macedonian inscr. III³).
•ETYM Xapáσow is both earlier and more frequently attested than xápač; still
Xapáσow < *xapáк-tw must be a denominative formation from the latter. For the
suffix, cf. лívač, кáµaž, кλīµaž, etc. Without etymology. Connection with Lith. žeriu,
žeŕti 'to scrape', with žarstýti ‘to poke' does not explain the Greek formation. In view
of the suffix, the word is most probably Pre-Greek (not in Fur.).
xapía [f.] Bouvóc (H.). <?>
•
ETYM A suggestion by Persson 1912(1): 223, accepted by Pok. 440, but rejected by
Frisk, is mentioned s.v. xápμn 2.
xápic →Xaipw.
Xάpun 1 'bellicosity'. →xaípw.
Xάpun 2 [f.] acc. to the sch. Pi. O. 9, 128, it stands for έdopatíç in Stesich. 267 (Page)
and Ibyc. 340 (Page); likewise for Pi. Dith. 3, 13. <PG?>
•DER Bahuvrihi ǎу-è̟αρμov· ávшôεpñ tǹv aixµýv (H.).
•ETYM Connected with xapía. Bouvós (H.) and with xoчpás 'rock in the sea', and
other words for stick out, protrude, etc.' (IE *gher-; cf. ►xnp) has been proposed.
Alternatively, a poetical reinterpretation of Xápμn 1 has been suggested, after the
model of Xaλкo-xápμns (beside xáλк-ασлç, -XÍτwv, etc.), and μεvε-xápμns (beside
μεv-αíxμns). The existence of a compound ǎyxαpμoç casts doubt on the later idea.
Perhaps a Pre-Greek word?
Xaponóc →xaipw.
xápτns [m.] 'papyrus leaf, roll', metaph. ‘thin plate' (Att. inscr., Pl. Com., Hell.). <LW
Eg.➤

=== page 834 ===

1616
Xápwv, -wvoc
•COMP As a first member, e.g. in xapt-vqávtŋs [m.] 'manufacturer of papyrus leaves'
(Corycos).
⚫DER Diminutive xapτ-íov [n.] (Hell.), -ídiov [n.] (late), -ápiov [n.] (late); also -npía
[f] = xápτns (LXX), -ŋpá [f.] 'papyrus tax, output' (Hell. and late pap. and inscr.),
-apéa [f.] 'papyrus tax' (Pergamon), cf. the rare forms oivapέa, τpoxapέa.
•ETYM Unexplained; probably from Egypt, like the papyrus plant itself. Borrowed as
Lat. charta, whence MoFr. carte, etc. From Xápτηs probably also Skt. kaḍitra- [n.]
'writing leather' (Mayrhofer AION 1 (1963): 232, with Burrow). From Lat.
chartulārius, chart(i)āticum, Greek borrowed the late forms xaprov\ápios
‘archivisť, xapτ(¹)atikóv ‘tax on a document' in return.
Xápwv, -wvos [m., f.] epithet or name of the lion of Nemea (Euph., Lyc., H.), also of
the eagle and of the cyclops (Lyc.). <GR>
⚫ETYM Short form for xαpoлóç (Sommer 1948: 121f., Leumann Sprache 5 (1959): 72);
see ►xaipw.
•
Xáσtos [adj.] · ȧyaðós, Xpnotós (H.).
⚫ETYM Considered to be the base form for Lac. ►xáïoç, s.v.
Xáσкw [v.] 'to gape, yawn, open (the mouth) wide' (IA). <IE *geh₂n- ‘break open,
yawn'>
●VAR Xaívw (Hell.), them. aor. Xavɛïv, perf. (with present meaning, see Wackernagel
1920-1924(1): 167) кéxηvα (both Il.), aor.subj. кατα-xývη (H.), Dor. Exāva (Aesop.),
perf. зpl. кɛxávavɩɩ (Sophr.), fut. Xavoñµai (IA).
⚫COMP Often with prefix, e.g. ȧva-, έv-, лερɩ-, úлo-.
•DER A. Adverb xav-dóv ‘with an opened mouth, greedily' ( 294, Hell. and late epic,
late prose), xavбo-лótai [m.pl.] (AP): xavðòv íéïv· кεxŋvótwę kaì åƉpówç nɛiv öλw
σtóµatɩ (H.); xav-Sá ‘id.' (A. D.).
B. Substantives: 1. Xάoµα [n.] ‘gaping hole, abyss, chasm' (Hes.), diminutive -átov
[n.] (Hero, sch.), -aτíaç [m.] ‘earthquake which causes fissures in the earth' (Arist.,
Posidon.), cf. ẞpаσμаτíaç s.v. ßpáσow). 2. Xáoµŋ [f.] 'yawning, especially of
sleepiness' (Hp., Pl.), denominative xãσµάoµαι 'to yawn, stand with one's mouth
open', rarely with ảνɩɩ-, έл-, кατα- (IA), also -έoμai (Theoc.); thence xáoµ-ŋµa [n.]
‘open mouth' (Ar. Av. 61), -11015 [f.] = xáoµŋ (H., EM, Eust.); -wdns (also from
Xάoµα) ‘yawning constantly, indifferent' (D. L., Plu.), also metrical ‘forming a hiatus'
(A. D.), with -wdía [f.] ‘hiatus', -wdéw ‘to form or create hiatus' (Eust.).
кATA-
3. Xávos [n.] ‘throat, mouth' (Com. Adesp.); to this or directly to Xaveĩv: ȧ-xavýs
(dissimilated from ȧ-) ‘gaping, open wide, expanded, immeasurable' (Parm., Arist.,
Hell. and late), with ȧxáv-ɛa [f.] 'wide hole, expension, immeasurability' (late), also
(with privative a) 'not wide open, with a closed mouth' (Thphr., Hegesipp. Com.,
Plb., Luc.).
C. Verbs: 1. Xαoк-άw 'to gape at, gaze at' (Ar. V. 695 [anap.]), with xáσк-až, -AKOÇ
[m.] 'gazer' (Eust.). 2. Xαoк-wpɛïv. nepißàéñɛiv (H.), after Oɛwpɛîv etc. 3. Xavúɛɩv.
ẞoāv, xavúσσɛ· ẞoã (cod. ẞía), kaλɛĩ (H.); to this Xavú-λaos etc. (Pharsalos), see
Bechtel 1917b: 464. 4. iterative (Schwyzer: 719) Xnvñoaɩ• kaτaµwкýσaσðαɩ, with
xývηµa kataµwêŋµa (H.).
Xé&pona (-ná)
1617
D. Rare compounds: каτшµóxavε [voc.] = xaívwv кατ' wµov, ‘usque ad humeros
hians' (Hippon. 28), cf. Masson ad loc.; кαταxývη [f.] 'scorn, mockery' (Ar. V. 575,
Eq. 631), = кαταxáoµnois, kaτáyɛλws (H.), cf. каταxηvη. кaτayελáσŋ, évêtηpion,
éžoveεvion (H.).
ETYM The pair Xavεiv and кεуηva is old; innovations are the future xavouμai, the
present Xaívw and the sigm. aor. EXηva. The ske/o-present Xáσкw is old, too, and
may derive from *khan-ske/o-. So we are dealing with a root PGr. *khan- < PIE
*għh¸n-. Xavɛïv and xávos further agree with a North Germanic word: ON gan [n.]
‘opening of the mouth, call, cry', also 'throat, gill' (MoSw., MoNw.), and the weak
verb gana 'to open wide, desire, gape'. The root *geh₂- seems to appear unenlarged
in ►xnun, and it may of course also be present in xáσкw. The nouns xáσµɑ, -µŋ can
be explained from Xáσкw as well as from xavɛiv (cf. qάoµa to paívw). The situation
strongly reminds of PGr. *phan- < *b"h₂-n-.
A root *g"Hi- in the same meaning is found in Lat. hiscō 'to open the mouth', OHG
giën, ON gína ‘to yawn', OHG ginën ‘to be wide open', MoHG gähnen ‘to yawn',
Hitt. kīnu-zi ‘to break open (by force)', also in Lat. hiäre, hiō = Lith. žióti, 1sg. žióju,
OCS 1sg. zějo, ToB kāy- ‘to open', pass. ptc. kakāyau. This was perhaps an i-present
to *geh₂- (though some of the forms seem to presuppose *gheh,-). It is unclear if
►xipás can be related to this root. Cf. also xáos and ►xýv.
xatέw [v.] ‘to lack, need, desire' (Il., epic poet.). <IE? *gheh,- 'leave behind'>
•VAR Xaτíw (only pres. except for ipf. Xατéɛσкε Nonn. 4, 56); Xατεúεɩ· xpýšεi (cod.
Xαpíчε), εлvμεi 'needs, desires'; Xaτεúovσа· Xpηovσa, dɛoμévη 'in need' (H.).
•DER Xaτíç (leg. Xáτiç?). ¿лiðvµía, õpñσiç ‘desire, use' (H.) is probably a back-
formation.
Beside this, we find a frozen dative nτεï, Xητя 'out of lack (or desire)' (Il., poet., also
late prose), which may derive from the noun xñtos. évdela, otέpŋois ‘need,
deprivation' (H.), or possibly from *õñτɩç. Thence ✗ηãoσúvé lack, atrophy' (AP 9,
408), Xŋtɛia. xpɛía ‘need' (H.) (where cod. Xn- has a wrong position in the
alphabet), xnτí\w = xati¢w (EM).
⚫ETYM For Xarέw, cf. aiτéw, µaτéw, лaτéoμal, daτéoμα, etc. (Schwyzer: 705). For
Xñtos, cf. kñtos, okūtos, žvtos (Schwyzer: 513). Remote cognates may be found in
►xnpa, xúpa, from a root *geh,-. If ✗nt- contains this root, Xaτ- must somehow be
analogical.
Xav入ió8wv, Xaivos →Xáoc.
Xavwv [m.] a kind of cake (LXX, EM, Suid.). <LW Hebr.➤
•ETYM Transcription of Hebr. kawwān, Köhler and Baumgartner 1953: 428.
xédpora (-ñá) [n.pl.] ‘leguminous fruits' (Hp., Arist., Thphr., Nic.). <PG(V)►
•VAR xédpoñaç (v.l. -ñoús) [acc.pl.] (Arist.), xédpoy. лāv öorpiov, oñépµa (H.). Also
XɛSpía [f.] ‘id.' (pap. IV-VIP); variants кέdpoлa (Erot. H.), кép♪oña (H.).
•COMP Xεбролwбdns 'X.-like' (Phanias apud Ath.).
⚫ETYM Grošelj Živa Ant. 7 (1957): 43 compared Ru. goróx ‘pea', Lat. furfur ‘pod of
corn and pulses', etc.; formally untenable. Folk etymology with Xɛip and Spεлw

=== page 835 ===

1618
Xε(w
(Xεɩρoбрóлoι чwτεc) by Nic. Th. 752. The variation shows that the word is Pre-
Greek. Cf. ►xispa.
Xεw [v.] 'to shit' (Ar. et al.). <IE *ged- 'shit'>
•VAR Perf. -kέxoda, aor. Xéσaɩ, also ỵɛσɛïv (to ỵεσoûµaɩ, after ëɛσoñµai to rɛσɛïv, see
Schwyzer: 7466 and 786), fut. Xεσoчμαι, also xéσoμαι, perf. ptc. pass. кεxeqµévos.
•COMP Also with έv-, εл-, кατα-, έк-. As a first member in xε-aváукn [f.] 'purgative
medicine' (late medic.).
•DER Desiderative Xɛσ-ɛíw (Ar.) and xɛ-ŋuáw (Ar.), like лaσx-ŋáw, etc., see
Schwyzer: 732.
Nouns: xɛσ-ã¢ [m.] (Poll., sch., Suid.), -µa [n.] (medic.); лoλú-ɣεσoç (Com. Adesp.);
on the formation see Schwyzer: 461 and 516. From the verbal stem xóðavov. τǹу
бpav (H.), xodɩtɛúεiv. àñoлaτяiу (H.) (to *odí), ó-xodov [n.] 'mice.
droppings' (late), as a term of abuse µvóxodoç (yépwv) = oúdevòs ǎžios (Men. 363
Koe.).
•ETYM The yod-present Xέw agrees with Alb. dhjes 'to shit' < IE *ghed-ie/o-; beside
these, we find a late thematic root-present in Skt. hadati ‘id.'.
The root is also attested in nominal formations: Arm. jet, -oy ‘tail' < IE *gredos- or
*ghed-o-; an s-stem also in Av. zadaŋha [acc.du.] 'both buttocks, hindmost', apa-
zadah- 'with the ass backwards (?)'.
Xε name of the letter X (Att. inscr. [not before 307ª], Pl. Ti., Hp.). <LW Sem.>
•VAR Later Xĭ.
•DER Xɩo-dǹç 'formed like a X' (late medic.), xt-ά\w [v.] 'to designate with a X, to put
athwart, cross out, cancel' (D. S., pap., sch.), with -aoua [n.] 'cross-piece of wood'
(Bito), 'cross-bandage' (medic.); -aσuós [m.] 'putting athwart, cancellation, etc.'
(late), yielding Lat. chiasmus; -aστóç ‘put athwart, etc.' (Ph. Bel., late).
⚫ETYM After ►лɛï (like ►čɛĩ, ►qɛĩ, ► чɛî).
Xεá [f.] 'serpent's den' (X 93 and 95, Plu., Orph., Crete), ‘gap' (Pi. I. 8, 77 [uncertain]).
<PG?(V)►
●var Ion. -ɩý. Dat.pl. xɛɛaîç (Nic. Th. 79 verse-final; codd. Xɛλɛí-).
•ETYM The analysis of the rare word depends on the interpretation of verse-final
Xɛɛaç in Nic. If not adapted to the metre, it must stand for *XεFε(0)-tá, whence by
contraction Xεtá, -iý.
The further assessment is uncertain; one has thought of Lat. fovea (dismissed in De
Vaan 2008) and of xáos (Bechtel 1914 s.v.). If oxen is a variant with prothetic
vowel, the word may be Pre-Greek.
Xeos [n.] lip', metaph. 'edge, seam'. <?>>
•VAR Mostly plur. -ɛα, -ŋ (Il.), Dor. Xñλoç (Corc.), Aeol. Xéos (gramm.).
•COMP Often as a second member, e.g. ioo-Xελns level with the brim, having a
height equal to the brim of the vessel, rising to the brim' (X., Arist.), -λos (Gp.);
лαxv-Xελns (Arist.), -λoc (Ruf., Gal.) 'with thick lips'. Rarely as a first member, e.g.
Xελо-лоτеw to drink with the lips, slurp' (AP 7, 223), cf. λaßро-лоτéw (ibid. 5, 109
and 10, 18).
Xεчua
1619
●DER Diminutive xɛλ-ápiov [n.] (gloss.), enlargement -wμa [n.] = xεîλoç (Aq.); also
-ãç labrosus (gloss.).
=
•ETYM If the transmitted dialectal forms are reliable, possible basic forms are
*xéolos, *xéloos, and perhaps also *xέλvoç.
There is no convincing etymology. ON gjolnar [f.pl.] = granar, i.e. 'moustache,
bearded lips' < PGm. *gelunōz, which Adontz 1937: 9 compared with Arm. jełun
'palate, ceiling'. An original form *XελƑos, which would fit the non-Greek forms
better (Schwyzer: 491), is satisfctory for Ion. Xεios - but the word seems to be
genuinely Attic, too. Cf. Xελúvηn.
Xεчua [n.] 'winter, winter weather, storm' (poet. since Od.). <IE *gh(e)i-m- 'winter'>
•VAR Xεμwv, -wvoç [m.] (general, since Il.).
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. Xεчá-ppoos, -ppovs, -ppos 'streaming in winter' (Il.,
Thgn., Hdt., trag.), msc. 'bourn, torrent, current' (Att., LXX, Paus.), -ppwdŋs ‘similar
to a ỵ.' (Str.); õεµwvo-túños ‘buffeting with storms' (A. Supp. 34 [anap.]), xɛqµó-
σлороç 'sown in winter' (Thphr.), лоλʊ-Xεíµwv 'with many storms' (App.), ȧ-
Xεíματ-oç 'without storms' (A. Supp. 136 [lyr.]).
•DER 1. Xɛiµwv-ikós ‘belonging to the storm' (late), -60εv ‘from the storm' (Arat.). 2.
Xequat-ikóç, xeyµ-wdŋs ‘hibernal, stormy' (sch.). 3. Xεчµ-íŋ [f.] ‘hibernal weather'
(Hp.), after vηvεµ-ín, etc. 4. PN Xɛíµa, -ãç [m.] (Thess.).
Denominative verbs: 5. Xεчμ-αívw (v.] 'to vex by storms, rage' (Pi., Hdt., Arist.,
Theoc.), ȧ-Xεíμav-τoc 'not vexed by storms, without storms' (Alc., B.). More
common is 6. Xεчμ-áчw [v.] 'to distress, visit with winter and storm', metaph. 'to
hurt, wound', also 'to spend the winter, hibernate' (IA), also prefixed, e.g. with
лapα-, εлɩ-; thence ά-xεíµãƒτos 'not visited by storms' (J.), εaσía, -aoin (also
ларα-) [f.] 'hibernation, winter quarters' (Hdt., Hell.), plur. also 'winter storms'
(Arist., Thphr.), -aσıç [f.] = tempestivitas (gloss.), -aστpov [n.] 'winter coat' (Ar. fr.
888), cf. Оépiστpoν etc., also лαрα-ɣεчµãστкóç 'fit for hibernation', ntr.pl. -aσtiкá
(late); -ádiov [n.] 'winter quarters' (D., Str., Plu.), -ádios (Poll., Suid., Et. Gud.),
-adɛvw = -álw (Str.); with a suffix -8- also xɛчµáda. ¡µáτov xεчµεþívóv, xɛµáç.
Xεчμáv (H.).
With a suffix -r-: 7. Xɛquépɩoç ‘hibernal, stormy' (II.), -ɛpɩwdns ‘id.' (Gp.). 8. -ɛpivós
'concerning winter, hibernal' (IA), cf. έapivóç etc. 9. -ɛpos = -épios (Arat.), disjoined
from compounds like Svo-xεiuɛpoç 'distressed by heavy winter or storms' (Il., Hdt.,
A.). 10. Xεчμεpíчw 'to spend the winter' (Hdt., D. H.), 'to storm' (Thphr.). See also
▶ xeijiapoc.
Xtov, óvoc [f.] 'snow, blanket of snow, snow-water' (II.). As a first member e.g. in
Xiovó-xpws, -włoç ‘with a skin white as snow' (E. [lyr.]). Hence Xióv-ɛos 'snowy,
white as snow' (poet. Asios [VII-VIª]), -wdŋs ‘snowily' (Hp., E., Hell. poetry), -ɩкóç
'consisting of snow' (Thphr.), -tvos 'white as snow' (Ptol. Euerg.), -tov [n.]
designation of an eye-salve (Alex. Trall.), -íw, -íčoμαι (кατα-) [v.] 'to snow (upon),
be covered with snow' (Hdt., D. S., Dsc.), -íɛ· Aɛvкaívɛi (H.), -toµós [m.] 'snowing
upon' (Apollon. Lex., H.).
Zero grade Xчμ- in: X₁μετλov (mostly plur. -tλa) [n.] 'frostbite' (Hippon., Ar., Nic.,
Lyc., Poll.), also tλn [f.] (Dsc.), dissimilated from -0λov, -0λn, cf. Schwyzer: 533; as a

=== page 836 ===

1620
xeluapog
second member -Xчuos in the poet. adjectives dúo-xчo 'stormy, fearful' (A., E.),
µελáу-xчµoç ‘black (on a white ground), dark spotted (A., E.), τà µελáуxчµα black
spots in the snow' (X. Cyn. 8, 1 and 7, Poll.). See also ►xíμaipa.
•ETYM An inherited word for 'winter' or 'snow', with numerous representatives in
various languages:
1. An n-stem like in xεчµa and Xεчv is found in Skt. loc. héman ‘in winter' < IE
*geim-en and in Hitt. gimmi, gimmant- ‘winter' < *gʻim-n-i, *għim-n-ent-. Alb.
(Gheg) dimën is from *gheimen- or *gimen- (Hamp IF 66 (1961): 52ff.). Skt.
hemantá- [m.] is derived with the suffix -ta-.
2. To xεчµɛp-ɩvóç, -10s, -os: Arm. jmern ‘winter' < *g"imer-n-, Lat. hibernus 'winterly'
< *gheim-r-ino-. An -r- also in Alb. (Tosk) dimër(ë) ‘winter', but from secondary
transition nr (Jokl IF 36 (1916): 130ff.).
3. Xiv corresponds to Arm. jiwn ‘snow' (cf. ►кíwv to Arm. siwn), from IE nom.
*gioōm (with final -m > -n in both languages). The m-stem also in Lat. hiems, hiemis
[f.] 'winter, storm' from the acc. *ghi-em-m, and in YAv. ziiå < IE *għiōms, acc. ziiqm
'winter' (after the ā-stems), OAv. gen. zimō.
4. Xiu-ετλov, dúo-xчuos from *ghim-o- like in Skt. himá- [m.] 'cold, frost, snow',
hímā [f.] 'winter'; as a second member in śatá-hima- 'of a hundred winters' = 'a
hundred years (old)', just like Lat. bimus from *bi-himos 'two years old'.
IE *gheim-h, is found in Balto-Slavic, e.g. Lith. žiemà, Ru. zimá.
An Indo-Iranian word for 'winter' in Av. zaiian- [m.], zaiiana- 'winterly', Skt.
hayaná [m., n.] 'year', also [adj.] 'belonging to the year, yearly', was thought to
derive from IE *g"ei-en-. However, we may better assume thematic *gheim-n-o-. Still,
it is most probable that the -m- in *gheim-, etc. is originally a suffix.
Xɛiµapos [m.] ‘plug in a ship's hull', which was drawn out for letting out the water,
after the ship had been brought to land in a sudden storm (Hes. Op. 626). ◄GR►
•ETYM Probably denoting a “bad weather bung", related to xεчµα, xeiµwv, xeiµépios,
as opposite to Evdíalos "good weather hole" (Plu., Poll., H.), see ɛúdía. See Sommer
1914: 123ff.
xeuáppovg →Xeiua.
Xeɩńßotos [adj.] · Xɛɩµɛpɩvŋ wpa ‘winter time' (H.). <GR►
▶
•ETYM See Lobel ZPE 19 (1975): 210, who derives it from þóσкw.
Xɛip, xeɩpós [f.] ‘hand, fist', also metaph. 'deed, strength, violence; crowd, band'. < IE
*ghes-r- 'hand'>
•VAR Xεpoí [dat.pl.] (IA, Il.); Dor. xnp, xηpós, Aeol. Xέpp' [acc.sg.], xéppas [acc.pl.],
poet. and Hell. also (secondarily) Xep- in xepí, xepós, xépa, xépɛc, etc.
•COMP Highly productive in compounds. As a first member e.g. Xεipo-téxvns [m.]
'craftsman' (IA), with -τεxvíα, -τέvov, etc.; XɛƖpí-σoo PN, probably
instrumental; Xép-vių, -vɩßos [f.] ‘cleansing water for the hands, holy water', plur.
also 'purifications with holy water' (since Od., where only acc.sg. -ɩẞa); thence
Xépviẞov [n.] '‘washing bowl, basin' (N 304, also Delos IVª), probably via
reinterpretation of the acc.sg. Xépvißa (Leumann 1950: 160), also -ov (Hp., Ar.,
xeip, xeupós
1621
And.), ɛiov (Antiph., inscr.) '‘id.'; rare denominative Xεpvíчaσa, -víлτoμαι (for
Xɛipaç viaσa) 'to wash the hands (before the sacrifice), besprinkle with purifying
water' (A 449, E., Ar., Lys.), -vía 'to besprinkle with holy water, to sacrifice' (Lyc.),
-viqbɛiç 'consecrated' (AP), -vччμα [n.] 'washing of the hands' (com. Vª).
As a second member e.g. aúτó-Xεp by one's own hand, acting, perpetrator',
euphem. = 'murderous, murderer' (Att. since A.), with -Xεɩpí, -Xεɩpíα, -Xεpí™w, etc.
Thematically enlarged in έкατóy-Xεpos 'with a hundred hands' (A 402); in
hypostases like éрó̟-è̟ε (to éρò εpшv) ‘at hand, prepared (IA), with
лpoxεpíšoµα [v.] 'to get, fetch, prepare, choose, etc.', vлo-xεípios 'under the hand,
in someone's possession, subject' (o 448), έy-xεpídios 'in the hand' (A.), -ídtov [n.]
'hand weapon' (IA), 'handbook' (late). See also εóµ˜кτ ►xεpvýs,
▶ Ékexeipia.
●DER 1. Diminutive xɛp-ídɩov [n.] (Att. inscr., late medic.), Xép-tov [n.] (late medic.),
also 'handle' (Hero), -úðpiov [n.] (Mosch.). 2. Xεip-ís, -ïdos [f.] ‘long handshoe,
sleeve' (w 230), cf. kvŋµís, with -ɩdwτóç ‘provided with sleeves' (Hdt., Hell. pap.,
Str.), 186oμa [v.] 'to be provided with sleeves' (comm. Arist., gloss.). 3. Xεip-ηtýs
[m.] 'manual worker' (pap. IIIP). 4. Xɛp-ápios [m.] an official in Ilion (inscr. II-III³).
5. Adjective Xεip-10s in the hands, in sbd.'s possession' (S., E.), -Iкóç 'manual' (pap.
IIP), -wτóc 'provided with hands' (comm. Arist.). 6. Short names, e.g. Xɛip-wv (Aeol.
Xépp-, Att. vases Xíp-); either the connection with xɛip is folk-etymology, or the
Attic form is itacistic; also Xɛp-ías (Xepp-, Xnp-) [m.] (Megara, Boeot.), see
Heubeck Beitr. z. Namenforsch. 7 (1956): 2769). 7. Verbs: a) xεip-iw, Dor. NWGr. fut.
- 'to maintain, govern' (Hp., Corc., Hell. and late), with -σiç, -išic, -oµóc, -loµa,
-LOTŃS, -LOTIKÓS, -1στɛúw; often in derivatives and hypostases, е.g. лроxɛɩp-íšoµai (to
лро-Xερоç, sее above), μετα-Xερíčo̟μαι, -íw (to µετà Xεчρаç) 'to take in hand, deal
with' (IA); b) -Xεpέw, -έoµαɩ in hypostases like εлɩ-ɣεp-έw 'to take hold of,
undertake' (w 386, 395), with -ŋµa, -ŋois, etc., ¿yxɛipéw (Arc. -xηp-) ‘id.' (Att.); c)
Xεɩpóoµαι (act. -ów Ar. V. 443), aor. -wσaσa 'to conquer, overpower, make subject',
pass. -wеñvaɩ, perf. кɛxεipwμαι 'to fall in sbd.'s hands, to be subject' (IA), with -wμa,
-WOIS, -WTIKÓS, E-Xεip-wτoç; see Kerschensteiner MSS 15 (1959): 39ff.; d) xeipiãv = tò
kateppñXĐai tàs xɛĩpas ǹ áλyɛïv έлì кóлov (Poll. 2, 152), cf. on ►xīpás.
•ETYM The dialectal forms Dor. XP-, and Aeol. Xεpp- correspond nicely to Hitt.
keššar < *ghes-r. The oldest inflected forms in Hittite are acc. kiššeran, gen. kiš(ša)raš
<*gs-er-m, *gs-r-os (see Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.). We would expect a nom. *xéap in
Greek, but it was apparantly replaced after the genitive. ToA tsar and ToB şar also
point to a stem *ges-r-, although the exact phonetic development remains unclear.
The old reconstruction *gher-s- has been generally abandoned.
Further forms are: Arm. jeřn from the accus., plur. jerk' (= xɛõpɛc), Alb. dorë.
Connection with Skt. hásta-, Av. zasta-, OP dasta- [m.] 'hand, arm' < *ges-to- is
likely, though the replacement of the suffix with -t- is hard to motivate.
The basic article for this word is Schindler IF 72 (1967): 244ff. On the spread of the
stem Xεp from the dat.pl. Xεpσí < *ghes-r-su, see most recently Viredaz KZ 113
(2000): 290-307 (also on the Armenian forms). See also on loxέaipa < *-g'es-r-ih,
which nicely preserves the old nominative form.

=== page 837 ===

1622
Xερóμαкτρov [n.] 'towel, cloth, napkin' (Sapph., Hecat., S. and Ar. in Fr., X., Hell.
pap.). <GR➤
•VAR Also --.
•ETYM The oldest interpretation departs from ►xɛip and ►µáσσw (whence µáкτpov)
‘to knead, treat with the hands' (cf. åлo-, ¿к-µáσow 'to strip off, wipe off). In this
case, however, the incidental occurrence of -w- (Hdt. v.l., Hell. pap.) beside the
much more ususal -o-, remains unclear. Hoffmann 1898: 365 therefore proposed
*Xερ(o)-wμαρктроv (with dissimilation), with a second member connected with
► ò̟µópyvvu ‘to wipe'; for the zero grade, he refers to öµаðšov. áлó̟µаžov (H.). This
is the more likely solution.
Xεipwv [compar.] 'worse, weaker' (IA, II.). <?>
•VAR Aeol. (gramm.) Xéppwv, poet. also Xεɩpóτεpos (O 513, Y 436, Hes. Op. 127, etc.),
superl. xɛipiotos (Att.).
●DER Epic forms xepeiwv, xepeiótepos; xépeia [acc.pl.n., acc.sg.m.], xépŋes [nom.pl.],
Xépnï [dat.sg.].
•ETYM In order to explain the forms, Leumann Mus. Helv. 2 (1945): 2ff. assumes that
a superlative *xép-ɩσtos was built to Xɛípwv < *xέp-jwv, replacing zero grade
*xápiστoç after µεšov < *µéу-jwv to μéуiστoç. Att. xɛípiστos was then reshaped after
Xɛipwv, to which Xεpíwv. ελáττwv, Xɛipwv (H.) was formed. Xɛpɛiwy was formed.
beside *xépɩσtos after the model äpiσtos: ápɛíwv, with a ntr. Xépɛtov, to which the
plur. Xépɛa after the o-stems; to this, finally, the m./f. *xépɛt-ɛs (written Xεpη-εç, see
Schwyzer: 243), with a dat.sg. Xépn-ï, acc. Xépεi-a.
No convincing etymology. Earlier attempts fail: the connection with Skt. hrasvá-,
compar. hrásiyas- 'short, small', OIr. gerr 'short' because Gr. Xεp- cannot be
explained, and the proposal by Machek Listy filol. 72 (1948): 74f. (to OCS gorjii
'worse', which is usually connected with gorěti 'to burn', gorǝk 'bitter') is formally
not evident in view of the Slavic o-grade.
Оn Xερóоμαι sее Xɛíp. Cf. also xpń.
·
Xeλïdwv, -óvos [f.] 'swallow' (Od.), often metaph., e.g. of a flying fish (middle com.,
Arist.), see Strömberg 1943: 117f., Thompson 1947 S.V. <PG(S)►
VAR Poetic voc. -oi, like ȧndoi to andw(v), etc.
•DER 1. poetic Xελidov-íç, -ídos [f.], = -óv with elucidation of the sex (AP), also as a
mythological name (Ant. Lib.). 2. xeλidov-ideús [m.] ‘young swallow' (Eust.), like
àɛt-idɛúç, etc., see Boßhardt 1942: 78f. 3. Xελɩdov-1ov [n.] ‘id.' (Gal.), also the name of
a plant (Thphr., Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 72. 4. Xελɩdov-íaç [m.] kind of tuna
(Diph. Siph.), see Strömberg 1943: l.c.), also the name of a constellation (Scherer
1953: 174), 'the spring wind' (Thphr.), likе áларкτíαç, etc. 5. Xελidóv-εws [f.] kind of
fig tree (Ath. et al.), after quẞáλɛws, etc. 6. Xελidov-iá [f.] name of a deme (Arx.), see
Scheller 1951: 137. 7. Xeλidóv-(e)ɩos belonging to the swallow, (colored) like a
swallow', e.g. of figs, σñкa, loxádɛç (Ar. Fr. 569: 4, Dsc., et al.), see Schulze 1933a: 415;
also of a cup, кúλɩ (Delos IV-IIª). 8. Xελdov-taños colored like a swallow' (pap.
imper. times). 9. Xε\ɩɗov-í\w [v.] ‘'to chirp like a swallow, speak unintelligibly,
ßapßapíšɛiv' (A. Fr. 450 = 728 M.), 'to gather for the swallows, beg' (Rhodos; Ath. 8,
xeluvn 2
1623
360b), whence -ɩotaí. oi tñ xeλidóν (τǹv -óva cod.) ȧyɛípovτes (H.). Extensively on
XEλSóv and its derivatives Thompson 1895 s.v.
•ETYM The woman's name XελiƑov (IG 9²(1), 86: 1 [Thermos VIª], of Corinthian
origin) for XελFovi[s (?, see Sommer 1948: 1463) would point to a suffix -Fov-. This
would be the only occurrence of this suffix in post-consonantal position in
alphabetic Greek (but cf. Myc. te-mi-dwe-te, -ta). It is preferable, therefore, to take
-F- as a false archaism, like in TλaσíaƑo instead of -ao (cf. Fraenkel Phil. 97 (1948):
161).
Otherwise, the formation is unclear too: Xελid- reminds of ηïd-, кvηµïd-, but
further connection with a root *gel- in reduplicated кixλn and the Germanic
group of OHG gellan 'to sound, cry', MHG glien 'to cry' is hardly credible.
On the other hand, a suffix -ïd- is unproblematic in Pre-Greek. Fur.: 272, 355 assumes
Mediterranean origin (also for Lat. hirundo).
xɛdixɛlwvŋ [f.] designation of a girls' game, in which the participants form a ring
around a player called Xελovn (Poll. 9, 125, Eust.). <PG?>
•ETYM A playful reduplicated formation, for which Specht KZ 59 (1932): 122ff. tried
to explain a semantic relation with Xελdóv. This is quite doubtful. The word could
also be connected with xɛλóvn (s.v. ►xɛλúvŋ 2), which is Pre-Greek.
Xellwv, -ŵvos [m.] a kind of mullet, ‘Mugil chelo' (Arist., Hikes. and Diph. apud Ath.,
H.); also as a PN (Ephesus IV*), see Bechtel 1917a: 48. <PG(V)>
•VAR Also -λ-.
•DER XEλλaping = óvíσкoç fishname (Dorio apud Ath.), see Strömberg 1943: 130 and
134.
•ETYM On the fish see Thompson 1947 s.v. The semantically obvious connection with
Xεios (Mastrelli Arch. glott. ital. 51 (1966): 135; cf. the Romance continuants of Lat.
labeō) is phonetically difficult.
Fur: 140 connects Xεapins with кaλλapías, yaλapias (H.) and yaλλɛpíaç,
yeλaping (Dorio and Euthydem. apud Ath. 7, 315f.). The variation shows that these
words are Pre-Greek, and the same must hold for Xελλov, then.
Xɛλúvŋ 1 [f.] ‘lip' (Ar. V. 1083, Poll. 2, 89, H.), ‘jaw' (Ael.). ◄PG(V)►
•COMP As a first member in xελuv-oidŋs 'with swollen lips' (Com. Adesp., Eust.).
•DER XEλúviov [n.] ‘lip' (pap., Hippiatr.), 'jaw' (Hp. Ep., Hipparch., J., Hippiatr.).
Probably also in xελvvášɛv. Xλeváεv 'to jest, scoff (H.), which has variants
oxελvváčε λvapεi 'talks nonsense', εσxελúvaσεv· έqλvápŋσev (H.).
•ETYM The word is probably Pre-Greek, in view of its structure and of the variants
with oxɛλuv-. Connection with Xελúvŋ 2, xélus, xelwvŋ is semantically unclear; the
relation to synonymous ✗εiλoç is unclear too.
Xελбvŋ 2 [f.] 'land turtle' (Nic. Al. 555, 558 v.l.). <PG(S)►
•VAR Aeol. Xελúvva [f.] ‘lyre' (Sapph.), ‘game of turtles' (Erinn.), see Scheidweiler
Phil. 100 (1956): 40ff. Also xéλvμva (Babr. 115, 5), which has been doubted without
justification (Fur: 247). Also xéλovç. μоvσιкòv öруavov 'musical instrument' (H.),
perhaps Boeotian?

=== page 838 ===

1624
xedovn 2
•DER Diminutive Xελúv-tov [n.] 'braincase' (Hippiatr.), = Xελávov (H.).
Xéλus, -vos [f.] ‘tortoise' (h. Merc.), often ‘lyre' (h. Merc., Sapph., A. Fr. 314 = 621 M.,
E. [lyr.], Call.), with u, secondarily ŭ. Also a constellation (Arat.), see Scherer 1953:
181 and 203; metaph. ‘chest' (Hp., E.). As a first member e.g. in Xελv-o-σσóoç
'causing the (strings of the) lyre to move' (Hell. poetry), XÉλ-vdpos [m.] 'tortoise
snake', an amphibious snake with rough scales (Nic., Lyc.), see Morel Phil. 83 (1928):
378. A rare derivative is ✗ελvoμa [n.] 'wooden sheathing on the keel of a ship for
protection during haulage' (Thphr., Poll.), see Chantraine 1928: 9, and cf. εpεɩσµα,
ödiσμa, etc.; Xελ-TIÇ [f.] epithet of Artemis in Sparta (Clem. Al.); the naming
motive is unknown.
*Xελúε is found in Xελovεv. ẞησσя 'to cough' (H.), probably Lac., and in
Xε\(\)úσooµai [v.] (also ȧva-) 'to expectorate' (Hp., Nic., H.), -w 'to disgorge' (Lyc.).
Cf. also Xελ-íσкov [n.] = tpúßλiov (Hp. apud Erot.), -íoкtov [n.] ‘mild coughing'
(Hp. apud Gal.).
Xéλяov [n.] 'tortoise shell' (Nic., H.), XελεÚç. кiеápa (H.).
With a different stem Xελovn [f.] 'tortoise (shell)' (h. Merc.+), metaph. of many
tortoise-like objects, especially a wooden shield cover of siege-troops, Lat. testūdō
(X., Plb., etc.). As a first member in Xɛλwvo-oáyou [m.pl.] EN (Str., D. S., Plin.), also
άɛtoí tɩves (H.).
=
Thence 1. Xελwv-tov [n.] 'tortoise shell' (Arist.), often metaph., e.g. 'cover of a lock
which is shaped like a tortoise shell' (Delos IIIª, pap.), see Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 43;
diminutive -ápiov [n.] (Hero, Peripl. M. Rubr.). 2. xeλwv-is, -ídos [f.] lyre, footstool,
threshold' (Poseid., LXX, S. E.). 3. Xɛλwv-ía, -ītis [f.] name of a stone (Plin.), -ítŋs
(кóλлoç), -ītɩç (vñσoç, etc.) as a geographical name (Redard 1949: 122, 125, 160, 178).
4. vos 'made of tortoise shell' (Edict. Diocl.).
•ETYM XÉλÜç is at the basis of Xελúvη < *-us-no- ‘ptng. to the X.' and έλɛtov <
*xελɛƑɩov (like yέvɛov to yέvus). With a change of suffix, we also find xελíσkov,
-ÍσKLOV.
Xελus is usually identified with a Slavic word for ‘tortoise': CS žely, Ru. žolv', etc. <
PSl. *želū- < IE *gheluH- or *gelH-u-. The connection with the word for 'green,
yellow' in Lat. helvus, Greek ►xλón, etc. from a root *ghelh3- seems possible, but is
rejected e.g. by Schmeja IF 68 (1963): 40f.
Traditionally, Xɛλwvη is connected to xέλuç under an analysis *Xελw[v]-vā, where
the long diphthong loses its second element. This would presuppose that suffixal -vη
was added to an old nominative *gel-ōu. It is more probable that xελovη reflects an
old interchange of suffixes -u- and -n- (e.g. Lat. grūs beside yέpavos, Lat. corvus next
to кopwvn). It would be conceivable that the -w- has to do with the root-final *h¸ of
*ghelh3-, but the details remain unclear.
Another option (Mastrelli apud Frisk) is that Xελovn derives from the sharp sides of
the jaw of tortoises, and that it is connected with the word for ‘lip, jaw' in ►xɛîλoç,
► Xελúvη 1.
Finally, Fur.: 247 points out that the form xéλuμva is real, and that it yielded
*XελuƑva > Xελúvη, Xελúvva (with interchange μ/F), like in σíyчμvoç, σiyuvoç. This
strongly suggests Pre-Greek origin. DELG writes that the form with -üv- is of a rare
Xεpápios
1625
type; Chantraine 1933: 208 already stated that the words with -v- must be
interpreted as loans from a non-IE language. In spite of the similarity with the Slavic
words, I think this conclusion is unavoidable for xéλus, xeλúvŋ and related words.
The explanation of Xελwvη from a long diphthong is an interpretation which has
long since been given up (-wv- is a Pre-Greek suffix; see Fur.: 303³).
Xελwτpα = stillicidium (gloss.), water that falls drip by drip.
•ETYM Conomis Glotta 46 (1968): 183 connects xoλédpa ‘roof-gutter', s.v.
Xεvóσɩɩç Egyptian name of ‘ivy' (Plu. Mor. 365). ◄LW Eg.➤
•ETYM According to Plutarch, qutòv 'Ooípidos, which is correct according to
Newberry J. Egypt Arch. 15 (1929): 93¹.
Xépados [n.] ‘debris, gravel, rubble' (Ø 319, Sapph. 145, Alc. fr. 344 L.P., A. R. 1, 1123).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Dat.sg. Xεpádɛɩ or -ɩ (Pi. P. 6, 13, Fr. 327), gen. Xapádɛos = xapádpas (Tab.
Heracl. 1, 60); Also a fem. in the glosses Xɛpás. τò ảnò Đaláσoŋs kai rotaļiŵv
Afwdɛs and xɛpádes. ai tŵv xeiµáppwv notaµwv Niðwdeis áßpoíoɛiç (H.). Variant
σxερ- in gen. лоλv-σxɛpádoc (Euph. fr. 25 Powell), 'shingly' (LSJ), probably from
false word-division in 319. Further Xɛpadéws [adv.] 'in mass' (Gal. Gloss. XIX, 154
Kühn), with J. Jouanna.
•DIAL Myc. ka-ra-do-ro (see Ruijgh 1967a: 75).
•DER Xapádpa [f.] ‘dry bed of a mountain river, torrent (which dries out in summer),
ravine, etc.' (Il.); also xápadpos [m.] ‘id.' (Delph., Boeot., Plu.), also HN (Th., Paus.).
Derivatives: 1. Xapádp-lov (Str.), -ɛtov (Nic.) [n.] ‘id.'; 2. -ɛwv, -ɛwvos [m.] ‘place
with many riverbeds' (Hdn.). 3. -wdns 'full of riverbeds' (Str., Dsc.), -años 'belonging
to a riverbed (API., Nonn.), 'striated, serrated' (Nonn.), -nɛiç ‘id., full of riverbeds'
(Nonn.). 4. Xapadp-óoµaι [v.] 'to be filled or corroded by a torrent, form a torrent,
cleave' (Hdt., Hp., Plb., Str.), also with έк-. 5. Xapadpiós [m.] name of a bird, perhaps
‘plover' (IA), acc. to Arist. because it lives in xapádpal, probably folk etymology?
More in Thompson 1895 s.v.; formation like έpwdiós, aiyumós, etc.
ETYM As is shown by the Heraclean gen. Xapádɛos (probably reshaped after
Xapádpa), the neuter Xépados is old. The feminine xɛpás, which was already
(re) constructed in antiquity from the ambiguous form Xɛpados (either Xépadoç
[acc.sg.n.] or xεpádos [gen.sg.f.]), is found beside xέpados in H., EM, etc., and is
supported by collective formations (Chantraine 1933: 352f.) like Aάç, dɛpáç; for
further discussion Leumann 1950: 161f.
The pair Xépados: Xapádpa (rather not with vowel assimilation) reminds of doç:
Spa, exеos: Exеpa, etc. For the formation, cf. also ïétpa, táôpŋ, etc.
The older connection with xapáσow must be given up. There is no convincing
alternative etymology. Since the variation between Xɛpad- and xapad- cannot be
explained in IE terms, the word is probably Pre-Greek. This is quite plausible for a
geographical term. Not in Fur. See also on XóvSpoç.
Xepɛiwv, xépnes, -nɩ ⇒xɛipwv.
Xεpápios [m.] probably 'secretary' in Ilion (CIG 3620, 3621 [Iª]). <LW Latin>>

=== page 839 ===

1626
Xepµác, -ádos
⚫ETYM Interpreted as *Xεip-ápios by Boeckh.
Xepµác, -ádos [f.] ‘large pebble, sling stone' (poet. Pi., also late prose). <?>
•VAR Also xεpμa. roíŋua, xáλič (H.); cross of Xεpua and Xɛpáç? See Schwyzer: 508.
•DER Xεpµádiov [n.] 'cobble, sling stone' (Hom.), -ádios similar to a xεpµáç³ (Luc.).
Xepμatiotńs. Xíŝoç xeporλýðŋç, kaì díokoç Bakxɛios (H.), xεpµ-aoτnp [m.] 'sling'
(AP), -άται [m.pl.] 'slingers' (D. H.). Verb xεpµáчw [v.] 'to clear of stones, remove
the stones' in exεµáµ· è ñv εipуаóµÐα (H.); with verbal connection also
vεwxεpμoç. уñ vεwoτì ɛipyaσµévη (H.).
•ETYM Connected with Xɛip by ancient sources (e.g. H. Xεpµás. λíos xεiporλýßnc),
Xεpua reminds of Xépados and xεpác, which are also unclear. If the word belongs to
Xépados, etc., it is probably Pre-Greek.
The formally unobjectionable connection with Skt. harm(i)yá- [n.] ‘firm, permanent
house', Av. zairimiia- [n.] ‘id.' remains hypothetical because of the meaning.
Xepvýc, -ñtos [m.] Adjunct of dóµos, ßíos, yuvý = névns, Xátpis, Xeipo-téxvns (H.),
‘poor, meagre' (E. El. 207 [lyr.], AP 6, 39, Gal. apud Orib.), oi õεpvñτeç ‘craftsmen,
day labourers' (Arist. Pol. 1277ª, 38: “oi (ŵvtes åñò tŵv Xeipŵv”); <GR?>
VAR Fem. also Xερуñσσа (Hdn. Gr. 1, 250).
•DER Besides Xεpvýtηs (Dor. -ńτac) [m.] 'craftsman, day labourer' (Simon. 124A, A.
Pr. 893 [lyr.], D. H.), fem. -ñτɩç ‘'craftswoman, day labourer (fem.)' (M 433, Parth.,
AP); also Xεpvnτopεç = xεpvñτai (Man.). Adjective To ✗εруητɩкóν 'the profession of
craftsman' (Arist.). Backformation xépva yàp ǹ éɛvía (H.), probably constructed for
the sake of etymology.
•ETYM Departing from M 433, where a spinster is mentioned, scholars have seen in
Xερvñτɩç a compound (univerbation) of Xɛip and véw 'to spin', so properly 'spinning
with the hands'; thence, Xεps, Xεpvns would have secondarily acquired the
general meaning 'day labourer', and (as an adjective) 'poor, scanty'. Schwyzer RhM
77 (1928): 1052 explained the word as haplological for *Xεp-apv-nτ- (Xεp- for Xεɩp-
after Xép-vi) earning with the hands' (to ǎpvvμai, cf. μσapvéw, -os, -ŋc), but
this seems rather artificial.
Xɛpvítŋs [m.] designation of a white marble (Thphr., Plin.), see Redard 1949: 63. <?►
•VAR Also -ITIS [f.].
•ETYM Unexplained; there is nothing that would support connection with xɛíp.
Xépvɩų →Xεip.
Xépoos [f.] 'dry land, mainland' (epic poet. Il.), as opposed to the sea, 'dry, infertile,
barren land, wasteland', also adjective 'dry, infertile, desert', mostly predicative,
which admits of a substantival interpretation (Hdt., trag., Thphr., LXX, pap.), also
metaph. of women (S.); on the mg. Finzenhagen 1939: 59f. <IE *ghers-o- ‘standing
erect'>
•VAR Att. Xέppos.
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. xɛpσó-vnσos (also Xεppo-, metrically shortened
Xεpo-) [f.] 'island conncted to the mainland, i.e. peninsula', also as a PN (IA), with
Xεpσovno-lov, iw, etc.; Xεpσo-кóлоç [m.] 'who works on barren land' with -колέw,
Xεw, -oμαι
1627
-колíα (Hell. pap.). Rarely as a second member, e.g. ȧpaкó-xɛpσoç [f.] ‘wasteland
overgrown with ǎ.' (pap.).
⚫DER 1. Adverbs Xépσovde 'to the mainland (238), Xεpσóεv 'from the mainland'
(Pi., E.), -ó at the mainland' (AP). 2. Adjective Xεpo-años living on land
(mainland)' (IA), -tvos ‘id.' (Plin.), -wdŋs ‘infertile' (pap.). 3. Subst. Xεpo-ítnc [m.]
'worker on wasteland (pap. IIIª), -ía (-ɛía) [f.] ‘wasteland, ¿pηµía' (pap., H.); also
лapаxεpσíа of a field (PTeb. 378, 13; 265³), from *лapá-xεpσos located next to X.' (cf.
лáрαλ-oç, -íα), 'almost barren land'; έv л. 'in a situation, which approximates a X.. 4.
verbs: a) Xεpo-εúw (ovv-, ¿к-) [v.] 'to live on the mainland' (S. and E. Fr. [both
uncertain], Plu.), 'to lie or lay waste, etc.' (X., Arist., pap.); b) -óoµαι (кexepowµévn),
-ów (Xepowoavtɛç) ‘id.' (pap., LXX, Plu.).
⚫ETYM The gender is after vñσoç, уñ, etc. Perhaps derived from the verbal root *ghers-
'to stand erect' seen in Skt. hárṣate, hŕsyati 'to be excited' and Lat. horreō 'to stand
erect, bristle, shudder', to which also belongs (with dialectal i for e) hirsūtus rough,
bristly, raw'. The Greek word may first have referred to arid, stubbly land, and only
later to land in opposition to water. See also ► xnp.
Specht KZ 66 (1939): 201f. differently assumed a metathesized form of ɛpóc 'dry',
like for oxɛpós 'mainland'.
Xéw, -oµai [v.] ‘to pour, pour out, gush, shed, douse, empty, heap up', med. intr. 'to
gush, stream, spread, pass. 'to be poured, be heaped up' (Il.). On the mg. in Homer
see Porzig 1942: 104f., in the sacrificial language Casabona 1966: 279ff. <IE *greu-
'pour'>
•VAR With prefix also -Xúvw (late); aor. έxɛa, inf. xéaɩ, epic έxɛva, xɛña, ỵɛñaɩ, med.
(epic poet.) also έxuto, xúto, xúµεvoç, etc., pass. έxúðŋv, xúðŋv, -ñvaɩ (Il.), fut. xέw,
-oμaι, epic xεúw, -oµaɩ, late xɛw, perf. med. кéxvµαi (Il.), act. kéxvka (Hell.).
•DIAL Myc. me-ta-ke-ku-me-na; as a second member e.g. in si-to-ko-wo.
•COMP Mostly with one or two prefixes, especially in prose: e.g. Sia- (ovv-dia-),
кατα- (у-кατα-), εл-(лρо-εл-), ovv- (лαрα-σvv-).
•DER A. With full grade: xεõµα [n.] ‘that which is poured, stream, pouring jug' (epic
Ion. poet. ¥ 561), époxeúµata [pl.] ‘outpourings, muď (Arist.).
B. With o-grade: 1. Xon (often plur. -aí) [f.] ‘'that which is poured, drink-offering,
libation, donation to the dead' (especially poet. Od.); very often from prefixed
compounds, e.g. лpoxоń (mostly pl. -aí) ‘outpourings, mouth of a river', also
‘libation' (epic poet. P 263); also with nominal first member, e.g. oivo-xón [f.] ‘jug for
scooping wine' (Hes.), to olvov xεiv, cf. oivo-xóos below. To this the verbs έ-xoá¶w
= mxéw (Lyd. Mens.), έк-Xoïw (pap.) mg. unclear (cf. Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 216).
2. Xoñç [m., f.] ‘jug' as a measure (= 12 кOTÚλα), also 'heaped up earth, rubble' (IA),
gen. Xou, often (analogical) xoós, etc. Thence xo-años ‘measuring a X.' (late), -ɩɛïoç
‘id.' (Hell. pap.), -tkós 'consisting of earth, earthly' (Ep. Cor., Ph.), 'belonging to the
Xóεç-festival' (inscr.). Diminutive -ïokos [m.], -ïoкlov [n.] (Att. inscr. IV³). From
пpo-xéw: лpóxoos, -xos, -xous [m.] ‘pouring jug' (2 304) with -xoïdtov [n.] (com. et
al.). Often with nominal first member, e.g. oivo-xóos [m.] 'wine pourer, cupbearer'
(B 128), with -Xoïкóç (Hld.); in bahuvrīhis, e.g. εá-xoos ‘measuring six xóɛç' (Arist.).
3. Xoɛúç [m.] = XoÛç as measure (Hp.).

=== page 840 ===

1628
Xεw, -oμαι
4. xóavoç [m.] ‘smelting furnace' (Σ 470, Hes., Emp.), also 'funnel (Xwvoc, Hp.);
Xoávŋ (Att.), xwvŋ [f.] (Att., Hell.) 'funnel' (also metaph.), ‘smelting furnace'
(Poseidon.). Hence Xoavεúw, xwvɛúw [v.] 'to cast into, smelt in, pour into a smelting
furnace' (Att., Hell.), also with ouv-, кατα-, etc., whence xwv-ɛía, -ɛïov, -εчµα,
-εUTHS, -εvτýpιov (Hell.).
C. With zero grade: 1. XU-Tóc 'heaped up' (Hom. only Xuτǹ yaĩa), 'poured (out),
fluid, mostly from the prefixed verbs, e.g. “po-, ¿ïɩ-, ¿к- (Pi., IA); époxútai [f.pl.]
(E., A. R.) = ovλo-xúτaι (see ovλaí).
2. Xúτηs 'pourer' (gloss.), further with prefix, e.g. лpoɣú-tη¢ [m.] ‘jug, mug' (Ion. lyr.,
Hell. com.). 3. Xvτýp = fusorium (gloss.), úño-,¸èñɩ-xv-týp [m.] ‘pouring jug' (LXX,
Sm.); kataxvtýp-ta [n.pl.] 'inundation festival' (pap.), etc. 4. xúσiç [f.] ‘pouring out,
emptying, that which is poured, rubble, heap' (Od.), mostly from prefixed verbs, e.g.
σvv-, έк-, dɩa-, éρo-; έкуvσαïoç ‘belonging to a drain' (pap. IIIP); besides XV-TIкóç
(Sα-, σvv-, лро-) 'dissolving, etc.' (Pl., Arist.). 5. xúμa [n.] 'that which is poured,
(cast) ingot, heap, bulk' (Arist., Hell.), innovated for Xεчua, mostly prefixed, e.g. with
¿v-, épo-, áƒo-, kατα-; thence xчµátiov [n.] ‘small ingot' (Delos IIª). 6. katá-xvoµa
[n.] (after ηdvσµa, лáoµa, etc.) ‘liquid poured over sth., sauce', plur. 'figs and nuts,
with which the bride is showered' (com.); diminutive -✗vσµáτov (com.); σuy-xv-
quós [m.] ‘the pouring of oil into a lamp' (Stud. Pal. II³). 7. xúτpa (Epich., Att.), Ion.
kúеpŋ, Hell. also кúðpa [f.] ‘earthen pot with кußpíç, also xvtp- [f.] (Hdt., Hell.),
-ídiov [n.] (IA), -ɛú¢ [m.] 'potter' (Pl.), -íτηs = лvóc (sch.), -ɛous (Att.), -εoç (Ar.),
-ɩvoç (Hp.), -ɩкóç (IV) ‘earthen, clay', -wons 'like a pot' (S.), -ívdα лaíčɛv (Poll., H.),
-íw (also кατα-, εv-, έк-) [v.] 'to abandon a child (in a pot), to put into a pot (for
burning)' (A., S. in Fr., com.), whence &уxuτpíστpia [f.] (Pl. Min., sch.),
nepixútpiqua [n.] ‘area enclosed by clay shards? (Att. inscr. IVª), xvtploriós. ǹ tŵv
ßpeqŵv ¿v tais xútpais škėεois (H.). 8. xútpos (kúеpos) [m.] ‘earthen pot', also
‘earthen hole' (Hell.); oi Xúτpot name of the warm sources near Thermopylai (Hdt.),
'festival of pots' (Ar.) with Xʊτp-(kvėp-)-īvos [m.] ‘subterranean water well, deep
holes in the riverbed' (Antig. Mir., Peripl. M. Rubr.); σvу-Xυτрóоuat [v.] 'to become
derelict, become ruined' vel sim., of an oil-mill (ouvεxvτρwеŋ, pap. IP). 9. Xúτλov [n.]
(mostly plur. -a) ‘liquid, especially for washing and anointing' (Hell. poetry), with
xvtλ-óoµai, -ów [v.] ‘to wash, anoinť (( 80, Hell. poetry., medic.), -á\w ‘id.' (medic.),
έy-xvτλów 'to perform a libation' (Herod.), кaτáɣv-tλov [n.] 'pouring jug' (com.,
Poll.). 10. Xúdηv, Dor. (Call.) xúdav ‘in streams, by heaps, disorderly' with Xud-años
‘abundant, ordinary, common' (Hell.), -aɩótηs, -aɩóµαí, -α¨ïšoµαí, -αïσtí (late). 11.
Sеe xvλóc, xчµóc, ▸xчµíα.
On the secondary present forms ỵoñv, époσãoĩ, xoñσɩ, etc. (as if from *xów) beside
Xwσal, xwσеñval, кéxwσμaι, etc., see xwvvчд. Reshaped from this xoεσα [aor.]
(Argolis IVa).
⚫ETYM Old forms are the verbal adjective Xuτóc, which formally agrees with Skt.
hutá 'sacrificed < IE *gu-tó-; other Greco-Indian isoglosses are: õεчµа = Skt.
hóman- [n.] 'sacrificial pouring, sacrifice'; xúσ = Skt. á-huti- ‘sacrifice'. The present
and aorist formations of Greek and Indo-Aryan, however, are far apart: Greek has a
xnλós
1629
full grade thematic xéw, while Indic has an athematic reduplicated present juhómi.
Both forms can be old.
A special problem is presented by the aorist forms exɛva and exɛa, see Kiparsky
Lang. 43 (1967): 627f., Hettrich MSS 35 (1976): 47-61, and more recently Harðarson.
1993a: 188 and 193-4. The question is whether they represent a sigmatic aorist or an
old root aorist; I do not have a strong opinion on this matter. On the treatment of
the intervocalic digamma, see Chantraine 1942: 159.
Beside these full grade active forms stand with regular zero grade the medial éxuto,
xúto, xúµɛvoç, to which ¿xúðŋv. From this aorist, the fut. *XέƑw arose as an original
thematic subjunctive.
Beside in Indo-Aryan, the verbal root is found in ToAB käw- ‘to pour', ToB 1sg. subj.
act. kewu, 3sg. med. kutär. The corresponding verb in Latin as in Germanic has an
enlargement in -d- (probably a present suffix: Lat. fundō 'to pour out', Go. giutan
'id.', etc. Nominal forms are found in Arm. joyl 'poured, molten, massive' < *gheu-lo-
or *ghou-lo- (cf. Xõλóc), Arm. jew ‘form, shape' < *gheu-o-, Lat. futis [f.] ‘watering
can' (Varro). Hitt. ku-uz-za /kūts/, acc. kuttan 'wall' < 'heaped up' is a t-stem, see
Schindler KZ 81 (1967): 297. Finally, there are two Thraco-Phrygian glosses: (εvµav.
tǹv äŋуýv ‘source'. Ôpúyɛç (H.), would be Gr. Xεũµa, see Solmsen KZ 34 (1897): 62',
and 【ετpaíα. xúτpη (Poll.), perhaps from *geu-tr-. Cf. ►кoxvdéw and ►xwoμai.
Xn\n [f.] 'cloven hoof of cattle, horse's hoof, talon, pincers', metaph. ‘surgical forceps,
hooked needle, crochet needle, notch of an arrow, breakwater jutting out in a claw-
like way' (Hes. Sc., IA since Hdt. and A.). <?►
•VAR Xaλá (trag. [lyr.]).
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. xaλ-apyós 'fleet of hoofs, with fleet hoofs' (S. [lyr.]),
dí-xos, -xalos 'with cloven hoofs, with two claws' (Hdt., E., Arist.); on -xaλoç in
Arist. see Björck 1950: 298ff. Thence Sixη\-éw [v.] 'to have cloven hoofs', with -ía,
-ŋσɩç; compounds, e.g. àyкvλo-xýλns with hooked talons' (Ar.), confused in the
tradition with the much more usual -xɛiλns.
•DER Verbs: 1. Xηλevei. pántei, nλékeɩ ‘stitch, plaiť' (H., Poll. = Eup. 388); xŋλevtá,
epithet of кpávɛa (Hdt. 7, 89), = þaлtá, nλektá (H., Poll.), xnλεvµα = óлýτɩov (H.,
Poll.). 2. xη\óoµat [v.] 'to be furnished with claws' (Hero), -ów ‘to furnish with
notches' (Ph.), wμa [n.] 'notch' (Hp. apud Gal., Eratosth.), -óτα. ai paqidɛç τwv
Siкtvoлλóкwv (H.). Also кexýλwµαι лódaç. dédeµai ovveppaµµévos toùs nódac (H.,
perhaps S. fr. 445). Further õòλãç. þáääηs, ñàéktns (H.). Unclear is nλvov
epithet of ǎyyos (Anacr. 37), acc. to H. and Poll. = лλεкτóv (but rather to ►xóc,
s.v.).
=
•ETYM No agreement outside Greek. Usually connected with xnun, ►xnpaµós and
further with Xáσкw, under the assumption of an original meaning "klaffender
Gegenstand". DELG calls this not very plausible.
Xn\ós [f.] 'chest, drawer, coffer' (P, Od., Theoc., epigr. Thasos). <?>
•VAR On the gender see Schwyzer 1950: 34².
•DER Perhaps xnλivov (ayyos) 'chest-like vessel' (Anacr. 37), or to xnλý?

=== page 841 ===

1630
Xun
•ETYM “áƒò τñу diaotáoews tñs katà tǹv ävoišɩv yɛvoµévès” (A. D.); if this is
correct, it may belong with xnun to ▸xáσкw.
·Xáokw.
Xnun [f.] ‘musseľ (Philyll., Arist., Hell. pap.), also used as a measure (Hp.); = xáoµn,
Xnpauis Aɛía 'smooth kind of mussel' (H.), see Olsson Symb. Oslo. 4 (1926): 63. ◄?►
•DER Diminutive ημ-íov [n.] (medic.) and xnuwos [f.] designation of an eye-disease
(medic.).
⚫ETYM Taken to be a verbal noun to xáσкw (like xáσun), with the same full grade as
in OCS zějo xaívw'. Cf. ►xnλń, ►xylós, ►xipaµós. Quite uncertain.
Xýv, xnvóc [m., f.] ‘goose' (II.). <IE *għh₂en-s- ‘goose'>
•DIAL Dor. Boeot. Xáv, xavóc; Myc. gen.sg. (pl) ka-no, dat.pl. ka-si (Aravantinos,
Godart & Sacconi 2002: 207f.
•COMP As a first member, e.g. Xηv-aλáƒη} [m., f.] “fox-goose" (after кvv-αλóη,
etc.), designation of an Egyptian kind of goose (Hdt., Ar., Arist., Herod.). Short form
Xŋváλoñes [pl.] (H.), with -aλwлek-ɩdeúç [f.] ‘young fox' (Ael.), -ɛos (Hell. pap.);
xòváyp-ɩov [n.] ‘young wild goose', diminutive of *xηv-aypos (on the formation
Risch IF 59 (1949): 286f.).
●DER 1. Diminutive: xηv-íov [n.] (Hell. pap.), -íʊkoç [m.] (Eub.), mostly metaph., e.g.
'curved part at the backside of a ship' (Ptol., Luc.), -áptov [n.] (Hdn.), -ɩdɛú¢ [m.]
(Ael., Eust.). 2. Adjectives -ε(1) os ‘of the goose' (Hdt., Arist., Hell. pap.), -wdŋs
‘goose-like' (S. E.). 3. Verb xηv-íčw and xηv-iášw 'to quack like a goose, cackle' (Ath.,
Diph.); of flute-players.
•ETYM The nom. plur. Xñveç, xāvɛs agrees nicely with Germanic and Baltic plural
forms: OE gēs > MoE geese, ON gæss, Lith. dial. žąses < *ghans-es. The s-stem was
generalized in Greek as an n-stem, with analogical nom. Xnv, xáv instead of *xắc <
*xávç.
Other cognates include Ru. gus', OHG gans, probably also Olr. géis 'swan', and the
secondary forms in Skt. hamsá- [m.] (o-stem), fem. hamsi, and OE gōs, ON gós <
PGm. *gáns-ō, continuing an ā-stem. Lat. äns-er, -eris [m.].
Connection with xavɛïv (see ►xáσкw) and onomatopoeic origin have both been
considered.
As IE had no phoneme /a/, Skt. hamsá- must continue *għh₂en-s-, and the same form
may be assumed for the other languages.
Xnp [?] • ¿xivos ‘hedgehog' (H.). <IE *gher- 'stick out'>
•ETYM Identical with Lat. ēr, ēris [m.] ‘hedgehog', which may represent *hēr, cf. ānser
‘goose' for *hänser. It is assumed that the root is *gher- 'to be excited' seen in ►xaípw,
and that this originally meant to stick out, be bristly'. It probably does not belong to
the root *gers- 'to be stiff found in ►xépσoç, because we do not find a trace of *-s-
in the present word. See also xoipoç.
Xnpa [f.] 'widow, woman left by her husband, vidua' (Il.). <IE *gheh,-ro->
•VAR Ion. -1.
•COMP As a second member in quλó-xηpos, -xúpa 'friend of widows' (late inscr.).
i
Xnpwotai
1631
●DER 1. Xñpoç ‘widowed, orphaned, bereaved (E., Call., A. R., AP, late prose), rarely
as a substantive ‘widower', of the male of an animal (Arist. [beside xnpa], Ath.).
2. Xŋpoσúvn [f.] ‘widowhood' (A. R., Man.). 3. xöp-alótŋs [f.] ‘id.' (pap. VI³), after
уεpaɩóτη, etc. 4. Xηp-nïos 'widowed, empty' (Antim.), -ɛto ‘id.' (AP). 5. Xηp-ɩкóç
'belonging to a widow' (Tz.).
Verbs: 6. xnp-ɛúw [v.] 'to be widowed, separated, bereaveď (1 124, Gortyn, Att.), also
with кatα-, έëɩ-; thence -ɛvoç [f.] 'widowhood, separateness' (Gortyn, LXX). 7. XNP-
ów [v.] ‘to make widow, rob (of one's spouse), depopulate' (II.), whence -wois [f.]
‘robbery' (sch.). 8. Xηp-aívw 'to become a widow' (Herod.).
See also on Xn\pwστai.
⚫ETYM Xnpa replaced the old word for 'widow' found in Lat. vidua, etc.; a cognate of
this is retained in noɛoç. Remote cognates may be found in xópa < *g"oh,-reh₂-,
and with a different suffix xñτoç, dat. Xητε (on ►Xaτéw see s.v.). It is assumed that
the root from which all these forms derive is identical with that in the verb meaning
'to leave' in Skt. jáhāti and ►кixắvw.
xnpáuẞn [f.] a kind of mussel (Archil. fr. 285 W, Sophr.) <PG(V)►
•VAR Also xηpaμús (Xanth., Hp., Str.), s.v. paμóç. See Fur.: 287.
⚫ETYM Fur.: 221, 287 assumes a Pre-Greek pre-form *xnpaßus in order to explain the
prenasalized form.
Xnpauós [f.] 'hole, cleft, slit' (epic poet. 495, also Arist. and late prose). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Plur. also -á [n.], dat. pl. also xηpaчóvεσσ (Оrph.), which seems to point to
*xηpaμov, but is probably only a metrical enlargement.
Xnpauís (Hp. Morb. 3, 15 and 16) and xεpaßos. xáσµа уñs (H.) are taken by Fur. 221
as mistakes for xηpauós, but could just as well be variants.
•DER Xnpaµo-Sútηs [m.] "who nuzzles through holes" (AP), ηpaµóεv 'from a hole'
(Orph.). Lexically attested by-forms: xapaµóç. ǹ tñç yñs diáσtaois, o pó
(H.), xηλaµóç (Eust.), Xεpaµóç (EM).
Beside it ööpaµúç, -údos [f.] ‘scallop-shell', used as a measure of content (Xanth., Hp.
[v.l. -µíc], Str.), Xnpaµúdes. tà koiλa kai έxovta kεvάμаτа 'hollow places, having
cavities' (H.); ×ηpáµßŋ [f.] 'kind of scallop' (Archil., Sophr.).
•ETYM A typical example where scholars have tried to explain away all variants,
instead of asking what they may indicate. We clearly have a Pre-Greek form with
several variants. Fur.: 339 suggests that Xεpaμós represents an earlier form
*xaipauoç. The variant with -uß- is a variant too, see Fur.: 2216 and 2876, recalling the
variations μ/ μẞ and B/ μ. Note also p/ λ. Further, -ud- is known as a Pre-Greek
suffix.
xŋpwoτai [m.pl.] = oi μакрóеɛv σuyyɛvɛiç (H.), 'far-off kinsmen, who inherit from a
deceased person lacking closer relatives' (E 158, Hes. Th. 607, Q. S.). <IE *geh,-ro-
'bereft'>
•ETYM Formation comparable with wµŋσtǹs, so like this to be analyzed as a
compound, extended with a suffix -ηs. Formally and semantically strongly
reminiscent of Lat. hērēs, -ēdis, it also resembles xp 'widow', Xñpos 'bereaved,
orphaned, etc.'. The first member in both words is ÏE *g³eh,-ro- > *xñpov ‘property

=== page 842 ===

1632
XITOS
left behind' (cf. MoHG Erbe 'property' to oppavós, s.v.). Dunkel 1987: 91-100
showed that the second member is from *hed- 'to eat'. This solves the problem of
the -w-: *gheh,ro-h₁d- > xηpwd-. The è of Latin is explained by assuming lengthened
grade -h,ēd in the second member, which may have been reintroduced at a later
stage or not.
Xñtos •var Dat. Xýteï, xýtel. →xatéw.
xaμalós →xwv.
XOés [adv.] 'yesterday' (h. Merc.). <IE *dgies- 'yesterday'>>
•VAR Also έ-X0έs (Ar., Hell.).
•DER Xеós of yesterday' (Hom.), to which the adverb X-óv (T 195), -á (B 303);
explanation see below. Several formations in -ɩvós (лɛpvolvós, etc.): XƉɛσ-ɩvós
(Luc.), ¿×¤×σ-ɩvós (AP), X¤i-tvós (Ar. [lyr.] conj., Gal., Alciphr.), ¿xt-ɩvós (Men.).
•ETYM Old expression of time for 'yesterday', retained in:
1. Lat. heri, Alb. dje < IE *ghes(i), ON í gær, OSw. i gār < *ģēs, where i is a
preposition; with a suffix -ter- in Lat. hes-ternus, Gm. *gester-, e.g. in OHG gestaron
'yesterday'.
2. Skt. hyás < *gies. The gloss σɛpóç. XОéç. 'HÀɛïoɩ (H.) can also be explained from
the same basis (with Elean rhotacism, and -ós after vuкTóc).
3. XOέs with the same initial as in ►x0wv; here probably also belong Celtic forms like
Olr. in-dé, MW (d)doe < PCl. *gd(i)ies (with loss of the g-).
Derivation from *dog¹o- ‘day' (Puhvel 1987a: 316-318) directly explains the initial
reflexes. Puhvel assumes a comparative suffix, with -ies as an endingless locative and
-is- as a zero grade; in this way, the forms with and without -- are also explained.
The comparative suffix gives an original meaning 'the day which is the other day in
relation to now'. The anlauting ẻ- in έ-xôέç may be the same deictic particle as in è-
кƐĭvoç. XÔɩšά may be from *x10-da (Pisani) with 8-suffix as in кpúß-da, etc.; Puhvel
1.c. n. 11.
X0wv, x¤ovós [f.] ‘earth, ground, land' (almost only epic poet. since Il.). <IE *d¹ghem-
'earth'>
•COMP Rarely as a first member, e.g. Xovo-τpεons 'bred by the earth' (A.). Often as
a second member, e.g. aúτó-xwv 'possessing one's own ground, living on proper
ground, indigenous', mostly plur. ‘aboriginals' (of the population of Attica, etc.),
secondarily produced by the earth' (IA); besides aúró-xovos 'together with the
land' (A. Ag. 536); aúτóxеwv and -ovos are treated extensively by Sommer 1948: 83ff.
•DER 1. X0óv-tos belonging to the earth, the ground, the underworld; indigenous'
(epic poet. Hes., also late prose); often in hypostases, e.g. εлóv-tos ‘living on the
earth, earthly' (epic poet. Il.); on 'Epixovos s.v. 2. x¤óvɛα [n.pl.] ‘festival for
worshipping the xvio ɛol (Argolis). 3. Xovýpεs. Xovious (H.), uncertain
XOóivos ynïvos (H.). 4. With ablaut and retained -μ-: xеaμ-αλós ‘low' (N 683), with
-αλóτη [f.] 'lowness' (late), -aλów [v.] 'to lower, make level (J.).
=
ETYM Old word for 'earth', retained in most daughter languages: Hitt. tēkan, gen.
taknaš, ToA tkam, ToB kem, Skt. kṣaḥ, gen. jmáḥ, Av. zå, gen. zamō, Alb. dhe, Lat.
XÍXOL
1633
humus, OIr. dū, acc. don, Lith. žēmė, Ru. zemljá. Typical derivations are found in
Germanic, e.g. Go. guma ‘man', Lat. homō, NPhr. (ɛµɛλws, which is a formation like
Xaμaλós and Lat. humilis. The Anatolian TN гdaμ-μava is better left out of the
discussion.
As a basis, we find an m-stem *dheg¹-m- > Hitt. tekan, to which a zero grade stem
*dgom-> ToA tkam was formed. The initial dh was lost in Lat. humus, Gr. Xaµaí,
etc. In Greek, dhgh- became X0- through metathesis, and final -µ regularly became -v,
which subsequently spread in the inflexion. The -m- was retained only in the zero
grade forms xеauaλós and ►xaµaí. The root may also be seen in aúxµós ‘drought’
and vɛoxµós 'new'. Further details on the morphology and phonetic development in
Schindler Sprache 13 (1967): 191ff.
XÃ, Xíagua =XE
-xɩ [encl.pcl.] in -xɩ, ov-xí, vaí-xɩ (Il.). ◄IE *għi▷
⚫ETYM An emphasizing particle, like Skt. hí, Av. zi, also encl. in kár-hi 'when?', tár-hi
'then', from IE *għi.
Xidpov [n.] 'dish of fresh barley-corns or other crops' (Alcm., Ar., LXX, Hell. pap.).
<PG(V)>
•VAR Mostly plur. -pa. Also xédpa (v.l. Ph. 1, 180); кídvaι ai έyxwpio (codd.;
¿qúpol) reqpvyμévot кpiеaí (H.), where Schmidt reads kidpaɩ sec. ord.
●DER xɩɗpíaç лvpós 'unripe wheat' (Ar. Fr. 889), ✗ɩεporwληs 'dealer in X.' (Poll. 7,
199); Xipoßpóxov 'vessel for soaking X.', Kafizin 219 (223/222 BC).
ETYM Acc. to sch. Ar. Pax 595, εdεσµа лεpì Kapíav. Unsuccessful attempt to connect
the word with кpiеń by Pisani RILomb. 77 (1943-44): 565f. The variation к/x shows.
that the word is Pre-Greek (Fur.: 135f.).
.
Xíбpv [n.] övo̟да dεóv (H.). ◄PG?►
⚫ETYM Probably a rude term, the meaning of which is not given. It could belong to
sexual language, compare xídalov· ávτì τoŨ <кíðaλov>. τò aidoĭov (H.), and
xídadov [leg. xídaλov]· τò лadíov (H.). The connection with кíðaλov ‘onion' is
popular. Difficult to judge is xidá. oppiкτn; see DELG. The word will be Pre-Greek.
xílio [num.] 'thousand' (Il.). <IE *geslo- 'thousand'>
●VAR Ion. (inscr.) Xεiλtot, Aeol. Xεtoi, Lac. XĤλioL.
•COMP As a first member in Xiλió-vaus 'consisting of a thousand ships' (E., Str.), also
-vaúτη, Dor. -vaúτaç ‘id.' (A. [anap.], E. [lyr.]), xɩɩóµ-ßŋ [f.] ‘sacrifice of a
thousand oxen (Jul.), after έkatóµßη. As a second member also -Xiλoɩ in ¿vvɛá-,
Sɛká-X(ε)ɩoɩ ‘nine thousand, ten thousand' (E 860, E 148), after this díʊ-xɩɩ (Att.
epigr. Va), a backfornation like -ẞ₁ßλoç to ►ßißλíov.
•DER 1. Xi\ioσtós ‘thousandth' (Att.), -óoµaɩ [v.] ‘to be convicted to a penalty of a
thousand drachmae' (Lycurg.); 2. xiλiáç, -ádoç [f.] 'number of a thousand' (IA),
-αστús (Ephesus, Samos, Cos), also -oστús (X.), Aeol. Xε\\ŋo-túc (Methymna) [f.]
'division or troop of a thousand men' (details on the formation in Fraenkel 1910:
202f., Schwyzer: 593 and 597); thence -aσtýp [m.] ‘member of a xiaotúç' (Samos),
see Fraenkel l.c., Benveniste 1948: 74. XIλiάw [v.] 'to be a thousand years old (Tz.).

=== page 843 ===

1634
Xilós
X入aiva
1635
•ETYM The dialectal forms Xεio
clearly point to a pre-form
*Xεoot, which is cognate with Skt. sahásra-, Av. hazaŋra- [n.] 'thousand'. A pre-
form IE *geslo- can be reconstructed, but the original concrete meaning of it
remains unknown ('heap' vel sim.?). Usually, Att. xiλot is thought to have arisen by
assimilation, and it also intruded into the text of Homer (see Wackernagel 1916: 7).
Skt. sa- and Av. ha- continue the zero grade of IE *sem ‘one' (see ►εic). It is usually
assumed that Lat. mille should be connected too, from *smih₂ geslih₂.
Xilós [m., f.] ‘green cattle-fodder, grass, meadow' (Hdt., X., Plu., Babr.). <?>
•VAR Also -ń [f.] ‘id.' (Gal., Suid.).
•COMP As a first member in Xin-yovos 'grown as fodder' (Nic.), as a second
member in Boú-xiλos 'feeding oxen' (A. [lyr.], AP).
•DER 1. XIX-ów [v.] ‘to feed, lead onto the meadow' (X.), -oûσðαɩ· лaxúvɛõðal,
σɩτíðaι to fatten, be feď (H.), with -wua [n.] 'fodder' (Agatharch.), -wτńp [m.]
'fodder-bag' (pap., Poll., H.); 2. -ɛúw ‘id.', also intr. 'to pasture' (Thphr., Nic.).
•ETYM Unexplained. Machek 1958: 54f. compared Cz. žir ‘fodder', Ru. žir ‘fat, larď.
Other explanations of the Slav. word are found in Vasmer 1953 s.v.
Xíμaɩpa [f.] ‘goat', also as a designation of a mythical monster (Il.). ◄IE *għei-m-
'winter, snow'>
•COMP As a first member in xчuapo-póvoç 'killing goats' (AP). Hence xчaip-ác [f.]
‘id.' (Del.³ 644, 16 [IV-III³]), beside ȧpvnáç (cf. Fraenkel 1910: 95), also -íç [f.] ‘kiď
(Alciphr.), -εos belonging to a goat' (Hdn.).
•DER Xíµapos [m.] ‘he-goat', also [f.] ‘goat' (Ar., Hell.); xчµαpo-кτóVOS = Xчapo-
póvos (Opp.); xчápa [f.] ‘id.' (AP).
•ETYM Formation with a suffix -α- (cf. лpãpa, vɛíaɩpa) which reminds of MoSw.
and MoNw. dial. gimmer, gimber, ON gymbr [f.] 'sheep that has not yet dropped a
lamb' < PGm. *gimbrī. The proper meaning is a one year old animal', cf. x₁µapoɩ
xflapo.
alyɛç xεчépiαι (H.), and X₁₁apα. ñ ¿v xεivɩ tε×¤×σα, olov vα εчva xovσ
(EM 811, 53), see also on taλov. If the Germanic forms are cognate, they are
probably independent innovations.
The age of the much later attested Xiuapos (replacing τpáуoç, s.v.) is uncertain;
probably it is an innovation to Xiµɑɑ like лɛpóç to лíɛpɑ; cf. also tapos beside
ëtapa.
It was derived from an r-stem, which is also seen in Arm. jmeřn 'winter' < *għimer-,
and within Greek with full grade in Xεчép-чoç, -tvóc. This r-stem alternates with the
n-stem in Xεov, xεµα.
Xiµetlov⇒xεчµa.
Xīpác, -ádos [f.] ‘chap, crack' (D. L., Suid., Eust.). <PG?>
toĩs
•VAR Also xɛpáç; plur. also ✗(ε)чpai = ai έv taïç лtépvαiç (H.), τoïç лoʊì þayádɛç
(EM 810, 27).
•COMP As a first member in xɩpo-лódãç [m.] (Alc.; cod. ✗εpoлódηs); also -лoυç,
plur. -лоdεç 'with chapped feet' (Poll., H., EM).
!
i
•DER Xɩp-αλéos (medic. pap.), -αλéovç· τoùç ñódaç katɛpyaqµévovs (H.), cf.
pwyaλéoc; xípaµa [n.] designation of a foot-disease of horses (Hippiatr.). Formation
like Aеás, σлλáç, etc.
⚫ETYM The connection with the Germanic group of MoNw. gir [m.] 'desire, passion',
OHG gīri 'desirous', also gīr 'vulture', is highly doubtful. Semantically close within
Greek are xnpaчóç, xηλý, but an ablaut IE *ghē(i)- : għi- cannot be assumed anymore;
this means that these words cannot be related. õηpaµós is probably Pre-Greek; the
hold for this word, in view of the suffix -ad- and the meaning.
same may
XITOV, -vos [m.] 'chiton', designation of a garment without sleeves, which was worn
directly on the body, 'body-garment, shirt' (II.); extensively on the mg. Trümpy 1950:
13f., E. Masson 1967: 27ff. <PG?>
•VAR Ion. prose and Hell. кiðáv (ON KITÚV, XIÐŵV see below).
DIAL Myc. ki-to, ki-to-ne, -na.
•DER Hypostasis Myc. E-pi-ki-to-ni-ja = έni-xitwv-ia [n.pl.] "that which is worn over
the chiton", designation of upper garments. Diminutives: XITvov [n.] (Ar., Att.
inscr., Hell. pap.), -ápiov [n.] (Hell. and late), -íoкoç [m.] (Att.), -íσкiov [n.] (Att.
inscr.), -toкápiov [n.] (Eust.). Further -ía [f.] mg. unclear (Melamp.), Scheller 1951:
54. Also XIτúvη (Call.), -ća or -ía (Epich., Ath.), Kivη (Milete), name of Artemis
as a huntress.
ETYM Acc. to E. Masson l.c., a Semitic loan word, first from Phoen. ktn ‘linen
garment'. On the different forms: XITV, with metathesis Kiwv, through
contamination кITŵν and Xiеáv, see Schulze 1933a: 386; Wackernagel 1916: 23 and
Kretschmer Glotta 26 (1938): 43. From Sem. also Lat. tunica (see WH s.v.). Acc. to
Fur.: 136, we are rather dealing with an Anatolian culture-word. Could it be Pre-
Greek, given the variants?
=
xɩóv ⇒xɛîµa, xeqiwv.
*xlădɛiv [v.] ‘to cheer, roar'. <?>
•VAR A hypothetical aor. beside the perf. кéxλāda (Pi.), a form which, is found as
kexλŋdévai. yoqeïv, époσλaλɛîv ‘to make noise, talk with' (H.).
•ETYM The formation may be compared with кéкpāya : kpãyeĭv, kékpiya : kpĭyeïv,
λεληка λaкɛīv. A present *xλádw (LSJ) cannot be accounted for; it would rather be
*xλáw (Thes., Pape), like кpáčw, кpíšw beside ►кaxλášw.
Xaiva [f.] ‘upper-garment, mantle', originally worn only by men (II.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Also Kλavíoкtov inscr. Athens (Fur.: 136).
•COMP μελáу-xλaivos 'with a black X.' (Mosch.), also a people north of the Scythians
(Hdt.).
DER Xλatv-íov [n.] (AP); denominative -woat, -ów [v.] 'to cover with a mantle'
(Nonn., AP), also with åva-, Sia-, кata-; thence -wµa [n.] 'cloak', of the skin of a lion
(API.), -iw ‘id.', -totńs [m.] (Hdn.).
Further xλavíc, -ídos [f.] light upper-garment', worn both by men and women (IA).
Compound xλavido-лotós [m.] ‘manufacturer of X.' (Poll.), -лoúíɑ [f.] (X.). Thence
xλav-ídiov [n.] (Hdt., E.), -1díσкα [f.] (Tanagra IIIª), -díσкiov [n.] (Aristaenet.); also

=== page 844 ===

.f
1636
-íokɩov [n.] (Ar., Aeschin. et al.), haplological; -ɩokíðɩov (Ar.). Also xλávdɩov [n.]
(Samos, Teos).
A third formation is xλauúc, gen. -údos, accus. -vv (Sapph.) [f.] 'upper-garment for
men, especially for traveling or for battle' (Ar., X., Hell.). Compound Xλquv-ovpуós
[m.] 'manufacturer of x.' (Poll.), -ovpyía [f.] (X.). Diminutive Xλauúdiov [n.] (Hell.),
-vdíoka [f.] (Tanagra IIIª), verb кɛxλaµvбwμévos 'dressed in a X.' (Nicostr.).
Unclear remain the glosses ✗λaµvpíç. ñóa, ó kupíws ßρóµos ‘wild oats', likewise
xλavía• repißolaí ‘garments'; Xλavítides. oi öpµoi rapðévwv ‘necklaces of girls’;
xλávos: tò repì toùs tpaxýlovę dáσoç 'rough part around the neck' (all from H.).
•ETYM For Xλaiva < *xλáv-₁ǎ and Xλavíc, a common base form may be assumed.
Fraenkel 1912: 178² attempted to derive them from a common form xλaμ-, together
with xλauús. Fur.: 338 connects Xλquús with xaiva as Pre-Greek, which is
convincing given the meanings. Also related are Xλavíaɩ· лɛpißoλaí, for the same
reason. Xλavíτdes 'necklace' is rather a different word.
Fur.: 220 connects xλaµupís with xλaßóv. evtpaqés. The group of xλaïva, xλavis
and xλauús is no doubt Pre-Greek, given the suffix -v8-, and the interchange v
(see Fur.: 388). Add to these кλavíσкiov (see above).
From Xλaiva was borrowed Lat. laena via foreign (Etruscan?) mediation.
=>
X入aquýs → x入aiva.
Xλapós [adj.] only in xλapòv yɛλáσσaɩ (Pi. P. 9, 38), which acc. to the sch. means
époʊnvèç kaì ǹdú 'friendly and sweet'. <?>
=
•VAR From H.: ✗λapóv. þu̟лαрóv, λeлτóv, τpvxaλέov 'dirty, small, XX'; also
ελapòç кwwv ‘oil vessel'; Xλapá. yaiσtà èv èλaiw 'ground in oil', cf. Myc. ka-ra-
re-we = XλapñƑεç? See Morpurgo Davies 1963 s.v.
=
⚫ETYM Unclear. Persson 1912(2): 791³ hesitatingly compared it with ON glóra 'to
sparkle', etc.; see also on Xλón. A gloss Xλáp. кóxλač (H.) кáxλn 'pebble'
reminds of Lat. glarea ‘id.', and this is probably not accidental. Alessio Studi etruschi
18 (1941): 132 thinks it is a Mediterranian word.
xλɛµɛpóv [adj.] · Xλαpóv, еεpµóv ‘warm, hot'; xλεµúpa. ✗λoavеovτα 'verdant (H.).
< PG➤
•ETYM Persson 1891: 94 and Persson 1912(1): 15 compares Lith. želmuō 'shoot of a
plant, to žélti ‘to become green, flourish', with further connection to the group of
►Xλón. This is difficult because the root is probably *gelh3-. The word seems Pre-
Greek: for the suffix cf. ►Suέpa.
tléos =x\nSos.
Xλevdóv · xúdŋv, owpndóv, nλŋßoñvta ‘unordered, in heaps, full' (H.). →xλñdos.
Xλɛúŋ [f.] ‘joke, jest, mock, scoff (h. Cer. 202, Lyr. [IV], Ph., Luc.). <IE *gleu- 'be
merry, joke'>
DER More usual xλɛv-άw [v.] 'to jest, mock, taunt' (Ar., D., Arist., Hell.), also with
Sɩα-, έк-, кaτα-, etc., probably denominative; thence -aσµós [m.] (D., Arist., Hell.),
-ασµα [n.] (LXX, sch.), -aσía [f.] (D., Arist., D. C.) 'mockery, taunť, -αστýs [m.]
xdiaívw
1637
'mocker' (Arist., M. Ant.), -αστкóç (also кατα-) 'mocking, taunting' (D. H., J., Poll.),
-a [m.] 'id.' (com. in Poll.).
•ETYM The retention of antevocalic -εv- seems to point to a lost following consonant
(like in ►σкɛñoç, okevý, okevášw). Xλɛún corresponds to OE glēo [n.] ‘cheerful
conversation, convivial pleasure, joy' < IE *ghleu-o-, OE glīw = ON glý [n.] ‘id.' < IE
*gleu-io-. Other cognates have a suffix *-m- (ON glaumr = OE gleam [m.] 'shouting,
joy', Ru. glúm [m.] 'banter, scoff) or -d- (e.g. Lith. glaudas 'banter'). See Pok. 451.
Xλñdoç [m.] ‘debris, filth, rubbish' vel sim. (A. Fr. 16 = 264 M., D. 55, 22 and 27, Crates
Com. 27, Hdn.), = ó σwpòs tŵv \íðwv 'heap of stones' (H.). <PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 136 and 12336 mentions variants кλndóv. σwpóv (H.), кλŋбéα. paуo
'fencings, partitions' (H.) and also Xλéos (inscr. Tegea [IV]). These ensure Pre-
Greek origin.
Miaívw [v.] 'to warm, soften' (Hp., S. Eleg., Ar., Arist., AP). <IE? *għlei(d)- ‘gleaming,
clear'>
•VAR Aor. -tavat, Ion. -ɩñvat, pass. -tavеñvaɩ, fut. -tavw (Ar.); perf. кɛxλíαукa.
τεеéρμαука 'am warm' (H.).
•COMP Also with άvα-, εлɩ-, úлo-, etc.
•DER Xλiáoµata [n.pl.] ‘warming compresses' (Hp.).
Further x\ɩášw [v.] ‘id.' (sch. Nic. Al. 206), Xλtáw ‘id.' in ptc. xλiówvti rotŵ (Nic.
Al.110; v.l. xλióɛvti), x\íw (also ¿v-) [v.] ‘to revel, behave haughtily' (A.), ¿yxλíɛɩ.
Evτpupã 'to live in luxury, be dainty' (H.), xá [f.] 'warmth' (D. S.), Xλióɛiç in
XALÓεVTI (v.l. Nic. Al.110), -ódne lukewarm' (late medic.).
Adjective Xapóç, -ɛpós (Schwyzer: 482), -ŋpws (Hp.) ‘lukewarm' (Alcm., Epich.,
Hdt., com., Arist., etc.), -apótŋs [f.] (Procl.).
With 8-enlargement: xλĭdń [f.] ‘effeminacy, luxury, haughtiness' (Hdt., trag., Pl.
Smp. 197d, X. Cyr. 4, 5, 54), also xλídos [n.] luxurious ornament' (Ion Trag. 3), Xλíð-
wv, -wvoç [m.] (accented acc. to Hdn. 2, 729, 18) 'bracelet, necklace, anklet' (Asios
VII-VIª, Ar. Fr. 320, 11, Att. inscr. IVª, Hell.), Xλídavós (Aeol. Xλíd-) ‘copious,
voluptuous' (Sapph., A. [anap.], E. [lyr.], Plu.), xλídaívoµaι [v.] 'to live luxuriously'
(X), Xλídáw (rarely with кατα-, кατ-εv-) [v.] 'to be effeminate, revel, be haughty' (Pi.,
trag., Ar. [troch.], Posidon., Arr.), whence -ŋua [n] = xλídos (E. IA 74). Further
some seemingly primary forms: кex\ɩdóta· áv¤oñvta ‘flowering' (H.), dɩakexλidws -
ерулτóμεvos (Archipp.); with full grade: SiaкεX\oidws. Siappéwv úñò tpvqñs
'wasting away in luxury', diaкexλodévai· Оpúлtεσða 'to be effeminate, etc.' (H.).
Thus also X入odãv.ié入readai Kai tpupāv, X入olSwo. OpÚntovtal, X入oldéokovaar
уaστpílovσαι (H.), on the formation see Schwyzer: 708.
=
MoGr. Xiós lukewarm' can hardly be the old inherited basis of the above group, as
per Georgacas Glotta 6 (1958): 191.
•ETYM The pair Xλtaívw : Xλapós (like µaívw : papós, raivw : лapós, etc.) belong
together both formally and semantically, due to their physiological meaning 'soft,
lukewarm². Xλiá, xλlóels, xλɩwdns fit with these semantically.
The rare forms Xλíw and xλƖŋ, in the metaphorical sense 'soft, luxuriant, etc.', seem
to be primary.

=== page 845 ===

1638
xión
Some Celtic and Germanic words with the meaning 'to shine, etc.' are compared:
Olr. glé 'clear, evident', MW gloew 'liquid, clear' < QIE *g"loiuo-, also ON gljá 'to
shine, gleam', MHG glīmen 'to lighten up, gleam', Lith. žlejà 'darkness, twilight,
dusk' (extensively on this Fraenkel 1955 s.v.). These words point to a root *għlei-.
XAS, on the other hand, would correspond to Go. glitmunjan ‘to gleam', ON glita
'to glitter', etc. The semantic connection between 'shine, gleam' and 'warm' is
difficult, so the reconstruction remains uncertain.
xλón [f.] 'first green shoots, young verdure, etc.' (IA), also Xλóŋ (Ar., inscr., etc.),
Xλoin (oracular saying [IIP]) as an epithet or name of Demeter. <IE *gelh¸- ‘green,
yellow'>
•VAR Also xλoin (Hp., Hell. pap., Babr.), Dor. Xλoa (E. [lyr.]).
•COMP E.g. Xλon-opópos 'bearing young green' (E. [lyr.], Ph.), whence -popέw [v.]
(Thphr., Ph.); εü-Xλoos (or έú-) 'verdant, fresh and green', of Demeter and others
(S., Nonn.).
•DER 1. Xλóïa [n.pl.] 'festival of Demeter Chloe' (Att. inscr. IIª). 2. Xλo-ɛpós ‘verdant,
bright green, fresh' (Hes. Sc., S., E. [lyr.], Theoc.), -ŋpós ‘id.' (Hp.), -ýpys ‘id.' (E.
[lyr.]). 3. xλo-avós ‘id.' (Lyd.). 4. Xλo-άw (also ¿v-) a) ‘to green, sprout, buď (Eup.,
Nic., AP, Ph.), b) 'to be pale' (Nonn.). 5. -άw = xλoάw (Arist., Nic., Plu.), whence
-aoua [n.] 'greening'.
Further xóos (Hell. poetry), Xλoñç (Hp. apud Gal.) [m.] '‘light green, green-yellow
color, pallor', xλo-wdns 'color of grass, green-yellow, pale' (Hp., Pl., Thphr.), Xλoɩ-
óoµαɩ (also ¿к-) [v.] 'to become green-yellow or pale' (Hp., Gal.).
On itself stands, with other formation, Xλwpós 'bright green, pale green, green-
yellow, yellowish, pale', also 'fresh, lively' (II.). Compounds, e.g. X\wpo-payos
‘eating green fodder' (Hp.), -qayέw [v.] (Hippiatr.), µελí-x\wpoç ‘honey-yellow' (Pl.,
Arist.).
Hence 1. X\wp-óτŋs [f.] 'bright green color, paleness' (LXX, Plu.). 2. -ĪTIS AÍOC
'bright green stone' (Plin.), see Redard 1949: 63. 3. Xλ\wp-αívoμaι [v.] 'to turn pale' (S.
Fr. 1114, Gal.), -aσµα [n.] 'becoming pale' (Hp.). 4. X\wp-í(w 'to become green or
pale' (LXX). 5. X\wp-ά(w [v.] ‘to eat green fodder' (Gal.). 6. xλwp-táw [v.] 'to become
pale, turn pale' (Hp., Longos), -íaσıç (H. s.v. xλóoc). 7. Xλwp-ɩký epithet of the
ȧρτεμσíα (PMag. Par.). 8. birdnames: ✗\wp-εús [m.] name of an unknown bird
(Arist., Plin., Ael.), see Boßhardt 1942: 62; x\wp-iç, -ídos [f.] 'greenfinch' (Arist.,
Nic., Ael.); XAwp-iwv, -iwvoc [m.] 'golden oriole' (Arist., Plin.), on xλwpŋïç s.v.; on
the birdnames see Thompson 1895 s.vv. 9. Xλwpic, -tv pet name (λ 281).
•ETYM The writing xλoíŋ, xλoιóoμat, which is probably Ionic, may have been caused
by the synonyms oíŋ, ſoía (which is лóα in Attic); cf. cases like xvoin beside ►xvón,
oλotóc beside ►óλoóc.
The Greek words for vegetation belong to a group of words which is represented in
Baltic, Slavic and Latin in the same meaning: Lith. žélti, 1sg. želiù 'to green, sprout',
želmuō plant, shoot, growth' < *gelH-mōn, žalias 'green, raw, uncooked', žolė ‘grass,
herb, flower' <*ghōl-, etc.; in Slavic e.g. OCS zelenʊ 'Xλwρóç, лрáσivoç', Ru. zelenyj
'green', etc.; Lat. helus, (h)olus, -eris [n.] 'green plants, vegetables, cabbage'. In Indo-
Iranian, Skt. hari- 'fallow, greenish' and Av. zairi- 'yellow' < *ge/olH-i- are related.
xvón
1639
From other languages, (ελкia. λáxava. Þpúyes (H.) and Oss. zældæ 'low grass' may
be mentioned.
From Xλwpóc, which must derive from zero grade *għlh3-ró-, it becomes clear that the
root was *gelh3-. It is unclear, however, how xλóŋ and Xλóos (with short -o-) can be
derived from this root, as they point to *xλóƑη, *xλóƑoç. The pair *´λófos to rλww
has been compared, but there we have evidence for two roots *pleu- and *pleh3-.
The comparison of Xλwpós with Icel. glóra 'to sparkle, gaze at', glór-eygðr, glór-ögd
'with sparkling eyes' is semantically not strong. Interesting is the identification of
X\wpós with youpós · xpvσós, y\oúpɛa• Xpúσɛa. Þpúyes (H.).
Other relatives are expressions for 'bile' and 'yellow', see ►xoλń.
= 29
Xoúvns [m.] epithet of the wild boar (I 539, Hes. Sc. 168, 177, Call. Dian. 150), 'boar'
(Nic. Fr. 74, 6, Opp. H. 1, 72), mg. unclear (A. Fr. 62 = 74 M., Hippon. 61
Masson). The meaning was already debated in antiquity: 'cut up, castrated, τoμíaç';
‘living solitarily, µovóc'; ‘foaming, copí(wv'; 'resting in the grass, ó ¿v tñ xλóŋ
εúvačóµεvoç'; ‘wrong-doer, robber, кaкoûρyoç, λwnodútns'. <?>
•VAR Acc. -11v.
=
•DER Also Xλoviç [f.] 'pubescence' vel sim. (A. Eu. 188), Xλouvóc xpuσóç 'gold' (H.).
Also MoGr. dial. (Calabria) ȧoкλoúvη(s) ‘povóxis kplós' or ‘oteipos kpLÓS
(Kapsomenos; see Risch Glotta 35 (1956): 76 and O. Masson 1962: 29).
•ETYM The word has no etymology, and the case is worsened by the unclear
meaning. For Xλovvós = xpuσós, connection with Xλón, Xλwpós is probable.
X\wpŋïç, -ídos [adj.] epithet of andwv (t 518), of káµлη (Nic. Th. 88). ◄ GR►
•ETYM Poetical feminine formation of x\wpós after patronymics and derivations
X\wpaúxεvεs
from PNs, e.g. Xpvonïs, Bpionïs (Risch 1937: 142); cf. andóves
(Simon. 73).
...
Prellwitz, however, reconstructed *x\wp-Ƒid- brightly singing', a compound of
X\wpós and the zero grade of åɛídw with compositional lengthening. The same
analysis by Duerbeck MSS 24 (1968): 15ff. (with extensive treatment), but in the sense
of 'singing in the fresh leaves'.
xdwpóc →X入ón.
Xvaúw [v.] ‘to gnaw (off), nibble' (Epich., E. Cyc. 358 [lyr.], com. IVª). <?>
•COMP Also with лapa- (Ael.).
•DER Xvañµa [n.] ‘delicacy, titbit' (com. IVª, Zen., Poll., H.), -µáτiov [n.] (com. V³),
-pós 'dainty' (Pherecr.), -σTIкóç [m.] 'gourmand' (com. IIIª). Further xvíɛ. yakáčɛ,
ерúлτε (cod. -τTε) 'drips, breaks into pieces' and xviαpwτépa⋅ xvow<deo>tépa (H.).
⚫ETYM These words agree in their vocalism with yaúw, Opaúw, xpaw; the glosses
remind of viw, xpíw. Further see xvón, xvóoc; it is unclear what the original form
was.
xvón [f.] 'axle-box, hub' (trag.). <?>
•VAR Also xvoin (Parm., Emp. [conj.]); cf. Xλoíŋ beside xλón.
•DER Besides Xvóos, xvoñç [m.] ‘fluff, dust, foam' (§ 226, Hp., Ar., Arist., Hell.), xvo-
wdns 'fluffy' (Hp., Thphr., Dsc., Gal.), xvó-ïoç ‘id.' (Anacreont.), Xvo-áw [v.] ‘to be

=== page 846 ===

1640
Xoávn
fluffy; to start growing a beard (Hell. and late poetry), also with επ-; also xvo-á¶w (S.
OT 742, com. Vª, Him.), Xvo-í\w (Crete II³, Gal.) ‘id.'.
•ETYM Starting from a meaning 'to plane, scratch, gnaw off, xvóos and xvóŋ may be
understood as action nouns 'what is planed or gnawed off, and 'place of planing off
(of the axle)'. It is tempting to connect the popular words Xvaúw and xvíw.
Reasonable connections can then be found in Germanic and Slavic: ON gnúa 'to
rub', OE gnēað < PGm. *gnauða- ‘niggardly', Ru. gnus 'rabble, vermin', Pol. gnus
'sluggerd', OCS gnusú þшαрóç'; DELG speaks of 'rather loose' connections. The
forms mentioned in Pok. can hardly yield Gr. Xvav-. Cf. also кVÍČw, ►KVÚw,
► кVóos, which agree in meaning.
Xoávη •VAR Xóavoc, xoń, xoñç. ⇒xéw.
Xoīvɩ, -кoç [f.] corn-measure = 4 KOTÚλaι (since T 28), metaph. a kind of fetter (Ar.,
D.), also of the socket of a door-hinge (Hell. pap.). ◄PG(S)►
•COMP As a first member in XOLVIко-µετρηу 'one who measures with a X. (as a daily
ration)' (Ath.), ó- one who shares a X. with someone else, fellow-slave'
(Plu.); further almost always thematically enlarged, e.g. τpi-xoíviкoç ‘measuring
three X. (Ar., X., Hell. pap., Poll.).
•DER XOLVɩk-íç, -ídos [f.] in several mgs. like 'nave, drum' of a wheel, an axle, a door-
hinge, a crown, etc. (D., Hell.); -tov [n.] as a measure, also 'fetter' (Phld., Them.),
Xavíкη τo poxoù, έv ✪ στpéqεται ó ǎεwv 'socket of a door-hinge' (H.); -taĭoç
'measuring one X.' (Hell. inscr.).
•ETYM The fact that no origin can be proposed for this technical expression, means
that it is almost certainly Pre-Greek; cf. the suffix -UK-.
xoчpos [m., f.] ‘(young) pig, piglet (§ 73), metaph. ‘pudenda muliebria' (com.); name
of a Nile-fish (Str., Ath., Gp.), on the naming motive Strömberg 1943: 101; or is it a
folk-etymology from Nubian (Thompson 1947 s.v.)? <PG?►
•COMP Often as a first member, e.g. Xoɩpo-лwλãç (Dor.) [m.] ‘pig-seller' (Ar.); also as
a second member, e.g. кaλλí-xoιpos ‘with fair piglets' (Arist.), ȧypɩó-xoɩpos [m.]
'wild boar' (sch. Ar. Pl. 304).
•DER 1. Xoipa [f.] 'female piglet' (Orph.). 2. diminutive xoup-íov [n.] (Ar.), -ídiov [n.]
(Att., etc.), -íoкoç [m.] (Luc.).
3. Xoɩp-ác, -ádoc [f.] 'sea-cliff (Pi., IA), because of the similarity with the back of a
swine, plur. 'swollen glands in the neck' (Hp.), cf. Lat. scrofulae to scrōfa, see WH
s.v.; thence -adwdns ‘craggy' (Str.), 'full of glands' (Plu.), -adɩкóç ‘suffering from
neck-glands', ntr. 'remedy against glands' (medic.). Pisani RILomb. 77 (1943-44):
566f. connected xoɩpás < *xop-ad- ‘cliff with Xέpados ‘gravel', but this is not
preferable.
4. Xoчp-ivāç [m.] 'kind of cake' (Philox. Lyr. V-IV). 5. Xoup-ivn [f.] 'small sea-mussel'
(Ar. [anap.], Poll.), like Sɛλqaк-, åɛp-ívŋ and other fish names). 6. xoɩp-íŋµa. τò
Xoɩpídɩov (H.), like έpɩɩýµata = plopol. 7. xoip-εwv [m.] ‘pigsty' (Tz.). 8. Xop-áciov
[n.] 'furrow' (pap. III³), like Onŋp-áqtov. 9. Adj. xoíp-ε(1)os (IA, § 81), see S. Schmid
1950: 26 and 51; -vos (Luc.) 'of (young) pigs', -ɩкós ‘id.' (EM), -wdŋs 'dirty' (late
medic., Hdn.), -wdía [f.] (sch.). 10. -í\w [v.] ‘to behave like a swine' (sch.). 11.
}
!
1
XoXέpa
1641
Xoчpεãτα [m.pl.] name of a phyle in Sicyon (Hdt. 5, 68), a nickname devised by
Cleisthenes. 12. Xoɩpóðavov [n.] name of a plant (Ps.-Dsc.), see Strömberg 1940: 147.
•ETYM The inherited word for ‘pig', σūç or ʊç, gradually extinguished and was
replaced by ypuλoç, ypúλλos and xoчpos. The latter probably represents *Xop-₁oc,
and in this case may be cognate with Alb. derr < ghoiro- 'swine'. Since wild pigs are
brushed, it may also be related to xp 'hedgehog', which is related to Lat. ēr. In
view of the limited distribution, we may wonder whether this etymon is a substrate
word.
The other etymology by Lidén Annales Academiae Scientiarum Fennicae B. 27 (1931):
117ff., that xoчpos would be identical with Arm. gēr, gen.pl. girac' 'fat (of men and
animals)' (which may derive from IE *ghoiro-) and related to Ru. žir 'fat, bacon,
wealth', is not very convincing.
Xoládɛç [f.pl.] 'entrails, guts' (A 526 = 181, h. Merc., Antim., AP). The sing. Xolác
means tò koɩvòv vлoxovôpíov кai λayóvoc, ‘abdominal cavity' (Arist.). ◄PG?(V)►
•VAR XOλλáбeç (Pherecr., Men.). Fur.: 131 compares кóλov 'intestines; (Ar.).
•DER Besides Xóλɩкɛç [f.pl.] ‘entrails, especially of oxen', also [m.], sing. Xóλı ‘gut'
(com., Milete Va), Xoλíкiov [n.] 'gut' (Thphr., Poll.).
•ETYM A Slavic word for 'stomach' shows remarkable similarity with xoλádɛç: Ru.
želúdok, CS želudókú, Pol. żołądek, which may be reconstructed as IE *ghel-ond-. The
formation is similar to that of Xoládɛç, if this derives from *gol-nd-, but not
identical. Lith. skilándis 'sausage-stomach, etc.' is considered unrelated, but shows
the same suffix.
There are a number of problems with this account: first, the deviating form xóλɩкɛÇ
remains unexplained (it is difficult to arrive at this form from *kholnd-). Second,
Fur.: 140 compares not only кóλov, but also кaλídia. έvtɛpa. Kúлpɩɩ 'intestines
(Cypr.)' (H.) and (ibid.: 345) yóla. έvτɛpa. Maкɛdóves (H.), yáλλia. vτεpα (H.),
yáλos (H.); he also adduces Arm. k‘alird ‘intestestines of animals. The variations
show that the word is Pre-Greek.
Xoλédpa [f.] 'roof-gutter, gutter' (Eratosth., Ph. Bel.). <PG?>
•ETYM Unexplained. It can hardly belong to xoλn. The formation cannot be Indo-
European; is the word Pre-Greek?
Xoλépa [f.] 'cholera, a disease of the stomach, which causes vomiting and diarrhoea',
Enpǹ X. obstruction' (Hp., Aret.), 'vomit, nausea' (LXX). Acc. to H. also = σwλýv, dɩ
оÚ τò Üбшρ ȧлò τшν кερáµшν чépεται εεαкovτóµεvov (= ►xoλεdpa). <PG?>
•VAR Ion. -pη.
●DER XOλɛp-ɩкós ‘belonging to X., suffering from X.', -wdŋs like X., causing X.', Xoλεp-
táw [v.] 'to suffer from X.' (medic.).
ETYM A medical expression. Formally, we may compare vστépа and names of
diseases like "кTεроç and üdɛpоç. Perhaps, Xoλépa is a substantivation from *xoλɛpós
with shift of accent (Schwyzer: 482). As a basic form, xoλn or xóλoc (Celsus) is more
probable than xolás (Alex. Trall.), but Pre-Greek is also quite possible.
OIr. galar [n.] 'disease' has to be kept separate (cf. Pok.: 411).

=== page 847 ===

1642
Xoλń
Xopón
1643
xoλń [f.] ‘gall', also metaph. (mostly poet.) ‘bitter hate, wrath' (IA), also of the
exception of the cuttle-fish (Nic.). <IE *gelh¸- ‘green'>
•COMP
Rarely as a first member, e.g. xoλn-dóxos ‘absorbing gall', of kúσtis 'gall-bladder'
(late medic.), xoló-ßaqos (Arist.), also xoλoí-Baqos (Nic.) ‘immersed in gall, gold-
yellow', with metrically conditioned variation acc. to Schwyzer: 4525. On ►xoλédpa
[f.] ‘gutter³, see s.v.
Frequent as a second member, e.g. µελáy-xolos 'containing black gall' (S.), -xoxía
[f.pl.], -íŋ [sg.] “melancholy”, ‘bilious complaint, gloominess, melancholy' (Hp., Ti.
Locr.), -xoláw [v.] 'to be gloomy, insane' (Att.); on the matter see Müri Mus. Helv.
10 (1953): 21ff.; on ȧкpáxoλoç s.V.
*
•DER 1. Diminutive xóλ-tov [n.] (M. Ant.). 2. Adjective xoλ-wdŋs full of gall, bilious'
(Hp., Pl., Arist.), also ‘wrathful' (Luc.), also connected with xóλoç; -óɛƖç ‘bilious'
(Nic., Opp.), -ɩкóç ‘id.' (Plu.), -años ‘id.' (Suid.).
3. Denominative xoláw [v.] 'to be full of gall, rage, be wrathful (Hp., com., LXX),
also with έк-, úñɛp-; xolaívw [v.] ‘id.' (Aesop., v.l.), ¿k-xoλíšw [v.] ‘to remove the
gall' (Gp., v.l.).
Also xóλoç [m.] 'bitter hate, wrath' (Il., epic poet., also Hdt. and late prose), rarely
'gall' (P 203). Thence Xol-wτós ‘wrathful' (Hom.), see Ammann 1956: 21f., -10C
'wrathful' (AP).
To Xoλwτós belongs a series of verbal forms: xoλw-0ñvai, -σaσ0αi. -σoμiai, kɛxóλw-
pai, -μévos, -σoаι, prеs. Xoλoчμа 'to become wrathful, be wrathful, grumble'; also
act. xoλw-σai, -σέµɛv ‘to make wrathful' (Hom., Hes., Pi., trag.); see Wackernagel
1916: 130, Chantraine 1942: 364.
From medical language xoλóoμaɩ [v.] ‘to turn into gall' (Gal., Alex. Aphr.), rarely
-ów, mostly with έê-, έëɩ- (to ¿ïí-xoλos), connected with xoλń.
•ETYM Formally, xoλń and xóλos are primary nouns to the root *g helh¸- found in Lat.
helus, (h)olus [n.] ‘greens, vegetables'.
A primary verb, which may be preserved in Lith. žélti ‘to sprout', originally referred
to the green-yellow color of germinating and sprouting vegetation, cf. OHG gruoni
'green' to gruoen 'to germinate', and Lat. viridis to vireō. This verb could also be used
of other objects that were characterized by a comparable color, e.g. gall: Av. zāra-
[m.], ON gall [n.] ‘gall, poison', OHG galla [f.] < PGm. *galla-, *gallō(n)- < IE
*golH-n-, OCS zlúčú < *g½lh¸-ti- (the appurtenance of Lat. fel, fellis [n.] ‘id.' with f- <
*g"- presupposes that it is a dialectal form).
A color adjective ‘green, yellow, etc.', is found in several variants, e.g. Skt. hári- = Av.
zairi- < IE *għeli- or *golH-i-, Lat. helvus 'honey-yellow' <*għelH-i-uo- (see De Vaan
2008 s.v.), Lith. želvas 'greenish, yellowish' < *gel-uo-, OHG gelo 'yellow' < PGm.
*gelwa- << IE *għelH-u-), ON gulr ‘id.' < PGm. *gula- < IE *għlH-o-, etc.
The word for 'gold', which occurs in various forms, is also related: Skt. híranya- =
Av. zaraniia- [n.] < *g"H-en-, Go. gulp, OHG gold [n.] < PGm. *gulpa- < IE *għlH-
to-), OCS zlato, Ru. zóloto < IE *għolH-to-.
See xλón, xoλépa.
1
!
}
Xóvôpoç [m.] ‘grain, grain of salt, seed, barley-grain, cartilage, especially of the
breastbone' (Ion., com. since Ar., Arist., Hell.). <?>
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. Xovdp-áкavеoç 'with cartilaginous backbone' (Arist.),
¤y-xovɗpos ‘grainy' (Dsc.), ¿yxovɗp-í\w [v.] ‘to make grainy, form into grains' (late
medic.), úлo-xóvSp-tos ‘located under the cartilage of the breastbone', -tov [n.]
'upper part of the abdominal cavity' (Hp., Arist., etc.).
•DER 1. Xovdp-ós ‘grainy, coarse' (Hp., Arist.), a secondary formation after the
oxytone adjectives in -póç. 2. Diminutive xovdp-íov [n.] (Hp.). 3. Xovdp-itns (äptos)
‘bread made of barley' (LXX), see Redard 1949: 91. 4. Xovdp-íλŋ [f.] ‘gum-plant,
Chondrilla iuncea' (Dsc., Gal.), like кovíλŋ etc. 5. xovdp-íç, -ídos [f.] name of a plant
(Plin.). 6. Xovdp-wdns ‘grainy, cartilaginous' (Hp., Arist.), -ɩvoç ‘made of barley'
(Archestr.). 7. Xovdp-woɩ [f.] name of a disease of the breasts (Sor.), from
*xovôpóοµai. 8. xovdp-táw [v.] 'to swell with clots of milk', of female breasts (Dsc.).
9. Xovdpɛvei. σɛµúíðaλɩv лoεi ‘produces flour' (H.).
⚫ETYM Unexplained. The connection with a verb for ‘to rub, etc.' in OE grindan 'to
grind, Lith. gręsti, 1sg. gréndžiu ‘to shave, scour, scratch', Lat. frendō 'to grind, gnash,
shatter', with dissimilation from *xpóvôpoc, has to meet the difficulty that Greek
excludes an initial labiovelar, while Latin seems to require one. Another problem is
that Germanic -d- cannot be combined with Greek -8- and with the acute in
Lithuanian. Unclear is Alb. grundë 'clay'.
Alternatively, a pre-form *xópd-pos (related to Xépadoc, xapádpa) dissimilated to
Xóvбpoc; in this case, the word would be non-IE.
Xóvvos [m.] ‘copper cup', a Cretan word (Hermonax apud Ath., H.). <?>
•VAR Plur. -o as the name of a festival (Gortyn V-IV³)?
•ETYM Frisk comments that it is probably from Xous, Xεw, comparing Xóa voç,
►X@voç. Unclear.
xopdń [f.] ‘gut, catgut, string, sausage' (since & 407). <IE *gor H- ‘intestine >>
•COMP As a first member in xopd-ayós [m.] ‘ileus, volvulus' vel sim. (medic.); on
connection with äлτw see extensively Strömberg 1944: 100f. Often as a second
member, е.g. εлτά-✗орdoç 'with seven strings' (Arist.).
⚫DER Diminutives xopd-íov [n.] (Milete V-IV³), -ápiov [n.] (Alex. [lyr.]); further
-ɛúw [v.] 'to make sausages', -εvμa [n.] ‘sausage-dish' (Ar.), кaτα-xopdεúw 'to chop
to sausage-meat, cut up, slit' (Hdt., Them.), -éw 'id.' (Ael.).
•ETYM Derived from an Indo-European term for ‘intestine', but without an exact
correspondence. A formation in -n- is found in Lith. žárna (žarnà) [f.] ‘(small) guts,
leather bag, hose', plur. žárnos ‘intestines', ON gorn ‘id.', plur. garnar ‘intestines' < IE
*gorH-nh₂-, OHG garn [n.] ‘yarn' (made of dried gut). Without -n-, we find Lat.
haru-spex 'diviner, soothsayer' <*grH-u-, Skt. híra- [m.] 'band', hirá [f.] 'vein' <
*għrH-o-.
Given the frequent forms with -n-, it has been proposed that xopεn is an irregular
development from *xopvý (e.g. Haas 1956: 131f.); the -8- would have been taken over
from a semantically close word, e.g. from the group of kapdía (the reverse may have

=== page 848 ===

1644
Xóplov
happened to Skt. hŕdaya- 'heart' with h- < *gh- instead of *ś- < k- after the word for
'gut'.
The appurtenance of Lat. hernia [f.] 'rupture' and Alb. zorrë 'gut', plur. ‘guts,
intestines' is doubtful because of the reflex of the initial stop.
Xópiov [n.] 'skin enclosing the foetus, afterbirth' (Hp., Arist., Thphr., Dsc.),
'membrane inside an egg' (Arist.), mg. unclear in Theoc. 10, 11; plur. -ɩa ‘dish filled
with milk and honey, a kind of pudding' (com., Theoc.). <?>
•ETYM Unexplained. Neither xopdý nor xópτos yields a convincing connection.
Xopós [m.] 'round dance, dancing-place, band of dancers, choir' (Il.), metaph. ‘row,
band' (Att.). <IE? gher- ‘seize, catch'>
B
•COMP Numerous compounds, e.g. Xopoι-τúлоç 'stamping at the round dance (at the
dancing-place?), dancing, dancer' (Pi. Fr. 156, Opp., Nonn.), probably also h. Merc.
31 (of tortoises; see Porzig 1942: 210); others accentuate ✗opoí-τʊños (see Zumbach
1955: 40); thence -tvšíŋ [f.] ‘(stamping at the) round dance' (§ 261, AP), -turέw [v.]
'to stamp the floor at the round dance, to dance' (Opp.); also -τUлoç (of älσoc)
'stamped by a band of dancers' (Nonn., perhaps also h. Merc. 31, see above); on the
first member, which may be an old locative, see Schwyzer: 452. As a second member,
e.g. кaλλí-xopoç ‘with fair dacing-places, choral dances' (epic and lyr. since λ 581).
●DER 1. Adjective Xop-ɩкós ‘belonging to the choir, etc.' (Ar. [lyr.], Pl., Arist.), -ɛĩoç
[adj.] ‘id.' (A. R., late), also [m.] name of a meter = tpoxaños, tpißpaxus (Cic., D. H.),
-ɛĩov [n.] ‘dancing-place' (LXX), -ɛĩa plur. ‘thank-offering for a victory of a choir'
(Delos III-II), 'choir-tax' (Pergam. IIP), toc = τроxαïоç, τpíßpаxus (AP), of
ελуμóç name of a tactical manoeuvre (Ael., Arr.). 2. -τç [f.] 'dancer, choir-
member' (Call., Nonn.), -ɩrɛía = -ɛía (Andania Iª), as if from *-ɩɩɛúw. 3. Verb xopɛvw
[v.] 'to perform a choral dance, celebrate with dance, etc.' (Pi., IA), often prefixed,
e.g. with ava-, εл-, σuv-; thence -εvσiç, -εvµα, -εvτýç, -ευTIкÓÇ. 4. лεрixоpíČELV.
εvóлλwç, σUVτÓvwç ópуɛiσ0aι 'to dance in arms, vehemently' (H.).
By a cross of xopós and кopwvóc (-víc, -vn) arose Xopwvóc 'στéqavoc', see Apion in
Ath. 15, 680d and Güntert 1914: 129.
ETYM Xopóc may originally have been a choral dance, but the original meaning of
xopós cannot be established with certainty.
Xopós has been connected, together with Xópτos, with a verb 'to seize, grasp' in Skt.
hárati 'to bring, carry'. On the other hand, Lith. žāras ‘row, twig, etc.' is phonetically
identical with xopóç. Meier-Brügger 2002 connected the root of xaipw 'to rejoice',
i.e. *gher-, which seems reasonable.
Xóptoç [m.] ‘enclosure, court' (A 774, № 640), cf. Xóρτov oúpavov. tò repiópioµa
‘enclosed place' (H.), ‘pasture-ground (Pi., E. [lyr.]), mostly 'pasture, fodder, grass,
hay' (IA, Hes.). <IE *gor-t- 'fence'>>
•COMP Very frequent as a first member (Hell. and late), e.g. xopτo-opópos 'bearing
grass, transporting fodder'; also as a second member, e.g. σúу-xopτoç (of xwv,
лεdía, etc.) 'whose ✗ópτo are adjacent' (A., E.).
●DER 1. Diminutive xopτ-íov [n.] 'small enclosure' (Erinn.), -ápia [n.pl.] 'coarse.
grass' (Dsc.). 2. Adjective xopτ-aïoç = 'µαλλwτóç, ragged, from *belonging to a
!
Xpasiv
1645
court, rural, rustic' (Ar. Fr. 707a, D. H., Ael.), -aía yñ ‘pasture-land' (pap. IV³); -ɩкóç
'concerning hay' (Hell. and late pap., Ptol.), -wdŋs ‘grass-like, rich of grass' (LXX,
Dsc.). 3. Verb xopτ-άw (also áлo-, εл- Sosith. 2, 13) [v.] 'to fodder, satiate, fatten'
(Hes.), whence -aσía [f.] 'foddering, fattening' (LXX, late pap.), -aσµóç [m.] ‘id.'
(Anaxandr.), -áσµata [n.pl.] (-aoµa [sg.]) ‘fodder, nourishment' (Plb., LXX, D. H.,
Act. Ap.), -aʊtɩкŵτɛpa ‘foddering more' (H. s.v. кαлavikwtepa).
•ETYM Xópτоs phonetically corresponds with an Italo-Celtic word: Lat. hortus
‘garden', OLat. 'villa, estate', Osc. húrz, acc. húrtúm 'enclosure'. and Celtic words like
W garth hurdle, field', OIr. gort 'field'. These three branches require a pre-form
*g"orto-.
From other branches, several words which clearly go back on *ghord"- must be
adduced: OCS gradú ‘ñóλɩç, kññoç', Ru. górod 'town', Lith. gardas 'bed, hurdle', Alb.
gardh, -dhi 'fence', and (with zero grade) also Skt. gṛhá- [m.] 'house'. This form,
however, would have yielded Gr. *кópłoç.
For Germanic, it is necessary to pose IE *ghord- for some words, e.g. Go. gards [m.]
'house, garden', aurti-gards ‘garden'; further cognates are ON garðr 'fence, enclosure,
garden', etc.
Ambiguous regarding the suffixal stop is ToB kerciye 'palace'. It is also assumed that
a number of toponyms from Anatolia and the eastern Mediterranean derive from
this word: Hitt. gurta- [c.] ‘citadeľ (which can hardly be Anatolian, however; see
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v.), Phr. Mane-gordum (also -zordum), Tópdos, -tov, Cret. Tóptuç.
This has been taken as evidence for an Indo-European substrate in Greece, see
Heubeck 1961: 58ff.
IE *gorto- is generally considered a to-derivation of a verb for ‘seize, grasp' found in
Skt. hárati 'to bring, carry'. This presupposes that the initial palatovelar *gh- was
depalatalized in Balto-Slavic and in Sanskrit. An initial palatal is in fact found in
some semantically close Balto-Slavic words: Lith. žárdas 'scaffold for drying', žařdis
'Roßgarten, great pasture', OPr. sardis ‘fence', Ru. zoród 'heap, fenced place', etc.; but
a problem is that their accentuation points to a pre-form *ghord- (Winter's Law), not
*ghord"-.
The analysis as a participle from *gher- 'to seize' has one remarkable detail: the o-
grade of the root is unexpected.
Xovs →Xέw.
xpaɛiv [v.aor.] ‘to attack, assault, inflict, take up, etc.', also with inf. (Hom., Nic., A. R.
AP); έлεxpαɛ, -ov also 'to affect, touch' (A. R., Q. S.).
•VAR Also with л-, only зsg. (εл-)εxpαε, зpl. (εл-)éxpaov, 2pl. Expάete.
•ETYM Expα(F)ε, Xpα(F)εv are isolated thematic aorist forms, with zero grade of the
root (cf. Ƒade, (Ƒ)adɛĩv s.v. ► ȧvdávw, etc.). They are connected with Lat. in-gruō
(from -uō or -auō) 'to rush', Lith. griáuti, 1sg. griáuju 'to destroy', and griúti, 1sg.
griųvù to crumble'. This presupposes that the root is *greh₂u- and that the
palatalization in Lithuanian is secondary. A different (but not very attractive)
proposal was made by Peters 1980b: 342, who assumes an analogical, secondary zero
grade *krau- to a root PG *kreu-. See ►Taxpηns and ►xpaúw.

=== page 849 ===

1646
Xpaívw
Xpaívw [v.] 'to besmear, sully, stain' (B., trag., Nic., AP, Pl. Lg. 769a, also late prose).
<?7
•VAR Aor. Xpaval, fut. xpava.
•COMP Sometimes with ảлo- in the sense to grade or tinge colors' (Pl. Lg. 769a,
Arist.).
⚫DER Verbal adjective ǎ-Xpav-τoç 'unsullied, unstained' (trag., late prose, etc.); also
ȧxpavés ǎxpavτоν, άµóλνтоν, кαеарóv, àµíаντov 'undefiled, clean' (H.), ȧxpãéç
'id.' (Nic., AP).
•ETYM Unknown. Frisk compares xpíw and μaivw and suggests that it is a cross
of both. See also ►xpaúw, xpóa, xpíw, etc. Pok. 459 subsumes it under IE *gren-,
which is rejected by DELG.
xpaioµéw [v.] ‘to be of use, help, promote' (Il.). <?►
●var Ind. -µɛĩ (Nic. Th. 914), fut. Xpaioµñow, aor. -ñσaɩ, often them. aor. expatoµε,
Xpañoµe, ipv. Xpaioµete (A. R.), to which a subj. Xpaíoµn, probably also inf. -µɛïv (A.
R).
•DER Late epic nouns: back-formation õpɑíoµ-ŋ [f.] ‘use, help, promotion' (Nic.),
-nεiç useful, promotive' (Nic.), -nois [f.] = xpaioµŋ (Nic., metr. inscr. Hypaepa),
-nov [n.] 'means of help' (Marc. Sid.), -nτwp [m.] 'helper, promotor' (Nonn.).
•ETYM An epic verb of unclear formation, which acc. to sch. A. R. 2, 218 was also
used by the Arcadian Clitorians (cf. Ruijgh 1957: 164). Its formation presupposes a
noun *xpaɩσμóç. The aorist expaμε could be best explained as analogical to
Xpaɩµɛv (which would originally be a pres. inf.) after examples like škɩɩëɛ to
KTUTEiv.
Acc. to Schwyzer: 723 and 748, Expatoμε is originally an ipf. of a denominative
*xpaíoμ-дw, which was reinterpreted as an aorist because of xpatσμεïv. The non-
presentic forms xpαioμ-ñow, -ñσaɩ may have been built later to expaσμε
(Chantraine 1942: 347) and have produced the late ind. pres. Xpaσμεi; the inf.
Xpασμεiv was ambiguous from the beginning.
Etymologically obscure. It is semantically plausible to connect Xpη, xpñσðaɩ, but an
analysis in *xpat-σμó-s with a further unknown zero grade beside õpñ-σɩ
(Brugmann-Thumb 1.c. after Mekler; also Bechtel 1914 s.v. and Schwyzer: 347) in
unconvincing.
Xpaów [v.] 'to graze, wound slightly, scratch' (II.). <?>
•VAR Only ipf. ¿v-έxpavε (Hdt. 6, 75), aor. subj. Xpavon (E 138), ¿vi-xpaúσn (Nic. Th.
277), ptc. Xpaúσavтα (Q. S. 11, 76).
Further Expavoεу· εлÉτуXεν 'hit upon' and xpañσai katažñoaɩ, xpãval, okiáσal,
ypáчaɩ, ɩɩɩxɛiv 'to scratch, touch, cast a shadow, engrave, hit upon' (H.); ptc. med.
Xpavóμεvov, also xpavóμεvov (-avoo-?) ‘grazing, adjacent' (Cypr. inscr. [Va]).
•DER Xpañσiç ǎукuρа μоvóßоlos anchor of one piece' (H.), probably also
Expαúτičev. εvɛy to catch by birdlime' (H.), like pavτíчw, σлаτíш, etc., see
Schwyzer: 706.
⚫ETYM The only remains of this verb are found in the epic tradition (cf. Ruijgh 1957:
131). It can hardly be separated from Xpa(Ƒ)εïv, expa(F)ε 'to attack, etc.'. If the word
!
!
Xpεμvç
1647
is Indo-European, we have to assume a root *greh₂u-. For the vocalism cf. waúw,
Xvaúw, Opaúw. See further on xpóa, ▸xpíw.
Xpɛía •VAR Xpéos, etc. →xpń.
Xpeµetí¼w [v.] ‘to whinny, neigh' (M 51, Hdt., Pl., LXX, Q. S.). <IE *g½rem- ‘thunder,
rumble'>
•COMP Rarely with úлo-, ¿v-.
●der Xpeµet-ioµós [m.] ‘whinnying' (Ar. [lyr.], LXX, D. H.), -toµa [n.] ‘id.' (AP,
Iamb. Bab.), -1σTIкóç 'fond of whinnying' (Ph., S. E., Plu., etc.).
Further xpεμ-éеw ‘id.' (A. R., Q. S., Opp., AP), also with εлɩ-, and -í\w, only aor. 3pl.
Xpéчuσav (Hes. Sc. 348), xpεµετα. ηxεi 'resounds' (H.), Xpɛµétŋs [m.] name of a river
in Libya (Arist., Nonn.).
Several nouns: 1. Xpóµos. vsópos rotóç ‘kind of noise'. oi dè xpeletioµós and xpóµɖ.
opvayµóc, ópµý, Opáσos 'neighing, impulse, boldness' (H.). 2. xpóµados (yɛvúwv)
‘gnashing' (Y 688), see ŏчadoç, кéλadoç. 3. fish names (after natural sounds; see
Strömberg 1943: 65ff.): xpóµç, also xpóчoç [m., f.] (Anan., Epich., Arist.), xpéμns,
-ητо [m.] (Opp., Ael.), also xpéµuç: ó óvíσкoç ix0us (H., also Arist. v.l. кp-), cf.
Thompson 1947 s.v. Xpóшuç. 4. Several PNs and nicknames, e.g. Xpεunc, Xpéμwv,
Xpεμúλoç, Xpoμíos, Xpóµç, Xpoμúλoç.
On itself stands õpέµëtoµai, aor. Xpéµiyaσðaɩ [v.] ‘to clear one's throat, cough up,
spit ouť (IA), also prefixed, e.g. with ảva-, ảлo-, кatα-, έлɩ-. Thence ảvá-, åлó-
Xpɛµɩɩ [f.] ‘coughing up' (Hp.), Xpέa (also άvá-, év-) [n.] ‘expectoration' (Hp.).
Perhaps the fish name xpε is a back-formation (Strömberg 1943: 67).
ETYM As basis of these words we must posit a primary verb *xpεuw (cf. ßpέµw, Lat.
fremō; from this xpóчos etc.), which however had to give up for several popular-
expressive enlargements: Xpεμ-í(w (: уεµ-í¶w, στεvax-í(w, ¿pε0-í(w), -έw (: pley-
ÉÐw, τɛλ-É¤w), -ετάw, -ετí¶w (: Xpεµé, vaɩ-ɛt-áw, aipɛ-τ-í¢w, ¿pa-t-i¶w,
TEpeti(w).
A special position has ρéµлoμα (-л- onomatopoeic as in лτúш?); perhaps it does
not belong at all here (cf. WH s.v. scratta with another hypothesis).
There is no exact outer-Greek correspondence to the verb, but the root *grem- is
Indo-European. In Balto-Slavic, there are sound verbs with different ablaut, like Lith.
grumëti, 1sg. grumù 'to thunder, roar, rumble', gramëti, 1sg. gramu 'to fall in the
depth with noise', and OCS grúměti, 1sg. grúmljo 'ẞpovτäv, to thunder', Ru. gremét',
1sg. gremljú [v.] 'to thunder, tinkle, rattle', OCS grom 'thunder' (which formally
matches xpóuoc).
Germanic has several expressions for anger and grumbling, which must originally
have referred to sounds like droning, gnashing the teeth, etc.: ON grimmr 'grim,
excited', OHG grim ‘wild, cruel < PGm. *grimma- < *grem-no-, ON gramr, OHG
gram 'wrathful' < PGm. *grama- < *gromo-, Go. gramjan, OHG gremman [v.] 'to
get angry or embittered'. The same meaning is encountered in Av. gramaṇtąm
[ptc.gen.pl.] of those who are wrathful to us', MoP yaram 'wrath'.
Xpέµvç · ó óvíσkoç ixúç kind of gadus or cod' (H.). <PG(V)►

=== page 850 ===

1648
XPń
⚫ETYM Fur.: 131 connects кpεµvç ‘a fish with a hard head' (Arist.), see on ►кλɛµµúç,
and considers the word to be Pre-Greek. Frisk cites it under ►xpεµετíw.
Xpn [subst.] 'it is necessary; one must, should', often with negation and in questions
(II.). <IE? *greh,>
•VAR Indeclinable in Homer; post-Hom. inflected forms ipf. Xpñv < xpǹ ñv, later
Expñv, opt. xpεiŋ, subj. XpÑ, fut. Xpñστaι, inf. Xpñvaι, ptc. ✗pηεóvτα [n.pl.], all
univerbations with forms of ɛiµí.
•DER Xρwμαι < *xpη-oµαι [v.] 'to need, use, utilise; to treat, handle, associate with
someone' (since Y 834), also with ảva-, кaτα-, лapα-, лρoσ-, etc., in various shades
of meaning (IA); also 'to consult an oracle or a god' (Od.).
Ion. (also Dor. in Sophr. 126) has xpéoµai, ptc. xpεwµevoç; 3sg. Xpñtaɩ, inf. Xpñσðaɩ
(Ion. Hell. also pãταɩ, -ãσēαɩ after ópãτaɩ, -ãσðaɩ, etc.), aor. Xpñσaσðaι, fut.
Xpǹooµai, perf. képηuaɩ. The aor. also means 'to borrow (from)', perhaps from 'to
put in use for oneself or to the act. Xpñσai (E., etc.); the perf. (especially ptc.
кεxpημεvoc) means 'to require, crave, desire' (epic poet. T 262).
It is probably an old denominative. Active forms in special mgs. were secondarily
created to the medial forms: to Xpηoaσšai, xpñσoµai, xpшμai 'to consult an oracle',
Xpñσaι, Xpηow, xpw arose, in the sense ‘to give an oracle' (since 0 79), with 3sg. XPÑ
and xpã, ptc. Xpɛiwv = Xpηwv, also with - etc., with pass. aor. Expησon ‘an oracle
ε-
was granted', plpf. ¿кέxpη(σ)τo, etc. (Pi., IA).
In a similar vein, the active xpñσaɩ 'to lend (to)' arose to pησaσðaɩ 'to borrow
(from)'. Fut. xpnow, also with лpo-, έл- etc. (IA) with кéxpηka (Hell.) and the new
present кíxpη, кíxpaшaɩ, also xpηvvvµ, -ów (Thphr., Hell. pap.).
On itself stands with prefix, especially àлo- (IA), also (Hdt.) έк-, кatα-, àvɩɩ-Xpã
(Att. åлóõpη after xpñ), -έxpηoa, -Xpnow 'to suffice, to serve', mostly 3. sg. ‘it is
sufficient', with unexplained development of mg.
Secondary verbal forms: 1. Xpη-έoμal in Megar. Xpηεiow (Calchedon), Boeot.
Xpelεion, El. xpeεστai 'to need'. 2. Xpn-ï\w, xpεï\w, Xpń w [v.] 'to be in need, require,
desire, wish' (since A 835; cf. кεpηuvos above). 3. Xpη-ïσкovται 'they require, lack'
(Hdt. 3, 117).
A concise survey of nouns derived from xpшuat or from xpη (a sharp distinction is
not possible in all cases): 1. Xpεw, -oûç [f.] (secondarily [n.]) 'requirement, need,
necessity, desire' (Il., epic), also xpɛɩw = xpηw. To this xpεwv and Xpɛóv [n.] ‘id.' (Pi.,
IA), with -v after déov, époσñкov, etc.
2. Xpέos ‘obligation, debt, fee, commitment, engagement, affair' (IA, also 0 353, λ
479), epic also xpεños = xpños (since Il.), Att. also xpέws [n.], plur. Xpέă (Hes. Op.
647), Xpéã (Ar.), Xpña (Arc. IV), which is much more probable than a lecture
*xpηατα from *xpñƑαp; further xpñïa < *xpηεa (Cret.).
3. Xpɛía (Ion. -ín) [f.] 'requirement, desire, wish, use, praxis, benefit, help, service,
function, association', rhet. 'theme of a speech' (Thgn., Att., Hell.); xpηïα. лεvía
'poverty, need' (H.), Xpεɩ-wŋs 'needy, necessitous, useful' (Hell.), -aкóç [m.]
'official' (Peripl. M.Rubr., pap. III³); ά-xpεños, Att. ǎ-xpεtos, Ion. ȧ-xpηïoç ‘useless,
unusable, unapt' (since Hes.). The ntr. άxpeĭov as an adverb to idúv, έyélaooev (B
XPń
1649
269, σ 163), to kλášov (Theoc. 25, 72), but the mg. is not quite clear; after this õpɛãoç
'useful, apt' (Hell., but rare).
4. Xρñµα [n.] ‘affair which one needs, object, thing, etc.', mostly plur. 'goods,
property, money' (Od.), whence xprµatítns áywv 'competition with a money-prize'
(Marm. Par.), õpηua-tí\w, -tíšoµiai [v.] 'to negotiate, do business, etc.' (Att., Hell.),
also 'to handle a name, give an oracle, prophesy' (Hell.), whence -τoμiós, -tioię,
-TIστŃ, -TIστŃρIOV, -TIσTIKÓÇ.
5. Xpýµn [f.] ‘need, requirement' (Archil. et al.).
6. Xpη(σ)µooúvn [f.] 'need, poverty' (Thgn., Tyrt.), Xpησµ- also ‘aid' (A. R.), cf. on
xenofóc, but áxpηão-σúvη [f.] 'need, lack' (p 502, Thgn. 156) from ȧ-xpŕµwv. 7.
Xpñσiç [f.] ‘use, application, benefit, intercourse, association' (Pi., IA), also 'response
of an oracle' (Pi.), ‘loan' (Arist., Plb.), whence xpηo-чoç ‘usable, useful, proficient'
(Thgn.+), -чµóτηg, -queúw.
8. xpηouós [m.] 'response of an oracle' (Pi., IA), very frequent as a first member, e.g.
Xpηoдo-λóуos prophesying, prophet' (IA); in the same mg. probably xpηoμo-σúv
(Hdt. 9, 33).
9. Xpηστplov [n.] 'seat of an oracle, response of an oracle, sacrifice to it' (h. Ap.+),
like µvotýpiov, Sikaσtýpiov, etc. Thence -nptos belonging to an oracle' (Hdt., A., E.,
etc.), -ŋpláčoμa [v.] 'to consult an oracle' (Hdt.), but xpηστηpia okeúŋ [n.pl.]
'utensils, furniture' (Argos [VIª], Pl. Com., Hell. inscr. and pap.).
10. Xpñotns [m.] ‘lender, creditor', also 'debtor' (Att., etc.), also Xpεwots 'debtor'
(late) after xpέws; xpńotns and xpηστwp also = µávtis (H.);
11. Xpntñpes [pl.] = xpηotǹpia ‘furniture' (pap. IIª)?
12. Xpηστós 'usable, fit, proficient, good' (IA), whence -óτηç, -oσúvη, -εúoµai; often
as a second member, e.g. ǎ-xpηστoç 'unusable, useless' (IA; = ȧxpεñoç); but лvеó-
Xpŋotos (trag.), Đɛó-xpηotos (Ph.) ‘prophesied by (the Pythian) god' from Xpáw 'to
give an oracle, prophesy'.
13. Xpεños 'poor, needy' (A., E., late prose) is probably for xprios to xpη; beside it
Xpεtoç 'useful' from ȧ-xpεños (see 3).
On Xpη, xpwμαι and their derivations see the extensive treatment by Redard 1953.
•ETYM Xpη is formally isolated within Greek. As a closest formal counterpart, we find
frozen accusatives лληу and dηу < *pleh₂-m, *dueh₂-m and εлí-кλn-v, further the
ambiguous forms ►ò̟µoкλý and ►µεσóðµŋ. In other languages, monosyllables like
Lat. spēs ‘hope', and compounds like Skt. prati-má [f.] ‘picture' (from *meh,-), Lith.
avi-dė [f.] 'sheepfold' (to τíðu) are found, cf. Pedersen 1926: 71ff.
Though xp is best considerd a feminine, many scholars preferred to see an old
neuter in it (Wackernagel, Fraenkel, Hermann). As a basic meaning 'need, necessity,
duty, custom', which is usually assumed, arose without a doubt by abstraction or
generalization, all etymologies are quite hypothetical.
Connection with xapñvaɩ, xαípw was proposed by Brugmann 1886-1900 II: 962,
Pedersen 1.c.; that with Skt. hárati 'to bring, carry' (cf. on Xópτoc) by Brugmann IF
37 (1916-1917): 239f. These proposals are far from convincing. As I found no noun
ending in a long vowel in Pre-Greek, nor any indication for laryngeals, I rather think
that the word is Indo-European, perhaps *greh,.

=== page 851 ===

1650
XPÍintoual, -TW
xpiµлτoμal, -tw (v.] med. (mostly intr.) 'to force one's way near, come near, strike
firmly', act. (mostly trans.) 'to force near, bring close to something, make crash' (epic
poet. since к 516). ◄IE? *għreib¹- ‘grab'>
•VAR Aor. med. (¿у-)õpшóðñvαɩ, fut. έypíµ¼µ; act. (¿y-)xpíµyaɩ; aor. med.
Xpíμчaσеaι can be both trans. and intr.
•COMP Also with prefix, especially έv- (Il., epic Ion. poet., late prose).
⚫ETYM The similarity with xpíw (cf. also xpaúw) has long since bee observed; for the
ending -μлτоμα no parallel has been found except for (the imitation?) oкíµëtoµal.
The resembling xpεµлτo̟µα is semantically far off.
Kölligan, in a paper read at the 13th Fachtagung der indogermanischen Gesellschaft,
Salzburg 2008, proposes a nasal present to the root *ghreib"- (Go. greipan, Lith.
griēbti ‘to grab', 1sg. griebiù, to which Greek secondarily made a yod-present. So
*għrimb¹- > PGr. *khrimp"- + -ie/o- > xpiµñte/o-.
Xpíw, -qµaɩ [v.] 'to graze, spread, (be)smear, enqueue, anoint, plaster' (Il.). <IE?
*g"rei(H)- 'strike'>>
•VAR Late also -ĭ-. Aor. xpiσaι, -σãσðaɩ (Il.), -σðñvai (A.), fut. xpíσw (E.), -σoμα
(Od.), -σ¤ýσoµai (LXX), perf. кéxpiµai (Hdt.), -iσµai (LXX), kéxpika (LXX).
•COMP Often prefixed, e.g. with εл-, ¿v-, kata-, úño-.
•DER 1. Xpiσç (also у-, кατá-, etc.) [f.] 'spreading, besmearing, anointing, tinging'
(Hp., Arist., Hell.), xpíoчos (sch.). 2. xpчµa (A., X., Call.), more usual xpioµa, later
Xpíoμа (after кλiμa, Oέµα, etc.) [n.] ' ointment, tincture, etc.', also with έní-, nɛpí-,
etc. 3. Sia-, ovy-xpɩσµós [m.] ‘anointing, ointment' (medic.). 4. xpiστaɩ [m.pl.] (H.
s.v. koviataí). 5. Xplotýpiov [n.] ‘oil, oil-bottle' (Suid.). 6. Xpστós (also έní-, katá-,
etc.) 'fit for spreading or anointing' (A. Pr. 480, E.), 'anointed', msc. 'the anointed
one' (LXX), whence 'Messiah, Christ' (NT).
⚫ETYM The regular inflexion of xpíw is clearly a late creation. A convincing outer-
Greek connection does not exist. Mostly connected with Lith. griēti, 1sg. gr(i)ejù ‘to
skim cream from the milk'; the same root would be found in the Germanic group of
OE grīma [m.] ‘mask, helmet, ghost', MLG grēme [f.] ‘dirt', etc. The comparison with
NPhr. уɛуpεчεvav [ptc.] 'painted, adorned, written, уɛуpaµµévos' vel sim. (Haas
Sprache 6 (1960): 19ff.) is tempting. The Lithuanian verb seems to point to an aniṭ
root, so if it is related to xpiw, the length in Greek must be secondary.
From xpioua were borrowed Lat. chrisma (Eccl.), whence MoFr. crème, etc.; from
Xploτós Lat. Christus, whence Christiānus.
Xpóa [f.] (contact) surface of the body, skin, skin-color, color' (E 164), also 'surface,
εлɩávεɩα' among the Pythagoraeans (Arist.). <?>
•VAR Also Xpotá, Ion. xpoń (see below). Further xpws [f.], gen. xpo-ós, dat. -ï, acc.
Xpóa, younger gen. Xpw-τóc (since K 575), -tí (since Pi.), -ta (Od., Hes. Op. 556),
plur. -τεç (Arist.) ‘surface of the body, skin, skin-color', also 'flesh, body', rarely
'color' (Il., epic Ion. poet.). A fixed expression is ev xp (Att.), which is older than ev
Xpot (Ion.) 'close to the skin' (e.g. kɛipɛɩv), metaph. ‘very close, hard by' (with gen.),
cf. Schwyzer: 578.
Xpóvos
1651
•DIAL Probably Myc. a-ko-ro-we-e /a-k³rowe¹e/ [n.du.] 'without spots', or /ha-
khrowe¹e/ of one color'.
•COMP Very frequent as a second member, e.g. μɛλavó-xpo-os 'with a dark skin' (t
246), which is thematicized; athem. inflection preserved in plur. μɛλανó-xpо-εç (N
589), μελáу-xpo-εs (Hdt.); younger μελáу-Xpшτεç, -pwτα (E. [lyr.]), nom. -xpwc.
(Pl. Phdr. 253e), etc. On -xpoos, -Xpovs, -xpws as a second member see Sommer
1948: 21ff.; also µελay-xpos ‘id.' (to xpoɩ [л 175]) and -xpns (com., pap.), after the
adjectives in -ns.
⚫DER 1. Diminutive xpwτ-ídiov (Cratin.).
2. Verbs: perf. med. kéxpwoµai, -µévos (IA), aor. Xpwσ¤ñvai (Att.) ‘to take on a color
or hue, etc.', act. õpãʊaɩ (Arist.), ¿л- кéxpwкa (Plu.), xpwσɛv (H.), xpoï¢w, xpά¶w
(Alex., Nic., Dsc.), 'to color, stain', later also xpóvvчд, -úw (Luc., Lib., Plot.); xpoïw,
xpчw, -oμα also 'to touch (a surface), unite with someone' (Pi., E. [lyr.], Theoc.);
often prefixed, e.g. with έлɩ-, кατα-, лapα-; cf. also on xpotá below.
Hence several verbal nouns: a) Xpшua [n.] 'color (of the skin), make-up;
characteristic appearance, e.g. of a chromatic scale, of a speech, etc.' (IA); thence
Xpw-µáta [pl.] = -µata (AP), -µatikós (music., rhet.) ‘chromatic' (Hell.), -µátivos
‘colorful' (Peripl. M. Rubr.), xpwµatíšw, -oµai (also έ-) ‘to color, tinge' (Hp., Pl.,
Arist.). b) xpwσ (also with ảvá-, àлó-, ¿лí-) [f.] ‘coloring' (Epicur., pap., Plu.). c)
Xpwoτnp [m.] 'that which colors' (AP). d) from xpoïw 'to color': xpó-ïç, -ïoµóç
(gloss.), ¿лxpó-ïσiç mg. unclear (Thphr.).
3. Xpwt-í¶w, -íčoµa (also ovv-avα-) 'to color, give an appearance' (Ar. [lyr.], Plu.).
From xpwc, xpo-ós also xpo-tá, -ɩý (like σkor-tá, λoo-tá, etc.: xpóa is like póa (to
polá, poiń), nóa, etc.). Hence xpoĩa [n.pl.] 'colors' (Emp.), εлуpoαí [f.pl.] ‘id.'
(Thphr.), xpo-άw [v.] ‘to color' (late medic.), cf. Xpot (w above. Further xpoτin [f.]
'skin' (AP 15, 35), a cross of xpoin and xpws, -wtós.
•ETYM Xpwç is an old s-stem, and its complicated declination reminds of that of
Epwc, yéλwc, aidwç. Acc. to DELG, the Mycenaean form a-ko-ro-we-e (cf. εüxpoέs,
24) points to a root *khrow-, to which xpwc is an s-stem formation which underwent
hyphaeresis: gen. *khrowosos > *krohos. DELG assumes that most forms arose by
such a process, e.g. Xpolá < *khrowosia. кεxpwσдaι is probably an analogical form to
Xpwïw.
The superficial similarity with xpavw, xpaívw, xpíw is not sufficient for a solid
etymological proposal. The assumption of vowel assimilation from *xpaƑós
(Schmidt KZ 32 (1893): 370¹f.) is dictated by the desire to connect ▸xpaúw.
Xpóμadoc •VAR Xpóµis, xpóµos. →xpeµieti¢w.
Xpóvos [m.] 'period or course of time, (a definite) time, lifetime, time limit' (II.), plur.
Xpóvoɩ also 'year' (= Lat. tempora, since III-IVP; see Schwyzer: 124f.). <?>
●COMP As a first member, e.g. Xpovo-ypácos [m.] 'chronicler, annalist' (Str.),
-ypaqpía [f.] 'chronicle, yearbook' (Plb.). Often as a second member, e.g. σúy-xpovos
'at the same time', ovyxpov-éw, -íw, -σµóc (Hell.); also suffixed, e.g. лоλv-xрóv-оç
'comprising a long time, lasting, durable' (h. Merc.+), whence -ía, -tótŋc, -í¶w (Arist.,
Hell.).

=== page 852 ===

1652
Xpiaós
●DER 1. Xpov-íσKoç [m.] 'small timespan' (LXX). 2. -10s 'protracted, late' (p 112),
-ɩótŋs [f.] ‘long period (Thphr.), -tóoμat 'to become protracted, chronic' (Hp.). 3.
-ɩkóç 'concerning time' (D. H., D. S., Plu.). 4. Xpov-í(w (also έy-) 'to spend the time
(somewhere), abide, be late, linger' (IA), whence toµós [m.] (Hell.), also with έy-. 5.
Xpov-wσai 'to make temporal' (Plot.).
•ETYM Etymology unknown. On the model of кλóvos and Opóvos, it has been
assumed that xpóvos should be analyzed as Xp-ovo- <*gr-ono-, from a root seize,
bring' also supposed for ►xópτoç. On the semantic side, an original meaning
"encompassing time-limit" has been assumed for xpóvos, or even "seizer" (Porzig
1942: 346). A number of verbal roots *gher- etc. exist (see LIV²). However, it is rather
doubtful that кλóvos and ▶Opóvos should be analysed in this way, as DELG
already remarked. Other words for ‘time' are кatpós, which is etymologically
unclear too, and inherited ►aiwv.
Xpñσóç [m.] ‘gold' (Il.). <LW Sem.➤
•VAR Secondarily --, see Schwyzer: 516².
•DIAL Myc. ku-ru-so.
•COMP Productive in compounds, e.g. Myc. ku-ru-so-wo-kò = xpuσ-oupyós (LXX)
'gold-worker'; xpuσó-Opovos (see on Opóva), Xpvσ-ávηtos 'bought with money',
designation of a slave (Callistr. Hist.), úлó-xρvσos “"with gold below", ‘auriferous,
gilt' (Pl., Hell. inscr.); on prefixed compounds with xpvσóç, see Strömberg 1946: 136.
●DER 1. Xpuσ-íov [n.] 'gold, golden ornaments, golden coins, money' (IA), -ídiov [n.]
with contemptuous connotation (Att. orators), -ɩdápiov [n.] (Ar.), also -ápiov
(Hdn., Eust.). 2. Xpuσ-εiov, mostly plur. -ɛia [n.] '‘goldmine' (X., Plb.). 3. xpuσ-íc,
-ídos [f.] 'golden vessel, dress, golden shoe, etc.' (com., inscr., Luc.). 4. Xpvo-aλλíç,
-ídos [f.] 'gold-colored larva of a butterfly' (Arist., Thphr.), also = μλoλóvěŋ (Eust.),
cf. Opvaλλíç. 5. Xpúσ-ɑqoç [m.] name of a fish (Marc. Sid.), like λaqoç; also
Xpúσoqoç (Cyran.), for xpúσ-oœpus (Strömberg 1943: 26). 6. xpvo-itns [m.], mostly
-ɩɩ [f.] ‘goldish, auriferous, gold-ore' (Hdt., Hp., Str.). 7. Adjectives: a) Xpúσ-ɛoç,
late also -εtos, Att. -oûç ‘golden, gold-colored, etc.' (Il.), -oûç (scil. σtatηp) name of a
golden coin; also as a first member, e.g. xpvσɛo-ï½½§ ‘with a golden helmet (h.
Mart., Call.), metrical variant of xpuσ0-лýληš (A. [lyr.], E.). b) xpúσ-ivos 'golden'
(late). c) Xpvσ-кóç ‘id.', [n.pl.] ‘hardcash' (pap.). d) comparative xpvσ-oτépα [f.]
'gold to a higher degree' (Sapph., late epigr.). 8. Verbs: a) xpuσ-óoμαι (mostly perf.
ptc. kexpvowμévos ‘gilt'), also -ów ‘to gild' (IA), also with prefix, especially katα-;
thence wμα, -woię, -włńp, -ŵtpia, -ŵv. b) xpvo-í(w 'to be golden or gold-like,
abound in gold' (Arist., Dsc.). c) xpvo-aïïetai. kooµɛītaɩ (H.). Also in PNs, e.g.
Xpúons, -nïs, -17.
•ETYM A Semitic loan word, usually assumed to be Punic. Cf. Akk. hurāṣu, Ugar. hrs,
Phoen. hrs%, Hebr. ḥārus. See E. Masson 1967: 37f. for further details.
An IE word for 'gold' from the root *glh3- is found in Germanic, Balto-Slavic and
Indo-Iranian, e.g. Go. gulþ, Ru. zóloto, Latv. zèlts, Skt. híranya-, Av. zaraniia- [n.];
the root is found in Gr. ►xoλń.
Another IE word is retained in Italic and Baltic: Lat. aurum, Lith. áuksas (with
secondary -k-), OPr. ausis, and perhaps in ToA wäs, ToB yasa.
Xpшμа VAR Xpwc. →xpóa.
Xwλós
1653
Xüλóc [m.] juice (of plants), gruel, broth', also 'taste, aroma' (IA). <?>
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. xvλo-лоέw [v.] 'to turn into juice' (medic.), yλuкú-
Xuλos 'with sweet juice' (Hp., Xenocr.).
●DER 1. Diminutive xvλ-áptov [n.] 'little juice', hypocoristic (M. Ant.). 2. -wdŋs
'juice-like, juicy' (late). 3. Xvλ-óoµaι (also -ów) 'to convert into juice, be turned into
it, etc. (medic.), also with ảлo-, ¿к-, έv-, etc. Thence xúλwµa, (¿y-)Xúλwoiç. 4. Xvλ-
iw to extract juice, turn into juice' (Hp., Arist., Thphr.), also with εк-, εv-, ȧло-;
thence -ɩoµa, -ɩoµós. 5. xvλ-tášw ‘id.' (Aet.).
Beside it stands Xчµóç [m.] ‘juice (of plants and bodies), liquid, taste, aroma' (IA). As
a second member e.g. in у-Xчμos 'having juice inside, juicy' (Hp., Pl., Arist.,
Thphr.). Hence the diminutive xuμ-íov [n.] (com.); -wdns juicy' (sch.), verb -óoμa
'to be turned into juice' (Gal.), -ów 'to give taste' (Suid.), with к- 'to squeeze out,
extract juice'; thence -wμa, -wσis (Hp.). xvµíšw [v.] ‘to make tasty' (Ar.), with ¿ê-
εкxчμów (Arist.).
=
•ETYM Both Xuλós and xчμós have traditionally been connected with ►xέw 'to pour',
but it is unclear how the long u can be explained. Positing a suffix *-slo- or *-smo- is
not really satisfactory, as no other form with *gu-s- is known.
xvμɛía [f.] 'the art of alloying metals, alchemy' (Zos. Alch., Olymp. Alch.). <?►
VAR Also xnuɛía.
⚫DER Besides Xúμevolç (xýµ-) [f.] ‘id.' (EM, Eust., Tz.), -EUTIкóç 'concerning X.' (Zos.,
Olymp.).
•ETYM AS DELG remarks, the late attestations do not allow to draw a conclusion
regarding whether v or η is original.
The old etymology by Pott, deriving the word from the indigenous name of Egypt
Xŋuía (Plu.), copt. Kŋµɛ, Xŋ, which originally means 'Black-land' (Plu.), remains a
possibility. Xчuɛía would derive either from a verb *µɛú 'to work in an Egyptian
way' or, with -ɛía after payɛía, it would mean "the Egyptian art”. The notation Xчμ-
would then be popular after Xuμóc.
According to Diels, however, it is a Greek word deriving from xúμa (see Xéw) in
the sense 'casting, alloying', whence *Xчμεúw and then xчμεíα = 'the art of alloying
metal'. It is beyond our reach to make a decision between these alternatives. Older
proposals, which are obviously dated, are given by Frisk.
XÚTAOV VAR Xúτρα, xúτрoç. →Xεw.
xwlós [adj.] ‘lame, paralyzeď, especially of a foot, ‘limping' (Il.). <IE? *għoh₂-ló-
'remaining behind'>
•COMP E.g. Xwλó-лoυç 'lame-footed' (Man.), xwλó-xεɩpos 'lame-handed' (Hippon.).
•DER xwλótŋs [f.] ‘lameness' (Plu., Iul.) and several denominatives: 1. Xwλ-ɛúw (also
άлo-) [v.] ‘to be lame', also ‘to make lame' (II.), whence -ɛía [f.] (Pl.), -ɛúµata [pl.]
(Hp.). 2. xwλ-óoμαι (also ȧлo-) (v.] 'to be or become lame', rare -ów [v.] 'to make
lame' (Hp., Th., Paus.), whence -woiç, -wµa (Hp.). 3. Xwλ-aívw (also ȧлo-, σvv-) [v.]
'to be or become lame' (Hp., Pl., LXX, pap.), whence -avσiç, -aσμa (late).

=== page 853 ===

1654
xwvvvμ
⚫ETYM Seemingly, a formation with the suffix -lo-, like στpɛßλóc, ►τuqλóc, but
without obvious etymology. Does it belong to xaλáw 'to slacken, relax? Or is it
from *goh,-ló-, from the root *gheh,- 'to leave behind' seen in pa 'widow' (Van
Beek p.c.): a lame person being someone who lags or stays behind.
Xávvvµ [v.] 'to heap up, raise, stuff with rubbish or earth' (IA). <IE *gheu- ‘pour'>
•VAR -úw (Arist., Hell.); rare лpoσ-ỵoĩ, Xoñσɩ, Xoñv, xwv (as if from *xów; Hdt., Th.),
aor. Xwσal, -σaσðaɩ, -σðñvaɩ, perf. med. kέxwoµaɩ (IA), act. кéxwka (D., Arist.), fut.
Xwow (Att.).
•COMP Very frequently prefixed, e.g. with εлɩ-, лρоσ-, кατα-, ovv-.
•DER Xwμa (rare and late -σua) [n.] 'heap, rubbish, dam, wall' (IA), -σts [f.] 'heaping.
up, raising, damming' (Th., Hell.), often from prefixed verbs, e.g. ȧváxwµa, žуxwσiç,
etc. Also xwστpis (Xελwvn) ‘a shed to protect besiegers who fill up a ditch' (Hell.).
•ETYM The above system of forms is built on the aorist Xoaɩ, which replaced the
unclear form xéαɩ and may represent either *xowσal (denominative of xóoç, xoûç) or
a contraction from *xoñσα to *xoέw (cf. vwoα < voñσa from voέw and σoчμα s.v.
►σεúoμαι), which would be a denominative or an intensive to Xέw. All other forms
were secondarily created, e.g. the present Xúvvuμt, -úw. The presentic forms -xoi,
Xoσɩ, etc. have never become dominant. Further details on the etymology s.v. ►xéw.
Xuvos
•VAR Xwvn.
⚫ETYM = Xóavoc, -ávn. See ►xεw.
xwoμaι [v.] 'to be angry, wrathful' (Il., epic). <GR?>
•VAR Aor. Xúσaobai.
•COMP Also with έïɩ-, nɛpɩ-.
•ETYM Formation like pwoμat or лλów, so is it perhaps deverbative to ▸xέw ‘to
pour', as was proposed already by Aristarchus (xwóчεvoç σуxεóμεvo) and
=
repeated by Frisk? On the formal side, see also Chantraine 1942: 365; on the meaning
in Hom. see Adkins JHS 89 (1969): 13ff.
Xwpa [f.] 'space, interspace, place, position, rank, location, region, estate, land,
country' (Il., IA), also ‘eye-hole' (Epid.). <?>
•VAR x@poç [m.] ‘space, region, land' (Il.), rare in Att. prose, except in X.
•COMP As a first member e.g. xwpo-ypáq-os [m.] 'describer of countries,
chorographer', whence -έw, -ía (Plb., Str.). Gained an enormous productivity as a
second member, е.g. лλησιó-✗wрos 'inhabiting a nearby country, neighbouring,
neighbour' (IA), also in hypostases with an enlargement -to-, e.g. έy-xwp-loc
'situated in the region, native, indigenous' (Pi., IA).
•DER 1. Xwp-íov [n.] 'space, place, location, estate' (prose since Hdt.). 2. diminutive
-ídov [n.] (Lys., Plu.), -áqtov [n.] (Thphr.) 'small estate', -aquaños (Hdn.). 3. On
►xwpiapós kiotn 'vessel' (H.), see s.v. 4. -íτηs [m.] 'countryman, farmer, native
inhabitanť (A., S., X.), -îtɩç [f.] ‘woman from the countryside' (Luc.), -itikós (X.,
Plu.). 5. Adjective -ɩкóç ‘rural, rustic' (late); -áσμat epithet of λaĩa (Pamphyl. [IIP];
after aлodáσuoç?).
xwplaμós
1655
6. verbs: a) xwpέw, -ñoaɩ, -ŋow (Il., in Att. the act. fut. only with prefix, but otherwise
-ýσoµai); kexwpηka (IA), -10ñval, -ŋðýσoµai, kexwpŋtai (Att.) 'to make room, give
way, recede' (Il., trag.), 'to step (forward), go forth, make progress', trans. 'to
comprehend, contain' (IA), also 'to catch' = 'to understand' (late), intr. 'to find a
place' (Ev. Jo. 8, 37), very frequently prefixed in various mgs., e.g. άvα-, ȧлo-, εv-,
лро-, лроσ-, σvv-, úлo-. Thence nominal derivatives in -nua, pátio, no,
-NTIKÓS.
b) xwpáčw, Dor. aor. -áža 'to situate, position, raise' (Hell. inscr.).
Isolated xwpis [adv., prep.] ‘separated, detached, far from, apart' (H 470), X@pɩ
(accus. acc. to Hdn., Choerob.) ‘id.' (Thera, Cos, Crete, Call., Test. Epict., pap. II³).
The formation reminds of äλiç, uóyiç, etc.; the accent perhaps after ȧuqpíç?
Thence xwpicw 'to separate, part' (IA), med. 'to depart' (Plb., D. S.), also with ȧva-,
άло-, εк-, etc. Also in hypostases like кατα-Xwp-íw 'to put in place (кατà xúpav),
publish, enrol' (X., Hell.); thence -, -loµós, -a, -lotŃs, -lotikós, -LOTÓC.
•ETYM The formation in -p- has been compared with ảypóc, táppoç, ëdpa and other
designations of place (Frisk), but is without agreement outside Greek. Assuming a
basic meaning 'unoccupied space', xwpa and xwpos can be connected with ►xnpa
'widow', from a root *geh,- 'to leave behind' (LIV2 s.v. *gheh,- 'zurücklassen'). Under
this etymology, Xaτéw cannot be connected. The analysis remains uncertain
(DELG).
xwpiaµós [f.] · kíστη ‘basket, urn' (H.). <PG?(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 389 takes owpiaμós as a variant and concludes that the word is Pre-
Greek. I am unable to interpret the variation, however.

=== page 854 ===

Y
váyбns [m.] name of an Egyptian ointment (com.), see Fraenkel 1912: 175'f.). <LW
Eg.➤
●var Also -ãç, -āv; σáydã(c).
•ETYM From Egyptian, see Spiegelberg Herm. 65 (1930): 232f.
váyiov [adj.] mg. unclear; it qualifies a song in Pi. (N. 7, 69); glossed by Hesychius as
лλάуιov, λožóν, кεкλчμévov 'athwart, slanting, bent. <?; PG(V)►
•ETYM Fur.: 389 compares vádiov: kátavtes.
vádiov [adv.] кάταντεç 'steep, downwards' (H.). <PG(V)►
ETYM M. Schmidt (the editor of Hesychius) connects vodiov. σкoλóv 'curved,
bent'; if this is correct, the word is Pre-Greek. See also Fur.: 389 and ▸ váyiov.
vāέvaɩ [inf.] = qáσaι, [кτíσαι] 'to be first, [build]' (H.). <?►
⚫ETYM For the initial cf. vivoμat, with a Cretan development of *60- (Lejeune 1972:
39). Perhaps here also belong чατñσaɩ· époεɩлɛïv to say before' (H.) and чaτãσðaɩ.
лрокаταλаμẞávɛv 'to occupy in advance, etc.' (H.). See pávw.
yaðá\\w [v.] ‘to grind, scratch' (Hermipp., Pl. Com.); ¿½½λato. έkvýσato
'scratched' (H.). <PG(S,V)►
•ETYM Analyzed by Frisk as a popular formation to ►чñv, ►¥áλλw; comparing
►чabupóç for the -0-. This is just a guess.
Fur.: 196 compared чadupóv· åσðɛvés, µadapóv, yałupóv 'weak, wet, loose' (H.),
with variation 0/8, further aidpá. ȧpaιóτpixα ‘thin-haired (H.), and post-Hom.
σapós 'weak', to yaðapós. A suffix -aλ- is also found in Pre-Greek.
yałupós [adj.] 'loose, brittle, friable' (medic., Arist., Thphr.). <PG(S,V)►
•VAR Also yaapá· εűðλαστα, σaßpá, Eŋpá, áσßevñ, чaðupá ‘easily bruised, weak,
dry, weak, loose' and чadupóv. àσevés, µadapóv, yaðupóv 'weak, wet, loose' (H.).
●DER yaðvp-ótŋs [f.] 'looseness' (Arist., Gal.), tov = 4w0iov (Ath.), -óoµαι [v.] 'to
crumble' (Aq.), -ματα· áлокóµµατa ‘chips' (H.).
ETYM The formation looks like that of semantically close кαлuρóç. Frisk
compared váɛa (cod. -éα). ywuía 'morsel, bit' (H.), but an old formation is
excluded in view of the variants. See ▸yaðάλλw, yñv.
vaipw [v.] 'to scrub, scrape gently'; also intr., of a slight movement, 'to flutter, vibrate,
shiver'; also of the sound that arose from such a movement: 'to rustle', of leaves (Hp.,
A. Pr. 394, E., Hermipp., Ar., Nic., Opp.). <?>

=== page 855 ===

1658
•VAR Only present.
yaiw
•COMP Also prefixed, especially with dia-.
▶
⚫ETYM Cf. the rhyming formations σaipw, σлaipw, σкaipw and ►чñv. Perhaps,
σaípw is the simplified form of waipw? Differently Benveniste MSL 23 (1930): 405,
who compared Av. fšarǝma- [m.] ‘shame', Ru. sórom 'shame', which to my opinion
(and that of DELG) is not better.
vaiw [v.] 'to grind, triturate'. <PG?>
•VAR The present only in H. waiɛɩv (for yai<p>εɩv); aor. чaíσaσðaɩ, yaɩσñvai
(Thphr. apud Porph. Abst. 2, 6).
●DER yaɩotós ‘triturated, ground' in waʊtǹ µãša (Hp.), also -στóv [n.], plur. -σťá
(лéµa, лóñavov, aλita) 'sacrificial cake' made of flour and honey (com., Hell.
inscr., Herod., AP); hence waiστ-íov [n.] ‘id.' (AP), -wdŋs like a y.' (AB), waî(σ)µa•
σĭtov óλíyov ‘small bread' (H.), yaíoτwp “scrubber”, epithet of σлóууos (AP).
With simplification of the anlaut: σaστós éλaía Oλaστn 'crushed olives' (H.), cf.
owxwwwxw. Other glosses from H. are aidpós = ȧpatós 'loose' and with a suffix
-vv- чaivóvtɛç yшúčovτεç 'feeding in bits'; waivvov. ȧxpeñov 'rendering useless';
waivvoua·odíyov little’; valvýdov.yevdéc, hátalov, eitedés, p入Úapov, oiktpóv
'false, idle, mean, rubbish, pitiable'. This reminds of waivuvеα еεσлívτα
'prophesying falsely' (Lyc. 1420) yevdñ voµoðɛto ½ þóμεvov (like
дívuva, see Schwyzer: 629). The PN Yaidapos confirms the gloss vaidpá.
ápαióτpixα (H.), O. Masson 1992: 146.
=
⚫ETYM Formation like in paíw, ►-кvaíw (кvñv), лταíш, etc.; cf. also on чñv. The
word is probably Pre-Greek, in view of the variant with σ-.
yakás [f.] ‘drop', especially of rain; collective 'drizzle' (Hdt., Hp., trag., Ar., X., Arist.).
<PG(S,V)►
VAR Ion. and Hell. also чɛкáç, -ádos (cf. Schwyzer: 258).
•DER Diminutive yaкád-tov [n.] (Hell. com.,Thphr.), also ч/ɛк-; -10σa [f.] 'spotted,
dappled', of a mare (pap. IIIª) see Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 103; also yaкad-íσxios of
horses (ibid.) 'with dappled haunches?'. Verb yaкá(w 'to drip, spray, drizzle' (A.,
Ar., X., Plu.), also wεк-, and prefixed with кατα-, εл-, бло-; aoг. ptc. pass. чaкασɛíç
'besprinkled' (Thphr.).
We also find чákaλov [n.], -os [m.] in the meaning 'new-born animal' (Ar. Byz., H.);
the same metaphor is found with Spóσos and pon. The suffix reminds of
▶ëta入ov.
•ETYM The formation is similar to that of ikµás, vás, λißás (Frisk notes wakád- next
to чáкaλov, like iкµád- beside iкμαλ-έoç). Connection with the group of ñ is
highly unlikely, because the к-enlargement would remain unclear.
There is no reason to call -aк- an infix (as per Schwyzer: 497); it is simply part of the
root чak-/ чɛк-. In view of the suffix -ad- or -aλ-, it is probably Pre-Greek. The
connection with Lith. spākas 'drop, point' (also spāgas) may be correct, in which case
both go back to a 'substrate language' of the northern Balkans. Beside чákaλov, Fur.:
339 cites a form чaíкaλov. žuẞpov, ẞpéopos 'new-born, cub' (H.), with an
interchange -a-/-at- typical for Pre-Greek.
yáкɛlov [adj.] · µέya (H.). <?►
vá
⚫ETYM One compares ►σqάкɛλoç 2, as the middle finger is the largest.
1659
yaláσow [v.] 'to touch, infringe, pluck' (S., Ar., Lyc., Ael.), med. Sayaλátteσðai• tò
εiç épεvvav diaσTÉλλεσa 'to be instructed to do research'. Cf. évaλážato. žчavoɛv,
EKɩvnen 'was touched lightly, was moved' (H.). <PG>
•VAR Att. also -ɩɩw; aor. -ážαɩ, fut. -ážw.
•COMP Also with άvα-, úло-, лpo-, fiɛta-.
•DER Verbal adjective άyáλaкtos = äyavotos, ákívητos ‘untoucheď (S. fr. 550, Ar.,
Crates Com.), ȧлo-уáλaктoç = áкpóτητоç (Phot.); cf. чaλážεiç ... vɛupāç ktúrov
άño-yáλaktos åkpótŋtos
'make a string sound by touching it' (Lyc. 139); referring to the sound also opto-
yáλaktos (épis) ‘resounding loudly, making some real noise' (S. Ichn.).
⚫ETYM Enlargement of yáλλw; cf. ảчáσσw to às̟áw, σaláσow, лaláσow, etc., also
▶yabáλλw. The word is most probably Pre-Greek, because of its a-vocalism.
yáλov [n.] 'curb-chain' vel sim. (Att. since A.); on the unclear mg. see Anderson JHS
88 (1968): 3ff. PG?(V)►
⚫ETYM A technical word without convincing etymology; connection with чáλλw
remains hypothetic. The gloss waλóv. εidoç xαλɩvou'kind of bit' (H.) is probably a
mistake for váλiov. Palmer recognized the word in Myc pa-sa-ro, see Morpurgo
Davies 1963 s.v. This was later defended by Taillardat REG 91 (1978): 1-11, but rejected
by Fur: 35864. See чéλov.
yalis, -idos [f.] 1. ‘subterranean (arched) passage, canal, (subterranean) vault, flying
buttress' (S. fr. 367, Pl. Lg. 947d, Arist., Ph. Bel., Hero, Hell. and late inscr.); 2.
‘scissors' (S. fr. 413, Ar. fr. 320, 1, AP, pap. IIP, Poll.); 3. 'ring or the like for supporting
or strengthening' (LXX, Ph. Bel.; also BGU 1028, 9 [II³]: yaλλíd[wv]?). ◄PG(V)►
•VAR Gen. also -ĭdos?
●COMP yaλido-eids similar to a vault' (Ph. Bel., Gal.).
●DER From 1.: yaλɩd-óoµai ‘to arch' (Bito), -wτós ‘archeď (D. H.), -wµa [n.] ‘vaulť
(Str., inscr. IIP).
From 2: чaλidó-στoμоç 'nipper-mouthed, epithet of crabs (Batr.). Hence diminutive
чaλídov [n.] (pap. VP), waλíšw [v.] (also àлo-, Sα-) 'to cut with scissors' (late
medic., Babr.), waλížaɩ• kɛīpaɩ 'to cut, shave' (H.), -lotós, -loµós [m.] (late medic.).
•ETYM In the third meaning, yaλis might be connected with wλov, and probably
also with áλov; for seemingly unconnectable meanings 'vault' end 'scissors' no
explanation has been found.
чáλλw [v.] 'to pluck, twitch a string (also a bowstring) with the fingers, instead of with
the plectrum' (IA), 'to sing to a harp, chant praises' (LXX, NT). <PG?>
•VAR Aor. чñλaɩ, Hell. (LXX) yaλai, fut. yaλŵ.
•COMP Also with έлɩ-, кaτα-, dia-, etc.
•DER 1. чaλuós (also diα-, εл-) [m.] ‘twitching, plucking of the bowstring, string,
string music' (Pi., A. [anap.], E. [lyr.], etc.), 'a song to string music, song of praise'
(LXX, NT), ávtí-yaλµos 'accompanied by string music' (E. [lyr.]), -µíšw [v.] ‘to sing
songs of praise or psalms', στs (gloss.), etc. 2. чáλµa (also dɩá-, áñó-) [n.]

=== page 856 ===

1660
valóv
'sound, melody of string music, etc.' (LXX, AP, Max. Tyr., Ptol.). 3. -σiç [f.]
'plucking, twitching' (Philostr.). 4. -τns [m.] 'player of a string instrument, lutenist,
harpist' (Hell. and late), older fem. -τpiα 'harpist' (Pl., Ion Trag., Arist., Hell.). 5.
-τplov [n.] 'stringed instrument, harp' (Arist., Thphr., LXX). 6. -τɩкóç ‘belonging to
harp music' (late). 7. ¥áλtiyš· kɩðápa (H., Suid.), after qópµy} etc.
⚫ETYM No etymology; cf. ► ynλaqáw. Probably Pre-Greek.
yalóv [n.] · ɛïdoç xaλɩvou ‘kind of bit or bridle' (H.), in fact ‘ring of a muzzle(?)'
(DELG). <PG(V)►
•DIAL Myc. pa-sa-ro (Taillardat REGr. 91 (1978): 1-11).
•DER Here belong all words with yalio-, yad (also with ε and σлr-). yáliov;
Véλov 'open ring' worn by the Persians (Hdt., X.), 'open collar' of the Gauls (Plb.);
also vitov (Delos IIIa), víλtov (inscr. IIIª), σлελλov (Aeol., sch. D. T., An. Ox. 4,
46). vɛλiów (AP 7, 234). yaλíç, -ídoç with σлaλíç (sch. D. T. 320 H); also 'vaulted
construction' (S. fr. 367, Pl.). vyaλíw [v.] 'to cut with scissors', yaλidów 'to vault';
чaλíττετα áμλλãτai (H.), σлαλíwv 'mobile covered galery', used in sieges.
•ETYM Not to чáλλw. Hypothesis by Taillardat REG 91 (1978): 1-11.
váμaboç [f.] 'sand' (Il., epic poet.), often plur. <EUR?>
•COMP As a second member in лоλv-чáμαеoç 'rich in sand' (Opp.), etc.
•DER yaµað-wdŋs ‘sandy' (h. Merc., A. R.), -ŋïs [f.] ‘id.' (Nic.); poetic formation, cf.
on xλwpŋïç; yaµað-íç, -ídos [f.] name of a fish (Numen. apud Ath.), called after its
habitat acc. to Strömberg 1943: 81, -ía aiyiaλós 'beach' (H.).
PN Yaμáеn name of a Nereid (Hes. Th. 260), Yεμáðŋ (Att. vase), by inverse writing
(Fraenkel Phil. 97 (1948): 161) or dissimilation (Kretschmer 1923: 193ff.)? Also
σaμalov (POxy. 1290, 1 [VP]) = -0óv 'sandpit', for y-? (see Preisigke 1925).
•ETYM Taken to be a cross of ǎµáðos and ‣чáµµoç. Fur. 209 adduces MHG sant <
(p)samtho-, MHG sam(p)t, samp <*(p)samatho-, so it could also directly continue a
word from the European substrate.
чáμμoç [f.] 'sand' (243). EUR?>
•VAR Also msc. (Archim.). Dor. -ā (A. and Ar. [lyr.]), -n (Hdt. 4, 181)? See Schwyzer
1950: 324).
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. чaµµó-yɛws 'with a soil rich in sand (Hdn.), úлó-
чaµµos having sand underneath, sandy' (Hdt., X., Plu.); cf. úлó-épvσoç s.v.
►xpvσóç; *¿лí-чашчоç in εлуаμμ-íw [v.] 'to cover with sand' (Hero).
•DER 1. vauμ-ía [n.pl.] 'gravel' in urine (medic.). 2. -íτns [m.] designation of a
treatise of Archim., 'made of sand (AP), -īɩç [f.] name of a fish (Archestr.), cf.
чauabic and Redard 1949: 23 and 113. 3. -wdns (Hdt., Hp.), -tvos (Hdt., Philostr.),
-ałos (Priene) ‘sandy'; -taños ‘as large as a grain of sand (Olymp. in Phd.); -wτóç
'consisting of plaster or stucco' (LXX). 4. -toµóc [m.] 'burying in sand' (Paul Aeg.),
from *-í\w). 5. Sıα-чaµµãσα [aor.] 'to polish with sand' (Lesbos). Further чáµµaτα-
σлapάyata ‘fragments' and чaµµατíšovσa. уwµíšovσa ‘feeding morsels' (H.).
•ETYM чáµµoç seems to be a Greek innovation and reminds of ►äμaboç. Connection
with the group of чñy has been suggested, but the formation is not clear. In
Vεyw
1661
principle, wάuμoç may represent older *чáq-μoç (cf. уρáµµа to уpáqw) and thus
belong to vaqapóc, vñqoç 'pebble', further to Lat. sabulum 'sand'.
According to Deroy Glotta 35 (1956): 183 (extensive treatment and lit.), ǎuaboç,
ǎμчoç as well as чáð, чáµµ would come from Pre-Greek *sam- 'sand, mud.
чáµaðos and ǎµµos may have arisen as crosses between äµaðos and чáµµoç. See
Fur.: 209.
váp [m.] 'starling', extensively discussed in Thompson 1895 s.v. <?>
•VAR Gen. чāpóç, nom.pl. yāpes (P 755 [gen. ¥āpŵv], Antiph., Dsc., AP 9, 373).
Also vnp, gen. ηpóç, nom. pl. чñpεç (P 583 [acc. ¥ñpac], Q. S., AP 7, 172).
Thematicized чãpos or чápos (Arist., Gal.).
•DER yapós 'starling-colored, grey, speckled' [adj.] (Ar., Arist., LXX); cf. Georgacas
Glotta 6 (1958): 193.
⚫ETYM The difficult epic gen. pl. vãpwv has been explained by metrical lengthening
of *vǎpwv; the oldest flexion, then, would have been vnp, gen. *văpóc, to which a
new nom. чấp was created (thus Schmidt KZ 25 (1881): 20; Kretschmer Glotta 4
(1913): 336). On the explanation of the vocalic interchange see also Björck 1950: 45
and 219. The word remains without a certain etymology. It seems impossible to
connect the Germanic name of the starling, OHG stara, etc., to which Lat. sturnus
‘id.' belongs (and perhaps ►åστpαλós). See also the bird names mentioned under
►σлоруíλoç (IE *sper-, see Pok. 991).
yavкporódŋs ‘swift-footed', epithet of the horse Arion (EM 817, 45); accus. -лоðα
(H.). →σavкpóv.
yaúw [v.] 'to touch lightly, brush, infringe, etc.'; pass. (rare) чavσµαι (Hp.),
уаvσеñvαι, чаúoμai (late) 'to be touched, brushed. <PG?>
•VAR Aor. чañσaɩ (Il., very rare in Att. prose), fut. yavow (A., etc.), perf. čчavкa
(late).
•COMP Also with έëɩ-, лotɩ-, лρоσ-, σvv-, etc.
•DER чañoɩç (èní-, σúv-, etc.) [f.] ‘touch, caress', yaυñσµa [n.] ‘id.' (X. Eph.).
•ETYM Frisk analyzes it as a rhiming formation to ▶xpaúw, xvaúw, Opaúw, with
the anlaut like in yaíw, yaípw [sic!], víw. He compares чñv. However, semantically
the word has little to do with ►чñv, and a rhiming formation based on it is unlikely.
Rather a Pre-Greek word.
vapapós → vñoos.
váw →чñv.
VE VAR VIV. oqɛīs.
yéyos [?] · táqos ‘grave'. kai éлyέyeɩv• έnikŋdeveɩv ‘to form connections by marriage'
(H.). <?►
⚫ETYM Unexplained.
yέyw [v.] ‘to blame, chide' (Thgn.). <PG?►
•VAR Aor. véžai, fut. véw, perf. pass. чεуμα.

=== page 857 ===

1662
Yedvós
•DER VÉк-TNS [m.] 'censurer' (Hp., Pl.), -τIкóç 'censuring' (Arist., Poll.), naμ-yéкtwp
[m.] 'all-censurer' (Man.), véεıç ‘censure' (gloss.); ä-σektos àyaðóc, napà ‘Pívłwvi
Tapavτivo (H.) if <*without blemish'; on σ- instead of - see Schwyzer: 329. wóyoç
[m.] 'censure' (Xenoph.+); often as a second member, e.g. quiló-yoyos 'censorious'
(E., Pl.); thence woy-ɛpós 'censorious' (Pi., Plu.), woyɛɩa yoyɛpá, kai ovк ǎžiα áкoñç
'not worthy to be heard' (H., Choerob.); woy-íoat or -ñσaɩ [aor.] ‘to censure' (LXX),
fut. pass. -100σεtal, -10½σovtaι (Vett. Val.); yoуions [m.] 'censurer, captious
person' (Rhetor.).
⚫ETYM Old words for 'reproach, blame, revilement' are övεdos (whence ovεditw
since Il.), which is inherited, and μεμчoμα, which is etymologically less clear, but
attested from Homer onwards. In comparison with these words, wέyw seems to be a
younger creation. No etymology exists. Connection with чñv makes little sense; the
same holds for derivation of woyos from the interjection wó (the same holds for
►ópoc). The word seems to be Pre-Greek, although there is no clear formal
argument (except for the initial w-).
yɛdvóc [adj.] 'thin, sparse', also 'bald' (of hair); secondarily 'bare', of the bottom (B.
219, AP, Aret., Luc., Aristid.). <PG?>
●der wɛdvo-kápηvos ‘bald' (Orph.), -Opı ‘thin-haireď (Tz.), wedvótns [f.] ‘baldness'
(Adam.), wεdvóoμa [v.] 'to become balď (S. E.).
ETYM Connection with ñv is not evident. Beside wɛdvóc, we find synonymous
ηvós (Semon.), yavós (H.), чlós, чaidpá. ápαιóτpixα (H.), etc. The word is
probably Pre-Greek, like many other words with initial v-.
Solmsen 1909: 136² suggested that wɛdvóc B 219 is an old corruption of the text for
earlier *advós or *чidvóc, and he explained all other places from there. But, as
Frisk remarks, why would *advós (to yaíw) or *yidvós (to λóc) have been given
up for a seemingly isolated form yɛdvóç?
yɛĩ (yĩ) name of the letter W (Hellad. apud Phot.). →лɛɩ and xɛĩ.
vɛipɛi • poɛipɛi 'destroys' (H.). <GR>
⚫ETYM A dialectal form, probably Cretan. Cf. Lejeune 1972: 39.
véλov [n.] 'bracelet, ring, arm jewel, anklet' (Hdt., X., Hell. and late inscr. and pap.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Mostly plur. -α. Also yέλov and íλ(\) tov, Aeol. (gramm.) σлελ(\)ɩov
(Schwyzer: 266).
●DER yɛλio-qópos 'wearing a bracelet' (Hdt.), aor. yɛliwσai σteqávoɩs 'to adorn
with wreaths' (AP), weλovµévn [f.] designation of a statue of Praxiteles (Plin.).
•ETYM Connection with yάλλw (Schwyzer: 329) can at best be folk-etymological.
The word is no doubt Pre-Greek, like many other words with -. Here also belongs
vaλíç. Fur. also connects Myc. qe-ro₂ /skweliō/. The -e- may be a variant of PG *a
before palatal --. See ►áλiov.
vellós [adj.] 'speaking inarticulately', like a child (Arist., Com. Adesp.);
'unintelligible', of words (A. Pr. 816). <PG?>
yɛúdoμai
1663
•DER чελλ-óτηs [f.] 'inarticulate speech' (Arist., Plu.); чελλíoμα [v.] (late also -í(w)
‘to speak inarticulately, faultily' (Pl., Arist., Hell. and late prose); the med. after
еéуyoд, εxμa, etc.; also with каτα-, ларα-, σuv-, etc. Thence -ɩσµóç [m.], -toμa
[n.] (late).
•ETYM Probably Pre-Greek.
чεúdoμaι [v.] 'to lie, be wrong, break (an oath)' (II.), in Att. also 'to lie to, deceive,
cheat, be false, etc.', often regardless of intention. See Luther 1935: 80ff., 115ff., 133ff.
<PG(V)►
•VAR Aor. чεúσaσðaι, fut. чεúσoμaɩ (both Il.), pf. εyεvõµai (Hdt., Att.). On чve- see
bel.
A younger active form (very rare in Att. prose) is yεúdw, aor. чεñσai, fut. чɛúσw 'to
deceive, mislead (with lies)', also with Sia-; more often pass. aor. чεvσñvaι, perf.
Eчεvσμαι 'to be deceived or misled' (Hdt., Att.), also with кατα-, diα-.
•COMP Often with prefix, especially кaτα-.
●DER 1. ¥ɛñdoç [n.] ‘lie' (Il.), which enjoys enormous productivity as a first member,
e.g. yɛvd-áyyɛdos [m.] ‘lying messenger, reporter of lies' (O 159), whence -ía [f.] (X.,
D. C.), -έw (Ph.; uncertain Ar. Av. 1340); чɛvdo-µápτvs [m.] ‘false witness' (Pl.,
Critias, Arist.); also as a second member, e.g. à-yɛvdǹs 'without deceit, truthful'
(Hes.), whence -εiα, -έw, -ía; εлɩ-чɛvdns 'fraudulent' (A 235).
From чɛuбoç: a) yɛvd-ápia [n.pl.] title of a treatise by Euclid. b) wɛudns 'lying, false'
(Hes. Th. 229, IA), probably after åλons; besides in the same mg. þɛñd-ɩç (Pi.),
-ýµwv, -aλéos (Nonn.), yεñd-áλµov. yɛvdéç (H.), cf. qvτáλµoç.
2. katá-, diá-yɛvois [f.] false message, deceit (Str., Stob.), yɛvoí-σtvě epithet of
Apollo, 'Hater of Lies' (AP). 3. чεñσ-µa (also кατá-, diá-) [n.] ‘lie, deceit' (Pl., Hell.),
katayevo-µós [m.] 'slander' (LXX). 4. -τns [m.] ‘lier' (2 261, probably also T 107, Pi.,
Hdt., S.), fem. -τɩç (epigr. Cyrene), -τýp ‘id.' (Man.), fem. -τɛƖpα (Orac. Sibyll.);
-τá\w [v.] ‘to lie' (Tz.). 5. ǎ-yɛvo-toç ‘without deceit, truthful' (Ph., Plu., AP),
whence -τéw (Plb.).
The expected zero grade in yudpós 'fraudulent, false' (Thgn. 122 [v.l. yudvóc], Lyc.),
Yudpɛúc [m.] month name (Corc., IG 9(1), 682 [IV]), referring to Hermes; also in
чúdos, plur. чúdŋ (EM 819, 13, A. Ag. 999 [lyr.]), for which mostly wúbos, -ŋ is found
(A. Ag. 478 and 1089 [lyr.], Call. Fr. 184; EM), and yvðɛv. ¿yɛúσato (H.); cf. also
vioμévwv. yуulóvτwv 'murmuring; yoτás. στá 'whispering',
чvwveç diáẞoλot 'slanderers' (H.).
⚫ETYM The zero grade found in wudpós agrees with Arm. sut (o-stem) [adj.] 'false',
[subst.] 'lie'. On the comparison see Clackson 1994: 168f. and Martirosyan 2010 s.v.
sut.
Clackson is inclined to believe the proposal by Taillardat BAGB 36 (1977): 344-354
that the Greek word is related to *psu- ‘wind' (which is assumed in чúxw 'to blow'
and in Skt. psu-). Taillardat gives a number of semantic parallels for a development
from 'wind' to 'nonsense, idle talk'. Intermediate forms, as far as the semantics are
concerned, may be seen in vpíšw and wúdpa.
The full grade in wɛúdoμat reminds of a Slavic word for 'deceive' in Slk. šudiť, Cz.
šiditi (see Machek Ling. Posn. 5 (1955): 70f.). If related, the Slavic words would point

=== page 858 ===

1664
véqaç
to an initial cluster *ks-, and we have to reconstruct *k"seud- for Greek (Pronk and
Van Beek, p.c.).
To my mind, the forms with чve- rather point to Pre-Greek origin (variation 8/ 0).
The Armenian form may derive from a language cognate to Pre-Greek. Fur.: 197
adduces yavdns (inscr. Pholegandros) and yoúdiov ‘lie' (H., Phot.).
yéqaç [n.] ‘gloom, darkness' (Pi. Fr. 324, H.). ◄PG(V) ►
•VAR Also yέqos (H., conj. by Lobeck for yoqov, oкótov Alc. Z 114).
●COMP ¥ɛqo-εidŃc = yeqapóc (Gal.), yɛq-avyoûç· σкotɛvñç ‘dark” (H.).
•DER Vεqaios = σкOTεVÓS (H.), чɛqηvós (Pi. N. 3, 41; -Evvóc Porson, -ɛvóc Bergk),
yɛçapós (Hp. apud Gal.) 'dark, gloomy, cloudy'. Uncertain yάqa, kvéqaç and
σɛiqa. σкoτía. Kρñτεç (H.).
•ETYM A rhyming formation to ▶kvéqaç. Usually, Skt. kṣáp- ‘night' is considered to
be somehow related, but a precise connection cannot be established (see Mayrhofer
EWAia s.v.).
Fur.: takes σɛipa as a shortened from of *yεo-, and also suggests to connect
(équpoç. The variations would point to substrate origin.
yéqeɩ [v.]<?>
•VAR in the glosses чéqɛi. dédolkev, έvtpénεi, Avnεĩ, opovτíčɛi ‘to fear, take heed,
repent, think of (H.); μεταчéш· μετаßоvλεúоμa 'to repent' (H.); µεταчéε·
μετμελεσ to repent' (H.); άчεéwv. àµελwv 'careless' (H.); ȧчɛqéç
ȧopóvτiστov Σooкλñç Þaidpα [=fr. 692] 'heedless' (H.).
Here perhaps belongs έлíσσoqoç, name of a yearly changing official in Thera (Test.
Epict.) if a variant of *¿éów; Schwyzer: 329 and 460; different Brugmann IF 16
(1904): 409f.
•ETYM Unknown.
yŋlaqάw [v.] ‘to feel, grope, caress, grope around, examine' (1 416). ◄PG?(S)►
•VAR Reshaped as yŋλaq-í\w ‘id.' (middle com.). Non-presentic forms are rare, and
mostly late: aor. чnλaña (Pl. Prt. 310c, LXX), -aqńow, -aqη¤ñσoµai (LXX),
-αqηеñvαι (S. E., Plu.).
•COMP Also with έлɩ-, etc.
•DER 1. чηλáq-ŋuα [n.] 'touch, caress' (X., Ph.), лpoуηλas̟é̟µаτα [pl.] = лpooíµa
(Procl. in Ti.). 2. -ŋois [f.] 'touching' (Hp., Hell.), with ȧva- 'resumption of a cause'
(to áva-ynλaqáw Just.). 3. -ŋtýs [f.] “groper” (sch.), -ntikŵs (Eust.). 4. -ŋtós epithet
of σкóτOÇ (LXX), because in the dark, groping is a means of orientation. 5. ¥ŋλáq-ía
(Ion. -ín) [f.] 'touching' (medic., Hell.), as if from *y\apos; thus also 6. -wdŋs
'groping, groping around' (Hp.); 7. чŋλáó-ívda лαíεv 'to play blindman's buff
(Phryn.).
•ETYM Analyzed by Fick BB 18 (1892): 102 as a univerbation from the aor. чñλa to
váλλw and ȧqάw 'to handle'; cf. στpεqε-divηev and similar instances (Schwyzer:
645). It remains unclear, however, why the aorist was preferred. Bechtel recognized a
noun *vālā in the first member, referring to unλ-aqάw 'to touch with the probe
(unλn); but this rare verb was rather created after the example of yŋλaqáw, which is
a common word. If -aq- is rather a suffix, the word could be Pre-Greek.
;
į
чñν
1665
yńv, ynvóc [m.] ‘date wasp, fig wasp, gall wasp' (Hdt., Ar., Arist., Thphr.), also as a
PN (Thera [VIIª]?). <PG?►
●DER ¥nvíčw (also úлo-, пpo-) [v.] 'to impregnate the figs artificially by the sting of
the gall wasp, caprificate', also metaph. (Ar., Com. Adesp., Suid., Phot.).
•ETYM The connection with yñv is hardly credible. For the suffix -n-, see also
►кnońv 'drone'.
чñv [v.inf.] ‘to rub, grate, scratch, stroke, wipe' (IA, Hdt., com., Hell. and late inscr.
and pap., etc.). <PG?>
•VAR Ind. зsg. vñ < *výη, ptc. med. чwμεvoç, etc., aor. чñoαι, výσaσðaɩ, pass.
vn(o)0ñva, perf. чσчa; late also inf. vāv.
•COMP Mostly prefixed, e.g. with кατα-, áлo-, σvv-, nɛpɩ-.
●DER 1. åлó-, лɛpí-yŋµa [n.] ‘scrapings, refuse, dirť (Ep. Cor., Dsc., inscr.). 2. лapá-
ynoiç = rapá-tpiшμа (gloss.). 3. áлó-éŋσtpov. tò åлóµåкéрov τ µεtpovμέvov
σítov 'what is wiped off the measured grain' (H.); лαλíµ-yησo “scraped again', i.e.
'scraped and written on again', of parchment (ßißλíov), also -ov [n.] ‘palimpsest'
(Plu.), Lat. palim-psestus (Cat., Cic.). 4. n-vóc (Semon.), yavós. чεdvóc (H.)
'bald(headed)'; vñ-pós = Enpóc (Suid.), μεσóч· ηuinpov half-dried' (H.),
vapóv [n.] name of a siccative powder (Paul. Aeg.). 5. чηкεбáv. коνiopτóç 'cloud of
dust' (H.) (after τŋkɛdwv). 6. чýλŋkes. twv åλekтрυóvwv oi voƉoyévval 'bastard
cocks' (H., Suid.), originally 'without a crest??
With an enlargement -X-: vnxw [v.] 'to stroke, comb, wear away' (IA, etc.), aor.
yñžal, ynxеñval, fut. výšw, perf. чηyμα, also prefixed, especially with кατα-.
Thence 1. чñуµ¤ (¿ëí-) [n.] ‘granule, dust which is scraped off (Hdt., A., Arist.,
Hell.). 2. vñšɩç (лapá-, àлó-) [f.] ‘combing, scraping' (X., late medic.). 3. Yýktpa [f.]
'curry-comb for horses' (S., E., Ar., Hell. pap.), -τpíov [n.] (gloss.), -tpíç, -tpia (H.
s.v. \woτpa), -τpíšw (sch.). áлó-чηкτрov [n.] name of a remedy against úлóлa
(Gal.), лaλíµ-ηкτроv = deleticia [charta] (gloss.), сf. лаλíµуηστу. 4. Ynktóc
(μódoc) level (gloss.), áƒó-énкtóç metaph. 'shrewd' (S. Ichn.). To this also belongs
5. Ynxpáv. tǹv λeлτ½у ‘peeled, husked, small' (H., Suid.).
With ã-vocalism (cf. below): чaкtýp· чýkτpa and yáktav. tǹv ywktǹv µáľav (H.).
With w-vocalism: 1. чwµóc [m.] 'morsel, bit' (since 1374), -íov [n.] (Hell. pap., NT),
-íç [f.] (Arist.), -í\w 'to put morsels in the mouth, feed' (IA), whence -ɩoµa, -loµós;
also чwµŋkɛç oi toñ σítov tàç þíšaç àлεσ¤íovτεç 'who eat the roots of the grain'
(H.), after μúрдηkeç, okwλŋkɛç, and yŵµyč. σońкwμа 'point of a helmet' (H.). 2.
ywpa (Ion. -ŋ) [f.] ‘itch' (IA), ywpós, -aλéos, -ikós, -wdns, -ítns, -láw, -íaoiç, -wolç.
3. чwλós 'without foreskin, circumcized, lecherous', also -ǹ (Dor. -á) [f.] ‘exposed
penis' (Ar., Diph.), whence άлoчwλéw (Ar.), -wv = лóσðшv 'with a large penis' (H.).
4. ww0-íov [n.], also -ía [f.] 'bread crumb, etc.' (Pherecr., Poll.). Uncertain 5.
чwбарέov. аúxμηpóv 'dry, withered' (H.), for ywpaléov? 6. ►чwa 'rotten and
malodorous stuff (A. R. fr. 5). 7. ywxòs yñ. yalqıwdns ‘sandy' (H.), perhaps for
yŵxos. yñ yaµµwdŋs. With an enlargement -X- (cf. on чnxw above) also чwxw [v.]
'to grind, scrub' (Nic., Ev. Luc., Dsc.), also owxw (Nic.); with кατα- (Hdt.), also with
άлo-. Unclear is чwêτóv. τpáñεšav ‘table' (H.), cf. чáktav above.

=== page 859 ===

1666
unvóc
⚫ETYM The glosses чактηр and чάкτav in H. prove that the basic form of чñv, чnxw
was *чā-, beside ablauting ww- as found in ywµóc, ywxw, etc. (Solmsen 1909: 136).
Old Indic has been supposed to show a counterpart in the athematic present psá-ti
'chews, devours', from IE *PseH-. An r-derivation is supposed by Nieminen KZ 74
(1956): 168ff. in Lith. sóra 'millet' (< IE *psā-rā: ywpa); on this Fraenkel 1955 s.v. Cf.
also ñpoç.
Skt. psá-ti, Gr. чñν and чóxш can be explained as vocalic enlargements (*psā-, *psō-
<*bs-eh₂-, *bhs-oh₂-) of IE *bes- in Skt. bábhasti 'to chew, digest'. Beekes Sprache 18
(1972): 126 gave semantic objections; and Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 198 (s.v. psā-) also
rejected the connection.
DELG (s.v. *wnw and Supp.) suggests that the n may continue an ē, i.e. -eh,-. Finally,
Meier-Brügger in DELG Supp. states that the “analyse définitive” of чñ has to
depart from the root *pes- seen in Hitt. peš(š)-zi ‘to rub, scrub (with soap)', with a
factitive suffix -eh₂-.
To my mind, the IE explanations must be given up; the group of words is probably
Pre-Greek, especially given the coexistence of waiw, yaúw, yiw, which cannot be
explained if we start from a PIE form.
ynvóc •VAR yηpós. →yñv.
vñtta [f.] name of a flatfish, further identification uncertain ('plaice, flounder'?)
(Att.), see Thompson 1947 s.v. Metaphorically 'glutton' (Pl. Com.). <?>
•VAR чñσσa (Alex. Trall.). ¥ηττó-лodɛç [pl.] name of a mythic people (Luc.).
⚫DER Diminutive чηTτápiov (Anaxandr.), nooíov (Zonar.).
⚫ETYM Frisk suggests it could stand for *x-α (comparing Opioσa from ►Оpíž, etc.)
from vnxw, referring to the hard, raw skin (cf. Ital. = Lat. lima 'file', also 'flatfish' (=
MoFr. limande), and cf. Strömberg 1943: 87f. with more examples. Of course, this is
only a suggestion.
¥ñços [f.] ‘small stone, pebble', used especially for counting and calculating, ‘voting
stone, vote, decision' (Pi., IA); cf. wnqis below. <?>
•VAR Dor. wãqoç.
•COMP Numerous compounds, e.g. ynpo-popέw ‘to give one's vote', -qopía [f.]
'voting' (Arist., Hell. and late); -opópos (D. H.), iσó-pos 'with an equal vote,
having an equal vote' (Att.).
●DER 1. ynq-is, -ĭdos [f.] 'little stone' ( 260, etc.), whence -1d-wdns (Gp.), -íov [n.]
(late), -ídiov [n.] (lamb.). 2. Aeol. чã¢-ɩy\, -tyyo¢ [f.] (Eresos [IVª]), cf. λãɩy§; ¥ãpaž
(Greg. Cor.), to Míða§ ‘id.'. 3. ynq-ác, -ádoc [m.] ‘juggler, magician' (Cat. Cod. Astr.).
4. Adjective -кós ‘ptng. to calculating' (Vett. Val.), -tvos ‘of stones' (PMag. Par., H.,
AB).
5. Verb ynq-íšoµaɩ, -í\w ‘to vote, decide', act. 'to bring to vote', also 'to count (with
pebbles)' (Dor., IA), frequent with prefìx, e.g. àño-, ¿лɩ-, кατα-. Thence -toμa, Cret.
чáуα, ч (Schwyzer: 523) [n.] 'vote, motion, decision' (Emp., Att.), -чσµóç
(also with dα-, εл-, ларα-, кατα-) [m.] 'voting, etc.' (Arist., late), -tots (also with
εл-, кατα-, etc.) [f.] ‘id.' (Att.), wά (Locr. Va), see Schwyzer: 271, on the
gemination 238; -1σtýs (also ¿ïi-, ovv-, etc.) [m.] ‘an office' (pap.).
1
!
Yiloquar
1667
6. Also ypów 'to surface with pebbles, mosaics' (inscr., Lyd.), -wτós (Lydia [I³]),
-wois [f.] (gloss.).
A zero grade wǎ-após (-ɛpós Hp.) 'loose, rotten, crumbled' (IA), whence -apía [f.]
(Dsc.), -apíτns [m.] (AP), yaqapóoμa (Olymp. Alch.); cf. λayapós, xaλapós, etc.
ETYM A semantic proximity between yños, yãços and чñv cannot be denied.
However, the formal side is difficult, for what would -o- have to represent? A zero
grade wǎq- is also supposed in váчuoç, if this derives from *чáo-μoç, and it can also
be assumed for Lat. sabulum ‘sand' (see on ►yáµµoc). The comparison with Hitt.
paššila- ‘pebble' (Goetze Lang. 30 (1954): 403) does not make sense formally.
Fur.: 381 compares waqapós with yaúρioç. кovioρτóç, qopuτóç. oi dè yavpós 'cloud
of dust, rubbish' (uncertain).
=>
xnxw →чñv.
yiá → Évia.
váчw [v.] 'to play', only in Lac. 3pl. váεdovτ (Ar. Lys. 1302 [lyr.]). <PG(V)►
•Var yɩáddɛv. naíšɛɩv ‘id.' (H.).
•DER Also wiά. Xapá, yɛloíaoµa, naiyvia ‘joy, laughter, game' (H.).
•ETYM On the anlaut also Schwyzer: 329. The variant ►έvía, etc. is due to a prothetic
vowel, which is characteristic of substrate words. Perhaps, the Pre-Greek form had
ps-, cf. víaкa beside wakás (s.v. \ác) and yiɛσσa. ɛúdaíµwv, µakapia and yiɛvta.
Tà avτá (H.).
víaðos [f., m.] ‘rush mať (Att. inscr. [Vª], Ar., Arist., Thphr.), also used as a screen
(Apollod. Poliorc.) and as a means of transport (pap. IIIª, Sor.). <PG(V)►
•VAR Also wiɛ005.
•COMP чαео-лλóкоç [m.] 'plaiter of mats' (pap.).
•DER Diminutive чá-ov [n.] (com. IV-IIIª, pap. V-VI³), -wdŋs ‘like a mat' (Eust.,
sch.), -ŋdóv ‘in the style of a mat' (sch., Suid.), -íoμa 'to be cured by lying on a mat'
(Hierocl. Facet.).
ETYM A formation like yupya0óç, кáλaboç; a loan from the Pre-Greek substrate, as
is shown by the variation a/ɛ.
viác [f.] 'drop of blood' (P 459), plur. чádɛç aiµaτóɛσσal. <PG(V)►
•VAR чíaka. чyaкáda 'drop', vídɛç. чiádɛç, yakádɛç, and чáčε· чakáčɛ (H.).
•ETYM чíaк- is found beside waк-ád-; this points to a Pre-Greek palatalized
phoneme *s. See ▸ víw.
yɩßdeî [v.] · vñonvεĩ, ßdɛi ‘to blow underneath, fart' (H.). <?►
•ETYM Unknown.
víšoµai [v.] ‘to weep', in yoµévŋ. kλaíovoa (H.). <PG(V)►
•VAR = Аeol. чσбoμéva (Sapph. 94, 2); also čчid<d>εv• *кλavσεv, чívdɛσðαι· кλαíεɩv
(H.).
•ETYM Probably onomatopoeic; cf. σí(w; see also yópos. Cf. vídɛç ‘drops', and
note the prenasalization.

=== page 860 ===

1668
VÍOLOS
vietos [adj.] epithet of olvos, στaqvlý, žλivos (com. IVª, Cyrene IVª, Nic., Dsc.), so a
kind of grape. Lat. psithia (vitis, uva), psythium, scil. vinum (Verg., Plin., etc.).
<PG(V)►
•VAR Also úLOÇ.
⚫ETYM No etymology. Probably Pre-Greek.
¥ɩðvpíšw [v.] ‘to whisper, murmer, slander', metaph. of trees and birds, 'to rustle,
chirp' (Pl., Ar., Hell.). ◄PG(V)►
VAR Dor. (Bucol.) -íodw.
•COMP Also with dα-, лроσ-, ȧлo-, etc.
•DER ɩеúp-σµα (also úлo-) [n.], -ɩouós [m.] whispering, rustling' (Hell.), -ɩσtηs
[m.] "whisperer", epithet of Hermes in Athens ([D.] 59, 39), 'slanderer, whisperer'
(Ep. Rom.), -1σTIкóç (Cat. Cod. Astr.). чíðupos [m.] 'slanderer, whisperer' (Pi., Ar. Fr.
167 [anap.], LXX, Plu.), also [adj.] 'whispering, slandering' (S. Aj. 148 [anap.]), of
music humming' (Ar. Fr. 671), of birds ‘chirping' (AP). It seemingly served as a basis
for vpíw, but is probably a back-formation. Also wíðup = víðupos (Hdn. Gr. et
al.), after μápτup? wedupós (also wéd-) = yíðupos (A. Supp. 1042 [lyr.], Hdn. Gr., H.),
чdóveç diáßolot, íupo 'slanderers' (H.). Here also belongs чúpa [f.]
designation of a Libyan musical instrument (S. Inach. [lyr.], Poll.), probably a folk-
etymological transformation of a foreign word. Cf. μvvpíw, кλavеµvpí™w,
TIVеvpíšw, ovpíšw (to σūpiу§), etc.; also λуʊрóç, кαrupóç, óïšupós (to óïľúc), etc.
•ETYM If it dissimilated from *чveup- (as assumed by Specht KZ 61 (1934): 277; on
the phenomenon see Kretschmer Glotta 26 (1938): 57f., and cf. qïïv), it may belong
to ús, etc., see чεúdoµα. On the other hand, cf. ►чíšoµaɩ. Pisani Arch. glott.
ital. 46 (1964): 23 considered relationship with Skt. kṣvéḍati (also kṣvédati) 'to hum'
<IE *ks- (not even mentioned by Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.).
Given the variant wɛdupós and the nom. up, the word is no doubt non-Indo-
European, i.e. Pre-Greek.
vilov ETYM Dor. for лτíλov.
чīλós [adj.] ‘bald, bare, smooth, exposed' (I 580). <?►
•VAR Also msc. subst. 'light-armed soldier' (IA).
•COMP Few compounds, e.g. чdó-tanis, -idos [f.] "smooth carpet”, i.e. a carpet
smooth on one side and woolly on the other (Hell. pap.), opposite to àµqi-tañis
'carpet woolly on both sides'; Sá-λoç уñ 'completely bare, uncovered land' (pap.
II³).
•DER 1. yiλ-ótŋs [f.] 'baldness' (Hp., Arist., Plb.). 2. wiλńc, -ñtos [m.] ‘yvµvýc' (A. fr.
732 M.), plur. -ñται (Eust.), also -ĭαι after óлλīτai? 3. -āž, -ākos [m.] 'the bald one'
(Ar. fr. 891), also as an epithet of Dionysus in Amyklai (Paus.), see Björck 1950: 48
and 264. 4. чɛis [m.pl.] 'the first choreutes' (H., Suid.), after the light-armed
vanguard. 5. yıλ-ów [v.] 'to make bald, lay bare, expose', also with άло-, etc., pass.
-óoμa 'to become bald, become bare, get exposed' (IA); thence -шos (also ȧло-,
лεp-) [f.] 'exposure, depilation' (medic.), gramm. 'removal of aspiration, inaspirate
pronunciation' (Eust.), -wμa [n.] 'bare situation' (Hp.), -wτns 'one who drops the
aspiration' (Tz.), -wτIкóç (Gal., EM, Eust.). 6. -íčoμα = -óоμα (D. C.).
}
vóal
1669
•ETYM No etymology. Some semantic parallels can be found within the enormous
group of ñv, but the formation (cf. чw-λóc) remains unclear. Cf. iw, wixeç.
viuvos [m.] 'white lead' (Ar., Pl., X., Hell.; Delos [301], AP). <PG(V)►
•VAR Often -útov, later -ítov (pap.), rarely -чμ-; also wηµúðɩov [n.].
•DER чvеóμat 'to be colored with white lead' (Lys., Hell.), act. -ów ‘to color ...';
also -0ów (Thom. Mag.), -0í(w (Zonar.) ‘id.', whence -ɩστns [m.] (gloss.).
⚫ETYM Has been assumed to be a loanword, perhaps from Egyptian. However, no
evidence for this can be found. The variations rather point to a Pre-Greek word. See
Fur.: 367.
vívoμai [v.] 'to shed fruits before ripening' (Thphr.). <GR>
●DER yɩvádɛç ai þvádɛç äµñελo ‘vines shedding (their fruits or leaves)' and чváča.
àлoppɛi tà áƒ¤εvñ tov kaproû, quλoppoɛi 'to fall off (of the weak fruits), to shed
the leaves' (H.).
⚫ETYM Cretan forms for oеívoμat, etc. Cf. чivovτoç = pivovτos (Tenos, IG 12(5),
867), vios (= pos). áлwlεa 'destruction' (H.), etc. See more examples and
phonetic notes in Schwyzer: 326. On the dialectal words in Thphr. see Strömberg
1937:72.
yírta, yútta →oitta.
чɩɩtákη [f.] ‘parrot' (Arist.). <LW? Orient, PG? (V)►
•VAR чittaкóç (accent after Hdn. Gr. 1, 150) [m.] (Call., Plu., D. S.), also σɩτταкóç
(Phld., Arr.), -áкŋ (v.l. Arist.), ► ẞíttakos, oittas. öpviç rolós. évɩoi dè tòv yittakòv
λέyovσɩv (H.).
•ETYM Formerly assumed to be a foreign word of Oriental origin, connected with
Skt. śúka- [m.] 'parrot'. Fur.: 325 thinks the Indic word should be left aside, and asks
if it could be a Pre-Greek bird name that was transferred to the parrot. The variation
does seem to point to Pre-Greek origin. Borrowed as Lat. psittacus > MoHG Sittich.
víw [v.] 'to feed with morsels; to milk, pap'; = ywµíčw, лoτíčw. Also 'to chew up' in fut.
med. (Lyc., Euph., AP, Phot., Eust.). <?>
•VAR Aor. viσai, fut. yiσoµai, ¿ñɩ-yɩɛĩ, perf. pass. žyɩoµai.
•COMP Also with кatα-, ȧão-, ¿ëɩ- (EM, H.). ¿<µ>yiovσa = tpoqàç dɩdoñσa xóvdpov
(A. Fr. 51 = 427 M.), = έpéуµατα §íðoñσa (H.).
•DER wíž [m., f.] ‘morsel' (Plu., Aret., Alex. Aphr.), gen. wɩxós, nom.pl. wɩxec (also -aɩ
H.). xía [n.pl.] ‘bread crumbs' (NT), -ídɩα (H., EM), -iwdɛis ywµoí (Eust.). Yıx-
ápлα 'thief of bread crumbs' (Batr.).
ETYM The formation is similar to лрíw, xpíw, xvíw. The enlargement -X- reminds
of чnxw, wwxw. I do not think, however, that the word belongs to ►чñv.
vó 'pooh' (Ael. Dion. 337). A shepherd's call, also an exclamation of disgust: лì τo
σалρoб кai μǹ σuvaрéσкovτоç. <ONOM
⚫ETYM See on wwa. I see no sufficient basis to derive words like wóλoc, wółoç from
this interjection, as suggested by DELG.
vóa [f.pl.] 'psoas muscle, muscles of the loins' (Hp., LXX). <PG(V)►

=== page 861 ===

1670
vóyčaɩ
•VAR Also volaí, yúai, yvai. yoïtŋs µvɛλóç ‘lumbar part of the spinal chord' (Gal.),
чvadıкóç 'suffering from lumbago' (Orib.). Cf. чɛɩαí· àλwлɛкɛç '(foxes,) psoas
muscles' (H.), víaι· ȧλóлεкεç (H.); чoñaι· àλáлεкεç (H.), qúλλɛç· ȧλóлɛкɛç (H.).
•ETYM The variations cannot be all understood in IE terms. The connection with
►ỏσquç (Prellwitz), with ỏ- as a prothetic vowel instead of a- before u in the
following syllable, is quite possible. The word is clearly Pre-Greek. For further details
see ►òσquç.
vóyža [v.inf.] άкoñσaι 'to hear' (H.). <GR
.
•ETYM A Doric form connected with ▸ qoyyn?
=
vodiov → váyiov.
чółoç 1 [m.] = áкαðαpσíα, þúñоç, ywpa (A. fr. 82 = 21 M., Ar. fr. 829, Phryn. Com.,
H., Phot., Suid.); pólov (-íov cod.). αiðaλ@dɛç, yo¤óv. дελαv (H.); also чow<p>a·
vwpa, yówp<ov>. aúxµηpóv (H.), cf. Wackernagel Phil. 95 (1943): 191; woеóкη
άкaеapσía (Hdn. Gr.), yoðotòs ó åкáðapτos (Theognost. Can.). <PG(V)►
ETYM Closest to yoλos 'soot'. Fur: 197 connects yoïðoç = σлodóç 'ashes', and
assumes also *wdos 'dirt' on the basis of ywdapéov. aúxµηpóv (H.), cf. yo0wp-
above. He also compares чódos 'soot, smoke' and äoßolos 'soot' (ibid.: 393²).
}
!
yóðos 2 [m.] · (…….) Oópußos 'noise, commotion'; yoáά\\ɛv. чoчɛïv 'to make noise'
(H.); ч00εσ = yoqέovov (Call. fr. 194, 106). <PG?>
•ETYM Frisk assumed a cross of wooos and półos, where yoάλλɛ would be
formed after áλav. I do not believe in such ‘crosses'. The word is no doubt Pre-
Greek.
yoĩƉos [m.] = oлodóç ‘ashes' (Theognost. Can., EM, Phot.). ◄PG(V)►
ETYM See Fur.: 197, and s.v. ►ÓƉOS 1.
wóλos [m.] 'soot, smoke, fume' (A. fr. 24 = 88 M.). <PG(V)►
●Der yoλokoµñíaɩ (from *yoλó-koµños) [f.pl.] ‘fumy pomposities' (Ar. Eq. 696).
From this woló-εs sooty, smoky, fumy, smoke-colored, dark' (Od., epic poet.).
Besides weλóç ailaλós 'soot' (for -óεç?) and чóμμoç. άкαеаpσíα, кαлvóç 'impurity,
smoke' (H.), cf. чáµµoç.
⚫ETYM The ending is similar to that of ǎoßolos, Boλóç, aïaλoç. Connection with
►ñv makes little sense semantically. Fur.: 388 compares wółoç 'dirt' and also (393)
σлоdós, ǎ-σßolos (with prothetic vowel). In view of these variants, the word is most
probably Pre-Greek.
vópos [m.] 'clangour, noise, crash, vain noise, idle babble' (h. Merc.). <?>
●COMP E.g. yoqo-dens ‘fearing noise' (Pl.), ä-yoqos 'noiseless' (S., E., Arist.).
●DER 1. yoq-wdns 'full of noise' (Hp., Arist.). 2. yoqa} [m.] epithet (inscr. Phrygia).
3. yoq-έw ‘to make noise or clamour, sound, blow' (IA), also with ảлo-, σvv-, έɩ-,
etc.; thence -σç (also with ảлo-, εлɩ-) [f.] ‘making a noise' (Cratin., Arist., Plu.),
-μaτα [n.pl.] idle babble' (S. Inach.), -τкós 'boisterous' (Arist.), à-чópos
'noiseless' (S.), -ŋtí, -ŋtɛí [adv.] (Pl., D., Arist.).
!
yixń
1671
Besides the glosses from H., in quite different mgs.: yéqel dédoikev, ¿vtpénei, Avneĩ,
ppovtiČea; hetavÉqw. fietapov入eÚoqial; fletarÉpelv• qietaquedeiala; àvepÉwv-
ȧμελwv and ȧчεqés. ȧppóvtiσtov. Σoчoкλñç Þaídpą (Fr. 692), see yεqɛɩ.
⚫ETYM Like чɛudoç and чúðoç, it may originally be onomatopoeic and somehow
belong with the interjection yó ‘pooh![pfui!]' (S. Fr. 521; “¿ïì toñ σañpoñ kai µǹ
σuvapéσкovτos” [Ael. Dion.; cf. A.Fr. 21 M.]); in detail dark. After Petersson 1923: 20
to *bes- 'to blow' (see on ►чūxn) with broken reduplication.
yúdpaž, -akoç [f.] ‘pustule, blister', on the head, on the eyelid, on the nose, on the
tongue (EM 819, 10). <?►
•DER чupákov [n.] (Dsc., Cyran., sch. Theoc. 12, 24); yudpaków [v.] 'to form a
pustule' (medic.).
•ETYM After sch. on Theoc. it was called this way, because it betrayed the lier
(yudpóc); they were also called yεúdɛа and чεúσμаτа. Cf. Theoc. 9, 30 and 12, 24, to
which Kaibel 1899-1901(1): 218. Connection with why should be given up.
=>
yidog → veidoc.
yúλa [f.] ‘flea' (Epich., Ar., X., Arist., Thphr.). <IE *p/bl(o)u-s- ‘flea'>
•VAR Secondary and rare qúos [m.]. Also yúλlakas. tàç yúλλaç (H.); yvλλí【w
[v.] 'to catch fleas' (Suid.).
•DER Plant name чúλλ-tov [n.] (Dsc., Luc.), -ɛpíç [f.] (Ps.-Dsc.), after nuεpic, etc.)
'flea seed, Plantago psyllium'; because of the form of the seed (Strömberg 1940: 55).
⚫ETYM An inherited word *plusi- 'flea', which underwent metathesis in Greek to
*psuli- (perhaps by association with vñv): cf. Skt. plúși-, Arm. lu <*plus-, Lith. blusà
< *b(h)lus-, Lat. pūlex < *pusl-, Germanic, e.g. OHG flōh (probably folk etymology
after fly), etc.; the variations are the result of euphemistic, playful or folk-
etymological distortions that may have been current already in the parent language.
чūxń [f.] ‘aspiration, breath, life, vitality, soul (of the deceased), spirit', also as a
representation of the dead, seen as a winged creature ((@ov ëtepwtóv) (†1.). <PG►
•COMP As a first member e.g. in yux-aywyós [m.] ‘guide of souls, necromancer',
whence -ía, -έw (since A.); very productive as a second member, e.g. μ-xo
'animate' (IA), μεуαλó-чxоç 'magnanimous' (Att., etc.).
⚫DER 1. Diminutive чux-áptov [n.] (Pl., M. Ant.) > MoGr. чuxápi 'butterfly', see
Immisch Glotta 6 (1915): 193ff.; -íov [n.] (epigr. IG 14, 2068), -ídtov [n.] (Luc., D. C.).
2. yux-ɩkóç ‘mentaľ (Arist., Hell.), -ałoç, -ñïoç ‘id.' (late). 3. чuxów [v.] ‘to animate'
(Ph., Nonn.), whence -wois [f.] 'animation' (Ph., M. Ant.); also µívx-ów, -óoµai
(μεt-), whence (µiet-)eµyúxwois (D. S., Gal.) from žµyxos (see above).
чúxw [v.] 'to blow' (Hom. only Y 440), aor. чõžaɩ, pass. (also intr.) ч×¤ñvai (Il.),
-ñvai (Att.), yňy-ñvaɩ (Hell.), fut. yúčw, yvx-¤ńooµai, -ǹooµai, yňуýσoµaɩ, perf.
чvyчaι (IA), act. чuxa (late). Often prefixed, in various shades of meaning: e.g.
ȧva- 'to take breath', άло-, εк- 'to expire, lose consciousness, die' (Od., IA), but more
frequently 'to cool down', also intr. and pass. (Il.), 'to dry (in the wind)' (IA). Also
with кατα-, diα-, έni-.
Other words meaning 'cool, cold' are treated s.v. yuxpóc.

=== page 862 ===

P
1672
YUXpós
•ETYM The present чúxw is clearly the basis of all other verbal forms. The nominal
formations fit semantically and formally to the verb: for yux 'soul' from чúxw 'to
blow, breathe', cf. лνεччα to луéw, Lat. animus and anima to Skt. ániti 'to breathe',
etc.
Greek had another verb for 'to blow, breathе': лvéw, which remains alive throughout
the history of Greek. Therefore, it is generally thought that чúxw developed its
meaning 'to cool, make dry (in the wind)', from 'to blow'. Note that this is now
doubted by Mumm and Richter, IJDLLR 5 (2008): 33-108, who argue that the
meaning 'cool' is primary to 'breath, soul'. In the meaning 'cool', чúxw, yñãos and
чuxpós are maintained in prose against other expressions for 'cool, cold', like piyoç,
KpÚos, náyog.
The earlier history of чúxw is obscure. It is tempting to analyze it as чú-x-w (like
τрúуw to τpúш, чnxw and чwxw to чñv), and to connect a verb *bhes- 'to blow'
(Benveniste BSL 33 (1932): 165ff., who compares τpúw to τɛipw and Lat. terō).
Derivatives of *bhes- would be seen in Skt. bhástrā- [f.] ‘bag, bellows', bhásman- [n.]
'ashes' (for another possibility see on vóloc). Moreover, Skt. °psu- in á-psu
'without breath' (RV) would contain the same extension. See details in Mayrhofer
EWAia s.vv. A recent attempt was made by Mumm and Richter (l.c.).
I do not find these suggestions convincing. There is hardly any evidence for an IE
root *bes- 'to blow' (Mayrhofer EWAia 2: 257 puts the Skt. root bhas² between
brackets). Therefore, the word is more probably of Pre-Greek origin.
yuxpós [adj.] 'cold' (Hom.). <?>
•COMP μs 'cold'.
•DER чúxw [v.] 'to refresh, etc.'; often prefixed. For forms, see on чuñxŃ.
Nominal derivations: 1. άvα-чŏxn (Att., Arist.) 'refreshment, consolation' (also
лapα-), where Ŏ is explained from чé×ñvαι (Schwyzer: 460). 2. чūšis (also άvá-,
katá-, nɛpí-, éµ-, etc.) [f.] ‘refreshment' (Hp., Pl., Arist.). 3. чõуµα (also áлó-, dá-)
[n.] 'means of cooling; dry or infertile land' (Hp., pap.). 4. чvyµós (also ñɛpɩ-),
чuxчós [m.] 'refreshment, chill; place for drying' (LXX, Hell. pap., medic.). 5.
чUкτnρ (also ȧvα-, oivo-) [m.] 'cooler' (Att., Hell.), also 'place for drying' (sch. Od.),
-týplov, -tnpídiov [n.] 'cooler' (com. [IV], Hell. inscr. and pap.), 'place for drying or
recovering' (Hes., A., E.), with лapα- 'consolation' (S. Ichn.), -τplos 'cooling'
(Achae. [V]), -τnpias, -tnpiokos [m.] 'cooler' (Hell. pap. and com.). 6. yúktpa [f.]
'place for drying' (Att. inscr. [Iª], H. s.v. τpaσiá). 7. чuktiкóç (also diα-, έv-, кατα-)
'cooling' (medic., Arist.). 8. yuyɛús [m.] 'cooler' (Alex.), perhaps directly from
yvyñval. 9. Yvyós = τapσós (sch. Od.).
From чúxw: 10. чñxos [n.] ‘cold, frost' (к 555), ‘winter' (Hdt.); чvxóoμaι to become
cold' (Hp.), yvxá\w 'refresh oneself (Alciphr.), -íčoµai (gloss.) 'to cool down', чux-
ELVóc 'cold' (Hp., X., Arist.), after the opposite ȧλɛɛɩvós, perhaps directly from чúxw;
-ɛov [n.] 'place for cooling water' (Semos Hist.). Cf. чvyɛĩa. ȧyyɛĩa έv olç üdwp
yúxetai, kai ó tóños aʊtós (H.), also IG 22, 1695: 21 [IIIª] (inscr. \v[y]ɛa)? 11.
yuxpós (like aĭoxos to aiσxpóc, etc.) 'cool, cold, numb; without success, etc.' (Il.),
also with kata-, ¿v-, úлo-, etc. Thence чuxpótηs 'cold(ness)”, чuxpía ‘id.”, чvxpaσía
!
}
yúa
1673
'making cold' (Epicur.); чvxpaívoμai 'be cold' (Plu.), whence чuxpavtikós (Hdn.),
чvxpíšoμα ‘id.' (Gal.), чvxpεúo̟µai 'to have a cold style' (Hermog.).
•ETYM чxpóc and чuxos form a Caland sysem. It cannot be decided whether the
system is etymologically related to чuxη; see s.v. for attempts.
чw •VAR Also чwµós, ywpa, ywxw, etc. →чñv.
vwa [f.] 'stench of rottenness' (A. R. fr. 5) <?>
•VAR ywía. σañpà dvowdía 'rotten and malodorous stuff (H.).
•DER чwiÇoç. äqodos vypá ½ öv¤oç, dvowdía, kaì ñv кaλoñσv µívðαv. oi dè aú×µòv ½
μóλvσμа 'liquid excrement, dung, malodorous stuff, etc.' (H.).
•ETYM DELG and Frisk posit an interjection yó, from which the word would have
been derived. Doubtful.

=== page 863 ===

i
!
!
Q
w exclamation of astonishment and of complaint. <IE *ō►
•VAR Also do, especially before a vocative (II.).
●DER w【w [v.] ‘to call Oh' (Ar.). Also wń ‘hey, hello!' (A., E., X.), wóл a cry of rowers
(Ar.).
•ETYM Similar interjections, which are in part independent, in part genetically
cognate, are: Lat. ō, ōh, Go. o, Lith. ō, OCS o, OIr. a, Skt. ā.
wa [f.] 1. 'sheepskin, apron' (com., Att. inscr. [IVª], Poll., H.). 2. ‘fringe (of a garment),
edge' (Corinn. [?], Ar. fr. 228 [?], LXX, Cret. inscr. [IIª], Longus, Poll., Hdn.). <IE
*h eui- 'sheep'>
•VAR Also wa, wa, öa; gloss wïaι· äкpai, ëoxata, µŋλwtai, λéyvai ‘tops, utmost parts,
sheepskins, fringes of a garment' (H.).
⚫ETYM In the sense 'sheepskin, apron (made of sheepskin)', it probably belongs to
►öiç 'sheep' and derives from *wfía or *Fia, with a lengthened grade like in Skt.
āvika- [n.] 'sheepskin' (Kretschmer KZ 31 (1892): 456). However, Mayrhofer EWAia
s.v. ávi- says that āvika- (SB) replaces earlier avyáya- (RV), which casts doubt on the
connection.
The meaning 'fringe' can be identical with 'sheepskin' if we assume that it denoted
an edge made of sheepskin (Sommer 1905: 18f., 154¹).
wẞá →oïn 2.
wуavov [n.] кvηµìç áµážηç 'spoke of a wagon (wheel)', also лερióуava. έлíσσwτpα. oi
dè tàs kvŋuías aï rεpiñó̟yvvvtai taïç άµážαiç ‘felloes; spokes by which wagons are
fixed (?)' (H.). <IE *heģ- 'drive'>
•ETYM von Blumenthal 1930: 7 assumed Illyrian origin, connecting *ueg¹- ‘to drive'
(see exw 2). Rather to ►äyw, though the formation is unclear (not a lengthened
grade like in ȧywyn, as per Frisk 1938: 17f.).
=>
wdń •VAR @dóç. → àɛídw.
wdis, -ivos [f.] 'throes of birth, that which is born (out of pains)', metaph. 'strain' (A
271). <PG(S)►
VAR Usually pl. -īvɛç. Later nom. -ív.
●COMP dvσ-wdɩvoç ‘accompanied by severe birth-pangs' (AP).

=== page 864 ===

1676
wdéw -éoual
•DER wdivw [v.] (A 269) 'to have birth-pangs, be pregnant of something', metaph. 'to
experience heavy pains, tire oneself out, labour hard', also prefixed with σuv- etc.
Thence aor. ¿dîv-aɩ, -ñoaɩ, -ñσaoðaɩ, -ŋ¤ñvai, fut. ¿div-w, -ńow (Hell.).
•ETYM Formation like yλwx-ïv-, deλq-ĩv-, åkt-ĩv-, but the root is unclear. It is
tempting to connect ódúvŋ, but the long initial vowel of wd- has not been
explained so far. Van Beek (p.c.) suggests an old reduplicated formation *h¸e-h¸d-i-
of the type Skt. cákri- 'doing' (< *ke-k"r-i-) from the root *hed- 'to bite' (see on
►ódúvη for a demarcation of the root). Note that Lith. úodas 'gnat' does not require
a lengthened grade: it derives from *h¸od-o- by Winter's Law. A connection with ‘eat’
cannot be demonstrated in Greek (in spite of A. 415).
Alternatively, the word may be Pre-Greek, because of the suffix -iv- (which is already
remarked by DELG).
włźw, -ćoµai [v.] ‘to push, thrust, drive, push away or forward, drive out, throw back',
med. also intr. 'to force one's way'. <IE *h₂uod¹h,-éie- ‘push away, slay'>
•VAR Aor. coat, -aσat, ind. wσa, -áµŋy (Hom., Att.), ‰oa, -áµŋv (epic Ion.),
włŋoa (late), pass. ¿wołŋv (X.), wołŋv (late), fut. wow, -oµai (Il.), włńow (S., E.,
Ar.), pass. donσoμai (E., D.), perf. pass. wσμai (Th., X.), ptc. ȧл-woµévoç (Hdt.),
act. Ewka (Plu.).
■COMP Mostly prefixed, e.g. with ȧл-, εε-, -, лρо-.
•DER Deverbal formations: 1. wots [f.] ‘pushing (away or forward)' (Hp., Th., Arist.),
also with ǎл-, -, лpó-, etc.; further wŋois [f.] ‘id.' (Hero, late), also with ảл-, è̟‹-,
Si-, etc.
2. woµós [m.] ‘id.' (LXX, Hero, late medic.), also with άл-, §ɩ-, лро-, etc.; woµń [f.]
'push' (pap. [IIP]); -wσµα [n.] ‘exile' (LXX).
3. Won (σóc) 'earthquake' (Arist.), woτηs ävεчoç 'wind which throws the
ship off course' (Ion.), also with лρо-, ȧл- (late); ȧл-wστóç 'repellable, repelled,
driven away' (Hdt., S.); wotikós ‘pushing (away)' (Arist., Epicur., Gal.), also with
án, Ě,丌po-.
4. di-wotńp [m.] (LXX, Paul. Aeg.), di-wotpa [f.] (Ph. Bel., Hero Bel.), έ-woτpa
(Plb.), -wστpα [n.pl.] (Delos IIIª) designations of different instruments and
machines.
Secondary presents: 1. wiμa 'to push each other, jostle, quarrel', -í\w ‘to push'
(Hdt., late prose),, also with St-, εiσ-, εл-; (di-, ovv-)wiσµós [m.] 'pushing, jostle,
quarrel' (Hdt., Th., X., Plb.). 2. woτíoμαι 'to push about, jostle with someone' (Ar.);
wotiofiós [m.] = woμós (Moeris).
•ETYM The iterative present wéw is clearly the basic form of the verb in Greek. A
link with the present ε, the ptc. Оwv, Оovτεs and the nouns Opɩç, ëƉɛɩpɑ is
highly unlikely; see on these words for objections. It is therefore not clear a priori
that weźw contains an old lengthened grade of the typе лwλéoμаi лελоμа (for
which cf. Schwyzer: 720). It is attractive to compare the optative in Av. vādāiiōiț ‘he
may push back', and primary forms in Sanskrit, e.g. aor. ávadhit 'he killed'.
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. further suggests that Hitt. huett-ta(r) 'to draw, pull, etc.' is
related. This nicely fits the long scansion of the initial vowel in Skt. ávadhīt (2 times).
The fact that the Skt. root is set and that the Hittite verb is consistently spelled with a
!
j
1
WKÚC
1677
geminate -tt- (Kloekhorst ibid.) point to a root-final laryngeal. This means that we
have to reconstruct a root *h₂ued¹h,-, whence an iterative *h₂uodh,-éie- yielded
Greek wéw. This explanation nicely accounts for the fact that initial Ƒ- is not
evident for weźw in Homeric scansion. The only problem is that we have to assume a
pre-Homeric development *awoth-> *w0-.
Nкɛavós [m.] name of a river that surrounds the world, ‘ocean' (since Il.). <PG(V)>
•VarNyńv, -ñvos (H), Nyevós (Lyc., St. Byz.), Nyηvós (Pherecyd. Syr. Fr. 2 D).
•Der Nkɛav-ís [f.] ‘of the ocean' (Pi., etc.), -ídɛç [pl.] 'the daughters of the ocean'
(Call.), -ívn [f.] 'daughter of the ocean' (Hes.), -πç [f.] 'of the ocean' (D. H., AP,
etc.), -τa [m.pl.] 'inhabitants of the ocean coast' (St. Byz.), -(e) los 'belonging to the
ocean' (Gal., etc.), fem. -ŋïáç (Nonn.), -115 [m.] old name of the river Nile (D. S.).
•ETYM Since the idea of a world-river is not of IE origin, the word must be a loan. All
attempts to find an IE etymology have failed: e.g. connection with Skt. ā-śáyāna-
lying on', approximately equivalent to έëɩкɛíµɛvoç (literature in WP 1, 358); from IE
ōku̟-eianos "(le dieu fleuve) qui a la marche rapide” (to wкús and Skt. áyana-
'course'), Borgeaud IF 66 (1961): 49ff.
*
K
Further indications that the word is not inherited from Proto-Indo-European, but
rather Pre-Greek, are the variants with y instead of к cited above. In the framework
of Pre-Greek, the alternation ε/η may be due to *a or *ā influenced by the preceding
palatalized *k”. This is confirmed by the following: as the influence of the palatal
must have been strongest in the immediately adjacent part of the vowel, and less in
the more remote part, this resulted in a sequence [aa] which was rendered as -ɛa- in
Kɛavós. In other forms, the vowel was changed as a whole, which resulted in (2ynv.
Therefore, I reconstruct a Pre-Greek form *ūkān (with w- from *ū-).
кчдov [n.] 'basil, Ocimum Basilicum' (com., Thphr., Dsc.). <PG(V)►
•COMP wкчµo-εidés [n.] ‘like w.' (Nic.), used as an adverb; as a substantivized
adjective in -ǹs also name of several plants (Dsc., Ps.-Dsc., Gal.), ; cf. Strömberg
1940: 43; wкy-wdns ‘id.' (Thphr.), -tvoc 'made of w.' (Dsc.).
⚫DER Besides wкivov [n.] name of a fodder-plant, perhaps a kind of clover in Lat.
ōcinum (Cato, Varro, Plin.); ǎкivoç, äкovoç [m.] 'wild basil, Calamintha graveolens'
(Dsc.).
•ETYM Foreign words of unknown origin. Connection with άкý, äкaiva, etc. is at
best folk-etymological, and it does not explain the initial w-. The variants ǎkɩvos and
ǎkovoç rather suggest a Pre-Greek origin.
wêúç [adj.] ‘fast, swift' (Il., epic). <IE *h,oh,k-u- ‘fast’>>
•VAR Superl. ❝кɩστos (Hom.), ¿кúτατoç (poet. since 0 331), compar. wкúτεpos
(Pi.+), for earlier *woowv? Adverb wкa (Hom.).
•COMP
Very frequent as a first member in poetic compounds, e.g. шкú-лovç, -лodoç ‘swift-
footed', epithet of iллоç (Il.). Disputed is wкú-aλos, epithet of vaus (Hom., S. [lyr.],
Mosch.), also of þɩñý (Pi., Opp.), of лτɛpá (H.), as the name of a Phaiacean (0 111), cf.
Eúpú-, AσTú-aλos, where -aλoç is taken as an obscured second member after ȧyxí-,
auoí-aλoç etc. Bechtel 1914 s.v., Risch 1937 $74d, Sommer 1948: 69 connected

=== page 865 ===

1678
wλévn
►ǎλλoμα, and Ruijgh 1957: 1654 (following sch. O 705 and H.) assumed that -aλos
was only enlarging, like in ouaλós : ÓFLÓS.
As a second member in лоd-wкηç, epithet of Axiɛúc and others, also лóðaç шкúç,
wêú-лovç (Il.); these compounds seem to presuppose a neuter *wкoç. After this iл-
Wкn, ȧvεμ-wкs (B., E. [lyr.]).
•DER Few derivatives: wкúτηs (Dor. -τac) [f.] ‘swiftness' (Pi., E.); enlarged wêńɛvta
tépɛtpa (AP), verse-final. Ruijgh l.c. extensively discusses wкúç and its compounds
and derivations.
•ETYM The archaic adjective wкúç was pushed away and replaced by taxús at an early
date. It is etymologically identical with Skt. aśú- and Av. āsu- < QIE *HoHk-ú-. It is
quite possible that the pre-form is actually IE *h,o-h,k-ú- 'swift', and that it contains
the same root and suffix as *h,ek-uo- ‘horse' (see on ►ïëлoç).
Latin preserves the comparative Lat. öcior = Skt. áśīyan, Av. äsiiå. Celtic only
preserved it in composition with a negative prefix, e.g. W di-auc 'slow' < “un-fast”.
Lat. acu-pedius probably contains *hek- ‘sharp', while it is possible that Lat. accipiter
'hawk, falcon' derives from an old zero grade *HHku-petro- 'fast-flying', cf. Gr.
шкúлτεpoç. On the other hand, Greek also uses ošú-, e.g. in òžú-лovç 'swift-footed'
(E.), óчú-лτεроç 'with swift wings' (Аesop.), óεú-рρоños 'inclining swiftly' (Pl.).
wλévŋ [f.] ‘elbow, the curved arm, lower arm' (poet. since h. Merc., also Luc.), also
'bundle of reed' < *armful', ‘reed-mať (Ph. Rel., pap.), = Lat. torus (gloss.). <IE
*h3eHl-en- (vel sim.) 'elbow'>
■COMP Few compounds: wλé-кpāvov, also oλé-кpāvov [n.] '(point of the) elbow'
(Hp., Ar., Arist.), dissimilated from *wλɛvó-кpаvov; cf. on кpavíov. Thence
wλɛкpav-í¶w, -í¶μα (also óλ-) 'to push with the elbow' (Com. Adesp., Phryn.);
wλevo-otpópos [m.] ‘plaiter of bundles or mats' (pap. IIIª); Aɛuk-wλɛvos ‘with white
elbows, white-armed' epithet especially of Hera (II., epic poet.). Hypostasis έл-
wλévios 'at the arms' (h. Merc., A. R.).
●DER wλév-tos ‘in the elbow' (Arat.), -íτŋs [m.] ‘id.' (Lyc.), of xóvdpoc; wλev-is [f.]
'small bundle or mat' (Poll.).
Also wλnv, -évos [f.] ‘id.' (Suid.); the plur. acc. wλévac and gen. wλɛvwv (pap.) are
ambiguous; also wλλóv. τǹу τоÛ ßρаxíovoç кαµлηу 'the curve of the arm' (H.).
λéкpava. toùç ȧyкŵvaç ‘elbows' (H., Phot.).
⚫ETYM Within Greek, we find different ablauting variants of an n-stem: wλýv, -évos
(cf. aúxýv, -évos), enlarged wλévŋ, and wλλóv < *wλvóv. Also, there is a short initial
vowel in oλéкpāvov <óλévo-кpavov.
Related words, mainly from European languages, are: Lat. ulna '(bone of the) elbow,
forearm' < *olen-, the Germanic group of OHG elina ‘ell' < *alin-, and the Celtic
group of MW elin ‘elbow' < *olēn-. It may be that these ultimately go back on forms
with a long initial vowel *ōlén-, *ōlén-, which was shortened in pretonic position in
these languages (Dybo's Law).
Balto-Slavic forms like Lith. úolektis, Latv. uôlekts ‘ell' < *HoHl-ek-ti-, OPr. alkunis,
Lith. alkūnė (arch.) ‘elbow' < *HHol-k- and OCS lakútú [m.], Ru. lókoť ‘id.' <
*HHolkuti- show that the word was not an n-stem in PIE yet, and that the initial
1679
μo
long vowel, which is acute in Baltic, must be due to a pre-form *HoHl-. It is possible
that an n-stem was made to this form in the Western languages in late PIE.
The n-stem is also found in Arm. uln, gen. ulan, nom.pl. ulun-k', but in the sense of
‘vertebrae, neck'. A similar formation is shown by Arm. ołn, gen. ołin, plur. ołun-k'
'dorsal vertebra, spine, back, shoulder' from IE *olen-, olon-. However, it is unclear if
the semantic difference between Armenian and the other languages can be bridged
(see now Martirosyan 2010 s.v. uln.
The precise reconstruction of Skt. aratní- [m.] ‘elbow' is not quite clear, but cf.
Lubotsky 1990; Skt. āṇí- [m.] 'the part of the leg directly above the knee, axle-pin'
does not belong here, see Pinault BSL 98 (2003).
wλiyyn [f.] 'wrinkle, small furrow, crow's-feet in the corner of the eye' (Poll., EM, AB),
also 'short nap, short moment, instant'. <PG(S)>
•VAR Also wλy? wλiyyía (H.).
●der wλiyyıov. ólíyov ‘few' (EM, AB), -ñ¨ïov· óλíyov, ßpaxútatov ‘very short (H.),
-ɩāv. vvotáčɛiv ‘'to doze, take a nap' (H.).
●ETYM Without a convincing connection. Not related to Skt. āli- [f.] ‘stripe, line', as
this derives from *āḍi- (see Mayrhofer EWAia s.v.). The word is clearly of Pre-Greek
origin in view of the nasalized suffix -(y)y-.
The connection with wλa (EM), Dor. for äλoε 'furrow' is certainly wrong.
wλкα [acc.sg.] 'furrow'. →ǎλoč.
=>
wµalía [f.] ‘similarity, average' in έ' wµaλíav ‘on average' (Hell. inscr. and pap.), see
Mayser 1906-1938, I: 3: 27. ◄ GR➤
⚫ETYM After the opposite àvwuaλía [f.] 'unevenness, unconformity' (Att., Hell. and
late), which derives from àv-wuaλos (with compositional lengthening), see
►óμaλóç.
wula [f.] name of a game in which nuts or similar objects were thrown in a circle;
also metaph. of a sociable meeting (Eup., Poll., H.). <?, PG?►
⚫ETYM Unexplained, perhaps Pre-Greek in view of the suffix.
wuos [m.] 'shoulder, shoulder with the upper arm' (Il.). <IE *h¸ems-o- ‘shoulder’►
•DIAL Myc. e-po-mi-jo [du.] /ep-ōmiō/.
-wµí¢w [v.] ‘to
●COMP As a first member e.g. in wµo-лλáτη (mostly plur. -at) [f.] 'shoulder-blade'
(Hp., X., Arist.). Numerous hypostases, e.g. εл-wµíç [f.] 'upper part of the shoulder, a
garment buttoned over the shoulder' (Hp., E., X.), ε-wµíc [f.] 'tunic with one sleeve'
(Ar., X.), кατ-wдadóv, -ádios 'down from the shoulders' (Il.),
denude the shoulders' (Ar.); on εлшá (-) see below.
●DER 1. Diminutive wµíov [n.] (AP). 2. wµía [f.] ‘angle of a building' (LXX), semitism
acc. to Scheller 1951: 54, also a part of a riverbed (pap. IIª). 3. wµías. ó µɛyálovs
wµovs éxwv, ó ɛúpúσtɛpvos ‘who has large shoulders, or a large chest' (H., Poll.). 4.
wμatos belonging to the shoulders' (Arist., Gal.). 5. wμσáµεvos [aor.ptc.] 'taking on
the shoulders' (Suid., Zonar.), whence -10τns 'carrier' (Hdn.).

=== page 866 ===

1680
wμóc
•ETYM Related are Skt. ámsa- [m.], Go. ams [m.] (acc. pl. amsans), Lat. umerus, U
onse [loc.] 'in umero', Arm. us, gen. us-oy, ToA es, ToB āntse, most of which point to
QIE *omso-.
ToA es [m.] 'shoulder, element, etc.', and ToB antse [m.] 'id.; bough' go back to PTO.
*anse. ToA es has e from *an before s, and in ToB, t-epenthesis is regular. The PTo.
a-vocalism is problematic, as a development *h3mC- or *hemC- > *anC- is
unexpected.
The unclear gloss åµέow. шμoлλáτα (H.) is probably foreign in view of the
preserved intervocalic -σ-; cf. Latte ad loc. It is unnecessary to postulate a special
lengthened grade IE *ōmso- for wμoç. Rather, Aeol. έлoµµádioç (in Theoc. 29, 29 as a
v.l. for εлwμádios) most probably points to PGr. *omso-. Dunkel 1995 has suggested
that the forms with long vowel as a reflex of the first compensatory lengthening are
survivals from Mycenaean (i.e. borrowings into the poetic language).
wμóc [adj.] 'raw, uncooked', metaph. ‘hard, gruesome' (Il.). <IE *HeHmo- 'raw'>>
•COMP Very frequent as a first member, e.g. wμ-ŋotýs, Dor. -tás [m.] ‘eating raw
flesh, duo-qάyoç, sanguinary, wild' (Il., epic poet.), a compound from wμóç and ědw
with a suffix -τã- and old contraction (cf. Skt. āmād- ‘id.' from āma-ad-); wµ-ńλvois
[f.] grist from raw grains', especially in preparing a poultice (Hp.), from the root
*h₂leu- of ► áλéw (the simplex *äλvσis was later replaced by äλεσis), with later folk-
etymological connection with λúσiç, λúw (“µετà wµñç λúσɛwç”, Dsc.). As a second
member in ěv-wuos 'something raw' (Hp.).
⚫ETYM Old adjective for 'raw', identical with Skt. āmá- and Arm. hum < QIE *ōmó-.
The word probably represents *heHmos or *h₂ehmos (see Kortlandt 2003: 42, 73,
123, 163, 183). See also De Vaan 2008 s.v. amārus.
ovos [m.] 'purchase price, buy' (Hom., also A. R., Theoc., inscr. Delos [IIIª]). <IE
*uos-no- 'purchase price'>
•VAR More usual is cový (IA).
●DIAL Dor. wvá, Aeol. övva [f.] ‘purchase, purchase-charter' (partly adapted to the
verb, e.g. ovvwv-ý [late] from ovv-wvέoµα). On Samian ovovηµéva see Ringe Glotta
62 (1984): 45-56.
●DER ɛű-wvoç ‘at a good price, low-priced' (Epich., IA), -wvns [m.] (from the verb or
closely related to it), e.g. Tελ-úvns 'toll-holder, levier of tax' (Att., Hell.), v-LOS
'buyable', τå via 'merchandise' (Epich., Att.), -taкóç ‘id.' (pap. [VIP], Just. Nov.).
Denominative verb covéoдa (Hes.+) 'to buy', also with ȧvτι-, ¿к-, σuv-, etc.; aor.
wvýσaσðaι (Ion., also recent Att. for лрíασðα), pass. ŵvηßñvai, fut. wvýσoμai, Dor.
3sg. vaσεται (Sophr.), pass. wooμa (Theopomp. Com.), perf. (med. and
pass.) έóvŋµai (Att.). Cret. also has the act. wvéw 'to offer for sale, sell' (Leg. Gort.,
etc.).
Thence 1. vnqua [n.] 'buy' (Att. inscr.), also Búvηuа. εpημα. Аáкшvɛç (H.)? 2.
wvnois [f.] 'the buying' (Att. decree apud Poll.). 3. wvητýs (Att.), шvatás (Delphi IIª)
[m.] 'buyer', whence -ητiáw 'to be desirous of buying, wish to buy' (Thphr., D. C.,
Poll.), nτwp 'id.' (late). 4. wvn-τós 'buyable, bought', e.g. of slaves (since (202),
-TIKÓç 'desirous of buying' (Ph.). 5. Desiderative wvnoɛíw 'wish to buy' (D. C.).
wpa
1681
•ETYM Both wvέoμal and the old aor. лрíασðαι were replaced, in the course of time,
by ȧyopáw and ȧyopáσa. Beside covoç < *uós-no- (see below) stands Lat. vēnum
(acc.) in vēnum dare 'to give for sale', Arm. gin, gen. gn-oy ‘purchase-price', both
from IE *uesno-. Ambiguous as to the vocalism is Skt. vasná- [n.] (also [m.])
'puchase-price', whence vásniya- ‘vendible, venal' (cf. Gr. wvios) and denominative
vasnayati in the ptc. du. -ayántā ‘to bargain', cf. Gr. wvéw, both reflecting *uos-n-
éie-.
It is not necessary to posit an awkward lengthened grade pre-form *uōs-no- for
wvoç, see on wμoç. The noun *ues-no-, *uos-no- belongs to a primary verb still
preserved in Hittite: 2sg. чašti, 3sg. чāši ‘to purchase, acquire' < *uos-e-i. A zero
grade *us-n- is preserved in the denominative verb ušnije/a-zi 'to offer for sale, sell'.
Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. ušnije/a-zi argues that this form shows that the noun for 'sale'
originally was an n-stem *uos-n; gen. *us-en-s, which was later thematicized in the
individual IE languages. This would nicely explain the different root vowels of
Armenian, Greek and Latin.
wóv [n.] ‘egg' (IA). ◄IE *h₂ōui-o- ‘egg'>
•VAR wóv (Hell.), wïov (Sapph.), also wɛov (Epich., Ibyc., Semon., Hell. poetry);
wßɛa• tả wá. Apyɛĩoɩ (H.), if = wfɛa.
•COMP As a first member e.g. in wo-τóкoç ‘laying eggs', whence -τokia, -tokέw
(Arist.).
•DER Diminutive -qtov [n.] (Theognost., pap. IIP), -wdns ‘egg-shaped' (Arist.).
•ETYM An old word for ‘egg', preserved in several languages, but in various forms:
Lat. ōvum, OHG ei, ON egg < PGm. *aiia- [n.], in Iranian e.g. MoP xāya < PIr. *āya-
without a trace of -u-. In Slavic we find the diminutive OCS ajúce, Ru. jajcó < PSI.
*āje- <IE *ōio-. Arm. ju, gen. juoy (from *iōio-?), Alb. ve, voe, and Celtic forms like
W wy have an unclear pre-form.
The many attempts to obtain a unified account of the different forms have not lead
to a conclusive result. See the extensive and careful treatment by Schindler Sprache 15
(1969): 144 ff. (with rich lit.); there also on the possibility to connect the word for
‘egg' with that for ‘bird' (Lat. avis, etc.).
öpa [f.] 'season, year, time of day, hour, right time, florescence, time of ripening', plur.
also personified ‘the Hours' (Il.); Hell. and late also wopos [m.] 'year' (gender perhaps
after έviavtóc), plur. pot ‘annals' (of Ionian writers). <IE *Hieh,-r-, Hioh,-r- ‘year'>
•VAR Ion. wpη.
●COMP E.g. wp-pópos leading on the seasons, bringing on the fruits in their
season', epithet of Demeter (h. Cer., Orph.), wpo-λóytov [n.] 'hour hand, sundial,
water clock' (Hell. and late), ä-wpos 'untimely, unpretty' (IA, Cret.), also äv-wpos
and à-wptos ‘id.' (Thphr.), évvé-wpos 'nine years old' (Hom.), 'for nine hours'
(Herod.).
●DER 1. wp-ałoç ‘according to the season, timely, ripe, florescent, beautiful (Hes.),
often substantivized, e.g. τả wpaĩa 'fruits of the season' (IA); on wpaĩa yάμov see
Fatouros Glotta 54 (1976): 239f. Thence wpaιóτηs [f.] 'florescence, beauty' (X., LXX),
-αïšo̟µai, -άšo̟μai ‘to be beautiful, blossom, act nobly' (Att. com.), also with ¿v-, ¿‹-;

=== page 867 ===

1682
wpa
-aï‹w, -ά¶w ‘id.' (Amorgos IIIP), 'to make beautiful' (Aristid. Quint.), whence
-aïoµós, -aïoτńS.
2. wp-tos (epic poet. since 1 131, late prose), poet. for -aĩoç, see Treu 1955: 230f.; wp-
taivoµal, -taívw = -aït̃oµai, -aï¶w (Clearch., H.).
3. wp-чuoç 'timely, ripe' (Leg. Gort., Herod., Hell. pap., AP), whence -чó, -,
-чiάw.
4. wpikós 'florescent, youthful, beautiful' (Ar., Crates Com., Ael.). 5. wplaĭoç 'for one
hour' (Hipparch., Ptol.). 6. ‘Npíïns epithet of Apollo (Lyc.).
•ETYM Greek apa continues IE *HioH-r-h₂, which matches the Germanic cognates
Go. jer, OHG jār [n.] ‘year' < PGm. *įēra- [n.], IE *Hieh,-r-. In Slavic, we find CS jara
'spring' and (with an old r-stem) Av. yārə [n.] “year”.
On a trace of the word in Latin hornus 'grown in this year' (supposedly from *ho-įōr-
ino-, with a prefix like in OHG hiuru 'this year' < *hiu jāru), see De Vaan 2008 s.v. It
is probable that the word contains the root *Hieh,- 'to send'; for the semantics, we
may compare MoHG Geschick 'fate' from schicken 'to send'.
A loan word from Greek is Lat. hōra.
opa [f.] 'care, precaution, concern' (epic Ion. poet., Hes., late prose). <IE *uer- 'notice,
be attentive, care for'>
•VAR Ion. ❝pn.
●COMP As a second member in ovdɛvóσ-wpos 'worth no notice or regard, epithet of
Tɛíxɛa (178), of ỏστέov (Opp. H. 2, 478), cf. Bechtel 1914 s.v.; ólíy-wpos 'taking few
precautions, indifferent, reckless', whence oλtywpéw, -wpía (IA). The same element
is contained in Oɛwpós, τɩɩwpós, but not in εv0vwpía.
⚫ETYM From *Fúpa, with a lengthened grade like λóлη, λóуŋ, etc. and derived from
the root 'to be attentive, care for', which is also contained in ópáw. Note the gloss
ẞwpoɩ (= F-). óðaλµoí ‘eyes' (H.).
wpāкiáw [v.] 'to faint, be or become dizzy', later also 'to become pale' (Ar., late prose).
<IE? *uoH-r- 'faint', PG?(S)►
•VAR Also wp-; aor. -tãoat. Also wpaкíw 'id.' (EM).
•ETYM As a verb of disease in -táw, it probably derives from *wpač ‘dizziness, vel
sim.', formed like véαč, лλoúταε, кvádač, etc. This in turn derives from a noun
*wpos or *wpa that could be identified with ON órar [f.pl.] 'fits of mind-confusion' <
IE *uoH-rh₂, and (with a suffix -ja-) ON ørr 'dizzy' < IE *uoH-r-io-. On the
derivational type see Björck 1950: 260ff.
As a root etymology between only Greek and Germanic, the Indo-European
proposal is not strong. Because of the element -ãк-, the word could also be Pre-
Greek.
wpn [f.] designation of a part of a sacrificial animal (Ion.). ǎwpol 1.
wpvyyes [m.pl.] 'striped or piebald horses, including zebras' (Opp. K. 1, 317). ◄PG(S) ►
•ETYM Fur.: 279 compares opuε ‘a kind of gazelle in Libya' (Arist.). He asks whether
it is the same word as opus 'wild animal from Libya' (Hdt. 4, 192). The prenasalized
suffix -(Y)Y- seems to point to a Pre-Greek word.
WTεIAŃ
wpvyń •VAR Also wpvyµa, wpvyµóc. →wpúoµai.
wpбoµaɩ [v.] ‘to howl, cry, wail' (Pi., Hdt., Hell.). ◄IE *h¸reuH-‘howl, roar'>
•VAR Aor. wpбσaoðaɩ (áv-, ávt-, kAT-).
1683
•DER wpudóv [adv.] 'howling' (Nic.), pūµa [n.] 'howling' (LXX), wpŨτóç [m.] ‘id.'
(Theognost.). Often enlarged with -y-: wpuyń (Dor. -á) [f.] (Erinn., Plu., Poll.),
wpvyµóc [m.] (Ael., Longus, Poll.), wpvyµa [n.] (AP) ‘id.'; wpuкtáç [m.] (Dor.)
'howler, howling' (Hymn. Is.). Also wpvêµós [m.] ‘id.' (Opp., Q. S.; also Theoc. as a
v.l. beside -yμós), after кλavеμóç.
⚫ETYM Cognate with Skt. rauti, ruváti 'to howl, roar' (set-root rav³-), OCS rjuti ‘id.',
isg. rovo, which presupposes a root *HreuH-. This perfectly matches the Greek data,
which also point to a root-final laryngeal. Other cognates are Lat. rumor 'noise', Lat.
ravis 'hoarseness', YAv. uruuant- roaring'.
Forms with a velar enlargement (like wpuyn) are found in Latin, e.g. Lat. rūgio 'to
roar', and in Ru. rykáť, Lith. rúkti ‘id.', 1sg. rúkiu. They remind of Gr. έpuyɛīv (see
► έpɛúyoµai 2, etc.), ópvyµádec, ► ópvμaydóç, but it is unclear if they are old.
Initial - is unexplained; there is not enough evidence for a prefix &- in Greek (as
per Brugmann-Delbrück 1897-1916 2:2, 817, who compares Skt. á ruva [ipv.] 'cry
with' [RV 1, 10, 4]).
ŵç 1 [adv., conj.] ‘as, so far as', also temporal 'when', causal 'because', final 'therewith',
perhaps also as an exclamation (Il.). <IE *Hio- 'which'>
•VAR Dor. also w.
•DER To this wσTE (Dor. WTε), wσлεр, etc.
⚫ETYM Old instrumental-ablative of the relative pronoun öç, like Av. yā [instr.], Skt.
yát [abl.], IE *Hioh,, *Hiōd. On the auslauting - see ► wç 2.
ws 2 [adv.] demonstrative: 'thus' (Il.). ◄IE *so-➤
•VAR Note the accentuation of кal wç, ovd' wç, úde (see Vendryes 1904).
•ETYM Mostly interpreted to derive from an IE instr. *soh, from the demonstrative
*so-, to- (see ►ó). Besides, Twç (TWC) is found, from ▶TO-.
wc 3 [postpos.] 'as, like' (epic), e.g. "σav öpviеɛç üç (П 2). <IE *se, seue>
⚫ETYM Because wç 'like' often makes position, it is usually derived from *Fws < IE
*suō, beside *suē in Go. swe 'as, like'; cf. also OLat. suad 'sic' (Festus). See Chantraine
1942: 126.
ws 4 [prep.] 'to' (p 218, Hdt., Att.). <?>
•VAR With acc., only with persons.
⚫ETYM Origin unclear; several propositions in Schwyzer 1950: 534.
woxŋ VAR woxoi. →ŏoxn 2.
WτAKOVσTέw →ovc.
wtɛilý [f.] ‘wound', especially referring to close combat in Hom. (Hom., Hp., X.,
Plu.); see Trümpy 1950: 93ff. <?, PG?►
•VAR Aeol. wτÉλλa (gramm.).

=== page 868 ===

1684
ÚTÍS, TOS
•DER Wτεiλóoμα [v.] 'to scar' (Hp., Aret.), also with лερɩ-, εv-; óτελñεv 'from the
wound' (Orph.).
ETYM The formation is unclear, and the etymology is controversial. Greek
formations which are candidates to be cognate are yaτáλa ovλaí (H.), if = Ƒατ-,
ovτáw [v.] ‘to wounď, ßwt[ɛ]áleiv. þáλλɛɩv (H.), if = Ƒwt-, and (less probable) ätŋ
'damage, guilt, blindness' < *åƑáτη. Bechtel 1914 s.v. remarked that a pre-form *oƑfa-
is possible everywhere in Homer except at τ 456.
From other languages, Lith. votis 'ulcer' and and Latv. vâts '(festering) wound' are
compared, which seem to require *ueh₂-ti-. Direct connection of waλ with Lith.
votēlis (which is a diminutive from votis) should be rejected in any case.
The word could well be Pre-Greek; this seems confirmed by the form *Faτaλ- in the
first gloss: is *ỏ- from prothetic a- before Ƒ-?
Wtic, wtog oic.
->
wqeléw → öpelos under ooέλλw 2.
wxpós [adj.] ‘pale, sallow' (IA), on the mg. see Capelle RhM 101 (1958): 23ff. <?►
•COMP Some compounds, e.g. άxpo-µéλaç ‘dark and sallow', said of somebody who
suffers from jaundice (medic.), cf. Risch IF 59 (1949): 60; (-wxpos 'very pale' (Arist.,
Thphr., Aret.), see Strömberg 1946: 68.
•DER 1. Xpos [m.] 'paleness' (г 35; after this AP et al.), usually name of a sallow-
colored leguminous plant, ‘'birds' pease, Lathyrus Ochrus' (com. IVª, Arist., Thphr.,
Hell. pap.). On the gender see below. 2. wxpa [f.] 'sallow color, ochre-color' (Arist.,
Thphr., Hell. pap.); also = εpuoiẞn, 'mildew' (LXX), in this sense also wxpía [f.]
(EM). 3. wxpias [m.] 'man with a pale hue' (Arist.). 4. -óτŋs [f.] ‘paleness' (Pl.,
Arist.), -ooúvŋ [f.] ‘id.' (late). 5. verbs: wxpñσaɩ [aor.] 'to become pale' (λ 529, Aret.,
AP), also with кατ-; (кατ-)wxpιáw ‘id.' (Ar., Arist., Babr.), whence -íaσis (late);
wxpaívw 'to become pale' (Nic.), 'to make pale' (Orph.), -αívoдa 'to become pale' (S.
E., Sor.), whence -αvτɩк@ç [adv.] 'making pale' (S. E.).
ETYM The connection with Skt. vyāghrá- [m.] ‘tiger' is untenable for formal reasons
(what would the element ó- = -ā- have to represent, and what is vi-?). Wackernagel
w-
hesitatingly supposed (see Wackernagel 1916: 234f.) that a neuter &xpos (like
µáкpos/ µaкpós) would have replaced an older *wxos [n.] in Homer, like alσxos to
aioxpóc, vuxos to чuxpóc, etc.
*wч ‘eye, face, countenance' (Hom.). <IE *h3ek"- 'see'>
•VAR The gender is disputed: fem. acc. to EM 344, 55; msc. acc. to Ar. Byz., Eust. and
other sources (probably after ooαλµós; cf. EM 233, 32); ntr. acc. to Sommer 1948: 10.
Old only in fixed expressions ►εvwлa (only in кaτ ¿võña), ɛiç dëɑ ‘in the face, eye
in eye' (Hom., Hes.); recent forms are шлεσσ [dat.pl.] (Max.), μεуáλoυç шлaç
[acc.pl.] (Ar. Byz.), etc., tà ẵ›лa (Pl. Cra. 409c regarding an etymology).
•COMP As a second member in έλíкwy, ►µúwy and other forms; these may have
compositional lengthening (Schwyzer: 4264). To this numerous feminine formations,
e.g. έλik-ŵniç, ßo-ŵлç (perhaps originally -óлīç < *-iH-s, see Chantraine 1942: 208
and Ruijgh 1995: 76f.
*wy
1685
•DER Hypostases: on ¿v-ários, -lov, -ñ, see ►¿vwna; έε-áлoç ‘out of sight, without'
(E.); ɛiσ-wñós (to εiç лα) 'face to face, right in front of (O 653, A. R., Arat.); úл-
óñα [n.pl.] 'part of the face below the eyes, bruise under the eyes' (since M 463),
rarely-ov [sg.]; µét-wñov, ▶éρóσwлov.
Further derivations: 1. wл- [f.] 'sight, view' (A. R., Nic.). 2. шлα. ópúdia 'eyebrows'
(H.). 3. wлáw [v.] 'to observe' in wлŵvtes (EM 322, 9 regarding έλík-w´eç), med. aor.
wrthσaoba (Opp.), fut. -σɛσα öчɛσa (H.). With prefix εл-шñáш [v.] 'to
contemplate, overview, supervise' (A.), to which έлwлý [f.] ‘observation post, watch'
(A. Supp. 539 [lyr.]), TN’Eлóëη = 'Akpokópivłos (St. B.), -ɛú¢ [m.] eponymous name
of kings (Apollod.), name or epithet of a god (Mycale [IVª]), 'Enwütis. Anµýtnp rapà
ΣIкuwvious and -íðεç· εлíσколоι, åкóλovеоι ларà Аакεбαчдovíι 'watchmen,
followers (Lacon.)', also -éτηę. Zɛùç лαрà АОηvαíoιç (H.). Enlarged εлwлáɛi. ¿opα,
εлолτεÚε to oversee, observe' (H.).
⚫ETYM Old formation with lengthened grade beside öy ‘eye, face'; see on ►öлwлα
for further connections.

=== page 869 ===

BIBLIOGRAPHY
The bibliographical references in general follow the "name-date" system, except for a
few very common book references given in abbreviated form (Category A). The
journal articles are not included in the bibliography, and the journal abbreviations
are given below (Category B).
A. Book abbreviations
Bq = Émile Boisacq, Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque étudiée dans ses
rapports avec les autres langues indo-européennes, Heidelberg-Paris, 1907-1916.
=
Del.3 Eduard Schwyzer, Dialectorum graecarum exempla epigraphica potiora.
Leipzig, 1923.
=
DELG Pierre Chantraine, Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque: histoire
des mots (terminé par O. Masson, J.-L. Perpillou, J. Taillardat, avec le concours
de F. Bader, J. Irigoin, D. Lecco, P. Monteil, sous la dir. de M. Lejeune). Paris,
1968-1980.
DELG Supp.
=
Idem. Nouvelle édition avec, en supplément, les Chroniques
d'étymologie grecque (1-10), rassemblées par Alain Blanc, Charles de Lamberterie
et Jean-Louis Perpillou. Paris, 2009.
DKP = Der kleine Pauly. Lexikon der Antike. Auf der Grundlage von Pauly's
Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft. Unter Mitwirkung
zahlreicher Fachgelehrter bearb. und hrsg. von Konrat Ziegler und Walther
Sontheimer. 5 vols. Stuttgart, 1964-1975.
=
DNP Hubert Cancik and Helmuth Schneider (eds.), Der neue Pauly. Enzyklopädie
der Antike. Das klassische Altertum und seine Rezeptionsgeschichte. Stuttgart,
2003.
E-MAlfred Ernout and Antoine Meillet, Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue
latine: histoire des mots. 4ème éd., 4ème tirage augmenté d'additions et de
corrections nouvelles par Jacques André. Paris, 1985.
EIEC = James P. Mallory and Douglas Q. Adams (eds.), Encyclopedia of Indo-
European Culture. London etc., 1997.
Frisk Hjalmar Frisk, Griechisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. 3 vols. Heidelberg,
=
1960-73.
=
Fur. Edzard J. Furnée, Die wichtigsten konsonantischen Erscheinungen des
Vorgriechischen. Mit einem Appendix über den Vokalismus. Den Haag, 1972.

=== page 870 ===

1688
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1689
ICS = Olivier Masson, Les inscriptions chypriotes syllabiques. Paris, 1961.
IG
=
Inscriptiones Graecae, consilio et auctoritate Academiae Litterarum Regiae
Borussicae editae. Berlin, 1873-.
Latte = Latte, Kurt (ed.), Hesychii Alexandrini Lexicon. Kopenhagen, 1953-.
LfgrE = Lexikon des frühgriechischen Epos. Bruno Snell et al (eds.). Göttingen, 1955-.
LIV = Helmut Rix and Martin Joachim Kümmel (eds.), Lexikon der
indogermanischen Verben. Die Wurzeln und ihre Primärstammbildungen.
Wiesbaden², 2002.
LSJ = A Greek-English lexicon, compiled by Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott;
revised and augmented throughout by Henry Stuart Jones with the assistance of
Roderick McKenzie, and with the co-operation of many scholars. Oxford, 1977.
LSJ Supp. = A Greek-English lexicon: revised supplement, edited by P.G.W. Glare, with
the assistance of A.A. Thompson. Oxford, 1996.
Pok. Julius Pokorny, Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Bern, 1949-
=
1959.
PW= August Friedrich Pauly and Georg Wissowa, Paulys Realencyclopädie der
classischen Altertumswissenschaft. Stuttgart, 1896ff.
Schwyzer = Eduard Schwyzer, Griechische Grammatik: auf der Grundlage von Karl
Brugmanns Griechischer Grammatik. Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft Tl. 1,
Bd. 1. München, 1939.
SEG = Supplementum epigraphicum graecum. Leiden/Amsterdam, 1923-.
SGDI = Friedrich Bechtel et al., Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften. Hrsg.
von Hermann Collitz. Göttingen, 1884-1915.
=
WH Alois Walde and Johann Baptist Hofmann, Lateinisches etymologisches
Wörterbuch. Heidelberg, 1930-1954.
=
WP Alois Walde and Julius Pokorny, Vergleichendes Wörterbuch der
indogermanischen Sprachen. Berlin, 1927.
B. Journal abbreviations
AAL = Annual of Armenian Linguistics
ABäG = Amsterdamer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik
Acta Ant. Acad. Hungar. = Acta Antiqua Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae
Acta Or. Acta Orientalia
AfP = Archiv für Papyrusforschung
AION = AION-L = Annali dell'Istituto Orientali di Napoli. Sezione linguistica
AJA = American Journal of Archaeology
==
AmJPh. = American Journal of Philology
Ann. Serv. Ant. Égypte = Annales du Service des Antiquités de l'Égypte
Ann.Pisa Annali della Scuola normale superiore di Pisa
====
Ant. class. L'antiquité classique
=
AAHG = Anzeiger fur die Altertumswissenschaft. Hrsg. von der Osterreichischen
Humanistischen Gesellschaft
=
Anz. AltWiss. Anzeiger für die Altertumswissenschaft
Apx. Aedt. = Apxalodoyukov Ae入tiov
Apx. Ep. = Apxalodoyu Epinepic
-
Arch. f. Orientforsch. = Archiv für Orientforschung
Arch. f. Religionswiss. = Archiv für Religionswissenschaft
Arch. glott. ital. = Archivio glottologico italiano
Arch. Or. Archiv Orientální
===
Arch. slav. Phil. = Archiv für Slavische Philologie
Archiv. Linguist. = Archivum Linguisticum
Arkiv f. nord. fil. = Arkiv för nordisk filologi
=
Ath. Mitt. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts. Athenische
Abteilung
BAGB = Bulletin de l'association Guillaume Budé
BB = Beiträge zur Kunde der indogermanischen Sprachen
BCH Bulletin de correspondance hellénique (Paris)
=
Beitr. z. Namenforsch. = Beiträge zur Namenforschung
Berl.Ak.Sb.
=====
Sitzungsberichte der deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Berlin. Philosophisch-historische Klasse
BICS = Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies of the University of London
BiOr. Bibliotheca Orientalis
=
BNF = Beiträge zur Namenforschung
Boll. fil. class. Bollettino di filologia classical
=
BPhW= Berliner philologische Wochenschrift
BSL Bulletin de la Societé Linguistique de Paris
=
BSOAS = Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
ByzZ = Byzantinische Zeitschrift
CEGA. Blanc, Ch. de Lamberterie and J.-L. Perpillou, Chronique d'étymologie
grecque.
CEG 1, 1996 RPh. 70.1 (1996) 103ff.
=
CEG 2, 1997 = RPh. 71.1 (1997) 147ff.

=== page 871 ===

1690
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1691
CEG 3, 1998 = RPh. 72.1 (1998) 117ff.
=
CEG 4, 1999 = RPh. 73.1 (1999) 79-108
CEG 5, 2000 RPh. 74.1 (2000) 257-286
CEG 6, 2001 = RPh. 75.1 (2001) 131-162
CEG 7. 2002 = RPh. 76.1 (2002) 113-142
CEG 8, 2003 = RPh. 77.1 (2003) 111-140
CEG 9, 2004 = RPh. 78.1 (2004) 155-179
CEG 10, 2005 = RPh. 79.1 (2005) 159-193
CEG 11, 2006 = RPh. 80.2 (2006) 339-369
Class. et Med. = Classica et Mediaevalia
Class. Quart. Classical Quarterly
=
Class. Journ. The Classical Journal
=
Class. Phil. Classical Philology
=
Class. Rev. Classical Review
=
Comm. Aenip. Commentationes Aenipontanae
=
CRAI= Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres
=
Curtius Studien Studien zur Griechischen und Lateinischen Grammatik/Leipziger
Studien zur classischen Philologie
DLZ = Deutsche Literaturzeitung für Kritik der internationalen Wissenschaft
=
Ep. Et. Byz. Epetiris Etairias Vyzantinon Spoudon
Ét. celt. = Études celtiques
Ét. class. = Études classiques
GGA = Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen
GHÅ = Goteborgs Hogskola Årsskrift
=
GLECS Comptes rendus du Groupe Linguistique d'études Chamito-Sémitiques
=
Gött. Abh. Gött. Nachr. = Abhandlungen/ Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu Göttingen
Gr. Rom. Byz. St. = Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies
Helikon Helikon. Rivista di tradizione e cultura classica
=
Herm. Hermes. Zeitschrift für klassische Philologie
HSPh. = Harvard Studies in Classical Philology
HZ = Historische Zeitschrift
Idg. Jb. Indogermanisches Jahrbuch
=
IF Indogermanische Forschungen
=
IF Anz. Indogermanische Forschungen, Anzeiger
=
IIJ Indo-Iranian Journal
=
IJDLLR International Journal for Diachronic Linguistics and Linguistic
=
Reconstruction
Inc. ling. Incontri linguistici
=
J. Egypt. Arch. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology
=
Jahresh. d. Osterr. Arch. Inst. = Jahreshefte des Österreichischen archäologischen
Instituts in Wien
JANER = Journal of Ancient Near Eastern Religions
JAOS = Journal of the American Oriental Society
Jb. d. deut. arch. Inst. = Jahrbuch des deutschen archäologischen Instituts
Jb. f. kleinas. Forsch. = Jahrbuch für kleinasiatische Forschung
JHS Journal of Hellenic Studies
=
JIES = Journal of Indo-European Studies.
Journal of Phil. = Journal of Philology
KZ = Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung auf dem Gebiete des Deutschen,
Griechischen und Lateinischen ("Kuhns Zeitschift"); from 23 (1875/77) onwards,
"Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung auf dem Gebiete der
indogermanischen Sprachen" (ZVS); from 82 (1968) onwards, “Zeitschrift für
vergleichende Sprachforschung" (ZVS); from 101 (1988) onwards, “Historische
Sprachforschung" (HS)
LALIES = Actes des sessions de linguistique et de littérature
LAMA Centre de recherches comparatives sur les langues de la Méditerranée
=
ancienne
Lang. = Language
Leipz. Stud. Leipziger Studien zur klassischen Philologie
=
Ling. Balkan. = Linguistique Balkanique
Ling. Posn. Lingua Posnaniensis
=
=
Listy filol. Listy filologické
Mél. Univ. St. Joseph = Mélanges de l'université St. Joseph (Beyrouth)
MKNAW = Mededelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van
Wetenschappen, Afdeling Letterkunde
Mnem. Mnemosyne
=
MondOr. Le Monde Oriental
=
MSL = Memoires de la Societé Linguistique de Paris
MSS = Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft
MU Morphologische Untersuchungen auf dem Gebiet der indogermanischen
=
Sprachen
Mus. Helv. Museum Helveticum
=
N. Jb. f. d. klass. Altertum = Neue Jahrbücher für das klassische Altertum
NOWELE North-Western European Language Evolution
=
NTS=Norsk Tidsskrift for Sprogvidenskap
OLZ Orientalistische Literaturzeitung
=
=
Par. del pass. La parola del passato (Napoli)
PBBeitr. = Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur
Phil. Philologus
=
Philol. Stud. Philologische Studiën (Leuven)
=
PhW Philologische Wochenschrift
=
Quad. Urbinati = Quaderni urbinati di cultura classica
REA Revue des études anciennes
=
REArm. =
Revue des études armeniennes
REGr. = Revue des études grecques
-
REIE = Revue des études indo-européennes
RELat.
Revue des études latines

=== page 872 ===

1692
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1693
Rend. Acc. Linc.
=
Rendiconti della Reale Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. Classe di
Scienze Morali, Storiche e Filologiche
RESlav. Revue des études slaves
=
Rev. arch. = Revue archeologique
Rev. belge de phil. = Revue belge de philologie et d'histoire
Rev. celt. Revue celtique
=
Rev. Hitt. Ass.
RFIC=Rivista di Filologia e di Istruzione Classica
RhMRheinisches Museum
=
Ric. ling. Ricerche Linguistiche, Bolletino dell' Istituto di Glottologia dell
Universitá de Roma
4
RILomb. Rendiconti del Reale Istituto Lombardo di Scienze e Lettere
=
Riv. degli stud. or. = Rivista degli studi orientali
Riv. fil. class. = Rivista di Filologia e di Istruzione Classica
RPh. = Revue de philologie, de litterature et d'histoire anciennes
Sächs. Abh. and Sächs. Ber. = Abhandlungen (Berichte) der sächsischen Gesellschaft
(Akademie) der Wissenschaften
SCauc. = - Studia Caucasica
SII = Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik
SMEA Studi Micenei ed Egeo-Anatolici
=
Sprache Die Sprache
=
SSL = Studi e Saggi Linguistici
Stud. ital. fil. class. = Studi italiani di filologia classica
Symb. Oslo. Symbolae Osloenses
=
TPS = Transactions of the Philological Society
TAPA = Transactions (and Proceedings) of the American Philological Association
Welt des Orients Die Welt des Orients: wissenschaftliche Beiträge zur Kunde des
Morgenlandes
=
Wien. Ak. Abh. = Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien
Wien. Ak. Anz. = Akademischer Anzeiger, Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien
Wien. Ak. Sb. = Sitzungsberichte der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien
Wiener Stud. = Wiener Studien
Würzb. Jb. = Würzburger Jahrbücher für die Altertumswissenschaft
WuS Wörter und Sachen
=
WZHalle
=
Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-
Wittenberg, Gesellschafts- und Sprachwissenschaftliche Reihe
WZKM Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes
=
WZKS Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens
=
ZDMG = Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft
Zeitschr. f. celt. Phil. = Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie
Zeitschr. f. Phon. = Zeitschrift für Phonologie, Sprachwissenschaft und Kommuni-
kationsforschung
Zeitschr. f. slav. Phil. = Zeitschrift für slavische Philologie
ZfdA = Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum und deutsche Literatur
ZII = Zeitschrift für Indologie und Iranistik
Živa Ant. Živa Antika. Antiquité vivante
=
Z(O)NF = Zeitschrift fur (Orts)namenforschung
ZPE = Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik
ZRPh. Zeitschrift für romanische Philologie
=
Zs. f. ägypt. Spr. = Zeitschrift für ägyptische Sprache und Alterthumskunde
ZVS Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft
=

=== page 873 ===

1694
BIBLIOGRAPHY
T
!
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1695
C. Books and articles in books
Ačaŕyan, Hrač'ya Hakobi
1937:
1977
De l'affinité du grec et de l'arménien, in: Mélanges Emile Boisacq.
Bruxelles, 3-4.
Hayeren armatakan bararan 3. Erevan².
Adams, Douglas Q.
1999
Adontz, N.
1937
Alessio, G.
1955
A dictionary of Tocharian B. Amsterdam-Atlanta.
Quelques étymologies armeniennes, in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq.
Bruxelles, 5-27.
Le lingue indo-europee nell'ambiente mediterrano. Bari.
Amandry, Pierre
1950
La mantique apollinienne à Delphes: essai sur le fonctionnement de
l'oracle. Paris.
Amigues, Suzanne
1989 Théophraste: Recherches sur les plantes. Texte établi et trad. par
Suzanne Amigues, vol. II. Paris.
Ammann, Hermann
1956
Zum griechischen Verbaladjektiv auf-τóç, in: Kronasser 1956(1): 10-23.
André, Jacques
1949 Études sur les termes de couleur dans la langue latine. Diss. Paris.
Lexique des termes de botanique en latin. Paris.
1956
1958
1961
1967
1985
Notes de lexicographie botanique grecque. Paris.
L'alimentation et la cuisine à Rome. Paris.
Les noms d'oiseaux en latin. Paris.
Les noms de plantes dans la Rome antique. Paris.
Anreiter, Peter et al. (eds.)
1998 Man and the animal world: studies in archaeozoology, archaeology,
anthropology and palaeolinguistics, in memoriam Sándor Bökönyi.
Budapest.
Anttila, Raimo
1969
Proto-Indo-European Schwebeablaut. Berkeley.
Aravantinos, Vassilis L., Louis Godart and Anna Sacconi
2002 Thèbes: fouilles de la Cadmée. Pisa etc.
Arbenz, Carl
1933
Die Adjektive auf -чµoç. Zürich.
Armini, Harry et al. (eds.)
1936
Apophoreta Gotoburgensia Vilelmo Lundström oblata. Göteborg.
Aura Jorro, Francisco
1985-1993 Diccionario micénico. Madrid.
Autran, Charles
1938 Homère et les origines sacerdotales de l'épopée grecque, 2 vols. Paris.
Aymard, André
1935
}
Le Zeus fédéral achaien Hamarios-Homarios, in: Berthelot (ed.): 453-
470.
Aymard, André (ed.)
1966 Mélanges d'archéologie, d'épigraphie et d'histoire, offerts à Jérôme
Carcopino. Paris.
Bader, Françoise
1965 Les composés grecs du type de demiourgos. Paris.
1994
Langues indo-européennes. Paris.
Bader, Françoise et al. (eds.)
1972 Mélanges de linguistique et de philologie grecques: offerts à Pierre
Chantraine. Paris.
Bailey, Harold W.
1985
Balles, Irene
2007
Indo-Scythian studies being Khotanese texts, Volume 7. Cambridge.
A Greek laryngeal metathesis that needn't be either..., in: Nussbaum
2007: 15-24.
Bammesberger, Alfred (ed.)
1988
Die Laryngaltheorie und die Rekonstruktion des indogermanischen
Laut- und Formensystems. Heidelberg.
Bammesberger, Alfred and Theo Vennemann (eds.)
2004 Languages in prehistoric Europe. Heidelberg.
Barb, Alphons A.
1969 Lapis Adamas - Der Blutstein, in: Bibauw 1969: 66-82.
Barnhart, Robert J. (ed.)
1988 The Barnhart dictionary of etymology. Bronx (NY).
Barrett, William Spencer
1964
Euripides, Hippolytos, edited with Introduction and Commentary by
W.S. Barrett. Oxford.
Bartholomae, Christian
1895
Grundriß der iranischen Philologie 1. Strassburg.

=== page 874 ===

1696
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1697
Bauer, Walter
1910
Griechisch-Deutsches
Wörterbuch
zu den Schriften des Neuen
Testaments und der übrigen urchristlichen Literatur. Berlin.
Baunack, Johannes and Baunack, Theodor
1886 Studien auf dem Gebiete des griechischen und der arischen Sprachen 1.
Leipzig.
Bechtel, Friedrich
1898
1914
Die einstämmigen männlichen Personennamen des Griechischen, die
aus Spitznamen hervorgegangen sind. Berlin.
!
Beekes, Robert S. P. et al. (eds.)
1992
Rekonstruktion und relative Chronologie. Akten der VIII. Fachtagung
der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, Leiden, 31. August - 4. September
1987. Innsbruck.
Belardi, Walter
1969
Greco даváкηç tra celtico e iranico, in: Studia classica et orientalia
Antonino Pagliaro oblata 1. Roma, 189-212.
Bennett, Emmett L. Jr. (ed.)
1964
Mycenaean studies: proceedings of the third International colloquium
for Mycenaean studies held at 'Wingspread' (Racine, Wis.), 4-8
September 1961. Madison.
Benveniste, Émile
Lexilogus zu Homer: Etymologie und Stammbildung homerischer
Wörter. Halle an der Saale.
1917a
Namenstudien. Halle an der Saale.
1917b
Die historischen Personennamen des Griechischen bis zur Kaiserzeit.
Halle an der Saale.
1929
1920
1921
1923
Die Attische Frauennamen. Göttingen.
Die Griechischen Dialekte. 3 vols. Berlin.
1935
1937a
1937b
Lakonische Namen, in: Avrídwpov: Festschrift Jacob Wackernagel zur
Vollendung des 70. Lebensjahres am 11. Dezember 1923 gewidmet von
Schülern, Freunden und Kollegen. Göttingen, 154-155.
Beek, Lucien van
2009 The "Saussure Effect” in Greek: a revision of the evidence. Paper read
at the conference "The Sound of Indo-European". Copenhagen.
New evidence for the PIE root *h₂ep-: Greek äлτW.
1939
1940a
Le nom d'un animal indien chez Élien, in: Teeuwen (ed.): 371-376.
Origines de la formation des noms en indo-européen. Paris.
Hittite hatugi, in: Hjelmslev et al. (eds.): 496-499.
Noms d'armes orientaux en grec, in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq.
Bruxelles, 37-46.
La legende de Kombabos, in: Mélanges syriens offerts à M. René
Dussaud, secrétaire perpétuel de l'Académie des inscriptions et belles-
lettres, par ses amis et ses élèves. Paris, 249-258.
Latin Tempus, in: Mélanges de philologie, de littérature et d'histoire
anciennes offerts à Alfred Ernout. Paris, 11-16.
fthc.a
1940b
Textes sogdiens. Paris.
fthc.b
Vowel assimilation in Greek: the evidence reconsidered, in: T. Krisch
et al. (eds.), Proceedings Fachtagung Salzburg.
1948
Noms d'agent et noms d'action en indo-européen. Paris.
1954
Formes et sens de μváoμat, in: Redard (ed.): 13-18.
Beekes, Robert S. P.
1956
1969
1975
1985
1990
The development of the Proto-Indo-European laryngeals in Greek. The
Hague.
1962
"Hiver" et "neige" en indo-européen, in: Kronasser 1956(1): 31-39.
Hittite et indo-européen: études comparatives. Paris.
Un fait de supplétisme lexical en indo-européen, in: Meiď (ed.): 11-15.
Le vocabulaire des institutions indo-européennes, 2 vols. Paris.
1995
1998
2000
2003
2004
2008
Two notes on PIE stems in dentals, in: Rix (ed.): 9-14.
The origins of the Indo-European nominal inflection. Innsbruck.
Bloem en blad, in: A. Moerdijk et al. (eds.), 100 jaar etymologisch
woordenboek van het Nederlands. The Hague, 375-382.
Comparative Indo-European linguistics: An introduction. Amsterdam.
Hades and Elysion, in: Jasanoff 1998: 17-28.
European substratum words in Greek, in: Ofitsch and Zinko 2000: 21-
31.
Indo-European or substrate? qάτvη and кñрvč, in: Bammesberger and
Vennemann 2003: 109-116.
Armenian gišer and the Indo-European word for 'evening', in:
Hyllested et al. (eds.): 59ff.
Palatalized consonants in Pre-Greek, in: Lubotsky et al. (eds.): 45-56.
!
1967
1969
Bergson, Leif
1956
L'épithète ornementale dans Éschyle, Sophocle et Euripide (PhD diss.
Lund). Uppsala.
Berthelot, André (ed.)
1935
Mélanges offerts à M. Octave Navarre par ses élèves et ses amis.
Toulouse.
Beševliev, Veselin and Vladimir Georgiev (eds.)
1958
Bethe, Erich
1923
Studia in honorem Acad. D. Dečev. Sofia.
Apollon, der Hellene, in: Avrídwpov: Festschrift Jacob Wackernagel zur
Vollendung des 70. Lebensjahres am 11. Dezember 1923 gewidmet von
Schülern, Freunden und Kollegen. Göttingen, 14-21.

=== page 875 ===

1698
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1699
Bibauw, Jacqueline (ed.)
1969
Hommages à Marcel Renard. Bruxelles.
Bielefeld, Erwin
1968
Schmuck (Archaeologia Homerica 1C). Göttingen.
Biraud, Michèle
1993
1994
Usages de l'asphodèle et étymologies d'ảσpódɛλoç, in: Les phytonymes
grecs et latins, actes du colloque international tenu a Nice les 14, 15 et 16
mai 1992. Nice.
Noms sans choses pour choses sans nom, in: Kircher-Durand et al.
(eds.): 57-70.
Björck, Gudmund
1950
Blanc, Alain
1988
1994
Das Alpha impurum und die tragische Kunstsprache: Attische Wort-
und Stilstudien. Uppsala etc.
L'accablement et la stupéfaction: кaτηons et τéе½α, in: 'HAIETON
AOÃOДЕIÏINON. Logopédies: mélanges de philologie et de linguistique
grecques offerts à Jean Taillardat. Paris, 33-48.
Erreur et errance: à propos d'aµñлλакɛïv et åµлλαкía, in: Kircher-
Durand et al. (eds.): 79-85.
Blass, Friedrich and Albert Debrunner
1959
Grammatik des neutestamentischen Griechisch. Göttingen¹.
Blass, Friedrich, Albert Debrunner and Robert W. Funk
1961
Bloch, Alfred
A Greek grammar of the New Testament and other early Christian
literature. Chicago.
Zur Geschichte einiger suppletiver Verba im Griechischen. Basel.
Zur Herkunft der lateinischen Adjektive auf -idus, in: Redard (ed.): 19-
1940
1954
32.
Blumenthal, Albrecht von
1930
Hesychstudien. Stuttgart.
Blümner, Hugo
1875-1887 Technologie und Terminologie der Gewerbe und Künste bei Griechen
und Römern. Leipzig.
Boëthius, Axel (ed.)
1932
Symbolae philologicae O. A. Danielsson octogenario dicatae. Uppsala.
Bolkestein, Johanna Christina
1936
"Oσios en Evσεẞnç: bijdrage tot de godsdienstige en zedelijke terminologie
van de Grieken. Amsterdam.
Bolling, George M.
1930
A matter of semantics, in: Studies in honor of H. Collitz. Baltimore, 43-
47.
Bomba, Rafaella et al. (eds.)
2006 Studi linguistici in onore di Roberto Gusmani. Alessandria.
Bonfante, Giuliano
1954 L'animismo nelle lingue indoeuropee, in: Redard (ed.): 33-56.
Boẞhardt, Ernst
1942
Die Nomina auf -ɛvç: ein Beitrag zur Wortbildung der griechischen
Sprache. Zürich.
Bourguet, Émile
1927
Le dialecte laconien. Paris.
Boyce, Mary and Ilya Gershevitch (eds.)
1970
W.B. Henning memorial volume. London.
Brandenstein, Wilhelm
1952
1954a
1954b
1956
1958
Studien zur indogermanischen Grundsprache. Wien.
Die Reichsgründersage des makedonischen Herrscherhauses, in:
Sutter (ed.): 54-58.
Bemerkungen zur Völkertafel der Genesis, in: Redard (ed.): 57-84.
Arica, in: Kronasser 1956(1): 52-60.
Sprache und Schrift von Side, in: Grumach (ed.): 80-91.
Brandenstein, Wilhelm (ed.)
1958
Sybaris: Festschrift Hans Krahe zum 60. Geburtstag am 7. Februar 1958
dargebracht von Freunden, Schülern und Kollegen. Wiesbaden.
Brands, Josephus Petrus Joannes Maria
1935
Grieksche diernamen. Purmerend.
Brause, Johannes
1909
Briand, Michel
1997
Lautlehre der kretischen Dialekte. Halle.
Grec кáлроç: du ‘(porc) vorace' au 'sanglier', in: Les zoonymes. Actes
du colloque international tenu à Nice les 23, 24 et 25 janvier 1997. Nice,
91-115.
Brice, William C. (ed.)
1967 Europa: Studien zur Geschichte und Epigraphik der frühen Aegaeis.
Festschrift für Ernst Grumach. Berlin.
Brixhe, Claude
1976
Le dialecte grec de Pamphylie: documents et grammaire. Paris.

=== page 876 ===

1700
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1701
Brixhe, Claude and Réné Hodot
1988
L'Asie Mineure du nord au sud: inscriptions inédites. Nancy.
Brock, Nadia van
1961
Recherches sur le vocabulaire médical du grec ancien: soins et
guérison. Études et commentaires, 41. Paris.
Brogyanyi, Bela et al. (eds.)
1992
Historical philology: Greek, Latin, and Romance: papers in honor of
Oswald Szemerényi. Amsterdam.
Brommer, Peter
1940
Eldoç et idéa : étude sémantique et chronologique des oeuvres de Platon.
Utrecht.
Brown, Raymond A.
1985 Evidence for pre-Greek speech on Crete from Greek alphabetic sources.
Amsterdam.
Brugmann, Karl
1886-1900 Grundriss der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen
Sprachen. Strassburg'.
1894
1912
1913
Die Ausdrücke für den Begriff der Totalität in den indogermanischen
Sprachen: eine semasiologisch-etymologische Untersuchung. Leipzig.
Homerisch ävɛw (ävɛw) und nachhomerisch ¿vɛóç, in: Festschrift
Vilhelm Thomsen (Finnisch-Ugrische Untersuchungen 12-13). Leipzig
etc., 1-7.
Griechische Grammatik: Lautlehre, Stammbildungs- und Flexionslehre,
Syntax. 4. vermehrte Aufl. bearb. von Albert Thumb. München.
Brugmann, Karl and Berthold Delbrück
1897-1916 Grundriss der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen
Sprachen. Strassburg².
Brunel, Jean
1939
L'aspect verbal et l'emploi des préverbes en grec, particulièrement en
attique. Paris.
Brunius-Nilsson, Elisabeth
1955 Aatuóvie: an inquiry into a mode of apostrophe in old Greek literature.
Uppsala.
Burg, Nicolaas Marius Henricus van den
1939
Алóррητα, Spáμɛvα, öpуia: bijdrage tot de kennis der religieuze
terminologie in het Grieksch. Amsterdam.
Burkert, Walter
1955
1985
1992
Burr, Viktor
1932
Zum altgriechischen Mitleidsbegriff. Diss. Erlangen.
Greek Religion. Cambridge (Mass.).
The Orientalizing Revolution. Cambridge (Mass.).
Nostrum Mare. Ursprung und Geschichte der Namen des Mittelmeeres
und seiner Teilmeere im Altertum. Stuttgart.
Buttmann, Philipp
1825
Lexilogus oder Beiträge zur griechischen Wort-Erklärung, hauptsächlich
für Homer und Hesiod. Berlin.
Campanile, Enrico
1969
Note sulle glosse sicule e sui rapporti linguistici fra siculo e latino, in:
Studia classica et orientalia Antonino Pagliaro oblata. Roma, 293-322.
Cardona, George et al. (eds.)
1987
Carnoy, Albert
1934
Festschrift for Henry Hoenigswald on the occasion of his seventieth
birthday. Tübingen.
Les noms de Démeter et de Coré, in: Mélanges Bidez. Bruxelles, 71-77.
Casabona, Jean
1966
Recherches sur le vocabulaire des sacrifices en grec, des origines à la fin
de l'époque classique. Paris.
Castleden, Rodney
Atlantis destroyed. London.
1998
1
Chadwick, John
1964
Pylos Tablet Un 1322, in: Bennett (ed.): 19-26.
Chantraine, Pierre
1928
1932
Brust, Manfred
2005
Die indischen und iranischen Lehnwörter im Griechischen. Innsbruck².
1933
1934
Buck, Carl D.
1953
Oεwpós, in: Mylonas and Raymond 1953: 443-444.
1955
The Greek Dialects. Chicago².
1935
1936
Sur le vocabulaire maritime des grecs, in: Étrennes de linguistique
offertes par quelques amis à Émile Benveniste. Paris, 1-25.
Quelques mots grecs suspects d'être empruntés à des parlers
préhellléniques. Mélanges Gustave Glotz I, Paris, 163-171.
La formation des noms en grec ancien. Paris.
Deux notes sur le vocabulaire juridique dans les papyrus grecs, in:
Mémoires de l'Institut français d'archéologie orientale 67, 219-224.
L'épithète homérique Apуɛïqóvτns, in: Berthelot (ed.): 69-79.
Homérique Mεрóлшу Аvерóлwv, in: Mélanges Franz Cumont.
Bruxelles, 121-128.
1

=== page 877 ===

1702
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1703
1940
Le parallélisme sémantique latin locus et grec τóлоç, in: Mélanges de
philologie, de littérature et d'histoire anciennes offerts à Alfred Ernout.
Paris, 51-60.
Grammaire homérique. Paris.
Grammaire homérique II: Syntaxe. Paris.
Études sur le vocabulaire grec. Paris.
Les mots designant la gauche en grec ancien, in: Kronasser 1956(1): 61-
69.
Morphologie historique du grec. Paris².
Curtius, Georg
1858
Grundzüge der griechischen Etymologie. Leipzig.
Danielsson, Olof August
1892
Davreux, J.
1942
De voce ai nós. Uppsala.
La légende de la prophétesse Cassandre. Paris.
Debrunner, Albert
1917
1923
1942
1953
1956a
1956b
1961
1966
Grec yλauкóc, Пλauкoç et mycénien “Karauko”, in: A. Aymard et al.
(eds.): 193-203.
1968
Kira et keraso dans la tablette MY V 659, in: Atti e memorie del 1°
Congresso Internazionale di Micenologia, Roma, 27 settembre-3 ottobre
1967. Roma, 574-577.
1937
|
1947
1954
Sur quelques termes du vocabulaire religieux des Grecs: La valeur du
mot ayos et ses dérivés, in: Redard (ed.): 85-108.
Chantraine, Pierre and Olivier Masson
Cheung, Johnny
2007
Etymological dictionary of the Iranian verb. Leiden.
Citron, Albrecht
1965
Semantische Untersuchungen zu σлévбɛσðαι - σлédε -
anévdely - eiyeoda.
Winterthur.
Clackson, James
1994
The linguistic relationship between Armenian and Greek. Oxford.
Clackson, James and Birgit Anette Olsen (eds.)
2004
Indo-European word formation: proceedings of the conference held at
the University of Copenhagen October 20th - 22nd 2000. Copenhagen.
Collinder, Björn
1943
Ein indoeuropäisches Wohllautgesetz. Uppsala.
Collins, Billie Jean et al. (eds.)
2008
Anatolian interfaces: Hittites, Greeks and their neighbours: proceedings
of an international conference on cross-cultural interaction, September
17-19, 2004, Emory University, Atlanta, GA. Oxford.
Cuillandre, Joseph
1944
Cuny, Albert
1908
La droite et la gauche dans les poèmes homériques. Paris.
Gr. Buxávn, lat. būcina, in: Mélanges de linguistique offerts à F. de
Saussure. Paris, 107-114.
1
i
1956
Griechische Wortbildungslehre. Heidelberg.
Metrische Kürzung bei Homer, in: 'Avτídwpov: Festschrift Jacob
Wackernagel zur Vollendung des 70. Lebensjahres am 11. Dezember 1923
gewidmet von Schülern, Freunden und Kollegen. Göttingen, 28-40.
AISάoкw, in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq. Bruxelles, 251-266.
Аŋμокρаτíα, in: Festschrift für Edouard Tièche, ehemaligen Professor
an der Universität Bern, zum 70. Geburtstage am 21. März 1947. Bern,
11-24.
Aéyuevos, Ɛoróµevoç, äpxµevos, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(1): 77-84.
Decourt, Jean-Claude
1995
Inscriptions de Thessalie 1. Athènes.
Defner, Michael
1923
AεČIкÒV τñÇ Tσαкwviкñç Siαλéктov. Athens.
Deger-Jalkotzy, Sigrid et al. (eds.)
1999
Floreant studia
Akten des X. Internationalen
mycenaea:
Mykenologischen Colloquiums in Salzburg vom 1.-5. Mai 1995. Wien.
Del Grande, Carlo
1947
Hybris. Colpa e castigo nell' espressione poetica e letteraria degli scrittori
della Grecia antica da Omero a Cleante. Napoli.
Delbrück, Berthold
1893-1900 Vergleichende Syntax der indogermanischen Sprachen. Strassburg.
Delebecque, Édouard
1951
Le cheval dans l'Iliade: suivi d'un lexique du cheval chez Homère et d'un
essai sur le cheval pré-homérique. Paris.
Demiraj, Bardhyl
1997
Albanische Etymologien. Amsterdam.
Denniston, John Dewar
1954
The Greek particles. Oxford.
言
Derksen, Rick H.
1996
2008
Etymological dictionary of the Slavic inherited lexicon. Leiden.
Metatony in Baltic. Amsterdam.
}

=== page 878 ===

1704
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1705
Detienne, Marcel and Jean-Pierre Vernant
1974
Les ruses de l'intelligence: la métis des grecs. Paris.
Detschew, Dimitar
1957
Die thrakischen Sprachreste. Wien.
Deubner, Ludwig
1932
Attische Feste. Berlin.
Diehl, Jakob
1938
Sphragis. Eine semasiologische Nachlese. Gießen.
Diels, Hermann
1920
斑
Antike Technik: sieben Vorträge². Leipzig.
Dobias-Lalou, Catherine
2000 Le dialecte des inscriptions grecques de Cyrène. Paris.
Döderlein, Ludwig
1835
Dörrie, H.
1956
Vocabulorum Homericorum etyma sive ad emendat: Glossarii
Passoviani symbolae. Erlangen.
Leid und Erfahrung. Die Wort- und Sinnverbindung na◊ɛĩv - µaðɛĩv im
griechischen Denken. Mainz.
Drioton, Etienne and Jacques Vandier
1962 L'Égypte. Paris.
Dubois, Laurent
1988
Recherches sur le dialecte arcadien. Leuven.
Duchesne-Guillemin, Jacques
1937 Greek iɛpós - Skr. işirá, in: Mélanges Emile Boisacq. Bruxelles, 333-338.
Duhoux, Yves
1993
Les premiers phytonymes grecs: les données mycéniennes, in: Les
phytonymes grecs et latins, actes du colloque international tenu à Nice
les 14, 15 et 16 mai 1992. Nice, 97-122.
Dunkel, George E.
1987 heres, xnpwoτai: indogermanische Richtersprache, in: Cardona (ed.):
1995
Dussaud, René
1953
91-100.
More Mycenaean survivals in later Greek, in: Hettrich (ed.): 1-21.
Prélydiens, Hittites et Achéens. Paris.
Ebert, Max (ed.)
1924-1932 Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte. Berlin.
1
Eggers, Eckhard et al. (eds.)
1999
!
Egli, Jakob
1954
Ehrlich, Hugo
1910
1912
Florilegium linguisticum: Festschrift für Wolfgang P. Schmid zum 70.
Geburtstag. Frankfurt am Main.
Heteroklisie im Griechischen mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Fälle
von Gelenkheteroklisie. Zürich.
Zur indogermanischen Sprachgeschichte. Königsberg.
Untersuchungen über die Natur der griechischen Betonung Berlin.
Eichner, Heiner et al. (eds.)
1999
Compositiones Indogermanicae in memoriam Jochem Schindler.
Prague.
Eilers, Wilhelm and Manfred Mayrhofer
1962
Eiẞfeldt, Otto
1939
Ekman, E.
1933
Kurdisch būz und die indogermanische "Buchen"-Sippe, in: Festschrift
zum siebzigsten Geburtstage (Mitteilungen der
Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien 92). Horn/Wien, 61-92.
Franz Hančar
Linos und Alijan, in: Mélanges syriens offerts à M. René Dussaud,
secrétaire perpétuel de l'Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, par
ses amis et ses élèves. Paris, 161-170.
Zu Xenophon's Hipparchikos. Diss. Uppsala.
Elferink, Lambertus Johan
1934 Lekythos. Archäologische, sprachliche und religionsgeschichtliche
Untersuchungen. Amsterdam.
Erbse, Hartmut (ed.)
1956
Festschrift Bruno Snell: zum 60. Geburtstag am 18. Juni 1956 von
Freunden und Schülern überreicht. München.
Ernout, Alfred Georges
1946
1954
Philologica 1. Paris.
Aspects du vocabulaire latin. Paris.
Etter, Annemarie (ed.)
1986
O-o-pe-ro-si: Festschrift für Ernst Risch zum 75. Geburtstag. Berlin.
Falk, Hjalmar and Torp, Alf
Norwegisch-dänisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Heidelberg.
1910
Faure, Paul
1980
Ulysse, le Crétois. Paris.

=== page 879 ===

1706
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1707
Feist, Sigmund
1939
Vergleichendes Wörterbuch der gotischen Sprache. Leiden.
Festugière, André-Jean
1936
Fick, August
Contemplation et vie contemplative selon Platon. Paris.
1874-1876 Vergleichendes Wörterbuch der indogermanischen Sprachen. 4 vols.
Göttingen³.
1905
Vorgriechische
Ortsnamen als Quelle für die Vorgeschichte
Griechenlands verwertet. Göttingen.
1950
Aeschylus: Agamemnon. Edited with a commentary by Eduard
Fraenkel. 3 vols. Oxford.
Fraenkel, Ernst
1906 Griechische Denominativa in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung und
Verbreitung. Göttingen.
1910-1912 Geschichte der griechischen Nomina agentis auf -tēr, -tör, -tēs, 2 vols.
Strassburg.
1937
Zu eu-Erweiterung indogermanischer Wurzeln under besonderer
Berücksichtigung von Baltisch, Slavisch und Griechisch, in: Mélanges
Emile Boisacq. Bruxelles, 355-381.
Litauisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Heidelberg.
Zur Verkürzung von Komposita in den indogermanischen Sprachen,
in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(1): 100-106.
Fick, August and Friedrich Bechtel
1955
1894
Die griechischen Personennamen nach ihrer Bildung erklärt und
systematisch geordnet. Göttingen.
1956a
Fiesel, Eva
1928
1956b
Namen des griechischen Mythos im Etruskischen. Göttingen.
1958
Zur indogermanischen Namenforschung, in: Brandenstein (ed.): 37-
44.
Zur griechischen Volkskunde und Sprachforschung, in: Erbse (ed.):
181-188.
Finzenhagen, Ulrich
1939 Die geographische Terminologie des Griechischen. Würzburg/Aumühle.
Fohalle, René
1925
A propos de кuẞɛpväv : gubernare, in: Mélanges linguistiques offerts à
J. Vendryes par ses amis et ses élèves. Paris, 179-186.
Forssman, Bernhard
1966
1980
1986
2000
Untersuchungen zur Sprache Pindars. Wiesbaden.
Ein unbekanntes Lautgesetz in der homerischen Sprache?, in:
Mayrhofer et al. (eds.): 180-198.
Homerisch ǎμoτov, in: Etter (ed.): 329-339.
Das Verbum oig- ‘öffnen' bei Homer, in: G. Meiser et al. (eds.): 17-23.
Zürich.
2005
Forssman, Bernhard and Robert Plath (eds.)
Indoarisch, Iranisch und die Indogermanistik. Arbeitstagung der
Indogermanischen Gesellschaft vom 2. bis 5. Oktober in Erlangen.
Wiesbaden.
Forster, Hans A.
1950 Zur Geschichte der griechischen Komposita vom Typus 'Eлíxpvoos.
Fournier, Henry
1946 Les verbes "dire" en grec ancien: exemple de conjugaison supplétive.
Fraenkel, Eduard
Homerische Wörter, in: Avrídwpov: Festschrift Jacob Wackernagel zur
Vollendung des 70. Lebensjahres am 11. Dezember 1923 gewidmet von.
Schülern, Freunden und Kollegen. Göttingen, 274-282.
1923
Paris.
Francis, Eric D.
1970 Greek disyllabic roots: the aorist formations. Unpublished diss.
Harvard.
Fränkel, Hermann
1960
Wege und Formen frühgriechischen Denkens. München².
Friedmann, Beatrice
1937 Die jonischen und attischen Wörter im Altlatein. Helsingfors.
Friedrich, Johannes
1952
Frisk, Hjalmar
1931
!
1934
1935
1938
1941
1
1944
1948
1951
1966
Hethitisches Wörterbuch. Heidelberg.
Bankakten aus dem Faijum nebst anderen berliner Papyri. Göteborg.
Zur indoiranischen und griechischen Nominalbildung. Göteborg.
"Wahrheit" und "Lüge" in den indogermanischen Sprachen: einige
morphologische Beobachtungen (GHÅ 41: 3). Göteburg.
Indogermanica (GHÅ 44: 1). Göteborg.
Über den Gebrauch des Privat präfixes im indogermanischen Adjektiv
(GHÅ 47:11). Göteborg.
Etyma armeniaca (GHÅ 50: 1). Göteborg.
Substantiva privativa im Indogermanischen: eine morphologisch-
stilistische Studie. Göteborg.
Quelques noms de la tempe en indo-européen (GHÅ 57: 4). Göteborg.
Kleine Schriften zur Indogermanistik und zur griechischen Wortkunde.
Göteborg.
1

=== page 880 ===

1708
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1709
Gantz, Timothy
1993
Early Greek Myth. Baltimore etc.
Garbini, Giovanni
1969
Grabovius, in: Studi linguistici in onore di Vittore Pisani. Brescia, 391-
400.
García Ramón, José Luis
1986
1992a
1992b
1993a
1993b
1997
1998
1999a
1999b
1999C
2000
2004
fthc.
Griego iάouat, in: Etter (ed.): 497-514.
Mycénien ke-sa-do-ro /Kessandros/, ke-ti-ro /Kestilos/, ke-to /Kestōr/:
grec alphabétique Avηoшчßрóτα, Avηoiλaos, Avýτwp et le nom de
Cassandra, in: Mykenaika: actes du IXe Colloque international sur les
textes mycéniens et égéens (Athènes, 2-6 octobre 1990). Athènes, 239-
255.
Griechisch iɛpós (und Varianten), vedisch ișirá-, in: Beekes et al.
(eds.): 183-205.
Lat. cēnsēre, got. hazjan und idg. Präs. *kéns-e-ti (und *kns-éie-ti)
'verkündigt, schätzt', stativ *ks-eh,- 'verkündigt, geschätzt werden',
in: Meiser (ed.): 106-130.
Latín cière, citus, IE *kei- / ki- ‘ponerse en movimiento' y Causat. *koi̟-
éie-ti, in: Heidermanns (ed.): 125-139.
Lat. prae, gr. лαpáɩ, лapá und Verwandtes: idg. *prh₂- und *pr- 'vorn
daneben, vor' gegenüber *pro(h,) 'vor(n), vorwärts', in: Lubotsky (ed.):
47-62.
Indogermanisch *ghen- '(wiederholt) schlagen', 'töten', in: Jasanoff et
al. (eds.): 139-154.
Zur Bedeutung indogermanischer Verbalwurzeln: *h₂nek- erreichen,
reichen bis', *h,nek- ‘erhalten, (weg)nehmen', in: Habisreitinger et al.
(eds.): 47-80.
Myk. qe-qi-no-me-no, hom. Sivwτós und der PN di-nu-wa-ta, in:
Deger-Jalkotzy et al. (eds.): 237-248.
Griechisch Zητp: Zeùç ¿v Kúлpw, vedisch yātár- "Rächer” und die
Vertretung von *i- im Griechischen, in: Eichner et al. (eds.): 77-96.
Homerisch oúpos 'Fahrtwind', Ooüpoç 'ungestüm', ouλoç 'verderblich':
zur Funktion der -o-stufigen *-uo-Bildungen im Griechischen, in:
Hintze et al. (eds.): 63-78.
Homerisch opoí ‘Kielfurchen, Landgräben' (*uoru̟-o- ‘der Ziehende')
und έpúw 'ziehen', gr. óλкóç und ελкw, кéλɛτpov und hom. kéλσai',
in: Hyllested et al. (eds.): 145-154.
Idg. *(s)peh₂- 'in (heftige) Bewegung setzen, ziehen' : Ved. pā-3, heth.
pipp(a) hhi und gr. σлáw, arm. hanem, in: Akten der XII. Fachtagung
der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, Krakau 2004.
Georgacas, Demetrius J.
Ancient Greek terms surviving orally, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(1): 114-
1956
129.
1
!
George, Coulter et al. (eds.)
2007 Greek and Latin from an Indo-European perspective. Cambridge.
Georgiev, Vladimir I.
1937
Die Träger der Kretisch-Mykenischen Kultur, ihre Herkunft und ihre
Sprache. I. Teil: Urgriechen und Urillyrier (Thrako-Illyrier). Sofia.
Germain, Gabriel
1954
Gernet, Louis
1937
Genèse de l'Odyssée. Le fantastique et le sacré. Paris.
Notes de lexicologie juridique, in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq. Bruxelles,
391-398.
Gershevitch, Ilya
1989
Margarites the Pearl, in: C.-H. de Fouchécour and Ph. Gignoux (eds.),
Etudes irano-aryennes offertes à Gilbert Lazard. Paris, 113-36.
Gérard-Rousseau, Monique
1968
Gigon, Olof
1954
Les mentions religieuses dans les tablettes mycéniennes. Roma.
Zur Geschichtsschreibung der römischen Republik, in: Redard (ed.):
151-170.
Gigon, Olof et al. (eds.)
1946 Phyllobolia für Peter von der Mühll zum 60. Geburtstag am 1. August
1945. Basel.
Gil Fernández, Luis
1959
Nombres de insectos en griego antiguo. Madrid.
Gildersleeve, Basil Lanneau
1980 Syntax of classical Greek: from Homer to Demosthenes. Groningen.
Girard, Marie Christine
1988
Connaissance et méconnaissance de l'hellébore dans l'Antiquité. Labal.
Gladigow, Burkhard
1965
Gonda, Jan
1929
1952
1953
Sophia und Kosmos. Untersuchungen zur Frühgeschichte von σopós
und ooqin. Hildesheim.
Aɛíкvvu: semantische studie over den Indo-Germaanschen wortel
DEIK. Amsterdam.
Ancient Indian ojas, Latin *augos and the Indo-European nouns in -es-,
-os. Utrecht.
Reflexions on the numerals "one" and "two" in ancient Indo-European
Languages. Utrecht.

=== page 881 ===

1710
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1711
1956
The character of the Indo-European moods: with special regard to Greek
and Sanskrit. Wiesbaden.
Gotō, Toshifumi
1995
Graz, Louis
1965
Griechisch èλɛqaipouat, in: Smoczyński (ed.): 365-370.
La feu dans l'Iliade et l'Odyssée. Paris.
Grégoire, Henri
1949a
Greindl, Max
1938
1949b
Thraces et Thessaliens, maîtres de religion et de magie, in: Hommages
à Joseph Bidez et à Franz Cumont, Bruxelles, 375-386.
KλÉoç, kŨdoç, εûxos, tiµń, qátis, dóα. Diss. München.
Asklepios, Apollon Smintheus et Rudra. Bruxelles.
Grumach, Ernst (ed.)
1958
Minoica: Festschrift zum 80. Geburtstag von Johannes Sundwall. Berlin.
Gsell, Stéphane
1913
1915
Histoire ancienne de l'Afrique du Nord 1. Paris.
Hérodote. Alger.
Güntert, Hermann Georg Konrad
1914
1916
1919
1921
1923
1932
Über Reimwortbildungen im Arischen und Altgriechischen: eine
sprachwissenschaftliche Untersuchung. Heidelberg.
Indogermanische Ablautprobleme: Untersuchungen über Schwa
secundum, einen zweiten indogermanischen Murmelvokal. Strassburg.
Kalypso: Bedeutungsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen auf dem Gebiet der
indogermanischen Sprachen. Halle an der Saale.
Von der Sprache der Götter und Geister: Bedeutungsgeschichtliche
Untersuchungen zur homerischen und eddischen Göttersprache. Halle.
Der arische Weltkönig und Heiland: Bedeutungsgeschichtliche
Untersuchungen zur indo-iranischen Religionsgeschichte und
Altertumskunde. Halle.
Labyrinth: eine sprachwissenschaftliche Untersuchung Heidelberg.
Gusmani, Roberto
1964
1969
Lydisches Wörterbuch. Heidelberg.
Isoglosse lessicali greco-ittite, in: Studi linguistici in onore di Vittore
Pisani. Brescia, 501-514.
Guthrie, William Keith Chambers
1952
Haas, Otto
1956
Orpheus and Greek religion: a study of the Orphic Movement. London.
Die griechischen Absolutiva auf -da, -dŋv, -dov, in: Kronasser (ed.)
1956(1):130-145
1966 Die phrygische Sprachdenkmäler. Sofia.
Habisreitinger, Jürgen et al. (eds.)
1999
Gering und doch von Herzen: 25 indogermanistische Beiträge: Bernhard
Forssman zum 65. Geburstag. Wiesbaden.
Hackstein, Olav
1995
2002
Hajnal, Ivo
1992
Untersuchungen zu den sigmatischen Präsensstammbildungen des
Tocharischen. Göttingen.
Die Sprachform der homerischen Epen. Wiesbaden.
Griechisch xauaí. Ein Problem der Rekonstruktion?, in: Beekes et al.
(eds.): 207-220.
Hamm, Eva Maria
1957
Grammatik zu Sappho und Alkaios. Berlin.
Hamp, Eric Pratt
2005 A far-out question, in: Hegedűs et al. (eds.): 94-105.
Harðarson, Jón Axel
1993a
1993b
Studien zum urindogermanischen Wurzelaorist und dessen Vertretung
im Indoiranischen und Griechischen. Innsbruck.
Griechisch (F)íɛμat, in: Meiser (ed.): 159-168.
Harkemanne, Jean
1967 Recherches de philologie et de linguistique 1. Louvain.
Harpe, Jean de la et al. (eds.)
1944
Mélanges offerts à M. Max Niedermann à l'occasion de son soixante-
dixième anniversaire. Neuchâtel.
Hartmann, Hans
1956
Zur Funktion des Perfekts, in: Erbse (ed.): 243-250.
Hartmann, Hans and Hans Neumann (eds.)
1960
Haug, Dag
2002
Indogermanica: Festschrift für Wolfgang Krause zum 65. Geburtstag am
18. September 1960 von Fachgenossen und Freunden dargebracht.
Heidelberg.
Les phases de l'évolution de la langue épique. Göttingen.
Haupt, Paul (ed.)
1912
Actes du 16me congrès international des orientalistes, tenu en 1912 à
Athènes. Athènes.
Havers, Wilhelm
1946
Neuere Literatur zum Sprachtabu. Wien.

=== page 882 ===

1712
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1713
Headlam, Walter George and Knox, Alfred Dillwyn
1922
Herodes' Mimes and fragments. Cambridge.
Heberdey, Rudolph and Ernst Kalinka
1897
Bericht über zwei Reisen im südwestlichen Kleinasien. Wien.
Heesterman, Johannes Cornelis et al. (eds.)
1968
Pratidānam: Indian, Iranian and Indo-European studies presented to
Franciscus Bernardus Jacobus Kuiper on his sixtieth birthday. The
Hague.
Hegedűís, Irén et al. (eds.)
2005
Indo-European, Nostratic, & Beyond: Festschrift for Vitalij V.
Shevoroshkin. Washington D.C.
Hehn, Victor and Otto Schrader
1911
Kulturpflanzen und Haustiere in ihrem Übergang aus Asien nach
Griechenland. 3. Auflage von O. Schrader. Berlin.
Heidermanns, Frank et al. (eds.)
1993
Sprachen und Schriften des antiken Mittelmeerraums: Festschrift für
Jürgen Untermann zum 65. Geburtstag. Innsbruck.
Heinz, Adam et al. (eds.)
1965
Symbolae linguisticae in honorem Georgii Kuryłowicz. Wrocław etc.
Heller, Karin, et al. (eds.)
1989
Indogermanica Europaea: Festschrift für Wolfgang Meid zum 60.
Geburtstag am 12. 11. 1989. Graz.
Hellmann, Marie-Christine
1992
Recherches sur le vocabulaire de l'architecture grecque, d'après les
inscriptions de Délos. Athens.
Helm, Rudolf (ed.)
1931
Hemberg, Bengt
Hesselman, Bengt
1932
Marathon, in: Nelson (ed.): 94-112.
Hettrich, Heinrich et al. (eds.)
1995
Verba et Structurae, Festschrift für Klaus Strunk. Innsbruck.
Heubeck, Anton
1961
1966
Praegraeca: sprachliche Untersuchungen zum
indogermanischen Substrat. Erlangen.
vorgriechisch-
Mycenaean qe-qi-no-me-no, in: Palmer and Chadwick (eds.): 229-237.
Heurgon, Jacques
1966
Hiersche, Rolf
1964
La Coupe d'Aulus Vibenna, in: Melanges offerts à Jérôme Carcopino,
Paris, 515-528.
Untersuchungen zur Frage der Tenues aspiratae im Indogermanischen.
Wiesbaden.
Hiltbrunner, Otto
1958 Latina graeca: semasiologische Studien über lateinische Wörter im
Hinblick auf ihr Verhältnis zu griechischen Vorbildern. Bern.
Hintze, Almut et al. (eds.)
2000
Anusantatyai: Festschrift für Johanna Narten zum 70. Geburtstag (MSS
Beiheft 19). Dettelbach.
Hitzig, Hermann and Hügo Blümner (eds.)
1896-1910 Pausaniae Graeciae descriptio
Griechenland. Leipzig.
Hjelmslev, Louis et al. (eds.)
1937
Hodot, Réné
1990
= Des Pausanias Beschreibung von
Mélanges linguistiques offerts à M. Holger Pedersen: à l'occasion de son
soixante-dixième anniversaire, 7 avril 1937. Aarhus.
Le dialecte éolien d'Asie: la langue des inscriptions. Paris.
Hoffmann, Karl
1955
Altpers. afuvāyā, in: Krahe (ed.): 80-85.
1975-1976 Aufsätze zur Indoiranistik 2. Wiesbaden.
Hoffmann, Otto
Natalicium: Johannes Geffcken zum 70. Geburtstag, 2. Mai 1931,
gewidmet von Freunden, Kollegen und Schülern: Beiträge zur
klassischen Altertumskunde. Heidelberg.
1950
Die Kabiren. Diss. Uppsala.
Hemelrijk, Jacob
1925
Пεvía en ПouTоç (diss.). Utrecht.
1891
Die griechischen Dialekte 1. Göttingen.
Herten, Joseph Christiaan Antonius van
1893
Die griechischen Dialekte 2. Göttingen.
1934 Opŋokɛíα, evλáßɛia, ikétŋs: bijdrage tot de kennis der religieuze
terminologie in het grieksch. Diss. Utrecht.
1898
Die griechischen Dialekte 3. Göttingen.
1906
Die Makedonen, ihre Sprache und ihr Volkstum. Göttingen.
1921
Griechische Wortdeutungen, in: Festschrift Adalbert Bezzenberger,
Herwerden, Hendrik van
zum 14. April 1921 dargebracht. Göttingen, 77-85.
1910
Lexicon graecum suppletorium et dialecticum, 2 vols. Leiden².

=== page 883 ===

1714
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1715
Hoffmann, Otto and Albert Debrunner
1954 Geschichte der griechischen Sprache. 2 vols. Berlin.
Hoffmann, Wilhelm
1956
Die Polis bei Homer, in: Erbse (ed.): 153-165.
Hofinger, Marcel et al. (eds.)
1967
Recherches de philologie et de linguistique. Louvain.
Hollerbach, Hans Rainer
1964
Holt, Jens
1941
Zur Bedeutung des Wortes xpɛía. Diss. Köln.
Les noms d'action en -oç (TIC): études de linguistique grecque.
København.
Holwerda, Douwe
1955
Commentatio de vocis quae est qúoiç vi atque usu praesertim in
graecitate Aristotele anteriore. Groningen.
Hoops, Johannes
1905
Waldbäume und Kulturpflanzen im
Strassburg.
Germanischen Altertum.
Horn, Paul
1893
Grundriss der neupersischen Etymologie. Strassburg.
Hrozný, Bedřich
1940
Huber, J.
1921
Die älteste Geschichte Vorderasiens und Indiens. Prag.
Hübschmann, Heinrich
Armenische Grammatik. Leipzig.
Hubschmid, Johannes
1897
De lingua antiquissimorum graeciae incolarum. Wien.
1953a
1953b
Essais de philologie moderne. Paris.
Sardische Studien. Bern.
1955
Schläuche und Fässer: Wort- und Sachgeschichtliche Untersuchungen
mit besonderer Berücksichtigung des romanischen Sprachgutes in und
ausserhalb der Romania sowie der türkisch-europäischen und türkisch-
kaukasisch-persischen Lehnbeziehungen. Bern.
Thesaurus Praeromanicus. Bern.
Huld, Martin E.
1984 Basic Albanian etymologies. Los Angeles.
1963
Hyet, Charles (ed.)
1969
Mélanges de linguistique, de philologie et de méthodologie de
l'enseignement des langues anciennes offerts à M. René Fohalle à
l'occasion de son soixante-dixième anniversaire. Gembloux.
Hyllested, Adam
2004
Greek Awτós lotus' and the Indo-European words for 'blue', in:
Clackson and Olsen (eds.): 59-64.
Hyllested, Adam et al. (eds.)
2004
Per aspera ad asteriscos: Studia Indogermanica in honorem Jens
Elmegård Rasmussen sexagenarii. Idibus Martiis anno
anno MMIV.
Innsbruck.
Ibn Sirin, Abu Bakr Muḥammad
1925
Achmetis Oneirocriticon. Leipzig.
Irmscher, Johannes
1950
Götter zorn bei Homer. Leipzig.
Isebaert, Lambert (ed.)
1993
Miscellanea linguistica Graeco-Latina. Namur.
Ivanov, Vyacheslav V.
1999
Old Novgorodian Nevide, Russian nevidal Greek ȧídŋlos, in:
Vyacheslav V. Ivanov and Brent Vine (eds.), UCLA Indo-European
Studies, vol. 1. Los Angeles, 283-292.
Ivantchik, Askold I.
1993
Jaberg, Karl
1954
Janda, Michael
1997
1999
2000
2005
Janzén, Assar
1937
Jasanoff, Jay
2003
Les Cimmériens au Proche Orient. Fribourg-Göttingen.
Die Schleuder. Zur expressiven Wortgestaltung, in: Redard (ed.): 213-
232.
Über "Stock und Stein": die indogermanischen Variationen eines
universalen Phraseologismus. Dettelbach.
'Evooixwv "Erderschütterer", in: Eichner et al. (eds.): 183-204.
Eleusis. Das indogermanische Erbe der Mysterie. Innsbruck.
-
Σwμа oñua and Socrates' snub nose: The new IE root *tiah₂- ‘to
strike', paper presented at the Colloquium 'Indo-European and its
neighbours' in combination with the 2. Indogermanistischer
Arbeitstagung Münster/Leiden, Leiden, 6 June 2005.
Bock und Ziege: wortgeschichtliche Untersuchungen. Göteborg.
Hittite and the Indo-European verb. Oxford.

=== page 884 ===

1716
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1717
Jasanoff, Jay et al. (eds.)
1998
Mír Curad. Studies in honor of Calvert Watkins. Innsbruck.
Jeffery, Lilian Hamilton.
1961
The local scripts of archaic Greece. Oxford.
Baltische Etymologien. Bonn.
Jēgers, Benjamins
1958
Johansson, Karl Ferdinand
1890
Jokl, Norbert
1923
1937
Beiträge zur griechischen Sprachkunde. Uppsala.
*
Linguistisch-kulturhistorische Untersuchungen aus dem Bereiche des
Albanischen. Berlin.
Ein Beitrag zur Lehre von der alb. Vertretung der idg. Labiovelare, in:
Hjelmslev et al. (eds.): 127-161.
Kahane, Henry and Rene
1958
Kaibel, Georg
1878
Two Nautical Terms of Greek Origin: Typhoon and Galley, in: Keller
(ed.): 417-440.
Epigrammata Graeca ex lapidibus conlecta. Berlin.
1899-1901 Comicorum Graecorum Fragmenta. Berlin.
Kakridis, Hellene
1963
Kalén, Ture
1918
1936
La notion de l'amitié et de l'hospitalité chez Homère. Diss.
Paris/Thessaloniki.
Quaestiones grammaticae graecae (GHÅ 24: 1). Göteborg.
Ett grekiskt lantbruksord, in: Armini et al. (eds.): 389-414.
Kalléris, Jean N.
1954 Les anciens Macédoniens: étude linguistique et historique. Athènes.
Kamptz, Hans von
1982
Karl, Werner
1968
Katz, Hartmut
2003
Homerische Personennamen: sprachwissenschaftliche und historische
Klassifikation. Göttingen.
Chaos und Tartaros in Hesiods Theogonie. Erlangen.
Studien zu den älteren indoiranischen Lehnwörtern in den uralischen
Sprachen. Heidelberg.
Katz, Joshua
1998
2004
How to be a dragon in Indo-European: Hittite illuyankas and its
linguistic and cultural congeners in Latin, Greek, and Germanic, in:
Jasanoff et al. (eds.): 317-334.
Sanskrit sphij-sphigi- and Greek *piкıç, in: A. Hyllested et al. (eds.):
277-289.
Kazansky, Nikolai N.
2005
K ètimologii drevnegrečeskogo výлоç, in: Kazansky et al. (eds.): 232-
239.
Kazansky, Nikolai N. et al. (eds.)
2005
Hṛdá Mánasă. Studies presented to Professor Leonard G. Herzenberg on
the occasion of his seventieth birthday. St. Petersburg.
Kazansky, Nikolai N. (ed.)
2006
Acta Linguistica Petropolitana II (1). St. Petersburg.
Keller, Hans Erich (ed.)
1958
Keller, Otto
1887
1909
1913
Keuck, Karl
1934
Etymologica: Walther von Wartburg zum siebzigsten Geburtstag, 18.
Mai 1958. Tübingen.
Thiere des classischen Alterthums in culturgeschichtlicher Beziehung.
Innsbruck.
Die antike Tierwelt 1: Säugetiere. Leipzig.
Die antike Tierwelt 2: Vögel, Reptilien, Fische, Insekten. Leipzig.
Historia. Geschichte des Wortes und seiner Bedeutungen in der Antike
und in den romanischen Sprachen. Diss. Münster.
Kircher-Durand, Chantal et al. (eds.)
}
1994 Nomina rerum. Hommage à Jacqueline Manessy-Guitton. Nice.
Kittel, Gerhard
1935
Theologisches Wörterbuch zum neuen Testament 2. Stuttgart.
Klein, Jared S.
1988 PIE *g*iH¸- ‘live', in: Bammesberger (ed.): 257-279.
Klingenschmitt, Gert
1974
1975
1982
Griechisch лapеévos, in: Mayrhofer et al. (eds.): 273-279.
Tocharisch und Urindogermanisch, in: Rix (ed.): 148-163.
Das altarmenische Verbum. Wiesbaden.
Kloekhorst, Alwin
2008
Etymological dictionary of the Hittite inherited lexicon. Leiden.

=== page 885 ===

1718
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1719
Kluge, Friedrich and Elmar Seebold
1989
Knecht, Theodor
Etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache. Berlin.
1946 Geschichte der griechischen Komposita vom Typ τεpчíμẞpoτoç. Biel.
Kock, Theodor
1880-1888 Comicorum atticorum fragmenta. Leipzig.
Lexicon in Veteris Testamenti libros. Leiden.
Köhler, Ludwig and Walter Baumgartner
1953
Kölligan, Daniel
2007 Suppletion und Defektivität im griechischen Verbum. Bremen.
Körner, Otto
1930
Die homerische Tierwelt. München.
Kortlandt, Frederik H.H.
Slavic accentuation. Lisse.
1975
1992
2003
The Aeolic optative, in: Beekes et al. (eds.): 235-239.
Armeniaca: comparative notes. Ann Arbor.
Krahe, Hans
1929
1950
1954
Lexikon altillyrischer Personennamen. Heidelberg.
Das Venetische: seine Stellung im Kreise der verwandten Sprachen.
Heidelberg.
Sprache und Vorzeit. Heidelberg.
1955-1964 Sprache der Illyrier. Wiesbaden.
Krahe, Hans (ed.)
1955
Corolla linguistica: Festschrift Ferdinand Sommer zum 80. Geburtstag
am 4. Mai 1955 dargebracht von Freunden, Schülern und Kollegen.
Wiesbaden.
Krause, Wolfgang
1958
Ein altkretischer Ortsname Bunasos?, in: Brandenstein (ed.): 58-66.
Krause, Wolfgang and Werner Thomas
1960
Tocharisches Elementarbuch 1: Grammatik. Heidelberg.
Kretschmer, Paul
1894
1896
1909
Die griechischen Vaseninschriften ihrer Sprache nach untersucht.
Gütersloh.
Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache. Göttingen.
Zur griechischen Wortkunde, in: Wiener Eranos: zur fünfzigsten
Versammlung deutscher Philologen und Schulmänner in Graz. Wien,
118-124.
1921
1923
Der Götterbeiname Grabovius auf den Tafeln von Iguvium, in:
Festschrift Adalbert Bezzenberger, zum 14. April 1921 dargebracht.
Göttingen, 89-96.
Beiträge zur griechischen Lautlehre aus Vaseninschriften, in:
'Avτídwpov: Festschrift Jacob Wackernagel zur Vollendung des 70.
Lebensjahres am 11. Dezember 1923 gewidmet von Schülern, Freunden
und Kollegen. Göttingen, 190-196.
Kronasser, Heinz
1956
Vergleichende Laut- und Formenlehre des Hethitischen. Heidelberg.
1962-1987 Etymologie der hethitischen Sprache. Wiesbaden.
1969
Heth. mannin(n)i- 'Halsschmuck', in: Studia classica et orientalia
Antonino Pagliaro oblata 3. Roma, 62-66.
Kronasser, Heinz (ed.)
1956
Mvun xápiv: Gedenkschrift Paul Kretschmer, 2 Mai 1866 - 9 März
1956. Wien.
Kroonen, Guus
2009 Consonant and vowel gradation in the Proto-Germanic n-stems. Diss.
Leiden.
Krüger, Thomas and Hans-Georg Stephan (eds.)
1980 Beiträge zur Archäologie Nordwestdeutschlands und Mitteleuropas.
Hildesheim.
Kuch, Heinrich
1965
Philologos. Untersuchungen eines Wortes von seinem ersten Auftreten
in der Tradition bis zur ersten überlieferten lexikalischen Festlegung.
Berlin.
Kuiper, Franciscus Bernardus Jacobus
1937
Die indogermanischen Nasalpräsentia: ein Versuch zu einer
morphologischen Analyse. Amsterdam.
Notes on Vedic noun-inflexion. Amsterdam.
Proto-Munda Words in Sanskrit. Amsterdam.
Two Rigvedic loanwords, in: Redard (ed.): 241-250.
1942
1948
1954
1956
1991
The etymology of äveрwлoç, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(1): 211-226.
Aryans in the Rgveda. Amsterdam.
Kümmel, Martin Joachim
2000a
2000b
Der Aorist der Wurzel(n) ar im Indoiranischen, in: Forssman and
Plath (eds.): 253-267.
Das Perfekt im Indoiranischen: eine Untersuchung der Form und
Funktion einer ererbten Kategorie des Verbums und ihrer
Weiterentwicklung in den altindoiranischen Sprachen. Wiesbaden.

=== page 886 ===

1720
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1721
Kusch, Horst (ed.)
1953
Lacroix, Léon
1937
1938
Festschrift Franz Dornseiff zum 65. Geburtstag. Leipzig.
”Häoç, výлoç, in: Mélanges offerts à A.M. Desrousseaux par ses amis et
ses élèves: en l'honneur de sa cinquantième année d'enseignement
supérieur (1887-1937). Paris, 261-272.
Une liste de noms de poissons dans une inscription béotienne, in:
Mélanges Émile Boisacq II. Bruxelles, 49-56.
Lagarde, Paul Anton de
1866 Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Leipzig.
Zur griechischen Lautgeschichte. Uppsala.
Lagercrantz, Otto
1898
1913
1924
1932
1938
Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis. Uppsala.
Die drei dorischen Phylennamen, in: Streitberg-Festgabe. Leipzig, 218-
223.
Sophokles O. T. 473-482, in: Nelson (ed.): 143-147.
Lat. populus, in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq II. Bruxelles, 57-60.
Lamberterie, Charles de
1990
1992
1996
1999
2004
Les adjectifs grecs en -vç. Louvain-la-Neuve.
Le problème de l'homonymie: les trois verbes opéλλw en grec ancien,
in: Létoublon (ed.): 201-217.
Latin pignus et la théorie glottalique, in: Rosén (ed.): 135-150.
L'adjectif grec έdavós ‘suave', in: Habisreitinger (ed.): 153-166.
Sella, subsellium, meretrix: sonantes-voyelles et “effet-Saussure” en
grec ancien, in: Penney (ed.): 236-253.
Landfester, Manfred
1966 Das griechische Nomen qiλoç und seine Ableitungen. Hildesheim.
Laroche, Emmanuel
1949
1960
Histoire de la racine nem- en grec ancien (Études et commentaires 6).
Paris.
"Kubaba déesse anatolienne, et le problème des origines de Cybèle",
in: Éléments orientaux dans la religion grecque ancienne: colloque de
Strasbourg, 22-24 mai 1958. Paris, 113-128.
Latacz, Joachim
1966
2001
Zum Wortfeld "Freude" in der Sprache Homers. Heidelberg.
Troia und Homer: der Weg zur Lösung eines alten Rätsels. München.
Latte, Kurt (ed.)
1953ff.
Hesychii Alexandrini Lexicon, recensuit et emendavit Kurt Latte.
Kopenhagen.
Lehmann, Winfred P.
1986
A Gothic etymological dictionary. Leiden.
Lejeune, Michel
1939
1955
1958
1964
1971
1972
1997
Les adverbes grecs en -0εv. Bordeaux.
Traité de phonétique grecque. Paris.
Mémoires de philologie mycénienne, 1ère série. Paris.
Observations sur l'idéogramme 146, in: Bennett (ed.): 111-124.
Mémoires de philologie mycénienne, 2ème série. Roma.
Phonétique historique du mycénien et du grec ancien. Paris.
Mémoires de philologie mycénienne, 4ème série. Roma.
Leroy, Maurice
1954 Présents thématiques grecs en -ē-, in: Redard (ed.): 279-290.
1969 Le binarisme, concept moteur de la linguistique, in: Hyet (ed.): 3-18.
Leskien, August
1884 Der Ablaut der Wurzelsilben im Litauischen. Leipzig.
Létoublon, Françoise (ed.)
1992
Leukart, Alex
1980
1986
1994
La langue et les textes en grec ancien: actes du colloque Pierre
Chantraine (Grenoble, 5-8 septembre 1989). Amsterdam.
vɛāvíaç und das urgriechische Suffix -āv-, in: Mayrhofer et al. (eds.):
238-247.
Homerisch ȧτpúуετоç, in: Etter (ed.): 340-345.
Die frühgriechischen Nomina auf -tās und -ās: Untersuchungen zu ihrer
Herkunft und Ausbreitung (unter Vergleich mit den Nomina auf -eús).
Wien.
Leumann, Manu
}
1950
Homerische Wörter. Basel.
1954
Die altkirchenslavischen Kiewer Blätter und ihr lateinisches Original,
in: Redard (ed.): 291-307.
1956
σάoç und σwç, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(2): 8-14
Kleine Schriften. Zürich.
1959
1963-1979 Lateinische Grammatik. München.
1977
Lewy, Ernst
1953
Lateinische Laut- und Formenlehre. München.
Griechisch-Irisches, in: Kusch (ed.) 1953: 226-227.
Lewy, Heinrich
1895
Lidén, Evald
1892
Die semitischen Fremdwörter im Griechischen. Berlin.
Smärre språkhistoriska bidrag, in: Uppsalastudier tillegnade Sophus
Bugge på hans 60-åra födelsedag den 5 Jan. 1893. Uppsala, 79-96.

=== page 887 ===

1722
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1723
1897
1899
1906
Studien zur altindischen und vergleichenden Sprachgeschichte. Uppsala.
Ein baltisch-slavisches Anlautgesetz (GHÅ 5:4). Göteborg.
Armenische Studien. Göteborg.
1916
1924
1932
1937
Zum Tocharischen, in: Aufsätze zur Kultur- und Sprachgeschichte
vornehmlich des Orients: Ernst Kuhn zum 70. Geburtstag am 7. Februar
1916 gewidmet von Freunden und Schülern. Breslau, 139-146.
Griechische Worterklärungen, in: Streitberg Festgabe. Leipzig, 224-229.
Griech. ǎμлvε awest. pusă, in: Nelson (ed.): 148-151.
Wortgeschichtliches, in: Hjelmslev et al. (eds.): 88-94.
Lindsay, Robert Leeson Jack
1974 Helen of Troy: woman and goddess. London.
Lippmann, Edmund Oskar von
1919
Entstehung und Ausbreitung der Alchemie 1. Berlin.
Lobeck, Christian August
1837 Paralipomena grammaticae Graecae. Leipzig.
Pathologiae sermonis Graeci prolegomena. Leipzig.
1843
Locher, Jan Peter
1963 Untersuchungen zu iɛpós hauptsächlich bei Homer. Bern.
Lochner von Hüttenbach, Fritz
1960
1967
Loenen, Dirk
1948
Lokotsch, Karl
1927
Lommel, H.
1912
Die Pelasger. Wien.
Zum Namen der Habergeiß, in: Meid (ed.): 51-56.
Dikè. Een historisch-semantische analyse. Amsterdam.
(germanischen,
Etymologisches Wörterbuch der europäischen
romanischen und slavischen) Wörter orientalischen Ursprungs.
Heidelberg.
Studien über indogermanische Femininbildungen. Göttingen.
Lubotsky, Alexander
1988
1989
1990
1995
The system of nominal accentuation in Sanskrit and Proto-Indo-
European. Leiden.
Against a Proto-Indo-European phoneme *a, in: Th. Vennemann
(ed.), The new sound of Indo-European, Essays in phonological
reconstruction. Berlin - New York, 53-66.
La loi de Brugmann et *H₁e-, in: La reconstruction des laryngales.
Liège, 129-136.
Reflexes of intervocalic laryngeals in Sanskrit, in: Smoczyński (ed.):
213-33.
1998
2000a
2000b
2006
New Phrygian metrics and the dɛwç (ɛμɛλwç formula, in Jasanoff et al.
(eds.): 413-421.
The Vedic root vr- 'to cover' and its present, in: Forssman and Plath
(eds.): 315-325.
Indo-Aryan 'six', in: Ofitsch and Zinko (eds.): 255-261.
Indo-European 'heel', in: Bomba et al. (eds.): 1006-1010.
Lubotsky, Alexander (ed.)
1997
Sound law and analogy: papers in honor of Robert S. P. Beekes on the
occasion of his 60th birthday. Amsterdam.
Lubotsky, Alexander et al. (eds.)
2008 Evidence and counter-evidence: essays in honour of Frederik Kortlandt.
Amsterdam.
Luther, Wilhelm
1935
1954
"Wahrheit" und "Lüge" im ältesten Griechentum. Leipzig.
Weltansicht und Geistesleben. Göttingen.
Machek, Vaclav
1958
Une douzaine de graeco-slavica, in: Beševliev and Georgiev (eds.): 49-
56.
Mahlow, Georg Heinrich
1927 Neue Wege durch die griechische Sprache und Dichtung. Leipzig.
Malten, Ludolf
1961
Sprache des menschlichen Antlitzes im frühen Griechentum. Berlin.
Manessy-Guitton, Jacqueline
1970
Grec Sñvoç, Sanscrit dámsas, in: Philologie, histoire et littératures
anciennes (Annales de la Faculté des Lettres et Sciences Humaines de
Nice). Paris, 3-14.
Mannhardt, Wilhelm
1877
Wald- und Feldkulte. Berlin.
Manolessou and Pantelidis
2008
Probleme der relativen Chronologie am Beispiel des Frühgriechischen.
Paper read at the 13th Fachtagung der indogermanischen Gesellschaft,
Salzburg, September 22-27, 2008.
Mansion, Joseph
1904 Les gutturales grecques. Gent/Paris.
Maresch, Gustav
1956 Etruskisch avil, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(2): 36-39

=== page 888 ===

1724
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1725
Marg, Walter
1938
Der Charakter in der Sprache der frühgriechischen Dichtung.
Würzburg.
Marinatos, Spyridon
1967
Kleidung, Haar- und Barttracht (Archeologica Homerica 1).
Göttingen.
Martirosyan, Hrach
2008 Studies in Armenian etymology with special emphasis on dialects and
culture. Diss. Leiden.
2010
Etymological dictionary of the Armenian inherited lexicon. Leiden.
Marxer, Gertrud
1935
Sprache des Apollonius Rhodius in ihren Beziehungen zu Homer. Diss.
Zürich.
Marzullo, Benedetto
1963
1970
La "coppia contigua” nella glossografia di Esichio, in: Studia classica et
orientalia Antonino Pagliaro oblata 3. Roma, 85-105.
Il problema Omerico. Milano-Napoli.
Masson, Emilia
1967
Recherches sur les plus ancien emprunts sémitiques en grec. Paris.
Masson, Olivier
1961
1962
1992
2000
Les inscriptions chypriotes syllabiques: recueil critique et commenté par
Olivier Masson. Diss. Paris.
Les fragments du poète Hipponax. Paris.
L'apport de l'anthroponymie grecque à l'étymologie et à l'histoire des
mots, in: Létoublon (ed.): 257-266.
Onomastica graeca selecta. Tome III, introduction et index par
Catharine Dobias et Laurent Dubois. Genève.
Matasović, Ranko
2009 Etymological dictionary of Proto-Celtic. Leiden.
Mayer, Anton
1938
Idg. *ned- “tönen", in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq II. Bruxelles, 131-140.
Mayrhofer, Manfred
1952
1956
1969
KEWA
EWAia
Studien zur indogermanischen Grundsprache. Innsbruck.
άoкóç, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(2): 36-39
Das angebliche iranische Etymon des Amazonen-Namens, in: Studi
linguistici in onore di Vittore Pisani 2. Brescia, 661-666.
Kurzgefaßtes etymologisches Wörterbuch des Altindischen. Heidelberg,
1956-1980.
Etymologisches Wörterbuch des Altindoarischen, 3 vols. Heidelberg,
1986-2002.
Mayrhofer, Manfred et al. (eds.)
1974
1980
Mayser, Edwin
Antiquitates Indogermanicae, Gedenkschrift für Hermann Güntert.
Innsbruck.
Lautgeschichte und Etymologie: Akten der VI. Fachtagung der
Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, Wien, 24.-29. September
September 1978.
Wiesbaden.
1906-1938 Grammatik der griechischen Papyri aus der Ptolemäerzeit: mit
Einschluss der gleichzeitigen Ostraka und der in Ägypten verfassten
Inschriften. I: 1-3, II: 1-3. Berlin and Leipzig.
Mayser, Edwin and Hans Schmoll
1970 Grammatik der griechischen Papyri aus der Ptolemäerzeit. Berlin.
Meid, Wolfgang (ed.)
1967 Beiträge zur Indogermanistik und Keltologie: Julius Pokorny zum 80.
Geburtstag gewidmet. Innsbruck.
Meier-Brügger, Michael
1992a
1992b
2000
2002
Griechische Sprachwissenschaft 1. Berlin.
A propos de la partie étymologique du dictionnaire de Chantraine, in:
Létoublon (ed.): 267-272.
Indogermanische Sprachwissenschaft. Berlin.
Zu griechisch Xopóc, in: M. Fritz et al. (eds.), Novalis Indogermanica:
Festschrift für Günter Neumann zum 80. Geburtstag. Graz, 297-303.
Meillet, Antoine
1924
1936
À propos du verbe wegen et des substantifs Wagen, Weg en allemand,
in: Mélanges offerts à M. Charles Andler par ses amis et ses élèves.
Strasbourg, 249-255.
Esquisse d'une grammaire comparée de l'arménien classique. Vienne².
Meiser, Gerhard
1998 Historische Laut- und Formenlehre der lateinischen Sprache.
Darmstadt.
Meiser, Gerhard (ed.)
1993
Indogermanica et Italica. Festschrift für Helmut Rix zum 65.
Geburtstag. Innsbruck.
Meiser, Gerhard and Olav Hackstein (eds.)
2005
Sprachkontakt und Sprachwandel. Akten der XI. Fachtagung der
indogermanischen Gesellschaft, 17.-23. September 2000, Halle an der
Saale.
Meister, Karl
1921
Die homerische Kunstsprache. Darmstadt.

=== page 889 ===

1726
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1727
Meister, Richard
1893
Die Mimiamben des Herodas. Leipzig.
Meisterhans, Konrad
1900
Grammatik der attischen Inschriften. Berlin³.
Melchert, H. Craig
1993
2003
2004
2007
fthc.
Cuneiform Luvian Lexicon. Chapel Hill (N. C.).
Hittite nominal stems in -anzan-, in: E. Tichy et al. (eds.), Indo-
germanisches Nomen. Akten der Arbeitstagung der Indogermanischen
Gesellschaft (Freiburg 19. bis 21. September 2001). Bremen, 129-139.
Greek mólybdos as a loanword from Lydian, in: Collins et al. (eds.):
153-158.
PIE *h₂esp- 'to cut', in: Nussbaum (ed.): 253-258.
Hittite har(ap)p- and derivatives, in: J. Klinger, E. Rieken, Chr. Rüster
(eds.), Investigationes Anatolicae. Gedenkschrift für Erich Neu.
Mendner, Siegfried
1956
Das Ballspiel im Leben der Völker. Münster.
Merlingen, Weriand
1955
1956
Meuli, Karl
1946
Meyer, Gustav
1891
1892
1896
Das Vorgriechische und die sprachwissenschaftlich-vorhistorischen
Grundlagen. Wien.
Idg. "p" und Verwandtes, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(2): 49-61
Griechische Opferbräuche, in: Gigon, Olov et al. (eds.): 185-287.
Etymologisches Wörterbuch der albanesischen Sprache. Strassburg.
Albanesische Studien III: Lautlehre der indogermanischen Bestandtheile
des Albanesischen Zahlwörter. Wien.
Meyer-Lübke, Wilhelm
Mugler, Charles
1958-1959 Dictionnaire historique de la terminologie géométrique des Grecs. Paris.
Muller, Frederik M. Jzn.
1926
Altitalisches Wörterbuch. Göttingen.
Mylonas, George E. and Doris Raymond (eds.)
1953
Studies presented to David Moore Robinson on his seventieth birthday.
Saint Louis.
Narten, Johanna
1968
1986
Zum "proterodynamischen" Wurzelpräsens, in: Heesterman et al.
(eds.): 97-107.
Griechisch oús und das vedische Verb aks-, in: Etter (ed.): 204-214.
Nelson, Axel (ed.)
1932
Neri, Sergio
2007
Neu, Erich
1987
1988
Symbolae philologicae O.A. Danielsson octogenario dicatae. Uppsala.
Cadere e abbattere in indoeuropeo. Sull' etimologia di tedesco fallen,
latino aboleo e greco àлóλλvμ. Innsbruck.
Der Wortschatz des Hethitischen aus synchroner und diachroner
Sicht, in: W. Meid (ed.), Studien zum indogermanischen Wortschatz.
Innsbruck, 167-188.
Das Hurritische: eine altorientalische Sprache in neuem Licht.
Abhandlungen der Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse, Jg.
1988, Nr. 3. Mainz.
Neumann, Günter
1961
1967
1983
Griechische Grammatik. Leipzig.
1911-1920 Romanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Heidelberg.
Monteil, Pierre
1963
La phrase relative en Grec ancien: sa formation, son developpement, sa
structure des origines a la fin du Ve siecle A.C. Paris.
1986
1999
Moorhouse, Alfred Charles
1959
Studies in the Greek negatives. Cardiff.
An etymological vocabulary of Pashto. Oslo.
Morgenstierne, Georg
1927
Morpurgo Davies, Anna
1963
Mycenaeae Graecitatis Lexicon. Rome.
Untersuchungen zum Weiterleben hethitischen und luwischen
Sprachgutes in hellenistischer und römischer Zeit. Wiesbaden.
Kretisch yλaßpnvη - die Päonie, in: Brice (ed.): 229-235.
Zur Deutung einiger mykenischer Personennamen, in: A. Heubeck
and G. Neumann (eds.), Res Mycenaeae. Akten des VII.
internationalen Mykenologischen Colloquiums in Nürnberg vom 6.-10.
April 1981. Göttingen 1983, 328-334.
Griechisch Souλos "Sklave", in: Etter (ed.): 489-496.
Sovμoç: Belege, Bedeutungen, Herkunft, Etymologie, in: Eggers (ed.):
345-353-
Niedermann, Max
1918
Essais d'étymologie et de critique verbale latines. Neuchâtel.
1927-1928 De quelques noms indo-européens du millet, in: Taszycki (ed.) 1927-
1928(1), 109-117.

=== page 890 ===

1728
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1729
Nikolaev, Alexander S.
2005
2006
2007
K dejstviju zakona Riksa v drevnegrečeskom jazyke, in: Kazansky et al.
(eds.): 38-72.
'Iάovec, in: Kazansky (ed.): 100-115.
The name of Achilles, in: George et al. (eds.): 162-173.
Nilsson, Martin Persson
1906
1920
1941
1951
1955
Griechische Feste von religiöser Bedeutung: mit Ausschluss der
attischen. Leipzig.
Primitive time-reckoning: a study in the origins and first development of
the art of counting time among the primitive and early culture peoples.
Lund.
Geschichte der griechischen Religion 1: Die Religion Griechenlands bis
auf die griechische Weltherrschaft. München.
Cults, myths, oracles, and politics in ancient Greece: with two
appendices: The Ionian phylae, The phratries. Studies in
Mediterranean archaeology 44. Göteborg.
Geschichte der griechischen Religion 1. München².
Nussbaum, Alan J.
1986
1997
1998
1999
Head and horn in Indo-European. Berlin.
The Saussure Effect in Latin and Italic, in: Lubotsky (ed.): 181-204.
Two studies in Greek and Homeric linguistics. Göttingen.
*Jocidus: An account of the Latin adjectives in -idus, in: Eichner et al.
(eds.): 377-419.
Nussbaum, Alan J. (ed.)
2007
Verba Docenti. Studies in historical and Indo-European linguistics
presented to Jay H. Jasanoff by students, colleagues, and friends. Ann
Arbor etc.
Oettinger, Norbert
!
1
Olivier, Jean-Pierre (ed.)
1992
Mykenaika: actes du IXe Colloque international sur les textes mycéniens
et égéens organisé par le Centre de l'Antiquité Grecque et Romaine de la
Fondation Hellénique des Recherches Scientifiques et l'École Française
d'Athènes. Paris.
Onians, Richard Broxton
1951
The origins of European thought about the body, the mind, the soul, the
world, time and fate: new interpretations of Greek, Roman and kindred
evidence, also of some basic Jewish and Christian beliefs. Cambridge.
Osthoff, Hermann
1884
Zur Geschichte des Perfekts im Indogermanischen mit besonderer
Rücksicht auf Griechisch und Lateinisch. Straßburg.
1901 Etymologische Parerga 1. Leipzig.
Page, Denys L.
1959
History and the Homeric Iliad. Sather classical lectures, vol 31. Berkeley.
Palmer, Leonard R.
1962 The Language of Homer, in: Wace et al. (eds.): 75-178.
1963 The interpretation of Mycenaean Greek texts. Oxford.
Palmer, Leonard R. and John Chadwick (eds.)
1966 Proceedings of the Cambridge Colloquium on Mycenaean Studies.
Cambridge.
Panagl, Oswald
1992
Mykenische Fossilien in Homertext? Zur Deutung von àρματолηуós
und ȧpματpoxin, in: Brogyanyi et al. (eds.): 137-146.
Pape, Wilhelm and Gustav Eduard Benseler
1911
W. Pape's Wörterbuch der griechischen Eigennamen. Braunschweig.
Pedersen, Holger
1979
Die Stammbildung des hethitischen Verbums. Nürnberg.
1998
Wiesel und Gevatterin: Zu einem semantischen Problem, in: Anreiter
et al. (eds.): 649-654-
1909
!
2008a
An Indo-European custom of sacrifice in Greece and elsewhere, in:
Lubotsky et al. (eds.): 403-414.
1913
2008b
The seer Mopsos as a historical figure, in: Collins et al. (eds.): 63-66.
1926
!
1938
1941
Ofitsch, Michaela and Christian Zinko (eds.)
2000 125 Jahre Indogermanistik in Graz. Graz.
Ölberg, Hermann M. et al. (eds.)
1985
Sprachwissenschaftliche Forschungen: Festschrift für Johann Knobloch
zum 65. Geburtstag am 5. Januar 1984 dargebracht von Freunden und
Kollegen. Innsbruck.
Peek, Werner
1897
Vergleichende Grammatik der keltischen Sprachen I: Einleitung und
Lautlehre. Göttingen.
Vergleichende Grammatik der keltischen Sprachen II: Bedeutungslehre
(Wortlehre). Göttingen.
La cinquième déclinaison latine. Kopenhagen.
Hittitisch und die anderen indoeuropäischen Sprachen. Kopenhagen.
Tocharisch
vom Gesichtspunkt
Sprachvergleichung. Kopenhagen.
der indoeuropäischen
Griechische Vers-Inschriften Bd. I: Grab-Epigramme. Verzeichnis der
Gedicht-Anfänge und vergleichende Übersicht zu den griechischen Vers-
Inschriften. Berlin.
}

=== page 891 ===

1730
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1731
Penney, John H. W. (ed.)
2004 Indo-European perspectives: studies in honour of Anna Morpurgo
Davies. Oxford.
Perpillou, Jean-Louis
1973
1996
Les substantifs grecs en -ɛúç. Paris.
Persson, Per
1891
1912
Peters, Martin
1980a
1980b
1986
1989
1993a
1993b
Recherches lexicales en grec ancien: étymologie, analogie,
représentations. Louvain.
Studien zur Lehre von der Wurzelerweiterung und Wurzelvariation.
Upsala Universitets årsskrift, 1891 4. Uppsala.
Beiträge zur indogermanischen Wortforschung (I, II). Skrifter utgifna
af Kongl. Humanistiska Vetenskaps-Samfundet i Upsala, 10. Uppsala.
Untersuchungen zur Vertretung der indogermanischen Laryngale im
Griechischen. Sitzungsberichte Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 377. Band. Wien.
Attisch τpачµа: griechische Etymologie und indogermanische
Labiolaryngale, in: Mayrhofer et al. (eds.): 328-352.
Zur frage einer ‘achäischen' Phase des griechischen Epos, in: Etter
(ed.): 303-319.
Sprachliche Studien zum Frühgriechischen. Habilitationsschrift Wien.
Ein weiterer Fall für das Rixsche Gesetz, in: Meiser (ed.): 373-405.
Beiträge zur griechischen Etymologie, in: Isebaert (ed.): 85-114.
Petersen, Walter
1937
Hethitische Lautprobleme, in: Hjelmslev et al. (eds.): 471-479.
Petersson, Herbert
1918
1921
1922
1923
Petit, Daniel
1999
Baltische und slavische Wortstudien. Lund.
Studien über die indogermanische Heteroklisie. Lund.
Griechische und lateinische Wortstudien. Lund.
Etymologische Miszellen. Lund.
*Sue- en grec ancien: la famille du pronom réfléchi: linguistique grecque
et comparaison indo-européenne. Leuven.
Pfeiffer, Rudolf
1949-1953 Callimachus. Vol. I: Fragmenta. Vol. II: Hymni et epigrammata.
Oxford.
Pfister, Friedrich
1938
Kairos und Symmetrie, in: R. Herbig (ed.), Würzburger Festgabe,
Heinrich Bulle dargebracht zum siebzigsten Geburtstag am 11.
Dezember 1937. Stuttgart, 131-150.
Picard, Ch.
1935
Dionysos Psilax, in: Berthelot (ed.): 317-338.
Pinault, George-Jean
1982
1996
1997
2007
Pinsent, J.
1983
Pisani, Vittore
1938
1959
Plath, Robert
1999
2000
A neglected phonetic law: the reduction of the Indo-European
laryngeals in internal syllables before yod, in: A. Ahlqvist (ed.), Papers
from the 5th International Conference on Historical Linguistics
(Galway, April 1981). Amsterdam, 265-272.
La base radicale sat- et la notion de loi dans les hymnes védiques, in:
Fezas et al. (eds.) Langue, style et structure dans le monde indien:
centenaire de Louis Renou: actes du Colloque international. Paris, 33-
69.
Remarque sur le pluriel tokh. B akrūna, A ākrunt, in: Lubotsky (ed.):
219-233.
A star is born: A 'new' PIE *-ter- suffix, in: Nussbaum (ed.): 271-279.
εταчpoç / τapov in the Iliad, in: Mélanges Édouard Delebecque. Aix-
en-Provence, 311-318.
Sulla radice IIAIX-, in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq II. Bruxelles, 181-192.
Saggi di linguistica storica: scritti scelti. Torino.
25 bekannte mykenische Wörter - neu gedeutet. I: a-pi-qo-to. II: ta-ti-
qo-we-u, in: Deger-Jalkotzy et al. (eds.): 503-519.
Zur Etymologie der altindoarischen Wurzel TOJ, in: Forssman et al.
(eds.): 409-423.
Podborský, Vladimír (ed.)
1991
Porzig, Walter
1942
1954a
1954b
1960
Palaeograeca et Mycenaea: Antonino Bartoněk quinque et sexagenario
oblata. Brno.
Die Namen für Satzinhalte im Griechischen und im Indogermanischen.
Berlin.
Die Gliederung des indogermanischen Sprachgebiets. Heidelberg.
Alt und jung, alt und neu, in: Redard (ed.): 343-350.
Altitalische Sprachgeographie, in: Hartmann and Neumann (eds.):
170-189.
Powell, John Undershell
1925
Collectanea Alexandrina: reliquiae minores poetarum graecorum
aetatis Ptolemaicae 323-146 A.C.: epicorum, elegiacorum, lyricorum,
ethicorum: cum epimetris et indice nominum. Oxford.

=== page 892 ===

1732
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1733
Preisigke, Friedrich P.
1925
Wörterbuch der griechischen Papyrusurkunden mit Einschluß der
griechischen Inschriften, Aufschriften, Ostraka, Mumienschilder usw.
aus Ägypten 1-3. Berlin.
Prellwitz, Walther
1892
1905
Pronk, Tijmen
2009
fthc.a
fthc.b
fthc.c
Puhvel, Jaan
Etymologisches Wörterbuch der griechischen Sprache. Göttingen.
Etymologisches Wörterbuch der griechischen Sprache. Göttingen².
The Saussure-Effect in Indo-European languages, other than Greek.
Paper read at the conference: "The Sound of Indo-European".
Copenhagen.
On Greek aúxuós 'drought' and aúxηv ‘neck'. Glotta.
Sanskrit (v)rsabhá-, Greek apoŋv, pony: the spraying bull of Indo-
European? KZ.
On the accentuation of initial *Hu, *Hi and diphthongs in Baltic and
Slavic, in: Accent Matters: Papers on Baltic and Slavic Accentology (=
Studies in Slavic and General Linguistics 37), Amsterdam.
The sea in Hittite texts, in: E. Pulgram (ed.), Studies presented to
Joshua Whatnough on his sixtieth birthday. 's-Gravenhage, 1967.
Hittite etymological dictionary. Berlin, 1984-.
1957
HED
1987a
1987b
All our 'yesterdays', in: Cardona (ed.): 315-318.
Comparative mythology. Baltimore.
Radt, Stefan Lorenz
1958
Pindars zweiter und sechster Paian: Text, Scholien und Kommentar.
Amsterdam.
Redard, Georges
1949
1953
Les noms grecs en -τns, -τis, et principalement en -íτηs, -īτıç: étude
philologique et linguistique. Paris.
Recherches sur xpη, Xpñoеaι. Étude sémantique. Paris.
Redard, Georges (ed.)
1954
Sprachgeschichte und Wortbedeutung: Festschrift Albert Debrunner
gewidmet von Schülern, Freunden und Kollegen. Bern.
Rein, Mary Jane
1996
Phrygian Matar: Emergence of an iconographic type, in: Eugene N.
Lane (ed.), Cybele, Attis and related cults: essays in memory of M.J.
Vermaseren. Leiden.
Reiter, Gerhard
1962
Die griechischen Bezeichnungen der Farben Weiss, Grau und Braun:
eine Bedeutungsuntersuchung. Commentationes Aenipontanae, 16.
Innsbruck.
Reitzenstein, Richard
1897
Renou, Louis
1937
Geschichte der griechischen Etymologika: ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der
Philologie in Alexandria und Byzanz. Leipzig.
Monographies sanskrites II: Le suffixe -tu- et la constitution des
infinitifs. Paris.
Restelli, Giuseppe
1969
TNQEKO
Epirotico гNQк e il problema della posizione linguistica
dell'antico epirotico, in: Studi linguistici in onore di Vittore Pisani.
Brescia, 815-830.
Ribezzo, Francesco
1929
Richel, Albert
1936
Risch, Ernst
1937
1947
1954
Sulla formazione del femminile in -ī e in -ā nell' indoeuropea, in:
Teeuwen (ed.): 347-356.
Worte für Erde, Boden, Land und Erdoberflächengebiete in der
homerischen Sprache: Untersuchung eines Sinnbezirks in seiner
sprachbegrifflichen Gliederung und Ordnung. Frankfurt.
Wortbildung der homerischen Sprache. Berlin.
Namensdeutungen und
ältesten
den
Worterklärungen bei
griechischen Dichtern, in: von Salis (ed.): 72-91.
Der homerische Typus iëлóτɑ Néotwp und µŋtieta Zɛúç, in: Redard
(ed.): 389-398.
Rix, Helmut
1976
Historische Grammatik des Griechischen: Laut- und Formenlehre.
Darmstadt.
1985
1994
Die Termini der Unfreiheit in den Sprachen Alt-Italiens. Stuttgart.
Sudor und sidus, in: Ölberg et al. (eds.): 339-350.
Rix, Helmut (ed.)
1975
Robert, Fritz
1944
Flexion und Wortbildung: Akten der Fachtagung der Indogermanischen
Gesellschaft Regensburg, 9-14 September 1973. Wiesbaden.
Grec öpviç et ses dérivés, in: De la Harpe et al. (eds.): 67-71.

=== page 893 ===

1734
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1735
Robert, Louis
Études anatoliennes: recherches sur les inscriptions grecques de l'Asie
mineure. Paris.
1937
1938
Études épigraphiques et philologiques. Paris.
1963
1964
1969
Noms indigènes dans l'Asie-Mineure gréco-romaine. Paris.
Les stèles funéraires de Byzance gréco-romaine. Paris.
Opera Minora Selecta: épigraphie et antiquités grecques, Vol. II.
Amsterdam.
Rohlfs, Gerhard
1930
1958
Rolle, Renate
1980
Etymologisches Wörterbuch der unter italienischen Gräzität. Halle an
der Saale.
Messapisches und Griechisches aus dem Salento, in: Brandenstein
(ed.): 121-128.
Oiorpata, in: Krüger, Thomas and Hans-Georg Stephan: Beiträge zur
Archäologie Nordwestdeutschlands und Mitteleuropas. Hildesheim,
275-294.
Rosén, Haiim (ed.)
1996
Aspects of Latin. Innsbruck.
Studien zur platonischen Substantivbildung. Würzburg.
Röttger, Gerhard
1937
Rougé, Jean
1966
Roux, Jeanne
Recherches sur l'organisation du commerce maritime en Méditerranée
sous l'Empire Romain. Paris.
1970-1972 Les Bacchantes, Euripide. I: Introduction, texte grec, traduction; II:
Commentaire. Paris.
Ruijgh, Cornelis Jord
1957
1967
1971
1980
1988
L'élément achéen dans la langue épique. Assen.
Études sur la grammaire et le vocabulaire du grec mycénien.
Amsterdam.
Autour de 'Tε épique': études sur la syntaxe grecque. Amsterdam.
Le problème du degré zéro dans les adverbes du type кápτ-α et dans
d'autres types morphologiques, in: Hommages à M. Leroy. Bruxelles,
189-198.
Observations sur les traitements des laryngales en grec préhistorique,
in: Bammesberger (ed.): 443-469.
1
Į
1996 Scripta minora ad linguam Graecam pertinentia, Vol. II. Amsterdam.
Ruipérez, Martin S.
1972 'Hλéktwp et ñλektpov, “ambre”, in: Bader et al. (eds.): 231-242.
Sadnik-Aizetmüller, Linda and Rudolf Aitzetmüller
1955
Handwörterbuch zu den altkirchenslavischen Texten. 's-Gravenhage.
Saint-Denis, Eugène de
1947 Le vocabulaire des animaux marins en latin classique. Études et
commentaires 2. Paris.
Sainte Croix, Geoffrey E. M. de
1972 The origins of the Peloponnesian War. London.
Sakellariou, Michel B.
1967
Les tribus ioniennes-attiques, in: Brice (ed.): 294-302.
Salis, Arnold von (ed.)
1947
Eumusia: Festgabe für Ernst Howald zum sechzigsten Geburtstag am 20
April 1947. Erlenbach, Zürich.
Sandoz, Claude
1971
Sandsjoe, G.
1918
Les noms grecs de la forme: étude linguistique. Neuchâtel.
Die Adjektive auf -atoç. Diss. Uppsala.
Saussure, Ferdinand de
1879
1922
Mémoire sur le système primitif des voyelles dans les langues indo-
européennes. Leipzig.
Recueil des publications scientifiques. Genève.
Schachermeyr, Fritz
1950
Poseidon und die Entstehung des griechischen Götter glaubens. Bern.
Scheller, Meinrad
1951
Die Oxytonierung der griechischen Substantiva auf-tά. Zürich.
Scherer, Anton
1953
Gestirnnamen bei den indogermanischen Völkern. Indogermanische
Bibliothek 1. Heidelberg.
Schindler, Jochem
1972
1975
1991a
1991b
1995
L'étymologie de l'adjectif ȧya0óc, in: Podborský (ed.): 131-148.
Scripta minora ad linguam Graecam pertinentia, Vol. I. Amsterdam.
D'Homère aux origines proto-mycéniennes de la tradition épique, in:
Crielaard, Jan Paul (ed.), Homeric Questions. Amsterdam.
1987
Das Wurzelnomen im Arischen und Griechischen. Diss. Würzburg.
Zum Ablaut der neutralen s-Stämme des Indogermanischen, in: Rix
(ed.): 259-267.
Zur avestischen Kompositionslehre: aš.- 'groß', in: Cardona (ed.): 337-
348.

=== page 894 ===

1736
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1737
Schmeja, Hans
1968
Zur griechischen Wortbildung. Die Nomina auf -wλós, -wλń, -wλov,
in: Mayrhofer et al. (eds.), Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft und
Kulturkunde: Gedenkschrift für Wilhelm Brandenstein (1898-1967).
Innsbruck, 129-138.
Schmid, Siegfried
1950
-ɛoç und -ɛios bei den griechischen Stoffadjektiven. Frauenfeld (Diss.
Zürich).
Schmidt, Johannes
1871
1875
1889
1895
Zur Geschichte des indogermanischen Vocalismus 1. Weimar.
Zur Geschichte des indogermanischen Vocalismus 2. Weimar.
Die Pluralbildungen der indogermanischen Neutra. Weimar.
Kritik der Sonantentheorie: eine sprachwissenschaftliche Untersuchung.
Weimar.
Schmidt, Klaus T.
1988 Stellungsbedingte Konsonantisierung von ǝ2 im Tocharischen?, in:
Bammesberger (ed.): 471-480.
Schmidt, Volkmar
1968 Sprachliche Untersuchungen zu Herondas. Untersuchungen zur
antiken Literatur und Geschichte, Bd. 1. Berlin.
Schmitt, Rüdiger
1967
1989
1997
Dichtung und Dichtersprache in indogermanischer Zeit. Wiesbaden.
Ein altiranisches Flüssigkeitsmaß: *mariš, in: Heller et al. (eds.): 301-15.
Vedisch ávya-, avyáya-, ávyaya- 'vom Schafe herrührend', in:
Lubotsky (ed.): 285-292.
1
1999
Schrader, Otto
1906
1911
Beiträge zu altpersischen Inschriften. Wiesbaden.
Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte: linguistisch-historische Beiträge
zur Erforschung des indogermanischen Altertums. Jena³.
Aus griechischer Frühzeit, in: Th. Siebs (ed.), Festschrift zur
Jahrhundertfeier der Universität Breslau, Breslau, 464-480.
Schrader, Otto and Alfons Nehring
1917
Schrijver, Peter
1991
1995
1997
Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde: Grundzüge einer
Kultur- und Völkergeschichte Alteuropas. Berlin.
The reflexes of the Proto-Indo-European laryngeals in Latin.
Amsterdam.
Studies in British Celtic historical phonology. Amsterdam.
Animal, vegetable and mineral: some Western European substratum
words, in: Lubotsky (ed.): 293-316.
Schulze, Wilhelm
1892
1933a
1933b
Quaestiones epicae. Gütersloh.
Kleine Schriften. Göttingen.
Zur Geschichte lateinischer Eigennamen. Abhandlungen der
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Bd. 5, No. 5.
Schumacher, Stefan
2004 Die keltischen Primärverben: ein vergleichendes, etymologisches und
morphologisches Lexikon. Innsbruck.
Schwarz, Martin
1970 Miscellanea Iranica, in: Boyce and Gerschevitch (eds.): 385-394.
Schwentner, Ernst
1924 Die primären Interjektionen in den indogermanischen Sprachen, mit
besonderer Berücksichtigung des Griechischen, Lateinischen und
Germanischen. Heidelberg.
Schwyzer, Eduard
1908
1923
1937
1950
Gr. кaτηons als adjektivische Zusammensetzung mit кaτα- und
Verbaladjectiv auf -ŋs, in: Mélanges de linguistique offerts à M.
Ferdinand de Saussure. Paris, 245-265.
Der Götter Knie - Abrahams Schoß, in: 'Avτdwpov: Festschrift Jacob
Wackernagel zur Vollendung des 70. Lebensjahres am 11. Dezember 1923
gewidmet von Schülern, Freunden und Kollegen. Göttingen, 283-293.
Griechisch -άw und got. -atja, in: Hjelmslev (ed.): 63-75.
Griechische Grammatik: auf der Grundlage von Karl Brugmanns
Griechischer Grammatik. Bd. 2: Syntax und syntaktische Stilistik,
vervollständigt und hrsg. von Albert Debrunner. Handbuch der
Altertumswissenschaft. Tl. 1. München.
Seebold, Elmar
1980
Materialsammlung: Die Vertretung von anlautend idg. gh- und ghu̟-
im Germanischen, in: Mayrhofer et al. (eds.): 450-484.
Seiler, Hansjakob
1950
1954
Die primären griechischen Steigerungsformen. Leipzig.
Homerisch ȧáą und äτη, in: Redard (ed.): 409-418.
Shipp, George Pelham
1967
Studies in the language of Homer. Amsterdam.
Sinclair, Thomas A.
1953
Sittig, Ernst
1931
On two words in Homer (λúματaα, àлоλчμаντηр), in: Kusch (ed.): 330-
333.
Das Alter der Anordnung unserer Kasus und der Ursprung ihrer
Bezeichnung als "Falle". Stuttgart.

=== page 895 ===

1738
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1739
Theophrastea: Studien zur botanischen Begriffsbildung. Göteborg.
Griechische Pflanzennamen. Göteborg.
Sjölund, Rode Maria
1938
Skoda, Françoise
Strömberg, Reinhold
Metrische Kürzung im Griechischen. Uppsala.
1937
1940
1943
Principes de formation du vocabulaire botanique grec: illustrations et
hypothèses, in: Actes du colloque international: Les phytonymes grecs et
latins. Nice, 271-283.
1993
Smoczyński, Wojciech (ed.)
1995
Snell, Bruno
1924
1948
Solmsen, Felix
1901
1909
Kuryłowicz memorial volume 1. Cracow.
✓
Die Ausdrücke für den Begriff des Wissens in der vorplatonischen
Philosophie (sofia, gnômê, sunesis, historia, mathêma, epistêmê). Berlin.
Die Entdeckung des Geistes: Studien zur Entstehung des europäischen
Denkens bei den Griechen. Hamburg.
Untersuchungen zur griechischen Laut- und Verslehre. Straßburg.
Beiträge zur Griechischen Wortforschung. Strassburg.
Sommer, Ferdinand Johann
1905
1914
Griechische Lautstudien. Straßburg.
Konträrbildungen, in: Festschrift Ernst Windisch zum siebzigsten
Geburtstag am 4. Sept. 1914. Leipzig, 1914.
1944
1946
Strunk, Klaus
1967
1995
Stüber, Karin
2002
Studien zur Etymologie und Bildung der griechischen Fischnamen.
Göteborg.
Griechische Wortstudien: Untersuchungen zur Benennung von Tieren,
Pflanzen, Körperteilen und Krankheiten. Göteborg.
Greek prefix studies: on the use of adjective particles. Göteborg.
Nasal präsentien und Aoriste: ein Beitrag zur Morphologie des Verbums
im Indo-Iranischen und Griechischen. Heidelberg.
Griechisch SévSpɛov und Zugehöriges, in: Smoczyński (ed.): 357-363.
Die primären s-Stämme des Indogermanischen. Wiesbaden.
Sutter, Berthold (ed.)
1954
Festschrift Julius Franz Schütz. Graz etc.
Szemerényi, Oswald
1964
Syncope in Greek and Indo-European and the nature of Indo-European
accent. Naples.
1969a
Etyma Latina II (7-18), in: Studi linguistici in onore di Vittore Pisani.
Brescia, 963-994-
1934
Ahhijavafrage und Sprachwissenschaft. Abhandlungen der Bayrischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, N.F., H. 9. München.
1969b
Etyma Graeca II (8-15), in: Studia classica et orientalia Antonino
Pagliaro oblata 3. Roma, 233-250.
1948
1950
Zur Geschichte der griechischen Nominalkomposita. Abhandlungen der
Bayrischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, N.F., H. 27. München.
Zum Zahlwort. Sitzungsberichte der Bayerischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften 1950: 7. München.
1980
1989
Einführung in die vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft. Darmstadt.
An den Quellen des lateinischen Wortschatzes. Innsbruck.
1991
!
1956
1958
Specht, Franz
1944
Starke, Frank
1990
Homerica, in: Kronasser (ed.) 1956(2): 142-151.
A 11, in: Brandenstein (ed.): 146-163.
Der Ursprung der indogermanischen Deklination. Göttingen.
Untersuchung zur Stammbildung des keilschrift-luwischen Nomens.
Wiesbaden.
Steinbauer, Dieter
1989
Untersuchungen zu den bei Plautus belegten Verben der lateinischen
ersten Konjugation. Unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der
Denominative (Diss. Regensburg). Altendorf b. Bamberg.
Steinkopf, Gerhard
1937
Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Ruhmes bei den Griechen. Diss.
Halle an der Saale.
Scripta Minora IV (Indo-European Languages Other than Latin and
Greek). Innsbruck.
Taillardat, Jean
1962
Les images d'Aristophane: études de langue et de style. Paris.
Taszycki, Witold (ed.)
1927
1928
Tedesco, Paul
1956
Symbolae grammaticae in honorem Ioannis Rozwadowski I. Kraków.
Symbolae grammaticae in honorem Ioannis Rozwadowski II. Kraków.
The Sanskrit and Middle Indic words for 'sinew', in: Kronasser (ed.)
1956(2): 182-187.
Teeuwen, St.W.J. (ed.)
1929
Donum natalicium Schrijnen: verzameling van opstellen door oud-
leerlingen en bevriende vakgenooten, opgedragen aan Mgr. Prof. Dr. Jos.
Schrijnen bij gelegenheid van zijn zestigsten verjaardag. Nijmegen.

=== page 896 ===

1740
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1741
Terstegen, Wilhelmus Johannus
1941
Theander, Carl
1932
Evσεẞnç en öσιoç in het Grieksch taalgebruik na de IVe eeuw. Utrecht.
lykabas, lykambēs, in: Boëthius (ed.): 349-351.
Thesleff, Holger
1953
Thieme, Paul
1938
1952
1953
1957
Thomas, Emil
1912
Studies on intensification in early and classical Greek. Leipzig.
Der Fremdling im Rgveda. Abhandlungen für die Kunde des
Morgenlandes, 23, 2. Leipzig.
Studien zur indogermanischen Wortkunde und Religionsgeschichte.
Berichte über die Verhandlungen der Sächsischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Bd. 98, H. 5. Berlin.
Die Heimat der indogermanischen Gemeinsprache. Abhandlungen der
Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse, Jrg. 1953: Nr. 11. Mainz.
Mitra and Aryaman. Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts
and Sciences, vol. 41, no. 1. New Haven.
Studien zur lateinischen und griechischen Sprachgeschichte. Berlin.
Thompson, D'Arcy Wentworth
1895
1947
A glossary of Greek birds. London.
A glossary of Greek fishes. London.
Threatte, Leslie
1980
Thumb, Albert
1901
The grammar of Attic inscriptions. Vol. I: Phonology. Berlin.
Die griechische Sprache im Zeitalter des Hellenismus: Beiträge zur
Geschichte und Beurteilung der кolvη. Berlin.
Thumb, Albert and Richard Hauschild
1905
Handbuch des Sanskrit: eine Einführung in das sprachwissenschaftliche
Studium des Altindischen I: Grammatik. Heidelberg.
Thumb, Albert and Eduard Kieckers
1932
Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte I. Heidelberg.
Thumb, Albert and Anton Scherer
1959
Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte II. Heidelberg.
Thurneysen, Rudolf
1946
Tichy, Eva
1983
A grammar of Old Irish. Dublin.
Onomatopoetische Verbalbildungen des Griechischen. Wien.
Tischler, Johann
1983ff. Hethitisches etymologisches Glossar. Innsbruck.
Tischler, Johann (ed.)
1982
Serta Indogermanica, Festschrift für Günter Neumann. Innsbruck.
Trautmann, Felix Kurt Reinhold
1923
Treu, Max
1955
Trier, Jost
1963
Troxler, Hans
1964
Trümpy, Hans
Baltisch-slavisches Wörterbuch. Göttingen.
Von Homer zur Lyrik: Wandlungen des griechischen Weltbildes im
Spiegel der Sprache. München.
Venus: Etymologien um das Futterlaub. Köln.
Sprache und Wortschatz Hesiods. Zürich.
1950 Kriegerische Fachausdrücke im griechischen Epos: Untersuchungen zum
Wortschatze Homers. Basel.
Tucker, Elizabeth Fawcett
1990
The creation of morphological regularity: early Greek verbs in -έw, -άw,
-ów, -ów and -íw. Göttingen.
Turner, Ralph Lilley
1966 A comparative dictionary of the Indo-Aryan languages. London.
Tyrell, William Blake
1984 Amazons: a study in Athenian mythmaking. Baltimore.
Untermann, Jürgen
1993
2000
Gr. Onкa = lat. feci, gr. ñкα = lat. ieci?, in: Meiser (ed.): 461-468.
Wörterbuch des Oskisch-Umbrischen. Heidelberg.
Usener, Hermann
1896 Götternamen: Versuch einer Lehre von der religiösen Begriffsbildung.
Bonn.
De Vaan, Michiel
2003
2008
2009
The Avestan vowels. Amsterdam.
Etymological dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages. Leiden.
Syntax and etymology of Avestan bā and bōit, in: Éric Pirart et al.
(eds.), Zarathushtra entre l'Inde et l'Iran. Études indo-iraniennes et
indo-européennes offertes à Jean Kellens à l'occasion de son 65°
anniversaire. Wiesbaden, 43-55.

=== page 897 ===

1742
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1743
Vart, Jules
1887
Vasmer, Max
1921
1953
L'art nautique dans l'antiquité et spécialement en Grèce, d'après A.
Breusing. Paris.
Studien zur albanesischen Wortforschung. Dorpat.
Russisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Heidelberg.
Vendryes, Joseph Jean Baptiste Marie
Traité d'accentuation grecque. Paris.
Vries, Jan de
1961
Altnordisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Leiden.
Waanders, Frederik M. J.
1992
Mycenaean evidence for the Indo-European roots *tel- and *kel- in
Greek, in: Olivier (ed.): 591-596.
Wace, Alan J.B. et al. (eds.)
1962 A companion to Homer. London.
Wackernagel, Jacob
1889
1904
1927
A propos de trois mots iraniens signifiant “sec", in: Taszycki (ed.): 137-
142.
1938
A propos du verbe ȧypɛiv "prendre", in: Mélanges Émile Boisacq II.
Bruxelles, 331-334.
1896
1897
1907
1916
1919
Ventris, Michael and John Chadwick
1973
Documents in Mycenaean Greek. Cambridge.
Versnel, Hendrik Simon
1970
Vian, Francis
1952
Vine, Brent
1998
1999a
1999b
2002
2007
Viredaz, Remy
1993
Triumphus: an inquiry into the origin, development and meaning of the
Roman triumph. Leiden.
La guerre des Géants: le mythe avant l'époque hellénistique. Paris.
Aeolic öpлετоv and deverbative *-etó- in Greek and Indo-European.
Innsbruck.
Greek pica 'root' and 'Schwa Secundum', in: Vyacheslav V. Ivanov and
Brent Vine (eds.), UCLA Indo-European Studies, vol. 1. Los Angeles, 5-
30.
On "Cowgill's Law" in Greek, in: Eichner et al. (eds.): 555-600.
On full-grade *-ro-formations in Greek and Indo-European, in: Mark
R. V. Southern (ed.), Indo-European perspectives. Los Angeles, 329-
350.
Latin gemō 'groan', Greek yέywve 'cry out' and Tocharian A ken- 'call',
in: Nussbaum (ed.): 343-358.
Palatalisations grecques: chronologie et classification des traitements,
in: E. Crespo et al. (eds.), Dialectologica Graeca. Actas del II Coloquio
Internacional de Dialectología Griega (Madrid, 1991). Madrid, 331-337.
Voigt, Christian
1934
Vos, Harm
1956
Überlegung und Entscheidung: Studien zur Selbstauffassung des
Menschen bei Homer. Berlin.
Themis. PhD diss. Utrecht.
Das Dehnungsgesetz der griechischen Composita. Basel.
Altindische Grammatik Bd. I: Lautlehre. Göttingen.
Vermischte Beiträge zur griechischen Sprachkunde. Basel.
Hellenistica. Göttingen.
Sprachliche Untersuchungen zu Homer. Göttingen.
Über einige lateinische und griechische Ableitungen, in: Festgabe
Adolf Kaegi von Schülern und Freunden dargebrach zum 30. September
1919. Frauenfeld.
1920-1924 Vorlesungen über Syntax mit besonderer Berücksichtigung von
Griechisch, Lateinisch und Deutsch, Tl. 1-2. 1924. Basel.
1955
Kleine Schriften (Bd. I-II). Göttingen.
Wackernagel, Jacob and Albert Debrunner
1930
1954
Walde, Alois
Altindische Grammatik, Bd. III: Nominalflexion-Zahlwort-Pronomen.
Göttingen.
Altindische Grammatik, Bd. II, 2. Göttingen.
1910 Lateinisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, 2. Auflage. Heidelberg.
Wathelet, Paul
1970 Les traits éoliens dans la langue de l'épopée grecque. Roma.
Watkins, Calvert
1982 A Greco-Hittite etymology, in: Tischler (ed.): 455-457.
Weisgerber, Leo
1931 Galatische Sprachreste, in: Helm (ed.): 151-175.
Weitenberg, Joseph Johannes Sicco
1984
Die hethitischen U-Stämme. Amsterdam.
Welles, C. Bradford
1934
Royal correspondence in the Hellenistic period: a study in Greek
epigraphy. New Haven.
Wersdörfer, Hans
1940
Die Dilooopía des Isokrates im Spiegel ihrer Terminologie:
Untersuchungen zur frühattischen Rhetorik und Stillehre. Leipzig.

=== page 898 ===

1744
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1745
West, Martin Litchfield
1966
1978
1997
2007
Hesiod, Theogony: edition with prolegomena and commentary. Oxford.
Hesiod. Theogony, Works and Days. Translated with Introduction and
Notes by M. L. West. Oxford.
The East face of Helicon: West Asiatic elements in Greek poetry and
myth. Oxford.
Indo-European poetry and myth. Oxford.
Widengren, Geo
1960
Iranisch-semitische
Kulturbegegnung
in Parthischer Zeit.
Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Forschung des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, H.
70. Köln-Opladen.
Wikander, Stig
1946
Feuerpriester in Kleinasien und Iran. Lund.
Wilamowitz, Ulrich von
1889
1927
1931
1932
Euripides, Herakles, erklärt von Ulrich von Wilamowitz. Berlin.
Die Heimkehr des Odysseus: neue Homerische Untersuchungen. Berlin.
Der Glaube der Hellenen, vol. 1. Berlin.
Der Glaube der Hellenen, vol. 2. Berlin.
Wilhelm, Adolf
1909
Beiträge zur griechischen Inschriftenkunde: mit einem Anhange über
die öffentliche Aufzeichnung von Urkunden. Wien.
Williger, Eduard
1928
Sprachliche Untersuchungen zu den Komposita der griechischen Dichter
des 5. Jahrhunderts. Göttingen.
Windekens, Albert Joris van
1941
1952
Lexique étymologique des dialectes tokhariens. Louvain.
Le pélasgique: essai sur une langue indo-européenne préhellénique.
Louvain.
Winter, Werner
1950
Studien zum "Prothetischen Vokal" im Griechischen. Hamburg.
Witczak, Krzysztof T.
1993
Greek Aphrodite and her Indo-European origin, in: Isebaert (ed.): 115-
123.
Wodtko, Dagmar S., Britta Irslinger, and Carolin Schneider
2008
Wolf, Ernst
1947
Nomina im indogermanischen Lexikon. Heidelberg.
Die Bedeutung von ¿vėµóç in der griechischen Literatur bis auf Platon.
Diss. Innsbruck.
Wüst, Walther (ed.)
1931
Studia Indo-iranica: Ehrengabe für Wilhelm Geiger zur Vollendung des
75. Lebensjahres 1856-21. Juli-1931. Leipzig.
Wyatt, William F.
1969
Wyss, Urs
1954
Metrical lengthening in Homer. Roma.
Die Wörter auf-σúvn in ihrer historischen Entwicklung. Zürich.
Greek baptismal terminology. Nijmegen.
Ysebaert, Joseph
1962
Zumbach, Othmar
1955
Zupitza, Ernst
1896
Neuerungen in der Sprache der homerischen Hymnen. Winterthur.
心
Die germanischen Gutturale. Berlin.
;

=== page 899 ===

INDICES
Numbers refer to pages. All languages are given in the order of the Latin alphabet,
with the exception of Sanskrit and Tocharian.
ALBANIAN
âdërrë, 1082
drithë, 779
dru, 357
këmbë, 633
kep, 749
ag, 168
aḥ, 1088
amë, 82, 1051
arrë, 144
as, 1123
bâj, 1546
balë, 1551
ballë, 196
barrë, 1562
bashkë, 1557
bathë, 1556
bërrakë, 234
bimë, 1598
birë, 1555
bri, 237
bubullin, 226
Ç-, 327
çalë, 1346
çanj, 1344
dhe, 314, 324, 1632
dhëmb, 282
dhemjë, 314
dhëndërr, 259
dhi, 333
dhjamë, 326
dhjes, 1618
dhjetë, 312
elb, 77
emër, 1085
end, 167
endë, 104
epërë, 438
ethe, 523
fier, 1247, 1379
gardh, 1645
klan, 709
kopshtë, 688
lagje, 853
lap, 834
laparós, 864
lapë, 849
lend,
195
lerë, 818, 838
lig, 869, 1068
liri, 864
lodh, 855
lule, 845
lum, 878
man, 206
mangë, 888
mbi, 95
mbledh, 842
daj, 298
dal, 531
danë, 299
dardhë, 182
darkë, 348
derr, 1641
dimër(ë), 1620
dirsë, 579
dje, 1632
dorë, 363, 1621
drā, 553
drapën, 353
drëri, 558
dritë, 318
glatë, 346
grundë, 1643
gjak, 1093
gjalpë, 415
gjan, 537
gjarpër, 464
gjashtë, 433
gjerp, 1292
gjumë, 1535
hell, 1364
helq, 412
herdhë, 1116
hie, 1351
hir, 1355
hut, 476
i gjallë, 1072
ka, 676
mbush, 248
mjaltë, 926
mjel, 86
mjet, 936
mo, 941
mushk, 978
nden, 1458
ndesh, 327
nëkon, 1044
ngjomë, 274
ngre, 370
njeri, 104
njoh, 273
nuse, 1028
pas, 1224
pelë, 1266

=== page 900 ===

INDICES
1749
1748
petk, 193
pishë, 1199
pjek, 1181
pjerdh, 1176
prish, 1234
pshtyn, 1252
punë, 1382
puth, 1256
ragál', 125
rjep, 453
rrah, 1113
rrush, 1275
rrymë, 1282
siell, 1169
shark, 1310
shegë, 1329
shemërë, 922
shi, 1541
shkop, 1350
shpellë, 1382
shqerr, 665
shteg, 1396
shtiell, 1398
shtjerrë, 1395
shtrin, 1410
trem, 1503
tul, 1517
than, 171
thellë, 730
thëni, 747
ujë, 1527
ulk, 877
vatër, 207
ve, 1681
ven, 1540
vênë, 1059
zorrë, 1644
zot, 1606
INDICES
ANATOLIAN
Hittite
āant-, 105
Ahhiia-, 181
ahrushi (Hurr.), 788
aganni (Hurr.), 181
akkuš(š)a-, 248
alil-, 845
allaniia-zi, 63
alš-, 75
aluanz-, 76
amiiar(a)-, 82
andan, 421
anna-, 107
-ant/d-, 312
antuuahhaš-, 106
āppa, 117
Appaliunaš, 118
appezziia-, 1010
arā-, 123
āra-, 123
arai-/ari-, 1103
arkuuae-zi, 127
arnu-2, 136, 1107
arra-, 1110
arši-, 141
arške/a-zi, 468
aruuae-zi, 121
ašatar, 157
aši, 571
aši-, 397
aššula-, 151
atta-, 165
vëlla, 233
auli-, 170
vit, 477
ed-21, 375
vjedh, 491
vjerr, 24
vodhë, 1042
zânë, 479
zë, 1601
zjarm, 542
ekt-, 336
eku-zi, 1020
ešḥar, 366, 608
eš-zi, 389
hai(n)k-ta, 12
halzai-', 60
hamank-', 18
hamešḥa(nt)-, 84
hān-', 109
hanna-', 1086
hanti, 109
hanzana-, 149
happar, 638
happina(nt)-, 177, 1080
happ-zi, 120, 522
hapuš-, 1094
ḥāran-, 1106
harduppi, 644
harki-, 126
hark-zi, 133
harp-tta(ri), 1114
harra-', 137
hartagga-, 133
hašduer-, 1050
hasp-, 154
haštāi/hašti-, 1119
hasterza, 157
hāt-', 26
hatk-', 183
hatt-a(ri), 167
hatuki-, 167, 1048
hekur, 57
henkan-, 97
hišša-, 1052
huek-zi, 174
huett-tta(r), 1676
huhha-, 290
huiš-zi, 26, 158
hulana-, 858
huprušḥi-, 1043
hurnāi-, 1272
huuant-, 27
iiant-, 1235
impa, 575
išḥaḥru-, 300
išhai-', 590, 591
išḥamai-, 1532
išḥamāi-', 1057
išhuua-', 1360
iškalla-'/ iškall-, 1340
išpant-, 471, 722
išpānt- / išpant-, 1381
išpār-', 1380
*išpatalla-, 1377
ištalk-zi,-1407
(UZU)ištāman-/
ištamin-, 1408
ištų-ari, 1402
kakkapa-, 619
kallikalli-, 754
kalliš-zi / kališš-, 624
galaktar, 256
kane/išš-zi, 273
kānk-³, 254
ganut, 280
kardiaš, 644
kariulli, 788
karšani, 643
karš-zi, 665, 764
kartimiie/a-zi, 681
kattan, 656
katti, 615
genu, 283
keššar, 1621
ki, 397
kinun, 694
gimmi, 1620
kīnu-zi, 1617
kišt-ari, 1315
kiš-zi, 682
ki-tta, 664
kuen-zi, 536
kuiš, 1487
gullakuwan, 217
gulš-zi, 1464
kuntarra-, 284
kupaḥi-, 804
kureuana-, 643
kurimpa-, 806
kurk-, 816
kurpiši- (Hurr.), 806
gurta-, 1645
kurtal(i)-, 808
LÜ kuuan-, 811
kuyanna(n)-, 793
kutt-, 1629
laḥan(n)i, 820
lāḥh-, 833
lahu-/lahu-, 873
lāk-1, 853
parai-', 1192
parku-, 1262
paršina-, 1247
pāš-', 1195
paššila-, 1667
=pat, 1225
pāt-, 1228
lāman-, 1085
pattai-', 1182
lapp-zi/lapp-, 830
pattar, 1248
li(n)k-zi, 405
peda-, 1161
lišši-, 522
peie-zi, 582
lip(p)-zi, 864
līšāe-zi, 842
lukk-tta, 852
-ma, 887, 1479
mahla-, 944
māḥla-, 81
maklant-, 895, 942
malla-/ mall-, 980
maninku-, 902, 966
-mant-, 1479
mark-, 953
marriya-, 922
mekk-, 918
milit, 926
mimma-, 931
-miš, 416
mišriuant-, 958
mitgaimi-, 92
mūgae-zi, 976
munnae-zi, 988
nekumanza, 291
nekuz mehur, 1027
nepiš, 1012
neua-, 1009
nini(n)k-zi, 1002
nitri-, 1022
nu, 1025
paḥhur, 1261
pai-', 40
pāi-zi, 388
piššu, 1180
punušš, 1174
NINDA purpura-, 227
purut-, 1267
ša(n)h-zi, 110
šāḥ-', 146
šakkar, 1365
šalli-, 1072
šarnink-, 461
šaudišt-, 477
šēr, 130, 457, 1287, 1288
šiluḥa-, 1330
šiptamiia-, 368
šuḥha-', 1541
šuliia-, 1372
šulli-, 1530
šumanza-, 1531
S
šuppariia-, 1532
tāie/a-zi, 1481
dāiuga-, 359
takš-zi, 1460
talugi-, 346
damāš-zi, 301
tarkuuant-, 1452
tarma-, 1469, 1495
tarpašša-, 541
tarra-ta(r), 162
tāru, 349
tarupp-", 1492
daššu-, 305
tekan, 1633
palzah(h)a-, 1201, 1169
panku-, 1160
tēkan, 1632
parā, 1235
tekkuššije/a-zi, 309

=== page 901 ===

1750
INDICES
INDICES
terepp-zi, 1504
tiia, 322
tuekka-, 1302
tuḥhae-zi, 568
tūrije/a-zi, 1316
turpa, 346
tuua, 327
uāk-', 14
uakturi-, 194
ualḥ-zi, 70
uarš-', 464, 1079
uaššuuar, 205
uaštul, 163
uek-zi, 400
ueriie/a-zi, 393
uēš, 519
uiian(a)-, 1059
uk, 373
Ul(l)uš, 1049
ulae-zi, 859
utne, 1124
utnē, 1124
uttar, 168
zah-/ zahh-, 1333,
1337
Cuneiform Luwian
*hulani-, 858
mitgaimi-, 92
pāta/i-, 1228
taluppi, 1492
tipas-, 317
tuwarsa-, 566, 1515
tuwatra/i-, 561
usa/i-, 477
wiian(i)-, 1059
Lycian
A ttiti, B kikiti, 1487
ara-, 123
erawazije, 123
esb-, 598
ałjamułjk', 184
ałk'at, 869, 1068
ałt, 75
ałuēs, 79
amb, 1075
ambarnam, 97
amol, 1075
and, 104, 425
anic, 747
anicanem, 1083
anjuk, 18
ant'el, 105
kbatra-, 561
sijēni, sijeni, 664
anun, 1085
tideimi, 548, 1482
Xawa-, 1061
xnna-, 107
Xuge-, 290
Lydian
bilis, 1574
blaso, 1201
fa-karsed, 764
kaveś, 658, 732
Kaúnç, 173
marivda-, 964
qa入m入us, 1148
Carian
yiooa, 264,703
ARMENIAN
Classical Armenian
tarma/i-, 1495
tati(ia)-, 1455
titaimma/i-, 1482
acem, 19
ač'k', 1118
ušša/i-, 477
aigi, 1042
akn, 1134
alik', 1219
Hieroglyphic
Luwian
aśu-, 598
a-ta4/5-ma-za, 1085
hawi-, 1061
huha-, 290
swan(i)-, 811
ta+mi-ha, 315
aliwr, 65
ał, 75
ałač'em, 587
ałam, 65
aławni, 78
ałbiwr, 1590
anurj, 1082
apr(a)sam, 198
ap'n, 523
arari, 123
arawr, 137
arbi, 1292
ard, 143, 144
areg-akn, 156
argel, 133
ari, 1103
ariwn, 366
arj, 133
arjn, 1114
ark'ay, 146
art, 16
artasuk', 299
artevan, 353
arac, 110
ařaspel, 115
arn, 141
arnum, 136
astandel, 149
astł, 157
atamn, 1049
ateam, 1048
atok',
21
awelum, 1133
awjik', 174
awr, 518
awt', 169
ayc, 41
ayl, 73
ayr, 104, 110
aytnum, 1054
bam, 1567
bambak, 199
ban, 1601
banam, 1546
bark, 1544
bazum, 1160
beran, 1555
berem, 1564
bern, 1562
bołk, 225
bor, 1171
boys, 1259
brinj, 1102
bu, 246
burn, 1602
całr, 258, 265
caneay, 273
car, 268
egit, 577
eker, 214
elanem, 402
elik', 845
eluzanem, 409
ełanim, 402
ełn, 402
etungn, 1087
ep'em, 492
erastank', 1244
erb, 1135
erbuc, 1556
erek, 451
eres, 1231
erewim, 1231
ergicanem, 1283
erkar, 327
erkir, 449
erkn, 1048
erknč'im, 308
erko-tasan, 359
erēc', 1232
cer, 269
cnawt, 267
es, 373
cunr, 283
et, 332
c'ec', 1325
ett, 375
c'elum, 1340
c'in, 586
c'tim, 1437
c'ul, 1361
č'ogay, 1322
ew, 440
ewł, 401
ewt'n, 448
ezr, 182
ēš, 598, 1086
ancay, 321
ǝnderk', 431
gam, 706
č'ork', 1472
daku, 546
dalar, 531
damban, 534
ganj, 255
dayl, 546
dēz, 1459
dik',
540
dizanem, 549
dram, 352
gari, 779
garun, 366
garn, 129
gelum, 385, 388
durgn, 1507
getin, 1124
gini, 1059
gišer, 470
gitem, 1053
gog, 486
gołanam, 70
gom, 26
gorc, 450
hac'i, 58, 1088
han, 107
hanem, 1378
hanum, 1172
hasanem, 422
hav, 290
helg, 412
heru, 1180
het, 1161
het'anos, 378
hin, 430
hołm, 102
hot, 1051
hotim, 1051
hu, 1256
hum, 1680
hun, 1221
i, 419, 433
i ver, 1533
ijanem, 1064
im, 416
inn, 427
iž, 489, 1135
jetun, 1619
jern, 1621
jet, 1618
jew, 1629
jir, 1607
jiwn, 1620
jmern, 1620, 1634
joyl, 1629
ju, 1681
gelumn, 388
gełmn, 858
jukn, 607
gerem, 145, 390, 483
jer, 542
jerm, 542
jnem, 536
jnjem, 537
duŕn, 566
dustr, 561
eber, 365
gēr, 1641
gin, 1681
ed, 1483
1751

=== page 902 ===

INDICES
1752
kałał, 293
kałin, 195
kamurj, 39, 269
kanayk', 292
karcr, 283
karič, 645
karkař, 652
kařk', 442
kask, 151, 655
keam, 217
keras, 677
kin, 292
klanem, 312
INDICES
magil, 1077
mahaz, 916
mak'i, 942
mal, 899, 944
malem, 980
maneak, 901
manr, 902, 966
manragor, 900
mard, 242
market, 894
mašk, 934
mawru, 949
orb, 1114
orcam, 454
orjik', 1116
orm, 1105
oroj, 460
ors, 1222
ort', 1250
or, 1110
ost, 1050
otk', 1228
ozni, 489
popop, 448
p'andir, 1149
mec, 918
kogi, 232
mecarem, 917
p'arem, 1377
kork, 227
mełk, 218
p'aycałn, 1385
metr, 926
p'aylakn, 156
kov, 232
krcem, 244
merj, 941
krunk, 267
stin, 1153, 1403, 1404
stoyg, 475
sunk, 1385
sut, 1663
suzanem, 682
sxalem, 1428
šert, 1344
šēn, 792
t'ag, 1403
t'ak čim, 1249
t'anam, 1477
t'ar, 1454
t'eti, 1247
t'er, 1248
t'rik', 1485
vec', 433
-vor, 1564
xał, 1609
xausim, 659
xaxank', 660
xstor, 1358
y-armar, 134
y-erum, 392
y-et, 1160
yisun, 1173
y-ogn, 479
keuto, 810, 1363
kirscha, 441
krawian, 774
kylo, 698
lauxnos, 880
licuts, 1068
lopis, 830
melne, 924
nabis, 1080
pallaips, 865
pedan, 1161
peuse, 1183
pintis, 1221
pleynis, 1168
z-genum, 429
zgest, 429
BALTIC
poquelbton, 627
t'uk', 1252
t'umb, 1518
salme, 622
Old Prussian
sardis, 1645
aglo, 184
sasins, 666
k'ac'ax, 510
k'akor, 619
k'alird, 1641
k'atcr, 278
k'ałc', 385
k'ałird, 624
k'amem, 687
k'erem, 665
k'irtn, 579
k'un, 1535
lain, 1205
lam, 858
lar, 480, 884
law, 883
leard, 522
linim, 717
lir, 1192
lizum, 846
loganam, 873
lor, 835
lorc'k', 871
lu, 719, 1671
lucanem, 850
lusanunk', 875
macanim, 910
mač, 894
merk, 291
mēg, 1077
mi, 394, 941
mitk', 941
mizem, 1076
mnam, 931
mor, 968
mozi, 971
mrmram, 967
mukn, 985
mun, 976
munj, 974, 978
murt, 984
mux, 1371
mxem, 987
naw, 999
nawt'i, 1019, 1020
nay, 1025
p'ert', 1376
p'rp'ur, 179
p'ŕngam, 1246
p'uk', 1600
īngunk, 1293
samik', 629
sar, 641
sarik', 617
sayl, 1310
ser, 671, 752
sēr, 664
savin, 1327
sin, 672
siwn, 707, 1620
skesrayr, 399
skesur, 399
snerb, 1023
sor, 793
soyl, 730
spaŕnam, 1374
sp'er, 1427
t'uz, 1421
tal, 259
tanuter, 347
tarex, 1453
tawn, 303
taygr, 296
tełm, 1462
tevem, 327
ti, 298
tik, 333
titern, 354
top'em, 320
trc'ak, 352
tun, 363
tur, 363
ul, 1266
uln, 1679
unayn, 481
und, 476
unim, 481
unkn, 1131
neard, 1011
nerk, 1002
nerk'in, 424
sp'ir, 1380
nor, 1009
sring, 1424
srtiw, 644
stelcanem, 1398
us, 1680
ut', 1066
nu, 1028
oč', 1123
olok', 871
steln, 1397
sterj, 1395
ołb,
1073
step, 1394
ołn, 1679
ur, 319
uranam, 121, 135
uzem, 486
vard, 1290
ains, 1058
alkunis, 1678
assaran, 182
auklipts, 714
aulis, 170
ausis, 1652
aysmis, 46
babo, 1548
buccareisis, 144
caulan, 659
corto, 808
cucan, 723
dim, 955
dyrsos, 535
emmens, 1085
en, 419
enwackēmai, 429
geits, 1337
gelso, 1612
genna, 292
gorme, 542
iuwis, 1042
kailūstikan, 731
kelan, 799
kerko, 776
kērmens, 665
semmai, 1613
sirwis, 676
spurglis, 1375, 1386
stogis, 1393
suge, 1541
tauris, 1455
trupis, 1513
tulan, 1517
wagnis, 1135
wanso, 594
weders, 1526
witwan, 605
wolti, 836
wosi-grabis, 284
Old Lithuanian
antà, 108
aštras, 57
bu, 1598
drāgės, 553
eš, 373
esmi, 389
ešva, 598
jentė, 389
juosti, 504
krienas, 1233
1753

=== page 903 ===

INDICES
INDICES
1754
ėdžiótis, 1047
biaūrus, 1575
-mi, 416
minžu, 1076
bimbalas, 226
eigà, 1064
eimi, 388
bliáuti, 1578, 1582
sēkmas, 368
blusà, 1671
sėris, 393
brūkis, 1553
šle jù, 717
brùvė, 1135
talokas, 1478
vieš-patni, 1227
búgstu, 1565
Lithuanian
bundu, 1258
burbulas, 225
bùrė, 1555
dantis, 1049
darau, 353
élnis, 402
erēlis, 1106
eřžilas, 1116
ésti, 375
ēžeras, 182
ežià, 182
gaidrus, 1544, 1547
gaisas, 1547
ganà, 479
ir, 121
iriù, 454
irti, 457
iš, 433
abù, 96
aistrà, 1062
akėčios, 1087
akmuo, 52
algà, 77
alkúnė, 871
alpstù, 61
ant, 108, 475
gardas, 1645
gaudžiù, 224
gauti, 369
geležis, 1612
dėdė, 1477
ganas, 1586
dègtinas, 541
degu, 1476
garnys, 267
dėlė, 546
déngti, 1457
derděti, 303
ántis, 1019
apnikti, 1002, 1022
derù, 318
geliù, 210
dēšimt, 312
genu, 536
aprėpti, 453
gérvė, 267
dēšinas, 317
arti, 143
dėtas, 1483
gèsti, 1315
árti, 137
détis, 543
gëtis, 230
devyni, 427
gijà, 215
ašarà, 300
didelis, 918
gilė, 195
ašis, 111
girė, 227
aštuoni, 1066
dievas, 499
dieveris, 296
girtas, 214
atis, 474
au-, 167, 173
dimstis, 303
glaudas, 1637
gleivės, 978
dirsė, 304
áugti, 171
glēmės, 274
glinda, 747
glitùs, 277
qsà, 521
aulas, 170
áuksas, 1652
dirvà, 303
dovaná, 332
dragės, 553
dramblys, 557
drikà, 556
aurè, 319
aušra, 172, 493
avidė, 1649
avis, 1061
bà, 1565
bālas, 1551
baūbti, 207
bēbras, 1594
bedu, 224
bėgti, 1559
beñdras, 1171
bérnas, 1562
bezdu, 209
gomurys, 1614
gráužiu, 244
dristi, 535
gręsti, 1643
drugŷs, 523, 1449
griauti, 1645
dubus, 358
griebti, 1650
griēti, 1650
dukte, 561
dúmai, 564
dundulis, 562
duris, 566
dvasià, 540
dvěsti, 537
dvi-, 339
grùdas, 662
grumdau, 287
gruměti, 1647
gungulys, 281
guōlis, 293
gúotas, 228
gurdus, 234
gurgulys, 261
gúžas, 290
iēšmas, 46
íesmė, 37
iñksti, 1044
kermušė, 783
kerpu, 649
keturi, 1472
kielė, 698
kiltis, 671
kirmis, 414
Kirnis, 771
ketvirtas, 1472
kiaūlė, 1246, 1425
kiáutas, 810, 1363
lapènti, 834
laukas, 851
léidžiu, 870
leilas, 845
lēkti, 856
lēngvas, 403
lentà, 401
lèsti, 842
lēvas, 854
liáudis, 408
įvykti, 435
kirpti, 788
klumbas, 710
liaukà, 838
liegti, 869
klupti, 627
knabénti, 722
kniaūkti, 726
lieku, 845
liepti, 865
liësti, 866
kniáuktis, 726
knisti, 724
líeti, 843, 844
liežiu, 846
jáunas, 47
(j)ēknos, 522
()ievà, 1042
kabinti, 743
kadagys, 663
káima(s), 814
káina, 1218, 1487
kāklas, 799, 1501
kálnas, 742
kálti, 711, 734,739
kalýbas, 687
kamanos, 688
kampas, 633
kándu, 727, 746
kánduolas, 746
kanká, 612
kàpti, 749
kārias, 732
kárštas, 674
kárvė, 676
kasà, 682
katrás, 1226
kaukỹs, 658
káulas, 170, 659
kedinti, 1344, 1345
keliūta, 669
kelys, 813
kēmeras, 630
kenčiù, 1156
kenkti, 612, 620
kepù, 143, 1181, 1347
kepure, 1347
kēras, 1468
knóti, 721
korys, 689
kr(i)ōkti, 788
kraivas, 781
krākė, 783
kraujas, 774
kraūkti, 773
kraušýti, 786
kráuti, 787
kreivas, 781
krēklės, 775
krėsti, 784
krumplys, 783
krykti, 778
kúlas, 687
kūlės, 618
kulti, 668
kumbras, 794
kuōlas, 1364
kuprà, 806
kurpė, 643, 778
kvāpas, 639
lakti, 834
lalúoti, 828
langóti, 820
lāpas, 849
lapė, 79
linai, 864
lipti, 32, 864
lōmas, 857
lópė, 830
lóti, 858
lùgnas, 874
lupti, 879
lúžti, 850
lýdyti, 867
lýnas, 863
magëti, 950
makāras, 894.
malkas, 926
málnos, 926
malónė, 921
malù, 980
mamá, 899
mandras, 901
mangalis, 888
márgas, 970
márška, 243
martì, 922
máudyti, 974
máuti, 87
mazgas, 971
medus, 919
mekčióti, 942
1755

=== page 904 ===

INDICES
INDICES
1757
1756
mélžu, 86
menkas, 902, 966
ménkė, 892
mėnuo, 945
mergà, 922, 970
mérkti, 83
miglà, 1077
milas, 899
miniù, 892
minkyti, 910
mintas, 173
minti, 913
mirgėti, 956
rengtis, 1280
paláidas, 823
rāžas, 1278
palvas, 1165, 1219
regëti, 146
pampti, 1171
rėžti, 1283
pàs, 1224
pasigendú, 1216
riáugmi, 454
patogùs, 1444, 1455
riekiù, 453
riešas, 144
pàts, 1225
pėdà, 1161, 1185
rimti, 525
pelděti, 1200
rišti, 1286
peľnas, 418, 1265
rópė, 1277
penki, 1173
rúkti, 1683
sakai, 1093
per, 1176
pérnai, 426
pérsti, 1176
sakau, 428
saldus, 75
sāpnas, 1535
saulė, 516
sausas, 171
miškas, 958
mišras, 920
pešù, 1164
mótė, 948
-pi, 440
móti, 893, 946
piáuti, 1249
mukti, 977
piemuō, 1217
seku, 447
seli, 386
mulkis, 898
pieva, 1215
sémti, 82
mulvė, 965
pikis, 1197
murdau, 236
pilis, 1220
murměti, 967
pinti, 1172
murti, 982
pirmas, 1245
pjauti, 1144, 1246
siékiu, 586
plaūčiai, 1208
siekti, 1236
siēti, 590
sijóju, 511
sikti, 748
sēnas, 430
sérgėti, 468, 1400
sidabras, 1329
musià, 976
mušti, 94
nāgas, 1087
naktis, 1027
naujas, 1009
negù, 263
neriù, 316, 424
niaūsti, 1011
plėnė, 1168
plėvė, 443
plókis, 1210
pra-, 1235
(pra-)skisti, 1360
siúti, 1531
skeliu, 1340
skabiù, 1343
skalikas, 1361
smagus, 960
smárdas, 1369
šaltinis, 1184
šāmas, 630
smáugti, 1371
šankus, 685
smirdėti, 1369
smukti, 988
šāpalas, 805
šaukštas, 798
šaukti, 659
sniegti, 1003
snústi, 1029
sóra, 1666
sótis, 21, 146
sotùs, 146
spākas, 1658
spālis, 1386
sparnas, 1248
spáudžiu, 1254
spáusti, 1382
spiáuti, 1252
spilgti, 1560
spindžiu, 1384
spingiù, 1559
spiriù, 153, 1374
spiros, 1387
šauti, 1349
šeimýna, 664
šeivà, 707
šérti, 752
šeši, 433
šēštas, 433
šēšuras, 399
šiēnas, 731
širdis, 644
šiřmas, 702
šis, 397
šiùpti, 1324
šlàpti, 713
šlaunis, 717
šliñti, 717
spisti, 1382
šlitis, 717
sprógti, 1429, 1433
šlúoti, 719
spurgas, 1376
šmulas, 671
sravà, 1282
stāgaras, 1410
stangus, 1392
statinė, 1390
stíebas, 1394
stigti, 1396
stirta, 1410
stógas, 1393
skersas, 441
stomuō, 1404
stovėti, 1407
skiedžiu, 694, 1437
skilándis, 1641
sūnus, 1528
priē, 1234
niedėti, 1083
prisimuolėti, 990
niekóti, 862
pulti, 1070
nóras, 1030
pūnu, 1256
norėti, 1031
pūrai, 1263
nu, 1025
purvas, 1264
núogas, 291
pušis, 1183
skirti, 665
nýtis, 1013
putà; 1259
ō, 1675
ráišas, 1286
opùs, 522
randu, 1271
skilvis, 624
sklempti, 1356
skrebėti, 776
skrèbti, 652
skusti, 1040
slēpti, 714
slogà, 882
subinė, 1524
surbti, 1292
su-vérti, 112
svagiù, 528
svēčas, 475
svēčias, 474
svekas, 1093
sveriù, 461
šókti, 685
šùlas, 1038
šunmuse, 803
šuō, 811
švánkus, 745
švilpti, 1304
tānas, 1458
tařpti, 1470
tarýti, 1496
tás, 1491
tašau, 1460
taūras, 1455
tè, 1476, 1494
teku, 1226
tēmyti(s), 1479
tèpti, 1494
tetervà, 1472, 1473
tētis, 1455
tėvas, 1448
pādas, 1228
rangus, 1286
padùrmai, 30
raūdas, 466
paišas, 1217
raukas, 1295
paisaй, 1250
rausvas, 467
slýsti, 870, 1069
svilti, 62, 385
tinti, 1466
titilvis, 1489
tr(i)ušis, 560
trānas, 106
tremiù, 1503
trepsěti, 1500
trinu, 1473
trobà, 1467
trūnėti, 1514
tu, 1420
tùkti, 1439
túlas, 1517
tūpti, 432
tūtuoti, 1521
tveñkti, 1311
tvérti, 1316, 1373, 1520
tvinstu, 1301
údra, 1526
ūdróti, 1124
ulbúoti, 1073
ulula (bañgos), 1071
ulúoti, 1529
ungurys, 372, 590
úodžiu, 1051
úolektis, 1678
úosis, 182, 1088
vaiveris, 35
vākaras, 470
váltis, 836
vanduo, 1527
varmas, 1291
várpa, 1110
vasarà, 366
vědaras, 1526
vedù, 374, 1051
véidas, 380
veliù, 384
velkù, 73
vémti, 417
veřpti, 138, 1276
veŕšis, 141
veržiù, 390, 1117
vētušas, 477
vežù, 491
viešpats, 1225

=== page 905 ===

INDICES
dramblis, 557
list, 867
maût, 974
melns, 924
merga, 243
merguôt, 238
murdēt, 236
stringt, 1411
stups, 1417
sust, 171
svakas, 1093
sviêdri, 579
svinît, 1193
šķēpele, 1346
šķērpêt, 1359
ár,
INDICES
cloth, 719
clú, 713
cluain, 713
ar-a-chrin, 673
arbe, 137
ard, 1101
argat, 127
áru, 1012
atbaill, 198
bacc, 194
báidim, 213
1758
stingt, 1392
vilbinti, 409
dels, 546
vilkas, 877
dêt, 548
anaid, 102
and, 425
15
diệt, 332
dirst, 304
drēbt, 1505
drubaža, 560
druska, 559
duonis, 347
dupêtiês, 350
žāses, 1630
vilna, 858
1127
vilti,
viŕbas, 1270
viršus, 1128
virve, 24
viřzis, 452
votis, 1684
výti, 579, 605
žambas, 282
žándas, 279
žāras, 1644
žárna, 1643
želmuō, 1636
žélti, 1638, 1642
žēmė, 1633
dubra, 358
dùre, 363
duša, 566
gans, 1586
gnīda, 747
grīva, 317
gùmstu, 266
guola, 293
pelt, 114
plakt, 1202
milns, 895
mukls, 986
naba, 1080
šķībs, 1352
ņemt, 1007
tešu, 1460
nīcām, 1021
tiêvs, 1448
nîdêt, 1083
niēkât, 862
tîgas, 1466
tūkât, 1516
ban-, 292
nikns, 1002
uôds, 1049
bán, 1546
pêda, 1161
uôlekts, 1678
barr, 1557
pļaut, 1144
pun(i)s, 1259
pupukis, 448
žéntas, 259
gùovs, 232
žeriu, 1615
gurds, 234
rieksts, 144
žiema, 1620
iēva, 1042
žióti, 1617
ils, 589
rūkēt, 1113
saime, 664
žisti, 1008
vâts, 1684
veruôs, 1096
virpêt, 1276
virši, 452
zèlts, 1652
znuôts, 259
zuobs, 282
bairgen, 1568
ball, 1550
ben, 292
benaid, 1574
bó, 232
bot, 1225
cnaí, 722
cnáim, 723
cóim, 664
coll, 669
cride, 644
críth, 1233
crú, 774
cruim, 414
cuach, 658
cúal, 659
da, 359
-dair*, 561
dall, 551
dám, 325
damnaim, 301
dardaim, 303
dechmad, 312
deidmea, 543
delb, 297
both, 1598
brágae, 242
dér, 299
brón, 244
žlejà, 1638
žmogus, 1232
žuvis, 607
ir, 121
kalss, 1346
kalt, 711
kampis, 633
žvelgiù, 537
kapât, 749
žvéngiu, 1569
kâpe, 632
žvėres, 547
Latvian
aîcinât, 37
kâre(s), 689
karinât, 646
kauls, 659
krausêt, 786
salms, 622
sāls, 75
sams, 630
seja, 1351
sirpe, 139
sīts, 673
skadrs, 1345
skripât, 1344
skundet, 1360
slāga, 882
sliet, 717
smag(r)s, 960
smiêt, 920
zuôds, 279
zuvs, 607
CELTIC
Old Irish
a, 1675
ad-bond-, 1258
ad-con-darc, 318
ad-ellaim, 402
ad-féded, 380
ad-gair, 271
ad-roilli, 405
-ágadar, 184
kauns, 659
aluôt, 61
knidêt, 724
asins, 366
kniêbt, 725
knūdu, 726
āte, 474
bâls, 1551
bambals, 226
krekls, 775
snāju, 1013
snaudule, 1029
-aig, 19
kūla, 618
bêgt, 1559
bèrns, 1562
kvêpt, 639
spals, 1428
aile, 73
blaîzît, 1579
lāpa, 830
spîdêt, 1384
blaurs, 1575
lapsa, 79
staiga, 1396
blêt, 221
leja, 844
stātis, 1391
ciēlava, 698
lekât, 856
stęga, 1410
darît, 353
liga, 869
stiba, 1394, 1406
ainm, 1085
ainmne, 931
aird, 127
alim, 98
all, 1220
bruth, 245
búachaill, 230
caech, 616
dess, 317
dí, 322
diabul, 1174
dían, 332
do-cer, 673
dóim, 299
caile, 687
caire, 646
cairem, 643
dorn, 363
camm, 1341
canim, 634
carr, 442
cath, 815
celim, 628
cen, 592
driss, 354
droch, 1507
drucht, 560
du-, 359
dū, 1633
dub, 1521
cerd, 678
écen, 97
céss(a)im, 1156
ech, 598
cét, 397
cét-, 656
cilornn, 627
cinim, 616
cír, 682.
clár, 715
cló, 712
eirg, 468
elae, 404
én, 1182
eó, 1042
ér, 57
erp, 460
1759

=== page 906 ===

1760
err, 1110, 1127
ess-, 433
fás, 159
fedid, 374
fén, 1138
ferc, 1097
indé, 1632
INDICES
slucim, 876
nem, 1007
slige, 861
i
nemed, 1006
ni-cria, 1233
ingen, 593, 1087
insce, 428
lac, 819
nigim, 1021
smi(u)r, 983, 1370
snäim, 1013
INDICES
brommach, 238
brúad, 1136
búas, 248
cá(i)d, 666
caccaim, 619
cercc, 776
ciar, 702
snáth, 1013
snigid, 1003
cail, 685
srennim, 1278
cais, 684
sreod, 1246
sreth, 1412
olann, 858
ónn-urid, 1180
i
súan, 1535
orb(b)e, 1114
súil, 516
suth, 1528
sruaim, 1282
tairm, 1495
táis, 1389
tamnaid, 1466
fichim, 440
fillim, 385
find, 592
láech, 833
nocht, 291
laigid, 853
óegi, 1064
laigiu, 403
lám, 1145
lassaim, 830
lenaid, 859
leon, 854
fir, 524
fo, 1535
lesc, 850
fo-geir, 542
folt, 836
for-bru, 1135
óeth, 1063
óin, 1058
fo-rimim, 525
(fo-)sligim, 861
fraig, 390
froech, 452
lethan, 1205
líach, 869, 1068
lie, 818
ligim, 846
lín, 864
-ling, 403
lóathar, 873
-fúar, 483
fuil, 1126
loch, 827
gae, 255, 1605
loth, 878
gáir, 271
luid, 409
galar, 1641
garg(g), 283
géis, 1630
gerr, 1622
giun, 267
glé, 1638
glenim, 277
glún, 272
gnáth, 273
gonim, 536
gort, 1645
luid, 1209
maidim, 890
maith, 914
mall, 927
már, 372
mebul, 930
melim, 980
menb, 902
mescaid, 920
mess, 919
ós, 1541
renaid, 1179
richt, 1231
rigim, 1099
rím, 131
ro-, 1235
ro-finnadar, 592
ro-geinn, 1613
ro-laimethar, 1030
rúad, 466
rúsc, 1288
saigim, 509
sain, 162
sáith, 146
salann, 75
saltraid, 72
samail, 89, 1075
scar(a)im, 665
scáth, 1360
sceinnid, 1339
sechur, 447
séim, 1384
tám, 1477
t-ānac, 422
at-noí, 1011
言
airim, 137
all, 63, 1168
cluain, 714
cned, 724
comm, 802
corrán, 788
crim, 783
crocán, 788
crú, 759
của, 730
cuire, 732
cuma, 632
dech, 321
del, 546
ochtach, 1183
on, 1044, 1085
ong, 1044
orbaind, 451
ro-s-teind, 1466
scaindrim, 1345
scellec, 1610
scríp(a)id, 1344
sellaid, 1406
serb, 1402
sesc, 603
sned, 747
sréimm, 1278
srengim, 1411
tomm, 1518
uirgge, 1116
ulcha, 1257
ussarb, 1402
Modern Irish
fraigh, 390
slaod, 1069
tanae, 1448
tarathar, 1468
tarb, 1456
teg, 1393
dobur, 358
teilm, 1461
drab, 1505
rucht, 1113
tiagu, 1396
éigid, 1057
Old Welsh
torc, 1310
éis(s)i, 521
eitne, 476
traig, 1507
úan, 89
úasal, 1541
vá, 507
Middle Irish
erc, 1178
ert, 449
ethaim, 388
fáir, 493
fés, 594
fí, 595
find, 594
cant, 656
cein, 616
dauu, 325
hair, 15
hepp, 428
}
minci, 901
petru-, 1499
1761
allas, 63
arathar, 137
frass, 465
gairb-driuch, 556
gaiset, 1608
arbor, 137
gemel, 266
art, 133
gúaire, 263
bern(a), 1555
lacht, 256
berr, 216
luan, 880
bláth, 1597
bligim, 86
blind, 219
slán, 1072
bond, 1255
sliassait, 1211
meng, 888
mess, 941
mocht, 986
och(a)ir, 1066
Middle Welsh
aer, 15
bara, 1568
bedd, 224
bele, 257
braich, 236
brefu, 237
breuant, 242
brwyn, 244
bugail, 230
byw, 216
mid, 919
selb, 405
guidid, 1216
mil, 926, 944
sell, 1406
mír, 947
hicc, 55
(h)uam, 481
mláith, 218
íasc, 607
ibid, 1195
il, 1221
imb-, 95
imbliu, 1080
imbrá, 454
in, 419
inathar, 527
moirb, 982
mosach, 985
múch, 1371
muinithir, 892
muin-torc, 901
nau, 999
necht, 1021
nél, 1012
sen, 430
ser, 157
serc, 1400
sern(a)id, 392
sernim, 1410
serr, 139
sí, 571

=== page 907 ===

1762
INDICES
INDICES
1763
Middle Breton
dellit, 405
carros, 442
nyfel, 1012
carw,
676
serch, 1400
cawdd, 684
tarfu, 1452
felch, 1385
cerdd, 678
tarw, 1456
serch, 1400
chwech, 433
telm, 1461
chwegr, 399
tlawdd, 1447
Breton
chwegr-wn, 399
clo, 712
clun, 717
tom, 1518
argud, 664
ucher, 470
hanter, 475
kentr, 673
Welsh
kleur, 715
cnaif, 722
cordd, 753
craf, 783
ambi-, 95
angen, 97
cuan, 658
dan-gos-, 760
(d)doe, 1632
deddf, 543
-derig, 561
digoni, 371
dol, 551
dryll, 559
awel, 25
benn, 1558
cant, 635
ceinach, 666
cerddaf, 1339
cethr, 673
mell, 928
Old Cornish
dof, 325
moroin, 922
Cornish
deleth,
eskit, 1363
405
mal, 928
chwerfu, 1425
clir, 718
gew, 255
dyrllid, 405
di-auc, 1678
ehedec, 1182
echel, 111
elain, 403
edn, 1182
elin, 1678
erw, 449
eskit, 1363
ex-, 433
garan, 267
gen, 267
gloew, 1638
go-grynu, 781
grug, 452
gweli, 1126
gwlan, 858
hanther, 475
haul, 516
hun, 1535
iach, 55
ias, 500
erch, 1178
garth, 1645
gawr, 271
gwraidd, 1285
gwyar, 595
helw, 405
hufen, 39
llawen, 835
Llydau, 1205
llywarn, 79
malu, 980
morwyn, 922
ner, 104
oged, 1087
pob-, 1180
rhith, 1231
iwrch, 348
safn, 1408
llydan, 1205
swch, 1532
mant, 909
syllu, 1406
merch, 922
mwg, 1371
uchel, 1541
byrr, 216
tro, 1507
Gaulish
Axrotalus, 57
caddos, 666
com-, 731
Dexsiva dea, 317
Kavapog, 807
lautro, 873
nemeton, 1006
Nertomārus, 372
Noviodunum, 1009
Suadurix, 510
suexos, 434
trigaranos, 267
Uxello-, 1541
Veragri, 15
Vindo-, 592
GERMANIC
Gothic
abrs, 176
af, 117
afdobn, 533
(af)holon, 686
afhvapjan, 639
(af)leipan, 870
aflinnan, 859
afmauips, 91
aggwus, 18, 174
agis, 184
agls, 13
ahana, 59, 184
ahs, 55
ahtau, 1066
ahtuda, 1044
aihtron, 584, 1057
ainfalps, 339
ains, 1058
air, 525
airpa, 449
aistan, 34, 45
aips, 40, 1063
aiwiski, 45
aiz, 1612
akrs, 16
alan, 62
alands, 67, 98
aljis, 73
ams, 1680
an, 97
ana, 97
ana-biudan, 1258
and(a)-, 108
ansts, 1084
aqizi, 111
ara, 1106
arbi, 1114
arjan, 137
arms, 134
asans, 1095
asts, 1050
appan, 161
atisk, 28, 29
atsnarpjan, 1023
atta, 165
auhns, 597
aukan, 171
faran, 1164
fawai, 1143
fera, 1187
fidur-, 1472
auso, 1131
aups, 173
awistr, 1061
azgo, 26
bai, 96
bairan, 1564
bairhts, 1554
balgs, 962
barizeins, 1568
barms, 1587
baurgs, 1262
beidan, 1162
beitan, 1560
bigitan, 1613
bilaigon, 846
bileiban, 64
bindan, 1558
bismeitan, 951
biwaibjan, 591
boka, 1566
bropar, 1589
brunna, 1590
brubfabs, 1225
daddjan, 548
daigs, 1459
dal(s), 551
daufs, 1521
daug, 1475, 1516
daur, 566
distairan, 318
diswinþjan, 40
diups, 358
doms, 350, 569
driusan, 559
drunjus, 554
dwals, 551
fadar, 1158
faiflokun, 1201, 1210
faihugairns, 1607
fairra, 1176
fairzna, 1247
fana, 1187
filu, 918, 1221
filufaihs, 1217
fimf, 1173
finpan, 114, 1221
fodjan, 1157
fodr, 1267
fon, 1261
fotus, 1228
fra-, 1235
fraliusan, 882
fram fairnin jera, 426
framwigis, 1592
fraweitan, 380
fruma, 1237
fula, 1266
fuls, 1256
gadars, 535
gadeds, 543
gaggan, 766
gamalteins, 924
ga-nah, 422
ganaitjan, 1083
ganisan, 1008
gards, 1645
gasmeitan, 1367
gasoþjan, 146}
gasts, 1034
gatarhjan, 318
gateihan, 309
gatiman, 315
gawi, 1055
gawidan, 377, 1051
gawigan, 255
gawigan, 491
gibla, 683
giutan, 1629
glitmunjan, 1638
gops, 7, 1606
gramjan, 1647
gulp, 1642, 1652

=== page 908 ===

1764
INDICES
INDICES
juk, 503
jund, 47
guma, 1633
jer, 1682
gunds, 636
-h, 1457
hafjan, 640
haidus, 1360
haihs, 616
kann, 273
kara, 271
kaupatjan, 735
hails, 731
kaurus, 203
haims, 664, 814
kinnus, 267
kiusan, 269
hairda, 753
kniu, 283
lailu, 845
hairto, 644
hairus, 678
haipno, 378
hamfs, 633
hana, 634
harjis, 732
hatis, 684
hauns, 659
laikan, 406
lasiws, 870
laun, 118
leihts, 403
leilvan, 845
lein, 864
hauri, 674
hausjan, 55
letan, 855
ligan, 853
himins, 630
lisan, 842
hlaifs, 716
niman, 1007
niujis, 1009
niuklahs, 273
niun, 427
0,1675
paida, 193
qens, 292
qiman, 192
qino, 292
qist, 1315
qiwa-, 216
Radagaisus, 255
raihts, 1099
raups, 466
rimis, 525
riqiz, 451
sa, 1041
saggws, 1081
ska þis, 151
skeirs, 1355
smals, 944
snaiws, 1003
snutrs, 1023
sokjan, 509
sparwa, 1375
speiwan, 1252
spilda, 1386
spill, 114
spillon, 334
spinnan, 1172
stains, 1405
stairno, 157
stairo, 1395
staps, 1391
steigan, 1396
stibna, 1408
twaddje, 344
tweifl, 117
twi-, 339
pana, 1491
baurban, 1470
þaurnus, 1470
baursjan, 1471
þaursus, 1500
pragjan, 1507
prins, 1502
bulan, 1447
uf, 1535
ufar, 1533
uhtwo, 59
un-, 1
und hita, 694
unmildjai, 898
uns, 519
unskawai, 565
wraton, 1271
writs, 1287
wruggo, 1452
wulfs, 877
wulla, 858
Old Norse
afl, 1067
aka, 19
ala, 98
ár, 525
arðr, 137
ár-gali, 512
ari, 1106
arta, 469
askr, 1088
áss, 512
atall, 1048
aurr, 100
ausa, 175
usanan, 102
usfilma, 1167
ushulon, 659
baka, 1600
bára, 1587
barn, 1562
ut, 1523
barr, 1568
wahsjan, 170
berja, 1555
hlaupan, 627
hlifan, 714
hlutrs, 718
hrains, 781
hramjan, 775
hrisjan, 781
hruk, 773
huhrus, 612, 620
huljan, 629
hund, 397
hups, 795
Ivairban, 649
Ivairnei, 680
lvaiteis, 1337
liudan, 409
lustus, 862
mag, 950
mahts, 950
maihstus, 88
maitan, 958
malan, 980
man, 929
mel, 949
menops, 945
merjan, 372
midjis, 935
mik, 263, 416
milib, 926
mimz, 947
mitan, 919
hvas, 1215
Ivapar, 1226
mip, 936
mizdo, 957
mops, 991
mundon sis, 901, 1237
munps, 909
lve, 1265
Ivis, 1487
im, 389
inu, 102
is, 591
itan, 375
iþ, 476
nahts, 1027
namo, 1085
naqabs, 291
:
stiggan, 725
sailvan, 447
stiks, 1405
stiur, 1456
saihs, 433
saihsta, 433
sair, 39
saljan, 405
salt, 75
sama, 1079
sarwa, 393
saps, 21
sauil, 516, 1213
sauls, 1038
saups, 172
si, 571
sibun, 448
sidus, 378
siggwan, 1081
sigis, 490, 491
sigqan, 367
sik, 365
simle, 1075
sina(s), 1333
sineigs, 430
sinteins, 394
sitls, 375
siujan, 1531
skadus, 1359
stomin, 1404
sums, 89
sundro, 475
sunno, 516
sunus, 1528
sutis, 478
swaihro, 399
swamm, 1372
swe, 1683
sweiban, 1338
swistar, 436
tagr, 299
taihswa, 317
taihun, 312
tains, 347
taujan, 358
tiuhan, 295
trauan, 355
triu, 316, 357
tulgus, 346
tun þus, 1049
wai, 1041
waian, 27
wait, 1053
walus, 76
walwjan, 388
wans, 482
warjan, 466, 526
wasti, 429
wato, 1527
waurkeiþ, 451
waurms, 1291
waurts, 1271, 1285
weihan, 440
widuwo, 512
wilwan, 70
winds, 27
wisan, 26
bjóða, 1258
blauðr, 1575
blautr, 1580
bógr, 1188
bók, 1566
ból, 1601
botn, 1255
brá, 1136
bresta, 1555
brími, 1591
brún, 1136
brunnr, 1590
bumla, 226
búr, 249
bón, 1567, 1601
borkr, 1586
dalr, 551
daufr, 1521
wiprus, 474
tuzwerjan, 359
wopjan, 524
twa, 359
wraiqs, 1272
drafli, 1505
1765

=== page 909 ===

1766
INDICES
dregg, 553
drjúpa, 560
gá, 706
gafl, 683
hremma, 775
leiðr, 63
hrífa, 1344
líða, 870
dubba, 1522
gall, 1642
dvol, 551
gan, 1617
dogg, 545
efna, 1080
garðr, 1645
hriflingr, 643
hríka, 778
hrinda, 784
ljósta, 852
lykna, 874
geirr, 255
hrjósa, 786
efni, 1080
geta, 1613
hrókr, 788
magr, 895
malr, 962
egg, 1681
gína, 1617
hræll, 775
maurr-, 982
eið, 600
eir, 34
eisa, 37
eista, 1054
ek, 373
elfr, 78
elgr, 71
endr, 1019
erta, 127
fá, 405
faldr, 339
falr, 418, 1265
farri, 1222
felmsfullr, 1167
gljá, 1638
glý, 1637
gæss, 1630
gjolnar, 1619
hronn, 777, 785
með, 936
glaumr, 1637
humarr, 631
mél, 909
sár,
glita, 1638
hvalf, 740
melta, 924
segja, 428
hvalr, 153
miga, 1076
selja, 405
glóra, 1636
hvel, 799
mjoðr, 919
sétti, 433
hvelfa, 740
mjór, 923
sími, 590
ró, 469
róa, 454
roora, 466
magn, megin, 950
rót, 1285
rókja, 129
INDICES
røkkr, 451
sal(a), 405
samr, 1079
sannr, 473
39
stig, 1396
stigr, 1396
stinga, 1392, 1410
stirðr, 1409
stjarfi, 1402
stjol, 1397
strangr, 1411
straumr, 1282
strjúka, 1413
stúfr, 1417
stynja, 1399
stækr, 1443
stong, 1410
súl, 1320
1767
gnit, 747
hverba, 755
mjúkr, 986
sina, 430
gnúa, 1640
hvern, 680
mjok, 918
skakkr, 1339
gómr, 1614
hverna, 680
múgi, 977
skalli, 1340
gramr, 1647
hod, 761
munda, 901
skapt, 1350
grimmr, 1647
hom, 723
my, 980
skarn, 1365
skeifr, 1352
gulr, 1642
iðrar, 431
-(i)ka, 373
fet, 1161
fit, 1161
gymbr, 1634
gorn, 1643
gós, 1630
fjall, 1168, 1220
há, 612
fjøðr, 1248
hafr, 640
fjoturr, 1160
hagl, 660
hali, 685
flaga, 1202
hamarr, 52
fleiri, 1206
haull, 687
fley, 1209
fló, 1202
flóa, 1213
flóki, 1200
herjann, 732
hjarsi, 680
í fjørð, 1180
í gær, 1632
júgr, 1124
jorð, 449
jorvi, 449
kass, 268
kjarf, kerfi, 287
kjarr, 268
kjóll, 262
kjósa, 269
kjúklingr, 290
kofi, 292
krumma, 287
kursi, 141
kvefja, 200
hlakka, 708
fnasa, 1214
fnýsa, 1214
hlaun, 717
hlíð, 717
foli, 1266
hljóð, 719
fótr, 1228
hniss, 725
fram, 1237
hníta, 724
kýll, 291
kokkr, 281
hnjóða, 726
lag, 853
fúinn, 1256
funi, 1261
hnykr, 748
mý, 976
mylia, 980
myrkr, 956
morr, 953
nakinn, 291
njól, 1012
nór, 999
skírr, 1355
skjalgr, 1346
skorpna, 652
slakr, 819
slíkr, 861
slím, 843
slókr, 855
norðr, 424
smali, 944
nøkkviðr, 291
smið, 1368
ofn, 596
ól, 12
órar, 1682
ostr, 503
posi, 248
rás, 469
rasa, 469
smjúga, 987
snara, 997
snarpr, 1023
sól, 516
sværa, 399
svefn, 1535
svelta, 385
svilar, 25
svima, 1333
svína, 1333
svoppr, 1372
sørvi, 393
tafn, 303
tál, 346
tími, 298
topt, 302
torbyfill, 304
trof, 353
tveggja, 344
tvistr, 340
tong, 299
þak, 1393
þarmr, 1495
spá, 1348
þefja, 1450
spánn, 1430
þegn, 1460
spark, 1376
þeira, 1491
rauðr, 466
sperna, 153
þiðurr, 1473
raun, 392, 456
spjorr, 1376
þjórr, 1456
rif, 456
sporr, 1375
rata, 1271
frúsa, frýsa, 1192
fúrr, 1261
fyl, 1266
folr, 1219
holfinn, 740
holr, 659, 730
hraukr, 773
hreinn, 781
lágr, 839
lauðr, 873
lé, 824
leiða, 870
leiði, 870
rífa, 453
rím, 131
ríp, 453
rjóða, 455
rjóðr, 466
staðr, 601
stafr, 1403
staurr, 1391
stertr, 1409
stífla, 1394
pollr, 1517
þúfa, 1521
þunnr, 1450
unnum, 1084
úr, 1129
usli, 486, 1530

=== page 910 ===

INDICES
1769
blat, 218, 1597
blāzan, 1577
blazen, 221
blecchan, 1577
1768
INDICES
vagl, 1138
stampa, 1398
vár, 367
stomme, 1404
vatn, 1527
svamper, 1372
vega, 491
valmōghi, 943
vami,
417
bodam, 1255
borōn, 1555
Modern Swedish
brāwa, 1136
fala, 444
färna, 1178
ver, 526
verk, 450
vil, 258
virgill, 1117
vírr, 598
værr, 524
vog, 1138
vokr, 1526
volr, 76
vor, 526
ylgr, 880
æðr, 527
æs, 521
órr, 1682
lō, 78, 875, 877
ögonsten, 868
Old High German
ad(a)ra, 527
ahir, 55
ahorn, 49, 50
ahsa, 111
ahta, 97
ogn, 59
ondurr, 426
Qxull, 111
Modern Icelandic
her past, 652
Modern Norwegian
aul (dial.), 170
Brund (dial.), 237
gir, 1635
hempe, 743
lake, 819
lape, 868
mor, 953
run(n)e, 463
Old Swedish
böle, 1601
īgār, 1632
kvaf, 200
kvaster, 1225
myra, 982
miærdher, 903
niūre, 1012
oghn, 597
ahtowi, 1044
alawāri, 524
albiz, 78, 404
amban, 1080
ana, 107
angul, 12
antōn, 500
ānu, 102
anut, 1019
aran, 1095
araweiz, 451
arbi, 1114
ars, 1110
asc, 1088
asca, 26
ast, 1050
atuh, 58
ātum, 164
bāen, 1600
bahhan, 1600
beitten, 1162
belihha, 1551
biliban, 864
bilinnan, 859
breman, 237, 1171
brestan, 1555
brun, 1594
buog, 1188
buohha, 1566
burst, 1557
butera, 233
butin, 250
chara, 271
chestinna, 655
chirsa, 677
chuo, 232
chutina, 797
dah, 1393
dahhazzen, 1443
darra, 1454
degan, 1460
derran, 1471
dolen, 1447
dorf, 1467
dunni, 1448, 1450
durfan, 1470
dweran, 1123, 1302, 1496
dwingan, 1311
ebenus, 368
egida, 1087
egidehsa, 1135
ei, 1681
eid, 40, 1063
eit, 37
eittar, 1054
eiz, 1054
elahho, 71
elina, 1678
elira, 67
ēra, 581
billih, 1574
bitelpan, 1464
ero, 449
erpf, 1114
fāli, 418, 1265
fallan, 1070
fano, 1187
gīri, 1635
gitwelan, 551
gizehōn, 321
glas, 1524
far(a)n, 1247
gold, 1642
far(ro), 1222
fedara, 1248
graba, 284
gram, 1647
fedelgold, 1181
fehtan, 1164
fel, 1168
felis, 1168
ferzan, 1176
fiara, 1187
filz, 1191
fincho, 1383
firstān, 445
(fir-)zeran, 318
fiuhta, 1183
fizza, 1161
flah, 1200, 1207
flehtan, 1207
flōh, 1671
fluoh, 1202
fnehan, 1214
folma, 1145, 1203
folo, 1266
forhana, 1178
fowen, 1251
fuir, 1261
funko, 1559
furben, 1231
galla, 1642
gans, 1630
garn, 1643
gebal, 683
gellan, 1623
ger, 1607
gēr, 1605
gerno, 1607
gersta, 779
geruohhen, 129
giãn, 1617
gikewen, 281
ginēn, 1617
grim, 1647
gruoni, 1642
gund, 636
guomo, 1614
hadu-, 761
hagal, 660
hal(a)p, 627
halm, 622
hamma, 723
hanaf, 637
hantag, 673
harawēn, 646
haso, 666
helan, 628
hellan, 624
hemera, 630
herbist, 649
herd, 527, 674
herdar, 527
hina, 592
hinkan, 1339
hinta, 671
hirn(i), 645, 680
hirnireba, 456
hirso, 662
hiruz, 676, 756
hlamōn, 710
hliněn, 717
hlut, 719
hniuwan, 726
(h)niz, 747
hol, 730
hōla, 687
honag, 723
hovar, 806
hregil, 775
(h)reigaro, 778
(h)rimfan, 769, 770, 783
hroso, 786
(h)roz, 756
huoba, 688
huohōn, 685
huolen, 686
hurt, 808
hūt, 810, 1363
(h)welben, 740
hwerban, 648, 649
igil, 489
ihh-ā, 507
itaruchjan, 454
iwa, 1042
jāmar, 519
jār, 1682
jesan, 500
kachazzen, 660
kalb, 314
kalch, 1610
kamb, 282
karp(f)0, 805
kavatōt, 1157
314
kilbur,
kiol, 262
kista, 705
kiulla, 291
kleini, 276
klenan, 277
klioban, 278, 650
klobolouh, 650
kran-uh, 267
krimman, 287
krump, 289
kruog, 788
kus, 803
labōn, 885
lahhan, 819
lam, 1030
lebara, 522
lecchōn, 846
lehtar, 853
leid, 63
leiten, 870

=== page 911 ===

INDICES
INDICES
1770
leiti, 870
lescan, 850
mūs, 985
naba, 1080
nackt, 291
sehto, 433
seifa, 1307
seim, 39
selah, 1318
lewo, 854
līdan, 870
näen, 1013
lihan, 845
nagal, 1087
sellen, 405
senf, 1333
lin, 864
sēr, 39
linta, 401
serawēn, 1036
sezzal, 375
liohhan, 850
līra, 879
lit, 717
liut, 408, 409, 833
lōh, 851
louft, 879
luhs, 875
lungar, 403
nazza, 21
nebul, 1012
nerian, 1008
sigu, 490
sihan, 584, 1512
sinnan, 110
nidar, 1003
nihhus, 1021
nioro, 1012
nй, 1025
siodan, 172
nuoen, 721
nuohturn, 1020
sizzen, 376
ōst(a)ra, 493
skaft, 1350
ottar, 1526
skena, 707
ovan, 596
steg, 1396
sterban, 1402
sterz, 1409
stih, 1405
stimna, 1408
stincan, 725
stior, 1456
stirna, 1401
stollo, 1404
strengi, 1411
sū, 1537
sul, 1038, 1320
suntar, 162, 475
Volkmār, 372
waen, 27
wagan, 1138
walzan, 68
wanast, 521
wār, 524
wara, 1096
weban, 1540
weit, 599
werc, 450
widomo, 374
wihhan, 382
getwās, 540
glien, 1623
glīmen, 1638
grūz, 662
hader, 761
hamel, 629
hemmen, 688
hurren, 442
jiuch, 498
kamin, 631
kerben, 286
koffer, 765
wihsela, 594
krage, 242
sunu, 1528
winister, 131
krebe, 287
suozi, 510
wintbrāwa, 594
læge, 839
swamp, 1372
wintōn, 40
leffen, 834
swār(i), 461
wisunt, 216
māen, 84
magan, 950
magar, 895
mago, maho, 943
māl, 949
malaha, 962
mandala, 92
mark, 975
melchan, 86
melo, 897
mendi, 901
menni, 901
mespila, 936
metu, 919
milti, 898
mindel, 909
miscan, 920
mit(i), 936
mitti, 935
moraha, 235
mucka, 976
muckazzen, 976
mūla, 980
muljan, 980
muoan, 990
muojan, 91
muoter, 948
mūr-bere, 968
murg(i), 236
peh, 1197
pfawo, 1457
pfeit, 193
pflastar, 1203
pfoso, 248
pi-gezzan, 1613
prod, 245
quellan, 198, 223
queran, 311
redan, 784
riga, 453
rohōn, 455
rost, 467
rōt, 466
ruoba, 1277
ruowa, 469
saban, 1299.
sagen, 428
sleffar, 1067
slihhan, 861
slinc, 820
smāhen, 405
smalaz fihu, 944
smelzan, 80, 924
smero, 981, 983, 1370
smerzan, 1367
smid, 1368
smīzan, 1367
snar(a)ha, 997
sner(a)han, 997
snerfan, 1023
snur, 1028
spān, 1430
sparo, 1375
sper, 1377
sprehhan, 1429
springan, 1381
stampfōn, 1398
stanga, 155, 1392, 1410
stanta, 1390
sāmi-, 520
scaban, 1343
scala, 1340
scato, 1359
scelah, 1346
scelifa, 1356
sceran, 665
scouwon, 565
scur, 444
spurnan, 1374
staben, 1403
stanc, 1443
stara, 158, 1661
starablint, 1401
stat, 1391
swehur, 399
sweiz, 578
swelli, 1320
swelzan, 385
swerban, 1425
swigar, 399
swigen, 1327
swin, 1537
swinan, 1333
täen, 548
tāt, 543
tenar, 540
teppid, 1451
theismo, 1389
thunkōn, 1457
tila, 546
tolc, 537
tou, 545
toub, 1521
toum, 564
trebir, 1505
tuom, 569
turi, 566
tut, 1521
ubir, 1533
umbi, 95
untar, 431
wuosti, 159
wurchit, 451
zahar, 299
zāla, 346
zan(d), 1049
zangar, 299
zelt, 313
zeman, 315
zeso, 317
zi-, 327
ziga, 333
zihan, 309
zinko, 300
zīt, 298
zoraht, 318
zuo, 307, 362
zur-, 359
zuscen, 299, 358
zweiio, 344
Middle High German
äder, 527
be-nuomen, 1085
blæjen, 221
dien, 548
gebel, 683
gehiuze, 795
lerz, 872
mag, 950
mahen, 943
malhe, 962
mange, 888
māt, 84
meckatzen, 942
mühen, 977
mül, 968, 980
mulber, 968
nйn, 1025
quiten, 797
ragen, 146
riben, 1288
riha, 453
sam(p)t, 79, 1660
sant, 1660
schie, 707
sliten, 1069
sluchen, 876
slurc, 835
smiegen, 987
snerhen, 997
snouwen, 1532
spachen, 1427
sperke, 1375, 1386
stif, 1394
strūch, 1416
1771

=== page 912 ===

1772
INDICES
INDICES
stunge, 1392
swimen, 1333
traben, 1500
tübel, 1522
usel(e), 486
uter, 1124
verse, 1222
vert, 1180
wester, 429
wilge, 410
wurz, 1285
zinober, 700
Modern High
German
Acht, 97
aus, 1523
Auster, 1120
backen, 1600
Baumwolle, 199
Belche, 1551
benne (dial.), 1558
Bienenbaum, 1574
bille (dial.), 1550
Blatt, 1597
Büchse, 1259
Burg, 1262
feil, 1265
Feuer, 1261
Fisch, 607
Fitze, 1161
Flüche, 1202
Fohlen, 1266
Funke, 1560
Futter, 1267
gackern, 619
gähnen, 1617
genesen, 1008
grunzen, 288
gut, 7
Hahn, 512
hell, 624, 1346
Hengst, 613
Hohn, 659
Hufe, 688
Hummer, 631
Joch, 498
Kastan(i)e, 655
kikeriki, 696
Koben, 292
Korn, 271
Lappen, 868
qua(c)k, 727
rams (Bav.), 783
rasen, 469
rif, 453
sanft, 519
scheel, 1346
Scheide, 14
scheißen, 1380
Scherbe, 1347
schier, 1355
schmähen, 405
schmelzen, 924
Schnee, 1003
Schnittlauch, 650
Schnur, 1028
schwelen, 62, 385
Schwiegervater, 399
Sittich, 1669
Skizze, 1438
spalten, 1386
starr, 1401
stechen, 1405, 1410
Steiẞ, 1253
stinken, 1443
Strauch, 1416
lauter, 718
Tapete, 1451
lehnen, 717
leiden, 870
tappen, 533
Tochter, 561
Bütte, 250
Tor, 566
Leier, 879
Darm, 1495
Döbel, 1522
lesen, 842
Dorn, 1470
Drohne, 106
du, 1420
Düne, 549
Eberesche, 1247
Ehre, 34
Erbe, 1632
Ernte, 1095
erwürgen, 1117
Esel, 697
Fahne, 1187
falzen, 1191
Farn, 1247
Faust, 15
lieb, 879
löschen, 850
machen, 910
Mange(1), 888
Meer, 530
mengen, 910
messen, 919
Tunke, 1457
tuten, 1521
Ufer, 523
(ver)zehren, 318
Wald, 836
Wasser, 1527
Widder, 474
winden, 30
wölben, 740
Metall, 937
wollen, 882
Miete, 957
mischen, 920
zeihen, 309
Zelt, 346
Nix, 1021
zwir, 339
öde, 173
Orf, 1115
Planke, 1549
Swiss German
Fluh, 1202
wilgia, 410
wirkiu, 451
Old Saxon
ambon, 1080
atol, 1048
bothme, 1255
brāha, 1136
brū, 1135
dren, 106
dreno, 554
drūbōn,, 560
edor, 1120
fathmos, 1226
filmen, 1168
flaka, 1200
fordwelan, 551
gēr, 255
halōn, 624
hirot, 756
hlinōn, 717
hōba, 688
kiosan, 269
lagu, 827
lakan, 819
lungor, 403
makōn, 910
rōkjan, 129
seggian, 428
selmo, 1320
simo, 590
skauwōn, 565
slac, 819
spado, 1374
teman, 315
thegan, 1460
thorp, 1467
thrabon, 1500
tō, 362
torht, 318
war, 1096
watar, 1527
wealtan, 68
wican, 382
wrisil, 1287
wrītan, 1287
Middle Low German
äderläten, 1435
anken, 1044
bleken, 221
bōdem(e), 1255
bragen, 238
dövel, 1522
draf, 1505
dülle (Westfäl.), 1517
gaden, 7
grēme, 1650
ham, 723
helen, 736
kūt, 282
lak, 819
lē, 824
nucken, 1028
ōrlepel, 868
ōst, 1050
pladderen, 1201
rās, 469
schore, 1436
slap, 868
slīpen, 1067
slūken, 876
stivele, 1394
stūve, 1417
wrich, 1286
wrimpen, 1274, 1280
wriven, 1288
Modern Low German
barsch, 1557
bohnen, 1546
hal(!)-, 1346
mussig, 985
spaken, 1427
strif, 1414
Old Low Franconian
māla, 944
Modern Dutch
tarwe, 303
blaken, 1577
boter, 233
delven, 1464
happen, 640
hoeve, 688
insteken, 167
kakelen, 619
kakken, 619
maal, 944
miggelen, 1077
mot, 974
noemen, 1085
oonen, 89
reiger, 778
roekeloos, 129
saffier, 1307
snerpen, 1023
wrang, 1452
zorgen, 62
Old Frisian
brein, 238
bufle, 229
naken, 291
nōmia, 1085
East Frisian
åndul, 104
Old English
ād, 37
afol, 1067
anda, 500
æfnan, 1080
ægerfelma, 1168
badan, 1162
bēn, 1567, 1601
beorðor, 1564
bere, 1568
1773

=== page 913 ===

1774
INDICES
INDICES
berstan, 1555
blætan, 221, 1577
bodan, 1255
bōnian, 1546
bræs, 215
brow, 1136
bræð, 1121
broð, 245
brægen, 238
būr, 249
byden, 250
canc, 253
cearu, 271
ceorfan, 286
ciegan, 281
clæg, 277
clone, 276
clūd, 277
clufu, 650
cnāwan, 273
cofa, 292
cræft, 773
cran, 267
crocca, 788
fneosan, 1214
forn(e), 1178
forstandan, 445
fyrs, 1263
gān, 706
lēapor, 873
lempi-healt, 710
lēo, 854
leod, 408, 833
lox, 875
lungre, 403
mæd, 949
māwan, 84
gar, 255
(ge)cynd, 273
gemyscan, 94
genesan, 1008
mearh, 953
melcan, 86
gierran, 682
meltan, 924
glēam, 1637
mengan, 910
glēo, 1637
metan, 919
glīw, 1637
gēs, 1630
gnað, 1640
gōs, 1630
grima, 1650
grindan, 1643
grun(n)ian, 288
hænep, 637
hamm, 723
hŷdan, 682
heala, 687
higora, 704
cruma, 288
crumb, 289
dolg, 537
dubbian, 1522
ēanian, 89
earn, 1106
eoh, 598
eolh, 71
eorp, 1114
fæðm, 1226
fana, 1187
fell, 1168
felt, 1191
fēt, 1228
fetan, 1185
finc, 1383
fleax, 1207
floc, 1200
flōcan, 1210
flōwan, 1213
hlōwan, 624
hōlian, 686
holt, 709
hræn, 777
hramsan, 783
hrān, 781
hreðer, 527
hremman, 775
hrēol, 775
hrif, 643, 1229
hrifeling, 643
hrindan, 784
hrot, 756
hwealf, 740
hwēol, 799
hyll, 742
modrige, 949
molda, 223
moru, 235
mūga, 977
myrge, 236
næsc, 994
neowol, 1003
ofen, 596
ōfer, 523
posa, 248
ræs, 469
read, 466
rēod, 466
rēodan, 455
ribb, 456
rŷn, 455
rocettan, 454
row, 469
sāpe, 1307
sceadu, 1359
sceolh, 1346
scia, 707
score, 1436
sear, 171
selma, 1320
slæc, 819
slīdan, 1069
smeart, 1367
knitu, 747
slipor, 1067
læcc(e)an, 822, 829
læppa, 868
lapian, 834
smēocan, 1371
smeortan, 87, 1367
smiþ, 1368
sniwan, 1003
snōd, 1013
sōl, 516
spade, 1374
spincan, 1559
spōn, 1430
sprecan, 1429
spyrd, 1387
staca, 1410
stela, 1397
stenan, 1399
stif, 1394
stige, 1396
stingan, 1392, 1410
stōwian, 1407
stroccian, 1413
stunian, 1399
sulh, 412, 1069
sunne, 516
swamm, 1372
swelan, 62, 385
swer, 461
swēte, 510
swodrian, 478
swōgan, 528
tal, 346
te-, 327
tiergan, 352
tima, 298
to, 307
tor-, 359
tord, 304
trem, 351
trēow, 316
trig, 354, 355
trum, 357
peccan, 1443
þeg(e)n, 1460
þinan, 1485
boll, 1517
þúf, 1521
bweran, 1302, 1496
þwinan, 1326, 1334
wād, 599
wealwian, 388
welig, 410
weotuma, 374
wir, 598
wreon, 1286
writan, 1287
wyrt, 1285
Middle English
bilurten, 872
bothme, 1255
crawe, 242
dabben, 533
nere, 1012
scateren, 1345
schalowe, 1346
spale, 1428
wrāh, 1286
Modern English
arse, 1110
bite, 1560
box, 1259
buffalo, 229
draff, 1505
ramsons, 783
sing, 120
smart, 1367
smith, 1368
wheel, 799
yean, 89
INDO-IRANIAN
Sanskrit
a(n)-, 1
ámsa-, 1680
aņhú-, 18, 174, 1141
aktú-, 58
ákṣa-, 111
ákṣi, 1134
akṣṇoti, 1089
áňkas-, 12
ankurá-, 12
ánga-, 334
ángiras-, 9
ajá-, 18, 41
ájati, 19
ajirá-, 10
ájma-, 19, 1045
ájra-, 16
áñcati, 12
áti, 476
áti stig-, 1406
ádmi, 375
ádhara-, 29
ádhṛṣta-, 161
ádhvan-, 410, 425
ánas, 430
ándhas-, 104
ániti, 102, 1672
ánila-, 102
ánu, 97
ántara-, 431
ánti, 109
anyá-, 73
anyátra, 73
anyo'nyam, 72
ápa, 117, 1010
ápa-citi-, 1487
apa-chid-, 1437
ápa-tya-, 938
ápi, 440
api-vṛṇoti, 112
ap-túr, 1004
ápnas-, 177, 1080
á-prās, 1192
apvá-, 522
ábharat, 365
abhí, 95
abhicārá-, 95
abhi-dāsati, 327
abhrá-, 179, 1075
ábhri-, 179
ábhva-, 180
áma-, 1079
ámatra-, 82
1775

=== page 914 ===

INDICES
INDICES
1776
ámīti, 1078
ámīvā, 106, 1078
amŕta-, 242
áyaḥ, 1612
aratní-, 1679
aravinda-, 451
ári-, 459
áricat, 845
aritár-, 454
árjuna-, 126, 127
árṇas-, 463
árdati, 127
ársas-, 412
árhati, 77
alala-bhávant-, 60
álpa-, 61
áva, 167
ávas-, 424
ávi-, 1061
ávidat, 577
ávyaya-, 1061
ávradanta, 1271
aśáni-, 59
aśnáti, 53, 59
áśman-, 52
áśri-, 57, 1066
áśru-, 300
áśva-, 598
aṣṭā(u), 1066
aṣṭhīvánt-, 707
ásarat, 72
asi-, 112
ásita-, 149
ásura-, 512
ásrk, 366
asáu, 397
ásthi, 77, 155, 1120
asmadiya-, 519
asmán, 519
ásmi, 389
ahám, 373
ágas-, 14, 425
ā-cámati, 1465
āņi-, 627, 1679
ātí-, 1019
ātmán-, 164
ādhrá-, 1030
āná-, 1534
apí-, 523
āmá-, 1680
áyu-, 41, 47
á ruva, 1683
ali-, 1679
ávadhit, 1676
āvika-, 1675
āvis, 46
ā-śáyāna-, 1677
áśiyān, 1678
áśirta-, 675
āśú-, 1678
ása-, 27
ā-sad-, 1047
áste, 518
ā-hanás-, 479
á-huti-, 1628
iccháti, 34
itáḥ, 432
iyarti, 572
irasyá, 128
iş-, 39, 106, 595
işirá-, 580
isu-, 595
iṣṇāti, 573, 592
işmá-, 591
isyati, 1062
ihá, 582
ikṣate, 427, 1094
idé, 34
irmá-, 134
īsá, 1052
íhate, 183, 606
úkṣant-, 171
ukhá-, 597
áhi-, 489, 1135
á, 507, 1628, 1675
a-kúvate, 729
ugrá-, 171
úcyati, 398
ut-, 1523
utá, 527
úttara-, 1539
udanyáti, 1527
udára-, 1526, 1539
ud-gūrṇa-, 198
udrá-, 1526
undura-, 592
éjati, 31, 33, 41
kirí-, 1246
édha-, 37
édhate, 470
édhas-, 37
énas, 40
kitá-, 703
kukkubha-, 763
kuņi-, 801
kunkuma-, 782
kutsáyati, 795
Kúbera-, 612
kṣáyati, 606, 789
kṣárati, 1570
kṣaḥ, 1632
kṣāra-, 1036
kṣití-, 791
kṣiti-, 1571
éman-, 1058
kṣurá-, 1039
émi, 388
erakā-, 42
kubhrá-, 806
"
kşivati, 1326
úpa, 1535
evám, 380
kumbhá-, 802, 806
upa-dŕś-, 1536
ójas-, 171
upabdá-, 440
ósati, 486
kulya-, 659
kúṣṭha-, 760
kṣṇauti, 1040
ksvédati, 1668
upamá-, 1532
óhate, 486
úpara-, 1533
upári, 1533
upa-valhate, 409
ubháu, 96
ubhnáti, 1540
úrana-, 129
urú-, 484
urvárā-, 137
ululí-, 1071, 1529
uśánt-, 400
uşás-, 493
uṣā-kala-, 621, 624
usrá-, 172
údhar, 1124
ūná-, 481
ūrjá, 1097
úrṇa-mradas-, 219
úrṇā-, 858
ürdhvá-, 1097, 1101
ŕkṣa-, 133
ṛghāyáti, 468, 1115
rdhnóti, 67
rjipyá-, 33
rjrá-, 126
гñjáti, 1099
rnóti, 1107
rtá-, 123
rtú-, 144
rté, 457
Ţsvá-, 1110, 1111
ekatara-, 475
ej-, 32
káța-, 808
"
kaḍitra-, 1616
kant(h)a-, 49
katará-, 1226
káti, 1225
kanda-, 746
kapați, 638
kapaná, 632
kapí-, 684
kám, 661
kamáṭha-, 631
karaka-, 651
karkata-, 646
karkara-, 645
karki(n)-, 646
karpása-, 648
karbara-, 678
kars-, 1464
kaláma-, 622
kalayati, 670
kalikā-, 628
kalyāṇa-, 627
kás, 1215
kastira-, 655
kastūrī, 656
kásmin, 519
kāñcana-, 723
kāṇá-, 669
kārú-, 690
kālá-, 617
kālinda-, 739
kiki-, 704
kuhú-, 682
kú, 1516
kúpa-, 804
kúbara-, 794
kūrmá-, 712
kr-, 1468
krkara-, 776
krdhú-, 729, 1362
kṛntáti, 665
krp-, 1440
kṛpá, 1229, 1231
kṛpāṇa-, 788
kŕmi-, 414
kekara-, 616
kéta-, 704
kévaţa-, 615
kokilá-, 733
kauti, 658, 813
kmárati, 630
kyāku-, 1324
krátu-, 773
kramela-, 630
kravis-, 774
kravyá-, 774
krīnāti, 1233
krūrá-, 774, 786
króśati, 773
klámyati, 709
klomán-, 1208
kṣaṇóti, 790
kṣatrá-, 789
kṣatrapa-, 1311
kṣáp-, 471, 722, 1664
khañjati, 1339
khadgá-, 1556
khara-, 652
gangūyati, 281
gácchati, 192
gañjana-, 253
gadh-, 7
gadhya-, 7
gandhá-, 1467
gábhasti-, 369
gáya-, 217
gárbha-, 238, 314
galati, 198, 223
gavini, 230
gátram, 213
gáhate, 213
giri-, 257, 1282
girí-, 227
girṇá-, 214
gudá-, 282
gurú-, 203, 484
grhá-, 1645
go-śatam, 230
gánh, 232, 233
grapsa-, 287
grásate, 286
grastar-, 262
gráha-, 284, 390
grīvā-, 317
grīşmá-, 239
gláu-, 277
gha, 380
ghaná-, 479, 1586
gharghara-, 682
1777

=== page 915 ===

1778
INDICES
INDICES
gharmá-, 542
ghāsé-ajra-, 15
-ca, 1457
cakrá-, 799
cañcala-, 694
catvárah, 1472
candrá-, 634
cáyate, 1218
cárati, 1169, 1464
carú-, 680
cárman-, 665
carma-mná-, 913
cárvati, 1263
caste, 1459
cayati, 1480
cikéti, 1487
cid, 703
cinóti, 1216
jyótsnā-, 881
jválati, 312
tákman-, 1460
tákṣati, 1460, 1476
tákṣan-, 1460
tatá-, 1455
táti, 1497
tánas-, 1458
tanú-, 1450
tanuté, 1450
tamāla-pattra-, 896
tará-, 1495
tárati, 1004, 1469
táruṇa-, 1471
tarjati, 1452
tarkú-, 164, 1452
tala-, 1478
tav²-, 1327
táva, 1420
tavás-, 1456
cyávate, 1322
chāyā-, 1339, 1351
chyati, 1435
jaghána-, 766
tāyú-, 1481
jajána, 273
tādŕśa-, 1478
tārá-, 1496
táraḥ, 157
tigmá-, 1482
jáni-, 292
jámbha-, 282
tāla-, 1478
jáyati, 213
járate, 311
járant-, 269
jarás-, 268
jarbhurīti, 1591
jásate, 1315
jáhāti, 706, 1631
jāgāra, 370
jánu, 283, 294
jámātar-, 259
jāmí-, 259
jíghrati, 1121
titaü-, 330
tittirá-, 1473, 1489
tiro-dhā-, 543
tujyáte, 167
turá-, 1489
tulá-, 1447
tūṇa-, 1424
túla-, 1517
tṛṇa-, 1470
tŕṣyati, 1471
tvanakti, 1311
tvárate, 1123
tváṣṭar-, 1310
tvis-, 1317
tvéṣati, 1318
tsárati, 386
dámsas-, 326
dákṣiņa-, 317
dadárśa, 318
dádāti, 332
dádhāmi, 1483
dán, 1049
dabhnóti, 162
dáma-, 347
damitár-, 301
dám pati-, 319
dáyate, 298
dárdar(i)ti, 297
dardurá-, 303
darbhá-, 304
darśatá-, 318
dása, 312
dasrá-, 295, 296, 298
dáhati, 1476
dána-, 363
dánu-, 326
dāpayati, 303
-dāri-, 326
dáru, 349, 357
dāváne, 332
dāśnóti, 308, 321
devár-, 296
dur-mánas-, 359, 931
dus-, 359
duhitár-, 561
dūrá-, 327
dúrvā-, 303
dŕti-, 318
dŕś-, 351
drsád-, 311
dódhat-, 1474
dosa-, 322
dosá-, 306, 309
dyánh, 498
drávati, 351
dráti, 304
drāntu, 331
dru-, 357
dru-padá-, 771
druma-, 356, 357
dvayá-, 344
dvádaśa, 362
dvíḥ, 339
dviṣṭha-, 340
dvésti, 308
dhagnu-, 1568
dháyati, 548
dhar-, 552, 558
dharma-, 353
dhavate, 545
dhāká-, 546
dhātár-, 1483
dháman-, 1483
dhāraka-, 569
dhára, 551
naḍá-, 996
nana-, 1007
nápāt, 102, 1010
nábhas-, 1012
námati, 1006, 1007
nár- 104
naraka-, 424
náva, 427
náva-, 1009
návate, 1011
náśati, 422
náśyati, 1004
násate, 1008
nāthá-, 1084
nábhi-, 1080
náma, 1085
ní, 1003, 1008
niktá-, 1021
níndati, 1085
ni-mná-, 1243
ni-ṣṭhā-s, 937
nica-, 1021
nú, 1025
nau, 1029
náus, 999
pardate, 1176
parṣá-, 1179
pálikni, 1167
palitá-, 1219
pávate, 1198, 1251
páśyati, 318, 1348
pásas-, 1173
pắt, 1217, 1228
pátram, 1267
pāmán-, 1186
pāyú-, 1217
párṣṇi-, 1247
pālavi, 1168
pāṣāṇa-, 1168
pimśáti, 1190, 1217
pingalá-, 1188
pitár-, 1158
pítrvya-, 114
pínāka-, 1193
píparti, 1164
pip pakā, 1196
pibáti, 1195
piș-ṭá-, 1250
pīḍáyati, 1189
pitudāru-, 1199
pivan-, 1188
pivas-, 1188
putau, 1259
púnar, 1257
púmāms-, 1265
pácyate, 1180
pajrá-, 1184
páñca, 1173
pana-, 418
pánate, 1265
pátati, 1182, 1196
purás, 1154
páti-, 1225
pátni, 1227
dhārú-, 547
pátra-, 1248
dhíṣnya-, 549
padá-, 1161
dhur-, 1316
pádya-, 1161
dhūnóti, 567
dhūmá-, 564
deha-, 1459
ditá-, 322
diná-, 302
divyá-, 338
diśáti, 309
diśā-, 335
diná-, 309, 500
diyati, 332
dhṛṣú-, 535
dhyāman-, 1323
dhráṇati, 554
nák, 1027
nakhá-, 1087
nagná-, 291
pádyate, 1185
pánthāḥ, 669, 1221
paraśú-, 1167
pári, 1176
pari-kşít-, 791
purú-, 1221
puru-péśa-, 1217
puro-gavá-, 1232
pulaka-, 1256
pūga-, 1253
púr, 1220
pūr-dhi, 1222
púrva-, 1244, 1245
Pūṣán-, 1149
prthú-, 1203, 1205
pŕdāku-, 1152
parút, 1180
párur, 1163
pŕśni-, 1178
parṇá-, 1247, 1248
pŕsan-, 1244
te, 1406, 1491
jináti, 215
-tta-, 332
jihmá-, 350
tyajati, 1316
jivá-,216
trayaḥ, 1502
jusáte, 269
trásati, 1507
dirghá-, 346
jóguve, 224
tri-ká-, 1510
dúdhi-, 567
jñātá-, 273
tri-vatsá-, 477
dunóti, 358
jyá-, 215, 495
trác-, 13O2
dúraḥ, 566
1779

=== page 916 ===

1780
INDICES
INDICES
péśa-, 1217
pyúkṣṇa-, 1252
prá, 1205, 1235
bhrú-, 1135
makhá-, 916
macate, 911
pratará-, 1240
práti, 1238
majján-, 975
prátika-, 1240
pra-parṇa-, 538
mañjarī, 904
mañju-, 888
-mat, 1479
praśna-, 1207
matá-, 173
prá-svādas-, 510
mádati, 890, 974
prātár, 1244
mádhya-, 935
prāyaḥ, 1206
próthati, 1192
mádhu-, 919
plávate, 1209
madhya, 936
plīhán-, 1385
mánas-, 931
plúși-, 1671
maná-, 960
plehate, 1211
manák, 902, 966
ploṣyati, 1209
mánthati, 961
psá-ti, 1666
mandirá-, 900
phalati, 1386
mányate, 892
phalgú-, 1560
phūtkaroti, 1600
badhnáti, 1558
bándh-u-, 1171
babhrú-, 1594
bála-, 210
bálbaja-, 225
bahíḥ, 69
bahú-, 1160
madhyám-dinam, 499
máyate, 86
marakata-, 1365
márīci-, 907
maruva(ka)-, 82
marj-, 87
márta-, 243, 969
mīḍhá-, 957
mina-, 892
mívati, 87
mudira-, 974
múrmura-, 967
muşká-, 971, 985
múhuḥ, 236
múka-, 978
mūrá-, 992
mūrtá-, 243
mürdhán-, 223
múla, 980
mús-, 985
mrgá-, 970
mrc-, 217
mṛṇīhí, 907
mrtá-, 242
mrdú-, 217
mrdnáti, 87, 201
mṛśáti, 235, 908
méthati, 958
medhá, 901
rákṣas-, 133, 456
rajatá-, 127
vadhú-, 374
rájas-, 451
rájyati, 1279
rámate, 525
rājā, 129
rārahāņa-, 403
rásnā-, 505
rikháti, 453
rip-, 864
riśádas-, 684
ruj-, 76
rujáti, 850, 879
rudhirá-, 466
réjate, 406
rocá-, 851
rocáyati, 852
ró(d)hati, 409
rauti, 1683
laghú-, 403
lápati, 834
lábhate, 838
laví-, 824
la-las-a-, 836, 862
lināti, 859
meçá-, 921
méhati, 1076
lasati, 840
mlātá-, 218
laşati, 862
márdhati, 898
yákṛt, 522
lākṣā, 827
márya-, 921
yájati, 12
mála-, 963, 965, 979
yajňá-, 13
malinī, 924
yatará-, 1117
líbujā, 819
máhi, 918
yati, 440
mā, 416, 887
yábhati, 499, 1063
bódhati, 1258
má, 941, 947
yámati, 519
bhága-, 297, 1543
bhájati, 1543
máti, 12, 940
bāhú-, 1188
bi-bhr-más, 1199
budh-ná-, 1255
bhánati, 1567
bharati, 1564
bhárman-, 1564
bháti, 1546, 1567
bhāryá-, 1602
bhás-, 1552, 1602
bhāsa-, 1567
bhinádmi, 1560
bhramará-, 1171
bhrátar-, 1589
māmsá-, 947
mātár-, 948
mátrā, 940
māyā, 955
márjmi, 86
mās-, 945
mitrá-, 959
mináti, 923, 952
miśrá-, 920
misáti, 958
mih-, 1077
yáva-, 497
yás, 1117
yát, 1683
yātar-, 389
yugám, 503
yudhmá-, 1538
yunákti, 498
yúvan-, 47
yüyám, 1531
yúş-, 503
rámhate, 403
rákṣati, 64
limpáti, 64
luncati, 1113
lubdha-, 879
lūna-, 231, 881
léhmi, 847
lotra-, 118
lopāśá-, 79
lohá-, 466
vakṣáyati, 170
vagnú-, 1176
vácas-, 447
vájra-, 14
vatsá-, 474, 477,928
vádati, 168, 1526
vádhri-, 378
vanisthú-, 521
vandhúra-, 30
váyas-, 599
var-, 384
váras-, 484
Váruņa-, 1128
varutra-, 388
varūtár-, 294
vártate, 1276
várdhati, 1101, 1280
varsá-, 1128
várṣati, 1128, 1129
‹ várṣman-, 461, 1287
valká-, 840
valmika-, 982
vásati, 26, 158
vásana-, 429
vasantá-, 366
váste, 429
vástra-, 429
vasná-, 1681
vásman-, 429
váhati, 491
vā, 507
vāghát-, 486
váta-, 27
váti, 27
vātula-, 27
vāyati, 23
vár(i), 100
vāraka-, 525
vástu, 158
váhas-, 1138
ví, 578, 1437
vimśatí-, 381
vik, 1064
vijáte, 382, 1053
vidhávā-, 512
vindáti, 592
viśáti, 1056
viś-páti-, 1225
visá-, 595
vi-şah-, 604
visu-, 600
vīrúdh-, 408
vŕka-, 877
vrkíḥ, 880
vrjána-, 390
vṛścáti, 1273
vrsan-, 403, 465
(v)rsa-bhá-, 141
vṛṣṇí-, 135
véga-, 1053
véti, 579
vedá-, 578
véda, 1053
védas-, 380
vevijyáte, 44
véśa-, 1056
veśyà-, 1056
veṣṭate, 209
vyáyati, 605
vyāghrá-, 1684
vrajá-, 390
vrihí-, 1113
śams-, 760
śámsa-, 814
śákṛt, 748
śańkhá-, 728
śata-gu-, 396
śatám, 397
śátru-, 761
śaphara-, 805
śáma-, 671
śámyā, 629
-śay-á-, 1099
śara-, 1260
śárāva-, 680
śáru-, 678
śárdha-, 753
śalá-, 623
śaśá-, 666
śas-, 662
śāna-, 815
śārá-, 690
śāśadúḥ, 666
śithirá-, 615
1781

=== page 917 ===

1782
INDICES
INDICES
1783
śíras-, 677
śīrṣā, 645
śúka-, 1669
śuva-, 803
śúska-, 171
śúşyati, 171
śūna-, 793
śúra-, 807
śŕnga-, 335, 766
śṛngavera-, 501
śéte, 664
śéva-, 664
śócati, 799
śoşa-, 171
śyená-, 586
śrayati, 717
śrávas-, 713
śruvam, 719
śréyāms-, 774
śróņi-, 717
ślakṣṇá-, 820
śváyati, 797
śváśura-, 399
śvaśrú-, 399
śvas-, 803, 809
śvasiti, 809
śvá, 811
śvitná-, 1488
sás-, 433
sasthá-, 433
(niḥ-)ṣṭhívati, 1252
sa-, 1, 1634
sá(h), 1041
sákhi-, 113
sakhāy-, 181
sagarbhya-, 20
saghnóti, 1326
sácate, 447
satyá-, 473, 1117
sa-dívaḥ, 173
sadhry-añc-, 30
sána-, 430
sanutár, 102, 162
sanóti, 110, 420
sápati, 439, 448
stibhi-, 1406
saptá, 448
stiyāḥ, 1405
saptamá-, 368
strṇāti, 1410
sám, 1
sama-, 89
samá-, 1074, 1079
samád-, 1074
sam vid-, 34
sáras-, 415
sárpati, 464
sarpís-, 415
sárma-, 1105
sárva-, 1072
sarvá-tāt(-1), 1072
savi-, 368
sas yá-, 511
sáhate, 491
sahásra-, 1634
sáhuri-, 490
sādhú-, 583
sáman-, 1057
sāmi-, 520
sara-, 1297
sincáti, 584
sísarti, 572, 1109
sītā-, 1060
sidati, 376
sīm, 571
simán-, 590
su-, 484, 931
su-dív-, 478
su-mánas-, 931
sūkará-, 1537
súte, 1528
sūdáyati, 510
sūnú-, 1528
stṛṇóti, 1401, 1412
sthagati, 1393
sthátar-, 1391
sthána-, 361
stháman-, 1404
sthíti-, 1391
sthúṇā-, 1417
snáti, 1013
snavan-, 1011
sníhyati, 1003
snuşá, 1028
snauti, 1000
spandate, 1430
spárdhate, 1387
spaś-, 1348
sphuráti, 153, 1374, 1434
sphúrjati, 1429
sphyá-, 1374, 1430
sma, 945
smáyate, 920
smárati, 591, 909, 932
små, 887
syáti, 591
syúman-, 1531
srávati, 1282
srúc-, 1293
srédhati, 1069
sva-, 365
svaka-, 516
svatá-, 476
svadha-, 378, 395
svapiti, 478
svápna-, 1535
súrya-, 516
svarati, 407
skándati, 1339, 1341
svásar-, 436
svādú-, 510
skunāti, 444
skhálate, 1428
svéda-, 578
stána, 1153, 1403, 1404
stanati, 1399
stabhnáti, 1403
stari-, 1395
hamsá-, 1630
hadati, 1618
hánu-, 267
hánti, 536
hárati, 1644, 1645,
1649
háras-, 542
hari-, 1638
hári-, 149, 1642
harm(1)yá-, 1626
háryati, 1607
hárṣate, 1627
hásta-, 15, 1621
hāyaná-, 1620
hí, 263, 1123, 1633
hitá-, 1483
himá-, 1620
híra-, 1643
híraṇya-, 1642, 1652
hutá-, 1628
hŕdaya-, 644, 1119
héman, 1620
héṣas-, 1606
hóman-, 1628
ayžō.nuuamnǝm, 1571
ahma, 519
aibi, 95
aiẞii-āxšaiia-, 1094
aiiara, 525
aipi, 440
ama-, 1079
amǝša-, 242
ana, 97
antara-, 431
aogǝdā, 486
aojaite, 486
apa-had-, 1047
arǝjaiti, 77
aram, 123
arša-, 133
asaiia-, 1351, 1339
ascuua-, 707
asista-, 1437
baosah-, 1258
baodaiti, 1258
bā, 1565
bānu-, 1546
bāzu-, 1188
bǝzuuaitē, 1160
bi-taĕya-, 1406
bruuat-biiam, 1136
buuāuua, 1598
būjaiiamna-, 1565
būjat, 1565
cahiiā, 1487
carǝman-, 665
cašman-, 1459
ca9ru-, 1499
caxra-, 799
cikaiiat, 1487
cinuuaiti, 1216
cinuuant-, 1487
dadāiti, 332
hemantá-, 1620
asman-, 52
aspa-, 598
dasami, 1483
aspǝrǝzatā, 1381
aspō.gara-, 214
danhah-, 326
darǝya-, 346
dadarǝsa, 318
hyás, 1321, 1632
hrasvá-, 1622
hvárate, 537, 1585
Middle Indic
atthi-taco, 155
āṭā, 65
tārisa-, 1478
pippari, 1174
loptra-, 118
sakkharā- (Pāli), 1302
singivera- (Pāli), 501
su-mukha, 625
Avestan
aduuan-, 410, 425
aēsma-, 37
aěšma-, 1057
aēta-, 1063
aētahmāiiuš, 40
aĕuua-, 1060
aēzah-, 183
aya-, 184
asrū-, 300
ast-, 1119
aš-, 7
aša-, 65
auruua-, 480
auuah-, 424
auua-jaynat, 536
auuapasti-, 1182
auuarǝ, 319
azaiti, 19
azdiia-, 470
azgata-, 1326
aži-, 489, 1135
aiiu, 35, 47
āsiiå, 1678
äste, 518
āsu-, 1678
āzi-, 183
baẞra-, 1594
baga-, 297, 1543
bairišta, 1562
dam, 362
dāman-, 1483
dāmi-, 539
dānu-, 326
dāta-, 332
dātar-, 1483
dāuru, 349
dbōištǝm, 327
dājiṭ.arǝta-, 1571
dōng paitiš, 319
disiieiti, 309
dīdaińhē, 296
dražaite, 352
dugǝdar-, 561
duš-, 359, 931
duš-manah-, 359, 931
duuaēdā, 308
-Säiti, 543
ǝrǝduua-, 1101
ǝrǝnuuainti, 136

=== page 918 ===

1784
INDICES
INDICES
ǝrǝzata-, 127
ǝrǝzi, 1116
ǝrǝzifiia-, 33
frabda-, 440
fraĕštǝm, 1206
fra-stanuuanti, 601
fra-šnu-, 280
fra-tǝrǝsaiti, 1507
frā, 1244
fräiiah-, 1206
fsarǝma-, 1658
fštāna-, 1153, 1404
gaĕsa-, 1608
gaiia-, 217
gairi-, 227
gaona-, 263
gaoš, 232
garǝẞa-, 314
garǝma-, 542
gauua-, 290, 369
gāman-, 192
gǝnā, 292
gu-, 290
hupō.busta-, 1258
huška-, 171
huuarǝ, 516
huxšnuta-, 1040
hu-, 1537
ida, 582
išu-, 595
izaēna-, 41
iziieiti, 183, 606
jayāra, 370
jaidiiemi, 544, 1216
jainti, 536
janaiti, 536
jiiā-, 215, 217
jiiātu-, 217
jīti-, 216
kaēnā-, 1218, 1487
kaii-, 1218
kaine, 616
kamarā, 630
kaōfa-, 806
karš-, 1464
mainiiu.šūta-, 1322
gǝrǝbuš-, 314
gramǝṇtam, 1647
gufra-, 292
yžaraiti, 1570
im, 571
hacaitē, 447
haf-šī, 448
ham-, 239
ham-päfräiti, 1192
hana-, 430
ma-, 416
hanarǝ, 162
hauruua-, 1072
hauruua-tāt-, 1072
haxa-, 1421
hazah-, 491
hazaŋra-, 1634
hē, 365
hišku-, 603
hi-šmarǝnt-, 591
hu-jiiāiti-, 1525
hunu-, 1528
mörǝndat, 87
nadant-, 1085
naptiia-, 102
nas, 1004
nas-, 1004
nā, 1029
nāismi, 1083
nǝmah-, 1007
niyrāire, 198
pada-, pada-, 1161
paĕman-, 1188
paēsa-, 1217
pairi, 1176
pairi-daēza-, 1151, 1459
paiti, 1225, 1226
pantå, 1221
parǝna-, 1247
parō, 1154
pa⁹ni-, 1227
pauruua-, 1245
pāiiu-, 1217
pāman-, 1186
pāraiia-, 1164
pǝrǝdu-, 1205
piuuah-, 1188
pusā, 92, 1256
raĕ9-, 870
rah-, 135
raocah-, 881
raoxšna-, 880
madu-, 919
pāšnā-, 1247
maēzaiti, 1076
mayna-, 291
mainiieite, 892
mairiia-, 921
manah-, 931
maoiri-, 982
maraiti, 932
marǝta-, 243, 969
masah-, 942
masišta-, 942
mazdā, 901
rasman-, 1099
raš-, 133
rašah-, 456
rāšaiieņte, 456
rǎšta-, 1099
mā, 931, 941
rǝnjiiō, 403
mānaiieiti, 931
ruu-, 403
mǝrǝya-, 925
mǝrǝncaitē, 217
mǝrǝta-, 242
mǝrǝzu-, 236, 238
migra-, 959
mižda-, 957
saēna-, 586
saēte, 664
sar-, 675
sarah-, 641
satǝm, 397
sādra-, 684
sārǝntē, 675
scindaiieiti, 1344
simā, 629
snaēža-, 1003
snaoda-, 1025
snāuuarǝ, 1011
sparǝga-, 1376
spas-, 1348
spasiieiti, 318, 1348
spǝrǝzan-, 1385
sraiiah-, 774
srauuah-, 713
srinu-, 717
sru-, 335, 676
staman-, 1408
staora-, 1456
stāiti-, 1391
starǝm, 157
stǝrǝta-, 1412
stija, 1406
stūṇa-, 1417
surunaoiti, 719
sura-, 793, 807
šačiti, 791
(ana)-šita-, 791
šiti-, 791
šiiao-man-, 1474
siiauuaite, 1322
tarōi-dīti-, 543
taršta-, 1507
tašan-, 1460
tauruna-, 1471
tauuah-, 1456
tāiiu-, 1481
tāšt, 1460
tigri-, 1482
tūiri-, 1520
9ẞarǝs-, 1310
9ẞisra-, 1317
9ẞōrǝštar-, 1310
gråŋhaiiete, 1507
ubdaĕna-, 1540
udara-, 1526
udra-, 1526
upa, 1535
upairi, 1533
upara-, 1533
uruuaĕsa-, 1286
uruuant-, 1683
uruuāta-, 393
uruuisiia-, 1286
uruxti-, 851
usaiti, 493
uši, 1131
uua, 96
uxšiieitī, 171
йna-, 481
,
vacah-, 447
vadar-, 378
vaĕya-, 1053
vairiia.stāra-, 131
vaŋri, 366
varǝd-, 1101
varǝk-, 73
varǝnā, 858
varǝsa-, 839
varǝša-, 1273
varǝzǝm, 450
varšni-, 135
vaxš-, 170
vazaiti, 491
vādāiiōiț, 1676
vāta-, 27
vāza-, 1138
vǝhrkam azrōdaidīm, 15
vǝrǝc-, 73
vǝrǝzna-, 390
vǝrǝziian, 390
vǝrǝziieiti, 451
vi-gā9-, 213
vi-mad-, 919
vīs-, 1056
visa'ti, 381, 1056
viša-, 595
vohu-, 484
vouru-; 484
xraosaiti, 773
xratu-, 773
xrūma-, 786
xrura-, 786
xšaiieiti, 789
xšap-, 722
xšarǝm, 789
xšuuaš, 433
xumba-, 802, 806
x'ar-, 908
x'arǝnah-, 1318
x'asura-, 399
x'atō, 476
yaēš-iia-, 500
yaogǝt, 498
yaoš, 35, 47
yatāra-, 1117
yauua-, 497
yauuaē-ji-, 1525
yā, 1683
yakarǝ, 522
yārǝ, 1682
yāsta-, 504
yō, 1117
zadaŋha, 1618
zaiian-, 1620
zairi-, 1638, 1642
zairimiia-, 1626
*zanauua, 267
zara-, 1607
zaraniia-, 1642, 1652
zarǝnu-maini-, 901
zasta-, 1621
zazāiti, 706
zāmaoiia-, 259
zāmātar-, 259
zānu-drājah-, 283
zara-, 1642
zå, 1632
zǝrǝdaĕ-, 644
zi, 1123
ziiā-, 213
ziia, 1620
zināiti, 215
zimō, 1620
zi, 1633
1785

=== page 919 ===

INDICES
1786
žnubiiō, 280
Old Persian
adam, 373
adā, 1483
afuvā, 522
aiva-, 1060
anā, 97
apiy, 440
aršan-, 141
baga-, 191, 297,1543
Bardiya, 1366
basta-, 205
dasta-, 1621
dāta-, 1483
dim, 955
duvaištam, 327
fra-, 1235
fratara-, 1240
gādu-, 251
hama-, 1079
ham-ataxšata, 1455
Haxāmaniš, 180
jadiyāmiy, 544
kā, 732, 1265
kāra-, 732
krš, 681
Maguš, 889
martiya-, 908
maškā, 934
madišta-, 942
mā, 941
Migra-, 959
patiy, 1226
stāna-, 361
tarsatiy, 1507
tigra-, 1482
9ah-, 760
ud-pata-, 1182
upariy, 1533
upa-stā, 446
uška-, 171
vardana-, 390
vidam, 1056
INDICES
xšnāsa-, 273
yauna, 609
xšaça-pāvan-, 1310
kēbūt, 693
laglag, 871
lädän, 855
mahr, 903
Middle Persian
man, 960
marvā-rīd, 904
angur, 10
azg, 1122
frasang, 1151
ganj, 255
jakar, 522
kalapad, 626
mang, 888
marvārīt, 904
pambak, 199
parik, 1147
rōpās, 79
šalwār, 1307
tedzrev, 1472
mori, muri, 968
mušk, 971
mūrd, 984
nana, 1007
nāv, 999
ni-kūhīdan, 795
palang, 1152
pari, 1147
pālēz, 1151
pista, 1197
pil, 410
qafiz, 638
raxna, 826
varak, 129
rūda, 294
yāsman, 574
zānūk, 283
Modern Persian
āganiš, 479
ārd, 65
ārōy, 454
azay, 1122
bād(i)yah, 206
birinj, 1102
būm, 246
daftar, 341
dāna(k), 301
farsang, 1151
gēs, 1608
gōšā, 290
gul, 1290
gurs, 840
yaram, 1647
jigar, 522
kabar, 639
karamb, 769
karyadan, 650
kaval, 611
kālbud, 626
saya, 1351
sandal, 1305
šakar, 1302
šamšīr, 1305
šāna, 790
taxš, 1493
tāb-ad, 1451
tāj, 1403
vardīj-, 1112
xargōš, 821
xaya, 1681
xār(ā), 652
xusrū, 399
yasaman, 574
zanax, 267
zar, 269
zarnix, 141
zōpin, 1327
žāla, 1608
Pashto
mēčan, 950
prāng, 1152
sōe, 666
yina, 522
yum, 84
žmanj, 790
Ossetic
æxsirf, 1036
bæmbæg, 199
don, 326
fændur, 1149
duis, 339
en, 419
fēced, 1483
horitur, 1607
im, 591
loebertatem, 408
odōs, 1051
oino, 1058
osmen, 1060
iouxmenta, 498
quia-nam, 1299
sa-psa, 1041
færæt, 1167
mæng, 888
tærqus, 821
Sovos, 365
suad, 1683
tagam, 1472
zæl-, 271
zældæ, 1639
zærond, 269
Sogdian
mnk, 888
murzak, 236
pwrɗnk, 1152
zwtk, 503
zy'nt, 149
Khotanese
dīśś-, 334
pāysa-, 1184
phvai, 1374, 1430
rriys-, 406
ysanuva, 267
Kurdish
būz, 1566
ghilas, 677
pūr, 1256
Afghan
vrižē, 1113
ITALIC
Old Latin
escit, 470
āsa, 27
cluere, 718
deicō, 554
Latin
ab, 117
abacus, 3
abies, 5
*abitōrium, 5
abnuō, 1011
abolla, 5
abs, 186
Acca, 52
accipiter, 1248
acer, 50
acer, 57
Achivi, 181
acte, 58
acus, 55
adarca, 19
adeps, 64
adoleō, 63
ador, 28, 29
aedēs, 22, 37
aemidus, 1054
aerumna, 44
aes, 1612
aesculus, 31, 152
aevum, 35
ager, 16
agilis, 10
agina, 111
agna, 59, 184
agnus, 89
agō, 19
agolum, 10
aiō, 110
āla, 111
albus, 77, 78
alcēs, 71
alea, 515
alica, 69
alicula, 72
aliud, 72
ālium, 71
alius, 73
alius alium, 72
alō, 62, 67, 98, 1001
alvus, 170
amaracum, 82
amāre, 1078
amb(i)-, 94
ambō, 96
ambulō, 61
amma, 88
amphora, 96
amulum, 93
amurca, 87
amygdala, 92
an, 97
anas, 1019
anc(u)lāre, 95
ancora, 13
anculus, 95, 1169
angina, 18
angō, 18
anguilla, 372, 591
anhēlāre, 97
animus, 102, 1672
anna, 107
ansa, 521
änser, 1630
ante, 109
antemna, 110
antrum, 110
aper, 438, 640
1787

=== page 920 ===

INDICES
1789
1788
apiō, 120
apium, 178, 1574
aplustr(i)a, 178
aptus, 120, 522
araneus, 124
arāre, 137
arceō, 133
ardea, 469
arduus, 1101
āreō, 27
argentum, 126, 127
argilla, 126
arguō, 127
aries, 460
arinca, 122
arma, 134
arrabō, 140
ars, 143
artemo(n), 142
artus, 144
arvīna, 124, 1112
arvum, 137
ascalōnia, 149
ascia, 111
aser, 366
asinus, 1086
axis, 111
INDICES
axungia, 1088
babae, 189
baburrus, 190
baccar, 194
bacchinon, 189
baculum, 194
bal(i)neum, 195
ballaena, 1549
ballāre, 197
Balliō, 210
bal(Duca, 196
bambax, 199
barbarus, 201
bargus, 241
bāris, 202
bassus, 205
batioca, 206
baubor, 207
bibō, 1195
bifariam, 340
birrus, 216
bis, 216, 339
bisōn, 216
blaesus, 218
blatio, 219, 1159
asper, 154
blatta, 219
at, 161
blitum, 222
ātriplex, 165
bōlētus, 250
atta, 165
attilus, 474
au-, 167, 173, 1109
audiō, 43
augeō, 171
bombus, 226
boō, 224
bōs, 232
brācae, 235
bracchium, 236
bratus, 235
augur, 171
augustus, 171
brevis, 236
auris, 1130
brōmus, 246
aurora, 493
bruchus, 243
būbalus,, 229
būbō, 246
aurum, 1652
(aurum) coctum, 1071
aveō, 425
avia, 31
avis, 35, 1064, 1681
avus, 290
būcina, 248
bulla, 225
burdō, 232
būricus, 1264
burrus, 249
būtỹrum, 233
buttis, 233
butubatta, 207
buxus, 1259
caballus, 611, 728
cabō, 635
cacabāre, 619
cacāre, 619
cac(c)abus, 619
cachinnus, 660
cactus, 620
cadamitās, 613
cadō, 665
cadus, 614
caecus, 616
caenum, 1193
calamus, 622
calare, 624
calceus, 627
calidus, 687
calix, 800
callum, 737
calpar, 627, 667
calvor, 686
calx, 832, 1610
camēlus, 630
camera, 630
caminus, 631
cammarus, 631
campus, 633
camurus, 630
camus, 688
canaba, 634
cancamum, 612
cancelli, 613
cancer, 281, 646
candor, 634
canis, 636, 811
canna, 636
cannabis, 636
cano, 512, 634
cānus, 666, 1033
caper, 640
capiō, 640, 688
caprificus, 458
capsa, 661
capulus, 816
carabus, 642
caracalla, 642
carbasus, 648
carcer, 645
carchesium, 652
cardō, 767
caries, 1260
carina, 651
carināre, 646, 681
carpisc(u)lum, 643
carpō, 649, 788
carrus, 442, 650
cassiterum, 655
castanea, 655
castrō, 662
casula, 653
catīnus, 763
caucum, 658
caulis, 659
caupō, 638
cavannus, 658
caveō, 729, 732
cavus, 730
cedo, 397
cedrus, 663
cēlāre, 629, 931
celer, 670
celēs, 669
-cellō, 711, 742
cēnseō, 760
cento, 673
centrum, 673
centum, 397
cerasus, 677
cerebrum, 645, 677,
998
cēreolus, 690
cernō, 781
cernuus, 675
cervus, 335, 676
ceterum, 71
charta, 1616
chartulārius, 1616
chrisma, 1650
cibōrium, 693
cibus, 693
cicada, 696
cicer, 781
cicuma, 696
cincinnus, 695
cinis, 747
circus, 779
cis, 694
cista, 705, 1602
citrium, 705
citrus, 663
cīvis, 664
clādēs, 709
clāmāre, 710
clangō, 708
clāvus, 711
clepsi, 714
clināre, 717
clīvus, 712
clūnis, 717
coactor, 742
coaxāre, 727
coda, 1111
collis, 742
colo, 1169, 1464
colostra, 1260
columba, 667
colus, 720
coma, 744
commentus, 173
comminus, 370
communis, 86
conditiō, 543
conditor, 1483
cōnor, 371
cophinus, 765
coquo, 1180
coracinus, 750
cordis, 644
corium, 816
cornix, 750, 758
cornum, 771
corpus, 1229, 1231, 1440
corvus, 750, 758, 1624
cōs, 815
costum, 760
cotinus, 761
cottabus, 762
cottana, 762
crambe, 769
crāpula, 768
crātis, 808
creō, 752
crepida, 778
crepō, 776
crōcire, 788
crocus, 782
crūdus, 786
cruor, 774
crusta, 786, 787
cubitum, 795
cubus, 795
cucubio, 763
cuculus, 733
cucumis, 1330
culleus, 735
cum, 656, 731, 1038
cuminum, 83
cunctārī, 1066
cupa, 804
cuprum, 805
cūra, 1472
currō, 442
curvus, 808
cutis, 810
cutis, 1363
cyathus, 792
cydōneum, 797
cymba, 802
dacruma, 300
daps, 303, 310
dē, 322
dēbilis, 197, 210

=== page 921 ===

1790
INDICES
INDICES
1791
decem, 312
decet, 321
dēfluō, 890
dēfrutum, 245
delpa, 1332, 1489
dēns, 305, 306, 1049
dēnsus, 305, 306
depsō, 320
dexter, 317
dicis, 335
ēnsis, 112
equus, 598
ēr, 1630, 1641
fiscus, 215
flaccus, 218
flagellum, 1588
flēmina, 1577, 1580
ērūgō, 454
ervum, 451, 1108
flīgō, 1579
es, 389
fluō, 1578
ēst, 375
fodiō, 224
et, 476
ex, 433
excrementum, 778
expergiscor, 370
folium, 1596
follis, 196
for(c)tis, 209
forāre, 1555
forda, 201
extrā, 489
dicō, 309
dies, 173
digitus, 300
dīrus, 308
dis-, 327, 781
discrimen, 617
faba, 1548
dius, 338
dīvus, 330
doceō, 345
dolāre, 297, 313
doleō, 324
dolus, 346
dominus, 732
domitor, 301
domus, 347
dōnum, 363
dormiō, 304
du-, 338
duco, 20, 295
dūdum, 327
ē-, 454, 507
faciale, 1547
factum, 1548
fāgus, 1566
fallō, 1566
falx, 495, 1549
fāma, 1567
farciō, 1589
fascia, 204, 1557
fascinum, 203
fascis, 205, 1557
fastigium, 1557
febris, 1476
fēced, 1483
fēcī, 582
fel, fellis, 1642
fēlāre, 546
-fendō, 536
dulcis, 278
fēnus, 479
duodecim, 362
feriae, 540
dūracinum, 363
feriō, 202
durēta, 354
ferō, 1564
fervō, 1590
ebenus, 368
fiber, 1594
fica, 1572
ficus, 1421
elephās, 410
fidēs, 1432
ēlogium, 404
fidō, 1162
emplastrum, 1203
filius, 546
endo, 362, 421
filum, 215
findō, 1560
enim, 397
fingō, 549
ebur, 410
egō, 373
en, 520
forēs, 566
formica, 967, 982
formus, 542
fovea, 1618
fraces, 553
frāter, 1589
fremō, 237, 1647
frendō, 1643
fricāre, 1553
frigō, 1594
frīgus, 1285
fringilla, 1593
frumen, 1556
frustum, 559
fū, 1564
fūcus, 1595
fugiō, 1565
fui, 1598
fūmus, 564
funda, 1430
fundō, 1629
fundus, 1255, 1257
fungus, 1385
für, 1602
furfur, 1617
futis, 1629
gabata, 253
gaesum, 255, 1605
gagātēs, 253
galbanum, 1609
galea, 257
gallus, 621
gandeia, 254
ganea, 260
ganniō, 253
garriō, 262, 271
garum, 262
gaudeō, 270
gaulus, 262
gaunaca, 263
gausa pe(s), 263
gaza, 255
gelidus, 264
gena, 267
gener, 259
genista, 274
genū, 283
gerdius, 268
gerra, 268
gignō, 273
gingrina, 272
glamae, 274
glāns, 195
glārea, 1636
glittus, 277
glōs, 259
glūbō, 278
(g)nōscō, 273
gōbius, 812
grabātus, 766
grānum, 271
gravis, 203
gremium, 287
grūmus, 288, 720
grunniō, 288
grūs, 267, 1624
gryphus, 289
gubernō, 794
gula, 312
gumia, 265
gurdus, 234
gustāre, 269
guttātus, 284
habēs, 4
hāmus, 1605
hauriō, 175, 180
hebes, 673, 692
(h)eia, 379
(h)elops, 413, 414
helus, 1638, 1642
helvus, 1624, 1642
hērēs, 1631
heri, 1632
hernia, 1644
hiäre, 1617
hibernus, 1620
(h)ibiscum, 575
hiems, 1620
hinnus, 593
hirriō, 682
hirundō, 1623
hiscō, 1617
homō, 1633
hōra, 1682
hordeum, 779
horreō, 1627
hortus, 1645
hospes, 1225
hostis, 489, 1034
humi, 1613
humilis, 1633
humus, 1633
ianitrīcēs, 389
ibi, 582
icō, 585
iecur, 522
Iegius, 508
ilia, 588, 594
imber, 1075
in-, 1
inclutus, 719
inde, 307, 425
indulgeō, 346
in-gruō, 1645
inguen, 21
inseque, 428
insicium, 600
instaurāre, 1391
instīgāre, 1406
inter, 431
intus, 432
inuleus, 423
(in-)vītus, 595
invocō, 429
Iovis, 498
ira, 1057
ire, 388
is, 591
iuba, 377
iugera, 498
iūgis, 1525
iugum, 503
iungō, 498
iūs, 503
iuvenis, 47
labāre, 868
labeō, 1623
lac, 256
lacerāre, 826
lacerna, 871
lacerta, 813
lacertus, 832
lacus, 827
laena, 1636
laevus, 824, 825
lagūna, 820
lallāre, 828
lāma, 857
lamenta, 858,
lāna, 858
langueō, 820, 854, 868
lapis, 848
lardum, 834
largus, 401
läridum, 834
lasanum, 835
lascīvus, 836, 862
lassus, 855
lateō, 831, 859
lātus, 1447
laurus, 307
lavābrum, 818
lavāre, 873, 885
lavō, 873

=== page 922 ===

1792
INDICES
INDICES
1793
laxus, 820
lēdanum, 855
legō, 842
lembus, 847
lemurēs, 830
lēns, 747
lentus, 401
leō, 854
lepista, 848
lepōs, 849
lepus, 840
lestūdō, 1120
lēvir, 296
levis, 403
lībāre, 843
liber, 1073
liber, 408
Libitina, 67
libra, 867
lien, 1385
ligō, 866
lilium, 845
līmāx, 843
limus, 843, 844
lingō, 846
linō, 69
linum, 864
liqui, 845
līra, 867
litāre, 866
littera, 341
litus, 69
lōdix, 884
longus, 869
lōrica, 569
lōrum, 480, 884
lubet, 879
lūceō, 852
lucrum, 118
lūcus, 851, 872
lūdus, 869, 870
lūgeō, 850
lūna, 880, 1319
luō, 881
lupiō, 883
lupus, 877
melior, 927
melius, 895
membra, 945, 947
membrana, 945
memini, 929
memōria, 930
mēnsis, 945
lurcor, 835
lutra, 1526
lux, 872
luxus, 874
menta, 955
Lyaeus, 881
mereō, 922
mergae, 87
lyra, 879
maccus, 895
macellum, 895
mespilum, 936
metallum, 937
mētior, 949
macer, 895
machaera, 915
micciō, 942
māchina, 950
macies, 942
mactare, 889
macula, 1367
maena, 892
maia, 891
mālobat(h)rum, 896
malt(h)a, 898
mālum, 944
malva, 896
mamma, 899
mānāre, 901
mandō, 909
mānēs, 946
manganum, 887
margarita, 905
maritus, 922
marmor, 907
marsup(p)ium, 908
massa, 890
mateola, 894
māter, 948
mattea, 914
matula, 891
mē, 416, 949
medeor, 919
medius, 935
medulla, 983
lumbricus, 314
lūmen, 881
mel, 921, 926
melca, 926
migrare, 86
mihi-pte, 1487
milium, 926
mimus, 955
mina, 960
minuō, 956
minurriō, 956
misceō, 920
mixi, 1076
modius, 918
moechus, 962
mōlēs, 990
mollis, 217
molō, 926, 980
monile, 901
mont-, 972
mordeō, 87, 1367
morior, 904
mors, 969
mortuus, 242
mōrum, 968
mōrus, 992
mōtacilla, 698
moveō, 87, 93
mox, 917
mū facere, 973
mūcrō, 94
mucus, 978
mūgiō, 976, 977
mulceō, 217
!
mulgeō, 86
mullus, 980
mūlus, 978
murcus, 953, 978
muria, 982
murmillō, 967
murmurō, 967
murra, 968, 983
murtus, 984
mūs, 985
musca, 976
müs-cerda, 984, 1365
musculus, 974, 985
muscus, 971
mūsēum, 972
müūtāre, 961
mūtus, 978
nablium, nablum, 993
naccae, 998
nanciscor, 422
nānus, 995
nardus, 996
nāre, 1013
nārēs, 1288
natis, 1031
nauclērus, 998
naulum, 999
nāvem, 999
nē, 993, 1013, 1016
nebula, 1012
nemus, 1006
nēnia, 1016
ne peta, 1010
ne pōs, 102
nepōtes, 1010
nere, 1013
NerĀ, 104
nervus, 1011
nex, 1004
nidor, 725, 986
nīdus, 1050
nivit, 1003
nocturnus, 1020, 1027
nōmen, 1085
nonnus, 1007
nos, 519, 1029
novācula, 1040
novālis, 1003
novem, 427
novus, 1009
nox, 1027
nūbēs, 1025
nūbō, 1026
nu-dius, 1025
nūdus, 291
numerus, 1007
nundinae, 499
nuō, 1028
nurus, 1028
ō, 1675
ob, 1091
obrussa, 1044
obs, 1140
obscurus, 444
observare, 1490
obsēs, 1076
occa, 1065, 1087
ōcinum, 1677
ōcior, 1678
ocris, 1066
octāvus, 1044
octō, 1066
ōdī, 1048
odor, 1051
-oleō, 1070
oleum, 400
oliva, 400
olō, 1051
olor,
404
ōmen, 1060
oncare, 1044
onus, 55, 430, 1086
onus-tus, 55
operiō, 112
oppidum, 1161
ops, 177, 1068, 1597
ops-, 1139
opsōnium, 1139
orbus, 1114
orca, 1537
ōrdior, 1098
orior, 1103
ornus, 1088
orphus, 1115
OS, 1119, 1120
ovis, 1061
ovó, 477
ōvum, 1681
paenula, 1545
palla, 153
palma, 1145
palumbēs, 1166
pālus, 973, 1148
pangō, 1184
pannus, 1187
pār, 1187
parandrum, 1451
pardus, 848, 1152
pariō, 1222
parvus, 1143, 1158
pasceolus, 1557
patella, 1157
pater, 1158
patēre, 1181
patruus, 114, 1158
paveō, 1250
paviō, 1144, 1346, 1249,
1263
pecten, 790
pectō, 1164
pedica, 1160
pēdō, 209, 1161
pellis, 1168, 1169
pellō, 115
pēluis, 1168
pēnis, 1173
pēnsum, 1446
per, 1176
-per, 1174
perfines, 1574
perna, 1178, 1247
perō, 1187

=== page 923 ===

1794
INDICES
INDICES
1795
perperus, 1179
pertica, 47
pēs, 1228
phalerae, 1550
phasēlus, 1556
pila, 1190
pilleus, 1191
pilus, 1191, 1249
pingō, 1217
pīnus, 1199
pirum, 116
piscis, 607
proboscis, promuscis,
1236
profundus, 538
prō-mellere, 927
prūnus, 1241
psittacus, 1669
pudet, 1254
puer, 1143, 1266
reddō, 332
regimen, 1099
regō, 129, 1099
rēlātor, 1280
rēmus, 454
sampsüc(h)um, 1305
sandalium, 1305
sandyx, 1306
sanna, 1307
sēmi-, 520
semper, 394
senex, 430
sentīna, 82, 109
sepeliō, 448
septem, 448
sermō, 462
sollicitus, 699
sollus, 1072
soloecismus, 1372
solūtus, 231
somnō gravātus, 240
somnus, 1535
sopor, 1532
sorbeō, 1292
prooemium, 1057
prōra, prōreta, 1245
rēnēs, 1012
saperda, 1307
sāpō, 1307
rēnō, 1283
sapphirus, 1307
ridica, 452
sarciō, 461
sarpiō, 139
septimus, 368
sequor, 113, 447
serēnus, 1036
sorbus, 1373
ripa, 453
riscus, 1289
sarpō, 1110
satis, 21, 146
serō, 1316
pugil, 1254
rītus, 131
pulc(h)er, 1178
rixa, 453
sator, 1312
pūlex, 1671
rōbus, 455
pisum, 1197
pulmō, 1208
pittacium, 1198
puls, 1147, 1220
ruber, 466
pix, 1197
purpura, 1224
rūdēns, 468
rūfus, 466
pustula, 1600
rūga, 1295
putāre, 1144, 1194
rūgiō, 455, 1683
putus, 1198
pyxinum, 1259
pistus, 1250
rōrārii, 469
scabō, 1343
scaena, 1349
scaevus, 1339
scalae, 1404
scalpō, 1356
scandō, 1339, 1341
scapulae, 1343
scāpus, 1350
scarabaeus, 286, 642
scelus, 1346
scheda, 1435, 1438
schedius, 1436
serpō, 464
serum, 1108
servāre, 524
servus, 390
sevērus, 524
sex, 433, 1034, 1166
sextus, 433
sibi, 1429
sibilō, 1330
sīdō, 376
sīdus, 1329
silex, 1610
silīgō, 1331
sōrex, 1536
soror, 436
spada, spatha, spatula,
1374
spargō, 1376
spartum, 1377
sparus, 1377
sparus, -ulus, 1377
speciō, 1348
speculum, 1429
spēlaeum, 1382
spernō, 153, 1374
spēs, 1649
sphondyle, 1432
spissus, 1382
splēn, 1385
placenta, 1202
plangō, 1201, 1210
planus, 1202
plānus, 1202, 1203
plectō, 1207
plēnus, 1403
plērus, 1192
pluit, 1209
plumbum, 964, 965
poena, 1218
pollen, 1147
pollingō, 1021
polluō, 878
pōlypus, 1266
pōmārium, 1267
pōns, 1221
pōpulus, 115, 1247
porrō, 1223
porrum, 1179, 1229
portāre, 1164
post, 1156, 1224
pūs, 1256
pyxis, 1259
quadrāns, 1035
quadru-, 1499
quālis, 1185
quatiō, 1155
quattuor, 1472
-que, 1457
queror, 809
querquedula, 679
quinque, 1173
quis, 759, 1487
quisquiliae, 759
quod, 1215
quot, 1225
racēmus, 1274
rādīx, 1271, 1285
rūmex, 1295
rūmor, 1683
rumpō, 879
runcina, 1293
runcō, 1113
ruō, 1107
russeus, 320, 1291
russus, 467
rūta, 1295, 1296
sabanum, 1299
sabulum, 1661, 1667
saccharum, 1303
saccus, 1302
saepēs, 39
saevus, 31
sāgiō, 509
sagitta, 1300
sagus, 1300
sāl, 75
saliō, 72, 572
salix, 410
salpa, 1304
postis, 1156
rapiō, 453
potis, 1225
rāpum, 1277
praeda, 1613
rārus, 457
pretium, 1238
rasis, 1284
prior, 1234
ravis, 1683
recēns, 616
salvus, 1072
reciprocus, 473, 1237
priscus, 1232
pro-, 1235
salus, 1304
sambūca, 1305
scilla, 1352
scindō, 986
scintilla, 1384
sciō, 1435
scipiō, 1354
scissus, 1437
scomber, 1357
scopulus, 1357
silus, 1331
silva, 415, 1530
simila, 589, 1320
similis, 89, 1075
simplus, 117
simpulum, 1332, 1335
sine, 102, 162
sinister, 131
sirpe, 1332
scorpius, -iō, 1359
scriblīta, 1360, 1520
sistit, 601
scribō, 1344
sistō, 602
scrinium, 680
sitis, 1571
scrōfa, 287
situla, 1336
scutula, 1363
sē, 365
sectile porrum, 650
sēgnis, 513
sella, 375
sem-, 1
semen, 527
smaragdus, 1366
soccus, 1421
socer, 399
socius, 113, 181
socrus, 399
sodālis, 378, 395
solea, 1372
spolia, 1422
spolium, 1386
spondeō, 1381
spongia, 1385!
spuō, 1252
squalus, 153
stadium, 1387
stāgnum, 1388
stāmen, 1404
statio, 1391
Stator,
1391
stella, 157
stercus, 1400
sterilis, 1395
sternō, 1410
sternuō, 1246
stilla, 1406
stimi, stibi(um), 1406
stīpāre, 1394

=== page 924 ===

1796
INDICES
INDICES
stomachus, 1408
strēnuus, 1414
strictōrium, 555
strīdeō, 1510
stringō, 1411
strix, 1414
stupeō, 1519
sturnus, 158, 1661
styrax, storax, 1418
suādeō, 100
suāvis, 510
sub, 1535
subāre, 1420
süber, 1426
sucinum, 1373
sūcus, 1093
sūdor, 579
sūdus, 171, 478
sulcus, 412, 1069
summus, 1532
super, 1533
superbus, 1534
supercilium, 799
superus, 1533
supīnus, 1536
sūra, 187
surculus, 1104
surus, 461
sūs, 1425, 1537
tabānus, 534
tabella, 1443
tābēs, 1490
tabula, 1443
tālea, 1478
talentum, 1445
tālis, 1478
tamnus, 533
tangō, 1472
tapēte, 1451
tata, 1455
taurus, 1455
tegō, 312, 1393
tellūs, 1478
tener, 1468
tenuis, 1448, 1450
tenus, 162, 1458
terebra, 1468
termen, 1469
terō, 161, 1234, 1473, 1672
terreō, 1507
testa, 802
testimōnium, 908
texō, 1460
thesaurus, 548
thymallus, 562
thynnus, thunnus, 564
tiāra, 1481
Tiberis, 358
tigris, 1482
tinea, 1325
tingō, 1457
titulus, 1331, 1488
tonere, 1400
toral(i), 1494
torpēdō, 1497
torqueō, 164, 165, 1452,
1504
torreō, 1471
torvus, 1452
tot, 1497
trabs, 1467, 1500
tractum, 1498
tremō, 1503
trepidus, 1508
trepit, 1504
trēs, 1502
trīvī, 1234
trua, 1496
truella, 1512
trutina, 1513
tū, 1420, 1521
tüber, 1521
tulī, 1564
tullius, 1517
tunica, 1635
turba, 1138, 1520
turma, 588, 1302
tūs, 565
tutubāre, 1521
über, 1124
ūdō, 1124
uettonica, 211
uitus, 216
ventus, 27
-ventus, 192
vēnum, 1681
vēr, 366
verbera, 1270
verēri, 1096
vermis, 414, 1291
verrō, 464, 1079
verrūca, 202, 1287
ulcus, 412
ulna, 1678
ulula, 407
ululāre, 1071, 1529
umbilicus, 1080
vertō, 1276
umbō, 85, 726, 1080, 1081
vērus, 524
vervēx, 392
umerus, 1680
vesper, 470
uncare, 1044
uncus, 1045
ūnus, 1058
upupa, 114, 448
ūrīna, 1129
ūrō, 486
ursus, 133
urvare, 1109
uterus, 1526, 1539
uti, 571
ūva, 1042
vaccinium, 1523
ūvidus, 1526
vāgina, 14
vāgiō, 1176
vāgīre, 528
vāh, 1041
vallus, 517
vannus, 40
vānus, 368, 482
vapor, 639
vāpulō, 524
vasculum, 204
vāstus, 159
-ve, 507
vectis, 1138
vehiculum, 1138
vehō, 491, 1136, 1138
vellō, 70, 405, 858, 1126
venēnum, 595
venetus, 211
veniō, 192
Vesta, 471, 472
vestis, 429
vetus, 477
vicia, 1057
vicus, 1056
videō, 577
vīdī, 1053
vidua, 512, 1631
vidulus, 578
vieö, 209, 605
viginti, 381
vimen, 388
vinciō, 591
vincō, 440
vinum, 1059
viola, 594
vīrus, 595
vīs, 579, 598
viscum, 594
vita, 216
vitrum, 599
vitulus, 474
viverra, 35
vīvus, 216
volnus, 1125
volpes, 79
voltur(us), 222
volup, 415
volvō, 388
vōmis, 1135
vomit, 417
vorāre, 214
vōs, 1531
voveō, 486
vox, 1139
zingiberi, 501
zinzala, 501
Middle Latin
jujuba, 502
plastrum, 1203
Vulgar Latin
colpus, 735
Faliscan
lecet, 853
Venetic
ekvon, 598
exo, 373
Louzera, 408
zo-to, 332
Xe.noe.i, 266
Oscan
aeteis, 43
aíkdafed, 37
aisusis, 34, 581
aserum, 392
auti, 167
bíitam, 216
cadeis, 684
Cicirrus, 696
didest, 332
dolom, 346
Entraí, 431
feíhúss, 1459
futír, 561
húrz, 1645
Ieíis, 508
Iúveis, 408
kaispatar, 704
nertrak, 424
nerum, 104
patensíns, 1181
puf, 1516
senateis, 430
sífeí, 1429
supro-, 1533
σaλaƑç, 1072
Taupou,1455
Paelignian
Salavatur, 1072
"
Umbrian
alfu, 78
amb-oltu, 61
(buf) kaleřuf, 687
bum, 232
cabru, 640
curnaco, 758
en, 419
erietu, 460
erus, 581
et, 476
feliuf, 546
Grabovius, 284
heries, 1607
kařetu, 624
kumiaf, 265
nertru, 424
onse, 1680 !
peřum, 1161
pir, 1261
promom, 1237
pru-sikurent, 586
scapla, 1343
sent, 389
si-, 1537
sistu, 376
skalse-to, 800
termnom-e, 1469
tremnu, 1467
tuplak, 338
tursitu, 1507
turuf, toru, 1455
ukar, 1066
1797

=== page 925 ===

1798
INDICES
INDICES
lęšta, 822
lěvб, 824
lice, 67
liti, 843
ližo, 846
ljudi je, 408
loky, 827
lomiti, 1030
lovo, 118
lože, 853
i
luča, 872
luna, 880
lбbбnб, 874
logбkб, 403
oba, 96
obora, 24
oči, 1118
odro, 1120
onb, 397
orati, 137
orĕxv, 144
orblb, 1106
ostrovб, 1282
ostro, 57
Osb, 111
otv-lěkv, 845
otбcb, 165
Ovb, 1132
uru, 319
utur, 1527
vestikatu, 367
vinu, 1059
vitluf, 474
Italian
bambagia, 199
Gallo-Romance
*cabrostos, 640
*cantos, 635
*drullia, 559
* iestā, 500
drappus, 353
Modern French
bombasin, 199
buis, 1259
carte, 1616
perche, 47
Old Spanish
artal, 143
Spanish
alisa, 67
bljusti, 1258
bljúvati, 1578, 1582
bogato, 1543
bogu, 297, 1543
boljii, 210
borjo, 1555
brašno, 1568
brat(r)b, 1589
brěmę, 1564
brovú, 1135
cělo, 731
cěna, 1218
čajati, 1490
čajo, 1480
čelo, 668
česati, 682, 1035
česo, 1487
-četi, 616
gorjii, 1622
gostb, 1034
govędo, 232
govor, 224, 281
grado, 1645
grěti sę, 543
gromb, 1647
groza, 283
gryzą, 244
grostb, 15
grбměti, 1647
ilv, 589
imę, 1085
is, 34, 433
iskati, 34
jado, 1054
jagnędʊ, 13
četverb, 1472
jasto, 375
meljo, 980
(j)avě, 43, 46
!
męti, 913
piti, 1195
čudo, 796
jebą, 1063
měšiti, 920
daro, 363
jelenb, 403
měxv, 921
davбn, 326
mlozo, 86
plavb, 1219
jugu, 168
mlбčati, 898
plesti, 1207
mošti, 950
plęsati, 1211
kaditi, 663, 729
moštv, 950
plěnt, 1265
kamy, 52, 631
modrú, 901
pljujo̟, 1252
klati, 711, 734, 739
mreža, 243
dero, 318
desętv, 312
dešą, 321, 327
devęto, 427
dědo, 1477
jezero, 182
juno, 47
děverb, 296
dlogo, 346
do, 307, 551
dělo, 470
Catalan
a(l)bercoc, 211
SLAVIC
dojo, 548
dolo, 551
Old Church Slavonic
drova, 357
agnę, 89
dvorb, 566
ajúce, 1681
dymo, 564
azb, 373
bero, 1564
běda, 1162
bělo, 1551
běžati, 1559
biti, 1574
blago-dětv, 543
blęsti, 1577
dobro, 358
došti, 561
dʊvojú, 344
dбždb, 359
gnus, 1640
godбnб, 7
goněti, 479
gora, 227
ključb, 712
kolěno, 813
koliko, 1185
kolo, 799
kositer b, 655
kodu, 425
kotv, 633
krotiti, 784
kropб, 783
kry, 774, 787
!
malo, 944
mazati, 890, 910
medo, 919
mrбtvo, 242
mogla, 1077
monjo, 892
mušica, 976
muzda, 957
na, 1029
nago, 291
namajati, 893, 946
nebo, 1012
Qzǝkö, 18, 174
peką, 143, 1181
pelena, 1168
pęti, 1172
plačo, 1210
plavati, 1213
pljušta, 1208
pluti, 1209
po, 117, 1224
po-drago, 352
polje, 444
polo, 1386
po-sětiti, 474
po-slědnju, 870
potb, 1221
prě-, 120, 1176
prědo, 1176
prě-sočiti, 120
nesq, 422
kryti, 787
netii, 102
kroma, 665, 1243
nico, 1021
-pręže, 1381
kuditi, 795
niže, 263
lajati, 831, 858
lakotv, 1678
lebedb, 78
ležą, 853
puxati, 1600
pytati, 1194
рбсбlб, 1197
pбsati, 1190, 1217
ralo, 137
rano, 1102
raz-dražiti, 553
rězati, 1276, 1283
rjuti, 1683
rusb, 467
rykati, 455
sę, 365, 760
sebě, 1429
sedmb, 368
sęt b, 760
sěmbja, 664
sěno, 731
sěnь, 1351
skoluka, 1610
slabo, 868
sladoko, 75
sland, 75
slědv, 1069
slovo, 713
smijati sę, 920
smykati sę, 987
sněgб, 1003
snubiti, 1026
sokб, 1093!
solv, 75
srěda, 644
srobati, 1292
sroduce, 644
srбpb, 139
staviti, 1407
stenjo, 1399
stěna, 1405
strěšti, 1400
noštб, 1027
novб, 1009
nukati, 1028
0,1675
pri-lopljo, 864
pro-, 1235
prokb,.1237
protivo, 1238
provb, 1245
strupb, 1295
strogati, 1413
studenьcb, 1184
suxb, 171
svekry, 399
svino, 1537
1799

=== page 926 ===

1800
INDICES
INDICES
soto, 397
synб, 1528
Sb, 1038
vrбxб, 1287
jerębu, 1114
vysokб, 1541
sb-krušiti, 785
vbsb, 1056
jesenv, 1095
klada, 709
polo, 444
púlstú, 1191
sedulo, 375
solati, 405
xodo, 1047
klějv, 736
svato, 475
sono, 1535
xoxotati, 660
kosv, 760
tjati, 1466
drápať', 353
drobá, 1505
drógnut', 1449
drom, 356
drožáť, 523
kopáť', 749
kor, 646
kor', 754
korábľ', 642
kormá, 665
koróbit', 651
1
dur', 30
zavoro, 112
kotora, 761
trupo, 1513
koróva, 676
zeleno, 282, 1638
krakati, 788
tyky, 1330
durnica, 561
kréčet, 776
étot, 397
zęto, 259
krivo, 781
uty, 1019
kresíť', 775
krбxa, 786
vermie, 1291
glej, 277
kričať', 778
kyla, 687
J
věno, 374
glev, 277
krókva, 783
glína, 277
maku, 943
Modern Russian
glotáť', 312
kropotáť', 776
męzdra, 947
bájati, 1567
glum, 1637
glýboko, 278
svčati, 584
šesto, 434
šestv, 433
tajiti, 1481
tajo, 1477
tamo, 1479
tato, 1480
tešą, 1460
teti, 1494
tina, 1485
tolb, 1478
trono, 1470
trustb, 560
turb, 1455
tylo, 1517
to, 1491, 1516
tōknoti, 1516
túnбkú, 1448, 1450
zějo, 1630
zlato, 1642
zločb, 1642
znati, 273
zobo, 282
zvęgo, 1569
zvěrb, 547
zvono, 1601
zolova, 259
že, 307, 380
želeją, 377
žena, 292
ženo, 536
žeravb, 267
žędati, 1216
žica, 215
židokб, 311
žlědica, 1608
u-, 167
ucho, 1130
žitv, 216
ugasiti, 1315
živo, 216
(u)strabiti, 1402
vaditi, 168
žrěbę, 238
večerб, 470
žrěbii, 286
vetǝcho, 477
žumo, 266
vezo, 491
žbro, 214
vědě, 1053
věra, 524
větvú, 605, 1061
vido, 380
vlakno, 840
vlaso, 840
vlěko̟, 73
vlúkб, 877
voda, 1527
vozб, 1138
vrat, 1501
vrocho, 464
Church Slavonic
blějati, 221
buben, 226
čemerv, 630
cěpiti, 617
drěmati, 304
glěno, 277
glogo, 279
istukati, 1516
jara, 1682
jatry, 389
novakz, 1009
QSb, 594
plovati, 1252
po-klop, 714
Pyro, 1263
рбkбlб, 1197
рбпб, 1193
pbstrб, 1190
rěpa, 1277
rudбrб, 466
sěrb, 702
skoba, 743
slězena, 1385
snoxa, 1028
stand, 361
stúblo, 1394, 1406
suložb, 853
vraska, 1273
vгQ, 316
želudzko, 1641
želudo, 195
žely, 1624
Old Russian
ězv, 182
gdunja, 797
gojb, 217
krúnuti, 1233
kudeso, 797
lobo, 874
morovij, 982
mбskб, 978
}
bélyj, 1551
berém ja, 1564
bergléz, 1593
gnída, 747
gnus, 1640
gódnyj, 7
górod, 1645
grab, 284
berú, 1564
bežáť', 1559
blizná, 1579
bljustí, 1258
bo, 1565
goróx, 1617
gospóď', 1225
gremét', 1647
bódnja, 250
gríva, 317
bogátyj, 1543
grívna, 317
grýzla, 244
bob, 1548
boloná, 1561
boz, 1566
bráť❜ja, 1590
byt, 1598
bzdet', 209
cená, 1218
čad, 663
čáry, 1468
čéljad, 1464
čemerica, 630
čepéc, 1347
čeremšá, 783
čérez, 441
člen, 813
ded, 1477
dërgat', 352
dërn, 558
dert', 319
dol, 551
dožď, 359
gubá, 260
gumnó, 284
gus', 1630
ikrá, 522
íva, 1042
izumrúd, 1366
jačáť', 1044
jajcó, 1681
jásen', 1088
jebú, 499, 1063
kákať', 619
kilá, 687
klej, 736
kobýla, 611
kokotáť', 619
koléno, 813
kolóda, 709
kolóť, 711, 734
kom, 688
krósno, 775
kroxá, 786
kruk, 773
krušíť', 786
kudesá (dial.), 797
kut, 635
ládan, 855
lápot', 849
láska, 862
lébeď', 404
legin, 847
lën, 864
lépest, 849
lepetáť', 834
lev, 854
lévyj, 824
lin', 863
ljača, 822
ljudi, 408
!
lob, 874
log, 853
lokáť', 834
lókot', 871, 1678
loní, 426
lópať', 834
los', 71
lub, 1073
lupiť', 879
májať, 91
mak, 943
mályj, 944
máma, 899
1801

=== page 927 ===

1802
INDICES
INDICES
maráť', 969
men', 892
mezdrá, 945
mjáso, 947
mjat', 913
moč', 950
molčáť', 218
molokó, 926
morosíť', 238
motáť', 961
muká, 910
múslit', 985
múxa, 976
myčáť', 977
mýlo, 979
mzdá, 957
nevidal', 34
nit', 1013
níva, 1003
njánja, 1007
núriť', 1011
ol'xa, 67
orël, 1106
ósen', 1095
óstrov, 1282
oželédica, 1608
pek, 1197
pelená, 1168
pen', 1193
perdéť', 1176
pyrėj, 1263
pyxáť', 1600
rakita, 132
ráno, 1102
raz, 1276
razíť', 1276
rebró, 456
répa, 1277
rézat', 1276, 1283
rjab, 1114
roníť', 1272
rygáť', 454
rykáť', 1683
rys', 875
s(0), 1038
sávan, 1299
sbor, 1564
strup, 1295
stýgnuť', 1417
ščepáť', 1346
šúlo, 1038
táta, 1455
téterev, 1473
tína, 1485
tjámiť', 1479
tknut', 1516
tónkij, 1448, 1450
tropá, 164, 1500
tropáť', 1500
tur, 1455
tvor, 1373
tyl, 1517
úgor', 590
želúdok, 1641
žídkij, 311
žir, 1634, 1641
žíto, 1337
žolv', 1624
Ukrainian
mal', 944
múkaty, 977
Old Czech
lákati, 831
Czech
}
blekati, 221
hon, 1586
katiti se, 761
valjáť', 384
krpě, 643
sedló, 375
válom, 384
sen', 1351
vérba, 1270
!
křen, 674
pa-čes, 682
serbáť', 1292
véres, 452
skobá, 743
verx, 1287
skóbel', 1343
sled, 1069
slimák, 843
slízkij, 861
slúšať', 1077
smórod, 1369
smúglyj, 1371
sočíť', 428
solóma, 622
som, 630
ves', 1056
víšnja, 594
viť', 605
vítvina, 605
vólna, 858
voloknó, 840
vólos, 840
vólot', 836
vrat', 393
výdra, 1526
výmja, 1124
pére-, 1176
péred(o), 1176
son, 1535
peró, 1248
soróka, 750
výše, 1541
pixáť', 1250
sórom, 1658
xod, 1047
plávať, 1213
sováť', 1349
xren, 674
plená, 1168
stan, 361
zavór, 112
zelënyj, 1638
zemljá, 1633
plestí, 1207
plevá, 443
pljasáť', 1211
plov, 1209
pod, 1228
polón, 1265
polst', 1191
pro, 1235
stat', 1391
stená, 1405
stérbnut', 1402
stog, 1410
stópka, 1417
storoná, 1401, 1410
stradáť', 1446
strogáť', 1413
zimá, 1620
zóloto, 1642, 1652
zólva, zolóvka, 259
zvjagú, 1569
zvon, 1601
železo, 1612
ráz, 1276
raziti, 1276
roniti, 1272
šiditi, 1663
stydnouti, 1417
teta, 1455
žir, 1634
Slovak
Slk. šudit', 1663
Old Polish
ozd, 26
Polish
deptać, 320
drapać, 353
gnus, 1640
łkac, 876
matać, 914
od-łog, 853
ronić, 1272
wróbel, 1289
żłód, 1608
Polabian
zlåd, 1608
Serbo-Croatian
bjelojka, 1549
bümbar, 1171
cijev, 707
čajati, 1490
čudo, 796
dépati, 320
drâpām, 353
dŕpām, 353
düpiti, 350
gön, 1586
izmòlīti, 223
júha, 503
kljuka, 712
krava, 676
krèsati, 775
lôg, 853
matati, 914
mézdra, 945
miš, 985
nana, 1007
pir, 1263
släma, 622
stud,
1417
šûlj, 1038
tijesto, 1389
vime, 1124
vlât, 836
Slovene
belica, 1549
glíva, 978
gluta, glúta, 277
mézdra, 945
molíti, 223
oję, ojęsa, 1052
ozdíti, 26
pláti, 1148
żołądek, 1641
pléna, 1168
pléva, 443
Bulgarian
buh, 246
dórpam, 353
stéžer, 1410
TOCHARIAN
Tocharian A
ak, 1240
arkant-, 1114
āk-, 19
ākāl, 183
äkär, 300
āknats, 273
ampi, 126
ārki, 126
alak, 73
-(ä)k, 263
e-, 40, 405
ents-, 422
es, 1680
or, 349
orkäm, 1114
olar, 169
kanwem, 283
kam, 282
kayurs, 141
kāc, 810, 1363
kātk-, 270
kät -, 1156, 1344
kärna-, 646
kärṣta-, 764
kärsa-, 764
käw-, 1629
käs-, 1315
kukäl, 799
kupre, 1135
kuryar, 1233
ken-, 264
ko, 232
kňasu, 273
klā-, 198
1803

=== page 928 ===

INDICES
1804
cacäl, 1447
ckācar, 561
йu, 1009
ňom, 1085
ñom-klyu, 713
tāp-, 303
täp-, 350
täprem, 1135
täm-, 1472
tärm-, 1503
tkaņı, 1632, 1633
trak, 1452
träsk-, 1515
trit, 1502
triw-, 1509
trisk-, 1510
twānk-, 1311
nakät, 1004
nasam, 1008
pañi, 1546
pats, 1225
rtär, 466
lake, 853
lap, 874
läwä-, 231
INDICES
litantär, 870
Ikām, 852
want, 27
war, 1096
wast, 158
wäp-, 1540
wär, 1096
wärts, 484
wälläṣtär, 70
wäs, 595, 1652
wik-, 382
wraske, 1273
śanweņi, 267
śāw-, 216
śäm, 292
śtärt, 1472
śtwar, 1472
śpāl, 683
appakke, 119
amäkṣpänta, 81
alāṣṣām, 1070
alyek, 73
āk-, 19
ākṣām, 111
antpi, 94
antse, 1680
ārkwi, 126, 127
älyinträ, 65
enk-, 422
erkent-, 1114
ai-, 40, 405
or, 349
orkamo, 1114
ost, 158
auks-, 171
aulāre, 169
-k, 263
katnaṇı, 1344
kante, 397
karyor, 1233
kartse, 1607
klāyā-, 198
klutk-, 1461
klep-, 714
йuwе, 1009
nem-kälywe, 713
}
nem, 1085
ñor, 424
täpp-, 303
tāś, 1444, 1455
täp-, 350
täm-, 1472
tärrek, 1452
tkācer, 561
trāsk-, 1515
trite, 1502
triw-, 1509
tremi, 1503
tressäm, 1515
twānk-, 1311
twere, 566
näm-, 1007
nesau, 1008
plāce, 1577
plewe, 1209
maścitse, 985
mā, 941
mäsk-, 931
mit, 919
misa, 947
menki, 966
maiwe, 923
mlutka-, 223
yakwe, 598
yayāsau, 500
yal, 403
yasa, 1652
yasar, 366
yäp-, 499, 1063
yente, 27
yku, 1064
ratre, 466
riye, riye, 1287
lankutse, 403
lät-, 831
läwä-, 231
lita, 870
laitam, 870
Ikāskau, 852
pāk, 1543
nai, 993
päl, 115, 1597
säk, 433
paruwa, 1248
pälk-, 1577
şkäst, 433
kalnem, 719
leke, 853
päke, 1543
pält, 1597
stare, 1401
kalṣäm, 670
pāss-, 1378
pälläntär, 115
späm, 1535
kalstär, 670
pärwāne, 1136
puk, 1155
salat, 572
kātk-, 270
lyaśäm, 853
j
pärwe, 1245
pukäl, 1559
salu, 1072
kay-, 1617
pälk-, 1577
putk-, 1144
pe, 1228
sāle, 75
kätä-, 1156, 1344
pällätär, 115
se, 1528
kärna-, 646
pikul, 1559
poke, 1188
sne, 102, 162
kärsa-, 764
pile, 115
por, 1167, 1261
kärstä-, 764
}
pilta, 1597
ścire, 1401
ścirye, 157
ścono, 1417
śtarte, 1472
śtwer, 1472
şar, 1621
şalype, 415
se, şeme, 394
şñaura, 1011
spane, 1535
salamo, 572
salāte, 72, 572
sālyiye, 75
sälk-, 412
siknam, 586
suwani, 1541
suwo, 1537
se, 1041
soy, 1528
solme, 1072
ski yo, 1351
skente, 470
stām, 1390
snai, 102, 162
spänt-, 1381
smi-, 920
sruk-, 1413
swese, 1541
putk-, 1144
puwar, 1261
peñiyo, 1546
paiyye, 1228
po, 1155, 1188
pokai, 1188
pyakar, 1144
pyāktsi, 1249
pratsāko, 1240
lyuketrä, 852
wartse, 484
wase, 595
wāk-,
14
wap-, 1540
wärsk-, 1096
wäs-, 26
wäsk-, 491
wässāte, 429
wik-, 382
witsako, 1285
were, 1096
wai, 386
śana, 292
śāy-, śāw-, 216
śerwe, 547
tsāk-, 299
tsäk-, 1476
tsuwa, 358
-tsaika, 1459
OTHER INDO-
EUROPEAN
Messapian
gunakhai, 292
vastei, 158
Old Phrygian
edaes, 365
ios, 1117
onoman, 1085
keu, 232
kem, 1632
}
peret, 1167
petso, 1225
kenine, 283
kentse, 747
porat, 1167
pkänt, 1559
pratsak, 1240
plāc, 1577
mā, 941
mālkant, 86
mäsk-, 931
mluska-, 223
yäl, 403
yäs-, 500
smi-, 920
sruk-, 1413
släkkär, 820
swase, 1541
swiйc, 1541
tsar, 1621
tsäk-, 1476
tsnäntär, 534
Tocharian B
akālk, 183
kälyp-, 714
käw-, 1629
käs-, 1315
keme, 282
kerciye, 1645
kewu, 1629
kaurṣe, 141
ysār, 366
aknātsa, 273
ri, 239, 1287
akrūna, 300
krośce, 786
1805

=== page 929 ===

1806
INDICES
INDICES
vanaktei, 98
ven avtun, 367
New Phrygian
avavKal, 97
avap, 104
(α)τεаμα, 19
yeypelfievav, 1650
εdaɛç, 365
Celle入ws, 1633
LOC, 1117
-KE, 1457
KValKaV, 292
o£ avtal, 367
ovoflav, 1085
Ovavaktav, 98
NON-INDO-
EUROPEAN
Akkadian
adamu, 19
agru, 9
(a)murdennu, 6
parzillu, 215
pilakku, 1167
saqqu, 1302
sāsu, 1325
šammaššamu, 1325
šērittu, 1061
šūru, 1456
temennu, 1465
Arabic
'abnūs, 368
aģģūr (Eg.), 10
albarquq, 211
bašām, 198
bosr, 226
būrī, 251
dirham, 352
fil, 410
gamal, 631
gem, 688
harmal, 134
ķādūs, 614
kamkām, 612
Aramaic
ba'lēna, 197
berāt, 235
bizqā, 214
būs, 249
gamlā, 259
ḥaṣṣīnā, 111
kitrā, 694
ma'aforā, 915
meškā, 934
mōrīgā, 981
mūrā, 983
neṭāpā, 1010
nirda, 996
saj³fā, 1036
šūmšemā, 1325
tanûr, 715
tōr, 1456
wardā, 1290
Assyrian
burāšu, 235
gunakku, 263
kašūth, 656
guzippu, 761
assammu(m), 146
khalandjan, 256
karpu, 627
korsuf, 761
karšu, 677
kurkum, 612, 782
kasia, 653
budulhu, 208, 897
lādan, 855, 884
labbu, 854
leken, 847
barraqtu, 1365
bašāmu, 198
Gublu, 247
hannu, 181
hassinu, 111
hurāṣu, 1652
huri'ānu, 754
jašpu, 574
kamūnu, 802
karūbu, 289
khurunnu, 647
kukubu, 619
murr, 983
ladunu, 855
mašku, 934
națrūn, 1022
pûlu, 1267
samīdu, 1320
przn, 215
qalam, 622
qalib, 626
qazdir, 655
qermez, 780
sabanijjat, 1299
şabār, 1307
sukkar, 1303
kuppu, 812
saifun, 1036
kurkanu, 782
kurkānu, 612
laḥannu, 820
madgaltu, 888
manu, 960
wain, 1059
warada, 1290
ward, 1290
zumurrud, 1366
sâmtu, 1306
siparru, 805
šindu arku, 1306
šuparraru, 1337
ussu, 1538
Babylonian
kalakku, 1610
lardu, 996
Basque
adar, 19
ap(h)ur, 1263
arto, 143
azkáŕ, 152
berún, 964
burdin, 215
muno, 232
tšapaŕ, 154
tšokoŕo, 1372
zitu, 1337
satero, 1301
Berber
ádrār, 163
aselbu, 1332
mogador, 888
zaġāja, 1300
Burushaski
phešo, 116
Coptic
bai, 193
barī, 202
204
bašor,
bori, 251
kommi, 744
šabouri, 1307
Eẞ(0)v, 410
OU(E)LVI, 1127
σðnu, στnu, 1406
Egyptian
'ikn, 181
ab(u), 410
b'j, 193
b:k.t, 215
bahan, 203
dql, 1005
hams, 815
hn, 181
labu, 854
mnw, 960
msḥ, 1613
ntr(j), 1022
qefi, 684
r, 71, 136, 1298
repi, 71
rms, 1298
sēfet, 1036
sśśn, 1373
ştim, 1406
w:d, 249
wasar, 204
wny, 1127
Elamite
čupar, 805
Ethiopian
spīr, 1427
Finnish
juusto, 503
Georgian
105
*nt',
balba, 896
bu, 246
etli, 1310
kotoxi, 812
kviša, 264
laglagi, 871
mona, 960
'aleph, 77
'arab, 139
'argāmān, 125
'ātōn, 1086
'ēṭūn, 1051
ādōn, 23
baræqæt, 1365
barzel, 215
bāśām, 198
bath, 206
bedōlaḥ, 208, 897
berōš, 235
bêth, 77
boşer, 228
dāleth, 313
êzōb, 1539
gāmāl, 259, 630
gan, 260
gargerim, 268
Gebal, 247
gimel, 259
girdā'ā, 268
gōfer, 235, 804
gōlēl, 291
gōrāl, 749
gullā, 262
ḥālap, 737
delet, 313
helbana, 1609
hēṣ, 1538
h'sidhah, 148
heth, 527
hobnim, 368
panţuri, 1149
jajin, 1059
semi(n)dali, 1320
jāšpe, 574
si-qmili, 52
jāwān, 609
spero, 1427
yvino, 1059
Hebrew
'agil, 33
'ērābōn, 140
jōdh, 609
kad, 614
kammōn, 802
kaph, 639
karkōm, 612, 782
kawwān, 1617
kepōr, 805
hbnj, 368
jwn(n)', 609
kb, 612
'ābāq, 3
kema(i), kmjt, 744
'ahābā, 8
kerūb, 289
1807

=== page 930 ===

1808
INDICES
kinnōr, 701
kisse', 653
koeloeb, 667
qöf, 684
gõ ph, 748
qubba'at, 792
sādīn, 1334
sämekh, 1328
sap, 1307, 1335
sappir, 1307
śaq, 1302
kōfer, 805
kōhēn, 732
kōr, 755
:
ktr mlkwt, 694
labi', 854
lajiš, 854
sās, 1325
lāmedh, 818
šebākā, 1305
lebōnā, 860
šekar, 1330
liškāh, 850
šekel, 1328
lōt, 884
ma'aforet, 915
šīn, 1305
šiqmā, 1421
šūšan, 1373
tannin, 564
malluaḥ, 896
šōr, 1456
man, 902, 960
şŏrī, 1418
māne, 960
mărar, 981
maṣṣāh, 890
taw, 1455
me❜ārā, 917
m*gērā, 887
m'kērā, 915
tēth, 548
tēbhāh, 549
tǝhōm, 247
Punic
qn', 636
Sumerian
anšu, 1086
asam, 146
kalga, 1610
temen, 1465
zid, 1337
gin, 636
Svan
berež, 215
Syrian
êspērō, 1427
gazā, 255
kelūb, 719
m²nārā, 995
namara, 995
qēbūthā, 693
Ṣelpā, 1303
s'mïdā, 1320
mēm, 973
migdal, 888
miklā, 895
mikla'ōt, 895
mōr, 983
nāṭāp, 1010
nēbel, 993
nērd, 996
neter, 1022
nun, 1025
pēn in, 1193
plgš, 1147
pūk, 1595
qab, 612
top, 1518
Mingrelian
koto, 812
Ottoman Turkish
kalém, 622
kalyp, 626
kambur, 633
käväl, 611
lejen, 847
swbyn, 1327
ṭārixā, 1453
zarnikā, 141
zūzfā, 502
Tsakhurian
lägläg, 871
Ugarit
brśl, 215
liman, 843
hrs, 1652
pambuk, 226
zümrüd, 1366
qb't, 792
qn, 636
qānoeh, 637
gātān, 762
qātōn, 762
qesi'ah, 653
qinnāmōn, 701
qiššu❜ā, 1330
Phoenician
dlt, 313
ktn, 1635
lebōnat, 860
Schchr = Sxr, 1436
Urartian
burgana, 1262
harhar, 652