!!! BROKEN FONT ENCODING - DO NOT CITE VOWEL QUALITY FROM THIS FILE !!!

Bennett, William H. 1950. "The Germanic Development of Indo-European e-macron".
Language 26.2: 232-235.

This is the raw pdftotext extraction of the JSTOR scan. The PDF's embedded
font mapping is broken: every phonetic symbol is mis-rendered. In particular
e-macron, ae-macron and a-macron appear variously as "j", "8", "z", "&",
"d", "a", "t", "P" and "?", inconsistently and sometimes for different
sounds on the same line. Nothing about vowel quality may be read off this
file.

For a verified transcript, made from the rendered page images, see the
sibling file:
    bennett_1950_germanic_development_of_ie_e.vision.txt

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Germanic Development of Indo-European ē
Author(s): William H. Bennett
Source: Language , Apr. - Jun., 1950, Vol. 26, No. 2 (Apr. - Jun., 1950), pp. 232-235
Published by: Linguistic Society of America

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/410059

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms




            is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
            Language




                                                    This content downloaded from
                                  193.60.238.225 on Sun, 06 Sep 2026 07:59:11 UTC
                                            All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
       THE GERMANIC DEVELOPMENT OF INDO-EUROPEAN 8

                                  WILLIAM H. BENNETT

                                 University of Notre Dame

   In comparative Germanic grammar it is a commonplace assumption that IE
j first became P in Proto-Germanic and then developed into a in the parent forms
of both North and West Germanic. Prokosch,' for example, remarks, 'Two
changes [affecting IE long vowels] are generally ascribed to Primitive Ger-
manic: that of a to 5 and of j to P. The latter is largely a "Phonetic Interpola-
tion", i.e., the assumption of a transitional stage between 8 and a. In Gothic, t
reverts to j by a different process of tensing (raising and fronting); in North and
West Germanic, a results; this develops secondarily into t in Old English, and j
in Frisian.'
  For the purposes of the present discussion it is necessary to expand this state-
ment. The Proto-Germanic vowel J appears as t only in West Saxon Old English;
the other Old English dialects, together with Old Frisian and Gothic, show e.
Old Saxon, Old Low Franconian, Old High German, and Old Norse have a, but
Old Saxon also exhibits individual instances of j, e.g. berun gebun beside OHG
bdrun gabun, OIcel. baru gafu, WS OE baron gjafon (< *gafon), Go. bjrun
g#bun, etc.
  The assumption that IE first became PGmc. ? and then later broke up into
N and WGmc. a, Go. j, implies the following phonological developments for the
separate Old Germanic languages:
                    ON, OHG, OLFr... e> > a
                     Go................ j > & >
                    OS................ > > ()
                    WS OE............ e > a > a > a
                    Non-WS OE, OFris. j> & > a > a > j

In comparison with the simple, completely attested change of IE d to PGmc.
some of these developments appear to be rather complicated and speculative.
a whole, they represent five phonological patterns. Old Norse, Old Low Fran
conian, and Old High German, to be sure, show a wholly comprehensible tend
ency to lower j to z and then to retract this to d, but the inferred developmen
in the other Old Germanic languages show no such directional trend. So far
Gothic is concerned, we must assume that j first became c and then returned
j. In the Saxon and Anglo-Frisian group the assumptions become much more i
volved. For Old Saxon we must suppose that j became z, then a, which remain
for the most part but was represented sometimes by j. The West Saxon Old En
lish development requires the supposition that j became &, then d, then z aga
Finally, for Old Frisian and the non-West-Saxon dialects of Old English, we mu
believe that j changed to J, then to a, then to & again, and finally back to e
While such a development as 8 > > a > > 8 is phonologically possible, in
  1 Comp. Gmc. Gr. ?34; cf. Hirt, HU 1.?29.3. A few, e.g. Noreen, UL 23, assume that IE
was already an open z.
                                                232




                                 This content downloaded from
               193.60.238.225 on Sun, 06 Sep 2026 07:59:11 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
           THE GERMANIC DEVELOPMENT OF INDO-EUROPEAN E 233


this instance we have no assurance that it actually occurred. The ?-vo
Proto-Germanic, unlike the 5-vowel, is not supposed to be preserved di
any historic Germanic language, West Saxon OE t being traced back t
d and only indirectly to PGmc. a.
  Whether right or wrong, these assumed developments may be summ
follows:


                                          ONa rWS OE a
           IE i > PGmc. - > Go. j Non-WS OE, OFris.j
                                         WGmc. d> OS d, but also j
                                                                OHG, OLFr. d
Additional classifications and provisions for combinative changes might
of course, but they would only increase the complexity without clarifying
assumed developments merely summarize the historical facts without at
to explain them. Furthermore, the basis of classification implies rigid, unw
lines of cleavage between one language and another, though the phon
behavior of the languages themselves warrants no such conclusion. As
Germanic appears to show no one phonological trend; if any tendency is
ible in this scheme, it is one leading toward an inexplicable diversity. It is p
to be sure, that the assumed changes took place exactly as indicated abo
inasmuch as there is no historic evidence to show that they did occur in pr
such a fashion, it can do no harm to examine the reasoning upon which
the assumptions are based.
  As shown by the foregoing summary, many complications arise from postulat-
ing a common parent West Germanic d. The existence of such a vowel appears
to be suggested by two considerations. First, Old Saxon, Old Low Franconian,
and Old High German generally show d for IE j, so that the d is presumed to
have existed in the parent West Germanic speech. As already observed, however,
Old Saxon still preserves instances of j (gqbun etc.) in the 9th century. Further-
more, the first foreign records of Old High German show j, not d; Caesar, for
example, refers to the Old High German Swabians as Suibi, not *Su&bi, and their
leaders are designated by such names as Hariomerus, not *-m&rus.2 Secondly,
WGmc. d is supposed to have undergone in the descendant languages a develop-
ment parallel to that of the 'same sound' in words borrowed from Latin, e.g.
Lat. nrpus > OE ntp (Ep.), n*p (Corp.) 'turnip', Lat. strata > OHG strapa,
strdga, WS OE str~t 'street'. To be sure, we know that d occurred in Latin, but this
fact gives us no reason to infer that the 'same sound' occurred in the parent
West Germanic speech or underwent the 'same developments' in the separate
West Germanic languages. The parent West Germanic vowel e, for example, re-
mained unchanged in Old English (*her > hir 'here'), but the 'same sound' in
early loanwords from Latin became 1 or i (cpa > cipe 'onion', denrarius > dinor
'denarius'). It would appear, therefore, that the parent WGmc. a in such as-
sumed developments as e > 2 > & > 2 > e is by no means indispensable.3
  2 Cf. Hirt, loc.cit. fn. 2 and reff.
   3 Wright (OE Gr. ?113), unlike most scholars, does not postulate a WGmc. d in this de-
velopment but assumes that PGmc. & remained in WS OE and was raised to ? in Kent. and
Angl.



                                  This content downloaded from
                193.60.238.225 on Sun, 06 Sep 2026 07:59:11 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
234 WILLIAM H. BENNETT


 Perhaps the Germanic development of I
by examining the problem from a chron
The Proto-Germanic homeland was a distr
ern Scandinavian peninsula, Denmark with
German lowlands between the Elbe and t
these areas were more or less contiguous
then scarcely more than small bays or f
lake that covered a much smaller area t
known Germanic colonies had been form
speech had begun to disintegrate, undergoin
(North Germanic), the center (later 'East
Germanic). The first great emigrations f
and such kindred peoples as the Herulia
tially to the east and appear to have occu
turies B.C. The first South ('West') Germ
almost as early, but they were to proceed m
and to cover less territory. In the north,
be said to have begun before 750; Icelan
more than a century later.
 It may be worthy of notice that Gothic ('E
manic language to be carried from the hom
tendency whatever to change j to d. In th
English and Old Frisian, which was spoke
the Elbe and the Rhine, the most wester
continental West Germanic colonial settl
Old Low Franconian, and Old High Germ
uous and somewhat closer to the central
show the change of j to d. Continental Sa
continental Anglian and Frisian, shows j
English similarly shows g. If we consider on
'East' and 'West' Germanic tribes, the ch
along the far eastern or far western periph
came a in North Germanic and in those l
tiguous with it after the first expansions t
 The change of j through z to a apparent
and spread gradually toward the south. B
trict originally inhabited by the Goths, Go
it), had been carried far to the east and so
the change of j to d likewise had no effect
Angles, who had migrated to the west. Con
in the path of the change, generally shows
 4 Cf. Prokosch's summary of the migrations, o
 5 If our knowledge of the early tribal movem
ably find a number of instances in which e-, &
contact. Certainly there were both Frisians a
number of Frisians found their way into En




                        This content downloaded from
      193.60.238.225 on Sun, 06 Sep 2026 07:59:11 UTC
                All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
          THE GERMANIC DEVELOPMENT OF INDO-EUROPEAN j 235


carried to the west before the change was completed, shows the i
stage A. Low Franconian and High German remained in the path of
and developed a; as noted above, the first foreign records of High
preserve the old j. It would be difficult to ascertain precisely when the
manic pronunciation of the vowel began to affect continental We
by the 5th century, in any event, the area in Jutland that had been ev
the northern Angles was occupied by Danes, in whose speech j had b
  This hypothesis (it is nothing more) attempts merely to account f
It does not alter, of course, the historical correspondences among
vowels j, , and a in the Old Germanic languages,6 nor does it deny
was a difference between the two Proto-Germanic vowels that dev
IE and ei. When we are faced with the necessity of accepting at lea
unproved suppositions as j > c > a > ? > , with no apparent agree-
ment among the languages and no discernible phonological trend, a more credible
interpretation of the facts appears to be required. If it is true that the change of j
to a began in the north and spread toward the south, missing or only partly affect-
ing the more peripheral areas, the development of IE in Germanic is much less
complicated than has been supposed.

speakers who remained on the continent were ultimately absorbed by the neighboring d-
speakers. In such instances there may well have been variant pronunciations of the IE e-
vowel within a given area, with one development or another finally predominating.
   8 The results of secondary combinative changes in the historic languages remain
the same, regardless of the phonological developments that are postulated for preliterary
times. WS Old English, for example, shows & as a regular isolative development of IE but
has a before w or g plus a back vowel (analogical forms like wtgas for wagas 'waves', sg.
wig, also occur). If WS & developed from a WGmc. a, as usually assumed, the WS d in such
forms is simply a combinative retention of the older vowel. If d is the later development, it
represents a combinative change and shows that the shift of j to a occurred in insular as well
as continental West Germanic, though only under certain specific conditions.




                                 This content downloaded from
               193.60.238.225 on Sun, 06 Sep 2026 07:59:11 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
