OLD ENGLISH
GRAMMAR
A. CAMPBELL

OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

Oxford University Press, Walton Street, Oxford ox2 6pP

Oxford New York Toronto
Delhi Bombay Calcutta Madras Karachi
Petaling Jaya Singapore Hong Kong Tokyo
Nairobi Dar es Salaam Cape Town
Melbourne Auckland
and associated companies in
Berlin Ibadan

Oxford is a trade mark of Oxford University Press
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press, New York

© Executors of Alistair Campbell, 1959
First published 1959
Reprinted with corrections

1962, 1964, 1969, 1971, 1974, 1977
First published in paperback 1983
Reprinted 1987, 1991

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without
the prior permission of Oxford University Press
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way
of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated
without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover
other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition
including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

Campbell, A.
Old English grammar
1. Anglo-Saxon language—Grammar
I. Title
429.5 PE131
ISBN o-19-811943-7

Printed in Hong Kong

PREFACE
THE present Old English grammar does not aim at superseding
any existing book. It differs from the standard works in its arrange-

ment of the phonology under the great sound-changes. Most other
books have traces of a merely alphabetic arrangement, treating
first a, and then e, &c., and finally reverting to the sound-changes,
a method involving much repetition. Luick, however, attempted

a chronological arrangement. This was difficult to achieve, especially in the sections on consonants and unaccented vowels, and
led him to separate much related matter, for example, the different

strata of the influence exerted upon vowels by palatal consonants
are treated in widely separated places. It is hoped that the arrangement here adopted will facilitate the assimilation of the facts. The
deviations from a chronological arrangement are explained in
summaries at the end of the main divisions, where the uncertainty
surrounding many of the familiar conclusions on the chronology

of the sound-changes is emphasized.
This book differs also from most others in that a clearly limited
field is taken. The main facts of early and late West-Saxon are
given, and also those of the earliest Anglian remains, the great
Anglian glosses, the early Kentish charters, and the late Kentish

glosses. Other texts are quoted only for forms of great interest.
Especially in the accidence, a more limited selection of forms is
given than in Sievers~Brunner, and it is hoped that this will
enable the student to acquire a groundwork of solid knowledge
more easily. The Select Bibliography is intended not for mere
reference, but as a list of works which every student should know
arid use. Accordingly, less important references are given, not in
the Bibliography, but at the relevant places in the Grammar.
My chief obligation in writing this book has been to the standard
works mentioned in the Bibliography, but I have also benefited

greatly from the use of the following unpublished dissertations, to
which the authors generously gave me access: The origins of Old
English orthography by J. E. Blomfield (Mrs. G. Turville-Petre);
An edition of the Mercian portions of the Rushworth manuscript by

D. H. McAllister; The interpretation of diphthongal spellings in
Old English by R. Quirk. I have also to thank Pamela Gradon for

vi

,

PREFACE

placing her unpublished revision of the Old English sections of the

Cambridge bibliography of English literature at my disposal.
Of the scholars who have helped me I have particularly to thank
K. Sisam, the original conceiver of the book, whose criticism of

the first draft was invaluable. The first draft was also read by
Bruce Dickins and Norman Davis. Advice on special problems

was given by C. E. Bazell, T. Burrow, H. M. Flasdieck, A. S. C.
Ross, M. L. Samuels, J. R. R. Tolkien, and C. L. Wrenn. I wish
also to thank the Clarendon Press for undertaking to publish the
book, and Kathleen Campbell and M. L. Samuels for efficient

help with the proofs.
A. C.
September 1958

A NUMBER of corrections have been made in this reprint. Many
of these were kindly suggested by friends who have used the book,

especially Norman Davis, E. J. Dobson, Pamela Gradon, C. A.
Ladd, Dorothy Whitelock, and C. L. Wrenn.
June 1961

A.C.

Some further corrections have now been made, and I have to
thank A. Bammesberger and C. E. Bazell for suggestions.
A.C.

July 1968

CONTENTS
ABBREVIATIONS

.

.

.

.

.

.

xiii

NOTE ON SYMBOLS

.

.

:

.

:

-

xvi

INTRODUCTION

.

.

.

.

:

I

The term ‘Old English’ (§ 1)3 the place of Old English among Germanic
English

languages (§§ 2-4); the origin of the English (§ 5); the Old
dialects and their representative texts (§§ 6-17); the language of Old
English poetry (§ 18); the limitations of our knowledge of Old English
dialects (§§ 19-22)

Cuapter

I.

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY, AND PRO-

NUNCIATION

.

:

.

.

.

.

3

Writing, contractions, accents, punctuation, and word-division
(§§ 23-29); the Old English vowel system (§§ 30-49); the Old English

consonant system (§§ 50-70)
Cuarter II.

ACCENT

.

.

.

.

.

+

30

A. Word Accent (§§ 71-86)
B. Half-stress (§§ 87-92)
C. Sentence Accent (§§ 93-98)

Cuarter III]. THE ACCENTED VOWELS IN PRIMITIVE
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
GERMANIC
the
99-110);
(§§
origins
its
and
system
vowel
The Primitive Germanic
redistribution of ¢, i, 0, u in Primitive Germanic (§§ 111-18); the
development of nasal yowels in Primitive Germanic (§ 119)

Cuarpter

IV.

WEST GERMANIC

INNOVATIONS

IN
-

THE VOWELS OF ACCENTED SYLLABLES

38

45

New diphthongs (§ 120); Ingvaeonic nasal vowels (§ 121); change of
final 6 to d (§ 122); lowering of i and u before z (§ 123); treatment of
-azdi- (§ 124); lengthening of final open vowels (§ 125)

Cuapter V. PREHISTORIC OLD ENGLISH CHANGES
OF ACCENTED VOWELS.

:

.

.

»

A. Germanic a, #, and the Germanic and West Germanic Diphthongs
(§§ 126-38)

The Breaking and Retraction of Front Vowels before Consonant
Groups (§§ 139-56)
C. The Restoration of d before Back Vowels (§§ 157-63)

B.

D. The Second Fronting (§§ 164-9)
E. The Influence of Initial Palatal Consonants (§§ 170-89)

§0

viii

CONTENTS

F,

#-Mutation (§§ 190-204)

G.

Back Mutation (§§ 205-21)

H.

Smoothing (§§ 222-33)

I.
j.

The Contraction of Vowels (§§ 234-9)
Compensatory Lengthening (§§ 240-5)

K.

Chronological Summary (§§ 246-55)
Dialectal Summary (§§ 256-64)

L.

Cuarter

VI.

FROM

BD

A.

CHANGES

OF

ACCENTED

ABOUT 700 TO 1000

.

VOWELS

.

.

-

413

niyl- > ny- (§ 265)

Vocalization of § and y (§§ 266—74)
The Second Elements of the Old English Diphthongs (§§ 275-81)

moO moO

Changes of Quantity (§§ 282-7)

Modifications, mainly Kentish, of the Front Vowels (§§ 288-92)

Later History of Diphthongs (§§ 293-303)

Palatal Umlaut (§§ 304-11)
Late West-Saxon Smoothing (§§ 312-14)

ZO

ATS

Unrounding and Rounding of Front Vowels (§§ 315-19)

Vowels between w and r in West-Saxon (§§ 320-4)
The Group sel (§§ 325-6)
Anglian e > # (§§ 327-8)

. The Transition to Middle English (§ 329)

Cuapter

VII

THE

SYLLABLES
A.

B.
Cc.

.

VOWELS

OF

UNACCENTED

.

The Germanic and West Germanic Periods (§ 330-1)

.

»

The Operation of the Major Ingvaeonic and Primitive Old English

Vowel Changes in Unaccented Syllables (§§ 332-40)
Early Old English Loss of Unaccented Vowels

© Q, ‘i e ($§ 341-4); (2) u, 7 (§§ 345-53); (3) Vowels of prefixes
354

Early Old English Shortening of Unaccented Long Vowels

(1) Final and medial syllables (§ 355); (2) Second elements of
compounds (§§ 356—7); (3) Loss of new short vowels (§§ 358~9)
Parasite Vowels

(1) Accented syllables (§§ 360-2) ; (2) Unaccented syllables (§§ 363~4);
(3) Later parasiting (§§ 365-6); (4) Parasite connecting vowels

(§ 367)

Reduction in Variety of Vowels in Unaccented Syllables

(1) @, e, 1 > € (§§ 369-72); (2) u > o (§§ 373-4); (3) 2 (§ 375);
(4) ¢ > ¢ (§ 376); (5) Later developments (§§ 377-9); (6) Low-

stressed 2 (§ 380)
Suffix Confusion (§§ 381-4)

Medial Unaccented Vowels

(1) Vowel harmony (§§ 385-7); (a) LLoss of medial vowels after

short syllables (§§ 388-91); (3) Syncopation after long syllables

(§§ 392-3)

Chronological Summary (§§ 394-7)

137

CONTENTS
Cuapter

VIII. THE INDO-EUROPEAN CONSONANTS

IN GERMANIC AND WEST GERMANIC

163

The Germanic consonants, double consonants, Verner’s law, distribution of consonants, Sievers’s law (§ 398); loss of final consonants

(§ 399); new syllabic consonants (§ 400); final consonant groups (§ 401);
doubling of j and y (§ 402); loss of nasals (§ 403); Germanic z > 7 (§ 404);
loss of y and 7 (§§ 405-6); West Germanic consonant doubling (§§ 4078); J > d(§ 409); interchange of j and y, of i and iy, of3 and y (§§ 410-

12); pl > fl (§ 413); lb > Id (§ 414)
Cuaprer

IX.

THE

GERMANIC

OLD ENGLISH
A.

:

CONSONANTS

IN

.

170

Early Changes of Groups

xs
> ks (§ 416); xs>5s (§ 417); fs>
ps (§ 418); Dl, dm, pr
(§§ 419-25)

Q

Fronting and Assibilation

k, g, and 3 (§§ 426-39); sk (§§ 440-1); x ($§ 442-3)

Voicing and Unvoicing of Consonants (mainly Spirants)
Voicing of spirants (§ 444); exceptions in suffixes (§ 445); un-

Om

D

voicing of spirants (§§ 446-8); results (§ 449); unvoicing of stops

(§ 450); dating (§ 451)

Change of Final k to x (§ 452)
Doubling of Consonants in Old English (§§ 453-6)

Simplification of Consonants (§§ 457-8)
Metathesis of Consonants (§§ 459-60)

Loss of Consonants
Loss of x (§§ 461-6); loss and modification of g (§ 467); loss of
and y in composition (§§ 468-9); loss of u before u (§§ 470-1); loss
of final 7 (§§ 472-3); loss of medial n (§ 474); loss of r (§ 475); loss
in triple groups (§§ 476-7)

I.

Intrusion of Consonants (§§ 478-9)

J.

Assimilation of Consonants and Kindred Changes (§§ 480-5)

K.

Chronological Summary (§§ 486-90)

CHAPTER X.

A.
B.

LOAN-WORDS

IN OLD ENGLISH

Graeco-Latin Loan-words (§§ 491-2)
Early Latin Loan-words

General remarks (§§ 493-4); vowels of accented syllables (§§ 495-

510); vowels of unaccented syllables (§§ 511~17); suffix substitution
(§ 518); declension and conjugation (§§ 519-28); loan-words with
native formative elements (§ 529); consonants (§§ 530-43); abnormal developments (§ 544)
C.

Later Latin Loan-words

General remarks (§ 545); phonology (§§ 546-58); declension and

conjugation (§§ 559-64)
my

Celtic Loan-words (§ 565)

Scandinavian Loan-words (§ 566)
French Loan-words (§ 567)

199

CONTENTS

x
Cuapter XI.

NOUNS

.

.

.

+

.

.

232

Classification of nouns (§ 568); methods of the present treatment (§ 569)
A.

Strong Declensions
1. a-Nouns

a. Pure a-Nouns (§§ 570-4)

b. ja-Nouns (§§ 575-9)

c. ya-Nouns (§§ 580-4)

2. 6-Nouns
a. Pure 6-Nouns (§§ 585-9)
b. 76-Nouns (§§ 590-3)
c. yd-Nouns (§§ 594-8)
3. i-Nouns

a. Masculine (§§ 599-602)
b. Feminine (§§ 603-6)

c. Neuter (§§ 607-10)
4. u-Nouns (§§ 611-14)
B.

The Weak Declension (§§ 615-19)

C.

Minor Declensions
1. Athematic nouns
a. Masculine (§§ 620-3)
b. Feminine (§§ 624-8)
2. Nouns of relationship (§§ 629-31)
3. Nouns in -nd- (§§ 632-4)

4. Stems in Indo-European -es-, -os- (§§ 635-6)
5. Dental stems (§ 637)

Cuapter XII.

ADJECTIVES

.

:

.

.

-

261

Cuaprer XIII. THE FORMATION OF ADVERBS.

+

275

Classification of Adjectives (§ 638)
A. Strong Declensions
1. a- and 6-Adjectives (§§ 639-43)
2. fa- and jd-Adjectives (§§ 644-8)
3. ya- and yd-Adjectives (§§ 649-53)
4. t-Adjectives (§ 654)
5. u-Adjectives (§ 655)
B.

Weak Adjectives (§ 656)

C.

Comparison of Adjectives (§§ 657-60)

Adjectival adverbs (§§ 661-3); adverbs in -lide, -unga, -a (§§ 664-6); the
adverb wéi(!) (§ 667); adverbial use of cases (§ 668); compound adverbs
(§ 669); comparison of adverbs (§§ 670-6); adverbs of place (§§ 677-81)
Cuapter XIV. NUMERALS

.

1. Cardinal Numbers (§§ 682-91)

2. Ordinal Numbers (§§ 692-5)
3. Miscellaneous Numerals (§§ 696-700)

.

.

.

-

280

CONTENTS

CuHuaPpTer XV. PRONOUNS

.

xi

.

.

.

-

288

1. Personal Pronouns (§§ 702-4)
2. Possessive Adjectives (§§ 705-7)

3. Demonstrative Pronouns (§§ 708-15)
4. Interrogative Pronouns (§§ 716-17)

5. Indefinite Pronouns (§§ 718-25)
CHAPTER XVI.

VERBS

.

.

.

295

Classification of verbs (§ 726); forms of the Old English verbs (§§ 727-9);

paradigms of strong verbs (§ 730); origin of inflexions of strong verbs
(§ 731); Old English forms of present indicative 2nd and 3rd singular
(§§ 732-4); early, late, and dialectal variants of the inflexions of strong
verbs (§ 735); the origin of the strong tenses (§§ 736-7); the classes of
strong verbs (§§ 738-45); reduplicated past tenses (§ 746); weak forms

from strong verbs of Class VII (§747); paradigms of weak verbs of
Class I and further examples (§§ 748~—9); origin of their inflexions (§ 750);

the Old English development of their present indicative 2nd and 3rd
singular, past, and passive participle (§ 751); early, late, and dialectal
forms (§ 752); variant forms of the conjugation (§ 753); paradigm of weak
verbs of Class II and further examples (§§ 754-5); origin of forms
(§ 756); dialectal variations (§ 757); contracted weak verbs of Class II
(§§ 758-61); paradigms and dialectal forms of the four chief verbs of weak
Class III (§ 762); other verbs of the class (§§ 763-5); origin of forms
(§ 766); preterite-present verbs (§ 767); anomalous verbs (§ 768)
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

.

.

:

.

.
.

:

.

.

+

352

:

:

-

37K

ABBREVIATIONS
LANGUAGES AND DIALECTS

Angl.
Gmc.
Goth.

Anglian
Germanic
Gothic

Kt.
Lat.
MD

Kentish
Latin
Middle Dutch

ME

Middle English

NE

New

NHG

New High German

I-E

Merc.

North.
nW-S
OBrit.
OE
OF ris.
OHG
Olr.

Indo-European

ON

Mercian

English

(i.e.

Os

Modern)

Northumbrian
non-West-Saxon
Old British
Old English

Old Frisian
Old High German
Old Irish
Old Norse

Old Saxon

Vulg. Lat. Vulgar Latin

W-S

West-Saxon

The following are often added before the names of languages and dialects:
e
1

Early
Late

Prim.
BOOKS
AB
B-T

Primitive

AND PERIODICALS

Anglia
Beiblatt zur Anglia

PBB

MLN

An Anglo-Saxon dictionary, J. Bosworth,
T.N. Toller
Englische Studien
Indogermanische Forschungen
Modern language notes

MLR

Modern

ES

IF

OED

language

view
Oxford

PMLA

S-B

re-

_
English

dic-

Oldest English
ed. H. Sweet

texts,

ZfdA

tionary

OET

Beitrdge zur Geschichte
der deutschen Sprache
und Literatur
Publications
of
the
Modern Language Association of America
Altenglische Grammatik

nach der angelsdchsischen
Grammatik von Eduard
Stevers neubearbeitet von
Karl Brunner
Zeitschrift fir deutsches
Altertum

SOURCES
And.

Bd. Gl.
BDS
Beow.
BG

Andreas
Azarias
Bede Glosses in MS.
Cott. Tib. C. ii
Bede’s Death-song
Beowulf
Blickling Glosses

BH

Boeth.

CA
CH

Bede’s Historia Ecclesiastica (Latin text)
Boethius
(OE prose
translation)
Inscription on Codex
Aureus
Crdmon’s Hymn

ABBREVIATIONS

Gregory’s Cura Pasto-

MS.

College,

in

OET
Epinal Glossary
Erfurt Glossary
Exodus
Franks Casket

Ps.
RC

RG

Genesis
Genealogies
Guthlac
Juliana
Kentish
Proverbs

Rid.

Rit.

Corpus

173)

Psalms (OE metrical
translation)
Inscription on Ruthwell
Cross
Royal Glosses
Riddles
Rituale Ecclesiae Dunelmensis (OE gloss)

Liber
Vitae
Dunelmensis
Battle of Maldon
Metres
of
Boethius
(OE verse translation)
Old English Chronicle
Orosius (OE translation)

Gospels

(Mercian
gloss_—to
Matthew,
and small
portions of Mark and
John)

to

(OE gloss)
Lorica Prayer
Leiden Riddle

Christi

| Cambridge,

Rushworth

Glosses

Leiden Glossary
Lorica Glosses
Lindisfarne
Gospels

OEC
Oros.

Parker Chronicle (OEC,

Corpus Glossary
Charters _ selected

Mal.
Met.

PC

ralis (OE translation)

Ru.?

St. Chad
VP

Rushworth

Gospels

(North. gloss to most of
Mark, Luke, John)
Life of St. Chad
Vespasian Psalter (OE
gloss)

N.B. Ep., Erf., Cp., Ld. are
quoted by gloss number in OET;
CP and Oros. are quoted by page
and line of Sweet’s editions; OEC
is quoted by annals.

GRAMMATICAL TERMS
a., acc.

adj.
adv.
compar.

accusative
adjective
adverb
comparative

d., dat.
f., fem.

dative
feminine
8, gen.
genitive
i., inst.
instrumental
imper.
imperative
indic., ind. indicative
inf.
infinitive
infl,
inflected
m., masc,

masculine

n., neut.

neuter

opt.

nominative
optative

p., pl.

plural

n., nom.

prep.

participle
passive
preposition

pres.

present

pret.-pres.

preterite-present

pron.

pronoun

8., Sg.

singular

part.

pass.

st.

strong

subj.

subjunctive
superlative
weak

superl.
wk,

NOTE ON SYMBOLS
THE sounds of OE are usually indicated by the symbols with which
they are usually expressed in the OE spelling-system, but front
and velar c, g are distinguished by a dot added when a front sound
is denoted (¢, g). A macron is added to long vowels and diphthongs;

in falling diphthongs it is placed over the first element, in rising
diphthongs over the second (éa, ed). Phonetic symbols in square
brackets are occasionally used.
In writing pre-literary forms and in discussing their sounds the
following consonant symbols are used:
i, u = y, win NE yet, wet.
x = ch in Scots loch.
3 = the voiced spirant corresponding to x.

p, 5 = the voiceless (p) and the voiced (8) spirants in NE
thin, then.
Vv = approximately the voiced spirant in NE vine, but

perhaps bi-labial, not labio-dental.'
n = the velar nasal in NE sing.
Pre-literary forms and forms of the literary period not recorded in
manuscripts are marked *. > denotes ‘changed to’, < ‘changed

from’.
t This symbol is used in reconstructed forms instead of 5.

INTRODUCTION
§ 1. ‘Old English’ is the name applied in the present work to the
vernacular Germanic language of Great Britain as it is recorded
in manuscripts and inscriptions dating from before about 1100."
When it is necessary to quote forms more primitive than those
recorded in these sources, but which may be inferred to have been
spoken between the beginning of the settlement of Britain by
Germanic peoples (c. 450) and the first records of their language

(c. 700), these will be described as Primitive Old English (abbreviated Prim. OE), and will be marked with an asterisk (*).
§2. Old English is one of the Germanic branch of the IndoEuropean

family of languages.

The Germanic languages are

conventionally grouped as follows
:?
A. East Germanic. This group consists of West Gothic, known

from fragments of a fourth-century version of the Bible, and a few
other languages which are only very imperfectly known from
names.

B. North Germanic. This is to be subdivided into East Norse
(mainly Danish and Swedish), and West Norse (mainly Nor-

wegian, Icelandic, and Faroese).

North Germanic forms are

usually quoted for philological comparison in the spelling system
of Classical Old Icelandic (c. 1250).3

C. West Germanic. The languages of this group have certain
similarities in their history, which enable us to describe each as
! This has been the customary term since about 1870. In 1871 Henry Sweet
(ed. of OE Cura Pastoralis, p. v) deplored the use of the term ‘Anglo-Saxon’, for
which he himself used ‘Old English’, and in 1876 (1st ed. of Anglo-Saxon
Reader, p. xi) he wrote, “The oldest stage of English . .. is now called “Old
English”, but the older name of ‘‘Anglo-Saxon”’ is still very generally used’.
The contemporary vernacular term for OE is Englisé, in Anglo-Latin of the
period both lingua Anglica and lingua Saxonica occur (with obvious variants
like lingua Anglorum). On the source of the term ‘Anglo-Saxon’ see OED, s.v.,

supplemented by K. Malone, RES v. 173-85.

/

2 Of course any such grouping invites criticism, and the attempts to improve
on this one are many, yet it is based on very fundamental peculiarities of the
languages involved, and still holds the field. Various attempts to modify it are
summarized by E. Schwarz, Goten, Nordgermanen, Angelsachsen (Bern and
Minchen, 1951), pp. 271 ff.
3 This spelling as used in modern grammatical works gives a considerably
regularized picture of the spelling of the manuscripts upon which it is based.

2

INTRODUCTION

$3

having an Old, a Middle, and a Modern period. The first of these
periods ends about 1100, the second about 1500.' The West
Germanic languages which are well recorded in the ‘Old’ stage
are Old High German, Old Saxon, and Old English. Old High
German and Old English develop into Middle High German and
Middle English. Old Saxon is the language of two ninth-century
poems, Heliand and Genesis, and of a few glosses and other brief
texts from the North German area. Middle Dutch and Middle Low
German, while they are very richly recorded in the ‘Middle’ period,
are not exactly derived from any of the languages recorded in the
‘Old’ period. The language known as Old Frisian is recorded in
manuscripts dating from about 1300 to 1500, and might be more
properly described as Middle Frisian.?

§ 3. Within the West Germanic family there is a sharp distinction between Old High German and the remaining languages of
the group. Old Saxon, Old English, and Old Frisian agree in the
following points against Old High German: (1) the Germanic consonant system is not disturbed by the group of changes known
as the Old High German sound-shift; (2) the groups mf, ns, np
are reduced by loss of the nasal consonant, and the preceding
vowel is lengthened
;* (3) one form is used for the three persons
of the plural in all verbal tenses. On the other hand, Old English
and Old Frisian are distinguished in the following points from
Old Saxon as we know it from the above-mentioned Biblical
poems: (1) West Germanic d@ generally appear as fronted sounds;
(z) before nasals, however, they appear as back sounds; (3) West
! This method of describing the stages of development of the West Gmc.
languages was made familiar by Jacob Grimm in his Deutsche Grammatik (vol. i,
1819, passim). He bases his terms on the state of a language, not mechanically on
date, and observes that the sources for Altfriesisch are of the same period as
those for Mittelhochdeutsch, or even later (cf. next note). Yet he did not apply
his usual terminology to English, but calls OE Angelsdchsisch, and uses the
terms Altenglisch and Mittelenglisch for respectively Early and Late ME (see
especially the introduction to his section on OFris. i, 2nd ed., 1822, p. 269).
3 Yet in the earliest Frisian MSS. the unaccented back vowels to some degree
remain, and this is the chief criterion of the ‘Old’ stage of the West Gmc.
languages. Frisian, in fact, does not quite keep step with the other languages of
its group. Native Frisian scholars use the term ‘Middle Frisian’ of the stage of
their language c. 1600-1800 between OFris. and the active modern Frisian
literary movement, but German scholars usually distinguish only Old and New
Frisian, making the line of division about 1550.
3 E. Schwarz, op. cit., regards HG as originally a member of the Northern
group, drawn into the West Gmc. orbit.
4 Examples below,§ 121.

§4

INTRODUCTION

3

Germanic au is OE éa, OFris. 4, but Old Saxon 6; (4) & and g are

fronted before front vowels.'
§ 4. It is now the opinion of many scholars that the language
of the Heliand and the Genesis is a literary Old Saxon, approximated to Old High German, and that, in the ‘Old’ period of the
West Germanic languages, all West Germanic except Old High
German shared the characteristics named above as peculiar to
Old English and Old Frisian. This view has emerged from the
careful study of all the glosses, names, and other stray material
which survive from the Low German area in the ‘Old’ period,
as well as the Heliand and Genesis.2 This West Germanic without
Old High German is often called ‘Ingvaeonic’, because in Tacitus’

threefold division of the Germans the Ingvaeones lie near the sea.3
§5. Writing about 730, Bede regarded the Germanic invaders
of England as descended from three peoples—the Angles, Saxons,
and Jutes.4 There is no need to doubt the soundness of this
tradition, which is confirmed by several of the Old English racial
names. The localization of the continental areas whence these

peoples came has excited much ingenuity.5 It must, however, be
remembered that they were drawn from the Ingvaeonic West
Germans,‘ and that at an early date linguistic differentiation seems

not to have been sharp among these, and would seem to have been
practically limited to matters of vocabulary.” Accordingly, while
there is no objection to the designation of the two main Old English

dialect types as Anglian and West Saxon, the distinctions between
them mostly developed in England, owing to the considerable
isolation of the various parts of the country from one another in
' Points 1-3 are discussed and exemplified in Chapter V a; point 4 in §§ 426 ff.
2 The main literature on this point is referred to in my article,“West Germanic
problems in the light of modern dialects’, Trans. Philological Soc., 1947, pp. 1-14.
An important work since published is E. Rooth, Saxonica (Lund, 1949).
3 Germania ii: Manno tres filios assignant, e quorum nominibus proximi Oceano
Ingaevones... . But many of Tacitus’ Ingaevones were not Ingvaeonic in the sense
in which philologists now use the term (see Schwarz, op. cit., pp. 244 and 272).
H. Kuhn, ZfdA lxxxvi. 23 ff., emphasizes the comparatively late origin of the
Ingvaeonic linguistic unity.
* Hist. Ece.i. 15.
5 Clear and sufficient on this subject is Stenton, Anglo-Saxon England, chap. i.

6 Procopius (Bell. Goth. iv. 19) states that in- Britain there were Angles,
Frisians, and Britons. These Frisians would, of course, also be of Ingvaeonic
stock, and hence but little different from Angles and Saxons.
7 The special problems of vocabulary lie rather outside the scope of a grammar,
A considerable distinction between Angl. and W-S has been drawn by R. Jordan,

Die Eigentiimlichkeiten des anglischen Wortschatzes (Heidelberg, 1906) (Anglistische Forschungen 17). Some minor works are mentioned in the Bibliography.

4

INTRODUCTION

§6

early times. Similarly, the differentiation of Kentish from other
dialects is due to the isolation of the area rather than to the descent
of the inhabitants from the Jutes. In fact, the most obvious Kentish
features can be observed gradually making their appearance in
documents of the ninth century.
§6. In the extant Old English monuments four well-marked
dialects are to be traced, Northumbrian, Mercian, West-Saxon, and
Kentish.' Northumbrian and Mercian are associated as the Anglian

dialects.

The Northumbrian dialect is above all to be identified

by means of the inscription in runes on the Ruthwell Cross, a
bulky monument which belongs to a spot in the heart of Northumbrian territory (Ruthwell in Dumfriesshire). General linguistic
agreement with this inscription enables us to regard as Northum-

brian a number of short pieces of the same, or perhaps of a slightly
earlier, period: the two earliest manuscripts of Caedmon's Hymn,

the earliest manuscripts of Bede’s Death-song and of the Leiden
Riddle, and the runic inscriptions of the Franks Casket. The two
earliest manuscripts of Cadmon’s Hymn belong to the first half

of the eighth century, and the somewhat later (ninth-century)
foreign manuscripts of Bede’s Death-song and the Leiden Riddle
seem to preserve the linguistic features of manuscripts of the same

period faithfully. The inscriptions of the Ruthwell Cross and the
Franks Casket are slightly later than the other three texts in their
linguistic forms.2 A number of other Northumbrian runic in1 It may be of interest to observe when each of these dialects was first distinguished. Hickes (Thesaurus i, 1705, pp. 87-88) already isolated North., for

he distinguished the language of the Lindisfarne and Rushworth MSS. from
that of the bulk of the OE texts he knew, and said that the former was used
chiefly in the north during the 270 years preceding the Norman Conquest, and
arose owing to the Danish invasions. The OE of the majority of texts was apparently first called W-S by R. Garnett in some unimportant work in the Trans.
Philological Soc.,1844, pp. 17-18. Some nineteenth-century scholars assumed that
the Parker Chronicle differed linguistically from other manuscripts of the OFC
because it was Merc., but no text now regarded as Merc. was recognized as such
till J. A. H. Murray (Athenaeum, 3 Apr. 1875), who had previously seen the
presence of two dialects in the Rushworth Gospels, decided that Ru. was probably Merc. Sweet (Gétt. gelehrte Anzeigen, 1882, p. 1186) followed by Sievers
(first ed. of Angelsdchsische Grammatik) suspected that VP was Merc. in 1882.
Fr. Dietrich inferred, from the Canterbury origin of MS. Cott. Vesp. D vi, that
the two OE poems which it contains were Kentish (Marburger Vorlesungsverzeichnis, Autumn 1854). By 1876 Sweet knew that KG in the same manuscript
were Kentish, and that there were many charters in the same dialect (Trans.
Philological Soc., 1876, p. 555).
3 The dating of these inscriptions (especially RC) has been much disputed:
they can, however, be assigned to the eighth century without hazard.

§7

INTRODUCTION

8

scriptions add little to our knowledge of the dialect,’ but general
linguistic agreement with the five short texts just discussed
enables us to regard as Northumbrian three extensive tenthcentury texts, the glosses on the Lindisfarne Gospels, the Rush-

worth Gospels? and the Durham Ritual.3
§7. The names contained in the early manuscripts of Bede’s
Historia Ecclesiastica (several are of the eighth century), and in
the Liber Vitae Dunelmensis (first half of the ninth century), are
a further source for Northumbrian,* but in using names for
linguistic purposes it should always be remembered that in them
archaic and dialectal forms tend to be crystallized, so that they do
not reflect the dialect of the writers of the texts in which they are

preserved.

For example,

a number of southern names

with

Eorcon- as first element occur in Bede: they are sometimes given
a Northumbrian form (Ercon-) in the manuscripts, but more
usually the southern form is preserved, being spelt with either
ea or eo, as these graphs are much confused in Northumbrian.’
Similarly, in the Liber Vitae we find several names with the first
elements Beadu- and Headu-: here we have accepted poetical

forms of wide distribution in compounds, though dialectally
proper only to a limited Mercian area.® But in the same text we
also find these elements with a (the correct Northumbrian form),
and with eo (again reflecting the Northumbrian graphic confusion

of ea and eo).
§ 8. ‘Mercian’ is a term used by modern scholars to imply all
the Anglian dialects excluding Northumbrian. The most obvious

source for Mercian is the large collection of charters of Mercian
kings, and a word must therefore now be said on the use of Old

English charters for linguistic purposes. The word ‘charter’
(German Urkunde) is one used recklessly in Old English studies
' For a list of North. runic inscriptions see Bibliography, § F.
2 Except the Merc. part, see below, § 11; the Merc. part is commonly referred
to as Ru.', the North. as Rut «= 2-4 Forman, bate dwen
3 The glosses on the Lindisfarne Gospels and the Durham Ritual were written
by the same scribe at a time when the manuscripts were associated with the see
situated till 995 at Chester-le-Street and afterwards at Durham.
* On the other hand, the text headed by Sweet, Genealogies (? Northumbrian),
is a collection of lists of kings and bishops of diverse origin, and cannot be taken
to represent any dialect (OET, pp. 167 ff.). The document was compiled c. 812,
probably at Lichfield (Sisam, Studies in the history of OE literature, pp. 4-6;
‘A-S Royal Genealogies’, Proc. Brit. Acad., xxxix. 289).
5 See Strém, Old English personal names in Bede’s History, pp. 105-6.

® See below, § 206.

6

INTRODUCTION

§9

to describe documents of the most varied nature: royal grants,
private agreements, wills, records of proceedings of councils, &c.

Many hundreds of such documents survive, but they are mostly
preserved in ‘cartularies’, that is large manuscripts recording many
documents of interest to a particular foundation. None of these
cartularies is older than 1100, and therefore documents preserved
only in them cannot be relied upon to preserve the practices of the
period of their origin in orthography and inflexion, though they
may provide evidence of value in matters of syntax and semantics.
The student of phonology and inflexion must confine himself to
charters preserved on single sheets which appear to be palaeographically of a date reasonably near to that of the transactions

recorded in the documents. Even so, charters cease to be of great
linguistic value after 900, for they tend, whatever their area of
origin, to be written in the standard West-Saxon of the period,!

and for that dialect records of other kinds are particularly rich.
For the period before goo, Sweet in his Oldest English Texts
selected fifty-nine charters as preserved in contemporary copies.?
Sweet’s work was soundly done, and few charters can be added
with confidence to his selection, but nos. 1, 3, 4, and 24 are to be
eliminated from it as later copies, and Birch 1334 may be added to it.

§9. Even the few documents left by this process of elimination
are not of equal linguistic value. Many record grants of land in

Kent by West-Saxon and Mercian kings, and it is not possible to
be sure if the extant copies reflect the orthographical practices of
the area of the grant, or those of the kingdom of the monarch
concerned. The reports of the proceedings of Church councils are
not of any linguistic value, for they are invariably in Latin except
for names, and since ecclesiastics from all parts would be present,
the lists of their names cannot be said to represent any dialect at all.
§ 10. When due regard is taken to all the methods of elimination just indicated, we are left in the period before 900 with the
following Mercian charters: Sweet’s nos. 9, 10, II, 12, 13, 14, 47;
48. No. 48 and part of No. 47 are in English; the rest are in Latin
and afford only English place- and personal names.
3 See, for example, the Worcester charters collected by Sweet, Second Anglo-

Saxon Reader, pp. 199-209, and the North. ones printed by Stevenson, EHR

a"He vented only the names from the Latin documents, the OE documents

in full, OET, pp. 426-60. I am deeply indebted to Professor E. A. Lowe for

advice and help in reviewing Sweet’s work on the charters.

§ 11

INTRODUCTION

7

§ 11. The great phonological feature which connects Mercian
and Northumbrian is the Anglian ‘smoothing’. When a text exhibits this, but lacks the peculiar features of Northumbrian, we
are justified in regarding it as Mercian. By this means we are able
to add to the Mercian material the interlinear glosses on the
Vespasian Psalter and the Rushworth Gospels (Matthew; Mark
i. 1-ii. 15; John xviii. 1-3, referred to as Ru.*), although they
represent in many respects highly divergent dialects. The former
belongs to the mid-ninth,' the latter to the tenth century. The
Mercian nature of the Vespasian Psalter gloss emerges, furthermore, from its correspondence with the language of certain West
Midland Middle English texts.”

§ 12. There are extant three manuscripts of a glossary containing
material of very diverse origins. They are known as the Corpus

Glossary, the Epinal Glossary, and the Erfurt Glossary. The

English glosses in these are but a small part of the whole. Corpus
is a more extensive copy than the others. The Erfurt MS. is the
least linguistically reliable, as it is by a foreign scribe. The Corpus

MS. usually has rather later forms than those of Epinal and Erfurt,

but neverthelessit appears to be the oldest manuscript of the three.
Professor Lowe dates it ‘eighth to ninth century’, while the other
two may be definitely placed in the ninth century.+ These texts
are to be regarded as mainly Mercian, but they are chiefly interesting for their archaic nature. The same may be said of the Leiden
Glossary, preserved in a late eighth-century continental manuscript. Shorter texts, not rich in decisive dialect forms, but to be
regarded as Mercian, are the glosses on the Blickling Psalter
(eighth century), and the Lorica Glosses and the Lorica Prayer
(ninth century).

§ 13. After goo the use of West-Saxon as a standard language
1 §, M. Kuhn (Speculum xviii. 458 ff.) dates it in the first third of the century
on palaeographical grounds. But allowance must be made (1) for the charters,
with which he compares the hand of the gloss, being somewhat later than the
dates which they bear; (2) for the possibility that hands of this type persisted in
Mercia into the second half of the century, for no contemporary copies of Merc,
charters from that period are extant.

3 The Corpus MS. of the Ancrene Wisse, and the lives of saints in MS. Bodley
34. The fullest treatment of the language of these texts is in the Appendix to
Pe liflade ant te passiun of Seinte Iuliene, ed. by S. T. R. O. d’Ardenne (Liége,

1936); cf. J. R. R. Tolkien, Essays and Studies xiv. 104~26.
3 Codices Latini Antiquioresii. 3 (no. 122).

* Lowe, however, dates the Epinal Glossaryin the first half of the eighth

century, op. cit. vi. 18 (no. 760).

8

INTRODUCTION

§ 14

reduced the writing of Mercian, and only the brief Royal Glosses
of about rooo survive in the dialect. Some Mercian elements
overlaid with West Saxon are to be observed in the Life of St.
Chad, which is preserved in a twelfth-century copy of an Old
English original.
§ 14. The Kentish dialect is known in the eighth century only
from the names in Latin charters, Sweet’s nos. 5, 6, 7, 8.1 In the
ninth century, however, it is used in a valuable series of vernacular
charters, Sweet’s nos. 34 and 37-42.

To these we may add

Kentish endorsements on Sweet’s charters 28, 30, and 44. The
Codex Aureus inscription and Sweet’s charter 45 represent the
practically identical dialect of Surrey in the same period.2? The
glosses on MS. Cott. Tib. C ii of Bede’s Historia Ecclesiastica seem
to contain Kentish elements} (c. goo), and four Latin charters,
Sweet’s nos. 35, 36, 43, and 44, contain Kentish names.
§15. After goo the Kentish dialect is known in the Old English
period only from the Kentish Psalm, the Kentish Hymn, and the
glosses to Proverbs (KG), all preserved in MS. Cott. Vesp. D vi
(late tenth century). The dialect of the two poems, while exhibiting
many Kentish forms, is remarkably mixed. .
§ 16. The West-Saxon dialect is very ill represented until the
literary activity of /Elfred’s later years. There survive only the
names and boundaries of two charters (Sweet’s nos. 3 and 20),

some genealogies, and fragments of two early manuscripts of a
martyrology. All these texts belong to the ninth century, for, as is

noted above, the manuscript of charter 3 (dated 778) is not contemporary. In them, West-Saxon is fighting against the strong
traditions of Mercian spelling (cf. § 17). Later the dialect is richly
exemplified. The ‘Early West-Saxon’, which has come to be
regarded as a grammatical norm, is based on the Parker MS. of

the Old English Chronicle from the beginning to 924, the two
oldest manuscripts of Aélfred’s translation of Gregory’s Cura
* While the manuscript of Sweet’s charter 4 is not contemporary with the
transaction (which belongs to 679), it is probably not later than 750, and preserves
some important archaic spellings.
3 Ekwall (English studies v. 61 ff.) regards these Surrey documents as in a
Merc. literary dialect. His only weighty points are: (1) the frequence of # for
the i-mutation of d, e.g. cléne, hInum, n&nig, r#rad ; (2) alleged cases of smoothing, e.g. Berhtsige, éc, -lége. But (1) proves only a good spelling tradition, such
as is sometimes found in Kent also (§ 289), and the symbols 2 and e¢ are in any
event equivalent in these texts (§ 291); concerning (2) cf. § 307, 314.
3 See Campbell, Medium Afvum xxiv. 55.

§17

INTRODUCTION

9

Pastoralis, and the Lauderdale MS. of Alfred’s translation of
Orosius. These manuscripts belong to the end of the ninth or the
early tenth century. This ‘Early West-Saxon’ is in many respects
contrasted with ‘Late West-Saxon’, which is above all exemplified

in the works of A£lfric (c. 1000). Valuable for tracing the history of

West-Saxon are the gloss on the Junius Psalter and the L&cebéc
(both early tenth-century manuscripts, probably from Winchester),
the Abingdon MSS. of the Old English Chronicle (late tenth and
eleventh century), the West-Saxon Gospels (the early manuscripts
are dated c, 1000), the Abingdon copy of Elfred’s Orosius (eleventh
century), MS. A of the Benedictine Rule (c. 1000), the boundaries
in the charters of West-Saxon kings, and the royal writs which
are numerous in the last years of the OE kingdom.
§17. In a country where there had been so much vernacular

literary activity as there had been in England, it is not surprising
that at first texts in West-Saxon, which seems to have been late in

its literary development, exhibit forms proper to the spelling
systems of other dialects. Even in the manuscripts just mentioned

as the main sources for Early West-Saxon, many spellings are
found which reflect non-West-Saxon phonological forms rather
than the forms which must have been the ancestors of those found

in Late West-Saxon.! Even when West-Saxon had become a
well-established literary dialect, and was used as something of a
standard written language, many manuscripts display a consider-

able non-West-Saxon element in their orthography and inflexions.

Such manuscripts are those of the Old English translations of
Bede’s Historia Ecclesiastica* (especially MS. T, late tenth century),
of Gregory’s Dialogues (all eleventh century), and of Boethius’ De

Consolatione Philosophiae (the only manuscript of any value is of
the mid-tenth century); the Blickling Homilies (late tenth century);

the D version of the Old English Chronicle (several hands, all
after 1050).
§18. A lack of dialectal uniformity also characterizes the bulk

of the extant Old English verse. This verse is mostly preserved in

' A useful survey of such forms is given by Vleeskruyer, St. Chad, p. 42,

note 4.

? This work is particularly rich in Merc. forms. It is, however, controversial
whether this or other W-S texts of Merc. colour (e.g. Gregory’s Dialogues)

ever existed in Merc. of a purity comparable to that of VP. See on this Harting,

'

Neophilologus xxii. 287 ff., against S. Potter, On the relation of the OE Bede to
Werferth’s Gregory and to Alfred's translations (Prague, 1931).

10

INTRODUCTION

§ 19

copies dating from c. 1000, and while these are predominantly late
West-Saxon, they are extremely rich in dialectal forms of various
kinds. Although most of these non-West-Saxon forms can be
classified as phonologically or morphologically proper to one dialect
or another, it is seldom possible to declare with confidence that
a given poem was originally in a particular dialect, or even that it
was non-West-Saxon. For example, the two poems on the victories
of Ethelstan and Eadmund in 937 and 942 can hardly be regarded
as non-West-Saxon in origin, but all the extant copies are rich
in non-West-Saxon forms. There seems to have been, in fact,
a ‘general OE poetic dialect’,! mixed in vocabulary, phonology,
and inflexion, and an originally dialectally pure poem, which
achieved general popularity, would in transmission become
approximated to this poetic dialect, while new poems would be
written down from the beginning with considerable indifference to
dialectal consistency.

§ 19. It will be apparent from the above sections that it is not
possible to draw a dialect map of England in the Old English
period. What our Anglian documents afford is rather a fair knowledge of the language in use at a number of centres of culture,

represented by the glosses on the Vespasian Psalter, the Lindis-

farne Gospels, the Rushworth Gospels, and the Durham Ritual.
We should be justified in grouping Li., Ru.?, and Rit. together as
Northumbrian, even if the history of the manuscripts was quite
unknown, for they share certain features with each other and with
the shorter Northumbrian texts, but this does not show us the
territorial limits of the dialect, or of the distinctions which we can
trace within it. Furthermore, the approximate whereabouts of
only one of the points whence our major texts come is known
(Durham area), for Ru.* is of undecided origin. Similarly, in the
case of Mercian we have a bright light on the language of two
unknown points, afforded by VP and Rwu.1, and just enough
independent knowledge of Mercian phonology (mostly provided
by charters) to place those two points in the Mercian area. We
can suspect on similar grounds that there is a large Mercian
element in the early glossaries. We cannot, however, set geographical limits to Mercian any more than to Northumbrian.
§ 20. Of West-Saxon we have considerable knowledge, but
t The phrase is K. Sisam’s (Studies in the history of OE literature, p. 1 38),
and his careful remarks on the poetical language are of the first importance.

§ a1

INTRODUCTION

11

again we have no means to define its limits or those of its internal

inconsistencies. We can sometimes say that a given development
is found at a known centre, but we cannot from this be sure of the
extent of the area to which the change was proper, or even that

the centre, at which the manuscript displaying the change was
written, itself lay within that area. Furthermore, even evidence
derived clearly from a known centre is often contradictory. For
example, some Abingdon scribes have the tenth-century change
éa > 2 before and after c, g, and before h, but others. do not.
In any event, no monastery would always recruit every scribe

from the same area,

§ 21. The same conditions limit our knowledge of the Kentish
dialect. The vernacular ninth-century charters show a steady

tendency towards the development of a local Schriftsprache, with
increasing avoidance of Anglian spellings, and care to express
local sound-changes. This Schriftsprache we find used in the follow-

ing century in the Kentish Glosses and two poems, but the geographical bounds of its various peculiarities (e.g. 2 > &,9 > é,
€0 > io) we cannot determine. When we find a similar dialect
in two documents with a Surrey background, this is not evidence

for the identity of the dialects of the soil of Kent and Surrey, but
rather for the wide use of a south-eastern written koiné, which had
gained prestige by use at Canterbury, for most of the documents
in it make gifts or bequests to Christchurch, and Canterbury
monks may well have had a hand in their shaping.
§22. Place-names recorded in documents of later periods are
the main weapon with which attempts have been made to supplement our knowledge of the distribution of the Old English dialects.

From these some light has been shed on the extent of certain
dialectal peculiarities in Middle English times.' But while some of

these peculiarities go back to Old English times, it is not possible

to be sure that their geographical limits were the same then as
later, or that these had not been seriously altered by linguistic
expansions before we become able to trace them.
' Of special interest for OE studies are A. Brandl, Zur Geographie der altenglischen Dialekte (Berlin, 1915), and E, Ekwall, Contributions to the history of
OE dialects (Lund, 1917). The former deals particularly with the areas of W-S
#, and of the different developments of mutated #(4, i, 2), the latter with those

of ea and a before /+ consonant, and of ie, e and 2 for the mutations of those
sounds,

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY, AND

PRONUNCIATION
§ 23. Old English is written by contemporary scribes in the
Latin alphabet in insular script. To this a number of additions

were made for convenience in writing Old English: these will be

discussed below.

§ 24. Old English manuscripts use few contractions compared
with Latin ones of the same period. Very common are 7 = and,
B = pet,? pon = ponne, hwo = hwonne, t (really = uel) = oppe,
and a stroke over a final vowel for m3 (e.g. cé = com, -% = -um).
Less frequent are g- = ge-,4 grd = geard, € = cwep, m = menS
The group er can be represented by a stroke over any consonant

(e.g. xft = efter, of = ofer), fo by a stroke over f (e.g. befran
= beforan).

§

25. Occasionally a rune is used to represent the word which

is its name, e.g. P = wynn joy; 8 = gpel home; Pi = mann man;
b4= dzxg day. Still more rarely, a word is represented by the
corresponding Latin word or its contraction, e.g. Diis (= Dominus)
= Dryhten, prb (= presbyter) = préost, dux = ealdormann, rex
= cyning.
§ 26. Vowel length is occasionally indicated, especially in early
1 The insular script is a development of the insular half-uncial. A few charters
containing English names are written in this half-uncial (OET, nos. 3, 5, 10),
as is the fine register of names known as the Liber Vitae. The Corpus Glossary
is in an early stage of transition from half-uncial to insular. There are also three
charters containing English names in uncial script (OET, nos. 1, 4, 9). Late in
the OE period the insular script is invaded by a few letter-forms from the continental script, which by then was used for writing Latin. The attribution of
different phonetic values to the insular and continental forms of g belongs to
the eME period.
2 7 and # are also used for the syllables and-, pet- in compounds, e.g. 7lang,
pte for andlang, pxtte.
3 In OE manuscripts this stroke very rarely stands for n: certain examples are
limited to 6, 7 = on, in (e.g. Bd. Gl. 89); other instances are perhaps errors,
e.g. PC, f. 17’, 1. 8, worhtié, past pl.
+ Also freely used for -ge asa final syllable, e.g. freog forfréoge. A rare symbol
for ge- in the form of a Greek capital I’ occurs in Ct. 45.

5 Also used for men as part of a word: gnu for genumen, Beow. 3165.

$27,

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY, PRONUNCIATION

3

manuscripts (e.g. Cp.), by doubling the vowel. Some mistakes
occur in the application of this device, e.g. Ep. fraam for fram bold,

The acute accents, which are freely used in many manuscripts,
stand most frequently on monosyllables (alone, or in compounds

like drlice, Wendelsz#), and monosyllabic prefixes (e.g. d-, tip-, tn-).
They are also frequent on inflected monosyllables, alone or in

compounds (e.g. mdédum, cynegéde). The accents often stand on

long vowels, but by no means always;! when they are over short
vowels they often indicate stress, e.g. wég, forwirdon, and many

prefixes. The frequent use of accents on accented monosyllabic
words and prefixes led to a tendency to put them on short words
and prefixes even when these are unaccented. Hence we find them

on the unstressed prefixes of verbs (e.g. dgdl, El. 342; dstah,
Ex. 468), conjunctions (e.g. pd, hu), and proclitic words, such as
an, nan, and even sé (e.g. pd igland, Oros. ed. Bosworth, p. 26).

Similarly, they may occur on pronouns where these have no
special emphasis. Another use of the accent mark is as a diaeresis,

e.g. Cp. neopotard, eduaelle, and so in foreign words, Isddc,
Faraénes.?

§27. Marks indicating vowel shortness are found in some late
manuscripts. On their various forms see K. Sisam, Studies in the

history of OE literature, pp. 187-8.

§ 28. Most manuscripts are freely punctuated. The point and
the comma are both used, and some manuscripts have both.
Various more elaborate stops are used for the ends of paragraphs.

In the late tenth and eleventh centuries a different system also

appears in which the semi-colon (;) is the strongest stop, and the

point the weakest, while the inverted semi-colon (:) is usually
stronger than the point, but can be equal to it. A question mark
(.-~) is also used.3 Old English verse is written out continuously,

like prose, but the ends of the half-lines are indicated by some

scribes by means of stops. Of the four major poetic codices, the

* In some manuscripts (e.g. Beow.) the accents are practically limited to long
vowels, but this is not a general tendency.
? On accents see further L. Schmitt, Die Akzente in altengl. HSS. (Bonn,
1907) (extract from study of Laéebéc, see Bibliography, § M; unequal); W.

Keller, Uber die Akzente in den ags. HSS. (Prager deutsche Studien viii, 1907,
PP- 97-120).

3 This later punctuation is studied in detail by C. G. Harlow, The punctuation
of six of ZElfric’s Catholic Homilies (Oxford dissertation, 1955); more briefly by
P. Clemoes, Liturgical influence on punctuation in late Old English and early
Middle English MSS. (Cambridge, 1952).

14

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ a9

Vercelli and Junius MSS. have these indications of the half-verse
SO
end.
§ 29. Word-division is inconsistent in Old English manuscripts,
for the accentual group obscures the word, and proclitics (e.g.
articles and prepositions) are frequently joined to the following
word, or divided from it by a space less than that which normally
divides words. On the other hand, compounds are frequently divided into their component parts (e.g. ge hwa, nip wundor, Hrop
gar).
:
§30. The Old English vowel system was normally expressed
with the following symbols, which all express both long and short
sounds:
Back vowels:

Front vowels:
Diphthongs:

a

ze
ea

)

e
eo

u

i
io

oe
ie

y

§ 31. Before considering the phonetic value of these symbols,
I wish to emphasize that our knowledge of the sounds of a dead
language can never be more than approximate. The following
reconstruction of the phonetic system of Old English is based on
the probable value of the symbols when they are used to write
Latin of the same period, and upon reasonable deductions from
the history of the sounds both in Germanic and in the later periods
of English.?

§ 32. a represented a back sound, which occurred chiefly before
a back vowel of the following syllable, e.g. dagas days, sacu strife,
faran go, habban have. It was also frequent before nasal consonants,
and in this position o is a frequent alternative spelling, e.g. mann,
monn man, gelamp, gelomp happened, nama, noma name (cf. § 130).
It may be assumed that before nasals the a represents a lower or
less advanced sound than elsewhere, which may even have been
slightly rounded. The distinction between the vowels of dagas
and monn would be approximately that between open advanced
1 See further M. Rademacher, Die Worttrennung in ags. HSS. (Minster,
1921).

2 For the meaning of the phonetic terms which I use, see Daniel Jones, The
Pronunciation of English. | merely suggest the probable approximate positions
of the OE vowels, and do not attempt to decide if they were tense or lax. It is
fundamental to the history of English vowels that the long and short vowels
were practically identical in quality till about 1200, and that afterwards they
became distinguished by the short sounds becoming more open or more lax
than the long sounds to which they had previously corresponded.

§ 33

AND PRONUNCIATION

15

back and open full back. The long sound corresponding to
the vowel of dagas is also represented by a, e.g. stan stone,
gast spirit.
§ 33. o (except when it is a variant of a before a nasal) repre-

sented a rounded back vowel, probably rather less open than
that of NE not, more like that of NHG Gott, e.g. god god, dohtor
daughter, boden offered. The corresponding long sound is also
represented by 0, e.g. mddor mother, gos goose, mona moon. There

was no long sound corresponding to the a/o of monn.
§ 34. u represented a rounded back close vowel, e.g. full full,
lufian love, guma man. It also represented the corresponding long
sound, e.g. Ais house, cil cow, briican use.
§ 35. 2, e, i represented front sounds, distinguished by their
height, which would be approximately that of NE bat, bet, bit. They

all represented both long and short sounds, e.g. dzg day, fader
father; d#d deed, sd seed, h&lan heal; etan eat, helpan help,
here army; méd reward, léf weak, slép slept; fis¢ fish, ping thing,
sittan sit, bindan bind; tid time, fif five, ridan ride.

§ 36. oe' and y represented front rounded vowels, both short
is unrounded early in the history of the language in

and long.

some areas (see §§ 196-8), while # is unrounded in one district

after another, beginning about 800 (see §§ 288, 317). It would be
unwise to attempt a precise definition of these sounds, but since

§ is usually a fronting of a, and dé of 6, and since the unrounding
of is usually i, and that of d is always 4, it is clear that # was
close, and dé half-open. Examples of these sounds are oele oil,
oexen oxen; cwoén queen, foédan feed; cyning king, pyncan seem;

mys mice, jp wave.

§37. The symbols ea, eo, io represented partly the sounds
developed from the West Gmc. diphthongs au, eu, iu. It is accordingly reasonable to assume that they represented diphthongs in
these cases at least. Their use seems based on a successful attempt
to analyse the diphthongs in question, and to express their
components with the symbols used to express monophthongs.

The West Gmc. diphthongs might be expected to develop to
OE zu, eu, iu, and we find such spellings in early texts. Afterwards,
the second element of all these diphthongs was lowered, and that
of zu was also usually unrounded, so that the normal OE develop1 In Ct. 45 (Surrey) and CA this symbol is reversed to eo, e.g. gefédrum d.p.
companions.

16

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ 38

ments are xa (usually written ea), eo, io," e.g. béam tree, céas chose,
péof thief, céosan choose, diore dear, liohtan give light.
§ 38. The symbols ea, eo, io were used in a great many words
for sounds developed out of a monophthong. When this monophthong was long, the symbols no doubt had the same value as

when they represented sounds developed out of diphthongs, e.g. néah
near, géar year, néol&can (Angl.) approach, Hoht light (in weight).

But in many words the symbols ea, eo, io represented sounds which
were derived from older short monophthongs, and which were
themselves equivalent to short vowels in the metrical system. The

value of the symbols in such words will be discussed below (see
§§ 248-50). In this book they are written without diacritics, while
diphthongs derived from old diphthongs or long monophthongs
are marked long.? Examples of these so-called ‘short diphthongs’
are ceald cold, bearn child, geaf gave, eorpe earth, heofon heaven,
stodo custom.*

§ 39. The eW-S dialect had in many words the symbol ie. What
has been said of the symbols discussed in § 38 applies to this one
also. It is often derived ultimately from a West Gmc. diphthong
or long vowel,’ and in such cases can be regarded as representing
a diphthong, analysed as i+-e by the first W-S experimenters in
writing the vernacular, e.g. hieran hear, liehtan give light, *ciese
cheese. It often, however, represented the W-S development of
short vowels which in other dialects remain, or are otherwise
1 But there is great dialectal variety. In North. the symbols ea and eo suffer
an apparent confusion (see § 278), while io should theoretically not appear in
W-S, and when it does so, it early becomes éo (see § 202). This also happens
in Merc. (i.e. VP and Ru,}), but in North. io is kept distinct from ée, and in
Kt. éo and io fall together in io (see §§ 293-8).
2 Diphthongs in -u were so completely foreign to the developed spellingsystem of OE that eo was sometimes used in foreign names like Deusdedit,
Eudoxius (OE Bede).
3 There has been some disagreement whether the distinction in quantity of
the OE diphthongs affected the first element only or the whole diphthong; and
hence whether the macron on long diphthongs should be over the first element
only or over both elements. See on this R. Quirk, The interpretation of diphthongal
spellings in OE (unpublished, London dissertation, 1949). In the present work
the macron is placed over the first element in normal diphthongs, which are thus
distinguished from rising diphthongs (§ 44), in which the macron is over the
second element.

4 Here again there is great dialectal variation, not only for the reason indicated
for the long diphthongs in the preceding note, but also owing to frequent
failure of the ‘diphthongizing’ processes (see §§ 139 ff., 205 ff.).
5 On W-S ie from contraction see § 47.

§ 40

AND PRONUNCIATION

17

developed. In this book, ie is printed with no diacritic in such
words, and its value will be discussed below (§ 248). Examples are
Siest guest, giefan give, teldra older, hierde shepherd. ie was merely
an archaic spelling in even the earliest extensive W-S manuscripts,

for inverted spellings like dienga for dinga, g.p. things, show that
the sound which it represented had become i.!
§ 40. The selection of the symbols a, e, i, 0, u for the purposes
indicated in §§ 32-35 offers no difficulty, apart from the hesitation
between a and o in words of the type monn. This was no doubt due

to the lack of a separate symbol for a sound which was lower, or

more retracted, than the sound represented by a in sacu. It
no doubt resembled the 0 of god acoustically. The symbols 2,
oe, y require closer consideration. In the Latin spelling of the
period, ae, e, and oe were equivalent graphs, and their. use in
different values neatly met a serious demand of Old English.?

Early manuscripts write ae and 2 indifferently, but later 2 prevailed. There is in OE spelling no sign of a distinction, such as
that made in OlIr. spelling, between ae and x.3 The symbol g¢,
used especially in Sweet’s Oldest English Texts, represents ¢ of
the manuscripts, that is an 2 with the loop, which represents the
a in the insular form of that ligature, much attenuated. It is wiser
to use & for any ligature of a+e. The use of the symbol y in OE
spelling to indicate a high front rounded sound will receive further

consideration below (§ 42).
§ 41. The above sections have been devoted to the symbols normally
and generally used for the vowel sounds of Old English. Symbols in
less common use and special values sometimes given to the common
symbols must now be considered.
§ 42. In early manuscripts many instances occur of the symbols e7, oi,
ui: these are used instead of e, oe, y of normal OE, and practically all

examples are given below, §§ 198-200. Most examples of ei in early
texts are in words with i-umlaut of Prim. OE éa (e.g. néid-) or with
theoretical i-umlaut of Prim. OE é (e.g. déid). Since of and ui are
always in positions where normally the mutations of 6 and #@ are found,
it would seem that 1-umlaut was at first a process of fronting of a vowel
and epenthesis of i into the syllable containing it, so that é, 6, 4 became
1 See
§ 300, and cf. Biilbring, AB ix. 96.
2 Nevertheless, the Lat. equation of the symbols leaves its mark on some early
texts in an occasional failure to distinguish the symbols 2 and e correctly: see
A. H. Smith, Three Northumbrian poems, p. 31, § 9. c. 2 and p. 34, § 16. ¢.
3 See R. Thurneysen, A grammar of Old Irish (Dublin, 1946), § 24.

18

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ 43

é+i, 5+-4, 44, and that these diphthongs were soon monophthongized

to é, 5, i, written e, oe, y.' As has been pointed out above, the use of
the symbol oe was an intelligent use of a symbol which had become

useless in Latin. The substitution of the symbol y for u¢ probably ante-

dates the monophthongization of the i-mutation of u, because, while
there is some evidence in Latin grammatical tradition that y is the
symbol for a diphthong w#,” there is practically none that it was ever

regarded in the West as representing a rounded monophthong.
§ 43. A number of diphthongs with -i and -z as their second elements
arise in OE at various times from the vocalization of final g and w, e.g.
wei, gréi, méu, stou, for weg, gr¥s, m&w, stow. Such forms are commonest
in the early glossaries and in Kentish texts. For details see §§ 266, 272.
§ 44. In W-S and to a much lesser degree in other dialects, the
graphs ea, €0, io are used not for the usual OE falling diphthongs, but

for rising diphthongs, which were formed when palatal glides developed
before back vowels, as in gedra once, geoc yoke, gedmrian be sad.
A palatal glide + u is written eo, io or iu in W-S and Kt., but usually iu
in North., e.g. geong, giong, giung, young. See details, §§ 172-5,180-2.
In Late Old English a good many ordinary diphthongs seem to have

become rising by change of the position of the stress, see § 302.
§ 45. In some positions the palatal quality of c, g, and sc is indicated
by the addition of e. This occurs mainly before unaccented a, so that
a graph ea arises, e.g. herigeas, nerigean, sécean, adw&séean, pencean,

segean = herigas armies, nerigan save, sécan seek, adw&scan quench,
penéan think, seégan say. This use of e as a diacritic also occurs frequently
before 0, but only rarely before u, e.g. menigeo multitude, strengeo
strength, bergeum d.p. berries.3 Before u, however, i is frequently
inserted as a similar diacritic, and occasionally this 1 occurs before o,*

e.g. drencium drinks (d.p.), édium eternal (d.p.), gefylcio troops.$ An
oddity is gebiggiean, Oros. 222, 29.
* A similar treatment of 2 is not to be traced, for seic = sedg sedge (Ld. 151) is
hardly more than a slip. When éi was monophthongized, the spelling persisted,
and could be extended to words without i-umlaut, e.g. di] = #/ eel (Cp, 1331),
gebréicon they enjoyed (with vowel of North. sg. bréc; Li., J. 6, 31).
3 The best treatment of this subject is that of J. E. Blomfield (Mrs. G.

Turville-Petre) in her unpublished thesis on The origins of OE orthography.
The chief points are: (1) The grammarian Velius Longus (second century A.D.,
see Grammatici Latini vii. 54 and 75) considers the sound of Greek v to be
audible in words beginning with ui like uirvum. (2) This grammatical tradition
is reiterated in German, Icelandic, and French sources from the tenth century
onwards, (3) It would account for the English name of the letter, which is
first found in the Orrmulum, where y is transcribed as wi (col. 109, 1. 4320).
3 Eleventh-century glossary in MS. Cott. Cleop. A iii (Wright-Wiilcker’s
Vocabularies 505, 5).
4 I have not observed it before a.
5 In this use of e andi as diacritics to indicate a palatal consonant before an
unaccented vowel, we probably have the influence of Irish orthography. Irish

§ 46

AND PRONUNCIATION

19

§ 46. It has been emphasized above that ea is normally a diphthong
of which the first element is not e, but 2. A diphthong consisting of
e-+a, however, occurs in the phonological systems of Northumbrian
and of the dialect of VP, e.g. North. séa, VP geséan, for séon see. These
dialects also have a diphthongi-+-a, written ia, e.g. (ge)fiad he hates.
See § 238 for details. Kt. developed diphthongs e+-a, 7-++a, and the corresponding short diphthongs by extensive unrounding of the second
elements of éo, fo (§ 280).
§ 47. The W-S diphthong #e has been discussed above (§ 39). When
accented7 was followed by unaccented e, contraction produced a diphthong in W-S, which fell together with ie of other origin, but in

nW-S dialects no contraction took place, and the graph ie stands for two
syllables, e.g. sie, pres. subj, of béon be (see BD.S 2>, where the metre
requires two syllables), See further
§ 237. 3. In all dialects, ua represents

two syllables, e.g. buan dwell.

§ 48. Old English scribes are very consistent in their representation of accented vowel sounds,! but every accented syllable did not

have the same vowel sound in every dialect, or even at every time
within one dialect. Hence there is great diversity of spelling in
Old English, arising not from inconsistency in the values of the
symbols, but from diversity of sound.”
§49. The vowels of OE unaccented syllables are expressed

with the same symbols which are used in accented syllables.

Naturally the values of these symbols would here be only approximately the same as in accented syllables. In very early texts the
common unaccented vowels are expressed with the symbols 2, i,

a, u. e normally occurs only before 7 (e.g. feder). But very soon

2, é€, 1, fall together in one sound, which was written e. Also o
is written for unaccented u with increasing frequency, especially
before a consonant (e.g. past pl. in -on, older -un), but also in
final position (e.g. neut. pl. of nouns in -o, -z). In IOE unaccented
-a, -u, -o, all fell together in one sound, and the three symbols are
interchangeable in some manuscripts. This is very common in
scribes also prefer e before a and o, and i before u: see Thurneysen, op. cit.,
§ 97. In very early texts similar diacritics are found before front vowels:
birdiae = birée birch (Ep. 792), hringiae = hringe ring (d.s., id. 410).
' In fact the only major hesitancy in the spelling of vowel sounds by OE
scribes is that between a and o before nasals (see § 40). A curious fluctuation is
that of W-S scribes between iu, io, eo, for u preceded by a palatal glide(see§ 44).
2 The use of the symbols has been mainly exemplified with eW-S forms in
the present chapter. Some of the examples of o¢ in § 36, and of io in §§ 37-38,

are found in Angl. texts only.

20

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ 50

the plural of past tenses, where -an is as frequent as -on in IOE,
but is also found in absolute finality, so that, for example, we find
-a, -0, or -u in neuter plurals.

§ 50. The Old English consonant system was normally expressed
by the following symbols:
Voiceless spirants

Labials

f,hwi

Dentals Palatals Velars Glottal Sibilants

p(=d)

fh

h

Voiced spirants

f,w'

p(=3)

g

g

Voiceless stops
Voiced stops
Voiced nasals
Voiceless nasals
Voiced liquids
Voiceless liquids

P
b
m

t
d
n
hn
lr
hi, hr

c
g
(n)

c
g
n

h

8

8

(1) The ambiguity whereby f, p, and s represent voiced and
voiceless spirants is not serious, because the sound indicated is
usually evident from the position in the word. Initially and finally
voiceless spirants are represented, e.g. fot foot, panc thought,
seax knife, stdn stone, sweord sword, geaf gave, bxp bath, his
house. Internally between voiced sounds voiced spirants are
represented, e.g. drifan drive, wulfas wolves, hrefn raven, snipan
cut, weorpan become, cypde made known, fepm embrace, ¢éosan
choose, r@sde rushed, bdsm bosom. Internally before and after
voiceless sounds voiceless spirants are represented, e.g. sceaft
shaft, cyste kissed, miltsian pity.”

(2) The use of for a dental and a velar nasal causes no ambiguity, for the velar occurs only in the groups ng, nc, e.g. singan sing,

panc thought. On the temporary development of a palatal nasal
see § 62.

(3) The use of # for a velar spirant and for a glottal spirant or
breathing is not ambiguous, because it always represents a breathing initially, e.g. his house; but finally and internally it is a velar
1 Following the usual practice, w is in this book used to represent p of OE

manuscripts and inscriptions.

2 To these general rules there are two exceptions: (a) s and p are voiceless
between voiced sounds in a few suffixes, e.g. infl. treowpe, miltse; see § 445;
(b) s between vowels is voiceless when it is a simplification of ss, e.g. infl. hagtese; see § 457. Final f sometimes represents an old voiced spirant, and it is then
not evident if unvoicing has yet taken place, e.g. geaf gave, gléf glove, gif if;
see § 446. This uncertainty does not arise with s and }, which always represent
voiceless sounds finally, as the voiced equivalents became r and d in West Gmc.

(§§ 404, 409).

§ 51

AND PRONUNCIATION

21

spirant, e.g. seak saw, siehp sees, bréhte brought, and so when from
final g, e.g. béah ring (§ 446). On the palatalization of h in final
groups ht, hs (x), hp, see §§ 304-11; on palatal A& after mutated
vowels § 442; on A as a graph for 7 § 447.
(4) Some knowledge of the history of the language is required
to distinguish whether c represented a palatal or a velar stop in
any given word. Single g is a stop only in the group ng = [ng],

and here again it is not immediately evident when it represents
a palatal and when a velar. Examples and full discussion of the
different values of c and g will be found in Chapter IX. 8. The
palatal stops ¢ and g passed into [tf] and [dz] as in NE church,
judge in the course of OE." Initial velar g became a stop in
1OE.?
(5) At first se represented s+c or ¢ according to the nature of

the surrounding sounds. In the course of OE every initial sc and sé
became [f] as in NE ship, but internally and finally this change
affected only s¢, while sc remained or became x: see §§ 440-1.

(6) No difficulty arises in the case of p, t, b, d, m, l, r, w which
can all occur initially, medially, and finally, e.g. plega play, spere
spear, wépan weep, helpan help, rap rope; tunge tongue, teelf
twelve, metan measure, meltan melt, fot foot; béam tree, blind blind,

climban climb, lamb lamb; din hill, bindan bind, land land; ména
moon, niman take, besma besom, gelimpan happen, hém home;

lédan \ead, helpan help, eall all; rodor sky, gréne green, weorc
work, wer man; wépan weep, sweord sword, cndwan know, snaw
snow.

(7) The voiceless sounds hl, hr, hn, hw occur initially only, e.g.
hlaf loaf, hréosan fall, hnutu nut, hwéol wheel.
§51. The following geminate consonants occur in OE: ff, bp,
58, hh, pp, bb, tt, dd, cc, cg (= gg, § 64), mm, nn, Il, rr. Since OE
had no voiced spirantal geminates the symbols ff, pp, ss are unambiguous. The geminate stops cc and cg are ambiguously palatal
or velar, e.g. bucca buck, frocga frog, but streccan stretch, ecg edge.

The palatal geminates ¢¢ and ¢g passed in the course of OE into

[tJ] and [dz}: see §§ 433-4. Examples of the other geminates are
t But cf. § 486, footnote.
7 In this book a dot is printed over palatal ¢ and g, which entirely removes

ambiguity in the case of ¢ and ¢, and practically does so in that of g and g,
because they are spirants except in the groups cg, cg, mg, ng, where they are
stops. On attempts to distinguish ¢ and ¢ in the runic alphabet and some manuscripts see § 427, footnote.

22

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ 52

pyffan puff, scebpan injure, cyssan kiss, hliehhan laugh, clyppan
embrace, habban have, settan set, biddan ask, swimman swim,
spinnan spin, tellan tell, afierran remove. In final position geminates are frequently subject to graphic shortening, see § 66.
§52. One of the conditions under which palatal ¢ and g
developed was after a mutated vowel,’ in which position they
originally stood before z or 7, e.g. béé books, streccan stretch,
drenéan cause to drink, fégan join, leégan lay, mengan mix. It is
disputed if other consonants and groups were palatalized in similar
positions. It is reasonably assumed that x would be palatalized
under the same conditions as 3 (§ 442). Owing to the absence of
breaking before // due to West Gmc. doubling of consonants (e.g.
tellan tell, see § 139, footnote 3), a palatal pronunciation of the
geminate may be assumed. There is reasonable evidence that |
and n-+consonant and single m had a palatal pronunciation after
a mutated vowel, e.g. ieldra older, cennan beget, ened duck (cf.
§ 192). m both singly and followed by another consonant seems to
have like
a capacity to cause raising of 2 to e, and hence would
seem to share its palatal nature, e.g. cemban comb, gremman
irritate, gefremed made. ‘Palatalization’ of these labial consonants
would consist in the development of a palatal off-glide, -mbi-,
&c.?

§53. The group [ks] is usually expressed by the symbol x
(for examples, see § 416); rarer variants (cs, cx, hx, xs, hs) are
exemplified by Cosijn, Altwestsdéchs. Gramm. i. 171, 180, 191.

The symbol z is used in Biblical names (e.g. Azarias, Baldazar) with the value [ts], and hence it is sometimes used for ts
in English words, e.g. bezt, milze, draconze, bezere
= betst best,
miltse mercy (inflected), dracontse dragon-wort, *bzpsere baptist.
Balzam also occurs beside balsam (see § 478). In late manuscripts
the French use of c = [ts] is found (e.g. milce, OEC, MS. E), and
seems to appear already in plzxce place (Li., Rit.), becere baptist
(Rit.). Rare graphs for [ts] are dz (e.g. bedzere, Ru.) and ds
(e.g. palendse palace, Oros.). Early texts have occasional initial qu
for [kw], e.g. Cp. quedol talkative, Ct. 57 Qudéndrydae.
§54. The Old English consonant system described above was
® Or a theoretically mutated vowel, i.e. a vowel originally followed by f or j,
but incapable of mutation, e.g. 2, i of @¢e physician, vice kingdom.
2 Or the distinction from the normal form of the consonant may be one of
tone ( J. R. R. Tolkien, private communication).

23
AND PRONUNCIATION
$58
developed from an earlier one. The following are the consonant symbols
in common use in the earliest texts:

Labials:

P

Velars:

c

Dentals:
Palatals:
Glottal:

Liquids:

t
c
I

f

b

ch

g

th
ch
h

hl

d
gi
r

u

8

hu

m

n
(n)

hn

n

hr

§ 55. The model for this system was clearly the Latin one as preserved

in grammatical tradition. The use of th and ch to represent voiceless
spirants, respectively dental and velar (or palatal), appears, however, to
have been suggested by Olr. spelling.? On the other hand, the ambiguity of the Olr. system, whereby p, #, ¢ can represent both voiced
and voiceless stops, was avoided, although 5, d, g represented both
voiced stops and spirants. This was not a great disadvantage, because
Old English had initially neither voiced labial or dental spirants, nor
velar or palatal stops. Hence initially b and d always represented stops,
but g always spirants. Internally and finally there were no single voiced
labial, palatal, and velar stops. Again there were no double voiced
spirants, or voiced spirants after nasals: hence bb, dd, gg, mb, nd, ng are
unambiguous symbols.

§ 56. While the broad scheme of the original Old English spelling
of stops and spirants is outlined above, there are a good many inconsistencies in its application, and furthermore the system was much
changed by later developments, so it will be necessary to. consider the
various symbols separately.

§57. The representation of voiceless spirants by f, th, ch? was

disturbed in various ways:

(1) f was used in medial positions to indicate voiced spirants, and the
1 T use a familiar but vague term, for the precise nature of OE / andr is

unknown, and some argue that there were several varieties of each.
2 In Latin, words with th, ch seem normally to have been pronounced with ¢
and ¢; ph, however, was equated with f. Examples, § 538.
3 The assumption that th at first represented a voiceless spirant is based on
Irish usage, and the parallel with ch. No OF manuscript preserves this usage:
some use th only initially, and have d medially for both the voiced and voiceless

sound (e.g. English names in the Moore Bede), others extend zh to the internal
and final position for both the voiced and voiceless sounds (e.g. Ep.). The original
value of f in OE spelling is uncertain, since it is not known whether the voicing
of {f] between voiced sounds is later than the first spelling experiments. If it is
so, then f originally represented a voiceless spirant, while b was used for the
voiced one, and Ep. preserves this position well. Then when [f] > [v] between

voiced sounds, f began to be used for both new and old {v]. But if the voicing of
[f] between voiced sounds is very old, then [v] from Gmc. [f] must have still
resembled [f] in articulation, rather than [v] from Gme. [v], and the symbols

24

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ 57

spelling system of Ep. indicates that at first f represented only the
voiced labial spirant which arose in OE from Gmc. [f] between voiced
sounds, while 6 stood for Gmc. [v] when this remained spirantal. f soon
extended itself as the symbol for every labial spirant; 5 is less common
as a symbol for a spirant in Cp. than in Ep. and Erf., but it is still
frequent in the early manuscripts of Bede.' For examples see § 444.
After 800, 6 survives only as an archaism, chiefly in the Kt. charters of
about 830-40, e.g. hlabard, gib, ob, hiabenlice, agiaban, and occasionally
in
LV
(2) In early texts pt is often written for ft: this is frequent in Ep.,
Erf., and Cp. in compounds of séaept, for sceaft shaft; note also gidopta,
for gepofta companion, Ep. 189.
(3) When [x] was lost between vowels (see § 461), the symbol &
rapidly became the normal one for [x]. While ch is used finally in the
Moore Bede, it yields to h increasingly in the glossaries. In LV ch
reappears extensively, both finally and as the final symbol of first
elements (e.g. Alchfrith, Ualchstod). Before t, however, the normal
symbol of a velar or palatal spirant was c in early OE, though cht is also
found. Already in Irish spelling ct had tended to replace cht.3 But here
also A gradually replaces c: while ct is universal in the Moore Bede, it
gives way rapidly to ht in the glossaries, though it returns in LV, where
both ct and cht are more frequent than At.4 Later the survival of ch is
very sporadic, e.g. PC 845 Ealchstan, Ru. gesech imper. see.

(4) A few instances of the use of the symbol g for [x] are found in
early texts, and occasionally compromise symbols like gh, gch, hg occur,

e.g. sldg Cp. 289, slagh- id. 1380, misthdgch id. 667, -lég Ct. 5, for slah
sloe, misbah (past of mispéon), léah open country. Cf. also fegtap, unnég
in runes on FC.

(5) Early manuscripts (especially the Moore Bede) use th initially,
and d medially and finally, for a dental spirant. The distinction seems to
be one of position in the word, not of voiced and unvoiced sounds, for
d often represents a voiceless spirant, as in the numerous names in the
Moore Bede in -frid, -thryd, -suid, -haéd, and in the firet element of
Gidfrid. th, however, has already invaded the internal and final positions in Ep.5 th is still often used in LV, where it is especially common

finally.°
f and } must have expressed, not the contrast voiceless against voiced, but some
difference in articulation, perhaps labio-dental against bi-labial.
' Substitution of 5 for f is rare, e.g. cnéoribt Cp. 21.
3 For a few other survivals see S-B, § 192.a.4; note poetical tiber for tifer.

3 See Thurneysen, A grammar of Old Irish, p. 21.
4 Initial ch is hardly found: Erf. 364 has achlocadum, pass. part. d.p. from
ahlocian pull out.
5 Note also mddgithanc CH, Leningrad MS., for smddgidanc, Moore MS.

6 Often in the Moore Bede, th is a graph for a spirant + 4h, e.g. Fortheri,

§ 58

AND PRONUNCIATION

25

(6) In Cp. the symbol d (i.e. d with a diacritic stroke) is very freely
used for dental spirants, without regard to position or quality. But
already in Ep. and Cp. a rival to & appears in the rune p. At first it
appears to have been used mainly initially: Zp. has ten initial instances,
and seven others, Cp. has forty-four initial instances and eight others.
These two symbols, J and p, remain the usual ones for the dental
spirants in OE: the distinction between them is purely a palaeographical
question."

(7) ¢ rarely represents a spirant: instances are earbet- (Ep. 619,
Cp. 1320), haet- (Cp. 570), flitat (Cp. 680), Siitangli (Ct. 9), Cuutfert
(Ct. 11), for earfop-, h&p-, flitap, Sup-, Ciupferp.?
§ 58. The disappearance of b and d as symbols for voiced spirants has
been incidentally covered in § 57. g remained a symbol for both a velar
and a palatal spirant, e.g. gdd good, geoc yoke (see § 427 for examples).
In early texts 1 is also written for the palatal spirant, e.g. hiniongae
BDS, iéces-sitrae? Cp. 380, Jaruman Moore Bede, Aethiliaeardi Ct. 6,
Aiéelieard Ct. 34; sporadic spellings of this type, especially i, iung,
iugop for ged, geong, geogop (cf. § 172), are always to be found, e.g. oc,
iii
iémung for geoc yoke, giemung marriage, Glosses in MS. Cott. Cleop. A
(eleventh century).* In 1OE the velar spirant becamea stop initially, and
so in words like god the g became a symbol for a stop (see § 430).5
This may account for occasional use of gh and hg for medial and final
spirantal g and g in IW-S, lNorth. and Ru.) (examples S-B, § 214.a.6).
After [n] the g of the graph ng was a symbol for a velar stop, or a palatal
stop, according to the surrounding sounds (§§ 428, 429), and in later
OE the palatal stop became [dz] as in NE judge; for examples, see

§ 433.

§ 59. Of the graphs p, t, ¢, only ¢ offers any difficulty. It represented

Nothelmus, Hlétheri beside Fordheri, Suidhelm. LV usually has -dh- or -thhin such words, but also Cathelm, Cuthere, Cutheard. Cf. also Hiétharius Ct. 4,
Nétheard Ct. 33. On Baldhild, Balthild see § 414. Similarly, -ch- probably indicates at times ch-+h, for there is much variation between these graphs in names
like Alhheard and Alhhere.

! The first instances of the three new symbols J, d, and p (see § 60) in dated
charters are: ) in a report of a Clofeshoas council dated 803 (Ct. 33); din a
second and altered copy of a charter dating in its original form from 700 or 715
(Ct. 5); p in a charter of 692-3, but the copy is not less than fifty years later.
(Ct. 1).

2 MS. Cott. Tib. C ii of Bede has a few instances of ¢ for the final consonant
of the name elements Swip-, -swip, -brip. Not here belongs 3rd sg. pres. ind. in
-t, which is an alternative phonological form (see § 735.b).
3 i.e. géaces-siire cuckoo’s sorrel.

4 Note also Liminiaee Lyminge, Ct. 7. Not here belongs internal and finalé

for g (e.g. streide, wei), where a sound-change is involved (see § 266).
5 An alternative view of the sound of initial g and g will be mentioned in

§ 398.3, footnote.

26

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ 60

a velar or palatal stop according to circumstances (see §§ 426 ff.), and
in later OE the palatal stop became [tf] as in NE church.

§ 60. In the early Northumbrian poems and the Moore Bede, wu and

uu are the symbols used for y, e.g. uard, uneorthae, uyrmas, sué, Uighard,

Caedualla. Ep., however, has the rune p about ten times, and it is
frequent in Cp. The older spelling, however, remains in all Northumbrian texts, and is universal in LV and Rit.’ After consonants u prevails
longer than initially and after vowels, and forms like sud, huzt, cudm,
cuén, are frequent in Li., Ru.1, and eW-S manuscripts.” In late manuscripts f sometimes represents u, e.g. gléof for gléow glowed; and «
often occurs for the labial voiced spirant, e.g. yuel, selua.?
§ 61. The use of # as a symbol for [x] has been discussed above,
§ 50.3. Representing the breathing [h], it is found only initially in
normal OE: its preservation in other positions is limited to a few archaic
forms in the early glossaries (see § 461). It is also used as a diacritic to
indicate a voiceless consonant in hl, hr, hn, hw: these four sounds are
also found initially only. Sporadic forms with omission of the symbol h&
are found in texts of all periods, e.g. aest! Ep. 50, lafardscipes Rit. 182,
10 for hexsel hazel, hlaford- lord. Occasional incorrect addition of the
symbol & also occurs, e.g. haam Ep. 177, hdgen Li., J. 19, 27, ahebbad
PC 897, hertan KG 730, for dm weaver’s reed, dgen own, aebbad ebbed,
erian plow.

§ 62. When in the combinations ae and ng the g and ¢ were palatalized
(see § 50.4), the velar nasal doubtless became a palatal, and subsequently,
when g and c became [dz] and [tf], the nasal would become articulated
as a dental.*

§ 63. Of the OE double consonants, the only ones requiring comment are hh, pp, and cg. Before h and p (0) became established as the
graphs for the velar and dental spirants, replacing ch, th, and d, various
spellings are found for the clumsy doublets chch and thth. For chch we
find in early texts ch, heh, and chh: for the names Eahha, Eahhe, the
Moore Bede has Acha (dat.), LV frequently Echha, and Ct. 5 Aehcha.
All these spellings survive to a limited degree beside the normal hh in

Early West-Saxon, chiefly in forms of the verb teohhian and hliehhan,

1 In Rit. the printed text often has v for u as both vowel and consonant.
2 On minor (chiefly North.) variations, see S~B § 171.a.1; note especially
o =u, e.g. Li. gedod for gedwad, W-S pwéan wash; Rit. soesternum collective
d.p. sisters.

3 There are one or two such spellings in early manuscripts: Cott. Tib. C ii of
BH has Peanuahel for Peanfahel of other manuscripts; Ep., Erf. 428 siuida siftings, cp. sifidan. There are scattered instances in the poetical manuscripts (see
Klaeber’s Beowulf*, p. Ixxxv).

4 The occasional use of nc, ng for cn, gn may be noted, e.g. tdnc, Jeng, freng

for tdcn, Segn, fragn. On the distribution of such spellings see Forster, Flussname
Themse, p. 327; cf. below, § 400, footnote.

§ 64

AND PRONUNCIATION

27

and the noun pohha (Cosijn, Altwestsdchsische Grammatik i. 181). The
full graph thth occurs in aeththa (i.e. eppa, BDS) and a reduction of
this to tht in othte (for obpe, quoted S-B § 199 without reference).
§ 64. In the Moore Bede cg is already established as the symbol for
the geminate of the palatal stop, which is frequent in the element E¢gin names. The older symbol was, however, gg which is used in Ep. for
both the palatal and velar geminate stops, e.g. segg sedge, 463, sugga a
kind of bird, 422. Cp. introduces cg into most of these words, and Erf.
is derived from a source which had both graphs. An occasional variant
is cgg, e.g. hycéganne think, BDS. Rarer are geg, e.g. gebygégean buy,
CP 327, 16, and ge, e.g. Egéberht Ct. 29, gdrsegé ocean, Oros. 22, 28.
Although cg became well established early as the geminate of g, the
older graph gg always recurs sporadically. There is no ground for the
traditional statement that gg became associated with the velar, cg with
the palatal: gg is frequent for the palatal, while all the words quoted to
prove the association of gg with the velar are also found spelled with eg;
they are docga dog, frocga frog, sucga a kind of bird, clucge bell.”

§ 65. Ilogical doubling of consonant symbols is a well-known feature

of Northumbrian texts: e.g. zppilz, gistoddun, almezttig RC; and many
forms in Li. and Ru.? like scipp, gebedd, eatta, brecca = scip, gebed, etan,
brecan.3

§ 66. Double consonant symbols are very frequently simplified at the
ends of words or élements of compound words, e.g. eal, mon, bed,
ealgylden, and forms of the contracted 3rd sg. pres. ind. like hzt, slit,
toscéat. This is only a graphic simplification,‘ and is therefore mentioned
here: on phonological simplifications of geminates, see §§ 457 ff. The
graph cg is not usually simplified, though instances of both c and g occur:
a few instances of Eg-, Ec-, for E¢g- are scattered through BH, OEC,
and other texts (e.g. Beow. 957, 980). Graphic simplification of geminates
in other positions is sporadic: it is most frequent in the case of hh, e.g.
eW-S hliehad we laugh, and North. practically always eher ear of corn,
teher tear.

§ 67. The special problems of runic epigraphy are not in place in a
grammar, but a word must be said upon the possible influence of the
runic upon the form of the Latin alphabet used for writing Old English.
Clear and obvious influence is to be observed in the adoption of the
runes p and p (see §§ 57.6 and 60), but beyond this it is hazardous to go,
! This geminate shows the only considerable trace in OE spelling of the

Celtic use of p, t, c, for voiced stops.

2 Docga is not recorded with gg at all, nor are sceacga hair, éarwicga earwig,

where also the geminate is velar.

3 Note also Cyniberhtte, Ct. 9 (Merc.). On the North, doubling ef. Luick,

Hist. Gramm., §§ 670-1.

4 In Li. final double consonants are written with remarkable regularity.

28

WRITING, ORTHOGRAPHY

§ 68

because there are few OE runic inscriptions which can be shown to

ante-date the first writing in the vernacular. The symbols ae, oe, and y

represent, in the OE form of the Latin alphabet, front vowels which had

become very frequent in OE, but in writing Latin ae and oe had become
mere variants of e, and y was used in Greek words only. The OE form

of the runic alphabet, similarly, has added three new symbols to
represent

the same sounds, and

the question arises whether this

development first took place in runes or in the Latin alphabet. It has

been remarked above (§ 42), that wi is the earlier spelling for y, while

the runic symbol is fq, that is 7 added inside the symbol for u.' That
ut and {i} are independent developments is unlikely, but it is difficult
to assign priority to either the one or the other. The two alphabets
express the sound which arose from the mutation of 0 in different ways.

The Latin alphabet utilized a symbol
oe which had become useless, the
runic one used the old o- rune, Q. This it was able to do, because [a]

had become practically [o] before nasals (e.g. monn, ména), and a
variant of the old a-rune could therefore be used for [o]. The a-rune
was now split into three, for Gmc. a gave in OE from an early date

three sounds seen in deg, dagas, monn. Accordingly, from the a-rune

were developed three runes, RB for 2, R for a, § for o. This system
would seem to have been developed independently of the Latin alphabet. If the Latin alphabet had been the model, one would have expected
the rune for 2 to have been marked with a diacritic, and either @ or 0

to have been given the basic symbol . So perhaps the rune-smiths
preceded the scribes in the search for ways to express the front vowels
and provided them with a model.”

§ 68. The major innovation to be observed, when the normal OE
spelling-system is compared with that of the earliest manuscripts, is

the use of f, » (8) as symbols for both voiced and voiceless spirants,
and h as a symbol for both [h] and [y]. In the former case there is
little ambiguity, in the latter none, owing to the phonetic structure of

the language. The double use of h was probably suggested by the runic

' This is at least the probable origin of the symbol; yet it may be observed
that in some Italic alphabets a similar symbol apparently developed directly
from Gr, v (see Conway, Whatmough, and Johnson, Prz-Italic dialects
ii.
528).
* The Frisian (i.e. continental Ingvaeonic) inscriptions are too uncertain in
date for their evidence to be used to decide the question of priority between
scribe and rune-smith in the use of special symbols for 2 and @. Concerning
these inscriptions see especially W. Krogmann, Zur Frage der Sriesischen
Runeninschriften (Frisian Institute of Groningen University, 1953); P. C. J. A. Boeles,
De inheemse runen-inscripties uit Friesland en Groningen (Oudheidkundige mededelingen uit het Rijksmuseum van oudheden te Leiden xxxv. 18-32). The standard
texts are in H. Arntz and H. Zeiss, Die einheimischen Runendenkméler
des Fest-

landes (Leipzig, 1939).

§ 69

AND PRONUNCIATION

29

alphabet, where fY had continued in use initially, after the sound it
represented changed from [x] to [h], although it remained the symbol

for [x] in other positions. The use of h for [x] would not be suggested by
the spelling of either Latin or Irish.
§ 69. To judge from the Scandinavian runic inscriptions, in the
earliest period the 6 and d runes represented the voiced spirants, and
also the stops which had arisen from them initially and after nasals,
while the f and p runes represented voiceless sounds, When spirants
became unvoiced finally, f and p were extended to the new voiceless
sounds: early examples are gaf gave, Eggjum, bariutib he breaks,
Stentofta. When the voiceless spirants became voiced between vowels,
fand p remained the symbols used for them, and were extended to the
old voiced spirants. Hence in the later runic inscriptions, any labial
spirant may be written with the f rune, and any dental spirant with the
p rune.

§ 70. In a West Gme. language, every
represents an old voiceless
sound, for every voiced dental spirant had become [d]. » would therefore be the rune normally representing the dental spirant in all positions.'
The opposition of initial }, medial d, found in early manuscripts, is
not likely to have originated in the runic alphabet, where d represented
a stop. On the other hand, the change to a common symbol (8) for the
spirants may well have been helped by the runic system. This common
symbol was soon frequently replaced by the rune p. In the case of the
labial spirants, the OE development seems to have been different from
the Scandinavian in that, when [f] became voiced between vowels, it
remained related in articulation to initial and final [f], rather than to old
[v]. This may have prevented the spread of the 5 rune to the new [v],
and hence have helped towards the final triumph of the f rune, which is
complete in our earliest extant inscriptions. If this was the course of
events, it no doubt helped the triumph of the symbol f in manuscripts,
but the lack of inscriptions old enough to be regarded as certainly free
from the influence of manuscript spelling makes it impossible to be sure
that the steps of development were as is here suggested.
! The use of the d symbol for p in runes (e.g. gebided der for gebiddap per,
Falstone runes) is due to the influence of the Latin alphabet.

II

ACCENT
A. Word Accent
§ 71. The primitive Germanic language developed a stress accent
which fell upon the first syllable of all words, and this is in essentials preserved in all the Germanic languages. Thus in Old English
we find the stress on the first syllable in all simple words, and in

most compound words: wérd word, stdnas stones, lifiende loving,
sipfet journey, dndgiet sense, dndwyrde answer, unnytt useless,
Ons#ge assailing.
§ 72. The main exception to this rule is due to the fact that in

Germanic a syntactic combination of prepositional adverb! with
verb was not yet a single word at the time when the main stress of
words was fixed on the first syllable, and such combinations ultimately developed into compound words stressed on the second
element. These remain in the West Germanic languages: OE
apénéan devise, opfléon flee, wipsdcan deny.
§ 73. A natural consequence of the different stress of compound
nouns and verbs is that the prepositional adverbs have two forms
in compound words, the accented form appearing in nouns and
adjectives, the unaccented in verbs. The principal doublets are:

-:
eef-:

2wielm fountain
zfpunca source of offence

a-: . awéallan well up
_—of-:
ofbynéan displease

et-:

ztspyrning offence

Ot-:

(impers.)

ofspurnan stumble.”

! This term denotes words which can be readily used in both a prepositional
and an adverbial function. As verbal prefixes, they have an adverbial function
when combined with intransitive verbs; in combination with transitive verbs,
they have a function approximating to that of prepositions, the object being
under their government.
2 A regular interchange of zt- and of- is hardly to be traced in OE, for x?has become the prevailing form, both accented and unaccented. of- survives in
a few forms in VP and KG (otéawan show, VP frequently, oté¢tun they added,

otspurne pres. subj., stumble, id., otspernince d.s., offence, KG), but it is mostly
replaced by zt- (properly the accented form), or by op- (the unaccented form of
tip-). Hence op- has both its original sense ‘away’, and that of zt-, ‘towards’.
This in turn has caused #t- to acquire the sense ‘away’. Thus there are doublets
like zxtféolan, opféolan, adhere, zxtberstan, opberstan, escape, while xtberan,
opberan can both mean ‘bear away’ or ‘bear towards’.

§ 74

WORD ACCENT

dndsaca apostate
and-:
bigenga inhabitant
bi-:
orpanc mind
or-:
Up-:
uipgenge evanescent
wiper-: wipersaca adversary

31

on-: onsdcan deny"
be-: begdn occupy
apénéan devise”
a-:
op-:
opgdn escape
wip-: wipsdcan refuse.?

The accented and unaccented forms of for-, ofer-, to-, purh-,
under-, ymb-, are identical:* férwyrd ruin, forwrécan banish, dfermapum rich treasure, ofergdn traverse, téhyht hope, tohwéorfan
disperse, purhbeorht very bright, burhfén penetrate, indercyning dependent king, undergietan understand, ymbryne course, ymbhwéorfan go round. Although it is often not shown by the spelling, the
prefix inn- is distinguished from its unaccented form by the double

consonant: innorf furniture, in&lan kindle.
§ 74. The prefix ge- is always unaccented in OE,5 e.g. geféoht
fight. Unaccented for- and be- (for bi-) have penetrated extensively
into nouns, e.g. forbéd prohibition, bebéd command; but there are
a few words which preserve the regular accent:® férwyrd ruin
(beside forwyrd), bileofa food, bispell proverb, béhat, béot vow. The
prefix geond- seems to occur only in verbs, and hence is always
unaccented, e.g. geondhwéorfan traverse.

§ 75. The negative prefix un- was not originally used with finite
verbs (though freely added to participles: unlifigende dead, un-

1 Historically on-, an- represents both a stressed and an unstressed prefix
(Goth. ana-, as in dnabusns command, noun, anabtudan command, verb), and it
survives extensively in OE. Stressed and unstressed on- can interchange regu-

larly: dngin enterprise, onginnan undertake. But the prefix and- has in OE lost
its unstressed form (OS ant-), and unstressed on- has supplied the loss, so that
pairs like that above quoted are fairly common (e.g. andgiet sense, ongietan
understand). Stressed and- and on- are only occasionally confused, e.g. onwlite
face, LG 17, andmitta measure, Cp. 793.

2 The unaccented prefix a- answers to accented @- and or-. The true un-

accented form of or- is seen in OE only in arzfnan, perform, falsely divided to
alliterate on r, and hence giving rise to a simplex rafnan.

3 The correct use of wiper- beside wip- in participles (see § 81) leads to its

occasional extension to finite verbs and nouns derived from them: wipercwepban
resist, wibercwepness contradiction.

+ There are alternative forms of several of these prefixes (fer-, te-, perh-,
porh-, ymbe-), but they are used sporadically, not by a systematic interchange of
accented and unaccented forms.

5 An accented form of it, ga-, is contained in the word géatwe armour, cf.

~getawe (Beow. 368, 2636, and perhaps 395).

6 The true accented form of for- occurs in frétwe armour, frdcob wicked.
The latter word shows the original accentuation of participles (see § 81) being
from *fra-cuép.

.

32

ACCENT

§ 76

wrecen unavenged), and so should always be accented.' Occasional

unaccented uses, however, occur, e.g. uncléne impure, beside
uncléne. But already in OE the unaccented prefix on-, an- in its
reversive function before verbs (e.g. onliican unlock) is sometimes
replaced by un- (e.g. unbindan unbind).
§ 76. There is in OE a tendency, which is at its strongest in
IW-S, for the prep. on to usurp the functions of in. This occurs
also with the unaccented prefixes, and we find e.g. onbryrdan in-

spire, onélan kindle, beside forms with in-.
§ 77. Verbs formed from compound nouns naturally retain the
initial stress: dndwyrdan, dndswarian answer, Orettan fight.2 Conversely, nouns derived from compound verbs have unaccented

prefixes: forgifness forgiveness, aljsing redemption.
§ 78. In OE any prepositional adverb may stand before a verb
in loose syntactic combination.3 The verse shows that such a quasiprefix is more strongly stressed than the verb which follows it:
het da in beran he ordered to carry in (Beow. 2152), pe pe mid
wuniad who dwell with thee (And. 101). Such a prefix may be
removed from before the verb,* and hence these quasi-compounds
are syntactically equivalent to combinations consisting of verbs
preceded by non-prepositional adverbs such as eft, forp, onweg, up,

ut. It is not usual to print combinations of quasi-prefix and verb
as one word in editions of OE texts, yet we have in fact a system of
separable verbs like those of Dutch and German.

§ 79. Prepositional adverbs which are used with verbs to form
quasi-compounds, and which do not occur in an unaccented form,

are: zfter, fore, from, mid, (on)géan. Quasi-compounds may also be
formed by verbs preceded by prepositional adverbs identical in
form with the stressed forms of prefixes discussed in §§ 73-74:
zt, bi, inn, ofer, to, purh, under, ymbe. The prepositional adverb

used in quasi-compounds is sometimes identical in form with an
unstressed prefix, because the unstressed form has been generalized
in use for the independent word: of, on, wip.$
1 With participles un- is accented, unless the participle has already an unaccented prefix; tnwrecen, tinbunden, but unbefohten (Mal. 57), unapbréotend
(Crist 388).
* Here belong dndettan confess (cf. OHG antheiz vow), and dnettan hasten

(< *an-haitian), which were in OE no longer of obvious nominal derivation.
3 See the material collected by T. P. Harrison, The separable prefixes in AngloSaxon (Baltimore, 1892).
* Compare, for example, niht zfter cymed (Order of the World 72) with pa

com zxfter niht (Gen, 2450).

5 But note wipre healdap resist

(Gn. Ex. 53).

§ 80

WORD ACCENT

33

§ 80. Examples of quasi-compounds of the type defined in
§§ 78-79 are: zxfter-spyrian inquire, fore-gescrifan pre-ordain,
from-hweorfan turn away, mid-wesan

be

with,

ongéan-pingian

speak against, 2t-wunian dwell with, bi-standan stand by, inngangan enter, to-li¢gan lie near, of-adrifan drive away, on-lécian

look at, wip-sprecan speak against. These accented quasi-prefixes
may be used before a verb which itself has an unaccented prefix

(fore-gescrifan, of-adrifan).
§ 81. Participles are properly adjectives, yet they have adopted the
normal stress of verbs in most compounds. The participle wiberhydgende hostile, has, however, a stressed prefix, as has the participial noun
ttperfeohtend enemy, while tinderbéoded subjected, occurs beside underpéoded. The same preservation of the original stress may explain occasional wiper- for wip- in participial compounds: wipercoren reprobate,
wiperwinnende fighting against, Ep. uuidirhliniendae leaning against.

§ 82. Compound adverbs of which the first element is a preposition are stressed on the second, whether it be a noun or an adverb:
todég,

onwég,

onbéé,

bedftan,

befdéran,

begéondan,

behindan,

beinnan, benéopan,' onifan, onuppan, wipéftan, wipféran, wipinnan,

wipnéopan,

wipiitan,

undernéopan,

toféran,

togédere,

zxtfdran,

zxtgédere.
§ 83. Evidence is insufficient to decide the relative stress of the
two elements of conjunctions compounded of preposition and pronoun (e.g. oppzxt until, forpon because).?
§ 84. Of common adverbs formed from two simple adverbs,

nii-pa is stressed on the first element, but the majority are stressed
on the second: pa-gén, pd-giet, swa-péah.
§ 85. Compounds of J#r- with a preposition (p&r-inne, bar-in,
&c.) are stressed on the prepositional element.
§ 86. The intensive prefix full-is subordinatedin stress to the
following element: full-dft, full-néah, full-mdnig. Similarly, it is
an unaccented prefix in many verbs: full-gdn perform, full-

triiwian confide.} On the other hand eall- is stressed: éalswa so,
éalneg always.
1 Here may be added bzftan, biltan, bufan, binnan, with elision of the vowel
of the prefix.
? See H.
Kuhn
in PBB Wii. 11, note 2.
3 The prefix is accented in the nouns fullzst help, fulteam (Erf. 360, usually
fultum) help, and the verbs derived from them, fullastan, fultumian. Note also
Sulwian, fullian baptize.

34

ACCENT

§ 87

B. Half-stress
§ 87. The Old English metrical system shows that many words
had both a stressed and a half-stressed syllable.! A half-stress always
fell on the second element of a compound when both the elements
retained full semantic force: géldwlanc proud with gold, wéldréor
blood of slaughter, gdmolféax grey-haired, fyrhéard hardened by
fire, fyrgenstrgam mountain-stream.
§ 88. The half-stress of second elements which did not retain
their original semantic force fully, and that of the second elements
of proper names, tended to be much reduced: their vowels were
shortened, and they can undergo considerable phonological changes
owing to their reduced stress. The verse shows that the general
rule is that they retain a half-stress only when they are either themselves disyllabic (e.g. -b#re, -r&den, -scipe, -wende) or have an inflexional syllable added. So we find as a rule a half-stress in inwidda,

hldfordes, énszge, Hrépgares, éorlscipe, but not in inwit, hldford,
Hrépgar.

The principal monosyllabic suffixes which are thus

reduced to low stress in the uninflected form, but which recover
half-stress when followed by an inflexion, are: -dém, -cund, -fzst,
-feald, -full, -had, -lac, -léas, -li¢, -sum, -weard, -wist.

§ 89. Similarly, heavy derivative suffixes have a half-stress after
a long syllable (*) or its equivalent (“ x ), when followed by an unaccented syllable. This applies to -els, -en, -end, -ere, -erne, -estre,
-ig,3 -ing, -ung,-isé, -ness, -op; the endings -ende (participle), -enne
(inflected inf.), -est, -ost (superlative); the medial -i- and -odof weak verbs of the second class.

§ 90. As well as these suffixes, any long final syllable,* after
' The types of word which can have a half-stress are classified by J. Huguenin,
Secondary stress in Anglo-Saxon (Baltimore, 1901).
2 eg. fultum < full-téam, fulluht < fulwiht, hldford < hlafweard, and 1W-S

forms of names like Oswold, Eadword (earlier -wald, -ward). See below §§ 336,

338, 356-7.

3 When from older -ig, e.g. daldwérnige Ex. 50, médcwdnige El. 377; but -ig is
mainly from -zg, and its vowel is then syncopated metrically, though often
written (§ 358).

+ Such a syllable can only be long by virtue of having two consonants after the
vowel. Vowel length in OE is present only under full stress, and in the second
elements of compounds which either are of fully retained meaning (e.g. hetespr@é angry speech) or have half-stress as defined in §§ 88-89. The practice of
adding marks of length to the vowels of final-syllables of reduced meaning (e.g.
Hrépgar, hetelié) has nothing to recommend it. Such syllables are clearly shown
to be short by the prosody of the OE Latin poets who scan them short finally

§ ox

SENTENCE ACCENT

35

another long syllable or its equivalent, acquires half-stress when
it becomes internal by the addition of an inflexion: Héngéstes,

&ghweléne. Short final syllables which become long in inflexion are
similarly treated: dpérne.!

§ 91. The half-stresses described in §§ 89-90 all require to be
preceded by a long syllable or its equivalent: thus &pelinges,
séalfode, singénde, huntope have a half-stress, but cyninges, winode,

wésende, fdrope, do not do so. Such words, however, acquire a
half-stress when they are the second element of compounds with
accented first elements: béodcyninga, cnihtwésénde.?
§ 92. The half-stresses described in § 89 were clearly very light
when they fell on a syllable which was itself short (i.e. did not end
in two consonants). Such half-stresses are often neglected in verse,3
and in late Old English syllables bearing them are frequently subject to change and loss, like fully unaccented syllables.

c. Sentence Accent
§ 93. Old English prosody reveals that the verb was more lightly
stressed in a sentence than the noun and the adjective, especially
when it was in an early place in its clause. If a verb occurs before

the first metrical stress of its clause, or between the first and the
second one, it need not itself bear a metrical stress. Hence we find
many principal sentences in poetry like ne wiston hie Drihten Géd
(Beow. 181), wéorod wes on wynne (id. 2014), and in a subordinate
clause a metrically unstressed verb must be drawn to the beginning, after the introducing conjunction or relative: ac pet wees géd
cyning (id. 863).* If, however, a verb is delayed till after the second
but long when an inflexion is added, e.g. 4ifstan, A&lfheah but Elfstdnus,
El fhégus.
' Such a system leaves scope for analogy, and especially in late poems (e.g.
Metres) syllables of the type discussed in §§ 88-90 can discard their half-stress
when internal if metre so demands: cf. wes him Beowulfes sid (Beow. 501) with
sid Beowulfes (id. 1971). Similarly, such syllables in final position can acquire
some degree of stress when this is metrically convenient: Hrunting nama (id.
1457), epeling manig (id. 1112).

2 So the virtual compounds feorh cyninges, fyll cyninges, Beow. 1210, 2912.
3 In the metrical system of OS, which reflects a rather later stage of linguistic
development than that of OE, short derivative syllables (e.g. the medial -odof the second class of weak verbs) are practically never given half-stress.
4 We can observe this law, and the similar ones discussed below, in the
language of verse only, for we have no means to determine the stress of prose.
In verse, the position of unaccented verbs, adverbs, and pronouns is actually

36

ACCENT

$94

stress of its clause, it must receive a metrical stress, although this

must not throw it into more prominence than any noun or adjec_ tive in the same half-line. It may join with these in alliteration, but
it must not alliterate, if they do not do so. Exceptions are few, and

occur chiefly in recurrent conventional formulae, such as swa secgap
bec; swa bebead Metod; ponne hniton fepan; hreopon friccan.

§ 94. Adverbs are stressed like verbs: while lower in stress than

nouns and adjectives, they can have fully weak stress only when

placed early in the sentence, before or after the first metrical stress:
oft Scyld Scefing (Beow. 4); gewat pa ofer wexgholm (id. 217).!

§95. Pronouns are all of weak stress (except self and the #gcompounds, which are fully stressed words, equal to nouns and

adjectives), but they also are allowed full weak stress only early in

the sentence: hine fyren onwod (Beow. 915); ne frin pu zfter selum
(id. 1322). But like verbs and adverbs they bear a metrical stress

when they occur after the second metrical stress of their clause.

§ 96. Fully unstressed words are conjunctions and relatives
introducing subordinate clauses, and all proclitic words (demon-

stratives, possessives, prepositions). Proclitics also are the adjectives of indefinite quantity fela, féa, Znig, n#nig, manig, sum, nan,

as may be seen by the manner in which they often stand before
their noun in a metrical dip, or bearing a non-alliterating lift:
ealles moncynnes (Beow. 1955); pxr him nznig weter (id. 1514).
The numerals, on the contrary, are fully stressed adjectives.
§.97. Proclitic words receive a full stress if they are removed
from their natural position immediately before the governed word:

Scedelandum in (Beow. 19); ic minne can gledne Hropulf (id.
1180-1); gudbeorna stim (id. 314). An intervening line-end is suffi-

cient to cause a proclitic to be stressed, even if it immediately pre-

more narrowly limited than I indicate above, but this is due to special conven-

tions of poetic word-order, rather than to general tendencies of the language.
The fundamental study of the subject is H. Kuhn, Zur Wortstellung und
-Betonung im Altgermanischen, PBB Wii. 1-109.
' An adverb and a verb immediately following it form a quasi-compound in
which the adverb carries the main stress: swipe ondr&dan, on séon (cf. § 78). An
intensifying adverb is more weakly stressed than a following adjective, e.g. midle
léofre (Beow. 2651), but a defining adverb draws the main stress away from a
following adjective, e.g. wide gesjne (id. 1403). Expressions like ufan gr&g, zftan
hwit are quasi-compounds with the main stress on the first elements. Similar
quasi-compounds are formed by the prep. innan+dat. (innan landum, innan
burgum, innan bréostum): these combinations always have a stressed first element,
and the alliteration falls on the 1. innan is once used as a proclitic prep., Edward’s
Death 28.

§ 98

SENTENCE ACCENT

37

cedes the governed word: ponne weorded his | hus onhzted (Phoen.
211-12); panon woc féla | geosceaftgasta (Beow. 1265-6).
§ 98. The adjectives of indefinite quantity,! while normally
proclitic, form in certain fixed formulae loose compounds with

the governed noun, and they are then stressed. This applies
especially to fela and eall with words of time (e.g. fela missera,

ealle hwile), and to &nig mon, while in n#nig mon the adjective is
Other phrases in which the adjective of indefinite

proclitic.

quantity is usually stressed are fela worda, féa worda, &nig pinga,
mongum reordum.
§ 99. Any rule for sentence stress may be broken owing to

special rhetorical emphasis. This explains occasional high-stressing
not only of verbs, so that they are elevated even over nouns (e.g.
da gebeah cyning, Beow. 2980), but even of purely proclitic words
(e.g. on pam dzge pysses lifes, id. 197).
t D. Slay thoroughly studies the adjectives of indefinite quantity in OE verse
in Trans, Philological Soc., 1952, pp. 2 ff.

Il

THE ACCENTED VOWELS IN PRIMITIVE
GERMANIC
§ 99. If we use the letters of the Latin alphabet to represent approximately the sounds which they represent in the Old English
spelling system, we may say that Primitive Germanic had at first

the following vowels:
Short Vowels:
Long Vowels:

a

Diphthongs:

ai

#
au

e

i

€
eu

i

u

6

a

§ 100. It lies outside the scope of a grammar of an individual
Germanic language to trace the above vowel system in detail to its

Indo-European origin, but the following points may be noted:

(1) Prim. Gmc. @ was derived from I-E a, 0, and a,' both as a
monophthong and as the first element of the diphthongs ai and au.

(2) Prim. Gme. e and uw represent not only I-E e and u, but
I-E 2.2 A further source of Prim. Gmc. u is the development of the
I-E syllabic liquids and nasals J, r, m, 2,3 to ul, ur, um, un.
(3) Prim. Gmc. & corresponds to I-E é, while Prim. Gmc. é is of
composite origin, representing as a rule I-E &, but also sometimes

I-E iz (cf. OE méd reward, Gr. puo8ds, and see § 404). Prim.

Gmc. é is found in OE mainly in the past tenses of strong verbs
of Class VII, but it occurs also in the words méd reward, cén torch,
léf weak, hér here, Wéland Wayland.*
(4) Prim. Gmc. 7 represents I-E i and ei.
(5) Prim. Gme. 6 represents I-E 6 and 4.
' The vowel known as schwa, a term of Hebrew grammar for a vowel reduced
by lack of stress; see further § 106.
2 Known as schwa secundum, because discovered later than schwa. The symbol

t is the ‘soft sign’ of Slavonic grammar.
3 They had both a short and a long form; but while this is clearly reflected
in many languages, in Gmc. the short and long sounds were developed identically. Cf. OE porn thorn, with IE 7, and corn corn, with 7. For the long sounds

many use the formula ola &c., instead of | &c.

+ The adv. wél(1) well, is assumed from ME evidence to have had OE é at
least sometimes, but this was due to a special OE lengthening; see for possible
parallels S-B, § 137.4.6.

§101

ACCENTED VOWELS IN PRIMITIVE GERMANIC

39

(6) Most Prim. Gme. diphthongs represent both I-E short and
long diphthongs: e.g. au may be derived not only from au, ou, au,
but also from du and 6u.!
§ 101. From what has been said in § 100 it will be evident that the
Prim. Gmc. vowel system set out in § 99 is to be derived from the
following I-E system:

Vowels:
Diphthongs:

4
4%

Vocalized Consonants: |

®

€
&

fF

§ &
f
2
28
Si Au fu bu

wm ff

§ 102. I-E had had centuries of development before Prim. Gmc.
developed from it, and the above vowel system is not to be regarded as
particularly ancient. It owed its origin largely to changes of quantity and
quality induced by the degree of stress which a syllable received in differ-

ent forms and functions of any word. Short vowels which had the main
stress could be lengthened in certain functions; as, for example, the
nominative singular of many consonant-stem nouns: e.g. Gr. ods?
foot, OE fét,? contrasted with the stem zod-.* Lack of stress frequently
caused the entire loss of short vowels or their reduction to s. For
example, in the passive participles of strong verbs of Classes I-III we
have in Gmc. forms in which the e seen in the root syllable in the
infinitive has been lost entirely. Contrast pass. parts. OE riden, coren,
bunden, where the J-E root vowels were respectively 7, u, 2, with infs.
ridan, céosan, bindan, where they were ei, eu, en.’ On the other hand,
in the passive participles of Classes IV-V we have, not entire loss of
the e seen in the infinitive, but reduction of it to »: contrast pass. parts.
OE stolen, meten,® with infs. stelan, metan.
§ 103. The usual source of the I-E short vowels i and « and of the
short vocalized consonants /, 7, m,
was the loss of the vowel a, e, or 0
in the short diphthongs, and in combinations of short vowel--J, r, m, n,
so that, for example, ef, el >i, 1. This process has been illustrated
above from the OE strong passive participle,
§ 104. Not only did. short, long, and reduced vowels come to alternate in I-E for the reasons described in § 102, but for less clear reasons
® du and 6u both became au in being reduced to short diphthongs, because
every o > ain Gme. It has already been noted that éf > é, not ei.
2 Gr. ov = 6, a monophthong closer than that written w.
3 Here the4 is levelled through all cases.
+ A probable instance of lengthening is the past p!. of Gmc. strong verbs of
Classes IV and V. OE b&ron, mé&ton, inf. beran, metan (OE, Gmc. @ = I-E é;
ef. § 736.g).
5 See further § 736.

§ » normally develops to e in Gmce., but to u in a nasal or liquid neighbour-

hood. This u can become o by a later change (see § 115).

40

THE ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 105

we can trace I-E alternations of vowel quality, especially a variation

between e and o. For example, the past tense of Gmc. strong verbs of
Classes I-V shows in the 1st and 3rd sg. ind. the root vowel a from I-E
o: e.g. OE rad, céas, band, stzl, mzt, where the first two had the I-E
root vowels o, ou, against et, eu of the infinitives, and the last three had
o against e in the infinitives. The alternating sounds e, 0 could be

lengthened to é and 6 for the reasons discussed in § ror, so that ¢, é, 0, 6
may all occur in alternations: e.g. Lat. pedem, pés, Gr. 2é5a, mous.

§ 105. The alternations of quality and quantity described in
§§ 101-4 are known as ABLAUT or GRADATION. They have been
illustrated only from the e-series, in which all the grades (e, é, 0,

6, s, loss) have been exemplified.
§ 106. I-E possessed original long vowels as well as those produced by lengthening in the e-series. It was long agreed that
weak accent could cause the reduction of any of the original long
vowels d, é, 6 to a, a vowel which became i in Indo-Iranian, but a
elsewhere. This view was based on correspondences of the type
Sanskrit pitd, Lat. pater. It cannot be regarded as certain today. It

is possible that reduction of the long vowels normally led to their
complete loss, and that a should be excluded from the I-E vowels."

§ 107. In Gmc. strong verbs of Classes VI and VII the vowel of
the past tense is in most verbs the reflex of a long vowel or di-

phthong, e.g. OE for, hét, with I-E 6, é. Such verbs have Gmc. a
alone or as first element of a diphthong? in infinitive and passive
participle, e.g. OE faran, -en, hatan, -en (OE a < ai).3 This a
could be conveniently regarded as in origin the reduction of the
long vowel seen in the past tense, i.e. I-E 2. But until the reality

of a has been established, the I-E form of the ablaut seen in these
verbs must be regarded as uncertain.

§ 108. Much speculation has been devoted to tracing the IndoEuropean vocalic system to an even more primitive form than that

reached by envisaging the stage before the operation of ablaut.
The long vowels a, é, 6 have been regarded as contractions of
diphthongs aa, ea, 02. Some have regarded a, o as always secondary
and derived from e. These views are all highly uncertain. Much

1 T.. Burrow, Trans. Philological Soc. 1949, pp. 22 ff., has argued strongly
that Indo-Iranian j is always from I-E i; this view, if accepted, would render a

difficult to trace, for it is only recognizable from the equation Indo-Iranian

other I-E languages a.
* ‘Diphthong’ denotes vowel+i, u, J, m,n, r.

3 Cf. § 736.h.

i=

§ 109

IN PRIMITIVE GERMANIC

41

modification of the traditional formulae for I-E sounds has been

recently attempted on the basis of the ‘laryngeal theory’. This
theory offers convenient solutions of at least two major problems

of Gmc. grammar, the origin of é (§ 100.3), and that of the long

diphthongs in the past tense of strong verbs of Class VII (§ 107),
but its implications for Gmc. have not yet reached a sufficiently
settled state for formulation in a general textbook.

§ 109. It is evident from §§ 102-3 that Indo-European passed
through a period in which the accent had a marked effect on the
vowel system. During this period it is probable that the accented

syllable of a word received its prominence from the stress with
which it was pronounced. This period was followed by one in

which the accent had less influence on vowels. In this period vowels
were freely levelled into forms in which they could not have stood

originally, so that the full vowels 2, 6, d could appear outside the
accented syllable of a word, and the vowels a, i, d, », though they

could arise only in unaccented syllables, could be transferred into

syllables with the accent. An example is the declension of con-

sonant stem nouns, which usually have one root vowel throughout

(except in forms with lengthening, § 102), though the accent may
vary between root syllable and ending, e.g. Gr. acc. 2é8a, dat. zodi.

Also, in this period many new formations appeared which could
not have survived the period of strong influence by the wordaccent on vowels, e.g. the present tense of verbs with stems in e

(in ablaut with 0). These verbs, which appear in Gmc. as the strong

verbs of Classes I-V, had in I-E the vowel e in some forms of
the present in two successive syllables, which would be manifestly

impossible in the period when e was reduced outside the accent,

e.g. *bhereti, he bears. This period of I-E was still continuing when

Gmc. began to emerge, and the Gmc. changes of vowels set out in
§ 100 accordingly affect vowels of all syllables, whether they bear

the accent or not. During this period, in which vowels were little
affected by the accent, it is probable that accented syllables were

given prominence by means of pitch.

§ 110. Prim. Gmc, however, developed a stress accent (cf. § 71).
The result is that the vowel system received from Indo-European
is quite differently developed in accented and unaccented syllables.
From now on, it will accordingly be necessary for accented and
* See further W. P. Lehmann, Proto-Indo-European phonology (University
of

Texas Press, 1952).

42

THE ACCENTED VOWELS

§ rir

unaccented vowels to be separately discussed. Accented ones will
be dealt with first.
' § 111. The chief modifications which the vowel system set out
in § 99 underwent in accented syllables in the course of the Prim.

Gmc. period were due to the development of a tendency to harmonize e, i, and u to the vowel which followed in the next syllable.
In principle, the results of this tendency should be:
(a) When a high vowel (#, #) follows in the next syllable, ¢ and u

remain, but e becomes 7.
(5) When a mid or low vowel (4, 2, 6)! follows in the next syllable,
e remains, but 7 becomes e, and u becomes 0. This tendency to
vowel harmony was, however, more vigorous in some parts of the

Gmc. area than in others. Its results cannot be traced in Goth.,
as e and 7 fall together in that language, as do o and u. The harmonizing processes have been very fully carried through in OHG, but

less so in the other West Gmc. languages and in ON. The individual changes must now be considered with regard to their operation in OE.?
§ 112. e >7

before i.3 This change is carried out with prac-

tically perfect regularity in all the Germanic languages. OE
examples are midd middle, Lat. medius; rignan to rain, cf. regn
rain; 2nd and 3rd pers. sg. pres. ind. of strong verbs of Classes
III-V, e.g. hilpst, hilpp, birst, birp, cwist, cwip, beside inf. helpan,
beran, cwepan (but cf. § 195); the whole present system of verbs
with root vowel e and stem vowel 7, e.g. biddan, fricgan, picgan,
liégan, sittan.4 Under the same circumstances, eu > iu, as appears
from 2nd and 3rd pers. sg. pres. ind. of strong verbs of Class II,
e.g. ciest,5 inf. céosan.
§ 113 e > 7 before u. This change is unknown in OE and OF ris,®
but it is frequently found in OS and OHG,’ though alternative
® All these sounds are not theoretically possible: o had become a, d had become
6, and e had become j practically always in unaccented syllables.
* Further discussion of these changes and examples in Trans. Philological

Soc., 1939, pp. 79 ff.

3 Consonantal i had the same effect. It generally occurred after short syllables
before another vowel. In West Gmc. it also doubled the consonant which

preceded it. For example OE sittan < West Gmce. “sittjan < Prim. Gme.
*sitjan- < *setjan-.
+ See § 331.3 for the development of e before i of the next syllable but one.
5 ie is from older iu (see § 201).

® Unless in OE *cwidu > cwudu cud (§ 218); see Trans. Phil. Soc., 1954, p. 96.

7 The change is relatively late in OS and OHG, for it can be caused by -u < -6,
as in the 1st sg. pres. ind. of strong verbs,

§ 114

IN PRIMITIVE GERMANIC

43

forms in which the e is preserved are found in those languages also,
e.g. OHG, OS fihu money, beside fehu, fila many; OHG mitu

mead, beside metu. Cf. OE feoh, fela, medu, and note that the eo
of the first form is derived frome (see § 146).
§ 114. ¢ > e before mid and low vowels. In OE this change is
shown only by the common Gmc. words nest nest, and wer man

(Lat. nidus, vir), and by spec, bacon, beside spic.! Instances are
rather more frequent in the other West Gmc. languages, e.g. OFris.

leth limb, quec cattle, bevia shake, frethia make peace, levath he
lives, beside Lith, &c.
§ 115. > o before mid and low vowels. In OE forms this change

occurs with considerable regularity,? e.g. dohtor daughter, god god,
gold gold, geoc yoke (cf. § 172), and passive participles of strong
verbs of Classes II, III, and IV, e.g. coren, boren, holpen. There are,
however, many exceptions in OE, which have preserved u, very

often where other West Gmc. languages, especially OHG, have o,
e.g. full full, fugol bird, bucca buck, wulf wolf, ufan from above,

OHG foll, fogal, boch, wolf, obana. Even within OE itself, there is
variation in some words, e.g. cnocian knock, spora spur, spornan
spurn, beside cnucian, spura, spurnan. The second element of the
diphthong eu,seems not to have been subject to this change in the
form of West Gmc. from which OE was derived. In some parts of
the West Gmc. area, eu became normally eo when noi followed, but
remained before y, so that we find distinctions like e.g. OS breost
breast, treuwa troth. In OE, however, the oldest texts have eu for
Gmc. eu before u and before all other consonants, e.g. tréulesnis
faithlessness, stéup- step-, Ep. 726, 1070.
§ 116. The redistribution of e, 7, 0, u described in §§ 111-15
does not take place before a nasal consonant followed by another
consonant.? Before such groups w is retained, and e > 2 irrespective of what vowel follows in the next syllable. OE forms exemplifying this are hund hundred (Prim. Gmc. *hund-, I-E *kmtom),
wind wind (cf. Lat. ventus), and the passive participles and infinitives
of strong verbs of Class III like swummen, bunden, sprungen, swimman, bindan, springan.$
t For more dubious OE instances see Ritter, Vermischte Beitrdge, pp. 173-6.
3 We find o before Prim. Gmc. -6, which has become -u in OE, e.g. OE
nosu < *nusd,

3 It should be remembered that ng in OE spelling implies 7+-g.
* ¢ would, of course, be retained also, but it is hardly theoretically possible in
such a position.
5 Contrast holpen, helpan.

44

THE ACCENTED VOWELS IN PRIMITIVE GERMANIC

§ 117

§ 117. OE was clearly derived from a type of Gmc. in which a
single m had the same effect on preceding u and e as a nasal consonant followed by another consonant. Thus we find in Class IV
the strong verb niman take, with past part. numen, having the same

vowels as bindan, bunden. Other examples of OE retention of u
before a single m are cuman come, fruma beginning, guma man,
sumor summer. The other West Gmc. languages vary between e
and i in miman, and between o and u in the other words.
§ 118. Before a single m no tendency to changee to 7 appears in

the forms of any Gmc. language (e.g. OE cwene woman), unless the
following vowel made such a change normal (e.g. OE wine friend <

*uiniz, cf. Lat. venia). But before single » OE has a tendency to
have u where o might be expected from the following vowel, e.g.

punor thunder, wunap he dwells, hunig (older -#g) honey. In such
words again the other West Gmc. languages vary between u and o.

§119. In Prim. Gmc. the combinations ayy, iyy, uyy! became

ax, ix, 4x by loss of the nasal consonant, and compensatory

lengthening and nasalization of the vowel. { and # were subsequently developed like original 7 and z, but while & became @ in

Goth., North Gmc., OHG, and OS, it retained its nasalization,
and ultimately became 6 in OE and OFris. For example OE péon
thrive < *piyyan- (cf. OS thihan, and OE past part. gepungen),

fiht moisture, ihte dawn, pihte it seemed (cf. inf. byndan), fon
take < *fayyan- (cf. OS fahan), pohte he thought (cf. OS thahta
and OE inf. pencan), oht persecution (cf. OHG ahta).
* e and o are not possible in such a position (see § 116).

IV

WEST GERMANIC INNOVATIONS IN

THE VOWELS OF ACCENTED
SYLLABLES
§ 120. The West Germanic languages are all distinguished by a
free development of diphthongs, and accordingly the origin of
these is to be placed in Primitive West Germanic. These West
Germanic diphthongs have three main sources:
(1) The Prim. Gmc. double consonantsi and wy (on their origin
see § 402) developed in West Gmc. to # and uu, the vocalic ele-

ments 7 and

combining with the preceding vowel to form a

ait, it, any, euu, tun. In OE ai> a (cf.§ 134) > zit (cf. § 197),

while auy > éaw (cf. § 135). Since Prim. Gmc. # and ux becamein

Goth. respectively ddj and gew, andin ON ggjfand &gv, we get the

following correspondences:
Prim. Gmc.

aji-

OE
#g egg (cf. ON g.p. eggja)

xnajjan-

hngan neigh (cf. ON gneggja)

klajjd
yajia-

cl&¢ clay
wag" wall (cf. Goth. waddjus)

frijjd

Frig(e)-deg Friday (cf. ON g.s. Friggjar)

dayya-

glayya-

déaw dew (cf. ON g.s. déggvar)
gléaw wise (cf. Goth. adv. glaggwo, ON a.s.m.

xauyan-

héawan cut (cf. ON héggva)

xnayya-

hnéaw mean (cf. ON a.s.m. Anéggvan)

skayydjan-

beyyabreyyan-

&loggvan)

scéawian observe

béow? barley (cf. ON d.s. byggvi)
bréowan‘ brew (cf. OSwed. bryggja, older *bryggva)

' Generally spelled 2g.
2 The form is widely given in grammars, but it rests on the cpd. grundwag,
which occurs only And. 582, and may be for grundweg (see Krapp’s note ad loc.).
The form w&ge in B-T’s citation of CP 153, 23 is a misprint for wage.
3 eu > OE éo (see § 275).
4 This verb forms in West Gmc. a pass. part. OE browen, as if originally a
strong verb of Class II with root vowel eu+y.

46

WEST GERMANIC INNOVATIONS IN

xreyyan-

hréowan" grieve (cf. ON hrygeva)

treyys

tréow faith (cf. Goth. triggwa)

triyyi-

triewe true (cf. Goth. trigpws)

triyyian-

§ 120

triewan trust (cf. ON tryggva)

(2) A similar development took place when u was doubled before
by the West Gmc. gemination of consonants (see § 407): auj >
auut > au, and iui > iuui.> iuuj. In OE the diphthongs are
developed normally: au- > éa- (cf. § 135), which was then mutated

to é- in nW-S, ie- in W-S by the following 7; iu- appears as io- in

nW-S,? ie- in W-S.3 Generally, the u of auus is lost, so that the final
result is & or ieg, but the ¢ of iuug is lost, so that the result is ow or
iew. Examples are:. Prim. Gmc.*yauja- > West Gmc. *hauu> OE hég, hig, hay, and similarly OE hégan exalt, eg, ieg island,
cégan, ciegan call, strégan* strew, frigea lord, trég, trig tray, and

with a different development of the consonants, éwan, iewan show;
Prim. Gme. *niyja- > *West Gmc. *niuuia > OE niowe, niewe
new, and similarly OE hiow, hiew form, gliow, gliw’ mirth,

hléowan, hlpwan warm.®

(3) Contraction was already in West Gmc. a fertile source of
diphthongs. (a) % was lost before u (generally from older 6, see
§§ 331.5, 405), and hence ayu > au, and euu > eu, which develop

normally in OE to respectively éa and éo. Thus, in the nom. sg.

of the yé-declension, Prim. Gmc. *klaué > *klayu > *klau >
OE *cléa, claw (see § 598), and similarly OE préa affliction; OE
féa few, has its diphthong from the neut. pl. Prim. Gmc. *faué, and
so fréa lord, from inflected forms with *frauun-; in the neuter
plural of the a- declension *treué and *kneud > OE tréo trees,
cnéo knees. (b) Diphthongs also arose when 4 became final, owing

to the loss of the unaccented vowel of a final syllable. Thus
*straua- > *strau > OE *stréa straw, and so *hréa raw;7 *treua' This verb also follows the strong Class I] in West Gmc., e.g. OE past hréaw
and hréow.
2 This nW-S io > éo in Merc. texts (see § 294).
3 Spellings with ie are not actually recorded for some of the words, but only
its developments to 7 or 7 (cf. § 300).
4 Seafarer 97. Not recorded in W-S form.
5 Also glig, cf. § 411.
® The poetical past tenses spéowde, spiowde (beside spiowede) would appear to
be from inf. *spiowan spit, and to belong here. The usual assumption of an inf.
*sfowan sew, from tst sg. pres. indic. siouu, Cp. 1773, and the pass. part. -siuwid,
-siowid, seowed, is less certain, as the quantity of the diphthong is uncertain in
these forms. See further § 753.6.
7 Usually found with addition of w from inflected forms, stréaw, hréaw; but
cf. stréaberige.

§ raz

THE VOWELS OF ACCENTED SYLLABLES

47

> *treu > OE tréo tree, and so cnéo knee, péo servant. (c) tu!

arose by contraction when the ending 6 became u (§ 331.5) in the

neut. pl. *thriu, OE prio three, and similarly in the analogical

nom. sg. fem. forms of the pronouns, OE hé, sé, bes, which appear
in OE as hio, sio, pios, from *hiu, &c., where the feminine ending
ii (< 6) was added to stems in -i. iz from contraction also occurred
in the prehistoric forms of OE friond friend, fiond enemy, frio free,
blio colour.?

§ 121. In OS, OFris., and OE, the so-called Ingvaeonic languages, we find evidence for a West Gmc. sound-change similar
to the Gmc. one described in § 119. By this later change the groups

mf, ns, np also reject the nasal consonant with compensatory

lengthening and nasalization of the preceding vowel to d, f, #. As
in the cases before Gmc. yx, West Gmc. 7 and # subsequently
develop like original 7 and %, but West Gme. @ > d in OS only,
while in OFris. and OE it remained nasalized, and was ultimately
developed to 6. OE examples of the change are sdfte soft, gs
goose, hés company, ésle ousel, dper other, sop true, truth, 6p tooth,
fif five, fifel monster, hriper head of cattle, ibe gentle, mipl horse’s
bit, sip journey, stip strong, dist dust, fis ready, hiisl Eucharist,
iis us, cijp known, ciipe he knew, giip war, miip mouth, siip south,

tipe he granted. To these should be added the prefixes Os- (in

proper names),‘ and #p- (cf. Gothic unpa-).5

§ 122. A change of final accented 6 to % appears to have taken
place in the form of West Gmc. from which OE was derived: OE
cii cow, hii how, tu two, ba both. It is, however, possible that ci,
which has # in ON and OF ris. also, is an I-E variant, and that the
West Gmc. change of 6 > a only occurred after u, which was then
lost. OS, OF ris. ha (in both languages beside hu6) suggests that the
change could occur after y in all the ‘Ingvaeonic’ area. Similarly,
X On its subsequent history in OE see § 275, 293.

2 See Ritter, Archiv cxxii. 98; below, § 331.6, footnote. But final y dropped
after (see § 400). In North. hiorod family, LV Tiouald, we seem to have evidence
that the 4 was not dropped in composition but contracted with 7 to iu (later
io). W-S hired would seem influenced by a simple *hi, cf. Tiw (i.e. *7i plus
u from inflected forms).

3 Some forms with 6 appear in OS texts.

+ OHG Ans-, undoubtedly identical with ON dss, god; recorded as a rune-

name in OE, Runic Poem 4, and in gen. pl. ésa (§ 622).

5 OHG is derived from a form of West Gmc. free from the sound-change
under discussion, and hence it exhibits forms of the above words with preservation of the nasal consonant, e.g. samfto softly, gans goose, zand tooth, fimf five,

lindi gentle, funs ready, mund mouth.

48

WEST GERMANIC INNOVATIONS IN

§ 123

OE ti is from *tud, and may well have influenced the vowel of
ba. In no language is the prep.-adv. #6 affected by this change.!

§ 123. OE is derived from a form of West Gmc. which shared
with North Gmc. a lowering of i and u to e and o before the voiced
spirant z, which arose from I-E s by Verner’s law, and is later lost
or changed to r (see §§ 398.2, 404). The OE forms exhibiting these
changes are meord reward (cf. Gr. pucfés, Goth. mizdo), leornian*

' learn, the pron. wé, gé, hé, mé, pé (cf. Goth. weis, jus, is, mis, pus;

OHG wr, ir, mir, dir), and the prefixes or-, tor- (cf. Goth. uz-, tuz-;
OHG ur-, zur-).3
§ 124. A special early development occurs in the OE words
reord voice, gereord(e) voice, reord food, gereord(e) food, heordan
hards of flax. All these words appear to have had in Gmc. the soundsuccession -azd- (cf. ON rédd, Goth. razda voice; ON greddir
feeder; haddr hair). The normal OE development would be -eard-,
and the ME reflex of this appears in rearde voice, A jzenbyte ofInwyt.
The usual OE -eord- is shown by frequent North. spellings with
io to have had Prim. OE 10, not eo (see § 293).* It is therefore probable that reord (in both meanings) is a g6- stem, gereorde a jastem, gereord an i-stem, and heordan a jan- stem, and that at an
early period a > e before -2di-, and that e later became eo by

breaking, which became io by umlaut (§ 202).5 In historical OE,
the io remains in North., but becomes eo again in Merc. and W-S.
§ 125. In West Gmc., as in North Gmc., final open vowels are
lengthened when under full accent, e.g. OE pi, pé, mé, wé, gé, hé,
Sé, nil, ge6 (i.e. 1, cf. § 172), sw#, td, bi. Such words usually had
© Cf. literature given by S—B, § 69, and add Trans. Philological Soc., 1939,
p. 83.

2 The eo of meord, leornian is from e by a later change (see § 146). Beside
leornian, forms with io are found in North., where original eo and io are well

distinguished, and reflect a Prim. OE variation of e and i. This variation recurs
in OHG lernen, lirnen and OFris. lernia, lirnia, so the word can hardly be
regarded as reliable evidence for the sound-change under discussion. Its variation of vowel is perhaps due purely to variation in stem-suffix between -i- and
-#-, and is to be referred to § 114 above.

3 On the operation of these changes in North Gme., see Noreen, Altisland.
Gramm., § 72, 110.2, Altschwed. Gramm. §§ 83-84. It is uncertain whether their
operation can be traced in West Gmc. outside OE: see Trans. Philological Soc.,

1939, pp. 82-83.
4 Heordan does not occur in North.; the other words under discussion and
their derivatives have io 58 times, eo only 4 times.

5 The relationship of vowel seen in riord, *reard seems to recur in North.
briord point (the usual form, three instances), beside breard (Li., Mk. 13, 27).
There also occur the ablaut variant brord, and its mutated form brerd.

§ 125

THE VOWELS OF ACCENTED SYLLABLES

49

unaccented forms without lengthening: e.g. OE swd is from unaccented West Gmc. *swa, with or without later lengthening by

transference to stressed position (cf. § 335). When lengthening
occurred in West Gmc., *swd > OE sw, swé (cf.§ 128).! In the

case of hed, the form with West Gmc. lengthening (OE *hw2) does
not exist. be is the unaccented form without lengthening, corresponding toi. In this book these wordsare usually printed in the unaccented form, with short vowel, e.g. me, hwa.

¥ Owing to the absence of a form *hw2, *hwé, direct equation of sw#, swé with
Goth. swe might be preferred to the above explanation. Either explanation leaves
North. sw# (LR, Li., Rit.) difficult, while accounting for VP, CH swé, W-S sw.

Kt. has swé and sw#, but e and

are there equivalent graphs.

Vv

PREHISTORIC OLD ENGLISH

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS
A. Germanic a, , and the Germanic and West
Germanic Diphthongs

§ 126. The language of the earliest Old English texts, when compared with that of the other West Germanic languages, shows that
the accented vowels underwent extensive changes in Old English
after its separation from the body of West Germanic. The evidence for the dating of these changes is tenuous, though obviously
they all belong to the period between the Germanic invasion
of England c. 450, and the oldest surviving texts c. 730-50.
Their relative chronology has long since been worked out on
a basis of reasonable probability. Some modern scholars now
challenge this chronology: their work has a certain value for its
demonstration that only reasonable probability and not certainty
has been achieved (cf. §§ 248-50).
§ 127. In OE and OFris., Prim. Gmc. # appears before nasal
consonants as 6.! Examples of OE 6 from Prim. Gme. @ are:
ména moon, ménap month, 6m rust, spon chip, séna soon, cwomon’
they came, némon they took, gedon done; and with a vocalic glide
subsequently developed before it (cf. § 172) gedmor sad, gedmrian
mourn.

§ 128. When not before nasal consonants, and when later soundchanges do not intervene, Prim. Gmc. # appears in W-S as &,
but in other OE dialects practically always as é. It also appears as
é in OF ris.? Examples in W-S spelling are: d¥d deed, l&ée physi! This 6 is derived from a nasalized, but not rounded, vowel d, for when it is

subject to very early shortening the result is a (from earlier @), not 0, ¢.g. samcucu
half-alive (cf. § 285). The written symbol varies between a and 0, as in the case
of a from originally short a (see § 130). Similarly, the early shortening of the

corresponding mutated sound is 2, not oe, e.g. brembel (§ 193. d). d from Prim.

Gme. # became already in prehistoric OE identical with 6 from Prim. Gme. 6,
and this change affected d from Prim. Gmc. d (§ 119) and from Ingvaeonic d
(§ 121) at the same time.

2 The spelling # is practically universal in the early manuscripts of the
Alfredian translations and in PC. In Kt. the distinction of 2 and é was destroyed

§ 129

GERMANIC a, #2, AND DIPHTHONGS

5%

cian, h#@r hair, mre famous, m#g kinsman, and past plural of
strong verbs of Classes IV and V, bé#ron they bore, s#ton they sat,
&c. For examples in positions where further changes intervene,
see §§ 151-2, 162, 185.
§ 129. It is tempting to assume, though not definitely demonstrable,
that Prim. Gmc. 2 > d in the form of West Gmc. from which OE and

OF ris. were derived, just as it did in OHG, OS, and ONorse, and that
this @ was then subject to change in two directions, becoming @ before
nasal consonants, & (or é) elsewhere. Such a double development of @
would be parallel to the OE and OF ris. treatment of a@ (see §§ 130, 131)."

§ 130. At the same time as the OE and OFris. development of @
from Prim. Gmc. # before nasal consonants, a development of
Prim. Gmc. a@ to @ occurred in the same position. But while Prim.
OE d@ appears as 6 in all extant texts, there was no parallel development of @, which became in OE a sound distinct from OE 0, and at

first also distinct from OE a (§ 32). It is spelled both with a and
with o.? In later texts, however, the spelling with a prevails, and
this together with the evidence of ME suggests that a before nasal
consonants had become identical with ordinary OE a by the end
because & (the i-mutation of d, see § 197) became é (see § 288); hence inverted

spellings with & for é (whether from Prim. Gmc. é, #, or Prim. OE d mutated)
in the ninth-century charters, e.g. hér, w¥ron, hu&ten, Ct. 43, for W-S hér here
(Prim. Gmc. é), w¥ron they were (Prim. Gmc. #), hw#ten wheaten (mutated 4),

In Angl. texts the spelling ¢ greatly predominates for Prim. Gmc. &. The few
cases of & in early texts are probably due to imperfect differentiation of the
symbols, which were equivalent in the contemporary spelling of Latin (cf. § 40),
e.g. giwéde dress LR, p#¥r there FC, spr®é speech Cp. 1852. In later Angl.
texts, # for Prim. Gmc. & is not frequent except in Ru.!, where & and é@ are in
approximately the proportion 7:10.
The poetical word méée sword, is not put into W-S form with & in the extant
poetical manuscripts, though these are predominantly W-S in spelling: this is
held to be due to its being an Angl. word not normally used by W-S speakers.
The compound méée-fisé sword-fish, occurs with both # and é.
! The view that OE & was directly derived from Prim. Gmc. &, with no intervening stage d, is very familiar in this country from Wright’s OE grammar, but
most foreign authorities have long been against it. The question is far from
decided: I have discussed it and mentioned much important literature not included in the bibliography of Sievers-Brunner, § 62, in Trans. Philological
Soc., 1947, pp. 1-14. See also Th. Frings, Die Stellung der Niederlande im
Aufbau des Germanischen (Halle, 1944), p. 35, and E. Schwarz, Goten, Nordgermanen, Angelsachsen, pp. 189—90.
2 Ep. always has a, Evf. and Cp. have both a and o. Both spellings occur also
in the early North. texts and in LV, but o greatly predominates. In the tenth
century North. texts o is practically universal except in the past sg. of strong

verbs of Class III, where a is used (band, dranc, &c.). VP has o universally, Ris?
predominantly. eW-S and Kt. texts vary; later a heavily predominates.

52

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 13:

of the OE period, except in an area in the West Midlands.!
Examples of words in which there is variation between the symbols
a and o are gangan go, hana cock, hand hand, camb comb, nama
name, ramm ram, mann man, and past singular of strong verbs of

Class IIT with nasal consonants after the root vowel, swamm swam,
sang sang, dranc drank, &c. When owing to metathesis (§ 459. 1)
the sound is no longer followed by a nasal consonant, the spelling
variation between a and 0 is still found, e.g. born, barn he burned,
orn, arn he ran.
§ 131. By a very early change Prim. Gmc. a > 2 in OE and
OF ris. when not followed by a nasal consonant, but this development seems to have been later than that of d to &/é (if we do not
simply assume that OE, OF ris. #/é is derived directly from Prim.

Gmc. #2). The change a > 2 seems, in fact, to have taken place
independently in OE and OFris.?
§ 132. The view advanced in § 131 that the development of 2 was
later than that of 2, and that it may have taken place independently in
OE and OFris., is based on a consideration of the development of
Prim. Gmc. ai in OE and OF ris. In OE its normal development is to
a. Now clearly this @ cannot have been developed till West Gmc. d@

(< Prim. Gmc. #) had become OE 2/é, or the new d would have
become #/é also. On the other hand, ai must have become d before
a > 2, otherwise it would have become 2, and such a diphthong could

hardly have become d. (The normal development of Prim. Gmc. au to
OE a, written éa, shows that the change a > 2 would affect the first
element of a diphthong.) Accordingly the changes under discussion
must have taken place in the following order:

(1) West Gmc. @ > OE #/é, unless the OE sounds are regarded as
directly from Prim. Gme. 2.

(2) West Gmc. ai > OE d, by loss of the second element, accompanied by lengthening of the first.
(3) West Gmc. a > OE 2; West Gmc. au > OE zu.
On the other hand, in OFris. the normal development of ai is to #
(written 2), a sound which might well develop from zi. It is accordingly
possible that @ > # before the monophthongization of ai to # in
® Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 367.
2 Henceforth, the phonological developments of OFris. will not usually be
alluded to in this book.
3 at has an unexplained alternative development to 6 in frequent 6 ever, nd
not, beside d, nd. So dwiht, &c., and with mutation deghwelé (§ 233, footnote),
beside dwiht, ghwelé. Cf. Pogatscher, AB xiii. 15. Other instances of 6 for d
are sporadic, and without significance till after 1100, cf. Klaeber, A xxv. 270.

§ 133

GERMANIC a, 2, AND DIPHTHONGS

53

OF ris. But in any case, since ai is so differently treated in OE and

OFris., it must have been monophthongized after the separation of the
two languages. Also, since a > 2 later than the monophthongization
of ai in OE, it follows that the former change also took place after
the separation of the languages.'

§ 133. Examples of OE 2 from Prim. Gme. a are: dzg day,
creft skill, hwzl whale, hwzt what, xcer field, snzgl snail, and past
singular of strong verbs of Classes IV and V, bzr he bore, stzl he
stole, szt he sat, &c. But in many cases later sound changes affect 2,

so that it no longer appears in the forms actually recorded, or does
so only in some dialects: see §§ 139, 157, 164, 185-6, 191.

§ 134. It has already been noted that ai > d at an early date.
Examples are ac oak, ba both, ban bone, brad broad, gast spirit,
hal whole, sdwol soul, wa woe, and past singular of strong verbs

of Class I, bat he bit, rdd he rode, &c.

§ 135. It has been noted that Prim. Gmc. au > OE &a, written
éa (see § 132 and cf. § 37). The first element is occasionally spelled
out fully in early texts, e.g. the name-element Aean-, BH, Ct. 6,

and the name ata, BH: later manuscripts have occasional sur-

vivals like ger@afie, VP 9, 30; p&ah, CP 357, 11.2 For the even
more archaic spelling aeo see §§ 276, 278 below. Examples of the

normal OE development of Prim. Gmc. au are déap death, éage
eye, éare ear, ast east, léaf leaf, léan reward, stréam stream, and

past singular of strong verbs of Class II, céas he chose, sééat he

shot, &c.

§ 136. In OE the earliest texts have eu for Prim. Gme. eu, and
show no sign of the West Gmc. differentiation of the sound into

eu and eo which is traceable in some languages (see § 115). Accordingly, when some North. texts showa similar differentiation, it can

be regarded as secondary (cf. § 279). On the development of the

second element from -w to -o see §§ 275-8 below, where examples
are given.

§ 137. Prim. Gmc. iu appears unchanged in the oldest OE texts,
e.g. gepiudde, piustra, Cp. 91, 152, fliusum, LR. Development to
* Similarly, since au > OFris. d, it can be assumed that this monophthongization is earlier than a > 2, But the change au > d belongs to a period subse-

quent to the separation of Frisian from English, and hence the change a > &
is considerably later than that separation.
* This spelling was revived as an archaism by moneyers of A&thelred and
Cnut in the name-element ad- for Ead-; hence analogically #o is used for eo
on coins of the same period, e.g. Lzof-.

54

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 138

io soon followed (see § 275). In W-S, however, i became ie by

i- umlaut (see § 201). On the later history of io in the various
dialects, see § 293-7, where examples will be found.
§ 138. The development of Prim. Gmc. au, eu, and iu described

in §§ 135~7 is shared by the same sounds when they arose by the
special West Gmc. processes dealt with in § 120, where examples
will be found.

B. The Breaking and Retraction of Front Vowels
before Consonant Groups

§ 139. A group of early changes are very diverse in result, but
are associated in that they are all due to the influence of consonants
on the front vowels #,' é,2 i. The consonants which cause these
changes are (1) J, 7, x when they are followed by a consonant,}
(2) single x, and (3) single y. Before these consonants and consonant groups front vowels are either retracted to whichever
back vowel of the language is nearest in height (so that x > a,

and occasionally e > 0, 7 > u), or are protected from the following
consonant by the development of a vocalic glide, a process known
as Breaking or Fracture.* The vocalic glide would no doubt at first
be in all cases a rounded sound, but after 2 it was generally unrounded when #o from Prim. Gmc. au became &a (see § 276). The
diphthongs produced from é andi by the glide-development under
discussion are still written in early texts ew and zu. Later they
generally developed to eo and io (see § 277).

§ 140. In some early texts, forms occur in which the glide

t That x and not a was the sound from which the ea of OE eald, heard, eahta

developed, and that 2 was retracted in OE strawes, Angl. ald, North. barn

follows from the assumption in § 131 that Prim. Gmc. a, if not followed by a
nasal consonant, always became 2 in OE. This assumption was made to account
for the phenomenon of breaking: since eo and io arose from e and j, it is practically certain that 2a (written ea) arose from 2. That & is a previous stage in
the development of a in forms with retraction is not open to proof, but highly
probable, in view of the similarity of the circumstances under which a and ea
appear for Prim. Gmc. a.

2 @ and @ are, of course, dialectal variant developments of Prim. Gmc. 2,

not historically different sounds like 2 and e.

3 il, rh, hh, have the same effect as J, r, h++cons. But / doubled by West Gmc.
gemination of cons. (e.g. tellan tell, sellan sell, hell hell) does not have the effect
of i+cons, Geminated xx (e.g. Aliekhan laugh) has, however, the effect of
x+ cons. 7 is not subject to gemination (e.g. nerian save). Cf. § 407.

4 I give provisionally a conventional description of breaking. Cf. § 248.

§ 141

BEFORE CONSONANT GROUPS

55

developed by breakingis not indicatedin spelling. The instances

are practically all of e for eo before r followed by a consonant.

The name-element Beorn-is written Bern-in BH andin Cts. 4
and 5 (Kt.). BH also spells the name-element Eorp- as Erp- once
(against three times Eorp- or Earp-).! The early glossaries have

herth Ep., huerb Cp., for heorp hearth, hweorfa whorl.? An instance
of similar spelling of za is Aeldredi Ct. 4 for Ealdredi. In the second
element of a name -haerdi for -heardi g.s. occurs Ct. 5.3
§ 141. It will now be necessary to define the limits of retraction
and breaking in the case of each vowel. Examples will be given in
the spelling of c. goo. For more archaic spellings of the diphthongs
see §§ 276 ff.

§ 142. 2 is always retracted before uw, e.g. clawu* claw, prawus
punishment, awel hook, gesawen seen.

§ 143. 2 is retracted before / followed by a consonant in Angl.
texts, including the early glossaries. The only exceptions in texts
to be dated before goo are fealga Ep. 713 (meaning doubtful),
and Ealduuft Ct. 9 (proper name). In the later Angl. texts @ remains practically universal except in Ru.!, where there are a considerable number of ea spellings, especially in the word eall, beside
predominating a. In Kt. and W-S, on the other hand, while a

appears freely for Prim. OE 2 in early texts, ea rapidly asserts itself
as the prevailing spelling. Thus, in Kt. charters of before 800, ea

appears once only, Uuealhhunes g.s., Ct. 8 (dated 770), but in the
following century ea becomes increasingly more common, and
appears practically always in the tenth-century KG. Similarly, in
W-S, in earlier texts ea and a both appear, e.g. in the part of PC
written by the first scribe ea occurs 29 times and a 104 times in
accented syllables; but in late W-S ea becomes exclusively used.

Examples in normal W-S spelling are eall all, healdan hold, healf
! The instances in Bede are all found in several early manuscripts. There are
also extant two manuscripts of Ct. 5. A few forms in Bede are similar in appearance to those quoted above, but are to be otherwise explained: Deruuentio is
a British river-name, latinized without modification of vowel; the same explana-

tion applies to Bernicii (if to Celtic *bernd mountain pass) and Uurtigern. Later
OE texts have Beorniée, Wyrtgeorn, substituting the normal OE succession
-eorn- for -ern-.

2 In smeruui Ep. 944, for d.s. smeorwe fat, we have analogy of n.s. *smeru,
with vocalic u; cf. teru Ep. 858, blaeéteru Ep. 677. The secondary accent explains
the ¢ of Saluuerpae Ct. 13, for the river-name Saloweorpe.
3 I exclude a few relevant forms from Ld. as it is in a foreign hand.
+ See§ 598.2.
5 More usually préa, but cf. Ep. 53, Cp. 200.

56

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 144

half, sealfian anoint, wealh foreigner, weall wall; the corresponding
Angl. forms are all, haldan, &c.
§ 144. 2 was broken, and appears as ea with very great regularity, before r followed by a consonant. Retraction to @ is practically limited to North., where it is especially common when a
labial consonant (f; p, 6, m, w) precedes the vowel or follows the r."
Examples of the normal development of 2 to ea before r followed
by a consonant are bearn child, heard hard, hearg temple, mearh
horse, wearm warm.
§ 145. & was practically always broken to ea before x, whether
or not another consonant followed, although the development is
very often obscured by subsequent changes, especially in the Angl.

dialects (see § 222). Retraction to a is very rare, although sufficient
instances occur in the word meaht might, and its derivatives and
related forms, to suggest that these are due not to scribal error,
but to retraction having taken place instead of breaking, owing to
the preceding labial nasal.2 Examples of the normal treatment of
ea before x are eahta eight, weaxan grow (x < xs), seah he saw,
1 Instances from early North. texts are warp he became, FC, uarp warp, LR,
parf need, BDS, uard guardian, barnum d.p. children, CH, Baruz d.s. as placename, Jaruman personal name, BH. The only instance in the earlier texts in a
fully accented syllable not in the neighbourhood of a labial consonant is Arduini,
personal name, LV 213. Instances from early North. texts where breaking
occurs despite a labial consonant are Bearuae BH (MS. Cott. Tib. C ii),

Georored personal name, L V 282 (on eo for ea see§ 276). In the later North. texts

Li., Rit., and Ru.*, examples of words found with a are: arm arm, arm poor,

barm bosom, farr bull, harm harm, naru narrow, gesparriga bolt, parf need, warp
he threw, ward he became. Of these the majority are also found with ea (eo),
and the following have ea (eo) spellings only: bearu grove, cearf he cut, hearpe
harp, hwearf he turned, scearp sharp. In a non-labial neighbourhood, retraction
is found only in arg cowardly, Li. (four times), for ard, thou art, is a low-stressed
form, or is influenced by aron, they are, and the pret.-pres. verb darr, dare, is
influenced by parf. North. forms with a for ea in a labial neighbourhood have
penetrated the early glossaries: sparuua calf of leg, Ep. 897, tharme entrails,
Cp. 2140, puarm cutting tool, Cp. 1795, bisparrade bolted, pass. part. n.p., Cp.
1451, sarwo artifice, Cp. 88, waar callosity (i.e. wearr), Cp. 426. There are a
few similar forms in Ru.}, elsewhere instances are rare, e.g. barna g.p., Ct. 38;
on Jarf, CP 203, 15, see § 338; arwe, arrow, is used in OE texts only in the
North. form, and the ME dialect of MS. Bodley 34, where OE a and ea are
still distinguished, has arewe beside earewe.
* VP has maht might, three times, RG almahtig almighty, twice, Ct. 45
almahtig once. On the other hand, forms of the verbs siéan strike, and pwéan
wash, with a are to be explained as due to the analogy of other strong verbs of
Class VI, operating before the loss of medial x, so that *sleaxan was restored to
*slaxan and then contracted to *sidn: the actual occurrences are -sldnne, KG 827,
various forms of sid and dwd in North. and Ru.}, and the related nouns thuachl
washing, Erf. 326, g.s. Suahles, Li., J. 12, 3, slahae slay, Cp. 1576.

§ 146

BEFORE CONSONANT GROUPS

87

hleahtor laughter, seax knife, meaht might, neaht night; and with
loss of the x between vowels éa river, sléan strike, léan blame,
pwéan wash, éar ear of corn, téar tear.

§ 146. e is broken to eo with very great regularity before u and
x, and before x and r followed by a consonant. Examples are
hweowol wheel, cneowes g.s., and all inflected forms of enéo knee,
tréo tree, péow servant; feoh cattle, eoh horse; feohtan fight, cneohtas
boys; eorpe earth, weorban become, weorpan throw, eorl warrior,
sweord sword, steorra star. Before /, breaking of e occurs regularly
only when x follows, e.g. eolh elk, seolh seal, sceolh oblique; and
with loss of y, the inflected cases of these words (e.g. séoles), féolan
press on. Before /c, breaking of e is regular only when s precedes:
aseolcan become languid, but, on the other hand, melcan milk.
So before Jf, nW-S seolf self, beside self, but always delfan dig.
§ 147. Retraction of e to o is found only between 4 and r
followed by a consonant, and in North. only, e.g. worpa throw,
worda become, sword sword, word worth. Such forms are common in Li., Ru.?, and Rit. Ru.? has also a few forms with eo (ea),
mostly from weorpian honour, also cwearne d.s. mill. BDS has
uueorthae, pres. subj. from weorpan. Very doubtful is a North.
development fer- > feor- > fear- > far-: of the occurrences, farr
far, Rit., farra from far, Li., farma meal, L1., the first two may
be errors, the third exhibit a different vowel grade from W-S
feorm. Similarly, ymbhwarfad Rit. 36, 2, may be an error for -ymbhworfad they go round.

§ 148. i was broken, and appears as zo (later eo in most dialects)
with great regularity before u, and before x followed by a consonant,
e.g. niowul prostrate, breowa three times, aseowen pass. part. sifted;
tiohhian consider, Peohtas Picts, meox manure. Before r and x,
when a consonant follows, i appears to have been frequently
broken, but since 7 follows in the next syllable in all instances,
these forms will be considered below (§ 201). Breaking of i before /
is not demonstrable.
§ 149. Retraction of i to u is found in all nW-S dialects between
wu and r followed by a consonant, e.g. sinhwurfol round.? Other
instances all had 7 originally in the following syllable, and hence
* The reduplicated past tense leole played, would appear to have eo analogically from similar formations with r followed by a consonant (e.g. leort, reord,

see § 746).

2 sinuurbul Ep. 1047.

58

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 150

they exhibit y (Kt. e) in historical OE (cf. §§ 199 and 288), e.g.
wyrp honour, wyrpe worthy, wyrs worse, and derivatives and related forms of these words. Such y spellings are found practically
exclusively! in Ep., Cp., Li., Ru., Rit., VP, while KG have correspondingly werst, &c.? y spellings are also frequent in W-S, but
in view of many te spellings in CP, and one or two elsewhere
(wierde Or. 292, 15, Grwierba PC 716), the y may be regarded as
from older te, so W-S seems not to have had retraction in this
position. Retraction is also absent in BDS uuiurthit he becomes.3
§ 150. The retraction of e described in § 147, and that of 7
described in § 149, are prevented by ac, g, or x following the 7,
e.g. North. were < weorc (§ 227) work; wircan work, VP; swira
neck, LG (cf. § 154).
§ 151. @ from Prim. Gmc. 2 is peculiar to W-S. It is retracted
to @ before u, but broken to éa before x, e.g. sdwon they saw,

tdwian prepare, getawe armour; néah near; and with loss of x
between voiced sounds néar nearer, néal@éan approach, néawest
neighbourhood.

§ 152. In words where W-S has # from Prim. Gmc. 2, other
dialects had é (see § 128). This sound was not liable to retraction.
Before y it was broken to é0, but owing to a subsequent change
(see § 227) this breaking can only be observed in recorded forms
when the x is lost, e.g. néor Ct. 38, néol@éan, néowest VP.
§ 153. 7 appears broken to io before y and y followed by a consonant; the io frequently has become éo in recorded forms, e.g.
betwéoh between, léoht light (in weight), *wéoh idol (cf. pl. wéos),
and the imperative of strong verbs in y of Class I, e.g. béoh thrive;
with loss of x, betwéonum between, féol file, and many forms of the
strong verbs in y of Class I, léon lend, séon sieve, téon accuse, péon
thrive, wréon wrap.
t Almost the only exception is georuuterdid disgraced, Ep. 990 (so also Erf.).
The form is similar to others mentioned § 154.3, footnote 3; Cp. has georuuyrde.

2 aferran remove, may preserve a trace of a similar development after f: it
occurs in Boeth. and Kt. Psalm, and may be a genuine Kt. form.

3 This form cannot be dismissed as being intended for uunirthit, where ui
would be a continental symbol for y, for the same short text has the form
uueorthae with similar failure to retract e. Obviously one explanation must
cover both forms: either the dialect of the text has-no retraction of e or i, or the
verb has been reformed on the analogy of ones of the same class with no initial w
(e.g. steorfan). The expected y appears in Ru.' gewyrd, gewyrfeh demolitur. As
a rule Angl. texts level the vowel of 1st sg. and pl. of pres. indic. of strong
verbs through the tense, hence VP -weorded, Li. wordes.

§ 154

BEFORE CONSONANT GROUPS

59

§ 154. In a number of cases the normal processes of retraction
and breaking are prevented by -7- in the following syllable.
(1) The retraction of & fails in the group -zui-, which appears
in recorded forms as -ewe- (see § 194), e.g. ewe ewe, strewede he
strewed.!

(2) The breaking of i fails in the group -iut-, e.g. spiwe vomiting,
spiwepa the same, miwel prostrate,* gesiwed sewn.
(3) In Angl. dialects the breaking of 7 regularly failed before r

followed by a consonant if -i- stood in the next syllable. The occur-

rences are} various forms and derivatives of smirwan smear, afirran

remove, hirtan encourage in VP; various compounds of smirwan in
Ep. and Cp.; and gesuirbet polishes, cirn churn (MS. cérm), first
roof, Cp.; various forms of smirwan and afirran in tenth-century
North. and Ru.! Sporadically the unbroken 7 becomes e,‘ e.g.
sifunsterri the Pleiades, Ep., Cp., smerennis ointment, Ru. Breaking
of i is not, however, prevented by rr derived from Prim. Gmc. rz
(see § 404), even when -i- follows in the next syllable; hence
' It is not possible to declare that the retraction of # fails similarly, for -#yiwould appear as -£w- in historical OE, whether a stage -dyi- intervened or not,
e.g. bréw eye-lid, /2wan betray.
2 With suffix mixture niwol, and so spiwol, emetic.
3 I exclude from this list the name-element Irmin- BH (all early manuscripts), Ct. 4, as these texts sometimes omit the second element of short
diphthongs (see § 140); LV and Gn. have Iurmin- Iurmen-, with breaking, the
only clear exception to the rule. VP deorfed, -weorded, -weorped, are not exceptions, being formed analogically (§ 149, note 3). The diphthong of hiorde herdsman, is probably the mutation of that of *heordi- (cf. § 202), an analogical
formation with the vowel of heord, herd. Leornian learn, should show variation
between eo and 7 (§ 123, footnote 2), the latter appearing when -#- stood in the
next syllable: eo would appear to have been levelled through, and then mutated
before -t-, giving rise to eW-S Hornian, North. liornta (cf. § 202).
In two forms in Ep the unbroken ¢ has become ie, fierst roof, 595, orfiermae
squalid, 933; the same development occurs after y in georuuierdid 990, cf. note
to § 149 above (p. 58).
Further examples of unbroken 7 are perhaps Cp., Ru.) dirm (< *kirmi-,
beside *karmi-?) cry, cirnel (< *kirnil-, beside *kurnil-?) kernel.
Here may also belong a number of forms where it might be argued that breaking took place, but that 7 was later restored by smoothing (see § 228), e.g. CH
firum d.p. men, Ep., Cp. birde birch, firgin- mountain-, VP birhtu brightness,

gebirhtan make bright, wirdan work, LG infl, swiran neck, North. (ge)birga
taste.

4 So also in FC fergen- mountain-, a form of the type described at the end of
the last note. A number of forms quoted by Biilbring, Alteng. Elementarbuch,
§ 186, from Blick. Hom. do not belong here, but reflect a tendency for te > ¢ in
a dialect of W-S type. The words could not be subject to a common development in any Angl. dialect, as some of them have Angl. y (wyrresta), others Angl. i
(smirwan, wiréan), others Angl. io, eo (eorre, heorde). All exhibit e in Blick. Hom.

60

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 185

torre anger, angry, exhibits a diphthong (zo, eo) in all Merc. and
North. texts.
(4) In Angl. and Kt., the breaking of €(< Prim. Gmc. &) did
not take place before x when # stood in the next syllable; hence
Prim. OE *néhist- appears as nést nearest, in most Angl. texts,!
and Ct. 45. But in W-S in this position @ was broken to éa, which
later became ie (§ 200), e.g. niehst.
§ 155. Metathesis of 7 (§ 459) usually took place too late for secondary r- groups to cause breaking, e.g. gers grass, berst he burst,
berstan burst, perscan thresh, fers¢ fresh. But in Angl., when the
vowel is 7, metathesis of r is early enough for breaking to occur,?
e.g. North. biorna burn, torna run, VP beornan, eornan; but W-S

birnan, irnan (cf. § 459).3

§ 156. In a few words, for reasons not clear, Prim. Gmc. o is sometimes unrounded to a in Angl. dialects. This a is never subject to fronting and breaking before / or r followed by a consonant, e.g. past and
pass. part. warhte, gewarht worked, VP, Cp., Mortain Casket; pret.

walde would, nalde would not, VP, Ru? (beside wolde), North.; margen,
d.s. marne morning, VP; sé(e)alde* should, Ru.1, North.; past part.
Sewarden from weorban, OE Bede.’ These forms occur sporadically
elsewhere, not only in texts with an Angl. element (e.g. OE Bede,
St. Chad), but also in more purely W-S texts.

c. The Restoration of d before Back Vowels
§ 157. One of the most obvious peculiarities of the OE phono-

logical system is that 2 and a interchange, the former standing in
closed syllables, and in open syllables when a front vowel (e, in
early texts sometimes written 7 or 2) follows, the latter in open
syllables when a back vowel (a, 0, u) follows. The paradigm (see
§ 574) dag, deges, dxge, dagas, daga, dagum illustrates the prin1 Ru.}, like W-S, has forms with -h-: néhsta, n&hsta, also nihste 25, 11.
7 Other cases of breaking before metathesized 7 are rare: bears beside usual
bers, perch; Li. gedearsca.
3 IW-S past tenses bearn, earn are due to late analogy of wearp, &c. (based on
the pl. burnon, wurdon); eW-S has born, orn, barn, where the vowel-sound of
mann, &c., which may be spelled with a or 0, is preserved, although divided
from the nasal by a metathesized r, VP has orn, born, North., Ru. arn, barn (cf.
§ 130).
;
* The e seen after s¢ in this form in North. is due to the palatal nature of the
sé (cf. § 181).
§ The North. past darste for dorste he dared, has the vowel of pres. darr, on
which see § 144, footnote.

§ 158

RESTORATION OF @

61

ciple. This interchange is clearly due to the restoration of a before
a back vowel, for breaking can hardly be regarded otherwise than
as a change affecting front vowels (see § 139), and from this it
follows that OE sléan is developed from *slzyan. Now it is hardly
conceivable that when Prim. Gmc. *slayan- was at the stage

*sleyan, Prim. Gmc. *drazan- would not be at the stage *drezan;
from which it follows that OE dragan has restored a in its first
syllable by later change.
§ 158. The restoration of a is common before all single consonants and geminates, e.g. faran go, calan be cold, bacan bake,
gnagan gnaw, grafan dig, stapol pillar, sadol saddle, latost latest,

lapode he invited, cassoc rough grass, hassuc the same, mattoc
mattock, crabba crab, hnappian fall asleep, racca cord, lappa skirt.'

a is commonly restored also before groups consisting of f or s
followed by another consonant, e.g. *waséan wash, asce ash, flasce
flask (after inflected ascan, flascan), brastlian crackle, saftriende
rheumatic. Before other groups, a is not restored except for a few
instances before consonant plus liquid: W-S appla, apla apples,

watrode he watered, Angl. (Rit., Ru.) accras, acras? fields, beside
zplas, zcras, weterode, and always sxgdon, hzfdon, fedras, nzglas,
&c. Yet it need not be doubted that a was originally widely restored
before groups, and that it was subsequently removed by the analogy

of forms in which a front vowel followed. This is reflected by some
doublets, e.g. gzfel, gafol tribute, hxegel, hagol hail, fagen, fagen
glad, wecer, wacor awake, which are at least in some cases due to
an original distinction s. hxgl, p. haglas, &c.; but cf. § 193.c.
§ 159. The restoration of a was frequently due to a back vowel
which subsequently became a front vowel or was lost, e.g. gaderian
gather, stabelian found (cf. geador, stapol), and weak verbs in -i-

(< -dt-), lapian, macian, hnappian, &c.
§ 160. The principal grammatical categories in which the variation a-z occurs are: (1) masculine and neuter a- nouns, e.g. dzg
day, fet vessel, p. dagas, fatu. Before geminates and groups 2 is
usually levelled into the plural, e.g. hzttas hats, creftas powers;
but a is levelled into the sg. in bratt cloak, catt cat, facg plaice,
prass pride, sacc bag (beside szcc). (2) Adjectives of the same declension generally level a into all open syllables, so n.p.m. hrade,
1 Before geminates doublets with 2 sometimes exist, e.g. lzppa, hnappian.
? An English rubric in the Durham Ritual (not part of the North. gloss) has
d.p. acrum.

62

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 161

late, ware, wlace, from hrzd quick, lzt late, wer aware, wlec warm.
(3) The variation is rare in 6-nouns, e.g. sacu strife, inflected szece
or (anal.) sace, latta or lztta, pl. laths. (4) Strong verbs of Class VI
have in W-S a strong tendency to extend the a of the inf. and pres.
indic. pl. to forms where -e follows, and also to the monosyllabic
imperative, e.g. subj. fare, pres. part. farende, past part. faren,
imper. far from faran go.
§ 161. Sporadic analogical extension of a and 2 beyond the

limits indicated in § 160 occurs in most texts, e.g. g.s. hwales,
d.p. -hwelum, Oros. 18, 17; 17, 36. The adj. stre¢ severe, usually
extends 2 to all forms, so d.p. strecum, &c.

§ 162. A change of # to 4, parallel to that of # to a just described,
occurs frequently in W-S texts (in other dialects 2 has become é,
and hence was not subject to the change). It is much less regular

than the restoration of a, but forms with @ before a following back
vowel occur before intervening single consonants of all types
except dentals.' Examples are s/dpan sleep, and related words, d.p.
magum, and other plural forms of mé&g relative, d.p. warum from
wér agreement, gestal accusation, swar heavy, tal slander (after

forms with back vowels in inflexions), /acnian tend, and past of
strong verbs of Class V like lagon they lay.2 But forms with @ are

found also in most of these words.
§ 163. As noticed above, § 128, footnote, Ru.1 has a considerable
number of forms with & instead of the usual nW-S é. Correspondingly,

it has a few forms in which @ has been restored before a back vowel,

&esdgun they saw, three times beside forms with é and &, idra formerly.

So Cp. gestdlum.3

D. The Second Fronting
§ 164. The position whereby Prim. OE 2, when not subject to
breaking or retraction by the influence of the following consonant
or consonant-group, appears as 2 or a in historical forms, accord-

ing to the conditions described in §§ 157-61, is modified in the

dialect of VP. There 2 became raised to e, and a became fronted

' Hence always m#ton, cwadon, &c.; so eW-S unfzstrdd cannot be regarded
as having its final element developed as if accented.

? The doublets dcumba, Scumbe oakum, are due to prefix mixture rather than
to the sound-change under discussion.
3 Madgos KG 368
is probably an error; the ending is influenced by the glossed
word propinquos.

§ 165

THE SECOND FRONTING

63

to 2, so that, for example, the normal OE paradigm dzxg, dagas,
appears as deg, dxgas. Other examples are bec back, feder father,
efter after, hefde he had, segde he said; past singular of strong verbs
of Classes IV and V, e.g. -ber he bore, sprec he spoke, -set he sat;
imperative singular and pass. participle of strong verbs of Class IV,
e.g. fer go, gescepen created; cwexcian shake, hrece throat, dreca
dragon, wecian watch, wreca g.p. from *wrecu, W-S wracu vengeance, mzxgon they may, plegian play. The 2 produced by this

sound-change was subject to a subsequent change (see § 206) when
it stood before a consonant other than ¢ or g, but for the time being
the dialect had forms like *ftu vessels, *fzsu fringes, *geztu gates,
*fedur g.s. from feder father, *hzfuc hawk, which developed later
to featu, &c.
§ 165. The second fronting does not take place before /. This is
evident in the case of a: the relevant forms are Awalas whales,
wyrt-walan roots, and derivatives of galan sing. In the case of 2,
there is only one relevant form in VP, kel he concealed, 39, 11;
this isolated form, however, is perhaps an error, for ME evidence
suggests that the second fronting of 2 also failed before /.' Similarly, the a produced by retraction before / followed by another
consonant (§ 143) is immune from the second fronting, e.g. ald,
haldan2
§ 166. The change does not take place in a few words which
regularly have weak stress: the present system of habban have
(habban, -ad, hafast, -ad), ah but, and dzt, dzs, xt (prep.), cwxd,
wees, beside det, &c. There are a few further exceptions due to the
imperfect transposition of the gloss into the dialect, e.g. dwg 55, 5,
dagum 89, 15.

§ 167. The 2 produced by second fronting cannot be distinguished
from 2 of other origin. But it is reasonable to suppose that the e
produced by second fronting was, at least at first, distinguished from e
derived from Prim. Gmc. e (see § 195). This distinction cannot be shown
to have remained into the ME period. ME evidence suggests that there
was variety in different parts of the area in which second fronting
operated, as to whether or not the first element of the diphthong 2a
(written in OE ea) was affected. Its monophthongization is in some texts
# (written ea, e.g. Corpus MS. of Ancrene Wisse, hearm), which later

1 See S. T. R. O. d’Ardenne, Seinte Iuliene, p. 185.

2 Examples of words with retracted a before w do not occur in VP, but they
would probably escape second fronting also.

64

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 168

becomes a (e.g. Royal.MS. of Katherine Group), but in others the monophthongization is to e (e.g. Nero MS. of Ancrene Wisse, herm),

§ 168. Second fronting is not a general Merc. change, for it is
practically absent in Ru.1, and ME sources show that it was limited
to a small part of the vast Midland area. In OE the change of 2 to
e, in addition to its practically universal appearance in VP, is

fairly common in Ep. and Cp., and very frequent in RG and St.
Chad. The change of a to 2, on the other hand, apart from sporadic
forms, is not to be traced outside VP except in the early glossaries
(see § 207). Ru.1, RG, and St. Chad all have dagas, &c.
§ 169. The second fronting of VP and other Merc. texts is to
be regarded as earlier than the Kt. change of & to @; the latter
occurred later than i-umlaut, and hence affected #, the mutation

of @; sounds produced by i-umlaut are unaffected by second
fronting in VP. See further §§ 288 ff.

E. The Influence of Initial Palatal Consonants
§ 170. A number of sound-changes will now be discussed together, although they do not all belong to the same period, because
they are all due to initial palatal consonants, and consist in the
formation of new diphthongs. The initial palatal consonants of
Old English must first be detailed. (a) Prim. OE at first possessed

only one initial palatal consonant, the spirant 4, which may be
spelled 7 or g, e.g. VP gér year, gé ye, tung young, iugod youth.
(b) Later, however, West Gmc. initial 3 and k became fronted
before front vowels, including 2 and #/é, derived from Prim. Gme.
a and 2, and the first elements of the diphthongs éa, 20, io, of
whatever origin. k and 3 were not fronted before a due to retraction

(cald), or restoration (galan), as these processes were complete
at the time of the fronting. In the dialect of VP, the fronting of
consonants was earlier than the second fronting of vowels, as
appears from ME forms, which prove that OE *gedeling companion,
“togedere together, had back g in dialects subject to second fronting. Yet the accented syllable of the words quoted would have x

after the operation of second fronting: see § 203 on the full history
of the vowel. & and g were never fronted before front vowels
derived from back vowels by i-umlaut, e.g. cennan beget, cdene

bold, cyning king, gdés geese, gylden golden. So far as can be
determined, fronted 3 was identical with old j in sound. Examples

§ 1971

INITIAL PALATAL CONSONANTS

65

of fronted & and 3 are ééosan choose, céapian buy, éeald cold, dild
child, cerran turn, gealga gallows, giefan give, giest guest, gearu
ready, gierwan prepare. (c) At first sk was either back or front
under the same conditions as k and 3, e.g. scand disgrace, scacan

shake, scoh shoe, sciir shower, scyldig guilty, scearp sharp, séeal
shall, scip ship, scieppan create; it was of course back before
consonants, e.g. scriid garment. Later, perhaps about 800, every
initial sk was palatalized as a first stage in development to [f].
§ 171. It will be obvious from § 170 that in eOE there could be

no palatal consonant before a back vowel except Prim. Gmc. 4.
After 7 there was a strong tendency in W-S and North., which
appears less markedly in Kt. and Merc., to develop a glide front

vowel to facilitate the passage from front consonant to back vowel.
The main accent of the word remained on the back vowel, so that
no diphthong of the typical OE kind with an accented front vowel

as first element was formed. The usual subsequent history of the
sounds under consideration is loss of the glide and development

of the back vowel in ME. Thus OE geoe becomes ME yok, just
as if the glide vowel had never existed. It has, therefore, sometimes
been argued that the symbol (e or 7), which is generally supposed
to represent a glide, is merely a diacritic to indicate the palatal

nature of the preceding consonant. The existence of the glide
vowel is, however, proved by cases in which the accent is transferred to it. The glide is usually written e, but sometimes 7. In
W-S and Kt., glide+u is usually written eo or io, probably to

avoid the multiplication of graphs: North. uses the more phonetic

iu, €.g. giung young, and this graphis occasionally foundin W-S

also.
§ 172. In W-S the glide is written with considerable regularity,
though forms without it are frequent, especially in early texts.
So for Prim. Gmc. initial #@ we find ii (gu), gid, ged, the last being
practically established in later texts,! e.g. iung, gtong, geong young,

tugup, giogup, geogup youth, iuc, gioc, geoc yoke, giocda itch
(cP 71, 11), til, $10, £e6 formerly; less frequent spellings -are io,

giu, e.g. 10, iongum, fiungan, CP 213, 2435 385, 10; 178, 21. For
Prim. Gme. ja before nasals W-S has gio, geo, e.g. giond, geond

throughout, begiondan, begeondan beyond, geon? yonder. W-S a
1 An interesting spelling is Geeweorba, which apparently represents the
natural W-S pronunciation of Iugurtha (Oros., freq.).
2 Only d.s.f. geonre, CP 443, 25.

66

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 173

restored before a back vowel (§ 162) develops a glide before it in
geara, formerly; similarly 6 from Prim. Gmc. & in geémor sad, and
its derivatives.

§173. The North. forms corresponding to those quoted for
W-S in § 172 are giung (but cf. § 176), begeonda, begeande. In Li.
Seocc the basis is probably o not u, cf. ioc Rit., Ru. Other North.
forms with glides are geong! way, geonga go (both with # transferred
from past géong), Sedna yet.
§ 174. In Merc., VP shows development of a glide only in the
prefix geond-, and in gedmrung sadness; Ru. only in geond, begeonda, Cp. has bigeonan beyond, and geond-, geoc- as prefixes.
§175. In Kt. before goo, diphthongization occurs in gioc Ct. 42,
beside iocled Ct. 35; geocled occurs Ct. 49 (Merc.-Kt.). KG have
ftonne (read giongne) 183, giogede 109, giohdhade 1097, giond- 201,
Sidmras 94; but also tunges 815.
§ 176. More usualin North. than the form giung quoted aboveis

ging, and the same development appears exclusivelyin gigod. VP also
has ging* beside gung, and the form occurs sporadicallyin other texts
containing a Merc. element (BG, OE Bede, St. Chad), and in the poetry.
The explanation of these forms would seem to be that first a glide
developed after the initial palatal, producing the rising diphthong ju,
and that the accent was then transferred to the first element of that
diphthong. Subsequently the second, now unstressed, part of the diphthong was lost, having perhaps communicated its rounding to the
first element. Finally this rounding was lost by the influence of the
preceding palatal. The development thus would be ju > i¢ > y > 1.
This seems confirmed by the forms actually recorded in North. corresponding to W-S sculon they shall. In this word, a palatal consonant
seems to have been transferred from the sg. sceal, at least in North.,
and the various manuscripts of CH offer forms corresponding to those
just postulated for North. ging, &c.: the early Moore and Leningrad
MSS. have respectively séylun and scilun, the Dijon and Paris MSS.
(late, but preserving ancient forms) sctulun. Sdilon appears in Li., 80
it is to be regarded as the latest form: it developed early enough for its
vowel to undergo back umlaut (§ 205), hence Li. has also sciolun, sciolon,
and Ru* has sctolun.

§177. The history of the diphthongs developed from back
vowels after palatal consonants when -i- stood in the following
1 Cf. hin-tong, departure, BDS.

2 Only in compar. gingra 118, 9; 148, 12; but this is not a mutated form, for
y does not become i in VP.

§.178

INITIAL PALATAL CONSONANTS

67

syllable is obscure. In eW-S, beside geond, giond, there occur also
giend and gind, forms which may be reasonably regarded as from
*tandi-. The ze spellings are fairly frequent, so it seems likely that
the rising diphthong seen in geond, giond, could undergo umlaut
to a diphthong written ze, of which the phonetic nature is uncertain, but which was in any event soon simplified to i. gind occurs
also in Kt. both as preposition and prefix (Ct. 45, 31; KG 111).
Ep. has biginan beyond, Li. begienda. Accordingly io > ie >i

can be assumed for all dialects as the development of the vowel
when ia was followed by a nasal consonant and -7-.
§ 178. Evidence is even less extensive for the development of

ju before -i-. The only evidence for a diphthong is giecda itch,
CP 71, 18, beside gicda, id. 70, 19, presumably forms showing
umlaut of the vowel seen in giocda. Comparative and superlative

of geong have always i in eW-S, gingra, gingest, except once, CP
451, 28, giongrum without umlaut. The analogy of the treatment
of eo (§ 177), and the one occurrence of an ie spelling, are perhaps
enough to suggest that, before -i- of the following syllable, initial
fu-

> plu > pe > f1.

§ 179. The development of a glide vowel after the new palatal

sé, when a back vowel followed, is well established already in

eW-S texts in the groups s¢d and s¢é (including s¢a/séo with Prim.
Gme. a followed by a nasal consonant). Accordingly, we find

forms, derivatives, and compounds of the following written with
both se and sce initially: sceacan shake, sceadu shadow, séeamian
be ashamed, sceorian refuse, séeond disgrace, sceonca shank,
steddan divide, séeolde he should, sceop poet, geséedp he created,
scedgian shoe. In the oldest manuscripts a few words and their

related forms are written with sc- only but thisis due to chance,

e.g. forscapung crime, scaru cutting, séort short, séot shot, sédc he

shook. The glide is very rarely written i, e.g. sciolde, CP 77, 11.
§ 180. The group séi- does not develop a glide in eW-S except
in sceolon they shall, beside sculon. Here we may suspect that
a palatal sé was early transferred from the sg. sceal (cf. § 176).

Otherwise we have in eW-S initial sdi#-, e.g. sculdor shoulder,
' The absence of a positive ging in W-S makes it difficult to regard the -1- of
compar. and superl. as developed without mutation from -u-, as in other dialects. Thus, however, R. Vieeskruyer, St. Chad, p. 96. On the other hand,
gingra, gingest, can hardly be held to show mutation of undiphthongized u,
because they are regularly spelled with i, and never with y, and y is hardly ever
unrounded in eW-S (see § 316).

68

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 18x

onséunian shun, sétifan shove, sciir shower. In later texts, however,

a glide is frequently developed, and glide plus # is generally
written eo (as after 4, cf. § 172), e.g. scedfan shove, onsceonian shun,
s¢eér shower, and similarly séeocca demon, sceorf scurf, beside
séucca, scurf. Less frequent is the spelling eu, e.g. séeucca (Ps. 105,

27; W-S Gospels MS. A, Mt. 4, 10), scetifan (7Elfric, Gramm.

137, 11).
§ 181. In North., Zt. and Rit. exhibit a glide written e practically

always between initial sé and d or d, as in forms and derivatives

of séeacca shake, sceada enemy, scedda divide, sceoma shame,
sceond disgrace, sceort short, scedh shoe, and the past tenses scedn he
shone, gescedp he created.' Between s¢ and a the glide is written y,
e.g. ofscyufon they shoved, séyir shower.? But the more usual
development of sci- is s¢}-, a development similar to that of ju
(see § 176), e.g. séya shadow (beside scua), s¢yldrum d.p. shoulders,
s¢ynia shun, -s¢yfa shove.
§ 182. In Ru.*, a glide is developed after s¢ before d, but not

before 6 and w, hence (in various forms and compounds) séeaca,
sceada, scedn, but scomu, scortiga, scdh, scir.3
§ 183. In the Merc. texts, including VP, Ru., and the early

glossaries, and in Kt., there is no trace of the development of a
glide between initial sé and a back vowel.*
§ 184. In a few W-S and North. forms, a glide developed
between sé and a front vowel due to 7-mutation. The instances in

North. are all of e#, e6¢ appearing where we should expect the
mutations of d and 6: tosceéna break, Li. (beside -sé#na Li. Ru.*),
sée#d sheath, Li. (beside sé#d Ru.”), g(e)séedé shoes Li. (beside

giscoé Ru.*). In W-S the glide combined with the mutated vowels
to form diphthongs: glide +é gave ie, glide-+2 gave éa, and these
diphthongs were normal falling diphthongs, which had the same
subsequent history (§§ 301, 313) as ie and éa of other origin.
Beside the forms with these diphthongs there are usually others
without any sign that a glide was ever developed (cf. § 179).
' A few forms with no indication of a glide occur: scort Rit. twice, scoma id.
190, 15, sédes Li., J. 1, 27. Both early manuscripts of CH have s¢ép.
* Past pl. -sériungon, and pass. part. -s¢criuncen, -séryncan, from sérincan,
shrink, seems to show the same development u > iu/y after sér.
3 On Ru.? sdiolun for séulon, see § 176.
* Apparent exceptions are due to another process (see § 207 below), e.g.
séeadu shadow, Ep., sceaba plane, Ep., Cp., -sceadan a.s. enemy, Cp. Ru. has
-séeddan divide, beside -séddan, but this may be due to the influence of W-S
spelling.

§ 185

INITIAL PALATAL CONSONANTS

69

Examples are: with e, the mutation of a before a nasal: sciendan
hurt, beside séendan; with é, the mutation of 6: *gescie shoes, later
gescy; with x, the mutation of a@ (cf. § 193.c): sceabpig hurtful,
beside sczppig; with #, the mutation of ad: sééab sheath, beside
sc&p; -scéat, 3rd sg. pres. ind. of séeddan divide, CP 453, 17, beside
-sc&t, /Elfric, Hom. ii. 232, 8. Other words show no glide, e.g. scené
cup, scencan pour, scénan break.
§ 185. One of the most regular changes in the West Saxon dialect

is the diphthongization of front vowels after palatal consonants.
This changeis caused not only by original palatal7
L but by the new
palatals which arose from Prim. Gme. & and g in OE before all
front vowels which existed after the restoration of a before following back vowels. These palatals are in this book written ¢ and g:

the latter was identicalin sound with old
i, and thisis also written
& in quoting OE forms. sk became palatal at the same time as &
before front vowels. By the diphthongization, 2 became Ze, and #
became éa. Examples are:
e > te: scieran cut, giefan give (and related words), gieldan pay,

-gield sacrifice, -gietan get, ondgiet sense, gielpan boast. (Forms of
all these words are actually recorded with ie in eW-S.)
é > ie: giet yet (eW-S frequently), gieta, giena the same (both

forms poetical), gie ye (1W-S, beside ge, the unaccented development.)!

zx > ea: séeaft shaft, gesceaft creature, sceabb scab, sceal he shall,
sear he cut, sceatt treasure, ceaster city, éeaf chaff, geat gate,
ongeagn against, geaf he gave, -geat he got.”
# > éa: sééap sheep, scéaron they cut, céace jaw, géar year,
géafon they gave, géaton they got, géa yea.
Exceptions are not numerous in W-S texts, but examples are
sceld, gelp-, -geld, Oros. 188, 25; 214, 13 154, 34; gxglbérness CP

73, 11. These and similar forms are, no doubt, to be attributed
to the influence of Merc. spelling.
§ 186. In North. the same processes are found, but less regularly
t But the past of sdeddan divide is sééd in W-S, beside scedd, a different

formation (see § 745.a).
2 Naturally the symbol ea is sometimes ambiguous, e.g. n. pl. geatu, gates,
d.p. gearum years, may have respectively ea and éa transferred from formsin
which no back vowel followed; but they may also have restored d before a back

vowel preceded by a glide, according to § 172. (This in geatu would imply the

transference of an initial palatal from the sg.) The adv. gedra is usually assumed
to have the phonological ed, as its semantic development to ‘formerly’ has

removed it from the influence of géar year.

7o

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 187

than in W-S. In early texts we have only séeal he shall, geatum!
ornamentally, L.R., against -czstri, loc. sg., city, FC. In Li., Rit.,

and Ru.? there is often diphthongization of # (least frequently
in Ru.*) so that we find e.g. sdeal, sceatt, ceaster, geaf, geat,
-geat beside (in most instances) forms with 2. When 2 escaped
diphthongization to ea, a palatal glide was frequently developed
before it after palatal consonants, so the spelling ez also occurs in
Li., e.g. -gezett Mt. 26, 7, -gexef Mk. 10, 4, ongexegn L. 19, 30, &c.

e is not affected in North., but @ becomes Ze in gie ye (Li., Rit.,
Ru.*) and gie yea (Li., Rit.), and this can be monophthongized
to 7.2 Undiphthongized forms of both words, with é or ee, are also

frequent, occurring in all three texts for the adverb, and in Li.
and Ru.’ for the pronoun. Li. has also the spelling giee (Mk. 15, 44)
for the adverb, and g&, gi% (Mk. 14, 42; L. 11, 42) for the pronoun. The first is perhaps to be regarded as indicating a glide
before undiphthongized accented é, the others are hardly due to
more than the recurrent uncertainty of distinction of the symbols

z and e. Li., Rit., Ru.” all have scip sheep, presumably from
*sciep with palatal diphthongization of nW-S séép. Other words
with é are undiphthongized, e.g. gér, géfon.
§ 187. The diphthongization of front vowels after palatals is
unknown to all Kt. and Merc. texts except Ru.!, where a few forms
occur with ea from @, ceaster, ceaf, sceal, -séeatt, geat beside

ézster, séal (with the vowel of séalde), and once séip (18, 12),
beside usual séép.
§ 188. The W-S diphthongs 2a which arose from front vowels
by palatal influence were identical with a produced by breaking
and the normal development of Prim. Gmc. au, and were distinguished from ed, which arose from the development of a glide
between a palatal consonant and a back vowel, as their subsequent

history shows (see § 313, and cf. § 44). Accordingly their mutation
will be discussed together with that of 2a of other origin below
(§ 200). In North., since the mutation of ea is e, it is not possible
to determine if scebba hurt, sceppa create, cefis concubine, gest
guest, contain the mutation of # or of ea. Undiphthongized 2 is,

no doubt, mutated in VP sceddan,3 sceppend, gest,. cele coldness,
1 Adverbial d.p. of geatwe.
oo
2 The pron. occurs with 7 in Ru.*, the adv. in Li., Ru.®
> This form invades W-S prose: pure W-S séyppan < *sdiebpan is limited to

poetical manuscripts,

§ 189

INITIAL PALATAL CONSONANTS

a

Ep., Cp. cebis concubine, KG scerian divide, séepttenras (245,
read sceppendas).
§ 189. Rit. has e regularly in words of this type, but 7 always

appears in gimung marriage, and its derivatives (thirteen occurrences), a word containing the mutation of éa from Prim. Gmc.
au. In these forms, é produced by umlaut seems to have become
ie, and later z, owing to palatal influence. This is parallel to the
treatment of old @ in the text (gie, scip),? though old e is unaffected
by a preceding palatal.

F. i-Mutation
§ 190. The process known as ?-umlaut or 7-mutation operates
on practically all the sounds which it could theoretically affect in
OE. Wheni or ; stood in the following syllable, all back vowels
were invariably fronted, so that the following changes took place:

& > & (and 2 undergoes further change to e before m and n in most
dialects)

& > 8 (> &in most dialects)
4> 4 (> Zin Kt,, and often # in IW-S).

There is considerably more variety in the mutation of diphthongs.
In W-S the diphthongs é@ and io, whether derived from Prim.
Gme. diphthongs or arising from breaking or from palatal influence on front vowels.3 were mutated to fe. On the other hand,

in all nW-S dialects 2a was mutated to 2, while Zo was not subject
to mutation. The diphthong 2o is capable of mutation in very few
words in original position, for it did not normally exist before 7 or
f: it is, however, probable that in the few words where it arose
before i, and in words where it was analogically introduced before
i and 4, its mutation was io in all dialects.
§ 191. Just as all back vowels are subject to fronting by 7-umlaut,
so certain front vowels are subject to raising. It is certain that
z# > e under the same conditions as those in which back vowels
are fronted, but whether e > is not demonstrable. The long
vowels, W-S #, nW-S @, are not believed to be subject to raising
' These two forms are editorial errors for MS. sceppend, sceeppend.
2 Li., J. 1, 42 geciged is probably an error for gecéiged, the usual spelling in the
text.

3 The diphthongs arising from palatal influence on back vowels were different in quality: their mutations have been discussed, §§ 177-8, 184.

72

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 192

by i-umlaut: the evidence is the three words d%d deed (i-stem),
l&ce physician, m&re famous (fa-stems), which show unaffected #
in W-S, é in nW-S.!
§192. Very considerable discussion has taken place of the
precise cause of i-umlaut.? Many scholars (pre-eminently Sievers

and Luick among the earlier masters, Rooth among the moderns)
consider that the 7 or 7, standing in the syllable following the vowel
to undergo umlaut, palatalizes the intervening consonant, and

that the umlaut is the assimilation of the preceding vowel to
this consonant. In favour of this view it is to be argued: (1) that
the palatal quality of ¢ and stop g remained after a mutated vowel,

and led to their ultimate assibilation (see § 433 for examples);
(2) that groups consisting of m, n, or J, followed by another consonant, when they were preceded by a mutated vowel, remained

palatal and capable of causing a second mutation of the vowel, so
that e.g. cempa, cende, zldra became cempa, cende, eldra (see
details below, § 193); (3) that early in OE certain consonants and
consonant groups were changed in nature (presumably palatalized)

by a following or , so that breaking sometimes failed to take place
before them (see § 154); (4) that early OE spellings suggest that
i-umlaut was, in fact, begun by epenthesis of 7 into an accented

syllable (see § 42), and such an epenthetic7 could hardly be anything
but a glide anticipating a palatal consonant. In spite of these
arguments, it might be maintained that, although palatalization

of some consonant groups before 7 or 7 is easy to demonstrate, it
cannot be assumed for all groups, and ¢-umlaut can take place

before any group. Therefore i-umlaut may be a mere vowel har-

mony, approximating the mode of utterance of an accented vowel
to that of an 7 or¢ of the following syllable.3 It would then be
necessary to assume that i-umlaut was accompanied (or preceded

or followed, for the processes need not have been simultaneous)
by the palatalization of at least the consonant groups detailed in

(1) and (2) above, and that such palatalized consonant groups
sometimes changed preceding 2 toe.
§ 193. The 7-mutations of the various sounds will now be con-

sidered in detail.
¥ On méée for m&ée in manuscripts of W-S colour, see § 128, footnote.
2 A very useful selection of references is given by Samuels, Trans. Philological Soc., 1952, pp. 38-39.
3 It can hardly be other when no consonant intervenes between the vowel
influenced and the # or j (examples §§ 237, 120.2).

§ 193

i-MUTATION

73

a: the i-umlaut of this sound occurs in OE in the following

positions:

,

(2) When retraction of 2 to a took place before / followed by a

consonant in Angl., and before r followed by a consonant in North.

(see §§ 143-4), the result when 7 stood in the following syllable

was #. Before /-groups, we find
practically universally in Angl.
texts: examples from VP are cwelman kill, gemzltan melt, zldra

older, -heldan bend, gefzllan fell, fell fall, welle' well. But,
nevertheless, ME evidence shows that in the majority of dialects

this 2 passed into e before the end of the OE period, a change no
doubt due to the influence of the palatalized consonant group
which followed it. # seems to have remained (to become ME a)

only in the West Midlands.? The only OE text to show undoubted

traces of the beginning of this change is Ru.!: there we find various

forms of eldra, cwelman, -heldan, belgas wine-skins, in all ten

occurrences, beside twenty-four cases of x in the same and other

words.3 Since we find in North., in the early glossaries, and in
Ru.* frequently a for ea before r followed by a consonant, it is

natural that we should sometimes find & for e in the same position

when 7 stands in the following syllable. Hence, although we find
prevailingly in these sources forms like gerd rod, ferd army, &c.,
there also occur Ep. -gaerd, auuaerdid damaged; Cp. -gerd, faerd,

Seuaerpte he recovered, gegaerwendne pres. part. a.s.m. preparing;

Li. forms and derivatives of hwerfa turn, werma warm, weré4
pain, czrra turn, also underfe useless; Ru.' forms of werfan turn,
weergan curse, and astxrfan kill, also -garwende pres. part. pre-

paring, gegerelum d.p. garments. It will be noticed that in most of

these forms the vowel is in the neighbourhood of a labial con-

sonant.§

(6) a derived from 2 by restoration before a following back
' Also twice welle, perhaps another formation with original ¢ and no
following -t- (cf. OHG uuella).

* See Ekwall, Contributions to the history of OE dialects, p. 62.
3 e spellings sporadically occur in other manuscripts (e.g.
Blick. Hom.
ewelman, eldo, welm), but they are to be regarded as the mutation
of southern
ea, not of Angl. a.
* In this form the word and its verb werdan penetrate W-S:
pure W-S wyr¢
from “wierd is rare.
5 Note also baerdae barking, Cp. 1191, with first a cancelled by
subpunctuation.

© The peculiar a of margen (§ 1 56) seems to be mutated in Ru. dat.

:

mzrgne.

The mutation of the o of normal morgen appears in the form mergen,
dat. merne,
found in North., Ru.1, IW-S,

74

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 193

vowel (§§ 157-60) can be subject to umlaut only when the back
vowel is u, and i follows in the third syllable (see below, § 203).
(c) In many forms, a@ could be analogically placed before 7 or 7
of the following syllable, though phonologically 2 should always
stand in this position. Consequently, we find in the historical forms
of such words 2 (the #-mutation of a), instead of, or beside, e (the
i-mutation of z), and the origin of the mutated @ can usually be
readily seen in related forms, e.g. raced hall, beside reced, North.,
Ru.! gefel tribute (cf. gafol), Ep., Cp. haecid pike (cf. hacod), Ep.,
Cp. haedilae cloak (cf. hacele), hxleb man, beside helep, poet.

gest guest, beside nW-S gest (cf. g.p. gasta, Gen. 1346), stzpe step,
beside stepe (cf. pl. stapas), sce strife (cf. sacu), nzss cape, beside

ness (cf. nasu), waecce watch, wecéende watching, North. we¢¢a to
watch (cf. wacian), wrecca exile, beside wrecéa (cf. wracu), Rit.
sczppend creator, beside sceppend, gemzecéa companion (cf. gemaca),
mcg man, beside meds (cf. magu). To these may be added the W-S
2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. of strong verbs of Class VI, drazgd,
fard, sxcd, &c. (cf. inf. dragan, faran, sacan), and all forms of
habban, have, with -xbb-, W-S 1st sg. pres. indic. haebbe, W-S,

Ru.!, North. pres. part. hebbende, pres. subj. hebbe.! In VP, since

a had become a sound approximating to 2 before mutation took
place, its mutation was e, and this appears in the above forms so
far as they exist in the dialect, stepe, gest-, wrecan (a.s. 93, 6, read
toreccan), beside once wrexdcan (a.s. 145, 9), with the vowel of
*wrecu, W-S wracu.2 On the corresponding Kt. forms see § 288.
(d) A sound closely related to a was derived from Prim. Gmc. a
before nasals. Its umlaut was at first 2,3 which is extensively

preserved in early texts, e.g. cende he begot, LR, Raendles-,

Haengist BH, MS. Cott. Tib. C ii, and many forms in Ep., including aenid duck, -haen hen, lendino loins, giuuaemmid corrupted,
gifraemith he performs, caempan warriors, laempihalt lame,
graennung grinning, faengae d.s. capture, and various forms and
derivatives of maengan mingle, graemman irritate. But the palatalized consonant or consonant group early caused a further change
of z to e:4 such forms are already found in Ep., and outnumber the
On W-S, Ru.!, North. saéga(n) say, beside sedgan, see § 766.
2 So VP waden watch, has the vowel of wecian, W-S wacian.
3 On this mutation Férster, Flussname Themse, pp. 470-8, has valuable
material but unreliable conclusions.
4 Luick’s attempt to place here stemn stem, hremn raven, (Hist. Gramm.,
§ 186) is to be regretted, as the forms stefn, hrefn are common and suggest that

§ 193

.s-MUTATION

.

75

z- forms in Cp. by more than three to one. In all later texts e is

the normal spelling, and 2 the exception, although Ru.! has a few

more instances of # than is usual, with 27 instances against about

260 of e. ME evidence enables one to determine that in a limited
south-eastern area, including Essex, but not Kent, the mutation

of a before nasal consonants remained at the stage z.' It is difficult

to decide if the influence of this area is to be observed in any Old
English texts. In eW-S & spellings are of great rarity, but in some

later manuscripts they are frequent:? they can, however, be mere
inverted spellings, for in normal Angl. and W-S the sound [z]

no longer existed before m, n, or in some cases they may be due to
Kt. influence, for in that dialect [a] and [e] had fallen fully together
and 2 and e were hence equivalent graphs.

In W-S bzrnan, xrnan, causative formations to beornan burn,

eornan run, metathesis of r broke the contact between & and the

palatalized consonant group too soon for the latter to cause 2 to
become e (primitive forms *brannian, *rannian).s On the other
hand VP, Ru.1, North. have bernan (except Ru. 3, 12, forbernep).

If &, the mutation of @ (< Prim. Gmc. az) or of West Gmc. a
before nasals, undergoes early shortening, the resulting # becomes
e before the palatalized consonant group, like the originally short

the change of # to e preceded that off to m. The words would seem to be in OE
#-stems (Prim. OE *stxuni-, *hrzuni-). The form hrzfn without umlaut is comparable to gest beside gest (see below, § 204.5). arn house, hern wave, are also

not relevant; their development rather is *razn > *rarn > *rznn (before breaking
was caused by r+cons.; this stage remains in hraen Ep. 400) > zrn
by meta-

thesis of r. -ren, -ern in the second element of compounds have a vowel due
to reduced stress. Erf. 1137 rendegn, Beow. 770 renweardas are forms due,
if

correct, to Merc. or Kt. change of

to e: cf. mete-ren, Ct. 31 (Saxon-Kt.).

The mutation of 2 to e by a palatalized group was limited to fully accented
syllables; hence [W-S mznig many, represents the form with reduced stress
(cf. § 96), North. menig the accented form. The noun meenigo is influenced by
meenig. Meenig could, of course, be regarded as simply W-S unstressed develop-

ment of monig without mutation, cf. penne, hwzenne, pzne, hweene, xtsemne,

‘for bonne, &c. (see § 380).
? Cf. Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 363.a.2.

7 e.g. MS. D of the OEC, the glossary in MS. Brussels 1829, WrightWiilcker i. 284 ff. (eleventh century), and the copies of homilies in MS. Hatton

116, especially nos. 2-18 (list in Vleeskruyer, St. Chad, pp. 3-5). In the study
of this question, the forms manig (and hence mzenigo which it influences) are
irrelevant (cf. § 380): hence correct Biilbring, Alteng. Elementarbuch,
§ 1714.
Spzend, he entices, beside spend, is due to other verbs of strong
Class VI
(ferd, &c.).
* So wrenna, wren, but with metathesis werna; and by contamination
wrenna, werna,

76

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 194

sound, e.g. endlufon eleven, enwintre one year old, endemes together,
enne as.m. one (VP, Ru.', North.) beside &nne (W-S, Ru.},
North.), bremblas brambles, pl. of brémel (< *“bramil-), from
*breemblas, whence sg. brembel and brzmel.

§ 194. #: the i-umlaut of this sound is e, e.g. bedd bed, betera
better, hebban raise, eft again, here army, lecgan lay, nerian save,
rest rest. In nW-S this mutation can appear where W-S has the
mutation of ea after a palatal consonant (see § 188). VP has
similar forms, for the i-umlaut of e from Prim. OE 2 by second
fronting is e (cf. § 195). Before consonant groups and geminates,
however, there is a strong tendency to eliminate the umlaut, and

to restore & from the analogy of related forms without umlaut, e.g.

hzftan bind, mzstan feed on mast, festan make firm, gehlestan
load, fepman embrace, nzglan nail, peppan traverse, steppan
stay, steppan step, with which the related nouns may be compared,
and gedxftan arrange, hwexttan sharpen, beside hwettan, lettan
delay, beside /ettan, with which compare the related adjectives.
Bregden wily, beside bregden, is due to interchange of -zn- and
-in- in the suffix in Prim. OE (§ 381). More difficult to explain is
wfnan perform, beside efnan. In VP, of course, e appears for
restored &, as well as for original 2, hence geheftan, &c.
§ 195. e: it would seem reasonable to assume that the analogical
paradigm *faréd, *faris, *farip, which underlies W-S fare, ferst,
ferp, would be paralleled by *beré, *beris, *berib. Since such
restoration of e is rarely traceable, while restoration of a (see above)
and of o (see below) is traceable in many forms, an 7-umlaut of e
to i must be assumed for OE, to explain the prevailing absence of
analogical forms with e where i stood in the following syllable. It
would follow from this that the VP e from 2 by second fronting
was distinguished from e from Prim. Gmc. e till at least the time of
umlaut, for the umlaut of the former is not 7 but e (cf. above, and

§ 167).

§ 196. 0: this sound could be subject to 7-umlaut only in
loan-words, and in native words in positions into which it had
been analogically introduced, for it was not phonologically developed in Prim. Gmc. before a following z or z (see § 115). In such
forms its umlaut was oe, and this sound had a strong tendency
to become unrounded to e. The oldest glossaries have the following examples: Ep. loerge poles, Cp. droehtig vigorous, oefsung
shearing, cellendre coriander, and in a medium-stressed syllable

§ 197

?-MUTATION

77

Cp. éerfelle chervil (< chaerefolium).! From this it is evident that
the tendency oe > e was very early. VP has doehter d.s. daughter,
oexen oxen, forms and derivatives of oefestan hasten, but ele oil,
recetung eructation (cf. rocettan), and also, with shortening of a

vowel originally long, forms and derivatives of bledsian bless. Ru.

has oele, and gebloetsian beside (ge)bletsian. BG have ele-. North.
has doehter, oefistiga, &c., oele, but Li., Ru.*, Rit. all have exen,

and while Li., Rit. have mostly (ge)bloedsiga, Ru. has gibletsiga,
bletsiga. A number of strong pass. participles appear in Li. with the
mutation of 0, where normally OE has o (cf. § 736.m): gecnoeden,
£esuoeren, Sewoerden, awoerpen; so Ru.? gibroecen. eW-S has both

oele and ele, and always efesian shear, bletsian; IW-S has e in all
forms.? On the Kt. development see §§ 288 ff.
§ 197. 4: the z-umlaut of d@ was always 2: most instances are of
@ from Prim. Gme. ai, e.g. h&lan heal, #nig any, dé@lan divide,
l&édan lead, s# sea, sténen of stone. W-S léwan betray (and connected words), br&w brow, may be regarded as having the mutation
of a, the retraction of Prim. OE @ before y (§ 151), but it might
also be assumed that they have unchanged & before ui: this would

be parallel to the failure of 2 to retract before ui (§ 154). North.,
Ru.) hw#lé which, sw%lé such, appear to contain the mutation of
@, introduced into these words from hwd, swd@ (§ 125); so Ru.*

twzlf, twelve, perhaps contains the mutation of the d of ted. It is
plain that nasalized @ had not become fully identical with 6 at the
time of mutation, for when it is subject to early shortening the
product is a, not o (§ 127), and when its 7-umlaut is shortened
the product is z, not oe (§§ 127, 193.d). We must, therefore, assume
that 2 was at first mutated to an & slightly different from 2 the
mutation of @ < ai. The former sound became in historic OE 6¢,
while the latter remained. The future history of 6@ was the same as

that of 6é, the mutation of 6, i.e. it remained in Angl. (e.g. croden
queen, smdépe smooth,

wdén hope), but

became é in

W-S.4

? On Ep. 79 sowrgendi for which Erf., Cp. have sorgendi see § 764.
2 On the texts with the form mergen, containing probably mutated o, but not
recorded with oe, cf. above, § 193.a, footnote 6.
3 But if it has # it belongs to § 328; Kt. twalf is merely inverted spelling

, Divicult are the words n#m taking, n#ming the same, niedném taking by

force, be-, ge- n#man deprive. Holthausen (Archiv cxiii. 43, developing Sievers,
Angelsdchs. Gramm., § 68.a.1) regards them as from *naim-, and as not con-

nected with niman take; Bjérkman (AB xxix. 338) takes them, more probably,
as re-formations of ce words, which arose in consequence of the early re-formation

78

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 198

Examples are: with Prim. Gmc. @ (§ 119), éhtan persecute, féhp
he takes; with Ingvaeonic d (§ 121), gés geese, tép teeth, ést favour,
séfte soft, smépe smooth, gesépan testify, népan venture, fépe movement (and related words); with Prim, OE d (§ 127), cwén queen,
wen hope, cwéman please.
§ 198. 0: the :-mutation of 6 is o¢. This remains in Angl. texts,
where occasional o- and e- spellings can be regarded as errors.
Ru.1, however, has nine forms of héran hear, spelled with 6é, and

this inversion probably implies unrounding of 6é. eW-S sometimes

has dé in dépel home, beside épel, andin names in Coén- in the
Chronicle. On the Kt. development see § 288. Examples of the
mutation of 6 are fét feet, béé books, fédan feed, célan cool, swéte
sweet. It has been remarked above (§ 42) that in early texts of is
found as a graph for the mutation of 6: the examples are chiefly

from early manuscripts of Bede, where names in Coin- and Oidilfor later OE Cén-, Epel- are frequent,? and where the same graph
is used in a number of names of less clear etymology, but of which
some at least probably contain the mutation of 6: Oiddi, Oisé,
Boisil, Cotfi;3 cf. Cp. 1017 woidiberge hellebore. Occasionally the
graph 2 is used to represent the mutation of 6: examples from W-S
texts are onhréran CP 225, 5, ged#mde Oros. 258, 10, gefésd
Boeth. 54, 17, from hréran stir, déman judge, gefégan join. Rut

similarly has three times wasten beside wdésten wilderness, and
Sedréfde 24, 6, from gedroéfan disturb.* If correct, Cp. 143

laergae poles, for Ep., Erf. loerg(a)e, is the same treatment of
the mutation of short 0. The significance of these spellings is
uncertain.
§ 199. i: the z-umlauts of the short and long sounds seem
of past pl. ndmon te ndmon (Ep. 113 already naamun). Either view is preferable
to that of Morsbach, who assumes abnormal operation of umlaut in the group
West Gme. -dmi-, disregarding geséman, &c. (AB vii. 325, followed by Biilbring,
Alteng. Elementarbuch, § 192.a.) The compar. and superl. s#mra, -ost, worse,
worst, may belong here. VP gemrung, quoted by Biilbring, loc. cit., is an error
for frequent gedmrung (§ 174), and brzmbel is to be otherwise explained (§ 193.d).
! W-S dée, -déendum, CP 8,2; 13, 3, pres. subj. and pres. part. from dén do,
are to be regarded as analogical disyllabic formations for usual dé, -ddndum.
2 So MSS. Leningrad and Cott. Tib. A xiv once Quéinburg, for later Cwén(with the mutation of Prim, Gmc. @ before a nasal).
3 If Bede’s Loidis, Leeds, has a short vowel, it is the only word in which the
mutation of short o is spelled of (see E'S lvi. 222-4).
* Cf. Beow. 1942, ons®de. Ru. has also a few instances of # for the mutation
of Prim. Gme. @ before a nasal, cwwaén 12, 42, cw#mdon 12, 10, hwéne a little,

26, 39.

§ 200

i-MUTATION

79

identical in quality and history: they are both written y. On
subsequent unrounding see §§ 316-17, and on the special Kt.
treatment see §§ 288 ff. Examples are: with Prim. Gmc. u, bryég
bridge, byégan buy, cyme coming, hyge thought, Ayll hill, styrian
stir, yfel evil; with u by retraction of ¢ (§ 149), Angl. wyrp honour,
wyrpe worthy, wyrs worse; with Prim. Gme. a, bryd bride, mys
mice, l¥s lice, fpr fire, Lytel little; with Ingvaeonic a (§ 121), cypan

make known, dystig dusty, fysan send forth, wyscan wish, fst
storm, yd wave. The early spelling uz for $ (§ 42) occurs in
Thriidred BH (Moore MS. only), grizit g.s. meal, Cp. 1619,
buiris chisel, Cp. 11, for normal Pryp-, gryt, byres. Similar spellings
occur in Li., presumably as archaisms, e.g. driige dry, fuilgendo

following, geduild patience, suindrig separate.' In a very few cases
in early texts u is written for y;? these may be regarded as errors
for ui, e.g. pun BC, hurnitu, sculthéta, ontidri Cp., for pynne thin,
hyrnetu hornet, séyldhta bailiff, ontydre barren.3

§ 200. &a: the 7-umlaut of these sounds is with great regularity
ie in W-S, and 2 in nW-S, although, in this matter as in others,
spellings of Angl. type often penetrate W-S texts. Examples of the
mutation of 2a will now be given, classified according to the
origin of the mutated sound.
(1) ea by breaking before / occurred and could be subject to

i-umlaut in W-S and Kt., while Angl. dialects had the mutation
of a in the same position, e.g. W-S bieldan to make bold, ieldra
older, wielle well, fiell fall;+ Kt. eldra older, helt he holds, wellan
boil, geweldan subdue.
(2) ea by breaking before r occurred and could be subject to
#-umlaut in all dialects, though North. and Merc. sometimes have
the mutation of @ in this position (§ 193.4), e.g. W-S cierr turn,
dierne secret, hierdan make hard, mierran hinder, fierd army,
nW-S cerr, &c.
* Forms also occur with uy, wy, wi; for even rarer variants, see W. Stolz,

Der Vokalismus .. . der Lind. Ev., p. 55; M. Angstrém, Studies in OE MSS.,
Pp. 20.

3 Cf. occasional o for oe or oi noted above (e.g. FC oplz).
> So later Vuunhere, Cunehelm (ninth-century moneyers) and a few similar
names of moneyers after goo.
* While forms with Angl. 2 or Kt. e are infrequent in W-S texts, it seems
evident that the name-element Z/f- was not given W-S form (cf. ie/f elf). Undoubted 2 forms are far rarer in eW-S than the corresponding unmutated a;
but the relatively early W-S Ct. 20 (dated 847) has only one te (@wielme d.s.
source), against frequent wil fountain.

80

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 201

(3) ea by breaking before y occurred and could be subject to
i-umlaut in all dialects, e.g. W-S Alehhan laugh, nieht night,
-mieht might, -slieht blow, wiexd he grows, sliehd he strikes,
Swiehd he washes; nW-S hAlehhan,' neht, &c., in so far as forms

‘with mutated vowels occur.
(4) ea developed by palatal influence is subject to i-mutation
in W-S and perhaps in North., see § 188. Examples are: W-S
ciefes concubine, scieppend creator, besciered deprived, giest guest
(cf. giesdhiis CP 125, 8).

(5) éa the OE development of Prim. Gmc. au is subject to
i-umlaut in all dialects, e.g. W-S biecnan beckon, biegan bend,

ciegan call, gieman care for, hieran hear, liefan allow, nied need;
nW-S béénan, &c.
(6) éa by breaking is subject to i-umlaut only in W-S niehst(a)
nearest.

(7) éa due to palatal influence is subject to -umlaut only in
eW-S *ciese, cheese, inferred from 1W-S éyse.
On the later history of W-S ie see §§ 300-1. In early texts the
i-umlaut of éa is sometimes written 2, instead of @: the instances

are chiefly in the early manuscripts of Bede, e.g. Aeduini, Aedgils,
Aenheri, perhaps also Baeda, LV Baeéde.? On the spelling e in
BDS néidfaere, see § 42. but cf. § 270.
The mutation of the rising diphthongs ed has been discussed

above, §§§ 177, 184.
§ 201. io: the 7-umlaut of these soundsin W-S is ie, but iin
nW-S they were not changed; examples are:
(1) to by breaking before r is frequently subject to 7-umlautin

W-S forms, e.g. W-S bierhto brightness, fierr farther, afierran
drive out, hiertan encourage, ierre anger, angry, smierewad they
anoint (CP 69, 11), -wierpd he throws, wiers(a) worse, -wierd he
becomes, wierde worth, hierde shepherd. Kt. examples, except
stiorée, d.s. calf, iorsierne become angry, KG, all show the later
change io > eo (§ 297), e.g. weorde Ct. 41, and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
-weorpd, -weord, geornd, KG. In this position Angl. texts practically
always have unbroken: see § 154.3 and footnotes. When w precedes,
! This form occurs in poetry (e.g. Brun. 47, Gu. 1331), and is inferred for Kt.
from 3rd sg. pres. indic. hluhd KG 1150, from *hlehd with palatal umlaut (see
§ 306). Angl. had *hlzhan (pres. indic. pl. hlahad VP, -ed, -as Li.) with -z#hfrom hlzhtor

(W-S hleahtor, see § 222).

2 Occasional spellings with # elsewhere are insignificant, e.g. at@fred painted,

CP 467, 19, and thirteen forms of dégan, léfan, nédan in Ru.

§ 202

i-MUTATION

8x

Angl. texts have y (§ 149), to which Kt. e corresponds in werstum,
werdnes, KG, so perhaps the forms with eo just quoted have
analogical eo from unmutated forms.!
(2) to by breaking before x is subject to i-umlaut in W-S, e.g.
jieht he fights, gesiehd he sees, gesiehd vision; Kt. -siohd he sees.

In Angl. the diphthong is removed by a later change, e.g. gesid he
sees, VP, from *-sixip.
(3) #o from Prim. Gmc. iu is subject to i-umlaut in W-S only,

e.g. W-S liehtan lucere, biet he commands, gesiene manifest,
onsien face, gestieran steer, underdiedan subject, eldiedig foreign,
getriewe true, diestra darkness; so with io by early contraction,

friend friends, fiend enemies. Corresponding forms with io are
found in North. and Kt., e.g. Li. onsion, elldiodig, diostro, KG
-biot, underdiod, Griostrie (21 tenebrosas, read diostrige). On the

development of io in Merc. see §§ 294-5.2 Very early texts have
a few instances of the spelling iu for io (see § 275).
(4) io by breaking before y is subject to z-umlaut in W-S

*liehtan alleviate, inferred from I1W-S lyhtan, and in 2nd and 3rd
8g. pres. indic. of contracted strong verbs of Class I, e.g. *piehp
he thrives, from péon, but such forms all have? or y in the recorded
instances (cf. § 300).3

§ 202. 0: a small group of words (§ 124) suggest that the
mutation of eo was io, for they appear in W-S always with eo (from
older 10, which they still have in North.), and never have ze. This
confirms and supplements the view of Sievers* that when éo was
analogically introduced into a position in which it was followed by
t or

in the next syllable, the product of i-umlaut was io even in

W-S, and that this io became é@o later (see § 296). Hence we find

many forms in W-S texts with fo (é0) where we should expect
1 The equation W-S fe = nW-S io > 2o often causes false substitution of go
for W-S ie, the mutation of éa, in Boeth., e.g. sceoppend, gehéordon.
2 Unexpectedly VP has a few cases of ie: onsien face (always spelled with i,
over 60 instances) corresponding to North. onston, W-S onsien, is regarded as a
re-formation of onsion on the model of other nouns formed from a verbal
stem-+-en, e.g. lygen, selen (so Bjérkman, ES xlviii. 115-23). The forms fienda,
-um, g. and d.p. offiond enemy, occur 9.4, 14, 26; 26.11. Flasdieck (AB xli. 287)
regards these forms as from West Gmc. “fiandi-, beside *fiundi- (cf. § 120.3 ¢).
But since g. and d.p. should have no umlaut at all it is perhaps better to regard
the forms as due to the influence of the pres. part. ending.
3 Kt. has oferwrihd with intervention of a later change (§ 310). In Angl.
forms the diphthong is eliminated by smoothing, VP gelihtan, Rit. underlihta.
* Vokalismus, p. 44: he termed the process Halb-umlaut.

82

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 203

ie, because before umlaut took place, io had been replaced by
analogical go. In eW-S we find always with io or é0, leornian learn,
(cf. § 154, footnote 3), léode people, gepéode language, and variants
of many of the ie-forms quoted above to illustrate the 7-umlaut of
do, e.g. eldéodig, stioran, geortréowan. It is, of course, not possible
to distinguish forms of this type from ones due to the influence

of Merc. spelling.
§ 203. Double Umlaut. When in Prim. OE an accented vowel,
capable of undergoing i-umlaut, was followed by wu in a medial
syllable, and then by 7 in the second syllable after the stress, both

the accented vowel and the wu suffered i-umlaut. The mutation of
the medial -u- generally appears reduced to an indistinct vowel,
written e, in historical forms. The majority of the instances had
Prim. Gmc. a in the first syllable: this would become 2 by the
Anglo-Frisian fronting, but a would be restored before the following -u-. Hence the result of the double umlaut was that the
succession a--u-+7 became 2+-y+i. The only other successions

certainly

exemplified

are

d+u+i,

which

became

#+y-+4,

o+u-+i, which became oe+y+i, and d+u+7, which became
J+y+i. The examples are:
a+u-+i: gedeling companion (OS gaduling), xdeling prince (ON

Odlungr), xtgedere together, xfest envy (< *av-unsti-), fasten
fasting (OS fastunnia), letemest last (cf. Gothic superlatives in
-umists), Szterndeg Saturday (< Lat. Saturnit+OE deg), and
probably hzlfter halter, hzrfest harvest

(< *haluftri-, *haruvist-),

&ce eternal (< *ajuki-, cf. § 237.1).
t In the dialect of VP, the succession a—u-1 would become 2-u-s by second
fronting; i-umlaut would then give e-u-i. VP has accordingly festen, efestig, and
ME evidence enables us to add -gedere.
For less certain instances of double umlaut, see O. Ritter, Vermischte Beitrdge,

pp. 168-73.

Not here belong words with the Prim. OE succession a-a-i. This simply gave
#-z-t by Anglo-Frisian fronting, e.g. mzegden maiden (OHG magatin), nexded

nakedness (Goth. nagadei), zpele noble (OS adali), hzleb man. The accented xz
can then become e by second fronting, VP edele. VP xcesum, d.p. axes, Cp. 703
-zcus, appear to have second fronting of a, not umlaut: cf. Ld. 197 -acus, North.
acas, Ru.! axe. On WS ex, see § 341.
In Cp. 958 aedile, RC n.p. wppilz, the formative suffix of *xpeli has been
replaced by that of *epili (cf. OS adali, edili); so in the corresponding
name-element we have in early sources (BH, LV) Aedil-, Edil-, where the
former has acquired the suffix of the latter. Later Jel- becomes general, owing

perhaps to the influence of the adj. zpele, though Epel- remains frequent on
coins,

§ 204

G+u+i:

t-MUTATION

&myrge,

merge’

embers

83

(OHG

eimuria),

W-S

@rende errand (OS Grundi; @ would be restored in W-S and then
mutated, see § 162).
o-+u-+i: North. oefest haste, VP oefestan, W-S efstan, and other
related words.
u+u+i: yfemest upmost, jmest (< *uxumist-, Gothic auhumists)
upmost, ytemest outmost.

§ 204. Apparent failure of :-umlaut. The chief cases in which
t-umlaut seems not to function where it might be expected can be
classified as follows:
(1) Some words, which normally exhibit umlaut, sometimes fail
to do so as the first elements of compounds, owing to early syncopation of the -i-, e.g. Cantware men of Kent (cf. Cent), names

in Sa- (beside more frequent S#-), hup- beside hype- (simplex
always hype, hip), zlpéodig beside elpéodig, sam- half- (OHG sdami-),
wiiscbearn adopted child (cf. wyscan).
(2) It is essential to ¢-umlaut that the 7 or 7, which causes it,
should be in an unstressed syllable. Hence medium stressed second
elements of compounds do not usually cause it, e.g. néawist

neighbourhood, and many names such as LV Osric, Waldfrith,
Cithuini, Eaduini, Cathgils; yet with reduction of the stress of
the second element, umlaut could take place, and hence BH

Eduini, Héemgils, and with double umlaut LV Edgyth (beside
Eadgyd). Similarly, we have dnlic, puslic, samtinges, Grlié early,
Grmorgenlic, beside &nlic, pyslié, s#mtinges,2 #rmorgen. Umlaut
always appears in hl#fdige and the forms endlufon (< *4anliv-),
enwintre quoted above, § 193.d.3

(3) Second elements of compounds, which normally received a
' Only in this word is the mutation of the medial -u- recorded as y.
2 The practically universal spelling of the mutated form of this word with x

suggests a long vowel (cf. Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 186, against most authorities),
ef, § 193.d,
3 A number of compounds exhibit umlaut of the first element, when only
umlaut of the second would be expected: &nige one-eyed, beside dnige, nlipe
single, beside dnlipe, endémes similarly, Zrlést cruelty, beside drléast. Zérlést occurs
once (Met. 9, 1), and is probably an error, the other words are perhaps influenced by &nig, Zne, #nlic. The suffix -nes, -nis sometimes caused umlaut, no
doubt when in the form -nis, and the umlauted vowel could be transferred to
stand before -nes, e.g. W-S untrymnes weakness, fyrhtnes fear, VP, North.
untrymnis, fylnis fullness, North. fyrhinis, towyrpnis casting out, diopnis mystery,
Ru.! untrymnis, with which cf. trum, forht, full, toworpnis, déop. The element

-wiht is reduced so as to cause umlaut in North, #niht anything, n&niht nothing

(cf. W-S nanwiht).

84

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 204

suffix containing -i-, and hence should exhibit umlaut, sometimes
appear without umlaut by the influence of the simplex, so dnéage

one-eyed (beside dnige), meteléast lack of food (beside -/est, cf.
-léas), fiperfote four-footed (beside -féte), twibdte with double

compensation (beside twibéte).
(4) The medial -i- of the second class of weak verbs (/ufian) is
derived from -6{- and hence does not cause umlaut of the root
syllable.

(5) It has already been pointed out (§ 193.c), that some forms of
i-declension nouns (gasta, stapas) occur without umlaut. This is

due to partial substitution of endings of the a- and 6- declensions
for the original ones at a date before umlaut. Fluctuation between
mutated and unmutated vowels occurs similarly in meaht, mieht
(Angl. maht § 223, meht § 200.3), siiht, Angl. -sleht blow, while
only unmutated forms occur from gesceaft creature, Seaxe Saxons.
So with consonant stems there is fluctuation between neaht, niht
(§ 628.3) and similarly with many old -es, -os stems (see § 636). The
adjs. séfte soft, swéte sweet, myrge merry, enge narrow, cléne clean,
have advs. sdfte, swote, murge, ange, clane (beside cl@ne), on which
see Ross in Trans. Philological Soc., 1952, pp. 131 ff.
(6) The suffixes -ing (patronymic), -ts¢, -iht, -en (< -in, of
material), are frequently preceded by unmutated vowels, due
either to the influence of the simplex, or to the word having been
formed after the period of umlaut, e.g. Bronding, eorlisé noble,
folcisé popular, staniht stony, beside st#niht, porniht thorny, beside pyrniht, léaden of lead (but gylden of gold, &c.). All forms in
-inéel lack umlaut, e.g. hiisincel little house, sta@ninéel little stone.!
(7) The suffix -ig represents Prim. OE -a% (> -eg, e.g. CH
haleg) and -ig, cf. §376. Thus there was fluctuation between
mutated and unmutated vowels before -ig; the influence of the
simplex would no doubt often help the unmutated form to prevail.
Examples are hunig honey, médig brave, halig holy, beside North.
h&lig, meahtig mighty, beside mihtig, monig many, beside North.
menig (cf. §193.d), stanig stony, beside st#nig, purstig thirsty,
beside pyrstig.

(8) The suffixes -el, -er, -en, -ing (abstract) are partly from Prim.
Gme. -il, &c. (e.g. yfel evil), but are also due to Prim. OE formation of parasite vowels (e.g. segel sail, xcer field, swefen dream),
and to substitution for -ol, -or, -on, -ung (e.g. tungel*, wunder
t On “wilinéel, little slave, see ES xxxii. 352-4.

§ 205

BACK MUTATION

85

wonder, béacen beacon, leorning learning, eallinga entirely).
Naturally in the latter two cases there is no umlaut. More usual,

however, is the extension of suffixes which would not cause
umlaut to stand after umlauted vowels, e.g. hetol hateful, diegol
secret, eosol ass (cf. §

211). The suffix -en also represents Prim.

OE -zn (e.g. CH hefaen- heaven-, Ep. gibaen given): this is the
origin of the ending of the strong passive participle, which hence

normally has no umlaut. The form -in also occurred as a passive
participle ending, and caused umlaut when original (Ep. -sleginum,

North. woerpen, &c.), but it also occurs without causing umlaut,
when it is merely substituted for -zn (e.g. Ep. binumini).

(9) The pronominal ending -i¢ does not cause umlaut in extant

forms (tsié, éowic).

Gc. Back Mutation
§ 205. At the close of the prehistoric period of OE an extensive
group of changes occurred, whereby the short front vowels, 2, e, i,

were diphthongized to ea (= xa), eo, io, when a back vowel stood
in the following syllable. In W-S these changes take place only

when the consonant intervening between the vowel affected, and
the back vowel which causes the change, is a labial or liquid
(f, p, w, m, 1, r). In Anglian they take place before all consonants

except perhaps the back ones (c, g),! which were about to cause the
monophthongization of all diphthongs standing before them (see

H, below). In Kentish they could take place before any consonant.

Before geminates and consonant groups they are everywhere rare.

The unaccented back vowels which occasion the changes are
Prim. OE u and a. The former appears in historical forms as u
or 0 (e.g. scipu or scipo, ridon from early ridun), and may be reduced to e in medial syllables (e.g. heoretas, stabelian, cf. heorot,

stapol); the latter appears in historical forms as a (e.g. guma,

g.S. suna, g.p. stana, 3rd sg. pres. indic. leofap). Back Umlaut or

Mutation is accordingly a general term to include u-umlaut and

a-umlaut.? In general u-umlaut functions more regularly than
a-umlaut. The affinity of these changes with breaking (whereby

also 2, e, i become ea, eo, io) is obvious. Furthermore, when
* See, however, § 247 below.
? a-umlaut is often called o/a-umlaut because the unaccented a which causes

it was a shortening of 6 (cf. §

355), and may have been still in the stage o when it
caused diphthongization of preceding vowels.

86

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 206

breaking was taking place, wi- and ye- in certain cases developed
to yu- and yo- instead of to uto- and yeo- (§§ 147, 149), and this
recurred
in the operation of back umlaut. The change of ut- and
we- to wu- and yo- when a back vowel stood in the next syllable

may be termed Combinative Back Umlaut.
§ 206.' 2 does not normally appear before a back vowel of the
following syllable, as a was restored in that position (see § 157).

In the Merc. dialect of VP, however, where the second fronting

affected a, many forms have z before a back vowel of the following

syllable, and this 2 was preserved before ¢ and g (see § 164).
On the other hand, the 2 becomes ea by back umlaut before all

other consonants, e.g. -wearan inhabitants, earun are, feasum d.p.
fringes, creatum d.p. chariots, featu vessels, geatu gates, eadesan
d.s. adze, fearu I go, heafuces g.s. hawk, gehleadad ye draw (water),
steadul foundation, feadur g.s. father (hence d.p. feadrum), ceafurtin hall, gedeafenad is fitting, and all forms of many verbs of the
second weak class,? such as gleadian make glad, peafian need,
spearian spare, hreapian hasten, leatian be slow; and in some

instances before geminates and groups, e.g. leappan d.s. skirt,
eappul- apple, hneappian sleep, -sceattum d.p. treasures (hence
sg. -sceat), gneat gnat (after pl. forms), eascan a.s. ashes (beside

escan, after n.s.

“esce), gongeweafran n.p.

-weafre).3

spiders (hence n.s.

§ 207. Outside the dialect of VP the second fronting of a to 2 was
rare, and back mutation of the latter was hence seldom possible. The
only considerable group of forms with second fronting of @ is seen in the
early glossaries, e.g. Ep. baeso purple, haegu- enclosure, scaedu- shadow,
claedur rattle, -laeppan skirts.* Ep. has back umlaut of this 2 in sceadu
shadow, -séeada criminal (d = @) and sceaba plane, and in Cp. forms
with ea are much more frequent,5 and are found even before c and g,

e.g. -deaca roof, heago- enclosure, reagu- lichen, onseacan deny, weagat
he wags. There are also a few such forms in ninth-century Kentish:
* With reference to the following sections, it should be noted that declensional forms of pronouns showing back umlaut (e.g. hiora, Jeara, Jiossum) are
excluded from the examples, as they are given fully in Chapter XV.
? Such verbs have very freely -ea- in the forms with -i- (e.g. sg. pres. subj.
gleadie 103, 15) from the many forms with -a- and -o- (e.g. spearad 71, 13).
3 ME weater water (Katherine Group) suggests OE n.p. *weatru. VP, Hy.
13, 7, gegadrades is an error: cf. Cp. 512 gegaedradon.

* -hebuc 497 is no doubt an error for -haebuc (so Erf.).
5 In geaduling Cp. 914, 1496, we appear to have back umlaut of the & of
gadeling (§ 203), following formation of a mixed form *gaduling.

§ 208

BACK MUTATION

87

many forms of peafian, Cts. 41 and 42, Reacoluensae adj. of Reculver,
Ct. 35, teapera, g.p. tapers, Ct. 41, earan are, Cts. 34 and 58, and the
names Ealawynne, Ct. 39, Eacca Ct. 44. Against these, however, must
be set similar forms with a, partly in the same words, gedafie, Ct. 40,
alod, Cts. 37 and 41, Acca, Ct. 44, and names in Bada-, Cts. 35 and 36.
Accordingly, the ea forms are to be regarded as illustrating the influence
of Merc. scribal practice in Kt., rather than an actual sound-change of
the dialect. Kentish scribes advanced slowly towards the phonetic
expression of their dialect. In other texts we may notice the name-

elements Headu-, Beadu-, in LV; they are no doubt due to the use of
poetical forms, ultimately derived from the Mercian area, as nameelements. Headu- occurs also in Gn. (a Merc. MS.) and Ct. 12 (Merc.),
and Beadu- in MS. Cott. Tib. C ii of BH.? Ct. 48 (Merc.) has hiobbanne,*
have, and Ru.! ondstweorede.? Before back consonants we have lund-

leogan kidneys, LG 51, 62, while haga and its compounds often have ea:
Ru. 21, 33, LG 34, in addition to forms from Cp. quoted above. Of
later Merc. texts, RG has helwearum, St. Chad andswearede, eadusan,
earun, Instances of back umlaut of 2 are practically unknown in W-S

texts* but they are quite a feature of the W-S transcripts of OE poems:
Beow. alone has beadu- heapu-, eafora, eafod, eatol, heafo, geheaderod,

heafola.
§ 208. Forms in which the syllabic succession, accented #-+-back
vowel, required to produce back umlaut of #, arose without the operation

of second fronting are North. /eassa less (< léssa with early shortening),
meassa mass (< mzsse, a form arising from the transference of Kt.

messe into other dialects, where 2 usually corresponded to Kt. e),
geadriga gather (< *gzdor-,5 with the vowel of -gedre, § 203), W-S ealu
ale (< *zlu, with vowel of inflected *zlzp-), cearu care (< *cxru with

vowel of infl. *éwre > ceare).®
§ 209. On the other hand, W-S and North. forms with ea for a after
a palatal (e.g. séeacan) are otherwise explained (§179); while in all
' BH has also the names Peada, Eafa, Eabae, all of persons of Merc. birth,
but their etymology is uncertain. Elsewhere Eafe, Eafing are found in Mere.
charters, but Eafa is more widely spread.
2 The form is an error due to the following siollanne.
3 teoma, Ru.! 21, §, is doubtfully from tam or téam.
4 eg. geleapbade past part. pl. invited, PC 449; W-S meatte, -a, mat, beside
Cp. matte (< Lat. matta); geaflum d.p. forks, Thorpe’s lfric i. 430.

3 gegederad, KG 831, shows this form with the vowel z changed to e by normal

Kt. development.

® gefeastnadon Li., gifeasta Rit., appear to be from gifzst(nig)a with back

umlaut of analogically restored # (§ 194). 2 forms are usual in North. texts in
these and related words, except for a few instances of -feast in compounds: here
the back umlaut no doubt arose in forms like *f/zstum with analogical 2 from

Sast.

88

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 210

dialects, forms where ea is followed by J or ru have the diphthong
from inflected forms where it developed by breaking (e.g. bealu, nearu
owing to bealw-, nearw-).

§210. The treatment of e differs greatly in different areas.
(1) In W-S u-umlaut is general before labials and liquids, e.g.

heofon heaven, eofor boar, Eoforwi¢ York, beofor beaver, heorot
hart, but also with suffix containing front vowel, hefen, befer, and
hence with suffix mixture hefon, befor, efor, Eforwic. Analogical
removal is frequent, e.g. speru spear, nefum d.p. nephews, after
infl. spere, n.s. nefa. After u, combinative back umlaut generally
but not always intervened, e.g. woruld world, swostor' sister,

swolop heat, all beside forms with eo; but always weorod troop (or
werod, after wered), and similarly weorod, werod, wered sweet,
weolor lip (or welor-, after weler). a-umlaut and combinative

a-umlaut are generally absent,? e.g. fela many, helan conceal,

beran bear, nefa nephew, sefa mind, weras men, wela wealth.

(2) In Angl. both u- and a-umlaut of e are general before all

consonants except c and g. In the earliest texts, however, the

changes are not yet always indicated in spelling, e.g. CH metudaes
g-s. creator, but RC heafunzs g.s. heaven, LR goelu yellow (read

eolu). BH has always Herut- in compounds in early manuscripts,

except Cott. Tib. C ii, which has also Heorut-. The latter has also

Ceorteséi, against Cerotaes- of the other early manuscripts. LV has

Eofor-, but also Heruuald 162.3 Ep. has only one instance of back

umlaut (geolu 1064), elsewhere e¢ remains, e.g. felo- much-, eborboar-, teru tar, -fetor fetter, helostr concealment, but in Cp. the
eo spellings prevail in these and similar words. In the chief later
Angl. texts, VP, Ru.!, Li., Rit., Ru.2, the back umlaut of e is extensively developed; examples are VP ofergeotul forgetful, -cweodulnisse
a.s. utterance, feodur- four-, weorud troop, weolure n.p. lips, eofor-

boar, weoruld world (also weruld), heorut hart, heofen heaven, weolan
n.p. wealth, geofu gift, gebeodu prayers, weoras men, and many

1 The preceding y apparently helps combinative back umlaut or, if this failed,
back umlaut to take place in this word, although the consonant group st would
not normally permit it, This, however, does not apply in the case of geocsa,
§eocsung sobbing, which appears to have back umlaut (Ep. 958 tesca), but can
hardly be the W-S development, which is represented by gihsa < *giehsa

(§ 185).

? PC 530 has feala, 830 Feologid; CP heolad 449, 5, and o is sometimes added
to such forms above the line in the Hatton MS.

? Unless this is Her-wald; cf. Herred three times in the same text.

§ 210

BACK MUTATION

89

forms of strong verbs of Classes IV and V, as beorad, eotad, onfeotad, cweodad, ageofad, treodad, meotu. A feature of the dialect of

VP is the very extensive analogical extension of eo to positions
before back consonants, so that we have spreocu, wreocu, -breocu,
and many other forms of these verbs, including ones where the
eo is extended to forms where no back vowel follows, e.g.
spreocende. So we have frequently gespreocu n.p. talks, but only
once gesprecu. On the other hand, wegas, wegum, are frequent
beside three times weagas, once weogum. Ru.! has frequent forms

with back umlaut of e, e.g. feola, heofun, weoruld, geofu gift,
pleagade,' gebeodum; but in the present system of strong verbs of

Classes IV and V (e.g. beoran, -geofan, -geota) both e and eo forms
are used, and the former only in etan, wesa. Otherwise there are
only a few sporadic e forms, e.g. weras, hefonum, setulas (from
sg. sxtil). Before a back consonant eo appears in spreocap 12, 34,
spreocan 6, 7, beside many forms of the verb with e, and in weogas
frequently. The North. forms resemble the Merc. ones, apart
from the greater frequence of confusion of the graphs eo and ea.
Examples of forms will be found below, §278.b. As in Ru.}, e forms
are frequent in strong verbs of Classes IV and V, and they are also
found in nouns, e.g. Li. gefo, weras, hefon.2 Combinative u-umlaut

intervenes in Li., Rit. woruld, Li. worud.4 Combinative a-umlaut
is limited

to a few North.

forms, especially wosa be

(W-S

wesan), cuoda say (Li.), beside cweoda, cweda (Ru.*), cuoeda (Li.,
Rit.).4
(3) In Kt. back umlaut is found before all consonants, and hence
we find in the ninth-century charters not only -geofan give,
* Assuming, in view of the great rarity of back umlaut of @ in the text, that
the form corresponds to W-S plegode, not to VP *plegade; but perhaps, in view

of pl. plagadun, West Gmc. a should be assumed in all Ru. forms of the word,
and another case of back umlaut of 2 before a back consonant recorded.
+ Eofolsiga, blaspheme, and related words have back umlaut in Ru.*, but not
in Li., which has ebolsiga, &c. Ru.! also has no back umlaut in these words.
3 The word ‘sister’ does not have umlaut in North.: Li. suoester, soester, Ru?
swester. In Merc. VP lacks the word, Ru. has swester (§ 328), but also swuster,
which points to combinative back umlaut of swist-, beside the usual swest-: in
W-S swiostor occurs once, Oros, 126, 6, beside usual sweostor, swostor, and may
be significant, as swustor is recorded in 1W-S.
* Developments of we- to wa- and we- in positions where back umlaut might

be expected occur in Li. and Rit. in waras men (both), wras (Li.); various
forms of wala wealth (both), wa (Li.), and welig wealthy (Li., with vowel from
noun); ualerum and uzlerum d.p. lips (Rit.). Li. has also (in various inflexions)
wearas, weras, weala, wealig, welig. The cause of the wa-, wx- forms is uncertain.

go

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ arr

begeotan obtain, feola many, weorolde world,’ but also reogolrule (< *régula), forespreoca advocate. In KG there occur weolan
wealth, and derivatives, neofan nephews, sweostor sister, weogas
ways, and with Kt, io for eo, giofa, n.p. gifts, ongiotad imper.
understand. But in KG a tendency to analogical removal of the
umlaut is to be observed: etad, gefol, setol, forberan; and, without

clear reason, tela, well.
§ 211. All dialects provide instances of the back umlaut of an e
produced by 7-umlaut. After the latter change took place, a back

vowel might be placed in the syllable after the e by suffix trans-

ference, and cause back umlaut. Examples are eosol ass (beside

esol) for *esel (cf. § 518), and similarly meowle maiden (Goth.
mawilo), eowu ewe for ewe (< Prim. Gmc. *ayi), Cp. freomo
benefit (usually fremu),? speoru spear, and before a geminate North.
seolla, sealla give, beside sella. Also, some verbs pass into the
second weak conjugation from the first, and there acquire back
umlaut of an e produced by the -i-suffix of the first conjugation,

e.g. the forms recorded in IW-S freomian (with eo from forms
where a back vowel followed) underwreodod, streowode for eW-S

fremman do, underwreded supported, strewede he strewed; also
KG -wreodad he supports.

§ 212. The back umlaut of 7 presents a simpler picture than that
of e, for u-umlaut and a-umlaut are equally frequent, and both are
common to all dialects. They are, however, limited by the following
consonant, and do not appear before back consonants in Angl. or

before any consonants except liquids and labials in W-S. Analogical
extension of unmutated 7 is very frequent, especially in W-S. In

the earliest texts the state of development recalls that of the back

umlaut of e: Ep. retains i, e.g. sifun- seven, hnitu nit, unlidouudc

inflexible, nihol prostrate, but while Cp. has occasionally (e.g. tigule
tile, pisan- peas, wituma dowry, sibun-, hnitu), it has prevailingly
to, and some cases of eo (see § 294). In LV Fridu- and Friodu- both
appear.

§ 213. In considering the forms of the chief later monuments,
it should be noted that zo has become eo, and is usually so written
t Also with Kt. ia for eo (§ 297), wiaralde, -giaban, hiabenlide.
7 In VP freamsum benign, for W-S fremsum, we appear to have the vowel of
a form *freamu, in which the i-mutation of West Gmc. a before a nasal. consonant has undergone back umlaut, while in the stage 2 (§ 193.d; cf. Flasdieck,
AB xii. 283).

3 So siollanne Ct. 48 (Merc.).

§ 214

BACK MUTATION

91

in W-S and Merc. Forms recorded in eW-S with io are siolufrest
g.s. silver, mioloc milk (§ 628.5, footnote), tiola well (< *tila for
tela, with the vowel of til), forms and derivatives of tiolian strive

for, and of cliopian call, liomu limbs, siofan seven, liofad he lives;
with eo only, eorpbeofung earthquake. But we find also silofr,
clipian, tilian, limu, lifad, and in 1W-S -bifung; and with 7 only
clifu cliffs, séipu ships, niman take (all forms), hnipode he drooped,
and past plural of strong verbs of Class I, drifon they drove, ripon

they reaped.

§ 214. The dialect of VP is particularly rich in examples, and
as in the case of back umlaut of e, it also analogically extends the
diphthongal forms to positions before back consonants. Examples
are Lomu, séeopu, gewreotum d.p. writings, cleopiu I call (and other

forms and derivatives), teolung zeal, leofad, reopad they reap (from
ripan, see § 739), nioman, nioderra lower, and past plural of strong

verbs of Class I, biodun, -reosun, -smeotun, weotun (pret.-pres.), and
after them -steogun, -sweocun.? Ru. offers similar forms, but analogical removal of the diphthong is frequent (e.g. gewritu beside
fewriotu), and 7 appears exclusively in the past plural of Class I

strong verbs (e.g. gegripon), except wriogan once, wreogan twice.
§215. While North. forms resemble Merc. forms, it may be
observed that, while in Rit. and Ru.? the past plural of strong
verbs of Class I has zo, in Li. the diphthong is very often removed.
In North. the Merc. tendency to extend diphthongs to positions
before gutturals is absent, e.g. -stigun, wrigun.
§ 216. In the ninth-century Kt. charters the relevant forms are
niomanne, gewriota, bewiotige pres. subj. look after, and in a medial
syllable geornliocar.3 To these -stiogol stile, Ct. 29 (W-S-Kt.),
may be added. KG have many forms in which back umlaut of ¢
is lacking: gewiton they went, ofsticod he stabs, ficol fickle, gewita
* eWS spellings (not in themselves conclusive, § 296) and the IWS development (§ 299.c) point to the back umlaut of ¢ in this word; cf. unmutated silofr,
CP 368, 20. Li. seulfres, Rit. seolferes, seolfre point to back umlaut of e. VP
seolfur is inconclusive (§ 294). e was perhaps proper to the noun (cf. OFris.
selover), i to the adj., OE silfren, seolfren < *seluvrina- (§ 331.3, footnote 3), and
to the verb, VP pass. part. pl. besi(l)frede. Oros, past and pass. part. pl. ofersylefrede appears influenced by sylofr, CP 368, 6 ( Junius’ transcript), in
which the development described § 299.c was early; Ru.? sy/fur is influenced by
a similar W-S form,
2 The only Class I strong past lacking back umlautin VPis edwiton
m they
reproached (three times).
3 Here the
7 is due to shortening of i in medium stress.

92

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 217

witness, cwidas sayings, witodlice indeed; but clepad he calls, may

be an error for cleopad.

§ 217. Back umlaut of i before geminates occurs in a scattered
group of forms. To W-S siddan (also sie-, sy-, § 299.c), corresponds

Kt. stoddan, seoddan (Ct. 41, KG), VP seodan, Ru.! seoppan;}
also Li., Ru.? sodda (beside Li. sidda) points to *siodda (§ 302).

Ru.* has ionna womb, bionna within, ionnad womb. Before groups,

the back umlaut of 7 appears in siondon, seondan they are, (Cts.
37, 45) for W-S sindon, siendon; Li. gioster- yesterday;? Ru.? and

Li. bihionda behind (Li. also bihianda).

§ 218. Combinative back umlaut generally intervenes in the
case of u-umlaut of i, and has already taken place in the oldest
texts, e.g. BH Derauuda d.s. (after -wudu), Ep.

uudu- wood,

Cp. -cudu cud,} although Ep. has some forms without the change,

e.g. uuidu-, uuiloc-, -quidu, and Cp. has also forms which show
that 7 could escape combinative u-umlaut, and then undergo
normal u-umlaut, e.g. wioloc, seotol evident (770, read sweotol).
In W-S many forms have combinative u-umlaut of 7, and the

change seems not to be limited, like u-umlaut, to positions before
liquids and labials, e.g. wudu wood, wuduwe widow, wucu week,
swutol evident, cwoudu cud, swugian be silent, (w)uton let us; but

there occur also in many cases forms with io (eo) or 7, e.g. weoduwe,

widuwe, wicu, cwicu, swiotol, sweotol, cweodu, swigian, and always
swiocol, swicol treacherous, wioton, witon they know, swicon they

deserted. Practically the same applies to all the dialects, except
that 7 remains unchanged before ¢, g, in Angl. (e.g. cwicu, wicu,

twigu twig, swigian), apart from the analogical forms, mostly in
VP, mentioned in § 214. The material offered by the chief texts

is: VP wudu, but sweotullice, widwe, weotun; Ru.’ wutu let us,

wutan we, ye know, but widuwana g.p. widows; North. wutun let
us, wuton they know, uutodlice indeed (also with eo, io, i), -uutol

wise, uudu (and hence uuda), but widwe, giswiopornisse a.s. cunningness (also with 7); KG wuton let us, but witodlice.

§ 219. Combinative a-umlaut of 7 is practically limited to various

forms of wuta, know, and wuta wise man, in North. W-S has very

rare instances, wutan wise men, CP 2, 2, gewuta witness, id.

' Here also the 7 is due to shortening.
* But Ru.? gestor-, VP geostran, W-S gierstan- point to -e- as the original
vowel.

3 In huitcudu mastic.

§ 220

BACK MUTATION

93

145, 13; 449, 1. All these forms could be regarded as having the

vowel of wuton. W-S and VP extend the vowel of wudu to infl.
wuda, but Kt. has wiada, weada (Cts. 28 and 39).

§ 220. In pure W-S, where e became ie after an initial palatal,
it seems that this ie underwent back umlaut to io: the only such

form recorded with 20 is giofol generous, but we can infer similar
eW-S forms from the later forms geofu gift (beside giefu), geolu

yellow, geoloca yolk, geolstr pus,’ ceorian murmur, ceole throat
(after infl. ceolan). Ongiotan, however, is not pure W-S (see § 221),
as the dialect does not admit back umlaut before t.

§221. It may be observed, with general reference to the back
umlaut of e and i, that many forms which are Angl. or Kt. rather
than W-S appear in the extant manuscripts of W-S texts. It is

evident from a number of forms quoted above, that if combinative
back umlaut of i failed, ordinary u-umlaut could take place after

u even before dentals and back consonants (weoduwe, swiotol,
swiocol).? But there are many cases where there is no initial
to explain back umlaut before an unusual consonant, e.g. siodo
custom,

-tiogoda -tieth (in numerals), niodor down, niodemest

lowest, behionan on this side of, and with original e, ongeotan,

ongiotan.3 In other forms, though u precedes, only the conditions
of a-umlaut exist, e.g. wiotan wise men, gewiota witness.

H. Smoothing
§222. One of the most marked characteristics of the Anglian
dialects developed at the end of the prehistoric period. The back
consonants c, 3, x would no longer tolerate diphthongs of the

usual OE type (accented front+-unaccented back vowel) before
them, and such diphthongs accordingly rejected their second

elements when these consonants followed, either directly, or with
an intervening 7 or /, so that a (= #a), é0, io became respectively

2, 2, i. This process is termed smoothing. Very soon a further
change took place: 2, produced by smoothing, became e before
r or J plus back consonant, but remained directly before a back
consonant, while 2, produced by smoothing, became é everywhere.

Hence we find, for example, in VP the forms mzht might, merg
* Cp. gelostr.
2 Wiogoradeaster Worcester, might be added.

3 hweogol wheel, perhaps has éo from Awéol.

94

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 223

marrow, feh money, were work, gesihd sight, birhtu’ brightness,
héh high, néh (< *néoh) near, betwih between, corresponding to

W-S meaht, mearg, feoh, weorc, gesiehp, bierhtu, héah, néah,

betwioh.

§ 223. It will now be necessary to examine the smoothing of each
diphthong as reflected in the chief Anglian texts. The short diphthong
ea produced by breaking is smoothed to # before x in the oldest glossaries, e.g. Cp. aex axle, aehtad he considers, saex knife, waextt he grows.
Beside naeht- (four times) we have neht- (once) in Cp., the former due
to smoothing, the latter to i-umlaut (cf. § 204.5). Ep. has similar forms,

except for one unsmoothed diphthong (/eax salmon, 555), and brectme

d.s. noise, 928 (Cp. braechtme). Before rh, rc, rg, these texts have as a
rule 2, e.g. Cp. faerh pig, haerg shrine, sperca spark, waerg- criminal.

Unsmoothed ea occurs in Cp. mearh horse, Ep. mearc mark (547, cf.
227), and e appears already in Cp. merc- mark, merg marrow. In VP z
is found practically always before h, e.g. gefaeh he rejoiced, gesaeh he saw,
maehte he might, -saex knife, wax wax, hlehad they laugh, -aehtatiges,
g.s. eighty. In the past and pass. part. of awecéan wake, bideccan cover,
and various compounds of reééan direct, we find eighteen instances of
e against four of 2 (e.g. prevailingly -rehte, not rehte). Here the vowel
of the infinitive has been extended to the past system, especially as
these and similar verbs have frequently e instead of ea in W-S in the
corresponding forms.? Otherwise e is found once only, wex, wax, 96.5,
except in words in which # and e interchange as respectively the
smoothing and the i-umlaut of ea: naeht, maeht, machtig, and gedaeht
thought. Before 7 followed by ¢ or g,3 VP has always e, e.g. merg-,
werg-, herg, gesnerc it shrivelled. Ru. has similar forms, e.g. sah,
mehton, waexap they grow, slzhp he strikes, zchir ear (of corn), mexht,
fgemerkade he marked. Corresponding to the VP variation nzht, neht,
we find in Ru.! nzht, niht, the latter being due to a later change (see

§ 308). Ru. also has the forms wehton, gereht, due to the e of the

infinitive. In this text, however, there are many e spellings which

cannot be so explained, e.g. wexan grow, exlan shoulders, gepehtunge
a.s. consultation, ehtu I consider, and, unless it be regarded as having

mutation (against usual Anglian practice) wexep he grows.*

§ 224. In North., smoothing of ea before final -ys was frequently

followed by a change of 2 to e caused by the final consonant group,

which was becoming palatalized. Hence BH has Sex- more frequently
! But see above, § 154.3 and footnotes, on i before r+ cons. in Angl.

2 For the forms of other texts see § 753.9b.1.
3 There happens to be no example in the text with rh.

.

4 Ru.) frequently has ea in geseah, a southern form fossilized in the spelling,
beside (ge)saeh, and once geseh (Mk. 1, 10, probably with é from the pl.).

§ azs

SMOOTHING

95

than Sax- in names in most early manuscripts, Moore having Sexfive times, Saex- once. LV similarly has Fexstan. The only other examples
of smoothed ea in early North. are maecti a.p. powers, CH (so Moore,
but Leningrad mehti with umlaut), and aerig- arrow- LV, where the
expected change of 2 to e before rx is prevented by the division of the
consonant group by a parasite vowel. The later North. texts have
similar forms to VP and Ru.!: before x we have practically always 2,
and before r followed by a back consonant e: e.g. Li. zxhto eight,
mzhton they might, fax hair, -seh he saw, berg pig, mercung marking,
to which the forms in Ru.? and Rit. correspond. Ru.*, however, has the
further change of 2 to e before ys which appears in BH and LV: the
examples are wex- wax, and eight forms of wexan grow. In North., as
in VP and Ru.1, we find past tenses like wehte, due to the infinitive, and
although nzht and mzht have very few forms with e, the alternation of
z due to smoothing and e due to #-umlaut is found in xhher, eher, ear
of corn, tehher, teher, tear.

§ 225. The smoothing of éa has still not taken place in a number of
forms preserved in Ep.: léag lye, fléah flea, géacaes- g.s. cuckoo, téac
tye, and in the second element of compounds, -béacn beacon, -béag ring,
-léac leek. Smoothing to & appears in déc also, -bdécon beacon, ldéc leek,
and the further stage é in égan eyes. Cp. has smoothing always, except
féac, 965, most forms having 2, but é also occurring in a few instances:
-leec, -bécn (also. -bénc), égan. The early North. texts have mostly the

final stage 2: BC *-béen, LR héh- high, dé although. BC has (if correctly

read) one ea spelling, éac also. BH offers no material, LV has both
Bég- and Béag-. In VP and Ru.1, smoothing of éa is practically universal,
appearing as é except in dzh (both texts), ec (Ru.! only); these words
were probably shortened in low sentence stress, and hence the vowel
was treated like short ea directly before a back consonant, becoming z
and remaining at that stage. Similarly, in Li., Rit., and Ru.*, éa is
smoothed to é in practically all words except ac (Li., Rit., Ru.) and dah
(Li., Rit.) beside gc, déh. It may be observed that in North. strong verbs
of Class II sometimes extend the smoothed é of the past singular to
the forms which had historically u (e.g. gebrécon, past pl. from gebriican),
but, on the other hand, the past singular itself. sometimes has 2,
presumably a short vowel derived analogically from Classes IV and V,
e.g. flaeh, ataeh (Li.). A few stereotyped éa spellings remain in most
Angl. texts, e.g. péah (Ru.', Rit.), gage (Ru.! three times).

§ 226. Traces of the smoothing of é2 in W-S and Kt. are not to be
distinguished from early instances of a later change (see § 312).

§ 227. The smoothing of éo is 2, and it is practically always carried
out in Angl. texts. Ep. and Cp. have el(c)h, elk, and Ep. sceolhégi,
squinting, has simply introduced A from the simplex séelh (cf. Erf.

96

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 228

sééolégi). Before r followed by a back consonant they have a few more
preserved diphthongs, e.g. Ep. 556 -uueore -work, Cp. 1672 -biorg,
1771 -beorg protection. But mostly they have smoothing of eo before r
followed by a back consonant and before x, e.g. Cp. bere birch, duerg
dwarf, puerh- cross-, -cneht servant, -gefeht fight. In the case of é0, Cp.
has smoothing in flége fly, /éht- lumen, thégh thigh, beside péoh-; the
only one of these words occurring in Ep. is -fliogae 817 (also with io in
Erf,), and here, in view of the mixed origins of the glossaries, we may
suspect a Kt. form. BH and LV have always smoothing in the elements
Berht- and Peht-,' and perhaps the name Echha LV (if connected with
eoh) should be added. The short early North. texts offer the forms CH
uerc work, FC fegtap they fight, unnég not near, -berig mountain, LR
Ger(i)hk through. Practically the only point concerning the smoothing

of go in VP, Ru.1, and the later North. texts? is occasional 7 for the
expected é in strong verbs of Class II in VP and Ru.}: ligende mentiens
(VP, Ru.}), fligu I fly (VP), smikende smoking (Ru.1), beside many regular
forms in VP, although such are by chance lacking in Ru.
§ 228. The forms illustrating the treatment of before r followed by
a back consonant have already been quoted above (§ 154), where it was
shown that it cannot be proved that breaking ever took place in them
in Angl. As examples of before x, we have in the earlier texts only the
name-element Wiht-, which always has smoothing in BH, LV, and the
Merc. charters (except once Uueoht- Ct. 47), and the following forms all
with smoothing: Ep., Cp. frihtrung divination; Cp. uurixlende exchanging, rihtebred ruling-board; VP stihtian establish, pliiht danger, wrixendkée in turn, gesthd sight, gefihd he rejoices. Similar material is offered
by the later North. texts, and by Ru.!: from them may also be added
mixen dunghill (Li., Ru.*), gerihta correct (Li., Rit., Ru.?), gesihp he

sees (Ru.").

§ 229. The smoothing of io to 7 is carried out in all Angl. texts.
West Gmc. iz appears as 7 in the following forms: ciken chicken, Ru.},
a.p. ¢icceno, Li.; lhtan, lixa lucere (and related words), Li., Ru.?,
Ru. West Gmc. i appears as 7 instead of io (§ 153) in the following
forms: pixlum d.p. axles, Cp., Erf. (Ep. misspells dislum); lik imper.

lend, Li., Ru.?; onwrih imper. uncover, VP; wi(g)bed altar, VP, Ru.},
1 On the element Eorcon- in BH see § 7; LV has Ercin- 305.
2 Ru.! has a fair number of eo forms, e.g. feoh, beseoh (imper.), weorc, -séoc,

léoht, wéox, beside forms with smoothing, and the imperatives fléoh, atéoh.
Ru. and the tenth-century North, texts have very frequently cnzht servant
for cneht (which Ru.’ and Rit. have also). The cause of this development is
unknown, and it appears to have no reflection in ME or modern forms. In
other words it is sporadic, gefa#ht Ru.!, unafxhtendhé Rit., -szeh (imper.) Li.,
Ru,* Ru. were (twice) beside were and weorc is perhaps due to confusion with
were pain.

§ 230

SMOOTHING

97

Li., Rit., Ru.?; -uich, -uych, as second element in names, LV, Gn.
(but Gn. also Alouuioh); Lict- (i.e. levis) as first element, LV; liht levis,

Ru.}, and compar. lihtra, Li.; forms of lihtan alleviate, VP, Rit.; betwih
between, VP, Ru.1, Li., Rit., Ru.? (cf. bituihn Cp., betwinum VP); ful

(i.e. fil < *fiyl-) file, Cp. Instances where the smoothed 7 contracts
with another vowel will be discussed below. The only difficulty con-

nected with these forms is that occasionally we find é instead of the
expected i: léht levis, Li., Mt. 11, 30; betuén between, Li, Rit. (five
times); féla g.p. files, Beow. 1032.!

§ 230. In the forms wibed, bitwinum, fiil, just quoted, y standing
before a consonant is lost, but not until it had caused smoothing of
a diphthong preceding it. In a number of forms, however, x before

a consonant disappeared early, and a preceding diphthong was not

affected: Cp. héalécas skilled physicians, gorod- troop-; VP héanis
highness, gored troop, néosian visit, and words connected with néh near,
such as néowest neighbourhood, néolZéan approach; LV, Gn., and
Charters offer many names in Héa-; LV has also names in Pléo-.
Similar material is found in Ru. and the later North. texts.?

§ 231. When a diphthong stood before ly or rx, the x was lost too
early to occasion smoothing if a back vowel followed; if a front vowel

followed, the y caused smoothing before it was lost. This principle is
shown by Cp. elch elk, éola the same, VP zxtféalan adhere, pres. subj.
féle; Suerh crooked, infl. Jwéoran. BH Sélzxséu, ‘insula vituli marini’,
may be taken to follow the same principle, though diphthongs caused
by breaking are not always written in this text.‘

§ 232. There is some inconsistency, when the first element of a compound ended in /y or ry, whether smoothing took place before the x
was lost or not: Cp. séélégi squinting, but Erf. scéolégi (Ep. séeolhéi,

with analogical h, see § 227); LV Séoluini.
§ 233. From the forms lihtan lucere, ciken chicken (with Prim.
Gmc. ix), and from gesthd sight, gefihd he rejoices, gerthta correct, it is
plain that an originally back consonant could cause smoothing, even if
~i- followed. In such positions, éa became é in Angl. by i-umlaut, and
éo did not exist, so only the smoothing of io is to be observed; yet
the forms just quoted are sufficient evidence that smoothing could be
* Biilbring, Alteng. Elementarbuch, § 199, seems to regard these forms
as
exhibiting the smoothing of éu: but this is not possible, firstly because iu
(io)
did not anywhere become éu (é0) before it suffered smoothing
(see ample
evidence above), and secondly because iu (io) never became éu (é) in
North.
at all in the OE period (see § 293).
3 When h remains or is restored by analogy of the simplex, the smoothed
vowel
of the simplex is usually found before it: Cp. hdéhnisse, puerhfyri; LR
héhcraeft;

VP héhnisse, genéhldécu.
3 Cp. D12 (not in Sweet’s OET).
4 See §-140.

98

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 234

caused by an originally back consonant, even if this were advanced
towards the front position by a following -i- (cf. § 192). It is, however,
evident that the change of 2 (the smoothing of éa) to é took place only
before full back consonants, for 2 the #-umlaut of @ escapes it, e.g.
ht property, c#g key, r®éan reach. In such words the originally back
consonant had been fronted. Fronting could, however, be prevented

(or perhaps removed), if another consonant followed, and then #
(#-umlaut of @) could be changed to é. Hence the frequent forms in égbeside less frequent 2g- in North.: éghwelé each, éghwer everywhere,
éghwona from everywhere.'

1. The Contraction of Vowels
§ 234. As the prehistoric period of OE drew to a close, the
hiatus of an accented vowel or diphthong with a following unaccented one ceased to be permitted, except in the case of d-+a

(e.g. biian), and in nW-S of i+
e? (e.g. pres. subj. sie be). The
number of forms with hiatus had just been immensely increased
by the loss of intervocalic x (see § 461), and it is well known that
these cases of hiatus, and also older ones, have frequently to be
restored in OE verse to obtain the necessary number of syllables.
Hiatus was eliminated in OE by the following means; if the vowel
succession to be simplified consisted of the normal elements of
an OE diphthong, i.e. front vowel-+ back vowel, it was contracted
into a long diphthong; if, however, the vowel succession to be
simplified was back vowel (or diphthong ending in a back vowel)
++ any other vowel, or front vowel +- front vowel, the first vowel
or diphthong simply absorbed the second, becoming itself long, if
it were originally short. These principles may be illustrated as

follows: Prim. OE *sheyan strike, *seyan see, by breaking and

subsequent loss of x, gave W-5 *sleaan, *seoan. With absorption

of the unaccented back vowel, and compensatory lengthening of

the diphthong, the recorded forms sléan, séon were reached. In
the present subjunctive of the same verbs, *slea-x, *seo-z2 became
sléa, se6. In the same way a back monophthong absorbs following
vowels: *féxan receive, subj. *foyz become fon, fo; and a front
monophthong absorbs front vowels: *dryes g.s. magician, becomes
? But VP déghweld, a form found alsoin Ep., Erf., Cp., and containing the
t-umlaut of 5 instead of that of d: see § 132, footnote.
2 W-S naturally contracts {+e to ie, but other dialects had not such a di-

phthong, and hence their fe is disyllabic (cf., for example, the metre of BDS 2°,
where sie fills a lift and dip),

§ 235

THE CONTRACTION OF VOWELS

99

drys. But a front vowel contracts with a back vowel into a diphthong: in Angl., from *sleayan, *seoyan, the forms *slayan, *seyan
were produced by smoothing.

Contraction then gives VP *sléan

(cf. pres. ind. pl. -sléad), -séan.
§ 235. The various types of contraction may now be examined one
by one.

Diphthong-+-vowel. (1) This succession arises by loss of uz before
u (cf. § 405) in réon they rowed (< *réowun, Beow. 539). Analogical
réowon usually replaces this form.

(2) Most cases are due to the loss of x between diphthong and vowel
in dialects where there was no smoothing. Many examples are provided

by the present systems of contracted strong verbs of Classes I, II, V,
and VI. Thus *wrioyan, *téoyan, *seoyan, *sleayan, give wrion, téon,
séon, sléan. The Class II weak verbs twiogan doubt, préagan punish,
sméagan consider, 3rd sg. pres. indic. twéop, préap, sméap, are contracted from *twioxdian, *twioyap, *préaydjan, &c. Nominal instances

are provided by éa water (< *eaxu), twéo doubt (< *twio < *twioyd),
beféa joy (< *gifeayd), séo pupil of eye (< *seoyz), hwéol wheel

(< *hweoyul), swéor father-in-law (< *sweoyur, cf. Ep. suehoras), éar

ear of corn (< *eayur), téar tear (< *teayur),' gam maternal uncle
(< *éaxam, cf. Ger. Oheim). Further instances are provided by the
inflected forms of many nouns and adjectives in x, e.g. feoh money,

g.s. féos (< *feoxexs), héah high, g.s.m. héas (< *héayzs). Such
contracted inflected forms also occur from eoh horse, péoh thigh, pleoh

danger, /éah open country, hréoh rough, sééoh shy. Note also fléah flea,
fléah albugo, of which no inflected forms occur, but cf. the weak forms, fléa
flea, fléa? albugo. Note also the adverb W-S néar nearer (< *néaxur),
Kt. néor (< *néoxur, Ct. 38), later nior (Bd. GL., cf. § 152).
(3) The W-S diphthong Ze contracts with 7 in a few forms: with loss
of u, xtiede he showed (< *-ieuid-, CP 43, 19), gehlyde pass. part. pl.

warmed (< -*hlieyid-, Job iv); with loss of x, g.s., d.s.\ie (< *iexi-),
cf. éa water. The formation of flie, albugo, is uncertain.

§ 236. Back vowel-+-vowel. (1) Cases of contraction of original
hiatus are g.s. ci, cits, d.p. cilm, from ci, cow, past biide, pass. part.

£ebiin, from béan dwell.3 But ita remains: buan, g.p. cla, scua shadow.*
(2) Loss of u in clawum (itself restored for cléam, § 120.3) d.p. claws,

* Prim. OE forms with parasiting (§ 363) are assumed for éar and téar;
thisis necessary to explain Angl. téar < *teaxur (§ 238.2).
? Also flio, fléo.
3 In fid arrow, dd doe, the endings of the weak fem. declension were possibly
added to the root vowel, with which they contracted to give fldn, *dan.

* Or perhaps stia < scuwa, with uy > t as if > i (§ 267); cf. IWS triia, KG

&etriia forimper. truwa trust, |W-S trda beside truwa faith.

100

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 237

leads to contraction to clam (Phoen. 277), but clawum is usually restored

by analogy.
(3) Most cases are again due to the loss of x, e.g. the present system
of fon take, and hén hang, in all dialects (< *foyan, &c.); the nouns
gefd enemy, td toe (Cp. tdhae), 56 clay (Cp. théae, Ep. thihae), rd roe
(Cp. raha), sl sloe; and many inflected forms of hdh heel, séoh shoe,
sloh mire, prih trough, fah hostile, flah treacherous, gemah shameless,
toh tough, woh crooked. Here belong also sid, pwd, for W-S sléan,
pwéan (see § 145), found in North. and Ru.!
§ 237. Front vowel-+front vowel. (1) Front vowels produced by
umlaut contract with a following vowel in many forms. (a2) Without
loss of an intervening consonant, dry magician (OIr. drui); gdst, gp,
déést, doép, 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. of gdn go, din do (< *3dis, &c.);
past parts. -dén, -fén (And. 43, Crist 1265, 1157) from don, and fon
take. (6) With loss of u before i (cf. § 406), VP céd, céde, gecéd, 3rd sg.
pres. indic., past, and pass. part. of ¢égan call, and some similar forms
in North.! (< *kaui- > *kei- > *ké-), and similarly VP strén bed, Ru.?
strédun they strewed, Beow. 2436 stréd pass. part. (cf. past streide Cp.),
North., Ru.! éde flock. Uncontracted e+ is still required by the
metre in Beow. 2436, and may be indicated by the spelling in Cp.
streide. Loss of u before i and subsequent contraction occur also in
compounds with ni- new (e.g. nicenned newly-born < *niwi-), and
similarly in gliman minstrel, if this is not simply a spelling for glig-.
(c) Loss of i and subsequent contraction seems to occur in &ce eternal

< "8d < *eydi < *xtyhi < “atuki (cf. § 203, and Goth. ajukdups); but
this form, though frequent (VP, Ru.1, North.; also Kt. charters,
where, however, 2 = e in spelling), is always less frequent than ée,
a form not to be precisely explained (CH already éi). (d) With loss
of x, 3rd sg. pres. indic. pyp, typ, past pyde, tyde (< *pilyip, &c.),
and hence infs. pyn press, tyn instruct, beside péon, téon;? foép, 3rd sg.
pres. indic. of fon (< *foxip, VP, North.); Ep., Cp. faédun they painted
(< *faxidun, cf. 3rd sg. pres. indic. faéhit, Ep., Cp.); slés, sléd, Iwés,
Swed, 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. of sléan strike, pwéan wash (< *sleyis,
&c., with nW-S umlaut of ea to e, VP);3 héra, hést, comparative
and superlative of héah high (< *héyir-, *héyist- with nW-S umlaut
of éa to é, VP, North.); similarly -hést, -héd, and and 3rd sg.
% But in North., Ru.1, and W-S, forms with g are usual, ciegp, ciegde, &c.
2 Unless this is always the transferred use of téon draw, strong verb of

Class II. Other rare verbal forms have a similar formation: so ryn, roar, 3rd sg.
pres. indic, rjd, from *ruyt-, cf. OHG rohén; aprin (ES xliii. 331), 3rd sg.
pres. indic. gidrid, past gebryde, press, bind (a book); 3rd sg. pres. indic. gewép,
past gewéde, make crooked (< *-ydyi-), 3rd sg. pres. indic. sépp, past séyde,
persuade.

4 Other Angl. texts level out the unmutated vowel to these forms: Cp. sidét,
Ru.! sizp, North. sl&s, Iw#s, slBd, from *slexip, &c., with the smoothing of ea.

§ 238

THE CONTRACTION OF VOWELS

101

pres. indic. of *-héan exalt (< *héyis, *héyip, VP); nésta nearest

(< *néyist-, VP, North.).

(2) Many Angl. forms with smoothing of a diphthong before
inter-vocalic x afterwards lost belong here. They are derived from
contracted strong verbs, of which the W-S and Kt. forms belong to

§ 235.2. The pres. subj. forms *téoyx, *seoye, *sleayx, and 3rd 8g.
pres. indic. *tioxip, *stoxip, would become *téyzx, *seyz, *sleyex, *tixip,

“styip by smoothing, and *té, sé, sl®, tip, sib by contraction. The
actual forms found are giffee Rit., flén VP (pres. subj. from fléon flee),

~sé (id. from séon, VP), gefee (id. from geféon rejoice, VP), sl# (id. from
sléan Ru., Ru.*), -tid (3rd sg. pres. indic. of téon draw, VP), fluid (id. of
fléon flee, Li.), -sid (id. of séon VP, Ru.}, North.).' In Class I of the strong
verbs 3rd sg. pres. indic. *zriyid gives regular wrid (VP, Ru.®, cf. Cp.,
Ep. sitd, he sieves, from sion), but present optative should be *erie,

uncontracted, a form not recorded, but replaced by various analogical

formations. Nominal and adjectival forms which could exhibit this type
of contraction are rare, and the few which occur have undergone analogical reformation, e.g. fzes g.s. of feh money, Li., héae pl. of héh, high
(with vowel of infl. héan, &c.+-e, VP).

(3) It has been remarked above that {+e does not contract in nW-S.
The succession occurs, as well as in the subjunctive form sie there
quoted, in the pron. hie she (usually acc.), they, found in many texts
(see § 703), in the W-S numeral frie, three, and in North. betuien between (< *betwiyen). {+e occurs also in very many Angl. verbal forms,
e.g. VP past fiede for normal fiode, from fiogan hate, VP -siende,

pres. part. from séon, see; Li. getwiedon past from *getwia doubt; Li.,
Ru.! diendra, pres. part. g.p. from *dion, suck; Cp. diendi thriving,
1118; Ru.! fiege, fiegap, subj. and pl. pres. indic. from fiogan. Many of

these are analogical formations of an obvious kind. VP -sied , Li. -fied,
3rd sg. pres. indic. from séon and fiogan are also simple analogical
formations, but VP -sie, -fie, 1st sg. pres. indic. from -séon see, -féon

rejoice, are difficult, as the contraction should be with -x in the dialect.

§ 238. Front vowel-+back vowel. (1) By West Gmc. contraction,
successions consisting of vowel-+-u had become diphthongs (see
§ 120).
Now i+6, i+-a were also contracted. The result was io,’ ia, respective
ly,

but this distinction was kept up only in North. and VP. Elsewhere the

second element of ia was made identical with that of io (the normal
second element for an OE diphthong with a high or mid first element).

' For many phonologically less regular variants of the above verbal forms,

see §§ 739 ff.

* sliet, 3rd sg. pres. indic. of sléan, BG, is hardly more than an error
.
3 By the time of contraction, unaccented 6 was already changed to
u (§ 331.5, 6),
80 contraction of i+
6 was strictly to iu, which soon become io, like iu of other
origin (§ 275).

104

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 238

io became éo later in W-S and Merc. (VP, Ru.*). Similarly, in VP, ia has

become éa (i.e. e+a, not #+< like éa of other origin). Naturally, this
change of io, a to éo, éa is reflected in spelling, both directly, go and
éa appearing where historically io, ia would be expected, and also by
inverted spelling, the symbols io, ia appearing for historical é0, éa.

Contraction of ¢ with a following back vowel, without the loss of any
intervening consonant, occurs in the present tense of béon be: VP has
1st sg. biom, béom, pl. biad,’ North. biom, biad from *bi-u, *bi-ab; W-S
Kt., Ru. have, however, io, éo in 1st sg., pl., and inf. Similarly, bé bee,
has in W-S (forms do not occur in Kt. or Ru.) always that form, infl.
béon, but in VP and North. it is possible to trace an original distinction

between *bion and bian as inflected forms, reflecting an original variation in formation between *bién-, *bian-; either diphthong could be
transferred to the uninflected form.” VP, Rit. have pl. bia(n), and VP
has bia- once in composition; but bio- is found in composition in Ep.,

Cp., VP, North., and the older stage diu- is preserved in LV Biuuulf.
The same contraction may give rise to OE Swéon Swedes (cf. ON
Sviar), and Erf., Cp., North. scia shin. Many examples are provided by
forms of fiogan hate, friogan free, originally weak verbs of Class III,
but reformed in OE according to Class II. Hence in W-S we find 2nd
and 3rd sg. pres. indic., imper., and past all with é0,3 older io, from
*fi-as, -ap, -odz, &c. But in VP we find a distinction between 3rd sg.
pres. indic. fiad, past ftode, féode, though the distinction *gefriad
(gefréad), gefriode is less well preserved, io (é0) being levelled into the
former, and ia (éa) into the latter (and the pass. part.).4 In North.
confusion has advanced even further in both verbs. VP fréa, free, is
from older *fria, and reflects fri+-a; VP fréo-, North. frio reflect fri+-u
(see § 120.3.c; LV still Friu-).

(2) The Anglian forms of the words discussed § 235.2 frequently
exhibit contraction of a front and a back vowel into a diphthong. In
Angl. the diphthongs were smoothed to front vowels before the loss
of x, and contraction of 2, e, or i with a following back vowel to a di-

phthong takes place. (On forms in which a front vowel followed the y
see § 237.2.) (a) The contraction of 4 with a back vowel occurs in VP
héa, héan, héam, inflected forms of héh high (< *h#ya, &c.); VP, North.
éa water (< *2 x0), téar tear (< *txyur); Cp. fléan flay (< *flzhan);

VP sléa, dwéa, -sléad, 1st sg. and pl. pres. indic. of sléan strike, bwéan
wash (< *sleh6, -ad, &c.); Sréas, Tréad, Tréa, Sréade, 2nd and 3rd pres.
indic., imper., and pret. of dréagan punish, and similar forms from
' But more frequently analogical biod, and always inf. bion; Li., however, has
inf. bian once, no occurrences in other North. texts.
2 Which historically should, of course, be *bie << “bi-+2z.

3 But Ru. fiad 6, 24, by adding the frequent ending -ad to fi-.

4 But imper. always gefréa, gefria,

§ 238

THE CONTRACTION OF VOWELS

sméagan consider, found Cp.,

clear that

103

VP, North. (< *sméyas, &c.)." It- is

contracted with any back vowel to éa (= z++a). Yet when
the contraction was with d(u), the second element of the diphthong may
have been at first rounded, and this seems reflected by Ep., Cp. é0--

(for éa water), and by the element -éu in many place-names in BH.*

(5) The contraction of é with a back vowel, with loss of intervening y,
is usually éo in Ru.1, e.g. inf. geséon see, pl. pres. indic. geséop, beside
occasional analogical geséap. In VP the contrast of eyd > é0, exa > éa
is clear: the former gives éo, the latter éa, and for these as explained
above io and ia respectively may appear as inverted spellings. Hence

Ist sg. pres. indic. gesio I see, gefio I rejoice, pl. geséad, gesiad, geféad,
Sefiad, inf. geséan, gesian. Analogical gesiod, gefiod occur, but are rare.

The noun geféa joy, varies between éa and ia in spelling, which points
to *gifexd (cf. OHG gefeho), infl. *gifexan, rather than to an exact

equivalent of W-S geféa (< *gifeaya < *gifayo). Fléon flee, levels out
éo to all forms: ist sg. pres. indic. flgom, pl. figéod. In North., éa forms

prevail in these contracted verbs, except in 1st sg. pres. indic. séom Li.,

siom Ru.” (with si- levelled out from 2nd and 3rd sg.), sium Li., Rit.

Other instances of the development of exy-+back vowel are VP séan,

sian

as.

pupil

of

eye

(< “seyan-);

North.

swéor

father-in-law

(< *sweyur, cf. Ep. suehoras); Ep., Cp. huéol-, VP hwéol, hwiol wheel
(< *hweyul). (c) The following forms illustrate the contraction of ~
with a following back vowel, after loss of x: VP -toréan wrap (< *wrian

< *wrixan), North. pl. pres. indic. -wriad; but Ru.’ pl. pres. indic.

-wréop, contracting 7+-4 to io > é0; Ru.? bitwion between, Ru.* betwion,

betwéon (< *bitwixun); CH tiade arranged, Ep. Cp. gitiung order
(< *tixadz, -ung); North. twias, -ade, -ode, 3rd sg. pres. indic. and past
of *twia doubt (< *twixap, &c.), and so twia doubt (n.); W-S béot
boast, fréols freedom (< *bi-hat, *fri-hals).
(3) ¥ contracted with a following back vowel after loss of intervening
x to io, later é0. No doubt io and ia would interchange in VP and
North., as in the case of the contraction of i+- back vowel, but forms are

lacking in these dialects. The chief instances are the verbs péon press,

téon instruct, discussed above § 237.1.d (< *pixian, &c.), réo blanket
(Ep. ryhae); the same explanation would fit the recorded spellings of
céo, cio, Ep. chyae (< *efyz?) crow.

' In the forms of these two verbs with original j, VP has 2 for W-S éa: 1st sg.
pres. indic. drégu, smégu, pl. smégad, &c. One would expect #: *sméaydj- >
*smBxej- > *sma#-. Forms with @ in W-S and Kt. are otherwise explained
(§ 314). North. extends the diphthong of sméad, &c. to the -j- forms: sméage,
sméoge (cf. § 278), &c. Ru.) inf. dréiga is a form of VP type (ig = g, see § 270).
? This form has been much discussed, but it can hardly be explained without
assuming confusion of a form meaning ‘island’ with ga water: cf. Férster,
Flussname Themse, pp. 291-2; K. R. Brooks, English and Germanic studies v.
29-30.

104

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 239

§ 239. With reference to the preceding sections on vowel contraction,
it may be remarked that analogical forms with the contraction eliminated

quite often occur. Some have been mentioned above; others are héaum
d.p. of Aéah, North. superls. héista, néista, from héh, néh, and North.
infs. doa, foa, héa, for W-S dén, &c.

J. Compensatory Lengthening
§ 240. The absorption of a following unaccented vowel is not
necessary to occasion the lengthening of an accented vowel.
Vowels often undergo compensatory lengthening owing to the loss
of following consonants only, usually the spirants x, g, and 3.

Metrical evidence, however, shows that short quantity was often
replaced from related forms, e.g. meares (beside méares with compensatory lengthening) with the short quantity of mearh.'
§ 241. Compensatory lengthening following loss of x. (1) Loss of
x took place between vowel and voiced consonant with lengthen-

ing of the vowel. Instances are provided by: (a) a few words where
loss of x is proved by the etymology, Pwéal? washing (Goth. pwahl),
IW-S style steel (< *stieli, cf. Cp. 55 stéli,3 OS stehli), IW-S gesyne, Ang. geséne visible, ymest upmost (cf. Goth. auhumists), and
probably gedryl crowd (cf. gebryn press, bind);* (b) compounds
of eoh and pleoh quoted above, § 230, show the same process, e.g.
éored, pléohe.
(2) x is lost after a consonant (generally 7, !) with compensatory
lengthening of the vowel which precedes the consonant. Examples
are: (a) inflected forms of many words, such as g.s. féores, méares,
séoles, Wéales, inf. féolan, cf. n.s. feorh, mearh, seolh, Wealh, past
fealh; (b) some words where loss of x is proved by etymology, e.g.
pyrel hole (cf. purh), swéora’ neck, firas® men; (c) a few com® See Sievers, Aligerm. Metrik, § 77. In words of this type (2 (a) below) there
is no evidence except that of metre that lengthening took place: e.g. place-name
evidence points always to Wala as g.p. of Weath, and hdle as d.s. of heath.
2 If from *pyeayl, not *pyeaxol (cf. § 363 below). So Cp. 1991 Fudélum, d.p.
fillets, may represent *pyeay/l- or *Pyeayol, while Cp. 2120, Ep. 1060 thuélan
represents *pyeyil- (cf. OHG duuehila).
3 But Cp. 1431 stdéli, hardly a correct form.
+ North. hwél wheel, swér mother-in-law, are probably from *hye
xl, *syexr,
with smoothing, and without parasiting.
5 Beside swira (§ 154.3, footnote), and the obscure IW-S swura, swyra, which
suggest earlier sweora without lengthening (cf. § 321 below).

® Cf. feorh life, and see § 154.3, footnote.

§ 242

COMPENSATORY LENGTHENING

105

pounds, drettan fight, dnettan hurry, ifig ivy, from *or-haitian-,
*an-haitian-, *if-hieg.*

§ 242. In types 1a, 15, 2a, 26, it is evident that the loss of x
is later than breaking, but generally earlier than smoothing (cf.,
however, § 231). x is preserved in spelling in Ep. furhum d.p.

furrows, ebhat, but in Erf. thuachl, Cp. dhuehl, Li. Suahles, fikles

8-8. rag, we appear to have forms with gemination, *pwayyl, &c.

(see § 408). On the loss of x, see further §§ 461 ff.

§ 243. Compensatory lengthening following loss of g. Typical
of W-S is the loss of g before p, d, and n, with lengthening of the

preceding vowel. Instances occurring in early texts are rén rain,

-wen wagon, -pén thane, dénung service, m¥den maiden, ongéan

against, -hydig minded; all these, except rén, also occur with £
in eW-S. There is much fluctuation in W-S in the various forms

of bre(g)dan brandish, fri(g)nan ask, stre(¢)dan strew, past bra(g)d,
fra(g)n, stregd,? and of the weak pasts and pass. parts. sx(g)de,
le(8)de, see(g)d, le(g)d, from secgan say, lecgan lay. In eW-S we have

always é in rénian arrange, and related forms, but later regnian,
&c., appear also.3

§ 244. Occasional instances of similar loss of g in Angl. texts

are: Li., Ru.! ongén (beside frequent ongxgn, &c.), Cp. ongén
against, Li. m&den maiden (beside mzxgden), Li. £edukn, unduéen

pass. part. washed (for *gedwagn, -Owegn). Wén, wagon, occurs

Ct. 28 (Saxon-Kt.), and KG

have génet compulit 573 (for gegnep),

~hédigra 352 (for -hygdig-), -bridenum twice.*

§245. Similar loss of g before / is rare and sporadic, e.g. Ep,
snél snail (beside snegl), Ep., Cp. strél curtain (Cp. also stregl),
Li., Ru.* waghrél curtain (beside -hregl), Elfric’s Vocabulary

61

s#snZl sea-snail.

K. Chronological Summary
§ 246. The developments so far discussed in the present chapter
may be termed prehistoric, because they can all be exemplified to
* But no lengthening in eofot, Ep. ebhat crime, eofolsian blaspheme,
from *efhat, *ef-halsian,
* Hence analogical forms from these three verbs arise with
loss of back g:
frinon, gefriinen, briidon, bréden, stréden, beside forms with g. Note
also past sg.
Fran (for frén) formed from frinan on the model of ridan, rad.

3 Ru.* has girinad ornatum, girino aedificationes, so in view of the rarity
of
loss of g in nW-S, and the fact that in W-S forms without & are the
earlier, confusion of two roots is perhaps to be assumed in these words.

* Note also BH Génlddae g.s., Yenlet, apparently from gegn-+

lad.

106

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 247

some degree from the oldest surviving texts, although there are
also spellings in these which reflect a time previous to the later of
the sound-changes under consideration (especially back umlaut,
smoothing, and vowel contraction). It is accordingly not possible
to date any of these sound-changes by observing their gradual
appearance in texts, and we can establish their approximate dates
and arrange them in chronological order by theoretical means only.
§ 247. Vowel contraction is evidently later than the Anglian
smoothing (see § 238.2), and many forms are preserved in early
texts in which it has not yet taken place (see §§ 236-7). Smoothing
would also appear to have been a recent change when the earliest
extant manuscripts were written, as some forms appear in these
in which it has still not operated (see §§ 223, 225, 227). Back um-

laut must for several reasons be placed in approximately the same
period. Its relationship in time to smoothing has been disputed.
On the face of it, it would be reasonable to assume that the complete absence in Anglian except in analogical forms of back umlaut

before back consonants indicates that its effects were removed by
smoothing, and that it in fact took place earlier than that change.!
An indication that this is in fact the case is offered by occasional
forms preserved in spelling with ea from West Gmc. a by back

umlaut, see § 207. If the normal VP development dzgas be as-

sumed never to have had ea, it is inexplicable why ea spellings
occur at all.? But if in fact such forms had ea for a time, this method
of spelling might to some degree outlast its phonetic appropriateness, and even penetrate Kentish, where it had never been appro-

priate. The chronological relationship of 7-umlaut to back umlaut
is reasonably certain, for vowels produced by the former process
can be affected by the latter (see § 211). Hence we must regard:
é-umlaut as the older change, and with this its full development in
the earliest texts agrees. In these early texts there are many forms
in which back umlaut has not taken place (see §§ 207, 210.2, 212).3
1 This was the original view of Sievers (Angelsdchs. Gramm.',§ 162.a.2) and
Biilbring (Alteng. Elementarbuch, §§ 202, 204, 208), but Luick (Hist. Gramm.,
§ 235.a.3) considers that back umlaut was prevented by back consonants in Angl.,
just as by back and dental consonants in W-S.
2 It is, of course, not possible to regard the -eag- spellings as due to Kt.
influence, for West Gmce. a is not subject to second fronting to 2, and subsequent back mutation to ea, in Kt. at all (cf. § 207).
3 A modification of the traditional chronology is attempted by Girvan, Angelsaks, Handboeh, § 107, but it rests on the assumption that VP dwéoran, xtféalan

had short diphthongs due to back umlaut, not to breaking (cf. § 231 above).

§ 248

CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY

107

§ 248. The chronological relationship of breaking and diphthong-

ization of front vowels by the influence of palatal consonants
to
i-umlaut is a difficult question. It was long agreed that since the

diphthongs éa and io, from West Gme. au and iu, appear as W-S
ie when subject to -umlaut, it follows that W-S-ie was itself
a
diphthong. From this it was inferred that ie in words like ieldra
older, fieht he fights, was also a diphthong, and was the i-umlaut
of short diphthongs seen in eald, feohtan.' Hence it was assumed
that short diphthongs were produced by breaking, and were subse-

quently subject to z-umlaut to ze, itself a short diphthong. Similarly
,
the diphthongs produced from front vowels by palatal influence

were held to be subject to i-umlaut at least in W-S, and this
assumption placed palatal influence earlier than i-umlaut.2 Recently

Miss M. Daunt attacked this view,3 arguing that the OE short
diphthongs ea, eo, to, produced by breaking, palatal influence
,
and back umlaut, and their W-S mutation te, never existed,
but
that the spellings represent x, e, 7, followed by a diacritic vowel
symbol to indicate the nature of the following consonant. Hence,
for example, in eald, eorpe, the liquid consonants are represented
by al, or, and so distinguished from the phonetically different
liquids of Ang]. zldra, derne.*
§ 249. Samuels (op. cit.) rejects Miss Daunt’s views on the short

diphthongs, but questions the traditional chronology of the soundchanges. He stresses that the view that breaking is older than
iumlaut is based on the z-umlaut of the diphthongs produced
by
breaking in W-S to ie. But he suggests that this ie might be of late
origin (like those discussed below, § 299.a). If ieldra be derived

* Of course strictly io, not eo, undergoes i-umlaut to
ie (see § 201).
* Definitely demonstrable only in the case of the long
sound, since W-S giest
might be developed by palatal influence from *gesti-, and
this be by mutation
from *gzsti-. But since # is not subject to i-umlaut (see
§ 191), [W-S éfse must
represent older *ciese < *¢éasi- < *cdsi- (Lat.
cdseum), and giest may fairly be

assumed to have the same development.
3 Trans, Philological Soc., 1939, pp. 108-37.
« Miss Daunt’s views have been subjected to much criticism,
see, for example,
C. L. Wrenn, Trans. Philological Soc., 1943, pp. 31-32; M.
L. Samuels, id.,
1952, pp.

15-47; S. M. Kuhn, R. Quirk, Language xxix. 143-56;

R. Quirk, C. L.

Wrenn, An OE grammar (London, 1955), pp. 146-7. K. Brunner
, English studies
xxxiv. 247-51, takes a conventional view of breaking and
back umlaut, but
denies the reality of the diphthongs assumed to arise from
palatal influence,
and holds that e, i in geaf, giefan are merely indication
s of the palatal nature of
the consonant. He also doubts the actuality of the Angl. smoothing,
holding that
the second element of diphthongs was always particular
ly clear in Angl. before
velar consonants, and hence did not require to be written,

108

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 250

from *eldra we cannot postulate a stage *ealdir-. *xlda- and
*zldi- might have developed simultaneously to *ealda- and *eldirespectively. It may even be that the occasional spellings in early
manuscripts in which breaking is not indicated (see § 140) reflect
a spelling system developed before breaking took place: this
would make breaking relatively late.

§ 250. The present writer wishes to stress that in his opinion
only a balance of probability can be claimed for the traditional

view, but that this balance is sufficiently in its favour for it still
to be presented as probable. It is unlikely that the diphthongs of

teldra and hierra spring from so different a succession of processes
as Samuels suggests.

§ 251. If breaking and palatal influence be regarded as older
than 7-umlaut, their chronological relationship to each other is

settled by words where they conflict: ceorl, georn, show that *kerl-,
*zern-, had developed e to eo before the time of palatal influence,
otherwise *cierl, *giern would have developed, and (as there is no
reason to think ie would be subject to breaking) would have been
the historical forms. Hence breaking must be regarded as the
earlier change.!

§ 252. That the fronting of West Gmc. a preceded breaking
follows from § 139. This agrees with the fact that the long sound
had already been fronted (supposing a back vowel for Prim. Gmc.
# ever developed in the Anglo-Frisian area) in the continental
period, see § 129. The short sound was apparently fronted sepa-

rately in English and Frisian. The development of nasal d is shared
by English and Frisian and therefore belongs to the continental
period (§§ 127, 130).

§ 253. The type of Mercian which has the second fronting has.
no diphthongization of front vowels by palatal consonants, therefore the relative chronology of these changes cannot be decided.
They are both to be placed after the restoration of a before back
vowels. Palatal influence is shown to be later than the restoration

of a by forms like calan, galan: here kx, 3 became ka, 3a before
palatals could develop and produce éea, gea. Second fronting is by
definition later than restoration of a: the paradigm deg, dxgas

could not be developed from dzxg, dagas until this latter paradigm
itself existed. The reasons for placing palatal influence before :1 Girvan, Angelsaks. Handboek, § 64, refuses to accept this simple argument:
again, the appeal against him must be to the balance of probability.

§ 254

CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY

109

umlaut have been already indicated. Second fronting may be taken
to precede i-umlaut because all sounds produced bv i-umlaut
escape it: this applies to the mutations of @ (from ai), and of re-

tracted a before J groups (types /&ran, zldra).' This chronology
agrees well with evidence from the development of initial palatal

consonants from Prim. Gmc. k and 3. These became palatal before

front vowels due to the fronting of West Gmc. a, which were not

liable to restoration before a following back vowel. But they were
not palatalized before front vowels due to second fronting or 7-

umlaut: This suggests that when the palatalization of these con-

sonants took place, restoration of a had occurred, but second front-

ing and z-umlaut lay ahead (§ 170).

§ 254. The diphthongizations of back vowels by palatal consonants took place at various times as indicated in §§ 171-6,

179-81. Their beginnings may no doubt be placed back in the
period of the diphthongization of front vowels, before i-umlaut

(§§ 177-8).

§ 255. From what has now been said, we can suggest the following chronological order as probable for the sound-changes discussed in the present chapter:
1. Anglo-Frisian development of nasal d; and of #/é from
West Gmc. @.
. West Gme. ai > @ (§ 132).
wp

. Fronting of West Gmc. a to 2.
. Breaking and the related processes of retraction.

Restoration of d before back vowels.
ARH

Second fronting (mainly VP). Palatal diphthongization of
front vowels, and early diphthongizations of back vowels
(mainly W-S and North.).
7. 1-Mutation.

8. Back Mutation.
9 . Smoothing.
fe)
10.
Contraction of vowels, compensatory lengthening.
' It is true that the types ald, galan also escape second fronting, but this is
due to the / (see § 165). It is very doubtful if a similar influence could be

exerted by the / of zidra, through which the influence of i-umlaut had passed,
and before which a comparatively general change to e was to take place later

(§ 193.4).

110

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 256

L. Dialectal Summary
§ 256. It may be useful to recapitulate the main dialectal distinctions produced by the above sound-changes. It must first be emphasized that the dialectal names are in this book used practically
without claim to territorial significance. North. means the agreement of Li., Rit., Ru.*, and the early names and fragments, or of
such of all these sources as offer evidence on the point under discussion. Mercian means similarly the agreement of VP, Cp., Ep.,
and the majority forms of Ru.1, or of such of these as afford evidence. Angl. means the agreement of North. so defined with Merc.
so defined. Kt. means such forms in the charters of Kt. origin as
are shown to be genuinely Kt. by their reappearance in KG, or
the appearance of their obvious reflexes (i.e. forms descended from
them) there. nW-S is the agreement of Angl. so defined with Kt.
so defined. W-S means the agreement of the majority forms of the
four generally accepted eW-S manuscripts (see § 16) with a large
body of later W-S. IW-S means forms prevailing in a considerable
body of the later W-S manuscripts, but not prevailing in the four
manuscripts accepted as eW-S.

§ 257. The Germanic invaders of Britain already most probably
possessed one clear dialect distinction: the dialects from which
W-S was to descend had # from Prim. Gmc. &, but those from
which are descended all other known OE dialects had é (§ 128).!
§ 258. The early changes grouped together above as breaking
and retraction caused further dialectal distinctions to arise. Before
I groups, Angl. develops a from West Gmc. a, but W-S and Kt.
have ea. Spellings with a penetrate eW-S and eKt. extensively,
spellings with ea invade Angl. only in Ru.1 This is to be attributed
to the mutual influence of established orthographical systems. The
development of a for West Gmc. a before r groups, generally in a
labial neighbourhood, is mainly a North. feature, but invades some
Mercian texts (§ 144). The development of wer- followed by a consonant to wor- is North., that of wir- followed by a consonant to
wur- is nW-S (§§ 147, 149). The failure of ¢ to undergo breaking
! But # extensively penetrates the spelling system of Ru.’ It is a natural
consequence of the development of @ instead of é in W-S that that dialect is the
only one in which & can revert to d by retraction before y (§ 151), and by restoration before back vowels (§ 162). In the latter case, Ru.! has again admitted a
few forms of W-S type.

§ 259

DIALECTAL SUMMARY

unr

before 7 groups, wheni stands in the following syllable, is Angl.

(§ 154.3).

o

.

§ 259. The second fronting whereby 2 > e and a > 2 is mainly

a mark of VP, but forms of this type, especially ones with a > a,
have extensively penetrated Ep. and Cp.;! RG and St. Chad have

frequent 2 > e.
§ 260. W-S and North. are distinguished from Kt. and Merc.
by much more extensive diphthongization of vowels by the influence of preceding palatal consonants. In Kt. and Merc. such
influence is limited to the development of a few glides before back
vowels, except for some cases of 2 > ea in Ru. This agreement

of North. with W-S against the intervening Merc. is puzzling from
the point of view of dialect geography.
§ 261. The chief dialect distinction arising from 7-umlaut is the
mutation of 2a, io to ie in W-S, instead of to 2, Zo, as in nW-S.2
Naturally some distinctions arise because previous changes had left
different conditions for i-umlaut to operate upon in different dialects. One may note: (1) W-S, Kt. mutation of ea, Angl. mutation
1 S. M. Kuhn (PMLA liv. 1-19; x. 631~69) regards second fronting as common to VP, Cp., and Ru.! He holds that in Ru.! (1) while 2 generally appears for
Prim. Gmc. a, a falling together of 2 and e under the latter is indicated by the
frequent spelling of Prim. Gmc. e, and of e the i-mutation of z, with the symbol 2,
and (2) that second fronting of a to 2 is to be observed in the forms c#fertin,

Seder (g.s.), various parts of feran, gefel, feetu, gedxfnade, all of which occur in
VP with ea. Second fronting was followed, presumably, by back umlaut of 2
to ea as in VP, but this sound Kuhn thinks may have been early subject to
monophthongization to 2 in the Ru.) dialect. To Kuhn’s view it may be objected
that the bulk of the instances of 2 for Prim. Gmc. e are due to a combinative
change of the dialect, we > wz (§ 328); most of the rest are due to the consistent
abnormal spelling of a few words, especially pagn for pegn. The cause of these
abnormal spellings requires investigation, but it is not a general identification
of 2 and e. Even less conclusive are forms with 2 for the mutation of Prim.
Gme. a: most are to be explained under
§ 193.a, c, d, above. The forms alleged
to show second fronting of a to & are not typical of Ru.!, which also has e.g. fasu,
naru, -swarade, getalu, dagas, -a, -um, bacu, -um, wacane, nacud, gestapulad, magun,
wagende, plagadun, geladadum. Hence the # forms must be otherwise explained,
by analogy or i-umlaut: it should be noted that feran, czfertun, gedxfnade,
gefel are also North., and easy analogies explain fader, fetu. (Fader g.s. occurs
9 times, fader once; but fetu occurs once only, fatu, fatum 7 times.) Kuhn
regards Cp. as too early to show second fronting in its spelling, apart from occasional e for 2, and some instances of # and ea like regu, reagu-. This position
he is able to maintain only by making second fronting a relatively late change:
on reasons for regarding it as prehistoric, see § 253.
2 Significance can hardly be attached to one or two forms in Angl. texts of

W-S type: Cp. 774 alieset he frees, 1135 forsliet slaughter (read -slieht); Ru.?

gehyrde heard (twice); on forms with ie for io see § 281.

112

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 26a

of a, in type ieldra, eldra, zldra, § 193.4; (2) occasional mutation of a
instead of ea before r groups in North. and the early glossaries;
(3) W-S mutation of io, Ang]. unbroken i before r groups, §§ 154.3,
258; (4) W-S mutation of io, nW-S of u, in words of type wierpe,
wyrpe, §§ 149, 199, 258; (5) better preservation of a rounded sound
as mutation of 6 in nW-S, § 198; (6) mutations of diphthongs
due to palatal influence on front vowels are W-S, and doubtfully

North., § 184; (7) preservation of z as the mutation of d is of doubtful provenance, appearing in scattered sources, § 193.d.

§ 262. Many more diphthongs due to back umlaut appear in
nW-S than W-S, where the change is severely limited as to the
conditions in which it can occur, and is frequently removed by
analogy. .
§ 263. Smoothing is an outstanding feature of Anglian. Apart

from archaic survivals in the early glossaries, and forms with analogical diphthongs (especially in VP), the only noteworthy exceptions occur in Ru.1, which has again been penetrated by W-S
spellings.
§ 264. The chief dialectal distinction arising from vowel con-

traction is the development of diphthongs with mid or high first

elements and unrounded second elements, e+-a, i-+a, in North.
and VP, § 238. Otherwise, the chief differences in the processes of
contraction in different dialects arise from whether or not smoothing had previously taken effect, §§ 235, 238.
' It may be useful to recall how many striking non-Angl. features invade
Ru: (1) & for West Gme. d, and hence restoration of this # to d before back
vowels; (2) ea before / groups from Prim. Gmce. a; (3) forms lacking smoothing.

A consequence of the introduction of W-S # for West Gmc. 4, beside nW-S
é, is that # is freely substituted for é in words where no dialect has #: with the
smoothing of éo, frequently n&hste beside néhste; with the smoothing of éa,

b&g 27, 29, h#mehte Mk. 1, 22; for examples with the i-umlaut of éa see
§ 200, footnote 2. Here might also be placed the forms with # for the mutation
of 6, but they have parallels elsewhere (§ 198).

VI

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS
FROM ABOUT 700 TO 1000
A. niyi- > ny
§ 265. In all dialects at an early date the negative adverb mi contracted with a following accented ui- to produce ny-. Examples are
provided only by negated forms of willan will, and witan know,
e.g. nylle, nyllap, nylle, nyton, nyte, nyste, and by the noun nytenness ignorance. Such forms are established in VP, eW-S, and eKt.
(examples in Ct. 41 from nyllan). The other Angl. texts have
largely adopted other formations,’ but sufficient my- forms are
scattered through Ru. and North. to suggest that this is an early,
general OE development, afterwards partly eliminated.

KG have

ne- from ny- (§ 288): netenes. \W-S has with great frequence neinstead of ny- in forms of nyllan (nelle, nellap, nele), and such forms
already appear in eW-S. In view of the absence of a similar development in forms of nytan, these ne- forms from nyllan are best
regarded as arising in low sentence stress.”

B. Vocalization of 7 and u
§ 266. In early OE a marked tendency is to be observed for g to
be vocalized and to combine with a front vowel belonging to the
same syllable to form a diphthong, #7, &, or 7 (< i). But there
were many forms in which g did not belong to the same syllable
as the preceding vowel, and hence did not become vocalized and
combine with the preceding vowel, and by analogy of such forms

the diphthongs were usually removed, so that, for example, weg
way, wig war, are more usual than wet, wi, owing to the influence of
inflected weges, wiges.3 Examples of such diphthongs are: Ep. grét,
1 e.g. Ru.? nuton < ni wuton (§ 218), nallad < ni wallad (§ 768).
2 North. forms in ne- (Li., Ru.’ nelle imper., Li. nellad imper. pl.) do not

belong here, as the dialect has sometimes uncompounded forms with e (Li.,
Ru.? welle subj.).
3 On the other hand, in ME vocalization and diphthongization took place
over the following syllable boundary: not only was restored weg re-changed to
wei, but weges became wei-es.

114

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 267

bodzxi, Cp. gréi, popet, eKt. méi- (Ct. 38), dihwelé (Ct. 40), dei (Ct.

42), héi- (Ct. 43), LV Mé- 213, 268, KG wei weighed, wei the
same, meiden, meidhades, -stréide strewed, wréi imper. accuse,

sw#id' sounds, gecéide called, adréid? dries, &hwilcum.3

§ 267. There are more examples of i from ig. Many texts have
bridel(s) bridle (Ep., Cp., VP,
KG, W-S; Ef. still brigdels); eW-S
Jrinan ask, hlisa fame, rinan rain, -britt, -lid, 3rd sg. pres. ind. from
bregdan, licgan, gelires g.s. adultery (CP 143, 2), Wi- for Wig- in
names; Cp. side scythe (cf. Ep. sigdi); VP rined, rinde, from rinan
rain; eKt. Wi-, Si- in names; KG wilung sorcery (cf. wiglian),

wi- way,* hlisa. So in unaccented syllables in [W-S and KG the
syllable -ig interchanges freely with -7, and there are already a few

examples in earlier texts, e.g. meniu Cp. 685, dysi CP 267, 1, médie
Oros. 86, 28; VP has often -ie for -ige, e.g. hefie. In such unaccented
positions, however, 7 would doubtless soon be shortened. In eW-S
-ig- and -1- also interchange in the medial syllable of verbs of the

second weak class, and there is also much fluctuation in the forms
of other dialects: see § 757 for details.
§ 268. A few forms show contraction of -ie- from -ige- to i: eW-S
il, il hedgehog, IW-S Silhearwan Ethiopians; already Cp. has il, siras

(1241 for “sigeras gluttons). In early instances the contraction would
still be of -igi- (§ 369).5

§ 269. For 2, é, from 2%, é, we often find the compromise
spellings #ig, 2ig. Cp. already has gréig 850, seign 2093, but instances
are mostly IW-S and INorth.: e.g. in W-S manuscripts of eleventh
century weig, leg, m#ig, in Li. deign, héig, céigde. In

Northumbrian

the spelling 7g is sometimes extended to intervocalic g: Li., Rit.

céiga. Similarly, Ru.) has céigde, dréiga. KG have several forms with
ig between vowels for g: deige (d.s.), swéigas (a.p.), meige possis.
§ 270. It is possible that forms like those dealt with in § 269 caused
an equation in spelling of é and é&, for if méig = még, it follows that
& = é, This would provide another explanation for BDS néid- for nédand other forms quoted in § 42 above.
§ 271. The interchange of forms with 7 and ég described in § 267 leads
to an equation of 7g and 7 in spelling, and hence of yg and ¥: already in
' i.e. swéid with Kt. inverted spelling.

2 ie. -drygd, cf. § 288.

3 Since eg, ef were alternative spellings, eg was used for Latin and Norse ei,

e.g. Aquilegia, Swegn.
4 In wiferend 137, from curious local form wig 207, 475, 772; wigas Bd. 58;

cf, Bliss, Sir Orfeo, p. xx.
5 But Erf. 138 tuigin shows inverted spelling, igi=i (cf. Cp. tuin, and § 404).

§ 272

VOCALIZATION OF j- AND 4

115

eW-S such spellings are found, e.g. big, dnwigse, astiggende, swiggende,
for bt by, dnwige d.s. combat, and present participles of astigan ascend,
*swigan be silent, and so drygge, adryggean, for dryge dry, &c. Already
'

the early glossaries have spellings which may be of this type, e.g. gig

vulture; see § 411 below.

§ 272. Theoretically « should never stand finally after a vowel
in OE, for it was lost after some vowels, and combined with others
into diphthongs, see §§ 120.2 and 3, 400. It was, however, often
replaced by analogy, e.g. sndw, stdw, tréow, stréaw, m#w, briw,

after inflected sndwes, &c. Similar are W-S 2nd and 3rd sg. pres.
indic. of verbs in -w-, like cn#wd, s#wd, flew, hiewd, after cnawan,
&c. (Cf. gecen#d, CP 29, 1, the phonological development, with
loss of w, before -i-, cf. § 406.) In all these forms with analogical
wa diphthong with u as its second element is present. In early

texts and Northumbrian the symbol is sometimes u: Ep. méu mew
(610, so read for manuscript men), Cp. -stéu, Li. stéu.
§ 273. IW-S manuscripts sometimes have -éow-, -éaw- where -éw-,
-éw- might be expected: in Thorpe’s ed. of AElfric’s Homilies occur

Jléowd flows, spéowp succeeds, hréaw corpse, éaw- law, other manuscripts
have bréaw eyelid, beside more usual fléwd', spéewd, hréw, Bw, bréw.'
These forms give rise to a few inverted spellings, e.g. gl#wne a.s.m.
wise, Gen. 41, 33, MS. L, for gléawne. S-B, § 126.1.a.2, regard these
spellings as due to the general eleventh-century monophthongization of
diphthongs, and consequent inverted spelling: éa, go became &, é, and

hence éazw, gow are graphic equivalents of #w, éw. Luick, Hist. Gramm.,
§ 258, considers that hréw, fléwp ultimately approximated their diphthongs Zu, éu to the prevailing OE diphthong types éa, éo, and that

from the forms *hréa, *fléop, by analogical reintroduction of w, the
IW-S hréaw, fléowp were produced. A phonological explanation is to be
preferred to the purely graphic one of S—B, for traces of a similar process
are to be observed in Cp.: héawi 444, 981, méau 955, 1183, and inverted
gléu 1768, and so Ep. 649 séréuua, for W-S h&éwe blue, méw mew, gléaw
wise, séréawa shrew.” If Luick’s explanation be true of these early forms

also, héawi must be regarded as graphic, due to the spelling equation
of méau, méu.

§ 274. Diphthongs in IW-S manuscripts sometimes assimilate their
second element partially or completely to following -w-. Thus manu-

scripts of /Elfric have hréow, stréow for hréaw raw, stréaw straw,
! Probably add éawfinger, forefinger, Ps. 72, 11, not recorded as léw-.
2 A few instances of éw for éaw in Li. and

VP are probably errors (Li.

scéware, éwunga, VP scéwad, beside many forms with éaw; so Ru.! stréu).

116

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 275

Lambeth Ps. fléuwd 57, 9, for fléowd, Leechdoms stréuw iii, 114, for
stréaw.

c. The Second Elements of the Old English Diphthongs
§ 275. The diphthongs derived from Prim. Gmc. au, eu, iu, and
from the corresponding West Gmc. diphthongs (§ 120) may be
reasonably supposed to have passed into OE with the second
element -z, though this stage of development is rarely recorded in

the case of the diphthong derived from au. Recorded spellings for
those derived from eu and iu are: stéupfaeder Ep., Hréutford BH,
Stréunaeshalch BH (MSS. Leningrad and Cott. Tib. A xiv),

Scéutuald LV, gliu Ep., Cp., gepiudde, piustra Cp., Iuti! BH (in
various inflexions), fliusum LR, Biuuulf, Friubet, Friumon, Liutfrith LV. Already, however, in the earliest texts eo, io are the
prevailing spellings, e.g. Ep. ¢éol, spréot, anhriosith. The change

of the second element from x to o is more slowly carried out
when # followed, hence Ep. tréulesnis, Cp. mundléu basin,
Ep., Cp. gesiuwid sewn (if the diphthong is long, see § 120.2,
footnote 6), sniuuith it snows. Although we should no doubt be
justified in assuming that au became OE &u, and that this became
#o when éu, iu became @o, io, yet the most archaic spelling in a

fully reliable form is 20:2 BH Aeodbald, Cp. gendéot companion,
LV Aeostoruini.s More frequent is go, e.g. BH (MSS. Leningrad
and Tib. A xiv) Eodbald, North. coins Eotberehtus (i.e. Eadberht
737-58), Cp. earngéot vulture, gefréos froze, éorscripel ear-scraper,*

VP déode a.p. dead, héofud head, and twice in forms of otéawan

show, go, 16; 91, 8, Ct. 35 Eostorege, poetical fréo for fréa lord.s
Similarly, with a diphthong due to OE contraction (§ 238.2), Ep.,
Cp. éorisé rush, VP éoland island. However, the prevailing spelling

is already éa in even the earliest texts, e.g. Ep. éast, réad, stréam.
On the more archaic £a, see § 135.
§ 276. The diphthong which arose from Prim. Gmc. a by break* Hence by direct literary borrowing g. and d. lutna, futum, OEC 449, MS. E.
2 Possible archaic spellings: Ld. 207 arngeus, Erf. 40 aerngeup, glossing arpa
(i.e. dpm) may represent an original -géup or -géut, cf. Cp. earngéot, Ep. earngéat:
see Kraliks, Gétt. gel. Anz., 1914, pp. 158 ff.; manuscripts of BH vary between
Héuuald and Héauald, where the first element is presumably héah.

3 Beside which LV Aestor-, Aestur-, are hardly more than slips.

* But Ep., Cp. snidstréo, Cp. snithstréo, Erf. snidstréu (an unknown plant) is
influenced by ¢réo tree.
5 For examples from genealogies see K. Sisam, Proc. Brit. Acad. xxxix, 308.

§ 277,

SECOND ELEMENTS OF OLD ENGLISH DIPHTHONGS|

117

ing, back umlaut, and the influence of palatal consonants, was no
doubt at first apprehended as a short equivalent of that derived from
au, whether this was then in the stage @u or Zo. The most primitive
spelling is Urswick Cross d.s. beurne, if this is to bearn child, not
beorn. eo is frequent in early texts, e.g. with a diphthong due to
breaking, Cp. weorras hard skin, seorwum d.p. devices, LG speoruliran

suras, VP geeorningum d.p. merits, beorn child (twice),

Georfan a.s. poor man, LV Georored, Ct. 38 beorn children, Ct. 48
Seeornigan merit, Ct. 37 gegeorwien 3rd pl. pres. subj. prepare, to

which a few cases of -heord, -weord, in the second element of names
in LV and Kt. charters may be added; with a diphthong due to
back umlaut, VP feodrum d.p. fathers, gedeofenad is fitting, LG

lundleogan kidneys, Cp. beosu purple,2 BH Peoda (MSS. Leningrad and Cott. Tib. A xiv), LV Beodu-, Heodu-.
§ 277. Similarly, the diphthongs derived from Prim. Gme. e and

i by breaking and back umlaut were at first short equivalents
of those derived from Prim.

Gmc. ew and i.

In these short

diphthongs the stage with -u is recorded with breaking in BDS
uuiurthit, LV, Gn. Iurmin-; and with compensatory lengthening

BH Eumer (ftom eoh horse); with back umlaut in Bd. eutende,3
LV Friuduulf. But eo, io are the established spellings already in

the earliest texts.
§ 278. While what has been said concerning the development of ix
to fo applies to all dialects, the North. developments of #4u and éu
require separate discussion.

(a) In the type of North. represented by Ru.?, the Zo derived from
Prim. Gmc. au did not unround its second element, and this is reflected
in the spelling, which is usually é0, e.g. éostan from the east, héofud

head, giléofa belief, and many singular past tenses of strong verbs of
Class II, gicéos chose, &c. Similarly, the short diphthong arising from
the breaking of Prim. Gmc. a is usually written eo, e.g. -ceorf he cut, eorm
arm.‘ This reluctance of the Ru.? dialect to unround the second element
1 T exclude VP ondsweorian, which always has eo, to which occasional Li,
ondsweariga corresponds with North. ea for eo (§ 278). It would seem that these

forms have back mutation of e transferred from swerian, rather than of the a of
andswarian.
? But Cp. meottoc mattock, pl. meottucas, in view of Ep. mettocas 565, 586,
878, may be regarded as having basic e, despite Ep. 1003 maettoc, W-S mattuc.

The word is of unknown origin (see § 565).
3 Not in Sweet’s OET; cf. Z{dA xxxi. 28.
* Back umlaut of Prim. Gme. a is foreign to the dialect; ea from palatal
influence is written ea so far as it occurs, e.g. séeattas treasures.

118

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 278

of £o naturally leads to graphic confusion between o and éo, both being
usually written éo2, BDS seems to show affinity with Ru.?, having
déoth- death. Clear affinity is shown by LV, which has

occasionally é0

from Prim. Gmc. au in the elements Ead-, Ean-, beside frequent éa

and once Eostur-, twice Héouald. This text also has a few instances of
eo for the breaking and back umlaut of Prim. Gmc. a: the forms are

quoted in § 276.
(5) In the dialect of North. represented by Zi. and Rit., #o is
developed to 2a in the normal OE manner, and practically always
written é2. On the other hand, the tendency to unround the second

element of diphthongs is stronger than in other dialects, and do appears

prevailingly as Za except when w follows, or when o or w stands in the
next syllable,’ e.g. with é0 from éu or from breaking of @, léaf beloved,
déaf thief, céasa choose, néawung nearness, genéaleca approach; with eo

by breaking and back umlaut of e, fearra from afar, hearta heart,
stearra star, seatul seat, geafa gift, eatta eat. Very often, however, eo
appears for the back umlaut of e before o or wu, e.g. seofo seven, heofon
heaven, feolo many, feotrum d.p. fetters.?
(c) The names in the various manuscripts of BH have, as has been

shown, often éo or Zo for éa (§ 275), but this might be there regarded as
an archaic rather than a dialectal feature. They have practically always
ea for the short diphthong (except only Peoda quoted above). They
have prevailingly éo where it would normally occur in OE: exceptions
are the archaic forms with éu quoted above and a few cases of éa:

Earpuald, Cearl, Stréanzshalch.s
TM On the other hand, the second element of io is rarely unrounded: Li. has,
however, bihianda, frequently, against bihionda, once.
2 RC has forms with éa for éo according to the usual transliteration: fearran,

heafunzs, bihealdun; but it cannot be shown that the value of the rune T was éa
rather than éo in this inscription (cf. Girvan, Angelsaks. Handboek, § 42.4.2).
3 J. W. Watson, Language xxii. 19~26, regards the modern dialect of Lorton,
Cumberland, as described by B. Brilioth, A grammar of the dialect of Lorton
(Philological Society, 1913), as providing evidence that OE éa and éo fell
together in North. According to Brilioth the Lorton reflex of OE 2, éa, and éo is
ei, while that of é is normally 7. If this is accurate, it may be that in this dialect
éa and éo fell together already in OE, but this was not the case in the whole
North. area because (1) the evidence of rhymes in ME shows that the usual ME
distinction of the reflexes of OE éa and éo was generally found in the Northern
dialect: see Heuser, A xviii. 114 ff., xix. 319 ff.; (2) other Cumberland dialects
show a less clear-cut picture than that of Lorton: as described by Brilioth
(information supplied by Ian Catford), and other dialects belonging to the
ONorth. area show a distinction of the reflexes of OE éa and éo (e.g. Adlington,
Lancs., described by A. Hargreaves, A grammar of the dialect of A., Heidelberg,
1904). It would then seem that the view taken above, that éa and éo remained
distinguished in their first elements in ONorth., is correct. For the corresponding
short diphthongs Watson accepts such a distinction (see Studies in honor of 7. S.
Wilson, pp. 167-74).

§279

SECOND ELEMENTS OF OLD ENGLISH DIPHTHONGS

119

§ 279. Before w there is no regular unrounding of the second element
of Zo in any Northumbrian text,’ but it is often approximated to the w,
so that éuw results, and this is often written éw, éu. Similarly, Zow is often
developed to iuw, and this can be written éw, iz. Spellings of this type

are frequent in Li., e.g. cnewa a.p. knees, Jeua d.s. servant, diua maidservant, a.p. diuwas (but d.p. diowum), giwiga desire (many forms),
tréu tree, cnéw knee, tréwufzst faithful (and various related words),
fehréues repents, oncnéu knew, gebléuu blew, féwer four, niwe new, iw
you (and related forms)..Similar forms are frequent in Rit., but rare
in Ru.*, where -éow-, -fow- prevail in words of this type. Here and there,
the development appears in VP, e.g. tréw, oncnéw, Setréwlice, Siwgen.*
Ru. also has a few forms of this type, e.g. tréuw, cnéu, -péu(w), hré(u)wnisse, Setréeuwe (< *getriuwe, cf. § 295), priuwa; also in reduced stress
lareuw teacher, lateuw leader, pl. ldrewas, latewas.
§ 280. Unrounding of the second element of diphthongs, similar to
that of Li. and Rit., is seen in the Kt. charters of the ninth century,
but here both éo and io are affected, appearing often as éa, Za,} e.g. with
eo, agiaban give, wiaralde g.s. world, hiabenlice heavenly, Biarn- (in

many names), fiah money ;* with io, wiada, weada g.s. wood, Wiaht-;
with é0, bebiade I command, bibéaded he commands, Cial- (in several
names); with io, friandum d.p. friends, gedian thrive, bian be, hia she,

sia the (f.s.). KG also have a few instances of such unrounding: with
eo by breaking, hearran hinges, awearp imper. cast thou; with éo,
atiara imper. be exhausted; with io, ahriasd he falls, forbiet he forbids.
§ 281. In other texts the unrounding of the second element of éo, io
is sporadic. VP has a number of examples: with eo, xtféalan’ adhere,
earde earth (5 forms), weardiad imper. honour ye, afearra imper. be far

away,° weagas ways (3 times), cweadad they say, eatad they eat, Jeawde
he served; with io, earre anger (2 forms), ondwleatan d.s. face; with éo,
Géada, diada g.p. peoples, néasade he drew near (2 forms);? with
to, astéapte pass. part. n.p.m. deprived, déastrum d.p. darkness (87, 7,
* But Li. has occasional éa for é0 in hréawnise penitence (and related forms),
and also in the past tenses oncnéaw knew, geséaw sowed, under the influence of
other verbs of strong Class VII. There are scattered instances of -#w-, e.g. Li.
hrwende, oncnéw, réuun rowed, and so Rit. gifl@ue, Ru.* s#we, past subj. and
and sg. indic. from fldwan, sdwan.

2 i.e. pres. subj. pl. of Jeowian serve, so that here iw is for euw, a confusion
promoted by the free interchange of eo and io in VP (cf. § 294).
3 It will be observed that the first element of éo tends to be raised in Kt.,

producing io, or, with unrounding of the second element, ia (cf. § 297).
* Soin the second element, Ct. 31 Cialbearht; coins of Eégbeorht from Canterbury have Eégbearht.
5 With compensatory lengthening of the diphthong.
* Also in medium stress mildheartnisse, Hy. 1, 6.
7 The loan-word Jéa lion, beside once /éo and always inflected léon, &c., may
be added.

120

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 282

reading uncertain).' There are also a few instances in VP where the
second element of these diphthongs is reduced to a more indistinct
sound, written e: hiefene d.s. heaven, 32, 13, dieda g.p. peoples (3 times),
Sedieda g.p. languages, 30, 21, gehiewade he formed, 32, 15. With these
spellings cf. Ep. 983 unhieri fierce (MS. hun-), and KG forbiet quoted

above. VP onsien, fienda, -um are discussed above (§ 201). In Ru.

unrounding of the second element of é0, fo is even more rare, e.g.
hréad reed (twice), hréanis roughness, 16, 3, biatadae threatened, 9, 30,
and a few forms of weorban and weorpan. Such spellings occur also
sporadically in W-S, e.g. deawas servants, CP 196, 23, feala many

PC 530.

p. Changes of Quantity
§ 282. The vowels of the composition forms of the numerals
‘two’ and ‘three’, twi- and pri-, are lengthened in OE, e.g. twifeald

double, prifeald threefold.”

§ 283. Although it does not occasion a change of spelling in OE,
the lengthening of vowels before a liquid or nasal consonant
followed by a homorganic voiced sound, thus before /d, rd, rl, rn,

mb, nd, ng, and also before rs, rb when a vowel follows,? certainly
belongs to the OE period. Hence, at least for late OE, we can assume long vowels in such words as eald, heard, eorl, beorn, lamb,
land, lang, eorpe, earses.* The change would probably not take place

when a third consonant followed the consonant group, e.g. lambru,
englas, heardra, cembde, hundred, and this gave the possibility of

transferring the short vowel to the simple form. Hence, in the
future history of the language, there is great fluctuation in the
quantity of vowels in words of this type, and already certain OE

sound-changes show lengthening to be absent in some words where
it might be expected, e.g. IW-S swurd, wurd, cwyrn, for sweord,
word, cweorn, show changes possible only in short syllables (§§ 3204). Low stress could also cause lengthening to be absent in such
words as and, under, sceolde, wolde.
§ 284. In date this change seems later than the latest prehistoric changes: it was not early enough to prevent 2 > e before
1 It will be observed that the first elements of éo, fo are no longer distinguished
in VP (see § 294 below).
? ‘The evidence for this is the metrical value of these syllables in OE, and later
phonological developments (e.g. NE twilight).
3 Finally, s and } are voiceless in OE.
* Following the usual convention I do not mark quantity in such words in
OE.

§ 285

CHANGES OF QUANTITY

121

nasals (e.g. cemban, sendan, § 193.d), or the operation of back umlaut in North. bihionda, Kt. siondan (§ 217). On the other hand, it
was in time to prevent the tenth-century W-S change sel > siel
(§ 325), for this does not occur in seldan. Other tests of date have
been suggested but are unreliable: long vowels before groups of
late origin (e.g. fald fold, older falud), and in loan-words (e.g.
wrang wrong, ON rangr, *scarn scorn, OF escarn) may be due to
reforming the word to obtain a normal OE sound-pattern.

§ 285. Shortening of vowels normally occurred in OE (1) before
groups of three consonants, and (2) before groups of two consonants, if at least two unaccented syllables followed in the word.
This system is the forerunner of the system developed in the period
of transition from OE to ME, by which vowels shorten (1) before
groups of two consonants (other than the groups which cause
lengthening), and (2) before a single consonant or a lengthening
group, if at least two unaccented syllables follow. Examples of OE
shortening before triple consonants are godspell gospel, *bramblas
brambles, and probably many words with consonant gemination

before liquids (cf. § 453), e.g. n#ddre adder, attres g.s. poison.!
Hence the geminate (and no doubt the short vowel) could be transferred to forms like attor. Examples before two consonants when
two more syllables follow are bletsian bless (cf. bléd), *spanniewe

very new (cf. spon), Hlammzsse2 Lammas, semtinges immediately,
compounds in en- (< *#n1-) like enliepig individual, enetere one
winter old, and in sam- (< *s6m-) like samcucu’ half-alive. In these,
the phonological form of the word often suggests shortening (cf.

§§ 127, 193.4).

§ 286. There seems to have been in OE sporadic shortening

before geminates. Phonological developments prove short vowels
in leassa (§ 208), sioddan (§ 217), enne (§ 193.d), |W-S sylla* (§ 325).
Shorts may be suspected in the etymologically obscured ewimman
woman, latteow leader, bliss bliss, liss mercy, beside wifman, lad-

teow, blips, lips.
§ 287. A number of forms show shortening of a vowel, and com' Again I follow the convention in marking the vowels of such words long.
7 But in the form Hldfmzsse, the obvious etymology would preserve the
length.
3 And hence sam- is generalized to words where only one syllable follows, e.g.
sSamworht.
* Li. sella always has e (not oe) and this suggests a short vowel, which has been

transferred to sel, beside sdel.

122

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 288

pensatory gemination of the following consonant. The causes of

this development are obscure. The chief instances are: recéan care!
(for *roecan, cf. rohte), lin(n)en of linen,? eW-S geli¢(é)ettan pretend,

si¢(c)ettan sigh, scien(n)ess suggestion, gemet(t)ing, meeting. Forms

found in later texts are IW-S, North., Ru.! prittig thirty, [W-S

preottyne thirteen, Prinness Trinity, wissian direct, wittig wise,
orrettan disgrace, geliccost most like, ri¢ceter power, hleappettan

leap.

E. Modifications, mainly Kentish, of the Front Vowels
§ 288. The spellings of
KG make it clear that by the tenth century & of whatever origin had been raised to éin Kt., while 6@ had

been unrounded to é, and # unrounded and lowered to é. These

changes are proved by the glosses both by direct orthographical
evidence (the symbol e appearing for 2, oe, y) and by inverted
spellings, in which 2, y appear for e (e.g. war, byrene for wer man,
berene g.s. she-bear). Examples from KG of the changes under
consideration are:

# > é: with z from Prim. Gme. a, fet vessel, glednes joy; with
w due to double umlaut, gegederad gathered, 831; with # the
t-umlaut of a, geléred learned, todél imper. divide.
dé > é: efst he hurries, bénum d.p. prayers.

§ > é: with § due to mutation of a, gerdels girdle, ferht fear,
brécd enjoys, onténd opens; with y due to umlaut in group wur< wir- (§ 149), werstum d.p. worst, werdnes dignity; with ny< niui- (§ 265), netenes ignorance.

Since Kt. had e for the z-umlaut of a before nasal groups and
I groups (§§ 193.d, 200.1), and é for Prim. Gmc. @ (§ 128), it is

plain that all front vowels except i appeared in I.Kt. as é.

§ 289. It is difficult to determine precisely the age of the various
changes which led to the disappearance of &, 6, # from the Kt.

sound-system. In the ninth-century charters dé and # are still in
general use. Some few cases of 2 for 68, however, occur: bledsung

' This word probably has early shortening in all dialects. Cp. 1646 already has
reccileas, Li., Ru.* have reces Mk. 4, 38, and the e suggests a short. There is no

other nW-S evidence. W-S has always ¢¢ in the verb except once in AElfric’s

Colloquy, éé beside ¢ in reé(é)eleas and derivatives.

? Already recorded with nn in Ep., but n in Cp.; it fluctuates between n and
nn in North. and IW-S.
3 Fiffalde butterfly, beside fifalde is perhaps due to false etymology; Cp. has
already ff.

§ 290

MODIFICATIONS OF FRONT VOWELS

123

blessing, geréfa reeve,! and inverted bdém for bém, W-S b&m dat.
both, also tw&gen for twoégen two, since 2 and 6é were both
equivalent to é. The symbol y is even more fixed, but note Heregéde (Ct. 28), and inverted yfter for efter, W-S zfter after. The
eighth-century charters provide no evidence for the treatment of
6 and #, except the name Byrnham Ct. 8, where y is undisturbed.
# is used still for West Gmc. a and for mutated 4 in the Kt. will
added to Ct. 34 in the first quarter of the ninth century, e.g. zt, Jzt,
zlmeslié, aréddan, n#nig, ged#le, Zhte, d#m, b#m; this, however,
proves a good spelling tradition rather than the existence of the
sounds &, and in fact several inverted spellings occur: onézrrende,
sw (for nW-S swé, § 125). After this the symbols become increasingly confused, e appearing for 2 (< Prim. Gmc. a), and for # the
mutation of a, while 2 appears by inverted spelling for Prim. Gmc.
e (gxfe), & (hér here), & (m&gas, sw¥sendum, d#r), and for the
i-mutations of x (sxlen), and ea (zrfe, erde-). This confusion cannot be traced back to the eighth century, where we find 2 used
for Gmc. and Lat. a in -paed and éaestr-, and for its double umlaut
in 4thel-, and not extended to the place of e, at least in any name
of certain etymology.”
§ 290. If the evidence of spelling set out in § 289 be directly

assessed, the Kentish modifications of the front vowels must be
placed in the ninth century. It would, however, be possible to
argue that the ninth-century charters preserve a spelling tradition
Merc. rather than Kt., and that the process we can observe in
them is not the occurrence of Kt. sound-changes, but the gradual
emancipation of Kt. spelling from Merc. tradition, leading to a
better expression of the phonological facts of the dialect.3 If this be
the case, the Kt. modification of dé and # may have taken place at
any time after i-umlaut caused these sounds to arise, and the same
applies to # the i-umlaut of a. 2 (< Prim. Gmc. a) existed before

i-umlaut operated, but it is reasonable to assume that it was
modified to e when @ became @, otherwise two periods of raising
have to be assumed for Kt. Here Kt. is sharply distinguished from
the dialect of VP, where the older & is raised before umlaut, and
#& due to umlaut is unaffected (zldra, cléne).
1 Cf. Cénwald (moneyer of Ceolnoth, 833-70) for Caén-.
2 T refer to the evidence of Cts. 5~8, dated 7o0o~70. I exclude the suspect

Cr 4.
:
3 Angl. influence on Kt. spelling has been noted §§ 207, 258.

124

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 208

§ 291. The dialect of Surrey, as seen in Ct. 45 and CA, from the last
quarter of the ninth century, shows much the same features as Kentish
of the same date. The symbols # and generally é@ (here written é€)
remain used in the places historically justified, but 4 is sometimes

retained, sometimes changed to @, e.g. dege, geméne; there are also
inverted uses of # for e, e.g. zrfe. Before nasals 2 is so frequent for the
i-mutation of Prim. Gmc. a (e.g. man, acenned, Cent) that the influence
of the type of language found in Essex in the ME period may be
suspected (see § 193.d).

§ 292. In other dialects 4 is relatively stable till after 1000, and
§ till after goo (see §§ 315-18, 329). The history of é has been
given above (§§ 196, 198). In Angl., however, &, the i-umlaut of d,
is often changed to é by a following dental consonant, e.g. Cp.
Seléstunne accompany, -ténel basket, sculthéta bailiff (i.e. s¢yld-

h#ta); VP many examples including /éred he teaches, alédde he led,
Sebréded pass. part. dilated, fordrésted crushed, flés¢ flesh; Ru.1 many

forms and derivatives of cléne clean, hélend saviour, ér before,
hwéte wheat, and single occurrences of many other words; Li.
single occurrences of flés¢, huuéte, -geléred; Rit. cléne; Ru.? élé
each. Other instances of é for the mutation of d@ are sporadic and of
no significance.

F. Later History of Diphthongs
io
§ 293. io, derived from earlier iz according to §§ 275, 277, is
retained unaltered in North. until after the period of our OE texts.

Exceptions are beorna burn (cf. § 155), heona hence, fréond friend,

beside biorna, hiona, friond; on leornia beside lornia, see § 154.3,

footnote. Other verbs to be explained like Jeornia are léora go,
getréwa trust (§ 279), beside liora, getriowa. Ru.” siofu seven, per-

haps represents inflected *sifuni, Li. seofo uninflected *sefun. In
a few isolated cases, probably errors, io is written for éo, e.g. Li.

giorne eagerly, bebiodo I command; and so éo for io, e.g. ueototlice

certainly, gestréonde he gained.
§ 294. In Merc., éo and io are still in great measure distinguished
in the early glossaries. Nevertheless, a few forms occur with io for

é0, e.g. Ep., Cp. criopungae d.s. creeping; Ep. buturfliogae butterfly;

Cp. gestrion treasure, briost- breast,

tionan injuries, getriowad

trusted, -biorg protection, so LP iordan infl. earth. The symbol eo

§ 295

LATER HISTORY OF DIPHTHONGS

125

encroaches upon io only in the case of the back umlaut of ¢ in Cp.
neopouard lower, geonath he yawns, biheonan on this side, seotol
evident (770, read sweotol). In VP, io does not encroach upon eo,
but, on the other hand, eo appears instead of io by breaking in
eorre anger or angry, heorde shepherd, and frequently instead of io

by back umlaut, e.g. sceopu ships, gewreotum d.p. writings. The
long diphthongs éo and io are completely confused, both appearing
in éo-words like léof, t@ona, and in io-words like niowe, hiow, and
their derivatives. It seems evident that 20 and io have fallen together
in VP, and in the case of the short sounds under ¢o; in the case of
the long sounds, ME evidence makes it plain that the falling
together was in é0.! The falling together of go and io in VP was
accompanied by a

similar falling together of the contracted

diphthongs éa and ia: this is fully exemplified, § 238 above.

§ 295. In Ru. the position resembles that of VP: io is practically never found for eo by breaking or back umlaut, but eo has

replaced io in eorre and related words, and has often replaced io

by back umlaut.? In the case of the long diphthongs, io seldom
replaces éo (e.g. piof), but io is often replaced by éo, e.g. péostre,
getréowe, déorwyrpe, néowe, beside forms with io.

§ 296. In W-S it is evident that the graphs éo and fo had become
equivalent in force by the time of the oldest manuscripts, but it is

difficult to decide if vestiges of an old distinction can still be traced.
For eo by breaking, Oros. and PC have only eo, but a number of
zo spellings occur in CP, e.g. diow-, fioh, plioh, biorht, ciorl, cwiorn,
fiorm, fior, hiord, mildhiortnes, beside eo spellings. Similarly, eo by
breaking, when subject to lengthening, appears as Zo (beside éo) in
CP only of the eW-S texts, e.g. fios, twion d.s. doubt (358, 13),
and various forms of gefion, plion, sion. eo by back umlaut is never
certainly written io, though possible instances are Oros. sewiostor

(cf. § 210.2, footnote), CP tiogodiad, siofan. io by breaking and
half-umlaut (§ 202) is always replaced by eo in leornian and related
words in Oros., but in C’P io and eo both appear. io by back umlaut
is frequently preserved in CP, though eo often replaces it (cf.
§ 213); in Oros. it is usually eo (note, however, stolfre, -es, 70, 34;
170, 27); PC preserves to in wiotan 755. For io by breaking, CP has
® See D’Ardenne, Seinte Fuliene, pp. 192-3. On the dating of the coalescence
of éo and io in the dialect of VP, see Flasdieck, AB xli. 37-39.
2 e.g. cleopap, weotudlice, leoman g.p. limbs, beside forms with io; see also
§ 214 above.

126

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 297

both go and io in léoht, and in various forms of péon thrive, and
wrion wrap, but éo only in betwéoh. PC and Oros. have no relevant
material except in betwéonum. For Prim. OE éu we find both éo and
io in CP in the majority of words, but in Oros. and PC io is rare
except in diofol: Oros. has io in dior 286, 12, and in iower, five times,
all in two passages. The half-umlaut of é0 similarly varies between
éo and io in CP, but is practically always éo in PC and Oros. except
in a few derivatives of béod.! We may sum these facts up thus. In

Oros. and PC the symbol io is becoming disused. In C’P, however,
éo and io heavily invade each other’s domains. The historical position is rather better preserved in the case of the short vowels: eo
by breaking and by back umlaut is rarely written to, and io by

breaking and half-umlaut and by back umlaut is still often written
io, though eo often replaces it. In !W-S the symbol Zo is little used.
§ 297. In ninth-century Kt. documents a marked tendency appears to raise the first element of é0, so that spellings occur like

siolf, wiord, fiah, agiaban, wiaralde, hiabenlice, bebiade, Cial-,

liofast, priost, ow, diow. Occasional inverted spellings with eo, ea
for historical io occur: weada g.s. wood, awreotene written. It is,
however, evident that the tendency was less strong in the case of

the short than of the long diphthong. From KG, it is evident that
ultimately éo and io fell together in io (ia), but that eo and io fell
together in eo as in W-S and Merc. These conclusions, based on the
prevailing spellings of KG, are confirmed by the history of the
dialect in the ME period.
§ 298. There is no reason to think that the first element of Za was
raised in Kt. in the OE period: smyagenne, KG 749, is simply for
sméagenne, as e and y were equivalent graphs in late Kt. (§ 288).

ie

§ 299. The main sources of this W-S diphthong were palatal
diphthongization of é (§ 185), z-umlaut of éa, zo (§§ 200-1), and con-

traction of i+e (§§ 234; 237.3). A number of subordinate sources
of ie may now be mentioned:
(a) When 7 was followed by r-+-another consonant, if the group
had arisen too late to cause breaking, we find very often that the
Z appears as ie in eW-S, though 7 frequently remains, e.g. bierd he
bears, iernan run, biernan burn, fierst period.
1 Elpiodigness PC 891, eldiode Oros. 126, 16, elbiodige 120, 13.
2 On -a in the second element, see § 280,

§ 300

LATER HISTORY OF DIPHTHONGS

127

(b) te apparently replaces io from 7 by back umlaut in eW-S
under circumstances not clear, e.g. tielung effort, and related forms,
wietad imper. know, and various forms and derivatives of witan,
fewrietum d.p. writings, geflietu p. disputes, Sefriedode he defended,
niedemest lowest, cliepiad they call, behienan on this side of. The
significance of these spellings is uncertain: they seem too frequent
to dismiss as graphic variants of 2 (cf. § 300). In the majority of the
forms, there should be no back umlaut in W-S: it may be that
when back umlaut of 7 failed to take place, there was later a tendency for i to become ze.
(c) Initial sto- seems to have frequently developed in eW-S to

sie-. The only recorded instances are frequent stent, siendon, are,
beside sint, sindon, but frequent |W-S syfon seven, syppan after,
sylfor silver, with y from te (§ 301), indicate that the change was
common.

(d) A later change of sel- to siel- will be discussed below, § 325.
§ 300. It is clear that W-S ie had undergone monophthongiza-

tion before the period of our early W-S manuscripts, for in all of
them i and # spellings appear for ze, and by inverted spelling ie
appears for i, especially in the Hatton MS. of CP, e.g. bieterness,
wiederweard, briengan, ondliefene, flietad, gietsiad (and related
words), gepriepd, giefernes, iedelre, gelieffeesd, riece, sciend, tiema,
undriestan, ryhtwiesnes, gewieten, wiese. i is so freely used for ie in
eW-S that one example only of each of the main phonological
types will be given: with 7-mutation of ea, wille fountain, fird army,
hithhad they laugh, scippend creator; with 7-mutation of io, smirewad they anoint, fikt he fights; with ze by palatal influence gescinded
pass. part. hurt, forgitan forget;! with 7-mutation of éa, gehiran
hear; with 7-mutation of io, gestiran control.? The monophthongiza-

tion of ie to ¥, on the other hand, is less frequent in eW-S, and
practically limited to the position between a labial consonant and
r: hwyrfan turn, wyrnan refuse, awyrged cursed, wyrsa worse,
wyrresta worst, wyrde worthy (and its compounds), wyrd he becomes,
1 In gifan give, pass. part. gifen, besideie spellings we may have, not change of
ie to i, but an alternative root form gif-, which may also be reflectedin frequent
IW-S gifan, &c., beside gyfan,in Ep. 525 gibaen, pass. part., andin Rit. 66, 15
Sorgifimper.

2 S-B § 107.2.5 are not justified in assuming a divergent W-S treatment of

mutated io before w at leastin the words hiew shape, niewe new; ie is recorded

in these words, and thereis no reason to suppose that the more usual i7 is not its

normal monophthongization.

128

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 30%

wyrpd he throws, occur frequently with y. These words are

also recorded with z and ie.! Other instances of ie > y are fyr

further (and related forms), Oros., byrhto brightness, CP 69, 22,
and with ze as defined under § 299.a, byrd' he bears, CP 72, 13,

Syrste d.s. period, CP 228, 6, Oros. 72, 1, forms of byrnan burn,
Oros. 142, 15; 160, 24.
§ 301. The picture obtained from later West Saxon texts is
different. It is plain that the type of language found in the manuscripts accepted as eW-S differed considerably from that which
contributed most to the formation of 1W-S. In the latter type ie
became 7 before palatal consonants, but # in all other positions,
hence we find prevailingly in !W-S manuscripts e.g. miht might,
niht night, sthd sees, gingra younger (§ 178), Aig hay, cigan call,
lihtan alleviate, but yldra older, yrmpu poverty, yrre angry, hyran
hear, éyse cheese, frynd friends, &c. On the subsequent treatment
of§ from ie see §§ 316-17.

TRANSFERENCE OF STRESS

§ 302. A few forms in lNorth. and IW-S point to occasional shift of
stress from the first to the second element of diphthongs, with loss of
the first element. The chief instances are Li., Rit. sudfer silver (cf. Li.
g.s. seulfres), Li., Ru.? sodda afterwards (for *siodda, cf. § 217), Ru.? solf
self (for seolf), Rit. fouer four (beside féouer), gitrdwalice faithfully (for
-tréow-). In |W-S most instances are after palatals, e.g. sédwian observe,
ongadn against, for scéawian, ongéan, but also sufon seven, sufoda seventh.
§ 303. Some late texts have spellings which suggest a tendency for
initial géa-, gé0- and éa-, Zo- to become identical in sound. The process

would involve a shift of stress: 2a, o > 1d, 10; géa, gé0 > jed, fed > 1d,
18. So we find spellings like éoc (Wald. 1, 25), for géoc help; and, on
the other hand, gealgodon (Brun. 9, MS. D), geornustlice (A xiii. 439)
for ealgodon they defended,? eornostlée earnestly. agiode for aéode,
! In view of these ze spellings, there can be no doubt that the eW-S y spellings
reflect a development of te. $ from ie not between a labial and 7 is very rare in
eW-S, except in Junius’ transcript of the Cotton MS. of CP: it is to be feared
that the scribe’s familiarity with I1W-S has impaired his accuracy. Oros. has
about eight instances in words with mutated ea (e.g. yldo, besyrede), and
Séowerscfte 74, 13, abr¥tton 238, 10, séyt 10, 35, etc. (3rd sg. pres. indic. from
scéotan). (The vowel of ijipre may be mutated #, Oros. 166, 16; 292, 27.)

2 $-B, § 212.4.2, quote Géanberht as an early instance of such a spelling (Ct.

of 781, Cott. Ct. vi. 4). But this is an error for JZnberht, and the manuscript is a
late copy (? tenth century). In middaneard, beside more original -geard, the elements eard, geard, are confused; so in wineard, -geard.

§ 304

PALATAL UMLAUT

129

happened (Ct. of 1038, Cott. Aug. ii. go), is an attempt at a phonetic
writing of 36; eador for geador (with velar g) shows graphic equation of

gea- and ea-.

G. Palatal Umlaut
§ 304. This change may be defined as follows: before yt, xs,

xP, in absolute finality, and perhaps when followed by -e, the diphthongs eo, io, and the monophthong e, all became 7. Obviously,

before x groups eo and io would occur only in W-S and Kt.:

smoothing would have reduced them to e and i in Angl. On the
other hand, owing to breaking e would not be found before x
groups in W-S and Kt., apart from Kt. forms with the mutation

of ea, e.g. *hlehp he laughs.

§ 305. In eW-S we already find cniht boy, riht right, siex six,
wrixl change, Wikt Wight, wiht creature, -bryht (name-element).!
It is doubtful whether occasional ie spellings indicate that the

change eo/io > i was through a stage ze, or whether they are merely
graphic (see § 300).? Since consonant groups were not palatal
before back vowels, and possibly not before -e, they would not

there cause palatal umlaut, and hence normal paradigms are cntht,
cneohtas, *Piht, *Piohtas later Peohtas. Hence analogical forms

like cneoht, cnihtas, Pihtas are freely formed; meox manure, rarely
has palatal umlaut, and gefeoht, fight, feohtan to fight, and related

words never have palatal umlaut, the diphthongal forms with a
back vowel after the At having prevailed.
§ 306. In KG the same change has occurred, for we find -riht,
cntht-, wiht weight, gewricl (for gewrixl). The dialect had a number

of forms with io or e in the 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic., where

W-S had ze from the mutation of ea or io. These forms should have
Kt. i by palatal umlaut: actually we find 4hd laughs (and hence

Ist sg. hithe),3 but -siohd sees (by analogy of type siod, with loss of x),

' In 1W-S -bryht, -briht is often transferred to the first element of names.
Byrht is found in 1W-S in both the first and second elements of names (e.g.
Byrhtnod, Ordbirht). It is rare except in names, e.g. byrhtword, unbyrhtor. It
seems due, not to palatal umlaut, but to a special development of beor- seen also
in Byrn- in names for Beorn- (e.g. Byrnstan), Intebyrgan for -beorgum, Inkberrow (Robertson, A-S charters, p. 162). Bern- for Beorn- in moneyers’ names

on ninth-century. W-S coins may reflect the beginning of the change.
3 Since riht is very rare, and ryht the normal spelling in eW-S, and since the
name-element -bryht practically always has y in PC, it might be argued that eo/io
became ie by palatal umlaut, and that this sound became i normally, but y after 7.
3 Perhaps add tirhd, he mocks, despite the intervention of r between the
vowel and the palatal group. Cf. poetical fyrhp for ferhp soul.

130

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 307

slehst strikest, slehd strikes. Special Kt. e < y (§ 288) is subjected

to palatal umlaut in genihtsumiad they abound.
§ 307. In Kentish before goo, spellings seem to suggest that in
this dialect at least palatal umlaut took place in two stages—first
monophthongization (eo, io > e, 7), then raising (e >i). Ct. 38,

14, reohte d.s. right, shows the original diphthong, id. 5, rehtlicast
most right, Ct. 41, 62, sex six, show the first change, while the
second appears in KG. So to appears as a diphthong in the Kt.
form ia in Ct. 30 Wiahtred, but in KG we have wiht.
§ 308. In the earlier Mercian texts (VP and the early glossaries),
there is no sign of palatal umlaut. In Ru.1, however, we find niht

(< neht, § 200.3), riht beside reht, sihbe behold, syxta sixth, beside
sex(ta); and in RG niht beside neht, cniht, sthpe.
§ 309. In North. there is no certain trace of palatal umlaut
in the OE period. ME forms show that it eventually reached

North.
§ 310. é0 and io seem not to be often affected by palatal umlaut

in OE; yet ME dht from léoht (lumen and levis) shows that it was
along-operative tendency, which could intervene after the shorten-

ing of vowels before groups of two consonants (§ 329). In the OE
period the only traces of such a change are Ru.’ ht lumen
(perhaps influenced by the verb /ihtan), nihste nearest, beside
léht, néhste; KG -wrihd (hence imper. -wrih), -flihd, -fligd, 3rd sg.
pres. indic. from wrion wrap, fiéon flee, flégan (W-S fliegan, with
i-umlaut of éa) put to flight, beside -tiohd from téon draw (perhaps
with analogical io), -bégd from biigan bend (with Kt. é < 7); so
nih, near, may have the vowel of *nihst.1
§ 311. It will be clear from the above sections that palatal umlaut is a change which began in the south: it can be seen operating
in ninth-century Kt., and in W-S it has affected all possible short
sounds by goo. In the tenth century it appears in Merc., still later
in North. It was apparently due to a palatalization of the groups
xs, xt, xp when final, or followed by the vowel e, which enabled

them to exert an influence on eo, to, e, similar to i-umlaut. Long
sounds were rarely subject to the change.
' The operation of palatal umlaut, and its imperfect representation in spell-

ing, so that Althd, fligd were written beside slehst, bégd, and contained the same
vowel (i), leads in KG to the misuse of the symbol i for é, e.g. 723 slide sledgehammer, 699 hinrad he is hungry (for hengrag, with Kt. e for y), 141 afliged apostate; and similarly of 2 for 7, e.g. 353 lédetere hypocrite.

131

H. Late West-Saxon Smoothing
§ 312. In IW-S a change occurs by which éa > é before ¢, g, x

and after ¢, sé and g (not after 4, which was initially not a palatal
or velar spirant, but a breathing, or glottal spirant). Hence we find
such forms as seh he saw, ehta eight, fex hair, héh high, bécon
beacon, ége eye, cerf he cut, gef he gave, séép sheep, cés he chose,
&ér year, beside seah, eahta, &c. The operation of these changes
seems to have been limited by factors no longer recoverable, for

they are not indicated with anything approaching consistency by
the spelling system of any manuscript, although W-S spelling is
fairly quick to allow for phonetic developments down to 1000, and
the changes under discussion are relatively early, for traces are to
be observed in eW-S, e.g. péh though, frequently Oros., toécan in
addition, Oros. 130, 30, mehte he might, frequently, unmeht weakness, CP 465, 32. Of IW-S manuscripts the Abingdon version of
OEC (i.e. MSS. B and C) down to 977 is very rich in forms of the
type, often having gér, Sexe, &c.
§ 313. It should be observed that these changes affect falling

diphthongs only: hence words like gedra formerly, séeadu shadow,
sceddan divide (§§ 172, 179) are not subject to it. On the other hand,

not only éa from palatal diphthongization of original front vowels
(e.g. gef, scép), but éa from palatal diphthongization of mutated
vowels (§ 184) is subject to this change, e.g. scép sheath, Mal.
162, &c.
§ 314. In Kt. of the ninth century there are a few forms which arose
from a process similar to that to be observed in W-S: B&gmund Ct. 42,
Hegyée Ct. 34, &c also (frequently). These forms are not to be attributed
to the influence of Angl. spelling, for this would be to postulate in-

fluence of eighth-century Angl. on ninth-century Kt. (see § 225).
KG
have only meht thou mayst, déh though, beside many forms with
éa unaffected."
' Perhaps to be placed here are CP 152, 13 smégeanne, KG 953 smégan,
although the g is palatal as the spelling of C’P indicates (< *smauyéjan-). Lack
of material, however, makes it difficult to decide if a following palatal could have
the same effect as a following back consonant.
Bliss (English and Germanic studies iii. 82-87) assumes that the change

#a > é@ indicates a narrowing of the first element of the diphthong before
monophthongization. It seems evident that the change was not through a stage

&, at least in W-S, otherwise /@gon would have become */égon, when the second
stage of da > & > é took place.

132

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 315

1. Unrounding and Rounding of Front Vowels
§

315. In early texts ¢ occasionally occurs where we should

expect y, and should perhaps be regarded as a spelling slip for ui
(§ 42), e.g. Ep. cistigtan, smigilas, Cp. risel, from cystig generous,
smygel retreat, rysel fat. Of later Merc. texts, VP has i for y only

in getrime, 50, 14, imper. of getrymman strengthen, RG only in the
word drthten (invariably), and Ru.1 only in kining and drihten frequently beside y forms, two forms of genihtsumian suffice, hingrade
hungered 21, 18, dincap seem, 18, 12. In early North. texts unrounding does not appear; in Li., Rit., Ru.” it is invariable in
arihten, frequent in cining, otherwise sporadic, e.g. Rit. gestir movement; Li. ofcimes he proceeds, getri(m)ad he strengthens. y for 7

in these North. texts is invariable in symle, always, sporadic in
other words, e.g. Rit. suyppa whip; Li. wynn work, wynnes they
work. Since these y spellings are all in a labial neighbourhood,
they represent rounding of z, not inverted spelling due to unrounding of y.
§ 316. In eW-S # is hardly ever written 7: instances are a few
forms of cyning, genihtsumnisse Oros. 182, 15, CP 325, 13, disigan
CP 279, 19, unscildig CP 379, 14, and occasionally is. pis, hwi. In
many 1W-S texts # has a tendency to appear as i before A, ¢, and
&, and groups containing them, and in such positions ze tends to be

monophthongized to Z instead of to the usual |W-S 4, e.g. drihten
lord, hige mind, bicgan buy, hingran hunger, drige dry, wiséan wish,

instead of dryhten, &c.;! and miht might, niht night, hig hay, cigan
call, ihtan alleviate, for eW-S mieht, &c.2 Yet y often remains
before r groups, e.g. wyréan work, byrg d.s. city; and develops from
ie, @.g. awyrgan curse.
§ 317. Some IW-S manuscripts show that in some areas # (both

mutated #, and from ie) was becoming unrounded by isolative
change. This appears in spellings with 7 for $, and inverted spell-

ings with # for 7 where there is nothing to cause rounding. An
example of such a manuscript is MS. Laud Misc. 509 of the OE
Heptateuch.

§ 318. In IW-S Z often becomes # in the neighbourhood of
labials and before 7, e.g. clypian call, éyrice church, myéel great,
* Also cining, cinn, where no fh, é, or g is present.
2 And so probably gingra from *giengra (§ 178).

§ 319

VOWELS BETWEEN w AND r

133

swype very. A few such spellings already occur in eW-S,' also
sporadic y for i in other positions, especially in cases of pes this
(pysne, pysses, &c.).

§ 319. In North. there is a tendency in the tenth century to
round é to é after w. With e this is practically always carried out
in Rit., very frequently in Li., e.g. woe we, woeg way, woer man,
woerc work, woes imper. be, cuoeda say, twoelf twelve, huoelé which,

suoelé such, woenda go, awoerda destroy. With 2 the rounding is
less frequent, e.g. wééron they were, cudédon they said, huder

where, woede garment, wdépen weapon, swoér mother-in-law. In
Ru.* rounding is practically limited to woeg way; it is sporadic in
other words, and absent in the case of the long vowel.

J. Vowels between w and 7 in West-Saxon
§ 320. In W-S texts an increasing tendency is seen to allow
groups consisting of w-+-short vowel-+r to fall together in wur. Of
groups of this type only wear is quite unaffected by the tendency,

which successively affects weor, wyr, wor.
§ 321. The change is first to be traced in the case of weor: Oros.

has Geoweorpa for Jugurtha, with assimilation of the second part
of the name to the adj. weorp worth, and this presupposes a form
wurp, which is directly recorded CP 200, 23 (a.s.m.). !W-S manuscripts usually have some wur spellings, e.g. in manuscripts of

the W-S Gospels, swurd sword, wurban become, wurpan throw,
wurpian honour, beside many eo forms;? so before vowels, pwuru,

-e, inflected forms of pweorh, crooked, swura neck (cf. § 241.2,
footnote 5).
§ 322. The change of wyr to wur is ill represented in our texts, e.g.
with y the 7-mutation of u, W-S Gospels, wurtruma root, awurtwalian
unplant,

ZfdA ix. 453, wurdwritere historian, Wulfstan 145, 10,
wurmum d.p. worms; with eW-S ie, W-S Gospels, wurpe worthy,
ilfric’s Lives of Saints 20, 65, gewurpan recover.
§ 323. The change of wor to wur is even less well evidenced in spelling;
of the forms usually quoted only wurd word, gewurden past part. become,
are etymologically certain examples for wor; they occur in the W-S

Gospels.3

* See Cosijn, Altwestsdchs. Gramm. i. 64-65.
? Rarely before r+-back consonant: perhaps only wurca g.p. works, Cott.
Tib. A vii, Wright-Wilcker 249, 18; 250, 20. On eW-S worc, see Luick, Hist.

Gramm., § 266.2.
3 Wurold world, may be from weorold not worold (§ 210.1); wurms pus,

134

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 324

§ 324. ME evidence shows that these changes were extensive, and
even in OE the meagre spelling evidence is increased by many inverted
spellings with wyr for weor, and weor for wyr, showing that these groups
had coalesced (in wur), e.g. sweyrd sword, Aélfric’s Voc., cwyrn mill (for
cweorn), W-S Gospels, weorm worm, And. 769.'

kK. The Group sel
§ 325. In W-S, after the period of the group of manuscripts
regarded as ‘early’, the group sel- developed (presumably through
siel-) to syl- or sil-: in IW-S sylf and syllan (and related words)
usually appear for self self, sellan give, and more sporadically occur
sylra, syllié for selra better, sellié wonderful. The change does not
occur in sele hall (a poetical word of fixed form), or before ld, where
é had developed (§ 283): seldan seldom, seld seat, selde porch.
§ 326. Outside W-S there are few OE traces of the change, though
ME forms suggest that it was widespread, and that the consonant
following the vowel did not always require to be /.7 In OE, however,
sile I give, Ct. 48, is hardly more than an error in view of infl. inf.
siollanne, also Ct. 48; sylf, Ct. 41, is a Kt. inverted spelling for self;
Ru.! sylle, imper. sg., once, and syl/f, four times, beside frequent sel
forms, are to be attributed to the influence of W-S spelling; Li., Rit.
(gi)stled he gives, beside more frequent (g1)seled, is due to the change
and has influenced Li., Rit. silo, -a, 1st sg.

L. Anglian e > z
§ 327. The many instances of 2 for e, the 7-umlaut of 2, in
North. and Ru.1 are for the most part to be explained under § 193
above.? The instances in North. texts of 2 for Prim. Gmc. e are
mostly due to a penetration of the present system of strong verbs
by the vowel of the preterite (see §§ 741-3). In a few words, however, North. and Ru.1 show an opening of e before ht, indicated by
the spelling z (see § 227, footnote); the curious forms Li. cnathtes,
wurdlian speak, may have had y, see Gabrielson, Influence of w, p. 254; S—B,
§ 117.4.
! Already CP 191, 15 and 339, 18 (Hatton MS.) has wyrden for weorden; but
wyrd- for weorp- in compounds is influenced by wyrde; and pwyres, crosswise,
has y always in Oros., so it must be regarded as a form with i-umlaut.
2 At least ME suggen points to OE *syégan for seégan say.
3 Bilbring, Alteng. Elementarbuch, p. 70; Kuhn, PMLA lx. 642-6.

§ 328

TRANSITION TO MIDDLE ENGLISH

135

Rit. cnaihtas are hardly due to more than a sporadic equation of

# and ai (but cf. A Ixxviii. 145-6).

§ 328. On the other hand, Ru. shows a well-marked change

we- > we-, e.g. cwep- appears for cwep- with very great frequence

in the present system and pass. part. of cweban, say, while other

verbs of the strong Classes IV and V preserve e with great regularity. Other words appearing with w- for we- in Ru.) are was
imper. be, weg way, wer man, wel- well, welig rich, sweltep he

dies, swagre a.s. mother-in-law, swester sister. There may be a
similar change before gn and fn, for pegn is frequent for pegn
servant, and regn rain, forlegnisse adultery, fregnast thou askest,
also occur, while zfne even (and compounds), stzfn voice, are
frequent. Other instances of & for e are insignificant, e.g. agefep

gives, forstelan pres, subj. steal, tagpigap ye tithe (once each),
and unaccented pzx¢ for pec thee (3 times).

M. The Transition to Middle English
§ 329. The eleventh century was a period of great change in the
accented vowels, but these changes did not generally receive expression in the by then fairly stable Old English spelling, and they are

to be traced mainly through Middle English evidence. The great
changes of the eleventh century were:
(1) The quantitative system was completely changed. Vowels
were shortened before all consonant groups, other than those
which cause lengthening (§ 283). Vowels were also shortened three
syllables from the end of a word before any consonant or consonant
group. Hence, for example, OE brohte, héafodu no longer had long

vowels."
(2) Diphthongs short and long were monophthongized, so that

éa > & and éo > 6. (fo had by now become @o in North.; io still
existed in Kt., see below.) Monophthongs first begin to be indi-

cated by spelling soon after 1000.2 Ed-, Léf- for the name-elements

Ead-, Léof-, are frequent on coins of the period of AEthelred (978* Consonant doubling in closed syllables to indicate vowel shortness (the
system afterwards developed by Orrm) is found in the mid-eleventh century,
see Weyhe in Germanica (Festschrift Sievers), p. 318.
2 Unless very occasional North. and Ru.) spelling with 2 for ea before r
groups be regarded as due to the beginnings of the process: Li. Jzrf (noun, and
some compounds and related forms), -wrd (pret. from worda, become), Ru.*
néddzerfe (frequently), Ru. Jzrf (noun).

136

CHANGES OF ACCENTED VOWELS

§ 329

1016) and later. In Kt., however, the long diphthongs éa and io
(from éo and io, § 297) underwent a shift of stress, to become level
or even rising, and hence were not subject to monophthongization,
which affects only the typical OE falling diphthongs. This shift of
stress seems to have occurred, though more sporadically, in other

dialects. Some spellings suggest that even short diphthongs could
survive if they underwent a shift of stress, but it is unlikely that
any falling diphthongs survived to 1100."
(3) The sounds represented in OE by 2 and a coalesced in a,

so that OE dzxg, dagas now had the same accented vowel. This
naturally had the result that dialects with e for Prim. Gmc. a were
now even more sharply distinguished than before, having a distinction in the phonological types deg, dagas, whether these repre-

sented older deg, dagas (Kt.) or deg, degas (VP). & derived from ea
by (2) above shared the change to a, so that in the course of the
century OE hearm > *hzerm > harm. Spellings of older 2 (from
# or ea) with a appear about 1100,” but the change was not complete in all areas at that time; in the dialect of MS. Bodley 34 of
the Katherine group, for example, the vowels of OE Merc. ail,
hearm are still distinguished about 1200 as a and & (written a, ea).
" See Samuels, Trans. Philological Soc., 1952, pp. 25-27; Kuhn and Quirk,
Language xxix. 150, and other references there given.
? Both a for z, and 2 for ea, occur in Cott. Aug. ii. 85, to be dated on subject-

matter 1035-40, but probably a copy of rather later date (see Whitelock, Anglo-

Saxon wills, p. 182). 2 > a earlier in the name-elements fel-, Z/f- when the
second element contains a back vowel: instances are frequent after 950, e.g.
Alfwold, Apelmod, Hyde Liber Vitae.

Vil

THE VOWELS OF UNACCENTED
SYLLABLES
A. The Germanic and West Germanic Periods
§ 330. In Indo-European the accent might fall on any syllable
of a word, but in Germanic it became limited to the first syllable."

Germanic had at first the same vowels in accented and unaccented
syllables, except that Gmc. é was developed in accented syllables
only.? In final syllables, however, the Indo-European long vowels

had had two intonations, the normal one, resembling that of
internal syllables, and the abnormal one, which left vowels less
prone to undergo shortening in Germanic.3
§ 331. The accent was in Germanic an expiratory stress, which
threw the syllable upon which it fell into sharp relief, while the

other syllables of the word became very prone to reduction.t The
ptincipal Germanic changes of unaccented vowels of which the
effects are to be traced in Old English are:

(1) IE a, o, e were lost in Gmc. in absolute finality, ie. when

no consonant had followed them in IE, e.g. OE wat I know, he
* On the accentuation of compound verbs see § 72.
2 See § 100.3.
3 The normal intonation is variously termed in English ‘acute’ or ‘broken’,
and the abnormal ‘circumflex’ or ‘slurred’. Acute and circumflex are adopted
from the terminology of English grammars of Greek, broken and slurred are

derived from the terms Stosston and Schleifton used in German of the two
intonations of Lithuanian. A vowel of a final syllable which had abnormal in-

tonation in I-E appears as a long vowel in Gothic (where norma! I-E long final
vowels are shortened), while in Greek it has a circumflex accent, in Lithuanian

a Schleifton; e.g. the g.s. of the d- (Gme. 6-) declension has Goth. -és, Gr. -as,
Lith, -és. Further examples and discussion in Trans. Philological Soc., 1936,

PP. 11-13, 34-36.

* All consonants which had been final in I-E except s and r were dropped in
Prim. Gmc.: examples below, § 399. Final m developed regularly to wm (§ 100.2),
and then the consonant dropped, leaving u, e.g. a.s. fotm foot, Goth. Sétu. The
final group -ns of most pl. accs. is retained in Goth., dropped in ON , e.g. Goth.
dagans, ON daga days, acc. The acc. pl. seems to have adopted the form of
the

nom. in West Gmc. (cf., however, § 586).

5 It is not possible to decide if a and o had fallen together before this loss ;
unaccented e had not yet become i, for final i remains in Gmc.

138

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 33

knows, Gr. olSa, ole; OE ber imper. bear, Lat. fer < *fere;
probably g.s. -zs of a-declension, believed to be from -oso.
(2) IE e remained in Gmc. in unaccented syllables before r, e.g.
OE feder father, zfter after, hwxper which of two, cf. Gr. acc.
marépa, anwrépw, morepos. Otherwise unaccented e > i,! e.g. OE
fet feet, hilpp he helps, < Gme. “fotiz, *yilpipi, cf. Gr. mddes,

*pépert.

(3) When two or more syllables preceded, i (generally from IE e)
was usually lost in Gmc. Examples are the g.s. and d.s. of weak
nouns (OE guman < -niz, -ni), 2nd and 3rd sg., and 3rd pl. of
present indic. (OE hilpst, hilpp, helpap < -ist, -ipi, -anpi), and
d.p. ending OE -um, in so far as this is from -miz, IE -mis.2 There
are a few exceptions in the g.s. and d.s. of trisyllabic consonant

stems, especially *milukiz, *miluki > Prim. OE *milyki > Angl.
mile (generalized to nom. and acc.), beside n.s. *meluk3 (§ 628.5)
> W-S meole milk; from this, retention of -i can be assumed in
these cases of all trisyllabic consonant stems, e.g. *alupi(z) > ealop.
(4) In final unaccented syllables, a (< a@ or 0) was lost even

when a consonant followed, or had done so in IE, as in the n.s.
and a.s. of the a-declension, *stainaz, -am, OE stan.+ This caused
syllabic liquids and nasals to arise again, e.g. *fiygraz > *fingrz
> Goth. fingrs.s Similarly yu often became u, e.g. *baryaz >
*baruz > OE bearu.® At this stage, however, unaccented -a- was
retained as the connecting element of compounds, cf. OHG
1 In unaccented syllables e was not subject to the vowel harmony which is
frequent in accented syllables (§ 114), but passes into ¢ even before a, e.g. adjs.
in -ila-, and participial formations in -ina-, OE lytel, gen, cymen, from *litilaz,
&c, Unaccented u similarly seems not to have been subject to vowel harmony in
the type of Gmc. from which OE was derived, e.g. eobor beside eobur- boar, Cp.
179, 558, suggests that OE eofor is for earlier eofur by § 373 below, though derived
from *evura-.
2 The evidence on the precise origin of this ending is conflicting.
3 The variation in root vowel seen in *meluk, *milukiz is due to the harmonization of accented ¢ to the following i (§ 112), a process which, like umlaut (§ 203),
‘was not hindered by an intervening u. Similarly in Prim. OE *sefun existed
beside *sifuni (§ 293).
+ This loss of protected a was later than the losses dealt with under (1) and
(3), for though lost in Goth. protected final a remains in the oldest Norse runic
inscriptions when a nasal had followed it. It is not clear why ~as < -oso in g.s.
of the a-declension escapes syncopation.
5 On the subsequent treatment of these new syllabic consonants in OE see
§§ 363 ff.

6 Vocalization of j due to a similar cause is rare: OE here army < *hariz <

*xarjaz (§ 575).

§331

GERMANIC AND WEST GERMANIC PERIODS

139

alamahtig, tagalih, but OE zlmihtig almighty, dxglic daily, owing
to later syncopation (§ 341).
(5) In final unaccented -syllables long vowels with the normal
intonation were shortened:

6 (< I-E 4 and 6) in shortening became in the East Gmc. area
subject to the tendency o > a: e.g. Goth. baira I bear, giba gift,

juka yokes. But in the North and West Gmc. areas, 6 was closed
in shortening, and, when preserved, appears as -u, OF beoru

(nW-S), giefu, geocu. But in all areas 6 >a when a nasal had
followed, e.g. OE a.s. giefe < -2 < -a < -6m, and so nsf. of
weak nouns, tunge < -dn.! This indicates that at the time of

shortening the vowel was nasalized by influence of the lost nasal,
and thus was prevented from closing.

i (< I-E i and ei) > i,? e.g. n.s. of g6- stems (Goth. bandi, OE
bend), endings of past subj. (OE s¢yle, -en < -i, -int).
# > 2, e.g. OE 3rd sg. of weak past indic., -de, earlier -dz (e.g.

CH astelidz).

(6) It has been shown under (4) and (5) that I-E 0 > a,
d@>6
in Gmc., in unaccented as in accented syllables. But in North and

West Gmc., in medial unaccented syllables when m followed, or

when u stood in the following syllable, I-E 0 > u, Gmc. 6 (< I-E
@ and 6) > a; e.g. with I-E 0, d.p. of a-declension, OE stanum,

Goth. stainam < I-E -omis; a.s. and p. of disyllabic consonant
stems, *bropuru, -uns, and of masc. weak nouns *Zumunu, -uns (on

these forms in OE see §§ 617, 630); with Gmc. 6, d.p. of ddeclension, OE giefum, Goth. gibém, and so of fem. weak nouns,
OE tungum, Goth. tugg6m < I-E -amis; a.s. and p. of fem. weak

nouns, *tungiinu, -uns (cf. OE foldu a.s. CH); nouns in I-E -dtus

> West Gmce. -iipuz, Goth. -dpus: *fiskdpus (Lat. piscdtus) >

OE fiscop’ fishing, cf. Goth. gaundpus mourning; superlatives in
-dst- had -ist- before u, as dip. -distumiz, and hence OE has

-ost < -tist, beside -ast < -dst (§§ 355.4); the past of weak verbs of

Class II varied between such forms as -606, -idunt, either vowel

might be generalized, and hence OE -ode beside -ade.*

? Other possible cases of OE -e from Gme. -én, -dm, are the a.p. giefe (nW-S
§ 586), 1st sg. pres. ind. bere (W-S, § 731.8).

? In OE, the 7 is either lost (§ 345) or becomes e (§ 369).
3 On OE o < u in unaccented syllables see § 373.
* West Gme. “friund, *fiund exhibited contraction of the succession i+a

(§ 120.3), which arose owing to the development of u in certain cases, such as

140

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 333

(7) In North and West Gmc., ai and au (< ai, o1; au, ou) > #
and 6 respectively in unaccented final syllables; e.g. OE pres. subj.
helpe, -en, d.s. stdne, giefe, éste, g.s. éste, n.p.m. géde, d.s.f. gddre,
g. and dis. suna, eahta eight,’ cf. Goth. hilpai, (staina), gibai,
anstai, anstais, godai, pizai, sunaus, sunau, ahtau.
The history of ai and au in unaccented medial syllables is difficult
to determine. If OHG g.s.f. blintera, d.s.f. blinteru, g.p. blintero,
correspond exactly in formation to Goth. blindaizos, -aizo, and if
the suffix seen in OE Uifen sustenance, lufen joy, is identical with

that of Goth. kbains, lubains, it is clear that medial unaccented
ai > # in West Gmc. For unaccented medial au there is no
evidence.?

B. The Operation of the Major Ingvaeonic and Primitive

Old English Vowel Changes in Unaccented Syllables
§ 332. The Ingvaeonic loss of nasal consonants before voiceless

spirants with compensatory lengthening of the vowel, and change
of d to 6, described in § 121, occurs in unaccented syllables also,
e.g. pres. indic. pl. OE -ab < -6p (§ 355.4) < -anpi (§ 331.3);
orap breath < *oranp-; dugup chivalry < *dugunp-, and so geogup
youth; a.p. endings -ans, -uns, -ins, > -6s, -iis, -is.3
§ 333. @ is subject to the same alternative developments in
unaccented as in accented syllables, becoming 2 normally, but a
before nasals. Before nasals in early texts the symbol is a, the
hesitation between a and o found in accented syllables does not
appear, e.g. helpan help, guman men, éastan from the east.
In a group of words generally used in low sentence stress 0
appears: spellings with a are rare, and this points to 0, not to the
accented vowel variously spelled a and o (§ 130); they are pone,
hwone, pon, hwon, bonne, hwonne, on. In a number of second elements, a further development to u takes place before m and 7:
a.s. and p., where u stood in the final syllable; hence North. friond, fiond, other
dialects usually fréond, féond (§ 293).
t On OE e (Prim. OE 2) and a from unaccented 2, 6, see § 355.
2 Eahtatyne, eahtatig are too obviously connected with the simplex eahta to
provide evidence for medial au. On ai, au in the second element of compounds,
see § 356.
3 These endings so fell together with the corresponding n.p., except -as,
which in West Gmc. is replaced by the nom. in both the u- and consonant
declensions (OE suna, fét).

$334

INGVAEONIC AND PRIMITIVE OE CHANGES

141

licuma body (beside lichama), acumba oakum, 2fpunca offence (be-

side zfpanca), furlung furlong (beside furlang).1
Except before nasals, unaccented a > @ (later e, § 369), eg.
n.s.f. and n. of weak nouns, OE tunge, éage; a.s. of 6-declension,
OE giefe (§ 331.5); g.s. of a-declension, OE.-es, earlier -zs < -as
< -oso (§ 331.1); ending OE -z¢, -eg (later -ig, § 376) < -ag, e.g.

hunz§, haleg.
§ 334. Unlike the accented vowel, unaccented a > 2 before a
nasal consonant if this did not belong to the same syllable, and this
2 could be transferred to forms where vowel and nasal belonged
to the same syllable. Thus CH hefaen-, heben, are due to infl.
*hevenes, &c. This is the origin of OE -en when absence of umlaut

shows it not to be from -in, and when it is not due to parasiting,
e.g. strong pass. parts. in -en (still often -an in Ep.), mzgen might

(OHG magan), fegen glad (OS fagan), péoden prince (Goth.
piudans).

§ 335. In a group of words frequently used in weak stress, and
in the second element of some compounds, a is treated as if it
stood before a nasal, appearing as a or o: of of, of-, ot- (unaccented

forms of zf-, xt-, § 73), was was, nas was not (beside wes, nz),
swa so (§125), ac but, ondsworu answer, sipfat journey (beside
andswaru, sipfxt), herepap, -pop main road.
§ 336. A similar development occurs in the case of @ < ai.

When shortened in low stress (§ 356), it appears in historical forms
as a or o: béot boast (< *bihdt, § 238.2), eofot crime (Ep. 854

ebhat), éorod troop, earfop trouble, wulmod distaff (OHG uuollameit); etymologically uncertain is innop, -ap, inside (of body). A
different development is shown by éored, earfep, where the accent

of the second element was reduced sufficiently early for ai to
become # under § 331.7, and unaccented & was developed in OE

as usual (§§ 356, 372).

§ 337. @ > @ in OE in unaccented as in accented syllables, e.g.

nomina agentis in -ere < -#ri (§§ 355.5, 369), as Jeornere learner

(OHG -4ri), and perhaps

with shortening and syncopation,

geatwe armour, fretwe ornaments (cf. getdwe, § 151, but see § 358,

footnote).
1 A similar development occurs in orup breath, beside orab from *oranp(§§ 332, 356); on orop see § 374. Beornap is developed like orapb (< -nanp-),
while Beornndp has stressed development of the second element. The etymology
of siilung, Kt. measure of land, is uncertain: not to sulh+ lang because o is rare,
a unknown in the second element, and medial // never occurs.

142

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 338

§ 338. Breaking seems not to take effect in OE unaccented
syllables, but instead we have retraction of 2 (< Gmc. a) before
l or r+consonant to a, and this a, like those dealt with in § 335-6,
tends to become o later, e.g. hldfard, -ord lord, toward, -word
towards (beside zoweard), North. efolsiga, ebalsiga blaspheme,
nalles not at all, weorold, -ald (Ct. 40, 20) world, onwald, onwold
power, and proper names with -bald, -bold, -wald, -wold, -ward,
~word, -hard in the second element.! So eW-S art art, barf need,
beside eart, pearf, are forms developed in low stress. A further
development to u appears in hlafurd (IW-S, rare), weoruld (frequent), eofulsiga (Ru.®).
§ 339. t-umlaut was fully operative in unaccented syllables, but
6@ and y became prehistorically already 2 and i, and 2 > e soon
after the earliest texts (§ 369). This left 2 and 7 as the only unaccented products of umlaut, and these soon fell together in e
(§§ 355-5, 369). Examples of umlaut in unaccented syllables are:
u: all words quoted in § 203 to illustrate double umlaut have
z-umlaut of u in the medial syllable.

o: suffix -ehte (OHG -ohti), as in stdnehte stony.
6: suffix -ede (OS -ddt) as in hdcede hooked; suffix -erne < -réni
(ON -raenn), as in siiperne southern; medial -ij- < -ei- < -6fin the present system of weak verbs of Class II (written -z-

or -ig-, cf. §§ 355.5, 376, 267).

@: pres. parts. in -ende* (< -andi), and gerundives in -enne

(< anj-);

z: suffixes -ettan, -estre (< -atian, -astri-) as in hléapettan leap,
séamestre sempstress; xpele noble (OS adali). The mutated
vowel was often syncopated (§ 341), e.g. mazgden maiden
(OHG magatin), lawrice lark (< *laiyarikon-, cf. § 364), and
® Forms like Eadweard, Beornheard, have the vowel of inflected Eadweardes,
&c., where the development proper to accented syllables takes place, since the
medial syllable has a half-stress (§ 90). This ea, transferred into low stress, could
be reduced to e, e.g. W-S towerd, andwerd, names in -werd for -weard, Li.

hidferd. (But Li. towzerd rather to § 329.2, footnote.) Similarly fo by breaking, if
transferred to low stress, was shortened (§ 356) if long, and can appear as u in
historical forms, e.g. ndnwuht, wuht, in low sentence stress, and with io,
Sulluht, betwuh, betwux. So in eKt., the name-element -beorht can appear in

low stress as -barht (Ct. 38 Cialbarht), no doubt over a stage -biarht (§§ 280, 297,
cf, Ct. 31 Cialbearht). But in dialects not subject to smoothing, forms with
unchanged vowels are due to absence of breaking in low stress, e.g. CA, Ct. 45,

W-S fulwiht, W-S néwiht, eKt. -berht.
+ Ep. still -andi.

§ 340

EARLY OLD ENGLISH LOSS

143

with double umlaut hegtess witch (< *hagatussj-, OHG g.p.
hagazussun).
§ 340. Back umlaut did not operate in unaccented syllables, but
it could operate under half-stress. Its results were often much
modified by subsequent loss of the half-stress, e.g. ondwlata, VP
ondwleata face (< ondwliota); sciptara, scipteara pitch (< s¢ipteora); -lucor, -lucost rare for -licor, -licost (cf. Kt. geornliocar,
with back umlaut of shortened ); endlufon eleven (beside endlifan,
-leofan); -togopa in ordinal numerals (beside -tigopa, -tiogopa).

c. Early Old English Loss of Unaccented. Vowels
§ 341. @ of unaccented final syllables was lost in Gmc. (§ 331.1,
4). In prehistoric OE it was also lost in all internal open syllables,

irrespective of whether it had been retained before a nasal, fronted

to x, or fronted and mutated to e. Examples are -ne < -anén in
a.s.m. of strong adjs., e.g. gddne; inflexions and derivatives of
adjs. in -ig, older -xg (§ 376), as monges, hdlgian; inflexions and
derivatives of words in -el, -er, -en, older -zl, &c., including pass.

parts. (§ 334), as awles, Gpres, péodnes, fagnes, fegnian, opnian,
&edafnian, gebundne, from awel hook, oper other, péoden prince,
fegen happy, open open, gedafen fit, gebunden bound; words in

-pa < -apé, as sceafpa shaving, spiwpa vomit; isolated words, as

sawl soul (< *saiyalo), hatte is called (Goth. haitada), hwepre
however, infl. exe, and hence xx axe,? and the words mezgden,
hxgtess, ldwrice, discussed § 339; the thematic -a- in compound

words with a-declension nouns in the first element, as deglic
daily, elmihtig almighty (OHG tagalih, alamahtig).3
* But #rendraca, widerbraca, are different formations beside Zrendwreca,
wiberbreca,
? Taking the form from *acas- > *xcexs- > xx-. There also existed *acus-

(see § 203, footnote), whence VP d.p. zcesum, Cp. -acus, Ld. -acus; and *acasén-,
whence Ru.! axe. Li. acas(a), Ru.? acase, are abnormal; acas is perhaps for acus
with confusion of the unaccented back vowels (§ 377), and this form by mixture
with axe has produced weak acasa, -e. (Ross, Studies in the accidence of the

Lindisfarne Gospels, p. 66, assumes a weak declension in W-S also, but the forms

he quotes are strong plurals from 2x.)
3 It is due to the analogy of these formations that the medial syllable is lost
also in compounds with nouns of the 6-declension and weak nouns in the first
element, e.g. giefstél gift-throne, heortléas dispirited: similar forms occur in

many languages, see Brugmann, Grundriss ii. 1, pp. 81, 84. Forms like Beardanéu (BH), Francancumb, marmanstdn, are genitival expressions, not true
compounds (cf. Beardséte, Francumb, marmstdn). The thematic vowels of other
declensions mostly follow the normal rules for syncope or retention (§§ 348, 3 §9).

144

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 342

§ 342. Since e, the ¢-umlaut of 2, suffered the above syncope, it is
reasonable to suppose that original e would also be subject to it. Here
may belong g. and d.s.f. -re, and g.p. -ra in the strong declension of
adjs., if they are from West Gmc. -erds, -erai, -erém, transferred from
the pronominal declension seen in OHG dera, deru, dero. Cf. § 331.7.

§ 343. When syncopated and unsyncopated forms existed together, analogical replacement of the vowel in forms in which it
phonologically disappeared was frequent, e.g. forms like halige,
opene, and especially often inflected pass. parts. like gecorene, from
halig, open, gecoren. But some apparently irregular forms are due
to the existence of alternative formations, especially -epa, -opa

(e.g. spiwepa, sceafopa) from -ipé, -upéd, beside -apé (§ 341).
§ 344. Syncopation does not take place in closed syllables, e.g. the
suffixes -ettan, -estre (§ 339). It also fails in bedecian beg (cf. probably
Goth. bidagwa).

§ 345. w and 7, whether originally short, or due to Gmc.
reduction of older long vowels (§ 331.5), were lost in Prim. OE,
in final unaccented syllables after a long accented syllable, or a
short accented syllable and another syllable. They remained after
a short accented syllable, or a long accented syllable followed by a
short syllable. Examples are neut. pls. of the a-declension (word,
weorod, beside fatu, héafodu); n.s. of the 6-declension (ar, firen,!

beside giefu), of the u-declension (feld beside sunu), of the
i-declension (giest beside wine), and of ua- and u6- stems (beadu-,
bearu, beside m#d, gad); n.p. of cons. stems (fét, cxlf; beside
hnyte); imper. of weak verbs of Class I (dém beside nere); isolated
examples are tem dat. two (< *tuaimiz), and so p&m dat. them,
milc (§ 331.3). The long syllable causing loss may itself be due to
the loss of a just described, e.g. séwl < *sdulu < *saiualé.
§ 346. In such a system levellings are very prone to occur, e.g.
nW-S 1st sg. pres. indic. of strong verbs has -u after both short
and long syllables (e.g. VP haldu); n.p. IW-S weredu (beside
werod), VP héafud (beside héafudu). Generally analogy intervenes
less in disyllabic than in trisyllabic forms, and in nouns the dis-

tinctions sdipu, word, giefu, dr, &c., are well observed.”

¥ And so nouns in -up and -ung, e.g. dugup, monung.
4 Unexplained exceptions are bet better (Goth. batis), perhaps due to the
analogy of sél, and ymbe about, beside ymb. FC fiséflédu is probably an error;
read with Chadwick fiséflod up (Heroic age, p. 69, footnote); Erf. 440 aetgaru is

§ 347

EARLY OLD ENGLISH LOSS

145

§ 347. When and wu of a final syllable are followed by a consonant, there is no loss, e.g. ddémed, middel, w&ron (with e, 0, for

older 7, u, see §§ 369~73).! Syncopation, however, passes its usual
limits in the W-S and (in part) Kt. 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. of
strong verbs and weak verbs of Class I, where 7 is lost before
consonants after both long and short syllables, e.g. birst, birp,

démst, démp (see §§ 732-4 for details).
§ 348. 7 and w are lost after long syllables in the formation of

compound words, e.g. giesthiis, hypgyld, m#dland, handseax,
flédblac.2 In names, this loss is frequently extended to elements
with short first syllables, so that Cyn-,3 Her-, Hyg-, Sig-,

Frip-, Hap-, Bad- occur as name-elements beside Cyni- (later
Cyne-), &c., Fripu-,* &c. Similar syncopation in common nouns
is seen in BC sigbécn’ beacon of victory, Li. metbzlig meat-bag,

W-S metseax meat-knife, metfzt dish, cwidbdc book of sayings,
herpap main road, hegstéw enclosure. So there is variation in the
prefix el-, ele- foreign.

§ 349. The weight of the second element seems to have had
influence upon the loss of medial vowels in compounds. Loss was
less prone to occur before + or +x than before x, hence hilderine,
an error for Ep., Cp. aeigdéru, pl. of Cp. 167 aetgdére, neut. ja-stem (for an
alternative view see § 591, footnote).
® On forms like démd, see § 643.5.d.
2 It has been pointed out (§ 341, footnote), that « is lost even after short
syllables in compounds with 6-declension nouns in the first element, as is seen
in compounds of lufu, giefu, caru, sceamu (e.g. carléas, séeamfzst). Exceptions
can be regarded.as late formations with the OE n.s, or g.s., e.g. nafugdar, nafegar.
There are some exceptions to the syncopation of -i- in compounds both with
fo-nouns, e.g. cwildefléd, restedeg, hellehund, and with i-nouns, e.g. brydelié,
Sebyrdetid, gewyrdelic, giftelic, tidelice, hljpeget, xrdelond (Kt., Ct. 42). The
former are relatively late compounds with the g.s., the latter are perhaps due to

contamination with the ja-declension, which regularly has a connecting vowel
in composition (§ 359). All such forms are beside ones with no connecting vowel
(cwyldb&re, bri dguma, &c.).
3 Late compounds of ja-stems have commonly the first element in the
nominatival form, e.g. hryégmearh, bedtid; so \W-S cynlié for cyneli¢ is to be
explained, and not by the old fluctuation cyn-, cyne-.
* But Selred, Selered reflects a variation already existing in the simplex (sel,
sele),
5 -sig is also frequent in the second element of compounds, e.g. Zlfsig, but
here the element follows the a-declension. Similar divergence in declension
between the form of a noun in independent use and as the second element of
compounds appears in ride, -ric, mre, -mer, lipe, -lip, e.g. Ailfric, Eumer
(BH), Hildilid (BH), and cf. Ridberct (BH), Riéred, &c. (LV). So in the first
element we find as a rule fribu- (u-stem, Gothic fripus), but in the second always

-frip, -ferp (a-stem).

146

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 350

hildewisa, but hildfruma, hildfreca, and inflected hildfrome, hildlata;
so LV Hildiburg, &c., but Hilduini.'

§ 350. On occasional early syncopation of -i- in compounds, so

that umlaut fails to take place, see § 204.1.

§ 351. i and w are also lost in open medial syllables after along
stressed syllable. This applies to original short vowels only, as 7
and @ had not yet been shortened in this position. The principle is
clearly seen in past tenses of weak verbs of Class I: contrast hierde
(Goth. hausida) with nerede (Goth. nasida). Other examples are
compar. adj. with i-mutation, teldra, grietra, gingra, &c. (< -iz6);
many inflected forms like engles, éples, héafdu;* probably some
inflexions of adjs. originally of the 7- and u-declensions, e.g. blipne,
heardne < -inén, -unon, and &nne a.s.m. one < *aininén; diminutive
names in -ca (< -ika), LV Brynca, Drémca, Hynca.'

§ 352. There is usually no syncopation before consonant groups,
as the inflexions of nouns and adjs. in -is¢, -tht, -est (< -ist), -ing,
-ung show, e.g. Englisce, ®resta, sceawunge. But syncopation is
extended beyond its usual limits in W-S superls. gingsta, lésta,
strengsta, wiersta, and these forms can be extended to uninflected
hiehst, &c. In IW-S a few more similar forms occur: yldsta, lengst.4
§ 353. When both a middle and an end syllable contained either
i or u, and both were in conditions demanding loss of the vowel,
the middle syllable was the one affected; phonological developments appear to be héafdu, ricu, strengbu < *h@ofudu, *rikiu,S
*strangipu. There are many analogical forms, e.g. héafodu (after
n.s.), héafod (after type weorod, § 345), strengp (extracted from
oblique cases).
' In And. 1092 hildbedd is an error: read hildebedd stréd (Holthausen).
2 While in this type analogical replacement of the vowel is found (e.g.
héafodu, see § 353), Zl¢, each, has conversely loss of the vowel from analogy of
inflected forms (*#lic# > Zlée, &c.), cf. § 394. Similarly many weak pass. parts.
in dentals, especially in W-S, e.g. gesend, gel#d, have analogical syncopation
from inflected gesende, gel@dde < *gisendid®, *gilédidz.
3 There is usually no syncopation of the suffix -we after a long syllable, e.g.
beallucas, bulluce, mattucas. The suffix perhaps had an originally long vowel.
+ W-S parts. of the type described in note 2 can extend analogical syncopation to forms where two consonants followed the medial vowel, e.g. geséendne
< gescendedne.

5 But -u drops after syllables made long by West Gmc. consonant gemination:
*kunjé > *kunnjé > Prim. OE *kynnu > cynn. The difference in development
of *kunnjé from *rikié was due to the fact that in the former 7 was consonantal
and hence -é followed one long syllable, while in the,latter -d followed long+
short (see § 398.4).

§ 354

EARLY OLD ENGLISH SHORTENING

147

Unaccented 7 and u seem to have been lost at exactly the same
time; otherwise, if 7 were lost first, *7vikin would have become
*riku and then *rik; while, if u were lost first, the development
would have been *rikiu > *riki > *rik. The syncopation of a
(2, e) was earlier than loss of i and u, for *saiyalé had become

*sdulu by the time of loss of u (§ 345). Yet even this loss of @ was
later than i-umlaut, otherwise *mazadin would have become
*mz3zdin > *megden, instead of mxgden.

§ 354. Inasmall group of words, unaccented ¢ is lost in pretonic
syllables; the examples are all with the prefixes bi- and ni-: binnan

within, biitan without, bufan above, blinnan cease (< *biinnan, &c.),
nahte had not (< *niaht#), nis is not, North., Ru.? nam, VP neam
am not, North. naro(n) are not; with loss of the initial consonant of

the stressed syllable, all forms of nabban have not, nat know not,
nzs was not, nolde would not (< ni+-habban, wat, wes, wolde).'

p. Early Old English Shortening of Unaccented Long
Vowels
§355. All the unaccented long vowels which still remained
were shortened in Prim. OE. These were:

(1) Vowels of final syllables which had had the abnormal IE
intonation? (§ 330), e.g. n.p. of d-declension -éz > -6 > OE -a

(e.g. giefa); g.p. of all declensions -6 > OE -a; g.s. of i-declension
in -€iz > -iz > OE -i (LR uyrdi, but cf. § 605); n.s.
ofmasc. weak
nouns in -6 > OE -a.

(2) #@ and 6 from ai and aw in final syllables (§ 331.7)? were
shortened to & (later e, § 369) and a; e.g. d.s. of a- and 6-declensions, n.p.m. and d.s.f. of strong adjs., pres. subj. of all verbs,
OE stane, giefe, gode, gédre, helpe, all with -e < -# < Gmc. -at;
g. and d.s. of u-declension, OE suna < Gmc. -auz, -au; OE eahta

eight, cf. Goth. ahtau.
(3) Gmce. -ia- of final syllables existed only after long syllables
(Sievers’ law, § 398.4), and might better be represented as -zia-.

With the loss of -a- (§ 331.4), -#- > i, but either this development
* For boofli¢ Li., Matt. I. 5, 8 read behdflie (the usual form in Li.); on nistig
hungry (perhaps from ni+ *wistig) see PBB ix. 212.
2 Jn this book “* is used to indicate that a sound had J-E abnormal intonation,
and ~ is reserved to indicate nasalization.
3 It is unnecessary to distinguish normal and abnormal intonation in these
diphthongs in order to explain Gmc. developments.

148

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 356

was too late for early shortening to take place, or 7 so developed

had an intonation similar to the old IE abnormal intonation, which
preserved its length. It underwent later shortening in OE, hence

in the ja-declension “andiaz > *andi > OE endi, later ende, and
so *rikiam > OE rice.

(4) Long vowels in syllables which had become final by the loss
of original final syllables, e.g. the formative elements -ig, -in
(diminutive), -in (adjectival), -ap (§ 331.6), -ip (§ 332) > -#,
-in, -up, e.g. OE mihtig, cicen, st®nen, fiscop, dugup; the inflexional
endings seen in OE g. and d.s. strenge (< -iniz, -ini, §§ 331.3, 483),

3rd pl. pres. indic. berapb (< -anpi, § 332), forms of weak verbs
of Class II, lufas, -ap, -od, -ad (< -dsi, -dpi, -tid-, -od-, § 331.6),
superl. in -ast, -ost (< -Gst-, -iist-, § 331.6).

(5) Long vowels in unaccented medial syllables, as in the
inflected forms of suffixes under (4), e.g. OE mihtige, fiscope,
léofosta; suffixes seen in hdcede (§ 339), siiperne (§ 339), leornere
(§ 337): forms of weak verbs of Class II with medial -i- < -ij- <
~ef- (§ 376) < -é- < -di- (§ 339), and past tenses in -ade, -ode
(< -6d-, -iid-, § 331.6); g.p. of fem. weak declension -ena < -oném.

With regard to all these shortenings, it will be observed that,
even when shortened late, 6 became a, but that this a was of too

late origin to become 2 by Anglo-Frisian fronting (§ 333). Thus 6
if shortened early gives OE 2(e), but if shortened late it gives a.
The other long vowels &, i, i > x, i, u, and later e and 7 become
usually e, and u becomes frequently o (§§ 369, 373).

§ 356. To the same process as this shortening is to be attributed

the shortening of long vowels in the second elements of compounds

of obscured meaning, e.g. lareow teacher (< lar+-péow), fulwiht
baptism (< *-wiht consecration), zfest malice (< #f+*unsti-,
cf. Dutch afgunst), adjs. in -lid," and advs. sina, awa, géna, gieta,?
all containing the element 4, ever.3 In the second element of such

formations, ai > # as in unaccented syllables (§ 331.7), if the
reduction in the semantic force of the second element was early.

By the further reduction now under consideration # > & (later e,
§372), e.g. éored troop (< eoh+*raid), earfep trouble (Gothic
* In these adjs. the short vowel developed early and extended to the inflected
forms, so that final -u was retained after the medial syllable, which had half-stress

before the inflexion (§ 88), e.g. heardlicu like wynsumu (§ 642).
? Also dwo, géno, see § 132, footnote 3.
3 Ofust haste, Erf. obust, probably belongs here, but the etymology of its
second element is uncertain (IF xx. 320; ES liv. 97-100).

§ 387

EARLY OLD ENGLISH SHORTENING

149

arbaips). If the obscuration of the meaning of the second element
was later, ai > d, and the development was as described in § 336.
A development of au to 6 and hence before m with shortening to u,
appears in fultum help, beside fultéam. Similarly 6 < West Gmc.

@, if shortened, can become u before m, e.g. andluma utensil,
beside andloma.'
§ 357. In the second element of compounds of obscured meaning, diphthongs are very prone to modification. Examples with

diphthongs due to back umlaut are given in § 340. Examples with
diphthongs due to OE shortening (§ 356) are Ru.? Jarow, Li.
la@ruu, hlatuu,2 VP ladtow, Li. anlap single (cf. W-S dnliepe),
North. dah (< déah), IW-S racentage dis. fetter (< -téag),
héadorhund deer-hound (< héahdéor-); cf. also the instances of
original and shortened io > u, § 338 footnote. W-S ie seems in
similar low stressed positions to shorten if long, and develop to e;
e.g. dnlepe, fulteman, #werdla, cynegerd* (sceptre, beside -gyrd).5
§ 358. Short medial vowels due to the process defined in § 355.5
had a half-stress in OE after long syllables, and were so preserved
(§§ 89, 91). Loss of the half-stress, however, could lead to loss of
the vowel, e.g. VP mondes, gyldnum, Li., Ru.? mxgdne, Li. nétna.
Such forms may be transferred to uninflected cases, e.g. mond
Menol. 164. In W-S syncopation of Prim. OE long vowels is
unusual except in ménap.° Adjs. in -ig (< -ig) have syncopation
very frequently in the inflected cases in Angl. after long syllables,
sometimes after shorts, e.g. VP, North. halge, Ru.? hefge, and
syncopation is the rule in OE metre (often against the manuscript
spelling). Unsyncopated forms prevail in W-S. It is impossible to
decide how far we have genuine syncopation of Prim. OE -ig, and
how far contamination with forms of -xg, which has syncopation

in any position when an open syllable (§§ 341, 376).
§ 359. The Prim. OE long vowels under discussion are not usually
lost in composition after one syllable, e.g. endeleas, lécecrzeft, riéedom.?
TM Cf. the same treatment of originally short o
2 i.e. latteow.

(< a) in liduma, &c. (§ 333).

3 Fulwiht (§ 356) had earlier loss of half-stress and hence never developed a
diphthong by breaking; but if a diphthong was developed, by later loss of stress

the development of § 338, footnote, could follow.
+ Also cynegeard, ingeniously explained by Barowski, Lautdubletten, p. 61.
5 Such forms may of course be dismissed as nW-S.

© The relationship of OE frztwa, geatwa to getdwa is doubtful, see Luick,

Hist. Gramm., § 314.a.2, Pope, Rhythm of Beowulf, p. 322.
7 On compounds with 6-nouns in the first element, see § 341, footnote 3.

150

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 360

After two syllables, however, the connecting vowel is lost: Zrendwreca,
cdserdom. Adjs. ending in cons.+ liquid or nasal+-e drop the e in composition, and develop a parasite vowel, e.g. frécenli¢, lyperlic, w&fersyn,
Serisenlic, efenlic, from frééne, &c. There is also no connecting vowel
in compounds of the following adjectives: céne, cléne, diere, dierne,
hnesce, m&re, stierne, swéte, Set®se, picce, wierpe, unwéne, and compounds

ending in -pw#re, -mte, -b#re, -wende. Some adjectives are inconsistent,
e.g. Genes but éelic, mildheort, &c. but mildelic, iepnes but tepelié, riclié,
but ricedom, &c., gescrépnes but gescrépelice, Sem¥nnes but gem¥n(e)lic,
Sedéfnes but gedéf(e)lic, gebyrd(e)lic, ési(e)lice, gedzeft(e)iice, blip(e)méd,
wild(e)déor. Fluctuation with the 7-declension may explain the forms
without connecting vowel (cf. § 348). Similar inconsistency is less
common with nominal first elements, but gem#re, boundary, always
rejects -e- in composition (gemz#rpédl, &c.), IW-S has sti¢m&lum,
yrfweardnys, beside older styéée-, yrfe-.'

E. Parasite Vowels
§ 360. Accented syllables. Forms with a parasite vowel after
the vowel of an accented syllable between ry or / and a consonant
are scattered through early texts. The vowel is 7 (rarely e) when the
accented vowel is front, usually u (less often a) when it is back.
Examples are FC wylf she-wolf, -berig mountain, LR derih
through, aerig- arrow, Mortain Casket gewarahtz, BH Tilaburug,
Ct. 47 Héanbyrig, and the name-elements LV Aluch-, Eorup-,
Berecht, Ct. 5 (Kt.) Bericht-, BH -berect, Ct. 25 (Sax.-Kt.) Alah-,
Walah-? (but cf. Stevenson’s Asser, p. 203).
§ 361. This process may reasonably be presumed to be later
than smoothing, since Angl. *beorht > berht > beriht. (On Ct. 5
Bercht-, Bericht- see § 140.) Similar forms in [North. may be
inherited from the early period or be due to a repetition of the
process, e.g. Li. Ru.? burug, Ru.? suluh, arog-, Li. worohton, forohtan1 The connecting element of compounds of verbs of Class I seems to have
resembled that of ja-nouns, rather than that of i-nouns, being normally retained
in OE, e.g. giemeleas, ciepemann, hierstepanne, hieremann, recceleas, gereccelié
(clearly, beside gereclié from gere¢). Again, forms with loss of the connecting
vowel occur, e.g. IW-S éjpman, gimleslice, herlié (praiseworthy, Metres).
Before -nes, these verbal elements have no connecting vowel if long, e.g. acennes,
aliesnes, cydnes, hiernes, inlihtnes, tod%lnes. After short syllables, however, there
is a connecting vowel, e.g. herenes, styrenes, smirenes, gidenes, gerecenes, trymenes
(beside trymnis from the adj. trum, § 204.2, footnote), adenenes.
2 But Ep., Cp. bearug pig, is probably an old disyilabic form, ON dbgrgr (with
u-umlaut).

§ 362

PARASITE VOWELS

15%

dum, Li., Rit., Ru.? d.s. byrig, Li. wyrihta, Ru.? fyligde, berehtnad,

sweriga, awerigdun; also with change -ig- > i (cf. § 267), Li. sueria,

Rit. heriad.

§ 362. The only Old English text which has parasiting in accented
syllables before the vowel is the Brussels Cross, berdpor brother (twice).
§ 363. Unaccented syllables. In OE there was considerable

divergence, whether syllabic J, r, m, n arising owing to the loss of
unaccented vowels of final syllables (§§ 331-4, 345) were retained
or developed a parasite vowel. This vowel, if developed, was 7
(later e) after a front vowel, u (later 0) after a back vowel. Already
Ep. has, for example, segil- sail, spinil spindle, (h)aesil hazel, tebelgaming-board (W-S tal), théthor ball, -bdécon beacon, and BH

has -caestir in place-names, and the name-element Eorcun-,
Earcon-. Accordingly, the parasiting must be regarded as prehistoric, and the frequent early forms in which it is absent (e.g.
Ep. bebr beaver, Gtr poison) as due to inflected cases in which

the liquid consonant was not syllabic, or to scribal neglect of the
parasite vowel. Normal OE forms are fugol bird, tungol star,
cumbol banner, sdwol soul, nagel nail, zppel apple, segel sail, punor
thuhder, wundor wonder, winter winter, fager fair, @cer acre,

hrefen raven, ofen. oven, bésum bosom, ma&pum treasure, westum

fruit. Forms without parasiting are, however, frequent, e.g. hisl
Eucharist, hripr head of cattle, segl, naegl; with n and m they are
the rule after short syllables, frequent after long ones, e.g. hrefn
raven, fdcn crime, tdcn token, wépn weapon, wolcn cloud, botm
bottom, mapm treasure, westm fruit: they are also the rule with
L after ¢ and d, e.g. set] seat, botl building, spatl spit, adl disease,
nédl needle. Owing to the coexistence of the types nagl and
nzgel, the groups el, er, em, en became regarded as expressing
syllabic consonants, and hence they frequently appear after back
vowels, e.g. fugel, wunder, wolcen, tacen, breahtem noise, and always
ceaster city.' Less frequent is -or (early -ur), &c., after front vowels
although it is to be similarly explained, e.g. fefor fever, pipor
pepper, VP bitur bitter, westum fruit, Ru.? gestordeg yesterday.
Extension of a parasitic vowel to internal open syllables is
frequent only with r after short syllables, e.g. feegeres, xceras, less
frequently fugoles.

® Cp. 1152 already puner. Angl. has both bécon (North.), and bécen: the
former is older, from *béacun (Cp. -b&cun), with parasiting before smoothing,

the latter is to be explained like wunder above.

152

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 364

§ 364. Parasiting in medial syllables occurs in North. past
tenses like hyngerde, dégelde, getimberde; cf. Cp. afroebirdun (W-S

afréfredon); in many adjectives before inflexions and formative
beginning with consonants,' e.g. fagerne, fagernes,
snotorlic; in forms of gifre, lypre, s¥fre, tidre, piestre, f®cne, frécne,
and also diegle, so far as the relevant forms are not regarded as
from diegol, before inflexions and formative syllables beginning
with unlike consonants, e.g. giferne, diegelnes, but a.s.m. f#ene <
*fzcnne (§ 476);? in a few isolated words, e.g. léwerce lark (<
*lurcan- < “laiurikn-),3 Emerca (< *Emykan- < *Amrikan-,
cf. Ann. Qued. Embrica).
syllables

§ 365. Later parasiting. Especially W-S, already present in
/Elfred, and increasingly frequent in later texts, is a tendency to

develop j and y after a short syllable to i, uu, e.g. herigas armies,
herigan praise, byrig d.s. city, bylig bag, mirigp joy, fyligan follow,
byrigan bury, gearuwe n.p. ready, beaduwe d.s. battle, seonuwa n.p.

sinews, swaluwe swallow. ij can be monophthongized to i, like ig
of earlier origin (see § 267), e.g. byriweard (i.e. byrgweard town-

guard), fylan follow, awyridum d.p. accursed (cf. awiergan). By

§§ 373, 385, u often appears as o and e, e.g. beadowe, swalewan; less
frequent is e for i (cf. § 371), e.g. g.p. herega armies, heregung
harrying. In nW-S these processes are very rare: e.g. KG 720
Serewe n.p.n. ready. Ru.1 has a few forms recalling the !North.

forms quoted § 361, e.g. herigas g.s. army, swerige answer, beligas
bags, but these may be due to the influence of North. or W-S
spelling.
§ 366. In IW-S parasiting is frequent before -re, -ra of the strong
adjectival and pronominal declension, e.g. sumere, pissere, see §§ 641,
711. Some 1W-S manuscripts show also a revival of the early process

of parasiting in accented syllables, e.g. tleca < tlca, wyrihta, burug,
weoruc.

§ 367. Parasite connecting vowels. Although many cases of inconsistency in the presence of connecting vowels may be explained by
§§ 348, 359, it seems also that often a parasite connecting vowel was
1 See § 359 on these adjs. in composition.
3 Elsewherei is not lost after J, r, n, if two consonants, or long vowel-+consonant, precede, hence timbrede, diglede, etc. Other weak past tenses have vocalic
consonants, e.g. seglde, xfnde.
3 Butin ldwerce,
er = 7, for after a back vowel the parasite vowel would be u
(0); but perhaps the form arises simply by transferring to /éwerde the vowel of
ldwrice (§ 339). Another view, Flasdieck, A lix. 38.

§ 368

REDUCTION IN VARIETY

153

developed. In forms with a-stem first elements this is especially striking,
for phonologically the connecting vowel should be lost (§ 341). Examples
from IW-S manuscripts are: (1) Short a-stems, berefot, dexgered,
godeweb, godefyrht, hredolice, gemeteliée, weregild, werewulf, werelice,
(2) Long a-stems, cideliée, goldefraetwum, halewende, holdelice, swiftilice.
(3) Weak and consonant stems, nomecud,' nihtelic,* fréonderedden. (4)
Rare late forms of prefixes, ore-, mede-, xle-, xli-, for or-, med-, zl-.
s) Forms of personal and place-names in late sources, e.g. Baldewine,
‘adewalla, Canteuuariorum, Coleman, Coloman, Cideredus, Ealdered,
Fordewié, Hiinewald, Pidewzlla, Plegomundus, Tiinewald, Werefrié,
Wiligeld, Willegoda.? In nW-S texts such forms are very rare: Rit. has
godecund, gimetomicla, rehtelice.

F. Reduction in Variety of Vowels in Unaccented
Syllables
§ 368. By the processes so far described in this chapter, OE had
the unaccented vowels a, 2, e, i, and u. Certain changes of these

must now be described.
369. x, e, and i fell together in a sound written e in unaccented syllables. 2 and i remain undisturbed only in very early
texts. They are used with considerable historical accuracy in the

early North. short texts, e.g. CH hefaen-, BDS uueorthae (pres.
subj.), LR biuorhtz (pass. part. a.s.f.), uundnae(pass part.n.p.), hafe
(1st sg. pres. indic.), uefl# (6-stem, n.p.), huethrae, uidx (advs.),
siz (pres. subj.), RC hinz, riicne, zppile (n.p.), -woerigne, FC
hiz (a.p.), and many instances of g.s. of m. nouns in -zs, d.s. of
m. and f. nouns in -#, 3rd sg. past. indic. of weak verbs in -dz;
CH maecti (a.p.), astelide, #rist, BDS uuiurthit (31d sg. pres.
indic.), déemid (part.), LR hlimmith (3rd sg. pres. indic.), helithum,
RC zppilz, the forms with parasite 7 (§ 360), and many instances
of unaccented ni, bi-, gi-. Occasionally, however, in these early
texts e replaces 2, e.g. CH heben, hréfe (d.s.), BDS fore, sie (pres.
subj.), -daege (d.s.), RC walde; more rarely e replaces 1, e.g. LR
But gewunelié not to gewana noun, but to gewuna adj.
2 But nihtegala has an old connecting element (OS nahtigala, Strassburg
Glosses), which appears in Ep. as -i- or -ae- (673, 857), and is presumably

identical with the g.s. ending of tht (§ 628.3).
3 But mihteléas (OEC 1053, MS. C), *feldefare (miswritten feldeware,
eleventh-century glossary) are genitival compounds; gesundeli¢ is for gesundigli¢

(§ 371); hym(e)lic, bil(e)wit, and polo-, pole-, bol-mod, polo-, pole-byrde are of uncertain formation, but the forms with connecting vowels are probably the older.

154

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 370

Brest, ne (neg., once for usual ni), RC geredx (3rd sg. past indic.).
At least in two forms, RC rédi, FC -cestri (d.s.f., in sense loc.), 2
is difficult to explain. 2 similarly is found for e, e.g. LR ofaer, RC
bismzradu, FC gibréper, which again points to confusion of the
sounds. In the early manuscripts of BH 2 and z are hardly disturbed,' but in LV, while -z generally remains (e.g. n.s.f. of weak
nouns usually -z, twice -e), e is fairly often written for 7, especially
in the elements Dene-, Here- (but usually -heri). The early glossaries illustrate the change clearly, for in the glosses common to
Ep., Erf., and Cp. the two former have practically always 7 in
final syllables (56 7; 4 e), but Cp. has ¢ and e almost equally (33 1;
27 e); the two former have very frequent 2 in final syllables (Ep.
158 x, Erf. 136 2; Ep. 8 e, Erf. 30 e), but Cp. has rarely x (18 2;
148 e). So in the charters, 2 and 7 are rare in documents dated
later than Ct. 8 (c. 770), and this already has g.s. -es (a-declension),
-stede, but preserves g.s. -is (i-declension, see § 601, footnote).?
In later texts the retention of 2 is rare,3 that of ¢ infrequent,‘
except in Li. and Rit. after i, y, g and dentals (e.g. micil, cyrtil,
degin, drygi, giséni, silid), and in Rit. and Ru.? in the unaccented
prefixes b1-, gi-.5

§ 370. After the change of 2 and i to e, normal OE forms were,
e.g. with old 2, g.s. and d.s. of a- and 6-stems stdnes, stdne, giefe,
a.s. of 6-stems giefe, n.s. of weak fem. nouns tunge, n.p.m. of
adjs. géde, pres. subj. helpe, 3rd sg. past indic. of weak verbs
1 That is, in the Moore and Leningrad MSS.; Cott. Tib. A xiv and the
foreign Namur MS. preserve 7 well, @ > e very often; in Cott. Tib. C ii both?
and 2 > e frequently. Cf. Storms, English studies xxxvii. 104 ff.

2 The charter evidence thus points to the reign of Offa (757-96) as the period

when e was developed from all unaccented front vowels in the Midlands and
South (cf. AB xli. 39), and this is confirmed by the inscriptions of Offa’s coins,
where e for i becomes frequent. In the early ninth century e for i is fully developed on coins of Kent (Cuthred, 798-c. 806), East Anglia (Ethelstan I, ¢. 82837), and Wessex (Ecgbeorht, 802-39). Coins, however, confirm the evidence of
LV that the change was later in Northumbria, where Eaduine occurs on one
coin of Eanred (c. 807—-c. 840), but otherwise e spellings are not found before the
reign of 7Ethelred II (c. 840—-c. 849), when they become frequent.
3 In Ru. unaccented 2 often appears as a spelling variant for e (e.g. g.s., d.s.
of a-nouns in -zs, -2), and can be used even for e < i (e.g. and sg. pres. indic.
gesexs, st&énzst, 3rd swerxep). Such spellings are also found in INorth., where
they are fairly frequent in Li. and Rit., not in Ru.* (see Mincoff, Archiv clxxiii.

32).

+ IW-S y for unaccented e is probably of no significance, e.g. hlynd, fedyr,

azftemysta, huntigystran.

5 Li, has bi-, gi- occasionally,

§ 37"

REDUCTION IN VARIETY

155

démde, strong past part. coren, pres. part. ridende; with old 7, n.s:
of i-stems wine, and of ia- stems ende, superl. with umlaut zeldest,
2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. rides, -ep, past subj. ride, weak past
tense nerede, forms with parasiting xppel, prefixes be-, ge-,' unaccented words ne, be.

§ 371. The formative elements -ig, -i¢, -isc, -ing, -iht, -li¢ (e.g.
mihtig, Eowic, Englisc, pening, st&niht, stronglic) are generally not
subject to the change i > e, though e is fairly frequent before
back vowels, e.g. mihtegu, fiftegum, welegode, Denescan, penengas,
eallenga, Basengum (PC 871), stronglecu. In 1OE, however, -ig
often > -i (§ 267), and could then be reduced to e before a heavy

syllable, e.g. dyselic, mihtelice.

§ 372. In the second elements of compounds, with reduction of
stress, # and i (after shortening, if long) can become e as in fully
unaccented syllables, e.g. with 2, &fest lawful (beside Zfest),
compounds of zrn house (as béodern), éored, earfed (cf. § 336),
hancred cock-crow (< -créd), Gwer anywhere (beside adhwér),
hired household (< -r&éd), Ailfred (< -r#d), Epelmer (< -mér),
Li. genéoleca (VP genéol&éan), fullestan (beside full@stan), Onettan,
Grettan (< *-haitian, if the suffix is not contaminated with that of
hléapettan, § 339); with 1, nawest neighbourhood (beside néawist),
@rest resurrection (beside &rist), fyrwet curiosity (beside fyrwit),
endlefan (beside -lifan), enetere a year old (beside enitre << *&nwintri), names in -ferp (rarely -frep, beside -frip, § 459.4); with ¢ from
y, cynren generation (beside rare cynryn), zfest (§ 356), nosterl
(§ 481.1), VP ymbhwerft (once for ymbhwyrft).

§ 373. Unaccented u is preserved in all instances in the early
North. short texts,3 BH*4 and LV.5 In Ep., however, protected
u > o very often, e.g. uuiloc-, helostr, déatlicostan, suornodun, and
occasionally in absolute finality, e.g. seto (neut. p.) 896, séeado goz.
In later sources u has an increasing tendency to change to 0, but
it was far more stable in absolute finality than when protected.
VP preserves even protected u extensively, e.g. héafud, wuldur,

TM So te- (CP 49, 11) for older #- (Ep. 195). In late OE ge- > 7-, and is
sometimes so written after prefixes, e.g. unilic; also ig (= i), unigmetes, Beow.
2 Cf. unaccented embe from ymbe.
1792.
3 The instances are past pl. in -un (frequently), d.p. in -um (frequently),
North. a.s. of weak declension in -u (3 instances, § 472), CH metudaes, uuldur-,
-fadur (§ 331), middun-, LR hriitendu, RC heafunes. BC has setton, but the inscription is hardly clear enough to be of linguistic value.
+ Except the parasite vowel of Earcon- beside less frequent Eorcun-,
,
5 Except only Aebbino (st. f.), LV 29.

156

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 374

past indic. pl. -un (very rarely -on), and it remains frequent in
INorth. and Ru.1 Ordinary OE forms are, however, e.g. héafod
head, heofon heaven, tungol star, past indic. pl. -on, weak past
of Class II -ode, superl. -ost, but n.s. of ua-, d- and u-stems -u
(bearu, giefu, sidu), n.p.n. of a-stems -u (scipu), nW-S ist sg. pres.

indic. -u (VP fearu). o for unprotected w is increasingly common in
late texts.

u is always well preserved after accented u, e.g. sunu, wudu,
dugup; before m, e.g. mapum, d.p. -um, -sum as suffix; in the suffix
-ung; in the suffix -uc of whatever origin, e.g. beallucas, bulluc,
gafeluc, hassuc, mattuc, munuc.

§ 374. Similar change u > 0 occurs in the second element of
compounds of obscured meaning, e.g. orop (§ 333, footnote), fracop
bad (< *-kunp-), ofost haste (beside ofust, § 356); cf. preps. porh,

op (beside purh, uip-).

§ 375. In contrast to 2, 1, u, unaccenteda is fairly stable in OE
till the late period; eW-S gerundive in -onne, beside more frequent
-anne, may be noted.
§ 376. Contrary to the usual change i > e, there is a change
e > 1 before g. This is seen in the suffix -ig (< -eg < -xg), which

except in the earliest texts appears as -ig, and is distinguished from
~ig < -ig (Goth. -eigs) only by the absence of umlaut in the preceding syllable, e.g. halig, CH haleg, bodig, Cp. bodeg.t The same
change is seen in the formative suffix of weak verbs of Class II,

~ig- (< ~ef- < -06}, § 355.5).?

§377. As a result of the changes described above, OE had
virtually two unaccented back vowels, o/u and a. The distinction

of these is clearly seen to be weakening in Kt. charters of the
ninth century, -a@ sometimes appearing for -o/-u, e.g. gedinga,
fodra (neut. pls.), willa (1st sg. pres. indic., Ct. 40), dohtar, alad
(g.s.), and past indic. pl. -an (very frequent). Conversely -on
appears for -an (d.s. gemanon, Ct. 37), and -u for -a (sunu d.s.,

Ct. 45, Surrey). In eW-S, while not frequent in CP, -a for -o/-u
increases in Or. In |W-S and KG the endings -on (past indic. pl.)
and -an (weak declension, infs., advs.) are very confused, though
-an is used more freely for -on than -on for -an. In
KG and some
IW-S manuscripts final -w, -o, -a are freely interchangeable (§ 49),
' Ep., Erf. have the very archaic bodzi.

2 Samtinges shows a similar change before ng, if the second element is that
seen in getenge.

§ 378

REDUCTION IN VARIETY

157

so that, for example, neut. pls. occur in -a, and (more rarely)
gen. pls. in -o.
§ 378. In IW-S! -um of the d.p. of nouns and adjs., and dat. sg.
masc. and neut. of adjs., appears very frequently as -on, -an.

Presumably -m > -n, and when no longer followed by m, unaccented u changed to o (§ 373) and a (§ 377). Fairly frequent
dat. pl. in -un in eW-S may show the first stage of the change.”
Note also IW-S furpon, -an for adv. furbum even.
§ 379. In the eleventh century unaccented e (< 2, e, 7) and the
unaccented back vowel in which a, 0, u had largely coalesced,
became confused, and spellings appear like Aléfdigen, minas for
hl#fdigan, mines (Cott. Aug. ii. 85; cf. p. 136, note 2). It is doubtful if significance should be attached to earlier spellings of this type,
e.g. Beow. 63 -scilfingas (gen. sg.), 519 -rd#mes (acc. pl.).3

§ 380. In IW-S and Ru.1, the pronominal accusatives pone,
hwone (§ 333) are often affected by the change of unaccented
o > a (§ 377), appearing as pane, hwane.t In Ru. ponne, hwonne

also appear with a. 1W-S has in these words also a peculiar development to 2, pane, hwzne, penne, hwxnne, and this seems to be shared

by the low-stressed monig (§ 96), which appears as mzenig too often
to be explained by § 193.d. Mznig then influences related words
like mznigo. This 2 can in Angl. appear changed to e in low stress
(§ 369), and can then be returned to stress, and rounded after w

(§ 319), hence North., Ru.1 pzne, pene; Ru. hwenne, Li. hwoenne.
Ru.1, Rit. mznig (rare) may belong here, though frequent North.
menig is probably the umlaut form (with old -ig not -zxg, § 376).
1 Not in IKt. (KG), IMerc. (RG); INorth. and Ru.’ also preserve -um
prevailingly.
2 Occasional -em for -um in eKt. (minem, disem, Cts. 39, 40, 41) is hardly of
significance, perhaps due to analogy of Jém.
3 I. Williams, Bonner Beitrdge xix. 122, 124, regards the change of unaccented
a and u to e as already evidenced in KG: the instances are, however, all to be
otherwise explained.
Ru. and the three North. glosses (Li., Rit., Ru.*) were probably written after
the unaccented back vowels had coalesced in e; hence e often replaced a (as in
the n.p. of a-stems in -es, and the pl. pres. indic. in -ep, for -as, -ap) and u/o
(as in n.s. of 6-stems in -e for -o or -u). For this e the spelling z is fairly frequent,
as for e < 2, 7 (§ 369, footnote 3, p. 154). Conversely, a can be written for e (as in
g-s. of a-stems in -as for -es). Yet in the main these texts preserve the unaccented
back vowels in their spelling. It is difficult to decide if unaccented a for o/u in
these texts is due to the falling together of all the back vowels with e, or whether,
asin W-S and Kt. (§ 377), there was a previous stage when the back vowels
fell together with each other but were not yet confused with e.
* Ru.! has only pane.

158

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 38:

Gc. Suffix Confusion
§ 381. An important principle of Old English word-formation

is that etymologically related suffixes can interchange. This has
already been illustrated by the interchange of -xg with -7 (§§ 358,
376). Other examples are provided by -in/-un/-an and -il/-ul/-al;
e.g. diegol secret, hetol hostile, are clearly from *diegil, *hetil, with
the suffix of déagol, *hatol. So heofon is for older hefzen (CH), eosol
for *esel.< *esil (§ 211). Cf. § 193.c on reced, gexfel, hxcid, hzxéile,

hzlep, in all of which a was first preserved before a suffix with a
back vowel, and then mutated after the suffix vowel was changed
toz; also § 210.1 on forms like hefon, werod, which lack back umlaut.
§ 382. The interchange of e and o in gored, -od, &c. (§ 336),
leads to a similar interchange in wéofod altar (Li. wigbed),! North.
hiorod family < *hiuréd (W-S hired, §§ 120.3.c, footnote 2, 372).

§ 383. The suffixes -ung, -ing, in abstract fem. nouns interchange
fairly systematically. In all dialects -ing prevails in derivatives of
weak verbs of Class I (e.g. gréting, geméting, gewemming, ielding,
Fylging, forcirring), and -ung in derivatives of weak verbs of Class II

(e.g. costnung, leornung).

.

Derivatives of strong verbs have -ing in INorth. practically

always (e.g. Li., Ru.? flowing, lesing, onwriting), \W-S sources vary,
elsewhere the instances are too few for any conclusions to be
drawn (details in H. Weyhe, Zu den alteng. Verbalabstrakten auf
-nes und -ing, -ung). In W-S there is a tendency to prefer -ing
to -ung in compounds, e.g. leorningeniht, bletsingbéc. VP changes
-ung- to -ing- before back vowels (d.p. -ingum,.g.p. not recorded,

but cf. advs. féringa, niowinga, woéninga).
§ 384. The suffix -nes is mainly W-S, while -nis prevails heavily
in VP, Ru.1, and North. KG have only -nes, but both forms
appear in the ninth-century Kt. charters.

H. Medial Unaccented Vowels
§ 385. Vowel harmony. Already in VP and eW-S, there is a
strong tendency for the first of two successive unaccented back
vowels to be reduced to a sound written e, and hence forms are
frequent like fugelas, roderas, heoretas, gedwimeru, from fugol,
* But if the secend element be regarded as béod, table, the development in
W-S is according to § 357.

§ 386

MEDIAL UNACCENTED VOWELS

159

rodor, heorot, gedwimor; eafera, adesa, nafela beside eafora, adosa,
nabula (Cp.); verbs like swutelian, stapelian, gaderian' from swutol,
stapol, geador. To this process is due g.p. of weak nouns in -ena
for older -ana (Cp. 687, and still frequent in North. and Ru.1);
superl. in -esta beside -osta; -edon for -odon in past. pl. of weak
verbs of Class II (and hence sg. -ede, especially KG). The back
vowels are, of course, always liable to analogical restoration.
§ 386. Second elements of compounds of reduced force are
subject to the same process; e.g. fultemian beside fultumian (§ 356),
fracedu (n.p.n. of fracop, § 374), hlaferdas (Li.); and with the
second element following the reduced back vowel, Badenod
beside Badanod (< beadu--nop, § 377).

§ 387. A phonetically related process is the reduction of back
vowels of formative syllables or obscured second elements to e

before heavy formative additions, e.g. fracedlecum, riimedlice (beside

rimodlice), aredlicor, beside fracop, ramméd (cf. § 458), arod.
§ 388. Loss of medial vowels after short syllables, Medial unaccented vowels are very freely dropped after short syllables,
when the loss causes a group consisting of consonant+-/ or r to

arise. Hence forms like yfle, micle, betra, byrle, xtgedre, beside

yfele, micele, betera, byrele, xtgedere. So Sxtresdxg (< Szteres-,

§ 474.3), Deglesford beside Degiles-, dyslié (< dyselic, § 371).

Such loss is frequent in weak verbs of Class IT between consonant

and nasal, e.g. medmian, opnian.3

§ 389. Similar loss of vowels between consonants other than
those dealt with in § 388 is more sporadic. It is frequent in weak
verbs of Class II, e.g. or(e)dian, ef(e)sian. Other examples which
mostly appear beside forms with preserved middle vowels are
fremde, egsa, egpe, migpa, *sigpe (§ 267), fyrsta, betsta, smelsta,
winstre, heolstor (Ep. pl. helustras), culfre, seolfor, heolfor (Napier’s
OE glosses, p. 218, helabr), geolca, balca, pylée, circe. So Hysca
beside Hysica (LV).

§ 390. Disyllabic forms which can appear as monosyllables (or

! The medial e would arise first before the endings with back vowels (-ast,
-ap, -a, ~ode).

2 In open syllables, after long accented syllables, medial i and u had been
previously lost (§ 351), while a (2, ¢) had been lost after short syllables also

(§ 341). Medial vowels remaining in open syllables after long syllables were
derived from old longs by shortening, and carried a half-stress (§§ 89, 91).
3 From openian with the second vowel (Gmc. a) replaced from open; so

gedaf(e)nian, but in fagnian the forms without e heavily predominate, and
probably directly represent the form with early syncopation.

160

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 39%

when inflected as disyllables) owing to similar loss are cyl(e)n kiln,
myl(e)n mill, fir(e)n crime, pyr(e)l hole, meol(o)c milk, seol(o)c silk,

weol(o)c whelk, cler(i)c clerk, mer(t)sé marsh, heor(o)t hart, fal(o)d
fold, ar(o)d- swift (simplex arod), war(o)p shore, or(o)p breath,

byr(e)s chisel. Only monosyllabic forms occur for twelf twelve, dale
clasp, eln ell, hwelé which, sweld such. It is, of course, not possible to

decide how far the vowel-losses recorded in this section arose first

in trisyllabic forms.

§ 391. Monosyllables arising through loss of an unaccented

vowel after a short syllable before a consonant group are afst
(eW-S) for zfest, cyng (Ru.1, W-S) for cyning, ofst (frequent, and
so efstan) for ofost, world (lNorth., |W-S) for woruld, bern (IW-S)
for berern.

§ 392. Syncopation after long syllables. After long accented syllables, all fully unaccented vowels had been lost in open medial
syllables in prehistoric OE (cf. § 388, footnote). In the historic
period, vowels preserved in this position by a half-stress (§§ 89, 91)
were sometimes dropped if the half-stress

was lost

(§ 358).

Similarly, heavy formative suffixes after long syllables sometimes,

especially in 1OE, lost their half-stress and were reduced, e.g.
nomina agentis in -ere (as |W-S bécre), comparative adjs. from advs.

(as IW-S ezftra, inra, ftra, for zxfterra, &c.), eW-S bismrian,
fultmian, pre, -ra (for bismerian, fultemian, Operre, -ra), \W-S
déoflic, pylc, héafre (for déofollic, pyllic, héahfore), Ct. of 938
Widléagate d.s. (beside Widigléa).

§ 393. Instances of loss of a vowel in a closed syllable after a
long accented syllable are eW-S &mtig beside Zmettig and the late
forms fulhtere, gefulhtnian for fulluhtere, &c., 2rndian for Zrendian,
hztse for hxgtesse, Hencstes for Hengestes. More extensive reduction

appears

in (n)auht,! (n)aht < (n)a@wiht; (n)ateshwon <
w¥pman < wépen-; alpig < #nlipig; heardra <
heardhara. The genitival -es is dropped after a long syllable in
(n)awihtes-;

Sztern(es)-deg, and loses its vowel in Céolsige (Ct. of Alfred in
Winchester Cartulary, beside Céolesig), Pursdzg (IW-S Gospels).

1, Chronological Summary
§ 394. Of the changes dealt with in this chapter, those described
in Section a belong to the period before the Germanic conquest of
'

VP already ndoht beside ndwiht.

§ 395

CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY

161

England, while the relative chronology of those described in Section
B has been discussed in Chapter V, Section xk. The Old English
losses and reductions of vowels described in Sections c and plie before
the period of the oldest texts, but after 7-umlaut, for 7 was lost neither

finally nor medially till it had caused that change (e.g. ést, démde <
*anstiz, *domid6). It appeared in §

353 that i and wu were lost at

the same time, and that the loss of x, although earlier, was itself
later than i-umlaut. It is, of course, evident that the reduction of

long vowels described in Section p was not completed at the time of
the vowel losses of Section c, for the new shorts would then have been
lost like the old ones. Nevertheless, the reduction of the long vowels
had gone sufficiently far, when the old shorts were dropping, for
the new shorts to count as such in the quantitative patterns which
governed loss and retention of vowels (§ 356 and footnote on

heardlicu). In #lé each < *#li¢ a new medial short is syncopated

like an old one. Accordingly, the changes of Sections c and p are
closely associated, and must all belong to nearly the same period.
.§395. The parasiting

described in

§§ 363-4 is

older

than

smoothing: Angl. bécun clearly developed a back parasite vowel

because a back vowel preceded, and hence it presupposes a form
béacun. It is, however, not possible to relate this parasiting to back
umlaut, for there is no certain case of a parasite vowel causing that

change.' The parasiting in accented syllables of §§ 360-1 is present
in the earliest texts, but may be assumed to be later than smoothing, for Angl. *beorht > berht before the new vowel of beriht
divided the back consonant from the r (and so perih). The parasiting described in §§ 365-6 is mainly W-S, and as it appears in
eW-S but is not yet at its height, it can be regarded as a change
which began about 800, and continued to gain ground till about
1000.

§ 396. The changes of unaccented vowels described in §§ 369-76,

380 are to be dated by their appearances in texts, as is indicated
in the discussion of them. The confusion of the unaccented back
vowels began before goo, and was completed in Kentish and
Northumbrian in the course of the tenth century, rather later in

West-Saxon (§§ 377-8). It was followed in the eleventh century
by confusion of all unaccented vowels (§ 379).
* It is uncertain if the vowel of the suffix of beofor is parasitic (Prim. Gme.
*bevur- or *bevur-). If it is parasitic, it must be explained like that of bitur, &c.
(§ 363); *beur-, Ep. bebr, gives normally befer (§ 210.1).

162

VOWELS OF UNACCENTED SYLLABLES

§ 397

§ 397. The vowel harmony described in §§ 385-7 is first traced
in the ninth century, and remains alive into the eleventh, when
the confusion of front and back unaccented vowels ended it. The
syncopation of vowels described in §§ 388-91 began prehistorically,'
but continued to occur throughout the Old English period, while
the various losses of §§ 392-3 appear for the most part in late texts,
a few only in Early West-Saxon.
! The loss of the vowel in fald was clearly later than breaking. Although
unsyncopated forms are not recorded, a similar loss is assumed in balca, dale
to explain the absence of breaking.

VII
THE INDO-EUROPEAN CONSONANTS
IN GERMANIC AND WEST GERMANIC
§ 398. By the operation of the Germanic sound-shift (Grimm’s
law), and various other processes which lie outside the scope of a
grammar of an individual language, Primitive Germanic received
the following consonantal sounds:!
Voiceless stops
Voiced
,,

Voiceless spirants

Voiced
Nasals

Liquids

”

Labials

Dentals

Velars

P
b

t
d

k
g

f

v,u
m

Pp

3
n

x

3
n

Palatals

i

Sibilants

8

Zz

Lr

(1) Of these, the following could appear as double consonants
in medial position: , t, k, m, n, 1, r, s.Such geminates are preserved
in OE hoppian hop, cnotta knot, liccian lick, swimman swim,
rinnan run, wulle wool, steorra star, wisse knew.
(2) Medially and finally f, p, s, x interchanged with their voiced
equivalents v, 0, 2, 3, according to a system by which a voiceless
spirant was voiced if the preceding vowel did not bear the main
stress according to the original Indo-European system of variable
accent position. This is known as Verner’s law. The interchange
of consonants is seen most clearly in the strong verbs, where the
infinitive, the present system, and the 1st and 3rd sg. indic. of the
past contrast with the rest of the past system (including the and sg.

past indic. in West Gmc.) and pass. part. Thus in Prim. Gmc. the
infs. and pass. parts. of OE drifan drive, céosan choose, snipan
cut, féon draw, séon see, would be *dretfan-, *drivan-; *keusan-,
*kozan-; *sneipan-, *snidan-; *teuxan-, *tozan-; *sexuan-, *sezuan-

(but 3rd pl. past indic. *s#zunt).*
* The symbols are mostly used with the approximate value which they
prevailingly have in NE, butj, 4 = y, win yet, wet; y = ng in sing; band d = th
in thin, then; x and 3 = ch in loch and its voiced equivalent.
? In North. and West Gmc. medial xy became x, but medial gy became y
normally, 3 under uncertain circumstances, but at least before d.

164

INDO-EUROPEAN CONSONANTS

§ 398

(3) 2 existed only owing to the operation of Verner’s law, arid
*mizdd reward, *xuzda-

before other voiced consonants, e.g.

treasure. 5, d existed only initially, and in the groups mb, nd, e.g.
*beran- bear, *kamba- comb, *daza- day, *bindan- bind. @, v did
not exist initially or after nasals, 3 existed initially but not after

nasals, e.g. *zoda- god, *zaiza- spear; g existed only in the group
yg, e.g. *layga- long. Thus in the labial and dental series, the voiced
stops, b, d, and the spirants, v, J, could not be used in the same
positions: the stops occur initially and in nasal groups mb, nd, the
spirants medially and finally. The back series is not symmetrical,

for the spirant 3 is used in the initial position, so that the stop g
is limited to the nasal group yg."
(4) There was in Prim. Gmc. an interchange between consonantal z and its syllabic equivalent. 7 was vocalized to a syllabic sound

which may be represented by 2, or better by #, after a long accented
syllable ending in a consonant,? so that, for example, n.s. *yariaz,
imper. *bidje contrasted with n.s. *andiaz, imper. *sdkite.3 When
the following vowel was in absolute finality, and was lost early
(§ 331-1), 7 contracted into final 7, e.g. *sdki > OE séé (§ 345).

With later loss of the following vowel, i > i, and this was then
treated as if it had the IE abnormal intonation, remaining in OE,
e.g. ende (§§ 355.3). When the vowel following 7 was not lost, #

was syncopated in OE like 7, e.g. *sdkijan- > sééan, *sokitip >
sécep.* After a preceding syllable was made long by West Gmc.
consonant gemination (§ 407), ¢ appears to have remained consonantal (§ 353, footnote), and was subject to loss in OE, e.g.

*framian- > *frammian > fremman. The interchange does not
affect IE 1, which remains vocalic, and hence causes no consonant
gemination in West Gmc. before a vowel after short syllables, e.g.
g.p. of i-declension, OE winia.
! Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 618, reverting to a view supported by Henry Sweet
in the History of English sounds, holds that Gmc. had g not 3 in initial position,
and hence that the back series was symmetrical with the labial and dental ones.
This view raises many difficulties, and has little to recommend it: cf. Flasdieck,
A ixix. 268.
2 4 also appeared after an unaccented syllable, e.g. Goth. 2nd sg. pres. indic.
mikileis, like sdkeis. After a long syllable ending in a vowel j appeared, e.g. Goth.
stdjis, like satjis, OE diegan < *kaujan- (§ 120.2).
3 This interchange of ¢ and ij is called Sievers’ law, owing to the discussion
by Sievers, PBB v. 129 ff.; cf. Edgerton, Language x. 235 ff.
4 Like hierde, § 351. So OE ricu is developed from *rikijd, as héafdu from
*yauvuds.

§ 399

IN GERMANIC AND WEST GERMANIC

165

§399. In Prim. Gmce. final s(z) and r remained (e.g. Goth.
stains < *stainaz stone, fadar father) but other final consonants
were dropped in unaccented syllables,' although a lost final nasal
consonant can influence the development of a preceding vowel (see
examples § 331.5). The acc. sg. of all nouns illustrates the loss of

final -m, the 3rd sg. of the pres. and past subj. that of final -,
e.g. OE stén < *stainam, bere, bére < *beraip, *b#rip. So in

cons. stems there is interchange between OE hele and hzlep,
with p restored from the inflected forms.

§ 400. The loss of vowels of final syllables, described in
§ 331.1.4, leads to the consonants /, m, n, r, 1, u becoming syllablebearers in some words. 7, u>1, u, eg. OE here < *heri <
*yarjaz, bearu < *baryaz. This process repeated itself later, after

the vowel losses described §§ 341-53, e.g. OE a.s.m. gearone

< *zaruna < *3zaruanon. After a long syllable, i and u of this
origin drop in OE like originally vocalic i and u (§ 345), e.g. s#
sea < *s®i < *saiui- (§ 406), and so # law, hré corpse; gad want

(Goth. gaidw); hra corpse < *yraiy-, and so sn@ snow,? @ always

(Goth. aiw); and cf. § 120.3.c, footnote, on *77, *hi.3 Syllabic J, m,
n, r remain in Goth. (e.g. fugls bird, maibms treasure, ibns even,
fingrs finger), and frequently do so in OE, whether due to early
or late vowel loss (see §§ 363-4).
§ 401. Consonant groups not ending in consonants capable of
becoming syllable-bearers,5 and all geminates, were retained without difficulty in Prim. Gmc. when they became final, and when

they immediately preceded final -s. They remain in OE, where,
however, final geminates are frequently graphically shortened
(§ 66), e.g. wulf wolf, horn horn, word word, healp helped, band
bound, eal(Z) all, coc(c) cock, seég man (§ 61).
t In accented syllables final consonants remained, at least after short vowels,
e.g. OE hwet (with the neut. pronominal suffix seen in Lat. quod), OE xt

(Lat. ad), Goth pan (Lat. tum). But in long accented syllables they perhaps dis-

appear, e.g. OE cii a.s., if this is not nom. used for acc.
2 Usually hrdw, sndw with w from inflected forms.
3 See § 120.3.b on cases where u stood finally after a short vowel.
* Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 625, regards OE spellings like tdnc, bénc, for tdcn
béacn as due to a metathesis in Gmc. aimed at eliminating the syllabic consonants.
They rather indicate a development of cn to y; ng for gn (e.g. reng for regn)

similarly indicates probably a change to y. (So S—B, § 185; Férster, Flussname
Themse, p. 327, believes in metathesis, others regard these spellings as graphic

variants.)

5 This includes /, m, n, r after r, and J after J, e.g. OE eorl, earm, earn, feorr,

eall,

166

INDO-EUROPEAN CONSONANTS

§ 402

§ 402. ¢ and uw were frequently doubled after a short vowel in

Gmc. On the development of the resulting groups aif, &c., in OE
see § 120.1. The doubling was not always carried out, e.g. *yauta-

> OE hieg (§ 120.2), but cf. *yauuan-, ON hédggva (§ 120.1);
*aui > OE eowu sheep; *aiaz > OE ar bronze; *treua- tree;

*kneua- knee. The conditions under which this gemination took
place or failed are unknown.?
§ 403. On Gmc. and Ingvaeonic loss of nasal consonants before

the homorganic spirants, see § 119, 121.
§ 404. Gmce. 2, whether due to Verner’s law or of earlier origin

(§ 398.2.3), became 7 in North and West Gmc. Between vowels
this remains in OE, so that s—r is a frequent variation in related
words, such as the principal parts of strong verbs, like céosan,

curon, and causative verbs like nerian save, against nesan escape.
Other examples are the comparative suffix -ra, éare ear, déor

animal (Goth. -oza, auso, dius). Between vowel and consonant r
usually remains, e.g. hord, reord, &c. (see § 123-4); but it is lost
with compensatory lengthening in OE had- hair (cf. ON haddr),
méd reward (beside meord), twin linen (cf. Ger. zwirn); cf. OS
linon learn, MD hede hards of flax (beside OE leornian, heordan,
§ 124). 2” is assimilated to mm in Prim. OE *rznn house, *hrann

wave, but this change is later than the Anglo-Frisian fronting
(§ 193.d, footnote 4).2 z is lost in West Gmc. finally in unaccented
syllables, e.g. many n.s. and n.p. inflexions, e.g. OE deg, giefa (cf.
Goth. dags, gibés); the unaccented pronominal words OE we, ge,
he, me, pe, hwa.3
§ 405. West Gmc. paradigms show regular loss of u before u

and of 7 before 7, e.g. weak verbs of Class I, 2nd and 3rd sg. pres.
indic. *neris, *nerip, inf. *nerian, OE nerest, nerep, nerian; fem.
nouns in “4-6 > -uu (§ 331.5) >-u,

as OE beadu-battle,

infil.

beadwe; forms like cléa, see §§ 120.3.a, 235.1, 236.2; see also § 122

on final 46 > ui > a (OE ta, &c.).
§ 406. OE forms often show loss of u before 7,4 although yw is
often analogically restored, e.g. forms of weak verbs of Class I
T References in Prokosch, Comparative Germanic grammar, p. 93.
2 dunn dark < *dusna- shows a similar development, if it is not a Celtic
loan-word (Férster, Keltisches Wortgut, p. 137).
3 For most of these, however, OHG exhibits accented forms with r retained,
wir, ir, mir, dir, wer.
+ This loss is probably also OFris., but its results are so prone to be obscured

by analogy that its extension in West Gmc. is impossible to trace.

§ 407

IN GERMANIC AND WEST GERMANIC

167

like gierest, -ep, -ede < *zaris, &c. < *zaruis, beside inf. gierwan,
and so wylep, &c., beside wylwan; various, mostly verbal forms
with loss of u cited § 237.1.b, as éde, strén, cé0, stréd, ni-; forms in

which 4 was lost between a long vowel and 7, andi was subsequently
lost (§§ 345, 351) as s# sea < *s#i < “sdi- < “saiui-, &c., and so
# law, hr@ corpse, and sporadic verbal forms like CP gecnzd,

ztiede, North. biléde, Ru.’ créd from Gme. *knaiyi-, *auyi-,
*léui-, *kraiui-, by phonological development beside analogical
gecnBwd knows, xtiewde showed, bel®wde betrayed, créwp crows.

§ 407. W. Gme. consonant doubling is particularly’ strongly
developed before #, every consonant except r being affected after
short syllables. The j is most consistently preserved in OS., e.g.
skeppian, OE scieppan < *skapian create. The forms in which u

is doubled are dealt with in § 120.2. Examples with other consonants are many weak verbs of Class I, as sellan give, fremman do,
pennan stretch, clyppan embrace, settan set, cnyssan knock, wecéan

awake, byégan buy; nouns and adjs. of the ja-, i6-, and jan-/iéndeclensions, as cynn race (cf. Goth. g.s. kunjis), sibb relationship,
wreéca exile, smippe smithy, nytt useful. But r was not doubled,
whether original or from z (§ 404), and -rj- remained in OE, e.g.
nerian save, herias armies (Goth. nasjan, harjés). When doubled,
v and 3 became the corresponding stops, 5b and gg (written in OE
cg), e.g. OE hebban raise, licgan lie < *yavian, *lizian. So, if
had not already become d before the doubling (§ 409), d¢ > ddi,

e.g. OE biddan ask < *bidian.
§ 408. There was clearly already in West. Gmc. extensive
doubling of consonants before / and r after short vowels, for there
is evidence in all the languages, e.g. OS appul apple, OHG
snottar wise, OE zppel, snottor. After long vowels the process was
rare, and was perhaps accompanied by shortening of the vowel,

e.g. OS. hluttar pure, OE hluttor. Doubling took place when consonant and liquid belonged to the same syllable, and the geminates
were transferred to other forms, so *hlittz (Goth. hlatrs) took tt from
* Many handbooks following Kauffmann, PBB xii. 508 ff., regard the
double consonants in weak nouns such as OE docga, sugga, crabba, lobbe, OHG
tropfo drop, chnappo boy, as due to West Gmc. gemination before n, in forms
where the thematic suffix was -n-, and the consonant to be doubled was hence
in contact with it. But these geminates are of earlier and diverse origin. Cf.
H. Krahe, Germanische Sprachwissenschaft i (Berlin, 1948), pp. 113-14; and on
various theories A. Martinet, La gémination consonantique d'origine. expressive
dans les langues germaniques (Copenhagen and Paris, 1937).

168

INDO-EUROPEAN CONSONANTS

§ 409

*hlattrd, &c. Examples occur of such doubling of p, t, k, h only,
e.g. OE zxppel, snottor, weccer awake, hweohhol wheel. Forms with
single consonants are sometimes generalized from the uninflected
form, e.g. zcer field (OS akkar). Sometimes double forms occur,
e.g. wec(c)er, snot(t)or, bit(t)er, wet(t)res. So beside éar ear of

corn, téar tear, hwéol wheel, with loss of single x (§ 235.2), we have

hweohhol and North. xhher, teher.

§ 409. In West Gmc. d whether original (i.e. from IE dh), or
due to Verner’s law (§ 398.2), became d: e.g. with original 0, OE
g6d good, word word, stéd stood, cf ON gddr, ord, stdd'; with d due
to Verner’s law, OE fléd flood, feder father, médor mother, cf. ON
fied, fadir, médir; also many past pls. and pass. parts. as snidon,
sniden, wurdon, worden from sniban cut, weorban become.”
§ 410. Owing to West Gmc. processes, there is in a few OE
words interchange between # and yu. In West Gmc. 7 contracted
with u to iu, OE io, go (§ 120.3.c) and later OE i+-back vowel
> io, éo (§ 238.1). But before a front vowel, 7 passed into a consonantal glide in Prim. OE. Hence beside fréo free (< *fria-,
*friu-), a.s.m. frigne, g.s.m. friges, n.p. frige (< *fritenz, *frites,
*frij@). Then analogical forms like g.s.m. fréos, d.p. frigum
develop.

§ 411. In absolute finality x dropped in West Gmc. after 7 and
hence in a few words in -iva- there is variation between final 7
(which may be written ig, § 271), io, éo (with restoration of u from
inflected forms, and development of tz to io, G0), and iw (with late
porridge, sii, siw mullet, Tiig, Tiwes-, a heathen god. The forms
in i(g) are the oldest, being mainly recorded in early glossaries;
-ig is transferred to an inflected form in Tiges. The development
éo with addition of u from inflected forms occurs in sléow; éo is
transferred to an inflected form in géowes. The variation of ig with
iw, iow in these words caused a form glig, gliges to arise beside
gliw, gliow mirth (§ 120.2), and southern place-names suggest that
*nige existed beside niwe, new (AB xxviii. 295).
§ 412. The alternation of w and g described in § 411 should be
carefully distinguished from that due to the development of 3x
as 3 or x according to the following sound (§ 398.2). This appears
1 h = hh, for single h is lost between voiced sounds (§ 66).

2 W-S fremde, Angl. frempe, foreign, reflect alternative forms of the suffix
due to Verner’s law.

§ 413

IN GERMANIC AND WEST GERMANIC

169

in OE higan family, miiga heap, hweogol wheel, brég (Angl.) eye-lid,
beside hiwan, miiwa, hweowol, br#w. By Verner’s law, beside iw,
éow yew (cf. giw, géow-) we find éoh < *ioh < *ih. Furthermore,

the interchange of Aw, due to Verner’s law, can become one of
&-w owing to inverted spelling of final h as g, and false introduction
of internal g (§ 447), e.g. holh, holg, *holwes' hollow, horh,? horg,
horu, horwes rheum, rith, riigan, ritwes rough.3

§ 413. The group pi at the beginnings of words became in
North and West Gmc. fi, e.g. OE fléon flee, ON fijja, but Goth.

phuhan, and probably flzh deceptive, cf. Goth. gaplaihan comfort.

This change cannot be traced with certainty in internal position.

§ 414. In West Gmc. medial Jp > Jd, and final Jp became replaced in OE by /d from inflected forms, e.g. wilde wild, fealdan

fold, wuldor glory, cf. Goth. wilpeis, falpan, wulbus; and after
inflected forms, beald bold, gold gold, feld field, Goth. balp-, gulp.
Final p is preserved in a few forms in early OE: -felth often in BH,

and transferred to internal position in Cp. 1797 feltha; Balth-

Cts. 6 and 7 (Kt.), Bald- LV, always before second elements with
initial h; and the existence of alternative forms with Jp, Id seems to

produce some spellings of id as Ith, Io: Ep. Cp. spilth, Ep. haldi,
Ghaeldi, for spild ruin, healde i.s. sloping, dhielde sloping. lparising

by syncopation in Prim. OE is not subject to this sound change,

e.g. h#lp health, hild he hides.

TM Cf. ME holwe (adj.), Mod. E. hollow.
? And hence horheht for phonological horweht.

3 And so réowe, riiwe, beside réo, Ep. rfhae blanket.

IX

THE GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN
OLD ENGLISH
A. Early Changes of Groups
§ 415. A number of consonant changes may be mentioned here,
which are to be put comparatively late in the Primitive Old English
period, but which are found in other Germanic languages also.
This must be due to linguistic expansions, which brought groups
of dialects into relationship, rather than to descent from a common
type of Germanic. One can compare the loss of final -n, which,
cutting across the old linguistic grouping, linked North Germanic
to Frisian and Northumbrian (§ 472).
§ 416. xs > ks in North Gmc., OE and O.Fris. This change
cannot be placed back in the Gmc. period, for xs remained late
enough to cause breaking, e.g. OE feax hair, weaxan grow, Seaxe
Saxons.' Other examples are fox fox, siex six, meox manure,
oxa ox, Oxn arm-pit, wéocsteall altar-place, (i.e. *wéoh-+-steall),
Weoxtan (PC for Wéohstan), lixan shine. hs in eW-S appears
occasionally as a spelling (e.g. weahsan), and may be extended to
ks of other origin (e.g. Ghsian beside dcsian, Oros.). This soundchange is a remarkable link of OE and OFris. to each other and to

North Gmc., for in OS ys > s, while in OHG ys remains (written
hs), cf. OF ris.,ON sex, OS ses, OHG sehs six. On the later repetition of the change in OE, see § 481.4.
§ 417. When a consonant follows, xs >s in OE, e.g. wastm

fruit, -w2sma growth (both related to weaxan), North. sesta sixth,
beside W-S, Ru. syxta, with ks from siex), but wrixlan exchange
(from gewrixl, where I is vocalic), pix! axle beside pis! (from
paradigm originally pixl, pisle), and weak pisle.2 This change is
found in all West Gmc. languages, and in North Gmc., e.g.
ON isl axle; OS uueslon exchange, uuastum fruit; ON nysa, OS
' See § 65 on the symbol x = ks, and rarer variants.
2 Néosan visit (< *niuhsian, cf. Goth. niuhsjan) is difficult to explain, as the
medial element would be vocalic by Sievers’ law (see § 398.4); cf. lixan <
*liuhsian.

§ 418

EARLY CHANGES OF GROUPS

171

niustan, OHG niusen visit; OS, OHG lastar reproach (< *laystra-,

cf. OE leahtor < *laytra-).
§ 418. fs > ps in OE relatively late, for the original sounds are

recorded in early texts: weps wasp (Ep., Cp. waefs, but Erf.
uaeps), repsan reprove! (in this and related words, Erf., Ep., Cp.

all have both fs and ps, Ep. once ds). This sound-change seems to
have had some spread in the West Gmc. area. In view of the fs
spellings of the glossaries, it would seem that the change is late,
and that regular forms like drifst, thou drivest, are due to paradigm

analogy.
§419. A group of changes arise from a tendency to develop

stops from spirants before liquids and nasals, After a short vowel,
pl, pm > tl, tm in W-S, e.g. botl building, bytla builder, set] seat,?

botm bottom, bytme keel.3 However, fepm embrace, mzpl talk,
preserve p, and possibly the change took place only when pi and

pm belonged to one syllable, and hence did not take place in
uninflected forms, e.g. fam. If this is so, levelling must have taken

place in individual words in favour of p or t.
§ 420. In Angl., however, pl, pm remained after short vowels

and the spirant became voiced by a normal process (§ 444): sepel*

(Li., Ru.’, Rit., Ru.1, OE Bede), bodles d.s. (OE Bede), *bopm (cf.
ME bothem), bythne (Cp.).

§ 421. An alternative development with entire loss of p and
compensatory lengthening of the preceding vowel appears in
mé&l, mzlan (beside mzxpl), and st#l place, st@lan impute. This

development seems not to be peculiar to a dialect.

§ 422. In W-S the phonological development of pi after a long
* Here, whether the OE forms are from *rafisjan or *ravisjan, OE f arose
from a voiced sound (§ 444) by assimilation to s. (Hence the distinction drawn

by Sturtevant, Language vii. 190 ff,, is

ufireal.)

? Possibly add watla bandage, see OED, s.v. watile, sb.*

3 Also bytne with the same change before 7.
‘4 In -sedlum Cp. 1667 d = 3 Angl., however, has, beside sebel < “sepla-,
also setel < *setla- (Li, Ru.1, RG); hence Ru.” settlas (§ 408). In W-S the
forms fall together. But Li. seatul, seatlas, Ru.* seotlas, seatlas, Ru.’ setulas,
VP -seotle to *setula-. Prevailingly setel, seatul=cathedra, but sepel, sedl = sedes.
5 OE botl, bodl, *bodl, bold in place-names is discussed by Ekwall, 4B xxviii.
82 ff. He would derive Bootle, -bottle in northern place-names (forms occur from
the twelfth century) from OE *bdtl, to explain the modern vowel. He assumes
that in this form 6 could be retained and normally developed, or shortened with
consonant gemination (§ 285). This assumes two abnormalities: that JJ > t/ in
Angl., for which there is no parallel; that JJ > ¢/ after a long vowel (the only
parallel is W-S spdtl). The normal Angl. development of a form with 6 appears
in Bothel (Cumberland, pron. %), Budle (Northumberland).

172

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH § 423

vowel was dl: n#dl needle, ddl disease (also Bd. Gl.), midl horse’s
bit, widl impurity, w¥dla poor man (and related words; also KG).

pl due to syncopation of i is not subject to this sound-change, e.g.

éples, &c., from épel home. Similarly pr > dr in Zdr vein (also KG
édr). But eW-S always madm treasure, 20m breath, for the same

reason as fxpm (§ 419). After long vowels Angl. kept the spirant,

which ultimately became voiced, the development thus being the
same as after shorts: Ep. ndédlae, éthm, Cp. néthle, déthm, wédl,
midlum,? VP wédla, Gdle. So before r, Cp. hédir (renes), VP édre.
Later North. has ddl, widlia (Li. once each; Ri. once uiddil ae

Ru. spaol.

§ 423. The extent to which these sound-changes operated in
other languages is difficult to decide, as medial & became d in
the later Middle Ages in Low German and Frisian, and while there

are no early Frisian texts, the spelling of OS is ambiguous on this
point (see Holthausen, Altsdchs. Elementarbuch, § 201). Yet in W-S

pl must have become Zl after short vowels before the voicing of
medial spirants (§ 444). The change pl > dl after a long vowel pre-

supposes a voiced spirant, and if it belongs to the same time as

pl > tl, a special voicing of pl after long vowels must be assumed.
Otherwise, the change pi > di must lie between the voicing of
spirants and the syncopation of i.

§ 424. In 1OE the distribution of ¢/, dl, &c., against pl as outlined
above is disturbed by a new change d > d before liquids and

nasals. To this are due |W-S forms like fadm, madm. \North. has,
beside the forms quoted above with preserved 3, more frequently

sedl, ddl, spadl, nédl, widliga, also bydla cultivator.3 Remarkable
extensions of the tendency are dédle (d.s. of épel, Ru. 4 times),

h&dna (and many other forms from h&pen heathen, Li.) where dl,

Gn due to syncopation of i are affected. So with dJ arising in
composition, 1W-S prydlice powerfully, gadmod, \North. (in deriva-

tives) édmod humble. Ru." has similar forms: sedle, -um, nédle, adle,
éadmod, but some Merc. areas may have escaped the tendency, for

dl forms are often preserved in the OE Bede (see § 420, also ddl,
weépelnysse).

§ 425. An alternative development of -f/ is metathesis to -/d.
Its basis seems to have been d/ with a voiced spirant, not dl, for
But spdti, saliva, developed as if the vowel were short.

? Cp. 66 nétl is an error; Erf. 796 nédlz has d = &.
3 Add *bodm, ME (northern) bodome.

§ 426

FRONTING AND ASSIBILATION

173

dl is late in developing in Angl., and already Cp. 2001 has -a/d, LG

73 ald, VP seld (frequently), LV 18 -maeld. To these forms poeti-

cal texts add bold (rarely prose), bylda (builder), spald, and 1OE has
byldan build. Note also -bold as a place-name element.

B. Fronting and Assibilation
§ 426. It was an outstanding feature of Prim. OE and Prim.
OFris. that the velar consonants 3 and k developed sensitivity to

the nature of vowels preceding and following them. This sensitivity
began in the continental period of OE, but continued well after
the
conquest of England.
§ 427. In Prim. OEa distinction arose between front or palatal

and velar k and 3. Palatal k probably differed from velar k hardly
more than do the initial consonants of NE it, cat. Palatal 3 was a

spirant which coincided with the sound derived from Prim. Gme.

j (i.e. y as in NE young). At the beginnings of words, these palatal
sounds were developed before the front vowels of OE (&, 2, i,

alone and as the first elements of diphthongs) as they existed after

the restoration of d before back vowels (§ 1 57). Hence palatal
sounds arose not only before the front vowels of West Gmc., and

the diphthongs developed from them by breaking, but also before
# (@) and éa, which had developed from West Gme. d and au, and

before éa (é0), the breakings of # (é). On the other hand, a from
retraction before consonant groups instead of breaking (Angl. cald,

galla), and from restoration before back vowels (caru, galan) had velar

consonants before it. Velars also appeared before all consonants

even if a front vowel followed, e.g. climban, cnéo, creft, cwepan,
gled, gnztt, grimm. Examples of initial palatal sounds are:!
cirice church, ¢idan chide, ceorl churl, ééace cheek, ceald cold,
* In the OE runic alphabet the front and velar sounds were sometimes

distinguished as |, (cén), X (évfu) against 4 (calc), x (gar). RC has a further

symbol K used for velar c before a front vowel, as in cyning. But ¢én and &yfu are

sometimes used for both the front and velar sounds. In the Latin alphabet as
developed to write OE they are not systematically distinguished except in Ru.},
where an attempt, better sustained initially than in other positions, is made to
use k for c, and c for ¢; see Bulbring, AB ix. 289 ff. Elsewhere there is only
sporadic use of k, especially in kyning. Occasional use of ch seems to be without
phonetic significance, as it is found for both ¢ and é¢; it is fairly frequent in Ru.*
(e.g. folches, stenches), and is found also in Li. and !W-S. On the use of vowel
symbols as diacritics to distinguish palatals, see § 45. In quoting OE forms in
the present work the palatal consonants and the affricates ultimately developed
from palatal stops are marked with a dot (¢, ¢¢, g, ¢g).

174

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH §428

cearig sorrowful, céas chose, céosan choose, ciecen chicken, gift

gift, gifre greedy, ginnan begin, gefan (W-S giefan) give, georn
eager, geaf gave, geard yard, géat poured, géotan pour; see also
§§ 185-7 on the development of diphthongs from front vowels

after these palatal consonants. Velar consonants, however, remained before back vowels and their umlauts, e.g. cii cow, cdl cool,

camb comb, caf (a < ai) brave, guma man, gold gold, gés goose,
gup war, cyning king, cemban comb, gylden golden, gés geese.'
§ 428. In final position, k and 3 were palatalized after OE front
vowels, including those due to i-umlaut, because this umlaut
implies that 7 or 7 had originally followed k or 3. Examples are

bxé back, freé bold (see § 435), pic pitch, did ditch, geli¢ like (and
so hwelé, swelé < -lié, § 390), dzg day, m#¢ relative, bodig body;
and after umlauted vowels, bé¢ books, swég sound, -hygd thought.
3 in final gd is similarly treated, e.g. br2gd. The development is the
same at the end of a syllable, e.g. waénan wake, lichoma body, ricne

a.s.m. powerful, nagled nailed, m#gden maiden, stigrap stirrup.
Palatalization takes place in the same circumstances of k in the

group nk, of 3 in the groups /3, rz, and of g in the group ng,? e.g.
finé finch, driné imper. drink, ping thing, féng received, and after
umlauted vowels, ben bench, feng grasp, streng string, bielg bag,
byrg cities. Similar palatalization took place of the geminates kk
and gg (the instances are all after umlauted vowels), e.g. cryéé
crutch, secg man, e¢g edge, brycg bridge. Velar consonants remain

after back vowels, including @ < ai, and the second elements of
diphthongs in -a and -o, e.g. bée book, éac also, séoc sick, plég
plough, and in groups, long long, burg city.3
§ 429. Medially, the same sounds and groups of sounds are
affected as finally, ie. k, 3, the geminates kk, gg, and the groups
nk, ng, lk, 13, rk, rz. The circumstances of palatalization are between
any two front vowels, between front vowel and syllabic consonant,

and always after a vowel which has suffered i-umlaut.* Examples
are bleces g.s.m. black, cwice n.p.m. alive, breée sg. pres. subj.
1 A front vowel due to the second fronting of @ (mainly peculiar to VP,
§ 164) also retained a velar consonant before it: *gatu gates, later geatu, and so
ceafurtin, *-gedere, ME togederes together (§ 203).
2 Theoretically all groups of liquid or nasal+-¢, g, or 3 would be affected, but
they do not all occur finally: nk, ng, lk, 13, rk, r3.
3 Velar consonants remained even when a diphthong became a front vowel
owing to Angl. smoothing, e.g. é also, bég ring.
+ Including vowels which have suffered theoretical i-umlaut, by which they
are not changed, e.g. l@ée physician, méée sword, ride kingdom.

§ 430

FRONTING AND ASSIBILATION

175

break, dxges g.s. day, sige victory; so before syllabic consonants
irrespective of whether these developed a parasite vowel or not:
zéer field, nzgl nail, fegr fair, wegn wain, regn rain, segl sail; with
groups: finces g.s. finch, pinges g.s. thing," finger finger. Examples

after mutated (or theoretically mutated) vowels are: /#¢ée physician, méce sword, rice kingdom, sééan seek, iecan increase, biegan
bend, fégan join, dryge dry; with groups: drencan cause to drink,
pencan think, pynéan seem, sengan singe, mengan mix, birée birch,
wyréan work, byrgan bury, felg felly, bielgas bags; with geminates:
streccan stretch, wxccende watching, stycée piece, gycéan itch,

liégan lie, leégan lay. Velar consonants, however, remained when
there was a back vowel (or back element of a diphthong) either
before or after them, e.g. wicu week, brecan break, aces g.s. oak,
séoce n.p.m. sick, wegas ways, nigon nine, pinga g.p. things. It is
important to note that an umlauted vowel is followed by a palatal
consonant, even if a back vowel followed, e.g. fégan, drenéan,
streccan, li¢gan. But velar consonants remained between a front

vowel and the umlaut of a back vowel, as is seen in verbs of
the type syngian sin, myngian remind, séyldgian sin, witgian
prophesy, wérgian grow weary (< -230ian or -izdjan, cf. § 430,
footnote).

§ 430. The subsequent history of ¢ (g), whether produced by
the processes just described or original (< Gmc. 1), is as follows:
initially it remained (hence NE yard, yield, &c.), while after vowels
it combined with them into diphthongs or long vowels, in OE
when it was in the same syllable, in ME when a syllable boundary
preceded it (§§ 266-9). Velar 3 became a stop initially by the end of
the OE period. This change may explain why it no longer alliterates

with 7 in 1OE verse.? Internally and finally 3 remained till the ME
period (after 1200), when it became 7 or u (OE /éogan, dragan >
ME leien, drawen).3
§ 431. Palatal stops (é, é¢, nc, é¢, mg) could have one of two

subsequent histories. They were either assibilated, so that ¢ and
cé > [tf],

g and ég > [dg], or were retracted to be velar stops

again.
* Note Ep. 410 hringiae d.s. ring, where gi = g.
2 See Campbell, Battle of Brunanburh, p. 33.
3 Development to a stop was rare internally, except in verbs of the type
syngian;, see Flasdieck, A lxx. 225 ff. Some I[W-S manuscripts have occasional
w as a spelling for the medial velar spirant, especially in forms of swugian,
adrigian (references in B-T; cf. S-B, § 214.8).

176

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH

§432

§ 432. Initially, palatal ¢ was always assibilated: examples are
all words with initial ¢ given above to illustrate fronting (§ 427).
§ 433. Finally and medially before vowels, palatal stops were
assibilated after i, and when umlaut had affected the preceding
vowel. Examples, in most of which the assibilation is shown by
the NE form, are finally dic, pic, hweld, swelc, finé, and after um-

lauted vowels bend, cryéé, ecg, seég, bryég; medially micel, cirice,
inflected forms of words just quoted, as dices, finces, and after
mutated vowels l#ce, sééan, strecéan, gycéan, cyégel, wyréan, birée.
§ 434. The development of the palatal stops to assibilated
consonants was through the stage #4, di, and hence # and di of
other origin were caught up in the development, so that ¢, ¢¢,

are found written in such words: eW-S gefeccan fetch (< *fetian,
§ 764), IW-S oréeard orchard (beside ordéeard for ort-geard),
micgern fat (for *mid-gern, OHG mittigarni).2 So creftga (for
*creftia workman, § 267) > creféa,3 for which crefta of manuscripts is probably a scribal error.*

§ 435. In other positions ¢ was not assibilated, and soon reverted
to k, e.g. bec, bxces, frec, freces, and all occurrences before consonants, whether the group was old or caused by OE syncopation,
exen oxen, fyxe vixen, bicnan signify, écness eternity, rixian rule.
The assumption of a palatal in such forms, where assibilation did not
arise, is due to the parallel with 3: since dzg and weg clearly developed 1, bzé, freé must have had ¢. This view seems supported by
some peculiar spellings in Li., e.g. becg, gebraecg, for bx, -bree.
§ 436. The assibilation of stop g (in the groups gg, ng) was

limited like that of ¢, and hence did not occur in forms like
jingras (and hence finger), hyngran hunger.$

§ 437. The distribution of velar and palatal or assibilated consonants outlined above is very prone to analogical disturbance, and
® It is doubtful if there are any exceptions, except those caused by sound
substitution by Scandinavian settlers, as ME kaf (northern) for OE céeaf chaff,
and the northern type -caster in place-names (but see Ekwall, AB xxx. 224-5).
2 But CP (Hatton) orcgeard, Napier’s Wulfstan, p. 152, 9 Munegiu (v.l. for
Muntgiu) are copyist’s errors of a common type (ce for f).
3 JElfric, Gramm., ed. Zupitza, p. 215, 1. 9 (v.l.).
4 So Sievers, A xiii. 328; other views, Borowski, Lautdubletten, pp. 17-18. On
the other hand, creeftica is for *craftéa, with partial assimilation of g to t (tg > ¢¢),
and then restoration of the unaccented vowel from creftig.
5 It is doubtful if assibilation ever passed the limits above defined: some
doubtful cases are discussed by Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 685.a.1; of these the
best known, ME thatch for OE pzé, is clearly influenced by pecéan.

§ 438

FRONTING AND ASSIBILATION

177

ME and NE forms show that there was much variation in OE,

e.g. ME kerven, beginnen, show the initial sound levelled out from
curfon, gunnon; and many forms like NE like, dike, Scots breeks,

beside such, ditch, breeches are explained from OE doublets like
&elic-gelicum, dié-dicas, bréc-bréé.
§ 438. The assumption that assibilation did not follow palatalization before consonants (§§ 435-6) explains many verbal forms,

e.g. beside pencan, pyncan, sécan, sengan with assibilation, 3rd sg.
pres. indic. would be pencp, pyncp, sécp, sengp, in which the palatal

stops reverted to velars; from these velars could be transferred to

the inf., hence NE think, seek (beside beseech), dial. sing (for singe),
and so reck, work (OE recéan, wyrcan), and various dialectal forms.

It is more difficult to explain similar alternative forms in nouns,
e.g. dial. brig, rig, steek, eg, seg, weg, birk, ME benk, for bridge,
ridge, stitch, edge, sedge, wedge, birch, bench. Luick (Hist. Gramm.,

§ 690) would explain such forms by assuming that assibilation did
not take place before a back vowel, and hence would derive them

from inflected brycgum, ecgas, sticas, bircan, &c. Similarly he
explains dial. ig, leg from OE licgan, lecgan. It is, however, more

likely that the explanation lies in complete failure to assibilate by

Scandinavian settlers.'

§ 439. On the other hand, ¢ due to the palatalization of 3 after
an umlauted vowel (§ 429) reverted to 3 before back vowels.
Examples are wrégan accuse, nW-S tégan tie, flégan put to flight,

and inflected forms like brégas brows, c&ga keys, belgas bags,
felga fellies. So with Gmc. i, 3rd sg. pres. indic. hergap, and so

inf. hergian ravage (< *yarjoian). The reasons for assuming this

reversion of z to 3 before back vowels belong to the field of ME

philology?

§ 440. [sk] is more prone to palatalization and assibilation than
{k]. Initially it was probably originally palatalized before front

vowels only, but at least before goo it was palatalized before back
vowels and their umlauts also. On the phonological consequences
of this, see §§ 179-84, where many examples are given. The subsequent history of English suggests assibilation of initial sc, not only
OE ¢iecen chicken seems already to have had medial [k] in OE (Ru. a.p.
¢iken), Since the suffix contained an originally long vowel there would not
normally be syncopation, and no forms actually occur in which -c- is before 7,
and hence would not be assibilated. Dissimilation of the initial sounds of two
successive syllables may be the explanation (Ritter, AB xxi, 152).
3 See Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 373.a.5.

278

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH

§ 441

before vowels, but before 1, e.g. scréad shred, séréawa shrewmouse, scrié shrike, scrifan decree, scrin coffer, scrincan shrink,

sérid dress, ‘shroud’. Internally, also, sc was palatalized and
assibilated before all front vowels, even if a back vowel preceded,
e.g. wasce I wash, persce I thresh, asce ashes, risce rush, and inflected forms like zxsces, disées, fisces, frosées, &c. The assibilated
consonant also followed a mutated vowel, even if a back vowel

followed, e.g. blyscan blush, wyscan wish. Finally sc was palatalized
and assibilated after any front vowel, original or due to umlaut,
e.g. zsé ash, disé dish, fis¢ fish, risé rush, the suffix -is¢, and after
an umlauted vowel fl#s¢ flesh. But internally before back vowels

(if the preceding vowel had not undergone umlaut) and finally

after back vowels [sk] remained, and frequently underwent
metathesis to [ks] in IW-S, e.g. frosc frog, husc insult, tusc tooth,
Jiscas fishes (and forms with a back vowel after sc from disé dish,
ris¢, risce rush, xsé ash, flasce flask, asce ashes), *wascan wash,
perscan thresh, perscold threshold, adscap asks (and hence dscian),
hnescian soften,! tosca frog. Hence IW-S dxian, dixas, dox dusk,

fixas, frox, flaxe, geoxa, -ung sobbing, hnexian, hux, max neut.
pl. meshes, rixe, toxa, tux, perxan, perxold, waxan wash (past pl.
woxon)..
§ 441. The system outlined in § 440 would be ready prey to
analogy, and OE doublets like xs¢ zscas, frosc frosées, -isé -iscan are
much reflected in ME and NE, e.g. ME ash, Orrm pl. asskess, Orrm
-ish beside -issk, NE dial. frosh beside frosk, and so ME busk, bush.3

§ 442. Palatalization of x parallel to that of 3 is to be assumed for
forms with i-umlaut like hiikhan laugh; North. tehher tear, eher ear

of corn; W-S siehp sees.*
' The vowel of hnesée, soft, is not due to umlaut (see S—B, § 303.a.2).
? Here belong the river-names Axe (OE Axe, beside once Asée) and Exe
(OE Exe, beside *Esce, ME Esshe), where [sk] > {ks] in the frequent g.s. Axan,

Exan. muxle beside muscle, muscelle mussel, has metathesis of [sk] of Lat.
musculus. Although metathesized forms are rare outside W-S in OE, ME
evidence shows them to have been more widely spread. Even in OE, Ru.) has
axast, dxsade, and many texts, eW-S, eKt. (Ct. 44), Ru., have betwix between,

eW-S also betwéox(n), betwuxn, with vowel of betwéoh, betwuh (§ 438, footnote). Betwix has x (< sk) from forms with a following back vowel, *betwiscum,
but cf. Scots bitwish.
3 Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 691, notes, discusses various irregularities of development. NE bishop, cushat (OE biscop, cuscute) may owe their medial [f] to a
strong medium stress, so that the initial of the second syllable developed as if
before a stressed syllable.
* Only such forms are here relevant, for a front vowel before x was broken

FRONTING AND ASSIBILATION

§ 443

¥79

§ 443. On palatalization of the groups xt, xs xp, and its consequences, see §§ 304-11.

c. Voicing and Unvoicing of Consonants
(mainly Spirants)_

§ 444. Of the Prim. Gmc. spirantal pairs f-v, s—z, pe, x-3, the

second and third had been disturbed by the changes z > 7,

d> d

(§§ 404, 409). By a prehistoric OE change, spirants were voiced
between voiced sounds. ‘y no longer existed in such positions
(§ 461), but f, s, p did so extensively, so the pairs s-z, p-d reappeared, though OE spelling does not show the distinction,
e.g. hréas fell, sndp cut, had voiceless spirants, but infs. hréosan,
snipan voiced ones. In the case of f-v OE spelling at first
distinguished old v (written b), and new v (written f). Examples
from Ep. are, finally, halb- half, hualb convex, salb ointment,
-réab spoil, scdb- splay, staeb- staff,

aelbitu swan,

éebisae concubines,

théb- thief, and medially

earbet-

trouble, gaebuli is.

tribute, gibaen given, anhaebd suspensus (pass. part. of -habban),
hebild thread, -hebuc hawk, hraebnzs g.s. raven, libr liver, gilébdae
allowed, sceaba plane, sééabas sheaves, sibaed siftings (error, but
cf. Cp. sibi sieve), faerscribaen decreed, scribun they decreed. So

BH has Aelbfled, Gebmund, Su&bheard, Cnobheri; other early

examples are CH heben, Erf., LR ob.' Ep., however, has already f
for old wv in sifun- seven, ofaer- over- (beside obaer-), clofae buckle,
staefnendra g.p. alternating (beside d.s.f. gistaebnaendrae); also
compromise nabfogdr auger, efbor- boar (beside nabae naves,
ebor-). Otherwise Ep. uses f for the new voiced sound regularly,

e.g. hofr hump, girdéfa reeve, scofl shovel, uulfes g.s. wolf. On the
disappearance of b as a symbol for a spirant see § 57.1. The spelling distinction f—b of early texts can reflect only a fine phonetic
distinction? between the old and the new voiced spirants, not the

distinction of voiced and voiceless, for this had ceased to exist

between vowels by the time of the loss of unaccented medial z
before palatalization took place, and then the y remained velar because in contact
with a back vowel, e.g. g
hhe, getiohhian, feoh, néah. (For the laws of palatalization, a smoothed diphthong is equal to a back vowel, e.g. feh; see § 428,
footnote.)

' Note the curious inverted spelling, FC afitatores for Lat. habitatores.
2 It has been suggested that this may have been bi-labial against labio-dental.
No doubt the distinction was short-lived.

18

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH

§445

(§ 351), as may be seen from weak past tenses of Class I such as
r&sde rushed, cypde made known: if the spirants had been voiced

in West Gmc. they would have become 1, d, yet they must have
been voiced before loss of i, or the forms would have been *réste,

*cypte (see § 480.1). Normal OE words, where f, s, p represent
sounds voiced between voiced sounds, are fife pl. five, hrofe d.s.
roof, wulfas wolves, céosan choose, bésm bosom, épel home, brépor

brother, fepm embrace.

§ 445. A number. of formative elements seem to have escaped
the voicing, especially the abstract suffix -ipd, e.g. tréowp truth,
strengp strength, cypp home-land, ofermétto (< *-méddipéd) pride.

So the ordinal suffix -opa had a voiceless consonant, e.g. seofopa
seventh. The evidence for voiceless spirants in these words is
partly OE sound-change (e.g. -métto) partly the subsequent history

of the words. The suffix seen in blips bliss, libs mercy (> bliss,
liss, §§ 286, 481.2), milts mercy, clearly had voiceless s, but its origin
is obscure.

$446. The voicing of medial spirants was followed by the
unvoicing of final spirants. West Gmc. v and 3 were the only
sounds involved, for d and z had become d and r, and 7 was not
affected. The change receives no expression in spelling in the case
of v, which is written at first b and then f both medially and
finally (§§ 57.1, 444), but for final 3 there is an increasing use of the
symbol h after Ailfred’s time. In the earlier period, Ep., Erf., Cp.

already have mzrh marrow,? but VP has no h spellings. eW-S has
a few examples: wah wall, gendh enough, burh city, -sloh struck, loh

blamed, and also in composition, gefohstan fitted stone, burhware

citizens. In IW-S the use of h for West Gmc. final 3 is frequent,
e.g. béah ring, ploh plough, stah ascended, sorh sorrow, bealh was

angry; less frequently in composition, e.g. Jahbryce breach of law,
béahgifa ring-giver, éahpyrl eye-hole; and at the syllable-end,
fuhlas birds, Ghnian possess. KG have h often, e.g. burh, genoh,

orsorh, borhhond. In Li. and Ru.) gendh is frequent, otherwise
final h for 3 is very rare in INorth. and Ru.t
* Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 639, attributes the voiceless spirants of these
suffixes to their position between two unaccented vowels. But this leaves isolated
exceptions, each of which has to be separately explained away, e.g. cl&nsian

cleanse (contrasted with bletsian bless, § 480.3), sibe scythe (Ep. sigdi <
*sizipi), adesa adze (but ‘addice’ supports Luick), infl. Temese Thames.

* Ep. has also a few cases of ¢ for ch (as in ct = cht, § 57.3) from 3 at the ends
of words and syllables: téac 964, brocdaettendi 735. So analogically c is written
for g in hraecli 84.

§ 447

VOICING AND UNVOICING

181

§ 447. The interchange of h and g in forms like burh—burge
leads in W-S to forms like héage, bléoge, from héah, bléoh (where h

is from West Gmc. x, or due to analogical addition, § 466). There
are also inverted spellings like mearg, burg, Ru.) betwig, for mearh

horse, purh through, betwih between.' The consequent confusion
of the symbols # andg enables h to be used for 3 medially, especially

in the OE Boethius, e.g. dahum. h is also extended as a symbol for
1 from 3 (§ 428), although this was not unvoiced, e.g. sth imper.
ascend, 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. of weak verbs, W-S byhd
bends, K.G. felhd follows, tirhd mocks,? byrh d.s. city (already
CP 164, 10).

§ 448. There was also unvoicing of final West Gmc. v: examples
are provided by the normal forms of the words quoted from early

texts with the symbol 5 in § 444.0
§ 449. The result of the changes described in §§ 444-8 was an
alternation of voiced medial spirants with final voiceless ones both

in nominal and verbal forms, e.g. stzf-stafas, fif-fife, céas—céosan,

smip—smipas, sndp—snipan. The basis of these alternations is always
an old voiceless spirant except in the case of f-v, which can be
based on West Gme. f or v. These alternations, with their rich

opportunities for the play of analogy, have been of profound
importance in the later history of English.3

§ 450. Unlike the continental West Gmc. languages, English
has never been prone to unvoice final stops. OE instances in ac-

cented syllables, both finally and at the end of accented elements
in composition, are sporadic, e.g. LR drét thread, Ep. déatlicostan

most deadly, Cp. sculthéta bailiff (for s¢yld-), Li. heartlice hardly,
lat guidance, KG lamp lamb, dinc* thing, Beow. 1121 -spranc
sprang, and many texts sint they are (§ 768.d). There are rather
more in unstressed position: Cp. hdélsent augur, uulatunc disgust,$

RC cynine king, BH Lyécitfeldensis (beside Lyé¢id-), Ct. Cott.
Aug. ii. 82° -hat (in names, for -hdd), Ct. 1 (copy before 800)

-felt (for -feld), W-S elpent elephant, farelt way, weorbmynt
' CP already sylg d.s. from sulh plough, 403, 2.

* Similar forms from strong verbs are frequent, but are due to extension of 3
from other forms to the 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic., followed by assimilation

38, 3p > hs, hp, e.g. abelhd, see § 732.

:

* On the voicing of initial spirants in southern OE, which is to be traced only

by ME evidence, see especially Luick, Hist. Gramm., §§ 703 ff.
* Extended to an inflected form in dince 446.
5 But wicincséeadan may have assimilation (§ 480.3).

§ Anno 704, copy very late (? c. 800).

~

182

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH § §4s1

honour, Li. héafut head, and so at the syllable. end, North. coins

Eotberehtus (737-58), Li. héhstaltnisse virginity, wutotlice certainly.! Zi. has also often weak past part. in -et, -at after dentals,
e.g. gesetet, gemoetet, geendat, and already Cp. has gerdédit, and

twice raefsit.2 KG and lNorth. have many nouns in -inc, -unc for
-ing, -ung,> and this spelling may be extended to medial position,
e.g. KG otspernince. An equation of the graphs ng, nc due to such
spellings accounts for Li. wlonga, Jongung for wlonca, Donc-.
§451. The unvoicing in finality dealt with in §§ 446-50 evi-

dently began prehistorically, for the early glossaries already have
some spellings indicating the change. The changes are very open
to analogical removal, and there may be purely orthographical as
well as phonological removal. It is hence difficult to determine the
precise phonological history of these changes.

p. Change of Final k to x
§ 452. A change of final k to x is expressed in spelling in most

areas in ah but (VP, Ru.', W-S, North.). The change seems
limited to low stress, for North. has also the pronominal forms 7h,
meh, deh, tisth, iouth, and occasionally final -lih for -lié. Final y
from € can also be spelled g, e.g. Li. sxegdig said I, dsig, hiilig for
hilic, and hence final -i¢ can be written -ih: Li. Orittih, sextih.
It seems evident that both the palatal and velar stops were affected.
The forms zh, -lih are of great importance for the history of the
language, NE J, -ly. In the case of the palatal stop, the change to
h was no doubt older than the development to an affricate (§ 433).

E. Doubling of Consonants in Old English
§ 453. Consonants appear to have been doubled in OE after a
short syllable when the syncopation of vowels brought them

before r and J, thus re-creating conditions which caused doubling
in West Gmce. (§ 408). Hence spellings like VP, Ru.1, eW-S
bettra, eW-S xtgzeddre, \W-S miccle, buttor- (< *buttre).+ There
are also frequent instances of consonant doubling before r after
a long vowel, which was probably shortened (§ 285), e.g. eW-S
' Cf. the frequent inverted spelling Li. ed- for the prefix xt-.
2 1084, 1087; Erf. confirms the -t in both glosses, Ep. has -d; 669 geraedit
is only Cp.
3 Cf. IW-S Lyfinc beside Lyfing.
4 VP feddras, feddra, once each beside frequent forms with -dr-, presumably
belong here, for though some cases had -dr- from I-E -ir-, there was no West
Gmc. doubling of d before liquids (§ 408).

§ 454

SIMPLIFICATION OF CONSONANTS

183

nz&ddre adder, Gttres g.s. and hence &ttor poison, and so IW-S
hl#dder \adder, foddor fodder, méddor mother, téddor progeny,
(all after infl. forms), @ddran veins, bl@ddre bladder, t¥ddre weak.
Consonant doubling after an originally long vowel is practically
only found before 7: IW-S has, however, mappum treasure, lyttle
infl. little, and INorth. [yttel.
§ 454. Although CP has geliécran (227, 24), doubling before -ra
of the comparative, and -re, -ra of the strong adjectival inflexion
becomes common first in IW-S, e.g. widdra, swéttra, déoppre, and
hence by transference Adttost, El. 579. Li. sellra probably has
shortening (oe is more prone to unrounding in North. than 6¢,
§§ 196, 198), while 1W-S sylra has a sound-change only affecting
short vowels (§ 325).

§ 455. Conditions for the West Gmc. doubling before 7 were recreated by shortening in an unaccented syllable in *anhaitian >

*anh&tian (§ 336) > *anhetian (§ 372)
> OE dnettan hasten, and

so Grettan fight, andettan confess.

§ 456. On North. apparent doubling see § 65.

F, Simplification of Consonants
§ 457. Double consonants generally remained in OE, though
the graph is often simplified (§ 66). In the metre of late OE poems

eall, for example, is still a long syllable, J making quantity both
finally and medially. But already before goo heavy medial syllables
resulting from adding -ne, -re, -ra, -lic, -nes, -dém lost stress,” and
this led to the simplification of double consonants, e.g. gyldene,
Gpera, zxftera, digelic, reccendom, for gyldenne, Gperra, zxfterra,
digellic, reccenddom.3 Similarly, in formative elements with geminates, e.g. &metig, bliccetung, infl. hegtese, bernetes, byrpene,
gydene. Here belongs also pises, pisum, which developed a single
consonant as low-stressed demonstratives.*

t e.g. Mal. 304°, ealle hwile. Early in ME (or in 10E, cf. § 329.1, footnote)
double consonants were simplified at the ends of syllables, and hence Orrm’s
use of the doubled consonant symbol as a diacritic to show the preceding vowel
to be short became possible.

2 Such syllables bear a half-stress after a long syllable in early verse, e.g.
Sperne, but in the AZlfredian Metres this can be neglected.

3 The process is the same in Ederié, A:dered, for Ederric, -red (§ 484). But

pairs in -n(nes) like drunce(n)nes represent different formations.

4 The interchange of double and single consonants in identical forms leads
to some false use of double consonants. They are all sporadic (examples S-B,

§ 231.a.3, add tydde instructed, OE Bede), except a.s.m. cuconne alive (also
cwicenne).

184

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH §458

§458. After fully accented syllables such simplification is much

rarer:

examples are riimedlic, geléaful, lateow for rimmédlic,
Seléafful, latteow. After another consonant, however, simplification

is the phonological norm and is often expressed in writing, e.g.

Seornes, eorlic for geornnes, eorllic, and even in full compounds,
e.g. wildéor, wyrttn, emniht for wilddéor, &c. So with assimilation

of dt to tt and subsequent simplification,
teltréo for cildtrog, s¢yldtruma, teldtréo.

diltrog, sceltruma,

Gc. Metathesis of Consonants
§459. By full metathesis a consonant moves from immediately
before a vowel to immediately after it, or the reverse.

(1) The most frequent metathesis in OE is that of r from before
to behind a short vowel followed by s or n. In § 155 and notes,

forms are quoted which show that this change was sometimes
earlier, sometimes later, than breaking; see also § 193.d with foot-

notes on hzrn, xrn, werna, xrnan, bernan. Further examples
are berstlian crackle, burna stream, cerse cress, cyrps curly,! first

period, dzrstan dregs, forsc frog, forst frost, hors horse. Many of

these words and of those quoted in §§ 155, 193 occur without
metathesis: brastlian, cresse, crisp, frist-, drestan, frosc, frost, grees,

hraen (Ep. 400), ren- (Erf. 1137, Beow. 770), wrenna. Beside
eornan occurs rinnan, and there are scattered forms of beornan,

berstan, perscan without metathesis (§ 741); beside burna, brunna
occurs in place-names

(e.g.

Denisaesbrunna BH,

Namur

and

Leningrad MSS.).
(2) Metathesis is much less frequent when d followed the vowel:

INorth. birdas young birds, dirda (beside rare dridda Li. only).
After a long vowel, And. 1313 gescyrded, Psalter Gloss 92, 1
(several late manuscripts) ges¢frd for gescryd(ed) clothed.

(3) Metathesis by which r is moved from behind to before
a vowel is much rarer, and is practically limited to before At:

INorth., IW-S wrohte worked (beside usual worhte); INorth. breht
bright, frokt afraid, frohtiga fear, fryhto fright, wrihta maker?

(all beside

forms without metathesis);

Ru.’ frohtiga (beside

* ME kers shows OE cerse to have had velar c: hence metathesis was
later
than assibilation; the same no doubt applies to cyrps (Lat. crispus).

? It is unnecessary to assume with S-B, § 166, that forms with
parasiting
(worohte), followed by transference of stress to the new vowel,
were the origin
of these North. forms.

§ 460

METATHESIS OF CONSONANTS

185

forhtiga); poet. frid soul (for fyrhp). Examples before consonants

other than h are prop farm (beside porp), IW-S séruf, wrusm (rare
beside scurf scurf, wursm pus).
(4) Low stress promotes metathesis of 7, e.g. eodorcian ruminate

(cf. edroc), adjs. in -erne (see § 339), the name-elements W-S, Kt.
-ferp for Angl. -frip,1 IW-S -erd (e.g. Ailferd, Déoderd, Ct. of 931,
original copy), handwyrst wrist, cnéowwyrst knee (beside wrist),
ondyrstlié terrible (§§ 477.5, 478), Ru.1, North. tinterg torment;

and with regressive metathesis, the name-element W-S -bryht,
Angl. -berht (rarely -breht), Kt. ~bearht,2
* stopp stern of mind
(Gen. 107, for -firhp).3
(5) A curious reciprocal metathesis occurs in welor lip (Goth.
d.p. wairilom),.
§ 460. More usual than full metathesis is reversal of order in
consonant groups, so that e.g. sk > ks, sp > ps.
(1) The mainly 1W-S metathesis sk > ks is dealt with in

§ 440.4

(2) The metathesis 6/ > Id is dealt with § 425.
(3) ps > sp in wesp beside weps (§ 418).
(4) sp > ps in xpse aspen, cops fetter, hepse hasp, whips lisping,

for all of which except hxpse forms with sp occur; also in cyrps,
combined with metathesis of 7 (§ 459.1).
(5) ts > st in pristfell leprosy (Goth. pritsfill); Li. bzstere

baptist < bazere (§ 53).
(6) Miscellaneous reversals of order in consonant groups are
clésnian cleanse, worms pus, gyrstandzg yesterday, beside clénsian,
worsm, Systran-, and rare cases mentioned S-B, § 183.a.
(7) Reversals of order in consonant groups in unaccented
syllables are: the formative elements -els (e.g. gyrdels) < -isl* On the vowel see § 372; -firp is rare (e.g. Tidfirh, Monk Wearmouth runes).
Attributions of areas to name-elements are only generally true: e.g. Ct. 11
(Merc.) has Cuutfert (i.e. Ciibferp, § 57.7) of a bishop of Lichfield, and Cynefrip
of Lichfield (c. 840) is Cyneferd in Mercian charters (Cts. 47, 48). LV has
-ferd 27 times beside usual -frid.
2 Cf. IW-S fréabriht gloriously bright; on the vowel, see § 305.
3 The forms mdderge aunt, suhterga nephew, beside médrige, suhtriga, may be
due to metathesis, but the Prim. Gmc. form of the suffix is uncertain.
In irenn iron, beside isern, metathesis of r was followed by assimilation and
simplification. of the double consonant so produced: “isarn- > *isrannj(§ 647, footnote) > *irrannj > irenn. On this development see Kluge and Braune,
PBB xiiii. 516-17; Hirt, Urgermanisch i. 122, footnote; on -sr- of later origin
see below, § 484.
+ The reverse, ks > sk, does not occur: once zse for 2x, axe, is an error.

186

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH § §46r

(cf.

OS dopisk baptism); name-element -gils < -gisl;' innelfe

intestine (Ep. innifli); feereld journey (if suffix is -ipl-, but cf. ON

farald).

H. Loss of Consonants
§ 461. Loss of x. In all Gmc. languages, initial

~ became a

breathing or glottal spirant. Before /, n, 7, u, it disappeared, leaving
the consonant voiceless, and # is written in OE as a diacritic to
indicate this: OE Aldf loaf, Anutu nut, hréosan fall, hwad who. In
all West Gmc. languages, medial y became a breathing between
vowels, and between vowel and J, m, n, r.

A few forms occur in

the early glossaries in which this breathing is still written as h, e.g.
Cp. bituihn, raha, tahae, Ep. furhum, ryhae, thihae, uulohum, for

W-S betwéonan between, 7d roe, td toe, firum, d.p. furrows, réo
blanket, p6 clay, *zlém d.p. fringes;? so Ct. 4 Uelhisci. The medial
breathing was, however, lost early in OE: examples will be found

of loss between vowels §§ 234; 235.2,
3; 236.3; 237.1.d, 2, 33
238.2, 3; between vowel and voiced consonant §§ 230, 241.1;
between voiced consonant and vowel §§ 231, 241.2. On analogical
restoration of x see §§ 230 footnote, 463. Further examples of
loss of x are fléam flight, héla heel, léoma light, l@ne temporary,
connected with *fiéoxan, hoh, léoht, *lixan; inflexions in -ne, -re,
-ra of adjs. in -h, e.g. héane, wora; so before -nes, -lic, héanes,
wolic, &c.; owing to the phonological structure of I-E, no inherited Gmc. word had x before voiced consonants other than
those above exemplified, but this could arise in new compounds,
and in these x can disappear in OE, e.g. Pléowald, Héaberht,

furlang, siilong (< furh+-lang, sulh+?), héadéor stag.3 But not
before voiceless sounds, e.g. héahcreft; and usually not even before
voiced ones when the compound has full meaning, e.g. héahburh.

§ 462. In W-S and to some extent in Kt. (see §§ 306, 310,
733) there was very early syncopation of 7 in the 2nd and 3rd sg.

pres. indic. of strong verbs, so that, if y preceded, it was brought
into contact with s or p before it became A. Hence eW-S had from
? This can be transferred to the first element: Gilsuib, Thornhill Cross II,

Gilsheard, Ct. 32; unmetathesized -gis/ is frequent in BH in Leningrad and other
early manuscripts, though not in Moore.
2 But on Erf. thuachi and similar later forms see § 242.
3 But not rddéor (as S-B, § 218.2) where the simplex is rd, § 236.3. In wéofod
< *wioxbed or. -béod loss of x was followed in W-S by substitution of wv for b,
owing to the lack of 6 between vowels in normal words; cf. Angl. wibed.

§ 463

LOSS OF CONSONANTS

187

séon see (<* seyan), 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. siehst, stehp,! and

similarly 3rd sg. pihp, flichp, sliehp, fehb from péon thrive, fléon
flee, sléan strike, fon receive, from Prim. OE *pixan, *fleuxan,
*slayan, *foxan. But KG has partly similar forms, partly ones with
loss of x as in Angl., e.g. -siohd beside -siod. For Angl. forms (e.g.
VP sid) see § 237.1.d, 2. It should be noted that these forms with h

occur only from the 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indie. of strong verbs:

contracted weak verbs show loss of x always, e.g. Pyp, typ, 1¥p,
see § 237.1.d.?

§ 463. The W-S comparative héahra higher, and superlatives
hiehsta highest, niehsta nearest, and similar nW-S forms (e.g. VP
héhsta), occur beside forms without A, and are to be attributed to
the analogy of héah, néah.3

§ 464. x remained finally in OE (written h), e.g- seolh seal,

mearh horse, seah he saw, feoh cattle. Internally, since xs > ks
(§ 416), the only group in which y was followed by a voiceless
consonant in Prim. OE was xt, and this group remained, e.g.

feohtan fight, gefeoht fight, sdhte he sought, miht might, niht night,

tyht training. Onits historyin later OE see §§ 304-11. The gemination of y remains (written hh) in OE whether due to doubling
i, e.g. hliechhan,‘ before J and r, e.g. hweohhol, North. zhher,
before
twher, or to other causes, e.g. geneahhe enough, crohha pot, pohha
pocket, tiohhian consider (§§ 407-8).

§ 465. h remains in OE between unaccented and accented vowel
in compounds like behindan behind, behealdan hold, gehelpan help,
toheald leaning; and also in similar forms before J, 7, n, w (where
it is a diacritic, § 461), tohréosan fall, tohweorfan separate.
§ 466. The interchange between loss of x internally and preservation finally as in feoh, féos, leads in W-S (already CP) to
incorrect addition of the symbol # to words ending in vowels, e.g.
fréoh free, bléoh colour. See further § 447 on this, and also on the
use of the symbol g for h.

§ 467. Loss and modification of g. On the loss of g with compensatory lengthening see §§ 243-5.5 On the vocalization of g see
t These and some forms to be quoted below are recorded only in compounds

in eW-S (e.g. ‘Besiehd).

2 Gesihp, vision, has internal x in all dialects (W-S, North., V.P., Ru.1).

3 On the subsequent development of xs in pres. indic. and superl. (stehst,

+ On palatalization of this sound, see § 442.
hiehsta), see §§ 304-11.
5 To the examples there given add in unaccented syllables finol, finul, Ep.
finugl (Lat. feniculum), fennel; holen, Ep., Cp. holegn, holly.

188

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH

§ 468

§§ 266~71, and note that this sound could be from both palatalized

3 (hefige > hefie) and Gmc. 4 (clénsigan > cl&nsian). In late texts
the prefix ge- can become #- especially after another prefix, e.g.
uniwemmed, unigmetes (Beow. 1792; cf. § 271.)

§ 468. Loss of # and x in composition. A and u are often lost
at the beginning of the second elements of compounds of obscured

meaning. OE words of which the vowels have been discussed
above, and which show such loss of h or u, are eofot (§ 336),

eofolsian (§ 338), licuma (§ 333), hldford (§ 338), fulluht (§ 338,
footnote), enitre (§ 372). Others are hwilende temporary, beside

hwilwende,

durere folding-door, beside durhere, ealneg always
(< ealne weg), and many names in -here, -helm, -wulf, as Waldere,

Ailfelm, Hropulf.* Loss of u, or apparent loss of
(really voicing
of a consonant) occurs in Zrendraca messenger, beside rendwreca,

ondliotum d.p. faces (Rit., usually ondwliota, cf. Cri. 1435 ondlata),

welréow

cruel,

beside

walhréow,

s¢yldréda

phalanx,

scyldhréoa, earmréad (i.e. < *earmhréad armlet, Beow.

beside
1194),

dnliepig individual. On cases of such loss of h leading to. compen-

satory lengthening (fig, Grettan, dnettan) see § 241.2.c; on cases
leading to vowel contraction (fréols, béot) see § 238.2.c. Cases of
more drastic reduction of compounds with initial A or u of the

second element are heardra, #lpig, naht, nateshwon (see § 393); also
6b, ab, beside and from éweb, dweb woof.2

§ 469. Although the vowels of unaccented prefixes usually
remain even in hiatus (e.g. airnan, beurnen, feunnan), there are

a few instances of elision of the vowels of be- and ne- (§ 354).
This involves loss of h in all forms of nabban have not: this

contraction is found in all dialects. u is lost in all forms of ndt

know not (all dialects), nas was not (W-S, North., not VP, Ru.),

nalde, nolde would not (all dialects). On ne- with the present
system of willan, and with forms of wat with root vowel i, see

§ 265.

§ 470. Loss of y before u. Loss of u occurs irregularly between

another consonant and u. Examples are: (1) with combinative back

umlaut (§ 218): cucu alive, cudu cud, sugian be silent, sutol clear,
beside cwucu, cwudu, swugian, swutol; (2) with development of
* Less often with -wine, e.g. Hygine, LV twice.

2 Ahwér, nahw&r have unstressed forms with loss of h, dwer, ndwer (§ 372).

So LR duana for dhwanan (on 6- cf. § 132, footnote 3). Ahwzper is more drastically
reduced to dwher, dper; so Sghwasper to Kiper.

§ 471

LOSS OF CONSONANTS.

189

diphthong to u (§ 338, footnote): betuh beside betwuh.' Tuwa
twice < twuwa has retraction of 7 to u between u and u, similar
to that between u and r (§ 149), followed by loss of #; retained
twiwa (due to analogy of twiga) can become tweowa (back umlaut).
§ 471. An isolated loss of x not preceded by a consonant before

u is uton beside wuton let us (§ 218).

§ 472. Loss of final -n. Already in eNorth. loss of final -n is
frequent. Examples are: weak nouns, CH foldu, LR eordu, RC
galgu, alla.s., FC sefa g.s.; infs. CH (Leningrad) herga, RC hzlda,
gistiga; past indic. pl. RC bismxradu, cwomu; adv. LR éuana.
In all these categories forms with -1 are found in these texts.

The g.s. of weak nouns seems to appear without -m in many
place-names in BH, note especially Degsastan id est Degsa lapis;
it is not clear if names belonging to the weak declension are indeclinable in a Latin context in Bede, or how far, for example,
Penda in oblique functions beside Pendan reflects loss of -n. In
INorth. loss of -n is established in weak inflexion, in advs. in -an
(e.g. bigeonda, bihianda, tita), in numerals (twoége, téa, seofo), in
infs., and in subj. pl. pres. and past. It is, however, not lost in
strong pass. parts., nouns in -en (e.g. drihten, mxgden), and un-

stressed words (e.g. on, in), nor as a rule in the past indic. pl.
(except in Li. in the pres. of pret.-pres. verbs). Ru.1 has frequent
loss of -m in weak inflexion; in the other categories it has loss

frequently, but less so than North.; it does not drop -m in the
pres. indic. pl. of pret.-pres. verbs, though it has a few cases of loss
in the weak past.
§:473. Loss of final -n extended further after 7 than after other
vowels. eW-S has frequent past subj. pl. in -e < -in, though

later -en is mostly restored from analogy of pres. subj. -en < -én.?
The same tendency explains oblique cases of abstract fem. nouns,
e.g. strenge a.s. strength, cf. Goth. managein (§ 589.7).3 So pyle

pillow < *pylwin, Lat. puluinus. The retention of -n in nouns like
nieten animal < *nautin- is due to the influence of inflected forms.
§ 474. Loss of medial . (1) The unaccented prefix on- can be
reduced to a- in aweg (eW-S, INorth.) beside on weg, abiiton (BI.H.)
' Hence occasional inverted spellings like twuxan for tuxum d.p. tusks,
stoulung for siilung (< sulh+ uncertain element).

2 Though instances of -e occur in later manuscripts, e.g. Dan. 101 dede.
3 Here may also belong uncompounded proper names in -?, e.g. BH Aelli,
Coitfi, Betti, from diminutives in -ina-. See various opinions discussed in I. Dahl,
Substantival inflexion in early OE, p. 56.

190

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH

§475

and so in verbs, |W-S adr&dan, &c. The prefix a- is transferred to
adine (Bl.H.) for ofdiine. (2) Loss of -2 of the pres. subj. pl. occurs
in the imper. forms bindewe, bindege. (3) Loss of n before 7 occurs
in IW-S Pures < Punres.g.s. Thor, and hence Puresdxg Thursday;
unaccented pronominal g. and d.s.f. and g.p. mire, mira, are, &c.,

for minre, &c. (already Whitelock, OE wills xiv, eleventh century).
(4) Loss of n after r: IW-S Szteresdeg < Sxternesdeg Saturday.
(5) The suffix -ing is reduced to -ig, -eg- after m in INorth. cynig,
IW-S cynegas,' penegas, pénigman, leornigman.? (5) Sporadic cases

of loss of m are enetere, enitre << *#nwintri; recedom government,
for recéendom < recéenddom (§ 457).
§ 475. Loss of r. The 1OE loss of r in sprecan speak and related
words first appears in KG (four forms without 7, one with r), and
then in IW-S. So IW-S spec, pxtig, Li. giuixla, for spree twig,
pretig sly, gewrixlan exchange. Loss after a stressed vowel appears

in endian, -zxndian for &rndian (§ 393; cf. Klaeber, AB xxxii. 37).
Instances in medium stress are VP, W-S endebyrdnis, -nes order

(and related words), but Li., Ru.?, Rit. endebrednis (related to
brord point, cf. onbryrdan beside W-S geanbyrdan); Li., Ru.? d.s.

and p. ondesne, -num fear (and derivatives in Rit.), cf. W-S ondrysnu; W-S isen iron (< isern), and IW-S compounds with -zxrn

house, as cwearten prison, beren barn.3

§ 476. Loss in triple groups. Groups of three or more consonants
were often reduced in OE in pronunciation, though the full form
generally continues to be written. Geminates were always simplified
before and after other consonants: examples in composition have

been given in § 458. Further examples are provided by words with
metathesis of r before a geminate (§ 459.1, 2), €.g. werna, irnan,
cerse < *wernna,

*irnnan,

*cersse,

cf.

wrenna,

rinnan,

cresse.

Many examples are due to syncopation of medial vowels, e.g.

and sg. pres. indic. of verbs in -s- (cyst < *ciesist thou choosest;
KG alést thou releasest), past of weak verbs in cons.+-d (sende <
*seendide sent),* and inflected adjs. in -ne, -re, -ra (ealne, pynne,
? But sg. more often cyng (§ 391).
? But hunig honey, Ep. hunaeg- (§ 376) has a different suffix from OHG
honang.
3 Li, Ru.4, Rit. (but not Ru.) all spell the unaccented syllable -en as -ern
with great frequency, e.g. éfern evening, fastern fast, wééstern desert. This
perhaps indicates by inverted spelling that berern was pronounced beren as in
IW-S,

* Etymological writing of dd is rare, e.g. begyrdde PC 189, hierdde CP 213, 8
(second d added above the line to avoid confusion with hierde heard).

§ 477

LOSS OF CONSONANTS

191

dierne, terre < eall,- bynn-, diern-4-ne, ierr-4+-re). Cases involving
assimilation of consonants are discussed below (§ 480). ~~
§ 477. Groups of three unlike consonants are sporadically
reduced in OE. Examples are frequent in KG, where, however,
scribal carelessness may be a contributory factor.' Examples from
;
other texts are:
(1) Loss of ¢ before s: 2nd sg. pres. indic. of strong verbs, and
weak verbs of Class I, as éhst from éhtan persecute, and with
assimilation of ds >. ts, finst from findan find; |W-S besta < betesta
best (§ 389), vase < yntse ounce (§ 533), and with ds > ts, mils <
milts mercy.

(2) Loss of ¢ between s and another consonant: I-WS wesm <
westm fruit, blésma < bléstma blossom, braslian < brastlian crackle,
nosle < nostle fillet (also eW-5S), belisnian < belistnian castrate
(rare with #), and compounds like sdpfesnes for -fastnes truth.

(3) Loss of d occurs after / before the ending -é in W-S sellic2
< seldlié wonderful (rare with d); Li, Ru.? ballice < baldlice
boldly; Li. monigfallicée manifoldly.

1W-S-enli¢ < -endlié, as un-

Seférenlié inaccessible, unacumenlié unbearable, and so anlang} <

andlang (Cleopatra Glossary). ond- > on- in Ru.” ongett sense.
(4) Reduction of the group yé to 2 before a third consonant

appears in eW-S -brinp < brinch < bringp brings; IW-S lenten
< lencten spring, strenb <.strencp strength. ygn > gn in IW-S
agneras beside ongneras corners of the eyes.
(5) Loss of » between consonants: IW-S elboga* < elnboga
elbow, f#mhalicum < fémnhadlicum d.s.n.

virginal (cf. § 484),

emlice < emnlice equally, wépman < w#pnman man, Seterdeg <
Seterndxg Saturday (§ 393), memst, nemp, nemde5 from nemnan

name, aremdest from *aremnan® for arefnan endure; Rit. ondeslié
(§ 475), IW-S ondryslié < ondrysnlié terrible.
(6) Miscellaneous

instances

are:

eW-S

awierda < awiergda

accursed; IW-S cemde < cembde combed,: myrp < myrhp joy,
ferp < ferhp

spirit,’

selciih < seldctip

strange,

elcian < eldcian

delay (and so elcung), horslice < horsclice readily, musle < muscle
* Full material in I. Williams, Grammatical investigation of OKt. glosses,
pp. 129-30.

2 Whence syllié, § 325.

,

3 Also ollung, Add. Ch. 19795.

4 Whence eleboga with parasiting (§ 367).
5 Nemde already eW-S.
© Apparently influenced by efn, emn.
7 And so from fyrhp (i.e. firhp, § 306, footnote), *firb and with metathesis
frid (Gen. 1142, And. 174).

192

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH

§ 478

mussel; INorth. dorleas < dorfleas useless; VP, Ru.1, OE Bede
marne, \North. merne d.s. from morgen morning (so g.p. morna,
Beow. 2450); 4lgar, Ailmexr, 4Elrié, Ailsig, Wulgar,

Wulmer,

Wulred, Wulstan, Léostan, and similar forms of names in /f-,

Wulf-, Léof-, in late sources.?
A further extensive collection of instances of consonant loss is
given by Klaeber, MEN xviii. 243-5; for many forms of names
with loss of final t of Beorht-, Wiht-, Torht- before another consonant see O. von Feilitzen, Pre-conquest personal names of Domes-

day Book, p. 95.

I. Intrusion of Consonants
§ 478. Intrusion of consonants occurs in a few forms only.

(1) ml > mbl: W-S simble always (and hence simbel), brembel
bramble,? cumbl sore place, beside simle, brémel, cuml; Ep. hymblicae hemlock (Cp. hymlice); less certain is cumbol banner.

(2) mt > mpt: IW-S &mptige I empty, &mptig empty, beside

&mtig (§ 393).

(3) nl > ndl: W-S endleofan eleven (beside enlefan).3
(4) nr > ndr: IW-S gandra gander (beside ganra).

(5) sl > stl: hwistlian whistle (and related words; ON hvisla);
elmestlic charitable (eKt., Ct. 38, but almesli¢ Ct. 42); IW-S
mzxstling brass, mistlice variously, ondrystlic terrible, beside
mezsling, mislice, ondryslic (§ 477.5).
(6) sn > stn: OE Bede towestnis discord (beside towesnis).
(7) ls > Its: IW-S balzam balsam (beside balsam).

§ 479. The significance is uncertain of occasional initial sel for
sl as in Cp. sclat tore, asclacade loosened, KG scleacnes laziness,
asclacad. Such forms recur in later texts and ME. Less frequent
is stl, and it is uncertain if this expresses the same sound. sem and
sen are very rare for initial sm, sn (VP 118, 129; CP 155, 17).4

j. Assimilation of Consonants and Kindred Changes
§ 480. The syncopations of medial vowels described in Chapter
VII, Section c above often caused groups of consonants to arise
' Wuif- more rarely loses 1, e.g. Wufgar, Wufred.
2 So before r in brember bramble.
3 But |W-S andliénes image (beside an-) is due rather to prefix mixture.
4 See Sisam, Archiv cxxxi. 305; other references S~B, § 210.1.

§ 481

ASSIMILATION OF CONSONANTS

193

which were subject to assimilation. If double consonants so arose

in a group of three or more consonants, they were simplified under
the principle laid down in § 476. Common assimilations are:
(1) d >t

after voiceless sounds. This is chiefly seen in weak

past tenses, e.g. métte met, cyste kissed < modét-, cyss-+--id#. This
formation is more fully discussed in § 751.2.
(2) All consonants become

voiceless before

#, e.g.

lencten

(§ 477.4), W-S mettrum, metrum infirm (i.e. med--- trum).

(3) Before the voiceless spirants s and ), every consonant was
unvoiced.! This cannot affect spelling in the case of f, p, s, which
stand for both voiceless and voiced sounds, e.g. 2nd and 3rd sg.

pres. indic. drifst, drifp, cypst, cypp, ciest, *ciesp from drifan drive,
cypan declare, céosan choose.? Groups in which spelling shows
the unvoicing are ds > ts, ngs > ncs, ngp > ncp, e.g. milts mercy,

bletsian bless, ancsum troublesome, strencp strength (derivatives of
milde, bléd, ange, strang), Henéstes (§ 393), Cp. etsith a looking again
(i.e. ed--+-sihp), and 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. like retst, brincst,
brincd from r&dan, bringan.3 The groups sp, ps, th (< dp), xs, xp
undergo further change and will be dealt with below.

§ 481. The following modifications of consonant groups also
occurred:
(1) sb > st whether the voiceless s was original or in accordance
with § 480.3, e.g. 3rd sg. pres. indic. cyst, wiext, ciest < cyss-,
wiex-, cies-+-ip, -liestu lack (e.g. meteliestu < -lies-+-ipd), 2nd sg.

berestut (< beres+ pu), compound nosterl nostril (< nospyrl).s
(2) ps (most instances are due to § 480.3) > ss by phonological
development, e.g. bliss bliss, diss kindness < blips, lips, 2nd sg. pres.
indic. cwist thou sayest < *cwipist. Hence verbal forms like cypst
are due to analogical restoration: such restored ps can become ts
in IW-S, e.g. snitst thou cuttest.

(3) tp > tt whether from t+/, or d+p due to § 480.3, e.g. 3rd
TM Except 7, e.g. egsa terror. Hence eW-S Hiehp, he lies, from ogan, had analogical velar 3 introduced from other forms, and this was unvoiced. On h as a
mere spelling for 3, e.g. myrhp joy, see § 447.

2 So in formations with -ipd, -sjd, in which the consonants were voiceless

(§ 445), esp, blips.

3 So the river-name Wantsumo (cf. wendan). Final d of first elements of
names can be unvoiced before any voiceless consonant, e.g. LV Altéeorl,

Eatdryd, Liutfrith, Titfrith, \ate sources Etsige, Goltsige, Gétsunu, Titstan.
4 Whence was extracted st as a personal ending.

5 Hence, especially in CP (Hatton MS.), inverted sp, sd for st, e.g. diisd dust,
wesdm fruit, Zresd first, beside hilpesd thou helpest.

194

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH §482

sg. pres. indic. itt eats, r#tt advises, fint finds, < it-, réd-, find-+
tp, pxtte < pxt pe, mitty < midpy, latteow leader < lad+ péow,
ofermetto pride, gesynto health < ofermééd-, gisynd-+-1po.
(4) 38, 32 > xs, xp, but in most instances 3 was an analogical
replacement for g (§ 480.3, footnote), e.g. eW-S Hehp lies, |W-S
adrihd bears, stihst ascendest from léogan, adréogan, stigan; with
original 3, KG giohd- for geogop- youth. Neither ys < 3s nor original ys usually repeats the early change ys > ks (§ 416), though
IW-S has héxta highest, néxta next, and less frequently verbs like
syxt seest, dxta beside dhsta arm-pit.' yp > xt in gestht vision
beside gesthp.?

(5) fp > ft in IW-S péoft theft; not in verbs, e.g. drifp drives.
(6) fs does not repeat the change to ps, see § 418.

(7) pd > dd in 1OE, e.g. 1W-S, iNorth., Ru. eydde declared.
(8) cb > ct in KG ofGrect oppresses, gehydl#ct repeats, cf. W-S
ofpryccéan, geedl#éan.

§ 482. Even the commonest of the changes described in §§ 480-1,
and the simplification of geminates in triple groups described
there and in § 476, are often disguised by etymological spellings,
e.g. lengten, medtrum, milds, blips, angsum, strengp, ladtéow (and
even ladpéow). Verbs are less prone to such disturbance, yet forms
like findst occur, and are especially frequent with ng, e.g. singd,
bringd.3 KG have three times -piod for -*piot joins, with d from
piodan; so eW-S hyd from hydan, and by compromise bidt from
biddan. It has been suggested above that forms with ps are not
phonological. The later assimilations are far more disturbed, and
here the resistance was phonological, e.g. [W-S, INorth., Ru.?
cydde beside cydde; so paradigm analogy prevents the change
fs> ps, and hinders ys >ks, fp > ft. Etymological graphic
retention of geminates in triple groups is also frequent, e.g.
a.s.m. eallne, g.p. fullra.

§ 483. In IW-S the final palatal groups cst, ¢b sometimes appear
as st, hp, e.g. 2nd sg. pres. indic. bep&hst, 3rd bep#hd, asihd, séhp,
from bep&can deceive, asican sigh, sécan seek. Conversely we find
1 So a few late names have xs > ks after loss of t in Briht-, Wiht- (§ 477.6),
e.g. Bricstan, Brixsie for Brihtstan, -sige, Wixie for Wihtsige.
2 ME evidence suggests that the change hb > ht was more extensive than OE
spellings suggest, see Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 718.2. In a few scattered forms,
OE has hp > ht in 3rd sg. pres. indic., VP gefiht rejoices, onfoeht receives, 1W-S
siht sees, tyht draws.
3 Hence inverted dringd from drincan, &c.

§ 484

ASSIMILATION OF CONSONANTS

195

cp for final hp, e.g. afécd, flicd, -swylcd from afén receive, fliegan
put to flight, swelgan swallow.! Compromise spellings also occur,

e.g. -t&chd, -t&hcd from t#éan teach.
-§ 484. In groups consisting of a consonant followed or preceded
by a liquid. or nasal, assimilation is not usual, e.g. adjs. with the
inflexions -ne, -re, gledne, gledre, riimne, ealre, and weak past
tenses like hiérde, h#lde, wénde. Assimilation in such groups is
sporadic. Examples arranged according to the second consonant
of the group are:

fn > mn: W-S emn even, hremn raven (§ 193.d, footnote 4), and
the homonyms stemn voice, stemn period, stemn stem (beside
efn, hrefn, stefn); nW-S only Ru. stemn voice (beside stzfn),
and perhaps poetical and Angl. nemne unless, beside nefne.?
mn > mm:\W-S hrem raven, pl. hremmas.
hn > nn: W-S héanne as.m. high; 1W-S, lNorth. héannes
highness.3

pn > mn: IW-S wemn (very rare) < wapn weapon.

sn > nn: Li. dionne a.s.m. this (beside usual dzosne).

fm > mm: BH Gemmund (MS. Cott. Tib. C ii, for Gefmund);
IW-S wimman, Hlammesse < wifmonn woman, Hlafmesse
Lammas; Leomman < Léofman, and so Leommer in late
sources.

dl > Il: W-S fémnhalicum < -hadlicum d.s.n. virginal (Napier’s
OE glosses, i. 535, 2280; on ll > J, cf. § 457).
nl > Il: North. zllef eleven.
sl > Il: Li. dullié, W-S pyllié < puslic, pyshé such.
hr > rr: W-S hierra higher, néarra nearer, Rit. hérra, Rut
nzrra4

lr > ll: W-S, Li. sella < séélra better.
lr > rr: Aederred (Ct. 29), and hence A@ered (Cts., frequently)

< Aspelred; so Ederié (Cts. 27, 43) < Atpelric.s
' Luick, Hist. Gramm., § 674.4; S-B, § 359.a.6.
2 See Flasdieck, A Ixix. 142.
3 hn was due to analogical replacement: the undisturbed development was
héane, héanes (§ 461).
+ hr was similarly due to analogical replacement.
5 The name-element pel- seems liable to reduction to Avpe- and AEpirrespective of what consonant follows, e.g. Aedeuulf, -wald (Ct. 24), Aidestan
(moneyer of Ed. II). Reduction to Zp- (e.g. 1OE dferd, -red, -rié, -ulf; Ct. 24
already Aedelm) was perhaps helped by the existence of another name-element
ZEp- (LV Aeduini); yet it occurs of persons who elsewhere have A@pe(I)-, e.g.
zGred, Birch, Ct. 469; Aistan < *Aipstan beside Ldestan (moneyer of Cnut).
The development Apel- > Avgel- > Agel- (ME Ail-) seems to be due toa French

196

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH § 485

nr > rr: Cyrred (Ct. 22) < Cynred.

sr > ss: l@ssa less, wiersa worse (all dialects); pisse, pissa, g. and
d.s.f. and g.p. of pes this (W-S, Merc., Kt., analogically disturbed in North., see § 711); d.s.m. issum, g.s.m. isses <<
*usrum, &c., from tiser our! (see § 706).
nd > md: eW-S emdemes < endemes together.”

nd > nn: poetical n.p. benne (once), d.p. bennum (three times)
from bend fetter.

nb > mb: IW-S elmboga, poetical hlimbed, gimfzst < elnboga
elbow, *hlinbed bed of rest, ginfzxst huge.

mb > mm: eW-S oferclom climbed; IW-S dcuma < dcumba
oakum (with simplification).
rp > rr: lareow teacher < lar+-péow (with simplification).
hg > hh: \W-S néh(h)ebiir < néahgebir neighbour; so Li. néhebur (with simplification).
ct > ht: W-S léahtin < *léactiin garden; cf. § 534 for this
change in loan-words.

§ 485. Syncopation far passes its normal limits in hypocoristic
names.3

k. Chronological Summary
§ 486. The dating of the changes in consonant groups dealt with
in Section a is there discussed. The sensitivity of k and 3 to the
nature of following sounds described in Section B doubtless began
in the continental period, for it is a major link of OE and OFris.,
and continued through the periods of Anglo-Frisian fronting,
breaking, and retraction before consonant groups and before back
vowels. Hence we find in OE ¢, g initially before front vowels, which
existed at the completion of these processes, but k, 3 before back
vowels which then existed, e.g. ceaf chaff, geaf gave; ceald cold,
gealla gall, but Angl. cald, galla; caru care, galan sing. Soon afterwards this sensitivity ceased, for when back vowels were changed
sound-change, and its use in OE charters and on coins to be an affectation:
it is frequent from the late tenth century.

! These syncopations must be earlier than the majority and precede the
voicing of s between vowels, for zr would not produce ss. Hence syncopation

must have intervened at the stage */&sir-, *user- *piser-.
2 Due not to assimilation, but rather anticipation of the second m.
3 See, for example, names discussed by O. S. Anderson, OF material in the
Leningrad MS. of Bede’s Eccl. Hist., pp. 121-2.

§ 487

CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY

197

to front ones by second fronting and i-umlaut, k and 3 appear
before these new front vowels: for examples see § 427 and footnote.
The period at which fronted stop consonants passed into affricates
is uncertain. Spellings of [tj] and [dj] as cc, cg appear from the
later ninth century (§ 434), and this suggests that these symbols
were then already familiar as representing sounds which had progressed towards assibilation.! There is no evidence to show how
long the assibilation of s¢ in positions in which it took place, though
that of ¢ was absent (§ 440), was delayed after the other assibilations.?
The palatalization of the groups xt, xs, xp when not followed by a
back vowel is only to be dated by its results, which begin before

goo in the south and spread north (§§ 304-11).

§ 487. Of the processes of voicing and unvoicing described in
Section c, the voicing of medial spirants is prehistoric (§ 444), the
unvoicing of final spirants and the sporadic unvoicing of final
stops is already to be traced in the earliest texts (§§ 446, 450).
§ 488. The change of final k and ¢ to x is only datable as being

older, at least in the case of ¢, than assibilation (§ 452).

§ 489. The OE consonant doubling described in Section & was
a tendency which had developed by the ninth century, though
evidence for it is wanting in very early texts. RC has xtgadre, Cp.
&egaedradon, but this does not establish that the gemination had

not begun, for VP has gegadrades, although this text has some forms
with gemination (§ 453). The tendency continued through the
whole OE period. The metathesis of r before s and n had already
begun before breaking (§ 459.1). The common assimilations of
consonants are early, and would follow the syncopations of un1 While the above interpretation of these spellings seems reasonable, the
matter has been much disputed. For an alternative view, and references to

older literature, see G. van Langenhove in the Jespersen Miscellany (Bibliography, § c). Assibilation in feééan < *fetjan is due to its being a weak verb of
Class III (§ 764). In verbs of Class II (e.g. hatian) -i- is vocalic, and there is

no assibilation. Failure to recognize this distinction invalidates much of the
arguments of Kuhn, ZfdA Ixxxvi. 30-31.
BH Lyccidfelth hardly proves. assibilation: British -tg- (in *Létgéd < Létocét-)
may have been assimilated to palatal é¢ in OE, and this would be assibilated
later, as it stood after a vowel-sound which would be due to i-umlaut in a native
word,
? In the metrical Psalms and the alliterative prose of Alfric, initial sé alliterates
with s, but this is not evidence that assibilation had not yet taken place, as [ J]
and [s] would provide a jingle sufficient for inexact poets. (Another view,
Schubel, Stud. Neophil. xiv. 255-76; a compromise, Slettengren, Stud. i mod.
sprdkvetenskap xv. 45-50; cf. also Flasdieck, A Ixix. 269-70).

198

GERMANIC CONSONANTS IN OLD ENGLISH §490

accented vowels. The loss of medial h < x belongs to approximately the period of the earliest texts (§ 461). North. loss of final
-n is well established in the earliest texts (§ 472). The typically
W-S loss of g before dentals is well established in the oldest W-S
texts, but is probably much older, for traces of similar changes

occur in the earliest Anglian texts (§ 243-5). Evidence is inadequate for dating the various losses of hk and w detailed in
§§ 468-71, but they may with probability be regarded as belonging
to the same period as the loss of medial x.
§ 490. The remaining changes dealt with in this chapter (minor
cases of metathesis and of consonant loss, the simplification of
consonant groups, the intrusion of consonants, and assimilations
and kindred changes of the less frequent types) were neither universally carried out nor invariably expressed in spelling when
they operated. All that can be done to determine their dating is to
observe when they are first expressed in spelling in manuscripts,
and this has already been done in discussing them.

X
LOAN-WORDS IN OLD ENGLISH
A. Graeco-Latin Loan-words
§ 491. While many problems of vocabulary cannot be handled in

a grammar, it is relevant to consider how far the operation of the
sound-changes so far described can be observed in borrowed
words, and to note any other sound-changes which take place in

the assimilation of such words.
§ 492. In the case of a few Greek words of wide dispersion in
Germanic, it may be suspected that they reached Germanic
directly from Greek, and especially when they occur in Gothic,

direct passage from Greek into that language and hence to West

Germanic is probable. But since all such words were also borrowed

into Latin, passage through Latin to Germanic cannot be regarded

as impossible. The chief examples are: OE déofol devil, North.
diofol,' Gr. &uaBodAos, where Gmc. iu has been used as a substitute
for ca, while v (written f in OE) corresponds to the spirantal 6 of
late Gr.; the Prim. Gmc. form would be *diuvul-, with substitution
of a common native formative element for Gr. -oA- (cf. Goth.

diabulus), and from this the OE form is derived. OE Crécas Greeks,
Goth. Krekos, shows substitution of k for g of paixot due to the

lack of a back voiced stop in Gmc. except in the combinations gg,

yg.2 OE engel angel, is from Gmc. *angil-, in which unaccented
-el- (cf. Gr. dyyedos) > Gme. -il-, which causes umlaut, and

appears in OE as -el-, as in native words. OE cirice church, is from

Prim. Gmc. *kirtk6n-, with substitution of
i for v of Gr. xupiaxdv.3

* North., however, has frequently ia in the first syllable, and 5 for the medial

consonant, owing to the influence of Lat. diabolus. North. also has frequently
w (u, v) for the medial consonant: the reason is unknown.
2 The same substitution occurs in OE forms of Celtic place-names: see
Forster, Flussname Themse, p. 325.a.2. But Kretschmer, KZ xxxiii. 472, prefers
to explain the first k of Gmc. *Krék- as assimilated to the second. The relationship of the é to Gr. a: or Lat. ae is uncertain: Gmc. # would be expected to
correspond to monophthongized development in either case. On OE Créacas
beside Crécas see Flasdieck, AB x1. 342, who explains it as due to W-S derivation of the word from Angl. sources, -éac being a frequent W-S equivalent of
Angl. -éc.
3 If the word passed through Lat. to Gmc., the change of gender may have

taken place there, and also the medial syncopation: cf. Walahfrid Strabo, ab
ipsis autem Grecis kyrica . . . accepimus (ZfdA xxv. 99).

200

LOAN-WORDS

§ 493

B. Early Latin Loan-words
§ 493. The Latin loan-words found in Old English can be
roughly classified into (1) those in which the sound-changes operate
which would effect the same sound-successions in native words,
and (2) those which were introduced into Old English by scholars
without modification of their sounds, or at least without the indication of such modification in spelling. Words of type (1) often

exhibit sound-changes of late spoken Latin (Vulg. Lat.), showing
that their classical form had been modified before they were
borrowed, yet the Latin from which they were taken had still
mainly the Classical not the Vulgar Latin quantities. Words of
type (2) retain the Classical Latin sounds with little qualitative
change, yet the monastic Latin from which they were derived

appears to have adopted a quantitative system similar to that of
Vulgar Latin, and further quantitative changes took place when
such words were given the invariable initial stress of Old English

(cf. §§ 547-8).

§ 494. The chief stress in Latin fell on the first syllable of words
of two syllables. In words of three or more syllables, it fell on the

last syllable but one if this was long, but on the last syllable but

two if the last but one was short. Examples are grddus, mdter,

ménsa; Rémdni, patérnus; déminus, cléricus. In all Germanic
languages the chief stress fell on the first syllable in loan-words as
in native words, but some vowels develop differently according
to whether they were already stressed in Latin or became stressed
when borrowed into Germanic.
§ 495. Short vowels. Lat. a was modified in loan-words as the
ordinary sound-patterns of OE suggested, developing to 2, a, a/o,
or ea, whether the syllable had the chief stress in Lat. or acquired
it when the word was borrowed. In early loan-words this would
arise by the operation of native sound-changes, but in later ones
sound-substitution might produce similar results. Examples are:
ézster city, lefel bowl, tefl gaming-board; sacce sack (§ 160.1),
abbod abbot, draca dragon; ancorfoncor anchor, candel/condel
candle; cealc plaster, sealtian dance, sealm psalm; earc ark, cearcern
prison, mearm- marble; leahtric lettuce, *treaht text (cf. treahtere)
from Lat. castrum, labellum, tabula, saccus, abbdtem, draco, ancora,
candéla, calcem, saltdre, psalma, arca, carcer, marmor, lactiica,
tractus. Further sound-changes frequently intervene. 2 > ea by

§ 496

EARLY LATIN

20%

palatal influence in W-S, North. ceaster; a> ex by second
fronting in VP draca; mutation of a/o is 2 > e as in native words,

e.g. Embene people of Amiens, cemes shirt, lempedu lamprey,
mentel cloak, from Lat. Ambidni, camisia, lampréda, mantellum;
the mutation of 2 is e, e.g. eded vinegar, VP celé cup, from Lat.

acétum, calicem; mutation of # to e and subsequent back umlaut
to eo (§211) occurs in eosol ass, ceosol hut, from Lat. asellus,
*casellum; mutation of ea < # by palatal influence occurs in
cytel kettle, cyren sweet wine, from Latin catillus, carénum; double

umlaut of a+u to 2+e (§ 203) occurs in sxlmerige brine, seperie
savory, and with a due to pre-tonic shortening (§ 504) in Sztern-

dzg, from Lat. *salmuria, saturéia, Saturni dies.
§ 496. In some words borrowing took place too late for a to
become 2 or ea by the usual OE sound-changes, but it remained,
and was later mutated to 2, e.g. wrée- arch-, cxfester halter,
Latin, megester master, from Lat. archi-, capistrum,

Leden

Latina, magister, and so ceren, North. xéed, celé beside cyren,
eced, celé quoted above.

§497. Late Lat. loan-words are independent of the native
changes, and preserve a in all positions; they include doublets of

many words cited above, e.g. arc, carcern, marm-, W-S salm,

traht, saturege, magister, calic. Other late borrowings with Latin a
are castel village, plaster plaster, sanct saint, alter altar, fals

falsehood, carte document, martyr martyr, from Lat. castellum,
emplastrum, sanctus, altare, falsum, charta, martyr. CE. § 545.
§ 498. Lat. i and u were originally close sounds, but became

more open in Vulg. Lat. Hence in an early group of loan-word
s

they appear as 7, u, both when they had the chief stress in Lat. and
when they acquired it when the words were borrowed; but in a

later group of loan-words they appear as e, 0. Examples of the first
group are dis¢ dish, pic pitch, trifetum d.p. tributes, cugele cowl,

culter knife, must must, from Lat. discus, ptcem, tribtitum, cuculla,

culter, mustum; examples of the second group are dest, W-S éyst
box, peru pear, segn banner, insegel seal, copor copper, torr tower,

from Lat. cista, pirum, signum, *insigillum, cuprum, turris. Both
developments occur in piper, *peper pepper, Lat. piper. On mezsse
mass, from Lat. missa, see § 208.

§ 499. Before nasal consonants, and wheni or 7 followed in the

TM Developed from *salmuri- borrowed after the operation of breaking,
but
before umlaut.

202

LOAN-WORDS

§ 500

next syllable, Lat. i and u were developed as i and u (with mutation
y) in OE, e.g. impian graft, pirge pear-tree, -humele hop-plant,
byden barrel, cymen cumin, cylen kiln, pyle pillow, pytt pit, from
Lat. imputare, *pirea, humulus, *butina (Gr. Butivn), cuminum,
culina, puluinus, puteus. But since e may stand before single m in
native words (§118), Lat. i may >e in that position: senop mustard,
senop' synod, beside sinop, from Lat. sindpi, synodus.
§ 500. Lat. e and o remain in OE loan-words, both under
original and acquired chief stress. Examples are: fefer fever,
regol rule, sester jar, scolu school, mortere mortar, port harbour,

from Lat. febris, régula, sextarius, schola, mortarium, portus.
The Lat. e was more open than OE e from Gme. e and Lat. 7, and
its breaking is ea (not eo): earfe tare, Lat. eruum. Breaking is
absent in the later borrowings mertze payment, persoc peach, from
Lat. mercem, persicum. Back umlaut of e occurs in eofole danewort,
teosol die,? from Lat. ebulus, tessella.

§ 501. Before nasal consonants, and when7 or 7 followed in the
next syllable, Lat. e and o were developed as i and u (by mutation
y) in OE, e.g. gimm gem, minte mint, pinsian consider, cirischerry, miltestre harlot, pylece robe, munuc monk, munt mount,
nunne nun, pund pound, cycene kitchen, mydd bushel, mynet coin,

mynster monastery, syrfe service-tree, from Lat. gemma, mentha,

pensare, *cerasia (cf. § 541.6), meretrix (§§ 515, 541.3), pellicia,
monachus, montem, nonna, pondo, coquina, modius, monéta, monastérium, *sorbea.

§ 502. In later loan-words Lat. e, o were developed as e, o (by
mutation oe) even before nasal consonants and i, i, e.g. aspendan
spend, lent lentil, tempel temple, font font,* oele oil, from Lat.
expendere, lentem, templum, fontem, oleum.

§ 503. Long vowels and diphthongs. Long vowels which had
the chief stress in Latin, and retain it in OE, remain long in OE.
But since pre-tonic long vowels were shortened in Vulgar Latin,

they appear as short vowels in OE even when the chief stress is

moved on to them.
' With back umlaut stonop, seonop.

2 But cf. Forster, Flussname Themse, p. 574; Flasdieck, A xxii. 191.
3 The alternative form tasul, -ol, Cp., Ep., Erf., is unexplained; Ld. has
tesulas.

4 Spelling with a is also found, so the sound in this word was sometimes a/o;
but a-spellings are not found in domme lord (generalized voc. of Lat. dominus),
so a regular substitution of a@/o for Lat. o before nasals is not to be assumed.

§ 504

EARLY LATIN

203

§ 504. Lat. @ was represented by W-S #, nW-S é. This would

be a necessary substitution until the development of OE @ < ai.
Examples are n#p turnip, r€dié radish, str#t street, nW-S cése
cheese, from Lat. ndpus, *radica, strata, caseus. Mutation of éa <

# by. palatal influence to ie, later 7 occurs in IW-S éyse, and
retraction of # to d before u (cf. § 151) in pawa peacock,' Lat.
pauo. a < aby pre-tonic shortening undergoes umlaut in Sztern-

dzg (§ 495). Later loan-words preserve Lat. d, e.g. pal pole, papa

pope, from Latin pdlus, papa.
§ 505. Lat. 7 and @ remained in OE loan-words when they
retained the chief stress, e.g. mil mile, win wine, mir wall, plime
plum, from Lat. milia, uinum, miirus, priinum. i undergoes mutation in plyme plum, stryta ostrich, from Lat. *priinea, striithio. Pretonic shortening of 7 in trifolian grind, Lat. tribuldre.?
§ 506. Lat. @ (< é, 66) and 6 develop in OE as i, a, e.g. cliroc
clergyman, mise table, pinung torture, pis heavy, Sigen Seine,

tigle tile, Riim- Rome, from Lat. cléricus, *mésa (< mensa), péna,
*pésus (< pensus), Séquana, tégula, Roma. But6 is retained in later

borrowings: m6ér- mulberry
;3 mutated in glésan gloss, from mérus,
glossére.* When shortened pre-tonically @ and 6 can develop asi, u
or é, 0, e.g. diner coin, finugle fennel, sicor secure, elehtre lupin,
Custantin Constantine, morab sweet wine, solor chamber, from
Lat. dénarius, fenuculum, séciirus, électrum, *Costantinus (< Const-),

moratum, solarium.
§ 507. An irregular mutation of the shortening of pre-tonic Lat.
6 occurs in lzrig, part of a shield, Lat. Jérica. Original Lat. o

seems to receive the same treatment in stzr history, Lat. historia.

It is possible that W-S scribes assumed that Angl. *lerig, ster
(OE Bede) with e < oe had Angl. é, and that the spelling x
implies 2, the W-S equivalent of é, although /erig has a short first

syllable in verse.

.

§ 508. The Lat. diphthongs au and ae were identified with
Gmc. au and ai, and developed to éa and 4 in early loan-words,
e.g. céac jug, céas strife, seam burden, cdsere emperor, from Lat.
caucus, causa, sauma (< sagma), Caesar. Mutation of éa < au
' Beside péa from as. *paun > péan, in which the West Gme. loss of x
before u was repeated in the borrowed word (cf. § 405).
2 But Eotol, Eatal Italy, has back umlaut of 7: the long 7 of Italia is a metrical
convention, see Archiv cxlvi. 131.
3 Beside mur- (once).

4 Retention of @ is rare: béte beet, and mése beside mise.

204

LOAN-WORDS

§ 509

occurs in siman load. An alternative Lat. development au > a is
reflected by clise enclosure, clister bolt, and mutated in -clysan,
close, from Lat. clausa, claustrum. Lat. monophthongization ae >
#, followed by pre-tonic shortening, gives in OE loan-words a
sound represented by e or y: Cerfille, ¢cyrfille chervil, predician,
prydician preach, from Lat. chaerefolium, praedicare. Before a
following back vowel this sound was very open, and retracted to
a in OE like native 2: prafost officer, Lat. praepositus (beside
profost < propositus).
§ 509. Lat.

au remained in later borrowings,

e.g.

clauster

cloister, Lat. claustrum. Before r and 1 belonging to the same

syllable au > a; but before 7 and / not belonging to the same syllable, au > d > Gu,? hence e.g. cal cabbage, Lat. caulis, infl. caules,

whence a new n.s. cdul, and with parasiting c@wel, and so lawer
laurel, Pawel Paul, Lat. laurus, Paulus.
§ 510. Lat. eo, ew are represented by OE éo, North. éa in léo, léa
lion, léowe league, from Lat. leo, leuca. Préost priest, has éo of disputed origin.3

§ 511. Vowels of unaccented syllables. In early Latin loanwords no half-stress fell upon syllables because they were accented
in Latin, if the chief stress was removed from them. But OE in
conformity with its native accent system might develop a half-stress
on second elements of compounds, e.g. éérfille chervil, ctineglé&sse*

dog’s tongue, sdlséce ‘heliotrope’, from Lat. chaerefolium, cynogléssum, sdlsequium;, and similarly on heavy formative syllables,
e.g. célléndre coriander, &lmzsse alms, from Lat.

coliandrum,

*alimosina. If such a half-stress did not fall upon it, any vowel in

a syllable unaccented in OE was developed as in an accented
syllable, and then subjected to shortening and change similar to
the processes to be observed in unaccented syllables of native
words. Hence in OE unaccented syllables the Latin vowels develop

as follows:
a> zx > e: Sigen Seine, Lat. Séquana.
e >1>e: elehtre lupin, Lat. électrum (e < é is not subject to
mutation).
* It occurs in cliido for claudo and derivatives, owing to the influence of
occliido &c.

2 This is assumed on the evidence of ME Powel Paul.
3 Principal literature cited S-B, § 77.4.5.
* On wu for Lat. y in Gr. words, cf. murre myrrh, beside myrre, Lat. myrrha
cruft crypt, Lat. crypta.

§ 512

EARLY LATIN

205

i > e or remains as in native words, causing umlaut if possible:
cemes shirt, cyrfet gourd, mzgester master, r@di¢ radish, Lat.
camisia, cucurbita, magister, *radica,
0 > e: antefen anthem, cuneglzsse dog’s tongue, Lat. *antephéna,

cynogléssum.
u > o or remains: eofole danewort, finugle fennel, trifolian,
trifulian grind, Lat. ebulus, fénuculum, tribulare. Reduction to
é in ampelle flask, beside ampulle, dnpolle, Lat. ampulla.
@ > x > e: alter altar, senep mustard, Embene people of Amiens,
Lat. altare, sinapi, Ambiani.*
é >i (causing mutation) > e: éyren sweet wine, eced vinegar,

lempedu

lamprey,

mynet

coin,

mynster

monastery,

Lat.

carénum, acétum, lampréda, monéta, monastérium. There is
syncopation of the vowel in segne net, Lat. sagéna. In later

borrowings there is no umlaut: candel candle, polleie pennyroyal, Lat. candéla, piléium.

i > e: cylen kiln, Leden Latin, mylen mill, Lat. culina, Latina,
molina.
6 > u: capun capon, Lat. caponem.?

ui > u > o: sicor secure, *trifot tribute, d.p. trifetum (cf. § 385),
Lat. séciirus, tribiitum.
§ 512. Lat. e and 7 in hiatus were developed to i (#), which

caused consonant doubling after short syllables and then dis-

appeared after both originally long and originally short syllables.
After short syllables ending in 7, however, i remains. These
developmentsin loan-words are precisely parallel to those seen
in native words (§§ 398.4, 407). Examples are éerfille chervil, mydd

bushel, pytt pit; plyme plum, spynge sponge, stryta ostrich,
syrfe service-tree, ynne- onion, yntse ounce; pirge pear-tree,

seperie savory; from Lat. chaerefolium, modius, puteus, *priinea,
spongea, striithio, *sorbea, *unnio (§ 542, footnote), uncia, *pirea,

saturéia.3 Butin later loan-words zjremains, and causes no doubling,

? But by later borrowing or re-formation d > a> o: senap, senop, morap,
morod, abbad, abbod (cf. §§ 335-6 for similar developments of unaccented a
to. 0).
? But perhaps the word was borrowed from French.
3 Uninflected forms of ja-stems (Lat. e0-, io-stems) have -e (< vocalized i),
like native ende, rice (§ 355.3), e.g. dyse cheese, cylle bag, Lat. cdseus, culleus.
Most such nouns, however, drop ~e and pass into the a-declension: belt belt,
mynster monastery, pzil pallium, s¢crin coffer, from Lat. balteus, monastérium,
pallium, scrinium.

206

LOAN-WORDS

§ 513

e.g. cuffie hood, feferfugie feverfew, oele oil, pollegie pennyroyal,
from Lat. *cuffia, febrifugia, oleum, piilegium (cf. § 542).
§ 513. Lat. o in hiatus is developed as 4 in OE loan-words, e.g.
alwe aloe, sideware zedoary (§ 365), Lat. aloe, zedoarium.
§ 514. Final -u may be added to long syllable+short syllable,
after the model of héafodu (§ 3 53), e.g. lempedu lamprey, teppedu
n.p. carpets.

§
515. Unaccented vowels are often lost in -loan-words as in
native words of similar pattern. Internali and u are dropped after
a long syllable in pisle chamber, tigle tile (beside tigele), Lat.
pensilis, tégula, and the OE. syncopation after short syllables
(§ 388 ff.) is frequent, e.g. antef(e)n anthem, cyl(e)n kiln, myl(e)n
mill, segne net, t2fl gaming-board, from Lat. *antephéna, culina,
molina, sagéna, tabula. But when no unsyncopated forms occur
in OE, and when the vowel was post-tonic in Lat., Vulg. Lat.
syncope is to be suspected, e.g. ézff halter, finugle fennel, flytme
lancet, prafost officer, sigle rye, are probably from Lat. *cap’lus,
*fenuc’lum, *flét’ma, *praepos’tus, *séc’le. Similarly pre-tonic
vowels were subject to loss in Vulg. Lat., hence OE mynster
monastery, miltestre harlot, from Lat. *mon’stérium, *mer tricem
(§ 541), and perhaps ¢erfille chervil from *chaer’folium.

§ 516. In a few words the stress was not retracted to the first
syllable, but this was left unaccented and lost, e.g. cyrfet gourd,
ster history, rénge spider, from Lat. cucurbita, historia, aranea.
Vulg. Lat. prothetic e is never developed in OE loan-words, e.g.
spynge, stryta quoted § 512.

§517. Parasiting takes place in loan-words as in native material.

Instances in words already quoted are ceaster, clilster, copor,
Sefer, plaster, segen, tempel; cf. also § 509 on cawel, lawer. Note
Meterne Marne, < *Meztyne < Lat. *Matr’na with post-tonic
syncope.

§ 518. The phonological development of loan-words is often
disturbed by the substitution of native suffixes for part of the
Latin word. Some of these substitutions are already West Gmc.
In particular, the suffix -ere, which sometimes reflects the cognate
-drius, -Gris (e.g. mynetere moneyer, scolere scholar, Lat. monétarius, scholaris) is freely extended to words which do not contain
those Lat. suffixes, e.g. fullere fuller, cantere singer, c@sere emperor,
Lat. fullo, cantor, Caesar; and so of things cucelere spoon,' mortere
« Here Lat. 0 was normally developed to u before j from e in hiatus (§§ 501,

§ 519

EARLY LATIN

207

mortar, saltere psalter from Lat. cochlear, mortarium, psaltérium.
Other suffixes which appear in loan-words owing to substitution
are:

~el, -ol:* these related suffixes often replace Lat. -ell-, -ill-, e.g.

cytel kettle, ceosol hut, eosol ass, mentel cloak, lzfel bowl,

s€amol stool, insegel seal, teosol die, cf. Lat. catillus, *casellum,

asellus, mantellum, labellum, scamellum, sigillum, tessella. Other
instances of the transference of these suffixes are: Eotol Italy,

éystel chestnut-tree, cf. Lat. Italia, castanea.
-ele: cugele cowl, fecele torch, ferele rod, fifele buckle, -humele
hop-plant, cf. Lat. cuculla, facula, ferula, fibula, humulus.
~er, -or: diner coin, pipor pepper, pundur plumb-line, sester jar,
solor chamber, cf. Lat. déndrius, piper, ponder-, sextdrius,

solarium.
-en: this suffix corresponds etymologically to -in-, e.g. cypren of
copper, Lzden Latin, Lat. cuprinus, Latina. It is extended in

byxen of box, picen of pitch, Cristen Christian, and in later
formations without umlaut, e.g. rosen of roses; cf. Lat. buxeus,

piceus, Christidnus, roseus.
~en, -i¢8e, -estre: these fem. suffixes are extended to loan-words
in mynecenu nun,

casern empress,? sealticge dancing-girl,

miltestre harlot (cf. § 541.3).
-oc: cliroc clergyman, munuc monk, persoc peach,
cléricus, monachus, persicum.3

cf.

Lat.

-isé: this suffix often replaces -ic- in adjs. from names of races,

e.g. Arabisé Arabic; it is also extended to a few other words,
e.g. gimmisc set with gems, cedrisé of cedar, gramatiscgrammatical.
-ig: papig poppy,‘ cf. Lat. papdauer.

Similar substitution of a native prefix occurs in aspendan spend,
Lat. expendere.
§ 519. When a native suffix is extended to a loan-word it is
naturally declined with its normal endings. Even if a native suffix
512); but the native suffix -Zri- replaced the sounds developed from Lat. -ear
before mutation took place.
' Earlier -il, -ul, and vocalic I, e.g. Cp. lebil, tasul, lebl for lefel, teosol.
? The suffix -inni- replaced -annj- from Lat. -ane- in *kastinni- chestnut-tree,
Lat. castanea, hence OE éistenbéam, OHG chestinna.

3 In later loan-words Lat. -ic- can be maintained without causing umlaut:
portié porch, tunice, -ece tunic, Lat. porticus, tunica.

* More frequently popeg with unexplained o.

208

LOAN-WORDS

§ 520

is not introduced, in early loan-words the Lat. declensional endings

are replaced by native ones. Most m. and n. nouns of the Lat.
second declension follow the a-declension in OE, e.g. disé dish,
sealm psalm, chister bolt, pund pound, teped carpet, win wine, from
Lat. discus, psalmus, claustrum, pondo, tapétum, uinum. Some neuts.

have become masc. in OE in whole or in part, e.g. eced vinegar,
pil spike, segn banner, from Lat. acétum, pilum, signum. The fems.
laurus, synodus become masc. in OE, ldwer laurel, seonop synod.
Names of nations in -i are usually received into the i-declension

in OE: Egipte, Perse, *Créce (once g.p. -na, beside Crécas), &c.

Many neut. pls. in -@ are treated in OE as if fem. sg., and follow

the 6-declension, e.g. ceaster city, peru pear, or the dn-declension,
e.g. butere butter, cerfille chervil, earfe tare, flytme lancet, plime
plum, pise pea, from Lat. castrum, pirum, bityrum, chaerefolium,

eruum, *flétoma (< flebotomum), prinum, pisum.: The g.s. sancti,
f. sanctae before names were retained in OE and both developed
to sancte (§ 369).

§ 520. Nouns of the Lat. fourth declension become a-nouns in
OE: port harbour, portic porch, fers verse (n.) from Lat. portus,
porticus, uersus.

§521. Nouns of the Lat. first declension are mostly retained as
fems. in OE, following either the 6-declension, e.g. cylen kiln,
earc ark, lempedu lamprey, str&t street, tefl gaming-board, or the

6n-declension, e.g. zlmesse alms, carte document, cugele cowl,

mezsse mass, segne net, side silk, from Lat. culina, arca, lampréda,

strata,

tabula,

*alimosina,

charta, cuculla, missa,

sagéna, séta.

Change to masc. gender is fairly frequent, e.g. ancor anchor, gimm

gem, mylen mill, r€dic¢ radish, regol rule, from Lat. anchora, gemma,
molina, *rddica, *régula;2 mynet, coin, becomes neut., Lat. monéta.

Lat. candéla developed as a i6-stem, OE candel, -lle.
§ 522. Lat. nouns in -ea and -ia mostly became OE j6n- stems,
e.g. éyrse cherry, pirge pear-tree, plece place, plyme plum, spynge
sponge, syrfe service-tree, from Lat. *cerasia, *pirea, platea,
*priinea, spongia, *sorbea. Cemes, shirt, is a 10-stem, Lat. camisia.
Lat. ostrea, oyster, was developed as an 6n-stem, and hence has
no mutation, OE ostre. Lat. uncia develops as a jén-stem meaning

‘ounce’ (yntse), but as a masc. (? neut.) ja-stem meaning ‘inch’
(ynce); on the difference of the consonants cf. §§ 532-3.
* Full list in Férster, Flussname Themse, p. 585.
? Full lists, ib., pp. 334-5.

§ 523

EARLY LATIN

209

§ 523. Lat. masc. nouns in -ius, -eus, and neuts. in -ium, -eum,
can appear as jo-stems, with final -e after long syllables, consonant
gemination after short ones, e.g. ¢yse cheese, cylle bag, mydd
bushel, pytt pit, from Lat. caseus, culleus, modius, puteus. Often,

however, these nouns appear as a-stems, see § 512, footnote,

although this change took place after mutation, as belt and pzll
show. Ele oil, Lat. oleum, was borrowed too late for consonant
gemination and hence retains -i- (> -e).
§ 524. Masc. and fem. i-stems and consonant stems of the Lat.

third declension are mostly developed as a-nouns, based on the

declined form of the Latin word; e.g.
z-stems: fefer fever, post post, torr tower, from Lat. febris,

postis, turris.
cons.-stems: font font, munt mount, part part, pic pitch, from

Lat. fontem, montem, partem, picem.
Divergent

developments appear in bytt cask (i-stem), mertze

payment (? za-stem), stor incense (a-stem, abnormal abbreviated
form),! from Lat. buttem, mercem, storacem.

§ 525. Neut. nouns of the Lat. third declension mostly follow
the OE a-declension, e.g. alter altar, pipor pepper, pundur plumbline, from Lat. altdre, piper, ponder-. But milia is developed as a
strong fem. sg., mil mile; and “sigle rye, Lat. sécale, passes into
the weak declension (g.s. siglan).

§ 526. Lat. m-stems mostly appear in the OE weak declension,
e.g. draca dragon, pdwa peacock, stryta ostrich, from Lat. dracénem, paudnem, strithiénem. But punt, punt, has passed to the

a-declension, ynne-, onion, to the ia-declension, Lat. ponténem,
uinionem.
§527. The few OE

adjs. borrowed

from Lat.

follow the

a-declension, or when fem. the 6-declension, whether in adjectival
or nominal use, e.g. crisp curly, fals falsehood, Leden Latin, pis
heavy, sanct saint, sicor secure, from Lat. crispus, falsum, Latina,
pensus, sanctus, séctirus.

§ 528. Verbs are taken into the weak conjugations, except the
very early borrowing sérifan decree, Lat. scribere. To the first weak
* There seems no reason for assuming that this word and the derived steran,
burn incense, have 4, é, as most dictionaries. Welsh ystor is perhaps from OE, not

direct from Lat. (Forster, ES lxx. 49-54, would regard OE stor as from Olr,
*stér < Vulg. Lat. stdrax, and ystor as from OE or direct from Irish).

LOAN-WORDS

210

§ 529

conjugation belong dihtan direct, glésan gloss,' pyngan prick,

aspendan spend, tyrnan turn, from Lat. dictdre, glossare, pungere,
exspendere, torndre; and re-formed with a native element salletan
sing, Lat. psallere. But most verbs pass into the second weak class,
e.g. pinsian consider, predician preach, trifolian grind, turnian
turn, from Lat. pensdre, predicare, tribulare, tornare, and re-formed

with a native element sériitnian consider, Lat. scrittari.
§ 529. In addition to the adjs. and verbs directly borrowed from

Lat., others are very freely formed from borrowed nouns with

native elements, e.g. gimmis¢ set with gems, gimbz#re rich in gems,
beclysan enclose, cristnian christen, gecyrtan shorten (cf. Lat.
curtus), gimmian produce gems, mzssian say mass, pinian torment,
siman load.

§ 530. Consonants. In Vulg. Lat. intervocalic p, t, k became
first voiced and then open. Intervocalic 5, d, g also became open.
West Gmc. loan-words exhibit v, d or o and 3 for both series. Very
early loan-words preserve the voiceless stops. OE examples are:
p: éipe onion, copor copper, n&p turnip, pio pepper, senop

mustard; czfester halter, prafost officer, from ‘Lat. cépa,
cuprum, napus, piper, sindpi, capistrum, praepositus.

t: mynet coin, Seternd#g Saturday, strét street, trifetum d.p.
tributes; abbod abbot, fidele fiddle, Laden Latin, morad,
morod sweet wine, szperie savory, tepped carpet, from monéta,
Saturni-, strata, tribiitum, abbatem, vitula, Latina, mératum,
saturéia, tapétum.

k: cyéene kitchen, draca dragon; cugele cowl, finugle fennel, from
coquina, draco, cuculla, fenuculum.
b: fefer fever, tzfl gaming-board, from febris, tabula.
d: rédié radish, sinod synod, from *rddica, synodus.3
g: tigle tile, regol rule, from tégula, *régula.
1 Here and below the conventional view of the origin of glésan is preferred to
that of Ritter, Vermischte Beitrdge, pp. 46~49.

3 Biscop bishop, Lat. episcopus is of peculiar difficulty, for p is retained in the
second syllable, but in the first becomes 5. The intervocalic consonant of epiprobably became b, and this was retained in Gmc. with loss of the pretonic vowel
(§ 516), for initial b was common in Gmc. The second p > 5, but Gmc. substituted p, having no post-vocalic b. This suggests that Gme. p replaced both
Lat. » and 6, and that Gme. v indicates that the consonant had become open
before the word was borrowed.
3 Frequent d (rarely }) for din classical, especially Gr., names, and occasionally
in other classical words in the OE Orosius (both manuscripts) is unexplained,
e.g. Mardonius, Sarpinia, adamans; cf. Pogatscher, Zur Lautlehre der... Lehnworte im Alteng., pp. 176-7; Archiv cxlvi. 132.

§ 531

EARLY LATIN

art

§ 531. Initially Lat. p, t, k, 5, d were all represented: by the
corresponding native sounds (e.g. peru, txfl, copor, bytt, disc) but
3 was used for g, and developed in OE as in native words, hence
£imm gem, but glésan gloss, from gemma, glossare. In OE initial k
was also fronted as in native words, e.g. céast strife, éyse cheese,
éyst box, from causa, cdseus, cista.
§ 532. Similarly in internal positions k, 3, and g were fronted
(and in the case of k, g assibilated) in the same conditions as in
native words. Fronted or assibilated sounds can be assumed in
eced vinegar, zrce- archi-, ynce inch, pylece robe, pollegie pennyroyal, spynge sponge, pyngan prick, from Lat. acétum, archi-,
uncia, pellicia, pilegium, spongia, pungere.
§ 533. In Vulg. Lat. ¢ before e and i, and ¢ before 7 (<e,
z in hiatus) were developed to ts, and in

some loan-words

this stage is reflected, e.g. mertze payment, yntse ounce, Profentse Provence, dracentse dragon-wort, plztse place, palendse
palace, from Lat. mercem, uncia, Prouincia, dracontea, platea,
*palantium. On various spellings for ts see § 53, and on nts, ns
see § 477.1.

§ 534. In loan-words Lat. ct, pt > ht, ft, e.g. cruft crypt, nefte
cat’s mint, dihtan direct, leahtrié lettuce, traht text, from Lat.

crypta, nepeta, dictare, lactuca, tractus. ks > s before a consonant
in sester jar, Lat. sextdrius (cf. § 417).! ku is preserved initially:
quatern quaternion, Lat. quaternio; cweartern prison, if to Lat.

quartarium; medially it becomes k or g; cyéen kitchen, Sigen Seine,
from Lat. coguina, Séquana. Léowe league, Lat. leuca > leuga,
shows a development of intervocalic 3 (< ) as u.?

§ 535. The voiceless spirants f and s were preserved initially and
in groups in Lat. loan-words, e.g. fié fig, segn banner, fals falsehood, disé dish, cluster bolt, from Lat.-ficus, signum, falsum, discus,
claustrum. The group sk was subject to the same developments as
in native words, hence assibilation is to be assumed initially (e.g.
séolu, sérin), and in disc, while metathesis occurs in muxle mussel
(§ 440, footnote).3

§ 536. Intervocalic f and s were voiced in both the Vulg. Lat.
* Such consonant changes can be readily removed by influence of the Lat.,
hence e.g. nepte; note also seoxter, by influence of seox six.
2 The development of 3 here resembles that of 3y before u in native words
(§ 398.2), and hence the OE form should perhaps be derived from Vulg. Lat.
*legua (cf. Arch. lat. lex. iii. 510) > Prim, OE *leuy-.
3 On the abnormal assibilation in biscop cf. § 441, footnote.

212

LOAN-WORDS

§ 537

and OE sound-systems, and so voicing can be assumed in loanwords, e.g. scrofell scrofula, clise, glésan (cf. § 543).
§ 537. h was silent in Vulg. Lat., and hence it is sometimes
dropped in the spelling of loan-words, e.g. (h)ymen hymn, Lat.
hymnus. In sester jar, Lat. sextdrius, ks+-cons. was developed like
xs-+cons. in native material (§ 417); so for bises intercalary day,
read bisest, Lat. bisextus.

§ 538. The Gr. aspirated stops ch, th are developed as ¢, f in
Lat. loan-words of ultimate Gr. origin, e.g. carte document, Crist
Christ, zrée- arch-, tyriaca antidote, from Lat. charta, Christus,
archi-, thériaca.’ But divergent Lat. developments of ph to p and

f are reflected, e.g. ampelle flask, but antefen anthem, graf style,
from Lat. ampulla, *antephona, graphium.

§ 539. ¢ remains in the oldest loan-words, e.g. weall wall, win
wine, pawa peacock, mealwe mallow, from Lat. uallum, uinum,
pauo, malua. In cawel basket, from cauellum, Lat. -auel- is developed like -aul- (§ 509). But 4 > v in Vulg. Lat. and this is
preserved medially in OE, e.g. earfe tare, salfie sage, from
Lat. eruum, saluia, while initially f was substituted for it, in accordance with the OE sound-system, e.g. fann fan, fers verse, from
Lat. uannus, uersus.*

§ 540. On the development of j from e or 7 in hiatus, see § 512.
§ 541. The following points may be noticed concerning the
development of liquids and nasals in loan-words:
(1) ns >s with compensatory lengthening of the preceding
vowel in Vulg. Lat., hence OE Custantin Constantine, mise table,

pis heavy, from Lat. Constantinus, mensa, pensus (cf. § 506).
Pensare, consider, seems to have been at first a learned word, and

hence was borrowed with ns, which remained in OE pinsian (and so
French penser).

(2) Loss of final after 7 occurs in loan-words as in native
material (§ 473), e.g. pyle pillow, seppe fir, from Lat. puluinus,
sappinus.

(3) In a number of words r-r > L-r or r-l: miltestre harlot <
*mirtestre from Lat. meretricem (§§ 501, 518); turtle turtle (beside
turtur) from Lat. turtur; North. purple purple (infl. adj.; W-S

- ¥ Occasionally in loan-words and biblical names ) is written for zh, e.g.

eater, Pracia, bibliopece. th, td are also found, e.g. Iuditpe, Bitdinia,

2 This spelling of initial y continues in purely literary loan-words (e.g.
Firgilius, Fulcania), and Irish influence has been suggested (see Archiv exlvi. 131).

§ 542

EARLY LATIN

213

purpure, noun), from Lat. purpura. But cellendre, coriander, is
from Lat. coliandrum < coriandrum.
(4) Intrusion of r occurs in leahtrié lettuce,! Lat. lactiica.
(5) Loss of 7 occurs in lempedu lamprey, Lat. lampréda.

(6) Metathesis of 7 occurs in cyrps curly (beside crisp), Lat.
crispus (cf. §§ 459.1, 460.4); and reciprocal metathesis of r and s

in ¢isir-, ciser- cherry (beside ciris-), Lat. *cerasia (modified to
*kirist6 with Gmc. suffix).
(7) Isolated abnormalities in plime, plyme plum, Lat. priinum,
*prinea; eolone elecampane, Lat. inula.2
§ 542. Geminate consonants are normally preserved in loanwords, both when original and when due to gemination before 7,

e.g. with original geminates abbod abbot, mzsse mass, sace sack,

from Lat. abbatem, missa, saccus; for examples of geminates before
z see §512. A pre-tonic vowel (whether originally short, or
shortened as described above, § 503) can develop a following
double consonant in Vulg. Lat., and this can be preserved in
OE, e.g. OE tzxpped carpet, pollegie pennyroyal, ynne- onion,3

Lat. tapéte, piilegium, tinidnem.4
§ 543. Latin geminates are sometimes shortened in OE when
they stood before the vowel which bore the accent in Lat., e.g.
pilece robe, teosol die. Lat. pellicia, tessella. But glésan is from

Lat. glisa < glossa.

§ 544. Abnormal developments. A number of loan-words are
not developed purely phonologically, but one of the following
processes intervenes:
(1) An OE equivalent is substituted for an element of the Lat.
word, e.g. feferfugie feverfew, solséce heliotrope, from Lat. febri-

Sugia, solsequium.

(2) More frequently an OE word is substituted for an element
* On various forms of this word see § 544.2.
2 OE elene is from Lat. helenium, and its existence seems to have promoted
reciprocal metathesis in *eonole < Lat. inula (unless Vulg. Lat. had already
*iluna), hence eolone; further mixture produces eolene, elone.
3 Not to diniénem as the composition form in -e- points to an original long

first syllable, not to gemination after a short syllable (§ 359); in the latter case
the composition form would be *yne- or *yn- (§ 348).
* Cellendre coriander (beside celendre), Lat. coliandrum (§ 541.3), seems to
belong here, for the fluctuation between // and / in OE suggests conflicting Lat.
forms rather than the consistent native gemination before j, and the latter
process should not take place in company with the late mutation 0 > oe, e (as

in oele, § 502).

214

LOAN-WORDS

§ 545

of a borrowed word, with which, aided by a resemblance of sound,

it had been falsely identified, as Eoforwic, Geoweorpa are derived

from Eboracum, Iugurtha (§ 321). Examples are dnpolle (beside
ampulle, § 511) flask, regarded as a measure and connected with
Gn one; biscopwyrt betony, Lat. hibiscum; carcern prison, Lat.
carcer, the ending being assimilated to -ern house (as in béodern,
§ 372); codzppel quince, Lat. malum cydonium; -léctric < *léactric,
modified from leahtric (§§ 534, 541.4) by influence of léac;?
lufestice lovage, Lat. lubestica; swiftlere slipper < *suftlere, Lat.
subtalaris. Two elements of a borrowed word can fall under the
influence of native words, e.g. meregrot pearl, Lat. margarita,
associated with mere sea, and grot particle;3 ofl#te offering, Lat.
oblata, with association of the first element with OE of-, and of the
second with -/#te (as in #1%te desert). The same process may be
suspected elsewhere, e.g. xlmesse, alms, has in the first syllable
confusion with the OE prefix zl-, as in OHG alamuosan (Lat.
*alimésina); l#wede lay, if from Lat. laicus, must be re-formed as
if connected with -/Zw weakness, lack;+ amber a measure, Lat.
amphora, seems to undergo early West Gmc. modification due to
assumed connexion with beran bear (OHG einbar, OS embar).
(3) Abnormal reductions of words sometimes occur,

e.g.

zlmesse, for *zlmoésine with ss of doubtful origin, fille (and hence
wudufille) for cerfille; gles, negles for cuneglzsse; stor incense, from
Lat. storacem.

c. Later Latin Loan-words
§ 545. Some distinction of early and late or popular and learned
Latin loan-words in Old English is made by all authorities, and
some distinguish from both a third group of ‘foreign words’ used
without genuine assimilation into the language. In the present work
a distinction is made between early loan-words which show modifications owing to native and Vulgar Latin sound-changes, and
later ones, which are taken not from Vulgar Latin but from the
learned Latin of the Middle Ages, in the pronunciation of which
the phonological changes of Vulgar Latin were largely eliminated,
TM Cf. OHG einbar, Lat. amphora; and OE seoxter for sester (§ 534).
2 But léactrog, -troc cluster, seems to be a different word.

3 Cf OS, OHG merigriota, -grioz, where the second element is ‘gravel’

(OE gréot).

+ Cf. Lotspeich, JEGP xl. 3.

§ 546

LATER LATIN

215

but in which the loan-words show considerable modifications of the
classical quantities to have prevailed. In general, the first group
will contain all sorts of words, the second mainly ones of a literary
type. The second group will contain late re-borrowings of many
words found in the first, e.g. calic, dracontie, lactuce, palant,

spongean (a.s.), istoriam, beside older éelc, dracentse, leahtric,
palendse, spynge, ster. The distinction is, however, difficult to
maintain. Some words probably came from monastic not Vulgar
Latin, yet were borrowed early enough to undergo native soundchanges, e.g. dracentse, with umlaut in the medial syllable, yet
without the Vulgar Latin change of intervocalic c >g (Lat.
dracontea). Other words lack distinguishing criteria entirely,
e.g. salm may be a late re-borrowing beside sealm, or merely an
Anglian form. It has been emphasized in the preceding sections
that there are many stages in the borrowing of loan-words (cf.
§§ 496-8, 500, 502, 508-9, 512, 530). The sections below aim at
describing the development of what appear to be the latest group
of borrowings, but do not claim infallibility in the apportionment
of words to it.

§ 546. Words of the latest group of borrowings generally
reproduce the Latin vowels and consonants in writing without
change, and it is uncertain how far their pronunciation was
modified to conform with the normal sounds of OE, e.g. whether
é and g developed as in native words.' It will appear below that z
and e in hiatus become readily non-syllabic, so that e.g. Gregorius,
Bersabea could be trisyllabic. Various other modifications are
clearly due to OE native practice: an OE diphthong is introduced
in déacon beside diacon; the loss of unaccented initial syllables
(§ 516) is repeated in postol apostle, pistol letter, Lat. apostolus,
epistola, and in many names like Commedia Nicomedia, Thrusct
Etruscans, Spdneas Spaniards, Paminund Epaminondas;? g is
written for z, and ig for i, e.g. Aquilegia, Uigenna, Assyrige; some
modifications like f for ph (Fenix, Filistina) and for initial 4
(Firgilius) occur. While the classical Lat. intervocalic stops are
' See on this question Pyles, PMLA \viii. goo-9. Alliteration shows that
initial ps, z were pronounced s (see Ps. xci. 3; Rid. 41, 68), and that initial se
could be modified to the contemporary state of native s¢ (see Met. 1, 2). The

frequent spelling séeriidnian beside sériitnian (Lat. scriitinare) would seem to

reflect native voicing of t before 7.

2 In later loan-words loss of internal syllablesis unusual, e.g. organemarjoram,

Lat. origanum.,

216

LOAN-WORDS

§ 547

mostly written unchanged (e.g. capitul, meter, diacon, Arabise),
it would seem that a spirantal pronunciation of b prevailed, and

it can be written f or u, e.g. safine, sauine savine, Lat. sabina, and
names like Galua Galba, and hence inverted spellings like Jébes
g.s. Jove, Lat. Jouis.

§ 547. The earlier Lat. loan-words of OE show shortening of
pre-tonic Lat. vowels (§ 503), but not shortening of accented
vowels before two unaccented syllables, e.g. cléricus, tégula are
developed in OE as cliroc, tigle; similarly there is no evidence for
lengthening accented vowels in open syllables when one unaccented
syllable followed, e.g. peru, scolu, Lat. pirum, schola. On the other
hand, the later loan-words reflect a pronunciation of Lat. in which

accented vowels had been shortened before two following syllables,

e.g. cleric, lilie, Lat. cléricus, lilium; while they had been lengthened
in open syllables when one unaccented syllable followed, e.g. cdc

cook, grad degree, scél school, sén sound, stél stole, Lat. *cocus <

coquus, gradus, schola, sonus, stola;? so OE profian, hold guilty, has

6 from disyllabic forms of Lat. probdre.
§ 548. Late loan-words, like early ones, transferred the main
stress to the first syllable, but a strong half-stress remained on the
syllable which had borne the main stress in Lat., so that the
accentuation mdgister arose. Now in the native system, a half-stress
on a medial formative syllable only existed after long syllables, and

hence, if the half-stress was maintained, the accented vowel had
to be lengthened to give the normal native pattern mdgister like
opérne. Accordingly we find verse evidence for long vowels in

magister master, and in célend calend, gigant giant, sdcerd priest,

following the inflected forms cdléndas, &c., and also in Romane
Romans, Lat. Romani, where the first syllable would be shortened

pretonically and then re-lengthened in OE. We cannot tell how

* There is very little evidence in early OE loan-words for Lat. shortening of

accented vowels in antepenultimate syllables. Regol rule, Class. Lat. régula is a

certain instance as it can undergo back umlaut (§ 210.3), and the unsyncopated
medial vowels in fifele buckle, fidele fiddle, tigele tile (beside tigle < tégula) may
point to short vowels in the first syllables, Butere butter, Lat. bitjrum, has
prevailingly no syncopation, so is perhaps from Lat. *bitirum; less frequent
butre would belong to § 388. The loan-word is latish, as no umlaut took place,
and medial ¢ points to a monastic rather than a popular origin (see § 545). The
composition form is Cp. buter-, Ep., Erf. with suffix mixture butur-, IW-S

buttor- (with -tt- from *buttre, § 453).
? Of course the inflected form may determine the quantity of words impari-

syllabic in Latin, e.g. calic < calicem. Fenix has a short first syllable irregularly,
perhaps from mistaken declined forms Phoenicem, &c. (AB xxviii. 41-42).

§ 549

LATER LATIN

217

far other words of similar pattern had lengthening, or if they
abandoned the half-stress, e.g. decan, safine, Lat. decdnus, sabina.
Conversely, a syllable short in Lat. receives a half-stress in OE
because a long syllable precedes in dspide asp, Lat. aspidem.
§ 549. The Biblical and classical names in OE verse mainly follow the
same principles of accent and quantity as the later loan-words. Hence

disyllables have usually a long first syllable, e.g. Adam, Iudith, Platon.

This long syllable is maintained in inflected forms, and causes the
middle syllable to acquire a light half-stress, like native Béowilfes,

which is similarly neglectable in verse, e.g. Addmes, Idcobes.! There are

no certain exceptions to the rule that the first syllable of a disyllabic
name is long even in inflected forms, except Tile.
§ 550. Trisyllabic names which had a long penultimate, which
accordingly had the accent in Lat., retain the Lat. accent as a half-stress,
and hence (like mdgister) have a long first syllable, whatever the history

of the vowel, e.g. Agustus, mérus, Néuémbris, Décémbris, and so with a

closed first syllable Albano d.s., Septémbris. Trisyllabic names which had

the Lat. accent on the first syllable, have in OEa short first syllable and
no half-stress, e.g. Babilon, Elene, Nineue, Lucifer, Salomon, Lengthened
inflected forms have a secondary stress on the penultimate, e.g. Babilénes. But the two types are sometimes confused, e.g. Libanus, Stéphanus
(Lat. Libanus, Stephanus) are developed in OE as if containing the
formative element -dn- (as in Romdnus). Sodome (and its derivatives
Sodome Sodomites, Sodomisé) would by rule have 6, but Gomorre
would have dG: but these names already influence each other in Lat.
verse, and in OE Gomorre shortens the first vowel and rejects halfstress on the second when linked by ond to Sodome in one half-line
(Gen. 1926, 1966, 2008, 2505). Beside Sodome there occurs infl.
Sédéme from disyllabic *Sédom (cf. Sédomware). Séraphin (El. 755),
beside normal Seraphin, Cheruphin is due to treating the word correctly
as an inflexion of *Séraph.
§ 551. Names of four syllables usually take the form + x+ x, eg.

Agamemnon, Agustinus, Héloférnus, and so with closed first syllable

Cénstantinus. Some, however, have a short first syllable, e.g. Abimélech,

Benedictus, and so basilisca. Apollinus, Filistina, Hi¢rusdlem usually fol-

low the latter type with short first syllables, more rarely the former.
§ 552. Of polysyllabic names, Elamitare is perhaps /~ x+ x like
native Ligoraceaster, while the handling of Nabochodonossor is uncertain.?

! e.g. ne pxt Idcobes god, Ps. xciii. 7, with which contrast ond Idcdbes, id. lxxxiii.
7; conversely, in disyllabic forms, as in native words of similar structure, the
final syllable may be given half-stress, e.g. [dbal noma (Gen. 1078) like Hrunting
nama (§ 90, footnote).
2 See metrical appendix to K. R. Brooks’s edition of Andreas (Oxford dissertation, unpublished),

218

LOAN-WORDS

§ 553

§ 553. Trisyllabic names with e and z in hiatus usually follow the
above rules, and hence long vowels appear in the first syllable and halfstress with metrical length on the vowel in hiatus in words like Jédéas,

Mathéas, Maria following the type Agistus.! Contrast words with the
Lat. accent on the first syllable, which follow the type Bdbilon, e.g.
Tulius, Tunius, Libia, Siria.2 Synizesis is rarely demonstrable, e.g.
weorcum Ebrea, Cri. 67.

§ 554. Names of four syllables with hiatus 7 in the second conform

to the type Agamémnon, e.g. Arridnus, Cyridcus, Tilidna, But those with

hiatus # in the third syllable form 44° x, e.g. Grégérius, hidtta. Synizesis occurs in both types, producing 4+ x, e.g. Cyridcus, Grégorius.

§ 555. Names of four syllables with hiatus e in the third syllable are

treated as

x +x (types Agamémnon or Bénedictus), e.g. Hélistus,

Cdnanéa (g.p.). Synizesis with shift of the secondary accent to the

second syllable is allowed, e.g. Ammorrea (g.p.), Bérsdbea, Galileam.

§ 556. Names of five syllables containing e or # in hiatus are usually

reduced to four syllables by synizesis, and then conform to the type

Agamémnon, e.g. Bartholomeus, Cdmpotdnea, Mdximianes, Mérmedinig.

§ 557. Vowels other than e and j in hiatus are often subject to synizesis. Disyllables are rarely so reduced to monosyllables (e.g. Cdam,
Cain, Méab, Née, Sion) but their inflected forms may be either ++ x
or + x, e.g. contrast Cdines, Gen. 1249, with Cdines, id. 1066. In names
or three syllables, synizesis is freely allowed, changing the word to the

disyllabic type (Adam), e.g. Iéhannis beside Iéhannis. It is sometimes

indicated in spelling, e.g. (infl. Arones, Isace, Fdrénes beside Aarénes,
Isaace, Fdraénes. Here may be mentioned the scriptural doublets

Abra(ha)m, Bethle(he)m, Sarra(i), which are used for metrical convenience (sometimes against the manuscript spelling). Of four syllable
names, synizesis can take place in Malaléhel, so that 4 x + x becomes
bux,

§ 558. In the quantitative patterning of foreign names, syllabic
length seems to have been sometimes obtained by consonantal rather
than by vocalic lengthening, and hence gemination often appears, e.g.
Commedia, Sarra, and so Sciddia (Met. 1, 2), Zefferus (Rid. 41, 68), both
incorrectly scanned as ‘+ x. Some of these geminates are, however,
pure errors, e.g. Annanias, Effessia.

§ 559. The later loan-words, like the earlier ones, are freely
assimilated into the OE declensional system. Hence masc. nouns
of the Lat. second and fourth declensions are usually received into
! These half-stresses may be neglected in verse, e.g. contrast wes hira
Maétheus sum, And. 11, with pa wes Mdthéus, id. 40.
2 But poets sometimes confuse the two types, and, for example, scan Sciddia,
Praciaas

£4 x,

§ 560

LATER LATIN

219

the OE a-declension, e.g. angel angel, cleric ecclesiastic, decan dean;
accent accent, grad degree.' Similarly neuts. of the second declension, e.g. castel village, cantic canticle (masc. in OE). A few become
weak in OE, e.g. basilisca basilisk, cristalla crystal.
§ 560. Nouns of the first Lat. declension generally become fem.
weak nouns in OE, e.g. albe alb, murre myrrh, safine savine; so

Lat. nouns in -ea, -ia, e.g. dracente dragon-wort, sponge sponge.
A large number of fem. nouns of the first declension become masc.

strong nouns in OE, e.g. cdlend calend, epact epact, non ninth hour,
pistol letter, reliquias p. relics. But gléria hymn of praise, crisma
(late Lat. f.) chrism, are masc. weak nouns in OE. Masc. nouns
of the first declension become masc. weak nouns in OE, e.g.
baptista baptist, cometa comet, pdpa pope.

§ 561. Lat. nouns in -ium mostly become weak fems. in OE, e.g.
centaurie centaury, marubie horehound, and this ending is extended
to alexandrie alexanders (Lat. -inum). But palant, palent palace (cf.
§ 533) is masc.

§ 562. Third declension masc. and fem. nouns follow the OE
masc. a-declension, e.g. calic cup, centur centurion, démon demon,

part part, tramet page (Lt. path).

§ 563. Very often, however, late loan-words retain their Lat.
declensional endings in whole or in part, e.g. confessores, cristallum,
istoriam, passio, -onem, paradisus, -um, -o, tigris, -es; so with a
Gr. ending paralisin. Neut. -e of the third declension is usually
retained, e.g. altare altar, scapulare scapular. So many names, e.g.
Constantinus, -o, but g. -es; Holofernus, all cases, but g. also -es;
Saducei, beside -eas; to g. Apollines is formed n. Apollinus; Siria,

Pracia serve as g.

§ 564. As in the earlier borrowings there are many instances of
the addition of native suffixes to foreign words, especially -ere,
-isé, and verbs in -ian, e.g. grammaticere grammarian, mechanisé
mechanical, tigrisé of tigers, capitulian divide into chapters,

declinian decline.

D. Celtic Loan-words
§ 565. Place-names, especially river-names, were heavily borrowed from the language of the conquered British (Old British)
by the English, and Celtic elements are also common in English
T In §§ 559-63 the Lat. forms of the examples are not given, as either they are
very familiar words, or their forms are obvious from the loan-words.

240

LOAN-WORDS

§ 566

place-names. Borrowings of this type are often difficult in form,
and the attempt to deal with them in a general grammar of OE

would make excessive demands on space.! The number of other
words which may be reasonably regarded as borrowed from
British into OE is small: Férster accepted? as such fourteen words,
but of these others have queried the Celtic origin of bannuc bit,

becca fork, carr rock, dunn dark (§ 404, footnote), gafeluc spear,
mattuc mattock, and have doubted if toroc, bung, is an OE word.
One certain addition has been made to Forster’s list, torr rock.

Forster also accepted six words as certain borrowings from OIr.
into OE. Of these the most important are dry, magician, where ui
is developed as ¥, corresponding to the process in native words by
which @ is mutated by, and then absorbs, immediately following i
(§ 237; cf. BH Lyccidfelth Lichfield < Brit. *Luitged), and cross
cross (in OE only in the place-name Normannes Cross), which
clearly is from OlIr. cross, though borrowing through ON is
possible. Férster holds to the principle that borrowings from Olr.
into OE would be of an exclusively monastic nature, but it is

doubtful if this is the case: OE bratt, cloak, would be more readily
derived from OlIr. than OBrit. (Férster has to regard it as an
Olr. loan-word in OBrit.), and OE assa, ass, is perhaps from OIr.
*assan (MIr. assan), rather than OBrit. *assin. The ss in this word

and in OE assen, she-ass, is in either event of Celtic origin. In
Forster’s list of Irish loan-words in OE stzr, history, is uncertain
(§ 507), but ancora, anchorite, may be added (to OlIr. anchara,

rather than direct to Lat. anachoreta).

E. Scandinavian Loan-words
§ 566. The great influx of Scandinavian words into OE caused
by the Norse settlements in England is not fully reflected in OE
texts, and the development of these words is mainly a branch of
ME studies. The Scandinavian loan-words recorded in OE texts
are mainly ones for ideas, persons, or things, which were either
peculiarly Scandinavian, or of which the OE conception had been

modified by contact with the Scandinavian civilization. Naturally,
* See Section N of the Bibliography for the principal works touching upon
Celtic names in English.
? Keltisches Wortgut im Englischen, §1. For the chief criticisms of and
supplements to this work, see Bibliography, Section Nn.

§ 567

FRENCH

221

they are found chiefly in late texts, especially in the Chronicle
after 1000. Complete or partial assimilation to the native soundand inflexional system is frequent. Examples are: brydlop bridal,
butsecarl sailor, féolaga partner, genge troop, grid truce, hamele
rowlock, hds#ta oarsman, lagu law, lid fleet, Lidsmen sailors,
niding evil man, tidung news, péonestmen retainers, pr&l thrall,

unwine enemy, itlaga outlaw, wicing pirate,’ of which the ON

forms in classical Icel. spelling? are bridlaup, buza boat+ karl man,
Sélagi, gengi, grid, hamla, hdseti, log, id, idsmenn, nidingr, tidindi,
pjénostumenn, préll,

uvinr

enemy, utlagi,

vikingr. Interesting

sound-substitutions occur in ¢éeallian call,3 cnearr ship, seaht
peace, wrang wrong, Olcel. kalla, knérr, sdtt (< *saht-), rangr

(< *wrang-). The OE poetical word eorl, man, was identified
with Prim. ON *earl, Olcel. jarl earl, and was used for it. Loanwords may be combined with native formative elements, e.g.

gripleas without protection, Jahlice lawfully. Partial translation of
compounds also occurs, e.g. lahbryée breach of law (cf. ON /égbrot).

F. French Loan-words
§ 567. In OE no loan-words which can certainly be regarded as
French occur in manuscripts older than 1066, except prid, priit

proud, whence are derived pryte (f. wk.), pryt (f. st.) pride.t There
are, of course, a few words like capun, castel, which might be derived
from Latin or French. Even after 1066 French words flow into
the literary language more slowly than Norse ones, and they do
not occur frequently till the last hand of the OE Chron. begins
(1132, MS. E). Before that year Chron. has only serfis, prisun;
Aldhelm Glosses (MS. Digby 146) add iugeleras n.p., -a g.p.,
glossing various words for ‘magician’.
' The word is early (already Ep., Erf., Cp.), and may well be native, but its
established use for the Scandinavian rovers is due to the fact that these called
themselves vikingar.
2 This reflects a later phonological state of ON than that reflected by the OE
loan-words.
3 Unless the word is native, ef. hildecalla herald, Ex. 252.
* On the phonological relationship of priid, pryte see OED, s.v. pride sb. Note
KG 249 préde (noun, cf. Williams, Gramm. investigation of OKt. glosses, p. 165),
with substitution of typical Kt. é for 7.

XI
NOUNS
§ 568. In Indo-European nouns were divided into (a) vowel stems,
in which the case-endings were added to a stem ending in a
characteristic vowel or diphthong, which might itself be subject
to ablaut variation, and (b) consonant stems, in which the caseendings were added to a stem ending in a consonant. A sub-class
of (b) were the -stems, in which endings were added to a stem
formed with -én-, -én-, or -n- (the variation was again due to
ablaut), e.g. acc. sg. Lat. sermon-em, Gr. rrowév-a. The n-stems are

of great importance in Germanic, where they are known as the
Weak Declension, while the vowel stems are known as the Strong
Declensions. Consonant declensions other than the weak declension had only a lintited survival in Germanic. In this book they are
grouped together as Minor Declensions.

§ 569. In the Late Northumbrian dialect of OE there is considerable confusion in the declensional system in Li. and Rit.,

while in Ru.? it is comparatively well preserved.! Other dialects
show little decay of the declensional system except in the very late
texts. In this Grammar, West Saxon paradigms are presented, and
the forms of other dialects are mentioned when they diverge from
them. No attempt is made to notice all the forms arising in Late

Northumbrian and Ru.! from the confusion of unaccented vowels
described in § 379, footnote, nor even all the forms which arise in
other dialects for the same reason (e.g. neut. pl. in -a for -u, -o,
gen. pl. in -o for -a, past pl. in -an for -on), and which are
sufficiently covered by § 377.
TM See U. Lindeléf, Mémoires de la société néo-philologique a Helsingfors i.

219 ff.; A. S.C. Ross, JEGP xxxv. 321 ff. Outstanding results of the decay of
the declensional system in Li. and Rit. are: (1) gen. sg. -es is extended from the
a-nouns, and is used beside the older forms in most other classes, e.g. 6-nouns
and weak nouns; (2) similarly nom. acc. pl. -as is extended from masc. a-nouns
to neuts., and to other declensions; (3) nom. acc. pl. neut. -o, -@ (< -u) are extended from neut. a-nouns with short root syllables to those with long ones;
(4) the distinction in nom. sg. of masc. and fem. weak nouns disappears, and
both end prevailingly in -a, while the neuts. have -o, -u in all sg. cases and in
nom, acc. pl.

223

A. Strong Declensions
I. @-NOUNS (MASC. AND NEUT.)
a. PURE @-NOUNS

§ 570.

Masculine

Neuter

Sg.

Nom.

Acc,
Gen.
Dat.

stan, stone

stan
stines
stane

stip, ship

scip
scipes
scipe

word, word

word
wordes
worde

Pl.

Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

stanas

stanas
stana
stanum

scipu

scipu
scipa
scipum

word

word
worda
wordum

§571. Origin of forms. The Prim. Gmc. forms of the above masc.
case-endings were sg. -az, -am, -as (< oso, § 331.1), -ai, pl. -6s, -6s

(extended from nom.), -6m, -umiz (§ 331.6). These endings were
developed in OE in accordance with the principles explained in

Chapter VII. The gen. sg. and nom. pl. endings were those proper to

nouns with the I-E accent on the endings, for in nouns with the accent

elsewhere s would have become z and dropped in West Gmc. (§§ 398.2,

404)." The dat. sg. is generally used also in the functions of the instrumental and locative. In early texts, where the dat. sg. is still in -@, forms

in -2 are found, and while they are mainly (so far as can be determined)
instrumental, the form was probably originally locative in function, and
derived from Gmc. -i, I-E -ei (cf. Gr. oixes), developed according to

§ 355.1. This -i causes neither harmonization of e (§ 112) nor umlaut in
the preceding syllable in extant forms, the vowel of the other cases
having been extended through the paradigm.” Except in very early
texts -7 falls together with -e (< #, § 369). There are also endingless
forms in locative function of which the origin is obscure (discussion and

references I. Dahl, Substantival inflexion in early OE, pp. 48 ff.). The
* The development of the I-E accented ending in the nom. pl., and its extension to acc, pl., was probably an Ingvaeonic peculiarity, for though it is traceable
only in OE and OS, the recorded endings of OFris. are probably secondary; see

Hammerich in Acta Jutlandica ix (Mélanges . . . offerts

am. H. Pedersen), p. 356.
* Note, however, mutation in the adverbial forms Zne once, hrvdene a little.

224

NOUNS

§ 572

neuter nouns differed from masculines in Gmc. only in the nom. sg.,

which ended in -om like the acc., and in the nom. and acc. pl., which
ended in -d. The distinction was lost in OE in the nom. sg., but it

persisted in the nom. and acc. pl., where -6 became -d in West Gmc.
(§ 331.5), which was retained as -u in OE after short syllables, but

dropped after long ones.

§ 572. Early, late, and dialectal forms. The gen. and dat. sg. appear
frequently as -zs, -& in early texts. The original locative function of the
case in -i appears in on bergi, Thornhill Cross II,’ and in the temporal
thys géri, Ep. 494.2 Other instances of the form are Cp. spelli, drési,
werci, and from disyllabic nouns caefli, facni, geabuli, hregli, most of

which Ep. and Erf. confirm. The endingless locative is frequent with
place-names in -hdm, -wic, -mynster, and occurs less frequently with
other elements, e.g. -stdn, -ttin, -borp (and so the u-stem -feld), and it is
also frequent with the words dxg, hdm, morgen;} note also sealtern,
twice Ct. 28, #fen, Ex. 16, 12. The dat. pl. ending appears as -an, -on
in IW-S,* perhaps developed from -um through eW-S -un (§ 378). Deg
has a weak gen. pl. in -ena, -ana, -ona in many texts, and in North. and
Ru." this is found in other nouns also.

§573. Nouns declined like the above are numerous; examples
are:

like stan: ap oath, beorn warrior, ceorl churl, coss kiss, dom
judgement, Alaf loaf, hund dog, sceatt property, péof thief,
weall wall, weg way, wer man;
like scip: geoc yoke, god god, hof dwelling;

like word: bearn child, déor animal, géar year, sweord sword,
weorc work, wif woman.

§ 574. Phonological variants. (1) Nouns with root vowel 2
change this to @ before a or u (0) of the following syllable (§ 157).

Masculine

Neuter

Nom.

deg, day

feet, vessel

Ace.
Gen.
Dat.

deg
deeges
deege

fet
feetes
fete

Sg.

' The preservation of -i is not necessarily early in North. (§ 369).
? Erf. 842 uuegi is not confirmed by Ep. and Cp.
3 Also in the form mergen.
* This applies to dat. pl. of all declensions; so in contracted nouns, e.g.
Swéon, gefan for Swéom, gefam.

STRONG DECLENSIONS

§ 574

225

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

dagas
dagas
daga
dagum

fatu
fatu
fata
fatum

Examples like dg are: hwxl whale, pep path, stzf staff; like
fzt: beé back, bep bath, dzl dale, wxd water. In such words VP
has in the root syllable e, ea for 2, a, except (1) before back consonants, where e, 2 appear, and (2) before /, where a appears in

the pl., the sg. is not recorded; e.g. fet, featu; deg, degas; hwalas
(§§ 164-5). Kt. has e for 2, but retains @ (§§ 288 ff.).

From geat, gate (§ 185), W-S has the phonological pl. gatu (VP

geatu), but also geatu (§ 185, footnote).
W-S has a variation of 2, a in mg relative, pl. magas, beside
mégas (§ 162).

(2) Nouns in -/ lost this between voiced sounds; if these sounds
were both vowels contraction followed, if one was a consonant the
root syllable underwent compensatory lengthening.

Sg.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

mearh, horse
mearh
méares
méare

scoh, shoe
scoh
scés
sco

méaras
méaras
méara

scis
s¢cds
[scdna]!
scm

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.

Dat.

méarum

In the type mearh short quantity can be transferred from nom.
and acc. sg. to inflected forms (§ 240).
Like mearh are ealh temple, eolh elk, fearh pig, healh corner,
horh rheum (also n.), sealh willow, seolh seal, wealh foreigner, and
the neuters feorh life, person (n. and a.p. feorh), holh hollow.?
' So féona, péona (with ending from wk. declension) from feoh, béoh; ef.
re-formed héa, Ps. xlviii. 5, from Adh,
2 On inverted spellings like feorg, mearg, see § 447; horh, horg, héres, -as is
beside horu (El. 297, acc. after mid), horwes, horwe, horwum, and re-formed neut.
nom. pl. horwu; and so holh, holg was beside *holw-, see § 412.

226

NOUNS

§ 574

Like sé6h are eoh horse, fléah flea (or n.?; beside weak fléa),

hoh heel, léah (also f.) open country, sl6h mire (also f. and n.), and
the neuters feoh money, fléah albugo (beside weak fléa, fléo, fito),
pleoh danger, péoh thigh (n. and a.p. péoh).!
(3) Nouns with J, 7, m, n, before the endings often develop a
parasite vowel in the uninflected forms. Hence normal paradigms
are:

Masculine

Neuter

Sg.
Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

fugol, bird

finger, finger

tungol, star

weter, water

fugol
fugles
fugle

finger
fingres
fingre

tungol
tungles
tungle

weeter
weetres
wetre

fuglas
fuglas
fugla
fuglum

fingras
fingras
fingra
fingrum

tungol
tungol
tungla
tunglum

weeter
weeter
weetra
wetrum

Pi.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

There is, however, great fluctuation in these nouns, for forms
without parasiting are frequent (e.g. segl, sail), while, especially
after short syllables before 7, a parasite vowel is often transferred

to inflected forms, where it is subject to vowel harmony (e.g.
weeteres, fugelas, see §§ 363, 385). The nom. and acc. pl. of neut.
nouns with parasiting should have no ending, as -u should drop
after the long syllable before parasiting took place, e.g. *tunglu >
*tungl > tungol, but -u is often restored, usually with rejection of
the parasite vowel, e.g. tdcnu, tunglu, wépnu, wundru, but also
w#peno, wolcenu, and especially with short root syllables, wt(e)ru.
Examples of nouns of this type are:
masculine: #ppel apple, cradol cradle, hzsel hazel, nzgl nail,
sadol saddle, segel sail (also n.); xcer field, befer beaver (cf.
§ 395, footnote), hamor hammer, hleahtor laughter, ofor shore,

punor thunder; &pm breath, dpum son-in-law, bléstm blossom,
bésm bosom, botm bottom, fepm embrace, mapm treasure,
westm fruit; hrefn raven, ofen oven, regn rain, pegn thane;
neuter: botl dwelling, cndsl race, cumbol banner, hrzgl garment,

® On re-formations like scées, sédas, séOum, dis. slée, g.p. héa, see § 239.

227

STRONG DECLENSIONS

§ 574

hiis! Eucharist, set] seat, spatl saliva, swegl sky; dtor poison,
fodor fodder (or m.?), fador case (or m.?), leger bed, tiéddor
progeny, weder weather, wuldor glory, wundor wonder;!
béacen beacon, bregen brain, fdcn crime, tacn token, wépen
weapon, wolcen cloud.

(4) Originally trisyllabic nouns with a long root syllable syncopated an originally short middle syllable before inflexional endings,
but often restored it analogically (§§ 341, 351). Those with a short

root syllable did not normally syncopate (but cf. § 390).

Masculine

Neuter

Sg.

Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

engel, angel

héafod, head

_—werod, troop

engel
engles
engle

héafod
héafdes
héafde

werod
werodes
werode

englas
englas
engla
englum

héafdu
héafdu
héafda
héafdum

werod
werod
weroda
werodum

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

The nom. and acc. pl. neut. should have -u after a long followed
by a short syllable, but no ending after two shorts (§ 345); but
analogy often occurs, hence, for example, eW-S mzgenu, IW-S

weredu, and conversely eW-S héafod.
When the medial syllable is not syncopated it is subject to vowel
harmony (§ 385).

From héafod a locatival dat. sg. héafdum is frequent.”
Nouns of this type are readily distinguished from those of type
(3) if the medial vowel was -7-, for umlaut then appears in the stem
syllable; examples are: masculine: brémel bramble, bydel beadle,
bytel mallet (? or n.), dryhten lord, ellen courage (also n.), épel
home, séyttel bolt, st¥pel tower, pymel thimble (? or n.); neuter:
reced building, pyrel hole. Other nouns of the type are distinguished
! Séuldor shoulder, is masc., and its apparently neut. pl. séuldru is to. be
regarded as dual in origin (cf. § 612, end).
2 'The form is perhaps instr. in origin: cf. meolcum which may be used as
ag. instr. as well as loc.

228

NOUNS

§ 574

from those of type (3) by their etymology, e.g. masculine: Zled
fire, awel hook, bismer disgrace (also f. and n.), darop dart, déofol
devil (also n.), eodor enclosure, eofor boar, falod fold (? n.), farop
sea near land (? n.), heorot hart, metod creator, péoden prince,

warop shore," and nouns in -uc, -oc (of diverse origin),? as bannuc
cake, hafoc hawk, hassuc hassock, mattoc mattock, seoloc silk,
weoloc whelk; neuter: gamen game, h#med married state, hrisel

shuttle, mxgen might (§ 334; Sievers, Vokalismus, pp. 23-24), ofet
fruit, warop sea-weed, and diminutives in -incel (see examples,
§ 204.6). A few nouns remain which belong doubtfully here or
to type (3), e.g. masc. rodor sky, stapol pillar.

_

(5) Forms with loss of medial x occur beside forms with -hh-

from masculine hwéol wheel, téar tear, pwéal washing (also n.),
and neuter éar ear of corn. See §§ 242, 408 for the forms with -hh-

(sometimes written -h-). Fihl, rag, does not occur with loss of y.
(6) An originally long syllable is not usually syncopated when
standing medially before inflexions. Here belong nouns with the
masc. suffixes -dom, -els, -had, -ing (-ling), -op (-nop), and the neut.

suffixes -/ac and -en (diminutive). Examples are cynedom royalty,
Jréodom freedom, f#tels tub, rédels riddle, camphad warfare, werhad manhood, cyning king, scilling shilling,‘ fiscop fishing, huntop
hunting, langop longing, orop breath (with -op of different origin,
§ 374),§ wedlac wedlock, witelac punishment, cliwen clew, lendenu

pl. loins, mzgden maiden, niten animal, and with double suffix,
tyncen tub, pyrncen thorn-plant. A few isolated nouns also belong
here, e.g. masc. hengest horse, merisé marsh, neut. isern iron; and

obscured compounds, e.g. masc. fereld journey (also n.), fultum
help, Alaford lord, neut. fulwiht baptism.

All such nouns decline like stan or word, except that neuters in
-en form nom. and acc. pl. in -u, e.g. maxgdenu, nitenu. Vowel
' Here might be added with re-formed suffixes eosol ass, heofon heaven; cf.

§§ 334, 381.

? Some of these may have an old long medial vowel and hence be under (6),
ef. § 351, footnote.
3 On the classing of -indel as an a-sterm, and the original nature of its second
vowel, see Eckhardt, ES xxxii. 357, Dahl, Substantival inflexion in early OE,
pp. 68 and 73.
.
4 From words like zpeling prince, litling little one, was extracted a new suffix

-ling, e.g. déorling darling, répling prisoner.
5 Another form of the suffix is -nop (e.g. fisénop); it is due to transference of
-n- from verbs in -nian to related nouns, e.g. drohtnop way of life, for drohtop

owing to drohtnian.

§ 575

STRONG DECLENSIONS

229

harmony (§ 385) can take place in nouns in -op, e.g. longepas. On
syncopation especially in the suffixes -op and -en see §§ 358, 390.
On the quantity of formative elements consisting of words of
reduced semantic force see § go, footnote.
Here may also be mentioned the nouns in -stafas, although the
vowel of that formative element is short, e.g. facenstafas treachery,

wyrdstafas fate.

b. ga-NOUNS

§ 575.

Masculine

Neuter

Sg.
Nom. here, army seég, man ende, end

cynn, race

wite, punish-

cynn

wite

:

Acc.

here

secg

ende

ment

Gen.

herges

secges

—_ endes

cynnes

Dat.

wites

herge

secge

ende

cynne

wite

Pi.

Nom. hergas

secgas

endas

Acc.

cynn

witu

secgas_

— endas

cynn

witu

hergas

Gen.

herga

secga

enda

cynna

Dat.

wita

hergum

secgum

endum

cynnum

witum

§ 576. Origin of forms. The endings were in Gmc. the same as those
of the a-nouns, preceded by # after short, # after long syllables (§ 398.4).
Before endings which remained in West Gmc. all consonants except r

were doubled after a short syllable (§ 407). In OE i and i were lost after
both originally long syllables and ones lengthened by the West Gmc.
doubling of consonants (§ 398.4). After r (< r or 2, § 398.2) Z caused no
doubling and remained in OE. Hence, for example, Gmc. d.s. *xarjat,

*saziat, *andijai > West Gmc. *xarid, *saggiz, *andiiz > OE herge,'
secge, ende, and similarly the g.s., g.p., d.p., and the n. and a.p. masc. Since

Gmc. *sazjaz, *sazjam would give *sazi by early vowel and consonant
loss (§§ 331.1, 399, 404), the OE form should be *sege, and so *cyne:?
hence secg and cynn must be regarded as analogical forms from the other
cases; for similar analogy in other West Gmc. languages see Dal, Norsk

tidsskrift for sprogvidenskap vii. 243. On the development of ende,
wite from *andijaz, *yitiiam see § 355.3; and on the development of
nom. and acc. pl. neut. from *kunjé, uitiid see § 353 and footnote.
T Also herige, herie, § 365.

2 Cf. § 579.3.

230

NOUNS

§ 577

§ 577. Early, late, and dialectal forms: Early texts have n.s. -1, e.g.
Ep., Cp. durheri folding door, meeli basin, steeli steel (Cp. stéli, staél),
-stycét piece, and names in -heri in many texts; g.s. -zs, e.g. CH
-cynnzs, -ri¢aes, inst. s. -t, Cp. geddi song. Names in -here always form
g.s. and d.s. without -{-, e.g. Ealdheres, -here (d. also -x, -i in early
texts). So simplex here has
in W-S very often (already eW-S) g. and
d.s. heres, here, n. and a.p. heras.

§ 578. Like here is durhere folding door, pl. IW-S durheras.
Examples of the other types are:

like seég: bridd young bird, Ayll hill, wecg wedge;
like ende: esne servant, hierde shepherd, hw¥te wheat, l&ce
physician, méce sword, méle basin, -sterri coll. stars (cf.
§ 153.3), and nomina agentis in -ere, e.g. bdcere scribe,

leornere learner;

like cynn: bedd bed, webb web, wedd pledge, wicg horse;

like wite: Brende errand, ierfe inheritance, rice kingdom, style
steel, many in ge-, e.g. gefylce troop, getimbre building,
&epéode language, gew&de dress, and fliéce flitch, styé¢e piece,
where ¢¢ is not due to West Gmc. gemination (pl. fliécu, styécu).
§ 579. Phonological variants. (1) Loss of x and contraction occurred in W-S geséy neut. shoes (< *gescie, slightly corrupted
Letter of Alexander, EETS, 0.8. 161, p. 41); VP gescde; Li. g(e)scedé,
Ru.? giscdé, g.s. giscdes.

(2) West Gmc.

gemination of consonants appears in the

formative elements of the neut. nouns &fenn evening (also m.),
festenn fortress, festenn fast, wéstenn desert (also m. and f.), and
of nouns in -ett, e.g. masc. péowett slavery, neut. bernett arson,
piccett thicket. In later texts they are increasingly liable to simplify
the double consonant before inflexions (§ 457), e.g. IW-S dis.

wéstene, peowete.! Nom. and acc. pl. is -u: 1W-S festenu, wésten(n)u,
picéet(t)u. Ligett, lightning, makes pl. liget(t)u (beside m. ligetas),
and this may be treated as fem. sg. and declined fem. sg. and pl.
(so already VP). The suffix -ett interchanges with -ot, which is
without gemination, and hence liable to syncopation, e.g. péowot,
péowte, &c.

(3) In a few nouns a formative element has retained the phonological nom. and acc. sg. in -e (< -i) without gemination, and the
1 The interchange of -n- and -na- in d.s. &fen(n)e caused frequent introduction of -2n- in the d.s. of morgen, mergen (already eW-S).

§ 580

STRONG DECLENSIONS

231

single consonant has been extended to the other cases. Here belong
masc. byrele cup-bearer (also f. wk.), merece smallage, and doubtfully masc. or neut. eowode flock (also f.; on root vowel see § 211),
hemepe shirt, sipe scythe (§ 267). On syncopated forms byrle,
merce, eowde, see § 388-9.

(4) A number of -ga- nouns had -y- before -7-. In OE -;remained (written g), causing umlaut if possible in the root syllable.
Examples are neut. hig hay, trig tray, with Gmc. -ayij- > West

Gmc. ~auys- (§ 120.2). But the OE development of West Gme.
~#uyf- is seen in gliw, gliow mirth, hiew, hiw, hiow hue, while glig
is a re-formation (§ 411). Both types have nom. and acc. sg. under
influence of the other cases: “hewt, *gliwi without gemination
would be the undisturbed developments. In re-formed gliow, hiow
final -y4- should drop (§ 400); glio, gléo, hio, héo are, however, rare,
-u- being usually replaced from the inflected cases.!
(5) Bléo neut. colour, g.s. bléos, d.s. bléo, n.a.p. *bléo, bléoh,
g.p. bléo, bléoa, bléona, d.p. bléom, bléoum, has a diphthong due to

early contraction (§ 120.3.c.), but is historically a ga- stem, Gmce.
blia-.2 On forms with final inorganic h and internal g (bléoh,
g.s. bléoge, g.p. bléohga) see §§ 447, 466. D.p. bléowum is analogical
(as enéowoum to cnéo).
c.

§ 580.
.

“a-NOUNS

Masculine

Neuter

bearu, grove
bearu
bearwes
bearwe

searu, device
searu
searwes
searwe

bearwas
bearwas
bearwa
bearwum

searu
searu
searwa
searwum

Sg.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.
Pl,

Nom.
Ace. .
Gen.
Dat.

§ 581. Origin of forms. The endings were in Gmc. the same as those
of the a-nouns preceded by y. In the nom. and acc. sg. » became vocalic
' Ep., Cp. gliu is probably a spelling of gliuw, later gliow (§ 279).
2 Distinguish Gmc. *bliya- lead, ON bly, OHG blio, bi.

232

NOUNS

§ 58a

after the loss of -a- in Gmc. (§ 331.4), so that *baruaz, *baruam,
*saruam became *baruz, &c. In OE breaking would not take place in
these forms, but ea, eo. were levelled out from the other cases, e.g.
bearu, teoru. In the nom. and acc. pl. neut. Gmc. *sarud > West
Gmce.*sarui > *sarii (§ 405) > OE searu (with ea from other cases).
In d.p. -wum, is. Ep., Erf. smeruui, the u is analogical, as it should
disappear before i and u (§§ 405, 406).
§ 582. Early, late, and dialectal forms. Dat. sg. -# is frequent in
the place-name Baruae BH. The inst. (historically loc.) in -i occurs in
smeruui Ep. Erf. On forms with parasite vowels (e.g. bearewum, searuwa,
melutwe, -owes, -ewes) see § 365. Early forms without the levelling of ea,
eo described in § 581 are Ep., Cp. teru, Erf. smeruuuyrt, Ep., Erf. smeruui.
LG smerum is a pure phonological form, neither eo nor wu being levelled
into it. Cp. sarwo (88, apparently n.s.) shows abnormal levelling of u to
the uninflected form.

§ 583. There is no other noun like bearu. Like searu (which
is also f.) are cudu cud, melu meal (also meolu, § 210.1), smeoru
grease, teoru tar.

§ 584. Phonological variants. (1) In some nouns a diphthong
stood before -y-. These nouns are of two kinds:
(a) Nouns which have a diphthong of Gmc. origin before -u-

in all cases. Final ¢ should drop after the diphthong (§§ 272, 400),
but it was practically always analogically retained or replaced. Here
belong béow barley, déaw dew (m. and n.), gehréow lamentation,

and probably béaw gad-fly, séaw juice (n.), with diphthongs of
uncertain origin. Except as indicated the genders of these words
are uncertain. These nouns inflect regularly so far as recorded, e.g.

sg. déaw, déawes, déawe, p\. déawas, d. séawum. No nom. acc. pl.
neut. is recorded. Note Bd. Gl. séa, without addition of w from
inflected forms.

(6) Nouns which developed a diphthong phonologically only in
the nom. and acc. sg. and the neut. nom. and acc. pl. (§ 120.3.a, b).

To this diphthong -y might be added from inflected forms. Here
belong masc. péow servant (with its compounds /areow teacher,
latteow leader), béaw custom, and neut. cnéow knee (after which
ancleow, ankle, is perhaps re-formed), hiéow protection (? m.),
tréow tree, stréaw straw. Words with internal -ey- subsequently

developed this to -eoy- (§ 146), while those with internal -aycould extend -éay- from the uninflected form. Hence regular
paradigms are:

§ 584

STRONG DECLENSIONS

233

Masculine

Neuter

péaw, custom pé&o(w), servant
péo(w)

stréaw, straw cnéo(w), knee
stréaw
cnéo(w)

Sg.
Nom.
Acc,

péaw

Gen.

péawes

peowes

Dat.

péawe

peowe

cneowes

Nom.

péawas

peowas

—'

cnéo(w)?

Acc.

péawas

peowas

—

cnéo(w)

Gen.

péawa

peowa

—

cneowa

Dat.

pbéawum

peowum

—

cneowum

stréawe

cneowe

Pl.

The uninflected form of -éaw- words appears without -w only
in the compound stréa-berige. Words in -éow frequently have the
uninflected form without -z. They can extend the long diphthong
to the inflected forms: cnéowes, &c. Hléow has as uninflected form
prevailingly hléo, which can also be used as d.s. (Gen. 102, And. 567).
In this type and also in (a) d.p. in -wum has analogical -u- (cf.
§ 581). Fluctuation in forms of these words is often due to changes
already discussed: IW-S stréow, stréaw (§ 274); North.

-éuz-

(-éw-, -€u-) for -€ow- (§ 279); North. éa for é0 as Li., Rit. déa for
péo (§ 280); -éow- for -€aw-, Ru.” déow for péaw (§ 278); Ru.? stréu
(§ 273, footnote). On the reduction of the second element in
lareow, latteow see §§

356-7. North. has many readily understood

analogical case-forms, e.g. Li. from déa (i.e. W-S péow), g.s. déas,
n.p. déas, g.p. déana; Ru.*, Rit. g.p. treona. From tréow VP has,

beside regular forms, g.s. -trés, g.p. tréa, and North. has n.a.s. tré,
stré, g.s. trees, strees: see Ross in Trans. Philological Soc., 1940,

PP: 47-52.

(2) In the following words -y- was preceded by a long vowel:
snaw snow (m.), gehléw lowing, briw porridge (m.), giw vulture,
iw yew (m.), sliw mullet, Tivo a god (m.). The genders are uncertain
except as marked. -u should drop in uninflected forms, but it is
usually restored, and hence the declension is regularly like stan,
the d.p. in -wum being analogical. No nom. or acc. pl. neut. occurs.
Except in nouns in -iw- uninflected forms without restoration of
u are very unusual, e.g. Li. smd. In nouns in -iw-, however, an
t IW-S stréwu (? for stréawu, cf. note 2).
2 W-S also cnéowu, tréowu; 1W-S andcléowa.

234

NOUNS

§ 585

uninflected form in -i (often written -7g) is frequent (see § 411) and
gives rise to inflected forms of the type Tiges. But more often u
was added to the uninflected form, and iu > io, éo (e.g. sléow, i.e.
*sléo with re-addition of z), and é0 could be extended to inflected

forms (e.g. géowes). See further § 411.

2. O-NOUNS (FEM.)
a. PURE 6-NOUNS

§ 585.

Sg.

Nom.

giefu, gift

lar, learning

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

giefe
giefe
giefe

lare
lare
lare

Nom.

giefa (-e nW-S)

lara (-e nW-S)

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

giefa, -e
giefa, -ena
giefum

lara, -e
lara
larum

Pl.

§ 586. Origin of forms. The Prim. Gmc. forms of the case-endings
were sg. -0, -6m, -62, -ai, pl. -6z, -dns, -6m, -timiz (§ 331.6). The OE

development of these forms is regular except in the gen. sg., where the
phonological development would be -a. Possibly the form has been

influenced by the acc. pl., owing to the identity of acc. pl. and gen. sg.
in the other main Gmc. fem. declension, the -dn- stems (§ 616, footnote).
On the survival of g.s. -a see § 589.6, 8. In the pl. -a is the phonological
development of nom. -éz, -e of acc. -dns (§§ 331.5, 355.1). In W-S -a is
extended to the acc., -e surviving rarely in eW-S, but always in its
historical acc. function. VP has -e for both cases, KG use -a and -e
indifferently. G.p.-ena is IW-S, and far more frequent with short than
with long root syllables: eW-S and VP have already -warena. On this
declension see particularly Flasdieck, ZF xlviii. 53-66.
§ 587. Early, late, and dialectal forms. Besides the usual late. change
of -u to -o and -a in nom. sg. (§ 377), }W-S sometimes extends -u to other
cases of sg. (e.g. acc. talu, Robertson, A-S charters, 152, 8; dat. lufu,
Napier’s Wulfstan, 302, 27). Acc., gen., dat. sg. all occur in early texts
with -z, e.g. acc. aerigfaerae LR, gen. Humbrae BH, Aedilburgae Ct. 5,1
* All examples of g.s. -a are from fem. personal- or place-names in Lat. texts,
hence the inflexion may be Lat.

§ 588

STRONG DECLENSIONS

235

dat. ndédlae, uuroctae Ep., wodhae Cp., sdule Urswick Cross. Very
remarkable are two forms in -é used in a locative function, RC rédi, FC
cxstri. Ep. 97 gitiungt shows the same ending in instrumental function.

The form is unexplained. Early Angl. texts have -z for -e of nom, and
ace. pl., e.g. LR weflz, Ep., Cp. nabae. The glossaries have -a also, e.g.

Cp. séyfla, Ep. scibla, fealga.' -a is not found in VP, and it is doubtful
if its occasional appearance in Ru. and INorth, is due to survival, or to
the uncertain value of the vowel symbols in unaccented syllables in
these texts. eKt. has -a for both nom. and acc.: sdula n. and a., Ct. 37;
dearfa a., Ct. 41. INorth. sometimes has g.p. in -ana, -ona, e.g. Rit.
Seafana, -ona, Li. reordana.

§ 588. Short-syllable nouns declined like giefu are: faru journey,

lufu love, nafu nave, racu narrative, séolu troop, -waru people.”
Long-syllable nouns declined like /ar are: bét remedy, gad goad,
lad way, laf remainder, meord (méd, § 404) reward, reord voice,
reord food, réd cross, sorg sorrow, weard protection, wund wound.
§ 589. Phonological variants. (1) While nouns with a in the root
syllable usually retain it analogically before -e and -ena (e.g. fare,
-warena), some forms with 2 occur, e.g. LR -faerae, eW-S wrexce;
so with second fronting of 2 to e, VP swede, wrece.
(2) In braé eyelash, eyebrow, a consonantal glide is sometimes
indicated in forms with hiatus: n.p. briiwa or briia, d.p. briiwum

or briium (Rit.), g.p. briina.
(3) The fem. forms of sloh mire, drop h and contract: a., g., d.s.
slo (Birch, no. 1176); those of /éah open country, have analogical g
(§ 447), a., g., ds. léage (already Ct. 3), but also d.s. -lieg (§ 627).

(4) Nouns with J, r, m, n before the inflexions drop -u in the

nom. sg., and parasiting may then take place, e.g. ceaster city,

éeastre, &c.3 Parasiting may be analogically extended to inflected
forms, e.g. d.p. federum Oros. 18, 17. Examples declined like
ceaster are:4 Gdl disease, feper feather, frofor comfort, n&dl needle,

stefn voice, sweger mother-in-law, wécor increase.
(5) Originally trisyllabic nouns reject -z in the nom. sg.,5 and
' Perhaps ‘harrows’; the root-syllable suggests that the gloss is W-S or Kt.
in origin.

? On re-formations of compounds in -waru see § 610.7.
3 -deaster as a place-name element usually has uninflected acc., but dat. in -e.

+ The prevailing form of the nom. sg. is given.
5 An exception is egenu chaff. -u is also retained after short half-stressed
syllables, e.g. BH Wantsumu a river, LV Aebbino fem. name. Names with -u
after a long syllable are reductions of names of this type, arising later than the

dropping of vowels after long syllables, e.g. LV Beonnu, Bettu, Eadu.

236

NOUNS

§ 589

generally retain the medial vowel in that case, but can syncopate it

in other cases, e.g. firen crime, firene or firne, &c. Monosyllabic
uninflected forms like firn also occur (§ 390). So are declined bisen
example, byden barrel, cylen kiln, eln ell, lygen lie; feter fetter;
netel nettle, spinel spindle; the medial syllable is not syncopated

in the inflected forms of efes eaves, dugup warriors, geogup youth,
but may have vowel harmony (e.g. dugepum, and hence dugepe,
§ 385). Sawol soul (Gothic saiwala), and Lifer liver (OHG lebara),
had syncopation of medial a in all cases (§ 341), but parasiting
subsequently arose in nom. sg., though saul, s@wl also occur.
W-S zx, axe, has syncope of a medial vowel in all forms: on Angl.
trisyllabic forms see §§ 203, 341, footnotes.
(6) The medial syllable of nouns with the Gmc. fem. abstract
suffix -ip6 is syncopated in OE.' The final -z should then remain
phonologically (§ 353), but it is often dropped on the analogy of

the type lar. The other cases have the same endings as in /ar. But
already in early texts -u can be levelled out to all sg. cases, and
to the nom. and acc. pl., e.g. VP 12ddu, ébylgdu occur as acc., gen.,
and dat. sg., and eW-S gesz#ldo, iermo as nom. and acc. pl. In
VP also occurs g.s. ermda (apparently the phonological development of Gmc. -6z), and so eW-S iermda, CP 183, 3.

Examples of these nouns are: £bylgpu anger, iergpu cowardice,
termpu poverty, léppbu hatred, m&rpu glory, myrgp mirth, s#lp
happiness. After dentals consonant assimilation is frequent, e.g.
gescentu shame, gesyntu health, ofermettu pride (cf. séond, sund, mad);
weorbmynt honour (< *-mundipéd, but cf. § 450); -/as+--ip6 >
-liest:? giemeliest neglect.

(7) In OE fem. abstract nouns of the in-declension (cf. Gothic
managei multitude, acc. managein) would normally have -e <i

< in (§ 473) in the acc., gen., and dat. sg. and in the nom. and acc.
pl. But their declension was early associated with that of nouns in

-ip6, so that their nom. sg. received the ending -u (-0), and this
was often extended to the whole sg. (so already VP), and to the
nom, and acc. pl.3 Examples are bieldu boldness, brédu breadth,

bysgu trouble, engu narrowness, fyllu fullness, h&lu health, h&tu

heat (beside h&te wk. fem.), hyldu homage, ieldu age, lengu length,
* Most examples have a long root syllable: Ep. Erf, siuida is an error for sifidan
(so Cp. 940) but note -brecb breaking, frymp beginning, gesihb vision, trymp
strength, all with analogical syncope.

2 Also -lest, § 357; and by re-formation -least.
* Nom. and.acc, pl. are rare, but note snyttro, v.l. snyttra, OE Bede 136, 29
(ed. Miller); wienda, CP 115, 1; bisgu, Boeth., preface.

§ 590

STRONG DECLENSIONS

237

menigu multitude, ofermédu pride, snyttru wisdom, strengu strength,
péostru darkness (besidepéostre st. neut.), westmb#ru fertility, wlencu
pride, wyrpu honour; also gebyrdu birth, gecyndu race, &c., byeforms to gebyrd, gecynd (§ 609). Here also belong micelu greatness,
oferfyrru great distance, though forms in -u (-o) are not recorded,
but only inflexions in -e. From several of these nouns nom. sg.

occurs without ending, e.g. fyll, hél, ield, leng.
(8) Abstract nouns in -ung, -ing may be declined like Jar, and
in VP this is always the case, and also in the early glossaries so far
as forms occur. In eW-S already there is considerable extension of
-a (historically proper to gen. sg. and nom. pl.) not only to acc.
pl. but also to acc. and dat. sg. It is doubtful if similar extension

of -a in Ru. and INorth. is due to the same processes, or to the
instability of the unaccented vowels in these texts. On d.s. gitiungi
Ep. see § 587; on the interchange of -ung and -ing, § 383. Examples
are: costung temptation, langung longing, léasung falsehood, niperung
humiliation, scéawung contemplation, scotung shooting.

b. 76-NOUNS

§ 590.
Sg.
Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

synn, sin

synne
synne
synne

gierd, rod

gierde
gfierde
gierde

Pl.

Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

synna (-e nW-S)

synna, -e
synna
synnum

gierda (-e nW-S)

gierda, -e
gierda
gierdum

§ 591. Origin of forms. n.s. synn is from Gmce. *sunié (cf. Goth. sibja),
which developed in OE by the same processes that produced neut. pl.

cynn (§ 576); gierd is from Gmc. *zardi' (cf. Goth. bandi), and the final

vowel was shortened and lost regularly in OE (§§ 331.5, 345).2 The other

' Or *zazdi (cf. Goth. gazds), but cf. Cosijn in Tijdschrift voor Ned. taal- en
letterkunde xiii. 19; S. Feist, Vergleichendes Wérterbuch der got. Sprache, s.v.
gazds, for further references.
7 Some regard Ep., Cp. aetgderu as nom. sg. developed from Gme. -#6, and
Cp. aetgaére as pl. of the same word. This agrees better with the numbers of the

238

NOUNS

§ 592

cases have the same endings as the 6-stems, and the -- (-if) which
preceded these caused consonant doubling after a short syllable, and
was then lost after both old long syllables and new ones due to the
gemination (§ 398.4), As in the d-declension a dat. sg. in -¢ occurs in

early texts: Ep., Erf. 109 mégsibbi, and Ld. 179 tyndri (if this is not for
tyndrin, reading of Cp., Erf. in the same gloss). When the root syllable

is long, it is possible to distinguish 6-stems from j6-stems only when
the root vowel can show 7-mutation, or when the final consonant of the
root can be assibilated (e.g. spr#é speech).

§ 592. Examples of 6-nouns are:
like synn: benn wound, bryc¢ bridge, ecg edge, hell hell, henn hen,
széé strife, secg sword, sibb relationship, syll base;
like gierd: bend band (also masc. i-stem), rest rest, spr#é speech,

wylf she-wolf, jp wave.
Nouns with several fem. formative suffixes belong to the 76-

declension:
(a) Nouns in -s < -si-; blips bliss, lips mercy (> bliss, iiss,

§§ 286, 481.2), milts mercy. Though the origin of the suffix is
obscure (cf. § 445), OS blidsea indicates a 76-stem.

(6) Abstract nouns in -enn < -ini-, e.g. byrpbenn burden,
byrgenn burial, haftenn captivity, hengen hanging, rédenn state."
On simplification of -nmn- in inflexion see § 457.

(c) Fem. derivatives in -enn from masc. nouns, e.g. gyden
goddess, menen maid-servant, péowenn the same, -wyrgenn female

monster. These nouns also have very frequent simplification of
-nn-, and double consonants are not recorded in nouns above
spelled with -2. The -u of the giefu class is added to this suffix
in myneéenu nun (§ 518).

(d) Fem. nouns in -ess < -isi-, e.g. ciefes concubine, byres
chisel, forlegess harlot, hagtess witch, ides female. Similarly is
inflected cnéoriss race, of uncertain formation. These nouns also
have frequent simplification of the double consonants, and ss is not
recorded in the ones above spelled with -s. Here originally belonged
lynis linchpin, treated as a masc. a-stem in OE (n.p. lynisas).
(e) Nouns in -ett (< -atj-), e.g. dnett solitude, hyrnett hornet,
lempet basin, ylfett swan. These nouns also have frequent simpliwords glossed than the usual view that aetgdére is sg., aetgaéru pl. of a neut. -ja

stem (§ 575):

;

! This is itself a fruitful suffix, e.g. hiwr@den family, manrdden fealty.

§ 593

STRONG DECLENSIONS

239

fication of the double consonants, and this is followed by addi-

tion of -u in hyrnetu, ylfetu (already early glossaries).! Treatment of
_ the neut. pl. igetu as a fem. sg. added a noun /iget(t)u to this class

(§ 579.2).

Fem. nouns of types (c), (d), and (e) often have alternative
forms according to the weak declension, e.g. infl. gydenan,

hegtesse, ylfete.

(f) Abstract nouns in -ness, -niss (§ 384) are declined regularly
like synn. But already in early texts -nesse is sometimes extended to
the nom. sg. (VP, eW-S), and later this is frequent especially in
Ru. and North. (not

KG). Examples of these nouns are: clénness

purity, mildheortness mercy, rihtwisness justice, wodness madness.

§ 593. Phonological variants. (1) A parasite vowel appears in
hl&der, hl@dder \adder, infl. hl@dre, &c.
(2) From Gmc. *ayi sheep (transferred from the i-declension,

cf. Lat. outs) was regularly developed OE ewe, usually re-formed
to eowu (§ 211), whence late euwu (§ 274). It declines both like

Siefu (acc. eowe, &c.) and as a weak noun, eowe, -an; there is also
a masc. g.s. eowes.”

(3) On the development of ieg island, see § 120.2. Here and
probably in c#¢ key (beside wk. m. c¥ga), the formative -- fol-

lowed directly on the root vowel, mutated it, and remained in OE
(§ 398.4, footnote).

§ 594.

Cc. 46-NOUNS

Sg.

Nom.

sinu, sinew

l&s, pasture

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

sinwe
sinwe
sinwe

l#swe
léswe
l#swe

PI.
Nom.

sinwa (-e nW-S)

léswa (-e nW-S)

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

sinwa, -e
sinwa
sinwum

l#swa, -e
l#swa
léswum

* Their forms are Ep., Cp. aelbitu, Erf. hirnitu, Cp. hurnitu, so OE -ett
apparently represents a coalescence of -itt < -itj- and -ett < -afj-.
2 *beowu, female servant, is a grammatical fiction to explain the eo of the
existing weak fem. Jeowe, -an, and Jeowen beside Jiwen; the short diphthong is
metrically well established in peowe (Gen. 2747, &c.), but peowen may have go
from péow ( Jud. 74).

240

NOUNS

§ sos

§ 595. Origin of forms. The only divergence from the d-declension
is in the nom. sg.: Gmc. -4é > West Gme. -ué (§ 331.5) > OE -a
(§ 405), and this remains after a short, drops after a long syllable. The
dat. pl. is analogical, the phonological development is seen in LR
featum (§ 405).

§ 596. Early, late, and dialectal forms. On forms with parasiting see
§ 365. Many words have alternative forms without -w-, following giefu
and lar exactly; e.g. already before goo n.p. méda, Cts. 28 and 30; forms
from later texts are a.s. sceade, sine, bladlése, mde (also m#d, Oros. 92,
15, like i-stems); g.s. mde; d.s. sceade, lése; n.a.p. séeada, sina,
l&sa, -e, m&da, -e; g.p. sina; d.p. lésum.

§ 597. Like sinu are declined sceadu shade (beside neut. scead),
searu device (usually neut., § 580), and the plurals fretwe ornaments, geatwe armour; like /€s are blédl#s blood-letting (beside
re-formed blédléswu), m#d meadow, *r#s council (only d.p.
réswum, Az. 126).

§ 598. Phonological variants. (1) When w follows a long vowel
or diphthong, it should drop when final, but in n.s. of yé-nouns
it is restored analogically (§ 272), e.g. hréow penitence, stéw place,
tréow faith.

(2) On the development of n.s. *cléa claw, préa affliction see
§ 120.3. préa extends that form to the whole sg., and nom., acc.,
gen. pl.; d.p. préam, préaum, but n.s. thrauu Ep., thrauuo Cp. is
re-formed from inflected *prawe, &c.' Similarly developed clawu
(already Ep., Erf., Cp. clauuo), inflected clawe, &c., has replaced
*cléa, which has, however, levelled out éa to some surviving forms,
VP ap. cléa, \W-S n.p. cléa, d.p. cléam, and re-formed cléum,
poetical n.p. cléo. On d.p. clam see § 236.2.
3. 1-NOUNS
a. MASCULINE

§ 599.
Sg.

Nom,
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

wine, friend
wine
wines
wine

giest, guest
giest
giestes
gieste

« préa can also follow the weak declension, inflected préan, and is then masc.

§ 600

STRONG DECLENSIONS

241

Pl.
Nom.

wine, ~as .

giestas

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

wine, -as
wina (poetical -iga)
winum

giestas
giesta
giestum

§ 600. Origin of forms. The Gmc. forms were sg. -iz, -im,—,—-,
pl. -éz, -ins, -ién, -imiz. The I-E gen. and dat. sg. were not developed in
Gmc., where the endings are from the a-stems. In the sg. the OE nom.

and acc. are regularly developed, -i being lost after long root syllables,
retained as -e after short ones. In the pl., the OE nom. and acc. in -as
and the dat. are from the a-declension. The nom. and acc. in -e < -2 and
the gen. in -zga (only in poetical Deniga, winiga) of nouns with short
root syllables represent the Gmc. forms. The gen. pl. in -a of the long
root syllable type may represent the Gmc. form, but in the short root
syllable type it is due to the combined influence of the long syllable
type and of other declensions.
§ 601. Early, late, and dialectal forms. In early texts the nom. and
acc. sg. are frequently recorded as -z, mostly in names in -zwini, but also
in BH -stedi, Ep., Erf. mert. Gen. sg. is not recorded in an early form."
Dat. sg. in - occurs in early texts, e.g. Ep., Erf., Cp. d#i, Wycliffe
Stone, Thornhill I -w:ni; this case-form appears beside -z, e.g. Ep.
faengae, suicae. Survivals of n.p. in -i > -e are Cp. stridi, ddéle, VP
Sehisscipe, poetical byre, wine; but early texts already have -as, e.g. Cp.
hegas, LR uyrmas. In \North. an endingless form of the nom. and acc.
sg. of nouns with short root syllables appears, e.g. lyg, styd, -wht; such
forms are not found in Ru.1

§ 602. Examples of this large declension are: like wine: byre
youth, cyre choice, gryre terror, hege hedge, lyge lie, mere lake, mete
food (§ 610.5), stede place, stride stride, swice smell, wlite beauty;
also compounds in -scipe, e.g. béorscipe feast, fréondscipe friendship,
weerscipe prudence; like giest: cierm shouting, clerr turn, d#l part,
drené drink, ent giant, feng grasp, stené smell, wyrm worm.
b. FEMININE

§ 603.

Singular

Plural

Nom.

dzd, deed

déda (-e nW-S)

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

d&d, déde
dé&de
d&de

dda, -e
d&da
dédum

T Cts. 3, 5, 14 have already -wines. Frequent -wini in names is the Lat. gen.,

OE Bede Eadwinis is too late to be of value, BH, MS. Cott, Tib. C ii, Eduine

242

NOUNS

§ 604

§ 604. Origin of forms. The case-endings in Gmc. were sg. -iz, -im,
-aiz, -at, pl. -iz," -ins, -ién, -imiz. In OE the nom. and acc. sg. without
ending correspond to Gmce., the acc. in -e is from the d-stems: it is
already freq. in VP and eW-S. OE -z > -e is a normal development in
the gen. and dat. sg. In the pl. the nom. (used also as acc.) should give
OE -i > -e; this is largely replaced by -a from the d-stems in eW-S,
where -e is rare, and confined to the acc. KG also have -a in the acc. pl.
(nom. not recorded). The gen. is regularly developed, the dat. is from
other declensions.

§ 605. Early forms. While g.s. -2 from female names in Lat. texts is
merely the Lat. ending, -# in ablatival function represents an early
spelling of the OE dat., e.g. Ct. 35 Cynedrydae, and similar forms in
BH. G.s. uyrdi LR corresponds to OHG geuurhti. This gen. is usually
regarded as representing I-E -eis, an ablaut variant of -ois, the source of
normal Gmc. -aiz (Gothic -ais). But in view of the absence of other
evidence for a reflex of I-E -eis in Gmc., it may be preferable to regard g.s.
-t in West Gmc. as due to an identification of the gen. sg. and acc. pl.
endings similar to that discussed above (§ 586), and due to the same cause.
N.p. Ajfi Cp., a.p. maecti CH, show early z < i. N.p. uuyrdae Ep.
suggests that -# of the d-stems began to replace -2 before the two
forms coalesced phonologically.

§ 606. There are very few short syllable fem. 7-stems. They
appear to have adopted early the endings of the 6-declension, and
are now distinguishable only by the umlaut of the root vowel, e.g.
denu valley, fremu benefit, and the compounds in -legu, -neru,
though their nom. sg. does not occur, e.g. *ealdorlegu death,
*ealdorneru safety.

Nouns declined like d&d are bén prayer, bryd bride, cweén queen,
fierd army, gléd coal, hyd hide, hyf hive, mieht might, nied need,
s¢yld guilt, spéd success, tid time, wen hope, wyrd fate, yst storm;
abstract and collective nouns in -t < -ti- are mainly fem., so far
as evidence is available, e.g. cyst choice, ést favour, h&st violence,
wist sustenance; /yft air, is masc., fem., and neut.
(OET 136, 93) is an error, for the manuscript elsewhere has nom. -wine or -t,
gen. -7. Ct. 8 Folcuuinis may, however, point to a contamination of a g.s. -7 (as
in the fem. nouns) with -zs of the a-declension.

1 The retention of -i after long root syllables in the nom. and acc. pl. in OS
and OHG and in OE at least in CH maecti (for OE -e could be regarded as from
the 6-stems) indicates that it came from a sound with abnormal intonation (§ 330).
The ending was I-E -ejes, and hence the development of abnormal intonation,
which was possible only in long syllables, must have been in Gmce., after -ejes
> -ijiz > -iz. The reason for the identification of the intonation of the new long
vowel with that of the old abnormal vowels is obscure.

§ 607

STRONG DECLENSIONS

243

c. NEUTER

§ 607.

Sg.
Nom.

spere, spear

Ace.
Gen.
Dat.

spere
speres
spere

— geswiné, toil

geswiné
geswinces
geswince

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

speru

speru
spera
sperum

geswiné

geswinc
geswinca
geswincum

§ 608. Origin of forms. Nom and acc. sg. had Gmc. -¢, nom. and acc.
pl. -6, an early re-formation after the a-stems. The OE development of
these cases is normal. The other cases have the same origin as in masc.
nouns.

§ 609. Like spere were probably clyne lump, gedyre door-post,
fedyne noise, gewife fate,’ gewile wish, ofdele slope, oferslege lintel,
orlege strife, sife sieve; all have developments of the root vowel
normal before -1- except spere, which has the vowel of early reformed pl. *sper6.

Like geswiné are neuters with a long mutated root syllable and
no ending in the uninflected form, e.g. cyrf fragment, fl#s¢ flesh,?

flies fleece, h#l omen, and a considerable group of words in ge-,
e.g. gedwild error, gegrynd plot of ground, gehlyd noise, geresp
conviction (of crime), gewéd madness; also some nouns which
fluctuate between neut. and fem., e.g.

wiht creature, fulwiht

baptism (also m.), forwyrd loss,3 and many in ge-, e.g. gebyrd birth,

gecynd race, gehygd thought (and so oferhygd pride), gemynd
memory, genyht sufficiency, gepyld patience, gewyrht deed. These
fem. and neut. nouns have neut. pl. in -w: wihtu, and so probably
fiftu marriage, gehyrstu ornaments (beside fem. gifta, gehyrste),
gedryhtu fortunes, of which sg. is not recorded. In abstract
nouns this form in -u is often treated as indeclinable fem. sg.,
1 Also a-stem gewif.
2 Pl. IW-S fléséu.

3 Here is usually classified grin, snare, but this is rather an 6-noun (n.p. grine,
e.g. Ps. lvi. 7), beside a neut. a-noun grin (n.p. grinu).

244

NOUNS

§-610

e.g. gebyrdu, gecyndu,' gewyrhtu both fem. sg. and neut. pl., oferhygdu fem. sg.

§ 610. Phonological variants. (1) Obscuration of compounds
produced a few apparently disyllabic 7-stems, e.g. zfest malice
(m. and f., § 356), #rist resurrection (m.f.n.), and with confusion
of the apparent suffix vowel (§ 382) weoruld world (f., rare m.).?

(2) S# sea (m. and f.) and @ law (f.) are developed from *saiui-,
*aiui- (§ 406). The normal forms of s# are n. and a.s. s#, g.s.f. sé,
g.s.m. s#s, d.s. s#, n. and a.p.f. s#, m. s&s, g.p. wanting, d.p. sém.
Abnormal forms are Blick. Hom. and poetical g. and d.s. s#we,

d.p. swum. (IW-S d.s. séo is an error.) % has indeclinable s. and n.

and a.p.; g.p. analogical a; also a., g., and d.s. Zwe, d.p. Zwum,
hence n.s. #w, (on éaw- see § 273); North. has g.s. #s, |W-S once
#ys. M#w mew (m.) has only forms with -w-, m@wes, &c.; for
early forms see § 273.
(3) On the interchange of consonants in br&zw, brég eye-lid (m.)
see § 412, on IW-S bréaw § 273.

(4) It has been pointed out (§ 204.5) that owing to substitution
of endings of a- and 6-stems before umlaut took place, some
i-declension nouns have forms without umlaut. Here belong n.p.
stapas, d.p. -um, to stepe step, g.p. gasta to giest guest; similarly
meaht, Angl. mzxht beside mieht, Angl. meht might. Of the national
names (type 7 below), Seaxe has no umlaut; so gesceaft creature,
gepeaht counsel, nouns of the type of gecynd, fluctuating between
fem. and neut., and with pl. in -« (also fem. pl. -a, masc. -as).
(5) Some short syllable i-stems can be declined according to
the ja-declension, and they then have double consonants (cf.
secg, § 575). Hence the doublets mete, North. mett (IW-S frequent
pl. mettas) food, hyse, *hyss (g.s. hysses, d.s. hysse, n.p. hyssas)
warrior, ile, *ill (g.p. illa) sole of foot, gewile, gewill will; so INorth.
2fdzil (Li., d.s.; Ru.* zfdelle) for ofdele slope.
(6) Bere barley, ege terror, hete hate, sele hall,3 sige victory, are
masc. nouns like wine, but are shown by cognate forms (Goth.
*baris, agis, hatis, sigis) to be -es, -os-stems in origin, which have
passed into the masc. i-declension, because Gme. -iz > OE -1.
TM Neut. pl. gecyndu gives rise to sg. gecynde, since witu is pl. of wite. There is
also a neut. pl. without ending.
2 The typical endingless acc. sg. of the fem. i-stems is very frequent from
weorold,
3 Beside a-stem szl, pl. salu; and ja-stem sel, i.e. *sell; its es-, os-origin is
shown by the variant salor, § 636.

§ 610

STRONG DECLENSIONS

245

Similarly, nouns of the type of gecynd, which fluctuate between
mutated and unmutated root vowels, are perhaps old -es, -os-stems,
reflecting the interchange of mutating and non-mutating vowels
in the formative element, e.g. gebann, gebenn proclamation, gefog,
Sefég joint, geheald, gehyld guard, gehnast, gehn&st clash, gewealc,

gewylé rolling. See also § 636 below.
(7) Many national names decline as follows:
Nom.

Mierée, Mercians

Engle, English

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

Mierée
Mieréna (-ena)
Mieréum

Engle
Engla
Englum

Like Mierée are declined (apart from absence of umlaut in the

root syllable, cf. type 4 above): Seaxe Saxons,! and compounds with -séte,? e.g. Sumors#te men of Somerset;

like Engle are: Beornice Bernicians, Dére Deirans, Norp(an)hymbre, Sip(an)hymbre men of Northumbria, Southumbria,
and the words ylde men, ylfe elves, léode people.3

To these declensions belong some names of ancient tribes
imperfectly recorded, e.g. *Holmrydge (d.p. -ry¢um), *Secge (g.p.
-ena).

*Yte, *Iote, *Eote Jutes, can follow either declension: g.p.
Iutna, Eota, d.p. Iutum, Iotum, Ytum. Here also belong probably
g.p. Eotena, d.p. Eotenum, Beow.
Dene, Danes, has g.p. Deniga or Dena (§ 599).

To territorial names in -gé are formed names for the inhabitants
in -ige, which may follow either of the above declensions: Siprige

men of Surrey, g.p. Suprig(e)na, Siépriga, d.p. Siprigum; cf. the

quasi-Lat. g.p. Siidergéona BH, and Eastrgena Ct. 18, formed from
* Siiperge, *Eastrge.*
See § 519 on foreign names which follow this declension.
Nouns in -ware (e.g. burgware citizens, Romware Romans) have

nom. and acc. pl. in -e in eW-S, although this element is really
a pl. of the 6-stem waru. The sg. waru, -e may also be used, e.g.
' Also weak Seaxan,
2 Also weak -s#tan.
3 Also léoda owing to the fluctuation of -e, -a in pl. of fem. nouns.
4 The locatival dat. of nouns in -gé is seen in its original form in Ct. 35

Eosterge, but there is usually re-formation due to confusion with names in ~feg,
-ég ‘island’, e.g. Cts. 34-35 Eastorege, Easterege; BH in regione Stiderige (altera-

tion in Cott. Tib, A xiv.) So £ige Ely, was re-formed to Elige, whence uninfi.

246

NOUNS

§ 61r

Cantware (dat.), OFC 617. The element can also be declined as
a weak pl.: this is already eW-S (Wihtwaran, OEC 661) and VP
(helwearan), and is frequent later. Pl. in -as also occurs. in later
manuscripts, e.g. Sigelwearas. In g.p., eW-S has usually -wara, but
also already -warena, VP -wearena,1W-S usually -warena. In North.
the element is confused with waras men (§ 210.2, footnote), e.g.
Li. burgwaras.
The nom. and acc. pl. -e of these names of nations is clearly

Prim. OE -i, the pl. of the z-declension. The re-formed dat. pl. in

-um which accounts for forms without mutation (Seaxe), and the
gen. pl. in -a, -iga correspond to the i-declension forms. The
adoption of g.p. -ena, -na is obscure; once adopted it caused
further confusion with the weak nouns (Seaxan, Englan, &c.).

4. U-NOUNS (MASC. AND FEM.)
§ 611.

Masculine

Feminine

Sg.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

sunu, son
sunu
suna
suna

feld, field
feld
felda
felda

duru, door
duru
dura
dura

hand, hand
hand
handa
handa

suna
suna
suna

felda
felda
felda

dura
dura
dura

handa
handa
handa

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.

Dat.

sunum

feldum

durum

handum

§ 612. Origin of forms. The Gmc. endings were sg. -uz, -um, -auz,
-au, pl. -iuiz, -uns, -~6m, -umiz. From these, the OE forms are regularly
developed except the nom. and acc. pl. It might be assumed to be from
a Gmc. nom. -ayiz > -auz, representing I-E -oyes, in ablaut with I-E
-eues, Gme. -iuiz (Goth. -jus). No forms outside OE and OFris.,
however, suggest the existence of an IE nom. pl. -oves."
' C. E. Bazell (private communication) regards OE, OFris. n. and a.p. -a@ as
the development of I-E n.p. -eyes. At least in the Ingvaeonic area he would limit
the change e > i in unaccented final syllables (§ 331.2) to before z (e.g. n.p.
*f6tiz) and before a lost I-E i (e.g. 3rd sg. *birip, I-E -eti). But -eyes > Ingvaeonic -eus > -eu, which shared the development of -au to OE, OF ris. -o > -a.

§ 613

STRONG DECLENSIONS

247

The nom. sg. of osu nose, and duru door, may be in origin a dual
formation, I-E -du, Gmce. -d: the root vowel of nosu supports this view,
that of duru does not.

§ 613. Early, late, and dialectal forms. A number of erroneous forms
are often quoted as belonging to u-stems: on FC -flddu see § 346,
footnote; Erf. aetgdru is an error for xigéru, §§ 346, 591, footnotes;
OEC Wihtgara- is an error for Wihtwara-; certain names on the
Bewcastle Column and an early coin have Lat. endings -us, -um (see
Dahl, Substantival inflexion in early OE, pp. xii and 179). Forms from
early texts illustrating the tendency of mascs. to take the endings of
a-stems, and fems. those of d-stems, are g.s.m. VP feldes, flddes, eW-S
zples, eardes, hades, wintres, dsm. VP -fldde, eW-S earde, fide,
hdde, sumere, wealde, n. and a.p.m.VP feldas, flédas, hergas, eW-S
zpplas, heargas, d.s.f. eW-S dure, nose. Such forms become increasingly
frequent later, e.g. KG g.s.f. dure, n.p.f. borhhande. The declension also
shows the effects of the increasing OE confusion of back vowels (§ 377)
from an early date. Already BH, MS. Cott. Tib. C ii, has d.s. Derauudu,
and eW-S has a.s. wuda, d.s. duru, CP 167, 15; 104, 13. Such forms
become frequent later, e.g. KG n.s. suna, and many forms in |North.
and Ru.! In 1OE an endingless loc. sg. like that of the a-stems appears,
e.g. Wynnefeld (Kemble, no. 710, late copy).

§ 614. Like sunu are declined medu mead (also n., cf. Trans.
Philological Soc., 1954, pp. 96-99),! sidu custom, wudu wood, and
several nouns with the inflexion of a u-stem only recorded in
nom. and acc. sg., bregu prince, heoru sword, lagu lake, magu youth,”
spitu spit (d.s. spite), and the composition forms fripu- peace,
leopu- limb.

Like feld: no noun of this type is entirely free from the encroachment of a-declension endings, but traces of u-declension
forms are recorded from eard country, fldd flood (also n.), ford
ford, hdd person, hearg shrine, weald forest; also with parasiting,
zppel apple, sumor3 summer, winter winter (also n. pl. winter or
wintru); disyllabic fxrelt journey (g.s. -a, CP 257, 9).
No fem. nouns are free from the influence of the 6-stems, but
some u-stem forms occur from the following:
like duru:* nosu nose;

like hand: cweorn hand-mill, flor floor (also m.).
1 IW-S g.s. medewes, n.p. medewa (read -as), as if like bearu.
2 Also weak maga.

3 u-stem forms are due to analogy of winter.
* IW-S d.s. dyre (analogy of hnutu, hnyte), also mixed forms dyru, dyran,

duran,

248

_ NOUNS

§ ors.

B. The Weak Declension
§ 615.

Masculine

Feminine

= Neuter

Sg.
Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

guma, man

tunge, tongue

Eage, eye

guman
guman
guman

tungan
tungan
tungan

éage
éagan
éagan

guman
guman
gumena
gumum

tungan
tungan
tungena
tungum

éagan
éagan
éagena
éagum

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

§ 616. Origin of forms. The thematic element was I-E -en-, which
was subject to ablaut variation to -on- (second full grade), -én, -dn-

(lengthened grades), and -n- (vanishing grade). These varieties existed
still in Gmc., and are reflected in some languages, e.g. Goth. a.s.m.
hanan, d.s.m. hanin, a.s.f. tuggdn, g.p.m. auhsné reflect 1-E -onm, -eni,
-onip, -n6m. In OE -an < I-E -on- has been extended to the acc. sg.
(except in neuters), the gen. and dat. sg., and the nom., acc., and gen. pl.
The old variation is preserved only in the isolated g.p. oxna oxen.
The case-ending of these six cases would be in Gmc. -num, -niz, -nt,
-niz (neut. -na), -nuns (neut. -na), -ném. Owing to normal loss of final
consonants, and of the vowels of final syllables in trisyllabic forms

(§§ 399, 331), the case-endings disappeared except in gen. pl.’ Hence
-an appears in OE as the final syllable in all these cases except the
gen. pl., where -andém developed to -ena (§ 385). The dat. pl. -um is of
uncertain development, though paralleled in all Gmc. languages. It is

usually assumed to be derived from I-E -onmis, which by assimilation
(-nm- > -mm_-) and simplification of the double consonants had in Gmc.
the same development as I-E -omis of the a-declension, hence OE -um.
I-E -onmis would itself be a re-formation, as the dat. pl. probably had

originally vanishing grade of the thematic element, as seen in isolated

Goth. abnam, watnam. These Goth. forms show partial assimilation
to the a-declension, as -num would be the phonological development
of I-E -nmis, so perhaps the prevailing Gmc. forms are due to total
tT But it may be reasonably assumed that in West Gmc. the weak nouns, like
other consonant stems, gave up the distinction of nom. and acc. in the pl., and
that both these cases would have -niz.

§ 617

WEAK DECLENSION

249

assimilation of the dat. pl. to the a-stems in masc. and neut., to the

6-stems in fem.

In the nom. sg. and neut. acc. sg. Gmc. developed three forms, I-E
-én, -6n, -6. In West Gmc. -6 was limited to the masc., -dn to fem. and

neut. nouns. These endings developed normally as OE -a and -e (older
-2).

§ 617. Early, late, and dialectal forms. In early texts -2 frequently
appears for nom. sg. fem., e.g. BH Earcongotz, Ep. nectaegalae. In
eNorth. there are three forms reflecting the West Gmc. development
of the thematic element before certain case-endings to -un- (§§ 331.6);
as.m. galgu RC, a.s.f. foldu’! CH, eordu LR, North. Loss of final -n is
shown by the three forms just quoted, and g.s.m. sefa FC, but ZR still
has g.s.f. uullan. On -n in BH see § 472. INorth has loss of -n always,
Ru. usually; these texts have very great fluctuation in the vowels of
the endings, but it is doubtful if these reflect the I-E ablaut, or are simply
due to the fluctuation described in § 379, footnote.” Poetical texts have
frequently syncope in the gen. pl. after long root syllables, e.g. brdgna,
éagna, Francna, Frésna, iihtna, wilna, wreéna (to wrecca), and perhaps
the first element of Neorxnawang; similarly, when the ending is transferred to d-stems, drna, ldrna, sorgna, eW-S also has wilna, tungna.
The ending appears early as -ana (Cp. 687 -doccana), and this remains
frequent in North. and Ru.

§ 618. Masc. and fem. weak nouns are numerous; examples are:
masculine: anda malice, bana slayer, bera bear, eafora son, flota
sailor, gealga gallows, lida sailor, ména moon, naca boat, nama
name, scucca demon, steorra star, wita prophet, and compounds
in -bora, e.g. mundbora protector, r€dbora counsellor; feminine:
burne stream, cirice church, folde earth, hearpe harp, hriise earth,

sunne sun, wulle wool, and formations in -ige, e.g. hlzfdige lady,

médrige aunt,3 and in -ele, e.g. hacele cloak, and many loan-words
(§ 518). The only invariably weak neuters are éage eye, éare ear;

wange, cheek (also punwange), can be weak, but has also strong
forms partly masc., partly fem. : g.s. wonges, d.s. -wange, n.p. wangas,
-wonge, -wonga, g.p. -wonga; so (pun)wenge, a strong form, has
weak inflexion, d.s. -wengan.

§ 619. Phonological variants. (1) (a) Traces of the I-E variations

TM The reading of the Moore MS. was persistently attacked by Forster, most
recently Flussname Themse, pp. 309-10; but the form is confirmed by the
Leningrad MS.

2 A few first elements of place-names may reflect a weak gen. sg. in Gmc. -in-

(cf. Goth. ~ins), e.g. Ct. 1 Budinhaam.

3 The origin of -ige is not identicalin these words: cf. Holthausen, Etym. Wh.

250

NOUNS

§ 619

in the thematic element appear in g.p. oxna, d.p. oxnum, from oxa ox:
in these forms the thematic element was I-E -n-. With this grade

of the thematic element extended, Gmc. had n.p. “oysniz; whence
with parasiting after regular loss of the final syllable and mutation,

VP oexen, North. exen, also used as acc. pl. But normal oxan,
oxena also occur. (b) Eastre Easter, usually forms inflected sg.
cases and nom. and acc. pl. in -on, apparently from Gmc. -6n-, a

form of the thematic element frequent in fem. nouns in other
languages; a strong nom. and acc. pl. Eastra, -o, -u occurs in
IW-S.
(2) Nouns with -z7- before the thematic element have umlaut
of the root vowel; if the root syllable is short, the West Gmc.
consonant doubling appears except in the case of r (§ 407).
Examples are, masculine: dglzéa monster, béna suppliant, bylda

builder, byrga surety, fépa troop, fliema fugitive, wyrhta worker;
feminine: béce beech, bieme trumpet, byrne corslet, myre mare,
yee toad, and nouns in -estre, e.g. hléapestre dancer, and -idge, e.g.

sealti¢ge dancer.
Examples with the West Gmc. doubling are masc. wrec¢a exile,
fem. smippe smithy; and with -7- retained after r, fem. berige berry.
With -7- immediately after the root vowel: frigea lord < *fraujé
(Goth. frauja).*

(3) Nouns from roots ending in a vowel or diphthong are declined
thus:
Masculine

Feminine

geféa, joy

béo, bee

Sg.

Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

geféan
geféan
geféan

béon .
béon
béon

Pi.
Nom.

geféan

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

béon

geféan
geféana
geféam

béon
béona
béom

* S-B, § 277.a.2, place here twy for twéo doubt, but the form does not occur
before 1200 (Bodleian MS. of OE Boethius).

§ 620

MINOR DECLENSIONS

251

There is no difference in the declension of masc. and fem. nouns
of this type. The phonology of most of the words has already been
discussed. Here belong the masculines:

beféa joy (§ 235.2; 238.2.b), gefa enemy, rd roe (§ 236.3), fréa
lord (§ 120.3), and so wéa woe, twéo doubt (§ 235.2), Angl.
scia shin (§ 238), Swéon Swedes, also the rare weak forms of
préa affliction (§ 598.2);

feminines are: dd doe, fla arrow, td toe, pé clay (§ 236), séo pupil
of eye (§ 235.2), béo bee (§ 238.1), céo crow, réo blanket
(§ 238.3), pie, péo sort of insect (origin unknown), slahae slay

(§ 145);

of doubtful gender are: Ep., Cp. cian pl. gills, fléa flea, fléa, fléo,
fito albugo (§ 235.2), méo shoe (origin unknown), s/d sloe (§ 236).
Beside fla, sla, ta, and fléa in both senses are strong forms:
flan(m-f.), slag, slah, tan (f., rare), fléah (n.). Conversely IW-S
has weak 2d (f.) twig, beside strong an (m.).
On /éo, lion, see § 510.

(4) Short syllable fem. weak nouns often have bye-forms declined according to the 6-declension. VP has only lufe, lufan love;

W-S has always n.s. Jufu, but often weak inflexions, Ru. only
once n.s. Jufu; loss of -n and confusion of endings make the North.
position obscure. Otherwise 6-declension forms are chiefly W-S,
e.g. cinu fissure, fapu aunt, spadu spade, wucu week, beside weak
forms, and so the loan-word peru, pere pear.

(5) On the interchange of g and w in higan, hiwan, family, see
§ 412; g.p. higna, hina, also hiona with vocalization, whence io > é0
is extended to d.p. héowum beside higum, hiwum.

c. Minor Declensions
I.

ATHEMATIC NOUNS

a. MASCULINE

§ 620.
Sg.

Nom.

fot, foot

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

fot
fotes
fet

mann, man

mann
mannes
menn

252

NOUNS

§ Gar

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.

Dat.

fet
fet

menn
menn

fota

manna

fotum

mannum

§ 621. Origin of forms. The Gmc. endings were sg. -s, -um (§ 331,
footnote), -iz, -i, pl. -iz, -uns, -6m, -umiz. In OE the gen. sg. is from the

a-declension, the dat. sg. and nom. pl. (used also as acc.) are regularly
developed from the Gmc. forms. The acc. sg. and gen. and dat. pl. may

be equally from the Gmc. forms or from the a-declension. In nom.

sg., consonant changes of various kinds would take place before -s, but

in all Gmc. languages these are levelled away, so Gmc. may already
have had, for example, *fot for *foss < *fots.

§ 622. Like fot is t6p tooth; ds immortal being (recorded only
in n.s. as a rune-name, and in g.p. éa, with extension of the
mutated vowel from nom. pl.; cf. ON n.p. &sir). Compound names
in -mann seem to have been declined according to the a-declension,
g.8. -mannes, d.s. -manne.' There is no neut. athematic noun in OE.?
§ 623. Early, late, and dialectal forms. The mutated forms of fot,
top often have dé in early and Angl. texts. VP has already analogical
pl. todas beside toed, and Martyrology fotas (OET, p. 178), and later
texts have other analogical forms after the a-declension from fot and
top. Mann has a weak bye-form manna.

§ 624.

b. FEMININE

Sg.
Nom.

studu, post

bic, book

Acc.

studu

bic

Gen.

*stude

béé, bice

Dat.

styde, stude

_—béé, bic

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

styde
styde
studa
studum

béé
bé¢
bica
bicum (bdécum, Ct. 42)

’ e.g. OE Bede Gearomonne, Ct. 14 Sulmonnesburg. The element is sometimes

not identical with OE mann but is Celtic, e.g. Cadmon < “Katumanos,
* The d.s. "sérfd often quoted as from serid, garment, seems not to exist;

the word is a neut. a-stem, pl. sértid.

§ 625

MINOR DECLENSIONS

253

§ 625. Origin of forms. The declension was originally identical with
that of the masc. nouns, but many analogies intervened. Nom. sg. of
short root syllable nouns in -u is from the 6-declension, or, since it is
extended to the acc. (recorded for studu), perhaps rather from the
u-declension. Other analogical forms are gen. and dat. sg. without
umlaut, various gen. sg. forms in -s (siles, éas, nihtes) and in -e (bdce,
géte), dis. dce, nihte (VP already nehte beside naht), n.p. burha, gen.
pl. forms in -na (hnutena, g€tena, ciina), gen. and dat. pl. with umlaut
(brétena, g&tena, bdécum).

§ 626. Like studu are hnutu nut, hnitu nit. From studu forms with
d also occur, d.s. styde, a.p. stySa, KG stode (with -a, -e from

d-declension). From Anutu occur g.s. hnute or hnyte, d.s. and a.p.
hnyte, g.p. hnuta, hnutena, d.p. hnutum. From hnitu only n.s., and
a.p. Anite.
§ 627. Like bc are declined a group of words, of which the
recorded forms are given below, including those found only in
composition. The acc. is not distinguished from the nom. in sg.
or pl. in this declension, so it does not appear among the forms,
though if the nom. is not recorded it is inferred from the acc. Forms

due to the normal variety of spelling of mutated sounds (6¢ for é,
f for $, Kt. é for #, $) are not given.

Gc oak:' g.s. dce, dis. #é, ‘ace, Gc, n.p. #¢é, g.p. dcana (Birch,
no. 219), d.p. dcum.

gat goat: g.s. gate, g&te, ds. g&t, n.p. g&t, g.p. gata, g¥tena,
d.p. gatum.
bréc, covering for the leg: n.p. bréc, g.p. brécena.
Os goose: g.s. gdse, n.p. gés, g.p. Zsa.

burg city:? g.s. byrg, burge, d.s. byrg, burg, n.p. byrg, burha,
g.p. burga, burha, d.p. burgum, burhum (§ 447).
*dung prison: d.s. ding (And. 1272).
turf, turf: g.s., d.s., n.p. tyrf,3 g.p. turfa, d.p. turfum.
grit, meal: d.s. gryt,* grit, g.p. grita.
lis, louse: n.p. Lys, g.p. liusa, d.p. lsum.
mits, mouse: g.S. mise, N.p. mys.

On this class is modelled the late d.s. -lieg (Birch, no. 1312)
from léah, open country (cf. § 589.3).
t But de as a rune-name follows the a-declension, n.p. dcas (Rid. 43, 10).
2 But fem. names in -burg follow the 6-declension, a.g.d. -burge. Variant forms

of burg due to parasiting, and to the unvoicing of final g, are not given above.
3 Apparent a.p. turf is probably collective sg.
+ Spelled gruiit, Cp. 1619 (cf. § 199) as g.s.

254

NOUNS

§ 628

§ 628. Phonological variants. (1) A number of nouns have final
~h which is lost in inflected forms with endings:
furh, furrow: g.s. fyrh, furh, fire, d.s. fyrh, furh, a.p. fara (Birch,
no. 945), g.p. fira, furena, d.p. firum.
Jurh, fir: a.p. fyrh.

sulh, plough: g.s. sile, sles, d.s. sylg, sylh, n.p. sylh, g.p. sila,

silum.

prih, trough: g.s. pryh, d.s. pryh, prih, prige, d.p. prim.

wloh, fringe: a.p. wloéh (Li.), g.p. wgléana (Li., sic).

Forms due to parasiting (e.g. furuh) are not given above. Early
forms are Ep., Erf. furhum, uulohum (§ 461); Cp. uuléum (uncon-

tracted); Ep., Erf., Cp. thuerhfyri (for -fyrih). Extension of loss
of h to final position occurs in IW-S a.s. sul, d.s. syl. On analogical

& & in prige, sylg see § 447.

(2) In c& cow, all inflexions (except g.p. -a, § 236) can be contracted with the root vowel, but they can be replaced by analogy,

hence g.s. cil, cile, ciis, d.s. cf, I.p. cy, g.p. cla, ciina, d.p. ciim,
cium. VP has a.p. cye (with -e from 6-stems).

(3) Neaht, nieht night, differs from other athematic nouns in
the completeness with which functional umlaut has disappeared.

The mutated or the unmutated vowel can be levelled out to any
case. In eW-S only forms with mutated vowel occur (i or ze), but
VP has unmutated 2 (i.e. ea smoothed) 32 times, mutated e twice,
and & is used nearly always in North. and Ru. IW-S and poetry

have occasional ea beside prevailing 7. On Angl. forms with palatal
umlaut see § 308. The usual declension is g.s. nihte, also nihtes,!
d.s. ntht, nihte, n.p. niht, g.p. nihta, d.p. nihtum.?

(4) £a water, river, can be used for all cases except d.p. éam,

also Ct. 44 éum, W-S éaum, |W-S éauum. W-S has frequently also

g. and d.s. ze. Analogical forms are eW-S g.s. éas, |W-S n.p. éan.

But W-S has also mutated g.s.

é(nW-S form); cf. d.s. &, Ps. 35, 8.
Addition of analogical endings to this form gives Ct. 30 g.s. ée,

eW-S d.s. éz, ée. Difficult forms in place-names are: Ct. 4 Uuestanae,
probably dat. (loc.) for nom., with # for é; Ct. 6 Liminaee (for
* With this inflexion (mostly used adverbially) the noun can be masc., e.g.
Gnes nihtes, OEC 616.

? The first element of nihtegale nightingale, has in early texts the ending -i

or -2: while -z may be an analogical ending from the 6-declension, -i (also

found in OS and OHG) is not explicable as a case-ending of the athematic
declension. It is perhaps identical with the -i of LR uyrdi (§ 605).

§ 629

MINOR DECLENSIONS

255

usual Liminéa) is acc., -aee is for éa (cf. § 140) with analogical
ending; later the form is used as loc. (syntactically nom., fluvius
qui dicitur L., Birch, nos, 148, 411, related texts).
(5) Meoluc milk, has d.s. meoloc or meoloce with levelling of the

root and formative elements from nom. and acc. On syncopated
forms see § 390. In Angl. milc (VP, Rit.) the form proper to gen.
and dat. sg. (§ 331.3) is levelled to nom. and acc. So inst. loc. sg.
(§ 574.4, footnote) meolcum, but Ang}. milcum (BG).!
(6) Place-names of Celtic origin seem frequently to adopt the

forms of the athematic nouns in OE, having gen. sg. in -e, other-

wise no endings, e.g. a. and d.s. Cent Kent, a. and ds. J, g.s. Ie
Iona, a. and dis. Wiht, g.s. Wihte Wight, d.s. Tenet Thanet. So

native d.s. Cert, Chart,? and other occasional forms.

2. NOUNS

OF RELATIONSHIP

§ 629. The following are the W-S paradigms; starred forms do
not occur in eW-S:

Sg.
Nom. feeder, father bropor, brother midor, mother dohtor, daughter
feeder

brdpor

médor

Gen. feeder

Acc.

brdpor

médor

Dat.

bréper

méder

feeder

dohtor

dohtor
-

dehter

Pi.

Nom. fed(e)ras — brdpor

*miédra, *-ru_

dohtor

Acc.

*médra, *-ru_

dohtor

mddra
m6édrum

dohtra
dohtrum

feed(e)ras

Gen. fed(e)ra
Dat. federum

brdpor
*bropra
_ brdprum

Normal variation between -er, -or, -ur is found in final syllables.
In IW-S, words with mutation in the dat. sg. can extend it to the
gen. (e.g. méder, rare bréper), or conversely remove it in the dat.
' If to of mioloc CP 459, 18 is not simply an inverted spelling for eo, it represents
a crossing of *meluk and *milik to produce *miluk whence *mioluk.
2 Foreign place-names are frequently indeclinable especially in the dat. (loc.),
e.g. Mailros, Gend, Paris, Rin, Names of English rivers are often indeclinable
(about 40 per cent. of the ones recorded in OE, Forster, Flussname Themse,
pp. 314 ff.). Other English place-names are sporadically indeclinable (especially
those in -ing, examples PBB ix. 251-2).

256

NOUNS

§ 630

(e.g. dohter). Collective ge- may be added to the pl. forms of
bropor and sweostor. 1W-S nom. and acc. pl. of all except fader is
normally in -ru, -ra; fadero is North. only. 1W-S analogical forms
are g.s. federes, ds. federe, g.p. federena.

Sweostor, sister, may be indeclinable except in gen. and dat. pl.

sweostra, -trum. There is great variety of root vowel, swostor,
swustor, &c. (§ 210.2, footnote). The nom. and acc. pl. is again
IW-S -tru, -tra.

§ 630. Early and dialectal forms. VP g.s. feadur, CH -fadur,
INorth. fador, represent an I-E gen. form (cf. Sanskrit pitur),' different
from that seen in fedres (cf. Lat. patris). In other cases VP has root
vowel e, except d.p. feadrum beside fedrum. VP extends mutation to g.s.

moeder, doehter. Extension of mutation to pl. is rare, e.g. Ru. brdépre.
Nom. and acc. pl. -ra, -7o, -re are frequent in !North.; Ru.1 has only -re,
-rz (beside the endingless form). On FC gibrapzr see § 369; on Kt. -ar
for -or (e.g. Ct. 38) see § 377; on the root vowel of ‘sister’ in North.
and Ru.! see §§ 210.2, footnote, 319, 328. Collectives in ge- are found in
North. and Ru. (not in VP). We appear to have in d.p. soesternum
Rit. (0 = w) a trace of a different collective formation (cf. OS gisustruonion). If correct, the OE form has metathesis, as in westerne, OS
uuestroni (§ 459-4).

§ 631. Origin of forms. The I-E case-endings were added to -r, and

the Gmc. paradigm would be sg. -r, -rum, -raz, -ri, pl. -riz, -runs,
-rém, -rumiz. In West Gmc. the nom. pl. was probably used for acc. pl.
In OE the disappearance of all endings except those of gen. and dat. pl.
was phonological, and endings appearing in recorded forms (e.g.
feedere, brépru) are analogical: their origin is obvious, except in the case
of nom. and acc. pl. -“, which is of uncertain source. The formative
element -er- was subject to ablaut variation. In the dat. sg. there was
no vowel before -7-, and hence the root vowel was subject to umlaut in

OE, but in the nom. pl. the full grade -er- appeared (cf. Gr. d.s. wazpi,
n.p marépes), and hence the final syllable was lost in Gmc. (§ 331-3), and
there was no umlaut in OE. D.s. feder is analogical, cf. North. feder
beside fader. The vowels of the final syllables of the OE recorded forms

in -er, -or, -ur are due to parasiting in the gen. and dat. sg. In the nom.

and acc. sg. and pl. -er may be from I-E -er- (§ 331.2), and -or, -ur from
I-E -or- in forms where u followed (acc. sg. and acc. pl.; see § 331.6).
The gen. and dat. pl. had vanishing grade of the suffix (i.e. no vowel

before -r-).
? Full discussion of this form by Lane, JEGP |. 522-8.

§ 632

MINOR DECLENSIONS

257

3. NOUNS IN -nd- (MASC.)
§ 632.

Sg.
Nom.

__fréond, friend

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

fréond
hettend
fréondes
hettendes
friend, fréonde hettende

_hettend, enemy

Pl.

Nom.

friend

hettend, -e, -as

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

friend
fréonda
fréondum

hettend, -e, -as
hettendra
hettendum

§ 633. The formative element -nd- is that found in the present participle, but this follows the za-declension in OE, while the nomina agentis
basically follow the athematic declension, as the mutation in the dat. sg.
and nom. and acc. pl. shows. The gen. and dat. sg. in -es, -e are from the
a-stems, while in the disyllables the nom. and acc. pl. in -e, gen. pl. in
-ra are from the adjectival declension. The ending -as of the nom. and
acc. pl. of disyllables appears already in eW-S, and is extended to
fréondas and féondas in \North., Ru.1, and poetry. Some IW-S texts have
forms from disyllables with -r- extended to other cases from the gen. pl.,
e.g. n.p. wealdendras, d.p. (less often) wealdendrum. The disyllables
have levelled -end all through the paradigm from cases with mutation
and from the pres. part. On VP fienda, -um, see § 201.3, footnote.

§ 634. Like fréond are declined féond enemy, téond accuser
(forms with mutation do not occur), and a.p. géddénd (El. 359)
from gédddnd benefactor.' Fréond and féond may take the collective
prefix ge-, when the sense is usually ‘reciprocal friends, enemies’.
Further examples declined like hettend are dgend owner, h#lend
saviour, wealdend ruler, wigend warrior.”
! But words of this type are usually re-formed as -ddend (disyllabic, sg. or pl.).
2 Swelgend glutton is masc., but swelgend whirlpool is fem. (later also masc.
and neut.).

258

NOUNS

§ 635

4. STEMS IN INDO-EUROPEAN -éS, ~0s

§ 635.

Sg.

Nom.

éealf, calf

lamb, lamb

&g, epg

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

cealf
cealfes
cealfe

lamb
lambes
lambe

eg
&ges
zege

éealfru
cealfru
cealfra
cealfrum

lambru
lambru

&gru
egru

lambra

&gra

Pl.

Nom.
Acc,
Gen.

Dat.

lambrum

#grum

The above are normal W-S paradigms for these neuters; in
IW-S cealf, lamb have also endingless nom. and acc. pl., and gen. and
dat. pl. -a, -um (following word, § 570); !W-S has also n.p. cealfas,
The sg. forms are derived from the a-declension. Case-endings
were originally added to a formative element, I-E -es-, with ablaut
variant -os-, Gmc. -iz, -az-, West Gmc. -ir-, -ar-.! The Gmc.
nom. sg. appears to have been *kalviz, *lambiz, whence OE n.a.s.

czif (Angl.: VP., Cp., Erf.), lemb (Rit.). From nom. sg. of this

type is formed Li. g.s. celfes, celfes. The original gen. sg., in which
the case-ending would drop after the formative element, appears
in VP g.s. calfur. Note also the composition form ger-, beside

#g, in Ep. degergelu yolk. VP has nom. and acc. pl. calfur, lombur,
beside calferu, lomberu; so North. lombor, beside lomboro, calfero;
poetical lomber (Gu. 1015 = 1042), lambru.
§ 636. The following traces of -es, -os declension also occur:

¢ild child, neut., is usually declined like word, but eW-S has
also n.p. cilderu, g.p. cildra, \W-S also d.p. cildrum, Rit., Ru.
g.p. cildra; léuw, ham, has |W-S n.p. léower, g.p. léwera.
Isolated forms in glosses are bréadru crumbs, h#medru married
relationships, speldra torches.
A considerable number of words have the formative element
’ OE forms like VP calfur, North. lombor point to West Gmc. -ur- as a form
of the suffix; this perhaps arose from -ar- in cases where -u- followed (§ 331.6).
It is usually held to represent I-E -ar-, but such a form of the suffix, and the
development I-E a > Gmc. u, are alike doubtful.

§ 637

MINOR DECLENSIONS

259

always, and are to be recognized as old -es, -os stems only by
etymological relationship to forms without it, and often by a dat.
sg. without ending. Such are: ddgor day, éagor-, éar- sea, halor
salvation, hriper head of cattle, hrdpor solace, salor hall, sigor
victory (changed to m.), North. st@ner stone, Ep., Cp. séérero, Cp.

-scéruru n.p. shears, with which cf. doeg (North.), 2g-, hal, hrip-,
hrép, sele, sige, stan, scéar. Words originally -es, -os-stems in which
the formative element appears in all surviving forms are clfor-,
éeolfor- (in c.-lamb she-lamb), hzteru pl. garments, éar, North.
whher ear of corn. Here may also belong grandor- guile, hécor
mockery, nicor water-monster, wildor-, g.s. wildres, n.p. wildru,
wild animal.' On nouns of the z-declension which appear to be
old -es, -os-stems, see § 610.6. A number of others follow the masc.
or neut. a-declension, but are shown to be old es-, os-nouns by
alternative forms with umlaut or with z for e, e.g. gdst, g&st spirit,
helt, hilt hilt, hlaw, hl#w

mound,

hraw, hréw body, North.

breard, briord point (cf. § 124, footnote 5).

5. DENTAL STEMS

§ 637. Nouns of the type of Lat. nepos, mepotem had in Gmc.

short vowels i, u, or a before the dental consonant. The consonant
was lost in the nom. sg., which was also used as the acc. In the
gen. and dat. sg., and the nom. (used also as acc.) pl., the endings
following the dental were lost in early OE (§ 345; cf. 331.3). The
gen. and dat. pl. had the usual endings of consonant stems, and
developed in OE normally. Hence a normal OE paradigm would
be: n.s. hele man, a.s. hzle, g.s., d.s., n.p. helep, g.p. hzlepa, d.p.

hzlepum. G.s. and d.s. hzlep are not, however, recorded; analogical
formations are d.s. hzlepe, n.p. hxlepas. A new nom. and acc. sg.
hzlep is also extracted from the other cases. On the root vowel #
(rarely e) see § 193.c. Further relics of this declension are:
ealu, ealop, n. ale; nom. and acc. sg. have normal variation of
vowel -u, -0, -a; ealop, -ap is recorded for gen. and dat. sg. ;2

in pl. only gen. ealepa occurs. Rit. has analogical g.s. aldes.
The root vowel is usually ea (§ 208), rarely a or & (e.g. [W-S

alu, zlap);
! VP already re-forms to wild(d)éor; cf. § 458.
? The vowels of both syllables in gen. and dat. sg. are due to levelling: ealup,
*alep (< *alupiz, -i, §§331.3, 203)
> ealu, ealup.

260

NOUNS

§ 637

monap, m. month: this noun is fully adopte
d into the a-declen-

sion, except for n.p. ménap beside ménapas. On syncopa

ted

ménp see § 358. On IW-S ménop, -up, North
. -od, -ed, see

§§ 377, 379.

megep, mxgp, f. maiden: the uninflected form
is retained in
gen. and dat. sg. and nom. and acc. pl.; -p is always
levelled to
nom. and acc. sg. ;' gen. and dat. pl. in -a, -um.
On syncopa-

tion see § 341.

? The existence of *mzxg, supposed to be the true
nom. sg. of magep, is very
doubtful; the instances rather belong to még (kins)wo
man.

XII

ADJECTIVES
§ 638. In the Germanic languages the adjective was declined
mainly with nominal endings, but with an admixture of pronominal endings. Most adjectives could be declined according to

a strong or vocalic declension, and also according to the weak

declension. Broadly, the weak declension was used when the
adjective followed a demonstrative (in OE se, pes, and possessives,

min, &c.), the strong in other positions, e.g. alé god treow byrd
gode westmas ‘every good tree bears good fruits’, but pa godan
menn ‘the good men’. OE verse admits a freer use of the weak
adjective than prose, but the later the verse the less it diverges

from the syntax of prose in this matter. Comparative adjectives
and the superlatives in -ma (§ 675) are declined only weak. Oper

‘second’, ‘other’, is always declined strong, even after demonstratives, e.g. pa opre ‘the others’. From adjectives of indefinite
quantity, eall all, monig many, gendg enough, &c., the weak forms
are naturally rare, but are used when syntax demands, e.g. pa

monigan cyningas ‘the numerous kings’. Fela many, is indeclinable,

and so generally are gewuna, bewuna accustomed, and wona lacking,

though some strong forms occur (n. and a.p. m. and f. gewune;

n.s.m. wan, f. wonu, n.p.m. wone).

Li, and Rit. show confusion in the adjectival, as in the nominal,
declension, e.g. in the strong declension -es can be extended to
gen. sg. fem. ; inst. sg. masc. and neut. -e is often used in preference
to dat. -um, and may be extended to the fem.; endingless forms
are frequent in all cases, but more so in sg. than pl. The weak
declension is much influenced by the strong, -es appearing in

gen. sg., and forms without ending in the nom. and acc. sg. masc.

and neut., while in the nom. and acc. pl. all distinction of strong
and weak has disappeared, -e, -o, -a occurring in all syntactic

positions.

In Ru. the declension of the strong adj. is much disturbed by
endingless forms,

262

ADJECTIVES

§ 639

A. Strong Declensions
I. @- AND O-ADJECTIVES

§ 639.

Masculine

. Feminine

Neuter

Sg.

Nom.

blind, blind

blind

blind

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

blindne
blindes
blindum
blinde

blinde
blindre
blindre

blind
blindes
blindum
blinde

Pi.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

.

blinde
blinde
blindra

blindum

blinde, -a
blinde, -a
blindra
blindum

blind
blind
blindra
blindum

Adjectives with a short root syllable differ from blind in the
NOMINATIVE SINGULAR FEMININE and the NOMINATIVE AND ACCUSATIVE PLURAL NEUTER: in these cases they have final -w (-o), e.g.
from til good, tilu.
§ 640. Origin of forms. The nominal inflexions require no comment
as they are identical with the corresponding forms of the a- and 6declensions. (The inst. sg. masc. and neut. is identical with the locativeinst. in -2 of a-nouns, § 571; it is recorded as -i in early texts, e.g. Ep.
binumini, bistuuidi.) The pronominal endings are italicized in the above
paradigm. The Gmc. forms of these were: a.s.m. -andn, d.s.m. and n.
-ammo, g.s.f. -aizéz, d.s.f. -aizai, n.p.m. -at, g.p. -aiz6m. In OE the
Gmc. final syllables are regularly developed in a.s.m. -ne, g.d.s.f. -re,
n.p.m. -e, g.p. -ra. On the syncope of medial vowels see §§ 341-2. In
view of the absence in early OE of any trace of a vowel before the fem.
ending -re and g.p. -ra, it is possible that the OE forms are derived
from -ezéz, &c., and that these forms are due to assimilation of the
endings to the pronominal declension seen in OHG dera, deru, dero:
medial -e- would be syncopated earlier than the reflex of -ai-, cf.
§ 331.7. The forms of the dat. sg. masc. and neut. given above are
inferred from the Goth. form -amma; in North and West Gmc. the
medial vowel might be -u- (§ 331.6), though this is not certain, since the
-mm- < -3m- (cf. Sanskrit tasmai d.s.). Even if this be assumed, it is
difficult to derive ON, OE, OS -um, OS -umu, OHG -emu from the

§ 641

STRONG DECLENSIONS

263

same form: the inflexion seems to have been inconsistent in Gmc. with
regard both to the internal vowel and the internal consonant (m or mm).
The reason why the final vowel is retained in some languages, while it
is lost in others, is also obscure.

§ 641. Early, late, and dialectal forms. See § 640 for early forms of
the inst. sg. masc. and neut. The pronominal endings -ne, -re, -e appear

with -z in early texts, e.g. RC riicne, fisx, Ep. frodrae, st&gilrae, from
rice powerful, fus eager, frod wise, st#gel steep. In W-S and KG gen.
and dat. sg. fem. and gen. pl. have very often parasiting to -ere, -era.!

In VP compound adjs. in -sum have nom. sg. fem. and nom. acc. pl.

neut. in -sum (not -sumu, e.g. wynsum, wilsum). In pass. parts. of both
strong and weak verbs -e is extended to nom. acc. pl. neut. in VP, e.g.

agotene, tolésde, In eW-S this extension is found occasionally with other

adjs., and in 1W-S, INorth., Ru.1, and KG it is frequent. In W-S nom.

acc. pl. fern. are frequently in -e, although in nouns -e is limited to the

acc, But, as in the noun, W-S has prevailingly -a, and this also occurs in
KG (manega 175, 476; but ofermode 249).

§ 642. Like blind are declined e.g. beald bold, beorht bright,
déad dead, hal sound, hwit white, lang long, séoc sick, wis wise,

wund wounded; also adjs. with the formative elements -cund,
e.g. epelcund noble, déofolcund devilish, eorlcund noble, g&stcund

spiritual, weoroldcund worldly; -fest, e.g. a@rfest virtuous, eorp-

fest fixed in the earth, sigefest victorious, tréowfest faithful;
-feald, e.g. anfeald single, felafeald manifold, and many compounds

with numerals, seofonfeald sevenfold, &c.; -full, e.g.
bismerfull disgraceful, wunderfull wonderful; -iht, e.g. st&niht
stony, wudiht woody (cf. § 204.6);? -isd, e.g. cildis¢ childish, Englisé

English; -leas, e.g. arleas merciless, gimeleas negligent, hamleas
homeless; -l¢, e.g. dxgli¢ daily, heofonlic heavenly, tidli¢ temporary ;3
-weard, e.g. andweard present, niberweard turned downward.

There are far fewer with short root syllables, e.g. dol foolish,
fram active, gram angry, til good, trum firm, also sum some, and

its compounds, e.g. fremsum beneficial, langsum lengthy, wilsum
pleasant, wynsum delightful.

§ 643. Phonological variants. (1) Adjs. with the root vowel #
* eW-S has already a few instances, mostly in g.d.s.f. sumere.
? There is also a form -ihte following the ja-, j6-declension (§ 644); decisive

inflexions are too rare to show which was the more frequent.
3 The formative element -/i¢ underwent very early shortening, hence it has
-u in the nom. sg. fem. and nom. acc. pl. neut. (§ 356, footnote 1); it is also subject to phonetic change (§§ 340, 371). Adjs. in -is¢ can also take the ending -u

(e.g. menniscu, CP 71, 12, n.s.f.).

264

ADJECTIVES

§ 643

have in W-S a not only before back vowels in the inflexional
syllables (like the corresponding nouns, § 574.1), but also as a rule
before -e in the acc. sg. fem., in the gen. and inst. sg. masc. and
neut., and in the nom. and acc. pl. masc. and fem. (and neut. if -e
is extended to it). Hence normal forms are:

Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

Nom.

hweet, active

hwatu (hwet) hwet

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

hwetne
hwates
hwatum
hwate

hwate
hwetre
hwetre

hweet
hwates
hwatum
hwate

hwate
hwate
hweetra
hwatum

hwate
hwate
hweetra
hwatum

hwatu
hwet
hweetra
hwatum

Sg.

Pl.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

This restoration of Gmc. a before -e in adjs. appears to be a
purely W-S development, cf. Li. glade, Ru.? glade, lete, VP hrede
(not *hrzde), KG unuuere, all nom. or acc. pl. masc.
Like hwet are declined bzr bare, bleé black, gled glad, hred
swift, let slow, smzl small, sed sated, strwé severe, wer cautious.
Forms with 2 levelled to positions before back vowels are not
uncommon, especially from hrad and streé, e.g. d.s.m. hredum,
d.s.f. wk. strecan.
(2) Adjs. with final -A lose it in inflexion between voiced sounds,
and contraction follows if both sounds are vowels, compensatory
lengthening if the first is a consonant. Between two consonants
h is lost, e.g. a.s.m. Pweorne from pPweorh+-ne, and so g.d.s.f.

pweorre, g.p. pweorra. The system will be shown by the following
paradigms:

Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

Sg.
Nom.

héah, high

héa

héah

Ace.
Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

héane
héas
héam
héa

héa
héare
héare

héah
héas .
héam
héa

§ 643

STRONG DECLENSIONS

- Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

héa

PL

Nom.

héa

Acc,

héa

héa

héa

Gen.
Dat.

265

héa

héara
héam

héara
héam

héara
héam

pweorh, crooked

pwéoru

pweorh

Sg.
Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

Pweorne
pwéores.
pwéorum
pwéore

pwéore
pweorre
pweorre

pweorh
pwéores
pwéorum
pwéore

PL

Nom.

Acc.
Gen,
Dat.

pwéore

pwéore
pweorra
pwéorum

*bwéore, -a

*pwéore, -a
pweorra
pwéorum

pwéoru

pwéoru
pweorra
pwéorum

On a.s.m. héanne (IW-S; eW-S only in Junius’ copy of CP),

wonne see § 484.' Nom.

and acc. pl.

neut. has both héa and

analogical héah. Other analogical forms are frequent, e.g. héahne,

héaum, gemaum, hréoum, frioum (§ 239), héage, gemdge, wage,
drogum (§ 447). On Angl. forms see § 238.2. On Angl. forms
of pweorh, sceolh see §§ 231-2; and on compensatory lengthening

§§ 240-1.

Like héah are declined: fah hostile, flah deceitful, gemah
depraved, hréoh rough, scéoh shy, toh tough, proh rancid, anwloh,

gewlbh fruitful, woh crooked.? The neuters of flah, gemah, prah,
woh occur used as nouns.
Like Pweorh are gefearh pregnant (of the sow), sceolh oblique.

Pweorh forms nom. sg. fem., nom. acc. pl. neut. pwéoru, 1W-S

pwéor, but gefearh is unchanged in nom. sg. fem. (only form
recorded). Only weak inflexions of séeolh occur.

(3) Rush rough declines with intervocalic -w-, riiwes, &c.; or -g-,
ruge, &c.; a.s.m. rithne; cf. § 412.

(4) Adjs. with final syllabic consonants can develop a parasite
vowel in forms without endings (§ 363), and before endings begin* But cf. Weyhe in Germanica, Festschrift fiir Ed. Sievers, p. 316.
* Here might be added néah near, rare and late as adj.

266

ADJECTIVES

§ 643

ning with consonants (§ 364), hence, for example, from fager fair,
a.s.m. fegerne, g.d.s.f. fegerre, g.s.m. fegres, but also analogical
feeperes (§ 363). In later OE medial rr can be simplified, e.g. g.p.

fegera (§ 457). Adjs. of this type are biter bitter, hlitor pure,
wacor wakeful, efen even.

(5) Adjs. with syncopation of a medial vowel are of many kinds,
Syncopation may be according to § 341, § 351, or § 388.
Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

Sg.

Nom.

halig, holy

haligu

halig

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

haligne
halges
halgum
halge

halge
haligre
haligre

halig
halges
halgum
halge

Nom.

halge

halge, -a

_—hailigu

Acc.
Gen.

halge
haligra

halge, -a_
haligra

_—si+hligu
haligra
halgum

Pl.

Dat.

halgum

halgum

Restoration of the medial vowel is frequent, e.g. monigum,
sG@rige. Late syncopation after short syllables (§ 388) can be assumed
not to have occurred when the vowel is written, e.g. micele, swutole,
yfeles. The nom. sg. fem. and nom. acc. pl. neut. should phonologically have -u only after long syllable-++short syllable, and even

then only if the medial syllable contained i or u, which was
syncopated (type héafdu, § 353). In practice -u is very frequently
used in all types of disyllabic adjs., and the medial vowel is usually
not syncopated (or is restored), e.g. eW-S #nigu, dgenu, monegu;
VP éadigu, forcerredu, idelu, micelu. The double consonant arising
in acc. sg. masc. of adjs. in -m, gen. dat. sg. fem., and gen. pl. of
adjs. in -r (e.g. gyldenne, dperre), seems to have been simplified
early and then often restored, for sporadic simplification in spelling
occurs before goo (e.g. eW-S g.p. Gpera).
So are declined:

(a) Adjs. in -ig, e.g. halig holy, monig many, mig rusty. On the
history of the suffix see §§ 358, 376. On -eg-, -i-, -e- for -ig- see
§ 371, 267.1
' It is doubtful if occasional spelling in eW-S of -ig as -ug, -og, in endingless

§ 644

STRONG DECLENSIONS

267

(6) Adjs. in -el, -ol, e.g. atol terrible, pancol thankful, lytel little,
micel great, yfel evil; and in -en (< -ina-), e.g. hépen heathen, and
the adjs. of material, gylden golden, &c., and later ones without
umlaut, as stdnen beside st&nen of stone.
(c) The strong pass. part. in -en: here syncope is less usual in
W-S, e.g. n.p. gebundene bound, forcorfene cut, afeallene fallen,

beside gehealdne held, -worpne thrown. Syncope is frequent in VP,
but less so in Ru.! and North.

(d) The weak pass. part. in -ed, in which syncope is usual in
inflected forms after long syllables, but not after shorts, e.g.
n.p. Sedémde judged, gefliemde put to flight, ar@rde raised up, but
fremede done, getrymede arranged, apenede stretched out. But in
W-S after long syllables syncope is frequently extended after

dentals (rarely after other consonants) to the uninflected form, e.g.

aféd(d) fed, gel@d(d) led. Cf. § 351, footnote.
(e) The weak pass. part. in -od, which is not subject to syncope,

e.g. lufod loved, gemacod made.

(f) Miscellaneous adjs. which also belong here are dagen own,
fegen glad, open open; also arod swift, forod broken, fracop bad,
nacod naked, which are not found with syncope.

2. 1a- AND 10-ADJECTIVES
§ 644.

Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

Sg.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

midd, middle
midne
middes
middum
midde

midd
midde
midre
midre

midd
midd
middes
middum
midde

midde, -a

midd

midde, -a
midra
middum

midd
midra
middum

PL.
Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

_— midde

midde
midra
middum

forms of nom. acc. pl. neut., shows influence of the apocopated -u: monog, hefug
(and similarly miéul).

268

ADJECTIVES

Masculine

—

Feminine

§ 645

Neuter

Sg.
Nom.

wilde, wild

Gen.

wildes

Acc.

Dat.
Inst.

wildne

wildum
wilde

Pl.
Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

wildu

wilde

wilde

wilde

wildre

wildum
wilde

wildre

wildes

.
wilde
wilde
wildra
wildum

wilde, -a
wilde, -a
wildra
wildum

wildu
wildu
wildra
wildum

§ 645. Origin of forms. In adjs. with root syllables with West Gmc.
gemination of consonants, the cases with nominal endings had the same
Gmc. forms as the corresponding cases of sedg, synn, cynn; adjs. with
originally long root syllables agreed in these cases with ende, gierd, wite
(see §§ 575, 590), except in the nom. sg. fem.: this was in -id, an analogical form instead of -2. The pronominal forms in the dat. sg. masc.
and neut. and the nom. and acc. pl. masc. had the same inflexions as in

a-stems with -j- (-#-) before them and are regularly developed iin OE,
The acc, sg. masc. -tan6n or -iiandn should give OE -inz > -ene, and
similarly the gen. dat. sg. fein. and gen. pl. should be -irz, -ira > -ere,
~era (cf. -unx, -urez, -ura > -one, &c., from ua-, ud-stems); the absence

of connecting vowel must be attributed to the influence of the a-,

6-stems.

§ 646. Early, late, and dialectal forms. In eW-S -e is found in use
for both nom. and acc. pl. fem. In eW-Sand VP-eis already frequently
extended to the nom. sg. fem., nom. and acc. pl. neut., especially in
present participles. Scribal retention of double consonants before inflexions beginning with consonants is frequent, e.g. middre, nyttre.

§ 647. Like

midd are declined

mytt

useful, gesibb

related.

Examples like wilde are xpele noble, céne bold, cléne clean, ée
eternal, fiperféte four-footed,' gréne green,

lipe

gentle,

mzre

famous, rice powerful, gesiene visible, wéste waste, wierpe worthy
;?
* This is an example of a frequent type of ja-, j6-adj. meaning ‘having a
certain number of an object’, e.g. priséyte triangular, brjmylée having three
milking hours, sixe¢ége hexagonal, sixnihte six days old.

2 Tren, iron, seems to be a ja-stem in OE as a noun, and a ja-, j6-stem as an

adj.; hence in Beow. g.p. irenna (noun), a.s.n. -irenne (adj.) have -nn- (sometimes
graphically simplified), and so 1W-S a.p.m. jrenne (adj.). But later poems have

§ 648

STRONG DECLENSIONS

269

also formations in -b@re, e.g. halbére wholesome, westmbzre
fruitful; in -ede, e.g. hdcede hooked, hringede ringed, hoferede
humpbacked; in -wende, e.g. hdtwende hot, hwilwende temporary;
and present participles in -ende.

§ 648. Phonological variants. (1) Prim. Gmc. *frija- free,
usually exhibits in W-S a declension from fréo (n.p. fréo, g.s.f.
fréore, &c.); but a declension from frig- also occurs (n.s.m. frig,
a.s.m. frigne, g.s.m. friges, n.p. frige, &c.). On the origin of these
alternatives see § 410; on forms with final -h § 466; on Angl. forms
§ 238.1.

(2) Prim. Gmc. niyja- new, West Gmc. niuyja- (§ 120.2) develops
as eW-S niewe, niwe, Angl. niowe, néowe, Li. niwe; inflected nizwne,
néowne, &c. The retention of final -i > -e after an originally short
root syllable is difficult (attempted explanation, Dahl, Substantival
inflexion in early OE, p. 106).

(3) The formation of acc. sg. masc., gen. and dat. sg. fem., and

gen. pl. of adjs. ending in consonant+liquid or nasal+e has
been discussed, and a list of such adjs. given, in § 364. Recorded
forms are a.s.m. lyderne, fécne, frécne, d.s.f. digolre, g.p. dygelra
(if these are to diegle, not to diegol), lydra, frécenra; divergent is
IW-S dis.f. giferre, greedy, beside gifre. Dierne secret, has no
parasiting, g.p. dyrnra.' Similar words in double consonants
simplify them (§ 476) in these cases, e.g. a.s.m. bynne, ginne, d.s.f.
pynre, to pynne thin, ginne vast, a.s.m. picne, d.s.f. picre (also
etymological spelling piccre) to picce thick.

(4) The neut. ja-stem earfepe trouble, n.p. earfepu was regarded
as neut. of an adj. earfepe difficult; earfepu could also be treated
as a fem. sg. and declined like bieldu (§ 589.7). Earfebe both noun
and adj. could also be transferred to the a-declension, when the
development might be earfop or earfep (§§ 336, 356; both are
frequent in inflected forms and in composition); hence with

suffix mixture earfope is frequent beside earfepe for the ja-, j6stem adj.
frequent forms with a short medial syllable or syncopation, pointing to inflexion
as a nominal a-stem, adjectival a-, d-stem (e.g. Sol. Sat. 28, 469, Chr. Sat. 518);
note also VP d.p. irnum (adj.), a.p.n. irenu (adj.). Thus forms with -n- seem too
early and numerous to belong to § 457, and it would appear that Gmc. *isarnadid not always change declension when OE *israna- > *irana- developed from

it (§ 459.4, footnote).
' From an OE point of view the adjs. of the points of the compass, norperne
northern, &c., are like dierne (cf. §§ 339, 459.4).

270

ADJECTIVES

§ 649

3. ua- AND “6-ADJECTIVES

§ 649.

Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

Sg.

Nom.
Acc.

gearu, ready
gearone

gearu
gearwe

gearu
gearu

Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

gearwes
gearwum
gearwe

gearore
gearore

gearwes
gearwum
gearwe

Nom.

gearwe

gearwe

gearu

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

gearwe
gearora
gearwum

gearwe
gearora
gearwum

gearu
gearora
gearwum

Pl.

§ 650. Origin of forms. The cases with nominal endings do not
diverge from those of the corresponding nouns bearu, sinu, searu
(§§ 580, 594). The pronominal cases are also developed regularly: see
§ 645 on the acc. sg. masc., gen. dat. sg. fem., and gen. pl.; the dat. sg.
masc. and neut. have analogical -y- like the dat. pl. (§ 581).
§ 651. Early, late, and dialectal forms. On W-S parasiting, e.g. n.p.
earuwe, -owe, -ewe, see § 365. Final -u can appear as -o and in later
texts as -a (§ 377). Nom. acc. pl. fem. is not recorded with -a in eW-S.
In IW-S both final and internal uw for u occurs, e.g. gearuw, -uwre.
Note g.p. gearra, CP 433, 30 (twice).

§ 652. Adjs. declined like gearu are basu purple, calu bald, fealu
fallow, geolu yellow, hasu grey, mearu tender, nearu narrow.
§ 653. Phonological variants. (1) Here belong historically a
group of adjs. with -u- after a long syllable: these all extend -ythrough the entire paradigm (cf. §272), eg. gléaw, gléawne,
gléawe, gleawum.' Early texts and North. have sometimes -u- for
-w-, e.g. Cp. gléu, Li. ungléu (cf. § 273). Such adjs. are slaw slow,
fedéaw dewy, gléaw wise, hnéaw mean, hréaw raw, geséaw juicy,

réow fierce, réw mild, péow servile.?
(2) The pl. feawe, few (W-S also féawa, influenced by fela many)
has d.p. feam < *faum < *fauum (§ 405), and analogical feawum,
' Forms without w are rare, e.g. n.s.f. gléa, KG 693, a.s.m. réone, Jul. 481.
2 The uninflected form of hlgow- (ge-, un-), warm, is uncertain,

§ 654

STRONG DECLENSIONS

271

féaum. Frequent is n.a.p. féa < *fau < *fauu < *fay6é nom. acc.
pl. neut. In IW-S an indeclinable féawa (like fela) appears, e.g.
after feawa dagum, ofer feawa (== super pauca), and often with
gen. pl., feawa fixa.

4. 1-ADJECTIVES
§ 654. Here belong the adjs. with short root syllables, bryce
brittle, freme excellent, gemyne mindful, swice deceitful. Their
declension is completely assimilated to that of wilde (§ 644), but
they remain clearly distinguished by their short root syllables with
no constant gemination.

Adjs. of this declension with long root syllables were also
assimilated to wilde, and are only to be distinguished in OE by
etymological means, e.g. blipe joyful, bryce useful, gedéfe becoming,
gem#ne common; traces of the original uninflected form without
-e may be the adv. (ge)fyrn formerly," and /yt little, used as noun

and adv. and (rarely) as indeclinable adj.

5. u-ADJECTIVES

§ 655. Traces of the u-declension are preserved in W-S by the
adj. cwicu, cucu alive, which has n.s. cucu, -a in all genders, a.s.m.

cucone, -une, -ene (also with -nn-, § 457, footnote), Other cases
follow the a-, 6-declension, cuce, cucre, cucum, &c., and a.s.m. also
cucne. (The form cwi¢ is the only one in Angl., and is frequent in
W-S beside cwicu.)
Similar is wlacu tepid, nom. sg. for all genders, beside wlec;
the declension is wlace, wlacre, wlacum, &c.,
Other u-adjs. have passed entirely into the a-, 6- or ia-, 10-

declensions. On etymological grounds the following may be
regarded as old u-stems:? egle troublesome, enge narrow, heard
hard, myrge pleasant, smolt, smylte tranquil, strang, strenge strong,
swer, swre heavy (less certain), swot, swéte sweet, pyrre dry, and
compounds in -wintre.
! Very rarely fyrn is adjectival.
? Mere fluctuation between the a- and ja-declensions does not constitute

evidence that an adj. is an old u-stem, e.g. smdp, smépe smooth, gréap, ungnype
(un)stinting. See further Ross in Trans, Philological Soc., 1952, pp. 131-42.

§ 656

ADJECTIVES

272

B. Weak Adjectives
§ 656.

Masculine

Neuter

Feminine

Sg.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.

Dat.

blinda, blind _ blinde
blindan
blindan
blindan
blindan

blindan

blindan

blindan

blindan
blindan
blindra, -ena__
blindum

blindan
blindan
blindan
blindan
blindra, -ena __ blindra, -ena
blindum
blindum

Pi.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

blinde
blinde
blindan

The weak adj. differs from the weak noun in declension only in
that the gen. pl. is usually in -ra (as in the strong adj.), and -ana,

-ena is rare except in eW-S, where it is always used: VP has
already -ra only, and this prevails in Rw.!, INorth., and IW-S.
W-S develops d.p. -an earlier in the weak adj. than in the noun
and the strong adj. (cf. § 378); it is already as frequent as -um in
weak adjs. in eW-S. IW-S sporadically extends -an to gen. pl.
The adjectival declensions discussed above (1-5) have the same
forms before the weak endings as before strong inflexions beginning
with vowels, and hence in the nom. sg. masc. their forms are as
follows: hwata, héa, pwéora, riiwa, fxg(e)ra, hal(i)ga, midda, wilda,
frigea, niwa, gifra, earfopa, gearwa, gléawa, swica, blipa. Before
d.p. -um there is always analogical retention of -w-, e.g. niwum.
Participles of all types can have the weak form, e.g. foresprecena,
gel&reda, gehorsoda, lacnigenda.

c. Comparison of Adjectives

§ 657. The compar. adj. ends in -ra, and is declined according
to the weak declension. The gen. pl. may be in -ra, e.g. North.
zldra, or -rena, e.g. VP aeldrena, eW-S geongrena.

The superlative normally ends in -ost < -ust (§35 §.4), more
rarely in -ast (§ 331.6), and may be declined both strong and weak.
The formative element is often changed to -est- by vowel harmony,

§ 658

COMPARISON

273

especially in cases with -osta- (§ 385). In eW-S -ost-, -ast-, and the
more archaic -ust- are used occasionally, but in all texts -est- pre-

vails heavily. In |W-S and INorth. -ost- prevails (iNorth. also -ust-).

In VP and Ru.) it is not possible to determine if -ost- or -astoriginally prevailed in the dialects, in VP because all the forms

have -est- by harmony, in Ru.! owing to entire absence of material.
eKt. has -ast,

KG has extended -est- to the uninflected form.
The compar. adj. is usually identical in the nom. sg. masc. with

the gen. pl. of the positive. The superl. -ost- is added under the
same conditions as the inflexions of the positive beginning with

vowels. The following are examples of the comparison of the
various declensions of adjectives discussed above:
blind, blind

blindra

hweet, active
halig, holy

blindost

hwetra
haligra

nytt, useful

hal(i)gost

nyttra!

blipe, joyful

nyttost

blipra

blipost

hwatost

fréo, free

fréora, frigra

frécne, terrible

frééenra?

fréénost

gearu, ready

gearora3

gearwost

gléaw, wise

gléawra

gléawost

féawe, few

féawost, féast

§ 658. A number of adjs. have mutation of the root vowel in
the comparative and superlative. The common ones are:
eald, old

ieldra

geong, young

héah, high

gingra, geongra, giongra_

gingest5

hier(r)a

lang, long

hiehst®

lengra

sceort, short

lengest

—_s¢cyrtra

s¢cyrtest

ieldest*

* So usually with etymological -zt-.
? But from tidre weak, both téderra and tédra.
3 Also IW-S gearu(w)ra; note also n.p. gearran, g.p. gearra, CP 4o1, 6;
433, 30 (cf. forms of positive, § 651).
* So Angl. ald, zldra, zldest.

§ But VP, Ru.) iung, gung, North. giung has comparison without umlaut,
VP iungra, gungra, North. giungra, VP gungest; VP, North. ging (§ 176) forms
VP, North. gingra, North. gingest.

® But Angl. héra, hést may have smoothing without mutation. On -h- in W-S

hiehst, Ang). héhst see § 463; on -rr-inhierra
484. Analogical
§ forms are frequent,

e.g. compar. W-S héara, héahra, héarra, superl. North. héist, W-S héagost, also

héahst whence héhst (§ 312) and héxt (§ 481.4).

274

ADJECTIVES

§ 659

Rarer examples of the same formation are br#dre broader, W-S
and poetry, gryttran greater, E.E.T.S. 0.8. 161, 20, 16, gehliuran
warmer, id. 34, 12. Strengra, strengest (also W-S strengst-, § 352)
are from strenge, beside strangra, strangost from strang strong.

The superl. elements -ost-, -ust- can be transferred to forms with
mutation, e.g. lengust, séyrtost. On forms with syncopation of
the medial vowel see §

352.

§ 659. Adjs. which derive their comparative and superlative

from another root are:

god, good

betera, bet(t)ra

bet(e)st, best

yfel, evil
micel, great
lytel, little

mara

mst

sélra, sella
wiersa

l&ssa

sélest
wierrest, wyrst

lést

On syncope in betra, betst see §§ 388, 389; on betira § 453; on

best § 477.1; on sella, wiersa, l#ssa § 484.

Syncope in wyrst, l&st is W-S; it is imitated in a few other lW-S
superlatives, § 352. KG also have werst but Angl. wyrrest, lsest

(Li. also leasest with ea from leassa, § 208).
Early texts have still sdélest; North. has always superl. mast
(often spelled with aa).

The endings -ost, -ust can be extended to superlatives of this

group also.

§ 660. Origin of forms. The comparative and superlative suffixes
which caused mutation were Gmc. -izan-, -ista-, and these were regularly
developed in OE, apart from the W-S syncopation in superlatives. The
non-mutating suffixes were Gmc. -dzan-, -dsta-. The latter develops
regularly to OE -ust, -ost, -ast (§ 331.6). The development of -dzan- in
OE is very difficult, as the invariable syncope of an originally long medial
syllable has no parallel. It is a peculiarly OE development, even OF ris.
having -er-, a normal development of -éz-, corresponding to OS, OHG
-or-, ON -ar-, Goth. -dz-. The OE form is presumably due to the
influence of the comparatives in -iz-, in which syncope is normal. This
suffix -iz- may have been used in Prim. OE, as in OHG, not only with
the few a-, d-stems with mutated comparatives, but with most za-,
j6-stems, e.g. OE swétra is not from *sydtidz- but *sydtiz-, cf. OHG
suozziro. It would also probably be used with i-stem adjs. so far as
these survived. Hence -r- < -iz- would be a very frequent comparative suffix, and might replace the form derived from -dz- in the other
adjectival classes.

XIII

THE FORMATION OF ADVERBS
a

§ 661. The adjectival adverb is formed in OE by means of the
suffix -e (< -z,' Gme. -#), usually added to the same stem form
as other inflexions beginning with vowels, e.g. hearde, hrape
(beside hrape),? feegre, gearwe. In normal OE the adjs. in -e < -i
and their advs. have the same form owing to the falling together
of unaccented -z and -i, e.g. cl&ne, niwe.
§ 662. The following advs. in -e have no corresponding adjs. in
West Gmce.: dre soon, same similarly, snéome quickly.
§ 663. The following advs. have unmutated vowels while those
of the adj. are mutated: ange anxiously, clane cleanly (beside
cléne), Eape easily, murge pleasantly (beside myrge), sdfte softly,
swote sweetly, the advs. of enge, cléne, iebe, myrge, séfte, swéte.3 In

the case of at least enge, myrge, swéte the reason for fluctuation
between forms with and without mutation is that these adjs. were
originally u-stems (cf. § 655).
§ 664. Since adjs. in -lié normally formed advs. in -li¢ée,* this

ending early became regarded as an adverbial suffix, which could
be used beside or instead of -e, e.g. heardlice, holdlice, hwetlice,
letlice (beside hearde, holde, late), the advs. of heard, hold, hwet,
let.
§ 665. The suffix -unga, -inga may be used to form advs. from
adjs., e.g. dninga entirely, dearnunga secretly, eallunga entirely,
terringa angrily. It is also used with nouns, e.g. féringa suddenly,

niedinga of necessity, wénunga by chance. In both uses it has an
extended form -lunga, -linga, e.g. bradlinga on the broad side,
ecglinga on the edge, grundlunga to the ground. In origin -unga,
-inga is a case form of the abstract noun in -ung, -ing, as is shown
by e.g. éawunga openly, edniwunga anew. It can be used to modify
or strengthen simple advs., e.g. gegnunga straight away, samnunga

all at once, symlinga always (Rit.), cf. gegnum, somen, symle. The
' e.g. LR uide.
2 The adv. always has } (also compar. and superl.), the adj. nearly always d.
3 The advs. give rise to unmutated adjs. éape, sdfte, swot.
* e.g. craeftlide, lofliée from creftlié skilful, loflz¢ honourable.

276

FORMATION OF ADVERBS

§ 666

bye-form -lung, -ling is extracted from forms like midlinga,
moderately, the adv. of middel.

§ 666. The suffix -a is used mainly in independent advs., and
its origin is not always the same. In fela much, it is an indirect
case-form of the u-declension, cf. Angl. feolu from nom. acc. sg.
In geara formerly, it is the ending of the gen. pl. Sometimes it is

the element d, ever, used in advs. of time, e.g. séna soon, dwa ever,

géna, gieta yet (cf. § 356). In tela well, from til good, its origin is

uncertain.

§ 667. The adv. of géd good, is wél(1) well (§ 100, footnote).
§ 668. The living case-forms of OE are often used adverbially.
Adjs. which use the acc. sg. neut. adverbially are efen even, full

full, (ge)fyrn ancient, gehwéde little, gendg enough, héah high
(beside héa), Lytel little.t So the nominal acc. sg. is used in dwiht at

all, ealneg always (< ealne weg), hwén, lythwon a little; the pronominal in hwxt for what reason.

The gen. sg. neut. is used abverbially in ealles entirely (neg.
nealles), micles much, singales always, samtenges together, sumes in

some degree, ungewisses ignorantly, and in many compounds in
-langes, e.g. dzglanges for a day; so the gen. sg. of nouns, dzges

by day, nihtes by night, niedes of necessity, ponces willingly, wéas
by chance, willes willingly.2 Elles otherwise, endemes together,
are obscured genitival advs. Note also lytes- in lytesna nearly, and

pronominal #ghwes in every respect, pzs consequently, afterwards,

so (also in pzxs ymb, pzs ofer after, to pzs so).

The dat. sg. (including instances originally loc. or inst.) is used
adverbially in facne deceitfully, hwéne a little (i.s. of hwon, small
quantity, also used as acc. adv.), niede of necessity (beside niedes),
ungemete without measure (beside ungemetes), instepe at once
(beside instzpes); so from adjs. &ne alone, ealle entirely, lytle a
little.
The dat. pl. is used adverbially in gifum gratis, firenum criminally, Aeoilum at times, unwearnum irresistibly, mi¢lum much, lytlum

little, and in compounds in -m#lum, e.g. namm&lum by names,
stepmélum gradually, stundmélum at intervals. Note also furbum
even, apparently from the adv. seen in forp with dat. pl. suffix.
* There are a few more examples in North., e.g. Li., Ru.? long, sd, and Li.
often -lié for -lide.
? Note that these are not always the normal gen. sg. of the related noun.
3 But firnum very, in Gen. B is an Old Saxonism.

§ 669

FORMATION OF ADVERBS

277

§ 669. In many compound advs. a gen. sg. depends on to, e.g.
tomiddes in the middle, togifes gratis; in others a gen. sg. or pl. is

in vague dependence on some adverbial word, e.g. hiimeta how,

higerades why, unfyrn faca soon, hitrupinga especially, &nge pinga

for any reason, &rest pinga first of all. Other prepositional phrases
used as adverbs are ofdiine down, onefen near by, underbeé backwards, 2t niehstan finally, onweg away. Many advs. are compounds

of prep.tadv., and some receive a case-ending: at-, to-samne
together (cf. North. somen together), xt-, to-gedere together, 2t-,

be-hindan behind, onuppan above, zxt-, be-, to- foran in front,
wipinnan within, wipiitan without, ymbiitan around, begeondan

beyond, be astan in the east, togegnes in return, ongéan opposite;!
and so with adv.+-prep. hider ofer on this side, geond ofer on the

other side.

§ 670. Comparison of adverbs. Adjectival advs. have normally

compar. -or, superl. -ost, e.g.:

hearde, severely

heardor

_ heardost

gearwe, readily

gearwor?

gearwost

-or also appears as -ur and -ar; -ost can appear as -ust, -ast (as in

the superl. adj.). In origin -ost is merely the acc. sg. neut. of the
superl. adjectival suffix. Compar. -or, -ur, -ar points to Gmc. -6z,

corresponding to Goth. -os. The final r (< 2) should be lost in
West Gmc., but is restored by analogy of the compar. adj.3
§671. The same suffixes are used with a few non-adjectival
advs., e.g. forp forth, furpor; inne within, innor; oft often, oftor,

oftost; gelime often, gelomor; seldan seldom, seld(n)or, seldost; sip,
southward, spor, and so norpor; so from gefyrn, formerly (§ 654),

Zefyrnost.

§ 672. From adjs. with umlaut in compar. and superl. only the

following compared advs. occur:
héa(h),* high
lange, long

=héar, héaors
leng®

= hyhst
lengest?

TM Many of these are themselves used as preps., e.g. behindan and most of
those in -an, togegnes, ongéan.
* Beside geare, gearor.
* The acc. sg. neut. of the compar. adj. is rarely used adverbially: a possible
example is widre, Beow. 763, but cf. Klaeber in Modern Philology iii. 263; further
examples are mainly North., e.g. Li., Ru.? lengre, Li., Rit., Ru.? mara, Li. rehtra,
Li., Ru.? wyrse,
+ Late héage.
5 Late hégur.
® Formed with suffix -iz, see § 673; also lenge.

7 Late lengst, lengost.

278

FORMATION OF ADVERBS

§ 673

§ 673. From the following advs. the compar. was formed with
the Gmc. suffix -7z, so that in OE mutation of the root vowel is the
only indication of the degree (except in nyr, néar with analogical r).
The superl. ending is either -est (with mutation of the root vowel)
or -ost.

#1, before

rest

éap(e), easily

iep!

éapost

feorr, far

fierr

firrest

néah, near

nyr?

niehst, néxt

sip, later

sipost

softe, softly
tulge, firmly

séft?
_ tylg

sdftost
tylgest

From 2r, sip are formed double comparatives #ror, sipor.

§ 674. From a number of adverbs adjectival compar. and superl.

are formed:

firra

feorr, far

néah, near

néarra

niehst*

zr, before

zrra

érest

fore, in front

fyrest, fyrst

The neuters of niehst and &rest are used as advs. and hence appear in § 673. The positives feorr and more rarely @r, néah are
also used as adjs., which inflect fully: feorne, feorres; &rne, &ran,
zZrum; néahne, néagum; &c.

§ 675. When compared adjs. are derived from advs., however,
the superl. has more frequently the ending -mest, a double
superl. formed by adding -est to the superl. suffix seen in forma
first, hindema last (cf. advs. fore in front, hinder behind).5 The chief
examples are:

inne, inside
lite, outside

innerra
literra, Yterra

innemest
utemest, ytemest

' Also éap.

3 Also séftor.
2 But more often néar.
4 Niehst has a great variety of forms: Angl. nést, Ru. nZhsta, néhst, nihst,
§§ 463, 263, footnote, 310; Li. anal, néist; without mutation W-S néahst, whence

néhst, § 312, néxt, § 481.4; Ru.) also néxt.

5 A similar double formation appears in Goth., e.g. aftumists, OE zftemest;
but in West Gmc. the formation is peculiar to OE, for in the continental
languages this group of words base the superl. on the compar., e.g. OFris.

itterst, innarost, &c.

§ 676

FORMATION OF ADVERBS

ufan, from above
neopan, from below

uferra, yferra
_ niberra

fore, in front

279

ufemest, yfemest!
nipemest
forma, fyrmest, formest

forp, forth

furpra

forpmest (North., Ru.)

efter, after

eefterra

zeftemest

elran, other?
sip, later

sipra

sipemest, sipest

norp, northward
sup, southward

norperra3
superra*

norpmest
stipmest

éast, eastward

éasterra

éastemest

west, westward

westerra

westmest

Medial -rv- in compar. (innerra, &c.) is often simplified (§ 457).

Syncopation is frequent in both compar. and superl., e.g. dtra,
tutmest (§ 388, 392).
The suffix -mest was in IOE identified with mst, North. mast
most, and was often spelled accordingly. On IW-S -myst see § 369,
footnote.

The neut. of adjs. in -mest can be used adverbially. In IW-S
endemes together, is assimilated to these words and can be spelled
-mest.

The superl. in -mest also occurs from the adjs. let, letra,
letemest beside letest; midd middle, midemest.

The superl. in -m- is developed as a positive following the
ja-, 10-declension in medeme moderate; compar. medemra, superl.
medemest.

From norp, sip, éast, west are formed compounds norpweard, &c.,
with the same meaning. They may be used as fully declined adjs.,
and also as advs. in either acc. sg. neut. or gen. sg. neut. (-weard or
-weardes).

§ 676. The advs. corresponding to the adjs. which form their
positives and compared degrees from different roots (§ 659) are:
wél(l), well

bet, sél_

yfle, evilly

wiers

_ bet(e)st, best, sélest
wyrrest, wyrst

mi¢le, much

mas

mést

l¥tle, lft, (a) little

ls

lést, lésest

T Also Jmest, not etymologically related to ufan (§ 203).
2 Beow. 752, d.s.m.; cf. advs. elles otherwise, ellor elsewhere.
3 Also nyrpra.
+ Also sjipera; and the adv. occurs as spp.
(Forms in this and previous note all from transcripts in Winchester Cartulary.)
s VP, Ru.) frequently m#; so Li. twice.

280

FORMATION OF ADVERBS

§ 677

§ 677. Adverbs of place. The following are groups of related

local adverbs:
Place where

Place to which

pér, there

pider

ponan

hwér, where?

hwider

hwonan

hér, here

hider

heonan

inn

innan

iite, outside

at

iitan

uppe, above

upp

uppan, ufan

nipor, to below

neopan

hinder, to behind

hindan

feorr, far

néah, near

feorran
néan

norp, northward
sup, southward

norpan
suipan

éast, eastward

éastan

west, westward

westan

efter, after
inne, inside

Place from which

zeftan

fore, in front

foran

Generally the senses of rest and movement towards tend to

be confused, and hér is often used for hider, br for pider, &c.
Especially when there is only one form (e.g. norp) it serves in
both senses. Néah is usually of position, néar (compar.) of move-

ment towards.
§ 678. IW-S has as variants of p¥r, hw#r: par, hwar, para; also
hwara in cpds. hwet-, zt-hwara, already Oros.
Variants of pider, hwider are Peder, hwxder, mostly in late
manuscripts, but cf. C’P 169, 13.
The advs. in -an have a bye-form in -e, e.g. utane; so some of

those in r: hidere, hwidere. In North. the final -n is lost, kwona,
&e.
Advs. in -r have occasionally genitival forms, e.g. hidres pidres
hither and thither; and comparatives, e.g. hideror more this way.

See § 669 for phrases consisting of prep.-t-adv. in -an.
§ 679. Hwer, hwider, hwonan, may be made general advs. of

place by the prefix ge-: gehw#r everywhere, &c. So with or without
ge- they are generalized by a- (6-; neg. nd-, né-) and wél-, e.g.

Ghwér, éghwer (< *d-gi-hwér), wél(ge)-hwé&r (also gewélhwer),
Ghwider, &shwider, ahwonan.

§ 680

FORMATION OF ADVERBS

281

§ 680. ‘Somewhere’ is hwergen; this can also be generalized:
Gwyrn everywhere (influenced by hwér), and so

Ghwergen,

&swern; negated ndwern nowhere.
§ 681. Note niwan(e) recently, with extension of -an(e) to an
adjectival adv. (already West Gmc., OHG niuuanes).

XIV

NUMERALS
1. Cardinal Numbers
§ 682. The following are the cardinals up to ‘twelve’ in W-S forms,
with the most interesting dialectal forms:

N

I.

an.

. twégen; Angl. usually has 6é as root vowel; |North. always
drops -n, Ru.) sometimes.
prie.

. féower; INorth. also féwer, féuor (§ 279), féor.

Sif.

. stex, later syx, six, also seox (from *seoxa, -um, § 305); eKt.
~J

sex (§ 307), Angl. sex.

. siofan, seofan; IW-S also syfon (§ 299), sufon (§ 302); early
texts have forms without back umlaut, Cp. sibun-, Ep.

sifun-; North. usually loses -n, seofo, -a, siofu, -o (§ 293); so
eNorth. already sifu (Napier’s OE glosses, p. 220).
. eahta, later ehta (§312); INorth. xhtu, -o (after seofo),
rarely -a; also xhtou, -uu, xhtowe (influence of inflected
form; cf. poetical ehtuwe); Merc., Kt. not recorded.
9.
10.

Il.

nigon; North. only inflected forms, ni(g)one, -a.

tien; nW-S tén, INorth. also téo, téa.
en(d)lefan, endleofan; Ru. enlefan; Li. once zllef, otherwise
no uninflected North. forms.

12.

twelf, \North. also twoelf, Ru.! and Kt. also tw&lf (§ 197).

§ 683. These cardinal numbers inflect as follows: dn is fully
declined like blind (§ 639), but it has irregular a.s.m. Zane (beside
anne); beside this nW-S (already VP) has enne (§ 193); an may

be usedin pl. before collective expressions, e.g. ane nigon naman
‘a batch of nine names’; meaning ‘alone’ it can be declined weak
(but generally only in n.s.m. dna, which may be extended to fem.
and pl., e.g. ond heo ana leg swa; ge hlyston pa word ana; pet hi
ana weron gecorene).

§ 683

CARDINAL

Masculine

Nom. Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

Feminine

283

Neuter

twégen!
twa
twa, tii
eC,
twég(e)a, twég(e)ra
tw&m?

This paradigm applies to W-S and Merc., except that VP has
g. twoéga, and Ru.) n.a.m. twége(n), tw¥gen. Kt. has only tw&gen,
twa, eNorth. only FC twoégen. In INorth. n.a.m. is usually twoége,
other forms are erroneous or uncertain,3 and Li. occasionally
disregards limitation of the form to masc.; twd (usually fem.),
tui (i.e. *twi; usually neut.)* appear; g. twoés(e)ra (Li. also tevdege);
d. tw#m (Li. once tudém).

Similarly declined is bégen, both:

Nom, Acc.

Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

. bégen

ba

ba, bi

Gen.
Dat.

u

UK

bégra, bég(e)a
b#m5

y

For ba and ba W-S has frequently the compound batwd, biti
(biita); biité, -a is especially frequent (it is the only nom. acc. in
eW-S) and may be used for fem. and masc. Dat. bam twam is also
frequent. eKt. has g. b(o)éga, d. b#m, boém. VP has no forms,

Ru. only bégen, bi. eNorth. has ba (acc. neut.), RC; !North. has
n.a. bdége, -o (m.), ba (f.), g. boégera, d. b#m.

Nom. Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

Masculine

Feminine

Neuter

prie

préo

préo

préora
prim

eW-S has frequently -io- for -é0-; IW-S has pry, pri for prie.
eKt. uses both prie and préo as neut. (Cts. 34, 41). In Angl. there
' The length of the root vowel is proved metrically.
2 W-S also tedm (with vowel of td).
3 But tuoge (Li. 9 times), twoge (Ru.? once) seem to reflect a genuine form
without umlaut: see Ross, Studies in the accidence of the Lindisfarne Gospels,
p.

109

+ Cf. Li. twii-, tuti- beside tui- in composition.
IW-S also bam.

284

NUMERALS

§ 684

is no distinction of gender: Merc. préo, prim (gen. not recorded).
INorth. has a great variety of diphthongs: dréo, dréa, drio, dria,

also driu (Li. once); g. dréa, Tréana;! d. Srim.2
When not immediately before the qualified noun the numerals
4-12 may be declined,’ e.g. niceras nigene, syxa sum, mid nigonum
Sara niwena scipa. The forms in W-S and Ru. are nom. acc. -e
(neut. also -u, -0), gen. -a, dat. -wm, e.g.

Nom. Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

féow(e)re
féow(e)ra
-f€ow(e)rum

fife, -u, -o
fifa
fifum

INorth. has nom. acc. in -a, -o, -u as well as -e. Note Ru.? d.
zhtowum. In North. and Ru.’ the inflected numerals are often

used without regard to the syntactic distinction defined above.
§ 684. The following are the composition forms of the numerals
so far as they differ from the cardinals given above: 2. twi(rarely twa-); 3. pri- (but also prie-, bréo-);+ 4. W-S fyper-, Angl.
feopor-, feopur- (but also féower-), Li. féar-.
§ 685. The numerals 13~19 are formed with -tiene, nW-S -téne

(North. also -téno), suffixed to préo-, féower-, fif-, six-, seofon-,

eahta-, nigon-, with variety of form according to date and dialect,
as in the simple numerals. -tiene can have gen. -a, dat. -um.
§ 686. The decades 20-120 are formed with -tig (North. also

-tih, § 452) from forms of the numerals 2-12; those from 70 to 120
have usually the unaccented prefix hund-, but this is already
sometimes dropped in eW-S, and it can be reduced to un- in Li.
Apart from the fluctuations due to these causes and regular dialectal

sound-changes, the forms are:
20. twéntig; INorth. also Li. tudéntig, Ru.” twéégentig.
30. pritig; later with -tt-, W-S, Ru.1, North. (§ 287).

40. féowertig; North. also féortig.
50. fiftig.
6o. siextig, nW-S sextig.
70. hundseofontig.
1 Li. once, perhaps for *dréara.
2 Length is sometimes indicated by spelling driim Li.
3 Also when divided from the noun by a metrical pause, e.g. feowere fet,

Rid. 37, 3.
+ Cf. § 282..

§ 687

CARDINAL

285

80. hundeahtatig.
90. hundnigontig; but Li. a phonological variant (< *niy-),
hundnéontig, -néantig.*
100. hundtéontig; Ru.' and North. also -téantig.
110. hundendlzftig, Birch, no. 619, very late copy.

120. hundtwelftig, hundtwéntig.
These numerals can form gen. both in -es and in -a, -ra; dat.
only in -um; in late texts indeclinable use appears. They can be
treated syntactically both as adjs. and nouns.

§ 687. ‘Hundred’ can also be expressed by the neut. nouns hund
and hundred.? These may be indeclinable. Hund also uses hunde

as dat. sg., acc. pl., dat. pl., e.g. mid priddan healf-hunde scipa,3
ymb feower hunde wintra, mid twam hunde scipa; the dat. pl. may
also be hundum. Hundred has nom. acc. pl. -u (-o, -a), dat. pl. -um,

which may be used when it does not stand immediately before
a noun.

§ 688. Multiples of roo are formed with hund (inflected according to § 687), and the cardinals ta, préo, &c. In these compounds
cardinals above préo are not declined, e.g. siex hunde wintrum.
Hundred is rarer in these multiples, hundtéontig is unusual.*

§ 689. Piisend thousand, is a neut. noun, g.s. -es, d.s. -e, n.a.p.
unchanged or -u (-0, -a), g.p. -a (rarely -ra), d.p. -um. It may also
be used as an uninflected adj., e.g. on six pusend wintrum.

§ 690. The use of healf with ordinals in forming virtual cardinals
should be noticed, e.g. eahtope healf hid means ‘(seven hides and)
half the eighth,’ hence ‘seven hides and a half’; very often a
multiple of 100+50 is so expressed, e.g. § 687; the system is also
used with pisend, e.g. fifte healf pusend, 4500.
§ 691. In compound numerals the units usually precede the
tens, e.g. seofon and twentig geara. The hundreds usually come first,

e.g. feower hund and twa and eahtatig, mid feower hunde scipa and
pritigum. In compound numerals the units are not usually declined,

and for 2 and 3 twa and préo are used for all genders, e.g. preo and
twentig manna, para twa and twentigra manna.
' But Ru.? Aundniontig, with i for ig (§ 267).

? INorth, also hundrad, -rzd, -red owing to Norse influence.
3 ‘With 250 ships’, PC 893; MS. mid cel hunde scipa.
* It is indeclinable when so used: examples PBB ix. 266.

286

NUMERALS

§ 692

2. Ordinal Numbers
§ 692. The ordinals up to ‘twelfth’ are:

» WN

1. forma, fyrmest; also fyrest (fyrst, § 389) in sense foremost
;?
&rest, also &rra usually of the first of two.
. Oper, xfterra.
. pridda, North. usually dirda (§ 459.2).
. féorpa, North. usually féarda.
. fifta.

Am

. siexta; nW-S sexta, Ru.) also syxta (§ 308), North. also sesta
(§ 417), seista (et = e, § 42, footnote).

7. seofopa, later -epa (§385); but Ru.t, North.

seofunda,

stofunda.
8. eahtopa, -epa; IW-S also eahteopa.
Q. nigopa, -epa.

10. téopa; but texts of Mercian colour also teogeda; Li. téi(g)da.
11. eW-S enlefta, later endlefta, -leofta, -lyfta; Ru, North.
zllefta, Ru.) also ellefta.

12. twelfta.

§ 693. The ordinals 13-19 are formed with W-S -téopa added
to the cardinal units, préotéopa (IW-S preottéopa, § 287), feowertéopa, &c. Merc. coloured texts have also -teg(e)da, -teog(e)da;
North. -tegeda, -teid'a.
§ 694. The ordinals of the tens 20-120 are formed by changing
-tig of the cardinals to -tigopa, of which -tegopa, -tiogopa, -teogopa,
and with syncopation -tigpa, &c., are normally developed variants.
Occasionally a form in -tiga, -tega is used, e.g. PC 763, on pone
feowertegan dxg.?
§ 695. The ordinals in -a are declined as weak adjs.; Oper is
always declined strong. The forms in -st for ‘first’ are superl. adjs.,
and may be declined strong and weak. Compound ordinals are
usually formed by placing an uninflected cardinal before the
ordinal ten, which can then be inflected, e.g. on bam an and
Gritigopan psalme.
© Rarer variants with this root are Ru.!, Li. fordmest, Ru.? foer(d)mest, Rit.
ruma.

2 In IW-S there appears to be some confusion of -tigoba with -téopa; already
Oros. 252, 31 féowertéopan quadragesimo.

287

3. Miscellaneous Numerals
§ 696. Fractions. On the expression of cardinals +4 see § 690.
Other fractions are expressed by phrases with d#l, e.g. twegen

dzlas weres ‘two-thirds of the wergild’. But 4 is also expressed by
tw#de (noun or adj.), twid#l (noun).
§ 697. Multiplicatives. These are expressed by compounds of

the cardinals with -feald, -fald: anfeald, twifeald, préo-, prifeald,!
féowerfeald,? &c. Li. has once a different formation, hunduelle.
§ 698. Distributives. ‘One each’ is expressed by dnliepig, e.g. pa
underfengon hi znlipige penegas ‘then they received a penny each’,

“Two each’ is getwinne; for the rest AElfric equates the Lat. distributives with twam and twam, prim and prim, &c.

§ 699. Collectives. The declension of bégen both, has been given
with that of twégen (§ 683). Another collective is preserved as the
second element of betwéoh between.
§ 700. Adverbs. The questions ‘How often?’ and ‘Which time?’

are mainly answered by phrases with sip time, occasion, e.g.
feower sipbum ‘four times’, forman sipe ‘on the first occasion’.3
Separate forms are:

1. &ne (also &ne sipa), &nes.+
2. twuwa, tuwa, tweowa, twiwa, tuig(e)a.
3. preowa (< priowa, § 148), priwa, priga.

The forms for 2 and 3 with -g- are exclusively used in North.,
where there is characteristic fluctuation of the final vowel, -a, -e, -o
(Li. dria has i for ig, § 267), but occur rarely in W-S. Merc. has

only Ru.) priowa, priuwa. The form tewuwa < *iwiw- shows a
retraction of Prim. OE i similar to that seen between w and r
(§ 149); on tuwa see § 470. Twiwa, priwa shows the influence of

forms with -g-, tweowa that of preowa.
The neuter cardinals ti, twa, préo, and uninflected forms of
other cardinals may be used adverbially, ‘twice’, &c., in multiplicative expressions with swa and swylé, e.g. tu(twa) swa lange
‘twice as long’ (pl.), twa swylé swylée ‘twice as much as’, feower swa
fela ‘four times as much’.

Note the adverbial phrase on emtwd ‘into two equal parts’.
* 1W-S has some doubly declined dat. forms: twdmfealdum (Oros. 248, 2,

Cott. MS.), primfealdum, -re, -an (legal texts, Elfric); note also adv. tw&mfaldum
doubly, Ru.
2 Ru.? also feodorfald.
3 Cierr and less often s#I may be similarly used.
* Note on xnne sid, once, Beow. 1579.

XV

PRONOUNS
§ 701. In this chapter no sections are included on ‘origin of forms’,

as the pronominal paradigms could be adequately discussed only
on a basis of the forms of all the early Germanic languages.

§ 702.

1. Personal Pronouns
Nom.

Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

ic, I

me
min
me

pu, thou

pe
pin
pe

we, we

is
tire
iis

ge, ye

éow
éower
éow

On the quantity of final open vowels see § 125.

VP has acc. mec, dec, tisié, Cowie beside the shorter forms. In
INorth. and Ru.! the forms with -¢ are frequent. In Ru.! they
invade the dat. only in the case of éowié, which is acc. 16 times, dat.

3 times. In North. the forms with -¢ are generally limited to acc.
except in the 2nd pl., where confusion is complete in Ru.?, while

tuth is generalized for acc. and dat. in Rit., and this seems to have
been the original state of the dialect of Li. (see Ross in JEGP
xxxli. 481-2). The -¢-forms are frequent in verse, and note Elfred
Jewel mec. On INorth. -A, -g for -¢ in i¢ and the acc. forms see
§ 452. On North. gi(e) beside ge see § 186, on Li. woe beside we

§ 319.

For g. wire VP has dr (also found in RG), Ru.) are, but North.

tiser, usra; verse frequently aser.

In gow, éower eW-S has frequently, North. always iow-, with
normal spelling variants iu-, iw- in North. (§ 279).

§ 703.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.

Dat.

wit, we two
unc
uncer

unc

git, ye two
iné
inéer

iné

Acc. forms with final -et, -it' occur. RC and late prose unket us
' -et appears not to be for older -it, because there is no mutation in uncet; it
is perhaps transferred from an accented nom. “wet, beside unaccented wit.

§ 704

PERSONAL

289

two, poetic incit you two. Of the Angl. glosses only Ru.! has dual
pronouns, but they are frequent in eW-S, IW-S, and verse.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.

he, he
hine
his
him

héo, she
hie, hi
hire
hire

hit, it
hit
his
him

hie, hi, héo, they
hie, hi, héo
hira, heora
him

eW-S has often ze for 7 in hiene, hiere, -a; and io for éo in hio,
hiora.
IW-S has frequently # for 7, ze in all forms. A peculiar n.p. he
occurs Reg. Psalt. (e.g. 17, 18; 21, 16). IW-S especially after 1000
has frequent d.p. heom.
VP has n.s.f., n.a.p. hie, g.p. heara' (rarely heora, hiera), otherwise the same forms as the first alternatives in the above paradigm.

Ru." has mainly the same forms as W-S, but also n.s.f. hiu, a.s.f.
hiz, héo, hio, d.s.m., d.p. heom.

North. forms also resemble W-S, but note also n.s.f. hiu (only Li.
where it prevails), a.s.f., n.a.p. hia (and Li. héa, Ru.? hiz for all
three), g.p. usually Aiora, but forms with -za-, and in Li. also with
-€0-, -ea-, occur.”

KG have hi beside hio in n.s.f. (a.s.f. not recorded), and in n.p.;
beside g.s.f. Aire also hiore, hiora. Interesting forms in early texts
are a.s.m. hine RC; n.s.f. hia frequent eKt.; a.s.f. hio Martyrology
fragment; n.a.p. hiz RC, FC; d.p. heom Ct. 45 (Surrey).

§ 704. It is a peculiarity of the Ingvaeonic languages, distinguishing them from OHG, that the pronoun of the third person
is also used as the reflexive and reciprocal pronoun of the third
person, e.g. OE da bepohte he hine ‘then he bethought himself’, hie
... Ate gemetton ‘they met one another’.

z. Possessive Adjectives
§ 705. The possessive adjs. are min, pin, tire, éower, uncer, incer;
there is also a mainly reflexive possessive sin his, her, their, but it
is largely superseded by the gen. forms of he. Possessive use of the
other pronominal genitives is rarer, e.g. tiser yldran ‘our ancestors’,
éower hundas ‘your dogs’, dre saula ‘of our souls’, hygeboncum min
‘in my thoughts’; it occurs most frequently
in groups like uncer,
(inéer) twéga ‘of us (you) two’, dre selfra ‘of ourselves’.
* Also RG; the form is perhaps influenced by peara.
2 On apocopated North. Hir, d.s.f., rarely g.s.f. see § 708, footnote 1, p. 291.
3 The sg. of this construction requires the poss. adj. agreeing with selfes, -re,

§ 706

PRONOUNS

290

§ 706. For W-S, Ru.! dre, VP ir, poetry has *dser,' a.s.m.
tiserne.2, With syncope sr > ss, €.g. disses, tissa, tissum < *usres,
&c., and -ss- can then be levelled to other forms like dsserne,
tissera (with r < rr, § 457).3 In North. dser appears to be the basic
form, and inflected forms with and without syncope appear,
iiserne, iisra, &c.; but inflexions from a simplified stem és- also
occur, tises, -um, &c. In North. éower is subject to spelling variation like gow (§ 701).

§ 707. The declension of the possessives is as strong adjs. like
blind and fager (§§ 639, 643.4); tre is like wilde (§ 644), although
absence of umlaut shows that its -e is not from -7. Simplification
of -rr- often takes place (§ 457), e.g. g.s.f. dre, g.p. dra, dssera,
uncera; and syncope can then follow (§ 392), ¢.g. g.s.m. uncres,
g.p. usra, iowra.

3. Demonstrative Pronouns
§ 708.

Plural
pa

Neuter
pet

Acc.

Masculine Feminine
—_s€o
se, that, the

pone

pa

pet

pa

Gen.
Dat.
Inst.4

pzes
p#&m, pam
pon, py

pére
pzre

pes
pzem, pam
pon, py

para, pera
pém, pam

Nom.

On less frequent a.s.m. pane, i.s.m.n. pan (all dialects) see § 333;
on a.s.m. pene (all dialects) see § 380.
eW-S has sio beside séo0; pam for b#m is W-S and rare Kt., not
Angl.; pare for p&re is frequent IW-S. eKt. (including Surrey) has
forms reflecting the change of # to 2 beside others with &: pet, pes,
pére, pém; also n.s.f. sia, dis.f. pare, g.p. beara. KG have d.s.f.

dara (cf. hiora, § 703), d.s.m., &c., Gam.
VP owing to second fronting has det, des beside det, Tzs (§ 166)

and g.p. deara.5 It has also n.s.f. sie (once séo), g.d.s.f. dére (? dere).
or with the noun possessed, e.g. mines selfes sunu, on minne selfes dom; but
pl. poss. adjs. are unusual with self, e.g. iowra selfra anwaldes,
' Marked as a theoretical form because in the uninflected form it is indistinguishable from the gen. of we.
2 Ru. once,
3 CP has tissum once, and--ss- forms occur in many 1W-S texts.
+ The classification of these forms as instrumental is traditional, but reflects
neither their origin nor their prevailing use.
5 Beara also occurs in LP; in the Kt. charters it is a Mercianism. The origin
of the form would be unaccented para (with short a) becoming re-accented, to
undergo second fronting and back mutation.

§ 709

DEMONSTRATIVE

291

Ru.) has forms similar to those of W-S, but also n.s.m. pe
(beside se), a.s.m. pene (beside pone, bane, pxne), n.s.f. siu, sie (beside
séo, sio). North. forms also resemble those of W-S, but new forms

n.s.m. de, n.s.f. dio, diu, Tf, are developed, beside se, sio.*
§ 709. The i.s.n. bon and d.s.n. b#m are freely used in forming
phrases, which are used as advs., and (with or without the particle
pe) as conjunctions, e.g. zfter b#m (pe) after, for pon (pe) because.
Note also sipbpan after, i.e. stb+-pon, and the comparative uses of

pon (1) as ‘than’ (usually Jonne), and (2) in phrases like pon ma the
more, where it interchanges with py and pé.2

§ 710. The lack of a relative pronoun in OE is largely made up

for by the use of se either alone or followed by the particle pe
(which shows it to be relatival, not demonstrative, in function),
e.g. se mon-dryhten se eow 3a maimas geaf ‘the lord who gave you
the treasures’, hisfeoh pzxt to lafe bip ‘his money which shall remain’,
se ellen-gzst se pe in pystrum bad ‘the mighty spirit who lingered

in darkness’, ond dzxtte (= pet pe, § 481.3) taelwyrdes sie, Tet hie
det tzlen ‘and that they may blame what is blameworthy’.3

§ 711.

Nom.
Acc.
Gen.
Dat.
Inst.

Masculine
pes, this
pisne
pisses
pissum
pys

Feminine
péos
pas
pisse
pisse

Neuter
pis
pis
pisses
pissum
pys

Plural
pas
pas
pissa
pissum

eW-S already has considerable variety owing to fluctuation of
y and i (hence e.g. i.s.n. dis, g.s.m. Tysses) and to the simplification
* North. has sometimes apocopated a.s.m. don, g.d.s.f. dér. The latter was
mainly used as dat., J#re is more frequent as gen. So hire is distinguished from
hir, and disser is rare as gen., frequent as dat. This limitation of forms in -7 to
the dat. is seen in Li., Rit., Ru.?, and many crosses have d.s.f. br, pér.
2 Strictly Jon md is comparative ‘more than some other already indicated’,
and is rarely used with resultative force ‘more for a reason already indicated’,
pé (b¥) md is both comparative and resultative. Examples B-T, s.v. md.

3 pe also functions as a relative alone or after a personal pronoun, e.g. i¢ Ait
eom pe wip pe sprece ‘it is I who speak with thee’; pat se mon ne wat pe him on
foldan fxgrost limped ‘that the man knows not to whom the fairest (fortune) falls
on earth’. Relatival ‘such as’ is swilé with or without correlatival demonstrative
suwilé, e.g. swylé séolde eorl wesan swylé AEschere wes, ‘7E. was such as a warrior
should be’; hafde his ende gebidenne swyléne he zr xfter worhte ‘he had met his
end, such a one as he worked for previously’. On the expression of the generalizing relatives, ‘whoever’, &c., see § 720.

292

PRONOUNS

§ 712

of -ss- (§ 457), hence g.s.m.n. dises, d.s.m.n. and d.p. disum, Tysum.
These dative forms also appear as pios(s)um, peosum. n.s.f. is pios
beside péos.
IW-S has g.d.s.f. pissere, g.p. pissera developed by parasiting

from pisre, pisra, which also occur; also occasionally a.s.m. peosne,
d.s.m.n. and d.p. peossum, g.p. peossa.
eKt. has g.p. deassa (Ct. 24), Surrey g.d.s.f. Teosse.!

VP forms largely agree with the above paradigm, but a.s.m.
always deosne, d.p. once deossum (beside dissum).
Ru} agrees with the above paradigm, but also a.s.m. peosne,
n.s.f, pios, d.s.f. pissere.
North. frequently develops a as root vowel, e.g. dis.f. dasse,
d.p. dassum; n.s.f. dius, Tys (Li.) beside usual dios; analogical forms
with r appear in g.d.s.f. (cf. § 708, footnote 1, p. 291), g.p. disra:
a.s.m. Siosne (Li. also dionne, § 484); i.s.m.n, disse. Other forms as
in the above paradigm.?
§712. A third demonstrative pronoun is preserved only in
eW-S in d.s.f. in the phrase to geonre byrg ‘to that city’, CP 443, 25.
§ 713. In IW-S (Gospels and Exeter diplomata), ON pei-r they,
is borrowed as pxge, showing -zg- for ON -ei-,3 and addition of the
pronominal nom. pl. -e. It isusedasa demonstrative (nom. and acc.),
less often as a relative (nom.); since it is equivalent to OE pd,
it is also used as a.s.f. Cf. Férster in AB lii. 274-80; liii. 86-87.
§ 714. Self self, declines strong and weak; on phonology see
§§ 146, 302, 325.

§ 715. Ilca same, is declined weak; strong forms are late and
rare.

4. Interrogative Pronouns
§ 716.
Nom.

Acc.
Gen.

Dat.
Inst.5

Masculine, Feminine
hwa, who?

hwone

Neuter
hwet

hwet
hwees4
hwm, hwim
hwy

T On eKt. d.s.m.n. dis(s)em see § 378, footnote.
2 Li. and Rit. (not Ru.*) have occasional simplification of intervocalic -ss-,
e.g. dises, Sisum, Jasum.
3 Cf. scegp beside scegh from ON skeid, ship.
4 In 1W-S the compound gehwa (§ 719) has a special fem. gen. and dat.
gehwére, gehwGre, often introduced by scribes into verse against metre, e.g.
Beow, 25.

5 Cf. footnote to § 708 (on inst. of se).

§ 717

INTERROGATIVE

293

On a.s.m. hwane see § 333; on hwane § 380; on early unrounding
in i.s. § 316.

There is an alternative i.s. hwon, hwan used only in phrases, for
hwon why?, &c.
The only dialectal variations are those caused by normal soundchanges, e.g. VP, Kt. hwet; but hwam is W-S only.
§ 717. Other interrogative pronouns are hweper, hweper which
of two?, hwelé, hwilé which? They are declined as strong adjs.

The interchange hwxper, hweper is found in all dialects.2 eW-S has
hwelé, which gives way later to hwylé, hwilé; Ru.1, Kt. have both,

VP hwelc, North. hwelc, hwoelé (§ 319); Ru.1, North. also hw#lé

(§ 197).

Hilic, of what sort?, declines like adjs. in -li¢ (§ 642); on North.
hilig see § 452; on eW-S hiilucu, North. hiluco § 340 (but cf.
§ 643.5, footnote).

5. Indefinite Pronouns
§718. The interrogative pronouns in hw- may be used as
indefinite pronouns: Awa anyone, someone, hweper either of two,
one or other, hwelc, hwilé anyone (but often adjectival, any . . .);
e.g. gif hwa to hwxdrum dissa genied sie ‘if anyone be forced to one

or other of these things’; sona swa sacerda hwylé hwone . . . gesyhp

‘as soon as anyone of the priests observes anyone’. Ahwd, ahwzper3
have the same sense as the simple forms.
§ 719. A general inclusive sense is given to the same words by
the prefix ge-: gehwa everyone; gehwexper each of two, gehwile each

(often adjectival); e.g. fordi sceal gehwa . . . ‘therefore everyone
must .. .’, was gehweper odrum lap ‘each of the two was hateful
to the other’. The same senses are more frequently expressed by

&ghwa (< *4-gi-hwa), &shweper, ghwilé.+

Other modifications

of the interrogative pronouns to obtain generalizing pronouns are
zthwa, welhwylc, gewelhwylé everyone.5
t Variety of root vowel is of Gmce. origin; cf. Goth. wabar, OHG uuedar;

OS huilik, OHG huelih,

? Not recorded as pron. in VP, where it occurs as a conjunction, always in the
form Aweder (§ 164).
3 Contracted dwher, dwper, dber; negated ndhwezper, &c.

* Interrogative advs. may be modified by d-, ge-, &g- like prons., e.g. hwer
where?, dhw#r (dwer, 6wer) anywhere, gehw#r, 2¢hw#r everywhere. So similar
compounds of Awanon, hwider, hi.

5 So with advs., (ge)welhw#r everywhere, &c., see § 679.

294

PRONOUNS

§ 720

§ 720. Generalizing relative pronouns can be made from interrogatives in hw- by adding swa . . . swa, e.g. swa hwa swa whoever,
swa hweper swa, swa hwilé swa whoever. Single swa is less usual;
swa hwa is very rare, swa hwzper (contracted sw#per) fairly common, and swilé may be sometimes for swa hwilé, not swilé such
(e.g. Beow. 72). The same meaning is expressed by léc(a) hwa,
lic hweper, loc hwilé;! and also by swelé, swilé with a normal
relative clause, e.g. swalé monn se Se to minum zrfe foe ‘whichever
man succeeds to my estate’.
§ 721. ‘In case anyone’ is weald hwa, e.g. weald hwzxt heom tide
‘in case anything befall them’.?
§ 722. Hwethwugu something; hAwilchwugu someone (also
adjectival ‘some’).3 The second element also appears as -hwugu,
-hwegu, -hwigu (also with -a); Cp. -huegu but Ep. -huuoegu, and
forms with oe prevail in North., where inflexion of this element is
also found, e.g. huoelchuoeges alicuius.
§ 723. ‘Someone’, ‘anyone’ can be expressed not only as described in § 718, but by nathwa, nathwelc, samhwelc; ‘something’,
‘anything’ not only by the neuters of these, but also by dwiht,
awuht* (neg. nadwiht, naénwiht). Note also the use of nom. sg. man
as ‘someone’, frequently giving a periphrasis for the passive voice,
e.g. hine man heng ‘someone hanged him’, ‘he was hanged’.
§ 724. ‘A certain’ is sum, declined strong;5 it may be used as
pron. ‘a certain person’.
§ 725. Other common indefinite pronouns (adjs.) are: eall all,
#lé each (VP ylc),° #nig any, nenig, nan none,’ se ilca, se sylfa
the same, ndnping nothing, swelc, swilc,® pyslic, puslic (also pyllic,
pullié § 484) such.
! So with advs., léca hwonne whenever, lic hw#r wherever.
2 So with advs., weald hweenne, in case at any time, weald hii in case in any
way (And. 1355).
3 So with advs., hwonanhwugu from somewhere, hiihwugu about (before
numbers, to show approximation); note also the adv. xthwega a little.
* On the phonology see § 338, footnote; on reduction in the adverb dteshwén,
at all, § 393.

5 n.s.f. eW-S sumu, 1W-S and poetry usually sum,

6 fre #lé, whence modern ‘every’, appears about 1000,
7 as.m. n&nne and ndnne.

8 The root vowels of swelé, and its adv. swelée, are distributed in the texts very
much like those of hwelé, hwilde (§ 717).

XVI
VERBS
§ 726. In the Germanic languages there are two main classes of
verbs: strong verbs, which form their past tense with vowel
variation, e.g. OE beran bear, ber bore, and weak verbs, which
form their past tense with a dental element, e.g. OE hieran hear,
hierde heard. Strong verbs practically all have a present tense with
e, interchanging with 0, as thematic vowel. Weak verbs all have
present tenses in which the thematic e/o is preceded by -7-: there

are three main classes, the -e-, -die-, and -#e- classes. There is also
a class of verbs known as the preterite-present! verbs: they are not
numerous, but most of them are very common. Originally strong
past tenses of present meaning (like Lat. movi, Gr. olda) they
developed a past tense with a dental formative element in Gmc.,
e.g. OE séeal shall, scolde should. There are very few verbs in
OE outside these three groups, and they will be classed together
below as anomalous verbs.

§ 727. Most of the independent forms of the OE verb belong
to the active voice. This has two moods, indicative and subjunctive, which have each two independently formed tenses,
present and past. It has also an imperative mood, which has a
present tense only; an infinitive mood, which consists of the
verbal noun of the present; and a verbal adjective, the present
participle. The passive voice has only a verbal adjective, the
passive participle: it expresses pure passivity, not necessarily

passivity in past time.? Apart from this form, the only trace of
an independent passive in OE is hatte is or was called, pl. hdtton
(cf. Goth. haitada, § 341).
§ 728. In addition to the above, the OE verb has many periphrastic forms. While the present can normally be used with
future meaning, the future can also be formed with willan+

inf., when there is a sense of desire, and with séulan+-inf., when
' The term ‘strong-weak’ is to be avoided, for it implies commitment to
the view that the dental element in the preterite of these verbs is identical in

origin with that of the Gmc. weak preterite. Cf. Prokosch in PMLA xlii. 334-5.
2 Note that therefore Lat. amatus est is OE he wes gelufod; but from intransitive verbs the part. is past: Ja ws geworden ‘then it had come to pass’.

296

VERBS

§ 729

there is a sense of obligation. There is a periphrastic past imperfect,
e.g. w&ron feohtende ‘they were fighting’, and a periphrastic perfect,
e.g. Gu hzfst geh&led ‘thou hast healed’. The passive voice is
formed by combinations of weorpan and wesan with the passive
participle.”

§ 729. The independent tenses of the indicative and the subjunctive have three persons in the singular, but it is a peculiarity
of the Ingvaeonic languages that there is only one form for the
three persons of the plural.3 There are no dual forms, and dual
pronouns are followed by plural verbs. The imperative has only
two forms, the 2nd pers. sg. and pl. The infinitive has an inflected
form used after to. The participles are fully inflected adjectives

(§§ 643.5.¢, d, e; 647).
1. Strong Verbs
a. INFLEXIONS

§ 730.

Indicative

Subjunctive

Imperative

Present

Sg. 1.

ride, I ride

tide

ritst
ritt
ridap

tide
tide
riden

Sg. 1.

rad

ride

2.

ride

ride

3.

rad

ride

ridon

riden

Inf.

ridan, to ridenne

Pres. part.
Pass. part.

riden

PL.

2.
3.

tid

ridap

Past

PL.

ridende

When a pronoun of the 1st or 2nd pers. follows, the pl. endings
-ap, -on, -en can be reduced to -e, e.g. ride we, ge. The final consonant of monosyllabic forms can be dropped under the same
* The part. may be uninflected, or inflected to agree with the object.
2 See further C. Pessels, The present and past periphrastic tenses in A-S (Strassburg, 1896); J. Klingebiel, Die Passtvumschretbungen im Altenglischen (Berlin
diss., 1937); F. Mossé, La périphrase verbale étre+participe présent en ancien
germanique (Paris, 1938).
3 In OE the three sg. persons of the subj. tenses have also fallen together.
Li. wutum let us, for normal OE wuton, uton, may preserve an old 1st pl. ending.

§ 731

STRONG

297

circumstances, e.g. fo we ‘let us take’. Such forms are mainly W-S:

VP has no instances in strong verbs, but cf. wynsumie we ‘let us
rejoice’; Ru.1 has instances only from pret.-pres. verbs, scule ge,
durfe wx. In North. such forms are distinguished only in the indic.,

as final -z is lost normally in the subj. In the indic. both normal
and reduced forms occur, e.g. Ru.? pres. forstonde we, past

Eisége we.

The conjugation of the present system of contracted verbs

should be carefully observed:

Indicative
Sg. 1.

Pi.

séo, I see

Subjunctive

2.

siehst

séo

3-

siehp

séo

séop

§ Imperative

séo

séon

Inf.

séon, to séonne

Pres. part.

séonde

seoh

séop

Like séon (Class V) are geféon rejoice, pléon risk. The contracted
verbs of Classes I and II, /éon grant, séon sieve, péon thrive, wréon

cover, fléon flee, téon draw, differ only in that they have long
diphthongs in the forms with preserved h, e.g. imper. téoh, 2nd

and 3rd sg. pres. indic. tiehst, tiehb. The contracted verbs of
Class VI, fléan flay, léan blame, sléan slay, pwéan wash, have éa
where séon has go, hence pres. indic. sléa, sliehst, sliehp, sléap,

imper. sleah, etc. The contracted verbs of Class VII, fon take, hén
hang, have where séon has é0, and é (< 6¢) where séon has te, hence
pres. indic. f6, féhst, féhp, fop, imper. foh, &c.

These contracted present systems show great diversity of form
in the dialects: see the discussions of the various classes below,
and the excellent conspectus of forms S-B, § 374.

§ 731. Origin of forms. (a2) The OE endings of the present indicative

were developed from Gmc. -6, -isi, -ipi, -anpi.! On the loss of final -i

see § 331.3; on syncopation and consonant changes in 2nd and 3rd sg.
pres. indic. see below; on the development of -anpi in Ingvaeanic see

§ 332. The final -t in 2nd sg. pres. indic. arose in inverted forms,
e.g. ritstu < rides pu dost thou ride (§ 481.1). The 1st sg. pres. indic.

' The 2nd and 3rd sg. and the pl. are assumed to be derived from forms

accented on the thematic vowel, otherwise the voiceless spirants following
that vowel would have been voiced in Gme. (§ 398.2), and would have become

West Gme. 7, d (§§ 404, 409).

298

VERBS

§ 73

in -z (-0), found in nW-S, corresponds to Gmc. -6,' the mainly W-S
ending -e must be from Prim, OE -z, and this would correspond to
Gmc. -6m, with -m added from the tenses with secondary endings (see
(5) below).?

(2) The Gmc. subj. mood is from an I-E viewpoint optative. The

present optative of verbs with thematic e/o was formed with -ot- to
which endings similar to those of the indic. but lacking final -7 (secondary endings) were added. In Gmc. the sg. and 3rd pl. would be -azm,
-aiz (-ais), -aip, -ainp, to which, with the loss of the final consonants
(§§ 399, 404), OE sg. -e, pl. -en correspond.’
(c), On the root vowels of OE strong past tenses see § 736.c, d. The
endings of the rst and 3rd sg. strong perfect in I-E were -a, -e (cf.

Gr. ofSa, -e), and these vowels dropped in Gmce. (§ 331.1). The 2nd

pers. ended in I-E in -tha, and the reflex of this is seen in the pret.-pres.

verbs (§ 767). But in Gmc. the pl. of the strong past tense, and in West
Gmc. the 2nd sg. also, were derived not from the I-E perfect, but from
the I-E thematic aorist (Gr. €Aurov to pres. Aeftw). The ending of the
2nd sg. of this tense was in J-E -es, which developed in Gme. as -iz >
OE -e.t The West Gmc. strong past sg. is accordingly a mixture of two
I-E sg. tenses. The 3rd pl., levelled to all persons in Ingvaeonic, was in
Gmc. -unp. This form will be discussed further below (§ 736.d).
(d) In Gmc. the past subj. extended a formative element -i- (proper
historically to the pl. opt. of athematic tenses) to all forms; hence the OE
forms are to be derived from Gmc. -im, -iz (-is), -i, -inb. The development in OE is normal.5 On umlaut of the root vowel in this tense see
§736.m.

(e) The imper. sg. had in I-E final -e which was lost early in Gmc.
(§ 331.1). In the pl. the I-E ending -ete coincided with the ending of the
and pl. pres. indic., and in Ingvaeonic it was replaced in both indic. and
imper. by the ending of the 3rd pl. pres. indic.® In OE -ap is extended
to the imper. pl. of pret.-pres. verbs, though pres. indic. pl. has -on,
! Final -u (-0) should remain only after short root syllables (§ 345), but it
appears analogically after long ones also, e.g. VP geldu, singu, gefallu, Li. drifo,
delfo, drinco.

2 See Bazell in Neophilologus xxiv. 64; but cf. Cowgill in Symbolae linguistical

in honorem Georgii Kurylowicz, pp. 44-50.

3 The unaccented ending -aiz was developed in the 2nd sg.; in other persons
the accented and unaccented endings would develop identically in Gmc.
4 The aorist had the I-E accent on the thematic vowel, and hence the Gmc.
development of the and sg. should be -is; but -iz arose also owing to the fluctuation of s and z in the pres. indic. and subj., and was developed in all the languages.
(Another view, Bazell, l.c.)

5 As in the pres. subj., the unaccented ending is developed in 2nd sg., while
in the other persons accented and unaccented endings would have the same
development in OE. See, however, Bazell in Neophilologus xxiv. 64-66, on
various theories of the development of the subj. endings.

6 Lancaster Cross has imper. pl. gibidep, Falstone Hogback gebided, Urswick

§ 732

(f)

STRONG

299

The infinitive is derived from the acc. sg. of a verbal noun, Gmc.

-anam < I-E -onom. This verbal noun is not developed as an infinitive

outside Gmc., nor has it been certainly shown to exist elsewhere in any

function (cf. Hirt, Urgermanisch ii, § 158). In West Gmc. other cases
(gen., dat., inst.) can be formed from the inf. according to the -ja-declension: of these OE has only the dat. in -enne, used after to.
(g) The pres. part. ending is derived from the I-E element -nt-, found
elsewhere in the same function (Lat. ferent-, Gr. dépovr-). Gmc. has a
(< I-E 0) as the thematic vowel, and after an unaccented vowel p

(< I-E t) >@ (Verner’s law) > West Gmc. d. In West. Gmc. the
formation follows the fa- and 76- declensions (§ 647), and -and- therefore

becomes -end- in OE owing to umlaut.

(2) The passive participle is a verbal adj. in I-E -en- or -on-. In OE,
Gmc. -an- from -on- was usually developed (§ 334). On traces of Gmc.

-in- (< LE -en-) see § 735.k, and on umlaut of the root vowel § 736.m.

The part. is declined in Gmc. as an a-, 6-adj. (§ 643.5.c), and this was
already the case in I-E.' In OE it usually has the prefix ge- if the verb

has not some other unaccented prefix.

§ 732. The 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. The endings of these are
derived from Gmc. -isi, -ipi (see above), and hence there is by

normal development in OE umlaut of the root vowel, and change

of e to 7 (§ 112), e.g. 3rd sg. biett, Lpcb, cymp, bricp, stent, fieht,
htt, fielb from béodan, lican, cuman, brecan, standan, feohtan,

hatan, feallan. In W-S there is generally syncope of -i- (§ 347),
and consequent assimilation of consonants and simplification of
double consonants within groups according to the principles dis-

cussed in §§ 476, 480. For clarity the rules which there emerge
are repeated here in so far as they affect the 2nd and 3rd sg.
pres. indic, and are reflected in OE spelling.

In the 2nd pers.:
dst > tst: retst, inf. rédan; later t can be dropped (§ 477.1):
Jinst, inf. findan, and so with original t, h&st, inf. hatan.

pst > sst > st: cwsst, inf.

cwepan; but analogically restored

ps > ts: snipst, snitst, inf. snipan,

ngst > nest: rare, brincst, inf. bringan; also brinst (§ 477.4).
Cross gebidzes. This is not to be regarded as a survival of the I-E imper. pl.
(Bazell, Litera ii. 31) or as a subj. (Ross, MLN x\lvii. 377), but as a INorth. form

for normal gebiddap, with extension of -d- from the 2nd and 3rd sg. (cf. Li.
bidas, Matt. 20, 22, and fairly frequent pres. indic. pls. in -xp, -zs).
* The I-E verbal adj. in -eno, -ono was developed as a pass. part. in Slavonic

also.

300

VERBS

§ 733

gst > hst: stihst, inf. stigan (cf. 480.3, footnote 1).
Ast > xt: rare, see § 481.4.
In the 3rd pers.:
th, dp > tt: l&tt, biett, bint (< *bintt), infs. létan, béodan,
bindan.
sp > st: ctest, inf, c€osan.

;

&p>hp: liehp, abelhd, byrhd, infs. léogan, belgan, beorgan

(§ 481.4).

ngp >> nép: rare, see § 482.

Note the simplification of geminates in groups of three consonants: cwist, bint, wierb < *cwisst, *bintt, *wierpp (inf. weorpan).
Analogical replacement of consonants is frequent, e.g. findst,
cwepst, and usual with -ng-, e.g. singp (§ 482). Final double con-

sonants are often graphically simplified, e.g. 3rd sg. rit, snip,
i.e. ritt, snipp (§ 66). For some rare changes of final -p to -¢ see
§ 481.4, footnote, 5, 8; S—B, § 359.9.
§ 733. (a) The 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. are rarely syncopated
in Angl. texts: e.g. VP has from strong verbs syncopation only
in gefihd, gefiht beside gefid, -foeht beside -foéd,' and always cwid,
inf. geféon, fon, cweban. VP normally has no syncope, and levels

away umlaut, e.g. falled’, ceorfed, -weorded,, -céosed, -liiced, -séaded,
-cnawed, flowed.2 But VP retains i in the root syllable, e.g. trides,
-e0, ites, xtfiled, bired, gilded, swilted, inf. tredan, etan, &c. The
position is similar in Ru.!, but there e is as a rule also restored,3
e.g. etep, -gefep, -getep, berep, swaltep (§ 328). In North. there is
practically never syncope, and the mutation of the root vowel is

levelled away, e.g. falled, wordes, eted, bered.
(b) The 3rd sg. forms occurring in eKt. are uncontracted, e.g.
Ct. 41 bibéaded, forgifed; but in KG there is prevailing syncope,
umlaut, and consonant assimilation, e.g. gebégd', togiot, helt, inf.

biigan, géotan, healdan. But root vowel e is often restored, e.g.
gelpd, tret, inf. gelpan, tredan; and so in 2nd sg. byrst (y = e in
* When there is no syncope, loss of intervocalic x and contraction naturally
take place in forms of this type.
2 VP., Ru.’, North. 3rd sg. pres. indic. cymed, he comes, will be separately
considered in § 742.
3 But Ru.', while having cwidst, ewid once each only, beside unsyncopated

forms, has a few more syncopated forms from other verbs than VP, e.g. cymp,
gewyrd, to cuman, weorban; note also gewyrfepb demolitur, with mutation but no

syncope (unless it is to weak Awierfan, not hweorfan); on syncopated forms in
contracted verbs in Ru. see §§ 743-5.

§ 734

STRONG

301

Kt. spelling), agelts, inf. beran, geldan. The vowel of the 3rd sg. in
~et (§ 735.b) is not syncopated: forberet, aweget, inf. beran, wegan.

§ 734. Even in W-S occasional forms of Angl. type occur; they

are especially common in CP, e.g. hated, béoded, drifed, hilped, and

there are also mixed forms, with syncope but no umlaut, or umlaut
but no syncope, e.g. weaxd, -h&test, inf. weaxan, hatan.
§ 735. Early, late, and dialectal forms. (a) the 1st sg. pres. indic.
appears in two forms, -e/-# and -o/-u. -e is practically universal in W-S,

the only eW-S exception being CP once cwedo. eKt. varies between -e
and -o, KG have only 1871 stele. The early Angl. texts have prevailingly
-o/-u, but there are a few cases of -e in VP, some of them probably due
to misunderstanding of Lat. future in -am as subj. Ru.1, however, has -e
about 20 times, -u once. In INorth. -o prevails, -a is frequent, -z less so,

and -e appears fairly often: this agrees well with the state of unaccented

vowels in these texts (§ 379, footnote). In Angl. monosyllabic forms occasionally add -m on the analogy of eam, &c., e.g. VP fléom, Li. -séom.

(5) The and and 3rd sg. pres. indic. often have -i- as the vowel of the
endings in early texts, e.g. LR hlimmith, Cp. midid, but also already
&ehéres thu, onhriosed, &c. Forms with -i- occur sporadically later,
especially Ru.? and North.

Early the 2nd sg, ends in -s, but later -st replaces this widely. VP has

-st only in monosyllabic forms, e.g. -sist, -foest. eW-S has already always

~st (or sd, § 481.1, footnote). Ru.! has both -st and -s. North. has -st
rarely, chiefly in monosyllabic forms, e.g. gesist, KG have byrst, but
agelts iu,
The 3rd sg. has in some texts -it, -et beside -ip, -eb. While in Ep., Cp.
this might be regarded as graphic (§ 57.7, footnote), the appearance of

the form in later texts suggests a genuine phonetic variant. In eW-S and
Ru.) examples are all from weak verbs, but Ru.? has hiscinet, fallet,
KG forberet, aweget.
The inflexions of the 2nd and 3rd sg. are confused in Ru. and North.
owing to the increasing weakening of distinction between unaccented

vowels and perhaps also because of confusion with the endings of weak
verbs of Class II. Ru.1 has historically correct forms (contracted or

uncontracted) in the and sg., but in the 3rd -ap, -zp appear beside -ep.

In North. -ad' is frequent in 3rd sg., -zd occasional, and and sg. also
has -as, -xs. A further confusion in North. (perhaps aggravated by
Scandinavian influence) is for 2nd and 3rd sg. to fall together under
the 2nd, hence 3rd sg. appears as -es, -as, -zs' (see Bazell in Litera ii.
28-31).
(c) The pl. of the pres. indic. shows little variation outside North.;
* North. has in verbs of all kinds occasionally and sg. in -d because in 3rd sg.
-3 = -s; so Ru, once hzfep habes.

302

VERBS

§ 735

Ru. has occasionally -ep. In North. -as is rather more frequent than
-ad, and in both forms reduction of the vowel is frequent, giving -ed, -es.
(d) The and sg. of the past indic. sometimes adds -s(#) in Ru.! and
North. owing to analogy of the weak verbs. Instances seem limited to
verbs of Class VII with root syllables ending in -t, e.g. Ru.! forlétes,
Li. hehtes, Rit. gihehtest.
(e) The pl. of the past indic. has -wn in the earliest texts, and this
remains in Cp. and VP beside -on, rarely -an. eKt. and KG have both
-on and -an. Although in eNorth. there are cases of the past pl. in -u
(RC bismzradu, cwému), -n is rarely lost in |North.,’ which usually has
-on beside -un (especially Ru.?). Ru.1 has usually -un, beside frequent
-on, -an, and occasional -en.
(f) The pres. subj. exhibits no variety of form in early texts. In IW-S
-an, -on generally replace pl. -en, and so always KG. In North. the loss
of -n destroys the distinction of sg. and pl., and while -e remains the
prevailing vowel, -a, -z, -o are also found. Ru.! also has sg. in -e, beside
more rarely -a and -, but in pl. -en like eW-S, -an, -on like 1W-S, and
-e, -# like North.
(g) The past subj. has little variety of form in early texts, except
eW-S pl. without -n (§ 473). In eW-S, however, -on (-an) from the
indic. begins to appear in the pl., and these endings are usual in IW-S;
so KG beswican. In |North., owing to loss of -2, -e prevails in sg. and pl.
with some fluctuation of vowel (-a, -0, -%); but -en also appears, beside
-on, -un from the indic. Ru. has sg. -e, pl. -e, beside -en, -an, -un.
(h) The pl. of the imper. has variants in Ru.’ and North. like those of
the pres. indic.
(i) The inf. appears in all early Merc. and southern texts in -am, later
-on also appears in IW-S and KG. In eNorth. the inf. already occurs
with loss of -2 (§ 472); North. has always loss of -n, and while the vowel
is usually -a, -e is frequent, and -z, -o are found. In Ru.! -az is usual,
-a, -en, -e rare.

Of the major monuments only VP has always -enne in the inflected
inf. IneW-Sa is introduced from the uninflected inf., and -anne prevails

beside rare -onne and forms with -n- (§ 457); but -enne, -ene also occur.
The position is similar in North., Rw.1, eKt., but
KG have only -en(n)e.
(j) The ending of the pres. part. is -ende in all texts, and Ru., North.
occasional -znde can be regarded as a spelling variant (2m = en, § 193-d).
In Ru. there are scattered instances of -ande, mostly in gangande going.
In Rit. and Li. (not in Ru.*) -ande is frequent in weak verbs of Class II,
Ii. has it sporadically with other verbs.
' A few cases of -o in Li. are mere scribal omission of the consonant; on -e
before pronouns see § 730. But in Li, (not in Rit., Ru.) loss of - is fairly frequent in the pres. indic. pl. of pret.-pres. verbs, e.g. wuto, cunno, Durfu, sdiolo,
mago.

§ 736

STRONG

303

(k) The pass. part. appears in early texts with both -in- and -zn- (cf.

§§ 204.8, 334), e.g. Ep. forsleginum, gibaen. The development proper to
the uninflected form (-a7, -on) is not found in OE.
§ 736. Formation of tenses. (a) The first five classes of strong verbs
had in the present as root vowel e, and were distinguished by the sound

which followed it: this was in I-E i in Class I, u in Class II, liquid or
nasal-+-consonant in Class III, liquid or nasal alone in Class IV, some

other single consonant in Class V. Since I-E ef > iin Gmc., and since
Gmc. eu > éo in OE, the first two classes have in OE i and éo, e.g.

ridan, céosan. In Classes III and IV i appears before nasal-+-consonant

and before single m, before liquids e remains, subject to the usual soundchanges, e.g. bindan, niman, helpan, weorban, W-S gieldan, beran, VP
beoran, W-S séteran. In Class V e remains except when subject to
dialectal modification, e.g. metan, VP meotan, W-S giefan. The modifica-

tion of these sounds in 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. has been fully
described in § 732.
(5) A few verbs are placed in Classes I~V because of the form of their
past tenses and passive participles, but their presents diverge from those

of most verbs of the classes in which they are placed. A large group of
verbs in Class II have a (not é0) in the present system, e.g. OE brican
enjoy, diican close. ‘The reason for the intrusion of @ into the present of

this class is uncertain, but may be no more than analogy with Class I
in Gmc.: after ef > i, since verbs with ai in the past had 7 in the present
system, those with au in the past might develop a in the present system.

In Classes I, III, and IV there are some aorist presents (e.g. ripan,

murnan, cuman), i.e. presents with the reduced grade of ablaut proper
to many aorist tenses (see below). A group of verbs usually included in

Class III are in origin verbs of Class V (i.e. they have presents with

e-+a single consonant not a liquid or nasal), but their presents were
extended by the addition of a dental element, e.g. OE streg-d-an strew,

feoh-t-an fight, frig-n-an ask. In Gmc. this element was levelled from
the pres. to all forms, and the past pl. and pass. part. adopted the

vocalism of Class III (e.g. OE fuhton, fohten). Lastly, a group of verbs

which had -?- before the endings in the present system, and hence might
be expected to be conjugated as weak verbs, have nevertheless their past

tense and pass. part. according to Class V: they are known as ‘weak
presents’, e.g. OE biddan < *bidjan-.

(c) The singular of the past tense has as root vowel Gmc. a, I-E o. In
Classes and II ai and au give OE 4, éa, e.g. rad, céas. In Classes III-V

a is subject to the usual OE changes, e.g. W-S band, healp, wearp,
feaht, stzl, met, geaf, seah. This Gmc. past tense represents a very
* Occasional forms like Cp. geborone are scribal; in Ru.! and North. occasional
-an, -on is due to the failing distinction of unaccented vowels.

304

VERBS

§ 736

common type of I-E perfect, which had o while the present system had

e (cf. Gr. Aetrw, A€Aoura).

(d) The plural of the past tense of Classes I-III had loss of the vowel
o which characterized the singular, and hence, corresponding to sg. I-E
oi, ou, or, ol, on, the pl. had 2, u, r, 1, 2. These gave Gmc. 4, u, ur, ul, un,
hence OE ridon, curon, wurdon, hulpon, bundon. This reduction of
vocalism was clearly due to absence of accent from the root syllable, for
if that syllable ended in Gmc. in a voiceless spirant in the past sg., in
the pl. the spirant was voiced, e.g. OE snap, snidon (d <0); céas, curon
(r < 2); téah, tugon. It is not entirely certain whether these past pls.
were in I-E a perfect or an aorist formation. Clearly there were in I-E
perfects with o in the sg., in which this o vanished in the pl. because the
chief accent of the word was now not on the root syllable (cf. Gr. ofa,
topev). Yet in the aorist also I-E verbs often exhibit loss of the vowel of
the root (cf. Gr. éAuzov, present Aeirw), and it has been noted in § 731.c
that the 2nd sg. of the past is in West Gmc. aorist in origin, so perhaps
the pl. is from the same I-E tense. The ending Gmc. -unp does not help
this matter to be decided for it is not original: the thematic aorist 3rd pl.
was I-E -ont, which would have given Gmc. -anp, and the perfect 3rd

pl. seems to have contained -r- (cf. Lat. fuere, &c.). The Gmc. subj. is
based on the same form of the root syllable as the indic. pl.

(e) The pass. part. of Classes I-III had the same I-E root vowel as the
pl. of the past tense, and the same consonant changes in Gmc. But in
Gmc. a root vowel u became o, unless a nasal consonant followed
(§ 115), while 7 remained (§ 114). Hence corresponding to the past tense
pls. just quoted the OE pass. parts. are riden, coren, worden, holpen,
togen, but bunden.

(f) Classes IV and V form the pass. part. with a reduction of the root
vowel seen in the present. But in I-E before a single consonant this
reduction did not cause complete loss (as in Classes I-III), but change
to » (§ 101), and this developed in Gmc. as u (subject to change to 0,
§ 115), before liquids and nasals, as e before other consonants. Hence

OE pass. parts. stolen, numen, meten.

(g) While resembling verbs of Classes I-III in the present system, the
past sg., and the pass. part., those of Classes IV and V have an entirely
different formation in the pl. of the past, where the root vowel is I-E é,
Gmc. 2, West Gmc. d, OE # (nW-S é), but 6 before nasals (§ 127-8),
e.g. OE st&lon, mton, noOmon.’ While there is some evidence for I-E
perfects with lengthening of the root vowel (see Hirt, Urgermanisch ii.
148), it is more likely that the source of the Gmc. past with long root
vowel is an I-E aorist of the type of Gr. én». Such formations contribute
to the Lat. perfect with lengthening of the root vowel, e.g. édi, sédi,
! The same vowel appears in the past sg. in #t, n6m, cwom.

§ 736

STRONG

305

véni, légi. Here clearly a formation with a fully accented root vowel was
involved, and so far as we find Verner’s law operating in these verbs,
the voiced spirant must have been levelled to the past pl. from the

pass. part.’ The usual Gmc. past pl. with reduction of the root vowel
appears in pret.-pres. verbs of Class IV, OE séulon, munon.

(h) The verbs of Classes VI and VII are of a different type. They had
in the past sg. an accented vowel, and the present system had an un-

accented vowel (thus resembling the aorist presents referred to above,
under (5)). The pass. part. had as usual an unaccented vowel, and hence

the same root syllable as the present. The form of the past pl. in Gmc.
is doubtful,” but in West Gmc. the vowel of the sg. was extended to it.
A long vowel or diphthong stood in the forms with accented root vowel

(i.e. the past sg.), and the present system and the pass. part. had in Gmc.
a either alone or as first element of a diphthong. Hence the main types
are:

Gmc. a, 6; OE the same, e.g. faran, for, faren.

Gmc. ai, é (< é, § 100.3); OE 4, é, e.g. hatan, hét, haten.
Gmc. au, éu; OE éa, é0, e.g. béatan, béot, béaten.
Gmc. al, él; OE the same, e.g. fallan, fell, fallen

Gmc, an, én; OE the same, e.g. *fanyan,* feng, fangen.

In OE, however, there is considerable analogical disturbance of the
distribution of é and éo in the past tense, éo having almost completely

replaced é in the / verbs (féoll, &c.), and in all n verbs except fon and

hén (béonn, &c.).

(#) Although the past tense pl. had an accented vowel in Classes VI
and VII, and this would normally be followed by voiceless spirants, the

voiced spirant proper to the pass. part. was transferred to the past in
Gmc., e.g. OE slég, feng < Gmc. *slag-, féng- (infs. *slayan-, *fayyan-).
(j) In I-E the perfect tense was usually marked by reduplication,

and this remains in Sanskrit, Gr., and often in Lat. (e.g. Gr. AéAoura,
Lat. pepigt). It is doubtful if all past tenses had in Gmc. reduplication
* What is known as the ‘Michels—Streitberg theory’ of the origin of Gmc. &
in the past pl. of Classes IV and V seeks to explain the formation as similar to
the past pls. of Classes I-III, having loss of the root vowel. This in Classes IV
and V involved loss of a syllable; and so the preceding reduplicating syllable

suffered compensatory lengthening, and was preserved in Gmc. Thus from the
root sed, sit, the I-E perf. pl. would be *sesed- > *sésd- > *sézd- > Gmc. *sét-.
This theory involves many difficulties (especially with regard to the simplification of the consonant groups) and is better abandoned.
2 If it had reduced grade, the root syllable would be the same as in the present

and in the pass. part. Then it would be the source of the Goth. past tense of
Class VII, with the same vowel as present and pass. part. (e.g. haihait, inf,
haitan), and of a small group of OE pasts with the same vowel as their presents,
séedd, gang, -bland, -ban,
3 W-S feallan, feallen.

4 OE fon (§ 119).

306

VERBS

§ 736

inherited from the I-E perfect, but in Goth. reduplication is developed
as the main distinguishing feature of the past of Class VII. In OE also
a small group of verbs of Class VII are developed from reduplicated
tenses with the accent on the reduplicating syllable and consequent
loss of the root syllable, e.g. heht < *yeyéit- (or *xexait-, with reduced
vowel in the root syllable) beside Aégt as the pret. of hdtan. The ME
development suggests that heht in OE acquired the long é of hét, but
other reduplicated pasts had short vowels capable of breaking (reord,
&c., § 746).

(R) Like Class V, Classes VI and VII have a number of weak presents,
e.g. OE hebban, wépan < *yavian-, *udptian. In Class VI two verbs
have infixed -n- in the present, OE sta-n-dan, wxé-n-an, past stéd, woc
(cf. Lat. vinco, vici, sterno, strévi), This -n- is extended in OE to the
past part. standen.

( J) A considerable number of verbs is included in Class VII of
which the forms are not to be explained according to (hk) above. One
group had I-Eé or @ in the present, 6 in the past, all accented vowels,
e.g. Goth. létan, lailot, fldkan, faiflok. In OE they developed é or éo as
the vowel of the past, e.g. lZtan, lét, hropan, hréop. This was perhaps
due to the continuance of reduplication in these verbs,? which might
cause them to be associated with the reduplicated verbs of Class VII
with é and éo in the past tense. OE wépan < *udpiian is a weak present
of this class. Another group of verbs had open root syllables, and
sometimes formed their past tenses with the element -y- seen in Lat.
perfects (e.g. sé-v-i), but in OE this element was extended to all forms,

e.g. blawan < *bléuan (§ 151), flowan, past bléow, fléow.3 The past
should have final go (<_ ew) in OE, but # was added from inflected forms,
and then éoy was taken as the base to which inflexions were added. The
pass. part. has the vowel of the present system in these verbs on the

analogy of other types with é and éo in the past.
(m) From what has been said in § 731.d, h of the endings of the past
subj. and pass. part., it is clear that the root vowel of the former should
always have umlaut while that of the latter might be expected to have
* It will be seen that the ‘Brugmann—Wood theory’ of the origin of the past
tenses of Classes VI and VII, as defended by E. Prokosch (A comparative
Germanic grammar, pp. 176 ff.), has been regarded above as offering the most
reasonable solution to the problem. It is, however, at present inadvisable to
attempt to reconstruct the I-E form of the ablaut which appears in Gmc. as

variation between a and a long vowel (cf. §§ 106-7).

? In OE reduplicated past tenses survive from /Ztan, -dr#dan, and r&dan (see
below, § 746).
3 This explanation of the -y- of these verbs is the most probable of several.
The objection to it is the uncertain antiquity of the Lat. y-perfect, and consequent doubt if it is evidence for an J-E formation which could reappear in Gmc.

Cf. Flasdieck in A 1x. 305-6.

307

STRONG

§ 737

umlaut sometimes, as the formative element was Gmc. -in- beside -an-.

In the past subj. umlaut is frequent in pret.-pres. verbs (e.g. séyle, see
§ 767), but otherwise instances are few and uncertain (see SB, § 377.4).
In the pass. part. there are, however, a number of forms with umlaut:

CP, Hatton MS., -cymen, -dr&éwen, Cott. MS. also -slegen; 1W-S cymen,
Sedefen, -tigen (Gn. Ex. 41, for togen), -pwegen, byn cultivated, geréwen;
Ep. forsleginum; Li. has often umlaut of o in the pass. part. (§ 196) and
also -hefen, -duegen (-duén, § 244), -scyfen (for scofen, shoved);' Rit.
-hefen, Ru.? gibroeéen broken, Ru. -dwegen. The North. analogical
pass. parts. -foen, -hden for fangen, hangen are probably disyllabic,?
with 6-+-e, not o¢, but a similar but older re-formation with umlaut is
preserved in poetical -fén (§ 237). A similar formation is the participial
adj. gen own, beside dgen.
§ 737. The origins of the verbal classes suggested above should not

be assumed to be true of every strong verb occurring in the historic
Gmc. languages separately considered. The types of conjugation had
the origins suggested, and they drew to themselves all verbs which
did not form weak past tenses. Class I could even draw a loan-word,
OE scrifan, Lat. scribere. Especially in Classes VI and VII, although the
prevailing origin of the conjugation is, as suggested above, verbs with
an accented root vowel in the past and an unaccented one in the present,
such a conjugation was very liable to confusion with one with I-E a or 0
in the present and having a past tense with lengthening: here may

belong e.g. faran, for (cf. Gr. wdpos ford, Sanskrit piparmi I conduct).3

b. THE CLASSES OF STRONG VERBS
§ 738. From the paradigm in § 730 it appears that an OE strong
verb can be conjugated if the infinitive (or some other part of
the present system), the singular and plural of the past, and the
passive participle are known. These parts of typical verbs of the
various classes will now be recorded, and divergent forms noted.

§ 739.
ridan, ride

CLASS I
rad

ridon

riden

Similarly a large number of verbs, e.g. ztwitan reproach, belifan
remain, drifan drive, glidan glide, hrinan touch, sérifan decree,
writan write.
' But geséryncan shrunken, is beside -sériuncen, and hence seems due to the
usual North. change u > iu/y after sé (§ 181), despite the intervening r.

2 So -dden done, beside poetical -dén.

3 On the composite origin of Class VI cf. Mezgerin Language Xviii. 223-5.

308

VERBS

§ 739

The operation of Verner’s law (§ 398.2) is seen in

snipan, cut

snap

snidon

sniden

and similarly /ipan go, scripan go;! but p, s are extended to all
forms of mipan conceal, risan rise, wripan twist; ztcliban adhere,
occurs only in pres.
Verbs with internal g frequently have -h in the past sg., e.g.
stigan ascend, stah (§ 446).

Verbs of this class are liable to back umlaut in the past pl., but
in W-S this was analogically removed, while in Angl. it commonly
remains, especially in VP? (details and examples §§ 214-15).
There is evidence in a few verbs for aorist presents with 7
(§ 736.b, h), especially VP reopan, Ru.) hriopan, North. riopa,
(h)rioppa reap,3 Li. grioppa grip.

A few verbs of the class pass partially into the weak class in
INorth. Weak past forms occur from gripan grip, fordwinan vanish,
hrinan touch, stigan ascend, e.g. Li. gegripp(e)de, forduinde,
gehrin(a)don, stig(a)de, formed from the present (or the past pl.),
Ru.? ast#gdon formed from past sg.

VP has from xtwitan: pres. part. edwitende, past. pl. edwiton,
but also past edwitte, -un, edwetede, whence pres. part. edwetende.
Contracted verbs.

wréon, cover

wrah

wrigon

wrigen

So with consonantal change h-g owing to Verner’s law /éon grant,
péon thrive; with change h-w, séon sieve, sah, astwen. In W-S these
verbs preserve h in the imper. sg. and 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.,
e.g. séoh sieve, onlihp grants.

Already in eW-S these verbs are affected by the analogy of
Class II, so that téon, accuse (< *tixan), has past téah, tugon. In
IW-S occur from téon frequently téah, tugon, togen, and similar
forms from péon, wréon; from péon occur also pungon, pungen
according to Class III.4

In Angi. VP has inf. -wréan (§ 238.2), 3rd sg. pres. indic. -wrid
(§ 237.2), imper. -wrth, past -wrah, pass. part. -wrigen; but beside
' But pass. part. sériben, Gu. 1039.
2 In Kt. material is practically lacking.

3 The quantity in W-S ripan is uncertain. OFC 1089 r&pon, past. pl., suggests

a bye-form repan (Class V).

4 These forms are historically correct, as péon < *piyxan- (§ 119).

§ 740

STRONG

309

similar forms, Ru.! and Li. have also present system from wriga(n)

with analogical extension of g from past system. Other Angl.
forms are regular except Rit. pres. subj. gid%i, pres. part. diiende

(cf. Cp. diendi, § 237.3).

Ct. 45 (Surrey) has 3rd sg. pres. indic. gelid grants, but KG

-wrihd, imper. -wrih (§ 310).
§ 740.

CLASS
béodan, command

béad

II
budon

boden

Similarly a large number of verbs, e.g. bréotan destroy, géotan pour,
néotan use, réocan smoke, sééotan shoot, sméocan smoke.

The operation of Verner’s law is seen in:
céosan, choose

céas

curon

coren

séopan, boil

séap

sudon

soden

Like céosan are dréosan fall, forléosan lose, fréosan freeze, hréosan
fall; but abréopan, fail, extends p to all forms.

Verbs with internal -g- often have -h in past sg., e.g. fleogan fly,

jléah, and so dréogan endure, léogan tell lies.

Occasional formsin Merc. withiinstead of é(< é0) by smoothing

before back consonants in the present system of these verbs are’to

be attributed to the analogy of 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic., e.g.
VP, Ru.! ligende, VP fligu, Ru. smikende.'

A considerable group of verbs have i instead of go in the present
system (§ 736.b), and hence ¥ in the 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
Examples are briican use, bigan bend, lican lock, striidan rob,
stican suck.
In North. both éo- and d-presents tend to extend the vowel of
the rst and 3rd sg. past to the pl., the 2nd sg., and the subj., e.g.

i. pl. gecéason, gebrécon, Rit. 2nd sg. onléce, Li. subj. gecéase, beside

frequent forms with u. Lz. has frequently past sg. with z (? analogy
of Class V) instead of é (smoothing of éa), e.g. gebrac, ataeh, flaeh.
In North. scitfan, shove, has in present system séff-, past pl.
Rit. -séyufon (§ 181), pass. part. Li. geséyfen (§ 736.m); IW-S inf.

séedfan (§ 180).

Weak forms develop from a few verbs; Li. gesiipedon, they tasted
(but sg. geséap); IW-S réohte smoked.
The verbs cnéodan, attribute to, snéowan, hasten, stand beside
* Cf. § 227. Another view, Biilbring, Altengl. Elementarbuch, § 513.

§ 742

VERBS

310

the Class VII forms cnédan, snéwan. Léoran, go, probably had past
part. *loren (cf. Ruin 7 geleorene, sic) beside weak forms. The past
tenses ahnéop plucked, genéop overcame (Guth. 847, Ex. 475) may
belong to this class, with archaic or dialectal éo for éa (§§ 275, 278).
Contracted verbs.
fléon, flee

fléah

flugon

_—flogen

Similar is ton draw. In W-S these verbs preserve A in 2nd and 3rd
sg. pres. indic. and imper. sg., e.g. fliehp, fléoh. In VP fléon extends

éo to all forms where the root vowel contracted with a back vowel
of the ending, e.g. 1st sg. pres. indic. fléom (§ 735.a), pl. fléod, and
by further extension pres. part. fléonde, but subj. pl. flén, 3rd sg.
pres. indic. -27 (§ 237.2), imper. -téh. Ru.” has @o in all pres. forms
of both verbs, even imper. fléoh, téoh, except occasionally éa when
the ending had -a-, e.g. fléap, beside fléop (§ 238.2.b); and and 3rd
sg. pres. indic. are not recorded. North. has éa in all forms where
there is contraction with a back vowel, e.g. inf. fléa, téa, pres. indic.

pl. fléas; but imper. Li. flzh, 3rd sg. pres. indic. Li. flad, Rit. fleed,
Ru? fiés, Rit. 120, subj. Rit. flee, flit; pres. part. Rit. fleende.
eKt. has inf. -téon, -tion; pres. subj. atee, Ct. 38, is perhaps an
error, cf. KG flio, atio. KG have 3rd sg. pres. indic. atiohd but
aflihd (§ 310), past sg. téah, pass. part. togen.

§ 741.

CLASS III

bindan, bind

band, bond

bundon

bunden

Similarly many verbs, e.g. drincan drink, gelimpan happen,
grindan grind, springan spring, climban climb, hlimman resound,
swimman swim. On the distribution of a, o in the past sg. see § 130,
footnote.
Findan find, has in W-S 1st and 3rd past sg. funde (replacing

fand). Swingan flog, has pass. part. sungen (Martyrology fragment)!
beside seoungen. On North. forms of s¢rincan shrink, see § 181,
footnote.
In the verbs brinnan burn, rinnan run, forms with metathesis are
usual
:?

birnan

barn, born

burnon

burnen

If correct, the form may be Gmce., and comparable to sund swimming, sulh

plough (cf. OED s.v. sullow), with early loss of y before u in West Gmc. (5 405)
or Prim. OE (§ 470).

2 Unmetathesized forms of rinnan are fairly frequent, and are usual in the
compound gerinnan congeal; note also onbran, Ex. 398.

§ 741

STRONG

311

On the root vowels of the present system, W-S birnan, biernan,
byrnan VP, Ru.! beornan, North. biorna, and similar forms
of

trnan, see §§ 155, 299.a, 459. In past sg. VP, eW-S have orn,
North, Ru.1, W-S arn, IW-S also earn (analogy of wearp); similarly

born, barn (but Ru. lacks the form).

North. has scattered weak forms, e.g. Li., Ru.? gibinde (past sg.),
Li. gedringdon, gedringed; also levelling of vowel of past sg. to pl.,

e.g. Li. ongannon; and levelling of vowel of pres. to past
and
passive part., e.g. Ru.? drincon, Li. besuingene (a.s.m.).

helpan, help

_healp, halp

= hulpon

_holpen

Similar are, for example, beteldan cover, delfan dig, meltan melt,
swelgan swallow, swellan swell, sweltan die. On the distribution of

healp, halp see § 143. Verbs with initial g have ie (i, y) in the present system in W-S, e.g. gieldan pay, giellan yell, gielpan boast.

Breaking in the present system occurs in aseolcan, become
languid, past part. be-, asolcen (§ 146). Féolan press on (< *felyan)
has breaking in the present system, but smoothing intervenes in
Angl. before inflexions beginning with front vowels (§ 231), hence

VP -féalan, subj. féle, Rit. subj. -féla; on VP 3rd sg. pres. indic.
-filed see § 148; past fealh, falh, fulgon, showing the action of
Verner’s law, but also analogical past pl. VP -félun.
Li. has weak past -suelte, suoelte.
weorpan, throw

= wearp }

wurpon

_—_ worpen

Similar verbs are, for example, beorgan protect, ceorfan cut,
hweorfan go, steorfan die, sweorcan grow dark.

Verner’s law is effective in
weorpan, become

wearp

wurdon

__ worden

On dialect variety in the root syllable of weorpan and weorpan see
§§ 147, 149, 320, 323; also § 156 on past part. gewarden. North.

has past pl. -worpon (with vowel of pass. part.), and Ru.? also weak

worpadun.,

Aorist presents are murnan mourn (pass. part. wanting),
spurnan spurn (also spornan, §115; pass. part. -spornen'), and
perhaps the isolated inf. forcwolstan swallow; from murnan a weak
past pl. murndan occurs (And. 37, cf. 154), from spurnan a weak
pass. part. -spurned (Gregory’s Dialogues 60, 28).
' Rare -spurnen (cf. Lambeth Psalter 94, 10).

312

VERBS

§ 742

feohtan, fight

feaht

fuhton

bregdan, brandish

fohten

bregd

brugdon

brogden

stregdan, strew
berstan, burst
perscan, thresh

stregd
beerst

*peersé

strugdon
burston
purscon

frignan, ask

__strogden
borsten
pors¢en

fregn

frugnon

frugnen

-

On the formation of these verbs see § 736.b. In every instance
the element originally infixed in the present was extended in Gmc.
to all forms. Metathesis intervened in berstan, perscan < *bres-t-,

*“pre-sk-. On absence of breaking before metathesized r see § 155
and footnote; sporadic forms with breaking are Li. gedearsca, -nne,

beside Szrscende (§ 327). A few forms without metathesis occur:

Ru." past pl. brustzen, IW-S infl. inf. prescenne.

On loss of g and g in bregdan, stregdan see § 243 and footnote.

In W-S stregdan is treated as a weak verb, hence contracted
3rd sg. pres. indic. always strétt (while bregdan forms brétt or britt),

past strédde, pass. part. (ge)stréd(ed); Ru.t and North. have also
many forms of a weak past stregde, strugde, strogde.
In eW-S frignan often loses g in the present system, and in IW-S

&, g disappear in all forms (§ 243 and footnote); IW-S has also past

sg. fran (analogy of Class I); this analogy is not usually extended

to past pl. and pass. part., though frinon, -en occur. On spellings
freng, frungon see §§ 62, 400, footnotes.

The reason for 7 of W-S frignan beside North. fregna (also
fregna, § 327), Ru.) fregnan (cf. pegn, § 328) is unknown. Li., Rit.

also have fraigna,! Ru.', North. past sg. fregn, but various analogical
formations in past pl. (Ru.? -fregnun) and pass. part (Li., Ru.?
-frognen). Li. has also weak forms -fregnde, -frxgn(a)de, etc.
§ 742.

CLASS IV

beran, bear

beer

bron

boren

Similarly cwelan die, helan hide, *hwelan roar (3rd sg. pres. indic.
hwilep), stelan steal, teran tear, -bweran stir, and the participial
adj. gedwolen perverse; also brecan break, hlecan unite, though not
formally of the class (pass. part. brocen, -hlocen); and nW-S sceran,
cut, beside W-S scieran, past scear, scéaron.
Divergence of forms is often due to normal dialect developments,
' The phonological development is not clear; cf. Li., Rit. cnatht beside
enzht (§§ 227, footnote, 327), Li. past fraign (beside fragn),

§ 743

STRONG

313

e.g. VP and Kt. e in past sg., nW-S é in past pl. Back umlaut in
the present system generally appears in North. and Ru.t when
phonologically justified (e.g. beora, beorad,) while VP even extends
the diphthong analogically, e.g. beorende, gebreocu. Li., Rit. often
have ea for eo, e.g. beara. Similar forms with back umlaut are a

feature of many dialectically coloured W-S texts. Cf. § 210.2.

North. has a few forms with & from the past sg. in pres. system,

e.g. Li. imper. -bzr (§ 327).

niman, take

nam, ndm

némon, namon

numen

cuman, come

c(w)dm

c(w)6mon

cumen

The variants given above are found already in eW-S except past

sg. nam.' In Angl. niman has always pret. ndm(on), except Ep. 113

naamun. Ang]. texts have prevailingly -w- in past of cuman, except

Ru.*, which always has cém(on).
Cuman has in eW-S alternative pres. subj. and past part. cyme,

cymen. In Angl. the pres. subj. with y appears in all texts, and 2nd

and 3rd sg. pres. indic. usually preserve mutation, e.g. VP cymes,

-e0; y is frequently levelled into other forms of the pres. system,
e.g. VP, Ru.1, North. imper.cym, Ru.1, North. pres. indic. pl. cymad,
part. cymende.
§ 743.

CLASS V

metan, measure

met

mzton

meten

Similar verbs are cnedan knead, drepan slay, screpan scrape, sprecan
speak, swefan sleep, tredan tread, wefan weave, wegan carry, wrecan

avenge. So also plegan, play, used only in pres. system, and pass.
part forrepen caught (Li.).

Drepan has pass. part. both drepen and dropen (Beow. 2981), so
cnedan both cneden and -cnoeden (Li., cf. §§ 196, 736.m).
Verner’s law operates in:

cweban, say

cwep

wesan, be

wes

cwedon
weron

cweden

But it is not operative in lesan gather, genesan escape.
Palatal influence has effect in the W-S forms of:

giefan, give

geaf

géafon

giefen

* Nam is due to analogy of nasal verbs of Class III, ndmon is due to early
analogical processes (Flasdieck in AB xli. 288).

314

VERBS

§ 743

and so -gietan get (only in compounds). Li. also has past sg. -gea/,
-geat beside forms with 2.

Etan, eat, fretan, devour, have 2 (nW-S @) in past sg. £t, fret.
Forms of the present system of etan often have an accent on the
vowel in Li., and this may indicate spread of é from the past.
Dialectal variants are largely as in Class IV: e for 2 in past sg.;
é for & in past pl.; eo (North. also ea) in pres. system; North. 2

for e in pres. system (from pret. sg., e.g. Li. spracende, -zxtta).
North. and Ru. have sometimes é in past sg. (from pl., e.g.
spréc, cwéd, seh); North. has conversely occasionally 2 in past pl.,
especially in weron.
On North. e > oe after
u see §319; on North. wosa, be, see §210.2.
Contracted verbs.

séon, see

seah

sawen

geféon, rejoice
pléon, risk

gefeah
pleah

gefégon

sewen

In Angl., where contraction is with e and a back vowel of the
inflexion, VP and North. have mostly éa but Ru.! éo,' e.g. VP,
North. inf. séa(n),2 Ru.! séon (§ 238.2.b). With a front vowel
contraction is to é, but ee may be restored, and analogical éo, éa,
io, ie, ii3 can appear; e.g. pres. part. Ru.1, Li. -seende, Ru." -séonde,
VP -sionde, -stende; pres. subj. pl. VP -sén, Li. -see (-séa, -séz),
Ru.? -sie, -sit, -séa. VP rst sg. pres. indic. -sie, gefie beside -sio,
gefio are difficult (§ 237.3); North. -siom, -sium.

In W-S these verbs retain A in 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. and
imper., e.g. stehp, seoh. Angl. forms have -h in the imper., but not
in the indic. forms, e.g. VP -sist, -sid, geftd, Ru.} sis,+ -sid, North.
~sis(t), -si0.5 KG have 3rd sg. both -siohd and -siod (§ 306).
For past pl. s@won, Ang]. has ségon, and this is sometimes West
Saxonized as s#gon. Ru.1 has -ségon, -s&gon, -s@gun (§ 257, footnote).
Pass. part. Angl. gesegen.®
1 Of these verbs VP has geféon and -séon, Ru.! and North. have many forms
of -séon, but geféon is not certainly used there in the present system, being replaced by weak giféag(i)a, see § 761.6.
2 VP also -sian.
3 Forms with -ie- are based on a stem -i- inferred from 2nd and 3rd sg. pres.
indic. (cf, Rit. diiende, § 739). The pres. subj. gesti (found Li., Rit., Ru.* as sg.,
Ru.* also as pl.) seems to be modelled on the indic.: as fded is to fée, so is gesiid
to gesti. So also Rit. subj. -d12, -flai (§§ 739-40).
+ Also -sees, -sihst.
5 North. forms often spelled with -#-.
® Cf. § 398.2, and Lane in JEGP xxxv. 20.
;

315

STRONG

§ 744

Another verb of this type is possibly (ge)scéon happen, pass,
ist sg. pres. indic. scio, Gen. 1103, 3rd sg. sceet, sceot (corrupt forms
in transcripts, Whitelock OE wills, no. xxxiv); but in OE weak past
and past part. gescéode, -scéod, And. 18, Dan. 619,' Ex. 507; cf.
OHG geskehan, -skah.
Weak presents.
biddan, ask

bed

b#don

beden

sittan, sit

set

ston

seten

licgan, He
picgan, partake
fri¢gan, ask}

leg
peah, pah

légon
p#gon

legen
pegen?
gefregen, -fregen,
-frigen

On the present system of these verbs see § 749 below. North.

and Ru.) have a few instances of é@ from past pl. in the sg., e.g.
béd, sét. W-S has past pl. lagon beside l¥gon (§ 162), nW-S
légon.
CLASS VI

§ 744.

faran,go

fdr

féron

§ faren

Similarly many verbs, e.g. dragan draw, galan sing, grafan dig,
hladan \oad, wadan go; also the participial adjs. gedafen, -dzfen
fitting, gepracen enduring.

Owing to palatal influence séafan shave, s¢acan shake, have forms
with scea- in pres. system in W-S and North., past scedc in IW-S

(§§ 179, 181).

Spanan entice, has already eW-S past spéon beside spén; hence
in some manuscripts confused with spannan span, e.g. past pl.
spéonnan, OE Bede.

Verbs with a nasal infix are weénan awake, past woc,* and standan
stand, past stéd, past part. standen.
Formed with infix -sk- is waxan’ wash (x < sk, § 440), past
wox, pass. part. wxscen, waxen, woxen; also past wéox (analogy of
Class VII, OE Bede); but also apparently weak present system,
inf. weséan, &c.
In W-S these verbs have usually 2 in 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
' But Dan. 266 read séynde for séyde.

3 Only certainly recorded in verse.
4 But past part. weak waecned,

2 In IW-S apegen surfeited.

5 From *yat-sk-.

316

VERBS

§.744

(§ 160), but they generally level a from inf. and pres. indic. pl. to
Ist sg. pres. indic., imper., pres. subj., pres. part. and inflected inf.,
e.g. fare, far, fare, -en, farende, -enne. The pass. part. fluctuates
between x and a, e.g. feren, faren,slegen, slagen, no doubt because
the ending fluctuated in Prim. OE between -an and -zn- (§ 334).
VP has 3rd sg. pres. indic. -fered, imper. fer (i.e. #2 undergoes
second fronting); but ea appears before back vowels, e.g. fearu,

-ad, -hleadaé, and by analogy in pres. part. fearende (but galende,
-séaecende, §§ 164-5). The subj. does not occur.
In Ru. and North. the phonological distinction of a and #
generally prevails, e.g. fara, fere, feerende, &c.; levelling is usually
in favour of 2, e.g. Ru. feran, Li. fero, &c.
In the pass. part. VP has e (second fronting), but Ru.1 and North.
have & apart from the few mutated forms quoted § 736.m.
KG suggest that the dialect had e in 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
(hlet from hladan), a in the rest of the present system (farad, faran
subj. pl., farende), a in pass. part. (ahafene).

Contracted verbs.

fléan, flay

flog

flogon

flagen

léan, blame

log

logon

lagen

sléan, slay

slog

slégon

slagen

pwéan, wash

pwodg

pwogon

pwagen!

These verbs all exhibit the operation of Verner’s law, but g is
extended into the past sg., and spellings with -/ are to be explained

by § 446. The 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. and imper. preserve h in
W-S, e.g. sliehp, sleah.
In VP the present system has éa by contraction when the
inflexion contained a back vowel (§ 238.2.a), otherwise é (§ 237.2),
e.g. indic. sléa, slés, slé0,, -sléad, subj. sg. -slé, and similar forms from
pwéan; imper. slzh, -duaeh.

In other Angl. texts @ is the prevailing vowel in the present
system, so already Cp. 3rd sg. pres. indic. slaét (§ 237.d, footnote).
Examples from North. are Li. inf. sl#, pres. indic. sg. sl#, sl#s,

sl#0, pl. -sl#0, pres. part. slénde. But North. has also inf. sl, -dod
(o = w), and many corresponding forms, e.g. ind. pres. pl. Li. -slds,
dwdas, Ru. -slad, pres. subj. sg. Li. sla@z, and even imper. Li.,
Ru.? -slah, Gwah.
1 Also IW-S gepwogen.

317

STRONG

$745

Ru.* has both the Northumbrian @ and 4 types, and some éa@
forms of W-S type: pres. indic. sg. sl, slegst, slép, slehp, pl. -slép
(slehp, -gp), thuad; pres. subj. sl; imper. slag, pwah, inf. sla(n),
-sléan, -sléan.

On various forms of the pass. part. of pwéan in Li. see §§ 244,
736.m!; on mutated slegen, pwegen see also § 736.m.
KG have only inf. sléan, pres. part. sléande, pres. indic. 2nd and
3rd sg. slehst, slehd, pl. -sléad, but inflected inf. -slanne (§ 145).

Weak presents.
hebban, raise

haf

hdfon

hafen

swerian, swear

swor

sworon

sworen?

sceppan, injure

sédd

s¢ddon

sceaden (Gen. 869)

hliehhan, laugh

hlég

hlégon

scieppan, create

scdép

scdpon

steppan,? step

stop

stopon

s¢apen

On the present system of these verbs see § 749. In the past the
consonant proper to the pl. is levelled to the sg. in scéd, hlog. The
dialectal forms vary mainly owing to the normal operation of
sound-changes. The present system of hliehhan has root vowel #
in Angl. texts, but e in poetry (§ 200.3, footnote).
In poetry a strong present sceapan occurs; poetry and 1W-S have
weak past scebede; |W-S also weak past hefde, pass. part. -hefed.
Li. has re-formed pass. part. -hofen (or 6 from past?), beside
-hzfen, and mutated -hefen (cf. § 736.m).
§ 745.

CLASS VII

The past tense of verbs of this class has the same root vowel and
consonants in singular and plural, so it will not be necessary to

quote past plural forms. The class is divided into subclasses by
the forms of the present system.
(a) hatan, command

hét

haten

and so ldcan play; sc(e)ddan divide, has eW-S past scedd and scéd
(§185, footnote). But seedpan sweep, has past sevéop, pass. part. swapen
* Add undweanum, error for -dwén-, re-formed from inf. dwd (cf. -foen,
-hden, § 736.m).
2 Rare -swaren (Laws of Ine 35).
3 Beside steppan, cf. § 194.

318

VERBS

§ 745

(but Ru.! aswopen); spdtan spit (Li. only, pres. part.) has no unreduplicated past (cf. § 746).!

(6) béatan, beat

béot

béaten

and so héawan hew, hléapan leap; the past héof? lamented; and
the participial adjs. éacen increased, éaden granted. Also probably
past déog, concealed himself (Beow. 850), confirmed by OHG pass.
part. tougan concealed.

(ec) feallan, fall

féoll

feallen

and so fealdan fold, healdan hold, wealcan roll, wealdan rule,
weallan boil, and the past stéold possessed; weaxan grow, has been
assimilated to this type.

North. can have éa for éo in the past, as in all types with éo.
Ru.1 has once féllun, beside normal -éo-.

(d) (1) blandan, mix

blénd*

blanden

spannan, span

spéonns

spannen

gangan, go

géong, giong

gangen

bannan, summon

béonn

bannen

and the pass. part. n.p.m. abloncgne angered (Li.).
(2) fon, take
hon, hang

féng
héng

fangen
hangen

Sometimes these verbs have a in the past, e.g. gang (verse),
geban (OE Bede, v. 1), gebland (And. 33; glossary in MS. Cott.

Cleop. A iii). But gieng (Gen. B 626, MS. gien), subj. genge (id.
834) are OS forms.
North. geonga (frequent Li., rare Ru.®, cf. Ru. tongap) shows
transference of ¢ from the past (cf. BDS d.s. hiniongae departure).

Li. 1st sg. pres. indic. giungo may reflect the root vowel seen in
OEFris. gunga, with initial consonant from past.
In W-S fon and hén preserved h in 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
and imper., e.g. féhp, foh.
' Perhaps to be added is past ahwét drove away, Gen. 406 (see Smithers,
English and Germanic studies iv. 80 ff.).
2 Beside weak W-S héofan, héofde (é0, io for ie, § 202), VP hiofende; past haf,
Gen. B, is not an OE form but to OS hiofan, Class II.
3 On Ru, North. wex-, beside wax-, in the pres. system of weaxan seé

§§ 223-4.

* Not certain, as the recorded forms might be from a weak past (ge)blende.

5 Gen. B spénn is not an OE form, and is corrected in the manuscript.

$745

STRONG

319

VP has pres. indic. -f6 (also -fou, with -u from uncontracted
verbs), -foést, -foed (also -foéht, § 732), -fod, imper. -foh, pres.
part. -fonde, but pres. subj. analogical -foe disyllabic). Ru.’ has
inf.

-f6, inflected inf. fone, but mostly analogical

disyllabic

forms, e.g. pres. indic. pl. -féad, hap, pres. subj. foe, inf. -féa,
infl. inf. hoanne; but 3rd sg. pres. indic. syncopated -foehp (beside
foep) and imper. -foh. In North. the present system of both verbs
is re-formed into disyllables with the endings of uncontracted
verbs, e.g. inf. féa, pres. indic. 3rd sg. -foed, -foas, &c.; but imper.

Joh, -hoh.
On abnormal pass. parts. of fon, hon see § 736.m.
(e)

(1) l&tan let

let

l#ten

and so ondrédan dread, r#dan advise, sl&pan sleep.

(2) cnawan, know

cnéow

cnawen

and so blawan blow, crawan crow, mawan mow, gerawan divide,
s@wan sow, prawan twist, wawan blow.

(f)

(1) blotan, sacrifice

— bléot

bléten

and so flécan clap, hrépan shout, hwépan threaten, swogan sound,
wrdtan root up; also cnddan (beside Class II forms), and possibly

past tenses ahnéop, genéop (§ 740).
(2) growan, grow

gréow

growen

and so blowan bloom, flowan flow, hléwan low, rowan row, snéwan
hasten (beside Class II forms), spdwan succeed; and probably
hwésan cough (pres. indic. 3rd sg. hwést, pl. hwésad, past hwéos).
(3) wépan, weep

wéop

wopen

This verb has a weak present system: the root vowel é is a mutation
of 6, and Angl. usually preserves 6é.
In types (e) (2) and (f) (2) North. often has past in -éw (graphic

for -éow, §279), and so sometimes VP, Ru.1; but in eW-S occasional
cnéw seems to indicate levelling of é from other types. On rare
North. past in -#w (Li. -cnéw, Ru.? séwe, Rit. -fléue) see § 279,

footnote.
(g) Here belong a group of defective verbs with @ in the pres.
system and pass. part.: bian cultivate, pass. part. bin, byn;

320

VERBS

§ 746

Sepriien compacted (Met. 20, 134; probably to be read for gepuren
Beow. 1285, Rid. 89, 1); apriiten swollen.
§ 746. The following are the certain instances of reduplicated
preterites occuring in OE. The verbs belong to Class VII, types

(a) and (e) (1).

hatan

héht:

poetry, all major Angl. glosses, OE
Bede,

élfred

Jewel,

PC

688,

Martyrology, Blick. Hom., St. Chad,

Birch, nos. 574, 5'79 (late transcripts
of Merc. charters)
poetry, Boeth.

lacan

leole:

ondr&édan
létan

ondreord: VP, Ru.1, Ru.?, Li.
leort:
poetry, all major Angl. glosses, OE

rédan

reord:

Bede

poetry, Ru.1, OE Bede

eo in ondreord, leort, reord is due to breaking, and leolc appears to
have eo on the analogy of these. Leort < *lert for *lelt, and
-dreord < *drerd for *dredrd both show dissimilation of consonants.
On é of héht see § 736.j. The North. glosses (Li., Ru.?, Rit.) and
VP have only reduplicated pasts from these verbs,! but Ru.) has
also lét frequently.

Possible further reduplicated past forms are North. speoft, speaft,
and beoftun, beaftun (Li., Ru.®), if to spatan and béatan.* Speft, *beft
might have developed from I-E *spept-, *bhebht-: the diphthongs
in OE would be analogical. Cf. Jordan in ES xxxviii. 28-34;

Schulze in Archiv cxli. 176-80.
§ 747. A number of verbs of Class VII have also weak forms,
e.g. gengan go, sp#tan spit, rédan advise (the prevailing W-S
form, with # < ai+1), séwan sow (eW-S), bya cultivate (North.).
It has been pointed out above that the past forms of blandan may

be from a weak verb *blendan.
North. has a number of new weak forms from Class VII verbs:
-scedd(a)de, -scedde, rédde (pass. part. geréded), gesaudes,

Li.

wepde,? pass. part. gespeoftad (formed from past speoft). More
general is slépte (VP, Ru.1, OE Bede), slépde (Li., Rit.), -slépedon

(Li.), slépade (Ru.4),3 slépte (eW-S). Note also IW-S i¢ eom
ondréd timeor.
' Li. also once h#t (dubious, cf. Lea, A xvi. 136).

2 ‘The root vowel is probably an error, cf. gew%p for gewéap.
3 Strong past slép seems not Angl. at all.

321

2. Weak Verbs
§ 748.

CLASS

I

Indicative

Subjunctive
Present

Sg. 1. fremme, Ido herie, I praise hiere, hear

Pl.

2. fremst, -est

herest

hierst

= fremmap

heriap

hierap

3. fremp, -ep

herep

hierp

fremme _herie

»

”

hiere

”

»

fremmenherien

”

”

_hieren

Imperative
Sg.2

Pl.

freme

fremmap

here

heriap

Indicative

hier

hierap

Subjunctive
Past

Sg.1. fremede
2. fremedest
3. fremede

Pl,

= fremedon

herede
—_ heredest
herede

heredon

hierde
hierdest
hierde

hierdon

fremede herede
”
”
”
”

_hierde
”
”

fremeden hereden hierden

Inf.
fremman, to fremmenne; herian, to herienne; hieran, to hierenne.
Pres. part.
fremmende
heriende
hierende
Pass. part.
fremed
hered
hiered

§ 749. Examples of verbs similarly conjugated are, like fremman:
enyssan knock, hrissan shake, swebban kill, trymman strengthen,
pennan stretch, we¢gan? move, wennan accustom, wreppan support;
the weak present tenses of strong verbs biddan, sittan, licgan, picgan

(also weak past and pass. part. pigde, -ede, -ed), fricgan, hebban
(also weak past and pass. part. hefde, -hefed, -hefod),3 scebpan (also
weak past and pass. part. scepede, -ed), hliehhan, scieppan, steppan;
like herian: derian hurt, nerian save, onhyrian emulate, werian
defend, werian clothe, and the weak present of strong swerian;
like hieran (with due regard to consonant changes in the past
tense): biegan bend, cypan make known, déman judge, dréfan

disturb, drencan make to drink, fédan feed, iecan increase, ldan

lead, l€ran teach, aliefan allow, métan meet, sengan singe, tjnan
close, bryééan* oppress, wendan turn, and the weak present wépan;
also verbs in -/&éan, as efenl#éan imitate, néal€can approach.
* ‘Put to sleep’, causative of swefan; -bb- < -vj- (§ 407), hence f in forms with
single consonant, aswefede, &c.
2 ég = gg, hence g in forms with single consonant, wege, wegede, &c.
3 In these weak presents with originally short root syllable, ég and 5b again
simplify to g, f; hence imper. lige, pige, frige, hefe, 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
list (i < ig), ligeb, igh, lip, hefst, hefp.
* Here ¢é is not due to West Gmc. gemination, and appears in all parts if a
vowel follows, 3rd sg. pres. ind. pryédéep, pass. part. brydéed,

VERBS

322

750

§ 750. Origin of forms. From a Gmc. point of view the present
system of these verbs is distinguished from that of the strong verbs
by the presence of an element -j- before the endings: cf. Lat. capio
compared with rego. This element was vocalic after long syllables ending in a consonant (Sievers’ law, § 398.4). After short syllables it was
consonantal, and by the usual West Gmc. processes (§ 407) it caused
doubling of all preceding consonants except 7 (< r and 2). In OE it disappeared after both old long closed syllables and old short ones made
long by the West Gmc. doubling, but remained after short syllables."
This explains the divergence of fremman, herian, hieran in the 1st sg.
and pl. of the indic., the subj., imper. pl., inf., and pres. part.

In the 2nd and 3rd sg. indic., 7 was lost before i in West Gmc. before
causing consonant doubling, and hence e.g. *framppi > *framip >
OE* fremip > fremep (see § 405). The imper. sg. is regularly developed
from Gmc. *xazje, *yauzije (§§ 331-1, 5, 345, 398-4).

The past of all Gmc. weak verbs was formed with an element d, the

origin of which is the most disputed problem of Gmc. philology.? From

a West Gmc. point of view, in the weak verb of Class I, d (West Gmc. d)

was added to the -i- which appears before the endings of the present
system, e.g. *framid-, *xauzid-. In OE i is syncopated after long

syllables (§ 351). The endings adopted for the weak past were probably
simply those of the strong past in the indic. pl. and the subj., while the

indic. sg. had the endings -dm, -s,3 -&p. These developed regularly to
OE -z, -zs, -z, later -e, -est,* -e (§§ 331.5, 399). The pass. part. of all
weak verbs was formed with the dental element seen in Lat. rectus,

auditus, &c., and in the verbs of Class I this was added to the stem in
-i-, e.g. Gmc. *framid-, *xauzid-. In West Gmc. d (< I-E t when the
accent of the word did not fall on the preceding vowel, § 398.2) became

d (§ 409).
§ 751. Primitive Old English development of the forms. (1) The 2nd
and 3rd sg. pres. indic, are subject to syncopation, like those of the
strong verb, and similar consonant changes arise (cf. § 732):
dst > tst: létst, fétst, infs. l@dan, fedan; later t can be dropped, fést,
and so with original #, [yhst, inf. liktan.

pst > st: but usually p is restored, e.g. cydst, inf. cydan, and then pst
> tst later, cytst (miswritten cystd, John viii. 13).
gst > hst: bihst, inf. biegan (§ 447).
ngst > nést > nst: sprenst, inf. sprengan.

1 It remained also after long open syllables, e.g. dlegan < ®haujan-, cf.

§ 398.4, footnote.

2 Cf. Prokosch, Comparative Germanic grammar, pp. 194 ff.
3 Final -s, not -z, because the tense-forming element had at first the stress of

an independent word.

4 Final -t of the same origin as in and sg. pres. indic. (§ 731.4).

§ 751

WEAK

323

tp, dpb > tt: métt, fétt, infs, métan, fédan.
sp > st: alyst, inf. aliesan release.

&p > hp: bihd, inf. biegan (cf. § 447).
ngb > nép: glené@, inf. glengan.

Analogical modification of these processes is frequent, e.g. bidst,
bidt to biddan, hyd to hydan, cnysd to cnyssan, and especially with ng,
sprengst, glengd (cf. § 482).
On further 1W-S changes in these persons: see § 483.

There are in W-S more unsyncopated forms of 2nd and 3rd sg. pres.
indic. in the weak than in the strong verb, These are especially frequent

after liquids and nasals, e.g. selep, derep, penep, fremep, trymep, beside
selp, trymp. The type nerian seems never to have syncope, but fremst,
fremp is put in the paradigm above on the model of widtremd, CP 441,

27 (Hatton MS.).
Angl. texts rarely have syncope in these persons: VP acersdu, sel,
Ru. bit, sel. The eKt. charters have only uncontracted forms, KG

fiuctuate like W-S.

(2) Consonant changes followed also upon the syncopation of -i- after
long root syllables in the past tense:

p, t,é +d > pt, tt, ct: slépte, métte, iecte, infs. sl&pan, métan, iecan.

ff, ss+-d > ft, st: pyfte, cyste, infs. pyffan puff, cyssan.
x+d > xt: lixte, inf. lixan shine.

Etymological spellings are in general rare, e.g. Cp. refsde, 1W-S
hyspdun, infs. reepsan (§ 418), hyspan. Such spellings are more frequent

in Li., e.g. -éde, slépde.

Less frequent changes in the past tense are:
sct > st: VP gehnistun, IW-S wiste, infs. hniscan soften (cf. hnescian),
wyscan,

pd > dd: cydde for eypde (LOE, § 481.7, 482).

mbd > md: cemde (\W-S, § 477.6).

ngd > nd: KG gemende, inf. mengan,

When in forming the past tense a double consonant came to be in a
triple group, it was simplified, e.g. cende, cyste, sende, infs. cennan, cyssan,

sendan, Etymological spellings occur, e.g. Li. gefyllde, eW-S forms
quoted § 476, footnote.

In North. double -dd-, -tt- are sometimes simplified in the weak past
even between vowels, e.g. past indic. 1 sg. Ru.? gimdete, 2 sg. Rit.
§il&dest, pl. Li. gel#don.
A frequent change in W-S in the weak past is ct > ht. This is due to
the analogy of verbs of the type of r&éan, r#hte (§ 753.9.b.2). eW-S has

already néaléhte (beside -lZ¢te), dlehte (beside dlecte), from néal#can,

324

VERBS

§ 752

dlecéan; IW-S examples are thte, bep&hte, gesihte, from iecan increase,
bep&éan deceive, syéan suckle, and frequent -l#hte from verbs in
-l&can; so with ¢ < é¢, gepryhte from prycéan oppress. Such verbs can
have the pass. part. either regularly formed or with -ht; e.g. geiced,
Seiht, bepz#ht, gesiced, gepryéced, and so gewkéed, gewkht from wecan
weaken. Wleééan warm, although having a short root syllable has pass.

part. gewleht, gewleht, beside gewleced.

Similar forms are sporadic in nW-S, e.g. VP -nioleahtun, Ru. néalehétun,! Li. gedryhton, KG pass. parts. geférléhte, geaht (296, read geeht

increased).?

(3) The pass. part. should have syncope of -i- in open syllables after
long root syllables in trisyllabic forms (§ 351, footnote). VP reflects
this, e.g. getrymed, pl. getrymede, but gel#ded, pl. gel@dde. In W-S,

however, there is a tendency for parts. in dentals to extend syncopation

to uninflected forms, e.g. gel@dd, gehyd, send beside gel&ded, gehyded,
sended;3 and to closed medial syllables in inflected forms, e.g. a.s.m.
gestendne, gewildne, infs. scendan, gewieldan. On the other hand, parts.
not in dentals frequently level out the unsyncopated form to inflected
cases, e.g. geh&lede, geléreda, geliefede.

Ru.) usually follows the phonological rule, distinguishing, for example, gehéred, pl. gehérde, and so even after dentals, e.g. léded, pel@dde,
sended, sende. Syncope is extended to the uninflected form in befest, and
occasionally fails, e.g. abelgede, gecerrede, awzergede.
In North., so far as new formations do not arise (§ 752), the uninflected form is always in -ed, but syncope is often eliminated in
inflected forms, especially in Li., e.g. gecerredo, gefylledo.

KG, like W-S, have frequent syncope in the uninflected form of

parts. in dentals, e.g. féd, gescend, aheld.

Syncopated forms of pass. parts. show the same consonant changes
as the past tense, e.g. besencte, geprycte, pl. of besenced, geprycced.

§ 752. Early, late, and dialectal forms. What has been said above of
the endings of the present system of strong verbs is also true of those of

weak verbs of Class I. Hence we find in the 1st sg. pres. indic, -e in
W-S and Ru.}, -u (-0) practically always in VP, while eKt. has -o and
-e, KG -e, North. -o (less often -a, -u, -e). In the 2nd pers. the same
variation of -s and st is found as in the strong verb: W-S and Ruw.! have
-st, VP has -s, with a few exceptions (uphést, inf. -hégan, and four in
uncontracted verbs). North. has -st seldom. KG alést, georwénst, but
asets, infs. W-S -liesan, -wénan, -settan. In the 3rd sg. -tp is often

* With assimilation to verbs in -eééan, -ehte; note also the compromise

spelling.

2 Note also North. past gicnyhte beside tocnuiéte bound, pass. part. gecnyht,

presumed from inf. *enycéan.

3 The syncopated form is always used from the participial adj. f#zz fat.

§ 752

WEAK

325

recorded in early texts, e.g. Cp. gehn&gith subdues; as in the strong
verb, forms in -t occur in early texts, and recur in eW-S, Ru., Ru.?,
KG. As in the strong verb, Ru. and North. have many innovations
beside historical forms: Ru.! 3rd sg. in -ap, -zp, pl. -ep; North. 2nd sg.
-as, -2s, 31d sg. -ad, -xi, also -es, -as, xs; pl. -ed, also -es, -as.
What has been said of the pres. subj., inf., inflected inf., and pres.
part. of the strong verb (§ 735.f, i, j) applies closely to the weak verb of
Class I,
On the variation between -g-, -ig-, -ige-, -i- in the type herian in
W-S and Ru! see § 365; and in North. § 361. VP has only -g-.

The middle vowel of the past and pass. part. often appears as -i- in
early texts, e.g. past CH astelide (but RC geredz), part. BDS, doemid,
Cp. helbid, gesmirwid.
On pass. parts. in final -¢ for -d (e.g. Cp. geraeédit) see § 450.

What has been said of the endings of the past indic. pl. and past subj.
in strong verbs (§ 735.e, g) is also true of weak verbs of Class I. In the
3rd sg. & is recorded in early texts, e.g. RC geredz, FC afoeddz.' The
2nd sg. has -st beside -s; W-S, Ru.1 have usually -st, VP always -s,”
North, -es more frequently than -est. In IW-S -st is frequently extended
to the 2nd sg. past. subj., so that past indic. and subj. are no longer
distinguished (since in pl. of subj. -en > -on).3

In W-S verbs with an originally short root syllable have a strong
tendency to join the second weak class. This could occur early enough
for back umlaut to be caused by the new endings (§ 211), and in eW-S
texts the new conjugation is well evidenced, e.g. pl. pres. indic. lemiad,

pres. subj. getrymige, -en (beside getrymme, -en), inf. adenian. In the
herian type all forms of the present system are ambiguous except 2nd

and 3rd sg. pres. indic. and imper. sg., and these forms are not yet
affected in eW-S. In IW-S the analogy spreads to them, and to the past,
e.g. nerap (sg.), nerode; so KG -wreodad (sg., 645).

Occasional analogical extension of the double consonant is found,
e.g. IW-S, Rit. pass. part. getrymmed, IW-S imper. telle, and Ru.
unsyncopated 3rd sg. pres. indic., biddep, selleb, and so North., Li.

biddes, selles, settes. Extension of the single consonant is less common:
it occurs Li., Rit., Ru.* in rst sg. pres. indic. of sellan (selo, silo), but
otherwise it is sporadic.

Syncopation is rarely found in the past of verbs with a short root
syllable, e.g. CP 451, 29 digden, Ps. cviii. 25 wegdan, Li. séedde.

In Ru.1 and North. (especially Li.) the influence of Class II upon
Class I is strong in the past and in the pass. part., so that past -ade and
* ast sg. does not occur, but cf. RC dorsta (pret.-pres.).
* But in verbs of other classes -st occurs: acunnadest, dydest (5 times, beside
dydes 16 times).
3° See F. J. Mather, The conditional sentence in Anglo-Saxon, pp. 16-18.

326

VERBS

§ 753

especially pass. part. -ad occur, e.g. past Li. gedehtadon, Ru. fylgadun,

pass. part. Li. gedroefad, Ru.? giwendad, Ru. gefyllad.

Li. and Rit. have frequent extension of -en from the strong to the
weak. pass. part.; nearly all examples are inflected forms, e.g. Li.
Seseteno, gesendeno, gewaehten, Rit. giléseno, giléfeno; more rarely in Ru.?:
onsetnum, giléfenne.

In IW-S, North., Ru.! there is considerable fluctuation in the form
of the imper. sg., -e being sometimes added to long root syllables (e.g.
Li. biléore go), while from verbs with originally short root syllables the
types tel and telle appear beside regular tele (inf. tellan).

§ 753. Phonological variants. (1) Verbs with originally short

root syllables ending in t or d syncopated the medial vowel in the
past tense, e.g. hredde (not *hredede like fremede), inf. hreddan save.
In the pass. part. they have in W-S similar syncope, e.g. ahredd;
it is usually held that they had no syncope in the pass. part. in
Angl., but there is no direct evidence.’ Verbs of this type are
cnyttan bind, hreddan save, hwettan urge, lettan hinder, spryttan
sprout, treddan investigate, and verbs in -ettan, e.g. licettan pretend,
sdrettan lament, and so with suffix of different origin (§ 455)
Onettan hasten, &c.

(2) Verbs with a long closed syllable before liquid or nasal have
in W-S no syncope in the past tense, e.g. fréfrede, hyngrede,
timbrede, diglede, wrixlede, symblede,? infs. fréfran comfort, hyngran
hunger, timbran build, diglan conceal, wrixlan exchange, symblan
feast. This -ede is often replaced by -ode, and the verbs tend to
pass into Class II, e.g. inf. fréfrian, hyngrian, timbrian.
VP forms the past of such verbs according to Class II, e.g.
-déglade, timbrade; but pass. part. has -ed beside -ad: froéfred,
timbred, gedéglad. Ru. has hyngrade beside -ede, and pass. part.
-ed: afroéfred, wépned.

North. has great variety, having past (a) with syncope and
parasiting, e.g. hyngerde, see § 364; (b) -ede, e.g. Li. froefredon,
Ru.2 -bécnede; (c) -ade, e.g. Ru.? bétnade, froéfradun. Pass. part.
has usually -ed, but Li. gedéglad.
(3) Verbs with a short closed syllable before liquid or nasal have

syncope in the past in W-S, e.g. efnde, eglde, seglde, brysmde,’ infs.
efnan perform, eglan trouble, seglan sail, brysman suffocate. Yet
1 The assumption is based on the forms of the pass. part. of settan, the history

of which is different, see (9) (5) (7) below (p. 331).
2 But wyrsmde, wyrmsde to wyrsman, wyrmsan suppurate.
3 So oferf2dmde, Dan. 501.

§ 753

WEAK

327

formsin -ede appear also, eW-S bytlede (inf. bytlan build), sigelede,

IW-S efnede, eglede, acwylmede (inf. cwielman kill). The few Anglian
forms are inconsistent: VP arefnde, Li. genzglede; transference to
Class IT also occurs, e.g. Li. geefnade.

(4) On reduction . heavy consonant groups in past nem(n)de,

cem(b)de see § 477.5,

6.
(5) Owing to the loss of u before i (§ 406) verbs like gierwan,

prepare, should have no w in the forms in which fremman has
single m (and and 3rd sg. pres. indic., imper., past system and

pass. part.), and regular forms for these would be gierest, -ep,
Siere, gierede, giered. But such verbs are prone to re-formation.
Sometimes they follow the analogy of forms without w, and
conjugate like hertan, e.g. wylian, roll, for wielwan, past wylede,

later -ode. But they can also follow the analogy of forms with w,

e.g. hierwan, despise, 3rd sg. pres. indic. *hierwd (cf. nyrwd from
nierwan), past hyrwde, pass. part. gehyrwed. In W-S phonologically
correct variation of forms with and without w is frequent with
Slerwan prepare, sterwan devise, smierwan anoint; retention of w

in all forms is usual with hierwan despise, nierwan constrain;
loss of w in all forms is usual with wylian roll. Divergences from

these general rules are frequent, e.g. eW-S pl. pres. indic. -sieriad,,

smiriad, pass. part. gehiered, !W-S pass. part. gewylwed.

In the early glossaries these verbs are no longer conjugated
phonologically, e.g. Cp. pass. part. gegeruuid, gesmirwid; but cf.

RC gerede. VP has regular forms from gerwan, smirwan, but w is

levelled throughin herwan, nerwan; past pl. herwdun, pass. part.

Senerwed, pi. -wde.
Ru.1 and North. have mostly phonological forms of gerwan,?
though Ru.? has pass. part. gigerwed. From smirwan there is
levelling away of w in Ru.? smiranne, Li. smiriane; extension of
w in Rit. pass. part. gesmiruad (with -ad from Class II); otherwise
only forms phonologically without w occur, e.g. Ru.! imper. smere,

Li., Ru.? past smiride.

Fratwan, adorn, has w in all recorded forms, e.g. 3rd sg. pres.

indic. fretwep, pass. part. fretwed, *Ag#lwan has pass. part. ag&led
and agélwed. R&swan, think, shows many processes of analogy:

3rd sg. pres. indic. rswep, past r®swede lead to re-formation

TM These verbs may also follow Class II with retention of w, inf. hyrwian,
nyrwian, pres. indic. pl. hyrwiap,imp. nyrwa, &c.
? Ru. also pres. part. -gzrwende (§ 193.a).

328

VERBS

§ 753

according to Class II: r@swian, past réswode; but forms like
past r@sede lead to re-formation as r&sian, r&sode.'
(6) Verbs with root syllables ending in a vowel followed by 4
retain w in all forms in W-S, although it should drop where i
originally followed (§ 406), e.g. l@wep, lwp, l@wde, léwed, inf.
l#wan betray, and similar forms from pywan, péwan press, -sléwan
make slow. North. has the phonological past Ru.? biléde, Li.
beleede, Cp. pass. part. gedédum.
From an OE point of view here belong also iewan* show,
triewan trust, hlywan warm (see § 120.1, 2). These have -w- in
most recorded forms in all dialects: sporadic exceptions are eW-S
past xtiede, |W-S pass. part. pl. gehlyde3 ( Job iv=xxxi. 20).
The infs. *spiowan spit, *siowan sow, are assumed to account
for a few forms mentioned in § 120.2, footnote. The past system of
these verbs was at first of the type *spiuid-, with analogical retention of u;* then transference to Class II and back umlaut gave
spiowode,5 siowode, hence inf. stowian, &c.
(7) Verbs in which -- followed upon a diphthong are ciegan
call, hn&gan neigh, nW-S strégan strew, hégan exalt.6 In W-S g
is extended to all forms, e.g. cigh, cigde, hn#gp, and so in most
dialect forms of cégan: for sporadic occurrences without g see
§ 237.1.b. The other verbs have recorded only infs. as quoted
(poetical), forms of strégan? with phonological loss of 4 before i
and contraction, quoted § 237.1.b, and similarly VP 2nd and 3rd
sg. pres. indic. -hést, -héd, poetical past gehéde; but with extension
of g, |W-S pass part. infl. gehigde, gehyd (§ 243).
1 So the verbal noun is r&swung or r&sung.
2 Past and pass. part. would be phonologically *eid- (< *eyid-) before vowel
contraction, and from this *eyid- was produced by analogical restoration of y;
with transference to Class II and back umlaut this gave eowode, whence inf.
eowian, &c. The phonological relationship iewan, eowian appears. also in bywan
polish, pass. part. abjwed and gebeowed.
3 The corresponding Angl. form would be *hiiode, *hléode: hence analogical
pres. indic. pl. hléod (Az. 85).
+ Recorded forms are frequent pass. part. gesiwed (§ 154.2), and many which
have adopted Class II endings: siwode, gestwud, and hence pres. siwige, &c.
5 Recorded Ful. 476 as spiowedan (cf. § 385).
6 See § 120.1, 2'0n the formation of these verbs. Phonologically they should
lose 7 before i in 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic., and imper.; then (except in
hn#gan) there should be loss of y before i (§§ 405-6) in these forms and also
in the past and pass. part., e.g. *kaujip > *kayib > *kaib > OE dép, *kayid- >
*kaid- > OE ééd.
7 Normal strewian, streowian (also stréawian influenced by the noun) arises by

the same processes as siowian from past *streyid- for *streid- from *strayid-.

§ 753

Here

WEAK

may belong

329

VP milcdéondra,

Ru,

Li.

sucklings, Li. gediides thou didst suck, pointing
< *dijan- with generalization of loss of { to all

and 3rd sg. pres. indic., imper., past and pass.

diendra

g.p.

to a verb *dion,
forms from 2nd

part.

(8) Contracted verbs. Verbs with a long root syllable

ending in

x would lose this between vowels in the 2nd
and 3rd sg. pres.
indic., imper., past and pass. part., and the mutate
d vowel of the
root would absorb a following front vowel,
e.g. *biixip > pypt
(§ 237.1.d), and so past pyde, pass. part. pyd, whenc
e inf. byn, press,
and the entire paradigm may be derived analog
ically.? So also tpn,

instruct, and rarer verbs quoted § 237.1.d, footnote.

In forms where
a back vowel followed x, contraction was to io >
éo, and here

would belong péon, téon, badly evidenced? alterna
tive forms of

yn, tyn (§ 238.3).

Early uncontracted forms are Ep., Cp. faéhit he paints
(but past
pl. faédun), Ep. séyhend, Cp. séyend persua
der.
IW-S has curious forms from pyn, ist sg. pres.
indic. -pyge,

past bygde, with analogical g from verbs

like ciegan.

(9) A considerable group of verbs formed the past

and pass.

part. in Gmc. without using as a connexion
between root and
dental element the formative -i- of the presen
t system.* There
are two main groups of these: (a) those
with root syllables end-

ing in J, and (4) those with root syllables ending
in
sonant and having ht in the past and pass.

a velar con-

part., for every velar+t

became ht in Gmc. These verbs are often disting
uished by the
absence of mutation in the root syllable in
the past and pass.

part., although it is present in the pres. system

the absence of the connecting vowel -i- in past

: this follows from

and pass. part. In

* These verbs have no forms with h in 2nd
and 3rd sg. pres. indic. of type of
W-S siehb. The occurrence of such forms from
strong verbs (and the weak present
hliehhan) suggests that in the weak verbs the
past py¥de, &c. influenced the pres.
indic. On various theories see M. T. Léfvenb
erg in Studia Neophilologica xxi.
231-76.

2 It is necessary to assume Gmc. *biiwijan
-

to explain the OE forms,

(under (6) above), beside piixtian-,

3 It is doubtful if téon instruct, is not
always the strong verb of Class II in
its
frequent transferred use; péon press,
is inferred from Sepéon, Rid. 40,
91,
forpéode, Dream of the Rood 54 (which
may be forp-éode). Yet the existence
of
péon beside
bywan would explain by mixtur
e past péowde; also Class II pres.

part. béowigende.

* The absence of the connecting vowel
probably went back to I-E in some
of
the roots, but was due to Gmc. phono
logical or analogical syncope in others
: see
Prokosch in PMLA xiii. 331-8.

330

§ 753

VERBS

the tables below the inf., past, and pass. part. of these verbs will

be given.

(a) cwellan, ill

cwealde

cweald

and so dwellan mislead, sellan give, stellan place, tellan tell. These
verbs are exactly like fremman in the present system. In the past
and pass. part. they have a or ea according to dialect.

A number of forms occur with the connecting vowel; past
astelide CH, getelede \North., IW-S; pass. part. onsteled eW-S,

geteled eW-S, lNorth., poetry. But IW-S past dwelode, dwelede is
due rather to transference to Class IT.

Li. has past sealde beside salde with the vowel of sealla (§ 211).
reaht, reht
reahte, rehte
(b) (1) recéan, narrate
and so cwecéan shake, dreccan afflict, leccan moisten, strecéan
stretch, peccan cover, w(r)ecéan awaken. These verbs also show
mutation of Gmc. a and consonant doubling in the present
system. In the past and pass. part. they have phonologically ea or
its smoothing #; but in VP and eW-S e from the pres. often
appears in the past and pass. part., and this is general in IW-S. In
Angl. the early glossaries have already e: Ep. arectae, Cp. arecte,
arehtun. So Ru.' and North. vary between e and 2, and the strong
influence of the pres. is shown in North. by the levelling of oe
from the present system of verbs in w-, e.g. Rit. -woehte. So KG.
areahtum, but rehton, awehte.

(2) t&éan, teach

tahte,téhte —‘ taht, taht

and so r&can reach. These verbs have in the present system #
(mutation of @ < ai), in the past and pass. part. d, but & is often
levelled to all forms in W-S (already eW-S), while Angl. retains a:
Ru! getahtz, |North. rahte, betaht.

(3) sé¢an, seek

sdhte

soht

Angl. and eKt. preserve 6é in the present system.

(4) ledcéan, seize
recéan, care

lahte, l@hte
rohte

Jaht, l@ht
roht

On the shortening in the present system of reccan see § 287, footnote. Similar shortening seems present in lzécan, for the varia-

tion in the past W-S & or @, Angl. d (North. gelahte), suggests
that the verb was originally of the class of t#can, IW-S 3rd sg.

pres. indic. l2hd beside lacd (§ 483).

§ 753

WEAK

(5)

331

brengan, bring

brdhte

penéan, think

brdht

pohte

pyncan, seem

poht

pihte

piht

In these verbs the past and pass. part. had in Gmc.
-ayxt-,

~uyxt-, which became regularly -dyt- (OE -édyt-),
-dyt- (§ 119).

The present system of brengan occurs occasionally W-S,
Kt., Ru.’,
but it is in regular use only in North., being elsewhere
replaced
by that of the strong verb bringan, which has in OE no strong
past,
but occasionally pass. part. brungen (poetry).

(6)

byégan, buy

bohte

wyrcan, work

boht

worhte

worht

The present system has mutation of Gmc. u, the past and pass.

part. Gmc. 0 < u (§ 115); byégan has consonant doubling (ég) in
the usual forms; 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. W-S
bygst, bygd.

For wyrcan VP has in the pres. system wircan, with a
different
vowel, for y does not unround in the text; past and
pass. part.
do not occur.! Occasional i for y in the pres. elsewhe
re (e.g. Ru.)
is insignificant.
On past warhte, pass. part. gewarht see §156; on wrohte,
gewroht

§ 459.3.
(7)

lecgan, lay

legde

legd

settan, set

sette

sett

These verbs are special West Gmc. additions to the type, cf. OS
leggian, settian, past lagda, satta, beside legda, setta. Although e is

the prevailing vowel in OE in all forms owing to the
influence of
the present system, a few traces of past and pass. part. without

mutation occur: Ru.' past gesette, legdun (but pass.

part. alegd),

Li. past geszette, pass. part. gesattedo (a.p.n.). In W-S

pass. part.
of settan never has a connecting vowel, but in Angl.
the form
without connecting vowel appears only in inflecte
d forms, e.g.
VP, Ru.? geseted, pl. gesette. North. can also retain
the connecting
vowel in inflexion, level out tt from the present,
and also form
quasi-strong forms (§ 752), eg. Li. &eset(tet, infl. gesettedo
,

Seseteno.

* VP, Hy. 1, 3 wyrctun in Sweet’s text is an error;
manuscript wyséturt
wished.

332

VERBS

§ 754.

§ 754

CLASS II
Indicative

Subjunctive

§ Imperative

Present

Sg. 1

lufige,

3

lufap

lufige

lufiap

lufigen

Sg. 1
2
3

lufode
lufodest
lufode

lufode
lufode
lufode

Pl.

lufodon

lufoden

Inf.

lufian, to lufienne

Pres. part.
Pass. part.

lufod

2

Pl,

lufast

J love

lufige

lufige

lufa
lufiap

Past

lufiende

§ 755. Examples of the very large number of verbs so conjugated
are dscian ask, bodian announce, endian end, fandian try, hdalgian
hallow, langian long, lécian look, lofian praise, macian make, réafian
plunder, pancian thank, polian suffer, wunian dwell; also various
formative elements: -ecian, as aswefecian eradicate, bedecian beg;
-sian,' as blissian rejoice, clénsian cleanse, m¥rsian make famous.
Verbs with root vowel 7 often have alternative forms with back
umlaut, owing to the many forms in which a back vowel follows,

e.g. eW-S clipian, cliopian, cleopian, VP cleopian, North. cliopiga

call; such verbs are bifian tremble, clifian adhere, ginian yawn,
hlinian \ean, hnipian droop, tilian strive for. In W-S extension of i
to forms where a back vowel follows is frequent, e.g. past
chipode, hnipode, tilode. Stician stick, can have back umlaut only
in Kt., hence Bd. Gl. stiocode (but KG -sticod). On sewugian, swigian,
be silent, see § 218.
§ 756. Origin of forms. This conjugation is a mixture of one in which
endings were added to Gmc. -6- < I-E -d- (2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
and imper.) and of one in which they were preceded by -7- as in Class I,
” Extracted from verbs like egesian terrify (cf. egesa terror).

§ 757

WEAK
333
but this -j- followed -6-. Hence the Gmc. endings of the pres. would be:

~040, -Gsi, ~Opi, -Gjanpi. In OE the medial -dj- became -i-, -i- (§§
339,
355-5, 376, 267). The imper. was the stem -d without ending. The
pres.
subj. had the same endings as strong verbs preceded by -j-. In the
past
system and the pass. part. the dental formative elements were the
same
as in Class I, but were added to -6-.

§ 757. Dialectal variants. On the variation of medial -i- and ~ig- see
§ 267. The above paradigm, with -ig- before e, -i- before @, represents
the prevailing spelling of eW-S and IW-S (but note usually pres. part.
~tende, inflected inf. -tenne). VP has nearly always -i- before all vowels,
but Ru. has -ig- prevailingly. All North. texts have mainly -ig-, though
they also have -i- frequently before a. KG have -ige-, but -ia-, like W-S;

here also the pres. part. is an exception with -ie-.

In the past -ode (older -ud-, Ep. aslacudae, and occasionally in eW-S)
heavily predominates in W-S, -ade' in Kt. and Angl. Pl. -edon, and
hence sg. -ede, occurs in all dialects (§ 385).
The pass. part. generally has -od or -ad corresponding to the prevailing form of the past in the text.
KG, however, have part. -ad beside -od,

but past only -ade, -ede. All dialects have examples of -ed, inflected -ede,
&c., originating by vowel harmony in forms where a back vowel followed,
e.g. eW-S gehorsedan.

Ist sg. pres. indic. is in -ix (-10) in VP; Ru. has -ige, -io; North.
-igo
prevails, beside -iga, rarely -ige; eKt. -ie, KG not recorded.

znd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. sometimes has -o- in IW-S and KG ;
Ru." has frequent -e-. In North. reduction to -e-, -z- can be accompanied by replacement of -d by -s in the 3rd pers., so the endings
are,
and pers.: -as, -es; 3rd. pers.: -ad, -as, -ed, ~€S, ~-20, ~25.

As in strong verbs and weak verbs of Class I there is interchange of
-s and -st in the 2nd pers., and occasional -t in the 3rd (eW-S, KG, not
Ru.+),
The pres. indic. pl. varies only in North., where the final consonant
may be -s and the vowel -e-, hence -igad, -igas, -iged, ~iges.

The vowel of the imper. may be reduced to -e, -® in Ru,},
North.

There was originally a special development of -ig- in the pres. part.

and inflected inf. Between a main and a secondary stress the vowel

syncopated, and the resulting -j- was lost after long syllables (and

was

after

two syllables), but remained after short syllables, and was usually
replaced by -i-, -ij- from other forms. The early glossaries show
this
distinction, e.g. Cp. tacnendi but dobgendi (inf. *dofian, cf. dofung,
stupidity). Metrical tests often show that the distinction obtained
in
* On the origin of this distinction see § 331.6.
? So Cp. tuigendi doubting < *tyixjendi- < *tyixéjendi«,

334

VERBS

§ 758

the language of verse though obliterated in the spelling of the surviving
transcripts (cf. PBB x. 482). In W-S the distinction did not survive,
-tende, -tenne (-ianne) being levelled to all verbs, and this is also true of
VP, although there -ende, -enne occasionally appear after long syllables,
e.g. gelocende, mildsende, niosenne. But Ru.) generally extends the forms
without -#- to all verbs of Class II, e.g. lakende, wagende, scéawenne. In
North. forms without -i- are found practically always after long syllables, and in nearly half the instances also after short.
Ru. and North. have very many forms in the present system in which
-1-, -ig- has been extended to the forms in which historically it should
not appear, and others in which it is removed although historically

justified, e.g. Ru. pres. indic. 1 sg. dréwa, 3 sg. prowiap, pl. -somnap
beside somniap; Li. 1 sg. lufo, 3 sg. uunias, pl. gewunas. Omission of -iis less frequent in the pres. subj., e.g. Ru.! folge, Li. fultume.
Particularly in Li. and Rit. occurs contamination of -a- and -ig-, e.g.
imper. in -ig, -iga (-ige), Li. arig, geclEnsiga, -e; pres. subj. -age, -aige,
Li. gerixage, losaige.

What has been said above of the endings of the present subjunctive,
infinitive, inflected infinitive, and present participle of the strong verb
(§ 735-£, i, j) applies also to those of weak verbs of Class II. The
inflexions of the past and the pass. part. are the same as in Class I.

§

758. Contracted verbs.

Indicative

Subjunctive

Imperative

Present

Sg. 1

sméage, J think

sméage

2

sméast

sméage

3

sméap

sméage

sméagap

sméagen

Pl.

sméa

sméagap

Past
Sg. 1

Pl.

sméade

sméade

2

sméadest

sméade

3.

sméade

sméade

= sméadon

sméaden

Inf.

sméagan, to sméagenne

Pres. part.

sméagende

Pass. part.

sméad

§ 759. Origin of forms. The above paradigm may be inferred for
eW-S from the recorded forms of sméan think, préan afflict. The stems

§ 760

WEAK

335

from which these were conjugated in Gmc. were *smauydj-, *smauyd-,
and the development of these in the southern dialects is explained in
§ 235.2. In Angl., owing to smoothing, contraction would be of e.g.
*“sméyij-, *sm#ya-, hence VP pres. indic. sg. drégu (see § 238.2.a,
footnote), Sréas(t), dréad, pl. smégad, past Dréade, pres. subj. Trége,
imper. Oréa, pres. part. drégende, pass. part. sméad.

§ 760. All dialects have some confusion of the two stems, e.g.
IW-S, Ru. pres. part. sméande. But in lNorth. the stem smég- is
eliminated, and all forms have sméa-, préa- (also with é0), except
for a few mixtures (mostly in Ru.*) of smég- with sméa-, producing
sméag-, sméog-, e.g. Rit. inf. -sméaga, Ru.* pres. indic. pl. sméogas,
imper. sméoge.
On KG smyagenne see § 298; on eW-S smégeanne, KG smégan

§ 314, footnote.
§ 761. Similarly formed verbs are:
(1) Twéogan, doubt, past twéode, is conjugated from the stems
twéog- (Angl. twig-), twéo- (Angl. also twio-, twia-, § 238) <
*tuiydi-, *tuixd- (§ 235). W-S and Ru. have regular forms, VP
has no occurrences; most reliable forms are regular in North., e.g.
Ru.? pres. indic. 3rd sg. twias, past twiade, pl. twiodun; but pres.
opt. twioge shows a mixture of stems (Li. getuiga). On pres. part.

Cp. tuigendi see § 757 footnote.
(2) A similar verb *t1yéj-, *tiy6-, arrange, is indicated by past
téode, tiode, CH tiadz, pass. part. getéod, OE Bede getéad, inflected inf. téagenne, tegenne (OE Bede, Miller, p. 366, variants),
perhaps faultily transmitted for *zigenne (developed like Cp.
tuigendi).

(3) Héan, exalt (beside hégan, § 753.7), has forms from the
second stem only, pres. indic. pl. héap, pass. part. gehéad.
(4) Fréogan set free, love, past fréode, is developed from */ridj-,
*frid-. These would give OE *frieg- > *friig- (§ 376) > frig-, and
frio-, fréo-. Accordingly VP has pres. indic. sg. gefrigu, -fréos,
-friod, -fréod, -fréad, pl. -frigad, imper. -fria, -fréa, past. -friode,
-fréode, -fréade, and so pass. part.? In view of this clear distinction of two stems /frig-, frio- in VP, the W-S stem /fréog- is to be
regarded as a contamination of frig- by fréo-; so also Ru.! pres.
subj. gefréoge.
North. has many forms with the second stem frio-, fria- (which
-1 An entirely different view, Flasdieck in A lix. 50-51.

2 On the fluctuations of the diphthong in VP see § 238.1.

336

VERBS

§ 761

are much confused, cf. § 238.1), e.g. Ru.” pres. indic. 3rd sg. gifriad’,
-friod, pass. part. gifriad, pl. gifriode. But some forms are analogically formed with fri- and common endings, e.g. Rit. pres. indic.
1st sg. fria, subj. -frie, Li. pres. part. friende. The second stem

seems not to invade the field of the first; but the first stem frigcan be used not only where historically proper, e.g. Zi. inf.
&efriega,’ but in many forms belonging historically to the second

stem, e.g. Li. pres. indic. 3rd sg. gefriged, imper. -frig, past
-frigade.
(5) Similar is *féogan hate (not recorded in W-S).

VP has

regular forms from stems fig-, fio- (e.g. pres. indic. pl. figad, pres.

part. figende, past fiode), but also analogical pres. indic. pl. fiad,
past fiede (with -ede for -ade as in uncontracted verbs, § 757).
So Ru. distinguishes the two stems: pres. indic. 3rd sg. fiap,
pl. fiegap, subj. (?) fiegz. North. mainly distinguishes the two
stems, but contaminates fig- to fiog-, fiag- (from the second stem
fio-, fia-), hence Ru.? 3rd sg. pres. indic. fiad, inf. -fioge,
past pl. -fiadun;
Li. for same forms -fiad, -fiage, -fiadon. But some
forms are simply fi- and normal endings, e.g. Li. 3rd sg. pres.
indic. gefied, -id.
(6) In North. the strong verb geféon, rejoice, is not certainly
recorded, having been replaced by geféaga. This has stems féag-,
jéog- (contamination of fég-), and féa-, féo-. There is much con-

fusion of the two stems. Ru.” has inf. giféaga, but all other forms
from the second stem; pres. indic. 1st sg. giféo, pres. part. -féande,
-féonde, past -féode, -féade. Li. and Rit. have similar forms, but
have also pres. subj. from first stem -féage. Some forms from the
second stem could be regarded as from the strong verb, e.g. indic.
Ist sg., and pl.; also inf. Li., Rit. -féa, imper. Li. -fag (for *feh).
The weak verb is found outside North. only in Ru.! pres. indic.
3rd sg. geféap, and in IW-S transcripts of the gloss on the Psalter
(e.g. Royal, Arundel, Lambeth), where it is a survival from
ultimate Angl. originals.

(7) Defectively preserved verbs of the same type are:
Poetical pres. indic. 3rd sg. bdp boasts, IW-S subj. bogie, past
béde, and hence analogical 3rd sg. bogap.
OE Bede pres. part. géiende lamenting, 3rd sg. pres. indic. géad
(analogical for *g6d).?
T On the spelling with te see § 765.
4 There are also corrupt forms in the Bede MSS., see B-T, Supp., s.v. géian.

§ 762

WEAK

337

W-S pres. indic. 1st sg. séoge shoe, pl. scedgead,, subj. pl. -scdgen,
imper. sced, pass. part. -scéd, North. analogical disyllable -scded.
CLASS III

§ 762. The following are W-S paradigms of the four verbs
which preserve the clearest signs of belonging to Class III, habban

have, secgan say, libban live, hycgan think. For clarity, the first
person singular only will be given in the past indicative, and in the
subjunctive tenses, as these all have the same endings as in Classes
I and II. The imperative plural is omitted, being identical with the
plural of the present indicative.

Present
Indic.
Sg. 1

hebbe

libbe

2

secge

hefst

leofast

seegst

hygst

3

hefp

leofap

segp

hygp

hycge

Pi.

habbab

libbap

secgap

hy¢gap

Subj.

hebbe

libbe

secge

hycge

Imper.

hafa

leofa

sege

hyge

hogde
hogde

Past

Indic.

Subj.

Inf.

hefde
hefde

lifde
lifde

segde
segde

habban

_ilibban

secgan

hy¢gan

Pres. part. habbende libbende

secgende

hyégende

Pass. part. hefd

segd

hogod

lifd

As in other types, uncontracted forms of the 2nd and 3rd sg. pres.
indic. sometimes occur in W-S, e.g. segep, hygep.
In W-S prose 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic. hafast, hafap occur occasionally. In the pl. W-S has occasionally root vowel #, especially in
inverted forms: hebbe we. On negated forms see § 469.' IW-S has

frequently pres. subj. habbe, pass. part. (OE Bede) hzefed.

The forms of libban with eo have back umlaut of i, and forms with io

occur in eW-S; forms with i before a back vowel do not occur in eW-S,
except once Lfad in Junius’ transcript of CP, 282, 21, but lifiende,
lifgende occur once each. IW-S has a re-formed verb following Class II,

leofian, lifian.
' Note the curious negated pass. part. genzefd, Boeth. 30, 26 (late manuscript only).

338

VERBS

§ 762

The present system of secgan is re-formed in IW-S to indic. secge,
seg(e)st, seg(e)p, seégap, imper. sege, subj. and part. unchanged. On past
sé&de see § 243.

In eW-S hyégan has already 3rd sg. pres. indic. -hogad’; past -hogode,
pass. part. -hogod appear, and are normal IW-S.

Various re-formed past tenses occur in late texts, e.g. sagode, hygde,
hygede.

eKt. has 1st sg. pres. indic. hebbe, subj. hebbe, hebbe, habbe, KG 3rd
sg. pres. indic. hefé, -heged (to hycgan), pl. habbad, imper. sege, all forms
agreeing with W-S with regular 2, y > e; but eKt. subj. Uifige, pres.
part. kbgende, forms of a type frequent in Angl.
The chief forms of the Anglian texts are:
VP Pres. indic. and sg. hafast, 3rd hafad, pl. habbad’, past hefde, pres.
part. *habbende,’ pass. part. hefd.
Pres. indic. 1st sg. lifgu, 3rd leofad, pl. lifgad’, subj. lifge, pres. part.
lifgende, pass. part. lifd.
Pres. indic. 1st sg. seégu, -o, 2nd -sagas, 3rd seged, pl. secgad, past
segide, inflected inf. seggenne, pres. part. se¢gende, pass. part. segd.

Pres, indic. 3rd sg. -hogad, pl. -hyégad, past -hogde.
Ru.) Pres. indic. and sg. hefest, 3rd hzfep, hzfp, pl. habbap, subj.
hzbbe, imper. hxfe, past hefde, inflected inf. habbanne, pres. part.
hzbbende.
Pres. indic. 3rd sg. leofap, pl. lifgap, pres. part. lifgende, past lifde.
Pres. indic. ist sg. sa#dge, sedge, and sxgest, 3rd sagep, pl. secgap,
seégap, subj. sedge, imper. sedge, seg(e), past segde, inf. seégan,
pass. part. sxgd.

North.?
Li, ist sg. pres. indic. hafo, 2nd hzxfes, 3rd hzfed, pl. habbad, subj.
hzbbe, imper. hxfe, past hzfde, inf. habba, pres. part. hebbende.
Rit. and Ru.? do not differ significantly from Li.
Li. 1st sg. pres. indic. hofo, 3rd lofad, lifed, pl. ifiad, subj. lifige, past
lifde, inf. lifiga, pres. part. lifigiende.
Rit. does not differ from Li. significantly.
Ru.? st sg. pres. indic. Ufo, 3rd fed, pl. lifgas, subj. kifge, past Lifde,
inf. lifga, pres. part. lifgende.
' Cf. negated nabbende.
2 North. variants will not be given which depend merely on features of the
dialect already discussed, e.g. the interchange of -as, -ad in the pres. indic. pl.;
the confusion of -s and -d in the endings of the 2nd and+3rd sg. pres. indic. In the
forms of habban, simple analogical disturbance of the root vowel is disregarded,
e.g. Li. pres. indic. sg. hefo, hafis, hafed.

§ 763

WEAK

339

Ii, 1st sg. pres. indic. szgo, and sewges, 3rd seged, pl. sxégad,' subj.
szge, imper. seeg(e), past seegde, inf. sega, pres. part. swdgende,
pass. part. -sag(e)d.

Rit. and Ru.* do not differ significantly from Li.
Li. 3rd sg. pres. indic. -hogas,? pl. hogad, past pl. ~hogdon, inf. -hyéga,
pres. part. -hydgende.
Rit. has in present system only imper. pl. hogad; past hogade, pl.
-hogdon, pass. part. pl. -hogodo.
Ru. does not differ significantly from Li.

§ 763. On the basis of the characteristic features of these four
verbs, a list of peculiarities may be compiled which are often

displayed by verbs originally belonging to the class in Anglian
texts, even though they have passed in the main into Class II.
(1) A sign of Class III inflexion is syncopation of the medial
vowel in the past tense, for this is shared by all four fundamental
verbs.3

(2) Forms with non-syllabic medial -7- (symbol g) instead of
the syllabic -7g-, -i- of Class II are generally a sign of Class III,

as in the VP and Ru.* paradigms of libban. But this will not apply
to all present participles and inflected infinitives, where in Anglian
Class II verbs have regularly -7- after short root syllables (§ 757).

(3) A mark of Class III is the appearance side by side of forms
with and without (a) 7-umlaut of the root vowel; (6) consonant

gemination.*

§ 764. The verbs which show traces of these characteristics, and
may reasonably be regarded as having been originally Class III
verbs in OE, are the following; the forms characteristic of Class

III are given for each:

bifian tremble: Ru.’ pres. part. bifgende is not decisive, but
cognates (OHG biben, &c.) point to Class III.

bismerian disgrace: Li. past pl. bismerdon.
fetian fetch: Angl., poetry (with late exceptions), and sometimes

W-S have Class II fetian, fetode; but W-S has also fecé- as

1 There are also contaminations of 3rd sg. by pl. and the reverse: 3rd sg. Ru.?
seégad, pl. Li. saegas.

? Also -hyégad (contamination with pl.).
3 It is rare for verbs of Class II to have syncopation in the past owing to the
analogy of Classes I and III: on possible instances in Li. see S~B, § 413.4.7;

Ross, Studies in the accidence of the Lindisfarne Gospels, pp. 151-2.
* But characteristics (3) (a) and (b) by themselves may point only to the
existence of Class I and Class II conjugation side by side, e.g. fylgan, folgian;
tellan, talian,

340

VERBS

§ 764

the first stem, pointing to Prim. OE feti- (§ 434), and past
fette, pass. part. gefett, thus showing characteristics 1 and 2
above.
giowige desire (North.): Rit. pres. indic. pl. giugad; Li. inf. giuge,
past giude.
hlinian lean: Cp. 1st sg. pres. indic. onhlingo.
iewan show: Angl. éawan, when compared with the W-S verb,
shows characteristic (3) (a), and its past. Zawde characteristic
léoran go: see § 293 on the interchange of forms with and without
umlaut.
leornian learn: see similarly § 154.3, footnote.

losian perish: Rit. inf. loesia; Ru.” pres. indic. pl. loesigad, inf.
loesga, &c. (So Ru.? has forms with umlaut and medial -g-

from trans. losian, destroy.)

.

murnan mourn: past pl. murndan (And. 37).

plagian play: Li. past plegde, and hence root vowel of plegade.
onscunian dread: VP past pl. onséynedun shows characteristic
(3) (a), and is supported by North. y forms which might in
themselves be due to palatal influence.
sorgian sorrow: Ep. pres. part. sowrgzndi shows characteristic
(3) (a), and is confirmed by ME serrghenn (Orrm). The Goth.
and OHG cognates are of Class IIT.
sparian spare: this verb does not show any of the characteristics

listed above, but Rit. inf. spzria, imper. spzxr, past -spwrede
VP forms with back mutation (pres. indic. 3rd sg.

beside

spearad, &c.) suggest Prim. OE forms both with and without
back vowels in the syllables after the root syllable, hence
conjugation according to Class II or Class III.
swigian be silent: Li., Ru.*, Martyrology past swigde. (On W-S

pres. part. swigende see Flasdieck, A lix. 49).
tilian strive for: CP pres. subj. pl. tilgen, PC pres. part. tilgende.!
getréwa trust (North.): beside gitriowa, this form (Zi. only)
would seem open to the same explanation as geléora beside
geliora. (So Sievers, Vokalismus, p. 35; Flasdieck is unconvinced, A lix. 75-76.)
truwian, trugian trust: eW-S past -truwdes; Ru.” gitrygade.
1 The medial -g- in W-S is probably decisive as it is there a very rare spelling
for the medial element of Class II (in eW-S only once, lufge, CP 145, 16); Ep.,
Cp. pres. part. tilgendum is indecisive.

. § 765

WEAK

341

peowian serve: VP pres. subj. pl. diwgen (§ 279), past Teawde,

pl. deowdun; OE Bede pres. part. péogende, past péo(w)de;
IW-S past peowde.
polian suffer: Rit. pres. subj. -doeliga; Ru. pres. indic. pl. (used
as 3rd sg. by contamination) -doelgas; inf. -doelge.
wacian be awake: Ru.1, North. wecéa, poetical pres.
weeccende show characteristics (3) (a) and (d).!

part.

wunian dwell: Ru.' imper. pl. wynigap.
§ 765. Contracted verbs. Here may belong fréogan and *féogan,
of which the formation is described in § 761.4, 5. It will be
seen there that while the first stem is in Angl. generally /rig-,
fig-, the spellings frieg-, fieg- also occur. It has been suggested
above that frieg- would in OE develop to frig-, and in that case the

spellings with ie would be archaic. It may well be, however, that
in OE friog- > frieg- and did not develop further, and that frig< frii-, and that frieg- and frig- accordingly represent Class II
and Class III conjugation, parallel to Jufie and lifgu.

§ 766. Origin of forms. In the pres. system of the weak verb of Class
III, reflexes of three Gmc. formative elements are traceable in OE: (1)

-®-, (2) --, (3) -g-. (1) and (2) stand in the same relationship as -diand -6- in Class II, (3) is an ablaut variant of (1) with vanishing grade

of the vowel.
Forms with (1) have in OE -i- (written -g-), the preceding vowel
having been syncopated too late for consonant gemination to take place,
but sufficiently early for -{- to cause umlaut. Such forms are VP lifgu,
lifgad, lifge; Ru." lifgas, lifga, lifge, and a number of forms from
other verbs quoted § 764. Forms with umlaut are Ru.? Joesga,
-Joelge (inf.); and with substitution of formative element of Class II,
Rit. loesia, Ru. loesigad, Rit. -doeliga.2 On W-S feccan with -ti- > -éé-

see § 486, footnote.

(2) is found in OE in 2nd and 3rd sg. indic. and imper. sg.? The
and and 3rd sg. indic. are subject to W-S syncope, but are distinguished
' Ru.? differentiated this verb from causative weéda; it uses -wehte as past of
wecéa, -wehte of wxéca (both forms are historically past of weééan, § 753.9.b.1).

Ti. and Rit. are in confusion. Ru. generalizes waecéan (the past occurs once only,
wehton, causative).
? Or perhaps by phonological development, § 361.

3 Phonologically the OE forms could correspond to Goth. habaih, &c., but I
assume Ingvaeonic -#- parallel to -d- of Class II, In OHG the present systems

of Classes II and III are made perfectly parallel, ail forms being derived from

the stem -6- in Class II, from -é- (< -#-) in Class III.

342

VERBS

§ 766

from those of strong verbs and weak verbs of Class I by absence: of
umlaut: hefst, hafp, segst, seep. Here may be placed imper. szge,
but hafa, leofa, and !W-S and poetical saga follow Class II. In Angl.,
imper. in -e, 2nd and 3rd sg. indic. in -est, -eb from the basic verbs may
be regarded as Class III forms: VP seged, hefed (with second fronting);
Ru.! sxge, saegest, segep, hxfest, hzfep, and similar forms in North.;
North. fed. But in verbs which largely follow Class II -e, -est, -ep are
to be regarded as weakened from Class II -a, &c. Even in the basic
verbs many forms follow Class II: VP hafast, -ad (§ 166), sagas, leofad,
~hogad’, Ru. leofap, Li. Kofad, -hogas.
Forms with (3) have consonant doubling and mutation and hence
resemble forms from weak verbs of Class I. Here belong all forms of the
type of secgan, ibban in 1st sg. and pl. indic., subj., part. and inf. In
secgan North. has root vowel -z-, and so Ru.! usually, !W-S occasionally
in impure and poetical texts (Blick. Hom., Ps.). This may be explained
by § 193.e or regarded as transferred from szgep, s#gde, &c. Similarly,

forms of habban with -bb- may have root vowel a' or 2, and *hebban

does not occur.
In verbs other than the basic four the analogy of Class IT has elimi-

nated practically all Class III forms. Other analogies produce rst sg.
indic. North. hafo, liofo, sego, based on the 2nd and 3rd sg., and so.
LR hafz.
Hyégan has in W-S the pres. system according to Class I, Angl. forms

are from Class I hydgan, Class II hogian.? Only the past is Class III.
The past and pass. part. have no medial vowel and no umlaut. VP
has second fronting in hefde, hefd, segde, segd. Analogy of Class II
appears only in pass. part. hogod (W-S, Rit.).
The chief problems concerning these verbs are (a) the formation of
the past and pass. part., and (6) the cause of the syncopation of the long
medial vowel in forms of type (1).
(a) The past and pass. part. are formed in Goth. and OHG by the
addition of the normal dental elements to a stem in -#- (written a7 in
Goth., e in OHG). In Ingvaeonic there is no connecting vowel before
the dental elements.3 Since syncopation of a long medial vowel is
unlikely, it is probable that the Goth., OHG forms have -#- analogically
introduced from the present system, and that the Ingvaeonic forms are
older. This view is supported by relict forms without connecting vowel
in OHG.* The medial consonant groups, however, show forms of this
' Transferred from hafapb, &c. The elimination of *hebban was perhaps due
to a desire to differentiate ‘have’ and ‘raise’ (hebban).
2 North. indic. and imper. pl. hogad is a normal analogy in the dialect (§ 757).
3 ON agrees with Ingvaeonic, but its greater tendency to syncopation of
medial vowels makes it possible that its forms are based on ones resembling
those of OHG.
* eg. hapta for habeta.

§ 767

PRETERITE-PRESENT

343

type to have been late in origin in Gmc., otherwise the OE forms would
be *hzxfte, *szehte, &c. (cf. brdhte).
(6) Present forms of type (1) are found with certainty in OE only. In
them -#- seems to have undergone very early shortening to -aj-, and

in this position before -j- the vowel 2 was syncopated early enough for

-{ to cause umlaut of the root syllable in forms like Ru.? -doelge.'

3. Preterite-Present Verbs
§ 767. The nature of these verbs has been indicated above, § 726.
They can be classified under the classes of strong verbs according
to the form of their present (in form a strong past) as follows:
CLASS I

wat, know.

Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. wat, 2nd wast, pl. witon, subj. wite,
imper. pl. witap,? past wiste, wisse, inf. witan, pres. part.
witende, pass. part. witen.
On negated forms see §§ 265, 469. Dialectal variety is mainly due to
the regular operation of sound-changes, e.g. eW-S wioton, wieton

(§§ 218, 299.b), Ru.!, North. wutan, -on (§ 218). In North. the normal
endings of the pres. indic. -ad, -as, -ed may be extended to this verb,
wutad, -as, &c. Li. imper. sg. gewit.

ah, possess.

Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. dh, dg, pl. dgon, subj. age, past ahte,
inf. dgan.
On negated forms see § 354. 2nd sg. pres. indic. is dhst |W-S, aht Li.,
and does not elsewhere occur. Pres. part. -dgende is frequent in compounds, the pass. part. dgen, gen own (§ 736.m) occurs in adjectival
use.

Li., Ru2 have pres. indic. sg. dh, and hence in view of the rarity of
final -g > -h in North. (§ 446) it would seem that Verner’s law was
operative in the Prim. OE forms, as in the cognate languages,’ and that
IW-S dg is an inverted spelling (§ 447). The pres. indic. sg. is not recorded eW-S, Ru.}, the verb is wanting entirely VP, Rit.
! Flasdieck, A lix. 36-38 regards this early syncopation as general, not limited
to before -j-, and challenges the chronology of the loss of medial 2 suggested
above, § 353.
2 These verbs generally employ subj. forms for imper., e.g. wite, dge (but note
eW-S gemun). But the development of witap as imper. pl. is found in all dialects,
in North. -ad interchanging with -ed, -as as in the pres, indic. pl.
3 Goth. ath, aigum; ON 4d, eigum.

VERBS

344

CLASS

§ 767

II

déag, avail.
Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. déag, déah (§ 446), pl. dugon, subj. dyge
(§ 736.m), duge, past dohte, pres. part. dugende.
Angl. has only Li, pres. indic. 3rd sg. dég; eKt. pres. part. dugunde,

Ct. 37 (-u- from scribal influence of preceding -u-).
CLASS

III

ann, grant.

Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. ann,' pl. unnon, subj. unne, past ie, inf.
unnan, pres. part. unnende, pass. part. geunnen.
Beside the subjunctival imper. unne, an endingless form appears,
IW-S geunn, Rit. gionn.

cann can, know.
Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. cann,' 2nd canst, pl. cunnon, subj.
cunne, past ciipe, inf. cunnan, pass. part. -cunnen, and adjectival
cup.

The pass. part. exists only from oncunnan accuse; Ru.1 has -ad, -ep
beside -w, -on in pres. indic. pl.

pearf, need.
Pres. indic. rst, 3rd sg. pearf, 2nd pearft, pl. purfon, subj.

purfe, pyrfe (§736.m), past porfte, inf. purfan, pres. part.
pearfende.
Ru}, North. pres. part. dorfende, Ru.’ also purfende; North. has
re-formed pres. dorfed, used as 3rd sg. and pl. (Li. also durfu).

dearr, dare.

Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. dearr, 2ud dearst, pl. durron, subj.
durre, dyrre (§ 736.m), past dorste.
RC past dorstz, but later Anglian has many re-formations, Ru.
past durste, dy(r)ste, Li., Ru.? darste; Li. also 1st sg. pres. indic. darr
(cf. §.144). VP lacks the verb.

CLASS IV

séeal, shall.
Pres, indic. 1st, 3rd sg. sceal, 2nd scealt, pl. sculon, subj. séyle

(§ 736.m), scule, past sceolde.

' With the normal variation of a, 0, and of final -n, -nn.

§ 767

PRETERITE-PRESENT

345

2nd sg. pres. indic. should be Angl. séalt, which occurs Ru.1, and a is
extended to 3rd sg. séal, Ru.! and a southern rubric in Rit.; but usually
ea (from & by. palatal diphthongization) is extended from 1st arid 3rd
persons, hence Ru.}, Li. séealt. Ru.! has past subj. scylde (analogy of

pres. subj.).

Much variety of form is due to the operation of sound-changes: on
W-S variation between scu-, sceo- in pres., scn-, séeo- in past see §§ 179-

80; on North. pres. pl. séylun, séilun, sciulun, sciolun § 176; on past
Ru.! séalde (beside sculde), North. séealde, § 156. VP lacks the verb.

geman, remember.
Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. seman, 2nd -manst, pl. -munon, subj. -mune,
-myne (§ 736.m), imper. sg. -mun, pl. -munap,' past -munde,
inf. -munan, pres. part. -munende, pass. part. -munen. The
simplex man occurs occasionally.
The verb is very prone to re-formation in |W-S, e.g. pres. indic.
gemune, -munst, -mand.

This verb appears not to be pret.-pres. in Angl. VP has pres. indic.
Ist sg. gemunu, 2nd gemynes, subj. pl. gemynen, imper. sg. gemyne,
pl. gemunad, past gemunde, inf. gemunan. Ru. has pres. indic. 2nd sg.
femynest, past gemunde. Thus the Merc. forms with their variation

between w and y suggest a weak verb of Class III. North. has similar
forms, but y is extended to all,” imper. sg. Li., Rit., Ru.? gemyne, pl. Li.,
Ru.? -as, pres. indic. 3rd sg. Li. -es, pl. -as, subj. -a2, past gemy(n)ste.

be-, geneah be enough.
Pres. indic. 3rd sg. -neah, pl. -nugon, subj. -nuge, past -nohte.
CLASS

VI

mot, must.

Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. mot, 2nd most, pl. méton, subj. méte,
past moste.
UNCERTAIN

CLASS

mzg, may.

Pres. indic. 1st, 3rd sg. mag, 2nd meaht, pl. magon, mzxgon,

subj. mxge, past meahte.
IW-S phonological modifications and additional forms are pres. indic.
1 Later the subjunctival imper. gemune, -en is used.
? Except Li. once imper. sg. or inf. gemona (Luke 16, 25) and once pres.
indic. pl. gemonas ( John 15, 20, 0 corrected to y).

346

VERBS

§ 768

2nd sg. miht,’ past mehte (already eW-S, § 312), mihte,! subj. mage, muge,
inf. magan, pres. part. magende.
The nW-S forms vary only owing to the sound-changes of the dialects, e.g. VP pres. indic. 3rd sg. meg, Li. 2nd meht; Merc., North.
past mxhte; KG pres.

indic.

2nd sg. meht (§ 314), subj. meige,

part. pres. megende.

This verb cannot be classified under any of Classes I-V, for the root
appears to have had I-E a (not 0), nor under Classes VI and VII, as

these have past tenses in 6, é, or é0.

4. Anomalous Verbs
§ 768. This small group of verbs presents many difficulties of

formation, and it would not be possible to discuss their origin
briefly. They have all been subjected to thorough study by H. M.
Flasdieck in a recent series of articles in A and ES (see Bibliography, Section c).
(a) Willan will

Indicative

Subjunctive

Sg.1

wille

wille

2

wilt

wille

3.

~—owilie

wille

Pl.

willap

willen

Past

wolde

Present

Inf.
Pres. part.

willan
_ willende

In W-S and Kt. -/J- is seldom extended to 3rd sg. pres. indic. (alleged
instances are mostly subj.).
eKt. has 1 sg. pres. indic. willa (< willu) beside wille; Surrey also
willio.
The Angl. forms are:
VP: pres. indic. 3rd sg. wile, pl. willad, pres. part. wellende, past walde.

Ru.': pres. indic. 1st sg. wille, and wilt, 3rd wile,’ pl. willap, subj,
wille, imper. pl. wellap, past wolde, walde.
' These forms seem influenced by the noun mht; in the past subj. there

may be umlaut, eW-S “miehte.
2 Alleged exceptions are subj.

§ 768

ANOMALOUS

347

Li.: pres. indic. rst sg. willo,’ 2nd wilt, 3rd wil(l),? pl. wallad,} -as
(once -on), subj. walle, welle, past indic. walde, subj. weelde.*
Rit.: pres. indic. 3rd sg. wil, pl. uallad, subj. uzlle, past ualde.
Ru.*: pres. indic. 1st sg. willo, and wilt, 3rd wil(l), pl. wallad, -as (and
inverted wallon we), subj. welle, past walde.

The W-S negated forms nyllan, nellan, nolde, are discussed in §§ 265,

469. In IW-S imper. nelle, nellap occurs.
The only Kt. negated forms are pres. subj. mylle (Ct. 41), past pl.
noldan (CA, Surrey).
The Anglian forms are:5

VP: imper. sg. nyl, pl. nyllad, past nalde.
Ru.): pres. indic. 1st sg. nyllic, 3rd nyle, pl. nyllep, imper. pl. nellap,
past pl. naldun, noldan.
L.: pres. indic. pl. nallad, -as, -es (inverted nallo we), imper. sg.
nzlle, nelle, pl. nallad’, &c. (see footnote 3), past nalde.
Rit.: pres. indic. 2nd sg. mylt, imper. sg. nzlle, pl. nzllad, past pl.
naldon.,
Ru.?: pres. indic. pl. inverted allan we, imper. sg. nelle, pl. nallad,
-as, nallon ge.

(6) Don do

Indicative

Subjunctive

§_Imperative

Present

Sg. 1

Pl.
Past

do

dé

2

dést

dé

3

dép

dé

dip

dén

do

dop

dyde
Inf.

don

Pres. part.

d6nde

Pass. part.

geddn

In W-S and Kt. there is little deviation from the above paradigm,
except for occasional analogical re-formations such as eW-S subj. dée,
pres. part. -ddende (with disyllabic o-++-e). Accordingly KG past dede
can be regarded as having e < y.
t Rarely will(e), wello, -e; inverted nuillié.
2 So all three INorth. glosses; already LR wil,
3 As imper. may have vowel of subj. wadlas, -ad, beside wallad. And so
negated nallad, -as, -ed, -es, nellad, &c. beside nallad, &c.
+ Both instances are subj. (Matt. 14, 7; Luke 1, 62).
5 Angl. texts have also uncontracted forms, e.g. Ru.! newylle, Li. nuillié.

348

VERBS

§ 768

VP and Ru." have pres. indic. 1 sg. dém (§ 735.a), 2nd doest, 3rd doed;
pass. part. gedden (§ 736.m), Ru. also geddan. Otherwise they differ

from W-S mainly in having more frequent analogical re-formation,
e.g. inf. déan, pres. indic. pl. déap (Ru. only), imper. déa (after weak

Class II, VP only), subj. dée (VP only; Ru.! dé, déa, pl. déan).
The North. texts also have pres. indic. sg. dom, does(t), doed, but
re-form pl. to déad (also déas, -es, -ed, forms which can invade 3rd sg.).
Re-formation is frequentin the present system, e.g. infin. dda (beside do),
subj. dée, part. déende.
Beside past dyde, Li. and Ru.® have dede.’ The form occurs in CA
deodan, where the vowel is shown to be short by back umlaut. Dede in
transcripts of poetry is due to the assumption that dede had Angl. é,

W-S 2;7 there is no evidence for an OE form equivalent to OHG
tdtun, OS ddadun they did.

(c) Gan go

Indicative

Subjunctive

Imperative

Present

Sg. 1

Pl.

ga

ga

2

gest

ga

3

gep

ga

Past

gap

gan

ga

gap

éode

Inf.

gan

Past part. gegan
For the past éode, North. and Ru.! have also éade. Instead of past
part. gegdn, North. has geéad; there are no Mercian instances. The
present system is as follows in the Mercian texts:

VP: indic. as above, but also 1st sg. often -gaa, once -gdn (? for
*gdu), subj. -gde, imper. sg. -gda (cf. dda); there is a pres. part.
~gande,
Ru.1; indic. as above, but 3rd sg. largely replaces pl. (but conversely
£48 is once 3rd sg.), imper. sg. ga(e), pl. gap (but more frequently
&#p), subj. gd, pl. g&n (once -gan), inf. g®, -gd.

Like Ru.!, the North. texts show extension of g#- to pres. indic.
pl., inf., and subj.,? and there is free formation of analogical disyllabic
* The instances are all pl!., and many are subj.
? And the paraphrast of the Psalms appears to have given the first syllable
metrical length. (Dan. 101 length is indifferent; Gen. 722 d#dun transliterates
OS dadun.)
‘
3 In North. g#- is extended to 1st sg. pres. indic. also; and to imper. sg. in

Li. g#a (once).

§ 768

ANOMALOUS

349

forms, with use of the characteristic North. endings. The chief forms
are:

Ii,: pres. indic. ist sg. g#, gde, gde, and -p#stu, gdst, -gdas, gdes,
gaz, -gad, 3rd gz, ges, gad, gaad, -as, -es, &c., pl. gaad, -as, -es,

-e0, g20, g#s, subj. gde, g#, imper. sg. gd, gda, gde, &c., inf. gaa,
£ae, gz.

Rit.: pres. indic. 1st sg. -g# (uncertain), 2nd g&st, 3rd g#d, pl. -gad,
-gGs, -gdad, -as, subj. -g# (sg. and pl.), -gde (pl. only), inf. -gda.
Ru.?: pres. indic, ist sg. g#, gaa, 2nd g&st, 3rd p#d, g#s, gad, gas,
-gdad, pl. gad, gas, gaas, also as imper. gdad, subj. sg. and pl. g#,
g4a, pl. also gée, gd, imper. sg. gaa, inf. gaa.

Kt. differs from W-S only phonologically (e.g. pres. indic. 3rd sg.
KG gé@).

(d) Béon be
Indicative

Present
Sg.x

eom, J am

béo,' I shall be

2 ~ eart

bist

3

bip

Pl.

«is
sindon, sint

§ béop

Subjunctive

Present

Sg.
Pl.

sie
sien

béo
béon
Imperative

Sg.
Pl.

béo
béop
Infinitive

béon
Variations from the above paradigms in W-S are occasioned only
by normal developments, e.g. eW-S still frequently zo in the forms of
béon; IW-S si, sf for sie. In eleventh-century texts the participles béonde,
gebéon appear. On negated forms see § 354.

Kt. has mostly similar forms to W-S, but note KG pres. indic.
Ist sg. eam, pl. sin(t), sion(t), subj. sio, si; Cts. 37 (Kt.), 45 (Surrey)
pl. seondan, siondan (§ 217); Cts. 34, 58 earan (apparently use of Merc.
form in a summarizing formula); Ct. 45 subj. séo, sio.
' Not recorded eW-S.

350

VERBS

§ 768

The chief Mercian forms are:
VP: pres. indic. ist sg. eam, 2nd ear, 3rd ts, pl. sind(un), earun,
subj. sie.
pres. indic. 1st sg. biom, 2nd bist, 3rd bid, pl. biod (once biad, § 238),

imper. sg. bio, pl. biod.
Ru’: pres. indic. rst sg. eam (negated nam, nam), 2nd eart, earp, arpu,
3rd is, pl. sindun, sint, arun, subj. sie, sy, sé, séo.
Pres. indic. 1st sg. béom, and bist, 3rd bip, béop, pl. béop, biop, bipon,
beopan, subj. béo, imper. sg. béo, pl. béop, biop, inf. béon.
The North. glosses Li., Rit., Ru.” all have: pres. indic. ist sg. am,
and ard, 3rd is, pl. sint, sindon, aron, subj. sie, sé;
Pres. indic. 1st sg. biom (Li. also béom, bium), and bist, 3rd bid, pl. bidon
(or biovon), Li., Ru.? also biad.
Li. has also subj. bie, bia, inf. bian.
As in gan there is some mutual influence of pres. indic. 3rd sg. and pl:
bid is pl. twice VP, twice Li.; béop is 3rd sg. once Ru.!, biad once
Ru?
There are no imperatives from these roots in North., all the glosses
using wes, was, woes, which is also found in VP and Ru.!; pl. wesap

Ru.}, wosad, -as North.

The past is supplied by wesan, defective strong verb of Class V,
subject to Verner’s law: indic. sg. 1st and 3rd wes, 2nd wre,

pl. wéron, subj. wére. The present system supplies in 1W-S imper.
sg. wes, pl. wesap, inf. wesan, pres. part. wesende. Less usual are a
pres. indic. and subj. wesep, -ap, -e (poetry, Blick. Hom.). In Angl.
the present system is represented by the imper. discussed above,
Cp. inf. wesan, pres. part. aetweosendne, North. inf. wosa, Ru.! wesa.
The various forms of wesan in the dialects are due to normal changes:
nW-S has -é- in past 2nd sg., pl., and subj. wére, -on; VP and Kt. have
past wes; on North. wosa see § 210.2; on imper. woes
§ 319, wes §§ 327-8;

on was for wes § 335; on negated forms § 354.

The distinction of the pres. indic. tenses eom and béo is fairly
well preserved in OE: béo expresses what is (a) an invariable fact,
e.g. ne bid’ swylé cwenli¢ peaw ‘such is not a queenly custom’,? or

(5) the future, e.g. ne bid pe wilna gad ‘you will have no lack of
pleasures’,? or (c) iterative extension into the future, e.g. bip
storma gehwyl¢ aswefed ‘every storm is always allayed’ (i.e. on all

occasions of the flight of the Phoenix, past and to come);+ eom
' This form is also found LR and Cp.
3 id. 660.

2 Beow. 1940.
4 Phoen. 185-6.

§ 768

ANOMALOUS

351

expresses a present state provided its continuance is not especially

regarded, e.g. wlitig is se wong ‘the plain is beautiful’.

The distinction of the imperatives bé and wes is one of dialect,
not of meaning. Broadly béo is W-S and Merc., wes (woes, wes)

North.; but while 5é0 is never North., wes is found in W-S and
Merc. (details above).
Similarly inf. béon (bion, bian) is W-S and Merc., wosa North.;
but Ru.! has once wesa, Li. once bian.

The subj. forms béo and sie (séo) are also dialectally distinguished:
ste is eW-S, Kt., VP, North., bé0 is Ru.1 But already in eW-S béo

appears, and in IW-S it is the prevailing form (it does not appear,
however, in KG). In North. it only appears in Li. (twice).
T id. 7.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
TREATMENTS of individual problems of phonology and accidence are
referred to in the present work at the relevant places. The Select
Bibliography indicates editions of the texts upon which this Grammar
is founded, and general aids to their linguistic study.
A. Bibliography
In the absence of a complete bibliography for Old English studies, the
sections devoted to Old English in the following annual publications are
invaluable:

Jahresbericht iiber die Erscheinungen auf dem Gebiete der germanischen
Philologie. Berlin, 1880-2, Leipzig, 1883— (published by the Gesell-

schaft fiir deutsche Philologie).
Bibliography of English language and literature.

Modern Humanities

Research Association. Cambridge, 1921-

The year’s work in English studies. English Association. Oxford, 1921Selective bibliographies are included in

the grammars of Luick,

Girvan, and Sievers—Brunner (see § c below), and the following are also
useful:
KENNEDY, A. G. A bibliography of writings on the English language from the
beginning of printing to the end of 1922. Cambridge (Mass.) and New

Haven, 1927.
HEUSINKVELD, A. H., BASHE, E. J. A bibliographical guide to Old English.
University of Iowa Humanistic Studies, 1931.

The Cambridge bibliography of English literature, I. Cambridge, 1940,
Supplement, 1957.

FUNKE, 0. Englische Sprachkunde: ein Uberblick ab 1935. Bern, 1950.

Bibliographical information concerning individual texts is given in the
various literary histories; especially useful are:

BRANDL, A. Geschichte der altenglischen Literatur. Paul’s Grundriss der
germanischen Philologie ti, 2nd ed.; also separately, Strassburg, 1908.
ANDERSON, G. K. The literature of the Anglo-Saxons. Princeton, 1949.

The early work on Old English is well recorded by:
WULKER, R.

Grundriss zur Geschichte der angelsdchsischen Litteratur.

Leipzig, 1885.

B. Dictionaries
A fairly complete lexicographical record of Old English is offered by:
BOSWORTH, J., TOLLER, T. N. An Anglo-Saxon dictionary. Oxford, 1898.

Supplement (by Toller alone), Oxford, 1921.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

353

The poetical vocabulary is separately treated in:
GREIN, C. W. M. Sprachschatz der angelsdchsischen Dichter. Revised ed. by

J. J. Kohler, assisted by F. Holthausen, Heidelberg, 1912.

Hand dictionaries are:
SWEET, H. The student’s dictionary of Anglo-Saxon. Oxford, 1897. (Uses

spelling normalized on West-Saxon basis.)

HALL, J. R. CLARK. A concise Anglo-Saxon dictionary. Cambridge, 1894,

revised and enlarged, 1916 and 1931.

On the origin and meaning of Old English words note also:
HOLTHAUSEN, F. Altenglisches etymologisches Wérterbuch. Heidelberg, 1934.

SCHUCKING, L. L. Untersuchungen zur Bedeutungslehre der angelsdchsischen
Dichtersprache. Heidelberg, 1915.

An extensive record of Old English personal names is offered by the
following, which is supplemented by the works of Bjirkman, Boehler,
Von Feilitzen, Forssner, Redin, and Tengvik (§ c):
SEARLE, W. G. Onomasticon Anglo-Saxonicum. Cambridge, 1897.

There is no record of geographical names of comparable fullness, but
parts of the field are covered by:
MEZGER, F. Angelsdchsische Vélker- und Léndernamen. Berlin, 1921. (Cf.
review, Archiv cxlvi. 131.)
MIDDENDORFF, H. Altenglisches Flurnamenbuch. Halle, 1902.
TENGSTRAND, E. H. R. A contribution to the study of genitival composition in

Old English place-names. Uppsala, 1940.

FORSBERG, R. A contribution to a dictionary of Old English place-names.

Uppsala, 1950.

c. Grammars
The most complete grammar is:
BRUNNER, K. Altenglische Grammatik nach der angelsdchsischen Grammatik

von Eduard Sievers neubearbeitet. Halle, 1942, slightly revised re-issue,
1951.

The most orderly presentment of the phonological history of Old
English is:
LUICK, K. Historische Grammatik der englischen Sprache. Leipzig, 1914—-

Wortweiser zu § 63-§ 614, Stockholm, 1949 (by E. Wiessner, revised
by Th. Katz).

The following works occasionally supplement the above:
BULBRING, K. D. Altenglisches Elementarbuch. I. Teil: Lautlehre. Heidel-

berg, 1902.

WRIGHT,

J., WRIGHT, E. M. Old English grammar. Third ed., Oxford

University Press, 1925.

GIRVAN, R. Angelsaksisch handboek. Haarlem, 1931.

354

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

‘The above standard works are regarded in this Grammar as offering a
satisfactory codification of earlier work, and so the books and articles by
their own authors and others upon which they were largely based are
not included in the bibliography. Other works dealing with important
questions of Old English phonology and accidence are:

ANncstROM, M. Studies in Old English MSS. with special reference to the
delabialisation of ¥ (< i+
i) to t. Uppsala, 1937.
BAZELL, C. E. ‘Kasusgruppierungen in der germ. Deklination.’ IF liv

(1936), 265-8.

‘IE final unaccented é in Germanic.’ JEGP xxxvi (1937), 1-9.
—— ‘Four West Germanic verbal endings.’ Neophilologus xxiv (1939),
62-66.

——- ‘Case-forms in -i in the oldest English texts.’ MLN lv (1940), 136-9.

BJORKMAN, E. Nordische Personennamen in England. Halle, 1910.

BLOOMFIELD, L. ‘Old English plural subjunctives in -e.’ JEGP xxix (1930),
100-13.

BOEHLER, M. Die altenglischen Frauennamen. Berlin, 1930.
BorRoWSKI, B. Zum Nebenakzent beim altenglischen Nominalkompositum.
Halle, 1921.
—— Lautdubletten im Altenglischen. Halle, 1924.
(Both works have invaluable material, but uncertain conclusions.)
BROSNAHAN, L. F. Some Old English sound changes. Cambridge, 1953.

BRUNNER, K. ‘The Old English vowel phonemes.’ English Studies xxxiv

(1953), 247-51.

DAHL, I. Substantival inflexion in early Old English. Lund, 1938.
ECKHARDT, E. Die vokalische Dissimilation im Altenglischen. ES \xxiii (1938),
161-79.
ELIASON, N. E. ‘Old English vowel lengthening and vowel shortening before
consonant groups.’ Studies in philology xlv (1948), 1-20. (A phonetic
consideration.)

VON FEILITZEN, 0. The pre-conquest personal names of Domesday Book.
Uppsala, 1937.
FLASDIECK, H. M. ‘Ae. gow.’ A lvii (1933), 208-15.
‘Die zweite Person des Singulars im ae. Verbalsystem.’ A lviii (1934),
113-21.

‘Untersuchungen iiber die germanischen schwachen Verben III.
Klasse unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung des Altenglischen.’ A lix

(1935), 1-192.

‘Die reduplizierenden Verben des Germanischen (unter besonderer

Berticksichtigung des Altenglischen).’ A lx (1936), 241-365.

‘Das Verbum wollen im Altgermanischen (unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung des Altenglischen).’ A Ixi (1937), 1-42.
‘Ae. dén und gan.’ Ibid., 43-64.
‘Das

altgermanische

Verbum

substantivum

unter

besonderer

Beriicksichtigung des Altenglischen.’ E'S Ixxi. 321-49; Ixxii. 158-60

(1936-8).

—— ‘Miszellen zur ae. Grammatik.’ AB xlj (1930), 37-39, 283-8.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

355

FLASDIECK, H. M. ‘Zur Geschichte der fem. 6-Flexion im Westgermanischen.’ IF xlviii (1930), 53-66.

‘Old English nefne: a revaluation.’ A Ixix (1950), 135-71. (Full study
of the assimilation fn > mn, cf. § 484.)
“The phonetic aspect of Old Germanic alliteration.’ A Ixix (1950),

266-87.

FORSTER, M. ‘Zur i-Epenthese im Altenglischen.’ A lix (1935), 287-08.
FORSSNER, TH. Continental-Germanic personal names in England. Uppsala,

1916.

GABRIELSON, A. ‘On the late Old Northumbrian (w)z for regular (w)e.’
AB xxi (1910), 208-19.

The influence of w- in Old English as seen in the Middle English
dialects. Gdteborg—Leipzig, 1912.
GERICKE, B., GREUL, W. Das Personal-pronomen der 3. Person in spdtags. und

Jriihmittelenglischen Texten. Leipzig, 1934. (Palaestra cxciii.)
GEVENICH, 0. Die englische Palatalisierung von k > & im Lichte der englischen Ortsnamen, Halle, 1918. (Cf. Ekwall, AB xxx. 221-8.)

HEDBERG, J. The syncope of the Old English present endings. Lund, 1945.

(Cf. Léfvenberg, Studia Neophilologica xxii. 225-9.)

HEIDEMANN, G. ‘Die Flexion des Verbum substantivum im Ags.’ Archiv

exlvii (1924), 30-46.

JIRICZEK, 0. L. “Tenuis fiir Media im Altenglischen.’ IF xxxviii (1917-20),
196-9. (Regards spellings discussed in § 450 as graphic; unlikely.)

VAN LANGENHOVE, G.

The assibilation of palatal stops in Old English.
A grammatical miscellany offered to Otto Jespersen, CopenhagenLondon, 1930, pp. 69-75.

LINKE, G. ‘standed und stent und dergleichen in ags. sicher fixierten HSS.’

ES xxiii (1939), 321-30.

LOCKWOOD, W. B.

‘Welsh ystwyrian and i-epenthesis in Old English.’
English and Germanic studies v (1952-3), 90-98.

LOFVENBERG, M. T. ‘On the syncope of the Old English present endings.’

Studia Neophilologica xxi (1948-9), 231-76.

LOEWE, K. ‘Der germanische Pluraldativ.’ Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende
Sprachforschung xlviii (1918), 76-99. (On pb&m, bam, twém, twam,

&c.)

MALONE, K. When did Middle English begin? Curme volume of linguistic

studies, Baltimore, 1930, pp. 110-17.

MARCKWARDT, A. H. Verb inflections in late Old English. Philologica: the
Malone anniversary studies, Baltimore, 1949, pp. 79-88.
PROKOSCH, E. “The Old English weak preterites without medial vowel.’
PMLA xiii (1927), 331-8.
REDIN,

M.

Studies

Uppsala, 1919.

RITTER, 0.

on uncompounded personal names in

Old English.

Vermischte Beitrdge zur englischen Sprachgeschichte. Halle,

1922.

Ross, A. 8. C. “The rst sg. pres. ind. -e in Old English.’ Neuphilologische
Mitteilungen xxxiv (1933), 232-9.

356

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ross, A. 8. C. ‘Old English 2 00 a.’ English Studies xxxii (1951), 49-56.

(Attempts an explanation of the greater frequence in adjectives than
nouns of 2 for a in the root syllable, cf. § 643.)
SALMEN, H. w + wesigerm. & und { im Angelsdchsischen. Berlin,

1936.

(Valuable material.)
SCHLEMILCH, W. Bettrdge zur Sprache und Orthographie spdatae. Sprach-

denkmdiler der Ubergangszeit (1000-1150). Halle, 1914.
SCHUBEL, F. ‘Die Aussprache des anlautenden ae. sc.’ Studia Neophilo-

logica xiv (1942), 255-76. (Summary AB liii. 219-20.)
SEELIG, F. Die Komparation der Adjektiva und Adverbien im Altenglischen.
Heidelberg, 1930.
SLETTENGREN, E. ‘On the development of Old English initial sc.’ Studier

4 modern sprdkvetenskap xv (1943), 45-50.
STANLEY, E. G. “The chronology of r-metathesis in Old English.’ English
and Germanic studies v (1952-3), 103-15.
TENGVIK, G. Old English bynames. Uppsala, 1938.
WATSON, J. Ww. ‘Northumbrian Old English éo and éa.’ Language xxii

(1946), 19-26.

Smoothing and palatal umlaut in Northumbrian. English studies

in honor of J. S. Wilson (University of Virginia Studies iv), 1951,

pp. 167-74.

WEBER, G. Suffixvokal nach kurzer Tonsilbe vor r, n, m im Angelsdchsischen. Leipzig, 1927. (Valuable material.)

WOKATSCH, Ww. Unhistorisches ea in angelsdchsischen und frithmittelenglischen Handschriften. Berlin, 1932. (Valuable material.)
WRENN, C. L. ‘Standard Old English.’

Trans. Philological Soc., 1933,

pp. 65-88.

ZESSIN, W. Uber die in- und auslautende Spirans g im Spdtwestsdchsischen.
Halle, 1922.

Dp. Metre
Metre is not directly treated in the present Grammar, but the evidence
for the accentuation of native and foreign words described in Chapters II
and X (§§ 549-58) is largely metrical. For the determination of accent, the
metrical system of Sievers is sufficient, as described in:
SIEVERS, E. Altgermanische Metrik. Halle, 1893.
SCHIPPER, J. Grundriss der englischen Metrik. Vienna and Leipzig, 1895.

English ed., A history of English versification. Oxford, 1910.
Works in which the lines of various Old English poems are classified
according to the system of Sievers are listed in § c of the. List of works

used in The battle of Brunanburh, ed. by A. Campbell (London, 1938). The
following works go more deeply than that of Sievers into the nature of
Old English verse rhythm, but diverge greatly from each other:
BOER, R.C. Studién over de metriek van het alliteratievers. Amsterdam, 1916.
HEUSLER, A. Deutsche Versgeschichte, I. Berlin and Leipzig, 1925.
POPE, J. Cc. The rhythm of Beowulf. Yale University Press, 1942.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

357

E. Collections of texts
Practically all Old English texts preserved in manuscripts older than

goo, except

the Parker

Chronicle,

and

the translations of the Cura

Pastoralis and Orosius (see § L), are edited with a full glossary in:
SWEET, H. The oldest English texts. London, 1885.

The poetical texts are conveniently edited with concise notes and ex-

tensive bibliographical references by G. Pp. KRAPP and E. VAN K. DOBBIE in

The Anglo-Saxon poetic records, 6 vols., Columbia University Press,’ as
follows:

I. The JuniusManuscript. 1931.
II. The Vercelli Book. 1932.

Ill. The Exeter Book. 1936.
IV. Beowulf and Fudith. 1954.
V. The Paris Psalter and the Metres of Boethius. 1933.
VI. The Anglo-Saxon minor poems. 1942.
Vol. IV supplements but does not supersede:
KLAEBER, F. Beowulf and the Fight at Finnsburg. D. C. Heath & Co., 1941

(3rd ed.).

The following are comprehensive collections of texts of particular
kinds:
THORPE, B. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. 2 vols. Rolls series, 1861. (Complete

texts of all versions.)

COCKAYNE, 0. Leechdoms,

wortcunning, and starcraft of early England.
3 vols. Rolls series, 1864-6.

SKEAT, W. W. The four gospels in Anglo-Saxon, Northumbrian, and Old

Mercian versions. 4 vols. Cambridge, 1871-87.

WRIGHT, T., WULCKER, R. P. Anglo-Saxon and Old English vocabularies.

2 vols. London, 1884.

LIEBERMANN, F. Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen. 3 vols. Halle, 1903-16.

F. Inscriptions
The most important runic inscriptions are those of the Ruthwell Cross
and the Franks Casket (see § 6). These are edited in Anglo-Saxon poetic

records vi. The best linguistic commentaries are given in:

DICKINS, B., ROSS, A. 8. C. The Dream of the Rood. London, 1934 and 1945.

NAPIER, A. S.

The Franks Casket. An English miscellany presented to

Dr. Furnivall, Oxford, 1901, pp. 362-81.

* This collection supersedes C. W. M. Grein and R. P. Wicker, Bibliothek
der angelsdchsischen Poesie, 3 vols., Cassel and Leipzig, 1883-98, but this work
is frequently the basis of references.

358

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

The most important of the remaining runic inscriptions are
:*
NORTHUMBRIAN
: Bewcastle Column (ed. A. B. Webster, in G. B. Brown,

The arts in early England v); Thornhill, Urswick, Lancaster Crosses,
Kirkheaton Stone (all ed. by Bruce Dickins, Leeds studies in English i.
18-19); Falstone Hogback (W. Viétor, Die northumbrischen Runensteine, Marburg, 1895, pp. 17-18; Collingham Cross (ibid., pp. 19-20) ;?
Monkwearmouth Panel (British Museum, A guide to the Anglo-Saxon
and foreign Teutonic antiquities, 1923, p. 123); Ethred’s ring (ibid.,
p. 115); Coquet Island Ring (OET, p. 128); Lindisfarne Slabs (ed.

A. S.C. Ross, ES Ixx. 36-39); Hartlepool Slabs (A. Hiibner, Inscriptiones Britanniae Christianae, Berlin, 1876, nos. 188-96).
MERCIAN: Overchurch Stone (ed. Bruce Dickins, loc.

cit.}; Mortain
Casket (M. Cahen, M. Olsen, L’ Inscription runique du coffret de Mortain,
Paris, 1930);? Derbyshire Bone Plate (BM guide, p. 118).*
SOUTHERN: Thames Knife (ed. Bruce Dickins, loc. cit.); Dover Slab
(ibid.); Sittingbourne Knife (BM guide, p. 95); Brussels Cross
(S. T. R. O. d’Ardenne, English Studies xxi. 145-64; Anglo-Saxon

poetic records vi. 115).
Interesting inscriptions in Latin letters are Falstone Hogback (see
above), Dewsbury Cross (BM guide, p. 125), Carlisle Cross (W. G.
Collingwood, Trans. Cumb. and West. Antiq. and Arch. Soc., N.S. xv. 125),
Yarm Cross (W. G. Collingwood, Victoria History of the County of York
ii. 128), Alfred Jewel (frequently quoted), Breamore Arch, and the long

Kirkdale Sundial 1055-65 (both ed. by M. Férster, ES xxxvi. 446-9).
A very large number of Old English coins inscribed with names of kings
and moneyers survive. On these, however, abnormal and bad spelling is so
frequent that only recurrent forms are of any linguistic value. Forms
abound which diverge from the dialect which might be expected in the
relevant kingdom, e.g. on Anglian coins, Ealraed, Beagstan, and many
names in -heah, beside Alred, Baeghelm; on West-Saxon coins -bearht
beside -beorht (§ 338, footnote), Biorn-, Liof-, beside Beorn-, Leof(though these peculiarities are mainly on coins from south-eastern mints),
Berht-, Biorht-, beside Beorht-. But the coins are mainly of value for
their occasional help in dating sound-changes (see, for example, §§ 329.2;
369). The most comprehensive collection of coin-inscriptions is:
KEARY, C. F., GRUEBER, H. A. A catalogue of English coins in the British

Museum. Anglo-Saxon Series. 2 vols. London, 1887-93.
For the late Old English period the following are especially valuable:
HILDEBRAND, B. E. Anglosachsiska mynt i Svenska kongliga myntkabinettet.
Second ed., Stockholm, 1881.
' Unintelligible inscriptions are not included in this list.
2 A form Onswini alleged by S—B, § 186.a.2, to occur on this cross is a misreading of early editors.
3 To be regarded as probably Merc. owing to the form gewarahtz, rare except
in Merc, texts (cf. § 156).
* Perhaps North. in origin, as final -n is dropped in Hadda(a.s.), but it is wiser not
to remove it definitely from the area of discovery, since Ru.! frequently rejects -n.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

359

HOLM, 8S. Studier Gfuer

Uppsala universitets Anglosaxiska myntsamling.
Uppsala, 1917. (Adds useful linguistic notes.)
SCHNITTGER, B. ‘Silverskatten fran Stora Sojdeby.’ Fornvdnnen
x (1915),
53-116, 189-246.

G. Glossaries
The Epinal, Erfurt, Corpus, and Leiden Glossaries (cf. § 12) are all

edited in Sweet’s

Oldest English

texts,* the Corpus

Wright-Wiilcker (see § £). Other editions are:

Glossary also in

SCHLUTTER, O. B. Das Epinaler und Erfurter Glossar. I. Teil: Faksimile
und

Transliteration des Epinaler Glossars. Hamburg,
Prosa viii. 1.)

LINDSAY,

W. M.

1912. (Bibl. d. ags.

The Corpus Glossary. With an Anglo-Saxon index by

H. McM. Buckhurst. Cambridge, 1921.

HESSELS, J. H. A late eighth-century Latin-Anglo-Saxon glossary preserved

in the library of the Leiden University. Cambridge, 1906. (Review by
Holthausen, 4B xix. 160-9.)

GLOGGER, P. Das Leidener Glossar. 3 vols. Augsburg, 1901-8.
HOLTHAUSEN, F. ‘Die Leidener Glossen.’ ES 1. 327. (The most convenient

edition, with annotations, of the English glosses.)

On the language of the early glossaries:
DIETER, F. Ueber Sprache und Mundart der dltesten englischen Denkmédiler.

I. Der Vocalismus. Géttingen, 1885.

KUHN, 8. M. “The dialect of the Corpus Glossary.’ PMLA liv (1939), 1-10.

SAUER, R. Zur Sprache des Leidener Glossars. Miinchen and Augsburg,
1917.

For later glossaries the collection of Wright-Wilcker remains invaluable, but is supplemented by:
BOUTERWEK, K. ‘Die angelsichsischen Glossen in dem Brtisseler Codex
von Aldhelms Schrift De Virginitate.’ ZfdA ix (1853), 401-530. (Colla-

tion by E. Hausknecht, A vi (1883), 96-103.)

FORSTER, M. ‘Die altenglische Glossenhandschrift Plantinus 32 (Antwerpen) und Additional 32246 (London).’ A xli (1917), 94~161.
HOLDER, A. ‘Die Bouloneser angelsdchsischen Glossen zu Prudentius.’

Germania xxiii (1878), 385-403.

MERITT, H. D. Old English glosses. New York, 1945.
NAPIER, A. S. Old English glosses chiefly unpublished. Oxford, 1900.

ZUPITZA, J. “Englisches aus Prudentiushandschriften.’ Z/dA xx (1876),

36-45.

—— ‘Altenglische Glossen zu Abbos Clericorum Decus.’?
(1887), 1-27.

ZfdA xxxi

* Only the vernacular glosses are given. Sweet’s edition of the Leiden Glossary
is not satisfactory, see Steinmeyer, Z/dA xxxiii. 248-9.

360

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

On the language of later glossaries:
BOLL, P. Die Sprache der altenglischen Glossen im MS. Harl. 3376. Bonn,
1904. (Bonner Beitrige zur Anglistik xv.)
SCHIEBEL, k. Die Sprache der altenglischen Glossen zu Aldhelms Schrift

‘De laude virginitatis’. Gdttingen, 1907.
On the Kentish glosses on Bede and Proverbs see § K.

H. Charters
The English charters and English words in Latin charters preserved
in manuscripts older than goo are given in Sweet’s Oldest English texts.
A useful selection of documents from the period 900-1066 is added in
the same editor’s Second Anglo-Saxon reader (Oxford, 1887). The
fundamental collection of charters of all types remains:
KEMBLE, J. M. Codex diplomaticus aevt Saxonici. 6 vols. London, 1839-48.
Rather more complete for the period down to 975

is:

BIRCH, W. DE G. Cartularium Saxonicum. 3 vols. London, 1885-93. Index

Saxonicus: an index to all the names of persons in Cartularium Saxonicum.
London, 1899.

Selections are edited in:
THORPE, B. Diplomatarium Anglicum aevi Saxonici. London, 1865.

BARLE, J. A hand-book to the land-charters, and other Saxonic documents.
Oxford, 1888.
Facsimiles of charters preserved on approximately contemporary single
sheets are given in:
BOND, E. A. (THOMPSON, E. M.). Facsimtles of ancient charters in the British

Museum. 4 vols. London, 1873-8.
SANDERS, W. B. (chief editor). Facsimiles of Anglo-Saxon manuscripts.
3 vols, Ordnance Survey Office, Southampton, 1878-84.
Practically all charters which are written entirely in Old English are
edited with excellent commentaries in the following collections:
NAPIER, A. S., STEVENSON, W. H. The Crawford collection of early charters

and documents. Oxford, 1895.
HARMER, F. £. Select English historical documents of the ninth and tenth
centuries. Cambridge, 1914.
WHITELOCK, D. Anglo-Saxon wills. Cambridge, 1930.
ROBERTSON, A. J. Anglo-Saxon charters. Cambridge, 1939.
HARMER, F. E. Anglo-Saxon writs. Manchester, 1952.

1. Northumbrian
The early non-runic texts (see §6) are edited in The Anglo-Saxon

poetic records vi, and also in:
SMITH, A. H. Three Northumbrian poems: Czedmon’s Hymn, Bede's Death-

Song and The Leiden Riddle. London, 1933."

1 Smith’s text of the Leiden Riddle is slightly corrected by R. W. Zandvoort,

English and Germanic studies iii. 42-56.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

361

The names in early manuscripts of Bede’s Historia Ecclesiastica and

in the Liber Vitae Dunelmensis are given in Sweet’s Oldest English texts.
Anderson provides the material of a further Bede MS. (see below).
The chief aids to study are:
PLUMMER, C. Venerabilis Baedae Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum, etc.

2 vols, Oxford, 1896.
KOHLER,

TH. Die altenglischen Namen in Baedas Historia ecclesiastica
und auf den altnordh, Miinzen. Berlin, 1908.

sTROM, H. Old English personal names in Bede’s History. Lund, 1939.
ANDERSON, ©. 8. Old English material in the Leningrad manuscript of Bede's

Ecclesiastical History. Lund, 1941.

BJORKMAN, E.

‘Zum nordhumbrischen Liber Vitae.’ AB xxix (1918),

243-7. (A collation.)
THOMPSON, A. H. Liber Vitae Dunelmensis. A collotype facsimile. Surtees

Society (Publications vol. cxxxvi), 1923.

HELLWIG, H. Untersuchungen tiber die Namen des nordh. Liber

Vitae i,

Berlin, 1888.
MOLLER, R. Untersuchungen ither die Namen des nordh. Liber Vitae. Berlin,
1901. (Palaestra ix.)

For the late Northumbrian gospel glosses on the Lindisfarne and Rushworth manuscripts (§ 6) we are still dependent upon Skeat’s Gospels in

Anglo-Saxon. A facsimile of The Lindisfarne Gospels edited by R. BruceMitford, J. J. Brown, A. S. C. Ross, and others, has appeared (Urs Graf
Verlag, Lausanne, 1956). The chief aids to study are:
COOK, A. s. A glossary of the Old Northumbrian Gospels (Lindisfarne
Gospels or Durham Book). Halle, 1894.
LEA, E. M. “The language of the Northumbrian gloss to the Gospel of
St. Mark.’ 4 xvi (1894), 62-206.
FOCHSEL, H. ‘Die Sprache der northumbrischen Interlinearversion zum
Johannes-Evangelium.’ A xxiv (1901), 1-99.

FOLEY, E. H. The language of the Northumbrian gloss to the Gospel of St.

Matthew. Part I, Phonology. New York, 1903. (Yale Studies in English
xiv.)

KELLUM, M. D. The language of the Northumbrian gloss to the Gospel of

St. Luke. New York, 1906. (Yale Studies in English xxx.)
STOLZ, W. Der Vokalismus der betonten Silben in der altnordhumbrischen
Interlinearversion der Lindisfarner Evangelien. Bonn, 1908.

CARPENTER, H. C. A. Die Deklination in der nordhumbrischen Evangelien-

ibersetzung der Lindisfarner Handschrift. Bonn, 1910.
KOLBE, TH. Die Konjugation der Lindisfarner Evangelien. Bonn, 1912.
ROSS, A. S. C. Studies in the accidence of the Lindisfarne Gospels. Leeds,

1937.
BLAKELEY, L. ‘The Lindisfarne s/5 problem.’ Studia Neophilologica xxii

(1949-50), 15-47.

LINDELOF, U. Glossar zur altnorthumbrischen Evangelienitbersetzung in der

Rushworth-handschrift. Helsingfors, 1897. (Acta Societatis Scientiarum
Fennicae xxii. 5.)

362

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

LINDELGF, U. Die siidnorthumbrische Mundart des 10. Jahrhunderts: die

Sprache der sog. Glosse Rushworth’. Bonn, 1901. (Bonner Beitrage zur
Anglistik x.)
The gloss on the Durham Ritual is re-edited in:
LINDELOF, U. Rituale Ecclesiae Dunelmensis. Surtees Society (Publications

vol. cxl), 1927.

Aids to study are:
LINDELOF, U. Die Sprache des Rituals von Durham. Helsingfors, 1890.
Warterbuch zur Interlinearglosse des Rituale Ecclesiae Dunelmensis.
Bonn, 1901. (Bonner Beitrége zur Anglistik ix. 105-220.)

More general works on Old Northumbrian are:
HILMER, H. Zur altnordhumbrischen Laut- und Flexionslehre. I. Lautlehre.
Goslar, 1880.
LINDELOF, U. ‘Beitrage zur Kenntnis des Altnordhumbrischen.’ Mémoires
de la société néo-phil. a Helsingfors i (1893), 219—302.

J. Mercian
The gloss on the Vespasian Psalter is edited in Sweet’s Oldest English
texts. Collations in Leeds studies in English and kindred languages i (R.
Roberts), JEGP xl (S. M. Kuhn). Aids to study are:
ZEUNER, R. Die Sprache des kentischen Psalters. Halle, 1881.
GRIMM, C. Glossar zum Vespasian-Psalter und den Hymnen. Heidelberg,
1906.
D’ARDENNE, S. T. R. 0. An edition of Pe liflade ant te passiun of Seinte
Iuliene. Liége, 1936. (Fundamental on the relationship of the dialect
of VP to that of certain Middle English texts.)
The gloss on St. Matthew and the other small Mercian portions of the
Rushworth Gospels (§ 11) is available in Skeat’s Gospels in Anglo-Saxon.
Aids to study are:

SCHULTE, E. Glossar zu Farmans Anteil an der Rushworth-Glosse. Bonn,
1904.

SVENSSON, J. V. Om sprdket 1 den férra (merciska) delen af Rushworthhandskriften. I, Ljudldra. Géteborg, 1883.
OTTEN, G. The language of the Rushworth gloss to the Gospel of St. Matthew.
Leipzig and Nordhausen, 1890-1.
BROWN, E. M. Die Sprache der Rushworth Glossen zum Evangelium
Matthdus und der mercische Dialect. Géttingen, 1891-2.
MENNER, R. J. ‘Farman vindicatus.’ A lviii (1934), 1-27.

KUHN, S. M. ‘e and & in Farman’s Mercian glosses.’ PMLA 1x (1945),
631-69.

The minor Mercian texts mentioned in § 12 are all in Sweet’s Oldest
English texts. The following works touch upon them:

LEONHARDI, G. Die Lorica des Gildas. Hamburg, 1905. (Also in Kleinere
ags. Denkmdaler, Bibl. d. ags. Prosa vi.)

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

363

ROSEMEIER, &. Uber Sprache und Mundart einiger kleinerer altenglisch
er
Denkmdler aus Sweet’s Oldest English Texts. Minster, 1913.
For the later Mercian texts mentioned in § 13 see:
ZUPITZA, J. “Mercisches aus der HS. Royal 2 A 20 im Britischen
Museum.’

ZfdA xxxiii (1889), 47-66.

NAPIER, A. S. ‘Ein altenglisches Leben des hl. Chad.’ 4 x

BRUNNER, K. ‘Die Sprache der Handschrift

(1888), 131-56.
Junius 24.’ AB li (1940), 207-13.

VLEESKRUYER, R. The life of St. Chad. Amsterdam, 1953.

The Lichfield genealogies (see § 7, footnote), are printed in Sweet's
Oldest English texts, and discussed by:
WILLIAMS, 0. T. “The dialect of the text of the Northumbrian

MLR iv (1908-9), 323-8.

genealogies.’

K. Dialects of Kent and Surrey
The early charters, the Codex Aureus inscription, and the Bede

are all in Sweet’s Oldest English texts. The Bede glosses are better

by:

glosses
edited

HOLTHAUSEN, F. ‘Die altenglischen Beda-Glossen.’ Archiv
cxxxvi (1917),
290-2.

The chiefs aids to the study of the early texts are:
WOLFF, R. Untersuchung der Laute in den kentischen

Urkunden. Heidel-

TAXWEILER,

kentischen

berg, 1893.

R.

Angelsdchsische

charakter. Berlin, 1906.
BRYAN,

Urkundenbiicher

von

Lokal-

W. F. Studies in the dialects of the Kentish charters of
the Old

English period. University of Chicago, 1915. (Valuable, stressing
the
partly Mercian spellings of the Kentish charters.)

CAMPBELL, A. ‘An Old English will.’ JEGP xxxvii (1938),
133-52.

Of the later Kentish texts (§ 15), the Kentish Psalm and the Kentish
Hymn are both in The Anglo-Saxon poetic records vi; of the glosses
to
Proverbs the following are the standard edition and study:
ZUPITZA,

J. ‘Kentische Glossen des neunten (sic) Jahrhunderts.’ ZfdA

xxi, I-59, xxii. 223-6 (1877-8).

WILLIAMS, 1. A grammatical investigation of the Old Kentish Glosses.

1905. (Bonner Beitrage zur Anglistik xix. 92-166.)

Bonn,

L, Early West-Saxon
The following are the editions of the major texts regarded as Early
West-Saxon (§ 16).
PLUMMER, C. Two of the Saxon Chronicles parallel. 2 vols.
Oxford, 1892-9.

(Includes complete text of the Parker Chronicle)!

* To be preferred to the edition in Thorpe (§ £), for additions in later
hands

are more clearly distinguished.

364

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

SWEET, H. King Alfred’s West-Saxon version of Gregory’s Pastoral Care.
Early English Text Society, 1871.
King Alfred’s Orosius. Early English Text Society, 1883.
The linguistic features of these texts are described with considerable
fullness by:
COSIJN, P. J. Altwestsdchsische Grammatik. 2 vols. Den Haag, 1883-6.
The following are additional aids to the linguistic study of these texts;
works dealing with their relationship to the Latin originals are not given
here:
GIESCHEN, L. Die charakteristischen Unterschiede der einzelnen Schreiber
im Hatton MS. der Cura Pastoralis. Greifswald, 1887.
Jost, k. ‘Zu den Handschriften der Cura Pastoralis.’ A xxxvii (1913), 63-68.
KUGLER, H. ie und seine Parallelformen im Angelsdchsischen. Berlin, 1916.
(Cf. reviews AB xxvii. 246; ES liv. 399.)
OLBRICH, R. Laut- und Flexionslehre der fremden Eigennamen in den
Werken Kénig Alfreds. Strassburg, 1908.
Of the minor fragments of Early West-Saxon (see § 16), the genealogies
are printed in Sweet’s Oldest English texts, p. 179, while one fragment of

the Martyrology is printed ibid., pp. 177-8; another (by C. Sisam), RES
xxix (1953), 209-20. A fragment of a further early manuscript. of the
Cura Pastoralis is edited and discussed by H. M. Flasdieck A 1xii (1938),

193-233, lxvi (1942), 56-58.
mM. Late West-Saxon
Of the extensive monuments extant in Late West-Saxon of various
degrees of purity, the works mentioned in §§ 16-17 are merely an introductory selection. The following are the best editions of these works:
BRENNER, E. Der altenglische Funius-Psalter. Heidelberg, 1908.
LEONHARDI, G. L&éebdc in Kleineré ags. Denkmdler. Hamburg, 1906.
ROSITZKE, H. A. The C-text of the Old English chronicles. Bochum-Langen-

dreer, 1940.
BRIGHT, J. W. The gospels in West-Saxon. 4 vols. Belles-Lettres Series,
Boston, 1904-6.
BOSWORTH,

J. King

Alfred’s Anglo-Saxon version of the compendious

history of the world by Orosius. London, 1859. (The text is from the
late West-Saxon Cottonian MS.)
LOGEMAN, H. The Rule of S. Benet. Early English Text Society, 1888.
SCHROER, A. Die angelsdchsischen Prosabearbeitungen der Benediktinerregel.

Cassel, 1885-8. (Bibl. d. ags. Prosa ii.)
MILLER, T. The Old English version of Bede's Ecclesiastical history of the
English people. 2 vols. Early English Text Society, 1890-8.

SCHIPPER, J. Kénig Alfreds Ubersetzung von Bedas Kirchengeschichte.

Cassel, 1899. (Bibl. d. ags. Prosa iv.)
HECHT, H. Bischof Werferths von Worcester Ubersetzung der Dialoge
Gregors des Grossen, Cassel, 1900-7. (Bibl. d. ags. Prosa v.)

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

365

SEDGEFIELD, W. J. King Alfred’s Old English version of Boethius.
Oxford,

1899.

MORRIS, R. The Blickling Homilies. Early English Text Society, 1880.

HARMER, F. E., CLASSEN, E. An Anglo-Saxon chronicle. Mancheste
r, 1926.

(Text of MS. D.)

For editions of the works of AElfric, see M.-M. Dubois, Zlfric, sermonnaire, docteur, et grammarien, Paris, 1943, pp. 375-8, and add:
HENEL, H. Aelfric’s De temporibus anni. Early English Text Society,

1042.

The following aids to the linguistic study of the above works may be
mentioned, in addition to the studies included in some of the editions:
ANDERSON, G. K.

Letters.’

‘Notes on the language of Aelfric’s English Pastoral

JEGP xl (1941), 5-13.

ASSMANN, B. Abt A®lfric’s ags. Bearbeitung des Buches Esther. Halle,
1885

(supplemented A ix (1886), 25-42).

BRUHL, C. Die Flexion des Verbums in Aelfrics Heptateuch und

Buch Hiob.

Marburg, 1892.

BRULL, H. Die altenglische Latein-Grammatik des Aelfric. Berlin, 1904.
FISCHER, F. ‘The stressed vowels in Elfric’s homilies.’ PMLA iv (1888-9),
194-213.

GLAESER, K. Lautlehre der Elfricschen Homilien in der HS. Cotton
D. XIV. Leipzig, 1916.
SCHULLER, 0. Lautlehre von Aelfric’s ‘Lives of Saints’. Bonn, 1908.

Vesp.

SCHWERDTFEGER, G. Das schwache Verbum in Aelfrics Homilien. Marburg,

1893.

TESSMANN, A. Aelfrics altenglische Bearbeitung der Interrogationes Sigewulfi.

Berlin, 1891.

WELLS, B. J. ‘Strong verbs in Aelfric’s Judith and Saints.’ MLN iii (1888),

13-15, 178-85, 256-62.

WILKES, J. Lautlehre zu Aelfrics Heptateuch und Buch Hiob. Bonn, 1905.

(Bonner Beitrige zur Anglistik xxi.)

HARRIS, M. A. A glossary of the West-Saxon gospels. Boston, 1899.
TRILSBACH, G. Die Lautlehre der spdtwestsdchsischen Evangelien. Bonn, 1905.
HERMANNS, W. Lautlehre und dialektische Untersuchung der altengl. Inter-

linearversion der Benediktinerregel. Bonn, 1906.

ROHR, G. W. Die Sprache der altengl. Prosabearbeitungen der Benediktiner-

regel. Bonn, 1912.

SCHMITT, L. Lautliche Untersuchung der Sprache der L&éebdc. Bonn, 1908,
CAMPBELL, J. J. “The dialect vocabulary of the Old English Bede.’ JEGP

1 (1951), 349-72.

DEUTSCHBEIN,

M.

‘Dialektisches in

der ags.

Ubersetzung

Kirchengeschichte.’ PBB xxvi (1901), 169-244, 266.

von Bedas

EGER, 0. Dialektisches in den Flexionsverhdltnissen der ags. Beda-Ubersetzung. Leipzig, 1910.
KLAEBER,

F.

‘Zur

altenglischen

XXVii. 399-435 (1902-4).

Bedatibersetzung.’

A

xxv.

2 57-3153

KUHN, S. M. ‘Synonyms in the OE Bede.’ JEGP xlvi (1947), 168-76.

366

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

LINKE, G. ‘Zum Velarumlaut in der starken Verbalflexion der Hs. T des
ags. Beda.’ Archiv clxxiii (1938), 210-12.
‘Zur Praposition “betweoh” und zum Zahlwort “tuwa’”’ im ags. Beda.’
Ibid. 71~72.
~— ‘Grammatische und phraseologische Tautologie im altengl. Beda.’

Ibid. clxxv (1939), 98-101.
MILLER, T. Place-names in the English Bede and the localisation of the

MSS.

Strassburg, 1896. (Quellen und Forschungen Ixxviii.) (Cf. review by

G. Binz, ZfdPh xxix. 414-17.)
HECHT, H. Die Sprache der altengl. Dialoge Gregors des Grossen. I (Die

Vokale der Stammsilben in den HSS. C und O). Berlin, 1900.

KRAWUTSCHKE, A. Die Sprache der Boéthius-Ubersetzung des Kénigs Alfred.
Berlin, 1902.
HARDY, A. K. Die Sprache der Blickling Homilien. Leipzig, 1899.
FLORSCHUTZ,

A. Die Sprache der Hs. D der angelsdchsischen Annalen,

Jena, 1910.

‘

A valuable general discussion of linguistic conditions in the late WestSaxon period is:
FLASDIECK, H. M. ‘Zur Charakteristik der sprachlichen Verhidltnisse in

altengl. Zeit.’ PBB xlviii (1924), 376-413.

N. Development of Loan-words
The fundamental studies of Latin loan-words in Old English are:
POGATSCHER, A. Zur Lautlehre der griechischen, lateinischen und roma-

nischen Lehnworte im Altenglischen. Strassburg, 1888. (Quellen und
Forschungen Ixiv.)
FUNKE, 0. Die gelehrten lateinischen Lehn- und Fremdwérter in der altenglischen Literatur von der Mitte des x. Jahrhunderts bis um das Jahr 1066.
Halle, 1914.
Valuable additions to and criticisms of these works are made by
L. Morsbach, Literaturbl. f. germ. und rom. Phil., 1889, 96-101 (review of
Pogatscher); E. Sievers, Vokalismus, pp. 3-14; K. Luick, Archiv cxxvi.
35-39; J. H. Kern, A xxxvii. 54-61; F. Hiittenbrenner, AB xxviii. 33-61
(review of Funke and thorough study of the use of foreign names in
verse); Th. Pyles, PMLA Iviii. 891-910. Luick gives a clear summary of
the subject, Historische Grammatik, §§ 208-19, 330-3, 661-6.
The development of Celtic place-names in Old English is not treated

in this Grammar, as the subject is full of problems which would demand
disproportionate space. The most useful works on the subject are:
EKWALL, E. English river-names. Oxford, 1928.
FORSTER, M. Der Flussname Themse und seine Sippe. Munich, 1941. (Bayer.

Akad., Sitzungsber., phil-hist. Abt., 1941, I.)
JACKSON, K. Language and history in early Britain. Edinburgh, 1953.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

367

On other Celtic loan-words the standard study is:
FORSTER, M. Keltisches Wortgut im Englischen. Halle, 1921 (reprinted
from Texte und Forschungen zur englischen Kulturgeschichte, Festgabe

fir Felix Liebermann).

Important additions and criticisms are made by J. Pokorny, Z. fur kelt.
Phil. xiv. 298-9; E. Ekwall, AB xxxiii. 73-82, ES liv. 102-10; M. Forster,
ES Wi. 204-39, Ixx. 49-54.
The most extensive list of the Scandinavian loan-words recorded in Old
English texts (although containing some questionable material) remains:
KLUGE, F. Geschichte der englischen Sprache (Grundriss der germ. Phil.,

and ed., i. 5, 7, Strassburg, 1901), pp. 932~5.

Additions to Kluge’s material mostly concern the form of words, rather

than additional borrowings (e.g. A. S. C. Ross, ‘Four examples of Norse
influence in the Old English gloss to the Lindisfarne Gospels’, Trans.
Philological Soc., 1940, pp. 39-52). The Old English loan-words are fully

discussed by:

HOFMANN, D. Nordisch-englische Lehnbeziehungen der Wikingerzeit. Copen~

hagen, 1955. (Bibliotheca Arnamagnzana xiv.)

The very few certain French loan-words in Old English texts are listed by :
METTIG, R. ‘Die franzésischen Elemente im Alt- und Mittelenglischen

(800-1258).’ ES xli, 177-252 (also separately, Marburg, 1910).

0.

Vocabulary

Distinctions between Old English dialects in vocabulary and attempts

to decide the dialectal colour of the vocabulary of various texts are the

subjects of:

JORDAN, R. Eigentiimlichkeiten des anglischen
1906.
MEISSNER,

P.

Wortschatzes. Heidelberg,

‘Studien zum Wortschatz Aelfrics.’ Archiv clxv.

clxvi. 30-39, 205-15 (1934).

11-19,

MENNER, R. J. “Anglian and Saxon elements in Wulfstan’s vocabulary.’

MLN Iixiii (1948), 1-9.
—— “The vocabulary of the Old English poems on Judgment Day.’
PMLA lxii (1947), 583-97.

The Anglian vocabulary of the Blickling Homilies. Philologica: the
Malone anniversary studies, Baltimore, 1949, 56-64.
RAUH, H. Der Wortschatz der altengl. Ubersetzungen des MatthdusEvangeliums untersucht auf seine dialektische und zeitliche Gebundenheit.
Berlin, 1936.
SCHERER, G. Zur Geographie und Chronologie des angelsdchsischen Wort-

schatzes, im Anschluss an Bischof Werferth’s Ubersetzung der ‘Dialoge’
Gregors. Berlin, 1928. (See, however, P, N. U. Harting in Neophilologus xxii. 284~5.)

See also the editions and studies of the Old English version of Bede
quoted in §M; Vieeskruyer’s St. Chad (§ J above), pp. 23-37; K. Sisam,

Studies in the history of Old English literature (Oxford, 1953), pp. 126-31.

368

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

A number of studies deal with semantic sections of the vocabulary.
Holthausen gives an excellent list of these, Altenglisches etym. Wérterbuch,
Bibliography, § c. c, to which the following may be added:
BACK, H. The synonyms for ‘child’, ‘boy’, ‘girl’ in Old English. Lund, 1934.
BEER, H. Fiihren und Folgen, Herrschen und Beherrschtwerden im Sprachgut
der Angelsachsen. Breslau, 1939.
BONSER, W. ‘Anglo-Saxon medical nomenclature.’ English and Germanic
studies iv (1951-2), 13-19.
GNEuss, H. Lehnbildungen und Lehnbedeutungen im Altenglischen. Berlin,
1955.

GRAMM, W. Die Kérperpflege der Angelsachsen. Heidelberg, 1938.
GRANDINGER, M. M. Die Bedeutung des Adjectivs ‘good’ in der religiisen
Literatur der Angelsachsen,. Landshut, 1933.
HALVORSON, N. 0. Doctrinal terms in Aelfric’s homilies. University of Iowa
Humanistic Studies, 1932.
HENDRICKSON, J. R. Old English prepositional compounds in relationship to
their Latin originals. 1948 (supplement to Language xxiv).
juzi, G. Die Ausdriicke des Schénen in der altengl. Dichtung. Ziirich, 1939.
LAMBERT, C. ‘The Old English medical vocabulary.’ Proceedings of the
Royal Society of Medicine xxxiii (1940), 137-45.

MARTZ, 0. Die Wiedergabe biblischer Personenbezeichnungen in der altengl.
Missionssprache. Bochum-Langendreer, 1939.

SCHUBEL, F. ‘Zur Bedeutungskunde altenglischer Wérter mit christlichem
Sinngehalt.” Archiv clxxxix (1953), 289-303.

STIBBE, H. ‘Herr’ und ‘Frau’ und verwandte Begriffe in ihren altengl. Aquivalenten. Heidelberg, 1935.

WEMAN, B. Old English semantic analysis and theory with special reference
to verbs denoting locomotion. Lund, 1933.
Numerous articles deal with the meaning and etymology of individual
difficult words, or treat groups of such words, and many problems con-

cerning Old English words are dealt with in notes and articles on difficult
glosses. This extensive literature is not dealt with here, but a useful
selection of it is mentioned in the bibliographies listed in § a.

Pp. Word-formation

The following are useful works on strictly Old English (as distinct
from Germanic or West Germanic) word-formation:

BERGSTEN, N. A study on compound substantives in English. Uppsala, 1911.
(Deals with Old English only incidentally.)

Best, K. Die persénlichen Konkreta des Altenglischen nach ihren Suffixen
geordnet. Strassburg, 1905.

BOTH, M. Die konsonantischen Suffixe altenglischer Konkreta und Kollektiva.
Kiel, 1909.

ECKHARDT, E. ‘Die angelsichsischen Deminutivbildungen.’ ES xxxii (1903),
325-66.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

369

JENSEN, J. Die I. und II. Ablautsrethe in der altenglischen Wortbildung.
Kiel, 1913.
KARRE, K. Nomina agentis in Old English, i. Uppsala, 1915.
MARCKWARDT, A. H. ‘The verbal suffix -ettan in Old English.’ Language

xviii (1942), 275-81.

NICOLAI, 0. Die Bildung des Adverbs im Altenglischen. Kiel, 1907.
PALMGREN, C. English gradation-nouns in their relation to strong verbs.

Uppsala, 1904.
RAITH, J. Die englischen Nasalverben. Leipzig, 1931.
Ross, A. 8. Cc. ‘Aldrediana I: three suffixes.’ Bilag to Moderna Sprak,

forthcoming. (On -ness, -ung, -ere, mainly in North.)
SCHON, E. Die Bildung des Adjektivs im Altenglischen. Kiel, 1905.
SCHULDT, CL. Die Bildung der schwachen Verba im Altenglischen. Kiel,
1905.

STORCH, TH. Angelsdchsische Nominalcomposita. Strassburg, 1886.
THIELE, 0. Dte konsonantischen Suffixe der Abstrakta des Altenglischen.
Darmstadt, 1902.

UHLER, K. Die Bedeutungsgleichheit der altenglischen
Adverbia mit und ohne -lic (-lice). Heidelberg, 1926.

Adjektiva

und

WEYHE, H. Zu den altenglischen Verbalabstrakten auf -nes und -ing, -ung.

Borna-Leipzig, 1910.
A considerable group of Kiel studies deal with prefixes commonly used
in Old English word-formation
:
LEHMANN, W. Das Prdfix uz- besonders im Altenglischen. Kiel, 1906.

And with similar titles

J. Lenze on bi-, 1909; O. Siemerling on for(e)-,

1909; W. Liingen on on(d)- and od-(4d-), 1911; C. Hohenstein on wid(er)-,
1912.

Other works in the same field are:
BECHLER, K. Das Prdfix to im

Verlaufe der englischen Sprachgeschichte.

Kénigsberg, 1909.
LENZ, PH. Der syntactische Gebrauch der Partikel ge in den Werken Alfred
des Grossen. Darmstadt, 1886.

LINDNER, F. Uber das Prdfix a im Englischen. Jena, 1873.
PILCH, H. ‘Das ae. Praverb ge.’ A Ixxi (1952), 129-39.
SAMUELS, M. L. ‘The ge-prefix in the Old English gloss to the Lindisfarne
Gospels.’ Trans. Philological Soc.,1949, pp. 62-116.

INDEX
References are to sections; f. = footnote.
In alphabetization no distinction is made between ae and 2, c (k) and ¢, g and
&, u (uu) in consonantal function and w, p and J; th is distinguished from ), 3
only when it equals t+h (e.g. 2thwa), and it then precedes them. Forms with
prefixed gi- are indexed under ge-.
When a word is discussed in only one phonological form, this is usually used
as head-word (e.g. hdélsent, hebild), otherwise the forms discussed are collected
under a West-Saxon head-word. Cross-references are not given for regular
variants (e.g. mann—monn, hieran—hyran) and inflexions (e.g. f6t—fét, bindan—
band, se—p#m).
The phonological variants and inflected forms given in the chapters on accidence are not indexed, but only the n.s.(m.), or in the case of verbs the inf.
(or the pres. indic. of pret.-pres. verbs with no inf. in use). All forms discussed
in the chapters on phonology are indexed under the relevant head-words.
Occasionally, when the only form of a.word discussed is an inflected one, this
form is used as a head-word (e.g. &mptige).
Variation of root-vowel is often indicated in round brackets, e.g. niewe
(i, 0, to) implies that the forms niewe, niwe, néowe, and niowe are discussed in
the sections cited.
Words occurring only in sentences and phrases quoted to illustrate points of
grammar are not indexed.

a- 26, 73 and f. 2.
4, 6 132 f. 3, 400.
&-, 6- 679.
ab see Gweb.

abbod, -ad 495, 511 f. 1, 530, 542.
abelgan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. abelhd 447
f. 2, 732, pass. part. abzelgede 751.3.

Abimélech 551.
abloncgne pass. part. 745 (d).
Abra(ha)m 557.
abréopan 740.
abiiton 474.
abywed pass. part. 753.6 f. 2.
ac 335, ah 166, 452.
ac 134, 429, 625, 627 and f. 1.
Acca (ea) 207.
accent 559.

acennan, pass. part, acaenned 291.
acennes 359 f. 1.
ac¢erran, 2nd sg. pres. indic. a¢ersdu

751.
Acha see Eahhe.
achlocadum see ahlocian.
acumba, acuma 162 f. 2, 333, 484.
acunnian, 2nd sg. pres. indic. acunnadest 752 f. 2.
acwylman, past acwylmede 753.3.

dam 549, 557.

adesa 385, 445 f. 1, adosa 385, infl.
eadesan, eadusan 206~7.

adl 363, 422, 424, 589.4, a6] 422, 424,

ald 425.
adosa see adesa.
adrédan 474.
adréogan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. adrihd
481.4.
adrdgian 430 f. 3.

adrygan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. adréid
266.

adine see ofdine.
adw&séan 45.

#, Bw- 273, 400, 406, 610.2, aw- 273.
#- 73 and f. 2.

FEad- see Ead-.
Aean- see Fan-.
ata 135.

aebbian, pass part. ahebbad 61.
Aebbino 373 f. 5, 589.5 f. 5.
&bylgpu 589.6.
#éc, dc see Eac,
#¢é see fic.
ze see éce,

eéed see eéed.

cer 133, 158, 204.8, 363, 408, 429,
574, ac(c)ras 158, acrum 158 f. 2.

zecesum, -zcus see x.

zechir see Gar.
#cumbe see acumbe.
&cyrf 609.
wed- see xt-.

INDEX

372

Aedgils see Eadgils.

Aedil- see Epel-.
adr (é), hédir, n.p. aBre 422.
#dre, infl. €ddran 453.
dre adv. 662.

Aeduini see Eadwine.

wf- 73, 335.

&feest, -fest 372, 610.1.
wefdell, -dele 610.5.
#fenn 572, 579, éfern 475 f. 3.
wfest 203, 356, 610.1, fst 391.
wefestig (e) 203 f. 1.
wfnan 194, past wfnde 364 f. 2 (cf.
efnan).
zefne 328.
&fre zl¢ 725 f. 6.
fst see aefeest.
eftan 677.

félfred 372, Elferd 459.4.
fElfrié 348 f. 5, Elrié 477.6.
fElfsig 348 f. 5, Elsig 477.6.
fElfstan, -stdnus go f. 4.
Elgar 477.6.
Aelli 473 f. 3.
ellef see endleofan.
ellefta see endlefta.
‘Elmer 477.6.

zlmeslié 289; elmestlié 478.

zlmesse, -mzsse 511, 521, 544.3.
elmihtig 341, almahtig 145 f.
almesttig 65.
élpig see Enlipig.

2,

filrié see AElfrié.
fE\sig see Elfsig.
elpéodig see elpéodig.
emerge, emyrge 203.

efter 24, 78 f. 4, 79, 80, 331.2, 675,

&met(t)ig, m(p)tig 393, 457, 478.2.

zefpunca, -panca 73, 333.

nes 700.
&nge pinga 669.

&g-, &g- 233.

nig 96, 98, 197, 204 f. 3, 643.5, 725.

677, efter 164, 289, zfter(r)a 392,
457, 675, 692, eftra 392, eftemest
675 and f. 5, -myst 369 f. 4.
efter-spyrian 80.
efter pém (pe) 709.
#g 120.1, 635.
&g-, éar-, 2agor- 636.

/Egel- see AEpel-.

eghwelé, -hwilé 90, 719, éihwelé,
-hwilé 266, éghwelé 233, déghwelé
132 f. 3, 233 f. 1.
&ghwern 680.
#ghwider 670.
&ghwonan, éghwona 233.
Aehcha see Eahha.
ehbher see éar.

geht 233.
aehtad see eahtian.

whto, -u(u), -ou, -owe, -owum see
eahta,
el-, wle-, eli- 367, 544.2.
el, éil 42 f. 1.
#l&te 544.
wlap see ealu.
Aelbfled 444,
aelbitu see ylfete.
#lé 351 f. 2, 394, 725, élé 292, ylé 725.
eeldra, eldest see eald.
Aeldredi see Ealdred.
= 200.1

f. 4, 329.3

f.

6

f. 2, 477.6.

ZElfeim 468.
Elfheah, -hégus go f. 4.

&ne 204 f. 3, 571 £. 2, 668, Joo.

enheri 200,
aenid see ened.

#gen see igen.
aégergelu 635.
#ghwa 719.
aghwér 679, 719 f. 4, éghwer 233.
&ghwes 668.
&ghweeper, Zgper 468 f. 2, 719.

ot eee

&mptige ist sg. pres. indic. 478.2.
&myrge see merge.
-endian see rendian.

eénige see anéage,
&niht 204.2 f. 3.
#nlié see anlidé.
énlipe see anliepe.

&nlipig, £lpig 393, 468.

énne see an.

Acod- see Fad-.
Aeostoruini see Eastorwine.

zppel 158, 363, 370, 408, 574.3, 61314, eappul- 206, a.p. ap(p)la 158.

gepse see espe.

&r 673-4, ér 292, €rra 674, 692, ‘ror
673, &rest 352, 369, 674, 692, &rist
369, 610, &resd 481 f. 5.

zerée- 496, 532, 538.

#rende 203, 578.
rendian, érndian,

"393, 475.

-endian, endian

#rendwreca, -raca 340 f. 1, 359, 468.
#rest, -ist n. 372, 610.1.
&rest pinga 660.
eerfe see yrfe.
aerig- 224, 360.
aerigfarae 587.
érlést see arléast.
z#rmorgen 204.2.
wr, ren-, -ern, -ren, -en 193 (d) f. 4

372, 459-1, 475, 544.

zernan 193 (d), 459.1.

zrde- see yrde-.
zrdelond see yrdelond.
esc 440-1,

INDEX

fEsée see Axe.
aesil see hzsel.

espe 460.4.
fEstan see Epelstan.

estor-, Aestur- 275 f. 3.

zt, et- 73 and f. 2, 79, 166, 289, 399

f. 1, ed- 450 f. 1.
ztberan 73 f. 2.
zetberstan 73 f. 2.
ztclipan 739.
ztféolan (éa) 73 £2, 231, 247 £. 3, 281,
3rd sg. pres. indic. ztfiled 733 (a).
ztforan 82, 669.
ztgedere 82, 203, 388, 669, -gaeddre

373

afligan, pass part. afliged 310 f. 1.
afén, 3rd sg. pres. indic. afécd 483.
afréfran 364, 753.2.
agél(w)ed pass. part. 753.5.
agalan, sg. past indic. agél 26.

Agamemnon 551, 554-6.

agan 767 and f. 2, negated past nahte
354-

Agel- see Epel-.

agen, #gen 331.2 f. 1, 643.5 (f), 736

mtgére 346 f. 2, sor f. 2, 613.

(m), 767, hagen 61.
agend 634.
agiefan, inf. agiaban 57.1, 210.3 f. 1,
280, 297, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
agefep 328, pl. ageofad 210.3.
agieldan, 2nd sg. pres, indic. agelts

ethwega 722 f. 3.

agiode (for a€ode) 303.
agleéa 619.2.

453, -gadre 489.

zthindan 669.
zthwa 719.

733 (a), 735 (6).

FEp(e)- see Epel-.
fEpel-, Aedil-, Edil-, Epel- 289, 203
f. 1, Apel- 329.3 f. 2, Egel-, Agel-,
fEpe-, Ep- 484 f. 5.
JEpelburg, g.s. Edilburgae 587.
zepelcund 642.
epele (e) 203 f. 1, 339, 647, aedile,
etdele 203 f. 1, n.p.m. eppile 65,
369.
/ESelieard, Aethiliaeardi 58.
wpeling 91, 203, 574.6 f. 4.
/Epelmer 372.
Epelmod, Apel- 329.3 f. 2.
‘Epelred, Aeterred, Edered, dred

457 f. 3, 484.

JEpelrié, Ederié 457 f. 3, 484.
fEpelstan, Edestan, AEstan 484 f. 5.

&pm (&) 422, $74.3.

/Edred see Epelred.
aeththa 63.
ztiewan, past xtiewde

235-3, 406, 753.6.

406,

zxtiede

zt niehstan 669.
ztsamne 669, -szemne 193 (d) f. 4.
ztspyrning 73.
ztwitan 739, pl. past indic. edwiton
214 f. 2.
zetwunian 80,
#w see B.

#werdla 357.
&wielm 73, 200.1 f. 4.
x 223,
341, 589.5,

axe,
~scus,
zcesum, acas, -a, -€, ~acus 203 f, 1,

341 f. 2, esc 460 f. 4.
afeallene past part. 643.5 (c).
afédan, past afdédde 752, pass. part.
aféd(d) 643.5 (d).
afeorrian, imper. afearra 281.
afierran (i, e) 149 f. 2, 154.3, 201.1.
afitatores 444 f. 1.
afléon, 3rd sg. pres. indic. aflihd 740,

agneras see ongneras.

agotene pass. part. n.p.n. 641.

gustinus 551.

Agustus 550, 553.

airnan 469.
ah see ac.
ahafene pass. part. 744.

ahebbad see aebbian.
aheld pass. part. 751.3.
ahlocian, pass. part. achlocadum 57.3
~ 4

ahnéop sg. past indic. 740, 745 (f. 1).
ahnian 446.
ahredd pass. part. 753.1.
ahréosan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. ahriasd
280.

ahsian see axian.
aht see awiht.
ahwa 718.
ahwér, awer, Swer 372, 468 f. 2, 679,
719 f. 4.
ahweper, awper, Swper 468 f. 2,
718 and f. 3.
ahwét sg. past indic. 745 (a) f. 1.
ahwider 679.
ahwonan 679, duana 468 f. 2, 472.
airnan 469.
al&dan, past alédde 292.
Alah- see Ealh-.
alad see ealop.
Albano 550,
albe 560,
Alchfrith 57.3.
ald see eald.
ald see adl.
aleégan, pass. part. alegd 753.9(b 7).
alédde see alédan.
alést see aliesan,
alexandrie 561.
Alf- see ZEIf-.
Albheard 57.5 f. 6.

INDEX

374

Alhhere 57.5 f. 6.

aliefan 749.

aliesan, 2nd sg. pres. indic. alést 476,
752, 3rd alyst 751.1, alieset 261 f. 2.

aliesnes 359 f. 1.
all see eall.

almahtig, -mesttig see elmihtig.

alot see ealop.
Alouuioh 229.
altare 563.
Altéeorl 480.3 f. 3.
alter 497, 511, 525.
aldes see ealop.
alu see ealu.
Aluh- see Ealh-.
alwe 513.
alfsing 77.
am, haam 61.
amber, 544.2.
Ammorrea g.p. 555.

ampelle,

538,

511,

an 26, 544, 682-3, g.ds.f. are 474,
a.s.m. znne, enne 193 (d), 286, 351,
683.

ancleow 584.1 and f. 2.
ancor 495, §21.

ancora 565.
ancsum 480, 482.
and 24, 283.
and- 73 and f. 1.
anda 618.
andettan 77 f. 2, 455.

andlang 24 f. 2, anlang 477.3 and f. 3.

Arduini 144 f. 1.
Gre see an.

arecéan, past arehte (ea) 753.9 (5 1).

aredlicor 387.

arefnde see arefnan.
arehte (ea) see areccan.
aremdest see arzefnan.
arfest 642.

arli¢ 204.2.
arlice 26.

arm see earm.

armorgenlic¢ 204.2.

arod 387, 390, 643.5 (f), ar(o)d- 390.

arog- see earg.

andsaca 73.

andswarian, ondsweariga, ondsweorian
77, 276 f. 1, past andswearede,

ondsweorede 207.
andswaru, ondsworu 335.

andweard 642, andwerd 338 f. 1.

andwyrdan 77.
andwyrde 71.

anéage, anige, enige 204.2 f. 3, 204.3.
anett 592 (e).
anfeald 642, 697.
ange 204.5, 480, 663.
angel 559.
anhaebd (i.e. -heefd) 444.

anhriosith 275.

arc see earc.

arg see earg.

an(d)liénes 478 f. 2.
andléma, -luma 356.
andmitta 73 f. 1.

anige see anéage.
aninga 665.

aréran, pass. part. arérde 643.5 (d).

arian, imper. 4rig 757.
arleas 642.
arléast, @rlést 204.2 f. 3.

andgiet 71, 73 f. 1, 185, ongett 477.3.

sg.

Annanias 558.
Anpolle see ampelle.
antef(e)n 511, 515, 538.
anwig, d.s. -wige, -wigge 271.
anwléh 643.2.

477.5.

an- see on-.

3rd

ann see unnan.

arefnan 73 f. 2 (p. 31), past indic.
arefnde 753.3, 2nd sg. aremdest

-pulle, anpolle

anhréosan,

anliepig 468, 698.

Apollinus, -es 551, 563.
appla see zppel.
Aquilegia 266 f. 3 (p. 114), 546.
ar mercy 345-6, 617.
ar bronze 402.
Arabisé 518, 546.
arédan, past aréddan 289.

544.2.

angsum see ancsum.

anliepe, -lipe, -lepe, -lap 204.2 f. 3,
357, &nlipe 204.2 f. 3.

pres.

anlang see andlang.
anli¢, &nlié 204.2 and f. 3.

Arones 557.

Arrianus 554.
art see wesan.

arwierpa 149.

asce 158, 440, infl. eascan, es¢an 206.

Ascian see axian.
asclacad(e) see aslacian.
aseolcan 146, past part. asolcen 741.
asettan, 2nd sg. pres. indic. asets 752.
asican, 3rd sg. pres. indic. asihd 483.

aslacian, past -udae 757, past and
pass. part. asclacad(e) 478.
asolcen see aseolcan.

aspendan 502, 518, 528.

indic.

aspide 548.
assa 565.
Assyrige 546.
astegdon see astigan.
astéapte see astiepan.

astellan, past astelide 331.5, 369, 752.
astiepan, pass. part. astéapte 281.

INDEX
astierfan (x) 193.
astigan, pres. part. astiggende 271, sg.
past indic. astah 26, pl. ast#gdon
739aswebban, past aswefede 749 f. 1.
aswefecian 755.
aswefede see aswebban.
aswopen pass. part. 745 (a).
atz#fred, pass. part. 200 f. 2.
ataeh see atéon.
;
atéon 740, imper. atéoh 227 f. 2, sg.
past indic. ataeh 225.
atéorian, imper. atiara 280.
ates- see awihtes-.
ateshw6n 393, 723 f. 4.

adamans 530 f. 3.
apegen pass. part. 743 f. 2 (p. 315).
Apel- see Epel-.
apenéan 72~73.

643-5 (d).

part.

apenede

4b1 see adl.
aprietan, past aprytton 300 f.
128).
apriten past part. 745 (g).
apryn 237 f. 2.

1 (p.

apum 574.3.

atol 643.5 (6), eatol 207.
dtor 574.3, attor, attres 285, 453, dtr
393.

auht see wiht.
awa 356, 666, dwo 356 f. 2.
aweallan 73.
web see Sweb.
awecéan
pass. part.
223,

753-9 (6 1).

awehte

aweg 474.
—
awegan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. aweget

733 (b), 735 (8).

awel 142, 341, 574.4.
aweorpan, imper. awearp 280, pass.
part. awoerpen 196.
awer see Ahwer.
awierdan, awoerda 319, pass. part.
auuaerdid 193 (a).
awiergan (y, ie)
316,
365, past
awerigdun 361, pass. part. awyrged
300,
awyridum
365,
awzrgede
751.3, awierda 477.6.
awiht, Swiht 132 f. 3, 668, 723,
awuht 723, auht, aht 393.
awihteshw6n, ates- 393.
&wo see awa.
awritan, pass. part. awreotene 297.

awper see 4hweper.
awuht see awiht.
awurtwalian 322.
axe see wx.

ba see bégen.
Babilon 550, 553.
bacan 158.
Badanod, -enod 386.
Bad(u)- 348, Beadu- 7, 207, Beodu276.

bet. 428, 435, 574, becg 435, bec
164.

ap 573.

abenenes 359 f. 1.
adenian 752, pass.

375

Axe 44o f. 2,
&xian (asc-, dcs-, ahs-, ixs-) 416, 440
and f. 2, 755.
Azarias 53.

becere, bee(d)zere 53, bestere 460.5.
-baécon see béacen.
Baéda 200,
Baéde 200,
beedzere see beecere.
bg see béag.
BZgmund 314.
b&m see bégen.
ber adj. 643.1.
beer see beran.
baeréae 193 (a) f. 5.
bére see beran.
-bére 88, 359, 647.
berefdt 367.
beernan (e) 193 (d), 459.1.
beernett 457, 579.2.
beers, bears 155 f..2.
berstlian see brastlian.
baeso see basu.
bestere see bzecere.
beep 50.1, 574.1.
beeurne d.s. see bearn.
bezere see becere.
balca 389, 397 f. 1.
Bald-, Balth-, Bald- 414.
-bald, -bold 338.
Baldazar 53.
Baldewine 367.
Baldhild, Balthild 57 f. 6.
ballice see bealdlice.
balsam, baizam 53, 478.7.
-ban see bannan,
ban 134.
bana 618,
bannan 745 (d), past béonn,
736 (A) and f. 2.
bannuc 565, 574.4.
baptista 560.
-barht see -beorht.

barm 144 f. 1.
barn n. see bearn,
barn see beornan.
Bartholomeus 556.

-ban

Baruae see bearu.
Basengum 371.
basilisca 551, 559.
basu, baeso, beosu 207, 276, 652.

376

INDEX

be 125, 370, 469.
.
;
be- 73-74, 370, 469, bi- 369 and f. 5.

béacen, bécun 204.8, 395, 574, -béacn

225, -baecon, -bzcun, bécon, bécen
363 and f. 1, -bécn 225, bénc 225,
4oo f. 4.
*beadu, infl. -we, -uwe, -owe 365, 405.
Beadu- see Badu-.
bezeftan, beeftan 82 and f. 1.
beaftun see béatan.
béag, béah 50.3, 446; -béag, -bach 225,
bég 428 f. 3.
Béag- (&) 225.
béahgifa 446,
beald 414, 642.
bealdliée, ballige 477.3.
bealh see belgan.
bealluc. 351 f. 3, 373.
bealu 209.
béam 37, 50.6.
Beardaneu 341 f. 3.
Beards&te 341 f. 3.
bearg, bearug 361 f. 2, berg 224.
~-bearht see -beorht.
bearn n. 38, 144, 276, 573, barn 144
f. 2, d.s. beurne(?) 276.
bearn see beornan.
bears, beers 155 f, 2.

bearu (a) 144 f. 1, 331.4, 345, 373, 400,
580-3, 614, 650.
bearug see bearg.

béatan 736 (h), 745-6.

béaw 584.1.
bebéodan (éa, ia, io) 280, 293, 297,

733 (5).

bebod 74.
bebr see beofor.
becca 565.
béée 619.2.
becl¥san 529.
bécn, bécun see béacen.
bed(d) 66, 194, 578.
bedecian 344, 755.
bedtid 348 f. 3.
be éastan 669.
befer see beofor.
befest pass. part. 751.3.
beforan 24, 82, 669.
bég see béag.
begiin 73.
begeande see begeondan.
bégen 683, 699, bi 134, bi 122, d.
b&m, bém, bdém 289.
begeondan (io) 82, 172, 669, begeonda,
begeande
172-4,
472,
biginan,
begienda 177.
begeotan 210.3.
beginnan, sg. past indic. began 73.
beg see bigan.
begyrdan, past -rdde 476 f. 4.

behat see béot.
;
behealdan 465, pl. past indic. bihealdun 278 (8) f. 2.
behindan 82, 465, 669 and f. 1,
bihionda (ia) 217, 278 (a)'f. 1, 284,
472.
behionan (eo, ie) 221, 294, 299 (6).
behdflié 354 f. 1.
beinnan 82, binnan 82 f. 1, 354, bionna
217.

beirnan, past part. beurnen 469.
bel&wan, past bel#wde, biléde, beleede 406, 753.6.
belgan 732, past bealh 446.
belgas see bielg.
belifan 739.
belis(t)nian 477.2.
belt 512 f. 3, 523.
bén 288, 606.
béna 619.2.
ben&man 197 f. 4.
bénc see béacen.
bené 428, 433.
bend 331.5, 592, benne, -um 484.
beneah 767.
Benedictus 551, 555.
beneopan 82.
benn 592.
béo n. 619.3, bio-, bia, biu- 238.1.
béodan 742, 3rd sg. pres. indic,
béoded, biett 201.3, 732, 734, -biot
201.3, past pl. biodun 214, pass. part.

boden 33.
béod 382 f. 1.
béodern 372, 544.

Beodu- see Beadu-.

beofor, befor, befer 210.1, 395 f. 1,

574.3, bebr 363.

beoftun see béatan.
béon see wesan.
béonn see bannan.
Beonnu 58o9 f. 5.
beorc (e) 227.
beorg mountain, -berig 227, d.s. bergi
572.
-beorg (io) protection 227, 294.
beorgan 741, 3rd sg. pres. indic, byrh’
732.
beorht (io, e), beriht 296, 395, 642,
breht 459.3.
Beorht- 477.6, Berht- 227, Bericht360, Byrht-, Bryht- 305 and f. 1.
-beorht,
-bearht,
-barht,
-berht,
-breht, -bryht, -birht 305 and ff. 1
and 2, 338 f. 1, 459.4, ~berect 360.
beorhtnian,
3rd sg. pres.
indic.
berehtnad 361.
beorn 283, 573.
Beorn-, Biarn-, Bern-, Byrn- 140, 280,
305 f. 1.

INDEX
beornan (i, ie, y), biorna 155, 193 (@),

293, 299 (a), 300, 459.1, 741, sg.

past indic. barn, born, bearn, pl.
burnon 130, 155 f. 3.
Beornap, Beornnop 333 f. 1.
Beormheard 338 f. 1.
Beorniée, Bernicii 140 f, 1, 610.7.
béors¢ipe 602.
beosu see basu.
béot n. 74, 238.2, 336, 468, behat 74.
béot see béatan.
béotian, past biatadae 281.
béow 120.1, 584.1.
bepaéan 483, 751.2.
ra 618.
beran (eo) 102.f. 4, 112, 210, 355.4,

544.2, 726, 733 (a), 736 (a), 742,

Ist sg. pres. indic. bere, beoru 331.5
and f. 1, and birst 112, 347, byrst

733 (6), 735 (6), berestu 481.1, 3rd

bierd, byrd 299 (a), 300, imper. ber
331.1, pres. subj. bere 399, sg. past
indic. ber 133, 726, -ber 164, pl.
béron 102 f. 4, 128, past subj. bz&re
399, pass. part. boren 115.

Berecht 360.
Berecht-, Beriht-, -berect see Beorht-,
-beorht.
berene (y) 288.
berern, bern 391, beren 475 and f. 3.
~berht see -beorht.
Berhtsig 14 f. 2.
Bericht- see Beorht-.
~berig see beorg.
berige 619.2, d.p. bergeum 45.
Bern- see Beorn-.
bern see berern.
bernan see bernan.
Bernicii see Beorniée.
berdpor see brdpor.
Bersabea 546.
beséiered pass. part. 200.4.
berstan 155, 459.1, 741.
besenéed pass. part., pl. besencte
751.3.

beséon, imper. besech 227 f. 2.
besierwan, past besyrede 300 f. 1
(p. 128).
besi(1)frede pass. part. 213 f. 1.
besma 50.6.
besolcen past part. 741.
best, besta see gid, wél.
beswican, past subj. -swican 735 (g).
besuingene pass. part. 741.
betaht pass. part. 753.9 (6 2).
béte 506 f. 4.
beteldan 741.
bet(e)ra see god.
betest see god, wél.
Bethle(he)m 557.

377

Betti 473 f. 3.
Bettu 589 f. 5.
betwéoh (io), betwih, betwig, betwuh,
betuh 153, 222, 229, 296, 338 f. 1,

440 f. 2, 447, 470, 699.

betwéon(um), betwéonan, bitwinum,
betwion (bi-),
betuien,
betuén,
bituihn 153, 229, 237.3, 238.2, 296,
440 f. 2, 461.

bewitian, pres. subj. bewiotige 216.
betwix, betwux(n) 338 f. 1, 440 f. 2.
bewuna 638.

bi, bi- 73-74, 79-80, 125, big 271.

bibliopece 538 f. 1.
bi¢gan see byégan.
biénan (ie, @), 200.5, 435, 753.2.
biddan 51, 112, 407, 482, 731 (e) f. 6,

736, 743, 749, 751-1, 752.
biegan 200.5, 429, 749, 751.1.

bieldan 200.1.
bieldu, -o 589.7, 648.4.

.

biely (e) 193 (a), 428-9, 439, bylig
36s.

bieme 619.2.
bierhtu, -o (i) 154 f. 3, 201, 222.
bifian 755, 764.
-bifung 213.
bigenga 73.
bihionda (ia) see behindan.
biléde see bel#wan.
bileofa 74.
biléore imper. 752.
bil(e)wit 367 f. 3.
bindan 35, 50, 102, 116-17, 736 (a),
741, 3rd sg. pres. indic. bint 732,
imper. pl. bindewe, -ge 474, sg.
past indic. band-104, 130 f. 2, 401,
736 (c), pl. bundon.736 (d), pass.

part. bunden 102, 116-17, 736 (e).
binnan see beinnan.
binumini pass. part. 204.8, 640.
bionna see beinnan.
birce 154 f. 3, 429, 433, biréiae 45 f. 5,
bircan 438.
birdas see bridd.
birga 154.3 f. 3.
biscop 441 f. 3, 529 f. 2, 535 f. 3.
biscopwyrt 544.
bisen 589.5.
bises 537.
bisiuuidi pass. part. 640.
bismer 574.4.
bismerfull 642.
bismerian, bismrian 392, past bismerdon 764, bismeradu 369, 472,

_735 (¢).

bisparrade pass. part. 144 f. 1.
bispell 74.
bi-standan 80.

bitan, sg. past indic. bat 134.

378

INDEX

biterness (ie) 300.
bidecéan 223.
bit(t)er 408, 643.4, bitur 363, 395 f. 1.
Bitdinia 538 f. 1.
Biuuulf 238.1, 275.
biuorhte pass. part. 369.
bled 429, 643.1.
blaeéteru 140 f. 2.
bléddre 453.

blandan 736 (h) f. 2, 745 (2), 747.
blawan 736 (7), 745 (e).

bléo (io), bléoh 120.3, 466, 579.5, infl.
bléoge 447.
bletsian, bledsian 196, 285, 445 f. 1,
480.3.
bletsingbéc 383.
bletsung, bledsung 289.
bli¢éetung 457.
blind 50.6, 639, 656-7.
blinnan 354.
blissian 755.
blipe 654, 656-7, a.s.m. blipne 351.
blip(e)méd 359.
blips, bliss 286, 445, 480.3 f. 2, 481.2,

482, 592 (a).

bléd 285, 480.3.
blédlés 596-7.
blésma 477.2.
bldstm 574.3.
blétan 745 (f 1).
bléwan 745 (f 2).
blyséan 440.
bdc 428, 624-5, n.p. béé 52, 198, 428.
bdc(e)re 392, 578.
bide see *bdgan.
bodian 755.
bodig 428, bodeg, -zi 266, 376 and f. 1.
bodome (ME) 424 f. 3.
*bégan, 3rd_ sg. pres. indic. bégap,
bdp, past bide 761.7.
Boisil 198.
-bold see -bald.
booflié see behdflic.
-bora 618.
borhhond 446, 613.
born see beornan.

bésm, -um 50.1, 363, 444, 574.3.

bot 588.
botl, bodl, bold 363, 419, 420 f. 5,
574.3.

botm 363, 419, 574.3.

bodl see botl.
brad 134, compar. f.n. br&édre 658.
bradlinga 665.
br&du 589.7.
breegden (e) 194.
bregen 574.3.
brembel, brémel

127 f. 1,

193

(d),

197 f. 4, 285, 478.1, 574.4, breemel,

bremblas 193 (d), brember 478 f. 2.

br&éw 154 f. 1, 197, 273, 412, 610.3,
bréaw 273, brég 412, brégas 439.
bras(t)lian 158, 477.2, berstlian 459.1.
bratt 160, 565.
bréadru n.p. 636.
breahtem (2, e) 223, 363.
breard (io) 124 f. 5, 636.
bréaw see bréw.
brecan 429, 742, brecca 65, Ist sg.
pres. indic. -breocu 210, 3rd briép
732.
brég see bréw.
bre(g)dan 243, 267, 741, 3rd sg. pres.
indic. britt 267, sg. past indic.
bregd 243, 428, pl. bradon, pass.
part. bréden 243 f. 2, 244.
bregden see bregden.
bregu 614.
-breht see -beorht.
brengan 753.9 (5 5).
bréost (io) 294.
bréotan 740.
bréowan 120.1 and f. 1.
brerd 124 f. 5.
bridd 578, birdas 459.2.
bri(g)del(s) 267.
Brihtsige, Brixsie 481 f. 1 (p. 194).
Brihtstan, Bricstan 481 f. 1 (p. 194).
briig see briw.
bringan 753.9 (6 5), briengan 300, 2nd
and 3rd sg. pres. indic. 477.4, 480.3,
482, 732, past brdhte 50.3, 329.1,
766.
*brinnan see beornan.
briord see breard.
briw, briig 272, 411, 584.2.
bréc, infil. bréé 437, 626.
bréga 617.
Bronding 204.6.
brord 124 f. 4, 475.
brépor 444, 629-31, berdpor 362.
bra 589.1.
briican 34, 736 (5), 740, 3rd sg. pres.
indic. brééd 288, sg. past indic. bréc
42 f. 1.
-brunna, burna 459.1.
bryée 654.
bryée 654.

bryég 199, 428, 433, 438, 592.

br¥d 199, 606.
brydeli¢ 348 f. 2.
brydguma 348 f. 2.
brydlop 566.
-bryht see -beorht.
Brynca 351.

bian 47, 234, 236.1, 745 (g), past bade
236.1, pass. part. byn 736 (m).
buccea §1, 115.
Budinhaam 617 f. 2.
bufan 82 f. 1, 354.

INDEX

bigan 733, 740, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
bégd 310 and f. 1, byhd 447.

buiris see byres.
bulluc 351 f. 3, 373-

burg 428, 625, 627, burh 446, 447,
buruh 361, 366, byrg 316, 428,

byrh 447, byrig 361, 365.

-burg 627 f. 2.
burgware, burh- 446, 610.7.
burna see -brunna.
burne 618.
bita see bégen.
bitan 82 f. 1, 354.

but(e)re 519, 547 f. 1, buter-, butur547 f. 1, buttor- 453, 547 f. 1.
butsecarl 566.
bita see bégen.
buturfliogae 294.
bya 746.

byégan 199, 407, 753.9 (b 6), bicgan 316.

379

Caedualla 60, Cadewalla 367.

cefester 496, 530.
éefl 515, 572.

CHE 233, 593-3, BP. cHga 439.

ceelé, éelé 495-6, 545.
ceren, ¢yren 495-6, $11.
caf 427.

cafortiin, caefer- 259 f. 1, ceafur- 206,
427 f. 1 (p. 174).

Cain §57.

cal see cawel,

calan 158, 253.

calc (rune name) 427 f. 1.

calend 548, s60.

calic 497, 545, 547 f. 2, 562.
calu 652.
camb 130, 427.

camphad 574.6.
Campotinea 556.
Cananéa 555.

bydel 574.4.

candel (0) 495, 511, 521.

bydla 424.
bylda see bytla.
byldan see bytian.
byn see bian.
byre 601-2.

cantere, 518.
cantic 559.

byden 499, 589.5.

cann see cunnan,

Cantware 204.1, 610.7, g.p. Cante-

byrene see berene.

uuariorum 367.
capitul 546.
capitulian 564.
capun 511, 567.

byrga 619.2.

carléas 348 f. 2.

byr(e)le 388, 579.3.
byr(e)s 390, 592 (d), buiris 199.
byrgenn 592 (5).
byrgweard, byri- 365.
byrh, byrig see burh.
Byrht- see Beorht-.
byrhd see beorgan.
Byrhtnod 305 f. 1.
byrhto 300.

byrhtword 305 f. x.

byr(i)gan 365, 429.

Byrn- see Beorn-.
byrnan see beornan.
byrne 619.2.
Byrnham 289.
Byrnstan 305 f. 1.
byrst see beran.
byrd see beran.

byrpenn 457, 592 (6).

bysgu(i) 589.7 and f. 3.
bytel 574.4.

bytla 419, bydla 424, bylda 425, 619.2.
bytlan, past bytlede 753.3, inf. byldan
425.

bytne, bythne, bytme 419 f. 3, 420.

bytt 524, 531.

bywan 753.6 f. 2.
byxen 518.
Caam 557.

Czdmon 622 f. 1.

carcern see cearcern.

carr 565.

carte 497, 521.

caru 348 f. 2, 427, 486, cearu, infl.
éeare 208.
caserdom 359.
casere 508, 518.
casern 518.
cassoc 158.

castel 497, 559, 567.

catt 160.

cawel, cdul, cal 509, 517, 539ééac 508.
ééace 185, 427.

ceaf 185, 187, 432 f. 1, 486.
éealc 495Y

éeald, cald 38, 170, 427, 486.
éealf 635, n.p. calf 345.
éeallian 566.

ééapian 170.
éearcern 495, carcern 497, 544.
éearig 427.
earl 278.
cearu see caru.

ééas 508.

céast 531.

éeaster 185-7, 363, 495, 517, 519,

589.4, cester 187, 495, caestr- 289,
~éacstir 363, loc. s. -Cxstri 186, 369,
597.

380

INDEX

éebis see ciefes.
éedrisé 518,
célan 198.
celé see cxlé.
éele 188.
cel(Iendre 196, 511, 541.3, 542 f. 4.
cemban 52, 284, 427, past cem(b)de

and f. 1, 406, past ciegde (i), ééde
237.1 f. 1, Céigde 269.
ciepemann, ¢ypman 359 f. 1.
éierm (i) 154.3 f. 3, 602.
cierr 200.2, 602, 700 f. 3.
éierran 170, éerra 193 (a).
*Giese, C¥se, CEse 200.7, 301, 504, 512

cemes 495, 511.

éild 170, 636.
Cildisé 642.
cil(d)trog 458.
cilfor- see éeolfor-.
cinu 619.4.

283, 477.6, 751.2, 753-4.

cempa (z) 192, n.p. caempan 193 (d).
¢én 100, 427 f. 1 (rune-name).
Cén- (56, di) 198, 289 f. 1.
céne 359, 647, cdéne 170.
cennan §2, 170, past cende (z) 192,

193 (d), 751.2.

Cent 204.1, 628.6, Cent 291.
centaurie 561.
centur 562.
Cénwald 289 f. 1.
céo, cio, ch¥ae 238.3, 619.3.
céol 275.
ééol- (ia) 280, 297.

Céolbryht, Cialb(e)arht 280 f. 4, 338
. 1.

éeole 220,

Céol(e)sigz 393.

éeolfor- (1) 636.
éeorfan 741, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
ceorfed 154.3 f. 3, 733 (a), sg. past
indic. ¢earf 144 f. 1, -ceorf 278,
éerf 312, pl. curfon 437.
éeorian 220.

Georl 427,
§73, ciorl 296.
eorteséi,
Cerotaes- 210.2.
C&osan 37, 50.1, 102, 170, 398.2, 404,

427, 444, 449, 736 (a), 740, céasa

278 (5), 2nd sg. pres. indic. cyst 476,
3rd Giest 112, 480.3, 481.1, 732,
-¢&osed 733 (a), sg. past indic. céas

37, 104, 135, 427, 449, 736 (5), cés

312, pl. curon 404, 736 (d), pass.
part. coren 102, 115, 370, 736 (e).

Geosol 495, 518.
éerfille, -felle 196, 508, 511-12, 515,

519, 544, ¢yrfille 508.
Cerotaes- see Ceortes-.

cerse, cresse 459.1 and f, 1, 476.
ert 628.6.
Gest see cyst.

Cheruphin n.p. 550.
chyae see céo.

Gian n.p. 619.3.

cidan 427.
ciecen (i) 355.4, 427, a.p. éiken, éicceno 229, 233, 438 f. 1.
Giefes 200.4, 592 (d), éefis, cebis 188,
n.p. cebisae 444.

Ciegan (i, €) 120.2, 200.5 and f. 2, 237,

301, 316, 398.4 f. 2, 750 f. 1, 753.7,

3rd sg. pres. indic. ciegp, 6&3 237.1

_£. 3, 523, 531.

cipe 530.

ciriée 427, 433, 492, 618, cyriée 318,
cirge 389.
Ciris- see ciser-,
éirn 154.3.
cirnel 154.3 f. 3.
Giser-, Cisir- 541.6, ciris- 501.
éistenbéam 518 f, 2.
claedur 207.
clég 120.1.
cléne adj. 14 f. 2, 290, 359, 647, cléne
292.

cléne adv. 661.
clénness 592 (d).
clénsian 445 f. 1, 467, 755, cl@snian
460.6.
cline 204.5, 663.
clauster 509.
*cléa, clawu 120.3, 142, 405, 598.2,
d.p. clawum, claim, cléam 236.2.
cleric 547, 559, clerc 390.
clif, n.p. clifu 213.
clifian 755.
climban 50.6, 427, 741.
clipian (eo, io) 213, 755, clypian 318,
Ist sg. pres. indic. cleopiu 214, 3rd
cleopad, clepad 216, 295 f. 2, pl.
cliepiad 299 (5).
cliroc 506, 518, 547.
cliwen 574.6,
clofae 444.
clucge 64.
clase 508, 536.
cliaster 508, 517, 519, 535.
clyne 609.

clyppan 51, 407.

-clysan 508.
cnawan 50.6, 745 (e 2), 3rd_ sg. pres.

indic. cn#wd 272, -cnawed 733 (a).

cnearr 566.
cnedan 743.
cnéodan see cnédan,
cnéoribt 57.1 f. 1.
cnéoriss 592 (d).
cnéo(w) 120.3, 427, 584.1, cnéw, cnéu
279, g.s. cneowes 146, a.p. cnewa
279, d.p. cnéowum 579.5.

381

INDEX
cnéowwyrst 459.4.

cniht 305-6, 308, cneoht 305, cneht
227, cnwht, cnaiht 227 f. 2, 327,
741 f. 1, n.p. cneohtas, cnihtas 146,
305.

culter 498.
cuman 117,736 (5),742, 3rd sg. pres.

indic. cymp, cymep 732, 733 (a)

ff. 2, 3, sg. past indic. c(w)dm 24,
736 (g) f. 1, cuém 60, pl. cwémon
127, cw6mu 472, 735 (e), past. part.

cnihtwesende pres. part. 91.
Cndbheri 444.
cnocian 115.

cum(b)! 478.1.

endsl 574.3.
cnotta 398.1.

cuneglasse 511, (nz)gles 544.3.

cnédan, cnéodan 740, 745 (f 1).

cnucian 115.

cnyssan 749, 3rd sg. pres. indic. cnysd

cymen 331.2 f. 1, 736 (m).

cumbol 363, 478.1, 574.3.
-cund 88, 642.

cunnan 767, pl. pres. indic. cunno 735
(e) f. 1, past clipe 121.
cuscute 441 f. 3
Custantin 506, 541.1.
cap 121, 767.

coce 401,

codeppel 544.
Coifi 198, 473 f. 3.
cél 427.
Coleman, Colo- 367.
cometa 560.
Commedia 546, 558.
confessores n.p. 563.
Constantinus 551, 563.

copor 498, 517, 530, 531.

cops 460.4.
corn 100 f, 3.
coss 573.

cost(n)ung 383, 589.8.
crabba 158, 407 f. 1.
cradol §74.3.
creft 133, n.p. creftas 160.

ereféa, crefta, creftica 434
crane ot

creeftli¢e $64 f. 4.

cret, d.p. creatum 206.

crawan 745 (e 2), 3rd sg. pres. indic.
créd, créwp 406.

Crécas (Ga) 492 and f. 2, 519.

Catheard 57.5 f. 6.
cidelice 367.
Cithelm 57.5 f. 6.
Cathere 57.5 f. 6.
Ciateredus 367.
Cupferp, Cuutfert 57.7, 459.4 f. 1.
Cathgils 204.2.
Cathuini 204.2.
cewacian (ze) 164.
cweartern 475, 534.

cweééan 753.9 (6 1)
cwedol, quedol 53.
cwelan 742.
cwellan 753.9 (a).

ower as
197, pl. past indic. cw#émdon

cwen (se) 36, 197, 606, cwaen 198f. 4,
I

cuén 60.
Cwénburg, Quéin- 198 f. 2.
cwene 118.
Cwéndryd, Quoén- 53.
-cweodulnisse a.s. 210.2.
cweorn (io, y) 283, 296, 324, 614, dis.
cwearne 147.

créopung (io) 294.
cresse, cerse 459.1, 476,
crisma 560.
crisp see cyrps.
Crist 538.
cristalla, -um 559, 563.
Cristen 518.
cristnian 529.
crohha 464.
cross 565.
cruft 511 f. 4.

cwepan 328, 427, 743, cweda, cweoda,
cuoda 210.2, cuoeda 210.2, 319, 18t
sg. pres, indic, cwedo 735 (a), 2nd

cucelere 518,
cucu see cwicu.
cuculla 521.
cudu see cwudu.
cuffie 512.
cugele 498, 518, 521, 530.
culfre 389

cwielman (2, e) 193 (a) and f. 3, 753.3.

cryéé 433cl 34, 122, 236.1, 427, 625, 628.2.

cwist 112, 481.2, 732, cwepst 732,
3rd cwid 112, 733 (a), pl. cweodabd
(ea) 210.2, 281, sg. past indic. cwep

24,

166,

pl.

cw&don

162

f.

1,

cuoédon 319.
cwicu, cucu, cwucu, cwié 218, 470,
655, a.8.m, cwicenne, cuconne 457
f. 4, n.p.m. cwice 429.
cwidas n.p. 216.
ewidbdc 348.
cwildefléd 348
f.

c(w)udu 113 f. %, 218, 470, 583,
-quidu, cweodu 218.

cwyldbére 348 f. 2.

cycen(e) 501, 530, 534.
cyégel 433.

382

INDEX

cyl(e)n 390, 499, 511, 515, 521, 589.5.

cylle 512 f. 3, 523.
cyme 199.

cymen 499.

Cyn-, Cyne-, Cyni- 348 and f. 3.
cynedom 574.6.
Cyneferd 459.4 f. 1.
cynegerd, -gyrd, -geard 357 and f. 4.
cynegéd 26.
Cynehelm, Cune- 199 f. 3.
cyn(e)lié 348 f. 3.
Cynetrydae d.s. 605.
Cyniberhtte 65 f. 3.

cyning 25, 36, 170, 427 and f. 1, 574.6,

kyning 427 f. 1, kining 315, cining
316 f. 1, cynine 450, cynig 474,
cyng 391, 474 f. 1, g.s. cyninges 91,
n.p. cynegas 474.

cynn 353 f. 5, 407, 575, 577, 591, 645,
cinn 316 f. 1.
Cynred, Cyrred 484.

cynren, cynryn 372.

¢¥pman see ciepemann.
cypren 518.
cyre 602.
cyren see ceren.

cyrfet 511, 516.
Cyriacus 554.
cyrps, crisp 459.1 and f. 1, 460.4, 527,
541.

éyrse 522.
cyrtil 369.
cyssan 51,
3rd
sg.
pres.
cyst 481, past cyste 50.1,

751 (2).

indic.
480.1,

cyst 606.
cyst, cest 498, 531.
éystel 518.
cystig, infl. wk. cistigian (so) 315.
éytel 495, 518.
cypan 199, 749, 2nd sg. pres. indic..
cypst 480.3, 481.2, 751.1, cytst
751.1, 3rd c¥pp 480.3, past cypde
50.1, 444, 482, cydde 481.7, 482,
751.2.

cyines 359 f. 1.

cybp 445, 480.3 f. 2.

da 236.1 f. 3, 619.3.
dad (€) 35, 128, 191, 603, déid 42.
deede see dén.

deg (e), pl. dagas (z) 25, 32, 35, 67,

133, 157, 160, 164, 166, 168, 203,

247, 253, 259 f. 1, 291, 329.3, 428-9,
435, 572, 574.1, -daege 369, deige
269, dahum 447.

degered 367.

deges adv. 668.
deeglanges 668.
Deglesford, Degiles- 388.

deeglié 331.4, 642.
del 574.1.
del 601, 602, 696.
d#lan 197.
dzerstan, drestan 459.
dale 390, 397 f. 1.
darop 574.4.
darr, past darste see dearr.
déacon (ia) 546.
déad 642.
déag, déah 767.
déagol (ie, i, ¥), diegle 204.8, 364, 381,
648.3.
dearnunga 665.
dearr 767, darr, darste 144 f. 1, 156f. 5,
dorste 752 f. 1.
déatlicostan 373, 450.

déap (€0) 135, 275, 278 (a).

déaw 120.1, 584.1.
decan 548, 559.
Décembris 550.
declinian 564.
déglan see dieglan.
Degsastan 472.
delfan 146, 741, Ist sg. pres. indic.
delfo 731 (a) f. 1 (p. 298).

déman (6€) 198, 749, 2nd and 3rd sg.

pres. indic. démst, démp 347, imper. dém 345, past démde 370, 394,
pass. part. ddémid, -ed, démd 347
and f. 1, 752.
démon 562.
-dén pass. part., see don.
Denaesbrunna 459.1.
Dene 600, 610.7.
Dene- 369.
Denisé 371.
denu 606.
déofol (io) 296, 492, 574.4, diawul
492 f. 1.
déofolcund 642.
déofolli¢, déoflié 392.
déog sg. past indic. 745 (5).
*déon 753.7, pres. part. diendra 237.3.
déop 204.2 f. 3, infl. déoppre 454.

déor (io) 296, 404, 573.

déorling 574.6 f. 4.
déorwyrpe 295.
déoth- see déap.
Derauuda 218, 613.
Dére 610.7.
derian 749, 751.
derne see dierne.
Deruuentio 140 f. 1.
Deusdedit 37 f. 2 (p. 16).

dié 428, 433, 437.

diegelnes 364.
dieglan (@), past diglede, dégelde,
~déglade 364 and f, 2, 753.2.
diegol, diegle see déagol.

383

INDEX

diere (io) 37, 359.
dierne (e, y) 200.2, 248, 359, 476,
648.3.
digel(])ié 457.
digol see deagol.
dihtan 528, 534.
diner 506, 518.
ding d.s. 626.
diopnis 204.2 f. 3.
dior see déor.

disé
it 498, 519, 531, 535, n.p. dixas

distg see dysig.

dislum (error) see pixl.
dobgendi see *dofian.
docce, g.p. doccana 617.
docga 64 and f; 2, 407 f. 1.
dodég see ddgor.
-déend 634 f. 1.
*dofian, pres. part. dobgendi 757.
dofung 757.
dédgor, doég 636.
dohtor 33, 115, 629, -ar 377; doehter
196, 630.
dém 573.

-dim 88, 457, 574.6.

domne 502 f. 4.
din, déa 23y, 768 (b), 2nd and 3rd sg.
pres. indic. déést, d6ép 237.1, pres.
subj. dde 198 f. 1, pres. part.
ddende 198 f. 1, 2nd sg. past indic.

dydes(t) 752 f. 2, past subj. pl.

d&de 473 f. 2, pass. part. déen,
-dén 237.1, 736 (m) f. 2.

draca (x) 164, 495, 526, 530.

dracente, -entse 533, 545, 560, -ontie,
-onze, -ontse 53, 545.

dreca see draca.
dregd see dragan.
drestan see derstan,

dragan 157, 430, 744, 3rd sg. pres.

indic. dregtd 193 (c).
dreééan 753.9 (2 1).
dréfan 749.
Drémca 351.
drené 602, d.p. drencium 45.
drenéan 52, 429, 749.
dréogan 740.
drepan 743.
drifan 50, 398.2, 739, Ist sg. pres.
indic. drifo 731 (a) f. 1 (p. 298), 2nd
sg. drifst 418, 480.3, 3rd sg. drifed

734, drifp 480.3, 481.5, past pl.

drifon 213.
drincan 741, Ist sg. pres. indic. drinco
731 (a) f. 1 (p. 298), 3rd sg. dringd

482 f. 3, imper. drine 428, past sg.

dranc 130 and f.

drohtnian 574.6 f. 5.

droht(n)op 574.6 f. 5.

drunce(n)nes 457 f. 3

dr¥ 237.1, 565, g.s. drys 234.

dr¥ge 429, dr¥gi 369, drygge 271,
drige 316, draige 199.

dryhten (1) 25, 315-16, 472, 574.4.
dugup 332, 345 f. 1, 355-4, 373, 589.5.

din 50.6.
dunn 404 f. 2, 565.
durhere 577-8, durere 468.
duru 611, 613-14.
dist 121, dist 481.1 f. 5.
dwellan 753.9 (a).
dweorg, duerg 227.
d¥gel see déagol.
dyrne see dierne.
dysig (i) 316, dysi 267.
dysigli¢, dys(e)li¢ 371, 388.
dystig 199.

&a 235.2, 625, 628.4, éo-, -€u 238.2 and
f. 2, g.d.s. ie 235.3.

éac, aec, ec 14 f. 2, 225, 314, 428 f. 3
Eacca see Acca.
éacen 745
(5).

Bed.

ad- 135 f. 2, 278 (a), Ed-

Bacibald, Keod-, Eod- 275.

Eadberht, Eotberehtus 275, 450.
éaden 745 (0).
eadesa see adesa.

Eadgils, Aed- 200.

Eadgyd, Ed- 204.2.
éadig 643.5.
éadmod, éd- 424.
eador see_geador.

Eaddry&, Eat- 480.3 f. 3.
Eadu 589.5 f. §

Eadweard 338°f. 1, Eadword 88 f. 2.

Eadwine, Eduini 204.2, Aeduini 200,

g.s. Fadwinis, Eduine 601 f. 1.

Eafa, 207 f. 1.
Eafe, Eabae 207 f. 1.
Eafing 207 f. 1.
eafora 207, 618, eafera 385.
eafod 207.

age (&) 135, 225, 312, 333, 615,
617.

éagor- see Bg-.

éagpyrl, éah- 446.

Eahha, ‘Aehchat Echha 63, 227.
Eahhe, d.s. Acha 63.

eahta 145, 331.7 and f. 2, 355.2, 682,
685, zhto 224, ehta 312.

eahtatig 331.7 f. 2, g. -aehtatiges 223.
eahtatyne 331.7 f. 2.
eahtian, 1st sg. pres. indic. ehtu, 3rd
aehtad 223.
eahtopa 692.
éaland, é0- 275.

Ealawynne a.s. 207.

384

INDEX

eald (a) 165, 248, 253 f. 1, 283, 658
and f. 4, compar. ieldra (z, e) 39,

52, 192, 193 (a), 200.1, 248-9, 250,

253 and f. 1, 261, 290, 351, 657-8,
yldra 301, superl. ieldest (x) 370, 658.
Ealdhere 577.
ealdormann 25.
Ealdred, Ealde- 365, Lat. g.s. Aeldredi
140,

ealdwérig 89 f. 3.
Ealduuft 143.
ealgian, pl. past indic. gealgodon 303.
ealgylden 66,
ealh 574.2.
Ealh-, Alah-, Aluh- 360.
Ealhstan, Ealch- 57.

eall 50.6, 96, 98, 143, 401 f. 5, 457,

638, 725, eal 66, 401, all 143, a.s.m.
ealne 476, eallne 482, g.d.s.f. ealre
8
454.
eall- 86.
ealle 668.
ealles 668.
eallunga 665, -enga 371, -inga 204.8.
ealneg 86, 468, 668,
ealswia 86.
ealu, alu, 208, 637, g.s. alod 207, alad
377.
éam 235.2.

Ean- 278 (a), Aean- 135, Aen- 200.
anheri, Aenheri 200.

€ar 145, 235.2, 574.5, 636, ehher 224,

408, 464, 636, eher 66, 224, 442,
echir 223.

€ar- see Bg-.
€arc 495, §21, arc 497.

Earcon- see Eorcon-.

eard 303 f. 2, 613-14.
Gare 135, 404, 615.

earfe 500, 519, 539.

earfepe, -fope 648.4.
earfepu 648.4.

earfop, -fep 336, 356, 372, 648.4, 656,
earbet- 57, 444.

earg, arg 144 f. 1, arog- 361.

éarisé, €0- 275.
earm (a) n. 144 f. 1, 278 (a), 401 f. 5.
earm (a) adj. 144 f. 1.
earmréad 468,
earn 401 f. 5.
earngéot,

-geat

(arngeus,

275 f. 2.
éarscripel, Eor- 275.

aerngeup)

earses g.s. 283.

earun see wesan.

éarwicga 64 f. 2.

€ast 135, 275, 675,
éastemest 675.

677,

éasterra,

€astan 333, 677, éostan 278 (a).

astor-, Eostur- 278 (a).

Eastorege,
Easterege,
Eostorege,
Eosterge d.s. 610.7 f. 4.

astorwine, Aecostoruini (Aestor-, Aestur-) 275 and f. 3.

astre 619.1.
astrgena g.p. 610.7.

Eatal see Eotol.
éape adj. 663 f. 3.
éap(e) adv. 663, compar.

iep,

éap,

203,

dip.

superl. éapost 673.
éaw- see &-,
éawan 764.
éawunga 665, éwunga 273 f. 2.

eaxl, infl. exlan 223.
Ebrea g.p. 553.
ébylgdu see Sbylgpu.
éée, Ei 237.1, 647,
&éjum 45.

Boe

eéed (x) 495-6, 511, 519.

&éelié 359.

ecg gh 428, 433, 592, n.p. ecgas
438.

Eég-, Eg-, Eé- 64, 66.
Ecgberht, Egé- 64, Eégbearht 280 f. 4.
e¢glinga 665.
Echha see Eahha.

éénes 359, 435.
Ed- see Ead-.

éde 237.1, 406.
Edil- see Epel-.
édmod see éadmod.
edniwunga 665.
édr see €dr.
edroc 459.4.
eduaelle 26.
edwiton see ztwitan.
efen 643.4, 668, efn, emn 477.5 f. 6,
484.
efenl@éan 749.
efenlié 359.
efenliée, em(n)liée 477.5.
éfern see @fenn.
efes 589.5.
ef(e)sian 196, 389.
efesung, oefsung 196.
Effessia 558.
efn see efen.
efnan 194, 753.3 (cf. efnan).
efstan 391, oefestan, oefistiga 196, 203,
3rd sg. pres. indic. efst 288.
eft 78, 194.
efter see efter.
ege 610.6.
egenu 589.5 f. 5.
egesa 755 f. 1, egsa 389, 480 f. 1.
egesian 755 f. 1.
gipte 519.

eglan 753.3.

egle 655.

egpe 389.

385

INDEX
éhtan 197, 477.1, 2nd sg. pres. indic.
thst 477.1.
Gil see zl,
el-, ele- 348.
Elamitare 552.
&lé see #1é.
*eldcian, elcian 477.6.
el(d)cung 477.6.

ele (oe) 36, 196, 512, 523, 542 f. 4.

elehtre 506, 511.
Elene 550.

:

Elig 610.7 f. 4.

ellen 574.4.
elles 668, 675 f. 2.
ellor 675 f. 2.
eln 390, 589.5.
elnboga, elboga, eleboga 477.5 and
f, 4, elmboga 484.
elone, eolone 541.7 f. 2.
elpent 450.
elran d.s.m. 675 f. 2.
~els 89, 460.7, 574.6.
elpéod d.s. eldiode 296 f. 1.
elpéodig 202, elpéodig 204.1, eldiedig
201.3, elpiodig 296 f. 1, elldiodig
201.3.

elpiodigness 296 f. 1.
embe see ymbe.
Embene 495, 511.
Emerca 364.
emn see efen.
emn(n)iht 458.

ende 355-3, 370, 398.4, 512 f. 3, 575-6,
45.

eofolsian

241

f.

1,

468,

efolsiga, eofulsiga 338, eofolsiga,
ebolsiga 210.2 f. 2.
eofor 210.1, 331.2 f. 1, 574.4, *eofur,
eobor, eobur- 331.2 f. 1, efor 210.1,
ebor- 210.2, 444, efbor- 444.
Eoforwi¢, Efor- 210.1, 544.
eofot, ebhat 241 f. 1, 242, 336, 468.
eoh 146, 235.2, 241.1, 276, 574.2.
éoh, gow, iw 411-12, 584.2.

€ola 231.

’

eolene, -one see elone.
eoth 146, 574.2, el(c)h 227, elch 231.
£om see wesan.

Eorcon-, Eorcun-, Earcon- 7, 227 f. 1,
363, 373 f. 4, Ercin- 227 f. 1.
Eorcongote, Earcongote 617.
éored, -od 230, 241.1, 336, 372, 382.
eorl 145, 283, 401 f. 5, 566.
eorlcund 642.
eorlisé 204.6.
eorl(l)i¢ 458.
eorlscipe 88.
eornan see yrnan.

eornostliée, geornustlice 303.
Eorp-, Earp-, Erp- 140, Eorup- 360.
Eorpwald, Earpuald 278 (c).
eorpbeofung 213.
eorpe 38, 146, 248, 283, earde 281, a.s,
eordu 472, 617, d.s. iordan 294.
eorpfest 642.
eosol 204.8, 211, 381, 495, 518, 574.4
f. 1, esol arr.

*Eote (io, ¥) 610.7, Iuti, g.d.p. Tutna,
lutum 275 and f. 1.

endebyrdnis, endebrednis 475.
endeleas 359.
endémes 193, 204.2 f. 3, 668, 675,
emdemes 484.
endian 755.
endian go an errand, see rendian.
en(d)lefan, endleofan, endlifan 372,
478, 682, endlufon 193 (d), 204.2,
340, ellef 484.
en(d)lefta 692.
ened 52, aenid 193 (d).

éower 702, 705-7, iower 296.
eowian 753.6 f. 2.
Eowié see gé.
eowode 579.
epact 560.

enetere, enitre see enwintre.

ér see £1.

enge 204.5, 655, 663.
engel 492, 574.4, g.s. engles 351, n.p.
englas 283.
Engle 610.7.
Englisé 371, 642, n.p.m. Englis¢e 352.

engu 589.7.

enne see an.

ent 602.

enwintre 193 (d), 204.2, enetere, enitre

372, 468, 474.

€ode see gan.
eodor 574.4.
eodorcian 459.4.
eofole 500, 511.

ebalsiga,

otena, -um g.d.p. 610.7.
Eotol, Eatal 505 f. 2, 518.
éow n, see éoh.
éow pron. see gé.

eowe, €owu 211, 402, 593, ewe 154.1.

-ere 89, 337, 392, 564, 578.

erian, herian 61.

-erne 89, 339, 459-4.

ésa see 6s.

esne 578.

esol see eosol.
€st 197, 394, 606, g.d.s. Este 331.7.
Est(e)lice 359.
-estre 89, 339, 344, 518, 619.2.
etan 35, 743, eatta 65, 278 (6), 2nd sg.
pres. indic, ites 733 (a), 3rd itt 481.3,
etep 733 (a), pl. etad (eo) 210, 2, 3,
eatad 281, pres. part. eutende 277,
sg. past indic. &t 736 (g) f. 1.

386

INDEX

pel. (0€) 25, 198, 444, 574.4, 8.8.
éples 351, 422, d.s. Oédle 424, Sple
Epel-, Oidil- 198.

pres. part. farende 160, past indic.
for 107, past part. faren 160,
Faraones 26, 557.
farma 147.

-ettan 339, 344, 753.1.
Eudoxius 37 f. 2 (p. 16).

farr 144 f. 1.
faru 588, 589.1.
fapu 619.4.
féa 96, 98, 120.3, 653.2, 657.
-feald (a) 88, 642, 697.

199

f. 2.

edele see zepele.
éthm see &pm.
Etsige 480.3 f. 3.
etsith 480.3.

Eumer 277, 348 f. 5.
ewe see ecowe,.

Exe 440 f. 2.
facenstafas n.p. 574.6.
facg 160,

ficn 363, §72, 574.3.
facne 668.
fecele 518.
f&éne 364, 648.3.

feeder 35, 49, 331.2, 409, 629-31,

feedyr 369 f. 4, feder 164, g.s. feder,
fader, -fadur, feadur 206, 259 f. 1,
373 £. 3, nf. feedras 158, feddras 453
f. 4, d.p. feadrum 206, feodrum 276.

fagen (a) 158, 334, 341, 643.5 (f).
feeger 363-4, 429, 643.4, 656, 707.
feegernes 364.

tegnian 341, 388 f. 3.

fegre 661
faéhit 3rd sg. pres. indic., pl. past
indic. faédun 237.1, 753.8.
fém(n)halié 477.5, 484.
fereld, -elt 450, 460.7, 574.6, 614.
féringa 665.
faerscribaen pass. part. 444.
fees, n.p. fasu 259 f. 1, d.p. feasum 206.
~fsest 88, 642, -feast 208 f. 6.
festan 194.
feestenn fortress 579.2.
festenn fast 203, 579.2, feestern 475
f. 3, festen 203 f. 1.
feet 160, 574.1, fet 288, n.p. fatu 259

f I, 345, featu 164, 206, fetu 259
1.

fetels 574.6.

fepm 50.1, 419, 422, 574.3, fedm
574-3
feepman 194.
f&tt 751.3 f. 3.
fah 236.3, 643.2.
fald, falod, falud 284, 390, 397 f. 1,
574-4.

fals 497, 527, 535.
fandian 755.

faran 32, 107, 158, 160, 736 (h), 737,

744, feeran 259 f. 1, Ist sg. pres.
indic. fare 195, fearu 373, 2nd feerst
195, 3rd feerd 193 (c), 195, imper.
far 160, fer 164, pres. subj. fare,

farop 91, 574.4.

fealdan 414, 745 (c).

fealga n.p. 143,587.
feallan (a) 736 (h), 745 (c), 3rd sg. pres.
indic. fielp 732, falled 733, fallet

735 (b).

fealu 652.
féar- see feower.
fearh (ae, e) 223, 574.2.
feax (x, e) 224, 312, 416.
feééan, fetian 486 f. 1, 764, 766.
fédan (G€) 36, 198, 749, 2nd sg. pres.
indic. fétst, fést, 3rd fétt 751.1, pass.
part. féd 751.3.

feter 500, 517, 524, 530.
feferfugie 512, 544.1.

fégan 52, 429.

fela 96, 98, 113, 210.1.2, 638, 653, 666,
700, feola 210.2, feolo 278 (5), feala
210.1 f. 2, 281.
felafeald 642.
feld 345, 611, 613, -felth 414, -felt 450.
*feldefare 367 f. 3.

felg 429, 439.

feng (ae) 193 (d), 428, 601-2.
Fenix 546, 547 f. 2.
*féogan, *féon 761.5, 765, 3rd sg. pres.
indic. fiad 46, 238.1, -fied 237.3, pl.
fiegap, pres. subj. fiegee 237.3, past
fiode (0) 238.1, fiede 237.3.
feoh (e) 113, 146, 222, 227 f. 2, 442 f. 4,
464, 466, 574.2, fioh 296, fiah 280,
297, g.s. fos 235.2, 466, fios 296,
fees 237.2.

feohtan 146, 248, 305, 464, 736 (6),
741, 3rd sg. pres. indic. fieht 201.2,

248, 732, fiht 300, pl, fegtap 57.4,
227.

féol 153, fill 229, g.p. féla 229.
feola see fela,
féolaga 566.
féolan 146, 241.2, 741, pres. subj, féle
231, sg. past indic. feath 241.2.

Feologid 210.1 f. 2.

féon hate, see *féogan.
-féon rejoice, see geféon.
féond (io) 120.3, 633-4, n.p. fiend, g.p.
fienda, d.p. fiendum 201.3 and f. 2,

feorh 241.2 and f. 6, 574.2.
feorm 147, 296.

INDEX

feorr 401 f. 5, 673-4, 677, fior 296, farr

147, compar, fierr 201.1, fyr 300.
feorran 677, fearra 278, farra 147.
féorpa 692.
feopur-, fyper- 210.2, 684.
féower 682-5, féouer, féuer 302,
féwer 279.
féowerfeald, feodor- 697 and f. 2.
féowerséjte 300 f. x (p. 128).
féowertig 686.
fer- 73 f. 4.
ferele 518.
ferhp (y) 306 f. 3, ferp, frid 459.3,
477.6 and f. 7.
féringa 383.
fers¢ 155.

~ferp, -frep, -frip, -firp 372, 459.4 and
.

Te

feter 589.6, -fetor 210.2, d.p. feotrum
278 (5).
fépa 619.2.
fépe 197,
feper 589.4.
fetian see feééan.
Fexstan 224.

fié 535.

ficol 216,
fiell 200.1, fell 193 (a).
fierd 200, 606, ferd (ae) 193 (a), fird 300.
fif 35, 121, 682, 685, n.p. fife 444, 449.
fifel rar.
fifele 518, 547 f. 1.
fiffalde, fifalde 287 f. 3.
fifta 692.
fiftig 686, d. fiftegum 371.
fihl 242, 574.5.
fiil see féol,
Filistina g.p. 546, 551.

—

findan 741, 2nd sg. pres. indic. finst
477.1, 732, findst 482, 3rd fint 481.3.

finger 429, 436, 574.3.

finol, finul, finug! 467 f. 5.
finugle 506, 511, 515, 530.
firas n.p. 241.2, d.p. firum 154.3 f£. 3.

firen 345, 589.5, firn 390.

firenum 668 and f. 3.
Firgilius 539 f. 2, 546.
firgin- 154.3 f. 3.
first (ie, y) 299, 300, 459.1, frist- 459.1.
fisé 35, n.p. fixas 440.
fiscfléd 346 f. 2.
fistnop 574.6 f. 4.

fistop 331.6, 355.4.5, 574.6.

fidele 530, 547 f. 1.
fiperfote, -féte 204.3, 647.
fla 236.1 f. 3, 619.3.
flsé 440, 600, flésé 292.
flah 236.3, 643.2.

235.3.

fléa, flea 235.2, 619.3.
fléah flea 225, 235.2, 574.2, 619.3.
fléah albugo 574.2.
fléam 461,

fléan 238.2, 730, 744.

fléogan 740, 1st sg. pres. indic. fligu
227.

fléoge (é), -fliogae 227.
fléon 238.2, 310, 413, 730, 740, Ist sg.
pres. indic. fléom 238.2, 735 (a),
3rd _fliehp (i) 310, 462, fliid 237.2,
pl. fléod 238.2, imper. fléoh 227 f. 2,
pres. subj. flé 237.2, -flii 743 f. 3
(p. 314), sg. past indic. flaeh 225.
fliéée 578.
fliegan (€) 439, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
flicd 483, fligd 310 and f. 1.
fliema 619.2.
flies 609, d.p. fliusum 137, 275.
flitan, pl. pres. indic. flitat 57.7,
flietad 300,

fildcan 745 (f 1).

fléd 409, 613-14.
fiddblac 348,
fldr 614.
flota 618.
flowan 736 (1), 745 (f 2), 3rd sg. pres.
indic. fléwd, fleowp, fléud 272-4,
fl6wed 733 (a).
flowing 383.

fiytme 515, 519.

fille 544.3.

finé 428-9, 433.

387

flan 619.3.
flasée 158, flaxe 440.
fléa (€0, io) albugo 235.2, 619.3, flie

fod(d)or fodder 453, 574.3.
fddor case 574.3.
foer(d)mest see forp.
folc, g.s. folches 427 f. 1.
folcisé 204.6.
Folcuuinis g.s. 601 f. 1.
folde 618, a.s. foldu 331.6, 472, 617.
folgian 763 f. 4, pres. subj. folge 757.

f6n 119, 234, 236.3, 462, 730, 736 (h),
745 (d2), fa 239, 2nd sg. pres.
indic. -foést 735 (6), 3rd féhp 197,

462, foeht 733 (a), foep 237.1, 733

(a), fed 743 £. 3 (p. 314), pres. subj.

£6 234, foe 743 f. 3 (p. 314), sg. past

indic. féng 428, 736 (1), pass. part.
fangen 736 (hk), -foen, -fén 237.1,

736 (m).

font 502, 524.
for, for- 73~74, 78.
foran 677,
forbeernan 193 (d).

forbéodan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. forbiet
280.

forberan 210.3, 3rd sg. pres. indic.

forberet 733 (6), 735 (0).

INDEX

388

fram adj. 642, fraam 26.

forbod 74.
foréerredu pass. part. 643.5.
foréirring 383.

Francena g.p. 617.

forcwolstan 741.
ford 614.
Fordewié 367.
fordwinan 739.

frééenlié 359.

forcorfene pass. part. 643.5 (c).

fore 79, 369, 677, fyr(e)st 389, 674,
692, forma, fyrmest, formest 677,

692.

fore-ges¢rifan 80.

foresprecen pass. part. 656.
forespreoca 210.3

forgiefan (i), ied 8g. pres. indic.

forgifed 733 (6), imper. forgif 300

fondictan (i) 300.

forgifness 77.
forht 204.2 f. 3, froht 459.3.
forhtiga, frohtiga 459.3.
forlegnisse 328.

foe and sg. past indic. forlétes

35 (d).
forlegess
592 (d).

forléosan 740.
forma see fore.
forod 643.5 (f).
forohtandum pres. part. 361.
forrepen pass. part. 743.
forse see frosc.
forséapung 179.

forsléan, pass. part. d.p. forsleginum

735 (k), 736 (m).

forsliet 261 f. 2.
forst see frost.

forstandan, 1st pl. pres. indic. for-

stonde we 730.
forstelan (2) 325.

forp 675, furpor 671, furpra, fordmest,
foer(5)mest675, 692 f. 1

*forpéon, past forpéode( ») 753.8 f. 3.

Fortheri, Fordheri 57 f..6.
forpon 83.

for pon (pe) 709.

fordrested pass. part. 292.

forweorpan, pl. past indic. forwurdon
26.
forwrecan 73.

forwyrd 73-74, 609.
fdt 50.1,

102, 620-3, n.p. fet 198,

331.2, 333 f. 3, 345.

fddor, n.p. fdbra 377.
fouer see féower.
fox 416,
fracedlecum d.p. 387.

fracop 74 f. 6, 374, 643.5 (f)fretwan 753.5.

fretwe -a n.p. 74 f. 6, 337, 358 f. 6,

Francancumb, Francumb 341 f. 3.
fréa 120.3, 619.3, fréo 275.
fréabriht 459 f. 2
freamsum see fremsum.

fret 428, 435.

frétne 359, 364, 648.3, 657.

fréfran 753.2.

fremde, frempe 389, 409 f. 2.

freme 654.

fremman 398.4, 407, 748, 750, freomian 211, 2nd sg. pres. indic.
fremst, 3rd frem(e)p 751.1, pass.
part. infl. fremede 643.5 (d).
fremsum 642, freamsum 211 f, 2.

fremu 606, freomo 211,
fr&o (io), frig- 120.3, 410, 648.1, 656-7,
fréoh 466, fréa, fréo-, frio, Friu238.1.
fréodom 574.6.
fréogan (io) 24 f. 2, 238.1, 761.4, 765.
fréols 238.2, 468.
fréond (io) 120.3, 293, 632-3, n.p.

friend (¥) 201.3, 301, d.p. friandum

280.

fréonderedden 367.
fréondstipe 602.
fréosan 740.
Frésna g.p. 617.
fretan 743.
friégan see frignan.
frigea 120.2, 619.

Frig(e)-daz 120.1,

fri(g)nan 243 and f. 2, 267, 736 (6),
741, fri¢gan 112, 743, 749, 2nd sg.
pres. indic. fregnast 328, sg. pest
indic. fre(g)n, frin 243 andf.

freeng 62 f. 4, pl. frinon 243 f. 2.

frihtrung
-frip 348

228.
f. 5, -ferp, -frep, -fert, -firp

372, 459.4 and f. 1, -frid §7.5.

Fribu- (id), Frid- 212, 348 and f. 5,
14
Friu- see fréo.
Friubet 275.
Friumon 275.
Friuduulf 277.

frocga 51, 64.

fréd 641.
fréfor 589.4.
froht see forht.
from 79.
from-hweorfan 80.
frosc, frox 440-1, forsc 459.1.
frost, forst 459.1.
fruma n. 117.
fruma adj. 692 f. 1.

fryhto see fyrht.

INDEX

fugol 115, 363, 574. 3, ugel 365, n.p.
fugelas 385, fuhlas 44!

fahe 11119.

Fulcania 539 f. 2.

full adj. 34, 115, 204.2 f. 3, g.p. fullra

full adv. 668.

389

*gafol fork, d.p. geaflum 207 f. 4.

galan 165, 253, 427, 486, 744.
galga see gealga.

Galileam a.s. 555.
galla see gealla.
Galua 546.
gamen 574.4.

full- 86.
-full 88, 642.
fullest 86 f.
3

gamolfeax 87,

gin 768 (o, 2nd and 3rd sg. pres.
indic. g&st, g@p 237.1.

fullestan 86 z 3, fullestan 372.

gan(d)ra 478.4.

fullere 518.

gengen 130, 745, geonga 173 8g. Pas

fulteman

gar (rune-name) 427
f.
garsegé 64.
Bast 32, 134, gest 636.

flere fulhtere 393-

falta folream 86 f. 3, 88 f£. 2, 356,
574

indic. géng 173, gan:
gang736 (kh) f. 2.

fultumian, -temian 86 f. 3, 386,
fultmian 392, pres. subj. fultume
757+
fulwian, fullian 86 f. 3.
fulwiht, fulluht 88 f. 2, 338 f. 1, 356,

BE ye 123, 125, 170, 404, 702, gle,

furrow
628.1,
furhum 461.
furh fir 628.1.

ea yea 185, gie, gi, 22, ice 186, 189.

357 f. 3, 468, 574.6, 609.

firum,

d.p.

.

fylgan 752, 763 f. 4, fylian, fyligan 365,
3rd sg. pres. indic. felhd 447, pres.

part.
aaa 199, past fyligde 361.

fylging 383
fyll(u) 589.7.

Inis 204.2 f. 3.

f¥r 199.

fyr(e)st see fore.
fyrgenstréam 87.
fyrheard 87,
fyrht, ferht 288, fryhto 459.3.
fyrhp see ferhp.
fyrhtnis 204.2 f. 3.
fyrmest see fore.
fyrn 654 and f. 1, 668.
fyrwet, -wit 372.
ysan 199.
fyper- see feopur-.

fyxe 435.

gid want 345, 500.

giid goad 588.
gaderian 159, 385, geadriga 208.
gedeling 203, 207 f. 5, geaduling

207 f. 5.
-gedre 208,

gers, gries 155, 459.1.
géstcund 642.

gafeluc 373, 565.

&(i)# 185-6, a.d. iow 297, iw 279,
a. owit 204.9, 371, iowih 452.

&e- 24, 74, 370, 578, 609, 731 (A), Bi
369 and f. 5, i- 370 f. 1

géac, g.s. géacaes- 225, iéces- 58.

furlang, -ung 333, 461.

furpor see forp.
furpum, furpon 378, 668.
fis 121, 641.
.

gasta g.p. see giest.

gat 625, 627.

gafol, gefel tribute 158, 193 (c), 259
f. 1, 381, i.8. gaebuli
444, geabuli 572.

geador 159, 385, eador 303.
geadriga see gaderian.
geaht pass, part. 751.2 (read gecht).
gealga 170, 618, a.s. galgu 472, 617..
gealgodon pl. past indic. 303 (i.e.
ealgodon).

gealla, gala 427, 486.

ganberht 302 f. 2.

éan
7

géar 38, 185 and f. 2, 572~3, gér 170,

186, 312.
geara 44, 172, 185 f. 2, 666, idra 163.
eard 24, 303 f. 2, 427.
earoman, Jaruman 58, 144 f. 1, d.s.

Gearomonne 622 f. 1.

gearu 170, 649, 651, 656-7, a.s.m.
gearone 400, n.p.m. gearuwe, n.p.n.
gerewe 365.
gearwe,
geare,
compar.
gearwor,
gearor, superl. gearwost 661, 670.

geat 185-7, 206, 427 f. 1 (p. 174),

574-1.
geatum 186 and f. 1, 595.
geatwe, -a n.p. 74 f. 5, 186 f. 1, 337,

358 f. 6, 597.

gebann 610.6.
gebed, gebedd 65, n.p. gebeodu, d.p.
gebeodum 210.2.
gebenn 610.6.
gebeowed pass. part. 753.6 f. 2.
gebiddan, pl. imper. gibidep, -zed, -x8
70 f. 1, 731 (e) £. 6.
gebirga see birga.
gebirhtan 154.3 f. 3.
gebliwan, sg. past indic, gebléuu 279.

INDEX

39°

gebloetsian see bletsian.
ebmund see Gefmund.
geborone pass. part. 735 (k) f. 1.
gebrédan pass. part. gebréded 292.
gebrecan 742, sg. past indic. gebrecg
435, pass. part. gibroecen 196,
736 (m).
gebropor coll. pl., gibrdpzer 369, 630.
gebriican, sg. past indic. gebrec 740,
pl. gebré(i)con 42 f. 1, 225, 740.
gebtigan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gebégd

733 (0).

geban pass, part. 236.1.
gebunden pass. part. 341, 643.5 (c).

gebygégean 64, gebiggiean 45.

gebyrd 589.7, 609.

gebyrd(e)lié 359.
gebyrdetid 348 f. 2.
gebyrdu 589.7.
gecéosan, sg. past indic. gié@os 278 (a),
pl. gecéason 740, pass. part. gecoren
343.

gecerred pass. part. 751.3.
gecigan, past gecéide 266, pass. part.
geciged, gecéiged 189 f. 1, gecéd

237.

geclénsiga imper. 757.
gecnawan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gecn&(w)d 272, 406.
gecnoeden pass. part. 196.
gecnyhte past, pass. part. gecnyht
751.2 f. 2.
gecynd 589.7, 609.
gecynde 609 f. 1 (p. 244).
gecyndu 589.7.
gecyrtan 5209.

gedeeftan 194.

gedeeft(e)lice 359.
ged@lan 289.
gedafen (xz) 341, 744, gedefen 736 (m).
gedaf(e)nian (a) 206, 259 f. 1, 341,
388 f. 3, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gedeafenad (eo) 206, 276.
gedd, is. geddi 577.
gedéaw 653.
gedéfe 654.
gedéf(e)lic 359.
gedéfnes 359.
gedéglad pass. part. 753.2.
gedéman, past ged&mde 198, pass.
part. infl. gedémde 643.5 (d).
*gedéon, 2nd sg. past indic. gediides

753-7-gedere 203 f. 1.
gedon pass. part. 127.
gedréfan, past gedr#fde
part. gedroéfad 752,
gedryhtu n.p. 609.
gedwild 609.
gedwimor, n.p. -eru 385.

198,

pass.

g&edwolen past part. 742.
gedyne 609.
gedyre 609.
geearnian (eo) 276.
geearnung, d.p. geeorningum 276.
geedl&éan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gehydleét 481.8.
geefnan, past -ade 753.3.
geéhtan, pl. past indic. gedéhtadon
752.
geendat pass. part. 450.
gefa 236.3, 572 f. 4, 619.3.
gefest(nig)a (ea) 208 f. 6.
geféa 235.2, 238.2, 619.3.

geféaga 743 f. 1 (p. 314), 761.6.
gefeallan, 1st sg. pres. indic. gefallu
730 (a) f. 1.
gefearh 643.2.
gefeccan 434, pass. part. gefett 764.
E zefég 610.6.
g gefégan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gefzgd
198.
gefeoht 74, 305, 464, -gefeht 227,
gefeht 227 f. 2.
geféon 730, 743, 761.6, gefion 296, Ist
sg. pres. indic. gefio 238.2, gefie
237.3, 3rd gefihd, gefiht, gefid 228,
233, 481.4 f. 2, 733 (a), pl. geféad
(ia, io) 238.2, pres. subj. gefee 237.2,
sg. past indic. gefaeh 223.
geféra, d.p. geféGrum 36 f. 1.
geférl@can, pass. part. infl. geférléhte
751.2.

gefiellan (2) 193 (a).
geflieman, pass. part. infl. gefliemde
643.5 (d).
Beflit (ie) 299 (d).

Geflowan, past subj. gifléue 279.1.
efmund, Gem- 484, Geb- 444
gefdg 610.6,
gefohstan 446.
gefremman,
3rd

sg. pres.
indic.
gifraemith
193 (d), pass. part.
gefremed 52.
gefréogan 238.1, 761.4.
gefréosan, sg. past indic, gefréos 275.
gefrignan, pass. part. gefranen 243 f. 2.
gefripian, past gefriedode 299 (6).
gefulhtnian 393.
gefylce 578, n.p. gefyléio 45.
gefyllan, past gefyllde 751.2, pass.
part. gefylled, -ad 751.3, 752.
gefyrn 654, 668, gefyrnost 671.
gegadrian (z, ea, e) 206 f. 3, 208 f. 5,
288, 489.
gegearwian (eo) 276.
geg ierela, d.p. gegerelum 193 (a).
gegierwan, pres. part. a.s.m. gegaer-

wendne 193 (a), pass. part. gegeruuid, gigerwed 753.5.

INDEX
gegnan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. génet 244.
gegnum 665.
gegnunga 665.

gegripan (ie) 300, 739, pl. past indic.
gegripon 214.
gegrynd 609.
geheftan (e) 194.
gehéled pass. part. 751.3.
gehatan, 2nd sg. past indic. gihehtest

735 (d).

gehéad pass. part. 761.3.
geheald 610.6.
gehealden pass. part. 643.5 (c).
§ yeheaderod pass. part. 207.
s zehelpan 465.
§ zehieran (i, ¥) 300, 2nd sg. pres. indic.
gehéres thu 735 (5), sg. past indic.
gehyrde 261 f. 2, pl. geheordon 201.1
f. 1, pass. part. gehéred 751.3.
gehiered, gehyrwed pass. part. 753.5.
gehigd, gehyd, gehéd pass. part. 753.7.
gehiowian (ie) 281.
gehladan (ea) 206.
gehlestan 194.
sehliura adj. compar. 658.
§ zehlow 584.2.
§ zehlyd 609.
i: sehlywan, pass. part. infl. gehlyde

235-3, 753-6.

gehnz#gan, 3rd sg. pres.

hnzgith 752.
gehné&st 610.6.
gehnast 610.6.

—

indic.

ge-

gehnis¢an, pl. past indic. gehnistun

indic.

gehweper 719.
gehwilé 719.
gehydan, pass. part. geh¥d(e)d 751.3.
gehygd 609.
gehyld 610.6.
gehyrstu, -e n.p. 609.
geiecan, pass. part. gei¢ed, geiht 751.2.
geleééan, past gelahte 753.4.
gel&dan, 2nd sg. past indic. gil&dest,
pl.
gel@don 751.2, pass. part.
geléd(ed), gelédd 351 f. 2, 751.3.
gel&red pass, part. 656, 751.3, geléred
288, 292.
geléstan, infl. inf. geléstunne 292.
gelapad (ea) pass. part. 207 f. 4, 259
wT.

geménnes 359.
gem#re 359.

gemérpél 359.

gemiah 236.3, 643.2.
geman see gemunan.

gemana, infl. gemanon 377.
gemearcian, past gemerkade 223.
gemengan, past gemende 751.2.
gemétan, past gimdéte 751.2, pass.
part. gemOétet 450.
gemeteli¢e 367.
geméting 383, gemetting 287.
gemetmicel, a.p.n. gimetomicla 367.

‘Gemmund see Gefmund.

751.2.

gehorsod pass. part. 656, 757.
gehréow 584.1 (a).
gehréowan,
3rd
sg. pres.
gehréues 279.
gehrinan 739.
gehisscipe 601.
gehwa 29, 716 f. 4, 719.
gehwéde 668.
gehwér 679, 719 f. 4.

391

geléafa (0) 278.
geléaf(f)ul 458.
geléon, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gelié 739.
geléora (io) 764.
gelié 428, 437, compar. infl, geliééran
454, superl. geliécost 287.
gelic(é)ettan 287.
geliefan, past gilébdae 444, pass. part.
geliefede 751.3, giléfenne 752.
geliffzest, gelieffzest 300.
gelihtan allevare 201.4 f. 3.
gelimpan 741, sg. past indic. gelamp
(0) 32.
gelire 267.
gelécian, pres. part. gelécende 757.
geléme 671.
gemaca 193 (c).
gemacod pass. part. 643.5 (e).
gemecéa 193 (c).
gemezltan 193 (a).
geméne (é) 291, 654.
geme£n(e)lié 359.

gemunan 767.
gemynd 609.
gemyne 654.
géna 356, 666, géno 356 f. 2, giena 185.
geneglan, past geneglede 753.3.
genzéman 197 f. 4.
Gend 628.6 f. 2.
geneah 767.
geneahhe 442 f. 4, 464.
genéal&éan (0) 278 (5), 372, 18st sg.
pres. indic. genéhlaecu 230 f. 2.
genéat, gendéot 275.

genéop sg. past indic. 740, 745 (f 1)
generwed pass. part. 753.5.
genesan 743.
génet see gegnan.

gengan 747.

genge 566.

Génlad 244 f. 4.

gendg 638, 668, genoh 446.
genumen pass. part. 24 f. 2.
genyht 609.
genyhtsumian (i) 306, 315.
genyhtsumniss (i) 316.
~

INDEX

392

ges, Sid, 10 58, 125, 172.
geoe, gioc, ioc, iuc 44, 58, 115, 172-5,
$73, N.p. geocu 331.5.
REoc, Eoc 303.

geocled, iocled 175.
geocsa, gihsa, iesca 210.1 f. 1, geoxa
440,

geocsung 210.1 f. 1, 440.

geogop, -up, iugop, -up 58, 170, 172,
332, 589.5, giogup 172, infl. giogete
175, giohB- 175, 481, gigod 176.

geol(o)ca 220, 389.
geolstr, gelostr 220 and f. x.
geolu, -o 210.2, 220, 652.
gedmor 127, 172.
gedmrian 44, 127, 2nd sg. pres. indic.
gidmras 175.

gedmrung,geimrung 174, 197 f. 4.

*geon, d.‘.f. geonre 172, 712.
gedna
17

feonbrycian, geanbyrdan 475.

geond (io) 172, 174, 177, gi(e)nd 177.
geond- 74, 174, giond- 175.

geondhweorfan 74.
geong way 173.
geong, giong, giung, iung, gung, iong

young 44, 58, 170-3, 175-6, 178,

ging 176, a.8.m. gionne 175, compar,
gingra (io, eo), superl. gingest 176
“3s 178, 316 f. 2, 351, 658 and f. 5,

wk. gingsta 352.

geonian see ginian.

georn 251, 427.
georne (io) 293.
geornli¢e, compar. -liocar 216, 340.
georn(n)es 458.

geornustliée 303 (i.e. eornostli¢e).
red 144 f. 1, 276.

geortréowan 202.

georwénan, 2nd sg. pres. indic. georwénst 752.

georuuierdid 149 f. 1, 154.3 f. 3.
georuuyrde 149 f. 1.
geostran see gierstan-.
géotan 427, 740, sg. past indic. géat 427.
w- see giw.

eoweorpa 172 f. 1, 321, 544.

geoxa see geocsa.

geraédit pass. part. 450 and f. 2, 752.
gerawan 745 (e 2), pass. part. geréwen

736 (m)._

geréafian (Za) 135.
gereé 359 f. 1.
geretéan, pass. part. gereht 223.
gerecéelié 359 f. 1.
gerecgenes 359 f. 1.
gerecli¢ 359 f. 1.
geréded pass. part. 747.
geréfa 280, girdéfa 444.
gereord(e) voice 124.

gereord(e) food 124.
geresp 609.
gerewe see gearu.

gerihta 228, 233.

gerinian, pass, Part. girinad 243 f. 3.
gerinnan 741 f, 2

*gerinu, girino n.p. 243 f. 3.

gerisenlié 359.
gerixian, pres. subj. gerixage 757.
ges#ldo 589.6.
gesfwan 747, sg. past indic. gestéaw
279 f. 1.
.
gesceaft 185, 204.5, 610.4.
gescend pass, part. see gescindan.
gescentu 589.6.
gescéon 743.

gescieppan, sg. past indic. gescedp
179, 181, pass. part. gescepen 164.
gescinan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. giscinet
735gescindan, pass. part. gescinded 300,
gescend 751.3, a.s.m. geséendne

352 f. 4, 751-3.

gescrépelice 359.
gesérépnes 359.
ges¢ryncan pass. part. 736 (m) f. 1.
gescifan, pass. part. ges¢yfen 740.
gescy, gesc(e)G€ 184, 579.1.
gescyrd pass. part. 459.2.
geséaw 653.1.
gesellan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gisiled,
geseled 326.
geséman 197 f. 4.
gesend. pass. part. 351 f. 2, 752.
geséon (éa, ia) 46, 238.2, 743, 1st sg.
pres. indic. gesio 238.2, and gesist
735 (6), gesees 369 f. 3, 3rd gesiehp
(i) 201.2, 228, gesié 201.2, pl. geséod

(8a,io, ia) 238. 2, imper. gesech 57.3,
8g. past indic. gesaeh (ea, e) 223 and
f. 4, pl. gesagun 163, gisége we 163,

730, pass. part, gesdwen 142.

gesépan 197.
gesett pass. part. 752, 753.7, gesetet
450.

gesibb 647.
gesiehd (i) 201.2, 222, 228, 233, 462
f. 2, gesiht 481.4.
gesiene (¥, €) 201.3, 241, 647, giséni
369
gesiwed pass. part. 154.2, 753.6 f. 4,
gesiuwid 275.
gesmirwid, gesmiruad, pass. part. 752,

753-5gesneorcan, sg. past indic. gesnerc 223.
gesparriga 144 f. 2.
gespeoftad pass. part. 747.
gesprec, n.p. gespreocu (e) 210.2.
gestefnan, pres. part. d.s.f, gistaebneendrae 444.

INDEX

gestal 162-3.

gestandan, pl. past indic. gistéddun
5.

.

gestapulad 259 f. 1.

gestieran (i) 201.3, 300.
gestigan, gistiga 472.

gestir 315.

gestréded pass. part. 741.
gestréonan, past gestréonde 293.
gestrion 294.

gesundeli¢, gesundiglié 367 f. 3.

gesipan 740.
gesweorfan,
3rd
sg. pres.
indic.
gesuirbet 154.3.
geswiné 607.
geswiporness, a.s. giswiopornisse 218.
gesuoeren pass. part. 196.
gesycan, past gesihte, pass. part.
gesiced 751.2.
gesynto 481, 589.6.
getecan, past getahte 753.9 (b 2).
getel, n.p. getalu 259 f. 1.
getése 359.

getlwa, -e 74 f. 5, 151, 337, 358 f. 6.

getellan, past getelede, pass. part.
geteled 753.9 (a).
getenge 376 f. 2.
getéod (@a) 761.2.
gedafian 207.
gepeaht (ae) 223, 610.4.
gepeahtung (e) 223.
Sepéode 202, 578, g.p. gedieda 281.
gepéon press 753.8 f. 3, pass. part. d.p.
gedédum 753.8.
Bepéon thrive, gedian 280, pres. subj.
gidii 739, pass. part. gepungen 1109.
&eperscan (ea) 155 f. 2, 741.
gepiedan, pass. part. gepiudde 137,
275.

gedinge, n.p. -a 377.

gepofta, gidopta 57.2.
gepracen 744.
gedringan 741.

geprien 745 (g).

geprycéan, past gepryhte, pass. part.
gepryéced 751.2.
getryl 241.1.
gepryn 241.1, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
gidrid, past gepryde 237.1 f. 2.
gepuren see gepriien.
;
gepwéan, gedwa, gedoa 60 f. 2, pass.
part. geduén 244.
&epyld 609, getuild 199.

gedywan see gepéon press.
getimbran, past getimberde 364.
getimbre 578.

getiohhian 442 f. 4.
getiung, gitiung 238.2, 587, 589.8.
getréowad (io) pass. part. 294.

getréwlice 279, gitrdwalice 302.

393

getriewan, gitriowa, getréwa 293, 764.
getriewe (Eo, éu) 201.3, 279, 295.
getruwian, imper. getria 236.1 f. 3,
past gitrygade 764. —
getrymman 752, 3rd sg. pres. indic.

getrimad, imper. getrime 315, pass.

part. getrimed 643.5 (d), 751.3.
getwéon, getuiga 761.1, pl. past indic.
getwiedon 237.3.
getwinne 698.
geunnan 469, 767.
gewxCan, pass. part. geweht, gewSied
7§1.2.

gewede 128 f. 2, 578.
gewealc 610.6.
:
gewecéan, pass. part. gewaehten 752.
gewéd 609.
gewélhwer 679, 719 f. 5.
gewelhwylé 719.
gewemmed pass. part., giuuaemmid
193 (d).
gewemming 383.
“gewén, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gewép,
past gewéde 237.1 f. 2.
gewendan, pass. part. giwendad 752.
geweorpan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. gewyrd

149 £. 3, 733 (a) f. 3, pass. part.

gewurden 323, gewoerden
196,
gewarden 156, 741.
gewépan, sg. past indic. gewéap (2)
747 £. 2.
gewieldan (e) 200.1, pass. part. a.s.m.
gewildne 751.3.
gewierpan (u) 322, past gewaerpte

193 (a).

gewif(e) 609 and f. 1.
gewile, gewill 609, 610.5.
gewita (io, u) 216, 219, 221.
gewitan, imper. gewit 767.
gewitan, pl. pres, subj. gewieten 300,
pl. past indic. gewiton 216.
gewleccan, pass. part. gewleht (2),
gewleced 751.2.
gewloh 643.2.
gewrit, n.p. gewritu (io) 214, g.p.
gewriota 216, d.p. gewrietum 299,
gewreotum 214, 294.
gewrixl 417, gewricl 306.
gewrixlan, giuixla 475.
gewuna 367 f. 1, 638.
gewunelié 367 f. 1.
gewunian, pl. pres. indic. gewunas 757.
gewylé 610.6.
gewylwed pass. part. 753.5.
gewyrcan, past gewarahte 360, pass.
part. gewarht, gewroht 156, 753.9
(b 6).
gewyrdelic 348 f. 2,
gewyrfep, 3rd sg. pres. indic. 149 f.-3,

733 (a) f. 3.

INDEX

394

gewyrht(u) 609.

gif 50.1 f. 2, gib §7.1.

gicenes 359 f. 1

gifernes (ie) 300.

giecba (i), giocha 178,

gift 427.
giftelié 348 f. 2.
giftu, -a n.p. 609.
gifum 668.

gidopta see gepofta.
giee see géa.

giefan 39, 170, 185, 248 f. 4, 427,
736 (a), 743, gefan 427, -geofan,

gifre 364, 427, 648.3, 656.

-giaban 210.2.3 and
f. 1, gyfan, gifan

|
Big see giw.

733: (a), sg. past indic. geaf 38, 50.1
and f, 2, 185-6, 248 f. 4, 427, 486,
736 (c), gef 312-13, -gexef 186, pl.
géafon, géfon 185-6, pass. part.
gifen, gibaen 204, 300 f. 1, 444,

gihsa see geocsa,

300 f. 1, 3rd sg. pres. indic. -gefep

35

-gils, Gils-, -gisl 460.7 and f. 1.

gimbére 529.
s zimfeest 484.
gimm 501, 531.

gimm_

gimmian 529.

(R).

giefol (e) 193, 210.3, giofol 220.
giefstdl 341 f. 3.

giefu 220, 331.5, 345-6, 348
f. 2, 373,

585, geofu 210.2, 220, gefo 210.2,

geafa 278, gyfu (rune-name) 427
f. 1,
infl. giefe 331.5 and f. 1, 7, 333,

355-2, 370, giofa 210.3, giefa 355.1,

404, g.p. geafana 587, d.p. gieftum
331.6.

-gield (e) 185.

gieldan 185, 736 (a), 741, geldan 733,
1st sg. pres. indic. geldu 731 (a) f. 1,
3rd gilded 733 (a).
giellan 741.
gielp- (e) 185.
gielpan 185,741, 3rd sg. pres. indic.

_&elpd 733 (5).

gieman 201.5.

iemeleas

gigant 548.

(i) 359 f. 1, 642.

giemeleasli¢e, gimlesli¢e 359 f. 1.
giemeliest 589.6.
giemung, iémung 58, gimung 189.
giena see géna.

giend see geond.

gierd (e) 193 (a), 590, 645, -gerd
193 (a).

giernan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. geornd
201.1.

gierstan-, gestor-, geostran, gioster217 and f. 2, 363, gyrstan-, gystran460.6.
gierwan 170, 753.5, 2nd sg. pres.
indic. gierest 406, pres. part. -gzrwende 193 (a), past gerede 369,

406, 752.
Biest 39, 170, 200.4, 248 f. 2, 345, 599,

610.4, gest, gest 188, 193 (c), g.p.
gasta 193 (c), 204.5, 610.4.
giesthis 348, giesd- 200.4.
giet 185.
gieta 185, 356, 666.
-gietan 185, 743, -Zeota 210.2, 3rd sg.
pres, indic. -getep 733 (a), sg. past
indic. -geat, -geztt, pl. -géaton
185-6.

§ zimmisé 518, 529.

§ zind see geond.

sinfeest see gimfest.
sing see geong.
ginian 755, 3rd sg. pres. indic. geonath
294.

ginnan 427, pl. past indic. gunnon 437.
yinne 648.3.

ziocda see giecba.

giowiga 764, giwiga 279.
giséde see gescy.

~gisl see -gils.

git 703.

gitsian (ie) 300.
giw, gig, Zeow- 271, 411, 584.2.
gled 427, 643.1, a.s.m. gledne, g.d.s.f.
gledre 484.

gledian (ea) 206 and f. 2.
gledness (e) 288.
gles 544.3 (i.e. cuneglesse).
gléaw 120.1, 653.1, 656-7, gléu, a.s.m.
gléwne 273.
gléd 606.
glengan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. glengd,
glenécd 751.1.
gléo(w), glio(w), glig 120.2 and f. 5,

411, 579.4, gliu 275.

glésan 506, 528 and f. 1, §31, 536, 543.

glidan 739.

gliman 237.1.
glof 50.1 f. 2.
gloria 560.

*glowan (cf. pres. part. glowende), sg.
past indic. gléow, gléof 60.
gnztt (ea) 206, 427.
gnagan 158.

gnéap 655

f. 2.

god 33, 115, 573.

god 58, 409, 659, 667, a.s.m. gddne,
341, ds.
gdédre 331.7,
355.2,

n.p.m.

gdde

331.7,

355.2,

370,

compar. betera, bet(t)ra 194, 388,

453, 659, superl. betest, be(t)st 389,

477-1, 659, bezt 53.

giddind 634.

INDEX
godecund 367.
godefyrht 367.
godeweb 367.
godspell 285.
“gégan, pres. part. gdiende, 3rd sg.
pres. indic. gad 761.7.

gold 115, 414, 427.

goldefretwum d.p. 367.
goldwlanc 87.
Goltsige 480.3 f. 3.
Gomorre 550.
gongeweafre 206.

Bds 33, 121, 427, 627, np. gés (56)
170, 197, 427.
Gétsunu 480.3 f. 3.

gref 538.

grafan 158, 744.
gram 642.
gramatisé- 518.

grammaticere 564.
grandor- 636.
*grietra, gryttra

hé&lend 634,

351,

gréne 50.6, 647.

grennung (ae) 193 (d).
gréot 544 f. 3.
gréting 383.

grimm 427,
grin 609 f. 3.
grindan 741.

gripan 739.

grip 566.
gripleas 566.
grot 544.

gréwan 745 (f 2).

grundlunga 665.
grundwég 120.1 f. 2.
grit 626-7, g.s. griiit 199.
gryre 602,
gryttra see gréat.
117,

205,

341,

592

(d),

infl.

-ynd

369 f. 4, hélend

292.

helep 193 (c), 203 f. 1, 381, 399, 637,

gremman 52, graemman 193 (d).

34,

339,

hele 399, 637.

658.
Grégorius 546, 554.

_

-haebuc see hafoc.
hecid 193 (c), 381.
haeéilae see hacele.
heeftan 194.

hegtes(s)e 50.1 f. 2, 457, heetse 393.
Hegyd see Héagyd.
hzl omen 609.
h#lan 35, 197, past h#lde 484.
helda see hieldan.

grees see gers,

guma

158.

hegtess

greg, gréig, gréi 43, 266, 269.

compar.

8.past indic. hefde 164, pl. hefdon

hacele 618, haedilae 193 (c), 381.
hacod 193 (c).
613-14.
had- hair- 404.
-hdd 88, 450, 574.6.

heeftenn 592 (6),
heeg(e)l, hagol 158.

grad 547, 559.

gréat,

395

(c), haf 369, 2nd hafast 166, 3rd
hafad 166, hefep (used as 2nd) 735
(5) f. 1, pres. part. hebbende 193 (c),

427,

615,

infl.

Suman 331.3, 333.

gung see geong.

gup 121, 427.

Gapfrip, Gadfrid 57.5.

gycéan 429, 433.

gyden 592 (c), infl. gydene 457.
gylden 170, 204.6, 427, 643.5(b), a.s.m.
gyldene 457, d.p. gyldnum 358. .
gyrdels 288, 460.7.

haam see 4m.
habban 32, 51, 166, 762, 766, negated
nabban 354, 469, infl. inf. hiobbanne
207, Ist sg. pres. indic. hebbe 193

helep 193 (c), d.p. halithum 369.
helfter 203 f. 1.
h@lig see halig.
haélsent 450.
hélp 414.
h#lI{u) 589.7.
h&mehte a.s. 263 f. 1.
hé&med 574.4.
hé&medru n.p. 636.
Haémgils 204.2.
-haen see henn.
hepse 460.
hér 128.
herfest 203 f. 1.
hern, hraen 193 (d) f. 4, 459.1.
hesel 574.3, aesil 61, 363.
h&st 606,
heteru n.p. 636.
h#p-, h&t- 57.7.
hzpen 14 f. 2, 643.5 (6), h&dn- 424.
hetse infl. see hegtess.
hettas n.p. 160.
hé&tu, -e 589.7.
héwe, héawi 273.
hafoc (x, ea) 206, 207 f. 4, 574.4,
-hebuc 207 f. 4, 444.
haga 207.
hagen see agen.
hagol see hegel.
hagu- (z, ea) 207.
hal 134, 636, 642.
halb&re 647.
halewende 367.

halgian 341, 755.

396

INDEX

hilig, -eg, h#lig 204.7, 333, 343, 358,
376, 643-5, 656-7.

halor
636.
ham 50.6, 572.
hamele 566.
hamleas 642.
hamor 574.3.
hana 130.
hancred 372.

hand 130, 611, 614.
handseax 348.
handwyrst 459.4.
hadseta 566.

hassuc 158, 373, 574.4.

hae 652. 1 ha
t,

superl.

-hAt see -h4d.

hattost 454.

hitan 107, 736 (h, j), 745-6, and sg.

pres. indic. h#test 734, h#st 732,
3rd hated 734, h&tt 732, het 66,
Ist, 3rd sg. past indic, hét 107, 2nd
hehtes 735 (d), passive hatte 341,
727.

Hap(u)- 348, Heatdu- 7, 207, Heotu276.

hatian 486 f. 1.
hatwende 647.

hé 123, 125, 404, 703, n.s.f. hio 120.3,
hia 280, a.s.m. hine 369, a.s.f. hie

237.3, g.d.s.f. hir 708 f. 1, a.p.m. hie
360, g.p. hiora 206 f. 1.
Héa- 230.
Héaberht 461.
héadéor 461.
héadorhund 357.
heafo n.p. 207.
héafod 329.1, 345~—6, 351 and f. 2, 353,

373, 398.4 f. 4, 574.4, héafut 450,

héofud 275, 278 (a).
heafola 207.
héafre see héahfore.
Héagyde (2) g.s. 314.
héah (@) adj. 222, 238.2, 312, 643.2,
658, a.s.m. héane, héanne 461, 484
and f. 3, g.s.m. héas 235.2, n.p.m.
héae 237.2, héage 447, d.p. héaum
239, compar. hierra 250, 484, héahra
463, héra 237.1, hérra 484, superl.
hiehst, héhst, hiest 352, 463, héxt
481.4, hést 237.1, héist 239.
héa(h) adv. 668, 672.
héah- (€) 225.
héahburh 461.
héahcreft 461, héh- 230 f. 2.
héahfore 392.
heald, hal 414.
healdan (a) 143, 165, 745 (c), Ist sg.
pres. indic. haldu 346, 3rd helt
200.1, 733 (8).
héalééas n.p. 230.

healf 143, 690, halb 444.
healh 574.2, d.s. hale 240 f. 1.
héan see hégan.
Héanbyrig d.s. 360.
héaness 461, 484 f. 3, héannes 484,
héanis 230, infl. haehnisse, héh230 f. 2.
heard 144, 283, 655, a.s.m. heardne
351, compar. heardra 283.
-heard (ae, a) 139, 338, -heord 276.
hearde 661, 664, 670.
heardlié 356 f. 1, 394.
heardlice 664, heart- 450.
heardra, heardhara 393, 468.
hearg (ae, e) 144, 223, 613-14.
hearm (a) 144 and f. 1, 329.3.
hearpe 144 f. 1, 618.
héawan 120.1, 745 (5), 3rd sg. pres.
indic. hiewd 272.
héawi see héwe.

hebban 194, 407, 736 (Rk), 744, 749,

pass, part. -hefen 736 (m).
hebild 444.

-hebuc see nafoc.
-hédigra g.p.

2.

hefig, infl. hefge"358, hefie 267, 467,

hefug 643.5 (a) f. 1.
hég see hieg.
hégan 120.2, 753.7, héan 761.3, 2nd
sg. pres. indic, -hést, 3rd -héd 237.1.
hege 601-2.
hegstéw 348.
héhstaltnisse 450.
héla 461.
helabr see heolfor.
helan 210.1, 742, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
hil3 414, pl. heolad 210.1 f. 2, sg. past
indic. hel 165.
helbid pass. part. 752.
helep see hzlep.
Héliséus 555.
hell 139 f. 3, 592.
hellehund 348 f. 2.
-helm 468.
helostr see heolstr.

helpan 35, 50.6, 116 f. 5, 333, 736 (a),

741, 2nd sg. pres. indic, hilpst 112,
331-3, hilpesd 481.1 f. 5, 3rd hilpp
112, 331.3, hilped 734, pl. helpap

331.3, pres. subj. helpe 331.7, 354,

370, sg. past indic. healp 401, 736
(c), pl. hulpon 736 (d), pass. part.
holpen 115, 116 f. 5, 736 (e).
helt (i) 636.
helwearan 207, 610.7.
hemepe 579.3.
hengen 592 (8).
hengest 574.6.
Hengest (ae) 90, 193 (d), g.s. Henéstes

393, 480.3.

INDEX
henn 592, -haen 193 (4).
héofan 745 (6) and f. 2.
heofon (e) 38, 210.1, 2, 278 (4), 373,

381, 574.4 f. 1, hefaen- 204, 334,
369, 381, heben 334, 360, 444, g.3.

heafunges 210.2, 278 (8) f. 2, 373 f. 3,
d.s. hiefene 281.
heofonlié 642, n.s.f.wk, hiabenli¢e
57.1, 210.3 £. 1, 280, 297.
heolfor, helabr 389.

heolstor, helostr 210.2, n.p. helustras
399.

heonan 677, heona (io) 293.
heord 154.3 f. 3, hiord 296.
heordan n.p. 124 and f. 4, 404.
heorde see hierde.
heorot 205, 210.1, 385, 574.4, heor(o)t
390, Heorut-,
Herut- 210.2.
eorran (ea) n.p. 280,
heorp, herth 140.
heortleas 341 f. 3.
heoru 614.
Héouald 278.
hér 100.3, 677, h&r 128 f. 2.

here 35, 331 4 f. 6, 575-7, 8-8. heriges
365, n.p. herigas 365, herias 407,
herigeas 45, g.p. herega 365.

Her(e)- 348, 369.

-here, -heri 369, 468, 577.
Heregéde g.s. 289.
heregung 365.
herenes 359 f. 1.

herepap, -pop 335, herpap 348.

hergian 439.
herian 748, 750, herigan 365, herga
472, pl. pres, indic. heriad 361.
herian plough see erian.
herlié 359 f. 1.
Herred 210.2 f. 3.
herth see heorp.
Heruuald 210.2.
hete 610.6,
hetelié go f. 4.
hetespr#é go f. 4.
hetol 204, 381.
hettend 632.
hider 677, hideror 678.
hidere 678.
hider ofer 669.
hidres pidres 678.

hieg (i, €) 120.2, 301, 316, 402, 579.4,

héig 269.
hieldan (z, e) 193 (a), helda 472.

hieran 39, 200.5, 726, 748, 750, hyran

gor, past hierde 351, 398.4 £. 4, 484,

476 f. 4

hierdan abo.2, past hierdde 476 f. 4.

hierde 39, 201.1, 578, heorde (io) 154.3

ff. 3, 4, 294.

hiernes 359 f. 1.

397

hierstepanne 359 f. 1.
hiertan (i) 154.3, 201.1.
Hierusalem 551.

hierwan (y, e) 753.5.

hiew (i, io, 0) 120.2, 294, 300 f. 2,
579.4.

higan, hiwan n.p. 412, 619.5.
hildebedd 349 f. 1.
hildecalla 566 f. 3.
hilderiné 349.
hildewisa 349.
hildfreca 349.
hildfrome infl. 349.
hildfruma 349.
Hildiburg 349.
Hildilid 348 f. 5.
hildlata infl. 349.
Hilduini 349.
hilt see helt.
hindan 677.
hindema superl. 675.
hinder 675, 677.
hiniong 58, 173 f. 1, 745 (d 2).
hiobbanne see habban.
hiorde see hierde.
hiorod see hired.
hired, hiorod 120.3 f. 2, 372, 382.
hiwan see higan.
hiwréden 592 (0) f. 1.
hladan 744.

hl@d(d)er 453, 593.1.

|

.

hl&fdige 204.2, 618, infl, hléfdigen
379.

hléw see hlaw.
hlaf 50.7, 461, 573.

Hlafmesse, Hlammeesse 285 and f. 2,
484.

hlaford 88, 468, 574.6, hlafard, -urd
338, lafard- 61, hlabard 57.2, hlafweard 88 f. 2, n.p. hlaferdas 386,
hlatuu see latteow.
hlaw (2) 636.
hleahtor (2) 145, 200.3 f. 1,574.3.
hléapan 745 (5).
hléapestre 619.2.
hléapettan 339, 372, hleappettan 287.
hlecan 742.
*hléow adj. 653.1 f. 2.
hiléo(w) n. 584.1.

hliehhan
(i) 51, 63, 139
f. 3, 200.3, 442,
464, 744, 749, 753.8 f. 1, hichhan
200.3, Ist sg. pres, indic, hlihe 306,
3rd hlihd 200.3 f. 1, 306, 310 f. 1,
pl. hlihha’ 300, hliehad 66, hlehad

200.3 f. 1, 223.
hlimbed 484.

hlimman

741,

3rd sg. pres.

hlimmith 369, 735 (6).
hlinian 755, 764.
hlisa 267.

indic,

398

INDEX

Hlétharius, Hidtheri 57.5 f. 6.
hlowan 745 (f 2).
hlat(t)or 408, 643.4.
hlypeget 348 f. 2.
hlywan (@0) 120.2, 753.6.
hn@gan 120.1, 753.7.
hnappian (2, ea) 158 and f. 1, 159, 206.
hnéaw 120.1, 653.1.
hnesée 359, 440 f. 1.
hnescian, hnexian 440, 751.2.
hnipian 213, 755.
hniséan 751.2.
hnitu 212, 626.
hnutu 50.7, 345, 461, 614 f. 4, 625-6.

hécede 339, 355.5, 647.

hécor 636.
hof 573.
hoferede 647.
hofr 444.
héh 236.3, 461, 574.2.
holde 664.
hold(e)li¢ée 367, 664.
hole(g)n 467 f. 5.
holh, holg 412, 574.2.
Holmryége 610.7.
Hédlofernus 563.

hén 236.3, 730, 736 (kh), 745 (d 2),

héa 239, pass. part. hangen, -héen

736 (m).

hoppian 398.1.
hord 404.
horh, horg, horu 412, 574.2.
horheht, horweht 412 f. 2.
horn 401.
hors 459.1.
hors(c)lice 477.6.
horu see horh,
hés 121.
hrace (x) 164.
hred 160, 643.1.
hredoliée 367.

href(e)n 50.1, 193 (d) f. 4, 363, 484,

574.3, hremn, hrem, hrefn 193 (d)
f. 4, 484, g.s. hraebnees 444.

hreegl 572, 574.3, is. hraecli 446 f. 2.
hraen see hern.
hrepe (a) 661.
hréw see hraw.
hrapian (ea) 206.
hra(w), hr&(w) 400 and f. 2, 406, 636,
hréaw 273.
hréaw n. see hraw.
hréaw adj. 120.3 f. 7, 653.1, hréow
274.

hreddan 753.1.
hrefn, hremn see hrzfen.
hréod (éa) 281,
hréoh 235.2, 643.
hré€osan 444, 461, 740.
hréow 598.1.

hréowan 120.1, pres, part. hréwende
279 f. 1, sg. past indic. hréaw, hreow
120.1 f. 1 (p. 46).
hréownes, hré(u)wnisse 279, hréanis
281.
hréran 198,
hrép 636.
Hréutford 275.
hrinan 739.
hring, d.s. hringiae 48 f. 1, 429 f. 1.
hringede 647.
hriopan see ripan.
hrisel 574.4.
hrissan 749.
hrip- 636.
hrip(e)r 121, 363, 636.

hrdf, d.s. hréfe 369, 444.

hrépan 736 (1), 745 (f 1)-

Hropgar 29, 88, go f. 4.
hrdpor 636.
Hroépulf 468.
hrise 618.
hritende pres. part., n.p.n. -u 373 f. 3.
hryégmearh 348 f. 3.
hii 26, 122, 719 f. 4.

higerades 669.

hihwugu 722 f. 3.
hilie 717, halig 452.
Humbrae g.s. 587.
-humele 499, 518.
himeta 669.
hund dog 573.
hund hundred 687-8.
hund- 686,
hundred 283, 686.
hunduelle 697.
Hinewald 367.
hunig, -2g 118, 204.7, 333, 474 f. 2.
huntigystre 369 f. 4.
huntop 91, 574.6.
hup- see hype.
hirupinga 669.
his 34, 50.1.
husc, hux 440.
hiasinéel 204.6.
his! 121, 363.

hw& 125, 197, 404, 461, 716, 718,
n.a.s.n. hwet 133, 399 f. 1, huet 60,
a.s.m. and f, hwone, hwane, hwzne

193 (d) f. 4, 333, 380, i.s. hwon 333,

hwi 316.

hwel 133, 161, 165, 574.1.
hwér 677, 679-80, hwar 678, hudér
319.

hweet adj. 643.1, 656-7, 664.
hwet adv. 668.
hw&te (@) 292, 578.
hwéten 128 f. 2.
hwethwara 678.
hwethwugu 722.

INDEX
hweeper (e) 331.2, 717-18.
hweepre 341, huethrae 369.
hweetlice 664.
hweettan see hwettan.
hualb 444.
hwél see hwéol.
*hwelan 741.

hwelé (i, y) 390, 428, 433, 717-18,
huoelé 319, hw2lé 197.

hwéne (0€) 571 f. 2, 668, hw&ne 198
+ 4.

hwéol 50.7, 235.2, 238.2, 408, 574.5,
hweogol 221 f. 3, 412, hweowol 146,
412, hweohhol 408, 464, hwél 241.1
f. 4, hwiol 238.2.
hweorfa, huerb 140.
hweorfan 733 (a) f. 3, 741, sg. past
indic. hwearf 144 f. 1.
hwéos see hwésan.
huerb see hweorfa.
hwergen 680.
hweper see hweper.
hwettan (2) 194, 753.1.
hwider (2) 677-9, 719 f. 4.
hwidere 678.
hwierfan 733 (a) f. 3, hwyrfan 300,
hweerfa, weerfan 193 (a).
hwiléhwugu 722.
hwilep see *hwelan.
hwilum adv. 668.
hwil(w)ende 468, 647.
hwistlian 478.5.
hwit 642.
huitcudu 218 f. 3.
huoeléhuoeges 722.
hwin 668.

hwonan (a) 677, 679, 719 f. 4, hwona

78.
hwonanhwugu 722 f. 3.
hwonne 24, 333, hwenne 193 f. 4,
380, hwenne, hwoenne 380.
*hwosan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. hwést,
past indic. hwéos 745 (f. 2).

hy¢gan 762, 766, infl. inf. hy¢gganne
4.

hyd 606.
hydan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. hjd 482,
751.1.

hyf 605-6.
-hygd 428.

-hygdig, -hy¥dig, g.p. -hédigra 243-4.

hyge (i) 199, 316.
Hyg(e)- 348.

Hygine 468 f. 1.
hyldu 589.7.

hyll 199, 578.

hymbliéae, hymliée 478.1.
hym(e)lié 367 f. 3.

hymen 537.“
Hynca 351.

399

hyngran, hyngrian 436, 753, hingran

316, 3rd sg. pres. indic. hinrad 310
I, past indic. hyngerde 364,
hingrade 315.
hype, hup- 204.1.
hyrnett 592 (e), hurnitu 199.
hyse 610.5.
Hys(i)ca 389.
hyspan, pl. past indic, hyspdun 751.2.

hypgyld 348.

Tabal 549 f. 1.
Tdcobes g.s. 549 and f. 1.

lznberht (Géanberht) 303 f. 2.

idra see geara.
Iaruman see
Gearoman.
i¢ 702, ih 452, ad. mé 123-5, 404,
a. meh 452.

-iége 518, 619.2.
idel (ie) 300, 643.5.
ides 592 (d).

fecan 429, 749, past iecte, -ééde, ihte
751.2.

i€ces- see géac.

eg, Eg 120.2, 593, 610.7 f. 4,

ielding 383.
ieldra, ieldest see eald.
ield(u) 589.7, yldo 300 £. 1 (p. 128),
eldo 193 (a) f. 3.
iémung see giemung.
ierfe 578, zerfe 289, 291.
iergpu 589.6.
iermpu (e, y) 301, 589.6.
iernan see yrnan.
ierre n. and adj. 201.1, 476, eorre (io)
154.3

and f. 4, 294-5, earre 281,

yrre 301,

ierringa 665.
iersian, infil. inf. jorsienne 201.1.
ierde- (2) 289.
ierdelond, zrde- 348 f. 2.
iesca see geocsa.
iepe 663.
iepelié 359.
fepnes 359.

iewan (€) 120.2, 753.6 and f. 2, 764.
ifig 241.2, 468.

~ig, -28, ~eg 89 and f. 3, 204.7, 333,
341, 355-4, 5, 358, 371, 376, 381,

518, 643.5, -ih 452, -i 267.
-iht 204.6, 352, 371, 642.
il, iil 268.
ilea 715, 725, ileca 366.
ile 610.5.
impian 499.
in 24 f. 3, 76, 472.
in- 76.

inélan 73.
ind see git.
-incel 204.6 and f. 1, 574.4.

INDEX

400

inéer 705.

l#ée 52 f. 1, 128, 191, 429 and f. 4

_ "8-474.
-ing f. see -ung.
inlihtnes 359 f. 1.

leéecreeft 359.
lédan 50.6, 197, 2nd sg. pres. indic.
l&tst 751.1, pass. part. jeded 751.3.
Leeden 496, 511, 518, 527, 530.

-ing m. 89, 204.6, 574.6, -inc 450, -ig,

inn 79, 677.

inn- 73.
innan 94 f. 1, 677.

inne 671, 675, 677,innor 671, innera,
innemest 675,inra 392.

innelfe, innifli 460.7.
inn-gangan 80,
innorf 73.
innop, -ap 336, ionnad 217.
insegel 498, 518.
instzepe(s) 668.
Intebyrgan 305 f. 1.
inwidda 88,
inwit 88.
Idbes g.s. 546.
loc see geoc.
iocled see geocled.
Idhannis 557.
iong see geong.
ionna 217.
jornan see yrnan,.

*lote see *Eote.

iren, isern n. and adj. 459.4 £. 3, 74.6,
647 f. 2, isen 475.
irnan see yrnan.
Isaac 26, 557.

risé 89, 204.6, 352, 371, 440-1, 518,
564, 642

istoriam 545, 563.

Italia 554.

id see ged.

iuc see geoc.

Tideas n.p. 553.
Tudith 549, infl. laditpe 538 f. 1.
iugeleras n.p. 567.
iugop, -up see geogop.
laliana 554.
Tulius 553.
iung see geong.
Iunius 553.
Iurmin-, Iurmen-, Irmin- 154.3 f. 3,
277-

luti see *Eote.

iw see €oh.

clic 88, 574.6.

lacan 745 (a), 746, past leole 146 f. 1.
Henian 162, pres. part. wk. lacnigenda
5'

lactuce 545.
lad 588, lat 450.
ladpéow, -téow, -tow see latteow.
laéc see léac.
-l#éan 749, 751.2.
leééan 753.9 (6 4).

(p. 174), 433, 578.

lefel 495, 518, lebil, lebl 18 f. 1
(p. 207).

laempihalt 193 (d).
leendino see lendenu.
l&éne 461.
leppa see lappa.
léran 253, 749, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
léred 292.
laergae see lorg.
lerig 507.

l&s n. 594, 596-7.

l&s adv. see lyt.
lésest see l¥tel and l¥t.
l&ssa see 1ytel.
l&st see l¥tel and lyt.
let 160, 643.1, 664, letra, -est, 675,
-emest 203, 675.

l&tan 736 (/) and f. 2, 745 (e), 746, 3rd
sg. pres. indic. létt 732, past lét

736 (2), leort 146 f. 1, 746.

-l&te 544.
hetli¢e 664.
lgppu 589.6.
letta see latta.
lettan see lettan.
léuw 636.
*lew- 273 f. 1.
-léw 544.
léwan 154 f. 1, 197, 753.6.
léwede 544.
léwercée see lawerée.
laf 588.
lafardscipes see hiaford.
lagu law 566.
lagu lake 614.
lahbryée 446, 566.
lahliée 566.
lamb 50.6, 283, 635, lamp 450.

land 50. 6, 283.

lang (0) 283, 632, 658, 668 f. 1, 670 f. 3.
lange 672, superl. lengst 352.

langian 755.
langop 574.6.

jangsum S42.
angung 589.8.

lappa (z, ea) 158 and f. 1, 206-7.

lar 585, 588, g.p. larna 617.

lareow 356, 484, 584.1 7, ldreuw
279, larow, ldruu 357, n.p. larewas
279.

lat see lad.
lapian, past -ode 158-9.
latost adv. 158.
latta (2) 160.

INDEX
latteow 286, 481.3, 584.1 (5), lidtéow
286, 482, ladtow 357, ladpéow 482,

lateow 458, lateuw, -ewas 279,

hlatuu 357.

lawer 509, 517, 519.

310,

lawerée (2), lawrice 339, 341, 364 f. 3.
léa see léo.
léac (a#€) 225, 544.
-léac 206, 225, -leec 225.
léactrog, -troc 544 f. 2.
léaden 204.6.
léaf 135.
léaf see léof.
léag 225.

léah 235, 574.2, 589.3, 627, -lég 57.4,
d.s. -lége 14 f. 2.
leahtor 417.

leahtrié 495, $34, 541-4, 544-5, cf.

-léétrié.
léahtin 484.
léan n. 135.
léan v. 145, 730, 744, past léh 446.
leappa see lappa.
~léas 88, 204.3, 642.
leasest see l¥tel.
leassa see l¥tel.
-least (e) 589.6 f. 2.
leatian 206.

léasung 589.8.

léawfinger 273 f. 1.

leax 223.

lebl, lebil see Lefel.
leééan 753 (5 1).

Iecetere 310 f. 1.
8,
(67)
eégan 52, 194, 429, 438, 753.9

past and pass. part. le(g)de, re(@ad
243.

-léctrié 544.
-leec see léac.
léf 35, 100.
Léf- see Léof-.
léfan see liefan.
-lég see léah.

léoht (i) levis 153, 229, 296, lioht 38.
Léoht- (i) 229.

leolc see lican.,
léoma 761.
léon 153, 73°, 739, imper. lih 229.

léoran 293, 740, 764.
leornere 337, 355-5, 578.

leornian (io) 123 and f. 2, 154 f. 3, 202,

293, 404, 764.

leornigman 474.
leorningeniht 384.
leornung, -ing 204.8, 383.
leort see létan.
Léostan 477.6.
leopu- 614.
léowe 510, 534.
léower see l@uw.

lesan 743.

lesing 383.
~lest see -least.
lettan (x) 194, 753.1.
léwera g.p. see léuw.
Libanus 550.
libban 762-3, 766, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
leofad (io, 1) 205, 213-14.
Libia 553.
libr see lifer.
.

le 88, 371, 457, 461, 477-35 642, -lih

452, compar, -lucor, superl. -lucost
340.

liccian 398.1.
-liée 664, 668 f. 1.

licettan 753.1.

li¢gan 112, 407, 429, 438, 743, 749%

3rd sg. pres, indic., -lid 267, sg. past
indic. leig 269, pl. l@gon (&) 162,

leger 574.

-legu 606.
léht see léoht.
lemman, pres. indic. pl. lemiad 752.

lempedu 495, 511, 514, 521, 541.
lempet 592 (e).
lenéten 480.2,

401

léogan 430, 740, 3rd sg. pres. indic,
lichp 480 f. 1, 481.4, 732, pres. part.
ligende 227.
léoht (&) lumen 227 and f. 2, 461, liht

lengten

482, lenten

477-40

lendenu (2) 193 (d), 574.6.
lengra, lengest see lang.
leng(u) 589.7.
lent 502.
léo (a) 281 f. 7, 510, 619.3.
léode 202, 610.7.

léof 294, léaf 278 (5), superl. léofosta
355.5, liofast 297.
Léof-, Léf- 329.2, 477.6, Leeof- 135 f. 2.

314 f. 1.
lighoma, -hama, li¢uma 333, 356 f. 1,
428, 468.
Lict- see Léoht-.
lida 618.
liefan (€) 200.5 and f. 2

-liest(u) 204, 481, 589.6 and f. 2.

lifen 331.7.
lifer 589.5, libr 444.
ligende see léogan.

liget(t), liget(t)u 579.2, 592 (e).

Ligoraceaster 552.
lih see léon.
-lih see -lié.
lihtan (ie, io) lucere 37, 39, 201.3, 229,

233, 310, and sg. pres. indic. lyhst

7§1.1.

lihtan levare 229, 301, 316.
lilie 547.

402

INDEX

lim, n.p. limu (eo, io) 213-14, 295 f. 2,
Liminéa, -aee 628.4.
Liminiaee 58 f. 4.

sling 574.6 and f. 4.

lin(n)en 287.
liss, lips 286, 445, 481.2, 592 (a).
lid 566.

-lip 348 f. 5.

lipan
739.
lipe 121, 348 f. 5, 647.
lips see liss,
lidsmen 566.
litling 574.6.
Liutfrith 275, 480.3 f.
3

lixan 229, 416, 417 f. 2 past lixte 751.
lobbe 407 f. 1

léc(a) hwa 720.

ldca hwonne 720 f. 1.
léc hw&r 720 f. 1.
1c hweper 720,
léc hwilé 720.
ldcian 755, pres. part. lokende 757.
loergae see lorg.
loesia see losian.
lofian 755.

loflic(e) 664 f. 4.

1dh see léan.
Loidis 198 f. 3

lomb see lamb,

long see lang.
longepas see langop.
lorg, n.p. loerg(aje (ae)
196, 198
(really pl. of *loerg-).
losian, loesia 764, 766, pres. subj.
losaige 757.
lican 740, 3rd sg. pres. indic. Isp,
-luced 732-3.
Lucifer 550.
-lucor, -ost see -1fé.
lufe 619.4.
lufen 331.7.
lufestiée 544.

lufian 34, 204.4, 355.4, 754, 764 f. 1

(p. 340), pres. part. lufiende 71,
pass. part. lufod 643.5 (e).
lufu 348, 587-8, 619.4.
lundleogan 207, 276.
lis 627, n.p. l¥s 199.
Lyééidfelth 486 f. 2, 565, Lyééit- 450.
\yép see lacan.
Lyfinc 450 f. 3.
lyft 606.
lyg(e) 601-2.
lygen 201 f. 2, 589.5.
lyhst see lihtan.
lynis 592 (d).
lyt adj., n. 654.

lyttel 453, compar. léssa, leassa 208,

286, 484, 659, superl. lésest, lést

352, 659

lytesna 608.

lythwon 668.
l¥perlié 359.
lypre 300 f. 1 (p. 128), 364, 648.3.
lytle adv. 668, 676.
lytlum 668.
ma see micle,
macian 159, 755.
miadm see matm.
mz see miéle.

maxtg (e) 193 (c).
méd 345, 596-7.

médland 348.
meg 767, 2nd sg. pres. indic. meht
314, pl. pres. indic. magun 259 f. 1,

mezgon 164, mago 735

(e) f. 1, pres.

subj. meige 269, sg. past ‘indie.

mehte 312, P. mehton 223-4.
*meg n. 637
f.

mg (é) 162, 280, 428, 574.1, 637 f. 1,
magas,

-um 162,

163

f. 3, mig,

*méig 269-70, méi- 266.
megden 203 f. 1, 339, 341, 428, 472,
574.6, mé&den 243-4, meiden 266,

infl. magdne 358.

mzgen 334, 574.4.

megester 496, 511.
meg(e)p 637 and f. 1.
meht see miht.
maehtig see mihtig.
mél 421,
mé@lan 421.
-maeld 425.
-mé&lum 668.
meen see mann.

maengan see mengan.

menig see manig.

meznigo see menigu.

mere (€) 128, 191, 348 f. 5, 359, 647.
meergne see morgen.

mezrh see mearh.
mérsian 755.
mérpu 589.
mezsse 498, 521, 542, meassa, messe
208,
messian 529.
mést see mitel and mic¢le.
mezstan 194.

mea(t)ling 478.5.
-mé&te 359.

Meeterne 517.

mepl 419, 421.

lyt adv.+, compar. l#s, superl. lést,

mw, méu 43, 272-3, 610.2, meau 273.

lytel 199, 331.2 f. 1, 643.5 (6), 659, 668,

magu, -a 193 (c), 614.

l&sest 676.

migister 497, 548, 550.
magos see m&g.

INDEX
maht see miht.
Mailros 628.6 f. 2.
Malaléhel 557.
man pron. 723.

manig (0) 96,98, 380, 643. 5, menig

£. 4, 380, menig 193 (d) f. 4,
193 (a)

204.7, 380, monog 643.5 f. 1, g.s.m.

monges 341, n.p.f. manega 641.

mann (0) 25, 32, 40, 67, 130, 620,
622-3, man 66, n.p..men 24, msn
2gI.

manréden 592 f. 1.
mara see mi¢el.
margen, marne see morgen.

Maria 553.
marm- 497.

marm(an)stan 341 f. 3.
Mar®onius 530 f. 3.
martyr 497.

marubie 561.
mast see micel.
Matheus 553.

mapm 363, 422, 574.3, mapum 363,
373, Mappum 453, madm 424.

mengan 52, 429, maengan 193 (d).
menig see manig.

menigu 589.7, menigeo 45, meni 267,
mzenigo 193 (d) f. 4, 380.

mennisé 642 f. 3.
mentel 495, 518.
méo 619.3.

meol(o)c, mile 331.3, 345, 39°, 628.5,
meolcum 574.4 f. 2, mioloc 213.

meord see méd.

meottoc see mattoc.

meowle 211.
meox 148, 416.
-mer 348 f. 5.

merc- see mearc,
mercung 224.

mere 544, 601-2.
mer(e)ée 579.3.
meregrot 544.
merg see mearg.

mergen see morgen.

mattoc, -uc 158, 351 f. 3, 373, 565,

mer(i)sé 390, 574.6.
Mermedénia 556.

mawan 745 (e 2).

mertze 500, 524, 533-

matte (ea) 207 f. 4 (p. 87).

574-4, maettoc, mettoc (eo) 276 f. 2.

max 440.

Maximianes 556.
mé see ié.
meahtig see mihtig.
mealwe 539.
mearc (e) 223.
mearg (e) 222-3.

403

meltan 146, 741.
melu 582-3.
menen 592 (c).

merne see morgen.

mése see mise.
messe see messe.

metan (eo) 50.6, 736 (a), 743, Ist sg.

pres. indic. meotu 210.2, past indic.
met 104, 736(c), pl. m&ton 102 f. 4,
162 f. 1, 736 (g), pass. part. 102,

736 (Ff).

mearh 144, 223, 464, $74.2, mearg

métan 749, 3rd sg. pres. indic. métt

mearm- 495.

metbalig 348.

447, g.s. méares 240, 241.2.

mearu 652.
meassa see meesse.

meatte see matta,

méau see mzw.

méée 128 f. 2, 191 f. 1, 429 and f. 4,
575.
méée-fisé 128 f. 2.

751.1, past métte 480.1, 751.2.

mete, mett 602, 610.5.
meteléast, -liest(u) 204.3, 481.1;
meter 546.
meteren 193 (d) f. 4.
| metfet 348.

médig, n.p.m. métie 267.

mecg see maxcg.

metod 210.2, 373 f. 3, 574.4.
metseax 348.

mechanisé 564.
med-, mede- 367.

met(t)rum 480.2, medtrum 482.

méd, meord 35, 100, 123 and f. 2, 404,
588.

med(e)- 367.
medeme 675.
medmian 388.
medtrum see mettrum.
medu 113, 614.
mégsibbi sgr.
meh see ié.
meidhades g.s. 266.
melcan 146.
méle 577-8.

mettoc see mattoc.
méu see méw.

miéel 388, 433, 643.5 (6), 659, myéil

318, midil 369, infl. miccle 453,
compar. mara, superl. mést (4) 659,

670 f. 3.
micelu 589.7.
miégern 434.

miéle adv., compar. ma, m&, super.

mést 676, compar. mara (North.)

670 f. 3.
micles adv. 668.
miclum adv. 668.

INDEX

404

mid 79.
midd 112, 644, 646,
midemest 675.
middaneard 303 f. 2.

656,

superl.

middel 347.
middun- 373 f. 3.
mid see mipl.

midlinga 665.

mid-wesan 80.

Mierée 610.7.
mierran 200.2,
migpa 389.
muht (1e, @, €, ea) 145, 200.3, 204.5,

222-4, 301, 316, 369, 464, 605-6,

610.4, maht 145 f. 2.
mihteleas 369 f. 3.
mihteliée 371.

mihtig (s, ea) 204.7, 223, 355-4 and 5,

371, mihtegu 371.
mil 505, 525.
mile see meolc.
milcdéondra 753.7.
milce see milts.
milde 480.3.
mildelié 359.
mildheort 359.
mildheortness 592 (f), -heartnisse 281
f. 6, -hiortnes 296.
miltestre 501, 515, 518, 541.3.
milts 50.1 f. 2, 445, 480.3, 592 (a),
milds 482, mils 477.1, infil. milce,
milze 53.
miltsian 50.1, pres. part. mildsende
757min 638, 705, minem 378 f. 2, minas
min g.s. see id.

minte sor.
mioloc see meoloc.
mise (&) 506 and f. 4, 541.1.
misp@on, sg. past indic. misthagch 57.
mis(t)liée 478.5.
mi’an 739, 3rd sg. pres. indic. midid

735 (6).

mipl 121, 422, midl 422.
mitty 481.3.
mixen 228,
Méab 557.
méd 26, 589.6.
méddecwanig 89 f. 3.
médderge see mddrige.
médgidanc 57.5 f. 5.
méodig 204.7.
médor 33, 409, 629-30, mdéddor 453.
méddrige, méderge 459.4 f. 3, 618.

mér- (0) 506 and note 3°
morap, -od 506,°511 f. 17 530.”
morgen 572, 579.2

f.

1, g.p. morna

477.6; margen 156, d.s. mergne
193 (a) f. 6, marne 156, 477, mergen
193 (a) f. 6, 572, 579.2 f. 1, merne

193 (a) f. 6, 477.6.

mortere 500, 518.
mét 767.
miga, miawa 412.
munan, pl. pres. indic. munon 736 (g).

Muncgiu, Muntgiu 434 f. 2.
mundbora 618,
mundléu 275.
munt 501, 524.

munuc 373, 501, 518.
mir 505.
mir- see mér-.

murge 204.5, 663.

murnan 736 (6), 741, 764.

murre (y) 511 f. 4, 560
mis 626, n.p. m¥s 36, 199.
muscelle 440 f. 2. .
muscle, muxle 440 f. 2, 535, musle

mip 121.
miwa see miiga.

myéel see micel.
mydd sor, 512, 523.

myl(e)n 390, §11, 515, 521.
mynecenu 518, 592.

mynet 501, 511, §21, 530.

mynetere 518,

myngian 429.

mynster 501, 511, 512 f. 3, 515, 572.

myre 619.2.
myrge 655.
_
myrgp 589.6, myrhp 480.3 f. 1, mirigp

365, myrp. 477.6.

myrre see murre.

na, nd 132 f. 3.
na-, nd- 679.
naamun see niman.
nabae see nafu.
nabban see habban.
Nabochodonossor 552.
nabula see nafela.
naca 618.
nacod, -ud 259 f. 1, 643.5 (f).
nzeéed 203 f. 1.
néddre 285, 453.
nzdl (&) 363, 422 and f. 2, 424, 589.4,

infl. néthle, naedlae 422, 589.4.

mona 33, 50, 67, 127, 618.

neve(e)l 363, 429, 574.3, n.p. neglas

mond 358.
monigfallice 477.3.
monung 345 f. 1.

negles see cuneglesse.
neeglan 194, pass. part. negled 428.

monap, -op, -ep, -up 127, 358, 637,

158.

neht see niht.

INDEX
ném 197 f. 4.
nzming 197 f. 4.
nénig 14 f. 2, 96, 98, 289, 725.
néniht see nanwiht.
Np 504, 530.
nérra see néah
nes see wesan,

ness 193 (c).
nafela, nabula 385.
nafu 587-8, n.p. nabae 444.
nafugar, nafe- 348 f. 2, nabfogar 444.
naht see nawiht.
nahte see agan.
nahwér, nawer 468 f. 2.
nahweeper 718 f. 3.
nalde see willan.
nalles (ea) 338, 668.
nam see wesan.

nama (0) 32, 130, 618.
nammélum 668
nin 26, 96, 725, a.s.m. nanne (#)
725 f. 7.

405

nédl see n&dl.
nefa (eo) 210.
nefne, nemne 484.
néh see néah,
neht see niht.
néid- see nied.
néist see néh,
nelle see willan.
nemnan, 2nd and 3rd sg. pres. indic.
nemst, nemp, past nemde 477.5 and

f. 5, 753-4.

nemne see nefne.
Neorxnawang 617.
néosan 417 f. 2.
néosian 230, infl. inf. niosenne 757,
past neasade 281.
;
néotan 740.

neopan 675, 677.

neopouard 26, 294.
néowe see niewe.

neowol, niowul 148, niwel, -ol 154 and
f. 2, nihol 212.

nanping 725.

nerian 139 f. 3, 194, 345, 351, 370,

naru see nearu.

-neru 606.
nes, -nis 89, 204.2 f. 3, 359 f. 1, 384,

nanwiht 723, -wuht 338 f. 1, néniht
204.2 f. 3.
nas see wesan,

nasu 193 (c).
nat see witan,
nathwa 723.
nathwelé 723.
nates- see nawihtes-.
nauht see nawiht.
nawern 680.
nawiht, naht 393, 468, nauht 393,
néwiht, ndht 338 f. 1, 393 f. 1.
nawihteshw6dn, nates- 393, 468
ne, ni 369-70.
ne-, ni- 265, 469.

néah (é) 222, 230, 442 f. 4, 463, 673-4,
677, nih 310, compar. néar 38, 151,

235, 673, 677, néor 152, 235, nfr

673, superl. niehst, néxt 154.4,
200.6, 673.
néah adj. 643.2 f. 2, 674, compar.
néarra 484, 674, nérra 484, superl.
niehst, nihst, néhst, nést, néxt, néhst,

néist, 154.4 f. I, 200.6, 237.1, 239,
263 f. 1, 310, 463, 481.4, 674.

néahgebar, néh(h)ebfr 484.

neaht see niht.
néalééan, néo-, nio- 38, 151-2, 230,
749, 751.2.
nealles see nalles.
néan 677.
nearu 209, 652, naru 144 f..1, 259 f. 1.

néawest, neo-, 151-2, 230, 372, -wist
204.2, 372.

néawung 278 (5).
néd see nied.

494, 405, 407, 749, 751-2, nerigean

45.

457 and f. 3, 461, 475, 592 (f)

nesan 404.

ness 193 (c).
nest 114.

netel. 589.
netenes see nytenness.

népan 197.

nétl see nédl.
ni see ne.
ni- see niewe,

nicenned 237.1 (5), 406.
nicor 636.

nied (2) 200.5, 606, néid- 42, 270.
niedan (é) 200.5 f. 2.
niede 668.
niedes 668.
niedinga 665.
niedném 197 f. 4.
niedpearf, a.s. néd&erfe 329.2 f. 2.

nierwan (y, €) 753.5.

niewe (i, €0, io) adj. 120.2, 279, 294-5,
300 f. 2, 648.2, 656, *nige 411, ni-

237.1 (5), 406,

niewe adv. 661.
nigon 429, 682, 685.
nigopa, -epa 692.
nihol see neowol.
niht (ie, ea, 2, e) 145, 200.3, 204.5,

ay 301, 308, 316, 464, 625,

nihtegela 367 f. 2, nectaegalae 617.

nihtelié 367.
nihtes 668.

INDEX

406

niman 50.6, 117, 197 f. 4, 213, 736.(a),
742, nioman(ne) 214, 216, 3rd sg.
past indic, ndm 736 (g) f. 1, pl.
naamun 197 f. 4, ndmon 127, 736
(g), pass. part. numen 117, 736 (f).
Nineue 550.
nior see néah.
niowinga 383.
nis see -nes.
nistig 354 f. 1.

of-adrifan 80.

ofcimes 3rd sg. pres. indic. 315.

ofdele 609, 610.5. ofdiine 669, adiine 474.

ofen 363, 574.3.

ofer 24, 79, ofaer 369.
ofer- 73, ofaer-, obaer- 444.
oferclom sg. past indic. 484.

.

niten. (ie, €) 473, 574.6, g.p. nétna
355.

of- 73, 335, 544.

.

niperra (io) 214, 675, superl. nipemest
675, niedemest 299, niodemest 221.

niperung 589.8.
niperweard 642.
niping 566.
nipor (io) 221, 677.

oferfetmde sg. past indic. 573.3 f. 3.

oferfyrru 589.7.
ofergan 73.
ofergeotul 210.2.
oferhygd(u) 609.
ofermapum 73.
ofermedu 589.7.

ofermétto, -u 445, 481.3, 589.6.
ofermode n.p.f. 641.
oferslege 609.

nipwundor 29.
niwan(e) 681.

ofersylefrede past indic.

no see na.

oferwrihd 3rd sg. pres. indic. 201.4 f. 3.

niwol see neowol.

Noe 557.

noht see nawiht.
nolde see willan.
noma see nama.

nomecud 367.
némon see niman.
nén 560.
norp 675, 677, norpor 671, norperra,
nyrpra, norpmest 675.
norpan 677.

Norp(an)hymbre 610.7.
norperne 648 f. 1.
norpweard 675.
nospyri, nosterl 372, 481.1.
nos(t)le 477.2.
nosu 613-14.
-ndp 574.6 f. 5.
Notheard 57.5 f. 6.
Nothelmus 57.5 f. 6.
Néuembris 550.

néwiht see nawiht.

na 125.

na-pa 84.
nylle see willan.
nyr see néah.
nyste see witan.

nytenness 265, netenes 265, 288.

nyton see witan.

nytt 407, 646-7, 657.
6, G- see a, a-.

5b see Sweb.

-oc, -uc 351 f. 3, 373, 518, 574.4.

oefest 203.
oefestan see efstan.
oefsung see efesung.
Geghwelé see E~hwelc.

of 79, 335, ob 57.1, 444.

part. infl, 213 f. 1.

and pass.

ofet 574.4.
ofléte 544.
ofor 574.3.

ofost 374, ofust, obust 356 f. 3, ofst
gl.

ofs¢yufon past indic. pl. 181.
ofst see ofost.

ofsticod 3rd sg. pres. indic. 216.
oft, oftor, oftost 671.
ofpryééan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. ofdreét

481.8.
ofpynéan 73.
Ghielde, Shaeldi 414.
6ht 119.
Oiddi 198.

Oidil- see Epel-.

Oisé 198.

élecéan, past dleéte, Slehte 751.2.

6m 127.

Omerus 550.

Omig 643.5 (a).

on 24 f. 3, 79, 333, 472.
on-, an- 73 and f. 1, 75, a- 474.

onzlan 76.
onbeé 82.

onbran sg. past indic. 741 f. 2.

onbryrdan 76, 475.

oncierran, pres. part. onézrrende 289.
oncndwan, sg. past indic, oncnéw,
erenen, oncnéw, oncnéaw 279 and
. 1.

ondgiet see andgiet.
ondlifen (ie) 300.

ondrédan 745 (e 1), 746-7.
ondrys(n)lié¢, ondeslié 477.5, ondyrstli¢
459.4, ondrys(t)li¢ 478.
ondrysnu, d.s. ondesne, d.p. ondesnum 475.

INDEX
ondwliota, ondlata 468, ondwleata,
ondwlata 340, d.s. ondwieatan 281,
d.p. ondliotum 468 (cf. onwlite).
onefen 669.
on emtwa 700.

oneean 77 £. 2, 241.2, 372, 455, 468,
53.1.

onfon, 3rd sg. pres. indic. onfdéht

481.4 f. 2.
ongeagn 185, ongéan 79, 243, 669 and
f. 1, ongeegn 186, ongén, ongén
244, ongan 302.
ongéan-pingian 80.

ongietan 73 f. 1, ongeotan (io) 220-1,
pl. pres. indic. ongeotad 210.2, pl.

imper. ongiotad 210.3.
ongin 73 f. 1.
onginnan 73 f. 1, 741.

onhlinian, Ist sg. pres. indic, onhlingo
704.

onhréosan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. onhrio-

sed 735 (0).

6s 622, g.p. ésa 121 f. 4.
S- 121,

dsle 121.

Osrié 204.2.
ostre §22.

Oswold 88 f. 2.

ot- 73, 335.
ot@awan 73 f. 2, 275.

otiecan, past indic. pl. otéétun 73 f. 2.
otspurnan 73 and f, 2.
otspyrning, d.s. -ince 73 f. 2, 450.
op 374.
op- 73 and f. 2.
opberan 73 f. 2.
opberstan 73 f. 2.
:
Sper 121, 638, 643.5, 692, 695, a.s.m.
Sperne go, 457 f. 2, 548, g.s.m.n.
Gpres 341, g.d.s.f. Sperre, Spre 392,

g.p. Opera 457, Spra 392.

opgan 73.

oppet 83.

onsacan 73, onseacan 207.

ons&ge 71, 88.
onscunian (eo) 180, 764. ©
onsééan, pres, subj. ons&ée 198 f. 4.
onsettan, pass. part. d.p. onsetnum
752.

onsien (io) 201.3 and f, 2, 281.
onstellan, pass. part. onsteled 753 (a).
ontydre, ontidri 199.

ontynan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. onténd
288.

oppe 24, othte 63.
dSuana see hwonan.
éweb, Sb, aweb, ab 468.

éwer see Ahwér.
dwiht see awiht.
Swper see Ahweper.
oxa 416, 616, 619.1, n.p. oexen, exen

196, 435.

6xn 416.

6xta, Shsta 481.4.
pell 512 f. 3, 523.

pep 289, 574.1.
peppan 194.

petig 475.

pal 504.
palant, -ent 545, 561.

.

open 341, 388 f. 3, 643.5 (f),. infl.
opene 343.

op(e)nian 341, 388 f. 3.
or- 73 and f. 2, ore- 367.

orap, -op, -up 332, 333 f. 1, 374, 574,
orp 390.

oréeard, ordéeard, orégeard 434 and
. 2.

orettan 77, 241.2, 372, 455, 468,
orrettan 287.
organe 546 f. 2.
orlege 609.

orpanc 73.

opféolan 73 f. 2.
opfléon 72.

onhréran (#) 198.
onhyrian 749.
onléon 739.
onldcian 80.
onlican 75, 740.

Ordbirht 305 f. 1.
or(e)dian 389.

orsorh 446.

-op 89, 331.6, 574.6.

ongneras, agneras 477.4.

onufan 82.
onuppan 82, 669.
onwald, onwold 338.
onweg 78, 82, 474, 669.
onwlite 73 f. 1 (cf. ondwliota).
onwré6n, imper. onwrih 229.
onwritung 383.

orn see yrnan.

palendze 53, 533, 545-

Paminund 546.

Papa 504, 560.

papig see popeg.
paradisus 563.
paralisin 563.
Paris 628.6 f. 2.
part 524, 562.
passio 563.

pawa 504, 526, 539.
Pawel 509.
péa 504 f. 1.

Peada 207 f. 1, Peoda 276, 278 (c).
Peanfahel 60 f. 3.
Peht- see Piht-.
Penda 472.

408
pening, n.p. penengas

474.

INDEX
371, penegas

peo, pie 619.4.

eoda see Peada.
Peohtas see ®Piht.
Perse 519.
persoc 500, 518.

;

piten 518.

Pideweella 367.

pie see péo.

*Piht, n.p. Peohtas 148, 305, Pihtas
305.

Piht- (e) 227.
pil 519.
pilece 543.
pinian 529.
pinsian 501, 528, 541.1.
pinung 506.

Pipor, -er 498, 518, 525, 530.
Pirge 499, 512, 522.
Pis 506, 527, 541.

pise 519, pisan- 212.

pisle 515.
pistol 546, 560.

place, pletse 53, 522, 533.
Plagian (ea, #) 164, 210.2 f. 1, 259 f. 1,
704.

plaster 497, 517.

Platon 549.
plega 50.6.

plegan 743.

plegian, past plegade 210.2 f. 1.
Plegomundus 367.
Pléo- 230.
pleoh 235.2, 241.1, 574.2, plioh 296.
pléolié 241.1.

pléon (io) 296, 730, 743.

Pléowald 461.
pliht 228.
ploh 446.

pollegie 512, 532, 542.
polleie 511.
popeg, papig 518 and f. 4, popei 266.
Port 500, 520.

portié 518 f. 3, 520.

post 524.
postol 546.
pretig see petig.
prafost 508, 515, 530.
prass 160,

préde 567 f. 4.
predician (y) 508, 528.

préost 25, 510, priost 297.

prisun 567.
Profentse 533.

profost 508.
prid, prat 567.

pryt, pryte 567 and f. 4.

peru, -e 498, 519, 531, 547, 619.4.
pit 428, 433, 498, 524.

plime 505, 519, 541.7.
plyme 505, §12, 522, 541.
pohha 63, 464.

profian 547.

pund 501, 519.
pundur 518, 525.
punt 526.
purple 541.3.

purpure 541.3.
pyffan 51, past pyfte 751.2,

pyle 473, 499, 541.
pylete 501, 532, pylée 389.
Pyngan 528, 532.
pytt 499, 512, 523.
quatern 534.

quedol see cwedol.
-quidu see cwudu,
Quéén- see Cwén-.
Quéin- see Cwén-.
ra, raha 236.3, 461, 619.3.
racca 158.
racentéag, d.s. -tage 357.
racu 588.
rad see ridan.
;
ré¢éan 233, 753.9 (b 2), past r&hte
751.2.

rected (e) 193 (c), 381, 574.4.

rédan st.v. 745 (e 1), 746, 2nd sg. pres.
indic. r&tst 480.3, 732, 3rd rétt
481.3, past indic. reord 146 f. 1,

736 (3) and (&) f. 2.

rédan wk. v. 747.
r&édbora 618,
rédels 574.6.
-reden 88, 592 (6) f. 1.
redenn 592 ().
rédi¢ 504, 511, 521, 530.
refnan 73 f. 2 (p. 31).
refsde, raefsit see reepsan.
regu see ragu.

-Ré&mas, a.p. -es 379.
Raendles- 193 (a).
répling 574.6.

repsan 418, past refsde 751.2, pass.
part. raefsit 450,
réran 14 f. 2.

*rés, d.p. réswum 597.

résan, past résde 50.1, 444.

réswan 753 (5).

rés(w)ung 753.5 f. 1 (p. 328).
ragu (2, ea) 207, 259 f. 1.
raha see ra.

ramm 130.

rap 50.6.
-réab see réaf.
Reacoluensae 207.
réad 275°
réaf, -réab 444.

INDEX
réafian 755.
reagu- see ragu.

reééan care 287, 438, 753.9 (6 4), and
Sg. pres. indic, reées 287 f. 1

reccan narrate 753.9 (b 1), past rehte

(2) 223.
rec(¢)eleas 287 f. 1, 359 f. 1.
recéend(d)om, recedom 457, 474.
reced see raced.

recetung 196.
regn 112, 429, 574.3, ren 328, reng
400 f. 4, rén 243, regnian see rénian.

regol 500, 521, 530, 547 f. 1, reogol
210.3.

reht see riht.
reliquias 560.
ren~ see ern.

rén see regn.
reng see regn.
rénge 516.

ripan, “repan, reopan 214, 739, past
indic. pl. ripon 213, 736 (6).
risan 739, past indic. pl. -reosun 214.

risé 440.

risée, rixe 440,

rixe see risée.
rixian 435.
rocettan 196.

réd 588, loc. s. rddi 369, 587.
rodor 50.6, 574.4, n.p. roderas 385.

Rémane 548.

Rémware 610.7,
rosen 518.
réw 653.
réwan 745 (f 2), past indic. pl. réon
235, reuun 279 f. 1

rah, rig-, raw- 412, 643. 3, 656.

rénian, regnian 243.
réo, ryhae 238.3, 412 f. 3, 461, 619.3,
réowe, riiwe 412 f. 3.
réocan 740.
reogol- see regol-.

reoht see riht.

réon see rdwan.

reord see rédan.
reord (io) food 124, 404, 588.
reord (io) voice 124, 404, 587-8.
réow 653.1.
Téowe see réo.

409

rinnan see yrnan.
riord see reord.

-

*repan see ripan.

rest 194, 592.

restedeg 348 f. 2.
-ri¢ 348 f. 5

Riéberct 348 f. 5.

ricéeter 287.
riée n. 52 f. 1, 355.3, 429 and f, 4, 512

£3
3, 577-8, 641, n.p. riéu 353, 398.4

ri¢e adj. 348 f. 5, 641, 647, riece 300,
a.s.m. ricne 428, riiéne 369.

riéedom 359.
ridlié 359.
Riéred 348 f. 5.
ridan 35, 102, 243 f. 2, 370, 730-2,
736 (a), 739, past indic. sg. rad

104, 134, 243 f. 2, 736 (c), pl. ridon

205, 736 (d), past subj. ride 370,
pass. part. riden 102, 730, 736 (e).

rignan 112, rinan 267.

riht (e, eo, y) 305 and f. 2, 306-8.

riht adj., compar. rehtra 670 f. 3.
rihtebred 228.
rihteliée (e) 367.

rihtlié, super!. rehtlicast 307.
rihtwisness 592 (f).
Rin 628.6 f. 2.
rinan see rignan.

ram, a.s.m. ramne 484.

Ram- 506.
ramméd 387.
rummédlic(e), ramedlié(e) 387, 458.
rawe see réo.

ryhae see réo.
ryn, 3rd sg. pres. indic. ryp 237.1 f. 1,
462.

rysel (i) 315.

Sa- see S&-.
sacan 193 (c).
sacc, szcc 160, 495, 542.
sacerd 548.
sacu 32, 160, 193 (c).
sadol 158, 574.3.
Saducet 563.
S€ 197, 400, 406, 610.2.
S#-, Sa- 204.1.
SCC See sacc.

sxe6C 193 (c), 592.
sc see sacan,
sed 643.1.
sd 35.
sel 610.6 f. 3.
sel Joo f. 3.
szlen see selen.
seimerige 495.

slp 589.

sémra, -ost 197 f. 4.

s&émtinges see samtinges.
S@ppe $41.2.

sesnél 245.
-séte 610.7.

Szter(n)dxg 203, 477.5, 495, 504, 539,

Seternesdxg 393, Seteresdeg 474,
Setresdeg 388.

seberie 495, 512, 530.
sxtil see setel.
swan 747.
SX see seax,

410

INDEX

safine 546, 548, 560.
saftriende 158.
-sigun see geséon.
salb see sealf.
salfie 539.
salletan 528.

salm, sealm 495, 497, 519, 545.

Salomon 550.
salor 610.6 f. 3, 636.
Saloweorpe 140 f. 2.
saltere 518.
sam- 204.1, 285 f. 3.
samcucu 127 f, 1, 285.
same 662.
samen see somen.

samhwelé 723.
samnunga 665.
samtinges, -tenges, smtinges, semtinges 204.2 and f. 2, 285, 668.
samworht 285 f. 3.
sanct n. 497, 519.

sanct adj. 527.
sarettan 753.1.

sarig 643.5.
Sarra(i) 557-8.
Sarpinia 530 f. 3.
sarwo see searu.

saturege 497.

siwan 745 (e 2), 3rd sg. pres. indic.
s#wd 272, past subj. séwe 279 f. 1.
sauine see safine.

sawol, saul 134, 341, 345, 363, 587,

589.5.
scab- 444
s¢acan 170, 744, sceacan 179, 209,
sceac(c)a 181~2, sg. past indic. scdc
179.

scegp, scegp 713 f. 3.
séénan 184.
s¢afan 744.
scéal, scalde see sceal
scamol 518.
scand (0) 170, 589.6, sceond 179, 181.
scapulare 563.
s¢aru 179.

sceaba 184 f. 4, 207, 444
sceabb 185.

sceacga 64 f. 2.
scead 597.
sceddan 181, 183 f. 4, 313, 736 (A) f. 2,

745 (a), 747, 3rd sg. pres. indic.

-scéat, -s¢#t 184, scaded 733 (a),
sg. past indic. scead, scéd 185 f. 1.

sceadu 179, 184 f. 4, 207, 313, 596-7,

sceado 373.
scéaf, n.p. sééabas 444.

sceaf(o)pa 341, 343.

séeaft 50.1, 185, scaept 57.2.

séeal 170, 176, 180, 185, 186, 187, 726,
767, stal 156, pl. pres. indic. sculon

736 (g), sciulun (y, i, io) 176, 182 f. 3,
sciolo 735 (e) f. 1, scule ge 730, pres.
subj. séyle 331.5, 736 (m), past indic.
sceolde (io) 179, 283, s¢(e)alde 156.
sceamfest 348 f. 2
s¢eamian 179.

séeamu (0) 182, 348 f. 2, s¢eoma 181
and f. 1.

scéap 185, scip 186-7, 189, scép 186-7,
312-13.

sééar, n.p. scérero, -uru 636.
scearp 170.

scéap (#), sce®d 184, scép 313.
sceapa 181-2, 184 f. 4, 207.
scéeappig (ze) 184.

sceatt 185-7, 206, 278 f. 4, 573.

scéawere, scéware 273 f. 2.
sGéawian 120.1, 302, 757, 3rd sg. pres.
indic. scéwad 273 f. 2
scéawung 352, 589.8.
sceet see *sceon.
scegp see scegp.

sceld see séyld.
sceltruma 458.
séené 184.
séenéan 184.
scendan (ie) 184, 751.3.
sceocca see scucca.
s¢edgean 179, 761.7.
scéoh 235.2, 643.2.
séedh 170, 181-2, 236.3, 574.2.
scéolégi, scél- 227, 232.
sceolh 146, 227, 643.2.
sceoma see sCeamu.
*sééon happen 743.
s¢eonca 179.

séeond see scand.
sceop 179.

sceorian 179.
sceort 179, 181, 658.

scéotan 740, 3rd sg. pres. indic. s¢¥t
300 f. 1 (p. 128), sg. past indic.
scéat 135.
scép see scéap.
scérero, -uru see scéar.

séerian 188.
sceppan 51, 188,
scyppan 188 f. 3.
Sééutuald 275.
scia 238.1, 619.3.
scien(n)ess 287.

744,

749,

752,

scieppan (i, y, e) 170, 188, 407, 744,
749, sg. past indic. sé6p 181 f. 1

scieppend (i, e) 189, 193 (c), 200.4,
300, steppend 189, 193 (c), sceoppend zor.1 f. 1.

scieran (e), sg. past indic. s¢ear, pl.
scéaron 185, 736 (a), 742.
-Scilfingas, g.s. -as 379.
scilling 574.6.

INDEX

scinan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. sciend 300,
‘8g. past indic, séein 181-2.
scio see *sG&on.

scip 205, 213-14, 294, 346, 373, 579
scipp 65.

scip see scéap.
-scipe 88, 602.

4ir

289, Set 166,

a.s.m. pone, pane,

pene, pene 193 (d) f. 4, 333, 380

and f. 4, g.s.m.n. pas 166, 668,
d.s.m.n. and d.p. 3#m 289, 345,
378 f. 2, i.s.m.n. bon 333, g.p. Seara
206 f. 1, 703 f.1

scipteora, -t(e)ara 340.
Sciddia 553 f. 2, 558.
sclat see slitan.
scleacnes see sleac.
scofl 444.
scél 547.
scolere 518.

seaht 566.
sealf, salb 444.
sealfian 91, 143.
sealh 574.2.
sealm see salm.
sealtern 572.
sealtian 495.
sealti¢ge 518, 619.2.
séam 508.

scortiga 182.

séamestre 339.

séolu 500, 535, 547, 588.

searu (a) 144 f. 1, 580-2, 597, d.p.

séot 179.

scotung 589.8.
séréad 440.
s¢réawa 440, scréuua 273.
sérepan 743.
sérié 440.

scrifan 440, 528, 737, 739; pl. past
indic. s¢ribun 444.
sérin 440, 512 f. 3, 535.

scrincan 181 f. 2, 440, 741, pl. past
indic.

-sériungon,

_pass.

part.

pSeriuncen (yu, y) 181 f. 2, 736 (m)
we

seorwum 276.
seatul see setel.
séaw 584.1.
seax (a) 50.1, 145, 223.
Seax- (z, e) 224.

Seaxe 204.5, 416, 610.4, 7, Sexe 312.

sééan 398.4, 429, 433, 438, 753-9 (0 3),

sécean 45, 3rd sg. pres. indic. sé¢ep
398.4, sé¢p, sthp 483, imper. séé
398.4, past sdhte 464.
secg man 401, 428, 433, 575-6,

610.5, 645.

s¢ripan 739.

secg sedge, segé 64, seic 42 f. 1.

scrud 170, 440, 622 f. 2.
s¢radnian, scriitnian 528, 546 f. 1.

seégan 193 (c) f. 1, 326 f. 2, 762, 766,
secgan 193 f. 1, past indic. sg.

s¢rofell 536.

s¢ruf see scurf.

séia, scuwa 180-1, 236.1 and f. 4,
séya 181.

scucca, sceocca, s¢eucca 180, 618.

scifan (ed, ei, ¥) 180-1, 740, pass.
part. scofen (y) 736 (m).
sculdor (y) 180-1, 574.3 f. 1.

sculthéta see séyldheta.

scir, scedr, s¢éylr 170, 180-2.
scurf, sceorf 180, s¢ruf 459.3.

*seyan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. s¢yp, pres.
part. scy(h)end, past s¢¥de 237.1

f. 2, 753.8.

s¢yfel (i) 587.
s¢yld guilt 606.

scyld shield, séeld 185.

s¢yldgian 429.
s¢yldh&ta, sculthéta 199, 292, 450.
s¢yldhréotda, scyldréda 468.
s¢yldig 170.
stynia 181,
s¢yrtra, scyrtest see sceort.
scyt see scéotan.
scyppan see sceppan.

séyttel 574.

sé 26, 125, 638, 708-9, 716 f. 5, n. s.f.
sio 120.3, sia 180, n.a.s.n. pet 166,

secg sword 592.

se(g)de 243, 452, segde 164, pl.

segdon 158, pass. part. se(g)d 243.

*Seége 610.7.
sedl see setel.
sefa 210.1, 472, 617.
séfte 197, 204.5.

segel, segl 204.8, 363, 429, 574.3,
segil- 363.

seglan 753.3, past seglde 364 f. 2.

segn 498, 519, 535, segen 517, seign
269.
segne 511, 515, 521.

sel 348 f. 4, 610 f. 3.
sél (de) see wél.

Séleséu 231.
selctip 477.

seld see setel.

seldan 284, 325,

seld(n)or,

seldost

71

selde 325.

sele 325, 348 f. 4,610.6, 636.
selen 201 f. 2, 289.
Selered, Selred 348 f. 4.

self see sylf.

sella, sélra 286 f. 4, 454, 484, 650,
sylra, sylla 286, 325, 454, super.
sélest 659.

412

INDEX

sellan (y) 139 f. 3, 325, 407, 753.9 (a),

sealla (eo) 211, infl. inf. siollanne
207 f. 2, 211 f. 3, 326, rst sg. pres.
indic. selo, silo, sila 326, 752, 3rd
sg. selep, selp, siled, sellep, selles
326, 751.1, 752, silid 369, imper. sylle
326.

sellié (y) 325, 477.3 and f. 2.
Selred see Selered.
semtinges see samtinges.
sendan 284, 476, 751.2, 3.

senep, -op, -ap 499, 511 and f. 1, 530,
sinop 499.

sengan 429, 438, 749.

senop see seonop.

séo 235.2, 619.3, infl. séan, sian 238.2.
séoc 227 f. 2, 429, 642.
seofon 682, 685, seofo 278 (b), 293,
472, siofan 213, 296, siofu 293,
sifun-, sibun- 212, 444, syfon 299
(c), sufon 302,
seofonfeald 642.
seofopa 50.1 f. 2, 445, 692, sufoda 302.
seolf (io) see sylf.
seolfor (io, y) 213 and f. 1, 296, 299,
389, silofr (y) 213 f. 1, seulfres
213 f. 1, 302, sulfer 302.
seolfren (i) 213 f. 1.
seolh 146, 241, 464, $74.2.
seol(o)c 390, 574.4.
Séoluini 232.
séon steve 153, 730, 739, 3rd sg. pres.
indic. siid 237.2.
séon see 46, 94 f. 1, 234, 235.2, 398.2,
73°, 743, sion 296, -séan 234, séa
46, 1st sg. pres. indic. -séom 238.2,
735 (a), sium, siom 238.2, -sie 237.3,
and siehst 462, 463 f. 3, sis(t) 735 (6),
syxt 481.4, 3rd siehd 50.3, 442, 462,
753.8 f. 1, sihd 301, -siohd, -siod
201.2, 306, 462, sid 237.2, 462, -sied
237.3, siht 481.4 f. 2, imper. -seh

227 f.2, pres. subj. sé 237.2, séo 234,

pres. part. -siende 237.3, sg. past
indic, seah (2, €) 50.3, 223-4, 312,
464, 736 (c), pl. siwon 151.
seonop (io, e, i) 499 and f. 1, 519, 530.

séopan 740.

seoppan see sippan.
seowian (i) 120.2 f. 6, 753.6.
8€OX see siex.
Septembris 550.
Seraphin n.p. 550.
serfis 567.
sesta see siexta.
sester, seoxter 500, 518, 534 and f. 1,

537, 544 f. 1.

set 373.

setel, setol, setl 210.2.3, 363, 419, 420
f. 4, 574, setil 210.2, sepel 420 and

f. 4, seotol (ea) 278 (5), 420 f. 4,

sedi 420 f. 4, 424, seld 325, 425.

settan §1, 407, 753.1 f. 1, 753.9, 3rd

8g. pres. indic. settes 752, pl. past
indic. setton 373 f. 3.
sex see siex.
Sex- see Seax-.
sibaed (error) 444.
sibb 407, 592.
sibi see sife.
sic(é)ettan 287.
sicor 506, 511, 527.
side 521.
sideware 513.
sidu (io) 38, 221, 373, 614.
sierwan 753.5.

siex Ce, €o, i, y) 395, 307-8, 416, 682,
S.

siexta (y) 308, 692, sesta 417, 308.
siextig (e) 686, sextih 452.
sife 609, sibi 444.
sifidan n.p. 60 f. 3, 589.6 f. 1.
sifunsterri 154.3.
~sig 348 f. 5.
sigbécn 348.
sige 429, 610.6, 636.
Sige-, Sig-, Si- 267, 348.
sigefeest 642.
sigelede see segian.
Sigelwearas 610.7.
Sigen 506, 511, $34.

sigle 515, 525.
sigor 636.
*sigpe, sigdi, side 267, 389, 445 f. 1,
579.3:
sihpe 308.
silfren see seolfren.
Silhearwan 268.
siman 508, 529.

sim(b)Ie, simbel 478.1, symle
6

315,

singales 668,
singan 50.2, 1st sg. pres. indic. singu
731 (a) f. 1 (p. 298), 3rd singp 482,
732, pres. part. singende 91, sg. past

indic. sang 130.
sinhwurfol, -uurbul 149 and f. 2.
sinop see senep.
sinop see seonop.
sinu 594, 596, n.p. seonuwa 365.
Sion 557.
*siowan see seowian.
siras n.p. 268.
Siria 553, 563.
sip n. 121, 700.

sip adv. 673, 675.
sipe see sigpe.
sipfeet, -fat 71, 335.

sippan (io, eo, y) 217, 286, 299 (c), 709,
seodan, sidtéa 217, sodda 217, 302.

INDEX

sittan 112 and f. 3, 743, 749, sg. past
_indic. set (e).133, 164, s&ton 128.

snap 449, 736 (d), pl. snidon 409,

siwian see seowian.

siuida see sifidan.
sixecge 647 f. 1.
sixnihte 647 f. 1.
sla 236.3, 619.3,

slig(h) 57.4.

slag,

slah

619.3,

;

slépan 745 (e 1), slapan 162, past indic.
slép 35, slépte, slépde 747, 751.2.
-sléwan 753.6.
slahae 144 f. 2, 619.3.
sliw 653.1.
sleacnes, scl- 478.
sléan 145 f. 2, 234, 235.2, 237.2,

238.2, 462, 730, 744, sla 145 f. 2,

236.3, infl. inf. -slinne 145.2, 2nd
8g. pres. indic. slehst 306, 310 f. 1,
slés 237.1, sl@s 237.1 f. 3, 3rd slichd
200.3, 462, slehd 223, 306, sled
237.1, sl#B 237.1 f. 3, shet 237.3 f. 2,
slact 237.1 f. 3, pres. subj. slz 237.3,
past indic. slog 736 (i), sloh 446,
pass. part. -slegen 204.8, 736 (m).
slecg, sliéé 310 f. 1.
sléow see sliw.
sliéé see slecg.
slieht (i, 2) 200.3, 204.5.

slitan, 3rd sg. pres. indic, slit 66, past
indic. sclat 478.
sli(w), slow, 411, 584.2.
sloh 236.3, 574.2, 589.3.

sme] 643.1, superl, smzlsta 389.
sméagan, sméan 235.2, 238.2 and f. 1,
758-60, smégan 314 f, 1, infl. inf.
smyYagenne 298, smégeanne 314 f. 1,
Ist sg. pres. indic. smégu 238.2 f. 1,
pl. smégat 238.2 f. 1, imper. sméage

(€0) 238.2 f. 1.

sméocan

740,

413

sg. pres. indic, snipst, snitst 481.2,
9732, 3rd snip(p) 732, past indic.

pres.

part.

smikende

227.

smeoru 581-3, d.s. smeruui 140 f. 2.
smeruuuyrt 582.
smépe (d€) 197, 655 f. 2.

smierwan (i, ¢) 154.3 and f. 4, 753.5,
pl. pres. indic. smirewat (ie) 201.1,
300.

smirenes 359 f. 1, smerennis 154.3.
smitan, past indic. pl. smeotun 214.

smip 449.

smippe 407, 619.2.

smolt 655.
smdp 655 f. 2.
smygel (i) 315.
smylte 655.
snegl (e) 133, snél 245.
sn(w) 50.6,:272, 400 and f, 2, 584.2.
snéome 662.

snéowan (5) 740, 745 (f 2).
snipan 50.1, 398.2, 409, 444, 739, 2nd

736 (d), pass. part. sniden 409.
snithstréo, snid-, -stréu 275 f. 4.
sniuuith 3rd sg. pres. indic. 275.
snotorlié 364.
snot(t)or 408.
snéwan see snéowan.

snyttru 589.7.

Sodome Sodom 550.
Sodome Sodomites 550.
Sodomisé 550.
Sédomware 550.
sdel see sél.
soester see sweostor.

sdfte adj. 663 f. 3.
sdfte adv, 121, 204.5, 663, 673.
solor 506, 518.
sdlsé¢e 511, 544.1.
somen 665, 669.
somnian 757.

son 547.

sdéna 127, 356, 666.
sorg, sorh 446, 588, 617.
sorgian 764, pres. part.
1096 f. 1.
sop 121, 668 f. 1.
sOpfees(t)nes 477.2.

sowrgendi

sodbda see sippan.
spadl see spatl.
spadu 619.4.
spec see sprec,

spzerca see spearca,

sp&tan 747.

spald see spat.
spanan 744, 3rd sg. pres.
speend,(e) 193 (d) f. 1.
Spaneas 546.
spannan 744-5 (d 1).
*spanniewe 285.
sparian 206 and f. 2, 764.
sparuua 144 f. 1.

spatan 745 (a), 746-7.

indic.

spatl, spadl, spadl, spald 363, 420 f. 5,
422 and f. 1, 424-5, $74.3.
speaft see spatan.
spearca (z) 223.
speé (i) 114,
spéd 606.
speld 636.
spell 572.
speoft see spatan.
speoruliran 276,
speowian (io) 120.2 f. 6, 753.6.
spere 50.6, 210.1, 607.
spié see spec,
spild, spilth 414.
spinel, -il 363, 589.
spinnan 51.

;

INDEX

414

stefn, stemn stem 193 f. 4, 484.
stelan 102, 742, past indic. sg. stzl

*spiowan see speowian.
spitu 614.

104, 133, 736 (c), pl. st#lon 736 (g),

spiwe 154.2.

pass. part. stolen 102, 736 (f).

spiw(e)pa 154.2, 341, 343-

stéli see style.
stellan 753.9 (a).

spiwol 154 f. 2.
spon 127, 285.

sponge 545, 560.

spora (u) 115.
spornan (u) 115, 741.

spowan 745 (f 2), 3rd sg. pres. indic.
spéwd, spéowd 273.

stené 602, g.s. stenches 427 f. 1.
stéold past indic. 745 (c).
stéop- (€u) 115.
stéopfeder (éu) 275.
steorfan 149 f. 3,
7

steorra 146, 618, 308. 1, stearra 278 (5).

sp(r)et 475.

stepe (2) 193 (c), 610.4.

sprxé (€) 128 f. 2, 591-2.
sprecan 743, spreocan 210, specan 475,

Stéphanus 550.

sg. past indic. spre¢ 164.
sprengan, 2nd sg. pres. indic. sprenst,

steppan see steeppan.

sprengst 751.1.
spréot 275.

springan

-spranc

116,

741,

sg. past indic.

450,

past

part.

sprungen

116.

ster see ster.

steran 524 f. 1.
-sterri 578.
stiée, n.p. *sticas 438.
stician (10) 755.
stierne 359.

stigan 739, 2nd sg. pres. indic. stihst

spryttan 753.1.
spura see spora.

spurnan see spornan.

spynge 512, 516, 522, 532, 545.

stef 574.1, staeb 444, pl. stafas 449.
staefnzendra pres. part. g.p. 444.
stegel 641.
st#l 421.
stélan 421.

sténan, 2nd sg. pres. indic. st&nest
369 f. 3.

stnen 197, 205, 355.4, 643.5 (8).

st&éner 636.
st#nig 204.7.
sténiht 204.6, 371, 642.

481.4, 732, imper. stih 447, sg. past
indic. 446, pl. stigun (eo) 214-15.
stigrap 428.
stihtian 228.
-stiogol 216.
stioran see styran.
stiorce d.s. see styré.

stidfrihp 459.afte

stdl stole 547.

stor 524 and f. 1, §44.3.
stode a.p. see studu.
stéw, stOu 43, 272, 598.1.
strec 161, 643.1.
str®#t 504, 521, 530.

stepe see stepe.

strang 480.3, 655, 658.

stepmzlum 668.

stréam 135, 275.

steeppan (e) 194, 744, 749.
ster (e) 507, 516, $45, 565.
steppan 194.

-stafas 574.1.

Stréanzshalch 278, Stréunaes- 275.
stréaw (€0) 120.3 and f. 7, 272, 274,
584.1, stréu(w) 273 f. 2, 274.
stréa(w)berige 120.2 f. 7, 584.1.

stn 32, 50.1, 71, 205, 331.4, 355.2,

strec¢an 51-52, 429, 433, 753-9 ( 1).

standan 736 (k), 744, 3rd sg. pres.
indic. stent 732, past indic. std 409.
stanehte 339.

stre(g)dan 243, 736 (b), 741, Sg. past indic. stregd 243, pass. part. strédden
243 f.2

sténig 204.7.
staniht 204.6.
staninéel 204.6.

strén 237.1, 406.
streng 428.
strenge 655, 658, superl. strengsta 352.

370, 399, 570, 572, 636

stanen 643.5 (d).

stapas n.p. 193 (c), 204.5, 610.4.
stapol 158-9, 574.4.
stapelian 159, 205, 385.
stapol 205, 385, steadul 206.
stede 601-2.
steeli see style.

stefn, stemn, stein voice 328, 484,
9.44

.

stefn, stemn period 484.

strégan see streowian.

stregl, stral 243.

strengp(u) 353, 445, 482, strencp 480.3,
strenp 477.4.

strengu
589.6,
strengeo 45, infl.
strenge 356.4.
streowian (e, €a) 753.7 f. 7, strégan

120.2, 753.7, 8g. past indic. streide
58 f. 4, 237.1, 266, strewede,
streowode 211, pl. strédun 237.1,
pass. part, stréd 237.1, 349 f. 1, 406.

INDEX

stride 601-2.
stronglié, infl. -leéu 371.

stryta 505, 512, 516, 526.
studu 624-6,
stundmélum 668.
stycée 429, 577-8.
styécemélum, stié- 359.
styd(e) 601.
style (&, a) 241.1 and f. 3, 577-8.

stypel 574.

styran (io) 202.
styré (io) 201.
styrenes 359 f. 1.

stican 740,

sucga, sugga 64, 407 f. 1.
Saderige 610.7 f. 4.

sufon see seofon.
sugian see swigian.
suhtriga, suhterga 459.4 f. 3.
sulfer see seolfor.
sulh 625, 628.1, 741 f. 1, suluh 361,
d.s. sylg 447 f. 1.
Sulmonnesburg 622 f. 1.
stlung, -ong 333 f. 1, 461, swilung
470 f. 1.
sum adj. 96, 641-2, g.d.s.f: sumere
366.
sum pron. 724.

-sum 88, 373, 642.
sumes 668.
sumor 117, 613-14.

Sumors&te 610.7.
sund n. 741 f. 1 (p. 310).
sund adj. 589.6.
sunne 618,
sunu 345, 373, 377, 611, 613, inf. suna

205, 331.7, 332 £. 3, 377.

Sitangli 57.7.

sip 121, 675, 677, sipor 671, sdperra,
sypera, siipmest 675.
stipan 677.

Sup(an)hymbre 610.7.

siperne 339, 355.5.

Siprige 610.7.
sutol see sweotol.
swd 125 and f. 1, 197, 335, 700, 720,
ewe, swé 125 and f. 1, 289, sud, sué
0.

Suébheard 444.

swér (4) 162, 655.
swere 655.
sw@sendum d.p. 289.
sweper 720.

swaluwe, n.p. -ewan 365.

swapan 745 (a).
swar see sweér.

-swarian, past -swarade 259 f. 1.
swa-péah 84.
swapu, infl. swede 589.1.
swebban 749.

415

swefan 743, 749 f. 1.
swefen 204.8.
swég 428, a.p. swéigas 269.

swégan, 3rd sg. pres. indic, swid 266
and f. 1.
sweger (2) 328, 589.4.
swegl 574.3.

Swegn 266 f. 3.

swel€é (i) 390, 428, 433, 700, 720, 725

and f. 8, swalé 197, suoelé 319.
swelée 725 f. 8.
swelgan 741, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
-swylcd 483.
swelgend 634 f. 2.
swellan 741.
sweltan 741, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
swilted, sweltep 328, 733 (a).
Swéon 238.1, 572 f. 4, 619.3.
swéor, n.p. suehoras 235.2, 238.2.

swéora (i, u, y) 150, 154.3 f. 3, 241.2
and f. 5, 321.
sweorcan 741.

sweord 50.1, 146, 573, sword
swurd 283, 321, swyrd 324.

147,

sweostor 210, 629, swiostor 210.2 f. 3,

296, sweester 210.2 f. 3, 238, soester,
suoester 210.2 f. 3, swester, swostor,
swuster
210.2
f.
3,
dip.
coll.
soesternum 60 f. 2, 630.
sweotelian (u) 385.
sweotol (io, u) 218, 221, 294, 385,
643.5, sutol 470,
sweotullice 218.
swér 241 f. 4, swder 319.
swerian 276 f. 1, 744, 749, sueria,
sweriga 361, 365, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
swerep 369 f. 3.
swéte 198, 204.5, 655, 660, compar.
swéttra 454.

swete see swapu.
swican,

pl.

past

indic.

swicon

218,

-sweocun 214.

swice n. 601-2.
swice adj. 654, 656.
swicol (io) 218, 221.
Suidhelm 57 f. 6.
swiftili¢e 367.
swiftlere 544.2.
swigian, swugian, sugian 218, 430 f. 3,

470, 755, 764, pres. part. swiggende
271.

swimman 51, 116, 398.1, 741, sg. past
indic. swamm 130, past part. swum-~
men 116,
swingan 741.
swipe, infl. suyppa 315.
swip 121.

Swip- 57.7 f. 2.
-swip 57.5, 57.7 f. 2.
swipe (¥) 318.

416

INDEX

swogan 745 (f 1).

swolop 210.1.
swornian, pl. past indic. -odun 373.

swot 655, 663 f. 3.

swugian see swigian.

sy¢an 751.2.

syfre 364.

sylf (e, eo, io) 146, 297, 325-6, 714,

solf 302, selua 60.
syll 592.
sylla see sella.
syllan see sellan,
syllié see sellic.

symblan 753.2.
symlinga 665.
syndrig, suindrig 199.
syngian 429, 430 f. 3.
synn 590, 645.
syrfe 501, 512, 522.
syppan see sippan.

| téon draw 235.2, 237.2, 398.2, 730,
740, 3rd sg. pres. indic. -tid 237.2,
-tiohd 310, tyht 481.4 f. 2, sg. past
indic. téag, téah 736 (d), pl. tugon
736 (d), pass. part. -tigen 736 (m).
téon instruct, see tyn.
téona (io) 294.
téond 634.

teoru §81, 583, teru 140 f, 2, 210.2,
582.

teosol 500, 518 and f. 1 (p. 207), 543,
pl. tesulas soo f. 3

-téopa 693.

téopa 692.

paca (ea) 207, 259 f. 1.

pee 436 f. 5.

pexé pron. see pu.

SYX see siex,

peder see pider,
pege 713.

ta, tahae 236.3, 461, 619.3.

pzenne see ponne.

tlcn $74.3, tacen 363, tanc 62 f. 4, 400
4.

taécnian, pres. part. tacnendi 757.
tééan 753.9 (b 2), 3rd sg. pres. indic.
-téhcd, -téchd 483.

tefl 495, 515, 521, 530-1, tebel- 363.

tegpigiap pl. pres. indic. 328.
teher see téar.
t&nel 292.

tapped 530, 542, teped 519, n.p. tep-

pedu 514.
tal (2) 162.
talian 763 f. 4.
talu 587.
tan 619.3.

tapor, g.p. teapera 207.

tasul, -ol 500 f. 3, 518 f. 1 (cf. teosol).
tawian 151.
te-, ti- 73 f. 4, 370 f. 1.
téag n. 225, 357, téac 446 f. 2.

téar 145, 235.2, 238.2, 408, 574.5,

teher 224, 408, 464, tehher 224,
442, teher 66.

tégan 439.

tehher see téar.
tela 210.3, 666, tiola 213.
tel(d)tréo0 458.

tellan 51, 52, 139 f. 3, 753-9 (a), 763

f. 4, imper. tele, tel, telle 752.
Temes 445 f. 1.
tempel 502, 517.
Tenet 628.6.
*téogan, *téon 761.2, past tiade 238.2.
teohhian (io) 63, 148, 464.
teolung see tilung.
teoma (?) 207 f. 3.
téon accuse 153, 730, 739.

peene see se.

per 85, 289, 677-8.
perf see pearf.
pet 24.

pette 24 f. 2, 681.3.
pafian (ea) 206~7.
pa-gén 84.
pa-giet 84.
panc (0) 50.2.
pances (0) 668.
pancian 755.

pancol 643.5 (8).

pancung, dongung 450.
pane see se.

par(a) see p#r.
parf see pearf.
pe particle 710.
pé see se.

pé pers. pron. see pu.
-Beaca see paca.
peafian see pafian.
péah (é) 725.3m 314, deh 225, p&ah

Sah 3

135»
pearf
n. 87,Sart 144 f, 1, 338, Serf
329.2 f. 2
pearf v. see, purfan.
pearfa (eo) 276.
pearm (a) 144 f. 1.
peater 538 f. 1.
péaw 584.1.
peé see pu.

peééan 436 f.'5, 753.9 (6 1).
pegn 574.3, pegn 259 f. 1, 328, 741,

-pén 243, Seign 269, degin 369, deng
62 f. 4.

pegnung, Sénung 243.

pencan 45, 429, 438, 753.9(b 5), past
péhte 11g.

INDEX
pene see se.

pénigman 474.

to.

pennan 407, 749, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
penep 751.1.

péod (Za, ia, ie) 281, 296.
péodcyninga g.p. 91.

;

péoden 334, 341, 574.4.

Déoderd 459.4.

péof 37, 573, déaf 278 (5), théb- 444

péoft 481.5.
péoh 153, 227, 235.2, 574.2, thégh 227.
péon thrive 119, 153, 201, 296, 462,

17

porh 374.
porh- 73 f. 4, 374.
porn 100 f. 3.
porniht 204.6.

porp, prop 459.3, 572.

thdthor 363.
Pracia 538 f. 1, 563.
préd, drét 450.
prél 566.
prés, i.s. drési 572.
prawan 745 (¢ 2), pass. part. -Br®wen

736 (m).

73°, 739, 3rd sg. pres. indic. pi(e)hp

préa, thrauu 120.3, 142 and f. 5, 598.2,

(p. 314), pres. part. Biendi 237.3,
743 £. 3 (p. 314).

préan, préagan 235.2, 238.2 and f. 1,

201.4, 462, pres. subj. -Bii 743 f. 3

péon press, see pywan.
péonestmen 566.

péo(w) 120.3 (6), 146, 584.1, 593 f. 2,

diow- 296-7,
Seaw- 281, -péu(w),
Beu- 279.
péow adj. 653.1.
peowe 593 f. 2, diuw-, Biow-, diu- 279.
péowen(n), Siwen 592 (c), 593 f. 2.

péowett 579.2.
peowian 764, pl. pres. subj. diwgen
279, past indic. Seawde 280.

perh- 73 f. 4.

per(i)h 227, 360, 395.

perscan, perxan 155, 440, 459.1, 741.
perscold, perxold 440.

pes 638, 711, n.s.f. pios 120.3, a.s.m.
pysne 318, dSiosne, Sionne 484, g.s.m.
and n, pysses 318, pises 457,
&.d.s.f,

619.3.

759, 760, Sréiga 269.

préo see pric.

préotéopa, preottéopa 693.
préotiene 685, preottyne 287.
preowa (io, i), priuwa 279, priga 148,
700.

prescenne see perscan.

pri- (ie, €0) 282, 684-5.
pridda 692, dirda 459.2.
prie 237.3, 682-3, prio 120.3.
riga see preowa.
rinness 287,
priséjte 647 f. 1.

pritig 686, prittig 287, drittih 452.
droehtig 196.
proh 643.2.
prop see porp.

pisse 484, pissere 366, d.s.m. and n.,

préwian 757.
prah 236.3, 628.1.
Thrusci 546.
prastfell 460.5.

316, g.p. pissa 484.

prymylée 647 f. 1.

d.p. pisum 457, bisem 378 f. 2,
Siossum 206 f. 1, ism. and n. pis
picée 359, 648.3.
piccett 579.2.

picgan 112, 743, 749 and f. 3, 752.

pider 677-8.

biedan (io), 3rd sg. pres. indic. -piod
482.

piestre, piestru (io, G0) n. 201.3, 589.7,
piustra 137, 275, d.p. 3eastrum 281.
piestre (io, é0) adj. 295, 364.2.
piestrig (io) 201.3.
pin 705.
pin g.s. see pa.

ping 35, 428-9, Siné 450 and f. 4, g-p.

prycéan 749, 751.2.

prysman 753.3.
-pryp 57.5 and 7 f. 2.
pryplice, prydlice 424.
Pr¥pred, Thraidred 199.

pt 125, 7o1, ad. pé 123, 125, 404,
a. pré 328,
Beh 452.
puhte see pynéan.

unor 118, 363, §74.3, puner 363 f. x.

u(n)resdeg 393, 474.

punwange, -wenge 618.

purfan 730, 735 (e) f. 1, 767.
purh 79, 241.2, porh 374, purg 447.

dienga 39.
pisl, pixl 229, 417.
po, tha(h)ae 236.3, 461, 619.3.
pohte see penéan.

purh- 73 and note 4.
purhbeorht 73.
purhf6n 73.
purstig 204.7.
pisend 689.

polian, Soeliga 755, 764, 766.
ponan 677.

pwa see pwéan.

pol(e)- 367 f. 3.

ponne 24, 333, 709, panne 193 f. 4, 380.

Sor(f)leas 477.6.

puslié, pullié, pysli¢, pyllié 204.2, 484,

725, pylé 392.

pwéle, n.p.
241.1 £, 2,

thuélan, d.p. dSuaélum

418

INDEX

-pwére 359.

pwéal 241.1, 574.5, Suehl 242, thuachl
145 f. 2, 242, 461 f. 2.
pwéan 60 f. 2, 145, 238.2, 730, pw
145 f. 2, 236.3, 2nd sg. pres. indic.
Bwés 237.1, 3rd Swiehd 200.3, Swéd
237.1, pass. part. -pweg(e)n, -duén,
-Buén 244, 736 (m).
pwearm, puarm 144 f. 1.
pweorh (e) 227, 231, 247 f. 3, 643.2,

656, pwur- 321, pwyr- 324 f. 1.

-pweran 742.

puerhfyri 229 f. 2, 628.1.
pymel 574.4.
pyn see pywan.

pynéan 36, 119, 429, 438, 753.9 (2 5),
Bine- 315.

pynne 476, 648.3, pun 199.
pyrel 241.2, 574.4, pyrl 390.
pyrnéen 574.6.
pyrniht 204.6.

pyrre 655.

pyrstig 204.6.
pyslié, pyllié, pylé see puslic.

pywan, pyn, péon 237.1 (d), 238.3,
753.6 and 8, 3rd sg. pres. indic. pyp

462.

tid 35, 606.
tideliée 348-f. 2.

Tidfirp 459.4 f. 1, Titfrip 480.3 f. 3.

tidli¢ 642.

tidre 364, tyddre 453, compar. tédra,

téderra 657 f. 2.
tidung 566.
tien 682, téa 472.
-tiene 685.
tifer, tiber 57.1 f. 2.
Tig see Tiw.
-tig, -tih 686, 694.
-tiga, -tega 694.

tigle, tigele 506, 515, 530, 547 f. 1,

tigule 212.
-tigopa, -tiogopa, -togopa 221, 340,
, 694.
tigris 563.
tigrisé 564.
til 213, 639, 642.
Tilaburug 360.
Tile 549.
tilian 755, 764, tiolian 213.
tilung (ie) 299 (6), teolung 214.
tima (ie) 300.

timbran 753.2, past timberde 364 f. 2.
tinterg 459.4.

tiogodiad pl. pres. indic. 296.
tiohhian see teohhian.
Tiouald 120.3 f. 2.
tirhd 3rd sg. pres. indic. 306 f. 3, 447.
Titstan 480.3 f. 3.

Tiw, Tig 120.3 f. 2, 411, 584.2.

t5 79, 125, 669, 729, to- 73.

tocnuicte past 751.2 f. 2.
todeg 82,
tod#lan, imper. todél 288.
todélnes 359 f. 1.
to€acan, toécan 312.

toforan 82.
togeedere 82, 669.

;
togéotan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. togiot

733togifes 669.
tdh 236.3, 643.2.
toheald 465.
tohréosan 465.
tohweorfan 73, 465.
tohyht 73.
tolésde pass. part. n.p.n. 641.
to-li¢gan 80.
tomiddes 669.

Torht- 477.
toroc 565.
torr tower 498, 524.
torr rock 565.
tosca, toxa 440.

tosteadan, 3rd sg. pres. indic. toscéat
66.

tos¢(e)éna 184.
tép 121, 622-3, n.p. tép 197.
toweard, -ward, -word, -werd, -werd
338 and f. 1.
towes(t)nis 478.
toworpnis, -wyrp- 204.2 f. 3.
toxa see tosca.

traht 497, 534.

tramet 562.
treahtere 495.
tredan 743, 2nd sg. pres. indic. trides,
3rd _trided, tret 733 (a, 5), pi.
treodad 210.2.
treddan 753.1.
tréo(w) tree 120.3, 146, 272, 275 f. 4,
584.1, tréw, tréu(w) 279.
tréow faith 120.1, 598.1.
tréowfest 642, tréwufest 279.
tréowp 50.1 f. 2, 445.
tréulesnis 115, 275.
triewan 120.1, 753.6.
triewe 120.1.
:
trifetum d.p. 498, 511, 530.
trifolian 505, 511, 528.
trig (€) 120.2, 579.4.
trum 204.2 f. 3, 359 f. 1, 642.
truwa, triia 236.1 f. 4.
truwian, trugian 764, imper. truwa,
triia 236.1 f. 4.
trymenes, trymnis 359 f. 1.
trymman 749, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
trymep, trymp 751.1.

tii see twégen.

tiddor 453, 574.3.

INDEX
underbzeé 669.

-tiin 572.

Tianewald 367.

tunge 50.6, 331.5, 333, 370, 615, 617,
d.p. tungum 331.6.

tungol 363, 373, 574.3, tungel 204.8.

tuniée 518 f. 3.
turf 627.
turnian 528.
turtle 541.

tw see twégen.

twa- 684.
twéde 696.

twégen 682-3, twgen, twoégen 289,
twdége 472, tw 197, th 122, d.
twém 345.

twelf 50.6, 390, 682, tw&lf 197 and f. 3,
-

twéo 235.2, 619.3, twia 238.2, twy
619.2 f. 1, d.s. twion 296.
twéogan 761, 3rd sg. pres. indic.

twéop, twias 235.2, 238.2, pres. part.
tuigendi 757 f. 2, past twiode,
twiade 238.2.
twi- 282, 683 f. 4, 684.
twibéte, -bdte 204.3.
twiddl 696.
twifeald 282, 697.
twigu 218.
twi- 683 f. 4.

t(w)uwa, tweowa, twiwa, twiga 470,
700,

tyht 464.
tylg see tulge.
tyn, téon, 3rd sg. pres. indic. typ, past

tyde 237.1, 238.3, 462, 753.8, tydde

_ 457 f. 4.

tynan 749.
tynéen 574.6.
tyndri(n) s9r.
tyriaca 538.
tyrnan 528.

ufan 115, 675, 677, uferra (y), ufemest

(y), Fmest 203, 241.1, 675.

thte 119, 617.
un- 26, 75 and f. 1.
unacumenlié 477.
unafehtendli¢é 227 f. 2.
unapréotend 75 f. 1.
unbefohten 75 f. 1.

undercyning 75.
undergietan 73.
underlihta 201.4 f. 3.
underneopan 82.

underdiedan 201.3, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
underdiod 201.3, pass. part. underpéoded 81.

tusc, tux 440, d.p, twuxan 470 f. 1.

twoelf 390.
twelfta 692.
twéntig 686.

419

under 79, 283, under- 73.

tulge 673.

unbindan, pass. part unbunden 75 and

underwreppan,

part.

pass.

wreodod, -wreted 211.
unfestrad 162 f. 1.
unfyrn faca 669.

under-

-ung, -ing 89, 204.8, 345 f. 1, 352, 373,

383, 589.8, -unc, -inc 450.
ungeférenlié 477.3.

ungemete(s) 668, unigmetes 370 f. 1,
407.

ungewisses 668.
ungléaw, -gléu 653.
ungnype 655 f. 2.

unhieri 281.
unilié 370 f. 1.
uniwemmed 467.
unlidouuae 212.
unlifigende 75.

unmeht 312.
unnan 767, past ipe 121.
unnéah, unnég 57.4, 227.

unnytt 71.

uns¢ildig 316.
underfe 193 (a).
unbdrist, -driest 300.
unduén pass. part.

(p. 317).

244,

744

unc see wit.
uncer 705, 707.

uncl&ne 75.

1

untrymnis 204.2 f. 3.
unwearnum 668.
unwéne 359.

unwine 566.
unwrecen 75 f. 1.

uphést 2nd sg. pres. indic. 752.

up(p) 78, 677, up- 26.

uppan 677.
uppe 677.
tre, *iiser 705-7, g.s.m. asses, d.s.m.
Gssum 484.

Us see we.

at 78, 677.
Gtan 677-8, fita 472.

te 675, 677, ytra 392, iterra (¥),

Gtemest (7) 203, 675.
Up- 73, 121, 374.
Upgenge 73.

Utlaga 566.

uton see wuton,

1

unbyrhtor 305 f. 1.

f.

wa 134.
waar see wearr.

wacan, d.s. wacane 259 f. 1.
wacian (#) 164, 193 (c) f. 2, 764.

INDEX

420

wacor (x) 158, 643.4, weeccer 408,
wadan 744.
wééan 751.2.
weecéa, pres. part. wetéende 193 (c),

429, 764.

weecée 193 (c).
weeten 193 (c) f. 2.
weetnan 428, 736 (R), 744.
weed 574.1.
wéde (&, S€) 319.
wédl, wédl 422.
wédla, wétla 422,
wefersyn 359.
weefs see weps.
wg 120.1.
wegn 429, -w&n 243, wén 244.
weeldréor 87.
weel(h)réow 468.
well see wiell.

wemn 484.
wépned (é) 753.2.

weall 143, 539, 573-

wdepen 319,

wrenna,

(2)
f. 3, 459.1, 476.

wrenna

193

werscipe 602.
weestan 744.

wearm 144.
wearp, uarp 144.1.

wearr, waar 144 f. 1, n.p. weorras 276.

wéas 668.
weax (gz, €) 223-4.

weaxan (, €) 145, 223-4, 416-17,

745 (c), 3rd sg. pres. indic. wiexd
200.3, wiext 481.1, wexep 223,

wreaxd 734, sg. past indic. wéox 227
.2

wetéan 407, 753 (b 1), 764 f. 1 (p. 341),

-weesma 417.

westm 417, 574.3, west(u)m 363,

westm 481.1 f. 5, weesm 477.2.
westmbé#re 647.
westmbéru 589.7.
weeter 574.3, g.s. wet(t)res 408.

wetla 419 f. 2.
weetrian, past watrode, weeterode 158.
wag, wah 120.1 f. 2, 446.
wagian, 3rd sg. pres. indic. weagat
207, pres. part wagende 259 f. 1,
757Valchstod 57.3.
-wald, -wold 88 f. 2, 338.
walde see willan,
Waldere 468.
Waldfrith 204.2.
wan 638.
wange 618.
Wantsumo 480.3, f. 3, 589.5 f. 5.
warhte see wyréan.
warop sea-weed 574.4.
warop shore 574.4, warp 390.
-ware

f. 2, 338 and f. 1, -weord 276.

webb 578.

weesp see weeps.

-waru, n.p.

weallan 745 (c).
weard guardian, uard 60, 144 f. 1.
weard protection 588.
-weard, -ward, -word, -werd 88 and
wearg, waerg- (e) 223.

weeps, wefs, wesp 418, 460.3.
wer 160, 643.1.
wer, d.p. warum 162.
were 193 (a), 227 f. 2, wyré 193 (a) f. 4.
weeréan 193 (a) f. 4.
weerfan see hwierfan.
werna,

waxan see wascan,

wé 123, 125, 404, 702, woe 319, a.d.

Wealh 143, 574.2, g.s. Wéales 241.2,
g.p. Wala 240 f. 1.
Uuealhhunes 143.

wep(n)man 393, 477.5.

wera,

*wascan, waxan 440,

744.
wawan 745 (e 2).

iis 121, a. dsié 204.9, sih, tsig 452.
wéa 619.3.
weada see wudu.
wealcan 745 (c).
weald forest 613-14.
weald particle 721 and f. 2.
wealdan 745 (c).
wealdend 633-4.

wemn see w2pn.

wep(e)n 363, 574.3,

“waséan 158,

586,

610.7, -wearan 206,

588,

589.1,

past wehte 223-4.
wecg 578.
wecgan 749 and f. 2, pl. past indic.
wegdan 752.
wedd 578.
weder 574.3.
wedlac 574.6.
wefan 743.
wefl, n.p. ueflae 369, 587.
weg 26, 266 and f. 3, 435, 572 f. 2, 573,
weig 269, wei 43, 58, 266, weg 328,
woeg 319, wig, wi 267 and f. 4, g.s.
weges 266 and f. 3, n.p. wegas (eo,

ea) 210.2, 281, 429, d.p. wegum (eo)
210.2,

wegan 733 (), 743, sg. past indic.
wei, wei 266.

wela (eo) 210.1, 2, wala, wala, weala
210.2 f. 4.
Wéland 100.3.
wel(ge)hweer 679, 719 f. 5.

UVelhisé 461.

welhwylé 719.
welig (ze, ea), 210.2 f. 4, 328.
weligian, past welegode 371.

INDEX

wél(l) 100 f. 4, 667, 676, wel- 328,

compar. bet, sél, sdél 286 f. 4, 346
f. 2, 676.
welor, weler, weolor 210.1, 459.5, n.p.
weolure 210.2, d.p. ualerum (2)
210.2 f. 4.
wén (dé) 197, 606.
wénan, past wénde 484.
wendan 480 f. 3, 749, woenda 319.
-wende 88, 359, 647.
Wendels& 26.
wenge 618,
wennan 749.

wéocsteall 416.
wéofod, wi(g)bed 229-30, 382 and f. 1,
461 f. 3.
*wéoh, a.p. wéos 153.
Wéohstan, Wéoxtan 416.
weoloc 574.4, weolc 390, uuiloc- 372,
wioloc 218,
weorc (e) 50.6, 222, 227 and f. 2, 572-3,
were 227 f. 2, woerc 319, worc,
wure- 321 f. 2, weoruc 366.
weorod, werod, wered troop 210.1,

345-6, 353, 381, 574.4, worud 210.2.

weorod, werod, wered sweet 210.1.
weorold, -uld 210.2, 3, 610.1 and f. 2,
woruld 210.1, 2, worold, wuruld
323 f. 3, weorold, -ald, -uld 338,
weruld 210.2, world 391, infl.
wiaralde 210.3 f. 1, 280, 297.
weoroldcund 642.
weorpan 281, 741, worpa 147, wurpan
321, 3rd sg. pres. indic. wyrpd 300,
-wierpd, -weorpd 201.1, -weorped
154.3 f. 3, sg. past indic. wearp 736
(c), warp 144 f. 1, pass. part.
oeren 204.8, infl. -worpne 643.5
c).

weorp (0) 147, wiord 297, wurp 321.
weorp- (y) 324 f. 1.

weorpan 50.1, 146, 281, 409, 728, 736

(a), 741, wurpan 321, worta 147,
329 f. 2, 3rd sg. pres. indic. wierp
201.1, 732, wyrd 300, -weord 201.1,

weorpep 149 f. 3, 154.3 f. 3, 733 (a),

wortes 149 f. 3, 733 (a), uuiurthit
149, 277, 369, pres. subj. uueorthae

60, 147, 149 £. 3, 369, pl. wyrten

324 f. 1, sg. past indic. wearp 155
f. 3, ward 144 f. 1, -werd 329.2 f. 2,
pl. wurdon 409, 736 (d), past part.
worden 409, 736 (e).
weorpian (ea, u) 147, 281, 321.
weorpmynt 450, 589.6.

wépan 50.6, 736 (), 745 (£3), 746,749.

wer 50.6, 114, 573, wer 288, woer 319,

n.p. weras 210.1, 2 and f. 4, weoras
210.2,

f. 4.

Waras, Weras,

Wearas

210.2

421

Wérefrid 367.
weregild 367.
wereli¢e 367.
werewulf 367.

wérgian 429.
werhad 574.6.

werian defend 749.
werian clothe 749.

wérig, a.s.m. -woérignz 369.
werna see weerna,

werod, -ed see weorod.
wesan 728, 743, 768 (d), wesa 210.2,
wosa 210.2, imper. woes 319, was
328, pres. part. wesende 91, sg. past
indic. wes 166, was 335, negated
nes 354, nas 335, pl. wéron 128 f. 2,

347, wOEron 319.

béon, bion, bian 238.1 and f. 1, 280,
768 (d), 1st sg. pres. indic. béom,
biom, pl. biod, biad 238.1 and f. 1.
Ist sg. pres. indic, eam 735 (a), negated nam, neam 354, 768 (d), and
eart, art 338, 3rd negated nis 354,
pl. earan, -un 206-7, sindon (ie, io,

€0) 217, 284, 299 (c), sint (ie) 299 (c),

450, pres. subj. sie 47, 234 and f. 2,

237.3, 369.

west 675, 677, westerra, westmest 675.
westan 677.
Uuestanae d.s. 628.4.
wéste 647.
wéstenn 579.2, woésten, westen 198,

woestern 475 f. 3.
westerne 630.
wépelnysse infl. 424.
webdl see wd.

-wié 572.
wicg 578.

-uich 229.
wicing 566.

widingsceada, infl. wi¢incséeadan 450
. 5.

wicu, wucu 218, 429, 619.4.
wid, compar. widdra 454.
uide 369, 661 f. 2.
widl, uiddil 422.
widliga, widlia 422, 424.
widre ? adv. 670 f. 3.
wid(u)we 218, weoduwe 221, wuduwe
218, g.p. widuwana 218.

wiell (z) 200.1 f. 4.
wiellan (e) 200.1.
wielle (2, e) 193 (a) and f. 1, 200.1,
265, wille 300.
wielm (e) 193 (a) f. 3.
.
wielwan 753.5, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
wylep 406.
wiergan (z) 193 (a).

wierman (2) 193 (a).
wiers see yfie.

422

INDEX

wiersa, wierst (y, e) see yfel,

wierp (y) 149, 199.

wierpe (y) 149, 199, 201.1, 261, 300,

324 f. 1, 359, 647, wurpe 322,

weorde 201.1.

wierpness, wertnes 201.1, 288.
wierpu (y) 589.7.
wif 573.
wiferend 267 f. 4.
wifman, wimman 286, 484.
wi(g) 266.
Wi(g)- 267.
wi(g)bed see wéofod.
wigend 634.
Uigenna 546.
Uighard 60.
wiglian 267.
wi(g)lung 267.
wiht creature 305, 609.

wiht anything, wuht 338 f. 1.

wiht weight 306-7.
Wiht 305, 628.6.
Wiht- (eo, ia) 228, 280, 307, 477, 481.4
oH.

-wiht 204.2 f,. 3.
Wihtsige, Wixige 481 f. 1.
Wihtwaran 610.7, 613.
wild(d)éor 458, 636 f. 1, wildedéor 359.
wilde 414, 644, 654, 656.
wildor- 636.
Wiligeld 367.
*wilinéel 204.6 f. 1.
willa 617.

willan 728, 768 (a), 1st sg. pres. indic.
willa 377, pres. subj. welle 265 f. 2,
past wolde, walde 156, 283, 369.

-wist 88.
wit 703.

wita 618, wuta 219, n.p. wiotan 221,

296, wutan 219.
witan 299 (5), 767, wuta 219, sg. pres.

indic. wat 331.1, pl. witon (io, eo, u)
218-19, wuto 735 (e) f. 1, imper. pl.
wietad 299 (b), past wisse 398.1.
Negated: sg. pres. indic. nat 354, pl.
nyton, nuton, pres. subj. nyte, past
nyste 265 and f. 1.

wite 575-6, 609 f. 1 (p. 244), 645.

witelac 574.6.
witgian 429.

wip, wip- 73 and f. 3, 79, 81.

wipeftan 82.

wiper- 73 and f. 3, 81, wipre- 79 f. 5.
wiperbreca, -braca 340 f. 1.
wipercoren 81.
wipercwepan 73 f. 3.
wipercwepness 73 f. 3.
wiperfeohtend 81.

wiperhlinian, pres. part. n.p. uuidirhliniendae 81.

wiperhyégende pres. part. 81.

wipersaca 73.
widerweard (ie) 300.

wiperwinnende 81.

wipforan 82.
Widigléa 392.
wipinnan 82, 669.
Widléagate d.s. 292.
widlia see widliga.
wipneopan 82.
wipsacan 72-73.
wip-sprecan 80.

widtremman, 3rd sg. pres. indic. wid-

Negated: inf. nyllan, rst sg. pres.
indic. nylle (e), 3rd nele, pl. nyllap
(e), nallad, subj. nylle, imper. nelle,
pl. nellad 265, past nolde, nalde 156,

tremd 751.1. .
wipitan 82, 669.

Willegoda 367.
wilsum 641-2.
wimman see wifman.

wutotlice 450.
-witol (u) 218.
wittig 287.
wituma 212.

354, 469.

win 505, 519, 539.
wind 116.

windan, pass. part. n.p.f. uundnae 369.
wine, -wini 118, 345, 37°, 599-601,
g-p. winia 398.
wingeard, wineard 303 f. 2.

winn (y) 315.

winnan, pl. pres. indic. wynnes 315.
winstre 389.
winter 363, 613-14.
-wintre 655.

Wiogoraceaster 221 f. 2.

wiréan see wyr¢an.
wis 642, n.p.m. wiese 300.
wissian 287.

wist 606.

witodli¢e 216, 218, uutodli¢e 218,
ueototli¢e 293, weotudli¢e 295 f. 2,

Wixie see Wihtsige.
wlacu, wlec 160, 655.

uuladtunc 450.
wlecéan 751.2.
wlenéu 589.7.
wlips 460.4.

wlite, -wlit 601-2.

wléh 628.1, d.p. uuldhum 461.

wlonc, g.p. wlonga 450.
wocor 589.4.
wodness 592 (/).
woéninga 383.

woh 236.3, 643.2, g.p. wdra 461.

woidiberge 198,
wolcen, wolcn 363, 574.3-

INDEX
wolié 461.
wona see wan.

word 71, 345, 401, 570, wurd 283, 323.
wordlian (u) 323 f. 3.

‘worms, worsm, wurms, wursm, wrusm

323 f. 3, 459.3, 460.6.

wid, d.s. wodhae 587.
wracu (2) 193 (c), 589.1, g.p. wreeca 164.
wreééa (e) 193 (c), 407, 617, 619.
‘wreenna see werna.

wrang 566
wrecan 743, 1st sg. pres. indic. wreocu
210.2,

wreééan see wec¢an.

wrégan 439, imper. wréi 266.
wrenna see werna.

wréon (io) 153, 235.2, 296, 310, 730,
739, -wréan 238.2, 3rd sg. pres.
indic, wrid 237.2, -wrihd 310, pl.
-wriad, wréop 238.2, pl. past indic.
wrigun (eo, io) 214-15.
wreppan 749, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
-wreodad 211, 752.

423

wynn 25.

Wynnefeld 613.
wynsum 356 f. 1, 641-2.
wynsumian, 1 sg. pl. imper. wynsumie
we 730.

wyré see were,

wyréan (i) 154.3 ff. 3 and 4, 316, 429,

433, 438, 753.9 (6 6), sg. past indic.

worhte, wrohte, worohte 459.3 and
f. 2, warhte 156, pl. worhtun 24 f. 3,
worohton 361.
wyrd 605-6, 628.4 f. 2.
wyrdstafas n.p. 574.6.
wyrdwritere, wurd- 322.
-wyrgenn 592 (c).
wyrhta 619.2, wyrihta 361, 366,
wrihta 459.3.
wyrm 601~2, n.p. uyrmas 60, weorm
324, d.p. wurmum 322.

wyrmsan 753.2 f. 2.
Wyrtgeorn, Uurtigern 140 f. 1.
wyrttruma, wurtruma 322.

writan 739.

wyrt(t)in 458.
wyrtwalan n.p. 165.
wys¢an 199, 204.1, 440, wistan 316,
sg. past indic. wiste 751.2, pl.
wysctun 753.9 (b 6) f. 1.

wroht, d.s. uuroctae 587.
wrotan 745 (f 1).

yfel 199, 204.8, 643.5, 659, yuel 60,
n.p.m. yf(ejle 388, compar. wiersa

wrist 459.4.

wrixendli¢e 228.
wrixl 305.
wrixlan 417, 753.2.

wrusm see worms.

wucu see wicu.
wudiht 642.

wudu, infil. wuda 218-19, 373, 613-14,
uuidu- 218, infl, wiada (ea) 219, 280,
297.

wudufille 544.3.
wuduwe see widuwe.
Wufgar 477.6 f. 1.
Wufred 477.6 f. 1.
wuldor 414, §74.3, wuldur 373 and f. 1.

wulf 115, sor, 8.
g.s. uulfes 444, n.p.
wulfas 50.1,

Wulf-, Wul-, Wat. 477.6 and f. 1.
-wulf 468.

wulle 398.1, 617-18.
wulmod 336.
wund n. 588.
wund adj. 642.
wunderfull 642.
wundor, wunder 204.8, 363, 574.3.
wunian 755, 764, 3rd sg. pres. indic.
wunap 118, past wunode 91.
wurdlian see wordlian.
wurms see worms,

wuton, uton, wutu(n) 218, 471, wutum
729 £. 3. |
euych see ~-uich.
wylf 592, wylif 360.
Wynhere, Vuunhere 198 f. 2.

(y) 201.1, 300, 484, 659, 670 f. 3,

superl. wierrest (y), wierst (y) 300,
352, 659, werst 149, 201.1, 288.
yferra, yfemest see ufan.
yfle 676, compar, wiers 201.1, 676, wyrs
149, 199, superl. wyrrest, wyrst 676.
ylé 725.
ylfetu 592 (e), aelbitu 444.
ymb(e) 79, 346 f. 2, embe 372 f. 2,
ymb(e)- 73 and f. 4.
ymbhweorfan 73.
ymbhwyrft, -hwerft 372.
ymbryne 73.
ymbitan 669.
ymen 537.
ymest see ufan.
ynée 532.

ynne- 526, 542.
yntse 533, ynse 477.1.
yrf(e)weardnys 359.

yrnan (io, eo) 155, 193 (d), 459.1, 741,
iernan 299, irnan 155, 476, rinnan
398.1, 476, sg. past indic. arn, orn,
earn 130, 155 f. 3
Fst 199, 606.

*Yte see *Eote.

yterra, Ytemest see ite.

YP 36, 199, 592.

Zefferus 558.

