Linguistic Society of America
Suffixal j in Germanic
Author(s): Peter H. Erdmann
Source: Language, Vol. 48, No. 2 (Jun., 1972), pp. 407-415
Published by: Linguistic Society of America
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/412142
Accessed: 27-03-2015 13:33 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Linguistic Society of America is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Language.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SUFFIXAL j IN GERMANIC
PETER H. ERDMANN

University of Hamburg
Comparative treatment of the Germanicresonants has, in the past, emphasized
Gothic. An analysis of irregular Old English material here leads to a better understanding of the problem. The present paper provides evidence for an extension of
Sievers' Law to polysyllables, and a refutation of Lehmann's claim that the IE
resonant system was maintained into late Proto-Germanic.l

It is well knownthat Germanicnouns and verbs with a j-formativehave two
types of syllablestructure.The suffixis said to represent/ij/ followinga heavy
or unstressedsyllable, and /j/ elsewhere.
Sievers (1878:129-30) noticed the allomorphic distribution of suffixal j for
monosyllables, but was unable to give any rules for polysyllabic stems. He based
his formulation on Germanic evidence, primarily on Old English, showing that it
was necessary to postulate syllabic and consonantal variants in order to avoid
contradictions with existing syncope rules for unstressed vowels (132-6). Research following Sievers' classic article has concentrated almost exclusively on
the comparative aspect by linking the Germanic phenomena with allophonic
variations in the Rigveda (Edgerton 1943).2
Regardless of the situation in Indo-European, it is necessary for Germanic to
distinguish between a syllabic and consonantal variant of suffixal j. Conclusive
evidence is found in Old English, e.g. in the nom.acc. pi. of heavy ja-neuters as
compared with their light counterparts:3 *kun-j-u 'races', *rzk-j-u 'kingdoms'.
In the attested nom.acc. pi. cyn, ricu one observes loss of final u after a light
stem syllable, but not after a heavy one. This contradicts the apocope rules for
Old English: (1) in monosyllabic stems, high vowels drop after a light syllable;
(2) in polysyllabic stems, final u drops in forms of the structure
lght-

{heavy}

- U

heavy -

heavy

- u

light

- u

but not in formsof the structure
heavy -

(Sievers-Brunner 1965, ??146-9). It is obvious that the only chance for *rZk-j-u
to retain its final u phonologically is to be of the structure HEAVY-LIGHT-U. The
j has to be a syllable, and it has to be light. As a kind of syllable filler, one can
1 I would like to thank Calvert Watkins and Gregory Nagy for reading an earlier draft of
this paper, and Warren Cowgill for suggesting several revisions in the present version.
2For a summary of the Germanic resonants, see Coetsem (1970:69-74) and Will 1970.
For a discussion of the Sievers-Edgerton Law, cf. Szemerenyi (1970:98-103).
8 The reconstructed forms in this paper are base forms arrived at by internal evidence.
They are the input to the rule mechanism deriving the attested forms of the various Germanic dialects. I label these underlying representations 'pre-OE,' 'pre-Gothic' etc. to
avoid confusion with the forms to be postulated for Common or Proto-Germanic, which
should be based on the internal reconstructions of the individual dialects.
407

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

408

LANGUAGE, VOLUME 48, NUMBER 2 (1972)

assume a preceding vocalic element, so that an internal reconstruction arrives
at a form *rik-ij-u, which preserves its final u regularly, and which is supported
by forms found in Runic inscriptions.
While graphemic ricu represents its phonemic output /rik'u/, a written form
like cyn must represent a heavy syllable which lost its final u bythe syncope rule
for monosyllables; i.e., /kynn/ goes back to /kynnu/, which was geminated by
suffixal j and dropped its palatal semivowel after a heavy syllable. Final geminates are simplified in Old English. Sievers' Law then would be a rule specifying
the phonetic variants of suffixal j by operating on base forms like *kun-j-u and
*rnk-j-u.
In the past, the Germanic resonants have been discussed from the comparative
point of view with Gothic emphasized to the exclusion of other dialects. Lehmann
1955 tried to explain some morphophonemic variations in Gothic as reflexes of
the Sievers-Edgerton Law, in order to underscore his thesis that the IndoEuropean resonant system had been maintained into late Proto-Germanic. The
question has been much discussed, and one can elaborate on the criticism of
Marchand 1956 and Winter 1955 to arrive at a more comprehensive view of the
problem. Gothic represents only part of the picture; it is necessary to include
Old English and Old Norse, which hold the key to a better understanding. Old
High German, Old Saxon, and Old Frisian provide only marginal evidence,
verifying certain aspects of the rules to be derived from a study of the Old English
and Old Norse material. The present article sets the frame for a wider study of
suffixal j in Germanic by linking the realizational rules of underlying j in two
Germanic dialects-Old English and Gothic.
Lehmann's contention must be seen in the wider perspective of his claim that
Germanic represents a 'conservative' Indo-European dialect, retaining archaic
features of the proto-language. The only support for this theory which Lehmann
was able to offer, up to the discovery of Indo-European resonants in Germanic,
had been his interpretation of Grimm's Law. As a phonetic change, it was said
by him to have a more preserving quality than, e.g., a phonemic change (Lehmann
1953). But one must question the validity of a characterization of Germanic
based exclusively on superficial phonological features, ignoring the incisive
morphological changes which the language has undergone since Indo-European
times. I will start with an examination of the points Lehmann considered decisive
for his arguments.
Gothic has morphophonemic variation between /ji/ and /l/ for light and heavy
ja-masculines, e.g. gen. sg. harjis 'army' vs. hairdeis 'shepherd'. There are only
traces of a comparable differentiation for the ja-neuters, e.g. gen. sg. gawairpeis
'peace', waldufneis 'power'. As a rule, the heavy ja-neuters are declined like their
light-syllabic counterparts. Lehmann (1955:360) interprets the different paradigmatic treatment of /ji/ and /l/ as a breakdown of the original positional
distribution of resonants in Gothic. If the Indo-European resonant system had
broken down in Gothic, it should have done so for both masculines and neuters.
The fact that only the latter eliminate the morpheme alternants points to an
analogical process based on gender.
Lehmann puts special emphasis on Edgerton's 'Converse of Sievers' Law'. He

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SUFFIXAL j IN GERMANIC

409

maintains that the causative suffix ij of late Proto-Germanic was altered in
accordance with the purely phonetic resonant rules of Indo-European. A reconstructed infinitive like *naz-ij-ana 'rescue' became Gothic /nasjan/ by the abovementioned 'Converse'. Marchand has pointed out that causatives like /nasjan/
can be explained by analogy to the je/jo-presents alternating according to
Sievers' Law, which refers to a phonetic realizational rule in Proto-Germanic,
described as such by Sievers himself, who interpreted j and ij as phonetic representations of an underlying j. A reconstruction such as *naz-ij-ana is based on
etymological considerations, and is unsupported by internal evidence pointing
to a suffix j undifferentiated for factitives, denominatives, or primary verbs in
IE je/jo-, and for causatives or iteratives in IE eje/ejo- (Kieckers 1928:225-32).
The problem of the 'Converse' is not a question of Germanic linguistics
proper.
There are other reasons for rejecting Lehmann's claim that the 'Converse'
worked in Proto-Germanic. For Gothic it does not matter whether we start with
a base form *naz-ij-ana or *naz-j-ana. In both cases general phonetic rules,
which are needed apart from the present problem, derive the attested infinitive
/nasjan/. There is no difference between an etymological ij and a phonetic
sequence ij derived by Sievers' Law; both result in j. It is therefore impossible
to prove on internal grounds that Go. /nasjan/ reflects the phonetic alteration
of *naz-ij-ana according to the Sievers-Edgerton Law for both morphological
and phonological reasons.4
It is only in West Germanic that we can hope to find evidence for the 'Converse of Sievers' Law', since the gemination of a final root consonant will not
apply where there is a following ij. There are actually two cases of the 'Converse'
in Old English. The gen. plurals of light-syllabic *dani- 'Dane' and *wini'friend' are attested as Deni(g)a5 and wini(g) (e)a6, beside their analogical forms
Dena and wina (Sievers-Brunner, ?262, fn. 2).
It need not concern us here whether Deni(g)a or wini(g) (e)a is phonetically a
di- or trisyllabic form. What matters in this context is the lack of gemination
of the nasal and the preservation of the palatal semivowel. There are two possibilities for reconstructing the gen. pl. preforms of the two attested nouns:
first, they can have *dan-j-o and *win-j-o as their underlying representations.
These base forms would lead to /denna/ and /winna/, showing gemination of
root-final n and subsequent loss of j after a heavy syllable-i.e., forms which are
nowhere attested.
The palatal semivowel thus has to be separated from the root in order to block
the doubling of the nasal, and the second possibility of reconstruction gives
*dan-ij-o, *win-ij-o. Both these preforms are supported by comparative evidence
(Kieckers, 115). However, both nouns violate Lehmann's claim that the 'Converse of Sievers' Law' applied in Germanic, whereby the suffix should have
4For a recent criticism of Lehmann's views, see Will (216-17).
6Bosworth (1898:1233)lists the following form for the gen. pl. of *dani-: wine Deniga.

Toller (1921:148) supplements: Denia leode, maegen Deniga.
6 For the gen. p1. of *wini-, Bosworth (1233)lists winiga (wunga, MS) hleo, winia bealdor,
winigea ledsum.

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

410

LANGUAGE, VOLUME 48, NUMBER 2 (1972)

changed from -ij-o to -j-o in late Proto-Germanic, making *dan-j-6 and *win-j-o
undergo j-gemination and loss of the palatal suffix-which did not happen, as is
apparent from the attested forms. The gen. pi. *dan-ij-o, *win-ij-o have to be
maintained until after the West Germanic doubling of consonants, and-as will
be recalled from the discussion of the nom.acc. pi. *rzk-ij-u-until after the syncope of unstressed high vowels in Old English, i.e. well into the period of the
individual dialects.
There is a basic difference between suffixal j and the declensional suffix found
in the gen. pi. of i-nouns. The former has to be listed in the lexicon as j, which is
specified by 'Sievers' Law' as /j/ or /ij/; but the gen. pi. must be entered as ij,
because it cannot be predicted by 'Sievers' Law' and is not altered by the 'Converse' (cf. Dahl 1938:166).
It has become clear that Sievers' Law refers to a morphophonemic rule of
Germanic, regulating the allomorphic distribution of suffixal j; but it is not
linked to 'Converse', for which there is no evidence at all. Since there are two
cases in Old English where morphological ij is not altered in accordance with the
phonetic rules postulated by Edgerton, it seems improbable that the Germanic
phenomena are on a par with the allophonic variations of the Indo-European
resonants.
Sievers was unable to give any rules for polysyllabic j-stems: 'fur die Stellung
/j/
[of
and /ij/ (Sievers writes i)] nach Ableitungssilben lasst sich eine bestimmte
Regel nicht geben' (1898, ?45, 8). Grammars have, however, formulated a rule
that in some dialects polysyllabic
j-stems are inflected like heavy
j-monosyllables.7
In Gothic, nouns like ragineis 'counselor' and siponeis 'disciple', or verb forms
like 3sg. pres.
ind. mikileid 'extols' and riqizei1b'becomes dark', are inflected like
monosyllabic heavy roots. Lehmann (1955:363-5) postulated junctures after
heavy monosyllables and polysyllables, which were supposed to have been lost
after light root syllables, to bring out the parallelism. This clearly is not an
explanation. The use of junctures mirrors the phonological theory of the time
when Lehmann wrote his article. Winter (530-2) tried to explain the fact in
terms of syllable structure of the polysyllabic base, pointing to a parallel in his
native Low German dialect of Haselau (20 miles northwest of Hamburg). We
have arrived at a similar solution from an interpretation of irregular polysyllabic
j-nouns in Old English, of which the Gothic material is only a special instance.
The solution in terms of syllable structure is based on internal evidence, which
supports an extension of Sievers' Law to polysyllables under statable conditions.
Consider the following polysyllabic ja-neuters in Old English: nom.acc. sg.
aerende,
serend,
**ud-jd-ja 'errand', *hamipr-ja 'shirt'. The former is attested as
7
and
I take OE a3rendeto be the reflex of the derivational form
*aeryndi
nerynd.
Cf. Nagy's statement (1970:35): 'There is no compelling internal evidence to justify
the positing of a special extension, as it were, of Sievers' Rule, wherein Germanic (or at
least Gothic) -CjV- becomes -CijY- after not only preceding heavy syllables but also preceding disyllables; THIS TRADITIONAL EXPLANATION MERELY ACCOUNTS FOR ATTESTED
8
[emphasis
...
'
added]. While I agree with Nagy on his latter pronouncement, I have
FORMS
to disagree with him on the question of internal evidence.
Bosworth (17) gives no examples for the spelling variant srynd, which is listed in the
lemma. Cowgill (personal communication) suggests that it is a late spelling 'dating from
the time when unaccented short vowels had all merged in Old English'.

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SUFFIXAL
j IN GERMANIC

411

which one expectsto get after applyingthe necessaryrules, and OE asrendto be
the result of an analogicalremodelingof polysyllabicj-stems after polysyllabic
i-stems, which lose their final -i's in syllable structuresof the form HEAVYHEAVY-ENDING. The -e in OE serendegoes back to -i because of the general
loweringof unstressedhigh vowels in classical Old English (Pilch 1970:74-5).
Underlying *hami-j-a is attested as hemepe(Toller, 531), showing a voiced
intervocalic[d] as a positionalvariant of basic A.Unstressed-e results from the
above-mentionedloweringof post-tonic-i in classicalOldEnglish.
Heavy monosyllabic*and-j-a'end' likewiseshows up as ende,going back to
endi in Early Old English.The nom.acc.sg. *and-j-a,specifiedby Sievers'Law
as *and-ij-a,loses its final -a and vocalizesthe semivowel,which contractswith
the precedingunstressed-i to long -i. Derivational *and- escapes the syncope
of post-tonicfinal high vowels, which appliesonly to short -i or -u, and finally
shortensits -Z.9Derivational *eryndi and *hemipi likewise must show a long
final -z beforethe syncopeof unstressedfinalhigh vowels, sinceshort -i wouldbe
lost in a polysyllabic structure HEAVY-HEAVY-Ior LIGHT-LIGHT-Z.Only HEAVYLIGHT-I preservesits finalshort -i (Sievers-Brunner,
?149).Final -z as a contrac-

tion of ij leads to reconstructions*arund-ij-aand *hamif-ij-a;i.e., ij occursin
polysyllablesafter a heavy middlesyllableand after two light syllables.
In polysyllables,a heavy middlesyllableequalstwo light syllablesin presuffixal
position. The weight of the syllableprecedingthe heavy middlesyllableis of no
importancefor the specificationof underlyingj. Thereis no differencebetweena
heavy syllable in a mono- or polysyllabic structure. We can summarizethe
conditionsin the followingrule:
J-A]/i/
-

/j/

/

{(Isij/ablel)
syllableJ]
-heavy 1n[-heavy 1 r
syllable LsyllableJ

-

elsewhere

I.e., underlyingj is rewrittenas /ij/ followinga heavy syllablewhetherstressed
or unstressedand followingtwo light syllables. In all other cases, suffixalj is
specifiedas /j/ (cf. Dahl, 74-81).
Formslike a?rende
and hemepeare exceptionalattestationsof the derivational
forms of underlying *arund-j-aand *hMmip-j.a.In general, the neuter polysyllabicj-stems of Old Englishhave been influencedby their non-suffixedpolysyllabiccorrespondents.OE westen'desert'goes back to a base form *wostin-j-a
in the nom.acc. sg. Final -a drops before the West Germanicdoublingof consonants. Prejunctural-j is subsequentlyvocalized along with the fronting of
stressed -o- to -a-, which is unroundedin West Saxon. Final vocalized-i is not
lost in syllable structures of the form HEAVY-LIGHT-I,according to the apocope

rules of Old English. The derivationalform of underlying*wostjn-fiatherefore
reads *westini,which loses its final vowel by analogy with the non-suffixed
polysyllabic a-neuters like OE heafod'head'. The nom.acc. pl. of underlying
is attested as westinuor westinnu.Applyingthe necessaryrules to
*w6stin-j-.u
9 Derivational

*and- is not to be taken as a form of Proto-Germanic

comparable to a

reconstruction like *piwj 'servant', but as a stage in the derivation of underlying *and-.ja.

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

412

LANGUAGB, VOLUME 48, NUMBER 2 (1972)

*w6stin-j-uresultsin a derivationalnom.acc.pi. *westinn,which is alteredon the
basis of the non-suffixednom.acc. pi. heafodu,preservingits final -u regularly.
The situationin Gothicis only a specialcase of the rulesgivenfor OldEnglish.
The following polysyllabic ja-masculines are attested: nom. sg. *ragin-j-az
(LIGHT-LIGHT-j) 'counselor',nom. sg. *sipon-j-az(HEAVY-j) 'disciple', which
must be specified according to the extended version of Sievers' Law as *ragin-ij-az
and *sipon-ij-az. These underlying forms lose their unstressed -a-; preconsonantal

-j- is vocalized and contracts with preceding-i- to long -z-. Long unstressed
vowels are not shortenedbefore a final consonantin Gothic. Voiced final -z is
subject to the unvoicingof final voiced spirants.Applyingthese rules to basic
*ragin-ij-az and *sipon-ij-az leads to their attested forms ragineis and siponeis.

Whetherthe Gothicagentivesuffix-areiscontainsa long or short -a- has been
a problem.'0The suffixis said to be borrowedfrom Lat. -drius, with long -a-.
Apart fromthis ocbviousreasonfor positing a long -a- in -areis,there is internal
evidencefor assumingthe -a- to be long. The long /-z-/ of -areis can arise only
after a heavy syllable or two light ones, accordingto our rules specifyingthe
derivation of basic j in polysyllables.The six nominal agents of Go. bokareis
'scribe', laisareis 'teacher', *liupareis 'singer',ll motareis 'toll-taker', sokareis

'scholar',and wullareis'cloth-fuller'are all of the polysyllabicstructureHEAVYar-ji.2 If the -a- in -areis is short, the agentive suffixshouldread -aris or -arjis
analogically.A long /-i-/ in -areisis possible only in a syllable structureof the
form ([syllable])[+heavy syllable]+ j; i.e. the -a- in -areis has to be long to
yield formslike the attested bokareisor laisareis.We thus take the basic form
of the Gothic agentive suffix -areis to be *-ar-j-az in the nom. sg.

Amongthe weak verbs of the first class, the only polysyllabicstems are again
of the structurenEAVY-j and LIGHT-LIGHT-j. Streitberg(1906, ?216) cites the
followinginfinitives:weitwodjan'bearwitness',arbaidjan'work',riqizjan'become
dark', mikiljan 'extol', managjan 'augment'. Both syllable structures lead
regularlyto forms like 2pl. pres. ind. weitwodeip,mikileid,or riqizeib(Jellinek,
?195).
The only counter-examplesmight come from polysyllablesof the structure
HEAVY-LIGHT-j, which should show formsin -jis, -jii for the 2-3sg. and -jii for
the 2pl. pres.ind. Thereare infinitiveslike audagjan'beatify',glitmunjan'shine',
kaupatjan

'slap one's face', lauhatjan

'flash', and swoqatjan

'sigh', which are of

the polysyllabicstructurethat is decisivefor the proposedextensionof Sievers'
Law. No verbs,however,show any attested formsfor the crucial2-3sg. and 2pl.
pres. ind. The three forms are attested with polysyllabicverbs only for the
10For a summary of arguments relating to Old High German, see Braune-Mitzka (1967,
?200, fn. 1). The two forms of the agentive suffix, *ar-j-az and *ar-j:az, are discussed by
Meid (1967:83).
11Nom. sg. *liupareis is not attested. Streitberg (1960:2.86) records the nom. p1.
liubarjos.
" Goth. daimonareis 'demoniac' is not to be counted as an agentive noun. Cf. Jellinek
(1926:188-9):'Es ist keine got. Ableitung mit Suffix -arja-, sondern eine leichte Umbildung
von [Gk.] daimonidriosoder [Lat.] daemoniarius'.

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SUFFIXAL j IN GERMANIC

413

structure
+heavy ]|

([syllable])

[r-heavy1 r-heavy

P

l Lsyllable L_syllableJJ
but not for the syllablestructure
[+heavyi r-heavy 1 +
L syllableJ L syllableJ
Ourrulesfor the extensionof Sievers'Law to polysyllablesare confirmedby the
Gothic materialfor the ei-forms;ji-forms in polysyllabicverbs of the structure
HEAVY-LIGHT-j are not attested.
Finally,we have to specifywhatis to be understoodby a light or heavy syllable.
For Gothic the ruleshave been laid down (Kieckers,223-4): syllablesendingin
a vowel, whetherlong or diphthongal,arecountedas light, as are syllablesending
in a single consonantprecededby a short vowel. The weighingof a syllable as
heavy or light is not affected by the controversyover whether Gothic had
diphthongsor not. If we take long vowelsto be sequencesof two identicalvocalic
nuclei, and diphthongsto be clustersof two non-identicalvocalic nuclei in their
deep-phonologicalrepresentation,the traditionalspecificationcan be reducedto
the following formula (the basic vocalic nucleus has been symbolizedby V):
[-short

[vowel]

]1

l

[diphthong]

-*

r+shortr [i

V1V2-* V {<
^}= syllable
V

L vowelj |_consonantJ

V C

Syllablesendingin two or more consonantsare counted as heavy, regardlessof
the quantity of the precedingvowel. Syllablesendingin a single consonantare
weighedas heavy if precededby a long vowel or a diphthong.These statements
can be reducedto the followingformula(the asteriskstandsforpossibleadditional
consonants):
(Tashort]

1 vowel

0 ,-

2*

[consonantj

-

C

[[diphthong]J
The following examples illustrate the distinction: (1) after a light syllable,
nasjip 'rescues', stojip 'judges',taujip 'makes',siujip 'sows', and the adjectives
fullatojis 'perfect', ubiltojis 'evil-doing'; (2) after a heavy syllable, sandei,b
'sends',taikneip'shows',faurhteij' 'you (pl.) are afraid',draibeis'you (sg.) derive',
hauseip 'hears', sokeip 'seeks',weneip 'hopes'.13
18 I have been unable to find an ei-form for the sequence -iuC-. The j-verbs riurjan

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

414

LANGUAGE, VOLUME 48, NUMBER 2 (1972)

The rule for Gothic that j-polysyllables are inflected like heavy j-monosyllables
has to be detailed by the observation that the Gothic j-polysyllables, which show
the long /-i-/ in forms like the 2-3sg. and 2pl. pres. ind., are all of a syllable
structure that regularly requires the j-suffix to be specified as /ij/, according to
the extended version of Sievers' Law arrived at by an analysis of Old English
material.
The evidence of Old English and Gothic allows, then, for an extension of
Sievers' Law to polysyllabic j-stems in Early Germanic. The allomorphic distribution of suffixal j has to be postulated for mono- and polysyllables alike. One
can account for the parallelism in terms of syllable structure. Following a heavy
syllable (stressed or unstressed) or two light syllables, suffixalj has to be specified
as /ij/. Following a light syllable, which will be stressed in case of monosyllabic
j-roots and unstressed in case of j-polysyllables preceded by a heavy stressed
syllable, the suffix shows up as /j/.
REFERENCES
BOSWORTH,JOSEPH. 1898. An Anglo-Saxon dictionary. London: Oxford University Press.

BRAUNE,WILHELM,and WALTHERMITZKA.1967. Althochdeutsche Grammatik. 12th
ed. Tiibingen: Niemeyer.
FRANSVAN.1970. Zur Entwicklung der germanischen Grundsprache. Kurzer
COETSEM,
GrundriB der germanischen Philologie bis 1500, vol. 1, ed. by L. E. Schmitt, 1-93.
Berlin: de Gruyter.
DAHL,IVAR.1938. Substantival inflexion in Early Old English. (Lund studies in English,
7.) Lund: Gleerup.
FRANKLIN.
1943. The Indo-European semivowels. Lg. 19.83-124.
EDGERTON,
MAX H. 1926. Geschichte der gotischen Sprache. Berlin: de Gruyter.
JELLINEK,
ERNST.1928. Handbuch der vergleichenden gotischen Grammatik. Miunchen:
KIECKERS,
Hueber.

P. 1953. The conservatismof Germanicphonology. Journal of
WINFRED
LEHMANN,
Englishand GermanicPhilology52.140-52.
-.
1955.The Proto-Indo-European
resonantsin Germanic.Lg. 31.355-66.
W. 1956.The 'Converseof Sievers'Law'and the Germanicfirst-class
JAMES
MARCHAND,
weak verbs. Lg. 32.285-7.
1967. Gernanische Sprachwissenschaft, 3. Berlin: de Gruyter.
MEID, WOLFGANG.
1970. Greek dialects and the transformation of an Indo-European
NAGY, GREGORY.
process. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
PILCH,HERBERT.1970. Altenglische Grammatik. Miinchen: Hueber.
SIEVERS,EDUARD.1878. Zur Accent- und Lautlehre der germanischen Sprachen. Beitrage
zur Geschichte der Deutschen Sprache und Literatur 5.63-163.
--.
1898. Angelsachsische Grammatik. 3rd ed. Halle: Niemeyer.
SIEVERS,EDUARD,and KARLBRUNNER.1965. Altenglische Grammatik. 3rd ed. Tiibingen:
Niemeyer.
WILHELM.
1906. Gotisches Elementarbuch. Heidelberg: Winter.
STREITBERG,
-.
1960. Die gotische Bibel. 4th ed. Heidelberg: Winter.
'ruin' and puiJpjan'bless' have no recorded forms for the 2-3sg. and 2pl. pres. ind., which
would show the complex iu to belong to the binuclear set of Gothic vowels. The deepphonological vowel system of Gothic is based on the primary distinction into a mono- and
binuclear set of vowels, which has traditonally been explained as an opposition of length.
Whether the binuclear set consists only of monophthongs is still a problem.

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

SUFFIXALj IN GERMANIC

415

OSWALD.
1970. Einfuiihrungin die vergleichendeSprachwissenschaft.
SZEMERINYI,
Darmstadt:WissenschaftlicheBuchgesellschaft.
1921. An Anglo-Saxon dictionary (Supplement). London:
TOLLER,T. NORTHCOTE.

OxfordUniversityPress.
WILL, WERNERH. 1970. The resonant system in Proto-Germanic. Journal of English

and GermanicPhilology69.211-22.
WINTER, WERNER. 1955. Juncture in Proto-Germanic: some deliberations. Lg. 31.530-2.

[Received11 June 1971]

This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Fri, 27 Mar 2015 13:33:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

