

=== page 01 ===

LECOM
Lexm
PHOMETOLOM
DEVELOPMENT
AND
DIVERSITY
Linguistic Variation
across Time and Space
SEMANTICA
R
PRIMETICA
PHONE1105
DESTOWNEY ACT
LEXICON
DARWOLDE
PHOMETOLOT
Lexi
LEFICOM
LEXICON
HEMPA
LEXICON
PADNE POLOWY
STRIAS
SOMANTICE
VALETICE
LIACER
PHAETOLO
www
STRTANT
PROMO DE
MARTICE
NIRLATICE
ANTIC
143G
AMEN
LEXICON
PHOMETOLOWY
L
N
STATES
PHOWOLD
vi
SENTA
SALATICE
POETICS
PONTICE
100
www.
LCOM
Ma
Lubbe
PETAL
LEO
DENTAR
PRO80.09+
。
and
rwby
PROIETICH
*
Σ plats
1
LEX.Com
MERY
LEXICO
PHONEFOR
PROMETOLOGY
LEE.COM
-
Mit
BYN FAR
Edited by Edmondson, Feagin, and Mühlhäusler
SUALSTICE
DIMETICE
MAATICS
L

=== page 02 ===

[blank]

=== page 03 ===

Development and Diversity
Language Variation across Time and Space
A Festschrift for Charles-James N. Bailey

=== page 04 ===

Summer Institute of Linguistics and
The University of Texas at Arlington
Publications in Linguistics
Virgil Poulter
University of Texas
at Arlington
Alan C. Wares
Publication 93
Editors
Assistant Editors
William R. Merrifield
Summer Institute of
Linguistics
Iris M. Wares
Consulting Editors
Doris A. Bartholomew
Pamela M. Bendor-Samuel
Desmond C. Derbyshire
Robert A. Dooley
Jerold A. Edmondson
Austin Hale
Robert E. Longacre
Eugene E. Loos
Kenneth L. Pike
Viola G. Waterhouse

=== page 05 ===

Development and Diversity
Language Variation across Time and Space
A Festschrift for Charles-James N. Bailey
Edited by
Jerold A. Edmondson, Crawford Feagin,
and
Peter Mühlhäusler
A Publication of
The Summer Institute of Linguistics
and
The University of Texas at Arlington
1990

=== page 06 ===

©1990 by the Summer Institute of Linguistics, Inc.
Library of Congress Catalog No: 90-070249
ISBN: 0-88312-800-4
ISSN: 1040-0850
All Rights Reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means-electronic,
mechanical, photocopy, recording, or otherwise-without the express
permission of the Summer Institute of Linguistics, with the exception of
brief excerpts in journal articles or reviews.
Cover design by Barb Alvarez
Copies of this and other publications of the Summer Institute of
Linguistics may be obtained from
International Academic Bookstore
Summer Institute of Linguistics
7500 W. Camp Wisdom Rd.
Dallas, TX 75236

=== page 07 ===

Charles-James N. Bailey

=== page 08 ===

[blank]

=== page 09 ===

Contents
Acknowledgments
Charles-James N. Bailey: A Personal View
C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
Peter Mühlhäusler
Bibliography of Charles-James N. Bailey
.
.:.
xi
•
xiii
xxi
xli
Theoretical Orientation
3
The Dialect Myth
.
Roy Harris
Variation in Language and Linguistic Descriptions
21
Dan Maxwell
Phonetology/Historical
Phonetic Constraints on Sociolinguistic Variation
35
Malcah Yaeger-Dror
Phonosymbolism in Diachrony: The Case of /r/> /R/ in Hispano-
Romance
71
.
Yakov Malkiel
A Glottalic Interpretation of the Germanic EXPRESSIVE GEMINATION
85
Paul J. Hopper
German Vowel Length and Syllable Contact
95
Thomas A. Perry
vii

=== page 10 ===

viii
A Few Remarks about the Great Vowel Shift
115
Karl Maroldt
The Dynamics of a Sound Change in Southern States English:
From R-less to R-ful in Three Generations
129
Crawford Feagin
Language Contact in Ireland: The Irish Phonological Substratum in Irish
English
147
.
.
Dónall Ó Baoill
Variability and Anglicization in the Distinction Between p/f in Young
Children's Tok Pisin
Suzanne Romaine
Kam Tone Splits and the Variation of Breathiness
Jerold A. Edmondson
Morphosyntax/Historical
Polylectal Grammars, Randomly Distributed Lects, and Introspective
Judgments: A Replication of Legum's while-clause Studies
173
187
205
Guy Carden
in, into, and enter
James D. McCawley
Information Flow and Dative Shift in English Discourse
Sandra A. Thompson
Empty NPs in English and Government in Unexpected Places
227
239
255
Arnold M. Zwicky
Re-marking the English Reciprocal: Commutation versus Mutuality
265
.
Dwight Bolinger
Syntactic Strategies for Questions
273
Alice Davison
Ute Reflexives, Complementation, and Clause Integration
Talmy Givón
287
A Survey of the Suffix /-s/ Analyses in Black English
John Baugh
297
The Development of #s Plural in Sierra Leone Krio
309
.
Frederick C. Jones

=== page 11 ===

Charles-James N. Bailey: A Personal View
ix
Divergence and Similarity in English-Australian English in Contrast
with Indian English
323
Gerhard Leitner
Towards an Implicational Analysis of Pronoun Development
Peter Mühlhäusler
351
.
.
Aspects of Bavarian Syntax or 'Every Language Has At Least Two
Parents'
.
Eva and Willi Mayerthaler
Laterality Effects in Agrammatism
•
Fred C. C. Peng
371
431
Lexicon/Historical
Variation in Indo-European 'bottom'
447
Eric Hamp
Divine Names, Myths, and Etymologies in the Germanic World
Edgar C. Polomé
451
Lexical Variation and Genetic Affiliation: The Case of Haruai
Bernard Comrie
461
.
.
.
Language acquisition/Language learning/Language contact
Child Language and the Developmental Framework
Barbara Horvath
Phonological Awareness, Misidentification, and Multiple Identities
Beatrice de Gelder
Variation and Markedness in the Phonology of a Child Acquiring
Spanish
James L. Fidelholtz and Rosa Graciela Montes
469
.
483
.
507
Markedness Reversals in the Acquisition of Morphology
529
Hannah Pishwa
Connatural and Abnatural Change in an Unnatural System:
The Case of Case Marking in German .
547
Carol W. Pfaff
Mutilingualism, Diglossia, and Research Methods:
Focus on the Alps and Ireland
P. Sture Ureland
.
587

=== page 12 ===

☑
Varia
The Interpretation of Variation in Pitcairn-Norfolk
621
Donald C. Laycock †
Functions of Repetition: Variation in Narrative and Conversation
Discourse
629
Susan C. Shepherd
From Natural Signal to Human Communication: A Typology of Sign
Processes
639
.
Roland Posner
Some Problems of Teaching English in Japan
647
Gerhard Nickel
C.-J. Glossary
TUB Handout
Letter to the editor
Indexes
Author Index
Language Index
Subject Index
.
C.-J.-isms and C.-J.-asms
663
.667
668
. 669
677
681

=== page 13 ===

Acknowledgments
We would like to take this opportunity to thank the many people who
helped in the preparation of this book, especially the staff of the SIL
Academic Publications Department. With such a wide range of topics,
languages, and styles, the editorial problems have been substantial, and we
wish to express our special appreciation to Wayne Leman who bore the
brunt of the editing task and to Kay Harper who prepared photoready
copy and coordinated production of the entire book. We are also grateful
to Hazel Shorey for the many fine maps, illustrations, and other artwork,
to Iris Wares for her diligent proofreading, to Delores Nelson for key-
boarding a large share of the tables, charts, and indexes, to Michael
Downey for facilitating the production of the indexes, and to William.
Merrifield, chief editor of SIL Academic Publications.
In addition, we would like to thank Shi Peng Edmondson for key-
boarding many of the tables and charts and Cynthia Williams for key-
boarding some of the articles.
Christine Kamprath's suggestions were invaluable in regard to the two
articles touching on Raeto-Romansh. Helga Brummenbaum helped in too
many ways to mention. We are also grateful to Eric Hamp who supplied
advice at crucial points.
Jerold A. Edmondson
Crawford Feagin
Peter Mühlhäusler

=== page 14 ===

[blank]

=== page 15 ===

Charles-James Nice Bailey
A Personal View
Despite outward appearances, Charles-James N. Bailey is, in fact, a very
private individual. For instance, anybody who has spent even five minutes
with him knows of his strong affection for-and loyalty to the American
South and the South Pacific.¹ On the other hand, there are a great many
things very important to him that only his closest friends know. The
character of his life, like the character of his work, shows this paradoxical
mixture of surface simplicity and deep complexity.
While C.-J. was born² and reared in a border state-Kentucky-in the
least 'typically Southern' part of the state, the mountains of Eastern
Kentucky, his roots and relatives are also found in Virginia, Tennessee,
Mississippi, Alabama, and South Carolina. In fact, Middlesboro, his home
town, is in one of the 'oldest' parts of Kentucky, right at the mouth of the
Cumberland Gap, where the settlement of Kentucky began. From nearby
mountaintops you can see four states-Kentucky, Virginia, Tennessee, and
West Virginia. His father's family were Virginians; his mother was from
nearby Rogersville, Tennessee, one of the oldest towns in that state. His
cousins include the writers Alexander Percy (Lanterns on the Levee) and
Walker Percy (The Moviegoer, Love in the Ruins); another cousin was
president of Washington and Lee University. Like most Southerners, C.-J.
1C.-J., with his passion for accuracy in the least detail, would argue that Hawaii,
being above the Equator, is not part of the South Pacific.
2 His birth date is May 2, 1926.
XIII

=== page 16 ===

xiv
is proud of his Southern heritage and of his family background. In light of
his devotion to the region, it will come as no surprise that he is a genuine
Kentucky Colonel, on the staff of the governor of Kentucky, surely the
only one in Berlin!
Middlesboro was an ideal place to become interested in language varia-
tion. It was a planned industrial town built about a hundred years ago with
money from an English industrialist. A mining town, it had a diverse
populace ranging from miners straight from the hills with their mountain
twangs and hard 's to the mine owners and professional people, like
C.-J.'s family, with their more 'Southern' r-less speech. Moreover, there
were blacks in the town, some of whom worked as domestics, so that it
was natural for middle- and upper-class children to grow up hearing Black
English on a daily basis. C.-J. went to the public schools in Middlesboro,
becoming thoroughly exposed to the many varieties of English in the white
community. While in high school he won the state championship in math-
ematics, competing with students from Louisville and from private schools
across Kentucky.³
On equal footing with his devotion to the American South is his love for
the South Pacific, especially his ‘jungalow' on the 'Big Island' of Hawaii,
near Hilo. (Just ask him where he's from!!) Not incidentally, the Big Island
is the southernmost point of the U.S. C.-J. first encountered Hawaii when
he joined the Navy right out of high school and was stationed in Honolulu
in the waning years of World War II in the Air Transport Service Com-
mand. Later, he returned to Micronesia for a year where he did fieldwork
in the Marshall Islands. (His M.A. thesis at the University of Chicago was
on Marshallese.) His next long residence in Hawaii was as a teacher at the
Kamehameha School in Honolulu. When he finished graduate school for
the last time (in linguistics at the University of Chicago), he was delighted
to land a job at the University of Hawaii. During his three years there he
started putting down some roots, buying a condominium in Honolulu, and
dreaming of his own place there. He was then lured to Georgetown
University, where a new sociolinguistics program was starting up. While
helping to launch the program at Georgetown, he indulged his taste for
the symphony, the opera, and other pleasant aspects of Washington cul-
tural life. After that, he returned to Hawaii for a year of writing in his tree
house on three acres of land he had bought. This tree house was the
predecessor of the current jungalow. In the fall of 1974 C.-J. reluctantly
abandoned his paradise and accepted the position he has held for the
3So much for those of us who think he opposes quantitative linguistics because he
can't count!

=== page 17 ===

Charles-James N. Bailey: A Personal View
XV
remainder of his professional career, Professor of English and General
Linguistics at the Technical University of Berlin (TUB).
During the long dreary winters in Berlin, he amused himself with dreams
of building his own place in Hawaii. While others had photo albums of
their children, C.-J. had one of his jungalow, Moani Lehua Gardens. (The
name means 'the fragrant breeze of the lehua tree-many lehua trees
grow on his property.) Yearly Christmas cards showed the steady progress
in the growth of the house and of the vegetation in his atrium. (In keeping
with his classical background, his house resembles a Roman one.) Retire-
ment for C.-J. means a permanent return to this island paradise. He'll
never be cold again!
For someone who is happiest in southern climes, he has spent a surpris-
ing amount of time in the northern latitudes of both hemispheres. After
his service in the Navy he went to the heart of 'Yankeeland'-Harvard.
Ever a fast starter, he won the Detur Book Prize for outstanding freshmen
and also the Latin Prize. Majoring in classics and comparative philology,
he was Phi Beta Kappa and salutatorian of his class, 4 an auspicious
beginning to a distinguished career as a scholar. But Harvard was not far
enough north. During the summers he worked as a counselor at a camp in
Maine, even more Yankee than Harvard!
After his stint of teaching Latin and French at Kamehameha, as well as
French at the Lake Forest School outside of Chicago, which followed
another career (see below), C.-J. returned to the study of language,
quickly earning his M.A. (1967) and Ph.D. (1969) degrees in linguistics at
Chicago. (His dissertation was on the inflectional morphology of Indo-
European nouns.) During those years he started working and writing on
what would be the main topics he would continue exploring over the
years-the interconnections among historical linguistics, dialectology (and
later sociolinguistics and creolistics), and theoretical linguistics; phonetics
and phonology; Southern States English, Indo-European, and Marshallese;
and the varying concepts of STANDARD in languages. (We tremble at the
thought of his reactions to our using the very word standard-even with a
little s.)
Always the innovator, C.-J. was instrumental in setting up the publica-
tion format of the Chicago Linguistic Society (CLS) proceedings. The CLS
volumes were an entirely new concept, widely imitated since, with students
as editors, and rapid and inexpensive publication. Equally successful was
4He gave the address in Latin; his brother still remembers it as being exciting, even
for nonlinguists.
"He has also taught Classical and New Testament Greek on the graduate level.

=== page 18 ===

xvi
his conception of NWAVE (New Ways of Analyzing Variation in English and
other languages) meetings, begun as an appendage to a SECOL/SAADS
meeting he chaired at Georgetown. What he had in mind was that NWAVE,
like CLS, would call for abstracts fairly close to the meeting time so that the
newest work could be discussed. It was also to be a low-budget meeting―
for participants as well as the host university-so that students could
attend and participate. Originally, the publication of papers was to have
been like those of CLS-unedited, camera-ready copy prepared by the
authors, which would be published before the following year's meeting.
(This was the case when he was involved.) The idea of NWAVE was
adopted in Britain and turned into a biennial meeting, the Sociolinguistics
Seminar. In addition to starting a series of meetings, working papers have
also been a specialty of C.-J.'s; those at Hawaii and at TUB were his
offspring. Undoubtedly, he picked up the idea for the establishment of
these working papers from his year as a visiting scholar at MIT where the
genre was well-known in the early 1960s.
One of the joys of scholarship for C.-J. has been the opportunity to
travel-probably better than if he had stayed in the Navy! Soon after
Harvard, he spent time in Italy, Switzerland, and England as a student at
the Universities of Florence, Basel, and Cambridge. Among his more
recent exotic trips were ones to Korea, India, Brazil, China, Tibet, and
Vanuatu giving talks along the way in Seoul, New Delhi, and Beijing. As
we were going to press with this volume, he was looking forward to a trip
to Canada, New Zealand, and Australia, with a summer as Visiting Profes-
sor and Program Assessor in Brunei. Previous positions as visiting profes-
sor or scholar in Johannesburg, The Hague (Wassenaar), and Jerusalem
gave him longer stays in those interesting places.
Music has been another important theme in his life. He tells of getting
to play the organ at Wanamakers in Philadelphia when he was visiting
there once while a college student. Among the attractions of both
Washington and Berlin were the resident symphonies and operas. Letters
from Hawaii mention “maxing out on Mozart” on the lanai under a full
moon with his CD full blast. A little-known opera-C.-J. auf Naxos—was
composed by a University of Chicago roommate, James Cottingham. One
screechy aria is entitled, Dork me not in mournful numbers!
More important than all the rest-but certainly the most personal-has
been his serious interest in religion. C.-J. grew up Southern Presbyterian
(Presbyterian Church, U.S.). A long intellectual and spiritual journey
6Southeast Conference on Linguistics/South Atlantic Regional Meeting of the
American Dialect Society.

=== page 19 ===

Charles-James N. Bailey: A Personal View
xvii
brought him to Orthodoxy. Many of his colleagues may not be aware that
he has an M.Div. degree in theology from Harvard (which included two
years at St. Catherine's College, Cambridge), and a D.Min. degree from
Vanderbilt. (His dissertation was on liturgy.)7 Before going to Cambridge
he studied with Karl Barth in Basel. Perhaps Barth is connected with
C.-J.'s admiration for Mozart; Barth was a Mozart fan, too.
While the attraction of Orthodoxy was undoubtedly intellectual and
spiritual "It's the TRUE Church!!"-his two loves, Greek and music, are
certainly united in the Eastern Church, the one in the Greek Orthodox
Church, the other in the Russian, Ukrainian, and other Slavic Orthodox
churches with their stunning choirs. (He once commented admiringly on a
Ukrainian choir in Chicago with their "lungs of leather.")
In this context, then, it is not surprising to learn that his fieldwork in
Micronesia, when he was in his twenties, included working on a translation
of the Bible into Marshallese.
It cannot be said that C.-J. is wishy-washy. He is not prone to alter his
position easily. This strength of mind, of course, is an advantage if he
decides he likes you! (It has been said that C.-J. believes in gradience for
linguistics but binariness for people.) While C.-J. may not be stingy with
his advice, our experience has been that he almost always turns out to be
right, whether about linguistics, people, or practical aspects of life. He has
taught us all that pushing a case to its extreme ("You don't believe THAT
dreck, do you?”) has its advantages. You are then forced to reexamine
your own position carefully, especially if you're defending an old, accepted
idea.
His fieldwork strategies drive his more methodical friends to frenzy.
Peter Mühlhäusler, for example, relates that "C.-J. has always assured me
that linguistics and personal matters should be kept strictly separate.
However, there is at least one area where the two are not properly kept
apart and that is C.-J.'s habit not only to talk to people but also to subject
them to a phonetological analysis at the same time. I have had C.-J. for
dinner parties at our place in Berlin and found him taking notes and
making phonetic transcriptions whilst eating his dinner and conversing with
the people around him. C.-J. not only describes what he finds on such
occasions but also predicts what variants his subject will come up with
next. Sometimes this can be quite a conversation stopper.'
"
All of his friends (and most of his enemies) have C.-J. stories, often
about his more provocative qualities. He tends to let the chips fall where
7 Charles-James N. Bailey. 1963. Two contemporary theologies of worship: Masure
and Barth: a study in comparative dogmatics. Vanderbilt University dissertation.

=== page 20 ===

xviii
they may; a diplomat he is not! Nonetheless, he can be utterly delightful,
often making corny jokes and puns in English and German about nearly
everything and everybody (e.g., "How's the ole crankcase?"). Life around
C.-J. is never dull!
C-J.'s influence on language has exceeded the limits of linguistics proper;
he has an evangelistic zeal for language. In addition to being the only
person alive who observes and enforces all the sound laws of English, he
has contributed a very special vocabulary to both English and German.
(See the Glossary for a small sample.) Friends are occasionally startled to
hear C.-J.-isms on national television or see them in print. Apparently
some of his inventions are gradually working their way through the net-
work of former campers, students, and colleagues who are now in strategic
positions at the New York Times, as well as on faculties from Johannes-
burg to Klagenfurt, and Oxford to Vancouver and Sydney, and back again.
Ever the gentleman, he may feud with—and infuriate-his peers, but he
is kindness and politeness itself to the polloi. His Southern hospitality is
legendary. Whether at his Berlin apartment or his tropical paradise in
Hawaii, he has wined, dined, and put up half the world's linguists, some-
times for months. So his seemingly solitary life has been sociable in the
extreme, not counting his plant and quadruped pets. His Berlin office and
apartment have been downright 'jungle-oid' on occasion. C.-J. even
managed to bring a gardenia to bloom indoors in Berlin! (Thorough, as
always, he belongs to the American Horticultural Society and the Palm
Society.) Letters to friends often request information about obtaining
seeds for difficult-to-find plants.
Ah, yes, the dawg! His flop-eared green-eyed black dog, Li/Lee/Ali, who
has been patiently waiting for him in Hawaii, is reportedly "of creole
extraction, but with the manners of quality." However, he has a penchant
for changing his name. Originally, baptized Ali'i ('Royalty' in Hawaiian)
and thus registered, C.-J. got lazy and shortened it to Li (also spelled Lee,
for Robert E.). But Li had been watching TV, listening to the news, and
reading the New York Times, and decided to change his name to Ali X.
Possibly under the influence of Freddie Jones, Li gave up the Babdis*
religion, changed his name, and insisted that he was from Sierra Leone.
C.-J. reports with glee that his dog "pidginizes Hawaiian Pidgin with Brack
Engrish." He will be the happiest of all to have C.-J. in Hawaii, per-
manently to scratch his ears and play him Mozart!
In a more serious vein, we want to emphasize that, despite his hilarious,
sometimes Rabelaisian, even shaggy-dog, wit, Charles-James N. Bailey is,
above all, a man of integrity and conviction whose life has been devoted
to the search for-and the defense of-Truth, whether in his personal life

=== page 21 ===

Charles-James N. Bailey: A Personal View
xix
or in his professional life. This seriousness is reflected in his sometimes.
annoying insistence on accuracy in the smallest detail. "Who cares?" is
definitely not C.-J.'s view of things. He cares, deeply. And he has been
willing to inconvenience himself considerably to follow his vision of the
Truth, whether in theology or in linguistics.
All of us who have worked on this volume feel that C.-J. has made an
enormous contribution to our lives, not only intellectually, but personally.
This volume is a small token of our appreciation, admiration, and affection
for "the iconoclast Bailey," as he was once introduced at a meeting.
Rather than 'Gomorrah-lizing' C.-J., we hope that it will send him into
many 'rhapsodasms'-'in mirthful numbers!'
CF & JAE⁹
84%
……
some would wish to defend the truth and show up the false as false."
Thanks to Lloyd Anderson, Jake and Barbara Bailey, Helga Brummenbaum, Bill
Burks, Eric Hamp, Bill Hanson, Frederick Jones, Karl Maroldt, Tom Perry, and Hedy
St-Denis, for suggestions and corrections. Peter Mühlhäusler also got his in.

=== page 22 ===

[blank]

=== page 23 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
When surveying the scholarly production of Charles-James Bailey over
the last two decades one is struck by three things:
(1) The enormous number of his publications,
(2) The wide scope of the topics addressed in them and, most
importantly,
(3) The consistency of his writing over time, stretching from his
early programmatic statement in the Hawaii Working Papers in
Linguistics of January 31, 1971, entitled "Trying to Talk in the
New Paradigm", up to the present.
Later work has added to, refined, and illustrated the revolutionary
program outlined in "Trying to talk in the new paradigm". Bailey's sub-
sequent publications have seldom deviated from or opposed his earlier
ideas. To use Baileyan phraseology, his early work is the basis from which
his later work is derived and by which it is implied.
An understanding of his later work thus, ideally, presupposes a
knowledge of his earlier work, in particular, his landmark 1973 book,
Variation and Linguistic Theory, where his early thoughts are most explicitly
illustrated. I consider myself lucky to have followed Bailey's writings from
the beginning (I first came into contact with them in 1972), to have been
teaching with him during the especially productive period of 1976-79, and
to have been on his mailing list ever since.
Bailey's bibliography almost speaks for itself. Almost, because what is
not in evidence are his contributions to theology and other fields of
xxi

=== page 24 ===

xxii
knowledge and his frequent letters to newspapers and magazines, many of
them dealing with linguistic matters. Equally prolific are his handouts
prepared for his students at the Technical University of Berlin. (See p. 667
for an example.)
In regard to their scope, Bailey's linguistic writings range widely, embrac-
ing phonetology, dialectology, historical linguistics, syntactic theory,
markedness theory, creolistics, philosophy of language, methodology, and,
more recently, applied linguistics, particularly language planning and teach-
ing English to speakers of other languages. Having thus stepped outside
the straight and narrow confines of grammatical theory, Bailey, like some
of his similarly-minded colleagues, has been called a sociolinguist, a label
which he himself would reject on the grounds that he has consistently
insisted on the separateness of linguistic and social facts and on the
precedence which linguistic or structural facts should take over social
considerations in variation research. More importantly, Bailey would feel
uneasy about being put into a category which is known for attention to
methodology rather than theory, for his own work quite undisputedly
primarily addresses theoretical questions.
A much more appropriate characterization of Bailey's linguistics is that
it is decompartmentalizing, i.e., that it breaks down the barriers the prac-
titioners of the field have erected between subbranches such as historical
linguistics, dialectology, stylistics, or sociolinguistics. Bailey's reasons for
abolishing such self-imposed compartments derives from two considera-
tions:
(1) His desire for explanations and predictions
(2) His introduction of temporality into linguistic thinking
The introduction of temporality is necessitated by the very nature of
language as a dynamic phenomenon. Variability and change are not ac-
cidental, peripheral, or disruptive properties of human language but the
very reason for its usefulness as a tool of human communication.
Variability means that a language is capable of satisfying the numerous
communicative needs of its speakers, indexical, stylistic, and informative,
while change allows human speakers to adapt to new situations. Linguistic
creativity consists of more than the rule-governed creativity which lies at
the core of most contemporary linguistic theories.
The changing, variable nature of real language structures is what Bailey
wants to account for and, more importantly, explain. Past researchers have
been aware of the considerable variability of human language but have felt
it necessary to design models that force it into simple invariant systems.

=== page 25 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
xxiii
This is done, for instance, by removing the main factors that introduce
variability, namely, change over time and individual behavior. These two
factors have traditionally been either neglected, or pushed to the
periphery or even completely out of the area considered by linguistics,
labels such as PAROLE or PERFORMANCE being regarded as justification for
the waste basket containing unexplainable or unexplained linguistic
phenomena. Bailey challenges such practice on several grounds, noting:
(1) That variation and systematicity do not have to go together; that
they are independent parameters. Instead, he regards the
linguist's job as reconciling static universals with the changing
variety of real language structure.
(2) That the static systems brought into being by static theory have
no counterpart in the real world and are thus not empirically
testable claims about human language.
(3) That criteria for distinguishing between competence and perfor-
mance, synchronic and diachronic, and other dichotomies are
non-empirical. At best, such dichotomies are initial heuristic
devices. It certainly makes no sense to regard them as essential
characteristics of human language to be explained by linguistic
theory.
Of the two forces shaping variable systems, time and individual changes,
Bailey is concerned mainly with the former. Variable patterns are regarded
as having been created largely by temporal differences. As a number of
papers in this volume address this question, I will limit myself to a basic
discussion of this principle. I shall come back to individual deviations
below.
Speaker
1234567
-but not-8
or
9
Table 1. Observed feature distribution
+ A +B
+C
-D
+E
- A +B
-C
- D
+E
++
+F Features
+F
-A
+B
-C
-D
-E
-F
-A
- B
-C
-D
- E
-F
+ A
+B
+C
+D
+E
+F
+ A +B
-C
-D
+E
+F
- A +B
-C
- D
+E
- F
+A -B -C
-D
- E
+F
-A -B
+C
+D
-E
+F

=== page 26 ===

xxiv
Let us assume that we have identified six linguistic features or grammati-
cal categories which are used variably by members of a 'speech
community'. Pluses represent the presence of a certain feature and
minuses its absence. There are numerous mathematically possible combina-
tions of pluses and minuses, but in actual fact observable combinations
tend to be a very small subset, as illustrated in Table 1.
The seven permitted combinations can then be arranged in such a way
that each speaker differs from the next one by just one feature, to yield
the arrangement shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Rearranged data
Speaker
5
+A
+B
+C
+D
+E
+F
Features
1
+A
+B
+C
-D
+ E
+F
6
+A
+B
-C
-D
+E
+F
etc.
In its most abstract form, the grid of features will look as shown in Table
3.
Table 3. The polylectal grid
B E F
A
C
D
Features
Speaker
+------
++111|
+++1
++++11
+++++
++++++1
1
11
I
This rearrangement clearly demonstrates what implicated patterns can
occur. A plus implies only pluses to its left and a minus implies only
minuses to its right. The implications are unidirectional. The presence of a
plus makes no predictions of what is found to its right.
Bailey's interpretation of this state of affairs would be that:
(1) The original system was one with minus values only.
(2) Plus features were added at different stages in the history of the
language.
6
2
7
5162734

=== page 27 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
XXV
(3) The pluses were added in strict sequence and the additions were
cumulative or retentive rather than replacive.
(4) Later additions imply earlier ones, but not vice versa.
(5) The implicational patterns observed thus reflect relative time:
what implies is added later than what is implied.
At a very abstract level the form of the implicational or polylectal grid
can be seen in Table 4.
Table 4
C
D Features
A B
Speaker
12345
++++1
+++1|
| 1 | ++
+---
An important aspect of implicational scales is that they are constant over
a number of dimensions: spatial, social, and stylistic. Thus, in Table 4, the
presence of feature D will always imply that of features C, B, and A, but
not vice versa. Again, B implies A but not vice versa. What differs is the
interpretation of this arrangement by different groups of users or contexts
of use. The forms are thus multifunctional: feature D could be associated,
for instance, with spatial distribution shown in Table 5.
Table 5 represents the wave-like travel of an innovation over space. The
center of innovation is location number 1. Innovation B is added after
innovation A thus implies innovation B. Innovations travel from 1 to 5
with the result that the largest number of innovations is found right at the
center and that all innovations reach outlying locations in a strict order.
What goes for space also goes for other dimensions, for instance, speech
styles. Location 1 could be a most advanced relaxed style with 2, 3, and 4
being increasingly more formal styles. If we combine these stylistic and
spatial dimensions, we might find that the most advanced style at one
location corresponds to the middle-of-the-road style at the center of the
innovative location.
From this claim two important and inescapable conclusions emerge:
(a) It is clear why Bailey is not a sociolinguist who correlates linguis-
tic with extralinguistic facts, since the pattern of linguistic varia-
tion is not related to a single external parameter.

=== page 28 ===

xxvi
(b) It is also evident why Bailey is a decompartmentalizing linguist:
the same implicational patterns are found in time, geographical
space, social space, or stylistic space.
The idealized picture presented thus far relates to an instance with a
single center of innovation. How interaction among different centers of
innovation complicates the picture will be discussed below.
As they were conceived originally, implicational scales display rather
than explain data and, thus, taken by themselves, do not meet Bailey's
requirement that linguistics should explain existing variation and predict
future patterns. To regard the development of devices for the display of
data as the essence of Baileyan linguistics would miss the main important
theoretical concerns that appear throughout his writings on variation. For
the transition from display to explanation, additional apparatus is needed.
This is provided by Bailey in the form of markedness-theoretical conven-
tions, and consideration of linguistic naturalness.
The two concepts of markedness and naturalness are not always kept
separate in the writings of variationists, including Bailey. My own
preference is that markedness be confined to single linguistic systems and
that naturalness relate to universal grammar. In actual fact, the two will
coincide and overlap. Nevertheless, such a separation allows one to make
important distinctions such as that between targeted language acquisition
(ordinary child acquisition) and untargeted language acquisition (such as
pidgin/creole development).
Table 5. Innovation over space
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
C
C
1 D
2
3
4
50

=== page 29 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
xxvii
Markedness is manifested in linguistic development in the following
ways:
(1) In the case of complexity-acquiring systems (child language ac-
quisition, development of pidgins) more marked categories
develop after less marked ones such that the presence of more
marked categories implies that of corresponding less marked
ones.
(2) In the history of fully-developed adult languages the opposite
tendency is encountered. All things being equal, linguistic change
goes in the direction from more to less marked.
In both instances the prediction of future states is possible, an important
consideration for people who work in the applied areas of linguistics such
as second language acquisition and language planning.
Bailey's contribution to markedness theory is considerable and can only
be briefly touched upon here. An important insight is that markedness can
relate both to linguistic entities or structures and to the environment in
which they appear. Such a view allows linguists to explain seeming
anomalies by appealing to the concept of markedness reversal.
The most convenient illustration of the principle of markedness reversal
comes from an area unrelated to linguistics such as the social conventions
of dress. The unmarked state of affairs in Western societies is to be
dressed in public, the marked one to be undressed. However, markedness
reversal makes it possible for a dressed person to be marked or stand out
at a nudist beach and an undressed person to be unmarked in the same
environment. A parallel case in language would be the unmarked impera-
tive without pronoun, don't cry, and the marked presence of the pronoun
in tbe imperative environment, don't you cry, which conveys the special
meaning of sympathy. Note that here we are dealing with constructional
iconicity, the marked construction standing for marked meaning. (See
Bailey 1984.)
A summary of some of the refinements that Bailey has made to marked-
ness theory (particularly with regard to phonetology) is found in Bailey
1985a.
Of great interest are his ideas that an unmarking in one part of grammar
may lead to increased marking in another part and his observations on
differential susceptibility to marking in the input and environment of
phonological rules.
It should be noted that such refinements are not necessitated by require-
ments of internal consistency but rather by Bailey's concern for an ex-

=== page 30 ===

xxviii
planation of data concerning linguistic change. That such explanations can
be provided is illustrated by Bailey in numerous articles and, most explicit-
ly, in his course on phonetology at the Technical University of Berlin.
Language being a highly complex phenomenon, it should not surprise us
that complex explanatory mechanisms are needed to deal with it.
One of Bailey's constant worries has been the proclivity of practitioners
in fields such as historical and general linguistics to be perfectly happy with
inadequate outdated and unsuitable models. His own prediction regarding
any shift from the static to the dynamic paradigm was that, as time went
by, "the hostilities which the new paradigm will evoke will be somewhat
more muted than before, while the inertia against it will be proportionally
greater" (1971:122). Such inertia is deplored in many of Bailey's articles,
for instance, when he castigates historical linguists for neglecting their
proper job (1985b:58):
Let me state my thesis at the very outset. The job of the histori-
cal-comparative linguist is to deal with change and to compare its
results. 1 can almost hear each reader saying to himself or herself:
'Who doubts that? Why did he go out of his way to tell us that?”
The answer to this question lies in the fact that numerous writings
on historical and comparative linguistics make use of models ex-
plicitly designed for the idiolect and explicitly designed to exclude
change and comparison-phonemes, morphemes, states, isoglossic
dialects, etc.-models that can with much less grace or ease be
turned to historical-comparative ends than a diver's suit could be
turned into an evening gown.
Similar outspokenness is found in Bailey's criticism of dialectology
(1980:234):
Let me note that I do not believe that the present methods are
ever going to bring us any nearer the goal of defining or delimiting
dialects, or that these methods are ever going to make more
contributions to our understanding of the theory of language, than
they already have.
He has also extended his criticism of dialectology to more recent
sociolinguistic work (1980:236):
The fiction of bundled isoglosses was accepted as an ideal and
attempts were made to patch up its known inadequacies with
bandages like Karl Haag's concept of a core region. But this
approach, summed up in Paul Meyer's pronouncement that

=== page 31 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
xxix
dialects are fictitious abstractions, constructs which admittedly rest
on an arbitrary choice of differentiating features, fails to offer
scientific inquiry a useful conceptual tool-first of all because of its
arbitrariness and non-objectivity and finally because it has to be
explained away in order for any progress to take place. But its
essential error is to suppose that extra-linguistic factors could or
should coincide with the distribution of linguistic factors within or
across language systems (which themselves are gradient in struc-
ture and in delimitation). Current sociolinguistics often repeats the
same error.
One could add that much of the ongoing research on speech markers
has also taken over this error, namely, that linguistic signs are biplanar and
fixed, a view incapable, in principle, of dealing with dynamic phenomena
such as linguistic change and accommodation.
Whereas Bailey has refined and tested his model over the years and
while many of his followers, such as some of those represented in this
volume, have taken his ideas aboard, inertia still persists in compartmen-
talized mainstream linguistics. One might wish to argue that this situation
is to the detriment of the field, since a time-incorporating model lends
itself much more readily to applications than a static one. That his linguis-
tics is indeed a highly practical one with close affinity to applied linguistics
was realized by Bailey very early on. However, in recent years applied
questions, in particular, that of teaching English to speakers of other
languages, have become more prominent in his writings.
I can highlight only two areas where his new emphasis is particularly
noticeable, namely language planning and second language teaching.
Language planners have for a long time been hampered by a view that
regarded closed systems where everything was determined by everything
else as the ideal end point of the planning process. Thus, they were
concerned with accidental gaps, asymmetries, irregularities, and a notion of
simplicity directly related to economy and communicative efficiency. It has
turned out, however, that such a view of language is misguided for two
reasons: it ignores the importance of language as a means of adapting to
new circumstances, i.e., the importance of having at one's disposal rule-
changing creativity, and it ignores the difference between mechanical
simplicity and regularity on the one hand, and naturalness and marked-
ness, which characterizes human communication systems, on the other.
A particular contribution of Bailey's to language planning is in the area
of developing writing systems where his phonetology would seem to be a
much more suitable basis than shallow phonemic systems or unjustifiably

=== page 32 ===

XXX
deep transformational phonologies. In particular, his phonetology is ideal
for languages that exhibit widespread lectal variation.
In regard to second language teaching, Bailey's insights are of impor-
tance in a number of areas. First of all, implicational scaling provides a
tool for describing interlanguages such as occur with second language
learners. Secondly, criteria of markedness and naturalness rather than rule
simplicity or contrastive considerations serve to explain learners' errors.
Thirdly, by pointing out to foreign language learners the importance of
using unmarked and leveled forms, they can be helped to get closer to
near-native performance in their target language.
Over the years students who have gone through the phonetology classes
in Berlin have acquired a superior understanding of the functioning of the
language they are going to teach to German school children. As their
numbers grow, one might hope that the incidence of "footling English"
(see the Glossary) in Berlin schools would decrease.
It would seem appropriate to return to a number of issues which were
briefly mentioned earlier, namely:
(1) language contact
(2) individual deviation
(3) the independence of linguistic structure
These issues raise questions as to the limitations of the Baileyan ap-
proach to language, or better, questions the limits of explanatory power of
linguistic theories as well as those about the origin of markedness.
In his programmatic paper of 1971 (pp. 124-25) Bailey stated that creole
situations are much more common than language development in isolation.
In his terminology creolization means the mixing of linguistic systems.
Mixing is one of the reasons why, on the one hand, changes over time of
full languages do not always proceed from more marked to less marked
and, on the other hand, why complexity-changing development does not
always go from less to more marked. Bailey's original assumption that
mixing increases markedness has been refined in his own later writings and
in the writings of some of his followers including my own (Mühlhäusler
1985). By emphasizing the centrality of mixing, Bailey altered a situation
where language contact and mixing was increasingly being pushed to the
periphery of linguistics. His insistence at the Technical University of Berlin
that creolistics should occupy a central position in the linguistics syllabus
bears witness to this thinking.
Mixing of separate systems is not the only area of language contact
Bailey has addressed. His work on dialectology and historical linguistics

=== page 33 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
XXXİ
makes frequent reference to intralinguistic mixing such as dialect contact
or style shifts.
His position on the independence of grammatical structures from prag-
matic and social parameters, at least in my interpretation, is one where the
unmarked case appears to be independence and the marked one prag-
matic influence on structure. In his introductory lectures on linguistics at
the Technical University of Berlin, Bailey used to distinguish a grammati-
cal core consisting of phonetology and semantax from a pragmatic outer
area. Just as dependence between phonetology and semantax is relatively
rare, so is dependence between grammar and pragmatics. However, we
have already noted that marked pragmatic contexts or marked meanings
tend to promote marked syntactic structures and to this needs to be added
that speakers of many languages also engage in activities such as hypercor-
rection, standardization, and the creation of esoteric styles for taboo or
other reasons. In as much as such changes take place in time, they can be
arranged on implicational scales. However, it should also be borne in mind
that deliberate changes can ignore or replace existing implicational scales
and that they typically do not take account of markedness hierarchies.
Thus, prestige borrowing from the superstrate in pidgin development can
upset established developmental tendencies as can an unsuitable teaching
syllabus in the case of second language acquisition.
In 1971 Bailey suggested that performance is in the individual, which, to
me, implies that the processes least likely to lend themselves to prediction
are individual activities, particularly deliberate individual changes. (For an
example of his own contributions to filling in lexical gaps in English and
German, see the Glossary.) The extent to which such processes shape
language, particularly small languages with a closed network of speakers,
remains to be established. Bailey's own concern has been with processes
where naturalness plays a major role and he has suggested on a number
of occasions that the other type of process should be explored by people
like myself. I still remember his remarks on the occasion of a lecture at
Oxford where he referred to me as the "King of the Abnatural." Recent
developments in the areas of chaos and catastrophe theory in other
branches of knowledge suggest that there is a vast hidden empire for such
a king to rule over.
Closely related to the question of individual preferences is that of the
pragmatic influence on grammar. Bailey's implicational scales are neutral
with regard to whether such implications are local (e.g., different environ-
ments of a phonetological process) or involve interlevel dependencies (e.g.,
semantactic preconditions to phonetological rules). I am not sure to what
extent they could incorporate pragmatic prerequisites to grammatical

=== page 34 ===

XXXII
analysis and whether his relative lack of concern for this question can be
justified in the long run. In as much as variation is functional and sensitive
to pragmatic considerations, an answer to this problem needs to be found.
Such an answer could change the status of variation theory from one
which explains grammatical changes to one that can explain the overall
process of human communication.
This brief survey of some of C.-J. Bailey's contributions to linguistics has
been structured in such a way as to help more linguists talk in the new
paradigm. The basis for my wanting to bring this about is both a personal
preference for a Baileyan approach to language as well as a number of
more substantive reasons. Many linguists, at one point or other in their
career, will have shared these concerns. They include:
(1) Linguists have for a long time regarded the cultural construct of
invariable grammar as the essential natural core of language. We
have reasons to reject such a view as mistaken and unlikely to
lead to significant insights.
(2) Scientific prediction, it is widely acknowledged, is contingent on
investigators coming to grips with change, fluctuations, instability,
and 'messy' data. It is unlikely that linguistics will be able to
escape from this obligation.
(3) It is not likely that linguistics can get away indefinitely with the
claim that it is totally value-free and can be carried out as a
self-contained intellectual exercise. Rather there is an urgent
need for the practitioners in this field to address social and
moral issues and pay attention to the needs of the communities
they work in. One aspect that is particularly stated in Bailey's
work on new modifications is that linguists should be making
qualitative judgments.
(4) Related to this is the growing demand for applicable linguistics
from applied areas such as speech therapy, language planning,
language teaching, and speech recognition research. All these
disciplines require an understanding of variable data and a
Baileyan approach may help bring solutions to their problems.
(5) The concepts put forward by Bailey would seem to provide a
viable alternative to more mechanistic approaches to language,
i.e., approaches that have operated with machine or conduit
metaphors in explaining human communication.

=== page 35 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
Xxxiii
Bailey would be the last person to claim that his system is capable of
solving all the problems just mentioned. However, I believe he would insist
that his approach has provided a badly needed re-orientation and that it
could lead to significant advances if seriously pursued. He has also made
the point on a number of occasions, for instance, with regard to dialectol-
ogy, that his own approach is complementary to other approaches and that
work done by others using different frameworks can be integrated within
it. I myself have suggested that a combination of Bailey's developmental
grammar and a Hallidayean systemic approach to language would result in
a particularly powerful explanatory model as it would be capable of coping
with both syntagmatic and paradigmatic dimensions of variation.
Despite changes in linguistics over the two decades since Bailey's first
programmatic statements we still have a long way to go. C.-J. Bailey will
continue to provide leadership and inspire linguists who address problems
of variation, change, and development. While the number of people con-
cerned with these topics has grown, much inertia remains, and is likely to
remain, for a long time to come. We, the editors of this volume, hope that
we have helped to reduce this inertia by making available to a wider
audience Bailey's views on language as well as demonstrating their ap-
plicability to problems in many areas of linguistic description and applied
linguistics.
I will not add much to the numerous proofs of the fertility of Bailey's
ideas, but it would seem desirable to make at least a few brief statements
about the contributions to this volume. One of the main problems for the
editors has been to justify headings and compartments in an exercise
which is decompartmentalizing. Most of the papers, in addition to address-
ing many areas of language such as the lexicon or phonology, also include
important statements about development, contact and creolization. The
editors have adopted an organization based on the more conventional
areas of linguistics in the hope that this would enable readers to ap-
preciate how a Baileyan perspective can illuminate all areas of language.
In the section on Theoretical Orientation we are confronted with two
issues that have dominated Bailey's work, 'the status of linguistic concepts
versus dialect, idiolect, phoneme, etc.' and the nature of linguistic varia-
tion. Harris, like Bailey, demonstrates the dangers of taking existing con-
cepts as given and to engage, as Francis Bacon (1939:6) put it in his
Premium to The Great Instauration (used as an epigram in Bailey's On the
Yin and Yang Nature of Language), "to engage in a perpetual struggle and
pursuit in causes which have no exit." Like Bailey, Harris also addresses
the problem of the "burden of history" and the dangers of establishing
closed shops for the discussion of linguistic knowledge. Maxwell addresses

=== page 36 ===

XXXİV
Bailey's solution to some central problems of linguistics, i.e., the provision
of description and explanation for patterned variations in language. His
general discussion of this area provides a useful reference point for the
remainder of the volume.
Phonetology has always been Bailey's central concern; this is reflected in
the large number of contributions in this area. The reasons for grouping
together phonetics and phonology under one heading--as well as his views
on the interface between phonetics and phonology-have been stated in a
number of places, though perhaps nowbere with greater clarity than in
Bailey 1989, which regrettably was not yet available to the contributors to
this volume. That the interface between phonetics and phonology is very
complex, but at the same time essential for the study of language develop-
ment and variation, is demonstrated by the example of "sonority" by
Yaeger-Dror. While Yaeger-Dror's explanations make appeal to natural
motivations underlying development, Malkiel supplies an impressive body
of evidence for the effects of cultural and semantic factors on phonetologi-
cal change. It is data of this kind that can provide insights into the still
insufficiently understood interlevel dependencies in implicational grammar.
Hopper's paper is a reminder that, while variation studies have often
been associated with a relatively shallow time depth, there are grounds for
not using them for purposes of reconstructing remote stages of human
language development. His analysis of Germanic gemination clearly il-
lustrates the applicability of the Baileyan approach to comparative-histori-
cal linguistics. This article, and the following one by Perry on 'syllable
contact', serves as a reminder of Bailey's extraordinarily wide-ranging
background. Bailey makes use of insights from many peoples and cultures,
organizing facts and fashions: In Perry's words, he "knew there were
syllables even when everyone else had forgotten.'
Bailey's Berlin colleague, Karl Maroldt, has demonstrated in various
publications how variables can be used to explain aspects of the history of
English. In this volume, he addresses some of the more problematic
aspects of the Great English Vowel Shift. Change in English is also the
topic of Feagin's paper. Feagin, like others before her, argues for a
symbiosis, if not integration, of Bailey's developmental/lectological model
and a quantitative/glottometric one.
The importance of Irish English for both local language centered studies
and for understanding the development of pidgins and creoles as far apart
as the Caribbean and Australia is becoming more widely recognized.
Ó Baoill, in his analysis of Irish English, contributes an example of ab-
natural phonological development resulting from language contact. He
supplements Bailey's ideas concerning the consequences of linguistic en-

=== page 37 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
XXXV
counters with considerations of accommodation and adjustment. Like
Ó Baoill's paper and, indeed, most papers in this volume, Romaine's study
on the p/f distinction in Tok Pisin is based on a large corpus of data. Her
analysis, demonstrating rapid change over short stretches of time and
space, illustrates why C.-J. Bailey has been so concerned that creolistics
should be considered part of the core of theoretical linguistics. It also
suggests the usefulness of a wave model of linguistic diffusion, as does the
paper by Edmondson on Kam tone splits. Edmondson's paper, again,
underlines the importance of integrating phonetic and phonological factors
in linguistic analysis.
Variation studies have tended to cluster in the phonetological area and
attempts to carry them to 'higher levels' of analysis have often run into
difficulties. These have tended to be of a practical, rather than a prin-
cipled nature, as is illustrated in Carden's replication of Legum's while-
clause studies. Given Bailey's insistence that linguists should remove
obstacles that "prevent linguistics from becoming a science," Carden's
suggestions as to how to overcome replication problems in experimental
linguistics is most welcome.
Markedness reversal has featured strongly in Bailey's more recent writ-
ings and the applicability of this concept to explaining linguistic data is
shown in a number of papers in this section, beginning with McCawley's
contribution on in, into, and enter, followed by Bolinger's study of the
English reciprocal.
Explaining variations in morphology and syntax, on the one hand,
involves appeal to the notions of markedness and markedness reversal. On
the other hand, pragmatic considerations are seen to govern regularities
and subregularities in this area. Thompson's paper, "Information Flow and
Dative Shift in English Discourse," nicely exemplifies how grammatical
rules are shaped by extra-grammatical patterns, as does Davison's account
of question strategies in Hindi-Urdu.
Dependencies of an implicational kind within a single component of
grammar are discussed for early NPs in English by Zwicky and in Givón's
paper on Ute reflexives, complementation, and clause integration. These
two papers underline the need to treat variation across styles and registers
as variations within a single grammar.
Mixed languages, pidgins, and creoles function prominently in this sec-
tion as they are particularly suited to sorting out the different effects of
natural and abnatural language development. Baugh reexamines the suffix
/-s/ in Black English, a feature which is particularly attractive to Baileyan
linguists because it has been a variable feature throughout the develop-
ment of the language and because it illustrates the interdependencies

=== page 38 ===

XXXvi
between different components of grammar. Jones' paper on the plural -s
in Krio describes processes that may well have occurred in the history of
American Black English Vernacular. That the development of morpho-
syntax can be predicted by appealing to language-independent patterns for
development from less to more complex systems is illustrated for pronoun
development in a number of pidgin languages by Mühlhäusler. The ques-
tion of identification and classification of mixed languages is taken up by
Leitner in his comparison of Australian and Indian English and, again, by
Mayerthaler and Mayerthaler in their study of Bavarian syntax. Their
suggestion that "Every language has at least two parents" is a particularly
important one in Baileyan linguistics. The two Mayerthalers demonstrate
in convincing detail how the neglect of these principles has led philologists
astray in their attempt to account for the development of Bavarian. As a
native speaker of Alemannic, I certainly welcome their suggestion that
Bavarian can be classified as a creolized Alemannic.
The final paper in this section is Peng's study of laterality effects in
agrammatism. It introduces an important consideration for those who are
in the business of considering intercomponent dependencies, i.e., the fact
that the term GRAMMAR, like the previously mentioned dialect, is culture-
and language-specific.
In the short section on Lexical and Historical matters we find two
articles dealing with etymological questions. Hamp shows how Bailey's
insistence on the centrality of variation and dynamism can help.
etymologists deal with complex problems such as the disturbingly varied
shapes of English bottom, a theme also shared in Polomé's discussion of
the etymology of divine names in the Germanic world. Considerations of
variation in historical studies is related to the question of genetic affiliation
in Comrie's paper on Papuan Haruai. Comrie also emphasizes the useful-
ness of Bailey's acceptance of mixed language to the study of this lan-
guage.
Language acquisition, learning, and contact all feature prominently in
Bailey's developmental linguistics. Horvath's paper provides an overall
survey of the role of variation studies in acquisition, while Fidelholtz and
Montes, Pishwa, and Pfaff present detailed case studies. Pfaff's analysis of
case marking in German demonstrates the explanatory power of the con-
cept of connatural and abnatural change. The importance of markedness
and markedness reversal for explaining language change is demonstrated
in Fidelholtz and Montes' report on the acquisition of Spanish phonology
and Pishwa's on the learning of German morphology. Fidelholtz and
Montes present the only study in this collection which concentrates on
variation in the individual, one of Bailey's great interests. De Gelder's

=== page 39 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
xxxvii
paper links up with themes dealt with by several of the contributors to this
volume, for instance, her remarks on the influences of the alphabetic
tradition on language reaffirm those of Harris at the beginning of this
volume and Peng's study on agrammatism. Bailey's dismissive views on the
phoneme are given further support by the study, as are his views on the
methodological precedence of developmental over static studies. Ureland's
paper on multilingualism, diglossia, and research methods confirms the
Mayerthalers' and Bailey's position that all languages have at least two
parents. Ureland's is a work-in-progress report on the language situation
in the Alps and Ireland, whose findings promise to provide challenging
data for variation linguists.
The last four articles, grouped together under the heading of 'Varia'
provide insights into areas that Baileyan linguists may yet come to deal
with-conscious human intervention in language change, discourse
strategies, semiotics, and the many issues involved in language teaching.
Don Laycock, who prematurely passed away in December, 1988, gives a
particularly original interpretation of Pitcairnese, suggesting that instead of
classifying it as a creole it is more appropriately seen as a cant, comparable
to forms of speech such as Shelta. Laycock emphasizes the importance of
abnatural deliberate human interference in the process of language
development. Shepherd's paper, in contrast, is concerned with a genuine
creole, Antiguan Creole. Like other contributors to this volume, she em-
phasizes the difference in linguistic behavior between oral and literate
cultures and the influence of discourse strategies on structures. Roland
Posner, for many years a colleague of Bailey's at the Technical University
of Berlin, provides a brief resumé of sign processes. From his semiotic
perspective, he characterizes a number of processes such as sign manipula-
tion, that are central to understanding Bailey's linguistics.
The final paper in this volume is Nickel's detailed account of teaching
English in Japan in which Nickel draws attention to Bailey's contribution
to language teaching. An interesting highlight of this article are Nickel's
comments on Tsunoda's claims that the "Japanese language is connected
with a unique brain structure", a claim that should remind us of our own
ethnocentric views on language (e.g., scriptism, binarity, obsession with
states) which Bailey, throughout his career, has urged language specialists
to overcome, whether as linguistic researchers, language teachers, or
workers in other areas.
The articles surveyed here are just an indication of the amount of
intellectual energy that has been generated by C.-J. Bailey's work. I find it
hard to improve on the last paragraph in Bailey 1982:82:

=== page 40 ===

Xxxviii
The vision of language and linguistics offered here is radically
different from all those that have been offered-and that have
failed in this century. It is based on a realistic look at human
language and a refusal to be blinded by the biases of the past in
doing so. It is a view that will probably replace the older paradigm
and the extremist philosophies on which its yroëths rest. But al-
though we developmentalists may turn out to be proposing the
wrong remedies for the present near impasse in linguistic analysis,
we refuse to be declared wrong by (static) definition or on the
basis of arbitrary and untenable premises.
References
Peter Mühlhäusler
September 1989
Bacon, Francis. 1939 [1620]. The great instauration. The English philosophers from
Bacon to Mill, ed. by Edwin A. Burtt, 5–23. New York: Random House.
Bailey, Charles-James N. 1971. Trying to talk in the new paradigm. Papers in linguis-
tics 4.312-38. Reprinted 1975 in Anthropology and linguistics: A reader and
workbook, ed. by A. Y. Dessaint and E. Miggliazza, 79-82. Dubuque: Ken-
dall/Hunt. [Preliminary version: Working Papers in Linguistics, University of
Hawaii. 3.111-37, 1971.] [To appear in Bailey, Essays.]
1973. Variation and linguistic theory. Arlington, VA: Center for Applied
Linguistics.
1980. Conceptualizing dialects as implicational constellations rather than as
entities bounded by isoglossic bundles. Dialect und Dialectologie: Ergebnisse des
internationalen Symposions zur Theories des Dialeckts, ed. by J. Göschel, P.
Ivić, and K. Kehr, 234–72. (=Zeitschrift für Mundartforschung, Supplement,
New series 26.) Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. [To appear in Bailey, Essays.]
1982. On the yin and yang nature of language. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma.
1984. Markedness-reversal and the pragmatic principle of 'reading between
the lines in the presence of marked usages.' Papiere zur Linguistik 31.43–100.
[To appear in Bailey, Essays.]
1985a. Towards principles governing the progress and patterning of
phonetological development. Developmental mechanisms of language, ed. by
Charles-James N. Bailey and Roy Harris, 1-49. Oxford: Pergamon.

=== page 41 ===

C.-J. Bailey's Contribution to Linguistics
xxxix
1985b. The proper job of the historical-comparative linguist. Grammatische
Kategorien: Funktion und Geschichte, ed. by B. Schlerath and V. Rittner,
58-70. Wiesbaden: Ludwig Reichert. [To appear in Bailey, Essays.]
1989. The interface between phonetics and phonology. Technical University of
Berlin. MS. [To appear in Bailey, Essays.]
To appear. Essays on time-based linguistic analysis, ed. by Peter Mühlhäusler.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. [=Essays.]
Mühlhäusler, Peter. 1985. Patterns of contact, mixture, creation and nativization: their
contribution to a general theory of language. Developmental mechanisms of
language, ed. by Charles-James N. Bailey and Roy Harris, 51-87. Oxford:
Pergamon.

=== page 42 ===

[blank]

=== page 43 ===

Bibliography1
Charles-James Nice Bailey
Theory
Books
1973. Variation and linguistic theory. Arlington, VA: Center for Applied Linguistics.
1982. On the yin and yang nature of language. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma.
*To appear: Essays on time-based linguistic analysis. Oxford University Press.²
Articles
1968. Optimality, positivism, and pan-dialect grammars. Washington: ERIC/PEGS 30.
1968. Three notes: (1) A paradox in mapping dialect boundaries. (2) An untested idea
on lexical exceptions to the regular ordering of the phonological rules of a
language. (3) Ternary-valued phonetic features. Washington: ERIC/PEGS 25.
¹This is not a complete listing of everything Charles-James N. Bailey has written.
His nonlinguistic writings are omitted, as well as papers that have never been sub-
mitted to a publisher-other than a number of working papers which have been
frequently cited; editorials as well as short working papers and letters to editors are
omitted. Some items were not included because they have been superseded by later
writings.
2Starred items will appear in this collection, some in a revised version.
xli

=== page 44 ===

xlii
Edmondson, Feagin, and Mühlhäusler
1969-70. Studies in three-dimensional linguistic theory: (1) Some implicational
phenomena in dialectology. (2) Implicational scales in diachronic linguistics and
dialectology. (3) Lectal groupings in matrices generated with waves defined
along the temporal parameter. (4) Mesomodels of linguistic change. Working
Papers in Linguistics, University of Hawaii 1.8.123–38, 1.10.245–49, 2.4.109-24,
2.6.149−56, 2.8.1−4.
1970. A note on markedness: Marking values of weightings in variable rules and an
addition to the definition of 'unmarked rules order'. Working Papers in Linguis-
tics, University of Hawaii 27.25-32.
1970. (and Gary J. Parker) Variant sub-weightings of m's in marking theory. Working
Papers in Linguistics, University of Hawaii 2.8.113-28.
*1971. Trying to talk in the new paradigm. Papers in Linguistics, 4.312–38. [Reprinted
1975 in Anthropology and linguistics: Reader and workbook, ed. by A. Y.
Dessaint and E. Migliazza, 79–82. Dubuque: Kendall/Hunt. Preliminary version:
Working Papers in Linguistics, University of Hawaii 3.111-137, 1971.]
*1972. The integration of linguistic theory: Internal reconstruction and the comparative
method in descriptive analysis. Linguistic change and generative theory: Essays
from the UCLA conference on historical linguistics in the perspective of trans-
formational theory, February 1969, ed. by R. P. Stockwell and R. K. S.
Macaulay, 22-31. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
1972. The practical value of abstract syntax for the ordinary working grammarian.
Studies in languages and linguistics 1972-73, ed. by R. W. Ewton, Jr. and J.
Ornstein, 1-11. El Paso: Texas Western Press.
1973. Comment on papers presented at the first plenary session, Sociolinguistics:
Current trends and prospects, ed. by Roger W. Shuy, 89-98. (Georgetown
University Round Table 1972, Monograph Series on Languages and Linguistics,
25) Washington: Georgetown University Press.
1973. The patterning of language variation. Varieties of present-day English, ed. by R.
W. Bailey and J. L. Robinson, 156-86. New York: Macmillan.
1974. Contributions of the study of variation to the framework of the new linguistics.
Linguistische Berichte 29.1-10.
1974. Naturalness in historical reconstruction and changes that are not natural. Papers
from the parasession on natural phonology, ed. by A. Bruck, R. A. Fox, and
M. A. LaGaly, 13-20. University of Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
1974. Some suggestions for greater consensus in creole terminology. Pidgins and
creoles: Current trends and prospects, ed. by David DeCamp and Ian F.
Hancock, 88-91. Washington: Georgetown University Press.
1975. Further observations on unmarked rule order. International Journal of American
Linguistics 41.73-78.
1976. The new linguistic framework and language planning. International Journal of the
Sociology of Language 4.153-57.
*1976. The state of non-state linguistics. Annual Review of Anthropology 5.93–106.

=== page 45 ===

Bibliography
xliii
1977. Linguistic change, naturalness, mixture, and structural principles. Papiere zur
Linguistik 12.6–73.
*1977. Variation and linguistic analysis. Papiere zur Linguistik 12.5-56.
1978. A case of necessarily simultaneous rule-ordering. (Squib) Arbeitspapiere zur
Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics, Technical University of Berlin 1.22-28.
1979. Invited comments on Congress reports by Basbøll, Anderson, and Bybee. Ar-
beitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics, Technical University
of Berlin 6.187-202. [Shorter version in Proceedings of the Ninth International
Congress of Linguists 3.66-68. Copenhagen, 1980.]
*1980. Conceptualizing dialects as implicational constellations rather than as entities
bounded by isoglossic bundles. Dialekt und Dialektologie: Ergebnisse des inter-
nationalen Symposiums zur Theorie des Dialekts, Marburg/Lahn, 5.-10. Sept.,
1977, ed. by J. Göschel, P. Ivić, and K. Kehr, 234–72. (Zeitschrift für Mun-
dartforschung, 26.) Weisbaden: Franz Steiner.
1980. Investigating human language. (Rev.) Arbeitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working
Papers in Linguistics, Technical University of Berlin 4.103–17.
1980. Logical lapses in 'What is a linguistic fact?' Arbeitspapiere zur Linguistik/Work-
ing Papers in Linguistics, Technical University of Berlin 6.183–86.
*1980. Old and new views on language history and language relationships. Kom-
munikationstheoretische Grundlagen des Sprachwandels, ed. by Helmut Lüdke,
139-81. Berlin: de Gruyter.
1980. The role of development in a theory of language. Papiere zur Linguistik 22.33–
42. (Discussion panel, Fourth World Conference on Historical Linguistics.)
1980. Yroëthian linguistics and the marvelous mirage of minilectal methodology.
Sprachvariation und Sprachwandel: Probleme der Inter- und Intralinguistik:
Akten des 3. Symposiums über Sprachkontakt in Europa, Mannheim 1979, ed.
by P. Sture Ureland, 39–50. (Linguistische Arbeiten, 92). Tübingen: Neimeyer.
1981. Contradictions in linguistics. Glossa 15.145–49.
1981. On taking the synchronic out of the diachronic. Canadian Journal of Linguistics
26.2.213-18.
1981. Theory, description and differences among linguists (or, what keeps linguistics
from becoming a science). Language & Communication 1.39-66 [= 1981.
Arbeitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics, Technical Univer-
sity of Berlin 11.58–67].
1981. What can rightly be required of a decent theory of language? Language Sciences
3.19-26.
1981. Developmental linguistics. Folia Linguistica 15.1-2.29-37.
1981. What if Saussure had extended developmental-comparative analysis? Indoger-
mansiche Forschungen 86.137-45.

=== page 46 ===

xliv
Edmondson, Feagin, and Mühlhäusler
*1982. The garden path that historical linguistics went astray on. Language & Com-
munication 2.151-60.
1982. The humane tradition: The academic tradition. Arbeitspapiere zur Linguis-
tik/Working Papers in Linguistics, Technical University of Berlin 13.228–38.
1982. Minilectal maximuddles. Cahiers linguistiques d'Ottawa. 10.1–8.
1983. An apparent paradox concerning the nature of language. Language & Com-
munication. 3.205-18.
1983. Working Group on Developmental Linguistics. Proceedings of the XIII Interna-
tional Congress of Linguists, August 29-September 4, 1982, Tokyo.
*1984. The concept of balance and linguistic naturalness. Language Sciences 6.229–38.
*1984. Markedness-reversal and the pragmatic principle of 'reading between the lines
in the presence of marked usages'. Papiere zur Linguistik 31.43–100. [Prelimi-
nary version, 1983: Arbeitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics,
Technical University of Berlin 17.212–317].
1984. Ideologue's dialogue on comparing in linguistics. Nordic Linguistic Bulletin 8.28-
35.
1984. Can Bickerton's interpretation of TMA be right? (Squib) Papiere zur Linguistik
29.2.50-55.
*1985. The proper job of the historical-comparative linguist. Grammatische Kategorien:
Funktion und Geschichte, ed. by B. Schlerath and V. Rittner, 58-70. Wies-
baden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert.
1985. Using data variation to confirm, rather than undermine, the validity of abstract
syntactic structures. Nach-Chomskysche Linguistik, ed. by Th. Ballmer and R.
Posner, 84-90. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
*1987. A note on reconstructing language development. Münchener Studien zur
Sprachwissenschaft 48.5–14.
*1987. Variation theory and so-called 'sociolinguistic grammars.' Language & Com-
munication 7.269-91.
*1989. Two true/false principles of language change. Indogermanische Forschungen.
94.1-4.
1990. The undecidability of synchronic theory. Papiere zur Linguistik 42(1).
To appear: Suggestions toward implicational analysis and developmental explanation
for syntactic patterning.
To appear: What linguistics would have to do to become a science. [Preliminary
version in Arbeitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics, Techni-
cal University of Berlin 15.]
To appear: Avoidable paradoxes (and fudges) in linguistic analysis.
*To appear: What grammarians haven't been doing right, or, Unriddling analytical
paradoxes.

=== page 47 ===

Bibliography
*To appear: Epilogue on the new historical linguistics.
English: General
xlv
Articles
1968. Is there a 'midland' dialect of American English? Washington: ERIC ED 021 240.
1970. Black English. Washington: ERIC ED 043 857.
1977. (and Karl Maroldt) The French lineage of English. Langues en contact-Pidgins-
creoles-languages in contact, ed. by Jürgen Meisel, 21-53. (Tübingen Beiträge
zur Linguistik, 75.) Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
1981. Standard nonsense. Scottish Literary Journal, Supplement 14: 63–65.
1982a. Irish English and Caribbean Black English: Another joinder. American Speech
57.237-39.
1982b. Aufsätze zur Sprachentwicklung und zur Entwicklung des Englischen (Topics on
language development and the development of English). Arbeitspapiere zur
Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics, Technical University of Berlin 13.
1985. The Anglic family of languages. Journal of Historical Linguistics and Philology
2.1.1-4.
1986. Remarks on standardization, English, and possibilities in developed and develop-
ing countries. Problems of standardization and linguistic variation in present-day
English, ed. by G. Nickel and J. C. Stalker, 79–83. Heidelberg: Julius Groos.
*1987. Fashions in English or a standard? Multilingua 6.399–410.
Phonetology/English Phonetology
(Phonetics/Phonology)
Books
1983. Grundzüge der englischen Phonetologie: Allgemeine Systematik. Vol. 1. Ar-
beitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics, Technical University
of Berlin 16. [2nd edition, 1988]
1984. Workbook for English transcriptional phonetics: Syllabus of exercises for
Southern British. Arbeitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working Papers in Linguistics,
Technical University of Berlin 21.1–48.
1984. Workbook for English transcriptional phonetics: Syllabus of exercises for
Southern States English. Arbeitspapiere zur Linguistik/Working Papers in Lin-
guistics, Technical University of Berlin 21.49–101.
1985. English phonetic transcription. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics and the
University of Texas at Arlington.

=== page 48 ===

xlvi
Edmondson, Feagin, and Mühlhäusler
Forthcoming: Southern States phonetics. [Considerable revision of 1969 preliminary
version issued in part as, Working Papers in Linguistics, University of Hawaii 1:
4.81-144; 5.107-84; 6.105-203; 7.75-95; 8.139-79; 9.61–147; 10.101-23; 11.143-
76.]
In preparation: Multivariety pronouncing dictionary of English.
Articles
1968. Dialectal differences in the syllabification of non-nasal sonorants in American
English. General Linguistics 8.79-91.
1968. Generating the co-ordinate obstruents in an English dialect having two kinds of
segmental length in addition to syllabic length. Washington: ERIC/PEGS 21.
1968. (and J.-C. G. Milner) The major class features 'sonorant' and 'vocalic' and the
problem of syllabicity in generative phonology: with a note on the feature 'high'.
Washington: ERIC/PEGS 19.
1968. The pronunciation of zeta in ancient Greek. Chicago Linguistic Society 4.177-93.
1968. Segmental length in Southern States English: An instrumental phonetic investiga-
tion of a standard dialect in South Carolina. Washington: ERIC/PEGS 20.
1968. Syllabic, semisyllabic, and unsyllabic in English: A ternary distinction. Chicago
Journal of Linguistics 1.53-84.
1969. An exploratory investigation of variations in the accented outputs of underlying
short vowels in a dialect of Southern States English. Working Papers in Linguis-
tics, University of Hawaii 1.1:57–63.
1969. Table: Tabular in The sound pattern of English. Working Papers in Linguistics,
University of Hawaii 1.10.233-37.
1970. The English great vowel shift past and present. Papers in Linguistics 3.173–78.
1970. A new intonation theory to account for pan-English and idiom-particular pat-
terns. Papers in Linguistics 2.522–604.
1970. New thoughts on accent and intonation. Working Papers in Linguistics, Univer-
sity of Hawaii 2.7.25–32.
1970. (and Gary J. Parker) Ternary marked values? An approach to the measurement
of complexity in the operation of phonological rules. Working Papers in Lin-
guistics, University of Hawaii 2.4.131–42.
1970. Toward specifying constraints on phonological metathesis. Linguistic Inquiry
1.347-49.
1971. Vowel reduction and syllabic sonorants in English. Working Papers in Linguistics,
University of Hawaii 3.2.36–104.
1973. Variation resulting from different rule orderings in English phonology. New ways
of analyzing variation in English, ed. by Charles-James N. Bailey and Roger
Shuy, 211-52. Washington: Georgetown University Press.

=== page 49 ===

Variation in Indo-European 'bottom'
Eric Hamp
University of Chicago
The forms lying behind English bottom are disturbingly varied. In fact,
the greatest variety to be found documented in all of Germanic is
registered in Middle English: bot(t)em, botme, boden, and bothem. As
earlier forms of the first three of these shapes we find Old English botm
and bodan. Let us now choose representatives to reflect the comparable
variation to be found in West Germanic: Old Frisian shows boden, while
Dutch has bodem, Middle Low German bōdem(e) and boddem(e), Old
Saxon the dative singular bothme, and Old High German bodam, etc.,
yielding modern German Boden. To these we may add Old Norse, Nor-
wegian, and Old Danish botn.
First let us recover the forms necessary to account for the observed
variety: Middle English, Old High German, Old Saxon, and probably
Middle Low German and Dutch require *bopm: Old English clearly
presupposes *botm, while Old English, Old Frisian, and German (if Bühne
is to be included here, as some have argued) call for *bodn. On this basis
now, Old Norse botn can be explained as a conflation of the last two, i.e.,
*botm X *bodn.
Of this bewildering array the clearest Germanic etymon is certainly
*bodn. Here we must have an exact cognate of Sanskrit budhná-, i.e.,
*bhudhnó-. The identity of the base is confirmed by Greek лvеµýv. Other
forms must be related, but the nature of the nasal is ambiguous: Latin
447

=== page 50 ===

448
Eric Hamp
fundus, Old Irish bond (perhaps properly bonn, because of its relatively
late attestation) 2 'sole of the foot'. To these I add Pre-Hellenic лúvdaž
'bottom of a receptacle' (accepting, e.g., the attribution in Georgiev 1981:
102), with the regular pseudo-Grassmann's Law *bhu(n)dh- > *bu(n)dh-,
and then the pseudo-Grimm's Law *bu(n)dh- > *pu(n)d-; cf. also Пúdva.
We may now attempt to explain *boþm. In the past the claims of
explanation for all of these forms have centered upon the hope of trans-
muting the nasals one into the other and of converting the obstruents by
an ill-motivated dissimilation or by manipulating the phonetics of voicing.
All such attempts are poorly founded. They all suffer from insufficient
specification of phonetic context and from the weak claim of affecting
some forms in some dialects while leaving other instances untouched.
Moreover, a suffix -m(e)n(o)- is unlikely as a derivation of such a zero-
grade form, especially when we have unclear accounting of its would-be
semantics. Finally, a form *boþ-m < *bhut-m- would violate the dominant
structure constraints on the permitted obstruents in an Indo-European
root. I propose, therefore, that we must strike out afresh in our search for
a solution.
It seems significant that the Germanic *-d- is limited to the forms in -n-.
If we take *bodn <*bhudh-nó- as a participle (at least in origin), we see
immediately that two analyses, or reconstructions, are possible: *bhudh-n-
and *bodn < *budna- < *budná- < *buþná- as if *bhut-nó-. If speakers,
starting with an inherited *bhudh-nó-, have interpreted the resulting *bud-
ná- as *buþ-ná-, i.e., as a Vernerized product, they would have generated
for themselves a new base *bup- which was then available for fresh
derivations. One such result would have led easily to *búþma, and this
fresh etymon would have yielded almost immediately *bubma-> *boþma-
> *boþm. Thus, *bodna- and *boþma- appeared in a role that had the air
of being a simple grammatical relation displaying a well-known consonan-
tal alternation.
We are left now with *botm to explain, whose final element has fruitfully
engaged C.-J. Bailey's vigilant attention in the context of Middle and
Modern English syllabification versus schwa-insertion of final postcon-
sonantal nasals (Bailey 1989:44). First, there seems to be no plausible
phonetic reason why a suffixed *-ma- should either deaspirate the *dh of
¹Pokorny IEW 174 has *bhundhos, but there is no Indo-European rule to infix a
nasal in a noun. As with unda <*ud-n-a ‘water (collective)' (with regular sound
change of whatever detailed phonetic character) we must have *bhud(h)no-. A
metathesis is a nonsolution.
2Early Irish bonn cannot be proximate *b(h)ud(h)no- since *-dn- gives Celtic *-n-.
Therefore, the sole comparandum seems to be Avestan būnō (Armenian bun).

=== page 51 ===

Variation in Indo-European 'bottom'
449
a *bhudhma- or devoice the *d of a Germanic *budma-. On the other
hand, the existence of an already formed *butma- would have provided a
partial model for the formation of "búþma- beside *budná-, as we have
just hypothesized.
It seems, then, that we must begin with two forms for Germanic:
*budná, and *butma-. Let us now recall the two problematic nouns,
Avestan bunō and Irish bonn; лúvda has its background too much
shrouded in prehistory to be worth any speculation here. The only
plausible and responsible solution to be offered for the Iranian and Celtic
instances seems to me to be an assumption of phonetic anticipation of the
nasal. This leads us to *bhund(h)no-; it could have taken place separately
in the dialects of Indo-European. Now what would be the context for such
a development?
Let us notice, also, that there is disagreement in the apparent suffix of
Greek лvb-μýv and Germanic *but-ma-. One gets the impression that an
old anomalous form lies underneath these, a formation that later and
separately was incorporated into the canonical paradigm of suffixes in the
dialects. The common portion in these forms is *bhud(h)-m. This has every
appearance of being a vestigial accusative singular of a root noun, if we
could motivate its fossilization with the case ending incorporated and later
refashioned into an acceptable suffix. One stray fact immediately improves
the plausibility of this notion: if *bhudh- was an old root noun we may
now hope to understand better the consonantism of *but-ma- < apparent
*bhud-mo-. Since the nominative singular of *bhudh- would have been
*bhuts, with neutralization, a new, and canonically acceptable, stem *bhud-
could have been created; such a stem form would have been functionally
welcome as eliminating the homonymy with the verbal noun *bhudh- from
the base 'be conscious', represented in Germanic by Old English bēodan,
etc.
Along these lines we may also speculate that in the accusative singular
*bhudhm the anticipatory nasalization first took place that led to *bhundh-
m. This could then have been carried over into the synonym *bhundh-nó-
> *b(h)unno- > Avestan bằnō Irish bonn. This last portion of the
argument is admittedly speculative, but at least it is principled.
C.-J. Bailey has done us a great service by insisting on the importance
and centrality of variation and dynamism in systems. This family of forms
exhibits a history of variation throughout-and notably in Germanic and
English. In reconstruction it is hard to distinguish synonymy from contex-
tual variant; but we must strive to chronologize.

=== page 52 ===

450
References
Eric Hamp
Bailey, Charles-James N. 1989. Epilogue on the new historical linguistics. MS. [To
appear in Essays on time-based linguistics analysis. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.]
Georgiev, V. L 1981. Introduction to the history of the Indo-European languages. 3rd
ed. Sofia: Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.
Pokorny, Julius. 1951-1969. Indo-Europäisches Wörterbuch. 2 vol. Bern: Francke.