American Journal of Germanic Linguistics & Literatures 9.1 (1997): 83-111.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic
Robert B. Howell

Joseph C. Salmons

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Evidence suggests that Germanic languages resisted the spread of
historical umlaut processes. We propose that examples of such
superficially varied umlautless residues all yield to a single coherent
phonological account. Specifically, these vocalic assimilations show
strong preferences for reducing more extreme differences in place of
articulation between trigger and target while failing to assimilate
articulatorily closer vowels, so that triggering /i, j / first and most
consistently mutated /a/ and last and least consistently mutated /u(:)/.
This vocalic cline interacts with the consonantal material intervening
between trigger and target, so that obstruent clusters (especially velar or
labial) are prone to inhibit umlaut. In both cases, the smaller the
phonetic difference between target and trigger, the less likely umlaut is
to occur. While umlaut failure has long been consigned to the margins
of theories of umlaut, we argue that it is crucial, providing a snapshot
of how umlaut unfolded across western and north Germanic. *
"The real point at issue is the scope of the phonetic correspondenceclasses and the significance of the residues. The neo-grammarians
claimed that the results of study justified us . . . in seeking a complete
analysis of the residues."
Bloomfield 1933:354
1. Introduction. While all Germanic languages save Gothic show
various forms of the vowel harmony process commonly known as
umlaut, much evidence indicates that all of these languages resisted
the spread of umlaut in some ways. Umlautless residues, including
* We thank the following colleagues for discussions on this topic and comments
on drafts of this paper and other help: two anonymous reviewers for this journal,
Garry Davis, Stuart Davis, Greg Iverson, Monica Macaulay, Mary Niepokuj,
Edgar Polome, and Jolanda Vanderwal Taylor. An earlier version of this paper
was presented at the Germanic Linguistics Annual Conference (GLAC) in Ann
Arbor, April 20-22, 1995, where we benefited from discussion with numerous
members of the audience. The usual disclaimers apply.
© Society for Germanic Philology

84

Howell & Salmons

cases of the failure of nonprimary umlaut in Upper German—
exemplified in 1 below—have been the subject of intense discussion
for over a century, discussions in which phonological solutions have
been out of fashion for decades.
(1) Umlautless forms (Schirmunski 1962:201-3)
Dialect
a. muck
sduk
b. khuxa
lu:ga
c. slupfs
lupfa
d. dro: n ma
map

Standard
Miicke
Stuck
Kiiche
Luge
schliipfen
liipfen
traumen
Rube

Earlier form
OHG mucka, cf. OS muggia
OHG stucki
OHG kuchina
OHG lugin
MHG slupfen
Gmc. *luppian
MHG troumen
OHG ruoba < *robjo

A procession of noted scholars since the 1960s have denied outright
that sound change can account for such recalcitrant data, and they
resort instead to purely analogical accounts. Building both phonological and comparative arguments, we propose that umlautless
residues, while complex and variable, in fact reflect well-attested and
comprehensible patterns of sound change rather than morphological
realignment, and, moreover, they have clear parallels across Germanic.
Even the apparent lexical irregularity at the margins of umlaut is
consistent with data from other vowel harmony systems.
Phonologically, umlaut shows strong preferences for reducing the
most extreme differences in place of articulation between trigger, or
umlaut factor, and target, or affected vowel, while failing to assimilate
articulatorily closer vowels, so that for /-umlaut, triggering A, j / first
and consistently mutated /a/ and last but only inconsistently mutated
/u/.
This varying effect by distance across the vowel space interacts
further with consonants intervening between trigger and target, where
umlaut fails with short /u/ when a geminate, especially velar, stop
intervenes between target and trigger. Comparatively, these data fit
closely with broader evidence from Germanic, including Netherlandic,
Old English, and Old Norse. The basic principle underlying these
superficially diverse phenomena is, again, simply that more similar

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 85

groups are less likely to show assimilation. Languages around the
world proffer parallels indicating that the phenomenon known as
"umlaut failure" or "blocking" in Germanic is part of a wellattested (and thoroughly explicable) phonological process.
We aim then to place umlaut failure back into the realm of sound
change and integrate it into an emerging broader school of thought
on umlaut. The American structuralist theory of umlaut, pioneered
by Twaddell (1938) and continued into the present decade by Penzl
(1949, 1994), Antonsen (1969, etc.), and others, remains a widely
accepted view, one that Keller (1978:160) calls "one of the finest
achievements of American linguists." An analogical approach to
umlaut failure becomes necessary under this traditional, Twaddellian
analysis, which regards umlaut as monolithic and thus exceptionless.
Iverson and Salmons (1996) argue that this approach fails on a variety
of descriptive and other grounds, notably that the assumption of a
single, simultaneous umlaut process in Old High German cannot
possibly handle any umlaut blocking phenomena. Crucially for the
present study, the Twaddellian view must explicitly deny any
phonological regularity and is thus forced to favor analogical
accounts over phonologically regular ones. Recognition of this
dilemma, we suggest, was the basic motivation for works such as Penzl
1949 and Antonsen 1969. As Penzl puts it: "If a form without umlaut
is not analogical, it can only go back to a form from which the isound was lost before the development of those allophonic variations
that led to umlaut" (1949). This view is later sharpened by Antonsen
(1966:120): "If a form without umlaut is not analogical, it can only
go back to a form which already lacked l-i-l in Proto-Germanic."
These strong views seem to reflect an implicit understanding of the
Achilles Heel of Twaddell's account, so that we in some sense draw
inspiration from the insights of Penzl and Antonsen.
The attempt to justify analogical approaches to umlaut failure is
founded on two points. First, Antonsen (1969) finds umlauted forms
of all types, including Ai/ with velar geminates, in Upper German.
Given that umlaut failure is a strongly recessive feature, this is to be
expected; the relevant point is that some dialects show umlaut
blocking in the environments in question: If a single dialect shows a
phonologically coherent distribution, we regard claims of analogy as
untenable. In fact, many dialects show the regular patterns we
describe, even one thousand years after umlaut ceased to be

86

Howell & Salmons

phonologically active, as we will see below. The second objection is
that no rule can be defined and motivated (Liissy 1974). Yet, the basic
regularities in this dataset are remarkable. That umlaut failure occurs
only with high back vowels but never mid or low vowels in Old High
German alone is fatal to the analogical view, even before we consider
evidence from other Germanic languages or intervening consonants.1
In moving umlaut failure back into the discussion, this paper
contributes to the growing body of opinion that umlaut was hardly the
monolithic change posited by Twaddell, but instead a process that can
only be seen coherently in terms of long, gradual evolution (Buccini
1992, Iverson, Davis, and Salmons 1994, Fertig 1996, Iverson and
Salmons 1996).2
In the rest of this paper, we first establish the central importance of
umlaut failure in a broader theory of umlaut and then develop a
principle for which vowels are most and least affected by umlaut,
which we adapt to cover intervening consonant blocking as well. We
close by dealing briefly with minor residual irregularities in umlaut
and other vowel harmony systems.
2. The Importance of Exceptions to Umlaut. An adequate
explanatory account of umlaut processes in Germanic must go
beyond mere description of the conditioning environments and the
effects they exert on preceding vowels. Simple description of umlaut
processes leaves key questions unanswered. It is, for example, crucial
to our understanding of umlaut to review precisely which sequences
of vowel-intervening consonant(s)-vowel tend to trigger umlaut
processes in the various dialects of Germanic and which sequences
rarely or never induce such changes. The investigator must then
1

Labov has recently noted about unprincipled claims of lexical diffusion that "by
accepting the word as the fundamental unit of change, the investigator is less
likely to search for the deeper phonetic regularities that may underlie the process
of change" (1994:450). This, mutatis mutandis, applies to analogical arguments,
where proponents have declined to pursue the search for regularity far enough.
2

Another aspect of this emerging view is that phonological solutions have been
too often given short shrift in understanding umlaut. For example, Salmons
(1994) argues that the connection between umlaut and plurality in Old High
German is ultimately far more directly phonologically driven than many recent
theories, especially natural morphology, have seen it as being.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 87

provide a principled phonetic explanation of exactly why umlaut
processes repeatedly arise cross-dialectally in certain environments
while other sequences appear to impede umlaut and still other VC0V
sequences virtually never participate in umlaut. Although extant data
may never suffice for a seamless account of umlaut in all its
permutations in the dialects of Germanic, it is safe to say that the facts
at our disposal have not been fully exploited. Specifically, too little
attention has been paid the exceptions to umlaut processes. In the
following paragraphs we will argue that it is precisely these jagged
edges of umlaut rules that shed the most light on the kinds of
conditions that tend to trigger umlaut and help to explain the
subsequent generalization of umlaut to other environments.
Neogrammarian handbooks typically provide rather complete
accounts of umlaut processes, prominently featuring a description of
the conditioning environment and the resulting vocalic mutation.
Major exceptions to the umlaut rules are also generally recorded in
subsequent paragraphs whereas more idiosyncratic exceptions tend to
be buried in the footnotes. More recent, feature-based accounts in the
generative paradigm have focused on capturing umlaut processes in
their most general form, while exceptions, which interfere with the
generality of a rule, are treated cursorily or ignored altogether
(beginning with King 1969, further developed by Lass and Anderson
1975, Barrack 1975, Voyles 1991, 1992, and many others). These
approaches succeed in providing a rudimentary account of a basic
umlaut rule and admirably capture the fact that umlaut processes
constitute assimilation of feature(s) of the conditioning vowels by the
umlauted vowel segment:
(2)

Secondary umlaut in German
V —>
v /_
[- back]
back]

Co

V
[- back]
[+ high]

This type of rule is not, however, even descriptively adequate if we
include among our data phonologically well-defined blocking
environments. Further, it cannot explain why the conditioning factor
for secondary umlaut must be specified for height as well as for
frontness, nor does it explain why the process fails to affect reflexes of

88

HoweII & Salmons

OHG u, u and ou in some Upper German dialects when certain
consonants intervene between root vowel and the umlaut factor.
If it seems counterintuitive to claim that restrictions on umlaut can
tell us much about the origin and spread of the process, one must
realize that early textual evidence reflecting incomplete umlaut
developments as well as more modern dialectal data showing
incomplete operation of umlaut processes provide us with valuable
"snapshots" of the developmental stages of umlaut. Old High
German texts, for example, reflect German /-umlaut in its infancy.
Given the fact that Old High German "primary umlaut" is limited to
the fronting and raising of WGmc. */a/ in certain environments, we
can view it as a paradigm example of a triggering environment for
umlaut. On the other hand, the limited failure of "secondary umlaut"
of OHG lul, IvJ, /ou/ in Upper German dialects of Middle High German
reflects a late stage in the umlaut process in fossilized form, with the
unumlauted reflexes of OHG IvJ, IvJ, /ou/ representing the vowels which
conform least to the original trigger environment for OHG/MHG iumlaut. By comparing various incomplete umlaut processes, we can,
therefore, potentially arrive at a basic typology of umlaut and
ascertain what conditions favor the development of umlaut-type
assimilation and which environments tend to hinder umlaut.
Howell (1983) and Van Coetsem and Buccini (1988) make clear
that umlaut processes are crucially affected both by the phonetic
relationship between the umlaut factor and the preceding vowel and
by the intervening consonant(s):
(3) V

C

V

Obviously only a limited subset of possible vocalic sequences in
Germanic result in umlaut phenomena. This set of umlaut
environments is in turn potentially affected by intervening
consonants. An explanatory account of umlaut must deal with both,
but the vocalic relationship is of primary importance.
3. Degrees of Difference: Trigger Environment for Umlaut. Umlaut
processes in Germanic present a broad range of vocalic mutations

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 89

including raising, lowering, fronting, backing, rounding, diphthongization, and combinations thereof. The uncontroversial unifying
characteristics in this diversity are: 1) umlaut is an assimilatory
process, and 2) the vowel-to-vowel assimilation is uniformly regressive
in Germanic. Less clear is why umlaut affects only certain sequences
of vowels. Even a partial answer to this question would represent a
contribution to our understanding of the genesis and generalization of
umlaut.
Any assimilation necessarily requires as input two phonetically
different segments. This simple principle represents a point of
departure for our discussion of the relationship between trigger and
target in Germanic. In what follows we argue that it is the degree of
difference between two vowels in height and frontness that determines
the likelihood of their participation in an umlaut process. Those
sequences that are most different with respect to tongue position will
be most susceptible to umlaut and, conversely, those segments which
are least different phonetically tend to undergo umlaut chronologically later or not at all. This principle, as an anonymous reader
points out, follows naturally from Vennemann's (1988) "Diachronic
Maxim," whereby change along a given parameter will always
improve the worst structures first and the least offensive structures last.
In a broad theoretical discussion of general characteristics of
feature spreading in vowel harmony languages, Cole and Kisseberth
(1994) introduce two basic principles which "drive the existence"
and, we would argue, the genesis of the spreading of vocalic features:
1) Perceptibility: Features should be perceptible, that is, "features
serve to mark contrast, and must be perceptible to fulfill their
function."
2) Articulator stability: Minimize changes from the neutral, steady
state of the articulators, that is, "features are implemented by an
articulatory system which imposes its own constraints on the
realization of features" (Cole and Kisseberth 1994).
These two principles are ideally met when a feature is realized over
more than one segment, which Cole and Kisseberth express in their
Principle of Extension:

90

Howell & Salmons

3) Extension: Extend a feature over longer stretches of sound in
order to maximize perceptibility and articulator stability.3
All instances of umlaut in Germanic satisfy the Principle of Extension
1) by maximizing perception of a feature or features of an umlaut
factor by extending it to a preceding vowel and 2) by increasing
articulator stability through reduction of articulatory distance between
umlaut factor and umlauted vowel.
While both perceptibility and articulator stability are enhanced in
the output of Germanic umlaut processes, evidence provided by
incomplete umlaut rules indicates that articulator stability plays a
decisive role in the chronology of umlaut. In the development of iumlaut in German, we see that the first vowel affected is the short
vowel most phonetically different from the conditioning factors,
namely /a/:
(4) Primary umlaut in German

3

Cole and Kisseberth (1994:4) recognize the fact that there is an "inherent
tension between the Principle of Extension and the functional role of a feature to
mark contrasts, since when a F[eature]-domain is extended, the possibility of
contrast between [F] and its absence is eliminated in all positions within the
extended domains." But they also simply assume that languages resolve this
tension in different ways. In Germanic, for example, the extension of frontness
and/or height of umlaut factors to umlauted vowels most often does not result in
a complete assimilation to the umlaut factor, but rather in umlauted vowels
which share features of the original vowel and the umlaut factor. In German, iumlaut of WGmc. */o/, */u/ to MHG /6/, /ii/ results in vowels that reflect the
roundness and height of the original vowels and the frontness of the umlaut
factors */i/, */j/, */i/.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 91

Examples: OHG gast ~ gesti 'guest/guests'; OHG/arw ~ feris ~ ferit
'(I) go, (you) go, (s/he) goes' (Braune and Eggers 1987:26-29)
Primary umlaut, which must precede secondary umlaut chronologically,4 illustrates the trigger environment for umlaut processes in
Germanic (within the limits of traditional vowel features to capture the
three-way height distinction):
(4.1) Trigger environment for umlaut (in features)
target
I
V
[a high]
[P back]

intervening C5
Co

trigger
I
V
[-a high]
[-P back]

(4.2) Trigger environment for umlaut (schematically represented)

4

See Iverson and Salmons 1996. Arguments in favor of placing primary umlaut
chronologically earlier than secondary umlaut include: 1) primary umlaut is the
only process to affect the entire continental West Germanic area. Secondary
umlaut, including umlaut of */a/ in blocking environments, does not occur in
western Dutch (examples given below), 2) Nonumlaut of WGmc. */a/ in
"blocking environments" dialectally in Old High German implies later onset of
at least this part of what is commonly called secondary umlaut, and 3) primary
umlaut and secondary umlaut result in fundamentally different vocalic
mutations—it is, in fact, difficult if not impossible to state the results of the
two processes in one phonological rule. Primary umlaut causes the fronting AND
raising of WGmc. */a/, while secondary umlaut causes only the fronting of the
affected vowels, a point going back at least to Vennemann (1972:882).
5

It is worth noting that umlaut is least constrained when no consonant intervenes, cf. the great extent of the so-called w-breaking in Old English and the
greater range of u-umlaut in Old Norse when umlauting u directly follows a root
vowel (Noreen 1970:69-72).

92

Howell & Salmons

Umlaut processes in Germanic indicate that the umlaut effect
generalizes from this optimal trigger environment to environments
where phonetic differences between conditioning factor and target
vowel are less dramatic. In those instances when umlaut processes do
not reach their full potential extent, the failure occurs as the umlaut
factor, or trigger, and the target vowel become more similar
phonetically. For the various types of umlaut in Germanic we
therefore posit the origin and direction of spread depicted in figures
5.1-5.4.
Umlaut has spread out in waves, stopping at points that show its
historical unfolding. On opposite ends of the West Germanic dialect
continuum we find interesting examples of partially completed iumlaut processes that illustrate the significance of the trigger
environment for umlaut depicted in figures 4.1-4.2 above. In coastal
Dutch, i-umlaut affects only WGmc. */a/ with complete regularity, the
environment most susceptible to /-umlaut according to the tendential
cline of umlaut resistance developed here. Only intervening -htclusters block the umlaut effect, a distribution reminiscent of that
found for primary umlaut in Old High German. Distribution of the /umlaut of WGmc. short *u is, as Goossens (1980:34) states,
"chaotisch," often with unumlauted forms where an original /-umlaut
factor was present and umlauted vowels in words with no original
umlaut factor. The presence of unumlauted forms with an original /umlaut factor points to a more limited distribution of /-umlaut of *u
in these coastal dialects. In the western dialects all long vowels remain
unaffected by /-umlaut—that is, what we traditionally call "secondary
umlaut" in German does not affect coastal Dutch.6 In these dialects,
the umlaut process has been arrested at an early date (cf. Buccini
1992), regularly affecting only environments where target and trigger
are phonetically most highly differentiated.
It is worth noting that the areal distribution of /-umlaut of the long
vowels in Dutch is predicted by the degree of articulatory difference
between target and trigger. WGmc. *d shows /-umlaut in the entire
southern part of the Dutch linguistic area except for a small West
Flemish coastal enclave. In Holland, unumlauted forms are found in
all of North and South Holland as well as in much of the province of
6
The situation among the short vowels is obscured particularly by the so-called
"spontaneous palatalization" of old /u/.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 93

Utrecht to the east (Weijnen 1991:262). Reflexes of umlauted WGmc.
*o and *au are, except in a small part of Utrecht, found well to the
east of the isogloss for umlaut of *a and at no point reach the coast
(Goossens 1977:91). The extent of /-umlaut of WGmc. long *M can
not be evaluated because the spontaneous palatalization of all reflexes
of *u masks the distribution of umlauted forms. We therefore find
that in Dutch, those long vowels that show a greater phonetic
difference from the umlaut factor prove more susceptible to the /umlaut process as reflected by their more extensive areal distribution.7
In Bavarian and Alemannic, on the other hand, we encounter a
much more extensive operation of /-umlaut. Nonetheless, many
dialects show failure of /-umlaut when the target contains [u], the
vowel predicted to be least susceptible to /-umlaut by our account. In
these dialects, /-umlaut (i.e., "primary" and "secondary" umlaut)
has affected long and short low and mid vowels, but the fronting of
high back vowels is more restricted and, as is so often the case in
incomplete umlaut processes in Germanic, limited by the nature of the
intervening consonant(s). Just as Dutch shows /-umlaut only when
target and trigger are maximally different with respect to height and
frontness, i-umlaut fails in Upper German dialects only when the
difference between target and trigger is least:
(5.1)

/-umlaut (trigger WGmc. */i/, */j/, *IV)

A) Coastal Dutch:
1) /-umlaut: MDu. gewelt 'power', denken 'think', best 'best', bed
'bed', mensche 'person', tellen 'count', temmen 'be fitting' (<
WGmc. *giwaldi, *pankjan, *batist-, *badi, *manisk-, *talljan,
*tammjan ) (Van Loey 1976:14-15)
7

For an exhaustive set of examples of umlauted versus unumlauted forms in
Middle Dutch, see Van Loey (1937:28-94).

94

Howell & Salmons

2) no /-umlaut: MDu. machtig 'mighty', kaas 'cheese', horen
'hear', schoon 'beautiful', groeten 'greet' (vs. German machtig,
Kdse, horen, scho'n, grufieri)
B) Upper German:
Failure of /-umlaut in Middle High German
1) OHG /uV: UG rumen 'raumen', sumen 'saumen'
2) OHG /uo/: UG uoben 'iiben', suochen 'suchen'
3) OHG lovJ: gelouben 'glauben', touben 'betauben', houbet
'Haupt', zoubern 'zaubern' (Paul, Wiehl, Grosse 1989:67)
In West Saxon dialects of Old English the limited extent of velar
umlaut provides a phonetic mirror image of /-umlaut depicted above.
West Saxon texts show a very limited distribution of o/a-umlaut: only
high front l\l is affected by the low back trigger, and, once again, the
process is sensitive to the nature of the intervening consonantism.
o/a-umlaut of N occurs only before a single liquid or a non-geminate
labial:
(5.2) West Saxon o/a-umlaut

Examples: Pre-OE */ > WS eo /_ Q (liquid/labial) o: cleopoda
'called', teoloda 'worked', bileofa 'food', seofoda 'seventh',
heora 'their' (Brunner 1965:87); Pre-OE *e > 'nicht streng' WS
eo l_ (I, r)o: steola 'handle', beoran 'bear' (Brunner 1965:86).
Some West Saxon texts show a limited o/a-umlaut of e when only a
liquid intervenes. Once again, the umlaut effect weakens as target and
trigger become more phonetically similar.
The distribution of the Old Norse w-umlaut and M-breaking
processes also serve to illustrate the strong mutating influence exerted
by the umlaut trigger environment, while the umlaut effect becomes

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 95

increasingly restricted as target and trigger share height features. The
low vowel a therefore undergoes unrestricted M-umlaut, short mid e is
diphthongized (so-called 'breaking'), but original high short i is
rounded only under a very restricted set of circumstances: when
immediately preceded by a labial consonant or when the umlaut
factor developed from an original *vv.
(5.3.1)

M-umlaut/M-breaking of short vowels in Old Norse

1) M-umlaut of *a > q mggr 'son' (cf. Go. magus) sqk 'affair'; Iqnd
'lands' (< Handu)
2) M-breaking of *e > io: hiotr 'deer'; hiorr 'sword; (cf. Go.
hairus); ioforr 'boar'
3) M-umlaut of *i > y only when umlaut factor develops from *w or
when target vowel is preceded by a labial: nykr 'water-sprite' (<
*nikuz < *nikwiz), myklom dat. pi. 'large' (Noreen 1970:69-79,
87)
Long vowels in Old Norse show a similar but even more restricted
distribution of M-umlaut, with low long a undergoing backing and
labialization regularly but with long mid e and long high i showing
rounding only when the trigger u directly followed:
(5.3.2)

M-umlaut/M-breaking of long vowels in Old Norse

96

Howell & Salmons

1) M-umlaut of *d > q: qtom 'we ate', skql 'bowl'
2) M-umlaut of *e, *i> 4, y only when u follows directly: / ^ 'cattle'
(< *feu < *fehu), by 'bees' (<*biu)
In all of the umlaut processes illustrated above, greater phonetic
similarity between the trigger and target vowels correlates with a
weaker umlaut effect. This kind of distribution for umlaut processes is
consistent with and provides additional evidence for Cole and
Kisseberth's Principle of Articulator Stability. Clearly, all umlaut
processes in Germanic ultimately work to "minimize changes from
the neutral, steady state of the articulators" and the evidence
presented here indicates that umlaut processes in fact originate in and
spread from environments where the original, pre-umlaut transition
from target to trigger vowel shows a maximal change "from the
neutral, steady state of the articulator." In target-trigger sequences
where the transition from vowel to vowel results in less articulatory
instability, the umlaut process is more weakly motivated phonetically,
predictably resulting in a more constrained set of umlaut
environments and/or chronologically later onset of the umlaut effect.
While the phonetic relationship between target and trigger vowel
provides the basic impetus for umlaut processes, it is clear from the
distribution of umlaut in Germanic that consonants intervening
between the two vowels can have a crucial limiting effect on the
operation of umlaut. In every umlaut process illustrated in figures
5.1-5.3, the nature of the intervening consonantism is critical in
defining the umlaut environment when the target and trigger conform
less completely to the Trigger Environment for umlaut. Our account,
focusing on similarity/difference between target and trigger (with
intervening consonants) can therefore account for the fact that failure
of "secondary umlaut" in Upper German is found only when the
target vowel is, like the trigger, high—but the fact that this failure of
umlaut is also affected by the intervening consonantism must be
explained.
4. Intervening Consonants. That intervening consonants contribute,
often decisively, to umlaut failure is hardly a new notion. Blocking of
umlaut by velar geminates following /u/ has been recognized since at
least von Bahder (1890, cf. Lussy 1974:81-83) and is so striking that
Schirmunski (1962:201) calls that subtype "regular" in Upper

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 97

German.8 For example, Vetsch describes Appenzeller dialects as
consistently lacking umlaut of MHG short /u/ before geminates
(1910:70-72), lacking it in /u:/ before geminate /m/ (1910:77) and so
on.9 While the most systematic and geographically widespread umlaut
failure in Old High German occurs with velar geminates, it is also well
attested with labials, less commonly with coronals, and sporadically
elsewhere, as seen in the data in Liissy 1974 and other sources. Recall
that greater differences are more likely to be assimilated earlier in the
unfolding of umlaut, while lesser differences are the last and least
likely to be assimilated. Degree of phonetic differentiation covers
both vocalic and consonantal aspects of blocking: the more
intervening consonants have in common with target vowels, the likelier
umlaut failure.
If we characterize blocking environments in place features, we see
that not only the vowels, but the entire sequence in the prototypical
blocking environment, forms of the "ukxi" type, shares the aperture
feature [+high] and all segments save the trigger share [+dorsal], the
maximum possible amount of place sharing.10 Exactly this sequence is
predicted by our principle to be least likely to harmonize. With
intervening labial geminates, the target and consonants share [+labial],
one place feature (differing from the trigger vowel), while coronal
geminates share nothing. This matches with the attested patterns,
shown in 6:
8

It has been noted that the dialects showing the most consistent blocking are not
the most conservative Swiss German dialects, as an argument against these
residues representing phonological failure of umlaut. Of course, dialects showing
umlaut failure are all extremely conservative, including even nonreduction and
loss of final vowels, key to umlaut (cf. Schirmunski 1962:162-64). At any rate,
retention of one archaic feature is not limited, in principle or in practice, solely
to the most archaic varieties, but we find rather complex patterns of archaism and
innovation, in German dialects and elsewhere.
9

Vetsch does think that umlaut has spread into some lexical items analogically.
If there is analogical change after it ceased to work phonologically, it can under
our analysis only be toward, not away from umlaut, but we note also the
possibility of borrowing of umlauted forms into the dialect.
10

We assume here, as has much other recent work on Germanic historical
phonology, Clements's model of feature geometry, with a vowel place node,
rather than treating all vowels as dorsal.

98

Howell & Salmons

(6) Geminate blocking
Most common
Aperture
Place

< >

Least common

-ukxi

-upfi

-utsi

[±high]
++++
[±coronal]
+
[llabial]
+
[±dorsal]
+++-

+—+
+

+—+
H

+

+—

(6a) Alemannic examples of blocking by place of intervening
geminate, from Liissy 1974
-kx- bucke 'biicken', drucke, hucke 'sich ducken, hinken', jucke
'springen', lucke 'locken', nucke 'einschlafen'
-pf- gupfe 'emporschnellen', hupfe 'hiipfen', lupfe 'heben', mupfe
'einen StoB geben'
-ts- butze 'putzen, kastrieren', gutze 'iiberschieBen', hutze 'aufspringen', nutze 'niitzen', stutze 'stehenbleiben'
This cline fits still more precisely if we avail ourselves of a recent
proposal about place features based on broad cross-linguistic data
from place assimilations. Using data from various Native American
languages, Korean, English, and other languages, Rice (1994) points
to a consistent but asymmetric pattern whereby coronals assimilate to
labials and velars, labials to velars but not to coronals, while velars do
not assimilate. This indicates that phonologically, velars have more
place structure than labials and labials more than coronals. Rice
captures this generalization formally by positing for place features a
hierarchical structure like 7a rather than a flat one (7b) or the more
directly articulatorily oriented proposal of Clements and Hume
(1994) (7c).11

" Note that this configuration is in some sense consistent with the notion of
"articulator stability" discussed above, since less marked place requires less
departure from the neutral position.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 99

(7) Models of place features
a.

Place
Peripheral
Dorsal

(Coronal)

(Labial)

[Parentheses = unmarked features]
b.

Place
Labial

Coronal Dorsal

c.

Place
Labial

Lingual

Coronal

Dorsal

Crudely put, the best blocking environment is the one with the
greatest amount of place structure: a dorsal linked to two timing
slots.'2 Rice's proposal mandates that since dorsals have the most
structure, they serve as triggers for assimilation, that is, allow their
structure to spread, but not as targets, since structure cannot spread
into their existing structure. This theory predicts that dorsals should
be the most likely segments to block a distant place assimilation, then
labials, with coronals most likely to be transparent.13
Still, it is not place features of intervening consonants alone that
lead to consistent blocking but place specifically of geminates. The
featural configurations assumed make blocking here feasible and even
intuitively appealing and consistent with the proposed account, but we
12

An anonymous reader notes that long vowels are more resistant to change than
short ones because they have "more structural stability in all regards," pointing
out a possible parallel to consonantal blocking here.
13

In fact, this place structure also bears directly on the geographical spread of the
second or High German consonant shift in somewhat similar ways, as argued by
Davis, Iverson, and Salmons (manuscript).

100 How ell & Salmons

have not yet accounted for this relationship in terms of modern
phonological theory, a task to which we now turn. Consonantal
blocking of vowel harmony and umlaut processes has been the source
of considerable theoretical maneuvering, even head-scratching. Most
feature geometries put vowel and consonant place on different tiers,
predicting that consonants will generally be transparent. When
consonantal material interacts with harmony, all consonants usually
block. Beyond this, the well-known "laryngeal transparency"—
harmony across [h] and [?] in languages where consonants otherwise
block—is easily enough explicable, since laryngeals lack (supralaryngeal) place specification. But where some consonants do and
others do not block harmony, things get complicated. In consonants
that contain "secondary place" specifications, like labiality on a velar
stop in [kw], these secondary place features are treated, under the
theoretical assumptions of those like Clements, as vowel place and can,
by virtue of this, block harmony (an idea already exploited for Old
High German by Iverson, Davis, and Salmons 1994).14 Geminate
blocking does not obviously fit into any of these types, and requires
another approach.
We see three plausible phonological accounts of this problem. We
will describe the first in some detail and note the other two only
briefly. First, we suggest that the Autosegmental Linking Condition is
responsible for blocking here (just as has been argued for Korean
(Iverson and Lee, forthcoming) and OHG -/zC-blocking (Iverson,
Davis, and Salmons 1994). This principle says that "in order to
change the feature content of a segment [A] every skeletal slot linked
to [A] must satisfy the rule" (Hayes 1986, this formulation from
Kenstowicz 1994:413). Where blocking occurs, it is because of shared
place features. Geminates are by definition multiply linked and thus
inalterable. Again, the more features shared and the more marked
those features are, the more likely blocking becomes.
Variability in blocking can derive, as Greg Iverson suggests to us,
from two possible configurations, one with feature-sharing and one
without. That is, sequences of the -ukxi type can be represented either
14

This should exhaust the possible types of blocking, pace Clements (1991),
but Casali (1993) finds that Clements-type geometries cannot handle Nawuri
labial blocking of roundness harmony, so these matters remain controversial.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 101

as feature sharing or having two independent instantiations of place
features. The former results in blocking, while the latter does not.
A second way that feature geometry can help motivate this
blocking pattern, is specifically by reference to the affricate status of
the blocking consonants. In works on the structure of "complex
segments," Steriade (1993 and elsewhere, see also Kenstowicz
1994:503-6) has proposed that stops consist of two distinct phases,
closure and release, with affricates characterized as stops with fricative
release rather than full or nonrelease. As Kenstowicz indicates, this
"release position is a natural docking site for aspiration and
glottalization and perhaps secondary place specifications such as
labialization and palatalization" (1994:503). In short, affricates can
be seen as having secondary place as a way of capturing the fricative
release. In this case, where the affricates are ambisyllabic or
disegmental, the consonants could still share this structure.
Incorporating Rice's internal organization of the place node into this
scheme predicts exactly the tendential hierarchy we find among the
old geminates: velars contain the most place structure and are thus
most likely to block and so forth. On Steriade's view, then, geminate
place structures are subordinate to C-place features, offering a close
parallel to blocking by segments with secondary place features.15
Third, Stuart Davis (1994) treats a case of geminate umlaut
blocking in Korean and argues that umlaut in Korean and crosslinguistically is sensitive to syllable weight. Geminate codas give the
target syllable enough weight to make it umlaut-resistant. This view,
while we will not pursue it here, is enticing given the weight sensitivity
of Germanic phonology in general, as familiar from such classic
works as Murray and Vennemann (1983). Primary umlaut itself was,
after all, weight sensitive, in its inherent limitation to a short vowel.
Blocking is, however, not entirely limited to geminates, but occurs
with -mb- clusters as in umbi 'around' (cf. umlauted variants farther
north), etc., if only sporadically. Kenstowicz (1994:422-23) in fact
suggests in a discussion of Kolami vowel copying that geminate
inalterability may be extendible to clusters sharing place of
articulation, coincidentally with nasal + oral stop clusters. Nonetheless,
15

While we do not go so far as to connect vowel height directly to Steriade's
stop aperture, it is at least interesting to note that it is stops with closer release
aperture—i.e., affricates—that block.

102 Howell & Salmons

we have additional reason to understand place-sharing clusters as
sporadic blockers. Nongeminate blocking still most often involves two
intervening consonants, so that the target syllable generally has a
coda. Clements (1991) has proposed a unified set of features common
to vowel and consonant place and demonstrated that "there is
pressure for agreement in place features across tiers" (1991:16) in
CV sequences.16 Clements argues for preferential sharing of place
specifications, such as sequences of [+labial] and those of [+dorsal],
viz. labial consonant + back rounded vowel and velar consonant plus
back rounded vowel. An obstruent marked for place in the coda of
the target syllable could inhibit spread when place features are shared
between nucleus and coda of the target syllable. Existing target
rhymes of -uk or -up represent the preferred, feature-sharing
structure, which is (tendentially) not disturbed by umlaut.17
Geometrically, this preference is realized as features shared on the
coda consonant as subordinates of C-place, resulting in blocking, and
we have variability because this preferred sharing is not pervasive but
competes with independent instantiations of the features on nucleus
and coda.18
This hypothesis that coda obstruents are preferred when they
share place features with the nucleus is, in fact, dramatically confirmed
by comparative Germanic evidence. In seventeenth-century English,
the unrounding of /u/ to [A] is inhibited by a preceding labial—as in
bull, pull, full, wolf—or following velar—cook, look, rook (Jespersen
1909, Clements 1990, Milroy 1992). That is, labiality is retained
16

While monoplanal line-crossing is of course still prohibited, this introduces
the possibility of line-crossing across planes.
17

Note that this point—a preference for codas and nuclei to share their place
features—also gives support to blocking across geminates as well, since velar
and labial geminates represent by definition place-sharing rhymes of target
syllables.
18
This may have more direct prosodic motivation as well. Codas inevitably
suffer restrictions on what features and segments they can bear (for example,
Vennemann 1988, Goldsmith 1990, and Clements 1991), so that this is a
conservative hypothesis on theoretical grounds, where feature sharing between
nucleus and coda is an intuitively attractive way of reducing distinctiveness of
the coda.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 103

between onset and nucleus, dorsality between nucleus and coda.
Jespersen's case parallels our (nongeminate) blocking data perfectly:
both show resistance to an otherwise regular loss of dorsality on
vowels when the rhyme shares [+dors] and [+hi]. Yet more
pronounced instances of place sharing between nucleus and coda can
be observed in Germanic, though, both modern and ancient. Milroy
(1992) reports that Belfast [ae] is raised to [e] before velar consonants
in monosyllable codas, as observed in the dialect of Madison,
Wisconsin as well.19 This kind of example shows particularly strong
preference for place sharing, since C-place features of codas come to
be shared with nuclei rather than as in our situation, where sharing
simply prevents changes away from shared structure.
"Back" or u-umlaut in Old English and Old Frisian shows a
related inclination at an earlier date. Old Frisian velar obstruents
followed by /w/ or IvJ change I'll into I'ml, that is, backness is regressively
assimilated into the nucleus of a preceding syllable (Sjolin 1969, etc.),
as in 8:
(8) Gmc.
*-irjkw*-ikkw*-irjgw*-igu-

Old Frisian
diunk- 'dark'
thiukke 'thick, fat'
siunga 'sing'
niugun 'nine'

Other Germanic languages
ON d0kkr
OS thikki
ON syngva
OS nigun

Dorsality, shared by trigger and all intervening material, comes to be
shared by the target vowel.
To summarize this section, the principle governing which vowels
trigger and are targeted by umlaut governs consonant blocking as
well: the more place features the target shares with intervening
consonants, the more likely umlaut failure becomes. Given that
various West Germanic languages spread place features to target
vowels in this environment, and given attested resistance to losing
identical features in sound change, it is not controversial to suggest
that sequences with a target vowel sharing the appropriate place
features are inclined to resist fronting processes at least sporadically.
19

Note that height gets assimilated, not backness, in these two possible first
steps toward a harmony system. Buccini (1992) establishes a typological
universal that height harmony necessarily precedes frontness harmony.

104 Howell & Salmons

This produces a viable phonological account of blocking and one
intimately connected to primary umlaut blocking in the analysis of
Iverson, Davis, and Salmons (1994), giving a unified account of
umlaut blocking from beginning to end, with the Autosegmental
Linking Condition playing a role throughout the long process.
5. Remaining Apparent Irregularity in Umlaut Failure. The fact
that the residues in the dataset are so few and so variable has suggested
to many that they do not reflect regular sound change. Two processes
have been proposed to account for lexical irregularities, analogy, and
lexical diffusion. The first has already been shown unlikely above
and, while some have hinted about lexical diffusion of umlaut (e.g.,
Hamans 1985), we will not pursue the second here. Our analysis rests
instead on showing the basic regularity of umlaut failure in and as
sound change, but a handful of problematic forms remain, leaving our
rules less than airtight. We are still obligated to show that these are
consistent with the analysis developed here, phonologically,
historically, and perhaps even socially.
With distant assimilations, such wrinkles are remarkably common
and attested in active phonological processes and recent past changes,
some showing parallels to the feature-sharing arguments advanced
here. Some Korean dialects, for instance, show umlaut and umlaut
blocking patterns often like those of OHG primary umlaut. According
to Iverson and Lee (forthcoming), a phonologically active umlaut
process in the Korean dialects of Kyungsang and Cheolla is
"sociolinguistically variable and subject to considerable lexical
exceptionality." For Nawuri, Casali (1993:3-6) reports blocking of
roundness harmony by intervening labial consonants, but this
blocking is "optional and speech-rate dependent." Nawuri
centralization harmony "sometimes fails to occur . . . when one or
both of the flanking consonants is a palatal." In both of these
systems, as in Germanic, place sharing seems to be central to harmony
and failure, while both show lexical exceptionality. Other, if less
precise parallels in lexical exceptionality in harmony systems are
found around the world. Kenstowicz (1994:354-55) reports a handful
of cases of failure of ATR harmony in Akan. Clements and Sezer
(1982:249-50) are able to account for most disharmonic forms in

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 105

Turkish, yet still find themselves with a residue, instances where
harmony processes can be "optional."20
In short, lexical irregularity in umlaut failure—the justification for
considering analogy—is consistent with vowel harmony processes
around the world, in settings where "analogy" cannot be seriously
appealed to.21 If this limited irregularity presents a problem—and we
do not see it as a serious one—it is a problem for theories of vowel
harmony generally, not a problem for the Upper German case in
particular.22 If anything, the regularity in attested Upper German
dialects is astonishing, given the antiquity of umlaut itself. That is, if
morphological realignments had been busily undoing phonological
coherent patterns of umlaut for over a millennium, we should find far
less phonological regularity than we find in more active harmony
processes, perhaps even the complete obliteration of phonological
patterns by analogy. Instead we find roughly the same patterns of
regularity and exceptions in Upper German dialect umlaut and active
harmony systems.
While better understanding of prosody may illuminate exceptions,
a few may ultimately have a social explanation. "Late stage
20

See also Kirchner 1993.

21

We leave aside here later and clearly analogical processes, such as the
elimination of umlaut from the singular of some nominal paradigms, such as the
dative and genitive singular forms of OHG masculine n-stem nouns. Note that
this process is substantially different from the analogical spread of umlaut to
new lexical items.
22

We even leave aside the possibility that more detailed phonetic conditioning is
at work than has hitherto been uncovered, just as Labov (1994:426-28, 444-48)
shows subtler distant conditioning for the Atayalic labial/velar shift, previously
seen as lexical diffusion. For instance, in the limited set of Old High German
verbs with medial labial affricates, i.e., medial consonants ultimately derived
from geminates (following the data in Liissy 1974:105, 109-10), some show
competition between umlauted and umlautless forms (gupfe/gupfe; hiipfe/hupfe;
liipfe/lupfe; miipfe/mupfe; riipfe/rupfe), while another shows only umlautless
forms (schlupfe, schnupfe, schupfe, strupfe, stupfe, verstumpfe, supfe, zupfe).
The first set contains an array of different but always simplex onsets, while the
second set always contains sibilants and seven of eight contain complex onsets.
A similar, if weaker pattern of this type exists for the fern. -jo(n) stems
(1974:89).

106 How ell & Salmons

correction" has become an established part of studies of sound
change in progress and it fits well with the pattern of lexical
exceptions we find here. In late stage correction, lexical exceptions to
otherwise regular sound change reflect borrowings from "higher"
varieties that have not undergone the sound change in question. The
change in question is typical of "change from below," that is,
changes originating in the vernacular and generally reflecting the
"operation of internal, linguistic factors" (Labov 1994:78). Speakers
are not conscious of such change until it reaches its last stages and
when they do become aware of it, new forms can be stigmatized,
motivating reintroduction of a few unchanged forms. Labov
(1994:453-54) reanalyzes a number of putative cases of lexical
diffusion as "late stage correction," including the well-known
Chaozhou tone split. While we lack the necessary social information to
prove this case, we note its plausibility. The handful of Middle High
German forms still blocking with -LC- clusters, for example, would fit
that pattern particularly nicely: arte 'sort, kind', einfalte 'simplicity',
drivalte 'trinity', gewaltec 'violent'. With or without late stage
correction, though, the limited lexical exceptionality we find in the
Old High German data is at most a minor problem for a phonological
account of umlaut failure.
6. Conclusion. Umlaut failure in Old High German and across
Germanic generally is, we conclude, clearly phonological, driven by
one principle: the greater the phonetic difference between target and
trigger, the more likely umlaut is. Less difference correlates then
directly with umlaut failure. Even the pattern of exceptionality finds
parallels in other vowel harmony systems. Less principled analogical
accounts must be dismissed. The hierarchy of umlaut failure reflects
the likely chronological unfolding of umlaut in Upper German, where
forms showing the most failure were the last reached by umlaut
(shown in 9, below).
Across the board, it is the umlautless residues, evidence of where
and how umlaut failed, that provide the key to understanding the
complex unfolding of umlaut over time and space. In primary umlaut,
a process limited to a single short vowel, intervening vocalized liquids
systematically removed many umlautable forms. The last forms to
umlaut were those showing the broadest sharing of features, notably
between vowels and in the secondary place features of intervening

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 107

consonants. The process of Old High German umlaut—from the early
days of primary umlaut with LC/hC blocking to the last stages of /u/
blocked by geminate velars—shows remarkable phonological
coherence, viewed in the right perspective, and a steady progression,
shown in 9.
(9) The generalization of umlaut
1. Primary: only short /a/ target; intervening V-place as target coda
blocks: /a/, but not aLC, ahC
2. Nonprimary:
a. long and short targets, without former blocking environments: /a:/, lol, etc.
b. increasingly higher vowels, to IvJ
c. within the /u/ cases, geminates and place-sharing target
codas block: Everything but -ukxi, etc.
3. Consistent umlaut.
Over the vast majority of the German-speaking territory, umlaut
ultimately generalized across all environments, reaching stage 3. The
few southern relict areas retaining umlautlessness, of type 2c, shed
light on the last steps in umlaut's evolution. Even within those relict
areas, a hierarchy is apparent, with geminate velars at the top, followed
by labial and coronal geminates.
We started with the simple task of showing regular phonological
development to be the source of Umlautfeindlichkeit in Upper
German, but something broader has emerged: the many and
variegated umlaut phenomena found across Germanic all operate and
fail to operate in accordance with one basic principle of assimilation.
REFERENCES
Antonsen, Elmer H. 1966. Review of Aleksander Szulc. 1964. Umlaut und
Brechung: Zur inneren und ausseren Geschichte der nordischen Sprachen.
Language 42.115-22.
. 1969. Zur Umlautfeindlichkeit des Oberdeutschen. Zeitschrift fur
Dialektologie und Linguistik 36.201-7.
Bander, Karl von. 1890. Grundlagen des neuhochdeutschen Lautsystems: Beitrage
zur Geschichte der deutschen Schriftsprache im 15. und 16. Jahrhundert.
Strassburg: Triibner.

108 Howell & Salmons

Barrack, Charles M. 1975. A diachronic phonology from Proto-Germanic to Old
English stressing West-Saxon conditions. The Hague: Mouton.
Bloomfield, Leonard. 1933. Language. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Braune, W. and H. Eggers. 1987. Althochdeutsche Grammatik. 14th edn.
Tubingen: Max Niemeyer.
Brunner, Karl. 1965. Altenglische Grammatik nach der angelsachsischen
Grammatik von Edward Sievers. 3rd edn. Tubingen: Max Niemeyer.
Buccini, Anthony F. 1992. The development of umlaut and the dialectal position
of Dutch in Germanic. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University.
Campbell, Alistair. 1959. Old English grammar. Oxford: Clarendon.
Casali, Roderic F. 1993. Labial opacity and roundness harmony in Nawuri.
Papers in Phonology, ed. by D. Silverman and R. Kirchner, 1-20. (UCLA
occasional papers in linguistics. 13.) Los Angeles: Department of Linguistics,
UCLA.
Catford, J. C. 1988. A practical introduction to phonetics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Clements, George N. 1985. The geometry of phonological features. Phonology
Yearbook 2.225-52.
. 1990. The role of the sonority cycle in core syllabification. Papers in
laboratory phonology I, ed. by J. Kingston and M. Beckman, 283-333.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
. 1991. Place of articulation in consonants and vowels: A unified theory.
(Revised paper presented at NELS 21.) Published 1993 as Lieu d'articulation
des consonnes et des voyelles: une theorie unifee. Architecture des
representations phonologiques, ed. by B. Laks and A. Rialland, 101—45.
(Collection sciences du langage.) Paris: CNRS Editions.
and Elizabeth Hume. 1994. The internal organization of speech sounds.
A handbook of phonological theory, ed. by John Goldsmith, 245-306.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
and Engin Sezer. 1982. Vowel and consonant disharmony in Turkish.
The structure of phonological representations, part II, ed. by H. van der Hulst
and N. Smith, 213-55. Dordrecht: Foris.
Cole, Jennifer and Charles Kisseberth. 1994. An optimal theory of harmony.
Studies in the Linguistic Sciences 24.101-14.
Davis, Garry W. and Gregory K. Iverson. 1995. The High German consonant
shift as feature spreading. AJGLL 7.111-27.
,
, and Joseph C. Salmons. Manuscript. Peripherality in the
spread of the High German consonant shift.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 109

Davis, Stuart. 1994. Geminate consonants in moraic phonology. West Coast
Conference on Formal Linguistics 13.32—45.
Fertig, David. 1996. Orthography, phonology and the umlaut puzzle. Syntactic
and diachronic studies in Germanic linguistics, ed. by Rosina Lippi-Green and
Joseph C. Salmons, 169-84. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Goldsmith, John A. 1990. Autosegmental and metrical phonology. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Goossens, Jan. 1977. Inleiding tot de Nederlandse dialektologie. Groningen:
Wolters-Noordhoff.
. 1980. Middelnederlandse vokaalsystemen. (Verslagen en Mededelingen
van de Koninklijke Academie voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde, 2.)
Ghent: Koninklijke Academic voor Nederlande Taal- en Letterkunde.
Hamans, Camiel. 1985. Umlaut as a harmony process. Papers from the 6th
International Conference on Historical Linguistics, ed. by Jacek Fisiak, 21734. (Current issues in linguistic theory, 34.) Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hayes, Bruce. 1986. Inalterability in CV phonology. Language 62.321-51.
Howell, Robert B. 1983. Contribution to a theory of consonantal influence in
Germanic: Gothic breaking and Old English breaking and velar umlaut.
Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University.
. 1991. Old English breaking and its Germanic analogues. Tubingen:
Max Niemeyer.
Iverson, Gregory K., Garry W. Davis, and Joseph C. Salmons. 1994. Umlaut
blocking environments in Old High German. Folia Linguistica Historica
15.131-48.
and Shin-Sook Lee. Forthcoming. Umlaut uniformity in Korean and Old
High German. Description and explanation in Korean linguistics, ed. by Ross
King. Ithaca: Cornell East Asia Series.
and Joseph C. Salmons. 1996. The primacy of primary umlaut. PBB
118.69-86.
Jespersen, Otto. 1909. A modern English grammar on historical principles.
Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Keller, R. E. 1978. The German language. New Jersey: The Humanities Press.
Kenstowicz, Michael. 1994. Phonology in generative grammar. Oxford:
Blackwell.
King, Robert D. 1969. Historical linguistics and generative grammar.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kirchner, Robert. 1993. Turkish vowel harmony and disharmony: An optimality
theoretic account. Manuscript, Rutgers Optimality Archive (available via ftp
to ruccs.rutgers.edu).

110 Howell & Salmons

Labov, William. 1994. Principles of linguistic change. Volume 1: Internal
factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lass, Roger and John M. Anderson. 1975. Old English phonology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Loey, A. van. 1937. Bijdrage tot de kennis van het Zuidwestbrabantsch in da
Xllle en XlVe eeuw. (Nomina Geographica Flandrica, 4.) The Hague: Nijhoff.
. 1976. Middelnederlandse Spraakunst. 2. Klankleer. 7th edn. Groningen:
H. D. Tjeenk Willink.
Liissy, Heinrich. 1974. Umlautprobleme im Schweizerdeutschen. (Beitrage zur
schweizerdeutschen Mundartforschung, 20.) Frauenfeld: Huber & Co.
Milroy, James. 1992. Linguistic variation and change. Oxford: Blackwell.
Murray, Robert W. and Theo Vennemann. 1983. Sound change and syllable
structure in Germanic phonology. Language 59.514—28.
Noreen, Adolf. 1970. Altnordische Grammatik I: Altislandische und
altnorwegische Grammatik (Laut- und Flexionslehre) unter Beriicksichtigung
des Urnordischen. University: University of Alabama Press. Reprint of 4th
edn., 1884. Halle: Max Niemeyer.
Paul, H., P. Wiehl, and S. Grosse. 1989. Mittelhochdeutsche Grammatik. 23rd
edn. Tubingen: Max Niemeyer.
Penzl, Herbert. 1949. Umlaut and secondary umlaut in Old High German.
Language 25.223-40.
. 1994. Historiographie und Sprachgeschichte: Zur Beschreibung des
althochdeutschen j-Umlauts. AJGLL 6.51-62.
Rice, Keren. 1994. Peripheral in consonants. Canadian Journal of Linguistics
39.191-216.
Salmons, Joseph C. 1994. Umlaut and plurality in Old High German: Some
problems with a natural morphology account. Diachronica. 11.213-29.
Schirmunski, Viktor M. 1962. Deutsche Mundartkunde. Berlin: AkademieVerlag.
Sjolin, Bo. 1969. Einfiihrung in das Friesische. Stuttgart: Metzler.
Steriade, Donca. 1993. Segments, contours, and clusters. Proceedings of the
XVth International Congress of Linguists, Universite Laval, 9-14 August
1992, ed. by Andre Crochetiere, et al, 1.71-82. Sainte-Foy: PU Laval.
Twaddell, W. Freeman. 1938. A note on OHG umlaut. Monatshefte 30.177-81.
Van Coetsem, Frans and Anthony F. Buccini. 1990. Variation and the
reconditioning of phonological rules. Lingua 81.169-220.
Vennemann, Theo. 1972. Phonetic detail in assimilation: Problems in Germanic
phonology. Language 48.863-82.

Umlautless Residues in Germanic 111

. 1988. Preference laws for syllable structure and the explanation of
sound change. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Vetsch, Jakob. 1910. Die Laute der Appenzeller Mundarten. (Beitrage zur
Schweizerdeutschen Grammatik, 1.) Frauenfeld: Huber & Co.
Voyles, Joseph. 1991. A history of OHG /-umlaut. PBB 113.159-94.
. 1992. On Old High German i-umlaut. On Germanic linguistics: Issues
and methods, ed. by Irmengard Rauch, Gerald F. Carr, and Robert L. Kyes,
365-77. (Trends in linguistics. Studies and Monographs, 68.) Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Weijnen, A. 1991. Vergelijkende klankleer van de Nederlandse dialecten. The
Hague: SDU Uitgeverij.
Department of German
818 Van Hise Hall
1220 Linden Drive
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
[rbhowell @ facstaff.wisc.edu]
[jsalmons @ facstaff. wise .edu]

