Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)


University Press Scholarship Online
Oxford Scholarship Online

                           Laws and Rules in Indo‐European
                           Philomen Probert and Andreas Willi

                           Print publication date: 2012
                           Print ISBN-13: 9780199609925
                           Published to Oxford Scholarship Online: September 2012
                           DOI: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199609925.001.0001




                  Older Runic evidence for North‐
                  West Germanic a‐umlaut of u (and
                  ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)
                  Patrick Stiles

                  DOI:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199609925.003.0004




                  Abstract and Keywords

                  The main structural effect of North-West-Germanic ‘a-umlaut’
                  — which involved shuffling the allophones of /i/, /e/ and /u/
                  depending on the following environment — was creation of the
                  phoneme short /o/, split from Proto-Germanic /u/, as in Old
                  High German gold “gold” beside guldīn “golden”. The
                  standard view sees the change as an instance of secondary
                  split, phonologized by the loss of one of the conditioning
                  factors, short a, from final syllables, thus: nom. sg. */nistaz/
                  [nestaz] > /nest(z)/ “nest”. Up to then, the allophones were in
                  complementary distribution. However, such forms in the Older
                  Runic language (c.150 to 500 AD) as horna (Gallehus),
                  worahto [= worahto] (Tune); holtijaR (Gallehus), dohtriR
                  (Tune) call this account into question by showing the change
                  with the supposed conditioning factors intact. The chapter
                  seeks to explain this state of affairs, which is in apparent


Page 1 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  conflict with ‘Polivanov’s Law’, which states there is ‘no split
                  without a merger, that is sound-changes that add to the
                  inventory of phonemes are always triggered by a phonemic
                  merger (including with zero, i.e. loss) elsewhere in the system.


                  Keywords: Old Germanic languages, sound change, a-umlaut, phonologization,
                  Older Runic, Prague School linguistics, PHONEMIC split, Polivanov’s Law


                  4.1 Details of the change and its main structural
                  effect
                  4.1.1 Introductory
                  North‐West Germanic a‐umlaut has been much discussed, yet
                  it seems to me that some of the most interesting and
                  fundamental problems have not received due attention. These
                  are posed by the evidence of Older Runic inscriptions.

                  North‐West Germanic is an intermediate proto‐language,
                  ancestor of both the North Germanic (Scandinavian) and West
                  Germanic languages, which are attested in manuscripts from
                  about 1150 and shortly before 700 AD, respectively, and which
                  both have earlier runic traditions. They constitute two of the
                  three branches of Germanic, the third being East Germanic, in
                  effect Bishop Wulfila's Bible translation from the fourth
                  century AD, which is attested in manuscripts written two
                  centuries later. Older Runic is used to designate the (early
                  North Germanic) language of runic inscriptions written in the
                  Older Futhark alphabet, from the earliest examples, c. (1)50,
                  up to c. 500 AD.1

                    (p.44)   This article is not intended as a contribution to
                  linguistic theory, but to understanding how a‐umlaut might
                  have been phonologized. I lay no claims to originality in my
                  analysis. Most of what I shall present lies buried in the
                  secondary literature in the context of other topics, and I have
                  done little more than disinter it. The ideas are hardly
                  revolutionary; they have just not been applied to the specific
                  problem of a‐umlaut and are not reflected in our handbooks of
                  Germanic. I have kept references to a minimum and
                  concentrated on earlier work (cf. n. 3).




Page 2 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  4.1.1.1 Mechanism
                  The term ‘a‐umlaut’ is used here—faute de mieux—as an
                  inaccurate but convenient label to refer to a set of early
                  assimilatory changes in North‐West Germanic affecting the
                  high and mid short vowels in accented syllables.2 The Proto‐
                  Germanic inventory had four members: /i/, /e/, /a/, /u/ (cf.
                  Benediktsson 1967). The change involved the lowering and
                  raising of short i and e and the lowering of short u, depending
                  on the one hand whether a high or low vowel followed in the
                  next syllable and on the other whether a nasal‐initial
                  consonant cluster immediately followed. (The vowel a was
                  unaffected by these changes.) The diphthong /eu/ was also
                  subject to a‐umlaut, but will not be of concern here.

                  4.1.1.2 Environments
                  The relevant environments are three in number: those that
                  conditioned a high vowel, a low vowel, or were neutral. They
                  are constituted as follows:

                       (a) High vowel: before i,ī, (iu) and j in the following
                       syllable, and when the intervening consonantism starts
                       with a nasal, regardless of the vocalism of the following
                       syllable. (The sequence *‐eww‐ also became *‐iggw‐
                        (p.45) regardless of the following vowel: see

                       Heidermanns 1986: 297–9, Rasmussen 1989a; cf. Kock
                       1910: 98. Similarly, only the sequence ‐ugg(w)‐ occurs;
                       cf. Kock 1898: 517.)
                       Examples: *giƀiđ ‘gives’ (beside geƀan ‘to give’),
                       *hringaz ‘ring’ (〈 *hrengaz, cf. Finnish rengas),
                       *hundaz ‘dog’.
                       (b) Low vowel: before short a, long ō (and long ā, in so
                       far as it existed). (Proto‐Germanic absolute final
                       bimoric long *‐ō# had already shortened to *‐u in
                       North‐West Germanic by the time of a‐umlaut.)
                       Examples: *weraz ‘man’ (〈 *wiraz, cf. Lat. vir), *snozō‐
                       ‘daughter in law’ (〈 *snuzō‐), *golþa ‘gold’ (beside
                       *gulþīn‐ ‘golden’), *korna ‘corn’ (〈 *kurna), *worhtō ‘I
                       worked, made’ (beside *wurhtē 3sg.).




Page 3 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                       (c) Neutral: before u,ū, and ē (also short e, if it existed
                       in unaccented syllables). Also when nothing followed
                       (in monosyllables).
                       Examples: *siđuz ‘custom’, *međuz ‘mead’, *wig ipv.
                       ‘kill!’, *weg ipv. ‘carry!’, *sehs ‘six’, *snuzu nom. sg.
                       ‘daughter in law’,*duhtēr nom. sg. ‘daughter’.

                  As can be seen, in environment (c) the vowel was unaffected
                  and the etymological value was retained. This means that
                  although /i/ and /e/ were to a large extent in complementary
                  distribution (cf. 4.1.1.3), they did not fully merge as phonemes
                  (cf. for example Beeler 1966, Benediktsson 1967: 190–4;
                  already Luick 1914–40: 1.i. §71 A2).

                  4.1.1.3 Distribution of allophones
                  The distribution of allophones of the four short accented
                  vowels in the various environments can be summarized as in
                  Table 4.1.


                    Table 4.1 Distribution of allophones of the four
                    short accented vowels in North‐West Germanic

                            High vowel                   Low vowel                 Neutral

                     /i/    [i]                          [e]                       [i]

                     /e/    [i]                          [e]                       [e]

                     /u/    [u]                          [o]                       [u]

                     /a/    [a]                          [a]                       [a]

                  This schema implies a stage in the development of the North‐
                  West Germanic languages when there were automatic
                  positional allophones [i] and [e] of /i/ and /e/, and [u] and [o]
                  of /u/ in the raising and lowering environments just specified.
                  (By contrast, a occurred in all environments.) During this
                  ‘phonetic period’,         (p.46)   there were sub‐phonemic variations
                  within a paradigm, for example nom. sg. [duhte:r], but gen. pl.
                  [dohtro:].

                  4.1.1.4 Creation of short /o/
                  The main structural effect of a‐umlaut is the creation of the
                  phoneme short /o/, split from Proto‐Germanic /u/. (As



Page 4 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  concerns /i/ and /e/, the upshot is chiefly changes in the
                  incidence of pre‐existent phonemes.) Exploring the means
                  whereby the single phoneme PGmc short /u/ came to be
                  replaced by two phonemes, North and West Germanic /u/ and /
                  o/, is the concern of this article.

                  4.2 The structuralist account and its
                  inadequacies
                  4.2.1 The change as ‘secondary split’
                  As the development of /u/ and /o/ from PGmc short */u/
                  entailed adding a new term to the phonemic inventory, the
                  change is classified by structuralist theory as an example of
                  secondary split (as opposed to primary split, where the
                  ‘splitting’ allophones join pre‐existing phonemes and the
                  overall inventory is unaffected).3 It is an axiom, known as
                  Polivanov's Law,4 that in a phonological system, there is ‘no
                  split without a merger’. That is to say: any split always
                  involves a simultaneous merger of some kind. In primary split,
                  the splitting‐off allophone is the one that does the merging
                  (and the process can also be styled ‘partial merger’). In the
                  case of secondary split, the merger takes place elsewhere, as
                  the creation of the new phoneme is triggered by merger
                  (including with zero) among the conditioning factors; loss of
                  contrast there transfers the distinctive function to the
                  conditioned phones.

                  4.2.2 The classic interpretation
                  The classic structuralist interpretation is that a‐umlaut was
                  phonologized by the loss (merger with zero) of one of the
                  conditioning factors, short a, from final               (p.47)   syllables: thus,
                  for example, nom. sg. /hurna/ [horna] 〉 /horn/ ‘horn’. That is,
                  the allophones were in complementary distribution until they
                  were phonemicized by the loss of final ‐a (generally regarded
                  as the vowel that was lost earliest from final syllables).5

                  This view is epitomized by Moulton (1961a: 14–15):

                      Die komplementäre Verteilung von urgerm. *[i] und *[e],
                      *[u] und *[o], *[iu] und *[eo] war von dem
                      Weiterbestehen der unbetonten Vokale der folgenden




Page 5 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                      Silben (*i, *u, bzw. *a) völlig abhängig. Solange diese
                      unbetonten Vokale fortlebten, wurde die komplementäre
                      Verteilung der Allophone aufrechterhalten. Sobald die
                      unbetonten Vokale aber zusammenfielen (welches
                      jedenfalls theoretisch hätte vorkommen können) oder
                      schwanden (welches tatsächlich eintrat), war die
                      komplementäre Verteilung der betonten Vokale
                      durchbrochen.

                      …um die phonetischen Oppositionen *[i e], *[u o], *[iu
                      eo] zu phonologisieren, genügte es, daß die
                      komplementäre Verteilung der Allophone in je einer
                      Lautumgebung aufgehoben wurde. Der Verlust dieser
                      unbetonten Vokale und damit die Phonologisierung der
                      Allophone der betonten Vokale ist eine Erscheinung, die
                      allen nord‐ und westgerm. Sprachen gemeinsam war.

                  (Moulton erroneously assumes complementary distribution; cf.
                  4.1.1.2–3.)

                  4.2.3 Older Runic counter‐evidence
                  This account would be exemplary and unobjectionable, were it
                  not for the existence of certain forms in the Older Runic
                  language.6 I cite as examples forms for which both reading
                  and interpretation are fairly certain: horna ‘horn’ acc. sg.
                  (Gallehus), worahto ‘I made’ [= worahto] (Tune), holtijaR ‘of
                  Holt’ (Gallehus), dohtriR ‘daughters’ nom. pl. (Tune).7

                  The first two examples have 〈o〉 (presumably o) correctly
                  conditioned; the second two examples have 〈o〉 (presumably
                  o) analogically transferred from a ‘forme de fondation’ to a
                  ‘forme fondée’ and present an environment that ‘ought’ to
                  have 〈u〉 (u).

                    (p.48)   These forms confront the classic structuralist view with
                  two problems:

                       (1) Short ‐a has clearly not been lost—indeed its
                       retention after heavy and light syllables both medially
                       and finally is one of the defining characteristics of the
                       Older Runic linguistic stage, cf. Grønvik (1998: 15)—so
                       we would not expect the allophones to be graphically



Page 6 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                       represented. We should have only 〈u〉‐spellings in all
                       these instances, representing /u/, and the rune 〈o〉
                       should denote solely the long vowel /o:/.8 The fact that
                       the allophones are graphically represented indicates
                       that the sound change of a‐umlaut, paradoxically and
                       ‘prematurely’, has somehow been phonologized before
                       the loss of its conditioning factors. In addition, and in
                       apparent contradiction of Polivanov's Law (cf. 4.2.1),
                       we appear to have an instance of split without merger.
                       If it is not the loss of the conditioning factors, what has
                       phonemicized the allophone [o] of the phoneme */u/?
                       (2) The distribution of allophones is patently not
                       complementary, which again indicates that the sound
                       change has been phonologized.

                  As scholars almost invariably remark, the forms holtijaR ,
                  nom. sg. of a derived adjective, and dohtriR , nom. pl.,
                  presuppose base‐forms /holta‐/* and /dohtar‐/*.9 But, although
                  this statement is evidently correct, it cannot be said to be
                  particularly illuminating for our purposes; the nub of the
                  matter is how we are to account for such forms as /holta/*
                  and /dohte:r/*. These forms, and /horna/ and /worhto:/,
                  constitute the core of the problem that Older Runic poses for
                  the classic structuralist view of a‐umlaut; holtijaR and
                  dohtriR are merely an epiphenomenon.

                  It is admittedly a very small corpus of four items—extendable
                  to six if the base‐forms just discussed are included—but
                  adequate in the circumstances, I believe. That is, having more
                  data would not necessarily tell us much more about the
                  language. The two inscriptions come from south‐east Norway
                  (Tune) and south Jutland in Denmark (Gallehus), which
                  involves a reasonable geographic spread.

                  4.2.4 Distribution of reflexes
                  There has been quite some discussion of the second problem
                  mentioned in 4.2.3, that of the distribution of the reflexes,
                  largely in the context of the question of ‘i and e, two phonemes
                  or one?’ (a non‐issue as they were clearly two, cf. 4.1.1.2–3),
                  and the problem of ‘failure of a‐umlaut of i’.10 However, the
                  focus here is on the phonologization of o.


Page 7 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                    (p.49)   Of the West Germanic languages, High German is
                  usually considered to have carried through the change of u
                  to o most consistently, cf. OHG wolf, OE wulf ‘wolf’. Yet, even
                  here, by‐forms—e.g. OHG snora, snur(a), Germ. Schnur
                  ‘daughter in law’, etc.—indicate that later repartitions are the
                  result of analogy. In some instances, where there were both
                  semantic and phonological variants, the products could be
                  lexicalized, cf. OHG stehhal(a) ‘drinking vessel’ and stihhil(a)
                  ‘prick, sting (Germ. Stachel)’, cognate with Goth. stikls
                  ‘drinking vessel’.

                  It should be noted that in North Germanic reflexes of the
                  lowering of u to o show a dialectal distribution. There is a cline
                  from west to east, with o‐reflexes much more established in
                  the west—in Icelandic, Faroese, Norwegian, and Danish west
                  of the Great Belt (Jutlandic and on Funen)—than in Danish
                  east of the Great Belt, Scanian (the dialect of Skåne), Swedish,
                  and Old Gutnish (the language of the island of Gotland), where
                  u‐reflexes predominate. See Bandle (1973: 24–8), with
                  important earlier references; compare also the discussion in
                  Benediktsson (1967: 184–6). It is clear that the repartition is
                  largely the result of secondary developments (cf. Kock 1910:
                  esp. 138–9). Thus, even in Old Gutnish, which has one of the
                  highest proportions of u‐outcomes, the word for ‘daughter’ has
                  preserved a reflex of *o in certain forms of the paradigm, for
                  example the accusative singular: dōtur (〈 *dohtaru); while
                  elsewhere showing a reflex of u levelled from case‐forms
                  providing a high‐vowel environment: dat. pl. dȳtrum (see
                  4.1.1.2–3). This is no doubt because the *‐h‐ was lost and the
                  preceding vowel lengthened, fossilizing the alternation.11

                  Because of the nature of the evidence, the remainder of this
                  article relates to Older Runic rather than the rest of North‐
                  West Germanic. However, the discussion is mainly about
                  interpreting the evidence rather than the evidence itself.

                  4.2.5 The problem of phonologization
                  Relatively little attention seems to have been paid to the first
                  problem mentioned in 4.2.3—how /o/ came to be phonemicized
                  —except by some Scandinavian scholars whose response is to
                  deny that there was any such thing as a‐umlaut in the sense


Page 8 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  used here. (Part of the difficulty stems from a literalistic
                  interpretation of a‐umlaut to mean lowering before a following
                  short a and nothing else, cf. n. 2.) These scholars operate
                  instead with a lowering before certain consonants.

                    (p.50)   Thus Harry Andersen (1960: 406) speaks of ‘o‐forms
                  such as holtijaR (which presupposes *holta not *hulta)
                  worahto and dohtriR , which can have nothing whatsoever to
                  do with a presumed a‐umlaut’ and concludes that the ‘shift of u
                  to o must be extremely old in the Germanic languages
                  (compare Gothic) and it must have been independent of a
                  following a’.12 He and others posit a Proto‐Germanic lowering
                  of u to o before certain consonants, notably r, h—as in Gothic—
                  (and to a lesser extent l).13

                  This claim does not stand up to scrutiny. In the first place, it is
                  directly refuted by such West Germanic forms as OE, OHG
                  burg ‘(fortified) town’, OHG suht ‘illness’, zuht ‘nourishment,
                  breeding, offspring’; as well as Old Gutnish dȳtrum dat. pl.
                  ‘daughter’, cited in 4.2.4.

                  Secondly, the fact that Proto‐Germanic had no /o/‐phoneme
                  means that if there was a lowering of /u/ before certain
                  consonants, it must have been sub‐phonemic. Yet, proponents
                  of the lowering view offer no account of how a short [o]‐
                  allophone was phonemicized. (I would not deny the possibility
                  that a lowering influence of h—and r and l—may have worked
                  in such a way as to favour the generalization of o‐variants,
                  once the phoneme /o/ existed. Consonantal environments
                  apparently played a role in determining lexicalized forms of
                  words; cf. Bandle 1973: 25–7, with references.)

                  These scholars are right to have raised objections, for, as we
                  have seen, there are problems the ‘standard view’ ignores.
                  Grønvik (1998: 86) notes that ‘diese Allophone [wurden]
                  phonemisiert, ohne daß dieser Vorgang bisher völlig geklärt
                  wäre. Diese Phonemisierung ist jedoch schon für die älteste
                  Runensprache…sicher nachzuweisen.’ The problem should at
                  least be addressed, even if it cannot be satisfactorily
                  answered.




Page 9 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  4.3 Ways in which allophones achieve phonemic
                  status
                  4.3.1 The standard view
                  Conveniently for the present purposes, in a couple of articles
                  Dobson explicitly considered the question of how it is that
                  allophones come to be phonemicized (1962: 141–4, essentially
                  repeated in 1969: 43–8). Two of the ways he gives in which ‘a
                  contextual variant, an allophone, comes to be regarded as a
                  distinct     (p.51)   sound in its own right, a phoneme separate
                  from the one from which it arose’ (1962: 141) are of relevance
                  to changes that add a phoneme to the inventory (cf. 4.2.1).
                  These are (cf. 1969: 43):

                       (1) destruction, by some independent sound change, of
                       the environment in which the allophone arose, so that it
                       ceases to be tied to an existing phonetic context
                       (2) an allophone of one phoneme developed in one
                       context or set of contexts may become phonetically
                       identical with an allophone of a different phoneme
                       developed in a different context or set of contexts, in
                       such a way that the merged allophones are neither
                       referable to a single source nor identifiable as
                       occurring in limited and recognizable contexts.

                  The first method is prototypical secondary split; the second
                  could result in merger with an existing third phoneme (and
                  thus be a kind of ‘partial merger’) or it could lead to creation
                  of a new phoneme (for example, in a given language, rounding
                  of /e/ and fronting of /o/ could coincide and produce a
                  previously non‐existent /ö/; in those circumstances, the split
                  would also be the product of a merger, although not among
                  the conditioning factors). What is clear, however, is that
                  neither of these routes can account for the phonologization of
                  a‐umlaut (cf. 4.2.3).

                  Dobson goes so far as to exclude a further way in which an
                  allophone could become a phoneme (perhaps because he
                  conceives of this as a general process that comes about ‘when
                  the variant ceases to be recognizably dependent on the
                  context or contexts in which it originally developed’, 1962:
                  141). In his later article (1969: 44), he writes:


Page 10 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                      analogical processes, as when a variant developed in one
                      inflexional form is transferred to another, must always
                      take place after a distinction has become phonemic;3
                      the possibility of transference depends on observation
                      and choice, and the lack of an automatic link with the
                      context. Thus in primitive OE there must already have
                      been a phonemic distinction between æ and a
                      before *færiþ could be remodelled as *fariþ (to become
                      færþ); it is the business of the phonologist to ask by what
                      means it had become phonemic, for it certainly does not
                      depend on the mere physical difference between the
                      sounds, which is slight.

                      3
                       Explanations which assume the analogical substitution
                      of one allophone for another are contrary to principle…

                  (Cf. Dobson 1962: 143–4 n. 1.) Trnka ([1936 =] 1982: 30)
                  seems to have been the first expressly to deny the possibility
                  of analogical transference of allophones (also with reference
                  to the Old English a ≠ æ opposition).

                  4.3.2 Phonemicization by levelling
                  However, Bazell, for one, had already dissented from this
                  position, claiming that an allophone can indeed achieve
                  phonemic status by ‘levelling’ (1952: 37):

                          (p.52)   The analogical transference of an allophone is by
                      definition impossible, since the ‘allophone’ would then
                      have phonemic status. Occasionally (although this is not
                      a very productive source of new phonemes, and is even
                      denied entirely by some scholars) new phonemic
                      distinctions arise in this way. Thus the Old English short
                      vowels a (before back vowels of the following syllable,
                      including the combination ‐ia‐) and æ (elsewhere) appear
                      to have been variants before analogical forms (fare subj.
                      pres. after infin. faran etc., as against fære dat. sing. of
                      fær) arose.

                  Cf. also the discussion in Hoenigswald (1944: 82–3).

                  Bazell, I think, must be correct (probably also specifically for
                  the a ≠ æ opposition in West Saxon Old English; similarly



Page 11 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  Samuels 1972: 35). Yet this observation still begs the question
                  of how it can be that speakers should start shuffling around a
                  supposedly automatic alternation.

                  4.3.3 Alternations can cease to be automatic
                  On this topic, C. A. Ladd (1964: 656) offers an interesting
                  insight that adds detail and clarification to Bazell's statement.
                  In brief, the alternation must cease to be wholly automatic—if
                  by ‘automatic’ we mean that speakers are unaware of it. After
                  a lapse of time, the allophonic rule that gave rise to the
                  alternation is no longer ‘live’ and

                      a new generation of speakers hears the allophones as
                      two sounds rather than one. We cannot suppose that
                      children have to wait for a minimal pair before they
                      decide whether two sounds form two separate phonemes
                      or not; what matters is that they can interchange them
                      freely…children learning the language…imitate the
                      sounds in the distribution in which they heard them, a
                      distribution which depends on phonetic criteria. At the
                      same time, however, the way is now open for analogical
                      interchange which will disturb the phonetic pattern. It is
                      in fact the possibility of disturbance which indicates that
                      the change has reached the phonemic level; the two
                      things go hand in hand. Frequently, it is the appearance
                      of analogical forms which leads to the recognition that
                      the sound‐change has occurred…


                  4.3.4 The role of ‘system balance’
                  Some remarks of Kuryłowicz regarding the phonologization of
                  ‘a‐umlaut’ are of relevance to how speakers might have
                  become aware of the previously automatic alternation in this
                  instance (1952b: 54):14

                        (p.53)   The rise of long ā…from ē 1…severs the
                      quantitative bond between [short] /a/ and [long] /o:/, the
                      latter becoming the long grade of [o]. The vocalic
                      timbres [o] and [u], up to now variants of a single
                      phoneme /u/, become INDIRECTLY autonomous owing to
                      the phonological distinction between the respective long
                      vowels /o:/ and /u:/…



Page 12 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  Kuryłowicz incisively draws attention to the relevance of the
                  North‐West Germanic rise of a new long /a:/ phoneme (by
                  shift). This had the effect of changing the correlations between
                  short and long members of the phonological space. Linking the
                  development of the short vowels to the shift of long /e:/ to /a:/
                  (except in final syllables) certainly correlates with the fact that
                  a‐umlaut is a non‐Gothic North‐West Germanic feature (cf. n.
                  2).

                  Elmer H. Antonsen developed Kuryłowicz's thought and
                  interpreted it as demonstrating how [u] and [o] were
                  phonemicized by what Antonsen came to call ‘system
                  balance’ (e.g. 1965: 27, 1972: 138, 2002: 25). In his 1965
                  article, he noted that /o/ filled the ‘hole in the pattern’ of short
                  vowels (compare also Benediktsson 1967: 177, 1970: 102).
                  Introduction of a phoneme as a result of the re‐evaluation of
                  allophones in terms of the oppositions in the phonological
                  system has been discussed several times by Moulton (his study
                  1961b offers an interesting analogue to the case of a‐
                  umlaut).15

                  Awareness of the distinction between the allophones is the
                  necessary precondition, but levelling (which may itself have
                  been ‘unconscious’) was the decisive step that gave
                  phonological status to the variants by disrupting the
                  complementary distribution.

                  4.4 Diachronic considerations and the question
                  of reversion
                  4.4.1 The transmission problem
                  The factors outlined in 4.3.2–4 help explain how a‐umlaut
                  came to be phonologized before its conditioning factors were
                  lost, in defiance of Polivanov's Law. Dobson—and, of course,
                  many others; I am only using him as the representative of a
                  viewpoint—had a too rigidly synchronic concept of the
                  phoneme, and (as a corollary) an almost a‐chronistic approach
                  to its application to historical phonology (cf. 4.3.1). Language
                  may be a system ‘où tout se tient’, as de Saussure maintained
                  (see Koerner 1999), but it is rather a loose system and ‘all
                  grammars        (p.54)   leak’ (Sapir 1921: 38), even synchronic ones.
                  If this were not so and they were ‘watertight’, there would be


Page 13 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  no redundancy and the loss of a phoneme, indeed any real
                  change, would be impossible (cf. Hockett 1965: 203). The
                  reality is continuous change and, even in a synchronic
                  analysis, we are trying to hit a moving target.

                  The simplistic transfer of methods of synchronic analysis on to
                  the diachronic plane is reminiscent of Zeno's paradoxes (cf.
                  Coseriu 1958: 10–12 = 1974: 12–14). One of these is taken up
                  memorably by Tolstoj, in the opening section of War and
                  Peace, Book Three, Part Three: operating with discrete units
                  of motion instead of continuous motion has the result that
                  —‘logically’—Achilles can never overtake the tortoise, who has
                  been given a start, although we all know in reality that he can.
                  Likewise—puristically—the i‐mutation of short o is
                  ‘impossible’, because, according to the rules of a‐umlaut (cf.
                  4.1.1.2), only u could stand before an i‐mutation factor. Yet, of
                  course, the i‐mutation of o is well attested, being reflected, for
                  example, in OIc. dǿtr ‘daughters’ (nom. pl.). Janda and others
                  have fallen into the same ‘logical’ trap (cf. Joseph and Janda
                  2003: 409–10 with references) in assuming that the loss of
                  conditioning factors ‘ought’ in every case to result in reversion
                  of allophones; cf. 4.4.2–3. This is a diachrony that is strangely
                  devoid of history.

                  Even granting the correctness of the dogma that all speakers
                  are totally unaware of subphonemic alternations, this could
                  only really be so synchronically; it ignores the transmission of
                  language from generation to generation (as noted by Ladd, cf.
                  4.3.3)—recognizing, of course, that generations form a
                  continuum within the community, cf. Weinreich et al. (1968:
                  114) (already Saussure, Cours de linguistique générale I.2. §1
                  = 1955: 106).

                  4.4.2 ‘Significant allophones’
                  I think a point C. A. Ladd makes about Old English
                  palatalization earlier in the article cited previously is a crucial
                  one (1964: 655):

                      what happens when a subphonemic variation becomes
                      phonemic…is a vital stage in the process which has
                      received curiously little attention…In the case of



Page 14 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                      conditioned sound‐change the result will eventually be a
                      phonemic split of some sort. Now, it is surely not
                      sufficient to say that in such cases a subphonemic
                      variation becomes phonemic as the result, for instance,
                      of a loss of conditioning sounds. In the case of the split
                      between back and front c and g in Old English there is
                      little question that other consonants than c and g
                      originally had fronted allophones, as the same sounds
                      which produced fronting of c and g also produced front
                      mutation of the vowel of the preceding syllable, no
                      matter what the intervening consonant. But only in the
                      case of c and g had the variation between the two
                      allophones reached such a degree that they could stand
                      on    (p.55)   their own without the support of the
                      conditioning sounds. In other words, even before the loss
                      of the conditioning sounds, the two allophones must have
                      been potentially phonemic…

                  It is probable that these reconstructable ‘significant
                  allophones’, which hindsight reveals to have been ‘potential
                  phonemes’, correspond synchronically to what may usefully be
                  termed ‘perceived allophones’.16 Instead of an absolute divide
                  between the phonemic and subphonemic, there is rather a
                  cline from unconscious ‘universal phonetic’ accommodations,
                  through unnoticed automatic alternations to perceived
                  allophones (the dividing line between these two probably
                  varying somewhat from speaker to speaker), and on to actual
                  phonemic contrasts (the acid test being that they are actually
                  exploited functionally). Here, there is also a range, from
                  ‘marginal phonemes’, with minimal, to ‘full phonemes’, with
                  maximal functional load.17

                  As C. A. Ladd has pointed out, minute changes in
                  pronunciation cannot spread consistently through a speech
                  community ‘unless they spread by                 (p.56)   imitation’; further,
                  ‘to be imitable, variations in pronunciation must be
                  perceptible’ (1965: 100–1; cf. also Weinreich, Labov, and
                  Herzog 1968: 130–1). If this were not so, mimicry (the
                  imitation of someone else's speech idiosyncracies), let alone
                  code‐switching, would be impossible.




Page 15 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  4.4.3 Allophone formation and reversion
                  Reversion, a subject that Ladd raises in the quotation given in
                  4.4.2, is a genuine issue. In many cases where split would be
                  possible, the presumed allophonic variation effectively
                  vanishes and no phonemicization takes place when the
                  ‘conditioning factors’ are lost (cf. Hoenigswald 1999: 204).
                  Polivanov had already observed that ‘split can only take place
                  when there is sufficient physical difference between the
                  diverging variants’ (1928: 38 = 1974: 77). Similarly,
                  Hoenigswald added a caveat concerning secondary split:
                  ‘allophones become phonemes when part or all of their
                  determining environments fall together without at the same
                  time canceling the phonetic difference between the allophones
                  in question’ (1960: 94, also 77 ‘if the phones remain distinct’;
                  cf. 1999: 204). Compare also the discussion of Janda (in Joseph
                  and Janda 2003: 409–10, with references). Van Wijk, in the
                  early days of Prague structuralism, explicitly recognized that
                  whether phonologization takes place in a given instance is
                  largely a matter of phonetics and thus subject to chance (e.g.
                  1939: 304–5).18 Much the same point has been made by Ohala
                  (e.g. in Joseph and Janda 2003: 683–5; perhaps it is not
                  surprising that those who consider these issues reach similar
                  conclusions). This underlines the fact that our knowledge is
                  imperfect and little more is open to us than post‐hoc
                  rationalization.

                  Another factor to bear in mind when considering the apparent
                  reversion of allophones that one might have expected to be
                  phonemicized is the process of allophone formation. A prime
                  example, which is scarcely mentioned by the handbooks,
                  concerns the phonologization of i‐umlaut in Old High German
                  —or rather the non‐phonologization of i‐umlaut at the time of
                  the loss of short ‐i after heavy syllables. This is certainly
                  different from the situation in Old English: compare OE giest,
                  giestas ‘guest, guests’ and mann, menn ‘man, men’, beside
                  OHG gast, gesti and man, man. In view of the outcome of
                  ‘primary umlaut’ (as in gesti), it is hard to see why supposed
                  umlaut allophones (of a, at least) should have reverted before
                  lost ‐i. Rather than positing wholesale reversion—shortly to be
                  followed by phonemicization of other apparently ‘identical’



Page 16 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                    (p.57)   conditioned variants—it seems more plausible to
                  suppose that ‘significant’ i‐umlaut allophones had not yet
                  formed when short ‐i was lost after heavy syllables, but
                  developed later, and were phonemicized by the loss of *‐(i)j‐
                  (including ‐ja‐ 〉 ‐e‐), which causes i‐umlaut in both English
                  and German, e.g. to drench : tränken; to hear : hören. (On the
                  subject of allophone formation, we may further note that
                  Russian shows no sign of developing an allophone [ŋ] in words
                  such as bank ‘bank’: [bank], not †[baŋk].)

                  4.4.4 Citation forms and the spoken chain
                  It is also worth recalling that sound change originates not in
                  citation forms but in the spoken chain. The allegro forms of
                  connected speech are characterized by special allophones
                  conditioned by their environment in the utterance, and varying
                  degrees of reduction (utterances are often distinguished by
                  distinctive features that do not play any part in the
                  composition of the ‘paradigmatic’ phoneme inventory). In
                  ‘decoding speech’, the listener evaluates them against the
                  template of the lento citation forms (which conventionally
                  serve as the basis of phonemic analysis).

                  At certain stages, when the divergence gets too big for
                  ‘comfort’ (ease of comprehension), some sort of
                  accommodation takes place in (sections of) the speech
                  community. Either (somewhat more rarely, I should guess),
                  speakers adjust their ‘contextual forms’ so as to bring them
                  more into line with the citation form (‘don't speak in such a
                  slovenly fashion, dear’), or (the most usual strategy), the
                  citation form is restructured to bring it more into line with the
                  contextual form—a fact to which Polivanov already drew
                  attention (1928: 39–40 = 1974: 77–8; cf. also Hockett 1965:
                  203). This must be what happens in the case of such ‘radical’
                  changes as i‐umlaut, when a whole new class of (front
                  rounded) phonemes enters the language and, for a period, the
                  new forms that contain them compete with the ‘original’
                  forms.

                  This is one way in which sound change can take place within
                  purely chronological ‘space’ (cf. C. A. Ladd 1964: 656, quoted
                  in 4.3.3), even where there is little relevant geographical or



Page 17 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  sociological variation in a given speech community (e.g. a
                  remote island containing a single village of egalitarians).
                  Greater geographical dispersal and social stratification of a
                  single speech community will certainly lead to widespread
                  ‘dialect borrowing’ and a greatly increased rate of change,
                  which again can be somewhat offset by literacy, standard
                  languages, and so forth.

                  I have been concerned with some aspects of the ‘generation of
                  innovations’ rather than the ‘propagation of change’ in all its
                  sociolinguistic aspects, something we cannot reach in
                  reconstructive work.

                    (p.58)   4.5 Main conclusions
                  4.5.1 Review of how a phoneme can be introduced into the
                  inventory
                  To round off the discussion, I rehearse the various ways in
                  which a new phoneme can be introduced into the inventory:

                       I. As the result of ‘regular sound change’, which is to
                       say by secondary split, to which Polivanov's Law
                       applies (cf. 4.2.1, 4.2.3(1)).
                       II. As the result of some kind of ‘analogy’ (‘split without
                       merger’), where—because it is not strictly a sound‐
                       change process—Polivanov's Law does not apply:
                             (a) The redistribution of perceived allophones by
                             levelling within a paradigm and/or between a
                             base and a (synchronic) derivative. This is the
                             process I have invoked for NWGmc a‐umlaut,
                             where the allophones had come to be perceived
                             through ‘system balance’ (4.3.4). Levelling of
                             this kind is often tacitly adduced in historical
                             work, but it is unclear to what extent it is
                             explicitly acknowledged in historical linguists’
                             theory of what they do. As in conventional
                             secondary split (I), the variants must have been
                             phonetically conditioned and phonemicization
                             results from disruption of complementary
                             distribution. This does not hold for the
                             remaining two analogical types.




Page 18 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                            (b) ‘Morphophonemic analogy’—the
                            redistribution of allophones by pressure of an
                            existing morphophonological alternation. Such a
                            development was first suggested by Jakobson
                            (1949: 17 = 1971: 114), with the example of
                            Byelorussian palatalized consonants. The
                            existence of the alternations /rv‐ú/ ‘I tear’ /rv’‐
                            oš/ ‘you tear’, /vr‐ú/ ‘I tell lies’ /vr’‐oš/ ‘you tell
                            lies’ calls into being the pair /tk‐ú/ ‘I weave’ /tk’‐
                            oš/ ‘you weave’ (replacing /tk‐oš/) and creates
                            the phoneme palatalized /k’/, which up until then
                            had been a positional variant of /k/ in other
                            contexts.
                            (c) ‘Morphophonemic genesis’—the recombining
                            of existing distinctive features so as to fill out
                            the pattern of a productive morphophonological
                            alternation. A phoneme is created de novo,
                            without there having been a pre‐existing
                            (phonetically conditioned) allophone awaiting
                            phonemicization. This process was proposed by
                            Moulton (1961b: esp. 243–6), with an example
                            from Swiss German dialects, where the regularly
                            developed umlaut alternation /ɔ/~/ö/ (alongside
                            the regularly developed umlaut alternation /o/
                            ~ /ö/) was replaced by the alternation /ɔ/~/ɔ̈/,
                            featuring the wholly new phoneme /ɔ̈/. See also
                            Moulton (1967: 1402–5), where he introduced
                            the term and added some analogous Dutch data.

                         (p.59)   III. Via ‘foreign loans’—the result of borrowing
                       of words containing the new phoneme (from another
                       dialect or language). An example is the introduction of
                       French loans with initial v‐ into Middle English dialects
                       that lacked initial fricative voicing, which made the
                       sound phonemic. In Modern Engish, /ž/ occurs in
                       French loans such as prestige, and has brought within
                       its orbit the medial sound of words such as vision (with
                       [‐ž‐] from [‐zj‐]), beside visible (with [z]) and visual,
                       which varies.




Page 19 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  Whereas types I and II rely on factors internal to the
                  phonological system, type III relates to external factors and, as
                  a result, does not necessarily present a particularly interesting
                  development structurally (although it may result in hole‐
                  filling).

                  4.5.2 Methodological rider
                  From a methodological perspective, I suggest one of the
                  ‘analogical’ explanations (type II) should be adduced only if it
                  does not prove possible to account for the phonologization as
                  the result of a merger elsewhere in the system (type I).19

                  4.6 Summary of the process of a ̠‐umlaut
                  By way of summary, I supply a set of diagrams illustrating my
                  scenario of the phonologization of North‐Germanic a‐umlaut,
                  alongside the development of the vowel system (excluding
                  diphthongs) and illustrated by key forms.

                       (i) Proto‐Germanic (pre‐allophone formation)


                                               i:                    i          u             u:

                                              e:                    e       a (å)        o: (å:)

                                  */duhtar(‐)/            */hultaz/

                                  */duhtariz/           */hultijaz/

                       (ii) North‐West Germanic (‘insignificant allophones’)
                       The shift of ē 1 to ā (except in final syllables) triggers
                       potential new correlations between short and long
                       vowels and the likelihood of an allophone [o] of short /




                       u/:
                         (p.60)   (iii) North Germanic I (‘significant allophones’)
                       In terms of phoneme inventory, this is the same as
                       North‐West Germanic. However, a later generation,
                       aided and abetted by the long‐short vowel correlations,
                       ‘perceives’ the [o] allophone of /u/ and levels it within
                       paradigms and between bases and their derivatives.


Page 20 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                       (The sound change has ipso facto ceased to be a ‘live
                       rule’ by this stage, so the complementary distribution
                       can be disrupted.)


                                   */duhtar(‐)/ [dohtar(‐)]               */hultaz/ [holtaz]

                          *[doht(a)riz]20 ←                        *[holtijaz] ←

                       (iv) North Germanic II (phonemes)




                  As both u and o occur in all positions, the way is open to their
                  extensive shuffling, leading to the observed oddities of their
                  distribution. (This is especially true of i and e, with the proviso
                  that e generally does not occur before following i etc., in which
                  case it falls in with /i/.) Redistributed o before following i etc.,
                  instead of reverting to u—an option not now open to it, as the
                  allophonic rule is no longer live—persists, later developing the
                  ‘front mutation allophone’ [ö] in this position (cf. 4.4.1).21

                  Notes:
                  (1) The question as to when the attestation starts depends on
                  whether one thinks the inscriptions on the Meldorf fibula
                  (dated to the first half of the first century AD) and the
                  Osterrönfeld pot‐sherd (dated to the first century AD) use
                  runic, ‘proto‐runic’, or Latin characters; cf. in the first
                  instance Düwel (2008: 3, 23–4, 178–9). The rough cut‐off date
                  of c. 500 AD excludes ‘transitional’ inscriptions that still use
                  the older alphabet but show linguistic innovations; cf. Grønvik
                  (1998: 16–26). Older Runic is remarkably stable linguistically.

                  (2) The term ‘a‐umlaut’ could be justified on the basis that it is
                  generally considered that the loss of this vowel in final
                  syllables triggered phonologization of the change (cf. 4.2.2),
                  but it will turn out that this is in fact not the case. Campbell
                  (1962: §111) refers to ‘a tendency to harmonize e, i, and u to
                  the vowel which follows in the next syllable’. One could dub it
                  the ‘North‐West Germanic short vowel shuffle’, but the term


Page 21 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  might not catch on. See especially Benediktsson (1970: 100–
                  5). The phonologized change of a‐umlaut is exclusively a
                  North‐West Germanic phenomenon. Any phonemic distinctions
                  between the short vowels /i/ and /e/, and /u/ and /o/ in Bible
                  Gothic (cf. Braune and Heidermanns 2004: §§20, 24) are of
                  independent origin, the result of separate Bible Gothic
                  developments (cf. Bennett 1952, with references). It may be
                  noted that so‐called Crimean Gothic is to be classed as a
                  North‐West Germanic dialect, as it attests a‐umlaut; note
                  especially Schuos [for Schnos*]: Sponsa ‘fiancée’ in the list of
                  words not recognized by Busbecq (‘cum nostra lingua non
                  satis congruentia’). See Stearns (1978: 151–2), Grønvik (1983:
                  27).

                  (3) I focus on structuralist theory because I consider it the
                  best‐fitted to diachronic work, especially the kind of problem
                  under consideration (cf. also Issatschenko 1973: 5). A
                  sociolinguistic approach, by contrast, is not ideally suited for
                  poorly documented or prehistoric stages, although see Ringe
                  (2006b) for an inspired example. If they discuss these issues at
                  all, other ‘schools’ differ largely in using their own
                  terminology and notation. (I allude to some recent work by
                  way of references to Joseph and Janda 2003.) As Jean Rostand
                  observed: ‘Le biologiste passe; la grenouille reste’.

                  (4) The ‘law’ is named after its framer, the Russian linguist and
                  orientalist Yevgenij Dmitrievich Polivanov, who promulgated it
                  in an article of 1928 (38 = 1974: 77). See especially Jakobson
                  (1931: section IX); also Hoenigswald (1960: 77–8, 1999: 202–
                  4).

                  (5) In my usage, a sound change is ‘phonologized’ and a
                  specific allophone is ‘phonemicized’ (achieves phonemic
                  status).

                  (6) Runes are transliterated into bold letters, while italics are
                  used for transcriptions, which necessarily involve some degree
                  of interpretation. R represents a rune written for etymological
                  z, which had acquired some r‐like features and eventually
                  merged with original r. Runic forms are followed in brackets
                  by the name of the monument on which they are found. The
                  standard edition remains Krause and Jankuhn (1966).


Page 22 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  (7) Note also gudija ‘priest’, ON goði (Nordhuglo), wurte
                  ‘(s)he made’, ‐kurne ‘corn’ dat. sg. (Tjurkö), without the
                  conditions for lowering.

                  (8) There is no evidence to lead us to believe that 〈o〉 is in
                  fact a spelling for /u/ in these examples.

                  (9) Dohtēr has apparently been relexicalized, which is further
                  evidence of phonologization of a‐umlaut.

                  (10) One of the peculiarities of a‐umlaut is that, whereas before
                  following i and j only i generally occurs as a reflex, both e and i
                  are tolerated as reflexes before a and ō (see the examples in
                  the next paragraph). Compare the treatment of Benediktsson
                  (1967: 183–4). See Hock (1973) for a discussion of the issues
                  and a summary of earlier work.

                  (11) Interestingly, some of the early material is in conformity
                  with the later distribution: Gallehus holtijaR and horna are
                  both from Jutland, Tune worahto and dohtriR from Norway,
                  and Tjurkö wurte and ‐kurne from Sweden. Nordhuglo gudija
                  comes from western Norway, however.

                  (12) ‘o‐former som holtijaR (der forudsætter *holta og ikke
                  *hulta), worahto og dohtriR der intet som helst kan have at
                  gøre med en formodet a‐omlyd’. ‘Overgangen af u til o må
                  være overordentlig gammel i de germanske sprog (sml.
                  gotisk), og den må have været uafhængig af et følgende a’.

                  (13) As well as Harry Andersen, a vocal opponent of a‐umlaut
                  was Erik Harding; cf. Harding (1937–49: esp. items 22, 32, 45,
                  49, 65, 86 (‘det obegripliga [incomprehensible] a‐omljudet’),
                  97). Compare also Andersen (1986).

                  (14) The following quotation is taken out of context and some
                  clarifying words are added in square brackets in order to help
                  emphasize the desired point. The format is also altered and I
                  silently emend one misprint and change the symbolization to
                  make clear what are (allo)phones (also in square brackets) and
                  what are phonemes (between slashes).




Page 23 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  (15) In the specific context of the creation of a short /o/
                  phoneme, we may also note that Haas (1978: 246–8) has
                  observed that the quality of a short mid‐back vowel in a given
                  phonological system is often tied closely to the quality of the
                  corresponding long mid‐back vowel (a point at least
                  anticipated by Moulton, e.g. 1960: 163, 1961b: 236–7, 1970:
                  23). Similarly, in the case of North‐West Germanic, it could be
                  argued that the influence of the long‐vowel contrast /i:/ ≠ /e:/
                  helped preserve that between the short vowels /i/ and /e/ (cf.
                  4.1.1.2 end).

                  (16) ‘Perceived allophones’, which must be based on a degree
                  of phonetic dis‐similarity, complement the ‘phonetic similarity’
                  criterion for phoneme identification. Others have come to
                  similar conclusions; compare the discussion by Janda in Joseph
                  and Janda (2003: 412–13).

                  (17) Compare the discussion of Janda in Joseph and Janda
                  (2003: 415). The idea of the cline and problems of
                  indeterminacy can be illustrated by the oft‐discussed situation
                  with [æ] in several varieties of contemporary ‘standard
                  English’. The speech‐sound occurs in citation forms with three
                  degrees of length: (i) short [æ] is found before voiceless
                  consonants; while both (ii) slightly longer [æˑ] and (iii) fully
                  long [æː] precede voiced segments. Examples are bat; bade
                  (also pronounced [beid]); and bad. The first two sounds count
                  as short and are automatic positional variants that sound ‘the
                  same’ to naïve native speakers. The third is perceptibly
                  different. While some words regularly have (iii), e.g. mad, bad,
                  sad, there are no rules that predict whether certain other
                  words will have (ii) or (iii). Thus I pronounce cadge [æˑ], but
                  badge [æː], mag [æˑ] (short for magazine), but bag [æː]. In
                  addition, the lexical incidence of the perceived long allophone
                  varies from speaker to speaker. In my own speech, brandy and
                  shandy are both pronounced with the long variant, whereas for
                  some speakers they are conveniently distinguished, with
                  brandy, a short drink, having variant (ii), while shandy, a long
                  drink, has variant (iii); cf. Fudge (1977: 57, 64; to judge by his
                  article, our distribution of (ii) and (iii) differs significantly).
                  There are some potential minimal pairs, for example candid
                  [kæˑndid] ‘frank’ vs. candied [kæːndid] ‘covered with candy’,


Page 24 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  although, again, I use the long phone (iii) for both (as does
                  Fudge 1977: 58). Granted the existence of a noun badger
                  ‘someone who puts badges on things’ (iii), derived from the
                  verb to badge, it would contrast with the animal badger (ii) in
                  my speech. There are thus some potential minimal pairs and,
                  on some criteria, (iii) might count as a separate phoneme for
                  some speakers, although not for others. However, the
                  distribution and collocations of the words in question mean
                  that there is no serious functional contrast. Wells (1982: 288)
                  calls it ‘marginally contrastive’. Compare the varying views on
                  this issue—which is only raised here to make a general point—
                  of Hoenigswald (1944: 82–3), Bazell (1952: 34; he deems it
                  ‘marginal’, saying: ‘It is neither quite true nor quite false to
                  say that there is an opposition æ/æː in Standard British
                  pronunciation’), C. A. Ladd (1964: 656), Fudge (1977), Lass
                  (1984: 34–6). A classic example of perceived allophones are
                  the German Ich‐ and Ach‐Laute; native speakers have no
                  difficulty in hearing the difference between the two sounds,
                  while linguists debate whether they should be considered
                  contrastive and thus different (albeit marginal) phonemes—
                  supposed minimal pairs involve dubious lexemes, diminutive
                  suffixes, or compounds (cf. Issatschenko 1973).

                  (18) As Gould (2001: 228) remarks: ‘Unpredictable
                  contingency, not lawlike order, rules the pathways of history’.

                  (19) In the case of NWGmc a‐umlaut, a sound change
                  elsewhere may yet be found to have triggered phonologization.

                  (20) If we recognize a sound change of PIE *‐er(‐) to *‐ar(‐) in
                  Proto‐Germanic unaccented syllables, the North‐West
                  Germanic paradigm of ‘daughter’ is seen to have lowering
                  environments in the following case‐forms: voc. sg. ‐ar, acc. sg.
                  ‐ar, nom. pl. ‐ar(z), gen. pl. ‐rō. This is a much stronger base—
                  four endings out of nine—from which to generalize o‐vocalism
                  (cf. the doubts about a‐umlaut in this form assembled by
                  Andersen 1986: 118–19).

                  (21) An earlier version of this paper was presented at the
                  Second International Symposium on Runes and Runic
                  Inscriptions in Sigtuna, Sweden, in September 1985. I would
                  like to thank a number of scholars who have been kind enough


Page 25 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
Older Runic evidence for North‐West Germanic a‐
umlaut of u (and ‘the converse of Polivanov's Law’)

                  to read various drafts or discuss these issues over the years:
                  Michael Benskin, Paul Bibire, N. E. Collinge, Martin Durrell,
                  †Henry M. Hoenigswald, †David McLintock, †William G.
                  Moulton, Lena Peterson.




Page 26 of 26

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2017. All
Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a
monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy). Subscriber: SUNY
Binghamton University; date: 01 March 2017
