American Journal of Germanic Linguistics & Literatures 11.1 (1999)

125

Sievers' Law in Germanic. By Charles Barrack. (Berkeley
Insights in Linguistics and Semiotics, 22). New York: Peter Lang,
1998. Pp. xii, 288. Hardcover. $52.95.
Reviewed by MARC PIERCE, University of Michigan
The volume under consideration discusses one of the classic
problems of Germanic phonology, the vowel/glide alternation known
as Sievers' Law (hereafter SL). In order to account for alternations
like Gothic nasjis [nasjis] 'save' but sokeis [so:ki:s] 'seek', Sievers
(1878:129) formulated his law as follows: "Unbetontes . . . i oder u
vor einem vocal ist consonant nach kurzer, vocal nach langer silbe
ohne riicksicht auf die sonstige accentlage des wortes." Later
historical developments have obscured the picture somewhat;
according to Barrack (p. 1), "virtually every aspect of SL has been
the subject of controversy, save one: . . . it appears with pristine,
remarkable regularity only in the case of -j- and -ij- and in only one
dialect of Indo-European, in . . . Gothic." (I have modified Barrack's
transcription slightly, and use <j> where he uses <i> and <w> where he
uses <u>). Issues addressed in the monograph include the following:
evidence for SL in West Germanic, specifically Old English; possible
links between SL and other phonological developments in early
Germanic; and the origins of SL (i.e., whether it was polygenetic or
monogenetic).
The analysis presented in the book is conservative, agreeing
largely with Sievers's own (1878) study, and employs the syllable
preference laws developed mainly by Theo Vennemann (1988).
Barrack argues that SL began as "denuclearization of unaccented
high vowels in prevocalic position after light syllables" (p. 215), and
then became a nuclearization process due to the change in accent
systems from Indo-European to Germanic. For this portion of his
analysis, Barrack draws heavily on what he refers to as "the
Dahl/Erdmann hypothesis" (p. 108), which claims that front loaded
stems (66) are equivalent to light monosyllabic stems (6-), and
balanced stems (66) to heavy stems ((a)a-). This hypothesis,
originally developed by Dahl (1938) to account for gemination in
Old English, was extended by Erdmann (1972) to include SL. Given
this hypothesis, Barrack assumes the following formulation for SL in

126

Reviews

Germanic: "*j/w nuclearize to *ij/uw after a heavy . . . or a balanced
. . . stem; otherwise they remain unchanged" (p. 156).
Barrack's analysis crucially relies on his reconstruction of ProtoGermanic syllable structure, specifically of *-VCjV sequences. There
are two possibilities here; such sequences could be syllabified either as
*-$$CjV or as *-$C$jV ($ indicates a syllable boundary). Sievers
(1892) contended that the first syllabification was the correct one, a
position defended by Barrack here (as well as in Barrack 1991), and
one that has been attacked by a number of scholars, most recently
Murray (1993). Barrack bases his conclusion on a variety of data
(open syllable lengthening in Faroese and Icelandic; word division in
the Gothic and Old English manuscripts), which, he concludes,
demonstrate a tendency to tautosyllabify voiceless stop + r clusters.
Since these four languages, with at least one representative from the
three main branches of Germanic, all tautosyllabify these clusters
following stressed vowels, Barrack reconstructs the same
syllabification for Proto-Germanic, for example, *-V$TrV- (T is used
as a cover symbol for "any voiceless stop")- Barrack then argues that
the presence of this syllabification demands that *- VTjV sequences be
syllabified as *-V$TjV—a conclusion based on the Synchronic
Maxim posited by Vennemann (1988:3), which holds that if less
preferred structures occur in a language, then more preferred
structures will also occur. (According to the Head Law, Tj is more
preferred than Tr.)
This argument, while elegant, ultimately fails to convince, largely
because of Barrack's interpretation of the Synchronic Maxim as an
absolute law. Consider the following: Icelandic tautosyllabifies certain
consonant clusters, including pv. If the Synchronic Maxim were an
absolute law, then pi clusters would also be tautosyllabified, since pi is
a more preferred syllable head than pv. However, pi clusters are
actually heterosyllabified (e.g., epli [ep$li] 'apple', Einarsson
1949:20), indicating that the Synchronic Maxim should not be
interpreted as an absolute law, but rather as a statement of preference,
since other developments may lead to violations of it. (Note that this
appears to be Vennemann's view as well; cf. Vennemann 1988:4).
This indicates that Barrack's proposed syllabification may well be
incorrect, which considerably weakens his analysis.
The traditional view of SL is that it is most clearly preserved in
Gothic, has been largely eliminated in Old Norse, and occurs only

American Journal of Germanic Linguistics & Literatures 11.1 (1999)

127

marginally, if at all, in West Germanic. Barrack partially accepts the
traditional view of West Germanic, agreeing that SL is only marginal
in Old High German and Old Saxon, but argues that Old English
actually preserves SL much more extensively than the traditional view
would have it, and even better than Gothic in some contexts: "Old
English preserves the distinction between the reflexes of the two
Proto-Germanic alternants *-jV- and *- ijV- among the nominals
better than any other Germanic dialect" (p. 141; italics in original).
The reflex of the Proto-Germanic glide is retained in all environments
in Old English as gemination (PGmc. *bidjan > OE biddan 'ask'), as
-j- (PGmc. *nazjan > OE nerian 'save'), or as final -i, which later
shifted to -e (PGmc. *harjaz > OE here 'army'). There are a few
exceptions to this generalization, namely, when the glide preceded
*-/- and "possibly in the nominative singular masculine of the jastems" (p. 145), for example, *salijip > *salip > OE selep 'he/she
gives'.
Much of the Old English evidence for SL must be recaptured by
internal reconstruction, and Barrack spends a good deal of the chapter
on Old English doing just that. He examines apocope/syncope,
breaking, and brightening, and concludes that various differences in
these developments can best be accounted for if SL applied in Old
English as well. For instance, breaking, by which "short front vowels
develop a back off-glide when preceding a liquid followed by a
consonant" (p. 151), occurs in fiellan 'to fell', but not in tellan 'to
tell', even though these forms differ only in their initial segments.
Barrack reconstructs tellan as an original light stem (PGmc. *taljan),
and fiellan as an original heavy stem (PGmc. *fallijan), leading to the
further conclusion that *taljan, but not *fallijan, would have been
subject to SL. Given that this possible application of SL is the only
difference in the developments of these two forms, Barrack views this
as strong evidence for the preservation of SL in Old English.
Barrack also argues that SL can be linked to two other
phonological developments found in early Germanic: high vowel
deletion (syncope) and the metrics of Germanic alliterative verse
{Stabreim). In terms of high vowel deletion, Barrack points out that
"unstressed *i/*u are lost after heavy or balanced stems, but remain
after light stressed or front-loaded stems" (p. 146). This leads to the
curious situation that high vowel deletion eliminates short unstressed
high vowels in the same environments in which SL preserves

128

Reviews

them—an observation that Barrack returns to when considering the
genesis of SL. As for Stabreim, given that heavy stems and balanced
stems are equivalent, the same environment that triggers SL and high
vowel deletion forms a lift in Stabreim. These observations are not
new; they are the focus of Dresher and Lahiri 1991, a study
mentioned by Barrack but dismissed with the comment that it is
"marred by [its failure] . . . to consider the Dahl/Erdmann
hypothesis" (p. 165).
The origin of SL is also controversial. Horowitz (1974:66) argued
that it was polygenetic, "since its effects do not entirely coincide from
language to language." Seebold (1972:340-41) took another
position, basically arguing for poly genesis, but hedging his bets by
admitting that monogenesis was also a possibility. Sievers himself
(1878:139) viewed it as a Proto-Indo-European alternation, and hence
monogenetic: "die doppelheit der bildung [muss] als indogermanisches eigentum beansprucht werden," and Barrack agrees.
This conclusion is based on the connection (and conflict) between SL
and high vowel deletion, two competing processes that occur in the
same conditioning environment. Barrack resolves this anomaly by
appealing to periodization, arguing that SL took place before high
vowel deletion—a view "consistent with the proposition that SL began
in Proto-Indo-European and continued as an active process . . . in
Proto-Germanic . . . but gradually became morpholo-gized in the
individual daughter dialects" (p. 168).
Ultimately, however, Barrack's analysis fails to convince the
reader fully. Perhaps the major weakness of the book is that Barrack
relies so heavily on his proposed syllabification of Proto-Germanic; if
his proposed syllabification is faulty, then much of his argumentation
is also faulty. The quality of the book is uneven; some sections (e.g.,
the discussion of SL in Old English and the review of SL in the other
Indo-European languages) are well argued and convincing, but others
(e.g., the discussion of Proto-Germanic syllabification) do not come
up to this standard. The volume itself is well bound and quite sturdy.
It is unfortunately marred by a number of typographical errors, most
of which are minor and self-correcting (e.g., Beowolf for Beowulf),
although some are more troublesome (e.g., footnote 13 to chapter
nine is missing). Finally, as a basketball fan, I feel obligated to point
out that the Los Angeles Lakers are (presumably) named after the
Great Lakes, not for Silver Lake in Los Angeles, since the team

American Journal of Germanic Linguistics & Literatures 11.1 (1999)

129

originated in Minneapolis before moving to Los Angeles in 1960 (p.
257).
These critical remarks should not be taken as a total rejection of
the book. Despite its flaws, the book is still the most comprehensive
treatment of SL in Germanic to date, thought-provoking, and worthy
of investigation.
REFERENCES
Barrack, Charles M. 1991. PGmc. *-fcjV- revisited. AJGLL 3.119-44.
Dahl, Ivar. 1938. Substantival inflection in early Old English vocalic stems.
Lund: Gleerup.
Dresher, B. Elan, and Aditi Lahiri. 1991. The Germanic foot: Metrical coherence
in Old English. Linguistic Inquiry 22.251-86.
Einarsson, Stefan. 1949. Icelandic: Grammar, texts, glossary. Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins Press.
Erdmann, Peter H. 1972. Suffixaly in Germanic. Language 48.407-15.
Horowitz, Franklin Eugene. 1974. Sievers' Law and the evidence of the Rigveda.
The Hague: Mouton.
Murray, Robert W. 1993. PGmc. *-tQV-: A response to Barrack. AJGLL
5.1-28.
, and Theo Vennemann. 1983. Sound change and syllable structure in
Germanic phonology. Language 59.514-28.
Seebold, Elmar. 1972. Das System der indogermanischen Halbvokale.
Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Sievers, Eduard. 1878. Zur accent- und lautlehre der germanischen sprachen. PBB
5.63-163.
. 1892. Zur westgermanischen Gemination. PBB 16.262-65.
Vennemann, Theo. 1988. Preference laws for syllable structure. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures
University of Michigan
3110 Modern Languages Building
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1275
[karhu @ umich.edu]

