PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC*

1. Introduction
In 1878, Eduard Sievers proposed his eponymous law, in order to
account for certain vowel/semivowel alternations found in a number
of Indo-European language families (certainly in Germanic, Indic, and
Iranian, possibly also in Greek, Latin, Baltic, Slavic, Celtic, and Tocharian). Sievers formulated his law as follows: »unbetontes [. . .] i oder
u ist consonant nach kurzer, vokal nach langer silbe ohne rücksicht
auf die sonstige accentlage des wortes« (Sievers 1878, p. 129), thus
accounting for the contrast between forms like Gothic nasjis ›thou
savest‹ and sôkeis ›thou seekest‹, where nasjis contains a light initial
syllable and therefore shows the semivowel alternant, while sôkeis
contains a heavy initial syllable and thus exhibits the vocalic alternant.1
Sievers’ Law remains one of the classic problems of historical Germanic (and Indo-European) phonology; Sievers’ deceptively simple
formulation has resulted in an enormous body of literature. This
paper critically examines one of the most recent treatments of this
problem, the generally thoughtful essay by Yookang Kim (Kim 2001).
Although Kim’s analysis is careful and well-argued, some of his arguments and conclusions are not entirely supported by the Gothic data,
and a response therefore seems appropriate.

* An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2001 meeting of
the Michigan Linguistics Society. I thank the conference participants
for useful comments and discussion. I am grateful to San Duanmu,
Robert Kyes, Tomas Riad, Joseph Salmons, Bruce Spencer and
especially Yookang Kim for their comments on various versions of this
paper (although they do not necessarily agree with me on all points).
Any oversights or errors are mine alone.
1
Siever’s use of the terms ›heavy‹ and ›light‹ follows traditional practice:
›heavy‹ syllables are syllables containing a long vowel or a diphthong,
or a short vowel followed by two or more consonants, while ›light‹
syllables are syllables containing a short vowel followed by a single
consonant.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

224

MARC PIERCE

II. The problem
In Gothic, Sievers’ Law is restricted to certain morphological
contexts. The i/j alternation appears in Class 1 weak verbs, masculine
ja stem nouns, and ja stem adjectives, the u/w alternation is even
more limited, occurring in only a handful of forms. Kim (2001) restricts his analysis to the i/j alternation, and more specifically to the
i/j alternation in the masculine ja stem nouns and the Class 1 weak
verbs, as these morphological classes have best preserved Sievers’
Law in Gothic, and the following discussion is therefore similarily
restricted. The relevant alternation can be seen in the following paradigms (reproduced from Kim 2001, p. 101). Forms that exhibit Sievers’
Law are in bold. Main stress falls on the initial syllable of all these
forms; note also that Gothic ·eiÒ represents [i].
(1)

Sievers’ Law in Gothic: Class 1 weak verbs

Gloss
Inf.
Sg. 1
2
3
Du. 1
2
Pl. 1
2
3
(2)

light stems

heavy stems

polysyllabic stems

›choose‹
nasjan
nasja
nasjis
nasjiþ
nasjôs
nasjats
nasjam
nasjiþ
nasjand

›seek‹
sôkjan
sôkja
sôkeis
sôkeiþ
sôkjôs
sôkjats
sôkjam
sôkeiþ
sôkjand

›praise‹
mikiljan
mikilja
mikileis
mikileiþ
mikiljôs
mikiljats
mikiljam
mikileiþ
mikiljand

Sievers’ Law in Gothic: masculine ja stem nouns

Gloss
Sg. nom.
gen.
dat.
acc.
voc.
Pl. nom.
gen.
dat.
acc.

light stems

heavy stems

polysyllabic stems

›army‹
harjis
harjis
harja
(hari)
(hari)
harjôs
harjê
harjam
harjans

›herdsman‹
hairdeis
hairdeis
hairdja
hairdi
hairdi
hairdjôs
hairdjê
hairdjam
hairdjans

›disciple‹
sipôneis
sipôneis
sipônja
sipôni
sipôni
sipônjôs
sipônjê
sipônjam
sipônjans

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

225

III. Kim’s analysis
Kim’s analysis is couched within the Lexical Phonology (hereafter
LP) framework, which, he suggests, provides a better account of the
fact that Sievers’ Law is restricted to certain morphological contexts.
He points out that most previous accounts of Sievers’ Law in Gothic
tend to simply note that Sievers’ Law only applies in certain morphological contexts in Gothic, and then offer an account of Sievers’ Law
without ever accounting for these morphological conditions (Kim
2001, p. 115). Within LP, however, this problem can be easily resolved.
In LP, there are two types of phonological rules, lexical and postlexical; lexical rules are (or can be) sensitive to morpholexical information, while postlexical rules are not, and Kim therefore formulates
Sievers’ Law as a lexical rule. This accounts for the morphological
sensitivity of Sievers’ Law in a more principled way than merely stipulating which morphological categories it applies in, as it follows from
the theory of LP itself (but see below for further discussion).
Kim further argues that LP provides an advantage in analyzing the
diachronic develpoment of Sievers’ Law. He suggests that Sievers’
Law was a postlexical rule which applied across the board in ProtoIndo-European and then became a lexical rule in Gothic. Differences
between the Indo-European language families in the application of
Sievers’ Law can also be attributed to this shift, since the various
Indo-European dialects can now be viewed as different points on the
continuum of the shift of Sievers’ Law from a postlexical rule to a
lexical one.
With regard specifically to Gothic, Kim views Sievers’ Law as a repair strategy, designed to yield maximal optimal foot parsing, by parsing words into moraic trochees (bimoraic, left-headed feet). He further assumes that the underlying representation of the relevant segment is / j /; that final consonants are extrametrical; and the consonant
+ j clusters are tautosyllabified, in accordance with the Maximal Onset Principle.2 He recognizes that this final assumption conflicts with
the scribal evidence for Gothic syllabification, and resolves this di2

Kim had earlier formulated the Maximal Onset Principle as follows:
»Incorporate all consonants preceding each vowel into the onset of
the vowel [by which he surely must mean ›syllable‹] if and only if the
incorporation does not violate the Sonority Principle and the languagespecific phonotactic constraint« (Kim 2000, p. 25).

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

226

MARC PIERCE

lemma by following Barrack (1998, p. 39), and claiming that word divisions in these cases reflect morphological boundaries, not phonological ones.3 Consider the following forms: nasjis ›(thou) savest‹, sôkeis
›(thou) seekest‹, and mikileis ›(thou) praisest‹. According to Kim,
these forms are parsed as follows (syllable boundaries are indicated
with a period and foot boundaries with parentheses, extrametrical
material is enclosed in angled brackets, and long vowels are written
as two short vowels):
(3)

Gothic foot parsing I (Kim 2001, p. 121)
(na.sji)·sÒ

(soo)(kii)·sÒ

(mi.ki)(lii)·sÒ

The short stem form nasjis can be exhaustively parsed into moraic
trochees without any changes being made to the underlying representation, and the underlying / j / therefore surfaces as [j]. However, neither sôkeis nor mikileis can be exhaustively parsed into moraic trochees without some change being made to the underlying representation, and the underlying / j / is therefore vocalized to [i], which then
merges with the following [i] of the suffix, yielding [i]. All of these
forms meet the morphological restrictions on Sievers’ Law (more accurately, the lexical rule Kim uses to formalize Sievers’ Law), and are
therefore subject to it.
Kim’s analysis has a number of advantages over other earlier analyses. It places Sievers’ Law in its early Germanic context, as one of a
number of phonological phenomena sensitive to foot structure, in that
they are either repair strategies to yield maximal foot parsing, like
Sievers’ Law in Gothic, or apply in the domain of the foot, like Germanic stress assignment (although this comment applies more precisely to the larger work that his essay is derived from, Kim 2000). As
such, Kim is able to account for several seemingly unrelated phonological phenomena, since he views them all as attempts to fit this
preferred foot structure. It also provides a more principled account
of the morphological sensitivity of Sievers’ Law, thanks to the two
types of rules available within LP. Furthermore, the different rule
types allow a better account of the diachronic development of Sievers’ Law in Gothic and its dialectal distribution in Indo-European, as
outlined above.

3

This claim is also made, although more tentatively, by Voyles (1992,
p. 89) and Riad (1992, p. 86 f.).

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

227

IV. Problems with Kim’s analysis
Despite these advantages, there are several problems with Kim’s
proposals that need to be discussed further. The first of these is that
his proposed tautosyllabification of consonant + j clusters is contradicted by the scribal evidence. Recall that Kim argues that such clusters are tautosyllabified due to the Maximal Onset Principle, which,
as he notes, is »crosslinguistically well supported« (Kim 2001, p. 123,
fn. 32). Before discussing the evidence for Gothic syllabification, it
should be pointed out that Kim’s reliance on theoretical considerations to motivate Gothic syllabification is somewhat problematic,
since it would seem preferable to determine if Gothic syllable structure conformed to this theoretical principle, rather than to assume
that it does.
Determining the syllable structure of living languages is not overly
complicated, as native speakers tend to have reasonably reliable intuitions about syllables (or at least about certain aspects of syllables,
e. g. how many syllables a word contains), and the syllable structure
of living languages can therefore be determined with relative ease.4
Where there are no native speakers to consult (as is of course the
case with Gothic), other methods must be employed.
Devine and Stephens (1994, p. 37Ð43) argue that three major types
of evidence provide insight into the syllable structure of dead languages: metrical, linguistic, and orthographic.5 In addition, Tomas
Riad (p. c.) and Joseph Salmons (p. c.) have both suggested that language universals may provide evidence for syllable structure. While
metrical and linguistic evidence are relatively uncontroversial and do
not require extensive commentary, typological/universal evidence and
orthographic evidence are more troublesome, and are therefore discussed in somewhat more detail. In terms of metrical evidence, given
the equivalent weight of CVC and CVV sequences, if the initial syllable
4

San Duanmu (p. c.) reminds me that the claims made here may be too
strong, as speakers tend to be uncertain about syllable boundaries in
some words, e. g. Modern English city. However, while speakers’ intuitions about syllable structure may not be foolproof, they are reasonably reliable.
5
Although this division is obviously somewhat artificial, since metrical
and orthographic phenomena are indeed linguistic in nature, it is both
reasonably traditional and convenient, and is hence retained here. I
thank Tomas Riad for reminding me of this.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

228

MARC PIERCE

in a VCCV sequence is metrically and phonologically heavy, then the
sequence must be syllabified VC.CV. On the other hand, if the initial
syllable is metrically and phonologically light, then the sequence must
be syllabified V.CCV. As to linguistic evidence, a number of linguistic
developments are clearly contingent on syllable structure. For instance, in Middle Dutch, short stressed vowels were lengthened in
open syllables, e. g. vôgel ›bird‹, cf. Old English fugel. This lengthening
is apparently triggered by the requirement that stressed syllables must
be heavy, indicating that the word must have been syllabified vô.gel,
since a syllabification *vog.el would have resulted in a heavy stressed
syllable and thus obviated the need for vowel lengthening.
The use of language universals and typology in reconstruction remains controversial, and a comprehensive discussion of this issue is
beyond the scope of this paper (see Schwink 1994 for more detailed
discussion); the following brief remarks will have to suffice.6 The typological generalization relevant for our purposes is that languages
that tautosyllabify stop + liquid clusters generally also tautosyllabify
stop + semivowel clusters, and one could therefore argue that since
stop (or þ) + liquid clusters were tautosyllabified in Gothic (a claim
that currently seems uncontroversial), stop + semivowel clusters
must also have been tautosyllabified, in accordance with this principle.
This argument ist not completely compelling, however. Caution is
advisable in the use of universals and typology in reconstruction,
since universals need not be absolute.7 For instance, one of the points
raised by Vennemann (1984, p. 40) in support of his bifurcation theory
of the Germanic Consonant Shift(s) is that stops become fricatives
more frequently than fricatives become stops. Since his proposals are
in accordance with this generalization, he claims that they are preferable to the traditional theory. As Stevens (1998, p. 22 f.) points out,
however, occlusion certainly does occur in Germanic; Stevens cites
examples like the following: Holtzmann’s Law, e. g. Gothic twaddjê,
Old Norse tveggja ›of two‹, both from Proto-Germanic *twajjê; Old
High German alwâri ›all true‹, but Modern German albern ›inane‹;
6

Although Kim is not reconstructing a proto-language, his use of typological considerations to determine Gothic syllabification is sufficiently
close that the same criticisms apply.
7
This is of course not to say that typology and universals are useless
for reconstruction, merely that they must be employed with caution.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

229

and Modern English [bıdnıs] for business. A similar point can be
made regarding Gothic syllabification: although most languages that
tautosyllabify stop + liquid clusters also tautosyllabify stop + semivowel clusters, it is not necessarily true that all languages do so.8
The drawback to rejecting Kim’s claim is that it entails accepting
the view that Gothic is a typologically odd language, which tautosyllabifies stop + liquid clusters, but heterosyllabifies stop + semivowel
clusters. This is not an insurmountable difficulty; Comrie (1993, p. 95)
suggests that »possibly every language is implausible in at least one
area of its grammar«, and there seems to be no reason to expect
Gothic to be different. Vennemann (1988, p. 3) further notes that
»changes run along many parameters, and they may incidentally shoot
holes in parameters that are not theirs.« For instance, at least in some
cases, the tautosyllabification of consonant + semivowel clusters results in a bimoraic stressed syllable, which is more preferred than a
monomoraic stressed syllable. In such cases, forming a more preferred syllable leads to a violation of the typological generalization
cited above Ð a case of an optimization on one parameter resulting
in a less optimal structure on another parameter.
We now consider the language-internal evidence for Gothic syllabification, namely the orthographic evidence. The main question regarding orthographic evidence for syllabification is the following: do word
breaks at the ends of lines in manuscripts correspond to syllable divisions, or are they motivated by some other factor or factors? Fix and
Birkmann (1998, p. 23 f.) suggest that there are five possible types of
word divisions: (1) »chaotic«, by which words were divided randomly,
with no attention paid to their structure, either phonological or morphological; (2) »phonological«, where word breaks indeed correspond
to syllable breaks; (3) »calligraphic«, where the scribe may be paying
more attention to how the manuscript actually looks than to the structure of the words; (4) »morphological«, where words are divided according to morphological criteria; and, finally, (5) »orthopoeic«,
where word breaks are intended to show the quantity of the preceding
vowel.
The traditional interpretation of the Gothic orthographic evidence,
going back to Hechtenberg Collitz (1906) and Schulze (1908), has
8

Moreover, it seems that language-internal evidence must be given precedence over language-external evidence, assuming, of course, that the
language-internal evidence is reliable.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

230

MARC PIERCE

been that word breaks are phonologically motivated, i. e. that when
the Gothic scribes came to the end of a line in a manuscript, they
divided words at syllable boundaries, and not according to one of the
other factors mentioned above. Thus, Schulze (1908, p. 484) claimed
that »in allen gotischen Handschriften wird die Praxis der Zeilenbrechung durch feste Regeln beherrscht, die [. . .] auf dem Prinzipe
rationeller und konsequenter Silbenbildung beruhen.« More recently,
a number of scholars, including Dresher and Lahiri (1991), Barrack
(1998), and now Kim (2001), have argued against the traditional interpretation, claiming that word breaks do not necessarily correspond
to syllable breaks, specifically in the case of consonant + semivowel
clusters.
However, there are compelling reasons to accept the traditional
view. Frey (1989, p. 286) points out that a syllabification of Gothic
based on the traditional interpretation of word breaks generally coincides with both the Syllable Preference Laws codified in Vennemann
(1988) and with syllable structure in North and West Germanic (based
on an examination of North and West Germanic verse).9 In addition,
of the three sources of evidence cited in Devine and Stephens (1994),
the only truly reliable evidence we have for Gothic syllable structure
is the orthographic evidence. There is no metrical evidence for Gothic
syllabification (due to the absence of poetic texts from the surviving
Gothic corpus), and using linguistic evidence brings us in danger of
circular conclusions, as we may assume that certain phonological developments occurred because of syllable structure, and analyze them
as such, but then use our very analysis as evidence for syllable structure. Furthermore, rejecting the orthographic evidence means that improbable or unsupported claims can be made, since such arguments
can be justified by claiming that certain developments are not recorded orthographically. In light of this, it would seem that the burden
of proof is on those scholars who claim that the orthographic evidence does not reflect syllable structure, at least in the absence of
any truly compelling evidence in favor of this claim.
Furthermore, Kim’s reasoning for rejecting the traditional claim that
word breaks correspond to syllable breaks seems questionable. He
notes that, as pointed out already by Hechtenberg Collitz (1906), com9

Frey (1989, p. 289 f.) also argues that the treatment of muta cum liquida
clusters provides evidence for this connection. Her reasoning on this
point is somewhat unclear, and is therefore not discussed here.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

231

pounds and simplex words pattern differently in the Gothic manuscripts. In simplex words, word breaks occur before the last consonant of the cluster, while in compounds a word break occurs between
each member of the compound. Based on this observation, Kim
claims that, under the traditional interpretation, the Syllable Preference Laws proposed in Murray and Vennemann (1983) do not apply
in compounds, because word breaks in compounds (and therefore
syllable breaks, according to the traditional view) are morphologically-based. But, since syllable and morpheme boundaries do not always coincide, »it is hard to explain why different conventions are
used in compounds and in non compounds [. . .]. Therefore it is hard
to justify M[urray and] V[ennemann]’s argument that the scribal conventions manifest syllabification in Gothic« (Kim 2001, p. 109).
Kim’s reasoning here is somewhat unclear. Different conventions
are indeed used in treating compounds and simplex words, but that
does not mean that the traditional interpretation must be rejected. In
fact, it is largely unsurprising that compounds and simplex words are
treated differently; if speakers perceive them as different types of
words, they may well be treated differently.10 Pierce (2002, p. 56 f.)
accounts for the different treatment of compounds and simplex
words, while retaining the traditional interpretation of word breaks,
by arguing that compounds were treated as groups of words, and that
word boundaries had to coincide with syllable breaks. Thus, a syllable
break had to occur between each component of a compound; other
syllable breaks in compounds are done according to phonological criteria. Evidence from the Skeireins manuscript appears to support this
claim. Frey (1989, p. 282) points out that in this particular manuscript,
syllabification can vary with respect to the clitic -uh ›and‹, as in forms
like nauhþ anuh ›yet‹ and sumanuhþ an ›partly‹, which can be divided
into morphemes as nauh + þan + uh and suman + uh + þan, respectively (here a plus sign indicates a morpheme boundary). Since the
phonological environments are the same, we would expect both
forms to syllabify in the same way. Yet this is not the case; nauhþ anuh is syllabified nauhþ a.nuh, and sumanuhþ an suman.uhþ an
(omitting irrevelant syllable breaks). This variation can be accounted
for, as argued above, by assuming that syllable breaks had to occur
10

Note also in this context that the ›Chicago Manual of Style‹ prescribes
different rules for word breaks in compounds and in simplex words in
Modern English.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

232

MARC PIERCE

before each element of a compound. As long as words were perceived
as compounds, the various members of the compound were treated
as separate words. Once this perception had been obscured, however,
these forms were treated as simplex words. In the case of the two
forms mentioned above, it seems that speakers of Gothic perceived
sumanuhþ an as a compound, and hence syllabified each member
separately. On the other hand, nauhþ anuh was no longer perceived
as a compound, and was therefore syllabified as a simplex word.
Returning now to the syllabification of consonant + j clusters, careful examination of the Gothic material indeed seems to disprove Kim’s
claim that such clusters were tautosyllabified. There are two positions
to be considered here, word-initial and word-internal. It is relatively
clear that most languages permit a richer set of syllable onsets word
initially than word internally. For instance, in Modern English, [pw]
and [bw] onsets are marginal at best. They are only attested in loan
words, and then only word-initially, e. g. pueblo and bwana (Hammond 1999, p. 11). In Gothic, consonant + j clusters are not attested
in word initial position, where we would in fact expect to find them
if they were licit syllable onsets. While there may well be other explanations for the lack of such onsets word initially besides a ban on
such clusters (this may reflect an accidental gap in the surviving
Gothic corpus, for instance), their absence from word initial position
is at least slightly disconcerting.
Moreover, consonant + j onsets are unattested word internally.
Hermann (1923, p. 288) states that there are approximately 260 such
clusters attested at word breaks in the Gothic corpus, along with
about 80 consonant + w clusters. Of these clusters, only one is tautosyllabified (assuming again that word breaks correspond to syllable
breaks), fraþja ›understanding, knowledge‹ (dat.sg.), which is syllabified fra.þja. Assuming that such clusters were really tautosyllabified, their apparent heterosyllabification in the manuscripts remains
to be accounted for.
As mentioned above, Kim’s solution to this problem, following Barrack (1998, p. 39), is to propose that word breaks involving these clusters do not reflect syllable breaks, but rather morphological boundaries. This proposal is open to question, however, since not all consonant + semivowel clusters contain a morpheme boundary. Consider
forms affected by Holtzmann’s Law, e. g. twaddjê ›of two‹, where the
syllable break occurs before the j but the morpheme break before the
ê, or triggwa ›covenant‹, where the syllable break occurs before the

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

233

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

w but the morpheme break before the a; or a few verbs whose stems
end in w, e. g., siggwan ›to sing‹, where the morpheme break occurs
before the final vowel of the word, but the syllable break before the
semivowel. Moreover, there is no readily apparent reason as to why
just these clusters were syllabified according to morphological
factors. That is, if all other consonant clusters are syllabified due to
phonological factors (as both Kim and Barrack seem to believe), why
should just consonant + j clusters (or consonant + semivowel clusters
in general) be syllabified otherwise?
Furthermore, if we were to accept any claim that word breaks do
not correspond to syllable breaks in simplex words, accepting the
claim made by Hermann (1923) would result in a simpler analysis.
Hermann (1923, p. 291) argued that muta cum liquida clusters were
really heterosyllabified, and that their apparent tautosyllabification in
the Gothic manuscripts is the result of influence from Greek scribal
practices. If we accept Hermann’s claim, then all consonant clusters
were heterosyllabified word-internally, which can accounted for by
means of a constraint banning complex onsets.11 However, Hermann’s
proposal faces the same difficulty as Kim’s: why would one type of
consonant cluster be treated differently from all other consonant clusters (cf. Frey 1989, p. 289 f.).
Once the proposed tautosyllabification of consonant + j clusters is
rejected, Kim’s analysis is weakened. Consider the same three forms
cited in (3): nasjis, sôkeis, and mikileis. Given that such clusters
are heterosyllabified, pace Kim, but retaining the other points of his
analysis, these three forms must be parsed as follows. (Again, syllable
boundaries are indicated with a dot, foot boundaries with parentheses, and extrametrical material is enclosed in angled brackets):
(4)

Gothic foot parsing II
*(nas)(ji)·sÒ

(soo)(kii)·sÒ

(mi.ki)(lii)·sÒ

Kim’s analysis successfully accounts for both sôkeis and mikileis, but
founders on nasjis; the inviolable extrametricality of final consonants
blocks an exhaustive parse into moraic troches.
There are a handful of other, more minor, difficulties with Kim’s
analysis which will be discussed in somewhat less detail. First, Kim’s
analysis encounters problems once it is extended beyond the very
11

Other constraints banning the insertion, deletion, and reordering of
segments would intervene to permit complex onsets word-initially.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

234

MARC PIERCE

limited set of data it is designed to account for. In fairness, it must be
conceded that Kim’s analysis is not meant to provide a general account of Gothic syllable structure, but it does seem that a more general account would be preferable. For example, forms like brôþar
›brother‹ and saljan ›to make an offering‹ cannot be exhaustively
parsed into moraic trochees using Kim’s footing algorithm, because
final consonants are invariably extrametrical.12
Next, Kim’s analysis is overly complicated. Sievers’ Law can certainly be treated in terms of syllable structure, as has been recently
done by Riad (1992), Rice (1994), and Pierce (2002), among others
(and such an analysis is sketched below), reference to foot structure
is consequently unnecessary. As mentioned above, Kim (2001) is
based on his dissertation, Kim (2000), in which he argues that a
number of phonological phenomena found in the early Germanic languages can be accounted for by reference to foot structure. However,
all of these phenomena can also be analyzed in terms of syllable structure (with the possible exception of high vowel deletion in Old English), which seems to further support the claim that a foot-based
analysis of Sievers’ Law in Gothic is unnecessary. Furthermore, a footbased analysis does not appear to have any real advantages over a
syllable-based analysis.
However, even if a foot-based analysis is necessary (and advantageous), it is possible to develop such an analysis that gives the orthographic evidence the consideration it deserves without encountering
problems with the light stems, as done by Kiparsky (1998), an Optimality Theory (hereafter OT) analysis of the problem. Since OT constraints can be violable, Kiparsky is able to provide a more principled
account of Sievers’ Law in Gothic than Kim by letting his constraint
FOOT-FORM (feet must be bimoraic trochees) outrank his extrametricality constraint (final consonants must be extrametrical). Final consonants can therefore be extrametrical when necessary so that the
rest of the word can be footed as bimoraic trochees, but can be
parsed as part of a foot/syllable so that the entire word can be footed
as bimoraic trochees.
Kim rejects Kiparsky’s analysis largely on the basis of Kiparsky’s
proposed (and admittedly inelegant) constraint *σ[Cj, which bans con12

Contrast this with the analysis proposed in Kiparsky (1998), which can
account for such forms by letting final consonants be extrametrical in
some cases, but not in others (see below).

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

235

sonant + j onsets, a constraint about which Kim states »it is hard to
see the constraint *σ[Cj as being universal« (Kim 2001, p. 114). This is
an accurate criticism, since the standard OT view is that all constraints are indeed universal. However, Kiparsky (1998) never claims
that this constraint is meant to be universal, and in fact never mentions the standard OT view in his paper. Note also that Kim’s own
formulation of the Maximal Onset Principle leaves an escape hatch
for language-specific phonotactic constraints.
The next problem to be considered is the correct underlying representation of the relevant segment. As indicated above, Kim assumes
that the underlying representation of the relevant segment is / j /, yet
does not provide any justification for this assumption, leaving the impression that this is a relatively unimportant issue. However, this is
not the case, as the choice of the correct underlying representation
plays a crucial role both diachronically and synchronically. Riad
(1992, p. 48 et pass.) argues at length that the correct underlying representation is in fact neither /i/ or / j /, but rather an archiphoneme,
i. e. a vocoid unspecified for the feature [vocalic] (cf. the similar argument in Calabrese 1994). The crucial forms are those where we have
these phonemes (whatever their correct underlying representation
may be) adjacent to each other, e. g. mawi ~ máujôs ›girl‹ (nom.sg. ~
gen.sg.). In these cases, we must be able to predict the correct surface
forms based on the underlying representation.
It seems that employing two archiphonemes, one from which surface i and j are derived, and one from which surface u and w are
derived, yields the best account of such cases. In the case of mawi,
the u/w archiphoneme must be an onset, and consequently a semivowel, because both *maui and *mawj are illicit. If the u/w archiphonemes surfaces as a semivowel, then the i/j archiphoneme must
be a vowel. Similarly, in the case of máujôs, the i/j archiphoneme
must be a semivowel, since otherwise an onsetless syllable would
result.
In addition, employing underlying archiphonemes seems to fit better with certain diachronic aspects of Sievers’ Law. Marchand (1973,
p. 70 f.) suggests that i and j were allophones of one archiphoneme,
and u and w allophones of another, in Pre-Gothic. In Gothic itself,
this distribution seems to be breaking down, such that where PreGothic had had two archiphonemes, one for u/w and the other for i/
j, Gothic had six phonemes: /i/, / j /, /u/, and /w/, as well as the i/j and
u/w archiphonemes retained from Pre-Gothic. It may well have been

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

236

MARC PIERCE

that only forms containing the i/j and u/w archiphonemes were subject to Sievers’ Law in Gothic and that a constraint banning any
change in the underlying value of the feature [vocalic] then blocked
any change in forms containing /i/, / j /, /u/, or /w/. This proposal seems
to also account for the fact that the u/w alternation is more limited
than the i/j alternation in Gothic (if the u/w archiphoneme was lost
before the i/j archiphoneme, then it is natural that the u/w alternation
is more restricted), as well as for the ›exceptions to Sievers’ Law‹
discussed in Murray and Vennemann (1983) and Kiparsky (2000).
Kim also assumes that word-final consonants are extrametrical. His
reasoning is as follows. Riad (1992, p. 43) distinguishes between obstruents and sonorants on the basis of sonority, and then further suggests that not all consonants can be moraic in all contexts. In Gothic,
Riad claims, sonorants can be moraic in both stressed and unstressed
syllables, while obstruents can only be moraic in stressed syllables.
Kim points out, however, that it is difficult to distinguish phonologically between obstruents and sonorants in word final position, and
therefore concludes that »without any negative evidence, it may be
safer to assume that all word-final consonants are extrametrical in
Gothic« (Kim 2001, p. 122, fn. 30). As was the case with his choice of
an underlying representation, one wishes that Kim had justified his
choice more thoroughly, since it seems that it might be just as safe to
assume that word-final consonants are never extrametrical, or that
word-final consonants can be extrametrical sometimes.
Two final, more theoretically-oriented, issues remain to be discussed here. First, any account of Sievers’ Law in Gothic must somehow account for the fact that the alternation is morphologically restricted. As noted above, Kim argues that LP allows him to account
for this fact in a more principled way than mere stipulation, due to
the distinction drawn between lexical and postlexical rules. He notes
that this distinction between lexical and postlexical rules follows
from the theory itself, and is therefore not stipulative. There appear
to be two ways to handle this problem within OT. One could argue,
as Pierce (2002) does, that the morphological restrictions on Sievers’
Law result from the loss of the archiphoneme, which occurred earlier
in some contexts than in others. Alternatively, one could simply stipulate that the necessary constraints are only ranked appropriately in
the relevant morphological contexts.
It seems that either of these claims is a explanatorily adequate as
Kim’s proposals. A lexical rule is (or can be) still a morphologically

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

237

conditioned phonological rule, and, in comparison to the second OT
approach to this problem just mentioned, for example, it is somewhat
unclear how a morphologically conditioned rule outperforms a morphologically restricted set of constraints in terms of explanatory adequacy. In addition, the distinction between lexical and postlexical
rules is indeed stipulative, albeit a stipulation of the theory itself, not
of individual analyses.
Secondly, Kim argues that LP also provides a better account of the
diachronic development of Sievers’ Law, again due to the different
types of rules available within LP. Contrast this approach with OT,
where the standard view is that sound change can be formalized as
constraint reranking. While this problem can be accounted for within
OT by using archiphonemes, it is somewhat more problematic for an
OT analysis that does not use archiphonemes. This in fact seems to
be the biggest advantage that an LP account has over an OT account,
since LP has a clearly-defined life cycle for rules, while there is no
corresponding life-cycle for OT constraints. This is not to say that OT
cannot handle diachronic data, only that LP approaches to sound
change are better-developed (cf. Kiparsky 1995). This issue therefore
remains open at this time.
V. An alternative analysis
We now sketch a possible alternative analysis of Sievers’ Law in
Gothic. Pierce (2002), in an OT analysis of the phenomenon, argues
that it results from the interaction of the following OT constraints
on syllable structure, although additional constraints are necessary to
account for all aspects of Gothic syllable structure:13
(5) The Onset Constraint (ONS):
Syllables must have onsets (Prince and Smolensky 1993, p. 16).
(6) Prokosch’s Law (PL)
Stressed syllables must be heavy (Prokosch 1938, p. 134).
(7) The Coda Constraint (NO CODA)
Syllables may not have codas (Prince and Smolensky 1993, p. 34).

These constraints are ranked in the following order:
(8) ONS >> PL >> NO CODA
13

No introduction to OT is given here. Readers unfamiliar with the theory
are referred to Kager (1999).

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

238

MARC PIERCE

Sievers’ Law is therefore a consequence of Gothic syllabification.
When ONS must be satisfied, the underlying archiphoneme will be
manifested as a semivowel; otherwise, it is a vowel.
The ›additional constraints‹ mentioned above include some way of
formalizing the fact that consonant + semivowel clusters are not permitted. A variety of proposals have been made in the literature. Pierce
(2002) relies on a family of constraints banning various types of complex onsets, as well as a family of constraints banning various types
of syllable contacts. If the various constraints belonging to these two
families are properly ranked with regard to each other, then the tautosyllabification of muta cum liquida clusters and the heterosyllabification of consonant + semivowel clusters can be accounted for, by having the constraint banning consonant + semivowel onsets outrank the
constraint banning consonant + semivowel contacts, while the constraint banning muta cum liquida contacts outranks that banning muta
cum liquida onsets. Alternatively, Kiparsky (1998) employs a constraint banning consonant + j onsets (as does Calabrese 1994, although Calabrese’s analysis is couched in a much different theoretical
framework). This issue will not be discussed further here, although it
must be kept in mind that consonant + j clusters are illicit, however
this ban is ultimately formalized.
The following tableaux illustrate the interaction of these constraints. Since the same constraints account for all the alternations,
only the Class 1 weak verbs are discussed here, starting with the light
stem nasjis. Pierce (2002) follows Riad (1992) in using an archiphoneme, transcribed here as /ı/, as the underlying representation of the
relevant segment.
Table 1: Light stems: nasjis ›(thou) savest‹
/nasjıs/

ONS

PL

NO CODA

nas.jis

冪

冪

**

nas.iis

*!

冪

**

na.siis

冪

*!

*

na.sjis

冪

*!

*

The winning candidate nasjis (nas.jis) obeys ONS and PL, but violates
NO CODA Ð a violation caused by the need to obey the higher-ranking

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

239

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

constraint PL. The losing candidates all violate either ONS or PL (in
addition to NO CODA) and are therefore eliminated.
The next form to consider is the heavy stem sôkeis.
Table 2: Heavy stems: sôkeis ›(thou) seekest‹
/sokııs/

ONS

PL

NO CODA

soo.kiis

冪

冪

*

sook.iis

*!

冪

**

sook.jis

冪

冪

**!

The attested form sôkeis (sô.keis) is preferred over the two alternate
candidates because it obeys ONS and PL, while only violating NO
CODA once. Its competitors either violate PL or incur additional NO
CODA violations. In addition, *sô.kjis is ruled out by the ban on consonant + semivowel onsets discussed above.
The final form considered here is the polysyllabic stem mikileis.
Table 3: Polysyllabic stems: mikileis ›(thou) praisest‹
/mıkılııs/

ONS

PL

NO CODA

mi.ki.liis

冪

*

*

mik.il.iis

*!

冪

**

mi.kil.jis

冪

*

**!

The winning candidate mikileis (mi.ki.leis) violates PL and NO
CODA. Its competitors either violate ONS or incur more NO CODA
violations; mikileis is therefore optimal. As was the case with *sô.kjis,
*mi.ki.ljis is ruled out by the ban on tautosyllabified consonant +
semivowel clusters.
VI. Conclusion
This paper critically examined Kim (2001), one of the most recent
treatments of one of the classic problems of historical Germanic (and
Indo-European) phonology, namely Sievers’ Law in Gothic. It was argued that, although Kim’s analysis is generally thoughtful and well-

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

240

MARC PIERCE

argued, not all of his proposals and conclusions are supported by the
Gothic data. For instance, his proposed tautosyllabification of consonant + semivowel clusters is contradicted by the scribal evidence. An
alternative proposal, one couched within OT, was sketched, and it
was argued that the OT proposal was as explanatorily adequate as
Kim’s, while avoiding some of the problems of his analysis.

REFERENCES
Barrack, C. 1998: Sievers’ Law in Germanic, New York.
Calabrese, A. 1994: Sievers’ Law in Gothic. A synchronic analysis with
some notes on its diachronic development, The Linguistic Review 11,
p. 49Ð94.
Comrie, B. 1993: Typology and reconstruction. Historical linguistics: Problems and perspectives, ed. by Ch. Jones, London and New York,
p. 74Ð97.
Devine, A. M., & L. D. Stephens 1994: The prosody of Greek speech, Oxford.
Dresher, B. E., & A. Lahiri 1991: The Germanic foot. Metrical coherence
in Old English, Linguistic Inquiry 22, p. 251Ð285.
Fix, H., & Th. Birkmann 1998: Die Worttrennung am Zeilenende in Handschriften der Snorra Edda, in: H. Fix (Ed.), Snorri Sturluson. Beiträge
zu Werk und Rezeption, Berlin, p. 23Ð33.
Frey, E. 1989: Worttrennung und Silbenstruktur des Gotischen mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Skeireins, Indogermanische Forschungen
94, p. 272Ð293.
Hammond, M. 1999: The phonology of English, Oxford.
Hechtenberg Collitz, K. 1906: Syllabication in Gothic, Journal of English
and Germanic Philology 6, p. 72Ð91.
Hermann, E. 1923: Silbenbildung im Griechischen und in den anderen indogermanischen Sprachen, Göttingen.
Kager, R. 1999: Optimality theory, Cambridge.
Kim, Y. 2000: Prosody and prosodically-motivated processes from Germanic to Middle English, Doctoral dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Ð 2001: Prosody and i/j alternation in Gothic, Journal of Germanic Linguistics 13, p. 97Ð130.
Kiparsky, P. 1995: The phonological basis of sound change. The handbook
of phonological theory, ed. by J. Goldsmith, Cambridge/MA, p. 640Ð
670.
Ð 1998: Sievers’ Law as prosodic optimization. Mir curad: Studies in
honor of Calvert Watkins, ed. by J. Jasanoff [et al.], Innsbruck, p. 345Ð
360.
Ð 2000: Analogy as optimization. ›Exceptions‹ to Sievers’ Law in Gothic.
Analogy, levelling, markedness, ed. by A. Lahiri, Berlin, p. 15Ð46.

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

241

PROSODY AND SIEVERS’ LAW IN GOTHIC

Marchand, J. W. 1973: The sounds and phonemes of Wulfila’s Gothic, The
Hague.
Murray, R. W., & Th. Vennemann 1983: Sound change and syllable structure in Germanic phonology, Language 59, p. 514Ð528.
Pierce, M. 2002: Syllable structure and Sievers’ Law in Gothic and Old
Norse, Doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.
Prince, A., & P. Smolensky 1993: Optimality theory. Constraint interaction
in generative grammar, Technical Report # 2, Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science.
Prokosch, E. 1938: A comparative Germanic grammar, Philadelphia.
Riad, T. 1992: Structures in Germanic prosody, Doctoral dissertation,
Stockholm University.
Rice, C. 1994: Sievers’ Law in Gothic. MS, University of Tromsø.
Schulze, W. 1908: Wortbrechung in den gotischen Handschriften. Sitzungsberichte der preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, p. 610Ð624
[Page references to reprint in Schulze 1966].
Ð 1966: Kleine Schriften, 2nd ed., ed. by W. Wissmann, Göttingen,
p. 483Ð496.
Schwink, F. W. 1994: Linguistic typology, universality, and the realism of
reconstruction, Washington, D. C.
Sievers, E. 1878: Zur accent- und lautlehre der germanischen sprachen,
PBB 5, p. 63Ð163.
Stevens, Ch. M. 1998: On the bifurcation and repression theories of Germanic and German, Washington, D. C.
Vennemann, Th. 1984: Hochgermanisch und Niedergermanisch. Die Verzweigungstheorie der germanisch-deutschen Lautverschiebungen,
PBB 106, p. 1Ð45.
Ð 1988: Preference laws for syllable structure, Berlin.
Voyles, J. 1992: Early Germanic grammar, New York.

ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN

MARC PIERCE

Brought to you by | University of Georgia Libraries
Authenticated
Download Date | 5/29/15 2:42 AM

