Journal of Germanic Linguistics 18.4 (2006):275–319

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law in Gothic
Marc Pierce
University of Michigan
While there is general agreement about many aspects of Gothic syllable
structure, a number of important issues remain controversial. This
paper offers an Optimality Theory analysis, with a focus on the syllabification of intervocalic consonants and consonant clusters. It is argued
that Gothic syllabification generally results from the interaction of
constraints requiring that syllables have onsets, that syllables may not
have complex codas, or codas in general, and regulating the
relationship between the input and the output. A family of constraints
banning various types of complex onsets is also proposed. With this
analysis of Gothic syllabification in hand, a new analysis of Sievers’
Law, one of the classic problems of Gothic phonology, is developed.
From this perspective, Sievers’ Law is contingent on syllable structure
and falls out from the interaction of the proposed constraints on syllable
structure. It is also argued that the correct underlying representation of
the segment affected by Sievers’ Law is an archiphoneme, as this
enables a better account of the Sievers’ Law alternations, their morphological sensitivity, and the exceptions to Sievers’ Law. Although alternative analyses are possible, the analysis presented here sidesteps some
of the problems they face and is more philologically rigorous.*

*

This paper is a substantially revised version of a portion of my doctoral
dissertation (Pierce 2002). For their assistance in the preparation of this revised
version, I thank James Cathey, San Duanmu, Benjamin Fortson, Robert Kyes,
Tomas Riad, Martti Sloan, and Bruce Spencer. I am especially grateful to the
two anonymous JGL referees, who provided a number of helpful comments that
caused me to rethink much of the analysis, and to Robert Murray for his
assistance in his role as editor.
© Society for Germanic Linguistics

276 Pierce
1. Introduction.
The importance of the syllable in phonological theory can hardly be
exaggerated. In his groundbreaking work on Indo-European syllable
structure, Eduard Hermann (1923:1) observed that “[es] bedarf keiner
großen Gelehrsamkeit, um zu sehen, daß die Silbenbildung in eine ganz
ungewöhnlich große Zahl von Fragen der Lautlehre tief eingreift.”1 One
such “Frage der Lautlehre” [“question of phonology”] and one of the
classic problems of Gothic phonology (as well as of Germanic and IndoEuropean phonology more generally) is Sievers’ Law. This law was
proposed in 1878 by Eduard Sievers to account for certain vowel/glide
alternations found in a number of Indo-European language families
(certainly in Germanic, Indic, and Iranian, possibly also in Greek, Latin,
Baltic, Slavic, Celtic, and Tocharian), namely those found in forms such
as Gothic nasjis [nasjis] ‘(thou) savest’ versus sôkeis [sokis] ‘(thou)
seekest’, where nasjis contains a glide, but sôkeis has a long vowel and
no glide. While both syllable structure and Sievers’ Law in Gothic have
been treated extensively in the relevant scholarly literature, a number of
issues remain controversial. Such issues include: the syllabification of
consonant + glide and MUTA CUM LIQUIDA clusters (sequences of stop or
 followed by a liquid); the domain of the Sievers’ Law alternation (that
is, was it foot- or syllable-based?); and how the morphological sensitivity
of Sievers’ Law should be accounted for.
The present work therefore analyzes syllable structure and Sievers’
Law in Gothic, with a focus on the treatment of intervocalic singleton
consonants and consonant clusters. The theoretical framework employed
is Optimality Theory (OT), since that particular framework has proved to
be more successful in analyzing prosodic phenomena (as syllable structure and Sievers’ Law certainly are) than other current formal theories of
phonology (as conceded by even some opponents of OT as in, for
example, McMahon 2000). The analysis presented here synthesizes
insights drawn from traditional Germanic philology with those of current
formal approaches to phonology, without sacrificing either; it maintains a
straightforward and philologically rigorous approach to the Gothic

1

“Great erudition is not required to see that syllable structure plays a prominent
role in an unusually large number of questions of phonology” (all translations
are my own).

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

277

orthographic data and the interpretation of the Gothic alphabet, while
remaining theoretically current.
The paper begins with a presentation of the evidence for Gothic
syllable structure, followed by a few methodological remarks. An abbreviated survey of previous research is given in order to highlight some
trends exhibited by these earlier approaches. After developing an OT
analysis of the Gothic data, I then turn to Sievers’ Law—first laying out
the Gothic evidence, and then briefly commenting on some earlier
analyses of it before developing a new OT analysis of the problem. The
final section of the paper summarizes the arguments.
2. Syllable Structure in Gothic.
2.1. The Evidence for Gothic Syllabification.
The major source of evidence used in analyses of Gothic syllabification
has been word breaks in the Gothic manuscripts, and there are a number
of studies of the orthographic evidence for Gothic syllabification, most
prominently Hechtenberg Collitz 1906, Schulze 1908, Vennemann 1987,
and Frey 1989.2 This section therefore describes the rules for word
breaks in the Gothic manuscripts.3 Evidence from the Codex Argenteus
and the Codices Ambrosiani is drawn from Hechtenberg Collitz 1906
and Schulze 1908, while evidence from the Skeireins and the NL is
culled from Frey 1989. The data were also spot-checked against editions
of the relevant manuscripts: Uppström 1854 for the Codex Argenteus, de
Vries 1936 for the Codices Ambrosiani, Bennett 1960 for the Skeireins,
and Szemerényi 1972 for the NL.

2

There were four major versions of the Gothic Bible: the Codex Argenteus
(currently in the Uppsala University Library), the Codex Gissensis (formerly in
the Universitätsbibliothek zu Giessen, but now lost), the Codex Carolinus (in
Wolfenbüttel), and the Codices Ambrosiani (in the Ambrosian Library in
Milan). Other Gothic texts include the Skeireins (‘Explanation’), a fragment of a
commentary on the Gospel according to John; the “New Leaf” (hereafter NL), a
page from the Codex Argenteus containing Mark 16:12–18, discovered in
Speyer in 1971; and a handful of other fragmentary texts, runic inscriptions, and
so on. See Scardigli 1994 for details.
3

Note that this section is concerned with word breaks and not with syllable
boundaries per se.

278 Pierce
The relevant data can be divided into the following main groups: (i)
vowel-vowel sequences, (ii) intervocalic singleton consonants or consonant clusters (which can be divided into subgroups depending on how
many and what kind of consonants make up the relevant clusters), (iii)
compounds, and (iv) forms containing the clitic -uh ‘and’.4 The
generalizations below can be made.
Vowel-vowel sequences are divided if both vowels are monophthongs, while diphthongs are not divided, as in 1.
(1) Vowel-vowel sequences
Heli-as
gai-ainnan
stau-a

‘Elias’ (Mark 6: 15)
‘hell’ (Mark 9: 45)
‘judgment’ (Sk.V.b.18/19)

Intervocalic singleton consonants are always placed on the following
line (that is, CVCV sequences are divided CV-CV), as in 2.
(2) Intervocalic singleton consonants
twa-lif
‘twelve’ (John 11: 9, Luke 9: 12, 17)
galau-bidedun ‘believe’ (NL Mark 16: 13)
Hero-des
‘Herod’ (Sk. III.a.12/13)
If there are two or more intervocalic consonants, the final consonant
of the cluster is placed on the following line, while the remaining
consonants are kept on the preceding line. Thus, VCCV sequences are
divided VC-CV, VCCCV sequences as VCC-CV, and so on. The forms
in 3 illustrate these patterns.5

4

Gothic words are cited in Roman transcription; broad phonetic transcriptions
are given when necessary (in the tableaux, for instance). A word break is
represented by a dash, a syllable break by a period, and vowel length by a
macron. Also, only basic glosses are given throughout the paper.
5

For convenience, I have largely retained here the subdivisions according to the
number of consonants in the intervocalic cluster employed in Hechtenberg
Collitz 1906 and Frey 1989.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

279

(3) Intervocalic consonant clusters (except muta cum liquida)
a. Clusters of two consonants
bal-gins
liban-dans
sun-jus
gudis-kai

‘wine-skin’ (Matthew 9:17)
‘to live’ (John 7:38)
‘son’ (Sk. III.c.23/24)
‘divine, godly’ (Sk.I.c.6/7)

b. Clusters of three consonants
fraquist-nand
bairh-tai
gatarh-jan

‘perish, be destroyed’ (Mark 2:22)
‘light, obvious’ (Sk.V.c.22/23)
‘to characterize’(Sk.IV.d.17/18)

c. Clusters of four or more consonants
waurst-wa
rafst-jands
gabaírht-jan

‘work’ (John 9:3, Sk.VI.b.1/2)
‘encourage, comfort’ (Luke 3:18)
‘to reveal’ (John 14:22)

Muta cum liquida clusters (clusters of a stop or  followed by a
liquid) are exceptions to the pattern just described, since such sequences
are often not divided. Vennemann (1987:170) observes that in the Codex
Argenteus and the Codex Ambrosianus A only one cluster per manuscript is divided—against at least 40 that are not divided in the Codex
Argenteus and 12 that are not in the Codex Ambrosianus A. As for the
Skeireins and the Codex Ambrosianus B, there are six cases of intervocalic muta cum liquida clusters in the Skeireins, of which four are
divided and two are not (Vennemann 1987). In the Codex Ambrosianus
B, both Hechtenberg Collitz (1906:88) and Schulze (1908:490) suggest
that most muta cum liquida clusters were divided in this particular
manuscript, and Vennemann (1987:172) cites 17 cases of muta cum
liquida clusters, of which seven are divided, and ten are not.6

6

This last statistic is perhaps somewhat skewed, since five of the ten relevant
examples are occurrences of the same word, aikklesjo ‘church’.

280 Pierce
(4) Muta cum liquida clusters
wi-ra
para-kletus
An-draias

‘against’ (Mark 4:1)
‘comforter’ (John 14:6)
‘Andrew’ (Sk.VII.a.6/7)

Compounds are divided at the boundaries of their components, such
that they are divided between elements, as in the following forms: 7
(5) Compounds
suns-ei
ufar-stigun
mi-litidedun
weina-gardis
at-ainei

‘as soon as’ (John 11:32)
‘climb up beyond, go up’ (Mark 4:7)
‘feign together with’ (Galatians 2:13)
‘vineyard’ (Luke 20:13)
‘only’(Sk.VIII.b.23/24)

The final group of syllable breaks treated here consists of five forms
from the Skeireins involving the clitic -uh ‘and’. This clitic is sometimes
treated as a separate word and sometimes as part of a word, and is apparently unique in Gothic in that respect (Braune/Ebbinghaus 1981:15). In
the five examples cited by Frey (1989:282), -uh is treated as part of a
word five times, and as a separate word once. Thus, in the first two
examples cited below, the CVCV cluster is divided CV-CV, while the
VCV cluster in the final example is divided VC-V.
(6) Forms containing the clitic -uh ‘and’
anara-nuhan
nauha-nuh
suman-uhan

7

‘and another’ (Sk.VI.a.7/8)
‘yet’(Sk.III.a.4/5)
‘partly’ (Sk.VI.c.18/19)

The term “compound” is used here not only for true compounds, but also for
forms with certain prefixes and for reduplicated forms.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

281

2.2. Methodological Considerations.
While an extensive methodological discussion is beyond the scope of the
present work, some such remarks are in order.8 Determining the syllable
structure of a dead language remains controversial, as there is significant
disagreement over the possible sources of evidence, ranging from what
types of evidence may be used to the relative value of the different
sources of evidence.9 For instance, Riad (2004:174) suggests that orthographic evidence, evidence drawn from language universals and
typology, Gothic-internal phonological phenomena, and comparative
evidence can be considered in the analysis of Gothic syllabification.
However, most studies of Gothic syllabification have relied largely or
totally on the orthographic evidence. In my view, the orthographic
evidence is the most reliable evidence for Gothic syllabification. The use
of universal/typological considerations in historical linguistics remains
controversial, and the use of Gothic-internal linguistic evidence can lead
to circular reasoning: one may fall into the trap of assuming that certain
phonological developments occurred because of syllable structure, and
analyzing them as such, but then using that very analysis as evidence for
syllable structure. Comparative evidence can be important, but is not
necessarily crucial, especially as languages sometimes do not behave like
the languages they are related to. Relying on the orthographic evidence
sidesteps these controversies, although this decision is not without its
own problems.
As indicated in the previous section, the major source of evidence
used in analyses of Gothic syllabification has been word breaks in the
Gothic manuscripts. It has traditionally been held that these word breaks
were phonologically motivated and corresponded to syllable breaks. That
is, it has largely been assumed, since the groundbreaking analyses of
Hechtenberg Collitz (1906) and Schulze (1908), that when the Gothic
scribes reached the end of a line, and did not have room to fit the entire

8

See Riad 2004 for a substantially more elaborated methodological discussion,
which reaches a different conclusion from the one defended here.
9

See Devine and Stephens 1994 for a more general discussion of how to determine syllable structure in a dead language.

282 Pierce
next word on the line, they divided the word at a syllable boundary.10
This claim has been commonly, but not unanimously, accepted
(Hermann (1923), for instance, partially rejected it), and it has been
challenged by several scholars in recent years, for example, Barrack
(1998), Kiparsky (1998), Kim (2001), and Riad (2004).
The main arguments typically presented for and against the
traditional view can be summarized as follows. First, in support of the
traditional view, as Frey (1989:288) notes, a syllabification for Gothic
based on the traditional assumption that word breaks correspond to
syllable divisions generally coincides with syllable structure in the early
North and West Germanic languages and with the Syllable Preference
Laws developed by Theo Vennemann (most fully in Vennemann 1988).
This generalization is partially weakened if we give up the traditional
view. Secondly, those scholars who reject the traditional assumption
have been unable to explain why certain types of consonant clusters
should be treated differently. There is no readily apparent reason why
consonant + glide clusters or muta cum liquida sequences (the two favorite candidates for special treatment) should be handled differently from
all other clusters, and all theories to the contrary have severe weaknesses,
as discussed below. Third, word breaks in at least one of the other early
Germanic languages (Old English) also generally correspond to syllable
breaks, and it would therefore be unsurprising if Gothic were to fit this
pattern as well.11
At the same time, the traditional assumption has its own weaknesses.
First, if this approach is correct, then Gothic is a typologically odd
language, in that muta cum liquida clusters are generally tautosyllabified
while consonant + glide clusters are heterosyllabified. Languages that
tautosyllabify muta cum liquida clusters tend to tautosyllabify consonant
+ glide clusters as well (Vennemann 1987). Secondly, this type of
analysis largely brushes sonority, and especially sonority sequencing,
aside, despite the general importance of sonority for syllabification (see
Riad 2004:193–197 on this point). Third, any analysis of Gothic
10

Hechtenberg Collitz (1906) does not seem to have considered possible
alternatives, given that her article, which really deals with word breaks in the
Gothic manuscripts, is titled “Syllabication in Gothic.”
11

See Lutz (1986:193), who argues explicitly that “word division at the ends of
lines in Old English is based on the syllabification of that language.”

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

283

syllabification is necessarily more complex and less elegant. Finally, the
rules for word breaks in many modern languages reflect a mixture of
phonological, morphological, and orthographic factors (as evidenced by
the rules for word breaks in English prescribed by the Chicago Manual
of Style, for instance), and perhaps the rules for word breaks in Gothic
were similar. Modifying the traditional approach solves these problems,
as Gothic is now no longer typologically odd (as both consonant + glide
clusters and muta cum liquida clusters can be considered tautosyllabified,
as argued in Barrack 1998, among others, or heterosyllabified, as
suggested in Hermann 1923 and Kiparsky 1998, among others), and
sonority can play a more important role in Gothic syllabification. In
addition, the resulting analyses of Gothic syllabification are simpler and
more elegant, and Gothic is now more like many modern languages in
terms of the rules for word breaks.
Determining which of these perspectives is correct is obviously
difficult, as one is inevitably in danger of over- or under-interpreting the
data. This problem is compounded by the limited Gothic corpus: one can
never be entirely sure if something was impossible in Gothic simply
because it does not happen to occur in the preserved Gothic corpus. The
result, as Riad (2004:174) phrases it, is that “a methodological vacuum
of sorts is created between desired simplicity and the finite supply of
data.” In light of this methodological vacuum and finite supply of data,
disagreement is inevitable. When considering the comparative evidence,
for instance, as proponents of the traditional view can point to the rules
for word breaks in Old English in support of their claims, while
opponents of the traditional view can point to the rules for word breaks
in modern languages to support their own ideas.
To some extent, then, the issue has become a philosophical one. One
finds either the arguments in favor of the traditional interpretation of the
Gothic orthographic data or the arguments against it more convincing,
and therefore faces a difficult choice: either (a) the traditional interpretation is correct, and word breaks indeed correspond to syllable
breaks, meaning that Gothic is a typologically odd language that ignores
sonority sequencing to some extent and requires a more complicated
analysis, or (b) the traditional interpretation is substantially—but not
entirely—correct, in that word breaks do not always correspond to
syllable breaks, and the analysis of Gothic syllabification must therefore
differ from analyses of the syllable structure of the early North and West

284 Pierce
Germanic languages, and the Gothic scribes singled out one type of
consonant cluster for special treatment. The analysis developed here is
based on the first of these options, as I am willing to sacrifice typology,
sonority, elegance, and evidence from modern languages in favor of an
analysis that fits better with analyses of the other early Germanic
languages and is more philologically rigorous. In what follows, I therefore extrapolate from word breaks to syllable boundaries with a fair
amount of confidence, and assume that CVCV sequences were syllabified CV.CV, that CVCCV sequences were syllabified CVC.CV (except
in the case of some muta cum liquida clusters), and so on. To this point I
have only referred to word breaks, but below I refer almost exclusively
to syllable boundaries.12
2.3. Previous Analyses of Gothic Syllable Structure.
Although an exhaustive survey of the literature on Gothic syllabification
is not possible in this work, some such discussion is necessary.13 The
goal of this section is not to rebut entirely these earlier analyses, but
instead to give a snapshot of the relevant research, with an eye to
highlighting some of the issues that confront analyses of Gothic syllabification and how some earlier scholars have dealt with these issues. I begin
with the classic analyses in Schulze 1908 and Hermann 1923, before
turning to some more recent proposals.
In Schulze 1908—the first evaluation of the Gothic evidence to link
word breaks and syllable structure explicitly—it is argued that two rules
account for all cases of Gothic syllable structure: (a) intervocalic singleton consonants always form the onset of the following syllable, and (b)
only the last segment in intervocalic consonant clusters is placed in the
onset of the following syllable. As to muta cum liquida clusters, he
viewed them as “Belege einer neuen Regel” [“evidence for a new rule”]
arguing that in Gothic these clusters “fordern […] jene Ausnahme-

12

I also note, however, that a slight modification to the analysis presented here
also makes it compatible with the view that consonant + glide clusters were
tautosyllabified, as discussed in section 2.4 below.
13

Such a discussion remains a desideratum. See Palviainen 2001, Pierce 2002,
and Riad 2004 for some relevant historiographical discussion.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

285

stellung, die zu erkennen und anzuerkennen wir von der griechischen
und lateinischen Prosodie her früh gewöhnt sind” (Schulze 1908:488).14
Hermann (1923:288) reached the same general conclusion as
Schulze (1908), stating that all consonant clusters were heterosyllabified.
Unlike Schulze, Hermann suggested that muta cum liquida clusters were
only apparent exceptions to the general patterns of Gothic syllabification.
In Hermann’s view, these clusters were actually heterosyllabified, but the
Gothic scribes tautosyllabified them in imitation of Greek scribal practices, such that the apparent tautosyllabification of muta cum liquida
clusters in the Gothic manuscripts is “bloß eine Nachahmung des
griechischen Musters” [“merely an imitation of the Greek pattern”]
(Hermann 1923:292).
More recent work on Gothic syllable structure generally does not
invoke influence from the classical languages in this area, but instead
looks to Gothic-internal factors.15 For example, Frey (1989) provides a
sonority-based analysis, suggesting that the syllabification of intervocalic
consonant clusters can generally be traced to the SYLLABLE CONTACT
LAW (SCL), which takes the form in 7 (there are various possible versions of the SCL; I give a typical one here).16

14

“demand […] the same status as exceptions that we have been accustomed to
recognize from Greek and Latin prosody”
15

Murray and Vennemann 1983:516 is the exception to this generalization; the
treatment of muta cum liquida clusters is attributed there to Greek influence and
to morphological factors: “it would be inappropriate […] to conclude that the
failure to divide sequences of a stop or  plus a liquid in the manuscripts reflects
the phonological syllable structure of Gothic itself.” However, Vennemann has
abandoned these ideas in later work, for example, in Vennemann 1987.
16

I assume the following relatively typical version of the sonority scale: stops
>> fricatives >> nasals >> liquids >> glides >> vowels. This scale can be
refined such that voiceless consonants are less sonorous than voiced consonants,
and so on. These refinements are unnecessary for the analysis presented here,
with one exception discussed below. Note also that some analyses refer to
consonantal strength and others to sonority. In fact, the scale represents both—
the greater the sonority, the lower the consonantal strength. On this scale, sound
classes are listed in order of increasing sonority (that is, decreasing consonantal
strength).

286 Pierce
(7) Syllable Contact Law (SCL)
A syllable contact A.B is the more preferred, the less the Consonantal Strength of the offset A and the greater the Consonantal Strength
of the onset B; more precisely, the greater the characteristic
difference CS(B) – CS(A) between the Consonantal Strength of B
and that of A (Vennemann 1988:40).
According to the SCL, preferred syllable contacts involve a weak
coda (for example, liquids and nasals) and a strong onset (for example,
stops and fricatives), while less preferred syllable contacts conversely
involve a strong coda and a weak onset. Heterosyllabifying muta cum
liquida clusters would therefore result in a less preferred syllable contact
(as stops and fricatives are the strongest consonants and liquids the
second weakest), while tautosyllabifying them eliminates such dispreferred syllable contacts. All other aspects of Gothic syllabification can
then be accounted for within the other Syllable Preference Laws codified
in Vennemann 1988.
The final analysis considered here is proposed by Barrack (1998),
who partially rejects the traditional view of the relationship between
word breaks and syllable structure. Following on an observation made by
Voyles (1992:89), Barrack (1998:39) suggests that “the word division C/j
may simply be a reflection of morphological rather than syllabic
structure […] a similar explanation may be given for the division C/w
[…].”17 This type of approach acknowledges that such sequences
normally contain a morpheme boundary, for example, matjan ‘to eat’,
gasatjan ‘to set’, gudja ‘man of God, priest’, and waurstwa ‘work’,
where a morpheme boundary occurs before the <j> or <w> in all cases.
In Barrack’s view, consonant + glide clusters were really tautosyllabified, not heterosyllabified as had traditionally been assumed. Once
these clusters have been accounted for, then, as was the case with the
analysis presented in Frey 1989, the remaining aspects of Gothic syllable
structure can be accounted for by means of the Syllable Preference Laws
codified in Vennemann 1988.

17

Riad (1992:86–87) makes the same suggestion, although Barrack only cites
Voyles. This theory has also recently been endorsed by Kim (2001).

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

287

However, none of these proposals is completely unproblematic.
Dismissing muta cum liquida clusters as exceptions to the general pattern
of Gothic syllabification, in line with Schulze 1908, lacks explanatory
value. Analyses appealing to influence from the classical languages, as
proposed by Hermann (1923), must explain why this influence was
limited to muta cum liquida clusters (as Frey (1989:290) also observes).
As to sonority-based analyses, they must explain why less preferred
syllable contacts, specifically consonant + glide sequences, are tolerated,
while muta cum liquida contacts are eliminated. One of the more persuasive suggestions along these lines is the hypothesis of “glide
strengthening” (Murray and Vennemann 1983, Vennemann 1985, Frey
1989), according to which <j> and <w> did not represent glides in
Gothic, but rather fricatives. Since stop + fricative contacts are much
more preferred than stop + glide contacts, their heterosyllabification in
the manuscripts is no longer problematic, but instead exactly what the
SCL predicts.
A full treatment of glide strengthening in Germanic in general, and
in Gothic in particular, is beyond the scope of this work, and the following brief remarks will therefore have to suffice. A number of arguments
can be mustered in favor of glide strengthening, including the seemingly
aberrant treatment of consonant + glide contacts, the spelling of certain
loan words, and the occurrence of glide strengthening in the history of
Faroese, Gothic, Old Norse (Holtzmann’s Law), and possibly in the early
West Germanic languages as well. At the same time, a number of
arguments can be mustered against the hypothesis of glide strengthening,
including a sporadic process of <j> epenthesis, the alternation of <j>
with <i> in some Greek loan words, the lack of an orthographic indication of glide strengthening (contrary to the case of Holtzmann’s Law),
Sievers’ Law itself, and the absence of any truly convincing synchronic
evidence for glide strengthening in Gothic, barring an assumption about
the role of the SCL in Gothic syllabification. In sum, I find the arguments against glide strengthening more compelling than those in favor of
it, and therefore accept the traditional view that <j> and <w> represent
glides, and not fricatives, in Gothic here.18

18

See Barrack 1997, Page 1999, and Pierce 2002 for more extensive discussion
of these matters.

288 Pierce
Finally, consider the possibility of a morphologically-based
syllabification of consonant + glide clusters. This claim requires a
somewhat more extensive discussion, as it has found the most resonance
in the current literature (for example, Kim 2001 and Riad 2004). A
syllabification of Gothic based on this idea fits better with typological
considerations. This proposal is also perhaps bolstered by the observation that word breaks occurred between the elements of compounds.
Kim (2001) has recently invoked this very observation to challenge the
traditional view, arguing that since compounds were divided according to
morphological criteria, it would not be too much of a stretch to assume
that morphological considerations could have played a role in the division of simplex words as well.
Although such arguments are persuasive, they are not entirely convincing. First, in line with the point made above about possible influence
from Greek scribal practices, there is no readily apparent reason why
only consonant + glide clusters should have been divided at morpheme
boundaries. Second, not all consonant + glide sequences contain a
morpheme boundary. Consider forms affected by Holtzmann’s Law,
such as twaddjê ‘of two’ (where the word break/syllable boundary occurs
before the j but the morpheme boundary before the ê) and the handful of
verbs whose stems end in w, such as singwan ‘to sing’ (where the word
break/syllable boundary occurs before the w but the morpheme boundary
before the a).19 Moreover, consonant + glide clusters are almost invariably heterosyllabified in the Gothic manuscripts; Hermann (1923:288)
notes that there are 340 cases of consonant + glide clusters at line ends in
the Gothic corpus, of which 339 are divided across lines. Had they really
been tautosyllabified, one might plausibly expect the Gothic scribes to
have tautosyllabified them at least occasionally, especially since there are
19

An anonymous JGL referee suggested that neither of these types of exceptions
is particularly problematic for Barrack’s proposal, as forms affected by
Holtzmann’s Law are morphologically opaque and there are very few verbs
whose stems end in w. Gothic scribes may therefore have divided such clusters
(rare though they may be) according to the same principles as those consonant +
glide clusters containing a morpheme boundary. These observations are true, but
the larger point remains: not all consonant + glide clusters contained a
morpheme boundary, and such cases do indeed weaken the thesis that such
clusters were divided according to morphological, and not phonological,
principles.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

289

a handful of demonstrable cases of scribal error in terms of word breaks
(see Frey 1989:283). As to the treatment of compounds, they are
morphologically different from simplex words, and it is therefore
unsurprising that they are divided at morpheme boundaries. Moreover, as
argued below, it seems that even compounds were treated in
phonological terms, in that word breaks correspond to both morpheme
and syllable boundaries. Finally, there are no instances of consonant + j
onsets word-initially. This suggests that such onsets were not permitted
word-internally either, as languages typically permit a wider range of
complex onsets word-initially than they do word-internally.20 None of
these reasons is completely probative on its own (for instance, the lack of
consonant + j onsets word-initially may be an accidental gap in the
Gothic corpus, especially since consonant + w onsets do occur wordinitially, as in twalif ‘twelve’). However, taken together, I find them
convincing, and therefore reject the idea that consonant + glide clusters
were divided according to morphological principles in favor of the
traditional view that they were divided according to phonological
principles.
2.4. An OT Analysis of Gothic Syllable Structure: Simplex Words.
Having presented the data and reviewed the major methodological
assumptions of this analysis, as well as some earlier discussions of
Gothic syllable structure, I now develop an OT analysis of Gothic
syllabification. This analysis focuses on simplex words, but one slight
refinement is necessary to account for the syllabification of compounds,
as shown in section 2.5 below.21 The first group of constraints employed
20

For instance, in English, [pw] and [bw] onsets only occur word-initially, and
then only in loan words like pueblo and bwana (see, for example, Hammond
1999:11).
21

Gothic stress placement should be kept in mind here. The major condition
governing main stress in Gothic was the same generally reconstructed for ProtoGermanic, namely that main stress was located on the initial syllable of the root.
This observation can be formalized using an ALIGNMENT constraint (McCarthy
and Prince 1993), one of a family of constraints dealing with the relationship
between the prosodic word and the lexical word. Since main stress invariably
falls on the initial syllable of the root, the topic is not discussed further and the
constraint is omitted from the tableaux below. See Bennett 1970, 1972 for extensive discussion of the stress patterns of Gothic.

290 Pierce
here, all of which are familiar from the relevant literature (for example,
Prince and Smolensky 1993 and Kager 1999) is provided in 8.
(8) a. ONSET
Syllables must have onsets.
b. NOCODA
Syllables may not have codas.
c. NOCOMP CODA
At most one segment may occur in a syllable coda.
Some commentary on these three constraints is appropriate. With
regard to ONSET, Blevins (1995:217–219) points out that some languages
require every syllable to have an onset. In certain Northern dialects of
German, for instance, glottal stops are inserted at the beginning of
(underlyingly) onsetless syllables, especially when the syllable is wordinitial or stressed, for example, [alt] alt ‘old’ and [ka'ot] chaotisch
‘chaotic’ (Vennemann 1988:14).22 As to NOCODA, some languages, such
as Fijian, absolutely ban syllable codas (Blevins 1995:219). Vennemann
(1988:21) accounted for this by means of “the Coda Law,” of which only
the first clause is cited here: “A syllable coda is the more preferred: (a)
the smaller the number of speech sounds in the coda […].” Taken to its
logical conclusion, as it was, for example, also by Prince and Smolensky
(1993:34), an empty syllable coda is the best possible coda of all. Moreover, some languages that allow simplex codas do not allow complex
codas; for example, Mokilese permits CVC and VC syllables, but not
CVCC, VCC, or CVCCC syllables (Blevins 1995:217).
There must also be a way to rule out complex onsets, as they are
relatively rare in Gothic. There are a number of possible formulations of
this type of constraint, including the following. Calabrese (1994) and
Kiparsky (1998) both propose a Gothic-specific constraint banning consonant + j onsets, while Kager (1999) proposes a monolithic *COMPLEX
ONSETS constraint, along the lines of the NOCOMPCODA constraint given
above. Green (2003:239) argues in favor of a “universally and intrin22

The actual phonetics of this phenomenon are more complicated than indicated
here. See Kohler 1994 for details.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

291

sically ranked set of ONSET-WELL-FORMEDNESS (OWF) constraints” on
syllable onsets, according to which syllable onsets with steep-rising
sonority (for example, stop + glide onsets) are preferred to syllable
onsets with shallow-rising sonority (for example, stop + fricative onsets),
which are in turn preferred to syllable onsets with falling sonority (for
example, fricative + stop onsets). Hall (2005:234–235) conflates several
distinct constraints into a constraint called OWF, which states that
“certain O[bstruent] S[onorant] sequences are ungrammatical in the onset
(for example, [tl], [dl], and [gm]).
None of these proposals seems entirely satisfactory, for a variety of
reasons; for example, the OWF constraints proposed by Green (2003) do
not account for the absence of some syllable onsets with steep-rising
sonority, such as stop + glide onsets, when other such onsets are
permitted, such as voiceless stop + liquid onsets. I therefore propose a
family of constraints banning various types of complex onsets, as in 9.23
(9)

*NOCOMP ONSET
a. *[CONSONANT-GLIDE
b. *[CONSONANT-LIQUID
c. *[CONSONANT-NASAL
d. *[CONSONANT-FRICATIVE
e. *[CONSONANT-STOP

23

An anonymous JGL referee queried the possible role of sonority here, as
certain onsets (for example, [ns]) may be banned because they violate the
Sonority Sequencing Generalization. According to this principle, which goes
back to proposals originally made by Otto Jespersen and others, “complex
onsets rise in sonority, and complex codas fall in sonority” (Kager 1999:267).
Although the role of sonority sequencing in syllabification is well-established,
its status in Gothic is somewhat unclear. For example, the Gothic manuscripts
indicate a clear preference to heterosyllabify consonant + glide clusters, even
when this results in complex codas with rising sonority, as in forms like
waldufn.ja ‘power, authority’. Tautosyllabifying the relevant cluster would have
eliminated such a coda, while producing an onset that conformed to sonority
sequencing. Thus, while many of the NOCOMPONSET constraints are presumably
rooted in sonority, the Sonority Sequencing Generalization is not referred to
here. In addition, the term “consonant” in the following constraints is shorthand
for “consonant or glide.”

292 Pierce
The various members of this constraint family can be subdivided,
and, for the purposes of this paper, one of them must be as in 10.
(10) *[CONSONANT -LIQUID
a. *[GLIDE-LIQUID
b. *[LIQUID-LIQUID
c. *[NASAL-LIQUID
d. *[FRICATIVE-LIQUID
e. *[-LIQUID
f. *[STOP-LIQUID
At first glance, the status of  may seem problematic in this respect, as it
patterns with the stops, despite being a fricative. At the same time, this
type of syllabification pattern is reasonably common crosslinguistically
(it seems to be present in Old Norse, for instance), and it is therefore not
completely surprising that it occurs here. To account for this type of
pattern, Steriade (1982:95) argues that  is the least sonorous of the
fricatives, which indicates that in some languages (including Gothic) the
relevant division on the sonority scale is not stop versus fricative, but
instead stop and  versus the other fricatives, or perhaps, as the set of
constraints just proposed suggests, stop versus  versus the other
fricatives.24 In what follows, the constraint given as *[FRICATIVELIQUID is shorthand for *[ALL FRICATIVES EXCEPT FOR -LIQUID, and
the constraints *STOP][LIQUID and *][LIQUID are lumped together as
*[MUTA-LIQUID.25
The remaining constraints employed here are FAITHFULNESS
constraints, that is, constraints that regulate the relationship between the
input and the output. McCarthy (1995:3–4) proposes several FAITHFUL-

24

This is the one refinement to the sonority scale mentioned in note 16. This
step is not a modification of the sonority scale per se, but rather a finer-grained
version of the scale. That is, I am not proposing something along the lines of
“liquids are more sonorous than glides in Gothic” here.
25

It is currently unclear whether there is a universal ranking for this constraint
family, and I therefore leave this issue aside here, although I intend to pursue
this line of inquiry in future work.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

293

NESS constraints. Those necessary for the analysis presented here can be

informally stated as in 11.26
(11) a. MAX
Elements may not be deleted.
b. DEP
Elements may not be inserted.
c. IDENT [FEATURE]
Values for [features] may not be changed.
d. LINEARITY
Elements may not be reordered (essentially, metathesis is not
permitted).
These constraints are lumped together in what follows as FAITHFULNESS.
The correct ranking of these constraints must now be established. For
expository purposes, I treat the constraints in small groups. In what
follows, NOCOMP ONSET is shorthand for “all of the NOCOMP ONSET
constraints except for *[MUTA-LIQUID.” I propose the ranking in 12.
(12) FAITHFULNESS >> NOCOMP ONSET >> NOCOMP CODA, ONSET >>
NOCODA >> * [MUTA-LIQUID
I begin with the ranking of FAITHFULNESS and NOCOMPONSET.
The majority of the NOCOMP ONSET constraints must be extremely
high ranking in Gothic, as only muta cum liquida onsets are permitted
word-internally in simplex words. Word-initially, however, a wider
range of complex onsets is permitted. This is unsurprising, as languages
typically permit a richer set of complex onsets word-initially than they
do word-internally (this is true for English, for instance, as indicated in
note 20 above). In Gothic, a similar situation prevails, as onsets like [wl]
and [wr] are permitted word-initially, as in forms like wlits ‘face,
appearance’ and wrakja ‘persecution’, although they are not allowed

26

The wording of the constraints used here generally reflects Kager 1999.

294 Pierce
word-internally.27 This discrepancy can be accounted for by ranking
FAITHFULNESS over the various NOCOMP ONSET constraints, thus ruling
out deleting or inserting a segment, changing its value for various features, or reordering segments to satisfy the NOCOMP ONSET constraints.
Since NOCOMP ONSET is the highest-ranking of the other constraints (as
will be demonstrated below), this means that FAITHFULNESS is the
highest-ranking of the constraints. This ranking also accounts for the
greater range of complex onsets found word-initially—there is one way
to eliminate complex onsets word-internally that is not possible wordinitially, namely by moving a segment from the onset to the coda of the
proceeding syllable. As this is impossible word-initially, and the
FAITHFULNESS constraints rule out other possible ways of eliminating
word-initial complex onsets, certain complex onsets occur word-initially
but not word-internally.28 The tableau in 13 illustrates this point for twalif
‘twelve’.29
(13) twalif ‘twelve’
[twalif]

FAITHFULNESS

[twa.lif]
[wa.lif]
[te.wa.lif]
[wta.lif]
[tua.lif]

*NOCOMPONSET

*
*!
*!
*!
*!

*

27

See Joos 1942:34 and Calabrese 1994:164 for tables of possible word-initial
consonant clusters in Gothic, and Suzuki 1987 for a sonority-based analysis of
these word-initial clusters.
28

This raises the question of the source of such complex onsets. I see them as a
remnant of an earlier stage in the (pre-)history of Gothic, in the spirit of recent
work on Evolutionary Phonology (Blevins 2004).
29

Both here and in what follows, constraints not essential to the argument at
hand have been omitted; for example, the FAITHFULNESS constraints are omitted
in 14, although they rule out some possible alternative candidates.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

295

Next, NOCOMP ONSET must outrank NOCOMPCODA, as the latter
may be violated to ensure that illicit syllable onsets do not occur.
Consider, for instance, forms like iudangardjos ‘kingdom’, syllabified
[iu.dan.gard.jos]. As 14 shows, NOCOMPCODA could have been satisfied by having [dj] form a complex onset. The failure of this to occur
indicates that NOCOMP ONSET outranks NOCOMP CODA.
(14) iudangardjos ‘kingdom’
[iudangardjos]
[iu.dan.gard.jos]
[iu.dan.gar.djos]

NOCOMPONSET

NOCOMPCODA

*
*!

There does not seem to be any way to determine the relative ranking
of NOCOMPCODA and ONSET, as satisfying ONSET often also leads to the
satisfaction of NOCOMPCODA. For instance, in forms like bal.gins ‘wine
skin’, syllabified [bal.gins], placing the [g] in the onset of the second
syllable, rather than in the coda of the first syllable, allows the satisfaction of both ONSET and NOCOMP CODA. I therefore assume that these
constraints are both outranked by NOCOMP ONSET, but are not crucially
ranked with regard to each other.30
As for NOCOMPCODA and NOCODA, in line with the generalization
that languages that permit simplex syllable codas may not permit complex codas, it is to be expected that NOCOMPCODA outranks NOCODA.
Moreover, this proposed ranking is supported by the treatment of certain
forms containing muta cum liquida clusters, for example, Andraias
[an.drai.as] ‘Andrew’. In such forms, the only type of complex onset
permitted word-internally in simplex words in Gothic is created, which
avoids violation of NOCOMP CODA while violating NOCODA, suggesting
that violation of NOCOMPCODA is sufficient to eliminate a candidate,
30

An anonymous JGL referee pointed out that [j] can sometimes be inserted to
provide syllables with onsets, as in forms such as fijands ‘enemy’, thus
suggesting that the relative ranking of ONSET and FAITHFULNESS may not be as
straightforward as I have claimed. However, this development does not necessarily contradict the proposed ranking, since this process of epenthesis is
sporadic (for example, fiands, a form without the glide, is also attested, and is, in
my view, the regular form).

296 Pierce
while violation of NOCODA is not. Thus, NOCOMPCODA outranks
NOCODA, as illustrated in 15.31
(15) Andraias [an.drai.as] ‘Andrew’
[andraias]
[an.drai.as]
[and.rai.as]

NOCOMPCODA

NOCODA

*!

**
***

The final ranking to be justified at this point is the relative ranking of
NOCODA and NOCOMP ONSET. The treatment of muta cum liquida clusters provides the best evidence for the proposed ranking. Before this justification can be presented, however, the treatment of muta cum liquida
clusters in the various manuscripts requires more extensive discussion.
Therefore, I now turn to these clusters, beginning with the manuscripts
where the muta cum liquida clusters tended to be tautosyllabified, the
Codex Argenteus and the Codex Ambrosianus A.
According to Vennemann 1987, the vast majority of muta cum
liquida clusters are tautosyllabified in these manuscripts; there is one
instance of heterosyllabified muta cum liquida cluster per manuscript,
out of at least 41 cases in the Codex Argenteus and 13 in the Codex
Ambrosianus A. The ranking given in 12 successfully accounts for the
tautosyllabification of these clusters in these manuscripts, since
NOCOMP CODA and NOCODA both outrank *[MUTA-LIQUID. It is better
therefore to have muta cum liquida clusters form a syllable onset than to
place them in the coda of the previous syllable, as illustrated in 16 for
aftra ‘again, backwards’ (syllabified [af.tra]) and in 17 for fadreina
‘race, parents’ (syllabified [fa.dri.na]).
(16) aftra ‘again, backwards’
[aftra]

NOCOMPCODA

NOCODA

*[MUTA-LIQUID.

*

*!

*
**

[af.tra]
[aft.ra]

31

Other possible ways of avoiding a NO CODA violation, for example, deleting
one of the offending segments, are ruled out by FAITHFULNESS.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

297

In 16, *[MUTA-LIQUID could have been satisfied by heterosyllabifying
the [tr] cluster. However, this would have violated NOCOMPCODA, and
the relevant constraint ranking prevents this. Thus, the relevant cluster is
tautosyllabified.
A similar situation prevails in the case of fadreina, although here
NOCODA plays the deciding role (see 17). Again, if the relevant consonant cluster were heterosyllabified, then * [MUTA-LIQUID would be
satisfied, but at the expense of violating NOCODA. The constraint
ranking prohibits this, and the relevant cluster is therefore tautosyllabified.
(17) fadreina ‘race, parents’
[fadrina]
[fa.dri.na]
[fad.ri.na]

NOCOMPCODA

NOCODA

*[MUTA-LIQUID.

*
*!

The two heterosyllabified muta cum liquida clusters remain unaccounted for. The case found in the Codex Argenteus is probably a case of
scribal error, since the one heterosyllabified form is nelos [ne.los]
‘needle’, and there is another instance of the same word where the relevant cluster is tautosyllabified. As for the heterosyllabified form in the
Codex Ambrosius A, idreigondane [id.ri.gon.da.ne] ‘repent, regret’, this
is perhaps the result of paleographic considerations, as the Gothic scribes
were reluctant to divide words after a single initial vowel, and the
heterosyllabification of the muta cum liquida cluster in this particular
form may reflect this.32
The analysis of muta cum liquida clusters developed so far accounts
only for the Codex Argenteus and the Codex Ambrosianus A; it must be
modified slightly to account for the two manuscripts exhibiting more
variation in their syllabification, namely the Skeireins and the Codex
Ambrosianus B. In the Skeireins, there are six cases of intervocalic muta
cum liquida clusters, of which four are heterosyllabified (iuparo
[iu.pa.ro] ‘from above’ (2x), aro [a.ro] ‘afterwards’, and wirus
32

See Vennemann 1987:180, Barrack 1998:44–45, and Riad 2004:186, note 13
for discussion of this Gothic scribal practice, and also Lutz 1986:201, note 21 on
a similar scribal practice in Old English.

298 Pierce
[wi.rus] ‘lamb’), and two are tautosyllabified (Andraias [an.drai.as]
‘Andrew’ and aftra [af.tra] ‘back, again’) (Vennemann 1987:172). In the
Codex Ambrosianus B, there are seventeen cases of muta cum liquida
clusters, of which seven are heterosyllabified, and ten tautosyllabified, as
seen in 18 (Vennemann 1987:172).
(18) Muta cum liquida clusters in the Codex Ambrosianus B
HETEROSYLLABIFIED
Pait.rau ‘Peter’
ak.ran ‘fruit’
ag.laitei ‘lasciviousness’
ag.lom ‘anguish’
bro.runs ‘brethren’
hlut.rans ‘pure’
dauht.rum ‘daughter’

TAUTOSYLLABIFIED
Mam.bres ‘Mambres’ (personal name)
aik.klesjo ‘church’ (5x)
bai.trei ‘bitterness’
hlei.rai ‘hut, tent’
wul.rais ‘of worth’
hair.ram ‘heart’

The behavior of muta cum liquida clusters in these manuscripts can
be accounted for by revising the proposed constraint ranking, such that
*[MUTA-LIQUID outranks NOCODA in the Skeireins and the Codex
Ambrosianus B (more precisely, in the dialects of Gothic represented in
these two manuscripts). That is, in the Skeireins and in the Codex
Ambrosianus B, the ranking in 19 holds.
(19) FAITHFULNESS >> NOCOMP ONSET >> *NOCOMP CODA, ONSET
>> *[MUTA-LIQUID >> NOCODA
This reranking is illustrated in the tableaux in 20 for aro [a.ro]
‘afterwards’, a form from the Skeireins, and hlutrans [hlut.rans] ‘pure’, a
form from the Codex Ambrosianus B. In the case of aro, tautosyllabifying the [r] cluster would incur a violation of *[MUTA-LIQUID.
Heterosyllabifying the relevant cluster avoids this problem, despite the
ensuing violation of NOCODA, and the winning form is therefore
[a.ro]. The same argument applies to [hlut.rans].

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

299

(20) a. aro [a.ro] ‘afterwards’
[aro]

*[MUTA-LIQUID

[a.ro]
[a.ro]

NOCODA

*
*!

b. hlutrans [hlut.rans] ‘pure’
[hlutrans]

*[MUTA-LIQUID

[hlut.rans]
[hlu.trans]

NOCODA

*
*!

This ranking leaves us with five exceptions, one each from the
Codex Argenteus and the Codex Ambrosianus A, as well as three from
the Codex Ambrosianus B. It was suggested above that the exception
from the Codex Argenteus is probably a case of scribal error, and that the
exception from the Codex Ambrosianus A may be the result of paleographic considerations, leaving the three exceptions from the Codex
Ambrosianus B: bai.trei ‘bitterness’, hlei.rai ‘hut, tent’, and dauht.rum
‘daughter’. The analysis predicts that the muta cum liquida clusters in
bai.trei and hlei.rai should be heterosyllabified to avoid violations of
*[MUTA-LIQUID and that the relevant cluster in dauht.rum should be
tautosyllabified to avoid a violation of NOCOMPCODA, and it seems that
these three forms must remain exceptions. However, even with these
exceptions, the vast majority of muta cum liquida clusters have been
accounted for.33
At this point, I return briefly to the claim made above that the
analysis developed here can easily be made compatible with the view
that consonant + glide clusters were tautosyllabified. This can be
accomplished by reranking the *[CONSONANT-GLIDE constraint proposed above with regard to NOCODA, such that NOCODA now outranks
33

It is possible to account for bai.trei and hlei.rai by invoking the Stress-toWeight-Principle (SWP), according to which stressed syllables must be heavy
(both of these forms are stressed on the initial syllable), in line with the analysis
presented in Pierce 2002. As the status of SWP in Gothic is extremely controversial, and dauht.rum does not yield to such an analysis, this idea is not pursued
here.

300 Pierce
*[CONSONANT -GLIDE . Thus, in forms like nasjis ‘(thou) savest’—
which I have argued was syllabified nas.jis, but according to this
alternative view is syllabified na.sjis—the tautosyllabification of the [sj]
cluster is motivated by the need to avoid a violation of NOCODA. Again,
at this point I am unwilling to accept the idea that consonant + glide
clusters were tautosyllabified, but I take it as a positive indication that
my analysis can account for the data under both views with such a slight
modification.
2.5. The Syllabification of Gothic Compounds.
I conclude this portion of the analysis with some brief remarks about the
treatment of compounds.34 Compounds enjoy a special status in Gothic,
as they were treated differently from simplex words in the manuscripts,
being divided at morpheme boundaries. Thus, in terms of syllabification,
syllable breaks occur between the various elements of the compound, but
otherwise compounds syllabify exactly like simplex words. The syllabification of compounds is particularly interesting because of two major
factors: (a) they may contain complex onsets word-internally that are not
permitted in such a position in simplex words, for example, ufar+stigun
‘climb up beyond, go up’, where the [st] cluster forms a complex
onset);35 and (b) they may contain onsetless syllables word-internally,
even if a consonant is available to fill the onset position, as in forms such
as suns+ei ‘as soon as’ (John 11:32), where the [ns] cluster is tautosyllabified, even though heterosyllabifying it would have eliminated a
violation of ONSET.36 This can be accounted for by means of the
ALIGNMENT constraint in 21.

34

Recall that the term “compound” refers not only to true compounds, but also
to forms with certain prefixes and to reduplicated forms.
35
36

Here ‘+’ indicates a morpheme boundary.

Muta cum liquida clusters may also be heterosyllabified in compounds.
However, as such examples seem to be vanishingly rare (Hechtenberg Collitz
1906 and Frey 1989 each cite only one such case, for instance) and to be
confined to the Skeireins and Codex Ambrosianus B, where the heterosyllabification of muta cum liquida clusters is relatively common, this is not as
interesting as it might appear at first glance.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

301

(21) ALIGN-WORD-LEFT
The left edge of a word must coincide with the left edge of a
syllable.
This constraint is undominated in Gothic, and requires word boundaries
to be aligned with syllable boundaries such that the beginning of a word
must be the beginning of a syllable as well. Therefore, as long as compounds are perceived as such, then each element of the compound will be
aligned with a syllable boundary, and the high-ranking of ALIGN-WORDLEFT will allow violations of NOCOMP ONS and ONSET .
This constraint also accounts for the variable syllabification found in
forms containing -uh discussed in Frey 1989. As long as -uh was
perceived as a separate word, then forms that contained it were syllabified as compounds. If -uh was not perceived as a separate word, then
forms containing it were syllabified as simplex words. Consider
nauhanuh [nauhanuh] ‘yet’ and sumanuhan [sumanuhan] ‘partly’,
which are syllabified [nauh.a.nuh] and [su.man.uh.an], respectively. It
seems that nauhanuh was perceived as a simplex word, since otherwise
ALIGN-WORD-LEFT would require a syllabification *[nauh.an.uh],
while sumanuhan was still perceived as a compound, and ALIGNWORD-LEFT therefore compelled the alignment of phonological and
morphological boundaries. As for the other clitics in Gothic, they were
no longer perceived as separate words, and were therefore not affected
by ALIGN-WORD-LEFT. This point is illustrated in the tableaux in 22,
where the relevant constraints are ALIGN-WORD-LEFT and ONSET.
(22) a. sumanuhan [sumanuhan] ‘partly’
[sumanuhan]
[su.man.uh.an]
[su.ma.nuh.an]

ALIGN-WORD-LEFT

ONSET

*
*!

302 Pierce
b. nauhanuh [nauhanuh] ‘yet’
[nauhanuh]

ALIGN-WORD-LEFT

ONSET

[nauh.a.nuh]
[nauh.an.uh]

*!

3. Sievers’ Law in Gothic.
3.1. Introduction.
With an OT analysis of Gothic syllable structure on hand, one of the
most famous problems of Gothic phonology, Sievers’ Law, can now be
considered.37 As indicated in section 1, Eduard Sievers proposed his
eponymous law in 1878 in order to account for certain vowel/glide
alternations found in a number of Indo-European language families; for
example, between forms like Gothic nasjis [nasjis] ‘(thou) savest’ and
sôkeis [sokis] ‘(thou) seekest’, where nasjis contains a glide but sôkeis a
vowel.38 Sievers’ (1878:129) own deceptively simple formulation of his
law is as follows: “Unbetontes […] i oder u ist consonant nach kurzer,
vokal nach langer silbe ohne rücksicht auf die sonstige accentlage des
wortes”.39 As was the case with Gothic syllable structure, a number of
37

Because different scholars use the term “Sievers’ Law” to refer to various
types of alternations, there is a certain amount of terminological confusion in the
literature. Sievers himself spoke of an i/j and a u/w alternation, as indicated in
his original formulation. However, some scholars use the term to refer to an ij/j
alternation (and possibly a uw/w alternation), for example Sihler (1995:175),
while still other scholars use the term to refer to an alternation between a glide
(or a vowel) and nothing, as in the discussion of Sievers’ Law in Old Norse
presented in Barrack 1998:115. Here I follow Sievers and use the term “Sievers’
Law” to refer to the i/j and u/w alternations found in Gothic.
38

Sievers was not the first scholar to investigate these vowel/glide alternations.
See Seebold 1972:24–28 for details of early investigations of the problem,
Horowitz 1974 for a summary of research up to 1970 or so, and Collinge 1985
for a more abbreviated discussion up to the early 1980s. A comprehensive
survey of the history of Sievers’ Law as a scientific concept remains a desideratum.
39

“Unstressed […] i or u is a consonant following a short syllable, a vowel
following a long syllable, regardless of the remaining accentual situation of the
word.”

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

303

issues remain contentious, including the domain of the alternation (is it a
foot- or syllable-based alternation?), the correct underlying representation of the relevant segment (is it a vowel, a glide, or a segment
unspecified for the feature [consonantal]?), and the best way to account
for the morphologically restricted application of the alternation. Given
the implications of Sievers’ Law for both the prosodic structure and the
phonemic inventory of Gothic, a new analysis dealing with these
questions (and others) is both necessary and desirable.
3.2. Gothic Evidence for Sievers’ Law.
In Gothic, both aspects of Sievers’ Law are restricted to certain morphological contexts. The i/j alternation appears in the second and third
person singular and second person plural forms of Class 1 weak verbs,
and the nominative and genitive singular of masculine ja stem nouns, and
ja stem adjectives, where the alternation is actually between -ji and -ei
([ji] and [i], respectively).40 The u/w alternation is even more restricted,
occurring in only a handful of forms. This has unfortunately led to the
relative neglect of the u/w alternation in the literature; many treatments
of Sievers’ Law, including such recent discussions as Dresher and Lahiri
1991, Barrack 1998, and Kim 2001, restrict their attention to the i/j
alternation. However, the u/w alternation can be accounted for with the
same constraints as the i/j alternation, and it is therefore also treated here.
The relevant alternation can be seen in the paradigms in 23; forms
that exhibit Sievers’ Law are in bold. In all these forms, main stress falls
on the initial syllable; note also that Gothic <ei> represents [i].41

40

There are other i/j alternations in Gothic that are not the result of Sievers’
Law. Barrack (1998:87) cites the example of the nominative singular ending of
the jô-stem nouns, which is -i in heavy stems (for example, bandi ‘band, bond’),
but -ja in light stems (for example, sunja ‘truth’). These other alternations are
not discussed here (but note that the analysis developed here can also account
for such alternations).

41

The following paradigms have been extracted from Braune/Ebbinghaus 1981.
Use of the terms “heavy” and “light” here follows traditional practice, in that
“heavy” stems are stems containing a long vowel or a diphthong, or a short
vowel followed by two or more consonants, while “light” stems are stems containing a short vowel followed by a single consonant.

304 Pierce

(23) a. Sievers’ Law in Gothic I: i/j in Class 1 weak verbs

Sg.

Du.
Pl.

1
2
3
1
2
1
2
3

LIGHT STEMS

HEAVY STEMS

POLYSYLLABIC STEMS

‘save’

‘seek’

‘praise’

nasja
nasjis
nasji
nasjôs
nasjats
nasjam
nasji
nasjand

sôkja
sôkeis
sôkei
sôkjôs
sôkjats
sôkjam
sôkei
sôkjand

mikilja
mikileis
mikilei
mikiljôs
mikiljats
mikiljam
mikilei
mikiljand

b. Sievers’ Law in Gothic I: i/j in masculine ja stem nouns

Sg.

Pl.

nom.
gen.
dat.
acc.
voc.
nom.
gen.
dat.
acc.

LIGHT STEMS

HEAVY STEMS

POLYSYLLABIC STEMS

‘army’

‘herdsman’

‘disciple’

harjis
harjis
harja
(hari)
(hari)
harjôs
harjê
harjam
harjans

hairdeis
hairdeis
hairdja
hairdi
hairdi
hairdjôs
hairdjê
hairdjam
hairdjans

sipôneis
sipôneis
sipônja
sipôni
sipôni
sipônjôs
sipônjê
sipônjam
sipônjans

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

305

c. Sievers’ Law in Gothic I: i/j in masc./neut. strong ja adjectives

Sg.

Pl.

LIGHT STEMS

HEAVY STEMS

‘middle’

‘wild’

masc.

neut.

masc.

neut.

nom.

midjis

wileis

gen.
dat.
acc.

midjis
midjamma
midjana

nom.
gen.
dat.
acc.

midjai
(midjaizê)
midjaim
midjans

midi,
midjata
midjis
midjamma
midi,
midjata
midja
(midjaizê)
midjaim
midja

wili,
wiljata
-----wiljamma
wili,
wiljata
wilja
(wiljaizê)
wiljaim
wilja

wileis
wiljamma
wiljana
wiljai
(wiljaizê)
wiljaim
wiljans

d. Sievers’ Law in Gothic II: u/w alternation

Sg.

Pl.

nom.
gen.
dat.
acc.
nom.
gen.
dat.
acc.

‘tree’

‘maiden’

‘grave’

triu
triwis
triwa
triu
triwa
triwê
triwam
triwa

mawi
máujôs
máujai
mauja
maujôs
maujê
maujom
maujos

hlaiw
hlaiwis
hlaiwa
hlaiw
hlaiwa
hlaiwê
hlaiwam
hlaiwa

306 Pierce
3.3. Sievers’ Law in Gothic: Previous Analyses.
As was the case with Gothic syllabification, the analysis of Sievers’ Law
in Gothic remains controversial. I do not present an exhaustive, or even
an extensive, review of the relevant (and vast) literature here. Instead, I
briefly discuss three recent analyses with varying assumptions and
theoretical views, by way of contextualizing my own proposals, beginning with Barrack 1998.42
According to Barrack 1998, Sievers’ Law began in Proto-IndoEuropean as a process of “denuclearization,” by which unaccented high
vowels were lost after light syllables and following a CV sequence, and
then became a nuclearization process due to the change in accent systems
from Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic. Barrack also links
Sievers’ Law to processes of glide deletion and vowel syncope, which, in
his view, have combined to obscure the effects of Sievers’ Law in most
morphosyntactic classes. Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of Barrack’s
analysis is his reliance on what he calls the “Dahl/Erdmann hypothesis”
to account for polysyllabic stems. This hypothesis, originally developed
by Dahl (1938) to account for gemination in Old English, and extended
by Erdmann (1972) to cover Sievers’ Law, holds that “front-loaded”
stems (stems consisting of a heavy stressed syllable followed by a light
syllable) are equivalent to light monosyllabic stems, and that “balanced”
stems (stems consisting of a light stressed syllable followed by another
light syllable) are equivalent to heavy stems. In line with this hypothesis,
Barrack’s analysis predicts that front-loaded polysyllabic stems should
pattern like the light stems and exhibit a glide, while balanced polysyllabic stems should pattern like the heavy stems and exhibit a vowel.
The crucial forms for this hypothesis are polysyllabic stems consisting of a heavy syllable followed by a light syllable. Erdmann (1972)
suggests (and Barrack (1998) agrees) that the second and third singular
forms of these verbs should end in -jis and -ji, respectively, and the
second plural present indicative should end in -ji. Relevant Gothic
examples include the following: audagjan ‘beautify’, glitmunjan ‘shine’,
kaupatjan ‘slap one’s face’, lauhatjan ‘flash’, and swogatjan ‘sigh’.
Unfortunately, none of the necessary forms are preserved in the Gothic
42

A number of other recent analyses of Sievers’ Law are not discussed here. See
Kim 2001, Palviainen 2001, and Pierce 2002 for more substantial overviews of
the recent literature.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

307

corpus (although various analyses of Sievers’ Law cite the ghost form
*glitmuneis ‘shines’), making it impossible to confirm Barrack’s claim.
Kiparsky (1998) offers an OT analysis of Sievers’ Law in Gothic. In
Kiparsky’s view, Sievers’ Law is dependent on foot structure; the preferred foot in Gothic was the moraic trochee (a bimoraic, left-headed
foot), and Sievers’ Law represents an attempt to achieve maximal
optimal footing. This is accounted for with four major constraints (some
of which have already been cited), mandating that segments not be
inserted or deleted, that consonant + j syllable onsets are not allowed,
that syllables must have onsets, and that words are to be parsed into
moraic trochees, ranked in the order just listed. Kiparsky also assumes
that final consonants can be extrametrical and that main stress invariably
falls on the initial syllable of the word.
Consider Kiparsky’s treatment of harjis [har.jis] ‘army’ (gen.sg.). He
argues that this is the only possible surface form of this word, since
*hareis [ha.ris], the main competitor to harjis, cannot be parsed into
moraic trochees: if it is parsed into two separate feet (that is, as
[ha][ris]), the first foot is too short; if it parsed into one foot (as [ha.ris]),
the foot is too long. Other possible candidates violate one or another of
the constraints (for example, [ha.rjis] violates the ban on consonant + j
onsets), and are therefore eliminated. The attested form harjis, by
contrast, can be parsed into two separate moraic trochees without
violating any of the other high-ranking constraints (that is, it can be
parsed [har][jis]), and is thus the preferred form.
Like Kiparsky (1998), Kim (2001), in an analysis couched in the
Lexical Phonology framework, views Sievers’ Law as an attempt to yield
maximal optimal footing. He also argues that the moraic trochee was the
preferred foot in Gothic, and further assumes that the underlying
representation of the relevant segment is /j/, that final consonants are
extrametrical, and that consonant + j clusters are tautosyllabified, in
accordance with the Maximal Onset Principle. He accounts for the
morphological sensitivity of Sievers’ Law by formulating it as a lexical
rule, a type of phonological rule that can be sensitive to morpholexical
information.
Consider the following examples: nasjis, sôkeis, and mikileis. According to Kim 2001:121, in nasjis (syllabified na.sjis, in his view), there
are two light syllables, which form a bimoraic foot. In addition, both
syllables in the word are footed; hence the structure is optimal, no repairs

308 Pierce
are needed, and the underlying /j/ therefore surfaces as [j]. In the case of
sôkeis, however, without vocalization, the foot structure would be less
optimal. In a form *sôkjis, the first syllable could form a bimoraic foot
on its own, but, since final consonants are extrametrical, the second
syllable could not. The syllables cannot be footed together, because the
resulting foot structure would be less preferred. By vocalizing the /j/,
however, the second syllable becomes bimoraic (even with final consonant extrametricality), and can thus be footed on its own, resulting in a
more preferred foot structure. A similar argument accounts for mikileis;
without vocalization of the underlying glide, a less preferred foot
structure would result.
As was the case with earlier analyses of Gothic syllable structure,
none of these proposals is entirely satisfactory, again for a variety of
reasons. For instance, Kiparsky (1998) assumes that the treatment of
muta cum liquida clusters generally reflects influence from Greek scribal
practice, while there is no completely convincing Gothic evidence for the
Dahl-Erdmann hypothesis that Barrack (1998) relies upon, and none of
the truly crucial forms for Barrack’s analysis are preserved in the Gothic
corpus. This suggests that a new analysis is appropriate.
3.4. Sievers’ Law in Gothic: A New OT Analysis.
The first step in the analysis is to determine the correct underlying
representation of the relevant segment. There are three possibilities to be
considered. First, Sievers’ Law could be the vocalization of an underlying glide, as claimed by Dresher and Lahiri (1991) and Kim (2001),
among others. Secondly, Sievers’ Law could be the gliding of an
underlying vowel, as apparently believed by Sievers (1878) himself.
Third, the relevant underlying segment could be an archiphoneme, as
suggested by Riad (1992) and Calabrese (1994)—in this case a segment
unspecified for the feature [consonantal], although these analyses use
different terminology to refer to this segment.
Employing an archiphoneme in the underlying representation has
several advantages. As Riad (1992:48) argues, assuming underlying
archiphonemes is “the least redundant way of deriving the sounds
represented by <i, j> and <u, w> in Gothic orthography,” since the
realization of such sounds is generally predictable, depending on syllabic
position. Moreover, assuming archiphonemes yields a better account of
forms where the relevant segments are adjacent, for example, mawi ~

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

309

máujôs ‘maiden’ [mawi] ~ [mau.jos] (nom.sg. ~ gen.sg.). Using archiphonemes also fits better with the history of Gothic. Marchand
(1973:70–71) points out that there are a handful of near-minimal pairs in
Gothic that appear to require the presence of underlying /i/ or /j/, for
example, juka ‘yoke’ (nom./acc. pl.) and iupa ‘above’. The best account
of this seems to be, as Marchand argues, that all cases of [i]/[j] and
[u]/[w] were allophones of the same phoneme, that is, they were derived
from archiphonemes in Pre-Gothic. By the time of Biblical Gothic, some
of these instances of archiphonemes had been lost, resulting in the
presence of six phonemes (/i/, /j/, the archiphoneme //, /u/, /w/, and the
archiphoneme /U/), where only two (the archiphonemes // and /U/)
existed in Pre-Gothic. This hypothesis also accounts for the morphologically restricted application of Sievers’ Law, and for the more limited
occurrence of the u/w portion of Sievers’ Law. The assumption is that the
archiphonemes were lost earlier in certain morphological contexts and
that the u/w archiphoneme was lost more rapidly than the i/j archiphoneme.
The following analysis therefore employs two archiphonemes, /I/ and
/U/. Forms showing an alternation between i and j or u and w somewhere
in the paradigm (for example, mikiljan ‘praise’ and sôkjan ‘seek’)
contain the relevant archiphoneme, while forms that do not show this
alternation (for example, nasjan ‘save’) contain an underlying glide. In
addition, I rely on a more specific version of IDENT [FEATURE], IDENT
[CONS], which forbids changing the underlying value for the feature
[consonantal]. Since the underlying archiphonemes do not have a specific underlying value for this feature, they may occur on the surface as
either vowels or glides, depending on their position in the syllable.
Forms containing an underlying glide, on the other hand, may not be
vocalized, as this would incur a violation of IDENT [CONS].43
43

An anonymous JGL referee reminds me that underlying representations are
not as important as surface forms in OT, especially since Richness of the Base
mandates that there can be no constraints on underlying forms. An OT analysis
should ideally work with a variety of inputs. While conceding that the analysis
developed here does conflict with the strongest version of Richness of the Base,
as it requires a specific underlying representation to work, this does not nullify
my proposals. The status of the strongest version of Richness of the Base is
somewhat controversial (see van Oostendorp 2000 for some relevant discussion), and, to my mind, the empirical advantages of relying on specific

310 Pierce
Sievers’ Law falls out from the interaction of the various constraints
proposed above to account for Gothic syllabification. Recall that I
posited the following ranking (adapted from 12 above):44
(24) FAITHFULNESS >> NOCOMP ONSET >> *NOCOMP CODA, ONSET
>> NOCODA
The tableaux in 25–27 illustrate this claim. Since the same constraints and ranking account for all the alternations, only the Class 1
weak verbs are discussed here, starting with the light stem nasjis ‘thou
savest’.
(25) nasjis ‘(thou) savest’
/nasjIs/

IDENT
[CONS]

NOCOMP
ONSET

NOCOMP
CODA

ONSET

[nas.jis]
[na.sjis]
[nasj.is]
[nas.is]
[na.sis]

*!
*!
*!
*!

*!
*

NO
CODA

**
*
***
**
*

Here the winning candidate [nas.jis] violates only the relatively lowranked constraint NOCODA, while the various other candidates violate
one or another of the higher-ranked constraints. For instance, *[nas.is] is
eliminated because of an ONSET violation, *[na.sjis] violates one of the
high-ranking NOCOMP ONSET constraints, and *[na.sis] vocalizes the
underlying glide, thus violating IDENT[CONS].

underlying representations outweigh the philosophical disadvantage of violating
the strongest version of Richness of the Base here.
44

*[MUTA-LIQUID is not essential for the analysis of Sievers’ Law, as the following analysis yields the correct results regardless of its relative ranking to
NOCODA , and it has therefore been omitted from the following discussion.
FAITHFULNESS constraints other than IDENT [CONS] are also omitted.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

311

I now consider a heavy stem, sôkeis ‘thou seekest’.
(26) sôkeis ‘(thou) seekest’
/sokIIs/

IDENT
[CONS]

NOCOMP
ONSET

NOCOMP
CODA

ONSET

[so.kis]
[sok.is]
[so.kjis]
[sok.jis]

*!
**!

NO
CODA

*
*
*
**!

The attested form [so.kis] is preferred over the alternate candidates,
because it only incurs one violation of the relatively low-ranking
constraint NOCODA.45 (As the underlying representation of the relevant
segment is not specified for the feature [consonantal], IDENT [CONS] is
irrelevant here.) Meanwhile, the alternate candidate *[sok.is] is eliminated due to a violation of ONS, and *[so.kjis] loses because it violates
one of the high-ranking NOCOMP ONSET constraints. Finally, *[sok.jis]
is eliminated because it violates NOCODA twice, which the attested form
violates only once.
The final form considered here is a polysyllabic stem, mikileis
‘(thou) praisest’.
(27) mikileis ‘(thou) praisest’
/mIkIlIIs/

IDENT
[CONS]

NOCOMP
ONSET

NOCOMP
CODA

ONSET

[mi.ki.lis]
[mi.ki.ljis]
[mik.il.is]
[mi.kil.jis]

45

*!
*!

NO
CODA

*
*
*
**!

In this form, as well as in all of the following forms, IDENT [CONS] is
irrelevant, as the relevant segment is an archiphoneme that does not have an
underlying value for [consonantal].

312 Pierce
Here [mi.ki.lis] is preferred over the other possible candidates because it
obeys the various high-ranking constraints while only violating the
lower-ranked constraint NOCODA. The candidate *[mi.kil.is] is eliminated because of its violation of ONSET , while *[mi.ki.ljis] is eliminated
because it violates a high-ranking NOCOMP ONS constraint. The remaining candidate, *[mi.kil.jis], obeys the various high-ranking constraints,
leaving NOCODA to play the deciding role. In this case, [mi.ki.lis] only
violates NOCODA once, while *[mi.kil.jis] violates NOCODA twice, and
is thus eliminated.
I now examine the u/w alternation. Consider the form triu ‘tree’.
(28) triu ‘tree’
/trIU/

IDENT
[CONS]

NOCOMP
ONSET

NOCOMP
CODA

ONSET

NO
CODA

[triu]
[triw]

*!

As evident in 28, NOCODA plays the deciding role, as both candidates
obey the higher-ranking constraints. The attested form [triu] does not
violate NOCODA, while *[triw] does, and is therefore eliminated.
Now consider the dative singular form of this word, triwis.
(29) triwis ‘tree’ (dat.sg.)
/triUIs/

IDENT
[CONS]

NOCOMP
ONSET

NOCOMP
CODA

ONSET

[tri.wis]
[triu.is]
[triw.is]
[triwjs]
[triujs]

*!
*!
*!
*!

NO
CODA

*
*
**
***

In this case, violations of ONSET eliminate both *[triu.is] and *[triw.is],
while *[triwjs] and *[triwjs] both violate NOCOMPCODA. The attested
form [tri.wis] does violate NOCODA, but this violation of a relatively
low-ranking constraint is not sufficient to eliminate it from consideration.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

313

There are a handful of forms which this analysis does not account
for, the so-called “exceptions to Sievers’ Law.” While the analysis
outlined here predicts that the semivocalic variant will appear in the light
stems, with the vocalic variant appearing in the heavy and the polysyllabic stems, a few forms run counter to this prediction, including the
following (data from Murray and Vennemann 1983:525): andbahteis
‘office’ (1x), but also andbahtjis (4x); gawaíreis ‘peace’ (7x), but also
gawaírjis (8x); and only arbjis ‘inheritance’ (2x) and reikjis ‘kingdom’
(1x). These forms have traditionally been attributed to analogy. For
example, Murray and Vennemann (1983:525) refer to these forms as the
“analogical violations of Sievers’ Law,” and state that they developed
when “gen.sg. -jis is restored after long stems, on the analogy of the short
stems and the paradigmatically related forms with -ja(m) and -jê.” This
position is also endorsed in some handbooks, as in Braune/Ebbinghaus
1981:44 for instance. While analogy may indeed play a role in some such
cases, the bulk of these exceptions can instead be attributed to the
elimination of the underlying archiphonemes, such that those forms that
preserve Sievers’ Law contain an underlying archiphoneme (for
example, sôkeis), while those forms that have eliminated Sievers’ Law
contain an underlying glide (for example, arbjis), and those forms that
show variation (for example, andbahteis ~ andbahtjis) are in the process
of changing from an underlying archiphoneme to an underlying glide.46
4. Summary and Conclusions.
This paper reexamined the thorny problem of Gothic syllabification.
While many aspects of Gothic syllabification are relatively straightforward (for example, the syllabification of intervocalic singleton
consonants), others are more problematic (for example, the treatment of
muta cum liquida clusters), and this controversy is reflected in the
relevant literature. The paper, therefore, began by laying out the orthographic evidence for Gothic syllabification, and then offered a brief
methodological discussion in which the traditional assumption that word
breaks in the Gothic manuscripts correspond to syllable divisions was
defended. Some earlier analyses were also discussed, and it was suggested that these earlier proposals were lacking in some way, normally in
46

See Vennemann 1985, Kiparsky 2000, and Pierce 2005 for more extensive
discussion of these exceptions.

314 Pierce
their interpretation of the orthographic evidence. It was then argued that
Gothic syllabification results largely from the interaction of constraints
that a) mandate that syllables have onsets (ONSET), b) ban complex
codas (NOCOMPCODA) and syllable codas in general (NOCODA), c)
regulate the relationship between the input and the output (FAITHFULNESS), and d) ban various types of complex onsets (the family of
NOCOMP ONSET constraints).
Given the “methodological vacuum” discussed by Riad (2004:174)
and the limited supply of available Gothic data, alternative analyses are
inevitably possible. It is possible, for instance, to treat Gothic
syllabification in terms of syllable weight, or in terms of syllable contact.
Such analyses remain controversial. For example, any analysis based on
syllable contact must explain why certain types of more preferred syllable contacts, namely muta cum liquida contacts, are eliminated, while
other, less preferred types of syllable contacts, namely consonant + glide
contacts, are retained. This is normally accomplished by reinterpreting
the orthographic data or by invoking sound change. Thus, as noted
above, Frey (1989:291) rejects the traditional view that <j> and <w>
represented glides, arguing instead that they were fricatives, “da ihre
Bestimmung als reine ‘Halbvokale’ nicht mehr aufrechterhalten werden
kann, wenn Trennungen wie bruk-jands etc. mit dem Silbenkontaktgesetz übereinstimmen sollen,” which nullifies the apparent problem of
their heterosyllabification in the Gothic manuscripts.47 A reinterpretation
of the orthographic evidence, either to the extent that muta cum liquida
clusters were heterosyllabified or that consonant + glide clusters were
tautosyllabified, yields similar results.
The main advantage of the analysis presented here is that it successfully accounts for the Gothic data without requiring either of these
somewhat questionable proposals. Any account of Gothic syllabification
assuming that consonant + glide clusters were tautosyllabified must offer
a principled account of their apparent heterosyllabification in the manuscripts. Although a number of proposals have been advanced to account
for this problem, none of them is completely successful. For instance, the
claim that such clusters were divided according to morphological, not
phonological, principles fails to account for cases where those clusters do
47

“since their definition as pure ‘glides’ cannot be sustained if breaks like brukjands, etc. are to conform to the Syllable Contact Law”

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

315

not contain a morpheme boundary. Furthermore, such proposals do not
answer the question of why just those clusters were treated differently.
Additionally, as pointed out above, the arguments in favor of glide
strengthening seem less convincing than those against it. Both the
reinterpretation of the orthographic evidence for Gothic syllabification
and the assumption of glide strengthening are unnecessary in the analysis
developed here. Moreover, it was also noted that this analysis requires
only a minor modification (the reranking of two constraints) to work
with the major alternative interpretation of the Gothic data
Sievers’ Law in Gothic was also discussed, and it was argued that
this Law is best viewed as a consequence of Gothic syllabification. When
the underlying archiphoneme must be an onset to satisfy ONSET, it will
be a glide. When another consonant is available to satisfy ONSET, it will
be a vowel. The more limited application of the u/w alternation was
attributed to the more rapid loss of that archiphoneme. While it would be
presumptuous to claim that this analysis has “solved” the problem of
Sievers’ Law, it does represent a step forward in our understanding of the
topic, and does not suffer from some of the weaknesses present in other
formalist accounts of the problem.
Finally, with an analysis of Gothic syllable structure in hand, it is
possible to analyze a number of other phonological phenomena attested
in Gothic, for example, reduplication, as well as other developments that
took place in the (pre-)history of Gothic, along with developments from
the other branches of the Germanic language family.
REFERENCES
Barrack, Charles. 1997. Putative strengthening of glides in Gothic. Insights in
Germanic linguistics II: Classic and contemporary, ed. by Irmengard Rauch
and Gerald F. Carr, 1–8. (Trends in linguistics. Studies and monographs 94.)
Berlin: de Gruyter.
Barrack, Charles. 1998. Sievers’ Law in Germanic. (Berkeley insights in
linguistics and semiotics 22.) New York: Peter Lang.
Bennett, William H. 1960. The Gothic commentary on the Gospel of John. (MLA
monograph series 21.) New York: Modern Language Association.
Bennett, William H. 1970. The stress patterns of Gothic. Publications of the
Modern Language Association of America 85.463–472.

316 Pierce
Bennett, William H. 1972. Prosodic features in Proto-Germanic. Toward a
grammar of Proto-Germanic, ed. by Frans van Coetsem and Herbert L.
Kufner, 99–116. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
Blevins, Juliette. 1995. The syllable in phonological theory. The handbook of
phonological theory, ed. by John Goldsmith, 206–244. (Blackwell handbooks
in linguistics.) Oxford: Blackwell.
Blevins, Juliette. 2004. Evolutionary phonology. The emergence of sound
patterns. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Braune, Wilhelm. 1981. Gotische Grammatik. 19th ed. by Ernst A. Ebbinghaus.
(Sammlung kurzer Grammatiken germanischer Dialekte, A.1.) Tübingen: Max
Niemeyer Verlag.
Calabrese, Andrea. 1994. Sievers’ Law in Gothic: A synchronic analysis with
some notes on its diachronic development. The Linguistic Review 11.49–94.
Collinge, Neville E. 1985. The laws of Indo-European. (Current issues in
linguistic theory 35.) Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dahl, Ivar. 1938. Substantival inflection in early Old English vocalic stems.
(Lund studies in English 8.) Lund: Gleerup.
Devine, Andrew M., and Laurence D. Stephens. 1994. The prosody of Greek
speech. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dresher, B. Elan, and Aditi Lahiri. 1991. The Germanic foot: Metrical
coherence in Old English. Linguistic Inquiry 22.251–286.
Erdmann, Peter. 1972. Suffixal j in Germanic. Language 48.407–415.
Fix, Hans, and Thomas Birkmann. 1998. Die Worttrennung am Zeilenende in
Handschriften der Snorra Edda. Snorri Sturluson. Beiträge zu Werk und
Rezeption, ed. by Hans Fix, 23–33. (Ergänzungsbände zum Reallexikon der
Germanischen Altertumskunde 18.) Berlin: de Gruyter.
Frey, Evelyn. 1989. Worttrennung und Silbenstruktur des Gotischen mit
besonderer Berücksichtigung der Skeireins. Indogermanische Forschungen
94.272–293.
Green, Antony Dubach. 2003. Extrasyllabic consonants and onset wellformedness. The syllable in Optimality Theory, ed. by Caroline Féry and
Ruben van de Vijver, 238–253. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, Tracy Alan. 2005. Paradigm uniformity effects in German phonology.
Journal of Germanic Linguistics 17.225–264.
Hammond, Michael. 1999. The phonology of English. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hechtenberg Collitz, Klara. 1906. Syllabication in Gothic. Journal of English
and Germanic Philology 6.72–91.
Hermann, Eduard. 1923. Silbenbildung im Griechischen und in den anderen
indogermanischen Sprachen. (Ergänzungsheft zur Zeitschrift für
vergleichende Sprachforschung auf dem Gebiete der indogermanischen
Sprachen 2.) Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

317

Horowitz, Franklin Eugene. 1974. Sievers’ Law and the evidence of the Rigveda.
(Janua linguarum, series practica 216.) The Hague: Mouton.
Joos, Martin. 1942. Statistical patterns in Gothic phonology. Language 18.33–
38.
Kager, René. 1999. Optimality theory. (Cambridge textbooks in linguistics.)
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, Yookang. 2001. Prosody and i/j alternation in Gothic. Journal of
Germanic Linguistics 13.97–130.
Kiparsky, Paul. 1998. Sievers’ Law as prosodic optimization. Mír curad: Studies
in honor of Calvert Watkins, ed. by Jay Jasanoff , H. Craig Melchert, and Lisi
Olivier, 345–360. (Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft 92.)
Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck.
Kiparsky, Paul. 2000. Analogy as optimization: “Exceptions” to Sievers’ Law in
Gothic. Analogy, levelling, markedness, ed. by Aditi Lahiri, 15–46. (Trends in
linguistics. Studies and monographs 127.) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kohler, Klaus J. 1994. Glottal stops and glottalization in German. Phonetica
51.38–51.
Lutz, Angelika. 1986. The syllabic basis of word division in Old English
manuscripts. English Studies 3.193–210.
McCarthy, John. 1995. Extensions of Faithfulness: Rotuman revisited. Ms.,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
McCarthy, John, and Alan Prince. 1993. Generalized alignment. Yearbook of
Morphology 1993, ed. by Geert Booij and Jaap van Marle, 79–153. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
McMahon, April. 2000. Change, chance, and optimality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Marchand, James W. 1973. The sounds and phonemes of Wulfila’s Gothic.
(Janua linguarum, series practica 25.) The Hague: Mouton.
Murray, Robert W., and Theo Vennemann. 1983. Sound change and syllable
structure in Germanic phonology. Language 59.514–528.
Oostendorp, Marc van. 2000. Back to the base. On the Richness of the Base
hypothesis. Ms., Meertens Institute.
Page, B. Richard. 1999. The Germanic Verschärfung and prosodic change.
Diachronica 16.297–334.
Palviainen, Santeri. 2001. Sievers’ Law in Gothic: A synchronic and diachronic
analysis. Licentiate thesis, University of Helsinki.
Pierce, Marc. 2002. Syllable structure and Sievers’ Law in Gothic and Old
Norse. Doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.
Pierce, Marc. 2005. On the exceptions to Sievers’ Law in Gothic. Paper
presented at the seventeenth International Conference of Historical
Linguistics, Madison, Wisconsin.

318 Pierce
Prince, Alan, and Paul Smolensky. 1993. Optimality theory: Constraint
interaction in generative grammar. Technical report 2, Rutgers University
Center for Cognitive Science.
Riad, Tomas. 1992. Structures in Germanic prosody. Doctoral dissertation,
Stockholm University.
Riad, Tomas. 2004. Syllabification and word division in Gothic. Journal of
Germanic Linguistics 16.173–202.
Scardigli, Piergiuseppe. 1994. Zur Typologie der gotischen Handschriftenüberlieferung. Studien zum Altgermanischen. Festschrift für Heinrich Beck,
ed. by Heiko Uecker, 527–538. (Ergänzungsbände zum Reallexikon der
Germanischen Altertumskunde 11.) Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Schulze, Wilhelm. 1908. Wortbrechung in den gotischen Handschriften.
Sitzungsberichte der preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phil.-hist.
Klasse 31.610–624. [Page references refer to reprint in Schulze 1966.]
Schulze, Wilhelm. 1966. Kleine Schriften. 2nd ed. Edited by Wilhelm
Wissmann. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.
Seebold, Elmar. 1972. Das System der indogermanischen Halbvokale.
Untersuchungen zum sogenannten ‘Sieversschen Gesetz’ und zu den
halbvokalhaltigen Suffixen in den indogermanischen Sprachen, besonders im
Vedischen. (Indogermanische Bibliothek 3. Reihe: Untersuchungen.)
Heidelberg: Carl Winter Universitätsverlag.
Sievers, Eduard. 1878. Zur accent- und lautlehre der germanischen Sprachen.
Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur 5.63–163.
Sihler, Andrew L. 1995. New comparative grammar of Greek and Latin.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Steriade, Donca. 1982. Greek prosodies and the nature of syllabification.
Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Suzuki, Seiichi. 1987. Consonant clusters, sonority scales, and syllabification in
Gothic. Linguistics and Philology 7.23–51.
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1972. A new leaf of the Gothic Bible. Language 48.1–10.
Uppström, Andreas (ed.). 1854. Codex Argenteus sive sacrorum evangeliorum
versionis Gothicae. Uppsala: C.A. Leffler.
Vennemann, Theo. 1985. Phonologically conditioned morphological change.
Exceptions to Sievers’ Law in Gothic. Phono-morphology. Studies in the
interaction of phonology and morphology, ed. by Edmund Gussmann, 192–
229. Lublin: Redakcja Wydawnictw Katolickiego Universytyety Lubelskiego.
Vennemann, Theo. 1987. Muta cum liquida. Worttrennung und Syllabierung im
Gotischen. Mit einem Anhang zur Worttrennung in der Pariser Handschrift
der althochdeutschen Isidor-Übersetzung. Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum
und deutsche Literatur 116.165–204.
Vennemann, Theo. 1988. Preference laws for syllable structure. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.

Syllable Structure and Sievers’ Law

319

Voyles, Joseph B. 1992. Early Germanic grammar. San Diego: Academic Press.
Vries, Jan de (ed.). 1936. Ulfilae codices Ambrosiani rescripti. Turin: Augustae
Taurinorum.

University of Michigan
Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures
3110 Modern Languages Building
Ann Arbor, MI 48109–1275
USA
[mpierc@umich.edu]

