=== page 001 ===

Canadian Journal of Linguistics/Revue canadienne de linguistique 39(3):191–216 Sept./sep. 1994
Peripheral in Consonants
KEREN RICE
University of Toronto
In recent work in feature geometry, the internal structure of the Place node
has been the subject of attention. In the earliest work, the place features
[anterior], [coronal], [high], [low], [back], and [round] proposed by Chomsky
and Halle (1968) were arrayed under the Place node (Clements 1985). In
later work it was argued that such an arrangement did not capture the
classes required for operations involving place of articulation, and it was
proposed that unary articulator features Labial, Coronal, and Dorsal be
used, with [anterior], [high], [low], [back], and [round] being dependents
of these major articulators (Sagey 1986; McCarthy 1988). This structure,
which I will call the "flat structure", is diagrammed in (1).
(1) Flat structure:
Place
Labial Coronal Dorsal
In this paper¹ I would like to pursue an alternative proposal for the
structure of the Place node, a proposal suggested by but not developed
in Avery and Rice (1989), based on earlier work by Jakobson, Fant, and
Halle (1952) and Hyman (1973); see also Collinder (1965) and Lass (1976).
In particular, I argue that the Place node does not have the flat structure
proposed in (1), but rather is hierarchically organized, with labials and
dorsals grouped together as a subconstituent of Place, as in (2). I will call
this structure the hierarchical or Peripheral structure.
¹I am very grateful to the three anonymous reviewers for comments which
have greatly improved the paper. Funding for this research was provided by
Canada Council Killam Award 7000-92-0105 and Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada grant 410-92-0885.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 002 ===

192
(2) Peripheral structure:
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
Place
Peripheral
(Coronal)
Dorsal
(Labial)
In (2), parentheses indicate unmarked features. The major places of artic-
ulation are represented as in (3):
(3) coronal
Place
labial
dorsal
Place
Place
Peripheral Peripheral
Dorsal
In this paper, I will concentrate on the need for a Peripheral con-
stituent, being more concerned with evidence for Peripheral as a constituent
organizing Labial and Dorsal than with markedness relationships within the
constituent. The major focus of this paper is thus that features marking
place of articulation do not occur in a flat structure, but rather exhibit an
internal hierarchical organization.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, I set out assumptions
and compare predictions made by the flat and hierarchical structures, look-
ing specifically at predictions for possible assimilation processes and shifts
of place of articulation under each hypothesis. The predictions are tested
in Section 2, where it is shown that the flat structure hypothesis does not
predict the actually occurring assimilations and shifts while the Peripheral
structure hypothesis makes correct predictions. In Section 3, I consider
an alternative structure proposed by Clements and Hume (1994). This
proposal shares with the hierarchical structure the claim that the struc-
ture beneath Place is not flat; it differs from the Peripheral structure in
the constituency that is advanced: under their proposal the tongue body
features Coronal and Dorsal form a Lingual constituent, as in (4):
(4) Lingual structure:
Place
Labial
Lingual
Coronal
Dorsal
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 003 ===

KEREN RICE
193
1. Background
A common argument for features being organized into constituents is that
constituency accounts for why certain features pattern together to the ex-
clusion of others; this observation forms the basis for Clements' (1985)
original claim that segments have an internal hierarchical representation.
The flat structure in (1) and the Peripheral structure in (2) make different
predictions as to the relationship of the articulators, and these are discussed
in this section.
1.1. Assumptions
Representations of the major places of articulation under each structure
are shown in (5):
(5)
coronal
labial
dorsal
Flat structure
Place
Place
Place
Labial
Dorsal
Peripheral structure Place
Place
Place
Peripheral Peripheral
Dorsal
Several assumptions underlie these representations. The first set of as-
sumptions concerns specification and markedness relationships. I assume
under both structures the general absence of the feature Coronal (see the
papers in Paradis and Prunet 1991, for example, for discussion and ref-
erences). Under the Peripheral structure, I further assume the absence of
the feature Labial under Peripheral (see Avery and Rice 1989; Section 2.1).
These are unmarked features at their nodes (Place for Coronal, Peripheral
for Labial); their relative lack of markedness is captured by their absence
at the relevant node. Markedness relations are thus reflected directly in
the segment structure. A corollary to this assumption is that default spec-
ification is highly constrained: in (5) only Coronal is available as a default
feature at Place and only Labial at Peripheral (see Avery and Rice 1989;
Paradis and Prunet 1994, for discussion).
The second set of assumptions concerns the nature of assimilation rules.
I will assume under both hypotheses that assimilation rules are subject to
the following conditions (see Mascaró 1987; Avery and Rice 1989; Cho and
Inkelas 1993, for discussion):
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 004 ===

194
(6) Conditions on spreading:
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
a. A feature can spread only to an empty position.
b. Spreading can occur only if a structural target is present.
These conditions disallow structure changing assimilations and node gen-
eration.
To illustrate, the conditions allow for the spreading of Y to X in the
structure in (7a) but not in those in (7b) and (7c):
(7) a. spreading conditions met:
X X
b. target is not empty; spreading of Y to X not allowed by (6a):
✗
✗
Z
Y
c. no target present; spreading of Y to X not allowed by (6b):
✗ ✗
Z
Y
In (7a), Y can spread to X since X has no structure below it and X is an
immediate superordinate of Y. In (7b), Y fails to spread to X because X is
not empty: it dominates Z. In (7c), Y also fails to spread to X, this time
because Y is a dependent of Z, and in order for Y to spread, a node Z
would have to be generated.
1.2. Predictions
1.2.1.
Assimilation
I now consider the predictions for assimilation, beginning with the flat.
structure. Under this structure, coronals will assimilate to labials and
dorsals since the conditions for spreading in (6) are met. No other assimi-
lations will be found, since the conditions on empty targets will be violated.
These predictions are summarized in (8), where I illustrate assimilations
with coronal and labial targets; dorsal targets, like labial targets, are not
possible:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 005 ===

KEREN RICE
(8) Possible assimilations Flat structure:
-
coronal target
labial trigger
dorsal trigger
Place Place Place Place
Labial
Dorsal
labial target
dorsal trigger
coronal trigger
Place Place Place Place
Labial Dorsal Labial
195
Summary: Coronals assimilate to labials and to dorsals.
The asymmetry between labials and dorsals under the Peripheral struc-
ture predicts an additional kind of assimilation: not only can coronals
assimilate to labials and dorsals by the spreading of Peripheral, but labi-
als are also able to assimilate to dorsals by the spreading of Dorsal alone.
Spreading to a dorsal target is not possible since dorsal consonants have
the most structure. These predictions are illustrated in the table in (9):
(9) Possible assimilations - Peripheral structure:
coronal target
labial trigger
labial target
dorsal trigger
dorsal trigger
coronal trigger
Place
Place
Place
Place Place
Place Place Place
J
Peripheral
Peripheral Peripheral Peripheral Peripheral
Dorsal
Dorsal
Summary: Coronals assimilate to labials and to dorsals;
labials assimilate to dorsals.
1.2.2. Shifts in place of articulation
The two hypotheses also make different predictions concerning shifts in
place of articulation, or delinkings. First consider the flat structure. Labial
could delink on its own, creating a coronal; Dorsal could delink on its own;
or both Labial and Dorsal could delink. Thus, it is possible for a labial
alone to neutralize to a coronal, for a dorsal alone to so neutralize, and for
both labials and dorsals to become coronals. The Peripheral hypothesis, on
the other hand, does not allow a labial alone or a dorsal alone to neutralize
to a coronal; if one does, both must. This is because both have a Peripheral
node, so that delinking of this node results in labials and dorsals patterning
as a class. On the other hand, this hypothesis does allow for a dorsal to
shift to a labial through the delinking of Dorsal. The predictions of these
two hypotheses are compared in the table in (10). I use the symbols "pt k"
to represent a prototypical labial, coronal, and dorsal, respectively:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 006 ===

196
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
(10) Possible shifts of places of articulation:
Flat
segment representations
structure
coronal
labial
dorsal
Place
Place
Place
Labial
Dorsal
process
result
summary
1. Delink Labialt k
2. Delink Dorsalt p
3. Delink Labial t
and Dorsal
labials and coronals merge,
dorsals distinct
dorsals and coronals merge,
labials distinct
labials, dorsals, and coronals
merge
Peripheral
segment representations
structure coronal
labial
dorsal
Place
Place
Place
Peripheral Peripheral
Dorsal
process
result summary
1. Delink Dorsal
tp
labials and dorsals merge,
coronals distinct
2. Delink Peripheral t
labials, dorsals, and coronals
merge
In the following section I present evidence for deciding between these two
hypotheses.
2. Testing the hypotheses
2.1. Evidence from assimilation
I begin by reviewing the assimilation evidence that led Avery and Rice
(1989) to conclude that features marking place of articulation are hierar-
chically structured. As is discussed in the coronals literature (e.g., Avery
and Rice 1989; Cho 1988, 1990, 1991) an important reason that coronal
consonants are considered to have unmarked status is that they can serve
as targets for assimilation but not as triggers. Avery and Rice, Cho, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 007 ===

KEREN RICE
197
others argue that the unmarked status of coronals is captured through the
absence of a Place dependent. Coronals can serve as targets because they
lack a Place dependent; they fail to serve as triggers because they have
nothing to spread. Labials and dorsals, being specified for place of artic-
ulation, are assimilation triggers. If place is organized in a flat way, then
labials and dorsals are not predicted to exhibit asymmetric patterning with
respect to each other since both are equally specified, as in (5). However,
Avery and Rice (1989) argue that this is not the case, drawing on assimila-
tion facts in Korean. In Korean not only do coronals assimilate to labials
and dorsals, as shown in (11a), but labials also assimilate to dorsals, as
in (11b). The reverse assimilations are not found: a coronal is never an
assimilation trigger (11c), nor can dorsals assimilate to labials (11d). Data
is taken from Cho (1988:44) and Iverson and Kim (1987:186):
(11) a. coronals assimilate to labials and dorsals:
koppalo
'straight'
'to receive'
kotpalo
pat + ko →> pakko
b. labials assimilate to dorsals:
ap + ko
kam + ki
ǝ[kk]o
ka[ŋk]i
'carry (person) on the back and ...
'a cold'
c. labials and dorsals do not assimilate to coronals:
p-t
k-t →
[pt], *[tt]
[kt], *[tt]
d. dorsals do not assimilate to labials:
kukmul
k-p
ku[ŋm]ul, *ku[mm]ul ‘liquid part of soup' 2
[kp], *[pp]
'
If labials and dorsals have the structures required by the flat structure
hypothesis in (5), there is no reason to expect this kind of assimilation:
labials and dorsals are equally specified, as in (12), and the presence of
assimilation of labials to dorsals but not of dorsals to labials is unexpected:
(12) labial dorsal
dorsal labial
Place Place
Place
Place
Labial Dorsal
Dorsal
Labial
The Peripheral structure, on the other hand, captures the asymmetry
between dorsals and labials. Since these places of articulation are not sym-
metrically organized, but dorsals have more structure, labials are a target
2 The /k/ assimilates to the nasality of the adjacent labial, but not to its place
of articulation.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 008 ===

198
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
for assimilation from dorsals. Dorsals are not a target for assimilation be-
cause they have more structure than any other segment. The assimilations
that are found have the structure in (13a); those that are absent have the
structure in (13b):
(13) a.
labial
dorsal
b.
dorsal
labial
Place
Place
Place
Place
Peripheral Peripheral
Peripheral Peripheral
Dorsal
Dorsal
The right predictions follow from the Peripheral structure: coronals assim-
ilate to both other major places of articulation since coronals are the least
specified; labials assimilate to dorsals since labials are less specified than
dorsals; and dorsals serve only as triggers, never as targets, for assimilation
since they have the greatest degree of structure.
The facts of Korean are borne out in other languages. As Avery and
Rice report, in English fast speech, not only does /n/ assimilate to a fol-
lowing place of articulation (14a), but /m/ may also assimilate to following
dorsals (14b); /ŋ/ does not assimilate (14c):
(14) a. coronals assimilate to labials and dorsals:
in Brussels
in Kingston
i[m B]russels
i[ŋ K]ingston
b. labials assimilate to dorsals; labials do not assimilate to coronals:
from Kingston → fro[m Kingston, fro[ŋ Kingston
from Toronto → fro[m Toronto, *fro[n T]oronto
c. dorsals do not assimilate to labials or to coronals:
along Bloor alo[ŋ B]loor, *alo[m B]loor
along Thomas → alo[ŋ T]homas; * alo[n T]homas
Trigger/target asymmetries, so often noted between coronals and the
other places of articulation, are thus supplemented by asymmetries between
labials and dorsals. The asymmetries are summarized in (15), where rows
show assimilation targets and columns assimilation triggers:
(15)
coronal
Assimilation Trigger
labial
dorsal
attested
not applicable attested
unattested
not applicable
Assimilation coronal not applicable attested
Target
labial unattested
dorsal unattested
Coronals assimilate to everything because they share a level of structure
with all places of articulation. Under the Peripheral structure, labials
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 009 ===

KEREN RICE
199
assimilate to dorsals because they share an organizing node, Peripheral,
and have an internal markedness relationship between them. Without this
shared structure for labials and dorsals, we have no particular account of
why the assimilation facts are as they are: coronals would provide a target.
for structural reasons, but labials would have to provide a target for some
other reason.
2.2. Evidence from shifts in place of articulation
A type of change sometimes found in the historical development of lan-
guages involves shifts in place of articulation. Given the flat structure,
shifts from labial to coronal, from dorsal to coronal, and from both labial
and dorsal to coronal are predicted (see 10). The Peripheral structure pre-
dicts a different set of shifts: labials and dorsals may merge, or all three
places of articulation may neutralize. In this section I examine shifts in
place of articulation and show that they lend support to the Peripheral
structure.
2.2.1. Shifts between labials and dorsals
I begin by showing that shifts in place of articulation from one Peripheral
consonant to another are found. These shifts are important in demonstrat-
ing that the labials and dorsals form a natural class. A first example comes
from the historical development of Romanian. Where Latin has dorsal-
coronal sequences, labial-coronal sequences result in Romanian. This is
illustrated in (16); forms are taken from Sala (1976) and Nandris (1963):
(16) Latin
Romanian
la[k]tem
la[p]te
‘milk' (Sala)
no[k]tem
noa[p]te
'night' (Sala)
pe[k]tus pie[p]t
'chest' (Sala)
li[n]num li[m]n
'wood' (Nandris)
Under the flat structure hypothesis, labials and dorsals do not enter
into a privileged relationship, and there is no reason to expect this shift.
The shift would involve the loss of Dorsal and the subsequent addition of
Labial to those consonants that were underlyingly dorsal, as illustrated
in (17):
(17)
Place Place
Place Place → Place Place
Dorsal
Delink Dorsal
Labial
Insert Labial
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 010 ===

200
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
This hypothesis requires the weakening of the claim that only Coronal is
available as a default feature for a bare Place node: in Romanian, Labial
would be available as well.
The Peripheral structure hypothesis, on the other hand, provides an
account of this shift: the process involves the places of articulation domi-
nated by the Peripheral node. The process is expressed formally as in (18):
(18) Place
Peripheral
+
Dorsal
Place
The Dorsal node delinks, resulting in a labial consonant. Thus, the Periph-
eral hypothesis accounts for the shift with a simple delinking.
Arapaho, an Algonquian language, also exhibits a historical interac-
tion between labial and dorsal places of articulation. In Arapaho, Proto-
Algonquian *p shifted to /k/, along with a general loss of *k, leading to a
loss of contrast between labial and dorsal voiceless stops. Some examples
from Goddard (1974:107, 111) are given in (19):
(19) Proto-Algonquian
*[p]aši[p]ahw
*ke?ta:[p]iči
Arapaho
[k]oxu[k]ohy 'stab'
éétóó[k]ú0 'big tooth, canine tooth'
Similar shifts are found in the Algonquian languages of Atsina and Yurok
(Haas 1969, cited in Campbell 1974), with *p shifting to /k/. In order to
express this process under the flat structure, it is necessary to both delink
Labial and insert Dorsal, similar to the Romanian example in (17). Under
the Peripheral hypothesis, this process, like that in the development of
Romanian, can be seen as involving a shift between peripheral consonants.
It differs from Romanian in that it reverses the direction of the shift, with
a labial shifting to a dorsal. The processes required in the development of
Arapaho are illustrated in (20):
(20) Loss of dorsals:
Root
±
Place
Peripheral
Dorsal
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 011 ===

KEREN RICE
201
Shift of labials:³
Root
Root
Place
Place
Peripheral
Peripheral
Dorsal
3 The Arapaho shift of a labial to a dorsal is problematic under the assumptions
that (i) dorsals are universally more complex than labials and (ii) Labial is the
only possible default feature for a consonant with a bare Peripheral node. A
solution to this problem is beyond the scope of this paper, but I would like to
briefly discuss two possibilities.
First, one approach is to question the universality of the claim that dorsals
are more complex than labials. Hamilton (1993), following Dixon (1980), argues
that in languages of Australia the markedness hierarchy required is, from least
marked to most marked, coronal-dorsal-labial. In this case, assuming a structure
similar to that in (2) but with Labial replacing Dorsal, the default rule for a
bare Peripheral node would be to insert Dorsal. If the hierarchy in Arapaho
is that proposed for the Australian languages, the labial to dorsal shift would
simply involve the loss of Labial. No account is available for the original loss
of the dorsal *k; see Section 2.2.3.2 for a possible account under the Peripheral
structure in (3).
The second way of handling the Arapaho problem appeals to the role of con-
trast in a system. It has been argued that in the absence of a contrast between
two similar sounds in a system, a single phoneme can take on a range of phonetic
realizations. For example, in languages of the type discussed in this paper, where
there is only a single type of coronal stop, that stop may be realized phonetically
as alveolar in some languages and as dental in others. Even within a particular
language, the single coronal stop may range between alveolar and dental. In lan-
guages where alveolar and dental stops are in contrast with one another, these
places of articulation are kept distinct (see Avery and Rice 1989). Thus in the
absence of a contrast, a coronal stop may exhibit a great degree of freedom in its
place of articulation; in the presence of contrasts between coronal subplaces of
articulation, the freedom of place of articulation of each subplace is limited (see
Avery and Rice 1989 for fuller discussion).
Consider the notion of contrast with respect to peripherals. In a language like
Korean, with a/p t k/ system, a representation with a bare Peripheral node can
be realized only as a labial since the /p/ must be kept distinct from the /k/. A
language like Arapaho has only a single Peripheral consonant, lacking a contrast
between /p/ and /k/, as shown in (i):
(i) Place
Place
Peripheral
The consonant with just a Place node will be a coronal and that with a Peripheral
node will be a peripheral. Since there are no contrasts within the peripheral
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 012 ===

202
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
A final example comes from the Athapaskan language Ingalik. Here
*m shifted to ŋ, merging with *ŋ, while *n remained as /n/ (Krauss and
Leer 1981:77):
(21) Proto-Athapaskan Ingalik
*n
/n/
*m
*ŋ
/n/
/ŋ/
As in Arapaho, the process involves a shifting of the peripheral places of
articulation.
The Peripheral structure offers a straightforward account of cases in-
volving labials and dorsals: only peripherals are involved. If the flat
structure is adopted, the theory of default rules must be enriched to al-
low any feature to appear as a default feature. This is contrary to much
evidence in the phonology literature that only the feature Coronal functions
as a default (see the papers in Paradis and Prunet 1991; Paradis and Prunet
1994; Rice 1993, amongst others, for discussion). In the next section, I will
provide additional support for the Peripheral hypothesis by showing that
the other shifts in place of articulation that are found in languages are
those predicted by the Peripheral rather than the flat structure.
2.2.2. Other shifts in place of articulation
We have already seen that one prediction of the Peripheral hypothesis but.
not of the flat hypothesis is borne out: the labial/dorsal relationship illus-
trated in Section 2.2.1 is predicted only under the Peripheral hypothesis. In
this section I examine further predictions from shifts in place of articulation
of consonants.
Some shifts in place of articulation are expected under both structures.
One is the neutralization of both labials and dorsals to coronals. Historical
developments in some Athapaskan languages provide support for the claim
that dorsals and labials can pattern as a class: if one becomes coronal, both
do. This is shown in (22) (see Krauss and Leer 1981:77 for details):
consonants, the realization of the consonant is unimportant phonologically, so
long as it is within the peripheral, or non-coronal, range. This consonant could
thus be pronounced either as a dorsal or as a labial since these are not contrastive
sounds within the language. In Arapaho it is realized as a dorsal.
A model that incorporates contrast in this way is developed in Rice and Avery
(1994). Also see Dyck (1994) for evidence from vowel height and Rice (1994) for
evidence from place of articulation in vowels that the phonological representa-
tion of a segment may underdetermine the phonetic implementation just in case
contrasts are lacking.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 013 ===

KEREN RICE
203
(22) Proto-Athapaskan
*
Ahtna
Sekani
m
n
n
d/n
d/n
*ŋ
n
d/n
Under the Peripheral structure, these results are achieved by the loss of
the Peripheral node; under the flat structure they are achieved through the
loss of specified Place dependents. The workings of the two hypotheses are
compared in the table in (23):
(23)
representation
process
result
Flat
m
n
structure
Place Place
ŋ
Place
Delink Labial
Delink Dorsal
Place
Labial
Dorsal
Peripheral
structure
Place Place
Place
Delink Peripheral Place
Peripheral
Peripheral
Dorsal
The table in (24) provides full information regarding the kinds of shifts
in place of articulation that are/are not found in languages.
(24)
shifter
target
shift in-
stantiated? languages
example
predicted
by
coronal
labial
✗
N
coronal
dorsal
✗
N
labial
coronal
X
F
labial
dorsal
✓
Arapaho, Ingalik
P
dorsal
coronal
**
F
dorsal
labial
Romanian
P
coronal, labial
dorsal
X
N
coronal, dorsal labial
X
N
labial, dorsal
coronal
Ahtna, Sekani
F, P
*See Section 2.2.3 for discussion.
The inventories under consideration have (or had) sounds at the labial,
coronal, and dorsal places of articulation. The first column shows the shifter
and the second the target. For instance, a language that exhibited a coronal
to labial shift would have historically or underlyingly a/p t k/ system; the
resulting system would be /p k/, with the /t/ having merged with the
/p/. The third column indicates whether the shift under consideration
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 014 ===

204
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
is actually found, the fourth lists sample languages, and the final column
indicates which hypothesis/hypotheses predict the shift. An 'x' in the third
column means that such a shift is not found, while a check mark indicates
that this shift is found; in the final column F = flat, P = Peripheral, N =
neither.
As the table indicates, only a limited number of the potential shifts in
place of articulation occur. The Peripheral structure predicts exactly these
shifts: labials and dorsals shift to each other by manipulation at the level of
the Peripheral node; labials and dorsals both become coronals through the
loss of Peripheral; classes of sounds including a coronal and one peripheral
consonant are not found. The flat structure, too, allows a limited set of
changes but, through operations on a single node, it predicts the existence
of the non-occurring patterns as well. Specifically, while the presence of
shifts involving both labials and dorsals can be accounted for, the structure
has nothing to say about why a single specified place of articulation cannot
become a coronal; thus the absence of shifts from a labial to a coronal, with
dorsals remaining, or from a dorsal to a coronal, with labials remaining, is
not accounted for.
The argument based on shifts provides support for the claim that labi-
als and dorsals form a natural class which excludes coronals, and thus for
the Peripheral hypothesis.
2.2.3. Some apparent counterexamples
The table in (24) indicates that only a small number of shifts in place of
articulation is possible. However, some apparent counterexamples exist,
namely those marked by an * in (24); these are repeated in (25):
(25) coronal to dorsal
dorsal to coronal/glottal
If these shifts are actually found, two of the basic claims of the Periph-
eral structure are counterexemplified: first, if coronals shift to dorsals, the
restricted theory of default rules must be abandoned, as Dorsal would be
allowed as a default feature for a bare Place node (while Labial would not
be); second, if dorsals switch to coronals, labials should shift as well (see
example 10). In this section, I examine each of these types of shifts, argu-
ing that they are not true counterexamples to the claims of the Peripheral
hypothesis.
2.2.3.1. Coronal to dorsal shifts
Many languages have what appear to be shifts in place of articulation from
the coronal to the dorsal place of articulation. In this section, I will look at
two such languages and argue that in fact the shifts found in these languages
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 015 ===

KEREN RICE
205
are not truly to a dorsal (see Rice 1993 for more extensive development of
the claims presented here).
In Dakota, coronal consonants are realized as dorsals under certain con-
ditions. When reduplication creates a sequence of two coronal consonants,
the first dissimilates to a dorsal (26a). With dorsal-dorsal and labial-labial
sequences, on the other hand, degemination is found instead (26b) (Shaw
1980:339, 1985:184):
(26) Dakota reduplication:
dissimilation in coronal clusters:
a.
/žat+žat/
→ [žakžáta]
'be forked'
/sut+sut/
→ [suksúta]
'to be strong'
/nin+nin/
→ [nignina]
'very'
b. degemination in other homorganic clusters:
/khok+khok/ → [khokhóka] 'to sound like wood'
The stem-final coronal is replaced by a dorsal in reduplication (26a), while
other stem-final consonants degeminate (26b); Shaw provides no examples
of labial sequences, but implies in her description that both labials and
dorsals degeminate.
As a second example, in the historical development of South Vietnam-
ese, syllable-final coronal consonants underwent a shift from the coronal
place of articulation to the dorsal place of articulation, merging with the
original dorsals. In (27), the North Vietnamese data are representative of
the historical forms, while the South Vietnamese data show the more recent
developments. As these forms illustrate, coronals and dorsals merged, while
labials remained (Thompson 1965:83–85):
(27)
North Vietnamese South Vietnamese
(Hanoi)
(Hue)
coronals merge with dorsals:
a.
ŋo[n]
ŋo[ŋ]
'be tasty'
xwâ[t]
xuâ[k]
'to exit'
b.
labials remain:
buô[m]
buậ[m]
'ship's sail'
tiê[p]
tii[p]
'continue'
C.
dorsals remain:
tiên]
nuo[k]
tiâ[p]
nuâ[k]
‘noise, sound, language'
'water'
Distributional evidence from South Vietnamese indicates that syllable-final
coronals did not always neutralize to dorsals, and that coronals and dorsals
in this position are in complementary distribution. In South Vietnamese,
coronal consonants are found following front vowels and dorsal consonants
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 016 ===

206
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
after non-front vowels. The forms in (27) show dorsals after non-front
vowels; those in (28) show coronals after front vowels (Thompson 1965:82):
(28) it
dên
‘be a small amount'
'arrive'
Assuming that front vowels are coronal (see Clements 1976, 1991; Clements
and Hume 1994; Hume 1992; Pulleyblank 1989; Rose 1993; Walker 1993),
the complementary distribution of final coronals and dorsals can be ac-
counted for if both are underlyingly “coronal”, i.e., placeless, with repre-
sentations as in (29). The absence of a place feature for the vowel in (29b)
simply indicates a non-front vowel:
(29) a. following a front vowel b.
following a non-front vowel
V
V
C
C
Place
Place
Place
Place
Coronal
The final consonant receives its coronality from the preceding vowel (29a).
The dorsality of the consonant following a non-front vowel (29b) remains
to be accounted for.
The coronal-dorsal relationship exemplified by Dakota and South Viet-
namese has been discussed in the recent literature (see Trigo 1988; Paradis
and Prunet 1994; Rice 1993), and it has been argued that dorsals resulting
from shifts do not have the same phonological structure as dorsals under
either the flat or Peripheral structures. These consonants instead have
the underlying structure of the coronals, without a Place dependent. Ex-
ample (30) compares the representations of a true dorsal consonant (30a)
and of the syllable-final “dorsal" consonants (30b) in Dakota and South
Vietnamese under the Peripheral hypothesis.
(30) a.
true dorsal b. syllable-final "dorsals" (Dakota,
Place
Place
South Vietnamese)
Peripheral
Dorsal
The syllable-final dorsals, which I will call "velars" in the following discus-
sion, differ from the true dorsals in that they have the same representation
as coronals. Just how this class of coronals/velars achieves its surface velar
place of articulation has been a point of controversy. Trigo (1988) argues
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 017 ===

KEREN RICE
207
that the velars have a placeless representation phonologically and that a
default rule supplies the feature Dorsal as the unmarked option in syllable-
final position. This alternative requires that both Coronal and Dorsal can
serve as default features for a bare Place node, while Labial never does,
without explanation. Under the assumptions that a default rule inserting
Dorsal is in principle impossible, and that only Coronal can be supplied to
a consonant unspecified for place, Paradis and Prunet (1994) propose that
the surface velars receive the feature Dorsal by the spreading of this fea-
ture from the preceding vowel. Rice (1993) argues the coronals are achieved
through the insertion of the default feature Coronal while the velars are
phonetically placeless consonants; they at no stage have the representation
of the true dorsals in (30a) (see Durand 1988 and Yip 1991 for a similar
position). Whether the velars result from the spreading of Dorsal from the
vowel or are phonetically placeless is the topic of other work (see Rice 1993.
for discussion). What I hope this brief discussion has shown is that while
these forms appear to illustrate a shift from coronal to dorsal, a change not
predicted by the Peripheral structure, this shift is likely not of the type
observed so far: the consonants in question do not become independent
dorsals, but either share structure with the preceding vowel or have no
Place dependent.
Under the assumption that Coronal is the only possible default feature
for a bare Place node, a coronal to dorsal shift is problematic for the flat.
structure as well (see 24). If this assumption is maintained, the flat struc-
ture hypothesis will require the same sort of elaboration as is suggested
here for the Peripheral hypothesis. If the assumption that Coronal is the
only default feature available for a bare Place node is abandoned, one is
left with no account for why Labial never serves as a default feature. The
existence of coronal to dorsal shifts is thus neutral with respect to the two
hypotheses under the current assumptions, and the Peripheral structure
continues to receive support.
2.2.3.2. Dorsals to coronals or laryngeals
The second type of unexpected shift is that of dorsals to coronals or la-
ryngeals without the concomitant shift of labials. In other words, labials
remain labials while dorsals shift. Such shifts can be seen in the examples
from Hawaiian (Elbert and Pukui 1979:11-12, 24) and Hupa (Krauss and
Leer 1981:77):
(31)
Hawaiian
Hupa (Athapaskan)
historical synchronic
☐☐
Ptk
m
n
m n
k P
historical
synchronic
m nŋ m
n
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 018 ===

208
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
Labials remain while dorsals shift to coronals (Hawaiian nasals, Hupa
nasals) or to a glottal stop (Hawaiian stops).
Dorsal consonants are particularly vulnerable to deletion as well. For
instance, in the Arapaho example (19 above), the dorsal stop was lost, while
the coronal and labial (which shifted to a dorsal) remained. In Turkish, the
voiced velar fricative was lost, while the labial and coronal voiced fricatives
remained (Clements and Keyser 1983).
The existence of dorsal to coronal/glottal shifts appears to provide
damaging evidence to the Peripheral structure and evidence in favour of
the flat structure, as this hypothesis allows for a dorsal to shift to a coronal
without a labial also shifting. However, the acceptance of the flat struc-
ture to account for these facts creates several complications. The absence
of independent labial to coronal shifts would remain a mystery if the flat
structure were adopted, as would the assimilation facts discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1 and the labial/dorsal shifts in Section 2.2.1. Likewise, the existence
of languages in which dorsals are lost to the exclusion of labials, as illus-
trated by Turkish and Arapaho (although the labials shifted in Arapaho),
but not of languages in which labials are lost to the exclusion of dorsals, is
without explanation. Thus, it is worthwhile to seek an alternative account
for why dorsal to coronal/glottal shifts are found.
It appears that something rather different is going on in these cases
where dorsals shift to coronals/glottals or delete. Under the Peripheral hy-
pothesis, the dorsal is distinguished from the labial by amount of structure,
with the dorsal having more structure, or being more marked. Rice (1993)
hypothesizes that the reason shifts of dorsals to coronals/glottal stops are
found has to do with a move to decrease complexity; dorsals are the most
complex of the places of articulation in that they have not only a Periph-
eral node but also a Dorsal node; labials, on the other hand, have just a
Peripheral node. If the degree of complexity of dorsals is not tolerated in
some systems, they will simplify. This could be accomplished in two ways:
the Dorsal dependent could be lost, creating a labial, as in Romanian, or
the entire structure below Place could be lost under conditions of complex-
ity, as in the Hawaiian and Hupa nasals, the Hawaiian and Arapaho stops,
and the Turkish voiced fricatives. If this is correct, there is a reason for
such shifts that is independent of arguments for constituency: dorsals may
simplify because of their complexity of place. In a sense, the shift of dor-
sals without a shift of labials provides indirect evidence for the hierarchical
over the flat structure: under the flat structure, no reason exists for dorsals
but not labials shifting; under the hierarchical structure, the complexity of
dorsals provides some reason for why they alone shift.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 019 ===

KEREN RICE
209
2.3. Metathesis
Further evidence for the Peripheral constituent is found in Mokilese (Har-
rison 1976:46). Harrison reports that /p-k/ sequences may metathesize to
[k-p], yielding alternants as in (32):
(32) apkas
kapkihla
akpas 'now'
kakpihla 'to droop'
Mokilese does not otherwise exhibit constraints on sequencing of adjacent
places of articulation; the Mokilese dictionary (Harrison and Salich 1977)
shows that all possible sequences of pairs of coronal, labial, and dorsal are
found in clusters.
The Peripheral hypothesis allows the Mokilese metathesis to be de-
scribed as a switch of places of articulation within the Peripheral con-
stituent; coronals do not participate in metathesis because the process is
restricted to Peripherals:
(33) Place
Place
Place
Place
Peripheral Peripheral
Peripheral Peripheral
Dorsal
Dorsal
Although the flat structure could account for the Mokilese facts by switch-
ing around the Dorsal and Labial place dependents, as in (34), it does not
account for why metathesis is limited to labials and dorsals, to the exclusion
of coronals:
(34) Place Place
Place
Place
Labial Dorsal
Dorsal Labial
The class of consonants involved could be captured through reference to
specified dependents of Place, requiring a mechanism in addition to con-
stituency to capture features that group together.
2.4. Phonotactics
Another source of evidence for a Peripheral constituent comes from the
phonotactics of several Australian languages. For instance, in the language
Margany-Gunya, there is a six-way place of articulation distinction, as
in (35) (Breen 1981:293):
(35) labial laminal- laminal- apical-
p b m
dental
d
palatal
domal
apical-
alveolar
dorsal
n
t ḍ n
t ḍ n
tdn
kg ŋ
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 020 ===

210
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
However, in the position C _ V, only labial and dorsal voiceless stops and
nasals are permitted in heterorganic clusters, to the exclusion of coronals,
both laminal and apical (see Hamilton 1993 for discussion). If Labial and
Dorsal form a constituent, Peripheral, this phonotactic pattern receives an
explanation: only peripherals are allowed in this position.
This argument initially appears to be weak: under the flat structure,
one can claim that only specified places of articulation occur in this po-
sition. However, Margany-Gunya differs in a fundamental way from the
languages discussed so far. As argued by Hamilton (1993), the facts of
Margany-Gunya (and languages with similar inventories) lead to the con-
clusion that coronal consonants are specified for place (unlike the coronals
of the other languages discussed in this paper). If all consonants are spec-
ified for place, it is not possible to capture the natural class of labials and
dorsals structurally by reference to specified places. The places of articu-
lation that appear in the given position are the non-coronals, or, in other
words, the peripherals.
2.5.
Summary
In this section I have presented evidence from several processes involving.
place of articulation, arguing that the Peripheral structure provides a more
adequate account of the facts than does the flat structure. The two types of
counterexamples to this hypothesis, involving unexpected shifts of coronal
to dorsal and dorsal to coronal or glottal stop, receive alternative accounts.
If the Peripheral structure is abandoned in favour of the flat structure
in order to account for the aberrant dorsal to coronal/glottal stop shifts,
then other existing shifts, namely those involving peripheral consonants,
remain unexplained, as do the assimilations of labials to dorsals. Overall
then, the Peripheral structure makes the more restricted and accurate set
of predictions, while the flat structure both makes wrong predictions and
fails to make correct predictions.4
3. An alternative hypothesis-the Lingual node
Clements and Hume (1994) propose that the Place node does not have a
flat structure. Rather than the organization argued for here, they argue
that the Coronal and Dorsal nodes group together as a Lingual constituent,
with Labial set apart, as in (36). The individual places of articulation are
represented as in (37).
4 An anonymous reviewer points out that the Peripheral node also figures in
a cluster simplification process in Korean. A peripherality condition is required.
to determine whether the first or second consonant of a cluster is realized in
syllable-final position (see Iverson and Lee 1994 for discussion).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 021 ===

(36)
Labial
Place
Coronal
KEREN RICE
211
Lingual
Dorsal
(37) coronal labial dorsal
Place Place Place
Lingual Labial
Coronal
Lingual
Dorsal
Clements and Hume provide several arguments for this proposal. Since
this paper deals with consonants, I consider only their arguments from
consonantal classes here (see Rice 1994 for the other cases, which concern
the representation of vowels). The one argument that Clements and Hume
provide for the Lingual constituent based on consonants alone comes from
historical developments in Mandarin Chinese. Mandarin has six consonan-
tal places of articulation on the surface: labial, dental, alveolar, retroflex,
palatal, and velar. High front vowels (i, ü) have a limited distribution,
appearing only following labials, dentals, and palatals; following alveo-
lars, retroflexes, and velars high front vowels are systematically absent.
Clements and Hume argue that the limited distribution of the high front
vowel can be captured by using a Lingual node the high front vowels
cannot follow linguals. This hypothesis faces a problem. The dentals, alve-
olars, and retroflexes are all clearly coronal consonants, and the palatals.
may be. If the natural class of coronals and dorsals is captured with a
Lingual node, all the coronals and dorsals should pattern together in terms
of co-occurrence restrictions with the high front vowels. The class of con-
sonants that are lingual is, however, larger than the class of consonants
which fails to appear before high front vowels. Within the linguals, I know
of no feature that can distinguish the class of dentals and palatals from
the alveolars, retroflexes, and velars. Wu (1994) argues that the absence of
high front vowels following alveolars/retroflexes and their absence following
velars result from two distinct sources, and that these distributional facts
provide no evidence for a Lingual constituent.
-
While the Lingual hypothesis accounts for the coronal/dorsal interac-
tions noted in Section 2.2.3-apparent counterexamples to the Peripheral
hypothesis it lends no insight into the assimilations and shifts discussed
in Section 2: one would expect to find coronals and dorsals patterning to-
gether to the exclusion of labials, but commonly labials and dorsals pattern
together to the exclusion of coronals.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 022 ===

212
4. Conclusions
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
I have proposed, within a feature geometry framework, that the features
marking the major places of articulation are not organized in the flat struc-
ture in (1); rather they are hierarchically organized as in (2), with labials
and dorsals forming a constituent. In these concluding comments I would
like to discuss two points, first the phonetic basis of the feature geometry
system and second the assumption that markedness relations are encoded
directly in segmental representation.
Feature geometry has taken as its basis articulatory facts. Sagey
(1986), in her ground-breaking discussion of place of articulation, argues
that the place dependents Labial, Coronal, and Dorsal represent articu-
lators, a theme taken up by McCarthy (1988) and others. However, the
feature Peripheral, like its precursor [grave] (Jakobson, Fant, and Halle
1952; Hyman 1973), is arguably an acoustic or perceptual feature rather
than an articulatory feature. The proposal that I have made in this paper
is simply that a kind of feature organization that is not generally assumed.
in the feature geometry literature is required. In recent years, increasing
evidence has been amassed that acoustic features play an important role
in phonology; see, for instance, the papers in the forthcoming Laboratory
Phonology IV. It may well be the case that the hierarchical aspects of the
feature geometry proposal should be preserved, but that the articulatory
basis of the Place node (at least) should be abandoned and replaced with
acoustic underpinnings. Alternatively, Peripheral may perhaps be thought.
of in an articulatory way, involving the non-central articulators. The argu-
ments favouring a particular type of constituency are logically independent
of the phonetic basis of that constituency; the arguments that I have pro-
vided for Peripheral again raise the question of just what that basis is.
An important assumption of this paper has been that markedness re-
lations are encoded directly in segmental representations. Thus, in the
structures in (2), the coronal consonant, which is generally agreed to be
the least marked consonant, has less structure than the labial, which in
turn has less structure than the dorsal. The representations thus provide
information about both the nature of the sound and about its markedness
with respect to other sounds in the system. I have adopted a theory of
feature geometry, and built the markedness hierarchy into the geometry,
following earlier work by Rice and Avery (1993). In recent work in phonol-
ogy, it has been argued that all features can be fully specified so long as
markedness hierarchies are allowed (e.g., Prince and Smolensky 1993; Ste-
riade 1994). Even if it is assumed that all place features are fully specified,
the point of this paper remains: the relationship of labials and dorsals to
each other is a special one. While coronals are the least marked of the
places of articulation, they are relatively unmarked with respect to labials
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 023 ===

KEREN RICE
213
and dorsals as a class and not to each on its own. The labials and dorsals
themselves enter into a hierarchical arrangement; the evidence provided in
this paper suggests that labials are less marked than dorsals. The major
point that I hope to have made then, is that empirical evidence provides
support for a hierarchical hypothesis over a flat one, requiring that labials
and dorsals be ranked with respect to each other and not be equally ranked
with respect to coronals.
REFERENCES
Avery, Peter and Keren Rice
1989 Segment Structure and Coronal Underspecification. Phonology 6:
179-200.
Breen, J.G
1981
Margany and Gunya. Pp. 275-393 in Handbook of Australian Lan-
guages, vol. 2. Robert M.W. Dixon and Barry J. Blake, eds. Can-
berra: Australian National University Press.
Campbell, Lyle
1974 Phonological Features: Problems and Proposals. Language 50:52–65.
Cho, Young-mee Yu
1988 Korean Assimilation. Pp. 41-52 in Proceedings of the Seventh West
Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Hagit Borer, ed. Stanford:
Stanford Linguistic Association and the Center for the Study of Lan-
guage and Information.
1990 Parameters of Consonantal Assimilation. PhD thesis, Stanford Uni-
versity.
1991 On the Universality of the Coronal Articulator. Pp. 159-179 in The
Special Status of Coronals. Internal and External Evidence. Phonet-
ics and Phonology 2. Carole Paradis and Jean-François Prunet, eds.
San Diego: Academic Press.
Cho, Young-mee Yu, and Sharon Inkelas
1993 Inalterability as Prespecification. Language 69:529-574.
Chomsky, Noam, and Morris Halle
1968 The Sound Pattern of English. New York: Harper and Row.
Clements, George N.
1976 Palatalization: Linking or Assimilation? Pp. 96-109 in Papers from
the Twelfth Regional Meeting. Salikoko Mufwene, Carol Walker, and
Sanford Steever, eds. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Clements, George N.
1985 The Geometry of Phonological Features. Phonology Yearbook 2:223–
252.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published onlinė by Cambridge University Press

=== page 024 ===

214
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
1991 Place of Articulation in Consonants and Vowels: A Unified Theory.
Working Papers of the Cornell Phonetics Laboratory 5:77–123.
Clements, George N., and Elizabeth Hume
1994 The Internal Organization of Segments. In Handbook of Phonological
Theory. John Goldsmith, ed. Oxford: Blackwell. [Forthcoming.]
Clements, George N., and Samuel J. Keyser
1983 CV Phonology: A Generative Theory of the Syllable. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Collinder, Bjorn
1965 An Introduction to the Uralic Languages. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Dixon, Robert M.W.
1980 The Languages of Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Durand, Jacques
1988 Les phénomènes de nasalité en français du Midi: Phonologie de dépen-
dance et sous-spécification. Recherches Linguistiques de Vincennes:
Nouvelles Phonologies 17:29-54.
Dyck, Carrie
1994 Constraining the Phonology-Phonetics Interface. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of Toronto.
Elbert, Samuel H., and Mary K. Pukui
1979 Hawaiian Grammar. Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii.
Goddard, Ives
1974 An Outline of the Historical Phonology of Arapaho and Atsina. Inter-
national Journal of American Linguistics 40:102–116.
Haas, Mary R.
1969
The Prehistory of Language. The Hague: Mouton.
Hamilton, Philip
1993 Intrinsic Markedness Relations in Segment Structure. Toronto Work-
ing Papers in Linguistics 12(2):79–96.
Harrison, Sheldon P.
1976 Mokilese Reference Grammar. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Harrison, Sheldon P., and Albert Salich
1977 Mokilese-English Dictionary. PALI Language Texts: Micronesia.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Hume, Elizabeth
1992
Front Vowels, Coronal Consonants, and Their Interaction In Nonlin-
ear Phonology. PhD thesis, Cornell University.
Hyman, Larry
1973 The Feature [grave] in Phonological Theory. Journal of Phonetics
1:329–337.
Iverson, Greg, and K.-H. Kim
1987 Underspecification and Hierarchical Feature Representation in Ko-
rean Consonantal Phonology. Chicago Linguistic Society 23:182–198.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 025 ===

Iverson, Greg, and S.-S. Lee
KEREN RICE
215
1994 Variation and Optimality in Korean Consonantal Phonology. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1994 Eastern States Conference on Linguistics. Ithaca:
Cornell University Working Papers. [Forthcoming.]
Jakobson, Roman, Gunnar Fant, and Morris Halle
1963 Preliminaries to Speech Analysis. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
[1952.]
Krauss, Michael, and Jeff Leer
1981 Athabaskan, Eyak, and Tlingit Sonorants. Alaska Native Language
Center Research Papers 5. Fairbanks: Alaska Native Language Cen-
Lass, Roger
ter.
1976 English Phonology and Phonological Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mascaró, Joan
1987 A Reduction and Spreading Theory of Voicing and Other Sound Ef-
fects. Ms.
McCarthy, John
1988 Feature Geometry and Dependency. Phonetica 43:84-108.
Nandris, Octave
1963 Phonétique historique du roumain. Paris: Klincksieck.
Paradis, Carole, and Jean-François Prunet, eds.
1991 The Special Status of Coronals. Internal and External Evidence.
Phonetics and Phonology 2. San Diego: Academic Press.
Paradis, Carole, and Jean-François Prunet
1994 A Reanalysis of Velar Transparency Cases. The Linguistic Review
11:101-140.
Prince, Alan, and Paul Smolensky
1993
Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in Generative Grammar.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. [To appear.]
Pulleyblank, Edwin
1989 The Role of Coronal in Articulator Based Features. Chicago Linguis-
tic Society 25:375–393.
Rice, Keren
1993
Default Variability: The Coronal-Velar Relationship. Toronto Work-
ing Papers in Linguistics 12(2):97–130.
1994 On the Organization and Specification of Vowel Place Features. Pa-
per read at colloquia at Ohio State University and at MIT.
Rice, Keren, and Peter Avery
1993 Segmental Complexity and the Structure of Inventories. Toronto
Working Papers in Linguistics 12(2):131–153.
1994 Variability in a Deterministic Model of Language Acquisition: A
Theory of Segmental Elaboration. In Phonological Acquisition and
Phonological Theory. John Archibald, ed. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum. [Forthcoming.]
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

=== page 026 ===

216
Rose, Sharon
CJL/RCL 39(3), 1994
1993 Coronality and Vocalic Underspecification. Toronto Working Papers
in Linguistics 12(2):155–177.
Sagey, Elizabeth
1986 The Representation of Features and Relations in Nonlinear Phonol-
ogy. PhD thesis, MIT.
Sala, Marius
1976
Contributions à la phonétique historique du roumain. Paris: Éditions
Klincksieck.
Shaw, Patricia
1980
Theoretical Issues in Dakota Phonology and Morphology. New York:
Garland.
Steriade, Donca
1994 Underspecification and Markedness. In Handbook of Phonology. John
Goldsmith, ed. Oxford: Blackwell. [Forthcoming.]
Thompson, Lawrence C.
1965 A Vietnamese Grammar. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Trigo, R. Loren
1988 On the Phonological Derivation and Behavior of Nasal Glides. PhD
thesis, MIT.
Walker, Rachel
1993
Wu, Yuwen
A Vowel Feature Hierarchy for Contrastive Specification. Toronto
Working Papers in Linguistics 12(2):179–197.
1994 Mandarin Segmental Phonology. PhD thesis, University of Toronto.
Yip, Moira
1991 Coronals, Clusters, and the Coda Condition. Pp. 61-78 in The Spe-
cial Status of Coronals. Internal and External Evidence. Phonetics
and Phonology 2. Carole Paradis and Jean-François Prunet, eds. San
Diego: Academic Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000841310001522X Published online by Cambridge University Press

