                          OLD ENGLISH DIALECTS

                          Thomas E. Toon




             6.1          Introduction
             Dialectology is the study of varieties of speech and variation in
             language. Dialectologists work to make correlations between linguistic
             features (phonological, morphological, syntactic and lexical) and such
             extralinguistic facts as place of origin, race, sex, social status. In doing
             so, we identify individual varieties - idiolects - and relate them to
             dialects, the more general patterns of speech communities. When
             undertaking the study of a contemporary speech community, the
             dialectologist has living informants and modern devices for collecting
             data. Studies of historical varieties depend on less direct methods. The
             main sources of information are written records and conjectures about
             older varieties based on comparisons of surviving dialects. Linguists
             interested in earlier varieties of English are fortunate that the English
             language has been written for over a thousand years. Those records
             attest several clearly distinct historical varieties, compare the Old
             English of Beowulf with Chaucer's Middle English or Shakespeare's
             Early Modern English. More subtle distinctions within periods, as
             between Chaucer and the Pearl/Gawain, are also evident. This chapter
             will be an investigation of the modern methods used to extract as much
             information as possible from ancient written records.
                Given its name and rather narrow focus, Old English dialectology might
             at first seem a subject very remote from day-to-day human affairs.
             Speakers of a language are, however, by their very nature un-
             selfconscious 'students' of speech varieties. Early in life we begin that
             'training' by identifying and learning to imitate the wide range of
             speech habits and styles we encounter in our nurturing environments.
             As we progress through the stages of babble, baby-talk, the verbal games


                          409

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             and talk of childhood, the language of formal classroom, we are in fact
             learning different language systems. In so doing we become sensitive to
             the fact that the appropriateness of the language we use depends on a
             number of factors. Although that learning process seems to require no
             special effort, the knowledge we internalise in our early years is quite
             complex. For example, we 'automatically' adjust our language in terms
             of whom we are addressing (a parent, a stranger, a friend), where the
             interaction is talking place (at home, in a schoolroom, a playground),
             the genre (a conversation, a narrative, an argument, a report), the
             purpose (persuasion, play, friendship building). In addition, each of
             these language settings and uses has its own cadences and levels of
             formality expressed in lexical, phonological and syntactic choices.
             Linguistic maturity involves expansion of the range of such styles and
             registers. M. A. K. Halliday summarised this whole process very well
             when he observed that a child learns his/her language not because of
             what it is, but because of what it does. While we might think of most of
             these adjustments as embellishment to our language abilities, they are in
             fact central to our ability to communicate effectively.
                While we intuitively control and manipulate our speech in those
             ways, there are aspects of speech performance over which we apparently
             have a great deal less control. The speech patterns we acquire early (of
             course) include markers of regional and social dialect. That is, our
             speech contains pronunciations, word choices, styles that convey
             information about our gender, our nationality, our region, our ethnicity,
             our socio-economic class. We are able to change these patterns only
             with considerable overt effort, or under strong external pressure
             (influence from a new social group, a major geographical or social
             move). Even under the most extreme of conditions, we are rarely able
             to alter these speech habits completely. An American who has lived
             a number of years in England may sound British to his American family
             but would be readily detected as a 'colonial' by most Britains.
                For these reasons, linguists consider that all speakers of English have
             a dialect, or better, control a whole range of dialects which include many
             registers and styles. The linguistic use of the term 'dialect' is different
             from the everyday usage in which 'dialect' often means some non-
             standard or otherwise stigmatised variety. Dialectology then is the
             speciality devoted to studying the nature, range and uses of variation in
             speech. A major aspect of the work is to provide descriptions of
             regional, social and stylistic varieties. In the process of description,
             dialectologists hope to understand further how and why distinctive


                         410
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             speech communities develop and then why speech differences are
             maintained or lost. Clearly differences can arise when groups begin to
             feel the effects of geographical, political, cultural, social or ethnic
             isolation. North American and antipodean varieties of English have
             diverged significantly because of geographical distance from their
             insular sources; while the Scots, the English, the Canadians and United
             States Americans have developed recognisable national standards of
             speech which reflect their national identities. Indian and Singapore
             varieties of English reflect cultural isolation, just as many so-called non-
             standard varieties reflect social isolation from 'mainstream' society;
             these are highly complex language situations in which English is the
             mother tongue of relatively few but an important second language for
             many.
                The formal study of English dialects began well over a hundred years
             ago and was an integral part of the development of modern linguistics.
             Because early philologists were able to identify patterns of regional
             continuity over centuries, the study of English dialects was closely allied
             with the study of the history of the language. Historical documents were
             localised and then analysed as sources of data for reconstructing earlier
             pronunciations (Ellis, Sweet, Wright). At about the same time scholars
             began systematically to conduct extensive regional surveys of local
             speech habits. As a result the regional dialects of modern Britain are
             extensively documented.
                Traditionally such studies focus on the geographical distribution
             (often displayed in maps) of individual features of pronunciation, word
             ending, word choice or sentence structure. In recent decades, studies
             have been based on random samples selected in order to give
             representative geographical coverage of the areas being considered.
             Using data collected in this fashion, dialectologists have mapped the
             salient regional features of British and American speech communities.
             Figure 6.1 demonstrates regional distribution of speakers who pro-
             nounce [r] in such words as thirdfloor.The map displays by means of
             shading the fact that most English varieties of English are 'r-less' (non-
             rhotic), while a strong post-alveolar approximant / r / can be heard in
             the north and the southwest, where a retroflexed variety can also be
             observed. Such maps are statements of probability; the shaded areas are
             not to be taken as exclusively populated by [r] pronouncers, but rather
             areas in which there is better than average chance that the feature will be
             found. In fact we are not even dealing with general patterns of
             pronunciation. Even in the shaded area, [r]-ful (rhotic) speakers are


                         411

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon




                          Figure 6.1 Map of areas of rhotacism




                          412
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             regularly non-mobile, older, and rural - also individuals whose speech
             tends to be less influenced by received pronunciation. The boundary of
             such a dialect feature is known as an isogloss. If a number of such
             features are displayed on a composite map (as in the case of the lines in
             the same modern map), we discover that many isoglosses converge and
             divide the country into areas where speakers share similar habits. Thus
             bundles of isoglosses help dialectologists identify dialect boundaries
             and state the regional distribution of dialect criteria. This map illustrates
             the standard division of English dialects into northern, north-midland,
             midland, southwestern and southeastern varieties, the basic dialect
             distribution which Old English data also attest. Whenever possible,
             dialectologists try to trace the history of the spread or decline of the
             selected features. They also hope to explain those changes by relating
             them to contact among speakers of different varieties, to the mobility of
             significant population groups or to changes in social, political and
             economic influences. Thus the description of some contemporary
             varieties of London English might begin historically and describe
             modern features in terms of what is known about the speech habits of
             those who migrated in large numbers into the cities during the
             industrial revolution.
                Similarly, the first dialectologists who studied American English
             were able to explain the North American patterns of [^-pronunciation
             (or deletion) in terms of well attested migration patterns from [r]-
             pronouncing/deleting regions of Britain. Often one variety, as in the
             case of the London Cockney dialect, becomes associated with a single
             social group and further becomes the means of defining group
             membership - establishing and maintaining group solidarity. Labov
             and his associates initiated the work of studying contemporary language
             variation in terms of how it relates to processes of ongoing language
             change. They not only studied [r]-pronunciation in terms of historical
             development, but they collected data on how a variety of New Yorkers
             from a range of social backgrounds spoke in number of different speech
             contexts. The following graph (Figure 6.2) demonstrates that such a
             linguistic habit is not simply absent or present. Deletion of [r] is a matter
             of degree and a function of social class, context and use. Each speaker
             has a range of pronunciations; he or she can automatically, often even
             unconsciously, make subtle changes which communicate status to
             hearers.




                          413

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                           Thomas E. Toon

                    80 r




                    60




                    40




                    20




                                 CS                         FS                        RPS                      WLS
                                                                     Style
                           Figure 6.2 New York City (r) by class and style (after Labov 1966)

              6.2          Old English dialects: origins and sources

              The modern study of dialects requires careful analysis of copious data.
              Its methods have evolved to include extensive surveys, carefully
              designed field interviews, tape recordings collected from a number of
              controlled settings. Because of the nature of the sources and our
              distance from them, the study of Old English dialects must proceed
              along very different lines, and with different expectations about results.
              All of this will become much clearer below, but some initial contrast of
              methods and possible results will be useful. To begin with, the data
              sources for Old English are themselves written texts, rather than
              recordings or reports of speech. That is, the Old English texts were
              written by people whose intention was to conduct their day-to-day
              affairs; they were not written by trained linguists whose intention
              would be to record nuances of linguistic forms (see chapter 1,
              pp. 19-24). While students of the Old English period know quite a lot in
              general about manuscript production in early England, the knowledge
              about specific texts is very sparse, especially for the earliest documents.
              We might know the general area in which a text was produced, but we
              can only make educated guesses about most details. We can assign a
              rough geographical region and know the likeliest sites of production
              within that region, and we can propose the quarter or half century


                           414
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             within which the text was produced. But we do not know such specific
             information as who wrote the text or whose language it reflects. Nor do
             we know about the scribe's origins, training or social aspirations. What
             we see through the mists of a thousand years will seem only the bare
             outline when compared with descriptions of modern dialect patterns.
             Even when Old English patterns are quite distinct, we still have data for
             only one limited set of styles and registers. The scribes who wrote the
             texts are not to be taken as representative of the whole population,
             about whose general levels of literacy we can only speculate. Oc-
             casionally the data and our knowledge about them permit attempts to
             produce sketches of greater detail. In these cases the efforts of historical
             dialectologists can be informed by recent advances in the methods of
             contemporary socio-linguistics, but only when tempered with a firm
             appreciation of our limitations.
                Without disregarding diversity and pluralism, our view of modern
             England is determined by such facts as a strong national self-image, easy
             communication, a stable central government, a uniform educational
             policy and a received pronunciation of its dominant language. Anglo-
             Saxon England on the other hand was sparsely populated and travel was
             very difficult. The Germanic peoples from whom our language stems
             were comparative newcomers who brought social and political tra-
             ditions by which they viewed themselves in terms of familial or tribal
             (that is non-national) associations. Although we might tend to think of
             the migration as a single historical event, archaeological data and even
             contemporary accounts attest more long range and piecemeal patterns
             of immigration.
                By AD 600, the larger more powerful tribes had consolidated
             themselves into coherent political entities, called 'kingdoms' in a
             fashion that overdignifies the reality. Most histories of the period refer
             to the Anglo-Saxon Heptarchy, whose members are most commonly
             named as Northumbria, Mercia, East Anglia, Wessex, Essex, Sussex and
             Kent. In fact, our knowledge of Northumbria after Bede is too scant for
             a discussion of the nature of Northumbrian ' kingship'. East Anglia,
             Essex, Sussex and Kent never really achieved political autonomy. The
             generic term Mercia subsumes too many rival sub-kingdoms to be a
             useful descriptive term. Those we call 'kings' were locally powerful
             warlords, who managed temporarily to secure a tenuous influence over
             their rivals and eventual usurpers. Few died of old age; fewer still passed
             their title on to an immediate heir. According to Bede, an overlord was
             occasionally able to gain hegemony over neighbouring kingdoms. Even




Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Thomas E. Toon


             as Bede was writing his history, Northumbria enjoyed the benefits
             which come from a succession of strong kings. Bede's history of the
             church also gives occasional glimpses into social and cultural conditions,
             such as evidence that speech habits (among other criteria) were socially
             diagnostic among the Anglo-Saxons, just as they are today:
                          ...those who watched him closely realized by his appearance, his
                          bearing, and his speech that he was not of common stock as he said,
                          but of noble family.                     (Colgrave and Mynors, 1969:403)
              It is clear from Bede's work that Germanic tribal society, with a heroic
              ethic as its base, survived the transplantation to England. For instance,
              the conversion of the English proceeded tribally and had to begin with
              the conversion of overlords whose retainers followed his example.
              Bede's career is of immediate importance for students of the history of
              English for a number of reasons. His work carefully recorded Old
              English names for Roman and Celtic places which give clues to early
              pronunciations. Because of his position as the foremost Latin scholar of
              the time, his pioneer efforts to translate major texts into English gave
              vernacular literacy an important credibility. He urged the clergy to
              teach the rudiments of Christian doctrine in English and spent his
              waning energies in the act of dictating from his deathbed a translation
              of St John's Gospel. Bede's Death Song is also among the earliest
              recorded examples of Old English poetry.
                 Three kingdoms, each with successively greater influence, were able
              to extend their domination beyond their native realms: the North-
              umbrians (ca AD 625-75), the Mercians (ca AD 650-825), and the
              West Saxons (ca 800-1050). The Kentish were influential throughout
              the period by virtue of the importance of the See at Canterbury. The
              following table is an oversimplification (corrected below) but usefully
              summarises the major dialect features and their general association with
              these major political divisions of Anglo-Saxon England.

                                               Wessex         Northumbria            Mercia        Kent
                          Gmc ae: > e:                         +

                          Pal. diph.            +             limited
                          as>a/rC               -              +
                          smoothing             -              +
                          a>o/nasals            -              +
                          velar umlaut          limited

                                                —              —
                          y : / y > e:/e


                          416
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             That is, West Saxon was the most clearly distinct variety, as might be
             expected because of geographical factors which isolated it even from the
             Norse invaders. Northumbrian and Mercian shared two major features,
             and formed a non-southern (midlands and northern) unit. Kentish (in
             the southeast) differed dramatically from geographically remote West
             Saxon and Northumbrian, but shared some features with Mercian.
             Mercian, the surviving midlands variety, had elements in common with
             its neighbours to the north and to the southeast, but remained distinct
             from its nearby southwestern rivals.
                Of particular interest, is the fact that hegemony in each case
             (Northumbria, Mercia, Wessex) occasioned a flowering of learning. The
             Northumbrian kings fostered the establishment of the great monasteries
             of Wearmouth and Jarrow — which ultimately produced Bede and
             Alcuin, the famous school at York and the finest library in Europe. The
             magnificent books which survive from this period constitute substantial
             testimony to the importance of literacy and learning. Such productions
             would not have been possible without the patronage of the local kings.
             King Ceolwulf, we know, paid personal attention to the production of
             Bede's Historia ecclesiastica; he read and criticised a draft of it. We ought
             to be less than surprised that Bede, in the most influential book of the
             time, pays ample tribute to the power of the Northumbrian kings. His
             testimony here is peculiarly self-contradictory. In one passage he calls
             the Northumbrian kings the rulers of all England, while in another
             place he acknowledges the southern supremacy of the Mercians. King
             Ceolwulf and Bede knew the power of the written word. They would
             probably not have been surprised to discover that modern histories
             have perpetuated an account that contemporary political facts did not
             fully justify; scholars until recently accepted too uncritically what is
             clearly and naturally a northern perspective on the part of Nor-
             thumbria's historian. The Anglo-Saxon kings who read Bede no doubt
             learned an important political lesson. An educated clergy can be more
             than a mere luxurious adornment to a dignified court.
                The Mercian hegemony bridges the gap between Northumbria's first
             attempts at political unification of what is now England and the West
             Saxon accomplishment of that fact. Clearly the Mercian period was one
             of continuing consolidation of power; it was also the period of the first
             extensive texts written in English. Unfortunately, it failed to produce
             either its own local historian of Bede's stature, or an independent
             chronicle tradition such as the one which survives for Wessex (and
             makes the reconstruction of West Saxon history so much easier). But the
             texts which do survive can be pieced together to form a coherent

                         417
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


              narrative of political consolidation, and the role of vernacular literacy in
              that process. Under the Mercian kings diplomatic uses of literacy
              flourished, and charters became an integral means by which the Mercian
              overlords established, maintained and recorded permanently the facts of
              hegemony. In these charters, the Mercian kings styled themselves kings
              of Britain and collected the attestations of major clergy and regional
              subkings who in attesting confirmed the actions and status of their
              overlords. These same charters give further support to Bede's ob-
              servation (AD 731):

                          All these kingdoms and the other southern kingdoms which reach
                          right up to the Humber, together with their various kings, are subject
                          to iE]?elbald, king of Mercia.
                                                                                  (Colgrave and Mynors, 1969:559)

                           achievements were consolidated and refined by his successor
              Offa, who even managed to anoint his son and assure his succession.
              Offa became the strongest king that Anglo-Saxon England had
              produced to date. His reign saw a centralised production of a silver
              currency of unequalled integrity, often finding its way to the continent
              via a newly brisk foreign trade. He called himself Rex Ang/orum, and
              was a force in international politics. When he found the archbishop of
              Canterbury troublesome, he persuaded the Pope to establish a third
              archiepiscopal see in his native Lichfield. The charters attest the facts
              that he travelled widely throughout his kingdom, successfully levying
              taxes and granting lands in all parts of southern England. The same
              charters contain distinctly Mercian forms for the letters /, g, and d.
              Those orthographic innovations are strong evidence that Offa had
              official scribes of his own probably trained in a royally sponsored
              scriptorium. He commissioned a protective earthwork, a dike that
              stretched the whole length of the Welsh border. He was so strong that
              he was even able to establish his younger brother as the king of Kent.
              From relic vocabulary in later, mostly Late West Saxon poetry, we
              know that vernacular literature was developed to a high art under the
              Mercian kings. Even the more substantial literate achievements of King
              Alfred's reign drew on the strong base of Mercian scholarship; his
              intellectual advisers were predominantly Mercian, and Alfred ac-
              knowledged his debt to the (good) laws of Offa in his own legislation.
                 The Tribal Hidage, a document (ca AD 700) which dates from the
              Mercian hegemony, is an important resource for understanding the
              political and social structure of early Anglo-Saxon England. It contains


                          418
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


              c€y/                                                J                                                    Archdioceses
                                                                                                               •       Diocese
                                                                                                                   ~ Major roads
                                                                                                                   — Navigable rivers

                                                                                     i^Lindisfarne

                              )
                                               ^ ~ ^ =                     'HexhanrA

                              N
                                0                             r                                 ®York          \

                                                         z'                     \               \     ' LINDES
                                                         V.                          \              Y FARONAVI
                                                                                                                   \
                                       ^ " ^             A                                 Lindsey*        ^




                                                                                                  Y'                       • - » \ EAST'j
                                           C                 '.       •\"' 1         ^V/Leicester\ Q                           I J " xxx      J
                                                                                                                   i       ,A y    Dunwichv
                                      _/                  .Worcester^                     j y / \g.                \ ^                        7
                                                                                                                           E
                                                        Hereford               ,/-       */.'              j)c         1   AST
                                                                                                                       • SAXONS
                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                        S ^
                                                                                                                       1   XXXI   <*1
                                                                                                                       •            >
                                                                                                                   ^London         >
                              ZrT*
                                                              f            /                        ^.r^       - ^ ..:         (JanterburW
                                        ,—          "                      X!
                                                                  LONOONJi^^            .--*    "KENTXXXII/^
                                       •L                -    ^ -    . /   * • Winchester               v j
                                      /                  ^ ^
                                                         rf - ^ • f               SOUTH SAXONS XXXIII ^ y ^



                              J       WEST SAXONS XXXIV
                                                k/
                                                        Shelborne /

                                                           N/—--)
                                                                           ^ o a ' o A,—-—>—^/—
                                                                    • ^ . c t - V - , <~^cli._,
                                                                             ^vy



                                                                                                           0                      100
                                                                                                               Kilometres



                          Figure 6.3 Map of early Anglo-Saxon England




                          419
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             a list of the names of some thirty tribal groups (see Figure 6.3 in which
             the tribes are listed by Roman numeral) of various sizes, whose size is
             indicated in hides. As the term hide originally designated a nuclear family
             or the land needed to support a nuclear family (fixed in the later
             medieval period at 120 acres), it is clear that the Hidage is some sort of
             census list. Since it includes none of the people north of the Humber and
             begins with the Mercians, it was no doubt made for a Mercian king.' No
             one in the seventh or eighth century can be imagined compiling such a
             document out of mere curiosity. It only becomes intelligible when it is
             regarded as an attempt to guide a king's ministers in the exaction of his
             dues from subject provinces' (Stenton 1971:297). It is notable that the
             census is organised not according to strict geographical divisions but
             tribally; territory is viewed in terms of inhabitants rather than in terms
             of boundaries. Importantly, three major classifications of peoples
             emerge: the very large - the Mercians (30,000), the East Anglian
             (30,000), the Kentish (15,000), the West Saxons (100,000); the medium
             sized - the Hwicca (7,000), the Lindesfarona (7,000), the East Saxons
             (7,000), the South Saxons (7,000), the Nox gaga (5,000), the Chilterns
             (4,000), the Hendrica (3,500), the Oht gaga (2,000); the small - about 20
             units with hidages from 300 to 1,200, in multiples of 300. The largest are
             easily identifiable as the major groups who vied for control of southern
             England, groups whose kings were powerful enough to grant land and
             privilege in their own right. The middle groups were still substantial,
             but dependent. Their leaders might call themselves kings, but are
             known to us from documents in which they are designated ministri to or
             subreguli of their (in this case) Mercian overlords. The leaders of the
             smallest tribes constitute the comites, the principes, the duces and the
             ealdormenn of the major documents.
                From the hidage, an administrative hierarchy is clear. The Mercians
             exerted control directly over the intermediate and smaller units. The
             Mercian hegemony took advantage of the basically tribal fabric of
             Anglo-Saxon society. Since many small groups and a number of
             medium sized ones clearly played an important role in an overlord's
             political and economic base, we should be cautioned against over-
             dependence on a view of political organisation which emphasised the
             so-called heptarchy. The Hwicca and the Lindesfarona, for example, are
             equal in size to the East Saxons and the South Saxons, but they are
             ignored in the traditional view of the kingdoms. Further, information
             from the Tribal Hidage, emphasising inhabitants rather than region,
             argues that a purely geographical dialectology oversimplifies the facts.


                          420
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             Tribal diversity should also lead us to expect diversity of speech among
             the inhabitants of Anglo-Saxon England. Even though only a few of the
             tribes left written records, we should not assume that Old English
             dialects were limited to Northumbrian, Mercian, West Saxon and
             Kentish. Since groups of varying size were in constant contact (not to
             say, combat) with each other, we should assume a mixture of linguistic
             influence and expect variation in speech rather than the sort of
             uniformity that comes from well established social and educational
             traditions.
                 Chief among the tribes of the hidage are the West Saxons at 100,000
             hides — a number approximately equal to that assigned to the rest of
             southern England. Although the early West Saxon kings did not hold
             the Mercians in check, they were always a force to be reckoned with.
             Mercia certainly never dominated its southern neighbour in the way it
             controlled the east and southeast. The telling factor in the resolution of
             Anglo-Saxon hegemony was not in the end internal competition but the
             effects of long years of Viking raids. The northern and eastern kingdoms
             were decimated. The Anglo-Saxons were only able to muster a
             successful defence under Alfred the Great, and geography played a
             significant role in those events. Alfred and his successors built on the
             Mercian traditions, establishing a royal line that came close to modern
             standards for kingship. All manner of civil, cultural, political and liberal
             arts flourished as a result of the perfection of the burghal system of
             individually fortified and defended towns. The result was a tight
             network of locally governed burghs whose ealdormen were directly
              responsible to the king. For literate products, this stability meant a
             dramatic increase in the number of texts, prolific and identifiable scribal
             centres, and a steady progression towards a standard written variety.
                 The early history of Kent is more closely tied with the history of the
              English church than with the politics of its own kings. The success of
              Pope Gregory's hope to convert all of the English was ultimately
              determined when ^Ethelbert of Kent received the faith. The royal town
              of Canterbury became Augustine's base and eventually the archi-
              episcopal see. Under a series of strong archbishops, Canterbury became
             a religious and cultural centre of Europe. As Christianity spread
              through England, literacy spread with it, along with a very successful
              Roman model for administration. England was unified under one faith
              (and two archbishops - Canterbury and York), long before any single
              tribal overlord could claim to be the source of such unity. In the decades
              before Bede, Archbishop Theodore of Kent established the practice of


                          421

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             regular councils of the bishops and set diocesan structure in place. As we
             can tell from the Tribal Hidage, the Kentish kings simply did not have
             the resources to extend their influence beyond their borders. It became
             the special talent of the Northumbrian and Mercian kings to make the
             event of their conversions an occasion to join the forces of church and
             state. Certainly no king could rule,' though the grace of God', without
             the support of the church. In addition the church offered to the aspiring
             overlord the stability which comes from written histories, laws and
             charters. As the first primate of the English church, the archbishop of
             Canterbury was an necessary ally, even at those times when the Kentish
             kings were easy prey to their stronger Mercian and then West Saxon
             overlords.
                For the first centuries of the Anglo-Saxon migration and settlement,
             we have little direct information about the language of Germanic
             invaders. Our first clues come from names found in seventh and eighth
             century Latin manuscripts, especially of Bede's Historia ecclesiastica
             (Bede), with their English personal and place names. These manuscripts
             also contain snatches of vernacular poetry - Caedmon's Hymn (Cad)
             and Bede's Death Song (BDS). The earliest of the Bede manuscripts are
             all clearly of northern origin; the 6,000 or so names and fourteen lines
             of poetry found in them are thus thought to represent Northumbrian
             varieties of Old English. That assumption is further supported by
             linguistic features shared with the runic inscriptions on the Ruthwell
             Cross (RuthCr). Several other minor witnesses join this small but rather
             consistent corpus of data. A fourteen line poem - the Leiden Riddle
             (LRid), the fifty word inscription on the Franks Casket (RuneAu^pn),
             and nineteen Old English words in a Vatican manuscript (PsScholia) are
             all harder to date or localise precisely, but their linguistic similarities
             point clearly to an early Northumbrian origin. A series of late tenth-
             century glosses to older manuscripts abundantly attest northern varieties
             of Old English. These manuscripts additions are unusual among Anglo-
             Saxon texts because we have direct internal evidence about the date and
             place of their production. We even know the names of three of these
             scribes. A scribe called Owun copied a continuous interlinear gloss to
             much of the Rushworth Gospels (Ru2). His colleague, Farmon
             (probably not a northerner) glossed the Gospel of Matthew and small
             parts of Mark and John (Ru\). Aldred, a priest from Chester-le-Street,
             added the gloss between the lines of the Lindisfarne Gospels (hi) and
             probably produced the glosses to the Durham Ritual (DurRit).



                        •422

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Old English dialects


             Unfortunately, we have a textual gap for the ninth century, which
             witnessed continual Viking raids in the North of England.
                The nature of non-northern varieties of Old English is attested by a
             rather wider range of sources. Although there are no northern
             counterparts, a substantial number of official documents (loosely termed
             ' charters' (Ch)) survive which give insight into the political activities of
             midlands and southern kings and subkings over several centuries. We
             also have data of another sort because the scribes who wrote and used
             the Latin manuscripts of the day often found their texts troublesome in
             some way. When scribes encountered difficulties they regularly added a
             note (usually in Latin, occasionally in Old English) between the lines or
             in the margins. Apparently these glosses were useful since they were
             often collected from a number of sources and then compiled into
             extensive Latin—Latin glossaries. Many glossed manuscripts survive, as
             do a handful of glossaries which also contain Old English inter-
             pretations — notably the Epinal (EpGt), Erfurt (Er/Gl) and Corpus
             glossaries {CorpGt). Unfortunately, of these very important early texts,
             only CorpGl is unambiguously an English product. EpGl was written
             either in England or in an English centre on the continent; ErfGl was
             clearly written by a German who knew little or no Old English. The
             touchstone for the study of early midlands varieties of Old English is
             found in the Vespasian Psalter (VPs). Although the book was produced
             at Canterbury in the eighth century, the language of the gloss is
             strikingly different from the Northumbrian texts, very regular in its
             features, and closely related to a series of Middle English texts which
             can be placed with certainty in the West Midlands. In a fuller discussion
             below, we will explore the linguistic relations between the VPs, the
             charters, the glossaries and a number of other related texts, now
             generally regarded as representing Mercian or Mercian influenced
             varieties of Old English. Those texts include some ninth century glosses
             to the Blickling Psalter (BIGl), the Lorica Prayer (LorPr) and glosses
             (LorG/) in the ninth century Book of Cerne, tenth century glosses to
             London, British Library, Royal 2. A. XX (RqyG/), and Farmon's tenth
             century additions to the Rushworth Gospels (Ral). As is the case for
             Northumbria, no East Midland texts apparently survive the period of
             the Viking invasions of England.
               Since the texts of the period of the Mercian hegemony play an
             important role in the discussion below, some additional comment is
             warranted. The foregoing summary of facts about these texts fails to



                         423

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             account for them in one critically important way: they are often art
             historical monuments of exquisite beauty. Although they were written
             at a time when book production was costly indeed, we regularly find the
             best of materials, wide margins, spacious (and uneconomical) hands,
             and illuminated capitals of subtle and intricate design. The presence of
             English glosses in these texts suggests that the addition of the vernacular
             was considered a further adornment to these deluxe productions -
             powerful testimony to the privileged position of the written (English)
             word in Anglo-Saxon culture. Such books could only be produced at
             times of plenty and relative social and political stability. They were most
             likely produced at centres enjoying royal patronage, where political
             influences would also be most strongly felt. These books may even have
             been produced at royal command or as presentation copies to royal
             persons. After all, a psalter is a quintessentially royal book; the songs of
             a king make a fitting prayer book for a king. In the VPs painting of
             King David playing his conspicuously Anglo-Saxon harp, we may be
             invited to see the type of a perfect Anglo-Saxon king. A late ninth-
             century charter specifies the way in which royal patrons are to be
             remembered:
                         At every matins and at every vespers and at every tierce, the De
                         profundis as long as they live, and after their death Laudate Dominum;
                         and every Saturday in St Peter's church thirty psalms and a Mass for
                         them...
                                                                                              (Whitelock, 1955:598)
             A deluxe psalter would be an appropriate production for such a
             community as received this charge. Because of its references to Mercian
             supremacy in the south, (as well as its admonition on Christian
             kingship) a copy oiBede would be an especially fitting gift for a Mercian
             king. The Mercian Bede, copied in the time of ^EQelbald and Offa, unlike
             the other early Bede manuscripts, is a highly decorated volume. We
             know independently that King Offa possessed his own copy of Bede's
             Historia, and might wonder if the Mercian Bede was made for him. At
             any rate the nature and style of these texts reinforces our sense of the
             inter-relatedness of literacy and the coalition of church and state.
                Figure 6.4 summarises the historical, political, social and intellectual
             context within which the texts of the Mercian hegemony appeared. The
             construction of the Tribal Hidage was among the first Mercian acts of
             literacy. The text formalised the economic base for the Mercian
             hegemony. The revenue derived from the Hidage made possible the
             construction of Offa's dyke; the ability to assess taxes no doubt
             encouraged the production of coins and the regulation of their integrity.

                          424
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Old English dialects


             650
                                                                                         X Charters
                             Wulfhere                                                    ® Charters with Mercian
             660
                                                                                           letter forms

             670

             680
                                 /Eftelred
             690

             700                                                                                  Epinal Glossary

                                   Ceolred
             710

             720
                                      yEoelbald
             730                                                                    X

                                                                                    X
             740
                                                                                    X             Erfurt Glossary
             750
                                                                                                  Mercian Copy
             760                                                                                  of Bede

             770
                                        Offa              a

             780
                                                                        43
             790
                                                                                                  Corpus Glossary
             800
                                             Cenwulf
             810

             820

             830
                                                                                                  Vespasian
                                               Wiglaf                                             Psalter Gloss
             840                                                                                  Book of Cerne

             850
                         Figure 6.4 The products of literacy in their political context


             The resultant political stability enabled the solidification of the powers
             of the Mercian kings, and charters were drawn up to define and confirm
             royal prerogative. Royal support for the major religious houses made
             possible the extensive production of fine manuscripts. The expansion of

                          42 5
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Thomas E. Toon


             libraries reinforced the Mercian renaissance of Latin learning. As
             literacy flourished in the Roman mode, attention was directed to the
             writing of genealogies and the codification of laws. With the es-
             tablishment of a royal scriptorium, peculiarly Mercian orthographic
             practices developed and the production of charters mushroomed. (Note
             the dramatic hiatus in charter production during the 820s, the date of
             a quarrel between the Mercian king and the archbishop of Canterbury.)
             From the same period in which all charters exhibit Mercian letter forms,
             we find the VP gloss, replete with the same letter forms. The writing of
             the most thoroughly Mercian text coincides with the apex of Mercian
             influence on literacy. The consolidation of Anglo-Saxon politics and
             culture was the development of English politics and culture as a result of
             the acts of English kings writing a language that deserves to be called the
             English language.
                 The best attested of all Old English varieties is the standard literary
             language associated with the West Saxon hegemony of the late tenth
             century and onwards until the Norman conquest. That is the language
             of the majority of Anglo-Saxon texts, the variety usually taught in
             introductory Old English courses, and the subject of chapters three and
             four of this volume. There are several witnesses of Early West Saxon
             varieties which are of particular interest in providing a sense of the
             literary dialect during its formative period. A few charters survive from
             the end of the eighth century, but we have a comparatively large number
             of texts which were products of the intellectual renaissance fostered by
             King Alfred the Great. Two versions of the Alfredian translation of
             Pope Gregory's Cura pastoralis (CP) can be dated to the last decade of
             the ninth century; a translation of Orosius (Or) belongs to the early
             tenth. In addition we have entries to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle that
             range from the end of the ninth to the middle of the tenth centuries. Like
             the late tenth-century productions of Northumbria, each of these texts
             offers a large body of data. Several smaller texts, which are comparable
             in length to all of what survives during earlier periods, comprise the
             minor witnesses for this variety: late ninth century - Royal genealogies
             (Gn), martyrology fragments (Mart); early tenth century — medicinal
             recipes (Med).
                 Several early texts can be related to the southeast (mostly to the
             subkingdom of Kent), but none of these texts exhibits the same sort of
             regularity as found for the Mercian VPs, the Northumbrian Li (as well
             as DurKit, and R#2) or especially the later texts from Wessex. We have
             a few charters from the eighth and ninth centuries, but each of these
             contains records of affairs with either Mercian or West Saxon overlords.

                          426
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             Two poetic texts, the Kentish Psalm (KtPs) and the Kentish Hymn
             (KtHy) are found in London, British Library, Cotton Vespasian D. vi,
             along with some glosses to Proverbs (KtGI). Because the language of
             these texts shares features with Middle English texts which are very
             clearly Kentish, we are able to reconstruct more about southeastern
             varieties of Old English than these sparse sources might otherwise
             allow. In addition, the Codex Aureus (CA) contains an inscription
             recording that' aldormon' Alfred gave it to Christ Church, Canterbury;
             the text can be dated to ca 850 and localised in Surrey. Even if we had
             several extensive texts which we could localise at Canterbury and date
             with certainty, we would still have to be cautious about accepting them
             uncritically as 'Kentish'. The religious community at Canterbury was
             representative of all England. In fact, during the Mercian hegemony
             and after, the archbishop of Canterbury was often a man of Mercian
             origins. We need to remember that kings appointed bishops and were
             the major source of support for the establishment and maintenance of
             religious communities. Further contemporary accounts tell that mem-
             bers of religious orders were rather more mobile than we might expect.
             Records of travel usually include references to large numbers of books
             that moved with the travellers as loans from monastery to monastery.
                The following table summarises the major sources that survive,
             arranged chronologically and by general geographical area. Minor texts
             are indicated by parentheses; key texts are in bold face. Probable dates
             are for the language and are not necessarily the manuscripts, which are
             often later.


              Date     North                        Midlands                    Southwest             Southeast
              675      {KuneAu^pn)
              700      {PsScholia, KuthCr)          {Ch), EpGl
              725      Bede, {Cad, BDS)             {Ch)
              750      {LRid)                       Bede, {Ch)                                        {Ch)
              775                                   {Ch, BIGl), ErfGl                                 {Ch)
              800                                   Corp
              825                                   VPs, LorPr, LorGl                                 {Ch)
              850                                                               {Ch)                  Ch, {Med)
              875                                                               {Ch, Gn, Mart)
              900                                                               CP, ASC
              925                                                               Or, ASC
              950                                   RoyGI                       ASC, (AW)             Ch, KtHy,
                                                                                                      KtGl, KtPs
              975      Ru2, Li, DurRit              Rul



                          427
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


                 Such a display emphasises some of the limits which must be placed on
              the sorts of pronouncements we are able to make about the nature of
              early Old English dialects. Firstly, the period is clearly sparsely attested;
              about a dozen fairly extensive texts spread over nearly three centuries,
              leaving most of the country unattested most of the time. Only after the
              middle of the tenth century do we find several varieties represented
              simultaneously. Secondly, the geographical designations which we
              invoke must be read in very general terms. When we speak of northern
              (or Northumbrian) texts, we can not mean a specific area, neither do we
              speak of a single, homogeneous, or well-defined variety. It is far too
              easy to assume that when we say something about what northern
              varieties were like, we are saying something about what southern and
              southeastern varieties were not. Silence is the best response to the total
              absence of information about, say, Early East Anglian. Unfortunately
              our expectations about dialect are too seriously informed by the myth of
              the 'heptarchy'. While we expect that we should have something to say
              about Kentish or South Saxon, we have no similar expectation about the
              tribes that the notion of heptarchy ignores.
                 As is clear from the table, our statements about English before
              AD 800 are essentially reconstructions informed by a smattering of
              information. Even for the best attested periods, the limited number of
              'informants' does not make it possible to draw convincing isoglosses.
              By contrast, the Linguistic Atlas of Late Medieval English, which
              covers the period AD 1450-1550, has several texts within each of the
              counties of England. (Mclntosh & Samuels, 1986). The mobility of the
              religious and the lack of precise information for most texts obviate that
              traditional aspect of dialectology. On the other hand, we can note a clear
              convergence between the production and survival of texts and political
              and/or ecclesiastical importance. Since strong kings and strong
              religious centres yielded the fruits of literacy, we ought to expect that
              the texts reflect the facts of hegemony and religious influence rather than
              being merely geographically representative. All in all, the regularities of
              texts like the VPs and Li are probably well considered to be nascent
              moves towards standard written varieties, so clearly well-developed in
              the Late West Saxon texts.




                          428
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects



             6.3          Orthographic and phonological variation
             There is one advantage for the historical linguist that comes from the
             paucity of texts. The writing of English in these early times was not so
             well established that we should assume conventionalised or normalised
             spelling practices, such as those which currently all but mask differences
             in pronunciation among the speakers of standard written English. The
             scribes were not, of course, trained linguists, but their spelling in the
             absence of the pressures of a standard would be roughly phonetic
             'transcriptions' of speech patterns.
                By 1900, the study of these texts, and the comparison of them to texts
             from other Germanic languages, had already resulted in significant
             patterns of consistency (and difference) among the texts. The data are
             spelling variants from which historical linguists are able to deduce large
             scale patterns of pronunciation. Hogg has laid out the overall
             phonological pattern for Late West Saxon in chapter three above, but
             a quick summary will be convenient. Orthographic consistencies allow
             us to assume a system of contrastive vowels based on high/mid/low,
             front/back, rounded/spread, quantitative long/short distinctions. Sim-
             ilarly, widespread confusion in the spelling of weakly stressed vowels,
             especially in inflections, suggests the existence of a [a]-like unstressed
             vowel.
                        i: (y:)                     u:
                         i (y)                      u
                        e: (ce:)         a          o:
                         e(ce)                      o
                                £e:                                 a:
                              ae/a                                 a/o
             The phonetic and phonemic status of the long and short diphthongs
             (spelled <ea, io, e o > ) is one of the most controversial subjects in Old
             English phonology. Clearly six contrasts (depending on the height and
             length of the first element) were possible: /ae:a, aea, i:o, io, e:o, e o / .
             Phonetically, Old English may have preserved a height harmony in the
             second element of the diphthong (as the phonemic values suggest), but
             wide spread confusion of the second element again suggests [a]: [se: a,
             aea, i:a, ia, e:a, ea] (note that < e a > is a rather unusual spelling
             convention for /aea/).
                All of the early Old English dialects had contrasts which drew (but
             not completely) from this basic set of phonemes. Differences among
             texts have to do both with chronology and with regional/political


                          429
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             influences. Chronologically, for example, the front round vowels slowly
             disappeared from most dialects (surviving longest in the west) during
             the period, with the mid vowels going before the high ones. That means
             that an early text would tend to show some/all of them; while we would
             expect the unrounded < i > and < e > , or backed < u > , in a late text.
             The incidence or absence of other vowels often allows a safe guess about
             provenance. The West Saxon influenced varieties, for example, were
             distinct in having the vowels written < ie > , representing a series of
             developments from several sources. In a southeastern text < y > ,
              < oe > and < ae > would be rare, since several processes acted on the
             sounds written by those graphs to produce sounds regularly spelled
              < e > . An < o > before a nasal consonant <m, n, ng> is a fairly safe
             indication of Anglian (Northumbrian or Mercian origin or influence).
                Other features are not so easily diagnostic, since they involve a rather
             complicated interaction of sources, processes and results. Although it
             may seem complicated at first, what follows is an over-simplification
             and over-generalization of a great deal of textual diversity. We will
             shortly have occasion to make some sense of the sort of heterogeneous
             mix of forms one encounters in the sources. Only seven processes
             account for most of the phonological differences between the early
             texts:
              (1)     West Germanic */a:/ became prehistoric Old English */ae:/,
                      which remained /ae:/ (and is known traditionally as ae1) in West
                      Saxon but was raised to / e : / in all other dialects.
              (2) (a) West Germanic */a/ regularly developed to /ae/, but remained
                      / a / in open syllables followed by a back vowel. Since we find
                      dagas (nom. pi for 'day'), we assume that < a > itself was a
                      back vowel, / a / .
                  (b) In Mercian and Kentish influenced texts, we regularly find this
                      /ae/ raised to / e / , spelled < e > . This latter process is usually
                      called ' the second fronting', even though it involves a raising
                      rather than fronting. Mercian texts also exhibit the effects of a
                      change which is an actual fronting of / a / to / a / or /ae/. Since
                      the sound so formed always undergoes a further change, it will
                      be considered below along with other instances of 'velar
                      umlaut'.
                  (c) Fronted /ae/ was retracted to / a / in general Anglian texts
                      before [1 + C] (not geminated [11]), and in Northumbrian also
                      before [r + C].



                          43°
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


                 (d) When the consonant closing the syllable was a nasal or nasal + C
                     cluster, the West Germanic * / a / was written < o > in Anglian
                     (and Anglian influenced) texts (see pp. 438-9 below for a
                     fuller discussion).
             (3)     The front vowels, /i:, i, e:, e, as:, ae/, became diphthongs
                     (spelled < io > , < eo > , and < ea > - an orthographic con-
                     vention for /aea/) when they occurred before [x], variously
                     spelled <c, g, h > , or when they occurred before [1 + C,
                     r + C].
             (4)     In the Anglian varieties (including Anglian influenced Early
                     West Saxon and Kentish texts), the diphthongs so produced
                     were monophthongised, i.e. underwent what is known as
                     'smoothing'. (See pp. 440—2 below for a fuller discussion of
                     this change.)
             (5)     The short, front vowels [i, e, ae] were diphthongised to [ia, ea,
                     aea], written <io, eo, e a > , when they were found in closed
                     syllables before a back vowel, hence the change is known as
                     velar (or back) umlaut. The change is most general in Anglian
                     (especially Mercian) varieties, but common in all late texts (see
                     pp. 440-2 below). West Saxon texts also show velar umlaut
                     of / e / before labials and liquids and non-low back vowels
                     ( < heofon > ) , but the change is rare before other consonants or
                     before a low back vowel (<nefa>). In Northumbrian texts,
                     /eo/ was commonly written < ea > , whereas in Kentish texts
                     it was often written < io > .
             (6)     The unrounding of/y:, y/ usually resulted in < i > , except in the
                     southeast where < e > was the usual graph. In the southwest
                     the sound often remained rounded but was apparently backed
                     as it was written < u > .
             (7)     West Saxon texts (and to some extent, Anglian and Kentish
                     texts of the period of West Saxon hegemony) exhibit a further
                     change. Under the influence of an initial palatal consonant [j, J]
                      — spelled < g > and < sc > , the mid and low front vowels /e:,
                     e, ae:, se/ were diphthongised to < i e > and < e a > . This
                     process, common in Northumbrian texts for /ae/ after < s c > ,
                     is called palatal diphthongisation.

               The following table summarises the effects of the general tendencies
             by giving possible representative examples:



                          43 1
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                            Thomas E. Toon


                                  West Saxon          Northumbrian            Mercian             Kentish
             1 'broke'            br&con              brecon                  brecon              brecon
             2a ' vessel'         faet/fatas          fset/fatas                                  faet/fatas
             2b                                                               fet/(featas)
             2c 'old'             eald                aid                     aid                 eald
             2d 'land'            land                lond                    lond                land
             3 'light'            leoht                                                           leoht
             4                                        leht                    leht
             5    'seat'          setol               seatol                  seotul              (K/G/)setol
             6    ' evil'         yfel                yfel                    yfel                efel
             7    'yet'           glet                get                     get                 get




                 Certain inflectional characteristics are related to general dialect
              associations. In the north, inflectional n is lost in infinitives, while third
              person singular present forms are distinctive in the West Saxon bint, as
              opposed to general binded. The first and second person accusative
              pronouns are regularly mec, usic, Pec and eowic in Anglian varieties,
              against West Saxon me, us, pe, eow.
                 These dialectal features are demonstrated in the following three
              versions of the Lord's Prayer - the West Saxon version (late eleventh
              century) is taken from Cambridge, Corpus Christi College 140, the
              Northumbrian version (late tenth century) from the Lindisfarne Gospel,
              the Mercian version (early tenth century) from London, British Library,
              Royal 2. A. XX. The word order in this example does not follow that
              of the original interlinear glosses but has been rearranged for ease of
              comparison:


                            WS fe'der ure fu f e ea*rt     on h«o3fonu(m)
                            No fader urer 6u a rt / du bist in heo3fnu(m) / in heofnas
                                               4

                            Mer f«5der ure fu ea2rt         in hfo'fenum
                            WS si fin na'ma gehalgod
                            No sie1 6in no8ma gehalgad
                            Mer se fin no8ma is gehalgad
                            WS to bec»9me >in rice gewurfe 6in willa
                            No to cyme6 Sin rlc sie        3in willo
                            Mer to cyme   fin rice sie     fin willa
                            WS on «olor6an swa swa on h«o3fonu(m)
                            No in «o10r6o suae is in h«o3fne
                            Mer on eolorfan swe    in hw3fenum



                            432
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Old English dialects

                         WS urne gedaeghwamlican hlaf syle us to da>'g
                         No userne13 [ofet wistlic] hlaf sel us tods'g
                         Met ur     de6ghweamlice hlaf sele us to d«6g
                         WS & forg/'f us ure gyltas
                         No & f(or)gef us usra13 scylda
                         Mer & forgef us ussa scylda
                         WS swa swa we forgyfad urum gyltendum
                         No suar1   uoe12 f(or)gefon usum scyldgum
                                5
                         Mer sw« & us for gef        ure scylde
                         WS & ne gel£d y>u us      on costnunge
                         No & ne inlaed    usib13 in costunge
                         Mer & nu in laede is    in costunge
                         WS ac alys us       of     yfele (Skeat 1874:54)
                         No ah gefrig usicb13 fro8(m yfle (Skeat 1874:55)
                         Mer   ales us       fro8(m yfele (Zupitza 1889:60)
             1
                General fronting of West Germanic */a/
             2
                General breaking of /ae/ before /rC/
             3
                Velar umlaut of / e /
             4
                Northumbrian retraction of /ze/ before /rC/
             6
                Mercian second fronting
             6
                Non-Anglian development of West Germanic */a/ before nasals
             7
                Non-West Saxon failure of contraction of / i : e/
             8
                Anglian development of West Germanic */a/ before nasals
             9
                West Saxon retraction of early front round / y / from i-umlaut
             10
                 Breaking of / e / before /rC/
             11
                West Saxon /ie/ written < y >
             12
                Northumbrian tendency to round / e / after / w /
             13
                Anglian forms of the personal pronouns


             6.4          Variation and dialectology

             From the data presented so far, this much is clear: some thirteen
             hundred years ago, Anglo-Saxon scribes began to experiment with
             writing their own language. Before that, they had only ever written
             Latin. From those initial experiments, vernacular literacy flourished and
             developed to the point that it is now a commonplace in English
             speaking communities. A byproduct of those facts is that contemporary
             historical linguists have a nearly continuous documentary record of the
             English language on which to base studies of earlier periods and with
             which to trace historical developments through an unusually long
             period of time. Although the later periods of the history of the English
             language are generally well understood, the critical first periods of
             literate history remain understudied (especially Pre-Alfredian West


                          433
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


              Saxon varieties). Part of the explanation lies with the nature of the data;
              the documentary record of the first uses of literacy in English is
              fragmentary. We must rely on a corpus of several thousand words
              which occur in a wide variety of sources: occasional English names in
              Latin manuscripts and on coins, English boundaries in Latin charters
              and wills, sparse interlinear glosses (not extensive before AD 825) in
              Latin texts, or in the first attempts at making Latin-Old English
              glossaries. The attestations of English are sporadic, and the survival of
              manuscripts from those violent times is fortuitous. While the manu-
              scripts themselves survive, their histories are documented for only the
              last few, most recent centuries. We simply do not know, for example,
              what percentage of the manuscripts produced have managed to survive.
              Additionally, we cannot be sure of such facts as when and where a
              manuscript was written; at whose command, by whom and for what
              explicit purpose; when, where, and why the English glosses were
              added. That is, we are bound to have difficulty interpreting these data
              until we more fully understand the sources of data in relation to their
              impelling contexts - textual, intellectual, social and political.
                 Further, our understanding of the earliest varieties of English has
              been obscured in a large part by some of the analytical methods which
              have been applied to the data. No practising sociolinguist would be
              surprised to learn that the earliest English texts reflect extensive
              linguistic heterogeneity. What would come as a surprise is how that
              linguistically significant variation has been treated (or, closer to the
              facts, left untreated). As a consequence of the conflict between narrow
              assumptions about linguistic regularity and the facts of heterogeneity of
              living languages, an unnecessary asymmetry exists between the rigid
              traditional view of the state of early English dialects and the nature of
              the data found in the texts. The following pages are an attempt to
              account for and to correct that asymmetry through a review and re-
              evaluation of the methodological assumptions that determined the
              direction of previous studies of the earliest Old English dialects. The
              examples will be drawn from my own work at accounting for
              linguistically significant variation during the period of the Mercian
              hegemony. I will offer an alternative interpretation of the earliest non-
              Northumbrian data, an interpretation which demonstrates patterns of
              linguistically significant variation and takes into account what we can
              know of contexts in which the texts were produced.
                 The first full scale linguistic studies of Old English were philological
              in method and were attempts to understand the language of individual


                          434
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             texts. Each text was reviewed as reflecting a linguistic variety of its own,
             named by reference to the host manuscript and (when possible) a rough
             geographical provenance. As Campbell (1959:4n) notes,

                          Hick's (Thesaarusi., 1705, pp. 87-88) already isolated Northumbrian],
                          for he distinguished the language of the Lindisfarne and Rushworth
                          MS from that of the bulk of the OE texts he knew, and said that the
                          former was used chiefly in the north during the 270 years preceding
                          the Norman Conquest.

             The titles of early studies reflect assumptions about the relationship
             between linguistic variety and source: LindeloPs Die siidnorthumbrische
             Mundart des 10. Jarhhunderts: die Sprache der sog. Glosse Kushworth^, or
             Zeuner's Die Sprache des kentischen Psalters.
                While the neogrammarians had a well developed sense of individual
             dialects, a dialect like Northumbrian was largely thought of as a loose
             conglomerate of individual varieties as attested in the extant manu-
             scripts. The tendency was to treat the language of the DurKit
             separately from the language of the Lindisfarne gloss or that of the first
             part of the gloss to Rushworth. In content, these studies were elaborate,
             careful and exhaustive catalogues of the early development of each
             sound which had independently been posited in the reconstruction of
             the primitive Germanic parent. For example, a whole series of Old
             English spellings (and presumably sounds) would be described as the
             development of West Germanic */a/ in the various phonetic envir-
             onments in which it occurred: OE < ae > (Mercian < e > as the general
             development in closed syllables); OE < ae > (Mercian < e > ) in open
             syllables before front vowels; OE < a > (Anglian < o > ) as the de-
             velopment before < n > , before < m > , and clusters with < m > and
              < n > , Anglian OE < a > as the retracted form of fronted /ae/ found
             before consonant clusters beginning with <1> ('broken', that is
             diphthongised) to < e a > in West Saxon and Kentish); Northumbrian
              < a > before < r + C > (elsewhere 'broken' to < e a > ) ; OE < a >
             (Mercian < e a > ) as the restored form of fronted /ae/ before back
             vowels. No unfairness is intended in the summary; I mean only to
             highlight the fact that this careful proliferation of detail resulted in a
             highly complex description which made generalisation difficult. This is
             especially true since even the most minor of deviations (some obviously
             scribal errors) were noted, and because the nature of the complex
             relationship between spelling and pronunciation was never investigated
             in detail. In fact, the major directions of early sound developments are


                          43 5
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             often obscured as simple opening statements to be followed by pages of
             exceptions. As a consequence, the focus was on sounds as individual
             units; little regard was paid to the over-all pattern of the system or to
             patterns of alternation within the system. The very richness of the data,
             however, was a kind of embarrassment to scholars committed to a
             theory of perfectly regular sound change. Dialect mixture and analogy
             were the only terms in which to explain the profusion of variation to be
             found in Old English texts.
                From this rich foundation of data, such scholars as Luick (1914-40),
             Sievers (1898) and Sweet (1888) — the first great synthesisers in English
             historical linguistics - built their grammars of Old English. The
             profound debt of modern Anglo-Saxon scholarship to these pioneer
             efforts can nowhere more clearly be seen than in Campbell's standard
             reference work Old English Grammar, a careful summary of a century of
             neogrammarian research. Structural and generative linguists continued
             the work of synthesis, while focusing their attention on the best attested
             and most regular varieties of Old English - Late West Saxon (Brunner
             1955, Chatman 1958, Hockett 1959, Wagner 1969), Mercian (Kuhn
             1939, Dresher 1978, 1980), and general (Kuhn 1961, 1970). Except for
             Kuhn, these studies are based on summary data drawn from grammars
             rather than on texts. Since these linguists were also principally
             concerned with capturing the facts of linguistic homogeneity, these
             accounts quite understandably do not reflect the facts of prolific
             variation actually found in the earliest texts. The continued prominence
             of Campbell's work as the main reference work for Old English
             phonology is testimony both to his solid achievement and the field's
             general resistance to innovations in linguistic science. Further the
             inability of more modern theories to reflect the richness of variation in
             the data for Old English dialects renders those accounts less than
             satisfying for the community of Anglo-Saxon scholars.
                 Current interest in variation is enabling a new generation of linguists
              to broaden the base of study, to move from the exclusive study of what
              Anderson (1972) has termed diachronic correspondences to include a
              closer study of the mechanisms of phonetic change. Historical Germanic
              philology which began as close attention to detail has come full circle.
              The energy of our Germanic forbears derived from the discovery of the
              regularity of sound change; ours, from the correlation of patterns in the
              ubiquitous variation of living languages to the processes of linguistic
              change. Some scholars, of course, maintained an interest in phonetic
              change. Chadwick (1894-99) and Kuhn (1939, 1945, 1961, 1970) are


                           436
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Old English dialects


             notable among Anglo-Saxonists. As a prelude to contemporary studies,
             Weinreich, Labov and Herzog (1968) articulated under four general
             headings the theoretical problems to be considered in the study of
             language change: the transition problem, the constraints problem, the
             embedding problem and the actuation riddle. They will serve as useful
             divisions of the following examples from the variationist analysis of Old
             English data.
                The transition problem: This issue centres on the traditional questions
             of the regularity and gradualness of sound change. All of the changes to
             be considered involve alternation and variation within a phonetic class.
             In addition most have a phonetic environment as at least one of their
             conditioning factors. That is to say that the changes hold true to at least
             part of the neogrammarian hypothesis, but they also present interesting
             questions. Is sound change abrupt or gradual? Several misleading
             answers to this question have been proposed - especially in the case
             where writers have been to ready to lump together all varieties of sound
             change and have failed to discriminate between the ways in which a
             sound change may be abrupt or gradual. There are at least four levels at
             which the rate of sound change should be considered: phonological,
             phonetic, statistical, and lexical. Change of the phonological level is
             discrete and necessarily abrupt. Additions of surface forms, underlying
             representations, loss or additions of variable or obligatory rules, etc.,
             cannot be other than abrupt.
                Phonetic change can be abrupt or gradual. Old English offers an
             example of a change that was probably phonetically abrupt. During the
             Old English period, morpheme initial /hn, hr, hi, hw/ were reduced to
             initial /n, r, 1, (h)w/ with /hw/ remaining in the north and / w /
             prevailing in the south (see Toon 1976b). Thus Old English bnutu, hldf,
              hrsefn, hweol have the modern reflexes nut, loaf, raven and wheel, the last
              with a continuingly variable pronunciation. The loss of such a phonetic
              segment might have been abrupt. The modern situation would be an
              example of phonetic abruptness: the [h] is either pronounced or not (or
              the / w / is either voiced or voiceless. That is, we do not see a partially
              devoiced / w / or some sort of reduced [h]. On the other hand, the
              phonetic processes reflected in < o > spellings of / a / before nasal
              consonants were probably not abrupt. The raising and rounding of /a/
              could have been, and probably was, a gradual development through a
              continuum of vowel space (see Toon 1976a).
                 There is strong textual evidence that both sound changes were
              statistically gradual. We can, for example, write the following variable


                          437
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             rules to capture the development of / h / loss in two Anglian texts, the
             Mercian gloss made by Farmon in the Rushworth Gospels and the
             Northumbrian gloss to the Lindisfarne gospels. The first rule states the
             generalisation that [h] is lost variably (-> < < 0 > >), in the en-
             vironment (/       ) of a following [n, r, 1, w]. Then, it is lost all of the
             time before [n]; 17 per cent of the time before [r, w], and 25 per cent of
             the time before [1].                          *n J.QQ
                       Ru     h     -*      <<0>>/         r 0-17
                                                           1 0-25
                                                           w 0-17
                                                           n 0-33
                       Li     h     ->• <<&>>/             r 0-12
                                                           1 0-07
              Statistical graduality (and regularity) can be seen by comparing the
              following three developments in the nasalised vowel (Ch) is a
              homorganic consonant. The makers of the Corpus Glossary drew upon
              many of the same textual traditions as the assemblers of the closely
              related Epinal and Erfurt Glossaries did. As a result the glosses which
              CorpGl shares with EpGl and ErfGl ate likely to exhibit forms which
              reflect an older, more conservative state of the language. For these
              reasons, compare the development as seen in ErfGl with both the
             glosses shared with CorpGl and the material unique to CorpGl.
                                           Erfurt - ca AD 750
                                                                       rj    0-60
                                                                       n     0-55
                          a        ->        <<o>>/                    m 0-50
                                                                   nC h      0-50
                                                                   mC h      0-30

                                    Corpus - ca AD 800 (shared)
                                                            n 0-85
                                                           m 0-85
                          a       -*•    < < o> > /      nC h 0-50
                                                           rj 0-33
                                                         mC h 0-0

                                    Corpus - ca AD 800 (unique)
                                                          *m
                                                            n 0-75
                          a       -»•    < < o> > /      nC h 0-75
                                                           rj 0-66
                                                         mC h 0-66



                           438
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Old English dialects


             Of the latter sound change Campbell (1959:51) felt it sufficient to say,
             'Erf. and Cp. have both a and o'. While true, the statement typically
             regulates heterogeneity to free variation. On the other hand, it is
             possible to see a frozen reflection of an early phonetic change in
             progress. That interpretation is strongly supported by the phonetic
             regularity of the change; we can see the same implicational hierarchy of
             phonetic environments (excluding the sparsely attested / r j / : n > m
              > nCh > mCh. The fact that a single variable rule predicts the output
             for both early texts further argues for the close relationship between
             them:
                         a        -y        <<o>>                 I [+nasal]        <+apical> < - s e g >
             That rule captures the generalisation that [a] variably raises to [o] when
             nasalised. The raising is favoured by a combination of factors — when
             followed by a consonant made with the tip of the tongue ([n] is favoured
             over [m] and [13]) and when the nasal does not occur in clusters.
                Wang (1969) has proposed that sound changes can diffuse gradually
             through the lexicon - a serious challenge to the neogrammarian
             hypothesis that sound changes are sensitive only to phonetic en-
             vironment. The Northumbrian development of West Germanic * / a /
             before nasals offers an extremely important case in point. In all three
             tenth century Northumbrian glosses to Li, Ru1 and the DurRit, the
             sound is always spelled < o > except in the preterite singular of class III
             Strong verbs, where it is spelled < a > without exception. This is an
             important example of constrained lexical diffusion. A single grammatical
             class accounts for the entire residue of an otherwise completed sound
             change. But this residue is not unrelated to the earlier resistance, as seen
             above, to the sound change before homorganic clusters with a nasal.
             Most of the verbs of strong class III contain a homorganic consonant
             cluster. We have a lexical class based both on a shared ablaut alternation
             and a shared phonological environment. The resistance to sound change
             has been transferred from the phonological environment to the
             grammatical class. Even the verbs of class III which do not contain a
             homorganic cluster are resistant to the change {warm, blann, ingann, etc.)
             while the cluster outside of this grammatical class is subject to the
             phonological regularity. The resistance has not spread to the other
             strong verbs; we find the regular phonological development in class VI
             and preterite present verbs which contain West Germanic */a/ before
             a nasal, even a nasal homorganic consonant cluster.
                 The constraints problem: A strong theory of language change would


                         439
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             predict the direction of sound change after having established a set of
             possible changes and having described the sorts of pressures which
             apply to languages in flux. No such theory, of course, exists, although
             some work has been done in characterising the types of sound systems
             which exist in natural languages and in noting the sorts of changes
             which languages undergo. The results of these attempts to typify the
             natural and the universal aspects of human language must be taken into
             consideration when attempting to reconstruct from manuscript data a
             viable linguistic system. It is worth noting that front rounded vowels,
             and especially back spread vowels, are much rarer than front spread and
             back rounded vowels among the languages of the world, though not
             uncommon among Germanic languages. Languages, however, fre-
             quently do unexpected things. English, after all, added a set of high and
             mid front round vowels resulting in a more highly marked and less
             natural system (and proceeded to lose them in the next centuries).
                 The sound changes discussed above can profitably be considered in
             terms of the general constraints in question. We can notice that / h / was
             lost first before / n / (complete oral closure), next before / r / and / I /
             (substantial lateral and central closure), and only variably before / w /
             (minimal oral closure). That is, the loss of / h / , a consonant produced
             with the oral tract maximally open, is favoured before consonants
             produced with substantial oral closure. Further, the raising to Germanic
             * / a / follows the long observed tendency of nasalised vowels to rise.
             This raising can be seen as the last stage in a chain shift which began in
             Germanic times and had already affected Germanic * / e / and * / o / and
             resulted in niman and cuman by Primitive Old English times.
                 Old English studies can add to as well as benefit from study of natural
             and universal tendencies in language. Much of the history of English
             vowels involves the struggle between the opposing processes of
             monophthongisation and diphthongisation. Anglian smoothing (a
             monophthongisation) and velar umlaut (a diphthongisation) have long
             been documented, but a close examination of the variation in the
             manuscript data can refine our knowledge of the processes (see Toon
             1978a). The velar spirant plays a major role in the operation of these two
             competing sound changes; it triggers smoothing and inhibits velar
             umlaut. Labov, Yaeger and Steiner (1972) have identified velar
             consonants as among those which can change vowel peripherality. Since
             peripherality is associated with rising and in-gliding vowels, the
             monophthongising effect of the velar spirant is of interest to historical
             linguists and students of contemporary sound change alike. The inter-


                          440
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


              relationships of the various elements of smoothing and velar umlaut are
              summarised in the following table:

                                                            Epinal       Erfurt         Corpus         VPs
                                                            ca700        ca750          ca800          ca825
                          Smoothing of / i : 0/             +             +              +             +
                          Smoothing of / i o /              +             +              +             +
                          Smoothing of / e o /              80           90              +             +
                          Smoothing of /sea/                60            +              +             +
                          Smoothing of /ae:a/               60           80              +             +
                          Velar umlaut of /ae/              50           50             80             +
                          Smoothing o f / e : o /            0            0             70             +      •
                          Velar umlaut of /e, i/             0            0             90             +


                It is apparent that smoothing was complete by the time of Corpus and
             well progressed in Epinal, and the differences are, in addition,
             quantifiable and can be explained chronologically. Further, two general
             tendencies, of interest to natural phonologists, emerge. Short diph-
             thongs were smoothed before the long ones. Among the short
             diphthongs, a height hierarchy is to be observed /io > eo >sea/. Such
             phonetic regularity is hardly random and cannot be dismissed as
             unmotivated orthographic convention.
                Further examination of the data for the short diphthongs shows more
             clearly the combined effects of environment and vowel height. An
             intervening consonant diluted the effects of the velar spirant. In Corpus
             we find only /aea/ unsmoothed and then only unsmoothed in precisely
             the environment we would have predicted on the basis of the Epinal
             data, strong evidence that the two texts are closely related linguistically:

             Smoothing by environment

                                                       I         Cx /         x

                          Epinal         /eo/         60
                                         /sea/        30
                          Corpus         /eo/          +
                                                       55



             Again a single variable rule accounts for data from both texts; (the off-
             glide is variably lost before velar sounds in a process favoured by the


                          441
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             high vowels and the absence of a consonant between the diphthong and
             the velar consonant):
                          V3        -> < V >            / <+hl>            < - s e g > [ +velar]
                Except for the velar umlaut of /ae/, the product of the second
             fronting of /a/, the earliest glossaries fail to show evidence of velar
             umlaut. The sound change, on the other hand, is nearly complete in
             CorpGl. While both /e, i/ undergo velar umlaut at the same overall rate
             (0-75), significant differences emerge when the data are broken down by
             environment:

              Velar umlaut

                                                 N          N          /«/
                          /       labials        0-85       1-00       1-00
                          /       sibilants      080        1-00       1-00
                          /       resonants      075        085        1-00
                          /       dentals        0-70       0-65       1-00



                 F o r b o t h / e / and /[/, the same hierarchy h o l d s : labials > sibilants >
             dentals. T h e highest weighted e n v i r o n m e n t is, of course, also one of the
             e n v i r o n m e n t s for which the s o u n d change was most general in O l d
             English. T h e lowest weighted e n v i r o n m e n t was that e n v i r o n m e n t in
             which velar umlaut developed only in n o n - W e s t Saxon dialects. It is
             n o t e w o r t h y , in view of the resistance of /aea/ to s m o o t h i n g , that velar
             umlaut began in the E p i n a l - E r f u r t Glossaries with / a e / and is complete
             for / a e / in the CorpGl but still in progress for the higher vowels. Velar
             umlaut was hindered in the Epinal-Erfurt material before / x / . T h e same
             constraint is evident in Corpus for / e , i / ; / a e / , however, is diph-
             thongised to /aea/ before the velar spirant in that text. T h e relaxing of
             the constraint can also be seen in the VPs in which velar umlaut of all
             front vowels is the rule. A l t h o u g h velar umlaut and s m o o t h i n g were
             synchronic forces in the same texts, s m o o t h i n g began earlier and was
             complete before velar umlaut. It is further advanced than velar umlaut
             in EpGl and Er/Gl. It was ceasing to be a p r o d u c t i v e force in the
             language of the CorpGl: /aea/ could develop before the velar spirant. It
             was obviously n o t a p r o d u c t i v e rule in the p h o n o l o g y of the VPs scribe,
             where the newly forced d i p h t h o n g is never s m o o t h e d .
                  The embedding problem: This aspect of the study of sound change is



                          442
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             concerned with the possible loci of linguistic change (see Labov, Yaeger
             and Steiner 1972): At what abstract level of derivation are innovations
             implemented? Is linguistic innovation a change in competence or can
             performance effect changes in competence? Do changes occur in
             individuals or in communities? Although the larger issues of com-
             petence/performance and individual/community are beyond the scope
             of this study, the sound changes considered here do offer some evidence
             of the level at which they were embedded into the phonological system
             of Old English.
                 Because / o / when it occurred before nasals had been raised to / u / in
             Germanic times, Old English / a / and / o / could not be contrastive in
             prenasal positions. The raising of /a/ to / o / then involves a
             subphonemic change; an allophone of / a / is becoming an allophone of
             / o / . At the stage of uncertainty between < a > and < o > , the scribes were
             recording suballophonic variation.
                 Numerous minimal pairs (see Kuhn 1970) attest a potential Old
             English phonemic contrast between /n, r, 1, w/ and /hn, hi, hr, hw/.
             Loss of / h / from hlaf 'loaf, for example, would result in [laf]
             homophonous with laf 'remainder'. Hlaf and laf indeed both occur for
             'loaf, and because of scribal uncertainty /a/is found in the same text as
             Hlaf with an excrescent (etymologically unjustified) / h / . Aldred, the
             conservative scribe of the Lindisfarne Gospels, gives strong evidence
             for the phonetic reality of / h / loss in his speech by writing an incredible
             number of excrescent < h > 's before / r / and / I / ; for example, rip is
             spelled Hrip in all eleven occurrences and laetmest is spelled Hlaetmest
             twenty-seven of the thirty-two times it appears. The destruction of
             minimal pairs and the creation of what ought to be minimal pairs attest
             that the scribe is representing a subphonemic level in his orthographic
             habits.
                  The actuation riddle: Although we can usually come up with a plausible
             explanation of change after the fact, linguists have not as yet been able
             to predict precisely when a possible change is going to occur. This
             generalisation is, of course, particularly applicable to the slow, regular
             internal sort of change which is typical of language isolation. Change
             caused by external pressure is quite a different matter. Because of the
             loose political structure of early Anglo-Saxon England early English
             dialects must have been in constant contact (and conflict). We can in fact
             see evidence of the actuation of a linguistic innovation by examining the
             development of West Germanic * / a / before nasals as reflected in the
             extant original charters made in Kent (or with Kentish connection)


                          443
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             before, during and after the period of Mercian political ascendancy in
             England (AD 750-825). Four charters antedate Mercian control. The
             data are scant but unanimous in a forms. Seven texts document the
             period from AD 800 to 825, and they exhibit only < o > spellings
             (sixty-four in all), also the predominant form in Mercian charters. Six of
             these seven manuscripts also contain letter forms unique to VPs and
             other Mercian texts (see Kuhn 1943). Three charters (AD 833-50) attest
             the state of the language during the first years of the decay of Mercian
             influence:

                         Date          Charter                 a        o
                         833X9         BL, Aug. ii 64          11       40
                         845X53        BL, Aug. ii 42           0       13
                         850           BL, Aug. ii 52          10        4



                Since the transition was not cataclysmic, these data are what one
             would expect. Mercian religious would continue to live in Kent, and
             native Kentish scribes trained under Mercian domination would
             continue to exert an influence for about one generation (until ca 850),
             just as similar timelags can be observed after the Norman Conquest. In
             the late Kentish charters, we find a return to the < a > spelling for West
             Germanic * / a / before nasals in fully stressed words. Since the change
             of < a > to < o > is demonstrably tied to Mercian political fortunes and
             the change is concomitant with the appearance of Mercian orthographic
             influence, we ought not to dismiss the manuscript heterogeneity as mere
             dialect mixture. We can, on the other hand, reinterpret this structured
             variation as an intersection of two separate aspects of the actuation and
             implementation of a phonetic change: a perhaps natural tendency of a
             nasalised low vowel to rise (a possible change) and social and political
             pressure (a reason to change).
                Our knowledge of Old English (except for patterns discernable by
             the methods of comparative and internal reconstruction) is, necessarily,
             based on the vernacular records which survive. Since the nineteenth
             century period of extensive close analysis of the early manuscripts, the
             general linguistic patterns of Old English (mostly phonological) have
             been codified, and traditional, structuralist and generative study of the
             language have been based on those abstractions. Thus, after a lifetime of
             studying Old English, Campbell could still claim (1959:106):



                         444
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                         Old English dialects


                         It is accordingly not possible to date any of these sound changes
                         [including the nasal development of a, velar umlaut, and smoothing]
                         by observing their gradual appearance in texts and we can establish
                         their approximate date and arrange them in chronological order by
                         theoretical means only.

             Variation abounds in the early texts, and it is the contemporary
             historical linguist's responsibility to determine if that variation is
             regular (and consequently meaningful) or sporadic and rightly to be
             ignored.
                By now, my position on this question will be clear, but some
             additional justification is necessary. First, it must be recalled that the
             texts on which this study is based consist of the first experiments in
             writing English; scribes of the period were not trained in a system of
             standardised spellings. Scribes did not, however, invent a writing
             system in vacuo. Indeed, they were familiar with the orthograph-
             ic/phonological correspondences of Latin and they transferred those
             habits to the transcription of English. The exercise would be similar in
             kind to reducing the sounds of American English to a very broad
             International Phonetics Association transcription; except that the
             weight of traditional spellings would be absent. Would Americans
             (especially naive spellers) spell water and butter phonemically with a
             medial / t / rather than noticing the [d]-like quality of the allophone (the
             same sound which is an allophone of [r] in berry for some speakers of
             RP)? Linguistic contrast is an important fact about how languages
             operate, and a writing system must be able to convey the important
             linguistically significant contrasts of its language. But linguistic
             significance does not reside exclusively in contrasts, and it is not
             unreasonable to suppose that scribes (unconsciously) recorded their
             phonetic habits, just as New Yorkers unconsciously monitor the level of
             [r] loss.
                The strongest argument for taking manuscript variation seriously is
             certainly the facts of the internal structure of that heterogeneity. On
             those who will reject the orthographic variation as random lies the onus
             of otherwise explaining those regularities and their close resemblance to
             kinds of phonetic conditioning being discovered in contemporary
             studies of sound in progress.
                An immediate consequence of taking manuscript data seriously
             involves a reconsideration of the probable order in which the sound
             changes occurred. The data provide precisely the' gradual appearance in


                          445
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             texts' which Campbell demands. Campbell offers a summary of
             traditional scholarly opinion on the ordering of what he calls the
             prehistoric changes (Campbell 1959:109).
             (1)         Anglo-Frisian development of nasal / a : / and / a / ; and of /&2/
                         and / e : / from West Gmc */a:/
             (2)         West Gmc */ai/ > / a : /
             (3)         Fronting of West Gmc * / a / to /ag/
             (4)         Breaking and the related processes of retraction
             (5)         Restoration of / a / before back vowels
             (6)         Second fronting (mainly VP). Palatal diphthongisation of front
                         vowels, and early diphthongisation of back vowels (mainly
                         WS and Northumbrian)
             (7)         /-mutation
             (8)         Back mutation
             (9)         Smoothing
             There are several reasons to challenge this ordering. Consistent
             variation in the early glossaries argues for a later dating of the second
             fronting. Of the changes listed, items 1 (except for the development of
             nasal < a > ) , 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 are certainly prehistoric; that is, they are
             represented as complete and without variation in the earliest texts. It has
             been demonstrated herein that it is an error to lump together all of the
             smoothing processes. It is further unsatisfactory to suggest a precise
             linear ordering of the following:
                         Raising and rounding of / a / before nasals
                         The various smoothings (usually treated as a unit)
                         Second Fronting
                         Velar Umlaut
             Using EpGl, CorpGl and the VPs as touchstones, the following chart
             more closely reflects the situation as attested by manuscript variation.
                                    Epinal                         Corpus                  Vespasian Psalter
                                                                   ca
                                    ca 700                            800                      ca 825
                          smoothing of /io/
                                smoothing of I to I
                                smoothing of /aea/
                                    smoothing of / a : a /
                                         second fronting and velar umlaut
                                              nasal influence on [a]
                                                                   smoothing of /to/


                          446
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             The mixture of forms which we find in the glossaries, for example, can
             now profitably be explained as the residue of competing sound changes
             rather than dismissed as 'dialect mixture'.
                 The earliest English texts have been studied independently by a
             variety of scholars: historians, palaeographers, bibliographers, linguists
             and art historians. There has, unfortunately, been very little integration
             of these separate studies, and students of the texts consequently hold
             widely divergent views of their date, provenance, etc. Historical
             linguists then have not been able to take full account of the nature and
             ancient uses of the texts around which their pursuits revolve. The
             earliest glossaries are an excellent example. Written at a time when
             manuscript production was very costly indeed, we find the best of
             materials, wide margins, spacious (an uneconomic) hand, and in the case
             of the CorpGl exquisite illuminations. The facts, although a mystery,
             constitute eloquent testimony to the reverence with which these
             manuscripts and presumably in this case especially their contents were
             held. Although we know the sources of the glosses, we still have little
             idea of how and why the glossaries, especially their often mundane
             vernacular glosses, were collected. Close examination reveals (in the
             CorpGl) extensive dry point notation and even occasional doodles.
             Some of the more curious garbled glosses suggest that they were copied
             from exemplars into which vernacular glosses had been scratched by dry
             point. The sources, the nature and the purposes of those first attempts
             to record even occasional words in English are critically important to
             the study of the state of the language which they record. Why would a
             literate and learned community benefit from a word-for-word interlinear
             gloss to the psalms ? Is the regularity of the VPs gloss, which nearly
             approaches the regularity of the Late West Saxon literary language,
             related to the fact that it is inserted in one of the finest manuscript
             productions of Anglo-Saxon England? The questions and their
             consequences mount. We will better understand the language recorded
             within the texts when we know more about the texts themselves.
                Old English dialectology to date has been principally geographical,
             an attempt to assign texts (and their language) strictly to one of four
             regional varieties — West Saxon, Mercian, Northumbrian or Kentish.
             Objections have been of two major sorts. First, it has been claimed that
             the early texts with their high levels of orthographic variation exhibit a
             level of dialect mixture which precludes assigning them to any one
             dialect area. Other objections have centred around scholarly attempts to
             localise manuscripts and insist that the texts are too scant and too


                         447
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


              loosely assignable in terms of provenance to be the basis of a regional
              dialectology.
                 Variation admittedly abound in the texts, but differences have been
              over-emphasised and important similarities have been ignored. Two
              general observations are to be made. The following summary of
              synchronically variable data from EpGl, ErfGl, CorpGl and the VPs
              helps illustrate the first point. Much of variation in the texts can be
              explained chronologically (see Toon 1975):

                                                             Epinal        Erfurt         Corpus        VPs
                                                             ca700         ca750          ca800         ca825
                          Smoothing of/i:o/                  +              +             +             +
                          Smoothing of /io/                  +              +             +             +
                          Smoothing of /eo/                  0-8            +             +             +
                          Smoothing of /sea/                 0-6            +             +             +
                          Smoothing of/ae:a/                 0-6           0-8            +             +
                          Smoothing of /eo/                  0             0              +             +
                          Gmc /ae/ to /e/                    0-8           0-9            0-9           +
                          PrOE /a/ to / * /        0-3                     0-3            0-3           +
                          Velar umlaut of /m/      0-5                     0-5            0-8           +
                          Confusion of /io/, /eo/  0-5                     0-5            0-6           +
                                                   0-3                     0-3            0-9
                          Second fronting /ae/     0-2                     0-4            0-2           +
                          Confusion of/i:o/, /e:o/ 0-2                     0              0-2           +
                          Raising of nasal /a/     0                       0-5            0-7           +
                          Velar umlaut of /i, e/   0                       0              0-9           +




                Not only do the sound changes show a general progression toward
             completion from Epinal to the VPs, but the very similar implicational
             hierarchy of the progress of the changes attests the close relationship
             between the texts. The minor divergences can be attributed to the fact
             that not all sound changes proceed at the same rate. The regular, wave-
             like diffusion of sound developments into this community cannot be
             attributed to dialect mixture unless dialect mixture be interpreted as a
             productive force in linguistic change. The term has been invoked in
             traditional interpretations of Old English to dismiss rather than to
             explain variation.
                This analysis has further demonstrated that the close relationship
             between these texts can be made even clearer when the synchronic
             variation in the texts is subjected to close scrutiny. While it is important
             that the sound changes when viewed abstractly can be seen to be


                          448
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


              Sound changes in the minor texts

                                         Blick. Leyden Lorica Lorica Bede Codes Royal                        Omont
                                         Psalter Gloss Gloss Prayer Gloss Aur. Gloss                         Leaf

              Smoothing
                of io                     —        +          —        —         -      +         +          —
                of io                     —        —          —        —         —      —         —          —
                 of eo                    —        +          +        —         +       -        +          —
                 of eta                   —        +          -        —         -      +         +       +
                 of sea                   —        +          +        —         +      +         +       —
                 of lo                    -        -         (0/2)     (1/1)     -       -          (1/2) +
              Gmc a to I                  -        +         —         -         +       -        0       +
              Velar umlaut of ec          -        0          +        +         +      +         +       +
              io to eo                    —        0          +        +         —      +         +       +
                                                   +                   +         -      +         -       0
              Second fronting            (1/2)     0-6       0         1/1       +       -        +       0
              io to co                    —        0         0         +         +      0         +       +
                                          +        0-7        +        +         +      +         +
              Velar umlaut of /', e       —        -         0-7       +         +       -        +       +
              a to e                      +        —         —         —         —      —         —       0
              a toe                      (2/3)     —         (0/1)     (0/2)     "      (1/3)     + (2/2) —

              progressing regularly toward completion, it is even more important for
              a systematic analysis that the language of the individual texts not be
              dismissed as a random admixture of forms. The variable texts
              demonstrate the phonetic regularity of the synchronic states. The
              regularity is especially evident when the rules for the separate texts are
              placed together. The interaction of second fronting of Primitive Old
              English * / a / and its subsequent velar umlaut both follow a progression
              which logically would culminate in the language of the VPs, then, form
              a continuum against which the remaining texts of this study may be
              viewed. The table above, arranged roughly chronologically from
              left to right, summarises the developments in the Minora of the sound
              changes which are synchronic in the early texts. The data from these
              sources are, of course, extremely scant, and there are large gaps in this
              table. They do however offer a glimpse into an otherwise unrecorded
              period. Of these texts, BIG I, LorPr and RoyGl do not depart from the
              language of VPs. Since both LorPr and RqyGl derive from manuscripts
              with western connections, their language argues for a westerly
              provenance or dominant influence in the scribe of the VPs gloss. The
              only other clearly localisable text is the Codex Aureus (CA) inscription;
              it shows the variety of Mercian Old English to have been found in


                          449
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Thomas E. Toon


             Surrey. The Leiden Glossary is a Germanised corruption of the
             continental glossary tradition best preserved in the EpGl and ErfGl.
             The remaining texts, to varying degrees, exhibit some of the changes
             which are synchronic in the major Mercian texts. Because of the very
             nature of Mercian political control (overlords ruling subkings), one
             would not expect to find total diffusion of Mercian speech charac-
             teristics throughout all of England. It is certainly telling that Mercian
             features are most heavily concentrated in western manuscripts.
                R. M. Wilson (1959), while agreeing that the psalter (and its related
             texts) 'shows no distinctively Northumbrian, Kentish, or West Saxon
             forms', claims 'it does not follow from this that it must be Mercian'.
             For him, our knowledge of early Old English dialects is too scant to
             make any such designation. The texts, he argues, cannot be precisely
             located and might be from East Anglia, Essex or Sussex rather than
             from Mercia. His argument fails on several points. First, even if the texts
             did originate outside of Mercia proper, they were certainly produced
             during the period of Mercian political ascendancy. Some sociolinguistic
             perspective is needed at this point. All of the early Old English texts
             (including the charters) were produced by a small subsegment of the
             linguistic population. We will never know how the non-literate Anglo-
             Saxons spoke, but we do have an accurate record of how changes in
             speech influenced those who experimented in writing English. Not only
             were the educated a small minority, they were also all products of (or
             closely related with) the great religious houses of Anglo-Saxon England.
             One need only look at the lists of abbots and bishops to discover that
             Mercian kings appointed Mercians to positions of authority. It is likely
             therefore that the speech of the religious tended towards the prestigious
             variety of the Mercian overlords, abbots and bishops. The presence of
             Mercian letter forms and linguistic forms has been abundantly
             documented in the so-called 'Kentish' charters of the Mercian period.
             Wilson further rejects the term 'Mercian' because he expects there to be
             only one variety of Mercian. He demands a linguistic homogeneity
             atypical of viable speech communities, especially communities which
             are joined by loose political bonds. If a text is non-Northumbrian, non-
             West Saxon and non-Kentish and written when Mercian kings were in
             control, it seems sensible to consider its language to represent part of the
             Mercian linguistic continuum. In addition, the very similar EpGl,
             ErfGl, CorpGl and VPs are extremely close linguistically to both the
             LorPr and RqyGl the texts of which have clear associations with the
             West Midlands. Since the occurrence of Mercian features (phonological



                          45°
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
                          Old English dialects


             and orthographic) rises and falls in the charters with Mercian political
             fortunes, one has every reason to consider the texts representative of
             heterogeneity in the Mercian speech community.
                If we can accept the notion of a political, social, roughly chrono-
             logically sensitive Old English dialectology, early manuscript variation
             will cease to be a source of confusion. More importantly, that variation
             and the data provided by twelve hundred years of nearly continuously
             attested language variation and change can become an important tool
             from which modern linguistic science can learn more of the nature of
             language change and language variation and with which it can test the
             theories which it proposes to relate the two.


                          FURTHER READING

             There is, unfortunately, no full-scale study of Old English dialects such as
             exists for Middle English and present-day English. The standard handbooks
             such as Campbell (1959) and Brunner (1965) give an overview of the situation
             in each dialect as it pertains to phonology and morphology. Of these Brunner
             is particularly full, whilst Campbell has an extremely useful bibliography of
             individual studies of dialect material. For the study of dialect variation in
             vocabulary the most important recent study is Wenisch (1979), a monograph
             more wide-ranging than its title suggests. Syntactic variation between dialects
             has scarcely been studied and in any event the material is relatively meagre.
                Current linguistic theory has yet had little impact on Old English dialect
             study, although Toon (1983) is a substantial monograph and Hogg (1988) a
             shorter article, both attempting to present a revised view of the dialect situation
             in the light of recent sociolinguistic theory.




                          45 1
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Groningen, on 05 May 2018 at 12:55:47, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
                                   Cambridge Histories Online ©https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521264747.007
                                                                 Cambridge University Press, 2008
